Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

Śrī Bhajan-rahasya



Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura

GVP (2011)



Rating:   ★★★★★




* * *




* * *




Śrī Bhajana-rahasya

Introduction to the Rahasya [translated from the Bengali
edition]

Preface [translated from the Hindi edition]

Preface to the English Edition

1 Prathama-yāma-sādhana: Niśānta-bhajana — śraddhā (the
last six daṇḍas of the night: approximately 3.30 a.m. —
6.00 a.m.)

2 Dvitīya-yāma-sādhana: Prātaḥ-kālīya-bhajana — anartha-
nivṛtti in sādhu-saṅga (the first six daṇḍas of the
morning: approximately 6.00 a.m. — 8.30 a.m.)

3 Tṛtīya-yāma-sādhana: Pūrvāhna-kālīya-bhajana — niṣṭhā-
bhajana (from six daṇḍas until two praharas:
approximately 8.30 a.m. — 11.00 a.m.)

4 Caturtha-yāma-sādhana: Madhyāhna-kālīya-bhajana —
ruci-bhajana (from the second prahara until three-and-a-
half praharas: approximately 11.00 a.m. — 3.30 p.m.)

5 Pañcama-yāma-sādhana: Aparāhna-kālīya-bhajana — kṛṣṇa-
āsakti (from three-and-a-half praharas of the day until
dusk: approximately 3.30 p.m. — 6.00 p.m.)

6 Ṣaṣṭha-yāma-sādhana: Sāyaṁ-kālīya-bhajana — bhāva (six
daṇḍas after dusk: approximately 6.00 p.m. — 8.30 p.m.)

7 Saptama-yāma-sādhana: Pradoṣa-kālīya-bhajana —
vipralambha-prema (from six daṇḍas of the night until
midnight: approximately 8.30 p.m. — 12.00 p.m.)

8 Aṣṭama-yāma-sādhana: Rātri-līlā — prema-bhajana
sambhoga (from midnight to three-and-a-half praharas of

                             1
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

the night: approximately 00.00 a.m. — 3.30 a.m.)

Appendix: Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas’ Saṅkṣepa-arcana-
paddhati (abbreviated manual on deity worship)




Introduction to the Rahasya

[translated from the Bengali edition]




Śrī Bhajana-rahasya is compiled by Śrīmad Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura Mahāśaya. He has collected into the form of a
book several confidential hints from his own method of
bhajana to guide sincere sādhakas who are performing
bhajana under his direction. Some years ago, this
destitute person observed him performing bhajana. He was
constantly reciting and relishing verses such as the
ones in this book, thus becoming overwhelmed with
bhagavat-prema.

For sādhakas whose faith is on the neophyte platform,
the system of arcana is provided. Many people are unable
to understand the distinction between arcana and bhajana
and therefore use the word bhajana to refer to arcana.
One can practise bhajana by performing the nine kinds of
devotion, navadhā-bhakti. Because arcana is included
within navadhā-bhakti, it is also considered a part of
bhajana. There is a difference beween complete bhajana
and partial bhajana. Arcana means to worship the deity
with awe and reverence; that is, with knowledge of the
Lord’s opulence and by observing etiquette. It is also
arcana to serve Bhagavān with various paraphernalia
according to rules and regulations and with the mundane
conception of identifying oneself with the material
body. In viśrambha-sevā, service rendered with intimacy
and a sense of possessiveness, the hot rays of awe and
reverence are still apparent to a small degree, but no
one can refuse the excellent sweetness of its cool,
pleasant moonbeams. A brief arcana-paddhati has been
added as an appendix to this book.

Within the framework of this book, the secret meaning of
bhajana is given in a way that captivates the heart. In
the process of arcana, one remains more or less
entangled in one’s relationship with the gross and
subtle body. In the realm of bhajana, however, the
sādhaka passes beyond both the gross and subtle bodies
to directly serve Bhagavān. The transcendental
sentiments that others perceive in great personalities
(mahāpuruṣas), who perform bhajana and who are
completely free from all kinds of material designations,
are not worldly or illusory. Due to being directly
within the proximity of the non-dual Supreme Absolute
Truth (advaya-jñāna-para-tattva), who is beyond
perception, they experience the transcendental
sentiments of devotional service that are beyond the
range of material senses and material time.

                              2
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


Rahasya means “a profound subject that is instructed by
the guru and that is required to be known by those with
great faith”. As a result of first receiving spiritual
instructions and then performing viśrambha-sevā, which
is the third among the sixty-four limbs of sādhana-
bhakti mentioned in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, a devotee
begins to follow the path of sādhus. To do so is to
cultivate bhajana-rahasya. Niskiñcana-bhaktas (renounced
devotees) who are absorbed in bhagavad-bhajana become
freed from material bondage. They therefore also become
completely freed from the association of those bound by
worldly desires. At that time, the inclination to engage
in service throughout the twenty-four hours of the day
(aṣṭa-kāla) awakens in their hearts. Pure devotees who
are intent on rendering sevā consider the association of
non-devotees, who are attached to either enjoyment or
renunciation, to be an obstacle in the attainment of
their desired goal. Anyābhilāṣīs (those with desires
other than to serve Kṛṣṇa), karmīs and jñānīs do not
have a taste for bhajana-rahasya. Therefore, due to
being unqualified to enter the realm of bhajana, which
is transcendentally illuminated by the eight divisions
of the day, they do not revere this book.

When the day and night are divided into eight parts,
each part is known as a yāma. There are three yāmas
during the night, three during the day, one at dawn and
one at dusk. Only pure Vaiṣṇavas are able to perform
kṛṣṇa-bhajana with one-pointed determination in all
respects and at all times. Such continuous bhajana is
not possible as long as one’s gross and subtle material
conceptions of “I” and “mine” remain. The living
entities will not be liberated from this conditioning if
they attribute mundane conceptions to matters related to
Hari. Vaiṣṇavas devoted to bhajana who have achieved
their pure identity (śuddha-svarūpa) are forever
prepared to serve Kṛṣṇa.

The eight verses of Śikṣāṣṭaka, composed by Śrī
Gaurasundara, contain transcendental sentiments
favourable to bhajana throughout the eight periods of
the day. The eleven verses of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī’s Śrī
Rādhā-kṛṣṇayor aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā-smaraṇa-maṅgala-stotram*
and the poetry that expresses longing for aṣṭa-kāla-
bhajana composed by all the exalted personalities who
follow him, prescribe continuous bhajana. Upon becoming
completely free from mundane conceptions of time, place
and recipient, the servant of the spiritual master
should constantly study Śrī Bhajana-rahasya.



The servant of the devotees of Śrī Hari,

Dāsa Śrī Siddhānta Sarasvatī

13th November, 1927

Kanpur, Uttar Pradesh




                           3
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017


Preface

[translated from the Hindi edition]


Just as the sage Bhagīratha brought the River Bhāgīrathī
(Gaṅgā) to this Earth, oṁ viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad
Saccidānanda Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura Mahāśaya brought the
present flow of the Bhāgīrathī of pure bhakti to this
world. In his book Śrī Harināma-cintāmaṇi, Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has presented an extensive
deliberation on the glories of the holy name, on the
distinctions between nāma, nāma-ābhāsa and nāma-
aparādha, and on the method of chanting the holy name.
He has compiled Śrī Bhajana-rahasya as a supplement to
Śrī Harināma-cintāmaṇi. There are eight pairs of names
in the mahā-mantra. In this book, Ṭhākura Mahāśaya
describes the mercy of these eight pairs of names, and
provides a remarkably beautiful glimpse of how to
cultivate one’s contemplation of aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā
through the chanting of the mahā-mantra.

Several years ago, at the request of the sincere
devotees of Mathurā and Vṛndāvana, I continuously spoke
on this book for some time. The listeners gave rapt
attention and I also felt boundless joy. When I had
completed my classes, the faithful listeners repeatedly
requested me to publish a Hindi edition of this book. At
that time, however, I was busy publishing some books by
Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura — in particular his
commentary on Bhagavad-gītā — and I was also engaged in
preaching pure bhakti, as practised and propagated by
Śrīman Mahāprabhu, around the world. Therefore I was
unable to give this project my attention.

Some time later, I returned from preaching in the West
to Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha in Mathurā. During the
month of Kārttika, daughter Kumārī Savitā gave me a
manuscript of Śrī Bhajana-rahasya in Hindi with my
commentary, Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti. I was so pleased and
asked her how she had prepared it. She humbly replied
that she had compiled it from notes she had carefully
taken during my lectures and from my brahmacārīs’
cassette recordings of those lectures. I kept the
manuscript with me and after Kārttika-vrata, took it
with me when I again went abroad to preach.

We arrived at the very beautiful island of Cebu, which,
being part of the Philippines, is situated in the
Pacific Ocean. When, in that favourable atmosphere, I
looked at the manuscript of Bhajana-rahasya to edit it,
I became astonished and could not believe that I had
actually spoken it. I felt sure that Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura Mahāśaya himself had inspired me to speak this
commentary. To compile the manuscript, daughter Savitā
had also meticulously searched through many
authoritative books on rāgānuga-bhakti, thus further
enriching the Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti commentary.

The guardian of the Śrī Gauḍīya sampradāya and the
founder of Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti, my most
worshipful gurudeva, ācārya-kesarī aṣṭottara-śata Śrī
Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, used to

                           4
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

mercifully encourage and inspire me, his servant, to
publish Hindi editions of the books of Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura Mahāśaya. Today, offering this book
into his lotus hands, I feel unbounded joy. All glories
unto him! All glories unto him!

The services and great endeavours of daughter Kumārī
Savitā in preparing the manuscript of this book,
daughter Śrīmatī Jānakī-devī in helping her, Śrī Oṁ
Prakāśa Brijabāsī “Sahitya-ratna”, Śrīmatī Vṛndā-devī,
Śrīmatī Śānti-devī, Śrīman Purandara dāsa Brahmacārī,
Śrīman Śubhānanda Brahmacārī “Bhāgavata-bhūṣaṇa”, Śrīman
Navīna-kṛṣṇa Brahmacārī “Vidyālaṅkāra”, Śrīman
Parameśvarī dāsa Brahmacārī and others who were involved
in composing it on the computer, proofreading and
performing other services, are all greatly praiseworthy
and notable. My heartfelt prayer at the lotus feet of
Śrī Guru-Gaurāṅga-Gāndharvikā-Giridhārī is that They
bestow an abundance of merciful blessings upon them.

I am confident that persons eager for bhakti, and in
particular sādhakas of rāgānuga-bhakti who are eagerly
desirous of vraja-rasa, will greatly honour this book,
and that by studying it, faithful persons will attain
the eligibility to enter the prema-dharma of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

Finally, may the condensed personification of Bhagavān’s
compassion, my most worshipful śrī guru-pāda-padma,
shower me with profuse mercy so that I may attain the
eligibility to fulfil his inner-most desire. This is my
submissive prayer at his crimson lotus feet.



An aspirant for a particle of mercy

from Śrī Hari, Guru and Vaiṣṇavas,

humble and insignificant,



Śrī Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa



Śrī Gaura-pūrṇimā

20th March, 2000

Mathurā, Uttar Pradesh




Preface to the English Edition


In compiling Śrī Bhajana-rahasya, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura has selected specific verses from the Vedic
literature that serve to guide the sādhaka in awakening
his eternal identity as a servant of Kṛṣṇa. He reveals

                             5
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

the purpose of each verse with an introductory sentence.
These verses are presented in chapters that correspond
to the sādhaka’s level of spiritual practice, from the
early stages of faith up to the appearance of prema,
when one’s heart is blossoming with his eternal
relationship with Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

The book’s chapters are also divided according to the
eight parts of the day, called yāmas. In each yāma Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa enjoy particular pastimes, a general
synopsis of which is given in the final verse of each
chapter. Following the introductory sentence, the main
verse (individually referred to throughout as a “Text”)
and its translation, are Bengali verses composed by
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura himself. These verses paraphrase
the main Text and also include his commentary.

Just as Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura took the essence of
each Text and elaborated upon it in his paraphrases, our
beloved gurudeva, Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja, has expanded on the meaning of each verse with
a wonderful vṛtti, or commentary, named Bhajana-rahasya-
vṛtti. In most cases direct translations of Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura’s paraphrases have not been provided, as they
are generally included within Śrīla Gurudeva’s
commentary. This commentary reveals his genuine concern
for the souls in this world who, under the guidance of
śrī guru and Vaiṣṇavas, are endeavouring to develop
their relationship with Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. For this we
remain bound to him with affection.

A chart that serves as an overview of Śrī Bhajana-
rahasya is located at the inside of the back cover. This
chart, based on information from Śrīla Gurudeva’s
commentary on Text 6 of Chapter 1, can be understood as
follows.

The mahā-mantra is chanted by two types of sādhaka: that
person in whose heart bhāva has not arisen (the ajāta-
rati-sādhaka) and that person in whose heart bhāva has
arisen (the jāta-rati-sādhaka). How each sādhaka chants
each pair of names is described in the section outside
the chart’s concentric circles.

Each pair of names corresponds to a yāma, one of the
eight periods of the day into which Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s
eternal pastimes are divided. These pastimes are briefly
described under the heading “jāta-rati-sādhaka”. In
other words, this is the constant meditation of such a
sādhaka.

Each pair of names also corresponds with the ajāta-rati-
sādhaka’s devotional growth, as he progresses through
the stages from śraddhā to āsakti. This development is
outlined in the first verse of Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka, which
describes the seven progressive results of śrī-kṛṣṇa-
saṅkīrtana. And each result corresponds with one of the
eight successive verses of Śikṣāṣṭaka. Once the sādhaka
attains the stage of bhāva, he is no longer an ajāta-
rati-sādhaka, as described above; hence that title is
omitted from that part of the chart onwards.

Although Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s analysis of the mahā-
mantra is outlined in this diagram, one should be

                           6
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                               5/5/2017

careful not   to limit this analysis to its two
dimensions.   Rather, the chart is meant to serve as a
springboard   to a more developed understanding of the
mahā-mantra   and a deeper approach to chanting.

In the course of doing this translation, quite a number
of questions arose. The book contains many technical and
subtle points that needed clarification to remove any
ambiguity. Śrīpada Bhaktivedānta Mādhava Mahārāja kindly
gave his time to clearing confusion and answering
questions, although he repeatedly reminded us that many
of these concepts are never usually expressed in words
and that it is only by the mercy of Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura and Śrīla Gurudeva that they are presented at
all. He also pointed out that it is not possible for the
material mind to grasp them and we must patiently wait
until we attain higher levels of bhakti to realise their
meaning.

We are also indebted to Umā Dīdī, Mādhava-prīya
Brahmacārī, Savitā dāsī and Pūrṇimā dāsī, who were
constantly available to answer all varieties of
questions. The book would not have come to completion
without them

Vraja-sundarī dāsī (England) originally translated most
of the book from Hindi into English. Mañjarī dāsī edited
the English and Ananta-kṛṣṇa dāsa did a fidelity check
of the entire translation. Śyāmarāṇī dāsī reviewed this
draft, making English suggestions and clarifying the
siddhānta. We thank Śrīpada Bhaktivedānta Bhāgavata
Mahārāja and Atula-kṛṣṇa dāsa for checking the Sanskrit.
Kāntā dāsī compiled the glossary and assisted by doing
other computer work.

Sundara-gopāla dāsa (England) made numerous valuable
suggestions throughout the manuscript’s development, and
Giridhārī Brahmacārī proofread the book. Kṛṣṇa-kāruṇya
Brahmacārī and Jaya-gopāla dāsa did the graphic design
for the enclosed diagram. Kṛṣṇa-prema dāsa designed the
cover and provided the layout for the entire book. We
are ever grateful to Prema-vilāsa dāsa and Lavaṅga-latā
dāsī for providing the final edit and for preparing the
book for production.

This English version of Śrī Bhajana-rahasya was
published by the kind donation of Sundara-gopāla dāsa
(Fiji). We also thank Gopīnātha dāsa for his committed
support of Śrīla Gurudeva’s book production.

It is by the transcendental compassion of Śrīla A.C.
Bhaktivedānta Swami Prabhupāda, who introduced the
science of kṛṣṇa-bhakti to the Western world, that we
are now receiving the mercy of Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura and
our guru-paramparā. He endured great difficulties for
the sole purpose of giving us the most essential
teachings, as found in this Śrī Bhajana-rahasya. Our
feelings of indebtedness to him cannot be expressed in
words and we humbly pray that he forever bestow his
mercy upon us.

Finally, we would like to thank those devotees dedicated
to the service of our gurudeva who gave their constant
encouragement to this project, and to all those Gauḍīya

                             7
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

Vaiṣṇavas who embody the various aspects of the
teachings given herein and who are a constant source of
inspiration for devotees worldwide.



Vaijayantī-mālā dāsī / Śāntī dāsī



Kāmadā Ekādaśī

13th April, 2003

Gopīnātha-bhavana, Śrī Vṛndāvana




1 Prathama-yāma-sādhana: Niśānta-bhajana — śraddhā (the
last six daṇḍas of the night: approximately 3.30 a.m. —
6.00 a.m.)




Text 1

kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ tviṣākṛṣṇaṁ

sāṅgopāṅgāstra-pārṣadam

yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair

bhajāmi kali-pāvanam



I worship Śrī Gaurāṅgadeva, who delivers the living
entities of Kali-yuga (kali-pāvana) through the
congregational chanting of the Lord’s holy names (śrī-
nāma-saṅkīrtana-yajña). He describes the name, form,
qualities and pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; He performs kīrtana
of the two syllables kṛ and ṣṇa; His complexion is fair;
He is surrounded by His aṅgas (associates, meaning Śrī
Nityānanda Prabhu and Śrī Advaita Prabhu), upāṅgas
(servitors, meaning Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita and other pure
devotees) and pārṣadas (confidential companions like Śrī
Svarūpa Dāmodara, Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda, Śrī Gadādhara
Paṇḍita and the Six Gosvāmīs); and He is endowed with
His weapon (astra) of harināma, which destroys
ignorance.

A verse similar in meaning to Text 1 is found in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (11.5.32):



kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ tviṣākṛṣṇaṁ

sāṅgopāṅgāstra-pārṣadam

yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair

                             8
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017


yajanti hi su-medhasaḥ



In the age of Kali, Kṛṣṇa appears with a golden
complexion (akṛṣṇa). He is constantly singing the two
syllables kṛ and ṣṇa, and He is accompanied by His
associates, servitors, weapons and confidential
companions. Intelligent people worship Him by performing
saṅkīrtana-yajña.



kali-jīva uddhārite para-tattva hari

navadvīpe āilā gaura-rūpa āviṣkari

yuga-dharma kṛṣṇa-nāma-smaraṇa kīrtana

sāṅgopāṅge vitarila diyā prema dhana

jīvera sunitya dharma nāma-saṅkīrtana

anya saba dharma nāma-siddhira kāraṇa



“Śrī Hari, who is the Absolute Truth Himself, descended
in Navadvīpa as Gaurasundara to deliver the living
entities (jīvas) of Kali-yuga. Together with His
associates, He distributed the treasure of kṛṣṇa-prema
through śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma-saṅkīrtana, the religion of the
current age (yuga-dharma). Nāma-saṅkīrtana is the living
entities’ only eternal religion; all other dharmas are
simply secondary means to attain perfection in
chanting.”



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura begins this book by praying
to Śrīman Mahāprabhu. The jīva’s only duty is to worship
Śrī Gaurasundara, who is resplendent with the lustre and
sentiment of Śrī Rādhā. Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya, the central
figure (mūla-tattva) in navadvīpa-līlā, comprises five
features (pañca-tattva-ātmaka). He and His four other
forms — Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu, Śrī Advaita Ācārya, Śrī
Gadādhara and the associates headed by Śrīvāsa — are all
supremely worshipful.

The worship and service of Śrī Gaurasundara are
performed only through nāma-saṅkīrtana. By this process,
which is the most powerful of the nine kinds of bhakti,
all the limbs of bhakti are practised. Even if the other
types of sādhana are not performed during kīrtana,
kīrtana is sufficient in itself; arcana, smaraṇa and so
forth are nourished solely through kīrtana. Actual
service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa is carried out through saṅkīrtana,
a process prescribed by pañca-tattva-ātmaka Śrī
Gaurasundara. Śrīman Mahāprabhu and His associates
assembled and showed through śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma-saṅkīrtana
how to perform service to and worship of the Lord.

                           9
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


In this first Text the author establishes that Śrī
Gaurasundara is Kṛṣṇa Himself. In the word kṛṣṇa-varṇam
we find the two syllables kṛ and ṣṇa. Hence the quality
of being Kṛṣṇa (kṛṣṇatva), which is itself the quality
of being Bhagavān (bhagavattā), is displayed in the name
Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya. Kṛṣṇa-varṇam also refers to that
person who, by remembering His previous supremely
blissful pastimes of keli-vilāsa, becomes absorbed in
transcendental sentiments due to intense jubilation and
always describes (varṇam) — here meaning “performs
kīrtana of” — the name of Kṛṣṇa. He has assumed a fair
complexion, and out of supreme compassion has instructed
all living entities to chant Kṛṣṇa’s name, which will
naturally manifest in their hearts simply by receiving
Śrī Gaurasundara’s darśana. Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who possesses the
potency to make the impossible possible (aghaṭana-
ghaṭana-paṭīyasī-śaktimān), accepted the form of a
devotee and appeared as Gaurasundara. In other words Śrī
Kṛṣṇa Himself directly manifested as Gaurasundara.

This incarnation (avatāra) of Śrī Caitanyadeva is
extremely difficult for ordinary sādhakas to understand.
In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.9.38) Prahlāda Mahārāja says:
“channaḥ kalau yad abhavas triyugo ‘tha sa tvam — O
Puruṣottama, in Kali-yuga You are concealed. Your name,
therefore, is Tri-yuga, the Lord who appears only in
three yugas, because this covered incarnation is not
clearly evident in any scripture.”

When the great scholar Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya saw the
brightly shining ecstatic transformations (sūddīpta-
aṣṭa-sāttvika-bhāvas) in Śrīman Mahāprabhu, he was
amazed; he knew that these extremely rare transcendental
sentiments are not seen in any human being.
Nevertheless, he doubted that Śrīman Mahāprabhu was
Kṛṣṇa Himself and expressed this to Śrī Gopīnātha
Ācārya:



ataeva ‘triyuga’ kari’ kahi viṣṇunāma

kaliyuge avatāra nāhi — śāstra-jñāna



ŚrīCaitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 6.95)



[Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya said:] The verdict of the
scriptures is that there is no incarnation of Śrī Viṣṇu
in Kali-yuga; hence, one name of Śrī Viṣṇu is Tri-yuga.



Hearing this, Gopīnātha Ācārya said:



kali-yuge līlāvatāra nā kare bhagavān

ataeva ‘triyuga’ kari’ kahi tāra nāma

                           10
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                               5/5/2017


pratiyuge karena kṛṣṇa yuga-avatāra

tarka-niṣṭha hṛdaya tomāra nāhika vicāra



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 6.99—100)



In Kali-yuga there is no līlā-avatāra of Śrī Bhagavān;
therefore His name is Tri-yuga. But certainly there is
an incarnation in each yuga, and such an incarnation is
called a yuga-avatāra. Your heart has become hardened by
logic and arguments and thus you cannot consider these
facts.



On the other hand, when Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda, who is
Viśākhā Sakhī in vraja-līlā, received darśana of
Mahāprabhu, he clearly realised His identity. He said:



pahile dekhiluṅ tomāra sannyāsī-svarūpa

ebe tomā dekhi muñi śyāma-gopa-rūpa

tomāra sammukhe dekhi kāñcana-pañcālikā

tāṅra gaura-kāntye tomāra sarva aṅga ḍhākā



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 8.268—9)



At first I saw You in the form of a sannyāsī, but then I
saw You as a dark-complexioned cowherd boy. Now I see a
shining figure in front of You, whose golden lustre
appears to cover Your entire body.



Statements in various Purāṇas prove that Caitanya
Mahāprabhu is Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the source of all incarnations.
At the time of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s name-giving ceremony, Śrī
Gargācārya said:



āsan varṇās trayo hy asya

gṛhṇato ‘nuyugaṁ tanuḥ

śuklo raktas tathā pīta

idānīṁ kṛṣṇatāṁ gataḥ




                            11
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.8.13)



Your son Kṛṣṇa appears in every yuga as an avatāra.
Previously He assumed three different colours — white,
red and yellow — and now He has appeared in a blackish
colour.



The Mahābhārata (Dāna-dharma 149.92, 75) states:



suvarṇa-varṇo hemāṅgo

varāṅgaś candanāṅgadī

sannyāsa-kṛc chamaḥ śānto

niṣṭhā-śānti-parāyaṇaḥ



[Bhīṣma said to Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja:] Kṛṣṇa first
appears as a gṛhastha with a golden complexion. His
limbs are the colour of molten gold, His body is
extremely beautiful, He is decorated with sandalwood
pulp and He continuously chants “Kṛṣṇa”. Then He accepts
sannyāsa and is always equipoised. He is firmly fixed in
His mission of propagating harināma-saṅkīrtana and He
defeats the impersonalist philosophers, who are opposed
to bhakti. He is thus the highest abode of peace and
devotion.



Furthermore it is said in Bhagavad-gītā (4.8): “dharma-
saṁsthāpanārthāya sambhavāmi yuge yuge — to re-establish
the principles of religion, I appear in every yuga.” The
āgama-śāstras state: “māyāpure bhaviṣyāmi śacī-sutaḥ —
in the future, the son of Śacī will appear in Māyāpura.”
Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī writes in Tattva-sandarbha (Anuccheda
2):



antaḥ kṛṣṇaṁ bahir-gauraṁ

darśitāṅgādi-vaibhavam

kalau saṅkīrtanādyaiḥ smaḥ

kṛṣṇa-caitanyam āśritāḥ



I take shelter of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya, who is outwardly
gaura, of fair complexion, but is inwardly Kṛṣṇa
Himself. In Kali-yuga He displays His associates,
servitors and confidential companions while performing
saṅkīrtana.


                              12
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017



And in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 8.279) it is
said:



rādhikāra bhāva-kānti kari’ aṅgīkāra

nija-rasa āsvādite kariyācha avatāra



To taste Your own transcendental mellow You appeared as
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, accepting the sentiment and
lustre of

Śrīmatī Rādhikā.



The rays of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya’s yellow lustre, which
resemble molten gold, destroy the darkness of ignorance.
To destroy the darkness of the activities that are
opposed to bhakti performed by the living entities in
Kali-yuga, Śrī Mahāprabhu wanders the Earth together
with His aṅgas (associates), upāṅgas (servitors) and
pārṣadas (confidential companions), and with the weapon
of the saṅkīrtana of Hare Kṛṣṇa and other names of
Bhagavān. Other incarnations destroyed demons with
armies and weapons, but Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s
aṅgas and upāṅgas are His army. According to the
scriptures, the word aṅga means aṁśa, or part, and the
aṅga of an aṅga (part of a part) is called an upāṅga.
Śrī Nityānanda and Śrī Advaita Ācārya are both Śrī
Caitanya’s aṅgas, and their parts, the upāṅgas, are
Śrīvāsa and the other devotees who always accompany
Mahāprabhu. They preach Bhagavān’s name, Hare Kṛṣṇa,
which is itself the “sharp weapon” capable of destroying
atheism.

In this Text the adjective saṅkīrtana-prāyaiḥ, which
means “consisting chiefly of congregational chanting”,
defines harināma-saṅkīrtana-yajña as abhidheya-tattva,
the means to attain the goal. In the incarnation of
Śrīman Mahāprabhu the main weapon is harināma-
saṅkīrtana, by which He destroys the atheism of the
atheists and the sins of the sinful. He who worships Śrī
Caitanyadeva through nāma-saṅkīrtana-yajña is
intelligent and attains all perfection; he who does not
worship Him is unfortunate, unintelligent and devoid of
pious merit (sukṛti).

To conclude, in this age of Kali the only objects worthy
of meditation are Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s lotus feet,
which fulfil all treasured desires. Apart from Śrī
Caitanyadeva’s mercy, nothing is eternal or permanent;
rather, everything is perishable and incapable of
fulfilling these desires.




                           13
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                                5/5/2017

Text 2

Stavāvalī (Śrī Śacīsūnv-aṣṭaka (5)) says:



nijatve gauḍīyān jagati parigṛhya prabhur imān

hare kṛṣṇety evaṁ gaṇana-vidhinā kīrtayata bhoḥ

iti prāyāṁ śikṣāṁ caraṇa-madhupebhyaḥ paridiśan

śacī-sūnuḥ kiṁ me nayana-saraṇīṁ yāsyati padam



When will Śacīnandana Gaurahari appear on the path of my
eyes? He accepted the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas in this world,
who are like bees at His lotus feet, as His own, and He
instructed them to chant the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra by
counting a fixed number of rounds.



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Here Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī expresses the
natural, affectionate mercy of Śrīman Mahāprabhu for the
inhabitants of Gauḍa (Bengal). Their relationship with
each other is likened to the affectionate relationship
of near and dear ones in this mundane world (laukika-
sad-bandhuvat). This means they have a natural feeling
of possessiveness (madīya-bhāva, or mamatā) towards
Śrīman Mahāprabhu, by which they think, “Gaurasundara is
ours”. In Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta, in the section
describing rāgānuga-bhajana, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī
explains that a mood of laukika-sad-bandhuvat, which is
characterised by intense possessiveness (mamatā) in
relation to Bhagavān, is indeed the symptom of deep
prema for Him.

Although Rasarāja Śrī Kṛṣṇa appeared as Gaurasundara and
gave the process of chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra
to the entire world, He displayed special compassion
towards the inhabitants of Gauḍa. There, in Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma, is the place renowned as the aparādha-
bhañjana, where every kind of offence is vanquished.

Being entirely overwhelmed by bhāva, Śrī Gaurasundara,
the originator of saṅkīrtana, would perform kīrtana and
dance in the company of the Gauḍīya bhaktas in an
unprecedented way. As the sentiments in Śrī
Gaurasundara’s heart swelled more and more upon seeing
His affectionate devotees, like bees they would become
intoxicated by drinking the honey-like bliss of prema at
His lotus feet.

At the time of saṅkīrtana, Śrī Gaurasundara would dance
and sing and become absorbed in ecstatic bliss as He
tasted the sweetness of Kṛṣṇa’s rāsa dance with Śrī
Rādhā and the other vraja-gopīs. The wonderful
expressions of the spiritual sentiments of this sweet
and enchanting dance, which is possessed of
transcendental śṛṅgāra-rasa, thus embellished Him with

                           14
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

prema, and He became decorated with the ornaments of
extraordinary ecstatic symptoms (aṣṭa-sāttvika-bhāvas)
such as the shedding of tears and the standing of bodily
hairs on end.

During the Ratha-yātrā Festival in Jagannātha Purī,
Mahāprabhu’s ecstatic dancing and kīrtana reached their
topmost limit. To support Mahāprabhu’s sentiments Śrī
Svarūpa Dāmodara and Rāya Rāmānanda sang poetry endowed
with samṛddhimān sambhoga-rasa, the mellows experienced
by Śri Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa when They meet after having been
far away from each other. Svarūpa Dāmodara sang, “sei ta
parāṇa-nātha pāinu, yāhā lāgī’ madana-dahane jhuri’ genu
— now I have attained the master of My life. In His
absence I was being burned by Cupid and was withering
away.” Hearing this, Mahāprabhu would gaze upon
Jagannātha’s lotus face. When Their eyes met,
Mahāprabhu’s heart would be agitated by waves of
ecstatic mellows of prema, and He would proceed to dance
according to the mood of the song. At such times Śrī
Gaurasundara would exhibit extraordinary expressions. He
would bite His lips, which were pinkish like the
bandhūka flower, artistically place His left hand on His
hip, and move His right hand to demonstrate wonderful
dance postures that were extremely attractive. This
sight would overwhelm Śrī Jagannātha Himself with
astonishment and supreme bliss. Tasting the sweetness of
the unprecedented beauty of Mahāprabhu’s dance, Śrī
Jagannātha would slowly and gently proceed towards
Sundarācala (which represents Vṛndāvana).

The brightly shining golden lustre of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu’s large body defeated the splendour of a
golden mountain. Absorbed in ecstatic bliss, Śrī
Gaurasundara loudly chanted His own names, hare kṛṣṇety
uccaiḥ sphurita-rasanaḥ.1 Surrounded by His devotees,
Mahāprabhu performed kīrtana, and His restless lotus
feet danced. Tears flowed from His eyes like streams of
Gaṅgā and Yamunā water, and His bodily hairs stood erect
in a way that was astonishing, thus resembling the
filaments of a kadamba flower.

Remembering the unprecedented sweetness of Mahāprabhu’s
prema, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī said, “When will
Śacīnandana Śrī Gaurahari appear on the path of my
eyes?” As Śrī Dāsa Gosvāmī remembered the great
compassion of Mahāprabhu, he became overwhelmed by
feelings of separation from Him. He offered this prayer,
while continuously shedding tears, waiting for the
darśana of his beloved Lord with the utmost longing and
hope. Then Śrī Gaurasundara’s own compassion, abundant
steadfastness, unsurpassed renunciation and fully
transcendental prema-bhakti arose in the heart of Dāsa
Gosvāmī, who became overwhelmed with ecstatic emotions.
He had lived close to Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu for a long
time and had received unlimited affection, mercy and
blessings from Him. The compassion of Śrī Gaurasundara
is just like that of a mother. For this reason Dāsa
Gosvāmī addresses Him as Śacīnandana, the son of Mother
Śacī. Śacīnandana Śrī Gaurahari bestowed His mercy even
upon all kinds of unqualified jīvas, thus making them
fortunate.



                           15
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017




Text 3

The Viṣṇu-rahasya states:



yad abhyarcya hariṁ bhaktyā

kṛte kratu-śatair api

phalaṁ prāpnoty avikalaṁ

kalau govinda-kīrtanāt



Whatever fruit can be obtained in Satya-yuga by devoutly
performing austerities and so on for hundreds of years,
can be obtained in the age of Kali simply by chanting
the names of Śrī Govinda.



satya-yuge śata śata yajñe haryarcana

kalite govinda-nāme se phala-arjana



“The result received in Satya-yuga by meditation on
Bhagavān, in Tretā-yuga by worshipping Bhagavān through
great sacrifices, and in Dvāpara-yuga by performing
arcana of Bhagavān according to proper rules, is
obtained in Kali-yuga simply by chanting nāma-ābhāsa, a
semblance of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s names.”



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

In Kali-yuga, Śrīman Mahāprabhu Himself, the saviour of
the fallen, accepted the mood and conduct of a devotee
and taught the path of devotion to the entire world. The
Bṛhan-nāradīya Purāṇa states:



harer nāma harer nāma

harer nāmaiva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva

nāsty eva gatir anyathā



In Kali-yuga there is no other way for the jīva than
chanting harināma. There is no other way, there is no
other way.


                              16
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017



The mention of pure harināma three times in this verse
demonstrates the need for fixed determination in
performing bhakti and the need for one to understand the
futility of other practices like karma, jñāna and yoga.




Text 4

The Bṛhad-viṣṇu Purāṇa states that other kinds of
atonement (prāyaścitta) are not necessary for one who
chants the holy name:



nāmno ‘sya yāvatī śaktiḥ

pāpa-nirharaṇe hareḥ

tāvat kartuṁ na śaknoti

pātakaṁ pātakī janaḥ



Śrī Hari’s name possesses such potency to destroy sins
that it can counteract more sins than even the most
sinful person is able to commit.



kona prāyaścitta nahe nāmera samāna

ataeva karma-tyāga kare buddhimān



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The scriptures describe methods of atonement for many
kinds of sins. By chanting śrī harināma, however, all
kinds of sins are destroyed. Therefore no other kind of
atonement is required for one who is chanting the holy
name. Nāma Prabhu has the capacity to destroy more sins
than a sinful man is able to commit: eka hari-nāme jata
pāpa hare, pāpī haya tata pāpa karibāre nare.




Text 5

The superiority of kīrtana is described in Vaiṣṇava-
cintāmaṇi (Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (11.236)):



aghacchit-smaraṇaṁ viṣṇor


                            17
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

bahvāyāsena sādhyate

oṣṭha-spandana-mātreṇa

kīrtanaṁ tu tato varam



Sins are destroyed with great effort by remembering
Viṣṇu, but by chanting His name, they are very easily
destroyed. Kīrtana is performed simply by using the lips
to vibrate the names of Bhagavān and is far superior to
smaraṇa (remembrance).



tapasyāya dhyāna yoga kaṣṭa sādhya haya

oṣṭhera spandana-mātre kīrtana āśraya

oṣṭhera spandanābhāve nāmera smaraṇa

smaraṇa kīrtane sarva siddhi-saṅghaṭana

arcana apekṣā nāmera smaraṇa-kīrtana

ati śreṣṭha bali śāstre karila sthāpana



“Austerities, meditation, yoga and other practices are
very difficult to perform in Kali-yuga, but kīrtana is
easy; one need only vibrate one’s lips. Nāma chanted
without moving the lips is called nāma-smaraṇa. The jīva
can attain all perfection by nāma-kīrtana and nāma-
smaraṇa. The scriptures have therefore concluded that
kīrtana and smaraṇa of the holy name are superior to
arcana.”



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The practices of karma, jñāna and yoga are difficult and
troublesome, but the path of bhakti is easy and simple.
In Bhagavad-gītā (2.40) Śrī Kṛṣṇa says:



nehābhikrama-nāśo ‘sti

pratyavāyo na vidyate

svalpam apy asya dharmasya

trāyate mahato bhayāt



Endeavours on the path of bhakti-yoga are neither
fruitless nor subject to faults. Even a little
performance of bhakti-yoga frees one from the great fear
of material existence.


                             18
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017



Even though mistakes made in the practices of
meditation, yoga and so forth may be insignificant, as a
consequence of those mistakes the desired result is
unattainable. Actually, only bhakti-yoga is completely
nirguṇa, free from the influence of the material
qualities of goodness, passion and ignorance. Even if a
person begins to practise bhakti-yoga but for some
reason his practice remains incomplete, there is no
defect or fault in his endeavour. Neither destruction
nor misfortune in this world or the next awaits a person
who has fallen from the path of bhakti-yoga.

The main limb of bhakti-yoga is nāma-kīrtana, which is
performed merely by vibrating the lips. The holy name is
not of this material world. Nāma Prabhu dances on the
tongue of the sādhaka and, destroying his prārabdha-
karma and other impediments, bestows everything up to
prema. In previous yugas, a practitioner who was unable
to fix his mind in the practice of yoga was unable to
attain the goal. Yet in Kali-yuga perfection can be
attained simply by uttering the holy name. In Bṛhad-
bhāgavatāmṛta, Sanātana Gosvāmipāda states that kīrtana
is more powerful than smaraṇa. By the process of kīrtana
both the mind and the tongue attain a special pleasure.




Text 6

Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (11.237) states:



yena janma-śataiḥ pūrvaṁ

vāsudevaḥ samarcitaḥ

tan-mukhe hari-nāmāni

sadā tiṣṭhanti bhārataḥ



O best of the dynasty of Bharata, the holy name of Śrī
Hari is eternally present only in the mouth of one who
has perfectly worshipped Vāsudeva for hundreds of
births.



hare kṛṣṇa ṣolanāma aṣṭayuga haya

aṣṭayuga arthe aṣṭaśloka prabhu kaya

ādi hare kṛṣṇa arthe avidyā-damana

śraddhāra sahita kṛṣṇa-nāma-saṅkīrtana

āra hare kṛṣṇa nāma kṛṣṇa sarva-śakti


                           19
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

sādhu-saṅge nāmāśraye bhajanānurakti

sei ta bhajana-krame sarvānartha-nāśa

anarthāpagame nāme niṣṭhāra vikāśa

tṛtīye viśuddha-bhakta caritrera saha

kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa nāme niṣṭhā kare aharaha

caturthe ahaitukī bhakti uddīpana

ruci saha hare hare nāma-saṅkīrtana

pañcamete śuddha dāsya rucira sahita

hare rāma saṅkīrtana smaraṇa vihita

ṣaṣṭhe bhāvāṅkure hare rāmeti kīrtana

saṁsāre aruci kṛṣṇe ruci samarpaṇa

saptame madhurāsakti rādhā-padāśraya

vipralambhe rāma rāma nāmera udaya

aṣṭame vrajete aṣṭa-kāla gopī-bhāva

rādhā-kṛṣṇa-prema-sevā prayojana lābha



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The word samarcita in this Text means “properly
worshipped”. Here Svayam Bhagavān says to Arjuna, “O
Arjuna, when one has worshipped Bhagavān Vāsudeva for
several births according to rules and regulations, his
heart becomes indifferent to lust and so on. Indeed,
Mukunda appears in the heart of such a person.” The
scriptures present the system of arcana to enable the
neophyte devotee (kaniṣṭha-adhikārī) to develop pure,
good behaviour and to bring him to the practice of
bhagavad-bhakti. By performance of arcana his heart will
gradually become pure and freed from sorrow, anger, fear
and so forth. In Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.115) Rūpa
Gosvāmipāda says:



śokāmarṣādibhir-bhāvair

ākrāntaṁ yasya mānasam

kathaṁ tatra mukundasya

sphūrti-sambhāvanā bhavet



How can Mukunda manifest in the heart of a person who is
filled with emotions like grief and anger?



                            20
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017


In the scriptures, smaraṇa is considered to be a part of
arcana; one remembers the object of worship at the time
of arcana. For a neophyte devotee arcana is superior to
smaraṇa, but the compilers of the scriptures conclude
that one attains the actual fruit of arcana only when it
is performed with kīrtana. This is the rule for
performing arcana in Kali-yuga.

The mahā-mantra is that harināma which is composed of
sixteen names, or eight pairs of names, and consists of
thirty-two syllables. Śrīman Mahāprabhu revealed to the
world the meanings of these eight pairs of names in the
eight verses of His Śikṣāṣṭaka. The steps from śraddhā
to prema begin from the first verse and continue up to
the eighth.

The hidden meaning of the first pair of names — Hare
Kṛṣṇa — is that performing kṛṣṇa-nāma-saṅkīrtana with
śraddhā nullifies ignorance and cleanses the mirror-like
heart. The second pair of names — Hare Kṛṣṇa — indicates
that all potencies, such as mercy, are invested in the
holy name. These potencies destroy the ignorance in the
heart of the sādhaka who performs nāma-kīrtana, and they
create attachment for bhajana, which takes the form of
performing harināma-saṅkīrtana in the association of
devotees. Performance of such bhajana gradually destroys
all kinds of impediments (anarthas) and produces
unwavering faith (niṣṭhā) in bhajana.

When a sādhaka on the platform of bhāva (a jāta-rati-
sādhaka) chants the first and second pairs of names —
Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa — he remembers the pastimes in
which Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa meet. Under the guidance of Śrī
Rūpa Mañjarī and other vraja-devīs, he performs mānasī-
sevā to Śrī Rādhā-Govinda in his internally contemplated
form of a gopī.

When the sādhaka remembers Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s eternal
forms, pastimes, qualities and so forth, Their līlā-
vilāsa manifests, as does direct service to Them within
these pastimes. This service is the wish-fulfilling tree
(keli-kalpa-taru) of all treasured yearnings. The
sādhaka constantly remembers Lalitā and the other
sakhīs; in other words, he serves in his eternally
perfect body (siddha-deha) under their guidance.

By continuously chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, a sādhaka who has
not attained the stage of bhāva (an ajāta-rati-sādhaka)
has his anarthas gradually removed and develops
steadfastness in chanting. Consequently his intelligence
becomes fixed and he develops resolute attachment
(niṣṭhā) for kṛṣṇa-nāma. Such a sādhaka pursues as his
ideal the character, service and goal of Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī, Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī and other pure
devotees.

While chanting the third pair of names — Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa —
this sādhaka follows the ideal character of the pure
devotees, their way of chanting a fixed number of
rounds, their offering of a fixed number of obeisances,
their renunciation of material enjoyment and their
utterance of prayers and glorifications. With firm faith
he chants the holy name day and night. The jāta-rati-

                           21
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

sādhaka, on the other hand, remembers the pastimes of
Śrī Rādhā and the other gopīs when Śrī Kṛṣṇa leaves for
cowherding, as well as the moods of separation they
experience at that time.

With the fourth pair of names — Hare Hare — unalloyed
bhakti is stimulated within the heart of the ajāta-rati-
sādhaka when he performs nāma-saṅkīrtana with taste
(ruci). The jāta-rati-sādhaka chants this fourth pair of
holy names with great affection, and Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s
pastimes of meeting awaken within his heart.

While chanting the fifth pair of names — Hare Rāma — the
ajāta-rati-sādhaka prays for the mood of servitude
(dāsya-bhāva) to appear in his heart. Attachment
(āsakti) for nāma-bhajana arises at this time and
remembrance of pastimes begins. With attachment, that
sādhaka cultivates the conception that he is a servant
of Kṛṣṇa. The jāta-rati-sādhaka remembers the pastime of
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s meeting after Kṛṣṇa returns from
cowherding. The gopīs see to Kṛṣṇa’s bath, dressing and
so forth in the house of Nanda, and they help Rohiṇī-
devī cook various preparations for Him.

In this way, as the ajāta-rati-sādhaka continuously
chants the holy name, he attains the inherent mercy of
Nāma Prabhu, and his heart begins to soften and melt.
Śuddha-sattva (unalloyed goodness) then arises in his
heart, and his taste for chanting the holy name
thickens. In the heart of this sādhaka, the mood of
āsakti sprouts and the nine symptoms of bhāva — kṣāntir
avyartha-kālatvam2 — begin to manifest.

At this stage the sādhaka tastes the chanting of the
sixth pair of names — Hare Rāma — and a natural aversion
for that which is unrelated to Kṛṣṇa manifests. By the
sādhaka’s chanting of the holy name with complete
dedication to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, his heart melts and becomes
extremely soft. Tears (aśru), horripilation (pulaka) and
other aṣṭa-sāttvika-bhāvas manifest to the degree of
dhūmāyita (smouldering)3. With this pair of names, the
jāta-rati-sādhaka remembers how Rādhikā becomes
completely delighted upon obtaining Kṛṣṇa’s remnants
through Dhaniṣṭhā. Simultaneously She receives
information regarding where Their rendezvous will take
place later that evening.

Chanting the seventh pair of names — Rāma Rāma — the
nāma-sādhaka, who has taken shelter of mādhurya-rasa
with an exclusive service mood to Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
Yugala, attains the exclusive shelter of Śrī Rādhā’s
lotus feet. In other words, he attains the
transcendental sentiments of one of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s
maidservants (pālyadāsīs), whose hearts are one with
Hers. He also attains the ekādaśa-bhāvas and the five
daśās.4 Overwhelmed by the mood of separation
(vipralambha-rasa), however, the sādhaka performs nāma-
saṅkīrtana considering himself devoid of bhakti. At this
time an internal transcendental vision (sphūrti)
manifests in his heart: Śrī Rādhā is intensely eager to
meet Kṛṣṇa and, following Vṛndā-devī’s instruction, goes
to meet Him in a kuñja on the bank of the Yamunā. Śrī
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, fully absorbed in thinking of each
other, search for one another.

                           22
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


Performing kīrtana of the eighth pair of names — Hare
Hare — the sādhaka engages in the sweet prema-sevā of
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in the manifested Vraja-dhāma throughout the
eight divisions of the day and night (aṣṭa-kāla). In
other words, the sādhaka attains service imbued with the
mood of the gopīs in his eternal form (svarūpa). As he
performs nāma-bhajana of this pair of names, he
remembers the pastimes of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s meeting, in
which the completely dedicated mañjarīs of Śrī Rādhā are
serving Śrī Yugala by offering betel, massaging Their
feet and so on.

Śrī Bhajana-rahasya is truly a treasure chest of
rahasyas, intimate secrets. The secret of the
qualification to enter bhajana is hidden in the first
yāma of Bhajana-rahasya, niśānta-bhajana. This secret is
śraddhā, faith. After the stage of sādhu-saṅga, when
sādhana is executed through the performance of nāma-
saṅkīrtana under the shelter of the spiritual master and
with sambandha-jñāna, anarthas are eliminated. The first
verse of Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka, ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam,
indicates the most favourable process of bhajana for
this stage.

The second yāma, prātaḥ-kālīya-bhajana, holds the secret
of the removal of anarthas (anartha-nivṛtti) in the
association of devotees. Nāma (the holy name) and nāmī
(the possessor of the name) are non-different in tattva.
Mercy and all other potencies of the personification of
nāma are placed within the name of Bhagavān, and
cleansing the heart (ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam) becomes
possible by performing such bhajana. The second yāma
explains the secrets of nāma-bhajana in accordance with
the mood of the second verse of Śikṣāṣṭaka, which begins
with the words nāmnām akāri.

Bhajana with firm faith (bhajana-niṣṭhā) is the subject
of the third yāma, pūrvāhna-kālīya-bhajana. Performing
nāma-bhajana with niṣṭhā extinguishes the blazing forest
fire of material existence (bhava-mahā-dāvāgni). Bhajana
that is performed without pride (amānī) and with respect
for others in relation to their respective positions
(mānada) is the secret hidden within this yāma. This is
stated in the words of the third verse of Śikṣāṣṭaka,
tṛṇād api sunīcena taror api sahiṣṇunā.

The secrets of ruci are found to be concealed within the
fourth yāma, madhyāhna-kālīya-bhajana. In the stage of
ruci, the sādhaka has no other prominent desire but to
serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The transcendental sentiments of
prayers such as śreyaḥ kairava-candrikā-vitaraṇam
(Śikṣāṣṭaka (1)) and na dhanaṁ na janam (Śikṣāṣṭaka (4))
explain bhajana in this stage.

In the fifth yāma, aparāhna-kālīya-bhajana, the nāma-
sādhaka is praying to attain his true identity as an
eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa. Here an attachment for both
bhajana and the object of bhajana (bhajanīya) is
especially awakened. By performing such bhajana, one
realises that the holy name is without doubt the very
life of all transcendental knowledge, vidyā-vadhū-
jīvanam. At this stage, the mood of the prayer ayi nanda
tanuja kiṅkaram (Śikṣāṣṭaka (5)) appears in the heart of

                           23
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

the sādhaka.

The secret of performing nāma-bhajana with bhāva lies
hidden within the sixth yāma, sāyaṁ-kālīya-bhajana. At
this stage, the external symptoms of perfection become
visible. By performing nāma-saṅkīrtana with bhāva, the
ocean of transcendental bliss begins to expand
(ānandāmbudhi-vardhanam), and prayers like nayanaṁ
galad-aśru-dhārayā (Śikṣāṣṭaka (6)) arise in the
devotee’s heart. This is all discussed in this yāma.

The seventh yāma, pradoṣa-kālīya-bhajana, presents a
discussion on the internal symptoms of perfection. At
this stage, when nāma-bhajana is performed with
realisation of the mood of separation (viraha, or
vipralambha), it is possible to taste complete nectar at
every step, prati-padaṁ pūrṇāmṛtāsvādanam. Prayers to
obtain vipralambha-prema, as described in the seventh
verse of Śikṣāṣṭaka, yugāyitaṁ nimeṣeṇa, begin in this
yāma.

The secret of prema-bhajana is hidden in the eighth
yāma, rātri-līlā-bhajana, which describes perfection
together with aikāntika-niṣṭhā, one-pointed dependence
on Kṛṣṇa. Such a stage bestows sarvātma-snapanam, the
complete purification of the jīvātmā, both inside and
out. The desire to obtain bhāva (here referring to the
stage just prior to mahābhāva), which is described in
the eighth verse of Śikṣāṣtaka, āśliṣya vā pāda-ratām,
is contained within this eighth yāma.




Text 7

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.4.15—16) states:



ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-

saṅgo ‘tha bhajana-kriyā

tato ‘nartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt

tato niṣṭhā rucis tataḥ

athāsaktis tato bhāvas

tataḥ premābhyudañcati

sādhakānām ayaṁ premṇaḥ

prādurbhāve bhavet kramaḥ



[This verse describes the gradual development of the
sādhaka’s devotion.] Sukṛti that gives rise to bhakti
generates transcendental faith (paramārthika-śraddhā).
Faith in the words of the scriptures and a desire to
hear hari-kathā are the symptoms of this śraddhā. Upon

                             24
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

its appearance, one gets the opportunity for sādhu-
saṅga, and then bhajana-kriyā (devotional activity)
begins. Anartha-nivṛtti is also initiated at this time,
and thereafter niṣṭhā arises in bhajana. This is
followed by ruci, and then āsakti arises for both
bhajana and the object of bhajana. When this stage
ripens it is transformed into the state of bhāva, and
thereafter prema arises. This is how prema gradually
manifests in the heart of the sādhaka.



bhakti-mūlā sukṛti haite śraddhodaya

śraddhā haile sādhu-saṅga anāyāse haya

sādhu-saṅga phale haya bhajanera śikṣā

bhajana-śikṣāra saṅge nāma mantra dīkṣā

bhajite-bhajite haya anarthera kṣaya

anartha kharvita haile niṣṭhāra udaya

niṣṭhā-nāme yata haya anartha-vināśa

nāme tata ruci-krame haibe prakāśa

ruci-yukta nāmete anartha yata yāya

tatai āsakti nāme bhakta-jana pāya

nāmāsakti krame sarvānartha dūra haya

tabe bhāvodaya haya ei ta niścaya

iti madhye asat-saṅge pratiṣṭhā janmiyā

kuṭīnāṭī dvāre deya nimne phelāiyā

ati sāvadhāne bhāī asat-saṅga tyaja

nirantara parānande harināma bhaja




Text 8

The Kātyāyana-saṁhitā (quoted in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu
(1.2.51)) states:



varaṁ huta-vaha-jvālā

pañjarāntar-vyavasthitiḥ

na śauri-cintā-vimukha-

jana-saṁvāsa-vaiśasam



                           25
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017


Whether I am burned by fire or remain encaged forever, I
will never, ever desire the association of those who are
averse to Kṛṣṇa.




Text 9

The Viṣṇu-rahasya (Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.112))
states:



āliṅganaṁ varaṁ manye

vyāla-vyāghra-jalaukasām

na saṅgaḥ śalya-yuktānāṁ

nānā-devaikasevinām



It is better to live with or embrace a snake, a tiger or
an alligator than to associate with those whose hearts
are filled with varieties of material desires and who
worship various demigods.



agnite puḍi vā pañjarete baddha hai

tabu kṛṣṇa-bahirmukha saṅga nāhi lai

varaṁ sarpa-vyāghra-kumbhīrera āliṅgana

anyasevi saṅga nāhi kari kadācana



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti (for Texts 8—9)

These two Texts instruct the sādhaka to seek the
association of devotees of Kṛṣṇa who are like-minded and
favourable to oneself. The ācāryas instruct the sādhaka
to accept what is favourable for bhakti and to reject
what is unfavourable. One should completely give up bad
association. This means one should renounce association
with the opposite sex and with those desiring
liberation. The sādhaka should exclusively hear and
chant the narrations of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala’s
pastimes. The association of like-minded devotees is
beneficial for the performance of this sādhana.

A sādhaka should also stay far away from the association
of demigod worshippers; a good example of this are the
followers of the Śrī sampradāya, who never enter a
temple of Śiva nor worship him. The sādhaka should also
carefully avoid the company of materialists and persons
averse to Kṛṣṇa, for they will pollute his heart. In
this regard the example of Śrīla Gaura-kiśora dāsa

                           26
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                               5/5/2017

Bābājī is quite suitable. Occasionally, to avoid the
approach of materialists, Śrīla Bābājī Mahārāja would
lock himself in a public lavatory and perform his
bhajana there. He maintained that the stench of
excrement was superior to the “odour” of materialistic
people. Various kinds of material desires arise in the
heart of a jīva who has bad association, and he thus
becomes degraded. Therefore sādhakas of pure kṛṣṇa-
bhakti should avoid detrimental association.




Text 10

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (2.1.103) states that nāma-ābhāsa
destroys all sins and liberates one from material
existence:



taṁ nirvyājaṁ bhaja guṇa-nidhiṁ pāvanaṁ pāvanānāṁ

śraddhā rajyan matir atitarām uttama-śloka-maulim

prodyann antaḥ-karaṇa-kuhare hanta yan-nāma-bhānor

ābhāso ‘pi kṣapayati mahā-pātaka-dhvānta-rāśim



O reservoir of good qualities, just faithfully perform
bhajana of Śrī Kṛṣṇa without duplicity. He is the
supreme saviour among all saviours, and the most exalted
of those worshipped with poetic hymns. When even a
slight appearance of His name, which is like the sun,
arises in one’s cave-like heart, it destroys the
darkness of great sins that are present there.



parama pāvana kṛṣṇa tāṅhāra-caraṇa

niṣkapaṭa śraddhā-saha karaha bhajana

yāṅra nāma sūryābhāsa antare praveśi

dhvaṁsa kare kahāpāpa andhakāra rāśi

ei śikṣāṣṭake kahe kṛṣṇa-līlā-krama

ihāte bhajana-krame līlāra udgama

prathame prathama śloka bhaja kichu dina

dvitīya ślokete tabe haota pravīṇa

cāri śloke kramaśaḥ bhajana pakva kara

pañcama ślokete nija-siddha-deha bara

ai śloke siddha-dehe rādhā-padāśraya


                           27
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

ārambha kariyā krame unnati udaya

chaya śloka bhajite anartha dūre gela

tabe jāna siddha-dehe adhikāra haila

adhikāra nā labhiyā siddha-deha bhāve

viparyaya buddhi janme śaktira abhāve

sāvadhāne krama dhara yadi siddhi cāo

sādhura carita dekhi’ śuddha-buddhi pāo

siddha-deha peye krame bhajana karile

aṣṭa-kāla sevā-sukha anāyāse mile

śikṣāṣṭaka cinta, kara smaraṇa kīrtana

krame aṣṭa-kāla-sevā habe uddīpana

sakala anartha yābe pābe prema-dhana

catur-varga phalgu-prāya habe adarśana



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

When the holy name is chanted without any desire other
than that for bhakti, when it is not covered by jñāna,
karma and so forth, and when it is chanted in a
favourable mood with a sense of one’s relationship
(sambandha) with Kṛṣṇa, it is called śuddha-nāma, the
pure name. If it is not śuddha-nāma, it is called nāma-
ābhāsa, a semblance of the holy name. When one’s
chanting of the holy name is aśuddha, covered with
ignorance, or in other words when it has the defects of
bhrama (the tendency to commit mistakes) and pramāda
(the tendency to be illusioned), it is called nāma-
ābhāsa. Nāma-ābhāsa also refers to the chanting of the
name when one is absorbed in matters unrelated to Kṛṣṇa.
And when aśuddha-nāma is chanted with desires for
liberation and enjoyment, due to the influence of
māyāvāda (impersonalism) and so on, it is called nāma-
aparādha.

The semblance of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s name is so powerful that it
is capable of putting an end to the darkness of the
greatest of sins. Nāma-ābhāsa enters the ears of the
jīva, rises in his cave-like heart and liberates him.
Moreover, if one who chants nāma-ābhāsa gives up bad
association and constantly remains in the association of
pure devotees, he will very quickly attain śuddha-bhakti
and the topmost goal of life — kṛṣṇa-prema.

Nanda-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the ultimate limit of
bhagavattā (the quality of being Bhagavān). He is all-
powerful (sarva-śaktimān) and supremely merciful. Even a
semblance of His name burns the most terrible sins to
ashes and makes the heart pure and pleasant. It is
therefore necessary to perform one’s bhajana sincerely
and faithfully.

                           28
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017


The process of gradually developing kṛṣṇa-bhajana is
described in Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka. Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes will
progressively manifest in the heart of the sādhaka who
is following this process. First, one should practise
according to the rules of bhajana mentioned in the first
verse. Thereafter, by faithfully following the second,
third and fourth verses, one’s bhajana will gradually
become mature. When that is achieved, one should perform
bhajana according to the sentiments contained in the
fifth verse, and one should contemplate one’s perfect
spiritual body (siddha-deha), which develops gradually
by taking exclusive shelter of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s lotus
feet. By continuously performing bhajana in this way,
all anarthas will be removed and one will receive the
eligibility to attain one’s siddha-deha. As long as
anarthas are present, one can never attain one’s siddha-
deha. The intelligence of those who try to contemplate
their siddha-deha without sufficient qualification
becomes spoilt due to their lack of strength, and their
entire bhajana is ruined. This is called sahajiyā-bhāva,
and it is thoroughly opposed to pure bhajana. If there
is an honest desire to attain perfection, one should
carefully adopt the gradual process of bhajana as
mentioned previously and follow the path of Śrī Rūpa,
Śrī Raghunātha and other mahājanas who are expert in
bhajana.

By performing bhajana in this way and having obtained
one’s siddha-deha, one easily attains the happiness of
aṣṭa-kālīya-sevā, service in Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s eternal
pastimes during the eight periods of the day. Therefore,
contemplating the sentiments of Śikṣāṣṭaka through
smaraṇa and kīrtana will gradually stimulate aṣṭa-
kālīya-sevā. All anarthas will be removed by this
process and one will easily be able to attain prema-
dharma. At that time the four ultimate goals of human
life (puruṣārthas) — religiosity (dharma), economic
development (artha), sense gratification (kāma) and
liberation (mokṣa) — will appear very insignificant.




Text 11

The first verse of Śikṣāṣṭaka describes the sequence of
bhajana. First the mirror-like heart is cleansed by the
chanting of the holy name:



ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanaṁ bhava-mahā-dāvāgni-nirvāpaṇaṁ

śreyaḥ-kairava-candrikā-vitaraṇaṁ vidyā-vadhū-jīvanam

ānandāmbudhi-vardhanaṁ prati-padaṁ pūrṇāmṛtāsvādanaṁ

sarvātma-snapanaṁ paraṁ vijayate śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtanam



Let there be supreme victory for the chanting of the

                           29
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, which cleanses the mirror of the
heart and completely extinguishes the blazing forest
fire of material existence. Śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana
diffuses the moon rays of bhāva, which cause the white
lotus of good fortune for the jīvas to bloom. The holy
name is the life and soul of transcendental knowledge,
which is herein compared to a wife. It continuously
expands the ocean of transcendental bliss, enabling one
to taste complete nectar at every step, and thoroughly
cleanses and cools everything, both internally and
externally, including one’s body, heart, self (ātmā) and
nature.



saṅkīrtana haite pāpa-saṁsāra nāśana

citta śuddhi sarva-bhakti-sādhana udgama

kṛṣṇa premodgama premāmṛta-āsvādana

kṛṣṇa prāpti-sevāmṛta-samudre majjana



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The glory of śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana is mentioned first in
the teachings of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Because śrī-
kṛṣṇa-kīrtana is all-auspicious, the word param
(supreme) is used in the fourth line of this verse. This
word indicates pure saṅkīrtana, which is obtained in
progressive stages beginning with śraddhā and followed
by sādhu-saṅga and bhajana-kriyā. Caitanya Mahāprabhu,
the ocean of mercy and compassion, Himself appeared as a
sādhaka-bhakta. He sang the glories of śrī-kṛṣṇa-
saṅkīrtana, which is Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself, in order to
enlighten the living entities with the fundamental
truths of sambandha (relationship), abhidheya (the
process) and prayojana (the goal). For the benefit of
the jīvas, Śrī Bhagavān Himself appears in the material
world in the form of His name, which is the
transcendental, inconceivable, non-dual truth (aprākṛta-
acintya-advaya-tattva).

Our tattva-ācārya, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī, says that the one
Absolute Truth (parama-tattva) eternally exists in four
features by the influence of His inherent inconceivable
potency (svabhāvikī acintya-śakti). These four features
are: (1) svarūpa (His original form), (2) tad-rūpa-
vaibhava (His personal splendour), (3) jīva (the living
entity) and (4) pradhāna (the unmanifest state of
material nature). They can be compared to the four
aspects of the sun: (1) the effulgence situated in the
interior of the sun planet; (2) the sun globe; (3) the
atomic particles of light emanating from the sun globe;
and (4) the reflected rays of the sun. Although the sun
has four aspects, it is one.

Bhagavān’s parā-śakti (superior potency, also known as
svarūpa-śakti) is manifest in three forms: (1)
antaraṅga-śakti (internal potency), (2) taṭastha-śakti
(marginal potency) and (3) bahiraṅga-śakti (external
potency). By the antaraṅga-śakti, the Absolute Truth in

                           30
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

His complete and original feature eternally exists as
Bhagavān, devoid of all faults, supremely auspicious and
the basis of all transcendental qualities. Moreover, for
the accomplishment of His transcendental pastimes, tad-
rūpa-vaibhava (the Lord’s personal splendour,
specifically Vaikuṇṭha and other dhāmas, His associates,
and His forms such as Nārāyaṇa) is eternally established
by this same svarūpa-śakti.

This same Absolute Truth, when endowed only with the
marginal potency (taṭastha-śakti), exists as His
separate expansion (vibhinnāṁśa-svarūpa), which consists
of the innumerable infinitesimal conscious jīvas.
Although the infinitesimal conscious living entities
have no separate existence from Bhagavān, they cannot be
said to be Bhagavān, nor do they ever become Bhagavān.

Further, parama-tattva Bhagavān, by His external potency
(bahiraṅga-śakti), manifests this entire material world,
which is His external splendour. This material world is
a transformation of māyā-śakti, here meaning pradhāna,
the unmanifest material elements. In this way it is
proved that the living entities (jīvas), the material
world (jaḍa-jagat) and Bhagavān’s personal splendour
that is manifest as His Vaikuṇṭha existence (tad-rūpa-
vaibhava), are inconceivably one with and different from
(acintya-bhedābheda) Bhagavān’s original form.

The living entity’s eternal identity is understood by
the words ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanam. In this regard Jīva
Gosvāmī has concluded that the individual jīva is one
minute part of the Supreme Absolute Truth, who is
endowed with the marginal potency represented by the sum
total of all jīvas. The Supreme Lord is all-pervading
consciousness (vibhu-caitanya) and the living entity is
infinitesimal consciousness (aṇu-caitanya). The jīvas
are innumerable and are either conditioned (baddha) or
liberated (mukta). When the jīvas are vimukha,
indifferent to the Lord, they become conditioned. They
become liberated when they are unmukha, turned towards
Him, and the covering of māyā over the pure identity and
qualities of the jīva is removed.

Just as one’s face cannot be seen in a mirror that is
covered with dust, the jīva cannot perceive his actual
svarūpa in a heart that is covered by the dirt of
ignorance. When the practice of pure bhakti, which is
the essential function of the hlādinī-śakti, begins, one
engages in the process of śravaṇam, hearing. Thereafter,
śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana manifests automatically and
thoroughly cleanses the dirt of ignorance. When the
mirror of the heart is cleansed, it is possible to truly
have vision of one’s own svarūpa. The jīva’s
constitutional occupation (svadharma) is to serve
Bhagavān.

Bhava-mahā-dāvāgni-nirvāpaṇam — The purport of the word
bhava, mundane existence, is that the living entity has
to repeatedly take birth in this material world. This
bhava-mahā-dāvāgni, blazing forest fire of material
existence, cannot be extinguished by any means other
than śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana. Here a question may be
raised. Upon attaining knowledge of one’s svadharma,
does one cease to perform śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana? No, this

                           31
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

never happens. Hari-saṅkīrtana is the eternal occupation
of the living entity, and it is both the process
(sādhana) and the goal (sādhya).

Śreyaḥ-kairava-candrikā-vitaraṇam — For the living
entities ensnared by māyā, material enjoyment alone is
desirable and because of this they inevitably suffer the
threefold miseries. In complete opposition to this, it
is auspicious (śreyaḥ) to always be engaged in serving
Śrī Kṛṣṇa. This śreyaḥ is compared to the white water
lotus, which opens at night by the influence of the
moon. Śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana diffuses its moon rays of
bhāva and causes the white water lotus of auspiciousness
for the living entities to bloom.

Vidyā-vadhū-jīvanam — The power of śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana
removes the ignorance of the jīva, and then knowledge of
one’s relationship with Śrī Kṛṣṇa arises. Śrī-kṛṣṇa-
saṅkīrtana is therefore the life of all transcendental
knowledge, which has here been compared to a wife
(vadhū). Through saṅkīrtana the inherent identity of the
jīva manifests, and if by qualification one is fit to
taste mādhurya-rasa, he receives the pure spiritual form
of a gopī. Thus Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s svarūpa-śakti, which is the
embodiment of that transcendental knowledge, is compared
to a wife or consort.5

Ānandāmbudhi-vardhanam — Here another doubt may arise.
Since the inherent nature of the jīva is infinitesimal,
it may be assumed that his constitutional happiness is
also infinitesimal; but factually it is not. Śrī-kṛṣṇa-
saṅkīrtana unlimitedly expands the inherent
transcendental pleasure of the living entity by virtue
of the hlādinī-śakti. In other words, when the living
entity attains his purely spiritual form (śuddha-
svarūpa), he will gain boundless, transcendental
happiness.

Prati-padaṁ pūrṇāmṛtāsvādanam — Upon attaining his
śuddha-svarūpa and being eternally situated in one of
the transcendental rasas (dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya or
mādhurya), the jīva relishes the sweetness of Bhagavān’s
form and pastimes in an ever-new way at every moment. In
other words, he relishes the nectar of service to Nanda-
nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa in His two-armed form, holding a flute
and dressed as a cowherd boy.

Sarvātma-snapanam — At this stage, when the jīva’s heart
is completely pure and devoid of any selfish motive for
personal enjoyment, he naturally enjoys the
transcendental bliss of the loving pastimes of the
Divine Couple. In his internally contemplated spiritual
form he serves Them as a maidservant of Śrīmatī Rādhikā,
who is the embodiment of mahābhāva, the very essence of
hlādinī. The two words sarvātma-snapanam have been used
here to indicate supreme purity, completely devoid of
the faults of the desire to merge into Brahman and the
desire for selfish sense enjoyment.




Text 12

                           32
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017


The seventh verse of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī’s Nāmāṣṭaka
describes the holy name as the embodiment of
concentrated transcendental bliss and knowledge:



sūditāśrita-janārtir-āśaye ramya-

cid-ghana sukha-svarūpiṇe

nāma gokula-mahotsavāya te kṛṣṇa

pūrṇa-vapuṣe namo namaḥ



O destroyer of the numerous sufferings of those who have
taken shelter of You! O embodiment of delightful
transcendental bliss! O great festival for the residents
of Gokula! O all-pervading one! O Kṛṣṇa-nāma, time and
again I offer respects to You, who are replete with
these qualities.



āśrita janera saba ārtināśa kari

atiramya cidghana svarūpe vihari

gokulera mahotsava kṛṣṇa pūrna-rūpa

hena nāme nami prema pāī aparūpa

nāma kīrtane haya sarvānartha nāśa

sarva śubhodaya kṛṣṇe premera ullāsa



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu says, “The name of Kṛṣṇa removes
all kinds of distress and sorrow for those who have
taken shelter of Him. He especially removes the
Vrajavāsīs’ extreme pain of separation. Kṛṣṇa-nāma
sports as Nanda-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the personification
of supremely delightful, condensed, transcendental
happiness. The holy name is the great festival of Nanda-
Gokula and the very embodiment of Kṛṣṇa Himself. Please
let Me attain undivided love for śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma. Aho!
All anarthas will be completely destroyed through nāma-
saṅkīrtana, and all varieties of auspiciousness, as well
as joyful love for Kṛṣṇa, will arise.”

A question may arise here. The holy name is able to
destroy the thirty-two kinds of seva-aparādha, but how
can criticism of devotees and saintly persons (sādhu-
nindā) and the other nine kinds of nāma-aparādha be
destroyed? The answer is that they can also be destroyed
by chanting harināma. Mahāprabhu is speaking with this
mood.



                            33
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                                5/5/2017




Text 13

The path of aṣṭāṅga-yoga is always full of fear. Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (1.6.35) states:



yamādibhir yoga-pathaiḥ

kāma-lobha-hato muhuḥ

mukunda-sevayā yadvat

tathātmāddhā na śāmyati



The mind that is disturbed by the enemies of lust,
anger, greed and so forth does not become subdued or
peaceful by practising yama and niyama on the path of
aṣṭāṅga-yoga, as it does by performing service to Śrī
Mukunda, which completely controls it.



yoge śuddha kari’ citte ekāgraha kare

bahusthale e kathāra vyatikrama kare



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

In Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 22.29) it is
stated:



jñānī jīvan-mukta-daśā pāinu kari’ māne

vastutaḥ buddhi ‘śuddha’ nahe kṛṣṇa-bhakti bine



This verse describes how yogīs observe the practices of
aṣṭāṅga-yoga6, such as yama and niyama, in order to
restrain the senses. They use processes like prāṇāyāma
to pacify the restless mind, and they use pratyāhāra to
keep the objects of sense enjoyment far away. By
remembering their object of meditation, by repeated
dhāraṇā, and finally by samādhi, they become absorbed in
Brahman, which is devoid of transcendental pastimes.
Although they go through many difficulties and they
practise so much self-control, even if they become
successful they only attain a degraded state. The heart
of the jīva cannot become completely pure by doing yoga
and so forth, for upon seeing the forms and tasting the
objects that attract his senses, he again becomes
agitated to attain them. It is because of that desire
that he falls down. Examples of this are Maharṣi
Viśvāmitra and Saubhari Muni.

                           34
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017


The purity desired by the practitioner of aṣṭāṅga-yoga
is automatically manifest in the devotee who performs
bhakti-yoga; it naturally comes to the devotee on the
strength of bhakti. In bhakti-yoga the devotees, who are
fearless, free from care and sorrow, and without worldly
desires, are engaged in the service of Mukunda. Śrī
Mukunda, being pleased by their unalloyed devotion,
protects and maintains them under all circumstances.




Text 14

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.5.12) jñāna and karma are
condemned:



naiṣkarmyam apy acyuta-bhāva-varjitaṁ

na śobhate jñānam alaṁ nirañjanam

kutaḥ punaḥ śaśvad abhadram īśvare

na cārpitaṁ karma yad apy akāraṇam



Even pure knowledge (jñāna), which is the direct sādhana
to obtain liberation, has no beauty if it is devoid of
bhakti to Bhagavān. How then can selfless action
(niṣkāma-karma), which is not offered to Bhagavān, and
fruitive action (kāmya-karma), which is always
inauspicious in both its practice and perfection, be
beautiful?



nirañjana karmātīta, kabhu jñāna suśobhita,

śuddha bhakti vinā nāhi haya

svabhāva abhadra karma, haleo niṣkāma dharma,

kṛṣṇārpita naile śubha naya



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The word naiṣkarmya in this Text refers to niṣkāma-
karma, selfless action. Although such selfless action
does not have the variegated nature of karma-kāṇḍa,
devotees do not accept it because it is devoid of
worship of Bhagavān. Devotees also have no connection
with nirañjana-jñāna (knowledge freed from nescience) if
it is not dedicated to Bhagavān. Vairāgya (renunciation)
that does not lead to attachment for the lotus feet of
Bhagavān is also useless. The ācāryas have ascertained
that the jīva who leaves the eternal service of Hari and
runs towards inauspicious karma or contemptuous mokṣa

                              35
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

becomes bereft of his own supreme auspiciousness
forever.



Text 15

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.4) condemns the path of non-
devotion:



śreyaḥ-sṛtiṁ bhaktim udasya te vibho

kliśyanti ye kevala-bodha-labdhaye

teṣām asau kleśala eva śiṣyate

nānyad yathā sthūla-tuṣāvaghātinām



O Lord, devotional service unto You is the main source
of all kinds of auspiciousness. Those who give up this
path only to cultivate jñāna will simply undergo hard
work, suffer pain and achieve difficulty, just as the
only gain of a person who beats empty husks is hard
work, not rice.



bhakti-patha chāḍi’ kare jñānera prayāsa

miche kaṣṭa pāya tāra haya sarva-nāśa

ati kaṣṭe tuṣa kuṭi’ taṇḍūla nā pāya

bhakti-śūnya jñāne tathā vṛthā dina yāya



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Brahmājī says, “O Lord, the hard work of those who
disrespect the path of all-auspicious bhakti and strive
to attain nirviśeṣa-brahma-jñāna (knowledge aimed at
impersonal liberation) will only result in trouble. The
path of bhakti is extremely straightforward, simple and
easily attained without any effort. Bhagavān is pleased
merely with a leaf or flower if it is offered with a
heart full of love. But someone who leaves the service
of Bhagavān and endeavours to merge into Brahman will
only obtain misery.”




Text 16

The blazing fire of material existence is extinguished
by nāma-saṅkīrtana. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.2.46) says:



                           36
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                               5/5/2017


nātaḥ paraṁ karma-nibandha-kṛntanaṁ

mumukṣatāṁ tīrtha-padānukīrtanāt

na yat punaḥ karmasu sajjate mano

rajas-tamobhyāṁ kalilaṁ tato ‘nyathā



For those who desire liberation from the bondage of this
material existence, there is no other means than
chanting the name of Bhagavān, who sanctifies even the
holy places by the touch of His lotus feet. This nāma-
saṅkīrtana is able to destroy the root cause of all
sinful activities, because when the mind has taken
shelter of Bhagavān it will never again be caught by
fruitive activities. By taking shelter of any atonement
other than the name of Bhagavān, the heart will remain
affected by the modes of passion and ignorance, and sins
will not be destroyed at the root.



karma-bandha sukhaṇḍana, mokṣa prāpti saṅghaṭana,

kṛṣṇa-nāma-kīrtane sādhaya

karma-cakra rajas-tamaḥ, pūrṇa-rūpe vinirgama,

nāma vinā nāhi anyopāya




Text 17

Further, the Padma Purāṇa states:



sakṛd uccāritaṁ yena harir ity akṣara-dvayam

baddhaḥ parikaras tena mokṣāya gamanaṁ prati



A person who even once chants the two syllables ha and
ri easily attains liberation.



yāṅra mukhe ekabāra nāma nṛtya kare

mokṣa-sukha anāyāse pāya sei nare




Text 18


                             37
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

The holy name is like the moonlight that causes the
white water lotus of all-auspiciousness to blossom. The
Skanda Purāṇa says:



madhura-madhuram etan maṅgalaṁ maṅgalānāṁ

sakala-nigama-vallī sat-phalaṁ cit-svarūpam

sakṛd api parigītaṁ śraddhayā helayā vā

bhṛguvara nara-mātraṁ tārayet kṛṣṇa-nāma



The holy name is the most auspicious of all that is
auspicious, and the sweetest of all that is sweet. It is
the fully ripened transcendental fruit of all the
creepers of the Śrutis. O best of the Bhṛgu dynasty, if
a person even once chants the name of Kṛṣṇa without
offence — be it with faith or indifferently — that
chanting will deliver him from the bondage of material
existence.



sakala maṅgala haite parama maṅgala

cit-svārūpa sanātana vedavallī-phala

kṛṣṇa-nāma ekabāra śraddhāya helāya

yāṅhāra vedane sei mukta suniścaya




Text 19

The holy name is the life of all transcendental
knowledge, which is compared to a wife (vadhū). This is
supported by the following verse from the Garuḍa Purāṇa:



yad icchasi paraṁ jñānaṁ

jñānād yat paramaṁ padam

tad ādareṇa rājendra

kuru govinda-kīrtanam



O best of kings, if you desire to obtain the topmost
knowledge and the supreme goal of that knowledge, prema-
bhakti, then chant the holy name of Śrī Govinda with
great respect and devotion.




                           38
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

parama jñāna haite ye parama pada pāya

govinda-kīrtana sei karaha śraddhāya




Text 20

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.5.40) the demigods speak the
following:



dhātar yad asmin bhava īśa jīvās

tāpa-trayeṇābhihatā na śarma

ātman labhante bhagavaṁs tavāṅghri-

cchāyāṁ sa-vidyām ata āśrayema



O Vidhātā! O Lord! O Paramātmā! In this material world
the living entities, overwhelmed by the threefold
miseries, cannot find any peace. Therefore, O Bhagavān,
we take shelter of the shade of Your lotus feet, which
are full of knowledge.



e saṁsāre tāpa-traya, abhihata jīvacaya,

ohe kṛṣṇa nā labhe maṅgala

tava pada-chāyā vidyā, śubha dātā anavadyā,

tad-āśraye sarva-śubha phala



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The demigods are praying at the lotus feet of Bhagavān:
“O Lord, the jīva is experiencing the auspicious and
inauspicious fruits of lifetimes of karma. By the
management of māyā he is wandering around in the forest
of material existence, overwhelmed by suffering. The
jīva is endeavouring to find relief from these threefold
miseries, sometimes through knowledge and renunciation
and sometimes through knowledge of Brahman, but he is
unable to find peace. By obtaining liberation he wants
to become as if inert, unable to feel anything, just as
stones immersed in water cannot feel the pleasure of
being in water. Transcendental peace, para-śānti, is
attained at Śrī Hari’s lotus feet. By following the path
of bhakti, the living entity becomes immersed in an
ocean of transcendental peace and bliss. Thus, to take
shelter of Your lotus feet is the only means to attain
this para-śānti.”



                             39
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                               5/5/2017




Text 21

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (4.29.49) it is stated:



sā vidyā tan-matir yayā



Knowledge is that by which one’s attention is
concentrated upon Bhagavān.



ye śaktite kṛṣṇe kare udbhāvana

vidyā-nāme sei kare avidyā khaṇḍana

kṛṣṇa-nāma sei vidyā-vadhūra jīvana

kṛṣṇa-pāda-padme ye karaye sthira mana



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Bhagavān has only one potency (śakti), which has two
functions: knowledge (vidyā) and ignorance (avidyā).
Yogamāyā is knowledge and Mahāmāyā is ignorance.
Mahāmāyā is responsible for the creation of the material
world, and she covers the living entity’s eternal
identity and inherent qualities.

The word vidyā is derived from the verbal root vid, “to
know” or “to understand”. In other words vidyā is that
through which one can know service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. When
śuddha-bhakti arises in the heart of the sādhaka by his
continuous performance of hearing and chanting, at that
time Bhakti-devī removes his ignorance and dispels all
desires other than to attain the service of Bhagavān. By
vidyā-vṛtti, the function of knowledge, she destroys the
jīva’s coverings in the form of his gross and subtle
bodies and simultaneously manifests his pure spiritual
body according to his inherent nature (svarūpa). The
life of this transcendental knowledge (vidyā), which is
compared to a wife, is the holy name of Kṛṣṇa. This
vidyā fixes a person’s mind at the lotus feet of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu asked Rāya Rāmānanda:



prabhu kahe — “kaun vidyā vidyā madhye sāra?”

rāya kahe — “kṛṣṇa bhakti vinā vidyā nāhi āra”



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 8.245)



                           40
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017


“Which is the most important of all fields of
knowledge?” Rāya Rāmānanda replied, “Except for kṛṣṇa-
bhakti, no other education is important.”




Text 22

The chanting of the holy name expands the ocean of
transcendental bliss. It is stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(8.3.20):



ekāntino yasya na kañcanārthaṁ

vāñchanti ye vai bhagavat-prapannāḥ

aty-adbhutaṁ tac-caritaṁ sumaṅgalaṁ

gāyanta ānanda-samudra-magnāḥ



The devotees who are exclusively surrendered unto
Bhagavān, and who have no other desire than to attain
Him, become immersed in an ocean of bliss by performing
saṅkīrtana of His wonderful and supremely auspicious
pastimes.



akiñcana haye kare ekānta kīrtana

ānanda samudre magna haya sei jana



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

This Text comes from Gajendra’s prayers to Bhagavān,
when Gajendra was being attacked by the crocodile. The
sādhaka will also realise Bhagavān in his heart by
constantly chanting the holy name. Śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana
unlimitedly expands the jīva’s inherent transcendental
pleasure by virtue of the essential function of the
hlādinī-śakti. When the jīva attains his pure spiritual
form, he experiences unlimited bliss. In this condition
he is eternally situated in one of the transcendental
rasas — dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya or mādhurya — and he
relishes complete nectar at every step by virtue of the
ever-increasing freshness of his attachment to Śrī Kṛṣṇa
(nava-navāyamāna-anurāga).




Text 23

Nāma-saṅkīrtana enables one to taste complete nectar at

                           41
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                               5/5/2017

every step; therefore the Padma Purāṇa states:



tebhyo namo ‘stu bhava-vāridhi-jīrṇa-paṅka-

sammagna-mokṣaṇa-vicakṣaṇa-pādukebhyaḥ

kṛṣṇeti varṇa-yugalaṁ śravaṇena yeṣām

ānandathur bhavati nartita-roma-vṛndaḥ



The devotees whose bodily hairs stand on end and whose
hearts tremble with bliss upon hearing the two syllables
kṛ and ṣṇa, deliver the living entities engrossed in
material existence. Clear-sighted, intelligent persons
who desire eternal auspiciousness surrender to the lotus
feet of these rasika-bhaktas.



kṛṣṇa-nāma suni’ roma-vṛnda nṛtya kare

ānanda kampana haya yāṅhāra śarīre

bhava-sindhu-paṅka magna jīvera uddhāra

vicakṣaṇa tiṅho nami caraṇe tāṅhāra



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

I offer my repeated obeisances unto the lotus feet of
those persons whose bodily hairs stand on end, whose
hearts tremble with bliss, and from whose eyes tears
flow upon hearing the name of Kṛṣṇa. Such devotees, who
are most fortunate and magnanimous, are expert in
delivering the jīvas sunk in the horrible mud of
material existence.




Text 24

Chanting the holy name completely cleanses the self.
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (12.12.48) states:



saṅkīrtyamāno bhagavān anantaḥ

śrutānubhāvo vyasanaṁ hi puṁsām

praviśya cittaṁ vidhunoty aśeṣaṁ

yathā tamo ‘rko ‘bhram ivāti-vātaḥ




                           42
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

Bhagavān Śrī Hari Himself enters the heart of a devotee
who describes His name, form, qualities, pastimes and so
on, or hears His glories; and He destroys all the
darkness of the sins present there. Upon entering the
heart of the jīva, Bhagavān destroys his offences,
impediments, duplicity and material desires, just as the
sun drives away darkness or a powerful wind scatters the
clouds. This cleanses the mirror-like hearts of those
who take shelter of Kṛṣṇa’s name, and very quickly they
attain their pure transcendental forms.



śruta anubhūta yata anartha saṁyoga

śrī kṛṣṇa kīrtane saba haya ta viyoga

ye rūpa vāyute megha sūrya tamaḥ nāśe

citte praveśiyā doṣa aśeṣa vināśe

kṛṣṇa nāmāśraye citta darpaṇa mārjana

ati śīghra labhe jīva kṛṣṇa prema-dhana



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The glories of nāma-saṅkīrtana are described in this
Text. Nāma Prabhu enters the heart of the living entity
who is performing nāma-saṅkīrtana, destroys all his
anarthas and makes his heart soft and smooth. Not only
that, nāma-saṅkīrtana will also destroy all kinds of
anarthas in a person who merely sees or hears
saṅkīrtana, just as the sun drives away darkness or the
wind drives away the clouds. The scriptures state that
the jīvas’ tendency to enjoy will be completely
destroyed on the strength of performing nāma-kīrtana in
the association of devotees. At the end of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (12.13.23) Śrī Vedavyāsa glorifies nāma-
saṅkīrtana:



nāma-saṅkīrtanaṁ yasya

sarva-pāpa-praṇāśanam

praṇāmo duḥkha-śamanas

taṁ namāmi hariṁ param



All sins are completely destroyed by the chanting of
Bhagavān’s names, and all kinds of miseries are relieved
by complete surrender to His lotus feet and by always
bowing down to Him. I offer my respectful obeisances
unto that Absolute Truth, Śrī Hari.




                           43
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017


Text 25

The holy name is Kṛṣṇa Himself and the sweet embodiment
of transcendental mellows (caitanya-rasa-vigraha). In
Nāmāṣṭaka (8) it is stated:



nārada-vīṇojjīvana! sudhormi-

niryāsa-mādhurī-pūra!

tvaṁ kṛṣṇa-nāma! kāmaṁ

sphura me rasane rasena sadā



O life of Nārada’s vīṇā! O crest of the waves upon the
transcendental ocean of nectar! O condensed form of all
sweetness! O Kṛṣṇa-nāma! By Your own sweet will, may You
always appear on my tongue along with all transcendental
rasa.



muni-vīṇā-ujjīvana-sudhormi-niryāsa

mādhurīte paripūrṇa kṛṣṇa-nāmocchvāsa

sei nāma anargala āmāra rasane

nācuna rasera saha ei vāñchā mane



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Here Rūpa Gosvāmī prays: “O life of Nārada Muni’s vīṇā!
O crest of the waves on the transcendental ocean of
nectar! O condensed form of all sweetness! O Kṛṣṇa-nāma!
May You always, by Your own will, dance on my tongue
with all transcendental rasa. This is my prayer at Your
lotus feet.”




Text 26

The second verse of Nāmāṣṭaka states:



jaya nāmadheya! muni-vṛnda-geya!

jana-rañjanāya param akṣarākṛte!

tvam anādarād api manāg-udīritaṁ

nikhilogra-tāpa-paṭalīṁ vilumpasi


                           44
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017



O Harināma, the great sages constantly chant Your
glories. To delight the devotees You have appeared in
the form of transcendental syllables. All victory unto
You! May Your excellence forever be splendidly manifest,
and may You display it to all. Prabhu, Your excellence
is such that even if Your name is chanted only once and
without respect — that is, to indicate something else,
jokingly and so forth — it completely destroys the most
fearsome of sins, and even sinful thoughts. Thus, make
me surrender to You without fail, and by my remembrance
of Your power, purify me because I proclaim Your
glories.



jīva śiva lāgi’ paramākṣara ākāra

muni-vṛnda gāya śraddhā kari’ anivāra

jaya jaya harināma akhilogratāpa

nāśa kara helā gāne e baḍa pratāpa



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

O Lord, You have manifested as transcendental syllables
(śabda-brahma) for the benefit of the living entities.
The great munis and maharṣis always faithfully chant
these glories of Yours. All victory, all victory to the
holy name, which destroys all fearsome sufferings, even
if chanted indifferently.




Text 27

The Vedas (Ṛg Veda 1.156.3) describe the truth of the
holy name (nāma-tattva):



oṁ ity etad brahmaṇo nediṣṭaṁ

nāma yasmād uccāryamāna

eva saṁsāra-bhayāt tārayati

tasmād ucyate tāra iti



One who chants oṁ, which is very close to Brahman (here
meaning Bhagavān) and which indicates Brahman, is
liberated from the fear of the material world by this
name. Therefore oṁ is famous by the name tāraka-brahma
(the deliverer).



                              45
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


Text 28

oṁ āsya jānanto nāma-cid-vivaktan mahas te viṣṇo

sumatiṁ bhajāmahe oṁ tat sat



O Viṣṇu, all the Vedas appear from Your name, which is
fully conscious and all-illuminating. Your name is the
personification of transcendence and supreme bliss, and
it is the embodiment of easily obtainable transcendental
knowledge. I worship You by thoughtfully performing
continuous chanting of Your name.



Text 29

tato ‘bhūt trivṛd oṁkāro

yo ‘vyakta prabhavaḥ svarāṭ

yat tal liṅgaṁ bhagavato

brahmaṇaḥ paramātmanaḥ



Śrī Bhagavān is imperceptible; He is both undivided and
divided. The syllables found in the word oṁ are His
manifestation, and He is manifest in the three forms of
Brahman, Paramātmā and Bhagavān. The three syllables in
the oṁkāra represent the names Hari, Kṛṣṇa and Rāma. The
name of Hari is non-different from Hari Himself.



avyakta haite kṛṣṇa svarāṭa svatantra

brahma, ātmā, bhagavān liṅgatraya tantra

a-kāra u-kāra āra ma-kāra nirdeśa

oṁ hari kṛṣṇa rāma nāmera viśeṣa

hari haite abhinna sakala harināma

vācya-vācaka bhede pūrṇa kare kāma



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The manifest Brahman, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is much greater than
the unmanifest Brahman and completely independent from
it. Parabrahma Śrī Kṛṣṇa is always manifest in the three
forms of Brahman, Paramātmā and Bhagavān. The three
syllables in the oṁkāra — a, u and m — represent Hari,
Kṛṣṇa and Rāma, respectively. Śrī Hari is non-different
from all the names of Hari. His personal form is known
as vācya (that which is nameable) and His transcendental
name is known as vācaka (that which denotes). These two

                              46
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

forms fulfil the desires of each and every sādhaka. (The
syllables in the oṁkāra also have the following meaning:
a — Kṛṣṇa, u — Śrī Rādhā, m — gopīs, and the candrabindu
(the dot over the m) — the jīva.)



Text 30

Śrī Caitanya-bhāgavata (Madhya-khaṇḍa 23.76—8) states:



hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare

hare rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare

prabhu kahe kahilāma ei mahā-mantra

ihā japa giyā sabe kariyā nirbandha

ihā haite sarva-siddhi haibe sabāra

sarva-kṣaṇa bala ithe vidhi nāhi āra



The Lord said, “Regularly chant japa of this mahā-
mantra. In this way you will attain all perfection.
Chant at any time and in any circumstance; there are no
other rules for chanting.”



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Śrīman Mahāprabhu says that by chanting the mahā-mantra
all bondage will vanish and the jīva will achieve
perfection. In other words, he will attain kṛṣṇa-prema.
Therefore one should chant the mahā-mantra at all times.
One is not required to follow any special rules or
regulations to chant it.




Text 31

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.103) states:



acirād eva sarvārthaḥ

siddhaty eṣām abhīpsitaḥ

sad-dharmasyāvabodhāya

yeṣāṁ nirbandhinī matiḥ



The holy name is the bestower of all perfection, and

                           47
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

those who continuously chant harināma with such firm
faith and conviction quickly obtain the fruit of prema.



nirbandhinī-mati-saha kṛṣṇa-nāma kare

atiśīghra prema-phala sei nāme dhare



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

One who has a firm desire in his heart to know true
dharma will very quickly have his inner desire
fulfilled. The perfection and inner desire of devotees
is to attain the service of Govinda’s lotus feet. This
service is realised by affectionately completing one’s
fixed amount of nāma. By firmly chanting a fixed amount
of harināma, prema will be incited in the heart of the
sādhaka by the mercy of Nāma Prabhu. Day and night,
nāma-ācārya Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura was chanting three
lakhas of harināma with determination. His vow was:



khaṇḍa-khaṇḍa hai deha yāya yadi prāṇa

tabu āmi vadane nā chāḍi harināma



Śrī Caitanya-bhāgavata (Ādi-khaṇḍa 16.94)



Even if my body is cut to pieces and my life air exits,
I will never abandon the chanting of harināma.




Text 32

Hari-bhakti-vilāsa gives the following injunctions for
chanting:



tulasī-kāṣṭha-ghaṭitair

maṇibhir japa-mālikā

sarva-karmāṇi sarveṣām

īpsitārtha-phala-pradā

go-puccha-sadṛśī kāryā

yad vā sarpākṛtiḥ śubhā

tarjanyā na spṛśet sūtraṁ


                            48
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

kampayen na vidhūnayet

aṅguṣṭha-parva-madhyasthaṁ

parivartaṁ samācaret

na spṛśet vāma-hastena

kara-bhraṣṭāṁ na kārayet

bhuktau muktau tathā kṛṣṭau

madhya-māyāṁ japet sudhīḥ



A japa-mālā made of tulasī or precious stones fulfils
all kinds of inner desires. A japa-mālā shaped like a
cow’s tail or a snake is auspicious. One should not
touch the japa-mālā with the forefinger. One should not
swing or shake the mālā again and again while chanting.
Chant and change the direction of the mālā using the
thumb and the middle finger. Do not touch the mālā with
the left hand, and do not let it fall from the hand.
Those who desire material enjoyment (bhukti) and those
who desire liberation (mukti) chant with the middle
finger.



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Although it is mentioned that one can use a japa-mālā of
precious stones, such a mālā is not used in our
sampradāya. Also, it is mentioned that chanting with the
middle finger is for those desiring sense enjoyment and
liberation. Nonetheless, we chant in this way because we
should follow the method adopted by our guru-paramparā.




Text 33

Hari-bhakti-vilāsa states:



manaḥ saṁharaṇaṁ śaucaṁ

maunaṁ mantrārtha-cintanam

avyagratvam anirvedo

japa-sampatti-hetavaḥ



While chanting, one should be one-pointed and give up
talking about mundane topics. With a pure heart, one
should think about the meaning of the holy name, and be
steadfast and patient in his chanting and remembrance of
the holy name.

                              49
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017




japa kāle manake ekāgrabhāve laha

citte śuddha thāka, vṛthā kathā nāhi kaha

nāmārtha cintaha sadā dhairyāśraya kara

nāmete ādara kari’ kṛṣṇa-nāma smara



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The method for one to perfect the chanting of his
mantras, both harināma and gāyatrī, is described in this
Text.

Manaḥ saṁharaṇam — While chanting the holy name, one
should fix the mind on the desired name of the Lord and
remember pastimes connected with that name. The mind of
the conditioned living entity wanders to different
subject matters, and therefore one should stay in the
association of sādhus and control the mind through
renunciation and practice.

Śauca — It is necessary for the sādhaka to maintain a
standard of external cleanliness through bathing and so
forth, and to keep his mind pure through internal
cleanliness. He can do this by bringing the six enemies
headed by lust under control. In this way his mind will
not be attracted to anything other than Kṛṣṇa.

Mauna — To speak only bhagavat-kathā and reject talk
unrelated to Kṛṣṇa is known as mauna (silence). One
should not talk about anything mundane while chanting.

Avyagratā — The restless nature of the unsteady mind is
called vyagratā. One should chant with avyagratā, a
peaceful and undisturbed mind.

Anirveda — One should not become discouraged by moving
slowly in his endeavour to attain the desired goal;
rather, one should chant with patience.

Nāmārtha-cintana — While chanting the holy name, the
sādhaka should remember Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes of
meeting (milana) and separation (vipralambha). When he
chants his mantras, he should practise in the following
five ways:

(1) The sādhaka should know the meaning of the mantra,
and remember the predominating deity of the mantra (the
mantra-devatā) and his own specific relationship with
that deity.

(2) Nyāsa — “The deity of the mantra is my protector” —
this conviction is called nyāsa. It is true that success
can be attained by uttering the mantra one time only;
nonetheless, the mantra is uttered 10 or 108 times for
the pleasure of the mantra-devatā. This is also called
nyāsa.


                           50
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

(3) Prapatti — “I take shelter of the lotus feet of the
mantra-devatā” — this is called prapatti.

(4) Śaraṇāgati — “I am a jīva who is suffering
extremely, and therefore I surrender to the deity” —
this resolve is śaraṇāgati.

(5) Ātma-nivedana — “Whatever I have belongs to Him; it
is not mine. I am not mine either; I am His for Him to
enjoy.” This is ātma-nivedana.

If one follows the process comprised of these five
limbs, he will quickly attain perfection in chanting his
mantras.




Text 34

Śrī Gopāla-guru explains the meaning of the holy name as
follows:



vijñāpya bhagavat-tattvaṁ

cid-ghanānanda-vigraham

haraty avidyāṁ tat kāryam

ato harir iti smṛtaḥ

harati śrī-kṛṣṇa-manaḥ

kṛṣṇāhlāda-svarūpiṇī

ato harety anenaiva

śrī-rādhā parikīrtitā

ānandaika-sukha-svāmī

śyāmaḥ kamala-locanaḥ

gokulānandano nanda-

nandanaḥ kṛṣṇa īryate

vaidagdhī sāra-sarvasvaṁ

mūrti-līlādhidaivatam

rādhikāṁ ramyan nityaṁ

rāma ity abhidhīyate



The Supreme Person Śrī Bhagavān has descended in the
form of the holy name, which is the embodiment of
condensed knowledge and bliss. While remembering the
name of Bhagavān, one should remember that nāma and nāmī

                            51
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

are non-different. In the first stage of a sādhaka’s
progress, the holy name removes ignorance. Therefore He
is Hari, “He who removes”. The rasika-ācāryas, however,
taste harināma by thinking that, in the kuñjas
Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Śrī Rādhā is stealing away the mind of
Śrī Hari by Her service. He who chants Hare Kṛṣṇa with
this meditation attains prema-bhakti. Śrī Rādhā is
kṛṣṇa-hlādinī-rūpiṇī, the embodiment of Kṛṣṇa’s own
pleasure potency. She steals away Kṛṣṇa’s mind, and
therefore Her name is Harā. The vocative form of Harā is
Hare. Thus, Hare Kṛṣṇa means Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala.

The names Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa are sac-cid-ānanda, full of
eternity, knowledge and bliss. Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are
personally present in Hare Kṛṣṇa. The eternal master of
Śrī Rādhā, who is bliss personified, is Śyāma, who has
eyes like lotus petals and who desires that Śrī Rādhikā
always be happy. Nanda-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the giver of
bliss to the residents of Gokula, is always yearning to
taste happiness with Śrī Rādhā. Kṛṣṇa is Līleśvara, a
clever dhīra-lalita-nāyaka7; therefore His name is
Rādhā-ramaṇa. The Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra is comprised of
names of the Divine Couple. While chanting this mantra
one should remember Their pastimes.



cid-ghana ānanda-rūpa śrī bhagavān

nāma-rūpe avatāra ei ta pramāṇa

avidyā-haraṇa kārya haite nāma hari

ataeva hare kṛṣṇa nāme yāya tari

kṛṣṇāhlāda-svarūpiṇī śrī rādhā āmāra

kṛṣṇa mana hare tāi harā nāma tāṅra

rādhā-kṛṣṇa śabde śrī sac-cid-ānanda rūpa

hare kṛṣṇa śabde rādhā-krṣṇera svarūpa

ānanda-svarūpa-rādhā tāṅra nitya svāmī

kamala-locana śyāma rādhānanda-kāmī

gokula-ānanda nanda-nandana śrī kṛṣṇa

rādhā-saṅge sukhāsvāde sarvadā satṛṣṇa

vaidagdhya-sāra-sarvasva mūrta līleśvara

śrī rādhā-ramaṇa rāma nāma ataḥpara

hare kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra śrī yugala nāma

yugala līlāra cintā kara avirāma



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the personification of condensed eternity,

                           52
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

knowledge and bliss (sac-cid-ānanda). He is an ocean of
compassion. The clear proof of this is that He has
appeared on this Earth in the form of His name for the
benefit of the living entities. This form of Hari is
performing the task of removing ignorance. Therefore
those who affectionately chant harināma are saved from
this illusory world created by ignorance.

Śrī Rādhā is the essence of the hlādinī-śakti, and She
is always giving supreme pleasure to Svayam Bhagavān Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. She even steals away the mind of parama-puruṣa
Śrī Kṛṣṇa with Her sweet form and qualities and by Her
service, which is filled with prema. Therefore, one of
Her names is Harā. “Hare” in the mahā-mantra is the
vocative form of Harā, which refers to Śrī Rādhā. Thus,
the devotee who is exclusively intent on the Divine
Couple (the aikāntika-bhakta) accepts Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa as the
only meaning of Hare Kṛṣṇa. Śrī Rādhā is the
personification of bliss (ānanda-svarūpiṇī). Kamala-
locana Śyāmasundara is Her eternal beloved, prāṇa-
vallabha. He is always intent on pleasing Śrī Rādhā, but
He nonetheless remains indebted to Her. The source of
the great festival of bliss of Gokula, Nanda-nandana, is
the supremely attractive attractor. Therefore He is
named Kṛṣṇa. Even though He always tastes happiness in
Śrī Rādhā’s association, He always remains eager for it.
He is famous as Rādhā-ramaṇa because He, Līleśvara, the
personification and essence of all vaidagdhya
(cleverness in amorous pastimes), is always with Śrī
Rādhā, playing (ramaṇa) inside and outside Her heart.
This Rādhā-ramaṇa Śrī Kṛṣṇa is called Rāma in the mahā-
mantra. It should be understood that Hare Kṛṣṇa in the
mahā-mantra means Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala. Therefore, while
performing japa or kīrtana of the mahā-mantra, one
should continuously remember the pastimes of Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa Yugala.




Text 35

The Bṛhan-nāradīya Purāṇa states:



harer nāma harer nāma

harer nāmaiva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva

nāsty eva gatir anyathā



In Kali-yuga there is no other way for the jīva than
chanting the holy name. There is no other way, there is
no other way.



anya dharma karma chāḍi harināma sāra

                            53
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


kali-yuge tāhā vinā gati nāhi āra



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

In Kali-yuga, Svayam Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa has appeared in
the form of His name. Through harināma the whole world
can be delivered. The words harer nāma in this Text are
used three times to make people with mundane
intelligence become fixed in chanting harināma. The word
kevala (meaning “only”) is used to make it abundantly
clear that jñāna, yoga, tapasya and other activities are
to be renounced. Salvation is never possible for one who
disregards this instruction of the scriptures. To
emphasise this, the words nāsty eva (meaning “no other
way”) are repeated three times at the end of the śloka.




Text 36

The Bhāgavata-nāma-kaumudī states:



naktaṁ divā ca gatabhir jita-nidra eko

nirviṇṇa īkṣita-patho mita-bhuk praśāntaḥ

yady acyute bhagavati sva-mano na sajjen

nāmāni tad-rati-karāṇi paṭhed vilajjaḥ



If your mind is not absorbed in the name of Śrī Bhagavān
Acyuta, then day and night without shyness chant those
principal names that are endowed with rati (such as
Rādhā-ramaṇa, Vraja-vallabha and Gopījana-vallabha).
Minimise sleep, eat moderately, and proceed on the path
of spiritual truth with a peaceful mind and a disregard
for worldly things.



rātra dina unnidra nirvighna nirbhaya

mitabhuk praśānta nirjane cintāmaya

lajjā tyaji kṛṣṇa-rati uddīpaka nāma

uccāraṇa kare bhakta kṛṣṇāsakti kāma




Text 37

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.3.22) states:

                           54
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017




etāvān eva loke ‘smin

puṁsāṁ dharmaḥ paraḥ smṛtaḥ

bhakti-yogo bhagavati

tan-nāma-grahaṇādibhiḥ



Only the worship of Bhagavān Śrī Vāsudeva, performed
through nāma-saṅkīrtana, is called bhakti-yoga. This
alone is the supreme dharma for the living entities.



bhakti-yoga kṛṣṇa-nāma grahaṇādi rūpa

para dharma nāme tāra nirṇīta svarūpa



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Only nāma-saṅkīrtana is directly bhakti-yoga, and in
Kali-yuga it is the only means by which Śrī Vrajarāja-
nandana can be controlled. A question may arise here: if
sense enjoyment and so forth are easily attained through
nāma-kīrtana, why are learned persons teaching karma-
yoga? The answer is that the intelligence of
Yājñavalkya, Jaiminī and the other compilers of dharma-

śāstras was often bewildered by Māyā-devī. Their minds
remained attracted to the beautiful explanations given
at that time of the Ṛg, Yajur and Sāma Vedas, and they
were engrossed in the various kinds of activities by
which, with great difficulty, one obtains the
insignificant and temporary result of attaining Svarga,
the heavenly planets. The topmost dharma is nāma-

kīrtana, which is easily performed; however, they were
unable to understand this.



Text 38

While chanting harināma, one should remember Kṛṣṇa’s
pastimes. “Niśānte kīrtane kuñja-bhaṅga kare dhyāna,
krame krame citta lagne rasera vidhāna — by remembering
and performing kīrtana of niśānta-līlā, or kuñja-bhaṅga-
līlā, the mind will gradually relish rasa.” Govinda-
līlāmṛta (1.10) states:

At the end of the night, Vṛndā-devī, fearing the
approach of day, indicates to the śuka (parrot), śārī
(female parrot) and other birds to make sweet sounds to
awaken Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. A cool, gentle, fragrant breeze
is slowly blowing. With charming calls, the peacocks,
peahens, śuka, sārī and papīhā (cuckoos) glorify Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. They say, “O Vrajarāja-nandana!

                              55
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

O Nikuñjeśvarī! When will we receive Your darśana?”
Although the Divine Couple have been aroused by the
sweet chirping of the birds, They embrace each other in
fear of being separated and again fall asleep, weary
from amorous play. The more Vṛndā-devī tries to wake
Them, the more They drowsily pretend to sleep deeply,
for They do not desire to leave one another. At that
time, the she-monkey Kakkhaṭī loudly cries “Jaṭilā!
Jaṭilā!” and They awaken, filled with fear. (The meaning
of “Jaṭilā” is “Morning has come and the sun-rays, which
look like matted hair (jaṭā), are about to appear.” But
it can also mean “Jaṭilā is coming”, Jaṭilā being Śrī
Rādhā’s mother-in-law.) The nitya-sakhīs and prāṇa-
sakhīs enter the kuñja. These mañjarī-sakhīs redecorate
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa with clothes and ornaments, concealing
the signs of Their amorous pastimes, and then they call
the priya-sakhīs and priya-narma-sakhīs. Kiśora and
Kiśorī joke with each other, and Śrī Lalitā performs
Their ārati. Thereafter They proceed to Their respective
residences.



dekhiyā aruṇodaya, vṛndā-devī vyasta haya,

kuñje nānā rava karāila

śuka-sārī-padya suni, uṭhe rādhā nīlamaṇi,

sakhī-gaṇa dekhi hṛṣṭa hailā

kālocita sulalita, kakkhaṭīra rave bhīta,

rādhā-kṛṣṇa satṛṣṇa haiyā

nija-nija gṛhe gelā, nibhṛte śayana kailā,

dūṅhe bhaji se līlā smariyā

ei līlā smara āra gāo kṛṣṇa-nāma,

kṛṣṇa-līlā prema-dhana pābe kṛṣṇa-dhāma



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Niśānta-līlā, the pastime at night’s end, is also called
kuñja-bhaṅga-līlā because Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa have to
separate after Their night-long pastimes in the kuñja.
The eager sādhaka who remembers and performs kīrtana of
this pastime will very quickly become eligible for the
treasure of kṛṣṇa-prema.



Thus ends the Prathama-yāma-sādhana,

Niśānta-bhajana, of Śrī Bhajana-rahasya.




                              56
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

2 Dvitīya-yāma-sādhana: Prātaḥ-kālīya-bhajana — anartha-
nivṛtti in sādhu-saṅga (the first six daṇḍas of the
morning: approximately 6.00 a.m. — 8.30 a.m.)




Text 1

There is no consideration of proper or improper time in
regard to chanting the Lord’s holy names, which are
fully endowed with all potencies. This is described in
the second verse of Śikṣāṣṭaka:



nāmnām akāri bahudhā nija-sarva-śaktis

tatrārpitā niyamitaḥ smaraṇe na kālaḥ

etādṛśī tava kṛpā bhagavan mamāpi

durdaivam īdṛśam ihājani nānurāgaḥ



O Bhagavān, Your names bestow all auspiciousness upon
the jīvas. Therefore, for their benefit, You are
eternally manifest as Your innumerable names, such as
Rāma, Nārāyaṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Mukunda, Mādhava, Govinda and
Dāmodara. You have invested those names with all the
potencies of Their respective forms. Out of Your
causeless mercy, You have not even imposed any
restrictions on the remembrance of these names, as is
the case with certain prayers and mantras that must be
chanted at specific times (sandhyā-vandana). In other
words, the holy name of Bhagavān can be chanted and
remembered at any time of the day or night. This is the
arrangement You have made. O Prabhu, You have such
causeless mercy upon the jīvas; nevertheless, due to my
nāma-aparādha, I am so unfortunate that no attachment
for Your holy name, which is so easily accessible and
which bestows all good fortune, has awakened within me.



aneka lokera vāñchā aneka prakāra

kṛpāte karila aneka nāmera pracāra

khāite suite yathā tathā nāma laya

deśa-kāla-niyama nāhi sarva-siddhi haya

sarva-śakti nāme dila kariyā vibhāga

āmāra durdaiva nāme nāhi anurāga



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The innumerable people in this material world have many
different kinds of desires. Even so, Bhagavān is

                           57
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

supremely merciful and appears in this world as His
different names to fulfil these various desires. All
perfection is attained by harināma, even if it is
chanted while eating, drinking, sleeping or moving
about; nor are place, time, rules and so forth
considerations while chanting. All of Bhagavān’s
potencies are invested in His names.

The holy names are of two kinds: primary (mukhya) and
secondary (gauṇa). Names related to the material world,
like Brahman, Paramātmā and Jagadīśa, are secondary
names. Primary names are also of two kinds: those that
are full of opulence (aiśvarya-para) and those that are
full of sweetness (mādhurya-para). Names like Hari,
Nārāyaṇa and Vāsudeva are full of opulence, and names
like Kṛṣṇa, Madana-mohana, Govinda, Gopīnātha and Rādhā-
ramaṇa are full of sweetness. From the names of Bhagavān
that are related to this world (that is, the secondary
names), one attains sense enjoyment (bhoga) and
liberation (mokṣa), from aiśvarya-para names one attains
the aiśvarya-prema of Vaikuṇṭha, and from mādhurya-para
names one attains vraja-prema. The sādhaka chanting
harināma will take shelter of a specific name according
to his own mood and will thus have his heart’s desire
fulfilled.




Text 2

A prayer for attaining attachment for the holy name is
given in the fifth verse of Nāmāṣṭaka:



aghadamana-yaśodā-nandanau nanda-sūno

kamala-nayana-gopī-candra-vṛndāvanendrāḥ

praṇata-karuṇa-kṛṣṇāv ity aneka-svarūpe

tvayi mama ratir uccair vardhatāṁ nāmadheya



O Nāma Bhagavān, possessor of inconceivable glories, may
my affection for You continue to increase, day and
night. O Aghadamana! O Yaśodā-nandana! O Nanda-sūnu! O
Kamala-nayana! O Gopīcandra! O Vṛndāvanendra! O Praṇata-
karuṇa! O Kṛṣṇa! You have innumerable forms; may my
attachment to them always increase.



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

As the rāgānuga-sādhaka chants the holy name under the
guidance of pure devotees, he prays to Nāma Prabhu in
great distress, “O Nāma Prabhu! Please manifest in my
heart along with Your pastimes that relate to each
name.”


                           58
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

Aghadamana — “He who protected His friends by killing
the demon Agha.” The word agha means “sin” and damana
means “to destroy”. He destroys the sins in the heart of
the sādhaka, making it pure, and then He Himself comes
to reside there. In relation to mādhurya-rasa,
Aghadamana has another meaning: “He whose darśana
destroys the gopīs’ feelings of separation and thus
bestows great joy upon them.” During the day Śrī
Kṛṣṇacandra goes to the forest, causing the vraja-
sundarīs to burn in the fire of separation from Him.
During the night, when He is in their midst, He makes
their burning separation go far away, and He appears as
pleasant as the cool moon as He sports in the pastimes
of rāsa with them. Thus He tastes mādhurya-prema-rasa.

Yaśodā-nandana — “The son of Yaśodā.” All the good
qualities of Kṛṣṇa’s affectionate mother are also found
in Him. Therefore one of His names is Yaśodā-nandana.
Yaśo dadāti iti yaśodā — this means that Mother Yaśodā
is famous for her vātsalya-bhāva. The mood of this verse
is, “May the compassionate Yaśodā-nandana, who possesses
the same qualities as His mother, appear in my heart.”

Nanda-sūnu — “The son of Nanda.” Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(10.8.46) states:



nandaḥ kim akarod brahman

śreya evaṁ mahodayam

yaśodā ca mahā-bhāgā

papau yasyāḥ stanaṁ hariḥ



[Mahārāja Parīkṣit inquired:] What most auspicious
activity did the very fortunate Nanda Bābā perform, and
what kind of austerity did the supremely fortunate
Yaśodā perform that Bhagavān Himself drank her breast
milk with His lotus mouth?



By chanting this name of Kṛṣṇa, the sādhaka prays, “May
the son of the supremely munificent and most fortunate
Nanda Mahārāja, Nanda-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa, shower His
mercy upon me.”

Kamala-nayana — “Lotus-eyed one.” “May Kamala-nayana Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, whose half-closed eyes resemble a red lotus due
to His nocturnal amorous pastimes with His beloved
vraja-devīs in the nikuñjas, manifest within my heart.”

Gopīcandra — “The moon of the gopīs.” When Śrī Kṛṣṇa
sees the rising full moon, remembrance of the moon-like
faces of the vraja-devīs awakens in His heart.

Vṛndāvanendra — “The Lord of Vṛndāvana.” This refers to
He who makes the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana blissful by
His unique quality of prema-mādhurya.


                            59
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

Praṇata-karuṇa — “He who is merciful to the
surrendered.” Śrī Kṛṣṇa displays His mercy and
compassion to those who are surrendered to Him by making
them taste His caraṇāmṛta. Remembering the mercy Kāliya-
nāga received when Kṛṣṇa placed His lotus feet on
Kāliya’s heads, the gopīs sing, “praṇata-dehināṁ pāpa-
karṣaṇam — Your lotus feet destroy the past sins of all
souls who surrender unto them.”

Kṛṣṇa — This name is derived from the verbal root kṛṣ
meaning “to attract”. Kṛṣṇa attracts everyone with His
prema-mādhurya, and in this way bestows the bliss of
divine love upon them.

Devotees pray according to their transcendental
sentiments; thus Bhagavān appears to them according to
their prayers and makes them joyful. The sādhaka chants
a specific name of Bhagavān to increase his attachment
to Nāma Prabhu.




Text 3

Kṛṣṇa has invested all potencies in His name. The Skanda
Purāṇa states:



dāna-vrata-tapas-tīrtha-yātrādīnaś ca yāḥ sthitāḥ

śaktayo deva-mahatāṁ sarva-pāpa-harāḥ śubhāḥ

rājasūyāśvamedhānāṁ jñānasyādhyātma-vastunaḥ

ākṛṣya hariṇā sarvāḥ sthāpitāḥ sveṣu nāmasu



Whatever potency to nullify sins or bestow
auspiciousness found in charity, vows, austerities,
pilgrimage, the rājasūya- and aśvamedha-yajñas,
knowledge of transcendental objects, and so forth, has
been invested by Śrī Kṛṣṇa in His holy names (that is,
the primary names).



dharma-yajña-yoga-jñāne yata śakti chila

saba harināme kṛṣṇa svayaṁ samarpila



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The glories of the holy name are described in this Text.
Nāma Prabhu easily bestows sense enjoyment (bhukti) and
liberation (mukti). The mass of sins that are nullified
by the performance of charity, vows, austerities, fire
sacrifices, horse sacrifices and so forth, are destroyed
by the mere semblance of Nāma Prabhu. The results

                           60
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

obtained by those desiring liberation and by those
desiring sense enjoyment are the secondary results of
nāma-saṅkīrtana. The main result given by Nāma Prabhu is
the qualification to relish Bhagavān’s sweetness, or the
nectar of prema, through pure prema-bhakti. Pure
devotees do not pray to obtain the secondary results of
bhakti. Moreover, if these results are involuntarily
obtained, they do not accept them; rather, paying
respect from a distance, they disregard them. The lives
of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī
are exemplary in this regard.




Text 4

In the performance of nāma-bhajana, there is no
consideration of cleanliness or uncleanliness, nor of
proper or improper time. This is corroborated in the
Vaiśvānara-saṁhitā:



na deśa-kāla-niyamo

na śaucāśauca-nirṇayaḥ

paraṁ saṅkīrtanād eva

rāma rāmeti mucyate



In chanting the holy name, there is no rule concerning
place and time, nor is there one regarding cleanliness
or uncleanliness. By repeating the name “Rāma”, or in
other words by performing saṅkīrtana of the mahā-mantra,
the topmost liberation — namely prema-bhakti — is
obtained.



deśa kāla-śaucāśauca-vidhi nāme nāi

hare kṛṣṇa rāma nāme sadya tare yāi



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

When chanting the eternally perfect, transcendental holy
name, there are no rules regarding place, time and so
forth. In the performance of austerities and fire
sacrifices one has to follow rules prescribed by the
Vedas, but the holy name can be chanted under any
circumstance, whether one is in a pure or impure state.
By His own strength Nāma Prabhu purifies the heart of
the sādhaka.

The story of Gopāla-guru is noteworthy in this context.
A young boy named Gopāla was staying with Śrīman
Mahāprabhu and serving Him. One day, as Mahāprabhu was

                           61
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

going to the latrine, He caught hold of His tongue with
His hand. When Gopāla asked why He was doing this,
Mahāprabhu replied, “My tongue never gives up chanting
harināma, so when I am in an impure condition I must
restrain it.” The boy Gopāla then asked, “If someone
were to die at such a moment, what would happen to him?”
Hearing this, Mahāprabhu praised the boy and said, “What
you say is true. One should not consider cleanliness,
uncleanliness and so forth in chanting the immeasurably
powerful names of Hari. From today, your name is Gopāla-
guru.”




Text 5

The characteristics of misfortune are described in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.9.7):



daivena te hata-dhiyo bhavataḥ prasaṅgāt

sarvāśubhopaśamanād vimukhendriyā ye

kurvanti kāma-sukha-leśa-lavāya dīnā

lobhābhibhūta-manaso ‘kuśalāni śaśvat



Those persons who refrain from the hearing and chanting
of Your glories, which destroys all misfortune, and
instead always engage in inauspicious activities, being
obsessed with a desire for a particle of material sense
enjoyment, are certainly wretched, for fate has stolen
away their intelligence.



tomāra prasaṅga sarva, aśubha karaye kharva,

durdaiva prabhāve mora mana

kāmasukha-leśa āśe, lobha akuśalāyāse,

se prasaṅge nā kaila yatana



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Glorifying Bhagavān, Brahmā says here, “Those persons
who are averse to hearing narrations about Bhagavān and
bhakti, and who continuously perform inauspicious
activities, being engrossed in worthless sense
gratification, are unfortunate and bereft of good
intelligence.” Prahlāda Mahārāja also says, “A jīva who
is attached to his home because of his undisciplined
senses enters the deepest of hells. The intelligence of
one who again and again chews the happiness and distress
that has already been chewed can never become pure.” One

                              62
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

who is absorbed in karma-kāṇḍa by following the honey-
filled statements prescribed in the Vedas will be bound
by the long rope of the Vedas. The only means for the
lustful living entities to become liberated is to
immerse themselves in the dust of the lotus feet of a
great niṣkiñcana, paramahaṁsa Vaiṣṇava.




Text 6

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.7.4—6) it is stated:



bhakti-yogena manasi

samyak praṇihite ‘male

apaśyat puruṣaṁ pūrṇaṁ

māyāṁ ca tad-apāśrayām

yayā sammohito jīva

ātmānaṁ tri-guṇātmakam

paro ‘pi manute ‘narthaṁ

tat-kṛtaṁ cābhipadyate

anarthopaśamaṁ sākṣād

bhakti-yogam adhokṣaje

lokasyājānato vidvāṁś

cakre sātvata-saṁhitām



With a pure heart Śrī Kṛṣṇa-dvaipāyana Vedavyāsa became
absorbed in meditation through the process of bhakti-
yoga. He thus saw the Supreme Person, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, along
with His external energy (māyā), which was far away from
Him but under His control. Due to this māyā, the
conditioned living entity (baddha-jīva) forgets his
service to Kṛṣṇa and becomes affected by anarthas.
Although transcendental to the three modes of material
nature, the living entity who is bewildered by māyā
considers himself a material product. He thus identifies
himself with this body and considers that which is
related to it to be his. The infinitesimal living entity
can only be delivered by kṛṣṇa-bhakti-yoga, but the mass
of people in the material world are ignorant of this
fact. Understanding this, Śrī Vyāsa manifested
Bhāgavatam through bhakti-yoga.



kṛṣṇa, kṛṣṇa-māyā, jīva ei tina tattva


                           63
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

māyā-mohe māyā-baddha jīvera anartha

citkaṇa jīvera kṛṣṇa-bhakti-yoga-bale

anartha vinaṣṭa haya kṛṣṇa prema-phale

ei tattva nāma-samādhite pāile vyāsa

bhāgavate bhakti-yoga karila prakāśa



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Śrī Kṛṣṇa-dvaipāyana Vedavyāsa manifested all the Vedas,
Upaniṣads, Purāṇas and so forth. Even though he had
realisation of the Supreme Absolute Truth and His sound
incarnation (śabda-brahma), he remained dissatisfied,
feeling an inner lack. He enquired from Śrī Nārada about
this, who answered, “You have not described Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
sweet pastimes and spotless glories. You should do so,
and by this your heart will become satisfied.” By the
mercy of Śrī Nārada and by the means of bhakti-yoga,
Vedavyāsa, with a pure heart, became absorbed in
meditation and received darśana of all Bhagavān’s
pastimes. He then manifested the Bhāgavatam, the fully
ripened fruit of the desire tree of Vedic literature.

The essential teaching of this incident is that when the
mind of the living entity becomes pure through the
practice of bhakti, then by the combined mercy of the
saṁvit- and hlādinī-śaktis, he can experience Kṛṣṇa,
Kṛṣṇa’s internal potency (Yogamāyā) and his own
constitutional nature (svarūpa). The object of bhajana
will manifest in the heart naturally through bhakti-
yoga. Those who desire liberation through jñāna and
karma are deprived of realisation of the complete,
eternally conscious object.

The words puruṣaṁ pūrṇam in this Text refer to Svayam
Bhagavān Vrajendra-nandana Śyāmasundara, who is the
possessor of all potencies (sarva-śaktimān), and to all
the residents of Vraja, including the gopīs.

By means of bhakti-yoga, Śrīla Vyāsadeva saw Bhagavān’s
various manifestations and His three śaktis: svarūpa-
śakti, māyā-śakti and jīva-śakti. Through His svarūpa-
śakti, Bhagavān is performing eternal transcendental
pastimes. Māyā-śakti has two functions to control the
jīvas who are averse to Bhagavān: āvaraṇātmikā (to cover
real knowledge) and vikṣepātmikā (to hurl the living
entity down into the ocean of material existence). Those
jīvas who are controlled by material activities are
moved by the desire to gratify their senses, and Māyā-
devī makes them dance like puppets.

An argument can be raised in this connection. When
Vyāsadeva received darśana of Bhagavān’s form,
qualities, pastimes and so forth, what was the purpose
of his also having received darśana of māyā? The answer
is that Vyāsadeva was not an ordinary living being, so
he had no familiarity with the suffering of conditioned
souls ensnared by māyā. How, then, could he help them?
For this reason he also received darśana of the illusory

                           64
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

energy.

The ācāryas write that the living entities who are
controlled by māyā are absorbed in the three modes,
devoured by the great disease of material existence and
unable to taste the sweetness of Bhagavān. The
liberation of the living entities bound by māyā is
possible only when māyā’s coverings are removed. Śrīla
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura explains in his commentary
on this Text that to cure a sick patient, an expert
doctor prescribes both medicine and a good diet. The
remedial measure for the conditioned living entities is
the process of bhakti. The medicine is hearing hari-
kathā and chanting harināma, and the diet is to stay in
the association of devotees and avoid offences.

After receiving the above-mentioned darśana, Śrīla Vyāsa
manifested Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, the eternal authoritative
scripture that is filled with all truths. He did this
for the benefit of ignorant people who are devoured by
the great disease of material existence. By hearing
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, the living entities can become free
from their anarthas and ignorance, and thus obtain
kṛṣṇa-prema. Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental pastimes with
the vraja-devīs, which are filled with prema, are
described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. By hearing these
narrations with faith, the living entities can again
become established in their eternal dharma.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.33.36) states: “yāḥ śrutvā tat-
paro bhavet — upon hearing such pastimes, one becomes
dedicated to Him.” To become established in service to
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, which consists of the mellows of prema
that are saturated with sweetness, is the purpose of
life. This is achieved following the removal of one’s
anarthas through the process of bhakti-yoga, the essence
of all truths.




Text 7

Anarthas, or misfortune, are of four kinds. This is
described in the Āmnāya-sūtra:



māyā-mugdhasya jīvasya

jñeyo ‘narthaś catur-vidhaḥ

hṛd-daurbalyaṁ cāparādho

‘sat-tṛṣṇā tattva-vibhramaḥ



The anarthas of the living entities enchanted by māyā
are of four kinds: (1) illusion about one’s real
identity (svarūpa-bhrama), (2) hankering for that which
is temporary (asat-tṛṣṇā), (3) offences (aparādha) and
(4) weakness of heart (hṛdaya-daurbalya). They bind the

                              65
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

living entity to the material world and entangle him in
its miseries.



māyā-mugdha jīvera anartha catuṣṭaya

asat-tṛṣṇā, hṛdaya-daurbalya viṣamaya

aparādha svarūpa-vibhrama ei cāri

yāhāte saṁsāra-bandha vipatti vistāri

Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The living entities seized by māyā and derailed from
pure dharma wander in this material existence, falsely
thinking they are its enjoyers. Four anarthas are
noticed in these living entities: svarūpa-bhrama, asat-
tṛṣṇā, aparādha and hṛdaya-daurbalya. The word anartha
means “to collect that which has no purpose”. The jīva’s
only goal is service to Kṛṣṇa, but in this material
existence he is engaged in māyā’s service — hence, this
is an anartha.

Svarūpa-bhrama — The pure living entity is a tiny
transcendental particle (cid-aṇu) and the eternal
servant of Kṛṣṇa. Just as the conditioned living entity
experiences form, taste, smell, touch and so on through
his material senses, the pure living entity experiences
transcendental form, taste and so forth through his
transcendental senses. Forgetting that “I am an
infinitesimal particle of spiritual consciousness and
Kṛṣṇa’s servant”, the jīva becomes conditioned and
wanders about in this material existence. The primary
anartha of the living entity is his failure to realise
his true svarūpa.

Asat-tṛṣṇā — To consider the material body to be “me”,
to consider perishable objects in relation to the body
to be “mine”, and to desire happiness from perishable
objects, is called asat-tṛṣṇā.

Aparādha — Apagata-rādho yasmād ity aparādhaḥ. Rādha
means affection (prīti), so that action which causes
affection to vanish is called aparādha (offence).
Aparādha at the lotus feet of Bhagavān and at the lotus
feet of His devotees decreases prīti. One should avoid
the ten nāma-aparādhas, the thirty-two seva-aparādhas
and all the dhāma-aparādhas.

Hṛdaya-daurbalya — When the heart experiences illusion
and distress upon the attainment or loss of that which
is perishable, it is called hṛdaya-daurbalya, weakness
of heart. This anartha appears naturally in the living
entity due to ignorance, and it vanishes by the
cultivation of Kṛṣṇa consciousness in the association of
pure devotees.




Text 8

                           66
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


Svarūpa-bhrama is of four types, as stated in the
Āmnāya-sūtra:



sva-tattve para-tattve ca

sādhya-sādhana-tattvayoḥ

virodhi-viṣaye caiva

tattva-bhramaś catur-vidhaḥ



The conditioned living entity is subject to four kinds
of bhrama, illusion: (1) jīva-svarūpa-bhrama, (2)
paratattva-bhrama, (3) sādhya-sādhana-tattva-bhrama and
(4) bhajana-virodhi-viṣaya-bhrama.



tattva-bhrama catuṣṭaya baḍai viṣama

svīya-tattve bhrama āra kṛṣṇa-tattve bhrama

sādhya-sādhanete bhrama, virodhī viṣaye

cārividha tattva-bhrama baddha-jīva-caye



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Jīva-svarūpa-bhrama — The jīva cannot realise his own
transcendental form due to ignorance of it. He has
forgotten his real svarūpa, that he is the servant of
Kṛṣṇa, because he thinks himself to be the enjoyer.

Paratattva-bhrama — Who is paratattva, the Absolute
Truth? Not knowing this, the living entity becomes
illusioned. Sometimes he worships Śiva, sometimes Brahmā
and sometimes another demigod or goddess. The inability
to correctly ascertain the Absolute Truth is called
paratattva-bhrama.

Sādhya-sādhana-bhrama — According to the scriptures,
kṛṣṇa-prema is the only goal (sādhya) and bhakti the
only practice (sādhana). The conditioned living entity,
however, is unable to decide which is his goal among
sense enjoyment, liberation and kṛṣṇa-prema, and which
is his practice among karma, jñāna and bhakti. This is
sādhya-sādhana-bhrama, illusion about the goal and the
process to attain it. If one cannot ascertain the goal,
it is not possible to ascertain the practice, and
without the practice it is not possible to attain the
goal. It is only by the mercy of Vaiṣṇavas that one can
obtain the fortune to understand that bhakti is the only
auspicious sādhana, and prema is the only sādhya. Prema
is of two kinds: aiśvarya-para (full of opulence) and
mādhurya-para (full of sweetness). The ācāryas have
determined that the topmost goal is sweet, loving
service to Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa under the guidance of the vraja-

                              67
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

gopīs.

Bhajana-virodhi-viṣaya-bhrama — Doctrines other than
Vaiṣṇavism oppose bhajana and cause bewilderment
(virodhi-bhrama). This especially applies to
impersonalism (māyāvāda), which contaminates the heart
and thus renders the living entity unable to
discriminate.




Text 9

Asat-tṛṣṇā is of four kinds, as described in the Āmnāya-
sūtra:



aihikeṣvaiṣaṇā pāra-

trikeṣu caiṣaṇā ‘śubhā

bhūti-vāñchā mumukṣā ca

hy asat-tṛṣṇāś catur-vidhāḥ



The four types of asat-tṛṣṇā are: (1) desire for objects
of this material world, (2) desire for heavenly
pleasures, like those of Svarga, (3) desire for mystic
powers and (4) desire for liberation.



pāra-trika aihika eṣaṇā bhūti-kāma

mukti-kāma ei cāri asat-tṛṣṇā nāma

Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The desire to obtain that which is unrelated to Kṛṣṇa is
known as asat-tṛṣṇā. This desire is of four kinds: (1)
Desire for worldly, material objects and the various
endeavours to obtain them. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.3.18)
states: “karmāṇy ārabhamāṇā duḥkha-hatyai sukhāya ca —
the conditioned living entity endeavours to obtain
pleasure for the senses but receives only misery.” (2)
Desire to obtain the pleasures of the heavenly planets
and the worship of various demigods and goddesses. (3)
Desire to obtain mystic powers in order to bewilder
people by material wonders and thereby attain wealth,
worship, prestige and so forth. Human beings are
attracted to aṣṭāṅga-yoga and to mystic powers like
aṇimā and laghimā. (4) Desire for liberation.

These four desires are all opposed to bhajana, and
therefore devotees of Bhagavān never accept them.




                              68
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


Text 10

Aparādha is of four kinds, as mentioned in the Āmnāya-
sūtra:



kṛṣṇa-nāma-svarūpeṣu

tadīya-cit-kaṇeṣu ca

jñeyā budha-gaṇair nityam

aparādhāś catur-vidhāḥ



The four kinds of aparādha are: (1) offences to Kṛṣṇa’s
name (nāma-aparādha); (2) offences to Kṛṣṇa’s deity form
(seva-aparādha); (3) offences to that which belongs to
Kṛṣṇa, or in other words to Girirāja-Govardhana, the
Gaṅgā, the Yamunā, the dhāma or the lotus feet of the
devotees; and (4) offences to other living entities, who
are all infinitesimal particles of spirit belonging to
Kṛṣṇa.



kṛṣṇa-nāme, svarūpe o bhakte, anya nare

bhrama haite aparādha catuṣṭaya smare




Text 11

Hṛdaya-daurbalya is of four kinds, as stated in the
Āmnāya-sūtra:



tucchāsaktiḥ kuṭīnāṭī

mātsaryaṁ sva-pratiṣṭhatā

hṛd-daurbalyaṁ budhaiḥ śaśvaj

jñeyaṁ kila catur-vidham



Scholars consider hṛdaya-daurbalya to be of four types:
(1) attachment to worthless objects; that is, objects
unrelated to Kṛṣṇa; (2) hypocrisy and deceit (kuṭināṭī);
(3) envy upon seeing the prosperity of others; and (4)
desire for prestige and position (pratiṣṭhā).



kṛṣṇetara viṣaye āsakti, kuṭīnāṭī


                            69
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

para-droha, pratiṣṭhāśā ei ta’ cāriṭi

hṛdaya-daurbalya bali’ śāstre nirdhārila

chaya ripu, chaya ūrmi ihāte janmila

yata dina e saba anartha nāhi chāḍe

tata dina bhakti-latā kabhu nāhi bāḍhe



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Hṛdaya-daurbalya gives birth to six enemies: lust
(kāma), anger (krodha), greed (lobha), delusion (moha),
pride (mada) and envy (mātsarya); and their waves result
in distress (śoka), bewilderment (moha), hunger
(kṣudhā), thirst (pipāsā), old age (jarā) and death
(mṛtyu).

The creeper of devotion cannot grow as long as one does
not give up these anarthas.




Text 12

All anarthas are nullified by nāma-saṅkīrtana. Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (1.1.14) states:



āpannaḥ saṁsṛtiṁ ghorāṁ

yan-nāma vivaśo gṛṇan

tataḥ sadyo vimucyeta

yad bibheti svayaṁ bhayam



If a living entity who is caught in the whirlpool of
material existence even once chants the name of Kṛṣṇa,
he can be freed immediately. Even fear personified
trembles upon hearing the name of Bhagavān.



e ghora saṁsāre paḍi’ kṛṣṇa-nāma laya

sadya mukta haya āra bhaya pāya bhaya



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The far-sighted sages, reflecting on the terrible
distress of the living entities in the frightful age of
Kali, asked Sūta Gosvāmipāda, “O Saumya, how can the
conditioned living entities, who are attached to

                            70
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

material existence, become liberated?” Sūta replied,
“Association with devotees of Bhagavān is the only
means. Bathing in the Gaṅgā destroys sins, but all sins
are nullified solely by having darśana of a devotee who
is dedicated to the holy name. The direct result of
associating with Bhagavān’s devotees and serving them is
the attainment of prema. If a living entity merely
utters the holy name at the time of death, Nāma Prabhu
will bestow prema upon him.”




Text 13

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.37) states:



bhayaṁ dvitīyābhiniveśataḥ syād

īśād apetasya viparyayo ‘smṛtiḥ

tan-māyayāto budha ābhajet taṁ

bhaktyaikayeśaṁ guru-devatātmā



The jīva who is averse to Bhagavān forgets his own
constitutional nature because of his association with
māyā. Due to this forgetfulness, he becomes absorbed in
the conception that he is the material body and thus
thinks “I am a demigod”, “I am a human being”. In this
state of bodily identification, he fears old age,
disease and so forth. Therefore those who know the truth
should consider their own guru as īśvara, the Supreme.
In other words they should see him as their master who
is non-different from Bhagavān and who is very dear to
Him. Through exclusive devotion they should perform one-
pointed worship of that īśvara, their guru.



kṛṣṇa chāḍi’ jīva kaila anyābhiniveśa

tāi tāra viparyaya-smṛti āra kleśa

sad-guru āśraya kari’ kṛṣṇakṛpā-āśe

ananya-bhajana kare yāya kṛṣṇa-pāśe



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

When the jīvas are averse to Bhagavān, they become
absorbed in māyā and thus become materially conditioned.
Māyā-devī, through her two functions of āvaraṇātmikā and
vikṣepātmikā, makes the living entities wander in the
prison-like material existence, suffering its torment by
thinking they are the “experiencers” of happiness and
distress. A person who is resolute takes shelter of the

                           71
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

lotus feet of a bona fide guru and is thus able to cross
over this material existence. By accepting the guidance
of a guru who has realised Bhagavān and by being
absorbed in intimate service (viśrambha-sevā) to him,
one attains the mercy of Bhagavān and material
identification goes far away. One will attain knowledge
of one’s own svarūpa, Bhagavān’s svarūpa, and the
svarūpa of the illusory energy by understanding the
spiritual master to be near and dear like his own soul
and by serving him. By the guru’s mercy the living
entity will ultimately be engaged in eternal service in
Bhagavān’s abode.




Text 14

The characteristics of bhakti-yoga are described in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.12 and 1.2.7):



tac chraddadhānā munayo

jñāna-vairāgya-yuktayā

paśyanty ātmani cātmānaṁ

bhaktyā śruta-gṛhītayā

vāsudeve bhagavati

bhakti-yogaḥ prayojitaḥ

janayaty āśu vairāgyaṁ

jñānaṁ ca yad ahaitukam



A faithful person, after hearing Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,
automatically acquires bhakti endowed with knowledge and
renunciation. By such bhakti he realises Bhagavān’s
svarūpa in his heart and he realises his relationship
with Him. Thus he obtains service to the Lord.

When the relationship between the Lord and the living
entity is established, bhakti-yoga for Bhagavān Vāsudeva
appears.



śraddhā kari’ nāma bhaje sādhu-kṛpā pāñā

itare virāga nitya-svarūpa bujhiyā

ihākei bali bhakti-yoga anuttama

bhakti-yoge sarva-siddhi yadi dhare krama




                           72
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Sādhana of the non-dual Absolute Truth (advaya-jñāna-
para-tattva) is of three kinds: jñāna, yoga and bhakti.
The jñānīs realise Bhagavān as Brahman on the strength
of their cultivation of knowledge. They see tat-
padārtha, Bhagavān, within their souls (ātmās), they see
their own souls in Īśvara and they also see taṁ-
padārtha, all living entities, in Him. The yogīs realise
the non-dual object as Paramātmā. All attempts made by
the jīvas to attain renunciation through the cultivation
of dry knowledge are useless. Renunciation (vairāgya) is
an inherent result of bhakti and is easily attained
through the practice of bhakti-yoga. The bhakti-sādhaka
relishes the direct sweetness of the non-dual object on
the strength of his devotion. The process of bhakti is
to hear kṛṣṇa-kathā from the lotus mouth of the
spiritual master. Knowledge endowed with a sense of
one’s relationship with Kṛṣṇa appears through the
process of bhakti by the means of hearing and chanting.
The ācāryas have ascertained that the mood of service
appears by hearing from authorities. The impersonalists
do not follow this path of hearing, which is the
descending path. Rather, they endeavour to take shelter
of the doctrine of the ascending path. Their attempts
are compared to trying to reach the sky by climbing on
falling raindrops. When the living entity is absorbed in
service to the object of bhajana and not in any other
object, pure bhakti and proper renunciation (yukta-
vairāgya) will arise.




Text 15

The fourth verse of the catuḥ-ślokī of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(2.9.36) states:



etāvad eva jijñāsyaṁ

tattva-jijñāsunātmanaḥ

anvaya-vyatirekābhyāṁ

yat syāt sarvatra sarvadā



One who is inquisitive about the truth of the self
(ātma-tattva) inquires through direct (anvaya) and
indirect (vyatireka) means of deliberation about that
object, which is always eternal.



anartha-nāśera yatna dui ta’ prakāra

anvaya-mukhete vyatireka-mukhe āra

anvaya-mukhete vidhi bhajana-viṣaye

                            73
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017


vyatireka-mukhete niṣedha nānāśraye



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

After Brahmā took birth, he asked Śrī Bhagavān four
questions, which Bhagavān answered through the catuḥ-
ślokī. These four verses are famous as catuḥ-ślokī
Bhāgavata because they are the seed of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam. They contain the very essence of the Vedas,
Vedānta and so forth.

Philosophical knowledge of Bhagavān, the eternal form of
Bhagavān, His qualities, pastimes and so on, are all
described in the first verse in the form of aphorisms
(sūtras). In the second verse, māyā-tattva, which is
separate from Bhagavān’s eternal form, is discussed, as
is the material world (jaḍa-jagat). The sambhanda-jñāna
found in these two verses should be understood. The
third verse describes the existence of Bhagavān’s
eternal svarūpa, separate from His relationship of
inconceivable difference and non-difference (acintya-
bhedābheda) with the living entities and matter. It also
describes how the living entities, by taking shelter of
Bhagavān’s lotus feet, attain the treasure of the most
elevated prema.

This Text 15 is the fourth verse of catuḥ-ślokī
Bhāgavata, and it describes sādhana-bhakti, the means
for obtaining the above-mentioned supreme goal. Direct
following, or anvaya, means to accept the rules of
sādhana-bhakti with a favourable mood. The word
vyatireka is used in regard to avoiding those actions
that are unfavourable and that cause obstacles in
obtaining the desired goal. The path of sādhana is known
as abhidheya (the process). In other words, that
instruction which is obtained from the scriptures
through direct interpretation (abhidhā-vṛtti) is known
as abhidheya. This is described in this Text. Sādhana-
bhakti, which is none other than abhidheya, is not
dependent on time, place, performer or circumstance. The
duty of all living entities is to perform sādhana-bhakti
in all places, at all times and under all circumstances.
The sādhaka should inquire and hear from the spiritual
master about sādhana-bhakti.

In this Text the confidential meaning of “direct” and
“indirect” indicates the union (saṁyoga) and separation
(vipralambha) found in Vrajendra-nandana Śyāmasundara’s
amorous pastimes (śṛṅgāra-rasa) with His most beloved
vraja-sundarīs. To deceive the conditioned living
entities, all these priceless jewels are kept well
protected in a box that the jñānīs and aiśvarya-bhaktas
are unable to open. That guru who is adept at relishing
the rasa of Vraja displays its contents only to his
qualified disciples.




Text 16

                           74
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


The six urges unfavourable to bhakti and the anarthas
related to them (i.e. hṛdaya-daurbalya, asat-tṛṣṇā and
aparādha) are explained in the first verse of
Upadeśāmṛta:



vāco vegaṁ manasaḥ krodha-vegaṁ

jihvā-vegam udaropastha-vegam

etān vegān yo viṣaheta dhīraḥ

sarvām apīmāṁ pṛthivīṁ sa śiṣyāt



A wise and self-composed person who can tolerate the
impetus to speak, the agitation of the mind, the onset
of anger, the vehemence of the tongue, the urge of the
belly and the agitation of the genitals can instruct the
whole world. In other words, everyone becomes a disciple
of such a self-controlled person.



vākya-vega mano-vega krodha-jihvā-vega

udara upastha-vega bhajana udvega

bahu-yatne nitya saba karibe damana

nirjane karibe rādhā-kṛṣṇera bhajana



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

In this Text, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has given the
instruction to reject that which is unfavourable to
bhakti. The acceptance of that which is favourable and
rejection of that which is unfavourable are not direct
limbs of pure bhakti. Rather, they are aspects of
śraddhā that are characterised by surrender (śaraṇāgati)
and that bestow the eligibility for bhakti. A person who
is capable of tolerating the six urges mentioned in this
verse can instruct the entire world.

The purport is that lust (kāma), anger (krodha), greed
(lobha), delusion (moha), pride (mada) and envy
(matsaratā) always appear in the mind and cause
agitation to the living entity. These six enemies appear
in the mind of the living entity due to weakness of
heart, hṛdaya-daurbalya.

Three kinds of urges (vegas) are seen in the living
entity attached to enjoyment of material objects in this
worldly existence: the impetus to speak, agitation of
the mind and agitation of the body. It is very difficult
for a person who has fallen into the strong current of
these three urges to be rescued.

The impetus to speak (vākya-vega) refers to talks that

                           75
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

are unfavourable to bhakti, and to the use of words that
cause distress to others. However, one should not
consider talk that is useful in the service of Bhagavān
to be vākya-vega. Rather, one should consider such talk
to be the result of disciplining the impetus to speak.
Agitation of the mind is born from the various desires
of the heart. If these desires are not fulfilled, anger
arises. The three mental urges of speech, the mind and
anger will be pacified by remembering Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes.

The bodily urges are also of three types: the vehemence
of the tongue, the urge of the belly and the agitation
of the genitals. Vehemence of the tongue appears when
the desire to enjoy any of the six distinct tastes
impels one to eat prohibited foods and to take
intoxicants. A bhakti-sādhaka must never indulge in
these things. One should carefully keep the urge of the
tongue at bay by taking the remnants of Bhagavān and the
devotees. The urge of the belly will also be pacified by
taking bhagavat-prasāda as needed, by regularly
observing Ekādaśī and by serving Kṛṣṇa.

It is possible to fall into varieties of bad behaviour
and bad association just to satisfy the desires of the
tongue. Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya-līlā 6.227)
states: “jīhvāra lālase yei iti uti dhāya, śiśnodara-
parāyaṇa kṛṣṇa nāhi pāya — one who runs here and there
trying to satisfy his tongue and who is always devoted
to the desires of the genitals and belly cannot attain
Kṛṣṇa.” Also (Antya-līlā 6.236): “bhāla nā khāibe āra
bhāla nā paribe — do not eat delicious food and do not
dress opulently.” Many troubles come from overeating. A
person who eats too much becomes a servant of his
agitated genitals. In other words, he becomes devoid of
character. The agitation of the genitals, or the desire
to meet with the opposite sex, drags the mind towards
material sense objects and therefore renders one
incapable of cultivating pure bhakti.

Rūpa Gosvāmī composed this verse to make the heart of a
person who is endeavouring to perform bhajana inclined
towards the path of bhakti. It is not that the endeavour
to escape these six urges is itself the practice of
bhakti; rather, this endeavour is the path to attain the
qualification to enter the realm of bhakti. When bhakti
appears, these six urges automatically become pacified
of their own accord. This is because bhakti is a self-
manifesting function of Bhagavān’s svarūpa-śakti.




Text 17

The six impediments to bhakti are described in the
second verse of Upadeśāmṛta:



atyāhāraḥ prayāsaś ca

prajalpo niyamāgrahaḥ


                           76
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

jana-saṅgaś ca laulyaṁ ca

ṣaḍbhir bhaktir vinaśyati



The following six kinds of faults destroy bhakti: (1)
eating too much or collecting more than necessary; (2)
endeavouring for that which is opposed to bhakti; (3)
engaging in useless mundane talk; (4) failing to adopt
essential rules and regulations, or fanatically adhering
to rules and regulations; (5) taking bad association;
and (6) being greedy or restless in the mind to adopt
worthless opinions.



atyāhāra prayāsa prajalpa jana-saṅga

niyama-āgraha laulye haya bhakti bhaṅga



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The six impediments to bhakti are atyāhāra, prayāsa,
prajalpa, niyamāgraha, jana-saṅga and laulya.

Atyāhāra is formed by the words ati, meaning “too much”
or “excessively”, and āhāra, “to grasp or consume for
one’s own enjoyment”. It means either excessive
enjoyment of any sense object or collecting more than
necessary. While renunciants are forbidden to accumulate
objects, householder Vaiṣṇavas may collect and save what
is necessary to maintain their life. However, over-
accumulating is atyāhāra. It is not proper for those
desiring to perform bhajana to accumulate like
materialists. Prayāsa is the endeavour to enjoy material
objects or the engagement in activities opposed to
devotion. Prajalpa means to spend time uselessly
gossiping about mundane things. Niyamāgraha means
enthusiastic adherence to those rules that yield the
lowest results, such as attaining Svarga, while
abandoning the endeavour for the topmost attainment of
service to Bhagavān. It also refers to indifference
towards the rules and regulations that nourish bhakti.
The word jana-saṅga refers to giving up the association
of pure devotees and keeping company with others,
especially materialistic people. Laulyam refers to the
fickleness of the mind to accept varieties of false
doctrines, and the restlessness of the mind to enjoy
insignificant material sense enjoyment. The tendency for
bhakti will be destroyed if one wanders like a
promiscuous woman, sometimes on the path of karma,
sometimes on the path of yoga, sometimes on the path of
jñāna and sometimes on the path of bhakti. Prajalpa
leads to criticism of devotees, and laulya awakens a
taste for many temporary, uncertain conclusions. Both of
these will lead to nāma-aparādha. Therefore one should
carefully give them up.



Text 18

                            77
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


The six kinds of association that nourish bhakti are
described in the fourth verse of Upadeśāmṛta:



dadāti pratigṛhṇāti

guhyam ākhyāti pṛcchati

bhuṅkte bhojayate caiva

ṣaḍ-vidhaṁ prīti-lakṣaṇam



Offering pure devotees items in accordance with their
requirements and accepting prasāda, remnant items given
by pure devotees; revealing to devotees one’s
confidential realisations concerning bhajana and
inquiring from them about their confidential
realisations; eating with great love the prasāda given
by devotees and lovingly feeding them prasāda — these
are the six kinds of association that symptomise love
and affection.



ādāna pradāna prīte, gūḍha ālāpana

āhāra bhojana chaya saṅgera lakṣaṇa

sādhura sahita saṅge bhakti-vṛddhi haya

abhakta asat-saṅge bhakti haya kṣaya



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

This verse describes the visible symptoms of the
affection that nourishes devotion, or in other words,
affection for pure devotees. Bhakti manifests by
associating with Bhagavān’s devotees, but one should be
careful to associate only with pure devotees. One should
never keep the company of and reciprocate with gross
sense enjoyers, persons who desire liberation or those
who want to enjoy the fruits of their actions. Bhakti
will be destroyed by the fault of associating with them.
One should also not hear anything from them about the
confidential aspects of bhakti, and one should not
accept food that has been touched by them. Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta (Antya-līlā 6.278) confirms this:

viṣayīra anna khāile malina haya mana

malina mana haile nahe kṛṣṇera smaraṇa



[Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu said:] When one eats food
offered by a materialist one’s mind becomes
contaminated, and when the mind is contaminated one is
unable to think of Kṛṣṇa properly.

                            78
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017




On the other hand, loving exchanges with devotees who
are like-minded, more advanced than oneself and
affectionate to oneself (svajātīya-snigdhāśaya) enhance
one’s devotion.




Text 19

In Śrī Caitanya-candrodaya-nāṭaka (8.88) Śrīman
Mahāprabhu has prohibited one from even seeing a sense
enjoyer or a woman:



niṣkiñcanasya bhagavad-bhajanonmukhasya

pāraṁ paraṁ jigamiṣor bhava-sāgarasya

sandarśanaṁ viṣayiṇām atha yoṣitāṁ ca

hā hanta hanta viṣa-bhakṣaṇato ‘py asādhu



[Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu greatly lamented, saying:]
Alas, for a renunciant who is devoted to bhagavad-
bhajana and who desires to cross the ocean of material
existence, it is worse to see sense enjoyers and women
than it is to drink poison.



niṣkiñcana bhajana unmukha yei jana

bhava-sindhu uttīrṇa haite yāṅra mana

viṣayī-milana āra yoṣit sammilane

viṣa-pānāpekṣā tāṅra viruddha-ghaṭana



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Persons who desire to cross the ocean of material
existence, as well as renunciants intent on bhagavad-
bhajana, should avoid those who are attached to sense
enjoyment and the association of women. The company of
people in these two categories is more fearsome than
drinking poison. Śrī Raghunātha dāsa understood Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s hint and thereafter refused to
accept the wealth his father had sent him, understanding
that it was more auspicious to accept alms. Śrī
Mahāprabhu abandoned Choṭa Haridāsa for life because he
associated with a woman. Therefore in Prema-vivarta
Jagadānanda Paṇḍita says:



                           79
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


yadi cāha praṇaya rākhite gaurāṅgera sane

choṭa haridāsera kathā thāke yena mane



If you want to associate with Caitanya Mahāprabhu, you
must always remember the incident of Choṭa Haridāsa and
how he was rejected by the Lord.




Text 20

It is forbidden to judge a transcendental Vaiṣṇava from
a material viewpoint. Upadeśāmṛta (6) states:



dṛṣṭaiḥ svabhāva-janitair vapuṣaś ca doṣair

na prākṛtatvam iha bhakta-janasya paśyet

gaṅgāmbhasāṁ na khalu budbuda-phena-paṅkair

brahma-dravatvam apagacchati nīra-dharmaiḥ



Devotees who are in this material world should not be
considered material; that is, one should not consider
them ordinary jīvas. Imperfections seen in their
natures, such as birth in a low caste, harshness or
lethargy, and imperfections seen in their bodies, such
as ugly features, disease or deformities, are precisely
like the appearance of bubbles, foam and mud in the
Gaṅgā. Despite such apparent pollution of her water, the
Gaṅgā retains her nature as liquefied transcendence.
Similarly, one should not attribute material defects to
self-realised Vaiṣṇavas.



svabhāva-janita āra vapu-doṣe kṣaṇe

anādara nāhi kara śuddha-bhakta-jane

paṅkādi julīya doṣe kabhu gaṅgā-jale

cinmayatva lopa nahe, sarva-śāstre bale

aprākṛta bhakta-jana pāpa nāhi kare

avaśiṣṭa pāpa yāya kichu dina pare



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The instruction of this Text is that it is improper to
consider pure devotees to be material or to see material

                           80
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                                5/5/2017

defects in them. It is possible that they may have
defects in their bodies or natures, but it is impossible
for pure devotees to fall into bad association or commit
nāma-aparādha. The water of the Gaṅgā is considered to
be pure despite the appearance of bubbles, foam, mud and
so forth within it, for its nature as liquefied
transcendence is never lost. Similarly, self-realised
Vaiṣṇavas are not contaminated by the birth of the
material body nor by its deterioration. Therefore one
who is intent on performing bhajana should never
disrespect a pure Vaiṣṇava even if these defects are
apparent in him. The remaining imperfections of a
Vaiṣṇava are quickly removed, and if someone even looks
for them he becomes an offender.




Text 21

Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī states in Manaḥ-śikṣā (7)
that one should give up the desire for prestige and the
wickedness of deceit and hypocrisy:



pratiṣṭhāśā dhṛṣṭā śvapaca-ramaṇī me hṛdi naṭet

kathaṁ sādhu-premā spṛśati śucir etan nanu manaḥ

sadā tvaṁ sevasva prabhu-dayita-sāmantam atulaṁ

yathā tāṁ niṣkāśya tvaritam iha taṁ veśayati saḥ



[Why does deceit not go away even after one has given up
all material sense enjoyment? This verse has been
composed in order to remove this doubt.] O mind, tell
me, how can pure divine love appear in my heart (you, O
mind, are my heart) as long as the shameless outcaste
woman of the desire for prestige is audaciously dancing
there? Therefore without delay remember and serve the
immeasurably powerful commanders of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s army,
the very dear devotees of Bhagavān. They will quickly
chase away this outcaste woman and initiate the flow of
pure vraja-prema in my heart.



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The desire (āśā) for prestige (pratiṣṭhā) is called
pratiṣṭhāśā. Although all other anarthas may be
dispelled, the desire for pratiṣṭhā is not easily
removed. The desire for prestige is the root of all
anarthas; all kinds of deceit and hypocrisy arise from
it and are gradually nourished by it. The svaniṣṭha-
sādhaka1 yearns to be recognised as a virtuous,
benevolent and sinless devotee of Bhagavān, who is
detached from the world, scholarly and so on. Therefore
as long as the desire for prestige remains in the heart,
one is unable to drive away deceit. And until one

                           81
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                               5/5/2017

becomes free from deceit, one cannot obtain immaculate
divine love. In other words, if deceit remains, one does
not attain prema for Śrī Kṛṣṇa, which is endowed with a
sense of great possessiveness (mamatā) and which makes
the heart melt.

Service to pure Vaiṣṇavas is the only means to dispel
anarthas like wickedness, deceit and hypocrisy. The rays
of the hlādinī-śakti are to be seen in the hearts of
pure Vaiṣṇavas. These rays are transmitted into the
heart of a faithful sādhaka, where they dispel these
anarthas and manifest vraja-prema. Always serve the
immeasurably merciful and powerful commanders of Śrī
Nanda-nandana’s army, His beloved devotees! The embrace
of pure Vaiṣṇavas, the dust from their lotus feet, the
remnants of their prasāda, the water that has washed
their feet, their instructions, and so forth are all
fully competent to transmit hlādinī-śakti into the
heart. This is confirmed in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta
(Antya-līlā 6.60—1):



bhakta-pada-dhūli āra bhakta-pada-jala

bhakta-bhukta-avaśeṣa — tīna mahā-bala

ei tina-sevā haite kṛṣṇa-premā haya

punaḥ punaḥ sarva-śāstre phukāriyā kaya




Text 22

Manaḥ-śikṣa (6) states:



are cetaḥ prodyat-kapaṭa-kuṭināṭī-bhara-khara-

kṣaran mūtre snātvā dahasi katham ātmānam api mām

sadā tvaṁ gāndharvā-giridhara-pada-prema-vilasat

sudhāmbhodhau snātvā svam api nitarāṁ māṁ ca sukhaya



[In spite of having subdued the enemies of lust and
anger, one may not have conquered the great enemy of
deceit. This verse instructs how to gain victory over
this powerful enemy.] O wicked mind, although you have
adopted the path of sādhana, still you imagine yourself
purified by bathing in the trickling donkey urine of an
obvious abundance of deceit and hypocrisy. By doing so
you are burning yourself and at the same time scorching
me, a tiny jīva. Stop this! Eternally delight yourself
and me by bathing in the nectarean ocean of prema for
the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala.



                           82
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017


pratiṣṭhāśā kuṭīnāṭī yatne kara dūra

tāhā haile nāme rati pāibe pracura

Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The abundance of deceit and hypocrisy that are clearly
evident in a sādhaka, even though he has adopted the
path of sādhana, are compared to the urine of a donkey.
Considering oneself intently engaged in bhajana while
remaining devious and hypocritical is like considering
oneself pure after bathing in the filthy, burning urine
of a donkey. The duty of a sādhaka is to carefully
abandon these bad qualities.

There are three kinds of bhakti-sādhakas: svaniṣṭha,
pariniṣṭhita and nirapekṣa. The hypocrisy that can be
demonstrated by each is described below.

The svaniṣṭha-sādhaka is a householder devotee who
serves Śrī Hari and completely abandons the rules and
prohibitions prescribed within varṇāśrama. The deceits
of such sādhakas are to indulge in sense enjoyment on
the pretext of sādhana-bhakti; to serve wealthy and
influential materialists instead of unpretentious
devotees; to accumulate more wealth than necessary; to
be enthusiastic for futile, temporary enterprises; to
indulge in false doctrines; and to adopt the dress of a
renunciant in order to obtain material prestige.

The pariniṣṭhita-sādhaka is a householder devotee who
serves and attends Bhagavān according to rules and
regulations. His deceit is that externally he makes a
show of strict adherence to rules and regulations
(pariniṣṭhita), but inwardly he remains attached to
material objects. He also prefers the association of
jñānīs, yogīs, philanthropists and materialists to that
of resolute, loving devotees.

The deceit of the nirapekṣa-sādhaka (the renunciant) is
that he maintains pride by thinking himself to be the
topmost Vaiṣṇava; he adopts the dress of a renunciant
and due to false ego regards other sādhakas as inferior;
he collects wealth and other material assets; he
associates with women and materialistic people; he
collects wealth in the name of bhajana; he weakens his
affection towards Kṛṣṇa by being overly attached to the
external dress and rules of the renounced order; and so
forth.

A person should give up all this deceit and immerse
himself in the nectarean ocean of pure transcendental
pastimes that is born of prema for the lotus feet of the
Divine Couple. The prayers expressed in the writings of
Rūpa Gosvāmipāda and others in our disciplic succession
(guru-varga) point the sādhaka in the proper direction.
One should take guidance from these prayers and perform
sādhana while remembering within the heart Śrī Yugala’s
eternal eightfold daily pastimes (aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā).




                           83
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017


Text 23

The ten kinds of offence to the holy name, which should
be given up without fail, are described in the Padma
Purāṇa:



(1—2) satāṁ nindā nāmnaḥ paramam aparādhaṁ vitanute

yataḥ khyātiṁ yātaṁ katham u sahate tad vigarhām

śivasya śrī-viṣṇor ya iha guṇa-nāmādi-sakalaṁ

dhiyā bhinnaṁ paśyet sa khalu hari-nāmāhita-karaḥ

(3—7) guror avajñā śruti-śāstra-nindanaṁ

tathārtha-vādo hari-nāmni kalpanam

nāmno balād yasya hi pāpa-buddhir

na vidyate tasya yamair hi śuddhiḥ

(8—9) dharma-vrata-tyāga-hutādi-sarva-

śubha-kriyā-sāmyam api pramādaḥ

aśraddadhāne vimukhe ‘py aśṛṇvati

yaś copadeśaḥ śiva-nāmāparādhaḥ

(10) śrute ‘pi nāma-māhātmye

yaḥ prīti-rahito naraḥ

ahaṁ-mamādi-paramo

nāmni so ‘py aparādha-kṛt

(1) To criticise the devotees of Bhagavān is a grievous
offence to the holy name. How can Śrī Nāma Prabhu
tolerate criticism of those great souls who are deeply
devoted to Him and who spread His glories throughout the
world? Therefore the first offence is criticism of
sādhus and devotees.

(2) In this world a person who by mundane intelligence
distinguishes between the all-auspicious, transcendental
holy name, form, qualities and pastimes of Śrī Viṣṇu and
the possessor of the holy name (nāmi-viṣṇu), considering
them to be independent of or different from Him as is
the case with material objects, commits an offence
against the holy name. Furthermore, one who thinks that
Lord Śiva and other demigods are independent of Viṣṇu,
or similar to Viṣṇu, certainly commits nāma-aparādha.

(3) Guror avajñā — To disregard the guru who is
established in all the truths regarding the holy name,
considering him to be an ordinary man possessing a
perishable body composed of material elements.

(4) Śruti-śāstra-nindanam — To find fault with the

                            84
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

Vedas, the eternal Purāṇas and other scriptures. All the
Vedas and Upaniṣads illuminate the glories of the holy
name. To find fault with the mantras in which the holy
name is glorified is nāma-aparādha. Due to misfortune,
some persons neglect the śruti-mantras in which the
glories of nāma are indicated and give more honour to
other instructions of the Śrutis. This is also nāma-
aparādha.

(5) Tathārtha-vādaḥ — To consider the glories of
harināma to be exaggerated. The scriptures state that
all of Bhagavān’s potencies are contained within His
name, and that the holy name is completely
transcendental and therefore capable of destroying one’s
bondage to the material world. All these glories of the
holy name are the supreme truth. One should never
associate with those who have no faith in them and who
say that śāstra exaggerates the glories of the holy
name. If such an unfaithful person appears before one’s
eyes, one should take bath still wearing the clothes he
has on. This is the teaching of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

(6) Hari-nāmni kalpanam — To consider Bhagavān’s name to
be imaginary. Māyāvādīs and materialistic karmavādīs
consider Brahman, which is without name and form, to be
the supreme truth, and they say that the ṛṣis
manufactured names like Rāma and Kṛṣṇa thinking such
names would perfect their activities. These people are
nāma-aparādhīs. The name of Hari is not imaginary; it is
eternal and transcendental. It only manifests upon the
transcendental senses, and only through bhakti. This is
the teaching given by the bona fide guru and śāstra.
Therefore one should acknowledge that the glories of
harināma are the supreme truth. One who considers these
glories to be imaginary will never be able to receive
the mercy of the holy name.

(7) One who has a tendency to commit sinful and material
activities on the strength of the holy name cannot be
purified even if he performs superficial yoga processes
such as yama, niyama, dhyāna or dhāraṇā. This is
certain.

(8) To consider religiosity, vows, renunciation, fire
sacrifices and other ordinary pious activities to be
equal with or comparable to the transcendental name of
Bhagavān is a sign of inattentiveness and carelessness,
and is thus an offence.

(9) To instruct the glories of the holy name to
faithless persons who are averse to hearing and chanting
is also nāma-aparādha.

(10) Those who, in spite of hearing the astonishing
glories of the holy name, maintain the conception that
“I am this material body” and that “wordly objects of
sense gratification are mine”, and who show no
persistence in or love for the utterance of śrī nāma,
are also nāma-aparādhīs.



sādhu-anādara āra anye īśa-jñāna


                           85
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

guruke avajñā, nāma-śāstre apamāna

nāme arthavāda, nāma-bale pāpāndhatā

anya śubha-karma saha nāmera samatā

śraddhā-hīne nāma dāna, jaḍāsakti-krame

māhātmya jāniyā nāme śraddhā nahe bhrame

ei daśa aparādha yatne parihari’

harināme kara bhāi bhajana cāturī



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Skilfulness in nāma-bhajana is to perform bhajana in
association of devotees while carefully avoiding these
ten offences.




Text 24

False renunciation (phalgu-vairāgya) is prohibited.
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.126) states:



prāpañcikatayā buddhyā

hari-sambandhi-vastunaḥ

mumukṣubhiḥ parityāgo

vairāgyaṁ phalgu kathyate



When sādhakas who desire liberation renounce that which
is related to Hari, such as the scriptures, the deity,
the holy name, mahā-prasāda, the spiritual master and
Vaiṣṇavas, considering them material, their renunciation
is called futile renunciation, phalgu-vairāgya. This is
unfavourable to bhakti.



prāpañcika jñāne bhakti sambandha viṣaya

mumukṣu-janera tyāga phalgu nāma haya




Text 25

One who is qualified to chant the holy name gives up all
fruitive activities. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.5.41) says:

                            86
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017




devarṣi-bhūtāpta-nṛṇāṁ pitṝṇāṁ

na kiṅkaro nāyam ṛṇī ca rājan

sarvātmanā yaḥ śaraṇaṁ śaraṇyaṁ

gato mukundaṁ parihṛtya kartam



One who has taken complete shelter of Bhagavān Mukunda,
who is affectionate towards the surrendered, is not
indebted to the demigods, to his forefathers, to
ordinary living entities, or to relatives and guests. He
is not subordinate to anyone other than Mukunda, nor is
he their servant.



ekānta haiyā nāme ye laya śaraṇa

devādira ṛṇā tāra nahe kadācana



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The performance of the śrāddha ceremony and other
material activities meant to absolve one’s debts to the
forefathers, as presented in the karma-kāṇḍa section of
the Vedas, is not for devotees surrendered to Bhagavān.
The only injunction for these devotees is to worship
Bhagavān, offer bhagavat-prasāda to the forefathers and
accept bhagavat-prasāda with friends and relatives. The
ultimate purport of the entire Bhagavad-gītā is that
Bhagavān will liberate from all sins those who have
surrendered unto Him and given up their reliance on all
other dharmas. When a person acquires the qualification
for exclusive devotion, he is not obliged to follow the
rules of the jñāna- and karma-śāstras, for he will
attain all perfection simply by cultivating bhakti.
Therefore one should understand that Bhagavān’s promise
in Bhagavad-gītā (9.31), “na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati — My
devotee never perishes”, is placed above all.



Text 26

The Padma Purāṇa (quoted in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu
(1.2.8)) states that one should give up niyamāgraha and
follow the essence of all injunctions:



smartavyaḥ satataṁ viṣṇur

vismartavyo na jātucit

sarve vidhi-niṣedhāḥ syur


                            87
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

etayor eva kiṅkarāḥ



One should always remember Viṣṇu and never forget Him.
All other rules and prohibitions are subservient to
these two principles.



yāhe kṛṣṇa-smṛti haya, tāi vidhi jāni

kṛṣṇa-vismāraka kārya niṣedha bali’ māni



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

All of the various rules and prohibitions of śāstra are
established on the basis of the above-stated main rule
and prohibition. The main injunction is that throughout
one’s whole life one should always remember Bhagavān
Viṣṇu. Varṇāśrama and other arrangements that are made
to maintain one’s life are subordinate to this rule. The
main prohibition is that one should never forget
Bhagavān. To abandon sinful activities, to give up
indifference to Bhagavān and to atone for sins are
subordinate to this principal injunction and this
principal prohibition.

Hence all the rules and prohibitions mentioned in the
scriptures are perpetual servants of the rule to always
remember Bhagavān and of the prohibition to never forget
Him. From this, one can understand that among all the
rules regarding varṇāśrama and so forth, that rule which
calls for remembering Bhagavān is eternal.



Text 27

Do not endeavour to perform activities such as atoning
for sins through karma and jñāna. The Padma Purāṇa says:



harer apy aparādhān yaḥ

kuryād dvi-pada-pāṁśalaḥ

nāmāśrayaḥ kadācit syāt

taraty eva sa nāmataḥ

nāmno ‘pi sarva-suhṛdo

hy aparādhāt pataty adhaḥ

nāmāparādha-yuktānāṁ

nāmāny eva haranty-agham

aviśrānta-prayuktāni


                            88
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

tāny evārtha-karāṇi ca



That wretched person who commits seva-aparādha at the
lotus feet of Śrī Hari can become freed from his offence
if he takes shelter of the holy name. Every kind of
aparādha is nullified by service to the holy name. All
perfection is attained by chanting the holy name without
anarthas and with a sense of one’s relationship with the
Lord, continuously and uninterruptedly, like an unbroken
stream of oil.



kṛṣṇera śrī-mūrti prati aparādha kari’

nāmāśraye sei aparādhe yaya tari’

nāma aparādha yata nāme haya kṣaya

aviśrānta nāma laile sarva-siddhi haya




Text 28

Everyone should endeavour to attain knowledge of Kṛṣṇa
(kṛṣṇa-svarūpa) and oneself (ātma-svarūpa). One first
attains knowledge of Kṛṣṇa’s form and qualities, and
then of His pastimes. Catuḥ-ślokī Bhāgavata (2.9.33)
states:



aham evāsam evāgre

nānyad yat sad-asat param

paścād ahaṁ yad etac ca

yo ‘vaśiṣyeta so ‘smy aham



[Bhagavān said to Brahmā:] Before the creation of this
world, only I existed. The gross and the subtle, up to
the indefinable Brahman — in other words the cause (sat)
and the effect (asat) — did not exist. Nothing other
than I existed. What is manifested in the form of
creation is also I, after creation it is also I, and
after annihilation only I will remain.



cid-ghana-svarūpa kṛṣṇa nitya sanātana

kṛṣṇa-śakti pariṇati anya saṅghaṭana

sakalera avaśeṣe kṛṣṇa cid-bhāskara

avicintya-bhedābheda tattva kṛṣṇetara

                             89
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017




Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

In this Text the words aham eva, meaning “certainly I”,
are used three times. This is because Bhagavān is
eternally present since time immemorial in His form
possessed of all opulence. Bhagavān has used these words
“certainly I” three times to refute the doctrine of
persons who consider Parabrahma to be without form. The
implied meaning is, “Now I am present before you as a
great ocean of supremely captivating beauty, qualities
and sweetness. I was also present before this creation,
in other words at the time of the mahā-pralaya
(annihilation of the universe at the end of Brahmā’s
life).” At that time, except for creating the world
consisting of the five elements, Bhagavān was performing
all His activities. Bhagavān’s eternal, confidential
pastimes were also present with Him, as were His
associates, who are assistants in His pastimes. At the
time of the mahā-pralaya the material universes are
destroyed, but Bhagavān’s transcendental pastimes and
His various forms, abodes and intimate associates are
all eternally existent.

Bhagavān is present both before and after the creation.
The entire material world is the manifestation of
Bhagavān’s bahiraṅga-śakti and the living entity is His
taṭastha-śakti. Therefore this material world is not
separate from Bhagavān. Bhagavān is situated in
unlimited Vaikuṇṭha planets in His form complete with
six opulences. In the material world He is present as
the Supersoul (antaryāmī), and He appears as Matsya and
other incarnations when needed.

According to the impersonalists (nirviśeṣavādīs), only
the impersonal Brahman existed at first. To defeat this
doctrine, Śrī Bhagavān says to Brahmā, “Beyond the cause
(sat) and the effect (asat) is the supreme entity,
Brahman. That Brahman is nothing other than Me. Few can
realise My personal form replete with transcendental
pastimes; they can only realise the impersonal form
(nirviśeṣa-svarūpa). You, however, can realise My form
full of transcendental beauty and all qualities, by My
blessings and mercy.”




Text 29

Knowledge of the intrinsic natures of jīva-śakti and
māyā-śakti is found in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.9.34):



ṛte ‘rthaṁ yat pratīyeta

na pratīyeta cātmani

tad vidyād ātmano māyāṁ


                           90
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

yathābhāso yathā tamaḥ



The Supreme Absolute Truth (parama-tattva, or svarūpa-
tattva) is the only real truth. One should understand
that which is seen to be separate from this truth, or
not existing within it, to be the product of the Supreme
Absolute Truth’s illusory energy (māyā). The following
example demonstrates this. Parama-tattva can be compared
to the sun, which is an object consisting of light. The
sun is experienced in two other forms, namely its
reflection and darkness. Similarly, in regards to the
Absolute Truth, reflection pertains to the living
entities (jīva-śakti) and darkness to the material world
(māyā-śakti).



kṛṣṇa-śakti māyā, kṛṣṇa haite bhedābheda

cic-chakti svarūpāśritā cij-jyoti-sambheda

jaḍākāre māyā-śakti chāyā tamo-dharma

prapañca pratīti yāhe vinaśvara-karma



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Although the jīva and māyā are both dependent on
Bhagavān, a person does not experience them while he is
directly experiencing Bhagavān. And while having
experience of the jīva and māyā, one will not have
experience of Bhagavān.

The intrinsic nature of the Supreme Absolute Truth was
ascertained in the previous Text. The jīva and māyā are
separate from parama-tattva. When a jīva can realise
parama-tattva it is known as realised knowledge,
vijñāna. This Text 29 elaborates upon māyā-tattva.
Parama-tattva is the only real truth, and that which is
experienced outside parama-tattva and not within it, is
the product of the illusory energy of the Absolute
Truth.

An example of this is seen in the sun, its reflection
and darkness. A semblance of the sun is the reflection
of the sun on water or on other things at dawn. This
semblance does not exist without the sun. Similarly,
māyā is only perceived when the creative energy of
Bhagavān is manifest, and its existence is destroyed at
the time of annihilation (mahā-pralaya). Without
Bhagavān, māyā is not manifest. Where there is light
there can be no darkness, but darkness is also perceived
through the eyes. In the same way, māyā cannot be
perceived on its own without the help of Bhagavān. The
transcendental world (cid-jagat) is herein compared with
the rays of the sun, Bhagavān. Using the same analogy,
the jīvas are compared to the reflection of Bhagavān and
the material world (māyā-jagat) is compared with
darkness. The material realm is very far from Bhagavān,
the transcendental truth (cit-tattva).

                           91
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017


There are two kinds of relationship between parama-
tattva and māyā-tattva. That which is experienced as
separate from the Absolute Truth is māyā, and that which
is very far from the Absolute Truth and in ignorance of
it is also māyā. In this way, by carefully explaining
the inherent nature of Himself, the jīva and māyā, Śrī
Bhagavān explained sambandha-tattva to Brahmā.




Text 30

The relationship between Kṛṣṇa on one side, and the
living entity and the material world on the other, is
one of inconceivable difference and non-difference,
acintya-bhedābheda. Nevertheless, Kṛṣṇa is separately
situated in His eternal svarūpa. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(2.9.35) states:



yathā mahānti bhūtāni

bhūteṣūccāvaceṣv anu

praviṣṭāny apraviṣṭāni

tathā teṣu na teṣv aham



The five great elements of material creation enter into
the bodies of all living entities, high and low, from
the demigods to the sub-human species. But at the same
time, these elements exist independently. Similarly, I
have entered into all living entities as the Supersoul,
but at the same time I am situated independently in My
own svarūpa, and I appear to My surrendered devotees
both internally and externally.



mahābhūta uccāvaca-bhūte avasthita

haiyā o pūrṇa-rūpe mahābhūte sthita

sei rūpa cid-aṁśa jīve kṛṣṇāṁśa vyāpita

haiyā o pūrṇa kṛṣṇa svarūpāvasthita



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

After describing His own svarūpa, Śrī Bhagavān says, “I
am situated inside and outside every living entity.”
Bhagavān dwells in every living entity as the Supersoul,
but not all living entities are able to perceive Him.
Only His devotees can realise Him. Not only that,
Bhagavān is present everywhere, in all places, and the
devotees can also realise this. According to the

                           92
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

gradation of their bhakti, devotees relish the existence
of Bhagavān and the nectar of His sweetness and beauty.
The affection of the devotees for Śrī Bhagavān is called
prema, and this is prayojana-tattva, the ultimate
objective. The premi-bhakta sees Śrī Kṛṣṇa everywhere,
both within his heart and outside. This is the intrinsic
characteristic (svarūpa-lakṣaṇa) of prema, as described
by Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself:



bhakta āmā preme bāndhiyāche hṛdaya-bhitare

yāhāṅ netra paḍe tāhāṅ dekhaye āmāre



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 25.127)



The devotees keep Me bound in their hearts with the
ropes of prema. And outside their hearts, they see only
Me wherever they look.



Bhagavān resides affectionately in the hearts of the
devotees, considering them His own; and He resides in
the hearts of the other jīvas in a detached way.
Bhagavān is supremely independent, yet His quality of
being controlled is that He resides in the hearts of
devotees and has possessiveness (mamatā) towards them.
Bhagavān is made a prisoner by the loving devotion of
His premi-bhaktas. The essence of spiritual knowledge is
prema-bhakti, and the wonderful, confidential secret of
prema-bhakti is that Bhagavān becomes controlled by His
loving devotees.




Text 31

Knowledge of the intrinsic nature of the holy name is
given in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.233, quoted from
the Padma Purāṇa):



nāma cintāmaṇiḥ kṛṣṇaś

caitanya-rasa-vigrahaḥ

pūrṇaḥ śuddho nitya-mukto

‘bhinnatvān nāma-nāminoḥ



The holy name is a transcendental wish-fulfilling gem
(cintāmaṇi), for there is no difference between Kṛṣṇa’s
name (nāma) and Kṛṣṇa Himself (nāmī). In other words the

                            93
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

holy name is the bestower of the supreme goal (parama-
puruṣārtha). This name is the very form of
transcendental mellows (caitanya-rasa-svarūpa). It is
completely pure; that is, it is unlimited and eternally
liberated, devoid of any connection with māyā.



harināma cintāmaṇi cid-rasa-svarūpa

pūrṇa jaḍātīta nitya kṛṣṇa-nija-rūpa



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Nāma and nāmī are qualitatively non-different in
principle. Therefore in the name “Kṛṣṇa” all the
transcendental qualities of the possessor of the name
are present. The holy name is always the complete
Absolute Truth, unaffected by material matter. He is
eternally liberated because He is never bound by the
illusory energy. The holy name is Kṛṣṇa Himself and
therefore the personification of the aggregate wealth of
transcendental mellows. The holy name is a wish-
fulfilling gem, able to give whatever one desires. Śrī-
nāma-saṅkīrtana, which is the practice (sādhana), is
non-different in every respect from Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is
the goal (sādhya). The one Absolute Truth, who is imbued
with transcendental mellows consisting of eternity,
knowledge and bliss (sac-cid-ānanda), is eternally
present in these two manifested forms, nāma and nāmī.




Text 32

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.234) states:



ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi

na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ

sevonmukhe hi jihvādau

svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ



The material senses, such as the tongue, cannot perceive
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s name, which appears automatically only on
the transcendental senses of one in whose heart the
desire to serve Kṛṣṇa has arisen.



nāma, rūpa, guṇa, līlā indriya-grāhya naya

sevā-mukhe kṛpā kari’ indriya udaya


                              94
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

It is a natural tendency of one who has the desire to
serve Kṛṣṇa (sevonmukha) to be engaged in chanting
Bhagavān’s holy name, which is His intrinsic form. The
holy name Himself appears and begins to dance on the
tongue and other senses of one who has a tendency
towards śrī-nāma-sevā, in other words, an inclination
for chanting. Bhagavān’s name can appear even on the
tongues of animals. Examples of this are Bharata
Mahārāja when he was leaving his deer body, and the
elephant Gajendra when he was being pulled into the
water by the crocodile.



Text 33

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.21.2) states:



sve sve ‘dhikāre yā niṣṭhā

sa guṇaḥ parikīrtitaḥ

viparyayas tu doṣaḥ syād

ubhayor eṣa nirṇayaḥ



To have unyielding steadiness on the path of dharma,
according to one’s own qualification, is a virtue;
conversely, to make endeavours that do not accord with
one’s qualification is a fault.



adhikāra susammata kārye haya guṇa

viparīta kārye doṣa bujhibe nipuṇa



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The purport of this verse is that virtue and fault are
determined according to one’s qualification, and not by
any other criteria.




Text 34

Qualification for chanting the holy name is given in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.20.27—8):




                             95
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

jāta-śraddho mat-kathāsu

nirviṇṇaḥ sarva-karmaṣu

veda duḥkhātmakān kāmān

parityāge ‘py anīśvaraḥ

tato bhajeta māṁ prītaḥ

śraddhālur dṛḍha-niścayaḥ

juṣamāṇaś ca tān kāmān

duḥkhodarkāṁś ca garhayan



If a person whose faith in hearing narrations of Me has
been awakened is unable to give up sense enjoyment and
the desire for it, even though he knows it gives misery,
he should with a sincere heart condemn his inability to
give it up. All the while, he should continue
worshipping Me with firm faith, conviction and love.



kṛṣṇa-kathā śraddhā-lābha tyaje karmāsakti

duḥkhātmaka kāma-tyāge tabu nahe śakti

kāma-sevā kare tāhā kariyā garhaṇa

sudṛḍha-bhajane kāme kare vidhvaṁsana

puṇyamaya kāma-mātra uddiṣṭa ethāya

pāpa-kāme śraddhadhānera ādara nā haya



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

By the influence of association with devotees (sat-
saṅga), a person develops a taste for hearing hari-
kathā. At that time he will have no interest in any
other activity, and with firm faith he will chant the
name of Bhagavān continually. However, if due to his
previous habits someone is unable to give up sense
enjoyment or the desire for it, in his heart he condemns
his inability to give it up.

Here, in these two verses, the intrinsic nature of
bhakti is described by mentioning the first symptoms of
the qualification for bhakti. Sarva-karmasu means
sadness that comes as a result of performing all
material Vedic activities and from their results; in
other words, being distressed by a miserable mind. Kāmān
means realising the miseries that result from the
desires arising from associating with the opposite sex.
If a person is unable to give up these desires, he
should, from the beginning, have the following firm
conviction: “If my attachment to household life is
destroyed or if it increases, if my bhajana is full of

                            96
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

millions of obstacles or if I go to hell because of
offences, I will accept it all; but I will never give up
devotion, even if Brahmā himself tells me to.” A person
who performs bhajana with such firm conviction will
certainly be successful. Even if desires causing misery
arise from association with wife, children and so forth,
a person should condemn the desires and continue
fulfilling his worldly responsibilities. However, he
should never give up bhakti. The desire for enjoyment
will gradually diminish by hearing, chanting and so on,
and one will ultimately attain bhakti.




Text 35

The six vows favourable for bhakti are described in the
third verse of Upadeśāmṛta:



utsāhān niścayād dhairyāt

tat-tat-karma-pravartanāt

saṅga-tyāgāt sato vṛtteḥ

ṣaḍbhir bhaktiḥ prasidhyati



Perfection in bhakti can be achieved by the following
six kinds of practices: (1) to be enthusiastic in
following the rules which nourish devotion; (2) to have
firm faith in the statements of the scriptures and in
śrī gurudeva, whose words are fully in line with the
scriptures; (3) to be patient in the practice of bhakti,
even in the midst of obstacles or when there is a delay
in attaining one’s desired success; (4) to follow the
limbs of bhakti, such as śravaṇa and kīrtana, and to
give up one’s material sense enjoyment for the pleasure
of Kṛṣṇa; (5) to give up association that is opposed to
bhakti, like illicit connection with women, the
association of those who are overly attached to women
and the association of māyāvādīs, atheists and pseudo-
religionists; and (6) to adopt the good behaviour and
character of devotees.



utsāha, dṛḍhatā, dhairya bhakti kārye rati

saṅga-tyāga, sādhu-vṛtti chaye kara mati



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

To maintain one’s existence and to cultivate bhakti are
both necessary for devotees. The first half of this
verse indicates the activities that nourish bhakti and
the second half describes how a devotee should conduct

                              97
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

his life. Enthusiasm (utsāha), conviction (niścaya),
patience (dhairya), executing activities that nourish
devotion (tat-tat-karma-pravartana), renouncing bad
association (saṅga-tyāga) and adopting the good
behaviour and character of pure devotees (sad-vṛtti) are
the means to attain perfection in bhakti.

Utsāha means to remain indifferent in every respect to
the practices related to jñāna, karma and anyābhilāṣa
(desires other than to serve Kṛṣṇa), and also to one’s
preferred variety of material enjoyment, while steadily
executing the limbs of sādhana-bhakti. “Bhagavad-bhakti
is the only ultimate objective for all living entities”
— such firm faith is called niścaya, conviction.
Straying to the paths of karma, jñāna and so forth makes
one’s mind restless, and following their practices only
produces suffering in the end. Therefore the firm
resolve that the path of bhakti is the only
constitutional path for sincere living entities is
called dhairya, fortitude.

Śrī Haridāsa Ṭhākura took a vow never to give up
chanting and he strictly adhered to it:



khaṇḍa-khaṇḍa hai deha yāya yadi prāṇa

tabu āmi vadane nā chāḍi harināma



Śrī Caitanya-bhāgavata (Ādi-khaṇḍa 16.94)



Even if my body is cut to pieces and my life air exits,
I will never abandon the chanting of harināma.



This is the ideal in the realm of bhakti.

To cultivate the practices of bhakti such as hearing
hari-kathā, performing kīrtana of Bhagavān’s name, and
meditating on Bhagavān’s name, form and pastimes with
firm conviction like Haridāsa Ṭhākura, is tat-tat-karma-
pravartana.

Only the association of Bhagavān’s devotees is
desirable. One should never associate with karmīs,
jñānīs or those filled with desires other than to serve
Kṛṣṇa. One should know such people to be less
intelligent and indulgent. Karma, jñāna, aṣṭāṅga-yoga
and so forth, which are devoid of the desire to please
Bhagavān, are not steps on the path of bhakti. The path
of bhakti is characterised by saintly conduct (sādhu-
vṛtti), because all virtuous qualities certainly reside
within a person who possesses devotion.

Enthusiasm for serving Kṛṣṇa, conviction in service,
being steadfast in kṛṣṇa-sevā, ensuring that all
endeavours are solely for service to Kṛṣṇa, renouncing
the company of all others except Kṛṣṇa’s devotees and

                           98
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

following in the footsteps of Kṛṣṇa’s devotees are the
six practices that enhance bhakti.




Text 36

The gradual development of bhakti through the
association of genuine sādhus is described in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (3.25.25):



satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-saṁvido

bhavanti hṛt-karṇa-rasāyanāḥ kathāḥ

taj-joṣaṇād āśv apavarga-vartmani

śraddhā ratir bhaktir anukramiṣyati



In the association of pure devotees, there are powerful
discussions that illuminate My heroic deeds and that are
pleasing to both the ears and the heart. By hearing
these narrations, one quickly proceeds along the path of
the removal of ignorance (avidyā-nivṛtti), which is the
sequential development of śraddhā, rati and prema-
bhakti.

sādhu-saṅge haya kṛṣṇa-kathā rasāyana

tāhe śraddhā rati bhakti krame uddīpana



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

By great fortune the living entity wandering throughout
material existence may attain that kind of sukṛti which
bestows bhakti. When this sukṛti accumulates over many
births, it gives rise to faith (śraddhā) in exclusive
devotion. When śraddhā arises, the desire to associate
with pure devotees and true saints manifests, and by
this association one will gradually develop a taste for
sādhana and bhajana. When anarthas are removed and this
śraddhā becomes pure, it transforms into niṣṭhā, which
in turn, when pure, transforms into ruci. The beauty of
bhakti makes this ruci very fixed, and thus turns it
into āsakti. Gradually this āsakti gains perfection and
transforms into bhāva. When bhāva combines with its
corresponding components in the right proportion, rasa
appears. This is the gradual development leading to the
appearance of prema.




Text 37


                           99
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

A madhyama-bhakta renders service to the three kinds of
Vaiṣṇavas. Upadeśāmṛta (5) states:



kṛṣṇeti yasya giri taṁ manasādriyeta

dīkṣāsti cet praṇatibhiś ca bhajantam īśam

śuśrūṣayā bhajana-vijñam ananyam anya-

nindādi-śūnya-hṛdam īpsita-saṅga-labdhyā



That person who utters Kṛṣṇa’s name by just once calling
out “O Kṛṣṇa!” is a kaniṣṭha-adhikārī, and one should
offer him respect within one’s mind. That person who
fully understands the principle of dīkṣā, has accepted
dīkṣā from a qualified guru and performs bhajana of
Bhagavān in accordance with Vaiṣṇava conventions, is a
madhyama-adhikārī. One should respect such a devotee,
who is endowed with the correct understanding of reality
and illusion, by offering obeisances unto him and so
forth. That person who properly understands the science
of bhajana, as described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and other
Vaiṣṇava scriptures, and performs exclusive bhajana of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is a mahā-bhāgavata. Due to his undeviating
absorption in Kṛṣṇa, the pure heart of such a devotee is
free from faults, such as the tendency to criticise
others. He is expert in bhajana, which means he is
skilled in the method of remembering Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s
eternal eightfold daily pastimes through mānasī-sevā,
service performed within the mind. Knowing him to be a
mahā-bhāgavata whose heart is established in the
particular mood of service to Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa for which
one aspires (svajātīya) and who is affectionately
disposed towards oneself (susnigdha), one should seek
his association, considering it to be topmost. One
should honour him by offering prostrated obeisances,
making relevant inquiry and rendering service unto him
with great love.



akaitave kṛṣṇa-nāma yāra mukhe śuna

manete ādara tāre kara punaḥ punaḥ

bhakti sampradāya labhi’ yei kṛṣṇa bhaje

ādara karaha paḍi’ tāra pada-raje

svīya para-buddhi-śūnya ananya-bhajana

yāṅhāra, tāṅhāra sevā kara anukṣaṇa



Bhajana-rahasya vṛtti

Because the mahā-bhāgavatas see everything as related to
Kṛṣṇa, they look upon all with equal vision. They are
devoted to kṛṣṇa-bhajana like the madhyama-adhikārī, and

                          100
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

intent on chanting the holy name like the kaniṣṭha-
adhikārī.

The madhyama-adhikārīs have prema for Śrī Kṛṣṇa. They
offer appropriate respect to the three levels of
devotees (by rendering service, offering obeisances and
offering respect mentally). They always endeavour to
turn the conditioned living entities towards Kṛṣṇa and
they are indifferent towards those who are averse to
Kṛṣṇa. However, they do not possess equal vision like
the uttama-adhikārī mahā-bhāgavata, and if they
deceitfully imitate him they will very quickly fall
down.

The kaniṣṭha-adhikārī knows that the name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
is supremely auspicious, and therefore he takes shelter
of chanting the holy name. He does not understand,
however, that the position of the madhyama-adhikārī is
high and that he should strive to reach that level in
the future. Sometimes the kaniṣṭha-adhikārī considers
himself a guru and consequently falls down. Therefore,
by carefully offering appropriate respect to those
Vaiṣṇavas who are more advanced than him, he should take
shelter of the holy name.




Text 38

One should chant the holy name while maintaining one’s
life by yukta-vairāgya, the mood of appropriate
renunciation. Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.125) states:



anāsaktasya viṣayān

yathārham upayuñjataḥ

nirbandhaḥ kṛṣṇa-sambandhe

yuktaṁ vairāgyam ucyate



Appropriate renunciation is to accept objects favourable
to one’s service while being detached from that which is
unrelated to Kṛṣṇa and attached to that which is related
to Kṛṣṇa.



yathāyogya viṣaya bhoga anāsakta hañā

suyukta-vairāgya bhakti-sambandha kariyā




Text 39


                             101
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.11.32) further states:



vṛttyā sva-bhāva-kṛtayā

vartamānaḥ sva-karma-kṛt

hitvā sva-bhāva-jaṁ karma

śanair nirguṇatām iyāt



One who maintains his occupational duty (svadharma) by
taking shelter of his innate propensity will gradually
become detached from these activities and become
situated beyond the material modes.



svabhāva-vihita-vṛtti kariyā āśraya

niṣpāpa jīvane kara kṛṣṇa-nāmāśraya




Text 40

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.7.39) also says:



prāṇa-vṛttyaiva santuṣyen

munir naivendriya-priyaiḥ

jñānaṁ yathā na naśyeta

nāvakīryeta vāṅ-manaḥ



I have taken a lesson from the way in which the vital
force within the body operates, that one should eat and
drink only as much as is required to sustain the body. A
sādhaka should also eat only what is needed to maintain
his life. A sādhaka should not enjoy sense objects
merely for his own gratification; otherwise his
intelligence will become corrupted, his mind restless
and his speech engaged in topics unrelated to Kṛṣṇa.



aprajalpe kara prāṇa-vṛtti aṅgīkāra

indriyera priya-vṛtti nā kara svīkāra

vāg-indriya mano-jñāna yāhe svāsthya pāya

ei rūpa āhāre yukta-vairāgya nā yāya


                            102
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017




Text 41

Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya (8.51) explains that one should be
careful about whom he associates with:



yasya yat-saṅgatiḥ puṁso

maṇivat syāt sa tad-guṇaḥ

sva-kularddhyai tato dhīmān

sva-yuthāny eva saṁśrayet



A person develops the qualities of the company he keeps,
just as a crystal reflects the colour of those objects
which are brought into its proximity. Therefore, by
associating with pure devotees, one can himself become
pure.



svayūthera maṅgala o anye rākhi’ dūra

yathā saṅga yathā phala pāibe pracura



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Association with devotees (sādhu-saṅga) is the source of
all auspiciousness. Where the scriptures give the
instruction to be solitary (niḥsaṅga), it refers to
keeping only sādhu-saṅga.




Text 42

With great effort one should follow the path delineated
by the mahājanas. This is described in the Skanda
Purāṇa:



sa mṛgyaḥ śreyasāṁ hetuḥ

panthaḥ santāpa-varjitaḥ

anavāpta-śramaṁ pūrve

yena santaḥ pratasthire




                            103
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

Only by following the path upon which previous great
personalities (mahājanas) have easily traversed can we
find ultimate auspiciousness and freedom from all
suffering.




Text 43

Acquiring knowledge by hearing from scriptural
authorities is the real path of bhakti. The Brahma-
yāmala states:



śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi-

pañcarātra-vidhiṁ vinā

aikāntikī harer bhaktir

utpātāyaiva kalpate



One can only attain the one-pointedness, or aikāntika-
bhāva, of pure bhakti by adopting the path of the
previous mahājanas. It cannot be attained by leaving the
path of the mahājanas and creating another path. Because
Dattātreya, Buddha and later preachers were unable to
understand pure bhakti, they accepted only a semblance
of this transcendental sentiment. Dattātreya mixed it
with māyāvāda and Buddha with atheism, and thus they set
forth useless paths, describing them as one-pointed
devotion (aikāntikī-hari-bhakti). In reality, however,
the paths promoted by these people are not hari-bhakti;
they are simply a disturbance.



pūrva-mahājana pathe cale anāyāse

nava-pathe utpāta āsiyā jīve nāśe

anartha-nāśera yatna kabhu nāhi yāra

nāma-kṛpā nāhi pāya durdaiva tāhāra

nāma-kṛpā vinā koṭi koṭi yatna kare

tāhāte anartha kabhu nāhi chāḍe tāre

niṣkapaṭe yatne kāṅde nāmera caraṇe

dūra haya anartha tāhāra alpa dine

anartha chāḍiyā kara śravaṇa-kīrtana

ekānta-bhāvete lao nāmera śaraṇa




                          104
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

In rāga-mārga-bhajana there is no consideration of the
rules of the Śruti, Smṛti, Purāṇas, Nārada-pañcarātra
and so forth. The only consideration is to follow the
inhabitants of Vraja. But for sādhakas eligible only for
vidhi-mārga, it is necessary to adopt the path of
devotion as given by the mahājanas such as Dhruva,
Prahlāda, Nārada, Vyāsa and Śuka. Hence there is no
other means for the vaidha-bhaktas except to follow the
path of saintly persons.

Without the mercy of Nāma Prabhu, those who perform
bhajana will be unable to give up their anarthas, even
after millions of attempts. But if one sincerely weeps
at the lotus feet of Nāma Prabhu, all one’s anarthas
will vanish within a few days. Giving up one’s anarthas
in this way, one should take exclusive shelter of the
holy name and thereby hear and chant.




Text 44

Endeavours made in performing resolute bhajana are
described in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa:



evam ekāntināṁ prāyaḥ

kīrtanaṁ smaraṇaṁ prabhoḥ

kurvatāṁ parama-prītyā

kṛtyamanyan na rocyate

bhāvena kenacit preṣṭha-

śrī-mūrter aṅghri-sevane

syād icchaiṣāṁ sva-mantreṇa

sva-rasenaiva tad-vidhiḥ

vihiteṣv eva nityeṣu

pravartante svayaṁ hite

sarva-tyāge ‘py aheyāyāḥ

sarvānartha-bhuvaś ca te

kuryuḥ pratiṣṭhā-viṣṭhāyāḥ

yatnam asparśane varam

prabhāte cārdharāte ca

madhyāhne divasa-kṣaye

kīrtayanti hariṁ ye vai

                             105
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


na teṣām anya-sādhanam



If a one-pointed devotee (aikāntika-bhakta) chants and
contemplates the glories of his Prabhu, Śrī Viṣṇu, with
great affection and according to his transcendental
sentiments, he will have no taste for any other
activity. With whatever mood he desires to serve the
lotus feet of his beloved deity, he performs arcana
through his particular mantra and his particular mellow
of devotion. That same service later transforms into his
eternal service. Even if one has given up everything
else, something still remains to be given up before this
can happen — this is the desire for name and fame,
pratiṣṭhā, the root cause of all anarthas. The prime
duty is to give up this pratiṣṭhā, which is compared to
stool. What to speak of touching this pratiṣṭhā, do not
see it, even from a distance! For one who chants the
name of Śrī Hari in the morning, noon, evening and
midnight, no other sādhana is needed.



ekānta bhaktera mātra kīrtana-smaraṇa

anya parve ruci nāhi haya pravartana

bhāvera sahita haya śrī-kṛṣṇa-sevana

svārasikī-bhāva krame haya uddīpana

ekānta bhaktera kriyā-mudrā-rāgodita

tathāpi se saba nahe vidhi-viparīta

sarva-tyāga karileo chāḍā sukaṭhina

pratiṣṭhāśā tyāge yatna pāibe pravīṇa

prabhāte gabhīra rātre madhyāhne sandhyāya

anartha chāḍiyā lao nāmera āśraya

ei-rūpe kīrtana smaraṇa yei kare

kṛṣṇa-kṛpā haya śīghra, anāyāse tare

śraddhā kari sādhu-saṅge kṛṣṇa nāma laya

anartha sakala yāya niṣṭhā upajaya

prātaḥ-kāle nitya-līlā karibe cintana

cintite cintite bhāvera haibe sādhana




Text 45

Govinda-līlāmṛta (2.1) describes the early morning

                          106
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

pastimes (prātaḥ-līlā) as follows:

After the kuñja-bhaṅga-līlā, or niśānta-līlā (pastimes
at night’s end), Śrī Rādhā-Śyāmasundara return to Their
respective abodes and lay down on Their beds. The
condition of Śrī Kiśorī in Jāvaṭa is indescribable as
She burns in separation from Her beloved. Śrī Rūpa and
Rati Mañjarīs are absorbed in their service to Her, and
give Her encouragement as if again infusing Her with
life. Sometimes Jaṭilā, sometimes Mukharā and sometimes
Paurṇamāsī enter Śrī Kiśorī’s quarters, and at this time
Śyāmalā also comes. Kiśorī and Śyāmalā are immersed in a
joking conversation. In this way the pastime develops in
newer and newer ways. Rūpa, Rati and other mañjarīs
ornament Śrīmatī by cleansing Her body, decorating Her
and so forth, and at the same time they remind Her of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes.

rādhā snāta vibhūṣita, śrī-yaśodā-samāhuta,

sakhī-saṅge tad gṛhe gamana

tathā pāka-viracana, śrī-kṛṣṇāvaśeṣāśana,

madhye-madhye duṅhāra milana

kṛṣṇa nidrā parihari, goṣṭhe go-dohana kari,

snānāśana sahacara saṅge

ei līlā cintā kara, nāma-preme garagara,

prāte bhakta-jana-saṅge raṅge

ei līlā cinta āra kara saṅkīrtana

acire pāibe tumi bhāva-uddīpana



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Śrī Kiśorī and Her sakhīs depart for Nanda-bhavana. On
the way they meet Śrī Śyāmasundara and many pastimes
full of rasa take place. Our Gosvāmīs have revealed
these pastimes in their writings. Upon reaching Nanda-
bhavana, Kiśorī starts to cook in the midst of countless
stoves, and prepares many tasty dishes.

Śyāmasundara is sleeping in His home. Yaśodā-maiyā
awakens Him and, seeing the nail-marks on the body of
her dear son (lālā), she becomes sad and says, “The
limbs of my lālā are as soft as the petals of a blue
lotus. Why have the boys hurt Him in their wrestling
matches? And so much dhātu-rāga (colour from minerals)
is on His limbs. Alas, alas! What to do? I do not know
how to put an end to this.”

Kundalatā jokingly says, “Your lālā is performing rāsa
at night.” But the word rāsa is unknown to Yaśodā-maiyā.
Then, after expressing affection for His mother,
Śyāmasundara jumps up from bed and goes to milk the
cows. Upon His return He bathes, eats and then leaves
for cowherding. Kiśorī shyly accepts some of Her

                           107
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                                5/5/2017

priyatama’s remnants and returns to Jāvaṭa with Her
sakhīs.

Many other pastimes take place amidst all these   līlās,
and it would be very difficult to describe them   all. A
premi-bhakta performs bhajana while remembering   these
pastimes, which are alluded to here, and tastes   their
rasa even in the stage of sādhana.



Thus ends the Dvitīya-yāma-sādhana,

Prātaḥ-kālīya-bhajana, of Śrī-Bhajana-rahasya.




3 Tṛtīya-yāma-sādhana: Pūrvāhna-kālīya-bhajana — niṣṭhā-
bhajana (from six daṇḍas until two praharas:
approximately 8.30 a.m. — 11.00 a.m.)




Text 1

The third verse of Śikṣāṣṭaka describes the
qualification for nāma-saṅkīrtana and the process for
chanting the holy name:



tṛṇād api sunīcena

taror api sahiṣṇunā

amāninā mānadena

kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ



Thinking oneself to be even lower and more worthless
than insignificant grass that has been trampled beneath
everyone’s feet, being more tolerant than a tree, being
prideless and offering respect to everyone according to
their respective positions, one should continuously
chant the holy name of Śrī Hari.



ye rūpe laile nāma prema upajaya

tāra lakṣaṇa-śloka śuna, svarūpa-rāmarāya

uttama hañā āpanāke māne tṛṇādhama

dui prakāre sahiṣṇutā kare vṛkṣa sama

vṛkṣa yena kāṭileha kichu nā bolaya


                          108
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

śukāiñā maileha kāre pānī nā māgaya

yei ye māgaye, tāre deya āpana dhana

gharma-vṛṣṭi sahe, ānera karaye rakṣaṇa

uttama hañā vaiṣṇava ha’be nirabhimāna

jīve sammāna dibe jāni ‘kṛṣṇa’-adhiṣṭhāna



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Four symptoms are observed in sādhakas who chant the
holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa free from all offences: (1)
natural humility born of complete detachment from sense
objects, (2) pure compassion devoid of envy, (3) purity
of heart and freedom from false ego, and (4) an attitude
of respect towards everyone according to their position.

Taror api sahiṣṇunā refers to the tolerance of a tree. A
tree is so tolerant that it does not forget to show
kindness by offering its cool shade and sweet fruits
even to the person who comes to cut it down. Since
Kṛṣṇa’s devotees are even more merciful than a tree,
they show kindness to all, both friend and enemy. This
is compassion completely free from envy. Although such
devotees are topmost in the kingdom of bhakti, they
remain free from pride. They know that Kṛṣṇa resides in
the hearts of all living entities, and therefore give
all living entities appropriate respect. Such persons
are truly eligible to perform śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma-kīrtana,
and only performers of śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma-kīrtana attain
kṛṣṇa-prema.




Text 2

The features of surrender (śaraṇāgati) are given in the
Vaiṣṇava-tantra (Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (11.676)):



ānukūlyasya saṅkalpaḥ

prātikūlyasya varjanam

rakṣiṣyatīti viśvāso

goptṛtve varaṇaṁ tathā

ātma-nikṣepa-kārpaṇye

ṣaḍ-vidhā śaraṇāgatiḥ



The six types of surrender are: (1) to accept that which
is favourable to kṛṣṇa-bhakti; (2) to reject that which
is unfavourable; (3) to have the strong faith “Bhagavān

                          109
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

will protect me”; (4) to have dependence, thinking
“Bhagavān will take care of me”; (5) to be fully self-
surrendered (ātma-samarpaṇa); and (6) to be humble.



bhakti-anukūla yāhā tāhāi svīkāra

bhakti-pratikūla saba kari parihāra

kṛṣṇa vai rakṣā-kartā āra keha nāi

kṛṣṇa se pālana more karibena bhāi

āmi āmāra yata kichu kṛṣṇe nivedana

niṣkapaṭa dainye kari jīvana-yāpana



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The symptom of śaraṇāgati in one-pointed devotees is
that they perpetually engage in service to their Prabhu
and accept whatever He arranges. Such devotees accept
whatever punishment is given by Bhagavān as His mercy.
They know that every action takes place only due to the
desire of Kṛṣṇa; therefore they unite their desire with
Kṛṣṇa’s and thus remain peaceful. A devotee does not
think that Kṛṣṇa has sent him to this world to suffer
miseries, but that he chose the miseries of the world by
misusing his independence. The symptom of śaraṇāgati is
that one gives up the false conception of being the doer
and takes shelter of guru and Vaiṣṇavas. The intrinsic
characteristic (svarūpa-lakṣaṇa) of surrender is
acceptance of Śrī Kṛṣṇa as one’s maintainer (goptṛtve
varaṇam). The remaining five symptoms are the marginal
characteristics (taṭastha-lakṣaṇa) of śaraṇāgati.

Firm faith that “Śrī Kṛṣṇa will always maintain me” is
the meaning of goptṛtve varaṇam. In Bhagavad-gītā Śrī
Kṛṣṇa says: “teṣāṁ nityābhiyuktānāṁ yoga-kṣemaṁ vahāmy
aham — for those who are always absorbed in thoughts of
Me, and who worship Me by every means and with one-
pointed devotion, I Myself preserve what they have and
carry what they lack.” He also says, “My devotees will
never be destroyed.”

In the second and third verses of his Upadeśāmṛta, Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī has explained two of the marginal
characteristics of śaraṇāgati: to accept what is
favourable for bhakti (ānukūlyasya saṅkalpaḥ) and to
give up what is unfavourable (prātikūlyasya varjanam).
These two verses were explained in detail in the second
chapter of this book.




Text 3

One must first give up the false identification with
this material body (deha-abhimāna). The Mukunda-mālā

                          110
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

(37) states:



idaṁ śarīraṁ śata-sandhi-jarjaraṁ

pataty avaśyaṁ pariṇāma-peśalam

kim auṣadhaṁ pṛcchasi mūḍha durmate

nirāmayaṁ kṛṣṇa-rasāyanaṁ piba



This frail body, which is made of five elements and
connected by hundreds of joints, is certain to decline.
Consequently, the body will be burnt to ashes or will
become food for worms and transformed into excrement. O
foolish and wicked mind, you have decorated such a
disgusting body with a senseless attachment. The elixir
of śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma is the only powerful medicine to cure
this disease of material existence. You should
constantly drink it by incessantly chanting Kṛṣṇa’s holy
name.



śata sandhi-jara-jara, tava ei kalevara,

patana haibe eka-dina

bhasma, kṛmi, viṣṭhā ha’be, sakalera ghṛṇya tabe,

ihāte mamatā arvācīna

ore mana, śuna mora e satya-vacana,

e rogera mahauṣadhi, kṛṣṇa-nāma niravadhi,

nirāmaya kṛṣṇa-rasāyana



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

One should endeavour to serve Govinda and not
painstakingly try to protect this short-lived temporary
body. No matter how much one tries to protect this body,
which is made of five elements, its destruction is
inevitable. Therefore this Text says, “O wicked mind,
give up performing aṣṭāṅga-yoga, physical exercises and
so forth to keep this body fit, and only drink the
nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s holy name. Only this nectar can
liberate you from the cycle of birth and death. By the
mercy of nāma you will attain the eternal abode of Kṛṣṇa
and a transcendental body suitable for rendering service
there. Then you will be engaged in your nitya-sevā.”




Text 4


                          111
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

One should be tolerant like a tree and compassionate to
all jīvas. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.9.12) Śrī Brahmā
says:



nātiprasīdati tathopacitopacārair

ārādhitaḥ sura-gaṇair hṛdi baddha-kāmaiḥ

yat sarva-bhūta-dayayāsad-alabhyayaiko

nānā-janeṣv avahitaḥ suhṛd antar-ātmā



O Bhagavān, You are situated in the hearts of all living
entities as the supremely benevolent Supersoul. Because
of Your compassionate nature, You always remain pleasing
to everyone, but You cannot be attained by the non-
devotees.



bahu upacārārpaṇe, pūji’ kāmī deva-gaṇe,

prasannatā nā la’bhe tomāra

sarva-bhūte dayā kari’, bhaje akhilātmā hari,

tāre kṛpā tomāra apāra



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Śrī Brahmā is praying at the lotus feet of Bhagavān, “O
Bhagavān, You are situated as the Supersoul in all
living entities. You are everyone’s friend and, despite
being unattainable for the non-devotees, You are always
merciful to everyone. The demigods worship You so that
You will be pleased and fulfil their various material
desires. Due to Your merciful nature, You grant their
wishes, for You have said in Bhagavad-gītā (4.11): ‘ye
yathā māṁ prapadyante tāṁs tathaiva bhajāmy aham — as
all surrender unto Me and worship Me, I reciprocate
accordingly.’ However, You always give special mercy to
Your devotees. Although Your mercy is distributed
everywhere, You have special affection for Your
devotees. This is not a mixture of contradictory
qualities.”

According to Bhagavad-gītā (9.29):



samo ‘haṁ sarva-bhūteṣu

na me dveṣyo ‘sti na priyaḥ

ye bhajanti tu māṁ bhaktyā

mayi te teṣu cāpy aham


                             112
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017



I am equal to all living beings and am neither inimical
nor partial to anyone. But as those who serve Me with
devotion are attached to Me, so I too am bound by
affection for them.




Text 5

The glory of the virtue of giving respect to devotees is
described in the Mukunda-mālā (35):



śṛṇvan sato bhagavato guṇa-kīrtanāni

dehe na yasya pulakodgama-roma-rājiḥ

notpadyate nayanayor vimalāmbu-mālā

dhik tasya jīvitam aho puruṣādhamasya



If upon hearing the kīrtana of Hari’s name, form,
qualities and pastimes from the mouths of guru and
Vaiṣṇavas, one’s bodily hairs do not stand erect in
ecstasy, his heart does not melt, and tears do not flow
from his eyes, alas! the life of such a wretched person
is condemned.



sādhu-mukhe yei jana, kṛṣṇa-nāma-guṇa-gaṇa,

śuniyā nā haila pulakita

nayane vimala jala, nā vahila anargala,

se vā kena rahila jīvita



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Sādhakas performing bhajana condemn their lives and
repent in this way: “Alas! Even though I have heard
hari-kathā from the mouths of saintly persons, my hard
heart does not melt. This is the result of my offences.
The heart of one who just once hears the glories of
Kṛṣṇa’s name melts immediately. But my heart has not
realised this truth, and thus my life is condemned.”

There is a story in this regard. There was a person who
would come to hear hari-kathā in an assembly of sādhus.
Upon hearing the hari-kathā, everyone present would be
saturated with bliss, but the heart of this man bore no
change. He became very remorseful about this. The next
day, while hearing hari-kathā, he rubbed red chilli
powder in his eyes, which then poured forth a shower of

                           113
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

tears. The Vaiṣṇava giving the hari-kathā noticed this.
When the narrations were finished, he called him over
and praised him by saying, “The scriptures say those
senses that refuse to perform kṛṣṇa-bhajana should be
punished, and today you have put this into practice.
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam says, ‘It is useless to keep those
senses that are not engaged in the service of
Bhagavān.’” When the man heard this, a stream of real
tears flowed from his eyes.




Text 6

Knowledge of Kṛṣṇa’s glories is described in the
Mukunda-mālā (43):



kṛṣṇo rakṣati no jagat-traya-guruḥ kṛṣṇo hi viśvambharaḥ

kṛṣṇād eva samutthitaṁ jagad idaṁ kṛṣṇe layaṁ gacchati

kṛṣṇe tiṣṭhati viśvam etad akhilaṁ kṛṣṇasya dāsā vayaṁ

kṛṣṇenākhila sad-gatir-vitaritā kṛṣṇāya tasmai namaḥ



Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the guru of the three worlds, protects us.
Viśvambhara Kṛṣṇa maintains the entire universe in all
ways. This world is manifested by Kṛṣṇa — that is, by
His external potency (bahiraṅga-śakti) — and at the
proper time (during pralaya) the entire creation again
merges into Him. Kṛṣṇa pervades the entire world; the
entire world is situated within Him. Śrī Kṛṣṇa manifests
all wealth and opulence. We are all Kṛṣṇa’s eternal
servants. I offer my respects unto this Śrī Kṛṣṇa.



jagad-guru kṛṣṇa sabe karena rakṣaṇa

kṛṣṇa viśvambhara viśva karena pālana

kṛṣṇa haite ei viśva hañāche udaya

avaśeṣe ei viśva kṛṣṇe haya laya

kṛṣṇe viśva avasthita, jīva kṛṣṇadāsa

sad-gati-pradātā kṛṣṇe karaha viśvāsa

janama layecha kṛṣṇa-bhakti karibāre

kṛṣṇa-bhakti vinā saba mithyā e saṁsāre

Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

As sādhakas chant Kṛṣṇa’s names, they repeatedly sing
the glories of those names. They offer Him obeisances
and pray at His lotus feet: “O Kṛṣṇa, save my life by

                          114
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                                5/5/2017

giving me Your darśana. You are the provider and
maintainer of the entire world, and thus Your name,
Viśvambhara, has become meaningful. Since I am also
residing in this world, please protect me. From You come
the creation, maintenance and destruction of this world.
Millions of universes are situated in each and every
pore of Your body. Because I am present in this world, I
am also Your insignificant servant, so please bestow
Your mercy upon me. Prabhu, by Your causeless mercy, You
have arranged that the living entities take birth in
human bodies only so they can perform bhagavad-bhajana,
without which this entire universe is useless. As this
bhakti cannot be received without Your mercy, please
bestow that mercy upon me.”

Furthermore Śrī Caitanya-bhāgavata (Madhya-khaṇḍa 2.202)
states:



jagatera pitā kṛṣṇa je nā bhaje bāpa

pitṛ-drohī pātakīra janme-janme tāpa



Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the father of the universe. Although a
person may perform duties to his mother, father, wife,
children and so on, if he does not perform bhajana of
his original eternal father, he is offensive to that
father (pitṛ-drohī) and he will be scorched by the
threefold miseries of māyā, birth after birth.



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 6.85) states:



keha māne, kehā nā māne, saba taṅra dāsa

ye nā māne, tāra haya sei pāpe nāśa



Some accept Him whereas others do not, yet everyone is
His servant. One who does not accept Him, however, will
be ruined by his sinful activities.

The scriptures also state:



daśāśvamedhī punar eti janmani

kṛṣṇa-praṇāmī na punar bhavāya



Even a person who performs ten horse sacrifices takes
birth again in this world. But he who offers obeisances
to Kṛṣṇa just once does not return.



                             115
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


O Kṛṣṇa, I eternally offer my constant obeisances at
Your lotus feet, which bring one fearlessness.




Text 7

Great eagerness in kṛṣṇa-bhajana is described in the
Mukunda-mālā (33):



kṛṣṇa tvadīya-pada-paṅkaja-pañjarāntam

adyaiva me viśatu mānasa-rāja-haṁsaḥ

prāṇa-prayāṇa-samaye kapha-vāta-pittaiḥ

kaṇṭhāvarodhana-vidhau bhajanaṁ kutas te



O Kṛṣṇa, my request is that the swan of my mind be
confined in the cage of Your lotus feet and dwell there
in the ocean of rasa. At the time of death the throat
will be choked up with mucus, air and bile. Under such
conditions, how will it be possible to remember Your
name?



vṛthā dina yāya more majiyā saṁsāre

e mānasa-rāja-haṁsa bhajuka tomāre

adyai tomāra pāda-paṅkaja-pañjare

baddha ha’ye thākuka haṁsa rasera sāgare

e prāṇa prayāṇa-kāle kapha vāta pitta

karibeka kaṇṭharodha apraphulla citta

takhana jihvāya nā sphuribe tava nāma

samaya chāḍile kise ha’be siddhakāma

Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

As a person who is inclined to perform nāma-bhajana
increases his chanting of the holy name, feelings of
repentance increase in his aching heart. Even though he
is chanting harināma day and night, he thinks, “Alas, my
mind has dwelled on material objects and thus my days
have passed in vain. My mind is not fixed at the lotus
feet of Nāma Prabhu. O Prabhu, how will I be delivered?
It is my request at Your lotus feet that my swan-like
mind be confined in the cage of Your lotus feet and
always drink nectar. At the time of death, when mucus,
air, bile and so forth choke my throat, how will I drink
the nectar of Your name? If at that time Your name does

                          116
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                                5/5/2017

not appear on my tongue, how will I be able to attain
perfection? O Prabhu, I pray at Your lotus feet that at
the time of death, I will give up my body while
constantly chanting Your holy name.”




Text 8

The following six verses of the Yāmuna-stotra (which
comprise Texts 8—13) illustrate the poet Yāmunācārya’s
own humility:



na dharma-niṣṭho ‘smi na cātma-vedī

na bhaktimāṁs tvac-caraṇāravinde

akiñcano ‘nanya-gatiḥ śaraṇya

tvat-pāda-mūlaṁ śaraṇaṁ prapadye



I am not devoted to dharma, nor do I have any knowledge
of the soul, and my heart has no devotion for Your lotus
feet. O protector, being destitute, I take shelter of
You. I have no shelter other than You. You have come as
the saviour of the fallen to deliver such a wretched
fallen soul as me. I am Your eternal servant and You are
my eternal master.



hari he!

dharma-niṣṭhā nāhi mora, ātma-bodha vā sundara,

bhakti nāi tomāra caraṇe

ataeva akiñcana, gati-hīna duṣṭa-jana,

rata sadā āpana-vañcane

patita-pāvana tumi, patita adhama āmi,

tumi mora eka-mātra gati

tava pāda-mūle painu, tomāra śaraṇa lainu,

āmi dāsa tumi nitya-pati



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The sādhaka prays to Bhagavān in a meek and destitute
mood, “O Prabhu, I have no devotion to dharma, no bhakti
and no jñāna, so how can I remember Your lotus feet? You
are the saviour of the fallen (patita-pāvana); You even
give those who are poor and lowly a place at Your lotus

                           117
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

feet. Therefore please deliver me, this degraded soul.
Then Your name, Patita-pāvana, will become meaningful.”




Text 9

na ninditaṁ karma tad asti loke

sahasraśo yan na mayā vyadhāyi

so ‘haṁ vipākāvasare mukunda

krandāmi sampraty agatis tavāgre



O Prabhu! O Hari! There is no wicked or sinful activity
I have not performed thousands and thousands of times,
and I will suffer for them. O Mukunda, I see that
besides You there is no other shelter. I am constantly
crying, praying before You. If You so desire, punish me;
for You are the ruler of this destitute body.



hena duṣṭa karma nāi, yāhā āmi kari nāi,

sahasra-sahasra bāra hari

sei saba karma-phala, peye avasara bala,

āmāya piśiche yantropari

gati nāhi dekhi āra, kāndi hari ānivāra,

tomāra agrete ebe āmi

yā’ tomāra haya mane, daṇḍa deha akiñcane,

tumi mora daṇḍa-dhara svāmī



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

“O Lord, birth after birth I have performed innumerable
sinful and contemptible activities. To describe them all
to You is not even possible; but as You are omniscient,
You know of them anyway. So now I come before You,
clasping a piece of straw between my teeth, humbly
requesting You to please deliver me, even by giving me
punishment. O Prabhu, as a result of my numerous
offences, māyā crushes me just as one crushes a stick of
sugar cane. My tearful request to You is to please
purify this destitute person by punishing him. Since You
give liberation to the jīvas, one of Your names is
Mukunda. Therefore please liberate me from these sins
and bestow upon me service to Your lotus feet.”

Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī says in Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 5.205, 207):

                            118
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017




jagāi mādhāi haite muñi se pāpiṣṭa

purīṣera kīṭa haite muñi se laghiṣṭa

emana nirghṛṇṇā more kebā kṛpā kare

eka nityānanda vinā jagata bhitare



I am more sinful than Jagāi and Mādhāi and even lower
than a worm in stool. Who in this world but Nityānanda
could show His mercy to such an abominable person as me?




Text 10

nimajjato ‘nanta bhavārṇavāntaś

cirāya me kūlam ivāsi labdhaḥ

tvayāpi labdhaṁ bhagavann idānīm

anuttamaṁ pātram idaṁ dayāyāḥ



O Ananta, since time immemorial I have been drowning in
this unlimited ocean of material existence. The hope of
one day attaining Your lotus feet is the shore of this
ocean. Immersed in this material existence, I am
tearfully praying to You with a distressed voice to
please appear as guru and deliver me.



nija-karma-doṣa-phale, paḍi’ bhavārṇava jale,

hābu ḍubu khāi kata kāla

sāṅtāri sāṅtāri yāi, sindhu anta nāhi pāi,

bhava-sindhu ananta viśāla

nimagna haiyā yabe, ḍākinu kātara rave,

keha more karaha uddhāra

sei kāle āile tumi, tava pada-kūla-bhūmi,

āśā-bīja haila āmāra

tumi hari dayāmaya, pāile more suniścaya,

sarvottama bhājana dayāra




                             119
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

“O Lord, as a result of my previous activities I am
submerged in the ocean of material existence, where many
kinds of reactions are rising as huge waves, tormenting
me with happiness and distress. This path of karma has
no beginning and no end. I do not know how to swim in
this vast ocean, and the crocodiles of lust, anger and
so forth are eating my body. O Lord, please rescue me!
You are my only hope. I now relinquish dependence on my
own strength, and instead am taking shelter of Your
lotus feet. I have heard from the mahājanas that You
give mercy according to the extent of a person’s fallen
condition. As You protected the elephant Gajendra with
Your disc, please save me from this crocodile-like ocean
of material existence. Prabhu, I have also heard that
You are the pinnacle of compassion. Please understand
that I am fallen and wretched. Even if someone searches
the entire universe, he will not find any better object
for this compassion than I. Knowing this, kindly bestow
Your mercy upon me.”




Text 11

bhavantam evānucaran nirantaraḥ

praśānta-niḥśeṣa-mano-rathāntaraḥ

kadāham aikāntika-nitya-kiṅkaraḥ

praharṣayiṣyāmi sanātha-jīvitam



All mental creations and desires are alleviated and the
mind pacified by uninterrupted service to You. When will
I be designated as Your eternal servant? When will I be
radiant with joy, having obtained such a competent
master as You?



āmi baḍa duṣṭamati, nā dekhiyā anya-gati,

tava pade la’yechi śaraṇa

jāniyāchi ebe nātha, tumi prabhu jagannātha,

āmi tava nitya parijana

sei dina kabe habe, aikāntika-bhāve yabe,

nitya-dāsya-bhāva pāba āmi

manorathāntara yata, niḥśeṣa haibe svataḥ,

sevāya tuṣiba ohe svāmi




                             120
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

While chanting, the sādhaka prays as follows: “O Prabhu,
You are the Lord of the universe and I am Your servant,
but because of being opposed to serving You, I have gone
far away from You. Now I am tormented by the three kinds
of afflictions of Your māyā. Please bestow the mercy of
Your lotus feet upon this unfortunate person. Prabhu,
when will that auspicious day come when illusory desires
leave my heart and I become Your unalloyed servant? At
that time I will please You by fulfilling Your inner
desire (manobhīṣṭa-sevā).”




Text 12

aparādha-sahasra-bhājanaṁ

patitaṁ bhīma-bhavārṇavodare

agatiṁ śaraṇāgataṁ hare

kṛpayā kevalam ātmasāt-kuru



O Hari, I am an offender, guilty of thousands of
offences and therefore punishable. I am drowning in this
fearsome ocean of material existence. Lost, I take
shelter of Your lotus feet; please make me Your own. You
have promised that You will definitely deliver anyone
who has taken shelter of You. Please therefore deliver
me also.



āmi aparādhī jana, sadā daṇḍya durlakṣaṇa,

sahasra-sahasra doṣe doṣī

bhīma bhavārṇavodare, patita viṣama-ghore,

gati-hīna gati-abhilāṣī

hare tava pada-dvaye, śaraṇa lainu bhaye,

kṛpā kari’ kara ātmasāt

tomāra pratijñā ei, śaraṇa laibe yei,

tumi tāre uddhāribe nātha



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

“O Lord, I am suffering punishment for my thousands and
thousands of offences. As a fallen soul amidst the
towering waves of the fearful ocean of material
existence, I am without shelter. Sometimes the waves in
this ocean submerge me, and sometimes they lift me up

                            121
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

and knock me down again. In this condition, You who
deliver persons from the ocean of material existence are
my only friend. Please be merciful to me and make me
Your own. I have heard from the mouths of sādhus that
You certainly deliver those who have surrendered unto
You. This is Your promise. Therefore, O Lord, I am
situated at Your lotus feet with the hope and faith that
You will surely deliver me.”




Text 13

na mṛṣā paramārtham eva me

śṛṇu vijñāpanam ekam agrataḥ

yadi me na dayiṣyase tato

dayanīyas tava nātha durlabhaḥ



O Hari, I am submitting at Your lotus feet a petition in
which there is not the slightest untruth. You may or may
not be merciful to me, but my complete prayer, which is
full of meaning, is that if You are not merciful to me,
then it will be impossible for You to find a more
suitable candidate for Your mercy in this entire
material existence. Your name is Dayāmaya, “one who is
full of mercy”. Therefore, if You do not make me the
object of Your merciful sidelong glance, Your name will
be disgraced.



agre eka nivedana, kari madhunisūdana,

śuna kṛpā kariyā āmāya

nirarthaka kathā naya, nigūḍhārthamaya haya,

hṛdaya haite bāhirāya

ati apakṛṣṭa āmi, parama dayālu tumi,

more dayā tava adhikāra

ye yata patita haya, tava dayā tata tāya,

tāte āmi supātra dayāra

more yadi upekṣibe, dayā-pātra kothā pā’be,

dayāmaya nāmaṭi tomāra

Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

“O merciful Madhusūdana, I have a prayer to present
before Your lotus feet that comes from the core of my
heart. Do not neglect my prayer, thinking it
meaningless, because in this whole material existence

                             122
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                                5/5/2017

You will not find a more wretched person than I. If You
neglect me, whom will You accept as a fit candidate for
Your mercy? Make Your compassionate name successful by
bestowing Your mercy upon me.”




Text 14

Freedom from pride is described in the Yāmuna-stotra:



amaryādaḥ kṣudraś cala matir asūyā-prasava-bhūḥ

kṛta-ghno durmānī smara-para-vaśo rakṣaṇa-paraḥ

nṛśaṁsaḥ pāpiṣṭhaḥ katham aham ito duḥkha-jaladher

apārād uttīrṇas tava paricareyaṁ caraṇayoḥ



I am disrespectful, vile, fickle-minded, full of envy,
ungrateful, dependent on others, cruel and most sinful.
In this condition, how can I cross this impassable ocean
of material existence and attain the service of Your
lotus feet?



ami ta’ cañcala-mati, amaryāda kṣudra ati,

asūyā prasava sadā mora

pāpiṣṭha kṛta-ghna mānī, nṛśaṁsa vañcane jñānī,

kāma-vaśe thāki sadā ghora

e hena durjana ha’ye, e duḥkha-jaladhi va’ye,

calitechi saṁsāra-sāgare

kemane e bhavāmbudhi, pāra ha’ye niravadhi,

tava pada-sevā mile more



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

“O Lord, I am a disrespectful, vile jīva wandering in
this material existence. I am fickle-minded, full of
envy, ungrateful and dependent on others. Please save
this wretched person from this condition! Without Your
mercy there is no other means of rescue from this ocean
that is so difficult to cross. I offer millions and
millions of obeisances at Your feet. Please save me and
engage me in service to Your lotus feet.”




                             123
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017



Text 15

Respect for devotees is described in the Yāmuna-stotra:



tava dāsya-sukhaika-saṅgināṁ

bhavaneṣv astv api kīṭa-janma me

itarāvasatheṣu mā sma bhūd

api janma catur-mukhātmanā



O Bhagavān, if I take birth again due to my past
activities, or by Your desire, please let it be in the
home of a devotee, even if that birth is in the body of
an insect. I have no desire to take birth in a household
devoid of devotion to You, even if it has the opulence
of Brahmā. O Puruṣottama, this is my earnest prayer unto
You.



veda-vidhi-anusāre, karma kari’ e saṁsāre,

jīva punaḥ punaḥ janma pāya

pūrva-kṛta karma-phale, tomāra vā icchā-bale,

janma yadi labhi punarāya

tabe eka kathā mama, śuna he puruṣottama,

tava dāsa saṅgi-jana-ghare

kīṭa-janma yadi haya, tāhāte o dayāmaya,

rahiba he santuṣṭa antare

tava dāsa-saṅga-hīna, ye gṛhastha arvācīna,

tā’ra gṛhe caturmukha-bhūti

nā cāi kakhana hari, kara-dvaya yoḍa kari’,

kare tava kiṅkara minati



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

“O Lord, I have heard from guru and Vaiṣṇavas that the
living entity is wandering in the cycle of birth and
death according to his past activities. Prabhu, even if
according to my auspicious and inauspicious karma I take
birth in this material world, there is no cause for
grief. However, my earnest petition at Your lotus feet
is that even if I have to take the low birth of an
insect or dog as a result of my karma, please let it be

                             124
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

in the home of a devotee so that I will have the
association of the saintly Vaiṣṇavas. I have no desire
to take birth in a very rich family that is opposed to
You, even though its wealth may be compared to that of
Brahmā. I have heard from the scriptures that bhakti is
born of sādhu-saṅga:



kṛṣṇa-bhakti-janma-mūla haya ‘sādhu-saṅga’

kṛṣṇa-prema janme, teṅho punaḥ mukhya aṅga



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 22.83)



The root cause of kṛṣṇa-bhakti is sādhu-saṅga. Even when
one’s dormant kṛṣṇa-prema awakens, sādhu-saṅga is still
most essential.



“O Merciful One, whether I live in heaven, hell or
anywhere else, I will hear about Your lotus feet, sing
their glories and meditate upon them.”




Text 16

Humility that is full of self-surrender is described in
the Yāmuna-stotra (52):



vapur-ādiṣu yo ‘pi ko ‘pi vā

guṇato ‘sāni yathā-tathā-vidhaḥ

tad ayaṁ tava pāda-padmayor

aham adyaiva mayā samarpitaḥ



O Bhagavān, in this material existence there are the
bodily distinctions of male and female, and according to
the three modes of material nature (sattva, rajas and
tamas) there are the divisions of the four varṇas and
four āśramas. In this way humanity is unlimitedly
variegated. O Prāṇeśvara, let me take birth in any kind
of body or in any condition; it does not matter, because
now I am completely surrendered unto Your lotus feet and
there is nothing I consider mine.



strī-puruṣa-deha-gata, varṇa-ādi-dharma yata,


                          125
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

tāte punaḥ deha-gata bheda

sattva-rajas-tamo-guṇa, āśrayete bheda punaḥ,

ei rūpa sahasra prabheda

ye kona śarīre thāki, ye avasthā guṇa rākhi,

se ahaṁtā ebe tava pāya

sampilāma prāṇeśvara, mama bali’ ataḥpara,

āra kichu nā rahila dāya



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Here humility that is full of self-surrender is
expressed. While chanting the holy name, the sādhaka, in
a mood of distress, submits a humble petition at the
lotus feet of Bhagavān: “O Bhagavān, giving up this
false identification with the material male or female
body, with social classification and so on, I surrender
this body at Your lotus feet. Prāṇeśvara, You only are
my life.”

As long as the jīva falsely identifies with the gross
and subtle body, he cannot enter pure bhajana. When the
living entity is established in the mood of the verse
taught by Śrīman Mahāprabhu — nāhaṁ vipro na ca nara-
patir nāpi1 — or in other words, when he has become free
from all material designations, the door to the realm of
bhajana opens.



Text 17

An ideal example of sincere humility is given in Kṛṣṇa-
karṇāmṛta (30):



nibaddha-mūrdhāñjalir eṣa yāce

nīrandhra-dainyonnati-mukta-kaṇṭham

dayā-nidhe deva bhavat kaṭākṣaṁ

dākṣiṇya-leśena sakṛn niṣiñca



O Deva! O Ocean of Mercy! With folded hands raised to my
head, I humbly offer this prayer to You: please, just
once, shower me with Your merciful sidelong glance.



mastake añjali bāndhi’ ei duṣṭa-jana kāndi,

niṣkapaṭa dainya mukta-svare


                             126
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                                5/5/2017

phūkāri’, phūkāri’ kaya, ohe deva dayāmaya,

dākṣiṇya prakāśi’ antaḥpare

kṛpā-dṛṣṭi ekabāra karaha siñcana

tave e-janera prāṇa haibe rakṣaṇa



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

In this verse Līlāśuka Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura prays in a
distressed voice, induced by the humility caused by the
feelings of separation (viraha) felt by Śrī Rādhā. When
Śrī Kṛṣṇa left for Mathurā, He was separated from Rādhā
and lived far away (sudūra-pravāsa). Śrīmatī Rādhikā,
agitated by extreme separation, spoke with great
humility to a bumblebee (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.47.21)):
“smarati sa pitṛ-gehān — O bumblebee, does ārya-putra
(the son of a noble person) remember us?” She also
asked, “Upon happily returning from Ujjain, will He come
to Vṛndāvana?” When Kṛṣṇa disappeared from the rāsa
dance, She cried out (Śrīmad-Bhāgvatam (10.30.40)):
“dāsyāste kṛpaṇāyā me sakhe darśaya sannidhim — O Lord!
I am Your maidservant. Please show Yourself and make Me
satisfied.”

Desirous of this kind of humility, Śrī Līlāśuka is
saying, “O Kṛṣṇa, make me a traveller on the pathway of
Your eyes. Please give me service to You. Only by Your
mercy can I serve in Your intimate, secret nikuñja-
līlās. Upon attaining this service, the jīva becomes
forever successful. If I am unqualified for this
service, then let me worship You, immersed in these
sentiments. I am an offender; nonetheless, You are an
ocean of mercy. I beg You, therefore, do not pay
attention to my faults, and please make the creeper of
my desire bear fruit. This is my prayer unto You.”




Text 18

Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta (29) states:



mayi prasādaṁ madhuraiḥ kaṭākṣair

vaṁśī-ninādānucarair vidhehi

tvayi prasanne kim ihā parair nas

tvayy aprasanne kim ihā parair naḥ



O Kṛṣṇa, kindly bestow Your mercy    upon me through Your
sweet sidelong glances, which are    accompanied by the
sound of Your flute. When You are    pleased with me, there
is no harm if others are not. But    if You become

                          127
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

displeased, even if others are pleased, what is the use?



madhura kaṭākṣa-vaṁśī-ninādera saha

āmāke prasāda kari’ tava pade laha

prasanna haile tumi anya-prasannatā

prayojana kivā mora, ei mora kathā

tava prasannatā vinā anyera prasāde

ki kārya āmāra bala kahinu avādhe

ei rūpa niṣṭhā saha karile kīrtana

acire haibe ruci, pābe prema-dhana

pūrvāhna-kālera līlā ei rūpa haya

nāmāśrāya-kāle cintā kara mahāśaya

Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Remembering Her previous amorous sports (vilāsa) with
Śrī Kṛṣṇa in the kuñjas, Śrī Rādhikā becomes restless in
separation from Him (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.47.21)):
“kvacid api sa kathā naḥ kiṅkarīṇāṁ gṛṇīte bhujam aguru-
sugandhaṁ mūrdhny adhāsyat kadā nu — will Kṛṣṇa again
place His cooling hand, which is more fragrant than
aguru, on our heads?” In this viraha-pralāpa (incoherent
talk filled with lamentation, which is caused by
separation from Kṛṣṇa), Rādhikā says, “O Prāṇanātha,
please enter the kuñja, casting the same sidelong glance
as You did before.” What is the nature of this glance?
As Kṛṣṇa plays on His flute, His sidelong glance
indicates to Rādhā to enter the kuñja. For this reason,
the flute is a giver of bliss. Someone may question: “At
the time of rāsa-līlā, if Muralīvadana’s sidelong glance
signals to Śrī Rādhā alone, what about the other gopīs?”
The answer is that by the inconceivable potency
(acintya-śakti) contained within His flute and sidelong
glance, Kṛṣṇa signals Śrī Rādhā directly and the other
gopīs indirectly.

Rādhikā says, “I am only concerned with Your happiness.
If all of us gopīs become unhappy but You are happy,
then that is My cherished desire. If it pleases You to
not appear before Me, then even the gopīs’ endeavours to
find You cannot please Me.”

By resolutely performing bhajana with the sentiments
described in this third chapter, the stage of ruci will
arise and gradually the sādhaka will attain prema.




Text 19

The mid-morning pastimes (pūrvāhna-līlā) are described

                          128
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                                5/5/2017

in Govinda-līlāmṛta (5.1):

I remember Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who in the forenoon goes to the
forest with the cows and His sakhās. Śrī Nanda, Yaśodā
and other Vrajavāsīs follow Him for some distance.
Restless and hankering to meet with Śrī Rādhā, Kṛṣṇa
arrives at the bank of Rādhā-kuṇḍa for Their rendezvous
(abhisāra). I remember Śrī Rādhā, who after taking
Kṛṣṇa’s darśana at Nanda-bhavana, returns to Her home.
Jaṭilā orders Her to worship the Sun-god. Desiring to
learn of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s whereabouts, Rādhā sits and looks
down the road, waiting for the return of Her sakhī, whom
She has sent to gather this information.



dhenu sahacara saṅge, kṛṣṇa vane yāya raṅge,

goṣṭha-jana anuvrata hari

rādhā-saṅga-lobhe punaḥ, rādhā-kuṇḍa-taṭa-vana,

yāya dhenu saṅgī parihari’

kṛṣṇera iṅgīta pāñā, rādhā nija-gṛhe yāñā,

jaṭilājñā laya sūryārcane

gupte kṛṣṇa-patha lakhi’, katakṣaṇe āise sakhī,

vyākulitā rādhā smari mane



Bhajana-rahasya vṛtti

In pūrvāhna-līlā, after Śrī Kṛṣṇa has eaten, He prepares
to go to the forest, wearing the attire of a cowherd
boy; and Śrī Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī, decorated with cloth and
ornaments given by Śrī Yaśodā, returns to Jāvaṭa. They
meet halfway. Upon seeing Śrī Rādhā, Kṛṣṇa’s peacock
feather falls from His head and the flute slips from His
hand. This pastime is described in the following verse
from Śrī Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi (39):



veṇuḥ karān nipatitaḥ skhalitaṁ śikhaṇḍaṁ

bhraṣṭaṁ ca pīta-vasanaṁ vrajarāja-sūnoḥ



Kṛṣṇa arrives at the bank of Rādhā-kuṇḍa for another
meeting with Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Not finding Her there, He
becomes extremely eager, full of desire and restless. In
Jāvaṭa, meanwhile, Jaṭilā encourages Rādhikā to go and
worship the Sun-god (sūrya-pūjā). The way in which
Rādhikā performs pūjā to Kṛṣṇa at the place where sūrya-
pūjā is performed is the wealth that is attained by the
performance of bhajana.




                             129
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

Thus ends the Tṛtīya-yāma-sādhana,

Pūrvāhna-kālīya-bhajana, of Śrī Bhajana-rahasya.




4 Caturtha-yāma-sādhana: Madhyāhna-kālīya-bhajana —
ruci-bhajana (from the second prahara until three-and-a-
half praharas: approximately 11.00 a.m. — 3.30 p.m.)




Text 1

A nāma-sādhaka has no desire other than unadulterated
devotional service to Kṛṣṇa (ahaitukī-kṛṣṇa-bhakti). The
fourth verse of Śikṣāṣṭaka states:



na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ

kavitāṁ vā jagadīśa kāmaye

mama janmani janmanīśvare

bhavatād bhaktir ahaitukī tvayi



O Jagadīśa, I do not desire wealth, nor followers, nor
do I desire beautiful poetry (here meaning “knowledge”).
O Prāṇeśvara, my only desire is to have unalloyed
devotion unto Your lotus feet birth after birth.



gṛha-dravya-śiṣya-paśu-dhānya-ādi dhana

strī-putra dāsa-dāsī kuṭumbādi jana

kāvya-alaṅkāra-ādi sundarī kavitā

pārthiva-viṣaya madhye e saba vāratā

ei saba pāivāra āśā nāhi kari

śuddha-bhakti deha more, kṛṣṇa kṛpā kari’

premera svabhāva, yāhā premera sambandha

sei māne kṛṣṇa mora nāhi bhakti-gandha



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Bhakti only appears in the heart when one performs
harināma-kīrtana with firm faith (śraddhā). But the
sādhaka’s perfected body (śuddha-svarūpa) will not arise

                             130
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

unless he gives up all connection with sensual happiness
in this material world. This renunciation of sensual
happiness takes place in two ways: positive (anvaya) and
negative (vyatireka). Here anvaya refers to the
prominent characteristic of devotion, which is the
cultivation of activities favourable to Kṛṣṇa (ānukūlya-
maya-kṛṣṇānuśīlana). Vyatireka refers to the two
secondary characteristics of devotion, which are: (1)
the absence of desire for anything other than the
pleasure of Kṛṣṇa (anyābhilāṣitā-śūnya) and (2) the
absence of the coverings of karma and jñāna (jñāna-
karmādy-anāvṛta).

The words na dhanaṁ na janam in this Text clearly
explain the symptoms of vyatireka. The word dhana refers
to wealth and articles collected for enjoyment and
entertainment, and jana indicates women, children,
servants, maidservants, subjects, friends and relatives.
Sundarī-kavitā means ordinary knowledge expressed in
mundane poetry and literature.

“O Kṛṣṇa, Lord of my life, I am not praying to You for
all these things. My only prayer is that I may have
unalloyed devotion unto Your lotus feet birth after
birth.”




Text 2

Misusing material wealth and so forth is opposed to
bhakti. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.9.6) states:



tāvad bhayaṁ draviṇa-deha-suhṛn-nimittaṁ

śokaḥ spṛhā paribhavo vipulaś ca lobhaḥ

tāvan mamety asad-avagraha ārti-mūlaṁ

yāvan na te ‘ṅghrim abhayaṁ pravṛṇīta lokaḥ



As long as a person does not take shelter of Your lotus
feet, which remove all kinds of fear, he will be
tormented by anxiety, sorrow, hankering, wretchedness,
extreme greed and so forth caused by wealth, home,
friends and relatives. He will maintain the
misconception of “I” and “mine”, which is the sole cause
of unhappiness.



dravya-deha-suhṛn-nimitta śoka bhaya

spṛhā parābhava āra lobha atiśaya

āmi mama ārti-mūla asat-āśaya

yata dina nahe tava pāda-padmāśraya

                          131
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017




Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Persons who have never heard hari-kathā are not inclined
to serve Hari. They use their time, wealth and strength
in mundane activities and they maintain the
misconception that “I am the enjoyer”. They will suffer
due to their inclination to enjoy. In other words,
although they are in distress, they still endeavour to
obtain that which is unrelated to Kṛṣṇa. The sole cause
of this is illusion. Forgetting that Kṛṣṇa is their only
near and dear friend, they establish friendship with
persons averse to Kṛṣṇa and remain fearful of the
devotees. It is only by the merciful disposition of
Hari, Guru and Vaiṣṇavas that the living entity can be
delivered from these sufferings and the desire to serve
Bhagavān can arise in his heart. In other words the
inclination to serve Bhagavān (bhagavat-sevā-vṛtti) will
manifest in his heart. The living entity then realises
his own intrinsic nature, as well as the instrinsic
natures of Bhagavān and the illusory energy, and engages
all his senses in serving Hari, Guru and Vaiṣṇavas.
Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura sings in Śaraṇāgati (Ātma-
nivedana, song 8):



ātma nivedana, tuyā pade kari,

hainu parama sukhī

duḥkha dūre gela, cintā nā rahila,

caudike ānanda dekhī



By surrendering myself to Your lotus feet I have become
supremely happy. All suffering has gone far away and I
have no more worries. Now I see happiness in all
directions.




Text 3

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the supreme Lord of all lords, and by
worshipping Him, all others are worshipped. Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (4.31.14) states:



yathā taror mūla-niṣecanena

tṛpyanti tat-skandha-bhujopaśākhāḥ

prāṇopahārāc ca yathendriyāṇāṁ

tathaiva sarvārhaṇam acyutejyā


                          132
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017



By watering the root of a tree, all its parts, such as
the trunk, branches and sub-branches, are nourished, and
by satisfying the life-airs through eating, all of the
senses are nourished. Similarly, only by worshipping Śrī
Kṛṣṇa are the demigods, forefathers and so forth
worshipped.



taru-mūle dile jala, bhuja-śākhā-skandha

tṛpta haya anāyāse, sahaja nirbandha

prāṇera tarpaṇe yathā indriya sabala

kṛṣṇārcane tathā sarva-devatā śītala



Bhajana-rahasya vṛtti

By watering the root of a tree, all of its parts, such
as the trunk, branches, leaves and fruits, obtain
nourishment. By putting food in the stomach all the
different bodily limbs are satisfied and nourished.
Similarly, by performing exclusive worship of Acyuta,
all the demigods and goddesses are also worshipped. This
is because Acyuta is the root cause of all
consciousness, and all conscious and unconscious matter
is dependent on Him. Svayam Bhagavān is the only one who
is infallible (acyuta), and He can never become fallible
(cyuta). Here someone may ask, “What harm is there in
worshipping both Bhagavān and the demigods and goddesses
at the same time?” The answer is that such worship
signifies a lack of firm faith in Bhagavān. The demigods
and goddesses are ruled by material qualities, while the
process of serving Bhagavān is transcendental. It is
improper to disrespect the demigods and goddesses, but
it is also incorrect to elevate them to the same level
as Kṛṣṇa. The scriptures state that one who gives up
śrī-kṛṣṇa-bhajana to worship the demigods and goddesses
is like one who gives up his mother to worship an
outcaste woman, or like one who gives up nectar to drink
poison.




Text 4

Unalloyed devotees have no other duty than serving
Kṛṣṇa. The Padma Purāṇa states:



harir eva sadārādhyaḥ

sarva-deveśvareśvaraḥ

itare brahma-rudrādyā


                          133
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

nāvajñeyāḥ kadācana



The Lord of all demigods, Śrī Hari, is always the only
worshipful object, but it is improper to disrespect
Brahmā, Rudra and other demigods.



ādau sarveśvara-jñāna kṛṣṇete haibe

anya deve kabhu nāhi avajñā karibe




Text 5

One should not increase the number of his unqualified
disciples on the pretext of spreading bhakti. Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (7.13.8) states:



na śiṣyān anubadhnīta

granthān naivābhyased bahūn

na vyākhyām upayuñjīta

nārambhān ārabhet kvacit



One should not make many disciples for material gain,
nor study many books, nor give discourses on śāstra to
earn one’s livelihood. One should also give up large
undertakings.



bahu-śiṣya-lobhete ayogya śiṣya kare

bhakti-śūnya śāstrābhyāse tarka kari’ mare

vyākhyāvāda-bahvārambhe vṛthā kāla yāya

nāme yāra ruci sei e saba nā cāya



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

While explaining the duty of a sannyāsī, Devarṣi Nārada
said to Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja, “A sannyāsī should roam
about, be devoted to Nārāyaṇa and be the well-wisher of
all living entities. He should not engage in any
occupation to maintain his life, nor should he engage in
discussions only for the sake of debate. He should only
accept objects that come through begging (bhikṣā). He
should not be attached to literature that discusses
temporary, material subject matters, nor should he, for

                           134
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

material benefit, give mantras to unqualified persons to
increase his number of disciples. He should not show his
scholarly talent, but rather he should study literature
on bhakti and put these teachings into practice. It is
unfavourable to pure devotion, and also a waste of time,
to establish and maintain large temples to make a show
of opulence. Many kinds of unqualified persons will take
shelter of such temples, and their devious activities
will defame the society of sādhus. Saintly persons
should perform bhajana under the guidance of their
superiors, following the path designated by the
disciplic succession (paramparā). Only a sādhaka on the
platform of bhāva is qualified to make disciples, and he
does so only for the welfare of society and the
protection of the sampradāya. The scriptures forbid
unqualified persons from making many disciples.”




Text 6

Exclusive and unmotivated devotional service, known as
aikāntikī-ahaitukī-bhakti, is described in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (1.2.14):



tasmād ekena manasā

bhagavān sātvatāṁ patiḥ

śrotavyaḥ kīrtitavyaś ca

dhyeyaḥ pūjyaś ca nityadā



With an attentive mind, one should constantly hear
about, glorify, meditate upon and worship Bhagavān, who
is loving towards His devotees (bhakta-vatsala). All the
while, one should endeavour to remove his anarthas. Then
his creeper of devotion will very quickly bestow its
fruit in the form of prema.



ananya-bhāvete kara śravaṇa-kīrtana

nāma-rūpa-guṇa-dhyāna-kṛṣṇa-ārādhana

saṅge saṅge anartha-nāśera yatna kara

bhakti-latā phala-dāna karibe satvara



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

All religious duties are observed for the pleasure of
Śrī Hari. Therefore the living entity’s only duty is to
single-mindedly engage in kṛṣṇa-bhajana while giving up
the desire for karma and jñāna. For the pleasure of Śrī

                            135
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

Hari, he should reside in the dhāma with a resolute mind
and hear narrations about Hari from śrī guru and
Vaiṣṇavas. The method of cultivating pure bhajana is
that after hearing hari-kathā, one should perform
kīrtana and smaraṇa of those narrations. By this method
anarthas are nullified and pure bhajana arises. This is
the essence of all instruction for sādhakas.




Text 7

One should not be disturbed by the loss of acquired
assets. In this regard Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.114)
quotes the Padma Purāṇa:



alabdhe vā vinaṣṭe vā

bhakṣyācchādana-sādhane

aviklava-matir bhūtvā

harim eva dhiyā smaret



One who is devoted to hari-bhakti should remain
undisturbed and continue remembering Hari, even if he is
unsuccessful in obtaining food and clothing, or if what
he has obtained is lost.



bhakṣya-ācchādana yadi sahaje nā pāya

athavā pāiyā kona gatike hārāya

nāmāśrita bhakta aviklava-mati haiyā

govinda śaraṇa laya āsakti chāḍiyā



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

When the living entity attains taste (ruci) for śrī-
bhagavat-kathā and harināma, he no longer has an
attachment to worldly things. He is satisfied with only
the cloth and food necessary to protect and sustain the
body. If he gains or loses anything, his mind remains
steady. His mood is that whatever is obtained or lost is
the Lord’s desire. He knows that gain, loss and so forth
come according to one’s previous karma. Detached from
worldly matters, he remembers Śrī Bhagavān’s name with a
steady mind.




                          136
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

Text 8

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.113), quoting from the Padma
Purāṇa, mentions the necessity of giving up distress:



śokāmarṣādibhir bhāvair

ākrāntaṁ yasya mānasam

kathaṁ tatra mukundasya

sphūrtiḥ sambhāvanā bhavet



How can Mukunda manifest in the heart of a person who is
filled with lamentation, anger and so forth?



putra kalatrera śoka, krodha, abhimāna

ye hṛdaye tāhe kṛṣṇa sphūrti nāhi pāna



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Mukunda never manifests in a heart that becomes agitated
by pleasure upon obtaining something temporary or
distressed upon losing it. In this way the living entity
remains oblivious to Bhagavān. One should follow the
character of Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s devotees and, guided by
their mood, remain peaceful and steady in every
situation. In this regard one should follow the example
of Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita. Once Śrīman Mahāprabhu and His
devotees were performing kīrtana in Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita’s
home when, inside the house, Śrīvāsa’s son left his
body. Śrīvāsa remained calm and strictly forbade the
ladies and other persons in the house to cry, to ensure
that Mahāprabhu’s kīrtana would not be disturbed. He did
not even relate the news of his son’s death to
Mahāprabhu. With such a fixed and peaceful mind one
should remember and meditate upon Bhagavān. This is the
purport of śāstra.




Text 9

One should accept only as much wealth as is necessary to
maintain his life. The Nāradīya Purāṇa states:



yāvatā syāt sva-nirvāhaḥ

svīkuryāt tāvad arthavit

ādhikye nyūnatāyāṁ ca

                             137
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017


cyavate paramārthataḥ



A sādhaka who needs to maintain himself will collect
only as much wealth and other material necessities as
are required to maintain his bhakti; to accept too much
or too little will surely make him deviate from his
goal.



sahaje jīvana-yātrā-nirvāhopayogī

dravyādi svīkāra kare bhakta nahe bhogī



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

A person qualified for vaidhī-bhakti should earn money
to maintain his life through prescribed virtuous means;
that is, according to varṇāśrama-dharma. It is
auspicious to accept assets only according to one’s
needs. Craving to accept more than necessary creates
attachment, which will gradually destroy one’s bhajana.
Accepting less than necessary is also harmful, as this
will create an insufficiency, which in turn will weaken
one’s bhajana. Therefore as long as a person is not
indifferent to material things, he should cultivate pure
bhakti and accept only those assets that are required to
maintain his life.



Text 10

The symptoms of advancement in unmotivated devotional
service are given in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.42):



bhaktiḥ pareśānubhavo viraktir

anyatra caiṣa trika eka-kālaḥ

prapadyamānasya yathāśnataḥ syus

tuṣṭiḥ puṣṭiḥ kṣud-apāyo ‘nu-ghāsam



With each morsel of food that a hungry person eats, he
simultaneously experiences satisfaction, nourishment and
relief from hunger. Similarly a surrendered devotee, who
is engaged in the performance of bhakti, simultaneously
realises his worshipful deity, strengthens his
relationship with that deity and becomes detached from
this temporary world and material relationships.



bhakta-jane samamāne yugapad udaya

                          138
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


bhakti, jñāna, virakti, tina jānaha niścaya

cid-acid-īśvara sambandha-jñāne jñāna

kṛṣṇetare anāsakti virakti-pramāṇa

ye rūpa bhajane tuṣṭi puṣṭi pratigrāse

kṣudhāra nivṛtti ei tina anāyāse



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The symptoms observed in a sādhaka who has directly
experienced the sweetness of Bhagavān are described in
this Text. In such devotees, three symptoms are
simultaneously visible: attainment of service to the
Lord, realisation of all knowledge related to bhakti and
detachment from matters unrelated to Kṛṣṇa. The sādhaka
develops detachment from those items of enjoyment that
are not useful in the service of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, but he does
not develop detachment from that which can be used in
His service. Because he does not consider using such
objects for his own pleasure, there is no need for him
to renounce them.

When, due to humility, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī resolved
to give up his life by throwing his body under the wheel
of Lord Jagannātha’s chariot, Śrī Gaurasundara, who
resides in everyone’s heart as the Supersoul, told him
that a person cannot attain Kṛṣṇa merely by giving up
his body. Kṛṣṇa is only attained through bhajana; that
is, through fulfilling the inner desire of one’s guru
(manobhīṣṭa-sevā).

When the sādhaka surrenders to śrī guru’s lotus feet,
the guru becomes the owner of the sādhaka’s body.
Therefore, when one acknowledges his body to be his
guru’s property, it is necessary to take care of it. In
the same mood, the vraja-devīs decorate their bodies
with clothes, ornaments, cosmetics and so forth — only
for service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Indifference to material objects develops according to
the extent of one’s realisation of Bhagavān. This
indifference gives one the qualification to attain the
direct service of Bhagavān. Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī states in Vilāpa-kusumāñjali (6):



vairāgya-yug bhakti-rasaṁ prayatnair

apāyayan mām anabhīpsum andham

kṛpāmbudhir yaḥ para-duḥkha-duḥkhī

sanātanaṁ taṁ prabhum āśrayāmi



I surrender to the lotus feet of my master, Śrī Sanātana

                          139
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

Gosvāmī, who is the bestower of sambandha-jñāna. He is
an ocean of mercy and his heart always becomes
distressed upon seeing the suffering of others. Although
due to the darkness of ignorance I had no desire to
taste bhakti-rasa imbued with renunciation, he forced me
to taste it and thereby gave me knowledge of my
relationship with Kṛṣṇa.



Ignorant people honour artificial renunciation and
praise those who accumulate dry knowledge. Such
knowledge and renunciation, being devoid of the
inclination to serve, simply result in mundane talk and
deception of the public. There is no pure bhakti in
them.




Text 11

The following verse is a petition made at the stage of
humility described in the previous Texts. Prahlāda
Mahārāja (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.9.39)) prays:



naitan manas tava kathāsu vikuṇṭha-nātha

samprīyate durita-duṣṭam asādhu tīvram

kāmāturaṁ harṣa-śoka-bhayaiṣaṇārtaṁ

tasmin kathaṁ tava gatiṁ vimṛśāmi dīnaḥ



O Vaikuṇṭhanātha, my mind is polluted by the desire to
sin. How can I explain to You the suffering of my mind,
which is constantly afflicted by desires? My mind,
strongly attached to these desires, is sometimes
overpowered by happiness and sometimes by distress and
fear. It is always engaged in collecting wealth and
material assets, and it finds no taste in the narrations
of Your pastimes. How, then, can I remember and meditate
upon You?



durita-dūṣita mana asādhu mānasa

kāma-harṣa-śoka-bhaya eṣaṇāra vaśa

tava kathā-rati kise haibe āmāra?

kise kṛṣṇa tava līlā kariba vicāra?



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

When steady devotion arises in the heart of a sādhaka, a

                          140
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

mood of natural humility manifests. Out of greed to
constantly relish the sweetness of Bhagavān he repents,
“Alas, alas, I have not performed any sādhana-bhajana.
My heart is sinful and my mind is wicked, and therefore
I left the merciful Lord and am drowning in the ditch of
material enjoyment. How will I be able to relish the
nectar of Svāminī’s lotus feet? O Lord, how can I
develop affection for Your form, qualities and pastimes?
How can I obtain a taste for bhajana? Firmly bound by
many kinds of illicit desires, I am drowning in the
ocean of material existence. Oh, how can I protect
myself from all this? O Bhagavān, I have become a
servant of the six enemies. How can I, who am
unintelligent and devoted to material desires,
understand the boundless, eternal and deep truth about
You?” This kind of humility arises when bhakti is fully
ripe. In reality, fully mature prema is humility.
Considering himself to be extremely fallen and wretched,
the sādhaka always offers Bhagavān various humble and
grief-stricken prayers.




Text 12

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.9.40) explains how life is
completely destroyed by attraction to the form, taste
and so on of material objects:



jihvaikato ‘cyuta vikarṣati māvitṛptā

śiśno ‘nyatas tvag-udaraṁ śravaṇaṁ kutaścit

ghrāṇo ‘nyataś capala-dṛk kva ca karma-śaktir

bahvyaḥ sapatnya iva geha-patiṁ lunanti



O Acyuta, my tongue is pulling me towards very
relishable flavours, my genitals towards beautiful
women, my stomach towards foodstuffs that are harmful,
my ears towards sweet songs and useless talk, my nose
towards pleasant fragrances, my eyes towards beauty and
my sense of touch towards soft things. In this way all
my sense organs are pulling me towards their respective
sense objects. O Nanda-nandana, my situation is like
that of a man with many wives, each dragging him towards
her own bedroom. In such a condition how can I remember
You and Your form, qualities and pastimes?



jihvā ṭāne rasa prati, upastha kadarthe

udara bhojane ṭāne viṣama anarthe

carma ṭāne śayyādite, śravaṇa kathāya

ghrāṇa ṭāne surabhite, cakṣu dṛśye yāya

                          141
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


karmendriya karme ṭāne, bahu-patnī yathā

gṛhapati ākarṣaya, mora mana tathā

emata avasthā mora śrī-nanda-nandana

ki rūpe tomāra līlā kariba smaraṇa?



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The sādhaka is praying to Bhagavān with great humility,
“O Lord, let my mind always be completely attached to
Your lotus feet and engaged in glorifying You. But, O
Acyuta, although I am trying to control my senses by
innumerable endeavours, I have not been successful.
Alas, alas, what shall I do? My unsatisfied tongue,
genitals, belly, ears, nose, restless eyes and sense of
touch are drawing me in the direction of their
respective sense objects — sound, form, taste, smell and
touch — and are thus destroying me. O Prabhu, although I
have tried my best to subdue them, I have not succeeded.
My condition is like that of a man who, controlled by
lust, has married several wives. Now all these wives are
dragging him in their own direction, each wanting her
lustful desires fulfilled. He is not able to pacify the
fire of their lust nor do they leave him alone. The more
this lusty man tries in various ways to satisfy the
desires of these ladies, the less successful he is.
Similarly, I endeavoured in many ways, but all in vain.
O protector of the helpless, now You are my only
shelter. I have faith in You alone. By the power of Your
mercy, please deliver me from the entanglement of this
material existence and thus make Your name, Patita-
pāvana, meaningful.”




Text 13

A prayer for obtaining the association of vraja-bhaktas
is spoken by Lord Brahmā in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(10.14.30):



tad astu me nātha sa bhūri-bhāgo

bhave ‘tra vānyatra tu vā tiraścām

yenāham eko ‘pi bhavaj-janānāṁ

bhūtvā niṣeve tava pāda-pallavam



O Bhagavān, may I be so fortunate as to attain the
association of Your devotees and, under their guidance,
obtain service to Your lotus feet; be it in this or any
other human birth, or in a birth such as an animal,

                          142
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

bird, worm or moth.



ei brahma janmei vā anya kona bhave

paśu-pakṣī ha’ye janmi tomāra vibhave

ei mātra āśā tava bhakta-gaṇa-saṅge

thāki’ tava pada-sevā kari nānā-raṅge



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Lord Brahmā became perplexed when he saw Śrī Kṛṣṇa
playing with the other cowherd boys. So, in order to see
more of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, he stole the cowherd boys
and calves. Śrī Kṛṣṇa, however, assumed the forms of as
many cows and cowherd boys as Brahmā stole, and for one
year He continued His pastimes as before. Finally, He
showed Brahmā His four-armed form. Upon seeing
Bhagavān’s opulence, Brahmā deeply regretted his
actions. He praised Śrī Kṛṣṇa in various ways and begged
forgiveness for his offence: “O Lord, I have directly
received Your mercy. O fulfiller of all kinds of
desires, my fortune is not in having obtained this post
as Brahmā. Rather, if I take birth in Vraja from the
womb of an animal, bird, worm, moth or any other sub-
human species, I will consider myself most fortunate.
Even the mercy available to the deer in Vraja is not
easily obtained in this birth as Brahmā. The deer
cleanse the dust from Your limbs with their tongues, and
You caress them with Your hands. I want to take birth in
any species, high or low, where I can serve Your lotus
feet under the guidance of Your devotees. This is my
earnest desire and will be my good fortune.”




Text 14

It is useless to be anxious about attaining the four
goals of life. Śrī Uddhava explains in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(3.4.15):



ko nv īśa te pāda-saroja-bhājāṁ

sudurlabho ‘rtheṣu caturṣv apīha

tathāpi nāhaṁ pravṛṇomi bhūman

bhavat-padāmbhoja-niṣevaṇotsukaḥ



O Lord, it is not difficult for one who has taken
shelter of Your lotus feet to achieve the four goals of
life (religiosity, economic development, sense

                          143
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

gratification and liberation); nevertheless, such a
person does not desire them. O Great One, he is not
concerned with anything other than rendering service to
Your lotus feet.



kṛṣṇa! tava pāda-padme bhakti āche yāṅra

catur-varga-madhye kivā aprāpya tāṅhāra

tathāpi tomāra pada-sevā mātra cāi

anya kona arthe mora prayojana nāi



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The inherent dharma of the living entity is the tendency
to serve (sevā-vṛtti). The devotee therefore desires the
fifth goal of human life, pañcama-puruṣārtha, which is
prema-sevā. He does not accept the threefold
designations of religiosity (dharma), economic
development (artha) and sense gratification (kāma), nor
does he accept liberation (mokṣa), which is free from
material designations. The impersonalists strive for
sāyujya-mukti, which the devotee always completely
rejects. The Nārada-pañcarātra (1.1.34) states:



hari-bhakti-mahādevyāḥ

sarvā muktādi-siddhayaḥ

bhaktaś cādbhutās tasyāś

ceṭikāvad anuvratāḥ



All kinds of liberation are automatically accomplished
by devotees who perform pure devotional service to Hari.
Not only are they accomplished, but they follow the
devotees like maidservants, always ready to serve them.



Devotees reject the five kinds of mukti: sāyujya,
sārūpya, sāmīpya, sālokya and sārṣṭi. Excluding sāyujya,
however, the other four are not entirely opposed to
bhakti. They are of two kinds: sukhaiśvaryottarā
(liberation tainted with the desire to enjoy the Lord’s
opulence) and prema-sevottarā (liberation in which the
dominant desire is to serve the Lord for His pleasure).
Because there is some desire for personal happiness in
both of these, those who are devoted to unalloyed
service to Bhagavān consider them opposed to loving
service and do not accept them.




                           144
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


Text 15

One should endeavour to attain pure unalloyed devotion
(śuddha-ahaitukī-bhakti). Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.5.18)
states:



tasyaiva hetoḥ prayateta kovido

na labhyate yad bhramatām uparyadhaḥ

tal labhyate duḥkhavad-anyataḥ sukhaṁ

kālena sarvatra gabhīra-raṁhasā



[Śrī Nārada said:] In the course of time I have been
wandering from the seven higher planets to the seven
lower, such as Sutalaloka, but I have not attained
eternal, transcendental happiness, which wise persons
endeavour to taste. Just as misery comes without
endeavour, by the influence of grave, quickly-moving
time, happiness also comes without any endeavour. What,
therefore, is the use of endeavouring for worldly
happiness?



vinā yatne duḥkhera ghaṭanā yena haya

sei rūpe kāla-krame sukhera udaya

ataeva caudda-loke durlabha ye dhana

sei bhakti-janya yatna kare budha-gaṇa



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

A devotee understands that any pleasure within the
material universe is insignificant compared to even the
slightest experience of the nectar and fragrance of
Bhagavān’s lotus feet. One who has only tasted molasses
will give it up when he tastes fragrant sugar candy.
Similarly, before actually cultivating devotion to
Bhagavān in the association of pure devotees, the living
entity who is allured by the flowery words of the Vedas
desires to enjoy nectar, nectarean food and the other
heavenly pleasures of Svarga. Alternatively, by the
influence of association with jñānīs, the living entity
desires liberation. Pure devotees do not accept either
of these — they only desire the happiness of loving
service to Bhagavān through bhakti. This Text tells us
that those who are genuinely wise search only for that
constant, eternal, transcendental happiness that is only
obtained in Hari-dhāma (Vaikuṇṭha). This transcendental
happiness is not available to the jīva who wanders
throughout the fourteen worlds searching for mundane
enjoyment.


                          145
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

Material happiness is even obtained in the body of a
hog. According to his karma the living entity sometimes
tastes sorrow and difficulties, and sometimes he
effortlessly tastes happiness. Therefore the scriptures
unanimously instruct that one should not endeavour to
obtain that which is temporary and material. The jīva’s
goal is neither to prevent his material suffering nor to
be successful in endeavours for happiness. Such attempts
are simply childish fickleness. The wise give up
searching for these temporary things and endeavour to
attain service to Śrī Hari, which is the soul’s eternal
dharma.




Text 16

The desire for liberation is made insignificant by
ahaitukī-bhakti. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (4.9.10) states:



yā nirvṛtis tanu-bhṛtāṁ tava pāda-padma-

dhyānād bhavaj-jana-kathā-śravaṇena vā syāt

sā brahmaṇi sva-mahimany api nātha mā bhūt

kiṁ tv antakāsi-lulitāt patatāṁ vimānāt



O Lord, a drop of the bliss received from meditating on
Your lotus feet, from hearing about Your pastimes —
which flow from the mouths of Your devotees who are
expert in relishing vraja-rasa — and from hearing
descriptions of Your devotees’ pastimes, is not
available in the bliss of merging into Brahman. What to
speak of being available to others, it is not even
available to the demigods of the heavenly planets, who
fall down again, being cut by the sword of time.



tava pada-dhyāne bhakta-mukha tava kathā

śravaṇe ye sukha tāhā māgiye sarvathā

brahma-sukha nāhi bhāla lāge mora mane

ki chāra anitya loka-sukha-saṅghaṭane



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

In this prayer Dhruva Mahārāja describes the happiness
he experienced after receiving darśana of Bhagavān: “O
Master, the happiness found in hearing narrations of
Your pastimes in the association of Your devotees is not
available anywhere else. In the presence of the
devotees’ sun-like premānanda, the pleasure of the

                          146
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

impersonalists’ brahmānanda is like a firefly. The
demigods’ heavenly enjoyment (svargānanda) is
insignificant and also temporary, subject to being
ultimately cut by the sword of time. The living entity
can enjoy this pleasure only as long as the accumulated
credit of his pious activities is not exhausted.” This
is confirmed in Bhagavad-gītā (9.21):



te taṁ bhuktvā svarga-lokaṁ viśālaṁ

kṣīṇe puṇye martya-lokaṁ viśanti

evaṁ trayī-dharmam anuprapannā

gatāgataṁ kāma-kāmā labhante



Having enjoyed immense celestial pleasures, they again
return to the mortal world when their pious merit is
exhausted. In this way, those who perform fruitive
activities as described in the three Vedas repeatedly
come and go from this world.



Therefore only devotion to Bhagavān, which is devoid of
the attraction to hear about the enjoyment available on
Svarga and other higher planets, is supremely beneficial
for the jīva. The wise spend their lives hearing and
speaking hari-kathā in the company of pure devotees.




Text 17

The glory of hearing the holy name from the mouth of a
sādhu is described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (4.20.24):



na kāmaye nātha tad apy ahaṁ kvacin

na yatra yuṣmac-caraṇāmbujāsavaḥ

mahattamāntar-hṛdayān mukha-cyuto

vidhatsva karṇāyutam eṣa me varaḥ



O Lord, I do not want liberation. I receive no pleasure
in hearing any topic other than the glorious narrations
of the nectar of Your lotus feet. This nectar emanates
from the mouths of saintly persons from deep within
their hearts. I beg only for the boon that You will give
me ten thousand ears with which I can always hear the
sweetness of Your pastimes.



                          147
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


yāhāte tomāra pada-sevā-sukha nāi

sei rūpa vara āmi nātha kabhu nāhi cāi

bhaktera hṛdaya haite tava guṇa-gāna

śunite ayuta karṇa karaha vidhāna



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Pṛthu Mahārāja prays to the lotus feet of Bhagavān to be
able to hear and glorify the auspicious narrations of
His pastimes only in the association of devotees. He
says, “I offer my obeisances from far away to the topics
of liberation and any other kind of talk that does not
proclaim the glories of the nectar of Your lotus feet.
My only treasured wish is to drink the nectar of Your
līlā-kathā, which is filled with prema and which flows
from the mouths of devotees. I do not even desire to
hear about Your sweet pastimes from the mouths of non-
devotees. Even fragrant water mixed with honey should be
abandoned if it is salty.

“O Lord, I pray to You to please give me tens of
thousands of ears to hear the sweet narrations of Your
pastimes from the lotus mouths of devotees who are adept
at relishing vraja-rasa. In other words, I pray that I
may hear descriptions of Your pastimes with intense
eagerness, and that the desire for impersonal liberation
never arises in my heart. Drops of nectar from Your
lotus feet in the form of pollen are carried by the
breeze emanating from the mouths of great personalities,
thus transmitting the potency of bhakti to us and making
our lives successful. I am always ready to do anything
to hear this kathā. May a spark of the mood of such
personalities enter my heart and submerge me in an ocean
of prema.”




Text 18

Residence in the heavenly planets, residence in
Brahmaloka, sovereignty over the Earth and lower
planetary systems, the perfections of yoga and the
eighteen mystic perfections are all insignificant from
the perspective of a devotee. This is confirmed in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.11.25):



na nāka-pṛṣṭhaṁ na ca pārameṣṭhyaṁ

na sārva-bhaumaṁ na rasādhipatyam

na yoga-siddhīr apunar-bhavaṁ vā

samañjasa tvā virahayya kāṅkṣe


                          148
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017



O source of all good fortune, I have no desire to have a
position of great sovereignty like that of Dhruva or
Brahmā, or rulership over the Earth; nor do I desire
aṇimā or any other mystic perfection. I do not even want
liberation, if attaining it means I would have to give
You up.



svarga parameṣṭhī-sthāna, sarvabhauma-pada

rasātala-ādhipatya, yogera sampada

nirvāṇa ityādi yata chāḍi’ sevā tava

nāhi māgi, e mora pratijñā akaitava

Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Bhagavān prevents His devotees from endeavouring for
dharma, artha, kāma and mokṣa, and this infers His
mercy. While His mercy is easily attained by the
akiñcana-bhaktas, it is extremely difficult to attain
for living entities who are absorbed in sense enjoyment.

This Text is a prayer by Vṛtrāsura. While fighting with
Indra, Vṛtrāsura considered it better to choose death
over either victory or defeat, so that he could quickly
cut his bodily bondage. He would then be able to
directly serve Bhagavān.

Directly perceiving Bhagavān, Vṛtrāsura expressed the
moods of his heart. “O source of all good fortune, I do
not want a position in Dhruvaloka or Brahmaloka, nor do
I want sole rulership of the Earth. I have no desire for
mystic perfections or even liberation — which is the
goal of impersonalists, who perform severe practices to
attain it — if I have to give You up. My life is leaving
my body in the fire of separation from You. O Prabhu,
how can I ever attain eternal service to Your lotus
feet?”

Devotees long to attain the eternal service of Bhagavān.
Only one who has factually realised the bliss of serving
(sevānanda) knows the significance of this. By obtaining
dharma, artha and kāma, the living entity does not stop
his transmigration, and by sāyujya-mukti, the living
entity simply remains like an inert object in the
effulgent Brahman. However, devotees relish the
sweetness of service in newer and newer ways in the
eternal abode of Bhagavān. This is the unique
characteristic of the bhakta and bhakti. Bhakti-devī
disappears from the heart of that person who eagerly
desires liberation, and this is confirmed in Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 1.92):



tāra madhye mokṣa-vāñchā kaitava-pradhāna

yāhā haite kṛṣṇa-bhakti haya antardhāna


                          149
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017



The foremost process of cheating is the desire for
liberation, for this causes the disappearance of kṛṣṇa-
bhakti.




Text 19

The symptom of attachment (āsakti) that is developed by
taking shelter of the holy name is described in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.29.34):



cittaṁ sukhena bhavatāpahṛtaṁ gṛheṣu

yan nirviśaty uta karāv api gṛhya-kṛtye

pādau padaṁ na calatas tava pāda-mūlād

yāmaḥ kathaṁ vrajamatho karavāma kiṁ vā



[The gopīs said to Kṛṣṇa:] O stealer of minds
(cittacora), by playing on Your vaṁśī, You have stolen
our minds, which were absorbed in household affairs.
This was not difficult for You. However, having lost our
minds, our working senses are not functioning, and our
movements and intelligence have therefore become
abnormal. Our feet do not want to leave You to go
anywhere else. Please tell us then, how can we possibly
return to our homes?



gṛhasukhe citta chila, gṛhakārye kara

hariyā layecha tumi prāṇera īśvara

tava pādamūla chāḍi’ pada nāhi yāya

yāba kothā ki kariba balaha upāya



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

With the sweet sound of His flute, Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra, the
crown jewel of experts in amorous pastimes (vidagdha-
śiromaṇi), called to the vraja-gopīs, who were
abundantly endowed with paramour love. Forgetting
everything, the gopīs assembled on the bank of the
Yamunā at Vaṁśivaṭa, which was beautifully decorated by
bright moonlight. Then Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra, concealing His
real motive (avahitthā-bhāva), joked with them by
instructing them to return to their respective homes.
His intention, however, was as follows: during His
previous pastime of stealing the gopīs’ clothes, Śrī
Kṛṣṇacandra, the great connoisseur of the rāsa-līlā, saw

                          150
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

the vraja-devīs’ entire bodies, but on this day He
wanted to see the inner moods of their hearts. This is
one unique attribute of the ocean of prema-rasa.

The rasika-ācāryas of the amorous mellow of Vraja
ascertain that when the lover (nāyaka) assumes a
submissive mood (dākṣiṇya-bhāva), the beloved (nāyikā)
exhibits a contrary mood (vāmya-bhāva). And when the
lover assumes a contrary mood, the beloved exhibits a
submissive mood. The gopīs who assembled at the rāsa-
maṇḍala displayed various waves of sentiments. Some of
them were pragalbhā (bold and outspoken), some mṛdvī
(sweet and gentle) and some madhyā (with qualities
halfway between pragalbhā and mṛdvī). In this way,
through the combination of such different sentiments,
the ocean of rasa was adorned with unprecedented
sweetness.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa said, “A virtuous woman’s only duty is to
serve her husband. It is improper for her to stay, even
for a moment, with a brahmacārī in a lonely forest at
night. Therefore you should all quickly return home.”

Hearing these instructions, the gopīs, who possessed
great anurāga, responded with words saturated with rasa:
“O emperor of thieves! We did not come here to reside in
an uninhabited place, nor did we come to ask anything
from You. Our minds were happily absorbed in household
affairs, when You stole them away with Your flute. The
wealth of our hearts is already looted, so how can we
return home? O You who are expert in rendering a person
powerless by means of great mantras! Please return the
faculty of our minds. In their absence the activities of
all our senses are disabled and also our feet will not
move; so return them and we will happily go back to our
homes.”

One vraja-devī began to speak sarcastically: “O Mohana,
do You think that we have come to this place because we
were attracted by the sound of Your flute? No, no, this
is not the case! Our minds are deeply absorbed in our
happy household life; You could not steal away even the
smallest part of them. Do not think that we will rest
here, even for a moment. Indeed, what would we do here
in this desolate place? If You ask why we have come to
this lonely forest, O Śyāmasundara, it is because You
were so eager to have our darśana. That is the only
reason we have come. Now that You have seen us, we are
going.”




Text 20

As described in the following verse, all virtue and
peacefulness appear in the devotee. Prahlāda Mahārāja
explains in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (5.18.12):



yasyāsti bhaktir bhagavaty akiñcanā


                          151
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

sarvair guṇais tatra samāsate surāḥ

harāv abhaktasya kuto mahad-guṇā

manorathenāsati dhāvato bahiḥ



All the demigods and their exalted qualities, such as
religiosity and knowledge, always dwell in the heart of
a person who possesses selfless devotion to Bhagavān
(niṣkāma-bhakti). But how can a person who is not a
devotee of Bhagavān possess these qualities of great
personalities? He constantly runs after insignificant
and superfluous things, even after taking many different
vows to renounce them.



akiñcanā bhakti yāṅra tāṅhāra śarīre

sarva-guṇa saha sarva-devatā vihare

abhakta sarvadā mano-rathete caḍiyā

asad bāhye bhrame guṇa varjita haiyā



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The ācāryas have ascertained that once the tendency
arises in someone to serve Kṛṣṇa without selfish motive
(niṣkāma-sevā-vṛtti), all good qualities such as
religiosity, knowledge and renunciation become apparent
in him. This is simply the fruit of serving Mukunda. The
fifty virtuous qualities of the demigods headed by Indra
reside in the hearts of devotees. They cannot manifest
in a deceitful and envious heart. A person who is devoid
of hari-bhakti is attached to maintaining his body and
home, and to extraneous desires, jñāna, karma, yoga and
so on. He always runs towards external sense enjoyment
through the avenues of profit, worship, name and fame,
and mental speculation. In Prema-bhakti-candrikā (8.8)
Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says: “karma-kāṇḍa jñāna-
kāṇḍa kevala viṣera bhāṇḍa — fruitive activities and
mental speculation are simply pots of poison.” Mundane
people, who are attached to material things, obtain
different births according to their karma. The devotees,
on the other hand, are preoccupied with performing
service in the association of devotees and are thereby
submerged in the ocean of supreme transcendental
happiness. Thus they remain satisfied.




Text 21

Bhakti destroys the egoism arising from falsely
identifying the body with the self (deha-abhimāna). This
is stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (4.11.30):


                          152
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017



tvaṁ pratyag ātmani tadā bhagavaty ananta

ānanda-mātra upapanna-samasta-śaktau

bhaktiṁ vidhāya paramāṁ śanakair avidyā

granthiṁ vibhetsyasi mamāham iti prarūḍham

[Manu said to Dhruva:] By searching for Bhagavān Ananta,
who possesses all potencies, who is the embodiment of
supreme transcendental bliss and who resides within all
living entities as the Supersoul, your devotion will
become very steady. On the strength of that devotion you
will be able to cut the tight knot of ignorance in the
form of the false conceptions of “I” and “mine”.



manu bale dhruva tumi dhṛta sarva-śakti

pratyak ānanda-rūpa kṛṣṇe kara bhakti

āmi-mama-rūpa-vidyā-granthi dṛḍhatama

chedana karite krame haibe sakṣama



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

A sādhaka experiences his own transcendental form
(svarūpa) by cultivating pure devotional service that is
unobstructed and not personally motivated. Upon
realising his svarūpa, he very easily cuts the knot of
ignorance by which he identifies the material body as
“I” and material objects as “mine”. When the living
entity transcends the three modes (sattva, raja and
tama), he is able to experience bhagavad-rasa, which is
endowed with all potencies. This takes place by the
influence of association with devotees. Since he is
self-realised, he searches for Bhagavān, who is beyond
the material modes, who is the non-dual Absolute Truth
endowed with all transcendental qualities, and who is
infallible. By cultivating bhakti in this way, he
gradually becomes eternally situated in his own svarūpa.




Text 22

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (4.22.39) states:



yat-pāda-paṅkaja-palāśa-vilāsa-bhaktyā

karmāśayaṁ grathitam udgrathayanti santaḥ

tadvan na rikta-matayo yatayo ‘pi ruddha-


                          153
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

sroto-gaṇās tam araṇaṁ bhaja vāsudevam

[Śrī Sanat Kumāra instructed Pṛthu Mahārāja:] The
devotees of Bhagavān are easily able to cut the knot in
the heart in the form of desires for fruitive activities
by meditating upon the splendour that emanates from the
toes of Bhagavān’s lotus feet. However, impersonalist
yogīs, who are devoid of loving devotion, cannot do so
even by controlling their senses. Therefore give up the
endeavours of jñāna, yoga and so forth, and engage in
bhajana of Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa.



pratyāhāre ruddha-mati yogeśvara-gana

kadāca karite pāre yāhā sampādana

sei karmāśaya granthi kāṭe sādhu-gaṇa

yāṅra kṛpā-bale, laha tāṅhāra śaraṇa



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Impersonalists (nirviśeṣa-jñānīs) are not able to
control their senses even by performing severely rigid
practices, but devotees can very easily control the
extremely strong senses by meditating upon the lustre of
the lotus-petal-like toes of the most merciful Bhagavān.
In this way they become absorbed in deep meditation.
This meditation (dhyāna), and the object of meditation
(dhyeya), Śrī Bhagavān, are both eternal. The followers
of the theory of monism (advaitavādīs) say: “sādhakānāṁ
hitārthāya brahmaṇi rūpaḥ kalpate — Brahman is formless
but for the benefit of sādhakas a form has been
imagined.” They say that by worshipping imaginary forms
of Viṣṇu, Śiva, Durgā, Sūrya and Gaṇeśa, one’s heart is
purified and one then attains sāyujya-mukti, merging
into Brahman. This conception, however, is an ignorant
hypothesis that is opposed to the scriptures.

The word vilāsa-bhaktyā in this Text 22 means that the
sādhaka contemplates Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s body and meditates on
different kinds of services, such as anointing Him with
perfume, giving Him an oil-massage, bathing Him and so
forth. Meditation on the toes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is
clever in vraja-rasa, means remembering that His lotus
toes have been coloured by kuṅkuma while He was
performing intimate pastimes in the bowers of Vṛndāvana
with the vraja-devīs. By meditating on this, all the
knots of the disease in one’s heart are easily and
naturally destroyed. How can the impersonalists, who are
covered by ignorance, obtain all these transcendental
sentiments? They do not even accept the eternality of
Bhagavān and His transcendental form. Although they
consider themselves liberated, in reality they are not.
Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 22.29) confirms
this:



jñānī jīvan-mukta-daśā pāinu kari’ māne

                          154
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                                5/5/2017


vastutaḥ buddhi ‘śuddha’ nahe kṛṣṇa-bhakti bine



The endeavours of the offensive nirviśeṣa-jñānīs to
control their senses are futile. Externally their
activities may look like self-control, but internally
there is a flow of dirty, lusty desires likened to the
Phalgu River, a river in Gayā that has no flow of water
on the river bed but flows underground. Even after
thousands of years of severe austerities, Saubhari Ṛṣi
was not liberated from material desires. However, by
serving Bhagavān in the association of the pure devotee
Mahārāja Māndhātā, he was liberated from material
existence very easily. On the strength of bhakti, the
devotees are able to cut ignorance at the root. All
their senses remain engaged in Bhagavān’s service and
they make their senses successful by relishing the
nectar of Bhagavān’s beauty. Therefore give up futile
endeavours to subdue the senses and perform bhajana of
Śrī Vrajendra-nandana, who is eternal and full of
transcendental bliss. This is the only auspicious
activity.




Text 23

An introduction to the midday pastimes (madhyāhna-līlā)
is found in Govinda-līlāmṛta (8.1):

I meditate upon Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, who at midday enjoy
each other’s company while being beautifully decorated
with various bhāvas, such as aṣṭa-sāttvika-bhāvas and
vyabhicāri-bhāvas. They become extremely restless due to
contrariness (vāmya) and yearning (utkaṇṭhā). In Their
amorous play (kandarpa-yajña) the joking words of Śrī
Lalitā and the other sakhīs give Them much pleasure.
They blissfully enjoy sports like swinging (jhūlā),
frolicking in the forest (vana-vihāra), playing in the
water (jala-keli), stealing the flute (vaṁśī-haraṇa),
amorous meeting (rati-krīḍā), drinking honey (madhu-
pāna), worshipping the Sun-god (sūrya-pūjā) and many
other kinds of pastimes while being served by Their dear
ones.



rādhā-kuṇḍe sumilana, vikārādi-vibhūṣaṇa,

vāmyotkaṇṭha-mugdha-bhāva-līlā

sambhoga-narmādi-rīti, dolā-khelā vaṁśī-hṛti,

madhu-pāna, sūrya-pūja khelā

jala-khelā, vanyāśana, chala-supti, vanyāṭana,

bahu-līlānande dui jane

parijana suveṣṭita, rādhā-kṛṣṇa susevita,

                          155
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


madhyāhna-kālete smari mane



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

After finishing Her prasāda-sevā at Nanda-bhavana,
Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī returns to Jāvaṭa with Her sakhīs,
where She very eagerly waits to meet Her prāṇa-
priyatama, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Her mother-in-law, Jaṭilā, orders
Her to worship Sūryadeva, and on this pretext she leaves
Her house with Her sakhīs and secretly departs for
Rādhā-kuṇḍa, where She is able to freely meet with Her
beloved. There, His darśana and touch decorate Her with
aṣṭa-sāttvika, kila-kiñcita and many other bhāvas.
Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s contrary mood (vāmya-bhāva) enables
Her prāṇeśvara to relish the mellows of pastimes to
their highest extent, and it also stimulates His ever-
fresh eagerness. Then many pastimes take place with the
gopīs, such as meeting with Kṛṣṇa (sambhoga), joking
while playing dice (pāśā-krīḍā), playing hide-and-seek
(āṅkha-micaunī), stealing the flute (vaṁśī-corī),
drinking honey (madhu-pāna, or prema-pāna), engaging in
water-sports (jala-krīḍā), having a picnic (vanya-
bhojana), feigning sleep (chala-śayana) and worshipping
the Sun-god (sūrya-pūjā). Absorbed in meditating on
these pastimes, the rāgānuga-sādhaka performs kīrtana of
Kṛṣṇa’s names.



Thus ends the Caturtha-yāma-sādhana,

Madhyāhna-kālīya-bhajana, of Śrī Bhajana-rahasya.




5 Pañcama-yāma-sādhana: Aparāhna-kālīya-bhajana — kṛṣṇa-
āsakti (from three-and-a-half praharas of the day until
dusk: approximately 3.30 p.m. — 6.00 p.m.)




Text 1

The constitutional nature of the nāma-sādhaka and his
prayer for the eternal servitorship of Śrī Kṛṣṇa are
described in Śikṣāṣṭaka (5):



ayi nanda-tanuja kiṅkaraṁ

patitaṁ māṁ viṣame bhavāmbudhau

kṛpayā tava pāda-paṅkaja-

sthita-dhūli-sadṛśaṁ vicintaya



                            156
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017


O Nanda-nandana, as a result of my fruitive activities,
I have fallen into this fearful ocean of material
existence. Please bestow Your mercy upon this eternal
servant of Yours. Consider me to be just like a speck of
dust at Your lotus feet and always accept me as Your
purchased servant.



tava nitya dāsa muñi, tomā pāsariyā

paḍiyāchi bhavārṇave māyā-baddha haiyā

kṛpā kari’ kara more pada-dhūli-sama

tomāra sevaka, karoṅ tomāra sevana

“O Lord, I am Your eternal servant, but due to my
misfortune I have abandoned You. Being bound by māyā, I
am drowning in this bottomless ocean of material
existence. Please mercifully accept me as a particle of
dust at Your lotus feet. I will become Your servant and
serve You eternally.”



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

When a devotee attains the state of āsakti, his prayers
are filled with extreme humility and lamentation. In the
fully matured stage of āsakti there is some appearance
of his perfected body (siddha-deha), and attachment
arises for both bhajana and bhajanīya, the object of
bhajana. When one performs bhajana, śraddhā gradually
develops through anartha-nivṛtti and niṣṭhā up to the
stage of ruci. Kṛṣṇa, as the Supersoul situated in the
heart, accepts the prayers of devotees who are in these
stages. However, Kṛṣṇa Himself hears the prayers of a
devotee who is endowed with āsakti, and His heart melts
with compassion.




Text 2

When one performs kīrtana that is free from offences,
bhāva will arise by Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s mercy. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(1.2.17—19) states:



śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi

vidhunoti suhṛt satām

naṣṭa-prāyeṣv abhadreṣu


                             157
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā

bhagavaty uttama-śloke

bhaktir bhavati naiṣṭhikī

tadā rajas-tamo-bhāvāḥ

kāma-lobhādayaś ca ye

ceta etair anāviddhaṁ

sthitaṁ sattve prasīdati



Both hearing and chanting the glories of Śrī Kṛṣṇa are
purifying. Because Kṛṣṇa is the eternal friend of
saintly persons, He situates Himself in the hearts of
those who hear narrations of Him and He destroys their
inauspicious passions, such as lust. By continuous
service to both Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and the mahā-bhāgavata
devotee, inauspicious desires are almost completely
destroyed, and irrevocable devotional service
(naiṣṭhikī-bhakti) is awakened to Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
who is praised with transcendental prayers. As soon as
this naiṣṭhikī-bhakti is awakened, the qualities of the
modes of passion and ignorance, such as lust and anger,
become pacified, and one’s heart reaches the stage of
purity.



yāṅra kathā śravaṇa-kīrtane puṇya haya

sei kṛṣṇa hṛdaye vasiyā nāśe bhaya

sādhakera abhadra kramaśaḥ kare nāśa

bhaktira naiṣṭhika bhāva karena prakāśa

rajas-tama-samudbhuta kāma-lobha-hīna

haiyā bhakta-citta sattve hayata pravīṇa



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Taste for the topics of Śrī Vāsudeva will manifest only
after one has sincerely accepted the shelter of the
lotus feet of śrī guru. By the sādhaka’s performance of
the activities of sādhana, such as śravaṇa and kīrtana,
his inauspiciousness — anarthas and aparādhas — will be
removed and his heart will become pure. Bhagavān Himself
enters the devotee’s heart through the medium of hari-
kathā and destroys all kinds of inauspiciousness and
misfortune. In other words, the bad results of the
devotee’s prārabdha-karma are destroyed, his hṛd-roga
(disease of the heart in the form of lust) is removed,
and Bhagavān resides in his heart forever.

Bhāgavata-sevā means service to both the book bhāgavata
(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam) and the devotee bhāgavata (the pure

                            158
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

Vaiṣṇava). As a result of this service, steady bhakti
arises in the sādhaka’s heart. Naiṣṭhikī means that
through niṣṭhā the mind becomes fixed. Then gradually,
by the association of devotees, one’s fruitive
activities, false renunciation and so on are destroyed,
and the unhealthy inclination to seek the company of
non-devotees, such as māyāvādīs and those inclined
towards enjoyment with the opposite sex, does not
awaken. It is impossible to be freed from these
tendencies by one’s own endeavour. Naiṣṭhikī-bhakti
appears in the heart only through hearing topics of
Bhagavān described in exalted verses spoken by uttama-
bhāgavatas. By this act of devotion, passion, ignorance,
lust, anger and so forth are destroyed. Moreover, even
if these qualities remain, they are just like fried
seeds, unable to produce any fruit. The mode of passion
(rajo-guṇa) and the mode of ignorance (tamo-guṇa) cause
sleep, distraction and desires unrelated to serving
Kṛṣṇa to arise within the living entities. The words
etair anāviddham in this Text mean that upon the
awakening of naiṣṭhikī-bhakti, the heart of the sādhaka
is not agitated by the enemies headed by lust. This is
because his heart is fixed on the path of bhakti and he
no longer has taste for the objects of sense enjoyment.




Text 3

A prayer explaining Bhagavān’s mercy is given in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.14.8):



tat te ‘nukampāṁ su-samīkṣamāṇo

bhuñjāna evātma-kṛtaṁ vipākam

hṛd-vāg vapurbhir vidadhan namas te

jīveta yo mukti-pade sa dāya-bhāk



One who accepts as Your mercy the results of his own
actions as well as the happiness and distress of his
prārabdha-karma, who endures them with an undisturbed
mind, and who maintains his life by offering himself
unto You by body, mind and words, is eligible to attain
Your lotus feet, which are the shelter of liberation.



duḥkha bhoga kari’ nija-kṛta-karma-phale

kāya-mano-vākye tava caraṇa-kamale

bhakti kari’ kāṭe kāla tava kṛpā āśe

mukti-pada, tava pada pāya anāyāse



                          159
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

In this prayer to Bhagavān, Brahmā instructs the sādhaka
thus: a sādhaka should understand the attainment of both
happiness and distress to be Bhagavān’s mercy, or he
should understand them to be an opportunity to
completely eradicate sins and offences performed due to
previous impressions (saṁskāras). Sometimes Bhagavān
creates happiness or distress for the sādhaka in order
to increase the eagerness in his heart. In this Text the
word mukti-pada means the one at whose lotus feet
liberation (mukti) takes shelter. This refers either to
Bhagavān or to bhakti, i.e. bhagavat-sevā.




Text 4

Upon reaching the condition described in the following
verse (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.43)), one attains supreme
spiritual peace (parā-śānti):



ity acyutāṅghriṁ bhajato ‘nuvṛttyā

bhaktir viraktir bhagavat-prabodhaḥ

bhavanti vai bhāgavatasya rājaṁs

tataḥ parāṁ śāntim upaiti sākṣāt



O king, whoever devoutly worships the lotus feet of
Bhagavān will develop detachment from material existence
and devotion for Him that is saturated with prema. All
knowledge related to Bhagavān will manifest in his heart
and thus he will begin to experience supreme peace.



hena anuvṛtti saha yei kṛṣṇa bhaje

subhakti, virāga, jñāna, tāṅhāra upaje

se tina sundara-rūpe ekatre bāḍhiyā

parā-śānti-prema-dhana deya ta’ āniyā



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

In this Text, Kavi Ṛṣi, the best of the nine Yogendras,
responds to one of Nimi Mahārāja’s questions by saying
that besides devotion to Bhagavān, there is no means to
attain eternal auspiciousness. Temporary endeavours to
attain imaginary peace or freedom from material
suffering are foolish and can bring no actual
auspiciousness to the living entity. The only

                          160
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

auspiciousness is to take shelter of Śrī Bhagavān’s
devotees and by steady practice attain bhakti, which is
beyond the three modes of material nature. A person who
has pure bhakti, who is established in the devotional
way of life (bhāgavata-dharma) and who performs service
with appropriate renunciation (yukta-vairāgya) can never
be touched by ignorance. Established in the kingdom of
bhakti, he acquires higher and higher stages of elevated
devotion and thus attains transcendental peace.

Practising and following means to take exclusive shelter
of Śrī Bhagavān’s devotees; to remember and follow
Kṛṣṇa’s associates is more beneficial than to remember
and follow Kṛṣṇa Himself. It is more useful for the
bhakti-sādhaka to follow the process of devotion shown
by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī,
who themselves follow the gopīs, than it is to follow
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu directly. The method to awaken
lobha, transcendental greed, is to remember, pray and
weep for the sentiments of elevated devotees. Sādhana
means to practise bhakti through the senses and with the
aim of attaining svarūpa-siddhi. When bhāva appears,
one’s practice is no longer sādhana-bhakti but bhāva-
bhakti, and when one achieves vastu-siddhi, he will
attain prema-sevā.




Text 5

The nine types of bhakti-sādhana are described in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.5.23—4):



śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ

smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ

sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

iti puṁsārpitā viṣṇau

bhaktiś cen nava-lakṣaṇā

kriyeta bhagavaty addhā

tan manye ‘dhītam uttamam



A person is said to have perfectly studied the
scriptures if he is completely surrendered to Bhagavān
Śrī Viṣṇu, if he is free from karma, jñāna, yoga and
other obstructions, and if he is engaged in the nine
kinds of bhakti: hearing topics related to Bhagavān
(śravaṇam); chanting His name (kīrtanam); remembering
His name, form, qualities and pastimes (smaraṇam);
serving His lotus feet (pāda-sevanam); performing deity
worship (arcanam); offering prayers (vandanam); becoming

                            161
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

His servant (dāsyam); becoming His friend (sakhyam); and
offering one’s very self (ātma-nivedanam). Only such a
person’s study of the scriptures is successful.



śravaṇa-kīrtana-ādi-bhaktira prakāra

cid-ghana-ānanda kṛṣṇe sākṣāt yāṅhāra

sarva-śāstra-tattva bujhi’ kriyā-para tini

sarvārtha-siddhite tiṅha vijña-śiromaṇi



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The nine kinds of devotion, navadhā-bhakti, comprise
svarūpa-siddha-bhakti, unalloyed devotion. Other types
of devotional practices fall into the categories of
saṅga-siddha-bhakti, āropa-siddha-bhakti and so forth.
It is essential that one completely surrender to
Bhagavān, for one cannot enter svarūpa-siddha-bhakti
without surrender. This is the import of the phrase iti
puṁsārpitā viṣṇau in this Text. According to Śrīla
Sanātana Gosvāmī, the word puṁsā here indicates the
māyā-baddha-jīva, conditioned living entity, who is
attached to sense enjoyment. The words bhagavaty addhā
refer to the instruction to perform service to Bhagavān
that is stimulated by devotion that flows like a
continuous stream of oil.




Text 6

When one cultivates this kind of devotion, bhāva will
gradually arise and dāsya-rati will naturally awaken
within him. This is evident in Vṛtrāsura’s prayer in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.11.24):



ahaṁ hare tava pādaika-mūla-

dāsānudāso bhavitāsmi bhūyaḥ

manaḥ smaretāsu-pater guṇāṁs te

gṛṇīta vāk karma karotu kāyaḥ



The living entity is Your eternal servant, but by the
misuse of his free will, he has forgotten his position
of eternal servitude. Consequently, he is caught in the
snare of māyā and endures many kinds of afflictions in
this material existence. Moreover, the desire to become
the servant of Your servant can only be fulfilled by the
causeless compassion of guru and Vaiṣṇavas. This mood of
servitorship can only be obtained by performing bhakti.

                          162
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                               5/5/2017

O Lord, please bestow such mercy upon me, that in my
next birth I may obtain the opportunity to exclusively
serve the servants who have taken shelter of Your lotus
feet. May my mind always remember Your all-auspicious
qualities, my speech always chant the glories of these
qualities, and my body always remain engaged in Your
service.



chinu tava nitya-dāsa, gale bāṅdhi’ māyā-pāśa,

saṁsāre pāinu nānā-kleśa

ebe punaḥ kari āśa, haiyā tava dāsera dāsa,

bhaji’ pāi tava bhakti-leśa

prāneśvara tava guṇa, smaruk mana punaḥ punaḥ,

tava nāma jihvā karuk gāna

kara-dvaya tava karma, kariyā labhuk śarma,

tava pade saṁpinu parāṇa




Text 7

By nature the living entity is the object to be enjoyed
(bhogya-vastu) and Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the enjoyer (bhoktā). By
performing bhajana in the association of rasika-bhaktas,
the desire to serve Śrī Rādhā, who is permeated with
transcendental bliss, becomes strong, and the loving
sentiments of the gopīs (gopī-bhāva) awaken. Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.29.38) states:



tan naḥ prasīda vṛjinārdana te ‘ṅghri-mūlaṁ

prāptā visṛjya vasatīs tvad-upāsanāśāḥ

tvat-sundara-smita-nirīkṣaṇa-tīvra-kāma-

taptātmanāṁ puruṣa-bhūṣaṇa dehi dāsyam



[Attracted by the sound of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s flute, the gopīs
approached Him and said:] O You who remove suffering, we
have given up our homes, family members and relatives,
and we have come to Your lotus feet only because we
desire to serve You. O jewel among men, be pleased with
us. O best among men, Your sweet smile and attractive
glances have set our hearts ablaze with a burning desire
for intimate meeting with You. Every pore of our bodies
burns with this desire. Please accept us as Your
maidservants.



                             163
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017


tava dāsya-āśe chāḍiyāchi ghara-dvāra

dayā kari’ deha kṛṣṇa, caraṇa tomāra

tava hāsya-mukha-nirīkṣaṇa-kāmi-jane

tomāra kaiṅkarya deha praphulla-vadane



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Immersed in the mood of the gopīs, Śukadeva Gosvāmī
uttered this verse. Hearing the sound of the flute, the
vraja-gopīs go to the rāsa-sthalī where they come face
to face with Kṛṣṇa. Vrajendra-nandana Śyāmasundara, the
ocean of all nectarean mellows, then begins to joke with
them in order to taste the sentiments hidden within
their hearts. The gopīs’ retorts are full of sarcastic
humour.

The general meaning of this verse is that the gopīs are
praying to become the maidservants of Kṛṣṇa — dehi
dāsyam. Kṛṣṇa begins by saying, “O you who are
intoxicated with your fresh youth (nava-yauvana-
pramattā), it is extremely rare to attain service to
Me.”

The gopīs reply, “O Śyāmasundara, You fulfil the desires
of those who are surrendered unto You. Your beautiful
smiling glances have set intense lust ablaze in our
hearts and this is tormenting us. Nevertheless, we want
no kind of compensation for our suffering. Please, just
give us service to Your lotus feet.”

Or the gopīs say, “O Śyāmasundara, we are young women
and we want to create happiness for You with our bodily
limbs. We want to worship You through the
‘paraphernalia’ of accepting Your blooming smiling
glances and the nectar of Your lips. O ornament amongst
men (puruṣa-bhūṣaṇa), we are fair-complexioned
(gaurāṅgī) and You are like a sapphire (indra-nīlamaṇi),
so You are the natural ornament for our bodily limbs.”

Or the gopīs say sarcastically, “We are not praying to
obtain the dust of Your lotus feet. You are making us
suffer from moral guilt and unhappiness — You are
certainly living up to Your name Vṛjina-ardana
(vanquisher of distress)! We have heard from Paurṇamāsī
that even Lakṣmī, who enjoys pastimes on the chest of
Śrī Nārāyaṇa, comes to take shelter of Your lotus feet —
te ‘ṅghri-mūlam — but we are not Lakṣmī. We have just
come here out of curiosity to view the natural beauty of
Vṛndāvana on a moonlit night. So give Your shelter to
Lakṣmī of Vaikuṇṭha, not to us! You should remember,
though, that not even Lakṣmī and others would completely
accept servitude to You. O best amongst men, You so
eagerly desire to attain the young brides of Gokula that
You even adorn the sakhās, like Subala and others, in
gopī dress. O ornament of men, the male gender has been
defamed by this nature of Yours. Don’t think we are
suffering from lust. And we are not Your ‘beloveds’ —
this is only Your imagination.”

                          164
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017




Text 8

To take shelter of the perfect sentiments of the gopīs
(siddha-gopī-bhāva) is described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(10.29.39):



vīkṣyālakāvṛta-mukhaṁ tava kuṇḍala-śrī-

gaṇḍa-sthalādhara-sudhaṁ hasitāvalokam

dattābhayaṁ ca bhuja-daṇḍa-yugaṁ vilokya

vakṣaḥ śriyaika-ramaṇaṁ ca bhavāma dāsyaḥ



[The gopīs said:] Priyatama, after seeing Your beautiful
lotus face, decorated with glossy black curling tresses;
Your beautiful cheeks, upon which enchanting earrings
(kuṇḍalas) radiate Your boundless loveliness; Your sweet
lips, whose nectar defeats all other nectar; Your
charming glance, which is made radiant by Your slight
smile; Your two arms, which liberally give the charity
of fearlessness to surrendered souls; and Your chest,
beautified by Lakṣmī who resides there as a golden line,
we have all become Your maidservants.



o mukha alakāvṛta, o kuṇḍala-śobhā

adhara-amṛta-gaṇḍa-smita-manolobhā

abhaya-da bhuja-yuga, śrī-sevita-vakṣa

dekhiyā halāma dāsī, sevā-kārye dakṣa



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The gopīs’ internal bhāva is present within this verse.
When a transcendental revelation (sphūrti) of siddha-
gopī-bhāva appears to Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, he
remembers and utters this verse. Vrajendra-nandana
Śyāmasundara is rasika-cūḍāmaṇi, the crest-jewel amongst
those who relish rasa. Concealing His own submissive
mood (dākṣiṇya-bhāva), He expresses a mood of
indifference towards the vraja-devīs, saying, “O vraja-
devīs, why are you trying to attain the position of
being My unpaid maidservants?”

The gopīs meekly reply, “O Śyāmasundara, it is
impossible to describe the value of the payment You have
given us.”

Smiling, Śyāmasundara asks, “What was that payment?”

                          165
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


The gopīs reply, “You have given all us ramaṇīs the
naturally perfect nectar of Your lips, the touch of Your
alluring arms and other limbs, and the embrace of Your
chest, which is the shelter of Śrī Lakṣmī. Our eyes,
which are fickle like the movement of khañjana birds,
have been imprisoned by the net of Your face, which is
encircled by Your curly hair. Those curls are not
actually hair, but a snare, and both Your earrings are
traps. The nectar of Your lips is the lure for our
khañjana-bird-like eyes and Your smiling, restless
glances are well-bred and trained to capture our eyes.
Your alluring arms and Your chest, which bestow rati,
calm our hearts. O Kṛṣṇa, even before we attained our
adolescence, You called us to Your kuñja-mandira through
Your enchanting sweetness, gave us darśana of the wealth
of Your earrings and other ornaments made of precious
stones (nīla-nidhi and padma-nidhi) and of the best gold
(jāmbu-nada-svarṇa), and fed us the nectar of Your lips.
Such enticements have forced us to hanker to become Your
maidservants.” With loving anger the vraja-devīs then
say, “O Kṛṣṇa, upon seeing the unequalled wealth of Your
beauty, we have developed the desire to become Your
maidservants, but if this desire is not fulfilled, it
will change into hopelessness.”

Or the gopīs shake a chastising finger at Kṛṣṇa and say,
“O crest-jewel of religious personalities (dhārmika-
cūḍāmaṇi), we know very well about the nature of Your
dharma; You always flirt with the wives of other men.
You also keep the ramaṇīs of Vaikuṇṭha upon Your chest
for amorous dalliance. You can be forgiven by Nārāyaṇa,
but not by us, and not by our husbands. Rather, after
our husbands complain to the mighty Kaṁsa, You will be
punished. We are chaste women from good, noble families,
and the idea of having a paramour is extremely
contemptible for us. You cannot make us into Your
maidservants by showing Your beauty and sweetness.”

How the gopīs became the maidservants of Kṛṣṇa after
seeing the unprecedented beauty of His form is described
by the crest-jewel of those who relish vraja-rasa, Śrīla
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura:

Śyāmasundara says to the gopīs, “I did not purchase you
with any payment, so how have you become My
maidservants?”

The vraja-ramaṇīs reply, “You have given us a payment
which is millions and millions of times more than
enough. If You want to know what that priceless treasure
is, then listen. Ever since the very beginning of our
adolescence, You called us into Your kuñja-mandira and
gave us darśana of Your beautiful face, covered with
falling locks of curling hair. When You wrap a tilted
turban on Your head, we get darśana of Your lotus face
through the lattice made by Your curly tresses. Then,
with Your small delicate finger, You push those curling
locks into Your turban and Your beauty is thoroughly
revealed. Your curling tresses also hang loose when You
tie a centred turban, and when You untie Your turban to
take rest, Your locks of hair fall over Your face. In
this way, Your lotus face is sometimes uncovered,
sometimes slightly covered and sometimes completely

                          166
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

beautified by these curly locks. When You laugh and
joke, Your earrings swing to and fro to kiss Your
cheeks. By the impressions resulting from this meeting,
Your most attractive cheeks emanate an unprecedented
beauty. In this way, by seeing Your moonlike face, the
lotuses of the gopīs’ hearts blossom. You have purchased
us, with the incomparable sweetness of Your form as
payment.”

Kṛṣṇa may say, “I am devoted to religious principles,
and you are the wives of other men. How can I make you
My maidservants?”

Upon hearing this, the gopīs shake a finger at Him and
reply, “O best of the followers of dharma, You keep
Lakṣmī, the wife of Nārāyaṇa of Vaikuṇṭha, upon Your
chest where, in front of us, out of shame, she is
present merely as a golden line. In private, though, she
enjoys amorous sports with You. Can any woman in the
three worlds reject You? None can. By giving us darśana
of the priceless treasure of Yourself, You are compelled
to make us Your maidservants.”




Text 9

The superiority of paramour love (parakīya-bhāva) is
described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.29.33):



kurvanti hi tvayi ratiṁ kuśalāḥ sva ātman

nitya-priye pati-sutādibhir ārti-daiḥ kim

tan naḥ prasīda parameśvara mā sma chindyā

āśāṁ dhṛtāṁ tvayi cirād aravinda-netra



[The gopīs said:] O Paramātmā, the great personalities,
who are the well-wishers of everyone’s soul, direct
their love to You because You are the soul of all souls.
What is the use of loving or serving husbands, sons and
so forth, who are temporary and sources of misery? Be
pleased with us and give us Your mercy. O lotus-eyed
one, please do not cut the flourishing creeper of our
desire to serve You, which we have nourished for such a
long time.



tumi priya ātmā, nitya ratira bhājana

ārti-dātā pati-putre rati akāraṇa

baḍa āśā kari’ āinu tomāra caraṇe

kamala-nayana, hera prasanna-vadane


                          167
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

After the living entity attains self-realisation, his
material relationships, such as those with wife and
children, do not remain. He understands the futility of
material existence and naturally becomes immersed in
deep attachment for Kṛṣṇa. At this stage, the jīva is no
longer under the jurisdiction of rules and regulations.
Engaged in rāga-mārga-bhakti, he performs exclusive
bhajana of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.

At this point in the conversation between the vraja-
devīs and Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the gopīs say to Him, “We have
forevermore given up our relationships with husbands and
everyone else, and have now come here before You. The
love that appeared in our hearts as a sprout has since
become a vine of desire that has grown very large. We
have been attached to You since childhood and have
sincere love and affection for You. Please do not cut
down this creeper of affection.”

Or the gopīs say, “Our hearts have become naturally
delighted by seeing Your reddish lotus eyes, and we have
already become Your unpaid maidservants.”

The vraja-devīs say with rebuking words, “O lotus-eyed
one, as lotus flowers close at night time, Your eyes are
also half-closed, and You are therefore deprived of the
darśana of our youth and bodily beauty. So Your having
eyes is useless.”

Or they say, “We have understood Your inner heart’s
desire. It is right for us to desist from taking part in
Your improper activities, so we will not stay here long.
Please give up whatever desire is in Your heart.”



Text 10

The necessity of taking shelter of the lotus feet of Śrī
Rādhā is expressed by Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī in his
Sva-saṅkalpa-prakāśa-stotra (1):



anārādhya rādhā-padāmbhoja-reṇum

anāśritya vṛndāṭavīṁ tat-padāṅkām

asambhāṣya-tad-bhāva-gambhīra-cittān

kutaḥ śyāma-sindho rasasyāvagāhaḥ



How can a person become immersed in the ocean of
ecstatic mellows of Śyāma (śyāma-rasa-sindhu) if he has
never worshipped the dust of Śrī Rādhā’s lotus feet; if
he has never taken shelter of Her pastime-place Śrī
Vṛndāvana, which is marked with the impressions of Her
lotus feet; and if he has never served the devotees

                          168
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

whose hearts are already submerged in Her profound
sentiments? It will never be possible.



rādhā-padāmbhoja-reṇu nāhi ārādhile

tāṅhāra padāṅka-pūta-vraja nā bhajile

nā sevile rādhikā-gambhīra-bhāva-bhakta

śyāma-sindhu-rase kise habe anurakta?



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

While remembering this stotra, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura yearns to attain the wonderful and astonishing
service of Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava.

In order to be submerged in the ocean of śyāma-rasa
(śṛṅgāra-rasa, or the amorous mellow), it is absolutely
essential to worship the dust of the lotus feet of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, who is the personification of hlādinī;
to worship Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, Her place of playful,
amorous pastimes (keli-vilāsa-sthala); and to worship
Her dearmost devotees. Besides this method there is no
way to attain the service of Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava.
Considering there to be another way is only a vain and
useless hope. Śrī Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi (80) confirms
this:



rādhā-dāsyam apāsya yaḥ prayatate govinda-saṅgāśayā

so ‘yaṁ pūrṇa-sudhā-ruceḥ paricayaṁ rākāṁ vinā kāṅkṣati



Those who endeavour to attain the association of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa but reject rādhā-dāsya are like people who
endeavour to see the full moon when it is not a full
moon night.



Stavāvali (Sva-niyama-daśakam (6)) states:



ya ekaṁ govindaṁ bhajati kapaṭī dāmbhikatayā

tad abhyarṇe śīrṇe kṣaṇam api na yāmi vratam idam



I will never go near a hypocrite who worships Govinda
alone [without Rādhā]. This is my vow.



If Śyāma is directly the emperor of all transcendental

                          169
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

mellows (rasarāja) and the embodiment of the amorous
mellow (śṛṅgāra-rasa), then Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the form
of madanākhya-mahābhāva. Śrīmatī Rādhikā, with Her
śṛṅgāra-rasa, feeds Śyāma honey in the form of Kandarpa
(Cupid):



kṛṣṇake karāya śyāma-rasa madhu-pāna

nirantara pūrṇa kare kṛṣṇera sarva-kāma



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 8.180)



Śrīmatī Rādhikā makes Kṛṣṇa drink the honey of the
amorous mellow (śyāma-rasa). She is therefore engaged in
satisfying all of Kṛṣṇa’s lust (kāma).



Śṛṅgāra-rasa is also called śyāma-rasa. This is the
opinion of Śrī Viṣṇu-daivata, found in Sāhitya-darpaṇa:
śyāma-varṇo ‘yaṁ viṣṇu-daivataḥ.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura sings in his song Rādhikā-
caraṇa-padma:



rādhikā ujjvala-rasera ācārya

rādhā-mādhava-śuddha-prema vicārya

ye dharila rādhā-pada parama-yatane

se pāila kṛṣṇa-pada amūlya ratane

rādhā-pada vinā kabhu kṛṣṇa nāhi mile

rādhikā dāsīra kṛṣṇa sarva-vede bole



Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the ācārya of the mellows of amorous
love (ujjvala-rasa). The pure love between Rādhā and
Mādhava is meant to be discussed and contemplated. Those
who place Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s lotus feet in their hearts
and worship them with great care obtain the priceless
jewel of Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet. Without taking shelter of
the lotus feet of Rādhā, one can never meet Kṛṣṇa. The
Vedic scriptures declare that Kṛṣṇa is the property of
the maidservants of Śrī Rādhā.



Vṛndāvana-dhāma is the place of Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava’s
various amorous pastimes (līlā-vilāsa). Śrī Yugala-
kiśora roam here performing Their pastimes, and the land
of Vṛndāvana is marked with the impressions of Their
lotus feet, as Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura sings in Rādhikā-

                          170
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                                5/5/2017

caraṇa-padma — rādhā-padāṅkita-dhāma vṛndāvana yāṅra
nāma.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.30.28) states:



anayārādhito nūnaṁ

bhagavān harir īśvaraḥ

yan no vihāya govindaḥ

prīto yām anayad rahaḥ



[The gopīs said:] Most certainly She is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
worshipper. Therefore, being pleased with Her,
Śyāmasundara has left us and taken Her away to a
solitary place.

When Śrī Kṛṣṇa disappeared from the rāsa-sthalī (taking
Rādhā with Him), the gopīs who were searching for Him
saw His footprints in the forest, along with Śrīmatī
Rādhikā’s. Praising Her good fortune they said (Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.30.27)): “kasyāḥ padāni caitāni yātāyā
nanda sūnunā — here are the footprints of some gopī who
was walking with the son of Nanda Mahārāja.”

All of Vṛndāvana, including Govardhana and Rādhā-kuṇḍa,
is the abode of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s keli-vilāsa and is
marked with Their footprints. Jāta-rati-sādhakas have
internal revelations (sphūrtis) of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s
pastimes in Vṛndāvana’s bowers. Here the meaning of
taking shelter of Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma is to remember the
various līlās performed there and to be absorbed in the
sentiments of those līlās. But such realisation can only
be obtained by the association and mercy of great
personalities who are like-minded, affectionate towards
oneself, more advanced than oneself, and who taste
vraja-rasa.

In Prema-bhakti-candrikā (9.9) Śrīla Narottama dāsa
Ṭhākura sings:



tāṅra bhakta saṅge sadā, rāsa-līlā prema kathā,

ye kare se pāya ghanaśyāma



By staying in the company of devotees who always discuss
the sweet, nectarean pastimes of the rāsa dance, one is
sure to attain Ghanaśyāma.



The sweetness of the rasa of Śrī Rādhā-Śyāmasundara’s
pastimes can only be relished through association with
and service to the great personalities who taste rasa
and who are submerged in the waves of this endless and

                             171
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

eternal ocean of sweetness.




Text 11

The conception of being a maidservant of Śrī Rādhā is
described in the following words of the Gosvāmīs:



abhimānaṁ parityajya prākṛta-vapur-ādiṣu

śrī-kṛṣṇa-kṛpayā gopī-dehe vraje vasāmy aham

rādhikānucarī bhūtvā pārakīya-rase sadā

rādhā-kṛṣṇa-vilāseṣu paricaryāṁ karomy aham



After giving up false identification with this material
body, may I obtain the body of a gopī and reside in
Vraja by the mercy of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Becoming a maidservant
of Śrī Rādhā, may I always serve and attend Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa, who enjoy pastimes of paramour love (pārakīya-
rasa).



sthūla-dehādite ātma-buddhi parihari’

kṛṣṇa-kṛpa-āśraye nitya-gopī-deha dhari’

kabe āmi pārakīya rase nirantara

rādhā-kṛsna-sevā-sukha labhiba vistara



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

As long as the sādhaka identifies himself with the
material body, he cannot enter the kingdom of bhajana.
Only after one has rejected all kinds of false
identities pertaining to the body, such as, “I am a
brāhmaṇa”, “I am a kṣatriya”, and pertaining to
character, such as, “I am so qualified”, “I am rich”, “I
am a scholar”, and only after he becomes more humble
than a blade of grass (tṛṇād api sunīca) and prays with
extreme distress, is it possible to obtain Kṛṣṇa’s
mercy. All types of anarthas, aparādhas and abhimānas
(false identifications) can only be eradicated by good
association (sat-saṅga).

We should weep and pray in a distressed and humble
voice, “O Śrī Kṛṣṇa! O Śrī Rādhā! Gopī-dehe vraje vasāmy
aham — when will I obtain such mercy as to reside in
Vraja and become the dāsī of the dāsī of the dāsīs of
Rādhikā, and when will I eternally serve Your pārakīya-
rasa-vilāsa day and night?”


                          172
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                                5/5/2017

By such distress-filled prayers, gopī-bhāva will arise
in the heart by the mercy of Śrī Rādhā’s sakhīs, the
eternally perfected gopīs of Vraja. Without gopī-bhāva
it is impossible to attain the land of Vṛndāvana-dhāma
where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa perform Their amorous pastimes in
the solitary nikuñjas. This mood is attained only by
following Śrī Rādhā’s intimate sakhīs, who attend Her in
Her private chambers. Only they can enter these
pastimes, no one else, and only they expand these
pastimes and taste them. The ekādaśa-bhāvas and the five
daśās1 are evoked by their mercy.

Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura sings in Prema-bhakti-
candrikā (5.8):



yugala-caraṇa sevi nirantara ei bhāvi

anurāge thākiba sadāya

sādhane bhāviba yāhā siddha-dehe pāba tāhā

rāga-pathera ei se upāya



I will constantly serve the lotus feet of Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa with loving attachment. Whatever I contemplate
during sādhana will certainly be achieved upon attaining
the perfection of a spiritual body (siddha-deha). This
is the method of the path of rāga.



Pārakīya-rase sadā — The scriptures establish the pre-
eminence of the pārakīya-rasa of Vraja. By serving Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in the mood of wedded love (svakīya), one
will attain Goloka Vṛndāvana, and by serving in paramour
love, one will attain Vraja-Vṛndāvana, the absolute
innermost chamber of Goloka-dhāma where Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa’s nikuñja-līlās take place. There, the mañjarī-
sakhīs, being endowed with ullāsa-rati (much stronger
affection for Rādhā than for Kṛṣṇa), are topmost. They
render service to the rasa-keli-līlā-vilāsa in the
secluded groves without any hesitation. Śrī Raghunātha
dāsa Gosvāmī says in Vraja-vilāsa-stava (38):



tāmbūlārpaṇa-pāda-mardana-payodānābhisārādibhir

vṛndāraṇya-maheśvarīṁ priyatayā yās toṣayanti priyāḥ

prāṇa-preṣṭha-sakhī-kulād api kilāsaṅkocitā bhūmikāḥ

kelī-bhūmiṣu rūpa-mañjarī-mukhās tā dāsikāḥ saṁśraye



I take shelter of the maidservants of Śrīmatī Rādhikā of
whom Rūpa Mañjarī is prominent. Unlike the prāṇa-
preṣṭha-sakhīs, they can perform any service without
hesitation. They perpetually and affectionately satisfy

                           173
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

Śrīmatī Rādhikā by their various services, such as
offering tāmbūla, massaging Her feet, bringing Her water
and arranging for Her trysts with Kṛṣṇa.




Text 12

The rejection of all types of dharma, out of the desire
to serve Śrī Rādhā’s lotus feet, is described in Śrī
Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi (33):



dūrād apāsya svajanān sukham artha-koṭiṁ

sarveṣu sādhana-vareṣu ciraṁ nirāśaḥ

varṣantam eva sahajādbhuta-saukhya-dhārāṁ

śrī-rādhikā-caraṇa-reṇum ahaṁ smarāmi



The desire for the pleasure received from relationships
with family and friends; for the four goals of life,
namely dharma, artha, kāma and mokṣa; and for countless
wealth and so forth, are the causes of anarthas. Knowing
this, I abandoned them all. I worship the foot-dust of
Śrī Rādhā, which showers natural, wonderful happiness,
and I always hold this foot-dust upon my head.

svajana-sambandha-sukha, catur-varga artha

sakala-sādhana chāḍi’ jāniyā anartha

sahaja-adbhuta-saukhya-dhārā vṛṣṭi kari

rādhā-pada-reṇu bhaji, śire sadā dhari’



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The first line of this Text, dūrād apāsya sva-janān
sukham artha-koṭim, means that the desires for wealth
and the happiness derived from the company of relatives
cause impediments in remembering the dust of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā’s lotus feet; they are therefore worthy of being
rejected. Pure vairāgya, renunciation, is actually a
natural distaste for material matters and a taste for
the dust of Śrī Rādhā’s lotus feet. Sādhakas who possess
exclusive faith in Śrī Rādhā (rādhā-niṣṭhā) are solely
attached to the fragrance of Her lotus feet. Without Śrī
Rādhā, they do not even have a taste for Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Material happiness seems insignificant to such sādhakas,
who have firm attachment for Her lotus feet and who are
not inclined towards any other spiritual goal (sādhya)
or any other practice (sādhana) to attain it. Even other
exalted sādhanas are obstacles on the path of prema-
bhakti.


                          174
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                               5/5/2017



puṇya ye sukhera dhāma, tāra nā laio nāma,

puṇya mukti dui tyāga kari’

prema-bhakti-sudhā-nidhi, tāhe ḍūba niravadhi,

āra yata kṣāra-nidhi prāya



Prema-bhakti-candrikā (6.13—14)



Although piety is the abode of material happiness, do
not strive for it. Rather, give up the desire for piety,
as well as that for liberation. Loving devotional
service is an ocean of nectar — always be immersed in
it.



Pious activities, liberation and so forth are like a
pile of ashes to the devotee on the stage of prema.
Indeed, how can the devotee, who persistently desires to
submerge himself in the nectarean ocean of loving
devotional service and whose bee-like heart is attracted
by the fragrance of Śrī Rādhā’s foot-dust, which is full
of immaculate rasa, go anywhere else? After receiving
happiness from a supremely excellent object, can one
become attracted by some trifling pleasure? Compared to
the happiness of merging with Brahman (brahmānanda), the
happiness of bhajana (bhajanānanda) is a greater source
of bliss. That ecstasy is indescribable. The most
condensed nature of bhajanānanda is premānanda, but it
is beyond words to express the nature of premānanda, as
it is a stage that can only be realised. Amongst all
varieties of premānanda, the prema of the gopīs when
distressed in separation crosses beyond the ultimate
limit of ānanda and attains a state that cannot be
expressed in words. From the dust of the lotus feet of
the crest-jewel of all gopīs, Śrī Rādhā, a stream of
this indescribable happiness continuously flows towards
that sādhaka who remembers Her. This stream of ānanda,
composed of pure sweetness and devoid of even a scent of
aiśvarya-jñāna, is natural and filled with wonderful
astonishment. This is the meaning of the words
sahajādbhuta-saukhya-dhārā in this Text.

Śrī-rādhikā-caraṇa-reṇum aham smarāmi — In the absence
of directly receiving the exceedingly rare dust of Śrī
Rādhā’s lotus feet, the sādhaka who is established in
śrī-rādhā-dāsya remembers that dust. What this actually
means is that he yearns to obtain his cherished sevā in
Śrī Rādhā’s pastimes in the vilāsa-kuñjas. This is the
heartfelt desire of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, and their topmost
sādhana. Prema-bhakti-candrikā (2.2) states: “sādhana
smaraṇa-līlā, ihāte nā kara helā, kāya mane kariyā
susāra — the sādhana at this stage is to remember Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes; do not neglect this. Make this
the most essential endeavour of your body and mind.”


                             175
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017



Text 13

In this way, the sādhaka worships the dust of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā’s lotus feet. In Śrī Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi
(198) Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī prays:



āśāsya dāsyaṁ vṛṣabhānu-jāyās

tīre samadhyāsya ca bhānu-jāyāḥ

kadā nu vṛndāvana-kuñja-vīthiṣv

ahaṁ nu rādhe hy atithir bhaveyam



O Rādhā! O Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī! When will I, with the hope
of becoming Your maidservant, reside on the bank of the
Yamunā as a guest on the pathways of Vṛndāvana’s kuñjas?



vṛṣabhānu-kumārīra haiba kiṅkarī

kalinda-nandinī tīre ra’ba vāsa kari’

karuṇā kariyā rādhe e dāsīra prati

vṛndāṭavī kuñja-pathe haiba atithi



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Similarly, in one place Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura prays, “O Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī, there is a hope
growing in my heart, that You will become a guest on the
path of my vision as You go to Your rendezvous
(abhisāra) on the paths of Vṛndāvana’s kuñjas on the
bank of the Yamunā.”

In an extremely restless condition, Śrīla Prabodhānanda
Sarasvatīpāda has composed this Text while remembering
service to Śrī Svāminī. In the absence of this service,
vast pain and longing has arisen in his heart as he
remembers the sweetness of these pastimes. Realising his
disqualification to taste such sweetness, his life-air
is agitated by an intolerable unhappiness and pain.
However, a firm hope of one day attaining the eternal
service of Svāminī is stirring his heart. One symptom of
the jāta-rati-bhakta is āśā-bandha, a firm hope of
attaining Bhagavān, and the ultimate development of this
āśā-bandha is seen in mahābhāva. The resolute hope of
the vraja-devīs is indescribable. Even in the condition
of long-term separation from Kṛṣṇa, the hope of
attaining Kṛṣṇa’s service maintains their lives. They
have faith in Kṛṣṇa’s words spoken when He left for
Mathurā (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.39.35)): “āyāsya iti — I
will return.”


                          176
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

With this hope the poet prays at Śrī Svāminī’s lotus
feet, “O Rādhā! O Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī! When will I, with
the hope of becoming Your maidservant (kiṅkarī), be a
guest on the pathways of the kuñjas situated on the bank
of the Yamunā?

“O Rādhā, You are the daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu, the
empress of Vṛndāvana and a treasury of abundant
compassion. Therefore do not neglect me, a destitute and
lowly person. Please engage me as a maidservant in the
service of You and Your prāṇa-priyatama in Your pastimes
within the secluded groves. Filled with premānurāga, You
move along the bank of the Yamunā towards the nikuñjas
of Vṛndāvana to meet with Your prāṇanātha — when will
this destitute guest sit on the path of Your travels? My
determination will be fixed; I will not move from that
place without first receiving Your mercy. Upon seeing
this destitute guest sitting like this, Your heart will
certainly become aroused with compassion. O Svāminī, You
are Kṛṣṇa’s most beloved and His worshipper. Please make
me successful by giving me an opportunity to perform
some tiny service in the worship of Your dearmost
beloved. Now, at the end of my life, I am a beggar for
Your mercy. Please accept me as Your unpaid maidservant.
If You deprive me of this, Your name will be defamed,
and that I cannot tolerate.”




Text 14

Constantly seeking Kṛṣṇa through saṅkīrtana in the mood
of śrī-rādhā-dāsya is described in Śrī Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-
nidhi (259):

Keeping at my heart my highest aspiration of one day
becoming a maidservant of Śrī Rādhā’s lotus feet, I will
constantly meditate on Śrī Kṛṣṇa, whose head is
decorated with a peacock feather. I will constantly
chant His name, eternally serve His lotus feet and
always utter His most excellent mantras. May He bestow
mercy upon me at any moment so I will attain
anurāgotsava, the great festival of attachment to Śrī
Rādhā.



nirantara kṛṣṇa-dhyāna, tan-nāma-kīrtana

kṛṣṇa-pāda-padma-sevā, tan-mantra-japana

rādhā-pada-dāsya-mātra abhīṣṭa-cintana

kṛpāya labhiba rādhā-rāgānubhāvana



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Prabodhānanda Sarasvatīpāda is expressing a desire to
continuously seek Śrī Kṛṣṇa through saṅkīrtana in the
mood of rādhā-dāsya. The only desire and cherished

                          177
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

objective of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas is to attain rādhā-dāsya.
It is the only goal of their kṛṣṇa-bhajana. The
principal mantra of their kṛṣṇa-bhajana is found in the
ninth verse of Manaḥ-śikṣā: “mad-īśā-nāthatve vraja-
vipina-candraṁ vraja-vaneśvarīṁ tāṁ nāthatve — always
remember Vṛndāvana-candra as the prāṇanātha of my
Svāminī, Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrī Rādhikā.”

This Text 14 describes that, upon decorating the heart
with the most-cherished wealth of rādhā-dāsya, one will
meditate upon Śrī Kṛṣṇa, whose head is adorned with a
peacock feather. Kṛṣṇa is a little late in arriving at
the kuñja, so Rādhā, endowed with madīya-abhimāna (the
mood that “Kṛṣṇa is Mine”), becomes māninī, sulky. To
please His beloved, Śyāmasundara bows His head at Her
lotus feet, and His peacock feather crown falls to the
ground. This is described in Gīta-govinda: smara-garala-
khaṇḍanaṁ mama śirasi maṇḍanam.

May the remembrance of how my Svāminī controls the
dhīra-lalita-nāyaka Śrī Kṛṣṇa, that eminent festival of
anurāga, manifest in my heart. May I remain submerged in
this most charming śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana.

Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī prays, “The name of Rādhā
is unprecedented, beautiful and enchanting like nectar.
The name of Kṛṣṇa is delicious like condensed milk. O my
tongue, O you who are faint with hunger, please
constantly drink these two unprecedented substances,
which are made delightful by the ice of fragrant
anurāga.”

I will worship Śrī Svāminī by serving Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus
feet, and then giving Her Kṛṣṇa’s prasāda and flower
remnants. The nitya-sakhīs and prāṇa-sakhīs serve Kṛṣṇa
in the mood that they will offer to Svāminī whatever
articles, like flower remnants, are obtained by serving
Him. Upon receiving the objects used by Her prāṇanātha,
Svāminī will become extremely pleased. The ultimate
attachment for service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa will manifest in my
heart because my Īśvarī is pleased.




Text 15

A prayer to attain the service of Śrī Rādhā birth after
birth is given in Śrī Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi (40):



tasyā apāra-rasa-sāra-vilāsa-mūrter

ānanda-kanda-paramādbhuta-saukhya-lakṣmyāḥ

brahmādi-durlabha-gater vṛṣabhānu-jāyāḥ

kaiṅkaryam eva mama janmani janmani syāt



Birth after birth, may I attain the position of being a

                          178
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

maidservant of the daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu. She is
the vilāsa-mūrti (personification of playful pastimes)
of Śyāmasundara, who is Himself the essence of limitless
rasa. She is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s supremely wonderful pleasure-
Lakṣmī, and She is most difficult to attain for Brahmā
and others.



apāra-rasera sāra, vilāsa-mūrati

parama-adbhuta-saukhya-ānanda nirvṛtti

brahmādira sudurlabha vṛṣabhānu-kanyā

janme janme tāṅra dāsye hai yena dhanyā



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

In a voice filled with extreme distress, the poet is
praying to attain the position of a maidservant of Śrī
Rādhā. This prayer can never be fulfilled in this gross
body. The sādhaka attains his eternal identity by
continuously reciting the mantra and nāma given by his
spiritual master. Upon attaining his svarūpa, deep
attachment for Svāminī, Śrī Rādhā, arises in his heart
and he receives an internal vision (sphūrti) of Her
sweetness and beauty. Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the
personification of Śyāmasundara’s playful pastimes
(vilāsa). In other words, Her intrinsic nature as
concentrated rasa manifests in the kuñjas, where it is
tasted by Śrī Śyāmasundara, the emporium of all rasa.
Rādhikā, the essence of all rasa, is the personification
of vilāsa. She is the essence of unlimited mādhurya-
rasa. The joy of meeting is hidden within the mind of
Śrī Govinda, who is the embodiment of condensed
happiness. Śrī Rādhā’s mādanākhya-prema causes this joy
to blossom, thus making Him restless and beside Himself
to meet with His beloved by any means possible.
Therefore, in His eagerness to meet Her, He sometimes
dresses Himself as a woman, and sometimes He bows down
at the feet of the sakhīs. The bliss of meeting
(sambhoga-rasānanda) that Śrī Svāminī provides is
indescribable, even more so than Govinda Himself can
imagine.



rātri-dina kuñje kriḍā kare rādhā-saṅge

kaiśora-vayasa saphala kaila krīḍā-raṅge



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 8.189)



Day and night Śrī Kṛṣṇa enjoys the company of Śrī Rādhā
in the kuñjas of Vṛndāvana. Thus His early youth was
made successful through His sports with Her.


                          179
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017



Śrī Rādhā is the hlādinī-svarūpa-śakti of Vrajacandra,
who is ānanda-kanda, the source of transcendental bliss.
She is a dhīrādhīrā-nāyikā, a heroine who with tearful
eyes speaks crooked words to her beloved, and for this
reason Śrī Nanda-nandana is completely controlled by
Her. As stated in Śrī Rādhā-kṛpā-kaṭākṣa-stavarāja (3):
“nirantaraṁ vaśī-kṛta-pratīti nanda-nandane — She always
brings Nanda-nandana into submission.” Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the
source of transcendental bliss and Śrīmatī is His
supremely wonderful saumya-lakṣmī, gentle goddess of
fortune. Lakṣmī-devī, who always enjoys pastimes on the
chest of Nārāyaṇa, is restless and proud of her
opulence, but the prema-lakṣmī of Vraja, Śrī Rādhā, is
very sweet and endowed with a gentle, steady nature. She
is kṛṣṇa-mayī in prema, which means She sees Kṛṣṇa
everywhere, internally and externally; She is gaurāṅgī
in rasa, which means She is so expert, so beautiful,
dances so well and sings so sweetly that She becomes
gaurāṅgī (golden-limbed), and Kṛṣṇa becomes so attracted
by Her that He becomes rādhā-mayī and gaurāṅga; She is
sarva-lakṣmī-mayī in aiśvarya, which means She manifests
everywhere, and Kṛṣṇa sees Her everywhere; and She is
the prominent gopikā in mādhurya.

Service to Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Śrīmatī Rādhikā is very
difficult to attain for Brahmā and others. Brahmā, being
endowed with an awareness of Bhagavān’s majesty
(aiśvarya-jñāna), is unable to comprehend the mādhurya-
rasa of Vraja. He could not even understand
Śyāmasundara’s early boyhood pastimes (paugaṇḍa-līlā),
and he became an offender by stealing the calves and
cowherd boys. How, then, can he possibly understand the
profound secrets of the highly confidential adolescent
pastimes (kaiśora-līlā)? Only the vraja-gopīs have the
qualification to serve in these most confidential
pastimes that take place in the secluded bowers. Without
following in the footsteps of the sakhīs, it is
impossible to attain this sevā.



sakhī vinā ei līlāya anyera nāhi gati

sakhī-bhāve ye tāṅre kare anugati



rādhā-kṛṣṇa kuñja-sevā-sādhya sei pāya



sei sādhya pāite āra nāhika upāya




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 8.204—5)



Without the guidance of the sakhīs, one cannot enter

                          180
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

these

pastimes. One who worships Kṛṣṇa in the mood of the
sakhīs,

following in their footsteps, can attain the service of
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in the kuñjas of Vṛndāvana. There is no
other means to achieve this goal.



Śrī Kiśorī’s maidservants (kiṅkarīs) are always devoted
to Her service. The word kaiṅkarya expresses a mood of
being ardent to serve and it means kiṁ karomi, “What may
I do? What service can I do?” — this mood is expressed
in pure rādhā-dāsya, or mañjarī-bhāva. May I attain this
kaiṅkarya of Śrī Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī birth after birth.

To serve exclusively under the guidance of the vraja-
devīs is called tat-tad-bhāva-icchāmayī kāmānugā-bhakti.
This is the deep meaning of this Text.




Text 16

Searching for Śrī Rādhānātha while engaged in the
service of Śrī Rādhā (rādhā-dāsya) is described in Śrī
Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi (142):



rādhā-nāma sudhā-rasaṁ rasayituṁ jihvās tu me vihvalā

pādau tat-padakāṅkitāsu caratāṁ vṛndāṭavī-vīthiṣu

tat-karmaiva karaḥ karotu hṛdayaṁ tasyāḥ padaṁ dhyāyatāṁ

tad-bhāvotsavataḥ paraṁ bhavatu me tat-prāṇanāthe ratiḥ



May my tongue become constantly overwhelmed by relishing
the nectarean rasa of the name Rādhā, may my feet wander
on the pathways of that Vṛndāvana where Vṛṣabhānu-
nandinī walks, may both my hands be engaged in Svāminī’s
service, and may my heart contemplate Her lotus feet. By
Śrīmatī’s festival of ecstatic moods (bhāvotsava), may
one-pointed attachment manifest within me for Her
prāṇanātha, Śrī Śyāmasundara. This is my earnest prayer.



jihvā hauka su-vihvala, rādhā-nāma gāne

vṛndāraṇye cala pada, rādhā anveṣaṇe

rādhā-sevā kara-kara, rādhā smara mane

rādhā-bhāve mati, bhaja rādhā-prāṇa-dhane

Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

                          181
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017


Śrīla Gosvāmipāda is humbly praying to attain attachment
to the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā’s prāṇanātha through Her
festival of ecstatic moods (bhāvotsava), by engaging all
his senses in rādhā-bhajana. When will my tongue become
overwhelmed by tasting the nectarean rasa of Śrī Rādhā’s
name? There is no equal to the happiness experienced by
the tongue that, with heartfelt prema, tastes the nectar
of Śrīmatī’s name. Happiness comes when one has achieved
the desired perfection by performing nāma-saṅkīrtana of
one’s object of worship. The name appears primarily upon
the tongue, and both the chanter and the hearer derive
bliss.



nāma-saṅkīrtanaṁ proktaṁ

kṛṣṇasya prema-sampadi

baliṣṭhaṁ sādhanaṁ śreṣṭhaṁ

paramākarṣa-mantravat

tad eva manyate bhakteḥ

phalaṁ tad-rasikair janaiḥ

bhagavat-prema-sampattau

sadaivāvyabhicārataḥ



Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta (2.3.164—5)



It is said that to obtain the wealth of prema for Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, nāma-saṅkīrtana is the best and most powerful
sādhana. This supremely attractive mantra draws Śrī
Kṛṣṇa towards the sādhaka. Therefore rasika devotees of
Bhagavān conclude that saṅkīrtana is the result of
bhakti. It is unfailing in bestowing the wealth of
bhagavat-prema.



Relish of the very rasa of Bhagavān, who is Himself an
embodiment of concentrated rasa, is definitely contained
within His name. Although there is such taste in His
name, that same nāmī, Śrī Śyāmasundara, becomes
overwhelmed when He tastes the name of Śrī Rādhā. It is
the nature of prema that the lover will have affection
for the name of the beloved.

Once, due to the vigilance of Jaṭilā, Śrī Kiśorī could
not meet Śyāmasundara, who fainted in separation from
Her. Madhumaṅgala went to Kiśorī, but since She was
under guard, She was unable to leave the house. To
pacify Kṛṣṇa’s fire of separation, She wrote the two
syllables rā and dhā on a leaf and sent it to Him. When
He received it, Kṛṣṇa returned to His senses and He said
to Madhumaṅgala, “Friend, I am completely satisfied with

                             182
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

what you have given Me.”

In the second line of this Text, Śrīpāda is praying:
“pādau tat-padakāṅkitāsu caratāṁ vṛndāṭavī-vīthiṣu — may
my feet traverse the paths of Vṛndāvana-dhāma, which is
marked with the footprints of Śrī Rādhā. While wandering
there, may this sentiment be in my heart: My Svāminī is
travelling on these paths to meet with Her prāṇanātha.
Every infinitesimal particle of Vraja is mixed with the
dust from Her lotus feet and is thus perceived as prema-
makaranda, the nectar of love. May my Īśvarī’s vilāsa-
līlā be painted on the canvas of my heart. May the dust
particles that have touched Her lotus feet be the
ornaments of my limbs.”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s dear associate Uddhava also desired to
attain a particle of this dust by taking birth in Vraja
as a blade of grass or a shrub. Such a heart’s longing
will only be fulfilled by remembering Śrī Kiśorī’s foot-
dust which lies upon the pathways of Vraja.

Śrīla Gosvāmipāda continues: “tat-karmaiva karaḥ karotu
— may both my hands be engaged in stringing various
kinds of flowers into garlands, ornaments and so forth
for Śrī Svāminī. When Svāmīnī is fatigued from Her
vilāsa, please allow me to attain the good fortune of
massaging Her lotus feet.

“Tad-bhāvotsavataḥ paraṁ bhavatu me tat-prāṇanāthe ratiḥ
— Śrī Rādhā’s bhāvotsava, festival of ecstatic moods, is
Her pastimes with Śrī Govinda. Sometimes, when Śrīmatī
becomes māninī, sulky, Govinda will pray to me with
clever words, ‘O beautiful one! O merciful one! Please
satisfy Śrī Rādhā and thereby pacify My fire of
separation.’ Upon hearing His petition, I will catch
hold of His hand and lead Him to Svāminī. May it be my
goal and all-good fortune to arrange for my Svāminī to
meet with Her prāṇa-priyatama. Govinda will certainly
give me mercy, knowing that I have taken shelter of Śrī
Rādhā’s lotus feet.”




Text 17

A prayer to attain Śrī Rādhā’s lotus feet, which are the
only goal, is given in Vilāpa-kusumāñjali (8):



devi duḥkha-kula-sāgarodare

dūyamānam ati-durgataṁ janam

tvaṁ kṛpā-prabala-naukayādbhutaṁ

prāpaya svapada-paṅkajālayam



O Devī Śrī Rādhikā, I am in a helpless condition,
drowning in the ocean of unhappiness. Please lift me

                           183
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

into the strong boat of Your mercy and give me the
shelter of Your lotus feet.



duḥkha-sindhu mājhe devi, durgata e jana

kṛpā-pote pāda-padme uṭhāo ekhana



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Feeling himself to be bereft of service, Śrī Raghunātha
dāsa Gosvāmī is extremely agitated by separation from
Śrī Rādhā. He feels himself to be without shelter and is
drowning in the deep ocean of unhappiness. Remembering
this śloka, he begins to glorify Śrī Svāminī in every
way by using the word devī. The root of devī is div,
which means “playful” or “sportive”. In other words, She
enjoys pastimes of divine love sports with Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Remembering this, Dāsa Gosvāmī uses the word devī. In
Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 4.84) it is said:
“‘devī’ kahi dyotamānā, paramā sundarī — devī means
‘resplendent and most beautiful’.”

“O Śrīmatī Rādhikā, deprived of service to Your lotus
feet, I am drowning in this ocean of material existence,
which is difficult to cross. Please shelter me within
the boat of Your mercy and bestow upon me the
qualification to serve Your lotus feet, for apart from
this service, there is no other remedy to remove the
exhaustion caused by pangs of separation from You.
Everything in the material world causes misery; only
service to You is fully blissful.”

The mañjarīs are firmly and resolutely fixed in the mood
of being Śrī Rādhā’s maidservants. The only thing on
their minds is service to Śrī Rādhā’s lotus feet. A
desire to enjoy bodily association with Śrī Hari does
not arise even in their dreams. If Śrī Kṛṣṇa forcefully
catches hold of them and begins to speak to them, they
say stiffly, “O Nanda-nandana! Do not dare touch this
body!”

The bhāva that Śrī Rādhā’s maidservants have towards Her
is pure and completely free from the desire for self-
enjoyment. They do not even have a tinge of any desire
other than to serve Her.




Text 18

The inclination to be solely attached to serving Śrī
Rādhā is described in Vilāpa-kusumāñjali (16):



pādābjayos tava vinā vara-dāsyam eva

nānyat kadāpi samaye kila devi yāce

                          184
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


sakhyāya te mama namo ‘stu namo ‘stu nityaṁ

dāsyāya te mama raso ‘stu raso ‘stu satyam



O Devī, I have no desire other than for the topmost
attainment of servitude to Your lotus feet. I forever
offer obeisances to the position of being Your sakhī,
but may I remain firmly attached to being Your
maidservant. I speak this as a solemn vow.



tava pada-dāsya vinā kichu nāhi māgi

tava sakhye namaskāra, āchi dāsya lāgi’




Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

In this Text, Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, absorbed in
his internal mañjarī form, is praying in great distress
to the lotus feet of his Svāminī. “O Svāminī, please
make me Your maidservant by bestowing upon me the great
fortune of service to Your lotus feet.” This
servitorship (dāsya) is topmost (vara) because Śrī
Rādhā’s maidservants are free from reverence and fear.
Their service is devoid of hesitation and is supremely
tasty and relishable. The desire for this dāsya is the
compassionate gift of Śrīman Mahāprabhu, and its
attainment is the heartfelt aim of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas.

As maidservants, the mañjarīs are also receptacles of
mādhurya-rasa. They can, without fear or shyness, enter
the solitary nikuñja where amorous pastimes are taking
place, and very gracefully and cleverly perform their
service. They also thoroughly know the requirements of
the youthful Divine Couple, as well as when and how to
fulfil them. The speciality of these mañjarīs is
performing their service while knowing the innermost
feelings of the Divine Couple’s hearts. Seeing the
enchanting skill of the mañjarīs’ service, a desire for
such service is aroused in the mind of Śyāmasundara
Himself, the crest jewel of all those who relish rasa.

As svādhīna-bhartṛkā, a heroine who controls her lover,
Śrī Rādhā orders Him, “Fix My dishevelled clothes and
ornaments, or the other sakhīs will see them and tease
Me.” Understanding Svāminī’s mood, the kiṅkarīs bring
clothes and cosmetics. Śrīmatī orders Śyāmasundara to
apply footlac (altā), and upon seeing the beauty of Her
lotus feet, He becomes overwhelmed with prema. Ecstatic
transformations (sāttvika-vikāras) make all His limbs
horripilate and tremble (pulakita and kampita), and as a
result He is unable to hold the brush. Observing His
condition, Śrīmatī softly and sweetly smiles and orders
Rati Mañjarī to apply the altā. The mañjarīs taste
various types of sweet pastimes like this in a
completely unobstructed way.

                          185
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                               5/5/2017


Śyāmasundara has to take shelter of the mañjarīs in
order to get the opportunity to meet with Śrīmatī or to
pacify Her māna. While eating at the house of Nanda in
the evening, Śyāmasundara becomes restless to know if He
will be able to meet with Rādhikā that night or not.
Through subtle gestures He inquires from Śrīmatī’s
maidservants about the possibility of this meeting. A
maidservant indicates, “Yes, it will take place.”
Whatever these mañjarīs have is for the pleasure of the
Divine Couple — they have nothing of their own. In rank,
the priya-narma-sakhīs are superior, but from the
perspective of having the most fortunate service, the
mañjarīs are superior.

The kāmātmikā-bhakti of Vraja, which is exclusive to
mādhurya-rasa, is of two kinds: sambhoga-icchāmayī and
tat-tad-bhāva-icchāmayī. The mādhurya-rasa that Vraja’s
yūtheśvarīs (group leaders) such as Rādhā, Candrāvalī
and Śyāmalā have towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa is called sambhoga-
icchāmayī. Serving the Divine Couple in the mood of
mañjarīs like Śrī Rūpa and Śrī Rati, whose inclination
is towards Śrīmatī Rādhikā (rādhā-snehādhikā), is called
tat-tad-bhāva-icchāmayī.

The sakhīs are of three kinds: (1) rādhā-snehādhikā —
those more inclined towards Śrī Rādhā, (2) kṛṣṇa-
snehādhikā — those more inclined towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and
(3) ubhaya-snehādhikā — those equally disposed to both.
The sakhīs are also of five kinds: (1) sakhī, (2) nitya-
sakhī, (3) prāṇa-sakhī, (4) priya-sakhī and (5) priya-
narma-sakhī. Both the nitya-sakhīs and prāṇa-sakhīs are
rādhā-snehādhikā and are called mañjarīs. The mañjarīs
are absorbed in the mood of service, even though they
feel friendship (sakhya) for Śrī Rādhā. They remain
exclusively intent on Śrī Rādhā’s lotus feet and do not
desire bodily contact with Śrī Kṛṣṇa, even in their
dreams. This is confirmed in Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta
(16.94):



ananya-śrī-rādhā-pada-kamala-dāsyaika-rasadhīr

hareḥ saṅge raṅga-svapana-samaye nāpi dadhatī



Single-pointed service to the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā is
an ocean of transcendental rasa. One who wishes to enter
that ocean will never desire enjoyment with Śrī Hari,
even in dreams.



The object (viṣayālambana) of the mañjarīs’ love and
affection is Śrī Yugala-kiśora. The mañjarīs experience
all kinds of rati by beholding the Divine Couple
embracing, by hearing Them conversing, by tasting Their
chewed tāmbūla remnants, by smelling the matchlessly
beautiful fragrance arising from Their amorous pastimes,
by touching Their lotus feet as they massage them, and
so forth. They also taste the ecstasy of Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa’s most intimate union (samprayoga). In this

                          186
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

regard, Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja says in Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 8.209—10):



rādhāra svarūpa — kṛṣṇa-prema-kalpa-latā

sakhī-gaṇa haya tāra pallava-puṣpa pātā

kṛṣṇa-līlāmṛta yadi latāke siñcaya

nija-sukha haite pallavādyera koṭi-sukha haya



By nature Śrī Rādhā is like a creeper of kṛṣṇa-prema and
the sakhīs are the leaves, flowers and twigs of that
creeper. When the nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes is
sprinkled on that creeper, the leaves, flowers and twigs
experience a happiness millions of times greater than if
they were to be directly sprinkled with this nectar.



In Govinda-līlāmṛta one also finds this type of
description: when Kṛṣṇa touches Śrī Rādhā, sāttvika-
bhāvas also arise on the bodies of Her mañjarīs. And
when Kṛṣṇa drinks the nectar of Rādhā’s lips, the
resultant bhāva is also reflected in the nitya-sakhīs
and prāṇa-sakhīs, who become as if intoxicated. This is
described in the first verse of Vilāpa-kusumāñjali:



tvaṁ rūpa-mañjari sakhi! prathitā pure ‘smin

puṁsaḥ parasya vadanaṁ na hi paśyasīti

bimbādhare kṣatam anāgata-bhartṛkāyā

yat te vyadhāyi kim u tac chuka-puṅgavena



My dear sakhī Rūpa Mañjarī, you are well known in Vraja
for not even looking at the face of any man other than
your husband. Therefore it is surprising that your lips,
red like bimba fruits, have been bitten, even though
your husband is not at home. Has this been done by the
best of parrots?



Like Śrī Rādhā, Her mañjarīs also have samartha-rati2.
This rati is causelessly present in them in a
transcendental, incomprehensible and inconceivable way.
Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 18.225) says:
“sunileo bhāgya-hīnera nā haya pratīti — even though
hearing of this, those devoid of good fortune cannot
perceive it.”

In this Text 18, Dāsa Gosvāmī prays to attain pālyadāsī-
bhāva. Using the words raso ‘stu, he expresses an ever-
fresh heightening of prema and prays to Śrī Svāminī not

                          187
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

to cheat him, either with clever words or by giving him
other blessings.




Text 19

A sincere prayer for attaining śrī-rādhā-dāsya, spoken
in a voice choked with emotion, is found in Stava-mālā
(Śrī Gāndharvā-samprārthanāṣṭakam (2)):



hā devi! kāku-bhara-gadgadayādya vācā

yāce nipatya bhuvi daṇḍavad-udbhaṭārtiḥ

asya prasādam abudhasya janasya kṛtvā

gāndharvike! nija-gaṇe gaṇanāṁ vidhehi



O Devī Gāndharvikā! Today, in utter desperation, I throw
myself on the ground like a stick. Filled with great
distress, I implore You with a choked voice to be
merciful to this fool and count me as one of Your own.



bhume daṇḍavat-paḍi’ bahu ārti-svare

kāku-bhare gadgada-vacane yoḍa kare

prārthanā kari go devi, e abudha jane

tava gaṇe gaṇi’ kṛpā kara akiñcane



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Here Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī is offering an extremely grief-
filled prayer at the lotus feet of Śrī Svāminī: “Please
also count me amongst Your intimate maidservants.” Even
though he is one of Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s eternal
associates, he considers himself an ajāta-rati-sādhaka.
There is not a great difference between humility and
prema. Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta (2.5.224—5) states, “In the
fully mature stage of the highest type of prema, natural
humility arises. Similarly, when humility matures,
incessant prema develops. Therefore, in humility and
prema a relationship of mutual ‘cause and effect’ or
‘producer and product’ is clearly seen.”

The phrase kāku-bhara-gadgadayādya vācā indicates
melting of the heart, which is the external symptom of
prema. The word hā expresses longing (utkaṇṭhā), and the
word gadgada, which means “with a choked voice”,
indicates that his prayer is beseeching and filled with
humility.


                          188
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

Because their longing is so intense, the vraja-devīs are
able to reject their family members and the rules and
regulations of society. Due to abundant possessiveness
(mamatā), they are also able to cross over all obstacles
and impediments. Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is controlled by this
mamatā, which is filled with longing, considers Himself
ever-indebted to the gopīs.

The words devi gāndharvike express the glories of Śrī
Rādhā’s good fortune. They refer to She who is a mine of
sweetness and beauty and who, by Her captivating
dancing, singing, playing on musical instruments and
performance of other charming arts, completely enchants
the mind of Kṛṣṇa.

Attachment (rati) filled with longing and humility is
the wealth of rāga-mārga-sādhakas. Śrīla Sanātana
Gosvāmī defines humility as follows: “If in spite of
possessing all good qualities, one considers oneself
wretched, abhorrent and incompetent, this is dainya,
humility.” It is only humility that attracts the mercy
of Bhagavān and makes a person a worthy recipient of
Kṛṣṇa’s mercy. Pretentious humility is inimical to
bhakti and is always to be abandoned. In fact, real
humility is not mere external behaviour; it manifests
from the heart.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura sings in Vimala-vaiṣṇava
(from Kalyāṇa-kalpa-taru):



antara bāhire, sama vyavahāra, amānī mānada ha’ba

kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtane, śrī kṛṣṇa-smaraṇe, satata majiyā ra’ba



With a heart free from duplicity, my outer behaviour
will correspond to my inner thoughts and feelings.
Seeing myself as completely insignificant, I will give
respect to others, seeking no honour in return. Always
singing the holy names and dancing, I will remain
constantly absorbed in remembering Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s

pastimes.



Text 20

A prayer to attain the position of a maidservant of Śrī
Rādhā, who attracts the mind of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is found in
Śrī Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi (39):



veṇuṁ karān nipatitaṁ skhalitaṁ śikhaṇḍaṁ

bhraṣṭaṁ ca pīta-vasanaṁ vraja-rāja-sūnoḥ

yasyāḥ kaṭākṣa-śara-ghāta-vimūrcchitasya

tāṁ rādhikāṁ paricarāmi kadā rasena

                          189
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017




When, with rasa, will I serve Śrī Rādhā, whose arrow-
like sidelong glance causes Śrī Nanda-nandana to faint,
the flute to fall from His hands, the peacock-feather
crown to slip from His head, and His yellow cloth to
fall from His body?



yāṅhāra kaṭākṣa-śare śrī-kṛṣṇa mūrcchita

kara haite vaṁśi khase, śikhaṇḍa skhalita

pīta-vastra bhraṣṭa haya, se rādhā-caraṇa

kabe āmi rasa-yoge kariba sevana?




Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.291) states: “teṣāṁ
bhāvāptaye lubdho bhaved atrādhikāravān — the anurāga
from which ever-fresh greed is born and which is
displayed in a variegated way, manifests in an
astonishing, unparalleled manner and reaches the stage
of mahābhāva. Only a person who craves to attain this
kind of bhāva is eligible to enter rāga-mārga.”

Taste, or ruci, is the most important aspect of bhāva-
bhakti. When a person has ruci for rāgānuga-bhajana in
the mood of mādhurya-rasa, he relishes Śrī Rādhā-
Mādhava’s names, forms, qualities and pastimes in his
hearing and chanting. By this kind of bhajana, one can
perceive the method of service of the nitya-siddha-
mañjarīs.

In this Text, Śrī Sarasvatīpāda is praying for the rasa-
filled loving service of Śrī Rādhā, who enchants the
mind of Kānu, or Kṛṣṇa. Concealed within this verse is
the influence of mādanākhya-mahābhāva on the heart of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is the emporium of all nectarean mellows,
akhila-rasāmṛta-mūrti.

Padmā and other sakhīs somehow allured Śrī Kṛṣṇa to
Candrāvalī’s kuñja, leaving Śrīmatī distressed in a
state of extreme separation. The clever kiṅkarīs,
however, skilfully brought Him from there and submitted
Him to Śrīmatī. Rādhā’s mood of contrariness was then
set in motion. First She forbade Kṛṣṇa to touch Her;
then She exhibited feigned anger and cast a crooked
sidelong glance at Him.

Śrī Rādhā is the embodiment of mahābhāva, and the only
function of mahābhāva is to incite happiness in Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s heart. Here, mādanākhya-mahābhāva incited
countless indescribable, transcendental sentiments in
the heart of akhila-rasāmṛta-mūrti Śrī Kṛṣṇa, thus
silencing His boastfulness. Śrī Kṛṣṇa became submerged
in a swoon of bliss, pierced by the arrow of Śrīmatī’s

                          190
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

crooked sidelong glance. On a battlefield a hero faints
when struck by an arrow, and his bow, arrows, crown,
clothes, ornaments — everything — become scattered.
Similarly, in this battle of Cupid, the strike of one
arrow-like glance makes the flute fall from the hand,
the peacock-feather crown fall from the head and the
yellow cloth fall from the body of the transcendental
young Cupid — and He faints. That person whose crooked
sidelong glances strike the vraja-sundarīs like Cupid’s
arrows has now fallen to the ground. Only by Śrī Rādhā’s
sidelong glance does He who bewilders Cupid fall
unconscious. That flute by whose very sweet sound
hundreds and hundreds of vraja-sundarīs become stricken
with restlessness, like deer struck by arrows, now falls
to the ground from a trembling hand. Mādhava’s peacock
feather crown, which is an emblem of the pastimes of
Vraja and which enamours the minds of the gopa-ramaṇīs,
now rolls in the dust as a result of Śrī Rādhā’s crooked
sidelong glance. That yellow cloth (pītāmbara) which
like a lightning bolt from a fresh thundercloud emanates
splendorous beauty and upon seeing which the vraja-
ramaṇīs gave up the honour of their lineage, has now
also fallen down. This condition of the dhīra-lalita-
nāyaka is all due to the crooked sidelong glance of Śrī
Rādhā.

The embodiment of ānanda-rasa has fainted by the arrow
of Śrī Rādhā’s sidelong glance. Although Śrīmatī makes
many attempts to break this swoon of bliss (ānanda), it
cannot be broken. Now the service starts for the rasa-
kiṅkarīs. With a sweet voice, a maidservant sings a
madana-rāga (a melody of Cupid), which she learnt from
Śrī Svāminī. The kiṅkarī breaks the swoon of the hero
(nāyaka) who has fainted in prema, and thus facilitates
Śrī Svāminī’s meeting with Her beloved. This is the
maidservant’s rasa-paricaryā, her service that enhances
rasa: to arrange for the sweet pastime of the Divine
Couple to begin. Then, at the end of Their pastime, the
maidservants desire to attain the good fortune of
serving Them by offering cool water, betelnuts,
garlands, a fan and so forth.




Text 21

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.6.46) describes the mood of a
sādhaka who has attained attachment for rādhā-dāsya:



tvayopabhukta-srag-gandha-

vāso-’laṅkāra-carcitāḥ

ucchiṣṭa-bhojino dāsās

tava māyāṁ jayema hi



O Prabhu, we decorate ourselves with the garlands,

                             191
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

sandalwood paste, cloth and ornaments worn by You. Since
we are Your servants who eat Your remnants, we will
certainly conquer Your illusory energy (māyā).
[Therefore, Prabhu, we are not afraid of Your māyā — we
are only afraid of being separated from You.]



tomāra prasāda-mālā-gandha-alaṅkāra

vastrādi pariyā dina yāya ta āmāra

tomāra ucchiṣṭa-bhojī-dāsa-paricaye

tava māyā jaya kari anāsakta ha’ye




Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Persons who are not inclined to serve Kṛṣṇa are intent
on their own sense enjoyment, and thus they perform
various activities, such as sleeping, sitting,
travelling about, staying in one place and sporting.
However, if the same activities are connected to
Bhagavān, the jīva becomes eternally blessed. If the
jīva is eager for the service of honouring the remnants
enjoyed by Śrī Kṛṣṇa, such as garlands, fragrant oils,
clothes and ornaments, he will not be ensnared by the
bondage of material existence. Here Uddhava is saying to
Śrī Bhagavān, “By obtaining Your prasāda, the living
entity becomes freed from the slavery of māyā.”

Hari-bhakti-vilāsa states that a person who doubts the
potency of items offered to Viṣṇu will reside in hell
for eternity. One should not disrespect mahā-prasāda.
Even mahā-prasāda that has fallen into the mouth of a
dog is supremely pure and acceptable even for a
brāhmaṇa. The prasāda offered to ancient deities or
deities established by mahāpuruṣas is extremely pure and
worthy of acceptance. But it is not proper to distribute
the prasāda of deities who have been established here
and there by persons who indulge in sense enjoyment.
This is confirmed in the Nārada-pañcarātra:



śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi-

pañcarātra-vidhiṁ vinā

aikāntikī harer bhaktir

utpātāyaiva kalpate



Even one who practises one-pointed devotion to Hari will
only create a disturbance if he abandons the rules of
Śruti, Smṛti, the Purāṇas and the Nārada-pañcarātra.



                          192
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                                5/5/2017


The remnants of Śrī Kṛṣṇa are called mahā-prasāda. When
a pure devotee honours this mahā-prasāda, his remnants
are called mahā-mahā-prasāda. Śrī Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja
Gosvāmī says in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya-līlā
16.60):



bhakta-pada-dhūli āra bhakta-pada-jala

bhakta-bhukta-avaśeṣa — ei tina mahābala



The foot-dust of a devotee, the water that has washed
his feet and the remnants of food left by him are three
very powerful items.



By serving these three items, kṛṣṇa-prema-bhakti will
appear. They are extremely powerful.

It is improper for a sādhaka-bhakta to imitate the
behaviour of pure devotees. Once, my gurudeva, then Śrī
Vinoda-bihārī Brahmacārī, and his godbrother Śrī
Narahari Prabhu went to Śrī Vaṁśīdāsa Bābājī’s bhajana-
kuṭī to take his darśana. Bābājī had offered tea and was
distributing it. Vinoda-bihārī and Narahari Prabhu also
received some tea prasāda. Vinoda-bihārī paid his
respects to it, put it aside and did not take it. When
Narahari Prabhu asked him why, Śrī Vinoda-bihārī
answered philosophically, “An object which is taken by a
mahā-bhāgavata can still be unsuitable for us. Mahādeva
drank a deadly poison. He is capable of doing that, but
if an ordinary person drinks poison, he is sure to die.
For a sādhaka it is only proper to follow the rules of
the bhakti-śāstras.”




Text 22

The late afternoon pastimes (aparāhna-līlā) are
described in Govinda-līlāmṛta (19.1):

In the afternoon, after madhyāhna-līlā, Śrī Rādhā goes
to Her home, bathes and gets dressed and decorated. On
the affectionate order of Śrī Yaśomatī, She prepares
various kinds of preparations, such as karpūra-keli and
amṛta-keli, for Her prāṇanātha Śrī Kṛṣṇa. As He returns
to Vraja from the forest with the cows and sakhās, She
has darśana of His lotus face and becomes filled with
delight. Śrī Kṛṣṇa also becomes fully satisfied by
receiving Her darśana. After meeting with Śrī Nanda and
the other elderly gopas, He is bathed and dressed by the
elderly gopīs. I contemplate this Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.



śrī-rādhikā-gṛhe gelā, kṛṣṇa lāgi’ viracilā,

                          193
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                                 5/5/2017


nānā-vidha-khādya-upahāra

snāta ramya-veśa dhari’, priya-mukhekṣaṇa kari’,

pūrṇānanda pāila apāra

śrī-kṛṣṇāparāhna-kāle, dhenu-mitra laiyā cale,

pathe rādhā-mukha nirakhiyā

nandādi milana kari’, yaśodā-mārjita hari,

smara mana ānandita haiyā



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The various pastimes of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa during
madhyāhna-līlā, such as water sports (jala-krīḍā),
playing dice (pāśā-khelā), swinging (dola-līlā), and
laughing and joking (hāsa-parihāsa-līlās), are now
completed. In the house of Nanda, Śrī Svāminī is not
able to feed Her priyatama with Her own hands, but at
midday, Her desire to serve in this way is fulfilled.
Kṛṣṇa goes to the forest with His sakhās to herd the
cows, and on the pretext of beholding the beauty of the
forest, He separates Himself from His sakhās to go to
Svāminī. Text 20 described Kṛṣṇa’s condition when He
sees Svāminī’s charmingly attractive lotus face. After
madhyāhna-līlā, Śrī Rādhā and Her sakhīs return to Her
home in Jāvaṭa, and Śyāmasundara, along with His cows,
calves and sakhās, also returns from the forest.

In Her home, Śrī Svāminī busily performs various
activities with a restless mind, eagerly desiring to
meet with Her priyatama. At the time of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
return, the sakhās accompanying Him play their horns and
other instruments, making a tumultuous sound. The
Vrajavāsīs become extremely blissful when they see the
dust flying from the cows’ hooves. The arrival of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is like the arrival of the rainy season. The sky
is filled with clouds of dust raised by the cows, the
song of the flute is like a shower of nectar raining
from the sky, and the cows’ mooing is like the rumbling
of clouds. Like extremely thirsty cātaka birds (who only
drink rainwater as it falls), the Vrajavāsīs come
forward. When the cowherd boys leave to go cowherding,
Kṛṣṇa walks in the front, and when they return, Baladeva
Prabhu is at the front.

When Śrī Kṛṣṇa passes through Jāvaṭa-grāma, Śrī Rādhā
has darśana of Him through the openings in the small
latticed windows of Her house. Śrī Kṛṣṇa also craves the
darśana of His beloved, and sometimes receives it
directly when He begs something from Her. Before Priyājī
can give Him anything, though, He steals Her heart like
a snatching thief. But my Svāminī is no less. She also
steals the heart of Her priyatama. Now each acts with
the heart and mind of the other. Jīva Gosvāmipāda, in
his Śrī Yugalāṣṭakam (6), prays:

kṛṣṇa-citta-sthitā rādhā, rādhā-citta-sthito hariḥ,

                            194
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


jīvane maraṇe nityaṁ rādhā-kṛṣṇau gatir mama



Rādhā is always firmly situated within the mind of Kṛṣṇa
and Kṛṣṇa is always firmly situated within the mind of
Rādhā. May Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa be my shelter in life or
death.



My desired object is the service of this Divine Couple.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa arrives at His home, the house of Nanda. With
the end of her sārī, Yaśodā cleans her lālā’s face,
which is covered with dust from the cows, performs ārati
and then, placing Him on her lap, breast-feeds Him.
After some time, Kṛṣṇa goes to milk the cows. Upon His
return, Yaśodā bathes Him and very lovingly feeds Him
the sweets sent by Śrī Rādhā. Śrī Rādhā’s kiṅkarīs have
darśana of all these pastimes and, returning to their
Svāminī, who is restless and agitated, relate all these
events to Her.

He who chants harināma while contemplating these
pastimes will, by Śrī Svāminī’s grace, become eligible
to one day serve these pastimes.



Thus ends the Pañcama-yāma-sādhana,

Aparāhna-kālīya-bhajana, of Śrī Bhajana-rahasya.




6 Ṣaṣṭha-yāma-sādhana: Sāyaṁ-kālīya-bhajana — bhāva

(six daṇḍas after dusk: approximately 6.00 p.m. — 8.30
p.m.)




Text 1

The sixth verse of Śikṣāṣṭaka describes the visible
manifestations of perfection:



nayanaṁ galad-aśru-dhārayā

vadanaṁ gadgada-ruddhayā girā

pulakair nicitaṁ vapuḥ kadā

tava nāma-grahaṇe bhaviṣyati




                             195
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

O Lord, when will tears flow from my eyes, my voice
falter and all the hairs on my body stand erect as I
chant Your holy names?



prema dhana vinā vyartha daridra jīvana

‘dāsa’ kari’ vetana more deha prema-dhana



“Without the wealth of prema, my wretched life is
useless. O Lord, please accept me as Your paid servant
and grant me the wealth of prema as wages.”




Text 2

The intrinsic nature of bhāva is described in Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.3.2):



premnas tu prathamāvasthā

bhāva ity abhidhīyate

sāttvikāḥ svalpa-mātrā syur

atrāśru-pulakādayaḥ



The first stage of prema is known as bhāva. In this
stage sāttvika-bhāvas, such as hairs standing on end
(pulaka), tears (aśru) and shivering (kampa), are
slightly manifest.



premera prathamāvasthā bhāva nāma tāra

pulakāśru svalpa haya sāttvika vikāra



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Bhāva, also known as rati, is considered to be the
sprout of prema, which is the fully blossomed state of
bhakti. Bhāva, a special manifestation of śuddha-sattva,
is compared to a ray of the sun of prema and it softens
the heart by various tastes (ruci). In other words bhāva
is the condition in which the heart melts as a result of
cultivating activities favourable to Kṛṣṇa
(kṛṣṇānuśīlana).

Bhāva is also described in the following verse from
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.3.1):


                            196
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017



śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā

prema-sūryāṁśu-sāmyabhāk

rucibhiś citta-māsṛṇya-

kṛd asau bhāva ucyate



Bhāva-bhakti is a special manifestation of śuddha-
sattva. In other words the constitutional characteristic
of bhāva-bhakti is that it is a phenomenon entirely
constituted of śuddha-sattva. It is like a ray of the
sun of prema and it softens the heart by various tastes
(ruci).

In his commentary to this verse Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura writes, “When sādhana-bhakti succeeds
in softening the heart by various tastes (ruci), it is
called bhāva-bhakti. The word ruci here refers to: (1)
the desire to attain Bhagavān (bhagavat-prāpti-
abhilāṣa), (2) the desire to do what is favourable for
Bhagavān (ānukūlya-abhilāṣa) and (3) the desire to serve
Bhagavān with affection (sauhārda-abhilāṣa). The
constitutional nature of bhāva-bhakti is śuddha-sattva-
viṣeśātmā, which means it is fully comprised of śuddha-
sattva. Śuddha-sattva refers to the self-manifest
cognitive function of Bhagavān’s svarūpa-śakti known as
samvid-vṛtti, the function of divine cognisance. When
the word viśeṣa is added to śuddha-sattva, it indicates
hlādinī, another great potency of svarūpa-śakti. One
should understand from this that mahābhāva, which is the
highest state of hlādinī, is included within śuddha-
sattva-viśeṣa. Hence śuddha-sattva-viṣeśātmā is that
supreme function of svarūpa-śakti which is possessed of
desire favourable to Bhagavān, which is the essence of
the combined samvit- and hlādinī-śaktis, and which is
situated in the hearts of Bhagavān’s eternal associates.
It is one with the mood of their hearts (tādātmya-
bhāva). In simple words, the eternally perfect moods
situated within the eternal associates of Śrī Kṛṣṇa are
called śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā. The constitutional
nature of bhāva-bhakti is śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā and,
because it is likened to the first ray of the sun of
prema-bhakti, it is also called the sprout of prema.

The natural function of bhāva is to manifest Kṛṣṇa’s
inherent nature (svarūpa) and the inherent nature of His
pastimes. Bhāva can arise in two ways: (1) by absorption
in one’s spiritual practice (sādhana-abhiniveśa-ja) and
(2) by the mercy of Śrī Kṛṣṇa or His devotees (śrī-
kṛṣṇa-prasāda-ja or śrī-kṛṣṇa-bhakta-prasāda-ja).

By the influence of associating with great
personalities, one engages in the sādhana of bhagavad-
bhakti. Gradually a taste (ruci) for bhakti arises
within him, he develops attachment (āsakti) for
Bhagavān, and finally he attains bhāva. Bhāva received
in this way is called sādhana-abhiniveśa-ja.

Bhāva that suddenly arises, without any sādhana, is

                           197
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

called śrī-kṛṣṇa-prasāda-ja-bhāva or śrī-kṛṣṇa-bhakta-
prasāda-ja-bhāva. Prasāda-ja-bhāva is rare; generally
the living entity attains sādhana-abhiniveśa-ja-bhāva.

Śrī-kṛṣṇa-prasāda-ja-bhāva is received by Kṛṣṇa’s
benediction, His darśana, or by a revelation (sphūrti)
within the heart. Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī received bhāva
as a result of mercy manifesting in his heart. Numerous
examples of these three kinds of prasāda-ja-bhāvas were
seen during the advent of Śrīman Mahāprabhu. Bhāva arose
in the hearts of countless people just by receiving
Mahāprabhu’s darśana. Jagāi and Mādhāi received bhāva as
a result of a benediction, and Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī’s bhāva
manifested as a sphūrti within his heart.

Dhruva and Prahlāda are examples of personalities who
attained śrī-kṛṣṇa-bhakta-prasāda-ja-bhāva, as they
received bhagavad-bhāva by the mercy of Śrī Nārada Muni.
Bhāva was also awakened in the hearts of countless
people by the mercy of Śrī Rūpa, Śrī Sanātana and other
associates of Mahāprabhu.




Text 3

The characteristics of sthāyibhāva are described in
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.3.25—6):



kṣāntir avyartha-kālatvaṁ

viraktir māna-śūnyatā

āśā-bandhaḥ samutkaṇṭhā

nāma-gāne sadā ruciḥ

āsaktis tad-guṇākhyāne

prītis tad-vasati-sthale

ity ādayo ‘nubhāvāḥ

syur jāta-bhāvāṅkure jane



When bhāva arises, the following nine symptoms are
observed in the sādhaka: forbearance, effective use of
one’s time, detachment, absence of pride, steadfast hope
that Kṛṣṇa will bestow His mercy, intense longing to
obtain one’s goal, constant taste for chanting the holy
name, attachment to hearing about Kṛṣṇa’s qualities and
affection for Kṛṣṇa’s pastime-places.



kṣobhera kāraṇa sattve kṣobha nāhi haya

sadā kṛṣṇa bhaje, nāhi kare kāla-kṣaya

                            198
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


kṛṣṇetara-viṣaye virakti sadā raya

māna thakileo abhimānī nāhi haya

avaśya pāiba kṛṣṇa-kṛpā āśā kare

kṛṣṇa bhaje ahar ahaḥ vyākula antare

hare-kṛṣṇa-nāma-gāne ruci nirantara

śrī-kṛṣṇera guṇākhyāne āsakti vistara

prīti kare sadā kṛṣṇa-vasatira sthāne

ei anubhāva bhāvāṅkura vidyamāne



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

(1) Kṣānti — When one remains calm and composed although
there is reason to be angry or restless, it is called
kṣānti, forbearance. A sādhaka naturally displays
forbearance, as seen in the example of Parīkṣit
Mahārāja. Even after he received the curse of imminent
death by Śṛṅgī, the son of a muni, he did not become
disturbed, but with a steady mind proceeded to hear
hari-kathā.

(2) Avyartha-kālatva — This means not wasting time, and
always being absorbed in hari-bhajana.

(3) Virakti — A natural distaste for material sense
enjoyment is called virakti, detachment.

(4) Māna-śūnyatā — Pride arises from one’s high birth,
social class, stage of life, wealth, beauty, high
position and so on. Māna-śūnyatā is the condition in
which the heart remains free from pride even though one
may have all these qualifications.

(5) Āśā-bandha — To apply one’s mind very diligently to
bhajana with the firm faith that “Śrī Kṛṣṇa will surely
bestow His mercy upon me” is called āśā-bandha,
steadfast hope.

Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī has expressed his hope
(āśā) in Vilāpa-kusumāñjali (102):



āśā bharair amṛta-sindhu-mayaiḥ kathañcit

kālo mayātigamitaḥ kila sāmprataṁ hi

tvaṁ cet kṛpāṁ mayi vidhāsyasi naiva kiṁ me

prāṇair vrajena ca varoru bakāriṇāpi



O Varoru Rādhā, it is as rare to fulfil my hope as it is
to attain an ocean of nectar, but I pass my days,

                          199
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

greatly longing to fulfil it. Now You must give mercy to
this poor, unhappy person. What to speak of my life,
everything — my residing in Vraja and even my service to
Kṛṣṇa — is useless without Your mercy.



(6) Samutkaṇṭhā — Intense longing to attain one’s
desired object is called samutkaṇṭhā. This kind of
eagerness is shown in the prayer of Vṛtrāsura (Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (6.11.26)):



ajāta-pakṣā iva mātaraṁ khagāḥ

stanyaṁ yathā vatsatarāḥ kṣudhārtāḥ

priyaṁ priyeva vyuṣitaṁ viṣaṇṇā

mano ‘ravindākṣa didṛkṣate tvām



O lotus-eyed one, as baby birds that have not yet
developed their wings always look for their mother to
return and feed them, as small calves tied with ropes
anxiously await the time of milking when they will be
allowed to drink the milk of their mothers, or as a
morose wife whose husband is away from home always longs
for him to return and satisfy her in all respects, I
always yearn for the opportunity to render direct
service unto You.



(7) Nāma-gāne sadā ruci — To constantly chant the name
of Hari with the faith that śrī-nāma-bhajana is the
topmost form of bhajana, is called nāma-gāne sadā ruci,
taste in chanting the holy name. To have a taste for the
holy name is the key to obtaining the ultimate
auspiciousness.

Kṛṣṇa-nāma is both the practice (sādhana) and the goal
(sādhya). The topmost name, as taught by Śrī
Gaurasundara, is the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra. Nowadays,
non-devotees write lyrics that are imaginary and full of
rasa-ābhāsa, overlapping of transcendental mellows. Many
people understand these lyrics to be nāma-mantras, but
such mantras are not mentioned in the scriptures and it
is improper to chant them. Śrīman Mahāprabhu (Śrī
Caitanya-bhāgavata (Madhya-khaṇḍa 13.10)) has given the
order: “ihā vai āra nā bolibā bolāibā — ask them to
chant only Hare Kṛṣṇa, nothing else.”

(8) Āsaktis tad-guṇākhyāne — The thirst of a bhāva-
bhakta to describe and hear the sweet pastimes of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, which are filled with all auspicious qualities,
is never satiated. The more he hears, the more his
attachment increases.

(9) Tad-vasati-sthale-prīti — The desire to reside in
Śrī Vṛndāvana, Śrī Navadvīpa or other abodes of Bhagavān
is called tad-vasati-sthale-prīti, affection for the

                          200
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                                5/5/2017

transcendental residences of Bhagavān. Living in the
dhāma is only beneficial when one has the association of
pure devotees.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura sings in his song Śuddha-
bhakata:



gaura āmāra ye saba sthāne karalo bhramaṇa raṅge

se saba sthāna heriba āmi praṇayi-bhakata-saṅge



In the association of loving devotees, I will go to all
the places that Gaura joyfully visited.



And in the song Kabe gaura-vane, he sings: “dhāma-vāsī-
jane praṇati kariyā māgiba kṛpāra leśa — when will I
offer obeisances to all the residents of the dhāma,
begging one drop of mercy from them?”

If it is not possible to physically live in the dhāma,
then one should live there mentally, and, in the company
of pure devotees, one should hear and recite Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam and other scriptures. This is the same as
living in the dhāma.

If some of the symptoms of bhāva are observed in karmīs,
who desire sense enjoyment, or in jñānīs, who aspire for
liberation, one should understand that such symptoms are
nothing but a reflection (pratibimba) of bhāva or a
semblance of rati (raty-ābhāsa). When ignorant persons
exhibit these symptoms of bhāva by virtue of their
association with devotees, it can be called a shadow of
bhakti (chāyā-rūpa-bhakty-ābhāsa).




Text 4

The anubhāvas that arise in a devotee when he reaches a
developed stage of bhāva are listed in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindhu (2.2.2):



nṛtyaṁ viluṭhitaṁ gītaṁ

krośanaṁ tanu-moṭanam

huṅkāro jṛmbhaṇaṁ śvāsa-

bhūmā lokānapekṣitā

lālāsrāvo ‘ṭṭa-hāsaś ca

ghūrṇā-hikkādayo ‘pi ca


                           201
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017



The external transformations that reveal the heart’s
emotions (bhāvas) are called anubhāvas. They are dancing
(nṛtya), rolling on the ground (viluṭhita), singing
(gīta), loud crying (krośana), writhing of the body
(tanu-moṭana), roaring (huṅkāra), yawning (jṛmbhaṇa),
breathing heavily (śvāsa-bhūmā), neglecting others
(lokānapekṣitā), drooling (lālāsrāva), loud laughter
(aṭṭa-hāsa), staggering about (ghūrṇā) and hiccups
(hikkā).



nṛtya, gaḍāgaḍi, gīta, cītkāra, huṅkāra

tanu-phole, hāṅī uṭhe, śvāsa bāra bāra

lokāpekṣā chāḍe, lālāsrāva, aṭṭa-hāsa

hikkā ghūrṇā bāhya anubhāva suprakāśa




Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

With the development of the sādhaka’s transcendental
emotions, the above-mentioned anubhāvas manifest. Not
caring for public opinion, the sādhaka chants and
dances. It is impossible for worldly-minded persons to
understand such activities of the devotees. The
behaviour of the devotees who can taste bhāva (bhāvuka-
bhaktas) is completely different from that of mundane
persons. Sometimes, hypocrites, who desire material
gain, worship or fame, imitate the activities of pure
devotees. Once, while watching a snake dance, nāma-
ācārya Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura remembered Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
pastime of subduing Kāliya-nāga (kāliya-damana-līlā) and
started to dance. Other devotees took his foot-dust and
smeared it on their heads, considering themselves very
fortunate. An envious brāhmaṇa began to imitate Haridāsa
Ṭhākura, but no devotee was attracted to him, and
instead he was scolded by the snake-charmer.




Text 5

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (2.3.16) describes the aṣṭa-
sāttvika-bhāvas as follows:



te stambha-sveda-romāñcāḥ

svara-bhedo ‘tha vepathuḥ

vaivarṇyam aśru pralaya

ity aṣṭau sāttvikāḥ smṛtāḥ

                             202
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


The aṣṭa-sāttvika transformations of bhāva are: (1)
becoming stunned (stambha), (2) perspiration (sveda),
(3) standing of the hairs on end (romāñca), (4)
faltering of the voice (svara-bheda), (5) trembling
(kampa), (6) loss of colour (vaivarṇya), (7) tears
(aśru) and (8) loss of consciousness or fainting
(pralaya).



stambha, sveda, romāñca o kampa svara-bheda

vaivarṇya, pralaya, aśru vikāra-prabheda



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

In the pure consciousness (śuddha-sattva) of the living
entity, when the action of the heart (citta) becomes
stimulated it precipitates further action. At that time
a natural wonderfulness arises, which makes the heart
blossom in various ways. This externally manifests as
udbhāsvaras, anubhāvas that manifest as external
actions. These transformations, such as dancing and so
forth, are of many varieties. When the anubhāvas, which
nourish vibhāva, arise in the heart, they pervade the
body as udbhāsvaras.

The word sattva refers to the heart that is directly
stimulated by transcendental sentiments. The bhāvas, or
emotions, that arise from this sattva are called
sāttvika-bhāvas. Becoming stunned (stambha), trembling
(kampa) and so forth are symptoms of sāttvika
transformations. When the sādhaka’s heart attains
oneness with sāttvika-bhāvas, it submits itself to the
life-air (prāṇa). Then, when the prāṇa is excited, it is
transformed, causing excessive agitation to the body. At
that time, stambha (becoming stunned) and other
transformations arise.

In anubhāvas such as dancing (nṛtya), the bhāva that is
manifested by sattva does not directly perform the
activity. Rather, the activity is performed as a result
of the intelligence being stimulated. In the sāttvika-
bhāvas such as stambha, however, the intelligence is not
needed, as the sāttvika-bhāva itself directly performs
the activity. For this reason, anubhāvas and sāttvika-
bhāvas are considered to be different.

In some conditions, the life-air (prāṇa) becomes present
as the fifth element together with the other four
elements of earth, water, fire and sky. Sometimes it
consists mainly of itself — that is, it is predominated
by air (vāyu) — and it moves throughout the body of the
living entity. When the prāṇa comes in contact with the
earth element, inertness (stambha) is observed; when it
takes shelter of water, tears (aśru) manifest; when it
contacts fire, perspiration (sveda) and change in bodily
colour (vaivarṇya) are evident; and when it takes
shelter of sky, it manifests devastation (pralaya) or
loss of consciousness (mūrccha). When it consists
predominately of itself, or in other words, when it

                          203
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

takes shelter of the element air, horripilation
(romāñca), trembling (vepathu) and faltering of the
voice (svara-bheda) manifest respectively, corresponding
to the prāṇa’s mild, moderate or intense strength.

Stambha is a state in which one becomes inert, and it
arises from jubilation, fear, astonishment, dejection,
regret, anger and depression. Perspiration (sveda)
arises from jubilation, fear, anger and so forth. When
the bodily hairs stand on end, the condition is known as
romāñca, and it arises from astonishment, jubilation,
enthusiasm and fear. Faltering of the voice (svara-
bheda) arises from despair, wonder, anger, jubilation
and fear. Trembling (vepathu) is caused by fear, anger,
jubilation and so forth. When the body changes colour it
is called vaivarṇya, and it arises from despair, anger,
fear and so on. Tears (aśru) come from the eyes through
the influence of jubilation, anger, despair and so on.
Tears of joy are cool, whereas tears of anger and so
forth are warm. Cessation of all action, loss of
consciousness, becoming motionless and falling to the
ground are called pralaya. Pralaya arises from both
happiness and distress.

These sāttvika-bhāvas manifest in five stages of
intensity, according to the progressive gradation of
sattva: (1) smouldering (dhūmāyita), (2) flaming
(jvalita), (3) burning (dīpta), (4) brightly burning
(uddīpta) and (5) blazing (sūddīpta). They are gradually
reflected in the heart of a sincere pure devotee
according to the level of his sādhana. Many people
exhibit these bhāvas to impress others or to achieve
success in their own activities in this material world,
but such demonstrations are not the transcendental
sentiments of pure devotion.




Text 6

In his spiritual body (siddha-deha) the living entity is
a transcendental servant of Kṛṣṇa. When attachment to
service (dāsya-rati) arises, the jīva deems his material
designations insignificant. The following statement of
Śrīman Mahāprabhu is found in Padyāvalī (74):



nāhaṁ vipro na ca nara-patir nāpi vaiśyo na śūdro

nāhaṁ varṇī na ca gṛha-patir no vanastho yatir vā

kintu prodyan-nikhila-paramānanda-pūrṇāmṛtābdher

gopī-bhartuḥ pada-kamalayor dāsa-dāsānudāsaḥ



I am not a brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya or śūdra, nor am I
a

brahmacārī, gṛhastha, vānaprastha or sannyāsī. My sole

                          204
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

nature is that of a servant of the servants of the
Vaiṣṇavas who are the servants of the lotus feet of Śrī
Rādhā-vallabha, the maintainer of the gopīs. He is
naturally effulgent and the complete ocean of bliss.



vipra, kṣatra, vaiśya, śūdra kabhu nāhi āmi

gṛhī, brahmacārī, vānaprastha, yati, svāmī

prabhūta paramānanda-pūrṇāmṛtāvāsa

śrī-rādhā-vallabha-dāsa-dāsera anudāsa




Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The living entity is actually a servant of the
transcendental Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra, the ocean of all
nectarean mellows. This is confirmed in Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 5.142):

ekala īśvara kṛṣṇa āra saba bhṛtya



yāre yaiche nācāya, se taiche kare nṛtya




Śrī Kṛṣṇa alone is Īśvara, the supreme controller, and
all others are His servants. They dance as He makes them
do so.



The living entity who is bound by māyā identifies
himself with the temporary material body of a woman or
man and various other designations. However, with His
own lotus mouth, Śrī Gaurasundara, the incarnation in
Kali-yuga and saviour of all fallen souls, instructed
the human beings tormented by Kali. He said, “We are not
bound by social classes (varṇas), such as brāhmaṇa,
kṣatriya, vaiśya or sūdra, nor by brahmacārya or other
stages of life (āśramas). Our pure identity is gopī-
bhartuḥ pada-kamalayor dāsa-dāsānudāsaḥ, that of the
servant of the servant of the servant of the maintainer
of the gopīs.”

Because the living entity is conditioned, he receives a
new body according to his previous life’s desires and
impressions (saṁskāras), and thus takes birth in one of
the varṇas. The destination he attains after death is in
accordance with his karma. This is called karma-cakra,
the cycle of action and reaction. The living entity
realises his pure form (śuddha-svarūpa) by taking
shelter of the lotus feet of a bona fide guru and
thereby following the path of bhajana as established by

                          205
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

the previous mahājanas. His material identification is
removed by his constant performance of nāma-bhajana. A
pure spiritual mood then manifests, and he attains a
pure, transcendental body with which he can serve Kṛṣṇa.
This body is also endowed with hands, legs and so forth
just like the material body.

In pure, transcendental nature, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the only
male and all jīvas are female. Actually, in the
structure of the jīva’s heart, male and female
characteristics do not exist; yet when embodied the
living entity naturally conceives of himself as being
male or female. The jīva attains a pure body through the
medium of sādhana-bhajana. A person who is inclined
towards the amorous mellow (mādhurya-rasa) will perform
sādhana-bhajana under the guidance of rasika-bhaktas
and, according to his own desire and constitutional
nature, he will attain his spiritual form, which will be
the body of a gopī. Yogamāyā makes all arrangements for
the devotee’s service in a specific rasa by the potency
that makes the impossible possible (aghaṭana-ghaṭana-
paṭīyasī-śakti). Prema-bhakti-candrikā states:



sādhane bhāviba yāhā siddha-dehe pāba tāhā



Whatever one contemplates in sādhana, one will attain at
perfection.



pakvāpakva mātra se vicāra



The only difference is that in sādhana it is unripe, and
at perfection, ripe.



Dāsānudāsa — No one has the qualification to enter
mādhurya-sevā to Śrī Yugala-kiśora unless he is under
the guidance of the vraja-gopīs. By performing bhajana
under the guidance of the mañjarī-sakhīs who are
following those gopīs, one can attain the post of a
maidservant. At the time of sādhana, one desires to have
a mood of service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa according to the moods of
the vraja-gopīs. Then, when bhāva arises he considers
himself to be a maidservant of a vraja-gopī like Lalitā
Sakhī and serves Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa under her guidance. In
śṛṅgāra-rasa-upāsana, worship through the amorous
mellow, one conceives of oneself as a paramour (parakīya
or paroḍhā).

Some persons, although males, consider themselves to be
Lalitā or Viśākhā. They adopt feminine attire, pose as
sakhīs, and thus perform “bhajana”. By such actions,
they only destroy themselves and others. To think, “I am
Lalitā” or “I am Viśākhā” is the ahaṅgrahopāsanā of the
māyāvādīs, a type of worship in which one considers
himself to be identical with the object of worship.

                             206
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

Those who think like this are offenders at the lotus
feet of Lalitā, Viśākhā and others, and they descend
into the most dreadful hell. The living entity can never
become Rūpa Mañjarī, Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s eternal kiṅkarī,
nor can he become Lalitā or any other sakhī. These
sakhīs are not living entities; they are Śrī Rādhā’s
direct expansions (kāya-vyūha-svarūpa).

While performing śṛṅgāra-rasa-upāsana at the time of
sādhana, the living entity should serve Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
under the guidance of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s eternal sakhīs.
Conceiving oneself as a paramour, one’s aspiration
should be to take birth in the home of a vraja-gopī,
marry a specific gopa and remain a childless gopa-
kiśorī. This kiśorī, whose mood is parakīya-bhāva, is a
female sādhaka with an intense yearning to serve Śrī
Kṛṣṇa under the guidance of Śrī Rādhā. When this bhāva
is perfected, one attains gopī-bhāva.

In his song Dekhite dekhite Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
sings: “vraja-gopī-bhāva, haibe svabhāva, āna-bhāva nā
rahibe — my sole disposition and nature will be that of
a vraja-gopī.”




Text 7

In Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.295) it is described how
the devotee in rāga-mārga is fixed in two kinds of
service moods — one is executed with his external body
(sādhaka-deha) and the other with his internally
contemplated body (siddha-deha):



sevā sādhaka-rūpeṇa

siddha-rūpeṇa cātra hi

tad-bhāva-lipsunā kāryā

vraja-lokānusārataḥ

One who has intense longing to attain rāgātmikā-bhakti
follows in the footsteps of the Vrajavāsīs [such as Rūpa
Gosvāmī] who are devoted to rāga-mārga. With his
external body (sādhaka-rūpa) he should chant and hear
according to the practice of rāgānuga-bhakti, and with
his internally contemplated body (siddha-rūpa) bestowed
upon him by his guru, he should perform service.



śravaṇa-kīrtana bāhye sādhaka-śārīre

siddha-dehe vrajānuga-sevā abhyantare




                          207
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Rāgānuga-bhakti is performed in two ways: (1) with the
external body (sādhaka-rūpa) and (2) with the internally
contemplated body (siddha-rūpa) that is suitable for
carrying out the prema-sevā for which one aspires. With
the external body one should perform service like Śrī
Rūpa, Śrī Sanātana and other eminent Vrajavāsīs. With an
intense desire to obtain one’s cherished object Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, who resides in Vraja, and the sentiments of His
beloved associates (in other words, their affection for
Śrī Kṛṣṇa), one should execute service within the mind
(mānasī-sevā),

following eternal residents of Vraja such as Śrī Rādhā,
Lalitā, Viśākhā and Rūpa Mañjarī.

Because unqualified people are unable to understand the
sādhaka’s transcendental activities and gestures, for
their benefit he practises the rules and regulations of
vaidhī-bhakti with his external body. If such
unqualified people were to imitate the sādhaka’s
transcendental activities, their process of bhajana
itself would become the cause of their entanglement in
material existence. Our previous ācāryas personally
followed rules and regulations just to instruct the
ajāta-rati-sādhakas (those not on the platform of bhāva)
and to enable them to enter into pure bhakti.

The meaning of vidhi-mārga is the practice of the sixty-
four limbs of bhakti, beginning with guru-padāśraya
(taking shelter of the lotus feet of a genuine spiritual
master). By following vidhi-mārga in this way and by the
influence of associating with devotees who are
practising rāga-mārga, intense longing for rāgānuga-
bhakti manifests in the heart and one attains the
qualification to enter that path. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura confirms this in Kalyāṇa-kalpataru: vidhi-mārga-
rata-jane, svādhīnatā ratna-dāne, rāga-mārge karāna
praveśa.

Day and night one should serve Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala in
Vraja in one’s spiritual body (siddha-deha) that has
been revealed by the mercy of śrī guru. The sādhaka,
following Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beloved associates whom he
cherishes in his heart and for whose service he has
developed greed (lobha), should constantly serve the
youthful Divine Couple with an enraptured heart. By
following the mood of one of Kṛṣṇa’s associates who is
amongst His servants, friends, parents or beloveds, and
whose disposition corresponds to his own, the sādhaka
attains affection for Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet. This
affection is of the same nature as the affection of the
associate whom he follows. This is the method of
rāgānuga-bhakti.

Smaraṇa (remembrance) is the primary limb of rāgānuga-
bhakti. In accordance with one’s own internal mood,
smaraṇa, kīrtana and the other limbs of devotion should
be performed in relation to Kṛṣṇa, His pastimes, His
abode, His specific natures and His beloved associates.
Because smaraṇa is predominant in rāgānuga-bhakti, some
persons, who still have anarthas and in whose hearts
genuine attachment to Kṛṣṇa has not yet appeared, make a

                          208
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

deceitful display of solitary bhajana, and considering
themselves rāgānugā devotees, they practise what they
call aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā-smaraṇa. However, Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindhu (1.2.101) quotes from the āgama-śāstras as
follows:

śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi-

pañcarātra-vidhiṁ vinā

aikāntikī harer bhaktir

utpātāyaiva kalpate



If a person violates the regulations mentioned in the
Śruti, Smṛti, Purāṇas and the Nārada-pañcarātra, great
misgivings (anarthas) are produced, even though he may
be engaged in unalloyed devotion to Hari (aikāntikī-
hari-bhakti).



The specific point to be understood in connection with
rasa is that, upon hearing of the sweetness of śṛṅgāra-
rasa and the other transcendental sentiments of the
eternal associates in vraja-līlā, a greed arises to
obtain those same sentiments. At that point, a person is
no longer dependent on the logic of the scriptures that
explain vaidhī-bhakti and he inquires, “How may this
irresistible vraja-bhāva be obtained?” He must then
depend on śāstra, because only śāstra describes the
means by which he can attain it. The scripture that
establishes the method of bhagavad-bhajana is Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam.

There are five kinds of sādhana in rāgānuga-bhakti:

(1) Svābhīṣṭa-bhāvamaya (composed of one’s desired mood)
— When śravaṇa, kīrtana and other such limbs of bhakti
are saturated with one of the primary bhāvas (dāsya,
sakhya, vatsālya or mādhurya), they nourish the tree of
the sādhaka’s future prema. At that time they are called
bhāvamaya-sādhana. When prema manifests, they are called
bhāvamaya-sādhya.

(2) Svābhīṣṭa-bhāva-sambandhī (related to one’s desired
mood) — The limbs of bhakti, including śrī-guru-
padāśraya, mantra-japa, smaraṇa, dhyāna and so on, are
known as bhāva-sambandhī-sādhana. Because the following
of vows on holy days such as Ekādaśī and Janmāṣṭamī
assists the limb of smaraṇa, it is considered partial
bhāva-sambandhī.

(3) Svābhīṣṭa-bhāva-anukūla (favourable to one’s desired
mood) — Wearing neckbeads made of tulasī, applying
tilaka, adopting the outward signs of a Vaiṣṇava,
rendering tulasī-sevā, performing parikramā, offering
praṇāma and so forth are bhāva-anukūla.

(4) Svābhīṣṭa-bhāva-aviruddha (neither opposed to nor
incompatible with one’s desired mood) — Respecting cows,
the banyan tree, the myrobalan tree and brāhmaṇas are

                          209
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

conducive limbs and therefore called bhāva-aviruddha.

The above-mentioned (1—4) kinds of sādhana are all to be
adopted in the performance of bhajana.

(5) Svābhīṣṭa-bhāva-viruddha (opposed to one’s desired
mood) — Nyāsa (mental assignment of different parts of
the body to various deities), mudrā (particular
positions of intertwining the fingers), dvārakā-dhyāna
(meditation on Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes in Dvārakā) and other
such limbs should be abandoned in the performance of
rāgānuga-bhakti because they are opposed to the
attainment of one’s desired bhāva.

The rāga-mārga-sādhaka always follows the Vrajavāsīs; in
other words, he follows Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrī Sanātana
Gosvāmī and Śrī Ragunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, and constantly
practises the process of bhajana shown by them. A rāga-
mārga-sādhaka should always reside in Vraja. If possible
he should reside there physically; otherwise, mentally.

Siddha-rūpeṇa — By the mercy of the spiritual master,
the sādhaka gains the ekādaśa-bhāvas and the five daśās.
He then performs sevā in meditation while being
internally absorbed in these sentiments; that is to say,
he remains absorbed in remembrance of aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā.

The ekādaśa-bhāvas are: (1) sambandha, relationship; (2)
vayasa, age; (3) nāma, name; (4) rūpa, personal form;
(5) yūtha, group; (6) veśa, dress; (7) ājñā, specific
instruction; (8) vāsa, residence; (9) sevā, exclusive
service; (10) parākāṣṭhā-śvāsa, the utmost summit of
divine sentiment, which is the aspirant’s very life
breath; and (11) pālyadāsī-bhāva, the sentiment of a
maidservant.

The five daśās are: (1) śravaṇa-daśā, the stage of
hearing; (2) varaṇa-daśā, the stage of acceptance; (3)
smaraṇa-daśā, the stage of remembrance; (4) bhāvāpanna-
daśā, the stage of spiritual ecstasy; and (5) prema-
sampatti-daśā, the stage in which the highest success of
prema is achieved.

By the mercy of the svarūpa-śakti, the sādhaka receives
a spiritual body appropriate for service to Kṛṣṇa. The
Sanat-kumāra-saṁhitā describes how a sādhaka in
mādhurya-rasa is always absorbed in his internally
contemplated body:



ātmānaṁ cintayet tatra

tāsāṁ madhye manoramām

rūpa-yauvana-sampannāṁ

kiśorīṁ pramadākṛtim

nānā-śilpa-kalābhijñāṁ

kṛṣṇa-bhogānurūpiṇīm

prārthitām api kṛṣṇena,

                          210
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


tato bhoga-parāṅmukhīm

rādhikānucarīṁ nityaṁ

tat-sevana-parāyaṇām

kṛṣṇād apy adhikaṁ prema

rādhikāyāṁ prakurvatīm

prīty anudivasaṁ yatnāt

tayoḥ saṅgama-kāriṇīm

tat-sevana-sukhāhlāda-

bhāvenāti-sunirvṛtām

ity ātmānaṁ vicintyaiva

tatra sevāṁ samācaret

brāhma-muhūrtam ārabhya

yāvat tuṣyān mahāniśi



[Sadāśiva said to Nārada:] O Nārada, contemplate your
svarūpa in the transcendental land of Vṛndāvana amidst
Kṛṣṇa’s beloved damsels, who look upon Him as their
paramour, in the following way: “I am a kiśorī-ramaṇī,
whose beautiful youthful form is full of happiness. I am
skilled in many fine arts that please Kṛṣṇa. I am an
eternal maidservant of Śrī Rādhā, Kṛṣṇa’s most beloved
consort, and I will always be joyful to arrange for Her
meeting with Him. Therefore, even if Kṛṣṇa prays for
union with me, I will do anything to avoid that kind of
meeting because it would not be for Kṛṣṇa’s sense
pleasure, but my own. I am always ready to serve and
attend to Kṛṣṇa’s beloved Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and I have
more affection for Śrīmatī than I do for Kṛṣṇa. Every
day I am devoted to affectionately and carefully
arranging meetings between Śrī Rādhā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Remaining absorbed in the happiness of serving Them, I
will increase Their bliss in that meeting.”



In this way, attentively contemplating one’s svarūpa,
one should impeccably perform mānasī-sevā in the
transcendental land of Vṛndāvana, from brāhma-muhūrta
until midnight.

The word siddha-rūpeṇa in this Text 7 is defined by
Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī as follows: “antaś cintita tat
sevopayogī deha — the internally contemplated body that
is suitable for carrying out one’s desired service.” One
should thus be engaged in service according to one’s
mood and with a body suitable for serving Śrī Kṛṣṇa. One
should serve being absorbed in the ocean of sentiments
of Kṛṣṇa’s beloved associates in Vraja, who fulfil His
innermost desires.

                           211
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


Śrī gurudeva, the desire-tree of the devotees, makes the
siddha-deha appear within the heart of his dear
disciple, and thereafter acquaints him with this siddha-
deha. Having full faith in the guru’s words, the sādhaka
performs bhajana with firm niṣṭhā, and by the mercy of
the hlādinī-śakti, he fully realises his ultimate state
of being. The sādhaka then completely identifies himself
with his siddha-deha and in this perfected form, he
intently engages in the service of his most cherished
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the skilful enjoyer of pastimes (līlā-
vilāsī).




Text 8

Śrīman Mahāprabhu (Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā
1.211)) has described the public behaviour of rāga-
mārga-bhaktas with the following words:



para-vyasaninī nārī

vyagrāpi gṛha-karmasu

tad evāsvādayaty antar

nava-saṅga-rasāyanam



When a woman is attached to a man other than her
husband, she continues to carry out her many household
duties, but within her heart she relishes the new
pleasure of her meeting with her paramour. [Similarly, a
devotee may be engaged in activities within this world,
but he always relishes the rasa of Kṛṣṇa that he has
tasted in the association of devotees.]



para-puruṣete rata thāke ye ramaṇī

gṛhe vyasta thākiyāo divasa-rajanī

gopane antare nava-saṅga-rasāyana

parama-ullāse kare sadā āsvādana

sei rūpa bhakta vyagra thākiyāo ghare

kṛṣṇa-rasāsvāda kara niḥsaṅga antare




Bhajana-rahasaya-vṛtti

In this verse, by using a mundane example, Śrī Caitanya

                          212
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

Mahāprabhu explains both the internal and external
behaviour of the rāga-mārga-sādhaka. A woman who is
attached to her paramour very competently performs her
household duties, but her mind and heart are with her
lover. She remembers their laughing and loving
exchanges, and she relishes the happiness of their
recent meeting. Similarly, the rāga-mārga-sādhaka always
tastes the pleasure of serving Bhagavān within his
heart, even though he seems to be occupied with his
various duties. The opinion of the ācāryas is that
externally one should serve with the physical body, and
internally one should remember Kṛṣṇa’s form, qualities,
pastimes, associates and so forth.

Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura sings: “gṛhe vā vanete
thāke, ‘hā gaurāṅga’ bole ḍāke, narottama māṅge tāra
saṅga — whether a person lives in his home as a
householder or in the forest as a renunciant, as long as
he exclaims ‘O Gaurāṅga!’ Narottama dāsa begs for his
association.”




Text 9

In this state of rāga-mārga-bhajana, the devotee has
affection for places that are dear to Kṛṣṇa, and he
longs to stay in such places. This is described in the
following verse from Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.156):



kadāhaṁ yamunā-tīre

nāmāni tava kīrtayan

udvāṣpaḥ puṇḍarīkākṣa!

racayiṣyāmi tāṇḍavam



O lotus-eyed Kṛṣṇa, when, upon the banks of the Yamunā,
will I chant Your holy names and dance like a madman, my
eyes brimming with tears of love?



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

According to Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmipāda, this is an example
of lālasāmayī-vijñapti made by a jāta-rati-bhakta; that
is, a devotee in whom bhāva has appeared. Lālasāmayī-
vijñapti is a prayer in which such a devotee prays to
attain his desired sevā. Samprārthanātmikā-vijñapti is a
prayer by a sādhaka in whom rati has not yet awakened.
Such a prayer is also full of longing (lālasā), but
bhāva is absent. This Text 9 is a prayer by a devotee on
the path of rāgānuga.

The name Puṇḍarīkākṣa (lotus-eyed) here excites the
devotee’s heart with pastimes related to that name: “Śrī

                          213
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                                5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa’s eyes have become reddish like a lotus due to
sporting with the vraja-gopīs at night in a cottage
situated in a secluded grove on the bank of the Yamunā.
With extreme bliss and joy, in the society of sakhīs I
will describe Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s rasa, His personal beauty and
so on.” This is the mood that manifests. Or, “After
arranging the union of Śrī Kṛṣṇa with my beloved sakhī,
I will dance in a festival of bliss. Being satisfied, my
Svāminī will bless me.” Or, “When Śrīmatī Rādhikā
becomes victorious in water sports (jala-keli-vihāra) in
the Yamunā, I will dance like a madwoman, horripilating,
shivering and with tears in my eyes.”

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura sings:



yamunā-salila-āharaṇe giyā, bujhiba yugala-rasa

prema-mugdha haye pāgalinī-prāya, gāiba rādhāra yaśa



As I go to draw water from the Yamunā, I will understand
the confidential mellows of Yugala-kiśora’s loving
affairs. Like a madwoman captivated by prema, I will
sing Śrī Rādhikā’s glories.




Text 10

Apart from devotees, who desire to love Kṛṣṇa, everyone
else’s hearts are impure and stone-like due to offences.
According to Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.3.24), the emotions
exhibited by such people are artificial:



tad aśma-sāraṁ hṛdayaṁ batedaṁ

yad gṛhyamānair hari-nāma-dheyaiḥ

na vikriyetātha yadā vikāro

netre jalaṁ gātra-ruheṣu harṣaḥ

When a sādhaka performs harināma-saṅkīrtana, the hairs
of his body stand on end and tears of joy begin to flow
from his eyes. But the heart of one in whom such
sāttvika-bhāva transformations do not arise, is not
actually a heart, but a hard thunderbolt.



harināma-saṅkīrtane roma-harṣa haya

daihika vikāra netre jala-dhārā baya

se samaye nahe yāra hṛdaya-vikāra

dhik tāra hṛdaya kaṭhina vajra-sāra

                          214
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017




Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

If someone has been chanting the holy name for a long
time but his heart is not melting, it is certain that he
is a nāma-aparādhī. The holy name is all-powerful
(sarva-śaktimān), but no immediate result takes place in
a heart that is hard like stone. To criticise sādhus or
to commit other such offences obstructs the desired
transformation of the heart. If the obstruction is
ordinary, the utterance of the holy name manifests as a
semblance of the name (nāma-ābhāsa). If the obstruction
is deep, however, then it manifests as nāma-aparādha. In
other words, by offences committed at the lotus feet of
a great personality (mahāpuruṣa), one’s heart becomes
hard like iron, and it is not melted by śravaṇa, kīrtana
and so on.

The external symptoms of a heart that is melted by
harināma are tears, horripilation and so forth. However,
such symptoms are also seen in one whose heart is full
of distress. Rūpa Gosvāmipāda says that occasionally
tears, horripilation, etc. are observed in those whose
hearts are naturally devious. Externally such people
appear to be soft-hearted, but internally their hearts
are actually hard. These symptoms can also be observed
in those who believe they can acquire sāttvika-bhāvas by
determined practice, even without sattva-ābhāsa (the
semblance of sāttvika-bhāvas). Such emotions are never
connected to bhakti.

One will definitely observe the nine symptoms of bhāva,
such as forbearance (kṣānti) and not wasting time
(avyartha-kālatva), in a fortunate person whose heart
has been transformed by the appearance of pure harināma
on his tongue, which is always engaged in service
(sevonmukha). One should therefore understand that
extraordinary forbearance and exceptional attachment to
chanting the holy name are symptoms of a transformed
heart. If an ordinary person, a so-called Vaiṣṇava who
is actually envious, chants the holy name (nāma-
aparādha) for a long time, his heart will not melt. He
cannot perceive the sweetness of the holy name due to
the offences in his heart. The nine symptoms of bhāva,
beginning with kṣānti, may appear to be observed in a
person whose heart is disturbed by aparādha, but his
heart is actually hard like stone and he is worthy of
reproach. However, if that person associates with
devotees, he will gradually pass through anartha-nivṛtti
and come to niṣṭhā, ruci and the other stages. Then, at
the suitable time, the offences hardening his heart will
be removed and his heart may melt. By receiving the
mercy of Vaiṣṇavas and a pure niṣkiñcana, mahā-bhāgavata
guru and practising spiritual life under their guidance,
one will become free from the influence of aparādhas and
anarthas. Finally he will become fixed in vraja-bhāva,
which is filled with rasa, and he will attain the
supreme goal, prema.



                          215
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017




Text 11

In Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta (107) it is said that when attachment
(rati) for the holy name arises, the youthful form of
Kṛṣṇa easily manifests:



bhaktis tvayi sthiratarā bhagavan yadi syād

daivena naḥ phalati divya-kiśora-mūrtiḥ

muktiḥ svayaṁ mukulitāñjaliḥ sevate ‘smān

dharmārtha-kāma-gatayaḥ samaya-pratīkṣāḥ

O Bhagavān, if someone has steady devotion unto Your
lotus feet, he easily perceives Your most charming
divine youthful form. Thereafter, liberation stands
before him with folded hands, and dharma, artha and kāma
also wait for an opportunity to serve him.



bhakti sthiratarā yāṅra brajendra-nandana

tomāra kaiśora-mūrti tāṅra prāpya dhana

kara-yuḍi’ mukti seve tāṅhāra caraṇa

dharma-artha-kāma kare ājñāra pālana




Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The pure name manifests in a person’s heart when he
chants with pure devotees. At that stage bhakti that is
symptomised by prema manifests in his heart as visions
of pastimes (līlā-sphūrtis). When this prema-bhakti
becomes steadfast, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental youthful
form automatically appears in the heart. Although Mukti-
devī is neglected by the devotee, she personally prays
with folded hands for the devotee to accept her service.
Dharma, artha and kāma also wait for the opportunity to
pray to the devotee for service.

The jāta-rati-bhakta inclined towards mādhurya-rasa is
greatly allured by the divine adolescent form of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, whose topmost pastimes of amorous love (sṛṅgāra-
rasa-vilāsa) are displayed at this age. Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 8.189) states:



rātri-dina kuñje krīḍā kare rādhā-saṅge




                          216
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

kaiśora-vayasa saphala kaila krīḍā-raṅge




Day and night Śrī Kṛṣṇa enjoys the company of Śrī Rādhā
in the kuñjas of Vṛndāvana. Thus, His adolescence is
made successful through His pastimes with Her.



The art of amorous sport (rati-kalā), endowed with
cleverness and other qualities, is expressed in the
sweetest way during adolescence (kaiśora). Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu states, “Śrī Kṛṣṇa embarrasses Śrī Rādhā
by revealing to the sakhīs His skill and arrogance
during the previous night’s amorous sports by showing
them how He expertly painted wonderful keli-makarī1 on
Her breasts. In this way Śrī Kṛṣṇa sports in the kuñjas,
making His youth successful.”




Text 12

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.3.30—1) describes the practice of
chanting the holy name at the stage of rati in the
association of pure devotees:



parasparānukathanaṁ

pāvanaṁ bhagavad-yaśaḥ

mitho ratir mithas tuṣṭir

nivṛttir mitha ātmanaḥ

smarantaḥ smārayantaś ca

mitho ‘ghaugha-haraṁ harim

bhaktyā sañjātayā bhaktyā

bibhraty utpulakāṁ tanum



Bhagavān’s glories are supremely purifying. Devotees
discuss these glories amongst themselves and thus
develop loving friendships, feel satisfaction, and gain
release from material existence. They practise sādhana-
bhakti, constantly remembering and reminding each other
of the killer of Aghāsura, Śrī Hari. In this way para-
bhakti, or prema-bhakti, arises in their hearts, and
their bodies manifest ecstatic symptoms such as bodily
hairs standing on end.

bhakta-gaṇa paraspara kṛṣṇa-kathā gāya


                             217
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

tāhe rati tuṣṭi sukha paraspara pāya

hari-smṛti nije kare, anyere karāya

sādhane udita bhāve pulakāśru pāya




Bhajana-rahasaya-vṛtti

Śrī Kṛṣṇa burns up heaps of sins in a moment; therefore
everyone should remember Him and also remind others
about Him. In this way, by continuously following
sādhana-bhakti, prema-bhakti arises in the devotee. Due
to the predominance of prema, the devotee’s body then
displays ecstatic symptoms.

A sādhaka’s duty is to increase his affection for the
svajātīya-bhaktas (like-minded devotees who are more
advanced than oneself and affectionate towards oneself)
with whom he is associating, and to arrange for their
happiness. It is also his duty to give up sense objects
that are unfavourable to bhakti. The pure-hearted
svajātīya-bhakta purifies one’s heart by glorifying Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s qualities. Thus, by cultivating devotion through
processes such as the hearing and speaking of kṛṣṇa-
kathā, bhāva arises in the heart. By hearing, speaking
and remembering hari-kathā, which destroys all
inauspiciousness, the sādhaka enters the perfected stage
(siddha-avasthā).

The special meaning of this verse is that by the
influence of associating with vraja-rasika-bhaktas who
have the same mood as oneself, Bhakti-devī enters the
heart. Hearing such devotees’ hari-kathā with a pure
heart matures a new sādhaka’s impressions of bhakti.

In Prema-bhakti-candrikā it is said:



sādhane bhāviba yāhā siddha-dehe pāba tāhā



Whatever one contemplates in sādhana, one will attain at
perfection.

pakvāpakva mātra se vicāra



The only difference is that in sādhana it is unripe, and
at perfection, ripe.



By the mercy of a bona fide guru, the sādhaka realises
his perfected form (siddha-svarūpa) and receives further
instruction in the method of bhajana.

When like-minded pure devotees (svajātīya-śuddha-

                             218
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

bhaktas) meet, they speak only kṛṣṇa-kathā, thus
becoming overwhelmed by the description of Kṛṣṇa’s form,
qualities, etc. At Ṭera-kadamba and other places, Śrī
Rūpa Gosvāmī and Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī used to become
submerged in aṣṭa-sāttvika-bhāvas when sharing
realisations from their bhajana.

The sādhaka should be careful, though, that on the
pretext of speaking bhagavat-kathā, he does not gratify
his senses with female association, economic gain, fame,
adoration and so forth. The sādhaka should be extremely
cautious in the cultivation of his Kṛṣṇa consciousness
(kṛṣṇānuśīlana), otherwise he will deviate from the
correct path and be cheated of the wealth of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu’s prema.




Text 13

Sometimes the prideless pure devotee preaches nāma-prema
throughout the world by the medium of kīrtana. As stated
in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.6.26):



nāmāny anantasya hata-trapaḥ paṭhan

guhyāni bhadrāṇi kṛtāni ca smaran

gāṁ paryaṭaṁs tuṣṭa-manā gata-spṛhaḥ

kālaṁ pratīkṣan vimado vimatsaraḥ



[While telling his life story, Śrī Nārada said:] Not
feeling shy or embarrassed, I began to chant and
remember the mysterious and auspicious sweet names and
pastimes of Bhagavān. My heart was already free from
longing, pride and envy. Now I roamed the Earth
joyfully, waiting for the right time.



lajjā chāḍi’ kṛṣṇa-nāma sadā pāṭha kare

kṛṣṇera madhura-līlā sadā citte smare

tuṣṭamana, spṛhā-mada-śūnya-vimatsara

jīvana yāpana kare kṛṣṇecchā tatpara




Bhajana-rahasaya-vṛtti

Śrī Nārada engaged himself in the activities of chanting
the holy names and remembering Bhagavān’s confidential
pastimes while he waited for his vastu-siddhi. Pure

                          219
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                                5/5/2017

devotees wholly absorb themselves in chanting the holy
names without a trace of hypocrisy, and they never allow
criticism to enter their ears. They reveal confidential
pastimes of Śrī Rādhā-Govinda, which are filled with
extremely deep prema-vilāsa, to affectionate devotees
who are of a similar disposition (svajātīya-snigdha-
bhaktas). In his poem Vaiṣṇava ke?, Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda states:



kīrtana prabhāve smaraṇa haibe



sei kāle nirjana bhajana sambhava




Smaraṇa, remembrance, will come as a result of
performing kīrtana, and at that time bhajana in
seclusion becomes possible.



Nāma and nāmī are non-different. Upon attaining the
stage of bhāva, a devotee’s material sentiments are
destroyed and he becomes humble, respecting everyone. He
does not expect honour for himself, and giving up any
sense of shyness and inhibition, he performs harināma-
saṅkīrtana. Śrī Nārada is describing this condition in
this Text. Giving up all pride and shyness, he
propagated the chanting of the holy names everywhere.
The topmost devotees preach everywhere for the welfare
of human society. Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Prabhupāda says: “prāṇa āche yāra se hetu pracāra — he
who has life can preach.”

Smaraṇa is a limb of bhakti that is subservient to
śravaṇa and kīrtana. According to Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī,
narrations of the deep and confidential activities of
Bhagavān — that is, His pastimes of vilāsa with His
beloveds — should not be revealed in the presence of
ordinary persons. One should perform smaraṇa and kīrtana
according to one’s qualification.

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 22.157, 159)
states:



‘mane’ nija-siddha-deha kariyā bhāvana



rātri-dine kare vraje kṛṣṇera sevana



nijābhīṣṭa kṛṣṇa-preṣṭha pāche ta’ lāgiyā



                          220
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


nirantara sevā kare antarmanā hañā




The perfected devotee serves Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana day and
night within his mind, in his original, pure, self-
realised position (nija-siddha-deha). Actually, the
inhabitants of Vṛndāvana are very dear to Kṛṣṇa. If a
person wants to engage in spontaneous loving service, he
must follow the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana and constantly
engage in devotional service within his mind.




Text 14

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.3.32) states:



kvacid rudanty acyuta-cintayā kvacid

dhasanti nandanti vadanty alaukikāḥ

nṛtyanti gāyanty anuśīlayanty ajaṁ

bhavanti tūṣṇīṁ param etya nirvṛtāḥ



The transcendental mahā-bhāgavata’s condition is
astonishing. Sometimes he starts to worry, thinking, “So
far I have not had direct audience of Bhagavān. What
shall I do? Where shall I go? Whom shall I ask? Who will
be able to find Him for me?” Thinking like this he
begins to weep. Sometimes he receives an internal
revelation (sphūrti) of Bhagavān’s sweet pastimes, and
he laughs loudly as he beholds Bhagavān, who is endowed
with all opulences, hiding in fear of the gopīs.
Sometimes he is submerged in bliss upon receiving
Bhagavān’s darśana and directly experiencing His prema.
Sometimes, when situated in his siddha-deha, he speaks
with Bhagavān, saying, “O Prabhu, after so long, I have
attained You,” and he proceeds to sing the glories of
his Lord. Sometimes, when he receives Bhagavān’s
affection, he starts to dance, and sometimes he
experiences great peace and remains silent.



bhāvodaye kabhu kāṅde kṛṣṇa-cintā phale

hāse ānandita haya, alaukika bale

nāce gāya, kṛṣṇa ālocane sukha pāya

līlā-anubhave haya, tūṣṇīm bhūta prāya



                          221
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017




Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Upon the appearance of bhāva, the sādhaka’s internal and
external activities become extraordinary. Due to
remembering narrations of Bhagavān, sometimes he cries,
sometimes he laughs, sometimes he dances, sometimes he
displays delight and sometimes, becoming silent, he is
grave. And at other times, in the association of like-
minded devotees, he describes his transcendental
realisations, which are filled with prema.

In the Gambhīrā, Śrīman Mahāprabhu was immersed in many
transcendental sentiments and would reveal them to
Svarūpa Dāmodara and Rāya Rāmānanda. Mahāprabhu’s mind
used to completely drown in the ocean of Śrī Rādhā’s
sentiments and He became as if mad (unmatta), sometimes
losing external consciousness, and sometimes, in ardha-
bāhya-daśā (half internal and half external
consciousness), He would express some of the sentiments
in His heart. While absorbed in a dream (svapnāveśa), He
would become silent, fully absorbed in bliss. Sometimes,
in ardha-bāhya-daśā, He saw Kṛṣṇa, and sometimes He lost
Him. In bāhya-daśā (external consciousness), He was
unhappy to be separated from the jewel He had attained
but had now lost. Sometimes, like a madman, He asked
animals, birds and people, “Where is Kṛṣṇa? Have you
seen Him?” At night, when the atmosphere was calm and it
was time for Rādhikā’s rendezvous with Kṛṣṇa, He could
not keep His composure. As He remembered the rāsa-līlā,
He would become overwhelmed with bhāva and begin to sing
and dance.

In antar-daśā (internal consciousness) there is only
meeting and happiness. Sometimes, while thus absorbed,
Mahāprabhu would say, “Today Kṛṣṇa, surrounded by the
sakhīs, was sporting at Rādhā-kuṇḍa. One sakhī helped Me
behold those vilāsa pastimes from a distance.” When
Mahāprabhu returned to bāhya-daśā, He would say,
“Svarūpa! Did I just say something to you? What? Oh, I
am a sannyāsī named Caitanya!” He then lamented in the
anguish of separation. Remembering Kṛṣṇa’s qualities, He
would clasp the necks of Rāya Rāmānanda and Svarūpa
Dāmodara, and cry with great restlessness. This would
happen every day.

In the stage of bhāva, a sādhaka sometimes cries, “Alas!
Alas! It is impossible for me to obtain kṛṣṇa-prema, so
it is useless for me to remain alive.” Sometimes he
laughs as he remembers a pastime, and he thinks, “Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, who steals the young wives of the cowherd men,
passed the whole night under a tree in the courtyard.
Although He was calling the gopīs in various
intonations, He was defeated by Jaṭilā and Kuṭilā’s
careful guard and interrogation, and He could not attain
the gopīs’ association.” Sometimes a sādhaka becomes
silent and peaceful, concealing the wealth of prema in
his heart. Sometimes, imitating a pastime of Hari, he
dances, and sometimes he speaks in a strange and
incomprehensible way.



                          222
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017




Text 15

Attachment to beholding the beautiful form of the deity
is described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.23.22):



śyāmaṁ hiraṇya-paridhiṁ vanamālya-barha-

dhātu-pravāla-naṭa-veśam anuvratāṁse

vinyasta-hastam itareṇa dhunānam abjaṁ

karṇotpalālaka-kapola-mukhābja-hāsam



He is dark-complexioned like a fresh raincloud, and His
yellow cloth, which defeats the splendour of gold,
shimmers against His body. His head is decorated with a
peacock feather, and every part of His body is
ornamented with designs that are drawn with various
coloured minerals. Sprigs of new leaves adorn His body,
and around His neck is an enchanting forest-flower
garland of five colours. Dressed in this way, He appears
as a fresh, youthful, expert dancer. He rests one hand
upon His sakhā’s shoulder and with the other He twirls a
pastime lotus. His ears are decorated with earrings
(kuṇḍalas), curly locks of hair splash against His
cheeks, and His lotus face blossoms with a gentle smile.



kṣaṇe-kṣaṇe dekhe śyāma, hiraṇya-valita

vanamālā-śikhi-piñcha-dhātv-ādi-maṇḍita

naṭaveśa, saṅgī-skandhe nyasta-padma-kara

karṇa-bhūṣā-alakā-kapola-smitādhara




Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Upon the appearance of rati, attachment arises in the
sādhaka’s heart when he takes darśana of the deity, and
he experiences the splendour of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beauty as
described in this verse. Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s head is decorated
with a peacock feather crown, and His neck is beautified
by a garland of flowers and leaves strung by the vraja-
gopīs. His body is decorated with pictures made with
aromatic minerals from Kāmyavana. Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who
attracts everyone with His smiling face, puts His left
arm around the shoulder of a priya-narma-sakhā, and His
right hand twirls a pastime lotus. The ācāryas explain
that from His twirling of the pastime lotus it can be
understood that Kṛṣṇa’s heart dances like that lotus
when He sees the devotees. Or, the devotees’ hearts

                          223
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                               5/5/2017

dance like the lotus when they see Kṛṣṇa. Here, by His
twirling of the lotus, Śrī Kṛṣṇa expresses the
sentiment, “O fortunate brāhmaṇīs, I am holding your
lotus-like hearts in My hand.” He implies, “Upon
attaining darśana of Me, your hearts dance like this
lotus.” Or, “By accepting your hearts, I will make you
My own.”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa entices all living entities to drink nectar by
attracting them with the sweetness of His beauty. By
this mercy, many kinds of pastimes manifest within the
sādhaka’s heart, and he experiences the happiness of
relishing these pastimes.




Text 16

Also in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.21.5):



barhāpīḍaṁ naṭa-vara-vapuḥ karṇayoḥ karṇikāraṁ

bibhrad vāsaḥ kanaka-kapiśaṁ vaijayantīṁ ca mālām

randhrān veṇor adhara-sudhayāpūrayan gopa-vṛndair

vṛndāraṇyaṁ sva-pada ramaṇaṁ prāviśad gīta-kīrtiḥ



[Seeing Kṛṣṇa through the eyes of bhāva, the gopīs in
pūrva-rāga described His beauty:] Śyāmasundara is
entering the forest of Vṛndāvana accompanied by His
cowherd boyfriends. In His turban there is a peacock
feather; over His ears, a karṇikāra flower; on His body,
a pītāmbara glitters like gold; and around His neck,
extending down to His knees, is a heart-stealing garland
strung with five kinds of fragrant forest flowers. His
beautiful dress is like that of an expert dancer on a
stage, and the nectar of His lips flows through the
holes of His flute. Singing His glories, the cowherd
boys follow from behind. In this way, this Vṛndāvana-
dhāma, which is more charming than Vaikuṇṭha, has become
even more beautiful by the impressions of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
lotus feet, which are marked with the conch, disc and
other symbols.



śikhicūḍa, naṭavara, karṇe karṇikāra

pītavāsa, vaijayantī-mālā-galahāra

veṇu-randhre adhara-pīyūṣa pūrṇa kari’

sakhā-saṅge vṛndāraṇye praveśila hari




                          224
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

With this verse Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī, the crown jewel of
all paramahaṁsas, has drawn an amazing picture of the
sweet form of Kṛṣṇa that manifested in the hearts of the
beautiful damsels of Vraja when they heard the sound of
His veṇu. The vraja-ramaṇīs, filled with deep attachment
for Kṛṣṇa, became overwhelmed upon hearing the sweet
sound of His flute. As they began to describe to each
other the astonishing sweetness of that sound, the image
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in His very beautiful threefold-bending
form (tribhaṅga-lalita), with His playful way of
strolling, His crooked glances, His sweet slight smile
and so on, manifested within their hearts and
overwhelmed them with prema.

Barhāpīḍam — In the middle of the locks of black curly
hair on Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s head there is a peacock feather
crown that looks like a rainbow on a fresh raincloud.
These peacock feathers were a gift from blissfully
dancing peacocks. By wearing this crown on His head, the
dhīra-lalita-nāyaka Kṛṣṇa reveals the hāva, bhāva and
other ecstatic symptoms of His beloveds in an
unprecedented way. The nakha-candrikā, the shining
bluish-green centre of the peacock feather, is a seal of
cleverness in the loving affairs (prema-vidagdha) that
comprise the art of rasa. By wearing a peacock feather
on His head, Kṛṣṇa proclaims the victory of His beloved
Rādhā in the previous night’s pastimes in the pleasure
groves.

Naṭa-vara-vapuḥ — Even the art of dancing (nṛtya-vilāsa)
is defeated by Kṛṣṇa’s playful way of strolling.
Śyāmasundara, the best of dancers, is the
personification of the highest sweetness, which is
beyond comparison. When, accompanied by His cowherd
friends, He follows the cows into the Vṛndāvana forest,
His lotus feet dance in His own natural style, which
shames the art of dancing itself. At the same time, His
jewelled anklebells, golden-coloured pītāmbara, waist
bells and the vaijayantī-mālā on His chest also dance.
His fingers, too, dance upon the holes of His flute in a
unique manner. Kṛṣṇa’s two eyes, which defeat the beauty
of the restless movement of khañjana birds and baby
deer, also dance with various expressions. His makara-
shaped earrings, His black curling tresses and the
peacock feather adorning the top of His head also start
to dance. Thus, He Himself is the unequalled expert
dancer (naṭa-vara) and every part of His body is also a
naṭa-vara.

Karṇayoh karṇikāram — The yellow kanera flower
(karṇikāra) that Śyāmasundara wears on His ears as He
enters the forest increases the incomparable sweetness
of His fresh youth. Rasika-śekhara Śrī Kṛṣṇa wears only
one kanera flower, sometimes on His right ear and
sometimes on His left, thus demonstrating His carefree,
intoxicated youth. He places this flower on the ear that
faces the loving gopīs who stand on the roof-tops, thus
showing them His great affection.

Bibhrad vāsaḥ kanaka-kapiśam — Naṭa-vara Śyāmasundara’s
body, whose dark complexion defeats the colour of fresh

                          225
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

storm clouds, is adorned with a golden-yellow garment
(pītāmbara) which resembles lightning against a
thundercloud. By covering His body with the pītāmbara,
which is similar in colour to the vraja-gopīs’ golden
complexions, He expresses how He feels when being
embraced by them, thus revealing His deep love for them.
On His very broad chest, a vaijayantī-mālā, made from
five kinds of flowers, swings gently and sweetly. Seeing
this, ever-fresh waves of emotion surge in the gopīs’
hearts. These five flowers are like five arrows released
by the gopīs that pierce each and every part of Kṛṣṇa’s
body.

Randrān veṇor adhara-sudhayāpūrayan — When Śrī Kṛṣṇa
covers the holes of the veṇu with His fingers, puts it
to His tender, bud-like lips that defeat the beauty of
ripe bimba fruits, and gently blows into it, a sweet
sound pours from the holes that infatuates the entire
world and enchants all moving and non-moving beings. The
lifeless veṇu becomes alive and stirs the gopīs’ hearts,
stimulating transcendental lust (kāma) within them.
Moreover, when the gopīs see that the veṇu is enjoying
their wealth of the nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s lips (adhara-
sudhā) right in front of them, even though the flute is
male, the sañcāri-bhāva called jealousy (īrṣyā) arises
in their hearts.

In this way, Śyāmasundara plays on His veṇu as He enters
the most pleasant forest of Vṛndāvana. The moment a
stream of the flute’s sweet nectar enters the ears of
the vraja-ramaṇīs, who are endowed with mahābhāva, an
amazing condition arises in their hearts. They become
restless with a strong desire to meet with Kṛṣṇa, and
although they try to conceal this mood, they are
unsuccessful.

A sādhaka who aims to attain the gopīs’ love for Kṛṣṇa
will gradually develop his bhāva-mādhurya by performing
sādhana under the guidance of his spiritual master. When
the stage of bhāva arises, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s form manifests
within the sādhaka’s heart. At this stage the sādhaka’s
mood is similar to that of a gopī. He understands
himself (in his svarūpa) to be a young girl (kiśorī),
and he becomes absorbed in rendering service under the
guidance of the nitya-siddha-gopīs.




Text 17

When the holy name fully manifests, one becomes
enchanted by the deity, who enchants even Himself. In
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.2.12) Śrī Uddhava says to Vidura:



yan-martya-līlaupayikaṁ sva-yoga-

māyā-balaṁ darśayatā gṛhītam

vismāpanaṁ svasya ca saubhagarddheḥ


                          226
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                                5/5/2017

paraṁ padaṁ bhūṣaṇa-bhūṣaṇāṅgam



Through His Yogamāyā potency, Bhagavān appeared in His
transcendental form suitable for His pastimes as a human
being. This form was so beautiful that it not only
enchanted the entire world, but also amazed Bhagavān
Himself. This blessed form is the ultimate summit of
beauty, and His beautiful bodily lustre even embellishes
His ornaments.



martya-līlā-upayogī savismaya-kārī

prakaṭila vapu kṛṣṇa cic-chakti vistāri’

subhaga-ṛddhira para-pada camatkāra

bhūṣaṇa-bhūṣaṇa-rūpa tulanāra pāra




Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

By the influence of His cit-śakti, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa
manifests a completely captivating form appropriate for
His human-like pastimes. The unparalleled beauty of this
form astonishes even Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself. Śrī Kṛṣṇa has
unlimited pastimes as well as unlimited manifestations,
such as: His svayaṁ-prakāśa (personal manifestations)
like Vāsudeva and Saṅkarṣaṇa; His vilāsa-mūrti (pastime
form) Śrī Nārāyaṇa; and His svāṁśa-rūpa (personal
expansions), which are the puruṣa-avatāras (Lords of
creative energy — Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, Garbhodakaśāyī
Viṣṇu and Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu), guṇa-avatāras
(incarnations of the three qualities of nature — Brahmā,
Śiva and Viṣṇu) and āveśa-avatāras (empowered living
entities). Of all these expansions, He Himself (svayaṁ-
rūpa), Śrī Kṛṣṇa of Gokula — who is an ever-youthful and
expert dancer, who is attired in the dress of a gopa and
who holds a flute — is superior and the most attractive.
A single particle of this sweetness fully submerges
Gokula, Mathurā, Dvārakā and even Devī-dhāma.

By His Yogamāyā, Kṛṣṇa manifests Himself in such an
unparalleled form in this material world along with His
most confidential jewel, the eternal pastimes of Goloka
Vṛndāvana. This astonishing nature amazes even Kṛṣṇa
Himself, rendering Him helpless in His attempts to taste
its sweetness. Śrī Kṛṣṇa, complete in the six opulences
of wealth, beauty, fame, strength, knowledge and
renunciation, is situated in His ultimate perfection.
These six opulences are adorned with sweetness and
assume an unprecedented divine beauty.

Ornaments usually    beautify the body, but Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
body enhances the    beauty of His ornaments. His
threefold-bending    form (tribhaṅga-lalita) enhances the
amazing beauty of    His limbs and attracts the hearts of
all. The arrow of    His crooked sidelong glance joined to

                             227
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

the bow of His eyebrows stirs the minds of Śrī Rādhā and
the other vraja-devīs. The Lakṣmīs, proclaimed in the
Vedas to be virtuous and chaste, are also attracted by
His beauty and desire to serve the effulgence emanating
from His toenails. Even though Śrī Rādhā and Her sakhīs
in Vraja worship with their lives, millions of times
over, the moonbeams emanating from Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s toenails,
they eternally keep His moon-like face in the caves of
their hearts.

On the strength of His own cit-śakti, Bhagavān
Kṛṣṇacandra manifests an extraordinary form for His
pastimes in the material world. This form generates
astonishment even in Nārāyaṇa, His vilāsa-vigraha. Even
Kṛṣṇa Himself becomes mad to taste His own sweetness.
Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 4.158) confirms this:
kṛṣṇera mādhurye kṛṣṇe upajaya lobha.




Text 18

Kṛṣṇa’s beauty attracts the hearts of all. Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (9.24.65) describes the Vrajavāsīs’ anger
towards Brahmā for making eyes that blink and thus
obstruct their vision of Kṛṣṇa while they drink the
beauty of His form:



yasyānanaṁ makara-kuṇḍala-cāru-karṇa-

bhrājat-kapola-subhagaṁ savilāsa-hāsam

nityotsavaṁ na tatṛpur dṛśibhiḥ pibantyo

nāryo narāś ca muditāḥ kupitā nimeś ca



The makara-shaped earrings that swing on Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
ears play in the lake of His cheeks, and this splendour
increases even further the beauty of His cheeks. When He
smiles with enjoyment, the bliss that is always present
on His face is augmented. With the cups of their eyes,
all men and women drink the nectarean beauty of His
lotus face. They are never satisfied, however, so they
become angry with Brahmā for creating eyes that blink
and thus obstruct their relish of this sweetness.

subhaga-kapola heri’ makara-kuṇḍala

savilāsa hāsya-mukha-candra niramala

nara-nārī-gaṇa nitya-utsave mātila

nimeṣa-kārīra prati kupita haila



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti


                          228
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī, radiant with joy, began to
describe the sweetness of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beautiful form to
Mahārāja Parīkṣit. When the Vrajavāsīs see this beauty,
they are overwhelmed with prema and their own loving
attachment (anurāga) is unlimitedly amplified, attaining
a delightfulness beyond description. The vraja-sundarīs,
filled with mahābhāva, relish Kṛṣṇa’s extraordinary
beauty (rūpa-mādhurya) to its fullest extent due to
their very thick and deep anurāga. Their sentiments are
on the topmost level, and although there is no higher
position, their transcendental moods keep increasing to
the stage of yāvad-āśraya-vṛtti2. In this state of
anurāga, which cannot be described in words, they
experience nothing but rasa. They attain sva-saṁvedya-
daśā2, which is the ultimate stage of mahābhāva. This
condition is the wealth of the vraja-sundarīs alone.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s cheeks are surrounded by curly locks of hair
and are radiant with divine earrings. An eternal
festival of unprecedented beauty pervades His charming
lotus face. In the centre of this eternal festival, a
gentle, nectarean smile gracefully resides, like an
emperor of the sweetest of all great sweetness. Because
Śrī Kṛṣṇa has attained adolescence (between the ages of
paugaṇḍa and kiśora), happiness, impatience, liveliness
and so forth have appeared on His lotus face, revealing
His restlessness. His white teeth, stained by chewing
tāmbūla, and His reddish lips endowed with a charming
smile, have reached the extreme limit of beauty.

It seems that on the full moon night, the moon rays
remove the burning suffering of all living entities and
give rise to greed in the hearts of the devotee-like
cakora birds. In the same way, when the vraja-devīs see
the unprecedented sweetness of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beauty, their
ocean of kāma increases. Kṛṣṇa’s beauty thus destroys
their consideration of family, caste, religion, patience
and so forth; they become infatuated by His charm and
drown in an ocean of bliss. Constantly swinging makara-
shaped earrings dance on the cheeks of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
gentle, softly smiling face as they embrace and kiss His
cheeks. When the gopīs see this, Śrī Kṛṣṇa appears in
their hearts as dhīra-lalita, a hero expert in amorous
sports. His intention to embrace the vraja-sundarīs and
kiss their breasts is expressed by the kuṇḍalas’
touching and embracing His cheeks.

The gopīs, however, are not thoroughly satisfied by
watching the festival of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s sweetness in this
way. Angry with Brahmā for creating eyelids that
momentarily interrupt their darśana, they curse him.
“Brahmā is not qualified to create. To view such a
beautiful scene he has given only two eyes, and they
even have doors on them in the form of eyelids! After
dying, we will become Brahmā in our next lives and show
how creation should be done. Two eyes alone are not
sufficient to behold such elegance and beauty. The
entire body should have eyes with no eyelids so that we
can have unlimited darśana of Kṛṣṇa without blinking!”

This Text uses the words nāryo narāś ca to indicate that
all men and women drink the nectarean beauty of Kṛṣṇa’s
lotus face. Nāryaḥ means Rādhā and the other gopīs, and
narāḥ means Subala and other priya-narma-sakhās.

                          229
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


Only in Vraja are Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s four unique qualities —
prema-mādhurya, līlā-mādhurya, rūpa-mādhurya and veṇu-
mādhurya — present in their most complete form. For this
reason there is a special importance and a
distinguishing virtue that Vraja-dhāma has over other
dhāmas and that Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Rādhā-ramaṇa and
the vraja-gopikās have over other incarnations.




Text 19

The Creator fashioned Śrī Kṛṣṇa in an unprecedented way,
as described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.2.13):



yad dharma-sūnor bata rājasūye

nirīkṣya dṛk-svasty-ayanaṁ tri-lokaḥ

kārtsnyena cādyeha gataṁ vidhātur

arvāk-sṛtau kauśalam ity amanyata



When the people from all three worlds who were present
at Dharmarāja Yudhiṣṭhira’s rājasūya-yajña beheld
Bhagavān Kṛṣṇa’s form, which is so pleasing to the eye,
they thought that in fashioning this form the Creator
had reached the zenith of his expertise in creating
human forms.



yūdhiṣṭhira-rāja-sūye nayana-maṅgala

kṛṣṇa-rūpa loka-traya-nivāsī sakala

jagatera sṛṣti madhye ati camatkāra

vidhātāra kauśala e karila nirdhāra




Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Uddhava, overwhelmed with kṛṣṇa-prema, is describing the
beautiful form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa to Vidura. “Those who
personally saw Śrī Kṛṣṇa at Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja’s
rājasūya-yajña praised Vidhātā’s (Brahmā’s) skill in
creating by saying, ‘Even the Creator, Brahmā, becomes
wonderstruck upon seeing the splendour of this graceful
body, which eclipses the lustre of a blue lotus or a
sapphire.’”

This Text praises Vidhātā’s creative skill, yet Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s form is eternal, without a beginning.

                          230
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

Nevertheless, for the sake of material perspective,
words like “creation” have been used. Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s form
is perfect, eternal, human-like and beginningless. This
form is manifest in Vṛndāvana and is suitable for human-
like pastimes (nara-līlā). Among all the pastimes
performed by Kṛṣṇa in His different svarūpas in His
various abodes, such as Vaikuṇṭha, His nara-līlā, which
He performs in Vraja like an ordinary human being, is
topmost. He is glorified in three ways according to the
degree to which His qualities are manifest: pūrṇa
(complete), pūrṇatara (more complete) and pūrṇatama
(most complete). His form in which all of His qualities
such as beauty, sweetness and opulence are manifest in
the most complete way is called pūrṇatama, and this form
is manifest in Vṛndāvana. He appears in His most
complete form of Bhagavān only there, because that is
where His associates express the ultimate limit of
prema. In all other places He manifests as either pūrṇa
or pūrṇatara, according to the level to which prema is
developed in His associates of that abode.

In Vraja, Kṛṣṇa manifests as pūrṇatama. In three of the
bhāvas in which He has relationships with the Vrajavāsīs
(dāsya, sakhya and vātsalya), there is an expectation of
only one kind of relationship (for instance, in dāsya
only servitude is expected). Also, there is some
etiquette (maryādā) in the service rendered to Him by
the devotees in these three rasas. But the relationship
the vraja-gopīs have with Śrī Kṛṣṇa is that of lover and
beloved (kānta-kāntā), and their service follows solely
in the wake of their desire for Him. They do not
hesitate to transgress chastity and dignity for the sake
of serving Him and giving Him happiness. Therefore,
kāntā-prema is supreme. Śrī Rādhā is the crown jewel of
all these kāntās and Her love entirely controls Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. By the influence of Śrī Rādhā’s prema, the
pūrṇatama beauty and sweetness of Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra
increase without cessation.




Text 20

The result of having darśana of the deity with deep,
loving attachment (anurāga) is described in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (3.2.14):



yasyānurāga-pluta-hāsa-rāsa-

līlāvaloka-pratilabdha-mānāḥ

vraja-striyo dṛgbhir anupravṛtta-

dhiyo ‘vatasthuḥ kila kṛtya-śeṣāḥ



When the young women of Vraja were honoured by Kṛṣṇa’s
affectionate laughter, joking words and playful glances,
their eyes would become fixed on Him. Their minds would

                          231
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

become so absorbed in Him that they would become unaware
of their bodies and homes, and they would remain
standing as if lifeless — like dolls.



anurāga hāsa-rāsa-līlāvalokane

sampūjita-vraja-gopī nitya-daraśane

sarva-kṛtya-samādhāna antare māniyā

kṛṣṇa-rūpe mugdha-netre rahe dāṅḍāiyā




Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is controlled by prema, casts sidelong
glances at the gopīs as He laughs playfully. At that
time, prema increases in the gopīs’ hearts, and their
desire to enhance Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pleasure awakens. They
make Him eager to meet them by their varieties of
laughing, joking and sulkiness. In response to their
love for Him, Kṛṣṇa runs with an eager heart to pacify
their māna. Controlled by the deeply affectionate prema
of the gopīs, He announces His gratitude by accepting
eternal indebtedness to them.

Unlimited waves enter the ocean of bhāva of the vraja-
ramaṇīs, who are endowed with mahābhāva, and while
attending to their household duties, such as cleaning,
smearing cow dung over the floor and churning yoghurt,
they are always absorbed in remembering Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
different pastimes. The vraja-ramaṇīs’ hearts and senses
become His dedicated followers, and their minds become
imprisoned within His heart. Seeing their activities,
Kṛṣṇa Himself becomes astonished, what to speak of
others.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is extremely attached to the gopīs in many
ways. He prays to them, He spends much time trying to
appease their māna, and He waits at the gate of a kuñja
for permission to enter. At that time, the gopīs feel
content and successful. They drink the splendour of His
beauty and thus become motionless like statues.




Text 21

The mood of absolute opulence assuming the form of
sweetness (mādhurya) is described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(3.2.21):



svayaṁ tv asāmyātiśayas tryadhīśaḥ

svārājya-lakṣmy-āpta-samasta-kāmaḥ

                          232
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


baliṁ haradbhiś cira-loka-pālaiḥ

kirīṭa-koṭīḍita-pāda-pīṭhaḥ



Śrī Kṛṣṇa is Himself the Supreme Lord of the three
potencies (sandhinī, saṁvit and hlādinī). No one is
equal to Him, so who can be greater than Him? All of His
desires are fulfilled by His own transcendental goddess
of fortune (rājya-lakṣmī). Indra and innumerable other
loka-pālas, deities presiding over different regions of
the universe, bring Him varieties of offerings and pay
their obeisances, touching the tops of their crowns to
the footstool on which He rests His lotus feet.



samādhika-śūnya kṛṣṇa triśakti-īśvara

svarūpa-aiśvarye pūrṇa-kāma nirantara

sopāyana-lokapāla-kirīṭa-niścaya

lagna-pāda-pīṭha stavanīya atiśaya




Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The general meaning of the word tryadhīśvara is that Śrī
Kṛṣṇa has innumerable forms and incarnations. He has
unsurpassed opulence. Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Mahādeva are the
lords of creation, but they are under the rule of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, who is the Supreme Lord (adhīśvara) of everyone.

The intermediate meaning of tryadhīśvara is that the
three puruṣa-avatāras — Kāraṇodakaśāyī, Garbhodakaśāyī
and Kṣīrodakaśāyī — are the partial expansions of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s expansion, Baladeva Prabhu. This means that Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Lord of them all.

The essential meaning of tryadhīśvara is as follows. In
the scriptures, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is known to have three places
of residence. One place is His inner quarters, Goloka
Vṛndāvana, where He is eternally present with His
mother, father, friends and beloveds. There Yogamāyā
serves Him as a maidservant. Beneath this Goloka-dhāma
is Paravyoma, also known as Viṣṇuloka. Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
vilāsa-mūrti, Śrī Nārāyaṇa, and unlimited other forms
reside there. This is Kṛṣṇa’s intermediate place of
residence. Below this Paravyoma is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s third
place of residence, called bāhyāvāsa, His external
residence. It is situated in the material realm, across
the Virajā River where countless universes (brahmāṇḍas)
are present like chambers. This place is also called
Devī-dhāma, or Māyā-devī’s dhāma, and the living
entities who are bound by māyā reside there. The
material energy (jagat-lakṣmī), the shadow of the
transcendental goddess of fortune (rājya-lakṣmī),
protects the wealth of this world.

                          233
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Lord of these three places —
Goloka, Paravyoma and the material universes. Both
Goloka and Paravyoma are transcendental and are the
divine opulence (vibhūti) of the cit-śakti. They are
therefore called tripāda-aiśvarya, the opulence
comprising three-quarters of the Lord’s energy. The
vibhūti of māyā, the material universe, is called
ekapāda-aiśvarya. The opulence in Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
transcendental dhāmas is three times that of the
material world. His tripāda-vibhūti (the spiritual
world) cannot be glorified in words. In the unlimited
universes of the ekapāda-vibhūti there are countless
Brahmās and Śivas, and they are called loka-pālas,
eternal maintainers of the order of creation.

Once in Dvārakā, Brahmā came for Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s darśana.
When the doorman went to inform Bhagavān that Brahmā had
come to meet with Him, Śrī Kṛṣṇa asked, “Which Brahmā
has come? What is his name? Go and ask him.” The door-
keeper went back and enquired accordingly. Brahmā became
astonished and said, “Please go and tell Him that the
father of the four Kumāras, Caturmukha Brahmā, has
come.”

When Brahmā reached the threshold of the Sudharmā
assembly hall, he became stunned. The crowd was such
that he could not enter. Millions and millions of
Indras, Brahmās, Śivas and other loka-pālas, each with
heads numbering from eight to thousands, were paying
their prostrated obeisances in front of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
footstool. When their crowns, which were inlaid with
jewels, touched the ground, loud clattering sounds arose
and mixed with sounds of the loka-pālas’ jaya-dhvani
(calls of victory), which resounded in all directions.
Caturmukha Brahmā was like a firefly in the midst of
millions of suns. Suddenly everything disappeared and
the dumbfounded Caturmukha Brahmā stood alone. He was
astonished to see this magnificent opulence of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, and his pride vanished. Ashamed of his offence,
he began to glorify the Lord, praying for forgiveness.
Thereafter, Śrī Kṛṣṇa sent Brahmā on his way.

Tryadhīśvara has another confidential meaning. The word
tri refers to Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s three abodes — Gokula, Mathurā
and Dvārakā. Another name for these abodes is Goloka.
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is naturally and eternally present in these
three abodes, and He Himself is their adhīśvara (Supreme
Lord). Therefore, He is called tryadhīśvara. The
dikpālas, who preside over the ten directions of the
globe of the unlimited material universes, as well as
all the cira-loka-pālas who reside in the coverings of
the unlimited Vaikuṇṭhas, were paying their daṇḍavat-
praṇāmas at Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s footstool.

Svārājya-lakṣmy-āpta-samasta-kāmaḥ — Svarājya-lakṣmī,
the transcendental goddess of fortune, fulfils all Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s desires. He has unlimited pastimes in Vaikuṇṭha
and other abodes, but amongst them all, His human-like
pastimes (nara-līlā) are topmost. In His inner quarters
of Śrī Goloka Vṛndāvana, His opulence (aiśvarya), being
adorned with sweetness (mādhurya), is billions of times
greater than His opulence in Vaikuṇṭha.


                          234
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017




Text 22

It is stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.16.36) that Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s mercy is inconceivable (acintya) and causeless
(ahaitukī):



kasyānubhāvo ‘sya na deva vidmahe

tavāṅghri-reṇu-sparśādhikāraḥ

yad-vāñchayā śrīr lalanācarat tapo

vihāya kāmān su-ciraṁ dhṛta-vratā



[The Nāgapatnīs prayed to Śrī Kṛṣṇa:] O Lord, we cannot
understand what sādhana our husband has performed to
become qualified to receive the touch of the dust of
Your lotus feet. This dust is so rare that to attain it,
even Your wife Lakṣmī gave up all forms of enjoyment for
many, many days and performed austerities according to
rules and regulations.



ki puṇye kāliya pāya pada-reṇu tava

bujhite nā pāri kṛṣṇa kṛpāra sambhava

jāhā lāgi’ lakṣmī-devī tapa ācarila

bahukāla dhṛta-vratā kāmādi chāḍila




Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The astonished wives of Kāliya-nāga are saying, “O
Gokuleśvara, we cannot understand what kind of sukṛti
resulted in this lowly Kāliya attaining Your rare foot-
dust. The supremely gentle and very beautiful Lakṣmī,
who plays on the chest of Śrī Nārāyaṇa, gave up the
association of her husband and observed a vrata in which
she performed severe austerities to attain this dust,
but she was unsuccessful. Prabhu, it is not possible
even for Lakṣmī to have the same fortune as Kāliya and
receive the direct touch of Your lotus feet.”

This Text describes Kāliya’s great fortune. Lakṣmī
desired the association of Nanda-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa in
her body as Lakṣmī. However, Nanda-nandana does not
accept any demigoddess or beautiful lady; the only way
to attain Him is to follow the vraja-devīs and accept
the body and mood of a gopī. Since this was impossible
for Lakṣmī, she could not attain Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s

                          235
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

association. Jīva Gosvāmipāda says that the one-
pointedness of the gopīs was absent in Lakṣmī: aprāpti-
kāraṇaṁ ca gopīvat tad-ananyatābhāva aivati ca.

There can be two reasons why Kāliya attained Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
lotus feet. The first reason is that he had the
association of his wives, who were very good devotees.
The second reason is his residence in the Yamunā, which
is within Vṛndāvana. Due to saṁskāras, impressions, from
his previous lives, he attained both of these, but due
to his offensive inclination, he was indifferent to
them. The dhāma and other transcendental objects do not
manifest immediately before offensive persons. When Śrī
Kṛṣṇa split Kāliya’s hoods with a blow from His dancing
feet, Kāliya’s mouths began to vomit blood. He then
believed the words of his wives, that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
Bhagavān, and surrendered to Him. Kṛṣṇa had merely been
waiting to bestow His mercy upon Him.

Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartīpāda explains in his commentary
to this verse that Kāliya had the seed of bhakti in his
heart due to the association of his wives, who were
devotees, but this seed could not sprout in his hard
heart, which was like barren land due to his offences
and cruelty. By the touch of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s feet, that
barren land became fertile enough for the seed of bhakti
to germinate.




Text 23

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.47.60) states that the vraja-
gopīs’ devotion is topmost:



nāyaṁ śriyo ‘ṅga u nitānta-rateḥ prasādaḥ

svar-yoṣitāṁ nalina-gandha-rucāṁ kuto ‘nyāḥ

rāsotsave ‘sya bhuja-daṇḍa-gṛhīta-kaṇṭha-

labdhāśiṣāṁ ya udagād vraja-sundarīṇām



In the rāsa festival, Śrī Kṛṣṇa embraced the vraja-
sundarīs around their necks with His vine-like arms,
thus fulfilling their hearts’ desires. Even Lakṣmī, who
eternally resides on His chest, does not attain this
mercy. It is also not attained by the most beautiful
girls of the heavenly planets, whose bodily lustre and
fragrance resemble the lotus flower, what to speak of
other beautiful women.



rāse vraja-gopī skandhe bhujārpaṇa kari’

ye prasāda kaila kṛṣṇa, kahite nā pāri


                          236
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

lakṣmī nā pāila sei kṛpā-anubhava

anya devī kise pābe se kṛpā-vaibhava?




Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

With this Text, Śrī Uddhava, desirous of vraja-bhāva and
filled with patience, meekness and humility, offers his
precious puṣpāñjali to the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
beloved vraja-gopīs, the crown jewels amongst His
devotees. These words reveal the glory of the vraja-
sundarīs’ prema. To proclaim that the vraja-gopīs are
worshipful to the entire world, Uddhava says, “Such
unprecedented mercy of Bhagavān has never been seen or
received by anyone else.” Uddhava’s astonishment is
shown in this Text by his use of the exclamation u. In
the festival of rāsa, Śrī Kṛṣṇa joyfully embraced the
vraja-gopīs, putting His arms around their necks and
fulfilling their hearts’ desires. This good fortune was
not even attained by Lakṣmī, who is eternally situated
on His chest. Nor can such fortune be attained by the
beautiful heavenly women, whose excellent bodily lustre
and fragrance are like lotuses, so how can it be
possible for other beautiful ladies?

In his commentary on this Text, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī
raises an argument: “In tattva, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Nārāyaṇa
are non-different, and the most affectionate Lakṣmī-
devī, who sports on the chest of Nārāyaṇa, is His
svarūpa-śakti. She also resides on Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s chest as
a golden line, and she is never separated from Him. Why,
then, are the gopīs’ moods glorified over hers?”

He then resolves this argument: “Although Śrī Kṛṣṇa and
Nārāyaṇa are non-different in tattva, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s unique
pastimes, which are filled with astonishingly excellent
rasa, are embellished with an exceedingly splendid
brilliance. Lakṣmī is only engaged in meeting (sambhoga-
rasa), but the gopīs sometimes engage in meeting
(milana) and sometimes in separation (viraha). Lakṣmī is
Nārāyaṇa’s beloved who sports on His chest (vakṣaḥ-
vilāsinī), but the gopīs are not merely Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
beloveds; they delight in the rasa of amorous pastimes
endowed with paramour love (parakīya-bhāva), thereby
expanding His prema-mādhurya in an unprecedented way.
Vrajendra-nandana Śyāmasundara’s aiśvarya and mādhurya
only manifest in their topmost form when He is with the
vraja-devīs. Eagerly desiring this mādhurya, Lakṣmī also
desires to meet with Kṛṣṇa. However, the gopīs’ one-
pointed, steady devotion is absent in Lakṣmī. In nara-
līlā, Śrī Kṛṣṇa belongs to the caste of gopas, cowherds.
Because He considers Himself a gopa, His beloveds are
naturally daughters of gopas, and only they can be His
beloveds. Śrī Lakṣmī did not want to assume the body of
a gopī. She was unable to take birth in the home of a
gopī, marry a gopa other than Kṛṣṇa for the sake of
entering parakīya-bhāva, associate with the nitya-
siddha-gopīs and give up her identification as a
brāhmaṇī. This is why she was unable to meet with
Kṛṣṇa.”

                          237
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.47.35) it says:



yathā dūra-care preṣṭhe

mana āviśya vartate

strīṇāṁ ca na tathā cetaḥ

sannikṛṣṭe ‘kṣi-gocare



When her lover is far away, a woman thinks of him more
than when he is present before her.



Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura comments on this śloka
as follows: “The lover’s heart is more attracted to the
beloved when she is far from him than when she is living
near him. Due to this, although Lakṣmī perpetually
sports upon Nārāyaṇa’s chest, the glories of her good
fortune are less than those of the gopīs’.”

The rāsa-līlā is the crown jewel amongst all Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
pastimes. Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī says: “rāsaḥ parama-rasa-
kadambamaya-rati-yaugikārtha — the rāsa dance is the
supreme rasa; supreme rasa is that in which there is a
relationship with the supreme object.” The rāsa-līlā
does not take place in this world, nor does it occur in
the heavenly planets. In Dvārakā, where there are 16,108
queens, the rāsa dance is a possibility, but it does not
take place there either. Nor does it take place in
Bhagavān’s other abodes, such as Vaikuṇṭha. The rāsa-
līlā only manifests in Vṛndāvana and the vraja-ramaṇīs
are its participants. The main fountainhead of this
pastime, which is filled with all the consummate
mellows, is Śrī Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī. In extreme joy, Śrī
Śyāmasundara both floats upon and becomes submerged in
the waves of the ocean of prema that are found in the
supreme festival of rāsa-līlā. To protect Himself from
the towering waves of the gopīs’ charming behaviour and
sidelong glances in this vast ocean of prema, He
clutches the gopīs’ necks and rests Himself upon their
breasts.

Being especially insightful, Uddhava foresaw the
marriage of Kṛṣṇa and Rukmiṇī. Rukmiṇī is famous in the
world as Hari-priyā, the beloved of Hari; nevertheless,
she did not attain even a scent of the vraja-gopīs’ good
fortune. How, then, could it be possible for the other
queens of Dvārakā and the heavenly goddesses? The vraja-
devīs are capable of completely controlling Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
The pinnacle of mahābhāva, mādanākhya-bhāva endowed with
samartha-rati (that rati which is capable of controlling
Kṛṣṇa), is the bhāva of Śrī Rādhā only, and She is the
main source of pleasure in mādhurya-rasa. All the other
gopīs are like ingredients for rasa. The words vraja-
sundarīṇām in this Text allude to Śrī Rādhā’s love,
elegance, erudition, virtuous nature, good qualities,
skill in dancing and singing, and great wealth of

                            238
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

beauty.



Text 24

All types of devotees long for gopī-bhāva. This is
explained in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.47.61):

āsām aho caraṇa-reṇu-juṣām ahaṁ syāṁ

vṛndāvane kim api gulma-latauṣadhīnām

yā dustyajaṁ sva-janam ārya-pathaṁ ca hitvā

bhejur mukunda-padavīṁ śrutibhir vimṛgyām



Aho! The vraja-devīs have given up everything that is
difficult to renounce, such as children, family and the
path of chastity, and they have taken shelter of the
path of prema-bhakti to Śrī Kṛṣṇa that is eternally
searched for by the Śrutis. My prayer is that in a
future birth I may acquire a form among the bushes,
creepers and herbs of Śrī Vṛndāvana that receive the
dust of these gopīs’ lotus feet.



dustyajya ārya-patha-svajana chāḍi’ diyā

śruti-mṛgya kṛṣṇa-pada bhaje gopī giyā

āhā! vraje gulma-latā-vṛkṣa deha dhari’

gopī-pada-reṇu ki seviba bhakti kari’?




Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

In the previous Text, Śrī Uddhava described the
excellence of the gopīs’ prema-mādhurya. In his heart he
understands his insignificance and wretchedness, and an
eager longing awakens in him for prema like that of the
gopīs. The only means to attain this prema, which is
unattainable even for Lakṣmī and the queens of Dvārakā,
is to be sprinkled with the foot-dust of the mahābhāva-
vatī gopīs. The exclamation aho expresses the rarity of
the attainment of this prema. The nitya-siddha-gopīs
have natural attachment (anurāga) for Kṛṣṇa, and because
of this deep anurāga, they successfully renounced the
honour given by society for following social etiquette
and so forth, which is very difficult to give up. The
Śrutis and Upaniṣads such as Gopāla-tāpanī are searching
for such kṛṣṇa-anurāga, eagerly desiring to attain it.
Uddhava began to ponder, “It will not be possible for me
to attain such good fortune as the mahābhāva-vatī gopīs,
unless I can somehow obtain the dust of their lotus
feet.” He thus considers himself very fallen and
insignificant, and prays to take birth in Vṛndāvana as a

                          239
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

bush, creeper or herb.

Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartīpāda comments on this in his
Sārārtha-darśanī ṭīkā as follows: “It is because of
their anurāga that the vraja-devīs gave up their
reputation, patience and so forth, and departed in the
middle of the night for a rendezvous (abhisāra) with Śrī
Śyāmasundara. Due to the strength of their prema, they
were helpless and could not consider whether their
decision to leave their family was right or wrong. As
soon as they heard the sound of Śrī Śyāmasundara’s
flute, they were pierced by the arrow of lust (kāma),
and, as if mad (unmādinī), they moved like deer, leaving
the forest path without caring for shrubs, thorns and
sharp grass. At that time, the dust of their feet fell
on the grass, bushes and other vegetation. I can only
receive this dust by one day becoming such grass, a
plant like a creeper, or a bush. Even if I were to beg
humbly for a particle of that dust, they would never
bestow it upon me.”

Uddhava also had a doubt in this regard. “My birth and
mood are not compatible with vraja-bhāva, so why would
the gopīs be merciful to me?”

In this verse, the word caraṇa-reṇu (foot-dust) is
singular, thus indicating the foot-dust of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, the crown jewel of the gopīs.

Mukunda-padavī means “attaining the service of Kṛṣṇa”.
The gopīs always attain this service. Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī
says, “The name Mukunda comes from muktiṁ dadāti, which
means ‘He who gives liberation from one’s hair plait or
waist cloth’.” Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī’s purport of
mukunda-padavī is tad-anurakti-bhajana, or bhajana
imbued with the gopīs’ affection for Kṛṣṇa. The gopīs,
before and after Kṛṣṇa’s cowherding (in pūrvāhna-līlā
and aparāhna-līlā), eagerly watch for Kṛṣṇa’s departure
to and arrival from the pastures. Absorbed in waiting
for Him, they steal His heart and mind by their bodily
gestures and demeanour. Only the gopīs can render this
special service. Actually, the path followed by the
gopīs in serving Kṛṣṇa is the real ārya-patha, the path
of honesty and chastity indicated in the scriptures. The
Vedas enjoin that one should completely give up all
kinds of mundane and transcendental rules for aikāntika-
nirupādhika-prema, love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa that is one-
pointed and free from material designations. To attain
Kṛṣṇa, there is no fault in transgressing the apparent
ārya-patha.

According to another meaning of mukunda-padavī, the
topmost devotees on the path of devotion are none other
than the gopīs.

Sanātana Gosvāmipāda has raised a question in Bṛhad-
bhāgavatāmṛta: “To attain Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Rukmiṇī-devī even
abandoned her own marriage ceremony, which was arranged
by her father. By personally writing a letter to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, offering herself completely to Him and sending it
with the son of her priest, she also abandoned the
honour of being a chaste girl from a noble family. So,
what is the feature that distinguishes the vraja-devīs,
who renounced everything in order to attain Kṛṣṇa, from

                          240
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                                5/5/2017

Rukmiṇī, who gave up her noble family for Him?”

Sanātana Gosvāmī then explains, “The gopīs’ attachment
(rati) to Kṛṣṇa has no cause, whereas Rukmiṇī’s prema
for Him developed after hearing about His name, form,
qualities and so on. From birth the gopīs have natural
love for Kṛṣṇa, and with an extreme eagerness to meet
Him, they abandon their family members and ārya-patha.”

In Prīti-sandarbha Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī says, “This
eagerness reveals their prema as being far superior. The
gopīs’ extraordinary eagerness causes the development of
an amazing power by which ārya-patha is naturally
abandoned.”

The word mukunda in this verse also refers to one whose
enchanting lotus face is like a kunda flower; it also
refers to the dhīra-lalita-nāyaka Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra, who
fully manifests His sweetness in the assembly of the
gopīs.




Text 25

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.47.58) Uddhava mentions that
Brahmā is also distracted upon seeing the mood of the
gopīs:



etāḥ paraṁ tanu-bhṛto bhuvi gopa-vadhvo

govinda eva nikhilātmani rūḍha-bhāvāḥ

vāñchanti yad bhava-bhiyo munayo vayaṁ ca

kiṁ brahma-janmabhir ananta-kathā-rasasya



The gopīs have one-pointed rūḍha-bhāva towards Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, who is the soul of all living entities. This is
the topmost level of kṛṣṇa-prema, and by this, their
lives are successful. This bhāva is hankered for, not
only by fearful persons desiring liberation from this
material existence, but also by great mahāpuruṣas, as
well as devotees like ourselves; but none of us are able
to attain it. For one whose mind is attached to kṛṣṇa-
kathā, the three kinds of birth — seminal, brahminical
and sacrificial — are not necessary; but for one who has
no taste for hearing kṛṣṇa-kathā, what is the benefit of
taking birth, even as Brahmā, again and again for many
mahā-kalpas?



bhava-bhīta muni-gaṇa āra deva-gaṇa

yāṅhāra caraṇa-vāñchā kare anukṣaṇa

se govinde ruḍha-bhāvāpanna gopī dhanya

                          241
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


kṛṣṇa rasa-āge brahma-janma nahe gaṇya




Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

With this verse and others, Śrī Uddhava is praising the
crown jewels of all devotees, the gopīs, who are
worshipped by all. Uddhava is Kṛṣṇa’s dearmost friend.
Seeing the extraordinary prema of the gopīs, he became
astonished and reflected as follows: “Lord Brahmā is
Kṛṣṇa’s son, but is proud of being His son. Śaṅkara’s
nature is one with Kṛṣṇa’s, but he thinks more about his
oneness with Kṛṣṇa than he thinks of bhakti. Saṅkarṣaṇa
has the mood of a brother, and Lakṣmī the mood of a
wife, and these bhāvas are more prominent in them than
the mood of prema. But the gopīs love Kṛṣṇa as their
prāṇa-priyatama, and their love is nirupādhika, free
from any other designation, and has reached the upper
limit of prema. They have rūḍha-bhāva towards
Gokulendra-nandana Govinda.”

Rūḍha-bhāva is prema that is endowed with mādhurya-bhāva
and free from any sense of awe and reverence. It is
affection for Kṛṣṇa without any designation, and it is
paramour bhāva without any expectation. Rūḍha-bhāva
appears in the higher levels of mahābhāva. Rūḍha-bhāva
is mentioned in this verse, but the gopīs actually
attain adhirūḍha-bhāva, which is the final limit of
their mahābhāva. To only mention rūḍha-bhāva limits the
extent of the gopīs’ bhāvas. The vraja-devīs, who are
endowed with adhirūḍha-bhāva, in other words with
mādana, mohana and all other bhāvas, are the very soul
of Govinda. This is the meaning of the words
nikhilātmani rūḍha-bhāvāḥ.

Uddhava starts to contemplate the following: “Govinda is
the condensed form of Svayam Bhagavān Parameśvara.” All
śāstras state that the original, non-dual truth,
Govinda, is the original Person (ādi-puruṣa). Govinda
gives pleasure to the Vrajavāsīs with the sweetness of
His form: “go vindayati iti govinda — Govinda is He who
gives pleasure to the gopas, gopīs and cows.” Go means
one who pervades the senses, and the gopīs pervade the
senses of Govinda. It is a severe offence to ascribe the
moods of ordinary females to the vraja-devīs, who are
not ordinary, but the very embodiments of concentrated
prema.

Vāñchanti yad bhava-bhiyo munayo vayaṁ ca — Those
desiring liberation, munis and others who have attained
liberation and who are fully self-satisfied (ātmārāma),
and even Uddhava, who lives with Govinda, as well as the
Pāṇḍavas, Yādavas, Caturmukha Brahmā and others, are
attracted by the gopīs’ mahābhāva and eagerly desire it.
If one has no taste for hearing narrations about Ananta-
kṛṣṇa, then even birth as Brahmā is useless. There is
even no gain if as Brahmā one performs the act of
creation, or as a brāhmaṇa studies the Vedas, Upaniṣads
and other scriptures, and takes vows, performs
austerities and so on. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī says, “The

                          242
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

life and death of a person who has no taste for hearing
narrations of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s prema-mādhurya are
insignificant and meaningless.” If a person’s mood is
not similar to that of the gopīs, then Kṛṣṇa does not
accept him. He therefore sent the mathurā-brāhmaṇīs back
to their homes, as described in Chapter 23 of the Tenth
Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

Bhuvi — Refers to this Earth, the heavenly planets and
the spiritual world. The only success in these three
worlds is to take the form of a gopī.

Tanu-bhṛto bhuvi — Kṛṣṇa delivers all jīvas from
material existence, even those who are low and
insignificant. He nourishes them accordingly with the
prema of the gopīs, who are situated in His heart. He
propagates prema, He relishes this extraordinary prema
and makes others relish it, and He increases prema in
those to whom he gives it. The name of this potency is
“gopī”.

Uddhava is profusely praising the greatness of the
vraja-devīs in this verse. He also establishes the
superiority of a married gopī’s paramour mood in
comparison to the mood of a husband and wife. This
paramour mood is not possible anywhere else except
Vraja. In paramour love (parakīya-bhāva), rasa is
produced by unprecedented astonishment.




Text 26

Even devotees inclined towards Śrī Bhagavān’s opulence
(aiśvarya) long to attain gopī-bhāva. This is stated in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.44.14):



gopyas tapaḥ kim acaran yad amuṣya rūpaṁ

lāvaṇya-sāram asamordhvam ananya-siddham

dṛgbhiḥ pibanty anusavābhinavaṁ durāpam

ekānta-dhāma yaśasaḥ śriya aiśvarasya



Sakhī, I do not know what austerities the gopīs have
performed to be always drinking the sweetness of Kṛṣṇa’s
form with their eyes. What is the nature of His form? It
is the essence of bodily beauty (lāvaṇya-sāra)! Within
this material existence or above it, there is no beauty
equal to His, what to speak of a greater beauty. He is
not decorated by anyone, nor is He perfected by
ornaments and clothes. Rather, He is perfect in Himself.
While seeing this form, one does not become satiated,
because its beauty increases at every moment. All fame,
beauty and opulence take shelter of it. Only the gopīs
are fortunate enough to have such a darśana of Kṛṣṇa; no
one else.

                          243
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017




yaśaḥ śrī aiśvarya-dhāma durlabha ekānta

atīva-lāvaṇya-sāra svataḥ-siddha kānta

ki tapa karila gopī yāhe anukṣaṇa

nayanete śyāma-rasa kare āsvādana



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

This Text was spoken by the young, beautiful women of
Mathurā in Kaṁsa’s wrestling arena when they had
received darśana of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s unprecedented lustrous
body. Amazed by that form, they yearned to taste it.
They said, “O sakhī, what kind of austerities have the
gopīs performed to be able to fill their eyes with the
extraordinary beauty of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s form? They have made
their birth, body and mind successful. What is this
beauty like? There is no rūpa-mādhurya equal to or
greater than this. In Paravyoma, there are so many forms
of Bhagavān, but even Nārāyaṇa, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastime
expansion (vilāsa-mūrti-svarūpa), does not have such
rūpa-mādhurya, what to speak of other forms.”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beauty is topmost. It is incomparable,
perfect and natural, and it is not brought about by any
kind of ornamentation. In fact, it is both the origin
and treasury of all beautiful, sweet qualities. Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s form, which is filled with unequalled beauty, is
only present in Vṛndāvana, and Vrajabhūmi is blessed
because the original Person (purāṇa-puruṣa) performs
pastimes there in disguise. In this Vrajabhūmi, the
vraja-devīs are especially blessed because they received
darśana of dhīra-lalita-nāyaka Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is adorned
with all beauty and sweetness.

By the word amuṣya, the women of Mathurā note, “Today in
this wrestling arena, by our insignificant piety, we are
receiving Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s darśana, but the gopīs’ piety is
complete. O omniscient munis, please direct us how to
perform austerities like those performed by the gopīs,
so that we also will be able to gaze at Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
sweet form in Vraja.”

Another woman of Mathurā said with amazement, “O sakhī,
the good fortune of the vraja-devīs is not the result of
any austerity; their prema is without cause and cannot
be expressed in words.” If she had said, “We can also go
to Vraja and drink the nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s beauty like the
gopīs,” another lady would have replied, “That is very
difficult for us (durāpam). Only by the mercy of the
gopīs, who possess the topmost prema, is it possible to
drink this nectar.”

Another lady started speaking. “Oh! Before the vraja-
gopīs, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beauty manifests in newer and newer
forms, uninterruptedly, moment by moment.”

The women of Mathurā glorified the good fortune of the

                          244
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                                5/5/2017

vraja-devīs and eagerly desired to have a sevā like
theirs. They used to hear from the fruit-sellers and
others coming from Vraja about the sweet pastimes of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and the vraja-devīs. By hearing descriptions of
these pastimes, a yearning for a sevā like that of the
gopīs arose in their hearts.




Text 27

An introduction to the evening pastimes (sāyaṁ-kālīya-
līlā) is found in Govinda-līlāmṛta (20.1):

I remember Śrī Rādhā who, in the evening, sends many
kinds of cooked foodstuffs with Her sakhīs to Her lover,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and who becomes joyful by taking Kṛṣṇa’s
remnants that are brought back to Her by Her sakhīs. I
remember Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who takes bath upon returning from
cowherding, who is dressed in beautiful attire, and who
is fondly attended in many ways by Mother Yaśodā. He
goes to the cowshed, and after milking the cows returns
home for His evening meal.



śrī-rādhikā sāyaṁ-kāle, kṛṣṇa lāgi’ pāṭhāile,

sakhī haste vividha miṣṭhānna

kṛṣṇa-bhukta śeṣa āni’, sakhī dila sukha māni’,

pāñā rādhā haila prasanna

snāta ramyaveśa dhari’, yaśodā lālita hari,

sakhā-saha godohana kare

nānāvidha pakva anna, pāñā haila parasanna,

smari āmi parama ādare

Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

When Śrī Rādhā sees that evening has come, in Her heart
She becomes very eager and thinks, “Now Kṛṣṇa must have
returned from cowherding!” In the kitchen, She wears a
white dress, and together with Her sakhīs prepares many
kinds of sweets, such as amṛta-keli, karpūra-keli,
candrakānti and modaka. All the preparations are put
into new clay pots and covered with white cloth. She
puts the pots into the hands of Her nitya-sakhīs and
prāṇa-sakhīs to take to Her priyatama in Nanda-bhavana.
The sakhīs depart, and Śrī Rādhā’s mind goes with them.
She thinks, “When My sakhīs reach the house of Nanda,
Maiyā will embrace them to her heart, and she will
remember Me and give Me her blessings. My prāṇanātha,
surrounded by Bābā and the sakhās, will eat these
preparations. I do not know which ones He will like and
which ones He won’t.” In this way, with eyes of bhāva,
Śrī Rādhā has internal darśana of the evening meal. The
sakhīs offer all the preparations to Yaśodā, the queen

                            245
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

of Vraja, who affectionately serves them to Kṛṣṇa,
Balarāma and the sakhās. Cleverly, Dhaniṣṭhā places Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s remnants in the hands of a sakhī and sends them
to Śrī Rādhā, along with information about the location
of Their abhisāra later that night. At that time, Śrī
Rādhā anxiously awaits the sakhīs’ return from Nanda-
bhavana. When they arrive, they describe all the
conversations at Nanda-bhavana and how Kṛṣṇa relished
each preparation. Śrī Rādhā relishes Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
remnants in the same way. The sakhīs are also extremely
happy to take the remnants of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Rādhā.



Thus ends the Ṣaṣṭha-yāma-sādhana,

Sāyaṁ-kālīya-bhajana, of Śrī Bhajana-rahasya.




7 Saptama-yāma-sādhana: Pradoṣa-kālīya-bhajana —
vipralambha-prema (from six daṇḍas of the night until
midnight: approximately 8.30 p.m. — 12.00 p.m.)




Text 1

The internal symptom of devotion at the stage of
perfection (sādhya-bhakti) is worship of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in a
mood of separation. Śikṣāṣṭaka (7) states:



yugāyitaṁ nimeṣeṇa

cakṣuṣā prāvṛṣāyitam

śūnyāyitaṁ jagat sarvaṁ

govinda-viraheṇa me



O sakhī, in separation from Govinda, even a moment seems
like a millennium to Me. Tears pour from My eyes like
torrents of rain in the monsoon season and this entire
world seems void to Me.



udvege divasa nā yāya, ‘kṣana’ haila ‘yuga-sama’

varṣāra meghaprāya aśru varṣe du’ nayana

govinda-virahe śūnya haila tribhuvana

tuṣānale poḍe — yena nā yāya jīvana




                          246
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Śrīman Mahāprabhu is absorbed in Śrī Rādhā’s feelings of
intense separation from Śrī Kṛṣṇa. He says, “Sakhī, in
My distress without Śrī Nanda-nandana My days stand
still. Each and every moment seems like an entire
millennium. Tears flow incessantly from My eyes, like
torrents of rain from the clouds. I cannot tolerate
separation from Govinda anymore. The entire universe
appears void and My body constantly burns in the fire of
separation from Him. It is as if My limbs have been
placed in a fire of burning husks.1 But still, My life
air does not leave Me. What shall I do now?”

Both pūrva-rāga (attachment prior to meeting one’s
beloved) and pravāsa (separation by distance) are
favourable to bhajana in the mood of separation. Rati
(attachment) that is filled with eagerness and which
exists prior to meeting is called pūrva-rāga. When the
gopīs, who are deeply attached to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, hear the
glories of His form, qualities and so forth, many types
of sentiments are stimulated in their hearts and an
astonishing impatience (vyagratā) arises that is
impossible to describe. Those learned in the rasa-
śāstras call this impatience pūrva-rāga. In this state
of pūrva-rāga, various sañcāri-bhāvas arise, such as
longing (lālasā), anxiety (udvega) and sleeplessness
(jāgaraṇa). Texts 2—6, taken from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,
describe the pūrva-rāga of the gopīs.




Text 2

The gopīs praise the flute, which drinks the nectar of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lips. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.21.9) states:



gopyaḥ kim ācarad ayaṁ kuśalaṁ sma veṇur

dāmodarādhara-sudhām api gopikānām

bhuṅkte svayaṁ yad avaśiṣṭa-rasaṁ hradinyo

hṛṣyat-tvaco ‘śru mumucus taravo yathāryāḥ



What pious activities has this flute performed to relish
the nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s lips, which is meant for us gopīs?
He is drinking all the rasa and not even leaving us one
drop. Sakhī, upon seeing the good fortune of the veṇu,
the Yamunā, Mānasī-gaṅgā, and other rivers and ponds
manifest the ecstatic symptom of horripilation in the
form of blossoming lotuses and other flowers. The trees
shed tears of love, delighted to have such a descendant
in their dynasty, just as noble persons are delighted
that a Vaiṣṇava has taken birth in their family.




                          247
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

ohe sakhi! kivā tapa kaila kṛṣṇa-veṇu

gopī prāpya mukhāmṛta piye punaḥ punaḥ

avaśeṣa-jala deya taru aśru-chale

sādhu-putra-prāptye yena pitṛ-aśru gale




Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

One gopī says to another, “O sakhī, I do not know what
kind of highly pious activities this veṇu, a dry piece
of wood, has performed to profusely and independently
relish the nectar of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lips, which is meant to
be enjoyed only by us gopīs. He does not leave even a
drop of this nectar for us. Seeing the good fortune of
this veṇu, Mānasī-gaṅgā and other ponds secretly display
their ecstasy through their blossoming lotus flowers.
When family elders see that one of their descendents is
filled with love for Bhagavān, they shed tears of joy.
Similarly, since the trees have a relationship with the
veṇu, they emit streams of honey, as if shedding tears
of bliss.”

Now the vraja-ramaṇīs, already eager to meet with Kṛṣṇa,
become even more restless. A vision of the sweetness of
Kṛṣṇa’s beauty appears in their hearts, and in this
vision, they see the veṇu on His lips. The gopīs reflect
on the flute’s rare good fortune. “O sakhī, this veṇu
always relishes the nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s association, so
there is no doubt about his extreme fortune. But he has
now become so proud and arrogant that we find it
intolerable. The nectar of Dāmodara’s lips is meant for
the pleasure of the gopikās, but the veṇu considers it
his. Dāmodara was born in the gopa dynasty and so were
we. From childhood we shared deep love for each other.
He is our priyatama, so we alone have full rights to the
nectar of His lips. But this impudent and shameless veṇu
is depriving us of our birthright, and he drinks the
nectar of Dāmodara’s lips just as he pleases. We have
taken birth in the dynasty of gopas, but we are deprived
of the nectar of Gopendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lips. Yet
the veṇu, who has taken birth in the dynasty of inert
trees, constantly drinks that nectar. By doing so, he
challenges us in a manly way.

“The day Yasodā-maiyā bound Kṛṣṇa with rope, He became
famous as Dāmodara, and that very same day we gopikās
began our loving relationships with Him. No one in Vraja
knew anything about the veṇu then. It was when Kṛṣṇa
started taking the cows out to graze that the veṇu’s
relationship with Him began. By this meagre
relationship, the veṇu became the complete heir to the
nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s lips. Even though we gopikās have
loved Kṛṣṇa since childhood, we remain deprived of this
right. Therefore, I say, O sakhī, birth as a veṇu is
higher and more blessed than birth as a gopī.

“Seeing the great fortune of the veṇu, the trees, unable
to contain themselves, become covered with fruits and

                          248
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

flowers and ooze honey. It is as if they become ecstatic
and their hair stands on end upon seeing the supreme
good fortune of their own child, and they shed tears of
love due to pride. And why not? The veṇu is made of
bamboo, and bamboo is considered to be in the family of
trees. Bamboo is nourished by the water of rivers and
ponds, so for the bamboo, this water is actually milk,
and the rivers and ponds are the bamboo’s mothers.
Seeing the rare good fortune of their son, these
mothers, such as the Yamunā, Mānasī-gaṅgā, Pāvana-
sarovara, Māna-sarovara and Kusuma-sarovara, sometimes
laugh by displaying blossoming flowers. Sometimes, in
their great rapture, they express their joy through
their undulating waves, and at other times they shed
tears of happiness.”

In this way the gopīs, endowed with mahābhāva,
deliberate upon the veṇu’s great fortune and on their
own misfortune, and they display envy (asūyā) and other
sañcāri-bhāvas. They say, “In his previous life, this
veṇu must have performed some severe austerity or pious
activity. If we knew what it was, we would do the same
and also attain such rare good fortune. Paurṇamāsī is a
perfected ascetic who knows past, present and future.
Let us go and ask her! By acting according to her
instruction, we will attain that rare good fortune.”

According to Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī, this verse is
spoken by Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Herself, as She reveals Her
bhāvas to Her dear Lalitā Sakhī. Upon analysing the
various statements and indications in this śloka, it is
apparent that this prema is on the level of adhirūḍha-
mahābhāva.




Text 3

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.21.11) describes the good fortune
of the does and their husbands when they hear the sound
of the flute:



dhanyāḥ sma mūḍha-gatayo ‘pi hariṇya etā

yā nanda-nandanam upātta-vicitra-veśam

ākarṇya veṇu-raṇitaṁ saha-kṛṣṇa-sārāḥ

pūjāṁ dadhur viracitāṁ praṇayāvalokaiḥ

O sakhī, when Nanda-nandana Śyāmasundara, wearing
beautiful, multi-coloured attire, vibrates a sweet
melody on His flute, even the does, who are foolish due
to having taken birth from the wombs of ignorant
animals, run towards Him along with their husbands and
gaze upon Him with love-laden eyes. They are not merely
gazing, sakhī, but they are worshipping Him with crooked
sidelong glances from their large lotus-like eyes, and
He is accepting their worship with His own loving
sidelong glance. The lives of these deer are truly

                          249
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

blessed. Sakhī, although we are gopīs of Vṛndāvana, we
are unable to offer ourselves like this because our
family members harass us. How ironic!



kṛṣṇa-citra-veśa svīya cakṣete heriyā

tāṅhāra vāṁśarī-dhvani karṇete śuniyā

pūjāra vidhāna kaila praṇaya-nayane

kṛṣṇa-sāra-saha āja dhanya mṛgī-gaṇe




Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The vraja-ramaṇīs are always restless to meet with
Kṛṣṇa. This restlessness is due to their inability to be
satisfied, which is a natural characteristic of their
prema. They are also unable to steady their minds in any
way. They consider anyone who has even the slightest
relationship with Kṛṣṇa to be extremely fortunate. While
sitting in their homes, the gopīs hear the flute-song of
Govinda, who steals the hearts of all beings in
Vṛndāvana, and they become completely submerged in
prema-rasa. With eyes of bhāva, they see the does in the
forest not only abandon grazing when they hear the sound
of the veṇu, but abandon caring for their offspring and
everything else as well. These does dash towards Kṛṣṇa
with great speed, stopping so close to Him that He can
touch them with His hands.

The gopīs express their moods in a concealed way
(avahittha-bhāva). One says, “O sakhī, just see the
affection that these does, from the animal kingdom, have
for Kṛṣṇa. Indeed they are blessed! We, on the other
hand, who have taken birth as human beings, are deprived
of taking such darśana and performing such sevā, which
are a human being’s right. This is the frustration of
our lives.”

In autumn Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa, beautifully
decorated in marvellous attire suitable for roaming in
the forest, enters Vṛndāvana to herd the cows and
blissfully plays enchanting notes on His flute. At that
time, the does become content by seeing the sweet form
of Śyāmasundara, who steals the hearts of everyone in
the universe, and by hearing the sound of His flute. One
sakhī begins to speak, saying, “When the does hear the
sound of prāṇanātha Śyāmasundara’s flute, they become
senseless and proceed towards Him, staggering and
stumbling. At that time, their husbands, the kṛṣṇa-sāra
deer, follow behind them, accepting the guidance of
their wives. In this way, no obstacle prevents the does
from meeting with Kṛṣṇa.” Kṛṣṇa-sāra means that Kṛṣṇa
alone is the essence of their lives.

Hearing this, another sakhī says, “O friend, this is
really true! Where is our such fortune? We are females
and the wives of other men, so we cannot abandon the

                          250
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

fear of public opinion. When Śyāmasundara goes
cowherding on the path that runs by our homes, we can
only get darśana of Him through the holes in the
latticed windows. For this only, our family members
abuse us and create obstacles for us. Our husbands are
also disapproving. Birth as a deer is more fruitful than
birth as a human.”

The vraja-devīs’ longing to meet with Kṛṣṇa increases
more and more. Eagerness (utkaṇṭhā) and longing (lālasā)
to meet Kṛṣṇa are very helpful for a sādhaka.

Praṇayāvalokaiḥ pūjāṁ dadhau means that the does
lovingly look upon Kṛṣṇa with their very beautiful eyes,
which serve as lamps to perform ārati to Him. Kṛṣṇa
reciprocates by accepting their worship.

In Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī defines praṇaya
as the state in which the hearts of both the hero
(nāyaka) and heroine (nāyikā) become one. The hearts of
the does are one with Kṛṣṇa’s heart, and therefore the
gopīs have used the word praṇayāvalokaiḥ. With these
glances, the does offer their bhāvas as flowers and
other articles to worship Kṛṣṇa. In this Text, the
sweetness of the vraja-devīs’ paramour love is expressed
through metaphors.




Text 4

Hearing the sound of the veṇu, all the rivers stop
flowing and worship Kṛṣṇa’s feet with lotus flowers.
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.21.15) states:



nadyas tadā tad upadhārya mukunda-gītam

āvarta-lakṣita-manobhava-bhagna-vegāḥ

āliṅgana-sthagitam ūrmi-bhujair murārer

gṛhnanti pāda-yugalaṁ kamalopahārāḥ



Hearing the song of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s veṇu, the Yamunā,
Mānasī-gaṅgā and other rivers have become deluded by
lust (kāma). Their hearts’ desires for love cause many
whirlpools to surface and they stop flowing. Bringing
lotuses as gifts with their arm-like waves, they embrace
Madana-mohana and place His lotus feet on their breasts.



āhā! nadī kṛṣṇa-gīta śravaṇa kariyā

śroto-vega phirāila mohita haiyā

urmi-chale kṛṣṇa-pada āliṅgana kaila


                          251
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

o pada-yugale padma upahāra dila




Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Hearing the sweet sound of Kṛṣṇa’s veṇu, the vraja-
devīs, who are attached to Kṛṣṇa with profound love
(kṛṣṇa-anurāgiṇī), have become overwhelmed with prema.
They started speaking with sakhīs from their own groups
about the effects of the sound of the flute (veṇu-nāda)
and other such topics. With metaphors, they describe how
lifeless rivers exhibit transformations of love upon
hearing the sweet sound of Kṛṣṇa’s veṇu. Although it is
not possible for rivers to experience any feeling, the
vraja-ramaṇīs, who are endowed with mahābhāva and
controlled by its astonishing nature, do not consider
whether a being is sentient or insentient, and they
ascribe their own respective bhāvas everywhere they
look. Whatever mood and relationship an uttama-adhikārī
devotee has with his worshipful deity (iṣṭadeva), Śrī
Bhagavān, that same mood and relationship is seen by him
to exist in all living entities. This is described in
Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 8.273—4):



mahā-bhāgavata dekhe sthāvara-jaṅgama

tāhāṅ tāhāṅ haya tāṅra śrī-kṛṣṇa-sphuraṇa

sthāvara-jaṅgama dekhe, nā dekhe tāra mūrti

sarvatra haya nija iṣṭa-deva-sphūrti




While roaming in the charming Vṛndāvana forest, Nanda-
nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa arrives at the banks of the Yamunā or
Mānasī-gaṅgā, where he hears the sweet murmur of water,
sees the beautiful lotus flowers floating on high waves,
hears the sounds of cuckoo birds on the river banks, and
is pleasantly touched by a gentle, fragrant breeze.
Overwhelmed with immense elation, He plays a sweet
melody on His muralī. Upon hearing it, the river stops
flowing, and on the still waters of her breast,
unlimited whirlpools appear. Gradually the water of the
river rises to the height of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s chest. The
repeated crashing of waves causes the lotus flowers to
break from their stems and present themselves at Kṛṣṇa’s
lotus feet.2

Upon seeing these whirlpools in the rivers, the gopīs
are unable to conceal their own bhāvas. One says, “O
sakhī, hearing our prāṇakānta’s flute-song, this river
is affected by lust (kāma) and has become senseless. His
face is all-pleasing. It is radiant, fragrant, soft,
sweet and attractive to the heart, like a kunda flower.
This is why He is called Mukunda. With His soft,
delicate lotus face, He relishes kissing, the biting of

                          252
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

lips and other transcendental mellows of union. When
these mellows are relished, all kinds of obligations are
cut and, due to an increase in kāma, He observes with an
agitated heart the gopīs’ lotus-navels, which look like
whirpools.”

Another vraja-devī says, “When the rivers see Mukunda’s
sweet beauty and hear the ascending and descending waves
of sound from His veṇu, both of which enchant the whole
universe, their hearts become afflicted with kāma. Now
they have reversed their flow with great force, and
instead of moving towards their husband, the ocean, they
flow towards Kṛṣṇa. Their arm-like waves rise up higher
and embrace Murāri’s chest.”

There is a reason why the gopīs call Kṛṣṇa “Murāri”.
They say, “We have taken shelter of Śrī Nanda-nandana,
who has all the qualities of Nārāyaṇa, the destroyer of
the Mura demon. It is very sad, however, that we are
always tormented by kāma, or Cupid. Although the killer
of Mura is aware of this, He makes no arrangement to
punish māra, or kāma (lust). Śrī Nārāyaṇa has become
famous as Murāri by killing the demon Mura, thus making
the demigods fearless. In the same way, if Kṛṣṇa
destroys māra, He will become famous as Murāri and will
be recognised as having the same qualities as Nārāyaṇa,
otherwise not. With māra destroyed, we vraja-ramaṇīs
will also breathe a sigh of relief.”

Āliṅgana-sthagita — The waves of the rivers move closer
and closer to Kṛṣṇa’s chest and upon reaching it, they
fall to ripple at His lotus feet. Seeing this, the
gopīs, whose hearts are filled with loving attachment
for Kṛṣṇa, say, “O sakhī! Look, look! At first these
anurāgī rivers were trying to bind Śyāmasundara in the
bond of their embrace, but seeing His indifference, they
have become ashamed. They have stopped trying to embrace
Him and are again offering lotus flowers at His feet
with their arm-like waves.”

Upon observing the behaviour of the Yamunā and other
rivers, the vraja-ramaṇīs express various bhāvas. Seeing
how the moods of Śrī Yamunā and Mānasī-gaṅgā are one
with those of the gopa-ramaṇīs is an unprecedented
darśana.




Text 5

Giri-Govardhana becomes blissful by the touch of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s and Śrī Balarāma’s lotus feet, and he worships
them with various articles. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.21.18)
states:



hantāyam adrir abalā hari-dāsa-varyo

yad rāma-kṛṣṇa-caraṇa-sparśa-pramodaḥ

mānaṁ tanoti saha-go-gaṇayos tayor yat

                          253
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


pānīya-sūyavasa-kandara-kandamūlaiḥ



O sakhīs, this mountain, Govardhana, is the crown jewel
of Hari’s servants. Blessed is his fortune! By the touch
of the lotus feet of our prāṇa-vallabha Śrī Kṛṣṇa and
Baladeva Prabhu, who is most pleasing to the eyes,
Govardhana is blossoming with delight and supplying
crystal-clear water, soft grass, wonderful caves and
varieties of roots. By thus serving Śrī Kṛṣṇa and
Balarāma, who are surrounded by the cowherd boys and
cows, he highly honours them.



haridāsa-varya ei giri-govardhana

rāma-kṛṣṇa pada-sparśe sukhe acetana

sakhā-dhenu-saha kṛṣṇe ātithya karila

pānīya-kandara-kandamūla nivedila




Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The vraja-devīs, who are the embodiments of mahābhāva,
say, “If anyone can be said to be the topmost devotee,
it must be Girirāja. In a variety of ways he serves our
prāṇa-vallabha and the cowherd boys and cows who
accompany Him. We do not have the strength of kṛṣṇa-
prema, and therefore we are weak (abalā). This Girirāja,
however, is the proprietor of kṛṣṇa-prema. Let us go,
sakhī. We should bathe in Mānasī-gaṅgā, do parikramā of
Girirāja, take darśana of his presiding deity, Śrī
Harideva, and worship him. Then the desires we have long
held in our hearts will be fulfilled. Even though
attainment of the wealth of prema is extremely rare,
Girirāja will give some of it to us. O sister, we want
to touch priyatama Śyāmasundara’s chin and talk to Him.
It is so frustrating that we are unable to talk with
Him, what to speak of render direct service to Him.

“Just look! Girirāja becomes ecstatic by the touch of
Kṛṣṇa’s limbs as Kṛṣṇa climbs upon his body, and one can
easily see his ecstatic sentiments, such as tears,
horripilation and perspiration. The appearance of grass
is horripilation, the humidity is his perspiration and
the waterfalls are his tears. Moreover, Kṛṣṇa also
receives pleasure by sporting on Govardhana’s body and
performing pastimes there. Having seen all this, we do
not have even the slightest doubt that Girirāja-
Govardhana is haridāsa-varya, the topmost servant of Śrī
Hari.’’

That servant who delights Śrī Hari with his service, and
who receives the greatest happiness by rendering that
service to Him, is topmost among Śrī Hari’s servants. In
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, three great personalities are called

                          254
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

haridāsa: Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, Śrī Uddhava and Śrī
Girirāja-Govardhana. Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira accepts Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, who is the Supreme Absolute Truth and fully
independent, as his intimate friend, and he serves Him
lovingly in the mood of a servant (dāsya), a friend
(sakhya) and a parent (vātsalya).

Śrī Uddhava, the second haridāsa, became Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
messenger and went to Vraja to console Kṛṣṇa’s parents
as well as the vraja-ramaṇīs and other Vrajavāsīs. Upon
seeing the symptoms of the gopīs’ high class of prema,
Śrī Uddhava became astonished. He not only realised the
glories of the gopīs’ foot-dust, he also expressed a
desire to take birth in Vraja as grass, a shrub or a
herb. He fulfilled this desire at the most magnanimous
Girirāja-Govardhana, by taking birth in Girirāja’s lap
near Kusuma-sarovara as a blade of grass, but still he
was unable to serve the Vrajavāsīs as Girirāja does.

Girirāja is haridāsa-varya, the topmost servant of Hari.
Why? Because he fulfils all the needs of Kṛṣṇa and the
Vrajavāsīs. He serves Kṛṣṇa and His companions, the
cowherd boys and cows, with his body, mind, wealth and
very life, sacrificing everything to satisfy all of
their inner hearts’ desires. He offers them the pure,
cool, sweet drinking water of Mānasī-gaṅgā and other
sarovaras, very tasteful fruits and roots to eat,
varieties of flowers and red minerals for decoration,
jewelled seats and beds, precious stones to use for
lamps and mirrors, and well-adorned caves and kuñjas for
resting and playing. And he offers nutritious grass and
plants to the cows. Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His beloveds relish
very confidential pastimes in the beautifully decorated
groves and caves of Girirāja, who is expert in
performing the topmost service in śṛṅgāra-rasa. Because
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s confidential nikuñja-līlās take place
inside and upon his body, so as to not disturb these
confidential pastimes he has permanently assumed the
stationary form of stone.

In this way, the gopīs lavishly praise Girirāja-
Govardhana upon seeing the many kinds of services he
renders to Kṛṣṇa.




Text 6

Upon hearing the sound of Kṛṣṇa’s flute, moving living
entities acquire the nature of the non-moving, and non-
moving entities acquire the nature of the moving.
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.21.19) states:



gā gopakair anu-vanaṁ nayator udāra-

veṇu-svanaiḥ kala-padais tanu-bhṛtsu sakhyaḥ

aspandanaṁ gati-matāṁ pulakas tarūṇāṁ

niryoga-pāśa-kṛta-lakṣaṇayor vicitram

                          255
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017




O sakhīs, the elegance and charm of the two brothers,
our Śyāmasundara and Gaurasundara Balarāma, are quite
unique and wonderful. When Śyāmasundara, together with
His cowherd friends, leads the cows from one forest to
another by sweetly playing a melody on His veṇu, He
binds the top of His turban with the niryoga rope, which
is used for binding the legs of calves, and from His
shoulders (like His pītāmbara) hangs a rope known as
pāśa. Upon seeing that sweet, unparalleled beauty and
hearing the sound of the veṇu, moving living entities,
such as animals and birds, as well as rivers — and what
to speak of human beings — become inert like stone. And
ecstatic symptoms like horripilation are displayed in
non-moving entities, such as trees. Sakhī, how can I
describe the magical sound of that flute?



sakhā-dhenu-saṅge kṛṣṇa udāra-svabhāva

muralīra gāne sabe deya sakhya-bhāva

jaṅgame karila spandahīna, tarugaṇe

pulakita kaila aho! vicitra lakṣaṇe

hena kṛṣṇa nā pāiyā prāṇa pheṭe yāya

kabe sakhi! vidhi kṛṣṇa dibena āmāya




Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The beautiful women of Vraja, being filled with
mahābhāva, reflect, “All the moving and non-moving
entities of Vṛndāvana are blessed. Their lives are
successful because, regardless of their form, they have
attained the touch of Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet, or else they
have attained some kind of relationship with Him. In the
whole of Vraja, only we are unfortunate.” As the vraja-
ramaṇīs speak, the pastime of Kṛṣṇa taking the cows to
graze in the forest and the melodious sound of His veṇu
manifest in their hearts. Now they become completely
immersed in ecstatic rapture, as if seeing Kṛṣṇa
directly.

Overwhelmed with prema, they say, “Look sakhī! How sweet
are the movements of Śyāmasundara, the best of dancers,
as He gracefully roams from one forest to the other. The
sweet sound of His flute causes all moving and non-
moving living entities to become overwhelmed with the
ecstasy of prema, and they visibly manifest aṣṭa-
sāttvika transformations.”

Furthermore, the gopīs say, niryoga-pāśa-kṛta-lakṣaṇayor
vicitram. “Aho! What a beautiful sight are the two
brothers, Rāma and Kṛṣṇa, as They walk into the forest
wearing the niryoga and pāśa on Their bodies.” While the

                          256
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

cows are being milked, with a rope their restless calves
are tied before them to a post in the ground. In this
way, their mothers can see them. This rope is called
niryoga. Another rope, pāśa, binds the two hind legs of
a restless cow to keep her calm while being milked. The
niryoga and pāśa used by Śrī Kṛṣṇa are made of soft,
yellow threads of jute, tied at either end with clusters
of pearls. Like the other gopas, Kṛṣṇa ties the niryoga
to the top of His turban and lets the pāśa hang from His
shoulders onto His chest. His attire is so fascinating
that anyone who sees it cannot help being charmed, and
the mere sight of it renders the prema-filled gopa-
ramaṇīs unconscious.

They continue, “O sakhī, in Vidhātā’s creation there is
no living entity who will not be charmed by the sight of
the sweetness of Rāma’s and Kṛṣṇa’s beauty, which
attracts the entire universe. When Kṛṣṇa plays a melody
on His enchanting muralī to gather together the cows who
are far away, the condition He creates is difficult to
describe. When the tinkling of the ankle bells on
Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet mixes with the inexpressibly
melodious sound of His captivating muralī, the sweetness
of that sound increases even more. Is there any person
who can remain composed upon hearing this?”

While discussing Kṛṣṇa’s enchanting cowherd attire and
the sound of His flute, the vraja-ramaṇīs, who are
helplessly immersed in prema, say, “Sakhī, upon seeing
Kṛṣṇa’s niryoga and pāśa, it seems that they really are
niryoga-pāśa — through them, yoga (meeting) is certain
to take place uninterruptedly, for one’s whole life.
Even continuous samādhi-yoga is insignificant compared
to this. Kṛṣṇa’s niryoga-pāśa are really prema-pāśa,
ropes of love. The Vrajavāsīs and the vana-vāsīs (forest
entities) are rendered helpless by His niryoga-pāśa.
This demonstrates the amazing effect of these ‘ropes of
love’.’’ In this way, the gopīs consider Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
niryoga-pāśa to be a trap of love.

Hearing the sound of Kṛṣṇa’s flute, all the moving
living entities of the forest, such as the deer and
birds, are overwhelmed by prema and become inert. The
trees, creepers and other non-moving living entities
give up their natures and adopt the characteristics of
moving beings. They become jubilant and experience
ecstatic symptoms. Furthermore, the Yamunā, Mānasī-gaṅgā
and other rivers stop flowing, and the stones on
Govardhana and other mountains melt and flow like
streams.




Text 7

The sentiments of Śrī Rādhā in pravāsa (separation by
being out of sight) are most favourable to meditate upon
for the sādhaka who, immersed in these sentiments,
should read chapters from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam such as
Bhramara-gīta. Śrī Mādhavendra Purī has expressed Śrī
Rādhikā’s bhāvocchvāsa, outburst of feeling that
expresses the bhāva hidden in the heart, at the time of

                          257
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                                5/5/2017

pravāsa (Padyāvalī (334)):



ayi dīna-dayārdra nātha he

mathurā-nātha kadāvalokyase

hṛdayaṁ tvad-aloka-kātaraṁ

dayita bhrāmyati kiṁ karomy aham



O You whose heart is most merciful to the wretched! O
Master! O Lord of Mathurā! When will I have Your
darśana? O Lord of My life, because I cannot see You, My
heart has become agitated. What shall I do now?



he dīna-dayārdra-nātha, he kṛṣṇa mathurā-nātha,

kabe punaḥ pāba daraśana

nā dekhi’ se cāṅdamukha, vyathita hṛdaye duḥkha,

he dayita! ki kari ekhana?



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

As the Kaustubha jewel is the topmost of all jewels,
this verse is foremost among rasa poetry. Śrī Svāminī
spoke it in the state of divyonmāda (divine madness),
when She was deeply aggrieved in separation from Kṛṣṇa,
and by Her mercy it manifested in the speech of Śrī
Mādhavendra Purīpāda. Then, accepting the mood of Śrī
Rādhā, Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra relished this verse as Śrī
Gauracandra. No fourth person has ever tasted its inner
moods. Uttering this verse, Śrīman Mahāprabhu would
become overwhelmed by prema and faint. Thus maddened by
prema, sometimes He would run here and there, sometimes
He laughed and sometimes He danced. He was unable to
utter more than “ayi dīna, ayi dīna” due to absorption
in ecstatic love (premāveśa). Tears would flow from His
eyes, and sāttvika, vyabhicārī and other bhāvas appeared
in His body in their blazing state (sūddīpta). (This is
described by Śrī Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī in Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 4.191—203).)

Śrīman Mahāprabhu is the gardener of the desire tree of
kṛṣṇa-prema. He distributes the fruits of this tree and
also relishes them Himself. Śrī Mādhavendra Purī, whose
heart was saturated with kṛṣṇa-prema, was the very first
sprout of this desire tree. With Śrī Īśvara Purī, this
sprout of prema-rasa grew. The gardener, Śrī Caitanya
Himself, also manifested as the trunk. Previous to Śrī
Mādhavendra Purīpāda there was no rasamayī-upāsanā,
devotional service in amorous love, in the Madhva
sampradāya. Through the ideas expressed by the
Tattvavādīs whom Śrīman Mahāprabhu met while travelling
in South India, one can understand that worship in the

                             258
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

Madhva sampradāya used to be performed only in a mood of
awe and reverence (aiśvaryamayī-upāsanā).

Various sañcāri-bhāvas manifest in the state of
separation (viraha) and agitate the ocean of prema.
Humility (dainya), envy (asūyā) and contrariness (māna)
due to jealousy appear in the heart and nourish the
sthāyibhāva. Many kinds of sañcāri-bhāvas arise in Śrī
Rādhā’s heart when She is submerged in the ocean of
separation from Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Bhāva-utpatti (the generation
of a bhāva), bhāva-sandhi (the meeting together of two
bhāvas, either of the same or different types), bhāva-
śābalya (the clashing of many bhāvas, in which one bhāva
suppresses another and becomes prominent) and bhāva-
śānti (pacification of an extremely powerful bhāva)
create waves in this ocean of separation.

Rādhā, who is mad in separation (viraha-unmādinī),
addressed Kṛṣṇa in extreme humility: “Ayi dīna-dayārdra-
nātha! O Kṛṣṇa, You are very simple-hearted and
affectionate. It is You who remove the sorrows of the
residents of Vraja, so please bestow Your mercy upon Me.
You give mercy to all living entities, thus protecting
them from all distress, so why will You not give mercy
to Me, who am separated from My master? If You do not
bestow Your mercy upon Me, Your reputation as ‘He who
removes the distress of the residents of Vraja’ will
become disgraced. Only You are My beloved.” This is why
the word nātha, meaning “master”, is used in this śloka.

In this ocean of separation, though, there is a towering
wave that represses this feeling of humility (dainya)
and manifests the mood of envy (asūyā) and contrariness
(māna) due to jealousy. Now Śrī Rādhā addresses
Śyāmasundara as Mathurānātha, “the Lord of Mathurā”. “O
Mathurānātha, why would You be merciful to us now? How
can You remember us while You are in Mathurā, where
hundreds of affectionate, beautiful ladies serve You?
Surely You have forgotten us milkmaids. Since You are
receiving so much honour from the fabulously opulent
kings of Mathurā, how can You have time to remember us
wretched persons? By the association of Mathurā’s
Yādavas, Your heart has also become hard. Why would it
melt upon seeing the condition of us gopīs, who are
distressed in separation?”

Speaking thus, Śrī Rādhā becomes momentarily stunned,
and the sañcāri-bhāva of dainya again appears. She says,
“O beloved (dayita)! O Śyāmasundara, You are more dear
to us than our own lives. How can we forget Your loving
dealings? When we would become tired during the rāsa
dance, You would wipe away our drops of perspiration
with Your own pītāmbara. And if our kuṅkuma stained the
pītāmbara, You would lovingly hold it to Your heart.
When You left us You said, ‘I will return.’ With this
assurance we remain alive. But having to wonder whether
You will return or not confuses us, so please give us
some consolation. Our hearts are intensely restless to
see Your moon-like face.”

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura writes that the topmost
bhajana is to follow the vraja-devīs’ moods of
separation from Śrī Kṛṣṇa.


                          259
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017




Text 8

Agitated by separation from Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the gopīs blame
Vidhātā (Providence). Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.39.19)
describes:



aho vidhātas tava na kvacid dayā

saṁyojya maitryā praṇayena dehinaḥ

tāṁś cākṛtārthān viyunaṅkṣy apārthakaṁ

vikrīḍitaṁ te ‘rbhaka-ceṣṭitaṁ yathā



O Vidhātā, you are the arranger of everything, but there
is not even a trace of mercy in your heart. First you
unite living entities in this world in friendship and
love, but before they can fulfil their desires and
hopes, you pointlessly separate them while they are
still unsatisfied. The truth is that, like the play of a
child, this whimsical behaviour of yours is useless.



vidhātaḥ he! nāhi dayā kichu-i tomāra

maitra-bhāve praṇayete, dehī-dehī-saṁyogete,

kena eta kaile avicāra?

akṛtārtha-avasthāya, viyoga karile hāya,

bālakera ceṣṭā e vyāpāra



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The vraja-devīs, whose hearts have been seized by Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, are distressed in fear of impending separation
from Him. They have heard that Akrūra has come with a
chariot to take their prāṇakānta Śyāmasundara to
Mathurā. Tormented by the fear of future separation, the
vraja-devīs, speaking to like-minded gopīs, express
their own special sentiments of love and afflictions of
separation, and in doing so reveal the helplessness of
their prema.

“Śrī Kṛṣṇa is going to Madhupurī!” Hearing this, the
lustre of Bhadrā’s lotus face and the lotus faces of the
other taṭasthā-gopīs3 withered and became dejected.
Śyāmalā’s and other suhṛt-pakṣā-gopīs’ dresses, belts,
hair and so on loosened. In samādhi, Candrāvalī, who is
vipakṣā, began to see Śrī Govinda in her heart, which
was lost in meditation. The crown jewel of all the
vraja-gopīs, mahābhāva-vatī Śrīmatī Rādhikā, other

                           260
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

svapakṣā-gopīs like Lalitā and Viśākhā, and other
beloveds of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, envisioned in their hearts their
prāṇa-priyatama’s various prema-vilāsa — His behaviour,
dealings, laughter, glances and so forth. Then,
overwhelmed by the deep pain of separation from Him,
they began to weep.

In different groups the gopīs express their own
innermost feelings according to their prema. Together in
each group, they voice the deep pain of separation: “If
our life-airs leave our bodies due to the pain of
separation from Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Vidhātā is solely
responsible. O Vidhātā, you rule the entire universe
very well, but is there no arrangement for compassion in
your kingdom? If you had ever just once contemplated
justice or injustice, you would not be so harsh. You
arrange for the meeting and separation of living beings
according to a mere whim. You also establish
affectionate friendships between jīvas, but only for a
moment do you let them relish the happiness of meeting
before You again submerge them in an ocean of
separation. You are heartless and cruel, and we are
witness to this. Your behaviour is like that of an
ignorant child who makes toys and then afterwards
destroys them. Therefore, O Vidhātā, you are not only
merciless, unscrupulous and inconsiderate, you are also
wicked. Your present behaviour is highly contemptible.
First, you created the form of our prāṇakānta Mukunda,
who embodies all beauty, sweetness and charm, and who
charms the entire universe, and then you granted us
darśana of that form, by which our hearts experienced
boundless love. However, after placing this
unprecedented form before our eyes, you again removed it
and took our prāṇakānta far away. Such deceit is not
proper; only a wicked person acts like this. Why do you
behave sinfully even though you are so wise and learned?
Are you not committing the sin of taking back that which
you have given?”




Text 9

For a person attached to Kṛṣṇa, even a moment of
separation from Him is intolerable. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(10.39.29) states:



yasyānurāga-lalita-smita-valgu-mantra-

līlāvaloka-parirambhaṇa-rāsa-goṣṭhyām

nītāḥ sma naḥ kṣaṇam iva kṣaṇadā vinā taṁ

gopyaḥ kathaṁ nv atitarema tamo durantam



Sakhīs, by His captivating, affectionate smile, sweet,
intimate conversations, playful glances and loving
embraces, the long, long nights of the rāsa-līlā passed

                          261
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

in a moment. Indeed, how can we now overcome the
boundless anguish of separation from Him?



anurāga-vilokita, valgu-mantra-sulalita,

smita-āliṅgana rāsa-sthale

brahma-rātra kṣane gela, tabu tṛpti nā haila,

ebe kṛṣṇa-viraha ghaṭila

gopīra emana dina kemane yāibe

duḥkhera sāgare ḍūbe prāṇa hārāibe



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

When Śrī Kṛṣṇa was about to depart for Mathurā, the
vraja-gopīs, who were distressed by the fear of imminent
separation from Him, began to lament and reproach
Vidhātā (Providence) in various ways. They said, “Today
cruel (krūra) Vidhātā has arrived in Vraja, bearing the
name Akrūra (not cruel). We gave up our families and
religious principles, and offered our everything unto
the lotus feet of our prāṇakānta Śyāmasundara. Now what
will happen to us? Oh! Destiny is unfavourable to us!
There is no means of protection from this.”

Another gopī said, “O sakhī, today we shall give up all
shame and hesitation; we will somehow put a stop to
Govinda’s journey. Seeing our boldness and independence,
all of our relatives will be displeased, our family
elders will not tolerate our shamelessness and our
family friends will punish us, threaten us with death,
or forcibly evict us from our homes. But sakhī, we have
already given up the attachment to home and bodily
relationships. If we are put out of our homes, it will
be auspicious for us, because then we will easily attain
the company of Govinda. We shall give up our homes and
roam here and there with Him. Even if they punish us
with death there will be no loss, because it is better
to die than be separated from Govinda. If they lock us
in our homes we will die happily, meditating on Govinda.
Therefore sakhī, why wait? Go quickly! Do not delay in
putting a stop to Govinda’s journey.”

While Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beloveds lamented in the burning heat
of separation, they fell unconscious. At that time,
happy memories of meeting began to awaken in their
hearts, where the previous night of rāsa manifested. Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s gentle, sweetly smiling and loving lotus face,
His affectionate, charming conversations and His
affectionate, strong embrace manifested on the screen of
their hearts, and that night seemed to pass very slowly.
The thought of being deprived of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s sweet
company, the pain of separation, seemed like countless
forest fires. The gopīs lamented, “How can we cross this
ocean of suffering? How can we remain alive in
separation from our prāṇakānta? In the afternoon, when
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, surrounded by the cowherd boys, returns home

                             262
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                                5/5/2017

from the forest, the beauty of His face is
unprecedented. The indescribable sound of the muralī and
His sidelong glances stir our hearts. His face, which is
covered by the dust that has been raised by the cows’
hooves, His curly locks of hair, the extraordinarily
beautiful garland of forest flowers around His neck, and
His sidelong glances all reveal His love-filled desires.
How can we forget all our loving exchanges?”

That day Śrī Kṛṣṇa prepared to go to Mathurā, leaving
the gopīs behind. Who can express their deep anguish?
When the time for departure came, the barrier of their
patience broke and they all assembled, loudly expressing
the great pain in their hearts by incessantly wailing,
“O Govinda! O Dāmodara! O Mādhava!”




Text 10

Śrī Rādhā’s strong expressions of separation from Śrī
Kṛṣṇa are described in Haṁsadūta (2):



yadā yāto gopī-hṛdaya-madano nanda-sadanān

mukundo gāndhinyās tanayam anurundhan madhu-purīm

tadāmāṅkṣīc cintā-sariti ghana-ghūrṇāparicayair

agādhāyāṁ bādhāmaya-payasi rādhā-virahiṇī

Upon the request of Akrūra, Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra, who
gladdens the gopīs’ hearts, departed Nanda-bhavana for
Mathurā. Now separated from Her lover, Śrī Rādhikā
became greatly agitated and was completely submerged in
a river of anxiety, which was full of deep whirlpools of
unlimited suffering.



gopikā-hṛdaya-hari, vraja chāḍi’ madhupurī,

akrūra-sahita yabe gelā

tabe rādhā virahiṇī, ghana-ghūrṇa-taraṅgiṇī,

cintā-jale agādhe paḍilā



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

In his book Haṁsadūta, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmipāda gives an
incomparable description of the vraja-ramaṇī’s feelings
of separation (vipralambha-rasa) that resulted from Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s residing in a distant place (sudūra-pravāsa). In
śṛṅgara-rasa, vipralambha-rasa is most relishable. Śrī
Rūpa Gosvāmipāda has enabled rasika devotees to dive
deep into the ocean of vipralambha-rasa by writing about
the waves of separation that arose in all the limbs of

                           263
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

Śrī Rādhā’s body, Her incoherent conversations in
divyonmāda, and Her sorrowful speech, which were all due
to blazing (sūddīpta) sāttvika transformations.

The very bliss of the vraja-gopīs’ hearts, Śrī Nanda-
nandana, was taken to Mathurā by Akrūra, whose name
means “not cruel”. Actually, however, Akrūra was
supremely cruel, and as a consequence, all the gopīs
drowned in a bottomless ocean of separation (viraha).

One day the crown jewel of the gopīs, the
personification of mahābhāva, Śrī Rādhā, overwhelmed by
feelings of separation from Kṛṣṇa, went to the bank of
the Yamunā with Śrī Lalitā and other sakhīs to soothe
Her affliction. However, just by again seeing the kuñjas
where Their playful pastimes took place, Śrī Rādhā
fainted, distressed by the burning fire of that
separation. The sakhīs lifted Her up and laid Her on a
bed of lotus petals. Śrī Lalitā fanned Her with the end
of her veil and the sakhīs chanted the names of Kṛṣṇa.
By fanning Her and anointing Her with cooling sandalwood
paste, they tried to bring Her back to consciousness.

Impatient, Śrī Lalitā went to bring Her cool water from
the Yamunā. There, she saw an extremely beautiful,
white, male swan. An inspiration arose in her to send a
message to prāṇa-vallabha Śrī Kṛṣṇa about the incidents
that were destroying the life of her dear sakhī, Śrī
Rādhā. She understood that this male swan (haṁsa) would
be a suitable messenger (dūta), and she politely
petitioned him to go to Mathurā. While describing the
main road, she remembered previous pastimes with Kṛṣṇa.
She mentioned these pastimes to the swan, thus making
him thoroughly understand all the sufferings in Śrī
Rādhā’s heart, which was overwhelmed by separation from
Kṛṣṇa.

After Śrī Kṛṣṇa departed for Mathurā with Akrūra, Śrī
Rādhā became submerged in a fathomless ocean of anxiety.
She began to think, “Shall I protect this life-air,
which is burning in the fire of agony, by binding it
with the rope of hope? Or, shall I liberate My body from
this rope? As Prāṇanātha left Vṛndāvana, He said,
‘Āyāsya iti dautyakai — I will return the day after
tomorrow.’ But the day after tomorrow has been replaced
with many years, and we still have not received news
that He is coming. Shall I give up that hope and choose
death by entering fire or the waters of the Yamunā?”

Śrī Rādhikā further reflected, “When prāṇakānta
Śyāmasundara returns from Mathurā and does not find Me
here, He will become so distressed. So what shall I do?
My intelligence is perplexed. If My prāṇanātha cannot
see Me, He also will be unable to remain alive. What
shall I do? If I die, I will not see My priyatama’s
soft, delicate lotus face which resembles a kunda
flower. But I am unable to remain alive, as I am burning
in separation. That Lord of our lives has not abandoned
us; therefore, it is only right that I protect My life.”
In this way, Śrī Rādhā was submerged in the boundless
ocean of separation, in whirlpools of thoughts filled
with pain. The vraja-sundarīs’ yearning to meet Kṛṣṇa is
a transformation of their prema. It increases
unlimitedly, exuding a wonderful sweetness.

                          264
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017


Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmipāda follows Śrī Rādhā’s bhāvas and
becomes one with them. He taunts Akrūra by using the
word gāndhinī-tanaya, the son of Gāndhinī, which has a
double meaning. Akrūra took birth from the womb of
Gāndhinī, the daughter of the king of Kāśī. He stayed in
her womb for twelve years, which caused her much pain.
His father asked, “O child, why are you not taking
birth? Why are you making your mother suffer like this?”

The child in the womb replied, “Father, if you give one
cow to each brāhmaṇa every day, I will take birth after
one year.” His father gave the cows as requested, and
after one year, the child took birth. The Purāṇas state
that a son who is named after his father or his paternal
grandfather is blessed, but that son who is known by his
mother’s name is wretched. In this Text, Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmipāda indicates Akrūra’s cruel nature by making
him known through his mother, not his father. The Viṣṇu
Purāṇa describes that Akrūra’s mother gave her family
suffering, anxiety and worry. Consequently, Akrūra,
having the same qualities as his mother, threw the gopīs
and Vrajavāsīs into a limitless ocean of grief.

This Text expresses cintā (anxious consideration)
aroused in the state of udghūrṇā in mohana-mahābhāva.
Cintā is one of the ten stages of pravāsa-vipralambha.




Text 11

The ten conditions of viraha, separation, are described
in Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi:



cintātra jāgārodvegau

tānavaṁ malināṅgatā

pralāpo vyādhir unmādo

moho mṛtyur daśā daśa



Ten conditions arise in viraha: (1) cintā (anxious
consideration), (2) jāgara (sleeplessness), (3) udvega
(agitation), (4) tānava (emaciation of the body), (5)
malināṅgatā (discolouring of bodily limbs), (6) pralāpa
(incoherent speech), (7) vyādhi (being stricken with a
tormenting ailment), (8) unmāda (madness), (9) moha
(bewilderment) and (10) mṛtyu (death, or being
unconscious for a long time). At the stage of mohana, an
extraordinary condition manifests in Śrī Rādhā, in which
She experiences extreme anguish of separation from
Kṛṣṇa.



jāgara, udvega, cintā, tānavāṅga-malinatā,

                          265
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                               5/5/2017


pralāpa, unmāda āra vyādhi

moha, mṛtyu, daśā daśa, tāhe rādhā suvivaśa,

pāila duḥkha-kulera avadhi




Text 12

While Śrī Rādhā suffers from the scorching poison of
viraha, She expresses Her transcendental emotions, as
described in Jagannātha-vallabha-nāṭaka (3.9):



prema-ccheda-rujo ‘vagacchati harir nāyaṁ na ca prema vā

sthānāsthānam avaiti nāpi madano jānāti no durbalāḥ

anyo veda na cānya-duḥkham akhilaṁ no jīvanaṁ vāśravaṁ

dvi-trīṇy eva dināni yauvanam idaṁ hā hā vidhe kā gatiḥ



Śrī Hari does not understand the pain of separation in
prema. In fact, prema does not know anything about who
is deserving of itself and who is not. Kāmadeva also
torments us, knowing us to be weak. It is impossible for
anyone to understand another’s misery. Life is so
fleeting — it has no certainty — and youth remains only
two or three days. Alas! Alas! What kind of arrangement
of Vidhātā (the Creator) is this?



sakhī bale dhairya dhara, āsibe nāgara-vara,

vyākula haile kivā phala

rādhā bale ohe sakhi, patha āra nāhi lakhi’,

prema-ccheda roga ye bāḍila

latā vāṅcāite hari, nā āsila madhupurī,

prema nā bujhila sthānāsthāna

niṭhura kānura preme, pa’ḍe gelāma mahābhrame,

madana tāhāte hāne bāṇa

duḥkha nā bujhila sakhi, jīvana cañcala lakhi,

tāte e yauvana-śobhā yāya

āra ki nāgaramaṇi, e braje āsibe dhani,

hā hā vidhi! ki habe upāya


                             266
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                                 5/5/2017



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda gives the following description in
his Jagannātha-vallabha-nāṭaka. Once Śrī Rādhā and Her
sakhīs entered the Vṛndāvana forest. The sakhīs began to
describe the sweetness of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beauty with verses
appropriate for pūrva-rāga, such as so ‘yaṁ yuvā yuvati-
citta-vihaṅga-śākhī (Jagannātha-vallabha-nāṭaka (1.50)).
Śrī Kṛṣṇa spotted Rādhā from a distance and They both
became extremely restless to meet each other. Rādhā sent
a love-letter to Śrī Kṛṣṇa through Śaśimukhī Sakhī.
Although Śrī Kṛṣṇa became overwhelmed with emotion upon
reading it, He concealed His emotion and disrespected
Rādhā and the gopīs with words of indifference: “It is
improper for women from good families to forsake their
family honour to love Me like this.”

Śaśimukhī returned to Śrī Rādhikā, and relating all this
to Her, advised Rādhā to place Her attention elsewhere.
This made Śrī Rādhā attain an unbearably severe state of
viraha, and She conveyed Her sentiments in this Text 12.
Śrī Rādhā said to the gopī Madanikā, “Attracted by the
incomparably beautiful form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, I was unable
to remain patient, so I sent a letter to Him. O sakhī,
what was My fault in doing that? He is certainly
crooked, as His sole intention was to give Me a
punishment equal to death. First He attracted Me with
the sweetness of His form and now He is rejecting Me. O
sakhī, you may ask, ‘Why do You feel affection for Śrī
Kṛṣṇa when He is very competent in killing women?’ but
what can I say? Hā hā vidhe kā gatiḥ. It is very
difficult to understand why Vidhātā gives a particular
punishment to a particular person. I loved Kṛṣṇa for
pleasure, but instead of Vidhātā giving Me pleasure, he
gave Me sorrow, and because of this My life-air is now
leaving Me.” This is also described in Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 2.20) as follows:



sakhi he, nā bujhiye vidhira vidhāna

sukha lāgi’ kailuṅ prīta, haila duḥkha viparīta,

ebe yāya, nā rahe parāṇa



O sakhī, I do not understand the regulative principles
given by the Creator. I loved Kṛṣṇa for happiness, but
the result was just the opposite. I am now in an ocean
of distress. It must be that I am now going to die, for
My vital force no longer remains. This is My state of
mind.



Śrī Rādhā continues, “Sakhī Madanikā, the movement of
prema is crooked, like that of a snake, and it is
foolish. It does not consider whether the place is
suitable or unsuitable, or if the object is fit or
unfit. This prema moves in a crooked way and has tied My

                           267
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

hands, feet and neck with the ropes of that wicked one’s
beauty and virtues. I am unable to untie that knot.”

Śrī Rādhā is so captivated by Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s qualities that
it is impossible for Her to abandon the hope of meeting
Him. Her condition is similar to that of a person who
relishes the sweetness of hot sugarcane so much that he
cannot give up chewing it, even if his mouth is burning.
Moreover, She says, “Observing My helpless condition,
Madana (Cupid) torments Me with his five arrows, thus
exhausting My entire body.”

The sakhī says, “O Rādhā, take revenge on Kāmadeva
(Cupid).”

Rādhā answers, “O sakhī, Kāmadeva has no body, so how
can I retaliate? He tears My body asunder with His five
arrows, causing Me agony, but these arrows do not take
away My life.”

“Svāminī, since Śrī Kṛṣṇa is an ocean of mercy, He will
certainly bestow mercy upon You. Have patience.”

Śrī Rādhā replies, “Dvi-trīṇy eva dināni yauvanam idam.
Life is momentary. Who can remain alive until then? The
life-span of the living entity in a human body is one
hundred years, but youth only lasts a few days. Without
youth, how will I serve Him? My youth only is the cause
of His happiness.”

In reality, Śrī Rādhā is the eternal beloved of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. She is not an ordinary māninī, a woman who has
been offended by Her lover — She is the personification
of viśuddha-sattva. By her power, Yogamāyā has
manifested these pastimes on the surface of the Earth
for the purpose of accomplishing Kṛṣṇa’s nara-līlā. Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 4.29—30) confirms this
with the following words:



mo-viṣaye gopī-gaṇera upapati-bhāve

yoga-māyā karibeka āpana-prabhāve

āmiha nā jāni tāhā, nā jāne gopī-gaṇa

duṅhāra rūpa-guṇe duṅhāra nitya hare mana

The influence of Yogamāyā will inspire the gopīs with
the sentiment that I am their paramour. Neither the
gopīs nor I shall notice this, for our minds will always
be entranced by one another’s beauty and virtues.




Text 13

Śrī Rādhā’s condition of udvega, anxiety, in separation
from Śrī Kṛṣṇa is described in Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta (42):



                          268
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                               5/5/2017


kim iha kṛṇumaḥ kasya brūmaḥ kṛtaṁ kṛtam āśayā

kathayata kathām anyāṁ dhanyām aho hṛdayeśayaḥ

madhura-madhura-smerākāre mano-nayanotsave

kṛpaṇa kṛpaṇā kṛṣṇe tṛṣṇā ciraṁ bata lambate



What shall I do now? To whom shall I speak? What is the
purpose of holding on to the futile hope of receiving
His darśana? Please speak about something better. Aho!
But how can I possibly stop talking about He who is
contained within My heart? His gentle, sweet smile is a
festival for the mind and eyes. My longing to see this
form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa increases moment by moment.



ebe bala ki kariba, kāre duḥkha jānāiba,

deha dhari kṛṣṇera āśāya

kaha anya kathā dhanya, yāte citta suprasanna,

sakhi! tāhā nā haibe upāya

kṛṣṇa hṛde śu’ye āche, mṛdu madhu hāsiteche,

mano-nayanera mahotsava

kṛṣṇa lakhibāra āśā, mane kaila cira vāsā,

se āśā kṛpaṇā asambhava



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

A variety of sentiments are arising in Śrī Rādhā’s
heart. While in this state of bhāva-śābalya (the
clashing and jostling of many different bhāvas, in which
one bhāva suppresses another and becomes predominant),
Śrī Rādhā says, “O sakhīs, what shall I do in this state
of misfortune? I do not know how I will attain the
darśana of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. To whom shall I express this
heart-breaking anguish? In this state of separation from
Kṛṣṇa, your condition is similar to Mine, so who in
Vraja can I tell about the condition of My heart?”

A moment later, Śrī Rādhā conceals Her bhāva-śābalya and
says (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.8.44)): “‘Āśā hi paramaṁ
duḥkham — hope itself is the consummate giver of
sorrow.’ For many days I have sat and waited, hoping
that Kṛṣṇa would soon come, but so far He has not
arrived. Now it is appropriate to give up that hope.”
Here the sañcāri-bhāva called mati (resolve or wisdom)
has arisen, after which amarṣa (intolerance or
indignation) appears. Śrī Rādhā then says, “O sakhīs,
abandon talk about ungrateful Kṛṣṇa! Please tell Me
about something else.” As She says this, Kṛṣṇa manifests
to Her internal vision. Wounded by the arrow of kāma,

                             269
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

She becomes restless like a deer pierced by an arrow,
and the bhāva of amarṣa becomes covered by the
appearance of trāsa (fear). Distressed, She cries, “Oh,
what suffering! Kṛṣṇa is lying in My heart and looking
at Me with His sidelong glance, which is imbued with a
sweet, gentle smile. This glance, full of laughter, is a
great festival for the eyes and minds of all vraja-
ramaṇīs.”

Suddenly this bhāva disappears, and great distress and
remorse are aroused in Her heart. Again She laments,
saying, “Sakhī, what shall I do? You tell Me to be
patient, but how can I be patient? The hope of receiving
Kṛṣṇa’s darśana resides in My mind, but this seems to be
merely a vain hope that is fit to be abandoned.” While
lamenting in this way, autsukya-bhāva (ardent desire)
again arises. Restless in separation from Kṛṣṇa, Śrīmatī
says, “Understanding that her hope was extremely
distressful, the prostitute Piṅgalā4 abandoned it and
became happy. I should also give up the hope of
attaining Kṛṣṇa, but it is so difficult to stop talking
about Him. Alas! The thirst for Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s darśana is
increasing in My heart moment by moment. That thirst is
also increasing madana (kāma), which is sweeter than
sweet.”




Text 14

The divyonmāda (transcendental madness) of Śrī Rādhā,
who is restless in the intense fire of separation from
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is described in Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta (41):



amūny-adhanyāni dināntarāṇi

hare! tvad-ālokanam antareṇa

anātha-bandho! karuṇaika-sindho!

hā hanta! hā hanta! kathaṁ nayāmi



Alas! Alas! O Hari! O friend of the helpless! O You who
are the only ocean of mercy! How can I pass these
miserable days

without Your darśana?



nā heriye tava mukha, hṛdaye dāruṇa, duḥkha,

dīna-bandho, karuṇā-sāgara

e adhanya divā-niśi, kemane kāṭābe dāsī,

upāya balaha ataḥpara


                             270
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Without the darśana of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, a moment seems like
hundreds of yugas for Śrī Rādhā, who is burning in the
fire of separation, and Her days stand still. “These
days and nights, in which I cannot serve You, are not
blessed.”

The word hā (meaning “alas”) in this verse expresses a
distress that is full of grief. Kṛṣṇa may say (Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.29.20)), “patayaś ca vaḥ, vicinvanti — O
Rādhā, Your body, which is pierced by the arrows of
Anaṅga (Cupid), burns in the fire of kāma, so You should
search for Your husband.”

Then Śrī Rādhā will reply, “O Śyāma, I am searching for
My prāṇa-priyatama Vrajendra-nandana. What need have I
for a husband who gives distress? O friend of the
helpless, having abandoned My husband, I have come to My
priyatama (You).”

If somebody says, “Why have You come to Your priyatama?”
then Śrīmatī would answer, “He is the friend of the
helpless and destitute. I am helpless, so He is also My
friend.”

If Kṛṣṇa says (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.29.24)), “bhartuḥ
śuśrūṣaṇaṁ strīṇāṁ paro dharmaḥ — the supreme duty of
women is to serve their husbands,” then, in reply, She
will say (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.29.34)), “cittaṁ sukhena
bhavatāpahṛtam — our minds and senses were satisfied
engaging in household duties, but You stole them. O
Hari, we have come to You in search of the great wealth
of our hearts and senses. If there is anything wrong
with this, it is Your fault.”

If Kṛṣṇa says, “You are liars! When did I steal your
dharma and your hearts?” then She will reply (Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.29.38)), “tan naḥ prasīda — be pleased
with us, O You who are the only ocean of mercy, kindly
give us a mere drop from that ocean.”




Text 15

Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta (40) describes Śrī Rādhā’s longing to
meet Śrī Kṛṣṇa:



he deva! he dayita! he bhuvanaika-bandho!

he kṛṣṇa! he capala! he karuṇaika-sindho!

he nātha! he ramaṇa! he nayanābhirāma!

hā hā kadā nu bhavitāsi padaṁ dṛśor me



                          271
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017


O Lord! O dearest one! O only friend of the three
worlds! O Kṛṣṇa! O restless one! O only ocean of
compassion! O Deva! O lover (ramaṇa)! O You who delight
the eyes! Oh! When will You again be visible to My eyes?
When will I receive Your darśana?



he deva, he prāṇapriya, ekamātra bandhu iha,

he kṛṣṇa, capala, kṛpā-sindhu

he nātha, ramaṇa mama, nayanera priyatama,

kabe dekhā dibe prāṇa-bandho



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The sakhīs are consoling Śrī Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī, who is
suffering in separation from Kṛṣṇa. Suddenly, Śrī Rādhā
looks here and there and says, “O sakhī, listen! It is
the sound of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s ankle-bells! But why is He not
coming before My eyes? Surely that rogue is sporting
with some beautiful girl in a nearby kuñja.” While
speaking like this, Śrī Rādhā becomes mad (unmādinī) and
in that maddened condition, She sees that Śrī Kṛṣṇa has
come. On His body, though, are signs that He has been
sporting with another woman. Upon seeing the marks, Śrī
Rādhā becomes indignant (amarṣa) and, even though Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is present before Her, She does not speak to Him
but turns Her face away. Śrī Kṛṣṇa then disappears and
Rādhā eagerly begins to search for Him here and there.

Restlessness resulting from a delay in seeing and
attaining the desired object is called autsukya, ardent
desire. When bhāvas overlap, it is known as bhāva-
śābalya. When autsukya and asūyā (envy) awaken
simultaneously, Śrī Rādhā sometimes criticises Kṛṣṇa,
and sometimes She praises Him. Sometimes She goes into
māna, sometimes She becomes proud and sometimes She
praises Him sarcastically.

She says, “O Deva, because You sport with other women,
You are called Deva5.” Due to this disrespect, Kṛṣṇa
leaves. Repentant, Śrī Rādhā begins to speak out of an
eager longing to again have His darśana. “O beloved
(dayita), You are the most dear of My life. Why did You
abandon Me? Please, grant Me Your darśana.”

Hearing this, Śrī Kṛṣṇa again appears. As soon as Śrī
Rādhā sees Him, the bhāvas of amarṣa (indignation) and
asūyā (envy) arise in Her, and She sarcastically derides
Him. “O only friend of the three worlds (bhuvanaika-
bandho), by playing on Your enchanting flute, You bring
all women under Your control, and for this reason You
are the friend of the entire world. You are the friend
of all gopīs, therefore You stay near them. Isn’t it
Your own fault then, that You do not come to Me?”

Hearing this, Kṛṣṇa again disappears. Not seeing Him,
Śrī Rādhā says, “O Kṛṣṇa! O Śyāmasundara! You attract

                          272
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

the hearts of the entire universe. After stealing My
heart, where have You gone? Please, kindly give Me Your
darśana, just once.”

Hearing this, Śrī Kṛṣṇa again comes and says, “O Priyā,
I was just outside the kuñja. Please, be satisfied with
Me.”

Upon hearing Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s entreaty, which is mixed with
fickleness, Rādhā says, “O fickle one (capala)! O snake
of the cowherd maidens! Please, go away from here,
stealer of other men’s wives! I have no need for You. Go
back where You came from.”

Kṛṣṇa hears this and pretends to leave. Śrī Vṛṣabhānu-
nandinī understands that Her prāṇanātha has gone and
offers a supplication. “O only ocean of mercy, I know
that I am an offender, but You are the ocean of
compassion and Your heart is soft, so please, give Me
Your darśana. O lover (ramaṇa), You are always sporting
with Me, so please come to the kuñja.”

Within Her mind, She understands that Kṛṣṇa has again
arrived. Thus absorbed, She holds out Her arms to
embrace Him but is unable to do so. Coming to external
consciousness, She begins speaking in extreme distress,
“O You who delight the eyes (nayanābhirāma)! O You who
give joy to the eyes! My eyes are very thirsty to have
Your darśana. Alas! When will You appear before them?”




Text 16

Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta (68) describes an internal vision
(sphūrti-darśana) of Kṛṣṇa:



māraḥ svayaṁ nu madhura-dyuti-maṇḍalaṁ nu

mādhuryam eva nu mano-nayanāmṛtaṁ nu

veṇī-mṛjo nu mama jīvita-vallabho nu

kṛṣṇo ‘yam abhyudayate mama locanāya



Is this Cupid himself, or is it a halo of sweet
effulgence? Is this the personification of sweetness, or
the life-giving nectar of the mind and eyes? Is this the
lover who loosens My braid, the beloved of My life, the
youthful Kṛṣṇa, who has manifest before My eyes?



svayaṁ kandarpa eki, madhura-maṇḍala nāki,

mādhurya āpani mūrtimāna

mano-nayanera madhu, dūra ha’te āila bandhu,

                           273
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


jīvana-vallabha vraja-prāṇa

āmāra nayana-āge, āila kṛṣṇa anurāge,

dehe mora āila jīvana

saba duḥkha dūre gela, prāṇa mora juḍāila,

dekha sakhi! pāinu hārādhana



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

When Śrī Kṛṣṇa disappears from the rāsa-līlā, the gopīs
sing a piteous kīrtana filled with the mood of
separation from Him. At that time, Kṛṣṇa, who is
manmatha-manmatha, the bewilderer of the mind of Cupid,
appears before them. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.32.2)
Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī describes that unprecedentedly
beautiful form of Kṛṣṇa: “tāsām āvirabhūc chauriḥ
smayamāna-mukhāmbujaḥ — with a smile on His lotus face,
Kṛṣṇa appeared before the gopīs. Wearing a flower
garland and a yellow garment, He appeared directly as
one who can bewilder the mind of Cupid, who himself
bewilders the minds of ordinary people.”

Śauri Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who defeats even Cupid, appears before
the gopīs. Upon seeing His beauty, Rādhā becomes
perplexed and wonders, “Is Kṛṣṇa really present before
us?” Confused, She says to Her sakhīs, “O sakhīs, is He
who is standing before us Cupid incarnate, whose
invisible form attacks everyone?” Here in this Text, the
word nu (meaning “whether”) is used in the sense of
reasoning. Again perceiving His sweetness, She says with
astonishment, “That Cupid cannot be so sweet, so is this
a halo of sweet beauty? This is also astonishing. No, no
it is not merely a halo of beauty, it is some kind of
embodied sweetness. No other kind of sweetness can
satisfy our eyes, but our eyes are satisfied with this
darśana.” With great pleasure, She says, “Is this nectar
itself? But sakhī, nectar does not have a form and this
does, so it cannot be nectar.” Again She says, “Is it
our beloved, who loosens our braids, who has come to us
out of love?” Looking very carefully at Kṛṣṇa, She
blissfully says, “O sakhīs, it is the love of our lives,
the fresh, youthful dancer (nava-kiśora-naṭavara). It is
He who gives pleasure to the eyes and who is our
prāṇakānta.”



Text 17

A description of the direct darśana of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
given in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.32.2):



tāsām āvirabhūc chauriḥ

smayamāna-mukhāmbujaḥ


                          274
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

pītāmbara-dharaḥ sragvī

sākṣān manmatha-manmathaḥ



Just then, Śrī Kṛṣṇa appeared in the midst of the gopīs.
His lotus face blossomed with a mild, gentle smile.
Hanging from His neck was a garland of forest flowers,
and He wore a golden-yellow garment (pītāmbara). What
was the nature of His beauty? That beauty stirs the mind
of Kāmadeva (Cupid), who himself stirs the minds of
everyone.



gopīra sammukha hari, dāṅḍāila veṇu dhari’,

smayamāna-mukhāmbuja-śobhā

vanamālī pītāmbara, manmathera manohara,

rādhikāra deha-mano-lobhā



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is ever-skilful in increasing His
devotees’ prema, disappeared from the rāsa-līlā.
Devastated by separation from Him, weeping, the gopīs
arrived at the bank of the Yamunā. There they performed
kīrtana, having exhausted all alternatives in their
search for Him. Their voices were full of extreme
feeling and they used metaphors with multiple meanings
to express their sentiments. Restless in the pain of
separation, the vraja-ramaṇīs’ tears, full of prema,
flowed freely and continuously from their eyes. At that
time, Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra, who was in the dense, dark
forest, heard their weeping and suddenly appeared in
their midst, manifesting His lustre.

In this Text, Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī is thoroughly
absorbed in mañjarī-bhāva and in anger, he has used the
word śauri as an insult. Śrī Kṛṣṇa appeared in a
kṣatriya family within the Śūra dynasty, whose hearts
were deceitful and hard. Śukadeva Gosvāmipāda was unable
to tolerate Svāminī’s agony of separation from Kṛṣṇa,
and he therefore saw Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s hiding as a defect. He
thought, “The young girls of Vraja are simple lovers
(premikās), and You become joyful by making them
unhappy. Seeing the gopīs afflicted by grief, You
display Your prowess (śaurya).” Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī
felt that such so-called prowess was a disgrace: “If
Your heart were truly honest, You would not have done
such a thing.” These are examples of the defamatory
remarks used in prema; only one whose prema is deep can
speak like this.

Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra, the crown jewel of all those skilled in
amorous pastimes (vidagdha-cūḍāmaṇi), appeared in the
midst of the vraja-devīs, displaying His unparalleled
beauty. This beauty is described in this Text by the use
of three adjectives: smayamāna, sragvī and sākṣān-

                             275
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

manmatha-manmathaḥ.

Smayamāna — Although His face was radiant and smiling,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s heart was remorseful. Smiling is a
characteristic of bhagavattā (the quality of being
Bhagavān), but Kṛṣṇa’s smile before the gopīs was caused
by the bhāvas He experienced upon seeing them. He smiled
to remove their distress and console them. Darśana of
His extremely enchanting lotus face removes all the
gopīs’ sorrow. When Śrī Kṛṣṇa, wearing a pītāmbara
(golden-yellow garment), heard the distress-filled cry
of the vraja-devīs, He came swiftly, holding His
pītāmbara around His neck, so that it would not slip
off.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa had charmed the gopīs with the sound of His
flute. All those gopīs had abandoned their families,
morality, patience and shyness to arrive at Kṛṣṇa’s
side. But on that day, Kṛṣṇacandra had abandoned the
gopīs and disappeared. Upon His return, He held His
yellow cloth around His neck as a gesture, in order to
show that He was praying for forgiveness. Conscious that
He had given great suffering to His dear ones, Kṛṣṇa
admitted that He Himself was an offender, and He held
His pītāmbara with His hands to beg forgiveness for His
offence. Just as an offender clasps a piece of straw
between his teeth, Kṛṣṇa humbly put His cloth around His
neck, thus begging forgiveness. His hands held His
pītāmbara, which He used to carefully wipe away the
tears from the eyes of the vraja-devīs, who were grief-
stricken in separation from Him. Vrajendra-nandana is
also relating the following mood to the gopīs: “You are
of golden complexion, so I have covered My body, heart
and mind with the pītāmbara; My inner heart is also
coloured by your golden anurāga.”

Sragvī — Leaving aside all other ornaments, Kṛṣṇa wore a
fresh, radiant garland of forest flowers around His
charming neck. He wore this garland of cooling lotuses
only to remove the gopīs’ fire of separation. In doing
so, He expressed the sentiment, “You are like the
garland’s flowers; you are like My very heart. By
embracing you, I am praying for forgiveness and beg you
to soothe the heat of My feelings of separation from
you. You strung this very garland yourself and garlanded
Me with it. I am displaying My eternal gratitude by
wearing it upon My heart.”

Sākṣān-manmatha-manmathaḥ — Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s extremely
charming beauty, embellished by His being in the midst
of the gopīs, churned the mind of Cupid. Vyaṣṭi-kāmadeva
and samaṣṭi-kāmadeva are concealed in sākṣāt-manmatha,
the original Kāmadeva. The vyaṣṭi-kāmadevas are the
Kāmadevas that exists in different universes, samaṣṭi-
kāmadeva is Pradyumna, and the original Kāmadeva is
Nanda-nandana Himself. The material Madana (Kāmadeva)
intoxicates all jīvas, but when this material Madana
receives darśana of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s form, which enchants the
three worlds, he falls unconscious. Sākṣāt-manmatha-
manmatha Kṛṣṇa, who is the transcendental Kāmadeva,
manifested such a form to decrease the gopīs’ suffering.

Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī writes in the Krama-sandarbha that
manmatha-manmatha signifies that person who infatuates

                          276
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                                5/5/2017

even Madana. Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra displayed His Mohinī-mūrti
and even bewildered Mahādeva in his form as Rudra.6 But
actually, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s form as sākṣāt-manmatha-manmatha
is only displayed in the rāsa-maṇḍala. This is confirmed
in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 5.212—3):



vṛndāvana-purandara śrī-madana-gopāla

rāsa-vilāsī sākṣāt brajendra-kumāra

śrī-rādhā-lalitā-saṅge rāsa-vilāsa

manmatha-manmatha-rūpe yāṅhāra prakāśa



Madana-gopāla, the Lord of Vṛndāvana, is the enjoyer of
the rāsa dance and is directly the son of the King of
Vraja. He enjoys the rāsa dance with Śrīmatī Rādhikā,
Śrī Lalitā and others. He manifests Himself as the Cupid
of Cupids.




Text 18

Śrī Rādhā’s meeting with Kṛṣṇa in Nava-Vṛndāvana,
Dvārakā, and an expression of a desire for vraja-bhāva,
is described in Lalita-mādhava (10.260):



cirād āśā-mātraṁ tvayi viracayantaḥ sthira-dhiyo

vidadhyur ye vāsaṁ madhurima gabhīre madhu-pure

dadhānaḥ kaiśore vayasi sakhi tāṁ gokula-pate

prapadyethās teṣāṁ paricayam avaśyaṁ nayanayoḥ



[Śrī Rādhā said:] O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, for a long time, persons
with fixed intelligence have sustained their lives with
the hope that You will one day return. You reside in
Madhupurī, which is filled with profound sweetness. O
master of Gokula, the adolescent sakhās are patiently
gazing at Your return path. Therefore, You must give us
Your darśana without fail.



gabhīra-mādhurya-maya, sei vraja-dhāma haya,

tathā yata sthira-buddhi jana

cira-āśā hṛde dhari’, tomāra darśane hari,

basiyāche se saba sajjana


                            277
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                                 5/5/2017

tomāra kaiśora-līlā, hṛdaye varaṇa kailā,

ebe se savāre kṛpā kari’

nayana-gocara haiyā, līlā kara tathā giyā,

ei mātra nivedana kari




Text 19

Suffering pangs of separation from Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Rādhā
desires to bring Him back to Vṛndāvana, which is filled
with sweet memories. Lalita-mādhava (10.261) states:



yā te līlā-rasa-parimalodgāri-vanyā-parītā

dhanyā kṣauṇī vilasati vṛtā māthurī mādhurībhiḥ

tatrāsmābhiś caṭula-paśupī-bhāva-mugdhāntarābhiḥ

saṁvītas taṁ kalaya vadanollāsi veṇur vihāram



Near the highly praised Mathurā is that land of
Vṛndāvana, which is full of forests that emit the
sublime fragrance of the mellows of Your pastimes (līlā-
rasa), and which is made splendid with sweetness and
beauty. With a smiling face and playing the flute,
please sport in that Vṛndāvana with those whose hearts
are infatuated with capricious and unpredictable gopī-
bhāva.



mathurā-maṇḍala majhe, mādhurī-maṇḍita sāje,

dhanya-dhanya vṛndāvana-bhūmi

tāhe tava nitya-līlā, parimala prakāśilā,

acintya-śaktite kṛṣṇa tumi

gopī-bhāve mugdha yata, tomāra śṛṇgāra-rata,

āmā ādi praṇayī-nicaya

āmā-sabe la’ye punaḥ, krīḍā kara anukṣaṇa,

vaṁśī-vādye brajendra-tanaya



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

In his Lalita-mādhava, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī gives the
following narration. In one kalpa Śrī Rādhā was so
unable to tolerate the affliction of separation from

                             278
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa after He had left for Mathurā, that She jumped
into the Yamunā. Yamunā, the daughter of Sūryadeva, then
took Śrī Rādhā to her father. Sūryadeva entrusted Her to
his friend and devotee, Satrājit, who was childless, and
told him, “Her name is Satyabhāmā. Consider Her to be
your daughter.” Later, upon the instruction of Nārada,
King Satrājit sent Satyabhāmā to Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s inner
quarters in Dvārakā. The wife of Sūrya, Saṁjñā, was the
daughter of Viśvakarmā. Through her father, Saṁjñā had
previously created the captivating Nava-Vṛndāvana for
Satyabhāmā (Śrī Rādhā) in Dvārakā. Rukmiṇī, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
principal queen, kept the extraordinarily charming and
beautiful Satyabhāmā hidden in Nava-Vṛndāvana, so that
Kṛṣṇa would not see Her. In due course, however,
Satyabhāmā did meet with Kṛṣṇa, and the secret that
Satyabhāmā is actually Rādhā and Rukmiṇī is actually
Candrāvalī was revealed. Thereafter, Rukmiṇī arranged
for Satyabhāmā’s marriage to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. At the time of
the wedding, Yaśodārāṇī, Paurṇamāsī, Mukharā and other
Vrajavāsīs were present in Dvārakā.

One day, in this Nava-Vṛndāvana, Kṛṣṇa said to Rādhā, “O
Dearest, what more can I do to make You happy?”

Śrī Rādhā replied, “Prāṇeśvara, all the sakhīs of Vraja,
My cousin-sister Candrāvalī, Mother Vrajeśvarī and
everyone else came here, and I met with them.
Nonetheless, My earnest request to You is to please
leave this abode of opulence, Dvārakā, and in Your form
as a fresh, youthful, expert dancer, wearing the attire
of a cowherd boy, sport with Me in the kuñjas of Vraja-
dhāma, the renowned land of eternal pastimes.”




Text 20

Anguished that their blinking prevented them from seeing
Kṛṣṇa when they were taking His darśana, the gopīs curse
the person who created eyelids. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(10.82.39) describes this condition of the gopīs at
their meeting with Kṛṣṇa in Kurukṣetra:



gopyaś ca kṛṣṇam upalabhya cirād abhīṣṭaṁ

yat-prekṣaṇe dṛśiṣu pakṣma-kṛtaṁ śapanti

dṛgbhir hṛdī-kṛtam alaṁ parirabhya sarvās

tad-bhāvam āpur api nitya-yujāṁ durāpam



[Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī, who was experiencing the mood
of the gopīs when they saw Śrī Kṛṣṇa at Kurukṣetra,
said:] The vraja-sundarīs, who cursed the Creator for
making eyelids that obstructed their darśana of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, now saw Śrī Kṛṣṇa again after a very long time.
They took Him from the path of their eyes into their
hearts and tightly embraced Him there. They attained

                          279
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

that rare absorption that cannot be attained either by
yogīs or by Rukmiṇī and the other queens of Dvārakā, who
are always with Him.



cira-dina kṛṣṇa-āśe, chila gopī vraja-vāse,

kurukṣetre prāṇanāthe pāiyā

animeṣa-netra-dvāre, āni’ kṛṣṇe premādhāre,

hṛde āliṅgila mugdha haiyā

āhā se amiya bhāva, anya jane asambhava,

svakīya-kāntāya sudurlabha

gopī vinā ei prema, yena viśodhita hema,

lakṣmī-gaṇe cira asambhava

Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

At the time of the solar eclipse, all the Vrajavāsīs
arrived at Kurukṣetra, eager to see and meet with Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. When the vraja-ramaṇīs saw Kṛṣṇa after being
separated from Him for so long, they became radiant with
bliss, and their hearts and eyes did not move. Those
vraja-gopīs had been unable to tolerate even a moment’s
separation caused by the blinking of their eyes, and had
thus cursed the creator of eyelids. Who can describe
their ecstasy when they again saw Śrī Kṛṣṇa after
burning in a raging fire of separation from Him?

The Śrutis say it is impossible to describe in words the
happiness derived from merging into Brahman
(brahmānanda); no one is able to determine the extent of
it. This brahmānanda, however, is like a firefly before
rasānanda, the bliss attained by the mahābhāva-vatī
gopīs in their prema-filled service to Kṛṣṇa. The gopīs’
bodies are composed of anurāga, which is caused by the
great depth of their relationship with Kṛṣṇa. Anurāga is
a function of the hlādinī-śakti when it is endowed with
saṁvit. This state is called sva-saṁvedya, which means
that it can only be known by the person who experiences
it.

According to the intensity of anurāga, prema is
determined as perfect (pūrṇa), more perfect (pūrṇatara)
or most perfect (pūrṇatama). Compared to the pūrṇatama
anurāga of the gopīs, the bliss of the service performed
by Lakṣmī, who sports on the chest of Nārāyaṇa, and also
the skill of the queens of Dvārakā in the art of various
loving sports, are bland and insipid. Although they
exhibit various extraordinary moods, enchanting and
beautiful smiles, and so on, they cannot bring Kṛṣṇa’s
heart under their control. The vraja-gopīs, however, who
are coloured with dense anurāga, as well as with prema
imbued with madīya-bhāva (a feeling that “Kṛṣṇa belongs
to me”), control Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s heart through their
crooked, sidelong glances. Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmipāda’s
reference to the gopīs’ extraordinary prema in this Text
is a sharp cue meant for the jñānīs, who meditate on

                             280
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

Brahman. In effect he is saying, “O jñānīs performing
arduous sādhana! Fie on you! If you want to make your
lives successful, then surrender at the lotus feet of
these gopīs, who are endowed with prema.”

Darśana of the vraja-gopīs’ prema-mādhurya also makes
Uddhava yearn to attain it: vāñchanti yad bhava-bhiyo
munayo vayaṁ ca (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.47.58)).
Enchanted by this prema-mādhurya, the queens of Dvārakā,
who always accompany Kṛṣṇa, pray to attain the fragrance
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet, which are coloured with
kuṅkuma from the gopīs’ breasts.

One unprecedented experience of ecstasy in separation is
called divyonmāda. This ocean of prema stirs enormous
waves that inundate every universe. Its current
bewilders the heavenly damsels, whose lustre is like the
lotus. It stirs the hearts of earthly beings, invades
Satyaloka, and even rebukes the beauty of the land of
Vaikuṇṭha. Uddhava, Nārada and others are astonished to
see the prema engendered by the gopīs’ mahābhāva, which
even stuns the hearts of Rukmiṇī and Satyabhāmā. Despite
performing several arduous practices, the yogīs are
unable to establish in their hearts so much as the
effulgence of the nails of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet. The
gopīs, however, very easily and directly adorn their
breasts with the lotus feet of youthful Kṛṣṇa, who is
the essence of all beauty and lustre, and thus they
pacify His fire of lust. Blessed are these masterful
gopīs.




Text 21

The gopīs’ intense longing to receive Śrī Kṛṣṇa in their
own home, Vṛndāvana, is described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(10.82.48):



āhuś ca te nalina-nābha padāravindaṁ

yogeśvarair hṛdi vicintyam agādha-bodhaiḥ

saṁsāra-kūpa-patitottaraṇāvalambaṁ

gehaṁ juṣām api manasy udiyāt sadā naḥ



[At the meeting in Kurukṣetra, Śrī Rādhikā and the
prominent gopīs said:] O Kamalanābha (You whose navel is
like a lotus), great yogīs who possess profound
intelligence meditate upon Your lotus feet in their
hearts. Your lotus feet are the only means of escape for
those who have fallen into the well of material
existence. O Lord, please give us the benediction that,
even when we perform household work, Your lotus feet
shall always reside in our hearts and we shall never
forget them, even for a moment.


                          281
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017



kṛṣṇa he!

agādha-bodha-sampanna, yogeśvara-gaṇa dhanya,

tava pada karuṇa cintana

saṁsāra-patita jana, dharu tava śrī-caraṇa,

kūpa haite uddhāra kāraṇa

āmi vraja-gopa-nārī, nāhi-yogī, na-saṁsārī,

tomā lañā āmāra saṁsāra

mama mana vṛndāvana, rākhi’ tathā o’caraṇa,

ei vāñchā pūrāo āmāra



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

At the time of their meeting in Kurukṣetra, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
tried to console the vraja-gopīs, who had been agitated
in separation from Him, by instructing them on brahma-
jñāna and yoga. He said, “I am all-pervading; I am never
separated from you all. Endeavour to see Me in your
hearts through devout meditation.”

Hearing their priyatama’s instructions on brahma-jñāna
and yoga, the gopīs became somewhat angry and said, “O
shining sun of tattva-ācāryas! Give these instructions
on jñāna-yoga somewhere else; we very simple and
ignorant gopīs cannot understand them. It is commendable
to give an instruction that is suitable to the listener.
When we hear these instructions, our hearts begin to
burn. Prāṇanātha, it is true that the hearts of others
are the same as their minds, but our hearts are the same
as Vṛndāvana, so if You go to Vṛndāvana, we shall
consider that You have entered our hearts. Only this
will be Your complete mercy, nothing else. Vraja is not
only our heart, it is also our home. Unless we meet You
there, our life-airs will certainly leave our bodies.

“First, You sent Uddhava to instruct us on yoga and
jñāna, and today You are personally giving us this same
instruction. You are rasika and supremely compassionate,
and You also understand the feelings in our hearts, so
why do You speak like this? You know we want to remove
our affection for You and place it in worldly enjoyment,
but even after a hundred thousand such attempts, we have
been unable to do so. Now You are instructing us to
meditate upon You. Can You not even slightly consider
the persons You are instructing? We gopīs are not great
yogīs, and we can never be satisfied by meditating on
Your lotus feet. Hearing You talk like this makes us
very angry. O simpleton, where is the possibility of a
well of material existence, and desire for deliverance
from it, for those who cannot even recall their own
bodies? We are always drowning in the deep waters of
separation from You, where the crocodiles of lust
swallow us. O Prāṇanātha, please save us!

                            282
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


“O wealth of our lives, have You forgotten Vṛndāvana,
Govardhana, the banks of the Yamunā, and the rāsa-līlā
and other pastimes that took place in the kuñjas? Aho!
It is surprising that You have forgotten the sakhās,
Your parents and all the other Vrajavāsīs. It is our
misfortune. We are not unhappy for ourselves; we are
unhappy for Vrajeśvarī Yaśodā-maiyā. It tears our hearts
apart to see her so forlorn. We may or may not have a
relationship with You, but You are related to Yaśodā-
maiyā by blood, as Your body is made of her blood. You
may forget that relationship, but it cannot be removed.
Whether You come to Vṛndāvana or not is up to You, but
why have You kept the Vrajavāsīs alive? Is it just to
make them suffer again and again? Yes, if You want to
keep them alive, then quickly come to Vṛndāvana. This
royal attire of Yours, the elephants and horses, Your
association with the officers of the king of this place,
and this foreign land, do not slightly befit the
Vrajavāsīs. Although we are unable to abandon Vṛndāvana,
we could not remain alive without seeing You. You are
the life of Vraja, the wealth of Vrajarāja’s life and
also the very life of our lives. Quickly return to
Vṛndāvana and protect the lives of everyone.”




Text 22

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.82.40) describes Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
conversation with the gopīs that occurred in a solitary
place:



bhagavāṁs tās tathā-bhūtā

vivikta upasaṅgataḥ

āśliṣyānāmayaṁ pṛṣṭvā

prahasann idam abravīt



When Śrī Kṛṣṇa saw that the gopīs had attained oneness
(tādātmya) with Him, He went with them to a secluded
place. After embracing them to His heart and inquiring
about their well-being, He laughed and spoke as follows.



vivikte laiyā, gopī āliṅgiyā,

preme marma-kathā kaya

kṛṣṇa gopī prīti, mahiṣīra tati,

dekhiyā āścarya haya




                            283
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

When Śrī Kṛṣṇa heard Śrī Rādhā’s anguished talks of
separation, He remembered His unlimited, honest love for
the Vrajavāsīs and became very restless. Considering
Himself indebted to them, He began to console them by
addressing Śrī Rādhā. “Priyatamā, accept the following
as truth. Remembering You, I burn day and night in a
fire of separation. No one knows the extent of My
unbearable pain. The Vrajavāsīs, My parents and the
sakhās are My very life, and among them, the gopīs are
directly My life. And You are the life of My life. What
more can I say? I am always subservient to Your
unconditional love. Misfortune is very strong, and no
one can do anything about it. This misfortune has
separated Me from You, keeping Me in a distant country.

“It is true that the beloved cannot remain alive without
the association of the lover, and that the lover cannot
live without the beloved, but neither will die because
each thinks, ‘If I die, his condition of separation will
be the same as mine.’ Aho! The faithful beloved and the
truly affectionate lover think of each other’s welfare
even in separation. They never think of their own
sorrows and sufferings, but always want their beloved to
be happy. This kind of loving couple meet each other
again very quickly.

“You do not know that daily I worship Bhagavān Śrī
Nārāyaṇa to protect Your life. By His potency, I come to
Vṛndāvana from this distant country every day to meet
with You and sport with You in various ways, but You
think this is only a vision. Beloved Rādhā, it is My
good fortune that Your love for Me is unlimited and
incomparable. This prema will quickly pull Me back to
You in Vṛndāvana. In just a few days, after killing the
remaining enemies of the Yādavas, I will return to
Vṛndāvana. Consider that I have already come.”




Text 23

Śrī Kṛṣṇa spoke the following words to give the gopīs
consolation. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.82.44) states:



mayi bhaktir hi bhūtānām

amṛtatvāya kalpate

diṣṭyā yad āsīn mat-sneho

bhavatīnāṁ mad-āpanaḥ



Sakhīs, it is greatly fortunate that you have developed
prema for Me, by which one can attain Me. Loving
devotional service unto Me qualifies living entities to
attain My supremely blissful eternal abode.

                            284
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017




āmāte ye prema-bhakti parama amṛta

tava snehe niravadhi tava dāsye rata



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

After a long separation, the gopīs met with Śrī Kṛṣṇa at
Kurukṣetra. There, in a solitary place, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
consoled the beautiful, lotus-eyed women of Vraja by
embracing and kissing them, wiping the tears from their
eyes, and inquiring about their health and well-being.
He said, “O sakhīs, in this long separation you have
remembered Me! You are convinced that I am ungrateful,
but you do not consider Me cruel, do you? Without doubt,
Bhagavān is the cause of the living entities’ meeting
and separating. Just as blades of grass, cotton fluff
and granules of dust meet and again separate due to the
wind, similarly everyone meets and separates according
to the desire of Īśvara, the Supreme Controller. If you
say that I am that Īśvara who arranges meeting and
separation, then there is no reason for your sorrow,
because by good fortune you have achieved that prema by
which I can be attained. Devotion performed unto Me is
capable of giving living entities the eternal supreme
abode, but your loving affection for Me makes Me unable
to remain far away from you. Rather, it attracts Me to
you.”

In his Krama-sandarbha commentary, Śrīla Jīva
Gosvāmipāda says, “Through the practice of sādhana-
bhakti, the living entity can attain the dhāma of
Bhagavān according to his desire and constitutional
nature. Being pleased with such devotees, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
accepts their service. The sneha, rāga, anurāga and
mahābhāva of the vraja-devīs assume the highest
excellence and therefore Śrī Kṛṣṇa is controlled by the
gopīs. Pure devotional service and affection etc., which
are endowed with possessiveness, attract Śrī Kṛṣṇa. One
should understand that affection for Bhagavān is the
topmost way to attract Him.”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa again speaks. “The sky and the other four
primary elements are in all material objects in their
beginning, middle and end stages. Similarly, I exist in
the beginning and end of all objects, and inside and
outside of them also. I am not, therefore, separated
from you in any way. You are suffering from a false pain
of separation — due to a simple lack of discrimination.
Your bodies and life-airs are all situated in My
svarūpa. Try to realise this truth and meditate in your
hearts as yogīs do, then your pain of separation will be
removed.”

Upon hearing this spiritual teaching from the lotus
mouth of their prāṇa-vallabha Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the gopīs began
to speak, their lips quivering in anger born of
affection. “O Nalinanābha (one with an extremely
beautiful lotus-like navel), You want to please our
hearts by instructing us in knowledge of bhagavat-

                          285
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

tattva, but this knowledge does not enter our ears. We
are already engaged in relishing the nectar of Your
beauty through our eyes. Where is the time to hear these
tattvas?”

Or by use of the word nalinanābha the vraja-devīs
insinuate, “O Kṛṣṇa, a lotus has grown from Your navel.
This is a good thing, but just as the root of the lotus
is connected with water and mud, Your intelligence has
also become soiled. Please give these instructions to
ignorant persons only, not to us. Does one give the food
of animals to human beings? Now You are claiming
Yourself to be Bhagavān. If the Vrajavāsīs hear this,
You will become a laughing stock. Agādha-bodhair
yogeśvarair hṛdi vicintya. Please give this jñāna-yoga
to profoundly intelligent yogīs, endowed with tattva-
jñāna, who are unable to meditate on Your feet.”

Or the gopīs speak reproachfully, saying, “O Kṛṣṇa, we
have heard from Paurṇamāsī that Brahmā was born from the
lotus emanating from Your navel. By the association of
that jñānī, Brahmā, Your intelligence has also greatly
decreased.” (“Yasya yat-saṅgatiḥ puṁso maṇivat syāt sa
tad-guṇaḥ — a person develops the qualities of the
company he keeps, just as a crystal reflects the colour
of those objects which are brought into its proximity.”)

Or the gopīs angrily say, “O Kṛṣṇa, only great yogīs
endowed with profound intelligence are capable of
meditating on Your lotus feet. We are ignorant cowherd
girls with restless minds, and it is impossible for us
to meditate on Your lotus feet.”

Or the gopīs reveal the inner feelings of their hearts
to Śrī Kṛṣṇa: “O Kṛṣṇa, what to speak of meditating on
Your lotus feet, now the mere memory of them distresses
us. We fear placing Your lotus feet, which are softer
than a newly-blossomed lotus, on our hard breasts.



yat te sujāta-caraṇāmburuhaṁ staneṣu

bhītāḥ śanaiḥ priya dadhīmahi karkaśeṣu

tenāṭavīm aṭasi tad vyathate na kiṁ svit

kūrpādibhir bhramati dhīr bhavad-āyuṣāṁ naḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.31.19)



[The gopīs said:] A fear has arisen in our minds that
Your very soft lotus feet may be pained by being placed
on our hard breasts. Our minds are agitated by such
thoughts, as if tormented by a stinging scorpion.



Or they say, “O Kṛṣṇa, the nineteen signs marked on Your
lotus feet have appeared on the screen of our hearts,

                          286
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

reminding us of our previous pastimes in the kuñjas. The
flag on Your lotus feet reminds us of Your defeat by Śrī
Rādhā in amorous sports (keli-vilāsa). You said that You
would take Her victory flag on Your shoulder and wander
here and there. The sign of the goad on Your feet
reminds us that Śrī Rādhā, who is likened to an
elephant-driver, brings such an intoxicated elephant as
You under Her control with Her goad of prema. You
Yourself have admitted, ‘Na pāraye ‘haṁ niravadya-
saṁyujām — O gopīs, I cannot repay you.’ “

Or the gopīs say, “You assumed Your form of Mohinī to
cheat the demons out of nectar, and then You arranged
for the demigods to relish it. Similarly, by instructing
the yogīs on meditation, You deprive them of the secret
of love. But we are not like the demon or yogī who is
deprived of the confidential secret of prema-tattva.”

Saṁsāra-kūpa-patitottaraṇāvalambaṁ te padāravindam —
With affectionate anger, the gopīs say, “O Kṛṣṇa, You
also sent Uddhava to Vraja with Your collection of
tattva-jñāna, but instead of alleviating our pain of
separation, Your message simply increased it. And now
You again are giving us that same ridiculous
instruction, which is suitable for a child. Brahmā and
other great yogīs can be delivered from this material
existence by meditating on Your lotus feet, but we have
not fallen into the well of material existence. Rather,
we have fallen into the ocean of separation from You and
cannot even recollect our own bodies. We gave up
attachment to our homes for Your happiness. How, then,
is it possible for us to have fallen into the well of
material existence? Rather, we have fallen into the
ocean of separation, and the timiṅgila fish of lust
wants to swallow us. Therefore, O crown jewel of experts
in amorous sports (vidagdha-śiromaṇi), do not instruct
us on jñāna-yoga. Please just give us the pleasure of
Your association to deliver us from this ocean of
separation. Our hearts run towards Vṛndāvana, because
Vṛndāvana’s trees, creepers, fruits, flowers and every
particle of dust are inseparably studded with memories
of You. If Your lotus feet appear in Vṛndāvana, they
will also appear in our hearts.”

Gehaṁ juṣām api manasy udiyāt — Distressed, the vraja-
devīs say, “O Kṛṣṇa, we have again met with You here at
Kurukṣetra, and our meeting with You is like a first
meeting, but our minds are stolen away by memories of
Vṛndāvana. Here there is lokāraṇya, a “forest” of
people, and the uproarious sounds of elephants, horses
and chariots. In Vṛndāvana there is puṣpāraṇya, a forest
of flowers, where only the sweet sounds of bumblebees
and cuckoos are heard. Vṛndāvana is very pleasant and
filled with music and song. It resounds with the sweet
sounds of śukas, sārīs, peacocks and cuckoos. Here in
Kurukṣetra, You are dressed in royal attire and are
accompanied by kṣatriya warriors who are adorned with a
variety of weapons. In Vṛndāvana, however, where You
wore the attire of a gopa, You held a beautiful flute to
Your lips. On Your head was a peacock feather crown, on
Your ears were earrings made from the buds of campa
flowers, and You were decorated with creepers, leaves
and minerals like gairika (red ochre).”


                          287
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                               5/5/2017

Śrī Rādhā says, “O lotus-eyed one, the hearts of others
are non-different from their minds, and they are unable
to separate their hearts from their minds. But My mind
is Vṛndāvana. They are one; there is no difference
between them. Being Vṛndāvana, My mind is the sporting
ground for My prāṇakānta. Previously, as the topmost
connoisseur of mellows (rasikendra-śiromaṇi), You
performed playful pastimes, filled with the sweetness of
rasa, with Me there. My mind is eager to meet with You
again in that Vṛndāvana.”



prāṇanātha, śuna mora satya nivedana

vraja — āmāra sadana, tāhāṅ tomāra saṅgama,

nā pāile nā rahe jīvana



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 13.138)



[Śrī Rādhā said:] Prāṇanātha, hear My true submission.
My home is Vṛndāvana, and I wish to have Your
association there. If not, it will be very difficult for
Me to maintain My life.




Text 24

Pastimes during the first part of the night (pradoṣa-
līlā) are described in Govinda-līlāmṛta (21.1):

In the evening, Śrī Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī cooks some
preparations and sends them with Her sakhīs to Nanda-
bhavana. Yaśodārāṇī is very affectionate and loving to
Śrī Rādhā’s maidservants. She feeds these preparations
to the two brothers, Rāma and Kṛṣṇa, as well as to the
other family members. Maiyā places the remaining prasāda
in the hands of the maidservants to give to Śrī Rādhā.
Kundalatā or Dhaniṣṭhā indicate the whereabouts of that
night’s meeting place to the maidservants, who give Śrī
Rādhā the news from Nanda-bhavana as well as the
remaining prasāda. They tell Her, “Svāminī, Your
priyatama lovingly ate the manohara-laḍḍu You made.”
Describing the mood with which Kṛṣṇa took each
preparation, the sakhīs serve the rest of the prasāda
and prepare Svāminī for Her rendezvous (abhisāra).



rādhā vṛndā upadeśe, yamunopakūladeśe,

sāṅketika kuñje abhisāre

sitāsita-niśā-yogya, dhari’ veśa kṛṣṇa-bhogya,

sakhī-saṅge sānanda antare

                             288
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                                5/5/2017


gopa-sabhā-mājhe hari, nānā-guṇa-kalā heri’,

mātṛ-yatne karila śayana

rādhā-saṅga soṅariyā, nibhṛte bāhira haiyā,

prāpta-kuñja kariye smaraṇa



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

In accordance with Śrī Vṛndā-devī’s indication, Śrīmatī
Rādhikā goes to a keli-kuñja on the bank of the Yamunā
for Her abhisāra with Kṛṣṇa, bringing a few faithful
maidservants or some priya-narma-sakhīs with Her. These
most beloved sakhīs dress Kiśorī in black cloth on dark
nights and in white on moonlit nights, and then they
very carefully and blissfully take Her for abhisāra.

At that time, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is watching a charming
performance of music, singing, magical tricks, drama and
other arts in the assembly of the cowherds. Later, He
hears Yaśodā-maiyā sing Him a lullaby and He feigns
sleep. Then, to attain the association of Kiśorī, He
slips away from the royal palace and proceeds alone to
the kuñja where They will meet.

The qualified sādhaka, while performing harināma-
kīrtana, will lovingly remember these pastimes of the
seventh yāma.



Thus ends the Saptama-yāma-sādhana,

Pradoṣa-kālīya-bhajana, of Śrī Bhajana-rahasya.




8 Aṣṭama-yāma-sādhana: Rātri-līlā — prema-bhajana
sambhoga (from midnight to three-and-a-half praharas of
the night: approximately 00.00 a.m. — 3.30 a.m.)




Text 1

Steadiness in perfection — that is, one-pointed
dependence on Kṛṣṇa — is described in Śikṣāṣṭaka (8):



āśliṣya vā pāda-ratāṁ pinaṣṭu mām

adarśanān marma-hatāṁ karotu vā

yathā tathā vā vidadhātu lampaṭo

mat-prāna-nāthas tu sa eva nāparaḥ

                           289
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                                5/5/2017




Let that debauchee (Kṛṣṇa) tightly embrace this
maidservant, who is devoted to serving Him, and thus
delight Me. Or, let Him trample Me under His feet, or
break My heart by not giving Me His darśana. He may do
whatever He desires. Even if He sports with His other
beloveds directly in front of Me, He is still My
prāṇanātha. In My heart there is none other than Him.



āmi — kṛṣṇa-pada-dāsī, teṅho — rasa-sukha-rāśi,

āliṅgiya kare ātmasātha

kibā nā deya daraśana, jārena mora tanu-mana,

tabu tiṅho mora prāṇanātha

Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

In relation to this Text, Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta
(Antya-līlā 20.49—52) states:



sakhi he, śuna mora manera niścaya

kibā anurāga kare, kibā duḥkha diyā māre,

mora prāṇeśvara kṛṣṇa — anya naya

chāḍi’ anya nārī-gaṇa, mora vaśa tanu-mana,

mora saubhāgya prakaṭa kariyā

tā-sabāre deya pīḍā, āmā-sane kare krīḍā,

sei nārī-gaṇe dekhāñā

kibā teṅho lampaṭa, śaṭha, dhṛṣṭa, sakapaṭa,

anya nārī-gaṇa kari’ sātha

more dite manaḥ-pīḍā, mora āge kare krīḍā,

tabu teṅho — mora prāṇanātha

nā gaṇi āpana-duḥkha, sabe vāñchi tāṅra sukha,

tāṅra sukha — āmāra tātparya

more yadi diyā duḥkha, tāṅra haila mahā-sukha,

sei duḥkha — mora sukha-varya



[Śrīmatī Rādhikā said:] Sakhī, I am a maidservant of the
lotus feet of rasika-śekhara Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is an ocean
of happiness. He may make Me joyful by tightly embracing
Me, or He may trample Me beneath His feet. He may make

                             290
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

Me happy by mercifully giving Me His darśana, or He may
break My heart by not appearing before Me. He may not
understand My inner desires; nonetheless, He is My
prāṇanātha, the Lord of My life. Sakhī, I have decided
that He may love Me and display My fortune by abandoning
other beautiful ladies in order that He be controlled by
Me; He may make them unhappy by sporting with Me in
front of them, or, He may be deceitful, arrogant,
duplicitous and debauched, and, just to provoke Me, He
may torment Me by sporting before Me with other ladies.
Still, He and only He is My prāṇanātha. I am not
slightly concerned for My own suffering; I only desire
His happiness, always. The goal of My life is to make
Him happy in every way. If He feels happiness by giving
Me distress, that distress is My greatest happiness.




Text 2

A devotee who remembers these pastimes is
transcendental, being filled with eternality, knowledge
and bliss (sac-cid-ānanda) just like Bhagavān. A
Vaiṣṇava’s body is non-different from Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s body.
In this regard, in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.29.34), Śrī
Kṛṣṇa says to Uddhava:



martyo yadā tyakta-samasta-karmā

niveditātmā vicikīrṣito me

tadāmṛtatvaṁ pratipadyamāno

mayātma-bhūyāya ca kalpate vai



When a person abandons all fruitive activities and fully
surrenders himself to Me, he becomes a recipient of
special prema. This is a result of My merciful treatment
towards him. I release him from old age and grant him
entrance into My eternal pastimes, where he serves Me
eternally.



sarva karma teyāgiyā, more ātma nivediyā,

yei kare āmāra sevana

amṛtatva-dharma pāñā, līlā-madhye praveśiyā,

āmā-saha karaye ramaṇa



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Having explained sambandha-tattva (the jīva’s
relationship with Bhagavān), abhidheya-tattva (the

                             291
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

process to attain the supreme goal) and prayojana-tattva
(the supreme goal) to His dear devotee Uddhava, here
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa describes the situation of a pure
devotee who is exclusively surrendered to Him.

As the mortal jīva wanders throughout this material
existence, he attains the association of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
eternal associates according to the extent of his
sukṛti. Due to his association with pure devotees, the
devotee relinquishes the desire for nitya-karma and
naimittika-karma (daily and occasionally prescribed
duties), sense enjoyment and liberation, and he
cultivates pure bhakti. The darkness of his ignorance is
removed by the light of bhakti, just as darkness is
removed by the light of the sun. The devotee then serves
Bhagavān with a full sense of possessiveness (mamatā)
towards Him, and Bhagavān bestows upon that devotee a
spiritual body appropriate for rendering eternal service
to Him. That means He bestows a body, qualities,
activities, service and so on according to the
particular mood of the sādhaka.

As a result of associating with svajātīya-snigdhāśaya-
bhaktas, affectionate devotees who are of the same mood
as himself and more advanced, the sādhaka who is endowed
with mādhurya-rati attains a desire in his heart to
render service in the amorous mellow. And, by practising
bhakti and by the mercy of devotees, he attains the
state of perfection (siddha-avasthā). Such a devotee
performs his sādhana internally under the guidance of
Lalitā and other sakhīs, and by their mercy he receives
bodily features equal to those of the nitya-siddha-
mañjarīs and also obtains the pleasure of directly
rendering kuñja-sevā in Śrī Vraja-dhāma. After this
attainment of svarūpa-siddhi, the jīva achieves vastu-
siddhi and for eternity serves Śrī Rādhā in the eternal
land of Vṛndāvana. Such service is only attained by
sādhakas in

mādhurya-rati; it is not attained by others.




Text 3

Steadiness in bhajana is described in Manaḥ-śikṣā (2):



na dharmaṁ nādharmaṁ śruti-gaṇa-niruktaṁ kila kuru

vraje rādhā-kṛṣṇa-pracura-paricaryām iha tanu

śacī-sūnuṁ nandīśvara-pati-sutatve guru-varaṁ

mukunda-preṣṭhatve smara param ajasraṁ nanu manaḥ



O my dear mind, please do not perform either the dharma,
which produces piety, or adharma, which gives rise to
sin, that are mentioned in the Śrutis. Rather, render

                          292
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

profuse loving service to Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala, who
the Śrutis have ascertained to be supremely worshipful
above all others and the topmost Truth. Always remember
Śacīnandana Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who is endowed with
the sentiments and bodily lustre of Śrī Rādhā, knowing
Him to be non-different from Śrī Nanda-nandana; and
always remember śrī gurudeva, knowing him to be most
dear to Śrī Mukunda.



śruti-ukta-dharmādharma, vidhi-niṣedha-karmākarma,

chāḍi’ bhaja rādhā-kṛṣṇa-pada

gaurāṅge śrī-kṛṣṇa jāna, guru kṛṣṇa-preṣtha māna,

ei bhāva tomāra sampada



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Dharma and adharma are defined in the Śrutis and
literature pursuant to the Śrutis, such as the Smṛtis.
Every activity a person performs falls into one of these
two categories. If people were prohibited from
performing dharma and adharma, it would be impossible
for them to live a moment more. Therefore, Śrīla
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī has not prohibited all of the
activities performed by the sense organs. Those who are
ignorant are meant to perform dharma and auspicious
activities, whereas learned jīvas who have attained
knowledge of their spiritual identity are instructed to
act on the platform of ātma-rati, or kṛṣṇa-rati. In
other words they are instructed to perform loving
service to Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala. The sādhaka should
perform all his activities in a mood of service to
Bhagavān. Householder devotees should worship deities at
home and perform the activities of earning money,
maintaining their family members and protecting their
assets and home as services to their Lord. One should
consider oneself a mere servant of the Lord.



Text 4

Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī’s mood of humility is reflected
in the following statement, which is imbued with the
firm hope (āśā-bandha) characteristic of a jāta-rati-
bhakta devoted to bhajana. This verse is quoted by Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.3.35):



na premā śravaṇādi-bhaktir api vā yogo ‘tha vā vaiṣṇavo

jñānaṁ vā śubha-karma vā kiyad aho saj-jātir apy asti vā

hīnārthādhika-sādhake tvayi tathāpy acchedya-mūlā satī

he gopī-jana-vallabha vyathayate hā hā mad-āśaiva mām


                          293
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017



My heart is devoid of prema for You, and I am not
qualified to perform bhakti by hearing and chanting. I
possess no knowledge, pious activities or qualifications
of a Vaiṣṇava, nor have I taken birth in a high-class
family. I am, therefore, unqualified in every respect.
Nevertheless, O beloved of the gopīs, Your mercy also
falls upon the lowest of the low. This firm hope of
attaining You is making me very anxious.



śravaṇādi-bhakti, prema-bhakti, yoga hīna

jñāna-yoga-karma hīna, saj-janma-vihīna

kāṅgālera nātha tumi rādhā-prāṇa-dhana

tomā-pade dṛḍha-āśāya vyakulita mana




Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Humility is the foundation of bhakti, and it is by
humility that bhakti increases. Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī
defines humility as follows: “When a person has all good
qualities but feelings arise in his heart of being
unqualified, wretched and inferior, this is called
humility. In other words, humility is the utmost anxiety
to attain Bhagavān. A person with humility is without
false ego even though he possesses all good qualities.”
Only humility can attract Kṛṣṇa’s mercy, and genuine
humility only appears when prema is fully ripe. To
attain such humility the jāta-rati-sādhaka prays, “O
Prāṇa-vallabha, I have no attachment for You and am
incapable of performing śravaṇa and the other practices
in the ninefold path of devotion. My meditation is not
unbroken like that of the jñānīs. I do not perform
service according to varṇāśrama, I have not taken birth
in a high-class family and I have not performed any
pious activities. My hope is solely dependent on Your
mercy, which all the mahājanas glorify. You are the
master of the wretched, and You bestow Your mercy upon
them.”

Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī possesses all virtues, yet filled
with humility, he spoke this verse. Although a jāta-
rati-sādhaka performs abundant service, he thinks, “I
perform no sevā at all.” The sādhaka’s only desire is to
perform prema-sevā, pure bhakti that is devoid of karma
and jñāna. This is svarūpa-siddha-bhakti, and it is
attained only through śravaṇa, kīrtana and so forth. If
a person is too attached to fruitive activities,
whatever little devotion is in his heart disappears. And
if someone desires material gain, adoration and fame,
Bhakti-devī neglects that person. Bhakti only increases
in the heart of one who is humble and sincere, and only
humility that is thoroughly devoid of pride causes the
flowing current of mercy to swell.


                          294
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

The method of performing nāma-sādhana is to chant the
holy name while feeling more humble than a blade of
grass. Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 17.31—3) says:



tṛṇād api sunīcena

taror api sahiṣṇunā

amāninā mānadena

kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ



ūrdhva-bāhu kari’ kahoṅ, śuna sarva-loka

nāma-sūtre gāṅthi’ para kaṇṭhe ei śloka

prabhu-ājñāya kara ei śloka ācaraṇa

avaśya pāibe tabe śrī-kṛṣṇa-caraṇa



“Considering oneself to be even lower and more worthless
than insignificant grass that has been trampled beneath
everyone’s feet, being more tolerant than a tree, being
prideless and offering respect to everyone according to
their respective positions, one should continually chant
the holy name of Śrī Hari. Raising My hands, I declare,
‘Everyone please hear Me! For continuous remembrance,
string this śloka on the thread of the holy name and
wear it around your neck.’” One must strictly follow the
principles given by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu in this
verse. If one simply follows in the footsteps of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu and the Gosvāmīs, he will certainly achieve
the ultimate goal of life, the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.




Text 5

The identity of a perfected soul (siddha-paricaya) is
described in Śrī Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi (53):



dukūlaṁ vibhrāṇām atha kucataṭe kañcu-kapaṭaṁ

prasādaṁ svāminyāḥ svakara-tala-dattaṁ praṇayataḥ

sthitāṁ nityaṁ pārśve vividha-paricaryaika-caturāṁ

kiśorīm ātmānaṁ caṭula-parakīyāṁ nu kalaye



When will I remain near Svāminī eternally, intent on
serving Her in various ways? When, wearing Her silken
cloth and bodice that She affectionately gave me with

                          295
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

Her own hands, will I be able to count myself as a
clever and very beautiful kiśorī?



siddha-deha gopī āmi śrī-rādhikā kiṅkarī

rādhā-prasādita vastra-kañculikā pari

gṛhe pati parihari, kiśorī-vayase

rādhā-pada sevi kuñje rajanī-divase



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The rasika-ācāryas conclude that when the sādhaka enters
the stage of perfection, he attains that bhāva upon
which he meditated when he was in the stage of sādhana.
The cherished desire of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas is to
possess the self-identity (abhimāna) of being a
maidservant of Śrī Rādhā. The appropriate sādhana to
attain one’s svarūpa and one’s service to Śrī Rādhā is
revealed by the spiritual master.



ātmānaṁ cintayet tatra

tāsāṁ madhye manoramām

rūpa-yauvana-sampannāṁ

kiśorīṁ pramadākṛtim



Sanat-kumāra-saṁhitā



sakhīnāṁ saṅginī-rūpām

ātmānaṁ vāsanā-mayīm

ājñā-sevā-parāṁ tat tat

kṛpālaṅkāra-bhūṣitām



Prema-bhakti-candrikā (5.11)



A sādhaka of rāga-mārga should internally perceive
himself to be one of the young, beautiful gopī beloveds
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. He should meditate on his desired svarūpa
as a female companion of Śrī Rādhā’s maidservants, such
as Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī and Śrī Rati Mañjarī, and adorned in
the ornaments mercifully given by them, he should
completely absorb himself in service to Śrī Rādhā-
Mādhava according to their instructions.

                          296
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017




The word cintayet in the above verse from the Sanat-
kumāra-saṁhitā means that the sādhaka should nourish the
following firm conception: “I am a kiśorī with the same
moods and qualities as the nitya-siddha-mañjarīs of Śrī
Rādhā.” A Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sādhaka in deep meditation
will maintain the conception that, “I am not this body,
these senses and so forth; I am a maidservant of Śrī
Rādhā and I am endowed with qualities such as the beauty
and rasa of a gopa-kiśorī.” This deep meditation on the
soul (ātma-cintana) will quickly result in his giving up
identification with the material body, and he will
attain svarūpa-siddhi.

In this Text 5, Śrīla Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī describes
the method of becoming a beautiful young gopa-kiśorī: “I
will meditate on myself as a kiśorī adorned with the
silken cloth and bodice that Svāminī gave me with Her
own hands.” The remnant objects Svāminī gives with Her
own hands carry the mood of Her affectionate compassion,
and the cloth and bodice remnants are connected with the
sweet mood of the Divine Couple’s amorous play (vilāsa).
Absorption in one’s internal svarūpa is accompanied by
the rendering of sevā and a feeling of intimacy. For
this reason, Śrīla Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī mentions the
form of a clever kiśorī who is always close to Svāminī
and intent on performing various services to Her. Sevā-
rasa, which establishes one’s svarūpa, takes place as a
person serves Svāminī, who is the life and soul of Her
maidservants. The main goal of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas is
to become a rādhā-dāsī, a maidservant of Śrī Rādhā. The
sādhaka remains ever fixed on this goal, just as the
position of the pole star is fixed in the sky. By the
mercy of śrī guru, the sādhaka is introduced to his
eternal identity as a maidservant of Śrī Rādhā. Upon
attaining that, he abandons his bodily identity as a
servant of māyā, and he completely maintains the self-
identity of being a rādhā-dāsī.

In his song Śrī Rādhā-kṛṣṇa-pada-kamale, Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura prays: “lalitā sakhīra, ayogyā
kiṅkarī vinoda dhariche pāya — Vinoda, the unqualified
maidservant of Lalitā Sakhī, clasps the lotus feet of
the Divine Couple.”




Text 6

The method of bhajana and place of residence of one who
possesses the mood described in the previous Text is
explained in Upadeśāmṛta (8):



tan-nāma-rūpa-caritādi-sukīrtanānu-

smṛtyoḥ krameṇa rasanā-manasī niyojya

tiṣṭhan vraje tad-anurāgi-janānugāmī

                          297
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


kālaṁ nayed akhilam ity upadeśa-sāram



While living in Vraja as a follower of those who are
attached to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, one should utilise all his time
by gradually transferring the absorption of his tongue
and mind from matters other than Kṛṣṇa to the chanting
and remembering of narrations of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s name, form,
qualities and pastimes. This is the essence of all
instruction.



kṛṣṇa-nāma-rūpa-guṇa-līlā-saṅkīrtana

anusmṛti-krame jihvā-manaḥ-saṁyojana

kuñje vāsa anurāgi-jana-dāsī haiyā

aṣṭa-kāla bhaji līlā majiyā majiyā




Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The essential meaning of this Text is that, in
accordance with his own bhāva, the sādhaka should
remember his beloved Śrī Kṛṣṇa as well as the devotees
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa who possess the same mood as himself. One
should reside in Vraja-maṇḍala while being immersed in
chanting names of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, such as Rādhā-ramaṇa and
Rādhā-rāsa-bihārī, that are favourable to his own bhāva,
and in hearing narrations of pastimes connected to those
names. If it is not possible to reside in Vraja
physically, one should reside there mentally.

This Text explains both the process of bhajana and the
best place to perform bhajana. No place is superior to
Vraja-maṇḍala for performing bhajana of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.
The most exalted devotees, such as Brahmā and Uddhava,
therefore pray to take birth in Vraja as a blade of
grass or a plant.




Text 7

The rāgānuga-bhakta’s method of bhajana is to perform
his desired perfectional service (siddha-sevā) under the
constant guidance of the guru. Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu
(1.2.294) states:



kṛṣṇaṁ smaran janaṁ cāsya

preṣṭhaṁ nija-samīhitam


                            298
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

tat-tat-kathā-rataś cāsau

kuryād vāsaṁ vraje sadā



The devotee who desires rāgānuga-bhakti should
constantly remember Vṛndāvana-Kṛṣṇa, along with Kṛṣna’s
beloved associates who have the same mood as himself. He
should remain engrossed in hearing and speaking
narrations of their pastimes and always reside in Vraja.



smari’ kṛṣṇa, nija-kṛṣṇa-preṣṭha-vraja-jana

kṛṣṇa-kathā-rata, vraja-vāsa anukṣaṇa




Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The process of rāgānuga-bhakti is that the sādhaka
should remember his beloved and worshipful, ever-
youthful Nanda-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa, as well as the dear
sakhīs, such as Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī, who possess the mood
that he cherishes. He should hear narrations about them
while remaining a resident of Śrī Nandarāja’s Vraja;
that is, by physically residing in Vṛndāvana,
Govardhana, Rādhā-kuṇḍa and other such places if he is
able to do so. Or, if not, he should reside there
mentally. These places are saturated with śṛṅgāra-rasa,
and in bhajana, they are stimuli (uddīpaka) for rasa and
līlā. Therefore, Śrī Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura prays: “rādhā-
kuṇḍa-taṭa-kuñja-kuṭīra, govardhana-parvata yāmuna-tīra
— a small cottage within a kuñja on the bank of Rādhā-
kuṇḍa, Govardhana Hill, the banks of the Yamunā... .”

Such sādhakas should remember the narrations of Kṛṣṇa’s
dear associates, the rasika devotees of Vraja who are
favourable for his bhāva, such as Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī and
other sakhīs, and he should serve them. In this way,
their moods will be transmitted into his heart. An
example of this is Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī who,
under the guidance of Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara and Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī, attained the summit of the rasamayī-
upāsanā (devotional service in amorous love) of Vraja.




Text 8

The premi-bhakta’s behaviour, characteristics and
activities are expressed in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.40):



evaṁ-vrataḥ sva-priya-nāma-kīrtyā

jātānurāgo druta-citta uccaiḥ

                            299
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


hasaty atho roditi rauti gāyaty

unmāda-van nṛtyati loka-bāhyaḥ



In the heart of one who adopts such a transcendental
vow, attachment for chanting the name of his most dear
Lord arises and melts his heart. Now he rises above the
condition of the general mass of people, and he is
beyond caring for their opinions and views. In a natural
way — not out of pretence — he acts as if mad. Sometimes
he bursts out laughing and sometimes he sheds floods of
tears. Sometimes, in a loud voice, he calls out to
Bhagavān and sometimes, with a sweet voice, he sings
Bhagavān’s glories. At other times, when he perceives
his beloved standing before his eyes, he even starts
dancing in order to please Him.

ei vrate kṛṣṇa-nāma kīrtana kariyā

jāta-rāga drava-ccitta hāsiyā kāṅdiyā

cītkāra kariyā gāi loka-bāhya tyaji’

ei vyavahāre bhāi, preme kṛṣṇa bhaji




Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The devotees of the Lord always chant the auspicious
names of Bhagavān. As a result of this kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana,
all kinds of anarthas are removed; the heart is
purified; many lifetimes of sins and their result,
transmigration, are destroyed; all kinds of good fortune
arise; all the sādhana one needs to attain prema-bhakti
is transmitted into the heart; kṛṣṇa-prema appears; one
begins to relish the nectar of prema; one attains Śrī
Kṛṣṇa; and finally one attains coolness and purity
through completely immersing himself in the nectarean
ocean of eternal service. At this stage, through the
essential function of hlādinī (hlādinī-sāra-vṛtti), śrī-
kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana boundlessly increases the living
entity’s natural bliss. Now the living entity is
eternally fixed in one of the rasas (dāsya, sakhya,
vātsalya or mādhurya), and moment by moment, he relishes
complete nectar through an ever-fresh attachment for Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s sweet pastimes appear in the
devotee’s heart and he repeatedly relishes the sweetness
of all the Lord’s qualities, such as His beauty. This
ever-fresh sweetness astonishes the devotee and his
heart melts.

While describing the glories of śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma-
saṅkīrtana to Prakāśānanda Sarasvatī, Śrīman Mahāprabhu
said, “When I chant the name My guru gave Me, it
automatically makes My heart melt. Sometimes this name
makes Me dance, sometimes it makes Me laugh and at other
times it makes Me cry.” This is the nature of the mahā-
mantra; it makes kṛṣṇa-prema arise within whomever

                          300
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

chants it. Kṛṣṇa-prema is the topmost goal (parama-
puruṣārtha); the other four puruṣārthas — dharma, artha,
kāma and mokṣa — are insignificant in its presence. The
nature of prema is that it gives rise to a restless
heart, and the devotee who is controlled by this nature
sometimes laughs, sometimes cries and sometimes, being
maddened, starts dancing.

In his commentary on this verse, Viśvanātha
Cakravartīpāda writes that by chanting the holy name,
the sādhaka experiences a variety of pastimes as they
naturally appear in his heart. He laughs when he hears
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s joking words with the vraja-devīs during the
rāsa-līlā or in the pastime of stealing butter, and he
weeps when his vision of a pastime (līlā-sphūrti)
ceases. He thinks, “I have relished the nectar of Your
sweetness only once — when will I attain it again?”
Lamenting like this, he rolls on the ground and, heaving
long sighs, falls unconscious. Later, when he again sees
Bhagavān everywhere, he is overwhelmed by happiness and
becomes maddened. The devotee who performs such
transcendental activities is devoid of bodily needs.




Text 9

Firm faith in vraja-līlā is found in this verse recited
by Śrīman Mahāprabhu (Padyāvalī (386)):



yaḥ kaumāra-haraḥ sa eva hi varas tā eva caitra-kṣapās

te conmīlita-mālatī-surabhayaḥ prauḍhāḥ kadambānilāḥ

sā caivāsmi tathāpi tatra surata-vyāpāra-līlā-vidhau

revā-rodhasi vetasī-taru-tale cetaḥ samutkaṇṭhate



O friend, that beautiful one who stole my heart in my
youth is now here. These are also the same pleasant
nights of the month of Caitra, with the same fragrance
of blossoming mālatī flowers and the same cool, gentle,
fragrant breeze from the kadamba trees. I am also the
same; my beloved, too. Nonetheless, my mind is eager for
amorous play at the foot of the vetasī tree on the bank
of the river Revā.



kaumāre bhajinu yāre sei ebe vara

sei ta’ vasanta-niśi surabhi-pravara

sei nīpa, sei āmi, saṁyoga tāhāi

tathāpi se revā-taṭa sukha nāhi pāi



                          301
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017




Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Śrīman Mahāprabhu would recite this verse while dancing
in front of Śrī Jagannātha’s chariot. At that time, He
was immersed in the bhāva of Śrī Rādhā, considering
Himself to be Rādhā and Śrī Jagannātha to be Vrajendra-
nandana Śyāmasundara. He was feeling that They were
meeting each other at Kurukṣetra — this was His mood. At
Kurukṣetra, Śrī Rādhā could not experience the same
happiness She used to feel when meeting Śrī Kṛṣṇa in the
solitary nikuñjas of Vṛndāvana. Absorbed in the mood of
Rādhā, Mahāprabhu revealed the distress She felt as She
spoke to Her sakhī. “O sakhī, I am that same Rādhā and
He is that same Kṛṣṇa, and We are now meeting each other
again; nonetheless, My mind is eager that We should meet
and sport together in the secluded nikuñjas of
Vṛndāvana.”

Śrīman Mahāprabhu expressed His moods through this Text,
taken from Sāhitya-darpaṇa. It is described there how a
young unmarried nāyikā (heroine) became strongly
attached to the qualities of a nāyaka (hero) and met
with him on the bank of the river Revā. There, the
nāyaka took her innocence. A kumārī, a very young,
unmarried girl, naturally has no desire for union. When
this desire arises, youth (kaiśora) begins. After some
time, that nāyikā was married to the nāyaka. Upon the
arrival of the month of Caitra, memories have come to
the nāyikā of that charming, moonlit night in the
vetasī-kuñja on the bank of the river Revā, and how the
slow, gentle breeze carrying the fragrance of mālatī
flowers stimulated their lust and increased their desire
for union. Now, however, in the bonds of marriage, they
do not have the same eagerness as then, even though
there are no obstacles in their meeting. But her mind
has gone to that bank of the river Revā, and happy
memories have arisen in her heart of her first meeting
with the beloved of her life and their amorous play
under the vetasī tree.

In this verse, a mundane poet expresses the feelings of
a mundane nāyaka and a mundane nāyikā, but through it,
Mahāprabhu relished the sweetness of transcendental
śṛṅgāra-rasa. In mundane poetry, such a union is
considered impure and rasābhāsa, an overlapping of
mellows, but Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes are transcendental,
with the supreme sweetness of rasa flowing through them.
The meeting of an ordinary nāyaka and nāyikā is
controlled by lust, kāma, that arises from illusion.
When their lust is fulfilled, their feelings for each
other become different. On the other hand, in
transcendental amorous mellow (śṛṅgāra-rasa), the nāyaka
and the nāyikā have prema for each other. This prema
originates from the svarūpa-śakti’s function of hlādinī
and saṁvit, and its purpose is to give pleasure to
Kṛṣṇa. In kāma one desires one’s own enjoyment, but in
prema one aims for Kṛṣṇa’s happiness. This is confirmed
in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 4.165):




                          302
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

ātmendriya-prīti-vāñchā — tāre bali ‘kāma’

kṛṣṇendriya-prīti-icchā dhare ‘prema’ nāma



Śrī Rādhā’s desire to serve Kṛṣṇa is causeless and
perpetual. The birth of a material desire, on the other
hand, is caused and is therefore destroyed. The nāyaka
and nāyikā who are tied by marriage have svakīya-bhāva,
wedded love. Because they are with each other
constantly, the variegatedness of rasa does not manifest
in their meeting and the sweetness of rasa also remains
concealed. However, the sweetness of a nāyaka and
nāyikā’s prema in parakīya-bhāva, paramour love,
manifests in an extraordinary way because their prema is
endowed with an exalted, radiant rasa (samunnata-
ujjvala-rasa). The sweetness of the vraja-devīs’
parakīya-bhāva is unprecedented. Because they do not
always occur, their meetings with Kṛṣṇa are precious.
Owing to the paramour relationship, their mood is
characterised by contrariness, prohibition and secret
amorous desires. This bhāva is the wealth of the vraja-
devīs only. Its only nāyaka is the crown jewel of
rasikas, Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The crown jewel of
all the gopīs is Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Śrī Rādhā. Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 4.80) states: “bahu kāntā
vinā nahe rasera ullāsa — without many beloveds
(kāntās), there is no rapture in rasa.” Thus, to fulfil
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s desire to taste paramour love, Śrī Rādhā
manifests Herself as many beloveds. This parakīya-bhāva
is manifest only in Vraja.




Text 10

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has explained the previous Text by
composing this verse, which is found in Padyāvalī (387):



priyaḥ so ‘yaṁ kṛṣṇaḥ sahacari kuru-kṣetra-militas

tathāhaṁ sā rādhā tad idam ubhayoḥ saṅgama-sukham

tathāpy antaḥ-khelan-madhura-muralī-pañcama-juṣe

mano me kālindī-pulina-vipināya spṛhayati



[After meeting Śrī Kṛṣṇa at Kurukṣetra, Śrī Rādhā said:]
O sakhī, today at Kurukṣetra, I met My same prāṇa-priya,
Kṛṣṇa. I am that same Rādhā and there is also happiness
in Our meeting. But nonetheless, I deeply yearn for
Vṛndāvana, for the kuñja on the bank of the Kālindī that
is inundated by bliss as a result of Kṛṣṇa vibrating the
fifth note on His playful muralī.




                          303
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

sei kṛṣṇa prāṇanātha, kurukṣetre pāinu

sei rādhā āmi, sei saṅgama labhinu

tathāpi āmāra mana vaṁśī-dhvanimaya

kālindī-puline spṛhā kare atiśaya

vṛndāvana-līlā-sama līlā nāhi āra

vaikuṇṭhādye ei līlāra nāhi paracāra

vraje yei līlā tāhe viccheda, sambhoga

dui ta’ paramānanda, sadā kara bhoga




Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Absorbed in the mood of Śrī Rādhā, Śrīman Mahāprabhu
would recite the previous verse (Text 9) from Sāhitya-
darpaṇa in front of Śrī Jagannātha at the time of Ratha-
yātrā. Only Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara knew the essence of the
sweet mood of that verse. Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī was also
present at Ratha-yātrā. By Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s mercy, he
too was able to understand the mood of that verse, and
he composed this Text 10 in the same mood. When Śrīman
Mahāprabhu read it, He became overwhelmed with
transcendental emotions.

Śrī Rādhā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa met each other at Kurukṣetra
after a long separation from each other. Although this
meeting was pleasurable like Their very first meeting in
Vṛndāvana, the heart of Śrī Rādhā was not satisfied. She
expressed this heartfelt mood to Her intimate sakhī: “O
sakhī, My heart is very anxious to meet Śrī Kṛṣṇa in a
kuñja on the bank of the Yamunā. When Kṛṣṇa performs
sweet sports in the forests situated upon the banks of
the Kālindī, He manifests an unprecedented sweetness by
vibrating the fifth note on His flute. In the forest of
Vṛndāvana, the heart is stimulated by the ke-kā sound of
the peacocks and peahens, as well as by their
captivating dance; by the cuckoos’ kuhū-kuhū sound; by
the humming of bumblebees around fragrant mango buds; by
the life-giving air that is filled with the fragrance of
mādhavī and mālatī flowers; by the male and female swans
on the ponds; and by fragrant pollen from lotuses. In
that Vṛndāvana, the ever-youthful best of dancers, who
has a peacock feather and flute and who is adorned with
forest flowers, used to sport with Me. Here, at
Kurukṣetra, there is not the slightest scent of any of
this. Here I do not relish even a drop from the ocean of
pleasure I received from My meetings with Him in
Vṛndāvana. What’s more, here I am surrounded by persons
who are not like-minded. My innermost desire is to sport
with Śrī Kṛṣṇa in the nikuñjas of that place which is
well known to Me, Śrīdhāma Vṛndāvana.”




                          304
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


Text 11

Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes of meeting (sambhoga-līlā)
are described in Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi (15.222—4):



te tu sandarśanaṁ jalpaḥ

sparśanaṁ vartma-rodhanam

rāsa-vṛndāvana-krīḍā-

yamunādy-ambu-kelayaḥ

nau-khelā-līlayā cauryaṁ

ghaṭṭa-kuñjādi-līnatā

madhu-pānaṁ vadhū-veśa-

dhṛtiḥ kapaṭa-suptatā

dyūta-krīḍā-paṭākṛṣṭiś

cumbāśleṣau-nakhārpaṇam

bimbādhara-sudhāpānaṁ

samprayogādayo matāḥ



The anubhāvas of meeting (sambhoga) are: seeing each
other (sandarśana); talking (jalpa); touching
(sparśana); blocking each other’s way in a contrary mood
(vartma-rodhana); the rāsa-līlā; enjoying pleasure
pastimes in Vṛndāvana (vṛndāvana-krīḍā); playing water-
sports in the Yamunā and Mānasī-gaṅgā (jala-keli);
enjoying boat pastimes (nau-khelā); stealing flowers,
clothes and the flute (līlā-caurya); enjoying pastimes
of demanding taxes (ghaṭṭa); playing hide-and-seek in
the kuñjas (kuñjādi-līnatā); drinking honey (madhu-
pāna); Kṛṣṇa dressing in female attire (vadhū-veśa-
dhṛti); pretending to sleep (kapaṭa-suptatā); playing
dice (dyūta-krīḍā); pulling off each other’s garments
(paṭākṛṣti); kissing (cumba); embracing (āśleṣa); making
nail-marks on each other (nakha-arpaṇa); relishing the
nectar of each other’s lips, which are like bimba fruit
(bimba-adhara-sudhā-pāna); and enjoying amorous union
(samprayoga).



sandarśana, jalpa, sparśa, vartma-nirodhana

rāsa, vṛndāvana-krīḍā, yamunā-khelana

naukā-khelā, puṣpa-curi, ghaṭṭa, saṅgopana

madhupāna, vadhū-veśa, kapaṭa-svapana

dyūta-krīḍā, vastra-ṭānā, surata-vyāpāra

                            305
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                                5/5/2017


bimbādhara sudhāpāna, sambhoga prakāra




Text 12

Decorating Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa is described in Stavāvalī
(Sva-saṅkalpa-prakāśa-stotra (9)):



sphuran-muktā guñjā maṇi sumanasāṁ hāra-racane

mudendor lekhā me racayatu tathā śikṣaṇa-vidhim

yatha taiḥ saṅkḷptair dayita-sarasī madhya-sadane

sphuṭaṁ rādhā-kṛṣṇāv ayam api jano bhūṣayati tau



May Indulekhā Sakhī, as guru, mercifully teach me the
art of stringing very beautiful necklaces and garlands
composed of pearls, jewels, guñjā berries and flowers.
With these necklaces and garlands, I can decorate Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa for Their pleasure as They are seated on the
jewelled throne in the middle of Rādhā-kuṇḍa.

muktā-guñjā-maṇi-puṣpa-hāra viracane

indulekhā-guru-kṛpā labhiba yatane

rādhā-kuṇḍa ratnamaya mandire duṅhāre

bhūṣita kariba āmi sulalita hāre



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

In this Text, Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, who is
totally absorbed in his identity as a mañjarī, is
drawing a delightful picture of his desire to serve Śrī
Rādhā-Mādhava by decorating Them suitably in the nikuñja
situated in the middle of Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Śrī Rādhā’s
sakhīs have a variety of natures with which they nourish
many kinds of mellows (rasas). These sakhīs are
proficient in knowledge of their own rasa, and sometimes
they learn different arts from other sakhīs. By teaching
all the pālyadāsīs Herself, Śrī Rādhā makes them expert
in Her service.

Here Śrīla Dāsa Gosvāmī, in the mood of Rati Mañjarī, is
praying to Śrīmatī Indulekhā, one of Śrī Rādhā’s aṣṭa-
sakhīs, to teach her the art of stringing necklaces of
pearls, jewels and guñjā berries and making garlands of
flowers, as well as other delightful arts. According to
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s Śrī Rādhā-kṛṣṇa-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā,
Indulekhā is learned in scriptures dealing with snake-
charming mantras and in the sāmudrika-śāstra. She is
expert in stringing necklaces and garlands, drawing

                          306
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

pictures, decorating the teeth, gemmology, weaving
various kinds of cloth and writing auspicious mantras.
She is also expert in generating the mutual attraction
between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

As Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava perform amorous sports (rasa-
vilāsa-krīḍā) in the vilāsa-kuñja known as Madana-vāṭikā
situated in the middle of Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa, Their
necklaces of pearls, jewels and guñjā berries and Their
garlands of flowers break and scatter. The prāṇa-sakhīs
do not hesitate to enter the kuñja in order to rearrange
Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava’s clothes and ornaments. Śrīla Dāsa
Gosvāmī is praying to Śrī Indulekhā, who is expert in
all these arts, to impart knowledge about how to
skilfully accomplish all these services. By their skill
in stringing necklaces and garlands, the pālyadāsī-
mañjarīs have their desires to please Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava
fulfilled.




Text 13

For an understanding of vipralambha-rasa one should read
Gopī-gīta (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Tenth Canto, Chapter 31).
Only those who distribute bhagavat-kathā are most
munificent. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.31.9) states:



tava kathāmṛtaṁ tapta-jīvanaṁ

kavibhir īḍitaṁ kalmaṣāpaham

śravaṇa-maṅgalaṁ śrīmad ātataṁ

bhuvi gṛṇanti te bhūri-dā janāḥ



O Kṛṣṇa, nectar-filled narrations about You are the life
and soul of persons suffering in separation from You,
and they are sung by great, realised poets who are Your
devotees. Just by hearing the all-auspicious narrations
about You, all kinds of sins, such as prārabdha and
aprārabdha, are removed, and all prosperity, in the form
of prema-bhakti, arises in the heart. Therefore no one
is equal to or more generous than he who chants and
propagates narrations about You.



tava kathāmṛta kṛṣṇa! jīvanera sukha

kavi-gaṇa gāya yāte yāya pāpa-duḥkha

śravaṇa-maṅgala sadā saundarya-pūrita

sukṛta-janera mukhe nirantara gīta




                          307
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

At the time of Ratha-yātrā, Gaurasundara, endowed with
the mood of Śrī Rādhā, became tired and lay down to rest
beneath a tree, extending His lotus feet. Within His
mind, He relished the vraja-devīs’ various moods.
Mahārāja Pratāparudra came to Him dressed as an
insignificant and lowly person and, in a humble mood,
massaged Mahāprabhu’s feet while gently singing this
śloka.

In the previous verse of Gopī-gīta, which begins with
the words madhurayā girā, the gopīs who were suffering
in separation from Kṛṣṇa pray for the nectar of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s lips to cure their disease. In reply Śrī Kṛṣṇa
says, “O gopīs, I cannot understand how you can remain
alive in such a diseased condition.”

The gopīs reply, “Śyāmasundara, we are alive only due to
the nectar of narrations about You, which do not allow
us to die. If You ask what this nectar is like, we will
answer that it can even bring peace to someone who is
afflicted with the intractable disease of suffering the
threefold material miseries. The nectar of descriptions
of You even calms a forest fire of miseries.”

Kṛṣṇa may say, “O gopīs, I will bring you nectar from
heaven. You can take that!”

The gopīs answer, “Dear Śyāmasundara, nectar from heaven
will make the body healthy, but it will increase lust
(kāma) and so forth, which cause much misfortune. Indra
and the other demigods of Svarga have so much lust,
anger, greed, illusion, pride and envy.”

If Kṛṣṇa says, “O gopīs, take the nectar of liberation!”
then the gopīs will reply, “Even if You offer
liberation, Your devotees will not accept it because it
is unfavourable for prema-bhakti. Where are the loving
exchanges in liberation? Dhruva, Prahlāda, Brahmā,
Nārada, Catuḥsana, Vyāsa, Śuka and other great devotees
and poets glorify hari-kathā, descriptions of You. For
those who aspire for liberation, this kathā is the
immediately effective medicine to cure the disease of
material existence. And for materialists, it gives
pleasure to the ears and minds. Great personalities who
are liberated within this world praise such narrations
as nectar. Hearing them removes all the living entity’s
sins and offences and bestows auspiciousness. Just as
with the arrival of the autumn season the water in
rivers and ponds automatically becomes clean, similarly,
by hearing descriptions of You, the dirt in the living
entity’s heart is removed. Such narrations give new life
to the devotees who are burning in separation from You,
and it bestows all kinds of beauty and wealth. One who
distributes kṛṣṇa-kathā throughout the world is a truly
benevolent person.”




Text 14


                          308
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

When the gopīs think of Kṛṣṇa wandering in the forest,
they experience great sorrow. A description of their
deep love for Him at this time is given in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.31.11):



calasi yad vrajāc cārayan paśūn

nalina-sundaraṁ nātha te padam

śila-tṛṇāṅkuraiḥ sīdatīti naḥ

kalilatāṁ manaḥ kānta gacchati



O Prāṇa-vallabha! O Kānta! When You go to the forests of
Vraja to herd the cows, the soles of Your soft lotus
feet, which are like beautiful blue lotuses, must suffer
as they are pricked by small stones and dry straw.
Thought of this disturbs our hearts and minds.



dhenu la’ye vraja ha’te yabe yāo vane

nalina-sundara tava kamala-caraṇe

śilāṅkure kaṣṭa ha’be manete vicāri’

mahā-duḥkha pāi morā ohe cittahāri




Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

In the verse of Gopī-gīta that precedes this one and
begins with the words prahasitaṁ priya, the vraja-
sundarīs felt pain when they remembered pūrva-rāga — the
loving glances of their prāṇakānta Śrī Kṛṣṇa, His gentle
smile, His joking and talking with them in a secluded
place, and so forth — and their hearts became disturbed.
Now, they direct their words towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa, saying,
“O deceiver of the heart, how we will ever attain peace,
we do not know! Our hearts are anxious both when we meet
with You and when we are separated from You; they are
anxious in all conditions. O Kṛṣṇa, in the morning, You
are surrounded by countless sakhās as You take
innumerable cows to graze in the forest, and the
Vrajavāsīs, deprived of Your darśana, are plunged into a
deep ocean of separation from You. When we think of Your
lotus feet, which are softer than a thousand-petalled
lotus, being pierced by dry straw, thorns, sharp grass
and so forth, we sink in unlimited anxiety. How can we
tolerate pain to Your lotus feet, which we consider non-
different from our hearts? First, we suffer in
separation from You, and then, on top of that, we suffer
the pain caused to Your crimson lotus feet. How can we
tolerate this? Both types of pain break the barrier of
our endurance. O Prāṇakānta, please do not abuse Your
lotus feet. We remember that while roaming throughout

                          309
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

the forest with You, You would ask us to remove the
thorns that pricked Your feet. We would put Your feet on
our body and remove the thorns gently and slowly. But
when Your feet are pricked now, who will remove the
thorns?”

Kānta kalilatāṁ mano gacchati — “We think, ‘O Kānta,
surely Your soft, tender, lotus feet will be pierced by
thorns, sharp grass and stone chips.’ By such thoughts,
our minds begin to dispute with us.

“Our minds tell us, ‘Doesn’t Kṛṣṇa have eyes? He can see
the thorns, sharp grass and stone chips as He walks, and
He will avoid them.’

“To this we reply, ‘O cruel mind, the foolish cows
gallop off into rough places that are full of thorns,
sharp grass and stones. They do not feel them because
they have hooves. But when

Śyāmasundara runs after these galloping cows, will He
see these things and tread carefully? His soft lotus
feet will surely be pierced by thorns.’

“The mind argues, ‘O ignorant milkmaids, don’t you know
that Vṛndāvana’s thorns and stones are also very soft?’

“Then we say, ‘O mind, we do not believe this. We used
to remove thorns and sharp grass from Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet
ourselves.’”

In this way, the gopīs quarrel with their minds.
Finally, their minds say, “You can remain in such
anxiety — I am going to Kṛṣṇa.”

If Kṛṣṇa says, “O gopīs, why are you so worried about
Me?” the gopīs will answer, “O Kānta, You make our minds
restless and disturbed with transcendental lust, so our
intelligence has become dull. O Prāṇanātha, please do
not roam here and there in the forest. Quickly return
and give us Your darśana.”




Text 15

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.31.15) describes that for the
gopīs, even one moment seems like a hundred yugas when
they do not have darśana of that beautiful face adorned
with curling locks:



aṭati yad bhavān ahni kānanaṁ

truṭir yugāyate tvām apaśyatām

kuṭila-kuntalaṁ śrī-mukhaṁ ca te

jaḍa udīkṣatāṁ pakṣma-kṛd dṛśam



                          310
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


O Śyāmasundara, when You go to the forest to herd the
cows during the day, the Vrajavāsīs are unable to see
You and thus they feel one moment to be like a yuga. And
in the evening, when You return and we see Your
beautiful lotus face covered with curling locks, the
blinking of our eyelids becomes painful because it
obstructs our darśana. Is the Creator, who made these
eyelids, ignorant, or is he foolish?



pūrvāhne kānane tumi yāo go-cāraṇe

truṭi yuga-sama haya tava adarśane

kuṭila-kuntala tava śrī-candra-vadana

darśane nimeṣa-dātā vidhira nindana




Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Even a fraction of a second seems like a yuga for the
gopīs when they are afflicted by separation from Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, and when they meet Him, one yuga seems like a
moment. This condition is called mahābhāva.

In this Text, the gopīs address Śrī Kṛṣṇa as bhavān.
Bhavān is a term of honour, but here, the gopīs address
Kṛṣṇa as such due to their jealous love.

Aṭati yad bhavān — The gopīs say, “O Kṛṣṇa! You are
arasajña, ignorant of mellows. Even though we, who are
rasajña, well-versed in mellows, are correct here, You
continue to roam the forest. By roaming here and there
with foolish cows, Your intelligence has become as dull
as theirs. This is the effect of faulty association. By
Your grazing animals all day, Your intelligence has
become like that of an animal.” The gopīs, who have been
separated from Kṛṣṇa all day, eagerly await His return
to Vraja so that they can have darśana of His beautiful
lotus face. Upon hearing the gopīs, Śrī Kṛṣṇa may say,
“O vraja-devīs, you are always seeing My face. What is
so special about My face when I return from cowherding?”

The vraja-devīs reply, “Kuṭila-kuntalaṁ śrī-mukhaṁ ca —
Your beautiful lotus face is decorated by curly locks,
but because these locks of hair are scattered all over
Your face, we cannot see it.” With anger born of
affection, the vraja-devīs are saying, “When this curly
hair covers Your face, You are the only one to relish
its sweetness. This further torments our minds, which
are already burning in separation from You.”

Udīkṣatām — The gopīs say, “Furthermore, we open our
eyes wide and raise our faces in an endeavour to see
You, but because the Creator, who fashioned our eyelids,
is foolish (dṛśāṁ pakṣma-kṛd jaḍaḥ), we cannot take
complete darśana of You. This Creator, being irrational
and of meagre intelligence, has

                          311
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


created eyelids for the eyes. For darśana of such a
beautiful lotus face, he has only given two eyes, and on
top of that, he has

covered them with eyelids that constantly close and
obstruct darśana of You.”

Adhirūḍha-mahābhāva is characterised by the feeling that
each moment is like a kalpa when one is separated from
Kṛṣṇa, and the feeling that a kalpa is like a moment
when one is meeting Him. In this Text, this bhāva is
clearly visible in the vraja-devīs.




Text 16

The pre-eminent gopī-bhāva is intended solely for
Kṛṣṇa’s pleasure. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.31.19) states:



yat te sujāta-caraṇāmburuhaṁ staneṣu

bhītāḥ śanaiḥ priya dadhīmahi karkaśeṣu

tenāṭavīm aṭasi tad vyathate na kiṁ svit

kūrpādibhir bhramati dhīr bhavad-āyuṣāṁ naḥ



O beloved, Your beautiful feet are even softer than a
lotus. When we massage those soft, tender, lotus feet we
fearfully, slowly and gently place them on our breasts
in such a way that our hard breasts may cause them no
pain. With those same soft feet, You wander behind the
cows in the deep forest. Will Your lotus feet not be
pierced by sharp stones and the like? Such thoughts make
us extremely anxious. O Prāṇanātha, You are our life, so
please stop wandering in the forest. Please, appear
before us.



tomāra caraṇāmbuja e karkaśa stane

sāvadhāne dhari sakhe! kleśa-bhīta mane

se pada-kamale vane kūrpādira duḥkha

haya pāche, śaṅkā kari’ nāhi pāi sukha




Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

In this verse the gopīs express their extremely deep
prema. In previous verses the gopīs described their

                          312
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

condition in separation from Kṛṣṇa, but here their
anxiety for His happiness is evident in their words. The
gopīs, who are covered by kāma — that is, their love for
Kṛṣṇa — tried very hard to conceal their prema, but
because it flows so swiftly, it was revealed.

The gopīs suffer in their hearts at the thought of Kṛṣṇa
coming to harm. This is the characteristic of mahābhāva.
Only the gopīs are experienced in the sorrow of
separation from their prāṇa-priyatama, and only the
gopīs are experienced in the happiness of meeting with
Him. In Text 14, the gopīs expressed how troubled they
felt by the pain caused to Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet. That
is why this Text, in which the suffering of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
lotus feet is again mentioned, came to be. Text 15
described separation from Him during the day, and this
Text describes separation from Him at night. In the
daytime, Kṛṣṇa roams here and there herding the cows,
and He can easily protect Himself from the stone chips,
thorns and sharp grass. But on the bank of the Yamunā,
in the darkness of night, stones, thorns and sharp grass
are not easily seen. Thinking of this, the vraja-
sundarīs’ hearts begin to melt and they express their
moods with words of distress.

Śrī Vṛndā-devī puts great effort into making Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
pastime-places, like the bank of the Yamunā, very
pleasant and beautiful. There is no possibility of
thorns or sharp grass being there, but nonetheless, the
women of Vraja fear that Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet will
suffer.

Afflicted by prema, the gopīs pray in this Text, “O
life-giving Śyāmasundara, like beautifully blossoming
lotus flowers, Your reddish lotus feet, which are
endowed with fragrance and sweetness, mitigate any
suffering. Now these reddish lotus feet must be
suffering from the injuries caused by stones, sharp
grass and so forth as You roam from forest to forest. We
are saddened by such thoughts.”

Upon hearing this, Śrī Kṛṣṇa might reply, “Oh, come now!
What realisation do you have of My suffering?”

The gopīs answer, “Priya karkaśeṣu staneṣu bhītāḥ śanair
dadhīmahi — O beloved, we consider You to be non-
different from our bodies and to be the life of our
lives. How can we place Your supremely beautiful, tender
lotus feet on our hard breasts? Please listen for a
moment. Bhītāḥ śanaiḥ, we place them there very slowly
and gently so that You may feel no pain at all.
Therefore, when You, Yourself, cause them pain, we drown
in an ocean of sorrow.”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa says, “O gopīs overwhelmed by madana (Cupid),
why do you want to place My lotus feet on your hard
breasts?”

“O Priya, You are our beloved, and the only duty of a
lover is to increase the beloved’s happiness. Placing
Your lotus feet on our breasts gives You supreme
pleasure, and if You are happy, we are, too. For this
reason, we place Your lotus feet there, but as soon as
we remember their softness, our hearts melt.”

                          313
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                               5/5/2017


Kṛṣṇa says, “O mad gopīs, you all should perform some
austerity to satisfy the Creator, and then pray to him
for soft, tender breasts.”

The gopīs reply, “We are ready to perform this
austerity, but there is a consideration. If our breasts
were soft, You still may not be pleased, and if they are
hard, they will cause You pain. We are unable to
determine what to do and what not to do. You, however,
behave the same way You treat Your feet — mercilessly.”

Hearing this Kṛṣṇa may reply, “O gopīs, what are you
raving on about?”

The gopīs say, “O Śyāmasundara, we are unable to calm
our hearts at all.”

Kṛṣṇa replies, “Why do   you suffer so much? Where is your
affection for Me? What   are the symptoms of affection? If
the lover is unable to   remain alive when the beloved is
suffering severly, how   is it that you are still alive?”

The gopīs say, “Bhavad-āyuṣām. You are our very life.
Although we have endured much hardship, our lives do not
end.” With loving anger they continue, “O Śyāmasundara,
not only are You cruel to us, but so is the Creator; he
has given us such a long life — only to suffer.”

This is the commentary of Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura on this śloka, which expresses the deep
suffering in separation from Kṛṣṇa of the vraja-devīs,
who are filled with mahābhāva.




Text 17

The gopīs’ bhāvocchvāsa (outburst of feeling that
expresses the bhāva hidden in the heart) when meeting
with Kṛṣṇa is described in Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta (12):



nikhila-bhuvana-lakṣmī-nitya-līlāspadābhyāṁ

kamala-vipina-vīthī-garva-sarvāṅkaṣābhyāṁ

praṇamad-abhaya-dāna-prauḍhi-gāḍhādṛtābhyāṁ

kim api vahatu cetaḥ kṛṣṇa-pādāmbujābhyām



May my heart attain indescribable bliss at Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
lotus feet, which are the eternal abode of pastimes for
the original goddess of fortune, which thwart heaps of
lotus flowers’ pride in their beauty, and which are
deeply respected everywhere for their great power in
giving shelter to the surrendered souls.



                            314
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017


nikhila-bhuvana-lakṣmī rādhikā-sundarī

tāṅra nitya-līlāspada parama-mādhurī

kamala-vipina-garva kṣaya yāhe haya

praṇata-abhaya-dāne prauḍha-śaktimaya

hena kṛṣṇa-pāda-padma, kṛṣṇa! mama mana

apūrva utsava-rati karuka vahana




Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

When Śrī Kṛṣṇa reappeared after disappearing from the
rāsa-līlā, a gopī who was burning in the fire of
separation from Him placed His lotus feet upon her
breasts. Śrī Līlāśuka explains that this refers to Śrī
Rādhā’s keeping Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet on Her heart. Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is sporting with Rādhā in a solitary nikuñja. As
soon as He places His reddish lotus feet on Her breasts,
they become even more reddish. May these lotus feet,
smeared with kuṅkuma, fully manifest within our hearts.

In describing the speciality of Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet, he
says that they defeat the pride of lotus flowers. How?
The material lotus flower is cooling, fragrant, soft and
beautiful for the five senses, and the bumblebee becomes
mad by drinking its honey. But Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet
are intoxicating in a different, exceptional way. These
feet are the embodiment of beauty and wealth for all
material and transcendental living beings, and they are
the eternal abode of pastimes for the original goddess
of fortune (nikhila-bhuvana-lakṣmī). The word nikhila-
bhuvana-lakṣmī in this Text can also refer to all the
gopīs, who offer their everything to these lotus feet.
Śrī Kṛṣṇa removes the affliction of their kāma by
touching them with His lotus feet. The young girls of
Vraja affectionately keep these lotus feet on their
hearts and serve them in every way.



Text 18

It is also said in Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta (18):



taruṇāruṇa-karuṇāmaya-vipulāyata-nayanaṁ

kamalākuca-kalasībhara-vipulī-kṛta-pulakam

muralī-rava-taralī-kṛta-muni-mānasa-nalinaṁ

mama khelatu mada-cetasi madhurādharam amṛtam




                          315
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

His eyes are fresh and reddish like the early dawn, full
of compassion and very long and wide; His bodily hair
stands on end by the touch of the waterpot-like breasts
of Śrī Rādhā; and the sound of His flute makes the munis
restless like the gopīs. May the sweet nectar of His
lips sport in my heart.



taruṇa aruṇa jini, karuṇā-svarūpa maṇi,

vipula nayana śobhe yāṅra

rādhā-kuca-dvaya bhara, preme deha gara gara,

vipula pulaka camatkāra

madhura-muralī svare, muni-mana padmavane,

taralita kare sarva-kṣaṇa

kṛṣṇera madhurādhara, parāmṛta śaśadhara,

citte mora karuka nartana



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa are in a solitary nikuñja, and no tinkle
of ankle bells or any other sound comes from inside.
Knowing that the Divine Couple’s amorous pastimes
(surata-līlā) have come to an end, the sakhīs look
through the small eyelets in the kuñja at the intimacy
of the pastime. Kṛṣṇa has risen from bed and is sitting
up. To remove Śrī Rādhā’s fatigue and to stimulate Her
amorous desire, He massages Her limbs and cleverly fans
Her with His scarf. Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is the embodiment of
nectar, maddens our sakhī, Śrī Rādhā, with the happiness
of Her good fortune. Kṛṣṇa’s naturally youthful, reddish
eyes have become even more red by His drinking the
nectar of Rādhā’s lips, and They are again becoming
restless with intoxicating amorous desires. Full of
tenderness, He fans Rādhā to remove Her perspiration.
Seeing Śrī Rādhā’s fatigue due to amorous sports,
Kṛṣṇa’s heart overflows with an ocean of compassion, and
He endeavours in various ways to mitigate Her tiredness.

He places Śrī Rādhā on His lap, and the touch of each
other’s bodies drowns Them both in an ocean of aṣṭa-
sāttvika-bhāvas. His endeavours to remove Her fatigue of
amorous play increase Their desire to sport again.

Even the hard hearts of the munis become restless when
Śrī Kṛṣṇa plays His flute. When Rādhā is in māna, Kṛṣṇa
tries in various ways to pacify Her. This dense māna is
not removed by His falling at Her feet and crying, but
it is vanquished by His playing one note on the flute.
The sound of Kṛṣṇa’s flute enters Rādhā’s ears and makes
Her mad (unmāda). All glories to such a flute!




                            316
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


Text 19

The mānasī-sevā, service performed within the mind, of
one who performs bhajana of pastimes in his eternal form
(siddha-deha) is described in Ujjvala-nīlamāṇī (8.88—
91):



mithaḥ prema-guṇotkīrtis

tayor āsakti-kāritā

abhisāra-dvayor eva

sakhyāḥ kṛṣṇe samarpaṇam

narmāśvāsana-nepathyaṁ

hṛdayodghāṭa-pāṭavam

chidra-saṁvṛtir etasyāḥ

paty-ādeḥ parivañcanā

śikṣā-saṅgamanaṁ kāle

sevanaṁ vyajanādibhiḥ

tayor dvayor upālambhaḥ

sandeśa-preṣaṇaṁ tathā

nāyikā-prāṇa-saṁrakṣā

prayatnādyāḥ sakhī-kriyāḥ



The sixteen activities of the sakhīs are: (1) to glorify
the prema and qualities of the nāyikā to the nāyaka and
vice versa; (2) to create attachment between the nāyikā
and nāyaka; (3) to arrange for their abhisāra; (4) to
offer their sakhī to Śrī Kṛṣṇa; (5) to joke; (6) to
console; (7) to dress and decorate the nāyikā and
nāyaka; (8) to skilfully hide the nāyikā and nāyaka’s
innermost feelings; (9) to conceal the nāyikā’s faults;
(10) to cheat their husbands and others; (11) to give
favourable instructions; (12) to arrange for the nāyikā
and nāyaka to meet at the appropriate time; (13) to fan
and render other services; (14) to point out faults in
the nāyikā and nāyaka and to instruct them; (15) to
deliver the nāyikā and nāyaka’s messages to each other;
and (16) to endeavour to protect the nāyikā’s life.



rādhā-kṛṣṇa guṇotkīrti, āsakti-vardhana

abhisāra-dvaya, kṛṣṇe rādhā-samarpaṇa

narmāśvāsa, veṣa-kārya, hṛdaya-sandhāna


                            317
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                                5/5/2017

chidra-gupti, gṛha-pati-gaṇera vañcana

śikṣādāna, jala āra vyajana-sevana

ubhaya-milana, sandeśādi-ānayana

nāyikāra prāṇa-rakṣāya prayatna pradhāna

sakhī-sevā jāni’ yathā karaha vidhāna




Text 20

In Stavāvalī (Vraja-vilāsa-stava (38)) it is written:



tāmbūlārpaṇa-pāda-mardana-payodānābhisārādibhir

vṛndāraṇya-maheśvarīṁ priyatayā yās toṣayanti priyāḥ

prāṇa-preṣṭha-sakhī-kulād api kilāsaṅkocitā bhūmikāḥ

kelī-bhūmiṣu rūpa-mañjarī-mukhās tā dāsikāḥ saṁśraye



I take shelter of the maidservants of Śrīmatī Rādhikā,
of whom Rūpa Mañjarī is prominent. Unlike the priya-
narma-sakhīs, they can perform any service without
hesitation. They perpetually and affectionately satisfy
Śrīmatī Rādhikā with their various services, such as
offering tāmbūla, massaging Her feet, bringing Her water
and arranging for Her trysts with Kṛṣṇa.



tāmbūla-arpaṇa, duṅhāra caraṇa-mardana

payodāna, abhisāra, dāsī-sevā-dhana




Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Śrī Rādhā’s sakhīs are of five kinds. Among them, the
service of the nitya-sakhīs and prāṇa-sakhīs (all of
whom are mañjarīs) is topmost. When Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
become overwhelmed with ecstasy and become helpless
while sporting in a solitary nikuñja, the mañjarīs enter
without any hesitation to perform all varieties of
services. Although the mañjarīs perform their service
under the instruction of priya-narma-sakhīs such as
Lalitā, Viśākhā and others, when Yugala-kiśora are in a
solitary nikuñja, Lalitā and Viśākhā can only enter with
the permission of Rūpa Mañjarī and Rati Mañjarī. In
rank, the priya-narma-sakhīs are more eminent, but in
the good fortune of service, the mañjarīs are more
eminent. Even when the priya-narma-sakhīs cannot enter

                          318
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

the kuñja, the mañjarīs freely serve the Divine Couple
there. Often, when Śrī Kṛṣṇa desires to meet Śrī Rādhā,
He must repeatedly entreat the mañjarīs; only then does
He receive the opportunity to meet with Her.




Text 21

Pride in one’s service is described in these words of
Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī from Sva-saṅkalpa-prakāśa-
stotra (2):



navaṁ divyaṁ kāvyaṁ svakṛtam atulaṁ nāṭaka-kulaṁ

prahelī-gūḍhārthāḥ sakhi-rucira-vīṇā-dhvani-gatiḥ

kadā snehollāsair lalita-lalitā-preraṇa-balāt

salajjaṁ gāndharvā sa-rasam-asakṛc chikṣayati mām



Aho! When, in a secluded place, will I receive such
fortune that Śrīmatī Rādhikā will, upon the request of
Śrīmatī Lalitā-devī, affectionately and happily — yet
shyly — teach me dramas composed by Herself, new poems,
riddles with deep meanings, and melodies on the vīṇā?



svakṛta-nāṭaka āra navya kāvya-tati

gūḍhārtha-prahelī, divya vīṇā-rava-gati

lalitāra anurodhe snehollāse kabe

salajja gāndharvā more nibhṛte śikhābe




Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

Śrī Gaurasundara entrusted Śrīla Dāsa Gosvāmī to Śrīla
Svarūpa Dāmodara. In vraja-līlā Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara is
Lalitā Sakhī. Under her guidance, Śrī Rādhā’s pālyadāsīs
learn how to serve the Divine Couple, and they attain
the good fortune of directly serving Them. Śrīman
Mahāprabhu is absorbed in the mood of Śrī Rādhā. Here
Śrī Dāsa Gosvāmī, keeping the desire to serve Śrīman
Mahāprabhu in his heart, is begging at the foot-dust of
Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī for his cherished desires to be
fulfilled. He wants to attain expertise in all varieties
of fine arts that are useful for sevā.

In order to engage Śrī Rati Mañjarī in sevā to Śrī
Rādhā’s lotus feet, Lalitā Sakhī took her by the hand to
Śrī Rādhā and made the following request: “O Rādhā, this

                          319
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                               5/5/2017

incomparably charming and beautiful girl is very
qualified to serve Your lotus feet.” Hearing this,
Rādhā, feeling somewhat shy, spoke sweetly to Rati
Mañjarī and embraced her to Her heart, moistening her
with tears of compassion. Urged by the most charming
Lalitā Sakhī, Gāndharvikā Śrī Rādhā, overwhelmed with
great affection, instructed Rati Mañjarī on poetry,
playing the vīṇā, drama, composing riddles and other
arts. Śrī Rādhā is completely controlled by Lalitā
Sakhī.

Vṛndāvana is the only subject matter of the new
transcendental poetry that Śrī Rādhā teaches Rati
Mañjarī. The nāyaka in this poetry is Vrajendra-nandana
Śyāmasundara and the nāyikās are the vraja-devīs, the
embodiments of mahābhāva. In this transcendental flow of
rasa there ripples an unbroken stream of waves. The
movement of these waves is unrestricted and has an ever-
increasing freshness.

As well as teaching poetry, Śrī Rādhā also teaches the
art of acting in dramas and the art of composing riddles
with deep meanings. The pālyadāsīs employ this training
to stimulate śṛṅgāra-rasa in Śrī Rādhā-Mukunda. The
sakhīs ask Śrī Kṛṣṇa, “O best among clever persons, what
is young (bāla) and old, both bound and liberated, and
pure but also in darkness?” Perplexed, Śrī Kṛṣṇa begins
to think. After some time, He laughs loudly and says,
“Śrī Kiśorī’s hair (bāla)!” at which point the sakhīs
burst out laughing. The sakhīs please Śrī Kṛṣṇa with
such riddles during rāsa-vilāsa, while roaming in the
forest (vana-vihāra) and at other times. Śrī Rādhā, who
is skilled in all arts, inspires Her sakhīs to please
Kṛṣṇa in this way. Furthermore, when they play the
captivating vīṇā, having learned the art from Śrī Rādhā,
Śyāmasundara’s heartstrings resound.

The ācāryas give the following conclusion for sādhakas:
attachment (āsakti), eagerness (utkaṇṭhā) and service
filled with the relish of prema-rasa are attained by
associating with rasika-bhaktas. In Prema-bhakti-
candrikā Śrī Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura says: “rasika-
bhakta-saṅge, rahiba pirīti raṅge, vraja-pure vasati
kariyā — one attains one’s cherished desire by
associating with and serving rasika-bhaktas, and by
taking shelter of the land of Vraja.”




Text 22

Sva-saṅkalpa-prakāśa-stotra (6) expresses the acceptance
of Viśākhā Sakhī, whose beautiful voice defeats the
sound of the cuckoo bird, as śikṣā-guru:



kuhū-kaṇṭhī-kaṇṭhād api kamala-kaṇṭhī mayi punar

viśākhā-gānasyāpi ca rucira-śikṣāṁ praṇayatu

yathāhaṁ tenaitad yuva-yugalam ullāsya sagaṇāl

                          320
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017


labhe rāse tasmān maṇi-padaka-hārān iha muhuḥ



May Viśākhā, whose voice is sweeter than the cuckoo,
teach me the captivating art of singing. With that
singing, I will please the youthful couple Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa during the rāsa dance and will receive from Them
gifts, such as jewelled lockets and necklaces, again and
again.



kuhū-kaṇṭha-tiraskarī viśākhā-sundarī

gāna-vidyā śikhāibe more kṛpā kari’

sei gāne rādhā-kṛṣṇe rāse ullasiba

maṇi-padakādi pāritoṣika pāiba




Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

In this Text, Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī prays to
receive training in singing from Śrī Viśākhā-devī. With
this training, Rati Mañjarī considers herself blessed to
sing songs that are endowed with a variety of rasa and
fragrant with cleverness in amorous rasa. She sings
these songs to please the Divine Couple during the rāsa-
līlā, the crown jewel of all pastimes, and thus receives
many kinds of gifts from Them. Rati Mañjarī knows the
desire of Śyāmasundara and, on the direction of Svāminī,
she sings wonderfully melodious songs with her sweet,
pleasing voice. She has learned to sing so beautifully
from Viśākhā, whose soft, pleasant voice defeats the
attractive kuhū-kuhū sound of the cuckoo bird. During
the rāsa dance, which is filled with an abundance of
tasteful mellows, Rati Mañjarī sings intoxicating, sweet
notes in harmony with Viśākhā. Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava become
overjoyed by this and give Their priceless necklaces and
other ornaments to her as gifts. This remuneration makes
the heart of Rati Mañjarī’s guru, Viśākhā-devī, blossom
with joy. Understanding that her efforts have been
successful, Viśākhā-devī profusely praises Rati Mañjarī.

Viśākhā, who is both dear to and non-different from Śrī
Rādhā, is zealous in Her service. She is extremely
clever in the art of speaking, and she even defeats Śrī
Kṛṣṇa in that art. Kṛṣṇa is also pleased by her smiling
and laughing. Śrī Dāsa Gosvāmī, fixed in his svarūpa as
Rati Mañjarī, is eager to learn speech that is full of
joking, full of clever rasa and cooling like camphor.
Therefore, to learn to speak in this supremely
relishable, intoxicating way that is related to
mādhurya-rasa, he accepts Viśākhā as guru.




                          321
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                                 5/5/2017


Text 23

Śrī Gīta-govinda (1.12) describes the ecstasy of the
rāsa dance, the eternal rāsa-vilāsa of Kṛṣṇa and the
vraja-sundarīs:



viśveṣām anurañjanena janayann ānandam indīvara-

śreṇī śyāmala-komalair upanayann aṅgair anaṅgotsavam

svacchandaṁ vraja-sundarībhir abhitaḥ pratyaṅgam
āliṅgitaḥ

śṛṅgāraḥ sakhi mūrtimān iva madhau mugdho hariḥ krīḍati



O sakhī, He who gives pleasure and bliss to all the
gopīs; whose limbs are bluish-black, very soft and
resemble blue lotuses; whose qualities awaken the
festival of Kandarpa (Cupid) that lies dormant within
the gopīs’ hearts; and who is embraced by each and every
limb of the gopīs — that Kṛṣṇa is sporting like amorous
love personified in the spring season.



madhu-ṛtu madhukara-pāṅti

madhura kusuma madhu-māti

madhura vṛndāvana mājha

madhura-madhura rasa-rāja

madhura-naṭinīgaṇa-saṅga

madhura-madhura rasaraṅga

sumadhura yantra-rasāla

madhura-madhura karatāla

madhura-naṭana-gati-bhaṅga

madhura naṭanī-naṭa-raṅga

madhura-madhura rasa-gāna

madhura vidyāpati bhāṇa




Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The crown jewel of connoisseurs of mellows, dhīra-
lalita-nāyaka Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra, appears
as Kāmadeva personified and relishes śṛṅgāra-rasa with
the vraja-devīs. One sakhī informs her friend that in a

                             322
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                                5/5/2017

nearby forest of kuñjas, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is absorbed in rāsa-
vilāsa with the young gopīs. She says, “Look sakhī,
look! Just see how Kṛṣṇa, possessed by an eager desire
for captivating amorous sports, is bound by the embraces
of the young women of Vraja.” One gopa-ramaṇī is
lovingly embracing Śrī Kṛṣṇa and sweetly singing.
Another gopī is pressing against Śrī Kṛṣṇa with her
uplifted, hard breasts. One gopa-ramaṇī with heavy hips
is blooming with prema. On the pretext of whispering
into His ear, she fulfils her heartfelt wish by kissing
Him. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is also increasing the love of the
beautiful women of Vraja by embracing and kissing them
and pleasing them with His smiling sidelong glances. Śrī
Hari, not considering right or wrong, displays His
charming pastimes with the gopa-ramaṇīs in the spring
season. He creates a great festival of Cupid by awarding
the rasa longed for by the vraja-sundarīs with His soft,
bluish-black limbs, which resemble a blue lotus. He is
freely embracing and touching the vraja-ramaṇīs, thus
manifesting Himself as the personification of śṛṅgāra-
rasa.

The word indīvara in this Text indicates “coolness”, the
word śreṇī indicates “relishing ever-fresh mellows”,
śyāmala indicates “beauty” and komala indicates “extreme
softness”.




Text 24

Jagannātha-vallabha-nāṭaka (3.11) describes the
happiness the gopīs feel upon attaining Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
darśana after being separated from Him. In other words
it describes the condition of the gopīs when they are
meeting with Him:



yadā yāto daivān madhu-ripur asau locana-pathaṁ

tadāsmākaṁ ceto madana-hatakenāhṛtam abhūt

punar yasminn eṣa kṣaṇam api dṛśor eti padavīṁ

vidhāsyāmas tasminn akhila-ghaṭikā ratna-khacitāḥ



[Śrī Rādhā said:] From the moment Śrī Kṛṣṇa,   the enemy
of the Madhu demon, unexpectedly came before   My eyes,
wicked Cupid stole My heart. Nonetheless, if   He will
come within My vision again, I will decorate   those
moments with jewels.



ye kāle vā svapane, dekhinu vaṁśī-vadane,

sei kāle āilā dui vairī

‘ānanda’ āra ‘madana’, hari’ nila mora mana,

                          323
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017


dekhite nā pāiluṅ netra bhari’

punaḥ yadi kona kṣaṇa, karāya kṛṣṇa daraśana,

tabe sei ghaṭī kṣaṇa-pala

diyā mālya-candana, nānā ratna-ābharaṇa,

alaṅkṛta karimu sakala



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

This Text, written by Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda, describes Śrī
Rādhā’s deep attachment for Śrī Kṛṣṇa, which She
expresses to Her intimate friend Madanikā. Madanikā
consoles Her, saying, “Why are You so sad? Just see! The
captivating fragrance of the newly blossomed ketakī
flowers attracts the bumblebee from afar. But if the
bumblebee finds no honey in the flower over which it
hovers, doesn’t it abandon that flower? Similarly, You
became attracted by seeing Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus face, but
in Kṛṣṇa there was no prema. And even if Kṛṣṇa has
prema, He has no understanding of how much prema You
have, so it is only appropriate to give Him up.”

Śrī Rādhā contained Herself and then said, “All right, I
will now give Him up.” She shuddered, Her heart full of
fear, and then, with a trembling voice, said, “O sakhī,
I have given Him up as you told Me, but I cannot give up
My memories of His beauty and qualities. As much as I
try to forget Him, to that degree memories arise in My
mind of His gentle, soft, smiling lotus face and His
reddish bimba-fruit-like lips on which the vaṁśī
splendidly rests. When I receive this enchanting
darśana, two enemies, madana (Cupid) and ānanda (joy),
appear and obstruct My vision.”

Saying this, Śrī Rādhā lost external consciousness and
fainted. Such a condition resulted from Her increased
longing to have Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s darśana. This longing caused
an inexpressible happiness to arise in Her heart, and
She was overwhelmed by a deep yearning to serve Kṛṣṇa
with Her body.

Later, Śrī Rādhā said to Madanikā, “O sakhī, if Kṛṣṇa
gives Me His darśana now, I will not let these two
enemies, madana and ānanda, enter My heart, and I will
take darśana of Him to My full satisfaction. I will
decorate the moments that give Me darśana of My beloved
with garlands, sandalwood paste and various jewelled
ornaments.”




Text 25

The midnight pastimes (rātri-līlā) are described in
Govinda-līlāmṛta (22.1):


                            324
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

At night Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, who are very anxious to see
one another, finally meet. Their dear gopīs worship Them
by performing many services. Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa become
exhausted from roaming in the forest, singing, dancing
in the rāsa-līlā and performing other pastimes with
these most beloved sakhīs. Their group of loving
maidservants then serve Them by fanning Them, offering
Them camphor and tāmbūla, massaging Their feet and so
forth. Then the Divine Couple go to sleep on a bed of
flowers. I remember that Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.



vṛndā-paricaryā pāñā, preṣṭhāli-gaṇere lañā,

rādhā-kṛṣṇa rāsādika-līlā

gīta-lāsya kaila kata, sevā kaila sakhī yata,

kusuma-śayyāya dūṅhe śuilā

niśā-bhāge nidrā gela, sabe ānandita haila,

sakhī-gaṇa parānande bhāse

e sukha śayana smari, bhaja mana rādhā hari,

sei līlā praveśera āśe



Bhajana-rahasya-vṛtti

The sakhīs return to Jāvaṭa-grāma from Nanda-bhavana
with various kinds of food preparations, given by
Dhaniṣṭhā or Kundalatā, that are mixed with Kṛṣṇa’s
adharāmṛta, the nectar of His lips. By the beauty and
fragrance of these preparations, the eyes and nose of
Svāminī and the other sakhīs are satisfied. The sakhīs
also bring some indication of the place of rendezvous
(abhisāra). At night, when everyone is sleeping, the
sakhīs dress and decorate Śrī Svāminī with clothes and
ornaments suitable to the phase of the moon, and take
Her for abhisāra. Svāminī meets Her beloved at the
designated place and They relish joking, playing dice,
rāsa-līlā and other pastimes. The young couple then rest
on a bed of flowers, which has been prepared by the
sakhīs. At the end of the night, They awaken, much to
the happiness of the sakhīs.



Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s concluding words to Śrī
Bhajana-rahasya



sādhanera saha aṣṭakāla-līlā-dhana

cintite cintite krame siddha bhāvāpana

svarūpa-siddhite vraje prakaṭāvasthāna

guṇamaya gopī-dehe līlāra vitāna

                             325
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017


kṛṣṇa-kṛpā bale guṇamaya vapu tyaji’

aprakaṭa vraje gopī sālokyādi bhaji

nitya-kāla śuddha-dehe rādhā-kṛṣṇa-sevā

sthūla-liṅga-saṅga-bodha āra pāya kebā

‘hare kṛṣṇa’-nāma gāne nitya-mukta-bhāve

pūrṇa-premānanda-lābha anāyāse pābe

dekha bhāi! sādhane siddhite eka-i bhāva

kabhu nāhi chāḍe nāma svakīya prabhāva

ataeva nāma gāo, nāma kara sāra

āra kona sādhanera nā kara vicāra



The rāgānuga-bhakta, and especially the rūpānuga-bhakta,
remember Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala’s night pastimes, and
while chanting the holy name, they humbly pray, “When
will I attain service in these pastimes?”

The sādhaka remembers these pastimes in the association
of rasika-bhaktas and gradually attains perfection. Upon
attaining svarūpa-siddhi, he takes birth in a gopī’s
house in prakaṭa-līlā by the arrangement of Yogamāyā.
There, under the guidance of Kṛṣṇa’s eternal associates,
his sevā in the pastimes matures. He gives up his
attachment to family etc. and attains the body of a gopī
in the aprakaṭa-līlā of eternal Vṛndāvana. There, he is
forever absorbed in serving Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in his
perfected body. At the time of sādhana, the gross and
subtle bodies are obstacles in attaining one’s eternal
service. However, constant performance of Hare Kṛṣṇa
nāma-kīrtana manifests the sādhaka’s pure identity
(śuddha-svarūpa). The sādhaka-bhakta who follows rāga-
mārga, the path of spontaneous devotion, remembers
pastimes by means of his internally contemplated body.
The bhāvas upon which the sādhaka meditates at the time
of sādhana will be attained by him at the time of
perfection.



Thus ends the Aṣṭama-yāma-sādhana,

Rātri-līlā, of Śrī Bhajana-rahasya.

Thus ends Śrī Bhajana-rahasya.




Appendix: Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas’ Saṅkṣepa-arcana-
paddhati (abbreviated manual on deity worship)



                          326
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017



Nāma-saṅkīrtana gives all perfection; nonetheless, in
one’s devotional life, some activities related to arcana
give special benefit.

In the early morning, after taking bath, the sādhaka
should sit on an āsana (seat) and face east. While
touching the water in the

pañcapātra, he should summon all the tīrthas by chanting
the following mantra:



gaṅge ca yamune caiva

godāvari sarasvati

narmade sindho kāveri

jale ‘smin sannidhiṁ kuru



O Gaṅgā, O Yamunā, O Godāvarī, O Sarasvatī, O Narmadā, O
Sindhu, O Kāverī, please become present in this water.



He should sprinkle the water on his head, uttering
viṣṇuḥ three times, and then perform ācamana. Thereafter
he should apply tilaka in twelve places with gopī-
candana. The mantras for applying tilaka are as follows:



lalāṭe keśavaṁ dhyāyen

nārāyaṇaṁ athodare

vakṣaḥ-sthale mādhavaṁ tu

govindaṁ kaṇṭha-kūpake

viṣṇuṁ ca dakṣiṇe kukṣau

bāhau ca madhusūdanam

trivikramaṁ kandhare tu

vāmanaṁ vāma-pārśvake

śrīdharaṁ vāma-bāhau tu

hṛṣīkeśaṁ ca kandhare

pṛṣṭhe tu padmanābhaṁ ca

kaṭyāṁ dāmodaraṁ nyaset

tat prakṣālana-toyaṁ tu

vāsudevāya mūrdhani

                            327
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017




When one marks the forehead with tilaka, he must
remember Keśava. When one marks the lower abdomen, he
must remember Nārāyaṇa. For the chest, one should
remember Mādhava, and when marking the hollow of the
neck one should remember Govinda. Viṣṇu should be
remembered while marking the right side of the belly,
and Madhusūdana should be remembered when marking the
right arm. Trivikrama should be remembered when marking
the right shoulder, and Vāmana should be remembered when
marking the left side of the belly. Śrīdhara should be
remembered while marking the left arm, and Hṛṣīkeśa
should be remembered when marking the left shoulder.
Padmanābha and Dāmodara should be remembered when
marking the back.



First, the sādhaka should worship his guru (guru-pūjā),
and meditate on him as follows:



prātaḥ śrīman-navadvīpe

dvi-netraṁ dvi-bhujaṁ gurum

varābhaya-pradaṁ śāntaṁ

smaret tan-nāma-pūrvakam



In the early morning, chant śrī gurudeva’s name while
remembering him as being situated in Śrī Navadvīpa or
Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, and possessing two eyes and two
arms. He is the bestower of fearlessness and the
embodiment of peacefulness.



At the Yogapīṭha in Śrī Māyāpura, in transcendental
Navadvīpa, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is seated upon a
jewelled platform. Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu is seated on
His right, and Śrī Gadādhara Paṇḍita on His left. Śrī
Advaita Ācārya stands at the front offering prayers with
folded hands and Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita stands beside him
holding an umbrella. The guru is seated on an altar
below them. In this way one should meditate on sitting
near śrī gurudeva and worship him by offering sixteen
articles while chanting the appropriate mantra for each:



idam āsanam aiṁ gurudevāya namaḥ

etat pādyam aiṁ gurudevāya namaḥ

idam arghyam aiṁ gurudevāya namaḥ

idam ācamanīyam aiṁ gurudevāya namaḥ


                           328
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                                5/5/2017

eṣa madhuparkaḥ aiṁ gurudevāya namaḥ

idaṁ punar ācamanīyam aiṁ gurudevāya namaḥ

idaṁ snānīyam aiṁ gurudevāya namaḥ

idaṁ sottarīya-vastram aiṁ gurudevāya namaḥ

idam ābharaṇam aiṁ gurudevāya namaḥ

eṣa gandhaḥ aiṁ gurudevāya namaḥ

eṣa dhūpaḥ aiṁ gurudevāya namaḥ

eṣa dīpaḥ aiṁ gurudevāya namaḥ

idaṁ sacandana-puṣpam aiṁ gurudevāya namaḥ

idaṁ naivedyam aiṁ gurudevāya namaḥ

idaṁ pānīya-jalam aiṁ gurudevāya namaḥ

idaṁ punar ācamanīyam aiṁ gurudevāya namaḥ

idaṁ tāmbūlam aiṁ gurudevāya namaḥ

idaṁ sarvam aiṁ gurudevāya namaḥ



One should then chant the guru-gāyatrī-mantra according
to one’s capacity:



aiṁ gurudevāya vidmahe kṛṣṇānandāya

dhīmahi tan no guruḥ pracodayāt



Let us now meditate upon śrī gurudeva, who is always
giving pleasure to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Let us try to
understand śrī guru. May he inspire and guide us from
within.



After that one should offer obeisances to guru:



ajñāna-timirāndhasya

jñānāñjana-śalākayā

cakṣur unmīlitaṁ yena

tasmai śrī-gurave namaḥ



O Gurudeva, you are so merciful. I offer my humble
obeisances unto you and am praying from the core of my

                          329
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

heart that, with the torchlight of divine knowledge, you
open my eyes, which have been blinded by the darkness of
ignorance.



Then offer obeisances to the Vaiṣṇavas:



vāñchā-kalpa-tarubhyaś ca

kṛpā-sindhubhya eva ca

patitānāṁ pāvanebhyo

vaiṣṇavebhyo namo namaḥ



I offer obeisances unto the Vaiṣṇavas, who are just like
wish-fulfilling desire trees, who are an ocean of mercy
and who deliver the fallen, conditioned souls.



Thereafter one should perform pūjā of Śrī Gaurāṅga, who
is comprised of five principles or truths, meditating on
Him as follows:



śrīman-mauktikadāma-baddha-cikuraṁ susmera-candrānanaṁ

śrī-khaṇḍāguru-cāru-citra-vasanaṁ srag-divya-bhuṣāñcitam

nṛtyāveśa-rasānumoda-madhuraṁ kandarpa-veśojjvalaṁ

caitanyaṁ kanaka-dyutiṁ nija-janaiḥ saṁsevyamānaṁ bhaje



I worship Śrī Caitanyadeva, whose hair is intertwined
with beautiful garlands of pearls, whose face is
splendorous like a radiant moon, whose limbs are smeared
with candana and aguru and who, adorned with wonderful
clothes, garlands and transcendental, glittering
ornaments, dances while absorbed in ecstasies of sweet
mellows. His body of golden complexion, being adorned
with the ornaments of bhāva, makes Him appear like an
enchanting Cupid amidst the presence of His intimate
associates.



Śrī gaura-pūjā:



idam āsanaṁ klīṁ kṛṣṇa-caitanyāya namaḥ

etat pādyaṁ klīṁ kṛṣṇa-caitanyāya namaḥ

idam arghyaṁ klīṁ kṛṣṇa-caitanyāya namaḥ

                            330
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017


idam ācamanīyaṁ klīṁ kṛṣṇa-caitanyāya namaḥ

eṣa madhuparkaḥ klīṁ kṛṣṇa-caitanyāya namaḥ

idaṁ punar ācamanīyaṁ klīṁ kṛṣṇa-caitanyāya namaḥ

idam snānīyaṁ klīṁ kṛṣṇa-caitanyāya namaḥ

idaṁ sottarīya-vastraṁ klīṁ kṛṣṇa-caitanyāya namaḥ

idam ābharaṇaṁ klīṁ kṛṣṇa-caitanyāya namaḥ

eṣa gandhaḥ klīṁ kṛṣṇa-caitanyāya namaḥ

eṣa dhūpaḥ klīṁ kṛṣṇa-caitanyāya namaḥ

eṣa dīpaḥ klīṁ kṛṣṇa-caitanyāya namaḥ

idaṁ sacandana-puṣpaṁ klīṁ kṛṣṇa-caitanyāya namaḥ

idaṁ sacandana-tulasī-patraṁ klīṁ kṛṣṇa-caitanyāya namaḥ

idaṁ naivedyaṁ klīṁ kṛṣṇa-caitanyāya namaḥ

idaṁ pānīya-jalaṁ klīṁ kṛṣṇa-caitanyāya namaḥ

idaṁ punar ācamanīyaṁ klīṁ kṛṣṇa-caitanyāya namaḥ

idaṁ tāmbūlaṁ klīṁ kṛṣṇa-caitanyāya namaḥ

idaṁ mālyaṁ klīṁ kṛṣṇa-caitanyāya namaḥ

idaṁ sarvaṁ klīṁ kṛṣṇa-caitanyāya namaḥ



After completing worship of Śrī Gaura, one should chant
the gaura-gāyatrī according to one’s capacity:



klīṁ kṛṣṇa-caitanyāya vidmahe viśvambharāya

dhīmahi tan no gauraḥ pracodayāt



Let us try to understand Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya. Let us
meditate upon Viśvambhara, who is maintaining the entire
universe. May that golden-complexioned Gaura manifest
within our hearts and inspire us.



Thereafter one should offer obeisances to Gaurasundara
with the following mantra:



ānanda-līlā-maya-vigrahāya

hemābha-divyac-chavi-sundarāya


                             331
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017

tasmai mahā-prema-rasa-pradāya

caitanya-candrāya namo namas te



I offer obeisances unto Śrī Caitanya-candra, whose form
is the embodiment of blissful, transcendental pastimes,
whose golden complexion is divinely beautiful, and who
bestows unlimited nectar in the mellows of prema.



One should then perform arcana of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa with
the consciousness that it is the mercy of śrī guru and
Śrī Gaurāṅga. First, one should meditate on Śrī
Vṛndāvana:



tato vṛndāvanaṁ dhyāyet

paramānanda-vardhanam

kālindī-jala-kallola-

saṅgi-māruta-sevitam

nānā-puṣpa-latābaddha-

vṛkṣa-ṣaṇḍaiś ca maṇḍitam

koṭi-sūrya-samā bhāsaṁ

vimuktaṁ ṣaṭ-taraṅgakaiḥ

tan-madhye ratna-khacitaṁ

svarṇa-siṁhāsanaṁ mahat



Meditate on a great golden throne studded with jewels
within the divine realm of Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. A place
of ever-increasing bliss, Vṛndāvana-dhāma is served by
breezes that are cooled by the touch of the Yamunā’s
waves and decorated with various types of flowers,
creepers and trees. Its splendour is like that of
millions of suns and it is ever free from the six waves
of material nature (namely lust, anger, greed, envy,
false ego and illusion).



Hereafter, one should meditate on Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, who
are sitting on a golden throne inlaid with jewels:



śrī-kṛṣṇaṁ śrī-ghanaśyāmaṁ

pūrṇānanda-kalevaram

dvibhujaṁ sarva-deveśaṁ

                             332
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                                5/5/2017


rādhāliṅgita-vigraham



I meditate on Śrī Kṛṣṇa, whose bluish-black colour
resembles that of a fresh raincloud, whose body is full
of transcendental bliss, who possesses two arms, who is
the Lord of all the demigods and who is embraced by
Śrīmatī Rādhikā.



Then, one should offer pūjā to Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa with
sixteen articles:



idam āsanaṁ śrīṁ klīṁ rādhā-kṛṣṇābhyāṁ namaḥ

etat pādyaṁ śrīṁ klīṁ rādhā-kṛṣṇābhyāṁ namaḥ

idam arghyaṁ śrīṁ klīṁ rādhā-kṛṣṇābhyāṁ namaḥ

idam ācamanīyaṁ śrīṁ klīṁ rādhā-kṛṣṇābhyāṁ namaḥ

eṣa madhuparkaḥ śrīṁ klīṁ rādhā-kṛṣṇābhyāṁ namaḥ

idaṁ punar ācamanīyaṁ śrīṁ klīṁ rādhā-kṛṣṇābhyāṁ namaḥ

idaṁ snānīyaṁ śrīṁ klīṁ rādhā-kṛṣṇābhyāṁ namaḥ

idaṁ sottarīya-vastraṁ śrīṁ klīṁ rādhā-kṛṣṇābhyāṁ namaḥ

idam ābharaṇaṁ śrīṁ klīṁ rādhā-kṛṣṇābhyāṁ namaḥ

eṣa gandhaḥ śrīṁ klīṁ rādhā-kṛṣṇābhyāṁ namaḥ

eṣa dhūpaḥ śrīṁ klīṁ rādhā-kṛṣṇābhyāṁ namaḥ

eṣa dīpaḥ śrīṁ klīṁ rādhā-kṛṣṇābhyāṁ namaḥ

idaṁ sacandana-puspaṁ śrīṁ klīṁ rādhā-kṛṣṇābhyāṁ namaḥ

idaṁ sacandana-tulasī-patraṁ śrīṁ klīṁ rādhā-kṛṣṇābhyāṁ
namaḥ

idaṁ naivedyaṁ śrīṁ klīṁ rādhā-kṛṣṇābhyāṁ namaḥ

idaṁ pānīya-jalam śrīṁ klīṁ rādhā-kṛṣṇābhyāṁ namaḥ

idaṁ punar ācamanīyaṁ śrīṁ klīṁ rādhā-kṛṣṇābhyāṁ namaḥ

idaṁ tāmbūlaṁ śrīṁ klīṁ rādhā-kṛṣṇābhyāṁ namaḥ

idaṁ mālyaṁ śrīṁ klīṁ rādhā-kṛṣṇābhyāṁ namaḥ

idaṁ sarvaṁ śrīṁ klīṁ rādhā-kṛṣṇābhyāṁ namaḥ



After the worship, one should chant this yugala-gāyatrī-
mantra according to one’s capacity:


                          333
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017



klīṁ kṛṣṇāya vidmahe dāmodarāya

dhīmahi tan no kṛṣṇaḥ pracodayāt



Let us try to know the all-attractive Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Let us
meditate upon Dāmodara, who is bound by the love of His
devotees. May that Kṛṣṇa manifest in our hearts and
inspire us.



śrīṁ rādhikāyai vidmahe prema-rūpāyai

dhīmahi tan no rādhā pracodayāt



Let us try to understand Śrīmatī Rādhikā. We meditate
upon Her, who is the embodiment of prema. May that Rādhā
manifest in our hearts and inspire us.



And then offer obeisances to Śrī Kṛṣṇa:



he kṛṣṇa karuṇā-sindho

dīna-bandho jagat-pate

gopeśa gopikā-kānta

rādhā-kānta namo ‘stu te



I offer my unlimited obeisances unto You, O Kṛṣṇa! You
are the ocean of mercy, friend of the fallen, Lord of
creation and master of the cowherd community. You are
Gopī-kānta, beloved of the gopīs, and above all You are
Rādhā-kānta, the beloved of Śrīmatī Rādhikā.



And to Śrī Rādhā:



tapta-kāñcana-gaurāṅgi

rādhe vṛndāvaneśvari

vṛṣabhānu-sute devi

praṇamāmi hari-priye



O Gaurāṅgī, whose complexion is like molten gold! O

                           334
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                                5/5/2017

Rādhā! Queen of Vṛndāvana! O daughter of Vṛṣabhānu
Mahārāja! O Devī! O dearmost of Hari, obeisances unto
You again and again!



After that, one should chant the kāma-bīja, mūla-mantra
and kāma-gāyatrī according to one’s capacity. And then,
in the proper order, one should recite padya-pañcaka and
vijñapti-pañcaka in a mood of distress.



Padya-pañcaka:



saṁsāra-sāgarān nātha

putra-mitra-gṛhāṅganāt

goptārau me yuvām eva

prapanna-bhaya-bhañjanau



O Śrī Rādha-Kṛṣṇa, You    are my protectors from the ocean
of material existence,    which is characterised by sons,
friends, household and    land. Therefore You are known as
the destroyers of fear    for those who are surrendered
unto You.



yo ‘haṁ mamāsti yat kiñcid

iha loke paratra ca

tat sarvaṁ bhavato ‘dyaiva

caraṇesu samarpitam



O Your Lordships, myself and whatever little I possess
in this world and in the next — all this I now offer
unto Your lotus feet.



aham apy aparādhānām

ālayas tyakta-sādhanaḥ

agatiś ca tato nāthau

bhavantau me parā gatiḥ



O Your Lordships, I am certainly the abode of many
offences and I am completely devoid of any devotional
practice. I don’t have any other shelter; therefore, I

                             335
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

regard You as my ultimate goal.



tavāsmi rādhikā-nātha

karmaṇā manasā girā

kṛṣṇa-kānte tavaivāsmi

yuvām eva gatir mama



O Master of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, I am Yours by actions, mind
and words. O lover of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Śrīmatī Rādhikā, I
belong to You alone. You both are my only destination.



śaraṇaṁ vāṁ prapanno ‘smi

karuṇā-nikarākarau

prasādaṁ kuru dāsyaṁ bho

mayi duṣṭe ‘parādhini



O Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, O oceans of mercy, I am taking
shelter of You. Although I am fallen and an offender,
kindly be pleased with me and make me Your servant.



Vijñapti-pañcaka:



mat-samo nāsti pāpātmā

nāparādhī ca kaścana

parihāre ‘pi lajjā me

kiṁ bruve puruṣottama



O Puruṣottama, there is no one as sinful and offensive
as I am. How can I describe myself? I even feel ashamed
to give up my sins.



yuvatīnāṁ yathā yūni

yunāṁ ca yuvatau yathā

mano ‘bhiramate tadvan

mano me ramatāṁ tvayi


                            336
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                             5/5/2017



Just as the minds of young ladies take pleasure in
thinking of young men, and the minds of young men take
pleasure in thinking of young women, kindly let my mind
take pleasure in You alone.



bhūmau skhalita-pādānāṁ

bhūmir evāvalambanam

tvayi jātāparādhānāṁ

tvam eva śaraṇaṁ prabho



Just as the ground is the only support for those whose
feet have slipped, so also You alone are the only
shelter, even for those who have offended You.



govinda-vallabhe rādhe

prārthaye tvām ahaṁ sadā

tvadīyam iti jānātu

govindo māṁ tvayā saha



O Śrīmatī Rādhikā, dearest of Lord Govinda, this is
always my request to You: may You and Govinda consider
me to be Yours.



rādhe vṛndāvanādhīśe

karuṇāmṛta-vāhini

kṛpayā nija-pādābja-

dāsyaṁ mahyaṁ pradīyatām



O Śrīmatī Rādhikā, O queen of Vṛndāvana, You are a
flowing river of nectarean compassion. Please be
merciful unto me and grant me the service of Your lotus
feet.



Thereafter, one should offer the remnants to śrī guru
and Vaiṣṇavas:



etat mahā-prasāda nirmālyaṁ śrī-gurave namaḥ

                           337
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                               5/5/2017


etat pānīya-jalaṁ śrī-gurave namaḥ

etat prasāda-tāmbūlaṁ śrī-gurave namaḥ

etat sarvaṁ sarva-sakhībhyo namaḥ

śrī paurṇamāsyai namaḥ

sarva vraja-vāsibhyo namaḥ

sarva vaiṣṇavebhyo namaḥ



The mantra for picking tulasī before the pūjā:



tulasy-amṛta-janmāsi

sadā tvaṁ keśava-priye

keśavārthaṁ vicinomi

varadā bhava śobhane



O Tulasī of effulgent beauty, you have been produced
from nectar during the churning of the milk ocean. You
are always dear to Lord Keśava. I pick your leaves only
for the worship of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. May you bestow upon me the
benediction that my worship of Kṛṣṇa will obtain
success.



Tulasī-pūjā:



nirmālya-gandha-puṣpādi-pānīya-jalaṁ

idam arghyaṁ śrī-tulasyai namaḥ



Tulasī-mantra:



nirmitā tvaṁ purā devair

arcitā tvaṁ surāsuraiḥ

tulasi hara me ‘vidyāṁ

pūjāṁ gṛhna namo ‘stu te



You came into being long ago, and are worshipped by gods
and demons alike. O Tulasī, my obeisance unto you.

                             338
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

Kindly dispel my ignorance and accept my worship.



Tulasī-praṇāma:



yā dṛṣṭā nikhilāgha-saṅgha-śamanī spṛṣtā vapuḥ pāvanī

rogānām abhivanditā nirasanī siktā ‘ntaka-trāsinī

pratyāsatti-vidhāyinī bhagavataḥ kṛṣṇasya saṁropitā

nyastā tac-caraṇe subhakti-phaladā tasyai tulasyai namaḥ



O Tulasī, I offer my respectful obeisances unto you.
Simply by seeing you all sins are destroyed. Simply by
touching you one’s body is purified. By offering
obeisances unto you all diseases are driven away. By
offering water unto you the fear of death is dispelled.
By planting you one obtains proximity to the Lord. By
offering you unto the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, one
obtains a special type of devotion, the rare fruit of
prema-bhakti.



After offering obeisances to tulasī, one should chant
the prescribed number of kṛṣṇa-nāma on tulasī beads with
sambandha-jñāna. While chanting the holy name, which is
supremely auspicious and the eternal truth, there is no
consideration of time, place, purity or impurity.
Thereafter, recite the following mantra, accept śrī-
kṛṣṇa-caraṇāmṛta and then touch it to the head:



aśeṣa-kleśa-niḥśeṣa-

kāraṇaṁ śuddha-bhakti-dam

kṛṣṇa-pādodakaṁ pītvā

śirasā dhārayāmy aham



Having drunk the water from the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
which bestows pure bhakti and causes the destruction of
unlimited miseries and pains, I take that water on my
head.



After that one should chant the following mantra and
accept some mahā-prasāda:



rudanti pātakāḥ sarve


                            339
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

niśvasanti muhur-muhuḥ

hā hā kṛtvā palāyanti

jagannāthānna-bhakṣaṇāt



When one simply takes the foodstuffs offered to
Jagannātha, all types of sins gasp, and crying out
“Alas! Alas!” flee for their lives.



Then, one should offer full prostrated obeisances with
the following mantra:



dorbhyāṁ padbhyāṁ ca jānubhyām

urasā śirasā dṛśā

manasā vacasā ceti

praṇāmo ‘ṣṭāṅga īritaḥ



I offer obeisances with eight parts: the arms, the feet,
the knees, the chest, the forehead, the mind, vision and
speech.



Thus ends the morning duties.



In the evening, one should chant the kāma-bīja, mūla-
mantra and kāma-gāyatrī twelve times. One should never
eat or drink anything that is not in the mode of
goodness and not offered to Śrī Bhagavān.



pathyaṁ pūtam anāmayantam

āhāryaṁ sāttvikaṁ viduḥ

rājasam indriya-preṣṭhaṁ

tāmasam ārtido ‘śuciḥ



Foods in the mode of goodness are wholesome, pure and do
not cause pain. Foods in the mode of passion are dear to
the senses. Foods in the mode of ignorance are unclean
and cause suffering.

One should observe vratas on Śrī Ekādaśī, appearance
days of viṣṇu-tattva and so forth, to one’s capacity.
One should never fall into bad association. Abandoning

                            340
Bhajan-rahasya.txt                              5/5/2017

such association is the virtuous practice of a Vaiṣṇava.



Thus ends the Saṅkṣepa-arcana-paddhati.




                          341
