Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

Bhakti-rasäyana




For further information, free downloads of all titles,

world tour lectures, and more, please visit our
websites:www.purebhakti.comwww.purebhakti.tv
www.backtobhakti.comwww.bhaktistore.comArcana-d
épikäBeyond NérväëaÇré Bhajana-rahasya Çré Bhakti-
rasämåta-sindhu-binduBhakti-tattva-vivekaÇré Brahma-
saàhitä Essence of the Bhagavad-gétäFive Essential
EssaysGoing Beyond VaikuëöhaHarmonyJaiva-dharmaLetters
From America Çré Manaù-çikñä My Çikñä-guru and Priya-
bandhu Pinnacle of DevotionÇré PrabandhävaléSecret
Truths of the BhagavatamSecrets of the Undiscovered
SelfÇiva-tattva Çré Båhad-bhägavatämåtaÇré Camatkära-
candrikäÇré Dämodaräñöakam Çré Gauòéya Géti-gucchaÇré
Gétä-govindaÇré Gopi-géta Çré Harinäma Mahä-mantraÇré
Navadvépa-dhäma-mähätmyaÇré Navadvépa-dhäma ParikramäÇré
Prema-sampuöa Çré Rädhä-kåñëa-gaëoddeça-dépikä Çré
Saìkalpa-kalpadrumaù Çré ÇikñäñöakaÇré UpadeçämåtaÇré
Vraja-maëòala ParikramäÇré Räya Rämänanda Saàväda Çréla
Bhakti Prajïäna Keçava Gosvämé –          His Life and
TeachingsThe Distinctive Contribution of           Çréla
Rüpa GosväméThe Essence of All AdviceThe Gift of Çré
Caitanya MahäprabhuThe Journey of the Soul The Nectar of
Govinda-léläThe Origin of Ratha-yäträThe Way of
LoveUtkalikä-vallaréVaiñëava-siddhänta-mäläVeëu-
gétaWalking with a SaintRays of the Harmonist
(periodical)BOOKS BY ÇRÉ ÇRÉMAD BHAKTIVEDÄNTA NÄRÄYAËA
GOSVÄMÉ MAHÄRÄJA




Bhakti-rasäyana

Śrī Śrīmad bhaktivedānta nārāyan.a Gosvāmī mahārājaçré
çré guru-gauraìgau jayataùvr.ndāvana • new delhi • san
francisco




Artwork on the front cover and color plates by Çyämaräëé
däsé © The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust. Used with
permission.Photograph of Çréla Bhaktivedänta Svämé
Mahäräja © The Bhaktivedanta Book Trust. Used with
permission. All rights reserved.
www.krishna.comPhotograph of Çréla Bhaktivedänta
Näräyaëa Gosvämé Mahäräja © Subala-sakhä däsa. Used with
permission.© 2011 Gaudiya Vedanta Publications. Some
Rights Reserved. Except where otherwise noted, content
in this book is licensed under the Creative Commons
Attribution-No Derivative Works 3.0 Unported License.To
view a copy of this license, visit
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/3.0/
Permissions beyond the scope of this license may be
available at www.purebhakti.com/pluslicense or write to:
gvp.contactus@gmail.com

Bhakti-rasäyana, 4th edition First edition:

                           1
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017




November 1994 – 1,000 copiesSecond edition

:



November 1997 – 2,000 copiesThird edition:




September 2006 – 1,000 copiesFourth edition:




September 2011 – 2,000 copies



Printed at Spectrum Printers,



Okhla Industrial Estate (India)

isbn 978-1-935428-37-4Library of Congress Control Number
2011937004British Library Cataloguing in Publication
Data. A catalogue record for this book is available from
the British LibraryCataloging in Publication Data--DK
Courtesy: D.K. Agencies (P) Ltd.
<docinfo@dkagencies.com>Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa, 1921-

           Bhakti-rasāyana



/



Bhaktivedānta



Nārāyaṇa



Gosvāmī



Mahārāja.




                             2
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT       5/3/2017

--



4th



ed.




p.



cm.



           Includes



verses



in



Sanskrit



(roman);



with



English



translation.

           Includes



index.



           ISBN


                         3
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT       5/3/2017



9781935428374

          1.



Bhakti



in



literature.



2.



Krishna



(Hindu



deity)



in



literature.



3.



Vaishnava



poetry,



Sanskrit--History



and




                         4
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                       5/3/2017

criticism.



I.



Title.



DDC



294.5925



23




     i

Contents

Publisher’s Note



i

Introduction



v

Maìgaläcaraëa



ix

Chapter

1.



The Earth Becomes Fortunate



1

2.



The Peacocks Dance to Kåñëa’s Flute Melody

                              5
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                      5/3/2017




13

3.



The Best Servant of Hari



25

4.



The Clouds, Rivers and Trees Serve Kåñëa



35

5.



Happiness in Separation



49

6.



The Gopés Desire to Become Birds and Deer



59

7.



The Animals of Vraja are Stunned



69

8.



The Gopés Glorify the Pulinda Girl



77

                           6
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                    5/3/2017


9.



Kåñëa Enjoys Playing with His Friends



89

10.



The Glories of Sakhya-rasa



99

11.



Nanda and Yaçodä’s Love for Kåñëa



111

12.



Mother Yaçodä’s Bhakti is Indescribable



125

13.



Mother Yaçodä Binds Kåñëa



137

14.



Pürva-räga, or Preliminary Attraction



151

15.



                             7
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017


Kåñëa’s Beauty is Unsurpassed



159

16.



The Nature of the Gopés’ Mahäbhäva



169

Bhakti-rasäyana verses



181

Glossary



193

Verse Index



203




  iPublisher’s NoteThe Path of LoveThe soul’s nature is
  to seek real freedom, to hanker for lasting pleasure.
  We seek satisfaction and happiness in the world around
  us, but our experiences over time expose the futility
  of such ephemeral pleasure. Enlightened souls, who are
  full of compassion, describe the reality of a
  permanent bliss based on a lasting spiritual
  existence. Their writings provide us with an intimate
  insight into reality, which is replete with variety,
  form, qualities and exquisite, lustrous personalities.
  Their writings also invite us to participate in the
  sweetness of ever-increasing transcendental love, or
  prema. They thus direct us to that ultimate
  destination, which is achieved by attaining the
  spiritual perfection that they themselves possess.
  What they describe is called the path of love,
  distinct among the philosophies of India as bhakti-
  yoga, or devotion to God.The Great Master Bhakti-yoga
  is the essence of the Vedas (India’s vast body of
  ancient Sanskrit scriptures; veda means “knowledge”).
  It is the path that all paths ultimately lead to,
  since it reveals the topmost condition of the heart.
  Although bhakti-yoga has been practised since time
  immemorial, the bhakti-yoga movement underwent a

                           8
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

  renaissance five hundred years ago in Bengal,
  coinciding with Europe’s own Renaissance period. The
  leading figure and reformer of this bhakti movement
  was Çré Kåñëa Caitanya, also known as Mahäprabhu, ‘the
  Great Master’. The general populace of India regard
  Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu as a most extraordinary saint,
  but actually, He is an avatära, an incarnation of the
  Lord who comes to this world with a specific mission.




iiii



Bhakti-rasäyana

He chose to incarnate as compassion personified in order
to benefit the world in the troubled Age of Kali (our
current epoch, the age of quarrel and hypocrisy).
According to Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, worldly social
distinctions are utterly irrelevant to one’s eternal
spiritual identity, which can easily be realized by
chanting the names of God in the mahä-mantra – Hare
Kåñëa, Hare Kåñëa, Kåñëa Kåñëa, Hare Hare, Hare Räma,
Hare Räma, Räma Räma, Hare Hare. The Mahä-mantraThe Hare
Kåñëa mahä-mantra is Çré Rädhä and Çré Kåñëa personified
as sacred sound. The vibration of the mantra is not a
material sound as it comes directly from the spiritual
platform and is beyond the realm of the mind. One can
chant it all day and night and never feel tired. The
more one chants, the more our spiritual consciousness is
revived. The mahä-mantra consists of three words: Hare,
Kåñëa, and Räma. Each word is in the vocative, a calling
out to Rädhä and Kåñëa.Kåñëa is the source of all
spiritual potency and Çré Rädhä is the complete
embodiment of that potency. She is known as Hara (one
who steals away) because She can captivate Kåñëa’s mind.
In the vocative case, “Hara” becomes “Hare”. Because He
bestows bliss upon the residents of Våndävana, He is
referred to as Kåñëa, the all-attractive one. The
extraordinary beauty of His transcendental form always
surcharges the minds and senses of the cowherd damsels
and the other residents of Vraja with ever increasing
spiritual bliss. For this reason He is glorified as
Räma.The Supreme Form of GodheadÇré Kåñëa (God) has many
forms. All of them are perfect, but the Vedic scriptures
state that Çré Kåñëa’s original form in Våndävana is the
‘most perfect’. That holy abode is fully resplendent
with His sweetness, which even predominates over His
divine opulence. The residents of that holy place are
imbued with such elevated feelings for the Supreme Lord
that their worship of Him is devoid




Publisher’s Note               iiiof the reverence
normally offered to God. Those with a parental
relationship with Him chastise Him, His friends defeat
Him in games and order Him about, and His beloved gopés
sometimes become angry with Him and refuse to speak with
Him. Such familiar and charming exchanges please Him

                           9
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

unlimitedly more than exalted, reverential prayers
offered by persons who do not have the same purity of
love for Him.In his preface to Kåñëa, The Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Çréla Bhaktivedänta Svämé
Mahäräja states, “Kåñëa is all-attractive, one should
know that all his desires should be focused on Kåñëa. In
the Bhagavad-gétä it is said that the individual person
is the proprietor or master of his own body but that
Kåñëa, who is the Supersoul present in everyone’s heart,
is the supreme proprietor and supreme master of each and
every individual body. As such, if we concentrate our
loving propensities upon Kåñëa only, then immediately
universal love, unity and tranquillity will be
automatically realized. When one waters the root of a
tree, he automatically waters the branches, twigs,
leaves and flowers; when one supplies food to the
stomach through the mouth, he satisfies all the various
parts of the body.” This book, which reveals wonderful
truths about the Supreme Person, will satisfy any
sincere seeker of the Truth. •      •About the AuthorOn
the auspicious day of Mauné Amävasyä, 1921, Çré Çrémad
Bhaktivedänta Näräyaëa Gosvämé Mahäräja took his divine
birth in a devout Vaiñëava family in Tivärépura, in the
state of Bihar, India.In February, 1946, he met his
gurudeva, Çré Çrémad Bhakti Prajïäna Keçava Gosvämé
Mahäräja, and his life of complete and exemplary
dedication to Gauòéya Vaiñëavism, or the path of kåñëa-
bhakti in the line of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu, began. He
accompanied his gurudeva on his extensive preaching
tours throughout India, actively assisting him in
propagating the




iviv



Bhakti-rasäyana

teachings of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu for the eternal
benefit of the living entities in this world. This
included regularly hosting the thousands of pilgrims
attending the yearly circumambulation of Çré Navadvépa-
dhäma, the appearance place of Çré Caitanya Mahäprabhu
and Çré Våndävana-dhäma, the appearance place of Çré
Kåñëa.His gurudeva had instructed him to translate the
writings of prominent Gauòéya Vaiñëavas into Hindi, a
task he assiduously assumed throughout his entire life
and which resulted in the publication of nearly fifty
Hindi sacred texts. These invaluable masterpieces are
currently being translated into English and other major
languages of the world.For many years, he travelled
throughout India to spread the message of Gauòéya
Vaiñëavism, and it was for this end, also, that in 1996,
he journeyed abroad. During the next fourteen years, he
circled the globe more than thirty times. Whether he was
in India or abroad, his preaching always bore the
distinctive characteristic of boldly unmasking any
misconception obscuring the specific purposes of Çré
Caitanya Mahäprabhu’s advent, in strict adherence to the
desire of Çréla Bhaktisiddhänta Sarasvaté Öhäkura
Prabhupäda and in perfect congruence with the

                           10
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                            5/3/2017

conceptions of Çréla Rüpa Gosvämé, Çré Caitanya
Mahäprabhu’s foremost follower. Thus, in present times,
in upholding the glorious tenets of the Gauòéya
sampradäya, he performed the function of a true äcärya.
•••••At the age of ninety years, on December 29, 2010,
at Cakra-tértha in Çré Jagannätha Puré-dhäma, he
concluded his pastimes in this world. The following day,
in Çré Navadvépa-dhäma, Çré Gaurasundara’s fully
empowered emissary, the very embodiment of His unique
compassion, was given samädhi. He will never cease to
reside in his divine instructions and in the hearts of
those who are devoted to him.




nitya-lélä-praviñöa oà viñëupäda

Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyan

.

a Gosvāmī Mahārāja

Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyan

a Gosvāmī Mahārāja

Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyan




nitya-lélä-praviñöa oà viñëupäda

Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Vāmana Gosvāmī Mahārāja




nitya-lélä-praviñöa oà viñëupäda

Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja




nitya-lélä-praviñöa oà viñëupäda

Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja




nitya-lélä-praviñöa oà viñëupäda

Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda




Here the

gopés

                           11
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                            5/3/2017


    are mutually hearing and describing Kåñëa pastimes,

gopés

    are mutually hearing and describing Kåñëa pastimes,

gopés

and as remembrance comes, they are seeing Kåñëa with the
eyes of

bhäva

. It appears that they are suffering due to separation,
but inside

them is great happiness. (Page

52

)




During the day while playing and jumping about with His

sakhäs

,

if Kåñëa, desiring to see the splendour of the forest,
would go to a

somewhat distant place, then with great speed the

sakhäs

    would run

sakhäs

    would run

sakhäs

to Him saying, “I will touch Him first! I will touch Him
first!” and in this

way they enjoyed life. (Page

89

)




For the purpose of increasing their eagerness, sometimes
Kåñëa hides,

and then the


                              12
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                               5/3/2017

sakhäs

    are unable to stay where they are and they begin

sakhäs

    are unable to stay where they are and they begin

sakhäs

searching for Him. If one of them catches a glimpse of
Him, then at

once they all race there. One after the other, they
embrace Kåñëa, and

laughing, Kåñëa embraces them in return. (Page

92

)




“Neither Brahmä, Çiva, nor even Lakñmé-devé – who
eternally

resides at Kåñëa’s chest in the form of a golden line –
has ever

received as much mercy as Yaçodä did from He who is the
bestower

of liberation.” (Page

147

)




“Those

vraja-gopés

    who had fully given their hearts to Çré Kåñëa,

vraja-gopés

    who had fully given their hearts to Çré Kåñëa,

vraja-gopés

would imitate His manner of speaking and His activities.
Since they

had offered their very souls to Him and always sang His
glories, they

completely forgot themselves and their family
interests.” (Page


                              13
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

159

)




But upon seeing Kåñëa, one will have no desire to remove
one’s

gaze from Him because He always appears new and fresh.
One will

perpetually remain thirsty to drink the nectar of His
appearance and

will never desire to look away. (Page

166

)




IntroductionAt the beginning of the second part of Çrîla
Sanåtana Gosvåmî’sÇrî B®had-bhågavatåm®ta, Jaimini ‰ßi
explains to Janamejayahow, after having heard the
description of Nårada’s quest thatcomprises the first
part of this exalted scripture, ParîkßitMahåråja’s
mother Uttarå said to her son, “My heart cannot
besatisfied if those devotees who, being indifferent to
any otherspiritual practice and spiritual attainment,
desire only the eternalservice of Çrîmatî Rådhikå,and
who perpetually sing Her gloriesand are immersed in
lovefor Her, attain residence in merely thesame
Vaiku√†ha as so many other devotees do. This is a matter
ofgreat sorrow! And I cannot tolerate that this may be
the final des-tination for devotees like Çrî Nandaråya
and Çrî Yaçodå. Theremust certainly be a suitable abode
for them that is superior toVaiku√†ha. If there is such
a place, then please describe it anddeliver me from this
doubt.” (B®had-bhågavatåm®ta(2.1.21–2, 24))Parîkßit
Mahåråja replied, “Although I could satisfy you
byanswering your question with the words of the Çrutiand
Sm®ti,instead, by the mercy of my spiritual master, Çrî
Çukadeva, I willfirst relate a historical narration that
will dispel all of yourdoubts. Then I will speak those
essential verses of the scriptures.”(B®had-
bhågavatåm®ta(2.1.34–5))Then, after hearing the
incomparable story of Gopa-kumårathat comprises the
second part of the B®had-bhågavatåm®ta,Janamejaya said
to Jaimini ‰ßi, “Fearing that these descriptionswill now
come to an end, my heart is feeling great sorrow.




Therefore now please give me such potent nectar that,
uponhearing which, my heart will be fully purified for
all time.”(B®had-bhågavatåm®ta(2.7.89))Jaimini replied,
“O my child Janamejaya, your father, ÇrîParîkßit,

                           14
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

feeling transcendental pleasure upon describing the glo-
ries of Goloka, next sang with a wonderful and sweet
devotionalmoodnumerous versesfrom two great epics that
are the veryessence of the Çrutisand Sm®tis. With great
happiness I wanderin this world singing these verses,
thereby mitigating the pangs ofseparation from your
father that I feel.” (B®had-bhågavatåm®ta(2.7.90–1))Then
Jaimini ‰ßi went on to quote four verses from Brahma-
saμhitåand fifty-nine verses from Çrîmad-Bhågavatamthat
col-lectively have come to be known as bhakti-rasåyana,
nectar-tonicthat stimulates devotion unto the Supreme
Lord Çrî K®ß√a. Thisbook is a translation of lectures
spoken originally in Hindi by our esteemed Çrîla
Gurudeva, oμ viß√upåda aß†ottara-çataÇrîÇrîmad
Bhaktivedånta Nåråya√a Mahåråja. Spoken in 1991 atÇrî
Keçavajî Gau∂îya Ma†ha in Mathurå, this material
compriseshis commentary on twenty-eight of these verses
that are the veryessence of the Tenth Canto of Çrîmad-
Bhågavatam. In gradationthese verses glorify the
devotion of the different classes of devo-tees in Vraja,
culminating in the topmost bhakti of the vraja-gopîs. In
his ongoing publication of Vaiß√ava literature in
theEnglish language, Çrîla Gurudeva mentions repeatedly
that he issimply following in the footsteps of his dear
friend and instruct-ing spiritual master, nitya-lîlå-
praviß†a oμ viß√upåda Çrî Çrîmad A.C. Bhaktivedånta
Swami Prabhupåda. Çrîla Prabhupåda single-handedly and
in a relatively short period of time spread the
teachings of K®ß√a consciousness around the entire
world. His

Bhakti-rasåyana




translations and writings set the standard for the
literary presen-tation of Vaiß√ava philosophy, and we
sincerely pray that ourcurrent efforts are pleasing to
him.Grateful acknowledgement is extended to Lava∫ga-latå
dåsî forcopy-editing this new third edition, to Çånti
dåsî for proofread-ing the final manuscript, to Atula-
k®ß√a dåsa for checking theSanskrit, to K®ß√a-prema dåsa
for designing the new cover and toSubala-sakhå dåsa for
providing the new photograph of ÇrîlaGurudeva. It is the
earnest prayer of all of us serving in Gau∂îyaVedånta
Publications that Çrîla Gurudeva, who is the
veryembodiment of arasika Vaiß√ava, be pleased with our
efforts.We offer obeisances to him time and again for
giving us suchwonderful explanations of the nectar-tonic
that Parîkßit Mahåråjagave to Uttarå, Jaimini ‰ßi gave
to Janamejaya, and SanåtanaGosvåmî gave to the
inhabitants of this world.An aspiring servant of the
Vaiß√avas,Prema-vilåsa dåsathe holy day of Çaradîya-
pür√imå10th October, 2003Gopînåtha-bhavana, Çrî
V®ndåvana

Introduction




                           15
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

Ma∫galåcara√aoμ ajñåna-timiråndhasyajñånåñjana-
çalåkayåcakßur unmîlitaμ yenatasmai çri-gurave nama˙I
offer my most humble prostratedobeisancesunto the
spiritualmaster, who has opened my eyes, which were
blinded by thedarkness of ignorance, with the torchlight
of knowledge.våñchå-kalpa-tarubhyaç cak®på-sindhubhya
eva capatitånåμ påvenebhyovaiß√avebhyo namo nama˙I offer
obeisances to the Vaiß√avas, who just like desire trees
canfulfil the desires of everyone and who are full of
compassion forconditioned souls.namo mahå-
vadånyåyak®ß√a-prema-pradåya tek®ß√åya k®ß√a-caitanya-
nåmne gaura-tviße nama˙I offer obeisances to Çrî
Caitanya Mahåprabhu, who is K®ß√aHimself. He has assumed
the golden hue of Çrîmatî Rådhikå andis munificently
distributing k®ß√a-prema.




he k®ß√a karu√å-sindhodîna-bandho jagat-pategopeça
gopikå-kåntarådhå-kånta namo ’stu teI offer obeisancesto
Çrî K®ß√a, who is an ocean of mercy, thefriend of the
distressed and the source of all creation. He is
themaster of the gopasand the lover of the gopîsheaded
by ÇrîmatîRådhikå.tapta-kåñcana-gaurå∫girådhe
v®ndåvaneçvariv®ßabhånu-sute devipra√amåmi hari-priyeI
offer obeisances to Çrîmatî Rådhikå, whose complexion is
likemolten gold and who is the queen of V®ndåvana. She
is thedaughter of V®ßabhånu Mahåråja and is very dear to
Çrî K®ß√a.hå devi kåku-bhara-gadgadayådya våcåyåce
nipatya bhuvi da√∂avad udbha†årti˙asya prasådam
abudhasya janasya k®tvågåndharvike nija gane ga√anåμ
vidhehiO Devî Gåndharvikå, in utter desperation I throw
myself on theground like a stick and with a choked voice
humbly implore Youto please be merciful to this fool and
count me as one of Yourown.a∫ga-çyåmalima-ccha†åbhir
abhito mandîk®tendîvaraμjå∂yaμ jågu∂a-rocißåμ vidadhataμ
pa††åmbarasya çriyåv®ndåra√ya-nivåsinaμ h®di lasad-
dåmåbhir åmodaraμrådhå-skandha-niveçitojjvala-bhujaμ
dhyåyema dåmodaram

Bhakti-rasåyana




Whose dark bodily lustre is millions of times more
beautiful than the blue lotus flower, whose refulgent
yellow garmentsrebuke the radiance of golden ku∫kuma,
whose residence is ÇrîV®ndåvana-dhåma, whose chest is
beautified by a swinging vaijayantî garland, and whose
splendorous left hand rests uponthe right shoulder of
Çrîmatî Rådhikå – I meditate upon that
ÇrîDåmodara.bhaktyå vihînå aparådha-lakßyai˙kßiptåç ca
kåmådi-tara∫ga-madhyek®på-mayi tvåμ çara√aμ
prapannåv®nde numaste cara√åravindamDevoid of devotion
and guilty of committing unlimited offences,I am being
tossed about in the ocean of material existence by
theturbulent waves of lust, anger, greed and so forth.
Therefore, O merciful V®ndå-devî, I take shelter of you
and offer obeisancesunto your lotus feet.gurave
gauracandråyarådhikåyai tad-ålayek®ß√åya k®ß√a-
bhaktåyatad-bhaktåya namo nama˙I offer obeisances to the
spiritual master, to Çrî Gauracandra, toÇrîmatî Rådhikå

                           16
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

and Her associates, to Çrî K®ß√a and His devotees,and to
all Vaiß√avas.vairågya-yug-bhakti-rasaμ
prayatnairapåyayan måm anabhîpsum andhamk®påmbhudhir ya˙
para-du˙kha-du˙khîsanåtanaμ taμ prabhum åçrayåmi

Ma∫galåcara√a




I was unwilling to drink the nectar of bhaktipossessed
of renun-ciation, but Çrî Sanåtana Gosvåmî, being an
ocean of mercy whocannot tolerate the sufferings of
others, made me drink it.Therefore I take shelter of him
as my master.çrî-caitanya-mano-’bhîß†aμsthåpitaμ yena
bhütalesvayaμ rüpa˙ kadå mahyaμdadåti sva-padåntikamWhen
will Çrî Rüpa Gosvåmî, who has established the mission
inthis world that fulfils the internal desire of Çrî
CaitanyaMahåprabhu, give me shelter at his lotus feet?
yaμ pravrajantam anupetam apeta-k®tyaμdvaipåyano viraha-
kåtara åjuhåvaputreti tan-mayatayå taravo ’bhinedustaμ
sarva-bhüta-h®dayaμ munim ånato ’smiI offer obeisances
to Çrî Çukadeva Gosvåmî, who can enter thehearts of all
living entities. When he left home without under-going
the purificatory processes such as accepting the
sacredthread, his father Vyåsa cried out, “Oh my son!”
As if they wereabsorbed in that same feeling of
separation, only the trees echoedin response to his
call.tavaivåsmi tavaivåsmina jîvåmi tvayå vinåiti
vijñåya devi tvaμnaya måμ cara√åntikamI am Yours! I am
Yours! I cannot live without You! O Devî(Rådhå), please
understand this and bring me to Your feet.

Bhakti-rasåyana

Bhakti-rasåyana




Bhakti-rasåyana




Chapter OneThe Earth Becomes FortunateIn the final
chapter of Çrî B®had-bhågavatåm®ta, after the storyof
Gopa-kumåra has been completed, Sanåtana Gosvåmî
quotesverses from the Tenth Canto of Çrîmad-
Bhågavatamthat ParîkßitMahåråja spoke to his mother,
Uttarå. They are verses of verybeautiful poetry that
stimulate the sentiment of bhakti. Stringingthese verses
together, Sanåtana Gosvåmî has composed a necklacefor
the benefit of the sådhakasof this world, and when
sådhakaskeep these verses in their hearts, it is as if
they are wearing thisnecklace around their necks. And if
while chanting the holy namethey sometimes call out
these verses, it will increase the spiritualpleasure
(ånanda) in their chanting. This compilation of verses
is known as bhakti-rasåyana, the nectar-tonic of
devotional mel-lows. When the material body becomes
weakened by illness andone is unable to eat anything, by

                           17
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

drinking tonic the digestion andthe pulse again become
strong. Similarly, in the realm of bhakti,for those in
whom intense hankering for spontaneous
devotion(rågånuga-bhakti) has arisen, the verses in this
final chapter arelike nectar-tonic. In the moodof Kamala
Mañjarî, his eternalidentity within K®ß√a’s pastimes,
Bhaktivinoda ˇhåkura prayed:nåhaμ vande tava cara√ayor
dvandvam advanda-heto˙kümbhîpåkaμ gurum api hare nårakaμ
nåpanetumramyå-råmå-m®dutanulatå nandane
nåbhirastuμbhåve bhåve h®daya-bhavane bhåvayeyaμ
bhavantam

1




“O Lord, I am not performing bhajanaso that You will
removethe worldly misery that is strangling me. I am not
praying at Yourfeet for entrance into the heavenly
garden of Nandana-kånanawhere one can enjoy with
beautiful women for a very long time,nor am I praying
for liberation so that I will never again have tosuffer
for nine months in the womb of a mother and never
againbe punished by the messengers of Yamaråja. I pray
that in thecore of my heart You will increase the
bhåvaof V®ndåvana, whereYou are roaming with the
gopîsand enjoying amorous pastimes.In meditation on the
descriptions of these pastimes, I will at oncebecome
completely lost in prema– thisis what I am praying for.I
am praying that I may take birth as a gopaor gopî, or
even as a peacock or tree or anything, anywhere within
the sixty-foursquare-mile Vraja-ma√∂ala. There I will
acquire the company ofa rasikadevotee who, being full of
the bhåvaof V®ndåvana, willdescribe all of these
pastimes to me, and then my life will bemeaningful.”When
sådhakasstudy and learn these verses, deeply
meditatingwithin themselves on their meanings while
chanting the holyname, they will act as stimuli to fully
experience the mooddescribed in the verse above. Then
one’s mind will not wanderhere and there. We should not
just walk around talking to otherswhile chanting, but
taking our chanting beadswe should sit in asolitary
place and give it our mind and heart. Our
previousåcåryaschanted all night long, meditating on one
verse afteranother. For half an hour the waves of the
bhåvaof one particularverse would be coming to them:
sometimes they would be fullysubmerged in those waves,
sometimes they would rise to the surface and float on
those waves, and then they would move onto the next
verse. As they did this more and more the whole
nightwould pass, and where it went, they wouldn’t know.
Thisis thetraditional method of performing bhajana.

2

Bhakti-rasåyana




Through these verses Parîkßit Mahåråja is making the
bhaktiof his mother steady and strengthening her
determination forgopî-bhåva, and through these same

                           18
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

verses Sanåtana Gosvåmî is nurturing us. There is a
blend of so many different bhåvasinV®ndåvana, but in the
end, applying some polish to these senti-ments, he
emphasises gopî-bhåva. There are many verses here,and
they are all beneficial to the cultivation of bhajana.
To developand strengthen this bhåvawithin us, we will
study these versesinsequence, and from this endeavour
intense hankering for thisparticular devotional
sentiment will certainly arise within us.dhanyeyam adya
dhara√î t®√a-vîrudhas tvat-påda-sp®ço druma-latå˙
karajåbhim®ß†å˙nadyo ’draya˙ khaga-m®gå˙
sadayåvalokairgopyo ’ntare√a bhujayor api yat-sp®hå
çrî˙Çrîmad-Bhågavatam (10.15.8); B®had-bhågavatåm®ta
(2.7.107)[Çrî K®ß√a said to Balaråma:] Today this land,
along with all itsgreen grass, has become fortunate due
to receiving the touch ofyour lotus feet. And receiving
the touch of the fingers of yourlotus hands, the trees,
creepers and bushes consider that they haveattained the
greatest treasure. Receiving your affectionate
glances,the rivers, mountains, birds and animals are all
feeling fully grati-fied. But most fortunate of all are
the vraja-gopîs, who have beenembraced to Your strong
chest, a favour that even Lakßmî-devîherself always
desires.This verse describes the time when K®ß√a is at
the junction of His pauga√∂a-lîlå(ages six to ten) and
kaiçora-lîlå(ages ten tosixteen). At this time His full
beauty and charm are becomingmore apparent, and His
limbs are filling out. He would feel shyif He were to
remain naked at this age. Now He enjoys taking thecows
out to graze, and jumping about and creating mischief
withHis friends. At this age His form is like a bud that
is beginningto open; it has not yet become a flower, but
it is gradually opening

3

Chapter One




and becoming more charming. Previously no fragrance
camefrom the bud, and no bee would have been hovering
around it.But as it opens more and more, the fragrance
begins to come andthere is nectar available to the bee.
When it spreads out andbecomes fully mature, it means
that K®ß√a has reached the kaiçoraage. Now that K®ß√a
and Baladeva have become a little older,their forms have
become very charming. Their feet have alsobecome bigger;
previously they were thin from heel to toe, butnow like
ripe bananas their feet have become big and very
soft,and whereas before the soles of their feet had
yellowish complex-ions, now they have begun to take on a
reddish hue. Now K®ß√ahas become a little clever in
speaking; instead of always speakingdirectly, He has
learned to speak in a roundabout way. These areall
symptoms of this age.His newfound cleverness in speech
is evident in His speakingof this verse. To avoid
praising Himself, He uses the presence ofBaladeva Prabhu
as a pretext to express His feelings. Because atthis age
He has “become” a little intelligent, He realises that
Heshould never praise Himself; praising oneself is like
committingsuicide. Here He wants to describe how
V®ndåvana is more glorious than any place within the

                           19
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

three worlds, and even moreglorious than Vaiku√†ha. He
begins by saying that the Earth isfortunate. Why is the
Earth fortunate? Because of the presence of India. Why
is India so glorious? Because of the presence
ofV®ndåvana. And why is V®ndåvana so glorious? Because
of thepresence of the gopasand gopîs. Why are the
gopasand gopîsglo-rious? Because amongst them are K®ß√a
and Rådhå. And why areThey glorious? Because of the
mutual premabetween Them, andthat is our highest
objective. If not for the amorous love of ÇrîRådhå and
K®ß√a, then all of our endeavours would be meaning-less.
It is prayed for again and again by the topmost
devotees, andRådhå’s premais so glorious that it
overpowers K®ß√a Himself.

4

Bhakti-rasåyana




But He doesn’t describe all of this directly by saying,
“I am thesupreme ornament that beautifies V®ndåvana.”
Because He isnow entering His kaiçoraage, when speaking
He knows how tokeep this feeling hidden and how to
skilfully reveal it.Together K®ß√a and Balaråma are
taking the cows out to graze,and upon seeing the beauty
and splendour of the V®ndåvanaforest, at once K®ß√a
becomes overwhelmed with emotion. Whatis the meaning of
“V®ndåvana”? It means the forest of v®ndå, ortulasî.
There are many other wonderful trees and plants
foundthere, but the tulasî tree is primary. It can also
mean the forestwhere the cowherd girl V®ndå-devî is
queen. Why is she knownas the queen of V®ndåvana?
Because she arranges amorous meet-ings between Çrî Rådhå
and K®ß√a. Another meaning ofv®ndåis“group”, meaning
groups of cows, gopasand gopîs, andavana canmean “one
who nourishes and protects”. So V®ndåvana can alsomean
the ones who provide stimuli that nurture and
increasefeelings of love in Çrî Govinda and the cows,
gopasand gopîs.More meanings have been given, but these
three are primary.As K®ß√a was speaking this verse, He
was remembering Hisown pastimes, and waves of bhåvabegan
to flow inside Him. AsHe was going along with His
friends, the joy He felt knew nolimits, and He said, “My
dear brother, today P®thivî-devî (theEarth) has become
fortunate, and the hairs of her body, which arethe
grass, creepers, vines and trees, are standing on end in
ecstaticrapture. The grass, creepers and vines,
receiving the touch of yourlotus feet, and the trees,
being touched by your hands as you pickfruits and
flowers, have today become fully gratified. And
therivers, mountains, birds, deer and all other animals,
receivingaffectionate glances from you, have today
become especially for-tunate. But the most fortunate of
all are the gopîs, who havereceived what even Lakßmî-
devî herself desires – being embracedbetween your two
strong arms.”

5

Chapter One


                           20
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017




From the very beginning of creation, P®thivî-devî has
beenserving Bhagavån. Whenever he desired to assume an
incarna-tion, he would descend on this Earth and grace
the land with hisfootprints. Varåha held the Earth on
his snout, and at that timeP®thivî-devî became his wife,
and from them a son, Narakåsura,was born. And the Earth
is always in contact with the Lord’sform of Çeßa as he
holds her on his head. From time immemorialshe has been
receiving such good opportunities, but K®ß√a
tellsBalaråma, “Today, by receiving the touch of your
feet, the Earthhas become especially fortunate. Why?
Because you are now atthe junction of your pauga√∂aand
kaiçoraages and your lotusfeet are especially soft, and
such a nice fragrance is coming fromthem. You move along
the Earth like an intoxicated baby ele-phant. Has the
Earth ever received such an opportunity before?Today the
Earth has really become fortunate.”Here someone may
point out that at that time K®ß√a had beenin contact
with the V®ndåvana forest for only ten-and-a-half
years,whereas Çrî Råmacandra wandered in the forest of
Dandakaranyafor fourteen years. In bare feet he also
walked the entire distanceto South India before entering
Lanka, so did P®thivî-devî notbecome as fortunate then
as she did during k®ß√a-lîlå? But Råmawas banished to
the forest, and when in the last year of his exileRåva√a
kidnapped Sîtå, he wandered here and there crying
inanguish. Therefore at that time P®thivî-devî certainly
became fortunate from the touch of his feet, but she
must have also feltvery sad. She really became fortunate
when K®ß√a came in animmensely beautiful form; with a
peacock feather in His crown,He would smile as He was
decorated by His mother in the morn-ing, and then,
accompanied by Çrîdåmå and Subala and the othersakhås,
He would take the cows out to graze and jump about
withthe calves. Just as the young offspring of a deer
playfully jumpabout, He would go along with all of His
friends with a happy

6

Bhakti-rasåyana




heart. Picking flowers with their own hands, they would
makegarlands and decorate each other, and arriving at
places likeKusuma-sarovara, Rådhå-ku√∂a and Çyåma-ku√∂a,
they wouldenjoy pastimes that were saturated with rasa.
With special careK®ß√a would string one garland that was
not meant for any of thesakhås, and feeling great
happiness as He thought of whom Hewould place this
garland on, He tucked it away. Who can esti-mate the
great good fortune of those flowers, being picked
andmade into a garland by K®ß√a’s own beautiful hands?
When inthe evening He would place that garland on a
certain devotee, He would feel supremely blissful. Did
any of this happenin råma-lîlå? There was constant
heartbreak in Råmacandra’s pastimes,but in contrast in
k®ß√a-lîlåthere was so much carefree happiness.In the
same way as we may caress one person whom we loveand

                           21
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

lovingly slap another, Bhagavån has touched the Earth in
different ways in his different incarnations. Råmacandra
touchedthe Earth, and N®siμhadeva also touched the
Earth. Assuming afearful form, N®siμhadeva appeared, and
being extremely angryhe killed Hira√yakaçipu. All of the
residents of the heavenly andlower planetary systems
were petrified with fear, and at that timethe Earth did
not experience great pleasure. But when K®ß√atouched the
Earth in such a beautiful form, she really became
fortunate.The rivers, especially the Yamunå, also became
fortunate. Atthat time Månasî-ga∫gå was also a river,
though now it is in theform of a pond, and it also
became fortunate. He would lovinglyglance towards the
rivers because there He would sport with thegopîsand
sakhås. The rivers would make a sweet sound as
theyflowed gently, and bees would be hovering around the
bloominglotuses. The soft breeze would carry the
fragrance, and the entirescene would be so beautiful.
Through the bestowal of His affec-tionate glances, He
would also shower the nectar of His kindness

7

Chapter One




upon the hills and mountains, because near them were
veryattractive kuñjaswhere there would be very beautiful
grass, andon the pretext of taking the cows to graze He
would go there.Sitting on the large rocks with His
friends, they would decorateone another. These kuñjas,
such as the ones near Kusuma-sarovara,were very
beautiful, and there He would enjoy with the
gopîsaswell.This verse describes four benedictions:
receiving K®ß√a’s affec-tionate glances, receiving the
touch of His feet, receiving thetouch of His hands and
being embraced by His arms, as the gopîswere. When K®ß√a
would be taking the cows out to graze, fromhidden
positions the gopîswould lovingly glance at Him, andthen
He would glance towards them with such affection that
itwould immerse them in remembrance of His sweetness. In
thesame way He would glance towards the different birds
and animals, and from this they also became fortunate.
Sometimes apeacock, being maddened in bhåva, would come
near Him, andHe would gently stroke it with His hand.
Sometimes He wouldcall a parrot, and when it flew onto
His hand, while stroking itgently He would teach it to
speak and then listen to what theparrot said back. The
calves would also receive the touch of Hishands. Very
young calves – perhaps only a few days old – forget-ting
the company of their mothers, would jump along as
theyaccompanied K®ß√a to the forest. As they proceeded
further andfurther, they would become fatigued, so K®ß√a
would take themon His lap and massage their legs, and
with great love He wouldspeak sweet words to them. Tell
me – how much good fortunedid those calves possess? He
would also take the sakhåson His lapand stroke them, and
in this way Subala and others received thetouch of His
hands. Considering the diverse sentiments of
theresidents of V®ndåvana, He touches them in
differentways. WhenK®ß√a takes the cows and His friends
to drink from and sport in

                           22
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017


8

Bhakti-rasåyana




the rivers, the rivers have one type of sentiment, and
when Hegoes there with the gopîs, they have a different
type of bhåva.Receiving the touch of K®ß√a’s feet, the
rivers swell in spiritualecstasy. The trees have the
sentiment of sakhås, and they receivethe touch of both
His hands and feet. The cows have the senti-ment of
being His mother, and the calves have the sentiment
ofsakhås. The creepers have the devotional feelings of
sakhîs, andwhen He picks flowers from them, it is as if
He is teasing a gopîwith His touch. The gopîsalso
receive the touch of K®ß√a’s lotusfeet:yat te sujåta-
cara√åmburuhaμ staneßubhîtå˙ çanai˙ priya dadhîmahi
karkaçeßutenå†avîm a†asi tad vyathate na kiμ
svitkürpådibhir bhramati dhîr bhavad-åyußåμ na˙Çrîmad-
Bhågavatam (10.31.19)[The gopîssaid:] O dear one, Your
lotus feet are so soft that weplace them gently on our
breasts, fearing that they will be harmed.Our life rests
only in You, and therefore our minds are filled
withanxiety that Your tender feet might be wounded by
pebbles asYou roam about on the forest path.The gopîsare
arguing with their own minds. Their minds aresaying to
them, “Why are you worrying about K®ß√a? There is
nonecessity.”But from deep within their hearts, from
their very souls, thegopîsreply, “We are upset because
K®ß√a’s feet are very soft, andwe are afraid that they
will be pricked by thorns and pebbles. Wedesire that He
should never feel any pain.”“Is K®ß√a blind? He has
eyes, doesn’t He? He can see where toplace His feet
while walking.”“O mind, the calves run here and there,
and do they only goto safe and smooth places? They run
near the mountains, riversand jungles, and they also
have hooves that protect them from

9

Chapter One




sharp objects. But if K®ß√a goes to such places, His
feet will beburned by the hot sand or pricked by thorns
and pebbles. O mind,you have no intelligence!”“But in
V®ndåvana there are no such thorns and
pebbles.Everything here is viçuddha-sattva. They appear
to be ordinarythorns, but it is as if they are made of
rubber. Will rubber thornsprick your feet? They give a
very soft touch to K®ß√a’s tender feetwhen He steps on
them. And the pebbles are softer than butter!By the
influence of viçuddha-sattva, P®thivî-devî has
decoratedher landscape with these soft and golden
pebbles so K®ß√a willnever feel any pain.”In this way
they were arguing with their minds. The gopîsreceived
the touch of those feet in the råsa dance, a
benedictionthat even Lakßmî-devî desires, and Brahmå is
also always meditat-ingon those feet:åhuç ca te nalina-

                           23
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

nåbha padåravindaμyogeçvarair h®di vicintyam agådha-
bodhai˙Çrîmad-Bhågavatam (10.82.48)Such great
storehouses of knowledge as Lord Brahmå, Lord Çiva,the
Kumåras and Çukadeva Gosvåmî are always trying to remem-
ber K®ß√a’s lotus feet, but only with great difficulty
do those feetappear in their meditation. Responding to
K®ß√a’s teasing withjealous anger, the gopîssay, “You
have instructed us to meditate,but realisation of You
rarely comes even in the meditation of themost highly
learned devotees! We want You to come back toV®ndåvana.
And those feet that are being meditated on by somany –
we desire to play with them directly. What to speak
ofholding them within our brains in meditation, we
desire to holdthem close to us. Meditation will not
satisfy us, so we won’t do it!”They desire to receive
the touch of His feet while they are decorating Him, and
then they will also receive the touch of Hishands. And
in the end they will receive the benediction of being

10

Bhakti-rasåyana




embraced between His two strong arms. K®ß√a will be
touchingtheir feet also, when they exhibit jealous anger
(måna) and He istrying to appease them. Then everything
is reversed, and Lakßmîalso desires all of this.So in
this verse, when K®ß√a says, “My dear brother, today
theEarth has become glorious,” He is simply using the
presence ofBaladeva Prabhu as a pretext so that the
sweetness of K®ß√aHimself, the sweetness of the gopîs,
and the glories of V®ndåvanacan all be specifically
described. And why has V®ndåvana becomeglorious? Because
in that place the grass and creepers received thetouch
of K®ß√a’s feet, its vines and trees received the touch
of Hishands, and its rivers, mountains, birds and
animals received Hisaffectionate glances. But above all
V®ndåvana is especially gloriousbecause of the presence
of the gopîs, whom K®ß√a Himself serves.

11

Chapter One




Chapter TwoThe Peacocks Dance to K®ß√a’s Flute
MelodyAfter preparing lunch for K®ß√acandra and
Baladeva, Yaçodåalong with Nanda Båbå follows them for a
great distance as theytake the cows out to graze for the
day. Finally, after bidding themfarewell for the day,
they return home. After cooking for K®ß√a,Çrîmatî
Rådhikå and Her sakhîsreturn to Yåva†a. As
Rådhikå’ssakhîssit near Her, each of them in their own
specific parties asta†astha(neutral), svapakßa(belonging
to Rådhikå’s own group)and suh®t(friendly), they all
begin to meditate on K®ß√a. Theybecome deeply
spellbound, and when He sometimes appears totheir

                           24
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

internal vision, they become enthralled in the mellow
ofdivine separation (viraha-rasa). Seeing how Rådhikå is
especiallyimmersed in viraha-rasaand oblivious to all
external considera-tions, the sakhîscall out to Her and
bring even more remembranceof K®ß√a’s pastimes to Her by
speaking this verse:v®ndåvanaμ sakhi bhuvo vitanoti
kîrtiμyad devakî-suta-padåmbuja-labdha-lakßmigovinda-
ve√um anu matta-mayüra-n®tyamprekßyådri-sånv-avaratånya-
samasta-sattvamÇrîmad-Bhågavatam (10.21.10); B®had-
bhågavatåm®ta (2.7.108)O sakhîRådhå, V®ndåvana is more
glorious than the heavenlyplanets, Vaiku√†ha, and even
more glorious than Ayodhyå andDvårakå-purî, because it
has been graced with the footprints of

13




the son of Devakî. And only in this V®ndåvana are the
peacocksdancing in rhythm to the flute melody of
Govinda. Hearing thesound of the flute and seeing the
peacocks dancing, all of thebirds, animals and other
living entities have become stunned.Here “Devakî” refers
to the other name of Yaçodå, so in thisverse devakî-
sutameans Yaçodå-nandana K®ß√a, and His footprintsare
beautifying V®ndåvana. When Akrüra and later Uddhava
wentto Nandagråma, they saw these footprints everywhere.
Seeingthem, Akrüra fell down to offer obeisances and
rolled on theground, and crying profusely said, “Today I
am so fortunate tohave the darçanaof K®ß√a’s lotus
feet!”Playing very deep notes on the flute, Govinda
enters the forestnear Govardhana. Immediately all the
peacocks approach Himmaking the ke-kå sound, and they
see that He appears like a darkraincloud. Because He
uses the end holes of the flute to producevery deep
notes, His playing of the flute is like thunder, and
Hisyellow cloth is like lightning. The peacocks become
maddened,and forming a circle around K®ß√a, they begin
dancing with greatbhåvato the flute melody. Hearing the
sound of the flute, allsattva– meaning “living entities”
– become stunned and abandontheir usual course of
activities; animals such as tigers and bearseven abandon
their violent natures. Sattvacan also mean
thateverything in the spiritual world is viçuddha-
sattva, comprised ofpure spiritual energy. There is not
a touch of mundane qualitiesof goodness (sattva),
passion(rajas) or ignorance (tamas) in thatrealm. There
are so many objects in Vaiku√†ha, and they are
allviçuddha-sattva. Especially it is known as the
essence of the hlådinîand saμvitpotencies combined,
which is found in the hearts ofthe eternal
rågåtmikådevotees there. If greed arises in the heartof
a living entity for the sentiment of those devotees and
he per-forms bhajanafollowing in their footsteps, then
when even onemolecule of their devotion reflects into
his heart, it can be called

14

Bhakti-rasåyana




                           25
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017


sattva.There are three kinds of sattva:viçuddha-sattva,
sattva andmiçra-sattva[miçrameans “mixed”]. Miçra-
sattvaexists withinthe conditioned souls, sattvawithin
the liberated souls who havenot yet developed bhakti,
and viçuddha-sattvawithin the dhåmaand Bhagavån’s
eternal associates.Here, with some jealous anger, the
gopîsare revealing the feel-ings of their hearts: “All
of the animals, birds, insects and every-thing of
V®ndåvana has become fortunate. In an independentway
K®ß√a is bestowing His touch on everyone and everything
inV®ndåvana. When He climbs the hills His feet are
placed hereand there, and even the trees and flowers are
receiving His touch.But there is no possibility of us
receiving this benediction, andtherefore in V®ndåvana we
are the most unfortunate people.”As we mentioned before,
there are thorns in V®ndåvana also,but before K®ß√a
steps on them they become softer than
butter.Experiencing the touch of His feet, they melt in
divine bliss.With jealous anger the gopîsare saying, “As
of yet our hearts havenot become similarly melted in
k®ß√a-prema; therefore if we couldbecome thorns or
blades of grass in V®ndåvana, our lives wouldthen become
successful. For us there are so many obstacles. Weare
not able to go before Him and touch His feet and speak
with Him. We are not able to fan Him or serve Him in any
wayduring the daytime; there are so many restrictions
upon us, butthere are no such restrictions whatsoever
for all of the other livingentities in V®ndåvana. If we
were to become blades of grass, orthorns, or vines, or
ponds, or the dust of V®ndåvana, we couldreceive His
touch; but in this form it is not possible.” Here,
inexpressing their jealous anger, they are describing
the good for-tune of the land of V®ndåvana. They go on
to say that Bhagavånis also present in heaven in the
form of Våmana, in a form withthousands of heads and in
other forms also. Although he is alsopresent in these
forms, they are partial forms; all incarnations are

15

Chapter Two




not equal. Those incarnations that possess more of the
Lord’squalities, potencies and rasaare superior. K®ß√a,
Råma andN®siμha possess more of these in comparison to
other incarna-tions, and are therefore known as
paråvastha-avatåras. But ofthese three, K®ß√a is
avatårî, the source of all incarnations, andthe very
basis of all rasa– raso vai sa˙. So because He is
sportingthere, V®ndåvana is the most glorious place.In
his commentary on this verse, Sanåtana Gosvåmî says
thatK®ß√a playedm®du-mandraon the flute. What is the
meaning ofm®du-mandra? When rainclouds begin to gather,
the sky at oncebecomes dark, and very softly and slowly
thunder comes. Whenthe clouds clash violently it
produces loud thunder and lightningalso, but at first
they produce a very soft and deep thunder, andthat is
called mandra. K®ß√a produced a similar sound on
theflute, but withm®du, sweetness. The nature of the
peacock issuch that when it sees the sky darkening and

                           26
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

hears thunder, itbegins dancing madly. When K®ß√a
entered the forest, what didHe see? Giriråja-Govardhana
resplendent with creepers, bloomingflowers and ripe
fruits. The breeze was blowing very gently, seem-ingly
unable to carry the full weight of the flowers’
fragrance.Seeing this natural splendour, the desire for
enjoyment arose inK®ß√a, and He played the flute very
softly. Hearing this deepvibration, the peacocks went
mad, dancing in rhythm with theirtail-feathers fully
spread out. Then all of the animals, birds andinsects of
V®ndåvana congregated in the meadows of Govardhanato
witness the performance.The peacocks thought, “He is
playing such a beautiful melody,and dancing to that we
are feeling great joy, but we have nothingto offer Him
in return.”After professional actors enact some of
Bhagavån’s pastimes,they place a deity of K®ß√a or
Råmacandra on a plate and approachthe audience for
contributions. Seeing that others have placed

16

Bhakti-rasåyana




some money on the plate, everyone feels obliged to give
some-thing. There is some intimidation or psychology
used in thismethod. But when someone wants to give of
their own free will because they genuinely appreciated a
performance, they willreach in their pocket and no
matter what note they first pull out– whether it is two
rupees, five rupees or ten rupees – they willgive it
immediately. So one of these peacocks was thinking,
“Ihave nothing valuable to offer Him – no golden
necklace aroundmy neck or any valuable ornaments. I am
simply an animal, butthe feathers of my tail are very
valuable! There is nothing in thisworld that can compare
to their beauty, and upon seeing themeveryone becomes
pleased. With their seven colours they are soattractive,
so is there any reason why I shouldn’t offer Him
one?”Therefore he left behind one of his feathers.Seeing
it K®ß√a thought, “This peacock is very loving; he
hasfully appreciated My flute-playing, and offered Me
one of hisvaluable feathers. There is nothing artificial
in this offering.”Lifting the feather up and placing it
on His head, He thought,“Just as the flute is dear to
Me, this peacock feather has nowbecome dear to Me. While
walking, resting, dreaming, standingor sitting, I will
never abandon it. Wherever I may go in Vraja, I will
never abandon the flute or this peacock feather.” This
is theorigin of the peacock feather becoming K®ß√a’s
most celebratedornament.The peacock saw, “Oh, I left
that feather for Him, but Hedidn’t merely put it in His
pocket! He has placed it on His head,the most valuable
of all His bodily parts! Today my life hasbecome
completely successful.”If we desire to offer a gift to
our spiritual master, to a Vaiß√avaor to Bhagavån, but
upon receiving it they were to say, “Whatneed do I have
for this? I have millions of good quality things,”we
would feel pain in our hearts. But instead they accept
it and

Chapter Two

                           27
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017


17




say, “Oh, what a beautiful thing you have brought me!”
and thenwe feel very pleased. Similarly Sudåmå Vipra
brought K®ß√a someuncooked low-grade rice, and honouring
his offering, K®ß√asnatched it from him saying, “Oh,
such a nice snack you havebrought Me!” And even though
it was uncooked, dry and taste-less, He immediately
chewed it up and said, “Rukmi√î andSatyabhåmå have never
offered Me anything this nice!” Hearingthis, how did
Sudåmå Vipra feel? “Today I have become
fullygratified.”So the peacock saw that he had offered
K®ß√a such a trivial gift,yet K®ß√a had taken it and
placed it on His head. Then K®ß√aplayed the flute with
so much premathat He became maddenedalong with the
peacocks. The words anu mattain this verse gen-erally
refer to the peacocks becoming intoxicated, but it can
referto K®ß√a as well. Then He played the flute with
even more prema,and the peacocks became more maddened,
K®ß√a also becamemore maddened, and in this way there
was competition betweenthem. If someone offers something
with prema, and it is alsoaccepted with prema, then both
parties become the tasters of thatprema, and that is
precisely what happened here.While K®ß√a was playing the
flute in this way and the dancingwas going on, all of
thesattva, meaning the birds and animals,became
motionless and watched and listened. But don’t
considerthem to be like the birds and animals of this
world; the birds andanimals of Goloka are all viçuddha-
sattva, and there is no trace oftamas, rajasor material
sattvain them. Even when the livingentity becomes very
elevated, perhaps just before liberation, stillthere is
some trace of material sattvain him. But in this
worldmost people are tamasika, which means they are
affected by lowerattributes such as hatred, envy, anger
and the cheating propensity.Then there is rajasa, which
is characterised by intense greed forenjoyment. So even
when sattvacomes, at first it will be mixed

18

Bhakti-rasåyana




with tamasand rajas. In the case of Hariçcandra
Mahåråja,1hegave away a great amount in charity, which
is sattvika, but it wasmixed with rajas. Kar√a was very
charitable, always spoke thetruth and did good to
others, which are all sattvikaqualities, but hewas
affected by anger, envy and the tendency towards
violence, soit was mixed with tamas. Bharata
Mahåråja2showed affection foran animal, which was
sattvika, but still it was not çuddha-sattva.Only after
the jîvaattains svarüpa-siddhiand will imminentlyenter
into vastu-siddhican it be said that he is in viçuddha-
sattva.Bhagavån and all of His devotees in Vaiku√†ha,
whether they arepeacocks or monkeys or whatever, are
situated in viçuddha-sattva.In order to watch K®ß√a

                           28
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

playing the flute and see the dancingof the peacocks,
many other birds gathered in groups on thebranches of
the trees of Govardhana. Below in the forest the
deerwere also watching, but with their eyes closed, as
if in meditation.How could they be watching if their
eyes were closed? By sañcårî,which means that they were
internally experiencing the
particularsthåyibhåva,permanent devotional sentiment,
that they were situated in. There were a great many
species of birds and animalswatching from the meadows of
Govardhana, and they all dis-played the natures of
sages.Govinda-ve√um anu matta-mayüra-n®tyam– the name
Govinda comes from the wordsgoandindate.Gomeans the
gopas, gopîs, cows and calves. It can also meanVeda,
bråhma√a, knowledge, the senses and many other
things.Indatemeans indra, which means master. So Govinda
means “theone who increases the esctatic joy of everyone
in Vraja by thenotes He plays on the flute”. Hearing
this divine sound, all living

19

Chapter Two

1. The story of Hariçcandra Mahåråja is narrated in
Çrîmad-Bhågavatam,Ninth Canto, Chapter 7.2. The story of
Bhårata Mahåråja is narrated in Çrîmad-Bhågavatam,
FifthCanto, Chapters 7–8.




entities forget their normal course of activities. At
this time of theday, the birds generally make different
sounds in their chirpingsuch as che-chaand kala-rava,
but all of these activities stop, andeveryone forgets
even their own bodies. This is the meaning ofavaratånya.
In this way everyone stands motionless, just
listeningand watching, thinking, “Aho! This can only be
found in ÇrîV®ndåvana! Bhagavån is also present in
Vaiku√†ha, but there thesound of the flute cannot be
heard. In Ayodhyå and Dvårakå onewon’t see peacocks
dancing like this. This can only be found inV®ndåvana,
and nowhere else.”Vitanotimeans that V®ndåvana is more
glorious than the heavenly planets or even
Vaiku√†ha.There K®ß√a exhibits four special qualities:
rüpa-mådhurî (Hisextraordinary beauty), ve√u-mådhurî
(the sweet, mellow sound ofHis flute), lîlå-mådhurî(His
supremely captivating pastimes) andprema-mådhurî (the
especially sweet love that His companions inVraja have
for Him). Because Govinda is playing the flute there,the
splendour and glories of V®ndåvana are being proclaimed
asthe best of all.How did K®ß√a appear to the peacocks
as He was playing theflute? He had the peacock feather
placed in His crown, and Hewas standing in His
threefold-bending posture with His rightfoot wrapped
around His left. Seeing this, at once the joy of
thepeacocks increased. K®ß√a was adorned with a garland
of guñjaflowers, which also included kadambaflowers and
tulasî buds,that hung down to His knees. A mild
fragrance was coming fromit and bees were swarming
around it. He was wearing bracelets onHis wrists, and on
His limbs were paintings of spiders. In thisway Nanda-
nandana was decorated in His forest attire, and Hewas

                           29
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

holding the flute, which has been called His dear
sakhî,inHis hands. He will never abandon it; it always
remains withHim. Sometimes for increasing the waves of
lîlåand for the

20

Bhakti-rasåyana




pleasure of the gopîs, He enters a kuñjaand “falls
asleep”.Knowingly He allows the flute to hang loosely in
His hand – Heis not really sleeping. And seeing Him from
a hidden positionand thinking that He is sleeping, the
gopîssay, “Now we shouldtake the flute!”Then Rådhikå
says to the other gopîs, “Who is prepared to do it? If
He awakens He will grab you!” Then everyone
becomesafraid. In pretending to be asleep, K®ß√a
certainly has some special intention. If there is any
person who can take the flute, itis Rådhikå. All the
gopîspropose that She do it, and She agrees.Smiling and
watching Him very carefully, She approachesstealthily
like a cat. Standing over Him, She looks carefully to
seeif He is really sleeping; then She snatches the flute
and quicklydeparts the kuñja. Then Ku√∂alatå comes and
scolds K®ß√a,“Your everything is gone, and You are
sleeping?” Getting up andlooking around, K®ß√a says,
“Hey! Where has My flute gone?”Very perturbed He says,
“Who took it? Did you see who took it?”Then He
approaches the gopîs, and as if He knows nothing,
says,“Have you seen My flute?” In this way He knowingly
allows theflute to be taken in order to taste some
special rasa; otherwise Hewould never abandon it. In the
Brahma-saμhitåit says that theflute is His dearmost
companion. The vibration of this flute canmelt anything,
even rugged mountains, and it is also capable ofentering
devotees’ bodies and stealing their hearts. If the
flutewere not there, then so many of His pastimes (lîlå)
and sportivemerriment (vilåsa) would be meaningless;
such is the importanceof the flute. Being held to His
lips it drinks the rasathere andbecomes intoxicated,
inspiring the gopîsto say in the Ve√u-gîta,“This
inanimate stick of bamboo is relishing that which is
ourproperty – the nectar of Your lips!”In the verse we
are explaining here, the name Devakî-suta has

21

Chapter Two




been used. Once, Devakî-suta, Dvårakådhîça, went to the
heavenlyplanets; Vrajendra-nandana K®ß√a didn’t go
there. Dvårakådhîçawent there to acquire the
pårijåtaflower to appease the heart ofSatyabhåmå, and
approaching Indra, He said, “Dear brother, youare always
very affectionate towards Me; therefore please give
Meone pårijåtaflower.” When Indra refused to give Him
even oneflower, K®ß√a uprooted the entire tree, and
sitting along withSatyabhåmå on the back of His carrier

                           30
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

Garu∂a, prepared to leavethere. Indra and the demigods
tried to stop Him, and afterdefeating them He returned
to Dvårakå and planted the beauti-ful pårijåtatree in
Satyabhåmå’s garden. This was Devakî-suta,Dvårakådhîça-
K®ß√a, who bestowed the touch of His feet on theheavenly
planets, but there you won’t find peacocks dancing.
Hedoesn’t play the flute there; if there is anything to
be found inHis hands there, it will be the conchshell
and disc. He didn’t playthe flute there or exhibit the
four special aspects of sweetness thatare found only in
V®ndåvana. Therefore the fame of Vraja isgreater than
that of the heavenly planets, Vaiku√†ha or Dvårakå.In
Vaiku√†ha, Lakßmî receives the touch of Nåråya√a’s
feet.Nåråya√a is an extension of K®ß√a who possesses all
six opulences,but the four kinds of mådhurî are not
present in Vaiku√†ha.There you won’t find the peacocks
dancing to the melody of theflute. Therefore when the
word devakîis used in this verse, wecan understand it to
be another name for Yaçodå, because it isV®ndåvana-
K®ß√a, or Govinda, who played the flute. And whenHe
played the flute, all living entities forgot their
normal courseof activities and stood silently and
motionless, listening. How didthe gopîshear the flute
and witness the dancing of the peacocks?Sitting in their
homes, they heard and saw it all in meditation.They
said, “Look! The peacocks are descending to the meadow
todance to the melody of K®ß√a’s flute, but can wego
there? We

22

Bhakti-rasåyana




also desire to sing and dance with Him, but there are so
manyrestrictions upon us. Our elders are watching over
us, so it is notpossible for us. Therefore we are
greatly unfortunate.”

23

Chapter Two




Chapter ThreeThe Best Servant of HariIn the next verse
the gopîsglorify Govardhana Hill, which is notonly the
crown of V®ndåvana, but the crown of the entire
universe.hantåyam adrir abalå hari-dåsa-varyoyad-råma-
k®ß√a-cara√a-sparaça-pramoda˙månaμ tanoti saha-go-
ga√ayos tayor yatpånîya-süyavasa-kandara-
kandamülai˙Çrîmad-Bhågavatam (10.21.18); B®had-
bhågavatåm®ta (2.7.109)This Govardhana Hill is the best
of all those who are known as hari-dåsabecause he is
feeling great jubilation from the touchof the lotus feet
of K®ß√a and Balaråma. With great respectGovardhana is
worshipping them by providing all their necessitiessuch
as caves, fruits, flowers and water for their pleasure,
and forthe pleasure of their cowherd friends, cows and

                           31
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

calves.V®ndåvana is glorious because there K®ß√a is
playing the flutein the meadows of Govardhana and the
peacocks are dancing,and becoming stunned, all of the
birds and animals are listeningand watching. The
gopîssay hantåyam, which means they areexpressing their
feelings of sorrow, yet there is so much ånandain it.
They are disappointed because they cannot have
darçanaofK®ß√a and externally join in the festivities,
yet they are feelingincreasing ecstasy as they
experience it all internally within theirmeditation. “We
are abalå, devoid of strength. Why? The female

25




deer go near K®ß√a with their husbands following behind
them,and there is nothing in this world to restrict
them. But for us,everyoneis an obstacle – our husbands,
mothers-in-law, fathers-in-law, brothers and friends.
And what is the greatest obstacle ofall? The
restrictions that exist in our own minds: our fear of
beingdisgraced in society. Therefore we are
abalå.”Prema-bhaktiis something that is anugatya–
without the mercyof the spiritual master, it can never
be attained.çrî-guru-cara√a-padma, kevala-bhakati-
sadma,vando mui såvadhåna-mateThe lotus feet of the
guruare thesadma, the shelter, for thatçrî,the prema-
bhaktifor K®ß√a, which exists in the heart of that
guru.This is its source. If one does not have devotion
for the spiritualmaster, does not serve him and is not
surrendered to him in all respects, then bhaktiwill
never come. Unless one attains hismercy, one will never
experience bhaktiand will never receivedarçanaof K®ß√a.
Therefore here the gopîsare saying, “Sakhî, fora long
time we have been desiring to meet with K®ß√a, but
ourfeet are unable to go there, our eyes are unable to
see Him andour hands are unable to touch Him. In our
helpless condition wecannot attain His darçana. The
birds and the deer and everyoneelse is allowed to
receive His touch and serve Him, but we arenot. However,
nearby is Giriråja, who is hari-dåsa-varya– thebest
servant of Hari – and he is guru. If we surrender to
him, ifwe go to him and offer püjå to him and serve him,
then certainlywe will receive the good opportunity to
serve K®ß√a.” This is thenature of the spiritual
master:såkßåd-dharitvena samasta-çåstrairuktas tathå
bhåvyata eva sadbhi˙kintu prabhor ya˙ priya eva
tasyavande guro˙ çrî-cara√åravindamÇrî Gurvaß†aka (7)

26

Bhakti-rasåyana




The guruis the one who is especially dear to K®ß√a. All
jîvasaredear to Him, yet by serving and receiving the
mercy of such a guruwho can actually overpower K®ß√a by
prema, we can meetHim; otherwise we can’t meet Him. All
devotees performing circumabulation (parikramå) of
Govardhana should visit thetemple of Harideva. If one

                           32
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

performs the entire Govardhanaparikramåwithout first
taking darçanaof Harideva, then he will not receive the
full benefit of his parikramå. So the gopîsare saying,
“On the pretext of bathing in Månasî-ga∫gå, we will
first take darçanaof Harideva, and then we will go to
Giriråja-Govardhana, where the desires of our hearts
will be completelyfulfilled. Our desires will be
completely fulfilled because some-where on top of
Govardhana, K®ß√a is taking the cows to grazeand playing
with His friends. There we will be able to receive
Hisdarçana, to receive His touch and to freely mix with
Him – thisis the main objective of our lives.”This
should also be the main objective of ourlives.
MeetingK®ß√a and attaining K®ß√a’s service – solely for
this purpose weare practising sådhana. Ultimately the
sådhana(practice) andsådhya(goal) of bhaktiare one and
the same. For instance thereis çrava√a, hearing – what
will we hear? The science of theSupreme Lord (bhagavat-
tattva), and especially the nature of theillusory nergy
(måyå-tattva) we must understand well: “Thatwhich we are
seeing now and which we are attached to due to
ourselfishness will only bring us unhappiness.” Until we
surrender tothe feet of the spiritual master and follow
the sådhanathat he prescribes, we are just following the
advice given to us by ourown minds. When we take
exclusive shelter of the guru, he willsave us from our
own independence. Then we should empty our hearts
completely and accept the spiritual master’s order
andact accordingly. We must make our hearts one with
guruand the Vaiß√avas, and one with our previous
åcåryaslike Çrîla

27

Chapter Three




Viçvanåtha Cakravartî ˇhåkura, Çrîla Bhaktivinoda
ˇhåkura and Çrîla Bhaktisiddhånta Sarasvatî Prabhupåda.
If we keep ourhearts separate from them, then måyåwill
certainly snatch us. Ifwe don’t surrender our
independence to them, then we will onlyact according to
our own desire. We should depend solely onthem: “As they
instruct me, I will do. I will apply all of my intel-
ligence to carrying out their orders.” Then we will be
successful;otherwise bhakti, which is fully spiritual
and has its own indepen-dent nature, will not come
easily.Therefore here the gopîsare saying, “By thousands
of our ownefforts we will never overcome the obstacles
that prevent us frommeeting K®ß√a, such as fear of our
elders and adherence to theregulations of var√åçrama-
dharma. They will only be overcomewhen we attain the
mercy of Giriråja.” And those of us in thestage of
sådhanashould never leave the company of that
Vaiß√avawho is actually qualified to be followed. So
many distractionsmay come, but we should never leave him
– this is instructionnumber one. According to his desire
we will move, and then wewill surely progress upwards in
the kingdom of bhajana. But if welisten instead to the
dictates of our minds, we will descend intothe hell
known as Rasåtala. What kind of things does the mindtell
us? “Look, take good care of your body. Remain

                           33
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

comfortable,and endeavour only for that happiness which
is easily obtained.”And following these instructions we
will become trapped in the reactions to our enjoyment,
and suffer. Therefore instead we should honour the
instructions of the spiritual master, theVaiß√avas and
the scriptures. Like the gopîsare saying in thisverse,
we areabalå– we have no vitality in our association
withsådhus. If we are living in a temple but we never
speak to anyone,and we don’t have love for both the
guruand other Vaiß√avas,then what will happen? We will
become isolated and discouraged.Lovingly we should speak
with them, ask questions, attentively

28

Bhakti-rasåyana




listen to the answers, and have a mood of affectionate
reciproca-tion with them in all respects. Without them,
we are abalå– wehave no spiritual strength.pråcînånåμ
bhajanam atulaμ dußkaraμ s®√vato menairåçyena jvalati
h®dayaμ bhakti-leçålasasyaStava-målåHow did previous
great personalities obtain their most
cherishedobjectives? For sixty thousand years Kaçyapa
‰ßi and Aditi stoodon their hands and went without
eating, drinking and evenbreathing. After they performed
such severe austerities, Nåråya√aappeared and offered
them a boon. Kaçyapa ‰ßi said, “We desirea son like you,
we desire a son like you, we desire a son like
you.”Nåråya√a replied, “Where will you get a son like
me? ThereforeI myself will come as your son.” And
because he had asked threetimes, Nåråya√a became their
son in three separate births. Wecan see what severe
austerities Hira√yakaçipu performed to obtainonly
material things. For acquiring his own planet,
DhruvaMahåråja performed very severe austerities.
Someone offeredSanåtana Gosvåmî a quilt, but fearing
that it may make him sleepmore, he said, “Burn it!” But
on the contrary, what are we doing?With great pleasure
all day we are eating, sleeping, joking, laughing,
quarrelling and in the midst of all this we chant a
little harinåma. Relatively easily we can rid ourselves
of our worldlyattachments, but that rare premawhich we
are aspiring for willnot come if we are going on like
this. We must have great eager-ness, always thinking,
“How will I meet K®ß√a?”Once Bhagavån gave Nårada his
darçanaand then immediatelydisappeared, and Nårada began
crying profusely. Why did he disappear? “Inside you
there is not sufficient eagerness; thereforeI have come
to increase your eagerness for attaining my associa-
tion. In your present form you cannot always remain with
me,but when your eagerness to be with me becomes
sufficiently

29

Chapter Three




                           34
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

intense, you will automatically shed your present body,
and thenyou will always be able to see me.” But our
bhajanais not filledwith eagerness and intensity. If our
hearts are not completelymelted we will never meet
K®ß√a, so there is only one hope: “Weare standing on the
shores of the ocean of Your kindness, and ifeven one
drop of that ocean falls upon us, then our lives
willbecome meaningful.” Our only hope is that sometime
or otherwe will meet Him.Therefore if we are fortunate
enough to acquire the companyof a real Vaiß√ava, we
should stay with him and adopt his ways,hoping that one
day we will receive the direct mercy of K®ß√a.The
gopîsare saying, “We areabalå because our feet are
unable totake us to K®ß√a. Thousands of people will see
us and say, ‘Whereare you going?’ Or they will say to
our parents, ‘Where is yourdaughter going? She has
become a disgrace to your family!’” It islike this in
modern times also when a family member begins toengage
in bhajana. If a son or daughter drinks and smokes,
goesto the cinema, and keeps illicit connections with
the opposite sex,then the family members think nothing
of it. But if someoneleaves everything for bhajana, they
say that he or she has becomea disgrace to the family.
If a sådhuhears about this, what will hesay? “Because he
has taken up bhajana, he has become the lamp-light of
the family.” And hearing of this, that person’s
forefathers,whether they are in Pit®loka or wherever,
will begin dancing:“Now a devotee has appeared in our
family!”The gopîsare saying hari-dåsa-varya˙– Govardhana
is the bestservant of Hari. He in whom K®ß√a invests all
of His good quali-ties is called a devotee of Bhagavån,
and that person is hari-dåsa.Three personalities have
been referred to as hari-dåsa: Yudhiß†hiraMahåråja, Çrî
Uddhava and Giriråja-Govardhana. Yudhiß†hiraMahåråja has
three types of relationships with K®ß√a: in våtsalya-
bhåva, sakhya-bhåvaand dåsya-bhåva. He serves K®ß√a in
these

30

Bhakti-rasåyana




three sentiments, according to the necessity. He loves
K®ß√a in thesame way as he does Arjuna and Sahadeva, as
a younger brother.As K®ß√a’s friend he jokes and laughs
with Him. And by consid-ering that everything he
possesses – his kingdom, wealth, wife,sons – is for the
service of K®ß√a, he acts as His servant. AfterK®ß√a had
left Hastinåpura, Yudhiß†hira Mahåråja felt that
hiskingdom no longer had any value, but as long as K®ß√a
was present there, he felt that all of his property was
for the service ofK®ß√a. Whenever K®ß√a desired to leave
there and go to Dvårakå,Yudhiß†hira Mahåråja would
approach Kuntî and say, “My dearmother, He will not
listen to me, but He will listen to you. Pleasespeak
with Him.” To Draupadî he would say, “He won’t listento
me, so you just let some tears fall from your eyes. He
won’tlisten to me because I won’t cry, but by crying a
little you willcapture Him.” Then because she started
crying, and Kuntî criedalso, K®ß√a would not go. In this
way, sometimes implementingsome trickery, he would serve

                           35
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

K®ß√a. Even rasikaVaiß√avas like Nårada pray to
Yudhiß†hira Mahåråja, “You are hari-dåsa.Accompanied by
His queens, K®ß√a comes to your palace, and somany
sådhusalso come. The sådhuscome because they want
toexperience the glories of K®ß√a, but I have not come
for thatreason. I have come for your darçana; your
premais so elevatedthat it even overpowers
K®ß√a.”Uddhava is K®ß√a’s minister, friend and servant,
and he evenperformed the function of a priya-narma-
sakhåwhen he delivereda message from K®ß√a to the gopîs.
There is pür√a(complete),which is Yudhiß†hira Mahåråja,
pür√atara(more complete),which is Uddhava, and
pür√atama(most complete), which isGiriråja-Govardhana.
In whichever rasaK®ß√a desires to enjoy,Giriråja-
Govardhana is ready to serve Him. In the
çånta-,dåsya-,sakhya-,våtsalya-,mådhurya- andsumådhurya-
rasas, Govardhanamakes the suitable arrangement for
K®ß√a, and is therefore

31

Chapter Three




known as the best of those who are hari-dåsa. Knowing
this, thegopîsare saying here, “We will go to Giriråja,
offer püjåto Himand serve Him, and then we will attain
darçanaof K®ß√a takingthe cows out to graze.”In his
commentary on this verse, Sanåtana Gosvåmî explainsthat
the gopîswere thinking, “We have no strength when it
comesto tolerating all of the obstacles that prevent us
from meetingK®ß√a. We are sitting in our homes, and if
any other disturbancecomes, we can hold our patience;
but for meeting K®ß√a wecannot hold our patience. But if
we were to abandon it, whatwould happen? All would be
destroyed for us. We know thatK®ß√a has taken the cows
out to graze, yet for us to go therewould not be proper.
If we were to go, then our mothers-in-law,fathers-in-law
and all the people of the village would criticise
us.Therefore we are holding our patience. If we have any
hope ofever receiving the company of K®ß√a, our fear of
being disgracedin society, our fear of our elders, and
our fear of transgressing ourdharmamust remain.
Therefore we are abalå– we cannot aban-don our patience;
we don’t possess the strength to do it. We areunable to
go there.”In this world also these considerations exist.
One would beafraid of the reaction in society if he were
to leave his home, wife,children and job to engage in
bhajana. In our k®ß√a-bhajana, ourlack of strength is
also an obstacle. We are very lazy, and we arealways
thinking of our bodily comfort. And especially those
whoare householders have so many responsibilities to
society and totheir families that obstruct them.Soon
after taking birth, Çukadeva Gosvåmî left his home
andentered the jungle. His father Vyåsadeva was left
crying, “Mydear son! My dear son!” but Çukadeva didn’t
answer him. Whoanswered him? Only the echo of the
forest; his call didn’t evenreach his son’s ears. If not
today, then tomorrow or the next day

32


                           36
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

Bhakti-rasåyana




our eagerness for k®ß√a-bhajanashould be like
Çukadeva’s, andthen all of ourabalåsentiments will go
far away. When we reallydesire to overcome all of the
obstacles to our bhajana, where willwe get the strength
to do so? The gopîsare saying, “For this we willgo to
Giriråja-Govardhana, because He is the best servant
ofHari.Why? Because He doesn’t just serve K®ß√a, but
månaμ tanotisaha-go-ga√ayos tayor yat– K®ß√a has so many
companions, andhe serves all of them as well. He
provides pure and fragrant waterfor the cows and
sakhåsto drink, and for washing K®ß√a’s feet.”By
providing all necessities, Giriråja-Govardhana would
offerrespect not only to K®ß√a, but to His companions as
well. Manypeople are engaged in serving the spiritual
master,but few offerrespect to the servants of the guru;
but when one performs theservice of respecting the
guru’sservants, the guruis even morepleased. Similarly
many devotees are serving K®ß√a, but if some-one serves
K®ß√a’s devotees and pleases them, then
automaticallyK®ß√a will be pleased. Govardhana not only
provides pure water,but beautiful, soft grass as well.
Eating this grass, the cowsbecome strong and give ample
milk which satisfies K®ß√a. Andfor the sakhåsGovardhana
provides not only water, but all kindsof fruits, which
simply upon being seen increase their happiness:bananas,
lemons, pomegranates, coconut and tåla, which is espe-
cially fragrant. Govardhana also provided caves for the
sakhåswhen theybecame tired from tending the cows. On
hot days the caves wouldbe cooling, and on cold days
they gave warmth, and within thesecaves were kuñjaswith
mirrors composed of jewels where onecould see his
reflection. All materials for decorating oneself
andothers were available there, and in this way it also
became a meet-ing place for K®ß√a and the gopîs. Nearby
are such places as Dåna-ghå†î and Dåna-nivartana-ku√∂a,
where K®ß√a and Rådhikå andHer sakhîstook taxes from one
another. So the gopîsare praying,

33

Chapter Three




“O Giriråja-Govardhana, You are a witness to all of
K®ß√a’s pas-times; please give us a place from where we
can also witness Hispastimes.”Hearing these words of the
gopîs, a sådhaka’shankering willincrease and he will
think, “When will such a day be mine, whenI can go to
Giriråja-Govardhana with these sentiments of the
gopîsflowing in my heart? I also desire to witness
K®ß√a’s pastimesduring the day.” This desire is the aim
and objective of our lives,and the very pinnacle of
bhajana.

34

Bhakti-rasåyana

                           37
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017




Chapter FourThe Clouds, Rivers and Trees Serve K®ß√aIf
someone is inimical to Bhagavån, then they will have
toundergo much suffering and be very unhappy. They will
have totake millions of births in the material world,
and will never attainhappiness in any birth. The jîvais
a part of Bhagavån; his veryintrinsic form is as a
servant of Bhagavån. Abandoning thisunderstanding, the
living entity becomes opposed to Bhagavånand thinks, “I
am the enjoyer of this world,” “I am the master
ofeverything,” and “Everything has been created for my
enjoyment.”This is the illusion of the opposed jîva.
When K®ß√a disappearedfrom the vision of the gopîs, in
divine madness they went search-ing for Him. In reality
He is never far away from them; but onthe contrary we
have made ourselves separate from Him. If in oursearch
for Bhagavån we have the same kind of eagerness that
thegopîshave, then we can meet Him. But without such
eagerness,we will never meet Him. The gopîspossess an
extremely intense eagerness to meet K®ß√a,and if even a
fraction of that arises within us, then it can be
saidthat we are really searching for K®ß√a in our
sådhana-bhajana.Butfrom where will this eagerness come?
K®ß√a and Çrîmatî Rådhikåboth assume forms that are
easily accessible to conditioned souls.For the purpose
of bringing jîvastowards Himself, K®ß√a hasbecome the
çålagråma-çilå, and His dearest one has become

35




tulasî. K®ß√a has also entered this world in the form of
Giriråja-Govardhana, and His dearest one has come in the
form of theYamunå. We can see how merciful Bhagavån is:
so much so thatHe has made the arrangement for everyone
to attain Him.Govardhana is accessible for everyone, and
is fully capable ofbestowing k®ß√a-prema. It has been
said that he fulfils whateverdesires people approach him
with, and in this way has arranged avery nice trap for
them. If anyone desires a son, wealth, to gettheir son
or daughter married, a better job or whatever, they
cango to Govardhana, beg from him, and he will bestow
thosethings. In this way, at first he slowly captures
people by grabbingthe end of their finger, and then he
grabs the whole finger, nextthe hand, and finally he
grabs everything.Those of you who have travelled on the
trains in India haveseen how they are very crowded and
how no seats are available.So after boarding the train
people first move near a bench, thenplace their hand
down on it, then spread their hand out a little,and then
begin to edge their way in until they have
squeezedthemselves into a seat. In the same way,
Giriråja, the spiritualmaster and the Vaiß√avas
gradually bring the conditioned soultowards
bhakti.Having become separated from K®ß√a, the gopîsare
thinking,“K®ß√a is everything to us, so how will we meet
Him? We mustget the mercy of a Vaiß√ava, and who are the
best Vaiß√avas?Yudhiß†hira, Uddhava and Giriråja-
Govardhana; and amongstthem, Giriråja is the best. Going

                           38
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

to Yudhiß†hira or Uddhava won’tbe fruitful; they cannot
give us what we desire. Only Giriråja cangive it.” In
this way, if we really feel that Bhagavån is our
onlynecessity, we will have such eagerness. Then our
eagerness willlead us to ask a Vaiß√ava, “How can we
meet K®ß√a? How can weovercome all of our despair?” This
is where we recognise ournecessity for a guru. For
obtaining any material object a guruis

36

Bhakti-rasåyana




not necessary, but in spiritual matters approachinga
guruis necessary. Giriråja will give mercy, Yamunå-devî
will give mercy,V®ndåvana-dhåma will give mercy, and we
should pray to all ofthem.Here the gopîs, through the
eyes of vipralambha-bhåvain separation from K®ß√a, are
seeing premain all the residents ofV®ndåvana but
themselves. This is the symptom of an uttama-adhikårî
Vaiß√ava. There are three levels of Vaiß√ava. The first
isthe kaniß†ha-adhikårî, and his symptoms are that even
though heoffers püjåto the deity and accepts that the
water of holy placesand the water that has washed the
deity is sacred, he does notdetect the presence of
Bhagavån within the hearts of other livingentities. He
considers the body to be the self, and has no respectfor
the devotees of Bhagavån. He doesn’t believe that the
spiri-tual master knows all; he thinks that the gurumay
possess moreknowledge than he does, but that he
certainly doesn’t knoweverything. Therefore he feels
that there is no real necessity oftaking advice from the
guru. Upon not obtaining the materialthings that he
desires from his practice of bhajana, he maybecome
disgusted and even abandon his bhajana. The symptoms of
the madhyama-adhikårîVaiß√ava have beentold to be that
he has love for Bhagavån, he has friendship withother
devotees, he is merciful to those who are faithful and
heremains indifferent towards those who are opposed to
Bhagavån.He wants to give mercy to everyone, but it is
not possible to loveeveryone; it is inappropriate. One
cannot show love to a snake ora tiger – they will only
attack you. Therefore he behaves suitablytowards others
according to their qualification. The uttama-adhikårî
Vaiß√ava sees the presence of his masterin the hearts of
all jîvas, and believes that they all have the
samefeelings for Bhagavån that he does. Prahlåda
Mahåråja saw thathis worshipful deity was in the hearts
of all living entities, and

37

Chapter Four




that even the trees had the same feelings of çånta-and
dåsya-rasatowards Bhagavån that he did. Similarly the
gopîssaw their ownsentiments sometimes within Giriråja,
sometimes within the deerof V®ndåvana and sometimes even

                           39
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

within the clouds. And theyalso saw that just as K®ß√a
loves them, He also loves all the otherresidents of
V®ndåvana in the same way. Therefore the uttama-
adhikårîdoesn’t see anywhere in the world a living
entity who isnot engaged in bhajanaand who doesn’t have
the same sentimentfor K®ß√a as he himself does.mama
vartmånuvartantemanußyå˙ pårtha sarvaça˙Bhagavad-gîtå
(4.11)Everyone follows My path in all respects, O son of
P®thå.The highest devotees reallysee that everyone is
serving Bhagavån– don’t think that this statement is an
exaggeration. The gopîsactually see that, “Just as we
love K®ß√a, all of the trees, creepers,birds, mountains
and rivers of V®ndåvana are fully conscious andare
serving K®ß√a.” They are planning to go to Govardhana
onthe pretext of going to bathe in Månasî-ga∫gå and
having darçanaof Harideva because nearby there, K®ß√a is
taking the cows out tograze, and then they will surely
receive His darçana. In this way,with his eyes closed
and chanting the holy name, an uttama-adhikårî similarly
meditates on the pastimesof K®ß√a, especiallyHis eternal
eightfold daily pastimes (aß†akåla-lîlå). Meditatingmore
and more, eventually the object of his meditation
appears tohim, and he becomes absorbed in that flow: “I
am at Govardhana,and I am doing my service.” When his
vision begins to dissipate,he begins to lament,“Håya!
Håya!” And here, as the day pro-gresses and the gopîsare
sitting in their homes and conversing,their absorption
in the previous bhåvabegins to diminish, andone
sakhîsays to Rådhikå:

Bhakti-rasåyana

38




d®ß†våtape vraja-paçün saha råma-gopai˙sañcårayantam anu
ve√um udîrayantamprema-prav®ddha udita˙
kusumåvalîbhi˙sakhyur vyadhåt sva-vapußåmbuda
åtapatramÇrîmad-Bhågavatam (10.21.16);B®had-
bhågavatåm®ta (2.7.110)Seeing K®ß√a and Balaråma playing
their flutes in the afternoonsun and taking the cows and
calves out for grazing, the cloudsburst with divine
love, and like an umbrella shield their friend ÇrîK®ß√a
from the sun while showering tiny drops of rain that
arelike a shower of flowers.Now it is afternoon time,
and taking the cows out to grazeaccompanied by Baladeva
and the gopas, K®ß√a has entered theforest. Desiring
fresh grass to eat, the cows grazed on and on untilthey
reached the rocks of Govardhana. The rocks were very
hotin the afternoon sun, and the sand and soil below
their feet werealso very hot. Thinking that the cows and
His friends were feelingsome pain due to this, K®ß√a
played the flute in such a way thatat once the clouds
gathered and began to shower soft rain. In India there
are many rågasthat are well-known for producingdifferent
effects. Once there was a gurunamed Haridåsajî whowasa
master of rågas, and he had two disciples named
Baijubåvaraand Tanasena. Tanasena was a singer in the
court of the king,and it was his policy that if anyone
came to Delhi to sing, theywere obligated to challenge
him in the royal court – and if theywere defeated, they
would have to face punishment from theking. Hearing of

                           40
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

this, Baijubåvara went to Delhi and began skilfully
singing different melodies, and a large crowd of
peoplegathered to hear him. The news of this reached the
king, whosaid, “Who is this person daring to sing here?
This is a greatinsult to Tanasena!” So he called for
Baijubåvara and said to him,“You must have the proper
qualification; otherwise you are notallowed to sing in
Delhi.”

Chapter Four

39




Baijubåvara said, “All right, we will have a
competition. Wherewill it be held?”“It will be held in
the royal assembly.”“Then who will decide the winner?
Who will decide whosesinging is the sweetest and the
most beautiful?”“All of my queens here will decide.”“No,
I can’t trust them. I want the animals of the jungle
tomake the decision, and then I will accept it. The
queens will allcertainly be prejudiced. Therefore we
should go to the jungle andsee whose singing pleases the
animals most.”“All right, so it shall be.”The entire
assembly went to the jungle, and first Tanasenasang.
Then Baijubåvara sang, and groups of deer
immediatelygathered there. These deer became so absorbed
in his singing thathe reached over and placed a flower
garland around the neck ofone of them. Then as soon as
he stopped singing, all of the deerran off very quickly.
Baijubåvara said, “If Tanasena is a bettersinger than
me, then he should call all of these deer back with
hissinging, and once they are again absorbed, he should
reach overand retrieve the garland.” Tanasena stood and
began singing, andhe sang with such effort that he was
perspiring heavily, but stillthe deer didn’t come, and
he couldn’t retrieve the garland. ThenBaijubåvara sang
again, and this time even more deer came andat once
again became absorbed in his singing. With one hand
hereached over and took back the garland, and then when
hestopped singing, all the deer ran off again. In
previous times therewere singers and musicians like this
who could also produceeffects like bringing rain or even
starting a fire without the use ofany matches or other
such things. Therefore we can scarcely con-ceive of the
effects K®ß√a’s flute-playing is capable of
producing.After entering the forest, K®ß√a played the
flute in such a way

40

Bhakti-rasåyana




that it bewildered everyone, and the clouds saw that,
“Our friendhas come! We should show some respect to our
friend.” Why wasthere friendship between them? Because
they were of the samedarkish blue (çyåma) colour. The
afternoon sun had made therocks and the soil underfoot
very hot, and when K®ß√a playedthis particular rågaon

                           41
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

the flute, wherever the sakhåsand cowswere standing they
became stunned and just listened, and theclouds began to
gather in groups. But they didn’t only come forK®ß√a:
wherever there were gopas, cows or calves standing,
theclouds desired to render service and they covered the
sun withtheir own bodies like an umbrella. As they
rendered this service,it increased their prema, and
tears of joy came to their eyes. Thesetears took the
form of cooling drops of rain, and they fell softlyfrom
the sky like an offering of flowers.The gopîsare saying,
“These clouds are so fortunate! We cannotbe equal to
them; we cannot render even a little service to K®ß√a.No
one is as unfortunate as us.” Sådhakasshould also feel
like this– “Everyone is serving K®ß√a, but I am not.” If
a sådhakafeels thisway, then he will surely make
progress in his sådhana. Otherwise,if he sees the faults
in others, then all of those faults will in returncome
within him. Therefore we should never see the faults
inother devotees, but should always make an effort to
recogniseonly their good qualities.Next comes this
verse:nadyas tadå tad upadhårya mukunda-gîtam åvarta-
lakßita-manobhava-bhagna-vegå˙åli∫gana-sthagitam ürmi-
bhujair murårerg®h√anti påda-yugalaμ
kamalopahårå˙Çrîmad-Bhågavatam (10.21.15);B®had-
bhågavatåm®ta (2.7.111)O sakhîs, when the rivers of
V®ndåvana headed by the Yamunåhear the vibration of
K®ß√a’s flute, their currents completely stop,

41

Chapter Four




and their waters begin to swirl as if they are overcome
with desire.With their arms in the form of waves they
reach out to touch andoffer lotus flowers to His lotus
feet.These verses describe the sentiment of elevated
devotees, butthey may not even come to all elevated
devotees; they are exclu-sively the sentiments of the
gopîs. So why have they been given inthe Bhågavatam?
These verses are there for the benefit of
thosesådhakaswho have a similar type of hankering as the
gopîsdo. Byremembering these verses more and more, some
day, in some life-time, this beautiful bhåvaof the
gopîs’eagerness to meet K®ß√awill enter their hearts. As
the gopîsare sitting in their homes, one bhåvaarises
within them, and then as it diminishes,
anotherimmediately arises. This is called bhåva-çåbalya,
where one bhåvais fully relished and then another comes.
The meaning of thisverse is that as the gopîswere
looking towards the Yamunå, theysaid, “O sakhî, hearing
the flute-song of Mukunda, the river iscarrying all the
lotuses like gifts in her thousands of arms andoffering
them as pußpåñjalito K®ß√a’s feet. The waves of the
riverhave stopped flowing, and a whirlpool has been
created. Thiswhirlpool is a symptom ofmanobhava, the
river’s love for K®ß√a.”Who is the husband of the
Yamunå, Månasî-ga∫gå and theother rivers of Vraja? The
ocean, because they all flow towardshim. But these
rivers don’t flow easily towards their husband.The best
of these rivers is the one who is the dearest to
Bhagavån:Kålindî, she who springs forth from the Kålinda

                           42
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

Mountain.Kålindî is the one whose water, from receiving
K®ß√a’s touch orfrom the añjanaof the gopîs, has assumed
K®ß√a’s çyåmacolour.Having had her heart stolen by the
sound of K®ß√a’s flute, thewaves of her bhåvawere like
her hands, and taking a gift oflotuses – kamalopahårå˙–
in these hands, she offered them to the feet of
K®ß√a.Kamalopahårå˙can also mean Lakßmî, whichmeans
splendour. What is the splendour of a river? The lotus;
so

42

Bhakti-rasåyana




it can also mean taking that splendour and offering it
to K®ß√a’sfeet. The waves have been said to be Kålindî’s
long, long arms,and there were not just two of these
arms, but thousands andthousands of waves surrounding
K®ß√a’s feet. Why? For graspingHis feet so He wouldn’t
be able to go away from there. In thisway, after
offering a gift of all her splendour – the lotuses –
shesubmerged K®ß√a’s feet in her waves as if grasping
them, therebyplacing them in her heart.The gopîsare
saying, “How can we go and grasp the feet of K®ß√ain
this way? We are very afraid of being disgraced in
society, andtherefore we cannot go. We are unable to
abandon our presentcircumstances to meet with K®ß√a. But
this river is indicating tous, ‘You are unable to do
what I have done? Being attracted byK®ß√a’s flute you
are not able to leave everything – as I havestopped
flowing towards my husband, the ocean – and place allof
your splendour at His feet? You do not have that
muchcourage? You are so afraid of being disgraced in
society?’ But weare unable to do it, and therefore if
there is anyone in this worldwho is unfortunate, it is
us. Having taken birth in these circum-stances, we are
unable to meet K®ß√a, to speak with Him or toserve Him,
because we are always busy in our household affairs.But
this river has abandoned everything, even its fierce
flow, andembraced the feet of K®ß√a.”It is the same for
us; we are unable to engage in sådhana-bhajana. In the
same way as the river offered the gift of lotuses
toK®ß√a’s feet, we should offer our very hearts to the
spiritualmaster and the Vaiß√avas. We may have
everything – the associ-ation of guruand the Vaiß√avas –
but as yet we have no sucheagerness by which we can turn
the tendency of our minds awayfrom material enjoyment
and exclusively towards K®ß√a. This isthe message being
carried by the river, and the instruction beinggiven
here through the medium of the gopîs.

43

Chapter Four




Next comes this verse:vana-latås tarava åtmani
viß√uμvyañjayantya iva pußpa-phalå∂hyå˙pra√ata-bhåra-
vi†apå madhu-dhårå˙prema-h®ß†a-tanavo vav®ßu˙ smaÇrîmad-

                           43
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

Bhågavatam (10.35.9); B®had-bhågavatåm®ta (2.7.112)Look
how the creepers and the branches of the trees of
V®ndåvanaare drooping down due to their weight! They
must have also takenÇrî K®ß√a within their hearts,
because tears of love in the form ofstreams of honey are
dripping from them, and the emergence oftheir fruits and
flowers bear witness to their ecstatic rapture.The
previous verses were all from the Ve√u-gîtaof the
Çrîmad-Bhågavatam [chapter 21 of the Tenth Canto], but
this verse isfrom the Yugala-gîta [chapter 35 of the
Tenth Canto]. What isthe meaning of the Yugala-gîta? The
gopîsare singing to eachother concerning their
separation from K®ß√a. In the Ve√u-gîtathere was more
pürva-råga, preliminary attraction, but here,
aftermeeting with K®ß√a, they are speaking about their
agitated stateof vipralambha-bhåva. One who has such
eagerness as the gopîsare expressing here will be able
to meet K®ß√a and His dearestones.The system for
spiritual enlightenment is arranged by K®ß√aalone. Here
someone may ask, “There are so many jîvasin theworld, so
are they all in mådhurya-rasa? There are
numerousdevotees performing bhajanain the sampradåyasof
Nimbårka,Råmånuja and Viß√usvåmî, and there are others
such as yavanaswho perform no bhajanaat all. Why is it
that they don’t all cometowards mådhurya-rasa?” The
answer is that Bhagavån is so mer-ciful that all the
systems in this world are in His hands; accordingto a
person’s particular actions, a certain fruit is bestowed
uponthem. Every jîvacertainly has a particular
instrinsic rasa. Five primary sentiments have been
described: çånta,dåsya,sakhya,

44

Bhakti-rasåyana




våtsalyaand mådhurya, and every jîvafalls within one of
thesecategories. Yet from time immemorial he has been
taking birth,dying, sometimes attaining the higher
planetary systems and thenagain returning here,
wandering in all directions. Those who were more
fortunate took birth in Satya-yuga,where most people
worshipped Bhagavån through çånta-rasa, asthe four
Kumåras and the Nara-Nåråya√a ®ßisdid. After this
ÇrîRåmacandra came and emphasised the glories of dåsya-
rasa, andfor preaching this ideal, Hanumån remained in
this world after the disappearance of Råma. Then K®ß√a
came at the end ofDvåpara-yuga and gave premaeven to the
creepers. He performedsuch pastimes that simply by
hearing and chanting about them,especially through the
medium of Çrîmad-Bhågavatam, a jîvacould be attracted
and gradually attain that bhåva. But there were some
jîvaswho were contemporary with K®ß√a yet could not
understand His pastimes. Çiçupåla, Kaμsa, Du˙çåsana
andJaråsandha criticised this bhåva: “Oh, in Vraja this
boy of no par-ticular caste has appeared, no one even
knows for sure who hisreal mother and father are, and
now he has become a king inDvårakå and will rule over
us?”In the Bhågavatamit is stated that K®ß√a is Svayam
Bhagavån,and all bhåvasare included in Him, yet the
bhåvaHe showed inVraja was not shown anywhere else. But

                           44
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

very few people outsideof Vraja actually accepted that
bhåvaat that time and just criticised Him for it. For
this reason K®ß√a inspired ÇukadevaGosvåmî: “You please
manifest the shining sun of Çrîmad-Bhågavatam. No one
else is capable; you are lîlå-çuka, the expertnarrator
of our pastimes.” Then on the pretext of Parîkßit
Mahåråjabeing cursed to die by the bite of a snakebird,
the Bhågavatamwas manifest by Çukadeva Gosvåmî; but at
that time very fewpeople were actually qualified to
accept it. Then Ça∫karåcåryacame, then Madhva, then
Råmånuja, and other åcåryascame and

45

Chapter Four




gave dåsya-rasa, and maybe a little sakhya-rasa. Finally
CaitanyaMahåprabhu came with His eternal associates, and
through themedium of Çrîmad-Bhågavatamvalidated that
special vraja-bhåvaand gave premato the world. Meeting
the incarnation of Bhagavånwho goes by the name
Vrajendra-nandana is the ideal that is beingdescribed in
these verses from the Bhågavatam.The gopîs, being
extremely agitated to meet K®ß√a, have evenforgotten
their own bodies. Which K®ß√a are they desiring?Sakhå-
K®ß√a, the K®ß√a who is so dear to them. If
anyonebecomes similarly agitated to have K®ß√a as their
own friend, sonor dear one, and goes to an elevated
devotee and hears k®ß√a-kathå from him, then easily he
can attain k®ß√a-prema. Otherwisethere is no way to
attain it; Caitanya Mahåprabhu Himself came and showed
the way. And who was accompanying Him?Svarüpa Dåmodara,
Råya Råmånanda, and Rüpa, Sanåtana andRaghunåtha dåsa
Gosvåmîs. He bestowed all of His mercy onSvarüpa
Dåmodara and Råya Råmånanda by relishing kathåwith them
night after night, but He invested His potency
(çakti)directly into the hearts of Rüpa at Prayåga and
Sanåtana atVårå√asî. Through them this bhåvawas manifest
in the world,and everyone was drowned in the ocean of
bhakti-rasa. Before theappearance of Mahåprabhu these
things were not known; no onecould even imagine them.
Whenever Mahåprabhu saw a forest,He considered it to be
V®ndåvana, whenever He saw a body ofwater, He took it to
be the Kålindî, and whenever He saw anyelevated land, He
took it to be Govardhana. This is the bhåvaofan uttama-
adhikårî.So in this verse the gopîsare saying, “Aho!
K®ß√a has continuedon His way playing the flute, and it
seems that all of the trees,creepers and mountains of
V®ndåvana are revealing their hearts toHim. The creepers
have very large flowers and the trees have verylarge
fruits, and it seems that upon seeing K®ß√a they have
begun

46

Bhakti-rasåyana




laughing in great ecstasy. The premawithin them has

                           45
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

manifestedexternally in the form of their ripening
fruits and blossomingflowers. And when K®ß√a passes by
them, those trees and creep-ers bend over, and those
fruits and flowers that are normally atthe height of His
head are offered to His feet as pußpåñjali.
Andexpressing their premafor Him, there is an incessant
flow ofstreams of honey emanating from them. But we are
so unfortu-nate; we are unable to meet K®ß√a. These
creepers and trees haveso much premafor K®ß√a in their
hearts, and it is manifesting inthe form of all the
fruits and flowers and streams of honey, whichare like
tears flowing from their eyes. But can wetake any
fruitsand flowers to K®ß√a? What would people say?
Because of ourfear of being disgraced in society we are
unable to go. But maybeif in our next lives we assume
the form of trees and creepers, thenwe will also be able
to serve K®ß√a.”

47

Chapter Four




Chapter FiveHappiness in SeparationIn appearance the
trees and creepers of V®ndåvana seem to beordinary, but
upon seeing K®ß√a they became overwhelmed inbhåva. With
great joy they offered pra√åmato the feet of K®ß√aby
offering their fruits and flowers, and they shed tears
of love inthe form of streams of honey. Even the plants
and trees of thisworld have feelings; like us they are
conscious. They are not ableto express their feelings in
words, but they can express them.Especially the trees
and creepers of V®ndåvana are all viçuddha-sattva,
meaning that they are superior to those of us situated
in mixed goodness. So what won’t they understand? They
canunderstand and experience everything. Therefore by
offeringtheir fruits and flowers in ecstatic rapture,
they offered pra√åmato K®ß√a.In his commentary, Sanåtana
Gosvåmî is saying that thesetrees and creepers are more
conscious than the clouds. The gopîsfelt that all the
other residents of V®ndåvana were serving K®ß√a,but that
they themselves were not. They saw that even the
cloudswere serving Him by creating an umbrella above His
head toblock out the sun, and by showering cooling rain
on Him. So the trees and creepers were even more
conscious than the clouds, and we can see their
condition upon hearing the vibration ofK®ß√a’s flute and
receiving His darçana! Concerning Çrî
CaitanyaMahåprabhu, Narottama dåsa ˇhåkura wrote:

49




paçu-påkhî jhure, påßå√a vidare,çuni’ jå∫a gu√a-
gåthåUpon witnessing the pastimesof Mahåprabhu, the
birds, animalsand insects would melt in divine love.
When Mahåprabhu was inÅlålanåtha, upon hearing His
crying the stone there melted, andHis footprints and

                           46
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

imprints from where He fell unconscious wereeasily
indented there. When Çrî Råmacandra and Bharata met
atCitrakü†a, upon feeling the mutual love of the two
brothers, thestone there melted. When K®ß√a played the
flute at Cara√a-pahå∂îin Kåmyavana, the stone melted and
He left fifty or more foot-prints there. These
footprints are certainly His – they were notmade by
anyone else. So even stones, clouds, trees and
animalscan melt in emotion, but we have not yet become
melted in emo-tion. We haven’t yet developed the intense
eagerness that “I willcertainly engage in k®ß√a-
bhajana.”In the verse we began describing in the last
chapter we find theline vana-latås tarava˙,meaning “the
creepers and trees in theforest”, but why have the
creepers been mentioned before thetrees? It would seem
that it would be proper to mention the treesfirst
because they are primary, and without them the
creeperswould have nothing to climb up. But the creepers
are of the samegender as the gopîs, and their sentiment
is similar. “These creepersare female just as we are,
and men don’t have as much sentimentas we do.” Thinking
like this, the gopîsfirst mentioned the wordlatå in this
verse, and thentarava˙. They sayåtmani viß√um,whichmeans
“He who is pervading everything”, referring to bhakta-
våtsalyaBhagavån.Vyañjayantya˙ means “revealed in a
special wayto this Nanda-kiçora, Yaçodå-nandana,
K®ß√acandra or Gopî-kånta”. These creepers had a
treasure hidden in their hearts, butupon hearing the
sound of K®ß√a’s flute they immediatelyrevealed it in
the form of fruits and flowers. Bowing down to

50

Bhakti-rasåyana




K®ß√a’s feet, they offered the treasure of their hearts
as pra√åma.There are two ways of offering pra√åmato
someone. Someonewho has very little faith will
apathetically offer pra√åmawith hishands only one time
and then leave. But someone who has strongfaith will bow
down and offer pra√åmatime and again with greatlove and
humility. He will look towards his master with
greataffection, desiring his blessing. The trees offered
pra√åmato K®ß√ain this way, with great prema. K®ß√a
came, they offered pra√åma,and even after K®ß√a left
they remained bowing down becausethere was so much
premain their hearts.Being submerged in the ocean of
unhappiness of separationfrom K®ß√a, how did the
gopîspass the day? After cooking forK®ß√a at the home of
Yaçodå and seeing that K®ß√a has taken thecows to the
forest to graze, the gopîsreturn to their homes,
andthose sakhîswho are svapakßa (belonging to Rådhikå’s
own group)remain with Rådhikå. When someone is happy, it
seems to themthat the whole day passes in one minute; so
in separation fromK®ß√a, how will the gopîsmanage to
pass the day? It says here thatthey engaged in kîrtana–
singing these verses that we arereading– but did they
pass the day in happiness or unhappiness? Theywere
remembering the pastimes of K®ß√a by describing them,
andwere revealing their inner feelings to one another,
but were theyfeeling happiness or unhappiness? Hearing

                           47
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

the descriptions ofHis pastimes,they became absorbed and
felt that they were actu-ally seeing Him, but when the
excitement from that diminished,they were plunged into
the depths of despair.For the gopîs, happiness and
unhappiness became one ocean. Itsays in Çrî Caitanya-
caritåm®ta, “vißåm®ta ekatra milana– poisonand nectar
became one.” I am not able to explain this in such a way
that you will understand this, or even to fully
understandit myself. Because we are presently standing
on the platform of

51

Chapter Five




måyå,wrapped up in material enjoyment, we cannot
understandthis. Then why are we hearing of it? It is
like a coating of wax. Ifyou are placing candles here
and there, then a little wax comes offon your hand and
creates a coating. Similarly, if a sådhakareads,hears
and speaks about these topics, then certainly something
willrub off: a little feeling of bhåvawill come. Then,
practising sådhanamore and more, after some time this
feeling will become sostrong that it will never be
interrupted.Here the gopîsare mutually hearing and
describing K®ß√a’spastimes, and as remembrance comes,
they are seeing K®ß√a withthe eyes of bhåva. It appears
that they are suffering due to separa-tion, but inside
them is great happiness. evaμ vraja-striyo råjank®ß√a-
lîlånugåyatî˙remire ’ha˙su tac-cittåstan-manaskå
mahodayå˙Çrîmad-Bhågavatam (10.35.26)O king, during the
daytime the ladies of Vraja took pleasure incontinuously
singing about the pastimes of K®ß√a, and their
heartswere fully absorbed in Him.The ladies of Vraja had
offered their hearts to K®ß√a. We seein the Gopî-
gîta[chapter 31 of the Tenth Canto of Çrîmad-Bhågavatam]
and in the Ve√u-gîtathat the gopîsare absorbed
inspiritual ecstasy: even in separation from Him they
remain happyby meditating on His pastimes. Yet in
another place it is writtenthat being very unhappy, they
passed the day singing about Hispastimes. They took
shelter of only one thing – singing aboutK®ß√a’s
pastimes – otherwise they would have been unable to
passthe day. So are the gopîs happyas they sing about
His pastimes, orunhappy? It is harmonised in thisway: if
we see a person reallycrying and wailing in separation
from K®ß√a, just as Çrî CaitanyaMahåprabhu did, what
feelings will arise within us? Will we

52

Bhakti-rasåyana




think that, “I never want to be like this!”? Rather we
will thinkthat if even a small fraction of that
bhåvaenters us, our lives willbe completely successful.
As peculiar as it seems, we actuallydesireto cry in this
way. The verses in the Bhågavatamdescribingthe crying of

                           48
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

the gopîswill be those most read by a rasikadevotee.In
the Bhramara-gîta[chapter 47 of the Tenth Canto of
Çrîmad-Bhågavatam] the gopîsare in vipralambha-bhåva,
and speaking toa bumblebee they are expressing their
suffering. It is a very sadthing, but devotees enjoy it
very much. The Ve√u-gîta, Gopî-gîta, Yugala-gîta, and
other chapters inthe Bhågavatamall focus entirely on the
topic of separation from K®ß√a. Devotees find all of
this tasteful, even though theyare crying; they like
crying also. Therefore here happiness isincluded within
crying, and the gopîsare described in this
verseasmahodayå˙– experiencing a grand festival. Singing
aboutK®ß√a’s pastimes during the day, they were
supremely happy.Meeting K®ß√a at night they were fully
gratified, and in medita-tion during the day their minds
raced after Him as He wanderedin the forest. Thisis the
meaning of bhajana. If a devotee isabsorbed in
meditation on k®ß√a-lîlå, then that meditation is
bhajana. “How will I meet K®ß√a? So many lives have
passed, andstill I have not found Him.”Although
externally that premaappears to be unhappiness,inside
their meditation is immeasurable happiness. When K®ß√a
leaves V®ndåvana and goes to Mathurå or Dvårakå, and
atNandagråma or Uddhava-kyårî the gopîsare crying in
sadness,why won’t they abandon their meditation on
K®ß√a? Are theyable to abandon it? Sürya dåsa has
written that the gopîsplacedK®ß√a’s foot-dust all over
their sårîsand their limbs, and whenthe tears related to
K®ß√a fell from their eyes and mixed with that,they
became very dirty; but would any of them change their
sårîs?So this meditation is actually full of happiness,
but yes, externally

53

Chapter Five




it seems to be unhappiness. It is written in
ÇrîCaitanya-caritåm®tathat the happiness felt by one
person meeting K®ß√a exceeds thehappiness felt by the
residents of millions of material universescombined, and
the unhappiness felt by the residents of
V®ndåvanaexceeds the pain caused by the most potent
poison. ThereforeSanåtana Gosvåmî, Jîva Gosvåmî and
Viçvanåtha Cakravartîˇhåkura have written in their
commentaries that in this state ofseparation, happiness
and unhappiness are the same.At the end of his
explanation of this verse, Sanåtana Gosvåmîsays that in
this way K®ß√a is the very embodiment of the
topmostecstasy (paramånanda): He is the very embodiment
of rasa, He isthe possessor of all potencies, He is all-
pervading, He knows theminds and hearts of all, and He
is the foundation of all rasa. Heis both the rasaitself
and the taster of rasa. He performs pastimesthat
establish Him as the very embodiment of
paramånanda.There is no difference between K®ß√a and His
pastimes, just asthere is no difference between K®ß√a
and His name. Being mer-ciful, when k®ß√a-lîlåsees that
there is bhåvain our hearts, thenit will appear to us.
By thousands of our own efforts it will notappear, but
when it is merciful to us, at that moment it willappear

                           49
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

of its own accord.Just as K®ß√a is supremely
independent, His lîlåis alsosupremely independent. It
will know if a recipient is qualified ornot. If it sees
that one’s prayer is full of humility, then no
matterwhat one’s qualification may be, it will appear.
It may appear inthe hearts of qualified people like the
four Kumåras, or in some-one with a sinful background
like Bilvama∫gala. Lîlåmanifestedin his heart and K®ß√a
Himself came to help him walk to Vrajaand to listen to
his sweet singing. Therefore Sanåtana Gosvåmî issaying
that just as K®ß√a is the very embodiment of the
supremespiritual ecstasy, so are His pastimes. If one is
simply hearing

54

Bhakti-rasåyana




narrations of k®ß√a-lîlå, then for him there is no
necessity of prac-tising renunciation or anything of the
kind.jñåne prayåsam udapåsya namanta evajîvanti san-
mukharitåμ bhavadîya-vårtåmsthåne sthitå˙ çruti-gatåμ
tanu-vå∫-manobhirye pråyaço ’jita jito ’py asi tais tri-
lokyåmÇrîmad-Bhågavatam (10.14.3)Bhagavån is
unconquerable by anyone within this world. Yet if
someone faithfully hears hari-kathå, even while
remainingwithin his established social position, then
the disease of lust andall impediments to spiritual
advancement (anarthas) will vanishfrom his heart and he
will overpower that unconquerableBhagavån – such is the
potency of lîlå-kathå. But since this lîlå-kathå is the
very embodiment of the topmost spiritual
ecstasy(paramånanda), then what necessity will the
gopîsfeel to meetK®ß√a? Won’t they be satisfied just by
this? They won’t be satis-fied. Why? Sanåtana Gosvåmî
gives his opinion that althoughK®ß√a and the narrations
of His pastimesare one, the gopîswon’tbe satisfied by
just engaging in lîlå-kathå. Their premais suchthat it
can never be restricted in any way, and they will never
befully pleased, fully satisfied or receive the full
taste from onlyengaging in lîlå-kathåwithout meeting
K®ß√a. They desire toenter directly into pastimes where
K®ß√a will express similar sentiments towards them as He
did in the råsa-lîlå.Hari-kathåby itself won’t satisfy
the gopîs, but a sådhakashould always continue hearing
narrations of the Lord’s pastimes,understanding that the
unhappiness which the gopîsexperiencedwhile engaged in
hari-kathåwas merely a manifestation of
theirindescribable happiness. It is written that when
lîlå-kathåentersthe ears of a sådhaka, it enters his
heart, snatches away all inaus-piciousness and makes his
heart completely pure. Then it takes

Chapter Five

55




him to the place where he can relish a life of serving

                           50
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

Rådhå and K®ß√a with the sakhåsand sakhîs; in this way
K®ß√a and the narrations of His pastimes are supremely
merciful.Next comes this verse:ete ’linas tava yaço
’khila-loka-tîrthaμgåyanta ådi-purußånupathaμ
bhajantepråyo amî muni-ga√å bhavadîya-mukhyågü∂haμ vane
’pi na jahaty anaghåtma-daivamÇrîmad-Bhågavatam
(10.15.6); B®had-bhågavatåm®ta (2.7.113)[Çrî K®ß√a said
to Balaråma:] O Ådi-purußa, although you arekeeping your
opulences hidden and are performing pastimes as a young
boy here in V®ndåvana, still the sages, who are among
thebest of your devotees, have recognised you. Not
wanting to beseparated from you for even one moment,
they have assumed theforms of bees and are worshipping
you by constantly singing yourglories as the purifier of
this world.K®ß√a and Baladeva Prabhu have taken the cows
out for grazing,and using the presence of Baladeva as a
pretext, K®ß√a is actuallypraising Himself in His
speaking of this verse. Here He praisesBaladeva
asbeingådi-purußa, the original personality in all
ofexistence, but that is actually K®ß√a Himself. He is
describing somany of the glories of Baladeva here, but
they are actually Hisown glories. He says, “The buzzing
of the bees in this forest isactually the chanting of
Vedic mantras. The bees are actuallymunis, but in the
form of bees they are glorifying you with poemsand
prayers as they follow you along. You are wearing a
vaijayantî-målåthat is comprised of many different kinds
of flowers andtulasî buds also. There is nectar within
these buds, so sometimesthese bees are sitting on the
buds, sometimes on the other flowersof the garland, and
sometimes they are swarming around youoffering prayers.
They are actually sages who after performingausterities
for thousands of years have attained perfection. Being

56

Bhakti-rasåyana




munis, they are able to discern that you are actually
the ådi-purußa,even though you remain hidden in your
form as a young boy atthe conjunction of the pauga√∂aand
kaiçoraages. Therefore theyare unable to abandon your
company and are following behindyou offering
prayers.”What is the nature of their prayers? There are
so many differ-ent kinds of poems and prayers that can
be offered to K®ß√a, butamongst them, which are the
topmost? There are countlessmantraswithin the Vedas, and
their personifications pray,“Although we are the
mantrasof the Vedas, up until today wehave been
performing austerities for the purpose of attaining
andbecoming absorbed in the bhåvathat You share with the
gopîs.Please be kind and make that bhåvaarise within our
hearts.”There are so many types of prayers one can offer
to K®ß√a, but ifsomeone prays for the bhåvaof Vraja,
then He is more pleased.And especially if someone prays
for the bhåvaof the gopîs, thatwill please Him the
most.Grandfather Bhîßma prayed, “O Lord, out of
friendship Youare driving the chariot of Arjuna, and
Your blood is flowing fromthe wounds made by my arrows.
At this time I remember You inV®ndåvana as Your soft
body may have been pricked by thorns,and blood is coming

                           51
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                            5/3/2017

from those wounds. Seeing You in this condition, that
bhåvais coming to me.” In Vraja, K®ß√a’s skinmay have
been pricked as He was playing with the sakhås,
butreally Bhîßma is remembering K®ß√a with His skin
having beenscratched by the gopîsin their amorous
pastimes. In describingthat bhåva, Sanåtana Gosvåmî has
quoted this verse of Bhîßmahere in his commentaryand
given a very beautiful explanation.This kind of prayer
is the topmost. If we pray, “O Lord, Yaçodåhas scolded
You and You are crying. I offer pra√åmato You inthis
condition time and again,” then K®ß√a will be pleased.
Butabove that, if we pray, “O Lord, You are very rasika.
In V®ndåvana,

57

Chapter Five




when the gopîsare fatigued, You massage their feet and
appeasethem. I offer pra√åmato You time and again,” then
there will beno need to say anything more. Being very
pleased, K®ß√a will giveHimself to someone who offers
such a prayer. He is more pleasedby those who pray with
this elevated bhåvathan He was even bythe prayers of
Brahmå.The descriptions of K®ß√a’s pastimes are referred
to here asakhila-loka-tîrtham– they are the saviour and
purifier of theentire world. One may be purified by
repeatedly bathing in holyplaces, but hearing hari-kathå
from an elevated devotee willpurify one for all time,
and make one qualified to purify othersas well. Acting
as guru, this lîlå-kathåis the purifier of
everyone,whether they are qualified or not by other
considerations. It isthe bestower of the knowledge of
Bhagavån’s glories, and the verything that takes us
across the ocean of material existence. Singingabout
Bhagavån’s pastimeswill purify oneself and the
entireworld also. Holy places become very contaminated
and even begin todesire that sinful people will not
bathe in their waters, but ifsomeone hears hari-
kathåfrom Nårada, will Nårada ever becomecontaminated?
Whoever asks him questions and whoever hearshis answers
will become purified. He is always singing the gloriesof
Bhagavån’s pastimes, and sometimes even creates some
pastimeshimself, such as when he went to Dvårakå
accompanied byUddhava and the construction of Nava-
v®ndåvana was arranged.He inspires many different kinds
of pastimes, and then he singsabout them. No one knows
the glories of lîlå-kathåbetter thanNårada. If anyone
hears and chants such descriptions, especiallythe
descriptions of lîlåfound in Çrîmad-Bhågavatam, then
certainlyK®ß√a, accompanied by His associates, will
appear in that person’sheart.

58

Bhakti-rasåyana




Chapter SixThe Gopîs Desire to Become Birds and

                           52
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

DeerAfter telling the story of Çrî B®had-bhågavatåm®ta,
SanåtanaGosvåmî is giving us some rasåyana, some nectar-
tonic that isespecially for those who have been freed
from the disease, butwho are still a little weak. By
taking this medicine for some time,the body will again
become strong, meaning that one will be ableto progress
in sådhanaand one’s prema-bhaktiwill become stead-fast.
First he treated our disease, but just curing the
disease is not everything because one still remains
weak. After one’s faith(çraddhå) has increased and
transformed into resolute determina-tion (niß†hå),
progressing from there he will face many,
manyimpediments to spiritual advancement (anarthas).
This nectar-tonic is especially intended for those at
this stage. If in a regulatedmanner one hears these
final verses and then deeply meditates onthem, his love
for Bhagavån will surely increase. But if after hear-ing
these verses one doesn’t meditate on them, then at the
timeof chanting the holy name his mind will certainly be
absorbed inthoughts of material enjoyment. While
chanting his mind will beunsteady, and remembrance of
events from the life he led beforehe began to follow the
path of bhaktiwill awaken inside him.Various kinds of
sa∫kalpaand vikalpa, attraction and repulsion tomaterial
objects, will come to his mind, and he won’t receive
thefull benefit from this nectar-tonic. But if someone
meditates on

59




these verses while chanting the holy name, then his
bhaktiwillsurely increase. Thisis the method for
increasing one’s devotion.While we are dreaming, those
things which occupied ourminds and which we meditated on
time and again while awakecome to our vision. Sometimes
things that are completely unre-lated appear in our
dream; it is all scrambled and there is not evenany
realistic continuity. If our minds are not controlled,
then itwill be the same when we chant harinåma. For a
certain amountof time each day we all hear some hari-
kathå,but now considerwhat you are doing for all your
remaining waking hours. If wefully meditate on Bhagavån
during those remaining hours, thenat all times the mind
will remain absorbed in Him. The focus of our minds will
be determined by what we thinkabout during our waking
hours. If for those hours the mind ispondering over
sense enjoyment, such as what arrangements wehave made
for eating and drinking and how we will solve all ofour
worldly problems – then how will we be able to steadily
thinkof Bhagavån? Will our minds remain steady while
chanting fromour daily hearing of perhaps only one hour
of hari-kathå? It willcertainly be absorbed in what we
have thought about during mostof our waking hours, and
even while sleeping we will rememberthose same things.
But if one remains in sådhu-sa∫gaand duringall his
waking hours applies his mind to hearing hari-kathå,
read-ing the scriptures, serving the Lord, and doesn’t
worry about anyother problems, then his mind will remain
steady. Therefore thesådhakawho wants to elevate his
mind should meditate on thepastimes described in these
verses while chanting the holy name.We should make this

                           53
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

effort, pushing away the thoughts of expe-riencing sense
enjoyment and collecting good quality possessions,and
gradually, in due course, our minds will remain steady
inmeditation on Bhagavån’s pastimes.For this purpose the
pastimesof Çrî Caitanya Mahåprabhu are

Bhakti-rasåyana

60




supremely merciful and generous. When Mahåprabhu was
inSouth India, He met with Råya Råmånanda, and their
conversa-tion, the Råmånanda-saμvåda, is unanimously
appreciated by allthe topmost devotees in this world. If
you read it you will seewhy. There, with each verse they
are unveiling the deepest ofsecrets, and while reading
it, your heart will become so spell-bound that you won’t
want to put it down. Therefore whilechanting harinåma,
we should meditate on these types of narra-tions from
the scriptures. But if we are inattentive while
takingharinåma, we will not be benefited. We should
first try to attainniß†hå,and then ruci (taste) will
come. After that åsakti(deepattachment) will come, and
we should try to transform that intobhåva (ecstatic
emotion). In the lîlå-kathåthat we are hearinghere from
Sanåtana Gosvåmî, there are instructions for all
levelsof devotees. Those on the level of çraddhåwill
understand theseverses in a particular way, and those
who have niß†håwill under-stand them in a different way.
Those in åsaktiwill understandthem in a certain way, and
those who are in bhåvawill under-stand them in yet
another way. Speaking amongst themselves, the gopîssaid
that when all theplants, creepers and trees of V®ndåvana
were trembling in thebreeze, it was as if they were
experiencing ecstatic symptoms, andthat they were
drooping down solely to offer their everything toK®ß√a
as He passed by. A sådhakashould also try to offer
hiseverything to K®ß√a, and when he does, then it can be
said thathe is really engaged in sådhana. Then the
gopîsremembered howthe bees would sit on K®ß√a’s garland
of forest flowers and notleave Him, and how they would
sometimes swarm around Himoffering prayers. Next the
gopîsdescribe how the birds are even more elevated,and
how they reacted to the sweet melody emanating
fromK®ß√a’s flute. There are birds such as peacocks,
parrots, pigeons

61

Chapter Six




and koels that live on land, but first they describe the
birds thatreside on water:sarasi sårasa-haμsa-
viha∫gåçcåru-gîta-h®ta-cetasa etyaharim upåsata te yata-
cittåhanta mîlita-d®ço dh®ta-maunå˙Çrîmad-Bhågavatam
(10.35.11);B®had-bhågavatåm®ta (2.7.114)[The gopîssaid:]
It is very astonishing that K®ß√a steals away thehearts
of the swans, cranes and other water-birds in such a

                           54
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

waythat they approach Him, sit down and worship Him with
theireyes closed, and fully concentrate their minds on
Him.In this verse from the Yugala-gîta, the gopîsare
saying, “Forgetthose bees; more intelligent than them
are these birds who resideon the water.” When K®ß√a
arrived in the forest, what astonishingthing happened?
Hantameans “amazed”, and being wonderstruckthe gopîsare
now marvelling at seeing these birds. “When thecranes
and swans on the pond heard the beautiful song K®ß√a was
playing on His flute, they became completely spellbound!
Through the medium of their ears they held K®ß√a within
theirhearts. Ordinarily, when they see someone, they
immediatelyflee; but instead they quickly came near to
worship K®ß√a.”Upåsata means worshipping with the mind,
body and words allat once. As long as a jîvais
conditioned, he is not capable of per-forming real
upåsana. He can only be endeavouring for upåsana,because
it means being near Bhagavån, in His personal
presence.When we offer püjåto the deity it is called
upåsana, but is it reallyupåsana? Where is the deity,
and where are we? We are condi-tioned souls, and He is
all-pervading, the solidified form of sac-cid-ånanda.
Therefore we are not able to really be near Him, butwhen
our hearts are pure enough and we attain a spiritual
form,then we can go near Him and it can be called
upåsana. But as

62

Bhakti-rasåyana




long as we are conditioned souls full of anarthas, we
cannot reallyoffer Him arcana.So from far away these
birds approached K®ß√a with yata-cittå˙,their minds
fully controlled, but in our present condition ourminds
are not controlled. In meditation, there are the stages
ofyama (control of the senses),niyama (control of the
mind),åsana(bodily postures), prå√åyåma (breath
control),pratyåhåra (with-drawal of the mind from
sensory perception),dhåra√å (steadyingthe mind),dhyåna
(meditation) and finally samådhi (trance), andwhen one
has achieved this state, then his meditation can
becalled real upåsana. So when those birds heard K®ß√a
playing theflute and saw His exquisite form, they became
yata-cittå˙– fullyself-controlled. This is one symptom
of a sådhu, and two more aredescribed in this
verse:mîlita-d®ça˙– they closed their eyes, anddh®ta-
maunå˙– they became silent. Ordinarily they were
alwaysmaking their chirping sounds, but instead they
became silent. Speech is the cause of so many faults. If
someone speaks in adeceptive or unbeneficial manner, his
mind will be contaminatedand therefore become restless.
But if one’s speech is controlled,then he will never
offend any Vaiß√ava. Fighting and quarrelling–
uncontrolled speech is the cause of all this. Therefore
in theUpadeçåm®tathe first of all instructions given to
us isvåco-vegam– our speech must be controlled. So here
it saysdh®ta-maunå˙–the tongues of the water-birds,
which ordinarily make so manysounds, at once became
silent. If someone desires to engage inbhajana, then
they should practise silence, which means notspeaking

                           55
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

anything besides k®ß√a-nåmaor k®ß√a-kathå. Then itwill
really be sådhana-bhajana. And alsomîlita-d®ça˙– those
birdsclosed their eyes. They took a look at K®ß√a and
then immediatelyclosed their eyes: what does that mean?
Through the mediumoftheir eyes they took K®ß√a into
their hearts, and then they had no

63

Chapter Six




desire to see any worldly object. Andyata-cittå˙–
remaining silentwith their eyes closed, their minds
became fully controlled. Fromlooking here and there and
speaking in an unregulated manner,one’s mind becomes
restless. For this reason Bilvama∫galaplucked out both
of his eyes and became silent except for speakingk®ß√a-
kathå; but without harming our eyes or tongue we
shouldsimply control them, and then automatically our
mind willbecome controlled.Here the gopîsare saying,
“This is a very astonishing thing!These birds who
ordinarily chirp day and night have todaybecome silent,
and closing their eyes they have taken K®ß√a into their
hearts. Now automatically their minds have become
controlled, and they have no remaining desire in this
world.” Ifsomeone desires to engage in bhajana, then
they must be likethis. This instruction is for all
levels of devotees, and accordingto one’s level one will
be able to do this. Yet in the Yugala-gîta wefind, “Aho
sakhî! We are unable to do this! Day and night ourminds
are restless. We are not able to keep our eyes closed,
andwe are also constantly conversing; we are unable to
remain silent.The swans and cranes can go near to K®ß√a
and receive His directdarçana, but we cannot get such a
good opportunity. They arecertainly of a higher class
than us.” This is the gopîs’ uttama-adhikårî vision:
even though their eyes remain open solelybecause they
are always searching for K®ß√a, and even thoughthey are
unable to remain silent solely because they are
alwaysspeaking about K®ß√a, they are considering
everyone else to bemore fortunate than themselves, and
they are taking instructionfrom everything and
everyone.Sanåtana Gosvåmî also gives another meaning to
this versebeing discussed. These birds, being attracted
by the sound ofK®ß√a’s flute, came near Him, but then
they too could notremain silent. Very softly they
chanted,“K®ß√a,K®ß√a,K®ß√a.”

64

Bhakti-rasåyana




And although they closed their eyes, their minds could
not becontrolled because waves of ecstasy were flowing
inside them.When K®ß√a attracted the gopîsin the night
by playing the flute,they stood before Him silently.
Some of them may have evenclosed their eyes, but does
that mean that their minds were peace-ful? On the

                           56
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

contrary countless varieties of bhåvawere churningin
their hearts! If anyone goes near K®ß√a, will they be
able toremain silent? All the time they will be singing
either k®ß√a-kathåor k®ß√a-nåma– and will they be able
to keep their eyes closed?They will be looking here and
there to find the place from whichthe hypnotic flute
sound has come. And will their minds remainsteady? Their
minds will certainly become even more restless in astate
of divine ecstasy!Next comes this verse:pråyo batåmba
vihagå munayo vane ’smink®ß√ekßitaμ tad-uditaμ kala-
ve√u-gîtamåruhya ye druma-bhujån rucira-pravålånç®√vanti
mîlita-d®ço vigatånya-våca˙Çrîmad-Bhågavatam (10.21.14);
B®had-bhågavatåm®ta (2.7.115)O friend, the birds of
V®ndåvana are actually sages. They havetaken positions
on the branches of trees, which have new andfresh
leaves, from where they can easily have darçanaof Çrî
K®ß√a.Sitting there and hearing the sweet vibration of
His flute, theyclose their eyes and become immersed in
divine bliss.K®ß√a and Baladeva were decorated as if
they were dancingactors entering an arena to give a
performance. They wereadorned with forest flowers and
jumped about like young deer.This verse saysvigatånya-
våca˙– the birds became silent – whichcorresponds to
what was mentioned in the previous verse. K®ß√aplayed
the flute very beautifully, and at once all the
peacocksgathered together. They were sitting in the
kadambatrees at thetop of the mountain, but at once they
came down to the meadow

65

Chapter Six




to be near K®ß√a. Then so many different varieties of
birds camenear and watched as K®ß√a was playing the
flute and the peacockswere dancing. At that time, seeing
through the eyes of bhåva, thegopîsspoke this verse.In
great astonishment they saidpråyobatåmba.The wordamba
generally means “mother”, but doesthat mean they were
speaking to Yaçodå? Will all of these senti-ments come
to them when they are before Mother Yaçodå? No,that
bhåvawould be constrained. The sentiments of
våtsalyaandmådhuryaare completely opposed to one
another, and neithercan remain in the other’s presence.
So hereamba means they areaddressing another sakhî. “O
sakhî, the birds of this forest areactually munisbecause
upon hearing the sweet melody K®ß√a isplaying on the
flute, they have closed their eyes and are
simplyremaining silent. They have descended to the trees
of the meadowand are sitting on the branches in such a
way that there is no obsta-cle to their seeing K®ß√a,
and where K®ß√a can also glance at
themaffectionately.”Druma-bhujånmeans “the branches of
trees”, and can alsorefer to the “tree” of the Vedas.
The Vedic tree has thousands oflong branches, and seated
on certain branches according to theirclassification are
karmîs,jñånîs,yogîsand tapasvîs. The vulture isseated
where there are no leaves, and the koel is seated where
themango buds are drooping. Eating these soft buds and
leaves, itsings,“ku-hu, ku-hu”. The peacocks mostly sit
in the tops of thekadambatrees, and they are very

                           57
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

beautiful in appearance and verygood dancers. Among the
Vedic branches are also seated variouskinds of munis.
Seated on one branch is Patañjali ‰ßi, on anotheris
Jaimini ‰ßi and on another is Gautama ‰ßi. But the birds
ofV®ndåvana are different from them, and are sitting on
whichbranch of the allegorical Vedic tree? The branch
where the fruitthat has no pit – the ripened fruit of
the Purå√as and all scrip-tures – can be found. That
ripened fruit is Çrîmad-Bhågavatam,

66

Bhakti-rasåyana




and sitting on this branch they can taste the
Bhågavatam, havedarçanaof K®ß√a, and K®ß√a can
affectionately glance at them. So the gopîsare saying,
“Certain munishave become birds inV®ndåvana, and upon
hearing the beautiful melody from K®ß√a’sflute, these
munishave become silent and are sitting quietly with
controlled minds. Just see how fortunate they are, and
howunfortunate we are. Being birds they can hear the
melody ofK®ß√a’s flute and approach Him and feel so much
ånanda, but wecan’t listen to His flute or go near Him.
If we could become koelsor parrots or any other bird and
go to hear K®ß√a playing theflute at Govardhana and see
the peacocks dancing, then our liveswould be
meaningful.”Next is this verse:dhanyå˙ sma mü∂ha-gatayo
’pi hari√ya etåyå nanda-nandanam upåtta-vicitra-
veçamåkar√ya ve√u-ra√itaμ saha-k®ß√a-sårå˙püjåμ dadhur
viracitåμ pra√ayåvalokai˙Çrîmad-Bhågavatam
(10.21.11);B®had-bhågavatåm®ta (2.7.116)These ignorant
deer are also fortunate, because accompanied bytheir
husbands they are standing motionlessly and listening to
thevibration of K®ß√a’s flute. It is as if they are
offering püjåto thegorgeously attired son of Nanda with
their loving glances.The gopîs’meditation became
diverted, and again their inter-nal vision was directed
towards another group of living entities.They classified
the bees as more fortunate than themselves, theswans and
cranes as superior to the bees, the birds who reside
onland as more fortunate than the water-birds, and the
deer as supe-rior to the birds. “Most fortunate of all
are these deer, becausenot only have they at once
approached K®ß√a, and not only havethey received His
loving glance with their eager eyes – but intheir
exchange of glances was the most affection.”Mü∂ha-
gataya˙– people call deer foolish. Because the deer
easily fall into traps,

67

Chapter Six




they are considered foolish as a species. With some
simple allure-ment they can be easily captured. We have
heard that sometimeshunters have someone play a flute
very sweetly, and being attractedthe deer come near and

                           58
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

fall into a trap. But the gopîssay, “Wedon’t consider
the deer to be foolish at all! Hearing the sound
ofK®ß√a’s flute and seeing His gorgeous dress, they have
approachedHim.”Upåtta-vicitra-veçammeans K®ß√a is
decoratedwith forestflowers and leaves such as the
fragrant mango leaf. He is adornedwith red powder in
various places and has the designs of spidersdrawn on
His cheeks, and upon the body of Govardhana Heappears
more beautiful than millions of ornaments.Saha-k®ß√a-
sårå˙ means the female deer were searching here and
there forK®ß√a, and their husbands were following behind
them to protectthem. Püjåμ dadhur viracitåμ
pra√ayåvalokai˙means that theygazed towards K®ß√a’s
beautiful face with great love, and it was asif they
were offering püjåto Him with their sidelong
glances.Upon seeing this, and how affectionately K®ß√a
also glanced atthem – seeing how much mutual love there
was between them –the gopîssaid, “They have received
such a wonderful opportunity,but where is such an
opportunity for us? Can we approach K®ß√aand offer
arcanato Him with our eyes? We are not so fortunate.If
after leaving these bodies we could become female deer,
thenwe could receive such an opportunity and our lives
would bemeaningful.”

68

Bhakti-rasåyana




Chapter SevenThe Animals of Vraja are Stunnedgåvaç ca
k®ß√a-mukha-nirgata-ve√u-gîta-pîyüßam uttabhita-kar√a-
pu†ai˙ pibantya˙çåvå˙ snuta-stana-paya˙-kavalå˙ sma
tasthurgovindam åtmani d®çåçru-kalå˙ sp®çantya˙Çrîmad-
Bhågavatam (10.21.13); B®had-bhågavatåm®ta (2.7.117)In
order to drink the nectarean vibration of the flute-song
emanating from the lotus mouth of Çrî K®ß√a, the cows
haveraised their ears. The grass that they were chewing
just remains intheir mouths, and milk begins to drip
from their udders. Thecalves at once stop drinking their
mothers’ milk, and as theyembrace K®ß√a within their
hearts, tears of love begin to glidedown their faces.The
gopîsare conversing about K®ß√a in their homes duringthe
daytime. But we are different; upon awakening in the
morn-ing we just begin thinking about how to solve all
of our worldlyproblems. Except for a very few persons,
no one has the faith orthe free time to chant the holy
name, and even if someone hassome faith and time, then
we don’t chant in the way we should.Sådhakasshould learn
from the lives of the gopîs, who uponawakening in the
morning begin meditating on K®ß√a, whichmeans that they
begin burning in separation from K®ß√a. Thenthey bathe
and decorate themselves – for whom? Only for K®ß√a.The
theme of their conversation is: “How can we meet K®ß√a?

69




How can we serve Him?” Then they go to Nandagråma to
receiveHis darçanaand to cook for Him. When K®ß√a goes

                           59
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

to the forestfor the day, they return to their homes and
converse about Himfor the remainder of the day. In each
group one gopîwill bespeaking, and so many other
gopîswill be listening, and there arethousands of these
groups. According to their particular natures,they are
seated in groups and are singing about K®ß√a’s
pastimes.We take our beads and sit to chant, but our
minds wander hereand there. Then another devotee comes
and sits near us, and webegin conversing with him about
this or that. We abandon ourchanting of harinåma, and he
leaves it also. But the gopîsaren’tlike this; one gopî
says to another, “Aho! From the lotus mouthof K®ß√a the
sound of the flute has emerged. It has crossed theentire
brahmå√∂a, crossed Siddhaloka, Vaiku√†ha,
Ayodhyå,Mathurå and Dvårakå, and has now entered
V®ndåvana. Whilegrazing, the cows hear this hypnotic
vibration and at once raisetheir ears. The melody of
K®ß√a’s flute is like celestial nectar, andit is as if
they are drinking that nectar through their ears. And
thegrass that they had taken in their mouths moments
before is justremaining there! They aren’t swallowing
it, and it isn’t comingback out of their mouths either.
They are just standing motion-lessly and listening. “And
when the calves who are drinking their mother’s milkhear
the sound of K®ß√a’s flute, the milk that they had drawn
outremains in their mouths! Usually it is swallowed
immediately,but at that time it just remains in their
mouths and then gradu-ally begins to glide down from the
corners of their mouths. Whatto speak of just these cows
and calves, all the inhabitants of Vrajahave become
absorbed in the melody of K®ß√a’s flute. But we arenot
so fortunate. These cows and calves are also shedding
tears ofprema, and sometimes even the clouds shed tears
of premaforK®ß√a as well. But it is our great misfortune
that we are so hard-

70

Bhakti-rasåyana




hearted that we don’t leave our homes at once and go to
whereK®ß√a is playing His flute and become equally
spellbound. Becausewe are afraid of being disgraced in
society we are holding ourpatience and not going there,
considering that there are too manyobstacles. But if
someday the sound of the flute really enters ourhearts,
then at once our patience will fly away and we will
imme-diately run to K®ß√a. If we could give up these
bodies right nowand take birth as calves, that would be
very good! Then wheneverwe would hear the sound of
K®ß√a’s flute, we would go there atonce! We would be
entirely under His protection, and whilegazing at Him we
would forget everything else.”In this way the gopîsare
speaking. Just see the nature of theircondition, their
feelings. For receiving darçanaof K®ß√a and forhearing
the melody of His flute, a sådhakashould have such feel-
ings of separation (vipralambha-bhåva) in his heart, and
then hewill be engaging in real bhajana. If one’s
sådhanais established onsound knowledge of Vaiß√ava
philosophy and he becomes freefrom anarthas such
asfruitive acitivity,cultivating impersonalknowledge,

                           60
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

laziness, criticising other devotees and
committingoffences, then Bhagavån will not be far away
from him. Bhagavånis always just behind us, not far
away. Paramåtmå and åtmåarealways together; they are not
separate. K®ß√a and our very soulsare together within
us, but at present we are not seeing Himbecause we don’t
have sufficient faith. If a person is crying out from
afar, is there any friend or rela-tive who won’t come to
his aid? Even if there is a son who hasgiven his mother
great difficulty, even to the point of trying tokill
her, when he calls out in pain, will his mother not come
tohis aid? Are there any parents anywhere who could
possiblyignore the pleas of their offspring? Perhaps
only if they don’t hearthem – but K®ß√a is always
nearby, and if we call out to Him, willHe not hear? He
is much more merciful than mere worldly

71

Chapter Seven




parents. There is no place where He is not; He is always
very nearus inside our hearts. If we call Him sincerely,
is it possible thatHe won’t hear us? Will K®ß√a not hear
if we loudly call out toHim? At present we don’t have
sufficient faith, but when we prayfrom deep within our
heart with great faith and tears falling fromour eyes,
“O master of the gopîs, please hear my desperate
prayer!”will He not hear it? Certainly He will;
otherwise His name wouldhave to be changed. When we have
this mood, then what we areengaged in can really be
called bhajana.Next comes this verse:v®ndaço vraja-v®ßå
m®ga-gåvove√u-vådya-h®ta-cetasa åråtdanta-daß†a-kavalå
dh®ta-kar√ånidritå likhita-citram ivåsanÇrîmad-
Bhågavatam (10.35.5); B®had-bhågavatåm®ta
(2.7.118)Hearing the vibration of Çrî K®ß√a’s flute, the
bulls, cows and deerof V®ndåvana approach Him. Unable to
swallow the grass thatthey had taken into their mouths,
they stand silently with theirears raised and appear
like animals in a painting.The previous verse is from
the Ve√u-gîta, and this verse is fromthe Yugala-gîta. “O
sakhî, hearing the sound of K®ß√a’s flute andseeing His
attractive form, the cows, bulls and deer of Vraja
havebecome stunned and forgotten everything. They have
abruptlystopped grazing and the grass that they were
chewing merelyremains within their mouths. They have
lifted up their tails andraised their ears, trying to
discern from which direction thatsound has come. When
they realise the direction from which ithas come, they
slowly proceed until they come near to K®ß√a. Itis as if
the vibration of the flute has entered through their
ears,stolen their hearts and again exited their bodies.
Therefore whatcan they do? They must follow that sound
until they are near

72

Bhakti-rasåyana




                           61
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017


K®ß√a, and since their hearts are no longer within them,
theyappear like motionless animals in a painting.
K®ß√a’s flute-songhas stolen their hearts, and feeling
themselves possessionless, theyhave approached Him as if
begging alms.”Dh®ta-kar√å˙ –these animals’ ears
generally droop down, butupon hearing the music of
K®ß√a’s flute, they raised them. At firstthey were
listening, but then they reflexively turned their
earsaway from that sound so that it couldn’t enter. Why?
They werethinking, “We won’t allow this sound to enter
into our hearts,because then it will steal our hearts
and may even steal away ourvery lives! We may die, and
therefore we won’t allow this vibra-tion to enter!”
K®ß√a’s appearance and the vibration of His fluteare
like nectar and poison simultaneously – vißåm®ta ekatra-
milana.It cannot be discerned whether k®ß√a-premais
nectar or poison,just as when ice is placed in our hand,
it feels as if it is burning.We can’t tell if our hand
is burning or freezing. Similarly, comingin contact with
k®ß√a-prema, we can’t discern whether we are feel-ing
ecstasy or sadness. Saccharin has a bitter taste, but if
you mixit with water it becomes sweet. And if you suck
on a gooseberry,at first it seems sour, but when you get
the juice it becomes sweet. Like this, externally k®ß√a-
premaappears to be full of great sadness, and sometimes
internally it may even feel something likesadness, but
it is really the greatest happiness.So these cows closed
their ears, and when upon opening thema little the
vibration of the flute entered, they felt concerned
fortheir very lives. They didn’t know whether to accept
or reject it.In the same way, some people say, “My
friend, there is no needfor all of this devotion to God.
Those who have bhaktiactuallyhave no happiness. Even in
the stage of sådhanathey are crying.They think, ‘By
leaving home to engage in bhajana, I have madeall of my
family members cry, and I am no longer able to live with

73

Chapter Seven




them.’ And look at what the composers of the scriptures
havewritten: nayanaμ galad-açru-dhårayåvadanaμ gadgada-
ruddhayå giråpulakair nicitaμ vapu˙ kadåtava nåma-
graha√e bhavißyatiÇikßåß†aka (6)O Lord, when will my
eyes be filled with a stream of tears? Whenwill my voice
choke up? And when will the hairs of my body standerect
in ecstacy as I chant Your holy name?“They are praying
for the day when they will never stop crying,and they
desire to be always wailing in k®ß√a-prema. Actually it
isnot really such a surprising thing that they desire to
cry in thestage of sådhana, because without a child
crying, his mother will not feed him milk. All right, so
they are crying in the stage ofsådhana– but just look,
then, at their stage of perfection! Uddhavaand Akrüra
were perfected souls, and we have heard that whenthey
saw K®ß√a’s footprints on the ground, they began
wailingand even fell down and began writhing on the
ground! And untilthe gopîsmet K®ß√a again at Kurukßetra,
they were always crying.And when they again parted, they

                           62
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

cried even more! Even thoughthey were perfected souls!
Therefore all of this bhaktiis just anunnecessary
commotion.”But to persons who say this we say yayåtmå
suprasîdati(Çrîmad-Bhågavatam(1.2.6)): bhakticompletely
satisfies the soulwith spiritual bliss. Without engaging
in bhajana, no one can behappy. Churning water will
never produce ghee. Even if all thepeople of the
universe say that churning water produces ghee,will it
happen? Never. And without engaging in hari-bhajana,
noone can attain happiness or cross over this ocean of
material exis-tence. This point cannot be refuted any
more than the fact thatthe sun will definitely set in
the west. This is confirmed in the

Bhakti-rasåyana

74




Vedas, theRåmåya√aand all of the Purå√as, and it cannot
berefuted.Meeting with K®ß√a and separation from Him are
simulta-neously like nectar and poison, and their
characteristics cannotbe distinguished from one another.
They become one and thesame thing. Therefore these
animals of Vraja become bewilderedand concerned for
their very lives, while at the same time thegopîsare
saying, “In Vraja we are the most unfortunate.
Everyoneelse is becoming filled with bliss by receiving
K®ß√a’s darçana, butwe must remain here in our homes.”

Chapter Seven

75




Chapter EightThe Gopîs Glorify the Pulinda GirlDuring
the daytime, the gopîsare sitting together in their
homesand revealing their inner sentiments to one
another. One says,“After leaving this body, I desire to
take birth as a deer, and theneasily I will receive the
darçanaof K®ß√a.” Another says, “I desireto become a cow
or a calf. Who stops themfrom approachingK®ß√a? Hearing
the vibration of K®ß√a’s flute, I will approachHim and
become spellbound, just as the cows and calves do. Inan
unrestricted fashion I will receive His darçana.” In
this waysome gopîsdesire to become clouds, and others
desire to becomebees, birds or rivers. Now, in this
verse from the end of the Ve√u-gîta, they will begin to
speak about those in human form:pür√å˙ pulindya urugåya-
padåbja-råga-çrî-ku∫kumena dayitå-stana-ma√∂itenatad-
darçana-smara-rujas t®√a-rüßitenalimpantya ånana-kuceßu
jahus tad-ådhimÇrîmad-Bhågavatam (10.21.17); B®had-
bhågavatåm®ta (2.7.119)O sakhî, we consider the Pulinda
girls who collect grass and woodto be greatly fortunate,
because by spreading the ku∫kumawhichlies upon the grass
on their faces and bodies, the desires whicharise in
their hearts from seeing that very ku∫kumaare pacified.
Inreality, that ku∫kumais from the breasts of Çrîmatî

                           63
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

Rådhikå, andat the time of enjoying pastimes with Çrî
K®ß√a, it becomes

77




smeared on His lotus feet. Then as They wander in the
forest, itfalls from His feet onto the grass.In previous
times in Vraja there was a tribe called Pulinda,
whowould construct small huts that they would live in
for only a short time and then move on. Their women
would collectwood or dry plants and sell them to
maintain themselves, or theywould bring water for
people. They were also artists, so theywould travelto
peoples’ homes selling their craftwork. The gopîsare
saying, “Aho! All of the living entities we have
described so farare certainly fortunate, but this girl
of the Pulinda tribe ispür√å˙– completely fortunate.
Why? In the morning, arriving in the valleys of
Govardhana to collect wood, she notices that ku∫kumais
mixed with the dew on the grass. Seeing this, desire
begins toburn in her heart.”Intense eagerness to meet
K®ß√a arose in her heart becauseremembrance of a
previous incident came to her. The day before,in a
kuñjaof Govardhana, K®ß√a and His friends were
playingdice with the gopîs. There were two parties:
K®ß√a’s party andÇrîmatî Rådhikå’s party, and the main
players were K®ß√a andÇrîmatî. Subala and Madhuma∫gala
and others were on K®ß√a’sside, and Lalitå, Viçåkhå and
the other sakhîswere on Rådhikå’sside. K®ß√a put up
something as a bet and was defeated. ThenRådhikå said,
“What will You bet now? You should stake
Yourflute.”K®ß√a replied, “I will stake My flute, but
what will You put up?You should stake an equally
valuable thing. I value My flute likeMy very life, but I
will stake it if You stake something of
equalvalue.”Rådhikå said, “Then You please say what I
should stake.”K®ß√a said, “All right – You should stake
one of the friends ofYour sakhîs.”Being very pleased,
Rådhikå agreed to this and whispered to

78

Bhakti-rasåyana




one of Her sakhîs, “In the village nearby is a girl of
the Pulindatribe. Go and call her.” They brought the
girl there, and enteringthat assembly the poor girl felt
very shy. She felt ashamed becauseshe was of a lower
class, so reluctantly she sat in the back. Seeingher,
K®ß√a said, “I will not stake My flute for her! What is
themeaning of this?” Then all of the gopîsbegan laughing
and clap-ping. At that time, this Pulinda girl saw the
beauty of K®ß√a.Before it was described how all of the
birds and animals becamespellbound by seeing K®ß√a, but
this girl considered herself a maidservant of Rådhikå,
so upon seeing K®ß√a she became evenmore spellbound. So
the next morning while this aborigine girl was
collectingwood and plants, she saw ku∫kumalying on the

                           64
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

grass, and auto-matically she knew where it had come
from – the breasts of Rådhå.Are the birds, deer or
aborigines of V®ndåvana ordinary? Forinstance, how do
they know K®ß√a is coming in their directionwhen He is
taking the cows out for grazing? They all recogniseHis
intoxicating fragrance. It is expected that the
gopîswould naturally recognise this fragrance, but even
the birds and animalsare familiar with it. When the
Pulinda girl saw this ku∫kuma,such intense desire to
meet K®ß√a arose in her heart that she wasunable to
restrain it.When K®ß√a is departing Nanda-bhavana to
take the cows outto graze in the forest for the day, all
of the men, women and chil-dren of Vraja assemble along
the road to catch a glimpse of Him.They are all standing
along the path, and K®ß√a is coming on Hisway playing
the flute. At that time there are also some young
girlswho come to see Him who are in çånta-rati. There
are many typesof çånta-rati, such as samanya
(general)and svaccha (undeveloped).The aborigine girl
wassvaccha, which means that ratihad ariseninside her,
but not sthåyi-rati, her permanent internal
sentiment.After a seed is planted, a creeper begins to
grow from it. At that

79

Chapter Eight




time its leaves have begun to appear but have not
completelydeveloped, and from looking at the leaves you
cannot ascertainwhat kind of plant it is. But when the
leaves become full, thenyou can tell what kind of plant
it is. It is the same with rati, andthe Pulinda girl’s
ratiis described as being svaccha. Whenever shesees
K®ß√a reciprocating with His devotees in a particular
mellow,she desires to share that same mellow with Him.
For instance, when she sees Mother Yaçodå nurturing
K®ß√a,reciting mantrasso that no harm will come to Him
and wipingHis face with the end of her sårî, she becomes
spellbound.Without blinking she just gazes at Him,
thinking, “I would liketo be His mother just like her.”
This is svaccha-rati. Then a littlelater she sees K®ß√a
playing His flute, and running, playing andeating with
His friends with great pleasure, and then she
againbecomes spellbound, thinking, “I would like to
become a sakhåso I can run and play with Him like this.”
Then later she seesK®ß√a standing in His threefold-
bending posture, playing theflute and gazing at the
gopîs. He is shivering, His crown is tiltingto one side
and His yellow shawl is slipping down. Seeing this,she
thinks, “I would like to become a friend of Rådhå and
serveHim with a similar sentiment.” This is
calledsvaccha-rati.So this Pulinda girl, in comparison
to the creepers, bees, cloudsand deer, is the best of
all. As a result of witnessing K®ß√a per-forming His
pastimes, and especially from seeing K®ß√a just theday
before, she has gradually come to desire to enter the
camp ofRådhå’s servitors to be able to serve Him as they
do. Thereforewhen she saw the ku∫kumaon top of the
grass,smara-ruja˙–intense desire to meet K®ß√a arose in
her. If eagerness to meetK®ß√a arises even in the birds

                           65
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

and animals, then it is even morenatural that it would
arise in her. If such eagerness developswithin a
sådhaka, then it can be said that he is really engaged
insådhana-bhajana. But presently we have no such
eagerness to

Bhakti-rasåyana

80




meet Him; instead we are greatly determined to obtain
materialenjoyment. As yet we have no real eagerness for
bhakti, but weshould endeavour to obtain this eagerness
because it is the root,the very life of bhajana.The
Pulinda girl looked at the ku∫kumaand began analysingit:
“Where has this ku∫kuma come from? Has it come from
thefeet of K®ß√a, or the feet of the gopîs? Ku∫kumais
not applied to K®ß√a; only the gopîsapply ku∫kumato
their bodies, so howcould it have turned up here? This
is difficult to understand.Somehow I know that it could
have only come from K®ß√a’s feet,but how did it get on
K®ß√a’s feet? Oh, I understand! Fearing that K®ß√a’s
feet would be harmed by pebbles and thorns as He roams
about, the gopîssometimes place His feet on their
breasts.Therefore this ku∫kumamust have come from
K®ß√a’s feet as Hereturned home from His rendezvous with
the gopîs.” Under-standing the situation, she at once
became intoxicated, placedsome of this ku∫kumaon her
head, and by spreading it all overher whole body, her
kåma was pacified.The Bhågavatamsays that kåma, or lust,
exists in the heart ofthe conditioned soul like a
disease. This fire of lust burns insidethe conditioned
soul as he turns away from Bhagavån and castshis vision
in the direction of måyå. The conditioned soul
becomesattracted to the opposite sex, to wealth and to
being praised byothers. Some leave material life and
take up residence in a templeto engage in bhajana, and
even attain a little taste for chantingthe holy name and
hearing hari-kathå, then fall down and leave.Why? They
were attracted to måyå, were they not? Certainly
theywere very attracted; if they had such strong
attraction for theLord, they wouldn’t have entered the
material world in the firstplace. The attraction of
måyåis very, very strong, and in this con-nection there
is the example of Kålå K®ß√adåsa, a boy of sixteenor
seventeen years. Nityånanda Prabhu, Råya Råmånanda and

81

Chapter Eight




Svarüpa Dåmodara each said to Çrî Caitanya Mahåprabhu,
“OLord, please don’t go to South India alone. I will
accompanyYou.”Mahåprabhu replied, “If I take any of you,
then the others willsay, ‘You are taking him, but not
me?’ Then I will be at fault, soI will go alone.”“All
right, then we will send someone whom You are
notacquainted with: this simple and honest son of a

                           66
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

bråhma√a. Keephim with You, because how Your mind
changes we cannotunderstand. Sometimes You forget
everything, even Your bodilyneeds. You require
kaupînasand a waterpot, so who will carrythem? Sometimes
You throw them somewhere and proceedonward, and
sometimes when You are crying out, ‘Where is theLord of
My life?’ You roll on the ground, and even if
Yourclothes were to come off, You wouldn’t notice!
Crying andcrying, You just proceed onward. You will need
someone to fetchwater and beg alms for You, so please
take this Kålå K®ß√adåsa.”Mahåprabhu agreed, and Kålå
K®ß√adåsa accompanied Himuntil they reached Kanyåkumårî,
where there was a group of gypsies called Bha††athåris
who would travel here and there withtheir bulls, donkeys
and belongings. Their business was to lureyoung boys and
girls to join them – how? They would show boysa girl,
and girls a boy. Once they had lured someone they
wouldimmediately move on, and the people of the village
would notknow where their son or daughter had gone. In
this way theywould set traps for innocent boys and
girls, and there was a verylarge group of these gypsies
nearby where Mahåprabhu was staying. One day Mahåprabhu
went out begging, leaving KålåK®ß√adåsa sitting
underneath a tree. One of these gypsiesapproached him,
and after speaking with him for some time,said, “It is
as if you have been my son for a very long time! Look–
we will marry you to this girl, and you will live with
her very

82

Bhakti-rasåyana




happily. Within our tribe you will become a king.” The
poor boywas lured, and decided to go with them. When
Mahåprabhu returned and didn’t see him, He
thought,“Where has that boy gone? Oh, those gypsies must
have takenhim!” Mahåprabhu entered their party, and
locating KålåK®ß√adåsa, grabbed him by the çikhå,
saying, “You rascal! Youleft Me and came here?”He had to
forcibly drag back KålåK®ß√adåsa, who didn’t even desire
to leave there! So just see how,even if one is
associating with Bhagavån Himself, måyåcanattract him.
So what to speak of us? This måyåis very dangerous,and
escaping its many trappings is very difficult. And even
ifsomeone can renounce everything – even his wife and
family –still he may not be able to leave the desire for
prestige (pratiß†hå).It is as if the desire for it runs
in our veins. But if we receive somespecial mercy from
the spiritual master, the Vaiß√avas andBhagavån, then we
will be able to abandon that desire; otherwisewe won’t
easily be able to leave it. We should make our owneffort
to leave it, but we must also receive their mercy,
both.vikrî∂itaμ vraja-vadhübhir idaμ ca
viß√o˙çraddhånvito ’nuç®√uyåd atha var√ayed ya˙Çrîmad-
Bhågavatam (10.33.39)If one faithfully hears the five
chapters of the Çrîmad-Bhågavatamthat describe the
råsadance – K®ß√a’s transcendental pastimeswith the
gopîs– then the heart disease of lust will be
destroyed.But it must be heard with real faith, which is
received from thespiritual master and the Vaiß√avas. If

                           67
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

one enjoys reading novels,and considers these pastimes
between K®ß√a and the gopîsto bemere fiction, then it
will not have the desired effect. Previouslythere was
this lust in the Pulinda girl’s heart, but by the mercy
ofthe great bhåvaof the gopîs, who are K®ß√a’s hlådinî-
çakti, allanarthascan be destroyed. Therefore that
ku∫kumawas the gopîs’,and having been smeared on K®ß√a’s
feet, it now lay on the grass

83

Chapter Eight




invested with some powerful potency (çakti). Having come
incontact with both the gopîsand K®ß√a, it had become so
powerful.How much çaktican be in foot-dust? Once Çrî
Råmacandrawas walking along in a forest and he came
across Gautama ‰ßi,who had cursed his wife, Ahalyå, to
become stone. When Råmatouched that stone with his feet,
she immediately assumed heroriginal form as a very
beautiful goddess. She circumambulatedhim, offered him
prayers, and then bid him farewell and left withher
husband. So this ku∫kumaof the gopîsmixed with the dust
ofK®ß√a’s feet will have enormous çakti. In this Pulinda
girl’s heartwas the disease of lust, but upon touching
this ku∫kumaher heartwas made supremely pure and was
invested with k®ß√a-prema.Her feelings became like those
of the gopîs, and following them,she began serving
K®ß√a. So in this verse the gopîsare saying, “Foran
aborigine girl, she is so fortunate! Even more so than
thefemale deer. What would they understand of this
ku∫kuma? Butshe has understood that this ku∫kumais not
ordinary; by touch-ing it the amorous pastimes of Çrî
Rådhå and K®ß√a arise in one’sheart.”If a sådhakaapplies
the ku∫kumaof these descriptions to him-self through
hearing them – even in åbhåsa, the semblance of
realhearing – then his heart will also be supremely
purified, and allhis material desires will be destroyed.
Here the gopîsare actuallysinging their own glories, but
they’re not thinking that way.Whose ku∫kumawas this?
Their own; yet here, by the influenceof Yogamåyå, they
are forgetting that and singing the glories ofthe
aborigine girl.A devotee is one who considers himself
extremely fallen. If weare thinking, “I am an advanced
devotee and better than others;I can attract people by
giving various meanings of Sanskrit verses,I possess so
much bhaktiand so many people are showing merespect,”
then we have not yet become devotees. When even a little

84

Bhakti-rasåyana




bhaktihas entered someone’s heart, then humility will
certainlybe there. Where there is no humility, we can
understand thatthere is no bhakti. He who has become a
better devotee is he whosehumility has increased. Where
humility exists in its full form,there bhaktiwill also

                           68
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

be in its full form. And where there is nohumility,
there will not be even a trace of bhakti. More
humilityis found in a madhyama-adhikårîdevotee than in a
kaniß†ha-adhikårî, and more humility exists in the
uttama-adhikårî devo-tee than in the madhyama-adhikårî.
Then it is found more in theresidents of Goloka Vraja
than in the general class of uttama-adhikårîs, and
amongst the Vrajavåsîs more humility can be seenin the
gopîs, and amongst them the most humility is found
inÇrîmatî Rådhikå. She is the pinnacle of humility. In
whomeverShe detects even a trace of bhakti, She
considers that personworthy of Her reverence. She offers
prayers to that person, think-ing, “I should try to
become like them.”This is the vision of an
uttamadevotee: “Oh, Kaμsa is so fortunate! In order to
kill Kaμsa, Bhagavån has come in such anattractive form!
He won’t kill Kaμsa’s soul, but will show himmercy by
releasing him from his body. At the same time, He
hasbestowed on this world pastimes that are full of
unlimited puri-fying potency. If not for Kaμsa, then
K®ß√a would not haveappeared, and His glories would not
have become known. Onlybecause of fear of Kaμsa, K®ß√a
was taken to Gokula. Then Hereturned to Mathurå only to
kill Kaμsa, and then He left forDvårakå because of
Kaμsa. Why? Jaråsandha’s daughters weremarried to Kaμsa,
so when Kaμsa was killed, they went crying totheir
father, ‘For some reason K®ß√a has killed your son-in-
law!’Taking an army, Jaråsandha attacked K®ß√a seventeen
times, soK®ß√a thought, ‘Every day there is fighting
here, so we should go away from here,’ and He left for
Dvårakå. It was all becauseof Kaμsa. Kaμsa was not an
ordinary person, and that is why

85

Chapter Eight




a mahå-bhågavataVaiß√ava like Nårada would regularly go
to seehim.”A madhyama-adhikårî may feel some hatred for
Kaμsa, but anuttama-adhikårî won’t. In a similar way,
the gopîsare consideringthe Pulinda girl to be superior
to themselves and are glorifyingher: “If we could take
birth as a Pulinda girl, then our mother,father and
brothers would not restrict us from seeing K®ß√a
duringthe daytime. We could go to the forest every day
and collectwood, but because we belong to higher class
families, this is notpossible for us now.” If a
sådhakais to enter into bhakti, he musthave this
humility; and when he does, he can really be called
asådhaka.In the verse we are discussing, why does it
sayçrî-ku∫kuma? Itcan mean that ku∫kumawhich carries
some special splendour, orit can mean reddish, like
K®ß√a’s lotus feet. K®ß√a is of a darkblue (çyåma)
complexion, but the palms of His hands and thesoles of
His feet are a deep reddish colour. This ku∫kumais of
thesame hue, and when it came in contact with K®ß√a’s
feet, itassumed some special splendour and also some
special çakti. Iffood is prepared for and offered to
K®ß√a, His potency enters intoit – K®ß√a’s full çaktiis
in mahå-prasåda. Upon being touched byK®ß√a’s mouth it
becomes sac-cid-ånanda, just like Him. Sobefore the

                           69
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

gopîsused this ku∫kumait was notçrî, but coming
incontact with K®ß√a’s lotus feet, all the potency and
splendour ofthose lotus feet entered into it, and it
became extraordinarilybeautiful. And where did that
ku∫kumacome from originally?Dayitå-stana-ma√∂itena– from
Rådhikå, and therefore it can alsobe said that it
becameçrî from Her touch. By seeing that ku∫kumalying on
the grass in the morning,smara-ruja˙– lust arose in the
heart of the Pulinda girl. But whenshe smeared that
ku∫kumaon her body, did her lust increase ordiminish?
All the jîvasin V®ndåvana – the insects, birds, animals

86

Bhakti-rasåyana




and people – are always restless to see K®ß√a; and when
they seeHim, does their eagerness for Him increase – or
diminish? It cer-tainly increases, but when they receive
K®ß√a’s touch, then theymay become a little peaceful.
Therefore this çrî-ku∫kumais non-different from K®ß√a
Himself; upon seeing it, the eagerness of thePulinda
girl increased, but upon spreading it all over her
body,she became fully satisfied, and once again
peaceful.In speaking this verse, the gopîsconsidered the
Pulinda girl tobe pür√å˙– to have become completely
fulfilled, even more sothan the birds and animals of
Vraja. She was not as divinely beau-tiful as the
gopîsand was unqualified to participate in
amorouspastimes with K®ß√a, but in considering her to be
more fortunatethan themselves, the gopîsare exhibiting a
symptom of mådana,which is the upper stage of mahåbhåva.
This is when they con-sider an unqualified person, or
even an inanimate object, to besuperior to themselves,
and even give an explanation of why theyfeel this way.
The flute is an inanimate object, but because italways
resides at K®ß√a’s lips and never becomes separated
fromHim, and even though it is of male gender, the
gopîsfeel that itis more fortunate than them. Their
sentiment towards the fluteis that it is like the second
wife of K®ß√a. So here, this feeling from the upper
stage of mahåbhåvahasarisen in the gopîstowards the
Pulinda girl. It is not possible forother devotees to
have this high sentiment, and therefore inplaces like
Dvårakå this sentiment isn’t known. This
beautifulbhåvais found only in Vraja. Even though this
girl had no rela-tionship with K®ß√a, seeing how she
began shivering and tearsbegan flowing from her eyes
when she noticed the ku∫kumafromK®ß√a’s feet that was
lying on the grass, the gopîsdesired to expe-rience her
sentiments. Çrîmatî Rådhikå said, “Such a
bhåvanevercomes to us!” Here Rådhikå Herself is singing
the glories of thePulinda girl, and She is not
considering the actual elevated state

87

Chapter Eight




                           70
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017


of the vraja-gopîs. She is not thinking about that.
Whose ku∫kumawas it in the first place? Hers, but she is
considering the aboriginegirl to be more fortunate! This
is a symptom of mahåbhåva. “Sheis so fortunate! If in My
next life I could take birth as a girl of the Pulinda
tribe, then there would be no one to prohibit Me from
seeing K®ß√a, and I would also be able to experience
such a beautiful bhåva.”

88

Bhakti-rasåyana




Chapter NineK®ß√a Enjoys Playing with His
FriendsSuperior to the Pulinda girl we have been
discussing are thesakhås, and of them Çukadeva Gosvåmî
says:yadi düraμ gata˙ k®ß√ovana-çobhekßa√åya tamahaμ
pürvam ahaμ pürvamiti saμsp®çya remireÇrîmad-Bhågavatam
(10.12.6); B®had-bhågavatåm®ta (2.7.120)During the day,
while playing and jumping about with Hissakhås, if
K®ß√a, desiring to see the splendour of the forest,
wouldgo to a somewhat distant place, then with great
speed the sakhåswould run to Him saying, “I will touch
Him first! I will touchHim first!” and in this way they
enjoyed life. They would embraceK®ß√a, and K®ß√a would
also embrace them. They would refer toone another as
“Sakhå, Sakhå!” and they would carry one anotheron their
shoulders. Because they would play with K®ß√a in suchan
unrestricted fashion, both indoors and outside, these
younggopasare superior to the Pulinda girl. In the early
morning K®ß√a would still be sleeping, and
Subala,Madhuma∫gala and others would come and jump on
His bed toawaken Him. Mother Yaçodå would be hesitant to
awaken Him,because generally a sleeping child should not
be awakened. If Heslept too late, then to awaken Him
perhaps she would sing

89




a sweet song and gently sprinkle some water on His face.
But thesakhåswould simply jump on Him, and then they
would accom-pany Him to the forest for the day. While
eating and drinking,while inside the house or outside,
coming and going, they wouldalways accompany K®ß√a.
Seeing this, the gopîssay, “These sakhåsare so
fortunate! Day and night, anywhere and everywhere,
theyare always playing with K®ß√a. If we could become
sakhås, thenwe would always feel great happiness! We
could always be by Hisside. Sometimes Mother Yaçodå
feeds them at the same time shefeeds K®ß√a, and then
they play together all day long. In this waythey are
always fully satisfied.”Singing the glories of the
youthful cowherds, the gopîsbecameabsorbed in bhåva.
This is the nature of prema, and especially thenature of
mahåbhåva. Recognising even a trace of premain
others,the gopîsconsider them to be more fulfilled than
they themselves.When Çrî Caitanya Mahåprabhu was in Purî

                           71
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

surrounded by Hisdevotees, a dog approached Him. It was
making a whining sound,and tears began to fall from its
eyes. Mahåprabhu was eatingcoconut and gave that dog
some of His prasåda, and when thenext day the dog was
nowhere to be found, everyone understoodthat it went to
Vaiku√†ha. So who wouldn’t desire to becomethat dog and
be able to approach Mahåprabhu and receive someof His
prasåda? Then rolling on the ground in ecstasy, relin-
quishing his material body and becoming an eternal
associate ofBhagavån in Vaiku√†ha – who wouldn’t desire
such a benedic-tion? Especially those who have
premawould desire it. Similarly,upon seeing someone
receiving the kindness and affection ofK®ß√a – whether
they are qualified for it or not – Rådhikå
becomesintoxicated and thinks, “They are more fortunate
than Me; I wishthat My fortune could become like
theirs.”Accompanied by countless sakhås, K®ß√a takes the
calves out to

90

Bhakti-rasåyana




graze for the day. When calves become a little bigger
they give updrinking the cows’ milk, and K®ß√a takes
something like 900,000of these calves out to graze.
Meanwhile Çrîdåmå comes, and howmany calves does he
have? All of his calves join the procession.Then
Madhuma∫gala, Subala, Stokak®ß√a, Arjuna and
countlessother sakhåswith countless calves join them.
Amongst this pro-cession there are different parties,
like when a kîrtanaprocessionis going along. One party
holds a banner with the words “KeçavajîGau∂îya Ma†ha”,
another holds a banner with the name “Rüpa-Sanåtana
Gau∂îya Ma†ha”, and another party hold a banner dis-
playing the name of another temple. Similarly, the
sakhåsaregoing along together, but in separate parties.
Sometimes thosewho desire to separate during the course
of the day do so, but atthe end of the afternoon when
K®ß√a plays the particular melodyon His flute that
signifies it is time to return, they again cometogether.
Then upon returning, they again go their separate
wayswhen each sakhåtakes his calves and goes to his own
father’shouse.While going along together with their
millions of calves, thesakhåsplay their flutes and
horns, sing and play various games. Inthis verse it
saysremire, a derivative of the wordramanå, whichmeans
to enjoy. Enjoying with His friends, K®ß√a enters
theforest, where they decorate each other with the many
varieties offlowers and leaves as well as peacock
feathers. At once K®ß√a isdecorated like the king of
dancers, and He also decorates theother boys. Then they
begin playing; how does it start? Çrîdåmåsteals one of
Madhuma∫gala’s beloved la∂∂usand gives it toanother boy,
and it is passed around so many times that no oneknows
where it has gone. Madhuma∫gala approaches
everyoneasking them, “Have you seen my la∂∂u?”and if
they have it, theykeep it hidden. One gopasteals
another’s flute, horn or stick, and

91

                           72
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017


Chapter Nine




when the owner of it pursues him, he throws it away and
thenanother gopapicks it up and runs with it. In this
way they play intheir attractive childhood pastimes
(båla-lîlå). The boys are all laughing and K®ß√a smiles,
but if K®ß√a doesn’t smile, then everything is spoiled.
Everything is going onexclusively for K®ß√a’s pleasure.
At that time, these children haveforgotten their homes,
families and even their own bodily needs– everything.
One boy is playing the flute, another is singing likea
bird, another is mimicking a monkey and another is
imitatingthe sound of a frog. For the purpose of
increasing their eagerness,sometimes K®ß√a hides, and
then the sakhåsare unable to staywhere they are and they
begin searching for Him. If one of themcatches a glimpse
of Him, then at once they all race there. Oneafter the
other they embrace K®ß√a, and laughing, K®ß√a
embracesthem in return.When K®ß√a would sometimes go to
a slightly distant place tosee the splendour of the
forest, the sakhås, upon losing the greatecstasy
(paramånanda) they experience by playing with Him,become
very unhappy. Sanåtana Gosvåmî says in his commen-tary
that K®ß√a plays with the sakhåsfor nine hours each
daywhile taking the cows and calves out to graze. So
when do thegopîsreceive the opportunity to be with Him
for that long? Atthat time, by the arrangement of
Yogamåyå, K®ß√a assumes twoforms. In one form He remains
playing with the gopas, and in theother form He enjoys
with the gopîsat Kusuma-sarovara or Rådhå-ku√∂a. Or on
some pretext He tells the sakhås, “I am going toKusuma-
sarovara to get a drink of water,” and by the
influenceof Yogamåyå He seems to return in one second
only. The gopasdon’t know how much time has elapsed,
just as an entire night ofBrahmå elapsed while the råsa
dancewas being performed.During the råsa-lîlå, did any
of the members of K®ß√a’s or thegopîs’households know of
it? They considered that it was only an

92

Bhakti-rasåyana




ordinary night lasting eight hours. So either by
assuming twoforms or remaining in only one form, K®ß√a
would sometimesalso enjoy with the gopîsduring the
day.Next comes this verse:itthaμ satåμ brahma-
sukhånubhütyådåsyaμ gatånåμ para-daivatenamåyåçritånåμ
nara-dårake√asårdhaμ vijahru˙ k®ta-pu√ya-puñjå˙Çrîmad-
Bhågavatam (10.12.11);B®had-bhågavatåm®ta (2.7.121)In
this way the greatly fortunate cowherd boys enjoy in
variousways with Çrî K®ß√a, who is seen as the Brahman
effulgence by thejñånîs, as the supremely worshipful
deity by His servants and as anordinary boy by people in
general. (Or, the word måyåçritacanalso mean that those
who had received His utmost mercy, due tobeing devoid of
the mood of opulence, saw Him merely as the sonof

                           73
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

Nanda.)K®ß√a had killed Aghåsura, and while taking the
cows out tograze during the daytime, the sakhåswere
playing with thedemon’s bones and skin. There was no bad
odour coming fromthe demon’s body, and all the
sakhåsthought, “How has itbecome dried out like this?”
Because K®ß√a had assumed theforms of those cowherd boys
for one year immediately after thekilling of Aghåsura,
they thought that only one day had elapsedsince the
demon was slain. Brahmå had hidden them in a cave forone
year under mystic trance, but when K®ß√a glanced at
themthey revived, and the expanded forms of cowherd boys
enteredback into His original form. When K®ß√a killed
Aghåsura, theeffulgence of the demon’s soul merged into
K®ß√a’s feet. Brahmåand many yogîswere watching this and
thought, “Who is this? Heappears to be an ordinary young
boy, so how is this possible?”This verse says
satåm,which means saints who are always fixedin
meditation. For them K®ß√a is the personification of the
joy

93

Chapter Nine




derived from immersion in the impersonal Brahman, and
for devo-tees who consider themselves His servants, He
ispara-daivatena–the supreme god. When K®ß√a entered the
wrestling arena ofKaμsa, who saw Him as the para-devatå?
The V®ß√is, who con-sidered Him to be their worshipful
deity, but the gopîsand otherresidents of Vraja didn’t
see Him like that. Some saw Him as afriend, some as a
son and some as a paramour. Måyåçritånåμnara-dårake√a–
and those under the influence of måyå saw Himas an
ordinary young boy. The cowherd boys were playing
withHim because k®ta-pu√ya-puñjå˙– by their
“accumulation ofpious activities”, they were able to
enjoy with Him in this way.There are three meanings of
the wordpu√ya.First it can meanconventional pious
activities, but performance of this type ofpu√yadoes not
qualify one to meet K®ß√a. Secondly it can meansuk®ti,
and by accumulation of this one receives sådhu-sa∫ga,
thenthey may accept the shelter of a spiritual master,
and then developbhakti. And when bhaktibecomes
perfected, premacomes, andwhen one has this prema, then
he can meet K®ß√a. By the pu√yaof personalities like
Mahåråja Hariçcandra, Dadhîci ‰ßi orMahåråja Çibi,3can
one meet Bhagavån? No. By the practice ofsådhana-
bhaktione won’t meet Bhagavån, and even by
possessingbhåva-bhaktione won’t meet Him. When one has
prema-bhakti,then he can meet K®ß√a. Don’t consider all
types of bhaktito beone and the same. The cultivation of
sådhana-bhaktiwill gradu-ally elevate one, by bhåva-
bhaktione mayreceive some darçanaofK®ß√a, but only
prema-bhaktican overpower Him. To become

94

Bhakti-rasåyana

3. The story of Mahåråja Hariçcandra is found in Çrîmad-
Bhågavatam, NinthCanto, Chapter 7. A description of

                           74
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

Dadhîci ‰ßi is found in Çrîmad-Bhågavatam,Sixth Canto,
Chapters 6–7, and a description of Mahåråja Çibi is
found in thepurport to Çrîmad-Bhågavatam(1.12.20).




K®ß√a’s friend and live with Him may not even be
accomplishedby having prema-bhaktiif one does not have
the bhåvaof Vraja.These sakhåspossessed this prema-
bhaktiwith vraja-bhåva, andthat is the meaning ofk®ta-
pu√ya-puñjå˙.Sanåtana Gosvåmî describes how the
sakhåswould playtogether with great intimacy. Sometimes
they would run andplay with K®ß√a without any clothing.
They would eat from eachother’s plates and place food in
each other’s mouths, and theyhad no fear of reprimand
from their elders or anyone. Speakingthis verse,
Çukadeva Gosvåmî felt great ånanda, though he couldnot
remain solely on this topic for long. He is the parrot
ofRådhikå, and there is nothing that can fully immerse
him inånandawhich doesn’t include Her name. But here he
becamespellbound in sakhya-rasa, and that bhåvapoured
forth from hisheart in the form of his words. In this
verse he has used the wordsatåm,which means “saint”, and
here it refers to those who viewK®ß√a as the
personification of brahmånanda, the bliss derivedfrom
immersion in the impersonal Brahman. It refers to
thosewho are adorned with the twenty-six qualities of a
devotee andwho are jñåni-bhaktaslike the four Kumåras.
But if Rüpa andSanåtana Gosvåmîs had personally
described a saint by their owndefinition, they would
have referred to those who have the bhåvaof Vraja, and
amongst them those who possess the bhåvaof thegopîs, and
out of them the one who possesses the bhåvaof beinga
maidservantof Çrîmatî Rådhikå.Once, Durvåså Muni came
and saw K®ß√a playing with Hisfriends. The boys were
putting dust on top of K®ß√a’s head, andK®ß√a was
chasing them and throwing dust on them also. Theywere
sometimes embracing one another, sometimes singing
andsometimes verbally abusing one another as children
do. Durvåsåthought, “What is this? He who is the very
embodiment of

95

Chapter Nine




Brahman has taken birth in the house of Nanda?” Gazing
inK®ß√a’s direction, he became spellbound and just stood
motion-lessly. K®ß√a saw him from a distance, and at
once left His playingand approached him, saying, “Båbå,
I have defeated Subala!”Then Subala came and said, “I
have defeated Kanhaiyå!” Anotherboy came and said, “I
defeated K®ß√a!” and then K®ß√a said, “NoBåbå, I
defeated him!” Durvåså could only silently gaze at
K®ß√a,and then he sat down. He couldn’t determine who
defeated whoand was unable to give them a verdict. Then
K®ß√a sat in his lap,and grabbing his beard, said,
“Båbå, you don’t speak? Are youdeaf and dumb?” Then,
feeling restless, K®ß√a raced away fromthere smiling,
and began playing again. Durvåså had not entered Vraja

                           75
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

after only one or two days’journey; he had been
wandering for millions of years and hadseen countless
universes, countless Brahmås and Ça∫karas – andafter
that he entered Vraja. Wonderstruck, he thought,
“Here,playing with these boys, is the personification of
brahmånanda?”From a distance he offered obeisances so as
not to disturb K®ß√a’spastimes, and then he went away
from there. This is the vision ofK®ß√a being referred to
in this verse by the line itthaμ satåμbrahma-
sukhånubhütyå.Then the next line refers to devotees who
see K®ß√a aspara-devatå, their supremely worshipful
deity. And then the third linesays måyåçritånåμ nara-
dårake√a, which means that those underthe influence of
måyåsee K®ß√a as an ordinary child. But onemore meaning
has been given here: if this were to refer to thosesouls
trapped in material illusion, then the sequence would
beinconsistent. First was described how the sages see
K®ß√a, andthen how the devotees see Him, so here
måyåçritånåmmust referto those who are under the
influence of Yogamåyå. SanåtanaGosvåmî quotes this
verse:

Bhakti-rasåyana

96




kåtyåyani mahå-måyemahå-yoginy adhîçvarinanda-gopa-sutaμ
devipatiμ me kuru te nama˙Çrîmad-Bhågavatam (10.22.4)O
Kåtyåyanî, O possessor of the Yogamåyå potency, please
give usthe boon of having K®ß√a as our husband.So in the
verse we are discussing, narameans that those whohave
taken shelter of Yogamåyå saw the son of Nanda
Mahåråjaas an ordinary boy. They didn’t see Him with
aiçvarya-bhåva,awe and reverence, but with mådhurya-
bhåva, loving friendship.They always played with Him in
nara-lîlå, His pastimes inhuman form, never considering
Him to be the Supreme Lord. IfK®ß√a ever tried to tell
them that He was Bhagavån, the gopîswould start clapping
and say, “What, Youare Bhagavån? You areonly a liar and
a cheat, and when You are hungry You break Yourmother’s
pots of yoghurt!” So here,måyåçritånåmmust refer to the
gopîswho by reciting this siddha-mantraand offering
püjåto Kåtyåyanî received K®ß√a as their paramour.
Otherwise thesequence of the verse would be incorrect.
And in the wordsnara-dårake√a, the worddåracan also mean
“wife”, so in this way italso refers to the gopîs, who
always saw K®ß√a as an adolescent(kiçora), handsomely
decorated like a new bridegroom, andappearing supremely
attractive as the king of dancers. This verseis saying
that with this dearest paramour of the gopîs, the
sakhåsare playing all day long, so how fortunate must
they be consid-ered to be?

97

Chapter Nine




                           76
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017


Chapter TenThe Glories of Sakhya-rasayat-påda-paμçur
bahu-janma-k®cchratodh®tåtmabhir yogibhir apy alåbhya˙sa
eva yad-d®g vißaya˙ svayaμ sthita˙kiμ var√yate diß†am
aho vrajaukasåmÇrîmad-Bhågavatam (10.12.12);B®had-
bhågavatåm®ta (2.7.122)Great yogîsperform severe
austerities for many lifetimes, but evenwhen with great
difficulty they have completely controlled theirminds,
they still cannot attain even one particle of the dust
of thelotus feet of Çrî K®ß√a. How then can I possibly
describe the goodfortune of the Vrajavåsîs, who daily
received His direct darçana?Yogîs, through many births
of practising yama, niyama, åsana,prå√åyåma,
pratyåhåra,dhåra√å, dhyåna and samådhi, are unableto
touch even one particle of the dust of K®ß√a’s lotus
feet. Theyperform such severe austerities but are unable
to reach Him, andthis refers to Brahmå also. Brahmå has
a very long lifespan, andhe even sees K®ß√a sometimes,
but when he approached K®ß√a,did he receive the dust of
His feet? When Brahmå came toV®ndåvana, K®ß√a was
absorbed in playing with His friends.When Brahmå
arrived, K®ß√a glanced at him, but then quicklyreturned
to playing. Brahmå could only offer prayers, and
didn’tdirectly receive the dust of His feet. So what to
speak of ordinaryyogîs? But that very Vrajendra-nandana,
although He is Bhagavån

99




Himself, stands before the Vrajavåsîs and even plays
with them.Even the children younger than K®ß√a would
desire to accom-pany Him when He took the cows out for
grazing; they certainlywouldn’t just remain in their
homes! The mothers of these chil-dren would tell K®ß√a,
“Look after my son today,” and K®ß√awould take those
small boys with Him. What to speak of justplaying with
them, after walking some distance, K®ß√a would askone of
them, “Are you feeling tired?” and He would lovingly
takehim on His lap and begin massaging his feet.In this
verse Çukadeva Gosvåmî says, “Aho! While taking thecows
out to graze, K®ß√a will sometimes even massage their
feet!With His own hands He decorates the youthful
cowherd boys,and they also decorate Him! They play games
together, and whenK®ß√a is victorious He smiles with
great joy. They eat together,and play jokes on one
another – who can describe the good for-tune of the
Vrajavåsîs? Påda-paμçu˙, the dust of K®ß√a’s lotusfeet,
which even the yogîsare searching for in their
meditation,falls from His feet and is spread all around
as He jumps about, asHis friends massage His feet and as
He climbs the kadambatrees.And Yaçodå wipes away the
dust from K®ß√a’s face and appliesfresh añjanato His
eyes. And as He dances with the gopîs, withHis own hands
He wipes the dust from their lotus faces andplaces it on
His head. Tell me, how glorious is that dust? Whocan
describe it?”Quoting these verses in his B®håd-
bhågavatåm®ta,spiritualecstasy swells in the heart of
Sanåtana Gosvåmî, as if he is churn-ing cream and
tasting its very essence. Then another feeling comesand
he quotes this verse:


                           77
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

Bhakti-rasåyana

100




kvacit pallava-talpeßuniyuddha-çrama-karçita˙v®kßa-
mülåçraya˙ çetegopotsa∫gopabarha√a˙Çrîmad-Bhågavatam
(10.15.16);B®had-bhågavatåm®ta (2.7.123)Becoming
fatigued from wrestling and playing, K®ß√a spreadsHis
feet out, and one sakhå, his heart melted with love and
affec-tion for Him, takes K®ß√a’s feet on his lap.
Millions of sakhåsarrange millions of beds made of
flowers for His comfort. Then,unknown even to Himself,
by Yogamåyå, K®ß√a expands intomillions of forms and
accepts the service of each and every one ofthem.
Otherwise, if millions of sakhåsall came at once to
massageHis feet, there would be competition and a great
commotion.Therefore Yogamåyå arranges everything very
beautifully so thatthere will not be any conflict.
Underneath the cooling shade of atree, the sakhåsuse
their own laps as pillows for K®ß√a and gentlylull Him
to sleep.påda-saμvåhanaμ cakru˙kecit tasya
mahåtmana˙apare hata-påpmånovyajanai˙ samavîjayanÇrîmad-
Bhågavatam (10.15.17); B®had-bhågavatåm®ta (2.7.124)At
that time, one greatly fortunate sakhåwould massage His
feet,and another would fan His body with a fan made of
leaves.Because they would massage K®ß√a’s legs with
great love, here the sakhåsare referred to asmahåtmås,
great souls. There are millions of sakhåsand all are
exalted. Some would fan Him, butnot with a cåmara; with
a fan made of leaves and peacock feath-ers they would
fan Him with great love. They serve K®ß√a by pro-viding
their own laps as pillows for His head – can such good
for-tune be seen anywhere else? Their affection for
K®ß√a is

101

Chapter Ten




supremely natural in the mood of nara-lîlå, considering
Him tobe an ordinary child. Seeing how K®ß√a has exerted
Himself inwrestling with them and in taking the cows out
to graze, thesakhåsserve Him with great affection to
remove His exhaustion.When K®ß√a was driving Arjuna’s
chariot and the sharp arrows ofBhîßma were piercing Him,
did anyone on the battlefield feel anyreal pain because
of that? But are the sakhåslike this? To removeeven one
drop of perspiration from K®ß√a’s brow they are
preparedto give up their very lives.Because the
sakhåsare engaged in massaging K®ß√a’s legs, theyare
described as mahåtmås.Mahåtmåmeans “a great soul”,
andwhen does one become a great soul? When he attains
the serviceof K®ß√a – otherwise not. Here the
wordmahåtmana˙can also bean adjective for K®ß√a, who is
full in six opulences and who,though being
åtmåråma(self-satisfied) and åptakåma (withoutdesire),
still desires to accept service from others. Because
Henever really becomes exhausted, He has no need for the

                           78
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

beds offlowers arranged by the sakhås. If after fighting
with so manydemons and holding up Govardhana Hill for
seven days He didnot become exhausted, then how could
playing with some smallchildren exhaust Him? Thinking,
“They have such sincere desiresto serve Me that they
have come running to Me?”, then –although He is
Parabrahma and åptakåma– still He melts inemotion and
lies down on the beds that they arranged and
fallsasleep. For this reason He is referred to as a
mahåtmå. Mahåtmåcan also mean “glories”, and K®ß√a’s
glories are the six opulencesthat He possesses.Though it
seems that these glories would not be exhibited asHe is
playing the part of an ordinary young boy in this nara-
lîlå,He manifests these opulences by expanding into
millions offorms to accept service from each and every
sakhå, and not evenone sakhå knows of it. If K®ß√a were
to display to them that “I

Bhakti-rasåyana

102




am the possessor of all opulences and can assume
unlimitedforms,” then becoming astonished, they would
all begin offer-ing prayers, and there would be no
service for K®ß√a to accept.Therefore He ismahåtmana˙.It
is like when someone gives millions of rupees in charity
butdoesn’t think anything of it. This is the glory of
giving charity,but if someone gives something and then
says to others, “Do you understand how much I have
given?” then it is not glorious.Sudåmå didn’t consider
what he gave K®ß√a to be important, hiswife didn’t
consider it to be, and no one in the entire worldwould
consider it to be anything substantial; but that
offeringwas the most glorious.4In the same way, the
sakhåsare givingtheir everything, their prema, and
because by manifesting Hisopulences K®ß√a gives everyone
an opportunity to serve Him, Heismahåtmana˙. In the
råsa-lîlåHe gave all of the gopîsan oppor-tunity, and in
the pastime of bewildering Lord Brahmå He gaveall of the
cows and older gopîsthe chance to become His motherby
expanding into so many forms, and in both lîlåsno one
knewof it. Therefore in this verse the
adjectivemahåtmana˙is moreappropriate in referring to
K®ß√a.There are countless parties of sakhåsthat all have
their respec-tive leaders, and just as there are various
kinds of gopîs, there arealso five kinds of
sakhås:sakhå, priya-sakhå, preß†ha-sakhå, parama-preß†ha
sakhåand priya-narma-sakhå. Amongst them are thousandsof
parties, but there is never any conflict in their
service. Whenthe prime minister comes here, many
congressmen say, “I willgarland the prime minister!”,
and there is commotion. But thereare millions of
sakhåsand there is never any conflict
becauseK®ß√a’sdivine power(aiçvarya) is wonderful. Each
and everysakhåthinks, “Today I am the most fortunate;
K®ß√a has given

103

Chapter Ten

                           79
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017


4. This story is found in Çrîmad-Bhågavatam, Tenth
Canto, Chapter 81.




this good opportunity to me only because He loves me so
much!”Yogamåyå arranges everything so that neither K®ß√a
nor thesakhåsknow what is happening, otherwise K®ß√a
won’t be able totaste the sakhya-rasa. But this way He
can simply go on playingwith the boys and tasting the
rasa.In this verse the wordshata-påpmåna˙don’t mean
“withoutsin”, because there is no possibility of sin in
the sakhåsanyway. It means that they served K®ß√a with
melted hearts and great affection. Sometimes we serve
with love, but mostly we servebecause we feel that it is
our duty. But if service is done out ofpure affection,
then Bhagavån will really desire our service. Sohata-
påpmåna˙means that the sakhås’service was free from
anyfeelings of duty, and with fans made of leaves and
peacock feath-ers they softly fanned K®ß√a to relieve
His exhaustion. But it canalso have one more meaning: by
hearing descriptions of the livesof great devotees such
as these sakhås, all of one’s sins will beeliminated,
and for those whose internal forms are as sakhås,intense
hankering for this type of service will arise within
them.Seeing all of this in his internal identity as
Lava∫ga-mañjarî,Sanåtana Gosvåmî is submerged in sakhya-
rasa, thinking, “I wouldalso like to become a sakhåand
serve K®ß√a in that intimate way.”Then he quotes the
next verse:anye tad-anurüpå√imanojñåni mahåtmana˙gåyanti
sma mahå-råjasneha-klinna-dhiya˙ çanai˙Çrîmad-Bhågavatam
(10.15.18);B®had-bhågavatåm®ta (2.7.125)My dear
Mahåråja, other sakhåswould sing attractive
songsappropriate for resting-time, and all the cowherd
boys’ heartswould melt in affection for K®ß√a.Some other
boys then began singing charming songs that weretasteful
to K®ß√a. They sang songs of K®ß√a’s childhood pastimes

Bhakti-rasåyana

104




that were manojña– so full of rasathat it caused K®ß√a’s
heart tooverflow with blissful feelings. Here the
wordmahåråjarefers toParîkßit Mahåråja, who being very
rasikais the cause of ÇukadevaGosvåmî speaking such
beautiful things.If Sanåtana Gosvåmî had not come to
this world, then suchsimple, beautiful and sweet
explanations of these verses wouldhave never been given.
Even Çrîdhara Svåmî, the famous com-mentator on the
Bhågavatam, didn’t give explanations likeSanåtana
Gosvåmî’s; his explanations were mostly in relation
tovaidhî-bhakti and for showing the difference between
our philos-ophy and Advaitavåda. Çrî Caitanya Mahåprabhu
respectedÇrîdhara Svåmî’s commentary, and using that as
a foundation,Sanåtana Gosvåmî established Mahåprabhu’s
beautiful transcen-dental sentiments of bhakti in his
own commentary on the TenthCanto. Then Jîva Gosvåmî gave
further light to that explanationwith his Laghu-

                           80
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

vaiß√ava-toßa√îcommentary, and accepting bothof those
commentaries as remnants, Viçvanåtha Cakravartîˇhåkura
extracted the rasafrom them and composed his
owncommentary. Hundreds of commentaries on the
Bhågavatamhave been written, but none of them are as
beautiful as his.The cowherd boys, their hearts melted
in great affection, sangbeautiful songs for K®ß√a’s
pleasure. Seeing that K®ß√a wasfatigued, the sakhåsmade
pillows of their own laps and placedK®ß√a’s head there.
K®ß√a never really becomes tired, but seeingtheir desire
to render service He became fatigued. As K®ß√a waslying
like this, some were massaging His legs, others were
rub-bing His back, others were rubbing His head, and by
looking atHis face it appeared that He was resting
comfortably and Hisfatigue was fading.Sneha-klinna-
dhiya˙means that with tears in their eyes andmelted
hearts, the gopassang softly in such a way as to lull
K®ß√ato sleep. They sang songs related exclusively to
K®ß√a’s boyhood

Chapter Ten

105




pastimes that would give K®ß√a the most pleasure.
SanåtanaGosvåmî says in his commentary that these boys’
voices were asbeautiful as the birdsong of the koel.
After all, they are eternalassociates of K®ß√a, so will
they be any less expert than Him in singing?
Madhuma∫gala and Subala could sing just as sweetly as
K®ß√a, just as Mahåprabhu’s associates could also sing
verysweetly. They sang softly and sweetly to increase
K®ß√a’s pleasure,and they sang in the melody which was
appropriate for the after-noon time.Once, before Nårada
had learned the art of singing, he went tothe heavenly
planets and began singing. The words of the songwere
good, but it was out of tune and the melody was not
correct.Present there in heaven is the demigod of melody
named Sura,and upon hearing Nårada singing out of tune
he actually becamephysically deformed. Everyone there
who heard Nårada’s singingfelt pain in their hearts.
Then someone approached him and said,“My friend, your
singing has caused Sura and all of the beautifulsingers
present here to become ugly and deformed, so you
shouldimmediately go to Brahmå and learn the art of
singing.”So Nårada went to Brahmå, and Brahmå told him,
“You shouldapproach Sarasvatî and learn from her.”
Sarasvatî taught himhow to sing the appropriate
melodies, and when he returned tothe heavenly planets
and sang again, all of the residents therewere restored
to their original forms. Then Nårada became thegreatest
preacher in the world of beautiful devotional songs. If
inkîrtanathe correct melody is not sung at the
appropriate time,then it will be inauspicious. In the
morning we sing a particularmelody, and in the evening
we sing a different one. If we don’tsing the appropriate
melodies according to the time, then Sura,the demigod of
melody, will suffer greatly. Those of us here whohave to
hear it will feel pain, and he will also feel
pain.Knowing all the appropriate songs and melodies, the
sakhås

                           81
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017


106

Bhakti-rasåyana




were all masters of singing. In the same way, Lalitå,
Viçåkhå,Tu∫gavidyå and all of the sakhîsare also expert
in singing as wellas in all other arts. The sakhåsare
not less skilful than K®ß√a insinging ability, and they
have the skill to slowly raise and againlower their
pitch to create very wonderful melodies. This exper-tise
cannot be attained in only one life; if someone has it,
then wecan understand that it is coming from previous
lives. K®ß√a was resting with His eyes closed, and
listening as thesakhåsdid wonderful things with gentle
waves of sound. At thattime K®ß√a was more grave than
millions of oceans, and for Hispleasure the sakhåssoftly
sang songs which, being saturated withbhakti, were very
tasteful to Him. They sang songs describing theglories
of His playful activities, the glories of Mother Yaçodå
andthe glories of the gopîs’love for Him. In this way,
their hearts fullof rasa, they softly sang to K®ß√a in
the afternoon, and listeningmore and more with feelings
of great bliss, K®ß√a closed His eyesand became
overwhelmed with prema.When we offer food to K®ß√a, what
are our feelings? We chantthe mantra, but is the
necessary bhåvathere, or not? Our feelingsshould be like
those of Mother Yaçodå: with great affection sheseats
K®ß√a and pampering Him, begins to feed Him,
saying,“Take a little of this, it is very nice… Here,
take some of this, it isthe nicest.” Tell me, then, with
how much premais she feedingHim? We should try to offer
food to K®ß√a with these feelings,and sing kîrtanaat
that time with the feelings of Bhaktivinodaˇhåkura. When
we make an offering, we sing the songs he haswritten –
“Bhaja bhakata-vatsala” and “Yaçomatî-nandana” –
butgenerally we only memorise them and don’t consider
the feelingswithin them. There are so many beautiful
sentiments in thosesongs, and this is how the
sakhåsserve K®ß√a – massaging Himwith great affection,
and singing to Him with great bhåva. Atonce their hearts
melted, and as K®ß√a was listening, His heart

107

Chapter Ten




also melted. Therefore Çukadeva Gosvåmî, being very
rasika, saidsneha-klinna-dhiya˙– K®ß√a was overpowered
by premaand ren-dered helpless. Once the singing
started, even if someone wantedK®ß√a to get up and move
to another place, He couldn’t; beingspellbound, He could
only remain in the same position, with Hisheart melted
and tears rolling down His cheeks. Seeing K®ß√a
likethis, in this verse Çukadeva Gosvåmî has described
Him using thewordmahåtmana˙.Çrîla Sanåtana Gosvåmî has
given still one more meaning here: mahåtmana˙can also
meanlampa†a-çekhara, the king ofdebauchees. While K®ß√a

                           82
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

seems to be asleep, He is listening tothe sakhåssinging
songs about His pastimes that are full of Hismischievous
pranks. Taking the gopîs’clothes, He climbed a
tree,leaving the poor girls shivering in the water and
begging for theirclothing back. He said, “You have all
committed offences, so youmust come before Me and beg
forgiveness.” In beautiful, softvoices the gopassang
songs of pastimes like this and K®ß√a’s bliss-ful
feelings at once increased. K®ß√a is supremely rasika,
and He is sarvajña, the knower ofall. But still, even
though He knows what they will sing nextbefore they
actually sing it, when He hears it He becomes over-
whelmed with premaand tears begin to flow from His eyes.
AndHe receives much more pleasure from their singing
than He doesfrom their massaging Him. Their singing is
what really makesHim rest comfortably – and from this we
can understand thatkîrtanais the best service. Although
all the cowherd boys weremassaging Him and this
certainly increased His prema, whentheir service
included kîrtana, which is bhagavat-priya, the
servicemost dear to K®ß√a, just see how wonderful His
condition became!His premaincreased until He was
completely overwhelmed.In this verse the
wordmahåråjaappears. What is its meaning?Mahån rüpe√a
råjate– he who is radiant with some special

108

Bhakti-rasåyana




splendour. He in whose mind the desire for worldly
enjoymentdoesn’tshine, but instead whose thinking is
always resplendentwith thoughts of bhagavad-bhakti, is
called “Mahåråja”. Here itcan refer to Parîkßit
Mahåråja, and it can also mean that thesemost charming
pastimes of K®ß√a with the sakhåsare themahåråja, or
best of all lîlås. If one hears and chants the descrip-
tions of these pastimes where K®ß√a is playing in His
full glorywith the sakhås, then he also becomes fully
glorious and can alsobe called Mahåråja. Hearing
Çukadeva Gosvåmî describe how the sakhåsrelaxedK®ß√a,
how K®ß√a’s heart was at once melted in affection,
andhow He became so overpowered that He was unable to
evenmove, Parîkßit Mahåråja said, “Aho! Who can conceive
of theirgood fortune?” This description influenced him
so deeply thattears began to glide down his cheeks, and
his heart also melted.Thisis why in this verse Çukadeva
Gosvåmî refers to him asMahåråja: in its full form
bhaktihad entered his heart, and premabegan to flow
there. Seeing that he was fully qualified to hear
thetranscendental glories of the fortunate cowherd boys,
ÇukadevaGosvåmî referred to him as “Mahåråja”.The word
mahåråjacan also refer to those pastimes that are
thebest of all. Through their singing, the gopasare
bringing remem-brance of the gopîsto K®ß√a. Being very
pleased, K®ß√a smilesfrom ear to ear, and then the
sakhåsalso begin to smile, thinking,“He is appreciating
what we are singing.” Mahåråjacan also be anadjective to
describe the cowherd boys, whose hearts are
alwayssaturated with simple, natural sakhya-bhåva. Being
overwhelmedin their intimate service to K®ß√a, they

                           83
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

would experience anuråga,and sometimes even mahåbhåva.
In her våtsalya, Mother Yaçodåmay sometimes experience
anuråga, but she never experiencesmahåbhåva. But
sometimes it comes to Madhuma∫gala, Subala,Çrîdåmå,
Arjuna and other priya-narma-sakhås. Their pristine

109

Chapter Ten




hearts radiant with the wealth of rasa, they softly sing
songs thatincrease the blissful ecstasy of both K®ß√a
and themselves.

Bhakti-rasåyana

110




Chapter ElevenNanda and Yaçodå’s Lovefor K®ß√aNext, in
Sanåtana Gosvåmî’s heart, feelings of våtsalya-
bhåvabegin to come, and he begins quoting verses
describing that sentiment:nanda˙ kim akarod bråhmançreya
eva mahodayamyaçodå vå mahå-bhågåpapau yasyå˙ stanaμ
hari˙Çrîmad-Bhågavatam (10.8.46);B®had-bhågavatåm®ta
(2.7.126)[Çrî Parîkßit Mahåråja asked:] My dear
bråhma√a, which supremelyauspicious sådhanadid Nanda
perform, and which austerities didthe supremely
fortunate Yaçodå undergo to have her breast-milkdrunk by
Çrî Hari?Once, after K®ß√a had eaten some soil, Mother
Yaçodå forcedHim to open His mouth, and when He did, she
saw the entirecreation therein. Seeing so many universes
with so many Çivasand Viß√us, she thought, “What is
this?” When K®ß√a revealedHis universal form (viçva-
rüpa) to Arjuna, Arjuna thought “He isBhagavån!” and
with folded hands began offering prayers, butYaçodå
didn’t do this. Trembling, she thought, “Has a ghost
pos-sessed me? Has someone cast a spell on my child? Is
this the illu-sory energy of the demigods, or what? What
has happened to mychild?” Rubbing her eyes in
astonishment, she looked again and

111




then it had all disappeared. She thought, “Whose
illusory energywas this? How did it happen?” She didn’t
consider that “He is theSupreme Lord!” She continued to
see Him only as a small child. Being very frightened,
she took K®ß√a to the family priest andtold him, “I saw
something very astonishing within my child’smouth.
Someone must have cast a spell upon Him! Please ridHim
of this curse.” The family priest said, “Don’t be
afraid, wewill immediately make Him all right. You bring
some gold, somecloth and some cow dung, and bring some
cows to give in charityto the bråhma√as.” After she had
brought all of these things, thepriest chanted the

                           84
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

appropriate mantrasand Mother Yaçodå’s mindwas set at
ease.In this verse Parîkßit Mahåråja says, “Considering
K®ß√a to behis son, Nanda Båbå loves Him so much; he
takes K®ß√a on hisshoulders saying, ‘My dear son, my
dear son!’ and for this reasonhe is mahodaya. But
greater than him is Mother Yaçodå, who ismahå-bhågå– the
most fortunate! Although Hari steals away thehearts of
everyone in the entire universe and is the nurturer of
all, she takes Him on her lap and feeds Him breast-milk!
What auspicious activities did they perform in their
previous lives toreceive such benedictions?”Now Sanåtana
Gosvåmî will begin describing the good fortuneof Yaçodå
and Nanda Båbå so that their mood of service willbegin
to arise within us. By hearing the descriptions of these
pas-times, all the contamination within one’s heart will
be eradicated,and feelings of spontaneous love for K®ß√a
will be permanentlyestablished there. If we hear these
types of descriptions during theday and then meditate on
them during the night, then that iscalled smara√a, and
from that eventually samådhiwill come, so is there any
greater sådhanathan this? When he was hearing
theBhågavatamfrom Çukadeva Gosvåmî, Parîkßit Mahåråja
onlycontinued listening and hardly spoke at all.
Therefore this sådhana

112

Bhakti-rasåyana




is also sådhya, the final result. By hearing hari-
kathåone’s heartwill be completely purified, whereas by
practising any other limbof vaidhî-bhaktiit won’t happen
as quickly.The Universal Form is an aspect of the
Supreme Lord’s great divine opulence (aiçvarya), but
upon seeing it, not even a trace of aiçvarya-bhåvaarose
in Yaçodå. Instead her premafor K®ß√a onlyincreased, and
continuing to see Him merely as a small child, shebathed
Him in cow dung and cow urine for
auspiciousness.Bhagavån is the personification of
auspiciousness, yet to bringauspiciousness to Him, she
sang some mantrasand gave charityto the bråhma√as!
Sanåtana Gosvåmî says here in his commen-tary that if
one hears these descriptions of Yaçodå endeavouringto
bring auspiciousness to K®ß√a, then very soon that same
aus-piciousness will come to that person. And if a
sådhakahears thesedescriptions with love and deeply
meditates on them, then histendencies towards aiçvarya-
bhåvawill be blocked and he will beable to feel pure
våtsalya-bhåva. Therefore any trace of aiçvarya-bhåvawas
covered by Yogamåyå, and Yaçodå was able to
tastemådhurya-bhåva (where a devotee never considers
K®ß√a to beBhagavån Himself, but merely their dear
friend, son or lover).Being wonderstruck, Parîkßit
Mahåråja is saying, “Aho! Yaçodåpossesses even more good
fortune than Nanda! Nanda is certainlyfortunate – that
is true; but Yaçodå is even more so because shewas
actually able to bind K®ß√a, whereas Nanda could only
lateruntie Him.”In this verse Parîkßit Mahåråja
addresses Çukadeva Gosvåmî as bråhma√a, and Sanåtana
Gosvåmî says in his commentary that Çukadeva Gosvåmî is
the direct embodiment of Parabrahma.Generally a devotee

                           85
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

is not referred to in this way, but he has doneit
because here brahmameans he who is speaking such a
highlevel of hari-kathåthat it increases the premain
others. The jîvais part and parcel of Parabrahma, but
when he takes shelter of

113

Chapter Eleven




Parabrahma, then he experiences premaas a part of the
whole.Because Çukadeva Gosvåmî increases that prema, he
has beenreferred to here as the direct embodiment of
Parabrahma.Parîkßit Mahåråja is asking, “Which
auspicious activities didNanda and Yaçodå perform to
receive K®ß√a as their son?” Whatactivities did Prahlåda
Mahåråja perform to receive such bhaktifor Bhagavån? By
unknowingly fasting and staying awake allnight on
N®siμha-caturdaçî, in his next life, while remaining
inhis mother’s womb, he heard the science of the Supreme
Lordfrom Nårada for sixty thousand years, and after
taking birth hebecame the great devotee Prahlåda
Mahåråja. By keeping com-pany with the spiritual master
and the Vaiß√avas one becomeslike that. For us also: if
we observe Janmåß†amî, Gaura-pür√imåor N®siμha-caturdaçî
by fasting and hearing hari-kathåall dayand serving the
spiritual master and the Vaiß√avas with greatenthusiasm
and love – even if it is not for sixty thousand years
oreven sixty years, but only for sixty months or even
sixty days –then that is sådhana. In the lives of all
great devotees such as Rüpa and Sanåtana
thisenthusiastic spirit can be seen. But being
wonderstruck and feel-ing that it is impossible to
perform such activities in this worldthat would bestow
upon one the benediction of having K®ß√a astheir son,
Parîkßit Mahåråja is asking this question. He was com-
pletely astonished at the elevated våtsalya-premathat
Yaçodå andNanda possessed for K®ß√a. Bhagavån has had
many parents, butneither Vasudeva and Devakî, nor
Daçaratha and Kauçalyå, norKaçyapa and Aditi possessed
such a beautiful sentiment towardsHim as did Yaçodå and
Nanda. Vasudeva and Devakî wereunable to taste the
rasaof K®ß√a’s pastimes; immediately afterK®ß√a’s birth
Vasudeva took Him to Gokula, and there His pas-
timesbegan. On the first morning, Yaçodå was awakened by
thesound of K®ß√a crying, and then an immensely blissful
festival

114

Bhakti-rasåyana




was held. The news of K®ß√a’s birth spread in all
directions, andpeople came from all over to see Him. The
residents of Gokulatasted the rasaof K®ß√a’s childhood
pastimes, but Vasudeva andDevakî were unable to taste
even a little of it.In their previous lives, Nanda was
the Vasu demigod Dro√aand Yaçodå was his wife Dharå, and

                           86
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

for the purpose of obtaininga very beautiful son they
performed very severe austerities. Aftersome time,
Brahmå appeared before them and said, “You may ask any
boon from me.” They said, “Just as parents love a son,
wewant to have love like that towards Bhagavån.” Brahmå
said, “Soit shall be.” Sanåtana Gosvåmî also says that
Vasudeva and Devakîin their previous lives were Kaçyapa
and Aditi, and they per-formed austerities until
Bhagavån Himself appeared before themand said, “What do
you desire?” They replied, “We desire a sonlike You.”
Bhagavån said, “There isno one like Me, so I Myselfwill
become your son.” Bhagavån gave that boon Himself, and
before this Brahmå had given that boon. But if Brahmå
did not have våtsalya-premahimself, then how could he
possibly give it? The answer is thatBhagavån protects
the words of His devotees, but also, becauseBrahmå knows
past, present and future, he knew that Bhagavånwould
soon be taking birth in Gokula and performing
childhoodpastimes, so he gave his boon to Dro√a and
Dharå, and Bhagavånfulfilled his words and later came as
their son.Were Dro√a and Dharå ordinary jîvas? No, they
were plenaryportions of Nanda and Yaçodå who, for the
purpose of showingthe people of this world what type of
sådhanais necessary to com-pletely overpower Bhagavån,
performed severe austerities toreceive the boon of
having Bhagavån as their son. Both Bhagavånand His
devotees can give boons, but the devotee’s boon will
cer-tainly be more powerful and more filled with rasa.
ThereforeBhagavån fulfilled the boon given to Dro√a and
Dharå, and in

115

Chapter Eleven




their next lives they appeared in their original forms
as Nandaand Yaçodå and received K®ß√a as their son.In
comparison to the boons given by Bhagavån Himself,
theboon given by the devotee will be superior and bestow
a highertaste. If Råmacandra has taken a vow and Hanumån
has also takena vow, then if their vows conflict, whose
vow will be triumphant?Once, seeing the offences of some
man, Råmacandra told him,“Tomorrow morning I shall come
and certainly kill you.” So whocould possibly save him?
There was no one who could save him.Later that day, as
Nårada was walking along, he came across thisman, and
seeing his face, said, “My friend, what is wrong?
Whydoes your face appear withered in despair?”The man
said, “Råmacandra has vowed that tomorrow He
willcertainly kill me.” Grasping Nårada’s feet, he
cried, “O my Lord,please protect me!”Nårada said, “Me? I
am not able to save you, but you can doone thing: go and
grasp the feet of Hanumån, and don’t let go!Don’t tell
him the reason you have grasped his feet, but just
beghim to make a vow to always protect you. Then
afterwards youmay reveal to him the specific nature of
your dilemma.”So this man approached Hanumån, and
falling on the ground,grasped his feet and cried out, “O
Prabhu! Please protect me,please protect me!”Hanumån
said, “Hey! What do you want? Let go of my feet!”“No
Prabhu, I will never let go! Only when you vow to

                           87
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

alwaysprotect me will I let go!”“All right, all right, I
will always protect you, so what is it?”“Råmacandra has
vowed that before the sun rises tomorrowmorning He will
certainly kill me.”“Oh, I see! So who told you to do
this? You must have metsome intelligent man… or do you
have a guru?”

116

Bhakti-rasåyana




“It was Nårada.”This is Nårada’s nature, sometimes
creating a quarrel betweenBhagavån and His servants. So
when the morning came, Hanumåntold the man, “Just stand
behind me, and everything will be allright.” Seeing that
Råma was coming, Hanumån picked up Hisclub and assumed a
fighting posture. Fixing an arrow to His bow,Råma said,
“Now I will kill this offender.”Hanumån replied, “My
Lord, if You desire to kill him, it will only be over my
dead body! I have vowed to always protecthim.” Then Råma
retracted His vow, and honoured the vow ofHanumån.
Amongst all of His qualities, Bhagavån’s special
affection for His devotees is the supreme quality.
Therefore Hefulfilled the boon that Brahmå had given to
Dro√a and Dharå. We are more interested in taking
shelter of Bhagavån’s top-most loving (parama-
premî)devotees. It is a special characteristicof those
of us in the Gau∂îyasampradåyathat we don’t actuallytake
shelter of K®ß√a. Even though He is the one who
possessesall çakti, who is the unlimited ocean of rasa,
who is supremelymerciful, who is especially affectionate
to His devotees, who isbeginningless and who is the
cause of all causes, who is it that wetake shelter of?
Çrîmatî Rådhikå – and if we don’t directly takeshelter
of Her, then we take shelter of Lalitå or Viçåkhå
andaspire to become the dåsî of the dåsî of the dåsî of
Rådhikå. Weshould always consider ourselves to be the
devotee of the devoteeof the devotee, and then K®ß√a
will be more pleased with us. Hehas said, “One who says
that he is My devotee is not really Mydevotee. But he
who says that he is the devotee of My devotee ismore
dear to Me.”Next comes this verse:

117

Chapter Eleven




tato bhaktir bhagavatiputrî-bhüte janårdanedampatyor
nitaråm åsîdgopa-gopîßu bhårataÇrîmad-Bhågavatam
(10.8.51);B®had-bhågavatåm®ta (2.7.127)[Çrî Çukadeva
Gosvåmî replied:] O Bharata, for fulfilling thepromise
of His dear devotee Brahmå, Çrî K®ß√a, the SupremeLord
Himself and the destroyer of evil, appeared as the son
ofNanda and Yaçodå. In comparison to all of the other
gopasandgopîs, this couple possessed the most love for
Him.In this verse Çukadeva Gosvåmî addresses Parîkßit
Mahåråja asbhårata. The ordinary meaning is that
Parîkßit Mahåråja was theleader of his dynasty after the

                           88
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

great war at Kurukßetra, but thewordbhåratacan also be
interpreted like this:bhåcan mean bhavati, andratacan
mean rati.So since the actual meaning is hewho has
special ratior premafor the feet of Bhagavån, just see
therespect Çukadeva Gosvåmî is giving him! This verse
says that inVraja there were a great many couples of
gopasand gopîswho hadoffspring, and all of these couples
had våtsalya-premafor K®ß√a.Desiring to taste their
parental love, K®ß√a expanded into thecowherd boys and
became their son for one year during whichtime He tasted
that våtsalya-rasa, and so also did all of the parentsas
they nurtured Him. But amongst all of these couples,
Yaçodåand Nanda still had stronger feelings of
våtsalyafor Him thananyone. The other couples loved
K®ß√a even more than their ownsons, and only when He
expanded into their sons during the pas-time of
bewildering Lord Brahmå did they show equal affectionto
their own sons. He also expanded into the calves so that
the cows could tastevåtsalya-rasa, and of course He was
also the son of Devakî andVasudeva. But as described in
the previous verse, no one experi-enced the ecstasy
which Yaçodå did as K®ß√a drank from her

118

Bhakti-rasåyana




breasts. Devakî could have only experienced this for a
few sec-onds, because immediately after K®ß√a took birth
He was takento Gokula. At that time milk came to her
breasts, and K®ß√a wasa small baby of a suitable age to
drink her milk, but He was takenaway. When K®ß√a first
appeared to them in the jail, with foldedhands they had
offered prayers; but later, when K®ß√a returned to
Mathurå and freed them, K®ß√a covered their aiçvarya-
bhåvaby His Yogamåyå. He sat on Devakî’s lap and cried
“Mother,Mother!”, but at that time she could not feed
Him breast milk.Eleven years had elapsed, and the
opportunity to breast-feedK®ß√a had long passed. So this
verse says that thisdampatî, this couple Yaçodå
andNanda, were superior to all the other couples of
gopasand gopîsin Vraja. They experienced innumerable
wonderful sentiments ofparental love, but very few of
them have actually been describedin Çrîmad-Bhågavatam.
The pastime where Dåmodara wasbound by Yaçodå is
described, and it also describes the time whenK®ß√a was
very small He got up from Yaçodå’s lap and began tocrawl
towards the door. But hearing some jingling sound,
Heturned around wondering where that sound was coming
from,and was astonished to find that it was the jingling
of His ownankle-bells. Then at once Yaçodå caught Him
and placed Himback on her lap. Devakî never experienced
any of this, and noother gopîin Vraja ever experienced
so many feelings of våtsalya.The Bhågavatamhas described
only a few of these pastimes, butYaçodå felt countless
millions of wonderful sentiments, such aswhen K®ß√a
played and when He drank her breast-milk. And
tounderstand her elevated sentiments for K®ß√a is very
difficult.When Uddhava visited V®ndåvana, he saw Nanda
and Yaçodå.Nanda was weeping bitterly, and Uddhava could
not understandwhy he was crying. Even right up until the

                           89
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                           5/3/2017

very end of his stay in Vraja he did not fully
understand why Nanda was crying so

119

Chapter Eleven




bitterly. Uddhava thought, “K®ß√a is Parabrahma, He
cannotreally be anyone’s son! So towards Him, Nanda has
such feelings?Is this some kind of illusion, or what? I
know full well that K®ß√ais Bhagavån, so how can I be
attached to the idea that He is my friend?” Uddhava
could only feel aiçvarya-bhåvatowardsBhagavån, so seeing
this bhåvain Nanda Båbå, he couldn’tunderstand it. This
is how he felt coming before the great moun-tain of
Nanda Båbå’s mådhurya-bhåva. When we look at a one-
storey building, our head can be held level looking
straight ahead.But when we look up at a seven-storey
building, then we must tiltour head back slightly. And
when we look up at a high mountain,we must tilt our
heads back to the point where if we are wearinga hat, it
will fall off. So looking up at the towering mountain
ofNanda Båbå’s mådhurya-bhåva, it was as if Uddhava’s
hat of aiçvarya-bhåvafell off! Being so intelligent, a
scholar and a disci-ple of B®haspati, still Uddhava
couldn’t understand, “Why is hecrying like this? This is
certainly a matter of great good fortune,that K®ß√a has
appeared in his home! Okay, so K®ß√a told methat I
should give His parents some consolation. But what will
I say? Will I say, ‘Nanda Båbå, you are so fortunate! If
there isany person in this entire universe who is
fortunate, it is you!Please cry more and more! It is
said that if even one tear is shed for Bhagavån, then
one’s life has become completely successful!’Devotees
pray for the day when upon hearing descriptions
ofBhagavån’s pastimes, taking His name, and seeing the
placeswhere He has performed His pastimes, they will
shed tears andtheir voices will become so choked that
they won’t even be ableto pronounce His name properly!
And here I see Nanda Båbåcrying, and how is he crying?
Very bitterly, like he will neverstop!”It is said that
if someone sheds a tear out of love for Bhagavån,then
their life will automatically become successful and they
will

120

Bhakti-rasåyana




become the purifier of the three worlds. In one place
Uddhavahas said:vande nanda-vraja-strî√åμpåda-re√um
abhîkß√aça˙yåsåμ hari-kathodgîtaμpunåti bhuvana-
trayamÇrîmad-Bhågavatam (10.47.63)I repeatedly offer my
respects to the dust from the feet of thewomen of Nanda
Mahåråja’s cowherd village. When they loudlysing the
glories of Çrî K®ß√a, the vibration purifies the
threeworlds.Why does their kathåpurify the three worlds?
The tearful,deeply emotional songs which they sang to

                           90
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

one another becameverses in the Tenth Canto of Çrîmad-
Bhågavatam, and the scrip-tures say that when one
attains the darçanaof such a great per-sonality who is
crying in this way, one’s life becomes successful.But do
we ever cry while describing K®ß√a’s pastimes or
whilechanting His name? So tell me, then – how fortunate
is NandaBåbå to be crying, considering K®ß√a to be his
son?So Uddhava was thinking, “Will I say, ‘Nanda
Mahåråja, youare most fortunate, so please cry more and
more because byreceiving your darçanatoday my life has
become successful’? Thatwill be like adding ghee to the
fire! But if I say, ‘Nanda Mahåråja,please don’t cry, be
peaceful’, then that will be opposed to whatis said in
the scriptures.” This was Uddhava’s curious predica-
ment, and it was as if he were trapped. “If I tell him
not to cry,it will be opposed to the words of the
scriptures and I will bepunished, and if I tell him to
cry more, I will not be consolinghim as K®ß√a asked me
to. Should I tell him to stop crying, or tocry even
more?” He was unable to reach a decision, so in the
endhe mixed them both by saying, “Nanda Mahåråja, you
are themost fortunate person, but please don’t cry.” In
this way he was

121

Chapter Eleven




perplexed because K®ß√a had instructed him to console
His parents. Sitting nearby was another fortunate soul,
Yaçodå. Her tearshad long dried up; the poor woman could
not even shed tears.Her eyes were sunken in and she
appeared like a skeleton. In onesense she died on the
day Akrüra took K®ß√a to Mathurå, andlater she sent a
message to K®ß√a, “I don’t even have the qualifi-cation
to call You ‘my son’. Now, having gone to Mathurå,
Youhave accepted Devakî as Your mother and Vasudeva
Mahåråja asYour father. For eleven years here, You were
our very lives. AsYour dhåtrî– the one who raised You –
I held You in my lap andprotected You, and did
everything one could expect from adhåtrî. Koels lay
their eggs in the nest of a crow, and then thecrow sits
on the eggs until they hatch. When they have
hatched,then the mother koel returns and takes the
chicks to her own nestand raises them there, and the
crow just remains gazing in theirdirection. Our
situation is exactly like that.”Then K®ß√a sent this
message back to Yaçodå with Uddhava:“Because you have
used the word dhåtrîto describe yourself,Baladeva and I
should give up our lives at once! I am sustainingMy life
solely to see you again; otherwise I would die today.
Wewill certainly be returning to you soon, because
besides you wedon’t know any other mother. Therefore,
Mother, please do onething: Father will be crying, the
cows and calves will be crying,the plants which I
planted will be drying up, and the calves whichwe used
to take out to graze will no longer be taken out and
willbegin dying. Please look after them a little; they
will even give upeating out of separation from Me.”
Seeing and hearing all of this,Uddhava was wonderstruck.
Yaçodå was unable to speak; shecould only softly

                           91
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

stammer. The affection of Yaçodå for K®ß√a, hervåtsalya-
prema, was unlimited, like a fathomless ocean.
Uddhavawas not able to give her any consolation. Our
gosvåmîshave not

122

Bhakti-rasåyana




described much of this våtsalya-bhåva, because there are
very fewwho are actually qualified to hear it. Therefore
they have kept ithidden.The wordjanårdanecomes in this
verse, and two meaningshave been given for it. The one
who destroys whatever is opposedto devotion and
establishes bhaktiis called Janårdana, and ardanacan
also mean a prayer. Therefore it can refer to Dro√a
andDharå, who prayed to Brahmå for receiving that
Janårdana astheir son, whose prayers were completely
fulfilled, and whotasted the highest degree of våtsalya-
bhåva. Nanda and Yaçodå’sbhåvais higher than the
våtsalya-bhåvaof all the other gopasandgopîsin Vraja,
and this is the purport of this verse.

123

Chapter Eleven




Chapter TwelveMother Yaçodå’s Bhakti is
IndescribableDro√a and Dharå’s receiving Brahmå’s boon
of having parentallove for K®ß√a is similar to K®ß√a’s
receiving the boon from LordÇiva of having Såmba as His
son. At that time in Dvårakå, K®ß√aperformed austerities
for instructing people that by worshippingÇiva, material
wealth can be obtained. In reality no one can be K®ß√a’s
son – Pradyumna, Aniruddha, Såmba – they are
allBhagavån’s plenary portions, but they appeared in the
forms ofHis sons. Yaçodå and Nanda Båbå are the eternal
parents ofK®ß√a, but for showing that some austerities
are necessary toattain love for K®ß√a, the boon was
given to Dro√a and Dharå. All of the Vaiku√†ha
incarnations are plenary portions ofNåråya√a, and in a
similar way, Dro√a and Dharå, Vasudeva andDevakî,
Daçaratha and Kauçalyå, and Kaçyapa and Aditi are
allexpansions of Nanda and Yaçodå. Still, amongst all of
the eternalassociates of Bhagavån, the eternal
associates of K®ß√a are thebest.nanda˙ sva-putram
ådåyaproßyågatam udåra-dhî˙mürdhny avaghråya
paramaμmudaμ lebhe kurüdvahaÇrîmad-Bhågavatam (10.6.43);
B®had-bhågavatåm®ta (2.7.128)

125




When magnanimous Nanda returned from Mathurå, he took

                           92
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

hisown son Çrî K®ß√a on his lap and experienced immense
pleasureby repeatedly smelling His head.Previously Nanda
Båbå was very detached from worldly life,but after K®ß√a
was “born”, he became spellbound in attachmentfor Him.
Before K®ß√a’s birth, Nanda Båbå never had any needto go
to Kaμsa’s kingdom. But after His birth some money
wasnecessary for His sustenance, and for this reason
Nanda went toMathurå. There he spoke to Vasudeva, who
told him, “Please,you must return to Gokula quickly! The
demons will now createa disturbance in all directions!
Kaμsa is determined to see that allchildren born within
the last ten days are killed. Therefore pleasereturn
quickly!” As Nanda was returning to Gokula, he saw
themassive corpse of Pütanå beside the road, and being
frightenedfor K®ß√a’s welfare, he hurried home. Arriving
there and seeing that K®ß√a was all right, it was as if
his very life had returned to his body. His previous
feelings of detachment could not remain. Taking K®ß√a on
his lap, magnanimous Nanda Mahåråja time and again
smelled his son’shead, saying, “Bhagavån has saved You
from great danger!” Thenhe heard from his brother
Upananda and others how the råkßasîPütanå took K®ß√a on
her lap and forcibly put her breast in Hismouth. She had
applied poison to her breast, so how could K®ß√apossibly
have been saved? Next she flew up into the sky
becauseK®ß√a had latched onto her and would not let go,
and she wasthinking that if she could fly to where Kaμsa
was, Kaμsa couldseparate K®ß√a from her. She thought
that in one minute only shecould arrive there, but
instead K®ß√a sucked her breast with suchforce that He
not only drank her poisoned breast-milk, butsucked out
her very life. Hearing how K®ß√a was saved from thehands
of death, Nanda’s tears soaked K®ß√a’s body.In this
verse are the wordssva-putra, which mean that K®ß√a

Bhakti-rasåyana

126




was Nanda’s own son, and also the wordproßyågata, which
meansthat Nanda was not the actual father of K®ß√a, but
the one whonurtured Him. Most people consider that Nanda
Mahåråja wasK®ß√a’sproßyågata, and that His real parents
were Vasudeva andDevakî. Vasudeva brought K®ß√a to
Gokula, and there Nandaraised Him. But Nanda Båbå
trusted what he saw with his owneyes – that K®ß√a had
taken birth from the womb of Yaçodå inhis own home.
There was no doubt in his mind, but Vasudevaalso had no
doubt that K®ß√a was hisson. But if K®ß√a had takenbirth
in Nanda’s home, then how could He have had
lovingaffairs with the girls there, who are the
daughters of Nanda’sbrothers, and therefore would have
been K®ß√a’s cousins? Howwould this be possible? The
gopîsare actually His hlådinî-çakti,but He first
appeared in Mathurå to prevent the people of thisworld
from saying, “Oh, He is performing the råsadance withHis
own cousins!” So it is said that K®ß√a is really the son
ofVasudeva, but this verse refers to K®ß√a as Nanda’s
sva-putra, hisown son. What could be greater evidence
than this? Nanda˙ sva-putram ådåya proßyågata udåra-
dhî˙– with natural, simple-hearted feelings of great

                           93
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

fatherly affection, Nanda took his ownson on his lap and
nurtured Him. Here, the meaning of proßyågatais
“nurtured”.After the killing of Kaμsa, Nanda remained
waiting in hisMathurå residence and was feeling very
unhappy. He was think-ing, “More than twenty-four hours
have passed since Kaμsa was killed, and still neither
Vasudeva nor anyone else such asUgrasena or Akrüra has
brought me any news. K®ß√a and Balaråmathemselves have
also not come; because they are mere childrenthat is
alright, but why haven’t any of the others come? I
haveheard that people are saying that they are actually
the sons ofVasudeva.” Because no one went to him with
any news, NandaBåbå was crying in solitude, thinking,
“What will I do? Should

127

Chapter Twelve




I go to Vasudeva’s palace to meet him, or what should I
do?”Soon after dark, K®ß√a and Baladeva came alone to
him. Theysaw that their father was very sad, with his
head hanging down inhis hands. Sitting on his lap and
lifting up his father’s chin, K®ß√asaid, “Father, why
are you sitting like this, alone and silent?”Looking at
Baladeva, Nanda said, “My son, why haven’t youcome
earlier?”Baladeva replied, “Father, a very strange thing
is happening!Many people are saying that we are actually
the sons of Vasudeva,but I don’t accept this. Even if we
are the sons of Vasudeva, wedon’t know any other father
besides you! If for any reason a motherand father
renounce a son, then those who raise him are really
hismother and father. There are many different kinds of
fathers: theone who begets you, the one who raises you,
the king, the spiri-tual master, the father-in-law and
the family priest. But amongstthem, the best is he who
raises and protects you, and therefore I am your son
only, and I don’t know any other father besidesyou. I
don’t want to remain here in Mathurå for even one
moresecond; I want to immediately accompany you and
K®ß√a back toVraja!”Nanda Båbå said, “My son, don’t
speak like this! Hearing this,my younger brother
Vasudeva will die, and Devakî will also die!”Nanda Båbå
said this because he knew that they really would die,
and therefore he is more magnanimous than Vasudeva
andDevakî, who didn’t care as much about the Vrajavåsîs’
feelingswhile K®ß√a stayed with them in Mathurå. He said
to Baladeva,“Six of their sons were killed, and only
with great difficulty werethey able to save both of you.
If you hadn’t been brought toGokula, you would have also
been slain. Therefore we are foreverindebted to
Vasudeva, so you remain here! I will take K®ß√a
andreturn to Gokula.”Baladeva replied, “I will not be
without K®ß√a for even one

Bhakti-rasåyana

128




                           94
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017


second! I consider you to be my only father, and K®ß√a
to be myonly brother!”Then Nanda Båbå looked at K®ß√a,
because in His childhoodK®ß√a had given Nanda so much
good advice. He asked Him,“What should I do?”K®ß√a
replied, “Father, may I speak?”“Yes, please.”“In My
opinion it would not be auspicious for BaladevaPrabhu to
go to Vraja, leaving Vasudeva and Mother Devakî insuch a
difficult situation. And if I go, then he must go
also.Therefore if you will give us permission, we will
stay here for afew days, and then later we will both
return together.” What Hewas saying was having some
influence on Nanda Båbå, but Nandacould only remain
silent. K®ß√a continued, “I am prepared to go with you
now, but then everyone will say, ‘Nanda Båbå is very
cruel! Even after all of Vasudeva and Devakî’s children
died, he took both K®ß√a and Balaråma away from them and
returned to Gokula, leaving them to die also!’ So please
don’t do this. Kaμsa has now been killed, and we just
need a few more days to complete our work here by
killing all the remaining demons. Youplease return
home.”Concerning this point, Çrîla Viçvanåtha Cakravartî
ˇhåkurasays that a person will stay with whomever he
receives the mostaffection from, whoever they are. Each
and every jîva, even a dog,is hungry for love. It is
true that K®ß√a could not receive thepremaof Vraja
anywhere else. He was not able to obtain even afraction
of the love that Yaçodå and Nanda had given Him in
either Mathurå or Dvårakå, and the premathat the
gopîshadfor Him was so pure that He could not find
anything like it anywhere else in the entire universe.
So giving up that love, Hewent to Mathurå? Viçvanåtha
Cakravartî ˇhåkura says, “We don’thave any faith in
that. People may say that He left Vraja and went

129

Chapter Twelve




to Mathurå, but that can’t be so! He remained in Vraja
in anunmanifest form. No one could see Him, but He was
there. “When Akrüra took K®ß√a and Baladeva on the
oxcart toMathurå, it was actually their expansions in
the mode of aiçvaryaas the sons of Devakî and Rohi√î
that went to Mathurå. Theyremained in Vraja in their
original forms, but no one knew of it.How was this
possible? By the Yogamåyå potency, which makesthe
impossible possible.” Therefore K®ß√a always remains
inV®ndåvana; this is the special conception given by our
gosvåmîs.If K®ß√a was ever able to actually leave Vraja,
then it would meanthat the residents there didn’t love
Him the most and that K®ß√adidn’t love them the most,
and neither of these ideas are possible.Therefore He
never leaves V®ndåvana.What happened next? K®ß√a began
living in Mathurå, and all of the members of the Yadu
dynasty returned. Due to fear ofKaμsa’s atrocities they
had fled, but after Kaμsa’s death theyreturned to
Mathurå and began living there again with great hap-
piness. Meanwhile, Astî and Pråptî, the daughters of
Jaråsandhawho had married Kaμsa, approached their father
bewailing,“Your son-in-law was faultless! They threw him

                           95
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

on the groundand killed him even though he did not fight
back!” Becomingvery angry, Jaråsandha attacked Mathurå
seventeen times withvery large armies. K®ß√a was
thinking, “Should I return to Vrajanow?” But He was
unable to go, because Vasudeva saw that K®ß√ahad not
been properly educated; He knew only how to take cowsout
for grazing. So first he wanted to give K®ß√a the
saμskåraofthe sacred thread, and for this he called
Gargåcårya to his home. Everyone, whether local or from
distant places, was invited to the ceremony, but
Vrajavåsîs like Nanda and his brotherUpananda were
intentionally not invited. Taking advice fromsenior
members of the dynasty like Uddhava and Akrüra,Vasudeva
and Devakî had decided before in the assembly of

130

Bhakti-rasåyana




Ugrasena that, “If the residents of Vraja are invited
here for theceremony, then the bhåvaof Vraja will be
stimulated insideK®ß√a and He will certainly desire to
return to Vraja with them.If that bhåvaawakens inside
Him, none of us will be able tocheck it, and therefore
it is better not to invite them.” For theceremony, K®ß√a
had His head shaved, leaving only a çikhå.Wearing wooden
sandals and taking a staff, He assumed the fulldress of
a brahmacårî. Then Gargamuni gave Him the gåyatrî-
mantraand the sacred thread, and putting the cloth for
beggingalms around His neck, said, “My dear son, now beg
some alms.”Previously, in Vraja, Yaçodå had told K®ß√a,
“When Youreceive the sacred thread, we will fill Your
begging cloth withjewels.” Now K®ß√a remembered that
occasion, and in that greatassembly He anxiously started
looking in all directions, “Whereis My mother?” At the
ceremony, Devakî was fully decorated inher best attire,
sitting in the front to give K®ß√a alms. And K®ß√awas
anxiously looking around, “Where is My mother? Where
isMy mother?” But not seeing her, acute remembrance of
Yaçodåcame to Him, and He thought, “My mother, somewhere
inNanda-bhavana, will be standing alone by the door.
Sometimesshe will be looking inside the house, and
sometimes she will belooking outside. She will be
crying, not knowing where I am andwondering, ‘What is my
son doing at this moment?’ And here I am, accepting this
sacred thread amidst a joyous celebration.”Crying out,
“Mother! Mother!” K®ß√a fell to the ground, uncon-
scious. All of the excitement of the occasion and the
giving andtaking of alms immediately stopped, and
everyone ran to K®ß√aand lifted Him up. Witnessing this
spectacle, the members of theYadu dynasty said, “Just
see how strong His attachment is toVraja! He should be
sent far away for His education! He shouldbe sent to
Ujjain, and there He can start strictly following
Hisvows and the instructions of His spiritual master. He
will stay

131

Chapter Twelve


                           96
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017




there as long as the gurusees fit, and then upon
returning here,His nature will have changed, and He will
understand that He isreally the son of Vasudeva.” So
they sent Him there.Somehow the Vrajavåsîs came to know
of all this and said,“Considering Him to be their own
son, they have given Him thesacred thread? Forcibly they
have made Him a kßatriyathroughthe sacred thread
ceremony? And they have cruelly sent Him toUjjain to
receive His education from Såndîpani Muni?
Wearinghorizontal markings on his forehead, Såndîpani
Muni is animpersonalist worshipper of Ça∫kara! Why have
they sent K®ß√ato him?” Yogamåyå had made the
arrangement that K®ß√a be sent to Såndîpani, because if
He had been sent to a Vaiß√ava, theVaiß√ava would have
recognised Him. Therefore He was sent toa devotee of
Çiva who would not recognise Him, and His identitywould
not be revealed. K®ß√a was sent to Ujjain, and in sixty-
fourdays He learned sixty-four arts. When K®ß√a returned
from there, He sent Uddhava to Vraja.After speaking with
Uddhava, one of the gopîsbegan speaking toa bee,
considering it to also be a messenger from K®ß√a:api
bata madhu-puryåm årya-putro ’dhunåstesmarati sa pit®-
gehån saumya bandhüμç ca gopånkvacid api sa kathå na˙
ki∫karî√åμ g®√îtebhujam aguru-sugandhaμ mürdhny adhåsyat
kadå nuÇrîmad-Bhågavatam (10.47.21)Now that K®ß√a has
completed His studies at the åçramaofSåndîpani, will He
be coming here? Certainly He won’t be ableto stay in
Mathurå! Is He on the road coming here right now? Hetold
Me over two months ago that He will be returning ‘the
dayafter tomorrow’, but still He has not come. Does He
ever remem-ber us at any time? Does He remember us as
those who stringwonderful flower garlands for Him? Does
He remember, ‘Oh,the gopîs’beauty defeats that of even
the most beautiful women

132

Bhakti-rasåyana




in the world!’? Does He ever remember us in that way? Or
doesHe remember us even in a derogatory manner? ‘Oh,
yes, thosegopîsare foolish girls who work with milk
products and don’tknow anything.’ When He hears a song
or sees some dancing,does He remember us and the
sentiments we shared, the love ofHis insignificant
dåsîs? When will He return and make us fearlessby
placing His aguru-scented hands on our heads, and
puttingHis long arms around our necks as He did during
the råsa-lîlå?” Similarly, Nanda Båbå and all the
residents of Vraja hadextremely strong feelings for
K®ß√a from His very childhood, and although He didn’t
send them any news from Mathurå orDvårakå, in the end,
when it was the appropriate time for sürya-püjåat
Kurukßetra after the war there, without being
called,Nanda Båbå, Yaçodå, the gopîsand all the
residents of Vraja wentthere and at last met Him
again.In the verse we are discussing, it sayssva-putram.
The wordsva,meaning “one’s own”, is used because

                           97
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

otherwise the wordputracould mean that K®ß√a was the
adopted son of Nanda. So thisverse says, “Taking his own
son” – not taking the son of Vasudeva– “he repeatedly
embraced and kissed Him.” And because of his great
affection for K®ß√a, Nanda experienced paramam,
thatsupreme spiritual ecstasy which even Vasudeva never
felt. Oranother meaning ofparamaμ mudamcan be that Nanda
felt thatecstasy which even Mahå-Lakßmî, who is
worshipful to all devo-tees, could not attain. Udåra-
dhî˙– Nanda Båbå was very generous and magnani-mous. On
the day of K®ß√a’s birth festival, he gave cows,
jewels,cloth and everything he had in charity to the
bråhma√as.Udåracan also mean greatly intelligent. If he
hadn’t been highly intelli-gent, he wouldn’t have asked
Brahmå only for the boon of havingthat most elevated
våtsalya-premafor Bhagavån. He didn’t ask foran ordinary
son, nor did he even ask to have Bhagavån as his son,

133

Chapter Twelve




but he asked only for bhagavad-bhakti. This is the
proper yearn-ing – begging for bhakti, for prema. The
åcåryasin our sampradåyadon’t consider that obtaining
K®ß√a is the ultimate objective;they consider that
obtaining k®ß√a-premais the ultimate objec-tive.
Especially the k®ß√a-premaof the Vrajavåsîs, and
withinthat, especially the premaof the gopîs. And within
that, the premaof Rådhå has been emphasised – to have
premafor K®ß√a as Rådhå-vallabha.Nanda begged only for
bhagavad-bhakti, not for having a son.Vasudeva prayed,
“We desire a son like You” but Nanda prayed,“We desire
to have våtsalya-premafor You.” When Brahmå hadoffered
the boon to Dro√a and Dharå, Dro√a said, “Please
firstask my wife what she desires.” Dharå replied, “When
ParabrahmaHimself takes birth in this world and performs
His wonderfulhuman-like pastimes, we desire to have
great devotion for Him.” Both a mother and father will
love their son, but the motherwill love him more. The
mother actually nurtures the child, whilethe father
provides all the necessities such as clothing and
food.If during the night the father’s sleep is broken by
the child’scrying for even one moment, he may desire to
even put the childoutside of the house! But the mother
will stay awake all night if necessary feeding the child
milk, comforting him and lullinghim back to sleep. The
mother is ready to face any hardship, andtherefore she
looks after the child in a way that is not possible
forthe father. Nanda once went to Mathurå to meet with
Vasudeva concern-ing the taxes which had to be given to
Kaμsa, and one full dayelapsed before he returned to
Vraja. But Yaçodå couldn’t toleratebeing away from K®ß√a
for even one moment, and thereforeYaçodå’s affection for
K®ß√a was greater than that of Nanda.When Uddhava
visited Vraja, Nanda Båbå was able to converse

134

Bhakti-rasåyana


                           98
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017




with him a little, but Yaçodå could not. She couldn’t
possiblyhave spoken in her condition; she was simply
lying on the groundnearby and bitterly weeping.When
Brahmå stole the cowherd boys and calves, K®ß√aassumed
all of their forms for one year and drank the milk of
themotherly gopîs andcows. Describing the glories of
those motherlygopîsand cows is very difficult, so what
to speak of describing the glories of Yaçodå? With great
premashe fed K®ß√a milk forthe entire time He was
residing in V®ndåvana, and her glories areunlimited and
unfathomable. If someone attains even a smallparticle of
bhaktifor K®ß√a, then they feel that their lives
havebecome completely fulfilled. So what to speak of
Yaçodå? I don’tknow if we even have the courage to
attempt to describe herbhakti. After K®ß√a left
V®ndåvana for Mathurå, Mother Yaçodåstopped doing all
housework. The kitchen remained unclean, allthe pots
were upside-down and there were cobwebs everywhere.Who
would she cook for? When K®ß√a was present, with
greatdelight she would cook for Him, but she felt that
with K®ß√agone there was no one to cook for. She began
displaying the char-acteristics of someone who is
approaching old age, and on onevery hot afternoon, when
she was feeling particularly unhappy,remembrance of so
many of K®ß√a’s childhood pastimes begancoming to her,
and she was at once submerged in bhåva. Insidethe house
were K®ß√a’s clothing and many of His toys, like toycows
and tiny bamboo flutes. She collected all of these in a
clothsack and leaving the house, began to walk away.
Then one of herfriends who lived nearby approached her
and said, “Sakhî, whereare you going?” Seeing that she
was going somewhere, othersgathered around her and
asked, “Mother, where are you going?”Previously she was
unable to even speak; whenever she would

135

Chapter Twelve




desire to speak, she would just become choked up with
emotionand could only cry. But now she said, “I am going
to wherevermy Kanhaiyå is.” “What? Where is your
Kanhaiyå? This is Nandagråma, and Heis in Mathurå! It is
an extremely hot afternoon, the hot sun isbearing down,
and the ground will certainly burn your feet, sohow will
you go anywhere?”“I cannot live without Him.”“So going
to Mathurå, then what will you do?”“I will go there, and
arriving in the reception room, I will say,‘I desire to
meet Queen Devakî.’ And if someone brings me toDevakî,
then I will fall at her feet and say, ‘I will become
yourmaidservantbirth after birth. I will serve your
child – He is notmy child – and I will cook for you
both. I will become yourmaidservant for all time. Please
keep me in your palace, where I will eat only your
remnants and always serve you. That is all I desire.’”
Saying that, she became overwhelmed with emotionand fell
down right there; she had that much love for the Lord
asher son! The Vraja devotees have the highest level of

                           99
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

love for K®ß√a.Their love never comes and goes as the
love in this world does;they are all eternal associates
of K®ß√a, and their premais like afathomless ocean. On
rainy days, even though the rivers swell andflow even
stronger towards the ocean, the ocean itself
neverswells. And on dry days it never diminishes; so for
the fathomlessocean, swelling and diminishing never
occurs. It is the same withthe love of these devotees,
and Nanda and Yaçodå’s premaforK®ß√a is always taking
new and variegated forms.

136

Bhakti-rasåyana




Chapter ThirteenMother Yaçodå Binds K®ß√asa måtu˙
svinna-gåtråyavisrasta-kavara-sraja˙d®ß†vå pariçramaμ
k®ß√a˙k®payåsît sva-bandhaneÇrîmad-Bhågavatam
(10.9.18);B®had-bhågavatåm®ta (2.7.129)When K®ß√a saw
Yaçodå labouring so desperately that her wholebody was
dripping with perspiration and the flower garland
thatwas entwined in her hair braid was falling down, He
mercifullyallowed Himself to be bound by her.Sanåtana
Gosvåmî says that in describing the life of
Yaçodå,Çukadeva Gosvåmî became joyful and astonished.
The våtsalyaofYaçodå is more special than anyone else’s,
and even more specialthan Nanda’s because K®ß√a is not
completely overpowered byanyone else’s parental
affection the way He is by hers. K®ß√a isthe one who
unties the bindings of this material universe, evenfor
those who approach Him in the mood of an enemy. He is
thegiver of the five types of mukti,
liberation:sålokya(residing onthe same planet as the
Lord), såmîpya(becoming His personalassociate),
sårüpya(obtaining a spiritual form similar to
His),sårß†i(obtaining opulence similar to His) and
såyujya(merginginto His effulgence). Over and above
these He gives the specialtype of liberation known as
prema. That premaHe gave even toPütanå, who approached
Him in the guise of a mother to kill

137




Him. She was given a motherly position in Goloka even
thoughshe was an enemy, and her relatives Aghåsura and
Bakåsura, eventhough they were also enemies, were given
sålokya. Yet here wefind that very giver of liberation
Himself being bound by Yaçodå;just see what a pastime
this is!Outside her house beneath a large pot filled
with milk, Yaçodålit a fire fuelled by cow-dung, and the
smoke was rising in alldirections. Then she returned to
churning butter. It was earlymorning, the day after
Dîpåvalî, and while going about theirmorning duties, all
of the household servants were rememberingand singing
about K®ß√a’s pastimes. At that time K®ß√a woke up,and
not seeing His mother, He got up from His bed and
begancrying loudly. When Yaçodå looked over and saw the
small,naked boy, she took Him in her lap and began to

                          100
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

feed Him milk.At that time, she felt such strong waves
of spiritual ecstasy thattears fell from her eyes and
milk came to her breasts. There wasnot even any need for
K®ß√a to suck the milk out; automaticallyit flowed and
K®ß√a drank without effort. Meanwhile Yaçodå saw that
the milk she had placed on the firewas boiling over, so
she immediately got up and ran there. Beforeshe wanted
only to take K®ß√a in her lap and feed Him, yet nowher
immediate concern was the milk – it was boiling over
andwould not wait. At that moment she was not thinking
aboutwhether K®ß√a was satisfied or not, and even though
K®ß√a wasgrasping her with both His hands and His mouth,
leaving Himbehind she got up to see to the milk. The
powerful råkßasî Pütanåtried desperately to escape the
grasp of that same K®ß√a, butcould not. She even flew
into the sky and tried to fly back toMathurå, but K®ß√a
clutched her breast with such ferocity thatshe fell to
the ground. Effortlessly K®ß√a was able to hold
ontoPütanå, yet when K®ß√a desired that “Mother will not
leave Me!”and He even applied all of His çakti, still
she went to look after

138

Bhakti-rasåyana




the milk and left Him sitting there. Becoming very
angry, K®ß√abegan crying and His eyes became red. Biting
His lip as childrendo, He thought, “Mother left Me and
didn’t feed Me milk?” andHe picked up a stone and broke
the butter pot.Yaçodå was saying to the milk, “Don’t
boil over! I need you toprepare sweets for K®ß√a!” But
the milk may have been feeling,“What do you need me for?
What is the nature of K®ß√a’s stom-ach? It can never
really be filled. But neither can your milk supplyever
be exhausted; K®ß√a could keep drinking it forever andit
would never run out. Therefore my own life is worthless.
If I will never be able to satisfy K®ß√a, then I will
give up my life byboiling over into the fire.”Seeing
that the milk had risen and was boiling over, Yaçodåsaid
to it, “Don’t give up your life! I need you to prepare
sweetsfor K®ß√a!” After sprinkling some water on the
milk to prevent itfrom boiling over, Yaçodå returned and
found the broken butterpot. Not seeing K®ß√a, she
searched and searched until shenoticed His footprints
leading in the direction of the house, andshe laughed to
herself as she saw Him feeding some yoghurt tothe
monkeys and taking some Himself. She thought, “K®ß√a is
areal friend of these monkeys! I should discipline Him
for this, butit would spoil the fun. And besides, until
now I have not done sucha thing.” So laughing a little,
she picked up a stick to frightenHim and quietly hid so
He wouldn’t know she was watching. Shethought, “If He
looks this way and comes to know that I amwatching, then
I will have to at once run to catch Him.” AndK®ß√a was
also alert, thinking, “If Mother or anyone comes, I
mustrun away at once.”Yaçodå saw that there was a group
of crows there along withthe monkeys. All of them were
previously in råma-lîlå– the crowswere from the dynasty
of Kåkabhuça√∂i, and the monkeys werefrom the dynasty of
Hanumån and Sugrîva. K®ß√a was indebted

                          101
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017


139

Chapter Thirteen




to all of them, so He was feeding them. The crows were
belowcatching the drops of yoghurt that fell to the
ground, and themonkeys were beside K®ß√a taking the
yoghurt directly with theirhands. At first she laughed,
but then, very slowly, like a cat, sheapproached Him,
and He – whose very name pushes away theinfluence of
måyåfor the people of this world and saves themfrom
seeing the Yamadütas – looked at her with fearful
eyes.Who could He be afraid of? Was He afraid of Kaμsa?
Some saythat He went to Gokula out of fear of Kaμsa, but
really He wentthere to taste prema. He is never afraid
of anyone, yet upon seeingYaçodå, He jumped down and ran
off. Yaçodå ran after Him, and we also desire to catch
Bhagavån byour bhakti, yet unlike her, we cannot catch
Him. “So many dayshave passed, and every day I have
engaged in chanting harinåma.Yet as of today I still
have no direct experience of Bhagavån. Myheart has not
melted and I have never shed tears for Him, and I have
never felt ecstasy while chanting the holy name. How
willmy heart become changed? I can see no light at the
end of thetunnel or anything. How will I ever attain
bhakti?” We shouldconsider these things. As long as even
a little mundane visionremains within us, we won’t be
able to catch Him. By realisationof the subtle plane we
won’t catch Him, and by realisation of thenirgu√aplane
we won’t catch Him. Our mentality must be likethat of
the Vrajavåsîs such as Yaçodå and the other gopîs, and
thenwe will be able to catch Him; otherwise not. But we
are also run-ning after Him; we also possess some
eagerness. Perhaps we haveperformed some sacrifice in
the service of our spiritual masterand when we hear
hari-kathåwe get some devotional feelings, butdo we
possess that premawhich overpowers Bhagavån? Even
thepure-hearted yogîsin their samådhicannot catch a
glimpse of theLord’s shadow! Yaçodå is reallygiving
chase to K®ß√a – on foot, not by the

140

Bhakti-rasåyana




speed of mind. That is another thing. She is not
pursuing Himby the speed of mind but on foot, and trying
to catch K®ß√a inHis manifest form. Sometimes she would
come near Him, andagain He would give her the slip, and
like this He was playingwith His mother. If we possessed
such bhaktiby which we couldcome near K®ß√a, then would
it be easy to catch Him? It wouldstill be very
difficult. Even in “coming near Him”, how far awaywould
we still be? Even though He is always near, present
insideour hearts, we are not seeing Him there. Yaçodå
sees Him, chasesafter Him, and catches Him, but what
about us? We don’t per-form the required sådhanaor

                          102
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

bhajanato catch Him. We will onlycatch Him when we have
sufficient eagerness within us, but firstthe urges for
mundane pleasure must be completely forgotten.K®ß√a is
running and Yaçodå is also running, but she will have
torun twice as fast as K®ß√a to catch Him.Sugrîva’s
brother Våli worshipped the sun-god Sürya by per-forming
austerities, and then Sürya appeared before him
andasked, “What boon do you desire?” Våli said, “I
desire the boonthat whenever anyone comes before me to
fight, I will keep all ofmy own strength and also take
half of my opponent’s strength.”One day after having
received this boon, Våli was at a river offer-ing püjå
to Süryadeva when the demon Råva√a approached him.Råva√a
thought that he was the strongest person in the
entireuniverse, and with his twenty hands began
disturbing Våli bysplashing water on him. But Våli
simply continued offering hispüjåwith only one hand and
with the other he grabbed hold ofRåva√a and held him
underneath his armpit. Våli didn’t evenlook at Råva√a,
like one who has killed a mosquito on his back. Besides
Bhagavån no one could kill Våli, and even then,Bhagavån
had to use some trickery to kill him. Råma killed
himfrom a hidden position. Otherwise, if He had gone
before Våli,Våli would have taken half of His strength
and Råma would have

141

Chapter Thirteen




also been defeated! In a similar way, we can see that
for catchingK®ß√a, double speed is necessary; then He
can be caught. “Doublespeed” means that our own sincere
efforts must be there, andK®ß√a’s mercy must also be
upon us. He loves all jîvas, but wemust love Himtwice as
much, and then we can catch Him.Sometimes K®ß√a
remembers His own bhagavattå (nature asthe Supreme), but
all the time Yaçodå loves Him with the ideathat He is
merely an ordinary child, and she gives her everythingto
Him. In this stage of premathere may appear to be even
moreaffection for the beloved’s possessions than for the
beloved him-self. We may have great devotion to our
father, but then if we puton our father’s sandals and
wear them ourselves, is that real devo-tion, or not? We
should respect the sandals of our father as muchas we
respect him, just as Bharata served the wooden sandals
ofRåmacandra. That is the correct outlook, that is
really prema. Butif we are indifferent to the
possessions of our beloved that is notprema, and if we
use them for our own enjoyment that is notprema. K®ß√a’s
cloth, His flute, His toys, milk and butter that
aremeant for Him – a real devotee will sometimes appear
to havemore love for these things because they are dear
to K®ß√a. With great love Yaçodå feeds K®ß√a milk, so
does she havemore affection for K®ß√a Himself, or for
the milk? Of course forK®ß√a, but if the milk becomes
spoiled in some way, she will be very upset. She thinks,
“If K®ß√a takes this milk, He will live a long, healthy
life. From this milk I will make sandeça, rabarî,khîra,
malpuraand so many delectable preparations to
feedK®ß√a.” At other times, when Mother Yaçodå makes

                          103
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

K®ß√a somebeautiful new silken clothes and after
dressing Him in them Hegoes outside and plays in some
nearby mud, then, seeing Him,Yaçodå says, “Hey! Look
what you’ve done to Your new clothes!”Then K®ß√a thinks,
“Does Mother have more love for Me, or forMy clothes?”
Therefore devotees may sometimes show even more

Bhakti-rasåyana

142




regard for K®ß√a’s paraphernalia than for K®ß√a Himself;
that isone symptom of prema. And what are K®ß√a’s
dearest possessionsbut His devotees? This is why even
after performing bhajanaforthousands of lifetimes those
who don’t respect His devotees willattain absolutely
nothing.Therefore Yaçodå went to protect the milk so
that it would notbe wasted, and when K®ß√a broke the
butter pot, she ran afterHim to correct Him. Lifting her
stick, she said, “All right – nowI will hit
You!”Frightened, K®ß√a replied, “Mother, don’t hit
Me!”“Tell me then – why did You break the pot?”“I didn’t
break it!”“Then who did?”“You must have accidentally
broken it as you ran by! You werenot completely to your
senses!”Then Yaçodå became more angry and said, “And why
are Youstealing? There are no thieves on my side of the
family! You arethe only thief in our family!” Again
K®ß√a ran off, and again shelifted up her stick and
chased Him. As she was running, her hairloosened and she
was becoming fatigued, but she was determinedto catch
Him. Finally with the help of some of the household
servants He was caught, and she brought Him inside the
house.“Now shall I hit You, restless friend of the
monkeys? You stealfrom the homes of others as well as
Your own house! Do Youthink that’s good?”K®ß√a replied,
“Mother, don’t hit Me! There is no purpose inhitting
Me!”So she put down the stick and said, “All right, I
will bind Youinstead.” So she took the rope from her
loosened hair and triedto bind Him. His thin waist was
so nicely decorated with goldenornaments, and applying
the rope to it, she found that the ropewas short. She
said to the gopîs, “Bring more rope!” But even

143

Chapter Thirteen




upon more rope being added, K®ß√a still could not be
bound.Yogamåyå saw that, “My master does not desire to
be boundnow.” Therefore K®ß√a’s waist remained the same
size, but by theinfluence of Yogamåyå the rope was
always two finger lengthsshort. Because she still did
not have sufficient determination,Yaçodå couldn’t wrap
it all the way around even once, and every-one was
astonished.What difficulty should there be in binding
such a thin waist?It is like those of us who are
presently practising sådhana-bhajana.In general we
believe that Bhagavån is very merciful, but some-times

                          104
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

our faith becomes weak. “Is there really so much
çaktiinthe name of Bhagavån, or not? Can it really
bestow bhakti, ornot? Will I ever meet Bhagavån?” If in
the midst of the process ofchanting harinåmaall of one’s
difficulties are not eradicated, hemay begin to think,
“Is Bhagavån there, or not?” He may feel thathe has
attained nothing, that his unhappiness has not been
mitigated, his poverty has not been eradicated, and
after doingbhajanahis whole life, he may merely die
crying in disappoint-ment. Rather we should continue
chanting with such good quality faith that we will
always be thinking, “My endeavour willcertainly be
successful.”But sometimes our determination is not firm,
and many sådhakasfall into the trap of again becoming
involved in enjoy-ing måyå, thinking, “I will work hard,
make lots of money, builda house and live comfortably,”
but they forget that one day theywill have to die and
leave it all behind. At first Yaçodå thoughtthat she
would easily wrap the rope around K®ß√a’s waist, but
didit happen? Similarly, when we first take up
devotional life wethink that attaining Bhagavån will not
be difficult; but recognis-ing the reality of it, we
should never become despondent. Manydevotees become
despondent, but we should always remain eagerand
determined.

144

Bhakti-rasåyana




After some time, the gopîswere wonderstruck, and
especiallyYaçodå’s astonishment knew no limit as they
saw that thousandsof ropes had been joined together but
still this small child couldnot be bound. Yaçodå
thought, “From early morning until now I have been
trying to bind Him! The rope has become so long,and
still it won’t wrap around Him even once. Every time it
is twofinger lengths short. Not one, three, four or five
finger lengthsshort, but every time it is precisely two
finger lengths short! Whyis this?”There were two reasons
for the rope being short. First,Yogamåyå saw that K®ß√a
did not desire to be bound, so K®ß√a’ssanction was not
present, and second, there was not sufficienteagerness
in Yaçodå. There is the mercy of K®ß√a and a
devotee’seagerness for bhajana. When they both come
together, one willmeet Bhagavån and overpower Him with
prema. As long asYaçodå was not sufficiently eager, she
could not bind Him. Butthen she became more determined,
thinking, “This is my ownsmall child, and standing
before all of my friends I am unable tobind Him? Now I
will certainly bind Him, or else I might as wellgive up
my life!” She began perspiring and her face became
red,and k®payåsît sva-bandhane– seeing her endeavour to
bind Him,K®ß√a’s heart melted. The influence of Yogamåyå
withdrew, andat last He allowed her to bind Him.Sanåtana
Gosvåmî says here that there are two types of devotees:
those who desire to attain Bhagavån by the practice
ofsådhana-bhajana, and those who rely solely on K®ß√a’s
mercy.Mahåprabhu said that both are necessary. Kittens
don’t need tomake any effort; the cat feeds them and
nurtures them and carriesthem everywhere in her mouth,

                          105
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                           5/3/2017

and all the kittens do all day andnight is   merely cry
“meow, meow”. But baby monkeys have tohold   onto their
mothers themselves; otherwise they will be   fin-ished.
When the mother is ready to cross from one   roof or tree
to

145

Chapter Thirteen




another, at once the baby monkey runs over and holds on
aroundher stomach or on her back and is carried across.
She never grabsthe babies herself, and if they don’t
grab onto her, she goes without them, thinking, “What
good are such useless offspringanyway?” So which is the
primary consideration here concerning sådhanaor k®på,
mercy? Mahåprabhu said that both are essential. No
onecan actually bind Bhagavån by the strength of their
sådhana, butby endeavouring more and more until such
great determinationcomes that all of one’s bodily needs
and worldly attachments areforgotten, then Bhagavån’s
heart will melt and He will bestowspecial mercy.
Bhagavån’s k®påis upon all living entities at alltimes,
but not that special mercy by which He can actually
bebound. He only gives that upon seeing the intense
endeavour ofHis devotees, like the renunciation of
Raghunåtha dåsa Gosvåmî.How did he perform bhajana, day
and night? The Six Gosvåmîswould live outdoors in the
jungle, such as at Nandagråma, or nearPåvana-sarovara,
where a cool breeze is always blowing. Theywould reside
beneath trees, and nearby were snakes, scorpionsand many
different kinds of jungle animals. They ate very
littleand performed extremely strict bhajana. By that
kind of bhajanaone can meet Bhagavån, but where issuch
strictness and intensity in our bhajana? With great
comfortwe are eating and drinking, and we possess
quilts, pillows andshawls. On cold days we have plenty
of hot food to eat, and thereis never any deficiency in
our sleeping. Therefore Bhagavån’smercy is upon us, the
mercy of the Vaiß√avas is upon us, but it isour
misfortune that we don’t have the same intensity as the
SixGosvåmîs. Wonderstruck and experiencing ecstatic
symptoms in hisdescription of the glories of Yaçodå,
next Çukadeva Gosvåmîexperienced these feelings arising
in his heart:

146

Bhakti-rasåyana




nemaμ viriñco na bhavona çrîr apy a∫ga-saμçrayåprasådaμ
lebhire gopîyat tat pråpa vimuktidåtÇrîmad-Bhågavatam
(10.9.20); B®had-bhågavatåm®ta (2.7.130)Neither Brahmå,
Çiva or even Lakßmî-devî – who eternally residesat
K®ß√a’s chest in the form of a golden line – have ever
receivedas much mercy as Yaçodå did from He who is the
bestower of liberation.Although being Bhagavån’s own
son, still, even Brahmå didn’tattain as much mercy as

                          106
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

Yaçodå did. Brahmå was born from thelotus of Bhagavån’s
navel. Generally a father is most munificentto his son
regardless of the son’s nature – whether he is a
criminalor whatever. And usually the son is made the
father’s heir in allrespects, but even such a highly
qualified son as Brahmå did notreceive the mercy which
Yaçodå did. Coming to Vraja, Brahmåsaw, “First this
offenderAghåsura tried to swallow K®ß√a, and thenI saw
K®ß√a give liberation to him! I saw a light leave
Aghåsura’sbody, fly up into the sky, and then merge into
K®ß√a’s feet! Thatwas no ordinary light; it was
certainly Aghåsura’s soul!”Many were not able to
recognise the divine symptoms of K®ß√aand only saw Him
as an ordinary human being. As K®ß√a pre-pared to leave
this world and return to Goloka in His form
asDvårakådhîça, what did the ordinary people see? That
K®ß√a wasshot by a hunter’s arrow, He began to bleed and
He died rightthere. Others saw a light come out of
K®ß√a’s body and go intothe sky. Brahmå, Ça∫kara and
others saw K®ß√a return to Golokain His selfsame form as
His eternal associates offered Him prayers.And what did
the higher devotees of Dvårakå see? That K®ß√adidn’t go
anywhere; He always remains in Dvårakå. So accordingto
their different levels of inner development, people saw
Him indifferent ways.

147

Chapter Thirteen




When Brahmå saw K®ß√a’s pastime of giving liberation
toAghåsura, he became very astonished and thought, “How
can I see more pastimes like this?” Meanwhile, K®ß√a
rememberedthat He wanted to Himself become all of those
cowherd boys andcalves, so here was the opportunity to
accomplish all of Hisobjectives in one pastime. In this
pastime He could marry all ofthe gopîs, because if He
had kept relationships with them other-wise, the people
of mundane consciousness would have criticisedHim. Next
Yogamåyå sent inspiration into the heart of Brahmåand he
thought, “Let me see what will happen next if I steal
thecowherd boys and calves.” In the end, seeing how
K®ß√a Himself expanded into all of thecowherd boys and
calves, how all of their sticks and blankets
andeverything appeared as four-armed Nåråya√as, and how
so manydemigods were offering them prayers, he became
wonderstruckand immediately fell down like a stick at
K®ß√a’s feet. Then helooked again, and everything had
disappeared, and only the origi-nal form of K®ß√a
remained, standing in His threefold-bendingposture and
smiling.Na-bhava˙– Ça∫kara also did not receive as much
mercy asYaçodå did. And who is Ça∫kara? He and Hari are
one and thesame soul. For the purpose of showing the
ideal standard of worshipping Ça∫kara to the residents
of this world, K®ß√a onceworshipped Ça∫kara. Brahmå may
become offended, but Ça∫karanever accepts any offence.
And K®ß√a assigns Ça∫kara very diffi-cult tasks, even up
to bewildering the jîvasin his incarnation
asÇa∫karåcårya and Ça∫kara always fulfils those tasks.
Therefore heis certainly the recipient of K®ß√a’s mercy,
but not theprasåda,the special mercy that is spoken of

                          107
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

in this verse. Na çrî˙– and not even Lakßmî, who always
resides at theLord’s chest and who performed austerities
and püjåat Baelvana,received such mercy as Yaçodå
did.Vimuktidåt– K®ß√a is the

148

Bhakti-rasåyana




giver of liberation. He bestows upon some the
destination ofVaiku√†ha, and upon others even the
destination of GolokaV®ndåvana, but to Yaçodå He gave
that special mercy which wasnot given to anyone else and
by which He Himself becomesbound.

149

Chapter Thirteen




Chapter FourteenPürva-råga, or Preliminary
Attractiongopînåμ paramånandaåsîd govinda-darçanekßa√aμ
yuga-çatam ivayåsåμ yena vinåbhavatÇrîmad-Bhågavatam
(10.19.16);B®had-bhågavatåm®ta (2.7.133)The vraja-
gopîswould enjoy supreme pleasure from receiving
thedarçanaof Çrî Govinda, but they would consider even
onemoment of His absence to be like one hundred
yugas.K®ß√a and the sakhåshad taken the cows out to
graze in theMuñjåra√ya forest when a fire started, and
like a chariot driverthe wind carried that fire until it
surrounded the boys and cowson all sides. Then the
sakhåscalled out, “K®ß√a! Baladeva! Saveus!” Seeing that
they were threatened, K®ß√a said, “Just close youreyes!”
and He opened His mouth and consumed the fierce
fire.Then He told them that they could open their eyes;
if they hadwitnessed His swallowing that great fire they
would have beenterrified. But the sakhåssaw that
everything was just as it wasbefore and that the cows
were calmly resting under the Bhå√∂îratree. They
thought, “How is it that we are here? Everything wasjust
burning! Was that just a dream, or was it real?” And
thenthey all began blissfully taking their lunch
together.In the same way, when by the cultivation of
bhagavad-bhajana

151




and the mercy of the spiritual master and Bhagavån we
becomefree from the burning suffering of the material
energy, we willthink, “Was it just a dream, or was it
real?” Upon the eradicationof that pain which had been
tormenting us since time imme-morial, we will think,
“Where has it gone, as if in the snap of a finger? Was
it real?” We really won’t be able to remember.After this

                          108
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

K®ß√a led the cows back to Vraja, and the
gopîswerethirsty for His darçana, and that is the time
being described inthis verse spoken by Çukadeva Gosvåmî.
When He came beforethem, their ånandaincreased. Although
they had not yet estab-lished a relationship with Him
through either seeing Him orhearing about Him, they were
very attracted to Him, and this is called pürva-råga. It
can exist in both the vißaya,the supremeobject of love,
K®ß√a, and in the åçraya, the supreme receptacle oflove,
the gopîs. To feel this pürva-rågain the stage of
sådhanais not easy; thepürva-rågathat has been described
in the writings of Vidyåpati,Ca√∂îdåsa and in the Gopî-
gîtaand other places in the Çrîmad-Bhågavatamcannot be
attained by an ordinary sådhaka. Onlywhen one has
attained svarüpa-siddhi – meaning when in thestage of
bhåva one attains perception of his eternal identity–
willsuch restlessness for the sight of K®ß√a be felt.
Only a very fewdevotees, like Bilvama∫gala, have felt
these kind of sentiments in the selfsame lifetime. But
kßa√aμ yuga-çatam iva – feeling a moment of K®ß√a’s
absence to be like millenniums – what is thenature of
this sentiment? Although here it is pürva-råga, it
canalso be mahåbhåva, as in this verse:yugåyitaμ
nimeße√acakßußå pråv®ßåyitamçünyåyitaμ jagat
sarvaμgovinda-virahe√a meÇrî Çikßåß†aka (7)

152

Bhakti-rasåyana




O sakhî, in separation from Govinda, even one second
seems likemillenniums. Tears are flowing from My eyes
like clouds shower-ing torrents of rain, and the entire
world appears empty.This is also mahåbhåva; it is not an
ordinary sentiment. Thepoet Ca√∂îdåsa has written:sai!
kevå sunåile çyåma nåma?kånera bhitara diyå, marame
pasila go,åkula karila mora prå√aAlthough outwardly it
is on the order of Nanda and Yaçodå thatK®ß√a joins the
other boys to take the cows out to graze for theday – He
knows this is the dharmafor those of His class – it
isactually with immense bhåvathat He joins His friends.
He hasjust passed His pauga√∂aage and is entering His
kaiçoraage.K®ß√a is speaking with Subala or some other
cowherd boy, andthe sakhîsare conversing amongst
themselves. Saiis a very simpleand sweet word for sakhî.
They say, “Sai, why have we been madeto hear the name of
Çyåma? Entering through our ears, it hastouched the core
of our hearts and confounded our very lives.”At once the
gopîsbecame perplexed in the eagerness to attainK®ß√a,
and thisis the very purpose of hearing the scriptures.
Byhearing the glories of our worshipful deity through
the mediumof our ears, our heart should become so
attached to Him that dayand night we will do nothing
besides meditate on His sweetness.The gopîshave not just
come to the end of sådhanaby attainingsvarüpa-siddhi,
but they are actually manifestations of the hlådinî-
çakti. This meditation is not possible for ordinary
people. But asmen who work in an oil factory will
certainly develop a coatingof oil on their hands,
similarly when a sådhakahears and speaksabout these
topics, “his hands will become coated”, meaning thata

                          109
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

little bhåvawill arise in him by which his life will
become successful.

153

Chapter Fourteen




Our spiritual sentiments should be so deep that we won’t
beable to forget them even for a moment, but
regrettably, we havebecome accustomed to generally doing
exactly the opposite. Wehear these topics, but it seems
as if immediately afterwards,remembrance of material
enjoyment consumes us. We are chant-ing the holy name,
studying çlokasand giving scriptural readings,but where
are our minds? Just as when we place an empty pot ina
river it immediately fills up with water, immediately
after hear-ing some of this bhagavat-kathåour minds will
again becomefilled with thoughts of the sense enjoyment
that we have beenexperiencing since time immemorial. We
must try to keep themind free from these thoughts, even
though it may not alwaysremain steady. We should go to
wherever hari-kathåis beingspoken and completely fill
our minds with it, leaving no room forthoughts of sense
enjoyment. Indeed, there is nothing more favourable for
us than hearinghari-kathå, and it should be as our food.
We should have love forhari-kathå, and if not, then we
should at least consider it our dutyto hear it,
understanding that it will bestow upon us our
ultimategood fortune. Those whose hearts have been
thoroughly purified,who never think of sense enjoyment –
when they hear such kathå,deep sentiments that touch the
very core of their hearts arise, andthey remain absorbed
in those sentiments day and night.In another place
Ca√∂îdåsa writes that the young kiçorîdaugh-ter of
Mahåråja V®ßabhånu sits alone, completely perplexed,
notspeaking to anyone, and one of Her elders says to
Her, “Mychild, what are You doing? Why are You sitting
there like that?Come over here and do this task.” But
She doesn’t listen; She isunable to comprehend what has
happened inside Her. Her eyesare open, which is a
symptom of consciousness, but She isn’tlooking at
anything. She saw Çyåma one time, but He left, and

154

Bhakti-rasåyana




now She just remains silent and motionless. She has no
desire toeat, and She is wearing red cloth – why? To
help Her forget Hisbodily complexion so that She won’t
become more dazed andHer condition won’t then be
detected by Her elders. With a hair-band She has tied
white flowers onto Her hair so that its darkshade will
not remind Her of Çyåma, but since He has
alreadycaptured the core of Her heart, how can She
possibly preventremembrance of Him from coming? Then She
began gazing at a cloud that possessed the same com-
plexion as Çyåma. Sometimes She enters the house and

                          110
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

sometimesShe comes back out; She takes long breaths and
Her mind is notsteady on anything. Then an elder says to
Her, “Why did You gothere? What was the necessity?
Beware! Don’t ever look in thedirection of that boy
again! Don’t focus Your mind on Him foreven one moment,
or You won’t be able to perform Your house-hold duties!
You are not listening to me, so have You now lost
thefear of Your elders as well? Has some ghost or
demigod possessedYou?” Not aware of anything, She falls
down, and when they lift Her up and place Her somewhere
else, She falls down again.Because She has lost Her fear
of Her elders, they even abandonthe idea of finding a
husband for Her. But Ca√∂îdåsa says, “Yes,I understand:
She is not mad, not possessed,nothing of the sort,but
She has simply fallen into the trap of that black snake
Çyåma.”This is pürva-råga.But how can a
sådhakaexperience this? Generally our mindsare full of
unlimited varieties of material desires, but when noneof
these desires remain, meaning when one obtains the
companyof an exalted guruand receives the unconditional
mercy ofBhagavån, then some shadow of bhåvawill come. By
chantingthe extraordinarily beautiful çyåma-nåmaand the
Hare K®ß√amantra, Rüpa Gosvåmî, Raghunåtha dåsa Gosvåmî
and Nårada

155

Chapter Fourteen




all went mad in ecstasy, so tell me then – how much
bhåvamustbe contained within it? And Bhaktivinoda
ˇhåkura also has writ-ten so many lines that are
saturated with bhåva, like:vibhåvarî-çeßa, åloka-
praveça,nidrå chå∂i’ u†ha jîvaKalyå√a-kalpataru (Nåma-
kîrtana 2)This refers to meditating on the pastimes that
K®ß√a performs atthe end of the night while ordinary
jîvasremain sleeping. And inthe same song, phula-çara-
jojaka kåma: “Çrî K®ß√a utilises flow-ered arrows to
increase the gopîs’desire.” Until one has under-stood
well the conception delineated in Ujjvala-nîlama√i,
hewon’t understand this line. Or if the kåma-
gåyatrîreveals itself tosomeone, then that person will
understand something of itsmeaning, but without the
mercy of the kåma-gåyatrî it cannot be understood. The
bhåvaof a mahå-bhågavataVaiß√ava comeswithin this line,
but even though we sing this line every morning,what do
weaccrue from it? Therefore the difference between
asådhaka’schanting of the holy name and a perfected
soul’s chant-ing of the holy name is like the difference
between the land andthe sky. When one has fully realised
the sweetness of harinåma,then his tongue will not be
able to stop chanting it. For example,when Caitanya
Mahåprabhu would go to pass water, He wouldfirmly grasp
His tongue with one hand. Seeing this, His youngservant
Gopåla asked, “O Lord, why are You doing
this?”Mahåprabhu replied, “My tongue doesn’t obey Me.
Oneshouldn’t take the name of Govinda in a contaminated
place, butit won’t obey Me.”Gopåla replied, “But my
Lord, at the time of dying one maypass stool and urine,
and if we don’t chant the holy name at thattime, our
lives will be spoiled!”Being pleased, Mahåprabhu said,

                          111
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

“As of today you have

Bhakti-rasåyana

156




become guru. Yes, the holy name should be taken at that
timealso.” So He released His tongue and chanted at all
times, evenwhen going to the bathroom. During the night,
Mahåprabhu’sservant Govinda dåsa thought that He was
merely sleeping, butHe would remain awake chanting
k®ß√a-nåma, crying and some-times rubbing His face on
the wall. And when Råya Råmånandaand Svarüpa Dåmodara
would come, Govinda dåsa wouldbecome very unhappy and
think, “Why have they come? Theywill make Him cry and He
will not be able to sleep tonight.” When this high type
of intense bhåvacomes while chantingthe holy name, then
one’s composure will be destroyed and hewill think,
“Without seeing K®ß√a I cannot live any longer! Howcan I
meet Him? What will I do?” Then one’s fear of elders,
fearof being disgraced in society, and self-restraint
are all lost. Thereare certain inhibitions that restrain
love, but when they are allbroken down, one’s self-
restraint is lost. Even Rukmi√î andSatyabhåmå are not
capable of this, so what to speak of others?The night
before her proposed marriage, through a bråhma√aRukmi√î
sent a message to K®ß√a saying, “Tomorrow I will
bemarried. If You don’t come and save me from this, I
will give upmy life. Shamefully I am writing this to
You; a cultured girlshould not write like this, but
shamefully I am writing to Youbecause otherwise a jackal
will snatch away the lion’s share.” Soeven though
Rukmi√î is expressing these deep sentiments, shefeels
some shame; but the gopîsfeel no such shame, and
thereforetheir bhåvais so much deeper. When the
gopîswould see K®ß√areturning from taking the cows out
to graze, they would gazeupon Him with greedy eyes and
their ånandawould increase. Butwhen they couldn’t see
Him, even a moment seemed like millionsof yugasthat
would never pass. This is pürva-råga, and
countlessbeautiful sentiments are included within it.

157

Chapter Fourteen




The gopîsfelt that the time which elapsed during the
blinking oftheir eyes was like an infinity, and they
have themselves describedthis in Çrîmad-
Bhågavatam(10.31.15):a†ati yad bhavån ahni kånanaμtru†i
yugåyate tvåm apaçyatåmku†ila-kuntalaμ çrî-mukhaμ ca
teja∂a udîkßatåμ pakßma-k®d d®çåmWhen K®ß√a would spend
the day wandering in the forest withthe sakhås, the
gopîs, unable to see His beautiful face adorned
withlovely locks of hair, would be anguished in
separation from Him.And what to speak of that, even when
K®ß√a wasbefore them,they considered the tiny fraction
of time that elapsed in the blink-ing of their eyes to

                          112
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

be like millenniums, and they cursed the cre-ator Brahmå
as being foolish for having created eyes that mustblink.
Our time is mostly spent joking around, but in
comparisonwhat kind of bhajanawas performed by these
great personalities? We have read that only once in his
entire life did Raghunåthadåsa Gosvåmî laugh. While he
was reading Rüpa Gosvåmî’sVidagdha-mådhava-nå†aka, his
tears were falling on the hand-written pages and
smearing the ink. Seeing this, Rüpa Gosvåmîasked for it
back, but Raghunåtha dåsa clutched it to his heartand
refused to return it. Therefore Rüpa Gosvåmî composed
theDåna-keli-kaumudî very quickly, and after reading
only a fewverses of it, Raghunåtha dåsa began laughing.
Otherwise heremained crying for K®ß√a throughout his
entire life. If there issuch crying for K®ß√a, then that
is real sådhanaand one will cer-tainly receive His
darçana, just as in the case of Bilvama∫gala.Presently
we may be engaged in only the semblance (åbhåsa)ofreal
sådhana, but if even in this stage of sådhana-åbhåsawe
feel somuch joy by hearing and speaking this kathå, then
just imaginehow blissful we will feel when we enter into
real sådhana!

158

Bhakti-rasåyana




Chapter FifteenK®ß√a’s Beauty is Unsurpassedtan-manaskås
tad-ålåpåstad-viceß†ås tad-åtmikå˙tad-gu√ån eva
gåyantyonåtmågårå√i sasmaru˙Çrîmad-Bhågavatam
(10.30.43);B®had-bhågavatåm®ta (2.7.134)Those vraja-
gopîs, who had fully given their hearts to Çrî
K®ß√a,would imitate His manner of speaking and His
activities. Since theyhad offered their very souls to
Him and always sang His glories,they completely forgot
themselves and their family interests.In the gradual
development of bhakti, from niß†håcomes ruci,where it
becomes tasteful. From rucicomes åsakti, where one
willhave no desire to leave it. Then comes bhåva, and
then prema,sneha, måna, pra√aya, råga, anuråga, and in
some cases evenmahåbhåva, where one receives the
pinnacle of experience ofK®ß√a. Possessing this
mahåbhåva, the gopîs’minds and heartsbecame so absorbed
in K®ß√a that they could no longer be con-sidered their
own. If you place a piece of cotton on a few dropsof
water, the water is immediately absorbed into it.
Similarly, thewater of the gopîs’hearts was immediately
absorbed into theK®ß√a-cotton in such a way that it was
as if their individual existences were lost. If someone
is fortunate enough to receiveK®ß√a’s direct darçanaor
to hear about Him from a rasika

159




Vaiß√ava, then they may also experience this same
absorption.Singing about His virtues more and more, they
at once becametad-åtmikå – they completely forgot their
own bodies, theirbodily relations, their homes,

                          113
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

everything. If we have a task to perform but due to some
obstacle wecannot complete it, we simply return home.
But the gopîsweresearching for K®ß√a everywhere, asking
the vines, trees, tulasîandthe deer if they had seen
Him; still they could not find Him any-where. But did
they return to their homes? Even though theycould not
find Him, their homes and families had been com-pletely
forgotten. They became so absorbed in thinking of
Himthat it was as if they were possessed by ghosts.
Taking on K®ß√a’sidentity, they began imitating His
activities and saying to oneanother, “How beautiful is
my gait? How beautifully do I playthe flute?” At that
time they didn’t know what they were doing,and this is
what is meant by the words tan-manaskå˙. They becameso
absorbed in K®ß√a that their natures changed like iron
put intoa fire and they forgot everything. As the
gopîssearched for K®ß√a, all they remembered were
Hisvirtues and His pastimes with them. Whereas we think
mostly ofour material comforts and are capable of
forgetting bhakti, theyare just the opposite. We should
endeavour to become like theeternal associates of
Caitanya Mahåprabhu, such as MådhavendraPurî, who would
go days without eating or even begging and was always
absorbed in remembrance of K®ß√a. As our
bhaktiincreases, we will forget more and more the
demands of ourbodies and our bodily relations, and this
remembrance will alsoincrease. K®ß√a had left the gopîs,
but they never thought, “K®ß√ais so cruel because He has
left us!” Otherwise they would havegiven up searching
for Him and returned home, but they didn’tdo that. They
continued searching for Him, and they begansinging in
glorification of His virtues, especially His kindness:

160

Bhakti-rasåyana




pra√ata-dehinåμ påpa-karßa√aμt®√a-carånugaμ çrî-
niketanampha√i-pha√årpitaμ te padåmbujaμk®√u kuceßu na˙
k®ndhi h®c-chayamÇrîmad-Bhågavatam (10.31.7)O Lord, You
are very merciful. Why are You afraid that there maybe a
sinful reaction if You were to place Your lotus feet on
ourbreasts? By merely remembering Your name, all sins
are destroyed.Pra√atameans that if one surrenders
everything to Bhagavånincluding one’s false ego, then
all sins are destroyed, and when allof one’s sins are
destroyed, then at once one receives Bhagavån’sdirect
darçana. Gajendra the elephant fought with a crocodile
forthousands of years until, being partially submerged
in water, hetook a lotus in his trunk and held it up as
an offering to Bhagavånwhile silently praying, “O Lord,
now I am surrendered to You,and I am not even concerned
if You save me or if I perish.” Bythe power of this
surrender, all of his anarthasand aparådhasfrom so many
lives were destroyed and at once Bhagavån came.He killed
the crocodile with His cakra, and Gajendra was
released.If someone factually surrenders to Bhagavån,
then that surren-der will be the destroyer of all of his
faults. Are we surrenderedlike this? Have all of our
faults and offences been eradicated? Thisis the
measuring stick. Most of the suffering that we are

                          114
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

feelingand the obstacles that are arising in our
bhajanaare reactions toour misdeeds in previous lives.
No matter where one goes, thesereactions to previous
karmaand offences cannot be escaped, soan intelligent
man will remain in the company of sådhuswho
willgradually lead him to Bhagavån.The gopîspray,
“pra√ata-dehinåμ påpa-karßa√am– O Govinda,You are so
merciful that You destroy the sins of those who sur-
render to You. We are surrendered to You, so is it that
because ofthe sins of our previous lives You remain
hidden from us and do

161

Chapter Fifteen




not give us Your darçana? We are crying in separation
from You,and today, in this world there is no one as
unhappy as us. Wehave abandoned forever our homes and
families, and now we areleft with no other shelter
besides You! So won’t You destroy allof our sins?” These
are the inner sentiments of one gopî. Thereare so many
different kinds of gopîswith different sentiments,and
another gopîis saying, “You destroy the sins of one who
issurrendered. Until tonight we have not been able to
surrender,but having abandoned our homes, husbands,
children and thefear of being disgraced in society, we
have come to You. So whatremains for us to surrender?
Now please give us Your darçana,and by placing Your
lotus feet on our heads, give us the boon ofmitigating
our fear of the snake of separation from You. Thosefeet
are eternally served by Çrî Lakßmî, so are we to be
deprivedof the favour of serving them because we have
taken birth incowherding families in Gokula? Those feet
follow after the cowsin the pastures, and You are so
merciful that even without anyumbrella over Your head or
any shoes on Your feet You takethose cows, who are
merely ignorant animals, out to graze, sowho could be as
kind as You?” In this way, even though they
wereanguished, they continued to sing the glories of
K®ß√a’s lotusfeet.In the Bhramara-gîta, we find the
gopîsderiding K®ß√a andaccusing Him of being cruel and
deceptive, but still their mindsnever left Him.m®gayur
iva kapîndraμ vivyadhe lubdha-dharmåÇrîmad-Bhågavatam
(10.47.17)“In K®ß√a’s previous life, instead of killing
the innocent Våli inthe manner of a kßatriya, He killed
him from a hidden positionlike a hunter. And when a
woman approached Him with amorousdesires, being a
kßatriyaHe should have satisfied her; but
instead,although He was excited by her beauty, He wanted
to preserve

162

Bhakti-rasåyana




His vow to Sîtå, so He made her ugly by chopping off her
noseand ears. He is so eager to show that He cannot be

                          115
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

conquered bya woman, but in that instance we can clearly
see that He reallyhad been overpowered by a woman.” Even
though they wereaccusing K®ß√a, could they ever stop
thinking of Him and speakabout anything else?In the
verse we are discussing here, the words tad-
ålåpå˙meanthat the gopîssang in melodious tones the
glories of K®ß√a’snames (nåma), qualities (gu√a), form
(rüpa) and pastimes (lîlå).This is symptomatic of
bhakti. In the stage of sådhana, wheneverthe mind
strays, it must be brought back to Bhagavån’s nåma,gu√a,
rüpaand lîlå, and then it is real sådhana. There is no
greatersådhanathan this. Even endeavouring to push the
thoughts ofworldly enjoyment out of the mind is not
necessary. The mindthat has a tendency to ponder sense
enjoyment should simply beengaged in hearing and
describing Bhagavån’s names, qualities,form and pastimes
and that will be all that is necessary. Doingthat more
and more, then eventually these topics will becomefully
tasteful to us.Tad-viceß†å˙means the gopîssang of
K®ß√a’s activities that werein relation to them: how He
met with them, how He fed themtåmbüla, how He tied bells
on their ankles, how He strung gar-lands of flowers for
them, and how when they became fatiguedHe wiped the dust
from their faces and bodies and composed abed of flowers
for them to rest on. Then they became tad-åtmikå– both
internally and externally they began glorifying Him,
andthey forgot their homes and even their very own
selves. What tospeak of returningto their homes,
remembrance of the home itselfdidn’t even arise in their
minds. Glorifying K®ß√a more and morein their
separation, they completely forgot all worldly
concerns.Impersonalistyogîsdon’t meditate on anything;
their mindsbecome attached to the void. They don’t
meditate on the åtmå, on

163

Chapter Fifteen




Paramåtmå, or on any material object either. They are
niråçraya,without shelter, and are therefore prone to
falling down; butdevotees, who follow in the footsteps
of the gopîsand constantlymeditate on K®ß√a’s attributes
are åçraya, sheltered, and there isno possibility of
them falling down. Next comes this verse:gopyas tapa˙
kim acaran yad amußya rüpaμlåva√ya-såram asamordhvam
ananya-siddhamd®gbhi˙ pibanty anusavåbhinavaμ
duråpamekånta-dhåma yaçasa˙ çriya aiçvarasyaÇrîmad-
Bhågavatam (10.44.14 );B®had-bhågavatåm®ta (2.7.135)[The
ladies of Mathurå said:] Which austerities did the
vraja-gopîsperform by which they could always drink
through their eyes thenectar of Çrî K®ß√a’s form – which
is the very essence of loveliness,which is unequalled or
unsurpassed, which is perfect in itself andalways
appears new and fresh, which is extremely rare to
beholdand which is always the exclusive shelter of all
fame, splendourand opulence?When K®ß√acandra entered the
wrestling arena with Balaråma,the ladies of Mathurå
spoke this verse in glorification of the gopîs. They
said, “In this assembly, irreligious activity
(adharma)is taking place, so we should not remain here.”

                          116
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

One should notremain in a place where sinful activities
are being committed.When the attempt was made to disrobe
Draupadî, that was alsoan assembly of adharma, and men
of good values should not havestayed there. So why then
did Grandfather Bhîßma remain there?At that time sinful
reaction did not come to him because he knew well the
greatness of Bhagavån and His devotees, and heremained
silent so that their greatness would be shown. He
couldhave taken a stand against the evil men who were
offendingDraupadî, and he was certainly capable of
killing them all single-handedly; but even though
Draupadî implored him to help her,

164

Bhakti-rasåyana




he remained silent. He was a jñåni-bhakta, and he knew
that ifsomeone was surrendered to Bhagavån, then He
would protectthem accordingly. That was his thinking,
but what were thoseevil men thinking? “What will
Bhagavån do? He has no power tostop us, so we will do as
we please” and they tried to disrobe her.And what about
the På√∂avas? Four of them were infuriated,
butYudhiß†hira Mahåråja remained silent. Being a jñåni-
bhaktaalso,he knew that K®ß√a would protect Draupadî
appropriately, butBhîma and Arjuna, who had less
awareness of K®ß√a’s divinity andsaw Him more as a
common friend in sakhya-bhåva, were furious.At the
wrestling arena, the ladies of Mathurå saw how
thosefearful wrestlers, whose massive bodies were like
mountains andas if made of iron, wanted to kill soft and
tender K®ß√a. They sawhow Baladeva’s face was red with
anger, and how K®ß√a was smil-ing even though He was
also angry. Considering that an injusticewas about to
take place, they felt that it would be shameful if
theyremained there. There was no one present who could
prevent it:Ugrasena had been imprisoned, and other
elders like Akrüraremained hidden. The meaning of this
verse is, “What austerities did the gopîsperform by
which they could see such a beautiful and sweet formof
Çrî K®ß√a as He freely wandered in the forests and
kuñjasofVraja with a happy heart?” There the
gopîsreceived the darçanaof lovely, rasikaK®ß√a playing
the flute and wearing a peacockfeather in His crown. But
in the wrestling arena, the ladies ofMathurå did not see
that beautiful form of K®ß√a; instead theysaw Him in a
fighting mood, after He had broken the tusks of
anelephant and was decorated with drops of blood.What is
the nature of K®ß√a’s form? Låva√ya-såram asamordhvam–
it is the very essence of loveliness, and its beauty is
unequalledand unsurpassed. Råma is beautiful, Nåråya√a
is beautiful and allother incarnations of Bhagavån are
beautiful, but their beauty

165

Chapter Fifteen




                          117
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017


does not surpass or even equal K®ß√a’s beauty. Ananya-
siddham–if K®ß√a is wearing an ornament, He becomes more
beautiful andif He removes that ornament, He becomes
even more beautiful.Then if He becomes decorated with
dust, He becomes even morebeautiful again. In all
circumstances He is the most beautiful;there is no
necessity of His wearing any ornament such as an ear-
ring or a flower to increase His beauty. We feel a need
to increasethe attractiveness of our appearance – how do
we appear when weare not wearing tilakaor when we are
wearing soiled clothing?But because K®ß√a has no
necessity of trying to increase Hisbeauty, He is ananya-
siddham.D®gbhi˙ pibanty anusavåbhinavam– the ladies of
Mathurå aresaying, “That beautiful form of Çrî K®ß√a
which we have neverseen, the gopîshave seen in Vraja.”
Suppose we have a desire tosee someone whose appearance
is very beautiful. Upon seeingtheir face just once, we
become satisfied and there is no need tolook again. But
upon seeing K®ß√a, one will have no desire toremove
their gaze from Him because He always appears new
andfresh. One will perpetually remain thirsty to drink
the nectar ofHis appearance and will never desire to
look away. His form isthe ekånta-dhåma– the exclusive
shelter of fame, beauty andopulence as well as the three
other qualities of Bhagavån that arenot mentioned in
this verse. So the ladies of Mathurå are saying,“Aho!
What austerities did the gopîsperform to receive
darçanaofthat form of Çrî K®ß√a? We are seeing K®ß√a as
He is angrilyattacking His enemies, but they saw Him as
the attractor of evenCupid himself.”They want to know
what austerities were performed by thegopîsto attain
darçanaof that form, but only by aspiring to serveK®ß√a
in the mood of the gopîscan this be attained. Without
anintense hankering for that, it is very, very
difficult. No perform-ance of ordinary austerities can
bestow the darçanaof that form

Bhakti-rasåyana

166




of K®ß√a that was seen by the gopîs. There are so many
of us whochant one låkhaof harinåmadaily, and we haven’t
received thatdarçanayet, so what to speak of others?
There are many well-known austerities, but none of them
can bestow this fruit. Somepersons sit in the middle of
fires in the hot season, and othersbathe at four in the
morning in the Yamunå in the cold seasonand then return
home in wet cloth regardless of whether it iswindy,
raining, snowing, whatever. But are there any
austeritiesby the practice of which we can attain
Bhagavån?årådhito yadi haris tapaså tata˙ kiμnårådhito
yadi haristapaså tata˙ kimantar bahir yadi haristapaså
tata˙ kiμnåntar bahir yadi haris tapaså tata˙ kimNårada-
pañcaråtraWhat is the value of austerities performed by
sages like Durvåsåif they haven’t worshipped Bhagavån,
and if they don’t seeBhagavån everywhere? And if one
doessee Bhagavån within everyliving entity and
everywhere outside as well, then what is the useof any
other austerities besides that form of worship? For

                          118
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

themthere is no necessity of performing any austerities
other thanobserving devotional vows like those for
Ekådaçî, Janmåß†amîand so on. Besides chanting the holy
name and hearing and meditating on hari-kathå, there is
no method to attain K®ß√a’sdarçana. The objective of
performing austerities is to concentrateone’s mind, but
catching hold of the wind is easy in comparisonto
subjugating the wicked mind, so how will it be
accomplished?It can only be achieved by serving
Vaiß√avas, hearing hari-kathå,loudly chanting the holy
name and meditating on Bhagavån.Because the ladies of
Mathurå were seeing K®ß√a with prema,He appeared ever-
new and fresh. There were others present inthat arena
such as the wrestlers, but did they see Him in the
sameway? They were not pleased upon seeing Him and
instead merely

167

Chapter Fifteen




became angry. Did Hira√yakaçipu enjoy hearing
Bhagavån’sname, which is sweeter than sweetness itself?
So the ladies ofMathurå are saying that the gopîsdrank
the ever-fresh, enchant-ing form of K®ß√a with their
eyes just as one drinks nectar withthe mouth. His form
is the essence of låva√ya, loveliness. It is asif He is
the very embodiment of all loveliness. A lion that is
kept in a cage does not appear very beautiful, butwhen
it is set free in the forest, then the entirety of its
beauty,power and everything are apparent. Similarly, all
of K®ß√a’s beautyand sweetness are exhibited only “in
the forest” of Vraja. He wasnot as beautiful in the
wrestling arena with drops of the elephant’sblood
spattered on His face. In this connection Sanåtana
Gosvåmîquotes this verse from Çrîmad-
Bhågavatam(3.2.12):yan-martya-lîlaupayikaμ sva-yoga-
måyå-balaμ darçayatå g®hîtamvismåpanaμ svasya ca
saubhagarddhe˙paraμ padaμ bhüßa√a-bhüßa√å∫gamBy His
Yogamåyå potency, Bhagavån Çrî K®ß√a appeared in
thisworld to lead the conditioned souls back to Him, and
He exhib-ited a form which, upon being seen, would
enchant them all. Thatform is the best of all, the
ornament of all ornaments, and seeingit is the pinnacle
of good fortune.

168

Bhakti-rasåyana




Chapter SixteenThe Nature of the Gopîs’ MahåbhåvaNo one
can taste K®ß√a’s beauty as the gopîsdo. What is
thereason? Only in Vraja, where K®ß√a’s rüpa-
mådhurî,lîlå-mådhurî,ve√u-mådhurîand prema-mådhurî are
all present, is He overpow-ered by the premaof His
associates. Of the many devotees there,none overpower
Him as the gopîsdo, and amongst them, ÇrîmatîRådhikå
overpowers Him the most. Concerning this point,Sanåtana

                          119
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

Gosvåmî has written a special philosophical conclusionin
his commentary to this verse. As he said before, Çrî
K®ß√a, thesource of all incarnations, performs unlimited
pastimes in unlim-ited dhåmas, but the pinnacle of His
mådhurî flows in Vraja andnowhere else. Because the
anurågaof the residents there is foreverincreasing, the
entirety of His sweetness is exhibited there. K®ß√ais
mådhurya, sweet, but if the gopîswere not there, His
sweetnesswould not reach its highest point. No other
devotees can experi-ence yåvad-åçraya-v®tti, which is a
special characteristic of thegopîs’mahåbhåva. To the
degree that there is love for something, it can be
tasted,and if there is no love, it cannot really be
tasted. The meaning ofyåvad-åçraya-v®ttiis that the
gopîs’ premareaches as far as andeven further than
anyone can possibly describe it. If you stretcha rubber
band it will snap at a certain point, but their prema,
andonly theirs, increases unlimitedly. Therefore they
alone fullyrelish the rasaof K®ß√a’s four types of
mådhurî.

169




The tendency to relish the unsurpassed beauty of K®ß√a’s
formis yåvad-åçraya-v®tti, another name for which is
mahåbhåva. K®ß√ais rasaråja, and the gopîsare mahåbhåva,
and when they meet, thegopîsrelish He who is the very
embodiment of rasa. But thedynamic nature of this
meeting is that sometimes K®ß√a becomesyåvad-åçraya-
v®tti, and the gopîsbecome rasaråja. This is not pos-
sible for anyone else but the gopîs; being overpowered
by theirprema, K®ß√a begins serving and attending
them.Suppose there is a young boy who is lame, ugly and
unable tospeak properly. It is doubtful that others will
be very affectionatetowards him, but his mother will
always love him. Why? Becauseshe possesses anuråga,
spontaneous love for him, and althoughthat is simply a
reflection of the genuine sentiment, anurågaisthe root
cause of love. Because the gopîs’ anurågafor
K®ß√aexpands unlimitedly, it is called yåvad-åçraya-
v®tti. Upon receiv-ing K®ß√a’s darçana, the gopîs’love
multiplies millions of times –this is the v®tti,
tendency, of their anuråga. But this only occurswhen
they see the unsurpassed mådhuryaof K®ß√a’sform; it
doesnot happen when they see anyone else, including
Uddhava, wholooks so much like K®ß√a.The ladies of
Mathurå lamented that although they wereseeing K®ß√a
directly, they did not possess the quality of premafor
Him by which they could see His form of unsurpassed
beautyas the gopîsalways did. A person eats something
with great plea-sure when they are hungry. And if
someone isn’t hungry, theymay pinch a bit of the
preparation off with their nails, examineit, find fault
with it and not desire to eat it. But if one is
hungry,he will consider any preparation to be tasteful,
even if it is stale.Then what to speak of that
preparation which is unlimitedlysweet? In this way, the
gopîs’ “hunger” for K®ß√a is such that asthey taste
K®ß√a’s mådhurya, their mahåbhåvaincreases so muchthat
it knows no upper limit. Even though there is no space
for

                          120
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017


170

Bhakti-rasåyana




it to increase any further, still it increases. In the
upper stages of mahåbhåvaknown as mådanaand modana, it
perpetuallyincreases and feels ever-new and fresh. In
our present condition we cannot estimate even a fraction
ofthat, but when our faith in the spiritual master, the
Vaiß√avasand Bhagavån is sufficiently developed, then as
we become freefrom the influence of our anarthas,
niß†håwill come. Even if wepossess some çraddhåand
niß†håin partial form, still, our rucimust become deep.
For now our minds may not remain steady,but someday
bhåvawill come to us, and precisely when it willcome is
not in our hands. It is solely in the hands of
Bhagavånand those devotees who possess that bhåva, and
only when theybestow their mercy will it come to us. At
that time even the expe-rience of mahåbhåvawill come to
a deserving soul automatically,even though he may have
not previously known anything of thattendency. It may
seem that there is no hope of it ever coming andno space
whatsoever for it in our hearts, but still it will
comeautomatically. Then by its wonderful influence one
will easilycross over whatever seemingly insurmountable
obstacles mayexist in this world.The ladies of Mathurå
speak of mådhuryaK®ß√a who had cometo Mathurå from
Vraja. Why didn’t He bring His flute with Himto Mathurå?
Because if He were to play the flute in Mathurå, nolady
would leave her home and family in the dead of night
tocome to Him; there was no qualified recipient for the
flute-songin Mathurå. The ladies there saw His beautiful
form, but wouldthey ever leave their husbands to go to
Him? Would it happen inDvårakå? All would be afraid of
transgressing their dharmaandbeing disgraced in society.
Because mahåbhåvaand yåvad-åçraya-v®ttido not exist
there, no one would come.In this regard Sanåtana Gosvåmî
says in his commentary that a devotee will perform
kîrtanaand hear hari-kathå of his

171

Chapter Sixteen




worshipful deity, but direct experience of Him will only
come inthe dhåma. A devotee may meditate on K®ß√a,
become absorbed in remembrance of Him, and gain some
attachment for the bhåvaof Vraja, but direct experience
of K®ß√a can come only in V®ndåvana, whether it is
Gokula or Goloka. In other placesmeditation and
remembrance are possible, but direct experienceof Him is
available only in V®ndåvana. Therefore K®ß√a’s
eternalassociates in Dvårakå and Mathurå may also be
able to estimatethe mådhuryaof K®ß√a in Vraja to a
certain degree, but couldthey ever achieve direct
experience of it? Would they ever be ableto abandon
everything and come to K®ß√a in the dead of night?No,

                          121
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

and neither would K®ß√a ever enter the royal assembly
hallin Dvårakå in His Vraja attire.Mahåbhåvais
unlimitedly variegated. Ordinarily it is said
thatmahåbhåva is of two varieties, rü∂haand adhirü∂ha,
but thousandsof variations of each of them are possible,
some in meeting andsome in separation. But all varieties
of mahåbhåvaare embodiedin Çrîmatî Rådhikå, or they are
manifest in Her expansions as the sakhîs. She is the
svayaμ-rüpaof mahåbhåva, as K®ß√a is thesvayaμ-rüpåand
source of the tad-ekåtma,svåμçaka,vilåsa,
åveça,pråbhava-prakåça,vaibhava-prakåçaand
gu√aexpansions. Thegu√a-avatårasare Brahmå, Viß√u and
Ça∫kara, and the åveça-avatårasinclude P®thu, Nårada,
Vyåsa, Kapila and Paraçuråma.They all possess specific
natures or empowerments. Then whenK®ß√a expands into
forms that are fully sac-cid-ånandaand sarva-çaktimån,
it is called tad-ekåtma-rüpa. As all these personalities
expand from Him and perpetuallyexist within Him, Rådhå
embodies all of the three hundred andsixty varieties of
heroines. Due to this She always attracts K®ß√a’smind.
If K®ß√a desires a specific bhåva,and in one gopîit is
foundto be insufficient, He can attain it by associating
with another

172

Bhakti-rasåyana




gopî. But none of them can completely mystify and
enchant Himas only Rådhikå can. Because unlimited
feelings and desires arise within K®ß√a, as the best
lover and the hero of all women He is
sometimesdhîrodåtta(grave and gentle), sometimes dhîra-
çanta(peacefuland forbearing), sometimes dhîra-
lalita(carefree and jovial) andsometimes
dhîroddhata(proud and restless). He is all of these
atthe same time, and when there is the necessity for
only one ofthese moods, He manifests that specific one.
In the same way,Çrîmatî Rådhikå manifests whatever mood
is necessary, some-times becoming dhîra(grave),
sometimes måninî(pouting) andsometimes dakßi√a(clever).
As the crown jewel and very embodi-ment of the three
hundred and sixty varieties of heroines, She relishes
the sweetness of K®ß√a to the utmost. Because She
canmanifest all the qualities of all the varieties of
heroines, She isknown as mådanåkhya-bhåva-vatî. While
meeting with K®ß√a She experiences mådana, and
inseparation from Him She experiences mohana. Çrî
CaitanyaMahåprabhu showed something of these elevated
states of Hersto the world, and besides Him there has
never been anyone inthis world who could exhibit these
things. However, when Hewas exhibiting these states,
Råya Råmånanda and SvarüpaDåmodara, due to being His
intimate associates, could also relishsomething of them.
Besides them no one else could comprehendthese
sentiments, but later Mahåprabhu invested the potency
tounderstand them directly into the heart of Rüpa
Gosvåmî,saying, “He will manifest My bhåvain this world
through hiswritings.”As Rådhikå experiences unlimited
pastimes, the twenty vari-eties of ecstatic symptoms
beginning with kila-kiñcitaarise inHer simultaneously.

                          122
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

She Herself cannot comprehend all these

173

Chapter Sixteen




sentiments, and the appropriate sentiment is always
manifest inHer at the correct time for K®ß√a’s pleasure.
Because of this, Sheis eternally the beloved of K®ß√a in
His svayaμ-rüpa. He neverappears to Her as any kåya-
vyühaexpansion, or simply by sphürti(arising in Her
meditation), but is always with Her in His origi-nal
form – in both meeting and separation.Once, Rådhikå was
seated somewhere in Vraja meditating onK®ß√a more and
more until She suddenly became completelyoverwhelmed.
Then from behind someone placed their handsover Her
eyes. She called out, “Lalitå?” But the hands were
notremoved; only when She called out the name of the
person cov-ering Her eyes would the hands be removed.
“Viçåkhå? Citrå?Kundalatå?” She called out the names of
all Her sakhîs, but stillthe hands were not removed.
When She said, “Çyåmasundara!”then He removed His hands
and joyfully sat beside Her. SanåtanaGosvåmî comments on
this pastime that Rådhikå thought thatK®ß√a appeared by
sphürti– in Her meditation, or that becauseat that time
He was present in Mathurå or Dvårakå in His origi-nal
form, He must have come there by assuming a kåya-
vyühaexpansion. But he concludes that K®ß√a must have
appeared therein His svayaμ-rüpa, because otherwise
Rådhikå would not befully satisfied. This is the
wonderful conception of SanåtanaGosvåmî. If Mahåprabhu
is in Purî, but in Navadvîpa Mother Çacî iscrying while
making an offering to Him, would she be satisfiedif He
were to appear there in a mere kåya-vyühaexpansion?
Knowing that she would only be satisfied if He came in
Hisoriginal form, He does just that, and it is the same
with ÇrîmatîRådhikå. In His original form K®ß√a always
remains by the sideof Rådhikå, and is never able to be
separated from Her. SanåtanaGosvåmî says that because
the vraja-devîspossess the paramountmahåbhåva– yåvad-
åçraya-v®tti– how could K®ß√a ever leave

174

Bhakti-rasåyana




them? Even while residing in a foreign land He visits
them inV®ndåvana in His original form – and only them,
not others suchas the sakhås.råkhite tomåra jîvana, sevi
åmi nåråya√a,tå∫ra çaktye åsi niti-nititomå-sane krî∂å
kari’, niti yåi yadu-purî,tåhå tumi månaha mora
sphürtimora bhågya mo-vasaye, tomåra ye prema haye,sei
prema-parama prabalalukåñå åmå åne, sa∫ga karåya tomå-
sane,praka†eha ånibe satvaraÇrî Caitanya-caritåm®ta
(Madhya-lîlå 13.154–5)Sitting alone with Rådhå in Vraja,
K®ß√a says, “My dearestÇrîmatî Rådhikå, in the distant
land of Dvårakå I have marriedmany ladies, but in
reality I don’t love any of them as I love You.I

                          123
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

searched the entire universe for one kiçorîwhose beauty,
com-plexion and nature was like Yours. I found
Satyabhåmå, but I remain with her only because she
reminds Me of You; and sim-ilarly I have married sixteen
thousand queens because each ofthem reminds Me of the
gopîs. If somehow that remembrance ofYou were to be
lost, I would leave them all at once. You say that when
we are apart You feel as if You are dying, but I am
constantly meditating on how to save Your life, and for
this pur-pose I worship Nåråya√a. By His mercy and
mystical potency, I am able to come to V®ndåvana every
day to enjoy Your company.You consider My appearance to
be in Your meditation or in akåya-vyühaform but I come
to V®ndåvana in My original form.My great good fortune
is the immense love that You have for Me.Unknown to
everyone in Dvårakå and in V®ndåvana, I come hereto You,
and hopefully very soon I will also be visible to
everyoneelse here.”In the verse we are discussing are
the words amußya rüpam,

175

Chapter Sixteen




meaning “that very form”. The ladies of Mathurå are
saying, “Weare seeing K®ß√a, but why are we not feeling
the highest prema?What austerities did the gopîsperform
to be able to see with theeyes of mahåbhåvathe original
form of K®ß√a – adorned with apeacock feather in His
crown, and as the very essence of all love-liness?”
Unable to see that form of K®ß√a that the gopîssee
andunable to experience the mahåbhåvaof the gopîs, they
wanted toknow which austerities they could perform to
become similarlyfortunate. Not everyone will be able to
feel such elevated bhåva. Whenour gurudeva, Çrîla Bhakti
Prajñåna Keçava Gosvåmî Mahåråja,would dance, he would
move in an exceptionally sweet and lovelyway. With his
eyes turned upwards and holding his sannyåsa-da√∂ain his
hand, he would dance immersed in bhåva. I havenever seen
such dancing as his in all my life. Whenever he
wouldhear K®ß√a’s pastimes he would become emotional and
beginweeping, and if we perform bhajanasincerely with
resolute deter-mination, we may also one day experience
some of this bhåva. Wedesire these feelings as do the
ladies of Mathurå who lamented,“Håya! Håya!We are seeing
K®ß√a directly, yet we cannot experi-ence the bhåvaof
the gopîs. Our lives are useless!”Sanåtana Gosvåmî says
that only in Vraja can the sweet formof K®ß√a as the
essence of loveliness and the emporium of rasabeseen,
and only in Vraja can such a sweet bhåvabe
experienced.Outside Vraja, K®ß√a’s original form cannot
be seen directly, andthis bhåvacannot be directly
relished. In other places one maypossibly see K®ß√a by
meditation or in one of His expansions, butdirect
experience of Him is not possible.Next comes this verse:

176

Bhakti-rasåyana



                          124
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017



yå dohane ’vahanane mathanopalepa-pre∫khe∫khanårbha-
ruditokßa√a-mårjanådaugåyanti cainam anurakta-dhiyo
’çru-ka√†hyodhanyå vraja-striya urukrama-citta-
yånå˙Çrîmad-Bhågavatam (10.44.15);B®had-bhågavatåm®ta
(2.7.136)The gopîsare extremely fortunate, because their
hearts are alwaysso absorbed in Çrî K®ß√a that while
milking cows, churningyoghurt, applying candanaand other
decorations to their bodies,comforting crying babies,
washing their floors and performing allother household
duties, tears of love flow from their eyes as
theycontinuously sing about His purifying
fame.Generally, when a kaniß†ha-adhikårî goes to visit a
mahå-bhågavataVaiß√ava, he first thinks “He is a
kaniß†ha-adhikårîjustlike me.” At first, Sarvabhauma
Bha††åcårya ridiculed RåyaRåmånanda, thinking that he
spoke too highly about women –Sarvabhauma considered the
gopîsto be ordinary women. Heonly respected the
scholarship of the four Kumåras, the renunci-ation of
Çukadeva Gosvåmî and the impersonal conception
ofÇa∫karåcårya. Therefore if one isn’t of a higher type
himself, hewon’t be able to understand the bhåvaof
higher devotees. Andonly a great, perfected personality
who is rågåtmikå, a devoteewho is in the final stage of
rågånuga-sådhana, will understand thepremaof the gopîs.
Even devotees such as Bhîßma who were con-temporary with
them could not fully understand the exaltednature of
their prema. Only those who were near them
couldunderstand something of it. For instance, Uddhava
had to leaveDvårakå and go to Vraja to understand
something about howexalted the gopîswere; if he had
remained in Dvårakå, he wouldhave never understood. This
verse and the previous one were spoken by the ladies
ofMathurå, and because Mathurå is only five miles from
Vraja,sometimes the spiritual greed of the devotees of
Vraja would find

177

Chapter Sixteen




its way to Mathurå. Besides Uddhava, sometimes tradesmen
andothers would travel back and forth between Vraja and
Mathurå,and in this way the residents of Mathurå would
be able to under-stand something of the bhåvaof Vraja;
but those who lived faraway from Vraja understood
nothing of it. Even in separation from K®ß√a, the
gopîswere always meetingHim. While looking after their
children, milking the cows,churning yoghurt, applying
candanaand doing housework, theyalways received His
direct darçanathrough singing about Him,and therefore
kîrtanais the best devotional activity. Singing inunison
in a soft morning råga, they saw K®ß√a with the eyes
ofbhåva, even though not abandoning their duties.
Similarly, a sådhakawill observe all the rules and
regulations of vaidhî-bhakti,but internally his
bhåvashould be of rågånuga-bhakti. Externallyhe will
appear to be the same, but internally his bhåvawill be
dif-ferent. The greed of rågånugåwill take one to Vraja,
whereasvaidhî-bhaktiwill take one only to Vaiku√†ha.

                          125
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

Because the ladiesof Mathurå are in close proximity to
Vraja and therefore thebhåvaof Vraja, they are praying
that they will also experience thebhåvaof the gopîs.At
the time of the råsa-lîlå, K®ß√a and the gopîswere
singingtogether. In beautiful melodies saturated with
rasa, the gopîsdefeated K®ß√a by singing “K®ß√a sådhu,
K®ß√a sådhu” in a notehigher than K®ß√a could sing. As
the ladies of Mathurå contem-plated pastimes such as
this which the gopîsenjoyed with K®ß√a,they said,
“Whereas we can only see K®ß√a here in a fightingmood,
the gopîsperpetually see Him in His form as the
crownjewel of vidagdha. We have never received such good
fortune!”Vidagdhameans witty and ingenious, but when
applied to K®ß√ait means He who is rasika-catura–
supremely clever and skilfulin relishing rasa. These
ladies of Mathurå were not even as fortu-nate as the
Pulinda girl, who often heard the vibration of K®ß√a’s

Bhakti-rasåyana

178




flute. Even the deer of Vraja heard the melody of His
flute, butthe ladies of Mathurå could only imagine
it.All of our duties should be performed while singing
nåma-sa∫kîrtana. Suppose there is a pitcher of water. If
we simply addsome lemon juice and some sugar, it
immediately becomesnectar. Similarly, we must perform so
many worldly duties, butif, following in the bhåvaof our
spiritual master, we meditate onBhagavån while carrying
them out, they will all become nectar. Inthe conditioned
state, we are always considering what is favourableand
what is unfavourable to our bhakti. Because we are in
thebeginning stages, everything appears to be
unfavourable to us,and therefore our minds are
disturbed. But to the degree whichwe progress in
sådhana-bhajanameans to that degree the visionof what is
unfavourable will diminish. And when one reaches
thestage of bhåva, he will perceive everything that he
previously con-sidered to be unfavourable as
favourable.Actually, nothing in this world is
unfavourable to us; it is onlydue to our present
weaknesses and anarthasthat we see our envi-ronment as
unfavourable. Whatever obstacles we are currentlyfacing
are due to our own previous misdeeds, and are not
thefault of any other person. In this verse, the
rasikaladies of Mathurå say urukrama-citta-yånå˙: the
gopîs’minds flow spontaneously towards Urukrama-K®ß√a.
Urumeans a strong, continuous current, and because
theirminds spontaneously flow towards K®ß√a with great
speed andforce, they are fortunate, and thus K®ß√a comes
to them directlywhile they are singing. So if while
carrying out our householdduties our minds and hearts
are absorbed in K®ß√a’s nåma,rüpa,gu√aand lîlå, then
very soon we will receive His direct darçana.

179

Chapter Sixteen



                          126
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017




Bhakti-rasåyana verses dhanyeyam adya dhara√î t®√a-
vîrudhas tvat-påda-sp®ço druma-latå˙
karajåbhim®ß†å˙nadyo ’draya˙ khaga-m®gå˙
sadayåvalokairgopyo ’ntare√a bhujayor api yat-sp®hå
çrî˙Çrîmad-Bhågavatam(10.15.8); B®had-
bhågavatåm®ta(2.7.107)[Çrî K®ß√a said to Balaråma:]
Today this land, along with all itsgreen grass, has
become fortunate due to receiving the touch ofyour lotus
feet. And receiving the touch of the fingers of
yourlotus hands, the trees, creepers and bushes consider
that theyhave attained the greatest treasure. Receiving
your affectionateglances, the rivers, mountains, birds
and animals are all feelingfully gratified. But most
fortunate of all are the vraja-gopîs, whohave been
embraced to Your strong chest, a favour which
evenLakßmî-devî herself always desires.v®ndåvanaμ sakhi
bhuvo vitanoti kîrtiμyad devakî-suta-padåmbuja-labdha-
lakßmigovinda-ve√um anu matta-mayüra-n®tyamprekßyådri-
sånv-avaratånya-samasta-sattvamÇrîmad-
Bhågavatam(10.21.10); B®had-bhågavatåm®ta(2.7.108)[The
gopîssaid:] O sakhî, this V®ndåvana is expanding the
gloriesof the Earth planet because it is being adorned
with the lotusfootprints of Çrî K®ß√a. Hearing Him play
a soft and deep noteon the flute, the peacocks have
become maddened and havebegun dancing. Beholding this
spectacle, all of the birds and

181




animals who reside on the mountainside have abandoned
theirusual restive activities.hantåyam adrir abalå hari-
dåsa-varyoyad-råma-k®ß√a-cara√a-sparaça-pramoda˙månaμ
tanoti saha-go-ga√ayos tayor yatpånîya-süyavasa-kandara-
kandamülai˙Çrîmad-Bhågavatam(10.21.18); B®had-
bhågavatåm®ta(2.7.109)[The gopîssaid:] This Govardhana
Hill is the best of all thosewho are known as hari-dåsa
because he is feeling great jubilationfrom the touch of
the lotus feet of K®ß√a and Balaråma. Withgreat respect
Govardhana is worshipping them by providing alltheir
necessities such as caves, fruits, flowers and water for
theirpleasure, and for the pleasure of their cowherd
friends, cows andcalves.d®ß†våtape vraja-paçün saha
råma-gopai˙sañcårayantam anu ve√um udîrayantamprema-
prav®ddha udita˙ kusumåvalîbhi˙sakhyur vyadhåt sva-
vapußåmbuda åtapatramÇrîmad-Bhågavatam(10.21.16); B®had-
bhågavatåm®ta(2.7.110)[The gopîssaid:] Seeing K®ß√a and
Balaråma playing their flutesin the afternoon sun and
taking the cows and calves out for graz-ing, the clouds
burst with divine love, and like an umbrella shieldtheir
friend Çrî K®ß√a from the sun while showering tiny drops
ofrain that are like a shower of flowers.” (K®ß√a has
been referredto here as a friend of the clouds because
their natures are similar.Both are dark blue in
complexion, and as K®ß√a eradicates theheat of material
existence by bestowing the nectar of His mercy,the
clouds give relief from the heat of this world by
showeringrain. K®ß√a also plays soft and deep melodies

                          127
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                            5/3/2017

on His flute thatresemble the clouds’ thunder.)

182

Bhakti-rasåyana




nadyas tadå tad upadhårya mukunda-gîtamåvarta-lakßita-
manobhava-bhagna-vegå˙åli∫gana-sthagitam ürmi-bhujair
murårerg®h√anti påda-yugalaμ kamalopahårå˙Çrîmad-
Bhågavatam(10.21.15); B®had-bhågavatåm®ta(2.7.111)[The
gopîssaid:] O sakhîs, when the rivers of V®ndåvana
headedby the Yamunå hear the vibration of K®ß√a’s flute,
their currentscompletely stop, and their waters begin to
swirl as if they areovercome with desire. With their
arms in the form of waves theyreach out to touch and
offer lotus flowers to His lotus feet.vana-latås tarava
åtmani viß√uμvyañjayantya iva pußpa-phalådhyå˙pra√ata-
bhåra-vi†apå madhu-dhårå˙prema-h®ß†a-tanavo vav®ßu˙
smaÇrîmad-Bhågavatam(10.35.9); B®had-
bhågavatåm®ta(2.7.112)[The gopîssaid:] Look how the
creepers and the branches of thetrees of V®ndåvana are
drooping down due to their weight! Theymust have also
taken Çrî K®ß√a within their hearts, because tearsof
love in the form of streams of honey are dripping from
them,and the emergence of their fruits and flowers bear
witness to theirecstatic rapture.ete ’linas tava yaço
’khila-loka-tîrthaμgåyanta ådi-purußånupathaμ
bhajantepråyo amî muni-ga√å bhavadîya-mukhyågü∂haμ vane
’pi na jahaty anaghåtma-daivamÇrîmad-
Bhågavatam(10.15.6); B®had-bhågavatåm®ta(2.7.113)[Çrî
K®ß√a said to Balaråma:] O Ådi-purußa, although you
arekeeping your opulences hidden and are performing
pastimes as ayoung boy here in V®ndåvana, still the
munis, who are among the

183

Bhakti-rasåyana verses




best of your devotees, have recognised you. Not wanting
to beseparated from you for even one moment, they have
assumed theforms of bees and are worshipping you by
constantly singing yourglories as the purifier of this
world.sarasi sårasa-haμsa-viha∫gåçcåru-gîta-h®ta-cetasa
etyaharim upåsata te yata-cittåhanta-mîlita-d®ço dh®ta-
maunå˙Çrîmad-Bhågavatam(10.35.11); B®had-
bhågavatåm®ta(2.7.114)[The gopîssaid:] It is very
astonishing that K®ß√a steals away thehearts of the
swans, cranes and other water-birds in such a waythat
they approach Him, sit down and worship Him with
theireyes closed, and fully concentrate their minds on
Him.pråyo batåmba vihagå munayo vane ’smink®ß√ekßitaμ
tad-uditaμ kala-ve√u-gîtamåruhya ye druma-bhujån rucira-
pravålånç®√vanti mîlita-d®ço vigatånya-våca˙Çrîmad-
Bhågavatam(10.21.14); B®had-bhågavatåm®ta(2.7.115)[The
gopîssaid:] O friend, the birds of V®ndåvana are
actuallysages. They have taken positions on the branches
of trees that havenew and fresh leaves from where they

                          128
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

can easily have darçanaofÇrî K®ß√a. Sitting there and
hearing the sweet vibration of Hisflute, they close
their eyes and become immersed in divine bliss.dhanyå˙
sma mü∂ha-gatayo ’pi hari√ya etåyå nanda-nandanam
upåtta-vicitra-veçamåkar√ya ve√u-ra√itaμ saha-k®ß√a-
sårå˙püjåμ dadhur viracitåμ pra√ayåvalokai˙Çrîmad-
Bhågavatam(10.21.11); B®had-bhågavatåm®ta(2.7.116)

184

Bhakti-rasåyana




[The gopîssaid:] These ignorant deer are also fortunate,
becauseaccompanied by their husbands they are standing
motionlesslyand listening to the vibration of K®ß√a’s
flute. It is as if they areoffering püjå to the
gorgeously attired son of Nanda with theirloving
glances.gåvaç ca k®ß√a-mukha-nirgata-ve√u-gîta-pîyüßam
uttabhita-kar√a-pu†ai˙ pibantya˙çåvå˙ snuta-stana-paya˙-
kavalå˙ sma tasthurgovindam åtmani d®çåçru-kalå˙
sp®çantya˙Çrîmad-Bhågavatam(10.21.13); B®had-
bhågavatåm®ta(2.7.117)[The gopîssaid:] In order to drink
the nectarean vibration of theflute-song emanating from
the lotus mouth of Çrî K®ß√a, thecows have raised their
ears. The grass which they were chewingjust remains in
their mouths, and milk begins to drip from theirudders.
The calves at once stop drinking their mothers’ milk,
andas they embrace K®ß√a within their hearts, tears of
love begin toglide down their faces.v®ndaço vraja-v®ßå
m®ga-gåvove√u-vådya-h®ta-cetasa åråtdanta-daß†a-kavalå
dh®ta-kar√ånidritå likhita-citram ivåsanÇrîmad-
Bhågavatam(10.35.5); B®had-bhågavatåm®ta(2.7.118)[The
gopîssaid:] Hearing the vibration of Çrî K®ß√a’s flute,
thebulls, cows and deer of V®ndåvana approach Him.
Unable toswallow the grass that they had taken into
their mouths, theystand silently with their ears raised
and appear like animals in apainting.

185

Bhakti-rasåyana verses




pür√å˙ pulindya urugåya-padåbja-råga-çrî-ku∫kumena
dayitå-stana-ma√∂itenatad-darçana-smara-rujas t®√a-
rüßitenalimpantya ånana-kuceßu jahus tad-ådhimÇrîmad-
Bhågavatam(10.21.17); B®had-bhågavatåm®ta(2.7.119)[The
gopîssaid:] O sakhî, we consider the Pulinda girls who
col-lect grass and wood to be greatly fortunate, because
by spreadingthe ku∫kumathat lies upon the grass on their
faces and bodies,the desires which arise in their hearts
from seeing that veryku∫kumaare pacified. In reality,
that ku∫kumais from thebreasts of Çrîmatî Rådhikå, and
at the time of enjoying pastimeswith Çrî K®ß√a, it
becomes smeared on His lotus feet. Then asThey wander in
the forest, it falls from His feet onto the grass.yadi
düraμ gata˙ k®ß√ovana-çobhekßa√åya tamahaμ pürvam ahaμ
pürvamiti saμsp®çya remireÇrîmad-Bhågavatam(10.12.6);
B®had-bhågavatåm®ta(2.7.120)[Çrî Çukadeva Gosvåmî said:]

                          129
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

When Çrî K®ß√a would sometimeswander far away to see the
splendour of the forest, the cowherdboys would revel in
running after Him, saying, “I will be the firstto touch
Him! I will be the first to touch Him!”itthaμ satåμ
brahma-sukhånubhütyådåsyaμ gatånåμ para-
daivatenamåyåçritånåμ nara-dårake√asårdhaμ vijahru˙
k®ta-pu√ya-puñjå˙Çrîmad-Bhågavatam(10.12.11); B®had-
bhågavatåm®ta(2.7.121)

186

Bhakti-rasåyana




[Çrî Çukadeva Gosvåmî said:] In this way the greatly
fortunatecowherd boys enjoy in various ways with Çrî
K®ß√a, who is seenas the Brahman effulgence by the
jñånîs, as the supremely wor-shipful deity by His
servants and as an ordinary boy by people ingeneral.
(Ormåyåçritacan also mean that those who had receivedHis
utmost mercy, due to being devoid of the mood of
opulence,saw Him merely as the son of Nanda.)yat-påda-
paμçur bahu-janma-k®cchratodh®tåtmabhir yogibhir apy
alåbhya˙sa eva yåd-d®g vißaya˙ svayaμ sthita˙kiμ
var√yate diß†am aho vrajaukasåmÇrîmad-
Bhågavatam(10.12.12); B®had-bhågavatåm®ta(2.7.122)[Çrî
Çukadeva Gosvåmî said:] Great yogîsperform severe
austeri-ties for many lifetimes, but even when with
great difficulty theyhave completely controlled their
minds, they still cannot attaineven one particle of the
dust of the lotus feet of Çrî K®ß√a. Howthen can I
possibly describe the good fortune of the Vrajavåsîs,who
daily received His direct darçana?kvacit pallava-
talpeßuniyuddha-çrama-karçita˙v®kßa-mülåçraya˙
çetegopotsa∫gopabarha√a˙Çrîmad-Bhågavatam(10.15.16);
B®had-bhågavatåm®ta(2.7.123)[Çrî Çukadeva Gosvåmî said:]
When Çrî K®ß√a would becomefatigued from wrestling with
the cowherd boys, He would acceptthe lap of one of His
friends as a pillow and lie down beneath a tree on a
richly decorated bed of flowers and leaves.

187

Bhakti-rasåyana verses




påda-saμvåhanaμ cakru˙kecit tasya mahåtmana˙apare hata-
påpmånovyajanai˙ samavîjayanÇrîmad-Bhågavatam(10.15.17);
B®had-bhågavatåm®ta(2.7.124)[Çrî Çukadeva Gosvåmî said:]
At that time, one greatly fortunatesakhåwould massage
His feet, and another would fan His bodywith a fan made
of leaves.anye tad-anurüpå√imanojñåni mahåtmana˙gåyanti
sma mahå-råjasneha-klinna-dhiya˙ çanai˙Çrîmad-
Bhågavatam(10.15.18); B®had-bhågavatåm®ta(2.7.125)[Çrî
Çukadeva Gosvåmî said:] My dear Mahåråja, other
sakhåswould sing attractive songs appropriate for
resting-time, and allthe cowherd boys’ hearts would melt
in affection for K®ß√a.nanda˙ kim akarod bråhmançreya
evaμ mahodayamyaçodå vå mahå-bhågåpapau yasyå˙ stanaμ
hari˙Çrîmad-Bhågavatam(10.8.46); B®had-

                          130
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

bhågavatåm®ta(2.7.126)[Çrî Parîkßit Mahåråja asked:] My
dear bråhma√a, which supremelyauspicious sådhanadid
Nanda perform, and which austerities didthe supremely
fortunate Yaçodå undergo to have her breast-milkdrunk by
Çrî Hari?

188

Bhakti-rasåyana




tato bhaktir bhagavatiputrî-bhüte janårdanedampatyor
nitaråm åsîdgopa-gopîßu bhårataÇrîmad-
Bhågavatam(10.8.51); B®had-bhågavatåm®ta(2.7.127)[Çrî
Çukadeva Gosvåmî replied:] O Bharata, for fulfilling
thepromise of His dear devotee Brahmå, Çrî K®ß√a, the
SupremeLord Himself and the destroyer of evil, appeared
as the son ofNanda and Yaçodå. In comparison to all of
the other gopasandgopîs, this couple possessed the most
love for Him.nanda˙ sva-putram ådåyaproßyågatam udåra-
dhî˙mürdhny avaghråya paramaμmudaμ lebhe
kurüdvahaÇrîmad-Bhågavatam(10.6.43); B®had-
bhågavatåm®ta(2.7.128)[Çrî Çukadeva Gosvåmî said:] When
magnanimous Nandareturned from Mathurå, he took his own
son Çrî K®ß√a on his lapand experienced immense pleasure
by repeatedly smelling Hishead.sa måtu˙ svinna-
gåtråyavisrasta-kavara-sraja˙d®ß†vå pariçramaμ
k®ß√a˙k®payåsît sva-bandhaneÇrîmad-Bhågavatam(10.9.18);
B®had-bhågavatåm®ta(2.7.129)[Çrî Çukadeva Gosvåmî said:]
When K®ß√a saw Yaçodå labouringso desperately that her
whole body was dripping with perspirationand the flower
garland that was entwined in her hair braid wasfalling
down, He mercifully allowed Himself to be bound by her.

189

Bhakti-rasåyana verses




nemaμ viriñco na bhavona çrîr apy a∫ga-saμçrayåprasådaμ
lebhire gopîyat tat pråpa vimuktidåtÇrîmad-
Bhågavatam(10.9.20); B®had-bhågavatåm®ta(2.7.130)[Çrî
Çukadeva Gosvåmî said:] Neither Brahmå, Çiva, or
evenLakßmî-devî – who eternally resides at K®ß√a’s chest
in the formof a golden line – have ever received as much
mercy as Yaçodå didfrom He who is the bestower of
liberation.payaμsi yåsåm apibatputra-sneha-snutåny
alambhagavån devakî-putra˙kaivalyådy-akhilårtha-
da˙Çrîmad-Bhågavatam(10.6.39); B®had-
bhågavatåm®ta(2.7.131)[Çrî Çukadeva Gosvåmî said:]
Bhagavån Çrî K®ß√a, the bestowerof all the objectives of
human pursuit including all varieties ofliberation,
drank with full satisfaction the milk of all the moth-
erly gopîsand cows who were dripping with milk due to
theirmotherly affection for Him.tåsåm avirataμ
k®ß√ekurvatînåμ sutekßa√amna puna˙ kalpate råjansaμsåro
’jñåna-sambhava˙Çrîmad-Bhågavatam(10.6.40); B®had-
bhågavatåm®ta(2.7.132)[Çrî Çukadeva Gosvåmî said:] O
King, those gopîsand cows werealways feeling maternal
love for K®ß√a, and therefore after leavingtheir bodies

                          131
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

they could have never re-entered the cycle of birth
anddeath, the calamity which is imposed on those who are
ignorant.

190

Bhakti-rasåyana




gopînåμ paramånandaåsîd govinda-darçanekßa√aμ yuga-çatam
ivayåsåμ yena vinåbhavatÇrîmad-Bhågavatam(10.19.16);
B®had-bhågavatåm®ta(2.7.133)[Çrî Çukadeva Gosvåmî said:]
The vraja-gopîswould experiencesupreme pleasure upon
receiving the darçanaof Çrî Govinda, butthey would
consider one moment of His absence to be like onehundred
yugas.tan-manaskås tad-ålåpåstad-viceß†ås tad-
åtmikå˙tad-gu√ån eva gåyantyonåtmågårå√i sasmaru˙Çrîmad-
Bhågavatam(10.30.43); B®had-bhågavatåm®ta(2.7.134)[Çrî
Çukadeva Gosvåmî said:] Those vraja-gopîs, who had
fullygiven their hearts to Çrî K®ß√a, would imitate His
manner ofspeaking and His activities. Since they had
offered their verysouls to Him and always sang His
glories, they completely forgotthemselves and their
family interests.gopyas tapa˙ kim acaran yad amußya
rüpaμlåva√ya-såram asamordhvam ananya-siddhamd®gbhi˙
pibanty anusavåbhinavaμ duråpamekånta-dhåma yaçasa˙
çriya aiçvarasyaÇrîmad-Bhågavatam(10.44.14); B®had-
bhågavatåm®ta(2.7.135)[The ladies of Mathurå said:]
Which austerities did the vraja-gopîsperform by which
they could always drink through theireyes the nectar of
Çrî K®ß√a’s form – which is the very essence
ofloveliness, which is unequalled or unsurpassed, which
is perfect

191

Bhakti-rasåyana verses




in itself and always appears new and fresh, which is
extremely rareto behold and which is always the
exclusive shelter of all fame,splendour and opulence?yå
dohane ’vahanane mathanopalepa-pre∫khe∫khanårbha-
ruditokßa√a-mårjanådaugåyanti cainam anurakta-dhiyo
’çru-ka√†hyodhanyå vraja-striya urukrama-citta-
yånå˙Çrîmad-Bhågavatam(10.44.15); B®had-
bhågavatåm®ta(2.7.136)[The ladies of Mathurå said:] The
gopîsare extremely fortunate,because their hearts are
always so absorbed in Çrî K®ß√a that whilemilking cows,
churning yoghurt, applying candanaand otherdecorations
to their bodies, comforting crying babies, washingtheir
floors and performing all other household duties, tears
oflove flow from their eyes as they continuously sing
about Hispurifying fame.

192

Bhakti-rasåyana



                          132
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017



GlossaryAåcårya– spiritual preceptor; one who teaches by
example.adhirü∂ha – the highest state of mahåbhåva,
found only in thegopîsof Vraja. The mood in which all
the anubhåvasthat aremanifested in resolute
mahåbhåvaattain special characteristicsthat are even
more astonishing than those anubhåvasin theirnormal
forms.anarthas – unwanted desires in the heart, which
impede one’sadvancement in devotional life.añjana – an
ointment used to darken the edges of the eyelids.arcana
– deity worship; one of the nine primary processes
ofdevotional service.anuråga –an intensified stage of
prema; a stage in the develop-ment from premaup to
mahåbhåva. In Ujjvala-nîlama√i(14.146)anurågahas been
defined as follows: “Although one regularlymeets with
the beloved and is well acquainted with the beloved,the
ever-fresh sentiment of intense attachment causes the
belovedto be newly experienced at every moment as if one
has neverbefore had any experience of that person. The
attachment thatinspires such a feeling is known as
anuråga.”åçrama – the residence of someone practising
spiritual life.åtmå – the soul.Bbhajana – spiritual
practices, especially hearing, chanting andmeditating
upon the holy names, form, qualities and pastimes ofÇrî
K®ß√a.

193




bhakti – the word bhakti comes from the root bhaj,which
meansto serve. Therefore the primary meaning of the word
bhakti is torender service. The performance of
activities meant exclusivelyfor the pleasure of Çrî
K®ß√a, which are done in a favourable spiritsaturated
with love, which are devoid of all other desires
andwhich are not covered by the pursuits of fruitive
activity (karma)or the cultivation of knowledge aimed at
merging one’s existenceinto that of the Lord (jñåna), is
called bhakti.bhåva – (1) spiritual emotions, love or
sentiments. (2) the initialstage of perfection in
devotion (bhåva-bhakti).Brahman – the impersonal, all-
pervading feature of the Lord,which is devoid of
attributes and qualities. bråhma√a – the intellectual
class amongst the four castes withinthe Vedic social
system.brahmånanda – the bliss experienced by merging
into the Lord’simpersonal aspect, Brahman.brahmå√∂a – a
single, egg-shaped material universe.Ccakra – the Lord’s
disc, used as a weapon to subdue demons.cåmara – a fan
made of the hair of a yak’s tail, employed especiallyas
part of the paraphernalia offered to the deity.candana–
sandalwood paste.Ddarçana– seeing, meeting, visiting
with, beholding.dåsya-bhåva–one of the five primary
relationships with the Lordthat is established in the
stage of bhåvaor prema; love for orattraction to the
Lord that is expressed in the mood of a servant.dhåma– a
holy place of pilgrimage; the abode of Çrî
Bhagavån,where He appears and enacts His transcendental
pastimes.

194


                          133
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

Bhakti-rasåyana




Gghee– clarified butter.gopas – the cowherd boys who
serve K®ß√a in the mood of inti-mate friends. This may
also refer to the elderly gopaswho serveK®ß√a in the
mood of parental affection.gopîs – the young cowherd
maidens of Vraja, headed by ÇrîmatîRådhikå, who serve
Çrî K®ß√a in the mood of amorous love. Thismay also
refer to the elderly gopîs,headed by Mother Yaçodå,who
serve K®ß√a in the mood of parental affection.gopî-
bhåva– the mood of devotion for Çrî K®ß√a possessed
bythe cowherd women of Vraja.Hhari-kathå – narrations of
the Lord’s pastimes and personalnature.harinåma – the
holy name of the Lord, especially referring to themahå-
mantra.hlådinî – this refers to the Lord’s internal
potency (svarüpa-çakti)that is predominated by hlådinî.
Hlådinî is the potency thatrelates to the ånanda,or
bliss, aspect of the Supreme Lord.Although the Supreme
Lord is the embodiment of all pleasure,hlådinî is that
potency by which He relishes transcendental blissand
causes others to taste bliss.Jjîva – the eternal,
individual living entity, who in the conditionedstate of
material existence assumes a material body in any of
theinnumerable species of life.jñånî – one who pursues
the path of jñåna, knowledge directedtowards impersonal
liberation.

195

Glossary




Kkarmî – one who engages in pious activities, thinking
they will leadto material gain in this world or in the
heavenly planets after death.kila-kiñcita – bodily
symptoms of ecstasy. They are explained inÇrîla Rüpa
Gosvåmî’s Ujjvala-nîlama√i(Anubhå√a-prakara√a39):“Pride,
ambition, weeping, smiling, envy, fear and anger are
theseven ecstatic loving symptoms manifested by a
jubilant shrink-ing away, and these symptoms are called
kila-kiñcata-bhåvas.”kiçorî – an adolescent girl.k®ß√a-
kathå – narrations describing Çrî K®ß√a and His
activities.kßatriya– the second of the four
var√as(castes) in the var√åçramasystem; an administrator
or warrior.kuñja – a grove or bower; a natural shady
retreat, the sides androof of which are formed mainly by
trees and climbing plants.ku∫kuma – a reddish powder or
liquid used by married womento apply to the part in
their hair.Lla∂∂u– an Indian sweet made from chickpea
flour.Mmådana – highly advanced devotional ecstasy that
is experiencedwhen meeting with the object of one’s
worship.mådhurya-rasa– one of the five primary
relationships with K®ß√aestablished in the stage of
bhåvaand prema; love or attachmenttowards K®ß√a that is
expressed in the mood of a lover. Thismood is eternally
present in the gopîsof Vraja.mahåbhåva– the highest
stage of divine love.måna – an intensified stage of
prema; a stage in the developmentfrom prema up to
mahåbhåva. It is described in Ujjvala-nîlama√i(14.96):

                          134
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

“When sneha reaches exultation, thus causing one
toexperience the sweetness of the beloved in ever-new
varieties, yet

196

Bhakti-rasåyana




externally takes on a crooked feature, it is known as
måna.”mantra– a spiritual sound vibration that delivers
the mind fromits material conditioning and illusion when
repeated over andover; a Vedic hymn, prayer or
chant.måyå– the Lord’s illusory potency, which
influences the livingentities to accept the false egoism
of being independent enjoyersof this material
world.modana – highly advanced devotional ecstasy that
is experiencedwhen separated from the object of one’s
worship.Nnirgu√a– literally means “devoid of personal
attributes”. Refersto the impersonal Brahman.Ppra√åma –
an obeisance.pra√aya– an intensified stage of prema; a
stage in the developmentfrom prema up to mahåbhåva. It
is described in Ujjvala-nîlama√i(14.108): “When måna
assumes a feature of unrestrained intimacyknown as
viçrambha, learned authorities refer to it as
pra√aya.”The word viçrambha used in this verse means
“complete confidencedevoid of any restraint or
formality”. This confidence causes oneto consider one’s
life, mind, intelligence, body and possessions tobe one
in all respects with the life, mind, intelligence and
bodyof the beloved.prasåda – literally meaning mercy,
especially refers to the rem-nants of food offered to
the deity.prema – divine love.püjå– offering of
worship.pußpåñjali– an offering of flowers from cupped
hands to theLord or his exalted devotee.

197

Glossary




Rråga– (1) a deep attachment that is permeated by
spontaneousand intense absorption in the object of one’s
affection. The pri-mary characteristic of rågais a deep
and overpowering thirst forthe object of one’s
affection. (2) an intensified stage of prema; a stage in
the development from premaup to mahåbhåva. It
isdescribed as follows in Ujjvala-nîlama√i(14.126):
“Whenpra√ayareaches exultation, thus causing even
extreme misery tobe experienced within the heart as
happiness, it is known asråga.” In his commentary on
this verse Jîva Gosvåmî explainsthat if by accepting
some misery there is a chance of meeting withK®ß√a, then
that misery becomes a source of great happiness.
Andwhere happiness affords one no opportunity to meet
with K®ß√a,that happiness becomes the source of great
distress. When such a state is experienced, it is known
as råga. (3) a classical Indianmelody.rågånuga-bhakti–
an elevated stage of devotion that is motivatedby
spontaneous attraction or love.rågåtmikå– one in whose

                          135
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

heart there naturally and eternallyexists a deep
spontaneous desire to love and serve Çrî K®ß√a.
Thisspecifically refers to the eternal residents of
Vraja.råkßasî – a demoness.rasa– the spiritual
transformation of the heart that takes placewhen the
perfected state of love for K®ß√a, known as rati, is
con-verted into “liquid” emotions by combination with
various typesof transcendental ecstasy.råsa-lîlå– Çrî
K®ß√a’s dance with the vraja-gopîs, which is a
pureexchange of spiritual love between K®ß√a and the
gopîs, His mostconfidential servitors.rasika– one who
relishes the mellows of devotion (rasa) withinhis heart.

198

Bhakti-rasåyana




Ssac-cid-ånanda– that which is eternal, composed of
spiritualconsciousness and full of transcendental
bliss.sådhaka– one who follows a spiritual discipline
with the objec-tive of achieving pure devotion for Çrî
K®ß√a.sådhana – the stage of devotional life in which a
spiritual discipline is performed for the purpose of
bringing about themanifestation of ecstatic, pure love
for Çrî K®ß√a (bhåva).sådhu – a saintly person.sådhya –
the goal of one’s spiritual practice.sakhå– a male
friend, companion or attendant.sakhî– a female friend,
companion or attendant.sakhya-bhåva– one of the five
primary relationships with K®ß√athat are established in
the heart at the stage of bhåvaor prema;love or
attachment for the Lord that is expressed in the mood
ofa friend.çålagråma-çilå – self-manifesting deities of
Nåråya√a in the formof small, round black stones that
are found in the Gandakî Riverin the
Himalayas.sampradåya– a school of religious
thought.saμvit– this refers to the internal potency
(svarüpa-çakti) that ispredominated by saμvit. It is the
potency that relates to cit, thecognisant aspect of the
Supreme Lord. Although the SupremeLord is the embodiment
of knowledge, saμvitis the potency bywhich He knows
Himself and causes others to know Him.sannyåsa-da√∂a– a
stick carried by sannyåsîs, renunciants in thefourth
stage of life according to the Vedic social
system.sarva-çaktimån– the Supreme Lord, Çrî K®ß√a, who
possesses allpotencies.çloka– a Sanskrit verse.sneha– an
intensified stage of prema; a stage in the development

199

Glossary




from prema up to mahåbhåva. It is described in Ujjvala-
nîlama√i(14.79): “When prema ascends to its ultimate
limit, intensifiesone’s perception of the object of
love, and melts the heart, it isknown as sneha.”sürya-
püjå– worship of Süryadeva, the sun-god.svarüpa-siddhi–
the advanced stage of devotional life in which
adevotee’s svarüpa, internal spiritual form and

                          136
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

identity, becomesmanifest.Ttapasvî– one who practises
austerities as part of his spiritual path.tulasî– a
sacred plant whose leaves and blossoms are used
byVaiß√avas in the worship of Çrî K®ß√a; the wood is
also used forchanting beads and neck beads.Vvar√åçrama-
dharma– the Vedic social system, which organisessociety
into four occupational divisions (var√as) and four
stagesof life (åçramas).vastu-siddhi – the stage in
which the vastu, or the substantiveentity known as the
jîva, is fully liberated from matter. Aftergiving up the
material body, the living entity who has alreadyattained
svarüpa-siddhienters into Çrî K®ß√a’s manifest
pastimes,where or he or she receives the association of
K®ß√a and His eternal associates for the first time.
There one receives furthertraining from His eternal
associates. When one becomes estab-lished in the mood of
their premaand one’s eternal service toK®ß√a, one gives
up all connection with this world and enters
Hisspiritual abode. At this point the jîvabecomes
situated in hispure identity as a vastu, and this is
known as vastu-siddhi.våtsalya-bhåva– one of the five
primary relationships with K®ß√athat are established in
the stages of bhåvaor prema; love or attach-

200

Bhakti-rasåyana




mentfor the Lord expressed in the mood of a
parent.vipralambha-bhåva– the loving mood that is felt
when separatedfrom one’s beloved.viçuddha-sattva– the
state of unalloyed goodness; the quality ofexistence
that is beyond the influence of material nature;
ÇrîdharaSvåmî has defined viçuddha-sattvain his
commentary on a versefrom the Viß√u Pürå√a(1.2.69): “tad
evaμ tasyås try-åtmakatvesiddhe yena svaprakåçatå-
lakßa√ena tad-v®tti-viçeße√a svarüpaμ våsvarüpa-çakti-
viçiß†aμ våvirbhavati, tad-viçuddha-sattvaμ tac-cånya-
nirapekßas tat-prakåça iti jñåpaμ jñåna-v®ttikatvåt
saμvideva. asya måyayå sparçåbhåvåt viçuddhatvam– the
Lord’s cit-çaktiis known as svaprakåça. The term
svaprakåçameans that it revealsitself and illuminates
others also. Just as when the sun rises, itmakes itself
known and illuminates other objects, so when cit-
çaktiarises in the heart, one can know what is cit-
çaktiand onecan know oneself in one’s true spiritual
identity. Because the cit-çaktiis svaprakåça, its
v®ttiis also svaprakåça. The word v®ttiliterally means
function, which refers to the active agencythrough which
the cit-çaktioperates. The cit-çaktiis composed
ofhlådinî, sandhinîand saμvit. The particular
svaprakåça-v®ttiofthis threefold cit-çaktithat reveals
Bhagavån, His form and thetransformations of His cit-
çakti, such as His associates anddhåma, is known as
viçuddha-sattva. In other words viçuddha-sattvais the
self-revealing agency of the cit-çaktithrough whichthe
Lord and His paraphernalia are revealed to the
devotees.Because it has no contact whatsoever with the
external energy, itis known as viçuddha-sattva.”Yyavana
– a barbarian.yogî– one who practices the yoga system
with the goal of realisa-tion of the Supersoul or of

                          137
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                         5/3/2017

merging into the Lord’s personal body.

201

Glossary




yuga– one of the four ages described in the Vedas:
Satya-yuga,Tretå-yuga, Dvåpara-yuga and Kali-yuga. The
duration of eachyugais said to be, respectively:
1,728,000; 1,296,000; 864,000;and 432,000 years. The
descending numbers represent a corre-sponding physical
and moral deterioration of mankind in eachage.

202

Bhakti-rasåyana




Verse IndexAåhuç ca te nalina-nåbha padåravindaμ . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . .10anye tad-anurüpå√i . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .104, 188api bata madhu-
puryåm årya-putro ’dhunåste . . . . . . . . .132årådhito
yadi haris tapaså tata˙ kiμ . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. .167a†ati yad bhavån ahni kånanaμ . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . .158Ddhanyå˙ sma mü∂ha-gatayo ’pi
hari√ya etå . . . . . . . .67, 184dhanyeyam adya dhara√î
t®√a-vîrudhas tvat- . . . . . . . .2, 181d®ß†våtape
vraja-paçün saha råma-gopai˙ . . . . . . . . . .39,
182Eete ’linas tava yaço ’khila-loka-tîrthaμ . . . . . .
. . . . . .56, 183evaμ vraja-striyo råjan . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .52Ggåvaç ca
k®ß√a-mukha-nirgata-ve√u-gîta- . . . . . . . . . .69,
185gopînåμ paramånanda . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . .151, 191gopyas tapa˙ kim acaran yad amußya
rüpaμ . . . . . .164, 191Hhantåyam adrir abalå hari-
dåsa-varyo . . . . . . . . . . . .25, 182Iitthaμ satåμ
brahma-sukhånubhütyå . . . . . . . . . . . .93, 186

203




Jjñåne prayåsam udapåsya namanta eva . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . .55Kkåtyåyani mahå-måye . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .97kvacit pallava-talpeßu
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .101,
187Mmama vartmånuvartante . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . .38mora bhågya mo-vasaye . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .175m®gayur iva
kapîndraμ vivyadhe lubdha-dharmå . . . . . .162Nnadyas
tadå tad upadhårya mukunda- . . . . . . . . . . . .41,
183nåhaμ vande tava cara√ayor dvandvam . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . .1nanda˙ kim akarod bråhman . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . .111, 188nanda˙ sva-putram ådåya . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . .125, 189nayanaμ galad-açru-
dhårayå . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.74nemaμ viriñco na bhavo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . .147, 190Ppåda-saμvåhanaμ cakru˙ . . . . . . .

                          138
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                          5/3/2017

. . . . . . . . . . . . .101, 188paçu-påkhî jhure . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.50payaμsi yåsåm apibat . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . .190pråcînånåμ bhajanam atulaμ
dußkaraμ . . . . . . . . . . . . . .29pra√ata-dehinåμ
påpa-karßa√aμ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.161pråyo batåmba vihagå munayo vane ’smin . . . . . . .
. .65, 184pür√å˙ pulindya urugåya-padåbja-råga- . . . .
. . . . . .77, 186Rråkhite tomåra jîvana . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .175

204

Bhakti-rasåyana




Ssa måtu˙ svinna-gåtråya . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . .137, 189sai! kevå sunåile çyåma nåma? . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .153såkßåd-dharitvena
samasta-çåstrair . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.26sarasi sårasa-haμsa-viha∫gåç . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . .62, 184çrî-guru-cara√a-padma . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .26Ttan-manaskås
tad-ålåpås . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .159,
191tåsåm avirataμ k®ß√e . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . .190tato bhaktir bhagavati . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .118, 189Vvana-latås
tarava åtmani viß√uμ . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .44,
183vande nanda-vraja-strî√åμ . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . .121vibhåvarî-çeßa . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .156vikrî∂itaμ
vraja-vadhübhir idaμ ca viß√o˙ . . . . . . . . . . .
.83v®ndaço vraja-v®ßå m®ga-gåvo . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . .72, 185v®ndåvanaμ sakhi bhuvo vitanoti kîrtiμ
. . . . . . . . . .13, 181Yyå dohane ’vahanane
mathanopalepa- . . . . . . . . . . .177, 192yadi düraμ
gata˙ k®ß√o . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.89, 186yan-martya-lîlaupayikaμ sva-yoga- . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . .168yat te sujåta-cara√åmburuhaμ
staneßu . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .9yat-påda-
paμçur bahu-janma-k®cchrato . . . . . . . . . . .99,
187yugåyitaμ nimeße√a . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
. . . . . . . . . . .152

205

Verse Index




Worldwide Centers & ContactsPlease contact us at the
address stamped or written on the first page of this
book, or at the listings below:INDIA•    Mathura - Sri
Kesavaji Gaudiya Matha      Jawahar Hata, U.P. 281001
(Opp. Dist. Hospital)      Tel: 0565 250-2334, e-mail:
mathuramath@gmail.com•    New Delhi - Sri Ramana-vihari
Gaudiya Matha      Block B-3, Janakpuri, New Delhi 110058
(Near musical fountain park) Tel: 011 25533568,
9810192540•    New Delhi - Karol Bagh Center - Rohini-
nandana       9A/39 Channa Market, WEA, Karol Bagh
Tel.: 9810398406, 9810636370, Email:

                          139
Bhakti-rasayan_4ed.TXT                            5/3/2017

purebhakti.kb@gmail.com•    Vrindavan - Sri Rupa-Sanatana
Gaudiya Matha      Dan Gali, U.P. Tel: 0565 244-3270•
Vrindavan - Gopinath Bhavan      Ranapat Ghat, Seva
Kunja, Vrindavan 281121, U.P.      Tel: 0565 244-3359, e-
mail: vasantidasi@gmail.com•    Jagannath Puri - Jayasri
Damodar Gaudiya Math      Chakratirtha. Tel:
06752-229695•    Bangalore - Sri Madana Mohan Gaudiya
Matha       245/1 29th Cross, Kaggadasa pura,Balaji
layout, Bangalore-93      Tel: 08904427754 e-mail:
giridharidas@gmail.com USA•    Gaudiya Vedanta
Publications Offices      Tel: (800) 681-3040 ext. 108,
e-mail: orders@bhaktiprojects.org•     Houston - Preaching
Center     Tel: (1) 713-984 8334, e-mail:
byshouston@gmail.com•    Los Angeles – Sri Sri Radha
Govinda Temple      305 Rose Avenue, Venice, California
90291     Tel: (1) 310-310 2817UNITED KINGDOM & IRELAND•
Birmingham - International Distributor       Tel: (44)
153648-1769, e-mail: jivapavana@googlemail.com•      London
- Ganga-mata Gaudiya Matha      Email:
gangamatajis@yahoo.co.uk•    Galway - Family Center,
Tel: 353 85-1548200, e-mail:
loveisgod108@hotmail.comGUYANA•    East Cost Demerara-
Sri Sri Radha Govinda Gaudiya Matha       156 Area A
Bladen Hall School Road      Tel: 0592 270-4102, 0592
233-2898       e-mail: radhagovindagy@yahoo.com




                           140
