Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                5/5/2017

Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu



Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

GVP (2011)



Tags: Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārājattt



* * *




* * *




Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu



Preface

Maṅgalācaraṇam

Verse 1 — Uttama-bhakti

Verse 2 — Sādhana-bhakti

Verse 3 — Stages Leading to the Appearance of Prema

Verse 4 — The Sixty-four Limbs of Bhajana

Verse 5 — Sevāparādha

Verse 6 — The Severity of Nāmāparādha

Verse 7 — Nāmāparādha

Verse 8 — Vaidhī-bhakti

Verse 9 — Rāgānuga-bhakti

Verse 10 — Further Discussion on Rāgānuga-bhakti

Verse 11 — Five Types of Rāgānuga-sādhana

Verse 12 — Bhāva-bhakti

Verse 13 — Prema-bhakti


                            1
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                5/5/2017

Verse 14 — Overview of Bhakti-rasa

Verse 15 — Description of Vyabhicāri-bhāvas

Verse 16 — Gradation in the Manifestation of Bhāvas

Verse 17 — General Description of Sthāyibhāva

Verse 18 — Śānta-rasa

Verse 19 — Dāsya-rasa

Verse 20 — Sakhya-rasa

Verse 21 — Vātsalya-rasa

Verse 22 — Mādhurya-rasa

Verse 23 — Mixture of Bhāvas

Verse 24 — Overview of Gauṇa-rasa

Verse 25 — Compatible and Incompatible Rasas

Verse 26 — Inclusion of Gauṇa-rasas

Verse 27 — Rasābhāsa




Preface


[translated from the Hindi edition]

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, the crown prince of
illustrious teachers among the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava ācāryas,
is the author of this book. In this book there is a
description of the nature of uttama-bhakti, its
divisions, sādhana-bhakti, the stages in the development
of prema, the limbs of bhajana, offences committed in
the performance of devotional service (sevāparādha),
offences against the holy name (nāmāparādha), vaidhī-
and rāgānuga-sādhana-bhakti, bhāva-bhakti, prema-bhakti
and bhakti-rasa.



Life history of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura



Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura appeared in a family
of brāhmaṇas from the community of Rāḍhadeśa in the
district of Nadia, West Bengal. He was celebrated by the
name Hari-vallabha. He had two older brothers named
Rāmabhadra and Raghunātha. In childhood, he studied
grammar in a village named Devagrāma. After this he went
to a village named Śaiyadābād in the district of
Murśidābād where he studied the bhakti-śāstras in the
home of his guru. It was in Śaiyadābād that he wrote
three books while still undergoing his studies. These

                           2
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

three books are Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu, Śrī
Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi-kiraṇa and Śrī Bhāgavatāmṛta-kaṇā. A
short time later, he renounced his household life and
went to Vṛndāvana. There he wrote many books and
commentaries.

After the disappearance of Śrīman Mahāprabhu and His
eternal associates who had taken up residence in Vraja,
the current of śuddha-bhakti was flowing by the
influence of three great personalities: Śrīnivāsa
Ācārya, Narottama Ṭhākura and Śyāmānanda Prabhu. Śrīla
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura was fourth in the line of
disciplic succession coming from Śrīla Narottama
Ṭhākura.

One disciple of Śrīla Narottama Ṭhākura was named Śrī
Gaṅgā-nārāyaṇa Cakravartī Mahāśaya. He lived in Bālūcara
Gambhilā within the district of Murśidābād. He had no
sons and only one daughter, whose name was Viṣṇupriyā.
Śrīla Narottama Ṭhākura had another disciple named
Rāmakṛṣṇa Bhaṭṭācārya from the brāhmaṇa community of
Vārendra, a rural community of West Bengal. The youngest
son of Rāmakṛṣṇa Bhaṭṭācārya was named Kṛṣṇa-caraṇa. Śrī
Gaṅgā-nārāyaṇa accepted Kṛṣṇa-caraṇa as an adopted son.
The disciple of Śrī Kṛṣṇa-caraṇa was Rādhā-ramaṇa
Cakravartī, who was the spiritual master of Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura.

In his commentary on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam entitled
Sārārtha-darśinī, at the beginning of the rāsa-
pañcādhyāya, five chapters describing Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s rāsa-
līlā, Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has written the
following verse:



śrī-rāma-kṛṣṇa-gaṅgā-caraṇān

natvā gurūn uru-premṇaḥ

śrīla-narottama-nātha

śrī-gaurāṅga-prabhuṁ naumi



In this śloka the name Śrī Rāma refers to the spiritual
master of Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, Śrī Rādhā-
ramaṇa. The word Kṛṣṇa refers to his grand-spiritual
master, parama-gurudeva, Śrī Kṛṣṇa-caraṇa. The name
Gaṅgā-caraṇa refers to his great grand-spiritual master,
parātpara-gurudeva, Śrī Gaṅgā-caraṇa. The name Narottama
refers to his great-great grand-spiritual master,
parama-parātpara-gurudeva, Śrīla Narottama Ṭhākura, and
the word nātha refers to the spiritual master of Śrīla
Narottama Ṭhākura, Śrī Lokanātha Gosvāmī. In this way he
is offering obeisances unto his guru-paramparā up to
Śrīman Mahāprabhu.

The daughter of Śrīnivāsa Ācārya, Hemalatā Ṭhākurāṇī,
was extremely learned and a great Vaiṣṇavī. She expelled
an estranged disciple named Rūpa Kavirāja from the
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava community. Thereafter Rūpa Kavirāja was
known as atibāḍī in the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava community. He

                             3
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

established his own concocted doctrine, opposed to the
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava conclusions, that only a person in the
renounced order of life could act as ācārya. He claimed
that it was not possible for a householder to become a
spiritual master. Completely disregarding the path of
devotional rules and regulations (vidhi-mārga), he
propagated the path of spontaneous attraction (rāga-
mārga) in an unrestrained and undisciplined manner. His
opinion was that rāgānuga-bhakti could be practised by
smaraṇa (remembrance) alone, abandoning the practices of
śravaṇa and kīrtana (hearing and chanting).

Fortunately, Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura was present at
that time. In his Sārārtha-darśinī commentary on the
third canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam he refuted these false
conclusions. The householder disciples in the disciplic
succession of Nityānanda Prabhu’s son, Vīrabhadra, and
those who are descendants of the rejected sons of
Advaita Ācārya award and accept the title of “Gosvāmī”.
Such action is completely improper according to the line
of ācāryas. Śrī Cakravartī Ṭhākura refuted this idea of
Rūpa Kavirāja. He proved that it was not incompatible
for a qualified gṛhastha descendant of an ācārya to act
as a spiritual master. But for unfit descendants of
ācārya families who are greedy for disciples and wealth
to adopt the name of Gosvāmī is unlawful and contrary to
the statements of śāstra. This he also proved.
Therefore, although acting as an ācārya, he never used
the title gosvāmī with his name. He did this just to
instruct the foolish and unfit descendants of ācārya
families of modern times.

When Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura was very old,
he spent most of the time in a semi-conscious state,
deeply absorbed in bhajana. At that time in the state of
Jaipur, a debate broke out between the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas
and other Vaiṣṇavas who supported the doctrine of
svakīyāvāda (marital love in the Lord’s pastimes).

Jaya Singh II was the king of Jaipur. The Vaiṣṇavas of
the antagonistic camp led Jaya Singh to believe that the
worship of Śrīmatī Rādhikā along with Śrī Govindadeva
was not supported by śāstra. Their contention was that
Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s name was not mentioned anywhere in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam or the Viṣṇu Purāṇa and that She was
never legally married to Kṛṣṇa according to Vedic
rituals. Another objection was that the Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavas did not belong to a recognised line of
disciplic succession (sampradāya). There are but four
lines of Vaiṣṇava disciplic succession, which have
descended from time immemorial: the Śrīsampradāya,
Brahmā sampradāya, Rudra sampradāya and Sanaka (Kumāra)
sampradāya.

In the age of Kali the principal ācāryas of these four
sampradāyas are, respectively, Śrī Rāmānuja, Śrī Madhva,
Śrī Viṣṇusvāmī and Śrī Nimbāditya. The Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas
were thought to be outside of these four sampradāyas and
were not accepted as having a pure lineage. In
particular the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas did not have their own
commentary on the Brahma-sūtra (otherwise known as the
Vedānta-sūtra). Therefore they could not be accepted as
a bona fide line of Vaiṣṇava disciplic succession.


                           4
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

At that time Mahārāja Jaya Singh, knowing the prominent
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava ācāryas of Vṛndāvana to be followers of
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, summoned them to Jaipur to take up
the challenge with the Vaiṣṇavas from the line of Śrī
Rāmānuja. Because he was very old and immersed in the
transcendental bliss of bhajana, Śrī Cakravartī Ṭhākura
sent his student, Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava vedāntācāryamahā-
mahopādhyāya (the great one among exalted teachers of
Vedānta), paṇḍita-kula-mukuṭa (the crown of the assembly
of learned scholars) Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa, to
Jaipur along with his disciple Śrī Kṛṣṇadeva, in order
to address the assembly.

The caste gosvāmīs had completely forgotten their
connection with the Madhva sampradāya. In addition to
this they were disrespectful to the Vaiṣṇava Vedānta and
created a great disturb-ance for the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas.
Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa, by his irrefutable logic
and powerful scriptural evidence, proved that the
Gauḍīya sampradāya was a pure Vaiṣṇava sampradāya coming
in the line of Madhva. The name of this sampradāya is
the Śrī Brahma-Madhva-Gauḍīya sampradāya. Our previous
ācāryas like Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, Kavi Karṇapūra and
others accepted this fact. The Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas
accept Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam as the natural commentary on
the Vedānta-sūtra. For this reason no separate
commentary on the Vedānta-sūtra was written in the
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sampradāya.

In various Purāṇas the name of Śrīmatī Rādhikā is
mentioned. She is the personification of the hlādinī
(pleasure-giving) potency and the eternal beloved of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. In several places of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and
specifically in the tenth canto in connection with the
description of the Lord’s Vṛndāvana pastimes, Śrīmatī
Rādhikā is mentioned in a very concealed manner. Only
rasika and bhāvuka devotees who are conversant with the
conclusions of the scriptures can understand this
confidential mystery.

In the learned assembly in Jaipur, Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa
refuted all the arguments and doubts of the opposing
party. He solidly established that the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas
were following in the line of disciplic succession
descending from Madhva, as well as the authenticity of
the worship of Rādhā-Govinda. The opposition was
silenced by his presentation. Nonetheless, because the
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sampradāya did not have a commentary on
the Vedānta-sūtra, the contesting party did not accept
them as being a pure line of Vaiṣṇava disciplic
succession.

Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa then wrote the famous Gauḍīya
commentary on the Vedānta-sūtra named Śrī Govinda-
bhāṣya. Once again the worship of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Govinda
began in the temple of Śrī Govindadeva, and the validity
of the Śrī Brahma-Madhva Gauḍīya sampradāya was
accepted. It was only on the authority of Śrīla
Cakravartī Ṭhākura that Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa Prabhu
was able to write the Śrī Govinda-bhāṣya and prove the
connection of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas with the Madhva
sampradāya. There should be no doubt in this regard.
This accomplishment of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura done on behalf of the sampradāya will be

                           5
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                  5/5/2017

recorded in golden letters in the history of Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavism.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura describes a very
striking event in his own book entitled Mantrārtha-
dīpikā. Once, while reading Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, he
came upon the verse quoted below (Madhya-līlā 21.125),
which describes the meaning of the kāma-gāyatrī-mantra.



kāma-gāyatrī-mantra rūpa, haya kṛṣṇera svarūpa,

sārdha-cabbiśa akṣara tāra haya

se akṣara candra haya kṛṣṇe kari’ udaya

trijagat kaila kāmamaya



The kāma-gāyatrī-mantra is identical with Śrī Kṛṣṇa. In
this king of mantras there are twenty-four and a half
syllables and each syllable is a full moon. This
aggregate of moons has caused the moon of Śrī Kṛṣṇa to
rise and fill the three worlds with divine love, prema.



It is proved by the evidence of this verse that the
kāma-gāyatrī-mantra is composed of twenty-four and a
half syllables. But in spite of considerable thought,
Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartī could not ascertain which
syllable in the kāma-gāyatrī was considered a half-
syllable. Although he carefully scrutinised grammar
books, the Purāṇas, the Tantra, the scriptures (śāstras)
dealing with drama (nāṭya) and rhetoric (alaṅkāra), and
other scriptures, he found no mention anywhere of a
half-syllable. In all these scriptures he found mention
only of the vowels and consonants that make up the fifty
letters of the alphabet. He found no evidence anywhere
of a half-syllable.

In the Śrī Harināmāmṛta-vyākaraṇa, the grammar system
composed by Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī, he found mention of only
fifty letters in the section dealing with the names of
the various groups of vowels and consonants
(saṁjñāpāda). By study of the arrangement of letters
(mātṛkā) in the Mātṛkānyāsa and other books, he found no
mention anywhere of a half-syllable. In the Rādhikā-
sahasra-nāma-stotra, found in the Bṛhan-nāradīya Purāṇa,
one of the names of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, the goddess of
Vṛndāvana, is given as Pañcāśad-varṇa-rūpiṇī (one whose
form is composed of fifty syllables).

Seeing this, his doubt only increased. He began to
consider whether Kavirāja Gosvāmī might have made a
mistake while writing. But there was no possibility of
him committing any mistake. He was omniscient and thus
completely devoid of the material defects of mistakes,
illusion and so on. If the fragmented letter “t” (the
final letter of the kāma-gāyatrī-mantra) is taken as a
half-syllable, then Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī would be
guilty of the fault of disorder, for he has given the

                           6
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                 5/5/2017

following description in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta
(Madhya-līlā 21.126ñ8):



sakhi he! kṛṣṇa-mukha-dvija-rāja-rāja

kṛṣṇa-vapu siṁhāsane, vasi’ rājya-śāsane

kare saṅge candrera samāja

dui gaṇḍa sucikkaṇa, jini’ maṇi-sudarpaṇa,

sei dui pūrṇa-candra jāni

lalāṭe aṣṭamī-indu, tāhāte candana-bindu,

sei eka pūrṇa-candra māni

kara nakha cāndera hāṭa, vaṁśī upara kare nāṭa

tāra gīta muralīra tāna

pada nakha candra-gaṇa, tale kare sunartana

nūpurera dhvani yāra gāna



In these lines, Śrī Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī has
described the face of Śrī Kṛṣna as the first full moon.
His two cheeks are both considered as full moons. The
dot of sandalwood on the upper portion of His forehead
is considered as the fourth full moon, and the region of
the forehead below the dot of sandalwood is the moon of
aṣṭamī, or in other words, a half-moon. According to
this description, the fifth syllable is a half-syllable.
If the fragmented “t”, which is the final letter of the
mantra, is taken as a half-syllable, then the fifth
syllable could not be a half-syllable.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura fell into a dilemma
because he could not decipher the half-syllable. He
considered that if the syllables of the mantra would not
reveal themselves, then neither would it be possible for
the worshipful deity of the mantra to manifest to him.
He decided that since he could not obtain audience of
the worshipful deity of the mantra, it would be better
to die. Thinking thus, he went to the bank of Rādhā-
kuṇḍa at night with the intent of giving up his body.

After the second period of the night had passed, he
began to doze off when suddenly Śrī Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī,
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, appeared to him. She very
affectionately said, “O Viśvanātha! O Hari-vallabha! Do
not lament! Whatever Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja has written is
the absolute truth. By My grace, he knows all the inner
sentiments of My heart. Do not maintain any doubt about
his statements. The kāma-gāyatrī is a mantra to worship
Me and My dear beloved (prāṇa-vallabha). We are revealed
to the devotee by the syllables of this mantra. No one
is capable of knowing Us without My grace. The half-
syllable is described in the book known as Varṇāgama-
bhāsvat. After consulting this book, Śrī Kṛṣṇadāsa

                             7
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

Kavirāja determined the actual identity of the kāma-
gāyatrī. You should examine this book and then broadcast
its meaning for the benefit of faithful persons.”

After hearing this instruction from Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī
Śrīmatī Rādhikā Herself, Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura
suddenly arose. Calling out, “O Rādhe! O Rādhe!” he
began to cry in great lamentation. Thereafter, upon
regaining his composure, he set himself to carrying out
Her order.

According to the indication of Śrīmatī Rādhikā regarding
the determination of the half-syllable, the letter ya,
which precedes the letter vi in the mantra, is
considered a half-syllable. Apart from this, all other
syllables are full syllables or full moons.

By the mercy of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura became acquainted with the meaning of
the mantra. He obtained the direct audience of his
worshipful deity, and by means of his internal perfected
spiritual body (siddha-deha), he was able to participate
in the Lord’s eternal pastimes as an eternal associate.
After this, he established the deity of Śrī Gokulānanda
on the bank of Rādhā-kuṇḍa. While residing there, he
experienced the sweetness of the eternal pastimes of Śrī
Vṛndāvana. It was at this time that he wrote his
Sukhavartinī commentary on Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū, a
book written by Śrīla Kavi Karṇapūra.



rādhā-parastīra-kuṭīra-vartinaḥ

prāptavya-vṛndāvana-cakravartinaḥ

ānanda-campū-vivṛti-pravartinaḥ

sānto-gatir me sumahā-nivartinaḥ



I, Cakravartī, completely leaving aside all else, desire
to attain Śrī Vṛndāvana. Residing in a simple hut on the
bank of Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa, which is the topmost place of
pastimes for Śrī Rādhā, I am now writing this commentary
on Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū.



In old age, Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura spent most of
his time in a semi-conscious state, deeply absorbed in
bhajana. His principal student, Baladeva Vidyābhūṣana,
took over the responsibility of teaching the śāstras.



Re-establishment of the doctrine of parakīyāvāda



Because of a slight decline in influence of the Six
Gosvāmīs in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, a controversy arose
regarding the doctrines of svakīyāvāda, marital love,

                           8
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

and parakīyāvāda, paramour love. To dispel the
misconceptions regarding svakīyāvāda, Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura wrote two books named Rāga-vartma-
candrikā and Gopī-premāmṛta, which are wonderfully
filled with all the conclusions of śāstra. Thereafter,
in his Ānanda-candrikā commentary on the “laghutvam
atra”* verse of Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi (1.21), he soundly
refuted the theory of svakīyāvāda by scriptural evidence
and irrefutable arguments, and established the
conception of parakīyā. In his Sārārtha-darśinī
commentary on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, he gave strong support
to parakīyā-bhāva.

It is said that at the time of Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura there were some paṇḍitas who opposed
him in regard to worship in the mood of parakīyā. But by
his deep scholarship and irrefutable logic he defeated
them. On account of this, the paṇḍitas resolved to kill
him. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura used to go out
in the early morning before dawn to circumambulate of
Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. They formulated a plan to kill him
at that time in some dense, dark grove.

While performing such circumambulation, Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura came upon the grove where the
adversaries desired to kill him. But suddenly they
looked and saw that he was no longer there. In his
place, they saw a beautiful young Vrajavāsī girl picking
flowers along with two or three of her friends. The
paṇḍitas inquired from the girl, “Dear child, just a
moment ago a great devotee was approaching here. Where
did he go? Did you happen to see him?” The girl replied,
“I saw him, but I don’t know where he went.”

Seeing the astonishing beauty of the girl, her sidelong
glancing, her graceful feminine manner and gentle
smiling, the paṇḍitas became captivated. All the
impurity in their minds was vanquished and their hearts
became soft. On being requested by the paṇḍitas to
introduce herself the girl said, “I am a maidservant of
my mistress Śrīmatī Rādhikā. She is presently at Her
mother-in-law’s home at Yāvaṭa. She sent me to pick
flowers.” Saying this, she disappeared, and in her
place, they saw Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura once
again. The paṇḍitas fell at his feet and prayed for
forgiveness. He forgave them all.

Many such astonishing events are heard in the life of
Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura. In this way he
refuted the theory of svakīyāvāda and established the
truth of pure parakīyā. This work of his is of great
importance for the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas.

Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura not only protected the
integrity of the Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava dharma, but he
also re-established its influence in Śrī Vṛndāvana.
Anyone who evaluates this accomplishment of his is sure
to be struck with wonder by his uncommon genius. The
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava ācāryas have composed the following
verse in praise of his extraordinary work:



viśvasya nātharūpo ‘sau

                           9
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                  5/5/2017


bhakti-vartma-pradarśanāt

bhakta-cakre varttitatvāt

cakravarty ākhyayābhavat



Because he indicates the path of bhakti, he is known by
the name Viśvanātha, the Lord of the universe, and
because he always remains in the assembly (cakra) of
pure devotees, he is known by the name Cakravartī (he
around whom a circle or assembly turns).



In the year 1754, on the fifth day of the light phase of
the moon in the month of Māgha (JanuaryñFebruary), at
approximately one hundred years of age, while absorbed
in an internal condition at Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa, he entered
into aprakaṭa (unmanifest) Vṛndāvana. Even today his
samādhi tomb can be found just next to the temple of Śrī
Gokulānanda in Śrī Vṛndāvana.

Following in the footsteps of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, he
composed abundant transcendental literatures about
bhakti and thus established the inner heart’s longing of
Śrīman Mahāprabhu in this world. He also refuted various
faulty conclusions opposed to the genuine following of
Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī (rūpānuga). He is thus revered in
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava society as an illustrious ācārya and as
an authoritative mahājana. He is renowned as a great
transcendental philosopher, poet and rasika-bhakta. A
Vaiṣṇava composer of verse named Kṛṣṇa dāsa has written
the following lines at the conclusion of his translation
of Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s book Mādhurya-kādambinī:



mādhurya-kādambinī-grantha jagata kaila dhanya

cakravartī-mukhe vaktā āpani śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya

keha kahena-cakravartī śrī-rūpera avatāra

kaṭhina ye tattva sarala karite pracāra

ohe guṇa-nidhi śri-viśvanātha cakravartī

ki jāniba tomāra guṇa muñi mūḍha-mati



Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has benedicted the
whole world by writing the book Mādhurya-kādambinī. In
reality, Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu is the speaker of
this book. He has spoken it through the mouth of Śrī
Cakravartī. Some people say that Śrī Cakravartī Ṭhākura
is an incarnation of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. He is very
expert in the art of describing extremely complex truths
in an easily understandable manner. O ocean of mercy,
Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura! I am a great fool.
Kindly reveal the mystery of your transcendental

                            10
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                5/5/2017

qualities in my heart. This is my prayer at your lotus
feet.



Among Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava ācāryas there are very few who
wrote as many books as Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura. Even
today the following proverb regarding three of his books
is quite famous amongst the Vaiṣṇavas:



kiraṇa-bindu-kaṇā ei tīna niye vaiṣṇava-paṇā



These three books, Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi-kiraṇa, Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu and Bhāgavatāmṛta-kaṇā, are taken
by the Vaiṣṇavas as their wealth.



The following is a list of his books and commentaries,
which form a storehouse of incomparable wealth of
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava devotional literature.



(1) Vraja-rīti-cintāmaṇi

(2) Camatkāra-candrikā

(3) Prema-sampuṭam (Khaṇḍa-kāvyam — a poetic work that
displays only partial characteristics or ornamentation
of poetry)

(4) Gītāvalī

(5) Subodhinī (commentary on Alaṅkāra-kaustubha)

(6) Ānanda-candrikā (commentary on Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi)

(7) commentary on Śrī Gopāla-tāpanī

(8) Stavāmṛta-laharī

(9) Śrī Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta

(10) Śrī Bhāgavatāmṛta-kaṇā

(11) Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi-kiraṇa

(12) Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu

(13) Rāga-vartma-candrikā

(14) Aiśvarya-kādambinī (unavailable)

(15) Śrī Mādhurya-kādambinī

(16) commentary on Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu

(17) commentary on Dāna-keli-kaumudī


                              11
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

(18) commentary on Śrī Lalita-mādhava-nāṭaka

(19) commentary on Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (incomplete)

(20) commentary on Brahma-saṁhitā

(21) Sārārtha-varṣiṇī commentary on Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā

(22) Sārārtha-darśinī commentary on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam



My most revered Śrī Gurudeva, aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad
Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, was a guardian
of the Śrī Gauḍīya sampradāya and founder-ācārya of the
Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti as well as the Gauḍīya maṭhas
established under its auspices. Aside from publishing
his own books, he republished the books of Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura and other previous ācāryas in the
Bengali language. Today, by his heartfelt desire,
enthusiastic blessings and causeless mercy, Jaiva-
dharma, Śrī Caitanya-śikṣāmṛta, Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhura Śikṣā, Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka and other books have
been printed in Hindi, the national language of India.
Gradually other books are being published.

The present-day head and ācārya of the Śrī Gauḍīya
Vedānta Samiti, my most revered godbrother,
parivrājakācārya Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Vāmana
Mahārāja, is deeply immersed in transcendental knowledge
and is a very dear, intimate servant of the lotus feet
of our Śrī Guru. I humbly pray at his lotus feet that he
may bless me by presenting this precious book, Śrī
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu, into the lotus hands of
our Śrīla Gurudeva and thus fulfil his inner heart’s
longing.

I have complete faith that those who are possessed of
yearning for bhakti and especially the practitioners of
the path of sponteneous devotion who are captivated by
the mellows of Vṛndāvana (vraja-rasa) will receive this
book with great reverence. Faithful persons who study
this book will obtain qualification to enter into the
wealth of prema of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

Finally, I pray at the lotus feet of my most revered
Śrīla Gurudeva, the condensed personification of the
Lord’s compassion, that he may pour down a shower of
abundant mercy upon me, by which I may obtain more and
more eligibility to engage in the service of his inner
heart’s longing. This is our humble prayer at his lotus
feet, which bestow pure love for the Supreme Lord Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.



An aspirant for a particle of mercy

of Śrī Hari, Guru and Vaiṣṇavas,

humble and insignificant,




                            12
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                  5/5/2017

Tridaṇḍi Bhikṣu Śrī Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa



Akṣaya Tṛtīyā (third day of the bright half of Vaiśākha)

507 years after the appearance of Lord Gaurāṅga
(Gaurābda)

25th April, 1993




Introduction

Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu, a drop of the
nectarean ocean of devotional mellows, is a brief
summary of the essential topics from Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī’s classic devotional treatise Śrī Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu. It consists of twenty-seven verses,
some of which were taken from Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu,
but most of which were written by Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura in Sanskrit. Our esteemed Śrīla
Gurudeva, oṁ viṣṇupāda paramahaṁsa parivrājakācārya
aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja, has given an illuminating translation of these
verses into Hindi. His translation and commentary is
named Śrī Bindu-vikāśinī-vṛtti, or the commentary that
reveals the meaning of Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu. In
this commentary he has expanded the subject matter by
including Śrīla Cakravartipāda’s own commentary to the
verses that were taken from Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu. He
has also drawn additional material from Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindhu and relevant verses from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Hari-bhakti-vilāsa, Bhakti-
sandarbha and other scriptures. In addition, he has made
very significant comments to facilitate comprehension of
the subject matter. Some of these comments were
footnotes to his original Hindi commentary and others
were spoken by him in English. These comments are
identified in this edition simply as “Comment”. The end
of such comments are indicated by a lotus flower symbol,
at which point the text returns to the translation of
Śrīla Gurudeva’s Bindu-vikāśinī commentary.

The first English edition of Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-
bindu was published in April 1996, just before Śrīla
Gurudeva’s first preaching tour of Western countries. In
this second edition several improvements have been made
to help the reader assimilate the material. First, the
presentation of the material has been made simpler and
more direct. Secondly, the typography throughout has
been made consistent and the layout has been brought up
to a professional standard. Thirdly, the text has been
lightly edited in places to improve its clarity.

In the first edition of this book, the sequence of
Verses 22ñ5 was changed from Śrīla Cakravartipāda’s
original sequence in order to accommodate the additional
material taken from Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu. In this
second edition we have changed one of those verses back
to reflect the author’s original sequence, but we left

                           13
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

three still differing from it. This has been done to
ensure that, in light of the abundance of material added
from Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, the subject matter is
presented to the reader in the most logical and
effective manner.

Further, the explanations of the primary and secondary
rasas found in the second half of the book are in places
rather intricate. To aid comprehension of these topics,
the reader is advised to refer back as needed to the
chart entitled “Components of bhakti-rasa” on p. 151.

Finally, we would like to briefly mention the
contribution made to our sampradāya in the modern era by
nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa oṁ viṣṇupādaaṣṭottara-śata Śrī
Śrīmad A.C. Bhaktivedānta Swami Prabhupāda. Single-
handedly, and in a relatively short span of time, he
introduced the science of kṛṣṇa-bhakti to the English-
speaking world. He was an intimate friend of Śrīla
Gurudeva, and in 1972 he published an excellent summary
study of Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu entitled Nectar of
Devotion. Praying that this current work be pleasing to
both Śrīla Gurudeva and Śrīla Prabhupāda, we are
confident that it will be appreciated by devotees who
are eager to taste a drop of the nectarean ocean of
bhakti-rasa.



Aspirants for the service of Śrī Guru and Vaiṣṇavas,

Prema-vilāsa dāsa / Lavaṅga-latā dāsī

Mokṣadā Ekādaśī

15th December, 2002

Gopīnātha-bhavana, Śrī Vṛndāvana

śrī śrī guru-gaurāṅgau jayataḥ




Maṅgalācaraṇam


akhila-rasāmṛta-mūrtiḥ prasṛmara-

ruci-ruddha-tārakā-pāliḥ

kalita-śyāmā-lalito

rādhā-preyān vidhur jayati



The supreme benefactor of all devotees, Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī, composed the above śloka as the maṅgalācaraṇa
or invocation verse to his unprecedented book named Śrī
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, which manifested from the
treasury of the divine lotus of his heart. This sacred
book named Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu, written by

                             14
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, is also begun with
the same maṅgalācaraṇa śloka composed by Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī. The meaning of this verse is as follows:

“Let there be all glory to the omnipotent Lord Śrī
Kṛṣṇacandra, who is endowed with all excellence and who
is the personification of transcendental bliss
characterised by the twelve forms of rasa: five primary
(mukhya-rasa — śānta, dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya and
mādhurya) and seven secondary (gauṇa-rasa — laughter,
wonder, compassion, anger, fear, heroism and disgust).
By the radiance of His limbs, which is spreading in all
directions, He has brought under His control the
yūtheśvarīs, leaders of the various groups of gopīs,
named Tārakā (vipakṣā — representing a rival group to
that of Śrī Rādhā) and Pāli (taṭastha-pakṣā —
representing a neutral group). He has made Śyāmalā
(suhṛt-pakṣā — representing a friendly group) and Lalitā
(svapakṣā — belonging to Rādhikā’s own group) His very
own, and He is the most beloved of Śrīmatī Rādhikā
(rādhā-preyān). That is, being under the control of the
prema of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, who is the embodiment of the
mahābhāva of all the yūtheśvarīs, He is always intently
absorbed in inspiring Her love.”




Verses




Verse 1 — Uttama-bhakti




anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ

jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-

śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā



Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.1.11)



asyārthaḥ — anyābhilāṣa jñāna-karmādi-rahitā śrī-kṛṣṇam
uddiśyānukūlyena kāya-vāṅ-manobhir yāvatī kriyā sā
bhaktiḥ.



“The cultivation of activities that are meant
exclusively for the pleasure of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, or in other
words the uninterrupted flow of service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
performed through all endeavours of the body, mind and

                           15
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                 5/5/2017

speech, and through the expression of various spiritual
sentiments (bhāvas), which is not covered by jñāna
(knowledge aimed at impersonal liberation) and karma
(reward-seeking activity), and which is devoid of all
desires other than the aspiration to bring happiness to
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is called uttama-bhakti, pure devotional
service.”



Śrī Bindu-vikāśinī-vṛtti

Illumination of the meaning of

Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu



Let me first of all offer repeated obeisances at the
lotus feet of my spiritual master, nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa
oṁ viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī; Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, who is the eternal
associate of Lord Gaurāṅga; all the spiritual masters
who are following in the line of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī; and
Śrī Śrī Gaurāṅga Gāndharvikā Giridhārī Śrī Śrī Rādhā-
Vinoda-bihārī. Praying for their causeless mercy and
blessings, this insignificant and lowly person is
beginning the translation and commentary named Śrī
Bindu-vikāśinī-vṛtti of this sacred book Śrī Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu, written by the supreme teacher
among the followers of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī (rūpānugas), Śrī
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura.



Symptoms of Uttama-bhakti



We are beginning hereafter by enumerating the symptoms
of uttama-bhakti. The symptoms of uttama-bhakti, as
described in this first verse, are of two kinds: (A)
svarūpa-lakṣaṇa (intrinsic characteristic) and (B)
taṭastha-lakṣaṇa (extrinsic characteristics). The
svarūpa-lakṣaṇa is described in the second line of the
verse: “ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā —
uttama-bhakti involves the cultivation of activities
favourable to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.” This is said to be the
svarūpa-lakṣaṇa of uttama-bhakti because it acquaints us
with the inherent nature or svarūpa of bhakti.

The taṭastha-lakṣaṇa are described in the first line of
the verse: “anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam
— uttama-bhakti is devoid of all desires other than to
please Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and it is not covered by jñāna and
karma.” These are called the taṭastha-lakṣaṇa because
they define those characteristics that are not part of
the nature of bhakti.



(A) Svarūpa-lakṣaṇa — Intrinsic Characteristic



                            16
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017


Anuśīlanam — Constant cultivation

Here the svarūpa-lakṣaṇa of uttama-bhakti will be
described beginning with kṛṣṇānuśīlana. Just as all the
various meanings of the verbal roots (dhātus), or in
other words the constituent parts of words, can be
understood by the ideas they express when applied as
verbs (kriyā), all the meanings of the verbal root śīl,
to do or practise, may be known by the word anuśīlana,
to constantly practise or cultivate.

There are two meanings of any verbal root or dhātu:
ceṣṭā-rūpa (in every verbal root some activity is
implied) and bhāva-rūpa (inherent in every action, or
accompanying every action, there is some particular
sentiment). The meaning of ceṣṭā-rūpa is also of two
kinds: (1) sādhana-rūpa — endeavours in the stage of
sādhana leading to the manifestation of bhāva
(comprising both vaidhī- and rāgānuga-sādhana) and (2)
kārya-rūpa — endeavours that manifest as effects upon
attainment of the stage of bhāva, or in other words the
anubhāvas of bhāva-bhakti. Included within this category
are the eight sāttvika-bhāvas, such as crying and
standing of the hairs on end, and the anubhāvas such as
singing and dancing. All these effects (anubhāvas) are
expressions arising from the mind that is constituted of
viśuddha-sattva.

Sādhana-rūpa is further divided into two parts:
pravṛtti-mūlaka, that which is based on performance of
positive action, and nivṛtti-mūlaka, that which is based
on avoidance of negative action.

The aspect of the verbal root that deals with the
performance of positive action refers to favourable
endeavours undertaken with the body (kāyika), mind
(mānasika) and speech (vācika). The aspect of the verbal
root that involves the avoidance of negative action is
different in meaning from that which arises from
engagement in positive activity. In other words nivṛtty-
ātmaka-ceṣṭā-rūpa involves the avoidance of all
activities, also performed with body, mind and speech,
that give rise to offences in service (sevāparādha),
offences to the holy name (nāmāparādha) and offences to
the holy places (dhāmāparādha).

The meaning of bhāva-rūpa is also of two kinds: prīti,
love, and viṣāda, despondency. Prīti refers to the
manifestation of the sthāyibhāva, and viṣāda refers to
the sañcāri-bhāvas (also known as vyabhicāri-bhāvas).
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has explained this
same thing in his commentary to Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu
(1.3.1). There he says that bhāva-rūpa may be divided
into two aspects: (1) sthāyibhāva-rūpa — the permanent
sentiment in one of the five primary relationships of
śānta, dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya or mādhurya, and (2)
sañcāri-bhāva rūpa — the internal transitory emotions,
which arise like waves from the ocean of the
sthāyibhāva, enhance it and then submerge once again
into the sthāyibhāva. There are thirty-three sañcāri-
bhāvas, such as viṣāda (despondency), dainya
(depression) and nirveda (self-disparagement).


                           17
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

Sthāyibhāva-rūpa is again divided into two forms, which
are (1) premāṅkura-rūpa — the sprout of prema, that is,
rati or bhāva, and (2) prema-rūpa — prema, which is
developed through the stages of sneha, māna, praṇaya,
rāga, anurāga, bhāva and

mahābhāva. All these states (bhāva and so on) are
completely beyond mundane worldly sentiments. They are
transcendental and fully situated in unalloyed goodness,
viśuddha-sattva. These will be described later.



Comment



Of the sixty-four limbs (aṅgas) of bhakti that are
described in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, the first ten
beginning from śrī-guru-padāśraya, taking shelter of the
lotus feet of a spiritual master, involve the
cultivation of bhakti through endeavours (ceṣṭā-rūpa)
arising from positive activity, pravṛtti-mūlaka. These
ten limbs are the beginning forms of bhajana. After this
the next ten limbs describe activities that are to be
given up. These include renunciation of the association
of non-devotees (avaiṣṇava-saṅga-tyāga), avoidance of
sevāparādha and nāmāparādha, and so on. To refrain from
such activities is what is meant by the cultivation of
bhakti through endeavours arising from avoidance of
negative activity, nivṛtti-mūlaka. One should act in
such a way as to exclude these negative items.

The meaning of the word anuśīlana has thus been defined
in terms of endeavours or ceṣṭā-rūpa of two kinds,
pravṛttyātmaka and nivṛttyātmaka, and in terms of
sentiments that arise in connection with such
endeavours, bhāva-rūpa. When such cultivation
(anuśīlana) is in relation to Śrī Kṛṣṇa or when it is
performed for His pleasure, it is called bhakti.



The word kṛṣṇānuśīlana implies two kinds of endeavours
or ceṣṭā — all varieties of anuśīlana that are related
to Śrī Kṛṣṇa and all varieties of anuśīlana that are
performed directly for Śrī Kṛṣṇa. This refers to the
limbs of bhakti such as śrī-guru-padāśraya, accepting
dīkṣā (initiation) and śikṣā (spiritual instructions)
from Śrī Gurudeva, viśrambha-bhāva-guru-sevā (serving
the guru with a feeling of great intimacy) and so on. In
all these limbs of bhakti there is no possibility that
the fault of avyāpti, under-extension of a definition,
could occur. In other words there is no possibility that
these limbs of bhakti could fail to be included within
the definition of kṛṣṇānuśīlana.

Similarly the sthāyibhāva (including rati, prema, sneha
and so on) and the vyabhicāri-bhāvas, which both come
under the heading of bhāva-rūpa, are included within the
word kṛṣṇānuśīlana. Consequently there is no possibility
of the fault of avyāpti occurring in their case either.

Thus anuśīlana that is undertaken for Kṛṣṇa both as

                           18
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

ceṣṭā-rūpa (endeavours) and as bhāva-rūpa (both
sthāyibhāva- and vyabhicāri-bhāva-rūpa) is possible only
by the mercy of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the devotees of Kṛṣṇa. Śrī
Gurudeva is a parama-bhagavad-bhakta. Therefore the
limbs of bhakti such as śrī-guru-padāśraya and so on are
also within kṛṣṇānuśīlana. The sthāyibhāva and other
sentiments associated with it, or in other words
anubhāva, sāttvika-bhāva and vyabhicāri-bhāva, are
related to Śrī Kṛṣṇa as well. Therefore they are also
within kṛṣṇānuśīlana.

Kṛṣṇānuśīlana, or bhakti, is a special function (vṛtti)
of the svarūpa-śakti or internal energy of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
The body, mind and senses of conditioned souls (baddha-
jīvas) are all unconscious. The function of svarūpa-
śakti cannot manifest in the unconscious body, mind and
speech of conditioned souls. But due to the causeless
mercy of the ocean of mercy Śrī Kṛṣṇa or the parama-
bhagavad-bhaktas, the function of svarūpa-śakti obtains
identification with (tādātmya) and manifests in the
body, mind and words (even though they are material) of
the devotees who have taken shelter of the lotus feet of
Śrī Gurudeva. This subject will be described more
clearly ahead.

The meaning of the word tādātmya can be understood from
the following example. When fire permeates an iron rod
it burns other objects. The iron rod does not burn other
objects. In this example the fire is said to have
obtained oneness with the iron rod (tādātmya).
Similarly, by the mercy of the Lord, the bhakti-vṛtti of
svarūpa-śakti obtains tādātmya with the body, mind and
words of the devotees and then acts through them.



Kṛṣṇa

In the verse under discussion, the word Kṛṣṇa has been
used to indicate Svayam Bhagavān Vrajendra-nandana Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and all other incarnations (avatāras) of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. However, there is a gradation in the cultivation
of bhakti in accordance with its object — either svayam
avatārī Kṛṣṇa, the original source of all incarnations,
or other avatāras. This gradation in the cultivation of
bhakti will be described later.



Ānukūlyena

The svarūpa-lakṣaṇa of bhakti has been defined as the
culti-vation of activities in relation to Śrī Kṛṣṇa
(kṛṣṇānuśīlana). Now in order to further qualify this
definition, the word ānukūlyena will be explained. In
order to establish the svarūpa or inherent nature of
bhakti, the qualifying adjective ānukūlyena (favourably
disposed) has been used, because bhakti is not
accomplished by unfavourable behaviour.

Certain liberal-minded philosophers have defined the
meaning of the word ānukūlya as behaviour or engagement
that is pleasing. In other words they say that bhakti or
the cultivation of activities in relation to Śrī Kṛṣṇa

                           19
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

should be pleasing to Him. Such engagement that is
pleasing to Kṛṣṇa is termed as ānukūlya-viśiṣṭa-bhakti,
devotion that is favourable to the pleasure of Kṛṣṇa.
But by accepting this kind of meaning, the faults of
ativyāpti, over-extension, and avyāpti, under-extension,
may become present in the definition of bhakti.
Ativyāpti means that when a definition is too wide it
encompasses things which are not to be included within
the description. Avyāpti means that when a definition is
too narrow it excludes things which should be included
within the description.

When the asuras Cāṇūra, Mūṣṭika and others struck the
limbs of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in the wrestling match, it gave great
happiness to Him. He began to taste vīra-rasa (heroism)
with great enthusiasm in their company. In this example
the asuras’ activity of striking the Lord appears to be
pleasing to Kṛṣṇa. A doubt arises here as to how the
activity of the asuras can be pleasing to Kṛṣṇa. In
response to this doubt, a portion of a verse from
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.13.30) is cited here: “manasvinām
iva sat samprahāraḥ — although in the vision of ordinary
persons a fierce battle with an enemy is the cause of
great distress, for great heroes it is very pleasing.”

If the asuras’ activity of violently striking the Lord
in the wrestling match, due to its being pleasing to
Kṛṣṇa, is accepted as bhakti, then the fault of
ativyāpti or over-extension enters into the definition
of bhakti. In other words the asuras’ activity of
maliciously striking the Lord is completely opposed to
bhakti, but because it is pleasing to Kṛṣṇa, it appears
to be included within the description of bhakti.

Another example is when Yaśodā-maiyā seated Śrī Kṛṣṇa in
her lap and began to breast-feed Him. At that time the
milk on the stove boiled over and was falling into the
fire. Yaśodā-maiyā left Kṛṣṇa unsatisfied and went to
rescue the milk. This was not pleasing to Kṛṣṇa. His
tiny lips began to tremble with anger — sañjāta-kopaḥ
sphuritāruṇādharaṁ (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.9.6)). In this
example, because the activity of Mother Yaśodā was
displeasing to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, it would seem to be excluded
from the definition of bhakti. Therefore here the fault
of avyāpti or under-extension appears to be present in
the definition of bhakti.

The faults of ativyāpti and avyāpti, respectively, seem
to appear in the cited examples of the activities of the
asuras and those of Yaśodā-maiyā. The word ānukūlya has
been used here with the intention of prohibiting these
kinds of faults. The real meaning of ānukūlya is to be
completely free of any attitude that is unfavourable or
hostile to the Lord.

Without the complete absence of any attitude that is
unfa-vourable to the Lord, bhakti is not established.
According to this definition of bhakti, the fault of
ativyāpti cannot be applied to the asuras (in other
words the definition of bhakti does not extend to them),
because they are always possessed of a malicious
attitude towards the Lord. Consequently, because they
are not devoid of a hostile attitude, their activities
are not counted as bhakti. Here the meaning of anukūlya

                           20
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

is to be devoid of any attitude unfavourable to the
Lord.

On the other hand the activity of Yaśodā-maiyā, from the
external point of view, appeared to be unfavourable
because it was seen to be displeasing to Kṛṣṇa. But
Yaśodā-maiyā has no trace of any attitude that is
displeasing to Kṛṣṇa. She is always permeated with an
attitude that is completely agreeable towards Kṛṣṇa,
being constantly attentive to rearing Him and looking
after His welfare. Therefore the definition of bhakti
has no contact with the fault of avyāpti in regard to
Yaśodā (in other words the definition of bhakti does not
exclude her example).

The devotees naturally display even greater love towards
those things that are favourable towards the service of
Kṛṣṇa than towards Kṛṣṇa directly. Kṛṣṇa was to be
nourished with the milk that was boiling on the stove.
It was only with the idea of Kṛṣṇa’s future benefit that
Yaśodā-maiyā left Him aside to tend to the milk;
therefore this action is also bhakti.

Someone may raise the contention that if a favourable
attitude (ānukūlya), or in other words the absence of
any inimical attitude (prātikūlya), is defined as
bhakti, and if bhakti involves some kind of activity
that is favourable or pleasing to Kṛṣṇa, then what need
is there to further qualify bhakti by use of the word
anuśīlana (attentive study or practice)? Why has this
word been used if it is without meaning? It is with the
purpose of responding to just such a doubt that the word
anuśīlana has been employed.

The true nature of bhakti is not established by the mere
absence of an inimical attitude, for even within a clay
pot there is an absence of animosity. Can the pot then
be said to possess bhakti? It never can. It is true that
there is no animosity in the pot; however, because there
is no activity of the kind implied by the word
anuśīlana, the existence of bhakti cannot be admitted.
Therefore the use of the word anuśīlana is not without
meaning.

(B) Taṭastha-lakṣaṇa — Extrinsic Characteristics



Having thus described the svarūpa-lakṣaṇa of bhakti, the
taṭastha-lakṣaṇa or extrinsic characteristics are
described in order to establish the exclusivity of
uttama-bhakti. The taṭastha-lakṣaṇa are pointed out in
the beginning of this verse by the use of two terms:
anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyam and jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam.



Anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyam

How should the cultivation of activities favourable to
Kṛṣṇa be undertaken? One should act only in such a way
that bhakti may be augmented, giving up laukika-abhilāṣa
(worldly desires), pāralaukika-abhilāṣa (other-worldly
pursuits such as elevation to the heavenly planets and

                           21
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

acquisition of mystic perfections in yoga) and any other
kind of aspiration. This same idea has been expressed in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.3.31): “bhaktyā sañjātayā bhaktyā
— bhakti is produced only by bhakti.” According to this
statement bhakti (śravaṇa, kīrtana and other forms of
sādhana) is to be done only for the sake of bhakti. The
meaning of this is that sādhana- and bhāva-bhakti should
be done only with the objective of attaining prema-
bhakti. Therefore to be devoid of all desires other than
bhakti is uttama-bhakti.

It is especially noteworthy here to consider why it is
that the term anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyam has been used rather
than anyābhilāṣa-śūnyam. A very deep and confidential
idea of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmipāda has been concealed in
this statement. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has used the term
anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyam after giving a great deal of
consideration to this matter. The term anyābhilāṣa means
a desire for other objects. To this word the Sanskrit
suffix in has first been added. This suffix indicates
the natural or acquired way of living or acting. When
used in conjunction with the word anyābhilāṣa, it means
the innate tendency to act under extraneous desires. To
this the suffix tā is added, which indicates the quality
or state of being of anything. This means that in his
natural condition a sādhaka should have no desires other
than for bhakti. But if on the appearance of some
unexpected calamity (in an unnatural condition) a
sādhaka prays, “O Bhagavān, I am Your devotee. Please
protect me from this calamity,” then in spite of this
desire, no damage is done to his bhakti. It is only due
to some calamity that there is a reversal of his natural
condition. Therefore he becomes compelled by
circumstances to pray in an unnatural way. It should be
understood that this desire is not his innate condition.



Jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

The second extrinsic characteristic is now being
explained. The term jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam means that
the cultivation of bhakti should be free from the
covering of jñāna, karma and so forth. There are three
divisions of jñāna: (1) tat-padārtha-jñāna, (2) tvaṁ-
padārtha-jñāna and (3) jīva-brahma-aikya-jñāna.



(1) Tat-padārtha-jñāna

Knowledge of the constitutional identity of Bhagavān

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the absolute truth, parama-tattva. He is
the nondual Parabrahma. He is the origin of all, yet He
is without origin. He is the cause of all causes. He is
the supreme repository of all the qualities of aiśvarya
(majesty) and mādhurya (sweetness). He is completely
bereft of inferior material qualities (prākṛta-guṇa). He
is replete with all transcendental qualities (aprākṛta-
guṇa). He is sac-cid-ānandamaya-vigraha, the embodiment
of existence, cognisance and bliss. He is acintya-sarva-
śaktimān, the inconceivable possessor of all potencies.
He is the very identity of both rasa and rasika. In

                           22
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

other words He is the abode of all rasa, and He Himself
is fully adept in enjoying such rasa in the company of
His devotees. He is Svayam Bhagavān, the ultimate object
to be ascertained by the Vedas and all śāstras. He alone
is the person to be designated by the term Svayam
Bhagavān. This kind of knowledge is called tat-padārtha-
jñāna.

(2) Tvaṁ-padārtha-jñāna

Knowledge of the constitutional identity of the jīva

and his relationship with Bhagavān

The jīvas, as atomic particles of living spirit (cit-
paramāṇu-svarūpa), are but infinitesimal rays of the
supreme existential spirit, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Although non-
different from Lord Hari, they are eternally distinct
from Him. The jīvas are infinitesimal consciousness
(aṇu-caitanya), whereas the Lord is the all-pervading
consciousness (vibhu-caitanya). The jīvas are subjugated
by māyā, while the Lord is the controller of māyā. Even
in the liberated condition, the jīva, in accordance with
his nature as the marginal potency (taṭastha-śakti), is
capable of falling under the sway of material nature
(māyā-prakṛti). The jīva is represented both as
knowledge (jñāna-svarūpa) and as the knower (jñātā-
svarūpa). Although the potentiality for action
(kartṛtva) is present in him, he nonetheless remains
atomic spirit (aṇucit).

He has minute independence; therefore he is by nature
the eternal servant of the supreme absolute truth, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. He also possesses eternal separate existence. In
other words he is both independent and dependent. On
account of being a product of the taṭastha-śakti of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, the jīva’s relationship with Śrī Kṛṣṇa is one of
inconceivable, simultaneous oneness and difference
(acintya-bheda-abheda). Apart from this, because he is a
portion of the Lord and because the tendency to serve
the Lord is inherent in his nature, the jīva’s
relationship with Śrī Kṛṣṇa is that of the eternal
servant and the served. This type of knowledge is called
tvaṁ-padārtha-jñāna.



(3) Jīva-brahma-aikya-jñāna

Knowledge of the oneness of the jīva and Brahman

There is no difference between the jīva and Brahman.
When ignorance is dissipated the jīva becomes identical
with the svarūpa of Brahman. At that time the jīva has
no separate exist-ence. This kind of knowledge is called
jīva-brahma-aikya-jñāna.

The word jñāna, which is used in the verse under
discussion, refers only to this knowledge of the oneness
of the jīvas and Brahman. This knowledge is called
nirviśeṣa-jñāna, knowledge of non-distinction, or
impersonalism. Nirviśeṣa-jñāna is opposed to bhakti. But
the other two forms of knowledge mentioned before — tat-
padārtha-jñāna and tvaṁ-padārtha-jñāna — are not opposed

                              23
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

to bhakti. When one adopts the path of bhakti, these two
types of knowledge are essential. But upon entering the
path of bhakti, devotion mixed with empiric speculative
knowledge (jñāna-miśra-bhakti) is labelled as external.
This type of knowledge must be given up.

There is no possibility that the jīva’s natural
relationship with the Supreme Lord as servant and served
could ever arise in jīva-brahma-aikya-jñāna. This
attitude of servant and served, sevya-sevaka-bhāva, is
the very life of bhakti. Therefore to remain fully
purified of any taint of nirviśeṣa-jñāna is part of the
second extrinsic characteristic of uttama-bhakti.



Three types of bhakti

One should also remember that bhakti is of three types:
(1) āropa-siddhā (those activities which, although not
consisting of pure bhakti, are designated as bhakti due
to their being offered to the Supreme Lord); (2) saṅga-
siddhā (those endeavours that are associated with or
favourable to the development of bhakti but not of
themselves purely composed of bhakti); and (3) svarūpa-
siddhā (those endeavours that are purely constituted of
uttama-bhakti).



(1) Āropa-siddha-bhakti

Endeavours indirectly attributed with the quality of
bhakti

Endeavours which by nature are not purely constituted of
bhakti — that is, ānukūlya-kṛṣṇānuśīlana — and in which
the performer, in order to fulfil his own purpose,
offers his activities and their results to the Lord so
that He may be pleased, are called āropa-siddha-bhakti.
In other words because his activities are assigned
(āropa) to the Supreme Lord, bhakti is attributed
(āropita) to them.



Comment



That bhakti which is mixed with karma or desires for
material enjoyment is called sakāma-bhakti or saguṇa-
bhakti. Without the assistance of bhakti, karma cannot
yield any fruit. Knowing this, many persons offer their
prescribed duties for the satisfaction of the Lord, in
order that He might fulfil their extraneous desires. The
activities of such persons are not svarūpa-siddha-
bhakti. Nonetheless, because they offer the fruit of
their activity to the Lord, it is considered as a type
of bhakti. Although their activities are offered for the
satisfaction of the Lord, their motivation is that by
pleasing Him, He may fulfil their extraneous desires. In
this case their activities are attributed with the sense
of bhakti. Therefore such endeavours are known as āropa-

                           24
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                  5/5/2017

siddha-bhakti.



(2) Saṅga-siddha-bhakti

Endeavours associated with or favourable to the
cultivation of bhakti

There are other endeavours which, although not purely
constituted of bhakti (i.e. anukūlya-kṛṣṇānuśīlana),
acquire a likeness to bhakti due to their being
established as assistants to bhakti. Such endeavours are
known as saṅga-siddha-bhakti. An example of this is
found in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.3.23ñ5) in the statement
of Śrī Prabuddha Muni to Mahārāja Nimi: “One should
cultivate compassion towards others, friendliness,
offering respect to others, cleanliness, austerity,
tolerance, silence, study of the Vedas, simplicity,
celibacy, non-violence and so on. One should consider
heat and cold, happiness and distress to be the same.
One should perceive the presence of the Lord everywhere.
One should live in a secluded place, renounce family
attachments and remain satisfied with gain that comes of
its own accord.”

Even though the behaviour or practices of bhāgavata-
dharma described in this verse are not by nature purely
constituted of bhakti, they are assistants to bhakti.
Thus they are considered to be like associates or
parikaras of bhakti. If bhagavad-bhakti is removed from
the twenty-six qualities alluded to above by Prabuddha
Muni, then Bhagavān has no direct relationship with
them. Only when these qualities exist as assistants to
or associates of bhakti is their likeness to bhakti
effected. Therefore they are known as saṅga-siddha-
bhakti.



(3) Svarūpa-siddha-bhakti

Endeavours purely constituted of uttama-bhakti

All favourable endeavours (ceṣṭā) such as śravaṇa,
kīrtana, smaraṇa and so on, as well as the manifestation
of the spiritual sentiments which occur beginning from
the stage of bhāva, which are completely devoid of all
desires separate from Śrī Kṛṣṇa and which are freed from
the coverings of jñāna and karma, are known as svarūpa-
siddha-bhakti. In other words all endeavours of the
body, mind and words that are related to Śrī Kṛṣṇa and
that are performed exclusively and directly for His
pleasure without any intervention are known as svarūpa-
siddha-bhakti.

Therefore in rāmānanda-saṁvāda, the conversation between
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and Rāya Rāmānanda found in Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta, both āropa-siddha- and saṅga-
siddha-bhakti have been described as external.



Karma

                            25
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017


By the word karma used in this verse, all smārta-karma
or in other words all nitya-naimittika-karma (daily and
occasional duties) mentioned in the smṛti-śāstras as
well as all types of karma-miśra- and jñāna-miśra-bhakti
have been forbidden. Karma as activities that are
undertaken as sevā-paricaryā (service and attendance
upon the Lord) and that are helpful to the performance
of bhajana are not forbidden. Because all activities of
sevā-paricaryā related to bhajana fall within the
jurisdiction of kṛṣṇānuśīlana, they can never be
prohibited.



Ādi

In the phrase jñāna-karmādi, the word ādi (which means
“and so on”) refers to phalgu-vairāgya (renunciation
that is not helpful to bhakti), aṣṭāṅga-yoga (the
eightfold yoga system), the practice of abhyāsa-yoga
(frequent and repeated meditation on abstract spirit) as
cited in sāṅkhya-śāstra, and other practices. All these
are also prohibited.



Anāvṛta

One other topic is worthy of consideration here. Why is
it that the word anāvṛta (uncovered) has been used in
relation to jñāna, karma and so on instead of the word
śūnya (completely devoid of)? This has been done to
signify that only jñāna and karma that cover bhakti have
been prohibited and not jñāna or karma that gives
nourishment to bhakti. By a complete absence of karma
and jñāna, a sādhaka would not even be able to maintain
his life.

The coverings of bhakti are of two kinds: (1) the fear
that by not performing the nitya-karma (daily obligatory
rituals) in conformity to the injunctions of the
śāstras, one will incur sin; and (2) the conviction that
by carrying out the nitya-naimittika-karma (daily and
occasional duties) set down in the smṛti-śāstras, one
will obtain the desired fruit in the form of bhakti. If
one is impelled by such a conviction and faithfully
performs all the nitya-naimittika-karma thinking that
bhakti cannot be attained without them, then such karma
will obscure bhakti.

If, however, an advanced devotee sometimes performs
Vedic rituals like the śrāddha offering to the
forefathers, with no regard for them and merely for the
instruction and restraint of people in general, there
will be no harm done to his bhakti. Because he performs
such activities without the faith that bhakti is
dependent on such performances, there is no hindrance to
or covering of śuddha-bhakti.

Here the phrase kṛṣṇānuśīlana refers simply to kṛṣṇa-
bhakti. This phrase has been used in the verse to point
out very clearly that bhakti is to be directed
exclusively towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Wherever the word bhakti

                           26
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

is mentioned in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Nārada-pañcarātra and
all other bhakti-śāstras, it refers only to bhagavad-
bhakti. The purport of this is that the word bhakti
should be used only for the Lord’s incarnations in the
category of viṣṇu-tattva.




Verse 2 — Sādhana-bhakti




sā bhaktiḥ sādhana-bhaktir bhāva-bhaktiḥ

premā-bhaktir iti trividhā

sādhana-bhaktiḥ punar vaidhī-

rāgānugā-bhedena dvividhā



“Uttama-bhakti is of three types: sādhana-bhakti, bhāva-
bhakti and prema-bhakti. Sādhana-bhakti is further
divided into two — namely, vaidhī and rāgānugā.”



Śrī Bindu-vikāśinī-vṛtti



Types of Uttama-bhakti



If someone were to assert here that uttama-bhakti should
be classified into two types — sādhana-bhakti as the
means and prema-bhakti as sādhya, the objective — then
bhāva-bhakti would be included within the category of
sādhya-bhakti or prema-bhakti. Then what would be the
necessity of accepting three divisions? No! This
contention is completely unfounded. Uttama-bhakti should
be accepted to be of three types. There are solid
grounds to support this.

In Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (2.1.276) the characteristics
of a sādhaka of bhakti are described as follows:



utpanna-ratayaḥ samyaṅ

nairvighnyam anupāgatāḥ

kṛṣṇa-sākṣāt-kṛtau yogyāḥ

sādhakāḥ parikīrttitāḥ




                             27
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

One in whose heart rati (bhāva) towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa has
already manifested, who has become qualified to perceive
the direct

manifestation of the Lord, but who has not yet obtained
complete freedom from all obstacles, is called a
sādhaka-bhakta.



By this description of a sādhaka-bhakta it is clear
that, in spite of the appearance of bhāva-bhakti or rati
in the heart of the sādhaka, he has not obtained
complete freedom from all impedi-ments. At that time
there remains in the sādhaka some trace of a great
offence committed against a devotee. As long as a trace
of such an offence remains in the heart of the sādhaka-
bhakta, there is a possibility that kleśa, distress, and
vighna, impediments, may still arise. As such, the
manifestation of sādhya-bhakti or prema-bhakti is not
possible in the above-mentioned sādhaka. In contrast
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (2.1.280) describes the
characteristics of a siddha-bhakta (one who has attained
to the stage of sādhya-bhakti) as follows:



avijñātākhila-kleśāḥ

sadā kṛṣṇāśrita-kriyāḥ

siddhāḥ syuḥ santata-prema-

saukhyāsvāda-parāyaṇāḥ



One who is always fully immersed in activities related
to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is completely unacquainted with
impediments (vighna) or material distress (kleśa)1, and
who incessantly tastes the bliss of prema is called a
siddha-bhakta.



In the sādhaka of bhāva-bhakti, kleśa is still present.
He also experiences these types of distress and various
kinds of impediments, but in the siddha-bhakta there is
no presence or experience of any kind of kleśa.
Therefore bhāva-bhakti can never be included within
sādhya- or prema-bhakti.

It could be argued, alternatively, that bhāva-bhakti may
be included within sādhana-bhakti. In response to this
it is said that bhāva-bhakti can never be accepted to
fall within sādhana-bhakti. In this connection the
characteristics of sādhana-bhakti have been described in
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.2):

kṛti-sādhyā bhavet sādhya-

bhāvā sā sādhanābhidhā

nitya-siddhasya bhāvasya

                              28
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017


prākaṭyaṁ hṛdi sādhyatā



In this verse sādhana-bhakti is referred to as sādhya-
bhāva. In other words the sādhana or practice of bhakti
by which bhāva-bhakti is attained is called sādhya-
bhāva. Since bhāva-bhakti is the fruit of sādhana-
bhakti, how can it be included within sādhana-bhakti?
The sādhana or means of attainment of bhāva-bhakti can
never be called bhāva-bhakti. Therefore the previously
mentioned three divisions of uttama-bhakti — namely,
sādhana-bhakti, bhāva-bhakti and prema-bhakti — are
thoroughly appropriate and pleasing in every respect.



Sādhana-bhakti



After having defined uttama-bhakti to be of three types,
sādhana-bhakti is now being described. Sādhana-bhakti is
of two kinds: vaidhī and rāgānugā. The characteristics
of uttama-bhakti have been described in a general way in
the verse anyābhilāṣitā-śunyam. When uttama-bhakti is
accomplished through the medium of the senses of the
baddha-jīva, it is called sādhana-bhakti. This is stated
in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.2):



kṛti-sādhyā bhavet sādhya-

bhāvā sā sādhanābhidhā

nitya-siddhasya bhāvasya

prākaṭyaṁ hṛdi sādhyatā



That bhakti which is accomplished through the function
of the senses and by which bhāva-bhakti is obtained is
called sādhana-bhakti. The manifesting of the nitya-
siddha-bhāva within the heart of the purified jīva is
called sādhyatā.



Bhakti is the nitya-siddha-bhāva of the jīva. To bring
about its manifestation within the purified heart is
called sādhyatā, the attainment of the desired pursuit.
The purport of this statement is that in the jīva, who
is an infinitesimal particle of spirit (cit-kaṇa), there
exists inherently a particle of bliss (ānanda-kaṇa) of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is compared to the unlimited spiritual
sun. When the jīva is bound by māyā this ānanda-kaṇa
remains practically lost. To cause this eternal nature
to manifest within the heart is the one and only duty of
the jīvas. Only in this condition is the state of
attainment of the eternally accomplished reality (nitya-
siddha-vastu) effected. As long as bhakti that brings

                             29
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

about the manifestation of bhāva is effected through the
sense organs of the baddha-jīva, it is called sādhana-
bhakti.

Only by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa or His devotees does bhakti,
in the form of śravaṇa, kīrtana and so on, manifest
itself upon the purified senses of the jīva. Prior to
this, when the faithful jīva, through his own effort,
performs bhagavan-nāma-kīrtana with the tongue or hears
bhagavat-kathā with the ears, such an endeavour is
called indriya-vyāpāra (engagement of the senses) or
indriya-preraṇā (that which is induced by the senses).
But this is also accepted as sādhana-bhakti.

As an example, for the performance of a yajña it is
necessary to first collect ghee, firewood, kuśa grass,
flowers, a sitting place and other paraphernalia. The
gathering of these items and other preliminary
activities are understood to be included within the
yajña. Similarly, for the performance of sādhana-bhakti
consisting of śravaṇa, kīrtana and so on, the
preliminary activities of forcibly engaging the senses
(indriya-vyāpāra) are also accepted as part of bhakti.
Karma, jñāna, yoga, tapasya, vows or any other means
separate from bhakti cannot bring about its
manifestation. Bhakti is the only cause of the
appearance of bhakti. This conclusion is thoroughly
appropriate.



Comment



In reality śravaṇa, kīrtana and the other limbs of
bhakti are not functions of the material senses. They
cannot be undertaken by the material senses. Because
bhakti is a specialised function of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, it is an
eternal spiritual phenomenon (nitya-cinmaya-padārtha).
By the mercy of Śrī Kṛṣṇa or His devotees, bhakti,
manifesting itself upon the senses of the sādhaka,
spiritualises them and causes them to attain oneness
(tādātmyā) with its nature. The various sādhana-aṅgas of
uttama-bhakti may then be undertaken through the medium
of the purified senses. But it should be remembered that
the various types of sādhanas directed towards the
attainment of dharma, artha, kāma and mokṣa are not
counted as sādhana-bhakti. Only those limbs of bhakti
that give rise to bhāva-bhakti are accepted as sādhana-
bhakti.



Bhāva-bhakti as nitya-siddha

The limbs of bhakti such as śravaṇa, kīrtana and so on
that are performed in the stage of bhāva-bhakti, or in
other words that are undertaken as by-products or
anubhāvas of bhāva-bhakti, are also known as bhāva-
bhakti. To refer to them as sādhana-bhakti would be a
mistake. Therefore, in order to prevent this, the
qualifying term sādhya-bhāva has been used in the verse
under discussion (Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.2)). That

                           30
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

by which bhāva is to be accomplished (sādhya) is called
sādhya-bhāva. Sādhana-bhakti brings about the
manifestation of bhāva-bhakti. Therefore the practices
of bhakti by which dharma, artha, kāma, mokṣa and other
puruṣārthas or human goals are accomplished are quite
apart from sādhana-bhakti that gives rise to bhāva-
bhakti. They cannot be classified as sādhana-bhakti. The
reason for this is that sādhana-bhakti is carried out
only in connection with that uttama-bhakti in which
there is no trace of desire other than that for bhakti.

A doubt may be raised here that if bhāva-bhakti is
brought about by sādhana-bhakti, then bhāva-bhakti must
not have existed previously; it arose by the performance
of sādhana-bhakti. In that case bhāva-bhakti would be
anitya (non-eternal) or kṛtrim (that which is not
natural or spontaneously manifest). Therefore how could
this anitya-bhāva-bhakti be accepted as nitya-siddha
(eternally accomplished) or in other words as the
supreme object of attainment, parama-puruṣārtha-vastu?

The word nitya-siddha has been used in this verse in
order to dispel this doubt. Bhāva is an eternally
accomplished phenom-enon (nitya-siddha). It always
exists in the eternal associates (nitya-parikaras) of
Bhagavān. This nitya-siddha-bhāva manifests itself from
the Lord’s eternal associates into the heart of the
purified jīva. This is verified in Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 22.107):



nitya-siddha kṛṣṇa-prema sādhya kabhu naya

śravaṇādi śuddha-citte karaye udaya



Kṛṣṇa-prema is an eternally established reality; it is
not brought about by sādhana. It automatically manifests
itself in the heart purified by the performance of the
various limbs of bhakti such as śravaṇa, kīrtana and so
on.



Bhāva is the indistinct, beginning stage of prema, which
is also known as premāṅkura, the sprout of prema. The
mature or highly intensified condition of bhāva is
called prema. Therefore the bhāva being referred to is
also an eternally established reality (nitya-siddha-
vṛtti).

The word bhāva has been used in the sense of upalakṣaṇa.
Upalakṣaṇa means the act of implying something that has
not been directly expressed. Upa is a prefix that
literally means towards, near to, by the side of,
together with and so on. When in describing some
particular characteristic (lakṣaṇa) a second
characteristic is simultaneously and indirectly implied,
it is called upalakṣaṇa. Therefore the word bhāva also
implies the limbs of bhakti, such as śravaṇa and
kīrtana, undertaken as anubhāvas or resultant actions of
bhāva-bhakti.

                           31
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017


Although Śrī Kṛṣṇa “appeared” in the home of Vasudeva,
one should not think that He took birth there. Similarly
one should not think that sādhana gives birth to bhāva.
Rather bhāva automatically manifests itself upon the
ears, tongue and other senses that have been purified by
sādhana. At such a time the performances of sādhana such
as śravaṇa and kīrtana, being fully constituted of
bhāva, become one with its nature. They are then nitya-
siddha, being anubhāvas of nitya-siddha-bhāva-bhakti.
Therefore the limbs of śravaṇa, kīrtana and so on
manifest themselves automatically on the tongue, ears
and other senses of persons engaged in the nitya-siddha-
aṅgas of bhakti. This is due to the fact that bhakti is
a specialised function of the svarūpa-śakti of Bhagavān.
This will be described further ahead in connection with
bhāva-bhakti.




Verse 3 — Stages Leading to the Appearance of Prema


ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-

saṅgo ‘tha bhajana-kriyā

tato ‘nartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt

tato niṣṭhā rucis tataḥ

athāsaktis tato bhāvas

tataḥ premābhyudañcati

sādhakanām ayaṁ premṇaḥ

prādurbhāve bhavet kramaḥ



Śrī Bindu-vikāśinī-vṛtti



There are many stages leading to the manifestation of
prema. Among them, those which are most famous in the
scriptures will be described here. The bhagavad-vimukha-
jīva, or one whose face is averted from Bhagavān, has
from a time without beginning fallen into the unlimited
flow of the insurmountable ocean of material existence
and is thus wandering here and there. When by the
special mercy of Bhagavān the jīva’s material existence
begins to wane, he obtains the association of the Lord’s
devotees. At that time, in the company of sādhus, he
obtains the extraordinary fortune of hearing from the
mouths of elevated devotees the scriptures that are
filled with the glories concerning the three topics of
bhaktas, bhakti and Bhagavān.

The stages leading to the appearance of prema, as
described in the above verses from Bhakti-rasāmṛta-

                             32
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                  5/5/2017

sindhu (1.4.15ñ16), are as follows:

(1) By hearing the śāstras, pāramārthika or
transcendental śuddha-śraddhā appears. The word śraddhā
here implies firm belief in the meaning of the bhakti-
śāstras such as Bhagavad-gītā, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu and so forth.

(2) Upon the appearance of such śraddhā one again
obtains sādhu-saṅga and, in such company, begins to
receive instructions regarding the methods for executing
bhajana.

(3) Thereafter one takes up the practices of bhajana
(bhajana-kriyā) beginning with śrī-guru-padāśraya and so
on.

(4) By constant engagement in bhajana, anarthas
gradually disappear (anartha-nivṛtti).

(5) This elimination of anarthas takes place in
successive stages. As one becomes progressively freed
from anarthas he attains niṣṭhā and freedom from all
distractions (vikṣepa). At that stage one-pointedness
(ekāgratā) characterised by incessant striving arises in
the pursuit of bhajana.

(6) Thereafter ruci (taste), or in other words an
intense hankering for bhajana, develops.

(7) When ruci becomes very deep it is called āsakti. The
difference between niṣṭhā and āsakti is that niṣṭhā
involves application of the intelligence, whereas āsakti
is spontaneous. In the stage of niṣṭhā, even if the mind
is not attracted, by one’s intelligence one remains
devoted to the performance of bhajana. However, when one
comes to the stage of āsakti, he has no more dependence
on any kind of reasoning by the faculty of the
intelligence. At that stage he is deeply immersed in the
performance of bhajana in a spontaneous manner.

(8) After the stage of āsakti, bhāva makes its
appearance.

(9) At the final stage prema manifests. This is the
order of the stages leading to the appearance of prema
within the heart of the sādhaka.



Comment



To elaborate further on point (4) above, anarthas are of
four kinds: (1) svarūpa-bhrama (illusion about spiritual
identity), (2) asat-tṛṣṇā (thirst for that which is
unreal; that is, material enjoyment), (3) aparādha
(offences) and (4) hṛdaya-daurbalya (weakness of heart).

Svarūpa-bhrama is of four kinds: (1) sva-tattva- or
jīva-svarūpa-bhrama (illusion about one’s own spiritual
identity), (2) para-tattva-bhrama (illusion about the
spiritual identity of the supreme absolute truth), (3)

                           33
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

sādhya-sādhana-tattva-bhrama (illusion about sādhana-
bhakti, the means of spiritual perfection, and sādhya,
the object to be obtained by such sādhana, or in other
words prema-bhakti) and (4) māyā-tattva-bhrama (illusion
about the Lord’s external energy, māyā).

Asat-tṛṣṇā is of four types: (1) varieties of desires
for material enjoyment in this world, (2) desires for
enjoyment in the higher planetary systems of Svargaloka,
(3) desires for the attainment of the eight mystic
siddhis and the nine divine jewels of Kuvera (padma,
mahāpadma, śaṅkha, makara, kacchapa, mukunda, kunda,
nīla and kharva) and (4) the desire for mukti.

Aparādha is of four kinds: (1) offences towards Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, (2) offences towards kṛṣṇa-nāma, (3) offences
towards kṛṣna-svarūpa (the deity form of the Lord) and
(4) offences towards the tadīya-cit-kaṇa-jīvas (living
entities who are infinitesimal particles of spirit
belonging to the Lord).

Hṛdaya-daurbalya is of four kinds: (1) tuccha-āsakti
(attachment for useless things), (2) kūṭī-nāṭī
(deceitful behaviour — the word kūṭī-nāṭī may be broken
down into the constituent parts kū, bad or evil, and na
or nāṭī, that which is forbidden. In that case it would
mean doing wicked deeds or doing that which is
forbidden), (3) mātsarya (envy) and (4) sva-pratiṣṭhā-
lālasā (desire for one’s own fame and prestige).

Aside from the above, there are four additional
varieties of anartha: (1) duṣkṛti-uttha (arising from
past sins), (2) sukṛti-uttha (arising from previous
pious activities), (3) aparādha-uttha (arising from
offences) and (4) bhakti-uttha (arising in relation to
bhakti).

(1) Duṣkṛti-uttha: anarthas arising from past sinful
activities refer to five types of kleśa or distress,
which are (i) avidyā (ignorance or forgetfulness of
Kṛṣṇa), (ii) asmitā (the false egoism arising from the
conceptions of “I” and “mine” in relation to the
material body), (iii) rāga (attachment for the objects
of sense gratification), (iv) dveṣa (hatred or aversion
to unpleasant, disagreeable or adverse situations) and
(v) dur-abhiniveśa (attachment for or absorption in
sinful activities).

(2) Sukṛti-uttha: various kinds of material enjoyment
arising from the pious activities of one’s previous
birth.

(3) Aparādha-uttha: suffering arising from nāmāparādha
and other types of offences.

(4) Bhakti-uttha: desires for lābha (material gain),
pūjā (worship) and pratiṣṭhā (prestige) arising from the
performance of sakāma-bhakti or sopādhika-bhakti
(conditional devotional service).

One should endeavour to uproot all these anarthas;
otherwise niṣṭhā will not develop.



                           34
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017


One further point should be clarified in regard to the
appearance of prema. In the verse under consideration
(ādau śraddhā...), the word ādau refers to the initial
contact with devotees (sādhu-saṅga). This sādhu-saṅga is
not obtained coincidentally. It is the result of sukṛti,
pious activities accumulated over many, many lifetimes.



bhaktis tu bhagavad-bhakta-

saṅgena parijāyate

sat-saṅga-prāpyate pumbhiḥ

sukṛtaiḥ pūrva-sañcitaiḥ



Bṛhan-nāradīya Purāṇa (4.33); Hari-bhakti-vilāsa
(10.279)



Bhakti becomes manifest by the association of the Lord’s
devotees. The association of devotees is obtained by
previous accumulated piety.



In the scriptures pious activity is called sukṛti, which
is of two kinds: that which promotes bhakti and that
which instigates some secondary result other than
bhakti. Sukṛti that begets ordinary fruits arises from
such activities as service to one’s parents or husband,
material welfare work, charity, execution of nitya-
naimittika-karma (one’s daily and occasional duties),
cultivation of sāṅkhya and other types of jñāna, and so
on.

Sukṛti that gives rise to transcendental (pāramārthika)
results, or in other words bhakti, arises from contact
with places such as a temple or holy place, holy times
or days, or objects related to bhakti or sādhu-saṅga.
When heaps and heaps of sukṛti that yields bhakti
accumulate over countless lifetimes, bhakti makes its
appearance through the via-medium of sādhu-saṅga.

Laukika or material sukṛti, after producing its desired
fruits, is exhausted. The fruits of laukika-sukṛti
extend no further than the limit of material enjoyment.
Sukṛti that is rooted in brahma-jñāna produces its fruit
in the form of mukti and is then dissipated. These two
types of sukṛti are thoroughly incompetent to produce
the fruit of bhakti.

Sukṛti that yields bhakti arises from association with
Vaiṣṇavas; observance of Ekādaśī, Janmāṣṭamī, Gaura-
pūrṇimā and other occasions which produce a saintly
attitude; seeing or touching tulasī, the temple, Śrī
Vṛndāvana and other holy places connected to the Lord,
or a holy river like the Gaṅgā or Yamunā; honouring
mahā-prasāda; and other such activities. When these

                              35
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                 5/5/2017

activities are performed unknowingly it is called
sukṛti. When, however, these activities are performed in
the association of devotees and in full knowledge of
their greatness, they become limbs of bhakti. In Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 22.62) it is said:



śraddhā-śabde viśvāsa kahe sudṛḍha niścaya

kṛṣṇe bhakti kaile sarva-karma kṛta haya



Simply by performing bhakti unto Śrī Kṛṣṇa all
obligations of this human form of life will be
fulfilled. Such firm, decisive faith is called śraddhā.



śraddhā tv anyopāya-varjaṁ bhakty unmukhī citta-vṛtti
viśeṣaḥ



Āmnāya-sūtra (57)



That particular disposition of the heart (citta-vṛtti)
which remains always inclined towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa alone,
leaving aside all other methods of sādhana such as
jñāna, karma and yoga, is called śraddhā.

By the   association of saintly devotees, śraddhā, which
is the   seed of the creeper of devotion (bhakti-latā-
bīja),   arises in the heart of the sādhaka. This is
stated   in various places in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta:



kṛṣṇa-bhakti-janma-mūla haya sādhu-saṅga

kṛṣṇa-prema janme, teṅho punaḥ mukhya aṅga



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 22.83)



Sādhu-saṅga is the root cause of kṛṣṇa-bhakti. This
sādhu-saṅga waters the creeper of kṛṣṇa-bhakti (sādhana-
bhakti) through the medium of śravaṇa and kīrtana and
thus transforms it into kṛṣṇa-prema. When kṛṣṇa-prema is
awakened, sādhu-saṅga becomes the most essential limb
once again.



brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva

guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde pāya bhakti-latā-bīja


                             36
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 19.151)



While continuously wandering throughout the innumerable
material universes, some extremely fortunate jīvas
obtain the bhakti-latā-bīja in the form of śraddhā by
the causeless mercy of Śrī Śrī Guru and Kṛṣṇa.



kona bhāgye kāro saṁsāra kṣayonmukha haya

sādhu-saṅge tabe kṛṣṇe rati upajaya



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 22.45)



When the material entanglement of the living entity who
is wandering throughout this worldly existence begins to
diminish, then he obtains sādhu-saṅga by the causeless
mercy of the Lord. By that sādhu-saṅga he obtains kṛṣṇa-
bhakti successively in the stages of śraddhā, niṣṭhā,
ruci, āsakti and rati.



kṛṣṇa yadi kṛpā kare kona bhāgyavāne

guru-antaryāmi-rūpe śikhāya āpane



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 22.47)

When Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is an ocean of mercy, becomes
causelessly merciful towards some fortunate jīva
wandering throughout

material existence, then inspiring him from within as
the caitya-guru and from without as the elevated dīkṣā-
and śikṣā-gurus, He personally gives him instructions
about how to perform bhajana.



śraddhāvān jana haya bhakti-adhikārī

uttama, madhyama, kaniṣṭha — śraddhā-anusārī



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 22.64)



Devotees are categorised in accordance with the degree
of their śraddhā. Those whose faith is the least are
known as kaniṣṭha-bhaktas, those whose faith is

                           37
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

intermediate are known as madhyama-bhaktas and those
whose faith is highly developed are known as uttama-
mahā-bhāgavatas.



sādhu-saṅge kṛṣṇa-bhaktye śraddhā yadi haya

bhakti-phala prema haya, saṁsāra yāya kṣaya



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 22.49)



When a sādhaka-bhakta obtains faith in the association
of soft-hearted and affectionate rasika Vaiṣṇavas who
are more advanced than himself, who are thoroughly
versed in all the conclusions of the revealed
scriptures, and who are of the same disposition
(sajātīya), he very quickly obtains prema-bhakti and his
material entanglement is easily dissipated.



mahat-kṛpā vinā kona karme bhakti naya

kṛṣṇa-bhakti dūre rahu, saṁsāre nahe kṣaya



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 22.51)



Without the mercy of elevated devotees, bhakti cannot be
obtained by any method. To say nothing of kṛṣṇa-bhakti,
one cannot even obtain freedom from material attachment
and repeated birth and death.



Sādhu-saṅga is the root of bhagavad-bhakti — kṛṣṇa-
bhakti-janma-mūla haya sādhu-saṅga (Caitanya-caritāmṛta
(Madhya-līlā 22.83)). In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.20.8) the
Supreme Lord has said: “yadṛcchayā mat-kathādau jāta-
śraddhas tu yaḥ pumān — by virtue of the good fortune of
their previous births, those in whom śraddhā is awakened
towards My līlā-kathā are eligible to take up bhakti.”

Jīva Gosvāmī, in defining the word yadṛcchayā
(voluntarily, spontaneously or by their own will) used
in this śloka, has said: “kenāpi parama-svatantra
bhagavad-bhakta-saṅga tat-kṛpājāta parama-maṅgalodayena
— by the association of the Lord’s supremely independent
devotees and as a consequence of the mercy obtained from
them, one obtains great fortune (saubhāgya). That
saubhāgya itself becomes the eligibility for bhakti.”

The meaning of saubhāgya is that by the contact of
sādhus in one’s previous life and by the mercy obtained
from them, a very deep impression (saṁskāra) is formed
upon the mind or heart. When it is nourished again in

                           38
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

the present life, it arises in the form of śraddhā. This
śraddhā is the cause of the awakening of bhakti. In this
connection it is said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.25.25):



satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-saṁvido

bhavanti hṛt-karṇa-rasāyanāḥ kathāḥ

taj-joṣaṇād āśv apavarga-vartmani

śraddhā ratir bhaktir anukramiṣyati



In the association of pure devotees one hears
descriptions of My heroic deeds, which are very pleasing
to the ear and the heart. Such descriptions bestow real
knowledge of My excellence. By regular hearing and
contemplation of such topics one is liberated from
ignorance, as a result of which one successively attains
śraddhā, rati (bhāva-bhakti) and prema-bhakti towards
Me.



According to the above-mentioned conclusion, sādhu-saṅga
is the passageway which brings one face to face with the
Lord. By the influence of sādhu-saṅga, the living entity
who is averted from the Lord becomes turned towards the
Lord. Furthermore, by that association, śraddhā, rati
and prema arise one after another.

By the association of sādhus whose attention is not
incessantly and exclusively drawn upon the Lord, and in
whom śraddhā, rati and prema have not arisen, the
conditioned soul cannot be turned towards the Lord, nor
can śraddhā, rati or prema develop in him. By the
association of sādhus who are attached only to the
rituals of proper conduct that are in accordance with
the rules and regulations of the Vedas, bhagavad-
unmukhatā (attentiveness towards the Lord) and śraddhā,
rati and prema cannot arise.

Sādhu-saṅga is of two types: the association of siddha-
mahāpuruṣas, or perfected souls, who pursue the path of
knowledge (jñāna-mārga) and the association of siddha-
mahāpuruṣas who pursue the path of bhakti (bhakti-
mārga). By the association of jñānīs, śraddhā, rati and
prema cannot awaken. Although material attachments may
be dissipated by the association of such persons,
śraddhā, rati and prema towards the personal form of the
Lord do not arise in the jīva. Therefore their
association is irrelevant.

Siddha-mahāpuruṣas who pursue the path of bhakti are of
three types: (1) bhagavat-pārṣada-deha-prāpta (those who
have obtained perfected spiritual bodies as eternal
associates of the Lord), (2) nirdhūta-kaṣāya (those who
have thrown off all material impurities) and (3)
mūrcchita-kaṣāya (those in whom a trace of material
contamination still lies dormant).


                           39
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017



(1) Bhagavat-pārṣada-deha-prāpta

After giving up the gross material body, those who have
perfected themselves through the practice of bhakti
obtain sac-cid-ānanda spiritual forms, which are just
suitable for the service of the Lord as associates
(pārṣadas). Such persons are the best of all uttama-
bhāgavatas.



(2) Nirdhūta-kaṣāya

Those who, although still residing within the gross
material body made of five elements, have no trace of
material desire (vāsanā) nor any material impressions
(saṁskāras) within their hearts are called nirdhūta-
kaṣāya (those who have thrown off all material
impurities). They belong to the intermediate class of
uttama-bhāgavatas.



(3) Mūrcchita-kaṣāya

Those siddha-mahāpuruṣas pursuing the path of bhakti in
whose hearts there remains a trace of desire (vāsanā)
and impressions (saṁskāras) based on the material mode
of goodness are known as mūrcchita-kaṣāya. Due to
influence of their bhakti-yoga, these desires and
impressions remain in a dormant or unconscious state. As
soon as there is a favourable opportunity, their
worshipful object, Śrī Bhagavān, somehow causes their
desire to be consumed and attracts them to His lotus
feet. Such elevated souls belong to the preliminary
stage (kaniṣṭha) of uttama-bhāgavatas.

Devarṣi Nārada is an example of the topmost uttama-
bhāgavata. Śukadeva Gosvāmī belongs to the intermediate
stage of uttama-bhāgavatas (nirdhūta-kaṣāya). Śrī Nārada
in his previous birth as the son of a maidservant is an
example of the preliminary stage of uttama-bhāgavatas
(mūrcchita-kaṣāya). The association and mercy of these
three kinds of mahā-bhāgavatas is the cause of the
production of śraddhā. By discussing the gradations of
the bhakti of different categories of devotees, one can
automatically understand the gradations of the effect of
their association.

Some people think there is no need to take shelter at
the lotus feet of a spiritual master. Is there any harm
in reading books by oneself and thus performing bhajana?
Some persons accept dīkṣā from their mother, father or
other relatives, considering that there is no need to
take shelter at the lotus feet of a sad-guru. Such
persons think as follows: “Some elevated personalities
appeared in our dynasty and we are their descendants.
Therefore we are already gosvāmīs or mahāpuruṣas. Why
should we accept dīkṣā from any other person?” But
Śrīman Mahāprabhu has said in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta
(Madhya-līlā 8.128):


                           40
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017



kibā vipra, kibā nyāsī, śūdra kene naya

yei kṛṣṇa-tattva-vettā, sei guru haya



Whether one is a brāhmaṇa, a sannyāsī or a śūdra, if he
is learned in all the truths regarding Śrī Kṛṣṇa, then
he is to be accepted as a guru.



It is also stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.3.21):



tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta

jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam

śābde pare ca niṣṇātaṁ

brahmaṇy-upaśamāśrayam



How can a person who is desirous of knowing what is duty
and what is not duty obtain the topmost benefit? In
order to understand this, one must approach the lotus
feet of a sad-guru. One who is expert in understanding
all the conclusions of the revealed scriptures such as
the Vedas, who has direct experience and realisation of
Bhagavān, and who is not influenced by any kind of
material agitation is known as a sad-guru.



The purport of this statement is that only a person who
is situated in śuddha-bhakti, who is learned in all the
conclusions of the scriptures, whose actions are pure,
who is simple and honest, who is free from greed, who is
free from deviant conclusions such as māyāvāda, who is
expert in all functions related to the service of the
Lord, who is free from lethargy, and who is intently
devoted to the holy name of the Lord is fit to become a
guru. It does not matter what family, race, social
classification (varṇa) or stage of life (āśrama) he may
be in.

Another consideration is that only a person who is free
from lethargy, who is faithful, whose activities are
pure, and who is desirous of bhagavad-bhakti is eligible
to become a disciple. When the guru considers the
disciple fit and when the disciple ascertains the guru
to be a pure devotee of Kṛṣṇa and thus reposes his faith
in him, the spiritual master will then impart
instructions unto the disciple.

There are two kinds of guru: the dīkṣā-guru and the
śikṣā-guru (the śravaṇa-guru and the śikṣā-guru are here
considered as one). One should accept initiation from
the dīkṣā-guru and take instructions regarding the

                           41
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

process of worship (arcana). There is only one dīkṣā-
guru, but there can be many śikṣā-gurus. The śikṣā-guru
gives instructions on how to perform bhajana. According
to Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta and other scriptures, one
should not discriminate between the dīkṣā- and śikṣā-
guru — there is no difference between them.

The dīkṣā- and śikṣā-guru have been described
respectively as bhagavad-rūpa or prakāśa (the external
form or feature of the Lord) and bhagavat-svarūpa (the
internal identity or form of the Lord). This is clearly
mentioned in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta. The dīkṣā-guru has
been described in the following words:



guru kṛṣṇa-rūpa hana śāstrera pramāṇe

guru-rūpe kṛṣṇa kṛpā karena bhakta-gaṇe



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 1.45)



According to the evidence of the revealed scriptures,
the [dīkṣā-] guru is directly the outward form of the
Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa (kṛṣṇa-rūpa). Kṛṣṇa in the form
of the spiritual master bestows mercy upon the devotees.



The śikṣā-guru is described as follows:



śikṣā-guruke ta’ jāni kṛṣṇera svarūpa



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 1.47)



One should know the śikṣā-guru to be the internal form
or identity of Śrī Kṛṣṇa (kṛṣṇa-svarūpa).



Jagad-guru Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura has
given an elaborate explanation of these verses in his
commentary to Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta.



Comment



There is very little difference between the words rūpa
and svarūpa. The word rūpa conveys the sense of form,
figure or appearance, whereas the word svarūpa conveys
the sense of form, nature or condition. For example Śrī

                           42
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa appears very charming as He holds the flute to His
lips in His threefold-bending form (tribhaṅga-lalita).
This is kṛṣṇa-rūpa. The various moods He expresses as
dhīrodātta, dhīra-lalita, dhīra-śānta, dhīroddhata and
so on are all kṛṣṇa-svarūpa. In Kṛṣṇa there is no
difference between rūpa and svarūpa. There is no
difference between His external form and His internal
moods. Similarly there is no difference between the
dīkṣā- and śikṣā-guru. The dīkṣā-guru reveals Kṛṣṇa’s
rūpa and the śikṣā-guru reveals Kṛṣṇa’s svarūpa.



Without thoughtful consideration, some people take
shelter at the feet of a māyāvādī sannyāsī or a prākṛta-
sahajiyā2 who is a Vaiṣṇava in name only, or a family
guru (kula-guru) who is ignorant in the matter of
bhajana. Having taken shelter of such persons, they
think that they have obtained a genuine spiritual master
or sad-guru. They think that there is no need for
sādhana-bhajana or for sādhu-saṅga, but this kind of
consideration is blind faith. Such a spiritual master
simply hinders one’s attainment of prema.

After taking shelter of the lotus feet of a sad-guru and
performing bhajana in a regular way, the disciple should
discern whether or not his anarthas are going away. One
can consult the book named Mādhurya-kādambinī written by
the same author, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura,
for a detailed description of anarthas and the method to
obtain freedom from them. Those who perform bhajana but
make no endeavour to become free from anarthas cannot
make any advancement in bhajana. Only by performing
bhajana in accordance with the appropriate methods can
the sādhaka make steady progress beginning from śraddhā
and culminating in one’s desired goal of prema.




Verse 4 — The Sixty-four Limbs of Bhajana


atha bhajanasya catuḥ-ṣaṣṭir aṅgāni

śrī-guru-pādāśrayaḥ, śrī-kṛṣṇa-dīkṣā-śikṣādi, śrī-guru-
sevā, sādhu-mārgānusāraḥ, bhajana-rīti-praśnaḥ, śrī-
kṛṣṇa-prītaye bhogādi-tyāgaḥ, tīrtha-vāsaḥ tīrtha-
māhātmya-śravaṇaṁ ca, sva-bhakti-nirvāhānurūpa-
bhojanādi-svīkāraṁ, ekādaśī-vratam, aśvattha-tulasī-
dhātrī-go-brāhmaṇa-vaiṣṇava-sammānaṁ — pūrva-daśa-
grahaṇam.

para-daśa-tyāgaḥ — asādhu-saṅga-tyāgaḥ, bahu-śiṣya-
karaṇa-tyāgaḥ, bahu-ārambha-tyāgaḥ, bahu-śāstra-vyākhyā-
vivādādi- tyāgaḥ, vyavahāre kārpaṇya-tyāgaḥ, śoka-
krodhādi-tyāgaḥ, devatāntara-nindā-tyāgaḥ, prāṇimātre
udvega-tyāgaḥ, sevāparādha-nāmāparādha-tyāgaḥ, guru-
kṛṣṇa-bhakta-nindā-sahana-tyāgaḥ.

vaiṣṇava-cihna-dhāraṇaṁ, harināmākṣara-dhāraṇaṁ,
nirmālya-dhāraṇaṁ, nṛtyaṁ, daṇḍavat-praṇāmaṁ,
abhyutthānam, anuvrajyā, śrī-mūrti-sthāne gamanaṁ,

                           43
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

parikramā, pūjā, paricaryā, gītaṁ, saṅkīrtanaṁ, japaḥ,
stava-pāṭhaḥ, mahā-prasāda-sevā, vijñaptiḥ, caraṇāmṛta-
pānaṁ, dhūpa-mālyādi-saurabha-grahaṇaṁ, śrī-mūrti-
darśanaṁ, śrī-mūrti-sparśanaṁ, ārātrika-darśanaṁ,
śravaṇaṁ, tat-kṛpāpekṣaṇaṁ, smaraṇaṁ, dhyānaṁ, dāsyaṁ,
sakhyaṁ, ātma-nivedanaṁ, nija-priya-vastu-samarpaṇaṁ,
kṛṣṇārthe samasta-karma-karaṇaṁ.

sarvathā śaraṇāpattiḥ, tulasī-sevā, vaiṣṇava-śāstra-
sevā, mathurā-maṇḍale vāsaḥ, vaiṣṇava-sevā, yathā-śakti
dolādi-

mahotsava-karaṇaṁ, kārttika-vrataṁ, sarvadā harināma-
grahaṇaṁ, janmāṣṭamī-yātrādikaṁ ca evaṁ ūnaṣaṣṭi bhakty
aṅgāni; atha tatra pañca aṅgāni sarvataḥ śreṣṭhāni yathā
— śrī-mūrti-sevā-kauśalaṁ, rasikaiḥ saha śrī-
bhāgavatārthāsvādaḥ, sajātīya-snigdha-mahattara-sādhu-
saṅgaḥ, nāma-saṅkīrtanaṁ, śrī-vṛndāvana-vāsaḥ evaṁ
militvā catuḥ-ṣaṣṭy aṅgāni.

Śrī Bindu-vikāśinī-vṛtti



(1) Śrī-guru-padāśraya

Taking shelter at the lotus feet of Śrī Guru



In all the scriptures that promote bhakti the unlimited
glories of Śrī Guru have been described. Without taking
shelter at the lotus feet of a sad-guru it is impossible
to enter into the realm of bhagavad-bhajana. Therefore,
out of all the limbs of bhakti, sad-guru-padāśraya has
been cited first. It is the duty of all faithful persons
who have a desire for bhagavad-bhakti to take shelter at
the lotus feet of a spiritual master who is a genuine
March 2, 2007March 2, 2007preceptor of the śāstras
expounding the glories of Bhagavān and who is expert in
understanding and explaining the mantras describing
Bhagavān.

All anarthas are easily removed only by the mercy of
such a genuine spiritual master and thus one also
obtains the supreme favour of Bhagavān. By the mercy of
Śrī Guru all anarthas are easily destroyed. Śrīla Jīva
Gosvāmī has demonstrated this in his Bhakti-sandarbha
(Anuccheda 237) by citing the evidence of various
śāstras. He has explained this by the statement of
Brahmājī as well:



yo mantraḥ sa guruḥ sākṣāt

yo guruḥ sa hariḥ svayaṁ

gurur yasya bhavet tuṣṭas

tasya tuṣṭo hariḥ svayam




                             44
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

The mantra (which is given by the guru) is itself the
guru, and the guru is directly the Supreme Lord Hari. He
upon whom the

spiritual master is pleased also obtains the pleasure of
Śrī Hari Himself.



Comment



The guru’s internal, spiritual mood of service to Śrī
Rādhikā and Kṛṣṇa is conveyed to the disciple through
the medium of a mantra. Everything is given in seed form
within the mantra. At first the disciple will not be
able to understand, but by performing sādhana and
bhajana under the guidance of Śrī Gurudeva and by
meditating on the mantra given by him, gradually
everything will be revealed. Therefore it is said here
that the mantra is the direct representation of Śrī
Gurudeva.



In Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (4.360) it is stated:



harau ruṣṭe gurus trātā

gurau ruṣṭe na kaścana

tasmāt sarva-prayatnena

gurum eva prasādayet



Even if a person incurs the displeasure of the Lord, the
spiritual master may still give him protection, but if
the spiritual master is displeased, there is no one to
give him protection. Therefore one should please Śrī
Gurudeva by all endeavours of one’s body, mind and
words.



The author Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has also
said: “yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādo yasyāprasādān na
gatiḥ kuto ‘pi — for one who pleases the spiritual
master the Supreme Lord is automatically pleased, but
for one who displeases the spiritual master there is no
means of obtaining success. I therefore meditate upon
Śrī Gurudeva, offer prayers to him, and bow down before
him three times a day.”

What is required to be a guru? This has been stated in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.3.21):



tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta

                           45
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017


jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam

śābde pare ca niṣṇātaṁ

brahmaṇy-upaśamāśrayam



In Bhakti-sandarbha (Anuccheda 202) Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī
has defined the meaning of the words śābde pare ca
niṣṇātam in the

following statement: “śābde brahmaṇi vede tātparya
vicāreṇa niṣṇātaṁ tathaiva niṣṭhāṁ prāptam, pare
brahmaṇi-bhagavad-ādi-rūpāvirbhāves tu aparokṣānubhavena
— one who is expert in explaining the purport of the
Vedas, which are śabda-brahma, who has direct experience
of Parabrahma (the Supreme Brahman, Śrī Kṛṣṇa), and who
is devoid of all material expectations and requirements
should be accepted as a genuine spiritual master. One
should take shelter of such a guru through the process
of hearing in order to know the truth regarding sādhana,
the means, and sādhya, the goal.”

Similarly it has been stated in the Śrutis (Muṇḍaka
Upaniṣad 1.2.12): “tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum
evābhigacchet samit-pāṇiḥ śrotriyaṁ brahma-niṣṭham — in
order to obtain direct realisation of the supreme
absolute reality, or in other words knowledge concerning
prema-bhakti, a person who is desirous of his own
welfare should approach a sad-guru who knows the purport
of the Vedas and who is learned in the truths regarding
Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Taking an offering in one’s hands, one should
submit oneself to such a sad-guru with body, mind and
words.”

Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has here described that the
instructors who disseminate knowledge of bhagavat-tattva
are of two kinds: sarāga, with attachments, and nirāga,
without attachments. Instructors who are greedy for
wealth and who maintain desires for sensual enjoyment
are known as speakers with material attachments, or
sarāga-vaktās. The influence of such instructors is not
enduring. An instructor who is a topmost devotee of the
Lord, who is adept in relishing bhakti-rasa and evoking
spiritual emotions in others (sarasa), and who is
capable of extracting the essence of anything
(sāragrāhī) is known as a speaker without attachments,
or nirāga-vaktā. The verse cited on the previous page
from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam refers exclusively to the
instructor who is devoid of attachments (nirāga-vaktā).

In Bhakti-sandarbha Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, in examining
guru-tattva, has cited three types of guru: (i) śravaṇa-
guru, (ii) śikṣā-guru and (iii) dīkṣā-guru.



(i) Śravaṇa-guru

The person from whom one hears knowledge of the bhaktas,
bhakti and bhagavat-tattva is known as the śravaṇa-guru.
In the conversation between Mahārāja Nimi and the Nava-

                           46
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

Yogendras in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.3.22) it is said:



tatra bhāgavatān dharmān

śikṣed gurvātma-daivataḥ

amāyayānuvṛttyā yais

tuṣyed ātmātma-do hariḥ



A sādhaka should adopt the practice of bhakti free from
all hypocrisy. He should approach a guru who knows all
the truths related to the Supreme Lord and who is very
dear to the Lord. The sādhaka should receive
instructions on bhāgavata-dharma from such a spiritual
master. By carrying out those instructions, Bhagavān Śrī
Hari personally gives Himself to the devotee.



Such a person who gives instructions on how to execute
bhajana is called a śravaṇa-guru. There may be many
śravaṇa-gurus; nonetheless the sādhaka should take
shelter of one mahāpuruṣa among them who is suitable to
his nature and receive instructions from him regarding
how to perform bhajana.



(ii) Śikṣā-guru

Out of many such competent śravaṇa-gurus, one who gives
instructions in bhajana which are just suitable to the
bhāva of the sādhaka is called a śikṣā-guru. There may
be many śikṣā-gurus also; however, it is advantageous to
have one śikṣā-guru in particular who is conducive to
one’s mood. The śravaṇa-guru and the śikṣā-guru are
usually one and the same person, as stated in Bhakti-
sandarbha (Anuccheda 206): “atha śravaṇa-guru-bhajana-
śikṣā-gurvoḥ prāyakam ekatvam iti — the śravaṇa-guru and
the bhajana-śikṣā-guru are usually the same person.” The
verses already cited — “tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta”, “tad-
vijñānārtham”, “tatra bhāgavatān dharmān śikṣet” and so
on — should be understood in relation to both the
śravaṇa-guru and the śikṣā-guru.

(iii) Dīkṣā-guru

One who gives a mantra for worship according to the
rules and regulations of scripture is called a dīkṣā-
guru or mantra-guru. The dīkṣā-guru should possess all
the symptoms already described of a mahāpuruṣa and those
described in connection with the sad-guru. The dīkṣā-
guru should be conversant in the conclusions of the
Vedas, he should be adept in expounding those
conclusions, he should have direct experience and
realisation of Bhagavān, and he should be completely
detached from material sense objects. If he is lacking
in these characteristics, then the faith of the disciple
will waiver.

                           47
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                  5/5/2017


There is only one dīkṣā-guru. The śikṣā-guru should be
in conformity with the dīkṣā-guru; otherwise impediments
may arise in the practice of sādhana. Ordinarily the
dīkṣā-guru carries out the function of śikṣā-guru. In
his absence one should accept as one’s śikṣā-guru an
advanced devotee possessing the characteristics already
described.

There is no direction that permits one to renounce a
sad-guru; however, a guru who has become inimical to
Vaiṣṇavas, the śāstras and bhakti, who is engrossed in
sense enjoyment, who is lacking discrimination as to
what is duty and what is not duty, who is foolish, or
who is following a path other than śuddha-bhakti should
be given up. It is directed in various places in the
śāstras that one should then take dīksā again from a
Vaiṣṇava guru in accordance with the rules and
regulations. This is the purport of the verses quoted
below from Bhakti-sandarbha (Anuccheda 238):



guror apy avaliptasya

kāryākāryam ajānataḥ

utpatha-pratipannasya

parityāgo vidhīyate



Mahābhārata (Udyoga-parva 178.48)



avaiṣṇavopadiṣṭena

mantreṇa nirayaṁ vrajet

punaś ca vidhinā samyag

grāhayed-vaiṣṇavād guroḥ



Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (4.366)



In other words one who accepts a mantra from a non-
Vaiṣṇava guru goes to hell. Therefore one should again
receive dīkṣā-mantra from a Vaiṣṇava guru in accordance
with the rules and regulations.



(2) Śrī-kṛṣṇa-dīkṣā-śikṣādi

Receiving initiation and spiritual instructions




                              48
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

It is essential to accept dīkṣā and śikṣā from a guru in
order to gain entrance into bhagavad-bhajana. In Hari-
bhakti-vilāsa (2.9) the following is said regarding
dīkṣā:



divyaṁ jñānaṁ yato dadyāt

kuryāt pāpasya saṅkṣayam

tasmād-dīkṣeti sā proktā

deśikais tattva-kovidaiḥ



That religious undertaking which bestows divya-jñāna
(transcen-dental knowledge) and destroys pāpa (sin),
pāpa-bīja (the seed of sin) and avidyā (ignorance) to
the root is called dīkṣā by learned authorities in the
absolute truth.



Therefore a faithful sādhaka will dedicate his entire
self to the lotus feet of Śrī Gurudeva, offer praṇāma
unto him and take dīkṣā from him by receiving a Vaiṣṇava
mantra in accordance with the rules and regulations of
the scriptures. The meaning of divya-jñāna referred to
above is that the jīva is not a material phenomenon; the
jīva is an atomic particle of spiritual consciousness
belonging to the sac-cid-ānanda-svarūpa of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. By
virtue of this the jīva is nothing other than the nitya-
dāsa of Bhagavān. This is also stated in Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 20.108): “jīverasvarūpahaya
kṛṣṇeranitya-dāsa — the svarūpa or identity of the jīva
is to be an eternal servant of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.”

Although the jīva is by nature an eternal servant of
Bhagavān, because his face has been averted from the
Lord from a time without beginning, he has been
wandering in various species of life. He is thus being
scorched by the threefold miseries of

material existence.

By the causeless mercy of the ocean of mercy Śrī
Bhagavān or His devotees, the jīva attains sādhu-saṅga.
By the potency of that sādhu-saṅga, the jīva offers
himself at the lotus feet of Śrī Gurudeva. By bestowing
the kṛṣṇa-mantra, Śrī Gurudeva dispels the jīva’s
aversion towards the Lord (bhagavad-vimukhatā) and
directs his attention towards the performance of
bhagavad-bhajana. He gives sambandha-jñāna concerning
bhagavad-tattva, jīva-tattva and māyā-tattva, and
awakens the dormant inclination of the jīva to serve the
Lord (bhagavad-unmukhatā). As a consequence of this, the
pāpa, pāpa-bīja and avidyā of the sādhaka are all
destroyed to the root. This procedure of dīkṣā is not
completed in one day; rather it is begun from the day of
initiation.

In Bhakti-sandarbha (Anuccheda 283) Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī

                            49
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

has explained the meaning of divya-jñāna in the
following words: “divyaṁ jñānaṁ hy atra mantre bhagavat-
svarūpa-jñānam, tena bhagavatā sambandha-viśeṣa-jñānaṁ
ca — divya-jñāna is transcendental knowledge contained
within a mantra that reveals the form and identity of
the Supreme Lord (bhagavat-svarūpa) as well as the
knowledge of the sādhaka-jīva’s particular relationship
with the Lord.”

The relationship between Bhagavān and the jīva is that
of servant and served. Bhagavān is the served (sevya)
and the jīva is the servant (sevaka) — this is only a
general relationship. In the advanced stage, this same
relationship manifests in one particular form out of the
various moods of dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya or mādhurya.
Śrī Gurudeva, knowing the svarūpagata-bhāva, or in other
words the natural, inherent disposition of the sādhaka,
gives nourishment to that particular mood within his
heart in order to bring it clearly into view. In Hari-
bhakti-vilāsa (2.12), quoting a statement from the
Tattva-sāgara, it is said:



yathā kāñcanatāṁ yāti

kāṁsyaṁ rasa-vidhānataḥ

tathā dīkṣā-vidhānena

dvijatvaṁ jāyate nṛṇām



Just as bell metal is turned to gold by a particular
alchemical process, a man can attain to the state of
being a dvija by the process of Vaiṣṇava dīkṣā.



By the word nṛṇām used in this verse, Śrīla Sanātana
Gosvāmī has indicated a person who has received
initiation. In other words a person who receives dīkṣā
becomes a dvija3 or twice-born. By the word dvijatvam he
has indicated that one attains to the state of a
brāhmaṇa, or one who knows the absolute truth Brahman.
The word dvijatvam used here does not mean the state of
being a dvija by initiation into the sacred thread like
that of the kṣatriyas and vaiśyas. By the procedure of
dīkṣā the disciple is born again. This is called birth
by dīkṣā (daikṣa-janma).

There are three kinds of birth: (1) śaukra-janma —
seminal birth; that is, birth by mother and father, (2)
sāvitra-janma — a ceremony in which a boy is initiated
into one of the three twice-born classes by being
invested with the sacred thread and (3) daikṣa-janma —
birth by the process of spiritual initiation (dīkṣā).
Even a śūdra or an untouchable person who is born in the
lowest family obtains the saṁskāras for being a dvija
upon being initiated in accordance with the regulations
of the Pañcarātra. This is the purport of the following
statement from the Mahābhārata (Anuśāsana-parva 143.46):


                           50
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017



etaiḥ karma-phalair devi

nyūna-jāti-kulodbhavaḥ

śūdro ‘py āgama-sampanno

dvijo bhavati saṁskṛtaḥ



As a result of these activities, O Goddess, even a śūdra
born in a low-caste family becomes twice-born and
endowed with the āgama (the scripture).



In a conversation between Rukmāṅgada (a king) and Mohinī
quoted from the Skanda Purāṇa it is said:



adīkṣitasya vāmoru

kṛtaṁ sarvaṁ nirarthakam

paśu-yonim avāpnoti

dīkṣā-virahito janaḥ



Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (2.6)



O Vāmoru (O woman with beautiful thighs), all the
auspicious activities of men are worthless without
accepting dīkṣā. A person who is bereft of dīkṣā obtains
birth in the animal species of life.



In Bhakti-sandarbha Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has said that
without undergoing the upanayana-saṁskāra4 even children
appearing in twice-born families are unfit to study the
śāstras and to perform yajñas. Similarly without dīkṣā
one is unfit to worship the presiding deity of the
mantra.

It is seen in the śāstras in connection with the glories
of bhagavan-nāma that there is so much potency in the
Lord’s name that even without undergoing dīkṣā,
purificatory ceremonies (sat-kriyā) or preparatory rites
(puraścaryā), harināma is competent to produce results
as soon as it comes in contact with the tongue. This is
expressed in the following statement of Śrī Lakṣmīdhara,
cited from Padyāvalī (29):



ākṛṣṭiḥ kṛta-cetasāṁ sumahatām uccāṭanaṁ cāṁhasām


                           51
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

ācaṇḍālam amūka-loka-sulabho vaśyaś ca mokṣa-śriyaḥ

no dīkṣāṁ na ca dakṣiṇāṁ na ca puraścaryāṁ manāg īkṣate

mantro ‘yaṁ rasanā-spṛg eva phalati śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmātmakaḥ



This mahā-mantra, composed of the names of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is
so astonishingly powerful and accessible that it yields
fruit as soon as it touches the tongue. Because it
attracts even liberated souls who are purified at heart
and whose desires are fully satiated, this mantra is
supreme in its power of subjugation. It eradicates great
sins which could not be destroyed by yajña, yoga, tapa,
dāna and other means. Because it can be chanted anywhere
at any time, it is so easily available that even
caṇḍālas or anyone who is not mute can chant it. By its
causeless mercy it submits itself to a person who merely
desires to chant. The rare wealth of mokṣa runs behind
to serve it. Unlike other mantras, the chanting of this
mahā-mantra is not dependent on receiving dīkṣā from a
guru, moral conduct or preparatory rites.



Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, in discussing this topic in Bhakti-
sandarbha (Anuccheda 283), has said that in spite of the
statements in the scriptures as to the autonomous
potency of the holy name, the previous mahājanas such as
Śrī Nārada first accepted dīkṣā from their gurus and
then performed their sādhana and bhajana in worship of
their iṣṭadeva (the beloved deity of the heart).
Similarly those who desire to follow in the footsteps of
those mahāpuruṣas must also accept dīkṣā into bhagavad-
mantra from Śrī Gurudeva, because without accepting
dīkṣā one’s relationship with Bhagavān in dāsya, sakhya
and so on cannot be awakened. That relationship is
established only by the lotus feet of Śrī Guru. The
custom of dīkṣā was honoured by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
and His followers, the Gosvāmīs. It is prevalent even
today in their followers.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has clearly said
that those persons who have abandoned the pursuits of
karma-yoga, jñāna-yoga, japa, tapa and other processes
of sādhana, who have accepted Bhagavān as their iṣṭadeva
and who are engaged in śravana, kīrtana and smaraṇa of
bhagavan-nāma, but who have not accepted dīkṣā from a
Vaiṣṇava guru according to the Vaiṣṇava regulations,
cannot attain the Supreme Lord. They will merely be
prevented from entering hell, or in their next birth, by
the influence of the bhajana performed in the previous
life, they will obtain sādhu-saṅga. By then taking
shelter at the lotus feet of a guru, receiving dīkṣā
from him and making advancement through the different
stages of bhakti, they can attain the Supreme Lord.

In Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (5.450ñ1), quoting from the Skanda
Purāṇa, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī has said:



evaṁ śrī-bhagavān sarvaiḥ

                            52
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017


śālagrāma-śilātmakaḥ

dvijaiḥ strībhiś ca śūdraiś ca

pūjyo bhagavataḥ paraiḥ

brāhmaṇa-kṣatriya-viśāṁ

sac-chūdrāṇām athāpi vā

śālagrāme ‘dhikāro ‘sti

na cānyeṣāṁ kadācana



In the commentary on the above verses it is stated that
upon receiving dīkṣā in accordance with the regulations
of śāstra, everyone, whether they be a brāhmaṇa, vaiśya,
kṣatriya, woman or śūdra, becomes qualified to worship
Bhagavān in the form of śālagrāma-śilā. The word sat-
śūdra from the verse means a śūdra who has received
dīkṣā. After receiving dīkṣā, a śūdra no longer remains
a śūdra. In the scriptures, statements are sometimes
seen forbidding women and śūdras from the worship of
śālagrāma-śilā. These statements, however, do not apply
to persons who have taken dīkṣā — they are intended for
those who have not received dīkṣā.

In Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.98) the following verse
is quoted from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.3.22):



tatra bhāgavatān dharmān

śikṣed gurvātma-daivataḥ

amāyayānuvṛttyā yais

tuṣyed ātmātma-do hariḥ



One should know Śrī Gurudeva to be one’s supreme
benefactor, friend and most worshipful deity — the
direct personification of Hari. One should always follow
him without duplicity and take instructions from him
about bhāgavata-dharma. By this practice

the Supreme Lord Hari becomes pleased and gives Himself
to the disciple.



(3) Prīti-pūrvaka-guru-sevā

Serving Śrī Guru with love



In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself has declared to
Uddhava: “Know the ācārya to be My very own self and

                              53
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

never disrespect him. Never find fault with him,
considering him to be an ordinary man, for all the
demigods reside within Śrī Gurudeva.” All those anarthas
which cannot be removed even by very rigid practice of
sādhana are easily destroyed by serving Śrī Gurudeva
without duplicity. “Yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādo
yasyāprasādān na gatiḥ kuto ‘pi — the mercy of Śrī Guru
is itself the mercy of Bhagavān.” If a disciple has the
mercy of Śrī Guru but somehow displeases Bhagavān, the
spiritual master will take responsibility for the
disciple’s action and ensure that Bhagavān is pleased.
But if the spiritual master is displeased then Śrī
Bhagavān will never forgive such an offender. Therefore,
considering the spiritual master to be one’s supreme
friend, one should serve him with great love.

Some persons who are not conversant with the conclusions
of the scriptures serve only the spiritual master,
thinking him to be Bhagavān. They think that there is no
need to perform service to or bhajana of the Lord
separately. Such persons go as far as offering tulasī
and other articles at the feet of Śrī Gurudeva. This
thinking is opposed to the scriptures. According to the
scriptures, just as one possesses para-bhakti towards
Śrī Bhagavān, one should similarly possess bhakti
towards the lotus feet of Śrī Gurudeva; otherwise all
one’s efforts in sādhana and bhajana will bear no
result.



yasya deve parā bhaktir

yathā deve tathā gurau

tasyaite kathitā hy arthāḥ

prakāśante mahātmanaḥ



Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (6.23)



For one who has para-bhakti towards the Supreme Lord and
towards Śrī Gurudeva, all the conclusions mentioned in
the śāstras regarding the supreme, ultimate reality, Śrī
Bhagavān, become manifest in his heart. For those who
have no bhakti towards the lotus feet of the spiritual
master, the conclusions of the scriptures are not
revealed.



(4) Sādhu-mārgānusāraḥ

Following the path of sādhus



The method by which the mind may be fixed at the lotus
feet of Kṛṣṇa can be called sādhana-bhakti. But one
should pursue the very same path by which the previous

                             54
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

mahājanas attained the Lord. The reason for this is that
the path which has already been chalked out by the
mahājanas is free from all distress and hardship, and it
is the cause of all auspiciousness.



sa mṛgyaḥ śreyasāṁ hetuḥ

panthāḥ sastāpa-varjitaḥ

anavāpta-śramaṁ pūrve

yena santaḥ pratasthire



Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.100), from the Skanda Purāṇa



No path can be properly ascertained by any one
individual. All the previous mahājanas following in
consecutive succession, one after another, have made the
path of bhakti-yoga neat and clean and free from
obstruction. They have eliminated all the petty
obstacles and disturbances along the path and made it
very easy and free from fear. Therefore we must take
support from the specific path which they have laid.
Even though one may be engaged in aikāntikī-bhakti
(exclusive devotion) towards Lord Hari, if one
transgresses the regulations of the śāstras like the
Śruti, Smṛti, Purāṇas or Pañcarātra, his bhakti can
never produce a beneficial effect. Rather it will simply
be the cause of calamity.



śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi-

pañcarātra-vidhiṁ vinā

aikāntikī harer bhaktir

utpātāyaiva kalpate



Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.101), from the Brahma-yāmala



A question may be raised here as to how aikāntikī-bhakti
towards Lord Hari could ever be the cause of calamity?
In response to this it is said that the exclusive or
one-pointed mood (aikāntika-bhāva) of śuddha-bhakti is
obtained only by taking support of the path of the
previous mahājanas. By abandoning the path of the
previous mahājanas and erecting some other path, the
mood of one-pointed devotion is not obtained. Therefore
Dattātreya, Buddha and other more recent teachers, not
being able to comprehend śuddha-bhakti, accepted in its
place a mere reflection of śuddha-bhakti and thus
propagated paths that were mixed with māyāvāda and

                           55
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

atheism. Some aspect of aikāntikī-hari-bhakti is
attributed to these paths, but in reality the paths
introduced by those persons are not hari-bhakti — they
are a disturbance (utpāta).

In the bhajana of those who pursue the rāga-mārga there
is no dependence upon the regulations of the Śruti,
Smṛti, Purāṇas and Pañcarātra. It is dependent simply
upon the following of the Lord’s eternal associates of
Vraja. But for those sādhakas who have qualification for
the vidhi-mārga it is essential to take support only of
the path of bhakti specified by Dhruva, Prahlāda,
Nārada, Vyāsa, Śuka and other mahājanas. In particular,
it is even more beneficial to follow the path shown by
Śrī Rūpa, Sanātana, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī and other
associates of Śrī Śacīnandana Gaurahari, who is the
saviour of the fallen conditioned souls of the age of
Kali and who is decorated with the sentiment and
complexion of Śrī Rādhā. One should also follow
subsequent mahājanas following in their line. Therefore,
for vaidha-bhaktas, there is no method other than
following the path of sādhus.



(5) Bhajana-rīti-nīti-praśna

Questions about the procedures of bhajana



Sad-dharma means true religion, or in other words the
religion of true sādhus. In the association of saintly
persons, sādhakas should inquire about those procedures
which the sādhus have adopted to attain the Lord. To
inquire with great persistence in order to understand
those procedures is called inquiry about sad-dharma.
This has been stated in the Nārada-pañcarātra:



acirād eva sarvārthaḥ

sidhyaty eṣām abhīpsitaḥ

sad-dharmasyāvabodhāya

yeṣāṁ nirbandhinī matiḥ



Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.103)



Those whose minds are exceedingly anxious to know all
about sad-dharma, or the procedures of bhakti, very
quickly attain all their cherished goals.



(6) Kṛṣṇārthe akhila-bhoga-tyāga

Renunciation of all enjoyment

                           56
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017


for the sake of Kṛṣṇa



To enjoy material pleasure through activities such as
eating, drinking, sleeping and mating is called bhoga
(material enjoyment). This bhoga is principally opposed
to bhajana. Bhajana becomes easily accessible by giving
up such material enjoyments for the sake of kṛṣṇa-
bhajana. A person attached to sense enjoyment is like a
person addicted to intoxication. He becomes so engrossed
in the enjoyment of material pleasure that he cannot
perform pure bhajana. Therefore he should only accept
bhagavat-prasāda in the mood of service. He should
protect and maintain the body only to keep it fit for
the service of the Lord. He should give up all types of
material enjoyment, particularly on holy days such as
Ekādaśī, Janmāṣṭamī, Rāma-navamī, Gaura-pūrṇīmā,
Nṛsiṁha-caturdaśī and so on.



(7) Tīrtha-vāsaḥ tīrtha-māhātmya-śravaṇaṁ ca

To live in a sacred place and to hear the greatness of
such places



By living in close proximity to a holy river like the
Gaṅgā or Yamunā that is connected to the Lord’s pastimes
or by living in sacred places where the Lord appeared
and enacted various pastimes, niṣṭhā is awakened. In
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.105ñ7) the following has
been said about residing at a holy place:



saṁvatsaraṁ vā ṣanmāsān

māsaṁ māsārddham eva vā

dvārakā-vāsinaḥ sarve

narā nāryaś caturbhujāḥ



Skanda Purāṇa



By living in Dvārāka for one year, six months, one month
or even for fifteen days, a man or woman becomes a four-
armed denizen (of Vaikuṇṭha).



aho kṣetrasya māhātmyaṁ

samantād-daśa-yojanam

diviṣṭhā yatra paśyanti

                           57
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017


sarvān eva caturbhujān



Brahma Purāṇa



The glories of Puruṣottama-dhāma (Jagannātha Purī) are
extraordinary. The demigods from the celestial planets
look upon all living beings spread within a radius of
ten yojanas (approximately eighty miles) of this sacred
place as four-handed denizens of Vaikuṇṭha.

yā vai lasac-chrī-tulasī-vimiśra-

kṛṣṇāṅghri-reṇv-abhyadhikāmbu-netrī

punāti lokān ubhayatra seśān

kas tāṁ na seveta mariṣyamāṇaḥ



The śāstras have extensively proclaimed the glories of
residing on the bank of sacred rivers like the Gaṅgā,
Yamunā, Godāvarī and others. The above verse is taken
from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.19.6). “The Bhagavatī (Gaṅgā),
which carries the most sacred water mixed with the dust
of the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the beautiful,
alluring tulasī, purifies everyone in this world as well
as the world beyond, including Śiva. Therefore who is
there on the verge of death who will not take up her
service?” In other words everyone should engage in the
service of the Gaṅgā.

In Jaiva-dharma Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has said that
residence anywhere within the thirty-two mile radius of
Śrī Navadvīpa, and in particular within Māyāpura, is
identical to residence within Śrī Vṛndāvana. Of the
seven holy places that yield liberation — namely
Ayodhyā, Mathurā, Māyā, Kāśī, Kāñcī, Avantikā and
Dvārakā — Māyāpura is the chief. The reason for this is
that, in Māyāpura, Śrīman Mahāprabhu has manifested His
eternal abode of Śvetadvīpa.

Four centuries after the appearance of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu, this Śvetadvīpa has become the most
important of all the holy tīrthas on the planet Earth.
By living at this place all kinds of offences are
destroyed and one obtains śuddha-bhakti. Śrīla
Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī has described this dhāma as
being non-different from Śrī Vṛndāvana, and in some
places he has given even greater importance to Śrī
Māyāpura.

Those who are incapable of living at the above-mentioned
holy places can hear the glories of those places and, by
doing so, a strong desire will arise to live there. When
the time is ripe, they may then obtain the good fortune
to reside at a holy place.



                           58
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017


(8) Sva-bhakti-nirvāhānurūpa-

bhojanādi-svīkāram

Accepting only what is required for the sustenance of
bhakti



In the Nāradīya Purāṇa it is said:



yāvatā syāt svanirvāhaḥ

svīkuryāt tāvad-arthavit

ādhikye nyūnatāyāṁ ca

cyavate paramārthataḥ



Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.108)



A wise person, or one who actually knows the value of
wealth (arthavit), should accept only as much wealth and
other things as is required in order to be steadfast in
carrying out one’s obligations in the matter of bhakti.
For if one accepts more or less than one’s actual
requirement, he falls down from spiritual life and thus
his real wealth (paramārtha) becomes spoilt.



Sādhakas who are fit for vaidhī-bhakti may earn wealth
by honest means prescribed in accordance with
varṇāśrama-dharma in order that they may sustain their
existence. It is beneficial for them to accumulate
wealth only in proportion to their needs. If one is
anxious to seize more than he requires, attachment will
arise, which will systematically destroy his bhajana. If
one accepts less than he needs it will also be
detrimental because, by doing so, one will be in
scarcity and his bhajana will dwindle. Therefore, until
one has earned the qualification to become completely
desireless (nirapekṣa), he should practise śuddha-bhakti
and accept wealth only in a proportion appropriate for
the maintenance of his existence.



(9) Śrī-ekādaśī-vrata

Observing the vow of Ekādaśī



The name of śuddhā Ekādaśī is Harivāsara, the day of
Lord Hari. Śuddhā Ekādaśī means pure Ekādaśī. This
refers to a circumstance in which there is no

                           59
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

overlapping or mixture of tithis, lunar days. When the
Ekādaśī tithi begins one aruṇodaya period, or at least
ninety-six minutes before sunrise on a particular day,
and continues until sunrise of the following day with no
overlapping of tithis, this is known as śuddhā Ekādaśī
or pūrṇā Ekādaśī.

If, however, the Daśamītithi extends even one second
within the aruṇodaya period before sunrise, the tithis
are said to overlap and this is called pūrva-viddhā
Ekādaśī. The term pūrva-viddhā Ekādaśī means that the
overlapping takes place at the beginning of Ekādaśī, or
in other words with the Daśamītithi. One should not
observe the ekādaśī-vrata on pūrva-viddhā Ekādaśī. In
such a case the Dvādaśītithi that follows will be known
as Mahādvādaśī. The ekādaśī-vrata should then be
observed on Mahādvādaśī instead of on the Ekādaśī tithi.

When, however, the overlapping occurs any time before
sunrise of the following day, or in other words with the
Dvādaśītithi, this is known as para-viddhā Ekādaśī. The
term para-viddhā Ekādaśī means that the overlapping
occurs at the conclusion of Ekādaśī. This does not
present any problem and the ekādaśī-vrata should still
be observed on the Ekādaśītithi.

To honour the day of Lord Hari properly one should
observe celibacy the day before. Then on Harivāsara one
should fast even from water and remain awake throughout
the night, performing continuous bhajana. On the next
day one should maintain celibacy and break the fast at
the appropriate time. Fasting from water (nirambu-
upavāsa) means that one must also refrain from taking
any mahā-prasāda. Without doing so one cannot be said to
be observing nirambu-upavāsa.

For those who are incapable of observing complete
fasting throughout the day, an alternative arrangement
has been given in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (12.97), quoting
from the Vāyu Purāṇa. There the statement naktaṁ
haviṣyānnam is found. The word naktam means by night,
and the word haviṣyānnam means sacrificial food that is
suitable to be taken on certain religious festival days.
By this statement it is understood that those who are
incapable of observing complete fasting may accept
suitable eatables such as fruits in the evening.

A similar statement has been given in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa
(12.82), also quoted from the Vāyu Purāṇa, regarding the
method of observing fasting by appointing a
representative. This is stated in the following words:



upavāse tv aśaktasya

āhitāgner athāpi vā

putrān vā kārayed anyān

brāhmaṇān vāpi kārayet




                           60
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

If a brāhmaṇa who is maintaining a sacrificial fire is
incapable of observing fasting, he may appoint a son or
another brāhmaṇa to observe the fast in his place.



The complete statement of Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (12.97)
regarding the method of fasting by accepting suitable
eatables (haviṣyānna), as cited from the Vāyu Purāṇa, is
as follows:



naktaṁ haviṣyānnam anodanaṁ vā

phalam tilāḥ kṣīram athāmbu cājyaṁ

yat pañca-gavyaṁ yadi vāpi vāyuḥ

praśastam atrottaram uttaraṁ ca



In other words one may accept suitable foods
(haviṣyānna) at night. All types of grains are
unacceptable. Foods that are considered suitable include
fruits, sesame, milk, water, clarified butter, the five
articles derived from the cow (namely milk, yoghurt,
ghee, cow urine and cow dung) or simply air. Each of
these is considered progressively better than the one
preceding it. According to the Mahābhārata (Udyoga-
parva) there are eight items by which one’s vow is not
spoiled: water, roots, fruits, milk, ghee, the desires
of a brāhmaṇa, the order of the spiritual master and
medicine. The verse, cited in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa
(12.100), is as follows:



aṣṭaitāny avrata-ghnāny

āpo mūlaṁ phalaṁ payaḥ

havir brāhmaṇa-kāmyā ca

guror vacanam auṣadham



The word Harivāsara implies not only that one should
observe Ekādaśī but other Vaiṣṇava holy days such as
Janmāṣṭamī, Rāma-navamī, Nṛsiṁha-caturdaśī and Gaura-
pūrṇimā. The prescription to follow Ekādaśī that is
given in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa is meant for all men and
women of all four varṇas and āśramas. All women, whether
they be married or widowed, are meant to follow Ekādaśī.
Eating grains on Ekādaśī is equated with the sin of
eating cow flesh. One should observe methodically the
two Ekādaśīs that occur every month (one during the dark
phase and one during the light phase of the moon). In
Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (12.47), quoting from the Viṣṇu-
dharmottara, it is said:



                           61
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017


saputraś ca sabhāryaś ca

svajanair bhakti-samyutaḥ

ekādaśyām upavaset

pakṣayor ubhayor api



One should observe fasting on both Ekādaśīs of the month
along with one’s wife, sons and other family members in
a mood of great devotion.



In the above verse the word svabhārya means one’s own
wife. This indicates that one should follow the vow with
one’s wife. By this statement it has been prescribed
that women who have husbands should also observe the vow
of Ekādaśī. The ekādaśī-vrata is invariable. To neglect
the vow of Ekādaśī is a great transgression. There are
fasts originating from other desires which are forbidden
for married women, but not the ekādaśī-vrata. In Hari-
bhakti-vilāsa (12.3) it is stated:



atra vrata-stha-nityatvād

avaśyaṁ tat samācaret

sarva-pāpāpahaṁ sarvār-

thadaṁ śrī-kṛṣṇa-toṣaṇam



Because the ekādaśī- or dvādaśī-vrata is invariable, it
must certainly be followed. By doing so all sins are
eradicated, all purposes are fulfilled and Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
pleased.



(10) Aśvattha-tulasī-dhātrī-go-brāhmaṇa-vaiṣṇava-
sammānam

Offering respects to the aśvattha tree, tulasī, the
myrobalan tree, the cows, brāhmaṇas and Vaiṣṇavas



The sins of men are destroyed by worshipping, meditating
upon and offering obeisances to the aśvattha or banyan
tree, tulasī, the myrobalan tree, cows, the brāhmaṇas
and the Vaiṣṇavas. This is confirmed in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindhu (1.2.110), quoting from the Skanda Purāṇa:



aśvattha-tulasī-dhātrī-go-


                             62
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

bhūmi-sura-vaiṣṇavaḥ

pūjitāḥ praṇatāḥ dhyātāḥ

kṣapayanti nṛṇām agham



Those who are eligible for the practice of vaidhī-
bhakti, while residing in this material world, are
obliged to various living entities for the maintenance
of their livelihood. They are obliged to trees that
provide shade like the banyan, to trees that provide
fruits like the myrobalan, to trees that are worthy of
worship like tulasī, to beneficial animals like the cow,
to the brāhmaṇas who give instructions on religious
principles and preserve the integrity of society, and to
the Vaiṣṇavas, who are devotees of the Lord. They should
worship, meditate upon and offer respect to all of
these. By such activities they can protect their
existence.

Aśvattha tree (the banyan tree)

In Bhagavad-gītā (10.26) Śrī Bhagavān has declared the
banyan tree to be a manifestation of His splendour or
opulence: “aśvatthaḥ sarva-vṛkṣāṇām — of trees, I am the
banyan tree.”



Tulasī

Śrī Bhagavān does not accept grains, water or any other
food items if they are not offered with tulasī leaves.
Simply by offering a tulasī leaf and a palmful of water,
the Lord becomes so pleased that He sells Himself unto
the hands of the devotee. This is stated in Hari-bhakti-
vilāsa (11.261), quoting from the Gautamīya-tantra:



tulasī-dala-mātreṇa

jalasya culukena vā

vikrīṇīte svam ātmānaṁ

bhaktebhyo bhakta-vatsalaḥ



In Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.204) there is the
following quote from the Skanda Purāṇa regarding the
service of śrī tulasī:



dṛṣṭā spṛṣṭā tathā dhyātā

kīrtitā namitā śrutā

ropitā sevitā nityaṁ


                             63
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                  5/5/2017

pūjitā tulasī śubhā



One should serve tulasī in nine ways: by seeing,
touching, meditating, offering obeisances, performing
kīrtana, hearing her glories, planting, watering and
offering worship.



In Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (9.104) it is stated:



yā dṛṣṭā nikhilāgha-saṅgha-śamanī spṛṣṭā vapuḥ-pāvanī

rogāṇām abhivanditā nirasanī siktāntaka-trāsinī

pratyāsatti vidhāyinī bhagavataḥ kṛṣṇasya samropitā

nyastā tac-caraṇe vimukti-phaladā tasyai śrī tulasyai
namaḥ



O Tulasī, I offer my respectful obeisances unto you.
Simply by seeing you all sins are destroyed. Simply by
touching you one’s body is purified. By offering
obeisances unto you all diseases are driven away. By
offering water unto you the fear of death is dispelled.
By planting you one obtains proximity to the Lord. By
offering you unto the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, one
obtains a special type of mukti, the rare fruit of
prema-bhakti.



In the scriptures various mantras have been given (1) to
bathe tulasī, (2) to pick her leaves, (3) to
circumambulate her and (4) to offer obeisances unto her.



(1) Śrī-tulasī-snāna-mantra

(mantra for bathing tulasī)



govinda-vallabhāṁ devīṁ

bhakti-caitanya-kāriṇīm

snāpayāmi jagad-dhātrīṁ

viṣṇu-bhakti-pradāyinām



O Devī, beloved of Govinda, you awaken the consciousness
towards the service of the Lord and bestow kṛṣṇa-bhakti.
I bathe you, O Tulasī, who are the mother of the
universe.

                              64
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017




This mantra should be uttered while offering water to
śrī tulasī.



(2) Śrī-tulasī-cayana-mantra

(mantra for picking tulasī leaves)



tulasy amṛta janmāsi

sadā tvaṁ keśava-priyā

keśavārthe vicinvāmi

varadā bhava śobhane



Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (7.347), quoted from the Skanda
Purāṇa



O Tulasī of effulgent beauty, you have been produced
from nectar during the churning of the milk ocean. You
are always dear to Lord Keśava. I pick your leaves only
for the worship of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. May you bestow upon me the
benediction that my worship of Kṛṣṇa will obtain
success.

This mantra should be uttered while picking the leaves
of śrī tulasī.



(3) Śrī-tulasī-pradakṣiṇā-mantra

(mantra for circumambulating tulasī)



yāni kāni ca pāpāni

brahma-hatyādikāni ca

tat sarvaṁ vilayaṁ yāti

tulasi tvat pradakṣiṇāt



Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (12.19)



O Tulasī-devī, by circumambulating you all types of sins
are driven away, including the killing of a brāhmaṇa.


                             65
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017



One should recite this mantra while circumambulating
tulasī four times.



(4) Śrī-tulasī-praṇāma-mantra

(mantra for offering obeisances unto tulasī)



vṛndāyai tulasī-devyai

priyāyai keśavasya ca

kṛṣṇa-bhakti-prade devi

satyavatyai namo namaḥ



O Vṛndā-devī, O Tulasī-devī! You are very dear to Lord
Keśava. O Devī Satyavatī, you bestow kṛṣṇa-bhakti. I
offer repeated obeisances unto you.



The myrobalan tree

In Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (9.229), quoting from the Skanda
Purāṇa, the glories of the myrobalan tree are described
in the following statement of Śrī Brahmā to Śrī Nārada:



dhātrī-cchāyāṁ samāśritya

yo ‘rcayec cakra-pāṇinam

puṣpe puṣpe ‘śvamedhasya

phalaṁ prāpnoti mānavaḥ



One who worships Śrī Bhagavān, who bears the discus in
His hand, beneath the shade of a myrobalan tree obtains
the results of performing the aśvamedha-yajña with each
flower offered to the Lord.



Go (cows)

In the Gautamīya-tantra the following is said regarding
the glories of the cow:



gavāṁ kaṇḍūyanaṁ kuryād

gogrāsaṁ gau pradakṣiṇam

                            66
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017


goṣu nityaṁ prasannāsu

gopālo ‘pi prasīdati



The worship of the cow is accomplished by gently
scratching her limbs, by offering her a mouthful of
green grass and by circumambulating her. By pleasing the
cow Śrī Gopāla also becomes pleased.

The pleasure of Śrī Gopāla is the one and only aim of
the devotee. Therefore to raise cows, to offer
obeisances to them and to always honour them are
considered as a limb of bhakti. Millions and millions of
demigods reside in the limbs of a cow. Even Śrī Kṛṣṇa
and His friends always render service to cows. By
Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes of herding cows it is proved how much
the cow is worshipable for the devotees. Cows provide
nourishment and sustenance to all by offering their
milk, from which ghee and other products are derived.
Because of this great service that they render, cows are
considered to be the mother of human society.



Brāhmaṇas

Brāhmaṇas are very dear to Śrī Bhagavān. Those who know
the truth regarding Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the form of the supreme
absolute (parabrahma-svarūpa), and who always wander in
the realm of that absolute (by contemplating Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
nāma, rūpa, guṇa and līlā) are called brāhmaṇas. Those
who are unacquainted with this brahma-tattva, although
taking birth in a brāhmaṇa family, are not brāhmaṇas.
Only Vaiṣṇavas are brāhmaṇas in the true sense of the
word. Śrī Bhagavān appears specifically for the
protection and upliftment of such brāhmaṇas and cows.
Such brāhmaṇas are also known as bhūsura, gods of this
Earth planet. Therefore it is the duty of sādhakas to
offer respect to the brāhmaṇas who are possessed of such
qualities.



Vaiṣṇavas

The glories of the Vaiṣṇavas are profusely described in
all the śāstras. Without the association of bhagavad-
bhaktas, bhakti cannot be obtained, and without bhakti
Bhagavān cannot be obtained. In spite of the presence of
bhakti, if one does not hear and chant in the
association of devotees, then bhakti cannot mature and
blossom into the state of bhāva or prema. Śrīla
Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī has described three things
that are possessed of great potency for sādhakas: the
dust from the lotus feet of the devotees, the water that
washes their feet and the remnants of their prasāda
(which also refers to the words flowing from their
mouths). By honouring these three, bhakti very easily
makes its appearance in the heart of the sādhaka.



                           67
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017


bhakta-pada-dhūli āra bhakta-pada-jala

bhakta-bhukta-avaśeṣa tina mahābala



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya-līlā 16.60)



In his book Prārthanā, in the prayer known as Svaniṣṭhā,
Śrīla Narottama Ṭhākura has expressed deep faith in the
association of Vaiṣṇavas in the following words:



vaiṣṇavera pada-dhūli tāhe mora snāna keli

tarpaṇa mora vaiṣṇavera nāma

vaiṣṇavera ucchiṣṭa tāhe mora manoniṣṭha

vaiṣṇavera nāmete ullāsa



To consecrate my body with the dust of the lotus feet of
Vaiṣṇavas is a bath of ecstatic delight. By chanting
their names my offering of oblations to the forefathers
is automatically accomplished. The remnants of their
prasāda is my all-in-all, and by hearing and chanting
their names indescribable bliss radiates within my
heart.



In Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (10.312), quoting from the Skanda
Purāṇa, it is said:



hanti nindati vai dveṣṭi

vaiṣṇavān nābhinandati

krudhyate yāti no harṣaṁ

darśane patanāni ṣaṭ



To kill a Vaiṣṇava, to slander him, to bear malice
against him, to fail to welcome him or please him, to
display anger towards him and to not feel pleasure upon
seeing him — these six are the causes of falldown.



Thus far ten limbs of bhakti have been described
beginning from śrī-guru-padāśraya, taking shelter of the
lotus feet of a spiritual master, up to the present
point. All these ten limbs are to be followed. The next
ten limbs described are in the form of prohibitions and

                           68
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                  5/5/2017

are to be avoided by sādhakas. Only by refraining from
these can bhakti obtain nourishment.



(11) Asādhu-saṅga-tyāgaḥ

Giving up the association of non-devotees



On the manifestation of bhāva, bhakti becomes
concentrated. Until bhāva makes its appearance it is
essential to renounce association that is opposed to
bhakti. The word saṅga, meaning “association”, implies
attachment. Therefore proximity to others or
conversation with them is not called saṅga. Saṅga occurs
when attachment arises in others’ proximity or in
conversation with them.

The association of persons who are diverted from the
service of the Lord is strictly forbidden. When bhāva
arises there is no longer any inclination towards the
association of persons whose attention is drawn towards
the illusory material world. But those who are eligible
for the practice of vaidhī-bhakti should always
consciously avoid such association. As trees and plants
perish due to excessive heat and contaminated air, the
bhakti-latā also dries up due to the association of
persons averse to Kṛṣṇa.

There are four kinds of persons who are diverted from
the service of Kṛṣṇa: (1) sensualistic persons who are
devoid of kṛṣṇa-bhakti and attached to material
enjoyment; (2) strī-saṅgī, those who are attached to the
association of women; (3) those whose hearts are
infected with the faults of atheism and māyāvāda; and
(4) those who are entrenched in karma. One should keep a
safe distance from the association of these four kinds
of persons.



(12) Bahu-śiṣya-karaṇa-tyāgaḥ

Renouncing the desire to recruit many disciples



To make many disciples in order to accumulate wealth and
increase one’s pride and prestige is one of the
principal obstacles on the path of bhakti. In his
commentary on Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.113) Śrīla
Jīva Gosvāmī has written that one should not accept many
unqualified persons as disciples, even for the purpose
of expanding the sampradāya: sva sva sampradāya
vṛddyartham anadhikāriṇo ‘pi na saṅgṛhṇīyāt. To make
many disciples one will have to accept many unqualified
persons whose hearts are devoid of śraddhā. To make
disciples of faithless persons is an offence, which
presents obstacles in the practice of one’s bhajana, and
ultimately one will have to fall down into hell.



                           69
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017


(13) Bahu-ārambha-tyāgaḥ

Renouncing excessive undertakings



Pompous and showy enterprises or enormous festivals are
called excessive undertakings (bahu-ārambha). They
should be avoided under all circumstances. The purport
of this is that while accepting whatever little is
necessary to maintain one’s existence one should engage
in bhagavad-bhajana. By taking up grandiose enterprises
one becomes so attached to them that one cannot fix the
mind in bhajana. Therefore the prescription has been
given to renounce excessive undertakings.



(14) Bahu-śāstra-vyākhyā-vivādādi-tyāgaḥ

Renouncing the study of many scriptures in order to make
novel explanations and arguments



The śāstras are like an ocean. In taking instructions on
some particular subject it is best to study the śāstras
related to that subject from beginning to end and by
thorough examination. By reading only a little of many
different śāstras, one does not obtain full knowledge of
any subject. Especially in regard to the bhakti-śāstras,
if one does not apply the mind and study with careful
consideration, then one’s intelligence will not become
impregnated with sambandha-tattva-jñāna.

Bear in mind that only the direct meaning of the śāstras
should be taken. By presenting many varied explanations
of the scriptures contrary conclusions ensue. By too
much argument and disputation the mind becomes perplexed
and cannot become fixed in bhajana. In Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 22.118) Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
has given the following direction to Sanātana Gosvāmī:



bahu-grantha-kalābhyāsa-vyākhyāna varjiba



One should not partially study many scriptures just to
present new explanations.



Also, in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is said: “na vyākhyām
upayuñjīta — one should not make a profession of
explaining the scriptures or reciting the Bhāgavatam in
order to maintain one’s existence.” By doing so Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam and other scriptures simply become a medium
for business exchange, which is thoroughly opposed to
bhakti-sādhana. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.13.8) all these
practices have been clearly prohibited:


                           70
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

na śiṣyān anubadhnīta

granthān naivābhyased bahūn

na vyākhyām upayuñjīta

nārambhān ārabhet kvacit



Bhakti-sādhakas should not make many disciples. In other
words they should not be moved by greed to make
disciples of unqualified persons who are lacking in
faith. They should not study many scriptures. They
should not make a business of explaining the śāstras in
order to accumulate wealth, nor should they undertake
ostentatious enterprises.



(15) Vyavahāre kārpaṇya-tyāgaḥ

Giving up miserly behaviour



For the maintenance of one’s existence in this material
world it is necessary to acquire suitable items for
one’s food and clothing. If one does not obtain such
items, difficulty will arise. Even if such items are
obtained one experiences difficulty when they are
destroyed. Thus, even in the presence of miseries,
devotees should not become disturbed; rather they should
always remember Bhagavān within their minds. If endowed
with sufficient competence and capability, one should
not be miserly in regard to the service of the Lord, the
service of the Vaiṣṇavas, festivals commemorating the
appearance day of the Lord and other such activities.
One should be satisfied with whatever one obtains and
carry on with one’s activities of service to the Lord.



(16) Śoka-krodhādi-tyāgaḥ

Giving up lamentation, anger, etc.



Śrī Kṛṣṇa does not appear in the heart that is filled
with lamentation, fear, anger, greed and envy.
Lamentation and illusion may arise due to separation
from friends and relatives, and due to obstacles arising
in the fulfilment of one’s desires. However, one should
not fall under the sway of such lamentation and
illusion. One certainly feels lamentation on being
separated from one’s children but one should dispel such
lamentation by remembering Lord Hari. Therefore one
should practise fixing the mind on the lotus feet of
Bhagavān.



(17) Devatāntara-nindā-tyāgaḥ

                              71
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                 5/5/2017


Giving up blasphemy and disrespect of demigods



It is essential to have exclusive and undivided devotion
towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa (ananya-bhakti). Śrī Kṛṣna is the
mūla-devatā or original God of all gods. No one should
consider the demigods as independent from Śrī Kṛṣṇa and
thus offer separate worship to them. But one should not
disrespect the demigods upon seeing other persons
worshipping them. One should know all the demigods as
servants of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and thus offer respect to them.
However, one should incessantly meditate upon and
remember only Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

As long as the heart of the jīva is not free from the
influence of the three modes of nature, ananya-bhakti
will not arise there. Those whose hearts are covered by
the three modes — sattva, rajas and tamas — engage in
the worship of the demigods who are the controlling
deities of those modes. In accordance with the modes
that are prominent within their hearts, they worship the
corresponding demigods in charge of such modes. Their
faith is exactly in accordance with their eligibility.
Therefore one should not display any attitude of
animosity or disrespect towards the worshipful demigods
of such persons. By the mercy of the demigods such
worshippers can make gradual progress and their hearts
may at some time become free from the influence of the
modes.



(18) Prāṇī-mātre udvega-tyāgaḥ

Giving up harassment of other living entities



Śrī Kṛṣṇa becomes very quickly satisfied with those who
maintain an attitude of compassion towards other living
entities and do not create any kind of anxiety for them
either by body, mind or words. Mercy is the fundamental
dharma of the Vaiṣṇavas.



(19) Sevāparādha-nāmāparādha-tyāgaḥ

Giving up all offences

in regard to sevā and nāma



Devotees should be very attentive to avoid committing
sevāparādha in relation to the worship of the deity
(arcana) and nāmāparādha in relation to bhakti in
general. There are thirty-two kinds of sevāparādha such
as entering the temple of the Lord on a palanquin or
wearing shoes. There are ten kinds of nāmāparādha such
as blasphemy of devotees or disrespect of the spiritual
master. Offences of both these kinds should certainly be

                             72
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

avoided. As these offences are elaborately described
further ahead, they are only briefly mentioned here.



(20) Guru-kṛṣṇa-bhakta-nindā-sahana-tyāgaḥ

One should not tolerate blasphemy of

Śrī Guru, Śrī Kṛṣṇa or the devotees



To blaspheme Śrī Gurudeva, Śrī Bhagavān or the devotees
is an offence. Similarly to hear blasphemy of them is
also a great offence. If one is capable he should give
suitable punishment to such offenders. If one is unable,
he should cover his ears, leave that place and take bath
with his clothes on. By hearing blasphemy the active
principle (vṛtti) of bhakti becomes withered. Those who
blaspheme Kṛṣṇa or the Vaiṣṇavas are offenders who are
averse to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.74.40) it
is said:



nindāṁ bhagavataḥ śṛṇvaṁs

tat-parasya janasya vā

tato nāpaiti yaḥ so ‘pi

yāty adhaḥ sukṛtāc cyutaḥ



Those who hear blasphemy of Bhagavān or His devotees and
do not leave that place are deprived of their auspicious
activities and fall down to a degraded position.



Śrī Gurudeva is here included within the classification
of the devotees. Therefore one should never tolerate
blasphemy of Śrī Gurudeva, Śrī Kṛṣṇa or the devotees.



The forty-four limbs of bhakti which follow after this
are included within the twenty limbs already mentioned.
They have been described as separate limbs in order to
understand the subject matter elaborately. The thirty
limbs from the twenty-first item, adopting the outward
signs of a Vaiṣṇava, to the fiftieth item, offering of
one’s dear objects to Kṛṣṇa, are included within arcana-
mārga, the path of regulated worship.



(21) Vaiṣṇava-cihna-dhāraṇam

Adopting the outward signs of a Vaiṣṇava



                            73
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017


To wear three strings of tulasī beads around the neck,
to adorn the body in twelve places with tilaka and so on
is called vaiṣṇava-cihna-dhāraṇa, to adopt the outward
signs of a Vaiṣṇava. A sādhaka must certainly adopt
these Vaiṣṇava markings. The injunction to wear three
strands of tulasī beads around the neck has been given
in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa. Without wearing a tulasī-mālā,
all auspicious religious performances such as bhagavad-
arcana and bhagavad-upāsanā5 are rendered fruitless.

The śāstras prescribe wearing necklaces made of lotus
seeds, rudrākṣa beads, beads made from the myrobalan
tree, tulasī beads and so on. For the Vaiṣṇavas,
however, the wearing of a tulasī-mālā is the best of
all. Tulasī is supremely pure and very dear to Bhagavān.
Therefore by wearing a tulasī-mālā the body, mind, words
and soul become pure, and the inclination towards bhakti
begins to manifest spontaneously.

The śāstras prescribe wearing two kinds of tilaka:
ūrdhva-puṇḍra, vertical markings worn on the forehead by
Vaiṣṇavas, and tri-puṇḍra, three horizontal lines worn
across the forehead by Śaivites and māyāvādīs. Vaiṣṇavas
and faithful brāhmaṇas should wear ūrdhva-puṇḍra tilaka.
®rdhva-puṇḍra tilaka is known as a temple of Lord Hari,
for Śrī Bhagavān resides in it. Only after first
applying ūrdhva-puṇḍra tilaka in twelve places should
one carry out his daily religious performances, worship
and other various services. According to the Padma
Purāṇa one should not see the body of a human being that
is devoid of ūrdhva-puṇḍra tilaka. The body of such a
person is compared to a crematorium.

The śāstras prescribe wearing ūrdhva-puṇḍra tilaka made
either from gopī-candana, a type of white clay produced
in Dvārakā, or from the dust of Śrī Vṛndāvana, the dust
of Rādhā-kuṇḍa, the dust from places where tulasī is
grown and so on. Nonetheless in all the śāstras the
greatest importance is given to wearing ūrdhva-puṇḍra
tilaka made from gopī-candana. By wearing this tilaka
all of one’s śubha-karma produce imperishable results.
By this simple act Bhagavān becomes pleased and one
obtains bhagavad-bhakti. The following statement
regarding the wearing of ūrdhva-puṇḍra tilaka is found
in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (4.232ñ3), cited from the Garuḍa
Purāṇa:



yo mṛttikāṁ dvāravatī-samudbhavāṁ

kare samādāya lalāṭa-paṭṭake

karoti nityaṁ tv atha cordhva-puṇḍraṁ

kriyā-phalaṁ koṭi-guṇaṁ sadā bhavet



kriyā-vihīnaṁ yadi mantra-hīnaṁ

śraddhā-vihīnaṁ yadi kāla-varjitam


                           74
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

kṛtvā lalāṭe yadi gopī-candanaṁ

prāpnoti tat-karma-phalaṁ sadākṣayam

Those who take gopī-candana produced in Dvārakā and
apply it to their foreheads daily as ūrdhva-puṇḍra
tilaka find the results of all their activities
multiplied millions of times. Even if such activities
are performed without the proper purificatory rites,
without the chanting of mantras, without faith or at a
prohibited time, they produce imperishable results
simply by the wearing of gopī-candana on the forehead.



(22) Harināmākṣara-dhāraṇam

To wear the letters of the Lord’s holy name



To stamp the principal limbs of the body with candana
forming the letters of the Lord’s holy names such as the
Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, the Pañca-tattva mantra or other such
names, is known as wearing the letters of the Lord’s
holy name.



(23) Nirmālya-dhāraṇam

To accept the remnants of articles used by the deity



To accept articles offered to the deity of the Lord such
as clothes, garlands, sandalpaste, scents, ornaments and
other similar items is known as nirmālya-dhāraṇa,
wearing the remnants of the deity. By doing so one
easily conquers over māyā and enters into bhagavad-
bhakti. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.6.46) Uddhava,
addressing Lord Śrī Kṛṣna, has said:



tvayopabhukta-srag-gandha-

vāso ‘laṅkāra-carcitāḥ

ucchiṣṭa-bhojino dāsās

tava māyāṁ jayema hi



O Bhagavān, we decorate ourselves with the garlands,
sandalwood, clothes and ornaments worn by You. We are
Your servants who subsist on the remnants of food left
by You. Therefore we shall certainly conquer over Your
illusory energy.



From this statement it is clear that by wearing the

                              75
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

remnants of articles offered to the deity, the fear of
māyā cannot remain. Therefore it is the duty of sādhakas
to wear the remnants of articles offered to Bhagavān.



(24) Nṛtyam

Dancing before the Lord



Sādhakas should dance before the deity of the Lord with
a devotional attitude. In Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu
(1.2.127), quoting from the Dvārakā-māhātmya, it is
said:



yo nṛtyati prahṛṣṭātmā

bhāvair bahu-subhaktitaḥ

sa nirdahati pāpāni

manvantara-śateṣv api



Those who dance before the Lord with exuberant hearts
and overwhelming devotional feelings completely destroy
all their sins performed in hundreds of manvantaras6.



(25) Daṇḍavat-praṇāmam

Prostrated obeisances



One should offer daṇḍavat-praṇāma to the deity of
Bhagavān, keeping one’s left side to the Lord. One
should offer daṇḍavat-praṇāma to Śrī Gurudeva directly
facing him. One should offer sāṣṭāṅga-daṇḍavat-praṇāma
(obeisances with eight limbs) by extending both arms
forward and falling on the ground like a stick (daṇḍa).
The eight limbs referred to in this type of praṇāma are
the hands, the feet, the knees, the chest, the forehead,
the mind, vision and speech. There is also an injunction
to offer praṇāma with five limbs, pañcāṅga-praṇāma — the
knees, the arms, the forehead, the intelligence and
speech. In the Nāradīya Purāṇa the glories of bhagavat-
praṇāma have been described as follows (Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindhu (1.2.129)):



eko ‘pi kṛṣṇāya kṛtaḥ praṇāmo

daśāśvamedhāvabhṛthair na tulyaḥ

daśāśvamedhī punar eti janma


                           76
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

kṛṣṇa-praṇāmī na punar bhavāya



The effect of offering praṇāma to Śrī Kṛṣṇa once only is
so great that even the performance of ten aśvamedha-
yajñas cannot be compared with it. This is so because
the performer of ten aśvamedha-yajñas has to take birth
again, whereas one who once offers praṇāma to Kṛṣṇa does
not take birth again.



(26) Abhyutthānam

Rising from one’s seat in honour of the Lord



When one comes before Śrī Bhagavān for darśana at the
time of the Lord’s touring the city in a ratha or
palanquin, or when one sees Śrī Gurudeva or the
Vaiṣṇavas approaching, one should stand courteously and
offer respectful salutation. This is called abhyutthāna,
rising from one’s seat in honour of the Lord. By doing
so Bhagavān is pleased and bhakti flourishes. In the
Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa it is said:



yānārūḍhaṁ puraḥ prekṣya

samāyāntaṁ janārdanam

abhyutthānaṁ naraḥ kurvan

pātayet sarva-kilbiṣam



Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.130)



Those who see Bhagavān Śrī Janārdana mounted on His cart
or palanquin and rise from their seats to offer Him
respectful salutations have all their sins destroyed.



(27) Anuvrajyā

To follow behind the deity of the Lord



To faithfully follow behind, beside or in front of the
ratha-yātrā procession of Śrī Bhagavān at the time of
His touring the city is known as anuvrajyā, to follow
behind the deity of the Lord. One should also follow Śrī
Gurudeva and the Vaiṣṇavas at the time of their arrival
or departure. In the Bhaviṣya Purāṇa there is the
following statement about anuvrajyā (Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindhu (1.2.131)):

                            77
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017




rathena saha gacchanti

pārśvataḥ pṛṣṭhato ‘grataḥ

viṣṇunaiva samāḥ sarve

bhavanti svapadācayaḥ



If even a caṇḍāla follows behind, at the side of or in
front of the ratha cart of Śrī Bhagavān, he becomes as
worshipable as Viṣṇu Himself.



(28) Śrī-mūrti-sthāne gamanam

To visit the place where the deity is established



One should visit the temple and pastime places of Śrī
Bhagavān and offer respectful salutation by taking
darśana, offering praṇāma and reciting prayers. In the
Purāṇas it is said:



samsāra marukāntāra-

nistāra-karaṇa-kṣamau

ślāghyau tāv eva caraṇau

yau hares tīrtha-gāminau



Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.133)



The two feet that journey to the holy tīrthas of Śrī
Hari are praiseworthy because by doing so they enable
one to cross over the desert of this material existence.

(29) Parikramā

Circumambulation



One should perform parikramā of the mandira of Śrī
Bhagavān, the places associated with His pastimes (līlā-
sthalīs), tulasī, Śrī Girirāja-Govardhana and so on,
keeping one’s right side to them. In general one should
circumambulate four times. In Śrī Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya
it is said:



                             78
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017


viṣṇuṁ pradakṣiṇī-kurvan

yas tatrāvartate punaḥ

tad evāvartanaṁ tasya

punar nāvartate bhave



Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.135)



Those who perform parikramā of Śrī Viṣṇu again and again
while keeping their right side to the Lord (pradakṣiṇā)
carry out their final rotation, for they will not have
to rotate again in the cycle of repeated birth and
death.



(30) Pūjā or Arcana

Worship of the deity



To worship the deity with various kinds of articles
(upacāra) is called pūjana or arcana. Worship of the
Lord with five articles is called pañcopacāra-pūjana.
The five items employed in such worship are as follows:
(1) sweet scents (gandha), (2) flowers (puṣpa), (3)
incense (dhūpa), (4) a lamp (dīpa) and (5) offering of
eatables (naivedya).

Worship of Śrī Bhagavān with sixteen articles is called
ṣoḍaśopacāra-pūjana. The sixteen items are as follows:
(1) a sitting place (āsana), (2) welcoming or inviting
the deity (svāgata), (3) sipping water for purification
(ācamana), (4) water for washing the feet of the deity
(pādya), (5) water for washing the deity’s mouth
(arghya), (6) an oblation of honey, ghee, milk, yoghurt
and sugar all mixed together (madhuparka), (7) sipping
water for purification again (ācamanīya), (8) bathing
the deity (snāna), (9) clothes (vasana), (10) ornaments
(ābharaṇa), (11) sweet scents (gandha), (12) flowers
(puṣpa), (13) lamp (dīpa), (14) incense (dhūpa), (15)
eatables (naivedya) and (16) sandalwood (candana). In
the Viṣṇu-rahasya it is stated:



śrī-viṣṇor arcanam ye tu

prakurvanti narā bhuvi

te yānti śāśvataṁ viṣṇor

ānandaṁ paramaṁ padam




                           79
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                  5/5/2017

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.139)



Those who worship Bhagavān Śrī Viṣṇu attain to the
supreme abode of Viṣṇu, which is eternal and full of
transcendental bliss.



(31) Paricaryā

Service or attendance upon the Lord



In Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.140) it is stated:



paricaryā tu sevopa-

karaṇādi pariṣkriyā

tathā prakīrṇaka-cchatra-

vāditrādyair upāsanā



To serve Kṛṣṇa like a king is called paricaryā
(attendance upon the Lord). This service is of two
kinds: (1) cleansing and purifying the articles to be
offered in the worship of the Lord and (2) to render
service to Śrī Vigraha by waving the cāmara, holding the
umbrella over the deity, playing musical instruments and
other such services.



(32) Gītam

Singing



The bhakti-sādhakas should sing the songs of the
mahājanas in front of the deity of Bhagavān. Such songs
are steeped in prayer expressing the moods of surrender
to the Lord (śaraṇāgati), yearning for the personal
service of the Lord (lālasāmayī) and other such
sentiments.



(33) Saṅkīrtanam

Congregational chanting of the Lord’s holy name



When many faithful devotees following under the guidance
of mahāpuruṣas assemble together and loudly chant the
holy name of the Lord for the pleasure of Śrī Bhagavān,

                            80
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

it is called saṅkīrtana. This has been expressed in the
following words of Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī from the Krama-
sandarbha — saṅkīrtanaṁ bahubhir militvā tad-gāna-sukhaṁ
śrī-kṛṣṇa-gānam. In Śri Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya-līlā
4.70ñ1) nāma-saṅkīrtana has been declared to be the
foremost among the sixty-four limbs of bhakti or among
the nine limbs of bhakti:



bhajanera madhye śreṣṭha nava-vidhā bhakti

kṛṣṇa-prema kṛṣṇa dite dhare mahā-śakti

tāra madhye sarva-śreṣṭha nāma-saṅkīrtana

niraparādhe nāma laile pāya prema-dhana



Of the various processes of sādhana, nine types of
bhakti (śravaṇa, kīrtana, smaraṇa and so on) are the
best, for they have such great potency to bestow kṛṣṇa-
prema and Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Out of these nine practices,
bhagavan-nāma-saṅkīrtana is the most excellent. If one
performs nāma-saṅkīrtana free from offences he will
certainly attain the most valuable wealth of kṛṣṇa-
prema.



Especially in Kali-yuga nāma-saṅkīrtana is the one and
only super-excellent process of religion. Śrīla Jīva
Gosvāmī has said that in Kali-yuga, even if one performs
the other limbs of bhakti, they must certainly be
accompanied by śrī nāma-saṅkīrtana (ataeva yady anyāpi
bhaktiḥ kalau kartavyā, tadā tat-saṁyoge naivety uktam).



(34) Japaḥ

Utterance of the holy name and mantras



To utter bhagavan-nāma or mantras is called japa. This
utterance (uccāraṇa) is of three kinds: (1) verbal
(vācika), (2) in a whisper (upāṁśu) and (3) within the
mind (mānasika). To perform japa with clear, audible
enunciation of the mantra is called vācika-japa. When
japa is performed with very soft pronunciation, with
only a slight movement of the lips, and can only be
heard by one’s own ears, it is called upāṁśu-japa. To
meditate on nāma or a mantra within one’s mind is called
mānasika-japa.

In his commentary on Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (11.247)
Sanātana Gosvāmipāda has said: “vācikasya
kīrtanāntargatvāt mānasi-kasya smaraṇātmatvāt — vācika-
japa is included within the limb of kīrtana, and
mānasika-japa is included within the limb of smaraṇa.”
In Bhakti-sandarbha (Anuccheda 276) Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī has
said:

                           81
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017




tatra nāma-smaraṇaṁ — harer nāma paraṁ japyaṁ dhyeyaṁ
geyaṁ nirantaram. kīrtanīyaṁ ca bahudhā nirvṛttīr
bahudhecchatā. iti jāvāli-samhitādy-anusāreṇa jñeyam.
nāma-smaraṇaṁ tu śuddhāntaḥ-karaṇatām apekṣate. tat
saṅkīrtanāc-cāvaram iti mūle tu nodāharaṇa spaṣṭatā.



In the Jāvāli-saṁhitā the process of nāma-smaraṇa has
been described in the following way. Those who are
desirous of obtaining unlimited varieties of spiritual
bliss should always perform japa, meditation (dhyāna),
singing (gāna) and kīrtana of the topmost names of Śrī
Hari. But in the practice of nāma-smaraṇa one cannot
obtain spiritual bliss as long as the heart remains
impure, whereas the practice of nāma-saṅkīrtana does not
depend on purification of the heart. Therefore nāma-
smaraṇa is less effective than nāma-saṅkīrtana, and
nāma-saṅkīrtana has greater importance.



(35) Stava-pāṭhaḥ

Recitation of songs or hymns in praise of the Lord



In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and other scriptures, and in the
books composed by the Six Gosvāmīs, there are many
useful stavas and stotras, hymns of praise that are
saturated with the mood of prayer offered to Śrī Guru,
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Nityānanda Prabhu, Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma, Śrī
Girirāja-Govardhana, Yamunā, Rādhā-kuṇḍa, Śyāma-kuṇḍa
and so on. The sādhaka should recite these with great
love and devotion.



(36) Mahā-prasāda-sevā

Honouring the remnants

of food offered to the deity



Food items and beverages offered to the Lord are called
mahā-prasāda. It is the duty of the devotees to honour
mahā-prasāda. By honouring mahā-prasāda, anarthas are
easily destroyed and bhagavad-bhakti is augmented.
Bhagavad-bhaktas accept only mahā-prasāda, therefore the
remnants of their prasāda is called mahā-mahā-prasāda,
which is a greatly powerful medicine for effecting the
growth of bhakti within the heart.



(37) Vijñaptiḥ


                           82
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                5/5/2017

Submissive prayer or entreaty



To make known one’s prayer at the lotus feet of Śrī
Bhagavān is what is meant by vijñapti. To describe one’s
miserable condition, deceitfulness, attachment to
material existence, helplessness and so on, and to pray
in a despairing voice for deliverance as well as
attainment of the service of the Lord’s lotus feet is
called vijñapti. Vijñapti is of three kinds: (i)
samprārthanātmikā, (ii) dainyabodhikā and (iii)
lālasāmayī. Examples of each of these are found in the

following verses from Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu.

(i) Samprārthanātmikā

Prayer with wholehearted submission of mind, body and
everything to the Lord



yuvatīnāṁ yathā yūni

yūnāṁ ca yuvatau yathā

mano ‘bhiramate tadvan

mano ‘bhiramatāṁ tvayi



Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.153)



O my Lord, as the minds of young boys and girls remain
attached to one another, please let my mind be attached
to You.



(ii) Dainya-bodhikā

Making known one’s insignificance and worthlessness



mat-tulyo nāsti pāpātmā

nāparādhī ca kaścana

parihāre ‘pi lajjā me

kiṁ bruve puruṣottama



Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.154)



O Puruṣottama, in this world there is no sinner and

                           83
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                5/5/2017

offender like me. Even though You are an ocean of
causeless mercy, I am ashamed even to request You to
forgive my offences. What more shall I say?



(iii) Lālasāmayī

Yearning for the personal service of the Lord



kadāhaṁ yamunā-tīre

nāmāni tava kīrtayan

udbāṣpaḥ puṇḍarīkākṣa

racayiṣyāmi tāṇḍavam



Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.156)



O Puṇḍarīkākṣa (lotus-eyed Lord), when, upon the banks
of the Yamunā, with eyes brimming with tears of ecstasy
and voice choked up with divine spiritual emotion, will
I chant Your holy names and dance like a madman?



Comment



The above text (Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.2.156) is an
example of a prayer made by a jāta-rati bhakta; that is,
a devotee in whom bhāva-bhakti has already been aroused.
This is the characteristic of lālasāmayī-vijñapti.
Lālasāmayī-vijñapti is a prayer for some particular kind
of direct service to the Lord made by a devotee in whom
rati is already manifest. Samprārthanātmikā-vijñapti,
however, is a prayer by a devotee in whom rati is not
yet awakened. It is a prayer for the awakening of rati.
In such a prayer lālasā or longing is also present but
there is an absence of bhāva. According to the
commentary of Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī, the example of
lālasāmayī-vijñapti should actually come under the
heading of rāgānuga-bhakti.



(38) Caraṇāmṛta-pānam

Drinking the nectar used to wash

the lotus feet of the Lord



After the deity of the Lord has been bathed with various
substances, the nectar is collected from the Lord’s feet

                             84
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

and is thus called śrī caraṇāmṛta. Sādhakas should
regularly and with great faith drink that caraṇāmṛta and
reverentially bear it on their heads. By doing so their
bhakti is developed.



As the following limbs numbered 39ñ42 are completely
clear, no elaborate explanation has been given of them.



(39) Dhūpa-mālyādi-saurabha-grahaṇam



Smelling the fragrance of incense and flower garlands
offered to the Lord is the thirty-ninth limb of vaidhī-
sādhana-bhakti.

(40) Śrī-mūrti-darśanam



Sādhakas should take darśana daily of the deity of
Bhagavān, either in the temple or in one’s own home. By
doing so devotees directly taste the sweetness of the
Lord.



(41) Śrī-mūrti-sparśanam



Touching the deity of Bhagavān is also counted as a limb
of bhakti.



(42) Ārātrika-darśanam



The sādhaka should take darśana of the ārati offered to
the deity of Bhagavān at the three junctions of the day:
morning, noon and night.



(43) Śravaṇam

Hearing



To hear descriptions of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s nāma, rūpa, guṇa and
līlā is called śravaṇa. Such descriptions are non-
different from Him; all the potencies of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
Himself have been invested in them. Śrī Bhagavān enters
the heart of the listener through the medium of hearing
līlā-kathā, destroys all anarthas situated in the heart,
and transmits prema-bhakti there.


                           85
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017



śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

punya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi

vidhunoti suhṛt satām



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.17)



By hearing the līlā-kathā of Śrī Bhagavān, all
misfortunes of the jīvas are dispelled. Those who
possess an ardent desire to obtain unalloyed prema-
bhakti at the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa must certainly
hear His līlā-kathā repeatedly and incessantly.



(44) Tat-kṛpāpekṣaṇam

Anticipating the mercy of the Lord



Without the mercy of Bhagavān one cannot obtain bhakti,
nor is the performance of sādhana and bhajana possible.
The sādhaka of bhakti is always dependent on the mercy
of the Lord. He should perceive the mercy of Kṛṣṇa
everywhere. This is expressed in the following verse
from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.8):



tat te ‘nukampāṁ susamīkṣamāṇo

bhuñjāna evātma-kṛtaṁ vipākam

hrd-vāg-vapurbhir vidadhan namas te

jīveta yo mukti-pade sa dāya-bhāk



Those who clearly perceive Your mercy at every moment
with great enthusiasm are able to endure with
unperturbed minds the happiness and distress that comes
to them in accordance with their prārabdha-karma,
considering it to be the mercy of the Lord. With hearts
filled with love, voices choked with emotion and the
hairs of their bodies standing on end, they offer
themselves at Your lotus feet. Just as a son is eligible
for the wealth of the father, they become eligible for
the supreme spiritual status, or in other words,
bhagavat-prema.



(45) Smaraṇam

                             86
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017


Remembering



To contemplate Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s nāma, rūpa, guṇa and līlā
with the mind is called smaraṇa.



(46) Dhyānam

Meditation



Very thorough meditation upon the rūpa, guṇa, līlā and
sevā of Bhagavān is called dhyāna. The meaning of sevā-
dhyāna is worship or service that is performed within
the mind.



(47) Dāsyam

Servitude



The pure constitutional disposition (śuddha-svarūpa) of
the jīva is to be a servant of Lord Kṛṣṇa. Because the
jīva’s vision is diverted from Śrī Kṛṣṇa his pure
constitutional nature becomes covered by māyā. By virtue
of some great fortune, the jīva may come to learn of his
true identity by the association of saintly devotees.
The sādhaka should then always think, “I am a servant of
Lord Kṛṣṇa”. This attitude is called dāsya. There are
two kinds of dāsya: (1) in its beginning form, dāsya
means to offer all one’s activities to the Lord and (2)
to render all kinds of services to the Lord with the
feeling that, “I am a servant of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and He is my
master”. This attitude is called kaiṅkarya. Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu has said the following about the śuddha-
svarūpa of the jīva (Padyāvalī (74)):



nāhaṁ vipro na ca nara-patir nāpi vaiśyo na śūdro

nāhaṁ varṇī na ca gṛha-patir no vanastho yatir vā

kintu prodyan nikhila-paramānanda-pūrnāmṛtābdher

gopī-bhartuḥ pada-kamalayor dāsa-dāsānudāsaḥ



I am not a brāhmaṇa, a kṣatriya, a vaiśya or a śūdra.
Nor am I a brahmacārī, a gṛhastha, a vānaprastha or a
sannyāsī. I am a servant of the servant of the servants
of the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa who is the dearmost
beloved of the gopīs and an ocean of nectar laden with
undivided spiritual bliss.


                           87
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                 5/5/2017



Sādhakas should always maintain this conception.

(48) Sakhyam

Friendship



Sakhya is of two kinds: (1) that which is based on faith
(viśvāsa) and (2) that which is based on an attitude of
friendship (maitrī). Draupadī expressed her faith in Śrī
Kṛṣṇa in the following words: “Śrī Kṛṣṇa will certainly
protect me.” This is an example of sakhya-bhāva that is
based on faith. Draupadī is an eternally liberated
associate of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Therefore her attitude of
sakhya-bhāva, predominated by a very deep sense of
faith, is not a subject matter of sādhana-bhakti for
ordinary sādhakas. Nonetheless, because of the
prevalence of faith in the sakhya-bhāva demonstrated in
the statement of Draupadī, it is relevant to be used as
an example of sādhana-bhakti. The example of Draupadī
has been given in order to incite a similar attitude of
sakhya-bhāva predominated by viśvāsa in faithful
sādhakas.

In order to see Śrī Bhagavān in His human-like form (out
of a sense of affection) and in order to behave with Him
just like an intimate friend, certain sādhakas, engaged
in all kinds of personal services, lie down in the
temple. This disposition is called mitra-vṛtti. Sakhya
of this type is not for sādhakas of the vidhi-mārga. It
is suitable only for devotees situated in rāgānugā,
which is based on intense greed (lobha). Nevertheless it
is sometimes possible for sādhakas of the vidhi-mārga.
Therefore this limb has been described here in the
context of vaidhī-sādhana-bhakti.



(49) Ātma-nivedanam

Dedication of the self



The word ātmā refers to ahaṁtā (egoism),   or in other
words the sense of “I” pertaining to the   body, as well
as mamatā (possessiveness), or the sense   of “mine” that
is related to the body. To offer both of   these to Kṛṣṇa
is called ātma-nivedana.

The living entity who is within the body is known as
dehī, one who possesses the body, and aham, the ego,
egoism or the self. When the living entity takes support
of these two conceptions (i.e. the sense of possessing a
body (dehī) and the sense of ego or self (aham)), it
gives rise to the sense of “I”. The possessiveness or
attachment that rests upon this sense of “I” is called
dehī-niṣṭha-mamatā, or attachment grounded in the egoism
of possessing a body.

The sense of “mine” in relation to the body is called

                           88
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                  5/5/2017

deha-niṣṭha-mamatā, or possessiveness related to the
body itself. One should offer both the sense of “I” and
the sense of “mine” to Kṛṣṇa. One should give up the
conceptions of “I” and “mine” and adopt the conception
that, “I am a servant of Kṛṣṇa, I accept only the
remnants of Kṛṣṇa’s prasāda and this body is an
instrument suitable for the service of Kṛṣṇa”. To
maintain the body exclusively with this mentality is
called ātma-nivedana.



(50) Nija-priya-vastu-samarpaṇam

Offering one’s own dear objects



The things in this world that one likes best should be
accepted and offered to Kṛṣṇa, considering them to be
related to Him. This is what is meant by offering one’s
dear objects to Kṛṣṇa. One should offer to Kṛṣṇa those
things which are dear to other persons and which are
also dear to Kṛṣṇa. Those items which are dear to
others, dear to Kṛṣṇa and dear to the sādhakas also are
especially fit to be offered to Kṛṣṇa. Those objects
give the most pleasure to Kṛṣṇa. Those items which are
dear to people in general but are not dear to Kṛṣṇa, or
those things which are dear to Kṛṣṇa but are not dear to
people in general, should not be offered to Kṛṣṇa.



(51) Kṛṣṇārthe samasta-karma-karaṇam

Performing all activities for the sake of Kṛṣṇa



To make all activities, whether they be worldly duties
or those directly related to vaidhī-sādhana-bhakti,
favourable for the service of Lord Hari is to perform
all activities for the sake of Kṛṣna.



(52) Sarvathā śaraṇāpattiḥ

Full self-surrender



Self-surrender (śaraṇāgati or śaraṇāpatti) is
accomplished in six ways as stated in Bhakti-sandarbha
(Anuccheda 236), quoting a statement from the Vaiṣṇava-
tantra:



ānukūlyasya saṅkalpaḥ

prātikūlya-vivarjanaṁ

rakṣiṣyatīti viśvāso

                             89
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017


goptṛtve varaṇaṁ tathā

ātma-nikṣepa-kārpaṇye

ṣaḍ-vidhā śaraṇāgatiḥ



There are six symptoms of self-surrender: (1)
Ānukūlyasya saṅkalpa — fully surrendered sādhakas should
accept only those things which are favourable for prema-
bhakti. (2) Prātikūlya-vivarjana — they should
completely reject those things which are unfavourable to
prema-bhakti. (3) Rakṣiṣyatīti viśvāsa — they have firm
faith that Kṛṣṇa is their only protector, that there is
no protector other than Kṛṣṇa and that one cannot obtain
protection by any other activity. (4) Goptṛtve varaṇa —
surrendered devotees have absolutely no doubt that Kṛṣṇa
is their only guardian and maintainer. (5) Ātma-nikṣepa
— offering the self to the Lord is expressed in this
attitude: “I am incapable of doing anything
independently. Unless Kṛṣṇa desires, no one can do
anything.” Devotees who are without any other resort
have this kind of faith. (6) Kārpaṇya — humility is
expressed as follows: “I am very fallen and
insignificant.” Unalloyed devotees are possessed of this
very firm and simple faith. To possess all these
attitudes is called śaraṇāpatti.

(53) Tulasī-sevā

Serving tulasī



The service of tulasī has already been described within
the tenth limb of bhakti — offering respect to banyan
trees, tulasī, myrobalan trees, cows, brāhmaṇas and
Vaiṣṇavas.



(54) Vaiṣṇava-śāstra-sevā

Serving Vaiṣṇava scriptures



Only those śāstras which cause bhagavad-bhakti to be
obtained are vaiṣṇava-śāstras. One should faithfully and
regularly study such scriptures, hear them from the
mouths of pure devotees, and read and recite them with a
worshipful attitude. One should know the object to be
obtained by such scriptures, that being bhagavad-bhakti,
and having full faith in that one should mould one’s
life in accordance with its principles. The restoration
of, careful keeping of, publishing and propagation of
vaiṣṇava-śāstras are all included within śāstra-sevā
(service to Vaiṣṇava scriptures). In Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindhu (1.2.207ñ8), quoting from the Skanda Purāṇa, it
is said:



                              90
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017


vaiṣṇavāni tu śāstrāṇi

ye śṛṇvanti paṭhanti ca

dhanyāste mānavā loke

teṣāṁ kṛṣṇaḥ prasīdati

vaiṣṇavāni tu śāstrāṇi

ye ‘rcayanti gṛhe narāḥ

sarva-pāpa-vinirmuktā

bhavanti sura-vanditāḥ



The vaiṣṇava-śāstras like Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Bhagavad-
gītā and so on propound ananya-bhakti, exclusive
devotion unto Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Those who keep such scriptures
in their home and worship them with great respect are
freed from all sins. Even the demigods offer prayers to
such persons. Those who hear the vaiṣṇava-śāstras from
the mouths of pure devotees and who regularly study them
on their own are truly blessed in this world. Śrī Kṛṣṇa
becomes pleased with them.



Therefore it is imperative for the sādhakas to serve the
vaiṣṇava-śāstras. Of all the vaiṣṇava-śāstras, Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam is the most excellent because it is the
essence of the entire Vedānta. Those who taste the
nectarean rasa of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam have no taste for
any other scripture. This is the purport of the
following verse from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (12.13.15):



sarva-vedānta-sāraṁ hi

śrīmad-bhāgavatam iṣyate

tad-rasāmṛta-tṛptasya

nānyatra syād ratiḥ kvacit



(55) Mathurā-maṇḍale vāsaḥ

Residing within the district of Mathurā



One should hear about, glorify and remember the glories
of Mathurā. By desiring to go to Mathurā, by seeing
Mathurā, by touching the land of Mathurā, by living
there and by serving Mathurā, the aspiration for bhakti
is fulfilled. The term mathurā-vāsa refers to Śrī
Vṛndāvana, Gokula, Nandagāoṅ (Nanda-grāma), Varṣāṇā,
Rādhā-kuṇḍa, Śyāma-kuṇḍa and other places within

                             91
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                  5/5/2017

Mathurā-maṇḍala. It also refers to Śrī Māyāpura.



(56) Vaiṣṇava-sevana

Service of Vaiṣṇavas



Vaiṣṇavas are very dear to the Lord. By rendering
service to the Vaiṣṇavas one obtains bhakti towards
Bhagavān. In the scriptures it is said that the worship
of Viṣṇu is superior to the worship of all the demigods.
But the worship of His servants, the Vaiṣṇavas, is even
better than the worship of Viṣṇu. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(1.19.33) it is said:



yeṣāṁ saṁsmaraṇāt puṁsāṁ

sadyaḥ śuddhyanti vai gṛhāḥ

kim punar darśana-sparśa-

pāda-śaucāsanādibhiḥ



What wonder is there that men become purified by seeing,
touching, washing the feet of, offering a sitting place
to, and serving those Vaiṣṇavas, the mere remembrance of
whom sanctifies one’s household?



In the Ādi Purāṇa Śrī Kṛṣṇa says to Arjuna:



ye me bhakta-janāḥ pārtha

na me bhaktāś ca te janāḥ

mad-bhaktānāṁ ca ye bhaktā

mama bhaktās tu te narāḥ



Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.218)



O Pārtha, those who claim to be My devotees are not My
actual devotees. But those who are devotees of My
devotees, are My true devotees.



(57) Yathā-śakti dolādi-mahotsava-karaṇam

Celebration of festivals related to the Lord in

                              92
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

accordance with one’s ability



To collect articles in accordance with one’s ability and
celebrate festivals in the temple of the Lord such as
the Lord’s birth ceremony, ratha-yātra and hiṇḍola (the
swing festival), and to serve the pure Vaiṣṇavas after
first offering service to the Lord is called a
mahotsava. In this world there is no festival greater
than this.



(58) Kārttika-vratam

Observing the vow of Kārttika



Kārttika-vrata is also called dāmodara-vrata. The month
of Kārttika is also known by the name ūrjā. The word
ūrjā literally means power, strength, energy or vigour.
Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the energy of Lord Kṛṣṇa and
therefore ūrjā refers to Her. To worship Śrī Rādhā-
Dāmodara by observing the limbs of bhakti in a regulated
manner in this month of Kārttika is called ūrjādara, or
in other words, giving respect (ādara) to ®rjā (Śrīmatī
Rādhikā). ®rjā is also called śakti. The goddess who
presides over this month is known as ®rjeśvarī.
®rjeśvarī is another name of Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

In the Padma Purāṇa it is said (cited in Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.221)):



yathā dāmodaro bhakta-

vatsalo vidito janaiḥ

tasyāyaṁ tādṛśo māsaḥ

svalpam apy upakārakaḥ



As the Supreme Lord Śrī Dāmodara is famous in this world
for being very affectionate to His devotees (bhakta-
vatsala), this month of Dāmodara, which is dear to Him,
considers even very little spiritual practice to be very
great and bestows tremendous results.



In his commentary to this verse Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has
given a nice analogy. When a magnanimous person takes
compassion upon one who has a heavy debt, he considers a
small payment to be substantial and thus liberates the
debtor from his liability. Similarly the month of
Dāmodara considers a very small practice of bhajana
performed with a respectful attitude to be very great
and bestows the invaluable wealth of bhakti towards
Bhagavān Śrī Dāmodara.

                           93
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017


To observe vows related to bhakti for the pleasure of
the Lord in the month of Kārttika is called niyama-sevā.
The unique glory of observing niyama-sevā in the month
of Kārttika in Vraja-maṇḍala has been described in
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.222ñ3), quoting from the
Padma Purāṇa:



bhuktiṁ muktiṁ harir dadyāt

arcito ‘nyatra sevinām

bhaktis tu na dadāty eva

yato vaśyakarī hareḥ

sā tv añjasā harer bhaktir

labhyate kārttike naraiḥ

mathurāyāṁ sakṛd api

śrī-dāmodara-sevanāt



To persons who perform sādhana in places outside of
Vraja-maṇḍala and without strong attachment to Kṛṣṇa,
Bhagavān certainly awards bhukti and mukti but He does
not award bhakti, for by bhakti the Lord becomes bound
to His devotee. But if a person who is otherwise devoid
of sādhana worships Śrī Dāmodara even once in Vraja-
maṇḍala in the month of Kārttika, he very easily obtains
the most rare hari-bhakti.



(59) Sarvadā harināma-grahaṇam/janmāṣṭamī-yātrādikaṁ ca

To chant the holy name at all times/to celebrate
Janmāṣṭamī and other festivals



To always utter the holy name in all circumstances is
known as śrī harināma-grahaṇa (to take harināma). One
can chant śrī harināma in any condition, whether eating
or drinking, sleeping or rising, moving about, pure or
impure. This is stated in Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya-
līlā 20.18):



khāite śuite yathā tathā nāma laya

kāla-deśa-niyama nāhi sarva siddhi haya



Regardless of time or place, one who chants the holy
name, even while eating or sleeping, attains all
perfection.

                              94
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                  5/5/2017


Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has also said in the third verse
of Śikṣāṣṭaka: “kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ — always chant the
holy name of Hari.” To chant the holy name is accepted
as the topmost of all the limbs of bhakti. The holy name
may be chanted with or without keeping count, within the
mind, softly or loudly — in all ways. Nonetheless it is
seen that Śrīman Mahāprabhu, His follower Śrī Haridāsa
Ṭhākura and Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava ācāryas coming in
paramparā up to today have adopted the system of
chanting harināma while keeping count of their rounds.
After completing one’s fixed number of rounds one may
continue to chant without counting.

When one chants the holy name with great feeling and
dances accompanied by mṛdaṅga and karatālas, one cannot
keep track of the number of names chanted. To do so is
not opposed to śāstra. In recent times it is observed
that some persons do not pronounce audibly the Hare
Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra or perform kīrtana loudly, and they
forbid others to do so. However, this idea is completely
opposed to śāstra. This is clear from the life history
of Śrīman Mahāprabhu, Haridāsa Ṭhākura and others.

Celebration of Kṛṣṇāṣṭamī, the appearance day of Lord
Kṛṣṇa on the eighth day of the month of Bhādrapada
(AugustñSeptember), and Gaura-pūrṇimā, the full moon day
of the month of Phālguna (FebruaryñMarch), is known as
śrī janma-yātrā (celebration of the birth festival of
the Lord). Surrendered sādhakas should certainly observe
these festivals.



The five most excellent limbs of bhakti will now be
described.



(60) Śraddhā-pūrvaka-śrī-mūrti-sevā

Serving the deity with faith



In the service and worship of the deity it is essential
to have enthusiasm saturated with love. Unto those who
worship and serve the deity with great enthusiasm, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa gives not only the insignificant fruit of mukti
but the supreme fruit of bhakti.

(61) Rasikaiḥ saha śrī-bhāgavatārthāsvādaḥ

Tasting the meaning of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam in the
association of rasika Vaiṣṇavas



The delightfully sweet essence (rasa) of the wish-
fulfilling tree of Vedic literature is Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam. In the association of persons who are
estranged from that rasa there can be no tasting of the
rasa of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam; rather there can be only
aparādha. One should taste the rasa of the verses of

                           95
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam in the association of pure devotees
who are thoroughly versed in understanding the rasa of
the Bhāgavatam and who are possessed of deep yearning to
taste the rasa of kṛṣṇa-līlā. Śuddha-bhakti does not
arise by hearing or reciting Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam in an
assembly of ordinary persons.



(62) Sajātīya-snigdha-mahattara-sādhu-saṅgaḥ

Association of like-minded, affectionate, advanced
devotees



There can be no progress of bhakti by associating with
non-devotees who have merely adopted the designation of
“sat-saṅga”. The devotees’ only aspiration is to obtain
the service of the aprākṛta-līlā of Śrī Kṛṣna. Those who
have such a desire can be called bhaktas. The
development and growth of bhakti takes place in such
devotees by associating with devotees who are more
advanced than themselves. By failing to do so, the
advancement of bhakti is checked and one’s disposition
or nature will be of the exact same level as those
devotees whose association one keeps. In Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.229), quoting from Śrī Hari-bhakti-
sudhodaya (8.51), the following is said in connection
with

association:



yasya yat-saṅgatiḥ puṁso

maṇivat syāt sa tad gunaḥ

sva-kularddhyai tato dhīmān

svayūthyān eva saṁśrayet



As a crystal reflects the colour of those objects which
are brought into its proximity, a person’s nature will
be exactly in accordance with the association he keeps.
Therefore, by associating with pure devotees, one
becomes pure. Sādhu-saṅga (sat-saṅga) is beneficial in
every way. The actual purport of the instruction given
in the scriptures to live devoid of association
(niḥsaṅga) is that one should live in the company of
sādhus (sādhu-saṅga).

To associate with saintly devotees who are more advanced
than oneself, who are of the same disposition
(sajātīya), who taste the meaning of rasa (rasika) and
who are affectionate (snigdha), is what is signified by
this limb of bhakti. Sādhu-saṅga is the root cause of
kṛṣṇa-bhakti. This has already been stated previously.
But what kind of sādhu-saṅga should a sādhaka take? A
specific description of this is given here.


                              96
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                5/5/2017

A sādhaka should take association of those devotees who
are of the same spiritual disposition (sajātīya). In
other words one should associate with those devotees who
worship the same particular form of the Lord and who
possess the same internal spiritual mood as oneself.
Those who are sādhakas in the mood of dāsya-bhāva should
associate with devotees in dāsya-bhāva, and those who
are sādhakas in the mood of sakhya-bhāva should
associate with devotees in sakhya-bhāva. Similarly those
who are sādhakas in the moods of vātsalya- and mādhurya-
bhāva should associate with devotees situated in moods
that are favourable to their own respective bhāvas.

In the same way, sādhakas who worship Kṛṣṇa should
associate with devotees of Kṛṣṇa, and sādhakas who
worship other incarnations of the Lord should associate
with devotees who worship the same forms of the Lord.

Although a sādhu may be of the same spiritual
disposition, one should associate with those sādhus who
are affectionately disposed to oneself (snigdha). The
word snigdha refers to those who are affectionate, well-
wishing and rasika — not those who are harsh,
unsympathetic or indifferent. The esoteric mysteries of
bhajana and genuine instruction regarding the method of
performing bhajana cannot be obtained from sādhus who
are indifferently disposed or who are not affectionate.
Therefore to associate with saintly devotees who are
soft-hearted and affectionate is of the greatest
utility.

Even though a devotee may be sajātīya and snigdha, one
should associate with those devotees who are more
advanced in terms of steadiness in bhajana, direct
experience and realisation of the Lord, and in knowing
the confidential mysteries of the śāstras — in other
words who are superior to oneself in all respects. By
associating with devotees possessing all the above-
mentioned qualities a sādhaka can make steady and
gradual advancement on his path.



(63) Nāma-saṅkīrtanam

Loud congregational chanting of the holy name



The holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is supramundane and fully
sentient rasa, aprākṛta-caitanya-rasa. There is no trace
of anything material in it. When the sādhaka-jīva
engages himself in a devout manner in the service of the
Lord, Śrī Nāma automatically manifests Himself on the
tongue and other senses that have been purified by
bhakti. The holy name cannot be grasped by the material
senses. Therefore one should always perform nāma-
saṅkīrtana by oneself and in the company of others.

When the jīva, who is a particle of pure spirit (cit-
kaṇa), becomes fully purified, he is eligible to utter
harināma with his spiritual body (cinmaya-śarīra). But
when he is bound by māyā, he cannot chant the pure name
with the material senses. On obtaining the mercy of the

                           97
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

hlādinī-śakti, the activity of his own inner spiritual
form begins and at that time the appearance of nāma
takes place for him. As soon as nāma arises, śuddha-nāma
mercifully manifests within the faculty of the mind and
then dances upon the tongue of the devotee purified by
bhakti. The holy name is not in the shape of letters.
Only at the time of dancing on the material tongue does
the holy name manifest in the form of letters. This is
the mystery of nāma.

Harināma is of two types: mukhya, principal names, and
gauṇa, secondary names. The secondary names include
Brahma, Paramātmā, Niyantā (the controller), Pātā (the
protector), Sraṣṭā (the creator) and Mahendra (the
supreme monarch). The principal names include Viṣṇu,
Nārāyaṇa, Ananta, Rāma, Hari, Kṛṣṇa, Gopāla, Gopīnātha,
Rādhā-ramaṇa and so on. In the Śrī Rāmāṣṭottara-śata-
nāma-stotra of the Padma Purāṇa (cited in Hari-bhakti-
vilāsa (11.380)) it is said:



viṣṇor ekaikaṁ nāmāpi

sarva-vedādhikaṁ matam

tādṛṅ-nāma-sahasreṇa

rāma-nāma-samaṁ smṛtam



Each and every name of Viṣṇu is more beneficial than
reciting all the Vedas. Nevertheless a thousand such
names of Viṣṇu taken together are equal to just one name
of Rāma.



Further, in the Śrī Kṛṣṇāṣṭottara-śata-nāma-māhātmya of
the Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa (cited in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa
(11.488)) it is said:



sahasra-nāmnāṁ puṇyānāṁ

trir āvṛtyā tu yat phalam

ekāvṛtyā tu kṛṣṇasya

nāmaikaṁ tat prayacchati



The same result that is obtained by uttering a thousand
names of Viṣṇu three times is accomplished simply by
once pronouncing the name of Kṛṣṇa.



In the Kali-santaraṇa Upaniṣad, the Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa,
the Kṛṣṇa-yāmala and other places it is mentioned:


                            98
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017



hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare

hare rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare



This mantra consisting of sixteen words is called the
mahā-mantra. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu always instructed
the jīvas to perform saṅkīrtana by chanting this same
mahā-mantra. Śrī Gopāla-guru, Śrī Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
and other ācāryas who have tasted the essence of the
holy name have described the astonishing and ambrosial
meaning of each name of this mahā-mantra. Rāgānuga-
sādhakas should consult the sacred book Harināma-
cintāmaṇi composed by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura in
order to understand this subject in detail.

The glories of bhagavan-nāma-saṅkīrtana have been
described in the Śruti, Smṛti, Purāṇas and all other
śāstras. Out of the sixty-four limbs of bhakti, nine
types of bhakti — śravaṇa, kīrtana and so on — are
considered the best. Out of these nine types of bhakti,
nāma-saṅkīrtana has been proclaimed to be the topmost.
This is stated in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya-līlā
4.70ñ1):



bhajanera madhye śreṣṭha nava-vidhā bhakti

kṛṣṇa prema kṛṣṇe dite dhare mahā-śakti

tāra madhye sarva-śreṣṭha nāma-saṅkīrtana

niraparādhe nāma laile pāya prema-dhana



Of the various processes of sādhana, nine types of
bhakti are the best, for they have such great potency to
bestow kṛṣṇa-prema and Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Out of these nine
practices bhagavan-nāma-saṅkīrtana is the most
excellent. If one performs nāma-saṅkīrtana free from
offences he will certainly attain the most valuable
wealth of kṛṣṇa-prema.



In the Padma Purāṇa the identity of kṛṣṇa-nāma has been
explained (cited in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.233)):



nāma-cintāmaṇiḥ kṛṣṇaś

caitanya-rasa-vigrahaḥ

pūrṇaḥ śuddho nitya-mukto

‘bhinnatvān nāma-nāminoḥ


                            99
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017



Nāma, the holy name, and nāmī, Śrī Kṛṣṇa or He who
possesses the name, are a mutually non-differentiated
reality (abheda-

tattva). Therefore all the divine qualities of nāmī
Kṛṣṇa are also present in His name. Nāma is always a
fully accomplished truth (pūrṇa-tattva). There is no
touch of anything material in harināma. Nāma is
eternally liberated because it is never bound by the
illusory modes of nature. Nāma is Kṛṣṇa Himself;
therefore it is the concentrated form of all sentient
rasa. Nāma is cintāmaṇi; it is competent to deliver all
that is requested of it.



Harināma-saṅkīrtana is the best method of sādhana for
the sādhakas, the perfected souls (siddha-mahāpuruṣas),
those who are desirous of enjoying the fruits of their
worship (sakāma-sādhakas), and those who are free from
the desire to enjoy the fruits of their worship
(niṣkāma-sādhakas). This is stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(2.1.11):



etān nirvidyamānānām

icchatām akuto-bhayam

yogināṁ nṛpa nirṇītaṁ

harer nāmānukīrtanam



O Mahārāja (Parīkṣit), it has been concluded that śrī
bhagavan-nāma-saṅkīrtana is the only fearless method of
sādhana and sādhya for those who are desirous of
obtaining the heavenly planets and liberation (the
karmīs and jñānīs), for the self-satisfied yogīs, and
for the devotees who are completely devoid of material
desires.



This verse is quoted in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu
(1.2.230). In his commentary on this verse Śrīla
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura explains that the term
nirvidyamānānām means devoid of all desires, including
liberation. This term refers to those who possess one-
pointed devotion (ekānta-bhaktas). The word icchatām
means desirous of the attainment of the heavenly planets
and liberation. This refers to the jñānīs and karmīs.
The word yoginām refers to those who take pleasure in
the self (ātmārāmas).

The word akuto-bhayam means that there is absolutely no
doubt about the efficacy of nāma-kīrtana. It does not
depend on time, place, person, articles of worship,
purity or impurity. Even if the holy name comes in
contact with a mleccha who is intolerant of the service

                          100
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                  5/5/2017

of the Lord, the holy name will act. The word
nāmānukīrtanam means either constant chanting or
chanting to an extent that is appropriate for one’s
practice of bhakti. This practice is suitable both in
the stage of sādhana, practice, and sādhya, perfection.
The purport of the word nirṇītam (meaning “it has been
decided”) is that this fact has been decided by the
common consent of previous ṛṣis and maharṣis who became
devoid of all doubt after direct experience and
realisation.

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.40) it is also said:



evaṁ-vrataḥ sva-priya-nāma-kīrtyā

jātānurāgo druta-citta uccaiḥ

hasaty atho roditi rauti gāyaty

unmāda-van nṛtyati loka-bāhyaḥ



In the hearts of those who adopt such a pure vow, the
sprout of prema (bhāva) blossoms into anurāga, which
softens the heart and fills one with a deep sense of
attachment (mamatā) for the Lord. This occurs by
chanting the holy name of one’s most dearly beloved
Lord. At such a time one rises above the condition of
the general mass of people. One becomes indifferent to
public opinion and doesn’t seek approval for his
activities. By his natural disposition (of prema), the
devotee sometimes bursts out into laughter just like an
intoxicated person, sometimes he begins to weep
bitterly, sometimes he begins to call the name of the
Lord in a loud voice, sometimes he begins to sing of the
Lord’s attributes in a sweet and melodious voice, and
sometimes, when he witnesses his dearly beloved directly
before his eyes, he begins to dance in a most
captivating manner in order to charm the Lord.

This verse is cited in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.4.6) as
an example of prema arising from bhāva attained through
vaidhī-sādhana. The purport of the verse is that by
performing śravaṇa and kīrtana of the Lord’s holy name
in the stages of ruci and āsakti, bhāva manifests within
the heart. By continued performance of harināma with
deep attachment in the stage of bhāva, the heart becomes
melted and one becomes overwhelmed with a deep sense of
possessiveness (mamatā) in relation to the Lord. This
matured state of bhāva then transforms into prema. The
various symptoms mentioned in this verse are anubhāvas,
or outward manifestations of prema.

In citing the following verses in Bhakti-sandarbha
(Anuccheda 270ñ1) Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has pointed out
that loud performance of saṅkīrtana is the foremost
method to please the Lord in Kali-yuga:



kṛte yad dhyāyato viṣṇuṁ

                           101
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017


tretāyāṁ yajato makhaiḥ

dvāpare paricaryāyāṁ

kalau tad dhari-kīrtanāt



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (12.3.52)



Whatever results are acquired in Satya-yuga by
meditation on Lord Viṣṇu, in Tretā-yuga by the
performance of sacrifice and in Dvāpara-yuga by service
rendered to the deity form of the Lord, are obtained in
Kali-yuga simply by śrī hari-kīrtana.



dhyāyan kṛte yajan yajñais

tretāyāṁ dvāpare ‘rccayan

yad āpnoti tad āpnoti

kalau saṅkīrtya keśavam



Viṣṇu Purāṇa (6.2.17)



By chanting the holy name of Śrī Keśava in Kali-yuga, a
sādhaka obtains all the results that are gained in
Satya-yuga by meditation, in Tretā-yuga by performance
of sacrifice and in Dvāpara-yuga by worship of the
deity.

kaliṁ sabhājayanty āryā

guṇa-jñāḥ sāra-bhāginaḥ

yatra saṅkīrtanenaiva

sarva-svārtho ‘bhilabhyate



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.5.36)



O King, in Kali-yuga simply by chanting the holy name of
the Lord one can obtain all the desired goals of life
available in all the yugas. Knowing this, Āryans, those
highly esteemed in terms of culture and religion and who
know the actual merit of all things, praise Kali-yuga.



In Bhakti-sandarbha (Anuccheda 273), quoting from the

                             102
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

book Śrī Vaiṣṇava-cintāmaṇi, nāma-saṅkīrtana is said to
be superior to the process of smaraṇa, remembrance:



aghacchit smaraṇaṁ viṣṇor

bahv-āyāsena sādhyate

oṣṭha-spandana-mātreṇa

kīrtanaṁ tu tato varam



Remembrance of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who destroys all sins, is
accomplished with great endeavour, for it is very
difficult to withdraw the mind from the unlimited
varieties of worldly sense objects and concentrate it
upon Viṣṇu. But śrī kīrtana is easily accomplished
simply by vibrating the lips. Therefore it is superior
to and more effective than the process of smaraṇa.



The Nāradīya Purāṇa, describing bhagavan-nāma-kīrtana as
supremely glorious, has declared it to be the sole means
of rectification for the jīvas of Kali-yuga.



harer nāma harer nāma

harer nāmaiva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva

nāsty eva gatir anyathā



In Bhakti-sandarbha Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, while describing
the unending glories of the holy name, has told one
reason why harināma-saṅkīrtana is so extensively praised
in Kali-yuga. He has said that although in other yugas
the Supreme Lord personally instructed the system of
religion for those particular ages (dhyāna, yajña and so
on) by practising it Himself, He did not teach the
process of nāma-kīrtana by His personal behaviour.
However, in Kali-yuga, Śrī Bhagavān, seeing the
predicament of the jīvas, personally taught them the
method of nāma-kīrtana by practising it Himself in the
form of Śrī Gaurāṅga, as described in Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 4.40): “nāma-prema-mālā gāṅthi’
parāila saṁsāre — the Lord wove a wreath of the holy
name and prema with which He garlanded the entire
material world.”

Therefore in Kali-yuga the glories of nāma-kīrtana are
highly praised. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has consequently said
(Bhakti-sandarbha (Anuccheda 273)):




                            103
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

ataeva yady anyāpi bhaktiḥ kalau kartavyā

tadā tat-saṁyoge naivety uktam



In Kali-yuga if another limb of bhakti is performed, it
must be accompanied by harināma-saṅkīrtana.



Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī has also said that harināma-
saṅkīrtana is the foremost among all the limbs of
bhakti, such as smaraṇa and so on.



manyāmahe kīrtanam eva sattamaṁ

lolātmakaika svahṛdi sphurat smṛteḥ

vāci svayukte manasi śrutau tathā

dīvyat parān apy upakurvad ātmavat



Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta (2.3.148)



[The Lord’s associates in Vaikuṇṭha said:] In our
opinion kīrtana is superior to smaraṇa because
remembrance manifests only within the mind, which is by
nature unsteady. Kīrtana, however, manifests on the
tongue and vocal organs, and automatically creates an
impression upon the mind. In the end the sound of
kīrtana not only satisfies the sense of hearing but it
pleases all those who hear it, just as it pleases one’s
self.



In smaraṇa there is no such power, therefore kīrtana
alone is capable of controlling the mind, which is ever
more flickering than the wind. Besides, the mind cannot
perform smaraṇa without kīrtana. Other than kīrtana
there is no other method by which the mind can be made
steady — this is the deep and confidential meaning of
this verse of Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī.

Out of many different types of śrī kṛṣṇa-kīrtana,
chanting of the holy name of Kṛṣṇa (nāma-saṅkīrtana) is
the best and the most suitable to be taken up. By śrī
kṛṣṇa-nāma-saṅkīrtana the wealth of kṛṣṇa-prema very
quickly makes its appearance in the heart of the
sādhaka. Śrī nāma-saṅkīrtana is itself competent to
generate the wealth of prema without reliance upon any
other method. Therefore śrī nāma-saṅkīrtana is pre-
eminent among all the limbs of bhakti. Śrī nāma-
saṅkīrtana is both the means of attainment, sādhana, as
well as the object to be attained, sādhya — this is the
conclusion of Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī and all Vaiṣṇava
ācāryas possessed of prema.

                          104
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017




kṛṣṇasya nānā-vidha-kīrtaneṣu

tan-nāma-saṅkīrtanam eva mukhyam

tat-prema-sampajjanane svayaṁ drāk

śaktaṁ tataḥ śreṣṭhatamam mataṁ tat



śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmāmṛtam ātma-hṛdyaṁ

premṇā samāsvādana-bhaṅgi-pūrvam

yat sevyate jihvikayā ‘virāmaṁ

tasyā ‘tulaṁ jalpatu ko mahatvam



Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta (2.3.158ñ9)



Although there are many varieties of kṛṣṇa-kīrtana,
nāma-saṅkīrtana is the foremost. This is because nāma-
saṅkīrtana has the power to easily manifest the wealth
of prema. Therefore, in the opinion of all, kīrtana is
the best process. The happiness that is obtained by the
tongue which incessantly tastes the nectar of śrī kṛṣṇa-
nāma with heartfelt love is beyond comparison. Who can
describe its greatness?



To loudly chant the holy name, form, qualities and
pastimes of the Supreme Lord under the direction of pure
Vaiṣṇavas is called kīrtana. In Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī’s
Bhāgavatam commentary known as Krama-sandarbha, he has
written the following in connection with saṅkīrtana:



saṅkīrtanaṁ bahubhir militvā tad-gāna-sukhaṁ śrī-kṛṣṇa-
gānam



When many persons chant the name of the Lord in a loud
voice, with faith and for the pleasure of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, it
is called saṅkīrtana.



One other point to bear in mind is that, according to
the scriptures, the glories of śrī harināma-kīrtana have
been exalted hundreds of times over the process of
harināma-japa. This is because one who performs japa
purifies only himself, whereas one who performs loud
nāma-saṅkīrtana purifies himself as well as all who hear
the chanting.

                          105
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017


This is indicated in the Nāradīya Purāṇa in a statement
by Prahlāda Mahārāja:



japato harināmāni

sthāne śata-guṇādhikaḥ

ātmānaṁ ca putāty uccair

japan śrotṛn punāti ca



Chanting the holy name of Lord Hari loudly is a hundred
times more powerful than chanting softly. A person who
chants loudly purifies himself as well as those who hear
him chanting.



Some people think that the mahā-mantra — hare kṛṣṇa hare
kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare, hare rāma hare rāma rāma
rāma hare hare — is to be recited only as japa. They
prohibit the loud chanting of this mahā-mantra. But Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who personally practised and
propagated bhagavan-nāma-saṅkīrtana, has declared this
mantra to be the mahā-mantra of Kali-yuga. He personally
practised japa of this mahā-mantra, recording the number
of names He chanted. In addition He performed saṅkīrtana
in which there was no recording of the number of names
chanted while deeply overwhelmed in spiritual emotion,
with arms upraised, either alone or collectively. Much
evidence of this is available in Śrī Caitanya-bhāgavata
and in the sacred books of Śrī Kavi Karṇapūra and other
gosvāmīs. Therefore sādhakas can perform japa of this
mahā-mantra like nāmācārya Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura, and
they can also perform kīrtana by singing the holy name
in a loud voice.



(64) Śrī-vṛndāvana-vāsaḥ

Residing in Śrī Vṛndāvana



Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma is super-excellently glorified
because it is the eternal abode of the divine and
charming pastimes of Svayam Bhagavān Vrajendra-nandana
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is the embodiment of rasa and the
complete personification of majesty and sweetness. Śrī
Vṛndāvana is anointed with the sublime pastimes of
Mahābhāva-mayī Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Rasarāja Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
By residing there and performing sādhana and bhajana,
sādhakas may easily obtain manifestation of these
transcendental pastimes within their hearts. The
resolute determination to reside in Vraja displayed by
the most highly esteemed Six Gosvāmīs is without
precedent. Śrīla Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī has said in his
Śrī Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta (Śataka 12.78):

                            106
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                  5/5/2017




śrī-vṛndāvana mama pāvanaṁ tvam eva

śrī-vṛndāvana mama jīvanaṁ tvam eva

śrī-vṛndāvana mama bhūṣanaṁ tvam eva

śrī-vṛndāvana mama sad-yaśas tvam eva



O Vṛndāvana, you are my purifier! O Vṛndāvana, you are
my life! O Vṛndāvana, you are my ornament! O Vṛndāvana,
you are my

virtuous fame!



In Stavāvalī (Sva-niyama daśakam (2)) Śrīla Raghunātha
dāsa Gosvāmī has said:



na cānyatra kṣetre hari-tanu-sanāthe ‘pi sujanād

rasāsvādaṁ premṇā dadhad api vasāmi kṣaṇam api

samaṁ tv etad grāmyāvalibhir abhitanvann api kathāṁ

vidhāsye saṁvāsaṁ vraja-bhuvana eva pratibhavam



In this verse Dāsa Gosvāmī has, with great affection,
displayed deep faith towards Vraja-dhāma. Adopting
unflinching resolve for residence in Vraja, he says,
“Even if in some other dhāma the Śrī Vigraha of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is present and there is opportunity there to
relish with great love hari-kathā flowing from the
mouths of elevated devotees, I have no desire to live in
such a place, even for a moment. But even if I must live
in the company of vulgar persons who converse only about
mundane topics, I will live in Vraja-bhūmi life after
life.”



Out of the above-mentioned sixty-four limbs of bhakti,
the last five are the most excellent. Even by slight
contact with these items undertaken without offence,
bhāva-bhakti makes its appearance due to their
extraordinary power. By obtaining niṣṭhā in the
performance either of one or of several of these
principal limbs, one is sure to obtain perfection.




Verse 5 — Sevāparādha


                          107
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017




yathā āgame ñ

yānair vā pādukair vāpi gamanaṁ bhagavad-gṛhe.
devotsavādy asevā ca apraṇāmas tad agrataḥ. ucchiṣṭe
vāpy aśauce vā bhagavad-vandanādikam. eka-hasta-praṇāmaś
ca tat purastāt pradakṣiṇam. pāda-prasāraṇaṁ cāgre tathā
paryaṅka-bandhanam. śayanaṁ bhakṣaṇaṁ cāpi mithyā-
bhāṣaṇam eva ca. uccair bhāṣā mitho jalpa rodanādi tad
agrataḥ. nigrahānugrahau caiva niṣṭhura-krūra-bhāṣaṇam.
kambalāvaraṇaṁ caiva para-nindā para-stutiḥ. aślīla-
bhāṣaṇaṁ caiva adhovāyu-vimokṣaṇam. śaktau gauṇopacāraś
ca anivedita-bhakṣaṇam. tat-tat-kālodbhavānāṁ ca
phalādīnām anarpaṇam. viniyuktāvaśiṣṭasya vyañjanādeḥ
samarpaṇam. pṛṣṭhī-kṛtyāsanaṁ caiva pareṣām
abhivandanam. gurau maunaṁ nija-stotraṁ devatā-nindanaṁ
tathā. aparādhās tathā viṣṇor dvātriṁśat parikīrttitāḥ.

varāhe ca aparādhaś ca te ‘pi saṅkṣipya likhyante yathā
— rājānna-bhakṣanaṁ, dhvāntāgāre hareḥ sparśaḥ, vidhiṁ
vinā hary-upasarpaṇaṁ, vādyaṁ vinā tad-dvārodghāṭanaṁ,
kukkurādi-duṣṭa-bhakṣya-saṅgrahaḥ, arccane mauna-
bhaṅgaḥ, pūjā-kāle viḍ-utsargāya gamanaṁ, gandha-
mālyādikam adattvā dhūpanam, anarha-puṣpeṇa pūjanam.

akṛtvā dantakāṣṭhaṁ ca kṛtvā nidhuvanaṁ tathā. spṛṣṭvā
rajasvalāṁ dīpaṁ tathā mṛtakam eva ca. raktaṁ nīlam
adhautaṁ ca pārakyaṁ malinaṁ paṭam. paridhāya, mṛtaṁ
dṛṣṭvā vimucyāpāna-mārutam. krodhaṁ kṛtvā śmaśānaṁ ca
gatvā bhuktvāpy ajīrṇa-bhuk. bhuktvā kusumbhaṁ piṇyākaṁ
tailābhyagaṁ vidhāya ca. hareḥ sparśo hareḥ karma-
karaṇaṁ pātakāvaham.

tathā tatraivānyatra — bhagavac-chāstrānādara — pūrvakam
anya-śāstra — pravartanam, śrī-mūrti-sammukhe tāmbūla
carvaṇam, eraṇḍādi — patrastha — puṣpair arcanam, āsura
kāle pūjā, pīṭhe bhūmau vā upaviśya pūjanam; snapana-
kāle vāma-hastena tat-sparśaḥ, paryuṣitai yācitair vā
puṣpair arcanam, pūjāyāṁ niṣṭhīvanam, tasyāṁ svagarva-
pratipādanam, tiryak puṇḍra-dhṛtiḥ, aprakṣālita-pādatve
‘pi tan-mandira-praveśaḥ, avaiṣṇava-pakva-nivedanam,
avaiṣṇava-dṛṣṭena pūjanam, vighneśam apūjayitvā
kapālinaṁ dṛṣṭvā vā pūjanam, nakhāmbhaḥ snapanam,
gharmāmbuliptatve ‘pi pūjanam, nirmālya-laṅghanam,
bhagavac-chapathādayo ‘nye ca jñeyāḥ.



Śrī Bindu-vikāśinī-vṛtti



It has previously been stated that one must give up
offences in regard to service. In the āgama-śāstra these
sevāparādhas are said to be of thirty-two types: (1) to
enter the temple wearing sandals, (2) to enter the
temple seated on a palanquin, (3) to disrespect or to
fail to observe the festivals of one’s cherished deity
(iṣṭadeva), (4) to not offer prostrated obeisances to
one’s cherished deity although being present directly
before Him, (5) to offer prayers to the Lord without
washing the hands and mouth after eating, (6) to offer

                           108
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

prayers to the Lord in an unclean condition, (7) to
offer obeisances with only one hand, (8) to show one’s
back to the Lord while circumambulating,7 (9) to spread
one’s feet in front of the deity, (10) to sit in front
of the deity with hands binding one’s raised knees, (11)
to lie down in front of the deity, (12) to eat in front
of the deity, (13) to tell lies in front of the deity,
(14) to speak loudly before the deity, (15) to converse
with one another about mundane subjects before the
deity, (16) to shed tears on account of earthly matters
before the Lord, (17) to show favour to or to reprimand
someone before the deity, (18) to speak harshly to
others in front of the deity, (19) to wear a coarse
blanket in front of the Lord or while serving the deity,
(20) to blaspheme others in front of the deity, (21) to
praise others before the deity, (22) to use obscene
language before the Lord, (23) to pass wind before the
Lord, (24) to serve the Lord by offering Him secondary
or minor articles although competent to offer first-
class items (i.e. at the time of worshipping the deity,
if one is competent to offer all the principal
paraphernalia of worship such as flowers, tulasī,
incense, lamp and food offerings, but instead offers
only secondary items like water, it is an offence), (25)
to eat food items that are not offered to the Lord, (26)
to not offer the Lord the fruits and flowers that are in
season, (27) to personally enjoy the first portion of
anything or present it to someone else and then offer
the remainder to the Lord, (28) to sit with one’s back
to the deity, (29) to offer obeisances or salutation to
others in front of the deity, (30) to remain silent in
front of one’s spiritual master; that is, to not offer
prayers and obeisances to him or to remain silent
without responding to his questions, (31) to praise
oneself and (32) to slander the demigods. These are the
thirty-two types of sevāparādha. One should strictly
avoid them.

Other sevāparādhas that have been mentioned in the
Varāha Purāṇa are briefly stated here as follows: to eat
grains supplied by the king or government; to touch the
deity in a house or temple permeated by darkness; to
approach the deity without following the scriptural
regulations; to open the door of the temple without
ringing a bell or making any sound; to collect items
that have been left by a dog or other animals; to break
one’s silence at the time of worshipping the deity; to
go out in order to evacuate at the time of worship; to
offer incense without first offering scents and flower
garlands; to worship with forbidden flowers; to worship
the Lord without cleansing one’s teeth or without
bathing after sexual intercourse; to worship the deity
after touching a woman in menstruation, a dead body or a
lamp; to worship the Lord wearing red or blue clothes,
unwashed or dirty clothes or clothes belonging to
another; to worship the deity after seeing a dead body;
to pass wind while worshipping the deity; to worship the
Lord in anger, after visiting a cremation ground or in a
state of indigestion; and to touch or worship the deity
after taking an oil massage. All of these activities are
considered offences.

In other scriptures as well there are sevāparādhas that
are worthy of attention: to propagate other scriptures

                          109
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

while disregarding those that are related to the Lord;
to chew betel in front of the deity; to worship the
deity with flowers kept in the leaves of castor plants
or other forbidden plants; to worship at forbidden times
(when demoniac influences are prominent); to worship
while sitting on a four-legged wooden stool or without
any sitting mat; to touch the deity with the left hand
at the time of bathing Him; to worship with stale
flowers or with flowers that have already been asked for
by others; to spit at the time of worship; “I am a great
pūjārī” — to glorify oneself in such terms; to apply
tilaka on the forehead in a curved manner; to enter the
temple without washing one’s feet; to offer food grains
to the Lord cooked by a non-Vaiṣṇava; to worship the
deity in the presence of a non-Vaiṣṇava; to worship the
deity after seeing a Kāpālika8 without first offering
worship to Lord Śrī Nṛsiṁhadeva; to bathe the Lord with
water touched with the fingernails; to worship when the
body is covered with perspiration; to step over the
offerings to the Lord; and to take a vow in the name of
the Lord. Besides these, many other sevāparādhas have
been mentioned in the scriptures.




Verse 6 — The Severity of Nāmāparādha




sarvāparādha-kṛd api

mucyate hari-saṁśrayāt

harer apy aparādhān yaḥ

kuryād dvipada-pāṁśanaḥ

nāmāsrayaḥ kadācit syāt

taraty eva sa nāmataḥ

nāmno ‘pi sarva-suhṛdo

hy aparādhāt pataty adhaḥ



Śrī Bindu-vikāśinī-vṛtti



Sādhakas should remain thoroughly attentive to avoid
committing all the offences mentioned in the previous
section. Even a person who has committed all kinds of
offences is redeemed by taking shelter at the lotus feet
of Śrī Hari. If a most wretched and fallen person (a
two-legged animal) who has committed severe offences at
the feet of Śrī Hari ever takes shelter of the holy name
of Śrī Hari, then the holy name alone mercifully
delivers him from all such offences. There is no doubt

                            110
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

of this whatsoever. Therefore śrī harināma is the best
friend of all. But if one should commit an offence at
the feet of śrī harināma his falldown is inevitable. The
above two verses are quoted from Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu
(1.2.119ñ20).




Verse 7 — Nāmāparādha




atha nāmāparādha daśa: yathā — vaiṣṇava-nindādi —
vaiṣnavāparādhaḥ; viṣṇu-śivayoḥ pṛthag-īśvara-buddhiḥ;
śrī-gurudeve manuṣya-buddhiḥ; veda-purāṇādi-śāstra-
nindā; nāmni arthavādaḥ; nāmni kuvyākhyā vā kaṣṭa-
kalpanā; nāma-balena pāpe pravṛttiḥ; anya śubha-
karmabhir nāma-sāmya-mananam; aśraddha-jane nāmopadeśaḥ;
nāma māhātmye śrute ‘pi aprītiḥ — iti daśadhā.



Śrī Bindu-vikāśinī-vṛtti



Ten kinds of nāmāparādha will now be described in
connection with the chanting of the holy name of the
Lord.

(1) To commit offences against the Vaiṣṇavas by
slandering them and so on (nindādi). The word ādi here
refers to the six kinds of vaiṣṇava-aparādha indicated
in the following verse from the Skanda Purāṇa, quoted in
Bhakti-sandarbha (Anuccheda 265):



hanti nindati vai dveṣṭi

vaiṣṇavān nābhinandati

krudhyate yāti no harṣaṁ

darśane patanāni ṣaṭ



To beat Vaiṣṇavas, to slander them, to bear malice
against them, to fail to welcome them, to become angry
with them and to not feel happiness upon seeing them —
by these six types of vaiṣṇava-aparādha one falls down
to a degraded position.



(2) To consider Lord Śiva to be the Supreme Lord,
separate and independent from Lord Viṣṇu.

(3) To consider Śrī Gurudeva to be an ordinary human
being.

                           111
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                  5/5/2017


(4) To slander the Vedas, Purāṇas and other scriptures.

(5) To consider the praises of śrī harināma to be
imaginary; in other words, to consider that the
potencies which have been praised in the scriptures in
reference to harināma are not actually present in the
holy name.

(6) To give an unauthorised and misleading explanation
of śrī harināma; in other words, to abandon the
established and reputed meaning of the scriptures and
foolishly concoct some futile explanation. For example,
someone may argue that the Lord is incorporeal
(nirākāra), formless (arūpa) and nameless (anāma), and
that therefore His name is also imaginary.

(7) To engage in sinful activities again and again,
knowing that there is such power in the holy name that
simply by uttering śrī harināma all sins are vanquished.

(8) To consider all kinds of religious or pious
activities to be equal to śrī harināma.

(9) To instruct faithless persons about śrī harināma.

(10) To not have love for the name in spite of hearing
the glories of śrī nāma.

These ten offences must certainly be avoided. In the
practice of hari-bhajana, one should first of all be
very attentive to avoid all sevāparādhas and
nāmāparādhas. One should know these aparādhas to be
severe obstacles on the path of bhajana and vigorously
endeavour to give them up. Without giving up these
offences there can be no question of advancement in
bhajana; rather, the sādhaka’s falldown is assured.

The sādhaka should also be vigilant not to commit any
sevāparādhas in the matter of worship of the deity.
Sevāparādhas that are committed unknowingly in the
course of serving the deity are mitigated by
wholehearted surrender unto Lord Hari, by offering
prayers unto Him and, in particular, by taking shelter
of śrī harināma. The holy name mercifully forgives all
of one’s sevāparādhas. Śrī harināma is even more
merciful than the deity. But if in spite of taking
shelter of śrī harināma one is inattentive again in the
matter of nāmāparādha, then his falldown is assured.




Verse 8 — Vaidhī-bhakti




atha vaidhī lakṣanaṁ — śravaṇa-kīrtanādīni śāstra-
śāsana-bhayena yadi kriyante tadā vaidhī-bhaktiḥ.




                          112
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

Now the symptoms of vaidhī-bhakti are being described.
If the limbs of bhakti such as śravaṇa and kīrtana are
performed out of fear of scriptural discipline, it is
called vaidhī-bhakti.



Śrī Bindu-vikāśinī-vṛtti



Bhakti is of two kinds: vaidhī-bhakti and rāgānuga-
bhakti. The limbs of sādhana that are performed on the
paths of both these types of bhakti are generally
considered to be one and the same. Nonetheless there is
a specific distinction between them. In some devotees
intense longing or greed (lobha) is the cause of
engagement in bhakti, whereas in others the discipline
of the scriptures is the cause of engagement in bhakti.



yatra rāgānavāptatvāt

pravṛttir upajāyate

śāsanenaiva śāstrasya

sā vaidhī bhaktir ucyate



Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.6)



Sādhana-bhakti that is not inspired by intense longing,
but is instigated instead by the discipline of the
scriptures, is called vaidhī-bhakti.



One should understand what is meant by the discipline of
the scriptures. In all scriptures, of which Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam is the foremost, bhagavad-bhakti is said to
be the supreme duty for the jīvas. If a person fulfils
all his worldly obligations but does not engage in hari-
bhajana, he descends to a dreadful hell.



ya eṣāṁ puruṣaṁ sākṣād

ātma-prabhavam īśvaram

na bhajanty avajānanti

sthānād bhraṣṭāḥ patanty adhaḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.5.3)



                             113
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017


The original Supreme Lord is Himself the creator of the
four varṇas and four āśramas. He is the Lord, the
controller and the soul of them all. Therefore if anyone
belonging to the four varṇas and āśramas fails to
worship the Lord and disrespects Him instead, he is
deprived of his position, varṇa and āśrama, and falls
down to hell.



In Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 22.26) Śrīla
Kavirāja Gosvāmī has described the substance of this
śloka in the verse given below:



cāri varṇāśramī yadi kṛṣṇa nāhi bhaje

svakarma karite se raurave paḍi’ maje



The brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas, vaiśyas and śūdras may
perfectly carry out their varṇa-dharma. The brahmacārīs,
gṛhasthas, vānaprasthas and sannyāsīs may thoroughly
execute their āśrama-dharma. If, however, they do not
worship Śrī Kṛṣṇa, then although they may obtain
elevation due to material prestige, their piety will
wane and they will most certainly fall down to the hell
known as Raurava.



In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.1.32) Devarṣi Nārada has said:



tasmāt kenāpy upāyena

manaḥ kṛṣṇe niveśayet



The basic and primary aim of all types of sādhana is to
fix the mind on Kṛṣṇa by whatever method is effective.



This is stated in the Padma Purāṇa also:



smartavyaḥ satataṁ viṣṇur

vismartavyo na jātucit

sarve vidhi-niṣedhāḥ syur

etayor eva kiṅkarāḥ

That which has been ascertained in the scriptures to be
duty for the jīvas is called vidhi, regulation, and that
which has been forbidden is called niṣedha, prohibition.

                            114
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

Vaidha-dharma for the jīvas, or religion that is enacted
in accordance with scriptural regulations, involves
observing rules and prohibitions. One should remember
Lord Viṣṇu at all times — this is the basis of all
positive injunctions (vidhi). All the regulations of
varṇa and āśrama are attendants of this primary
injunction. Never forget the Lord at any time — this is
the basis of all prohibitory injunctions (niṣedha). All
the prohibitory injunctions such as the avoidance of
sins, abandonment of apathy towards the Lord and
atonement of sins are attendants of this primary
prohibition. To observe these rules and prohibitions is
to accept the discipline and direction of the
scriptures. When the jīvas are engaged in bhakti out of
fear of violating the directions of the scriptures it is
called vaidhī-bhakti.

By taking darśana of the deity of the Lord and by
hearing the sweetness of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes in childhood,
boyhood and youth, as described in the tenth canto of
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, intense longing (lobha) arises for
the practice of bhajana. When intense longing has not
arisen (in other words when lobha is not the cause of
one’s engagement in bhakti) and the discipline of the
scriptures alone is the cause for such engagement, it is
called vaidhī-bhakti.




Verse 9 — Rāgānuga-bhakti




atha rāgānugā-lakṣaṇaṁ — nijābhimata-vraja-rāja-
nandanasya sevā prāpti-lobhena yadi tāni kriyante tadā
rāgānugā bhaktiḥ; yad uktam —



sevā sādhaka-rūpeṇa

siddha-rūpeṇa cātra hi

tad bhāva-lipsunā kāryā

vraja-lokānusārataḥ

kṛṣṇaṁ smaran janaṁ cāsya

preṣṭhaṁ nija-samīhitam

tat-tat-kathā rataś cāsau

kuryād vāsaṁ vraje sadā



Śrī Bindu-vikāśinī-vṛtti




                            115
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

Devotion that involves the practice of the limbs of
bhakti, such as śravaṇa and kīrtana, carried out by
sādhakas with intense longing (lobha) to obtain the
service of their innermost desired object, Vrajarāja-
nandana Śrī Kṛsṇa, is called rāgānuga-bhakti.

Rāgānuga-bhakti is performed in two ways: (1) with the
sādhaka-rūpa — with the external body through execution
of the limbs of bhakti; and (2) with the siddha-rūpa —
with the internally conceived body that is suitable for
carrying out the perfected service (prema-sevā) for
which one aspires. Residing in Vraja with an intense
desire to obtain one’s cherished object Śrī Kṛṣṇa and
the divine sentiments of His beloved associates (that
is, rati towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa), one should follow in the
footsteps of the eternal residents of Vraja, the dear
associates of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, such as Śrī Rādhikā, Lalitā,
Viśākhā and Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī. One should also adhere to
personalities such as Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī and Sanātana
Gosvāmī who performed bhajana in Vraja in pursuance of
the sentiments of those eternal associates. With one’s
internally conceived body (siddha-rūpa) one should
execute service within the mind (mānasī-sevā) in
accordance with the eternal associates of Vraja such as
Śrī Rādhā, Lalitā, Viśākhā and Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī. With
the external body (sādhaka-rūpa) one should carry out
bodily services following in the wake of perfectly
realised devotees such as Śrī Rūpa and Sanātana who are
also residents of Vraja.

If someone raises the objection that the word vraja-loka
refers only to Śrī Rādhā, Lalitā and others, it would
then follow that with the sādhaka-deha (the external
body) one should perform bodily services following in
their wake. If this indeed were the case, then the
followers of those eternal associates would not be
required to carry out the limbs of bhakti such as taking
shelter of a spiritual master, observance of Ekādaśī,
worship of śālagrāma, worship of tulasī and so on, since
it is not mentioned anywhere that Śrī Rādhā and Lalitā
ever performed such activities. However, this erroneous
conclusion (apasiddhānta) held by sceptics who have
taken shelter of modern adverse opinions is actually
refuted by the word vraja-loka.

In his commentary to this verse of Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindhu (1.2.295), Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmipāda has explained
the same thing; namely, that the word vraja-loka refers
to the dearmost associates of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and their
followers such as Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī and others. Therefore
one should perform internal service (mānasī-sevā)
through the medium of the siddha-deha by following in
accordance with Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī and other Vrajavāsīs.
With the sādhaka-deha one should perform bodily service
by following Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī and others.



Comment



According to the conclusion of the Six Gosvāmīs, Śrīla
Kavirāja Gosvāmī and other rasika Vaiṣṇava ācāryas, the

                          116
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                 5/5/2017

līlā-rasa of Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the object
to be tasted by rāgānuga-sādhakas. But it is not
possible to taste the līlā-rasa of Śrī Kṛṣṇa without
entering into śrī gaura-līlā. In other words only
through the medium of gaura-līlā is it possible to taste
the līlā-rasa of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. In ŚrīCaitanya-caritāmṛta
(Madhya-līlā 25.271, 274) Śrīla Kavirāja Gosvāmī has
stated this as follows:



kṛṣṇa-līlā amṛta-sāra, tāra śata śata dhāra

daśa-dike vahe yāhā haite

se caitanya-līlā haya, sarovara akṣaya

mano-haṁsa carāha’ tāhāte



The pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa are the essence of all
transcendental nectar. These nectarean pastimes flow in
hundreds and hundreds of streams, inundating the ten
directions. The pastimes of Śrī Caitanya are an
imperishable reservoir of nectar, saturated with the
pastimes of Kṛṣṇa. O swanlike mind, please wander on
this transcendental lake.



nānā-bhāvera bhakta-jana, haṁsa-cakravāka-gaṇa

yāte sabe’ karena vihāra

kṛṣṇa-keli sumṛṇāla, yāhā pai sarva-kāla

bhakta-haṁsa karaye āhāra



The devotees situated in various transcendental moods
are like swans and cakravāka birds who play upon the
transcendental lake of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. The sweet bulbs
of the stalks of lotus flowers are the sportive amorous
pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Śrī Kṛṣṇa eternally enacts such
pastimes and, consequently, they are the foodstuff for
the swanlike devotees who have taken shelter of Śrī
Gaurasundara, who is the eternal embodiment of
vipralambha-rasa and identical in form to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
eternal embodiment of sambhoga-rasa.



In his book Prārthanā (13) Śrīla Narottama Ṭhākura has
simi-larly written:



gaura-prema rasārṇave se taraṅge yebā ḍūbe

se rādhā-mādhava-antaraṅga



                             117
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017


Gaura-prema is an ocean of rasa. Those who submerge
themselves in the waves of that ocean emerge in the
waves of the confidential and intimate service of Rādhā-
Mādhava.

Śrīla Kavirāja Gosvāmī and Śrīla Narottama Ṭhākura have
composed the above verses for the benefit of rāgānuga-
sādhakas. Therefore rāgānuga-sādhakas should taste
kṛṣṇa-līlā through the medium of gaura-līlā.
Consequently, it is essential for sādhakas to remember
gaura-līlā and to follow the eternal associates of Śrī
Caitanya. Since it is necessary to follow the gaura-
parikaras, it is certainly imperative that one observe
the limbs of bhakti (guru-padāśraya, ekādaśī-vrata,
tulasī-sevā, śrī śālagrāma-sevā and so on) that were
practised by the foremost associates such as Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī and others. There is no doubt about this.

Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, who is an eternal associate of
Caitanya Mahāprabhu, serves Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa as Śrī Rūpa
Mañjarī in kṛṣṇa-līlā. Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī, appearing as
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī with the attitude of a sādhaka, weeps
again and again and prays anxiously to obtain the
service of Śrī Yugala. Sometimes, while praying in this
way, he would become so deeply immersed in the emotional
trance of Rūpa Mañjarī that he would taste the happiness
of direct service. Therefore rāgānuga-sādhakas must
certainly follow Śrī Rūpa-Sanātana and other gosvāmīs.
Opposed to this are those who vainly consider themselves
as rasika-sādhakas but who do not adopt the limbs of
bhakti, such as guru-padāśraya and ekādaśī-vrata. They
can never obtain the service of Śrī Yugala.

This subject is extremely deep. Without the mercy of Śrī
Gurudeva or pure rasika devotees, the sādhaka cannot
conceive of his siddha-deha (perfected spiritual body).
Therefore the contemplation of one’s nitya-siddha-deha
arises of its own accord only by the merciful indication
of Śrī Gurudeva. By continual remembrance of aṣṭa-
kālīya-līlā (the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa performed in eight
divisions of the day), performed internally (mānasī-
sevā) with the nitya-siddha-deha, one obtains svarūpa-
siddhi (perception of one’s eternal perfected form,
which occurs at the stage of bhāva-bhakti) and
ultimately vastu-siddhi. Vastu-siddhi is attained after
giving up this body and taking birth in Kṛṣṇa’s bhauma-
līlā from the womb of a gopī. After attaining the
association of Kṛṣṇa’s eternal associates and being
purified of all final traces of material identification,
when prema is intensified, one attains vastu-siddhi.

But one should always bear in mind that not everyone has
the eligibility to perform yugala-sevā by meditating in
this way on Their supramundane (aprākṛta) daily
pastimes. This practice must be concealed very
diligently. One should not disclose these pastimes to
ineligible persons. Until genuine greed to enter into
the rāga-mārga arises in the heart of the jīva bound by
matter, this subject should be kept hidden from him. One
remains ineligible to hear the confidential pastimes of
Śrī Yugala, which are saturated with rasa, as long as
the conception of the transcendental nature of the
Lord’s name, form, qualities and pastimes has not

                          118
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

implanted itself in the heart. In other words one should
understand that the name, form, qualities and pastimes
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa are fully constituted of pure spiritual
transcendence (śuddha-cinmaya-svarūpa). When ineligible
persons hear or study these pastimes they recall only
the illusory and mundane association of men and women
and are thus compelled to fall down. Thus they sink down
into the muck of debauchery. Therefore judicious
students, proceeding cautiously, may enter into this
līlā after having obtained the appropriate impressions
(saṁskāras) for aprākṛta-śṛṅgāra-rasa.

The fundamental conclusion is that only upon obtaining
the aforementioned eligibility can the sādhaka undertake
the discipline of rāgānuga-bhakti. By following this
method of sādhana while still plagued with anarthas and
without the appearance of genuine greed, the opposite
effect will be produced. When genuine greed for vraja-
bhajana arises, one should first of all take shelter of
a dear devotee of Śrī Gaurasundara, that Lord who is
identical in every respect to Śrī Vrajendra-nandana. The
beloved devotees of Śrī Caitanya will instruct us on the
path of rāgānuga-sādhana in accordance with our
eligibility. Otherwise, if one falls into bad
association and by ill advice imitates the bhajana
practices of those on the highest level of eligibility,
then under the guise of adopting one’s siddha-deha one
will incur only a harmful effect.

Some persons, distorting the meaning of the instruction
that one should perform bhajana in the wake of the
residents of Vraja, consider themselves as Lalitā,
Viśākhā or others. Although males, they adopt a female
dress and perform bhajana making themselves out to be
sakhīs. By such practices they destroy themselves and
others. They think, “I am Lalitā”, “I am Viśākhā”. This
attitude leads to ahaṅgrahopāsanā of the māyāvādīs, a
type of worship in the course of which one considers
himself to be identical with the object of worship. Such
persons become offenders at the feet of Lalitā and
Viśākhā and fall down to a most dreadful hell.

Without faithful adherence to the vraja-gopīs, no one is
entitled to enter into the conjugal service of Yugala-
kiśora. Even amongst the various types of sakhīs, the
mañjarī-sakhīs are themselves followers of the sakhīs.
The aspiration to perform bhajana in allegiance to the
mañjarī-sakhīs was also exhibited by Śrīman Mahāprabhu.
This is supported by Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and the śāstras
composed by our gosvāmīs. In order to pursue mañjarī-
bhāva one must certainly follow the associates of Śrī
Caitanya such as Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmīs. Śrīla
Narottama Ṭhākura has expressed this in his song dealing
with the worship of mañjarī-bhāva. In one verse of this
song he has indicated his own heartfelt longing
(Prārthanā (39)):



śrī-rūpa-mañjarī-pada seī mora sampada

seī mora bhajana-pūjana

seī mora prāṇadhana seī mora ābharaṇa

                          119
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017


seī mora jīvanera-jīvana



The lotus feet of Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī are my supreme
wealth. To meditate upon and serve those lotus feet are
my topmost methods of bhajana and pūjana. They are a
treasure more precious to me than life itself. They are
the ornament of my life. Not only that, they are the
very life of my life.



He also says (Prārthanā (40)):



śuniyāchi sādhu-mukhe bale sarva-jana

śrī-rūpa-kṛpāya mile yugala-caraṇa

hā! hā! prabhu sanātana gaura-paribāra

sabe mili vāñchā-pūrṇa karaha āmāra

śrī rūpera kṛpā yena āmā prati haya

se-pada āśraya yāra seī mahāśaya

prabhu lokanātha kabe saṅge lañā yābe

śrī-rūpera pāda-padme more samarpibe



I have heard from the mouths of Vaiṣṇava sādhus that
only by the mercy of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī can one obtain
the lotus feet of Śrī Yugala. Alas! Alas! O Sanātana
Prabhu! O supremely merciful Vaiṣṇava associates of Śrī
Gaurasundara! All of you please fulfil my heart’s
longing. I pray again and again that the mercy of Śrī
Rūpa Gosvāmī may shower down upon me. O what wonder! One
who has attained the shelter of the lotus feet of Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī is indeed most fortunate. When will my
Śrīla Gurudeva, Śrīla Lokanātha Gosvāmī, take me with
him to meet Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī and offer me at his lotus
feet?



Now the methodology of rāgānuga-bhakti is being
described. The sādhaka, continuously remembering Śrī
Kṛṣṇa in the pastime form that is most cherished by him
and the beloved associates of Śrī Kṛṣṇa whom he desires
to follow, should always reside in Vraja with great
attachment to hearing their līlā-kathā. One should
remember Kṛṣṇa as navakiśora (a fresh youth) and
naṭavara (the best of dancers) and at the same time one
should remember Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī and other priya-sakhīs
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa who are deeply affected with the sentiments
that one cherishes in his heart. Being intently focused
on this kind of remembrance, the sādhaka should always
live in Vraja. If one is capable he should physically

                           120
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

take up residence in Vṛndāvana (Vṛndāvana, Nandagāoṅ,
Varṣāṇā, Govardhana, Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa and other places in
Vraja). Otherwise he should adopt residence in Vraja
within his mind.

In Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta the following is said in
connection with the cultivation of rāgānuga-bhakti:



bāhya antara — ihāra dui ta’ sādhana

bāhye sādhaka-dehe kare śravaṇa-kīrtana

mane nija-siddha-deha kariyā bhāvana

rātri-dine kare vraje kṛṣṇera sevana

nijābhīṣṭa kṛṣṇa-preṣṭha pācheta’ lāgiyā

nirantara sevā kare antarmanā hañā

dāsa-sakhā-pitrādi preyasīra gaṇa

rāga-mārge nija-nija-bhāvera gaṇana

ei mata kare yebā rāgānugā bhakti

kṛṣṇera caraṇe tāṅra upajaya prīti



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 22.156ñ7, 159, 161,
164)



The practice of rāgānuga-bhakti is undertaken in two
ways: with the sādhaka-śarīra, the external body, and
with the siddha-śarīra, the internal perfected spiritual
form. With the external sādhaka-deha, one should adopt
the limbs of bhakti such as śravaṇa, kīrtana and so on.
With one’s siddha-śarīra, revealed by the mercy of the
spiritual master, one should serve Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa day
and night in Vraja. Following the beloved associate of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa whom one cherishes within one’s heart (the
associate towards whose service the sādhaka has
developed lobha), one should constantly serve Yugala-
kiśora with an enraptured heart. By following the mood
and sentiment (bhāva) of one of Kṛṣṇa’s associates among
the servants, friends, parents or lovers, corresponding
to one’s own disposition, the sādhaka attains affection
for the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa that is exactly of the
same nature as the associate whom he follows. This is
the method of rāgānuga-bhakti.




Verse 10 — Further Discussion on Rāgānuga-bhakti




                          121
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017


tatra rāgānugāyāṁ smaraṇasya mukhyatvam. tac ca smaraṇaṁ
nija-bhāvo cit-līlāveśa-svabhāvasya śrī-kṛṣṇasya tat-
priya-janasya ca. tathaiva kīrtanādikam api arcanādāv
api mudrā-nyāsādi-dvārakā-dhyānādi-rukmiṇyādi pūjādi kam
api nija-bhāva-prātikūlyād āgamādi-śāstra-vihitam api na
kuryād iti, bhakti-mārge kiñcit kiñcit aṅga-vaikalye ‘pi
doṣābhāva smaraṇāt.



na hy aṅgopakrame dhvaṁso

mad-dharmasyoddhavāṇv api

mayā vyavasitaḥ samyaṅ

nirguṇatvād anāśiṣaḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.29.20)



aṅgivaikalye tu astyeva doṣaḥ. yad uktam —



śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi-

pañcarātra-vidhiṁ vinā

aikāntikī harer bhaktir

utpātāyaiva kalpate



yadi cāntare rāgo vartate, atha ca sarvam eva vidhi-
dṛṣṭyaiva karoti, tadā dvārakāyāṁ rukmiṇyāditvaṁ
prāpnoti.



Śrī Bindu-vikāśinī-vṛtti



In rāgānuga-bhakti, referred to above, the predominant
aṅga is smaraṇa (remembrance). Smaraṇa should be related
to Kṛṣṇa and His beloved associates who are
distinguished by pastimes (līlā), emotional rapture
(āveśa) and natures (svabhāva) that are appropriate for
one’s own internal spiritual mood. The other limbs of
bhakti such as kīrtana and so on should also be related
to Kṛṣṇa and His dear ones who are characterised by
pastimes, emotional rapture and natures befitting one’s
own internal spiritual mood.

In the process of arcana one is recommended to employ
mudrās (particular positions of intertwining the
fingers), nyāsa (consigning the prāṇas or the five life-
airs to the mind, or mental assignment of various parts

                            122
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                 5/5/2017

of the body to different deities), meditation   on
Dvārakā, worship of the queens of Dvārakā and   so on.
Although these limbs of bhakti are prescribed   in the
āgama-śāstras, they are not to be followed in   rāgānuga-
bhakti because they are unfavourable to one’s   particular
spiritual mood (bhāva-pratikūla).

Thus on the path of bhakti, although there may be some
diminution or relinquishment of certain aṅgas, no
detrimental effect will ensue. In regard to this topic
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa has said to Uddhava:



na hy aṅgopakrame dhvaṁso

mad-dharmasyoddhavāṇv api

mayā vyavasitaḥ samyaṅ

nirguṇatvād anāśiṣaḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.29.20)



O Uddhava, once the practice of bhakti-dharma consisting
of śravaṇa and kīrtana related to Me has begun, no harm
whatsoever can be done to the root of bhakti, even
though there may be diminution of certain aṅgas. This is
because bhakti-dharma is beyond the jurisdiction of the
material modes of nature. There is no possibility of its
being destroyed by any means because I have ensured this
dharma in this way for My unalloyed devotees.



On the path of bhakti no harm is done either by non-
performance of the assortment of activities appropriate
for varṇāśrama or by diminution of certain limbs of
bhakti. This is fine. But there is certainly great harm
if there is diminution of any of the principal limbs of
bhakti such as taking shelter of a bona fide spiritual
master, śravaṇa, kīrtana and so on. Therefore one should
take great care that there be no decline in any of the
principal limbs of bhakti. This is declared in the
āgama-śāstras, as quoted in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu
(1.2.101):

śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi-

pañcarātra-vidhiṁ vinā

aikāntikī harer bhaktir

utpātāyaiva kalpate



Although engaged in single-minded devotion to Lord Hari,
if one transgresses the regulations mentioned in the
Śruti, Smṛti, Purāṇas and the Nārada-pañcarātra, great

                            123
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

misgivings (anarthas) are produced.



There is one more point to be considered. A devotee who
has an intense desire within his heart to obtain the
spiritual mood of the Vrajavāsīs and who executes all
the limbs of bhakti in accordance with the vidhi-mārga,
obtains fidelity only to Rukmiṇī and the other principal
queens of Dvārakā. In other words he attains to the
position of the queens of Dvārakā.



Comment



Because the practice of smaraṇa is predominant in
rāgānuga-bhakti, some persons, prior to the actual
appearance of rāga within the heart, make a deceitful
display of solitary bhajana while still plagued with
anarthas. They consider themselves rāgānuga-bhaktas and
thus begin to practise remembrance of aṣṭa-kālīyā-līlā.
But to display the exclusive devotion that is described
in the śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi verse is for them the cause
of great disturbance. Some ineligible persons who are
entangled in anarthas obtain so-called siddha-praṇālī
from such deceitful people, and by imitation they begin
to consider themselves fit to conduct the practice of
rāgānuga-bhakti. But without the appearance of genuine
greed (lobha) they cannot obtain qualification by
pretentious means.

Because the vidhi-mārga is mixed with the mood of
Dvārakā and the majestic conception (aiśvarya), one
cannot obtain the service of Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa
by that means. This is confirmed in Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 8.226): “vidhi-mārge nāhi pāiye
braje kṛṣṇacandra — one cannot obtain Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra in
Vraja by following the vidhi-mārga.”




Verse 11 — Five Types of Rāgānuga-sādhana




atrāyaṁ vivekaḥ vraja-līlā-parikarastha-śṛṅgārādi-bhāva-
mādhurye śrute “idaṁ mamāpi bhūyāt” iti lobhotpatti-kāle
śāstra-yuktyepekṣā na syāt. tasyāṁ ca satyāṁ
lobhatvasyaivāsiddheḥ. na hi kenacit kutracit śāstra-
dṛṣṭyā lobhaḥ kriyate. kintu lobhye vastuni śrute dṛṣṭe
vā svata eva lobha utpadyate. tataś ca tad bhāva-prāpty-
upāya-jijñāsāyāṁ śāstrāpekṣā bhavet, śāstra evaṁ prāpty-
upāya-likhanāt nānyatra. tac ca śāstraṁ bhajana-
pratipādakam śrī-bhāgavatam eva. teṣu bhajaneṣv api
madhye kānicit tad bhāva-mayāni kānicit tad bhāva-
sambandhīni kānicit tad bhāvānukūlāni kānicit tad
bhāvāviruddhāni kānicit tad bhāva-pratikūlānīti pañca-

                          124
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

vidhāni sādhanāni. tatra dāsya-sakhyādīni bhāva-mayāny
eva. guru-padāśrayato mantra-japādīni tathā preṣṭhasya
nija-samīhitasya tat priya-janasya ca sama-yocitānāṁ
līlā-guṇa-rūpa-nāmnāṁ śravaṇa-kīrtana-smaraṇāni vividha-
paricaraṇāni ca bhāva-sambandhīni.

tat prāpty-utkaṇṭhāyām ekādaśī-janmāṣṭamī-kārtika-vrata-
bhoga-tyāgādīni taporūpāṇi tathāśvattha-tulasyādi
sammānanādīni tad bhāvānukūlāny eva. nāmākṣara-mālya-
nirmālyādi dhāraṇa-praṇāmādīni tad bhāvāviruddhāni.
uktāny etāni sarvāṇi karmāṇi karttavyāni. nyāsa-mudrā
dvārakādi-dhyānādīni tad bhāva-pratikūlāni rāgānugāyāṁ
varjanīyāni. evaṁ svādhikārocitāni śāstreṣu vihitāni
karttavyāni, niṣiddhāni tu sarvāṇi varjanīyāni.



Śrī Bindu-vikāśinī-vṛtti



The distinctive point to be understood in this matter is
that, upon hearing of the sweetness of the conjugal mood
(or the moods of the other rasas) displayed by Kṛṣṇa’s
eternal associates in vraja-līlā, one begins to think,
“This mood is possible for me also”. When this type of
greed arises one is no longer dependent on the
reasonings of śāstra. As long as one is dependent upon
the arguments of the scriptures, he has not obtained
consummation of his greed. In other words it should be
understood from this that greed has not yet arisen in
the sādhaka. This is so because greed is never observed
in anyone who is dependent on the reasonings of śāstra.
Rather, by hearing about or seeing an enticing object,
greed automatically arises to acquire it.

Nonetheless, after the appearance of greed when one
inquires, “How may this irresistible vraja-bhāva be
obtained?” there is dependence upon the scriptures
because it is only in the scriptures and nowhere else
that the method of obtaining this is written. The
scripture from which this method may be known is Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, for it has ascertained the method of
bhagavad-bhajana.

Among the limbs of bhajana, some are tad-bhāvamaya
(composed of bhāva), some are tad-bhāva-sambandhī
(related to bhāva), some are tad-bhāva-anukūla
(favourable to bhāva), some are tad-bhāva-aviruddha
(neither opposed to nor incompatible with bhāva) and
some are tad-bhāva-pratikūla (opposed to bhāva). Thus
rāgānuga-sādhana is seen to be of five types, as
explained below:



(1) Bhāvamaya

The four primary relationships of dāsya, sakhya,
vātsalya and mādhurya are known as bhāvamaya-sādhana.
When śravaṇa, kīrtana and other such limbs of bhakti
become saturated with one of the bhāvas of dāsya, sakhya
and so on, they nourish the future tree of the sādhaka’s
prema. Therefore dāsya, sakhya and so on are called

                           125
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

bhāvamaya-sādhana.



(2) Bhāva-sambandhī

The limbs of bhakti beginning from acceptance of the
shelter of a spiritual master, mantra-japa, hearing,
chanting and remembering of the name, form, qualities
and pastimes appropriate for different periods of the
day of dearest Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the beloved associates of
Kṛṣṇa towards whom one has attraction and rendering
various services unto them, are known as bhāva-
sambandhī-sādhana. The upādāna-kāraṇa, or material cause
of bhāva, is called bhāva-sambandhī. That by which bhāva
attains maturity is called the material cause. Bhāva is
shaped or moulded by the various limbs of bhakti such as
guru-padāśraya and so on. Therefore the performance of
these limbs is called bhāva-sambandhī-sādhana, that
sādhana which is related to bhāva.



(3) Bhāva-anukūla

The observance of Ekādaśī, Janmāṣṭamī and kārttika-
vrata, the renunciation of sense pleasure and other
austerities performed for the pleasure of Kṛṣṇa, and
offering respect to tulasī, the banyan tree and others —
all these limbs of bhakti performed with great eagerness
to obtain one’s cherished bhāva (among the four
attitudes of dāsya and so on) are favourable to bhāva.
In other words they are helpful for the attainment of
bhāva and are therefore known as bhāva-anukūla-sādhana.



(4) Bhāva-aviruddha

Wearing the remnants of flower garlands and other
paraphernalia offered to the deity, stamping one’s body
with the syllables of śrī harināma, offering obeisances
and other such limbs of bhakti are called bhāva-
aviruddha-sādhana. That which is not opposed to the
attainment of one’s bhāva is bhāva-aviruddha. It is
one’s duty to carry out these limbs of bhakti.



(5) Bhāva-pratikūla

Mental assignment of different parts of the body to
various deities (nyāsa), particular positions of
intertwining the fingers (mudrā), meditation on Kṛṣṇa’s
pastimes in Dvārakā and other such aṅgas should be
abandoned in rāgānuga-bhakti because they are opposed to
the attainment of one’s desired bhāva (bhāva-pratikūla).

Thus according to one’s eligibility, one is obligated to
perform the limbs of bhakti prescribed in the scriptures
and to reject those which are forbidden.




                          126
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017



Verse 12 — Bhāva-bhakti




atha sādhana-bhakti-paripākena kṛṣṇa-kṛpayā tad bhakta-
kṛpayā vā bhāva-bhaktir bhavati. tasya cihnāni nava
prīty-aṅkurāḥ, yathā —



kṣāntir avyartha-kālatvaṁ

viraktir māna-śūnyatā

āśā-bandhaḥ samutkaṇṭhā

nāma-gāne sadā-ruciḥ

āsaktis tad-guṇākhyāne

prītis tad vasati-sthale

ity ādayo ‘nubhāvāḥ syur

jāta-bhāvāṅkure jane



Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.3.25ñ6)



tadā kṛṣṇa-sākṣātkāra yogyatā bhavati. mumukṣu-
prabhṛtiṣu yadi bhāva-cihnaṁ dṛśyate tadā bhāva-bimba
eva na tu bhāvaḥ. ajña-janeṣu bhāva-cchāyā.



Śrī Bindu-vikāśinī-vṛtti



Now bhāva-bhakti is being described. This bhāva-bhakti
is not obtained by any means of sādhana. Rather, by
continual performance of śravaṇa, kīrtana and other
limbs of bhakti, when bhakti attains maturity, it
automatically cleanses all misgivings from the heart of
the sādhaka. At that time bhāva-bhakti manifests itself
in the transparent heart by the mercy of Śrī Kṛṣṇa or
His devotees.



Comment



śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā

prema-sūryāṁśu-sāmyabhāk


                            127
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

rucibhiś citta-māsṛṇya-

kṛd asau bhāva ucyate



Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.3.1)



Bhāva-bhakti (bhāva-rūpa-kṛṣṇānuśīlana) is a special
manifestation of śuddha-sattva. In other words the
constitutional characteristic of bhāva-bhakti is that it
is a phenomenon entirely constituted of śuddha-sattva.
It is like a ray (kiraṇa) of the sun of prema and it
softens the heart by various tastes (ruci).



In his commentary on this verse Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura has written as follows:

“When the previously mentioned sādhana-bhakti succeeds
in softening the heart by various tastes (ruci), it is
called bhāva-bhakti. The word ruci here refers to three
kinds of taste: (1) bhagavat-prāpti-abhilāṣa (desire for
the attainment of Śrī Kṛṣṇa), (2) ānukūlya-abhilāṣa
(desire to do that which is favourable to Kṛṣṇa) and (3)
sauhārda-abhilāṣa (desire to serve the Lord with
affection). The constitutional identity (svarūpa) of
bhāva-bhakti is that it is fully composed of śuddha-
sattva (śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā). The words śuddha-
sattva refer to the self-manifest cognitive function
(saṁvid-vṛtti) of the Lord’s own internal spiritual
energy known as svarūpa-śakti.

“The addition of the word viśeṣa to the words śuddha-
sattva indicates the second supreme potency (mahā-śakti)
of svarūpa-śakti known as hlādinī. It should be
understood from this that the condition known as
mahābhāva, which is the highest state of development of
the hlādinī-śakti, is also included within śuddha-
sattva-viśeṣa. Therefore that supreme function (parama-
pravṛtti) which is fully possessed of desire favourable
to Śrī Kṛṣna, which is the essence of the combination of
the saṁvit and hlādinī potencies, and which is situated
in the hearts of the Lord’s eternal associates being
indistinguishably unified with the condition of their
hearts (tādātmya-bhāva), is known as śuddha-sattva-
viśeṣātmā. In simpler language the nitya-siddha-bhāva
situated in the hearts of the eternal associates of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is called śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā. This bhāva-
bhakti is like the first ray of the sun of prema-bhakti.
Therefore it is also called the sprout of prema
(premāṅkura).”

In his commentary on Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta,
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has explained this verse in simple
and straightforward language. We are citing his words
here for the benefit of the reader. Prema-bhakti is the
fruit of sādhana-bhakti. There are two categories of
prema-bhakti: the state of bhāva and the state of prema.
If prema is compared with the sun, then bhāva can be
said to be a ray of the sun of prema. Bhāva, which is of

                          128
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

the identity of viśuddha-sattva, melts the heart by
various kinds of taste (ruci). At first, while
describing the general symptoms of bhakti, it was said
that bhakti involves the cultivation of activities in
relation to Kṛṣṇa (kṛṣṇānuśīlana). The state in which
that cultivation becomes saturated with viśuddha-sattva
and softens the heart by ruci is called bhāva.

When bhāva makes its appearance within the faculty of
the mind, it attains the state of identification with
the mental faculty. In reality bhāva is a self-manifest
condition, but when it makes its appearance within the
mental faculty it appears as though it was brought into
manifestation by the faculty of the mind. That which is
referred to here as bhāva is also known as rati.
Although rati is itself relishable, it is understood to
be the cause of tasting Śrī Kṛṣṇa and various
paraphernalia related to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

It should be understood here that rati (the word rati
also means love or affection) is that particular bhāva
(the word bhāva also means love, affection or emotion)
which is a fully spiritual reality (cit-tattva). It is
not a substance belonging to the world of inert matter.
The rati (mundane affection) that the baddha-jīvas have
towards mundane sense objects is merely a perverted
reflection, arising from contact with matter, of a
fragmented portion of the true spiritual bhāva of the
jīva. When, within the world of matter, one takes up the
cultivation of activities in relationship with Bhagavān,
then rati in its cognitive aspect (saṁvid-aṁśa) becomes
the cause of tasting worthy objects that are related to
Bhagavān. At the same time, by virtue of its pleasure-
giving aspect (hlādinī), rati itself bestows spiritual
delight.



Nine symptoms of bhāva

On the appearance of bhāva-bhakti the following nine
symptoms are observed:



kṣāntir avyartha-kālatvaṁ

viraktir māna-śūnyatā

āśā-bandhaḥ samutkaṇṭhā

nāma-gāne sadā-ruciḥ

āsaktis tad-guṇākhyāne

prītis tad vasati-sthale

ity ādayo ‘nubhāvāḥ syur

jāta-bhāvāṅkure jane



Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.3.25ñ6)

                            129
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017




Kṣānti (forbearance or tolerance), avyartha-kālatva
(effective use of one’s time), virakti (detachment from
worldly enjoyment), māna-śūnyatā (absence of pride),
āśā-bandha (steadfast hope that Kṛṣṇa will bestow His
mercy), samutkaṇṭhā (intense longing to obtain one’s
goal), nāma-gāne sadā-ruci (always possessed of taste to
chant the holy name), tad-guṇākhyāne āsakti (attachment
to hearing narrations of the Lord’s qualities) and tad-
vasati-sthale prīti (affection for the transcendental
residences of the Lord) — these are the nine sprouts of
love of God (prīti), or in other words, the symptoms of
the appearance of bhāva.



(1) Kṣānti — When the heart remains unagitated in spite
of the presence of some disturbing element, such a
condition is called kṣānti (forbearance or tolerance).

(2) Avyartha-kālatva — To spend one’s time exclusively
in bhagavad-bhajana, avoiding all futile material
engagements, is called avyartha-kālatva (effective use
of one’s time).

(3) Virakti — A natural distaste for material sense
enjoyment is called virakti (detachment). Upon the
appearance of bhāva within the heart, attraction towards
the spiritual dimension (cit-jagat) becomes
progressively stronger and one’s taste for the material
world gradually perishes. This is real detachment. Those
who, upon the awakening of this natural detachment,
adopt the external feature and dress of a renunciant in
order to diminish their material necessities can be
called renounced Vaiṣṇavas. But those who adopt the
external feature of a renunciant prior to the appearance
of bhāva do so unlawfully. By chastising Choṭa Haridāsa,
Śrīman Mahāprabhu has imparted this lesson to the world.

(4) Māna-śūnyatā — To remain devoid of pride in spite of
one’s elevated position is called māna-śūnyatā (absence
of pride). Pride arises from high birth, social
classification (varṇa), stage of life (āśrama), wealth,
strength, beauty, high position and so on. In spite of
possessing all these qualities the sādhakas in whose
hearts bhāva has manifested easily renounce all these
vanities. According to the Padma Purāṇa, King
Bhagīratha, the crest-jewel among kings, having attained
rati towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa, completely renounced the pride
borne of kingdom and wealth. He performed bhajana and
maintained his existence by begging from door to door in
the cities of his enemy kings. He always offered
obeisances and praise to everyone whether they were
brāhmaṇas or cāṇḍālas (dog-eaters).

(5) Āśā-bandha — “Śrī Kṛṣṇa will certainly bestow His
mercy upon me” — to apply one’s mind very diligently in
bhajana with this firm faith is called āśā-bandha
(steadfast hope that Kṛṣṇa will bestow His mercy).

(6) Samutkaṇṭhā — Intense longing for one’s desired
object of attainment is called samutkaṇṭhā. When bhāva-

                          130
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

bhakti manifests in the heart of the sādhaka his
hankering to obtain Śrī Kṛṣṇa increases day by day. The
desire to serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa becomes the obsession of his
heart. This is nicely expressed in Śrī Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta
(54), as quoted in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.3.36):



ānamrām asita-bhruvor upacitām akṣīṇa-pakṣmāṅkureṣv

ālolām anurāgiṇor nayanayor ārdrāṁ mṛdau jalpite

ātāmrām adharāmṛte mada-kalām amlāna vaṁśī-svaneṣv

āśāste mama locanaṁ vraja-śiśor mūrttiṁ jagan-mohinīm



My eyes are ever restless to see that vraja-kiśora who
enchants the entire world, whose eyebrows are dark and
slightly curved, whose eyelashes are thick and dense,
whose eyes are always restless to see those who are
possessed of anurāga (or whose eyes always display
anurāga), whose mild speech is exceedingly soft and
filled with rasa, whose lips are as sweet and tasty as
nectar and slightly reddish-copper in hue, and who
carries a flawless flute whose inexplicably sweet and
mild tones madden all (and incite the gopīs’ kāma).



This kind of intense hankering to see Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
called samutkaṇṭhā. It is ever-present in the hearts of
bhāva-bhaktas.

(7) Nāma-gāne sadā-ruci — Loving thirst to always sing
harināma is called nāma-gāne sadā-ruci.

(8) Guṇākhyāne āsakti — Natural and spontaneous
attachment for the descriptions of the Lord’s supremely
charming qualities is called guṇākhyāne āsakti. The
significance of this attachment is that, for the
devotees in whom bhāva has arisen (jāta-bhāva-bhaktas),
the thirst to hear and describe the charming pastimes of
Kṛṣṇa, which are decorated with all-auspicious
qualities, is never satiated. The more they hear and
describe the Lord’s qualities, the more their thirst
increases.

(9) Tad-vasati-sthale prīti — The desire to reside in
Śrī Vṛndāvana, Śrī Navadvīpa and other spiritual abodes
of the Lord is called tad-vasati-sthale prīti (affection
for the transcendental residences of the Lord).



Comment



For instance a devotee, in the course of
circumambulating Vraja-maṇḍala, arrives in Vṛndāvana
and, being overwhelmed with spiritual emotion (bhāva-
bhakti), inquires as follows from the Vrajavāsīs: “O

                          131
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

residents of Vraja! Where is Sevā-kuñja, Nidhuvana and
Vamśīvaṭa?” A Vrajavāsī devotee takes him by the hand
and leads him to Sevā-kuñja. Arriving at Sevā-kuñja he
falls down in the courtyard and begins to roll on the
ground. He exclaims, “How wonderful! At this very spot
Rasika-śekhara Vrajendra-nandana served the lotus feet
of our worshipful mistress Śrīmatī Rādhikā. O Sevā-
kuñja! O dust particles of this place! O creepers and
trees of this place! May you kindly bestow your mercy
upon us. When will we obtain the mercy of Sevā-kuñja?”

A second example is as follows. A devotee, while
performing parikramā of Navadvīpa-dhāma, inquired with
tearful eyes and the hairs of his body standing upright
due to ecstasy, “O Dhāmavāsīs, where is the birthsite of
our Gaurasundara? Which path did He follow while
performing kīrtana with His devotees?” Being shown these
places by the residents of the dhāma, his voice becomes
choked up with spiritual emotion (bhāva-bhakti), he
begins to roll on the ground and exclaims, “How
wonderful! This is Māyāpura-dhāma. Even though it is
non-different in every respect from Vraja, it confers
even greater mercy than Vraja. O birthplace of
Gaurasundara, please bestow your mercy upon this
insignificant and worthless person.” Saying this again
and again that devotee becomes deeply overwhelmed with
spiritual emotion. This is called affection for the
places of the Lord’s residence. To reside and perform
bhajana in these places with great love is also included
within this characteristic.



These nine symptoms (anubhāvas) are manifest in the
devotee in whose heart the sprout of bhāva has arisen.
It may be understood that the devotee in whom the sprout
of love is visible has become eligible to receive the
direct audience of Kṛṣṇa. If some of these symptoms of
bhāva are perceived in karmīs, who are anxious for
material sense enjoyment, or jñānīs, who aspire for
liberation, then one should know this to be but a
reflection (pratibimba) of bhāva. This should not be
considered as a genuine manifestation of bhāva. If the
symptoms of bhāva are seen in ignorant persons by virtue
of their association with devotees, this is known as a
shadow (chāyā) of rati.



Comment



In Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.3.45ñ51) there is the
following description of ratyābhāsa, the semblance of
rati. Ratyābhāsa is of two kinds: (1) pratibimba
(reflection) and (2) chāyā (shadow).



(1) Pratibimba-ratyābhāsa

If ratyābhāsa, which appears like genuine rati due to
the presence of one or two symptoms such as tears and

                            132
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

horripilation, is expressive of the desire for happiness
in the form of bhukti and mukti, it is known as
pratibimba-ratyābhāsa. This reflection of rati easily
fulfils the desired aspiration for happiness in the form
of bhukti and mukti without undergoing great endeavour.

In his commentary on verse 1.3.46, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī
explains that the principal nature of bhāgavatī-rati is
that it is free from all material designations or
adulterations. The presence of designations is
symptomatic of the semblance of rati. Where such
designations exist there is striving for some secondary
or inferior inclination. In the mumukṣus there is the
desire for liberation and in the karma-kāṇḍīs there is
the desire for elevation to the heavenly planets. These
are adulterations.

The mumukṣus and the karmīs know that the Lord bestows
liberation and material enjoyment and thus they engage
in bhakti to the Lord directed towards the fulfilment of
these two ends. Their performance of bhakti is not
primary but secondary, for bhakti or bhāgavatī-rati is
not the end desired by them. None-theless, due to the
power of performing the limbs of bhakti, tears and
horripilation arise in them. Because they are
adulterated with desires for bhukti and mukti, their
tears and horripilation are but a reflection of
bhāgavatī-rati. The power of even this reflection of
rati is such that, without undergoing the laborious
sādhana that constitutes the jñāna-mārga, they can
easily obtain the partial happiness of bhukti and mukti.

Sometimes persons who are attached to material enjoyment
and liberation adopt the limbs of bhakti such as kīrtana
in the assembly of pure devotees in order to obtain
their desired aspiration. By such performances they
remain pleased at heart for a considerable time. By the
influence of the association of pure devotees in whose
hearts the moon of bhāva has arisen, some such persons
may have the extreme good fortune of having the moon of
bhāva reflected in their hearts.

In his commentary on verses 1.3.47ñ8, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī
has said that it is only due to the association of
devotees in whose hearts bhāva has arisen that bhāva is
reflected in the hearts of persons attached to bhoga and
mokṣa. This reflection occurs during the performance of
kīrtana undertaken in the association of pure devotees.
The tears and horripilation that are observed in such
persons are not symptoms of genuine rati but of
pratibimba-ratyābhāsa.

Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī raises a question that when there is
intervention of a cloud, the moon is not reflected on a
reservoir of water. So when those desiring liberation
and those desiring material enjoyment are separated from
the association of pure devotees, how can the reflection
of bhāva remain in their hearts? He answers this by
saying that the transcendental influence of the
association of jāta-rati-bhaktas is so powerful that
even when separated from such persons the reflection of
bhāva remains in the hearts of the mumukṣus and bhoga-
kāmīs for a long time in the form of subtle impressions
(saṁskāras).

                          133
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017




(2) Chāyā-ratyābhāsa

That ratyābhāsa which bears some resemblance to śuddha-
rati, which possesses curiosity or inquisitiveness of an
insignificant nature, which is unsteady and which
relieves material distress is known as chāyā-ratyābhāsa.
By even incidental association with activities such as
kīrtana, times such as Janmāṣtamī, places such as Śrī
Vṛndāvana, and persons dear to Lord Hari, chāyā-rati
sometimes arises even in ignorant persons. This chāyā-
rati can never arise without extreme good fortune. Good
fortune here refers to the saṁskāras of bhakti acquired
in a previous life or by the association of devotees in
this or a previous life.

When śuddha-rati manifests to a very slight extent by
virtue of the association of jāta-bhāva-bhaktas or at
the time of performing sādhana in vaidhī-bhakti, it is
called chāyā-ratyābhāsa (a shadow of rati). This shadow
of rati is not steady. This semblance of rati is
sometimes observed even in ordinary persons, who are
ignorant of the truth, by the influence of the
association of devotees. It is highly auspicious for the
jīvas when chāyā-rati, which is of the form of the
lustre (kānti) of śuddha-rati, arises in them, for upon
its appearance they gradually obtain good fortune.




Verse 13 — Prema-bhakti




bhāva-bhakti-paripāka eva premā. tasya cihnam —
vighnādi-sambhave ‘pi kiñcin-mātrasyāpi na hrāsaḥ.
mamatvātiśayāt premṇa eva uparitano ‘vasthā viśeṣaḥ
snehaḥ. tasya cihṇa, citta-dravībhāvaḥ. tato rāgaḥ.
tasya lakṣaṇaṁ nibiḍa-snehaḥ. tataḥ praṇayaḥ. tasya
lakṣaṇaṁ gāḍha-viśvāsaḥ.



Śrī Bindu-vikāśinī-vṛtti



The mature stage of bhāva-bhakti is called prema. The
symptom of prema is that even when obstacles or
impediments are present, there is not even the slightest
diminution of affection (bhāva). A superior condition of
prema is marked by an increase of mamatā and is known as
sneha. The word mamatā refers to a deep sense of
attachment or possessiveness in relation to Śrī Kṛṣṇa by
which one thinks, “Kṛṣṇa is mine”. Sneha is symptomised
by the melting of the heart. Superior to this is the
condition known as rāga, which is symptomised by sneha
that has become intensified or condensed. Superior to
this is the condition known as praṇaya. The symptom of

                           134
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

praṇaya is deep faith.



Comment



In Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.4.1) the general definition
of prema has been given as follows:



samyaṅ masṛṇita-svānto

mamatvātiśayāṅkitaḥ

bhāvaḥ sa eva sāndrātmā

budhaiḥ premā nigadyate



Bhāva-bhakti which melts the heart much more so than in
its initial stage, which greatly augments the feeling of
transcendental bliss and which bestows a deep sense of
mamatā (possessiveness) in relation to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is
called prema by the learned.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s commentary to this
verse is translated as follows:

“The subject of prema is being discussed with reference
to the previously described bhāva-bhakti. When bhāva
thickens beyond its previous condition it begins to make
the inner recesses of the heart much more tender, moist
and soft than before, it produces an experience of
concentrated transcendental bliss and bestows extreme
mamatā towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa. This mature stage of bhāva is
called prema. The following doubt may be raised here.
According to sāṅkhya philosophy the material or
immediate cause (upādāna kāraṇa) abandons its previous
condition and is transformed into its effect. At that
time it no longer remains as a cause, or in other words,
there is no more existence of its prior condition.

“For instance, when guḍa (jaggery — a type of solid
unrefined molasses) is transformed, it abandons its
former state and becomes unrefined sugar (khāṇḍa). When
it becomes unrefined sugar, guḍa can no longer be
conceived as having its own separate state because the
guḍa has been transformed into raw sugar. Similarly,
unrefined sugar (khāṇḍa) becomes refined sugar (cīnī)
and refined sugar becomes rock candy (miśrī). In the
condition of rock candy there is no separate existence
of unrefined sugar or refined sugar. In the same way,
when bhāva matures into prema, why should there be any
separate existence of bhāva? When prema matures it
gradually increases and takes the forms of sneha, māna,
praṇaya, rāga, anurāga, bhāva and mahābhāva. At that
time only mahābhāva should remain. Why should there be
any existence of rati, prema, sneha, māna and the other
prior conditions?


                          135
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

“This cannot be said because rati is a distinct and
superior function of Kṛṣṇa’s hlādinī-śakti. By the power
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s inconceivable potency (acintya-śakti),
rati, sneha, māna, praṇaya and so on attain successively
higher states without giving up their previous
conditions. The separate existence of each and every
condition is certainly to be admitted.

“For example, it can be said that when Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
childhood form (bālya-deha) is imbued with a particular
sweetness, then without giving up the condition of
childhood, it attains to the boyhood form (paugaṇḍa-
deha). Again when the paugaṇḍa-deha attains even greater
sweetness and excellence, it assumes the form of fresh
youth (kaiśora-deha). Unlike the material body of the
jīva, Kṛṣṇa’s body is never subject to any
transformation arising from age. Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s bālya,
paugaṇḍa and kaiśora forms, as well as the līlās
connected with them, are all eternal. But when the
paugaṇḍa form manifests, the bālya-deha disappears from
this universe and manifests in some other universe.
Simultaneously the bālya-līlā is also revealed in that
universe. Therefore, as regards the revelation of the
unmanifest pastimes (aprakaṭa-līlā) within Vṛndāvana of
the earthly sphere (Bhauma-Vṛndāvana), where the bālya-
līlā begins, the bālya-deha also becomes manifest. In
the vaivasvata-manvantara of the next kalpa (day of
Brahmā), when the prakaṭa-līlā of Vṛndāvana is manifest
in this universe, then at that time the bālya-deha will
again be manifest in this very same universe.

“Therefore, as regards eternal phenomena, it is only a
matter of accepting their appearance and disappearance.
In the hearts of devotees in whom rati, prema and the
other stages of the sthāyibhāva have been aroused, a
particular aspect of the sthāyibhāva (rati, prema, sneha
and so on) sometimes arises due to contact with the
stimulating elements known as vibhāva. At that time that
particular feature of the sthāyibhāva becomes manifest
externally, while the other bhāvas remain in the
unmanifest condition. In ordinary worldly-minded persons
who are possessed of lust, anger and so on, when one
emotion is manifest the others remain dormant within in
the form of latent desires and impressions (saṁskāras).
When the appropriate opportunity comes about, the other
emotions assert themselves. Similarly rati, prema and so
on sometimes become manifest by contact with specific
stimuli and at other times they remain concealed
within.”




Verse 14 — Overview of Bhakti-rasa




vibhāvānubhāva-sāttvika-bhāva-vyabhicāri-bhāva-milanena
raso bhavati. yatra viṣaye bhāvo bhavati sa
viṣayālambana-vibhāvaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ. yo bhāva yukto bhavati sa
āśrayālambana-vibhāvo bhaktaḥ.


                          136
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

ye kṛṣṇaṁ smārayanti vastrālaṅkārādayas te-uddīpana-
vibhāvaḥ. ye bhāvaṁ jñāpayanti te anubhāvā nṛtya-gīta-
smitādayaḥ. ye cittaṁ tanuṁ ca kṣobhayanti te sāttvikāh.
te aṣṭau — stambha-sveda-romāñca-svarabheda-vepathu-
vaivarṇyāśru-pralayā iti. te dhūmāyitā jvalitā dīptā
uddīptā sūddīptā iti pañca-vidhā yathottara-sukhadāḥ
syuḥ. ete yadi nitya-siddhe tadā snigdhāḥ. yadi
jātaratau tadā digdhāḥ. bhāva-śūnya-jane yadi jātās
tadārukṣāḥ. mumukṣu-jane yadi jātās tadā ratyābhāsajāḥ.
karmi-jane viṣayi-jane vā yadi jātās tadā sattvā-
bhāsajāḥ. picchila-citta-jane tad-abhyāsa pare vā yadi
jātās tadā niḥsattvāḥ. bhagavad-dveṣi jane yadi jātās
tadā pratīpāḥ.



Śrī Bindu-vikāśinī-vṛtti



When kṛṣṇa-rati, or in other words the sthāyibhāva (the
permanent emotion of the heart in one of the five
primary relationships of śānta, dāsya, sakhya and so
on), becomes exceedingly tasty for the devotee by virtue
of the elements known as vibhāva, anubhāva, sāttvika-
bhāva and vyabhicāri-bhāva, induced through the medium
of śravaṇa, kīrtana and so on, it is called bhakti-rasa.
In other words when the sthāyibhāva or kṛṣṇa-rati mixes
with vibhāva, anubhāva, sāttvika-bhāva and vyabhicāri-
bhāva and becomes fit to be tasted in the heart of the
devotee, it is called bhakti-rasa.

Components of bhakti-rasa



Sthāyibhāva — The permanent sentiment in one of the five
primary relationships of śānta, dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya
or mādhurya, which is known as mukhya-rati. This also
refers to the dominant sentiment in the seven secondary
mellows (gauṇa-rati) of laughter, wonder, chivalry,
compassion, anger, fear and disgust.

Anubhāva — Visible actions that illustrate the spiritual
emotions situated within the heart (dancing, singing and
so on).



Sāttvika-bhāva — Eight symptoms of spiritual ecstasy
arising exclusively from viśuddha-sattva, or in other
words, when the heart is overwhelmed by emotions in
connection with mukhya-rati or gauṇa-rati.



Vyabhicāri-bhāva — Thirty-three internal spiritual
emotions, which emerge from the nectarean ocean of the
sthāyibhāva, cause it to swell, and then merge back into
that ocean.

Comment



                            137
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017


The terms vibhāva, anubhāva, sāttvika-bhāva, sthāyibhāva
and bhakti-rasa are defined in the following quotations
from Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu:



vibhāvyate hi ratyādir

yatra yena vibhāvyate

vibhāvo nāma sa dvedhā-

lambanoddīpanātmakaḥ



Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (2.1.15)



That in which rati is tasted and that cause by which
rati is tasted are called vibhāva. Vibhāva is of two
varieties: (1) ālambana (the support or repository of
rati) and (2) uddīpana (that which stimu-lates or
excites rati).



anubhāvās tu cittastha-

bhāvānām avabodhakāḥ

te bahir-vikriyā prāyāḥ

proktā udbhāsvarākhyayā



Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (2.2.1)



The symptoms that reveal the spiritual emotions situated
within the heart are called anubhāvas. When they
manifest mostly as external actions they are known as
udbhāsvara (that which gives light or makes apparent).



kṛṣṇa-sambandhibhiḥ sākṣāt

kiñcid vā vyavadhānataḥ

bhāvaiś cittam ihākrāntaṁ

sattvam ity ucyate budhaiḥ



Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (2.3.1)




                             138
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

When the heart is overwhelmed by any of the five primary
senti-ments (mukhya-rati) in relationship with Śrī Kṛṣṇa
of dāsya, sakhya and so on, stimulated by direct contact
with Him, or when the heart is overwhelmed by the seven
secondary sentiments (gauṇa-rati) of laughter, sorrow
and so on, induced by a circumstance in which Kṛṣṇa is
somewhat apart, learned scholars call this condition
sattva. The bhāvas or spiritual emotions arising
strictly from sattva are known as sāttvika-bhāvas.



The previously mentioned anubhāvas such as dancing,
singing and so on, like the sāttvika-bhāvas, arise from
emotion in relationship with Kṛṣṇa, or in other words,
when the mind is overwhelmed by emotion in relationship
with Kṛṣṇa. However, symptoms such as dancing and
singing are done with conscious intention and therefore
they are not counted as sāttvika-bhāvas. The sāttvika-
bhāvas are also referred to as anubhāvas because they
illustrate the emotions situated within the heart.
Therefore, to distinguish between anubhāvas and
sāttvika-bhāvas, the word udbhāsvara is used to refer to
those anubhāvas which do not arise exclusively from
sattva. The symptoms such as becoming stunned (stambha),
standing of the hairs on end (pulaka) and so on arise
spontaneously from sattva. Therefore they are known as
sāttvika-bhāvas.

In his commentary on Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (2.1.5)
Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī explains the nature of rasa.



vibhāvair iti. eṣā kṛṣṇa-ratir eva sthāyī bhāvaḥ saiva
ca bhakti-raso bhavet. kīdṛśī satī tatrāha vibhāvair
iti. śravaṇādibhiḥ karttṛbhir vibhāvādibhiḥ karaṇair
bhaktānāṁ hṛdi svādyatvam ānītā samyak prāpitā.
camatkāra viśeṣeṇa puṣṭety arthaḥ.



This kṛṣṇa-rati is the sthāyibhāva, and it is
transformed into bhakti-rasa. How does it become bhakti-
rasa? By combination with vibhāva, anubhāva, sāttvika-
bhāva and vyabhicāri-bhāva. In other words, when kṛṣṇa-
rati is aroused by the stimulating elements (vibhāvas)
transmitted through the medium of śravaṇa, kīrtana and
so on, and gives rise to various ensuing emotions
(anubhāvas, sāttvika-bhāvas and vyabhicāri-bhāvas), the
combination of all these elements produces an
extraordinary taste within the heart which is referred
to as bhakti-rasa.

The sthāyibhāva will be described elaborately further
ahead. Here it is sufficient to know that when kṛṣṇa-
rati is augmented, it attains to different levels such
as sneha, māna, praṇaya, rāga, anurāga, bhāva and
mahābhāva. All of these are known as sthāyibhāvas
(permanent emotions) of kṛṣṇa-bhakti. When these various
gradations of the sthāyibhāva combine with the
appropriate vibhāvas, anubhāvas, sāttvika-bhāvas and
vyabhicāri-bhāvas, bhakti-rasa is produced and yields an
unprecedented taste.

                          139
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017


Bhakti-rasa is of twelve varieties and each of these has
its own sthāyibhāva. For example: (1) the sthāyibhāva of
śānta-rasa is śānta-rati (tranquillity); (2) the
sthāyibhāva of dāsya-rasa is dāsya-rati (affection in
servitude); (3) the sthāyibhāva of sakhya-rasa is
sakhya-rati (friendship); (4) the sthāyibhāva of
vātsalya-rasa is vātsalya-rati (parental affection); (5)
the sthāyibhāva of mādhurya-rasa is madhura-rati
(conjugal love); (6) the sthāyibhāva of hāsya-rasa is
hāsa-rati (laughter); (7) the sthāyibhāva of adbhuta-
rasa (wonder) is vismaya-rati (astonishment); (8) the
sthāyibhāva of vīra-rasa (heroism) is utsāha-rati
(enthusiasm); (9) the sthāyibhāva of karuṇa-rasa
(compassion) is śoka-rati (sorrow or lamentation); (10)
the sthāyibhāva of raudra-rasa is krodha-rati (anger);
(11) the sthāyibhāva of bhayānaka-rasa is bhaya-rati
(fear); and (12) the sthāyibhāva of bībhatsa-rasa is
jugupsā-rati (disgust). Although bhakti-rasa is accepted
to be of twelve varieties, in the final analysis five
rasas are predominant. The five sthāyibhāvas on which
these are based will be discussed elaborately ahead.



Vibhāva

The Causes of Tasting Bhakti-rasa



Kṛṣṇa-rati is of five kinds: śānta, dāsya, sakhya,
vātsalya and madhura. That in and by which rati is
stimulated and thus

caused to be tasted is called vibhāva. Vibhāva is of two
kinds: ālambana (the support) and uddīpana (the
stimulus). That in which rati is stimulated is called
ālambana (the support or shelter of rati). That by which
rati is stimulated is called uddīpana (the stimulus for
rati). Ālambana-vibhāva is also of two varieties:
viṣayālambana and āśrayālambana. He for whom rati is
aroused is called viṣayālambana (the object of rati) and
one in whom rati is aroused is called āśrayālambana (the
receptacle of rati). Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the viṣayālambana of
kṛṣṇa-rati and the devotees are the āśrayālambana. That
by which rati is stimulated is called uddīpana-vibhāva.
Uddīpana-vibhāva refers to all those things which stimu-
late remembrance of Śrī Kṛṣṇa such as His dress and
ornaments, the spring season, the banks of the Yamunā,
forest groves, cows, peacocks and so on.



Viṣayālambana-vibhāva



Kṛṣṇa’s qualities as viṣayālambana



The qualities of Śrī Kṛṣṇa are sometimes classified as
viṣayālambana and sometimes as uddīpana. Because Kṛṣṇa’s

                          140
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                  5/5/2017

qualities are part and parcel of His form, they are
included as viṣayālambana. When the principal meditation
is upon Śrī Kṛṣṇa who possesses various qualities, those
qualities are thought of as belonging to the object of
love and are therefore classified as viṣayālambana.
When, however, the principal meditation is upon the
qualities of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and that remembrance stimulates
love for Kṛṣṇa, those qualities are considered as
uddīpana. Śrī Kṛṣṇa has sixty-four principal qualities.
Out of these the first fifty are present to a minute
extent in great personalities who are recipients of the
Lord’s mercy. The ordinary jīvas, however, display
merely a shadow of a particle of such qualities.



(1) Suramyāṅga — The construction of His limbs is
exceedingly beautiful.

(2) Sarva-sal-lakṣaṇa-yukta — His body is marked with
all auspicious characteristics.

(3) Rucira — His beauty is a festival of bliss for the
eyes.

(4) Tejasānvita — His body is radiant and He is
extremely powerful and influential.

(5) Balīyān — He possesses great strength.

(6) Vayasānvita — He displays different ages and yet He
is eternally situated in fresh youth.

(7) Vividhādbhuta-bhāṣāvit — He is expert in different
languages.

(8) Satyavākya — His words never prove false.

(9) Priyaṁvada — He speaks pleasantly even to offenders.

(10) Vāvadūka — His words are ambrosial and pleasing to
the ears.

(11) Supaṇḍita — He is learned and conducts Himself
appropriately with different kinds of persons.

(12) Buddhimān — His intelligence is sharp and subtle.

(13) Pratibhānvita — He is expert at improvising
original conversation on the spur of the moment.

(14) Vidagdha — He is skilled in the sixty-four arts and
in amorous pastimes.

(15) Catura — He can accomplish many actions at the same
time.

(16) Dakṣa — He can perform difficult tasks with ease.

(17) Kṛtajña — He is grateful for services rendered by
others.

(18) Sudṛḍha-vrata — His promises and vows always hold
true.

                          141
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017


(19) Deśa-kāla-supātrajña — He is an expert judge of
time, place and person and works accordingly.

(20) Śāstra-cakṣu — He acts in accordance with the
religious scriptures.

(21) Śuci — He is free from all sins and He purifies
others from sins.

(22) Vaśī — He is in full control of His senses.

(23) Sthira — He perseveres until His work is completed.

(24) Dānta — He endures even intolerable distress.

(25) Kṣamāśīla — He excuses the offences of others.

(26) Gambhīra — It is very difficult to understand the
import of His mind.

(27) Dhṛtimān — His desires are fulfilled and He remains
calm even in the midst of great anxiety.

(28) Sama — He is devoid of attachment and aversion.

(29) Vadānya — He is chivalrous in giving charity.

(30) Dhārmika — He is religious and He incites others to
adopt the path of religion.

(31) Śūra — He is enthusiastic to fight and expert in
the use of weapons.

(32) Karuṇa — He is unable to tolerate the distress of
others.

(33) Mānyamāna-kṛta — He is respectful to His guru, the
brāhmaṇas and elders.

(34) Dakṣiṇa — Because of His excellent disposition His
actions are very pleasing.

(35) Vinayī — He is devoid of pride.

(36) Hrīmān — He is bashful when He thinks that others
have detected His amorous affairs and when glorified by
others.

(37) Śaraṇāgata-pālaka — He protects those who take
shelter of Him.

(38) Sukhī — He enjoys pleasure and is untouched by
distress.

(39) Bhakta-suhṛta — He is a friend to His devotees and
is easily pleased.

(40) Prema-vaśya — He is controlled only by love.

(41) Sarva-śubhaṅkara — He is a well-wisher to everyone.

(42) Pratāpī — He torments and terrifies His enemies.


                          142
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                  5/5/2017

(43) Kīrtimān — He is famous by dint of His sterling
qualities.

(44) Rakta-loka — He is the object of love and
attachment for everyone.

(45) Sadhu-samāśraya — He is partial to the sādhus.

(46) Nārīgaṇa-manohārī — He is attractive to all women.

(47) Sarvārādhya — He is worshipable to everyone.

(48) Samṛddhimān — He possesses great opulence.

(49) Varīyān — He is superior to all.

(50) àśvara — He is independent and His order cannot be
transgressed.



The next five qualities are partially present in Śrī
Śiva



(51) Sadā-svarūpa-samprāpta — He is never controlled by
the dictates of māyā.

(52) Sarvajña — He knows the heart of everyone, and He
knows all things even though there may be an
intervention of time, place and so on.

(53) Nitya-nutana — Even though His beauty is always
experienced, it is new at every moment and so
astonishing that it appears as if it were never
previously experienced.

(54) Sac-cid-ānanda-sāndrāṅga — He is the concentrated
embodi-ment of existence, consciousness and bliss. The
word sat means that He pervades all time and space, the
word cit means that He is self-manifested, the word
ānanda means that He is the abode of unadulterated prema
and the word sāndra means that His form is so densely
composed of sat, cit and ānanda that it is untouched by
anything else.

(55) Sarva-siddhi-niṣevita — All mystic powers are under
His control.



The next five qualities are present in Śrī Nārāyaṇa and
Mahāviṣṇu



(56) Avicintya-mahāśakti — He possesses inconceivable
potencies by which He creates the universes and
manifests even the indwelling antaryāmī of those
universes, by which He bewilders even Brahmā and Rudra
and by which He destroys the prārabdha-karma of His
devotees.


                          143
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                  5/5/2017

(57) Koṭi-brahmāṇḍa-vigraha — Unlimited universes are
situated within His body.

(58) Avatārāvalī-bīja — He is the source of all
incarnations.

(59) Hatāri-gati-dāyaka — He awards mukti to the enemies
killed by Him.

(60) Ātmārāma-gaṇākarṣī — He attracts the liberated
souls who rejoice in the self.



The next four qualities are unique to Śrī Kṛṣṇa alone



(61) Līlā-mādhurya — He is an undulating ocean of
astonishing pastimes out of which rāsa-līlā is supremely
captivating.

(62) Prema-mādhurya — He is surrounded by devotees who
possess incomparable madhura-prema, which develops up to
the stage of mahābhāva.

(63) Veṇu-mādhurya — The sweet and mellow sound of His
flute attracts the minds of everyone within the three
worlds.

(64) Rūpa-mādhurya — His extraordinary beauty astonishes
all moving and non-moving entities.



Four kinds of nāyakas or heroes



Because Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the reservoir of all qualities and
activities He manifests the characteristics of all four
different heroes at different times in accordance with
specific pastimes. These four varieties of heroes are
described below.



(1) Dhīrodātta

The hero who is grave, humble, forgiving, compassionate,
fixed in vow, unboastful, extremely powerful and who
thwarts the pride of heroic fighters is known as
dhīrodātta. Previous ācāryas have described Bhagavān Śrī
Rāma as possessing the qualities of a dhīrodātta nāyaka.
These qualities are also observed in Śrī Kṛṣṇa.



(2) Dhīra-lalita

The hero who is expert in the sixty-four arts and in
amorous sports, always situated in fresh youth, expert
at joking, devoid of anxiety and controlled by the prema
of his beloveds is known as dhīra-lalita. Śrī Kṛṣṇa

                          144
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

clearly manifests the features of a dhīra-lalita nāyaka.
In the nāṭya-śāstra these qualities are also said to be
found in Kandarpa (Cupid).



(3) Dhīra-śānta

The hero who is peaceful, tolerant of miseries,
judicious and humble is known as dhīra-śānta. Learned
scholars of the nāṭya-śāstra have declared Mahārāja
Yudhiṣṭhira to be a dhīra-śānta nāyaka.



(4) Dhīroddhata

One who is malicious, proud, deceitful, angry, fickle
and boastful is known as dhīroddhata. Learned scholars
have accepted Bhīmasena as a dhīroddhata nāyaka.
Although these characteristics appear to be faults, they
are accepted as qualities in Śrī Kṛṣṇa because they are
appropriate in specific pastimes in which He chastises
the wicked to protect His devotees.

Snigdha sāttvika-bhāvas are manifest only in the
eternally perfected devotees. Sāttvika-bhāvas that arise
in jāta-rati-bhaktas (those in whom rati has made its
appearance) are called digdha sāttvika-bhāvas. When
these symptoms are seen in persons in whom rati has not
been aroused they are called rukṣa sāttvika-bhāvas. In
actuality sāttvika-bhāvas can occur only in persons in
whom rati has been aroused. When symptoms resembling the
sāttvika-bhāvas are manifest in persons who are devoid
of rati they are known as sāttvikābhāsa (a semblance of
sāttvika-bhāva). Therefore rukṣa sāttvika-bhāvas are
also said to be an ābhāsa.



Sāttvikābhāsa

Sāttvikābhāsa is of four types: (1) ratyābhāsa, (2)
sattvābhāsa, (3) niḥsattva and (4) pratīpa.



(1) Ratyābhāsa

Ratyābhāsa literally means an ābhāsa or semblance of
rati, and sāttvikābhāsa means a semblance of the
symptoms known as sāttvika-bhāvas. Ratyābhāsa
sāttvikābhāsa, therefore, refers to those symptoms which
resemble sāttvika-bhāvas arising due to a semblance of
rati. This ratyābhāsa refers to pratibimba- and chāyā-
ratyābhāsa previously described in the section on bhāva-
bhakti. Persons who are desirous of liberation may adopt
the limbs of bhakti not for the purpose of obtaining
bhakti or kṛṣṇa-rati but simply to attain mukti. When
such persons chant the holy name in the association of
bhāva-bhaktas, they may manifest tears, horripilation
and other symptoms. Because these symptoms arise from a
reflection of the rati situated in the hearts of genuine
bhāva-bhaktas, they are known as ratyābhāsa

                          145
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

sāttvikābhāsa. When symptoms resembling sāttvika-bhāvas
are seen in mumukṣus (those desirous of liberation) they
are said to arise from ratyābhāsa.



(2) Sattvābhāsa

Sattvābhāsa refers to those symptoms which arise from an
ābhāsa of sattva. Sattva refers to the condition wherein
the heart possessed of rati is overwhelmed by spiritual
emotions such as jubilation, wonder and despondency.
When a person who is devoid of rati hears or chants
about the Lord’s pastimes in the association of pure
devotees, he may become overwhelmed with some emotion
which resembles those originating from sattva. In this
case the symptoms he displays such as crying do not
arise from a reflection of rati but merely from some
emotion which resembles those arising from sattva.
Therefore they are known as sattvābhāsa sāttvikābhāsa.
These emotions generally arise in persons whose hearts
are naturally soft. When symptoms resembling sāttvika-
bhāvas are seen in karmīs or viṣayīs (sensualists) they
are said to arise from sattvābhāsa.

(3) Niḥsattva

Niḥsattva refers to those symptoms which do not arise
from sattva. The hearts of such persons are described as
picchila (slippery). Externally they appear to be soft-
hearted but internally they are hard-hearted. They
exhibit symptoms merely by forced practice. Because the
symptoms observed in such persons are devoid of even an
ābhāsa of sattva, they are known as niḥsattva
sāttvikābhāsa.



(4) Pratīpa

The word pratīpa literally means adverse, contrary or
displeasing. When the enemies of Kṛṣṇa display symptoms
that resemble sāttvika-bhāvas, they are called pratīpa
sāttvikābhāsa.




Verse 15 — Description of Vyabhicāri-bhāvas




atha vyabhicāriṇaḥ sthāyi-bhāva-poṣakā bhāvāḥ
kadācitkāḥ. nirvedo ‘tha viṣādo, dainyam glāni-śramau ca
mada-garvau śaṅkā-trāsāvegā unmādo ‘pasmṛtis tathā
vyādhiḥ moho mṛtir ālasyaṁ, jāḍyaṁ vrīḍāvahitthā ca
smṛtir atha vitarka-cintā-mati-dhṛtayo harṣa-utsukatvaṁ
ca augrāmarṣāsūyāś cāpalyaṁ caiva nidrā ca suptir bodha
itīme bhāvā vyabhicāriṇaḥ samākhyātāḥ.

athaiṣām-lakṣaṇam — ātma-nindā nirvedaḥ, anutāpo-

                          146
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

viṣādaḥ, ātmani ayogya-buddhir dainyam, śramajanya-
daurbalyaṁ glāniḥ, nṛtyādy-utthaḥ svedaḥ śramaḥ, mado
madhu-pānādi-mattatā, ahaṅkāro garvaḥ, aniṣṭāśaṅkanaṁ
śaṅkā, akasmād eva bhayaṁ trāsaḥ, citta-sambhrama
āvegaḥ, unmattatā unmādaḥ, apasmāro vyādhir apasmṛtiḥ,
jvara-tāpo vyādhiḥ, mūrcchaiva mohaḥ, mṛtir maraṇam,
ālasyam spaṣṭam, jāḍyaṁ jaḍatā, lajjaiva vrīḍā, ākāra-
gopanam avahitthā, pūrvānubhūta-vastu-smaraṇaṁ smṛtiḥ,
anumānaṁ vitarkaḥ, kiṁ bhaviṣyatīti bhāvanā cintā,
śāstrārtha-nirdhāraṇaṁ matiḥ, dhṛtir dhairyam, harṣa
ānandaḥ, utkaṇṭhaiva autsukyam, tīkṣṇa-svabhāvatā
augryam, asahiṣṇutā amarṣaḥ, guṇe ‘pi doṣāropaṇam asūyā,
sthairye aśaktiś cāpalyam, suṣuptir eva nidrā, svapna-
darśanaṁ suptiḥ, jāgaraṇaṁ bodhaḥ, avidyākṣayaś ca, iti
vyabhicāriṇaḥ.



Comment



viśeṣaṇābhimukhyena caranti sthāyinaṁ prati. iti
vyabhicāriṇaḥ



Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (2.4.1)



The vyabhicāri-bhāvas are thirty-three in number.
Because they are specifically directed towards and offer
special assistance to the sthāyibhāva, they are known as
vyabhicāri-bhāvas. The word vyabhicārī here has a
special technical meaning. It can be broken down into
three parts: vi (distinction or intensification), abhi
(towards) and cārī (going). In other words an emotion
that moves distinctively in the direction of the
sthāyibhāva and that serves to intensify it is called
vyabhicāri-bhāva. The vyabhicāri-bhāvas are made known
by one’s speech, by the limbs such as the eyes and
eyebrows, and by sattva, or in other words, by the
anubhāvas arising from sattva. All these vyabhicāri-
bhāvas move towards the sthāyibhāva; therefore they are
also called sañcāri-bhāvas. The word sañcārin means
moving. The vyabhicāri-bhāvas are like waves which
emerge from the nectarean ocean of the sthāyibhāva and
cause it to swell. Then they merge back into the ocean
and disappear.



Śrī Bindu-vikāśinī-vṛtti



There are thirty-three vyabhicāri-bhāvas that nourish
the sthāyibhāva. The causes and symptoms of each one are
described below.

(1) Nirveda (self-disparagement) — To reproach oneself
considering oneself to be fallen and worthless is called
nirveda. Nirveda arises from great distress, feelings of

                           147
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

separation, jealousy, non-performance of duty and
performance of non-duty. In nirveda anxiety, tears,
change of colour, feelings of worthlessness, heavy
sighing and other anubhāvas are manifest.

(2) Viṣāda (despondency or depression) — This arises
from non-attainment of one’s desired object, Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
from inability to complete some endeavour that was begun
for Kṛṣṇa, due to the appearance of some calamity that
befalls Kṛṣṇa, or due to committing an offence. The
symptoms of viṣāda are seeking a remedy and assistance,
anxiety, crying, lamentation, breathing heavily, change
of colour and drying of the mouth.

(3) Dainya (wretchedness or humility) — To consider
oneself despicable and unworthy is called dainya. Dainya
arises from distress, fear and offences. The symptoms of
dainya are speaking words of adulation, awkwardness
(incompetence of the heart), gloominess, anxiety and
inertia of the limbs.

(4) Glāni (physical and mental debility) — The principle
of vital energy and action throughout the body is called
oja. The weakness that arises due to the waning of this
vital energy, brought about by excessive labour (śrama),
by mental oppression or by conjugal activities, is
called glāni. The symptoms of glāni are trembling,
inactivity, change of colour, weakness and restlessness
of the eyes.

(5) Śrama — Fatigue or exhaustion accompanied by
perspiration which arises from vigorous movement in
pursuit of Kṛṣṇa (like Mother Yaśodā running to catch
Kṛṣṇa), dancing and conjugal activities is called śrama.
The symptoms of śrama are sleep, perspiration, yawning
and heavy sighing.

(6) Mada (intoxication) — The delight or exuberance that
extin-guishes knowledge is called mada. This mada arises
from drinking honey and from excessive conjugal
agitation. The symptoms of mada are stumbling movements,
tottering, stammering speech, rolling the eyes and
redness of the eyes.

(7) Garva (pride) — The disregard for others that occurs
due to one’s own good fortune, beauty, youth, qualities,
obtainment of the supreme refuge (Śrī Kṛṣṇa) or
attainment of one’s desired object, is called garva. The
symptoms of garva are disdainful speech, not answering
another simply to amuse oneself, displaying one’s limbs,
concealing one’s intention and not listening to
another’s words.

(8) Śaṅkā (apprehension) — The apprehension of calamity
arising from having stolen something that belongs to
Kṛṣṇa, from committing an offence or from the
viciousness of others (that is, the enemies of Kṛṣṇa),
is called śaṅkā. The symptoms of śaṅkā are drying of the
mouth, change of colour, looking here and there, and
hiding.

(9) Trāsa (fear) — The fear that arises suddenly or
unexpectedly due to lightning, a fearsome creature or a
fearful sound is called trāsa. The symptoms of trāsa are

                          148
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

taking shelter of nearby objects, becoming stunned,
horripilation, trembling and perplexity.

(10) Āvega — Agitation, excitement, tremendous outburst
of emotion and bewilderment of the heart are called
āvega. This āvega arises from eight causes: priya-vastu
(a pleasing object), apriya-vastu (a displeasing
object), agni (fire), vāyu (wind), varṣā (rain), utpāta
(an unusual or startling event or calamity), gaja (an
elephant) and śatru (an enemy). Each one of these causes
gives rise to different symptoms. In priya-vastu-āvega
there is horripilation, comforting words, fickleness and
standing to welcome the beloved. In apriya-vastu-āvega
there is falling on the ground, screaming and dizziness.
In āvega arising from fire there is disorderly movement,
trembling, closing the eyes and shedding tears. In āvega
arising from wind there is covering of the body, rapid
movement and wiping the eyes. In āvega arising from rain
there is running, taking an umbrella and contracting the
body. In āvega arising from calamity there is change of
facial colour, astonishment and trembling. In āvega
arising from an elephant there is running, trembling,
fear and looking behind oneself repeatedly. In āvega
arising from an enemy there is putting on armour, taking
up weapons, and leaving home to go to another place.

(11) Unmāda (madness) — Bewilderment of the heart that
arises from extreme bliss, calamity or acute separation
is called unmāda. The symptoms of unmāda are loud
laughter, dancing, singing, futile action, incoherent
speech, running, shouting and behaving in a contrary
manner.

(12) Apasmṛti (confusion or absence of mind) — The
bewilderment of the heart that occurs due to an
imbalance of the elements of the body arising from some
great distress is called apasmṛti. In apasmṛti there are
symptoms such as falling on the ground, running about,
delusion, trembling, foaming from the mouth, throwing up
of the hands and legs, and loud shouting.

(13) Vyādhi (disease) — A feverish condition produced by
separation or due to an excess in the humours (doṣas) of
the body (mucus, bile and air) is called vyādhi. Śrīla
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura explains in his commentary
to verse 2.4.90 of Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu that this
imbalance of bodily doṣas arises from severe distress
due to separation or hearing of Kṛṣṇa’s defeat at the
hands of the demons. In actuality it is the bhāvas or
spiritual transformations of the heart arising from
separation and severe distress that are called vyādhi.
The symptoms of vyādhi are becoming stunned, slackening
of the limbs, breathing heavily, severe distress and
fatigue.

(14) Moha (fainting or delusion) — The loss of
consciousness arising from jubilation, separation, fear
or despondency is called moha. The symptoms of moha are
falling on the ground, cessation of the functioning of
the senses, dizziness and absence of activity.

(15) Mṛti (death) — Giving up the life air (prāṇa) due
to disease, despondency, fear, physical debility or an
assault is called mṛti. The symptoms of mṛti are

                          149
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

indistinct speech, change of colour, shallow breathing
and hiccups. In Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (2.4.102) Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī explains that the vyabhicāri-bhāva known as
mṛti does not refer to actual death. Because the
symptoms resemble the condition of the heart just prior
to death, it is called mṛti.

(16) Ālasya (laziness) — When, in spite of being able to
do so, there is non-engagement in activity arising due
to satisfaction or fatigue, it is called ālasya. The
symptoms of ālasya are yawning, aversion to activity,
rubbing the eyes, laying down, drowsiness and sleep.

(17) Jāḍya (inertness or insensibility) — When one is
deprived of the power of deliberation due to separation
or due to seeing or hearing about either that which is
cherished or a calamity, it is called jāḍya. Jāḍya is
the condition just prior to or just following moha (loss
of consciousness). The symptoms of jāḍya are blinking
the eyes, remaining silent and forgetfulness.

(18) Vrīḍā (shyness or shame) — The bashfulness or shame
that arises due to new association, performance of
misdeeds, praise or scorn is called vrīḍā. The symptoms
of vrīḍā are silence, anxiety, covering the face,
writing on the ground and lowering the face.

(19) Avahitthā (concealment of emotions) — To display
emotions artificially in order to conceal one’s true
confidential feelings or emotions is called avahitthā.
The symptoms of avahitthā are hiding the limbs which
betray those emotions, looking elsewhere, futile action
and impaired speech.

(20) Smṛti (remembrance) — Recollection and love for
some previously experienced object brought about by
seeing a similar object or by constant practice is
called smṛti. The symptoms of smṛti are moving the head
and contracting the eyebrows.

(21) Vitarka (deliberation or reasoning) — The
deliberation performed to determine the truth about
something is called vitarka. This deliberation may be
instigated either by doubt or curiosity to determine its
cause. The symptoms of vitarka are contracting the
eyebrows and moving the head and fingers.

(22) Cintā (anxiety) — The thinking which arises due to
non-attainment of one’s desired object or due to
attainment of an undesired object is called cintā. To
think, “Now what will happen?” is called cintā. The
symptoms of cintā are breathing deeply, lowering the
head, writing on the ground, change of colour,
sleeplessness, lamentation, inflammation, weakness,
tears and meekness.

(23) Mati (resolve or understanding) — The conviction or
resolve that arises from ascertainment of the meaning of
the śāstras is called mati. The symptoms of mati are
performance of duty, giving instructions to disciples
and deliberation on the pros and cons of a subject.

(24) Dhṛti (fortitude) — The steadiness of the mind that
arises from knowledge (here meaning realisation of the

                          150
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

Lord), absence of distress (due to one’s relationship
with the Lord) and attainment of the topmost object
(bhagavat-prema), is called dhṛti. In dhṛti one feels no
distress on account of things which are not obtained or
those which have already been destroyed.

(25) Harṣa (jubilation) — The bliss that arises in the
heart from seeing or obtaining one’s desired object is
called harṣa. The symptoms of harṣa are horripilation,
perspiration, tears, blossoming of the face, impassioned
outburst, madness, inertness and bewilderment.

(26) Autsukya (ardent desire) — The inability to
tolerate the passing of time instigated by an intense
longing to see or to obtain one’s desired object is
called autsukya. The symptoms of autsukya are drying of
the mouth, haste, anxiety, breathing heavily and
unsteadiness.

(27) Augrya (fierceness or dreadfulness) — The anger or
fury arising from another’s offence or injurious speech
is called augrya. The symptoms of augrya are killing,
binding, trembling of the head, reprimanding and
beating.

(28) Amarṣa (intolerance or indignation) — Intolerance
arising from being rebuked or disrespected is called
amarṣa. The symptoms of amarṣa are perspiration,
trembling of the head, change of colour, anxiety,
seeking relief, shouting, turning the face away and
admonition.

(29) Asūyā (envy) — The malice that arises upon seeing
the good fortune and qualities of others is called
asūyā. The symptoms of asūyā are jealousy, disrespect,
accusations, projecting faults upon the qualities of
others, slander, scowling and raising the eyebrows.

(30) Cāpalyam (restlessness, fickleness, rashness or
impudence) — The loss of gravity or the lightness of the
heart that arises due to attachment or aversion is
called cāpalya. The symptoms of cāpalya are want of
discrimination, harsh speech and whimsical behaviour.

(31) Nidrā (deep sleep or complete unconsciousness) —
The absence of the external function of the mind arising
from anxiety, lethargy, natural disposition or
exhaustion is called nidrā. The symptoms of nidrā are
yawning, inertia, closing the eyes and shallow
breathing.

(32) Supti (dreaming) — Sleep in which there are many
impressions within the subconscious mind and the
manifestation of many different pastimes is called
supti. The symptoms of supti are cessation of the
external function of the senses, breathing in, and
closing the eyes.

(33) Bodha (awakening) — The enlightenment or awakening
of knowledge that occurs upon the cessation of
ignorance, fainting or sleep is called bodha.

These thirty-three bhāvas are called vyabhicāri-bhāvas.
Their characteristics along with examples are

                          151
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

elaborately described in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu.




Verse 16 — Gradation in the Manifestation of Bhāvas


kiṁ ca bhaktānāṁ cittānusāreṇa bhāvānāṁ prākaṭya-
tāratamyaṁ bhavati. tatra kvacit samudravad gambhīra-
citte ‘pi aprākaṭyam svalpa-prākaṭyaṁ vā. alpa-khātavat
tarala-citte atiśaya-prākaṭyaṁ ca bhavatīti nāyam
ātyantika niyama iti prapañco na likhitaḥ.



Śrī Bindu-vikāśinī-vṛtti



There is a gradation in the manifestation of bhāvas in
accordance with the mental disposition or the heart of
the devotee. In devotees whose hearts are very grave
(gambhīra) or deep like the ocean, the manifestation of
these bhāvas is not seen or their mani-festation may be
perceived only to a slight extent. In devotees whose
hearts are very flickering and shallow like a small
pond, these bhāvas are sometimes seen to manifest very
powerfully. Because there is no special rule that
governs the manifestation of such bhāvas, this subject
has not been elaborately described.



Comment



In Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (2.4.250ñ70) this topic has
been discussed more elaborately. The essential points
from that section are presented as follows.

In a devotee in whom rati for Kṛṣṇa in one of the five
primary relationships is manifest, there are forty-one
bhāvas that may arise and interact. The thirty-three
vyabhicāri-bhāvas together with the seven secondary
forms of rati (laughter, wonder and so on) and one among
the five primary forms of rati, make a total of forty-
one bhāvas. These are known as mukhya-bhāvas. The mental
disposition (citta-vṛtti) that arises from the
manifestation of all these bhāvas is said to bring about
various transformations in the body and senses.

Among the bhāvas or emotions such as fierceness,
restlessness, fortitude, shyness and so on, some are
innate (svabhāvika) in particular devotees and some are
incidental (āgantuka). Those bhāvas which are innate
pervade both the external and internal being of the
devotee. The innate bhāvas are compared to mañjiṣṭha, an
Indian plant which is a source of red dye. In this plant
the quality of redness is an inherent and enduring
feature that pervades throughout. The bhāvas or emotions
that are innate within particular devotees are very

                           152
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

easily activated by even slight stimulation.

The innate bhāvas follow in the wake of kṛṣṇa-rati. In
other words it is the permanent emotion of rati that
determines which emotions are svabhāvika. Although rati
is ordinarily of one type (in other words it is
constituted of nothing other than affection for Śrī
Kṛṣṇa), it manifests in different varieties as śānta,
dāsya and so on, in accordance with different
inclinations to serve Kṛṣṇa in a particular way.

The āgantuka or incidental emotions are like the
temporary application of red dye to a cloth that is
inherently white. They are manifested in the devotee by
the innate bhāvas. Therefore they are called anubhāvas,
or effects of the innate emotions.

Variegatedness is observed in all the emotions due to
the differences in the devotees and due to alteration of
the components of rasa such as vibhāva, anubhāva,
vyabhicāri-bhāva and so on, which come into play in
different circumstances. Because of the difference in
the characteristic qualities of various devotees, their
minds are of different types. Therefore there is a
gradation in the external and internal manifestation of
all these bhāvas in accordance with the disposition of
the mind or heart.

A devotee whose mental disposition is karkaśa or hard is
of three varieties: (1) gariṣṭha (heavy) — the heavy
heart is compared to gold in terms of its weight, (2)
gambhīra (grave) — the grave heart is compared to the
ocean in depth and (3) mahiṣṭha (big) — the big heart is
compared to a great city in size. These are all
characteristics of a heart that is said to be karkaśa.
Even though ecstatic emotions may arise very strongly in
devotees possessing such characteristics, they are not
visibly manifest and therefore cannot be detected by
others.

A devotee whose mental disposition is komala or soft is
also of three varieties: (1) laghiṣṭha (light) — the
light heart is compared to cotton in terms of its
lightness, (2) uttāna (shallow) — the shallow heart is
compared to a small pond in depth and (3) kṣodiṣṭha
(tiny) — the tiny heart is compared to a small cottage
in size. These are all characteristics of a heart that
is said to be komala. Even a slight uprise of emotion in
devotees possessing such characteristics is clearly
visible in the body and thus easily detected by others.

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has written that the heart which is
heavy (gariṣṭha) is like a lump of gold and the heart
which is light (laghiṣṭha) is like a ball of cotton.
Emotion that arises in the heart of these two varieties
is like the wind. A ball of cotton is sent flying by the
wind whereas a lump of gold remains fixed. Similarly,
even when there is a very powerful upsurge of emotion,
no external transformations are visible in a devotee
whose heart is very heavy. In a devotee whose heart is
light, however, transformations are observed even upon a
slight rise of emotion.

The heart which is deep (gambhīra) is like the ocean and

                          153
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                5/5/2017

the heart which is shallow (uttāna) is like a small
pond. Emotion that arises in the heart of these two
varieties is compared to a great mountain peak. Even if
a huge boulder or a mountain peak falls in the ocean, no
disturbance is seen in the ocean. But if a pebble is
thrown in a small pond, all the water is agitated.
Similarly, even if many bhāvas appear in a devotee whose
heart is very deep, he remains steady; no
transformations appear in his body. But when a slight
appearance of bhāvas manifest in a devotee whose heart
is shallow, he becomes agitated and ecstatic
transformations become visible in his body.

The heart which is large (mahiṣṭha) is like a great city
and the heart which is small (kṣodiṣṭha) is like a
cottage. Emotion that arises in the heart of these two
varieties is compared to a lamp and an elephant. In a
great city, lamps and elephants are not noticed. But
before a cottage, lamps and elephants are clearly seen.
Similarly, in the heart which is mahiṣṭha, no
transformations are seen on the rise of emotion. But in
the heart which is kṣodiṣṭha, transformations resulting
from the rise of emotion are immediately seen.

Heaviness (gariṣṭhatva) and lightness (laghiṣṭhatva) of
the heart have been described in order to illustrate the
perplexity (vikṣepa) and non-perplexity (avikṣepa) of
the heart that arises upon being exposed to the
influence of the vyabhicāri-bhāvas. Similarly the heart
is said to be karkaśa or komala according to its degree
of meltability or non-meltability by the vyabhicāri-
bhāvas. The heart which is unmoved by a slight contact
with the vyabhicāri-bhāvas is said to be heavy or
gariṣṭha, and the heart which is easily moved is said to
be light or laghiṣṭha. In reality the heart is neither
heavy nor light nor hard. Only according to the degree
of emotional frenzy experienced by the heart on contact
with the vyabhicāri-bhāvas is the heart said to be hard
or soft.




Verse 17 — General Description of Sthāyibhāva




sāmānya-rūpaḥ svaccha-rūpaś ca śāntādi-pañca-vidha-rūpaś
ca. ekaika-rasa-niṣṭha-bhakta-saṅga-rahitasya sāmānya-
janasya sāmānya-bhajana-paripākeṇa sāmānya-rati-rūpaś ca
sthāyī bhāvo yo bhavati sa sāmānya-rūpaḥ. śantādi-pañca-
vidha-bhakteṣv api aviśeṣeṇa kṛta-saṅgasya tat-tad
bhajana-paripākeṇa pañca-vidhā ratis tat-tad bhakta-
saṅga-vasati-kāla-bhedena yodayate yathā kadācit śāntiḥ
kadācit dāsyaṁ, kadācit sakhyaṁ, kadācit vātsalyaṁ,
kadācit kāntā-bhāvaś ca, na tv ekatra niṣṭhatvaṁ tadā
svaccha-rati-rūpaḥ. atha pṛthak-pṛthak rasaika-niṣṭheṣu
bhakteṣu śāntyādi-pañca-vidha-rūpaḥ. śānta-bhaktānāṁ
śāntiḥ. dāsya-bhaktānāṁ dāsya-ratiḥ. sakhya-bhaktānāṁ
sakhyam. vātsalya-bhaktānāṁ vātsalyam. ujjvala-bhaktānāṁ
priyatā. evaṁ śānta-dāsya-sakhya-vātsalyojjvalāś ca

                          154
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

pañca-mukhya-rasā yathottaraṁ śreṣṭhāḥ. śānte śrī-kṛṣṇa-
niṣṭha-buddhi-vṛttitā, dāsye sevā, sakhye
niḥsambhramatā, vātsalye snehaḥ, ujjvale saṅgi-saṅga-
dānena sukham utpādyam. evaṁ pūrva-pūrva-guṇād
uttarottarasthāḥ śreṣṭhāḥ syuḥ.



Comment



In Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (2.5.1) sthāyibhāva is defined
in the following way:



aviruddhān viruddhāṁś ca

bhāvān yo vaśatāṁ nayan

surājeva virājeta

sa sthāyī bhāva ucyate



That bhāva which is resplendent like the best of kings,
keeping under its control the aviruddha or compatible
emotions, such as laughter and so on, and the viruddha
or incompatible emotions, such as anger and so on, is
known as the sthāyibhāva.



Rati for Kṛṣṇa is known as sthāyibhāva. This rati is of
two types: mukhya (primary) and gauṇa (secondary). Rati
that is the essence of the combination of the hlādinī
and saṁvit potencies and thus purely composed of śuddha-
sattva is known as mukhya-rati. Mukhya-rati is of two
types: svārthā (self-nourishing) and parārthā
(nourishment-giving). The term svārthā means that when a
devotee situated in one of the five primary
relationships with Kṛṣṇa experiences different emotions,
those emotions will act on the sthāyibhāva to nourish
it, in the case of favourable emotions, or to cause
unbearable despondency, in the case of unfavourable
emotions. Because this type of rati nourishes its own
sthāyibhāva, it is called svārthā or self-nourishing.

When rati, instead of nourishing its own sthāyibhāva,
recedes into the background and nourishes one of the
seven secondary emotions, it is called parārthā,
nourishment-giving. These seven secondary emotions of
laughter and so on are different from svārtha-rati,
which is purely composed of śuddha-sattva. But because
they are connected with mukhya-parārtha-rati, the word
rati has been used for them. Only when parārtha-rati in
one of the five primary dominant emotions recedes into
the background and nourishes the seven secondary
emotions do those secondary emotions attain to the
status of gauṇa-rati.

Both svārthā- and parārthā-mukhya-rati are further

                           155
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

divided into five categories: śuddhā (unmixed), dāsya
(affection in servitude), sakhya (friendship), vātsalya
(parental affection) and madhura (conjugal love).
Śuddha-rati is divided into three types: sāmānya
(general), svaccha (transparent) and śānta
(tranquillity). This topic has been summarised as
follows by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura.



Śrī Bindu-vikāśinī-vṛtti



Sthāyibhāva is being described here. Sthāyibhāva is of
three varieties: sāmānya (general), svaccha
(transparent) and one among the five varieties of śānta,
dāsya and so on.

Sāmānya

A person who has never taken the association of even a
single devotee firmly situated in his particular
perfectional relationship in one of the five
transcendental rasas may, nevertheless, awaken a general
(sāmānya) type of rati by the maturing of his routine
practice of bhajana. This non-specific type of rati of a
general person is known as sāmānya sthāyibhāva. It is
said to be general because it is devoid of the specific
characteristics of śānta, dāsya and so on.



Svaccha

If one has associated in a routine manner with the five
different types of devotees, all situated in their
respective perfectional relationships of śānta, dāsya
and so on, then upon the maturing of his bhajana, five
different types of rati may be exhibited in him at
different times in accordance with the association he
keeps. When he associates with śānta-bhaktas he exhibits
śānta-rati; with dāsya-bhaktas he exhibits dāsya-rati;
with sakhya-bhaktas, sakhya-rati; with vātsalya-bhaktas,
vātsalya-rati; and with devotees in the conjugal mood
(kānta-bhāva) he exhibits madhura-rati. Nevertheless he
has no firmly fixed adherence to any one designated
bhāva. This type of rati is called svaccha sthāyibhāva.



Five types of sthāyibhāva

The different types of rati of devotees firmly
established in their specific moods of śānta-bhāva and
so forth, are known as the five types of sthāyibhāva. By
the influence of associating with a devotee who is
situated in one specific rasa, only one type of rati
among the five is awakened in a devotee upon the
maturing of his bhajana. In the śānta-bhaktas, śānta-
rati is awakened; in the dāsya-bhaktas, dāsya-rati; in
the sakhya-bhaktas, sakhya; in the vātsalya-bhaktas,
vātsalya; and in the mādhurya-bhaktas, madhura
sthāyibhāva. Thus śānta, dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya and

                            156
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                5/5/2017

mādhurya are the five primary rasas. They are
successively superior in quality.

The characteristic of śānta is that one’s intellect is
fixed in Kṛṣṇa (kṛṣṇa-niṣṭhā-buddhi). The characteristic
of dāsya is that one is attached to the service of the
Lord (sevā). The characteristic of sakhya is that one is
devoid of any reverential feelings towards Kṛṣṇa
(niḥsambhramatā). The characteristic of vātsalya is that
one is imbued with affection or sneha for Kṛṣṇa. The
characteristic of those in mādhurya is that they please
Kṛṣṇa by awarding Him the association of their bodies
(saṅgi-saṅga-dānena). Thus each quality should be
considered as superior to the one preceding it.



Comment



In śānta-rati there is only one quality, kṛṣṇa-niṣṭhā.
In dāsya-rati there is kṛṣṇa-niṣṭhā and the quality of
dāsya, kṛṣṇa-sevā. Similarly in sakhya-rati the
qualities of kṛṣṇa-niṣṭhā and kṛṣṇa-sevā are present
along with the quality of sakhya, niḥsambhramatā
(absence of reverence). In vātsalya the three previous
qualities are present along with the quality of sneha or
affection in rearing and taking care of Kṛṣṇa. In
madhura the four previous qualities exist in addition to
the quality of madhura, nijāṅga-saṅga-dāna (awarding the
association of one’s limbs).

This is exactly like the development of qualities that
are found in the universal elements. In the sky or ether
there is only one quality, sound. In the air there are
two qualities, sound and touch. In fire there are three
qualities, sound, touch and form. In water there are
four qualities, sound, touch, form and taste. And in the
earth, sound, touch, form, taste and smell are present.
Thus in śānta one quality is present, in dāsya two, in
sakhya three, in vātsalya four and in madhura all five
qualities are present.



The twelve forms of rati will now be defined:



Mukhya-rati



(1) Śānta-rati

Resoluteness or steadiness of mind is known as śama or
equanimity. Previous authorities have declared that the
mental disposition by which one renounces the
inclination for material sense enjoyment and becomes
established in the bliss of the self (nijānanda) is
called śama. The rati of persons who are predomi-nated
by this equanimity and who, due to seeing Śrī Kṛṣṇa as
the Paramātmā, are devoid of mamatā or a sense of

                          157
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

possessiveness in relation to Kṛṣṇa, is called śānta-
rati. Mamatā refers to a deep sense of attachment to
Kṛṣṇa by which one thinks, “Kṛṣṇa is my master. Kṛṣṇa is
my friend,” and so on.



(2) Dāsya-rati

That rati by which a devotee considers himself inferior
to Kṛṣṇa and therefore fit to receive the Lord’s favour
and which is possessed of a worshipful attitude towards
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is called dāsya-rati (also known as prīti-
rati). This dāsya-rati produces attachment for Śrī Kṛṣṇa
and destroys attachment for all other things.



(3) Sakhya-rati

One who possesses a particular type of rati by which he
considers himself to be equal to Kṛṣṇa in all respects
is called a sakhā or friend of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Because it
induces the sense of equality with Kṛṣṇa, this rati is
characterised by viśrambha, a deep feeling of intimacy
that is devoid of all restraint. This viśrambha-rati is
known as sakhya-rati. Because of this absence of
restraint there is joking and humorous behaviour. Unlike
the servants, Kṛṣṇa’s friends are devoid of the
conception that they are subordinate to Him.



(4) Vātsalya-rati

Those who are possessed of rati by which they consider
themselves as elders of Śrī Kṛṣṇa are honourable to Him.
Their rati, which is imbued with kindness and favour
towards Kṛṣṇa, is called vātsalya-rati. In vātsalya-rati
the activities of nurturing Kṛṣṇa, offering blessings,
touching the chin and so on are anubhāvas.



(5) Madhura-rati

The rati of the gopīs, which is the original cause of
the eight types of conjugal enjoyment (sambhoga) such as
remembrance, beholding the beloved and so on exchanged
between Śrī Hari and the deer-eyed gopīs, is called
madhura-rati. This is also known as priyatā-rati. In
madhura-rati sidelong glances, movement of the eyebrows,
intimate words and sweet smiles are manifested as
anubhāvas.



Gauṇa-rati



(1) Hāsa-rati

The cheerfulness of the heart that is experienced upon

                          158
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

witnessing unusual alterations of speech, dress,
activities and so on is called hāsa or laughter. In hāsa
there is expansion of the eyes and vibration of the
nose, lips and cheeks. When laughter arises from speech,
dress and activities that are related to Kṛṣṇa and
receives nourishment from a primary, nourishment-giving
emotion (mukhya-parārtha-rati) which then recedes into
the background, it is transformed into hāsa-rati.



(2) Vismaya-rati

The expansion of the heart that takes place upon
witnessing extraordinary objects is called vismaya or
astonishment. In vismaya there is widening of the eyes,
appreciative exclamations and horripilation. When
astonishment arises from seeing the uncommon pastimes of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa and receives nourishment from one of the
primary, nourishment-giving emotions (mukhya-parārtha-
rati) which then recedes into the background, it is
transformed into vismaya-rati.



(3) Utsāha-rati

A firm attachment and urgency to carry out one’s
aspired-for activity of fighting, giving charity,
displaying mercy or performing religious duties, the
fruit of which is praised by sādhus, is called utsāha,
enthusiasm. In utsāha there is tremendous exertion or
diligence, an absence of patience and no dependence upon
time. When enthusiasm arises in relation to Kṛṣṇa and
receives nourishment from mukhya-parārtha-rati which
recedes into the background, it is transformed into
utsāha-rati.



(4) Śoka-rati

The sorrow and grief that one experiences in the heart
due to separation from one’s beloved or upon perceiving
that some calamity has befallen the beloved is called
śoka. In śoka there is lamentation, falling on the
ground, sighing, drying of the mouth and delusion. When
that sorrow arises in relation to Śrī Kṛṣṇa and is
nourished by mukhya-parārtha-rati, it is transformed
into śoka-rati.



(5) Krodha-rati

The inflammation of the heart that takes place when
confronted with hostility is called krodha or anger. In
krodha there is

harshness, frowning and redness of the eyes. When anger
arises in relation to Śrī Kṛṣṇa and is nourished by
mukhya-parārtha-rati, it is transformed into krodha-
rati. Krodha-rati is of two types: kṛṣṇa-vibhāvā (having
Kṛṣṇa as its object) and kṛṣṇa-vairi-vibhāvā (having

                          159
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                  5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa’s enemy as its object).



(6) Bhaya-rati

The extreme agitation and restlessness of the heart that
is experienced upon committing some offence or seeing a
dreadful object is called bhaya or fear. In bhaya there
is hiding oneself, drying of the heart, running away and
delusion. When this fear arises in relation to Śrī Kṛṣṇa
and is nourished by mukhya-parārtha-rati, it is
transformed into bhaya-rati. Like krodha, bhaya-rati is
of two types: kṛṣṇa-vibhāvā (having Kṛṣṇa as its object)
and duṣṭa-vibhāvā (having a wicked person as its
object).



(7) Jugupsā-rati

The contraction or shutting of the heart that takes
place upon experiencing detestable things is called
jugupsā or disgust. In jugupsā there is spitting,
contraction of the mouth and expressions of
condemnation. When this feeling of disgust is nourished
by mukhya-parārtha-rati, it is transformed into jugupsā-
rati.




Verse 18 — Śānta-rasa




atha śānta-rase narākṛti parabrahma caturbhujaḥ
nārāyaṇaḥ paramātmā ityādi gunaḥ śrī-kṛṣṇo
viṣayālambanaḥ. sanaka

sanandana sanātana sanatkumārādayaḥ āśrayālambanāḥ
tapasvinaḥ. jñānino ‘pi mumukṣāṁ tyaktvā śrī-kṛṣṇa-
bhakta-kṛpayā bhakti-vāsanā-yuktā yadi syus tadā te ‘py
āśrayālambanāḥ. parvata-śaila-kānanādi-vāsijana-saṅga-
siddha-kṣetrādayaḥ uddīpana-vibhāvāḥ. nāsikāgra-dṛṣṭiḥ
avadhūta-ceṣṭā nirmamatā bhagavad-dveṣi-jane na dveṣaḥ
tad-bhakta-jane ‘pi nāti-bhaktiḥ maunaṁ jñāna-śāstre
‘bhiniveśaḥ ity ādayo ‘nubhāvāḥ. aśru-pulaka-romāñcādyāḥ
pralaya-varjītāḥ sāttvikāḥ. nirveda-mati-dhṛtyādayaḥ
sañcāriṇaḥ. śāntiḥ sthāyī. iti śānta-rasaḥ.



Śrī Bindu-vikāśinī-vṛtti



In Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (3.1.4) śānta-bhakti-rasa is
defined in the following way:




                           160
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

vakṣyamāṇair vibhāvādyaiḥ

śamināṁ svādyatāṁ gataḥ

sthāyī śānti-ratir dhīraiḥ

śānta-bhakti-rasaḥ smṛtaḥ



If śānta-rati sthāyibhāva mixes with the elements of
vibhāva, anubhāva, sāttvika-bhāva and vyabhicāri-bhāva
that are appropriate for śānta-rasa and becomes very
tasteful in the hearts of devotees who are predominated
by śama or equanimity, it is called śānta-bhakti-rasa by
the learned.



Vibhāva



Viṣayālambana of śānta-rasa

The viṣayālambana of śānta-rasa is Śrī Kṛṣṇa manifested
as the personification of eternity, cognisance and
bliss, the pinnacle of ātmārāmas, the Parabrahma with
humanlike appearance, four-handed Nārāyaṇa and the
Paramātmā.9 The qualities He exhibits are as follows: He
is peaceful (śānta), He endures even intolerable
distress (dānta), He is free from all sins and He
purifies others of sins (śuci), He is in full control of
His senses (vaśī), He is never controlled by the
dictates of māyā (sadā-svarūpa-samprāpta), He bestows
mukti on the enemies killed by Him (hatāri-gati-dāyaka)
and He is omnipresent (vibhu).



Āśrayālambana of śānta-rasa

The śānta-bhaktas (those whose rati is predominated by
śama, equanimity) are the āśrayālambana of śānta-rasa.
The śānta-bhaktas are of two types: (1) ātmārāma (those
who take pleasure in the self) and (2) tapasvī-gaṇa
(those who undertake austerities with faith in bhakti).



(1) Ātmārāma

Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanātana and Sanat Kumāra, who are
devoid of mamatā or the sense of possessiveness in
relation to the Lord, who are firmly focused on the
Supreme Lord (bhagavan-niṣṭha) and who propound the path
of bhakti, are prominent among the ātmārāma śānta-
bhaktas.



(2) Tapasvī-gaṇa

Those who adopt yukta-vairāgya and practise bhagavad-

                             161
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

bhajana, knowing that without bhakti liberation cannot
be obtained, are called tāpasa śānta-bhaktas. Such
persons have faith in bhakti only as a process for
attaining liberation. As long as they take up the limbs
of bhakti with a desire for mukti, śānta-rati, which is
the basis of śānta-rasa, cannot appear in their hearts.
If such jñānīs give up the desire for liberation, then
by the mercy of the devotees of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, bhakti, or in
other words śānta-rati, appears in their hearts. At that
time they may also become the āśrayālambana of śānta-
rasa.



Uddīpana



Uddīpana-vibhāva, or things which stimulate rati for Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, are of two kinds: asādhāraṇa (uncommon or unique)
and sādhāraṇa (common). The asādhāraṇa-uddīpanas are
stimulants which impel devotees of one specific rasa and
the sādhāraṇa-uddīpanas are those which impel devotees
of other rasas as well.



Asādhāraṇa-uddīpana

Hearing the mahā Upaniṣads, living in a secluded place,
apparition of Śrī Kṛṣṇa within the heart imbued with
śuddha-sattva, discussing philosophical conclusions,
predominance of jñāna-śakti, beholding the universal
form, association of holy men who reside in the
mountains and forests, discussion of the Upaniṣads with
persons who are equally knowledgeable and so on, are the
asādhāraṇa-uddīpanas or unique stimulants for this rasa.



Sādhāraṇa-uddīpana

The fragrance of tulasī from the lotus feet of the Lord,
the sound of a conchshell, sacred mountains and holy
forests, holy places (such as the Gaṅgā or
Badarikāśrama), the perishability of material objects
and the all-devouring quality of time, are sādhāraṇa-
uddīpanas or stimulants which the śānta-bhaktas share in
common with the dāsya-bhaktas.



Anubhāva



Asādhāraṇa-anubhāva

Staring at the tip of the nose, behaving as an ascetic
who is beyond all codes of social conduct (avadhūta),
indifference, walking while extending the vision no more
than six feet in front, exhibiting the jñāna-mudra
(joining together of the thumb with the forefinger),
absence of malice towards those who are adverse to the

                          162
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

Lord, absence of excessive affection towards the
devotees of the Lord, absence of proprietorship, freedom
from false ego, observance of silence, deep absorption
in the jñāna-śāstras, and other such items, are the
asādhāraṇa-anubhāvas or the specific outward symptoms
that reveal the śānta-rati situated within.



Sādhāraṇa-anubhāva

Yawning, writhing of the limbs, bowing and offering
prayers before the Lord, and giving instructions on
bhakti are the sādhāraṇa-anubhāvas or outward symptoms
which the śānta-bhaktas share in common with the dāsya-
bhaktas.



Sāttvika-bhāva



Other than pralaya (loss of consciousness or fainting),
all the sāttvika-bhāvas such as tears, standing of the
hairs on end,

perspiration, trembling and so on are visible in śānta-
bhakti-rasa. These sāttvika-bhāvas can manifest up to
the stage of jvalita. Jvalita10 is the stage in which
two or three sāttvika-bhāvas appear simultaneously and
can be controlled only with difficulty. They cannot
attain to the stage of dīpta10.



Vyabhicāri-bhāva



The vyabhicāri-bhāvas include nirveda (self-
disparagement), dhṛti (fortitude), harṣa (jubilation),
mati (conviction or understanding), smṛti (remembrance),
viṣāda (despondency), autsukhya (ardent desire), āvega
(excitement), vitarka (deliberation) and so on.



Sthāyibhāva



The sthāyibhāva of śānta-rasa is śānta-rati,
tranquillity. Śānta-rati is of two kinds: samā (equal)
and sāndrā (condensed). When a śānta-bhakta is absorbed
in samādhi and the Lord manifests in his heart, the rati
that he experiences is called sama-śānta-rati. When a
śānta-bhakta directly sees the form of the Lord before
him, the rati that he experiences is called sāndra-
śānta-rati. It is said to be condensed because the bliss
of receiving the direct darśana of the Lord is far more
intense than perceiving the Lord in samādhi.



                          163
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017


Comment



It may be noted that if someone is the recipient of
Nanda-

nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s special mercy, then even if he was
previously fixed in jñāna, he attains a super-excellent
quality of rati which far exceeds that of śānta-rati.
When his jñāna-saṁskāras slacken, he may even become
expert in the bliss of bhakti-rasa as was the case with
Śrī Śukadeva Muni. An example of this is seen in the
statement of Śrī Bilvamaṅgala cited in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindhu (3.1.44):



advaita-vīthī-pathikair upāsyāḥ

svānanda-siṁhāsana-labdha-dīkṣāḥ

śaṭhena kenāpi vayaṁ haṭhena

dāsī-kṛtā gopa-vadhū-viṭena



Formerly I was an object of worship for those who
traverse the path of monism. The advocates of the path
of impersonal brahma-jñāna used to worship me, thinking
me to be very great. Being seated on the throne of
brahmānanda realisation, I used to receive their
adoration. But some cunning ravisher of the young wives
of the cowherds, Gopījana-vallabha Nanda-nandana Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, has forcibly made me His maidservant.



It is evident from this that by the uncommon mercy of
Śrī Śyāmasundara, those who attain a glimpse of the
splendour of His charming lotus feet — even those
established in Brahman realisation — forget all their
deficiencies. They then repent their previous condition
and engage in bhakti.March 2, 2007March 2, 2007March 2,
2007




Verse 19 — Dāsya-rasa




atha dāsye rase īśvaraḥ prabhuḥ sarvajñaḥ bhakta-
vatsalaḥ ityādi guṇavān śrī-kṛṣṇo viṣayālambanaḥ.
āśrayālambanāś catur-vidhāḥ adhikṛta-bhaktāḥ āśritāḥ
pārṣadāḥ anugāś ceti. tatra brahmā, śaṅkara ityādayo
‘dhikṛta-bhaktāḥ. tatra āśritās

trividhāḥ śaraṇyāḥ jñānicarāḥ sevā-niṣṭhāḥ kāliya-

                          164
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

jarāsandha-magadha-rāja-baddha-rājādayaḥ śaraṇyāḥ.
prathamato jñānino ‘pi mumukṣāṁ parityajya ye dāsye
pravṛttās te sanakādayo jñānicarāḥ. ye prathamata eva
bhajane ratāste candradhvaja-harihaya-bahulāśvādayaḥ
sevā-niṣṭhāḥ. uddhava-dāruka-śrutadevādayaḥ pārṣadāḥ.
sucandra-maṇḍanādyāḥ pureḥ, raktaka-patraka madhu-
kaṇṭhādayo vraje anugāḥ. eṣāṁ saparivāra eva kṛṣṇe ye
yathocit bhakti-mantas te dhurya-bhaktāḥ. ye kṛṣṇa-
preyasī-varge ādara-yuktās te dhīra-bhaktāḥ. ye tu tat-
kṛpāṁ prāpya garveṇa kam api na gaṇayanti te vīra-
bhaktāḥ. eteṣu gauravānvita-sambhrama-prīti-yuktās tu
pradyumna-śāmbādayaḥ śrī-kṛṣṇasya pālyāḥ. te sarve kecin
nitya-siddhāḥ kecit sādhana-siddhāḥ kecit sādhakāḥ. śrī-
kṛṣṇānugraha-caraṇa-dhūlī-mahā-prasādādaya uddīpana-
vibhāvāḥ. śrī-kṛṣṇasyājñā-karaṇādayo ‘nubhāvāḥ. premā
rāgaḥ snehaś cātra rase bhavati. adhikṛta-bhakte āśrita-
bhakte ca prema-paryanto bhavati sthāyī. pārṣada-bhakte
sneha paryantaḥ. parīkṣita dāruke uddhave rāgaḥ prakaṭa
eva. vrajānuge raktakādau sarva eva. pradyumnādāv api
sarva eva. yāvat paryantaṁ śrī-kṛṣṇa-darśanaṁ prathamato
bhavati tāvat-kālam ayogaḥ. darśanānantaraṁ yadi
vicchedas tadā viyogaḥ. tatra daśa daśāḥ. aṅgeṣu tāpaḥ
kṛśatā jāgaryā ālambana-śūnyatā adhṛti jaḍatā vyādhir
unmādo mūrcchitaṁ mṛtiś ca. iti dāsya-rasaḥ.



Śrī Bindu-vikāśinī-vṛtti



In Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (3.2.3) dāsya-rasa (also known
as prīta-rasa) is described as follows:



ātmocitair vibhāvādyaiḥ

prītir āsvādanīyatām

nītā cetasi bhaktānāṁ

prīta-bhakti-raso mataḥ



When dāsya-rati becomes tasteful within the hearts of
devotees by combination with the appropriate elements of
vibhāva, anubhāva, sāttvika-bhāva and vyabhicāri-bhāva,
it is called prīta-bhakti-rasa or dāsya-bhakti-rasa.



In dāsya-rasa two kinds of devotees are fit recipients
of Kṛṣṇa’s mercy: those who possess the attitude of
servants and those who possess the attitude of being
maintained or reared by Kṛṣṇa. Consequently dāsya-rasa
is divided into two: (A) sambhrama-prīta (the reverence
and submission that a servant feels towards the master)
and (B) gaurava-prīta (the respect and high estimation
that a son feels for his father). Those who consider
themselves as servants of Kṛṣṇa possess sambhrama-prīta-
rati and those who consider themselves as reared by
Kṛṣṇa possess gaurava-prīta-rati. First sambhrama-prīta-

                           165
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

rasa will be discussed.



(A) Sambhrama-prīta-rasa



Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (3.2.5) describes sambhrama-
prīta-rasa as follows:



dāsābhimānināṁ kṛṣṇe

syāt prītiḥ sambhramottarā

pūrvavat puṣyamāṇo ‘yaṁ

sambhrama-prīta ucyate



When sambhrama-prīti towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa is nourished in
the hearts of the dāsya-bhaktas (those devotees who
cherish the conception of being Kṛṣṇa’s servants) by
combination with vibhāva and the other elements, it is
called sambhrama-prīta-rasa.



Vibhāva



Viṣayālambana of sambhrama-prīta-rasa

In sambhrama-prīta-rasa the two-handed form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
is the viṣayālambana for the residents of Gokula. In
other places, such as Dvārakā and Mathurā, the
viṣayālambana is Śrī Kṛṣṇa sometimes in a two-handed
form and sometimes in a four-handed form.

The qualities that Śrī Kṛṣṇa displays as the
viṣayālambana of sambhrama-prīta-rasa are described as
follows: millions of universes are situated in the pores
of His body (koṭi-brahmāṇḍa-vigraha); He is an ocean of
mercy (kṛpāmbudhi); He possesses inconceivable potency
(avicintya-mahāśakti); He is served by all mystic
perfections (sarva-siddhi-niṣevita); He is the source of
all incarnations (avatārāvalī-bīja); He always attracts
the ātmārāmas (ātmārāma-gaṇākarṣī); He is independent
and His order cannot be transgressed (īśvara); He is the
master (prabhu), the supreme object of worship
(paramārādhya) and all-knowing (sarvajña); He is firmly
fixed in vow (sudṛḍha-vrata), opulent (samṛddhimān),
forgiving (kṣamāśīla) and the protector of surrendered
souls (śaraṇāgata-pālaka); His actions are very pleasing
(dakṣiṇa); His words never prove false (satya-vacana);
He can perform difficult tasks with ease (dakṣa); He
acts for the welfare of everyone (sarva-śubhaṅkara); He
is famous for putting His enemies into distress
(pratāpī); He is religious (dhārmika) and acts in
accordance with śāstra (śāstra-cakṣuḥ); He is the friend

                             166
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                  5/5/2017

of His devotees (bhakta-suhṛt) and magnanimous
(vadānya); His body is radiant and He is extremely
powerful and influential (tejasvī); and He is grateful
(kṛtajña), famous (kīrtimān), the most excellent
(varīyān), powerful (balavān) and controlled by the love
of His devotees (prema-vaśya).



Āśrayālambana of sambhrama-prīta-rasa

Four kinds of devotees are the āśrayālambana of
sambhrama-prīta-rasa: (1) adhikṛta (appointed or
authorised servants), (2) āśrita (those who have taken
refuge at the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa), (3) pāriṣada (the
retinue or attendants of the Lord) and (4) anugas
(followers of the Lord).

(1) Adhikṛta-bhaktas

Servants who are appointed to their respective positions
by Śrī Kṛṣṇa such as Brahmā, Śaṅkara, Indra and other
demigods are known as adhikṛta-bhaktas.



(2) Āśrita-bhaktas

The āśrita-bhaktas are of three kinds: śaraṇya (those
who have taken refuge of the Lord), jñānicara (those who
were formerly attached to the path of jñāna) and sevā-
niṣṭha (those who are fixed in the service of the Lord).
The attitudes of these three types of devotees are
expressed in the following verse from Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindhu (3.2.22):



kecid bhītāḥ śaraṇam abhitaḥ saṁśrayante bhavantaṁ

vijñātārthās tvad-anubhavataḥ prāsya kecin mumukṣām

śrāvaṁ śrāvaṁ tava nava-navāṁ mādhurīṁ sādhu-vṛndād

vṛndāraṇyotsava! kila vayaṁ deva! sevemahi tvām



[A sādhaka-bhakta possessing the innate characteristic
of dāsya-rati spoke as follows:] O festival of Vṛndāvana
(one who gives pleasure to Vṛndāvana)! O Lord! Some
persons, being very fearful, have taken complete shelter
of You, knowing You to be their protector. Other
persons, having realised You, have become acquainted
with the supreme truth. Thus they have given up their
desire for mokṣa and taken refuge of You, whereas we are
devotedly engaged in Your service, having heard again
and again from the mouths of saintly devotees the ever-
fresh and sweet narrations about You.



The first part of this verse describes the śaraṇya-
bhaktas. They take shelter of the Lord as their

                          167
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

protector due to being subjected to a fearful situation.
Examples of such devotees include Kāliya-nāga and the
kings imprisoned by the King of Magadha, Jarāsandha. The
second part of this verse describes the jñānicara-
bhaktas. They are jñānīs who take shelter of the Lord
after abandoning their desire for mokṣa. The four
Kumāras — Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanātana and Sanat Kumāra —
are examples of jñānicara-bhaktas. Although previously
jñānīs, they renounced their desire for mokṣa by the
mercy and association of Brahmā, the original father of
all, and became engaged in dāsya-rasa. The third part of
the above śloka describes the sevā-niṣṭha-bhaktas. They
are devotees who are established in service from the
very beginning. These include the kings Candradhvaja,
Harihaya and Bahulāśva, as well as Ikṣvāku and
Puṇḍarīka.



(3) Pāriṣada-bhaktas

The attendants of the Lord in Dvārakā include the
kṣatriyas such as Uddhava, Dāruka, Sātyaki and Śatrujit
as well as the brāhmaṇa Śrutadeva. Although serving as
ministers, charioteers and so on, they also engage in
various services in accordance with time and their
respective abilities. Among the Kauravas, Bhīṣma,
Parīkṣit, Vidura and others are counted as pāriṣada-
bhaktas. Among the cowherd men of Vraja, Upananda,
Bhadra and others are pāriṣada-bhaktas.



(4) Anuga-bhaktas

Those whose hearts are always deeply attached to
rendering personal services to Śrī Kṛṣṇa are called
anuga-bhaktas (followers of the Lord). Anuga-bhaktas are
of two kinds: purastha (those residing in Dvārakā) and
vrajastha (those residing in Vraja). The anugas in
Dvārakā include Sucandra, Maṇḍana, Stanva, Sutanva and
others. In Vraja the anuga-bhaktas are Raktaka, Patraka,
Patrī, Madhukaṇṭha, Madhuvrata, Rasāla, Suvilāsa,
Premakanda, Makaranda, Ānanda, Candrahāsa, Payoda,
Vakula, Rasada, Śārada and others.



The pāriṣada- and anuga-bhaktas are further divided into
three classifications: (i) dhurya (those who are
eminently fit or distinguished), (ii) dhīra (composed,
calm or clever) and (iii) vīra (heroic).



(i) Dhurya

Those devotees who display appropriate love and devotion
towards both Kṛṣṇa and His family members are known as
dhurya-bhaktas. In Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (3.2.49) they
have been further described as follows:




                          168
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

kṛṣṇe ‘sya preyasī-varge

dāsādau ca yathāyatham

yaḥ prītiṁ tanute bhaktaḥ

sa dhurya iti kīrttate



Those devotees who extend appropriate love and affection
towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the lovers of Śrī Kṛṣṇa (kṛṣṇa-
preyasīs) and the servants of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, are called
dhurya-bhaktas.



An example of a dhurya-bhakta is given as follows in
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (3.2.50):



devaḥ sevyatayā yathā sphurati me devyas tathāsya priyāḥ

sarvaḥ prāṇa-samānatāṁ pracinute tad bhakti-bhājāṁ gaṇaḥ

smṛtvā sāhasikaṁ bibhemi tad ahaṁ bhaktābhimānonnataṁ

prītiṁ tat praṇate khare ‘py avidadhad yaḥ svāsthyam
ālambate



Just as Śrī Kṛṣṇadeva is fit to be served by us, so are
His beloveds. Similarly the devotees of Kṛṣṇa are as
dear to us as life. But I fear even to remember those
arrogant persons who, due to the pride of considering
themselves devotees, spend their time happily without
offering love to the less intelligent who are,
nonetheless, fully surrendered to Kṛṣṇa.



(ii) Dhīra

Those who maintain greater faith in the beloved damsels
(preyasīs) of Śrī Kṛṣṇa are known as dhīra-bhaktas. They
have been described in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (3.2.51)
as follows:



āśritya preyasīm asya

nāti-sevāparo ‘pi yaḥ

tasya prasāda-pātraṁ syān

mukhyaṁ dhīraḥ sa ucyate



Those devotees who have taken shelter of one of the
preyasīs of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and are a principal object of

                            169
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                 5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa’s affection even though they are not overly
absorbed in service, are known as dhīra-bhaktas.

An example of a dhīra-bhakta is given in Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu (3.2.52) as follows:



kam api pṛthag anuccair nācarāmi prayatnaṁ

yadukula-kamalārka tvat-prasāda-śriye ‘pi

samajani nanu devyāḥ pārijātārcitāyāḥ

parijana-nikhilāntaḥ pātinī me yadākhyā



[The son of a nurse of Satyabhāmā was very dear to her.
At the time of Satyabhāmā’s marriage, her father
Satrājit sent him along with her. He used to always live
near Satyabhāmā in the inner chambers of the palace at
Dvārakā. Although he was not actually the brother-in-law
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, he used to behave with Him in that way,
and by his humorous demeanour he gave pleasure to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. One day he spoke as follows to Śrī Kṛṣṇa:] O
Kṛṣṇa, You are the sun that causes the lotus flower of
the Yadu dynasty to bloom. I have not made even the
slightest endeavour to obtain the treasure of Your
mercy. Nonetheless I am renowned as one of the
attendants of Satyabhāmā whom You worshipped by the
Pārijāta tree.



(iii) Vīra

Those who, having attained Kṛṣṇa’s mercy, are somewhat
proud and therefore do not depend upon any others are
called vīra-bhaktas. An example of a vīra-bhakta is
given as follows in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (3.2.54):



pralamba-ripur īśvaro bhavatu kā kṛtis tena me

kumāra makaradhvajād api na kiñcid āste phalam

kim anyad aham uddhataḥ prabhu-kṛpā-kaṭākṣa-śriyā

priyā-pariṣad-agrimāṁ na gaṇayāmi bhāmām api



No doubt, Śrī Baladeva, the enemy of Pralambha, is the
Supreme īśvara — but of what use is that to me? I have
nothing to gain even from Pradyumna who bears the flag
of makara (a large sea creature that is considered to be
the epitome of sensual desire). Then what to speak of
others? Having obtained the wealth of the merciful
sidelong glance of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, I have become so haughty
that I take no consideration even of Satyabhāmā, the
foremost among Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lovers.


                          170
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī explains that in this instance,
although the vīra-bhakta internally has love for
Balarāma, Pradyumna and Satyabhāmā, there is an outward
suggestion of pride for the sake of amusement arising
out of affection. This is not real pride; otherwise it
would not be rasa but virasatā, that which is opposed to
rasa. He further explains that this verse was spoken by
a vīra-bhakta to an intimate attendant of Satyabhāmā in
a secluded place. If it had been spoken in public, it
would have been a source of embarrassment to Śrī Kṛṣṇa
because of the satirical allusion to Satyabhāmā, even
more so than the overstepping of Baladeva.

All the above-mentioned devotees are of three types:
nitya-siddha, sādhana-siddha and sādhaka.



Uddīpana



Asādhāraṇa-uddīpana

Attainment of Kṛṣṇa’s favour, the dust from His lotus
feet, acceptance of His mahā-prasāda and the association
of other devotees situated in dāsya-rasa are asādhāraṇa-
uddīpanas or stimulants unique to sambhrama-prīta-rasa.



Sādhāraṇa-uddīpana

The sound of Kṛṣṇa’s flute and buffalo horn, His smiling
glance, hearing of His qualities, a lotus flower, His
footprints, a fresh rain cloud, the fragrance of His
limbs and so on, are sādhāraṇa-uddīpanas or stimulants
that dāsya-bhaktas share in common with devotees of all
the other rasas.



Anubhāva



Asādhāraṇa-anubhāva

To be fully engaged in services to Śrī Kṛṣṇa that are
suited to one’s ability, to be devoid of all trace of
jealousy in spite of seeing each other’s excellence in
the matter of personal service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, to keep
friendships with the servants of the Lord and to have
firm faith in the mood of servitude only, are the
asādhāraṇa or specific anubhāvas of sambhrama-prīta-
rasa.



Sādhāraṇa-anubhāva

The thirteen anubhāvas previously mentioned such as
dancing and singing, showing respect towards Kṛṣṇa’s
friends, detachment and so on, are the sādhāraṇa-

                          171
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

anubhāvas or symptoms shared in common with devotees of
other rasas.



Sāttvika-bhāva



All eight sāttvika-bhāvas such as tears and becoming
stunned are present in this rasa.



Vyabhicāri-bhāva



There are twenty-four vyabhicāri-bhāvas in sambhrama-
prīta-rasa: jubilation, pride, fortitude, self-
disparagement, depression, wretchedness, anxiety,
remembrance, apprehension, resolve, ardent desire,
fickleness, deliberation, agitation, bashfulness,
inertness, bewilderment, madness, concealment of
emotions, awakening, dreaming, fatigue, disease and
death.

The nine remaining vyabhicāri-bhāvas — intoxication,
exhaustion, fear, hysteric convulsions, laziness, fury,
intolerance, envy and sleepiness — do not give much
nourishment to sambhrama-prīta-rasa. At the time of
meeting with Śrī Kṛṣṇa, jubilation, pride and fortitude
are manifest. In separation from Him, fatigue, disease
and death are manifest. The eighteen remaining
vyabhicāri-bhāvas are manifest both in meeting and in
separation.



Sthāyibhāva



In Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (3.2.76) the sthāyibhāva of
sambhrama-prīta-rasa is described as follows:



sambhramaḥ prabhutā-jñānāt

kampaś cetasi sādaraḥ

anenaikyaṁ gatā prītiḥ

sambhrama-prītir ucyate

eṣā rase ‘tra kathitā

sthāyi-bhāvatayā budhaiḥ



A respectful attitude towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa, evoked by the
conception of His being one’s worshipful master combined

                             172
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

with unsteadiness of the heart to serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is
called sambhrama. When prīti towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa attains
complete identity with this sense of sambhrama, it is
called sambhrama-prīti. According to learned scholars
this sambhrama-prīti is the sthāyibhāva of sambhrama-
prīta-rasa.



When sambhrama-prīti is augmented it attains
successively to the stages of prema, sneha and rāga.



Prema

In Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (3.2.81) prema is defined as
follows:



hrāsa-śaṅkā-cyutā baddha-

mūlā premeyam ucyate

asyānubhāvāḥ kathitās

tatra vyasanitādayaḥ



When sambhrama-prīti is very firmly rooted, there is no
fear of its being diminished. This state is called
prema. Distress, calamity and other symptoms which are
exhibited in this state are anubhāvas of prema.



Sneha

In Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (3.2.84) sneha is defined as
follows:



sāndraś citta-dravaṁ kurvan

premā sneha itīryyate

kṣaṇikasyāpi neha syād

viśleṣasya sahiṣṇutā



When prema is intensified and melts the heart it is
called sneha. In sneha one cannot tolerate separation
even for a moment.



Rāga

In Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (3.2.87) rāga is defined as

                            173
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

follows:



snehaḥ sa rāgo yena syāt

sukhaṁ duḥkham api sphuṭam

tat sambandha-lave ‘py atra

prītiḥ prāṇa-vyayair api



That sneha by which even distress appears like happiness
due to slight contact with Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and by which a
devotee is prepared to give up his life to please Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, is called rāga.



In his commentary to this verse Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī
explains the meaning of the words tat sambandha-lave ‘pi
— by even a slight contact with Śrī Kṛṣṇa. This means
either direct meeting with Śrī Kṛṣṇa, an appearance
identical to Him or the attainment of His mercy. By any
of these, even unbearable distress appears like
happiness. Furthermore he says that in the absence of
such contact with Śrī Kṛṣṇa, even happiness appears like
great distress.



Prema, sneha and rāga manifest in different devotees

Previously it was said that the servants of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
are of four kinds: adhikṛta, āśrita, pāriṣada and anuga.
In the adhikṛta- and āśrita-bhaktas, the sthāyibhāva
manifests up to the stage of prema. In the pāriṣada-
bhaktas the sthāyibhāva may attain to the stage of
sneha. In Parīkṣit, Dāruka and Uddhava it manifests up
to the stage of rāga. In the vrajānugas, of which
Raktaka is the chief, and in Pradyumna also, prema,
sneha and rāga are observed. (Pradyumna is classified as
a lālya-bhakta described ahead under the heading of
gaurava-prīta-rasa.) Rāga is found in the ordinary
anugas, but when rāga manifests in the vrajānugas it is
mixed with a small portion of praṇaya and therefore
displays symptoms of sakhya-bhāva.



Meeting and separation



In prīta-bhakti-rasa there are two conditions: (1) ayoga
(separation) and (2) yoga (meeting).



(1) Ayoga

The absence of Kṛṣṇa’s association is called ayoga. In

                             174
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

this condition all devotees experience various symptoms
or anubhāvas such as deep absorption of the mind in Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, searching out His qualities and thinking of some
means by which He may be obtained. Ayoga is further
divided into two parts: utkaṇṭhitva (anxious longing)
and viyoga (separation). The desire to see Śrī Kṛṣṇa for
the first time is called utkaṇṭhitva, anxious longing.
When there is separation from Kṛṣṇa after having already
attained His association, it is called viyoga.

In viyoga there are ten conditions: (1) aṅga-tāpa (fever
or burning of the limbs), (2) kṛśatā (emaciation), (3)
jāgaraṇa (sleeplessness), (4) ālambana-śūnyatā (absence
of support or shelter for the mind), (5) adhṛti (absence
of fortitude or absence of attachment for all objects),
(6) jaḍatā (inertness), (7) vyādhi (disease), (8) unmāda
(madness), (9) mūrcchā (fainting) and (10) mṛti (death).



(2) Yoga

To be united with Kṛṣṇa is called yoga. Yoga is of three
types: siddhi (perfection), tuṣṭi (satisfaction) and
sthiti (residence). When after utkaṇṭhitva one meets
Kṛṣṇa for the first time, it is called siddhi,
perfection. When one is reunited with Kṛṣṇa after
separation (viyoga) it is called tuṣṭi, satisfaction. To
live together with Kṛṣṇa on a steady basis is called
sthiti, residence.



(B) Gaurava-prīta-rasa



Having discussed sambhrama-prīta-rasa we will now
describe gaurava-prīta-rasa. Gaurava-prīta-rasa is
described as follows in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu
(3.2.144):

lālyābhimānināṁ kṛṣṇe

syāt prītir gauravottarā

sā vibhāvādibhiḥ puṣṭā

gaurava-prītir ucyate



Prīti or affection for Kṛṣṇa that is found in the sons
of Kṛṣṇa, who cherish the conception of being brought up
by Him, or those who consider themselves as younger
brothers and so on, is called gauravottara-prīti
(affection characterised by the reverence one has
towards an elder). When this type of prīti (or in other
words, kṛṣṇa-rati) is nourished by the corresponding
elements of vibhāva, anubhāva, sāttvika-bhāva and
vyabhicāri-bhāva, it is called gaurava-prīta-rasa.




                           175
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

Vibhāva



Viṣayālambana of gaurava-prīta-rasa

The viṣayālambana of gaurava-prīta-rasa is Śrī Kṛṣṇa who
is endowed with the qualities of being the supreme guru,
protector and maintainer, and who possesses great fame,
intelligence and strength.



Āśrayālambana of gaurava-prīta-rasa

The āśrayālambana of gaurava-prīta-rasa are the lālya-
bhaktas, those who are reared, nourished or cared for by
Kṛṣṇa. Those who cherish the conception of being juniors
and those who consider themselves as sons are both known
as lālya-bhaktas. Sāraṇa, Gada and Subhadra are
principal among those who consider themselves as
juniors. Pradyumna, Cārudeṣṇa, Sāmba and other princes
of the Yadu dynasty consider themselves as sons. Śrī
Pradyumna, the son of Rukmiṇī, is the chief among all
the lālya-bhaktas.

The devotees of both kinds — namely sambhrama-prīta-
bhaktas and gaurava-prīta-bhaktas — always serve Kṛṣṇa
with a reverential or respectful attitude. In the
servants at Dvārakā, aiśvarya-jñāna or knowledge of the
Lord’s majesty is predominant. In the lālya-bhaktas,
sambandha-jñāna or knowledge of one’s relationship with
Kṛṣṇa is predominant. The vrajānugas never consider Śrī
Kṛṣṇa to be Parameśvara or the supreme controller. They
are devoid of aiśvarya-jñāna. They consider Kṛṣṇa to be
the son of the king of the cowherds (Goparāja-nandana).
Nonetheless they are aware of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s opulence and
power at having obtained victory over Indra. However,
they do not consider this power to be due to His being
Parameśvara; rather they consider it to be simply some
extraordinary ability.



Uddīpana

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s parental affection, mild smiling and glances
are the uddīpanas of gaurava-prīta-rasa.



Anubhāva



To sit on a lower seat in Kṛṣṇa’s presence, to follow
the directions of the guru and elders, to accept
responsibilities given by Kṛṣṇa and to give up self-
willed behaviour, are the anubhāvas of gaurava-prīta-
rasa. There are other anubhāvas that the lālya-bhaktas
share in common with other dāsya-bhaktas. These include
offering praṇāma, frequently remaining silent, shyness,
modesty, following the orders of Kṛṣṇa even to the
extent of giving up one’s life, keeping one’s head

                          176
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

lowered, steadiness, refraining from laughing or
coughing in Kṛṣṇa’s presence, and desisting from talks
of Kṛṣṇa’s confidential pastimes.



Sāttvika-bhāva



All eight sāttvika-bhāvas described previously are found
in gaurava-prīta-rasa.



Vyabhicāri-bhāva



All the vyabhicāri-bhāvas that were described above in
regard to sambhrama-prīta-rasa also apply here.



Sthāyibhāva



In Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (3.2.166ñ7) the sthāyibhāva of
gaurava-prīta-rasa has been described as follows:



deha-sambandhitāmānād

gurudhīr atra gauravam

tan-mayī lālake prītir

gaurava-prītir ucyate

sthāyibhāvo ‘tra sā caiṣām

āmūlāt svayam ucchritā

kaṁ cid viśeṣam āpannā

premeti sneha ity api

rāga ity ucyate cātra

gaurava-prītir eva sā



The veneration that arises towards an elder due to
bodily relationship is called gaurava. In gaurava one
has the conception of belonging to someone and one
thinks, “He is my parent, elder or maintainer”. Prīti or
affection towards Kṛṣṇa that is characterised by this
type of veneration is called gaurava-prīti. This
gaurava-prīti, manifesting itself in the heart of the
devotee and then pervading his heart, is the sthāyibhāva
of gaurava-prīta-rasa. When gaurava-prīti is augmented

                             177
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

and attains a particular state, it is called prema. When
prema is further augmented it attains the state of
sneha, and when sneha is enhanced it attains the state
of rāga.



The conditions known as ayoga and yoga and their various
subdivisions described previously are also found in
gaurava-prīta-rasa, sakhya-rasa and vātsalya-rasa.




Verse 20 — Sakhya-rasa




atha sakhya-rase vidagdho buddhimān suveśaḥ sukhītyādi-
gunaḥ śrī-kṛṣṇo viṣayālambanaḥ. āśrayālambanāḥ sakhāyaś
catur-vidhāḥ. suhṛdaḥ sakhāyaḥ priya-sakhāyaḥ
priyanarma-sakhāyaś ca. ye kṛṣṇasya vayasādhikās te
suhṛdaḥ kiñcid vātsalyavantaḥ. te subhadra-
maṇḍalībhadra-balabhadrādayaḥ. ye kiñcid vayasā nyūnās
te kiñcid dāsya-miśrāḥ sakhāyaḥ. te viśāla-vṛṣabha-
devaprasthādayaḥ. ye vayasā tulyās te priya-sakhāyaḥ
śrīdāma-sudāma-vasudāmādayaḥ. ye tu preyasī rahasya-
sahāyāḥ śṛṅgāra bhāva-spṛhās te priyanarma-sakhāyaḥ
subala-madhumaṅgalārjunādayaḥ. śrī-kṛṣṇasya kaumāra-
paugaṇḍa-kaiśorān vayāṁsi śṛṅga-veṇu-dala-vādyādayaś ca
uddīpana-vibhāvāḥ. tatra pramāṇaṁ — “kaumāraṁ
pañcamābdāntaṁ paugaṇḍaṁ daśamāvadhi. kaiśoram āpañca-
daśaṁ yauvanaṁ tu tataḥ param.” aṣṭa-māsādhika-daśa-
varṣa-paryantaṁ śrī-kṛṣṇasya vraje prakaṭa-vihāraḥ.
ataeva śrī-kṛṣṇasyālpa-kālata eva vayo-vṛddhyā māsa-
catuṣṭayādhika-vatsara-traya-paryantaṁ kaumāraṁ. tataḥ
param aṣṭa-māsādhika-ṣaḍ-varṣa-paryantaṁ paugaṇḍam.
tataḥ param aṣṭa-māsādhika-daśa-varṣa-paryantaṁ-
kaiśoram. tataḥ param api sarva-kālaṁ vāpya kaiśoram
eva. daśa-varṣaṁ śeṣa- kaiśoram. tatraiva sadā sthitiḥ.
evaṁ saptame varṣe vaiśākhe māsi kaiśorārambhaḥ. ataeva
prasiddhaḥ paugaṇḍa-madhye preyasībhiḥ saha vihāraḥ.
tāsām api tathābhūtatvād iti prasaṅgāt likhitam. sakhye
bāhu-yuddha-khelā eka-śayyā-śayanādayo ‘nubhāvāḥ. aśru-
pulakādayaḥ sarve eva sāttvikāḥ. harṣa-garvādayaḥ
sañcāriṇaḥ sāmya-dṛṣṭyā niḥsambhramatāmayaḥ viśvāsa-
viśeṣaḥ sakhya-ratiḥ sthāyī bhāvaḥ. atha praṇayaḥ premā
sneho rāgaḥ sakhyena saha pañca-vidhaḥ syāt. anyatra
arjuna-bhīmasena śrīdāma-viprādyāḥ sakhāyaḥ. tatrāpi
viyoge daśa daśāḥ pūrvavat jñātavyāḥ. iti sakhya-rasaḥ.



Śrī Bindu-vikāśinī-vṛtti



In Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (3.3.1) sakhya-rasa is
described as follows:




                           178
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

sthāyī bhāvo vibhāvādyaiḥ

sakhyam ātmocitair iha

nītaś citte satāṁ puṣṭiṁ

rasaḥ preyān udīryyate



When sakhya-rati sthāyibhāva is nourished within the
hearts of devotees by combination with the appropriate
vibhāvas, anubhāvas, sāttvika-bhāvas and vyabhicāri-
bhāvas, it is called preyo-bhakti-rasa or sakhya-bhakti-
rasa.



Vibhāva



Viṣayālambana

As described earlier in regard to dāsya-bhakti-rasa, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is the viṣayālambana, sometimes in a two-handed
form and sometimes in a four-handed form. The qualities
He displays as the viṣayālambana of preyo-bhakti-rasa
are described as follows: He is beautifully dressed
(suveśa); He possesses all divine characteristics in the
features and markings of His body (sarva-sat-
lakṣaṇānvita); He is extremely powerful (baliṣṭha); He
is adept in many different languages (vividhādbhuta-
bhāṣānvita); His speech is very pleasing to the ears and
filled with sweetness and rasa (vāvadūka); He is learned
in all branches of knowledge and expert in adopting
appropriate behaviour (supaṇḍita); He is sagacious and
His intelligence is very subtle (buddhimān); He is
quick-witted and thus able to invent newer and newer
meanings on the spur of the moment (vipula-
pratibhānvita); He is expert, being able to quickly
accomplish very difficult tasks (dakṣa); He is merciful
and thus unable to tolerate the distress of others
(karuṇa); He is the best of heroes (vīra-śekhara); He is
expert in the sixty-four arts and in amorous sportive
pastimes (vidagdha-rasika); He forgives the offences of
others (kṣamāśīla); He is the object of everyone’s
affection (raktaloka); He is possessed of great opulence
(samṛddhimān); He always enjoys happiness and is never
touched by even a trace of distress (sukhī); and He is
superior to all (varīyān).



Āśrayālambana

The sakhās (friends) of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who have a strong
sense of mamatā (possessiveness) towards Him, who are
possessed of deep faith, who are firmly fixed on Him,
who benefit others by their behaviour and who are deeply
absorbed in serving Kṛṣṇa in the mood of a friend, are
the āśrayālambana. They have been further described in
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (3.3.8) as follows:


                            179
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017



rūpa-veṣa-guṇādyais tu

samāḥ samyag ayantritāḥ

viśrambha-sambhṛtātmāno

vayasyās tasya kīrttitāḥ



Those who are identical to Śrī Kṛṣṇa in terms of form,
qualities and dress, who are completely devoid of the
constraints that are found in the servants and who are
possessed of deep faith in Kṛṣṇa imbued with intimacy,
are known as vayasyas (friends).



The vayasyas of Kṛṣṇa are of two types: pura-sambandhi
(those residing in the city) and vraja-sambandhi (those
residing in Vraja). The sakhās residing in the city
include Arjuna, Bhīmasena, Draupadī, Śrīdāmā brāhmaṇa
(Sudāmā Vipra) and others. Of these Arjuna is considered
to be the best. The vraja-vayasyas are described as
follows in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (3.3.16):



kṣaṇādarśanato dīnāḥ

sadā saha-vihāriṇaḥ

tad-eka-jīvitāḥ proktā

vayasyā vrajavāsinaḥ

ataḥ sarva-vayasyeṣu

pradhānatvaṁ bhajanty amī



Those who become perturbed when Kṛṣṇa leaves their sight
for even a moment, who always play with Him and who hold
Him as dear as life, are the vraja-vayasyas. For these
reasons they are foremost among all the friends of
Kṛṣṇa.



The vayasyas of Kṛṣṇa in Gokula are of four types: (1)
suhṛt-sakhā, (2) sakhā, (3) priya-sakhā and (4)
priyanarma-sakhā.



(1) Suhṛt-sakhā

Those whose sakhya is mixed with a scent of vātsalya,
who are slightly older than Kṛṣṇa, who bear a staff and
other weapons and who always protect Kṛṣṇa from the
demons are called suhṛt-sakhās. These include Subhadra,

                            180
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

Maṇḍalībhadra, Bhadravardhana, Gobhaṭa, Yakṣa,
Indrabhaṭa, Bhadrāṅga, Vīrabhadra, Mahāguṇa, Vijaya and
Balabhadra. Of these Maṇḍalībhadra and Balabhadra are
the best.



(2) Sakhā

Those who are slightly younger than Śrī Kṛṣṇa, whose
sakhya is mixed with a scent of dāsya and who are
exclusively attached to the happiness of rendering
service to Kṛṣṇa are called sakhās. These include
Viśāla, Vṛṣabha, Ojasvī, Devaprastha, Varūthapa,
Maranda, Kusumāpīḍa, Maṇibandha and Karandhama. Of these
Devaprastha is the best.



(3) Priya-sakhā

Those who are the same age as Kṛṣṇa and who take
exclusive shelter of the attitude of sakhya are called
priya-sakhās. These include Śrīdāmā, Sudāmā, Dāmā,
Vasudāmā, Kiṅkiṇī, Stoka-kṛṣṇa, Amśu, Bhadrasena,
Vilāsī, Puṇḍarīka, Viṭaṅka and Kalaviṅka. They always
give pleasure to Kṛṣṇa by various types of games and by
wrestling, stick-fighting and other types of amusement.
Of these Śrīdāmā is the best.

In his commentary to Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (3.3.36ñ8)
Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has said that although the friends
known as Dāmā, Sudāmā, Vasudāmā and Kiṅkiṇī are known as
priya-sakhās, they may also be counted as priyanarma-
sakhās because they personify Kṛṣṇa’s heart and pervade
His entire being. In order to establish this he quotes
the following verse from the Gautamīya-tantra (15.38):



dāma-vasudāma-sudāma-kiṅkiṇīn

pūjayedgandha-puṣpakaiḥ

antaḥkaraṇa-rūpās te

kṛṣṇasya parikīrtitāḥ

ātmābhedena te pūjyā

yathā kṛṣṇas tathaiva te



The purport of this statement is that because Dāmā,
Vasudāmā, Sudāmā and Kiṅkiṇī personify Kṛṣṇa’s heart,
they are described to be as worshipable as Kṛṣṇa
Himself. Therefore in the ceremony known as āvaraṇa-
pūjā, a particular method of worship described in Hari-
bhakti-vilāsa (7.360ñ76) and referred to in the above
verse from the Gautamīya-tantra, these four
personalities are offered the first worship with scented
flowers and sandalwood.


                           181
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017



(4) Priyanarma-sakhā

The priyanarma-sakhās are superior in every way to the
three other types of sakhās. They are engaged in
extremely confidential services and are possessed of a
very special bhāva (sakhī-bhāva). In other words they
perform confidential services for the preyasīs (lovers)
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, they assist Kṛṣṇa in meeting with the
preyasīs and they desire to give pleasure to them. These
include Subala, Arjuna, Gandharva, Vasanta, Ujjvala and
Madhumaṅgala. Of these Subala and Ujjvala are the best.



The above four types of sakhā are of three kinds: nitya-
siddha, suracara (those who were previously demigods and
who attained to the position of Kṛṣṇa’s friends through
the performance of sādhana) and sādhana-siddha. Although
the suracaras also attained perfection through sādhana,
they are classified separately in order to distinguish
them from the general sādhana-siddhas.

Uddīpana

Kṛṣṇa’s age and beauty, His horn, flutes, conch and
other musical instruments made out of leaves, His joking
behaviour and heroism, His beloved associates and His
imitation of the behaviour of kings, demigods and
incarnations of the Lord, are the uddīpanas of sakhya-
bhakti-rasa.



Vayasa

Of the various uddīpanas mentioned above, Kṛṣṇa’s age or
vayasa will now be described. Kṛṣṇa’s age is of three
types: kaumāra (childhood), paugaṇḍa (boyhood) and
kaiśora (early youth). Generally kaumāra is up to the
age of five, paugaṇḍa is up to the age of ten and
kaiśora is up to the age of fifteen years. After that
comes yauvana (mature youth). However, it is well known
that Śrī Kṛṣṇa enacted His pastimes in Vraja up to the
age of ten years and eight months. Therefore in regard
to Śrī Kṛṣṇa maturity takes place even at a very young
age.

For Him kaumāra is up to three years and four months,
paugaṇḍa is up to six years and eight months and kaiśora
is up to ten years and eight months. Thereafter Kṛṣṇa
always remains in the condition of kaiśora. In Vraja
Kṛṣṇa enters the final stage of early youth (śeṣa-
kaiśora) at the age of ten, and from then on He always
remains in that condition. Kṛṣṇa’s kaiśora begins in the
month of Vaiśākha (AprilñMay, the second month of the
Indian calendar) of His seventh year. Therefore His
pastimes with the gopīs are celebrated even in the stage
of paugaṇḍa. The conditions of kaumāra, paugaṇḍa and
kaiśora in the gopīs follow the exact same pattern.
Kṛṣṇa’s various ages have been discussed here with
reference to the topic of uddīpana-vibhāva.


                          182
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017



Anubhāva



Sādhāraṇa-anubhāva

The sādhāraṇa or common anubhāvas of sakhya-rasa are
wrestling, playing with a ball, gambling, riding on each
others’ shoulders, pleasing Kṛṣṇa by stick-fighting,
laying down or sitting with Kṛṣṇa on a bed, sitting
place or swing, joking in a most striking and charming
manner, engaging in water sports and, upon meeting with
Kṛṣṇa, dancing, singing and the other symptoms
previously described. These are known as sādhāraṇa-
anubhāvas because they are common to all four kinds of
friends. The anubhāvas that are unique to each division
of friends will now be described.



Asādhāraṇa-anubhāva of the suhṛt-sakhās

To give instructions as to what is to be done and what
is not to be done, to engage Kṛṣṇa in beneficial
activities and to take the lead in almost all activities
are the anubhāvas that are unique to the suhṛt-sakhās.



Asādhāraṇa-anubhāva of the sakhās

To place tāmbūla in Kṛṣṇa’s mouth, to draw tilaka marks
on Him, to anoint Him with sandalwood and to draw
pictures on His face are the anubhāvas that are unique
to the sakhās.



Asādhāraṇa-anubhāva of the priya-sakhās

To defeat Kṛṣṇa in battle, to pull Kṛṣṇa by taking hold
of His clothes, to steal flowers from Kṛṣṇa’s hands, to
have oneself dressed and decorated by Kṛṣṇa, and to
engage in hand-to-hand battle with Kṛṣṇa are the
anubhāvas that are unique to the priya-sakhās.



Asādhāraṇa-anubhāva of the priyanarma-sakhās

The priyanarma-sakhās deliver messages to the Vraja
kiśorīs. They approve of the Vraja kiśorīs’ love for
Kṛṣṇa. When the Vraja kiśorīs quarrel with Kṛṣṇa, the
priyanarma-sakhās take Kṛṣṇa’s side, but when the
kiśorīs are absent, they are expert in supporting the
side of the yūtheśvarī of whom they have taken shelter.
They also whisper secret messages in Kṛṣṇa’s ear. These
are the anubhāvas that are unique to the priyanarma-
sakhās.




                          183
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

Sāttvika-bhāva



All eight sāttvika-bhāvas such as tears, trembling and
hairs standing on end are present in sakhya-rasa.



Vyabhicāri-bhāva



In sakhya-rasa all vyabhicāri-bhāvas are found except
for fierce-ness, fear and laziness. In separation from
Kṛṣṇa, all vyabhicāri-bhāvas are found except for
intoxication, jubilation, pride, sleep and fortitude,
and in meeting all are found except for death, fatigue,
disease, hysteric convulsions and wretchedness.



Sthāyibhāva



“We are equals.” When one’s rati for Kṛṣṇa is possessed
of this attitude and is therefore devoid of the
constraints arising from a reverential outlook, and when
it is possessed of very deep faith imbued with intimacy
(viśrambha), it is called sakhya-rati. This sakhya-rati
is the sthāyibhāva of sakhya-rasa. When sakhya-rati is
augmented it attains to the stages of praṇaya, prema,
sneha and rāga. Thus, including sakhya-rati, there are
five stages in total. Prema, sneha and rāga have been
defined already under the heading of dāsya-rasa. Praṇaya
will now be defined.



Praṇaya

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (3.3.108) defines praṇaya as
follows:



prāptāyāṁ sambhramādīnāṁ

yogyatāyām api sphuṭam

tad gandhenāpy asaṁspṛṣṭā

ratiḥ praṇaya ucyate



When there is a very distinct presence of elements which
would invoke a reverential attitude and yet one’s rati
is not even slightly influenced by such feelings, it is
known as praṇaya.




                            184
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

The conditions known as ayoga and yoga, as well as the
ten conditions of viyoga described previously in regard
to dāsya-rasa,11 are also found in sakhya-rasa.




Verse 21 — Vātsalya-rasa




atha vātsalya-rase komalāṅgo vinayī sarva-lakṣaṇa-yukta
ityādi-guṇaḥ śrī-kṛṣṇo viṣayālambanaḥ. śrī-kṛṣṇe
anugrāhya-bhāvavantaḥ pitrādayo gurujanā atra vraje
vrajeśvarī-vrajarāja-rohiṇy-upananda-tat-patny-ādayaḥ.
anyatra devakī-kuntī vasudevādayaś ca āśrayālambanāḥ.
smita-jalpita-bālya-ceṣṭādaya uddīpana-vibhāvāḥ.
mastakāghrāṇāśīrvāda-lālana-pālanādayo ‘nubhāvāḥ.
sāttvikāḥ stambha-svedādayaḥ sarva eva stana-sravaṇam
iti nava-saṅkhyāḥ. harṣa-śaṅkādyā vyabhicāriṇaḥ.
vātsalya-ratiḥ sthāyī bhāvaḥ. prema-sneha-rāgāś cātra
bhavanti. atrāpi viyoge pūrvavat daśa daśāḥ. iti
vātsalya-rasaḥ.



Śrī Bindu-vikāśinī-vṛtti



In Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (3.4.1) vātsalya-rasa is
described as follows:



vibhāvadyais tu vātsalyaṁ

sthāyī puṣṭim upāgataḥ

eṣa vatsalatā-mātraḥ

prokto bhakti-raso budhaiḥ



When vātsalya-rati sthāyibhāva is nourished by its
corresponding elements of vibhāva and so on, it is
called vātsalya-bhakti-rasa by the learned.



Vibhāva



Viṣayālambana

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the viṣayālambana of vātsalya-bhakti-rasa.
He is endowed with the following qualities: His limbs
are very soft (komalāṅga); they are of a darkish
complexion (śyāmāṅga); His beauty gives great happiness
to the eyes (rucira); He possesses all divine

                             185
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

characteristics in the features and markings of His body
(sarva-sal-lakṣaṇānvita); He is mild (mṛdu); His speech
is very pleasing even when addressing offenders (priya-
vāk); He is simple (sarala); He is shy when praised by
others (hrīmān); He is devoid of pride (vinayī); He
offers respect to His teachers, brāhmaṇas and elders
(mānya-mānakṛt); and He is charitable (dātā).



Āśrayālambana

Kṛṣṇa’s mother, father and other elders who have a
strong sense of mamatā or possessiveness in relation to
Him, who give instructions to Him and nurture Him, and
who desire to bestow their favour upon Him (who regard
Śrī Kṛṣṇa as the object of their mercy) are the
āśrayālambana of vātsalya-rasa. In Vraja these include
Vrajarāja Śrī Nanda Mahārāja, Vrajeśvarī Śrī Yaśodā,
Rohiṇī-maiyā, Upānanda and his wife Tuṅgī, the other
elder and younger brothers of Nanda Bābā and their
wives, and the gopīs whose sons were stolen by Brahmā.
In Mathurā or Dvārakā, Kṛṣṇa’s elders in parental
affection include Vasudeva, Devakī and her co-wives,
Kuntī, Sāndīpani Muni and others. Of all these Śrī
Yaśodā is the best.



Uddīpana

Kṛṣṇa’s age (kaumāra, paugaṇḍa and kaiśora), beauty,
dress, childhood restlessness, sweet words, mild smiling
and childhood pastimes are the uddīpanas of vātsalya-
rasa.



Anubhāva



Smelling Kṛṣṇa’s head, cleansing His limbs with the
hands, offering blessings, giving orders, looking after
Kṛṣṇa in various ways (such as bathing Him), offering
protection, giving beneficial instructions and other
such activities are the anubhāvas of vātsalya-rasa.



Sāttvika-bhāva



In addition to the eight usual sāttvika-bhāvas, there is
one more item which is unique to vātsalya-rasa, and that
is flowing of milk from the breast. Thus in all there
are nine sāttvika-bhāvas in this rasa.



Vyabhicāri-bhāva



                          186
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017


The twenty-four vyabhicāri-bhāvas that were listed for
dāsya-rasa are also found in vātsalya-rasa. In addition
to these, apasmṛti or hysteric convulsions are also
found in this rasa.



Sthāyibhāva



Vātsalya-rati is characterised by feelings of anukampa,
a desire to favour and support a person who is worthy of
and in need of support; it is also devoid of reverence.
This vātsalya-rati is the sthāyibhāva of this rasa. When
vātsalya-rati increases, it attains successively to the
stages of prema, sneha and rāga.



The conditions known as ayoga and yoga, as well as the
ten conditions of viyoga described previously in regard
to dāsya-rasa,12 are also found in vātsalya-rasa.




Verse 22 — Mādhurya-rasa




atha madhura-rase rūpa-mādhurya-līlā-mādhurya-prema-
mādhurya-sindhuḥ śrī-kṛṣṇo viṣayālambanaḥ. preyasī-gaṇaḥ
āśrayālambanaḥ. muralī-rava-vasanta-kokila-nāda-nava-
megha-mayūra-kaṇṭhādi-darśanādyāḥ uddīpana-vibhāvāḥ.
kaṭākṣa-hāsyādayo ‘nubhāvāḥ. sarva eva sāttvikāḥ
sūddīpta-paryantāḥ. nirvedādyāḥ sarve ālasyaugrya-
rahitāḥ sañcāriṇaḥ. priyatā-ratiḥ sthāyī bhāvaḥ. prema-
sneha-rāgādyāḥ śrīlojjvala-nīlamany uktāḥ sarva eva
bhavanti. iti madhura-rasaḥ. evaṁ pañca mukhya-rasāḥ
samāptāḥ.



Śrī Bindu-vikāśinī-vṛtti



Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (3.5.1) describes mādhurya-
bhakti-rasa as follows:



ātmocitair vibhāvādyaiḥ

puṣṭiṁ nītā satāṁ hṛdi

madhurākhyo bhaved bhakti-

raso ‘sau madhurā ratiḥ


                             187
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017



When madhura-rati is nourished in the hearts of pure
devotees by combination with its corresponding elements
of vibhāva and so on, it is called mādhurya-bhakti-rasa.



Vibhāva



Viṣayālambana

Śrī Kṛṣṇa who is an ocean of the qualities of rūpa-
mādhurya (uniquely sweet form), veṇu-mādhurya (uniquely
sweet flute), līlā-mādhurya (uniquely sweet pastimes)
and prema-mādhurya (uniquely sweet prema of His
devotees) is the viṣayālambana of mādhurya-rasa.



Āśrayālambana

The vraja-gopīs are the āśrayālambana of this rasa. Of
all of them Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the best.



Uddīpana

The sound of Kṛṣṇa’s flute (muralī), the season of
spring (vasanta), the call of the cuckoo, seeing a
peacock’s neck and so forth are the uddīpanas of this
rasa.



Anubhāva



Sidelong glances, mild smiling and laughter are the
anubhāvas of mādhurya-rasa.



Sāttvika-bhāva



All eight sāttvika-bhāvas such as becoming stunned are
present in mādhurya-rasa. They manifest up to the
intensity known as

sūddīpta (found only in the condition of mahābhāva, when
all eight sāttvika-bhāvas manifest simultaneously and to
the utmost limit of radiance).



Vyabhicāri-bhāva



                          188
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                 5/5/2017


All vyabhicāri-bhāvas are present in mādhurya-rasa with
the exception of ālasya (laziness) and ugratā
(fierceness).



Sthāyibhāva



The rati which is found in the deer-eyed ramaṇīs, and
which is the original cause of the eight types of
sambhoga such as remembering, seeing and so on,
exchanged between them and Kṛṣṇa, is known as madhura-
rati. This madhura-rati is the sthāyibhāva of mādhurya-
rasa. All further developments mentioned in the book Śrī
Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, such as prema, sneha, māna, praṇaya,
rāga, anurāga, bhāva, mahābhāva, modana and mādana, are
found in this rasa.



Meeting and separation



In mādhurya-rasa   meeting and separation are defined
differently than   in dāsya, sakhya and vātsalya.
Mādhurya-rasa is   of two kinds: (1) vipralambha
(separation) and   (2) sambhoga (meeting).



(1) Vipralambha

Learned scholars have described vipralambha to be of
many varieties, chief of which are pūrva-rāga, māna and
pravāsa.

Pūrva-rāga — The bhāva or mutual feeling of attachment
that exists between the lover and beloved prior to their
meeting is called pūrva-rāga. The pūrva-rāga experienced
by the gopīs (kāntā) is itself bhakti-rasa, whereas the
pūrva-rāga experienced by Śrī Kṛṣṇa (kānta) is an
uddīpana for bhakti-rasa.

Māna — In mādhurya-bhakti-rasa, māna (jealous anger) is
famous.

Pravāsa — Separation due to living at a distant place is
called pravāsa.



(2) Sambhoga

When the lover and beloved meet, the enjoyment they
experience is called sambhoga.



This completes the summary description of the five
principal rasas.

                            189
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017




Comment



The rasa described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and in the
literature of the Gosvāmīs is completely pure, non-
materialistic (aprākṛta) and transcendental (cinmaya).
It is entirely beyond the reach of the mental
speculative powers of the baddha-jīvas and is difficult
to attain. The baddha-jīva is compelled either to think
about gross matter or to conceive of the non-material as
being devoid of all attributes (nirviśeṣa-bhāva). When
due to great fortune one is blessed by the mercy of
Bhagavān or His devotees, he adopts the appropriate
method of performing sādhana and bhajana, his anarthas
are dispelled and his heart becomes situated in pure
consciousness. Then the nitya-siddha-bhāva of the Lord’s
eternal associates manifests in the form of śuddha-
sattva. His rati, which is of a general nature, is
gradually transformed into the sthāyibhāva, and when it
then combines with vibhāva, anubhāva, sāttvika-bhāva and
vyabhicāri-bhāva, the jīva tastes śuddha-bhakti-rasa.
While analysing rasa-tattva in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu,
Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī has defined the word rasa in the
following manner (2.5.132):



vyatītya bhāvanā-vartma

yaś camatkāra-bhāra-bhūḥ

hṛdi sattvojjvale bāḍhaṁ

svadate sa raso mataḥ



That which has an extraordinary taste and is experienced
only in the heart which is illuminated by śuddha-sattva
or the appearance of the sthāyibhāva, is called rasa.
The experience of rasa is far more intense than that of
rati and for this reason, when rasa is experienced, it
bypasses the individual perception of vibhāva,
vyabhicāri-bhāva and so on.



In order to further clarify the difference between rasa
and bhāva he further states (2.5.133):



bhāvanāyāḥ pade yas tu

budhenānanya-buddhinā

bhāvyate gāḍha-saṁskāraiś

citte bhāvaḥ sa kathyate


                            190
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017



That which is contemplated by means of profound
impressions (saṁskāras) by enlightened devotees whose
intelligence is fully

resolute and whose hearts are fit for the perception of
vibhāva, vyabhicāri-bhāva and so on, is called bhāva.



In his commentary on these two verses Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura has explained that first, with the
assistance of vibhāva (ālambana and uddīpana), bhāva is
directly awakened and then attains its svarūpa.
Thereafter, by combination with vibhāva and the other
elements, rasa is directly perceived. This is the order
of progression. The purport is that when rasa is being
experienced, the individual elements of vibhāva and so
on are not tasted independently. But when rati is being
experienced, vibhāva and the other elements are tasted
independently. This is so because the experience of rati
is not as intense as the experience of rasa. This is the
difference between rati and rasa.




Verse 23 — Mixture of Bhāvas




atha bhāva-miśraṇam. śrī-baladevādīnāṁ sakhyaṁ vātsalyaṁ
dāsyaṁ ca. mukharā-prabhṛtīnāṁ vātsalyaṁ sakhyaṁ ca.
yudhiṣṭhirasya vātsalyaṁ sakhyaṁ ca. bhīmasya sakhyaṁ
vātsalyaṁ ca. arjunasya sakhyaṁ dāsyaṁ ca. nakula-
sahadevayor dāsyaṁ sakhyaṁ ca. uddhavasya dāsyaṁ sakhyaṁ
ca. akrūrograsenādīnāṁ dāsyaṁ vātsalyaṁ ca.
aniruddhādīnāṁ dāsyaṁ sakhyaṁ ca.



Śrī Bindu-vikāśinī-vṛtti



In some devotees there is a mixture of the three rasas
of dāsya, sakhya and vātsalya. In those devotees one of
these rasas will be dominant and the others will be
subordinate. The sakhya-rasa of Śrī Baladeva is mixed
with vātsalya and dāsya. The vātsalya-rasa of Mukharā
and other elderly gopīs is mixed with sakhya. The
vātsalya-rasa of Yudhiṣṭhira is mixed with dāsya and
sakhya. The sakhya-rasa of Bhīmasena is mixed with
vātsalya. The sakhya-rasa of Arjuna is mixed with dāsya.
The dāsya-rasa of Nakula and Sahadeva is mixed with
sakhya. The dāsya of Śrī Uddhava, Rudra and Garuḍa is
mixed with sakhya. The dāsya of Akrūra and Ugrasena is
mixed with vātsalya. The dāsya of Aniruddha is mixed
with sakhya.



                           191
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                  5/5/2017




Verse 24 — Overview of Gauṇa-rasa




atha hāsyādbhuta-vīra-karuṇa-raudra-bhayānaka-bībhatsāḥ
sapta-gauṇa-bhakti-rasāḥ pañca-vidha-bhakteṣv
evodayante. ataeva pañca-vidha-bhaktā āśrayālambanāḥ.
hāsyādīnāṁ ṣaṇṇāṁ rasānāṁ śrī-kṛṣṇaś ca śrī-kṛṣṇa-
bhaktāś ca tat sambandhinaś ca viṣayālambanāḥ.
bībhatsasya tu ghṛṇāspadāmedhya-māṁsa śoṇitādayo
viṣayāḥ. raudra-bhayānakayoḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-śatravo ‘pi
viṣayāḥ. gaṇḍa-vikāśa-netra-visphārādayo yathā sambhavam
anubhāvāḥ. sāttvikā api yathā-sambhavaṁ dvitrāḥ.
harṣāmaryādyā vyabhicāriṇaḥ. hāso vismaya utsāhaḥ
krodha-śokau bhayaṁ tathā-jugupsā cety asau bhāva-
viśeṣaḥ saptadhoditaḥ. hāsyādīnām amī krameṇa
sthāyibhāvāḥ. kiṁ ca vīra-rase yuddha-dāna-dayā-dharmeṣu
utsāha-vaśāt yuddha-vīraḥ, dāna-vīraḥ, dayā-vīraḥ,
dharma-vīra iti caturddhā vīra-rasaḥ. iti sapta gauṇa-
rasāḥ. evaṁ militvā dvādaśa rasā bhavanti.



Śrī Bindu-vikāśinī-vṛtti



Hāsya (laughter), adbhuta (astonishment), vīra
(heroism), karuṇa (compassion), raudra (anger),
bhayānaka (fear) and

bībhatsa (disgust) — these seven are known as gauṇa-
bhakti-rasa. These gauṇa-rasas are seen to arise in the
five types of devotees previously mentioned. Therefore
the five types of devotees are the āśrayālambana of
these secondary rasas. Śrī Kṛṣṇa, His devotees and
persons related to His devotees are the viṣayālambana of
six of these rasas beginning from hāsya (bībhatsa is
excluded). Detestable objects, impure meat, blood and so
on are the viṣaya of bībhatsa-rasa. The enemies of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa may also be the viṣaya of raudra-rasa and
bhayānaka-rasa.

Blooming of the cheeks, widening of the eyes and many
other symptoms are anubhāvas. Two, three or more
sāttvika-bhāvas can manifest. Harṣa (jubilation), krodha
(anger) and other emotions are vyabhicāri-bhāvas. The
sthāyibhāva of hāsya is laughter (hāsa), of adbhuta it
is astonishment (vismaya), of vīra it is enthusiasm
(utsāha), of karuṇa it is sorrow (śoka), of raudra it is
anger (krodha), of bhayānaka it is fear (bhaya) and of
bībhatsa it is disgust (jugupsā or ghṛṇā).

Thus there are twelve kinds of rasas — five primary
(mukhya) and seven secondary (gauṇa). The seven gauṇa-
rasas will now be analysed one after another. These
seven types of gauṇa-bhakti-rasa are based on the seven
types of gauṇa-rati. Rati is defined as the essence of
the combination of the hlādinī and saṁvit potencies and
thus purely composed of śuddha-sattva. Rati of this type

                           192
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

is known as mukhya-rati. Mukhya-rati is of two types:
svārthā (self-nourishing) and parārthā (nourishment-
giving). The term svārthā means that when a devotee
situated in one of the five primary relationships with
Kṛṣṇa experiences different emotions, those emotions
will act on the sthāyibhāva to nourish it in the case of
favourable emotions, or to cause unbearable despondency
in the case of unfavourable emotions. Because this type
of rati nourishes its own sthāyibhāva it is called
svārthā, self-nourishing.

When rati, instead of nourishing its own sthāyibhāva,
recedes into the background and nourishes one of the
seven secondary emotions, it is called parārthā,
nourishment-giving. These seven secondary emotions of
laughter and so on are different from svārtha-rati,
which is purely composed of śuddha-sattva. But because
they are connected with mukhya-parārtha-rati, the word
rati has been used for them. Only when parārtha-rati in
one of the five primary dominant emotions recedes into
the background and nourishes the seven secondary
emotions do those secondary emotions attain to the
status of gauṇa-rati. When combined with their
corresponding components of vibhāva, anubhāva, sāttvika-
bhāva and vyabhicāri-bhāva, they are transformed into
gauṇa-rasa.



(A) Hāsya-bhakti-rasa — Laughter



When hāsa-rati is nourished by its corresponding
elements of vibhāva and so on and becomes relishable in
the devotee’s heart, it is transformed into hāsya-
bhakti-rasa.

Vibhāva



Ālambana

(1) Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the object of parārtha-rati, or rati
that nourishes the secondary emotions. As such He is the
ālambana or support of this rasa because His activities
give rise to laughter.

(2) Tad-anvayī — A person whose actions are connected to
Kṛṣṇa and stimulate laughter may also be the ālambana or
support of hāsya-rasa.

Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī says that because laughter is merely
blossoming or cheerfulness of the heart, it has no
viṣayālambana. The person towards whom rati is directed
is the viṣaya or object of that rati. Although laughter
may have an object when used in the sense of ridicule or
derision, such application of the word hāsa is not
acceptable here. Therefore the word ālambana, as used
above for both Śrī Kṛṣṇa and those persons described as
tad-anvayī, indicates that they are the support of
hāsya-rasa because their amusing speech and activities
stimulate laughter in others; not that they are the

                          193
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

object of other’s laughter in the sense of ridicule.
When that laughter is connected to Kṛṣṇa and is
nourished by the devotee’s rati for Him, it becomes
hāsya-rati.

The elderly and especially children are the
āśrayālambana of hāsya-rasa. Superior persons may also
sometimes be the āśraya.



Uddīpana

The statements, dress and behaviour of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and
those who perform some activity connected to Him (tad-
anvayī) are the stimulants for laughter.



Anubhāva



Anubhāvas include vibration of the nose, lips and
cheeks.



Sāttvika-bhāva



Several sāttvika-bhāvas may be possible.

Vyabhicāri-bhāva



Vyabhicāri-bhāvas include jubilation, laziness and
concealment of emotions.



Sthāyibhāva



The sthāyibhāva or dominant emotion is hāsa-rati. The
cheerfulness of the heart that is experienced upon
witnessing unusual alterations of speech, dress,
activities and so on is called hāsa, laughter. When
laughter arises from speech, dress and activities that
are related to Kṛṣṇa and receives nourishment from any
of the primary emotions (mukhya-parārtha-rati) which
then recede into the background, it is transformed into
hāsa-rati. Hāsa-rati is of six kinds as described below.

(1) Smita — when the teeth are not visible and there is
blossoming of the eyes and cheeks.

(2) Hasita — when the forepart of the teeth is slightly
visible. Smita and hasita are observed in superior
persons (jyeṣṭha). This term here refers to munis and
sakhīs.

                          194
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                5/5/2017


(3) Vihasita — when the teeth are visible and the sound
of laughter is heard.

(4) Avahasita — when there is flaring of the nostrils
and squinting of the eyes. Vihasita and avahasita are
observed in intermediate persons (madhyama). This term
here refers to the elderly and also to female messengers
(dūtī).

(5) Apahasita — when the eyes well up with tears and the
shoulders shake.

(6) Atihasita — when there is clapping of the hands and
throwing up of the hands and feet. Apahasita and
atihasita are observed in those who are inferior
(kaniṣṭha). This term here refers to children. In
particular situations, however, vihasita and the other
remaining varieties of hāsa-rati are exhibited even by
exalted personalities.



(B) Adbhuta-bhakti-rasa — Astonishment



When vismaya-rati is nourished by its corresponding
elements of vibhāva and so on and becomes relishable in
the heart of the devotee, it is known as adbhuta-bhakti-
rasa.



Vibhāva



Viṣayālambana

Kṛṣṇa who performs extraordinary deeds is the
viṣayālambana of adbhuta-rasa.



Āśrayālambana

Devotees of all five rasas can be the āśraya of adbhuta-
rasa.



Uddīpana

Kṛṣṇa’s unique activities are stimulants for this rasa.



Anubhāva



Widening of the eyes and so on.


                          195
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017



Sāttvika-bhāva



Becoming stunned, horripilation and so on.



Vyabhicāri-bhāvas



Vyabhicāri-bhāvas include excitement, jubilation,
inertness and other emotions.



Sthāyibhāva



Vismaya-rati arising from perception of extraordinary
deeds, forms and qualities is the sthāyibhāva or
dominant emotion of adbhuta-bhakti-rasa. The expansion
of the heart that takes place upon witnessing something
extraordinary is called vismaya, astonishment. When
astonishment arises from seeing the uncommon pastimes of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa and receives nourishment from one of the
primary emotions (mukhya-parārtha-rati) which then
recedes into the background, it is transformed into
vismaya-rati. Kṛṣṇa’s extraordinary activities may be
perceived in two ways: sākṣāt (directly perceived) and
anumita (inferred). Sākṣāt is further divided into three
categories: dṛṣṭa (seen), śruta (heard) and saṅkīrtita
(recited).



(C) Vīra-bhakti-rasa — Heroism



When utsāha-rati combines with its corresponding
elements of vibhāva, anubhāva and so on and becomes
relishable in the devotee’s heart, it is called vīra-
bhakti-rasa.

Vīra-bhakti-rasa is of four kinds: (i) yuddha-vīra
(heroism in fighting), (ii) dāna-vīra (heroism in giving
charity), (iii) dayā-vīra (heroism in compassion) and
(iv) dharma-vīra (heroism in religious activity). These
four types of heroes are the ālambana of vīra-bhakti-
rasa. Utsāha-rati is found in these four types of
devotees as enthusiasm for fighting, enthusiasm for
giving charity and so on. Each of these will now be
considered separately.



(i) Yuddha-vīra — Heroism in fighting



                          196
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017


Vibhāva



Ālambana

A friend who is eager to fight for the pleasure of Kṛṣṇa
is called yuddha-vīra. In this case either Kṛṣṇa may act
as the contesting warrior or another friend may do so at
Kṛṣṇa’s bidding while He looks on as a spectator.



Uddīpana

When a challenger is present and exhibits bragging,
slapping of the thighs as a gesture of challenge,
rivalry, heroism and wielding of weapons, these symptoms
are uddīpanas that stimulate another’s fighting spirit.



Anubhāva



When the symptoms mentioned above are automatically
exhibited without provocation by a challenger, they are
anubhāvas. Other anubhāvas include displaying one’s
valour out of pride in one’s virility, roaring like a
lion, angry words, fighting postures, enthusiasm to
fight although alone, never retreating from battle and
displaying fearlessness before a frightened person.



Sāttvika-bhāva



Tears, trembling and so on.



Vyabhicāri-bhāva



Vyabhicāri-bhāvas include pride, agitation, fortitude,
shame, resolve, jubilation, concealment of emotion,
indignation, ardent desire, envy and remembrance.



Sthāyibhāva



Yuddhotsāha-rati (enthusiasm for fighting) is the
sthāyibhāva or dominant emotion of yuddha-vīra-bhakti-
rasa. A very firm attachment and urgency to carry out
one’s aspired-for activity of fighting, giving charity
and so on, the fruit of which is praised by sādhus, is

                          197
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

called utsāha, enthusiasm. In utsāha there is tremendous
exertion or diligence, an absence of patience and no
dependence upon time. When enthusiasm arises in relation
to Kṛṣṇa and receives nourishment from mukhya-parārtha-
rati which recedes into the background, it is
transformed into utsāha-rati. A very firm desire to
achieve victory in the matter of fighting is known as
yuddhotsāha-rati. This is of four types:

(1) Svaśaktyā āhārya — one fights by his own power after
being provoked by a challenger.

(2) Svaśaktyā sahaja — one fights by his own power
spontaneously (without inducement).

(3) Sahāyenāhārya — one fights alongside a friend after
being coaxed by that friend to accompany him in battle.

(4) Sahāyena sahaja — one is spontaneously eager to
fight accompanied by a friend.

In yuddha-vīra-bhakti-rasa only Kṛṣṇa’s friends can act
as contesting warriors and never Kṛṣṇa’s enemies.
Because they agitate the devotees, enemies can be the
ālambana of raudra-rasa, anger [which is described ahead
on pp. 249ñ52].



(ii) Dāna-vīra — Heroism in giving charity



Dāna-vīra is of two types: (a) bahuprada (one who gives
great wealth) and (b) upasthita-durāpārtha-tyāgī (one
who refuses an offer of rare wealth). These will be
considered separately.



(a) Bahuprada — Giver of great wealth



Vibhāva



Ālambana

One who is spontaneously willing to give everything
including his very self for the pleasure of Kṛṣṇa is
called bahuprada. He is the āśraya of dāna-vīra-rasa,
whereas the person for whose benefit charity is given,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is the viṣaya.



Uddīpana

Seeing a fit recipient for charity.




                          198
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

Anubhāva



Giving more than desired, conversing with a mild smile,
steadiness, expertise, fortitude and so on are the
anubhāvas.

Vyabhicāri-bhāva



The vyabhicāri-bhāvas include deliberation, ardent
desire and jubilation.



Sthāyibhāva



Dānotsāha-rati is the sthāyibhāva of this rasa. Utsāha
has already been defined under yuddha-vīra. A steady and
deep enthusiasm to give charity is known as dānotsāha.
When enthusiasm to give charity arises in relation to
Kṛṣṇa and is nourished by mukhya-parārtha-rati, it is
transformed into dānotsāha-rati.

Bahuprada is of two types:

(1) Ābhyudayika (bestowing prosperity) — One who is
willing to offer everything to brāhmaṇas and others in
order to invoke auspiciousness for Śrī Kṛṣṇa is called
ābhyudayika. An example of this is Nanda Mahārāja, who
gave fabulous wealth to the brāhmaṇas at Kṛṣṇa’s birth
ceremony.

(2) Tat-sampradānaka (handing over completely) — One who
is in full knowledge of Kṛṣṇa’s glories and who offers
all his possessions and even his very self to Him is
known as tat-sampradānaka. This type of charity is
further divided into two types: prīti-dāna (to give to
Kṛṣṇa as a relative) and pūjā-dāna (to give alms to the
Lord in the form of a brāhmaṇa). Prīti-dāna was
exhibited by Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira at the rājasūya-yajña.
Pūjā-dāna was exhibited by Bali Mahārāja, who gave
charity to Vāmanadeva in the form of a brāhmaṇa.



(b) Upasthita-durāpārtha-tyāgī —

A renouncer of rare wealth



Vibhāva



Ālambana

One who refuses even the five types of liberation
offered by the Lord is called upasthita-durāpārtha-

                             199
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

tyāgī. This is a reversal of the roles exhibited by the
first type of dāna-vīra. In other words here the Lord is
the giver of charity and the devotee is the would-be
recipient.



Uddīpana

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s mercy, conversation and laughter are
uddīpanas.



Anubhāva



Steadiness in describing the superiority of the Lord and
other symptoms are the anubhāvas.



Vyabhicāri-bhāva



Fortitude is the vyabhicāri-bhāva most prominently seen
in this rasa.



Sthāyibhāva



Tyāgotsāha-rati is the sthāyibhāva of this rasa. A very
strong desire to renounce even the five types of
liberation is known as tyāgotsāha-rati.



(iii) Dayā-vīra — Heroism in compassion



Vibhāva



Ālambana

One whose heart is melting with compassion and who is
even prepared to cut his body to pieces and offer
himself to a disguised form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is called dayā-
vīra.



Uddīpana

Seeing the distress of the person towards whom
compassion is displayed is the stimulus for this rasa.


                          200
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017



Anubhāva



Being prepared to exchange one’s life for the protection
of a distressed person, words of consolation, and
steadiness.



Vyabhicāri-bhāva



Vyabhicāri-bhāvas include zeal, resolve and jubilation.



Sthāyibhāva



Dayotsāha-rati is the sthāyibhāva of this rasa.
Enthusiasm that is possessed of tremendous compassion is
known as dayotsāha. When this enthusiasm to give charity
is related to Kṛṣṇa and nourished by mukhya-parārtha-
rati, it is transformed into dayotsāha-rati. King
Mayūradhvaja is given as an example of dayā-vīra. The
king offered his body in sacrifice to Kṛṣṇa who came to
him disguised as a brāhmaṇa. In this case the king did
not actually know that the brāhmaṇa was Kṛṣṇa. Had he
known that the brāhmaṇa was Kṛṣṇa, then the quality of
compassion would have receded and enthusiasm to give
charity (dāna-vīra) would have been the dominant
sentiment. This is the distinction between dāna-vīra and
dayā-vīra.



(iv) Dharma-vīra — Heroism in religious activity



Vibhāva



Ālambana

A sober and calm person who is always completely fixed
in the performance of religious activities for the
pleasure of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is called dharma-vīra.



Uddīpana

Hearing the religious scriptures and so on.



Anubhāva

                          201
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                 5/5/2017




Moral conduct, theism, tolerance, control of the senses
and other symptoms are anubhāvas.



Vyabhicāri-bhāva



Vyabhicāri-bhāvas include resolve, remembrance and other
symptoms.



Sthāyibhāva



Dharmotsāha-rati is the sthāyibhāva of this rasa. Total
absorption in religious activity is known as
dharmotsāha. When enthusiasm for religious activity
arises in connection with Śrī Kṛṣṇa and is nourished by
mukhya-parārtha-rati, it is transformed into
dharmotsāha-rati. Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira, who performed
religious sacrifices in his palace daily for the
pleasure of Kṛṣṇa, is stated as an example of dharma-
vīra.



(D) Karuṇa-bhakti-rasa — Compassion



When śoka-rati combines with its corresponding
components of vibhāva, anubhāva and so on and becomes
relishable in the devotee’s heart, it is known as
karuṇa-bhakti-rasa.



Vibhāva



Viṣayālambana

In karuṇa-rasa the viṣayālambana is of three types:

(1) Śrī Kṛṣṇa — Being the embodiment of uninterrupted
supreme bliss, there is no possibility of any harm
coming to Him. But when a devotee out of intense love
thinks that some calamity may befall Him, He becomes the
object of karuṇa-rasa for that devotee.

(2) Priya   — The dear associates of Śrī Kṛṣṇa may be the
object of   karuṇa-rasa when they are placed in a
dangerous   situation. The gopīs who were threatened by
Śaṅkacūḍa   are given as an example.

(3) Sva-priya — The relatives of a devotee who are

                            202
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                  5/5/2017

deprived of the happiness of bhakti due to an absence of
Vaiṣṇavism or other reasons may also be the object of
karuṇa-rasa. The munis who attained sāyujya-mukti and
were thus deprived of the happiness of bhakti became the
object of karuṇa-rasa for Nārada Muni (a fellow muni).
Mādrī and Pāṇḍu became the object of karuṇa-rasa for
their son Sahadeva when he beheld the splendour of
Govinda’s lotus feet, for they were deprived of such an
opportunity.



Āśrayālambana

There are three corresponding types of devotees who
experience the sentiment of compassion towards the three
types of persons described above, and such devotees are
the āśrayālambana of this rasa. This sentiment generally
does not arise in śānta-bhaktas or in adhikṛta- and
śaraṇāgata-dāsya-bhaktas.



Uddīpana

Kṛṣṇa’s activities, qualities, form and so on are
stimulants for this rasa.



Anubhāva



Drying of the mouth, lamentation, sighing, crying out,
falling on the ground, striking the ground with one’s
fists, beating one’s chest and so on are the anubhāvas.



Sāttvika-bhāva



All eight sāttvika-bhāvas are observed in this rasa.



Vyabhicāri-bhāva



The vyabhicāri-bhāvas include inertness, self-
disparagement, debility, wretchedness, anxiety,
despondency, ardent desire,

restlessness, madness, death, laziness, confusion,
disease and fainting.

Sthāyibhāva



Śoka-rati is the sthāyibhāva of this rasa. The sorrow

                          203
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

and grief that one experiences in the heart due to
separation from one’s beloved or upon perceiving that
some calamity has befallen one’s beloved is called śoka.
When that sorrow arises in relation to Śrī Kṛṣṇa and is
nourished by mukhya-parārtha-rati, it is transformed
into śoka-rati.

If one is aware of Kṛṣṇa’s opulence and power, then
there is no possibility of fearing for His safety and
hence no possibility of experiencing śoka-rati. But in
the devotee who experiences śoka-rati towards Kṛṣṇa, the
absence of knowledge of His majesty is not due to
ignorance but due to the overwhelming sentiment of love.

Laughter and other emotions may sometimes arise even in
the absence of rati, but śoka is never possible without
rati. This is what distinguishes śoka-rati from the
other types of gauṇa-rati.



(E) Raudra-bhakti-rasa — Anger



When krodha-rati combines with its corresponding
components of vibhāva, anubhāva and so on and attains
prominence in the devotee’s heart, it is called raudra-
bhakti-rasa.



Vibhāva



Viṣayālambana

The viṣayālambana of raudra-rasa is of three types: Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, hita (a well-wisher) and ahita (one who is
hostile).

Hita, or well-wishers who become the object of anger,
are of three types:

(1) Anavahita (inattentive) — Those who are responsible
for protecting Kṛṣṇa but who become inattentive to
Kṛṣṇa’s safety due to carrying out other activities for
Kṛṣṇa, are called anavahita. Śrī Yaśodā became the
object of Rohiṇī’s anger for tying Kṛṣṇa to the grinding
mortar, when the latter saw Him wandering between the
fallen trees.

(2) Sāhasī (rash) — Those who incite Kṛṣṇa to go to a
dangerous place are called sāhasī. Kṛṣṇa’s friends
became the object of Śrī Yaśodā’s anger for leading
Kṛṣṇa to the Tālavana forest.

(3) àrṣyu (jealous) — Gopīs whose only treasure is
indignant anger and whose minds are always besieged by
jealousy are known as īrṣyu. Śrī Rādhā once displayed
such persistent indignant anger towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa that
in spite of all attempts both by Him and the sakhīs, Her
māna could not be broken. Finally Kṛṣṇa left in despair.

                          204
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

Because of Kṛṣṇa’s departure, Śrī Rādhā became
distressed and Her māna desisted. She begged Śrī Lalitā
to go and bring Kṛṣṇa back. At that time She became the
object of Lalitā’s anger for being so unrelenting in Her
māna.

Ahita, or hostile persons who become the object of
anger, are of two kinds:

(1) Svasyāhita (hostile to oneself) — Someone who
impedes one’s relationship with Kṛṣṇa is called
svasyāhita. Akrūra became the object of the gopīs’ anger
because he took Kṛṣṇa away from Vṛndāvana.

(2) Harer ahita (hostile to Kṛṣṇa) — The enemies of
Kṛṣṇa are known as harer ahita.



Āśrayālambana

The sakhīs and jaratī (elderly gopīs like Jaṭilā) are
the āśrayālambana when Kṛṣṇa is the object of anger. All
kinds of devotees may be the āśraya when a well-wisher
or hostile person is the object.



Uddīpana

Sarcastic laughter, evasive speech, leering, disrespect
and so on displayed both by well-wishers and persons
hostile to Śrī Kṛṣṇa are the stimulants of this rasa.



Anubhāva



Pounding one’s hands, grinding one’s teeth, reddening of
the eyes, biting the lips, knitting the eyebrows,
quivering of the arms, rebuking, remaining silent,
lowering of the head, breathing heavily, looking
askance, admonishing, moving the head, reddishness at
the corners of the eyes and trembling of the lips are
all anubhāvas.



Sāttvika-bhāva



All eight sāttvika-bhāvas are present in raudra-rasa.



Vyabhicāri-bhāva



The vyabhicāri-bhāvas include agitation, inertness,
pride, self-disparagement, delusion, rashness, jealousy,

                          205
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                 5/5/2017

fierceness, indignation, exhaustion and so on.



Sthāyibhāva



Krodha-rati is the sthāyibhāva of this rasa. The
inflammation of the heart that takes place when
confronted with hostility is called krodha, anger. When
anger arises in relation to Śrī Kṛṣṇa and is nourished
by mukhya-parārtha-rati, it is transformed into krodha-
rati.

Anger is of three types:

(1) Kopa (fury) — Anger exhibited towards enemies is
called kopa.

(2) Manyu (indignation) — Anger exhibited towards
relatives is called manyu. This manyu is also of three
types: pūjya (anger towards respectable and worshipful
relatives), sama (anger towards relatives of equal
status) and nyūna (anger towards junior relatives). Śrī
Rādhā expressed slight indignation towards Paurṇamāsī
when the latter instructed Her on the importance of
chastity to Her husband. This is an instance of pūjya
manyu. Once Mukharā (Rādhikā’s maternal grandmother)
became angry at Jaṭilā for accusing Kṛṣṇa of destroying
the reputation of her daughter-in-law. This is an
example of sama manyu. Once Jaṭilā became angry at Śrī
Rādhā when she saw Her wearing Kṛṣṇa’s necklace around
Her neck. This is an example of nyūna manyu.

(3) Roṣa (pique) — The anger that a woman exhibits
towards her lover is called roṣa. In mādhurya-rasa, roṣa
is counted as a vyabhicāri-bhāva or transitory emotion
and not as a dominant emotion. The anger of a woman
towards her lover (roṣa) does not attain to the status
of sthāyibhāva as is the case with the anger of the
sakhīs and elderly gopīs towards enemies (kopa) or
relatives (manyu). As far as the vyabhicāri-bhāvas
mentioned on the previous page are concerned, fierceness
is exhibited towards enemies, indignation towards
relatives and jealousy towards the beloved.

The natural inborn anger that enemies such as Śiśupāla
have towards Kṛṣṇa is not born of kṛṣṇa-rati and
therefore it can never be counted as bhakti-rasa.



(F) Bhayānaka-bhakti-rasa — Fear



When bhaya-rati combines with vibhāva, anubhāva and so
on and attains prominence in the devotee’s heart, it is
called bhayānaka-bhakti-rasa.



Vibhāva

                           206
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017




Viṣayālambana

The viṣayālambana of this rasa is of two types: Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and the wicked (dāruṇa).



Āśrayālambana

The āśrayālambana is also of two types:

(1) Anukampya (fit to be favoured) — When Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
the object of fear, a devotee who commits some offence
but who is a fit object of the Lord’s favour is the
āśrayālambana. Examples of this are Jāmbavān, who fought
with Kṛṣṇa not realising His identity, and Kāliyanāga
after fighting with Kṛṣṇa.

(2) Bandhu (a relative or friend) — A relative or friend
of Kṛṣṇa who out of affection is always apprehensive
that some harm may come to Him is the āśrayālambana when
a wicked person is the viṣayālambana. Fear arises in
such a devotee by seeing, hearing of, or remembering
such a wicked person. Examples are as follows:

(i) Darśana (seeing) — Śrī Yaśodā became fearful for
Kṛṣṇa upon seeing the Keśī demon.

(ii) Śravaṇa (hearing) — She became fearful upon hearing
of Keśī’s entrance into Gokula.

(iii) Smaraṇa (remembrance) — A woman from a distant
place one day inquired from Yaśodā about Pūtanā. The
mere remembrance of Pūtanā made Yaśodā fearful for
Kṛṣṇa.

Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī comments that acceptance of the wicked
as āśraya of this rasa instead of a devotee is in
accordance with the opinion of previous authorities on
nāṭya-śāstra like Bhārata Muni. Śrī Viśvanātha
Cakravartī’s own opinion, which is in accordance with
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, is that hāsya and the other secondary
rasas are for practical purposes vyabhicāri-bhāvas. The
purport is that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the viṣaya and the devotee
is the āśraya of the five primary forms of rati. This is
the general rule accepted everywhere.

Hāsa and the other secondary emotions are accepted as
sthāyibhāvas of the seven secondary rasas in accordance
with the ordinary rasa-śāstras only because they take on
the characteristics of rati being nourished by mukhya-
parārtha-rati. According to this opinion, dāruṇa or the
wicked are accepted as ālambana of bhayānaka-rasa. But
in the author’s own opinion ālambana refers to that in
which rati is stimulated (the devotee) and not by which
rati is stimulated (the wicked in the case of fear).
According to this understanding the ālambana of
bhayānaka-rasa may be of two types. When there are two
different devotees who are both fit for the Lord’s mercy
(anukampya), one may become angry with the other due to
some situation concerning Śrī Kṛṣṇa. In this case the

                          207
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

devotee who is angry will be the viṣaya of fear, the
other devotee will be the āśraya of fear, and Kṛṣṇa will
be the cause. This is a common scenario. The second
circumstance is more specialised. When a friend or
relative is anxious for Kṛṣṇa’s safety due to the threat
of a wicked person, the enemy is the cause of fear, the
relative is the repository of fear (āśraya) and Kṛṣṇa is
the object (viṣaya) for whom fear is experienced.

Uddīpana

Knitting the eyebrows on the part of the object of fear
and other symptoms are stimulants for this rasa.



Anubhāva



Drying of the mouth, panting, looking behind oneself,
hiding oneself, moving to and fro, looking for shelter
and screaming are anubhāvas.



Sāttvika-bhāva



All the sāttvika-bhāvas except for tears are manifest in
this rasa.



Vyabhicāri-bhāva



The vyabhicāri-bhāvas include fear, death, restlessness,
agitation, wretchedness, despondency, fainting,
confusion and apprehension.



Sthāyibhāva



Bhaya-rati is the sthāyibhāva of this rasa. The extreme
agitation and restlessness of the heart that is
experienced upon committing some offence or upon seeing
a dreadful object is called bhaya, fear. When this fear
arises in relation to Śrī Kṛṣṇa and is nourished by
mukhya-parārtha-rati, it is transformed into bhaya-rati.
Fear arises either due to an offence or upon seeing a
dreadful person. A person may be dreadful for three
reasons:

(1) Ākṛti — due to having a dreadful form like Pūtanā
and others.

(2) Prakṛti — due to having a dreadful nature like
Śiśupāla and others.

                          208
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017


(3) Prabhāva — due to awesome power like that of Indra
and Śaṅkara.

Fear arises in persons possessed of great love for the
object of fear, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and mostly in women and
children. Demons like Kaṁsa who are always afraid of the
Lord cannot be the āśraya of fear in bhayānaka-rasa
because they are devoid of rati for Kṛṣṇa.



(G) Bībhatsa-bhakti-rasa — Disgust



When jugupsā-rati is nourished by vibhāva, anubhāva and
so on, it is transformed into bībhatsa-bhakti-rasa.



Vibhāva



Ālambana

Śānta-bhaktas, āśrita-dāsya-bhaktas and others of a
similar disposition are the āśrayālambana of this rasa.
The material body and other such objects are the viṣaya
or object of disgust.



Anubhāva



Spitting, contorting the face, covering the nose and
running away are anubhāvas.



Sāttvika-bhāva



Trembling, horripilation, perspiration and so on are all
sāttvika-bhāvas.



Vyabhicāri-bhāva



The vyabhicāri-bhāvas include debility, exhaustion,
madness, delusion, self-disparagement, wretchedness,
despondency, restlessness and inertness.



Sthāyibhāva


                          209
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017



Jugupsā-rati is the sthāyibhāva of this rasa. The
contraction or shutting of the heart that takes place
upon experiencing detestable things is called jugupsā,
disgust. When this feeling of disgust is nourished by
mukhya-parārtha-rati, it is transformed into jugupsā-
rati. Jugupsā-rati is of two kinds:

(1) Vivekajā (arising from discrimination) — In devotees
who have developed rati towards Kṛṣṇa, feelings of
disgust towards the material body may arise from the
awakening of discrimination. This is called vivekajā
jugupsā-rati.

(2) Prāyikī (general) — Devotees of all five rasas
generally experience disgust in the presence of impure
or foul-smelling things. This is called prāyikī jugupsā-
rati.



In Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (4.7.13ñ14) Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī
concludes the discussion of gauṇa-rasa by saying that
hāsya and the other secondary emotions have been
accepted as rasa in accordance with the opinion of past
authorities like Bhārata Muni. This point should be
understood by insightful persons. The five primary rasas
are factually accepted as hari-bhakti-rasa. Hāsya and
the other secondary emotions are for practical purposes
vyabhicāri-bhāvas of these five rasas.




Verse 25 — Compatible and Incompatible Rasas




athaiṣāṁ maitrī-vaira-sthitiḥ. śāntasya dāsasya
parasparaṁ maitrī. sakhya-vātsalyau taṭasthau.
vātsalyasya na kenāpi maitrī. ujjvala-dāsya-rasau śatrū.
iti maitrī-vaira-sthitiḥ.



Śrī Bindu-vikāśinī-vṛtti



Śānta- and dāsya-rasa are compatible with each other.
Sakhya and vātsalya are neutral (neither compatible nor
incompatible). There is no other rasa (among the five
principal rasas) that is compatible with vātsalya.
Mādhurya and dāsya are incompatible.

The above description is a very brief summary of
compatibility and incompatibility of rasas based only
upon the consideration of mukhya-rasa or the five
primary rasas. A complete analysis of compatibility and
incompatibility of both primary and secondary rasas is
given in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (4.8.2ñ62), as outlined

                           210
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                  5/5/2017

below. The following code may be referred to: (c)
compatible, (i) incompatible and (n) neutral.

A reminder of the secondary rasas is provided here for
the reader’s convenience: hāsya (laughter), adbhuta
(astonishment), vīra (heroism, which is of four types:
yuddha-vīra (heroism in fighting), dāna-vīra (heroism in
giving charity), dayā-vīra (heroism in compassion) and
dharma-vīra (heroism in religious principles)), karuṇa
(compassion), raudra (anger), bhayānaka (fear) and
bībhatsa (disgust).



Mukhya-rasa



(1) Śānta

(c) dāsya, bībhatsa, dharma-vīra and adbhuta

(i) mādhurya, yuddha-vīra, raudra and bhayānaka

(n) sakhya, vātsalya, hāsya and karuṇa

(2) Dāsya

(c) bībhatsa, śānta, dharma-vīra, dāna-vīra and adbhuta

(i) mādhurya, yuddha-vīra and raudra

(n) sakhya, vātsalya, hāsya, karuṇa and bhayānaka

(3) Sakhya

(c) mādhurya, hāsya, yuddha-vīra and adbhuta

(i) vātsalya, bībhatsa, raudra and bhayānaka

(n) śānta, dāsya and karuṇa

(4) Vātsalya

(c) hāsya, karuṇa, bhayānaka and adbhuta

(i) mādhurya, yuddha-vīra, dāsya and raudra

(n) śānta, sakhya and bībhatsa

(5) Mādhurya

(c) hāsya, sakhya and adbhuta

(i) vātsalya, bībhatsa, śānta, raudra and bhayānaka

(n) dāsya, vīra and karuṇa



Gauṇa-rasa




                             211
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                  5/5/2017

(1) Hāsya

(c) bībhatsa, mādhurya and vātsalya

(i) karuṇa and bhayānaka

(n) śānta, dāsya, sakhya, adbhuta, vīra and raudra

(2) Adbhuta

(c) vīra, śānta, dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya and mādhurya

(i) raudra and bībhatsa

(n) hāsya, karuṇa and bhayānaka

(3) Vīra

(c) adbhuta, hāsya, sakhya and dāsya

(i) bhayānaka and (in the opinion of some) śānta

(n) vātsalya, mādhurya, karuṇa, raudra and bībhatsa

(4) Karuṇa

(c) raudra and vātsalya

(i) hāsya, adbhuta and sambhogātmaka-mādhurya13

(n) śānta, dāsya, sakhya, vīra, bhayānaka and bībhatsa

(5) Raudra

(c) karuṇa and vīra

(i) hāsya, mādhurya and bhayānaka

(n) śānta, dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya, adbhuta and bībhatsa

(6) Bhayānaka

(c) bībhatsa and karuṇa

(i) vīra, mādhurya, hāsya and raudra

(n) śānta, dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya and adbhuta

(7) Bībhatsa

(c) śānta, hāsya and dāsya

(i) mādhurya and sakhya

(n) vātsalya, adbhuta, vīra, karuṇa, raudra and
bhayānaka



When there is a mixture of rasas, the rasa which
receives nourishment is known as the whole or aṅgī-rasa
and the rasa which

provides nourishment is known as the component or aṅga-

                             212
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

rasa. Whether a rasa is mukhya (one of the five primary
rasas) or gauṇa (one of the seven secondary rasas), when
in a mixture it becomes the whole or aṅgi-rasa, it is
nourished by the component or aṅga-rasas. When there is
a meeting of many rasas, both mukhya and gauṇa, the rasa
that is tasted most prominently above the others in a
given situation is known as the aṅgi-rasa. That rasa
which is self-impelled and nourishes the aṅgi-rasa is
known as aṅga-rasa.

Although the gauṇa-rasas are secondary, when they rise
to prominence by the excellence of the stimulating
elements (vibhāva) being nourished by a primary,
nourishment-giving rasa which recedes into the
background, they attain to the state of aṅgi-rasa. As
Vāmanadeva concealed His opulence and nourished Indra, a
mukhya-rasa, even though acting as a component in a
given situation by nourishing a gauṇa-rasa, does not
disappear like the gauṇa-rasas or vyabhicāri-bhāvas. Its
influence remains clearly manifest in the heart of the
devotee who is firmly established in his perfectional
relationship with the Lord.

An aṅgi-rasa that is one of the primary rasas expands
itself by its aṅga-rasas and thus shines forth
independently. The aṅga-rasas may be of a similar
(sajātīya) or dissimilar (vijātīya) disposition to that
of the aṅgi-rasa. The word vijātīya here does not refer
to those rasas which have already been described as
incompatible with the mukhya-rasas.

The devotees who are the āśraya of a mukhya-rasa that
becomes the prominent rasa in the development of a
particular pastime, are always the āśraya of that rasa.
For those devotees, whenever there is a mixture of
different mukhya-rasas, that particular mukhya-rasa will
always be the aṅgi-rasa and the other mukhya-rasas will
be component parts.

Only when an aṅga-rasa increases the relish of the aṅgi-
rasa does it serve any purpose as a component part.
Otherwise its mixture with the aṅgi-rasa is fruitless.
In this case it actually presents some obstacle in
relishing the taste of rasa like a blade of grass that
accidentally falls into a drink of nectar. When
incompatible rasas combine together the result is
virasatā or repulsive taste like a salty or bitter-
tasting substance added to nectar.

In the chart of compatibility and incompatibility given
previously, the rasa that appears with the bold heading
refers to a mixture in which it is the aṅgi-rasa. The
compatible rasas and occasionally the neutral rasas
listed below it can be aṅga-rasas for that aṅgi-rasa.
The incompatible rasas are those which when mixed with
the aṅgi-rasa create virasatā or repulsive taste.
Differences in compatibility are based upon which rasa
is acting as the aṅgi-rasa. For example, when dāsya is
the aṅgi-rasa, mādhurya is incompatible. But when
mādhurya is the aṅgi-rasa, dāsya is neutral. This is
because dāsya cannot accommodate the sentiment of
conjugal love, whereas mādhurya can accommodate the
sentiment of servitude. Other similar peculiarities may
be noted.

                          213
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017




Verse 26 — Inclusion of Gauṇa-rasas


within Mukhya-rasas



athaiṣāṁ sapta-gauṇānāṁ pañcasu mukhya-raseṣu antarbhāvo
yathā — hāsya-yuddha-vīrayoḥ sakhye. adbhutasya
sarvatra. karuṇā-dāna-vīra-dayā-vīrāṇāṁ vātsalye.
bhayānakasya vātsalye dāsye ca. bībhatsasya śānte.
raudrasya krodha-rati-vātsalyojjvala-rasa-parivāreṣu
ekāṁśenety anenaiva parasparaṁ maitrī vairaṁ ca yuktyā
jñeyam.



Śrī Bindu-vikāśinī-vṛtti



The seven gauṇa-rasas may be included within the five
mukhya-rasas. For example hāsya and yuddha-vīra may be
included in sakhya. Adbhuta may be included in all five
mukhya-rasas. Dāna-vīra and dayā-vīra may be included in
vātsalya. Bhayānaka may be included in vātsalya and
dāsya, and bībhatsa within śānta. Krodha-rati of raudra-
rasa is included within one aspect of vātsalya- and
mādhurya-rasa. By studying the topic of inclusion of
gauṇa-rasas within mukhya-rasas and applying proper
judgement, one should understand the compatibility and
incompatibility of these rasas. (Those rasas which are
included within others should be understood to be
compatible with them. One may consult the compatibility
chart that is found in the commentary to Verse 25 for
further clarification of this point.)




Verse 27 — Rasābhāsa




vaira-rasasya smaraṇe rādhyatve vā viṣayāśraya-bhede vā
upamāyāṁ vā rasāntara-vyavadhānena vā varṇane sati na
rasābhāsaḥ. anyathā tu paraspara-vairayor yadi yogas
tadā rasābhāsaḥ. yadi parasparaṁ mitra-yogas tadā
surasatā. mukhyānāṁ tu viṣayāśraya-bhede ‘pi vaira-yoge
rasābhāsa eva. evam adhirūḍha-mahābhāve kevalaṁ śrī-
rādhāyāṁ tu vaira-yoge ‘pi varṇana-paripāṭyāṁ na
rasābhāsaḥ. kiṁ ca kṛṣṇo yadi svayam ekadaiva sarva-
rasānāṁ viṣayo vā āśrayo vā tadāpi na rasābhāsaḥ.
athānye ‘pi rasābhāsāḥ kecit grāhya-prāyāḥ — śrī-kṛṣṇe
yadi brahmataś camatkārādhikyaṁ na bhavati tadā śānta-
rasābhāsaḥ. śrī-kṛṣṇāgre yadi dāsasyāti-dhārṣṭyaṁ
bhavati tadā dāsya-rasābhāsaḥ, dvayor madhye ekasya

                           214
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

sakhya-bhāvaḥ anyasya dāsya-bhāvas tadā sakhya-
rasābhāsaḥ, putrādīnāṁ balādhikya-jñānena lālanādya-
karaṇaṁ vātsalya-rasābhāsaḥ, dvayor madhye ekasya
ramaṇecchānyasya nāsti prakaṭam eva sambhoga-prārthanaṁ
vā tadojjvala-rasāhāsaḥ, śrī-kṛṣṇa-sambandha-varjjitāś
cet hāsyādayas tadā te hāsyādi-rasābhāsāḥ, yadi śrī-
kṛṣṇa-vairiṣu bhavanti tadā ati rasābhāsāḥ.



anadhīta-vyākaraṇaś caraṇa-

pravaṇo hare jano yasmāt

bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-

binduto bindu-rūpeṇa



iti mahāmahopādhyāya-śrī-viśvanātha-cakravarti viracitaḥ
bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-binduḥ samāptaḥ.



Śrī Bindu-vikāśinī-vṛtti



In concluding, it is essential to understand rasābhāsa.
There are several circumstances in which the combination
of two incompatible rasas does not generate rasābhāsa:
when an incompatible rasa is remembered (and thus not
presently experienced); when a speaker describes an
incompatible rasa as detrimental and by so doing praises
the excellence of a particular rasa; when the āśraya or
viṣaya of the incompatible gauṇa-rasa is different from
that of the mukhya-rasa (this exception does not apply
when two incompatible mukhya-rasas are combined); when
there is comparison of two incompatible rasas; and when
a neutral or compatible rasa intervenes between two
opposing rasas. Otherwise when there is a combination of
two incompatible rasas it results in rasābhāsa.

When two compatible rasas are combined it results in
surasatā or an enhanced state of rasa. When any two
incompatible mukhya-rasas are combined, even though the
āśraya or viṣaya is different, it results in rasābhāsa.
In the state of adhirūḍha-mahābhāva found only in
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, when there is a combination of many
different incompatible rasas, it does not result in
rasābhāsa. When Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself is the āśraya or
viṣaya of all the rasas at the same time, there is no
rasābhāsa. An example of Śrī Kṛṣṇa as the viṣaya of all
twelve rasas at the same time is given in Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu (4.8.84):



daityācāryās tadāsye vikṛtim aruṇatāṁ malla-varyāḥ
sakhāyo

gaṇḍaunnatyaṁ khaleśāḥ pralayam ṛṣigaṇā dhyānam uṣṇāsram
ambāḥ

                           215
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017


romāñcaṁ sāmyugīnāḥ kam api nava-camatkāram antaḥ
sureśā-

lāsyaṁ dāsāḥ kaṭākṣaṁ yayur asitadṛśaḥ prekṣya raṅge
mukundam



When the priests of Kaṁsa saw Śrī Kṛṣṇa enter the
wrestling arena anointed with blood after killing the
elephant Kuvalayāpīḍa their faces became contorted
(bībhatsa). The faces of the wrestlers turned red with
anger (raudra). The cheeks of Kṛṣṇa’s friends blossomed
with joy (hāsya and sakhya). The wicked lost all
consciousness as if on the verge of death (bhayānaka).
The sages became absorbed in meditation (śānta). Devakī
and the other mothers began to cry warm tears (vātsalya
and karuṇa). The bodily hairs of the warriors stood on
end (vīra). Indra and the other demigods experienced
unprecedented astonishment within their hearts
(adbhuta). The dāsya-bhaktas danced (dāsya), and the
young girls cast sidelong glances (mādhurya).



An example of Śrī Kṛṣṇa as the āśraya of all twelve
rasas at the same time is given in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindhu (4.8.85):



svasmin dhurye ‘py amānī śiśuṣu giridhṛtāv udyateṣu
smitāsyas

thūtkārī dadhni visre praṇayiṣu vivṛta-prauḍhir indre
‘ruṇākṣaḥ

goṣṭhe sāśrur vidūne guruṣu harimakhaṁ prāsya kampaḥ sa
pāyād

āsāre sphāradṛṣṭir yuvatiṣu pulakī bibhrad adriṁ vibhur
vaḥ



Although Śrī Kṛṣṇa supported the great weight of
Govardhana, He was devoid of pride (śānta). He smiled
when He saw that the small boys were prepared to hold up
the hill (hāsya and vātsalya). He spat at the smell of
musty yoghurt (bībhatsa). He displayed tremendous
prowess to lift Govardhana in the presence of His
beloved friends (sakhya and vīra). He looked at Indra
with red eyes (raudra). Tears came to His eyes when He
saw the residents of Vraja tormented by the powerful
wind and rain (karuṇa). He trembled before His
respectful elders on account of having spoiled the Indra
yajña (dāsya and bhayānaka). His eyes widened at the
torrential downpour of water (adbhuta), and His hairs
stood on end when He saw the young girls (mādhurya). May
that Lord Giridhārī protect you.




                          216
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

Rasābhāsa has been defined in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu
(4.9.1) as follows:



pūrvam evānuśiṣṭena

vikalā rasa-lakṣmaṇā

rasā eva rasābhāsā

rasajñair anukīrtitāḥ



That which appears to be rasa but in which there is a
deficiency or impropriety in any of the elements that
comprise it is called rasābhāsa, a semblance of rasa, by
those learned in the science of rasa.



The elements that compose rasa are sthāyibhāva, vibhāva,
anubhāva, sāttvika-bhāva and vyabhicāri-bhāva. If any of
these elements are missing or if there is an impropriety
in any of them, then although the combination produced
may have the appearance of rasa, it is but a semblance
of rasa and is therefore known as rasābhāsa.

There are three gradations of rasābhāsa: (1) uparasa,
(2) anurasa and (3) aparasa. These are known
respectively as uttama, madhyama and kaniṣṭha.



(1) Uparasa

If śānta or any of the twelve rasas are obtained by
distortion of the sthāyibhāva, vibhāva, anubhāva or any
of the other elements, it is called uparasa. Although
there are many examples of this, we will give only one
example for each of the five principal rasas.

(i) Śānta-uparasa — If one does not see any greater
splendour in Śrī Kṛṣṇa who is the personification of
Parabrahma than one does in nirviśeṣa-brahma, it becomes
śānta-uparasa-rasābhāsa.

(ii) Dāsya-uparasa — If a servant displays excessive
impudence in the presence of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, it becomes
dāsya-uparasa-rasābhāsa.

(iii) Sakhya-uparasa — If amongst two friends one has
the attitude of a friend and the other has the attitude
of a servant, it becomes sakhya-uparasa-rasābhāsa.

(iv) Vātsalya-uparasa — If one does not endeavour to
care for and protect one’s child because of awareness of
his great strength, it becomes vātsalya-uparasa-
rasābhāsa.

(v) Mādhurya-uparasa — If a nāyikā (heroine) desires a
conjugal relationship with a nāyaka (hero), but he does
not desire the same with her, or vice-versa, or if one

                          217
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt               5/5/2017

of them openly solicits their conjugal union, it becomes
mādhurya-uparasa-rasābhāsa.



(2) Anurasa

If hāsya or any of the seven gauṇa-rasas and śānta-rasa
is produced by ālambana-vibhāva, anubhāva or other
elements that are devoid of a relationship with Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, it becomes anurasa.



(3) Aparasa

If Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the viṣaya and the enemies of Kṛṣṇa are
the āśraya of hāsya or any of the gauṇa-rasas, it is
known as aparasa. This is counted as an extreme case of
rasābhāsa.



In concluding Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says,
“Those who have not studied the śāstras dealing with
grammar but who are eager to serve the lotus feet of Śrī
Hari, shall become attached as a drop (bindu) at His
lotus feet by studying this Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-
bindu.”

Thus ends the translation of the commentary Śrī Bindu-
vikāśinī-vṛtti to Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu.

85



Table of Contents

Preface

Maṅgalācaraṇam

Verse 1 — Uttama-bhakti

Verse 2 — Sādhana-bhakti

Verse 3 — Stages Leading to the Appearance of Prema

Verse 4 — The Sixty-four Limbs of Bhajana

Verse 5 — Sevāparādha

Verse 6 — The Severity of Nāmāparādha

Verse 7 — Nāmāparādha

Verse 8 — Vaidhī-bhakti

Verse 9 — Rāgānuga-bhakti

Verse 10 — Further Discussion on Rāgānuga-bhakti

Verse 11 — Five Types of Rāgānuga-sādhana

                            218
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                5/5/2017


Verse 12 — Bhāva-bhakti

Verse 13 — Prema-bhakti

Verse 14 — Overview of Bhakti-rasa

Verse 15 — Description of Vyabhicāri-bhāvas

Verse 16 — Gradation in the Manifestation of Bhāvas

Verse 17 — General Description of Sthāyibhāva

Verse 18 — Śānta-rasa

Verse 19 — Dāsya-rasa

Verse 20 — Sakhya-rasa

Verse 21 — Vātsalya-rasa

Verse 22 — Mādhurya-rasa

Verse 23 — Mixture of Bhāvas

Verse 24 — Overview of Gauṇa-rasa

Verse 25 — Compatible and Incompatible Rasas

Verse 26 — Inclusion of Gauṇa-rasas

Verse 27 — Rasābhāsa




Table of Contents

Preface

Maṅgalācaraṇam

Verse 1 — Uttama-bhakti

Verse 2 — Sādhana-bhakti

Verse 3 — Stages Leading to the Appearance of Prema

Verse 4 — The Sixty-four Limbs of Bhajana

Verse 5 — Sevāparādha

Verse 6 — The Severity of Nāmāparādha

Verse 7 — Nāmāparādha

Verse 8 — Vaidhī-bhakti

Verse 9 — Rāgānuga-bhakti

Verse 10 — Further Discussion on Rāgānuga-bhakti

Verse 11 — Five Types of Rāgānuga-sādhana

                            219
Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu-bindu.txt                5/5/2017


Verse 12 — Bhāva-bhakti

Verse 13 — Prema-bhakti

Verse 14 — Overview of Bhakti-rasa

Verse 15 — Description of Vyabhicāri-bhāvas

Verse 16 — Gradation in the Manifestation of Bhāvas

Verse 17 — General Description of Sthāyibhāva

Verse 18 — Śānta-rasa

Verse 19 — Dāsya-rasa

Verse 20 — Sakhya-rasa

Verse 21 — Vātsalya-rasa

Verse 22 — Mādhurya-rasa

Verse 23 — Mixture of Bhāvas

Verse 24 — Overview of Gauṇa-rasa

Verse 25 — Compatible and Incompatible Rasas

Verse 26 — Inclusion of Gauṇa-rasas

Verse 27 — Rasābhāsa




                           220
