Brahma-samhita.txt       5/5/2017

Śrī Brahma-saṁhitā




Contents

Verse 1

Verse 2

Verses 3—4

Verse 5

Verse 6

Verse 7

Verse 8

Verse 9

Verse 10

Verse 11

Verse 12

Verse 13

Verse 14

Verse 15

Verse 16

Verse 17

Verse 18

Verse 19

Verse 20

Verse 21

Verse 22

Verse 23

Verse 24

Verse 25

Verse 26

Verse 27

Verse 28

Verse 29

Verse 30

                     1
Brahma-samhita.txt       5/5/2017


Verse 31

Verse 32

Verse 33

Verse 34

Verse 35

Verse 36

Verse 37

Verse 38

Verse 39

Verse 40

Verse 41

Verse 42

Verse 43

Verse 44

Verse 45

Verse 46

Verse 47

Verse 48

Verse 49

Verse 50

Verse 51

Verse 52

Verse 53

Verse 54

Verse 55

Verse 56

Verse 57

Verse 58

Verse 59

Verse 60

Verse 61

Verse 62

                     2
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017




Verse 1


īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ

anādir ādir govindaḥ

sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam



Anvaya

kṛṣṇaḥ — Vrajendra-nandana Kṛṣṇa (is); paramaḥ īśvaraḥ —
the Supreme Controller, that is to say the controller of
all other controllers, and the original source of all
incarnations; sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ — His body is
endowed with the three potencies of existence, knowledge
and bliss (sandhinī, saṁvit and hlādinī); govindaḥ — (He
is) known as Govinda, meaning He to whom service should
be rendered through the senses, and He is the presiding
deity of the practical process of devotional service
(abhidheya-tattva); anādiḥ — without a beginning; ādiḥ —
the original form of all else; sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam —
the cause of all causes, or the original form.



Translation

Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Govinda, is the embodiment of eternity,
knowledge and bliss. He is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, the controller of all lesser controllers, and
the source of all incarnations. He has no beginning or
origin, though He is the source of everything and the
cause of all causes.



Translation and explanation of Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī’s ṭīkā
(bhāvānuvāda)

I offer my obeisances to Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Govinda, by whose
grace I have been inspired with the desire to comment
upon Śrī Brahma-saṁhitā. May the glory of the beautiful
form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa arise most excellently within my
heart.

It is impossible for me to illuminate the thoroughly
consistent, genuine purports and pleasing considerations
within the heart of the greatest of sages, Śrī Brahmā,
but he is nonetheless my only refuge.

Although this Brahma-saṁhitā is complete with one
hundred chapters, still this Fifth Chapter, being the
condensed essence of the entire book, brings the subject
matter within our grasp.

                           3
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017


The deep philosophical considerations in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam and other śāstras that are seen by persons
endowed with immaculate intelligence are all found
collected together here. This brings extreme jubilation
to my heart.

In order to deliberate further on what I described
elaborately in Śrī Kṛṣṇa-sandarbha, I am touching upon
the content of this scripture with full, thoughtful
deliberation.

The following verse of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam has been
ascertained to be the defining statement (paribhāṣā):
“ete cāṁśa-kalāḥ puṁsaḥ, kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam — all
the incarnations of Godhead are either plenary
expansions or expansions of the expansions of the
Supreme Person, but Śrī Kṛṣṇa is Himself the original
Personality of Godhead.”

Similarly, in the verse at hand, Kṛṣṇa has also been
called the supreme controller, or the controller of all
other controllers (īśvaraḥ-paramaḥ). Other incarnations
of Kṛṣṇa are also called controllers (īśvara);
therefore, only the origin of all incarnations, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, has been called the supreme controller
(parameśvara).

It is stated in śāstra, “Let me try to understand Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, who is the supreme controller of all controllers,
the supreme worshipable deity among all worshipable
deities, the supreme progenitor of all progenitors, and
the master of the entire creation.”

In this first verse, the word kṛṣṇa is the subject, and
all the other words take the role of adjectives. All the
famous perfect authorities, including Śrī Śukadeva
Gosvāmī, have established Śrī Kṛṣṇa as the source of all
incarnations by phrases such as “kṛṣṇāvatāra-mahotsava —
the great festival of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s descent.” The
invocation of Sāmopaniṣad also supports this through the
kīrtana of Kṛṣṇa’s names in verses such as kṛṣṇāya
vāsudevāya devakī-nandanāya.

At the time of Kṛṣṇa’s appearance, when Gargācārya came
to Nanda-Gokula and performed Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s name-giving
ceremony, Garga Ṛṣi said, “O Nanda, your son has
appeared in previous ages as well. He came in a white
form in Satya-yuga, a red form in Tretā-yuga, a yellow
form in Kali-yuga, and now in Dvāpara-yuga He has
appeared with a blackish complexion. Therefore this
boy’s name is Kṛṣṇa.” In that statement of Gargācārya,
the phrase kṛṣṇatāṁ gataḥ means kṛṣṇa-svarūpatāṁ gataḥ,
entered into Kṛṣṇa’s original form. It is evident from
this statement that all the incarnations attain identity
with Kṛṣṇa by entering into Kṛṣṇa’s original form.1 This
conclusion is supported by the logic of filling a pot
with milk. Just as a pot is full of milk, so the śāstra
is filled with the names of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The all-in-all,
the Supreme Truth, the supreme non-dual reality has been
called Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

In the Prabhāsa-khaṇḍa of the Padma Purāṇa, there is a
discussion between Śrī Nārada and Kuśadhvaja, in which

                           4
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

the following verse has been cited: “nāmnāṁ mukhyatamaṁ
nāma kṛṣṇākhyaṁ me parantapa — O subduer of enemies, the
name Kṛṣṇa is foremost amongst all My names.” Therefore
it is said in Śrī Kṛṣṇa-aṣṭottara-śata-nāma-stotra in
the Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa (2.3.36.19):

sahasra-nāmnāṁ puṇyānām

trir āvṛttyā tu yat phalam

ekāvṛttyā tu kṛṣṇasya

nāmaikaṁ tat prayacchati

The result that comes from reciting the entire Viṣṇu-
sahasra-nāma (Thousand Names of Viṣṇu) thrice is
attained by reciting the name Kṛṣṇa only once.

In this way the specific glories of the name of Kṛṣṇa
have been highlighted. In the present verse also,
Brahmājī has offered prayers to Śrī Kṛṣṇa by the name
Govinda. Govinda is Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself — the protector of
cows, gopīs, cowherd boys and all the residents of
Vraja. To illuminate this special quality of His, He has
been called Gavendra, Lord of the cows. Kṛṣṇa’s
supremacy is proven by the logic of giving free rein
(mukta-pragraha-vṛtti)2 and solid evidence from
scriptures. Adjectives such as īśvara in the first verse
also specifically confirm this point.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s supremacy is also pointed out through His
endless qualities. For example, Śrī Gargācārya has said:

āsan varṇās trayo hy asya

gṛhṇato ‘nuyugaṁ tanūḥ

śuklo raktas tathā pīta

idānīṁ kṛṣṇatāṁ gataḥ

bahūni santi nāmāni

rūpāṇi ca sutasya te

guṇa-karmānurūpāṇi

tāny ahaṁ veda no janāḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.8.13, 15)

O Nanda Mahārāja, your son has many qualities and
activities, in accordance with which He has many names
at different times. This is known only to me and to no
one else. In every yuga He appears in different
incarnations, and now He has appeared as Kṛṣṇa.

All the incarnations who have appeared since the
beginning of the creation, such as Śukla, have come
within Kṛṣṇa (idānīṁ kṛṣṇatāṁ gataḥ); that is, all
incarnations have combined together in Kṛṣṇa. Therefore
Kṛṣṇa’s superiority is revealed by His status as the
actual agent. All the avatāras are only forms of Kṛṣṇa.
From the verse beginning bahūni santi nāmāni rūpāṇi, it

                             5
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

is understood that all names and forms are names and
forms of Kṛṣṇa. Thus, His distinguishing uniqueness is
also proven by His qualities.

Furthermore, the following verse exclusively describes
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and cannot be applicable to anyone else:

kṛṣir bhū-vācakaḥ śabdo

ṇaś ca nirvṛtti-vācakaḥ

tayor aikyaṁ paraṁ brahma

kṛṣṇa ity abhidhīyate

Mahābhārata (Udyoga-parva 71.4)

The word kṛṣ is the attractive feature of the Lord’s
existence, and ṇa means spiritual pleasure. When the
verb kṛṣ is added to ṇa, it becomes Kṛṣṇa, which
indicates the Absolute Truth.

The verbal root kṛṣ indicates all that exists (bhū-
vācaka), and ṇa indicates attraction that negates
everything else (nirvṛtti-vācaka). The combined form of
these two is Śrī Kṛṣṇa. In the Gautamīya-tantra — one of
the Sātvata-tantras, which are all primarily concerned
with the worship of Śrī Kṛṣṇa — there is a similar verse
in the description of the eighteen-syllable mantra
(2.60):

kṛṣi-śabdasya sattārtho

ṇaś cānanda-svarūpakaḥ

sukha-rūpo bhaved ātmā

bhāvānandamayas tataḥ

The word kṛṣi indicates “existence or truth,” and ṇa
refers to the embodiment of natural bliss. The combined
meaning is “one whose existence is characterized by
bliss” or “one who attracts all and bestows bliss upon
them.”

Such is the constitutional nature of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; He is
the embodiment of happiness and His very nature is the
topmost transcendental bliss. Many meanings can be
derived from this name. The verbal root bhū, found in
the verse at the bottom of the previous page, refers to
existence. The meaning can also be taken in this context
as “attraction.” In the Gautamīya-tantra, the word bhū
has been accepted as a statement of existence. For
example, both syllables of the Sanskrit word ghaṭa,
which refers to a narrow-mouthed waterpot, are required
to distinguish it as the word that refers to “waterpot.”
Thus, when we say ghaṭa, it is understood that we are
referring to a waterpot. Although the word paṭa (cloth)
differs from ghaṭa by only one syllable, it is
completely distinct from the word ghaṭa and the object
referred to by ghaṭa. Similarly, in the present context,
bhū and sattā can only proclaim the all-attractiveness
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Furthermore, nirvṛtti can only be taken to
mean “bliss” (ānanda). The two words together (tayor

                            6
Brahma-samhita.txt                               5/5/2017

aikyam) give a distinct meaning, according to the
grammatical rule of giving preference to the composite
meaning when two words refer to the same subject. This
is the etymology of the word kṛṣṇa.

Tayor aikyaṁ paraṁ brahma: When combined, the words for
undivided existence (sattā) and unbroken bliss (ānanda)
indicate that Parabrahma, who is supreme in every
possible way and who is the greatest of the great, is
called Kṛṣṇa. But here, taking the verbal root kṛṣ as
meaning “attractive,” and taking ṇa as ānanda, one
should understand that the description of their
inseparable nature has been given in the mood of
relation between cause and effect, and not by the
grammatical rule of taking them as referring to the same
subject.

The logic of “ghee is life” (āyur ghṛtam)3 is used to
show that in the form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, existence has an
abundant measure of attraction. It is stated in the
Viṣṇu Purāṇa (1.12.55):

bṛhatvād bṛhaṇatvāc ca yad brahmaṁ paraṁ viduḥ

One who is great and makes others great is Parabrahma.

It is also stated in the śruti:

atha kasmād ucyate brahma bṛṁhati bṛṁhayati ca

What is Brahman? Brahman is one who is great and who
makes others great.

The impersonalists accept that the words sattā
(existence) and ānanda (bliss) mean the same, but such
logic is inconsistent. The literal meaning of the word
sattā (existence), being a statement of the existence of
the Supreme Being, indicates that all sages and saints
are attracted to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. In the śruti it is said: “sa
deva saumya idam agram āsīt — O Saumya, before the
creation, only the eternal form (sat-svarūpa) of
Bhagavān existed.” Bhagavān, whose intrinsic form and
nature are eternal, has both complete bliss and complete
attraction. Thus, it is certain that the word kṛṣṇaḥ in
this first verse of Brahma-saṁhitā is a noun and the
other words are adjectives. The impersonalists use the
analogy of the tree, but in the phrase vṛkṣa-taruḥ,
there is no relationship of noun and adjective since
both words refer equally to “tree.” Therefore, the
impersonalists’ statement that sattā and ānanda have the
same meaning is completely irrational. The verse from
the Gautamīya-tantra is explained thus.

In the first half of this verse beginning īśvaraḥ
paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ, the most attractive personification of
bliss, who is distinguished by His inconceivable
energies, is called Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The all-attractiveness of
Kṛṣṇa’s form and His quality of being the original form
of all pleasure are mentioned in the second half of the
verse. Here the word sarva refers to the living
entities, because Śrī Kṛṣṇa attracts them and makes them
blissful. The cause of this is love (bhāva). Thus, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is He who is always immersed in the joy of love
(premānanda) and who immerses others in it as well.

                           7
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

Therefore, the word kṛṣṇa can only refer to the
embodiment of bliss, who is supremely attractive due to
His form and qualities. The word kṛṣṇa finds its limit
in Devakī-nandana (Kṛṣṇa, the son of Devakī). The all-
attractiveness of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is mentioned in the Vāsudeva
Upaṇiṣad: “devakī-nandano nikhilam ānandayet — Devakī-
nandana Kṛṣṇa gives bliss to all moving and non-moving
living entities.” In this first śloka of Brahma-saṁhitā,
the word ānanda (bliss) is not declinable according to
the rules of Sanskrit grammar and is therefore
independently meaningful. Thus this word ānanda should
not be taken out of context. It has been used to
indicate Śrī Kṛṣṇa. As Bhaṭṭajī has said:4

labdhvātmikā satī rūḍhir

bhaved yogāpahāriṇī

kalpanīyā tu labhate

nātmānaṁ yoga-vādhataḥ

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is clearly specified as Parabrahma in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam: “gūḍhaṁ paraṁ brahma manuṣya-liṅgam — Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is Parabrahma hiding in human form.” “Yan mitraṁ
paramānandaṁ pūrṇa-brahma sanātanam — Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the
friend of the cowherd folk headed by Nanda Mahārāja.
That very Śrī Kṛṣṇa is Parabrahma, the supremely
blissful, ultimate and eternal Absolute Truth.” In the
Viṣṇu Purāṇa it is stated: “yatrāvatīrṇaṁ kṛṣṇākhyaṁ
param brahma narākṛtiḥ — Parabrahma, who is known as
Kṛṣṇa, descended and exhibited His human-like pastimes.”
In Bhagavad-gītā it is said: “brahmaṇo hi pratiṣṭhāham —
I am the basis of the formless and imperishable
Brahman.” And in Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad it is said: “yo
‘sau paraṁ brahma gopālaḥ — He who is Parabrahma, the
Supreme Spirit, is Gopāla (Kṛṣṇa).” These scriptural
statements clearly establish the supremacy of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
as Parabrahma.

The description here is in accordance with the first
verse of Brahma-saṁhitā. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is that īśvara who is
replete with names, forms and qualities. Īśvara means
one who keeps everything under His control and who is
able to accomplish anything. This is also inferred in
the Gautamīya-tantra, where another meaning of the word
kṛṣṇa is found:

athavā karṣayet sarvaṁ

jagat sthāvara-jaṅgamam

kāla-rūpena bhagavāṁs

tenāyaṁ kṛṣṇa ucyate

That Bhagavān who in the form of all-devouring time
draws along all moving and non-moving living entities is
called Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

“Kalayati niyamayati sarvam iti hi kāla-śabdārthaḥ — one
who regulates everything in the form of time is called
kāla.” In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, the great devotee Śrī
Uddhava has expressed his opinion thus:

                           8
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017


svayaṁ tv asāmyātiśayas tryadhīśaḥ

svarājya-lakṣmyāpta-samasta-kāmaḥ

baliṁ haradbhiś cira-loka-pālaiḥ

kirīta-kotīḍita-pāda-pīṭhaḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.2.29)

Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa is that personality who is complete
and indivisible, who has no equal or superior, who is
the master of all three planetary systems, whose desires
are completely satisfied by His supreme Lakṣmī, and to
whose lotus feet all the universal authorities, such as
the millions of Brahmās, bow down their millions of
heads in order to attain the fulfillment of their
desires.

This is also supported by Bhagavad-gītā: “viṣṭabhyāham
idaṁ kṛtsnam ekāṁśena sthito jagat — through only one of
My expansions, I pervade and support this entire
universe.”

It is also stated in the Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad (21):
“eko vaśī sarvagaḥ kṛṣṇa īḍyaḥ — Śrī Kṛṣṇa is one. He
controls everyone, knows everything and is worshipable
by all.” Such an īśvara can be referred to as parama.
Para means “the most excellent” and mā means “Lakṣmī,
the sum total of all potencies.” Therefore, one who is
eternally accompanied by the most excellent Lakṣmī,
namely Śrī Rādhā, is called parameśvara Śrī Kṛṣṇa. For
example, it is stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam: “reme
ramābhir nija-kāma-samplutaḥ — Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa
enjoyed His pastimes with Śrīmatī Rādhikā and the other
gopīs.” Also: “nāyaṁ śriyo ‘nga u nitānta-rateḥ prasādaḥ
— the great fortune attained by the gopīs in the pastime
of the rāsa dance with Śrī Kṛṣṇa was not available for
the queens of Dvārakā headed by Rukmiṇī and Satyabhāmā,
nor for the Lakṣmīs of Vaikuṇṭha or Devaloka, not to
mention the demigoddesses of heaven.”

Furthermore, in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is stated:
“tatrātiśuśubhe tābhir bhagavān devakī-sutaḥ — Devakī-
nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa began to look even more beautiful
amidst all those gopīs.” In the latter part of this
Brahma-saṁhitā (56), we will find: “śriyaḥ kāntāḥ kāntaḥ
parama-puruṣah — in Goloka Vṛndāvana there is only one
hero, namely parama-puruṣa Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Lakṣmīs, in the
form of gopīs, are His beloveds.” The Gopāla-tāpanī
Upaniṣad confirms this: “kṛṣṇo vai paramaṁ daivatam —
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the only supreme worshipable deity.”

In the same way that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Person
(parama-puruṣa), He is also the original person (ādi-
puruṣa).

śrutvā ‘jitaṁ jarāsandhaṁ

nṛpater dhyāyato hariḥ

āhopāyaṁ tam evādya


                              9
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

uddhavo yam uvāca ha

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.72.15)

After conquering all directions, Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira
was contemplating how to defeat Jarāsandha, who appeared
to be invincible. At that moment Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
original personality (ādi-puruṣa), suggested a method
that He had heard from Uddhava.

Commentators on this verse have confirmed: “ādyo hariḥ
śrī-kṛṣṇaḥ — the original Hari is Śrī Kṛṣṇa.”

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.29.49), the supremacy of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and His status as the origin of everything are
both mentioned: “puruṣam ṛṣabham ādyaṁ kṛṣṇa-saṁjñaṁ
nato ‘smi — I offer my obeisances to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is
the origin of all, the eternal and supreme personality
(puruṣa). He is the origin (ādi) because He is the
source of all incarnations, though He is beginningless.”

In the Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad (21) it is said: “eko vaśī
sarvagaḥ kṛṣṇa īḍyaḥ — Svayam Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa is He
who is one without a second, who controls everyone, who
can go anywhere, who is omnipotent, who knows everything
and who is worshipable by all.” In the Upaniṣads it is
stated: “nityo nityānām — there is one Supreme Eternal
amongst all eternals, one Supreme Consciousness among
all conscious beings. Although He is one, He fulfills
the desires of all.”

According to the statements of śruti, He is the origin
of everything and the cause of all causes. He is also
the cause of Kāraṇodakaśāyī Mahā-Viṣṇu, who is the
creator of the material world. For example, in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.85.31) Mother Devakī says to Śrī Kṛṣṇa:

yasyāṁśāṁśāṁśa-bhāgena

viśvotpatti-layodayā

bhavanti kila viśvātmaṁs

taṁ tv ādyāhaṁ gatiṁ gatā

I take shelter of Govinda, who is the indwelling
supersoul of the entire universe. O original Puruṣa,
Your plenary portion is the great Lord of Vaikuṇṭha,
Nārāyaṇa, whose further partial expansion is
Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. Material nature is a partial
manifestation of His potency. The creation, destruction
and maintenance of this world are accomplished through
the modes of ignorance, passion and so on, which are
only constituent portions of this material nature.

It is also stated in Brahmā’s prayers (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
10.14.14): “nārāyaṇo ‘ṅga nārāyaṇa-bhū-jalāyanāt — O
Kṛṣṇa, You are the origin of Nārāyaṇa. Nāra means ‘the
collective group of living entities,’ and ayaṇa means
‘You are the shelter.’ Bhū means ‘the shelter of all the
worlds’ and sākṣī means ‘one who knows past, present and
future.’ Nārāyaṇa is Your part and parcel; He is one of
Your pastime expansions (vilāsa-mūrti). This is Your
constitutional nature, which is indivisible. If Your

                            10
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

nature is indivisible, how can You take shelter of water
that is divisible? To answer this doubt, it is said that
Your divisibility is not factual, but it seems to be so
because of māyā. Although You are indivisible, You seem
to be situated in divisibility by the influence of Your
inconceivable potency. Even though this is true, Your
form as Nārāyaṇa is not a false imaginary form like Your
universal form. Therefore, Nārāyaṇa is Your limb, and
You are His fundamental origin.”

In Bhagavad-gītā (10.42) it is also stated:
“viṣṭabhyāham idaṁ kṛtsnam ekāṁśena sthito jagat — this
entire world exists on the basis of one of My
expansions.” The etymological meaning of the word kṛṣṇa
has also been proven here. As described previously, His
all-attractiveness and His supremely blissful nature
have been indicated by the combination of both kṛṣ and
ṇa. He is one without a second; there is no other entity
or truth besides Him, nor can anyone be compared to Him.
That is why He is the non-dual Supreme Truth, who is one
without a second and the cause of all causes. There is
no separate substance or energy that can be imposed on
Him, because nothing else has any existence separate
from Him or independent of Him.

It is also said in the śruti, “ānandaḥ brahmeti —
Brahman is the original form of bliss.” “Ko hy evānyāt
kaḥ prāṇyād ya ākāśa ānando na syāt — if He were not the
original form of bliss, how could anyone else maintain
their life?” “Ānandād dhīmāni bhūtāni jāyante — all
living beings have been produced from this
blissfulness.”

na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇaṁ ca vidyate

na tat samaś cābhyadhikaś ca dṛśyate

parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate

svābhāvikī jñāna-bala-kriyā ca

Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (6.8)

He does not have any mundane work to perform, nor does
He possess material senses. There is no one like Him,
and certainly no one is greater than Him. He has an
eternal and natural superior energy which is manifested
in various ways and which is the source of knowledge,
strength and activity.

Someone may say, “According to etymology, ‘Śrī Kṛṣṇa’
certainly refers to the all-attractive supreme ānanda,
but this analysis does not establish that He has a
personal form, because bliss has no form; it is
unembodied.” This is partly true, but Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa
is the supremely original perfect form of ānanda. That
is why He has been called sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha in this
first verse of Brahma-saṁhitā. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the
embodiment of concentrated existence, knowledge and
bliss.

In Brahmā’s prayers in the Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.14.22) it is stated: “tvayy eva nitya-
sukha-bodha-tanau — the entire world is temporary. That

                              11
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

is why it is dreamlike, ephemeral, insentient, dull and
distressful. On the other hand, You are the embodiment
of eternity, knowledge and bliss, infinite and
unlimited. The creation and destruction of this world
takes place only by the influence of Your inconceivable
illusory energy, but even so, the world appears to be
reality.”

The Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad (1.1) and the Hayaśīrṣa-
pañcarātra also give evidence for Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s sac-cid-
ānanda form:

sac-cid-ānanda-rūpāya

kṛṣṇāyākliṣṭa-kāriṇe

namo vedānta-vedyāya

gurave buddhi-sākṣiṇe

I offer my obeisances to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is the
concentrated form of eternity, knowledge and bliss; who
is the subject matter defined by Vedānta; who
effortlessly creates, maintains and destroys the entire
world; who frees His devotees from the five types of
suffering beginning with ignorance; and who is our guru.
As guru He inspires the intelligence of all, and He is
the witness of our activities. Unto that Śrī Kṛṣṇa I
offer my obeisances again and again.

In the Śatanāma-stotra section of the Brahmānda Purāṇa,
it is also said: “nava-vraja-janānandī sac-cid-ānanda-
vigrahaḥ — Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is the concentrated form of
eternity, knowledge and bliss, increases the ānanda of
Śrī Nanda-Vraja, and all the residents of Vraja.” Later,
it will be stated: “sattvaṁ khalv avyabhicāritvam ucyate
— Śrī Kṛṣṇa is pure transcendental existence. His
existence can never be inhibited.”

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.2.26) the same conclusion has
been established by the statements of the demigods,
headed by Brahmā: “satya-vrataṁ satya-paraṁ tri-satyam —
O Bhagavān, whatever You desire becomes reality (satya-
saṅkalpa). You are true to Your vow (satya-vrata)
because You are responsible for manifesting Your own
desires (saṅkalpa). Truthfulness is the means to attain
You, and therefore You are the Supreme Truth (satya-
para). You are unchanged during creation, maintenance
and destruction. You are truth itself. You are the root
cause of the five major ingredients of creation: earth,
water, fire, air and space. After these elements are
again manifested during creation, You are present within
them as the indwelling Supersoul, and after the
devastation only You remain. You are the origin of both
truthful speech and equal vision. Therefore, we are
taking shelter of You, who are the original form of the
Absolute Truth.”

This conclusion is also supported by the statements of
Mother Devakī:

naṣṭe loke dviparārdhāvasāne

mahābhūteṣv ādibhūtaṁ gateṣu

                           12
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017


vyakte ‘vyaktaṁ kāla-vegena yāte

bhavān ekaḥ śiṣyate śeṣa-saṁjñaḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.3.25)

At the time of devastation at the end of Brahmā’s life,
the eternal time factor destroys all moving and non-
moving objects in the world. The five gross elements
beginning with earth revert to their subtle state, and
all manifested objects disappear into their unmanifested
form. Only You remain.

Furthermore, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.3.27) states: “martyo
mṛtyu-vyāla-bhītaḥ palāyan sarvāl lokān nirbhayaṁ
nādhyagacchat — the entities of this mortal world are
terrified of the great snake of death. Although they
flee throughout all the planets headed by Brahmaloka
just to find shelter, they cannot become fearless
anywhere. However, if such a fearful living entity
associates with a liberated soul, then by the influence
of devotion to You he attains the shelter of Your lotus
feet and becomes liberated from the fear of the material
world forever. Even death abandons him and flees far
away.”

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.18) states: “eko ‘si prathamam
— before the creation, only I existed.” Brahmājī has
also said: “tad idam brahmādvayaṁ śiṣyate — in the end,
only the indivisible Supreme Spirit remains.” In
Bhagavad-gītā it is said: “brahmaṇo hi pratiṣṭhāham — I
am also the basis of that Brahman.”

yasmāt kṣaram atīto ‘ham

akṣarād api cottamaḥ

ato ‘smi loke vede ca

prathitaḥ puruṣottamaḥ

Bhagavad-gītā (15.18)

I am beyond the manifest nature, and I am also superior
to the unmanifest. That is why I am celebrated
throughout the world and in the Vedas as Puruṣottama.

Bhagavān is eternally masculine (puruṣa-tattva); He is
not feminine or impotent. When the conception of
masculinity (puruṣa-tattva) is understood, the mistaken
conception of His being feminine or neuter cannot
remain. Amongst all the viṣṇu-tattva expansions,
Puruṣottama Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the most excellent.

In the Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad (23) it has been said:

janma-jarābhyāṁ bhinnaḥ sthāṇur ayam

acchedyo ‘yaṁ yo ‘sau saurye tiṣṭhati

yo ‘sau goṣu tiṣṭhati

yo ‘sau gāḥ pālayati yo ‘sau gopeṣu tiṣṭhati

                              13
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017


Bhagavān is without desire. He is not affected by the
six transformations, namely birth, death, hunger,
thirst, old age and sorrow. He is Parabrahman and always
exists in a form that never deteriorates. He is the
central feature of the solar system (sūrya-maṇḍala, or
Sauri). He protects and nourishes the wish-fulfilling
cows, surrounded by His cowherd boy companions. He also
performs His pastimes in the cottages and groves on the
banks of the Yamunā, who is the daughter of the sun-god
Sūrya. Even death personified is afraid of Him. That
Supreme Personality is Śrī Govinda.

Here one should understand the word saurye to mean the
Saurī, or Yamunā River, and also Śrī Vṛndāvana, which is
situated on its bank.

Having discussed the eternal form (sat-svarūpa) of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, we will now establish the cognizant nature (cit-
svarūpa) of that form. Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s original form is
self-manifested, so He can also manifest others.

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.23), Śrī Brahmā says: “ekas
tvam ātmā puruṣaḥ purāṇaḥ, satyaḥ svayaṁ jyotir ananta
ādyaḥ — O Bhagavān, You are the only truth because You
are the ātmā of all ātmās; that is, You are situated as
paramātmā in everyone’s heart. You are different from
the perceptible world around us. You are the root cause
of the creation, maintenance and destruction of this
world; You are the primeval personality and the eternal
supreme reality; You are completely immersed in eternal
bliss; You are the embodiment of nectar, beyond all
material designations; You are supremely pure, or in
other words free from the modes of material nature; and
You are self-illuminating, endless and indivisible. You
are the supreme non-dual Absolute Truth (advaya-jñāna-
para-tattva).”

In the Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad (1.24), it is stated:

yo brahmāṇaṁ vidadhāti pūrvaṁ yo

brahma-vidyāṁ tasmai gā pālayati sma kṛṣṇaḥ

tāṁ hi devam ātma-vṛtti-prakāśaṁ

mumukṣur vai śaraṇam amuṁ vrajet

In the beginning of creation Parameśvara first
manifested Brahmā, and then, in the forms of Matsya,
Hayagrīva and other incarnations, He delivered the Vedas
from sinking into the ocean of devastation. He gave
instructions to Brahmā on spiritual science. He is the
supreme worshipable deity, and He is self-manifest in
His eternal form as Śrī Kṛṣṇa. All devotees take shelter
of Him.

In the śruti it is stated: “na cakṣuṣā paśyati rūpam
asya — it is not possible to see Him with these material
eyes.” Katha Upaniṣad (1.2.23) states: “yam evaiṣa
vṛṇute tena labhyas tasyaiṣa ātmā vivṛṇute tanuṁ svām —
He manifests Himself in the hearts of those who are
surrendered to Him.” The self-manifested original form
of the Supreme Personality is Svayam Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

                           14
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

He is therefore called the form of knowledge, which
means that He is self-manifest.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is also the original form of bliss (ānanda-
svarūpa). The purport of ānanda-svarūpa is
“sarvatobhāvena nirupādhika-parama-premāspada — He is in
every respect the supreme abode of prema, without any
material designations.”

It is stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.49) that after
Mahārāja Parīkṣit heard Brahmājī’s prayers, he inquired
from Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī: “brahman parodbhave kṛṣṇe — O
brāhmaṇa, how is it that the residents of Vraja had such
prema for Śrī Kṛṣṇa, which they did not possess even for
their own sons?”

Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī replied, “O King, every living
entity only holds his own self (ātmā) dear. Besides
one’s self, all other objects of affection such as sons
and wealth are dear in a secondary way, not directly,
and only because of fondness for the ātmā. Living
entities who have accepted a material body have more
attachment for their own selves than for their sons,
wealth, house and other paraphernalia. Therefore, all
living beings are most attached to their own selves. In
this world of moving and non-moving entities, any sense
of happiness is due to the ātmā. The conclusion is that
one should understand Śrī Kṛṣṇa to be the original Self
(ātma-svarūpa) of all living entities. He mercifully
appears in this world for the benefit of all. The entire
universe is the external form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; in other
words Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the root cause of everything. Thus
there is nothing that is not related to Him.”

Śrī Vasudeva has described his own realization of this:

vidito ‘si bhavān sākṣād

īśvaraḥ prakṛteḥ paraḥ

kevalānubhavānanda-

svarūpaḥ sarva-buddhi-dṛk

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.3.13)

O Prabhu, You are the Supreme Controller beyond the
material nature, and You are that Supreme Personality
who enters within everything. You are the original form
of pure knowledge, and You are directly the Supreme
Godhead, Bhagavān.

It is also said in the śruti: “ānandaṁ brahmaṇo rūpam —
ānanda is the form of Brahman.” Therefore, on the basis
of all the evidence compiled from śruti, it is
established that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the form of eternity,
knowledge and bliss (sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha). One should
understand that Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s form is His very self, and
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s self is His form; vigraha is ātmā and ātmā
is vigraha. This is the conclusion of all scripture.
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa is His eternal, original form, so the
idea that He is

materially embodied like the conditioned souls, or that

                              15
Brahma-samhita.txt                                5/5/2017

He has accepted a material form from the illusory energy
(māyā), is totally erroneous.

Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī has remarked:

kṛṣṇam enam avehi tvam

ātmānam akhilātmanām

jagad-dhitāya so ‘py atra

dehī vābhāti māyayā

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.55)

O King, you should understand that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
Parabrahma and Paramātmā, the soul of all living
entities. He has mercifully descended for the benefit of
the whole world in such a way that He appears to be an
ordinary person with a physical human body that can be
perceived by the senses of the living entities. Although
His pastimes resemble those of a common person, He is
not an ordinary human being.

The human-like activities performed by Bhagavān during
His manifest pastimes in this world are called
mādhuryamayī-līlā, meaning that these pastimes are full
of sweetness. His pastimes are manifested in this world
only out of compassion for the living entities. In this
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam verse, the word māyā means “mercy.” In
the Viśva-prakāśa dictionary, the word māyā has been
defined as either “deceit” or “mercy.”

Now that the supremacy of Śrī Kṛṣṇa has been firmly
established on the basis of śāstra and logic, His
absorption in His pastimes will be discussed. His
pastimes are of two types: aiśvaryamayī pura-līlā
(pastimes related to transcendental opulence) and
mādhuryamayī vraja-līlā (the sweet pastimes of Vraja).
He performs His aiśvaryamayī-līlā while residing
sometimes in Mathurā-purī and sometimes in Dvārakā. At
that time He is called Yādavendra or Vṛṣṇīndra. When the
pastimes of His infancy, childhood and adolescence take
place in Vraja, He is called Vrajendra-nandana or
Govinda.

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī has said:

śrī kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa-sakha vṛṣṇy-ṛṣabhāvani-dhrug

rājanya-vaṁśa-dahanānapavarga-vīrya

govinda gopa-vanitā-vraja-bhṛtya-gīta-

tīrtha-śravaḥ śravaṇa-maṅgala pāhi bhṛtyān

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (12.11.25)

O Kṛṣṇa, O friend of Arjuna, O chief among the
descendants of Vṛṣṇi, You are the destroyer of those
political parties who are disturbing elements on this
Earth. Your prowess never deteriorates. You are the
proprietor of the transcendental abode, and Your most
sacred glories, which are sung by Vṛndāvana’s cowherd

                            16
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

men and women and their servants, bestow all
auspiciousness just by being heard. O Lord, please
protect Your devotees.

In this śloka, Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī has introduced his
worshipable deity Śrī Kṛṣṇa as the friend of Arjuna.
This indicates Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s intense affection for the
Pāṇḍavas, which renders Him subordinate to them. It is
also clear from the sequence of address in this verse
that He has even more affection for the Yādavas
(Vṛṣṇis). Śrī Kṛṣṇa not only destroyed the kings who
were oppressing the Earth, He also protected the
Pāṇḍavas and the Yādavas and maintained them in every
respect. Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī is also saying, “You have
still more affection for the Vrajavāsīs than for the
Yādavas, and amongst the residents of Vraja, You have
shown the most affection of all for the Vraja damsels.
When Your dear devotee Uddhava came to Vraja, he
repeatedly offered prayers to the dust of the lotus feet
of the gopīs.”

Śrī Brahmā considers that the form of Bhagavān that is
most desirable for him is his own worshipable deity, Śrī
Govinda. Later in this saṁhitā, Śrī Brahmā offers
prayers beginning with the verse cintāmaṇi-prakara-
sadmasu kalpa-vṛkṣa-lakṣāvṛteṣu, wherein he glorifies
his worshipable Lord, Śrī Govinda, who is always endowed
with His transcendental names, form, qualities and
pastimes.

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.27.20), the cow Surabhī
performs abhiṣeka (ceremonial bathing) of Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
giving Him the name Śrī Govinda: “tvaṁ na indro
jagatpate — O You who possess inconceivable and
unlimited energies, O indwelling soul of the universe, O
creator of the universe, O infallible Acyuta, O Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, O master of the universe, You are our only
worshipable deity. You are the real Indra (monarch)
because you are the maintainer of cows, brāhmaṇas,
saintly persons and demigods. O Soul of the universe,
You have descended to the surface of the Earth planet to
remove her burden. The father of the worlds, Brahmājī,
has engaged us in performing the abhiṣeka of You, who
are worshipable for all.” After saying this, Surabhī,
along with Indra and the great sages, performed the
abhiṣeka of Kṛṣṇa. Surabhī bathed Śrī Kṛṣṇa with her own
milk, and Indra and the sages offered the pure waters of
Mandākinī (the celestial Gaṅgā), which had been brought
there in the trunk of Indra’s elephant Airāvata. In this
ceremony they gave Śrī Kṛṣṇa the name Śrī Govinda
(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.27.19—23). After describing this
abhiṣeka, Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī has also prayed: “priyān
na indro gavām — O Indra (master) of the cows, Govinda,
be pleased with us.” Calling Him master of the cows does
not minimize Him or decrease His position. On the
contrary, it establishes His unrivaled monarchy, because
it is stated in the Go-sūkta:

gobhyo yajñāḥ pravartante

gobhyo devāḥ samutthitāḥ

gobhir devāḥ samudgīrṇāḥ


                            17
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

sa-ṣaḍ-aṅga-pada-kramāḥ

All the different types of sacrifice have come from the
cows of Goloka Vṛndāvana; the demigods have come from
those cows; and the Vedas with their six limbs have also
appeared from those cows.

Since Śrī Kṛṣṇa has descended from Goloka-dhāma, the
planet of cows, He is the master of the cows. In the
Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad (35), Śrī Brahmā relates to the
sages headed by Sanaka how he has prayed to his
worshipable deity:

govindaṁ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaṁ

sūrabhū-ruha-talāsīnaṁ satataṁ sa-marud-gaṇo ‘haṁ
toṣayāmi

Along with the demigods headed by Indra, I offer praise
to Vāsudeva, who is eternally ornamented with pure
transcendental qualities and pastimes. Although He is
the Supreme Truth, one without a second, He is also the
embodiment of eternity, knowledge and bliss,
resplendently situated beneath a desire-fulfilling tree
in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma.

Brahmājī has also prayed in the Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.14.34): “tad bhūri-bhāgyam iha janma kim
apy aṭavyāṁ yad gokule — the Vedas are still searching,
even today, for the dust of the lotus feet of Bhagavān
Mukunda, who is the very life and soul of the residents
of Vraja. My life will be successful only if I can take
birth in any species whatsoever in this earthly forest
of Vraja, or in a border region of Gokula, so that I may
be completely bathed in the foot-dust of the residents
of Gokula.”

Here the words bhagavān mukundaḥ directly refer to
Vrajarāja-nandana, Kṛṣṇa, the son of Nanda Mahārāja.
This form is found only in Vraja.

Brahmājī has also prayed:

naumīḍya te ‘bhra-vapuṣe taḍid-ambarāya

guñjāvataṁsa-paripiccha-lasan-mukhāya

vanya-sraje kavala-vetra-viṣāṇa-veṇu-

lakṣma-śriye mṛdu-pade paśupāṅgajāya

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.1)

O Prince of Vraja, You are worshipable for the whole
world. O Nava-Ghanaśyāma, Your yellow upper garment
beautifies Your dark, fresh raincloud-colored limbs like
a steady streak of lightning. Your ears are decorated
with ornaments made of guñjā berries, and Your head with
a crown of peacock feathers. A garland of forest flowers
and leaves adorns Your neck, a morsel of rice mixed with
yogurt is in Your hand, Your eyes are shaped like lotus
petals, and Your appearance with Your flute and buffalo
horn is exquisitely beautiful. Your lotus feet, which
are the shelter of Lakṣmī-devī, are very soft and full

                              18
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

of affection for Your devotees. You are always moving
here and there in Vṛndāvana forest with Your soft lotus
feet to enjoy Your pleasure pastimes. All glories unto
You, son of Nanda Mahārāja, who tend the cows. Please
accept my obeisances.

Thus Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s supreme opulence is expressed by names
such as Govinda. This is the significance of the name
Govinda in this first verse of Brahma-saṁhitā.

After Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s status as controller (īśvara) and
Supreme Controller (parameśvara) has been established,
in conclusion, His unique qualities are being described.
In an explanation of the ten-syllable mantra,5 the
Gautamīya-tantra (2.18—19, 22—23) reveals the following:

gopīti prakṛtiṁ vidyāj

janas tattva-samūhakaḥ

anayor āśrayo vyāptyā

kāraṇatvena ceśvaraḥ

sāndrānandaṁ paraṁ jyotir

vallabhena ca kathyate

athavā gopī prakṛtir

janas tad-aṁśa-maṇḍalam

anayor vallabhaḥ proktaḥ

svāmī kṛṣṇākhya īśvaraḥ

kārya-kāraṇayor īśaḥ

śrutibhis tena gīyate

aneka-janma-siddhānāṁ

gopīnāṁ patir eva vā

nanda-nandana ity uktas

trailokyānanda-vardhanaḥ

Śrī Govindadeva is famous throughout the Vedas, upon
planet Earth and among the cows. He nourishes them and
is always with them. Although complete with incomparable
opulence and sweetness, He is absorbed in enjoying His
independent pastimes while surrounded by herds of cows.
He is celebrated in all worlds and throughout the Vedas,
which means that He steals the hearts of the residents
of Vraja in Śrī Nanda-Gokula. His complexion is like a
fresh monsoon raincloud, and He expands His endearing
pastimes, the sweetness of which is continuously sung in
a loud voice by all the Vedas and throughout the worlds.
Only that Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the moon of Gokula, the cowherd boy
who carries a flute, is worthy of the name Govinda.

On examining the mood that Brahmā expresses in this
verse, it seems that he surrendered himself fully unto

                            19
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa from the very beginning.
However, as the ecstatic mellows of prema-rasa increased
in his heart, his greed to realize the sweetness of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa also increased. Therefore he began to offer
himself to Kṛṣṇa’s form of Govinda, meaning Vrajarāja-
nandana, the son of the King of Vraja, and Gopāla, who
is the treasure of the life of Mother Yaśodā. Moreover,
when Brahmājī’s mood increased and matured completely,
with his heart immersed in and relishing prema-rasa, he
became desperate to attain the supremely beautiful fresh
youth, Śyāmasundara — the expert dancer who, being
surrounded by the lotus-eyed damsels of Vraja, bewilders
the mind of Cupid. At that time, intoxicated by the
incomparable nectar of gopī-prema, Brahmājī offered his
life to Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s form as Gopījana-vallabha. His heart
was so thirsty for gopī-prema that he could not be
satisfied by uttering only kṛṣṇāya svāhā, or even
kṛṣṇāya govindāya svāhā. Helplessly overwhelmed with
prema, he began to utter kṛṣṇāya govindāya gopījana-
vallabhāya svāhā. When Brahmājī spoke thus, his intense
yearning was fulfilled.6

In the aforementioned verses from the Gautamīya-tantra
that explain the ten-syllable mantra, the word gopī has
been derived from the verbal root gup, meaning “to
protect and maintain.” Therefore the special energy that
bestows prema and maintains the devotees is called gopī,
or hlādinī-śakti. Śrī Rādhā is that hlādinī-śakti, so
one should understand that the word gopī refers to Śrī
Rādhā. Also, in the statement gopī tu prakṛtī rādhā
janas tad-aṁśa-maṇḍalaḥ, the word jana refers to those
gopīs who are direct expansions of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s
divine form. So gopījana refers to Śrīmatī Rādhikā and
Her own direct expansions such as Lalitā and Viśākhā.
Thus the word vallabha (beloved) can only refer to their
most dearly beloved sweetheart, prāṇa-priyatama Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.

The word vallabha means “one who gives inspiration,”
“the instigator,” or “the lover (ramaṇa).” That hero who
enjoys supremely sweet pastimes with the gopīs is Śrī
Gopījana-vallabha. Gopījana-vallabha also means the pati
or sole refuge of the gopīs, and specifically prāṇapati,
the only shelter of the life’s breath of Śrī Rādhikā,
who is always surrounded by Her sakhīs headed by Śrī
Lalitā and Viśākhā. Nanda-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the
crown-jewel among connoisseurs of ecstatic
transcendental mellows (rasika-śekhara). As Madana-
mohana, the enchanter of the god of amorous love, He is
elegantly present in Śrī Vṛndāvana with Śrīmatī Rādhikā,
who stands in the midst of Her supremely beautiful,
ever-fresh, lotus-eyed friends. Therefore only this
budding youth, the Madana-mohana form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa —
also called Govinda or Gopāla — is actually Śrī
Gopījana-vallabha. Gopījana-vallabha is the eternal form
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa who is always held in Śrī Rādhikā’s loving
embrace. Therefore it is automatically understood that
gopījana-vallabha refers to the Divine Couple, Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa Yugala.

aneka-janma-siddhānāṁ

gopīnāṁ patir eva vā


                           20
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

nanda-nandana-ity uktas

trailokyānanda-vardhanaḥ

Gautamīya-tantra (2.23)

The purport of this verse is that those gopīs who had
been performing sādhana for many lifetimes attained
Nanda-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa as their husband or beloved
paramour, who is dearer than life itself. He increases
the bliss of all the three planetary systems, and He is
the ever-fresh Kāmadeva, who awakens transcendental
desire in the heart of every living entity in the
universe, and then fulfills it. He increases the
spontaneous, transcendental dedication in the hearts of
the devotees, and He increases the prema of His dearmost
associates. That original form of Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
the ever-new deity of amorous love in Vṛndāvana.

This same Śrī Kṛṣṇa is thus the worshipable deity of the
first guru of our sampradāya, Śrī Brahmā, who is seated
upon a lotus flower.

The word prakṛti in the previously quoted verses from
the Gautamīya-tantra indicates the illusory energy
called māyā, which is the shelter of all the principal
ingredients, beginning with the aggregate of primal
matter (mahat-tattva) from which all the universes are
manifested. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the highly concentrated form of
condensed bliss, and He is supremely effulgent like a
blue sapphire. Īśvara means vallabha, beloved. Another
sense of the word īśvara is “one who is everywhere” or
“one who pervades the vraja-gopīs’ hearts, minds,
intelligence and so on.” The fundamental meaning of
prakṛti (dominated energy) is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s intrinsic
personal potency, which is radiantly present as the
gopīs of Vraja, and famous by the name of Mahā-Lakṣmī in
realms such as Vaikuṇṭha, which are situated far beyond
this material world.

The word aṁśa-maṇḍala (circle of expansions) is
generally interpreted as a reference to the catur-vyūha:
Vāsudeva, Saṅkarṣaṇa, Pradyumna and Aniruddha. However,
in this context, one should understand aṁśa-maṇḍala to
mean the expansions of Śrī Rādhā (kāya-vyūha-rūpā).

In aneka-janma-siddhānām, aneka means “many;” for many
lifetimes the gopīs have been perfect in their prema.
This proves that both the gopīs and Śrī Kṛṣṇa have taken
birth many times before.

It is stated in Bhagavad-gītā (4.5): “bahūni me
vyatītāni janmāni tava cārjuna — O Arjuna, both you and
I have already taken birth many times.” Similarly, the
gopīs and Nanda-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa have also taken birth
many times.

Gargācārya has also said (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.8.14):
“prāg ayaṁ vasudevasya kvacij jātas tavātmajaḥ — O Nanda
Mahārāja, at some time in the past, this son of yours
appeared as the son of Vasudeva.” This is also logical.
Although Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the son of Nanda Mahārāja, He had
appeared previously in the mind of Vasudeva Mahārāja
(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.2.16): “āviveśāṁśa-bhāgena mana

                           21
Brahma-samhita.txt                                 5/5/2017

ānaka-dundubheḥ — the expansion of Kṛṣṇa appeared in the
mind of Ānaka-dundubhi, Vasudeva Mahārāja.” In the same
way, Śrī Kṛṣṇa also appeared in the heart of Vrajeśvara
Nanda Mahārāja, but there is a specific distinction
between the two appearances. The partial manifestation
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa who appeared in Vasudeva’s heart is called
the full manifestation (pūrṇa-prakāśa), whereas the form
who appeared in Vrajeśvara Nanda Mahārāja’s heart is
called the most complete form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa (pūrṇatama-
prakāśa). Just before the appearance of Bhagavān Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, Nanda Mahārāja began to have His darśana in his
heart and everywhere else.

The appearance of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in the heart is not
sufficient to attain Him as one’s son, however. Intense
parental prema is also absolutely necessary. Such pure
fatherly love is only found in Vrajarāja Śrī Nanda
Mahārāja. Bhagavān may appear as one’s son, but unless
pure parental love is present, this does not constitute
a relationship in which one genuinely feels, “Kṛṣṇa is
my son.” Although Varāhadeva appeared from the nostril
of Brahmā, He is not considered the son of Brahmā,
because Brahmājī had no parental love for Him.

Knowledge of Kṛṣṇa’s opulence is an obstacle for the
spontaneous love based on a relationship resembling
intimate relationships with dear ones in this world.
Vasudeva has knowledge of Kṛṣṇa’s opulence, and
Vrajarāja Nanda has pure parental love. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
present according to the degree of one’s prema. Since
the highest pinnacle of prema is found in the gopīs, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is manifest to the superlative degree among them.
Thus the purport of the ten-syllable mantra also
ultimately refers to Nanda-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa.



Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s commentary: Śrī Brahma-
saṁhitā-prakāśinī-vṛtti

pracura-siddhānta-ratna, saṅgrahe viśeṣa yatna

kori’ brahmā śrī-kṛṣṇe stavila

ei granthe sei stava, mānavera suvaibhava

pañcama adhyāye niveśila

śrī gaurāṅga kṛpā-sindhu, kali-jīvera eka bandhu

dakṣiṇātya bhramite bhramite

e ‘brahma-saṁhitā’-dhana, korilena uddharaṇa

gauḍa-jīve uddhāra korite

nānā-śāstra vicāriyā, tāra ṭīkā viraciyā

śrī jīva gosvāmī mahodaya

śrī gauḍīya-bhakta-gaṇe, mahā-kṛpā-pūrṇa mane

e grantha arpilā sadāśaya


                            22
Brahma-samhita.txt                               5/5/2017

sei vyākhyā anusāre, āra kichu balivāre

prabhu mora vipina-bihārī

ājñā dilā akiñcane, e dāsa harṣita mane

baliyāche kathā dui cāri

prākṛtāprākṛta bhedi,7 śuddha-bhakti-saha yadi

bhakta-gaṇa korena vicāra

kṛtārtha hoibe dāsa, puribe manera āśa

śuddha-bhakti hoibe pracāra

bhakta-jana-prāṇa-dhana, rūpa, jīva, sanātana

tava kṛpā samudra-samāna

ṭīkāra āśaya gūḍha, jāte bujhi āmi mūḍha

sei śakti karaha vidhāna

śrī jīva vacana-caya, puṣpakali śobhāmaya

prasphuṭita koriyā jatane

guru kṛṣṇe praṇamiyā, śuddha-bhakta-kore diyā

dhanya hoi — ei icchā mane

It was by Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s mercy that the four-headed Śrī
Brahmā received the eighteen-syllable mantra through the
medium of divine Sarasvatī (daiva-vāṇī). Then he
performed worship by means of mantra-japa for a
prolonged period of time. As a result of this worship,
he received the kāma-gāyatrī-mantra through the sound of
Kṛṣṇa’s flute and attained twice-born status. Then he
offered prayers to Śrī Kṛṣṇa with invaluable jewel-like
statements that embodied the essential conclusions of
the Vedas. For the benefit of all living entities, these
precious jewels have been collected together in the
jewelry box of this scripture, Śrī Brahma-saṁhitā, whose
Fifth Chapter is especially full of the most valuable
jewels. Śrī Śacīnandana Gaurahari, who is the ocean of
compassion and the only friend of the living entities
suffering in Kali-yuga, found this book while traveling
in the holy places of Southern India, and carefully kept
it with Him. Then, after having many copies made, He
gave it to His associates. Later, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī wrote
a beautiful, comprehensive commentary on this book, full
of examples and conclusions from various scriptures, and
mercifully gave it to the devoted followers of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

Considering Śrī Brahma-saṁhitā with Śrī Jīva
Gosvāmipāda’s commentary to be extremely beneficial for
the devotees, my Gurudeva, Śrī Vipina-bihārī Gosvāmī,
ordered me to write a further explanation of the
aforementioned commentary in readily accessible
language. Taking his order on my head, I have included
several additional points of consideration in my
Tātparya (purports). If the faithful devotees study this

                              23
Brahma-samhita.txt                                 5/5/2017

book with pure and simple hearts, keeping in mind the
difference between the mundane (prākṛta) and the
transcendental (aprākṛta), then this servant will
consider his life successful and śuddha-bhakti will be
propagated everywhere.

O Rūpa Gosvāmī, you are the life and soul of the
devotees! O Sanātana Gosvāmī! O Jīva Gosvāmī! Your mercy
is like an unlimited and fathomless ocean. The
significance of your commentary on this Brahma-saṁhitā
is also extremely profound. Therefore, have mercy on
this foolish person. Kindly invest me with the power to
comprehend this commentary and express its hidden
meanings. The statements of Śrī Jīva Gosvāmipāda are
elegant like a row of tender flowerbuds. It is my
internal desire to make those fragrant flowerbuds
blossom so that, after offering praṇāma to śrī guru and
Kṛṣṇa, I may offer them into the lotus hands of the
śuddha-bhaktas.



Purport by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura (Tātparya)

Only Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is endowed with His own eternal
names, form, qualities and pastimes, is the topmost
transcendent reality. His eternal name, Kṛṣṇa, indicates
the supreme existence, characterized by the attractive
power of love. Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s own eternal form is the
embodiment of concentrated eternal existence, cognizance
and bliss. His dark complexion is enchanting and He
holds a flute in His two hands. Although He is the
Supreme Master, by the influence of His inconceivable
potency He appears in His original form in medium-sized
or human-like proportions as a fresh youth, the best of
dancers, in the simple dress of a cowherd boy, playing
upon a flute. Therefore His eternal form is full of
astonishing transcendental qualities that have the power
to attract everything. He is naturally the supreme
predominating male enjoyer with His own transcendental
senses. All contradictory qualities, including features
which could not ordinarily coexist, are simultaneously
fully present and coexisting harmoniously within Him.
Concentrated existence (sat), cognizance (cit) and bliss
(ānanda) are exhibited most elegantly in Him.

His expansions, known as Īśvara, Paramātmā or Viṣṇu, who
manifest the material universes, are merely partial
expansions of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s original form. Therefore only
Śrī Kṛṣṇa can be called the Supreme Controller,
Parameśvara. Although His transcendental senses and
qualities are distinct from each other by the influence
of His own inconceivable energy, they are combined
together in their appropriate places to make the most
beautiful, unprecedented spiritual form.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s form is His self, and His self is His form;
there is no difference between Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s self and His
form. The śrī vigraha of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the very form of
the condensed principle of eternality, cognizance and
bliss (sac-cid-ānanda). Therefore the impersonal
Brahman, which is the formless, diluted sac-cid-ānanda-
tattva, is merely the bodily effulgence of the
aforementioned condensed sac-cid-ānanda-tattva Śrī

                           24
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa, while the thumb-sized form of Paramātmā situated
in the hearts of all living beings, who is the universal
witness and regulator, is a partial expansion of that
Supreme Absolute Truth Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Thus, the concentrated
sac-cid-ānanda form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is beginningless and
without origin. He is the origin of Brahman and
Paramātmā.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beauty shines splendidly through His
pastimes as Go-pati (owner of the cows), Gopa-pati (the
chief of the cowherds), Gopī-pati (the beloved of the
gopīs), Gokula-pati (the protector of Gokula) and
Goloka-pati (the Lord of Goloka). That very Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
who is also served by numerous Lakṣmīs or goddesses of
fortune, is called Govinda.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the cause of all causes in the form of the
dominant principle (puruṣa) and the predominated
principle (prakṛti). The glance of His expansion, namely
the puruṣa-avatāra Kāraṇodakaśāyī Mahā-Viṣṇu, inspires
the inferior material nature to give birth to the
mundane universes. Through the marginal energy of
Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu or Paramātmā, innumerable living
entities are manifest, just as unlimited particles are
manifest in the rays of the sun. This Brahma-saṁhitā
establishes the ontology of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and therefore the
utterance of His names in this first verse constitutes
the auspicious invocation of this book.




Verse 2


sahasra-patra-kamalaṁ

gokulākhyaṁ mahat-padam

tat-karṇikāraṁ tad-dhāma

tad-anantāṁśa-sambhavam



Anvaya

mahat-padam — the best of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s abodes, the
residence of go-gopa-gopī (the cows, cowherds and
gopīs); gokula-ākhyam — called Gokula; sahasra-patra-
kamalam — has the form of a thousand-petaled lotus; tat-
karṇikāram — the pericarp, or central seed-vessel of
that lotus; tad-dhāma — is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s internal abode,
where Śrī Nanda-Yaśodā and the other gopas and gopīs
reside; tat — this Gokula; sambhavam — is manifest;
ananta-aṁśa — by a special manifesting power of Ananta,
who is the plenary portion of Baladeva. (In other words
the pericarp of the thousand-petaled lotus, which is the
abode of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is manifest from Baladeva, who is
called Ananta in His plenary expansion.)




                           25
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

Translation

Śrī Gokula-dhāma is the superlative realm of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
It is eternally manifested by Śrī Baladeva, of whom Śrī
Anantadeva is but a partial expansion. This eternal,
transcendental abode of Gokula exists in the form of a
divine lotus flower with thousands of petals. Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s own residence is the pericarp,8 situated in the
center of the whorl of that lotus.



Ṭīkā translation

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s qualifications as the supreme controller,
the embodiment of bliss, and the cause of all causes
have been described in the previous verse. Now in this
verse, His own eternal residence is being described.
This abode of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Gokula-dhāma, is exquisitely
manifest in the form of a lotus flower with thousands of
petals. The speciality of this place, which fulfills all
desires like a wish-fulfilling gem, is that just as Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is sac-cid-ānanda, this abode is also sac-cid-
ānanda. Just as Śrī Kṛṣṇa is all-pervading, vast and
all-illuminating, so this abode has similar qualities.
This realm is called the supermost world of all, and it
is also sometimes referred to as Mahā-Vaikuṇṭha.

In order that no one will harbor any doubts in this
regard, it is said that the name of this abode is
Gokula, or “the place that is inhabited by gopas and
gopīs.” In this context, it is stated in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.10.39): “bhagavān gokuleśvaraḥ — Bhagavān
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is Gokula-pati, the Lord of Gokula.” The same
type of description has been made in this second verse
of Brahma-saṁhitā, and we will proceed to elaborate upon
it from this point on. The expansive, internal realm
where Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa eternally resides with His
associates, such as His father Nanda Mahārāja and His
mother Yaśodā, has been called Gokula-dhāma.

Thus, the abode where Śrī Kṛṣṇa resides along with all
the inhabitants of Vraja is also described here. Then,
to acquaint us with the constitutional nature of that
abode, it is said to be manifested by Śrī Anantadeva, a
partial expansion of Śrī Balarāma. Here in this verse,
the word sambhava may be taken to indicate āvirbhāva-
viśeṣa (the special appearance of the divine abode), in
the sense that it is eternally manifested by a personal
expansion of Śrī Baladeva. Following this understanding,
anantāṁśa then refers to Ananta, the partial expansion
of Baladeva. Alternatively, one may interpret this
expression to mean “whose partial expansion is Ananta,”
namely Śrī Baladeva. Thus the sense becomes, “That abode
is the residence of Śrī Baladeva, who lives there along
with Śrī Kṛṣṇa.”



Tātparya

Goloka-dhāma or Gokula is not any kind of created
material place. Rather, it is eternally manifest. This
divine abode has been called anantāṁśa-sambhavam to

                           26
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

indicate that it is manifest from the śaiṣī-śakti
(Bhagavān Śeṣa’s potency) of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is unlimited
in nature. The purport is that this abode is manifested
by Baladeva Prabhu, whose partial expansion is
Anantadeva or Śeṣa Bhagavān. Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastime
expansion, Śrī Baladeva, is the reservoir or shelter of
this śaiṣī-śakti, and all spiritual and material
universes have manifested from Him.

Śrī Baladeva’s unlimited nature is exhibited in two
ways: first, spiritual infinity manifest as unlimited
transcendental abodes; and secondly, mundane infinity
manifest as unlimited, inert material worlds. An
analysis of the material worlds, which comprise one-
fourth of Bhagavān’s opulence, will be presented later,
in the appropriate place. The infinite spiritual
manifestation with its unlimited transcendental worlds
comprises three-fourths of Bhagavān’s opulence, and is
untouched by lamentation, mortality and fear. It is
fully illuminated, being entirely composed of completely
pure, conscious existence. This manifestation of
transcendental magnificence is called the immensely
opulent spiritual realm, Mahā-Vaikuṇṭha or Paravyoma-
dhāma. This Mahā-Vaikuṇṭha-dhāma is completely beyond
the purview of the inert material nature, and exists
splendidly and forever in the midst of the
transcendental effulgence (brahmajyoti) on the other
side of the Virajā.

This transcendental abode also has two features, namely
the upper and lower manifestations. The higher feature
is the realm of human-like sweetness (mādhurya), and the
lower is the realm of extraordinary opulence (mahā-
aiśvarya). The manifestation that is characterized by
sweetness is known as Goloka-dhāma or Gokula-dhāma. This
divine abode, which is divided into various subsections
according to specific devotional mellows, is exceedingly
elegant and charming. It is also sometimes called Mahā-
Nārāyaṇa-dhāma or Mūla-Nārāyaṇa-dhāma. Therefore, the
Gokula aspect of Goloka9 is the most excellent abode of
all. This one abode is resplendently situated in the
spiritual realm in the form of Goloka, and in the
material world in the form of Gokula. In his Bṛhad-
bhāgavatāmṛta, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmipāda has written a
śloka which reconciles the entire body of scripture:

yathā krīḍati tad-bhūmau

goloke ‘pi tathaiva saḥ

adha urddhatayā bhedo

‘nayoḥ kalpate kevalam

Just as Kṛṣṇa performs His playful pastimes in Gokula in
the material universe, similarly He also performs the
same pastimes in the Goloka of the upper region.
Therefore, there is no difference between Goloka and
Gokula.

One should simply understand that whatever is situated
in Goloka-dhāma in the spiritual realm is also
splendidly present in Gokula, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s place of
pastimes within the material universe.

                           27
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017


Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has written in the glossary of Ṣaṭ-
sandarbha: “goloka-nirūpaṇaṁ; vṛndāvanādīnāṁ nitya-
kṛṣṇa-dhāmatvaṁ; goloka-vṛndāvanayor ekatvaṁ ca — Goloka
and Gokula are non-different, but by the influence of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s inconceivable potency, Goloka is situated in
the highest territory of the spiritual universe, and the
Gokula that is located in Mathurā-maṇḍala is situated in
the mundane universe of the one-fourth manifestation
that has arisen from the material energy.” If the
transcendental abode is of the three-fourths
manifestation, how can it be situated in the inferior
material world of the one-fourth manifestation? This
cannot be understood by the meager intelligence of a
conditioned soul; one can only become acquainted with
this truth by the influence of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s inconceivable
potency. Gokula is a transcendental abode, so although
it is manifested in this universe of five material
elements, it is not confined by any kind of limitation
that might be imposed by mundane time and space. Its
unlimited, radiant existence is the supreme principle of
Vaikuṇṭha, but the material senses and intelligence of
the conditioned soul perceive the transcendental Gokula
in a mundane way, because the conditioned soul is always
absorbed in the inert material nature.

A cloud may cover the eyes of an observer, but it cannot
cover the sun. Still, a person in the shade of that
cloud sees, by ordinary vision, that the sun is covered
by a cloud. Similarly, the conditioned soul, whose
senses and intelligence are covered by material defects,
inevitably superimposes the qualities of the material
nature upon the transcendental abode of Gokula. Only one
whose relationship with material nature has already been
completely severed as a result of extremely good fortune
can have a vision of Goloka in Gokula, and of Gokula in
Goloka. The impersonal knowledge that is derived from
the philosophical process of the gradual elimination of
the material (neti neti) gives rise to satisfaction in
the self, but such enlightenment can never afford one a
vision of the transcendental realm that is situated
above the non-differentiated Brahman. The impersonal
Brahman is only a limited feature of the knowledge (cit)
aspect of sac-cid-ānanda.

Thus, it is impossible to see Goloka or Gokula through
the endeavor for impersonal knowledge because, in their
search for the Absolute Truth, the adherents of such dry
knowledge rely on their own subtle power of vision,
rather than depending on the mercy of Kṛṣṇa, which is
imbued with inconceivable potency. The endeavors for
knowledge of the nature of the self are also useless in
the matter of attaining Goloka Vṛndāvana. Similarly,
endeavors in the yoga system, which comprise a limb of
karma, also do not deserve Kṛṣṇa’s mercy. Thus, these
two types of endeavor cannot give rise to realization of
the transcendental pastimes, which are situated above
the oneness of impersonal liberation, and are separate
from it. Only those who take exclusive shelter of the
process of pure, unalloyed devotional service (śuddha-
bhakti) are competent to receive Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s mercy,
which is endowed with inconceivable potency. One’s
relationship with material nature is dispelled only by
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s mercy. Then the good fortune to have a

                           28
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

vision of Gokula will arise.

The perfection of bhakti is also of two types: svarūpa-
siddhi and vastu-siddhi. In the stage of svarūpa-siddhi,
Goloka is seen in Gokula; and in the stage of vastu-
siddhi, Gokula is seen in Goloka. This is an extremely
confidential mystery. The attainment of the first rays
of the sun of prema is called svarūpa-siddhi. After
svarūpa-siddhi, both the gross and subtle material
coverings of the sādhaka-jīva are removed by the mercy
of Kṛṣṇa, and he then takes birth as an associate of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa in the place of His pastimes. This is called
vastu-siddhi. Whatever one’s level of realization may
be, as long as one has not attained perfection, Gokula
will be seen as different from Goloka. Śrī Gokula, the
unique seat of transcendental pastimes, is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
eternal abode, which is replete with endless varieties
of enthralling features and fashioned in the shape of a
lotus with thousands of petals.



Bhāvārtha

Brahmājī has defined the intrinsic form and nature of
the transcendentally sportive Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and now he is
describing Gokula, the supramundane seat of Kṛṣṇa’s
pastimes. Śrī Gokula-maṇḍala, whose svarūpa (intrinsic
form) resembles a thousand-petaled lotus flower, is the
eternal adode of Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the son of Nanda
Mahārāja. The soil there is made of desire-fulfilling
gems (cintāmaṇi), so Gokula has the form of a lotus made
of cintāmaṇi. It is called mahat-padam, which means “the
greatest or most excellent place of all.” Alternatively,
the word mahat (great) can indicate that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
Mahā-Bhagavān, the ultimate feature of God. His pada
(abode) is the topmost portion of Mahā-Vaikuṇṭha. This
is the sense of the word mahat.

One may object, “But the word pada can be interpreted in
so many ways.” In order to dispel this doubt, it has
been stated definitively by the use of the adjective
mahat that this pada (abode) is called Gokula. Here, in
the conventional sense the word gokula means the abode
of the gopas, or cowherd community. According to the
logic of rūḍhir yogam apaharati, wherein the
conventional meaning steals usage from the other
legitimate interpretations, the word gokula is
understood to mean the abode of go and gopa (the cows
and cowherd community); however, other interpretations
are not invalid. With this intention, it has been stated
in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.10.34): “bhagavān gokuleśvaraḥ
— Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the Lord of Gokula.” Thus, it is
appropriate that such an explanation has also been made
in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, a favorable scripture that was
manifest later. Gokula-dhāma is a worthy residence for
Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the Vrajavāsīs such as Nanda and Yaśodā,
and that is why the word mahat has been used.

Now the meaning of mahat-pada is being explained in
terms of its svarūpa (intrinsic form and nature). Gokula
can be called the mahat-pada because it is manifested
from Ananta, an expansion of Śrī Baladeva, or because it
has arisen from an intensified portion of spiritual

                           29
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

effulgence. Alternatively, Gokula-dhāma may be called
mahat-pada because it is the residence of Śrī Balarāma,
of whom Ananta is a mere part. Gokula has also been
called mahad-dhāma because of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s appearance in
the pericarp of that thousand-petaled lotus.



Verses 3—4

karṇikāraṁ mahad-yantraṁ

ṣaṭ-koṇaṁ vajra-kīlakam

ṣaḍ-aṅga-ṣaṭ-padī-sthānaṁ

prakṛtyā puruṣeṇa ca

premānanda-mahānanda-

rasenāvasthitaṁ hi yat

jyotī-rūpeṇa manunā

kāma-bījena saṅgatam

tat-kiñjalkaṁ tad-aṁśānāṁ

tat-patrāṇi śriyām api

Anvaya

karṇikāram — the center of that thousand-petaled lotus
which is the central part of Vraja; mahad-yantram — is a
great and unique mystic device; ṣaṭ-koṇam — with six
corners; vajra-kīlakam — of which Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is
completely transcendental and who is the possessor of
all potencies, is the pivot in the form of a
thunderbolt, which is as brilliant as a diamond; ṣaḍ-
aṅga-ṣaṭ-padī-sthānam — in that place is manifest the
king of mantras, composed of eighteen syllables with six
limbs in six divisions; prakṛtyā puruṣeṇa ca — and
therein are situated the original potency and the
original enjoyer; yat hi premānanda-mahānanda-rasena
avasthitam — that Gokula, whose nature is the bliss of
pure, spiritual love, is the abode of supremely blissful
transcendental mellows; saṅgatam — it is endowed; kāma-
bījena — with kāma-bīja; jyotī-rūpeṇa — and the
effulgent; manunā — kāma-gāyatrī-mantra; tat-kīñjalkam —
the saffron filaments of the lotus; tad-aṁśānām — are
the supremely loving devotees, who are personal
expansions of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s svarūpa, and who are none
other than Kṛṣṇa’s intimate (sva-jātīya) gopas; tat-
patrāṇi — all the leaves of the lotus; śriyām api — are
the groves of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beloveds headed by Śrī Rādhā.



Translation

The pericarp, or central part of that transcendental
lotus, is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s abode. It is characterized by a
six-pointed device (yantra), presided over by the
predominated and predominating principles (prakṛti and

                            30
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

puruṣa). Like a diamond, the omnipotent, radiant,
transcendental kṛṣṇa-tattva is present as the central
pivot. The eighteen-syllable king of mantras, which has
six integral parts in six sections, is manifest in the
form of a hexagonal place with six divisions.

This pericarp of the eternal abode called Gokula is the
six-pointed realm of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s residence. The
filaments are the residences of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s supremely
loving parts and parcels, the intimate gopa friends who
consider Him their very own. They beautify all four
directions, forming an enclosure. The expanded petals of
this lotus are the special sub-forests of the divine
abode that belong to Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beloved Śrī Rādhā and
the other gopīs.



Ṭīkā translation

In these two verses, starting from karṇikāram, there is
a description of the chief seat among the many seats of
the divine eighteen-syllable king of great mantras,
which is attended by all other mantras. The setting of
this seat is characterized by a vast device, whose
facsimile is drawn everywhere in the form of a symbolic
diagram (yantra) for the sake of formal worship. Now the
svarūpa of that device is being described.

This yantra has six corners, which are made by the
overlapping of two mutually reversed triangles, and the
middle is decorated by the pivot in the form of a
brilliant thunderbolt. The purport is that the central
portion of the thousand-petaled lotus is embellished by
a diamond stud in the form of the bīja-mantra (klīṁ). In
this mantra (verse 3), the syllable ca indicates the
four-letter kāma-bīja, which is situated as the central
pivot of the pericarp. What is the necessity of the six
points? In response to this question, it is said that
these six limbs constitute the locations of the sixfold
integral parts of the divine eighteen-syllable
invocation. Therefore the yantra is exhibited with six
corners, and is presided over by the predominated and
predominating principles (prakṛti and puruṣa). Prakṛti
is present as the abode of the mantra. That prakṛti is
also Śrī Kṛṣṇa in person. He has been called prakṛti in
this context because He is the cause of prakṛti.

In remembering the presiding deity of this mantra, it is
stated thus: kṛṣṇaḥ prakṛtiḥ. The significance is that
Kṛṣṇa is prakṛti. Puruṣa also refers to the personality
who is present in the form of the presiding deity of the
mantra. Therefore, in this mantra, Śrī Kṛṣṇa presides as
prakṛti and puruṣa. He is experienced in four ways: as
the cause of the mantra, as the syllables of the mantra,
as the presiding deity of the mantra, and as the
personality who is to be worshiped by the mantra. Among
these four conceptions, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is presented here as
the cause of the mantra and the presiding deity of the
mantra, and He has been described previously as the
worshipable deity (ārādhya-devatā) in the verse īśvaraḥ
paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda vigrahaḥ. How He is
experienced in the form of syllables will be mentioned
later in the verse kāmaḥ kṛṣṇāya (verse 24).

                           31
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017


In the Hayaśīrṣa-pañcarātra, it is stated, “O brāhmaṇa,
enlightened visionaries of the truth say that the words
of a mantra and one who is indicated by those words —
that is, the mantra itself and its deity — are one, or
non-different.”

In the Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad, it is also stated, “Just
as the air within the body is one, and yet is known by
various names and forms — such as prāṇa, apāna, udāna,
vyāna and samāna — similarly Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
benefactor of the universe, is also present in five
integral parts in the form of mantra.”

There are some rare references mentioning that the
presiding deity of this mantra is Durgā-devī. This is
because potency and the possessor of potency are non-
different. For example, in the Gautamīya-tantra, it has
been stated:

yaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ saiva durgā syād

yā durgā kṛṣṇa eva saḥ

anayor antarādarśī

saṁsārān no vimucyate

Kṛṣṇa is Durgā and Durgā is Kṛṣṇa. Those who see any
difference between these two are never liberated from
the endless chain of birth and death.

Therefore, in this quotation, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s own internal
potency has been referred to by the name of Durgā. This
Durgā is not the Durgā who is a partial manifestation of
māyā. In the Nirukti dictionary it is mentioned:
“kṛcchreṇa durārādhanādi-bahu-prayāsena gamyate jñāyate
— that personality who is known with great endeavor by
the performance of extremely severe sādhana is called
Durgā.”

It is also stated in the Nārada-pañcarātra:

jānāty ekā parā kāntā

saiva durgā tadātmikā

yā parā paramā śaktir

mahā-viṣṇu-svarūpiṇī

yasyā vijñāna-mātreṇa

parāṇāṁ paramātmanaḥ

muhūrtād eva devasya

prāptir bhavati nānyathā

ekeyaṁ prema-sarvasva-

bhāvā śrī-gokuleśvarī

yathā mugdhaṁ jagat sarvaṁ

                              32
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017


sarva-dehābhimāninaḥ

She who is the highest, most excellent potency, or Mahā-
Viṣṇu-svarūpiṇī, whose very self is Kṛṣṇa (kṛṣṇātmikā),
and who is the best of all His beloveds, is called
Durgā. One who realizes Her surely attains the supreme
Paramātmā, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, in less than a moment;
there is not even the slightest doubt in this regard.
She is Gokuleśvarī Śrī Rādhā, the full embodiment of
spontaneous love and the personification of mahābhāva.
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is the supreme īśvara of all
existence and the God among gods, is attained by Her
mercy. Śrī Rādhā is Kṛṣṇa’s internal potency, and She
performs worship of Her most beloved Śrī Kṛṣṇa with the
entire wealth of Her devotion and service.
[Alternatively, Her most beloved Śrī Kṛṣṇa always
engages in Her worship with the entire wealth of His
devotion and service.] That very Śrī Rādhā, the dearmost
internal potency of Bhagavān, is known only to those who
perform extraordinarily difficult worship. Therefore,
saintly persons refer to Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beloved mistress of
undivided rasa by the name of Durgā.10 His covering
potency, Mahāmāyā, is the controller of all the mundane
worlds, and it covers and bewilders the entire
population of living beings who identify with their
material bodies.

The following statement by Śrī Durgā can be found in the
Sammohana-tantra:

yan nāmnā nāmni durgāhaṁ

guṇair guṇavatī hy aham

yad vaibhavān mahā-lakṣmī

rādhā nityā parādvayā

The name Durgā, by which I am known, is Her name. The
qualities for which I am famous are Her qualities. The
majesty with which I am resplendent is Her majesty. That
Mahā-Lakṣmī, Śrī Rādhā, is non-different from Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
She is His dearmost sweetheart and the crest-jewel of
His beloveds.

Thus, the svarūpa that is the embodiment of
transcendental love, bliss and supremely ecstatic
transcendental mellows, who is the pinnacle of mahābhāva
and who is the self-illuminating effulgence in the form
of mantra, is called Śrī Rādhā. The expression kāma-
bījena saṅgatam means that kāma-bīja is included in that
mantra which is the origin of all others, kāma-gāyatrī.
However, in some places it is stated that kāma-bīja is
completely independent of the gāyatrī-mantra.

In this way, after describing Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s divine abode,
Śrī Brahmā describes the covering of that abode in the
half śloka beginning with the words tat kiñjalkam (verse
4). If the dhāma is in the form of the pericarp of a
lotus, then the filaments of that lotus form the lines
of its enclosure. The word kiñjalka (filaments) has been
used to indicate that there is a row of peaks, or that
the lines of the enclosure are endowed with peaks, which

                            33
Brahma-samhita.txt                                5/5/2017

surround the dhāma in all four directions. One should
also understand the expression tat-tad-aṁśānām to
indicate the Supreme Personality Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s expansions
such as His gopa and gopī associates.

Gokula is that abode in which Śrī Kṛṣṇa resides with His
intimate associates who have a similar mood and are the
vessels of the highest love. In describing Gokula, the
abode of such associates, Śrīmat Kṛṣṇa-dvaipāyana
Vedavyāsa said:

evaṁ kukudminaṁ hatvā

stūyamānaḥ sajātibhiḥ

viveśa goṣṭhaṁ sabalo

gopīnāṁ nayanotsavaḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.36.15)

After the killing of Vṛṣabhāsura, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is a
festival for the eyes of the gopīs, entered the cowherd
village along with Baladeva. At that time the cowherd
folk began to praise Him with poetry of their own
composition.

The petals of this lotus are the abodes of His most
beloved sweethearts, the gopīs headed by Śrī Rādhā, and
are in the form of sub-forests. That Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
beloveds are called gopīs has been clearly stated by the
use of the word gopī in His mantra, and among all the
gopīs, Śrī Rādhā is the most excellent. Just as Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is the origin of everything, while being
personally without beginning, similarly Śrī Rādhā, being
non-different from Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is also the origin of
everything, while being without origin Herself.

It is therefore stated in the Gautamīya-tantra:

devī kṛṣṇamayī proktā

rādhikā para-devatā

sarva-lakṣmīmayī sarva-

kāntiḥ sammohinī parā

Śrī Rādhikā is the Supreme Goddess (para-devatā), the
exclusive abode of Kṛṣṇa’s loving pastimes (Devī), and
the shelter of all goddesses of fortune (Mahā-Lakṣmī).
She is the most beautiful. Her inside and outside are
nothing but Kṛṣṇa, and She is incessantly absorbed in
Kṛṣṇa. She is the embodiment of all splendor, and is the
enchantress of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s heart.

Furthermore, Śrī Rādhikā is the supreme ruler of
Vṛndāvana, as stated in the Matsya Purāṇa:

vārāṇasyāṁ viśālākṣī

vimalā puruṣottame

rukmiṇī tu dvārāvatyāṁ

                           34
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017


rādhā vṛndāvane vane

Viśālākṣī reigns in Vārāṇasī, Vimalā-devī in
Puruṣottama-dhāma, Rukmiṇī in Dvārakā and Śrī Rādhā in
Vṛndāvana.

Similarly, it is also stated in the Ṛk-pariśiṣṭa:
“rādhayā mādhavo devo mādhavenaiva rādhikā vibhrājante
janeṣvā — the handsomeness of Mādhava is enhanced by
Rādhā, and the exquisite loveliness of Rādhā is
heightened by Mādhava.”

Tatra patrāṇām: One should understand that in the
central section where the lotus petals of that Gokula-
dhāma join together, there is a multitude of paths as
well as the residences and pastures of the cows. Gokula
is one undivided lotus flower in which everything is
incorporated. Thus, dairy farming is also splendidly
present there. Gokula-dhāma is described as a thousand-
petaled lotus in other places in śāstra as well. For
example:

sahasrāraṁ padmaṁ dala-tatiṣu devībhir abhitaḥ parītaṁ
go-saṅghair api nikhila-kiñjalka-militaiḥ. kavāṭe
yasyāsti svayam akhila-śakti-prakaṭita-prabhāvaḥ sadyaḥ
śrī-parama-puruṣas taṁ kila bhaje.

Gokula-dhāma is a thousand-petaled lotus, on whose
petals are situated the residences of the gopīs. There
are dwellings for innumerable cows in all four
directions. I render service to the Supreme Personality,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the son of the Chief of Vraja, who is
radiantly present along with all His beloved gopīs on
the pericarp of the transcendental lotus.

Here it is correct to read the expression go-saṅghaiḥ as
go-saṅkhyaiḥ. Thus it is understood to indicate the
community of gopas, because the Amara-koṣa dictionary
has described many meanings of the word go, such as gopī
(cowherd damsel), gopāla (cowherd), go-saṅkhya
(community of cowherds), godhu (one who milks cows),
gābhīra (calf) and ballava (cowherd boy-friend). The
central part of the pericarp, situated in the middle of
the lotus, is indicated by the word kavāṭa. The
fundamental purport of this verse is that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
the supreme predominator and enjoyer, who eternally
manifests His influence through His diverse potencies.



Tātparya

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes are of two types: manifest and
unmanifest. The vṛndāvana-līlā that are exhibited to the
eyes of ordinary people are called manifest pastimes,
and the pastimes that are not visible to material eyes
are called unmanifest pastimes. In Goloka, the
unmanifest pastimes are perpetually occurring. When Śrī
Kṛṣṇa so desires, those unmanifest pastimes become
visible to material eyes in Gokula. At such times they
are called manifest pastimes.

In Kṛṣṇa-sandarbha Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmipāda has said:

                           35
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

“aprakaṭa-līlātaḥ prasūtiḥ prakaṭa-līlāyām abhivyaktiḥ —
the manifest pastimes are a revelation of the unmanifest
pastimes.” Furthermore, it is stated in Kṛṣṇa-sandarbha:
“śrī vṛndāvanasya prakāśa-viśeṣo golokatvam, tatra
prāpañcika-loka-prakaṭa-līlāvakāśatvenāvabhāsamānaṁ
prakāśo goloka iti samarthanīyam — the pastimes of
Goloka remain in an unmanifest state in the special
manifestation of Goloka within this material universe,
called Vṛndāvana. Those pastimes are manifested whenever
there is an opportunity.” Therefore, Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmipāda has reconciled this subject in his Laghu-
bhāgavatāmṛta (5.498):

yat tu goloka-nāma syāt

tac ca gokula-vaibhavam

tādātmya-vaibhavatvaṁ ca

tasya tan-mahimonnateḥ

The higher aspect of the greatness of Gokula is its non-
difference from Goloka. Thus Goloka is simply the
greatness or vaibhava of Gokula.

Although Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes are not always manifest in
Gokula, they are eternally manifest in Goloka-dhāma.

This mystery is such that Goloka and Vṛndāvana (Gokula)
are both one and the same tattva; there is no difference
between them. One is above, in the spiritual realm, and
the other manifests or appears below, in the material
world. However, from the angle of vision of one special
conception, just as Gokula is in Mathurā-maṇḍala,
Vṛndāvana is also present in Goloka. According to this
specialized deliberation, Goloka is considered to be
only the external manifestation of Vṛndāvana. There is
sameness between these two abodes from the perspective
of līlā, in which case a difference is seen only in
regard to manifest and unmanifest pastimes. Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
līlā is eternally manifest in Goloka.

Yet, from the point of view of differentiation, one will
observe that the pastimes of Goloka are integrated with
a reverential mood, whereas the pastimes of Vṛndāvana
are integrated with pure human-like sweetness. That is
why Goloka has been called the vaibhava or greatness of
Gokula.

The unmanifest pastimes of this Goloka that are revealed
to the conditioned soul are of two types. The purport is
that there are two types of process adopted by
practicing devotees in order to realize these pastimes.
One is mantramayī-upāsanā and the other svārasikī-
upāsanā. These will now be explained.

Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī has stated: “tat tad ekatara sthānādi;
niyata-sthitika evaṁ tat-tan-mantra-dhyānamayaḥ;
mantramayī-upāsanā is the process in which any one
particular pastime, which is situated in one location,
is being contemplated continuously by means of a mantra,
and the worship of that pastime is being accomplished by
this method.” The pastimes in which various types of
spontaneous playful revelry are strung together of their

                           36
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

own accord in an uninterrupted succession extending over
several locations are called svārasikī or svābhāvikī,
meaning “natural.”

This verse explains both mantramayī-upāsanā and
svārasikī-upāsanā. The first meaning (indicating
mantramayī-upāsanā) is as follows. In the līlā indicated
by eighteen syllables, the bases of the mantra, which
are arranged in different places, manifest only one
particular līlā of Kṛṣṇa. For example: klīṁ kṛṣṇāya
govindāya gopījana-vallabhāya svāhā. This mantra has six
limbs made of the following components: (1) kṛṣṇāya, (2)
govindāya, (3) gopījana, (4) vallabhāya, (5) svā and (6)
hā. The mantra is formed when these six parts are
arranged in sequence one after the other.

The six-pointed mahā-yantra is as follows. The kāma-
bīja, klīṁ, is situated in the middle of the diagram as
the pivot. If one draws the yantra in this way and
meditates on the transcendental tattva, knowledge of
reality arises in the heart, as it did for Mahārāja
Candradhvaja. The Gautamīya-tantra gives the following
instruction: “svā-śabdena ca kṣetrajño heti cit-prakṛtiḥ
parā — the word svā indicates the individual jīvātmā,
who is the knower of his own field of activities, and hā
indicates the spiritual dominated potency, the eternal
nature of the jīva.”

According to Śrī Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (1.87): “uttarād
govindāyety asmāt surabhiṁ gojātim. tad-uttarād
gopījanety asmād vidyāś caturdaśa. tad-uttarād vallabha
— the word govindāya after the word klīṁ indicates Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, who is known as Govinda because He tends the
surabhī cows and nurtures their pleasure. After that,
the word gopījana indicates the society of Vraja gopīs,
who are the embodiments of the fourteen types of
knowledge of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s internal potency. Then the word
vallabhāya indicates that Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the lover of those
gopīs, is the paramour hero of Vraja.” When worship is
performed by mantra through meanings such as these,
realization awakens of a līlā occuring in one location.
This is the purpose of mantropāsanā. The general meaning
is that those who cherish the exclusive aspiration to
enter into Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental pastimes will engage
in Kṛṣṇa’s service in accordance with their own svarūpa
by incessantly cultivating their particular relationship
with Him, which gives rise to bhakti-rasa.

The living entity’s relationship with Kṛṣṇa is
established when realized knowledge of the following six
svarūpas arises: (1) Kṛṣṇa’s svarūpa (intrinsic form and
nature), (2) the svarūpa of His transcendental pleasure
pastimes, (3) the svarūpa of His associates, the gopīs,
(4) the svarūpa of unconditional surrender of the self
to Kṛṣṇa, following in the wake of the gopīs, (5) the
svarūpa of the pure soul in full spiritual cognizance
and (6) the svarūpa of service to Kṛṣṇa. The happiness
of service to Bhagavān is the only relishable mellow. It
is accomplished by an unwavering conviction in the
process of bhakti, whose very nature is such that the
soul becomes established in the following relationship:
“The ultimate shelter is the Supreme Enjoyer, Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
and I am the predominated or enjoyed principle in the
form of a maidservant of Śrī Rādhā.” This is the

                           37
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

essential purport of the verse.

In the stage of sādhana, when bhakti is initiated by the
material senses, the practicing devotee realizes the
type of pastime in Goloka or Gokula that is the object
of meditation by mantra (mantropāsanā-dhyānamayī-līlā).
In the stage of perfection, the perfect devotee realizes
the pastimes of Goloka or Gokula in their feature of
totally uninhibited revelry. This is the condition of
affairs in Goloka or Gokula; it will be revealed
gradually.

The expression jyotī-rūpeṇa manunā in verse 3 indicates
that the transcendental meaning may be illuminated or
realized in the mantra. Having integrated pure kṛṣṇa-
prema in the form of transcendental amorous love in this
mantra, the practicing devotee who goes on rendering
service becomes situated in the form of a perfect
associate of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and realizes the astonishing
mellows of the greatest blissful love (premānanda-
mahānanda-rasa). This type of eternal līlā is always
radiant in Goloka.

The shape of the transcendental Gokula resembles a fully
blossomed lotus flower, whose central pericarp has a
six-pointed shape. Within this lies the embodiment of
the purport of the eighteen-syllable mantra, namely śrī
rādhā-kṛṣṇa-tattva, surrounded by Their direct bodily
expansions, the attendant gopīs who are manifested by
the internal potency. Here Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala are
the full manifestation of the seed of the mantra. It is
stated in the Uttara-gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad (13):

tasmād oṁkāra-sambhūto

gopālo viśva-sambhavaḥ

klīm-oṁkārasya caikatvaṁ

paṭhyate brahma-vādibhiḥ

Oṁkāra, the sacred syllable oṁ, is the perfect and
complete truth, the combination of potency and the
possessor of potency, Gopāla, from whom the entire
universe has arisen. Those who know the Absolute Truth,
Brahman, regard oṁkāra and klīṁ as synonyms.

Consequently, oṁkāra is Gopāla and klīṁ is also oṁkāra.
Therefore kāma-bīja indicates rādhā-kṛṣṇa-tattva.




Verse 5


catur-asraṁ tat-paritaḥ

śvetadvīpākhyam adbhutam

catur-asraṁ catur-mūrteś

catur-dhāma catuṣ-kṛtam

                           38
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017


caturbhiḥ puruṣārthaiś ca

caturbhir hetubhir vṛtam

śūlair daśabhir ānaddham

ūrddhādho dig-vidikṣv api

aṣṭabhir nidhibhir juṣṭam

aṣṭabhiḥ siddhibhis tathā

manu-rūpaiś ca daśabhir

dik-pālaiḥ parito vṛtam

śyāmair gauraiś ca raktaiś ca

śuklaiś ca pārṣadarṣabhaiḥ

śobhitaṁ śaktibhis tābhir

adbhutābhiḥ samantataḥ

Anvaya

tat-paritaḥ — surrounding Gokula; adbhutam — is an
astonishing; catur-asram — quadrangle; śvetadvīpa-ākhyam
— named Śvetadvīpa; catur-asram — having four corners;
catuḥ-kṛtam — it is divided into four parts; catuḥ-dhāma
— which are the four abodes; catuḥ-mūrteḥ — of the four
deities: Vāsudeva, Saṅkarṣaṇa, Pradyumna and Aniruddha;
caturbhiḥ puruṣa-arthaiḥ — with the four attainments of
human life, namely religiosity, economic development,
sense gratification and liberation; ca vṛtam caturbhiḥ
hetubhiḥ — and endowed with the four Vedas: Ṛg, Sāma,
Yajuḥ and Atharva, which are of the nature of mantra;
ānaddham api — and (that abode) is held; dik-vidikṣu —
in all directions: east, west, north, south, north-east,
north-west, south-east and south-west; ūrddha-adhaḥ —
above and below; śūlaiḥ daśabhiḥ — by ten spears; juṣṭam
— it is surrounded (in the eight directions); aṣṭabhiḥ
nidhibhiḥ — with the eight jewels: mahāpadma, padma,
śaṅkha, makara, kacchapa, mukunda, kunda and nīla;
aṣṭabhiḥ siddhibhiḥ tathā — and with the eight
perfections: aṇimā, laghimā, mahimā, garimā, īśitva,
vaśitva, prāpti and prākāmya; paritaḥ — it is
surrounded; vṛtam — and protected; daśabhiḥ dik-pālaiḥ —
by the ten protectors of the directions (headed by
Indra), who are of the nature of mantra; śobhitam —
(that abode of Śvetadvīpa) is beautified; pārṣada-
ṛṣabhaiḥ — by the Lord’s exalted associates; śyāmaiḥ —
whose bodily hues are bluish black; gauraiḥ ca — and
golden; raktaiḥ ca — and red; śuklaiḥ ca — and white;
samantataḥ — and who are accompanied; tābhiḥ adbhutābhiḥ
śaktibhiḥ — by their astonishing potencies (headed by
Vimalā).



Translation

The identity of Gokula’s surrounding area is being

                             39
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

presented. In the four directions beyond Gokula lies a
wonderful, four-cornered place called Śvetadvīpa.
Śvetadvīpa is divided into four sections in the four
directions, and each section is the abode of one of the
presiding deities: Vāsudeva, Saṅkarṣaṇa, Pradyumna and
Aniruddha. These four abodes are adorned with the four
objectives of life, namely religiosity, economic
development, sense gratification and liberation, and the
causes of those four objectives, namely the four Vedas
(Ṛg, Yajur, Sāma and Atharva), which are composed of
mantras. They are surrounded in eight directions and
above and below by ten lances. The eight directions are
ornamented with the eight jewels known as mahāpadma,
padma, śaṅkha, makara, kacchapa, mukunda, kunda and
nīla. Ten guardians in the form of mantras are present
in the ten directions, which are all beautified by
blackish, golden, red and white associates of Bhagavān,
along with the host of wondrous potencies headed by
Vimalā.



Ṭīkā translation

After the description of Gokula, its surrounding area is
now being described in four verses. Beyond Gokula lies
an exceedingly miraculous, four-cornered abode called
Śvetadvīpa. Although only Śvetadvīpa is mentioned here,
one should also understand it to be Goloka. Actually,
Śvetadvīpa is also a term for Gokula. All places are
within that region known as Śvetadvīpa or Gokula. The
employment of yet another special nomenclature indicates
that all locations are included within its jurisdiction.
The interior region is Vṛndāvana. Different names such
as Śvetadvīpa, Goloka, Gokula, Vṛndāvana, Vraja and so
on are used because of the different meanings carried by
the various names. This Śvetadvīpa which is the outer
covering of Goloka is different from the Śvetadvīpa
situated in Gokula,11 which will be described
separately. Vṛndāvana-dhāma is within the quadrilateral
realm.

For example, it is stated in the Svāyambhuva-āgama:
“dhyāyet tatra viśuddhātmā idaṁ sarvaṁ krameṇaiva — the
sādhaka whose heart is pure will meditate on all of the
following one after another.” Later, it is further
stated: “vṛndāvanaṁ kusumitaṁ nānā-vṛkṣair vihaṅgamaiḥ
saṁsmaret — one should meditate by remembering Śrī
Vṛndāvana with its charming groves (kuñjas) and many
varieties of trees. The trees are covered in fragrant,
flowering vines and resound with the sweet singing of
birds.”

Similarly, in the prayers of the personified Vedas to
Śrī Bhagavān in the Vāmana Purāṇa, we find the following
statement:

ānanda-rūpam iti yad

vidanti hi purā vidaḥ

tad-rūpaṁ darśayāsmākaṁ

yadi deyo varo hi naḥ

                           40
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017


śrutvaitad darśayām āsa

gokulaṁ prakṛteḥ param

kevalānubhavānanda-

mātram akṣaram adhvagam

yatra vṛndāvanaṁ nāma

vanaṁ kāma-dughair drumaiḥ

“O Bhagavān, if You want to bestow a benediction upon
us, then kindly grant us the boon that we may see the
divine abode that the enlightened sages call ānandamaya-
dhāma.” Upon hearing this, Bhagavān blessed them with
darśana of His supreme abode, Gokula, which is beyond
the influence of material nature, known only by
realization, and indestructible and absolute. In that
supreme abode is a charming forest called Vṛndāvana,
which is adorned with desire trees that completely
fulfill all the desires of the devotees.

Beyond this Vṛndāvana is a four-cornered area divided
into four sections, which are the individual abodes of
the four forms known as catur-vyūha: Śrī Vāsudeva,
Saṅkarṣaṇa, Pradyumna and Aniruddha. However, They are
situated in aircraft above because They are performing
pastimes that manifest Their divine opulence. Here hetu
(the causes) indicates that They reign splendidly with
dharma, artha, kāma and mokṣa, and that They are
decorated with the guardians of the ten directions,
headed by Indra, who are present in the form of their
respective mantras. The four Vedas — Ṛg, Sāma, Yajur and
Atharva — are also gracefully present in personified
forms. That the Vedas have individual embodiments is
confirmed by Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, wherein it is stated
that the personified Vedas offered prayers to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

In that abode Śrī Hari is resplendent with His sixteen
potencies, headed by Vimalā-devī, as stated in Laghu-
bhāgavatāmṛta (3.129):

śrīr bhūḥ kīrtir ilā līlā

kāntir vidheti saptakam

vimalādhā navehyetā

mukhyāḥ ṣoḍaśa-śaktayaḥ

The sixteen potencies are as follows: (1) Śrī, (2) Bhū,
(3) Līlā, (4) Kānti, (5) Kīrti, (6) Tuṣṭi, (7) Gī, (8)
Puṣṭi, (9) Satyā, (10) Jñānājñānā, (11) Jayā Utkarṣiṇī,
(12) Vimalā, (13) Yogamāyā, (14) Prahvī, (15) Īśānā and
(16) Anugraha.

Thus this planet is also called Goloka-dhāma. The
following description can be found in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam:

nandas tv atīndriyaṁ dṛṣṭvā

loka-pāla-mahodayam

                              41
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017


kṛṣṇe ca sannatiṁ teṣāṁ

jñātibhyo vismito ‘bravīt

te tv autsukya-dhiyo rājan

matvā gopās tam īśvaram

api naḥ svagatiṁ sūkṣmām

upādhāsyad adhīśvaram

iti svānāṁ sa bhagavān

vijñāyākhila-dṛk svayam

saṅkalpa-siddhaye teṣāṁ

kṛpayaitad acintayat

jano vai loka etasminn

avidyā-kāma-karmabhiḥ

uccāvacāsu gatiṣu

na veda svāṁ gatiṁ bhraman

iti sañcintya bhagavān

mahā-kāruṇiko hariḥ

darśayām āsa lokaṁ svaṁ

gopānāṁ tamasaḥ param

satyaṁ jñānam anantaṁ yad

brahma-jyotiḥ sanātanam

yad dhi paśyanti munayo

guṇāpāye samāhitāḥ

te tu brahma-hradaṁ nītāḥ

magnāḥ kṛṣṇena coddhṛtāḥ

dadṛśur brahmaṇo lokaṁ

yatrākrūro ‘dhyagāt purā

nandādayas tu taṁ dṛṣṭvā

paramānanda-nivṛtāḥ

kṛṣṇaṁ ca tatra cchandobhiḥ

stūyamānaṁ su-vismitāḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.28.10—17)

When Nanda Mahārāja returned to Vraja from Varuṇaloka,

                              42
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

he told his cowherd family and friends what had happened
there. Hearing this incredible and astonishing account
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s greatness, they became extremely curious
and amazed, and began to consider whether Śrī Kṛṣṇa
could actually be the supreme controller, Parameśvara.12
They began to request Him to show them His
incomprehensible transcendental abode.

Then Svayam Bhagavān, who sees everything, understood
the desire of the cowherds and, out of compassion, He
began to contemplate the fulfillment of their
aspiration: “Conditioned souls take birth in higher and
lower species such as demigods and animals as a result
of the selfish material pursuits they perform out of
ignorance. All these Vrajavāsīs are My nearest and
dearest family members. Although they have descended to
this material world, they consider themselves to be the
same as the conditioned souls because they are totally
absorbed in My sweet human-like pastimes. They are
oblivious to their actual position.” Pondering in this
way, the immensely compassionate Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa
granted the gopas a vision of His own realm, which is
situated beyond the material nature.

This realm of Bhagavān is transcendental, immeasurable,
real, self-effulgent, eternal and the embodiment of
Brahman. Even the great sages who have attained a state
of consciousness that is free from the three modes of
material nature can see that place only in trance. Śrī
Kṛṣṇa took the gopas to the place called Brahma-hrada,
where Akrūra also had darśana of that supreme abode
after immersing himself in the water. They saw that Śrī
Kṛṣṇa was also there, and that the Vedas personified
were offering prayers to Him. That loka was ultra-
subtle, beyond mundane sense perception, and
unintelligible to worldly thought processes. Upon seeing
it, they were both utterly amazed and overwhelmed with
joy.

In this narration, the word atīndriya means “that which
has never been seen before.” The word svagatim means
“His own abode,” which is thoroughly incomprehensible.
Śrī Kṛṣṇa granted a vision of that otherwise
incomprehensible realm. Why did He grant them darśana of
this abode? Because the Vrajavāsīs are His nearest and
dearest family members.

sālokya-sārṣṭi-sāmīpya-

sārūpyaikatvam apy uta

dīyamānaṁ na gṛhṇanti

vinā mat-sevanaṁ janāḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.29.13)

Without service to Me, My devotees will not accept the
forms of liberation known as sālokya (living on the same
planet as the Lord), sārṣṭi (having similar opulence to
the Lord), sāmīpya (always being near to the Lord) and
sārūpya (having a similar form to the Lord) — what to
speak of impersonal liberation — even if they are
offered to them.

                              43
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017


Just as the word janāḥ in the above verse is understood
to mean nija-jana (His own people), similarly the word
jana in the previously quoted verse of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(10.28.13) also indicates nija-jana. It would be
inconsistent to accept the word to refer to anyone else.
Above all others, Śrī Kṛṣṇa considers the residents of
Vraja to be His kith and kin, and He has personally
confirmed this fact (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.25.18):

tasmān mac-charaṇaṁ goṣṭhaṁ

man-nāthaṁ mat-parigraham

gopāye svātma-yogena

so ‘yaṁ me vrata āhitaḥ

This community of cowherds is under My shelter. I am the
patron of these Vrajavāsīs. I personally use My own
power and prowess to protect those whom I have accepted
as My closest family members, intimate relatives and
bosom friends. This is My steadfast vow.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa further considers, “Simply due to ignorance,
the living entities in this universe, which is composed
of five gross elements, attain various destinations in
higher and lower species, such as demigods and animals.
The Vrajavāsīs consider themselves to be in the same
category, and thus they could not understand their own
situation. They have forgotten their own constitutional
status. Their knowledge of My opulence has become
concealed because of their absorption in My unique,
sweet human-like pastimes.”

This is also illustrated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(10.11.58):

iti nandādayo gopāḥ

kṛṣṇa-rāma-kathāṁ mudā

kurvanto ramamāṇāś ca

nāvindan bhava-vedanām

Nanda Mahārāja and all the Vrajavāsīs always used to
enjoy talking about Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma. By doing so,
they would become so overwhelmed with bliss that they
never felt the distress of material existence.

Material qualities such as ignorance and self-centered
fruitive activities could never touch the Vrajavāsīs,
for the influence of ignorance is only exerted upon the
conditioned jīvas who are indifferent to Kṛṣṇa, not upon
the personal associates of Bhagavān.

From the expression gopānāṁ svaṁ lokam in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.28.14),13 it is clear that Śrī Kṛṣṇa had
granted the Vrajavāsīs a vision of His divine abode,
Goloka, which is beyond the illusory material nature in
all respects. That abode is the manifest expression of
the internal potency, which is indivisible and self-
effulgent, and the eternally true embodiment of infinite

                              44
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

existence, consciousness and bliss. Although it is
extremely difficult to see this abode, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
mercifully granted them a vision of it.

It is a matter of sheer wonderment to have such a
darśana of Goloka while being in Vṛndāvana-dhāma on this
Earth. How was it possible? In answer to this question,
it has been said that Śrī Kṛṣṇa had taken the Vrajavāsīs
headed by Nanda Mahārāja to Brahma-hrada, otherwise
known as Akrūra-tīrtha, and instructed them to immerse
themselves in Brahma-hrada. They dipped under the water
once. Then, on Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s request, they dipped under
again several times, and each time Śrī Kṛṣṇa granted
them darśana of a different loka. In the end He granted
them a vision of Brahma-dhāma, His greatest
transcendental abode, Goloka.

It is also stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.5.39):
“mūrdhabhiḥ satyalokas tu brahmalokaḥ sanātanaḥ — above
the head of Satyaloka lies the eternal Brahmaloka.”

Here one may raise the question, “Other sections of
Vaikuṇṭha are also called Brahmaloka, so which
Brahmaloka is this one?” In response to this it is said,
“In Brahma-hrada, Akrūra had a vision of the Brahmaloka
that is the highest abode of Goloka.14 Śrī Kṛṣṇa had
granted the darśana of His supreme abode there
especially to indicate the glories of that holy place of
pilgrimage.”

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartipāda has expressed the
following opinion in his commentary on the previously
mentioned verses of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.28.10—17): “In
order to make the Vrajavāsīs realize the superexcellent
sweetness of the eternal abode of Vṛndāvana, the most
compassionate Śrī Kṛṣṇa first showed them the realm of
impersonal liberation, Brahmaloka. Then He granted them
a vision of Vaikuṇṭhaloka, which is superior to that
Brahmaloka. Finally, He granted them darśana of the
superlative abode, Goloka-dhāma. In other words, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa submerged those Vrajavāsīs in impersonal
liberation by immersing them in Brahma-hrada, and from
there He lifted them up to have darśana of the spiritual
abode, Vaikuṇṭha-dhāma, by His inconceivable potency.”

In this way, the immensely merciful master of all saved
His devotees from the dire calamity of impersonal
liberation,15 and made them taste the happiness of
Vaikuṇṭha. The feeling of loving happiness in Vaikuṇṭha
is superior to the happiness derived from the impersonal
Brahman, which is completely devoid of love.
Furthermore, the love-laden happiness of Goloka
surpasses even the happiness of Vaikuṇṭha.

taṁ vaikuṇṭha-lokaṁ dṛṣtvā tu paramānanda-nivrtāḥ

vaikuṇṭhīya-golokasya vṛndāvanasya vṛndāvana-sādharmyaṁ
darśanād iti bhāvaḥ

Those Vrajavāsīs saw Vaikuṇṭhaloka and felt the highest
bliss, because the Vaikuṇṭha planet of which they had
darśana was actually the Goloka of the Vaikuṇṭha realm
or spiritual sky. This seems to be the same as
Vṛndāvana, due to the features that they have in common,

                           45
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

but they are not one and the same place. A millionaire
becomes severely aggrieved upon losing his wealth, and
overjoyed if he somehow retrieves it again. Similarly,
the Vrajavāsīs were restless in Brahmaloka and
Vaikuṇṭhaloka, because they were unable to see their Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, whose face is like a lotus flower, and to whom
they offer ārati with the lamp of their lives millions
of times over. Calling out, “Where, oh where, is our
darling Kṛṣṇa?” they were becoming increasingly anxious.
However, when they came to Goloka, they did see Kṛṣṇa
there. “Aho!” they exclaimed, “There’s Kṛṣṇa!” They
began to approach Him, but what they saw when they drew
nearer to Him took them by surprise. “Aho! What kind of
place have we come to? There are radiant, divine beings
here offering reverent hymns to Kṛṣṇa. They look just
like our old acquaintances, but we cannot call to mind
exactly who they are. We also feel hesitant to inquire
from them. The most surprising thing is that Kṛṣṇa, who
is sitting in their midst, is not expressing His mood of
childhood as He did before. Even upon seeing His father
and elder relatives, He is not coming to us and putting
His arms around our necks. And what’s more, we are also
hesitant to go to Him and take Him in our laps. Why is
He not feeling any hunger and thirst today? How will His
mother live without feeding Him?”

When Śrī Kṛṣṇa saw their reactions, His pastime potency
inspired Yogamāyā to lift the depressed Vrajavāsīs up
from that realm of Goloka and deliver them back to
Vṛndāvana (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.28.16—17).

Furthermore, it is stated in the Harivaṁśa, in the
narration concerning Indra (2.19.29):

svargād ūrdhvaṁ brahmaloko

brahmarṣi-gaṇa-sevitaḥ

tatra somagatiś caiva

jyotiṣāṁ ca mahātmanām

nighnatopadravān gavāmÖ etc.

In the celestial sphere above Svarga lies the world
called Brahmaloka, which is attended by the sages known
as brahmarṣis. That place is the destination of Candra
and the powerful mahātmās. Above that region lies the
planet of the cows, Goloka, which is protected by
perfected personalities. That great, all-pervading realm
is situated in a vast sky. Your (Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s) radiant
refuge is considered to lie even above that. Although we
inquired from Pitāmaha Brahmājī about this radiant
refuge, we are still incapable of knowing it.
Personalities who are endowed with qualities such as
control of the mind and senses, and who are dedicated to
pious activities, attain Svargaloka. The adherents of
impersonal knowledge, who are incessantly engaged in the
austerities associated with the impersonal feature of
the Absolute Truth, attain Brahmaloka. However, it is
extremely difficult to ascend to the planet of the cows,
Goloka. O almighty Śrī Kṛṣṇa, O self-manifest and
equipoised Lord, You are capable of accomplishing
anything. When this world was in a crisis, You upheld it

                             46
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

and relieved the cows from their calamity.

In this context, if we take the meaning of “calamity” in
the general sense, it would be unreasonable to interpret
Brahmaloka as the planet that lies above Svargaloka.
After deep deliberation, it must be understood that the
Brahmaloka described in this quotation is in every way
transcendental to the three mundane planetary systems.
The moon has no access to that realm, what to speak of
the other celestial bodies that are all situated beneath
Dhruvaloka. Furthermore, the phrase sādhyāḥ pālayanti
indicates that this Brahmaloka is protected by perfected
personalities (sādhyas). However, this is also
unreasonable because the sādhyas are included within the
species of demigods. The sādhyas cannot even protect
Svargaloka, so how can they protect Goloka? From every
angle this interpretation is impossible.

This passage continues, “The aforementioned planet,
which is also famous by the name of Surabhīloka, is all-
pervading.” This statement also seems to be
inappropriate. Just as Śrī Bhagavān’s form is all-
pervading by the power of His inconceivable energy,
similarly His planet is also all-pervading. This is not
possible for any planet other than the planet of
Bhagavān. Here in the statement of Indra, pṛcchanto ‘pi,
the word api has been used to indicate extreme
astonishment: “Aho! How amazing it is that, although we
inquired about this subject from Pitāmaha Brahmājī, we
still cannot understand it.” Surabhīloka is said to be
within the universe, and hence it is neither fully
transcendental, nor can it be the topmost planet.
Therefore the Surabhīloka in this world is distinct from
Goloka, which is transcendental to everything material,
being the superexcellent form of Śrī Bhagavān’s planet.
In the Mokṣa-dharma-nārāṇanīya-upākhyāna, Śrī Bhagavān
Himself states:

evaṁ bahu-vidhai rūpaiś

carāmīha vasundharām

brahma-lokaṁ ca kaunteya

golokaṁ ca sanātanam

O son of Kuntī! I wander upon this Earth in many forms.
In addition to this, I also roam perpetually in the
eternal abodes, Brahmaloka and Goloka Vṛndāvana.

Therefore the verse svargād ūrdhvaṁ brahma-lokaḥ,
nighnatopadravān gavām is properly understood as
follows. The word svargāt in this verse refers to Goloka
Vṛndāvana. In the Second Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,
Bhūrloka, Bhuvarloka and Svargaloka are described as the
lotus feet, the navel and the head, respectively, of the
imaginary universal form. From Svarga to Satyaloka there
are five planetary systems: Svarga, Mahar, Janas, Tapas
and Satya. Above these five planetary systems is the
chief Svarga, or in other words the spiritual
Brahmaloka, the embodiment of eternity, knowledge and
bliss that lies beyond the insentient material energy.
The term Brahmaloka is used to indicate the planet of
Bhagavān. It is also stated in the Second Canto of

                           47
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam that the eternal Brahmaloka lies above
the head of Satyaloka, the topmost planet within this
material world. Therefore the correct interpretation of
the term Brahmaloka in this context is “the eternal and
primeval Vaikuṇṭhaloka.” It is not a material place
within this created universe.

This is confirmed in the śruti. This Brahmaloka is also
known as Ātmaloka, the eternal planet of Bhagavān. It is
served by the brahmarṣis including Brahmājī, the
personified Vedas, the ṛṣis headed by Nārada, Śrī
Garuḍa, and the Lord’s other associates headed by
Viṣvaksena. This description of the personalities who
are eternally sheltered there acts as an indication of
the qualifications required to go to that realm. The
Soma who resides there is not the moon; rather, this
Soma refers to Śrī Śiva. This place is his desired
destination, because Śrī Śiva himself states in the
Rudra-gīta of the Fourth Canto, “That person who
performs his dharma unflinchingly for one hundred births
attains the position of Brahmā. Those who have performed
even more pious activities can attain my position, the
position of Śiva. But a living entity born in an
ordinary family who renders service to Bhagavān even for
a very short time becomes a Vaiṣṇava and attains the
supreme abode that I desire to attain after giving up
this position of Śiva.”

The word jyotiṣām in the previously quoted verse from
the Harivaṁśa refers to that Brahman into which persons
desire to merge. This Brahmaloka is extremely difficult
to attain, even for liberated saints who have realized
Brahman. That abode is only attained by great souls such
as the four Kumāras headed by Sanaka, as well as other
jñānīs who have attained prema-bhakti, all of whom
render devotional service to Bhagavān with an utter
disregard for impersonal liberation. For example, it is
stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.14.5):

muktānām api siddhānāṁ

nārāyaṇa-parāyaṇaḥ

sudurlabhaḥ praśāntātmā

koṭiṣv api mahā-mune

O great sage, one among many millions of liberated
persons may attain perfection, and among many perfected
beings, one may become fully devoted to Nārāyaṇa; and
among billions of such personalities, one who is fully
peaceful and self-satisfied is extremely rare.

Bhagavān has also stated in Bhagavad-gītā (6.47):

yoginām api sarveṣāṁ

mad-gatenāntarātmanā

śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ

sa me yuktatamo mataḥ

Amongst all yogīs, the best is he who is fully dedicated

                            48
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

to Me, Śrī Vāsudeva, and who serves Me with great faith.
This is My definite opinion.

Herein we find described the greatness of those devotees
who render loving service with immovable faith. The word
mahat (in the verse from the Harivaṁśa) refers to those
personalities who are possessed of the highest prema.
Only they attain Goloka.

Above Brahmaloka is gavāṁ loka, in other words Goloka-
dhāma. It is said that this planet is served by sādhyas.
Here sādhya refers to the original forms upon which the
forms of the demigods within the material world are
based. They are eternal associates of Śrī Kṛṣṇa who
serve in Goloka in the capacity of guardians of the
directions.

It is also confirmed in the śruti that this excellent
place is known as Svargaloka, and that it is the
residence of all the sādhyas and devatās. In this case,
Svargaloka refers to Goloka-dhāma, where all the
original forms of the demigods reside and render service
to Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa. It does not refer to the mundane
Svargaloka where Indra and other demigods reside.

In the Uttara-khaṇḍa of the Padma Purāṇa, in a
description of Mahā-Vaikuṇṭha Goloka-dhāma, it is stated
that this supremely glorious Goloka-dhāma is the
residence of the eternal devatās, viśvedevas and
sādhyas, who have immense beauty, and whose sight
invokes auspiciousness.

In Brahmājī’s prayers in the Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.14.34), we find that he also hankers to
take birth in Gokula: tad-bhūri-bhāgyam iha janma kim
apy aṭavyāṁ yad gokule ‘pi. Great devotees of the
caliber of four-headed Brahmā also take birth there as
immobile trees or creepers, and pray to receive the
foot-dust of the gopas and gopīs. Therefore Goloka-dhāma
is famous for being superior to all other abodes. Just
as Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa exists everwhere, Goloka-dhāma is
also all-pervading, for it simultaneously pervades all
material and January 19, 2007January 19, 2007spiritual
universes. It is also mentioned in śāstra that the
attainment of Goloka is the final destination among the
progressive stages of liberation.

It is described in the Second Canto that Brahmā, who
sits upon a lotus flower, saw Vaikuṇṭhaloka. Similarly
the Vrajavāsīs also saw Goloka in which opulence
predominates. This Goloka-dhāma is great; indeed, it is
a form of Bhagavān, as stated in śruti, mahāntaṁ vibhum
ātmānam.

This deliberation arises because several terms — such as
mahākāśa, brahma and paravyoma — have been used in
descriptions of Goloka. For example, Goloka has been
described as mahākāśa (the great sky) in the Vedānta-
sūtra code ākāśas tal-liṅgāt.

The phrase tad-gataḥ indicates the attainment of one’s
spiritual form, and consequently the attainment of this
supreme abode. For example, Ajāmila also attained
Vaikuṇṭha after being awarded his spiritual form. The

                           49
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

significance is that Bhagavān’s names, form, qualities,
pastimes and abode are all transcendental. Consequently,
upon attaining one’s svarūpa, one also attains
Bhagavān’s abode.

In Goloka-dhāma, which shines victoriously far above all
other planets, Śrī Kṛṣṇa sports in the form of Govinda.
The place wherein Śrī Kṛṣṇa revels in His pleasure
pastimes in the form of Govinda is by no means ordinary;
it is tapomayī. The word tapaḥ (austerity) should be
accepted in the sense of boundless and indivisible
opulence. The same interpretation of the word tapaḥ is
found in the commentary on Śrī Viṣṇu-sahasra-nāma-
stotram in relation to the phrase paramaṁ yo mahat-
tapaḥ. The śruti statement satayo ‘tapyata pertains to
Parameśvara. Its meaning is, “That Parameśvara has
manifested aiśvarya.” Therefore Goloka is extremely
difficult to attain, even for Brahmā.

This planet has been described in various places as
Brahmaloka, Vaikuṇṭha, Mahā-Nārāyaṇaloka, Paravyoma,
Mahākāśa and so on, which are all originally names only
for Goloka. Just as the attainment of Brahmaloka is
possible only for a person whose mind is perfectly
controlled, similarly only a premamaya-bhakta (one who
worships Śrī Viṣṇu — meaning Śrī Kṛṣṇa — with undivided
attention) can know this planet Goloka. Śruti also
confirms this: yasya jñānamayaṁ tapaḥ. Here the word
Brahmaloka means Vaikuṇṭha, the word parā means
“transcendental to material nature,” and gavām refers to
all the residents of Vraja including the trees, vines,
cows, cowherds and gopīs. Moreover, nighnatopadravān
gavām means that Kṛṣṇa dispels all the miseries of the
residents of Vraja. What are their miseries? They are
described in the Yugala-gīta of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(10.35.25) by the gopīs in their mood of separation:
“mocayan vraja-gavāṁ dina-tāpam — our dearmost
Śyāmasundara is returning to drive away the intolerable
affliction of separation that all the residents of Vraja
have suffered throughout the day in His absence.” This
is the meaning of His dispelling the calamities that
befall the Vrajavāsīs. The Vrajavāsis’ affection for Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is natural. One who is inspired by their loving
moods must practice sādhana continuously in order to
attain an emotional attachment just like theirs. Only
then can this extremely rare loving attachment that is
found in Vraja be attained. Thus, such a destination is
extraordinarily uncommon.

After the description of Goloka, now in the phrase
beginning with sa tu, there is an explanation of the
non-difference between Goloka and Gokula: “He protected
the Vrajavāsīs by holding up the mountain Govardhana.”
The same version is found in Śrī Nārāyaṇīyopākhyāna of
Mokṣa-dharma, wherein Śrī Bhagavān personally states, “O
son of Kuntī, I wander throughout the universe in many
forms. I roam throughout Brahmaloka, eternal Goloka, and
also in Śrīdhāma Vṛndāvana Gokula.” It is also stated in
the Mṛtyuñjaya-tantra: “According to His own independent
desire, He established Vaikuṇṭha from the Mahākāśa
(spiritual sky) upon the surface of the Earth in the
form of Gokula, and made successful very great festivals
such as the rāsa-līlā with the gopīs. This type of
festival is the very heart of bhakti, and it bestows

                           50
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

pure transcendental love upon the faithful.”

Nārada-pañcarātra contains the following description in
the history of Vijaya: “In Goloka-dhāma, which exists
above all other abodes, the incomparable supremely
blissful hero known as Govinda delights in the abode of
Gokula.” This is also confirmed in the Ṛg Veda (1.154.6)
as follows:

tā vāṁ vāstūny uśmasi gamadhyai

yatra gāvo bhūri-śṛṅgā ayāsaḥ

atrāha tad urugāyasya kṛṣṇaḥ

paramaṁ padam avabhāti bhūri

In the first line the word tāḥ means “all,” vām means
“of Rāma and Kṛṣṇa,” vāstūni means “the pastime places
of Gokula,” gamadhyai means “to attain,” and uśmasi
means “we desire.” What is the nature of those līlā-
sthalīs? Very excellent and beautiful horned cows are
found there. Here the word bhūri not only means that the
cows have very excellent horns; it also means that they
are endowed with great prosperity. These cows, which are
endowed with all auspicious symptoms, are kāma-dhenus,
who are capable of satisfying all desires of all people.
The word ayāsaḥ found here is defined in the Amara-koṣa
as meaning “auspiciousness,” and devāsa as meaning “you
are.” Thus Goloka is renowned in Bhū-maṇḍala, in
Vaikuṇṭha and in the Vedas. This Goloka-dhāma is in many
ways as famous and as transcendental to the material
nature as the much-famed Śrī Bhagavān.

In the śruti, the mādhyandinīya portion of the Yajur
Veda mentions: “dhāmāny uśmasīti iti viṣṇoḥ paramaṁ
padam avabhāti bhūri — we desire to attain that Goloka-
dhāma, which is the svarūpa of Śrī Viṣṇu’s supreme
abode.” In addition there are many other statements from
the śāstra that establish the same essential conclusion.



Tātparya

The supreme abode, Gokula, is the prominent seat or
shelter of prema-bhakti. Therefore all the places of the
manifestation of Vraja in the material world (Bhauma-
Vraja), such as Rādhā-kuṇḍa, Govardhana and the Yamunā,
are gracefully present there. Besides this, the complete
opulence of Vaikuṇṭha expands to the fullest extent in
all directions. The original quadruple pastime expansion
called ādi-catur-vyūha (Vāsudeva, Saṅkarṣaṇa, Pradyumna
and Aniruddha) and other such manifestations are present
there in their appropriate situations. This catur-vyūha
is partially manifest as the catur-vyūha of Vaikuṇṭha,
who in turn manifests the unlimited realm of Vaikuṇṭha.
The liberation attained in Vaikuṇṭha, and the three
objectives attained in the material world — namely
religiosity, economic development and sense
gratification — are also appropriately situated in
Gokula (Goloka) in their original root forms. The Vedas
are present there in their personified forms as well,
and are deeply absorbed in singing about the qualities

                           51
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

of the master of Gokula.

The endeavors of those who try to attain that Goloka-
dhāma solely by their own contemplation and meditation,
without attaining the favor of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, are utterly
futile. This is because it is surrounded on all sides by
ten formidable spears to check anyone from entering.
These ten spears bestow hopelessness on those desiring
to enter illegally. Proud persons who attempt to go to
that topmost planet by means of the paths of yoga and
jñāna are also pierced by those spears, and are forced
to return defeated. Nirvāṇa is worthy of a position in
Brahma-dhāma (the destination of impersonal liberation),
but not in Goloka. This impersonal liberation has been
called the spears (śūla) which form the outer covering
of Goloka. The meaning of the word śūla comes from
triśūla, or trident. Triśūla is comprised of the three
material qualities and also the three divisions of time:
past, present and future.

In this way, whatever aspirations the aṣṭāṅga-yogīs and
the monistic brahma-jñānīs hold for progress toward
Goloka are cut to shreds on the tridents situated in the
ten directions, and they fall into the ditch of
unmitigated dejection. When those traveling in the
direction of Goloka along the path of bhakti in the mood
of opulence make some progress on their journey, they
see the eight perfections of mystic yoga headed by
aṇimā-siddhi, and the treasures headed by mahāpadma, and
they become attracted to them. Thus, they stop in
Vaikuṇṭha, which is of the nature of an outer covering
of Śrī Goloka. Those whose intelligence is even less
refined are defeated by the guardians of the ten
directions who exist in the form of mantras, and return
again to the seven planetary systems within the material
universe.

Therefore, Goloka-dhāma is an incomprehensible and
impenetrable realm, which is easily accessible only
through pure prema-bhakti. The preacher of yuga-dharma,
who is the sum total of all avatāras of Bhagavān,
remains there eternally in order to bestow mercy upon
the devotees who arrive there after traversing the path
of śuddha-prema-bhakti. There He is surrounded by
eternal associates in accordance with His complexion,
mood and other specific features. That dhāma in Gokula
(the inner region of Goloka), called Śvetadvīpa, is His
abode.16

For this reason, Śrīla Vṛndāvana dāsa Ṭhākura, who is
the incarnation of Vyāsa, has described Śvetadvīpa thus:
“śvetadvīpa nāma, navadvīpa grāma — the pastimes of
Navadvīpa-dhāma, which are supplementary to gokula-līlā,
are eternally present in the center of that Śvetadvīpa.”
Therefore Navadvīpa-maṇḍala, Vraja-maṇḍala and Goloka
are one undivided reality. They are perceived in a
variety of forms only because they are illuminated by an
unlimited number of special ecstatic sentiments arising
from the variegated nature of prema.

There is yet another confidential truth that is
understood directly only by the most realized premi-
bhaktas, through the mercy of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. In the mundane
world there is a sequence of upper and lower planetary

                           52
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

systems totaling fourteen in all. The householders who
are dedicated to prescribed duties performed for the
sake of fulfilling material desires transmigrate within
the three planetary systems Bhūr, Bhuvar and Svar.
Peaceful personalities who are fixed in their great vows
of celibacy, austerity and truthfulness are elevated to
the spheres of Maharloka, Janaloka, Tapoloka and up as
far as Satyaloka, by engaging in their duties without
any desire to enjoy the fruit of their activities. In
the highest part of that planetary system is the planet
of the four-headed Brahmā, and above that lies the
Vaikuṇṭhaloka of Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. The paramahaṁsa
sannyāsīs and the demons killed by Bhagavān Śrī Hari
cross beyond the Virajā; that is, they cross beyond the
fourteen planetary systems of this mortal world and
attain monistic liberation by immersing the individual
existence of their selves in the light of Brahma-dhāma.

The jñāni-bhaktas, who are fond of Bhagavān’s supreme
opulence, the śuddha-bhaktas, premi-bhaktas, premapara-
bhaktas and premātura-bhaktas attain positions in
Vaikuṇṭha, which is the transcendental abode of Nārāyaṇa
also known as Paravyoma.17 The only devotees who attain
Goloka-dhāma are those who are absorbed in Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
supremely sweet, human-like feature, following the mood
prevalent in Vraja. By the influence of His
inconceivable potency, such devotees who are fully
intent on entering these sweet, human-like pastimes are
situated in different positions corresponding to the
gradations found between the individual rasas.

The devotees who exclusively follow the pure and
transcendental mood of Vraja make their residences in
Kṛṣṇaloka, while those who exclusively follow the mood
of Navadvīpa make their residences in Gauraloka. The
devotees who are equally dedicated to the bhāvas of
Vraja-dhāma and Navadvīpa-dhāma take up residence
simultaneously in both Kṛṣṇaloka and Gauraloka, and
attain the happiness of divine loving service in both
places at once. Therefore, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī has stated
in Śrī Gopāla-campū:

yasya khalu lokasya golokas tathā go-gopāvāsa-rūpasya
śvetadvīpatayā cānanya-spṛṣṭaḥ parama-śuddhatā-
samudbuddha-svarūpasya tādṛśa-jñānamaya-katipaya-mātra-
prameya-pātratayā tat-tat-paramatā matā, parama-golokaḥ
paramaḥ śvetadvīpa iti.

That supreme planet is called Goloka because it is the
residence of the cows (go) and the cowherds (gopa). This
is the prominent location of the rāsa-līlā, which is Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s very self. That topmost realm is also known as
Śvetadvīpa in the form of the primary place for
relishing the rasa of several varieties of spiritual
sentiments, which are of exactly the same sort of
inconceivable nature. It is an exceptionally pure
manifestation, for it is untouched by associates
possessed of other types of bhāva. Thus, these two
svarūpas of Parama-Goloka and Parama-Śvetadvīpa exist in
the undivided form of Goloka-dhāma.

The fundamental purport of this statement is that, even
after tasting His own pastimes in the form of vraja-
līlā, Kṛṣṇa had not attained the happiness derived from

                           53
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

relishing rasa completely. Therefore, Vrajendra-nandana
Śrī Kṛṣṇa accepted the internal mood and golden luster
of Śrī Rādhikā, who is the supermost abode of kṛṣṇa-
rasa. The compartment (prakoṣṭha) of Goloka where He
eternally manifests the pastime of completely tasting
rasa to the superlative degree is called Śvetadvīpa. The
special bhāva mentioned here has been described thus:

śrī-rādhāyāḥ praṇaya-mahimā kīdṛśo vānayaivā-

svādyo yenādbhuta-madhurimā kīdṛśo vā madīyaḥ

saukhyaṁ cāsyā mad-anubhavataḥ kīdṛśaṁ veti lobhāt

tad-bhāvāḍhyaḥ samajani śacī-garbha-sindhau harīnduḥ

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 1.6)

“How great is the deeply intense love (praṇaya) of Śrī
Rādhā? What is the nature of My astonishing sweetness,
which She alone relishes? And what special kind of
happiness does She experience on tasting My sweetness?”
A greed to taste these three things arose within the
heart of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and to fulfill that intense desire,
He took birth from the womb of Śrī Śacīmātā like the
moon appearing from the ocean.

Thus, the profound intention hidden within the
aforementioned Gopāla-campū verse of Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī
has been illuminated in the above verse. In the Vedas it
has also been stated:

“rahasyaṁ te vadiṣyāmi” — jāhnavī-tīre navadvīpe
golokākhye dhāmni govindo dvi-bhujo gauraḥ sarvātmā
mahāpuruṣo mahātmā mahāyogī triguṇātītaḥ sattva-svarūpo
bhaktiṁ loke kāśyatīti. tad ete ślokā bhavanti — eko
devaḥ sarva-rūpī mahātmā gaura-rakta-śyāmala-śveta-rūpaś
caitanyātma. sa vai caitanya-śaktir bhaktākāro bhaktido
bhakti-vedyaḥ

Listen! I am about to disclose a deep mystery to you. In
that Navadvīpa-dhāma, also known as Goloka, on the bank
of the Jāhnavī River, Gaura-Govinda, the two-handed
embodiment of pure existence, manifests pure bhakti for
the sake of delivering the living entities who are
ensnared in the chain of repeated birth and death. He is
all-pervading and beyond the influence of the three
modes of nature. He is the Supreme Personality, the best
yogī and the greatest ātmā. That one divinity, the
embodiment of all divine forms, the Supreme Soul,
appears as the golden, red, black and white yuga-
avatāras. He is the complete consciousness, and He is
endowed with spiritual potency. He appears in the form
of a devotee, He bestows bhakti and He is understood
only through bhakti.

There is much scriptural evidence that establishes the
non-difference of Śrī Gauracandra (Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu) and Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra, e.g. āsan varṇās
trayaḥ, kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ tviṣākṛṣṇam, yadā paśyaḥ paśyate
rukma-varṇam and mahān prabhur vai. In His eternal form
as Śrī Gaurahari in Navadvīpa, He is absorbed in tasting
the rasa of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s Goloka pastimes. This has
been certified by the Vedic mantras cited on the

                           54
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

previous page. Just as by the influence of Yogamāyā the
original form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa takes birth in the earthly
Gokula and performs pastimes of infancy, boyhood and
adolescence, so the original form of Śrī Gaura is
similarly endowed with such pastimes in the earthly
Navadvīpa, beginning with His birth from the womb of Śrī
Śacīmātā. This fundamental truth is an axiomatic
principle realized by the faculty of pure transcendental
cognition. It is not a figment of the imagination, or a
contemplation induced by the illusory energy.




Verse 6


evaṁ jyotir-mayo devaḥ

sad-ānandaḥ parāt paraḥ

ātmārāmasya tasyāsti

prakṛtyā na samāgamaḥ



Anvaya

evam — thus (existing in great opulence); devaḥ — Śrī
Govinda, the controller of Gokula; jyotir-mayaḥ — the
effulgent Supreme Controller; sad-ānandaḥ — who is the
original form of eternal bliss; parāt paraḥ — who is
greater than any other lord and controller; ātma-
ārāmasya tasya — delights with His internal potency; na
asti samāgamaḥ — and has no meeting; prakṛtyā — with His
external potency.



Translation

Thus it is seen that Bhagavān Gokuleśvara is the self-
effulgent worshipable personality, the Supreme Absolute
Truth and the embodiment of eternal bliss. He is
absorbed in amorous pastimes with His internal potency
in His own eternal abode, and He has no direct
connection with the dull material nature.



Ṭīkā translation

Now we will explain the deep intentions of Brahmājī in
uttering this verse. Just as mantras such as Puruṣa-
sūkta in the Vedas have defined Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa as
being one with the universal form, similarly the
creator, Viṣṇu, is described here in the verse beginning
evam as being non-different from Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
presiding deity of Goloka.

The word deva indicates Śrī Govindadeva, the eternally
self-effulgent presiding deity of Goloka. He is called

                           55
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

deva because He is ever absorbed in pastimes, which are
of two types: pastimes in which His transcendental
opulence is predominant, and pastimes in which His
transcendental sweetness is predominant. Śrī Mahā-
Viṣṇu’s pastime of creating the cosmos, from which all
moving and non-moving living entities in the universe
have sprung forth, is a manifestation of only one-fourth
of Bhagavān’s opulence.

The expression sad-ānanda indicates the sac-cid-ānanda
svarūpa of Bhagavān, who exists as the puruṣa in His
eternal form of bliss. The inherent constitutional
nature of the puruṣa is the state of being the
predominating male enjoyer. According to the statement
of śruti: “vijñānam ānandaṁ brahma — Brahman is the
origin of knowledge and bliss.” Here Brahman has been
referred to by the use of a noun that is neither
masculine nor feminine, but neuter. Since Bhagavān is
the Supreme Personality engaged in pastimes, why would
He give up His form as enjoyer and become an impersonal
entity, devoid of masculinity? He is self-satisfied, and
takes pleasure in His own ātmā; He does not have to
depend upon anyone else. Therefore He is impartial and
independently capable of accomplishing everything.
Nevertheless, He is eternally busy in pastimes with His
own pleasure potency. He never touches the inert
material nature, nor does He have any connection with
it. For example, in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.9.10) it is
stated: “na yatra māyā kim utāpare — māyā cannot enter
that region.”

The material modes of passion and ignorance, or even
goodness mixed with passion and ignorance, are not found
in that Vaikuṇṭha-dhāma. There, only pure goodness is
eternally present. In that realm, there is no influence
of time, what to speak of qualities such as attachment
and aversion. The illusory nature, which is the cause of
worldly happiness and distress, cannot even enter that
place. It is inhabited forever by the associates of
Bhagavān, who is praised by both demigods and demons.



Tātparya

The one supreme transcendental potency or internal
potency of Gokuleśvara Śrī Kṛṣṇa has manifested the
pastimes of Goloka, or Gokula. By the mercy of this
divine potency, the living entities who are
manifestations of the marginal potency can also enter
into those pastimes. Mahā-Vaikuṇṭha is the covering of
Goloka.18 Its extreme outer border is Brahma-dhāma, and
beyond Brahma-dhāma lies the Virajā River. The inferior
external energy, which is the shadow of the spiritual
potency, is situated on the other side of that Virajā
River. Therefore, the illusory energy (māyā) cannot
attain the direct association of the supremely pure sac-
cid-ānanda-svarūpa of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. To say nothing of
associating with Him, she even feels ashamed to come
within His sight.




                           56
Brahma-samhita.txt                               5/5/2017


Verse 7


māyayāramamāṇasya

na viyogas tayā saha

ātmanā ramayā reme

tyakta-kālaṁ sisṛkṣayā



Anvaya

aramamāṇasya — (although) not enjoying directly; māyayā
— with His external potency; na viyogaḥ — He is not
fully detached; tayā saha — from her; ātmanā ramayā reme
— He enjoys with His own internal potency Ramā-śakti;
sisṛkṣayā — (but) on account of His desire to create the
universes made of the five gross elements; tyakta-kālam
— He enjoys with her in a secondary form by means of His
glance by which His time-potency becomes enacted.



Translation

Mahā-Viṣṇu never consorts with the external energy
(māyā). Still, it cannot be said that māyā is entirely
separated or divorced from that aspect of the supreme
reality. Mahā-Viṣṇu consorts with His own personal
potency, Ramā-devī. Whenever He desires to create the
universe, Bhagavān activates His time potency, and casts
His glance toward the inert material energy.



Ṭīkā translation

Creating the universe is not the duty of Svayam
Bhagavān, but the responsibility of the expansion of His
expansion in the form of the puruṣa-avatāra. In this
task, the relationship of the puruṣa-avatāra with the
inert material energy is not direct, but indirect.
Bhagavān’s direct relationship is with His personal
energy, Ramā-devī. The external potency is not
permanently manifest, because she enters into the
puruṣa-avatāra at the time of the cosmic annihilation.
The puruṣa-avatāra causes māyā to perform her duties of
creation and so on by inspiring her through the agency
of His time potency. That is the only contact He has
with her; He has no direct contact with māyā in this
operation. The contact is only indirect, as confirmed in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.85.31): “yasyāṁśāṁśāṁśa-bhāgena —
the creation, maintenance and destruction of the mundane
universe is accomplished by the puruṣa-avatāra, who is
an expansion of an expansion of His expansion.”

A doubt may arise in this connection: The   living
entities become attached to māyā, so does   Bhagavān also
become engrossed in māyā in the same way,   and cease to
be the Lord? To resolve this doubt, it is   said: “ātmanā

                           57
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

ramayā reme — Bhagavān consorts with His own personal,
intrinsic potency, Ramā-devī.” Therefore, Bhagavān is
neither attached to māyā, nor subject to its control,
unlike the living entities who are bound by the results
of their karma. He is served by the external potency in
the external quarter, and by the intrinsic, internal
potency Śrī Ramā-devī in the internal realm. This is the
purport of the verse in question.

It is also stated in the prayers of Brahmā found in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.9.23): “eṣa prapanna-varado
ramayātma-śaktyā yad yat kariṣyati gṛhīta-guṇāvatāraḥ —
O Bhagavān, You bestow benedictions upon the living
entities who are unconditionally surrendered to You. In
order to manifest varieties of pastimes in the universe
composed of five gross elements, You descend along with
Your internal potency.”

This is also supported by Śrī Arjuna’s statement in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.7.23): “māyāṁ vyūdasya cic-chaktyā
kaivalye sthita ātmani — O Bhagavān, You are the
transcendental controller and enjoyer, You are beyond
the material nature, and You are the master of
existence. Therefore You are immutable; that is, You are
not attached to māyā. You keep the external potency far
distant by the influence of Your intrinsic, internal
potency, and You remain situated exclusively in Your own
intrinsic nature.”

If this conclusion is accepted, then how does creation
take place without being activated by Him? In answer to
this question it is said, sisṛkṣayā: when Bhagavān
desires to create, He activates His time potency,
through which He agitates the material nature. Material
existence takes place by the influence of this time
potency, which is the light of Bhagavān’s bodily luster.

The constitutional nature of time has been described
thus: “prabhāvaṁ pauruṣaṁ prāhuḥ kālam eke yato bhayam —
all remain in a state of fear of this puruṣa’s influence
in the form of time.” One can find a detailed analysis
of this in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.5.23):

kāla-vṛttyā tu māyāyāṁ

guṇamayyām adhokṣajaḥ

puruṣeṇātma-bhūtena

vīryam ādhatta vīryavān

Bhagavān Viṣṇu is the puruṣa, who is beyond material
sense perception and who is replete with spiritual
potency. By His time potency, He agitates the material
energy, which consists of the modes of material nature,
and then sows the seed of the cause of creation in māyā
through the medium of His partial manifestation.

The purport of this verse is that the first puruṣa-
avatāra of Adhokṣaja Bhagavān is Kāraṇodakaśāyī Mahā-
Viṣṇu, who glances toward māyā from a distance. By the
influence of this glance, Bhagavān impregnates māyā with
potency in the form of jīva-śakti, which is a semblance
of the transcendental potency (cit-śakti). The living

                           58
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

entities who, as a result of fruitive activities
performed in ignorance, had merged into the unmanifest
material nature at the time of the cosmic annihilation,
are sent again into the field of fruitive activities at
the time of creation and made to enter māyā.

The universe appears as a result of the combination of
māyā-śakti and jīva-śakti. Furthermore, śāstra confirms
that although jīva-śakti, who is the knower of the field
of his own activities, is superior to the material
energy, he is subordinate to māyā on account of his
entering into māyā. In this context the word puruṣa
indicates one who glances toward the predominated
material nature. This is how the puruṣa has impregnated
the unmanifest material nature with seed-potency in the
form of the living entities.



Tātparya

Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa has no direct connection with the
illusory potency; His contact with māyā is only
indirect. In His form of Kāraṇodakaśāyī Mahā-Viṣṇu, the
puruṣa-avatāra, He glances toward māyā. This form is a
plenary portion of Mahā-Saṅkarṣaṇa, who resides in the
seat of pastimes known as Vaikuṇṭha. Even in this act of
glancing He has no association with māyā because, by His
desire, Ramā-devī, the cit-śakti, carries out the
function of His glance as His inseparable potency. The
external potency renders service to the personal
expansion of Bhagavān as He sports with Ramā-devī, so
she acts in the capacity of Ramā-devī’s maidservant. The
function of time is simply Ramā-devī’s power of cause
and effect. In other words, only kāla-puruṣa, the
personified time factor, unites with the inert material
energy, with the result that the universe composed of
five elements emerges. Thus that kāla-puruṣa, or the
influence by which the cosmic creation, maintenance and
destruction take place, is the wish of Bhagavān.




Verse 8


niyatiḥ sā ramā devī

tat-priyā tad-vaśaṁ tadā

tal-liṅgaṁ bhagavān śambhur

jyoti-rūpaḥ sanātanaḥ

yā yoniḥ sāparā-śaktiḥ

kāmo bījaṁ mahad dhareḥ



Anvaya


                              59
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

sā ramā — that Ramā-devī (with whom Mahā-Viṣṇu enjoys);
devī — is the Lord’s self-effulgent potency; tat-priyā —
she is dear to Him; niyatiḥ — is born of His svarūpa;
tad-vaśam — and is fully submissive to Him; tadā — then
(at the time of creation); jyoti-rūpaḥ sanātanaḥ — the
personified reflection of His eternal effulgence;
bhagavān śambhuḥ — appears as the renowned Bhagavān
Śambhu; tat-liṅgam — the generative capacity (Śambhu’s
localized representation) of that same first puruṣa,
Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. He is a plenary portion of
Saṅkarṣaṇa who in turn is a plenary portion of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa; sā yā aparā śaktiḥ — (similarly) she who is the
inferior potency of Mahā-Viṣṇu, and the semblance of
Yogamāyā; yoniḥ — becomes the womb (for universal
generation); kāmaḥ — Mahā-Viṣṇu has a desire for
universal creation, as a result of which His glance
falls upon His illusory potency; bījam hareḥ — and on
account of the seed of Hari (bestowed upon māyā); mahat
— the mahat-tattva arises (which is the combined form of
the living entities and the five gross elements, the
result of the action performed by His personified
glance).



Translation

[Now the way in which Bhagavān indirectly comes in
contact with māyā is being described.]

The spiritual potency in the form of Ramā-devī, who is
dear to Bhagavān, is Destiny. That goddess is always
controlled by the Supreme Lord and is always dedicated
to His service. At the onset of creation, the effulgence
of Mahā-Viṣṇu, who is the expansion of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
plenary portion, is manifest in the form of Śambhu. That
Śambhu is called the liṅga of Bhagavān, meaning the
manifest symbol of His generative capacity, and appears
for the purpose of preparing the cosmic manifestation of
the material universes. The liṅga in the form of Śambhu
is a reflection of the eternal light or effulgence. The
feminine receptive potency is manifest from Ramā-devī or
Destiny. That potency which gives birth to the material
creation is the inferior energy called māyā, whose
intrinsic form is the yoni, the womb of universal
creation. The union of the yoni and liṅga is the
reflection of the Supreme Lord Śrī Hari’s desire seed,
in the form of the unmanifested material energy (mahat-
tattva).



Ṭīkā translation

Who is Ramā-devī? The one-and-a-half ślokas beginning
with niyatiḥ are being spoken in answer to this
question. She is constitutionally the spiritual potency,
and she is called niyati because she is eternally
present within the svarūpa of Svayam Bhagavān, and
because she remains niyamita (regulated in her
activities) by Svayam Bhagavān. Thus, she is Bhagavān’s
submissive and beloved consort. It is stated in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (12.11.20): “anapāyinī bhagavatī śrīḥ sākṣād-
ātmano hareḥ — she is directly Bhagavatī Śrī Lakṣmī-

                           60
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

devī, who is the internal, inseparable potency of Śrī
Hari.” The śakti of Śrī Hari is inseparable because she
is directly of His intrinsic nature. That is to say,
just as Śrī Hari is the embodiment of transcendental
consciousness, similarly His internal potency, being
non-different from Him, is the feminine aspect of the
embodiment of transcendental consciousness. Here the
word sākṣāt (directly) indicates that she is not the
śakti who is ashamed to be in the path of Śrī Hari’s
vision. That śakti is the illusory potency, who
bewilders the living entities who are averse to
Bhagavān. Bhagavatī Lakṣmī-devī has also been called
anapāyinī (imperishable or inseparable) in the Viṣṇu
Purāṇa:

nityaiva sā jagan-mātā

viṣṇo śrīr anapāyinī

yathā sarva-gato viṣṇus

tathaiveyaṁ dvijottama

O best of the twice-born, the mother of the universe,
Lakṣmī-devī, is Bhagavān Viṣṇu’s eternal anapāyinī-
śakti. Just as Viṣṇu is all pervading, similarly His
śakti is also present everywhere.

Whenever the master of the universe, the God of gods,
Janārdana, descends to this world, His internal potency
Bhagavatī Lakṣmī-devī also descends along with Him in
appropriate forms, such as those of goddesses or human
beings, corresponding to the forms of Śrī Hari.

In some scriptures it is mentioned that Śivajī’s potency
is the cause of the creation. Such statements should be
reconciled as follows. Just as the universe has been
considered the svarūpa of Bhagavān in descriptions of
the universal form, similarly Śivajī’s potency has been
referred to as the cause of the universe in the context
of considering her to be a limb of Bhagavān.

According to the Viṣṇu Purāṇa, the entire universe is a
semblance of the transcendental radiance of Bhagavān’s
plenary portion, i.e. it is the symbol (liṅga) of the
unmanifest puruṣa. The plenary portion that is indicated
by this symbol is the plenary portion that creates the
total material energy, and He is called Śambhu. The word
liṅga should be interpreted to mean symbol or form.

Bhagavān’s first incarnation for creating this world, in
whom the material universe is situated, who takes a
rounded form, and who is the shelter and benefactor of
unlimited living entities, is called śiva-liṅga, or
Śambhu.

The phrase anyas tu tad-āvirbhāva-viśeṣa means, “The
other form of Śiva is called Sadāśiva. He is a
manifestation of Bhagavān for a specific purpose, and
thus He is viṣṇu-tattva. He is supremely benevolent.”

However, the form of Śiva described as śivaḥ śakti-
yuktaḥ śaśvat tri-liṅgo guṇa-saṁvṛtaḥ is not viṣṇu-
tattva. The Śiva who is united with the illusory potency

                           61
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

remains covered by three types of false ego, namely
goodness, passion and ignorance. This Śiva will be
described ahead in verse 45, kṣīraṁ yathā dadhi-vikāra-
viśeṣa-yogāt. It should be understood that the portion
functioning as the womb of creation is the inferior
potency. In other words, it is that unmanifested area of
māyā that acts as the receptacle for Bhagavān’s
impregnation of potency in the form of innumerable
living entities. This is also called pradhāna.

The purport of this analysis is that Bhagavān glanced
toward māyā to create the cosmic existence. As a result
of this glance, Ramā-devī as material nature (that is,
her shadow) gave birth to progeny in the form of the
twenty-four elements of creation, beginning with the
total material energy (mahat-tattva).

In this verse 8, the unmanifested material energy has
been called the desire-seed of Śrī Hari, whose desire to
glance in the direction of māyā for the purpose of
creation is called kāma. Then Bhagavān impregnated the
material nature with His seed in the form of the
instrumental causes of creation, namely the jīva-śakti
and the mahat-tattva. This is the sense in which the
word mahat has been used.

A description found in śruti states: “so ‘kāmayata — at
the beginning of creation, Bhagavān manifested the
desire to beget the entire population.” According to
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.5.26), the statement beginning with
kāla-vṛttyā confirms that Bhagavān impregnated the
conscious spiritual jīva-śakti into the actively
manifesting area of material nature consisting of the
three modes of material nature, which was in a state of
being agitated by the time potency. As a result, that
manifestation of the predominated material nature gave
birth to the vast mahat-tattva.



Tātparya

Saṅkarṣaṇa is a personal expansion (aṁśa) of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Being imbued with a desire to create, He is inclined to
manifest the universe of five elements. As He reclines
in the Causal Ocean in the form of the first puruṣa-
avatāra, He casts toward māyā a glance that is the
instrumental cause of the creation. The semblance of its
reflected light is śambhu-liṅga, the generative
capacity, which unites with the shadow of ramā-śakti in
the form of the universal womb of Māyā-devī. At that
time, the semblance of the desire-seed in the form of
the aggregate unmanifest elements (mahat-tattva) emerges
and becomes absorbed in the task of creation. The first
awakening of the desire-seed created by Mahā-Viṣṇu is
called hiraṇyamaya-mahat-tattva (the golden form of the
aggregate elements), which is the mental principle of
readiness for cosmic creation. There is an extremely
confidential consideration here: the desire of the
puruṣa engages in the act of creation after accepting
the aspects of the instrumental cause and the ingredient
cause. Here māyā, the female receptive potency, acts as
the instrumental cause, while Śambhu, the male
generative capacity, acts as the ingredient cause

                           62
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

(upādāna). The puruṣa, who acts according to His own
sweet will, is Mahā-Viṣṇu. The ingredient principle
(pradhāna) is the ingredient cause (upādāna). The
receptive principle (prakṛti) is māyā. The creator of
the material universe and the cause of the union of the
other two principles is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s partial expansion,
the puruṣa, or the principle of desire. These three
(pradhāna, prakṛti and puruṣa) constitute the agents of
creation.

The desire-seed of Goloka is a purely transcendental
reality, whereas the desire-seed of the material world
is a manifestation of potencies such as time, which are
included within the shadow of the spiritual potency.
Although the transcendental desire-seed mentioned
previously is the original principle of which māyā is
the reflection, the purely transcendental reality is far
removed from māyā. The second desire-seed is the
illusory reflection of that original transcendental
desire-seed. Śambhu-tattva is elaborately described
ahead in verses 10 and 15.




Verse 9


liṅga-yony-ātmikā jātā

imā māheśvarī-prajāḥ



Anvaya

liṅga-yoni-ātmikā — through the combination of liṅga,
who is puruṣa-śakti as well as upādāna-kāraṇa, with
yoni, who is strī-śakti as well as nimitta-kāraṇa; imāḥ
māheśvarī-prajāḥ — all the universal progeny including
gods, mankind, animals, etc. through the great powers of
māyā; jātāḥ — have been born.



Translation

All progeny such as humans and demigods, along with
their respective worlds, have issued forth from this
combination of the generative capacity in the form of
liṅga, and the universal womb of material nature, called
yoni.



Ṭīkā translation

Whatever details have been narrated in śāstras such as
śaiva and tantra about Śiva’s creation of progeny are
not authentic; rather they have been spoken
independently out of ignorance. Actually, Mahā-maheśvara
refers exclusively to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Thus the fundamental
purport of māheśvarī-prajāḥ is that all progeny have

                           63
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

originally emerged from the māyā of the Supreme
Controller, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. It is in this context that the
expression has been used in the current verse.



Tātparya

Bhagavān’s divine opulence consists of the entirety of
His majestic influence. Out of that entirety, the
opulence of Vaikuṇṭha and Goloka constitutes three-
fourths of His majestic influence, wherein there is no
lamentation, death or fear. The remaining one-fourth is
the opulence of māyā, and consists of the entire
population of living entities, such as human beings and
demigods, along with all their planets in the mundane
universes. All these substances have issued forth from
the union of the ingredient cause and the instrumental
cause, that is liṅga and yoni. Whatever facts have been
accumulated to date through material science are all
characterized by this type of union. All inert material
objects such as trees, creepers, worms and insects have
been produced from the combination of puruṣa and
prakṛti, the generative masculine principle and the
receptive feminine principle.

There is a particularly profound point worthy of
consideration in this regard. Although the Sanskrit
words liṅga and yoni, generally indicating the male and
female generative organs, seem somewhat crude, these
terms are extremely useful for defining elementary
principles in scientific literature, and also for
illuminating matters of confidential significance.
Indecency is an external conception related to social
formality. However, science and transcendental science
cannot destroy the true substance by depending on social
formality. Thus, in order to understand the desire-seed
related to the material potency, which is the original
principle of the inanimate universe, the use of these
words is unavoidable. However, one should simply
interpret liṅga and yoni as referring to the active
potency of the predominating agent (puruṣa-śakti), and
the active potency of the predominated function (strī-
śakti).




Verse 10


śaktimān puruṣaḥ so ‘yaṁ

liṅga-rūpī maheśvaraḥ

tasminn āvirabhūl liṅge

mahā-viṣṇur jagat-patiḥ



Anvaya


                           64
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

mahā-viṣṇuḥ — the first of the puruṣa-avatāras, who is
known as Mahā-Viṣṇu or Kāraṇodakaśāyī, which means one
who lies within the Causal Ocean (kāraṇa-udaka); jagat-
patiḥ — the supreme master and Supersoul of all the
universes; āvirabhūt — appeared (by means of His
glance); tasmin liṅge — within that form; liṅga-rūpī
maheśvaraḥ — Bhagavān Śambhu, whose personal form is
represented by the localized symbol of liṅga (His
generative capacity); śaktimān — connected with His
illusory potency, who furnishes the universal
ingredients; saḥ ayam puruṣaḥ — is factually non-
different from that same Mahā-Viṣṇu (who performs the
function of ingredient cause through that Śambhu).



Translation

The controller of all, the original agent, who has been
indicated by the word maheśvara, is the potent male
(puruṣa). For the purpose of creation, He is manifest in
the form of the original male generative capacity
(liṅga). He who is called Mahā-Viṣṇu, the Lord of the
cosmos, also appears in that combination of the active
and receptive principles of creation by His expansion in
the form of His glance.



Ṭīkā translation

This verse has been spoken to clarify the previous
verse. The unmanifest form mentioned previously now
emerges in its manifest form for the purpose of
creation. How does it emerge? The partial expansion of a
partial expansion of Bhagavān, called the original
potent male principle, Maheśvara, creates the material
universe. Everything in the world of māyā — such as
false ego, intelligence, mind, the five gross elements,
the five sense objects and the unmanifest aggregate of
the material energy — is the manifest representation of
the unmanifest form of Bhagavān. The self-sufficient
Mahā-Viṣṇu, who is the Lord of all living entities and
all spiritual and material worlds, is the origin (aṁśī)
of Maheśvara, who appears in a manifest form as the
liṅga or original male generative capacity.

It is also stated in the commentary on Laghu-
bhāgavatāmṛta:

so ‘yaṁ śaktimān puruṣaḥ

liṅga-rūpī maheśvaro bhavati

tasmin liṅge jagat-patir

mahā-viṣṇur āvirabhūt

That Supreme Personality, the possessor of all
potencies, Mahā-Viṣṇu, takes the form of Maheśvara as
the liṅga or original

generative capacity, and then enters within it as the
Lord of the mundane universes.

                           65
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017




Tātparya

Śrī Nārāyaṇa, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s personal expansion, who is
non-different from Him, reigns gracefully in the
Vaikuṇṭha realm of the spiritual sky, wherein
transcendental opulence predominates. The Mahā-
Saṅkarṣaṇa of His quadruple expansion is also a partial
expansion of Śrī Baladeva, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s first pastime
expansion. By the influence of the inconceivable
potency, that Mahā-Saṅkarṣaṇa in the form of His partial
expansion Kāraṇodakaśāyī Mahā-Viṣṇu eternally reposes in
Virajā, which is the borderline between the conscious
and unconscious realms. From there He glances toward
māyā, which is the remotely situated shadow of the
spiritual potency. The semblance of that transcendental
glance is Śambhu, the lord of pradhāna, which is replete
with the potential material ingredients. Śambhu, in the
form of Rudra, unites with māyā, the instrumental cause.
However, he cannot do anything without the influence of
the direct spiritual might of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in the form of
Mahā-Viṣṇu. Therefore the unmanifest material energy
(mahat-tattva) emerges only when the active endeavors of
māyā (i.e. śiva-śakti) and the primordial material
ingredients (pradhāna) are sanctioned by Saṅkarṣaṇa, who
is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s personal expansion, and Mahā-Viṣṇu, who
is Saṅkarṣaṇa’s personal expansion and the first puruṣa-
avatāra.

Only when Mahā-Viṣṇu is favorable does śiva-śakti
gradually create the element of false ego, the five
gross elements beginning with space, the five sense
objects and the material senses of the jīvas, who are
particles of the rays of Mahā-Viṣṇu’s effulgence. An
elaborate analysis of this aspect will be presented in
the coming verses.




Verse 11


sahasra-śīrṣā puruṣaḥ

sahasrākṣaḥ sahasra-pāt

sahasra-bāhur viśvātmā

sahasrāṁśaḥ sahasra-sūḥ



Anvaya

puruṣaḥ — Mahā-Viṣṇu, the master of the universe;
sahasra-śīrṣā — has thousands of heads; sahasra-akṣaḥ —
thousands of eyes; sahasra-pāt — thousands of feet;
sahasra-bāhuḥ — thousands of arms; viśva-ātmā — He
pervades the whole universe as the Supersoul; sahasra-
aṁśaḥ — thousands of avatāra expansions; sahasra-sūḥ —

                           66
Brahma-samhita.txt                               5/5/2017

and generates many thousands of living beings.



Translation

That master of the universe, Mahā-Viṣṇu, possesses
thousands upon thousands of heads, thousands upon
thousands of eyes, thousands upon thousands of arms, and
thousands upon thousands of incarnations and plenary
expansions. He is the Self of the cosmos, and He alone
creates thousands upon thousands of living entities.



Ṭīkā translation

The form of Mahā-Viṣṇu is being described thus in the
current verse beginning with the words sahasra-śirṣā. He
whose innumerable incarnations appear in thousands upon
thousands of plenary portions is called sahasrāṁśa.
Similarly, He who creates thousands upon thousands of
living entities is called sahasra-sūḥ. Here the word
sahasra (one thousand) has been used to indicate an
uncountable number. It is evident that the word sahasra
is used throughout the scriptures to convey the sense of
“innumerable.”

Furthermore, in describing the intrinsic form and nature
of Mahā-Viṣṇu, it is stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(2.6.42): “The first avatāra of Bhagavān, the Lord of
the spiritual realm, is the puruṣa who lies down in the
Causal Ocean and casts His glance upon material nature.
The following are all substances related to Parameśvara:
His activities, such as the creation of time and
acquired nature; material nature, which is composed of
cause and effect; the unmanifest stage of material
nature (mahat-tattva); the gross elements; false ego;
the aggregate of the modes of material nature beginning
with the mode of goodness manifested as various forms of
life; hellish planets such as Pātālaloka; the aggregate
of living entities; Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu; moving and
non-moving entities; and individual bodies.”

In the commentary to this verse, it is stated that the
gigantic puruṣa, who instigates the activities of
material nature and who has thousands of heads and so
on, has been called the original avatāra who assumes a
pastime form. His activities include creation of the
time factor, acquired nature and other elements of the
material creation. Thus, the original puruṣa-avatāra
creates, maintains and destroys within Himself and by
Himself, at the beginning of every lifetime of Brahmā.
Although He is one, He is manifest in many forms through
His illusory energy. This universe, consisting of
factual existence and the non-factual or temporary
existence of cause and effect, is situated within Him
alone. Therefore, all these phenomena have been called
substances related to Him.



Tātparya


                           67
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

Mahā-Viṣṇu, who is praised throughout the Vedas, is
replete with unlimited transcendental senses, and is
characterized by endless power. That puruṣa is the
origin of all incarnations.19




Verse 12


nārāyaṇaḥ sa bhagavān

āpas tasmāt sanātanāt

āvirāsīt kāraṇārṇo

nidhiḥ saṅkarṣaṇātmakaḥ

yoga-nidrāṁ gatas tasmin

sahasrāṁśaḥ svayaṁ mahān



Anvaya

saḥ bhagavān — that very Mahā-Viṣṇu Bhagavān, the first
of the puruṣa-avatāras; nārāyaṇaḥ — is renowned in the
illusory universe by the name Nārāyaṇa; saṅkarṣaṇa-
ātmakaḥ — and is originally manifested from Mūla-
Saṅkarṣaṇa in Goloka, via His expansion named Mahā-
Saṇkarṣaṇa in the Vaikuṇṭha planets, which are situated
within the spiritual sky; tasmāt sanātanāt — from that
eternal Lord; kāraṇārṇaḥ nidhiḥ āpaḥ — the vast waters
of the Causal Ocean; āviḥ āsīt — become manifest; gataḥ
— (then) entering; yoga-nidrām — into samādhi upon the
bliss of His own intrinsic form and nature; tasmin —
upon those waters; svayam mahān — and that Supreme
Personality of Godhead; sahasra-aṁśaḥ — accepts many
thousands of expansions as His avatāras.



Translation

This Mahā-Viṣṇu is celebrated within the world of māyā
by the name “Nārāyaṇa.” The water of the Causal Ocean
has emanated from this eternal puruṣa. He is Bhagavān,
the supreme predominator, possessed of thousands of
plenary portions, although He is Himself a plenary
portion of the Saṅkarṣaṇa of Paravyoma. The eternal
puruṣa takes shelter of mystic slumber and lies down in
the vast waters of Virajā.



Ṭīkā translation

This Mahā-Viṣṇu reclines in the causal waters. He is
called the first puruṣa-avatāra, and this particular
verse is about Him, from whom the water of the Causal
Ocean has emanated. He is called Nārāyaṇa because He

                           68
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

lies down in this water (nāra means “water,” and ayana
means “shelter” or “resting place”). He is a partial
avatāra of Mahā-Saṅkarṣaṇa in Vaikuṇṭha. The Saṅkarṣaṇa
in the chamber of Goloka, who was described earlier, is
Mūla-Saṅkarṣaṇa, His plenary portion in the second
quadruple expansion in Vaikuṇṭha is called Mahā-
Saṅkarṣaṇa, and Kāraṇodakaśāyī Mahā-Viṣṇu is an
expansion of this Mahā-Saṅkarṣaṇa. It is His pastime to
create the Causal Ocean and lie down in it in mystic
slumber, which is a state of trance induced by His own
intrinsic, ecstatic nature (svarūpānanda-samādhi). It is
stated in the Viṣṇu Purāṇa (1.4.6):

āpo nārā iti proktā

āpo vai nara-sūnavaḥ

tasya tā ayanaṁ pūrvaṁ

tena nārāyaṇaḥ smṛtaḥ

Āpa means nāra, which in turn is understood to mean both
water and the living entity (jīva). Because Bhagavān is
the supreme shelter of both, He is called Nārāyaṇa.



Tātparya

Bhagavān’s samādhi in the form of absorption in His own
pleasure potency is called yoga-nidrā. Ramā-devī, who
was mentioned previously, is herself Yogamāyā in the
form of yoga-nidrā.




Verse 13


tad-roma-bila-jāleṣu

bījaṁ saṅkarṣaṇasya ca

haimāny aṇḍāni jātāni

mahā-bhūtāvṛtāni tu



Anvaya

bījam saṅkarṣaṇasya — the seeds made of mahā-tattva
(from which the five gross material elements manifest)
along with the jīvas, which are generated from Mahā-
Viṣṇu (the expansion of Saṅkarṣaṇa) and implanted within
the illusory potency, and which have not yet developed
into the subtle primordial forms of the material
creation; tat-roma-bila-jāleṣu — they remain within His
skin-pores; haimāni aṇḍāni — in the form of (countless)
golden eggs; mahā-bhūta-āvṛtāni ca — and covered by the
five gross elements; tu jātāni — are indeed born.


                           69
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017



Translation

The transcendental seeds of Saṅkarṣaṇa emerge in the
form of countless golden eggs from the pores of the skin
of Mahā-Viṣṇu as He reclines in the Causal Ocean. All
those eggs remain covered by the great material
elements.



Ṭīkā translation

Innumerable universes are born from Mahā-Viṣṇu as He
lies in the Causal Ocean. This point is analyzed in the
present verse. That puruṣa is a manifestation of
Saṅkarṣaṇa. All the seeds, in the form of the unmanifest
material energy, along with the aforementioned living
entities who were contained in the material nature,
first attain the state of the subtle primordial forms of
the elements. After transforming into the twenty-four
elements of creation,20 they manifest in the form of
golden eggs within the skin-pores of the puruṣa. All
these golden eggs remain covered by the gross elements
in their unmixed state.

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.11), Śrī Brahmā has also
stated:

kvedṛg-vidhāvigaṇitāṇḍa-parāṇu-caryā

vātādhva-roma-vivarasya ca te mahitvam:

O Bhagavān, within the sphere of the universe composed
of material energy, the unmanifest material energy,
false ego, space, air, fire, water and earth, where am
I, Brahmā, carrying this body, which measures seven
spans of my own hand? And where are You, that
personality within whose skin-pores innumerable
universes are drifting like infinitesimal dust particles
seen in the sun-rays entering through a window?

Furthermore, it is stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.11.40—
41), vikāraiḥ sahito yuktaiḥ koṭiśo hy aṇḍa-rāśayaḥ:

This universe is assembled by the combination of the
eightfold material nature, in the form of prakṛti, the
unmanifest aggregate of material elements, false ego and
the five sense objects, as well as sixteen
transformations in the form of the eleven senses and the
five great elements. Its inner portion extends over
5,000,000,000 yojanas (40,000,000,000 miles), and its
outer portion consists of the seven coverings beginning
with earth, each extending ten times further than the
previous one. There are millions upon billions of
universes that extend even further than this universe.
Nevertheless, millions and billions of such universes
are situated like tiny atomic particles within each of
the skin-pores of Mahā-Viṣṇu. Learned persons describe
the nature of Mahā-Viṣṇu in this way. That
Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu is the cause of all the universes.



                           70
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017


Tātparya

The first puruṣa-avatāra, who lies in the Causal Ocean,
is so colossal that the seeds of endless billions of
universes are born in the pores of His skin. Those
universes are only an imitation of the unlimited abodes
of the spiritual world. As long as they remain within
the body of the puruṣa-avatāra, they exist like golden
eggs in the form of a semblance of transcendence.
However, by the will of Mahā-Viṣṇu, they remain covered
by the subtle aspects of the gross elements that have
arisen from the instrumental cause and ingredient cause
of the illusory energy. These golden eggs manifest along
with the breathing of the puruṣa, and when they enter
the unlimited chamber of the illusory energy, they are
expanded by the unmixed five gross material elements.




Verse 14


praty-aṇḍam evam ekāṁśād

ekāṁśād viśati svayam

sahasra-mūrdhā viśvātmā

mahā-viṣṇuḥ sanātanaḥ



Anvaya

evam — thereafter; sanātanaḥ — the eternal; viśvātmā —
all-pervasive; mahā-viṣṇuḥ — Mahā-Viṣṇu; sahasra-mūrdhā
— who has thousands of heads; svayam — personally;
viśati — enters; praty-aṇḍam — each egg; eka-aṁśāt eka-
aṁśāt — by means of His respective expansions.



Translation

This Mahā-Viṣṇu entered into every individual universe
as His individual plenary portions, each of which is
complete with all His mystic opulences. In other words,
within each universe Mahā-Viṣṇu assumes the form of the
universal soul with thousands upon thousands of heads.



Ṭīkā translation

Mahā-Viṣṇu then enters into those billions of universes
in separate individual forms of Viṣṇu, who are called
Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. The meaning of ekāṁśād ekāṁśāt is
that an individual plenary portion of Mahā-Viṣṇu enters
each womb-like universe.



                           71
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017


Tātparya

The Mahā-Viṣṇu who lies down in the Causal Ocean is a
plenary portion of Mahā-Saṅkarṣaṇa. In the form of His
individual plenary portions, He personally enters into
each of the universes that are manifested from Him.
Every one of those plenary portions is directly Viṣṇu,
and they are similar to Mahā-Viṣṇu in every respect.
Each Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu is the aggregate feature of
all forms of the indwelling witness.




Verse 15


vāmāṅgād asṛjad viṣṇuṁ

dakṣiṇāṅgāt prajāpatim

jyotir-liṅga-mayaṁ śambhuṁ

kūrca-deśād avāsṛjat



Anvaya

vāma-aṅgāt — from the left side of Kāraṇodakaśāyī Mahā-
Viṣṇu; asṛjat — He created; viṣṇum — Śrī Viṣṇu; dakṣiṇa-
aṅgāt — from His right side; prajā-patim — (He created)
the primal progenitor known as Hiraṇyagarbha; kūrca-
deśāt — from the center of His eyebrows; avāsṛjat — He
created; śambhum - His expansion of Śambhu; jyotiḥ-
liṅga-mayam — in the form of an effulgent liṅga (male
symbol of generative capacity).



Translation

That Mahā-Viṣṇu created Viṣṇu from His left side,
Prajāpati from His right side, and Śambhu in the form of
an effulgent liṅga from between His eyebrows.



Ṭīkā translation

What did Śrī Mahā-Viṣṇu do next? In answer to this
question it is stated, vāmāṅgāt: “He manifested Viṣṇu
from His left side, Prajāpati from His right side and
Śambhu from between His eyebrows.” Brahmā is the
creator, Viṣṇu is the maintainer and Maheśa is the
destroyer of all the universes. The form of Śrī Viṣṇu in
each universe directs His own expansions in the form of
Brahmā and Śiva, and as a result of this impetus, Brahmā
is absorbed in the task of creation, and Maheśa is
absorbed in the task of annihilation. In this context
one should understand the term prajāpati (primal
progenitor) to mean Hiraṇyagarbha-Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu.

                             72
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

In some places the four-headed Brahmā has also been
referred to as the prajāpati, but in this context
prajāpati does not refer to Brahmā with four faces. This
Hiraṇyagarbha-puruṣa creates the predominating deities
within the shell of each universe. Viṣṇu and Śambhu are
also the maintainer and destroyer respectively of their
universes.

Śambhu has emanated from the area between the eyebrows
of Mahā-Viṣṇu. The place of Mahā-Viṣnu is the water
covering, which is considered to be His residence.



Tātparya

Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu is the indwelling witness of the
individual living entity, whereas Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu
is the indwelling witness of the aggregate of living
entities. The primal progenitor is Hiraṇyagarbha, the
expansion of Bhagavān, and he is different from the
four-headed Brahmā. This Hiraṇyagarbha is the seed
principle of each of the Brahmās in all the unlimited
universes. Jyotir-liṅga-mayaṁ śambhum refers to the
Śambhu who is the immensely qualified manifestation of
the fundamental principle of procreation in the form of
the original male generative capacity (liṅga). Śrī Viṣṇu
is Mahā-Viṣṇu’s personal expansion, and is therefore in
the category of the Supreme Īśvara. Prajāpati and Śambhu
are both Mahā-Viṣṇu’s separated expansions, and are thus
demigods who have been invested with special authority.
Since His potency resides in His left side, it is from
the transcendental potency of pure spiritual existence
in Mahā-Viṣṇu’s left limb that Viṣṇu emerges. Thus Viṣṇu
appears from the pure spiritual existence of Bhagavān.

As Īśvara, Viṣṇu is the Supersoul (Paramātmā) or
indwelling witness of every living entity. In the Vedas
He has been called “the thumb-sized predominator.” He is
the maintainer. Those who perform fruitive activities
worship Him as Yajñeśvara Nārāyaṇa, the Lord of
sacrifice, while the yogīs desire to attain the state of
trance by meditating upon Him.




Verse 16


ahaṅkārātmakaṁ viśvaṁ

tasmād etad vyajāyata



Anvaya

tasmāt — from Śambhu; etad viśvam — this universe;
vyajāyata — became; ahaṅkāra-ātmakam — imbued with the
nature of false ego.



                           73
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017


Translation

The world of false ego has been born from Śambhu. This
is his function in relation to the living entities.



Ṭīkā translation

Another function of Śambhu is being described here. He
is called the original form of false ego because this
world of false ego was born from him. Thus Śambhu is the
presiding deity of false ego. For example, it is stated
in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.26.24):

The unmanifest aggregate material energy originates from
Bhagavān’s spiritual potency, and it transforms into
three types of false ego, which were imbued with the
potency for activity at the time of creation. The mind,
the senses and the life airs are born from these three
modifications of false ego, namely false ego in
goodness, false ego in passion and false ego in the mode
of ignorance.

Therefore Śambhu is called the presiding deity of all
false ego. Learned authorities have also called him
Anantadeva. He is also the cause of matter, the senses
and the mind.



Tātparya

The original form of pure existence in its
transcendental constitutional state has no sense of
self-conception separate from the Supreme Person
Bhagavān. The symbol of separate self-conception, or the
separate existence that emerges in this material world,
is exemplified by the male generative capacity. This is
a mundane reflection of the original pure spiritual
existence. This liṅga, the emblem of the male generative
capacity, is Ādi-Śambhu. He unites with the receptive
principle, which is a transformation of Ramā-devī in the
form of the yoni or womb of material existence. At this
time, Śambhu is the material cause by dint of supplying
the raw material substances for creation. When each
universe is manifest from the gradual evolution of this
state of existence, the rudra or destructive principle
emerges from the existence of Śambhu. Although born from
between the eyebrows of the puruṣa-avatāra Mahā-Viṣṇu,
Śambhu remains as the epitome of false ego in all
conditions.

An unlimited number of atomic conscious particles emerge
from the spiritual rays of Paramātmā as the aggregate of
the living entities. When they identify themselves as
the servants of Bhagavān, they are of Vaikuṇṭha, and
have no relationship with the world of māyā. When the
living entity forgets this pure identity, he desires to
become the enjoyer of māyā, and the false ego principle
of Śambhu then enters his existence and produces within
him the self-conception of being a separate enjoyer.
Therefore, Śambhu alone is the principle underlying the

                           74
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

world of false ego and the identification of the living
entities with their material bodies.




Verse 17


atha tais tri-vidhair veśair

līlām udvahataḥ kila

yoga-nidrā bhagavatī

tasya śrīr iva saṅgatā



Anvaya

atha — thus (after mahā-puruṣa Kāraṇodakaśāyī entered
each universe in the form of Bhagavān Garbhodakaśāyī
Viṣṇu); kila udvahataḥ tasya — He indeed carried out;
līlām — His pastime, i.e. the duty of creation,
maintenance and destruction in each universe; taiḥ —
through these; tri-vidhaiḥ — three kinds; veśaiḥ — of
dresses, i.e. His expansions of Prajāpati, Viṣṇu and
Śambhu; śrīḥ iva saṅgatā — just as a plenary portion of
the intrinsic, personal potency meets with
Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu; tasya — similarly Garbhodakaśāyī
Viṣṇu also meets; yoga-nidrā — mystic slumber, another
plenary portion of the same śakti; bhagavatī — who is
replete with all opulence, and who is an expansion of
the mystic slumber aspect of the intrinsic, personal
potency. (This is to indicate that Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu
also reposes in mystic slumber.)



Translation

Thereafter, mahā-puruṣa Bhagavān, having entered the
universe in the forms of Prajāpati, Viṣṇu and Śambhu,
performs His pastime of maintenance, creation and
dissolution, which occurs within the inert material
energy. Since this pastime is so insignificant, He
associates with Bhagavatī Yoganidrā, who is the
personification of mystical absorption in His own
intrinsic bliss, and the partial manifestation of the
spiritual potency.



Ṭīkā translation

The current verse describes the līlā of the Brahmā,
Viṣṇu and Maheśa who have entered the material universe.
Bhagavān Viṣṇu performs the tasks of creating,
maintaining and annihilating the material world by
entering the universe in the three forms, Brahmā, Viṣṇu
and Maheśa. Here, yoganidrā bhagavatī tasya śrīr iva
saṅgatā indicates that, because Brahmā and Śambhu have a

                           75
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

self-conception of being separate from the essential
reality of Bhagavān, they sport with their respective
aspects of the inferior potency, namely Sāvitrī and Umā,
who are the shadow forms of the transcendental potency.
However, Bhagavān Viṣṇu associates (sleeps) with
Bhagavatī Mahā-Yoganidrā, who, being the partial
manifestation of Ramā-devī or Śrī Lakṣmī, is the
personification of mystical absorption in His own
intrinsic bliss. The expression śrīr iva means that this
Ramā-devī is an expansion of the original Lakṣmī-devī
who reigns in Vaikuṇṭha.



Tātparya

Since Brahmā and Śambu are both separated personal
expansions, and since they have a self-conception of
being separate from the essential reality of Bhagavān,
they sport with their respective aspects of the inferior
potency, Sāvitrī and Umā, who are the shadow forms of
the transcendental potency. Only Bhagavān Viṣṇu is the
husband of the personal transcendental potency, Ramā or
Lakṣmī.




Verse 18


qsisṛkṣāyāṁ tato nābhes

tasya padmaṁ viniryayau

tan nālaṁ hema-nalinaṁ

brahmaṇo lokam adbhutam



Anvaya

tataḥ — therafter; tasya — when Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu;
sisṛkṣāyām — desired to create; nābheḥ — from His lotus
navel; hema-nalinam padmam — a lotus flower appearing to
be made of gold; viniryayau — was manifest; tan-nālam —
within the stem of that lotus; adbhutam — was the
astonishing; lokam — world of fourteen planetary
systems;

brahmaṇaḥ — for the creation of Brahmā.



Translation

When Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu desired to create, from His
navel emerged a golden lotus flower, from which the
creator, Brahmā, appeared. Complete with its stem, this
wonderful golden lotus flower is the residence of Brahmā
and is known as Brahmaloka or Satyaloka.


                           76
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017



Ṭīkā translation

This golden lotus flower, complete with its stem, is the
birthplace and resting-place of Brahmājī. It is
therefore called Brahmaloka.



Tātparya

In this context, the word svarṇa (golden) indicates the
semblance of transcendence.




Verse 19


tattvāni pūrva-rūḍhāni

kāraṇāni parasparam

samavāyāprayogāc ca

vibhinnāni pṛthak pṛthak

cic-chaktyā sajjamāno ‘tha

bhagavān ādi-pūruṣaḥ

yojayan māyayā devo

yoganidrām akalpayat



Anvaya

pūrva-rūḍhāni — the primevally established; tattvāni —
essential principles of gross matter (described in verse
16); kāraṇāni — of universal causality, i.e. before the
interaction of the five gross elements, when they were
in a subtle, unmixed state; samavāya aprayogāt — because
of not coming together in the unified form of five
elements; ca parasparam pṛthak pṛthak — those elements
were mutually distinct from one another; vibhinnāni —
and separate; bhagavān ādi-pūruṣaḥ — Kāraṇodakaśāyī
Mahā-Viṣṇu, the original Personality of Godhead, replete
with all opulence; devaḥ — who was engaged in pleasure
pastimes; sajjamānaḥ — associating; cit-śaktyā — with
His spiritual potency; yojayan — He engaged; māyayā —
with His illusory potency, consisting of the distinct
principles of matter (thus they were transformed into a
combined form and created countless gross material
universes); atha — thereafter; akalpayat yoga-nidrām —
He enjoyed with His spiritual potency by taking shelter
of His pastime potency. (In other words, He reposed upon
His bed of Ananta.)



                             77
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017


Translation

Before the creation of the five gross elements, the
fundamental elements existed in their natural condition
in separate, individual forms, because the process of
combining them had not been applied. The primeval
personality, Bhagavān Mahā-Viṣṇu, acted through the
illusory potency by associating with His own
transcendental potency. Uniting those separate elements
by systematic combination, He created the material
world. After accomplishing the task of creation in this
way, He became absorbed in mystic slumber, the form of
union with His own transcendental potency.



Ṭīkā translation

The method of creation by Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu has been
described in the Third Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. In
order to describe the act of creation as the awakening
of the universal form, who is the embodiment of the
aggregate of countless living entities, it is being
explained more elaborately here. The primeval
personality, Bhagavān Kāraṇodakaśāyī, accomplished the
creation of the universe by amalgamating the previously
unmixed five gross elements through the influence of His
own spiritual potency reflected in the form of the
illusory energy. Then the Supreme Person, who is
inclined to perform pastimes, not being ambitious to
carry out the duty of creation, became engrossed in
mystic slumber with His transcendental potency, Ramā-
devī.

etāny asaṁhatya yadā

mahad-ādīni sapta vai

kāla-karma-guṇopeto

jagad-ādi rūpāviśat

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.26.50)

The cause of the universe, Bhagavān, being endowed with
time, activity and the modes of material nature, entered
this universe when the seven essential realities — that
is, the whole aggregate material energy, false ego and
the five gross elements — were in their unmixed state.

Thereby, all the substances became agitated and mixed
together. Then, from this mixture was born an
unconscious egg, from which the universal form was
manifested. This egg-like object is enclosed by pradhāna
(the seed principle of creation) and prakṛti (material
nature) and covered in layers of the elements beginning
with water,21 each layer being ten times greater than
the previous one.

Thus the Supreme Divinity, who was resting in the water
within the embryonic universe, arose and, giving up His
neutrality, He began to manifest many kinds of
variegatedness within the universal egg. Thus, the

                              78
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

mouth, the voice and fire were manifest from that egg,
and the nose, the life air and the sense of smell
emerged in the same way. Then the two eyes emerged,
along with Sūrya, the presiding deity of the eyes. The
ear also emerged and from the ear, the sense of hearing
was manifest. After that His skin, pores, tears,
genitals, legs, hands, feet and other bodily parts were
manifest.

All the demigods, being the presiding deities of the
senses, entered into that gigantic form, but the
universal form did not wake up. When, despite the
presence of faculties such as mind, intelligence and
ego, the universal form still did not awaken, the
Supersoul, who is the presiding deity of consciousness,
finally entered the heart from the consciousness. At
that time the universal form arose within the water.
Therefore, no one is capable of awakening the universal
form as He lies submerged beneath the waters except for
the kṣetrajña-puruṣa, the personality who is the knower
of all fields, and who is the presiding deity of the
life air, senses, mind, intelligence and consciousness.

In this way, after combining all the essential
realities, Bhagavān woke up the universal form for the
purpose of creation. Thereafter, since He is indifferent
and free from ambition, after engaging in all these
activities, He accepted the state of mystic slumber.



Tātparya

In Bhagavad-gītā (9.10) it is stated mayādhyakṣeṇa
prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram. The purport is that before
the creation, Māyā-devī, the shadow of the
transcendental potency, was inactive, and the substances
of her ingredient aspect also existed separately in a
state of non-amalgamation. By the desire of Kṛṣṇa — that
is, by the influence of Mahā-Viṣṇu — when the
instrumental and ingredient aspects of māyā were
combined, an effect emerged in the form of the cosmic
manifestation. When this was accomplished, Bhagavān
again became engrossed in His transcendental potency of
mystic slumber. The word yogamāyā (pastime potency) or
yoga-nidrā (mystic slumber) should be understood to mean
the natural or inherent illumination of the
transcendental potency. However, its shadow, the
illusory potency, is by nature inert and full of
darkness.

When Kṛṣṇa wants to make some illumination in the object
composed of insentient inertia, He combines (yoga) the
influence of His own transcendental potency with the
inactive shadow potency (māyā), thereby accomplishing
the aforementioned task of cosmic creation. This is
called yogamāyā, in which there are two types of
experience, namely the Vaikuṇṭha experience and the
insentient material experience. Śrī Kṛṣṇa, His plenary
portions, and the pure living entities who are His
separated expansions realize the Vaikuṇṭha experience,
whereas the bound living entities realize the insentient
material experience. The covering of spiritual
realization in the experience of the conditioned souls

                           79
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

has been called yoga-nidrā. This is also the influence
of Bhagavān’s potency. There will be a more elaborate
analysis of this principle later in the text.




Verse 20


yojayitvā tu tāny eva

praviveśa svayaṁ guhām

guhāṁ praviṣṭe tasmiṁs tu

jīvātmā pratibudhyate



Anvaya

tāni yojayitvā tu eva — having mixed (the separate gross
principles of material nature in their collective form
and creating unlimited billions of illusory material
universes); svayam — He personally; praviveśa — entered;
guhām — those cavities, i.e. entered within the
universes as the universal form and in the form of the
aggregate of living entities (Hiraṇyagarbha Prajāpati);
praviṣṭe tu — when He had indeed entered; tasmin guhām —
within those caves; jīvātmā — the universal form and the
aggregate living entities; pratibudhyate — awoke from
their sleep after the period of universal dissolution.



Translation

When Bhagavān mixed together the individual essential
realities, He manifested unlimited numbers of material
universes. After that He personally entered into His
hidden abode, the innermost region of each universe. At
that time, all the living entities woke up from the
sleeping condition in which they had passed the duration
of the cosmic dissolution.



Ṭīkā translation

Now there is a description of Bhagavān’s third type of
procedure. After combining the individual gross
essential realities, Bhagavān accepted mystic slumber.
In between the activity of amalgamating the essential
realities and accepting mystic slumber, He entered His
hidden abode, the body of the universal form. Then, all
the living entities who had been sleeping during the
cosmic dissolution woke up; that is, they immediately
became absorbed in enjoyment and activities in
accordance with their past impressions.




                            80
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

Tātparya

The term “hidden abode” assumes a variety of
connotations in numerous places throughout śāstra. In
some places the unmanifest pastimes have been called
“hidden abode.” In other places “hidden abode” refers to
the location of the indwelling witness. In many
instances the inner chamber of every jīva’s heart has
been called “hidden abode.” In essence, the term “hidden
abode” is used to indicate any place that is
imperceptible to the common man. In the previous
creation, countless living entities were absorbed into
the bodily limbs of Śrī Hari at the time of the cosmic
annihilation at the end of Brahmājī’s lifespan. These
living entities again became manifest within the
creation according to their previous fruitive desires.




Verse 21


sa nityo nitya-sambandhaḥ

prakṛtiś ca paraiva sā



Anvaya

saḥ nityaḥ — He is that same eternal person (who for
limitless time pervades the innumerable aggregate of the
potency that manifests the living entities); ca eva —
and indeed; sā parā prakṛtiḥ — Bhagavān’s superior
potency known as the marginal potency (the aggregate of
the living entities); nitya-sambandhaḥ — (there is) an
eternal relationship between the two.



Translation

The living entities are eternal, and they have an
eternal relationship with Bhagavān that extends
throughout time, with neither beginning nor end. By
constitution they are intrinsically His superior
potency.



Ṭīkā translation

The constitutional position of the living entities is
being described in this half śloka beginning with the
words sa nityaḥ. The word nitya (eternal) indicates that
the living entity exists throughout beginningless and
endless time. The living entity has an intimate and
inseparable eternal relationship with Bhagavān, called
samavāya-sambandha. The living entities have an eternal
relationship with Bhagavān, just as the rays of the sun
are always related to the sun. This has been explained
in the Nārada-pañcarātra:

                            81
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017


yat taṭasthantu cid-rūpaṁ

saṁvedāt tu vinirgatam

rañjitaṁ guṇa-rāgeṇa

sa jīva iti kathyate

The entity who is constituted of the marginal potency,
who has been manifested from the knowledge aspect of
transcendence, but who is colored by the influence of
māyā’s qualities of goodness, passion and ignorance, is
called the living entity (jīva).

It has also been stated in Bhagavad-gītā (15.7):
“mamaivāṁśo jīva-loke, jīva-bhūtaḥ sanātanaḥ — the
living entity is My part and parcel. He exists eternally
as an individual living entity, and is therefore eternal
by nature.” Thus the living entity is called superior
energy. Prakṛti means that the living entity is a
reflection of the image of Bhagavān, who is manifest as
the indwelling witness, the Supersoul. In the form of
the knower of the body, the living entity has attained a
state like one of the Lord’s predominated potencies.
Therefore it is also stated in Bhagavad-gītā (7.5):
“prakṛtiṁ viddhi me parām, jīva-bhūtām — the living
entity is My superior potency.”

The eternal intrinsic nature of the living entity is
also established by the Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (4.6): dvā
suparṇa-sayujā sakhāyā; there, the individual jīvātmā
and Paramātmā have been compared to two birds sitting on
a branch of the same pīpala tree.



Tātparya

Just as the relationship beween the sun and its rays is
eternal, similarly the living entities have an eternal
relationship with Bhagavān, the transcendental sun.
Since the living entities are particles of the rays of
Bhagavān, they are not temporary like material
substances, and His spiritual qualities are also
partially present in them. Therefore, by his intrinsic
nature, the living entity is knowledge, the knower, the
possessor of ego, the enjoyer, the thinker and the doer.
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is unlimited, omniscient and omnipotent.

The living entity is Bhagavān’s eternal servant, and
Bhagavān is the jīva’s eternal master. The living
entities are also eligible for exchanging transcendental
loving mellows with Bhagavān. From the Bhagavad-gītā
statement apareyam itas tv anyāṁ prakṛtiṁ viddhi me
parām, it is understood that the living entity is Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s superior potency. All the qualities of the pure
jīvātmā are beyond the eight components of the inferior
energy, beginning with false ego. Thus, although the
potency that comprises the living entities is
insignificant, being composed of tiny spiritual
particles, it is still superior to māyā. This potency is
also known as the marginal potency. The word “marginal”
(taṭasthā) indicates that it is situated on the marginal

                            82
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

line between the material energy and the eternal reality
of spiritual existence. The living entity is liable to
come under the control of māyā because of his
infinitesimal nature. The living entities who have been
conditioned from time immemorial suffer the distress of
material existence, and repeatedly rotate in the cycle
of birth and death. However, when the living entity
submits and remains under the control of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
master of māyā, he can never fall under the control of
māyā.




Verse 22


evaṁ sarvātma-sambandhaṁ

nābhyāṁ padmaṁ harer abhūt

tatra brahmābhavad bhūyaś

catur-vedī catur-mukhaḥ



Anvaya

evam — thus (when the first puruṣa-avatāra
Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu entered within the universe through
the form of Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, the second puruṣa-
avatāra); nābhyām — within the navel; hareḥ — of
Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu; padmam — a lotus flower; abhūt —
arose; sarva-ātma-sambandham — which had the form of the
abode for the collective living entities (i.e. it
contained the fourteen planetary systems within it. It
was the source of Hiraṇyagarbha Brahmā, who had the
bodily self-conception of the personified aggregate
jīvātmās); tatra bhūyaḥ — then later (within this
lotus); brahmā — Brahmā; catur-mukhaḥ — the four-headed;
catur-vedī — knower of the four Vedas; abhavat — was
born.



Translation

The lotus flower that emerged from the area of Śrī
Viṣṇu’s navel contained the collective bodily conception
of all living entities. The four-headed Brahmā, who is
the knower of the four Vedas, was manifested from that
lotus.



Ṭīkā translation

Then the lotus flower that was the resting place of all
living entities emerged from the puruṣa who had entered
His hidden abode. Thereafter Hiraṇyagarbha Brahmā, the
possessor of the collective bodily identification,
manifested. After that, four-headed Brahmā, the knower

                             83
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

of the four Vedas, emerged as the embodiment of
enjoyment from Hiraṇyagarbha. The four-headed Brahmā
appeared from the lotus that came from the area of Śrī
Hari’s navel, and whose flower and stem are the resting
place of the fourteen planetary systems. Here,
“embodiment of enjoyment” means that Brahmā’s present
four-headed body is a repository of material enjoyment,
made according to the impressions of desires to enjoy
the fruits of his actions from the previous creation.
Because of his previous impressions, he desired to
create the material world as soon as he appeared.



Tātparya

This lotus flower, which is the resting place of the
aggregate of the living entities, was manifested from
the puruṣa who had entered His hidden abode, namely the
egg-shaped universe. Four-headed Brahmā, who is the
embodiment of enjoyment, took birth from Hiraṇyagarbha
Brahmā, the personification of the collective bodily
conception. Four-headed Brahmā is known as a delegated
authority. Just as Brahmā is understood to be a
delegated authority, it is similarly understood that he
is a part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa in the category of His
separated expansions.




Verse 23


sañjāto bhagavac-chaktyā

tat-kālaṁ kila coditaḥ

sisṛkṣāyāṁ matiṁ cakre

pūrva-saṁskāra-saṁskṛtam

dadarśa kevalaṁ dhvāntaṁ

nānyat kim api sarvataḥ



Anvaya

sañjātaḥ — when Caturmukha Brahmā was born; coditaḥ —
being inspired; bhagavat-śaktyā — by the potency of Śrī
Bhagavān; tat-kālaṁ kila — at that very moment; pūrva-
saṁskāra-saṁskṛtam — in accordance with the impressions
he had undergone in his previous birth; matim cakre — he
absorbed his mind; sisṛkṣāyām — in matters concerning
his duties of creation; sarvataḥ — on all sides; dadarśa
— he perceived; kevalam dhvāntam — only darkness; na
anyat — nothing else; kim api — at all.



Translation

                           84
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017


After manifesting from the lotus flower, Brahmājī, who
is empowered by Bhagavān’s potency, absorbed his mind in
the subject of creation according to his previous
impressions. However, he saw nothing but darkness in all
four directions.



Ṭīkā translation

Now the activities of four-headed Brahmā are being
described in this verse beginning with sañjātaḥ. First
of all Brahmājī wanted to create the material world.
However, he saw nothing but darkness all around.

Furthermore, we find the following description in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. When Brahmā appeared from the lotus
flower, he began to situate himself in its pericarp, but
he could not see anything because of the dense darkness.
Brahmājī wanted to see by casting his glance in four
directions at once, and in so doing, he manifested four
faces in the four directions.

At that time, when the cosmos had been dissolved and the
vast waters were agitated into whirlpools by the force
of the wind, Brahmā, the original demigod, was situated
in the lotus flower that had emerged from the water.
However, he could neither factually understand the
situation of the world nor of his own self. Being seated
on the upper surface of the lotus flower, he began to
consider, “Who am I? What is the origin of this unique
lotus flower within the water? How did it appear? There
must definitely be something below it, and this lotus
flower must also be situated upon some supporting base.”

Deliberating in this way, Brahmājī entered the path
formed by the hollow within the middle of the lotus
stem. Still, despite approaching the base of the lotus
stem, namely Nārāyaṇa’s navel, he was incapable of
understanding anything, even after making extensive
research. Retiring from his investigation with his
ambition unfulfilled, Brahmājī returned once more to his
sitting-place on top of the lotus flower. There he sat
in a posture for meditation, and by controlling his
breathing he gradually concentrated his consciousness by
introspection.



Tātparya

Due to Brahmājī’s previous impressions, he had a desire
to create. Every living entity acquires a particular
nature in accordance with his previous impressions and,
in accordance with his nature, different types of
endeavors appeal to his heart. This is called adṛṣṭa
(unseen) because it is the fruit of action performed in
previous lives. In Brahmājī’s heart was the desire to
create just as he had done in the previous creation.
Similarly, certain qualified living entities may also
attain the position of Brahmā.



                           85
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017




Verse 24


uvāca puratas tasmai

tasya divyā sarasvatī

kāma kṛṣṇāya govinda-

ṅe gopījana ity api

vallabhāya priyā vahner

mantraṁ te dāsyati priyam



Anvaya

divyā sarasvatī — divine Sarasvatī; uvāca — then spoke a
message; tasya — from Bhagavān; tasmai — to Brahmā (who
was looking in the darkness); purataḥ — in his presence;
kāma-kṛṣṇāya — klīṁ kṛṣṇāya (kāma indicating the seed of
the mantra, klīṁ); govinda-ṅe — govindāya, unto Govinda
(ṅe indicates the dative declension, meaning “unto”);
api — also; gopījana-vallabhāya iti — unto the beloved
of the gopīs; priyā vahneḥ — she who is dear (priyā) to
fire (vahni) i.e. svāhā; thus the eighteen-syllable
mantra, klīṁ kṛṣṇāya govindāya gopījana-vallabhāya
svāhā; mantram — this mantra; dāsyati — will bestow; te
priyam — your most cherished desire.



Translation

Śrī Bhagavān’s transcendental Sarasvatī spoke to
Brahmājī as he was looking at the darkness in all
directions. “O Brahmā, klīṁ kṛṣṇāya govindāya gopījana-
vallabhāya svāhā. This mantra will fulfill your
cherished desires.”



Ṭīkā translation

Why did Divya Sarasvatī give this rare and precious
kṛṣṇa-mantra to Brahmājī so easily? It was only possible
by the mercy of Bhagavān. And why was such unexpected
mercy suddenly available? It should be understood that
Brahmājī had worshiped Bhagavān in his previous life.
This mercy of Bhagavān is being described in this verse.
Everything else described here is self-evident.



Tātparya

The eighteen-syllable kṛṣṇa-mantra, prefixed by the
kāma-bīja klīṁ, is the highest of all mantras, and it
has two functions. One is to attract the pure living

                            86
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

entities toward the supremely attractive master of
Gokula and beloved of the gopīs, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. This is the
highest attainment of the living entity’s transcendental
pursuit. When the sādhaka is free from material desires,
he attains the fruit of this perfect prema. However, in
the case of the sādhaka who has material desires, this
superlative mantra only fulfills those cherished
desires. In regard to spiritual matters, the kāma-bīja
is situated within the lotus flower of Goloka. In regard
to mundane affairs, it is the reflection of the kāma-
bīja that bestows the fulfillment of all types of
worldly aspirations.




Verse 25


tapas tvaṁ tapa etena

tava siddhir bhaviṣyati



Anvaya

tvam — you; tapa tapaḥ — must perform austerity; etena —
by chanting this mantra; tava — your; siddhiḥ — desired
perfection; bhaviṣyati — will be achieved.



Translation

O Brahmā, perform austerity by this mantra. Thus your
cherished desire will be fulfilled.



Ṭīkā translation

In this half śloka beginning with the words tapas tvam,
instruction is being given on how austerity should be
performed; that is, by the aforementioned method.
According to the Third Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,
Brahmājī heard the sixteenth and twenty-first consonants
of the alphabet, namely ta and pa, combined to make the
word tapa. Upon hearing this, he began to meditate on
Bhagavān with one-pointed attention. At that time, by
the mercy of Bhagavān, he heard the supreme monarch of
mantras, the kṛṣṇa-mantra, spoken by the transcendental
Sarasvatī. Goddess Sarasvatī said, “O Brahmā, perform
austerity by repeating this mantra with the utmost
diligence. Thus all your heart’s desires will be
fulfilled.”



Tātparya

The purport of this verse and its commentary are clear.


                           87
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017




Verse 26


atha tepe sa suciraṁ

prīṇan govindam avyayam

śvetadvīpa-patiṁ kṛṣṇaṁ

goloka-sthaṁ parāt param

prakṛtyā guṇa-rūpiṇyā

rūpiṇyā paryupāsitam

sahasra-dala-sampanne

koṭi-kiñjalka-bṛṁhite

bhūmiś cintāmaṇis tatra

karṇikāre mahāsane

samāsīnaṁ cid-ānandaṁ

jyoti-rūpaṁ sanātanam

śabda-brahma-mayaṁ veṇuṁ

vādayantaṁ mukhāmbuje

vilāsinī-gaṇa-vṛtaṁ

svaiḥ svair aṁśair abhiṣṭutam



Anvaya

atha — then (after hearing that divine message); saḥ —
Brahmājī; tepe — performed austerities; su-ciram — for a
very long time; prīṇan — for the purpose of pleasing;
kṛṣṇam govindam — Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is known as Govinda;
avyayam — whose form is immutable; śveta-dvīpa-patim —
who is the master of Śvetadvīpa; parāt param — the
supreme transcendence; go-loka-stham — and who is
situated within the planet of the cows; paryupāsitam —
(then in Brahmā’s trance he saw that from outside Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s abode) He was being offered worship; rūpiṇyā —
by the beautiful; prakṛtyā — material nature
personified; guṇa-rūpiṇyā — whose form comprises the
three modes of material nature (guṇas), namely goodness,
passion and ignorance; tatra — there (He saw); bhūmiḥ —
a land; cintā-maṇiḥ — composed of wish-fulfilling gems;
karṇikāre — within the pericarp; sahasra-dala-sampanne —
of a thousand-petaled lotus; koṭi-kiñjalka-bṛṁhite —
filled with millions of saffron filaments; mahā-āsane —
and upon a great throne; samāsīnam — comfortably seated;
sanātanam — was the eternal; jyoti-rūpam — effulgent
form; cid-ānandam — of cognizance and bliss; mukha-

                           88
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

ambuje — upon His lotus mouth; vādayantam — He was
playing; veṇum — His flute; śabda-brahma-mayam — which
is imbued with the sound of the Vedic hymns; āvṛtam — He
was surrounded; vilāsinī-gaṇa — by a group of gopīs who
engaged in pleasure-pastimes with Him; abhiṣṭutam — He
was offered praise; svaiḥ svaiḥ — by His respective;
aṁśaiḥ — plenary portions.



Translation

After hearing this divine message, Brahmājī engaged in
austerities for a very long time in order to please
Govinda, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of Śvetadvīpa, who is
situated in Goloka Vṛndāvana. Brahmā’s meditation was as
follows: “In that land, which is made of transcendental
desire-fulfilling gems, there is a lotus with thousands
of petals and millions of filaments. In the center or
pericarp there is a great sitting-place or throne, upon
which is seated Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the eternal form of effulgent
cognizance and bliss. With His lotus lips He is playing
the flute, whose sound contains all the Vedic hymns, and
He is surrounded by gopīs engaged in pleasure-pastimes
with Him. He is attended by His own plenary portions who
are pastime expansions, and who are engaged in offering
praise to Him. From outside Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s abode, māyā, who
takes the form of the three material modes of ignorance,
passion and goodness, is also worshiping Him.”



Ṭīkā translation

After Brahmā had performed japa of the aforementioned
mantra on account of his specific desire to create, he
recited the following hymn to worship Śrī Govindadeva as
He gracefully reclines in the holy sanctuary of Gokula.
In these four ślokas beginning with the words atha tepe,
Brahmājī describes the nature of Govindadeva, the master
of Goloka, whom he was worshiping. In that astonishing
vision, Brahmājī saw that the personified illusory
energy, who embodies the three qualities of material
nature, also performed worship of the all-worshipable
Bhagavān Śrī Govindadeva through meditation from outside
His abode. She did not come directly in Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
presence, because she felt very ashamed, considering
herself an offender for punishing the rebellious living
entities (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.7.47): “yogābhimukhe māyā
vilajjamānā satī pṛṣṭha-deśam upaiti — the extremely
chaste māyā remains far behind Bhagavān, and offers Him
worship through meditation.”

It is also stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.87.28):
“balim udvahanti samadanty ajayā nimiṣaḥ — the demigods
and material nature herself offer tribute to You.” In
this verse it is stated that the demigods are also
external functionaries of the material creation, and
they remain outside Śrī Bhagavān’s planet, together with
the illusory potency. As the lords of small kingdoms
offer oblations to their emperor, so the demigods also
offer their oblations of pūjā to Govinda. What to speak
of others, even the great demigods must certainly remain
situated in their separate worlds.

                           89
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017


The word aṁśaiḥ (meaning “by the plenary portions”) in
this verse indicates the direct expansions of the
personal form of Bhagavān who are situated in Goloka.
These associates also perform worship of Śrī
Govindadeva. Brahmājī engaged in austerities for a long
time in order to please the imperishable Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
who is known as Govinda, and who is the supreme
transcendence and the master of Śvetadvīpa. To please
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, His external potency also performed worship
of Him by meditation, not directly before Him but
remaining far away, outside of His abode.

What is the nature of her meditation? Herein it is
specifically described: “The land in Goloka is made of
desire-fulfilling gems. In that place is a thousand-
petaled lotus, the beauty of which is enhanced by
millions of saffron filaments. Śrī Govindadeva, whose
effulgent form is composed of eternity, knowledge and
bliss, is seated upon the pericarp of that lotus, which
takes the form of a throne. With His lotus lips He plays
a flute, whose sound manifests the Vedic hymns. He is
surrounded by His dearmost beloved gopīs, and He is
glorified by His associates, who also reside in Goloka.”
Such a meditation is capable of bestowing all blessings.

One who achieves a human birth but does not worship Śrī
Bhagavān certainly lives in vain. Bewildered by māyā, he
becomes her slave and wanders through the 8,400,000
species, being devoured by the threefold miseries. For a
specific discussion on this topic, see Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(3.15.25).



Tātparya

Although the subject matter of this meditation is
transcendental, the illusory potency is still situated
in the material mode of passion. She is the
personification of the material modes of goodness,
passion and ignorance, and, as the embodiment of
Bhagavān’s inferior potency, she has many forms, such as
Durgā. Herein she is meditating on Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa as
the object of her worship.

When a person desires to acquire a material object,
Māyā-devī certainly becomes his worshipable deity. If he
does not worship Māyā-devī, then he should perform pūjā
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and by this means he will attain the
fulfillment of all his desires. This is also confirmed
in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.3.10):

akāmaḥ sarva-kāmo vā

mokṣa-kāma udāra-dhīḥ

tīvreṇa bhakti-yogena

yajeta puruṣaṁ param

Whether one is desireless, or desires sense enjoyment or
liberation, one who is intelligent should worship the
Supreme Person through intense and unalloyed cultivation

                           90
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

of bhakti-yoga.

This means that the various demigods and demigoddesses
are expansions of Śrī Bhagavān’s opulences, and they
bestow their respective boons. However, an intelligent
person should give up worshiping them, and should engage
in undeviating bhakti to Bhagavān Śrī Hari, who is fully
capable of bestowing all boons.

In accordance with this principle, Brahmājī meditated
upon the Supreme Personality, who performs pastimes in
Goloka and who is the worshipable deity of Māyā-devī.
Pure bhakti means niṣkāma-bhakti, i.e. bhakti that is
free from any other desire, whereas the bhakti of Brahmā
and other demigods is mixed with desire (sakāma). Within
sakāma there also exists a type of bhakti called
niṣkāma, and this is elaborately described in five
ślokas at the end of this book. These concluding verses
describe the practice of sādhana-bhakti through the
processes of hearing, chanting, remembering and so on
with knowledge of one’s eternal relationship with Kṛṣṇa
(sambandha-jñāna). Until one attains the perfectional
stage of svarūpa-siddhi, this sādhana-bhakti is an
easily accessible facility for the soul bound in
illusion.




Verse 27


atha veṇu-ninādasya

trayī-mūrti-mayī gatiḥ

sphurantī praviveśāśu

mukhābjāni svayambhuvaḥ

gāyatrīṁ gāyatas tasmād

adhigatya sarojajaḥ

saṁskṛtaś cādi-guruṇā

dvijatām agamat tataḥ



Anvaya

atha — then (after Brahmā had performed penance for a
long time); sphurantī — the brilliant melody, i.e. the
kāma-gāyatrī mantra that was articulated on Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
flute; trayī-mūrtimayī gatiḥ — which was imbued with the
three Vedas; veṇu-ninādasya — of the vibration of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s bamboo flute; āśu — swiftly; praviveśa —
entered; mukha-abjāni — the ears of the four lotus
faces; svayambhuvaḥ — of the self-born Brahmā; adhigatya
— having thus received Gāyatrī; tasmāt — from Śrī Kṛṣṇa;
saroja-jaḥ — that lotus-born Brahmā; gāyatrīm gāyataḥ —
through chanting that Gāyatrī; saṁskṛtaḥ — became fully

                           91
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

trained and enlightened; ādi-guruṇā — by the original
preceptor, Śrī Kṛṣṇa; tataḥ — and thereby; agamat — he
achieved; dvijatvam — twice-born status.



Translation

Then the mother of all Vedic hymns, Gāyatrī (which
emanated as the sound of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s flute), along with
the means for receiving and transmitting it, entered the
lotus faces of Brahmā through his eight earholes, and
Brahmā achieved realization of the kāma-gāyatrī mantra.
The lotus-born Brahmā was thus initiated by the flute-
song of Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the original guru, and by
that reformation he attained twice-born status.



Ṭīkā translation

The sādhaka first becomes trained and purified through
the process of becoming twice-born as described in this
verse, and afterwards, through mantra-sādhana he attains
darśana of the presiding deity of the mantra. For
example, Dhruva Mahārāja left his home at the age of
five years to worship Śrī Bhagavān, although he had no
knowledge of the procedure for His worship. Bhagavān,
who dwells in the hearts of all, sent Devarṣi Nārada to
him, and when Śrī Nārada clearly saw Dhruva’s firm
determination, he bestowed dīkṣā-mantra upon him on the
bank of the Yamunā at Mathurā, and told him, “Go to
Madhuvana and perform bhajana of Śrī Bhagavān there. He
will give you His darśana very soon.” As a result of
performing severe sādhana in accordance with Nārada’s
instructions, Dhruva received the Lord’s darśana within
six months. As illustrated in this history, the
acceptance of dīkṣā is absolutely necessary in order to
perform the sādhana and bhajana for realizing Śrī
Bhagavān.

Brahmājī also became fully accomplished after undergoing
the process of purification by becoming twice-born, just
as Dhruva did. This process is described by the two
ślokas beginning with the words atha veṇu-ninādasya. It
is clearly stated in the second śloka that Gāyatrī is
the mother of the Vedas. Tan-mayī gatiḥ means that the
mantra, together with the traditions for receiving,
practicing and transmitting it, entered within his lotus
faces by way of his eight earholes. In this way Brahmā
received the reformatory process of initiation by means
of gāyatrī-mantra from the original guru Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and
attained the status of a twice-born brāhmaṇa.



Tātparya

The nature of the sound of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s flute is
specifically eternity, knowledge and bliss, and
therefore all of the Vedas exist in their perfect form
within that sound. Gāyatrī is a Vedic meter, and in
brief it can be said to contain a meditation and a
prayer. Among all the gāyatrīs, kāma-gāyatrī is the best

                           92
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

because, unlike any other gāyatrī, the prayer and
meditation within it are fully imbued with
transcendental pleasure-pastimes.

The gāyatrī that is chanted after the eighteen-syllable
gopāla-mantra is known as kāma-gāyatrī. It is as
follows: klīṁ kāma-devāya vidmahe puṣpa-bāṇāya dhīmahi
tan no ‘naṅgaḥ pracodayāt. Within this gāyatrī, after a
fully complete meditation on Śrī Gopījana-vallabha, the
transcendental Cupid is invoked by a prayer to attain
entrance into His pastimes. Nowhere can one find a more
excellent example of rasika poetry concerning the
transcendental world, through which the sādhaka can take
shelter of the abode of prema. At the moment this very
gāyatrī entered the ears of Brahmājī, he became
qualified as a brāhmaṇa and began to sing it. It should
be properly understood that whichever fortunate jīva
receives this mantra factually attains spiritual
rebirth. There are two types of second birth. One is
automatically attained by entrance into the
transcendental world. The second, which is for those
conditioned by gross matter in this illusory material
existence, is the acceptance of the reformatory process
called second birth according to the customs pertaining
to one’s lineage and personal nature. The jīva who
attains second birth in the first way is in every way
sublime and superexcellent in comparison to the jīva who
undergoes second birth by the second process. This is
because the purpose of undergoing dīkṣā, enlightenment
concerning spiritual topics, is to attain spiritual
birth, and the consequent attainment of the
transcendental realm is the ultimate glory of the jīva.
This is the ultimate benefit, which makes the life of a
jīva successful.




Verse 28


trayyā prabuddho ‘tha vidhir

vījñāta-tattva-sāgaraḥ

tuṣṭāva veda-sāreṇa

stotreṇānena keśavam



Anvaya

atha — thereafter; trayyā — through taking shelter of
gāyatrī-mantra, the essence of all the Vedas; vidhiḥ —
Brahmā; prabuddhaḥ — (became) fully enlightened;
vijñāta-tattva-sāgaraḥ — and an ocean of realized
truths, that is to say he comprehended the svarūpa of
Śrī Bhagavān; tuṣṭāva — he pleased; keśavam — Śrī Kṛṣṇa
(who has beautiful hair); anena stotreṇa — by
(composing) the (following) hymn.



                           93
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017


Translation

By remembrance of that gāyatrī-mantra, which is the
essence of all the Vedas, Brahmājī became fully
enlightened with the ocean of realized truths, and with
that essence of Vedic knowledge he offered the following
hymn to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is known as Keśava.



Ṭīkā translation

Following the mood of verse 26, Brahmājī performed
ārādhana (worship) by means of the kāma-gāyatrī kṛṣṇa-
mantra for a very long time. After that long period,
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is supremely full of compassion,
manifested all the truths and conclusions of the Vedas
and other scriptures within the heart of Brahmājī. Then
Brahmā began to offer prayers that were born from the
essence of the Vedas. Whatever else has been said in
this śloka is clear.

The word keśava is derived as follows: keśa means “all
the parts” or the expansion of all the various energies.
One who manifests these parts (aṁśas) and energies is
called Keśava. Also, ka means Brahmā, and īśa means
Śaṅkara, so the one who manifests both Brahmā and
Śaṅkara is called Keśava. There is one more hidden
meaning: keśān vayati saṁskarotīti keśavaḥ. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
called Keśava because He arranges the hair (keśa) of His
dearmost gopīs.



Tātparya

By remembering the kāma-gāyatrī, Brahmājī achieved some
degree of realization that “I am the eternal maidservant
of Kṛṣṇa.” The conception of being a maidservant of
Kṛṣṇa is such a deep and confidential mystery that it
was not fully realized by Brahmā, but his ability to
distinguish between spirit (cit) and dull matter (acit)
was so developed that the ocean of truths such as kṛṣṇa-
tattva, kṛṣṇa-śakti-tattva, māyā-tattva, bhakti-tattva23
and so on were fully manifest within his heart. All
Vedic knowledge was thus revealed to Brahmā, and with
the essence of the Vedas he offered this prayer known as
Śrī Brahma-saṁhitā to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. In this prayer all the
conclusions of Vaiṣṇava philosophy are present, as if
the ocean were condensed into a waterpot. For this
reason, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu taught this to His own
devotees, and all intelligent readers should therefore
make every endeavor to recite and taste the moods of
this Brahma-saṁhitā every day.




Verse 29


cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu kalpa-vṛkṣa-

                           94
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017


lakṣāvṛteṣu surabhīr abhipālayantam

lakṣmī-sahasra-śata-sambhrama-sevyamānaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi



Anvaya

aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — primeval person, Śrī Govinda;
abhipālayantam — who is tending with great care;
surabhīḥ — the wish-fulfilling cows; āvrteṣu — amidst;
lakṣa — hundreds of thousands; kalpa-vṛkṣa — of wish-
fulfilling trees; sevyamānam — He is served; sambhrama —
with special care and attention; laksmī-sahasra-śata —
by hundreds of thousands of goddesses of fortune, i.e.
the gopīs, who are all Mahā-Lakṣmīs; sadmasu — in
abodes; prakara — constructed; cintāmaṇi — from wish-
fulfilling gems.



Translation

The transcendental realm is eternally adorned by
millions of wish-fulfilling trees, by pavilions made of
desire-fulfilling jewels and by innumerable wish-
fulfilling cows. There, thousands upon thousands of
Lakṣmīs, or gopīs, are rendering services to the Supreme
Personality with great affection. I worship that
original Supreme Personality, Śrī Govinda.



Ṭīkā translation

Beginning with this verse 29, Brahmājī praises the
primeval personality, Śrī Govinda, with thirty-one
verses describing the glories of His name, form,
qualities, pastimes, opulence, sweetness, transcendental
abode and so on.

The pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa are endless, and among them
His daily pastimes are also innumerable. Those pastimes
are called aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā, the pastimes performed
throughout the eight periods of the day and night. In
these pastimes, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s associates who have taken
shelter of the transcendental mellows of parenthood,
friendship and amorous love simultaneously relish the
pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s infancy, childhood and
adolescence respectively according to their own moods.
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s svarūpa is that of an eternal adolescent, a
fresh youth, the best of dancers, dressed in the attire
of a cowherd boy with a flute in His hands (nava-kiśora-
naṭavara, gopa-veśa veṇukara). This is His eternal and
original svarūpa, which every devotee realizes according
to his own transcendental sentiment.

In śāstra we find that His worship is of two kinds. One
type is svārasikī and the other mantramayī-upāsanā, and
they are understood as follows. The pastimes of Śrī

                           95
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa in various places in Goloka Vṛndāvana are of many
types; therefore, the worship that is performed through
the limbs of bhakti, such as remembering, hearing and
chanting about those pastimes, is called svārasikī-
upāsanā. The term mantramayī-upāsanā applies to the
forms of hearing, contemplation and formal worship with
auspicious articles, in which a mantra is employed in
order to apply the consciousness to one particular
pastime that occurs in one particular location in Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s place of pastimes. In this method of worship,
there is meditation upon only one of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes in
one place, and therefore it has been called mantramayī-
upāsanā.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa has unlimited pastimes, such as the pastimes
of Vāsudeva, Saṅkarṣaṇa and other expansions in the
realm of transcendental opulence; the pastimes of the
puruṣa-avatāra Kāraṇodakaśāyī Mahā-Viṣṇu; the pastimes
of the occasional incarnations such as Matsya and Kūrma;
the pastimes of the presiding deities of the material
modes such as Brahmā and Śiva; the pastimes of the
empowered incarnations such as Pṛthu and Vyāsa; the
pastimes of Paramātmā, who is endowed with attributes
(saviśeṣa); and the pastimes of the formless
undifferentiated Brahman, which is devoid of specific
attributes.24 First of all, Brahmājī has praised the
supermost of all pastimes of the unlimitedly sportive
Bhagavān, namely Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes in Gokula
Vṛndāvana. This is the object of his soul’s deepest
yearning.

The place of pastimes that are the object of mantramayī-
upāsanā, which are situated in one particular place, as
well as the settings of innumerable pastimes (such as
the rāsa-līlā) that occur in many different locations
and are the object of svārasikī-upāsanā, are both
present in Goloka. Nevertheless, in this first verse
beginning cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu, Brahmājī prays by
describing the superior meditation on svārasikī-līlās
that occur in the central, most prominent seat of
pastimes (yoga-pīṭha).

What kinds of pastimes occur there? Surabhīr
abhipālayantam: Śrī Kṛṣṇa takes the cows from the
village to the forest to graze on very green, soft
grass. He makes them drink and take bath in lakes such
as Pāvana-sarovara, and then again He brings them back
to the cowsheds. In this way He protects and nourishes
them with much affection. Sometimes, in a solitary
place, He also engages in exceptionally confidential
pastimes. What are those astonishing, secret activities?
Lakṣmī-sahasra-śata: I render service to the primeval
personality who, in a pavilion made of desire-fulfilling
gems which is completely hidden among countless
surrounding desire-trees, is intimately served with
elation by unlimited numbers of beautiful vraja-gopīs.
The word lakṣmī should be understood to mean charming
cowherd girls.



Tātparya

Here the word cintāmaṇi indicates transcendental,

                           96
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

desire-fulfilling jewels. Just as the illusory potency
has created the mundane world from the five inert gross
elements, similarly the spiritual potency has produced
the spiritual world from a transcendental substance,
namely cintāmaṇi. Furthermore, the cintāmaṇi jewels used
as the materials in the construction of Bhagavān’s
chambers in Goloka are infinitely more rare and
resourceful than ordinary touchstone. Whenever one milks
the ordinary wish-fulfilling cows of the heavenly
planets (kāma-dhenus), they give ordinary milk. However,
an ocean of milk, which is actually a transcendental
current of prema, is constantly cascading from the
udders of the wish-fulfilling cows of Goloka to allay
the hunger and thirst of the jīvas engaged in pure
bhakti. In this verse the words lakṣa-lakṣa and sahasra-
śata indicate an infinite or uncountable number. The
word sambhrama, meaning “with veneration,” is used to
indicate “saturated with unconditional love.” One should
understand the word lakṣmī to refer to the beautiful
cowherd maidens. The words ādi-puruṣa indicate that Śrī
Govindadeva is the origin of all existence, though He
Himself, being eternal, has no origin.



Vivṛti

Śrī Brahmā has glorified Śrī Kṛṣṇa with this śloka
beginning with the words cintāmaṇi-prakara-sadmasu. In
this verse he has expressed profound moods of immense
longing. Regarding the most effective sādhana for a
sādhaka-bhakta, there are two methods, each appropriate
to the sādhaka in different stages. One is mantramayī-
upāsanā, which entails contemplating one specific
pastime situated in one place. The other is the method
of svārasikī, which entails contemplation on all the
pastimes collectively. In this prayer, Brahmājī has
first of all described the subject of the superior
meditation, svārasikī-līlā.

Brahmājī has also offered similar prayers in the Gopāla-
tāpanī Upaniṣad (1.37):

namo vijñāna-rūpāya

paramānanda-rūpiṇe

kṛṣṇāya gopīnāthāya

govindāya namo namaḥ

O Bhagavān, You are the foundation of that realized
knowledge, by whose power all things are illuminated.
You are the original reservoir of all pleasure, and You
attract all and bestow joy upon all. O Gopīnātha! O
Govinda! I offer my praṇāma unto You again and again.

Furthermore:

O Prabhu, Your two eyes expand like the petals of a
lotus flower, and a garland of forest flowers hangs down
gracefully from Your neck. O Govinda, the creation of
the universe has sprung up from the lotus of Your navel,
and You maintain the life-breath of all the gopīs. May

                           97
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

You accept my obeisances unto You.

barhāpīdābhirāmāya

rāmāyākuṇṭha-medhase

rāmā-mānasa haṁsāya

govindāya namo namaḥ

Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad (1.39)

O Bhagavān, Your head is decorated with a crown bedecked
with peacock feathers. You delight the hearts of all,
and there is no anxiety at all within You. You are the
embodiment of immeasurable knowledge. You are the king
of swans, who always plays upon the lake of the gopīs’
hearts. Therefore, O Govinda, may You kindly accept my
praṇāma at Your lotus feet.

veṇu-vādana-śīlāya

gopālāyāhi-mardane

kālindī-kūla-lolāya

lola-kuṇḍala-dhāriṇe

Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad (1.41)

O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, You frolic eternally in the forest of
Vṛndāvana, and at every moment You attract the devotees
by playing sweetly upon Your flute. You are the guardian
of the Vedas, Mother Earth and the cows. Your splendid
presence in the form of a cowherd boy, protecting the
land, cowherd boys, gopīs and cows is eternal. You give
life to all the gopas and gopīs by vanquishing wicked
demons such as Kāliya, Agha and Baka. O Yamunā-taṭa-
bihārī, You engage in delightful revelry on the banks of
the River Yamunā. Your dangling earrings swing to and
fro. O Govinda, may You kindly accept my humble
obeisances.

In this way Brahmājī has offered prayers while immersed
in the waves of a variety of wonderful bhāvas.

When the lotus-eyed Śrī Kṛṣṇa, surrounded by all His
friends, leaves the cowherd village and enters the
forest to tend the cows, He increases the bliss of the
residents of Vraja, especially the vraja-gopīs, and
steals their hearts, minds and life-breath. The
unprecedented aura of His cowherd-boy attire and His
attractive, dark, fresh raincloud complexion seems to
expand in all directions. As a blue sapphire fills its
surroundings with its brilliant luster, similarly
Śyāmasundara’s radiant hue makes the entire forest of
Vṛndāvana azure.

In the arbors of Vṛndāvana forest, the trees, which are
covered with flowering vines, observe a grand festival
to welcome Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Immediately upon His return to the
forest, the friendly creatures and birds become
submerged in the highest bliss of prema. On the pretext
of dripping streams of honey, all the trees weep tears

                           98
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

of joy. They experience bhāvas such as horripilation by
sprouting new thorns.

Brahmājī saw such love-laden trees of Vṛndāvana as
desire-trees (kalpa-vṛkṣa); therefore, to indicate that
thousands upon thousands of such desire-trees adorn the
transcendental forest of Vṛndāvana, he has said, kalpa-
vṛkṣa-lakṣāvṛteṣu. Countless bowers of desire-trees
stand as the concentrated embodiments of eternal,
conscious and euphoric rasa, fulfilling all the desires
of those who take shelter of them. Their different
colors are astonishing, and their various shapes cause
one to be struck with wonder. They produce exquisite
fruits, flowers and tender buds (mañjarīs) that perfume
the forest with amazing fragrances. For the sake of
facilitating Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s loving affairs, the
bowers of Vṛndāvana’s desire-trees are manifest in many
varieties. Some are the highest transformation of the
essence of nectar; some appear to be artistically
fashioned from transcendental butter; and some hold
intoxicating condensed nectar in their branches. There
are also some that have a brilliant white appearance —
one type resembles crystal, while others are like
camphor.

Another idea is conveyed by the words kalpa-vṛkṣa-
lakṣāvṛteṣu: the trees, which are covered with flowering
vines, are animate and possessed of ecstatic emotions.
Śrīla Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī has also stated: “he
mādhavī-madhurāṅga-taruṇa-tamāla — O young tamāla tree,
in the empire of the Vṛndāvana forest, Rājya-lakṣmī, the
empress in the form of the flowering mādhavī vine, has
enveloped you from head to toe, and thus she is
enhancing the exceptionally enchanting beauty of your
trunk, branches, twigs and other features. All
directions of Śrī Vṛndāvana are fully permeated by your
fragrance, and all the burning distress of the people of
this world is relieved by the cooling shade of your
fame.”

The trees of Vṛndāvana are studded with horripilation in
the form of newly-sprouted shoots, due to their intense
transcendental affection (anurāga) for Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.
On the pretext of dropping honey, they rain down streams
of tears. When the gentle breezes blow, the trees strike
comical poses by moving their leaves, and they begin to
perform a transcendental dance in the bliss of prema.
When the trees appear to bring forth a profusion of
blossoming flowers, they are actually bursting out
laughing. The desire-trees also perfectly sing the
praises of Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava through the chirping of the
birds residing in their branches. By bending down due to
the burden of so many fruits, they offer praṇāma to the
lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. May the bowers of Śrī
Vṛndāvana confer the supreme transcendental bliss upon
us all.

Thus all the trees and creepers of Vṛndāvana are desire-
trees and desire-creepers. They cannot be compared with
ordinary desire-trees and vines that fulfill the worldly
desires of mortal beings in the spheres of religiosity,
economic development and sense gratification. By taking
shelter of these transcendental desire-trees and desire-
creepers, all material ambitions and desires are

                           99
Brahma-samhita.txt                                 5/5/2017

dispelled from the heart, which becomes completely
filled with the mood of divine service to Śrī Rādhā-
Mādhava. These trees and creepers bestow prema for the
Divine Couple upon those who are under Their shelter,
thus allowing such surrendered souls to become supremely
fortunate.

In this regard Śrīla Prabodhānanda Sarasvatīpāda has
commented:

yā rādhāyā vara-tanu-natety ukti-mātreṇa nṛtyed

gāyety uktyā madhukara rutair vijña-gānaṁ tanoti

krandety uktyā visṛjati madhutphullitā syād dhaseti

proktā śliṣya-drumam iti girā sasvaje dhṛṣṭa-gucchā

Śrī Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta (5.37)

When Śrī Rādhā says to those creepers of Vraja, “O
beautiful-limbed ones, you should dance,” they begin to
dance by moving their leaves. When She says, “Now sing,”
they begin to sing by means of the humming of
bumblebees. When She says, “Now weep,” they at once
shower streams of honey, and when She says, “Now smile,”
they immediately burst into bloom. On hearing Śrī Rādhā
say, “Embrace this tree,” they become utterly overjoyed,
and wind around the tree.

Sometimes Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Śrī Rādhā conceals Herself
in a kuñja (bower) during a game of hide-and-seek.
Śyāmasundara then tries to find Her by taking help from
the creepers, who enable Him to discover Her by hinting
at Her whereabouts through the trembling of their newly
sprouted foliage. In this way, wherever the confidential
pastimes of Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava take place in the kuñjas
and hidden bowers, all the residents of Vraja are
forever immersed in the waves of the topmost bliss of
prema. I render service to the primeval personality, Śrī
Govinda, who resides eternally in that supreme abode of
Vṛndāvana.




Verse 30


veṇuṁ kvaṇantam aravinda-dalāyatākṣaṁ

barhāvataṁsam asitāmbuda-sundarāṅgam

kandarpa-koṭi-kamanīya-viśeṣa-śobhaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi



Anvaya

aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — to that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — the primeval person, Śrī Govinda;

                          100
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

kvaṇantam — who is vibrating; veṇum — His flute; akṣam —
whose blooming eyes; āyata — are extended; aravinda-dala
— like the petals of a lotus; avataṁsam — who has a
crest; barha — of peacock feathers; sundara-aṅgam —
whose beautiful body; asita-ambu — has the hue of black
clouds, i.e. thunderclouds; viśeṣa-śobham — and whose
unique loveliness; kamanīya — enchants the hearts; koṭi
— of millions; kandarpa — of Cupids.



Translation

I worship the primeval personality, Śrī Govinda, who is
absorbed in playing upon His flute, whose long eyes
expand and bloom like lotus flowers, whose headdress is
adorned with peacock feathers, and whose unique bodily
complexion, which resembles the luster of a dark blue
raincloud, bewilders the minds of millions of Cupids.



Ṭīkā translation

Later in this devotional scripture there are
descriptions such as: “kathā gānaṁ nāṭyaṁ gamanam api —
in that abode even natural speech is melodious song,
coming and going is a dance, and the flute is the
intimate female companion.” In accordance with these
descriptions, the previous verse has also described the
abode of desire-fulfilling gems as the extraordinary
setting of the svārasikī-līlā in Goloka. Now these two
verses (30—31), beginning with the words veṇuṁ
kvaṇantam, describe the second place of pastimes,
wherein the mantra-upāsanāmayī-līlā, the subject of this
detailed meditation, takes place. The mantra-
upāsanāmayī-līlā is situated in one place, without the
singing, dancing and so on included in svārasikī-līlā. I
worship Śrī Govindadeva, the primeval personality, who
is absorbed in playing a sweet, stirring melody on His
flute, who glances softly with His two elongated eyes,
which resemble the expanded, soft petals of a lotus
flower, who wears a crown of peacock feathers upon His
head, whose bodily complexion is like a fresh raincloud,
and whose radiant limbs reproach the beauty of millions
of Kandarpas (Cupids).



Tātparya

In this verse, the incomparable beauty of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
transcendental lover of Vṛndāvana, is being described.
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the supreme conscious entity, whose body
has a fully spiritual svarūpa. In describing Kṛṣṇa’s
svarūpa, one may compare it with charming aspects of the
mundane world, but this simply indicates the general
direction of the factual substance, in accordance with
the logic known as śākhā-candra-nyāya, “pointing to the
moon through the branches of a tree.” Kṛṣṇa is absorbed
in playing upon His flute, which steals the
consciousness of all living entities when they come in
contact with its delightful melody.


                          101
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

Just as the quality of softness is present in the petals
of a lotus flower, similarly His transcendental glance,
which removes pain from the hearts of all, is full of
tenderness and compassion. The sympathetic glances from
His lotus eyes expand the unlimited beauty of His
moonlike face. The elegance of Kṛṣṇa’s headdress,
decorated with peacock feathers, enhances His sublime
transcendental countenance. Just as a dark blue
raincloud is a soothing sight for the eyes, similarly
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental bluish complexion is a joy to
behold. Moreover, if one could January 19, 2007multiply
a millionfold the attractive qualities present in Cupid,
the resultant creation would still become madly
infatuated upon seeing Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s enchanting svarūpa.




Verse 31


ālola-candraka-lasad-vanamālya-vaṁśī-

ratnāṅgadaṁ praṇaya-keli-kalā-vilāsam

śyāmaṁ tri-bhaṅga-lalitaṁ niyata-prakāśaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi



Anvaya

aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — original person, Śrī Govinda; ālola-
candraka-lasad-vanamālya — who is beautified by an
effulgent garland of forest flowers and peacock
feathers, which swings to and fro; vaṁśī — who holds a
flute; ratna-aṅgadam — and whose arms are bedecked with
jeweled bangles; kalā-vilāsam — He is most expert in the
sixty-four pastime-arts; praṇaya-keli — of affectionate
loving affairs; śyāmam — His complexion is bluish like
the thundercloud of the rainy season; tri-bhaṅga-lalitam
— and whose graceful, threefold-bending form; niyata-
prakāśam — is eternally manifest.



Translation

I worship the original personality, Śrī Govinda, around
whose neck a garland of forest flowers and peacock
feathers swings gently, whose lotus hands hold a
captivating flute, whose arms are decorated with jeweled
ornaments, who is always madly absorbed in intimate
loving pastimes, and whose eternal natural aspect is His
graceful, threefold-bending Śyāmasundara form.



Ṭīkā translation

Here praṇaya-keli-vilāsa, games full of intimate loving

                          102
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

pastimes, indicates that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the crest-jewel of
experts in the art of laughter and joking, and that His
pastime is to revel in that skillfulness. In the Amara-
koṣa Sanskrit dictionary, the word keli is defined as
“humorous behavior” (dravakeli-parihāsāḥ).



Tātparya

In verse 29, beginning cintāmaṇi-prakara, Govinda’s
transcendental abode and name have been described. Then
His eternal spiritual form has been depicted in verse 30
beginning veṇuṁ kvaṇantam. Now, in this verse we find an
account of His playful pastimes, which are complete with
sixty-four qualities. Insofar as it is possible to
describe transcendental affairs, one should understand
that all activities pertaining to the amorous mellow
(mādhurya-rasa) have been included in the phrase
praṇaya-keli-vilāsa.



Vivṛti

In the verse beginning cintāmaṇi-prakara, Brahmājī has
described the method of meditation on many types of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes (svārasikī-upāsanāmayī), and in the
verse beginning veṇuṁ kvaṇantam, he has described
meditation on one pastime situated in one location
(mantramayī-upāsanā). Now in this verse, Brahmājī gives
another example of meditating on mantramayī-upāsanā
pastimes, of which there are many examples in śāstra.

On another occasion Brahmājī has stated:

sat-puṇḍarīka-nayanaṁ

meghābhaṁ vaidyutāmbaram

dvibhujaṁ mauna-mudrāḍhyaṁ

vanamālinam īśvaram

Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad (dhyāna 1)

I remember this very form of Govinda, the Lord of all
lords, whose eyes are extremely beautiful and soft like
an immaculate lotus; whose śyāma-colored bodily luster
resembles the hue of a fresh raincloud; who gives relief
to the hearts of the distressed; who is eternally full
of unique effulgence (that is to say, His form is self-
luminous, or His yellow upper cloth is like a fixed
flash of lightning); who has two arms, so that with one
hand He can deliver the jīvas who are averse to Him, and
with the other He can give them prema; who is eternally
situated in one mellow and one form (jñāna-mudrā);25 who
is decorated with a garland of forest flowers
(vanamālā); who is hiding from the view of others; and
who is tasting a special rasa in a solitary place with
one particular gopī.

In this verse, an alternative meaning of jñāna-mudrā is
“who, by playing His phenomenally rasa-laden flute-song,

                             103
Brahma-samhita.txt                                 5/5/2017

is absorbed in rasa and therefore remains silent, unable
to speak.” In the word vanamālā, vana also implies that
He is staying in a solitary place, while the verbal root
māla means “illumination.” In other words, it refers to
one who is revealed in the close company of His beloveds
in a lonely place, and who is busy in pastimes with
those gopīs who surround Him.

Furthermore, Brahmājī has also stated (Gopāla-tāpanī
Upaniṣad, dhyāna 2):

gopa-gopī-gavāvītaṁ

sura-druma-talāśritam

divyālaṅkaraṇopetaṁ

ratna-paṅkaja-madhyagam

I meditate upon Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is surrounded by gopas,
gopīs and cows, who keeps Himself hidden (gopa), or who
is in the company of His gopa friends such as Śrīdāmā.
(The word gopī refers to His mother, or to the gopīs
headed by Śrī Rādhā. The word go means Veda or the cows
such as Kapilā, who have all taken shelter of Him.)
Sura-druma-talāśrita means that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the subject
matter established by the Vedas, or that He is standing
beneath a desire tree. He is decorated with divine
ornaments, and possesses opulences such as wealth,
strength, fame, beauty, knowledge and renunciation. He
is seated like a jewel in the lotus of those hearts that
are perfectly pure; in other words, He reposes upon a
lotus beneath a desire tree in Vṛndāvana.

Similarly:

dīvyad-vṛndāraṇya-kalpa-drumādhaḥ-

śrīmad-ratnāgāra-siṁhāsana-sthau

śrī-śrī-rādhā-śrīla-govinda-devau

preṣṭhālībhiḥ sevyamānau smarāmi

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 1.16)

I absorb my mind in remembering Śrī Śrī Rādhā-
Govindadeva, who are gracefully seated upon a throne in
a temple of jewels beneath a desire tree in the self-
effulgent, enchanting forest of Vṛndāvana. They are
surrounded by the priya-sakhīs, who are rendering loving
services to Them.

Śrī Rūpa has given a similar description:

mahendra-maṇi-mañjula-dyuti-maranda-kunda-smitaḥ

sphurat-puraṭa-ketakī-kusuma-ramya-paṭṭāmbaraḥ

srag-ullasad-uraḥ-sthalaḥ kvaṇita-veṇur atrāvrajan

vrajād agha-haro haraty ahaha naḥ sakhīnāṁ manaḥ

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (3.3.4)

                          104
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017


Kṛṣṇa’s bodily complexion is more beautiful than a
brilliant blue sapphire, and the kunda flower of His
radiant smile shines on His lips. His upper garment
resembles a fully blossomed golden ketakī flower, and
His chest, which is adorned with a garland of forest
flowers, is captivating. That very Śrī Hari, who plays
upon His flute in Vraja, is stealing our hearts.




Verse 32


aṅgāni yasya sakalendriya-vṛttimanti

paśyanti pānti kalayanti ciraṁ jaganti

ānanda-cinmaya-sad-ujjvala-vigrahasya

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi



Anvaya

aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — original person, Śrī Govinda; yasya
vigrahasya — whose body; ānanda-cinmaya-sat — is imbued
with eternity, cognizance and bliss; ujjvala — and is
extraordinarily brilliant; aṅgāni — His limbs;
vṛttimanti — can perform the functions; sakala-indriya —
of all His senses; paśyanti — He beholds; pānti —
maintains; kalayanti — and regulates; ciram — eternally;
jaganti — the infinite universes.



Translation

I worship that original personality, Śrī Govinda. His
divine form is composed of eternity, cognizance and
bliss, and is therefore exceptionally effulgent. Each
and every limb or sense of His transcendental body is
inherently endowed with all the functions of all the
other senses. He eternally sees, maintains and regulates
an infinite number of universes, both spiritual and
mundane.



Ṭīkā translation

Brahmājī has described both types of līlā of Govinda,
the original personality. Now, in four verses beginning
with the verse aṅgāni yasya, he will explain the
influence of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s inconceivable potency. His
hands and feet also have the power to see, while His
eyes, besides having the capacity to see, can also
perform all other functions such as protecting,
nourishing and so on. Similarly, each one of His senses
is capable of performing the activities of all the other

                          105
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

senses. Therefore, it is stated in śruti: “sarvataḥ
pāni-pādaṁ tat sarvato ‘kṣi-śiro-mukham — His hands and
feet are everywhere, and His eyes, heads and mouths are
on all sides.” The word jaganti indicates that He
manifests His own svarūpa among His pastime associates
simultaneously according to their individual bhāvas, and
that He personally tastes the miraculous rasa of those
associates through His own limbs and senses. All this
can only be accomplished through the unique influence of
His divine, transcendental form.



Tātparya

There is an abysmal doubt in the minds of persons who
are completely bound in mundane knowledge, due to having
no experience of transcendental rasa. Such persons think
that the scholars of ancient times have concocted the
fundamental reality of Kṛṣṇa (kṛṣṇa-tattva) by the power
of their imagination, based on their experience of the
mundane world. In order to dispel this doubt, which
originates from the platform of material attachment and
offenses, Brahmājī has clearly shown the difference,
according to philosophical principles, between the
conscious spiritual substance (cit) and the unconscious
material substance (acit).

In this verse and the following three consecutive
verses, Brahmājī has made a diligent endeavor to make us
understand that the pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa are not the
imagination of a fertile mind, but rather they are
experienced in the stage of pure trance that is beyond
the reach of the material mental faculty.

Here the intention of Brahmājī is to establish that the
transcendental form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is composed of eternal
existence, knowledge and bliss, whereas all the
phenomena of the material world are inanimate and
composed of ignorance. Despite these two being
categorically distinct from each other, the spiritual
affair is factually the original root principle, and
therefore variety and specific distinctions must
necessarily exist there eternally. Thus it is confirmed
that Kṛṣṇa’s form, name, qualities, abode and pastimes
are transcendental, and only those whose consciousness
is pure and free from all connections with mundane
delusion are eligible to taste such pastimes.

All the following are comprised of the transcendental
substance: (1) Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s personal form, (2) the
spiritual realm and (3) the arena of pastimes, which is
made of transcendental wish-fulfilling gems and which is
illuminated by the spiritual potency. Just as the
illusory potency is the shadow of the transcendental
potency, similarly the fascinating variety generated
through the inert material energy is also nothing but
the crude reflection or shadow of the fascinating
variety that is manifest in the transcendental realm. It
is for this reason that all types of material phenomena
are dull and composed of the mode of darkness.

In conclusion, the spiritual world is the substance and
the material world is its insubstantial shadow. The

                          106
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

varieties experienced in the material world allude to
the appearance of the variety that exists eternally in
the transcendental world. Although there seems to be a
similarity between the diversity found in both realms,
they are categorically distinct from each other.

Lifelessness is the defect of the dull material realm,
where everything comes into existence, develops and
produces byproducts, and is finally destroyed. Thus,
even the apparent happiness of this world is temporary
and full of distress. However, the transcendental world
has no such defects. The wonderful varieties of that
realm are pure, conscious, eternal and completely devoid
of any material defect. There is no difference between
Kṛṣṇa and His body, whereas the body of the conditioned
soul in this world is different from his ātmā, for they
are entirely separate substances. In the spiritual
svarūpa, there is no difference between the body and the
embodied, the individual limb and the entire body, the
nature and the possessor of that nature. However, in
conditioned souls all these aspects are totally
distinct. Although Kṛṣṇa is the possessor and source of
His limbs, each and every limb is fully Kṛṣṇa Himself,
because all of His transcendental functions are included
in any particular limb. Therefore He is the indivisible,
complete and perfect transcendental principle.

The individual living entity and Kṛṣṇa are the same in
that they are both inherently conscious. The difference
between them is that the aggregate of all divine
qualities is eternally present in the living entity only
to a minute extent, whereas those divine attributes are
present in Kṛṣṇa to the full extent. Even when the jīva
attains his pure constitutional form, those qualities
will only be manifest to a minute degree in his pure
svarūpa. When by Kṛṣṇa’s mercy the potencies of
cognizance and pleasure (cit and hlādinī) gradually make
their appearance in the heart of the jīva, he attains a
perfect state similar to that of the Supreme
Personality. Still, some special qualities remain unique
to Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra, and He is therefore the worshipable
deity for everyone.

The four qualities that are only found in Kṛṣṇa are the
unparalleled sweetness of His form (rūpa-mādhurī),
qualities (guṇa-mādhurī), flute-song (veṇu-mādhurī) and
pastimes (līlā-mādhurī). These four unique, personal
characteristics pertain exclusively to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and
are not to be found even in Nārāyaṇa, the Lord of
Paravyoma, in the puruṣa-avatāra Kāraṇodakasāyī Mahā-
Viṣṇu, or in any other expansion of Bhagavān. If these
qualities are not present even in demigods such as
Mahādeva, how will it be possible for any ordinary jīva
to possess them?




Verse 33


advaitam acyutam anādim ananta-rūpam


                          107
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

ādyaṁ purāṇa-puruṣaṁ nava-yauvanaṁ ca

vedeṣu durlabham adurlabham ātma-bhaktau

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi



Anvaya

aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — primeval person, Śrī Govinda;
advaitam — who has no second; acyutam — who is
infallible; anādim — who is beginningless; ananta-rūpam
— who possesses limitless forms; ādyam — who is the
origin; purāṇa-puruṣam — who is the primeval person;
nava-yauvanam ca — yet is ever-youthful; vedeṣu
durlabham — whose tattva is difficult to determine
through study of the Vedas; adurlabham — but is
understood without difficulty; ātma-bhaktau — by His own
devotional service.



Translation

Although He is non-dual, infallible, beginningless,
possessed of unlimited forms and the oldest of all,
nevertheless He is a beautiful person with everlasting,
fresh youthfulness. Although He is incomprehensible
through study of the Vedas, He is easily attained by
spontaneous devotion of the soul (śuddha-prema). I
worship that original personality, Śrī Govinda.



Ṭīkā translation

In the three verses beginning with this verse 33,
Brahmājī confirms that Śrī Bhagavān is possessed of
extraordinary and unique characteristics. Extremely
learned personalities who are fully conversant with all
philosophical principles say that the Supreme Absolute
Truth is non-dual knowledge. He is the shelter of the
impersonal effulgence known as Brahman and of the all-
pervading Supersoul known as Paramātmā. The Vedas refer
to Him as one without a second (ekam eva advitīyam), for
no one is equal to or greater than Him. He has no
material senses and He is not bound by the results of
His activities. That supreme, transcendental reality is
the fully independent, singular, non-dual,
transcendental enjoyer, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

In regard to His being one without a second, it has been
stated:

svayaṁ tv asāmyātiśayas tryadhīśaḥ

svārājya-lakṣmy-āpta-samasta-kāmaḥ

baliṁ haradbhiś cira-loka-pālaiḥ

kirīṭa-koṭy-eḍita-pāda-pīṭhaḥ


                          108
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.2.21)

Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the original form of Bhagavān, is the master
of three potencies (sandhinī, saṁvit and hlādinī). No
one is equal to or greater than Him. He is completely
self-satisfied in His own intrinsic form of supreme,
transcendental bliss. All the demigods such as Indra,
Candra, Kuvera, Varuṇa, Brahmā and Śiva, and all the
countless guardians of the world, such as the puruṣa-
avatāras, offer various kinds of worship, presentations
and obeisances, and they keep their heads, which are
decorated with millions of crowns, at His lotus feet.

vismāpanaṁ svasya ca saubhagarddheḥ

paraṁ padaṁ bhūṣaṇa-bhūṣaṇāṅgam

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.2.12)

His pastimes are wonderful for everyone, even for those
who are proud of their own opulence, including the Lord
Himself in His form as the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha. Thus Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental body is the ornament of all
ornaments.

From this verse it is understood that, in order to show
the influence of His Yogamāyā, Bhagavān manifests His
own form of eternity, knowledge and bliss in this world,
which is composed of five gross elements. This form of
Kṛṣṇa, which is just suitable for performing pastimes
resembling the activities of ordinary mortal humans, is
so beautiful and enchanting that even Kṛṣṇa Himself is
thoroughly astonished upon seeing it. This svarūpa is
the ultimate limit of extremely great fortune, and it is
so beautiful that it beautifies the ornaments with which
it is adorned. In other words, it is transcendental to
all material comparisons.

Acyuta refers to one who never deviates from His own
form, nature and occupation. In the Kāśī-khaṇḍa it has
been stated: “ato ‘cyuto ‘khile loke sa ekaḥ sarvago
‘vyayaḥ — His devotees do not fall down even at the time
of the cosmic annihilation. Therefore, in all the
worlds, only the all-pervading personality Śrī Kṛṣṇa has
been called Acyuta.” Śrī Akrūra has also spoken about
the subject of Acyuta-Kṛṣṇa in his prayers:

Aho! Today Kaṁsa has bestowed great mercy upon me, by
which all inauspiciousness in my life has been
vanquished. The lotus feet of Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa have
descended upon the surface of the Earth. Now my human
birth has become successful, because today I will be
able to bow down directly to those lotus feet, although
they are the highest object of meditation for yogīs. In
ancient times great liberated personalities such as
Ambarīṣa, having attained just one glimpse of the
radiance emanating from the nails of those lotus feet,
have crossed over the insurmountable ocean of birth and
death. Aho! The demigods headed by Brahmā and Śiva are
possessed of all opulence, yet they never tire of
worshiping those lotus feet, which the supremely
fortunate Lakṣmī-devī worships incessantly, because they
bestow all good fortune. Those lotus feet are also
worshiped by the devotees and sages, because they bestow

                             109
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

the ultimate success of life. And because they are an
ocean of mercy, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s cowherd boyfriends serve
them with newer and newer feelings of deep love when He
sports in the forest at the time of cow grazing. Those
very same lotus feet are colored by the vermillion
kuṅkuma powder from the breasts of the gopīs, who are
full of the highest spontaneous love for Kṛṣṇa
(mahābhāva).

Similarly, in describing the glories of those lotus
feet, Śrī Uddhavajī has said:

yā vai śriyārcitam ajādibhir āpta-kāmair

yogeśvarair api yad ātmani rāsa-goṣṭhyām

kṛṣṇasya tad bhagavataś caraṇāravindaṁ

nyastaṁ staneṣu vijahuḥ parirabhya tāpam

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.47.62)

The lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa are served by Lakṣmī-devī,
the goddess of fortune, and are worshiped in the heart
by the self-satisfied masters of mystic yoga headed by
Brahmājī. Yet at the time of the rāsa-līlā, the gopīs of
Vṛndāvana relieved the burning of their hearts by
directly embracing those lotus feet to their breasts.

The glories of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet have been
described in this way throughout the scriptures.

Similarly, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental abode is also
beyond this world, beyond the illusory energy and beyond
the three modes of material nature. For instance,
Bhagavān gave Nanda Mahārāja and all the Vrajavāsīs a
vision of the spiritual abode of Vaikuṇṭha, which is
transcendental to material nature. That abode is
supramundane, composed of conscious spiritual energy,
indivisible, real, self-luminous, eternal and the
embodiment of truth. The great sages who have attained a
state beyond the three modes of material nature are
incapable of seeing the abode of Kṛṣṇa even in their
pure trance. On seeing the personified Vedas offering
reverent prayers to Śrī Kṛṣṇa in that world, Nanda and
the Vrajavāsīs were utterly astonished.

Śrī Jīva Gosvāmipāda has explained the meaning of
advaita and acyuta in this verse recited by Brahmājī,
and now he comments on the word anādi. In the discussion
regarding sāṅkhya found in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.24.27),
the verse kālo māyāmaye jīve states that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
the origin of that which has no origin. He remains
present in one svarūpa throughout the creation,
maintenance and annihilation. Even at the time that
Brahmā and Śaṅkara cease to exist, Bhagavān alone
remains present. Although the universe is eventually
destroyed, He remains absorbed in His eternal pastimes
with His eternal associates in His eternal abode.
Therefore, there is never a time when He is not present.

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.24.22—27), the annihilation has
been described thus: “At the time of the cosmic
annihilation, the mortal bodies of the living entities

                          110
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

enter into grains, grains enter into seeds, seeds into
the earth, earth into fragrance, fragrance into water,
water into the sense-object taste, taste into fire, fire
into form, form into air, air into touch, touch into
space, and space into the sense-object sound. All the
senses enter their respective presiding demigods, the
demigods enter into the controlling mind, mind enters
into false ego, sound enters the tamasic phase of false
ego, all the three modes of false ego enter into the
mahat-tattva, the mahat-tattva enters into the modes of
material nature, the modes of material nature enter into
the predominated principle (prakṛti), the predominated
principle (prakṛti) enters into time, time enters into
Bhagavān who is the controller of māyā, and finally
enters into Me. However, My svarūpa, which is the cause
of creation, maintenance and annihilation, is never
absent at any time.”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa has also been described as the oldest person
in the following way: ekas tvam ātmā puruṣaḥ purāṇaḥ.
Brahmājī said, “O Bhagavān, You are the only truth,
because You are Paramātmā, and You are separate from
this world of misleading appearances. You are the root
cause of the creation, maintenance and annihilation of
the universe. You are the oldest person, and You are
eternal, perfect, complete and unchanging. You are the
embodiment of nectar, composed of eternal bliss, and
free from all mundane designations and the qualities of
the illusory energy. You are pure, endless, indivisible
and non-dual.”

The Yadu wives of Mathurā said (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
10.44.13):

gūḍhaḥ purāṇa-puruṣo vana-citra-mālyah

This Kṛṣṇa is the eternal and primeval personality,
whose lotus feet are worshiped by Brahmā, Śaṅkara and
Lakṣmī-devī. “Avyaktaṁ vyaktim āpannaṁ manyante mām
abuddhayaḥ — You are unknown to ignorant people who
harbor the misconception that the formless,
undifferentiated, unmanifest Brahman has manifested
separately by the knowledge function of the illusory
potency, and has descended to this world in Nanda-
bhavana in the form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.” Therefore You are
confidential. Your original form is decorated with a
wonderful garland of forest flowers, and You perform
many varieties of pleasing pastimes while playing on
Your flute and grazing cows along with Baladeva.

This is the meaning of primeval personality (purāṇa-
puruṣa).It has also been mentioned in the śruti that Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s ever-fresh adolescent form is the eternal form
in which He is forever situated. Although He is the
oldest, He is eternally young.

It is stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.44.14):

gopyas tapaḥ kim acaran yad amuṣya rūpaṁ

lāvaṇya-sāram asamordhvam ananya-siddham

dṛgbhiḥ pibanty anusavābhinavaṁ durāpam


                          111
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

ekānta-dhāma yaśasaḥ śriya aiśvarasya

Aho! What kind of austerities did the gopīs perform to
be able to constantly drink the unequaled and
unsurpassed sweetness of His bodily beauty, which is
newer and newer at every moment? The gopīs directly see
with their own eyes the very rare and ever-fresh
loveliness of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s form, which is the essence of
all luster, and is the unrivaled, exclusive reservoir of
independently perfect fame, beauty and opulence. When He
begins to laugh, the makara-shaped ornaments adorning
His two charming ears cast sparkling reflections that
play with astonishing beauty upon His two cheeks. With
His form and qualities He attracts the hearts, minds and
lives of all pure devotees.

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.16.26—30) Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s qualities
are described thus:

satyaṁ śaucaṁ dayā kṣāntis

tyāgaḥ santoṣa ārjavam

śamo damas tapaḥ sāmyaṁ

titikṣoparatiḥ śrutam

jñānaṁ viraktir aiśvaryaṁ

śauryaṁ tejo balaṁ smṛtiḥ

svātantryaṁ kauśalaṁ kāntir

dhairyaṁ mārdavam eva ca

prāgalbhyaṁ praśrayaḥ śīlaṁ

saha ojo balaṁ bhagaḥ

gāmbhīryaṁ sthairyam āstikyaṁ

kīrtir māno ‘nahaṅkṛtiḥ

ete cānye ca bhagavan

nityā yatra mahā-guṇāḥ

prārthyā mahattvam icchadbhir

na viyanti sma karhicit

tenāhaṁ guṇa-pātreṇa

śrī-nivāsena sāmpratam

śocāmi rahitaṁ lokaṁ

pāpmanā kalinekṣitam

Bhagavān Śrī Hari has unlimited qualities, some of which
are being described here simply to afford us a glance in
the direction of His excellence. (1) His words are true.
(2) He is pure. (3) He is unable to tolerate the
distress of others. (4) He protects those who are

                             112
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

unconditionally surrendered to Him. (5) He is the friend
of the devotees. (6) His consciousness is equipoised
even when there is cause to be angry. (7) He is
generous. (8) He naturally feels satisfied. (9) He is
simple-hearted. (10) His activities are auspicious for
everyone because He is the well-wisher of all. (11) His
mind is steady and not prone to attachment and aversion.
(12) He is firmly avowed toward favorable subjects. (13)
He controls the external senses. (14) When He descends
and performs pastimes as a kṣatriya or a member of any
other caste, He adheres responsibly to the appropriate
principles of religious conduct. (15) He is equally
disposed to friends and enemies. (16) He tolerates great
offenses committed against Him. (17) He is indifferent
to things that are ordinarily most desirable. (18) He
abides by the injunctions of the scriptures. (19) He
possesses five types of knowledge, namely that which
pertains to direct sense perception of gross phenomena
(pratyakṣa), to Svarga (parokṣa), to the unmanifest,
formless Brahman (aparokṣa), to Vaikuṇṭha (adhokṣaja)
and to Goloka Vṛndāvana (aprākṛta). (20) He is
intelligent. (21) He is grateful for services rendered
by others. (22) He is an expert judge of time, place and
persons, and He acts accordingly. (23) He is omniscient.
(24) He is self-realized. (25) He is the controller of
all opulence. (26) He is enthusiastic in battle. (27) He
is influential. (28) He can subdue others by His
influence. (29) He is expert in quickly accomplishing
that which is ordinarily impossible. (30) He can
ascertain what kind of duty should be performed in any
particular situation. (31) His mind is never agitated.
(32) He is not dependent on others. (33) He is expert in
all activities. (34) He can accomplish many activities
at the same time. (35) He is expert in all arts. (36)
His limbs are beautiful. (37) His color, taste,
fragrance, touch and sound are beautiful. (38) His
adolescence is beautiful. (39) He is attractive to all
women. (40) He is patient. (41) His heart melts with
prema. (42) He is controlled only by love. (43) His bold
speech is remarkably witty. (44) He is an eloquent
speaker. (45) He is gentle. (46) He is bashful when He
thinks someone has detected His amorous affairs, or when
others glorify Him. (47) He offers appropriate respect
to all. (48) His words are sweet and pleasing. (49) His
natural disposition is charming. (50) He is partial to
the sādhus. (51) He is sharp-witted. (52) His knowledge-
acquiring senses are acute. (53) His working senses are
dexterous. (54) He is the abode of all enjoyment. (55)
He is always happy. (56) He possesses all opulence. (57)
It is very difficult to understand His intentions. (58)
He is immovable. (59) He sees through the eyes of
scripture. (60) He is famous for His sterling qualities.
(61) He is the object of love and attachment for
everyone. (62) He is worshipable for everyone. (63) He
is devoid of pride, despite being worshiped by everyone.
(64) He is possessed of brahminical qualities. (65) All
mystic powers are under His control. (66) He is the
concentrated embodiment of eternal existence,
consciousness and bliss. (67) Some qualities, such as
satisfaction, are also found in devotees, karmīs, jñānīs
and yogīs. However, all such qualities are present only
in a common way, whereas in Bhagavān they are fully
present to the ultimate extent. Therefore all these
qualities are transcendental, fully spiritual and

                          113
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

inherent in His very nature. (69) Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s qualities,
pastimes, associates, transcendental abode, devotees and
paraphernalia are all eternal, supramundane and
complete. Therefore the qualities that the ordinary
living entities cannot possibly possess are all present
only in Bhagavān. For example: (70) His avowed intention
becomes reality. (71) He is the controller of māyā. (72)
He is situated in pure goodness (viśuddha-sattva). (73)
He is the maintainer of the universe. (74) He awards
salvation to the enemies killed by Him. (75) He attracts
even the self-satisfied liberated souls. (76) He is
served by the demigods such as Brahmā and Śiva. (77) He
is equipped with unlimited, inconceivable potency. (78)
His beauty is eternally increasing in freshness at every
moment. (79) He is the predominating deity of māyā in
the form of the puruṣa-avatāra. (80) He is the creator,
maintainer and destroyer of the universes. (81) He is
the source of all incarnations. (82) Unlimited universes
are situated in the pores of His skin. (83) He is
complete with the aggregate of all inconceivable
energies in His forms such as Vāsudeva and Nārāyaṇa.
(84) In His original form as Śrī Kṛṣṇa He can bestow
mukti and even bhakti upon His enemies. (85) His form is
so sweet that it astonishes even Himself. (86) Unlimited
qualities are eternally present in Bhagavān, such as
bestowing boundless joy upon an unconscious substance in
His proximity.

This type of description is found in both Brahmājī’s
meditation on one pastime in a single location
(mantramayī-upāsanā), and also in his broader
meditation. In the Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad it has been
stated: “gopa-veśam abbhrābhaṁ taruṇaṁ kalpa-drumāśritam
— Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is dressed as a cowherd boy, whose
divine luster resembles the hue of a raincloud, who is a
fresh youth and who is seated at the foot of a desire
tree, has been called Gopāla.” Here the word taruṇa
indicates His ever-youthful personal form, which is the
storehouse of elegance and beauty.

By the phrase vedeṣu durlabham in this verse 33,
Brahmājī has explained that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is very difficult
to comprehend even for the personified Vedas, what to
speak of the adherents of Vedic paths such as karmīs,
jñānīs and yogīs. This is confirmed in the statement of
Śrī Uddhava (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.47.61): “The śrutis
have become exhausted by continually searching for the
lotus feet of Mukunda, and they are still searching to
this very day for those lotus feet, which the gopīs of
Vṛndāvana have already attained.”

Similarly, Brahmājī also stated (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
10.14.34): “adyāpi yat pada-rajaḥ śruti-mṛgyam eva —
motivated by an intense greed to attain the dust of His
lotus feet, the śrutis are still performing austerities
to this very day.”

Although Yaśodā-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa is inaccessible to the
karmīs and yogīs, He is easily accessible through the
love of His devotees: “bhaktyāham ekayā grāhyaḥ — He is
attained only through devotion.”

In this regard Bhagavān has also said (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
11.14.21): “O Uddhava, bhakti is the powerful method of

                          114
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

attaining Me. I am completely controlled by that
devotion, but I am never controlled by yoga,
philosophical deliberation, adherence to religious
principles, meticulous study of the Vedas, austerities,
giving charity, nor by any other method. I am the
Supersoul in everyone’s heart, and I am easily attained
by the sādhus alone, not by anyone else. This is because
they have unadulterated and undivided devotion, which is
born of their unflinching faith in Me. This type of
exclusive devotion has the power to purify even a member
of the caste of dog-eaters. However, all qualities such
as truthfulness, mercy, observing silence, following
scriptural injunctions, austerities and the cultivation
of knowledge definitely cannot purify the heart of a
human being who is devoid of bhakti unto Me.”

Brahmājī has declared (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.14.5):
“pureha bhūman bahavo ‘pi yoginaḥ — O indivisible one! O
Acyuta! There were many yogīs in this world in ancient
times who, being unable to attain success in the path of
yoga, began to perform their worldly and religious
duties as an offering unto Your lotus feet. As a result
of this, they began to practice bhakti in the form of
hearing and chanting the narrations of Your glories.
Thus they realized the essential reality of the self
without any extraneous endeavor, and without difficulty
they attained the excellent destination of becoming Your
associates.”



Tātparya

The word advaita denotes the non-dual, undivided
principle; He remains undivided, although the radiance
of His limbs comprises the endless brahmajyoti, and the
Supreme Lord in the form of Paramātmā in countless
millions of expansions is His partial manifestation.
Acyuta means that He remains full and complete, although
there are billions of incarnations who are His personal
expansions, and although unlimited millions of living
entities emanate from Him as His separated expansions.
Although He exhibits the pastime of being born, He
actually Has no beginning. Although He winds up His
manifest pastimes in this world, He is endless. Although
He is without a beginning, He also has an origin,
because He performs pastimes such as being born in His
prakaṭa-līlā. Although he is the primordial personality,
He is also the embodiment of fresh youthfulness. The
purport is that although all kinds of contradictory
qualities co-exist within Him, all compatible qualities
as well as mutually incompatible qualities are
reconciled by His inconceivable potency. This is the
nature of transcendence and its distinction from mundane
material characteristics.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s utterly enchanting, threefold-bending
personal form as Śyāmasundara is eternally in the bud of
youth. It is beyond the confines of time and space and
the mundane defects of the illusory energy. He exists
splendidly in the transcendental, spiritual abode, where
time is in the pure present, devoid of past and future.
In the material world, there is a distinction between
substances and their qualities. This distinction allows

                          115
Brahma-samhita.txt                               5/5/2017

material substances to sometimes take on various
qualities, and to sometimes become bereft of particular
qualities, but this distinction is absent from the
transcendental realm. Therefore, the qualities of the
inert universe are all simultaneously present,
reconciled, harmonious and purposeful in the
transcendental world, although they seem to be mutually
contradictory in the estimation of intelligence that is
covered by the experience of māyā’s time, place and
person. How can the living entity under the influence of
the illusory energy realize the spiritual existence when
he has no comparable experience?

The conditioned soul’s knowledge is always polluted by
the defects of material time and space, and therefore he
is helpless in the matter of renouncing his mundane
conception. If the conditioned soul is incapable of
understanding the spiritual substance by the faculty of
knowledge, then by which faculty can one realize the
specific nature of the aforementioned pure spiritual
substance? In answer to this question, Brahmājī has
said, “Transcendental affairs are incomprehensible even
for the Vedas, for the Vedas are based on sound, which
is material. Thus they cannot give us direct experience
of the supramundane Goloka. Only when the Vedas are
infused with the transcendental knowledge potency
(saṁvit-śakti) can they say something about
transcendental affairs.”

However, when that knowledge potency, combined with the
essence of the transcendental pleasure potency (hlādinī-
śakti), is manifest in the living entities in the form
of bhakti, then realization of the essential reality of
Goloka becomes possible. The bliss function of bhakti is
endless and unlimited, and is by nature full of pure
transcendental knowledge. When knowledge attains oneness
with the function of bhakti — that is to say, when it
does not express an identity separate from bhakti — at
that time it bestows perception of the essential reality
of Goloka.




Verse 34


panthās tu koṭi-śata-vatsara-sampragamyo

vāyor athāpi manaso muni-puṅgavānām

so ‘py asti yat-prapada-sīmny avicintya-tattve

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi



Anvaya

aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — original person, Śrī Govinda; tu —
indeed; atha api — even; panthāḥ — the paths; vāyoḥ — of
controlling the breathing process; manasaḥ — and mental

                          116
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

speculation (neti neti — “not that, not that”);
sampragamyaḥ — practiced; muni-puṅgavānām — by powerful
sages; koṭi-śata — for hundreds of millions; vatsara —
of years; asti — is (only capable of approaching); saḥ
api — (that non-differentiated divine light, or
brahmajyoti), which is nothing but; sīmni — the tip;
yat-prapada — of the toenails; avicintya-tattve — of
that inconceivable Absolute Truth.



Translation

Some yogīs, desiring to attain the Supreme Absolute
Truth, who lies beyond the realm of contemplation,
follow the path of strictly regulating the breathing
process. The prominent sages who advocate the philosophy
of the formless absolute follow the path of
philosophical discussion to ascertain the formless,
impersonal Brahman by the process of gradually
eliminating the unreal. After pursuing these paths for
hundreds of millions of years, they may reach only as
far as the tips of the toes of His lotus feet. I worship
that original personality, Śrī Govinda.



Ṭīkā translation

The advocates of the impersonal conception may, after
performing rigorous sādhana for billions of years, reach
only as far as the tips of the toes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus
feet. The purport is that at best they can only achieve
perception of the light emanating from His divine lotus
feet from very far away. It is absolutely impossible for
them to see Śrī Govinda being served by His associates
in Gokula.

How will it be possible for jñānīs and yogīs to have
darśana of Śrī Govinda being served by His associates in
Gokula, when it is astonishing even for premi-bhaktas
such as Śrī Nārada? Such jñānīs and yogīs cannot even
enter that place. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.69.2) it has
been stated:

citraṁ bataitad ekena

vapuṣā yugapat pṛthak

gṛheṣu dvy-aṣṭa-sāhasraṁ

striya eka udāvahat

On one occasion, the spectacle that Devarṣi Nārada
beheld when he went to Dvārakā filled him with wonder.
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa was marrying sixteen thousand
beautiful young ladies in separate ceremonies, which
were being conducted in sixteen thousand different royal
palaces simultaneously. In one place He was accepting
the hand of the bride; in another He was offering
oblations in the fire sacrifice; somewhere else, where
the knot had already been tied, He was circumambulating
the fire; and in all the other places He was engaged in
many different aspects of the marriage ritual. Upon

                           117
Brahma-samhita.txt                                5/5/2017

seeing this, even the omniscient Śrī Nārada was
astonished.

It is also stated in the Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad (21):

eko vaśī sarvagaḥ kṛṣṇa īdyaḥ

eko ‘pi san bahudhā yo vibhāti

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the one supreme controller of all
controllers, and He is all-pervading. Although He is
one, by the influence of His inconceivable potency He
manifests as incarnations who are His personal
expansions; as the living entities, who are His
separated subjective portions; and as innumerable
associates, who are His bodily expansions. He is the
incomparable and unsurpassed reality.

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.33.3) it is stated: “ātmeśvaro
‘tarkya-sahasra-śaktiḥ — Bhagavān alone is the soul of
all. He is the controller of all, being equipped with
unlimited, inconceivable powers that defy mundane
reasoning.”

In the Skanda Purāṇa and the Mahābhārata (Bhīṣma-parva
5.22), it is stated: “acintyāḥ khalu ye bhāvāḥ na tāṁs
tarkeṇa yojayet — the substances and moods that lie
beyond material nature have been called inconceivable.
They are absolutely incomprehensible to the power of
human intelligence, which is limited and full of
material defects.”

Similarly, we find this statement in the Vedānta-sūtra
(2.1.11): “tarkāpratiṣṭhānāt — logic is not the basis
for understanding anything.” This is because any
conclusion established by logic today will be refuted
tomorrow by another person with a new logic. Therefore
the Vedānta-sūtra also states (2.1.27): “śrutes tu
śabda-mūlatvāt — you should understand the
inconceivable, supreme personal Absolute Truth only
through the statements of śruti, because they are the
teachings of Bhagavān.” The statements of the Vedas are
the fundamental evidence because they are free from the
four defects of mistakes, illusion, defective perception
and the desire to cheat others. They are reliable
statements received through the system of guru-
paramparā. The inconceivable Absolute Truth can be known
only by this preceptorial succession. In this regard,
the commentary on Vedānta-sūtra reasons that, just as
the influence of a gemstone, a mantra or a potent
medicinal herb is beyond the comprehension of the
intelligence of the common man, so are the inherent
powers of the Absolute Transcendence. The supernatural
substance can only be known by the uncommon and divine
power of undivided, pure bhakti.



Tātparya

Only one who is tasting the transcendental mellows of
pure bhakti is considered to have attained the lotus
feet of Śrī Govinda. The practitioners of aṣṭāṅga-yoga
may absorb themselves in trance, and the greatest

                          118
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

philosophers of the doctrine of monism may deliberate on
matter and spirit, eliminating and rejecting all
material phenomena one by one for millions of years. In
the end they may both attain the state of merging into
the formless, impersonal, spiritual radiance. This
spiritual radiance, which is situated outside the
transcendental abode, is nothing more than the reflected
effulgence emanating from the small toenails of the
lotus feet of Śrī Govindadeva in Goloka. It cannot even
be considered to be the reflected effulgence of Śrī
Govinda’s lotus feet.

Actually, the processes of merging into the Absolute and
dissolving the self in Brahman are both situated in the
boundary area between the spiritual and material worlds.
Unless one crosses beyond these two conceptions, one
cannot realize the fascinating varieties of the served,
the servant and the service in the transcendental world.
The conditions of merging into the Absolute and
dissolving the self in Brahman are not genuine
happiness. They only mark the cessation of distressful
experiences arising from a connection with the illusory
energy. Although the absence of distress can be called
happiness to a certain extent, it is meager and
insignificant. Merely dispelling the suffering condition
of material existence is not sufficient; the statement
“ātyantika-duḥkha-nivṛtti — the ultimate goal of life is
to end distress” is not correct. The ultimate attainment
of the living entity is to be situated in his pure,
transcendental, constitutional position of devotional
service to Bhagavān. This condition can only be achieved
by the mercy of bhakti, which is inherently
transcendental. It is never available by following a
tasteless and troublesome path that is completely devoid
of rasa.




Verse 35


eko ‘py asau racayituṁ jagad-aṇḍa-koṭiṁ

yac-chaktir asti jagad-aṇḍa-cayā yad-antaḥ

aṇḍāntara-stha-paramāṇu-cayāntara-stham

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi



Anvaya

aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — original person, Śrī Govinda; api —
although; asau asti — He exists; ekaḥ — as a single,
absolute reality; yat-śaktiḥ — by His self-sufficient
potency; racayitum — in creating; koṭim — the tens of
milllions; jagad-aṇḍa — of universes; yad-antaḥ —
through His entrance; cayāḥ — within the host; jagad-
aṇḍa — of universes; antara-stha — He becomes situated;
aṇḍa — (simultaneously) in each universe; antara-stham —

                          119
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

and within; cayā — each of the host; paramāṇu — of
atoms.



Translation

Potency and the possessor of potency are one
undifferentiated principle. The potency by which
billions of universes are created is situated
inseparably within Bhagavān. All the universes are
situated within Bhagavān, and by the influence of His
inconceivable potency, Bhagavān is also fully present in
every atom of all the universes. I worship that original
personality, Śrī Govinda.



Ṭīkā translation

Although Śrī Kṛṣṇa is one, He creates everything, and
pervades every atom in the creation. He is smaller than
the smallest, and greater than the greatest. The
following description of His inconceivable potency is
found in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.13.46—55):

tāvat sarve vatsa-palāḥ

paśyato ‘jasya tat-kṣaṇāt

vyadṛśyanta ghanaśyāmāḥ

pīta-kauśeya-vāsasaḥ

The influence of His inconceivable potency is such that,
although Kṛṣṇa is one, He assumed the form of
innumerable calves and cowherd boys, as Brahmā looked on
again and again. All those forms became śyāma-colored,
like fresh rainclouds, and all were attired in yellow
upper garments. All the forms were resplendent with four
arms that held the conch, disk, mace and lotus flower.
Their heads were adorned with crowns, their ears with
earrings, their chests with necklaces and their necks
with garlands of forest flowers. All of them looked
beautiful with a clockwise curl of hair on their right
breast, three lines marking their throats and the
Kaustubha-jewel ornamenting their necks. They had
bracelets on their wrists, ankle-bells on their feet,
belts on their waists and rings on their fingers. Each
form was decorated from head to toe with a garland of
fresh young tulasī leaves, which had been offered by
some immensely pious personalities, and they were all
fulfilling the hearts’ desires of all their devotees.
The moving and non-moving living entities, from Brahmā
down to insignificant pieces of straw, all assumed forms
in which they performed varieties of worship by dancing,
singing, playing musical instruments and offering
different types of paraphernalia.

The expansions of Bhagavān were surrounded by the
personified mystic powers headed by aṇimā, by the
opulences headed by māyā, and by the twenty-four
elements headed by the mahat-tattva. All the ingredients
of the universe such as time, acquired nature,

                            120
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

impressions, desires, fruitive activities and the three
modes of material nature assumed personified forms, and
Brahmā saw that they were all worshiping the expansions
of Kṛṣṇa. Their conception of being independent from Him
was completely dispelled by His glories.

Then, the cowherd boys, all the substances from
unlimited numbers of universes, as well as the multitude
of presiding deities in those universes, entered into
Kṛṣṇa and again manifested from Him.

Then again, jagad-aṇḍa-cayāḥ — Brahmājī saw that
Parabrahma from whom all the animate and inanimate
worlds are manifest, along with His cows, calves and
cowherd boys, which were all non-different from Him.

Although Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa possesses a distinctly
human-like appearance, He has no outside or inside. He
is smaller than the smallest, and greater than the
greatest. He is all-pervading. He is not obstructed by
past and future time. He is the cause and the effect of
the universe. Since He is all-pervading, He is inside
and outside the cosmic manifestation. The form of the
universe is also Him, because cause and effect may be
seen as non-different. He is unmanifest in the sense
that He is beyond the range of material sense
perception. He is praised by śruti-mantras such as anor
aṇīyān mahato mahīyān. In Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad (23),
it is stated:

yo ‘sau sarveṣu bhuteṣv āviśya bhūtāni vidadhāti sa vo
hi svāmī bhavati. yo ‘sau sarva-bhūtātmā gopāla eko
devaḥ sarva-bhūteṣu gūḍhaḥ

Only Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa is Parabrahma. He is not only
free from birth and decay, but is completely untouched
by the six waves: hunger, thirst, aging, death,
lamentation and bewilderment. He is eternally in one
form, and free from deterioration. He is the center of
the universe. He is tending wish-fulfilling cows in
order to make them joyful. He is also present in all the
Vedas, who are loudly proclaiming His glories. He
remains within all moving and non-moving living
entities, and He regulates them. Such is the nature of
that cowherd boy, Govinda, who is the master of us all.
Gopāla is the Soul and Self of all living entities.
Although the Lord is one, He is hidden within all
animate beings.

Thus the fact that the Absolute Truth is possessed of
personal attributes is proven by evidence such as this.



Tātparya

The form and substance of the transcendental realm is
entirely beyond the illusory material nature. Śrī Kṛṣṇa
reigns supreme above even that superior nature. By His
free will, He creates unlimited numbers of universes
through the agency of His inconceivable potency. All the
universes are a transformation of His potency. Still,
His location remains transcendental, because all the
spiritual and material worlds are situated within Him,

                          121
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

and He is within them. Moreover, He is fully present
within each and every atom of all the universes. The
quality of being all-pervading is only one aspect of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s opulence, for He is also fully present
everywhere in His form as Śrī Kṛṣṇa, which is neither
gigantic nor minute, but of intermediate proportions
like that of a human being. This is His supernatural,
transcendental opulence. By this consideration, the
principle of inconceivable distinction with non-
distinction (acintya-bhedābheda-tattva) is established,
and simultaneously all contaminating opinions such as
Māyāvāda philosophy become unacceptable.




Verse 36


yad-bhāva-bhāvita-dhiyo manujās tathaiva

samprāpya rūpa-mahimāsana-yāna-bhūṣāḥ

sūktair yam eva nigama-prathitaiḥ stuvanti

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi



Anvaya

aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — original Supreme Person, Śrī Govinda;
yad-bhāva-bhāvita-dhiyaḥ — on account of being aborbed
in ecstatic consciousness of Him; manujāḥ — men; tathā
eva — in accordance with their respective moods and
perfections;26 samprāpya — attain; rūpa-mahimā-āsana-
yāna-bhūṣāḥ — beautiful forms, glories, seats,
conveyances and ornaments; yam eva — and whom; stuvanti
— they sing His praises; sūktaiḥ — by chanting mantras;
nigama-prathitaiḥ — renowned in the Vedas.



Translation

I worship the original personality, Śrī Govinda. Those
human beings whose hearts are enthused with ecstatic
devotion for Him attain their respective forms, seats,
conveyances and ornaments, in accordance with their
individual moods, and they glorify Him through the hymns
renowned in the Vedas.



Ṭīkā translation

It is true that Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa continually performs
His playful loving pastimes with His own eternal
associates. Now the verse yad-bhāva-bhāvita-dhiyaḥ uses
the logic of inferential partial illustration
(kaimutikī-nyāya)27 to describe how generous and
merciful He is to His practicing devotees in this world.

                          122
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

The residents of Vraja render various types of intimate
service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa by virtue of their intrinsic
qualities that are similar to His, such as their
disposition, age, playfulness, attire and so on. In this
way they sport and enjoy along with Him. Śāstras such as
the Vedas and Purāṇas give this account of their
position being on the same level with Śrī Kṛṣṇa as His
associates. Just as those eternal associates enjoy
pastimes along with Śrī Kṛṣṇa, similarly the sādhakas
under the guidance of those eternal associates follow
their respective service moods, and taste the happiness
of eternal service to Kṛṣṇa along with them. If one can
attain Kṛṣṇa by constantly thinking of Him as one’s
enemy, then those who are devoted to Kṛṣṇa must
definitely attain Him — how can there be any doubt about
it?

vaireṇa yaṁ nṛpatayaḥ śiśupāla-śālva-

pauṇḍrādayo gati-vilāsa-vilokanādyaiḥ

dhyāyanta ākṛti-dhiyaḥ śayanāsanādau

tad-bhāvam āpur anurakta-dhiyāṁ punaḥ kim

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.5.48)

Kings such as Śiśupāla, Pauṇḍraka and Śālva used to
think about Śrī Kṛṣṇa in an inimical mood even while
they were sleeping, eating and performing all their
duties. If they attained nearness in the form of
impersonal liberation simply by being absorbed in
thoughts of His activities, movements, sporting and
glancing, then those eminent personalities who are
deeply attached to Śrī Kṛṣṇa must definitely attain
equality with Him. What is the necessity of reassurance
in this regard? Without doubt they will all attain
perfection in their respective bhāvas.



Tātparya

From the perspective of transcendental mellows (rasa),
there are five types of bhāva (mood) in bhakti:
neutrality (śānta), servitorship (dāsya), friendship
(sakhya), parenthood (vātsalya) and amorous love
(śṛṅgāra). The devotee who adheres firmly to any one of
these bhāvas, and meditates continually on the service
of the appropriate form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, eventually attains
a position befitting his eligibility. According to his
rasa, he attains a transcendental form, greatness,
situation (i.e. place of service) and conveyance, as
well as ornaments in the form of supramundane qualities
that enhance his personal beauty. Those who are eligible
for the mellow of neutral adoration (śānta-rasa) attain
the setting of peacefulness, brahma-paramātma-dhāma.
Those who are eligible for the mellow of servitorship
attain the opulent abode of Vaikuṇṭha, while those who
are eligible for the mellows of pure friendship,
parenthood and service as a beloved attain Goloka-dhāma,
which is above Vaikuṇṭha. In each of these locations,
the devotees attain all the necessary elements and
ingredients appropriate to their own rasa. They offer

                          123
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

praise in accordance with the hymns mentioned in the
Vedas, or else they engage in intimate services.

In some places the Vedas narrate Bhagavān’s pastimes
through the support of the transcendental potency.
Through these indications, one can also find
descriptions of the great, liberated devotees. For
example, it has been stated in the Padma Purāṇa: “māne
‘syāpi vandanam, arcanaṁ kuñja-sevāyām — the sulky
reproaches of the gopīs are the limb of bhakti known as
offering prayers, and service within the groves (kuñjas)
of Vṛndāvana is called arcana.”




Verse 37


ānanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhāvitābhis

tābhir ya eva nija-rūpatayā kalābhiḥ

goloka eva nivasaty akhilātma-bhūto

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi



Anvaya

aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — original Supreme Person, Śrī Govinda;
yaḥ — who; eva — certainly; nivasati — resides; goloke —
in Goloka-dhāma; akhila-ātma-bhūtaḥ — as the original
complete intrinsic form; pratibhāvitābhiḥ — for all of
His dear associates who act as His counterparts; ānanda
— in enjoying transcendental, blissful; cinmaya-rasa —
spiritual mellows; eva nija-rūpatayā — with none other
than His own internal pleasure potency Śrī Rādhā, who
has the bhāva of amorous rasa; tābhiḥ kalābhiḥ —
together with the expansions of Śrī Rādhā’s body
(kalās), who act as Her sakhīs.



Translation

Śrī Govinda, who is all-pervading and who exists within
the hearts of all, resides in His Goloka-dhāma along
with Śrī Rādhā, who is the embodiment of His pleasure
potency and the counterpart of His own spiritual form.
She is the epitome of transcendental rasa, and is expert
in sixty-four arts. They are also accompanied by the
sakhīs, who are expansions of Śrī Rādhā’s own
transcendental body, and who are infused with blissful,
spiritual rasa. I worship that original personality, Śrī
Govinda.



Ṭīkā translation


                          124
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

The gopīs, with whom Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa resides in that
world, are Mahā-Lakṣmīs, original goddesses of fortune.
In this context, what does it mean to say that those
beloveds of Śrī Kṛṣṇa have the mood of complete unity
with Him? To demonstrate the pre-eminence of the gopīs,
Śrī Jīva Gosvāmipāda explains here that Śrī Kṛṣṇa only
stays in that place where the gopīs live. This is the
message loudly proclaimed by this verse. Consequently,
the planet of the gopīs is called Goloka-dhāma.28 To
establish this conclusion, Brahmājī is revealing the
unique distinction of those gopīs in the verse beginning
ānanda-cinmaya-rasa. The residents of Goloka, such as
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s bosom friends, His brother, close relatives,
mother, father and other well-wishing superiors, are all
the recipients of His extreme affection, and they are as
dear to Him as His very self. Nevertheless, nija-
rūpatayā kalābhiḥ means that the function of His own
pleasure potency in the form of His beloved gopīs is
non-different from His intrinsic form and nature. Thus
the gopīs are manifestations of His personal potency,
and they are embodiments of the most elevated amorous
mellow. The purport is that they are naturally His
beloveds because they are infused with the complete
transcendental bliss. Therefore, the topmost excellence
of the gopīs has been established by stating that Śrī
Kṛṣṇa resides in Goloka with his beloveds, who are the
direct embodiments of the transcendental, blissful
mellow (ānanda-cinmaya-rasa).

The gopīs and their unique distinction have been
described by the word prati-bhāvitābhiḥ. The gopīs are
infused by the most elevated and radiant mellow of
amorous love (ānanda-cinmaya-rasa). “You reside always
and forever with those gopīs” means that Śrī Kṛṣṇa has
inspired them all with prema-rasa, and that the gopīs
love Him with hearts totally saturated with that
astonishing mellow of love. This is clearly stated by
the word prati. For example, if it is said of someone,
praty-upakṛtaḥ saḥ, it should be understood from the
word prati that first he performed some beneficial work,
and afterwards he attained the benefit. The word
pratibhāvita should be accepted in the same way. Thus
the meaning in this context becomes, “Just as Śrī Kṛṣṇa
inspired the gopīs with the transcendental, blissful
mellow (ānanda-cinmaya-rasa), the gopīs also caused Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, who is absorbed in the most resplendent mellow,
to drink that very rasa. In this way the gopīs also
catered to His highest welfare.”

Here the word nija-rūpatayā reveals an even more
confidential meaning of the verse. Since the gopīs are
the embodiments of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pleasure potency, they
are His parts, and are therefore non-different from Him.
Hence, it is not possible for the gopīs, who are all
Mahā-Lakṣmīs, to be the wives of others in the
unmanifest pastimes of Goloka in the same way that they
appear to be the wives of others in the manifest
pastimes. In Goloka they are Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s own beloved
wives. Just as a wife is sometimes impelled by playful
curiosity to arouse some special eagerness in her
husband by using her veil to conceal her face, similarly
Yogamāyā crafts the experience of paramourship in the
manifest pastimes of Vṛndāvana29 in order to intensify
the feeling of eagerness.

                          125
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017


Goloka eva — Here the word eva emphasizes that in Goloka
Śrī Kṛṣṇa resides eternally with the gopīs as His wives,
and not as His paramours. The Gautamīya-tantra also
confirms this in its explanation of the ten-syllable
mantra for realization of the eternal unmanifest
pastimes: “aneka-janma-siddhānāṁ gopīnāṁ patir eva vā —
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the husband of the gopīs who have attained
perfection after many lifetimes.” Therefore, the purport
emphasized by the word eva after the word goloke is that
in the Goloka pastimes, the gopīs are only related to
Śrī Kṛṣṇa as His wives, and not in any other way.



Tātparya

Although the potency (śakti) and the possessor of the
potency (śaktimān) are both one soul, by the action of
the pleasure potency They exist eternally and separately
in the forms of Śrī Rādhā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

The inconceivable amorous mellow is resplendent only in
that ānanda as Śrī Rādhā, the personification of the
pleasure potency, and Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the embodiment of the
knowledge potency (cit-svarūpa). There are two types of
cause (vibhāva) of this rasa, namely the support
(ālambana), in whom the rasa appears, and the cause of
awakening (uddīpana). The support aspect is also of two
types, namely the object of rasa (viṣaya) and the abode
of rasa (aśraya). Śrī Rādhikā and the gopīs, who are Her
bodily manifestations, are the abode of rasa, and Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is the object. That Kṛṣṇa is the Lord of Goloka,
Govinda. The gopīs are fully infused with this rasa
(pratibhāvita āśraya), and Śrī Kṛṣṇa performs His
eternal pastimes in Goloka with them.

The expression nija-rūpatayā indicates that the
functions of the pleasure potency are manifest in the
form of different arts, of which there are sixty-four
types: (1) gīta — the art of singing; (2) vādya — the
art of playing on musical instruments; (3) nṛtya — the
art of dancing; (4) nāṭya — the art of theatricals; (5)
ālekhya — the art of painting; (6) viśeṣaka-cchedya —
the art of painting the face and body with colored
unguents and cosmetics; (7) taṇḍula-kusuma-balī-vikāra —
the art of preparing offerings from rice and flowers;
(8) puṣpāstaraṇa — the art of making a covering of
flowers for a bed; (9) daśana-vasanāṅga-rāga — the art
of applying preparations for cleansing the teeth and
clothes, and painting the body; (10) maṇi-bhūmikā-karma
— the art of arranging jewels on the ground; (11) śayyā-
racana — the art of arranging bed coverings; (12) udaka-
vādya — the art of playing music on water; (13) udaka-
ghāta — the art of splashing water; (14) citra-yoga —
the art of applying an admixture of colors; (15) mālya-
grathana-vikalpa — the art of weaving garlands together;
(16) śekharāpīḍa-yojana — the art of setting the coronet
on the head; (17) nepathya-yoga — the art of dressing
backstage in the green room; (18) karṇapātra-bhaṅga —
the art of decorating the part of the external ear that
partly covers the ear-hole; (19) sugandha-yukti — the
art of practical application of aromatics; (20) bhūṣaṇa-
yojana — the art of applying or setting ornaments; (21)

                          126
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

aindra-jāla — the art of jugglery; (22) kaucumāra — a
kind of decorative art; (23) hasta-lāghava — the art of
sleight of hand; (24) citra-śākā-pūpa-bhakṣya-vikāra-
kriyā — the art of preparing varieties of salad, bread,
cake and delicious food; (25) pānaka-rasa-rāgāsava-
yojana — the art of preparing palatable drinks and
tingeing draughts with red color; (26) sūcī-vāya-karma —
the art of needlework and weaving; (27) sūtra-krīḍā —
the art of playing with thread; (28) prahelikā — the art
of making and solving riddles; (29) pratimālā — the art
of reciting a verse-sequence as a trial of memory and
skill; (30) durvacaka-yoga — the art of practicing
language to which others find it difficult to respond;
(31) pustaka-vācana — the art of reciting books; (32)
nāṭikākhyāyikā-darśana — the art of enacting short plays
and anecdotes; (33) kāvya-samasyā-pūraṇa — the art of
solving enigmatic verses; (34) paṭṭikā-vetra-bāṇa-
vikalpa — the art of preparing shield, bow and arrows;
(35) tarku-karma — the art of using a spindle to spin
thread; (36) takṣaṇa — the art of carpentry; (37) vāstu-
vidyā — the art of engineering; (38) raupya-ratna-
parīkṣā — the art of testing silver and jewels; (39)
dhātu-vāda — the art of metallurgy; (40) maṇi-rāga-jñāna
— the art of tingeing jewels; (41) ākara-jñāna — the art
of mineralogy; (42) vṛkṣāyur-veda-yoga — the art of
practicing herbal medicine; (43) meṣa-kukkuṭa-lāvaka-
yuddha-vidhi — the art of knowing the mode of fighting
of lambs, cocks and birds; (44) śuka-śārikā-pralāpana —
the art of maintaining or knowing conversation between
male and female parrots; (45) utsādana — the art of
healing or cleaning a person with perfumes; (46) keśa-
mārjana-kauśala — the art of combing hair; (47) akṣara-
muṣṭikā-kathana — the art of talking using letters and
fingers; (48) mlecchita-kutarka-vikalpa — the art of
fabricating barbaric or foreign sophistry; (49) deśa-
bhāṣā-jñāna — the art of knowing provincial dialects;
(50) puṣpa-śakaṭikā-nirmiti-jñāna — the art of preparing
toy carts using flowers; (51) yantra-mātṛkā — the art of
mechanics; (52) dhāraṇa-mātṛkā — the art of using
amulets; (53) saṁvācya — the art of conversation; (54)
mānasī-kāvya-kriyā — the art of composing verse
mentally; (55) kriyā-vikalpa — the art of designing a
literary work or a medical remedy; (56) chalitaka-yoga —
the art of deception; (57) abhidhāna-koṣa-cchando-jñāna
— the art of lexicography and the use of poetic meters;
(58) vastra-gopana — the art of concealment of cloths;
(59) dyūta-viśeṣa — the art of specific gambling; (60)
ākarṣa-krīḍā — the art of playing with dice by using
magnets; (61) bālaka-krīḍanaka — the art of using
children’s toys; (62) vaināyikī vidyā — the art of
enforcing discipline; (63) vaijayikī vidyā — the art of
gaining victory; and (64) vaitālikī vidyā — the art of
awakening one’s master with music at dawn.

All these types of knowledge are embodied and eternally
manifest in the form of the ingredients of rasa in
Goloka-dhāma, and in the mundane universe they are
beautifully manifest in the Vraja pastimes by the
spiritual potency, Yogamāyā.

Therefore Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has stated:

sadānantaiḥ prakāśaiḥ svair


                          127
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

līlābhiś ca sa dīvyati

tatraikena prakāśena

kadācij jagad antare

sahaiva sva-parivārair

janmādi kurute hariḥ

kṛṣṇa-bhāvānusāreṇa

līlākhyā śaktir eva sā

teṣāṁ parikarāṇāṁ ca

taṁ taṁ bhāvaṁ vibhāvayet

prapañca-gocaratvena

sā līlā prakaṭā smṛtā

anyās tv aprakaṭā bhānti

adṛśyas tad-agocarāḥ

tatra prakaṭa-līlāyām

eva syātāṁ gamāgamau

gokule mathurāyāṁ ca

dvārakāyāṁ ca śārṅginaḥ

yās tatra tatrāprakaṭās

tatra tatraiva santi tāḥ

Laghu-bhāgavatāmṛta (5.436—40)

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is eternally resplendent in Goloka with His
display of unlimited pastimes. Sometimes He descends to
this world and, along with His associates who appear
with Him, manifests pastimes such as His birth and so
on. In accordance with Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s desire, the pastime
potency also infuses His associates with their
individual bhāvas. The pastimes that are perceived in
the material world are collectively called the manifest
pastimes, and the pastimes of Goloka that cannot be
perceived in the material world, and that remain
unmanifest to the world, are called unmanifest pastimes.
In the manifest pastimes, Kṛṣṇa travels to and from
Gokula, Mathurā and Dvārakā. However, the pastimes that
are not manifested in these three places during Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes on this Earth remain eternally manifest
in the transcendental abodes such as Goloka Vṛndāvana.
By these conclusive statements it is understood that
there is no difference at all between the manifest and
unmanifest pastimes.

Our honorable ācārya-caraṇa Śrī Jīva Gosvāmipāda has
explained in his commentary on this verse of Brahma-
saṁhitā, in his commentary on Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, in
Kṛṣṇa-sandarbha and in other places as well that Kṛṣṇa’s

                            128
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

manifest pastimes are arranged by Yogamāyā. Because of
their connection with the illusory realm, they appear to
have assimilated some mundane features that cannot exist
in the intrinsic fundamental reality (svarūpa-tattva).
Examples of such pastimes include killing the demons,
associating with the wives of others, taking birth and
so on. It is an established truth that the gopīs are
extensions of Kṛṣṇa’s personal intrinsic potency. Hence,
since they are unquestionably His own consorts, how can
there be any possibility of their being anyone else’s
wives? Still, we see that in the manifest pastimes the
gopīs do appear to be the wives of others, but this is
only an implicit conviction created by māyā.

There is a secret meaning in Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī’s
explanation, which, if brought to light, will
automatically dispel all types of doubt. The revered Śrī
Jīva Gosvāmī, the foremost follower of Śrīla Rūpa and
Sanātana Gosvāmīs, is the ācārya of essential truth and
reality (tattva-ācārya) of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas.
Furthermore, he is Śrī Rādhā’s confidential assistant in
kṛṣṇa-līlā. Therefore, there is no secret truth that is
unknown to him. Those who do not understand his profound
intentions raise arguments for and against his ideas by
presenting their own concocted interpretations.

According to Śrī Rūpa and Sanātana’s vision, there is no
difference between the manifest and the unmanifest
pastimes. The only distinction is that one manifestation
is beyond the material domain, and the other is seen
within it. In the region beyond the mundane sphere,
everything — the seer and the seen — is transcendentally
pure. Fortunate people, on receiving the extraordinary
mercy of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, relinquish all material connections
and enter the spiritual domain. If during the
performance of sādhana they attained perfection in
savoring the extraordinary varieties of rasa, they can
then see and take delight in all the supremely pure
pastimes of Goloka. Such recipients of mercy are very
rare.

On the other hand,30 those who attain perfection in
bhakti, and experience the nectar of spiritual rasa by
Kṛṣṇa’s mercy, witness the pastimes of Goloka in the
pastimes of Gokula which are manifest in this world,
even while remaining in the material universe. There are
some gradations of qualification in both categories of
sādhaka. As long as one has not attained vastu-siddhi
(birth from the womb of a gopī in Kṛṣṇa’s manifest
pastimes), the influence of māyā maintains some
restriction in one’s vision of the Goloka pastimes. On
the other hand, realization of one’s svarūpa varies
according to the level of one’s attainment of svarūpa-
siddhi. It must be accepted that a devotee’s darśana of
Goloka will vary according to the degree that he has
realized his intrinsic form and nature. Jīvas who are
tightly bound by māyā have no spiritual vision. Some of
them are trapped by the variegated charm of māyā, and
some, having taken shelter of impersonal knowledge of
the formless aspect of the Absolute, which is opposed to
the reality of Bhagavān’s personality, proceed toward
the path of total destruction. Even after seeing
Bhagavān’s manifest pastimes, both types of bound jīvas
view such pastimes as mundane activities, having no

                          129
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

connection with the unmanifest pastimes. Thus, there is
gradation in one’s darśana of Goloka depending upon
one’s qualification.

There is a subtle point to note here. Just as Goloka is
the completely pure, divine truth beyond the illusory
realm, the Gokula which is manifest on this Earth is
similarly always pure and uncontaminated, even though it
appears in the material world by Bhagavān’s knowledge
potency, Yogamāyā. There is not even the slightest touch
of material defect, degradation or imperfection in
either the manifest or the unmanifest pastimes.
Different people perceive the pastimes differently,
depending on their qualification. Defect
(contamination), foulness, designation, illusion,
ignorance, impurity, falsity, loathsomeness and
grossness are all perceived through the conditioned
living entities’ intelligence, false ego and eyes that
have been dulled by the material nature. They do not
belong to the object of their perception, Gokula. The
more one is free from defects, the more one is granted
vision of the transcendental truth. The truth is
revealed in śāstra, but the purity of realization for
those who deliberate on these tattvas will depend upon
their qualifications.

According to the views of Śrī Rūpa and Śrī Sanātana,
whatever pastimes are manifest in Bhauma-Gokula are also
present in Goloka, also in their pure form without a
tinge of māyā. That is why the mood of transcendental
paramourship is also certainly present in some form or
another in Goloka in its inconceivably pure state. All
the manifestations created by Yogamāyā are immaculate.
The transcendental mood that Yogamāyā creates of being
the wife of someone other than Kṛṣṇa, or of being His
paramour, is therefore based on the pure absolute
reality. But what is this pure absolute reality? This
should be discussed.

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī writes (Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi 1.9—10,
2.21, 5.2):

pūrvokta-dhīrodattādi

caturbhedasya tasya tu

patiś copapatiś ceti

prabhedāv iha viśrutau

patiḥ sa kanyāyāḥ yaḥ

pāṇi-grāhako bhavet

rāgeṇollaṅghayan dharmaṁ

parakīyā-valārthinā

tadīya-prema-sarvasyaṁ

būdhair upapatiḥ smṛtaḥ

laghutvam atra yat proktaṁ


                             130
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

tat tu prākṛta-nāyake

na kṛṣṇe rasa-niryāsa — svādārtham avatāriṇi

tatra nāyikābheda-vicāraḥ,

“nāsau nāḍhye rase mukhye

yat paroḍhā nigadyate

tat tu syāt prākṛta-kṣudra-

nāyikādy-anusārataḥ.”

After deep deliberation on these verses of Ujjvala-
nīlamaṇi, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī establishes that the
transcendental paramour mood, like the pastime of
Kṛṣṇa’s birth, is a divine delusion created by Yogamāyā.
“Tathāpi patiḥ pura-vanitānāṁ dvitīyo vraja-vanitānām —
it is understood that the mood of being married exists
in Dvārakā, while the vraja-sundarīs have the
transcendental paramour mood.” According to the
conclusions of Śrīla Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmīs, the
delightfully deceptive pastimes are also accepted as the
contrivance of Yogamāyā. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has
established that there is no difference between the
pastimes of Goloka and Gokula, and it must be accepted
that the original principle of all pastimes is manifest
in Gokula.31

One who accepts the hand of a virgin girl according to
the sacred rites of marriage is called a husband. And he
who, being overcome by passion, violates conventional
morality in order to win another’s wife is called a
paramour. Now, the religious obligation binding one
within matrimonial regulation does not exist in Goloka.
Even the concept of husbandhood within the bounds of
matrimony does not exist there. Therefore the gopīs, who
are Kṛṣṇa’s own potency, cannot be married to any other
person, and can never be the wives of other men. In that
realm of Goloka it is not possible for the paramour
(parakīyā) and married (svakīyā) conditions to exist
separately from each other. In the manifest pastimes
within the illusory realm, the strictures of marriage do
exist, but Śrī Kṛṣṇa is beyond their jurisdiction.
Therefore, the form of dharma (righteous prescription)
found in the sweet realm of Vraja is a creation of
Yogamāyā. Kṛṣṇa transgresses this dharma and enjoys the
transcendental paramour mellow. Only a person with
mundane vision in the material world will see this as a
violation of the dharma created by Yogamāyā. In reality,
there is no such degradation in Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes.

The paramour mellow is the very essence of all rasas, so
a denial of its presence in Goloka would minimize that
realm. It is not possible that the highest delight in
rasa could be absent from the topmost abode of Goloka.
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is the source of all incarnations,
relishes this rasa in one way in Goloka and in another
way in Gokula. Thus, even though there appears to be a
transgression of dharma according to material vision,
this truth must also exist in some form in Goloka.

“Ātmārāmo ‘py arīramat (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.29.42) —

                             131
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa performed amorous pastimes, although He is self-
satisfied (ātmārāma).” “Ātmany avaruddha-saurataḥ
(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.33.25) — Śrī Kṛṣṇa, whose every
desire comes to fruition, keeps in His heart the hāva,
bhāva and other anubhāvas arising from His amorous
diversions.” “Reme rameśo vraja-sundarībhir yathārbhakaḥ
sva-pratibimba-vibhramaḥ (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.33.16) —
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who gives pleasure to the supreme
goddess of fortune Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, enjoyed with the
beautiful Vraja maidens just as an innocent child plays
with his reflection without undergoing any
transformation.”

It is understood from these statements of śāstra that
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s constitutional nature is to be self-
satisfied. In those spiritual planets predominated by
opulence, He manifests His own potency as Lakṣmī, and
consorts with her in the mellow of wedded conjugal love.
There, with the sense of wedlock prevailing, rasa only
goes up to the stage of servitorship (dāsya). But in
Goloka, Kṛṣṇa manifests millions and millions of gopīs
and enjoys with them continuously, oblivious to any
sentiments of wedded love. In the svakīyā conception,
rasa does not remain extremely inaccessible as in the
parakīyā mood, where the obstacles to meeting make union
all the more precious. Hence, from beginningless time,
the gopīs are naturally imbued with an innate conception
of being other men’s wives. Śrī Kṛṣṇa therefore
reciprocates with their mood, and naturally assumes the
identity of their paramour, taking the help of His
flute, which is His dearly beloved intimate companion,
to accomplish the rāsa dance and other pastimes.

Goloka, which is eternally perfect and free from
illusion, is the abode of divine rapture. Thus, the flow
of rasa in the conception of paramourship finds its
perfection there. Even the parental mellow is not found
in Vaikuṇṭha because of the sense of awe and reverence
there. However, in the fountainhead of ultimate
sweetness, which is the Vraja situated in Goloka, there
exists nothing but the original conception of this rasa.
Nanda and Yaśodā are present there, but Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
birth does not actually take place. In reality,
parenthood does not exist in the absence of birth, so
Nanda and Yaśodā only have the self-conception
(abhimāna) of being parents. This is substantiated in
the verse jayati jana-nivāso devakī-janma-vādaḥ. This
abhimāna is eternal for the sake of perfect rasa.

By the same logic, there is no fault or transgression of
scriptural prohibitions in the amorous mellow, since the
bhāvas of being the wife of another and of being a
paramour are simply eternal self-conceptions. When the
essential reality of Goloka appears in manifest Vraja,
both of these conceptions (being another’s wife and
paramourship) are seen in a tangible form by worldly
vision. This is the only difference. In the mellow of
parenthood, Nanda and Yaśodā’s mood of being parents
becomes apparent in a concrete way through birth and
other pastimes; and in the amorous mellow, the idea of
the Vraja maidens being the wives of others takes on a
perceptible shape in the form of their marriages with
Abhimanyu, Govardhana Malla and others. In reality there
is no such thing as the gopīs having husbands, either in

                          132
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

Gokula or in Goloka.

Śāstra therefore proclaims: “na jātu vraja-devīnāṁ
patibhiḥ saha saṅgamaḥ — the vraja-devīs never had union
with their husbands.” Thus, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, the
master of the truths of rasa, has written: “patiś
copapatiś ceti prabhedāv iha viśrutau — in the
resplendent mellow of amorous love, there are two types
of heroes: husband and paramour.” Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has
written in his commentary on this śloka: “patiḥ pura-
vanitānāṁ dvitīyo vraja-vanitānām — the hero of Dvārakā-
purī’s young women is called a husband, and in Vraja,
the hero Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the paramour of the young women of
Vraja.”

This passage shows that Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has accepted
Kṛṣṇa as the husband in Vaikuṇṭha and Dvārakā, and as
the eternal paramour in Goloka-Gokula. The
characteristics of a paramour are exhibited to their
full extent in the Lord of Goloka-Gokula. Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who
is completely self-satisfied, transgresses His natural
state of self-satisfaction. The cause for this
transgression is His intense passion to meet with the
Vraja damsels, who are others’ wives. The state of being
another’s wife is nothing but the eternal self-
conception (abhimāna) of the gopīs. Even though the
gopīs do not factually have real husbands, their
transcendental paramour mood is fulfilled just by having
the sentiment of being the wives of others. Therefore,
transgressing the rules of dharma out of their intense
attachment and all other such symptoms are eternally
present in the arena of the super-excellent amorous
mellow. In Bhauma-Vraja, this bhāva is partially visible
in a tangible form to people with mundane vision.

Therefore, the simultaneous divergence and non-
distinction between the transcendental mellows of
wedlock and paramourship in Goloka is inconceivable by
material intelligence. It can be said that there is no
difference between them, and it can also be said that
there is difference. Why? The essence of paramourship is
loving enjoyment outside of the sanction of wedlock, and
the essence of wedlock is abstention from unlawful
connections. Therefore, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s loving enjoyment
with svarūpa-śakti (His own personal potency) can also
be understood as svakīyā by this definition.32 Although
these two, paramourship and wedlock, are one rasa, they
exist eternally as its dual variations. Furthermore,
although the form of rasa in Gokula is the same, mundane
observers view it otherwise.

Śrī Govinda, the hero of Goloka, exhibits His qualities
of being the pati (meaning “husband” or “shelter”) of
the gopīs as well as being their upapati (meaning
“paramour”). Both qualities shine forth brilliantly in
their pristine splendor, beyond all piety and impiety.
These same characteristics also exist in the hero of
Gokula, but with some diversity created by the agency of
Yogamāyā. One may raise the following point: whatever
Yogamāyā manifests is the Absolute Truth, so the
sentiment of paramour love would similarly have to be
accepted as absolutely true. To dispel this doubt, it is
said that conviction in the paramour conception can
exist in the relishing of rasa, and there is no fault in

                          133
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

that, because it is not unfounded. However, whatever
base convictions exist in mundane consciousness are
faulty. They are not present in the pure, transcendental
world.

Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has indeed given the correct, perfect
philosophical conclusion, while the opposing conclusions
are also inconceivably true. Simply arguing in vain
about the conclusions of paramourship and wedlock is a
fruitless exhibition of word jugglery. There is no
possibility of any type of skepticism rising in the
hearts of those who make a thorough and impartial study
of the commentaries by Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī and the
“opposing party.” Whatever is spoken by pure Vaiṣṇavas
is true and utterly free from any bias or party spirit,
but there is a mystery surrounding their apparent verbal
disagreements. Those whose intelligence is materialistic
and lacks the spirit of devotion cannot fathom the deep
secrets of the loving controversies between śuddha
Vaiṣṇavas, and thus they wrongly conceive of such great
personalities as philosophical adversaries. The great
devotee Śrīla Cakravartipāda has wholeheartedly and with
the utmost reverence supported the opinion that Śrī
Sanātana Gosvāmī has given in his Vaiṣṇava-toṣanī
commentary on the śloka from Rāsa-pañcādhyāya (Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam 10.33.35): “gopīnāṁ tat-patīnāṁ ca — the
gopīs and their husbands.”

When contemplating any opinion connected with the divine
pastimes of Goloka and other transcendental realms, we
should keep in mind the invaluable advice given by
Śrīman Mahāprabhu and His followers, the Six Gosvāmīs.
The Supreme Personality and Absolute Truth is never
without form and attributes. Rather, He is full with
variegated qualities and pleasurable engagements, which
lie completely beyond the material plane.

The supremely relishable and splendid form of the
mellows of transcendental service to Bhagavān, tasted
through the four types of transcendentally variegated
ingredients — vibhāva, anubhāva, sāttvika and
vyabhicārī33 — is eternally present in Goloka and
Vaikuṇṭha. By the agency of Yogamāyā, this very rasa of
Goloka manifests in the material realm as vraja-rasa for
the benefit of the devotees. One should know that all
the rasas seen in this Gokula must surely be found also
in Goloka in their radiantly pure state. That is why the
wonderful varieties of hero and heroines (Kṛṣṇa and the
gopīs), the diversity of rasa in them, and all the
surroundings and paraphernalia of Gokula, including the
land, rivers, mountain, residences, gateways, bowers
(kuñjas), cows and so on, collectively exist in the same
form in Goloka.

Only the worldly beliefs of those who are imbued with
mundane intelligence are missing in Goloka. In the
variegated pastimes of Vraja, different visions of
Goloka are realized according to one’s level of
qualification. It is difficult to establish a fixed
standard to determine which aspects of those varieties
of visions are illusory and which are pure. A clear
vision gradually arises within the heart as the eyes of
devotion become cleansed through being anointed with the
salve of prema. Therefore, there is no need to argue and

                          134
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

counter-argue over this matter, because it will not
elevate one’s qualification. The truth of Goloka is
filled with inconceivable bhāva, and any attempt to
investigate this inconceivable reality by the mind would
prove as unproductive as threshing empty husks. Hence,
one should disregard the method of empirical knowledge,
and strive for realization through the practice of
unalloyed bhakti.

On the path of bhakti, it is crucial to renounce any
subject matter whose acceptance would ultimately give
rise to an impersonal impression. The pure paramour
mellow described in the Goloka pastimes is free from all
mundane conceptions, and is very rarely attained.
Devotees on the path of bhakti following Kṛṣṇa’s eternal
associates in Goloka (rāgānuga-bhakti) should adopt this
concept and perform sādhana. By doing so, they will
realize this highly auspicious fundamental truth upon
attaining perfection. When persons of gross worldly
intellect endeavor for bhakti in the paramour mood, they
generally end up engaging in immoral activity in the
material sphere. Our tattva-ācārya Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī
took this into consideration and presented his line of
thought out of great concern. The spirit of pure
Vaiṣṇavism is to accept the essence of his statements.
It is an offense to disregard the ācārya by attempting
to establish another theory.




Verse 38


premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena

santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti

yaṁ śyāmasundaram acintya-guṇa-svarūpaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi



Anvaya

aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — original Supreme Person, Śrī Govinda;
yam — whose; svarūpam — original form; acintya-guṇa —
which is endowed with inconceivable transcendental
qualities; santaḥ — exclusively devoted saints; bhakti-
vilocanena — with eyes of devotion; churita — tinged;
prema-añjana — with the salve of love; eva vilokayanti —
certainly behold; sadā — at all times; hṛdayeṣu — within
their purified hearts; śyāmasundaram — as beautiful
Śyāma, the dark-hued prince of Vṛndāvana.



Translation

Saintly persons whose eyes of devotion are smeared with
the salve of prema always behold Śrī Kṛṣṇa within their

                          135
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

hearts as Śyāmasundara, the embodiment of inconceivable
qualities. I worship that original personality, Govinda.



Ṭīkā translation

Although Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s residence is in Goloka, and His
qualities are inconceivable, He can nevertheless be seen
by the eyes of devotion that are anointed with the black
salve of unconditional love. Therefore not everyone
realizes Him in the same way. His darśana is available
according to the degree to which one has developed
prema. Consequently, the depth of one’s realization of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa depends on how much one’s sādhana is infused
with bhakti. Therefore it is said (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
11.2.42): “bhaktiḥ pareśānubhavo viraktiḥ — realization
of Bhagavān depends on the measure of one’s bhakti.”
Furthermore, those whose hearts are filled with deep
feelings of possessiveness can realize Śrī Kṛṣṇa all the
more. Thus the level of perception of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
sweetness also depends on the intensity of prema.



Tātparya

The śyāmasundara-svarūpa is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s eternal form. It
is personal and endowed with all qualities and
attributes, and simultaneously impersonal and devoid of
qualities and attributes. This is because all compatible
and incompatible qualities are exquisitely reconciled
within it. Saintly persons can see this form within
their hearts in the trance of devotion.

The color of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s form as Śyāmasundara is not the
blackish color of this world, but is the form that
bestows eternal joy in that transcendental world. It
cannot be perceived with material eyes. In Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (1.7.4) it is stated: “bhakti-yogena manasi,
samyak praṇihite ‘male, apaśyat puruṣaṁ pūrṇam — by
practice of bhakti-yoga, Vyāsadeva directly saw in
trance within his purified heart the Supreme Personality
in His complete and full manifestation.” When we
consider Śrīla Vyāsadeva’s trance, we find that Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s svarūpa is complete, and that He is the complete
Personality of Godhead. He only appears in the heart
that is enthused with bhakti. When Kṛṣṇa displayed His
manifest pastimes in Vraja, devotees and non-devotees
could see Him, but only the devotees could adore that
Kṛṣṇa of Vraja as the greatest treasure of their hearts.
This is because they were imbued with a loving
disposition. Those whose hearts were devoid of bhakti
could not realize His sweetness, even when they saw Him
directly. Although devotees cannot see Him directly
nowadays, they do see Śrī Kṛṣṇa within their love-laden
hearts as He resides radiantly in Vraja-dhāma. The
phrase “eyes of devotion” refers to the eyes of the
jīva’s pure transcendental form. Those eyes develop
according to the advancement of one’s bhakti, and in
turn the pure vision of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s svarūpa is available
proportionately.

When sādhana-bhakti attains the stage of bhāva, by Śrī

                          136
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa’s mercy, the salve of prema is applied to the eyes
of that bhāva-bhakta, and direct darśana is possible.
This depends on the degree of one’s devotion. The
purport of this deliberation is that Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s svarūpa
as the very attractive threefold-bending Śyāmasundara —
a fresh youth, the best of dancers, dressed as a cowherd
boy and holding a flute (nava-kiśora naṭavara gopa-veśa)
— is not an imaginary form. It is His trancendental
constitutional form composed of eternal existence,
consciousness and bliss. It can only be perceived
directly with the eyes of samādhi, full absorption in
spiritual trance.




Verse 39


rāmādi-mūrtiṣu kalā-niyamena tiṣṭhan

nānāvatāram akarod bhuvaneṣu kintu

kṛṣṇaḥ svayaṁ samabhavat paramaḥ pumān yo

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi



Anvaya

aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — original Supreme Person, Śrī Govinda;
yaḥ — who; paramaḥ pumān — is the Supreme Person; kalā-
niyamena — through His forms of expanded plenary
portions (svāṁśa-kalā); akarot — He performed; nānā-
avatāram — many variegated descents as avatāra; tiṣṭhan
— remaining; bhuvaneṣu — within the many material
universes; rāmādi-mūrtiṣu — in the forms of Śrī
Rāmacandra etc; kintu — however; kṛṣṇaḥ — as Śrī Kṛṣṇa;
svayam — He Himself personally; samabhavat — descended
accompanied by all of His subsidiary avatāras and
potencies.



Translation

I worship the original personality, Govinda, who
manifests Himself in the material world as Śrī
Rāmacandra and many other incarnations who are His
plenary portions and sub-portions, and who personally
appears in the form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.



Ṭīkā translation

It is explained in this verse beginning rāmādi-mūrtiṣu
that Svayam Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa descends to this material
world from time to time, sometimes personally and
sometimes in the form of His plenary portions or sub-
portions.

                          137
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017


Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the supreme predominating enjoyer, manifests
in the material world through His plenary expansions and
partial expansions in forms such as Śrī Rāmacandra. Here
the word tiṣṭhan implies that Śrī Rāma and the other
avatāras are eternally manifest. Those svarūpas manifest
in the creation from time to time for the welfare of the
universe, and sometimes Śrī Kṛṣṇa descends personally. I
perform bhajana of the parama-puruṣa, Śrī Govinda, who
performs the aforementioned pastimes. For instance, in
the Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, the demigods have
prayed:

matsyāśva-kacchapa-nṛsiṁha-varāha-haṁsa-

rājanya-vipra-vibudheṣu kṛtāvatāraḥ

tvaṁ pāsi nas tri-bhuvanaṁ ca yathādhuneśa

bhāraṁ bhuvo hara yadūttama vandanaṁ te

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.2.40)

O Bhagavān, previously You accepted incarnations as a
fish, a horse, a tortoise, Narasiṁhadeva, a boar, a
swan, Śrī Rāmacandra, Paraśurāma, Vipra Vāmana and
various demigods to protect us and the entire world by
Your mercy. Now please protect us again by diminishing
the burden of Mother Earth. O Kṛṣṇa, best of the Yadus,
we respectfully offer our obeisances unto You.



Tātparya

Avatāras such as Śrī Rāma, Nṛsiṁha and Varāha are called
personal expansion avatāras. They all reside eternally
in Their own dhāmas in Vaikuṇṭha along with Their
associates, and whenever Kṛṣṇa desires, They descend
here for the welfare of the universe. All these
incarnations descend to relieve the burden of the Earth,
to chastise the miscreants, to establish religious
principles for that age and to bestow auspiciousness
upon the jīvas. However, whenever and wherever Bhagavān
descends into this world of five material elements along
with His dhāma and His associates, it is exclusively by
His own sweet will. Similarly, Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, who is non-different from the Supreme
Personality Śrī Kṛṣṇa, also appears in His original
personal form (svayaṁ-rūpa). This is the confidential
meaning of the verse.




Verse 40


yasya prabhā prabhavato jagad-aṇḍa-koṭi-

koṭiṣv aśeṣa-vasudhādi vibhūti-bhinnam

tad brahma niṣkalam anantam aśeṣa-bhūtaṁ

                          138
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017


govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi



Anvaya

aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — original Supreme Person, Śrī Govinda;
yasya prabhā — whose effulgence; prabhavataḥ — emanating
from His effulgent form, which is replete with all
potencies; tat brahma — is that divine light (Brahman);
niṣkalam — which is free from all inebriety; anantam —
without limitation; aśeṣa-bhūtam — and in complete
existence (the Brahman that the Upaniṣads describe as
impersonal and without qualities (nirviśeṣa) is
constitutionally situated upon the spiritual form of Śrī
Govinda, which has all transcendental qualities (sa-
viśeṣa)); aśeṣa-vasudhā-ādi-vibhūti-bhinnam — and which
is distinct from the unlimited opulences of the planets
such as the Earth; jagad-aṇḍa-koṭi-koṭiṣu — within the
millions and millions of universes.



Translation

I worship the original personality, Śrī Govinda. The
non-differentiated, impersonal Brahman that has been
described by the Upaniṣads has originated from the
radiance of His limbs. That effulgence is distinct from
the majestic opulence of billions of worlds such as the
Earth planet which comprise the mundane realm, and is
perceived as the indivisible, unlimited, endless
principle of truth.



Ṭīkā translation

The perfect completeness of Śrī Govinda, in the sense of
His being the origin of all avatāras, has been
established first. Now in this verse beginning yasya
prabhā prabhavato, His completeness is being further
established with regard to His svarūpa. Although Śrī
Govinda and Brahman are one from the point of view of
essential reality, Brahman, which is potency, is an
adjective of the possessor of the potency, Śrī Govinda.
This is because Śrī Govinda is dharmī, meaning that He
possesses a nature by constitution, whereas the
impersonal Brahman is His dharma (part of the nature
that He possesses), and is thus only one aspect of His
nature, namely His bodily effulgence. Therefore Śrī
Govinda can be compared to the sun globe, and Brahman,
which is devoid of transcendental variety, can be
compared to the light that emanates from the sun. This
idea is supported by this statement of the Viṣṇu Purāṇa:
śubhāśrayaḥ sacittasya sarvagasya tathātmanaḥ. We have
already explained this verse.

Śrīdhara Svāmī has also commented thus: Parabrahma is
also the basis or shelter of Brahman. In Bhagavad-gītā
(14.27) Svayam Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa has also said:
“brahmaṇo hi pratiṣṭhāham — I am the sole foundation or

                          139
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

shelter of Brahman.” In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.16.37)
Bhagavān has said while personally describing His own
opulences: “I am earth, air, space, water, fire, the
aggregate of material elements, transformation, puruṣa
and the modes of goodness, passion and ignorance. I am
also Parabrahma, situated beyond the material nature.”

In the Eighth Canto, Śrī Matsya-deva has also stated:

madīyaṁ mahimānaṁ ca

paraṁ brahmeti śabditam

vetsyasy anugṛhītaṁ me

sampraśnair vivṛtaṁ hṛdi

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (8.24.38)

O Satyavrata Muni, you will be able to realize My
glories from the word “Brahman,” as revealed in your
heart through our dialogue in the form of your questions
and My answers.

In the commentary to this verse, it is stated, “O Muni,
you have the desire to realize the intrinsic nature of
Brahman, because you have associated with sādhus who are
satisfied in the self. You will be successful in this by
My mercy because this Brahman is My glory. It is part of
My very nature, and it is all-pervading and devoid of
attributes. Therefore, you will realize this impersonal
Brahman only by My mercy, because Brahman is one of My
aspects.”

It is also stated in the story of Dhruva in the Fourth
Canto:

yā nirvṛtis tanu-bhṛtāṁ tava pāda-padma-

dhyānād bhavaj-jana-kathā-śravaṇena vā syāt

sā brahmaṇi sva-mahimany api nātha mā bhūt

kiṁ tv antakāsi-lulitāt patatāṁ vimānāt

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (4.9.10)

O Lord, the happiness of realizing Brahman does not
contain even one particle of the bliss derived from
meditating upon Your lotus feet, or hearing about Your
pastimes in the company of Your dear devotees. Attaining
the position of the demigods is even more insignificant,
because when the celestial airships ascending to Svarga
are slashed by the sword of time, the demigods fall down
to the planet of death. Therefore, sages who are
satisfied in the self also become attracted by the
qualities of Bhagavān. The attributes of Śrī Hari are
such that sages who are satisfied in the self engage in
devotional service, their hearts being deeply attached
to Bhagavān Urukrama. Perfect sādhus who have
transcended the necessity to obey scriptural rules and
regulations also engage in devotional service.

Thus, the bodily effulgence of Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa is

                             140
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

called Brahman. It is endless and all-pervading. It is
devoid of the narrations of pastimes, and it is by
constitution uniformly non-distinct. Those who are
specifically desirous of knowing this subject more
elaborately may refer to Śrī Bhāgavata-sandarbha. There
is no need to say more here.



Tātparya

The entire universe created by māyā is included within
one-fourth of the creation of Śrī Govinda. The principle
situated above this is the undifferentiated Brahman,
which itself is only the light emanating from the
external boundary of the transcendental cosmos which
constitutes three-fourths of Śrī Govinda’s creation. It
is indivisible and thus one without a second (ekam eva
advitīyam), endless and devoid of discernible features.




Verse 41


māyā hi yasya jagad-aṇḍa-śatāni sūte

traiguṇya-tad-viṣaya-veda-vitāyamānā

sattvāvalambi-para-sattva-viśuddha-sattvaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi



Anvaya

aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — original Supreme Person, Śrī Govinda;
viśuddha-sattvam — whose pure existence is free from any
mixture of passion or ignorance; para-sattva — and upon
whose supreme existence; sattva-avalambi — the material
mode of goodness, which is mixed with passion and
ignorance, is dependent; hi — indeed (it is He); yasya —
whose; māyā — illusory potency; sūte — gives birth;
śatāni — to hundreds; jagad-aṇḍa — of egg-like
universes; veda-vitāyamānā — and who expands throughout
the Vedas; tad-viṣaya — topics related to Govinda;
traiguṇya — in terms of the three material binding
qualities: goodness, passion and ignorance.



Translation

Māyā consists of the three material qualities of
goodness, passion and ignorance, and is Bhagavān’s
inferior energy. She propagates the Vedic knowledge that
pertains to the material universe. I worship the
original personality Śrī Govinda, who is the shelter of
that māyā, though His own existence is the embodiment of
pure goodness untinged by passion and ignorance.

                          141
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017




Ṭīkā translation

Brahmājī has described the glories of Bhagavān’s
svarūpa, and now in two verses he is presenting
Bhagavān’s glories relating to His material cosmic
manifestation.

First he is describing the inconceivable activity of
Bhagavān’s external illusory potency, māyā-śakti, in
creating the cosmic manifestation. Although Bhagavān
causes the creation of unlimited mundane worlds through
His external illusory potency, He personally remains
absolutely untouched by that potency. He is eternally
situated in transcendentally pure existence, which
should be understood in the following way. Material
nature has three qualities, namely the mode of goodness,
the mode of passion and the mode of ignorance. Creation
is conducted by the mode of passion, maintenance or
temporary endurance is conducted by the mode of goodness
mixed with passion, and destruction or devastation is
conducted by the mode of ignorance. The mixture of these
three qualities is called prākṛta-sattva, mundane
existence. Existence that is not mixed with the three
guṇas, and is beyond mundane existence, is called
śuddha-sattva, pure existence. This pure existence is
transcendental or supramundane, and it has also been
called superior existence. Even superior to śuddha-
sattva is the constitutional position of eternally
remaining in one original and pristine condition. This
is called viśuddha-sattva, perfectly pure existence.
This perfectly pure existence is the function of the
transcendental potency. Therefore the intrinsic nature
of the worshipable form of Śrī Govinda is the state of
perfectly pure existence. I perform bhajana of that Śrī
Govinda.

In the Viṣṇu Purāṇa it has also been said:

sattvādayo na santīśe

yatra na prākṛtā guṇāḥ

sa śuddhaḥ sarva-śuddhebhyaḥ

pumān ādyaḥ prasīdatu

The three material qualities of goodness, passion and
ignorance are not present in Bhagavān. He is completely
free from the qualities of the illusory nature; that is,
He is perfectly pure, and complete with all kinds of
eternal supramundane qualities. Even among pure
substances, the original personality is supremely pure.
May He be pleased.

For specific inquiries on this subject, one can refer to
Śrī Bhāgavata-sandarbha.



Tātparya


                          142
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

Creation is conducted by the mode of passion, endurance
by goodness mixed with passion, and destruction by
ignorance. Existence mixed with the three modes of
material nature has been called mundane existence
(prākṛta-sattva). However, existence that is not mixed
with passion and ignorance is called pure existence
(śuddha-sattva). This supramundane and eternally present
nature is superior existence. The intrinsic form and
nature of Bhagavān, which exists permanently in that
superior existence, is in the state of perfectly pure
existence (viśuddha-sattva). It is beyond the illusory
nature and the five elements of this world. It is free
from material qualities and is composed of
transcendental bliss (cid-ānanda). Māyā has propagated
in this mundane world all the regulative Vedic knowledge
that is related to the three modes of material nature.




Verse 42


ānanda-cinmaya-rasātmatayā manaḥsu

yaḥ prāṇināṁ pratiphalan smaratām upetya

līlāyitena bhuvanāni jayaty ajasraṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi



Anvaya

aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — original Supreme Person, Śrī Govinda;
yaḥ — who; ātmatayā — by the quality of His Being;
ānanda-cinmaya-rasa — which is surcharged with the
blissful mellows of the most resplendent amorous prema;
pratiphalan — reflects His presence (in a partial form);
manaḥsu — within the purified hearts; prāṇinām — of
living beings; smaratām upetya — attaining the nature of
a mind-enchanting Kāmadeva; ajasram — (He is)
incessantly; jayati — victorious; bhuvanāni — over the
universes; līlāyitena — by means of His aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā
(eightfold daily pastimes).



Translation

When living entities remember Śrī Govinda, He is
reflected in their pure hearts, appearing in His
original form, which is surcharged with blissful
transcendental mellows. This form is the embodiment of
the most resplendent, transcendental amorous rasa, which
churns the heart of the god of love, Cupid himself,
although he churns others’ hearts. Through His pastimes,
Śrī Govinda is ever victorious over the three worlds. I
worship that original personality, Śrī Govinda.



                          143
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017


Ṭīkā translation

Brahmājī has described Śrī Govindadeva’s most brilliant
and enchanting, love-laden nature. Now, in this verse,
ānanda-cinmaya-rasa, he is explaining that an ardent
greed to drink vraja-rasa appears in the hearts of
sincere practitioners of bhakti when they associate with
Vaiṣṇavas who know tattva and who are expert at tasting
rasa, and when they hear their transcendental
instructions. In accordance with those instructions,
such genuine sādhakas constantly remember Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
manmatha-manmatha form (which enchants the heart of
Cupid, who agitates others’ hearts) along with the
names, beauty, qualities and pastimes related to it. At
that time Śrī Kṛṣṇa is slightly reflected in their
hearts in His form as the embodiment of the intensely
amorous mellow. In this way He brings the three worlds
under His direct control.

The salient point here is that He effortlessly conquers
over the three worlds simply by slightly — even to an
infinitesimal degree — reflecting His form that churns
the heart of the all-enchanting Cupid. He achieves this
simply by the remote semblance of His intrinsic form,
nature and pastimes as the transcendental Cupid.
Therefore Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s manmatha-manmatha form has also
been mentioned in the five chapters of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
that relate the rāsa-līlā pastimes (10.32.2): śākṣān
manmatha-manmathaḥ. The purport is that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is so
attractive that His beauty crushes into fine powder the
pride of Kāmadeva, who bewilders the whole universe. One
should understand this fact by means of the example:
“cakṣuṣaś cakṣuḥ — Kṛṣṇa is the eye of all eyes.”
Similarly Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the Cupid of all Cupids.
Therefore, although the Supreme Lord is the cause of
Kāmadeva in the form of material lust, that Kāmadeva is
thoroughly undesirable for the jīvas who are absorbed in
lust. In the same way, although the material world is an
external part of the Supreme Lord, it is thoroughly
undesirable for the sādhaka to conceive of himself as
the enjoyer of all the substances in the material world.



Tātparya

When fortunate sādhakas who are free from ulterior
motives continually hear the pastimes of Bhagavān from
the lips of devotees who are rasika, expert in relishing
bhagavad-rasa, an intense greed awakens in their hearts
to attain loving service in the wake of the eternal
residents of Vraja. The only genuine practitioners of
meditative remembrance in the process of rāgānuga-bhakti
are those sādhakas who, in accordance with the good
instructions of the rasika devotees, constantly remember
the manmatha-manmatha form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and His names,
beauty, qualities and pastimes in connection with
ujjvala-rasa, the transcendental mellow of amorous love.
That Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is always engrossed in His playful
antics, is manifest along with His abode in the hearts
of the devotees who possess the aforementioned
qualification. The sādhaka thus realizes the pastimes of
that realm, which triumph in all respects over the sum

                          144
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

total of all the opulence and sweetness of the entire
material universe.




Verse 43


goloka-nāmni nija-dhāmni tale ca tasya

devī-maheśa-hari-dhāmasu teṣu teṣu

te te prabhāva-nicayā vihitāś ca yena

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi



Anvaya

aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — original Supreme Person, Śrī Govinda;
ca yena — by whom; nija-dhāmni — (He who gracefully
resides) in His own abode; goloka-nāmni — named Goloka
(which is above all); te te — the respective; prabhāva-
nicayāḥ — volumes of power; vihitāḥ — are apportioned;
teṣu teṣu — in the respective; devī-maheśa-hari-dhāmasu
— abodes of Vaikuṇṭhanātha-Hari, Maheśa Śiva and lastly
Durgā-devī; tale — which are situated at the base; tasya
— of His abode.



Translation

Devī-dhāma, the material world, consists of fourteen
planetary systems. Above this lies Maheśa-dhāma, above
that Hari-dhāma, and above all lies Goloka, the abode of
Svayam Bhagavān Śrī Govinda. I worship the original
personality Govinda, who regulates the characteristic
influence pertaining to each individual abode.



Ṭīkā translation

Brahmājī has described the glories of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in
relation to the material world, and he is now
illuminating the glories of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s own abode in
this verse beginning goloka nāmni. The locations of the
dhāmas — Devī, Maheśa and so on — have been presented in
ascending order in this verse. In describing how each
abode, beginning from Devī-dhāma, is situated one above
the other, Brahmājī defines the svarūpa of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
own planet, Goloka-dhāma, as existing splendidly in the
supermost position. The meaning behind Goloka being the
highest of all is that it encompasses all other dhāmas;
it is all-pervading.

There is no difference between that Goloka and the
Vṛndāvana manifest on the surface of this Earth. The
non-different nature of these two has been described

                          145
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

earlier. For instance, in the Harivaṁśa it is stated,
“The worshipers of Brahman attain Brahmaloka. However,
Goloka, the planet of cows, is very rarely attained.
Only the sādhaka who is thoroughly determined and sober
can reach that abode, which is free from all kinds of
calamities. Goloka is not easily accessible for
everyone.” These two dhāmas have been described as non-
different by this and other statements cited previously.

In the expression goloka eva nivasati found in verse 37,
the word eva has been used to convey the certainty of
the statement “He resides in Goloka.” The purport is
that Vṛndāvana, which has twelve forests, is completely
protected by Śrī Vṛndā-devī. Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma is the
eternal abode of Śrī Hari, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, whose
lotus feet are constantly served by all the prominent
demigods, such as Brahmā and Rudra.

The unique distinction of this abode is that it is the
place where the God of gods, Gadādhara Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
eternally enjoys His playful pastimes with His beloved
gopīs. Many varieties of pastimes take place there, such
as the Setubandha līlā,34 which destroys grievous sins.
In each pastime-place, Śrī Kṛṣṇa establishes a valabhī35
and He becomes overjoyed in sporting every day with His
friends. He spends eternal time there, in order to enjoy
such pastimes.

A similar description has been given in the Gautamīya-
tantra, wherein Śrī Nārada inquired from Bhagavān, “O
Viśāmpati, maintainer of all living beings, I want to
know about Vṛndāvana with its twelve forests. If I am
qualified to hear, kindly explain this subject to me.”

Śrī Bhagavān replied:

idaṁ vṛndāvanaṁ nāma

mama dhāmaiva kevalam

atra ye paśavaḥ pakṣi-

mṛgāḥ kīṭā narādhamāḥ

nivasanti mayāviṣṭe

mṛtā yānti mamālayam

atra yā gopa-kanyāś ca

nivasanti mamālaye

gopinyas tā mayā nityaṁ

mama sevā-parāyaṇāḥ

pañca-yojanam evāsti

vanaṁ me deha-rūpakam

kālindīyaṁ suṣumnākhyā

paramāmṛta-vāhinī


                          146
Brahma-samhita.txt                                5/5/2017

tejomayam idaṁ ramyam

adṛśyaṁ carma-cakṣuṣā

This Vṛndāvana is exclusively My abode. All who reside
here, whether they are birds, animals, worms, insects or
the lowest of human beings, attain My eternal abode at
the time of death because they are always absorbed in
Me. All the daughters of the cowherds attain union with
Me and are fully absorbed in My service. This Vṛndāvana,
measuring five yojanas, is My body. Kālindī, the flowing
current of transcendental nectar, is My suṣumnā nāḍi.36
All demigods and other types of living entities reside
here in a subtle form, and I am the embodiment of all
the demigods. I never leave Vṛndāvana, although I appear
and disappear from time to time. This dhāma is full of
effulgence and charm. It cannot be perceived with the
material eyes.

The subject of this unique Vṛndāvana-dhāma, with its
eternally existing kadamba trees and other features, has
been mentioned in Purāṇas such as the Varāha Purāṇa. The
unmanifest Vṛndāvana-dhāma can only be seen by
transcendental eyes, or by the eyes of prema. By such
eyes one can also have darśana of Goloka while one is in
the earthly Vṛndāvana; this is a special characteristic
of the manifestation of Vṛndāvana on this Earth.
Therefore it is said, “One can see Gokula in Goloka, and
Goloka in Gokula.” When Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa appears in
the visible earthly Vṛndāvana along with His associates,
that appearance is called avatāra. At that time, so many
fascinating pastimes — meeting, separation and meeting
again, and all the activities of paramour lovers — are
clearly evident in order to nourish the varieties of
rasa. Just as those pastimes are present in the earthly
manifestation of Vṛndāvana, they are also going on in
the manifestation that is beyond this world. An account
of this fact can be found by a perusal of the scriptures
such as kalpa, tantra, yāmala, saṁhitā and pañcarātra.
These special characteristics should be understood from
the various śāstras.

For example, it is stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(10.90.48):

jayati jana-nivāso devakī-janma-vādo

yadu-vara-pariṣat svair dorbhir asyann adharmam

sthira-cara-vṛjina-ghnaḥ su-smita-śrī-mukhena

vraja-pura-vanitānāṁ vardhayan kāma-devam

Śrī Kṛṣṇa resides in everyone’s heart as the Supersoul.
(Or: He lives among His own near and dear relatives, the
gopas or Yādavas. Or: He is present in the heart of
every jīva and He is the shelter of all.) It is only a
rumor that He was born from the womb of Devakī; actually
He has no birth. He is served by the best of the Yadu
dynasty. (Or: He is the honorable chairman in the
assembly of the Yādavas.) Although He can accomplish
anything simply by His desire, by the strength of His
own arms (or: by the strength of His arms in the form of
His associates like Bhīma and Arjuna), He destroys the

                          147
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

demons who oppose the principles of religion. He takes
away the pain of the endless chain of birth and death
from all moving and non-moving living entities. (Or: He
takes away the pain of separation that all moving and
non-moving living entities in Vraja-purī feel in His
absence.) He increases the transcendental desire of all
the young gopīs of Vraja-purī (or: of all the ladies of
Mathurā-purī, Dvārakā-purī and Vraja-purī) by His
smiling lotus face. May that Śrī Kṛṣṇa be ever
victorious.

Furthermore, in the Nirvāṇa-khaṇḍa of the Padma Purāṇa,
in the conversation between Śrī Bhagavān and Śrī Vyāsa,
it is stated:

paśya tvaṁ darśayiṣyāmi...gopa-bālakaiḥ

Bhagavān said, “O Vyāsa, I am bestowing upon you the
vision of My original form, which is hidden even from
the Vedas. Behold this transcendental form.” After
seeing Bhagavān’s svarūpa, Śrī Vyāsadeva said, “O King,
I have seen that Supreme Personality Śrī Kṛṣṇa, whose
dark blue complexion resembles a fresh raincloud. He is
surrounded by cowherd damsels (gopa-kanyā), and He is
laughing with the cowherd boys.”

The word kanyā (in the second verse quoted on page 243)
indicates the particular distinction of the gopīs,
namely that although they are mature youths, they have
not attained womanhood. Or, although they are fully in
love with Śrī Kṛṣṇa, they are still innocent girls who
have not blossomed into fertility. By saying that they
have not attained adulthood, it is to be understood that
they are eternal adolescents (nitya-kiśorī). Thus by
referring to them as kanyā, the idea that the gopīs are
similar to other women has been demolished.

The same conception has been presented in the Fourth
Chapter of the Gautamīya-tantra wherein it is stated:
“atha vṛndāvanaṁ dhyāyet — then one may meditate on
Vṛndāvana.” After this there is a description of how to
meditate on Vṛndāvana. “The entire cowherd community,
including millions of gopa-kanyās, cows and calves, have
descended from Svarga (Goloka-dhāma) and are beautifying
the whole of Vṛndāvana. In that charming forest of
Vṛndāvana, thousands upon thousands of gopīs with long
eyes like blooming lotuses perform worship (arcana and
pūjā) of the guru of the three worlds, Śrī Hari, with
the flowers of their bhāvas.”

Similarly, in the same scripture, it has been said in
relation to the appropriate conduct of all those who
aspire to have darśana of Śrī Kṛṣṇa or who have had His
darśana:

ahar-niśaṁ japen mantraṁ

mantrī niyata-mānasaḥ

sa paśyati na sandeho

gopa-rūpa-dharaṁ harim

The sādhaka should chant japa of the kṛṣṇa-mantra day

                           148
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

and night with constant, single-minded attention. That
devotee definitely receives darśana of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in His
cowherd boy dress. There is no doubt about it.

Furthermore, it is mentioned elsewhere in the Gautamīya-
tantra: “vṛndāvane vased dhīmān yāvat kṛṣṇasya darśanam
— highly intelligent persons always see Śrī Kṛṣṇa for as
long as they reside in Vṛndāvana.”

In the section concerning the eighteen-syllable mantra
in the Trailokya-sammohana-tantra, it is stated,
“Whoever performs the sādhana of this mantra will
definitely behold Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s cowherd boy form.”

Therefore in the Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad (27) one can
find the following statement by Brahmājī beginning with
tad u hovāca: “My dear child, when I was in the first
part of my vast duration of life, I meditated on and
offered prayers to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. At that time, when a
brāhmī-niśā (4.32 billion years) had passed, He appeared
in my heart in His cowherd boy dress.”

Although Śrī Kṛṣṇa has been described as the Supreme
Controller, the Supreme Brahman, the Supreme Personality
and so on, in a few places He has been described as an
avatāra of Śrī Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. This kind of
description has been given only because the partial
incarnations are within Him. Therefore it is not
necessary to elaborate upon this point any further. A
detailed exposition has been given in Śrī Kṛṣṇa-
sandarbha.

After thus describing the glories of Bhagavān in
relation to the material world, Brahmājī is now
describing the glories of Bhagavān’s own personal abode
in this verse 43 beginning goloka nāmni. Śrī Goloka-
dhāma exists splendidly above all other planets, but
Brahmājī, the grandfather of the material planetary
systems, resides in Brahmaloka, which is within Devī-
dhāma. Consequently, he is describing the glories of
Bhagavān existing in the different worlds from bottom to
top. This sequence is exactly opposite to the factual
order, in which Śrī Goloka is topmost, followed by
Vaikuṇṭhaloka, then Maheśaloka, and finally Devīloka.
The glories of Bhagavān are manifest in those worlds to
varying degrees corresponding to their lower and higher
positions. The supermost position and omnipresence of
Goloka-dhāma is established everywhere in śāstra. If it
is suggested that Śrī Vṛndāvana is situated within Devī-
dhāma, one may reply that it cannot be so. Even though
Vṛndāvana appears to be situated on the Earth planet,
this perception is possible only by the influence of
Yogamāyā; factually, Śrī Vṛndāvana-Gokula-dhāma is non-
different from Śrī Goloka. We have already presented
scriptural evidence to show that these two dhāmas are
non-different. In the Harivaṁśa (Viṣṇu-parva, chapter
19), the following account has been given:

gavām eva tu goloko

durārohā hi sā gatiḥ

sa tu lokas tvayā kṛṣṇa


                          149
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

sīdamānaḥ kṛtātmanā

dhṛto dhṛtimatā vīra

nighnatopadravān gavām

O Kṛṣṇa, O Vīra, O calm and steadfast Supreme Person,
You are capable of achieving anything. When the planet
called Vṛndāvana was distressed, You remembered it and
delivered the whole of Gokula, the cows and gopīs from
all calamities.

This statement supports the idea that Goloka and
Vṛndāvana are non-different. The use of the word eva in
the phrase goloka eva nivasati in verse 37 expresses the
non-difference of Goloka and Vṛndāvana. This non-
difference is indicated by descriptions in the śāstras
which state that Śrī Kṛṣṇa eternally resides in the
place called Vṛndāvana that is manifest in Bhūloka
(planet Earth). For example, in the Ādi-Varāha Purāṇa it
is stated: vṛndāvanaṁ dvādaśakaṁÖsevitam.



Tātparya

Śrī Goloka-dhāma exists splendidly above all other
worlds. Brahmājī is looking up in the direction of
Goloka from his own position in Brahmaloka or Satyaloka,
which is within Devī-dhāma, and he is describing the
glories of Bhagavān that are present first of all in
Devī-dhāma, and above that Maheśa-dhāma and so on. In
this material world, which is called Devī-dhāma, there
are seven upper planetary systems, namely Bhūḥ, Bhuvaḥ,
Svaḥ, Mahaḥ, Janaḥ, Tapaḥ and Satya, and seven lower
planetary systems, namely Atala, Vitala, Sutala,
Talātala, Rasātala, Mahātala and Pātāla. Thus there are
fourteen planetary systems within Devī-dhāma.

Above Devī-dhāma lies Śiva’s abode, in which one part is
in darkness and the other part is illuminated. The dark
portion is celebrated by the name of Mahākāla-dhāma, and
the light portion is renowned by the name of
Sadāśivaloka. Hari-dhāma or the Vaikuṇṭhaloka in the
spiritual world is situated above that Sadāśivaloka.

Influence (prabhāva) is present in Devī-dhāma as māyā’s
majestic opulence, and in Śiva-dhāma as the grandeur of
time, the aggregate of material elements, and the
semblance of a plenary portion of Bhagavān who manifests
in the form of Śambhu via the transforming agent of the
minuteness aspect of the marginal potency (this is
described in detail in verse 45). However, in Hari-dhāma
Vaikuṇṭha there is the influence of transcendental
opulence, while the influence of the supreme sweetness
that usurps all opulence is wonderfully present in
Goloka. The original personality, Govindadeva, directly
or indirectly ordains all these influences, and
regulates them in the various abodes.




                          150
Brahma-samhita.txt                                 5/5/2017

Verse 44


sṛṣṭi-sthiti-pralaya-sādhana-śaktir ekā

chāyeva yasya bhuvanāni bibharti durgā

icchānurūpam api yasya ca ceṣṭate sā

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi



Anvaya

aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — original Supreme Person, Śrī Govinda;
yasya — whose; śaktiḥ — potency; durgā — Durgā-devī; iva
chāyā — who is like a shadow (of His transcendental
potency); bibharti — nurtures; bhuvanāni — all the
planetary systems; ca — and; api ceṣṭate — she also acts
(thus); yasya icchā-anurūpam — in accordance with His
will; ekā — she alone; sādhana — executes; sṛṣṭi-sthiti-
pralaya — the duties of creation, sustenance and
dissolution.



Translation

The shadow of the transcendental potency is that great
potency who creates, maintains and annihilates the
material universe. She is worshiped throughout the world
as Durgā. I worship the original personality, Śrī
Govinda, in accordance with whose desire Durgā conducts
her every endeavor.



Ṭīkā translation

In the previous śloka, Brahmājī has described Devī-
dhāma, Maheśa-dhāma and Hari-dhāma, as well as Goloka-
dhāma, which is situated above all of them. Now the
respective shelters of all those dhāmas, that is their
presiding deities, are being described in five
consecutive ślokas beginning with this present verse 44.
The presiding deity of the fourteen planetary systems
within the mundane realm is Durgā, of whom the
personified Vedas speak as follows:

tvam akaraṇaḥ sva-rāḍ akhila-kāraka-śakti-dharas

tava balim udvahanti samadanty ajayānimiṣāḥ

varṣa-bhujo ‘khila-kṣiti-pater iva viśva-sṛjo

vidadhati yatra ye tv adhikṛtā bhavataś cakitāḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.87.28)

O Prabhu, although You are the independent controller,
and have no connection with the material senses, the
entire ability of all living beings to function with

                          151
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

their working senses is conducted by You. O Śrī Govinda,
Master of Goloka, the presiding deities headed by Durgā-
devī and Maheśa present all the offerings of their pūjā
unto Your illustrious lotus feet, just as the presiding
lords of separate kingdoms accept the gifts presented by
their respective subjects and in turn present them to
the emperor. As everyone executes their prescribed work
in accordance with their respective qualifications out
of fear of You, similarly Durgā-devī surrenders the
offerings made in her worship to Your lotus feet,
although she is the presiding deity of her abode.



Tātparya

The specific attributes of Devī-dhāma have already been
described, and now the presiding deity of that abode is
being described in the current śloka. The place from
which Brahmājī is offering his prayers to the Lord of
Goloka is the universe composed of fourteen planetary
systems known as Devī-dhāma, and its presiding deity is
Durgā, whose ten arms represent the tenfold fruitive
activities. She is known as Siṁha-vāhinī, because she
rides upon a lion as an expression of her heroic
prowess. As the subduer of sins, she is known as
Mahiṣāsura-mardinī, because she tramples down the demon
Mahiṣa, who is sin personified. She is the mother of two
sons, Kārttika and Gaṇeśa, who represent beauty and
success, and she is situated in the middle of her
associates, Lakṣmī and Sarasvatī, who are, respectively,
material opulence and material knowledge personified. In
order to subdue sin, she holds twenty kinds of weapons,
which comprise the ways of righteousness defined in the
Vedas. Because her beauty is all-devouring time, she is
Sarpa-śobhinī, adorned with a serpent. Thus Durgājī is
distinguished by possessing all these forms.

The name Durgā means prison. This refers to the
confinement of the jīvas born from the marginal potency
(taṭastha-śakti) who, due to their aversion to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, are confined within the dungeon of the gross
material elements. These bound jīvas are punished by
being crushed in the wheel of fruitive activities. Only
to fulfill Śrī Govindadeva’s desire, Durgā continuously
performs this task as the method to purify the living
entities who are averse to Him. The living entities turn
their attention within when, by good fortune and the
influence of the association of enlightened devotees,
they give up their indifference to Kṛṣṇa. Then, again in
accordance with the desires of Śrī Govinda, Durgā brings
about their liberation. Therefore, one should try to
attain the genuine, non-deceptive favor of the prison
warden Durgā by pleasing her through one’s mood of
introspection and attentiveness to Bhagavān. One should
understand that, if one begs from Devī benedictions such
as wealth, followers, sons, family members and freedom
from ill health, her kindness in fulfilling such boons
is deceptive. Durgā manifests the ten varieties of
knowledge (daśa-mahāvidyā) so that the bewildered jīvas
in the mundane realm can pursue mundane knowledge.

The living entity is a minute spiritual particle, but
due to the defect of being indifferent to Kṛṣṇa he

                          152
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

becomes agitated by the attraction of māyā. As soon as
the living entity is thus agitated, Durgā dresses him in
a gross material body, which can be compared to a
convict’s prison clothes. The gross material body is
composed of the five gross elements, the five sense-
objects and the eleven senses. When the jīva is thus
attired, Durgā places him in the cycle of fruitive work,
wherein he tastes material experiences such as happiness
and distress in heaven and hell. In addition to this
gross body, she also endows him with a subtle body
composed of mind, intelligence and false ego. When the
jīva gives up one gross body, he carries the subtle body
with him to the next gross body. The subtle body,
composed of ignorant and sinful desires, cannot be
discarded until the jīva attains liberation. After
ridding himself of the subtle body, the jīva bathes in
the Virajā River and goes to Hari-dhāma. Durgā-devī
performs all these duties in accordance with Śrī
Govinda’s desire.

vilajjamānayā yasya

sthātum īkṣa-pathe ‘muyā

vimohitā vikatthante

mamāham iti durdhiyaḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.5.13)

The illusory energy of the Lord cannot take precedence,
being ashamed of her position, but those who are
bewildered by her always talk nonsense, being absorbed
in thoughts of “I” and “mine.”

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is also said that Durgā’s
relationship is with the jīvas who have turned away from
Kṛṣṇa. The Durgā-devī who is worshiped in the mundane
world is the shadow aspect of Durgā, whereas the Durgā
who takes the form of the covering of Śrī Bhagavān’s
abode in the form of mantra is a pure, spiritual
maidservant of Kṛṣṇa, and the shadow aspect of Durgā
performs her duties in the mundane world as the servant
of the Durgā in the spiritual world. In this connection
one may study the commentary on the third verse of Śrī
Brahma-saṁhitā.




Verse 45


kṣīraṁ yathā dadhi vikāra-viśeṣa-yogāt

sañjāyate na hi tataḥ pṛthag asti hetoḥ

yaḥ śambhutām api tathā samupaiti kāryād

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi




                             153
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

Anvaya

aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — original Supreme Person, Śrī Govinda;
yaḥ — who; upaiti — takes on; śambhutām — the state of
Śambhu; kāryāt — on account of performing a special
duty; yathā tathā — in the same way that; kṣīram — milk;
sañjāyate — becomes; dadhi — yogurt; vikāra-viśeṣa-yogāt
— through contact with a transforming agent; asti — is;
hi — certainly; na — not; pṛthak — different; tataḥ —
than; hetoḥ — its cause (milk).



Translation

Śrī Govindadeva attains the condition of being Śambhu
for the sake of performing a specific function, just as
milk is transformed into yogurt by contact with a
particular transforming agent, although yogurt is not a
different substance, independent of milk, which is its
cause. I worship that original personality, Śrī Govinda.



Ṭīkā translation

The next subject, in ascending order, is Maheśvara Śiva,
whose svarūpa is being defined in this verse beginning
kṣīraṁ yathā. Just as milk is transformed into yogurt by
contact with a transforming agent, Śrī Govinda similarly
accepts the form of Śambhu in order to accomplish a
specific purpose. The example of yogurt is given in
order to convey the idea of cause and effect. Here the
transformation aspect of the analogy is not applicable,
for this example has not been given to convey the idea
of transformation. The reason for this is that Śrī
Govindadeva is a reality who cannot be transformed, so
it is not possible for Him to undergo any kind of
distortion. A wish-fulfilling gem manifests many things
according to one’s desire, yet its constitutional nature
remains untransformed; the desired articles are manifest
by the influence of its inconceivable potency.
Similarly, although Bhagavān Śrī Govinda manifests in
the form of the instrumental cause Śambhu, His svarūpa
remains unchanged.

As stated in śruti:

eko ha vai puruṣo nārāyaṇa āsīn na brahmā na ca śaṅkaraḥ

sa munir bhūtvā samacintayat

tata ete vyajāyanta viśvo hiraṇyagarbho ‘gnir

varuṇa-rudrendrās tathā

sa brahmaṇā sṛjati rudreṇa nāśayati ity ādi

Before the creation only the Supreme Person Bhagavān
Nārāyaṇa existed. At that time neither Brahmā nor even
Śaṅkara was there. Bhagavān, taking the form of a sage,
began to contemplate the means for bringing about the
creation of the universe, which then took place through

                          154
Brahma-samhita.txt                               5/5/2017

Hiraṇyagarbha; Agni, Varuṇa, Rudra, Indra and the other
demigods also became manifest. Furthermore, Bhagavān
takes the form of Brahmā to create, and the form of
Rudra to destroy, but Śrī Hari Himself, who is the
intrinsic form of supreme bliss, is completely devoid of
the influences of creation and dissolution. He performs
the duties of cosmic creation, maintenance and
destruction in the forms of the guṇa-avatāras. His
quality of being Śambhu occurs by his acceptance of
material modes, such as the mode of ignorance.

For example, it is stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(10.88.5):

harir hi nirguṇaḥ sākṣāt

puruṣaḥ prakṛteḥ paraḥ

śiva-śakti-yutaḥ śaśvat

tri-liṅgo guṇa-samvṛtaḥ

Śrī Hari, who is transcendental to material nature and
free from mundane qualities, is directly the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. However, Śiva is simultaneously
possessed of three types of false ego, namely goodness,
passion and ignorance, and he is always connected with
the illusory potency. Therefore, a jīva can only become
transcendental to the material modes by the

performance of śrī hari-bhajana.

To further clarify this point, this verse 45
specifically states vikāra-viśeṣa-yogāt. Śiva is fully
in contact with the external illusory potency, which is
subject to transformation. For this reason śiva-tattva
is sometimes described as being different from Śrī Hari,
and sometimes as being non-different. To resolve the
difference between them, it is stated herein that Śiva
is not an independent controller or cause separate from
the cause of all causes, Śrī Hari. His dominion or
aspect as controller is subordinate to the dominion of
the Absolute Truth, Śrī Hari.

As it is stated in the Ṛg Veda, “Thus, hereafter it
should be known that the one Nārāyaṇa is indeed eternal.
Brahmā is Nārāyaṇa, Śiva is Nārāyaṇa, Indra is Nārāyaṇa,
time is Nārāyaṇa and the ten directions are also
Nārāyaṇa. Nārāyaṇa is below, Nārāyaṇa is above, Nārāyaṇa
is within, Nārāyaṇa is without and whatever exists in
this universe is also nothing but Nārāyaṇa.”

In the Second Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Brahmājī has
stated, “I create by the inspiration of Bhagavān, Śrī
Śiva also destroys in subordination to Him, and Śrī Hari
Himself, equipped with His three potencies, also
performs the function of maintenance through the agency
of His puruṣa-avatāras.” In this way Bhagavān
accomplishes the creation, destruction and maintenance
of the universes through His three potencies, namely
goodness, passion and ignorance.




                           155
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

Tātparya

The current verse beginning kṣīraṁ yathā is an analysis
of the svarūpa of Śambhu, the previously mentioned
presiding deity of Maheśa-dhāma. Actually Śambhu is not
a separate lord, independent of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and those who
think that he is are offensive to Bhagavān. Śambhu’s
status as a lord is subordinate to and dependent upon
Śrī Govinda’s overlordship. Thus they are factually non-
different realities. The example of that non-difference
is that as milk is transformed into yogurt by contact
with a specific transforming agent, similarly by union
with a special transforming agent, the Supreme Lord
takes on a separate form, which is dependent on Him;
this separate form has no independence.

In this case, the special transforming agent is
constituted of a mixture of māyā’s aspect of the mode of
ignorance, the non-plenitude or minuteness aspect of the
marginal potency, and a slight degree of the combined
knowledge (saṁvit) and bliss (hlādinī) aspects of the
transcendental potency. The effulgent subordinate
controller in the form of Śambhu liṅga, being united
with this special transforming agent, is
constitutionally the semblance of an expansion of the
Supreme Godhead. He is the Sadāśiva from whom Rudradeva
is manifest. Śrī Govinda is manifest in the form of
Śambhu as guṇa-avatāra, in order to arrange the
ingredient materials for creation, to annihilate certain
asuras for the purpose of universal maintenance, and to
execute all functions of destruction. This Śambhu is a
separated expansion imbued with the mood of a plenary
expansion, and he is also known as kāla-puruṣa, the
personified time factor. In this regard a body of
evidence has been cited in Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī’s
commentary.

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (12.13.16) it is stated:
“vaisnavānāṁ yathā śambhuḥ — of all Vaiṣṇavas, Śambhu is
the greatest.” The purport of such statements is that
Śambhu meets together with Durgā-devī and performs his
function through his own time-potency in accordance with
Śrī Govinda’s desire. Many śāstras headed by the tantras
give instruction to follow the principles of righteous
conduct in accordance with the level of eligibility of
the respective jīvas. These principles are compared to a
ladder with steps that eventually lead to the attainment
of bhakti. Furthermore, in accord with Govinda’s desire,
Śambhu maintains and protects pure devotional service by
preaching Māyāvāda philosophy and imaginary
supplementary scriptures (āgamas).37 The fifty qualities
of the jīvas are present in abundance in Śambhu, and
five more great qualities not attainable by ordinary
living entities are partially manifest in him. Thus, one
cannot say that Śambhu is a jīva. Although his nature is
that of a separated expansion, he is still a lord and
controller (iśvara).




Verse 46


                          156
Brahma-samhita.txt                               5/5/2017


dīpārcir eva hi daśāntaram abhyupetya

dīpāyate vivṛta-hetu-samāna-dharmā

yas tādṛg eva hi ca viṣṇutayā vibhāti

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi



Anvaya

dīpa-arciḥ eva hi — just as the flame of a lamp;
abhyupetya — having been brought; daśā-antaram — to
another lamp; dīpāyate — causes illumination; vivṛta —
which is displayed; samāna-dharmā — in the same nature;
hetu — as the original lamp; aham bhajāmi — I perform
bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-puruṣam govindam — original
Supreme Person, Śrī Govinda; yaḥ vibhāti — who
illuminates; viṣṇutayā — through His Viṣṇu expansions;
tādṛk eva hi — in exactly the same way.



Translation

I worship the original personality, Śrī Govinda. Just as
when the flame of one lamp is transmitted to another
lamp, the second lamp illuminates in the same manner as
the original flame, although it exists separately, so
does Govinda accept the form of Mahā-Viṣṇu reclining on
the Causal Ocean. That Mahā-Viṣṇu is the source of all
the Viṣṇu expansions and incarnations in this world.



Ṭīkā translation

Following the sequence given in verse 43,   after the
discussion of the guṇa-avatāra Maheśa, in   order to
further clarify the unique svarūpa of Śrī   Hari, this
śloka beginning dīpārcir eva is spoken to   describe the
position of the guṇa-avatāra Śrī Viṣṇu.

As one lamp can be used to light many other lamps, which
can all shine in the same way as the original lamp,
similarly Kāraṇodakaśāyī Mahā-Viṣṇu is the portion of a
portion of Śrī Govinda; Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu is an
expansion of Mahā-Viṣṇu; and Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu is in
turn an expansion of Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. Although the
light emanating from a large lamp is transmitted to a
succession of lamps via a small flame, the lights are
all as pure and bright as that of the original one. From
the point of view of light, they are all equal. However,
since the pastime of Śambhu is to be the presiding deity
of the mode of ignorance, he can be compared to the
flame in a sooty lamp that is filled with smoke, rather
than a flame from a cleanly burning lamp. Thus, he is
not of the same nature as Śrī Govinda. Mahā-Viṣṇu is a
specific expansion of an expansion of Śrī Govinda. This
will be discussed elaborately in the coming verses.



                          157
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017


Tātparya

In the verse under discussion, the presiding deity of
Hari-dhāma, who is named variously as Hari, Nārāyaṇa,
Viṣṇu, etc., is being described as a plenary expansion.
The Lord of Vaikuṇṭha, Śrī Nārāyaṇa, is the pastime form
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. His expansion is the first of the puruṣa-
avatāras, Kāraṇodakaśāyī Mahā-Viṣṇu, who in turn expands
as the second puruṣa-avatāra, Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, who
further expands as the third puruṣa-avatāra,
Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. The word “Viṣṇu” indicates “He who
is known by His all-pervasiveness, which extends across
all situations and conditions.” Although He descends to
the mundane universe, he remains omnipresent and in
every way transcendental to the influence of the
illusory potency. In this verse the nature of pastime
expansions is being described by defining the nature of
Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. Viṣṇu-tattva, the presiding deity
of the material mode of goodness, is distinguished from
śambhu-tattva by the latter’s intermingling with the
qualities of māyā. The purport is that Viṣṇu also
possesses Śrī Govinda’s intrinsic nature. Both have the
quality of having a purely transcendental svarūpa.
Because Viṣṇu is manifest from Śrī Govinda, He has the
same constitutional nature as Śrī Govinda, that is to
say, viṣṇu-tattva is completely pure and transcendental
to māyā. The mundane mode of goodness present in the
material energy composed of the three material modes is
mixed with passion and ignorance; thus it is called
impure goodness.

Brahmā is endowed with the potency of a personal
expansion, but is a separated expansion mixed with the
mode of passion, while Śambhu, who also has the potency
of a personal expansion, is a separated expansion mixed
with the material mode of ignorance. Since both
principles are separated expansions mixed with the
material modes of passion and ignorance respectiveḷy,
they are extremely unconscious, or insentient. For this
reason, they have been cast very far away from the
original form (svayaṁ-rūpa), and from the expanded forms
of the Divinity (tad-ekātma-rūpa). However, although
Viṣṇu, the presiding deity of the material mode of
goodness, is situated within the material mode of
goodness, He is an expansion of Śrī Kṛṣṇa whose nature
is in unalloyed pure goodness, and He is also situated
in unalloyed pure goodness beyond the qualities of māyā.
Therefore Viṣṇu, being fully the Supreme Controller and
a pastime expansion, is not in contact with māyā;
rather, He is the Lord of māyā.

Viṣṇu is aware that he is Śrī Govinda’s personal
expansion. Śrī Govinda’s complete opulence, which
consists of sixty qualities, is fully displayed in His
pastime form, Śrī Nārāyaṇa. Brahmā and Śiva are mixed
with the modes of material nature, and thus they are not
unalloyed principles like Viṣṇu, although they are
presiding deities of the material modes. Śrī Nārāyaṇa
appears in the form of Kāraṇodakaśāyī Mahā-Viṣṇu, Mahā-
Viṣṇu appears in the form of Garbhodakaśāyī, who in turn
appears as Kṣīrodakaśāyī. Such appearances are examples
of Viṣṇu’s all-pervading nature. One whose individual
svarūpa is manifest everywhere is called cariṣṇu. Viṣṇu

                          158
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

is the only supreme controller; apart from Him the two
other presiding deities of the material modes, as well
as all of the demigods, are principles of subordinate
authority. Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu and Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu,
as well as the personal expansions such as Rāma, are
manifest from Mahā-Viṣṇu, who is also a pastime form.
Śrī Govinda is likened to the original great flame from
whom the pastime expansion Kāraṇodakaśāyī Mahā-Viṣṇu is
expanded. All personal expansions are likened to
separately situated flames transmitted from the
original. All such personal expansions shine brilliantly
and forever through the agency of Śrī Govinda’s
transcendental potency.




Verse 47


yaḥ kāraṇārṇava-jale bhajati sma yoga-

nidrām ananta-jagad-aṇḍa-sa-roma-kūpaḥ

ādhāra-śaktim avalambya parāṁ sva-mūrtiṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi



Anvaya

aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — original Supreme Person, Śrī Govinda;
yaḥ — who; bhajati sma — enjoys; yoga-nidrām — mystic
slumber (of His personal intrinsic potency); jale — in
the water; kāraṇa-arṇava — of the Causal Ocean; sa-roma-
kūpaḥ — within His hair follicles; ananta-jagad-aṇḍa —
(are) the limitless universes; avalambya — reposing
upon; parām — the most excellent; sva-mūrtim — His own
personal form (His expansion named Ananta); ādhāra-
śaktim — who is the embodiment of His all-accommodating
potency.



Translation

I worship that original personality, Śrī Govinda. Having
assumed His own most excellent form, Śeṣa, the
embodiment of the all-accommodating potency, He enjoys
mystic slumber while reclining in the Causal Ocean with
innumerable universes within every hair-pore of His
skin.



Ṭīkā translation

Now the principle of Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu is being
described. Unlimited millions of universes are situated
in each of the hair-pores of His skin; when He exhales,
countless universes are released, and they enter into

                          159
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

Him again along with His inhalation. This Mahā-Viṣṇu
rests within the causal water. The word sa, meaning
“with,” in the phrase sa-roma-kūpaḥ is an exception to
grammatical formulae, and is thus considered to be
acceptable due to its use by authoritative ṛṣis.
Bhagavān Śeṣa (Anantadeva) is His own great personal
form imbued with His all-accommodating potency. Reposing
upon Śeṣa, who takes the form of His bed, the Lord
enjoys with Yogamāyā.



Tātparya

In this verse the tattva of Anantadeva, taking the form
of Mahā-Viṣṇu’s bed, is described. Anantadeva is the bed
on which Mahā-Viṣṇu reposes. This avatāra of Bhagavān
named Śeṣa is in the category of a servant of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.




Verse 48


yasyaika-niśvasita-kālam athāvalambya

jīvanti loma-bilajā jagad-aṇḍa-nāthāḥ

viṣṇur mahān sa iha yasya kalā-viśeṣo

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi



Anvaya

atha — thereafter; aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam
— of that; ādi-puruṣam govindam — original Supreme
Person, Śrī Govinda; yasya — whose; kalā-viśeśaḥ —
special plenary portion; saḥ mahān viṣṇuḥ — (is) Mahā-
Viṣṇu; jagad-aṇḍa-nāthāḥ — the lords of the material
universes, Brahmā, Viṣṇu and Śiva; avalambya — taking
shelter (of Him); loma-bila-jāḥ — become manifest within
His hair-pores; jīvanti — they live; iha — in their
respective universes; yasya eka-niśvasita-kālam — for
the time-period of His one breath.



Translation

The lords of the universes, such as Brahmā, who emanate
from the hair-pores of Mahā-Viṣṇu’s skin, remain alive
only for the duration of His one exhalation. I worship
the original personality, Śrī Govinda, of whom Mahā-
Viṣṇu is a portion of a portion.



Ṭīkā translation

Mahā-Viṣṇu, who has been mentioned in the discussion of

                          160
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

avatāras, is Śrī Govinda’s avatāra, and is a portion of
a plenary portion of His plenary portion. He is the
protector of all the universes, and although He assists
Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu in the form of Mahā-Brahmā, or
Hiraṇyagarbha Prajāpati,38 Mahā-Viṣṇu is non-different
from Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. His intrinsic nature is being
defined in this verse. Headed by Brahmā, countless
masters of the individual universes become manifest from
the hair-pores of Mahā-Viṣṇu’s skin, and remain alive
only for the duration of one of His breaths. The purport
is that Viṣṇu the maintainer, Brahmā the creator and
Śiva the destroyer are manifest within this universe,
and they remain situated in their respective
jurisdictions of authority, absorbed in their prescribed
duties. After that, they again enter Mahā-Viṣṇu at the
time of His inhalation. That Mahā-Viṣṇu is a portion of
a plenary portion of Śrī Govinda’s plenary portion.



Tātparya

The immense majestic opulence of viṣṇu-tattva has been
illustrated in this verse.




Verse 49


bhāsvān yathāśma-śakaleṣu nijeṣu tejaḥ

svīyaṁ kiyat prakaṭayaty api tadvad atra

brahmā ya eṣa jagad-aṇḍa-vidhāna-kartā

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi



Anvaya

aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — original Supreme Person, Śrī Govinda;
yathā — just as; bhāsvān — the sun; prakaṭayati —
manifests; kiyat — a certain portion; svīyam — of his
own; tejaḥ — potency; aśma-śakaleṣu nijeṣu — within its
own gem-stones (which are celebrated by the sun’s names
such as sūrya-kānta, and enacts his duty of heating the
worlds); tadvad atra — similarly in the business of
creation within this universe, etc.; api — also; eṣaḥ
brahmā — Lord Brahmā; yaḥ — who; jagad-aṇḍa-vidhāna-
kartā — (is) the director of the universe (who is
empowered by Govinda).



Translation

Just as the sun manifests his potency to a minute degree
within jewels such as sūrya-kānta, and invests them with
the power to burn, similarly Śrī Govinda also infuses

                          161
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

His creative potency within the secondary creator of the
universe, Brahmā. I worship that original personality,
Śrī Govinda.



Ṭīkā translation

The demigods and demigoddesses are all under Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
shelter; they are not independent. To illustrate this,
the nature of Brahmā is being defined. It is established
in this verse that Brahmā is an extremely pious living
entity, and is thus categorically distinct from
bhagavat-tattva. In the same way that the sun manifests
some portion of its energy within gems such as sūrya-
kānta and invests them with the power to burn, similarly
Bhagavān bestows a minute degree of His creative potency
upon Brahmā, the secondary universal creator, and causes
the creation of the universe through his agency.

In this verse the word api indicates the functional
aspect of the heating potency of the jewel. This heating
potency does not belong to the jewel, because a jewel
cannot reduce anything to ashes by itself; it can only
burn up other things when a minute portion of the sun’s
rays has entered into it. Similarly, Bhagavān’s potency
becomes manifest within the jīva-tattva Brahmā, who
becomes the agent for accomplishing the creation. Just
as the function of burning belongs to the sun, similarly
the function of creation belongs to Bhagavān; Brahmā is
only an instrument in the matter. Bhagavān manifests His
potency in a qualified jīva, and causes the creation to
be accomplished through him.

Sometimes Bhagavān Himself becomes Brahmā, the creator
within an individual universe. Alternatively, He
performs the duties of creation and so on as Mahā-
Brahmā, Hiraṇyagarbha. By inference it should also be
accepted that He also becomes Mahā-Śiva; that is,
Bhagavān sometimes takes the form of Mahā-Śiva and
performs the duties of destruction Himself. Therefore,
the ultimate performer of the universal creation,
maintenance and destruction is Govinda Himself.

Although Māyā-devī Durgā is Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu’s
potency of cause and effect, and Brahmā, Kṣīrodakaśāyī
Viṣṇu and so on are avatāras of Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu,
still Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the original source of all
the avatāras. He is the shelter for all, and all others
are His dependents. Similarly, the forthcoming verses
will also describe those who are beings under His
shelter.



Tātparya

There are two kinds of Brahmā. In some kalpas, Bhagavān
empowers a worthy living entity with His potency, and
that jīva performs the duty of Brahmā. Occasionally, in
some kalpas when there is no suitable jīva and the
Brahmā of the previous kalpa has become liberated, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa manifests Brahmā, the avatāra of the material mode
of passion, by a portion of His potency.

                          162
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017


Brahmā is superior to all of the ordinary living
entities in terms of tattva, but it cannot be said that
he is directly the Supreme Lord. Furthermore, it should
be kept in mind that Śambhu, who has already been
discussed, possesses the qualities of īśvara to a
greater extent than Brahmā. The basic meaning is that
the fifty qualities present in the jīvas are present to
a greater extent in Brahmā, along with five other
qualities that are partially present in Brahmā but
absent from the jīvas. However, those fifty qualities
and the five further qualities are present to an even
greater extent in Śambhu.




Verse 50


yat-pāda-pallava-yugaṁ vinidhāya kumbha-

dvandve praṇāma-samaye sa gaṇādhirājaḥ

vighnān vihantum alam asya jagat-trayasya

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi



Anvaya

aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — original Supreme Person, Śrī Govinda;
vinidhāya — by placing; yat-pāda-pallava-yugam — His two
delicate lotus feet; kumbha-dvandve — upon the pair of
cranial mounds on his elephant head; praṇāma-samaye — at
the time of offering obeisances; saḥ gaṇa-adhirājaḥ —
that chief among the demigods; vihantum alam — is able
to remove easily; vighnān — the obstacles (on the path
of devotion); asya jagat-trayasya — of the three worlds.



Translation

In order to obtain the power required to remove all the
obstacles within the three worlds, Gaṇeśa, the bestower
of success, always holds the divine lotus feet of Śrī
Govinda upon the pair of cranial mounds protruding from
his elephant head. I worship that original personality,
Śrī Govinda.



Ṭīkā translation

Most people consider Gaṇeśajī to be an original and
independent lord, and they therefore worship him at the
beginning of any undertaking for the removal of the
mundane obstacles that impede their respective
endeavors. This verse beginning with yat-pāda-pallava is
being presented to resolve the issue of whether Gaṇeśa

                          163
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

should be worshiped as the original Personality or not.
Gaṇeśajī is the monarch of the populace, and he always
holds Śrī Govinda’s lotus feet upon the cranial mounds
on his elephant head so that he can obtain the power to
remove all obstacles within the realm of birth and
death. Thus it is by Govinda’s mercy that Gaṇeśajī
bestows all success and removes the obstacles impeding
those who bow down to him. Actually, Śrī Govinda is the
original bestower of perfections and the remover of
obstacles. As He alone is the original shelter of the
universe, intelligent men take exclusive shelter of Him.

Moreover, to reinforce this conclusion, the following
example is being presented from the conversation between
Kapiladeva and Devahūti in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Bhagavān
Kapiladeva said:

yat-pāda-niḥsṛta-sarit-pravarodakena

tīrthena mūrdhy-adhikṛtena śivaḥ śivo ‘bhūt

dhyātur manaḥ śamala-śaila-nisṛṣṭa-vajraṁ

dhyāyec ciraṁ bhagavataś caraṇāravindam

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.28.22)

Śivajī attained his intrinsic quality of auspiciousness
by holding upon his head the pure water of the exalted
river Bhāgavatī Gaṅgā, who springs from the foot-wash of
Śrī Govinda. If one simply meditates upon those lotus
feet, they vanquish all the inebrieties of his heart,
just as a thunderbolt hurled at a mountain smashes it
into tiny fragments. Therefore one should meditate
incessantly upon the divine lotus feet of Bhagavān.

In conclusion, it may be said that all kinds of
abilities and powers are attained by the mercy of His
lotus feet, and without that mercy, everything becomes
useless. Thus one should meditate upon Bhagavān Śrī
Hari, who is all-auspicious.



Tātparya

Śrī Gaṇeśa is a special authority, who is empowered by
Bhagavān to perform the duty of destroying the obstacles
on the path of progress for the entire universe. He is
certainly the object of worship for people possessed of
the appropriate eligibility. Moreover, among all the
demigods he is counted as one of the five worshipable
forms of Brahman with attributes (saguṇa-brahma). Gaṇeśa
is a demigod who has been empowered with authority by
Bhagavān. All of his glories are manifest only by Śrī
Govinda’s mercy.




Verse 51



                          164
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

agnir mahī gaganam ambu marud diśaś ca

kālas tathātma-manasīti jagat-trayāṇi

yasmād bhavanti vibhavanti viśanti yaṁ ca

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi



Anvaya

aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — original Supreme Person, Śrī Govinda;
yasmāt — from whom; jagat-trayāṇi — the three worlds
(heavenly, middle and hellish planets); iti — which are
composed of; agniḥ — fire; mahī — earth; gaganam —
space; ambu — water; marut — air; diśaḥ — the (ten)
directions; kālaḥ — time; tathā — as well as; ātma-
manasī ca — soul and mind; bhavanti — emanate;
vibhavanti — are maintained; yam — (and) into whom;
viśanti — they enter.



Translation

The three worlds have been created from nine elements,
namely earth, water, fire, air, space, the directions,
time, the mind and soul. I worship the original
personality, Śrī Govinda, from whom the elements have
originated, in whom they are situated after their
manifestation, and into whom they enter at the time of
the cosmic annihilation.



Ṭīkā translation

Everything is clear.



Tātparya

The entire universe is composed of nothing but the five
gross elements — earth, water, fire, air and space —
plus the directions, time, the jīvātmā, and the mental
principle allied with the conditioned soul’s subtle
body, which consists of mind, intelligence and false
ego. Those following the path of fruitive activities
offer sacrificial oblations into the fire. Such
materialistic jīvas do not know anything more than the
perceptible world of these nine essential realities. The
jñānīs engaged in the cultivation of dry impersonal
knowedge are searching for the self in the form of the
state of self-satisfaction, and the living entity is
himself that ātmā. The sāṅkhya philosophical system
calls this world prakṛti and says that the ātmā or self
is situated within it. In other words, the principles
defined by all kinds of philosophers are included within
the nine tattvas. Thus, Śrī Govinda is exclusively the
original cause and repose of the creation, maintenance
and annihilation of the sum total of these tattvas.

                          165
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017




Verse 52

yac-cakṣur eṣa savitā sakala-grahāṇāṁ

rājā samasta-sura-mūrtir aśeṣa-tejāḥ

yasyājñayā bhramati sambhṛta-kāla-cakro

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi



Anvaya

aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — original Supreme Person, Śrī Govinda;
eṣaḥ savitā — Sūryadeva (the sungod); yat-cakṣuḥ — who
functions as His eye (in other words he illuminates the
entire universe, thereby providing the power of sight);
rājā — (is) the king; sakala-grahānām — of all the
planets; samasta-sura-mūrtiḥ — regulator of all the
demigods; aśeṣa-tejaḥ — possessed of limitless potency;
yasya ājñayā — on account of Govinda’s order; bhramati —
he travels; sambhṛta — sustaining; kāla-cakraḥ — the
wheel of time.



Translation

Sūryadeva, the predominating deity of the sun, is the
king of all the planets, and is likened to the eye of
this world. I worship the original personality, Śrī
Govinda, upon whose order the sun travels in his regular
orbit, having mounted the wheel of time.



Ṭīkā translation

Some people say that Sūryadeva is the controller of all,
and the original person. The actual nature of the sun-
god is being analyzed in this śloka beginning yac-
cakṣuḥ, in order to resolve this misconception.
Factually, he is the king of all the planets, full of
infinite effulgence, and he acts as the eye of the
universe. He is a demigod who has been invested with
special authority by Śrī Govinda; he is not an
independent or separate god. Indeed, it is in accordance
with Śrī Govinda’s order that he mounts the wheel of
time and always remains dedicated to his service. This
has also been described in Bhagavad-gītā (15.12):

yad-āditya-gataṁ tejo

jagad bhāsayate ‘khilam

yac-candramasi yac-cāgnau

tat-tejo viddhi māmakam


                            166
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

All the power in the sun that illuminates the whole
universe is certainly only My power, and so is the power
of the moon and of fire.

Similarly, in the śruti we find: “bhīṣāsmād vātaḥ
parvate bhīṣodeti sūryaḥ — the wind blows out of fear of
Me, and the sun shines out of fear of Me.” Furthermore,
it is stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.25.42):

mad-bhayād vāti vāto ‘yaṁ

sūryas tapati mad-bhayāt

varṣatīndro dahaty agnir

mṛtyuś carati mad-bhayāt

The wind blows out of fear of Me, the sun shines out of
fear of Me, Indra sends the rain out of fear of Me, fire
incinerates out of fear of Me, and death continuously
traverses back and forth throughout the world out of
fear of Me.

The commentary on this verse explains Śrī Bhagavān’s
words as follows: “If any of them inflict any kind of
difficulty whatsoever upon My devotee, I do not delay in
withdrawing their authority.”

na tatra sūryo bhāti na candra-tārakaṁ

nemo vidyuto bhānti kuto ‘yam agniḥ

tam eva bhāntam anubhāti sarvaṁ

tasya bhāsā sarvam idaṁ vibhāti

Katha Upaniṣad (2.2.15)

Although the sun, moon, stars, lightning and fire
illuminate everything, they cannot illuminate Bhagavān
or His abode.

Descriptions such as this verse 52 of Brahma-saṁhitā,
defining Sūrya as the eye of the universal form, are
found in many places throughout the Vedas.



Tātparya

Many followers of the Vedas worship Sūryadeva and
consider him to be Brahman. Sūryadeva has also been
included among the five demigods who are worshiped
according to the system of pañcopāsanā. Some people
consider heat to be the original cause, and believe
Sūryadeva to be the original personality, because he is
the foundation of all heat and therefore the cause of
the universe. Whatever opinion they may hold, the fact
is that the sun is the presiding deity of only one solar
system, empowered with the aggregate of all the material
heat therein. Therefore, he is one demigod among the
delegated authorities of the mundane world. He always
remains absorbed in his service according to the order
of Śrī Govinda.

                            167
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017




Verse 53

dharmo ‘tha pāpa-nicayaḥ śrutayas tapāṁsi

brahmādi-kīṭa-patagāvadhayaś ca jīvāḥ

yad-datta-mātra-vibhava-prakaṭa-prabhāvā

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi



Anvaya

aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — original Supreme Person, Śrī Govinda;
yat-datta-mātra-vibhava — who merely by His power of
endowment; prakaṭa-prabhāvāḥ — are manifest the
respective potencies; dharmaḥ — of pious activities i.e.
varṇa- and āśrama-dharmas as described in the Vedas;
atha — and; pāpa-nicayaḥ — the multitude of sins;
śrutayaḥ — the Ṛg, Sāma, Yajur and Atharva Vedas, as
well as the Upaniṣads, which are the crest-jewels of the
Vedas; tapāṁsi — the various austerities; ca jīvāḥ — and
the living beings; brahmā-ādi — beginning from the great
Brahmā; avadhayaḥ — down to; kīṭa-pataga — the
insignificant birds and insects.



Translation

I worship that original personality, Śrī Govinda, whose
power of endowment alone manifests the respective
potencies in the principles of religious conduct, sinful
activities, the Vedas, various austerities and all
living entities from Brahmā down to the most
insignificant insect.



Ṭīkā translation

What remains to be said on this topic? In this world of
repeated birth and death, there are so many forms of
religious conduct and sinful activities, as well as all
the various living beings. All of these manifest their
own potency or prowess, which are all bestowed by
Bhagavān alone. Otherwise they have not the slightest
independent capacity to show their own potency. It is
also stated in Bhagavad-gītā (10.8):

ahaṁ sarvasya prabhavo

mattaḥ sarvaṁ pravartate

I am the source from which everything emanates, and I am
also the inspiration for all things.




                           168
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

Tātparya

The principles of religious conduct (dharma) are those
which have been prescribed in the Vedas as proper
conduct for the welfare of human society. The twenty
dharma-śāstras describe varṇa-dharma and āśrama-dharma.
Varṇa-dharma means religious duties prescribed according
to the various natures of priests and intellectuals
(brāhmaṇas), warriors and administrators (kṣatriyas),
farmers, traders and merchants (vaiśyas), and artisans
and workers (śūdras). Āśrama-dharma means the duties
that are suitable for the respective spiritual orders
(āśramas) of those living as celibate students
(brahmacārīs), householders (gṛhasthas), retired
ascetics (vānaprasthas) and renounced mendicants
(sannyasīs). These two forms of dharma (according to
varṇa and āśrama) alone have been ascertained to be
proper conduct for those in the human form of life.
Adharma (irreligion), as indicated by the words pāpa-
nicayaḥ, refers to all the various types of sin,
including ignorance, which is the root of sin; sinful
desires; the five heinous sins;39 serious crimes such as
murder, rape, adultery, robbery and so on; and all other
forms of illicit behavior. One should understand
śrutayaḥ to mean the Ṛg, Sāma, Yajur and Atharva Vedas,
along with the Upaniṣads, which are considered the head
of the body of śruti. The word tapāṁsi refers to the
many various types of difficult practices that are
characteristically meant for dharma, religious progress.
Many instructions have been written in the dharma-
śāstras regarding such troublesome and painful practice.
In many places the process of “five fires”40 and other
great austerities and penances are described. The
eightfold yoga process and the pursuit of impersonal
spiritual realization are included within the category
of austerities. The word jīvāḥ refers to all the
conditioned souls who are bound within this world on the
wheel of fruitive activities.

The conditioned souls wander throughout 8,400,000
species of life. There are so many varieties of life
such as demigods, demons, rākṣasas, human beings, nāgas,
kinnaras and gandharvas. The soul takes on bodies in
unlimited forms of life from Brahmā down to the most
insignificant insect. As the jīvas wander through
various species on the wheel of karma, they attain the
various powers that are specific to each life-form. Some
species exhibit great strength, while others possess
uncommon intelligence and so on. But these specific
powers are not manifest of their own accord. Śrī
Govindadeva bestows His own power or prowess upon the
various forms of life, and therefore they each manifest
varying degrees of Govinda’s potency or prowess.



Verse 54

yas tv indragopam athavendram aho sva-karma-

bandhānurūpa-phala-bhājanam ātanoti

karmāṇi nirdahati kintu ca bhakti-bhājāṁ


                          169
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi



Anvaya

aham bhajāmi — I perform bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — original Supreme Person, Śrī Govinda;
yaḥ — who (in a disinterested manner); ātanoti — makes;
indragopam — the insignificant red insect named
indragopa; athavā — as well as; indram — Indra, the king
of the administrative demigods; phala-bhājanam — the
recipient of the fruits; anurūpa-bandha — in accordance
with the bondage; sva-karma — generated by their
respective activities; kintu ca — however; aho — Oh how
astonishing!; bhakti-bhājām — for those dedicated in
śuddha-bhakti; nirdahati — He utterly consumes, i.e.
nullifies; karmāṇi — the results generated from their
activities performed in all of their previous lives.



Translation

Śrī Govinda impartially bestows the fruits of reaction
upon all living entities who are wandering on the path
of karma, from the insignificant indragopa insect to
Indradeva, the monarch of the demigods, according to the
bondage accrued from their respective individual
actions. However, it is wonderful that He completely
burns to the roots the karma of those who are devoted to
Him. I worship that original personality, Śrī Govinda.



Ṭīkā translation

As the fully independent controller of all controllers,
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa does whatever He considers to be
appropriate, and no one can oppose Him even in the
slightest way. Just as a cloud gives rain impartially,
He is equally disposed to all. In keeping with this
principle, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is also the impartial bestower of
the fruits of action. From the tiny red indragopa insect
that appears during the rainy season, up to Indra, the
king of heaven, Śrī Kṛṣṇa bestows good and bad results
upon everyone according to their good and bad
activities. However, He burns down to the roots the
karma, the fruits of karma, the desire for karma and
even the ignorance of His exclusively one-pointed
devotees who are attentively engaged in bhakti. This
favoritism that He shows to His devotees is utterly
astonishing.

The profound implication of saying that Śrī Kṛṣṇa
regards everyone equally like a cloud is as follows.
Just as a cloud rains down water in one place and not
another, or rains down more in one place and less in
another, and just as no one can control the rainfall,
similarly, although Bhagavān sees everyone equally, He
is totally independent in the matter of punishing or
showing favor to anyone. This particular quality of
Bhagavān is described in this verse beginning yas tv
indragopam.

                          170
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017


For example Svayam Bhagavān has said in Bhagavad-gītā
(9.29):

samo ‘haṁ sarva-bhūteṣu

na me dveṣyo ‘sti na priyaḥ

ye bhajanti tu māṁ bhaktyā

mayi te teṣu cāpy aham

I am equally disposed to all living entities. No one is
My enemy and no one is My friend. However, I consider
those who render service to Me with devotion to be Mine,
and I am theirs.

It is also stated in Bhagavad-gītā (9.22): “ananyāś
cintayanto mām — I personally carry the necessities of
My unalloyed devotees who are exclusively engaged in My
service, and I always protect them.”

Someone may say, “Bhagavān delivers His own devotees
from material existence and bestows upon them the loving
service of His lotus feet, but He never does this for
the non-devotees, so He must be guilty of partiality
arising from attachment and aversion.” However, such
partiality can never be found in Bhagavān merely because
He is extremely caring and affectionate to His devotees
(bhakta-vatsala). Being so kind to His devotees is one
of His unique characteristics, and this quality is His
ornament. There is no fault or partiality on His side.

For example, it is described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(8.16.24): tathāpi bhaktaṁ bhajate maheśvaraḥ. Although
all living entities have come from Bhagavān and Bhagavān
is equally disposed to all of them, still He shows a
special favoritism toward His devotees. Just as the
devotee remains constantly attached to Bhagavān, so
Bhagavān also remains constantly attached to His
devotee. Just as the devotee binds Bhagavān with the
rope of prema and keeps Him bound within his heart,
similarly Bhagavān binds His devotees with the ropes of
His sweet qualities.

visṛjati hṛdayaṁ na yasya sākṣād

dharir avaśābhihito ‘py aghaugha-nāśaḥ

praṇaya-rasanayā dhṛtāṅghri-padmaḥ

sa bhavati bhāgavata-pradhāna uktaḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.55)

If someone calls the name of Śrī Hari even accidentally,
He never leaves their heart, but destroys the heaps of
sins residing there. One who binds Śrī Hari’s lotus feet
in his heart with the ropes of intimate love (praṇaya)
is known as the topmost devotee.

It has also been stated in the Ādi Purāṇa:

asmākaṁ guravo bhaktā

                             171
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017


bhaktānāṁ guravo vayam

mad-bhaktā yatra gacchanti

tatra gacchāmi pārthiva

O King, the devotees are My gurus, and I am their guru.
I go wherever My devotees go.

This conclusion is also supported by the following
statement from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.16.16):

sārathya-pāraṣada-sevana-sakhya-dautya-

vīrāsanānugamana-stavana-praṇāmān

snigdheṣu pāṇḍuṣu jagat-praṇatiṁ ca viṣṇor

bhaktiṁ karoti nṛ-patiś caraṇāravinde

That Śrī Kṛṣṇa, to whom all the living beings in the
universe offer praṇāma, would sometimes become a chariot
driver for his dear devotees, the Paṇḍavas, and
sometimes He would become the chairman of their council.
He was their servant and friend. Sometimes He would take
up a sword in His hand and guard their door at night
like a doorkeeper. Following behind them, praying and
offering His obeisances, Śrī Kṛṣṇa showed His qualities
of loving affection for His devotees in such a way that
when Mahārāja Parīkṣit heard all this in the form of
songs from the mouths of the royal court bards, bhakti
that was full of intense pangs of separation from the
lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa awakened in his heart.

Similarly Akrūrajī said:

na tasya kaścid dayitaḥ suhṛttamo

na cāpriyo dveṣya upekṣya eva vā

tathāpi bhaktān bhajate yathā tathā

sura-drumo yadvad upāśrito ‘rtha-daḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.38.22)

Although no one is eligible to be Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s dear bosom
friend, His undesirable enemy, or the object of His
neglect, still, just as one attains whatever one prays
for from a desire-tree, in the same way one attains a
particular fruit from Śrī Kṛṣṇa corresponding to one’s
bhajana.

Only those who take shelter of a kalpa-vṛkṣa, desire-
tree, attain the benefit bestowed by it, not others.
This is not partiality on the part of the desire-tree.
Similarly, although there is a difference in the results
attained by those who take shelter of Bhagavān and those
who do not, this cannot be considered partiality.
Furthermore, the speciality of Bhagavān is even greater
than that of a desire-tree. For example, a desire-tree
never becomes subordinate to one who takes its shelter,
but Bhagavān becomes subordinate to His unconditionally

                             172
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

surrendered devotees.

Bhagavān is impartial in all cases. This is illustrated
by the following statements from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(6.17.22—23):

na tasya kaścid dayitaḥ pratīpo

na jñāti-bandhur na paro na ca svaḥ

samasya sarvatra nirañjanasya

sukhe na rāgaḥ kuta eva roṣaḥ

He is equally disposed to all living entities. No one is
dear to Him, nor does He dislike anyone. He is detached,
and therefore He has no affinity for the happiness
derived from sense objects. Neither is He subject to
aversion, which is simply the antithesis of sense
gratification. In the course of bestowing the results of
the jīvas’ own fruitive activities, He gives happiness
to one and distress to another, bondage to one and
liberation to another. Still, He never exhibits any
partiality arising from attachment or aversion.

tathāpi tac-chakti-visarga eṣāṁ

sukhāya duḥkhāya hitāhitāya

Although Bhagavān is the original performer of
activities, He is not personally responsible for the
jīva’s happiness, distress, bondage and liberation.

By acting under the influence of the three qualities of
material nature, the living entity creates his own
sinfulness and piety, which in turn become the cause of
his birth and death. Although this is the function of
māyā, it is understood to be the activity of Bhagavān.
One should not imagine that Bhagavān is partial in this,
because each individual living entity tastes the results
of his own activities. Although the light of the sun
generally gives happiness to everyone, it gives distress
to the owl and the night lotus. Nevertheless, one cannot
attribute partiality to the sun. Similarly, through the
agency of Bhagavān’s māyā, the jīva attains a particular
result according to his karma. Thus, there is no
question of partiality in Bhagavān.

The general rule is that Bhagavān bestows upon the jīvas
the fruit of their work, but although He is impartial in
all cases, He shows His loving care to His devotees.
This is not His personal partiality. It is well known
that Bhagavān is bhakta-vatsala, but He never becomes
jñāni-vatsala or yogi-vatsala. This has never happened.
Moreover, He is also not affectionate to the devotees of
demigods and demigoddesses. He is affectionate to His
own devotees (sva-bhakta-vatsala). Therefore in Brahma-
sūtra (2.1.36) it is stated: upapadyate ca api
upalabhyate ca. Bhagavān’s quality of being bhakta-
vatsala is imbued with partiality in the form of
favoritism. The protection of His devotees is the
function of His svarūpa-śakti.

This partiality in favoritism to His devotees is found

                          173
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

in the description of the qualities of Śrī Hari.
Moreover, Bhagavān’s quality of favoring His devotee is
the ornament among all other qualities.

Thus in his commentary on this verse from Śrī Brahma-
saṁhitā, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmipāda has presented another
verse from Bhagavad-gītā (9.22):

ananyāś cintayanto māṁ

ye janāḥ paryupāsate

teṣāṁ nityābhiyuktānāṁ

yoga-kṣemaṁ vahāmy aham

In personally describing the speciality of His unalloyed
devotees, Bhagavān said, “My devotees consider Me to be
the exclusive goal of their lives. They are always
absorbed in thoughts of Me with undivided attention;
that is, they never take shelter of any other object of
desire or serve any other worshipable deity. Unlimitedly
auspicious qualifications appear in them. Taking shelter
of My lotus feet, which are the essence of the nectar of
astonishing pastimes, they engage in bhajana with one-
pointed determination. Such devotees do not even
remember how to maintain their lives in this world, so I
personally maintain them by protecting them and by
collecting their eatables and other necessities.

“The purport of saying the word vahāmi (I personally
carry) and not karomi (I arrange) in this verse is that
the responsibility for maintaining those unalloyed
devotees falls upon Me, and I carry that responsibility
just as a householder personally maintains and nourishes
the members of his own family.”

Bhagavān takes the responsibility of personally and
directly taking care of His devotees by His own free
will, whereas duties such as creation and so on are
accomplished simply by His desiring them to take place.
Therefore His devotees are not really a burden for Him.
Just as a man feels happiness by taking care of a lover
with whom he enjoys, similarly Bhagavān feels happiness
in supporting and nourishing His devotees.

In this regard there is an example from Vedānta-sūtra
(3.4.44): svāminaḥ phala-śruter ity ātreyaḥ. Does the
detached devotee maintain his life in this world by his
own efforts, or does he depend on the efforts of
Parameśvara? In answer to this question, it is stated
that the devotee does not want Bhagavān to have to do
anything for him, so he makes some endeavor for his own
maintenance.

Although Bhagavān personally maintains His devotees,
when Ātreya Muni saw the final benediction (phala-śruti)
given to the readers of the Taittirīya Upaniṣad, he
said, “The worldly maintenance of the devotees is
arranged by Sarveśvara Bhagavān. Just as fish, turtles
and birds maintain their offspring by sight, meditation
and touch respectively, similarly Bhagavān maintains His
devotees.”


                          174
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

“My kindness upon such unalloyed devotees is that I make
them attain My transcendental abode. I do not do this
for the worshipers of other devatās.” Viśeṣaṁ ca
darśayati: this sūtra indicates that Bhagavān causes
those devotees who have no material desires, and who are
acutely afflicted by the distress of separation from
Him, to attain His abode very quickly because He is
unable to tolerate any delay. This is Bhagavān’s special
arrangement.

The following verse is found in the Varāha Purāṇa:

nayāmi paramaṁ sthānam

arcir-ādi-gatiṁ vinā

garuḍa-skandham āropya

yatheccham anivāritaḥ

My devotees are indifferent to material circumstances. I
lift them up onto the shoulders of Garuḍa and, bypassing
all the intermediate realms, I bring them directly to My
transcendental abode without any impediments, in
accordance with their desire.

Therefore Bhagavān personally carries the necessities of
His unalloyed devotees. This means that He does not
arrange for them through any other agent. It is
understood that this is no burden for Him; rather, it
gives Him great happiness due to His affection for His
unalloyed devotees, who are exceedingly dear to Him.



Tātparya

The supreme controller sees with equal vision. Exactly
in accordance with the previous activities of the
conditioned souls, He bestows the inclination for
particular karma at a later date without the slightest
partiality. However, He is especially kind to His
devotees. He totally incinerates their desires for
fruitive activities, their ignorance and all the results
of their sinful and pious work. Although karma is
beginningless (anādi), it is destructible.

The karma of those who engage in work with the hope of
enjoying the fruits of their activities is permanent; it
is never destroyed. Even the duties of the renounced
order (sannyāsa-dharma) is one kind of karma befitting
that āśrama. Simply following the duties of a renunciant
is not pleasing to Śrī Kṛṣṇa because the desire for the
fruit of liberation remains. Therefore sannyāsīs also
attain the results of their activities. Even if they
reach the final limit of desirelessness, they certainly
attain the insignificant result of satisfaction in the
self.

On the other hand, pure devotees continuously render
service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa with a favorable mood, abandoning
without exception all independent endeavors such as
jñāna and karma. For these pure devotees, who are devoid
of all desires except the desire for service, Śrī Kṛṣṇa

                          175
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

completely incinerates their karma, the desire for karma
and the root of karma, namely ignorance. In light of His
general neutrality, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s partiality to His
devotees is a matter of sheer astonishment.



Verse 55

yaṁ krodha-kāma-sahaja-praṇayādi-bhīti-

vātsalya-moha-guru-gaurava-sevya-bhāvaiḥ

sañcintya tasya sadṛśīṁ tanum āpur ete

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi



Anvaya

aham bhajāmi — I engage in bhajana; tam — of that; ādi-
puruṣam govindam — original Supreme Person, Śrī Govinda;
yam — whom; sañcintya — by full contemplation; bhāvaiḥ —
through the moods; krodha — of anger (such as that shown
by Śiśupāla toward Kṛṣṇa out of enmity); kāma — of lust
felt by the vraja-gopīs etc., out of a desire to give
Kṛṣṇa pleasure (in other words mādhurya-rasa or prema);
sahaja-praṇaya-ādi — of sakhya-bhāva, the spontaneous
affection of the cowherd friends (sakhās) such as
Śrīdāmā, Subala, etc.; bhīti — of incessant terror felt
by persons such as Kaṁsa, accompanied by the evil
thought, “I shall be slain by Kṛṣṇa!”; vātsalya — of
parental affection felt by persons headed by Śrī Nanda
and Yaśodā; moha — of delusion felt by those of the
Māyāvādī cult, i.e. a mood of total forgetfulness in the
contemplation of sāyujya-mukti (liberation through
merging one’s identity with Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s impersonal
aspect of the non-differentiated divine light, known as
nirbheda-brahma); guru-gaurava — of śānta-bhāva, wherein
one contemplates Him as a great personage, worthy of
respect; sevya — of dāsya-bhāva, the mood of servitude
rendered by those who contemplate Śrī Kṛṣṇa as the sole
object worthy of their service; ete — those persons;
āpuḥ — attain; sadṛśīm — an appropriate; tanum — body;
tasya — for His service.



Translation

Those who contemplate Him with feelings of lust, anger,
the natural intimacy of friendship, fear, parental
affection, bewilderment, reverence and servitude, attain
bodies (suitable for associates of Bhagavān) with
various degrees of beauty and qualities corresponding to
their individual meditations. I worship that original
personality, Govinda.



Ṭīkā translation

Svayam Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the only actual bestower of

                          176
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

results; He bestows the appropriate fruits upon all. The
results bestowed by others are perishable, but the fruit
bestowed by Śrī Kṛṣṇa is never subject to destruction.
Bhagavān is eternal, His devotees are eternal, and His
bhakti and the fruit of bhakti are also eternal. Because
pure devotees are full of deep attachment for Him, they
are infinitely superior to the desireless yogīs. That
Prabhu who bestows even upon His most antagonistic
enemies a result that is supremely difficult for great
yogīs to attain must necessarily, according to the logic
of “inferential partial illustration” (kaimutika-nyāya),
bestow the highest fruit of all upon His devotees who
incessantly cultivate favorable activities and moods in
His service. This is certainly not a point of
controversy. What intelligent person could possibly give
up such a highly generous Prabhu as Śrī Kṛṣṇa to worship
any other demigod or demigoddess? Having stated this in
the previous verse, Brahmājī completes the section
characterized by the phrase, “I worship the original
personality, Śrī Govindadeva,” with this verse beginning
yaṁ krodha-kāma.

Words such as krodha indicate fear and enmity, as well
as anger. For example, when Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s enemies
such as Kaṁsa and Śiśupāla become absorbed in Him, even
through moods that are unfavorable to bhakti, He bestows
upon them a transcendental destination. Aho! Pūtanā was
a man-eating demoness, accustomed to killing babies and
drinking their blood, yet the most liberal and merciful
Śrī Kṛṣṇa gave her a destination befitting a nurse-maid
in Goloka because she had assumed the appearance of a
mother. Vṛṣabhāsura and Keśī-daitya also attained
destinations like the oxen that pull carts in Goloka
Vraja. Śrī Kṛṣṇa also awarded a destination to the
wicked Kālīya-nāga in Goloka Vraja, using him as a boat
in His water-pastimes. Although many other avatāras of
Bhagavān are bestowers of elevated destinations upon
their enemies, they have given the demons killed by them
destinations such as heavenly happiness and vast sensory
enjoyment. However, they have not given destinations
extending even up to the point of liberation, what to
speak of elevation to Goloka.

Anger is the mood of an enemy. Natural intimacy is the
mood of a friend. Lust refers to śṛṅgāra, the amorous
mood, which is the sweetest of all. The affection of a
mother and father for their child is called vātsalya.
Reverence like that offered to one’s guru is neutrality
(śānta-bhāva). Servitude indicates dāsya-bhāva. Here the
word moha implies the utter forgetfulness experienced
due to a vision of Brahman; this is the brahmamaya-bhāva
of the proponents of impersonal knowledge.

The purport of saying that those who contemplate
Bhagavān attain bodies corresponding to their moods is
that by becoming absorbed in these moods at the time of
sādhana, when they achieve perfection, they attain
bodies like the associates of Bhagavān according to
their individual bhāvas, and they become absorbed in His
service. Those who become absorbed in the transcendental
subject through the mood of anger attain only a partial
aspect of that transcendence in the form of impersonal
liberation (sāyujya-mukti). Aside from that, those who
have the sentiments of śānta, dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya

                          177
Brahma-samhita.txt                                5/5/2017

and śṛṅgāra attain bodies appropriate for those
individual bhāvas, with beauty and qualities
corresponding to the extent of their attainment. In this
regard, we find evidence in the statement of Śrī
Vasudeva (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.3.41): “adṛṣṭānyatamaṁ
loke śīlaudārya-guṇaiḥ — in my previous life I begged
from You the benediction of having a son endowed with
all qualities like You. However, You said, ‘There is no
one else endowed with qualities like Me. It can never
be. Therefore I will personally appear as your son.’”
From this it is concluded that no living entity can have
all the transcendental qualities of Bhagavān. Thus the
words sadṛśīṁ tanum indicate that one can attain a body
suitable for an associate of Bhagavān, which is
partially imbued with His transcendental qualities.

It has also been stated in Brahma-sūtra: “jagad vyāpāra-
varjam — it is not possible for the jīvas to perform the
task of creation, maintenance and destruction of the
universe. It is only possible for Brahman. This ability
of Bhagavān cannot possibly occur in the jīva.” Śrī
Nārada has also stated (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.6.29):
“prayujyamāne mayi tāṁ śuddhāṁ bhagavatīṁ tanum — when
my devotional service was mature, Bhagavān mercifully
bestowed upon me my pure body as His associate. My
previous body composed of the five gross material
elements was cast aside and I went to the abode of
Bhagavān in that transcendental body.” The essence of
this statement is that no one is identical with Bhagavān
in all respects and no one can become so at any time.

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.5.48) we find: “vaireṇa yaṁ
nṛpatayaḥ — if kings such as Śiśupāla and Dantavakra
attained Bhagavān by the mood of enmity, then anurakta-
dhiyāṁ punaḥ kim — what will be unattainable for the
unalloyed premi-bhaktas through their powerful
attachment for Him? What need is there to say that they
most definitely attain Him?”

One can attain Śrī Kṛṣṇa by being absorbed in anger,
hostility or envy, or also through the moods of śānta,
dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya and śṛṅgāra. However, just as
there is a difference between hostility and loving
attachment, there is also a difference in the
destinations attained through these respective moods.
The sādhakas attain the positions of being different
types of associates in accordance with the level of
their prema or anurāga (deep attachment). The highest
attainment is only achieved by those with the highest
loving attachment. On the basis of this principle, it is
established that there is no difference between the
associates situated in Goloka and the associates who
descend to Bhauma-Vṛndāvana. The two are non-different.
This is also mentioned in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam: “nandādayas
tu taṁ dṛṣtvā — the Vrajavāsīs headed by Śrī Nanda saw
the majesty of Goloka in Brahma-hrada and became
joyfully amazed.” The oneness of Goloka and Bhauma-
Vṛndāvana has been established by this statement.



Tātparya

Bhakti is of two kinds: regulative (vaidhī) and

                          178
Brahma-samhita.txt                                 5/5/2017

spontaneous (rāgānugā). The first type of bhakti is
based on the faith that arises to a small extent through
the medium of śāstra and the instructions of one’s guru,
and it develops very slowly because of the confinement
of observing the rules and regulations of scripture.
That bhakti is transformed into niṣṭhā, ruci, āsakti and
bhāva by the cultivation of activities in connection
with Śrī Kṛṣṇa in the form of hearing, chanting and
remembering in the association of sādhus. When bhāva
arises, the sādhaka-bhakta can be the recipient of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s mercy. In this process there is a long delay
before arriving at the stage of bhāva. This is called
vaidhī-bhakti.

Rāgātmikā-bhakti gives results very quickly and attracts
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and therefore it is superior. What is its
inherent nature? This particular verse describes the
various forms in which it is perceived. The category of
rāgātmikā-bhakti includes passive or neutral adoration
(śānta-bhāva) characterized by guru-gaurava (reverence);
dāsya-bhāva exemplified by sevya-bhāva (servitude);
sakhya-bhāva (friendship) typified by sahaja-praṇaya
(natural intimacy); vātsalya-bhāva (parental affection);
and mādhurya-bhāva (amorous love) characterized by kāma.
Anger (krodha), fear (bhaya) and delusion (moha),
although spontaneous, are not included in the category
of bhakti. Anger is seen in demons like Śiśupāla, fear
in demons like Kaṁsa and delusion in the scholars of
Māyāvāda philosophy. Although there is absorption in the
spontaneous activities of anger, fear and the total
forgetfulness of everything arising from the internal
vision of the impersonal Brahman, they are still not
considered to be bhakti, because they are not favorable
to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Furthermore, when we consider śānta, dāsya, sakhya,
vātsalya and mādhurya, spontaneous attachment (rāga)
remains almost absent from śānta-bhāva because of an
excess of neutrality. Nevertheless, it has been accepted
as bhakti because it is somewhat favorable. Besides
this, the other four moods possess an abundance of
spontaneous attachment. According to Bhagavad-gītā
(4.11): “ye yathā māṁ prapadyante tāṁs tathaiva bhajāmy
aham — I reciprocate with everyone according to their
individual degree of surrender to Me.” Those who
cultivate attachment in the form of anger, fear and
delusion attain salvation in the form of sāyujya-mukti,
the impersonal aspect of liberation in which one
imagines that he has merged with Brahman. By śānta-bhāva
one attains a body suitable for remaining absorbed in
Brahman and Paramātmā, like the four Kumāras, headed by
Sanaka and Sanātana, or like Śukadeva Gosvāmī. By dāsya
and sakhya-bhāva one attains an appropriate male or
female form in accordance with one’s eligibility. By
vātsalya-bhāva one acquires a fatherly or motherly form
corresponding to one’s mode of service. A pure,
transcendental body of a gopī is attained by those in
śṛṅgāra-bhāva.



Verse 56

śriyaḥ kāntāḥ kāntaḥ parama-puruṣaḥ kalpa-taravo

                          179
Brahma-samhita.txt                                5/5/2017


drumā bhūmiś cintāmaṇi-gaṇa-mayī toyam amṛtam

kathā gānaṁ nāṭyaṁ gamanam api vaṁśī priya-sakhī

cid-ānandaṁ jyotiḥ param api tad āsvādyam api ca

sa yatra kṣīrābdhiḥ sravati surabhībhyaś ca su-mahān

nimeṣārdhākhyo vā vrajati na hi yatrāpi samayaḥ

bhaje śvetadvīpaṁ tam aham iha golokam iti yaṁ

vidantas te santaḥ kṣiti-virala-cārāḥ katipaye



Anvaya

yatra — where; kāntāḥ — the beloveds; śriyaḥ — (are)
Mahā-Lakṣmīs (who are none other than Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
dearmost beautiful vraja-gopīs); kāntaḥ — (where) the
sole hero; parama-puruṣaḥ — (is) the primeval Supreme
Person, Śrī Govinda; drumā — (where) the trees; kalpa-
taravaḥ — fulfill all desires; bhūmiḥ — (where) the
land; cintāmaṇi-gaṇa-mayī — (is) wish-fulfilling stone;
toyam — (where) water; amṛtam — (is) immortal nectar;
kathā — (where) speech; gānam — (is) song; api — and;
gamanam — movement; nāṭyam — (is) dance; vaṁśī — (where)
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s bamboo flute; priya-sakhī — acts as a dear
friend; jyotiḥ — (where) the svarūpa of light; cid-
ānandam — is a substance of cognizance and bliss; param
api tat — in that place even ordinary items that are
usually illuminated from outside illuminate all other
objects like the sun and moon, because their nature is
supreme, meaning full of knowledge and bliss; āsvādyam
api ca — and they are also relishable, i.e. enjoyable;
ca — and; saḥ su-mahān — (where) a very great; kṣīra-
abdhiḥ — ocean of milk; surabhībhyaḥ — from the udders
of millions upon millions of Surabhī cows, who are
absorbed in ṭhe vibration of Kṛṣṇa’s flute; sravati —
incessantly flows; yatra api — where also; samayaḥ —
time; hi na vrajati — certainly does not pass away (i.e.
eternal spiritual time, which is free from the influence
of material time, is an eternal unbroken present without
past or future); vā — even; nimeṣa-ardha-ākhyaḥ — to the
extent of half a moment; aham bhaje — I render service;
tam — to that; śveta-dvīpam — white island of
Śvetadvīpa; yam — which; te — those; katipaye — very
few; santaḥ — saints whose faith (niṣṭhā) for Śrī
Bhagavān is firmly established; kṣiti-virala-cārāḥ —
wandering on the face of the Earth; iha — in this world;
vidantaḥ — know; iti — as; golokam — Goloka.



Translation

I worship that supreme abode of Śvetadvīpa, where the
beloved heroines are a host of transcendental goddesses
of fortune, and the Supreme Personality Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the
only lover; where all the trees are spiritual desire-
trees, and the earth is made of transcendental wish-
fulfilling cintāmaṇi jewels; where the water is nectar,

                          180
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

natural speaking is a melodious song, and walking to and
fro is an artful dance; where the flute is the dearmost
friend; where light is full of knowledge and bliss, and
the supreme spiritual substance that comprises all
things is relishable; where a vast transcendental ocean
of milk is always flowing from millions upon millions of
surabhī cows; and where time is not subject to passing
away, even for half the blink of an eye, because it is
not divided into past and future, but remains in the
undivided eternal present. That divine abode, which is
practically unknown in this world, is known by the name
of Goloka to only a few, rare sādhus.



Ṭīkā translation

Brahmājī has thus described in poetic prayers the
glories of his worshipable Lord, and how He alone is the
supermost object of loving service. Now, in this pair of
verses which comprise verse 56, he eulogizes that realm
that is beautified by his worshipable deity (iṣṭadeva).
One should understand the word śriyaḥ to mean the
beautiful gopīs of Vraja. They are Mahā-Lakṣmīs and they
are the beloveds of Golokapati Śrī Kṛṣṇa. They have been
described in this way by the mantras and meditations
employed in their worship. The word kāntaḥ is singular
in number. This means that Śrī Kṛṣṇa alone is the one
exclusive lover of countless beautiful Vraja maidens.
Therefore, the glories of Śrī Govinda excel even those
of other forms of Bhagavān such as Mahā-Nārāyaṇa, and
the glories of Govinda-dhāma excel the glories of Mahā-
Vaikuṇṭha.

In Mahā-Vaikuṇṭha, Mahā-Lakṣmī continually renders
service to Mahā-Nārāyaṇa in a mood of extreme reverence.
Mahā-Nārāyaṇa also accepts Her service and bestows an
abundance of mercy upon her. However, in Goloka
Vṛndāvana the son of Nanda Mahārāja, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is the
lover of innumerable gopīs. He dances with them in rāsa-
līlā and always remains eager to attain their favor.
Thus Goloka-dhāma and Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the supreme connoisseur
of transcendental mellows (rasika-śekhara), are both
possessed of the highest and most astonishing glories
because they are adorned with a sweetness that covers
their opulences.

The trees there are wish-fulfilling trees (kalpa-taru),
which fulfill all the hearts’ desires of everyone. Out
of intense love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa, they have become like
inanimate trees, and they bestow sweet fruits upon all.
Feeling the anguish of separation from Śrī Kṛṣṇa when He
is away, and becoming immersed in prema upon meeting
Him, they exhibit the eight types of ecstatic bodily
symptoms (aṣṭa-sāttvika-vikāra). Even the soil of that
place fulfills all desires just like a desire-tree, for
its touch alone awakens kṛṣṇa-prema in the heart.
Furthermore, it is composed of transcendental bliss just
like Śrī Kṛṣṇa. If even the soil is of this nature, then
what can be said of jewels such as the Kaustubha jewel?
If the water there is as delectable as nectar, then what
can be said of the nectar?

In Goloka-dhāma, vaṁśī is the dearmost friend (priya-

                          181
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

sakhī), because, by the waves of her sweet voice, she
first informs Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beloved gopīs about where Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is happily engaged in His pastimes and then,
exerting a powerful attraction upon them, she brings
them to that very place. Furthermore, every substance in
that abode is the embodiment of transcendental joy.
Every article is self-effulgent like the sun and moon.
Thus it is stated in the Gautamīya-tantra: “samānodita
candrārkam — the sun and moon rise at the same time
there, and all the substances of that abode possess the
power of self-illumination like the sun and moon. The
moon displays sixteen phases every night there, and all
the objects illuminated by that full moon are themselves
self-effulgent. Being composed of cit-śakti, they are
all highly relishable.

darśayām āsa lokaṁ svam

gopānāṁ tamasaḥ param

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.28.14)

From this verse it is understood that Śrī Kṛṣṇa granted
to Śrī Nanda and the other Vrajavāsīs darśana of His own
planet, which is situated beyond the material energy. By
the expression surabhībhyaś ca, it should be understood
that when the cows hear the sweet sound of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
flute, they are helplessly overwhelmed with feelings of
parental affection, and a stream of milk flows
automatically from their udders. They forget to chew and
swallow the lush, green grass in their mouths. Instead,
they close their eyes and with an insatiable thirst
drink the nectar of the sound of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s flute
through the vessels of their ears.

The confidential purport of the expression vrajati na hi
is that because all the Vrajavāsīs are perpetually
immersed in the absorption of condensed prema for Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, they forget everything about their bodies and
everything related to the body. They have no time for
meditation. There, the great ocean of transcendental
blissfulness, which is completely devoid of material
afflictions such as birth, death, old age, disease,
lamentation and fear, is incessantly moving in endless
waves. There is no influence of time in that realm: na
ca kāla-vikramaḥ (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.9.10).

The word śveta means śuddha, absolutely pure and
untouched by the association of anything else. Therefore
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s abode is called Śvetadvīpa or Śuddhadvīpa.
It has also been stated in the Gopāla-tāpanī: “yathā
sarasi padmaṁ tiṣṭhati tathā bhūmyāṁ hi tiṣṭhati — just
as a lotus flower remains in water and yet is untouched
by it, similarly, although Śvetadvīpa-dhāma (Vṛndāvana-
Navadvīpa) is apparently located on the surface of the
earth, it remains untouched by earthly defects.”

The word kṣitīti indicates that very few rare persons in
this world know about the factual existence of Śrī
Goloka. The ṛṣis headed by Sanaka Kumāra said: “yaṁ na
vidyo vayaṁ sarve pṛcchanto ‘pi pitāmaham — although we
all posed questions before our great father, Brahmājī,
we could not understand Goloka Vṛndāvana-dhāma.”
Therefore, Goloka Vṛndāvana-dhāma is the most

                          182
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

inaccessible abode. It can only be understood by those
who are the recipients of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s mercy.



Tātparya

The dhāma is completely transcendental, full of the most
excellent transcendental mellows, and easily attained by
those living entities who perform bhajana. It cannot be
referred to as devoid of attributes (nirviśeṣa). The
impersonal brahma-dhāma is attained through anger, fear
and delusion. The devotees attain either Paravyoma
Vaikuṇṭha in the spiritual universe or above that,
Goloka-dhāma, depending on their rasa, or individual
devotional inclination. Goloka-dhāma is called
Śvetadvīpa (the white isle) because it is absolutely
pure. In this world, those who perform worship on the
path of viśuddha-bhakti attain viśuddha-prema-bhakti.
Only they have darśana of the aforementioned śvetadvīpa-
tattva in Gokula Vṛndāvana and Navadvīpa situated in
this world. Those rare devotees refer to that
śvetadvīpa-tattva as Goloka.

In that Goloka one will find the everlasting, exquisite
beauty of the transcendentally qualified lover and
beloved, trees and creepers, land (with mountains,
rivers and forests), water, speech, movement, flute-
song, moon, sun, the enjoyed and enjoyment (the
inconceivable variegated wonders of the sixty-four
arts), cows, nectar in the form of a flowing ocean of
milk, and spiritual time characterized by the eternal
present. This Goloka is described in numerous places in
śāstra such as the Vedas, Purāṇas and tantras.

It is stated in the Chāndogya Śruti: brūyād yāvān vā
ayam ākāśas tāvān eṣa antar hṛdaye ākāśaḥ uta asmin dyāv
āpṛthivī antar eva samāhite ubhāv agniś ca vāyuś ca
sūrya-candramasāv ubhau vidhun nakṣatrāṇi yac cānyad
ihāsti yac ca nāsti sarvaṁ tasmin samāhitam iti.

The purport is that, just as there are so many
attributes and varieties in the world of māyā, similarly
all those variegated features and even more are present
in that transcendental abode. The harmonious combination
of the diverse facets of the spiritual world produces
blissfulness, whereas the discord between the diverse
features of the material world produces mixed happiness
and distress. Through the Vedas and the principles of
knowledge contained therein, the Vedas personified and
the saintly devotees of Bhagavān adopt the pure and
uncontaminated state of consciousness. Thus, they adopt
the yoga system of the trance of pure devotion, in which
they attain the darśana of that Goloka-dhāma. By the
mercy of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the faculty of their insignificant
consciousness attains an unlimited nature of enjoyment
on the same level as Śrī Kṛṣṇa in His abode; that is,
they relish the happiness of loving service.

The expression param api tad āsvādyam api ca has a
hidden meaning. The words param api indicate that among
all the transcendentally blissful varieties within
Goloka, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Absolute Truth (para-
tattva). The words tad āsvādyam api indicate that all

                          183
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

the other transcendentally blissful varieties are the
objects of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s enjoyment; that is, they are Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s āsvādya-tattva, meaning they are to be tasted by
Him. Śrī Kṛṣṇa attains the condition of possessing a
golden complexion when He relishes the following three
bhāvas: the greatness of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s intimate love
(praṇaya), the rasa of Śrī Kṛṣṇa that is realized by
Her, and the happiness She feels upon realizing that
rasa. In other words, He assumes the form of Śrī
Gaurasundara, whose body is adorned with the emotions
and luster of Śrī Rādhā, and engages in tasting His own
glories. That condition is the happiness of His own
rasa-sevā, service imbued with transcendental mellows.
This happiness of rasa-sevā is also eternally present in
Śvetadvīpa.



Verse 57

athovāca mahā-viṣṇur

bhagavantaṁ prajāpatim

brahman mahattva-vijñāne

prajā-sarge ca cen matiḥ

pañca-ślokīm imāṁ vidyāṁ

vatsa dattāṁ nibodha me



Anvaya

atha — thereafter, i.e. after hearing the prayers of
Brahmā; mahā-viṣṇuḥ — Mahā-Viṣṇu, i.e. Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
controller of all controllers; uvāca — said; bhagavantam
prajāpatim — to Bhagavān Brahmā; brahman - O Prajāpati
(protector of the universal population); cet — if; matiḥ
— your mind desires; mahattva-vijñāne — realized
knowledge of My glories, i.e. specific knowledge of the
transcendental nature; ca — and; prajā-sarge — the
process of generating universal progeny; vatsa — (then)
dear child; nibodha — know; me — from Me; imām — this;
vidyām — knowledge; dattām — given; pañca-ślokīm — in
five verses.



Translation

On hearing this prayer, which contains so many essential
truths, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa said to Brahmā, “O Brahmā, if
you desire to create progeny by employing the
transcendental realization of My glories, then My dear
child, I will bestow upon you this knowledge, contained
in five verses. You should take it up in practice.”



Ṭīkā translation


                           184
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

Thus, the mercy bestowed on Brahmājī by Śrī Bhagavān
upon hearing his prayers is related in this one and a
half ślokas beginning with athovāca. Everything is clear
in this verse.



Tātparya

Until this point, Brahmājī has offered with a burning
expectation many types of prayers containing names such
as Kṛṣṇa and Govinda, which indicate Bhagavān’s form,
qualities and pastimes, and when Svayam Bhagavān Śrī
Kṛṣṇa heard this, He was very pleased. At that time
Brahmā also had a desire in his heart to create progeny.
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa understood his mood, and explained
how jīvas may perform the sādhana of pure, unalloyed
bhakti while carrying out His orders in the material
world. Śrī Bhagavān said, “O Brahmā, knowledge of the
transcendental reality is the essential science. If you
want to create progeny while remaining situated in this
realized knowledge of transcendence, then listen to the
instruction on bhakti-vidyā that I will impart in the
following five ślokas.”

Bhagavān will explain how one should practice śuddha-
bhakti while performing one’s worldly duties in
pursuance of His order.



Verse 58

prabuddhe jñāna-bhaktibhyām

ātmany ānanda-cin-mayī

udety anuttamā bhaktir

bhagavat-prema-lakṣaṇā



Anvaya

ātmani prabuddhe — when the soul becomes awakened;
jñāna-bhaktibhyām — through knowledge of the
transcendental tattvas of Śrī Bhagavān and devotion for
Him; anuttamā — (then) the most exalted of all; bhaktiḥ
— devotion; ānanda-cin-mayī — which is the rasa-svarūpa
of transcendental bliss; bhagavat-prema-lakṣaṇā — and is
characterized by love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa; udeti — arises.



Translation

When one realizes the transcendental subject through
knowledge, and through devotion whose goal is affection
for Śrī Kṛṣṇa, there is an awakening of prema for
Bhagavān. That prema is characterized by extremely
elevated bhakti in the form of transcendental rasa in
relation to the soul’s beloved Śrī Kṛṣṇa.


                          185
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017



Ṭīkā translation

Now, in these five verses, the mercy of Bhagavān is
being described. Bhagavān begins to bestow His mercy
with this verse beginning prabuddhe. “O Brahmā, being
imbued with knowledge and realization by My mercy, you
may engage in My service with ecstatic devotional
sentiments.”

For example, Bhagavān said to Uddhavajī: jñāna-vijñāna-
sampanno bhaja māṁ bhakti-bhāvitaḥ (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
11.19.5). The meaning is: “mām eva bhaja anyat-sarva-
tyaja — abandon everything and engage exclusively in My
service.”(Śrīdhara Svāmipāda)

“Service is the embodiment of knowledge (jñāna), and one
who serves is the embodiment of realized knowledge
(vijñāna). The highest auspiciousness for the jīvas lies
in rendering service to Bhagavān in knowledge of the
constitutional nature of the served and the servant.
Therefore the prime duty is to engage in His service
with knowledge of relationship (sambandha-jñāna). One
cannot attain love for Bhagavān by rendering the
unsightly service that results from the absence of
sambandha-jñāna.” (Prabhupāda Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura)



Tātparya

The meaning of jñāna is sambandha-jñāna, or knowledge of
the mutual relationship between spiritual substance (in
the form of the living entities), dull matter and the
supreme transcendental reality who is Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Here
jñāna udeti does not refer to knowledge of the body and
mind, because that knowledge is opposed to bhakti. The
statements of the Vedas and literature in pursuance of
the Vedic conclusion, received through the spiritual
hierarchy of guru-paramparā, constitute the only
immaculate evidence. The seven principles of Daśa-mūla
that constitute sambandha-jñāna are as follows: (1) Śrī
Hari is the Supreme Absolute Truth. (2) He is
omnipotent. (3) He is the nectarean ocean of all
transcendental mellows. (4) The living entities are His
separated expansions. (5) Some of those jīvas are
conditioned. (6) Most of the living entities exist
before and beyond this material world and are liberated.
(7) The relationship between Bhagavān, the jīvas and the
creation is one of inconceivable difference and non-
difference.

Bhakti is the only process to attain the goal of life,
and among the many limbs of bhakti, nine are prominent.
Activities such as hearing about Śrī Kṛṣṇa, glorifying
Him, remembering Him, serving His lotus feet, worshiping
Him, offering Him prayers, carrying out His orders,
relating to Him as a friend and fully surrendering
oneself to His will are called kṛṣṇānuśīlana, the
cultivation of endeavors directly for Śrī Kṛṣṇa or in
connection with Him. One should understand that such
kṛṣṇānuśīlana is the only process to attain the goal of

                          186
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

life. Its limbs and sub-limbs have been described
elaborately in Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu. Only by this
type of knowledge and devotion can one attain the
enlightenment characterized by the awakening of prema-
bhakti within the heart. Such prema is the highest form
of bhakti, and the ultimate goal for the living
entities.



Verse 59

pramāṇais tat-sad-ācārais

tad-abhyāsair nirantaram

bodhayann ātmanātmānaṁ

bhaktim apy uttamāṁ labhet



Anvaya

tad-abhyāsaiḥ — through the sādhaka’s repeated practice;
tat-sad-ācāraiḥ — in accordance with the pure standards
of bhakti that have been previously established by the
examples of sādhu-bhaktas; pramāṇaiḥ — and with the
evidence given in all śāstras that teach the
philosophical conclusions of pure bhakti; nirantaram —
incessantly; bodhayan — realizing; ātmānam — oneself;
ātmanā api — through one’s own self (in the form of a
purified jīva who has taken shelter of Śrī Bhagavān);
labhet — one can attain; uttamām bhaktim — pure
devotion.



Translation

One may attain incessant realization of one’s
constitutional identity by continuously observing the
codes of appropriate behavior, and by practicing the
sādhana-bhajana prescribed by the authentic scriptures.
Understanding oneself to be under the shelter of
Bhagavān, one may offer oneself fully at His lotus feet.
A sādhaka who does so attains uttama-bhakti.



Ṭīkā translation

Sādhana-bhakti is the only method to attain prema-
bhakti. Therefore the subject of sādhana-bhakti is being
described in this verse beginning pramāṇais tat. The
term sat or sādhu refers to the great transcendentally
realized personalities who conduct themselves perfectly
in accordance with the precepts of śuddha-bhakti, and
with the etiquette prescribed by authentic devotional
scriptures such as the Vedas, Purāṇas, Bhagavad-gītā and
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. When the sādhaka-bhakta continuously
practices the limbs of bhakti — such as śravaṇa, kīrtana
and smaraṇa — in accordance with the standards set by
such realized personalities, he realizes within his

                             187
Brahma-samhita.txt                                 5/5/2017

heart that he is a pure spirit soul under the shelter of
Bhagavān. Śuddha-bhakti is actually rāgānuga-bhakti;
that is, bhakti following the moods of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
eternal associates in Goloka who are by nature deeply
attached to Him. One who engages in the uninterrupted
cultivation of this śuddha-bhakti attains within his
pure heart a transcendental manifestation of his eternal
spiritual form as a servant of Bhagavān, by the mercy of
a pure devotee or by the direct mercy of Bhagavān
Himself. Subsequently he achieves the highest stage of
prema-bhakti.

A lucid analysis of this occurrence can also be found in
the prayers by the Vedas personified in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.87.20):

sva-kṛta-pureṣv amīṣv abahir-antara-saṁvaraṇaṁ

tava puruṣaṁ vadanty akhila-śakti-dhṛto ‘ṁśa-kṛtam

iti nṛ-gatiṁ vivicya kavayo nigamāvapanaṁ

bhavata upāsate ‘ṅghrim abhavam bhuvi viśvasitāḥ

The living entities are internally and externally
controllers of their bodies and populate the entire
universe. They are not independent, but are fragmentary
parts (vibhinnāṁśa) of Your energy. Those who attain a
true understanding, and who are in knowledge of the
desired goal of the greatly realized souls, utterly
reject the fruitive activities mentioned in the Vedas.
With complete faith they cultivate unalloyed,
transcendental bhakti in the form of worshiping You
without the slightest expectation of material
remuneration. In this way, although they remain in the
world, they easily cross over the insurmountable ocean
of material existence and come to You by engaging in the
loving service of Your lotus feet. Your divine lotus
feet are the only cure for the fear experienced in the
endless chain of birth and death.



Tātparya

The word pramāṇa (reliable evidence) refers to the
bhakti-śāstras such as the Vedas, Upaniṣads, Purāṇas,
Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. The word sadācāra
should be understood to indicate the behavior of
Vaiṣṇavas who are practicing pure bhakti, and whose
activities are based on deep, spontaneous attachment to
Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Tad-abhyāsa denotes the process of acquiring
a clear understanding of the ten fundamental principles
(daśa-mūla-tattva) described in bhakti-śāstra, and then,
as prescribed by the śāstra, receiving harināma, which
is the embodiment of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s names, form, qualities
and pastimes. After that one should continuously
cultivate the practice of chanting harināma throughout
the day and night. This is the meaning of abhyāsa. Thus,
this verse stresses that it is absolutely necessary to
adopt the process of spiritual cultivation in accordance
with the instructions of śāstra, and under the guidance
of sādhus. Cultivating the practice of chanting harināma
along with appropriate conduct dispels the ten kinds of

                          188
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

offenses against the holy name. Abhyāsa means to follow
the uninterrupted and offenseless cultivation of
harināma practiced by śuddha-bhaktas. If one practices
in this way, the desired result, namely prema-bhakti,
will manifest in the heart.



Verse 60

yasyāḥ śreyas-karaṁ nāsti

yayā nirvṛtim āpnuyāt

yā sādhayati mām eva

bhaktiṁ tām eva sādhayet



Anvaya

na asti — there is nothing else; śreyaḥ-karam — which is
more potent in promoting auspiciousness; yasyāḥ — than
that (śuddha-bhakti); yayā — (because) by that; āpnuyāt
— one can attain; nirvṛtim — supreme bliss; eva —
certainly; yā sādhayati — it captivates; mām — Me; eva —
indeed; sādhayet — one should practice sādhana; tām
bhaktim — for that śuddha-bhakti.



Translation

Prema-bhakti is the aim and object of life, and there is
nothing more auspicious than this. The platform of
supreme bliss is attained only through prema-bhakti.
This prema-bhakti, which leads to Me, is only achieved
through sādhana-bhakti.



Ṭīkā translation

Prema-bhakti is the only aim and object of life
(sādhya), and there is nothing more auspicious than this
for the living entities. Bhagavān is attained by prema-
bhakti, which is the embodiment of the highest
transcendental bliss. This has also been stated in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (4.24.55):

taṁ durārādhyam ārādhya

satām api durāpayā

ekānta-bhaktyā ko vāñchet

pāda-mūlaṁ vinā bahiḥ

O Bhagavān, Your unalloyed devotional service is
extremely difficult to attain, even for sādhus. After
worshiping Your lotus feet, which are rarely attained,
what kind of unfortunate person in this world could give
up loving service to them and desire anything else born

                            189
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

of ignorance, such as the happiness derived from the
gross physical body, from elevation to heaven, or from
liberation?

Those who wish to know more about this subject can refer
to Bhakti-sandarbha.



Tātparya

There is nothing more auspicious for the living entities
than prema-bhakti. This stage of accomplished devotion
constitutes the jīvas’ highest bliss. The lotus feet of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa are attained only by prema-bhakti. Only those
who cultivate sādhana-bhakti with a grief-stricken and
desperate hankering to attain accomplished devotion can
become successful in achieving it. Prema-bhakti can
never be attained by others.



Verse 61

dharmān anyān parityajya

mām ekaṁ bhaja viśvasan

yādṛśī yādṛśī śraddhā

siddhir bhavati tādṛśī

kurvan nirantaraṁ karma

loko ‘yam anuvartate

tenaiva karmaṇā dhyāyan

māṁ parāṁ bhaktim icchati



Anvaya

parityajya — completely renouncing; anyān — other;
dharmān — forms of constitutional activity centered
around the principles of religious conduct, economic
development, sense gratification and liberation, which
are practiced out of ignorance; bhaja — render service;
mām — to Me; ekam — exclusively; viśvasan — with faith;
yādṛśī yādṛśī — in accordance with the degree; śraddhā —
of faith; bhavati — there is achieved; tādṛśī — a
corresponding; siddhiḥ — perfection; ayam lokaḥ — the
people of this material world; nirantaram — incessantly;
kurvan — engaging in action; karma anuvartate — follow
this process of work; eva — certainly; tena karmaṇā —
through performing such activities; dhyāyan — while
contemplating; mām — Me; icchati — one hankers; parām
bhaktim — for the supreme stage of bhakti, i.e. prema-
bhakti.



Translation

                            190
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017


O Brahmā, abandon all varieties of dharma and engage
exclusively in My bhajana with unwavering determination
and faith. Perfection is attained according to one’s
faith. Human beings in this world are continuously
engaged in occupational duties. They should desire to
attain prema-bhakti by being absorbed in thoughts of Me
through the performance of their respective duties.



Ṭīkā translation

To further fortify the resolve of Brahmājī in the
practice of śuddha-bhakti, Śrī Bhagavān said, “O Brahmā,
engage in My service with unflinching faith. Others who
desire sense gratification or liberation should also
think exclusively of Me and nothing else while carrying
out their respective duties. In this way everyone may
worship Me, the Supreme Personality, through unalloyed
bhakti-yoga.”

This has also been stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.3.10):

akāmaḥ sarva-kāmo vā

mokṣa-kāma udāra-dhīḥ

tīvreṇa bhakti-yogena

yajeta puruṣaṁ param

Those who are desireless, those who have all desires,
those who desire liberation and those who desire
unalloyed devotion should all simply worship Me, the
Supreme Enjoyer, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, through the performance of
unadulterated bhakti-yoga.



Tātparya

Śuddha-bhakti is the only transcendental occupation for
the living entities, and is therefore called the eternal
constitutional occupation of the living entity (jaiva-
dharma). All other constitutional activities apart from
this are engagements arising from the influence of
material designations. There are many types of such
materially designated occupations current in the world,
such as the dharma of knowledge of Brahman aimed at
attaining impersonal liberation; yoga-dharma such as the
eightfold yoga process aimed at oneness with Brahman;
the dharma of mundane piety to acquire bodily sense
pleasure; the dharma of jñāna-yoga as a mixture of
fruitive activity with the cultivation of intellectual
knowledge; and the dharma of dry renunciation. Here
Bhagavān is saying, “Reject all these superficial
dharmas and engage in My service by taking shelter of
bhakti-dharma, which is based on transcendental faith.
Exclusive faith in Me is called viśvāsa. When that
conviction gradually matures, it assumes the form of
steadiness (niṣṭhā), taste (ruci), attachment (āsakti)
and ecstatic transcendental emotion (bhāva). The degree
of one’s attainment of spiritual perfection depends on

                          191
Brahma-samhita.txt                             5/5/2017

the extent to which faith matures or becomes
intensified.”

One might raise the question: how will a person protect
his body and maintain his life if he always remains
absorbed in the constant endeavor for perfection in
bhakti? Death is inevitable when activities for physical
preservation and maintenance are arrested, and how will
it be possible to endeavor for perfection in bhakti when
one has died? To dispel this doubt, Bhagavān is saying,
“If human beings maintain their lives and protect their
bodies with the sole intention of attaining Me, the
reactive quality of the activities they perform is
eliminated, and these activities become acts of
devotion. The survival and sustenance of the human being
is accomplished through three types of activity, namely,
bodily, mental and social. Bodily activities include
eating, drinking, sitting, walking, reclining, dressing
and activities for purifying oneself, such as bathing.
Mental activities include thinking, remembering,
concentrating, realizing and feeling happiness and
distress. There are many types of social activities such
as marriage, mutual obligations between the king and his
subjects, fraternity, assemblies for performing
sacrifice, activities related to one’s home and temple,
fulfilling desires by constructing hospitals and digging
wells for public welfare, maintaining family members,
receiving guests, observing customs and honoring others
according to their social status. When all these
activities are performed for the sake of one’s own
enjoyment, they can be called karma-kāṇḍa. When one
attempts to accumulate knowledge through the performance
of these activities, they can be called karma-yoga or
jñāna-yoga. But when all such activities are favorable
to sādhana-bhakti, they are called the indirect
application of bhakti (gauṇa-bhakti-yoga).

“Only activities that are purely based on service to Me
may be called the direct application of devotion.
According to the circumstances, one may sometimes engage
in the activities of direct devotion, and at other
times, one may be engaged in indirect bhakti while
meeting worldly obligations. In either case, every
activity is effectively a meditation upon Me. In such a
condition, one does not become indifferent to Me, even
while being engaged in activities.” In this method,
although work is performed, one remains internally
fixed. Śrī Iśopaniṣad (1) states:

īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvaṁ

yat kiñcij jagatyāṁ jagat

tena tyaktena bhuñjīthā

mā gṛdhaḥ kasya svid dhanam

Our revered commentator has stated, tena īśa-tyaktena
visṛṣtena. The essential purport is that whatever one
receives should be accepted with the understanding, “By
good fortune I have attained this mercy personally given
by Bhagavān.” If one accepts everything in this way, the
reactive quality of karma is eliminated and the activity
takes on the quality of devotion. Therefore, the verse

                            192
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

beginning with īśāvāsya conveys the following sense:

kurvann eveha karmāṇi

jijīviṣec chataṁ samāḥ

evaṁ tvayi nānyatheto ‘sti

na karma lipyate nare

Śrī Īśopaniṣad (2)

By observing this method, a human being may work
throughout a life extending over thousands of years,
without being tainted by karma.

The jñānīs interpret both of these mantras as advocating
the renunciation of the fruits of work. However, the
devotees interpret them to mean that one can attain the
mercy of Bhagavān by completely offering everything unto
Him. Bhagavān is saying, “Perform your worldly duties
along with meditating upon Me and worshiping Me on the
path of formal deity worship.”

Within Brahmā’s heart there is a desire to create. If
Brahmā considers the task of creation to be Bhagavān’s
order, and carries it out while meditating upon Him,
then, because he is surrendered to Bhagavān, this may be
included within bhakti as a secondary function favorable
to the nourishment of devotion. Thus it was appropriate
for Bhagavān to instruct Brahmā in this way, although
this type of instruction is not required for a living
entity who has attained bhāva, because he is naturally
detached from any subject other than Śrī Kṛṣṇa.



Verse 62

ahaṁ hi viśvasya carācarasya

bījaṁ pradhānaṁ prakṛtiḥ pumāṁś ca

mayāhitaṁ teja idaṁ vibharṣi

vidhe vidhehi tvam atho jaganti

iti śrī brahma-saṁhitāyāṁ bhagavat-siddhānta-saṅgrahe
mūla-sūtrākhyaḥ pañcamo ‘dhyāyaḥ



Anvaya

aham — I; hi — alone; bījam — (am) the seed; viśvasya —
of this universe; cara-acarasya — of moving and non-
moving beings; pradhānam — the unmanifest aggregate of
material elements; prakṛtiḥ — the external potency
(which is unmanifest to the conditioned souls)
consisting of the three binding qualities; ca — and;
pumān — the Supreme Person (overseer of everything);
idam — this; tejaḥ — spiritual power; vibharṣi — you
hold; āhitam — is endowed; mayā — by Me; vidhe — O
Creator (Brahmā); atho — now; vidhehi — (through that

                             193
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

power) furnish all necessities; jaganti — for the
worlds.



Translation

O Brahmā, listen to Me. I alone am the seed and the root
principle of this universe of moving and non-moving
entities. Only I am the unmanifest aggregate of the
material elements. Only I am the predominated (prakṛti)
as well as the predominator (puruṣa). The brahminical
power that is concealed within you has been given by Me.
Therefore, employ this power in creating the universe of
animate and inanimate entities.



Ṭīkā translation

In this verse beginning ahaṁ hi, Bhagavān tells Śrī
Brahmā with sound logic, “Thus your desire to create
will also be successful. Only I am the seed of the
unmanifest aggregate of material elements, the
embodiment of the highest cause of all causes, the full
and complete Brahman, and the complete truth, or Svayam
Bhagavān. I am the external energy (prakṛti), which is
composed of three material modes, and which is called
unmanifest. I am also the Supreme Male who glances upon
that energy. What more can I say? You are also employing
the potency that was bestowed by Me. Therefore, O
Brahmā, create the whole universe of mobile and
stationary beings by that potency.”

It is mentioned in Brahma-saṁhitā and other scriptures
that the text of Brahma-saṁhitā comprises one hundred
chapters. This fifth chapter is the essential purport of
Brahma-saṁhitā, also called Śrī Kṛṣṇopaniṣad, compiled
by Brahmājī, because it is the collected essence of the
entire text of one hundred chapters. Although many
different interpretations and meanings can be given, we
have defined the pure interpretation and significance,
along with the philosophical analysis according to the
eternally established conclusions received through the
genuine succession of realized spiritual preceptors.
Intelligent and learned readers will make a meticulous
study of this text with implicit faith. Just as the
eternal Supreme Personality is the ultimate refuge,
similarly that Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmipāda, whose elder brother
is Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmipāda and whose younger brother is
Śrī Vallabha, is my exclusive shelter.

Thus ends the translation of Śrī Jīva Gosvāmipāda’s
commentary on Śrī Brahma-saṁhitā.



Tātparya

According to some opinions, the superlative principle of
truth is the formless, undifferentiated Brahman, which
is devoid of qualities. Those who adhere to this
conception think as follows: “It is only due to
bewilderment that the impersonal substance known as

                          194
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

Brahman appears to have attributes. Otherwise, when the
illusory nature is divided, it is called material
existence (saṁsāra), and in the undivided state it is
called Brahman. Alternatively, Brahman is the object and
the material world is its reflection.” Another idea is,
“Everything is simply the jīva’s illusion. It is only in
the jīva’s deluded condition that the mistaken
conception of the jīva and the material world is present
in the impersonal Brahman.” Some say, “By nature īśvara
is one entity, the jīva is another and the universe of
five gross elements is another tattva. They all exist
with eternal and separate independence.” Others support
the following theory: if īśvara can be compared to a
noun, then the jīva and the universe can be compared to
its adjectives. Thus the noun of the Absolute Truth,
being qualified by the adjectives of jīva and jagat, is
the embodiment of qualified monism (viśiṣṭādvaita), and
that specifically non-dual Brahman is the Supreme Truth.
Some philosophers are of the opinion that the Supreme
Truth appears sometimes in oneness and sometimes in
duality by the influence of inconceivable potency. Some
conclude that the monistic conception of a truth without
potency is meaningless and illogical: “Thus, Brahman is
the eternally pure, non-dual principle, replete with
pure potency.”

All such philosophies have come into being on the basis
of statements from the Vedas with support from the
Vedānta-sūtra. Although they do not represent the
genuine all-encompassing conclusion of the Vedas, they
certainly contain some contextual aspects of the Vedic
truth of qualified monism (viśiṣṭādvaita). Philosophies
such as sāṅkhya, pātañjala, nyāya and vaiśeṣika are
contrary to the Vedas, and the pūrva-mīmāṁsa philosophy
conforms to the section of the Vedas that deals with the
dharma of mundane piety.

Not to mention such philosophies which only externally
take Vedānta as their basis, the philosophies of monism
(advaita), qualified monism (viśiṣṭādvaita), dualism-
with-non-dualism (dvaitādvaita), purified non-dualism
(śuddhādvaita) and pure dualism (śuddha-dvaita) outlined
previously have come into being on the basis of Vedānta.

“O Brahmā, leave behind those statements of the Vedas
that are relevant to a particular context, or that are
not universally applicable. You and your pure sampradāya
should accept that complete philosophical conclusion
that is consistent with the entirety of the Vedas,
namely the highest principle of inconceivable difference
and non-difference (acintya-bhedābheda). By doing so,
you will be able to become a śuddha-bhakta. The
essential significance of this statement is that the
animate world is composed of jīvas, and the inanimate
world is composed of matter. My superior potency has
manifested the jīvas from the marginal potency, and My
inferior potency has manifested the inert material
world. I am the seed of everything. In other words, My
desire potency, which is part of the predominated
potency and which is non-different from Me, regulates
everything. The transformations of the predominated
potencies have become the unmanifest aggregate of the
material energy (pradhāna), the predominated potency
(prakṛti) and puruṣa. Although manifest as the potency

                          195
Brahma-samhita.txt                              5/5/2017

of pradhāna, prakṛti and puruṣa, I am also eternally
separate from them as the possessor and controller of
the potency. In this way, the principle of simultaneous
difference and non-difference is manifested in its
fullest and most complete sense by the influence of My
inconceivable potency. The statements of the Vedas
descending in the succession of realized spiritual
preceptors are called āmnāya. Therefore, may the āmnāya
teaching of the preceptorial succession in your
sampradāya be concerned exclusively with the attainment
of kṛṣṇa-prema through that pure bhakti-yoga that is
complete with knowledge of the mutual relationship
between jīva, matter and Kṛṣṇa, on the basis of the
philosophy of inconceivable distinction with non-
distinction (acintya-bhedābheda-tattva). In this way,
let the followers of your Śrī Brahma sampradāya also
adopt this conception of śuddha-bhakti and bring
auspiciousness to the world.”

jīvābhaya-pradā vṛttir

jīvāśaya-prakāśinī

kṛtā bhaktivinodena

surabhī-kuñja-vāsinā

This Prakāśikā-vṛtti, which reveals the intention of Śrī
Jīva Gosvāmī and bestows fearlessness upon the jīvas,
has been published by Śrī Saccidānanda Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura, a resident of Surabhī-kuñja.

Thus ends the Gaudīya commentary entitled Prakāśinī on
the original sūtras of the fifth chapter of the
collected theistic conclusions that comprise Śrī Brahma-
saṁhitā.



Table of Contents

Verse 1

Verse 2

Verses 3—4

Verse 5

Verse 6

Verse 7

Verse 8

Verse 9

Verse 10

Verse 11

Verse 12

Verse 13

                          196
Brahma-samhita.txt         5/5/2017


Verse 14

Verse 15

Verse 16

Verse 17

Verse 18

Verse 19

Verse 20

Verse 21

Verse 22

Verse 23

Verse 24

Verse 25

Verse 26

Verse 27

Verse 28

Verse 29

Verse 30

Verse 31

Verse 32

Verse 33

Verse 34

Verse 35

Verse 36

Verse 37

Verse 38

Verse 39

Verse 40

Verse 41

Verse 42

Verse 43

Verse 44

Verse 45

                     197
Brahma-samhita.txt         5/5/2017


Verse 46

Verse 47

Verse 48

Verse 49

Verse 50

Verse 51




                     198
