Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                       5/5/2017

Sri Braja Mandala Parikrama



Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

GVP (2011)



Tags: Sri Braja Mandala Parikrama

Sri Braja Mandala Parikramattt



* * *




* * *




Table of Contents

Part 1

Chapter 1The Nature of Braja

Chapter 2The Borders of Braja

Chapter 3How to Observe Braja Maṇḍala Parikramā

Chapter 4Places Visited on Braja Maṇḍala Parikramā

Part 2

Chapter 2Madhuvana

Chapter 3Tālavana

Chapter 4Kumudavana

Chapter 5Bahulāvana

Chapter 6Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa andŚrī Śyāma Kuṇḍa

Chapter 7Śrī Govardhana

Chapter 8Śrī Kāmyavana(Kāmavana)

Chapter 9Varsānā (Vṛṣabhānupura)

Chapter 10Nandagaon

Chapter 11Jāvaṭa (Yāva Grāma)

Chapter 12Kokilāvana and OtherPastime-places


                              1
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                     5/5/2017

Chapter 13Śrī Bhadravana

Chapter 14Bhāṇḍīravana

Chapter 15Māṭavana

Chapter 16Baelvana (Bilvavana)

Chapter 17Lohavana

Chapter 18Mahāvana-Gokula

Chapter 19Śrī Vṛndāvana



Śrī Braja Maṇḍala Parikramā

Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

Śrī Braja Maṇḍala Parikramā, Second edition is Published
by Gaudiya Vedanta Publications. Some Rights Reserved.

Content in this book is licensed under the Creative
Commons Attribution-No Derivative Works 3.0 Unported
License.

To view a copy of this license, visit
http://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/3.0/

Permissions beyond the scope of this license may be
available at www.purebhakti.com/pluslicense or write to:
gvp.contactus@gmail.com

For further information, free downloads of all titles,
world tour lectures, and more, please visit:
www.purebhakti.com

, www.purebhakti.tv

or www.backtobhakti.com




Preface

For those sincere bhaktas who deeply desire to enter
into the sweetness of Śrī Braja Dhāma, this book is
cause for great joy. It takes the faithful reader on an
extraordinary journey through Braja, following the path
taken annually on the Śrī Braja Maṇḍala Parikramā.

Śrī Braja Maṇḍala Parikramā was originally set in motion
by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu Himself. Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Prabhupāda re-
established it in October 1932, and his dearmost
disciple Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī
Mahārāja sustained it in the decades that followed. Our
beloved Gurudeva, oṁ viṣṇupāda aṣṭottaraśata Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, who has been performing
Braja Maṇḍala Parikramā since 1954, is keeping the
tradition alive today — thus fulfilling the

                              2
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

mano’bhīṣṭha, or inner heart’s desire, of all the
ācāryas in our line going up to Śrīman Mahāprabhu.

The Western world was first introduced to Śrī Braja
Maṇḍala Parikramā by the causeless mercy of Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja, who founded the
International Society for Krishna Consciousness (ISKCON)
in July 1966 and spread the teachings of Mahāprabhu to
every corner of the world. Now, for more than twenty
years, Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja has
invested his energy into helping Western devotees gain a
better appreciation of Śrī Braja Dhāma and enter more
deeply into Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmīpāda’s teachings on bhakti
— especially many of the senior-most disciples of Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja. This English translation
of Śrī Braja Maṇḍala Parikramā is another priceless gem
that he is giving the English-speaking world.

This volume is basically a direct translation of the
Hindi edition. We have made some slight changes to the
order of the material, mostly to provide greater
continuity. We have also corrected a number of minor
mistakes in the Hindi edition, under the guidance of our
Gurudeva and of Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Mādhava Mahārāja,
Śrīman Pundarika dāsa Brahmacārī and Śrīman Mādhava
Priya dāsa Brahmacārī, to whom I would like to express
my thanks.

Where something in the Hindi edition is in fact intended
to be ambivalent or ambiguous, we have left it that way.
Thus, like the Hindi edition, the English rendition of
Śrī Braja Maṇḍala Parikramā is not meant as a catalogue
of information or data. Rather, it is meant to stir the
heart of the faithful and inquisitive reader, inspiring
him or her to understand the deeper and hidden meanings
of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala’s sweet Braja pastimes
directly from the lips of a pure Vaiṣṇava.

I am very grateful to Śrīmatī Janakī dāsī for
translating Śrī Braja Maṇḍala Parikramā into English.
She was assisted by Śrīmatī Manjulālī dāsī and Śrīman
Gaura Hari dāsa. Śrīmatī Vaijayantī Mālā dāsī and Śrīman
Sundara Gopāla dāsa edited the text and helped in
various ways to bring this book to print. The manuscript
was proofread by Śrīmatī Vicitrī dāsī, Śrīmatī Mañjarī
dāsī and many others. Śrīman Kṛṣṇa Karuṇya dāsa
Brahmacārī did the layout. Photographs for the book are
courtesy of Śrīman Hemant Kumār, Śrīman Kaliya Damana
dāsa, Śrīmatī Saradā dāsī, Śrīman Rūpa-Raghunātha dāsa
Brahmacārī and others.

I would also like to extend my thanks to Śrīman Nanda
Kiśora dāsa, Śrīman Purandara dāsa Brahmacārī, Śrīmatī
Umā dīdī, Śrīmatī Vṛndāvana Vilāsinī dāsī, Śrīman
Sudarśana dāsa, Śrīman Kiśora Kṛṣṇa dāsa, Śrīman Atula
Kṛṣṇa dāsa and Śrīman Śrīnivāsa dāsa for helping out in
various important ways. I also want to express my
heartfelt gratitude to the maṭhavāsīs in the Mathurā
Maṭha, under the guidance of Śrīman Premānanda dāsa
Brahmacārī, who are always supporting the Western
devotees by providing hari-kathā, prasāda, lodging and
their hospitality in general.

Finally, I want to thank Śrīman Rādhā-Kānta dāsa,

                              3
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Śrīmatī Rati Kalā dāsī and Śrīman Rāma-Kānta dāsa,
without whose generous financial contributions this
production would not have been possible.

I humbly beg our readers to overlook any imperfections
they might find in this production. All that is pleasing
and that touches the heart is the result of the mercy of
our Gurudeva, and any errors are due to my own
inadequacies.

Aspiring to serve

Śrī Guru and the Vaiṣṇavas,

Śānti dāsī




Introduction

(to the Hindi edition)

In 1947, I took shelter of the lotus feet of
paramārādhya oṁ viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja. From that time, by his
causeless mercy, I received the good fortune to travel
with him. On many occasions, I was highly blessed to
perform parikramā and have darśana of holy places
(tīrthas) throughout all of India. We visited tīrthas
like Māyāpura Yogapīṭha (the birthplace of Śrī Gaurāṅga
Mahāprabhu); the dvīpas (islands) of Śrīdhāma Navadvīpa;
the līlā-sthalīs (pastimes-places) and other tīrthas of
Gauḍa Maṇḍala; Vaidyanātha Deva-ghara; Mandāra
Madhusūdana; Gayā; Kāśī; Prayāga; Ayodhyā; Naimīṣāraṇya;
the tīrthas in South India marked by the lotus feet of
Śrī Gaura; Dvārakā and other tīrthas of West India;
Ajantā-Elorā of Central India; the tīrthas of
Rājasthāna, such as Jaipura and Ajmer; and all the līlā-
sthalīs of Braja Maṇḍala. Also, after Śrīla Gurudeva
entered into aprakaṭa-līlā, I was fortunate enough to
have darśana and perform parikramā of these līlā-sthalīs
and tīrthas several times under the guidance of the Śrī
Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti.

Above all, however, I received the great opportunity of
performing Braja Maṇḍala Parikramā on foot each year
with paramārādhya Śrī Gurudeva and some five hundred
faithful devotees. Paramārādhya Śrī Gurudeva entrusted
the responsibility of serving Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha
to me in 1954. Since then, I have annually been
performing Braja Maṇḍala Parikramā with the brahmacārīs
of Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha and some of the many
devout and respectable residents of Mathurā. Thus, I
have been fortunate enough to perform Braja Maṇḍala
Parikramā almost fifty times in fifty years.

After the disappearance of Śrīla Gurupādapadma, I gave
lectures during Śrī Braja Maṇḍala Parikramā on various
pastime-places and their glories. A short compilation of
these lectures was published in English in a book
entitled Śrī Vraja Maṇḍala Parikramā a few years ago.
This book was very highly regarded by faithful persons

                              4
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

in India and abroad. Soon, all copies had sold out. Many
devotees from all parts of the world have time and again
asked for this book to be reprinted along with more
līlās and glorifications so that it should cover the
entire Braja Maṇḍala. I could not ignore their requests
and began an attempt to fulfil their desire. However, I
then left India and began travelling to various small
and large countries across the world to preach śuddha
bhakti as taught and practised by Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu. Thus, I was unable to complete this task for
some time. At the same time, I also had other
commitments in writing books on bhakti and suffered
intermittent poor health. After returning from preaching
abroad in July 1999, I wanted to finally complete this
book, but was again obstructed by a sudden stroke of
ill-health.

Under these circumstances, I decided to present myself
at the lotus feet of Śrī Śacīnandana Gaurahari in the
Gambhīra, at the lotus feet of Śrī Haridāsa Ṭhākura at
Siddha Bakula, and at the lotus feet of gaura-śakti Śrī
Gadādhara Prabhu at Ṭoṭa Gopīnātha in Śrī Jagannātha
Purī. I resolved to complete this book there, only by
their mercy. I stayed in Purī Dhāma for some time and on
Viśvarūpa Mahotsava, 25 September 1999, completed the
book Braja Maṇḍala Parikramā.

I have based this book on Śrī Caitanya-bhāgavata, Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Bhakti-ratnākara by Śrī Narahari
Cakravartī, Braja-bhakti-vilāsa by Śrī Nārāyaṇa Bhaṭṭa,
and especially Braja-maṇḍala Darśana (Parikramā)
compiled by Śrī Kṛṣṇadāsa Bābājī Mahārāja of Kusuma
Sarovara. I have also collected various references to
different līlās from Govindalīlāmṛta by Śrī Kṛṣṇadāsa
Kavirāja Gosvāmī, Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta composed by
brajarasa rasika Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, and
the various works of the Gosvāmīs. In this regard, I
remember my Gurupādapadma, paramārādhya aṣṭotaraśata Śrī
Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, by whose
mercy I obtained everything on the subject of Braja
Maṇḍala Parikramā and the various pastime-places in
Braja. I have strung together these various
recollections along with the references to various
pastime-places from different literatures. Before
meeting my Gurupādapadma and receiving his causeless
mercy, my life was void.

Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Mādhava Mahārāja, Śrīmad
Bhaktivedānta Tīrtha Mahārāja, Śrīman Omprakāśa
Brajabāsī ‘Sāhityaratna’, Śrīman Purandara Brahmacārī
‘Sevāvigraha’, Śrīman Vakreśvara Brahmacārī, Śrīman
Parameśvarī Brahmacārī, Śrīman Kṛṣṇa Kāruṇya Brahmacārī,
and others have helped in preparing the manuscript,
proof reading and performing various other duties. Their
service endeavours are noteworthy and glorious. Besides
them, Śrīman Premānanda Brahmacārī has done a
praiseworthy sevā by collecting the funds for publishing
this book. My prayer is that Śrī Śrī Guru-Gaurāṅga-
Gāndharvikā-Giridhārī may shower Their abundant mercy
and blessings upon them.



Begging for a particle of the mercy of Śrī Guru,

                              5
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017


Śrī Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa

Śrī Śarada Pūrṇimā

Paramārādhyatama oṁ viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad

Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s

tirobhāva-tithi

13 October 2000 (26 Āśvina, 2057 Saṁvat)




Part 1




brajati gacchati iti brajaḥ




Chapter 1

The Nature of Braja


“That which moves around is braja” — this is the
original understanding of the word braja. Those places
where Nanda Bābā resided with his cows, calves,
associates and family members are included in the
meaning of this word. Brajanti gāvaḥ yasminnati brajaḥ:
“The land where the cows, gopālas, gopas and gopīs
wander is known as braja.” This term particularly
denotes the realm of Svayaṁ Bhagavān Brajendra-nandana
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes.

Braja-bihārī Śrī Kṛṣṇa is akhila rasāmṛta-murti, the
embodiment of the nectar of all primary and secondary
rasas. In this Braja, He performs His pastimes eternally
with His associates, and especially with Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, who is the embodiment of mahābhāva (the essence
of His hladinī-śakti). The most exalted of all rasamaya
līlās (nectar-filled pastimes), namely, His rāsa-līlā,
as well as a multitude of other pastimes take place here
eternally. In this Braja, every glance and gesture is
full of rasa. Here, ādi-puruṣa Śrī Govinda eternally
enjoys nectar-filled sports and pastimes with His
svarūpabhūtā gopīs, who have emanated from His own
svarūpa. These pastimes have no beginning and no end.
That place in which there is nothing but an endless
ocean of prema, whose waves of unnatojjvala praṇaya rasa
(the most elevated, radiant mellow of intimate paramour
love) are constantly rising up and swelling over, is
Braja. That place which consists purely of rasa that is
relished continuously by rasikas and bhavukas is the
land of Braja.


                              6
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                       5/5/2017

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.44.13) gives a deeply moving
description of Braja:


puṇyā bata braja-bhuvo yad ayaṁ nṛ-liṅga

gūḍhaḥ purāṇa-puruṣo vana-citra-mālyaḥ

gāḥ pālayan saha-balaḥ kvaṇayaṁś ca veṇuṁ

vikrīḍayāñcati giritra-ramārcitāṅghriḥ


“Sakhī! The actual truth is that the land of Braja is
supremely pure and blessed, because here Puruṣottama,
the Supreme Person, is living incognito, disguised as a
human being. That same Prabhu, whose lotus feet are
worshipped by devādideva Mahādeva Śaṅkara and Śrī
Ramādevī, wanders about here together with His brother
Balarāmajī and His sakhās. Adorned with a colourful
flower garland, He plays the flute sweetly and grazes
the cows. Thus absorbed in many kinds of pastimes, He
wanders here and there in great delight. By the touch of
His lotus feet, this land of Braja has become virtuous
and successful.”

The Skanda Purāṇa also presents a beautiful definition
of the word braja:


guṇātītaṁ paraṁ brahma

vyāpakaṁ braja ucyate

sadānandaṁ paraṁ jyoti

muktānāṁ padavyayam


“Parabrahma is beyond the three modes — goodness,
passion and ignorance — and because He pervades every
single particle of the universe, He is called braja. His
place, the embodiment of sac-cid-ānanda, is supremely
brilliant and indestructible. Parama rasikas liberated
from material existence reside here.”


Goloka and Braja (Gokula)

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 5.17) states:


sarvopari śrī-gokula — brajaloka-dhāma

śrī-goloka, śvetadvīpa, vṛndāvana nāma


“Śrī Gokula, the topmost abode, has many names — Braja,
Goloka, Śvetadvīpa and Vṛndāvana.” Thus, these names are
all considered synonymous. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, the
intimate associate of Śrīman Mahāprabhu, resolves any
confusion about Gokula and Goloka in his book Śrī Laghu-
Bhāgavatāmṛta — yattu golokanāma syāttacca gokula-
vaibhavam, and tādātmya-vaibhatvañca tasya

                              7
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                       5/5/2017

tanmahimonnateḥ. He states here that the glory of Gokula
is identical with the glory of Goloka. In fact, Goloka
is merely the glory of Gokula. Similarly, Vṛndāvana and
Gokula are simply different names for Braja.

The second śloka of Brahma-saṁhitā describes this Gokula
Dhāma:


sahasra-patra-kamalaṁ / gokulākhyaṁ mahat-padam

tat karṇikāra-tad-dhāma / tad-anantāṁśa-sambhavam


Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has explained the meaning of
this śloka in the following words: “Mahā-Vaikuṇṭha, or
Paravyoma Dhāma, is eternally situated beyond the Virajā
River. This dhāma is the embodiment of the three
vibhūtis, or divine opulences, being imperishable
(amṛta), devoid of sorrow (aśoka), and free from all
types of fear (abhaya). The extremely sweet Gokula,
otherwise known as Goloka, which is full of unlimited
transcendental opulence, is situated beyond that
Paravyoma Dhāma. Sometimes Goloka is also called Gokula,
but Goloka is actually the opulence (vaibhava) or
manifestation of Gokula, the abode of all sweet pastimes
(mādhuryalīlās). This dhāma, radiant as Goloka or
Gokula, appears in the form of Gokula below Vaikuṇṭha on
the Earth planet.”

In Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta, the quintessence of all
śāstra, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī writes:


yathā krīḍati tadbhumau / goloke’pi tathaiva saḥ

adha ūrdhvatayā bhedo / ‘nayoḥ kalpyeta kevalam


“Kṛṣṇa’s activities in Gokula, which is situated on the
material plane, are the same as those in Goloka. The
only difference between Goloka and Gokula is that Goloka
is situated in the highest region and Gokula manifests
on the Earth planet.” In Kṛṣṇa-sandarbha, Śrīla Jīva
Gosvāmī has accepted Goloka as the manifestation of
Vṛndāvana.1


Braja: the eternal abode of parakīyā-bhāva

In Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 4.47), Śrīla
Kavirāja Gosvāmī states:


parakīyā-bhāve ati rasera ullāsa

braja binā ihāra anyatra nāhi vāsa


Śrī Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura comments in his Amṛta-pravāha-
bhāṣya on this verse: “Many people think that Śrī Kṛṣṇa
is performing His pastimes eternally in Goloka and
appears in Braja for a short time just to perform His
pastimes in parakīyā-bhāva, the mood of unwedded amorous

                              8
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                      5/5/2017

love. This, however, is not the opinion of our Gauḍīya
gosvāmīs, who accept the braja-līlās as eternal also.
Braja is the name of the absolute inner chamber of the
transcendental and eternal Goloka Dhāma. The same līlās
Śrī Kṛṣṇa performs in Vṛndāvana on Earth, including
parakīyā-rasa, transpire eternally in the supremely
situated, eternal Braja Dhāma.”

Śrīla Kavirāja Gosvāmī states in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta
(Ādi-līlā 3.10):


aṣṭāviṁśa catur-yuge dvāparera śeṣe

brajera sahita haya kṛṣṇera prakāśe


Here the words brajera sahita, ‘along with Braja’,
clarify that in the transcendental Goloka Dhāma there
exists also one inconceivably sweet abode named Braja.
Śrī Kṛṣṇa appeared on Earth along with this very abode
by the help of His acintya-śakti. Parakīyā-rasa is
permanently present only in this eternal Braja, which
lies within the inner chambers of Goloka. This is
because parakīyā-rasa, the supermost mellow, is present
there with qualities that are unlimitedly superior to
those found anywhere else in Goloka.

Even in prakaṭa Braja, or Bhauma Vṛndāvana (Vṛndāvana
manifest on this Earth planet), the jīvas have been able
to directly witness the variegatedness (vicitratā) of
aprakaṭa Braja. Besides the prakaṭa prakāśa and aprakaṭa
prakāśa, the only remaining mystery is that on Earth
there is a dṛśyamāna prakāśa also, which is the vision
that ordinary people have of Vṛndāvana and other dhāmas
after the līlās there are no longer visible.


Braja: land of enchanting beauty and sweetness

Brahma-saṁhitā (5.56) describes Vṛndāvana Dhāma, or
Goloka, in this way:


śriyaḥ kāntāḥ kāntaḥ parama-puruṣaḥ kalpa-taravo

drumā bhūmiś cintāmaṇi-gaṇa-mayī toyam amṛtam

kathā gānaṁ nāṭyaṁ gamanam api vaṁśī priya-sakhī

cid-ānandaṁ jyotiḥ param api tad āsvādyam api ca


sa yatra kṣīrābdhiḥ sravati surabhībhyaś ca su-mahān

nimeṣārddhākhyo vā vrajati na hi yatrāpi samayaḥ

bhaje śvetadvīpaṁ tam aham iha golokam iti yaṁ

vidantas te santaḥ kṣiti-virala-cārāḥ katipaye


“I worship that supreme abode known as Śvetadvīpa, where
parama-puruṣa Brajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the only

                              9
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

kānta (lover); where His svarūpabhūtā braja-gopīs, the
embodiment of all Lakṣmīs, are the kāntās (beloveds);
where every tree and creeper is a transcendental
kalpataru (desire tree); where the earth is cintāmaṇi
(spiritual touchstone) and the water is amṛta (nectar);
where speech is like music and movements are like dance;
where the vaṁśī is the priya sakhī; where the light is
full of knowledge and bliss; where the supreme,
transcendental objects are all tasty and delectable;
where great divine oceans of milk always flow from the
udders of uncountable numbers of surabhī cows; and where
eternal, transcendental time is ever present — devoid of
past and future — and where even half a moment therefore
never enters the past. In this material world, only rare
sādhus have darśana of this dhāma as Goloka, and only
those who are the objects of Gokulapati Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
mercy can understand the nature of this dhāma.”

The Ṛg-veda (1st maṇḍala, sūkta 154) also describes
Braja Dhāma:


tā vāṁ vāstūnyuśmasi gamadhyai / yatra gāvo bhūriśṛṅgā
ayāsaḥ

atrāha tadurūgāyasya vṛṣṇāḥ / paramaṁ padamavabhāti
bhūri


“Braja Vṛndāvana is Bhagavān’s topmost dhāma: there,
parama-puruṣa Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the object of the Vedas,
sweetly plays His flute and protects the roaming cows,
who have many good qualities and beautiful horns.”

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.21.10), the gopīs themselves
sing the glories of Vṛndāvana:


vṛndāvanaṁ sakhi bhuvo vitanoti kīrtiṁ

yad devakī-suta-padāmbuja-labdha-lakṣmi

govinda-veṇum anu matta-mayūra-nṛtyaṁ

prekṣyādri-sānv-avaratānya-samasta-sattvam


“O sakhī! The fame of the Earth is enhanced due to being
splendidly decorated with the marks of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus
feet. Upon hearing the veṇunāda (sound of the flute),
the peacocks take it as the thunder of the clouds and,
becoming intoxicated, begin to dance. The other animals
in the meadows of Govardhana also feel pleasure and
become stunned. Thus, the presence of Śrī Vṛndāvana on
the Earth makes this planet even more glorious than
Vaikuṇṭha.”

The gopīs are saying, “O sakhī! Everywhere throughout
this Vṛndāvana bloom flowers of all the six seasons —
belī, jūhī, camelī, campaka, kadamba and so many others.
Their fragrance reaches far and wide, inviting the bees
to partake of their honey. They come in swarms to drink
this rasa and, becoming intoxicated, start humming. This
sound seems to be coming from Vanadevī, the goddess of

                              10
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

the forest, who is anticipating the arrival of madhupati
Kṛṣṇa and is welcoming Him. Hearing the bees’ humming,
how can the śuka, pika, papīha and other birds whose
voices are sweet and melodious remain silent? They also
become submerged in ecstasy and fly from one tree to
another and from one branch to the next. All of
Vṛndāvana resonates to their sweet, melodious singing,
the echo of which reverberates everywhere throughout
Vṛndāvana — in the ponds, across the rivers, and over
the hills.

“Aho! Vṛndāvana is such an extraordinary and astonishing
dhāma. In this Vṛndāvana, the unique splendour of
Vasanta (spring), which is the charmingly sweet queen of
all seasons, is ever present, and a green velvety carpet
is spread over the surface of the earth. Lotuses of many
colours bloom in the ponds and rivers, and the branches
of the trees are well adorned with fully-bloomed campā,
camelī, belī, jūhī and other delightfully fragrant
flowers, whose nectar is relished by intoxicated bees.
The entire atmosphere is pervaded with both
transcendental bliss and the intoxication of youth.
These combine to create a kingdom of ever-increasing joy
that captivates the body and mind.”

Playing sweetly on His flute, Brajendra-nandana Śrī
Kṛṣṇa roams throughout this land of Braja along with Dāū
Bhaiyā and Their innumerable gopa friends and cows.
Blessed is this land of Braja, where the creator of this
universe, Śrī Brahmājī, dwells in the form of a mountain
range in Varsānā, just to have the dust of the lotus
feet of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala on his head; where the
maintainer, Śrī Viṣṇu, has assumed the forms of
Govardhana and Viṣṇu Parvata; where Candramaulī Mahādeva
has taken up residence as Nandīśvara Hill in Nandagrāma;
and where Śrī Uddhavajī, the best of Hari’s servants
(haridāsa-vara), lives as a blade of grass, a small
shrub or a creeper on the bank of Kusuma Sarovara.

Here in Braja, Svayaṁ Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa becomes the
calves and relishes the tender and delicious grass.2
Here the young girls of Braja daily go to the wells and
other sources of water (panaghaṭas) on the pretext of
filling their water-pots, but in fact go only to fill
the pots of their hearts with the rasa of kṛṣṇa-prema.
Panaghaṭa jāna dai rī, panaghaṭa jāta hai — “O my
friend! Please let me go to the panaghaṭa, otherwise the
pana (resolve) to meet my beloved will decrease (ghaṭa
jāegā).” To protect this resolve, the young girls of
Braja would crowd the panaghaṭa, carrying their clay
pots. At this rasīla (rasa-filled) place, the Braja
girls begin to dip their pots in the water on the
pretext of filling them. Then, the rasīlī flute of the
crown-jewel of all rasikas fills the air with rasa. Who
even notices whether these girls of Braja fill their
pots or bring them back empty? O my friend! This is the
wonder of that panaghaṭa.

Rasika-śekhara Brajendra-nandana repeatedly drowns in
rasa — in the sweet nikuñjas that echo with the rippling
sounds of the Kālindī, and in the twisted and narrow
rasīlī lanes. He drowns in the rasīlī teasing of the
rasīlī girls of Braja — in the heated disputes He has
with them, in their crooked, sweet glances, in the sweet

                              11
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

conversations and water-sports He enjoys with them. Who
can describe the glories of such a Braja?

Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī has explained the meaning of
Vṛndāvana in the following way: vṛndasya samūhasya,
avanaṁ rakṣaṇaṁ pālanaṁ yasmāt tat vṛndāvanaṁ. “That
which maintains, nourishes and protects everyone is
called Vṛndāvana.” This land of Vṛndāvana conceals its
godly nature (bhagavad-bhāva) and lovingly maintains the
herds of cows and calves, and the society of gopas and
gopīs. Svayaṁ Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, being controlled by
their love, does not leave Vṛndāvana even for a moment —
vṛndāvanaṁ parityajya sa kvacin naiva gacchati (Cc.
Antya 1.67; quoted in Laghu-bhāgavatāmṛta 1.5.461).

Śrī Bhaṭṭajī describes the land of Braja as enchanting,
and expresses this with exquisite feelings:


brajbhūmi mohinī maiṅ jānī

mohinī kuñj, mohan śrī-vṛndāvan mohan jamunā pānī

mohinī nāri sakal gokul kī bolti mohinī bānī

śrī-bhaṭṭ ke prabhu mohan nāgar mohinī rādhā rānī


“Brajabhūmi is enchanting — the kuñjas are enchanting,
Śrī Vṛndāvana is enchanting, and the waters of the
Yamunā are enchanting. All the women of the entire
Gokula are enchantresses who speak in an enchanting way.
Śrī Bhaṭṭa’s master and mistress are Mohana Nāgara and
Mohinī Rādhārānī.”




Chapter 2

The Borders of Braja


Braja Maṇḍala extends for eighty-four kosas (about 168
miles). Garga Saṁhita (khaṇḍa 2) states:


prāgudīcyāṁ bahirṣado

dakṣiṇasyāṁ yadoḥ purāt

paścimāyāṁ śoṇitapurān

māthuraṁ maṇḍalaṁ viduḥ


“That land between Bahirśad (Barhada) in the north-east,
Yadupura (the village Baṭeśvara of Śūrasena) in the
south and Śoṇitpura (Sonhada) in the west, and which
measures eighty-four kosas, has been called Mathurā
Maṇḍala, or Braja, by learned persons.” Sir Growse in
his Mathurā Memoirs writes the following verse:


                              12
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017


it barhad it sonhad, ut sūrsen ko gaon

braj caurāsī kos meiṅ, mathurā maṇḍal maṅh


It is clear from this that the boundary of Braja is
considered to be Bara on one side, Sonhada on the other,
and Baṭeśvara, or the village of Śūrasena, on the third
side. Bara is situated in the present district of
Aligarh in the north-east corner of Braja Maṇḍala.
Sonhada lies in the present district of Guḍagaon in the
state of Harayāṇā, which is in the north-west corner of
Braja Maṇḍala. Its ancient name is Soṇitpura. The
village of Śūrasena is the village of Baṭeśvara in the
revenue district of Bāha. The area between these places
is called Braja Maṇḍala.

The borders of Braja Maṇḍala are also mentioned in the
Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa.1 According to this Purāṇa, Hāsyavana,
Janhuvana, Parvatavana and Sūryapattanavana lie in the
east, south, west and north of Braja Maṇḍala
respectively. Corresponding to this description,
Hasanagaḍha of the Agra district, which lies in the
east, is known as Hāsyavana; in the west, Bahāḍī Grāma
near Kāmyavana in Rājasthāna is known as Parvatavana; in
the south, Jājaū Grāma of the Dhaulapura revenue
district is famous as Janhu; and in the north, near
Jevara Grāma of the Aligarh district, lies
Sūryapattanavana.

In the eighty-four kosas of Braja Maṇḍala, there are
fourty-eight vanas (forests), which include upavanas,
prativanas and adhivanas. According to the Padma Purāṇa,
there are twelve principal forests situated east and
west of the Yamunā. They are (1) Mahāvana, (2)
Kāmyavana, (3) Madhuvana, (4) Tālavana, (5) Kumudavana,
(6) Bhāṇḍīra-vana, (7) Vṛndāvana, (8) Khadīravana, (9)
Lohavana, (10) Bhadravana, (11) Bahulāvana, and (12)
Baelvana. Of these twelve forests, seven lie on the
western side of the Yamunā. They are Madhuvana,
Tālavana, Kumudavana, Bahulāvana, Kāmyavana, Khadīravana
and Vṛndāvana. The remaining five forests — Bhadravana,
Bhāṇḍīrvana, Baelvana, Lohavana and Mahāvana — are
situated on the Yamunā’s eastern side.

The Varāha Purāṇa mentions twelve upavanas: (1)
Brahmavana, (2) Apsarāvana, (3) Vihvalavana, (4)
Kadambavana, (5) Svarṇavana, (6) Surabhīvana, (7)
Premavana, (8) Mayūravana, (9) Māneṅgitavana, (10)
Śeṣaśāyīvana, (11) Nāradavana, and (12) Paramānandavana.

The Bhaviṣya Purāṇa mentions the following twelve
prativanas: (1) Raṅkavana, (2) Vārttāvana, (3)
Karahāvana, (4) Kāmavana, (5) Añjanavana, (6) Karṇavana,
(7) Kṛṣṇākṣi-panavana, (8) Nandaprekṣaṇa Kṛṣṇavana, (9)
Indravana, (10) Śikṣāvana, (11) Candrāvalīvana, and (12)
Lohavana.

Finally, the Viṣṇu Purāṇa describes the following twelve
adhivanas: (1) Mathurā, (2) Rādhā Kuṇḍa, (3) Nandagaon,
(4) Gaḍha, (5) Lalitā Grāma, (6) Vṛṣabhānupura, (7)
Gokula, (8) Balabhadravana, (9) Govardhana, (10) Jāvaṭa,
(11) Vṛndāvana, and (12) Saṅketvana. This adds up to

                              13
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

make fourty-eight forests in all.




Chapter 3

How to Observe

Braja Maṇḍala Parikramā



Saṅkalpa at Viśrāma Ghāṭa

efore starting Braja Maṇḍala Parikramā, one should take
a saṅkalpa (vow) at Viśrāma Ghāṭa in Mathurā.
Preferably, this saṅkalpa should be made through the
medium of a bona fide rūpānuga guru or rūpānuga
Vaiṣṇava. Otherwise, it should be made through any
simple-hearted bhakta, tīrtha guru or Brajabāsī priest
who is learned in śāstra and tattva, who is virtuous,
merciful, non-envious, not avaricious, and who is
engaged in bhajana. When the saṅkalpa is taken,
parikramā may begin.


The Rules for Braja Maṇḍala Parikramā

While performing parikramā, one should as far as
possible observe certain positive and negative
injunctions. The positive injunctions are as follows: to
speak the truth, to observe celibacy, to sleep on the
ground, to forgive the aparādhas (offences) of others,
to take bath in the holy rivers or ponds, to do ācamana,
to accept only prasāda offered to Bhagavān, and to
perform harināma-kīrtana on Tulasī beads or perform
harināma-saṅkīrtana in the assembly of Vaiṣṇavas. One
should perform parikramā by showing proper respect to
and worshipping the brāhmaṇas, śrī mūrtis, tīrthas and
Bhagavān’s pastime-places encountered during the course
of the parikramā. Coming now to the negative
injunctions, it is prohibited to become angry; to commit
any violence towards trees, creepers, small shrubs, cows
and so forth along the parikramā path; to dishonour
brāhmaṇas, Vaiṣṇavas, and so on; to disrespect śrī
mūrti; to use soap and oil; to shave; to kill ants and
other jīvas; to involve oneself in disputes; and to
criticize others.


The Timing of the Parikramā

Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas follow Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s own
journey through Braja. Hence, some people start their
parikramā after Vijayā Daśamī in the month of Āśvina in
autumn. This is because, according to Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta, Śrīman Mahāprabhu arrived from Śrī Nīlācala
Dhāma at this time to have darśana of Braja Maṇḍala.
Other Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas start their parikramā and
Kārtika-vrata niyama-sevā on the Ekādaśī of the bright
fortnight in the month of Āśvina and complete their
vrata on Devotthāna Ekādaśī of the bright fortnight in

                              14
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

the month of Kārtika. Most Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, however,
make their saṅkalpa for both Kārtika niyama-sevā (or
ūrjā-vrata) and Braja Maṇḍala Parikramā on Śāradīyā
Pūrṇimā. They then complete the Kārtika-vrata and Braja
Maṇḍala Parikramā after Devotthāna Ekādaśī on Kārtika
Pūrṇimā.

The Vaiṣṇavas of the Nimbārka Sampradāya start Braja
Maṇḍala Parikramā on the Daśamī after Śrī Kṛṣṇa-
janmāṣṭhamī. They complete their parikramā in one and a
half months. The Vaiṣṇavas of Puṣṭī-mārga (the Vallabha
Sampradāya) start their parikramā on the Daśamī or
Ekādaśī after Śrī Rādhāṣṭamī and complete it in
approximately two months.




Chapter 4

Places Visited on

Braja Maṇḍala Parikramā


Pilgrims on Braja Maṇḍala Parikramā have darśana of the
pastime-places of Braja Maṇḍala in the order given
below. Some places appear more than once in this list,
because there are often alternative routes to get from
one place to another.

Braja Maṇḍala Parikramā begins in Śrī Mathurā. After
having darśana of this city, pilgrims visit the forests
of Madhuvana, Tālavana and Kumudavana. Then they proceed
to Śāntanu Kuṇḍa, Gandheśvara, Bahulāvana, Rāl, Magherā,
Jaita, Śakaṭīkarā (Chaṭṭīkarā) and Garuḍa-Govinda. From
Garuḍa-Govinda, one can go to Bahulāvana if one has not
already done so. Pilgrims then visit Maro, Datihā
(Datīyā), Aḍiga, Mādhurī Kuṇḍa, Jakhīnagaon, Toṣa,
Janatī, Vasati, Mukharāī, Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa and Śrī Śyāma
Kuṇḍa.

After this, pilgrims make their way to Kusuma Sarovara,
Nārada Kuṇḍa, Gvālā Puṣkariṇi, Yugala Kuṇḍa, Killola
Kuṇḍa, Mānasī Gaṅgā, the town of Govardhana,
Indradhvajavedī and Jamunāvati. From there, one proceeds
to Parāsaulī, Paiṅṭhāgaon and Bachagaon (Vatsavana), and
then to Ānyora Gaon, Gaurī Kuṇḍa, Saṅkarṣaṇa Kuṇḍa,
Govinda Kuṇḍa, Navala Kuṇḍa, Apsarā Kuṇḍa, Śakra Kuṇḍa,
Pūcharī, Śyāmaḍhāka, Rāghava Paṇḍita’s cave, Surabhī
Kuṇḍa, Airāvata Kuṇḍa, Harajī Kuṇḍa, Jatīpurā, Bilachu
Kuṇḍa and Cakreśvara Mahādeva.

Thereafter, one comes to Sakhī-sthalī, Nīmagaon, Pāḍara,
Kuñjerā, Pāli, Ḍerāvali, Māna, Sāhāra, Sūrya Kuṇḍa,
Peraku, Bhādāra, Konāī and Vasati. One can now have
darśana of Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa and Govardhana if one has not
already done so. Pilgrims then make their way to Jāvaka
Kuṇḍa, Gulāla Kuṇḍa, Gāṅṭholī, Beheja, Devaśīrṣa,
Muniśīrṣa, Paramādanā, Badrīnārāyaṇa, Guhānā, Khoṅ,
Ālīpura, Ādibadrī, Paśopā, Kedāranātha, Bilonda, Caraṇa
Pahāḍī, Bhojana Thālī and Kāmyavana.


                              15
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

After Kāmyavana, one goes to Vajerā, Sunaharā Kadamba-
khaṇḍī, Ūñcāgaon, Sakhīgirī Parvata, Varsānā,
Gahavaravana, Ḍabhorā, Rasolī, Prema Sarovara, Saṅket,
Riṭhaura, Meherāna, Satvāsa, Nanderā, Bhojana Thālī,
Nunerā, Śṛṅgāra Vaṭa, Bichoravana, Vanacarī, Hoḍal,
Dahīgaon, Lālpura, Kāmera, Harāvalī Gaon, Sāñculī,
Geṇḍo, Nandagaon, Kadamba Ṭer and Jāvaṭa. Thereafter,
pilgrims visit Dhanaśiṅgā, Kosī, Payagaon, Chattravana,
Sāmarī, Narī, Sāṅkhī, Ārabāḍī, Raṇavāḍī, Bhādāvalī,
Khāṁpura, Ūmrāva, Raheyā, Kāmāī, Karehlā, Pesāī,
Ludhaulī, Āñjanaka, Khadīravana and Bijavārī. One can
now also visit Nandagaon if one has not already done so.

Pilgrims now make their way to Kokilāvana, Choṭī
Baiṭhana, Baḍī Baiṭhana, Caraṇa Pahāḍī, Rasaulī,
Koṭvana, Khāmī, Śeṣaśāī, Rūpanagara, Majhaī, Rāmapura,
Ūjānī, Khelanavana, Obe, Rāma Ghāṭa, Kāśraṭa, Akṣaya
Vaṭa, Gopī Ghāṭa (Tapovana), Cīra Ghāṭa, Nanda Ghāṭa and
Bhaya-gaon. After this come Jaitapura, Hājarā, Balīhārā,
Bājanā, Jeolāī, Śakaroyā, Āṭāsa, Devīāṭāsa, Parkhama,
Caumā, Ajaī, Siṅhānā, Rehānā, Pasaulī, Baraulī, Taraulī,
Eī, Seī, Māī, Basāī and Nanda Ghāṭa.

Thereafter, one crosses the Yamunā to have darśana of
Bhadravana, Bhāṇḍīravana, Māṭa, Baelvana, Māna Sarovara,
Ārā, Pānīgaon, Lohavana, Rāvel, Gaḍhuī, Āyaro,
Kṛṣṇapura, Bāṅdī, Dāūjī, Hātaurā, Brahmāṇḍa Ghāṭa,
Cintāharaṇa Ghāṭa, Mahāvana, Gokula, Kailo and Bādāī
Grāma. Crossing the Yamunā again, one comes to
Nauraṅgābād, Śrī Mathurā, Akrūra Ghāṭa and Śrī Vṛndāvana
with its twelve forests — Bhātrol (Aṭalavana),
Kyārīvana, Bihāravana, Gocāraṇavana, Kālīya Damanavana,
Gopālavana, Nikuñjavana (Sevā Kuñja), Nidhuvana,
Rādhāvana (Rādhā Bāga), Jhūlanavana, Gahavaravana and
Papaḍavana.


Braja Maṇḍala’s sixteen banyan trees

On their journey through Braja Maṇḍala, pilgrims may be
fortunate enough to have darśana of the following
prominent banyan trees (vaṭas):


Mountains in Braja Maṇḍala

Pilgrims on Braja Maṇḍala Parikramā will visit or pass
close by the following hills or mountains (parvatas):


1) Girirāja-Govardhana

2) Setu Kandarā Parvata — Ādibadrī Nārāyaṇa

3) Sāṅgrāśikara Parvata — Jhūlana Sthāna

4) Nīla Parvata — near Śāṅarā Śikhara

5) Ānandādrī Parvata — near Śāṅarā Śikhara

6) Udyāna Parvata

7) Śaṅkhakūṭa Parvata


                              16
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                       5/5/2017

8) Ādi Kedāranātha Parvata — near Kāmyavana

9) Caraṇa Pahāḍī

10) Indrasena Parvata (stone slide)

11) Vyomāsura Gufā (cave)

12) Bhojana Thālī

13) Viṣṇu-cihna-pāda Parvata

14) Luklukī Kandarā

15) Bājana Śilā (musical stone)

16) Suvarṇācala — Sunaharā Gaon

17) Caraṇa Pahāḍī — Nandagaon

18) Aṭorā Parvata — Ūñcāgaon

19) Sakhīgiri Parvata — Ūñcāgaon

20) Viṣṇu Parvata — Varsānā

21) Brahma Parvata — Varsānā

22) Nandīśvara or Rudra Parvata — Nandagaon

23) Choṭī (small) Caraṇa Pahāḍī — near Baiṭhana




Part 2




Chapter 1

Śrī Mathurā


The Glories of Śrī Mathurā

There are seven abodes on earth that award mokṣa
(liberation). They are Ayodhyā, Mathurā, Māyā, Kāśī,
Kāñcī, Avantī and Dvārāvatī. Of these, Mathurā, the
birthplace of Svayaṁ Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is the topmost.
This abode not only awards mokṣa, but also bestows
bhagavat-prema. It is completely beyond māyā and is a
sac-cid-ānandamaya dhāma of Bhagavān. It is protected by
the Sudarśana Cakra, and is therefore not affected by
the universal dissolution (pralaya) or other
disruptions. What to speak of Vaikuṇṭha, it is even more
praiseworthy than Dvārakāpurī, whose ornament is Kṛṣṇa’s
queens.1

This city of Mathurā is never annihilated. In the
beginning of Satya-yuga, the child Dhruva met Devarṣi

                              17
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                      5/5/2017

Nārada here. The boy took bath in the Yamunā at Dhruva
Ghāṭa and accepted the nāma-mantra of Bhagavān from
Nāradajī. Nearby at Madhuvana Maholī, he attained
perfection in the worship of Bhagavān.

Also in Satya-yuga, Durvāsā Ṛṣi arrived here while
Mahārāja Ambarīṣa was in the course of breaking his
dvādaśī-vrata, and it was here that Durvāsā realised the
glory of bhakta Mahārāja Ambarīṣa. Even today, Cakra
Tīrtha and Ambarīṣa Ṭīlā stand as witnesses to how
Ambarīṣa Mahā-rāja was protected by the Sudarśana Cakra.

In Tretā-yuga, Śrī Śatrughnajī killed Lavaṇāsura, the
son of Madhudaitya, at this place on the order of Śrī
Rāmacandra. Everyone knows this incident. In Dvāpara-
yuga, Mathurā acquired prestige as the place of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s birth and many other līlās. It is also commonly
known that Śrī Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana Vedavyāsa took birth
here on an island in the Yamunā.

In Kali-yuga, Svayaṁ Bhagavān Śrī Śacīnandana Gaurahari,
endowed with the lustre and bhāva of Śrī Rādhā, came to
Braja Dhāma to take darśana. The first place He reached
was Mathurā, where He took bath at Viśrāma Ghāṭa. He
then took darśana of the pastime-places within the
eighty-four kosas of Braja Maṇḍala. One can also find
descriptions of Śrī Advaita Ācārya, Śrī Nityānanda
Prabhu, Śrī Lokanātha Gosvāmī and Śrī Bhūgarbha
Gosvāmī’s coming here before Caitanya Mahāprabhu.
Intimate associates of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, such as
Śrīla Rūpa, Sanātana and other gosvāmīs, came to Mathurā
and Braja after Him and roamed throughout this land. Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta and Bhakti-ratnākara further
describe how later on all our Gauḍīya ācāryās came to
Mathurā Braja Maṇḍala.

The abundant glories of Mathurā Purī are described in
the Purāṇas. Bhagavān Śrī Keśavajī is present in the
middle of this purī, which is likened to the whorl of a
lotus. On the north petal is Śrī Govinda Devajī (in
Vṛndāvana), by whose darśana a person is forever
liberated from the cycle of birth and death. On the
eastern petal, at Viśrāma Ghāṭa, is a form of Bhagavān
named Viśrānti and on the southern petal is Ādi Varāha
Deva, who bestows all-perfection.2 Taking bath anywhere
in Mathurā destroys all the sins of the jīvas, and one
gathers the fruit of performing an aśvamedha-yajña at
every step. Bhagavān Himself says in the Ādi Varāha
Purāṇa:


na vidyate ca pātāle / nāntarīkṣe na mānuṣe

samasta mathurāyāṁ hi / priyaṁ mama vasundhare


“O Vasundhare! It is certain that in Pātāla Loka (hell),
in the world of humans or in the celestial realm, no
other place is as dear to Me as Mathurā.”

He also states in that same Purāṇa:


pṛthivyāṁ yāni tīrthāni / āsamudrasarāṁsi ca

                              18
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                      5/5/2017


mathurāyāṁ gamiṣyanti / mayi supte vasundhare


“O Vasundhare! During My time of sleep (Cāturmāsya), all
the holy places (tīrthas), oceans and lakes dwell in
Mathurā.”

It is mentioned in the Skanda Purāṇa that the result one
attains by residing in any other part of Bhāratavarṣa
(India) for hundreds and thousands of years is attained
simply by remembering the city of Mathurā.3 That person
who performs japa and upavāsa (fasting) in Śrī Mathurā
becomes free from all sins by taking darśana of the
birthplace of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.4 That sinful person who has
killed a brāhmaṇa, who is a drunkard, who kills cows,
and who has fallen from celibacy becomes free of his
sins merely by doing parikramā of Mathurā. All those who
come from other far-off places to perform Mathurā
parikramā and to have darśana of her pastime-places
become free from all kinds of sins. Not only that, if
one simply takes a vow to reside in Mathurā, he becomes
free from all kinds of entanglements.

It is stated in the Padma Purāṇa that if one desires to
have darśana of Mathurā, but leaves his body before
having had the opportunity to do so, he definitely takes
birth in Mathurā.5 There is not the slightest doubt
about this. Only those who have firm, unshakeable
devotion for Śrī Kṛṣṇa and who are the objects of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s abundant mercy can have attachment to this
Mathurā Purī, which is beyond the material world.6

It is mentioned in the Vāyu Purāṇa that Mathurā Maṇḍala
is within the eighty-four kosas of Braja Maṇḍala, and
that Bhagavān Śrī Hari Himself eternally resides here.7
The Vāyu Purāṇa further states:


aho madhupurī dhanyā vaikuṇṭhācca garīyasī

dinamekaṁ nivāsena harau bhakti prajāyate

trirātramapi ye tatra vasanti manujāmune

harir dṛśyati sukhaṁ teṣāṁ muktānāpi durlabham


“Aho! This Mathurā Dhāma is even superior to and more
blessed than Vaikuṇṭha, the dhāma of Śrī Nārāyaṇa. By
residing here for only one day one attains śrī hari-
bhakti and by residing here three nights, one attains
that most rare bhagavat-prema, which is rare even for
great liberated souls (mukta mahā-puruṣas).”

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has stated in Śrī Mathurā-Māhātmya:


adyāvanti patad grahaṁ kuru kare māye śanairvījaya

chatra kāñci gṛhāṇa kāśi purataḥ pādūyugaṁ dhāraya

nāyodhye bhaja sambhraṁ stutikathāṁ nodagāraya dvārake


                              19
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                       5/5/2017

deviṁya bhavatīṣu hanta mathurā dṛṣṭiprasādaṁ dadhe


“O Avanti! Become ready with a spittoon in your hands. O
Māyāpurī (Haridvāra)! Become ready to fan with a cāmara.
O Kāñci! Take an umbrella in your hand. O Kāśi! Hold
wooden sandals in your hands and be ready. O Ayodhyā! Do
not be afraid any more. O Dvārake! Do not chant any
prayers. This Mathurā-devī, who has become the chief
queen of the king of kings, Mahārājādhirāja Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
is pleased with all of you maidservants.”


Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s Birthplace (Śrī Kṛṣṇa Janma-sthāna)

About 5,200 years ago, at the end of the last Dvāpara-
yuga, Svayaṁ Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇacandrajī appeared as the
son of Śrī Vasudevajī and Devakī in the prison house of
the extremely cruel Kaṁsa. At that time, Vasudeva and
Devakī saw Him in His four-handed form. Both of them
began praying to Him, seeing the child’s divinely
wonderful form, with a complexion like that of a dark
rain cloud. He was holding a conchshell, disc, club and
lotus-flower in His four hands, and the mark of Śrīvatsa
was on His chest and the Kaustubha jewel around His
neck. In response to their prayers, Bhagavān assumed the
form of a baby, and by His desire Vasudevajī picked up
the newborn baby in his arms and left for Gokula-
Mahāvana to leave the child in Nanda Bhavan. Vasudeva’s
handcuffs and foot-shackles loosened and, as he was
leaving the prison, the iron doors automatically opened
and the guards fell asleep. It started raining, and the
entire path cleared. Vasudevajī crossed the Yamunā,
which was filled with roaring waves, and reached Nanda
Bhavan in Gokula.

In Nanda Bhavan, two-handed Śyāmasundara was born from
Yaśodājī’s womb, followed some moments later by a girl
(Yogamāyā). Yaśodā was not fully conscious due to the
labour of child birth. As soon as Vasudevajī entered the
house, two-handed Kṛṣṇa assimilated the son of Vasudeva
within Himself. Vasudevajī was unable to understand that
this mysterious event had occurred. He picked up the
girl in his arms and silently returned to Kaṁsa’s
prison. The iron doors of the prison automatically
closed again behind him and he and Devakī became chained
by the handcuffs and the foot-shackles once more. That
night Kaṁsa received word that a child had been born to
Vasudeva and Devakī. In a maddened state, he went to the
prison with sword in hand, snatched the baby girl from
the hands of his sister Devakī, and tried to kill her by
holding her legs and dashing her onto a stone platform.
However, the girl at once assumed the form of eight-
handed Durgā and disappeared into the sky after rebuking
Kaṁsa.

Śrī Vajranābhajī, the great grandson of Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
established an extensive temple at Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
birthplace. Over the centuries, the religious kings of
India successively built large temples on the same
location. When Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu arrived in Braja,
there was a large temple there. Seeing Śrīman
Mahāprabhu’s sweet dancing, which was filled with bhāva,
and hearing His sweet kīrtana, hundreds and thousands of

                              20
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

people assembled there and became overwhelmed with
ecstasy.

At this place, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu saved Subuddhi
Rāya, the king of Bengal, by stopping him from
committing suicide. He then made him into a great
devotee. Bengal’s fanatic Muslim ruler had forcibly
ostracised Subuddhi Rāya from his Hindu caste. Subuddhi
Rāya wanted to become a Hindu again, but, according to
the rigid rules of the dog-matic Hindu priests and
legislators of that time, there was no path by which he
could re-enter Hinduism before his death. However, Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the ocean of mercy, asked him to
utter śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma just once, and Subuddhi Rāya was
thereby purified. Śrīman Mahāprabhu then made Subuddhi
Rāya’s life successful by instructing him to perform
harināma-saṅkīrtana and Vaiṣṇava sevā for the rest of
his days.

Śrīman Mahāprabhu arrived in Braja during the rule of
the Mughal emperor Humāyūṁ. The Muslims later destroyed
the temple that was there at the time. In 1610 A.D., the
king of Orchā, Mahārāja Vīrasingh Deva, constructed an
extensive temple of Ādikeśava at the cost of thirty-
three hundred thousand rupees; but in 1669 A.D. the
intolerant and fanatic Muslim ruler Aurangzeb destroyed
it and changed its external form to convert it into a
mosque. The priests of Śrī Ādikeśavajī hid the ancient
deity in Rājadhāna, a village situated seventeen miles
from the present city of Īṭāvā, in the district of
Kānpura.

Even today, this same vigraha resides in a very small
temple in Rājadhāna, although the vijaya vigraha
continues to be worshipped today in the Ādikeśava
Mandira in Mallapurā behind the present Janma-sthāna.
The speciality of this vigraha is that it is decorated
with the twenty-four avatāras of Bhagavān. In other
words, the marks of the twenty-four avatāras are seen on
the body of the deity. Vaiṣṇava bhaktas used to visit
this temple to take darśana of this Ādikeśava deity.
Today, a very big temple has been constructed through
the funds raised by Śrī Madanamohana Mālavīya at the old
birthplace of Śrī Kṛṣṇa at Keśava Kaṭara, by the desire
of the late Śrī Hanumān Prasāda Poddārajī of Gītā Press
in Go-rakhapura, and by the efforts of Śrī Ḍālmiyājī and
other wealthy persons.

The janma-bhūmi (birthplace) of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is situated in
the Mallapurā area of Mathurā. Cāṇura and the other
wrestlers (mallas) of Mahārāja Kaṁsa used to live
nearby. There is a very large kuṇḍa close by named
Potrā. Previously, Potrā Kuṇḍa lay within the premises
of Kaṁsa’s prison house, and Śrī Vasudeva and Devakījī
used to wash their clothes and take bath in it. It is
said that Devakījī’s clothes were washed here after the
delivery of her sons. The name of this kuṇḍa used to be
Pavitrā Kuṇḍa, but later, due to degeneration of the
word pavitrā, it became known as Potrā Kuṇḍa.


Viśrāma Ghāṭa (Viśrānti Tīrtha)

The famous Viśrāma Ghāṭa is the principal ghāṭa of

                              21
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Mathurā. According to the Saura Purāṇa, this tīrtha is
named Viśrānti Tīrtha for the following reasons:


tato viśrānti tīrthākhyaṁ

tīrthamaho vināśanam

saṁsāra maru sañcāra

kleśa viśrāntidaṁ nṛṇām


“Wandering throughout the desert of material existence,
the jīvas suffer the threefold miseries of life. They
are without shelter in all respects, and become
thoroughly exhausted by many kinds of afflictions. When
such jīvas take bath in the waters of this great tīrtha,
which have bathed Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet, they
experience tranquility (viśrāma). Therefore, the name of
this great tīrtha is Viśrānti or Viśrāma Ghāṭa.”

It is said that after killing the greatly powerful
Kaṁsa, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa had Kaṁsa’s funeral rites
performed at Dhruva Ghāṭa, after which He and His
relatives and friends took bath at this holy ghāṭa. He
then took rest here. Śrī Kṛṣṇa may need to rest in His
nara-līlā (human-like pastimes), but sac-cid-ānanda
Svayaṁ Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is full of all six
opulences and endowed with all śaktis that can make the
impossible possible (aghaṭana-ghaṭana-paṭīyasī), never
needs any rest. However, this ghāṭa is certainly a place
of rest (viśrāma) for the distressed jīvas who have
strayed from Bhagavān and are immersed in the endless
and bottomless ocean of birth and death.

Every year, before starting Braja Maṇḍala Parikramā,
hundreds and thousands of devout people take bath,
perform ācamana and then take saṅkalpa (a vow) here at
this great tīrtha. They also return to this place upon
completing their parikramā.

On the day of Yama-dvitīyā (or Bhaiyādūja), which is the
second day after Amāvasyā in the month of Kārtika, many
faithful and pious people from far-off places take bath
at this place. According to the Purāṇas, Yama
(Dharmarāja) and Yamunā (Yamī) are twins. Yamunājī’s
heart is very soft. Unable to tolerate seeing the
various sufferings of the jīvas, she invited her brother
on her birthday and satisfied him by feeding him many
kinds of delicious food preparations and sweets. Yama
became pleased and told her to ask for a boon. Yamunājī
said, “If anyone bathes in my waters with faith on this
day, please relieve him from the clutches of birth and
death and from the various threefold miseries.”

Hearing this, Yama Mahārāja replied, “So be it!”

Although it is very glorious to bathe anywhere in Śrī
Yamunā, it is especially glorious to do so in Braja, and
even more so at Viśrāma Ghāṭa on the day of Yama-
dvitīyā. In particular, lākhs of brothers and sisters
will come to take bath at Viśrāma Ghāṭa on this day of
the year.

                              22
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017



The Yamunā’s Twenty-four Ghāṭas

In Mathurā, Śrī Yamunā flows in a crescent shape.
Viśrāma Ghāṭa is situated in the centre. On her southern
side lie the following twelve ghāṭas: (1) Avimukta
Tīrtha, (2) Guhya Tīrtha, (3) Prayāga Tīrtha, (4)
Kankhala Tīrtha, (5) Tinduka Tīrtha, (6) Sūrya Tīrtha,
(7) Baṭa Svāmī Tīrtha, (8) Dhruva Tīrtha, (9) Ṛṣi
Tīrtha, (10) Mokṣa Tīrtha, (11) Koṭi Tīrtha and (12)
Bodhi Tīrtha. The following twelve ghāṭas lie on her
northern side: (13) Nava Tīrtha (Asī Tīrtha), (14)
Saṁyamana Tīrtha, (15) Dhārāpattana Tīrtha, (16) Nāga
Tīrtha, (17) Ghaṇṭā-Bharaṇaka Tīrtha, (18) Brahma
Tīrtha, (19) Soma Tīrtha, (20) Sarasvatī-Patana Tīrtha,
(21) Cakra Tīrtha, (22) Dasāśvamedha Tīrtha, (23)
Vighnarāja Tīrtha and (24) Koṭī Tīrtha.

All the principal tīrthas of India, even Tīrtharāja
Prayāga, worship Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa on the banks of Śrī
Yamunā Mahārānī, and do so under her shelter. Especially
during Cāturmāsya, these tīrthas all come here to
perform their worship.


1. Avimukta Tīrtha

Here, Kāśī Viśvanātha Mahādeva himself performs ārādhana
of Bhagavān. Those who take bath in this tīrtha or who
leave their body here very easily become free from
material existence and reach the dhāma of Bhagavān.8


2. Guhya Tīrtha

By taking bath here one is liberated from the cycle of
birth and death and attains bhagavat-loka, the planet of
Bhagavān.9


3. Prayāga Tīrtha

Tīrtharāja Prayāga, the king of the tīrthas, worships
Bhagavān here. Veṇī Mādhava of Prayāga is eternally
present at this place. Those who take bath here receive
the result of performing all the yajñas headed by the
agniṣṭoma-yajña and attain Vaikuṇṭha Dhāma.10



4. Kankhala Tīrtha

Mahādeva and Pārvatī are always devotedly worshipping
Śrī Hari at this tīrtha. Just as Mahādeva Śaṅkara
bestowed mercy upon Prajāpati Dakṣa and liberated him
from material existence, so one who bathes at this
tīrtha will attain Brahmaloka.11



5. Tinduka Tīrtha

This tīrtha is also named Guhya Tīrtha. By taking bath

                              23
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

here one attains bhagavad dhāma, the abode of
Bhagavān.12 Nearby is Daṇḍī Ghāṭa, where Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu took bath and captivated everyone by His
dancing and saṅkīrtana. Nowadays, this ghāṭa is also
called Bengālī Ghāṭa.



6. Sūrya Tīrtha

Mahārāja Bali, the son of Virocana, worshipped Sūryadeva
here and was granted his desired result, because
Sūryadeva, together with his twelve different aspects
(dvādaśa kalā), is always absorbed here in the worship
of His ārādhyadeva Śrī Kṛṣṇa. By bathing at this place
on Sunday, during saṅkrānti or at the time of a solar or
lunar eclipse, one achieves the result of performing a
rājasūya-yajña and after liberation attains the abode of
Bhagavān.13

Nearby is Bali Mahārāja Ṭīlā. A deity of Bali Mahārāja
and his own worshipable deity Śrī Vāmanadevajī reside in
the temple there.



7. Baṭasvāmī Tīrtha

Here Sūryadeva worships Bhagavān Nārāyaṇa. Another name
for Sūryadeva is Baṭasvāmī. By taking bath here with
faith on Sundays, a person becomes healthy and wealthy
and at the end of life attains parama gati, the supreme
destination.14



8. Dhruva Tīrtha

After being pierced by the arrow-like words of his
stepmother, the five-year-old Dhruva came to the forest
here on the instruction of his mother Sunītijī and met
Devarṣi Nārada at this ghāṭa on the bank of the Yamunā.
Devarṣī Nārada instructed Dhruva to take bath at this
ghāṭa and then gave him a twelve-syllable mantra. Dhruva
thereafter journeyed to the isolated highlands of
Madhuvana where he worshipped Bhagavān by performing
severe austerities and finally received His darśana.

By taking bath here, a person is glorified on Dhruva-
loka. Also, one’s forefathers become happy when one
offers them śrāddha here, which grants the equivalent
result of offering piṇḍa in Gayā.15 Many mahātmās
following the guru-paramparā of the ancient Nimbāditya
Sampradāya have been living here, and this is the only
place of this ancient sampradāya that remains in Braja
Maṇḍala.


9. Ṛṣi Tīrtha

Here Nara-Nārāyaṇa Ṛṣi of Badrī Dhāma is always absorbed
in the worship of Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa. This tīrtha is
situated south of Dhruva Tīrtha. A person who takes bath
here attains bhagavat-loka.16

                              24
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017



10. Mokṣa Tīrtha

All the tīrthas of South India, such as Madurāī Tīrtha
and Kanyā Kumārī, worship Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa at this
ghāṭa in Mathurā Purī. One who takes bath at Mokṣa
Tīrtha easily attains mokṣa in the form of service to
the lotus feet of Viṣṇu.17


11. Koṭi Tīrtha

Millions and millions of demigods desire to worship
Bhagavān here. It is rare even for the demigods to be
able to enter this place. One attains bhagavat-loka by
taking bath at Koṭi Tīrtha.18


12. Bodhi Tīrtha

Here Bhagavān Buddha gives the right understanding
(bodha) of the jīva’s svarūpa dharma, namely, bhagavad-
bhakti. Therefore, this place is called Bodhi Tīrtha.19

It is said that Rāvaṇa secretly performed austerities
here. He was a nirviśeṣa brahma-jñānī ṛṣi in Tretā-yuga.
In his Laṅkāvatāra-sūtra, he introduced his nirviśeṣa
brahma-jñāna or bauddhavāda (Buddhism). Being a
brahmavādī and niḥśaktik, he wanted to kidnap the wife
of Bhagavān Śrī Rāmacandrajī, Śrī Sītā-devī. In other
words, he wanted to possess the śakti of sarva-
śaktimāna. But Śrī Rāmacandrajī killed this nirveśeṣa
brahmavādī together with his dynasty. Simply by taking
bath at Bodhi Tīrtha, one very easily delivers his
forefathers and can himself proceed to Pitṛ-loka, the
planet of the forefathers. Fortunate jīvas reach
bhagavad-dhāma by bathing here in the Yamunā.


13. Nava Tīrtha

The twelve ghāṭas that follow (numbered 13 to 24) lie
south of Viśrāma Ghāṭa. Nava Tīrtha is situated north of
the famous Asi Kuṇḍa, or Askuṇḍa Ghāṭa, which lies near
Viśrama Ghāṭa. Anyone who takes bath in Asi Kuṇḍa has
all of his sins destroyed, whether he committed these
sins by body, mind or words. Taking bath at Nava Tīrtha
develops one’s bhakti to newer and higher forms. There
is no tīrtha greater than this one, nor will there ever
be.20


14. Saṁyamana Tīrtha

The present name of this tīrtha is Svāmī Ghāṭa. Some say
that Mahārāja Vasudeva crossed the Yamunā from here,
carrying the newborn baby Kṛṣṇa in his arms. One who
takes bath here attains the abode of Bhagavān.21


15. Dhārāpatana Tīrtha

A person who takes bath at Dhārāpatana Tīrtha enjoys all

                              25
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

kinds of pleasures and is easily elevated to Svarga. One
who leaves his body here goes to the dhāma of
Bhagavān.22


16. Nāga Tīrtha

This tīrtha is the best among the best of tīrthas. By
taking bath here, one does not return to the material
world.23 Bhagavān Śeṣa (Ananta Deva) is always present
here to protect the dhāma. When Śrī Vasudeva Mahārāja
carried the newborn baby Kṛṣṇa across the Yamunā, the
pouring rain drenched him. Ananta Deva shielded them
both from the rain at this place by spreading His
unlimited hoods like an umbrella.


17. Ghaṇṭābharaṇaka Tīrtha

One who bathes at this tīrtha is relieved from all kinds
of sins and proceeds to Sūrya-loka.24


18. Brahma Tīrtha

Brahmā, the grandsire of the universe, is present at
this ghāṭa of the Yamunā and worships Bhagavān here. By
taking bath, performing ācamana, drinking the Yamunā
water and residing here, a person advances to Viṣṇuloka
under the auspices of Brahmājī. This place is called
Brahma Tīrtha because of its connection with Brahmājī.25


19. Soma Tīrtha

The other name of this tīrtha is Gau Ghāṭa. A person who
sprinkles himself with the pure water of the Yamunā at
Soma Tīrtha will have all his cherished desires
fulfilled.26


20. Sarasvatī-Patana Tīrtha

This tīrtha lies nearby Gau Ghāṭa (or Soma Tīrtha), to
the left. The river Sarasvatī used to meet the Yamunā at
this place. Another name of the Sarasvatī is Śrī Kṛṣṇa
Gaṅgā; this tīrtha is therefore also known as Kṛṣṇa
Gaṅgā Ghāṭa.

This ghāṭa is related to Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Dvaipāyana Veda-
vyāsa, who took birth from Matsyagandhā Sarasvatī and
Maharṣi Pārāśara on an island in the Yamunā near here.
It is said that Śrī Vyāsadeva composed the paramahaṁsa
saṁhitā, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, here by seeing pūrṇabrahma
Śrī Kṛṣṇa and all the pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in Braja,
Mathurā and Dvārakā through bhakti-yoga, after having
heard the instructions of Devarṣi Nārada. This is
correct. How else could he have had darśana of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
and described the sweetest of His sweetest pastimes
without performing ārādhanā in Braja Dhāma, the sweetest
of all dhāmas? This is also the opinion of those learned
devotees who can extract the essence of śāstra. One who
takes bath here is relieved from all kinds of sins and
attains bhagavad prema. Even people of low castes become

                              26
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

paramahaṁsas, or in other words parama bhaktas, by
bathing here.27


21. Cakra Tīrtha

This tīrtha, situated on the bank of the Yamunā, is
famous throughout all Mathurā Maṇḍala. Nearby is
Mahārāja Ambarīṣa’s Ṭīlā, where he resided and
worshipped Bhagavān with all the limbs of śuddha bhakti.
The behaviour of Maharṣi Durvāsā towards rājā Ambarīṣa
displeased the cakra of Viṣṇu, who at the time of the
Dvādaśī pāraṇa (the moment on Dvādaśī that is auspicious
for breaking the fast) chased Durvāsā throughout the
universe. For one year Durvāsā fled, running up even to
Brahmaloka, Śivaloka and Vaikuṇṭhaloka, but the cakra
was relentless in its pursuit. Finally, on the advice of
Bhagavān Viṣṇu, Durvāsā returned to bhakta Ambarīṣa and
offered him prayers. It was by these prayers that the
cakra stopped at this place and the ṛṣi’s life was
spared. One who takes bath here is liberated from sins,
including even the sin of killing a brāhmaṇa. He obtains
darśana of Bhagavān by the mercy of Sudarśana Cakra, and
his life thus becomes successful.28


22. Daśāśvamedha Tīrtha

Brahmājī performed ten aśvamedha-yajñas at this sacred
ghāṭa on the Yamunā. Devarṣi Nārada, the four Kumāras
and other ṛṣis always worship this place. Anyone who
bathes at Daśāśvamedha Tīrtha attains bhagavad-dhāma.29


23. Vighnarāja Tīrtha

By bathing at Vighnarāja Tīrtha, a person is liberated
from all kinds of obstacles (vighna). Śrī Gaṇeśajī, who
removes all varieties of obstacles, always resides here
and worships Bhagavān. By the mercy of Bhagavān
Nṛsiṁhadeva especially, all impediments to bhakti are
removed for one who takes bath at this tīrtha, and he is
sent to the dhāma of Bhagavān.30


24. Koṭi Tīrtha

By bathing here, a person gets the result of donating
millions and millions (koṭi-koṭi) of cows.31 Nearby lies
Gokarṇa Tīrtha. The well-known Gokarṇa released his
brother Dhuṅdhukārī from the life of a ghost by reciting
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam to him. Gokarṇa Tīrtha is this same
Gokarṇa’s place of worship.32


Places Along the Mathurā Parikramā Path

Apart from the twenty-four ghāṭas just described, there
are numerous other places of interest on the pañca-kosī
(ten-mile) parikramā of Mathurā. Having started the
parikramā at Viśrāma Ghāṭa, the first place one comes to
is Pīpaleśvara Mahādeva.



                              27
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Pīpaleśvara Mahādeva

Situated near Viśrāma Ghāṭa, on the eastern side of
Mathurā Purī, Pīpaleśvara Mahādeva always protects
Mathurā Kṣetra. He is one of Mathurā’s four kṣetra-pālas
(area-protectors). Thereafter, one can have darśana of
Veṇī Mādhava, Rāmeśvara, Dāūjī, Madana-Mohana, Tinduka
Tīrtha, Sūrya Ghāṭa and Dhruva Ṭīlā. Then, on Sapta-ṛṣi
Ṭīlā one can have the sacred darśana of Atri, Marīci,
Kratu, Aṅgīrā, Gautama, Vaśiṣṭha and Pulastya Ṛṣi. These
seven (sapta) ṛṣis reside in Mathurā Dhāma at this
place, performing their worship of Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa.


Bali Mahārāja Ṭīlā

Here one can have darśana of Bali Mahārāja and
Vāmanadevajī. King Bali worshipped Bhagavān Vāmanadeva
at this place.


Akrūra Bhavan

A little further on lies the residence of Akrūrajī. He
wanted to bring Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma to his residence, but
They stayed with Their father, Śrī Nanda Bābā, on the
outskirts of Mathurā and promised to come to Akrūra
after killing Kaṁsa.


Kubjā Kūpa (the well of Kubjā)

While wandering throughout Mathurā, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and
Balarāma met Kubjā, the maidservant of Kaṁsa, at this
place. With great love Kubjā offered āṅgarāga (an
application of ointments) to the limbs of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and
Balarāma. Just by touching her waist and chin with His
hands, Śrī Kṛṣṇa transformed her into a very beautiful
young kiśorī with the appearance of an apsarā. Looking
at Him with shy, lust-filled eyes, Kubjā tried to take
Him to her home, but Śrī Kṛṣṇa left after promising to
visit her house upon completing His work. After killing
Kaṁsa, Kṛṣṇa went to Kubjā’s house with Uddhavajī and
stayed there for some time, thus fulfilling her heart’s
desire.


Raṅgabhūmi and Śrī Raṅgeśvara Mahādeva

In the southern part of Mathurā, Śrī Rāṅgeśvarajī is the
kṣetra-pāla. Mahārāja Kaṁsa, the destroyer of his
family, the Bhoja Dynasty, conspired to kill Śrī Kṛṣṇa
and Balarāma. He therefore had a raṅgaśālā (wrestling
arena) built here. Through cunning means, Akrūra brought
Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva from Śrī Nanda-Gokula. On the
pretext of sight-seeing, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva reached
this raṅgaśālā with the cowherd boys, after asking
various people for directions. The raṅgaśālā was very
beautifully decorated. Splendid arched gateways were
bedecked with flowers, and the huge bow of Śaṅkara was
placed at the front in the raṅgaśālā. The mad elephant,
Kuvalyāpīḍa, who was trained to kill the two brothers,
blocked the main entrance, waiting to receive a signal
to kill Them. The splendour of Raṅgeśvara Mahādeva, who

                              28
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

had been decorated in different ways, was also awesome.
Many gigantic and fierce wrestlers, such as Cāṇūra,
Muṣṭika, Śala and Tośala were ready for the wrestling
match inside the arena. Mahārāja Kaṁsa, together with
his friends and prominent citizens, were seated on a
high platform.

Upon entering the arena, Śrī Kṛṣṇa effortlessly picked
up the bow with His left hand. In front of everyone, He
strung the bow within a moment and pulled the string in
such a way that the bow broke into pieces, making a
thunderous sound. Both brothers easily killed all the
soldiers who were protecting the bow. After slaying
Kuvalyāpīḍa, Śrī Kṛṣṇa pulled out the elephant’s two
tusks and used them to kill the elephant-keeper and many
other wicked persons. Some soldiers ran to Mahārāja
Kaṁsa to tell him about the incident. Grinding his teeth
in anger, Kaṁsa signaled to Cāṇūra and Muṣṭika to
quickly kill the two boys. Just then, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and
Baladeva, smiling like two lion-cubs, reached the
wrestling arena, carrying the huge elephant-tusks on
Their shoulders, Their bodies sprinkled with blood.
Cāṇūra and Muṣṭika challenged the two brothers to
wrestle, through various gestures, like flexing their
muscles to display their power and strength. Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
the propagator of decent conduct, suggested that He and
Balarāmajī fight with wrestlers of Their own age; but to
entertain Mahārāja Kaṁsa, Cāṇūra arrogantly challenged
Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Muṣṭika challenged Balarāmajī. This is
what Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma in fact wanted, and thus the
fight began.

Considering this wrestling match to be immoral and
improper, the women of the city stood up and prepared to
leave. Beholding the sweetness of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s form, they
said, “Oh! In truth, only Brajabhūmi, the land of Vṛndā-
vana, is supremely sacred and blessed. Parama
Puruṣottama resides there, disguised as an ordinary
human being. That Prabhu, whose lotus feet are
worshipped by the god of gods Mahādeva Śaṅkara and by
Lakṣmījī, wanders about there in great bliss, wearing a
many-coloured garland of flowers, playing His flute and
performing various pastimes with Balarāmajī and His
sakhās while tending the cows. This sweetness of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s form is easily available only to the residents
of Vṛndāvana, especially the gopīs. The peacocks, śukas
(male parrots), sārīs (female parrots), cows, calves and
rivers of Braja are all blessed. They are satisfied by
freely relishing the varieties of Kṛṣṇa’s sweetness.”

As the women of Mathurā were discussing this, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
defeated Cāṇūra and Balarāmajī defeated Muṣṭika, killing
them. Thereafter, the two brothers also killed Kūṭa,
Śala, Tośala and the other wrestlers. Kaṁsa became
furious and ordered that Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Baladeva, Nanda and
Vasudeva be taken prisoners. However, in a moment and
with great speed, Śrī Kṛṣṇa leapt onto the platform
where Kaṁsa was sitting, and catching hold of his śikhā,
threw him to the ground. Kṛṣṇa then jumped on his chest,
causing his life-air to leave him like a bird flying
away. Kaṁsa was thus effortlessly killed. Śrī Kṛṣṇa
wonderfully slew Kaṁsa and his associates in the
raṅgaśālā. Seeing this spectacle (raṅga), Śaṅkarajī,
whom Kaṁsa had worshipped, became very happy. Hence, his

                              29
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

name became Śrī Raṅgeśvara. To this day, Raṅgabhūmi
glorifies this colourful pastime of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

According to Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartīpāda, Kaṁsa was killed on the day of Śiva-
rātri. Since Kaṁsa had called Akrūra to his home for
advice on the night of Ekādaśī, Akrūra had reached Nanda
Bhavan on Dvādaśī, and on Trayodaśī Śrī Kṛṣṇa and
Balarāma had travelled from Nandagaon to Mathurā in
Akrūra’s chariot. That evening, They wandered around the
city of Mathurā and the dhanuṣa-yajña (bow sacrifice)
was performed. The next day, in other words on, Śiva
Caturdaśī, the two brothers killed Kuvalayāpīḍa, Cāṇura,
Muṣṭika and Kaṁsa.

Every year in the month of Kārtika on Śuklā-daśamī, one
day before Devotthāna Ekādaśī, the Caube community
organises a festival in memory of the killing of Kaṁsa,
in which a twenty-five to thirty foot tall mūrti of
Kaṁsa is built to be killed by Śrī Kṛṣṇa.


Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha

This maṭha is situated adjacent to Śrī Raṅgeśvara
Mahādeva and Kaṁsa Ṭīlā, on the right side of the
parikramā path and on the left side of the Mathurā-Āgrā
road. It is currently a well-known place of darśana.
Ācārya keśarī oṁ viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja named this maṭha ‘Śrī Keśavajī
Gauḍīya Maṭha’ after the presiding deity of Mathurā,
Bhagavān Śrī Keśavajī. From its inauguration, the author
was appointed maṭha-rakṣaka (superintendent), in order
to propagate śuddha-bhakti as practised and preached by
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu to the Hindi-speaking areas of
India. In a very short time, many books were published
from here in Hindi, the national language of India, like
Jaiva-dharma, Śrī Śīkṣāṣṭaka, Śrīman Mahāprabhu kī
Śikṣā, Upadeśāmṛta, Śrī Manaḥ Śikṣā, Śrīmad Bhagavad-
gītā and the monthly magazine Śrī Bhāgavata-patrikā. New
books about bhakti continue to be published to this day.
Śrī Abhaycaraṇa Bhaktivedāntajī, who created an uproar
in the western world through śrī-harināma-saṅkīrtana as
preached by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and who extensively
published and distributed Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā, Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam and many other books in many languages of the
world, accepted tridaṇḍa sannyāsa at this place from oṁ
viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī
Mahārāja. He accepted the sannyāsa name and title of
tridaṇḍi-svāmī Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja
at that time. The author was the priest at this
ceremony.

After taking darśana of this maṭha, one can have the
darśana of Śiva-tāla and Kaṅkālī-devī.


Kaṅkālī

The mandira of Kaṅkālī-devī is found on Kaṅkālī Ṭīlā.
Because Kaṁsa worshipped her, she is called Kaṁsa Kālī
or Kaṅkālī. This is the same eight-armed Durgā-devī who
rides a lion. Kaṁsa wanted to kill her, thinking her to
be the daughter of Devakī, but Devī escaped from his

                              30
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                       5/5/2017

hands and ascended into the sky.

Proceeding from here, we find Balabhadra Kuṇḍa. On the
banks of this kuṇḍa lie the temples of Dāūjī and
Jagannāthajī. We then arrive at the temple of Bhūteśvara
Mahādeva.


Bhūteśvara Mahādeva

The eternal kṣetra-pāla on Mathurā’s western side is
Bhūteśvara Mahādeva. Nearby is Pātāla-devī, whom Kaṁsa
worshipped, and a little further on are Potrā Kuṇḍa, Ādī
Keśava and Śrī Kṛṣṇa Janma-sthāna, which have already
been described. We then reach Jñāna-vāpī, or Jñāna-
bāvaḍī.


Jñāna-vāpī (Jñāna-bāvaḍī)

This important ancient tīrtha is hidden within the earth
on the Mathurā pañca-kosī parikramā path between
Bhūteśvara Mahādeva and Kaṭarā Keśavadeva (the
birthplace of Śrī Kṛṣṇa). Referring to this tīrtha, the
Varāha Purāṇa (Mathurā Mahātmya, adhyāya 269-42) states:


yo vāpyāṁ dharmarājasya / mathurāyāstu paścimai

sthānaṁ karoti tasyāṁ tu / grahadorṣarna lipyate


“All the evil planetary influences of those persons who
bathe in Īśavāpī Bāvaḍī of Dharmarāja, situated in
western Mathurā, are removed and they attain bhagavat-
bhakti.” In his Mathurā Parikramā (vikramī 2500),
kavivara Harilālā Kakora says:


satyug kau ik tīrath kahau / vāpī jñān-bhakti koṅ lahoṅ

yāmai joṅ snān karaijū / dhoī pāp bahu puny bharaijū


“There is a tīrtha from Satya-yuga in the form of a well
that is filled with jñāna and bhakti. Those who bathe in
this well wash away all their sins and receive thousands
and thousands of pious credits.”

According to the Vāyu Purāṇa, Dharmarāja Yudhiṣṭhira
built this bāvaḍī, or deep tank with steps. This place
is also important as the place where Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa
used to consult with Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira.

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta specifically describes the
arrival in this same Śrīdhāma Mathurā of Śacīnandana
Gaurahari, who is non-different from Śrī Kṛṣṇa and who
preached śuddha-bhakti and kṛṣṇa-nāma-saṅkīrtana
throughout the whole world. He took bath in the Yamunā
at Viśrāma Ghāṭa and then went to the temple of Śrī
Keśavadeva. Seeing Him performing kīrtana and dancing in
ecstasy, a crowd of thousands assembled there. Caitanya
Mahāprabhu took bath and did ācamana in Jñāna-bāvaḍī.
Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta mentions that He later stayed at

                              31
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

the house of a Vaiṣṇava brāhmaṇa from the Sanodiyā
community who lived near Jñāna-bavaḍī, where he accepted
prasāda.

The Purāṇas mention that this place is related to
Bhārtṛ-hari Rājā. The samādhi of this rājā is also
located here, but has now fallen into ruins.


Mahāvidyā-devī (Ambikā-devī)

Once, Mahārāja Nanda, Kṛṣṇa, Baladeva, Yaśodā-devī and
other gopas came to this Ambikāvana on pilgrimage. They
bathed in the sacred water of the Sarasvatī River and
worshipped Paśupati (Gokarṇa Mahādeva). They remained
there overnight. During the night, a huge python caught
Nanda Bābā and slowly began to swallow him. Everyone
tried to save Nanda Bābā, but to no avail. Nanda Bābā
cried out to Kṛṣṇa in great distress, and something
wonderful took place — Kṛṣṇa touched the python with His
feet, and he at once gave up his huge snake body and
assumed the form of a beautiful vidyādhara (celestial
being). The vidyādhara stood up and offered obeisances
to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. On Kṛṣṇa’s inquiry, he revealed his
identity. “I was a vidyādhara named Sudarśana,” he said.
“Once, while flying in an airplane, I saw some ugly ṛṣis
in the lineage of Aṅgīrā Muni and made fun of them. They
cursed me to become a snake. Today that curse has proven
to be a benediction, because the touch of Your lotus
feet has not only freed me from the curse, but has also
made my life successful.” This place is famous by the
name of Mahāvidyā-devī.

After this tīrtha comes Sarasvatī Kuṇḍa, Cāmuṇḍā-devī
and Rajaka-badha Ṭīlā.


Rajaka-badha (the killing of the washerman)

While roaming throughout the city of Mathurā, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
and Baladevajī spotted a washerman here whose task was
to wash and dye Kaṁsa’s clothes. Seeing the beautiful
garments in his charge, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma asked to
have some that would be appropriate for Them to wear.
However, the rajaka (washerman) made fun of Them and
refused to hand over any clothes. Upon hearing his
sarcastic remarks, Śrī Kṛṣṇa at once beheaded him with
His bare hand in front of everyone, and granted him an
appropriate kind of liberation.

Proceeding further, one reaches Gokarṇa Mahādeva.


Gokarṇa Mahādeva

Gokarṇa Mahādeva is the kṣetra-pāla of the dhāma on
Mathurā’s northern side. He is called Gokarṇa Mahādeva
because Gokarṇa, the famous speaker of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, worshipped him.

Continuing from here, on the banks of the Yamunā are
Nīlakaṇṭheśvara Mahādeva and Ambarīṣa Tīlā.



                              32
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Ambarīṣa Ṭīlā

On the right hand side, near the confluence of the
Sarasvatī and Yamunā, is Ambarīṣa Ṭīlā. In Satya-yuga,
Mahārāja Ambarīṣa was the cakravartī emperor of this
world consisting of seven islands. He was an ekāntika
bhakta of Bhagavān and engaged all his senses in
following the different aṅgas (limbs) of bhakti. With
his mind, he would meditate upon the pastimes of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. With his voice, he would chant the names of
Bhagavān and glorify His various pastimes. With his
hands, he would clean the temple of Bhagavān. Through
his ears, he would hear about the pastimes of Bhagavān.
He would engage his eyes in taking darśana of Śrī
Mukunda’s temples. He would engage his nose in smelling
the garlands, sandalwood paste and other articles that
had been offered at the lotus feet of Bhagavān. He would
serve the prasāda offered to Bhagavān by tasting it with
his tongue, and with his legs he would circumambulate
Bhagavān’s dhāma, Tulasī, Bhagavān’s temples, and so on.
He would also observe Ekādaśī and other fasts related to
Hari.

Once, while residing at this place in Mathurā, Mahārāja
Ambarīṣa observed the vow of Dvādaśī by nirjala, fasting
without water. On the following day, there was only a
short time after sunrise in which it was auspicious to
break his fast (pāraṇa). Mahārāja Ambarīṣa performed
pūjā, arcana and so on, but just as he was about to
break his fast with grains offered to Bhagavān, Maharṣi
Durvāsā arrived. With great respect, the king invited
the ṛṣi to join him in breaking the fast. The maharṣi
said, “I accept your invitation, but I first need to go
to the bank of the Yamunā to perform some of my daily
duties, such as taking bath and finishing my daily
ritualistic ceremonies. Please wait until I return.”
Saying this, the ṛṣi went to the Yamunā. However,
Durvāsājī’s return was slightly delayed, and the
auspicious time for breaking the fast was about to pass.
After consulting with the brāhmaṇas and his ministers,
Mahārāja Ambarīṣa took a drop of Bhagavān’s caraṇāmṛta
in order to protect his fast.

When Maharṣi Durvāsā returned, he was furious, knowing
well that Mahārāja Ambarīṣa had broken the fast without
him. He pulled out a jaṭā (dread-lock) from his head and
transformed it into a rākṣasī made of fire called Kṛtyā,
who was about to burn Ambarīṣa to ashes. However,
Mahārāja Ambarīṣa remained standing there fearlessly
with folded hands. At once, Sudarśana Cakra, the
protector of the bhaktas, appeared and burnt Kṛtyā to
ashes. Sudarśana Cakra then leapt towards Maharṣi
Durvāsā, who swiftly ran in all directions to save his
life. He fled to Bhuḥ, Bhuvaḥ, Svaḥ and other planetary
systems. He even went to Brahmaloka and Śivaloka, but no
one could save him. Wherever he went, he saw the
frightening Sudarśana Cakra pursuing him. Finally,
Maharṣi Durvāsā came to Nārāyaṇa in Vaikuṇṭha-loka and
desperately cried out: “Help! Save me! Protect me!”
Bhagavān Śrī Nārāyaṇa said, “I am under the control of
My bhaktas. I am their heart and they are My heart. How
can I foresake those who have taken My shelter, having
left everything — their home, wife, sons, family, wealth
and so forth? You should at once return to bhakta

                              33
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Ambarīṣa and plead for forgiveness. Sudarśana Cakra can
be pacified by his prayer only, and not by any other
means.”

For one full year, the great devotee Ambarīṣa Mahārāja
remained standing there, waiting for Durvāsā and praying
for his welfare. Upon returning from Vaikuṇṭha, the
perturbed Durvāsā begged Mahārāja Ambarīṣa for his life.
By offering various prayers, Ambarīṣajī pacified
Sudarśana Cakra and then satisfied the maharṣi by
respectfully offering him a variety of delicious
foodstuffs. When Durvāsājī saw the glories of Mahārāja
Ambarīṣa, he became very astonished. He said, “Oh! Today
I have realised the unprecedented glories of the
devotees of Bhagavān Anantadeva. Although I am such an
aparādhī, Ambarīṣa Mahārāja always desires my welfare.
This is only possible for the devotees of Bhagavān!”

This līlā took place here. To this day, Ambarīṣa Ṭīlā
stands as witness to the glories of the devotee
Ambarīṣa. Nearby, on the banks of the Yamunā, is Cakra
Tīrtha, where Mahārāja Ambarīṣa pacified the cakra by
offering various prayers.


Kaṁsa-kilā and other nearby tīrthas

After Sarasvatī-Patana Tīrtha (Kṛṣṇa Gaṅgā) and Soma
Tīrtha (Gaū Ghāṭa), one comes to Kaṁsa-kilā, Ghaṇtākarṇa
and Mukti Tīrtha. Kaṁsa-kilā (the fort of Kaṁsa) was the
residence or palace of Kaṁsa. The ruins that lie there
today bear testimony to this. Between Kaṁsa-kilā and
Vasudeva Ghāṭa (near Svāmī Ghāṭa) are Brahma Ghāṭa,
Vaikuṇṭha Ghāṭa and Dhārā-patana. Then, after Asi Kuṇḍa
(Askuṇḍā Ghāṭa) and Maṇikarṇikā Ghāṭa is Viśrāma Ghāṭa,
which completes the pañca-kosī parikramā of Mathurā.


Gatāśrama Nārāyaṇa Mandira & other nearby tīrthas

On Mathurā’s inner parikramā path, south of Viśrāma
Ghāṭa, is the temple of Gatāśrama Nārāyaṇa. Close to the
present day Satiburja, in the right-hand side lane,
stands the temple of Carcikā-devī. Near Raṅgeśvara
Mandira, on the eastern side, lies Sapta-sāmudrī Kūpa,
or the well of seven oceans. Then, under the railway
line leading to the main railway station in Mathurā is
Śiva-tāla. The road to Madhuvana also begins from there.
Close to Bharatapura Gate lies the temple of Dīrgha
Viṣṇu.


Dīrgha Viṣṇu

When Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Baladevajī and Their cowherd friends
were proceeding to Kaṁsa’s wrestling arena (raṅgabhūmi),
Śrīdāma and other sakhās asked Him, “Sakhe! Are You
going to raṅgabhūmi? How will You kill the mighty Kaṁsa
with this small, tender body of Yours?” Śrī Kṛṣṇa then
displayed His huge (dīrgha) form, carrying a conchshell,
disk, club and lotus flower. Thus, the sakhās were
convinced that their Kanhaiyā could do anything by the
mercy of Nārāyaṇa, and that Nārāyaṇa sometimes
manifested through Him. Happily, they danced towards the

                              34
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

raṅgaśālā with Śrī Kṛṣṇa.


Mathurā-devī

Close to Dīrgha Viṣṇu, towards the east and inside a
lane, is the temple of Mathurā-devī, the presiding deity
(adhiṣṭhātrī-devī) of Mathurā. Mathurā-devī has a very
loving relationship as a sakhī of Śrī Yamunājī. Together
they serve their Prabhu, Śrī Kṛṣṇa.


Śrī Padmanābhajī

Heading east down the same lane, one comes to the temple
of Bhagavān Śrī Padmanābha in Caubeyā Pāḍā. The father
of the material creation, Brahmājī, took birth on the
lotus flower that manifests from the lotus stem growing
out of Garbhodaśāyī Bhagavān Padmanābha’s navel. Only by
Śrī Padmanābhajī’s mercy does Vairāja Brahmājī create
the material universe.


Ādi Varāha Mandira

Behind the present Dvārakādhīśa Mandira in Māṇika Choka
are two temples of Varāhajī. One of them has a black
deity of Varāha (Kṛṣṇa Varāha); the other has a white
deity of Varāha (Śveta Varāha). During the period of
Svāyambhuva Maṇu in Brāhmakalpa, Kṛṣṇa Varāha manifested
from the nostril of Brahmājī in a four-legged, boar
form. He kept the Earth on His tusk and brought her up
from Rasātala, the nether region. During the reign of
Cākṣusa Maṇu, Śveta Varāha manifested from the ocean.
His face was like that of a boar and the lower portion
of His body was human-like. He is also called Nṛ Varāha.
He killed Hiraṇyākśa and delivered the Earth.

At the beginning of Satya-yuga, there was a brāhmaṇa ṛṣi
named Kapila. He was a worshipper of Bhagavān Ādi
Varāha. Indra, the king of the demigods was pleased with
that brāhmaṇa and brought that deity of Varāha to
Svarga, where he installed Him for worship. Having
defeated Indra, the mighty Rāvaṇa seized that Varāha
deity from Svarga and established Him in Laṅkā. After
killing the nirviśeṣavādī Rāvaṇa, Bhagavān Śrī
Rāmacandra brought that same deity to Ayodhyā and
installed Him in His palace. While leaving Ayodhyā to
kill Lavaṇāsura, Mahārāja Śatrughna asked his elder
brother Śrī Rāmacandrajī for this Varāha deity. Mahārāja
Śatrughna carried the deity with him and, after killing
Lavaṇāsura, established Him in the city of Mathurā,
where one can take darśana of Him today.


Dvārakādīśa Mandira

Among the new temples of Mathurā, the Dvārakādīśa
Mandira is prominent. It was established about 150 years
ago by a devotee in the line of Śrī Vallabhācārya. This
temple is situated close to Viśrāma Ghāṭa and Gatāśrama
Ṭīlā. The temples of Kṛṣṇa Varāha and Śveta Varāha are
also nearby.


                              35
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Dvārakādīśa is the king of Dvārakā, and thus Kṛṣṇa is
here with His queens Rukmiṇī and Satyabhāmā. He is also
without His peacock feather and flute. Generally, at the
beginning of the rainy season, or the month of Śravaṇa,
a very elaborate jhūlana-yatra (swing festival) takes
place here. Hundreds and thousands of devotees, both
inhabitants of Mathurā and devotees from very far away,
assemble here to attend the festival. Dvārakādīśa is a
wealthy personality, so He swings on a golden swing
bedecked with jewels.

Once, the author went with a thousand devotees to the
Dvārakādīśa Mandira. When he arrived, the temple door
was closed. He sent a messenger to ask Dvārakādīśa, “Why
are You hiding? Where is Your flute, peacock feather and
dress of Vṛndāvana? Have You changed Your father and
mother? Do You have any new, beautiful beloveds from
Dvārakā or Mathurā? Why are You not coming forward?”
Hearing this, Dvārakādīśa began to cry bitterly,
remembering the pastimes of Vṛndāvana. The author and
his party told Him that Śrīmatījī had sent them to see
how He was. “She is lamenting for You,” they said.
Dvārakādīśa then promised that He would return to
Vṛndāvana in a day or two. The devotees then returned to
their maṭha.

The Purāṇas and other sacred texts mention many more
places worth seeing other than the ones listed above;
however, most of these places have now disappeared.




Chapter 2

Madhuvana


Madhuvana lies south-west of Śrī Mathurā, about two and
a half miles from Bhūteśvara Mahādeva. It is one of
Braja’s twelve famous forests. In Satya-yuga, Bhagavān
killed a demon named Madhu here, for which He became
known as Madhusūdana. Likewise, this forest became known
as Madhuvana. It is as beloved and sweet as Bhagavān Śrī
Madhusūdana Himself.1

Another name of Madhusūdana is Mādhava, because He is
the dhava (beloved) of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, who is sarva
lakṣmī-mayī, the foremost among all Lakṣmīs. This Śrī
Mādhava is the adhiṣṭhātrī devatā of this forest. While
taking bath here or performing ācamana when visiting
this forest, one should chant the following mantra — oṁ
hrāṁ hrīṁ madhuvanādhi-pataye mādhavāya namaḥ svāhā.
Chanting this mantra renders one’s parikramā of this
forest successful. The present name of Madhuvana is
Maholī Grāma. On the eastern side of this village of
Maholī is Dhruva Ṭīlā, where the deities of the child
Dhruva and his worshipable four-handed Nārāyaṇa reside.
Dhruva performed severe austerities here to attract
Bhagavān, using the mantra Devarṣi Nārada had given him.
Being pleased with his worship, Bhagavān appeared before
Dhruva and awarded him absolute monarchy over the entire
Earth for thirty-six thousand years and, following this,

                              36
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

rulership of Dhruva Loka, an imperishable abode of Śrī
Hari within this material universe.

In Tretā-yuga, the ṛṣis, munis and other residents of
Madhuvana were terrified by the atrocities committed by
the Madhu demon, who had obtained a trident from
Śaṅkarajī after performing severe austerities. So long
as that trident remained in Madhu’s hands, no demigod,
demon or human being could defeat him. Although Madhu
was a prince in the sūrya-vaṁśa, the dynasty of the Sun,
he became very cruel and devoid of good conduct due to
bad association. His father rejected him and banished
him from his kingdom. Madhu lived in Madhuvana, where he
established a new kingdom and began to harass everyone.
Māndhātā, the highly illustrious king of the sūrya-
vaṁśa, wanted to punish Madhu and therefore attacked
him. However, he was slain by the trident given to the
Madhu demon by Śaṅkara.

Before his death, Madhudaitya gave that trident to his
son, Lavaṇāsura, telling him that no one would be able
to kill him so long as it remained in his hands. Rather,
this infallible trident would kill all his enemies.

Trident in hand, Lavaṇāsura became an oppressor even
crueler than his father. Distressed by his atrocities,
the ṛṣis and maharṣis of Madhuvana and other,
surrounding areas went to Śrī Rāma in Ayodhyā and humbly
prayed for protection from Lavaṇāsura. They informed Him
of Lavaṇāsura’s might and of his infallible trident that
rendered him invincible. It would only be possible to
kill him, they explained, when he did not have his
trident at hand.

In Ayodhyā, Bhagavān Śrī Rāmacandrajī coronated his
younger brother Śatrughnajī as the king of Madhuvana.
Śatrughnajī asked Śrī Rāmacandrajī for the powerful
deity of Śrī Varāha that Śrī Rāmacandrajī had brought
back from Laṅkā for worship, and his elder brother
happily gave him this deity. Śatrughnajī then went with
the ṛṣis and maharṣis to the āśrama of Vālmīki Ṛṣi and
after receiving his blessings, proceeded to Madhuvana.
Bow and arrows in hand, Śatrughnajī arrived at the
entrance of Lavaṇāsura’s cave when Lavaṇāsura had gone
hunting in the woods, having left his trident behind in
the cave. When the demon returned, carrying elephants,
deer and many other animals that he had killed,
Śatrughnajī challenged him and a fierce fight ensued.
Lavaṇāsura desperately tried to retrieve his trident by
one means or another, but Śrī Śatrughna, the highly
valourous warrior and subduer of his enemies, obstructed
him and succeeded in cutting off his head with his sharp
arrows. Śatrughnajī then settled in the deserted
Madhupurī and established Bhagavān Varāhadeva there.
This Ādi Varāhadeva is still present at the very same
location in today’s Mathurā, which lies within
Madhuvana. Bhagavān Mādhava’s dear Madhu Kuṇḍa also lies
in Madhuvana, and is now called Kṛṣṇa Kuṇḍa. Nearby is
the cave of Lavaṇāsura. On the bank of Kṛṣṇa Kuṇḍa is
the beautiful deity of Bhagavān Śatrughnajī.

Towards the end of Dvāpara-yuga, Śrī Kṛṣṇa would take
lākhs of cows out to graze, walking behind them and
calling out their names: “Dhaulī! Dhūmrī! Kālindī! Ö” He

                              37
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

would make sounds to instruct them, such as Hiyo-hiyo!
(“Come! Come!”), Dhīrī-dhīrī! (“Slowly! Slowly!”) and
Tīrī-tīrī! (“Come to the riverbank to drink!”). As He
walked with Dāū Bhaiyā, He would sometimes play His
sweet flute and sometimes laugh and joke as He placed
His hands on the shoulders of the sakhās. Sometimes His
thirsty eyes would look with sidelong glances at the
gopīs who were hiding within the kuñjas. As the boys
herded the cows, delightful uproars would break out
amongst them. In this way, the sweet nectar of prema
used to shower everywhere in Madhuvana, and Śrī Kṛṣṇa
and Śrī Balarāmajī would relish it while grazing the
cows. Hiding in the kuñjas or on the balconies or
windows of their palaces, the braja-ramaṇīs used to
perform āratī of Kṛṣṇa with their loving sidelong
glances as He entered and returned from the forest.
Kṛṣṇa would show that He accepted this āratī by the
movement of His own eyes. To the braja-ramaṇīs, even a
second in separation from Kṛṣṇa would feel like millions
of yugas and a yuga in His company would seem like a
fraction of a second.

Kṛṣṇa’s cowherding pastimes in Madhuvana are as sweet as
madhu (honey) and beyond description. In Kali-yuga,
about five hundred years ago, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
visited Braja and came to Madhuvana, where the sphūrti,
or momentary vision, of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes overwhelmed
Him with ecstasy. Each year, many groups of pilgrims
stop here to rest.

It is well known that Dāūjī and the sakhās used to dance
in Madhuvana and thus relish its sweet nectar. Today,
one can also take darśana of the black deity of Dāūjī
here. There is a deep secret behind this deity. After
leaving Vṛndāvana and Mathurā, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva
resided in Dvārakā with Their relatives. When Baladevajī
heard about the restlessness and lamentation of all of
Braja in separation from Śrī Kṛṣṇa, He wanted to take
Kṛṣṇa there. However, because of some delay in Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s being able to go to Vṛndāvana, Baladevajī went
there alone and tried to console everyone as far as
possible. However, when He saw their state of
separation, He Himself became distressed in viraha from
Kṛṣṇa. Meditating upon Śyāma and His braja-līlās, He
began to relish śyāma-rasa, and Himself took on a śyāma
complexion. This śyāma-rasa, or nectar of Kṛṣṇa, is the
only madhu (sweet honey). Baladeva relishes it eternally
and thus remains always immersed in the ecstasy of
kṛṣṇa-prema.




Chapter 3

Tālavana


aho tālavanaṁ puṇyaṁ

yatra tālairhato suraḥ

hitāya yādavānāñca

                              38
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017


ātmakrīḍanakāya ca

(Skanda Purāṇa)



“Aho! This is the same Tālavana where Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrī
Balarāmajī killed Dhenukāsura, the ass-demon, for the
benefit of the Yādavas and for the entertainment of the
sakhās.” This forest is situated about two and a half
miles south-west of Madhuvana and was once a beautiful,
inviting forest full of tāla (palm) trees. Cruel Kaṁsa
had appointed one of his followers, Dhenukāsura, to
guard this forest, a duty he carefully performed along
with his many wives and sons. Only Mahārāja Kaṁsa and
his followers used to enjoy the sweet tāla fruits of
this forest, which were otherwise inaccessible to
ordinary people.

One day, while herding the cows, Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva
together with the sakhās wandered near Tālavana. The
sakhās were very hungry, and they requested Kṛṣṇa and
Baladeva to protect them from the demon of hunger. They
also said that they could detect the fragrance of sweet,
ripe tāla fruits coming from a nearby place. Hearing
this, Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva led the sakhās to Tālavana.1
There, Baladevajī shook a tree full of ripe fruits. At
once, the fruits started to fall to the ground making a
dhap-dhap sound, and the cowherd boys jumped about in
ecstasy. Hearing the sound of the falling fruits,
Dhenukāsura and his followers attacked Kṛṣṇa and
Balarāma with great force, kicking Them with their hind
legs. Without strain or effort, Baladeva Prabhu caught
the hind legs of the valourous Dhenukāsura and, whirling
him around in the sky, threw him on to the top of a huge
tāla tree. Passing stool and urine, the demon died.
Kṛṣṇa then started killing the followers of Dhenukāsura,
and soon the entire Tālavana became contaminated with
the urine, stool and blood of the donkeys. All the tāla
trees fell upon each other and were thus destroyed.
Later, when Tālavana became a clean place once more, the
sakhās could easily go there, as could the people in
general.

This pastime carries some deep and important teachings.
Śrī Baladeva Prabhu is akhaṇḍa guru-tattva. Only by śrī
gurudeva’s mercy can a sādhaka protect his heart from
ignorance. In other words, only śrī gurudeva can remove
all types of ignorance from a sincere disciple and
infuse his heart with kṛṣṇa-bhakti. Dhenukāsura is the
embodiment of ignorance. Realization of kṛṣṇa-tattva,
bhakti-tattva and māyā-tattva is possible by the mercy
of Śrī Baladeva Prabhu, the akhaṇḍa guru-tattva. Only
then will bhakti for Kṛṣṇa become strong and fixed.

Due to foolishness, donkeys carry all kinds of loads in
this material world. They tolerate the kicks of the she-
donkeys and the beatings of the washermen, and they are
very lusty. Those who out of gross foolishness neglect
to perform bhajana of Bhagavān, and who thus carry all
the bad qualities of a donkey, become very lean and thin
during the rainy season when there is plenty of grass
and become very fat during the summer when there is

                              39
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

little grass. This is because the donkey is so foolish
that when he sees the abundance of grass during the
rainy season, he thinks that he must not have eaten
anything; and when he sees the scarcity of grass during
the summer, he thinks that he must have eaten it all up.

Here, at Tālavana, lies Balabhadra Kuṇḍa and the mandira
of Baladevajī. Tālavana is situated six miles south of
Mathurā and two miles south-west of Madhuvana.




Chapter 4

Kumudavana


Two miles west of Tālavana is Kumudavana, which
presently goes by the name Kudaravana. The kuṇḍa here is
called Kumudinī Kuṇḍa or Vihāra Kuṇḍa. While cowherding,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Balarāmajī and the sakhās used to wander
throughout this beautiful place. Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself used
to sport in this kuṇḍa with the sakhās, and by sweet
words He would call the cows here. He would tell them to
drink water, calling out, Cūṅ-cūṅ!; and he would then
summon them to the bank by exclaiming Tīrī-tīrī! The
boys used to garland each other with kumudinī flowers.
Sometimes, unseen by His sakhās, Kṛṣṇa performed games
in the water (jal-vihāra) here with Śrīmatī Rādhikā,
Lalitā, Viśākhā and other priyanarma sakhīs. There is
currently a mūrti of Śrī Kapiladevajī on the bank of the
kuṇḍa. Bhagavān Kapila worshipped Svayaṁ Bhagavān Śrī
Kṛṣṇa at this place.

From here, the pilgrimage of Braja (braja-yātrā)
proceeds to Bahulāvana via Śāntanu Kuṇḍa. In the
neighbourhood are found the pastime-places of Uspār,
Mānako Nagara, Lagāyo, Gaṇeśarā (Gandheśvarīvana),
Datihā (Datīya), Āyore, Gorvāī, Chaṭṭīkarā and Garuḍa-
Govinda, which are all worth visiting.


Datihā (Datīya)

This place lies approximately six miles west of Mathurā
and two miles from Śāntanu Kuṇḍa. Śrī Kṛṣṇa killed
Dantavakra here. According to the Padma Purāṇa, Nanda
and all the Brajabāsīs, including Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beloved
gopīs, went to Kurukṣetra at the time of a solar eclipse
to meet Kṛṣṇa. “I shall soon return to Braja,” Kṛṣṇa
repeatedly assured them, and He sent them home. Although
the gopas and gopīs returned to Braja with Nanda Bābā,
instead of going back to Gokula-Mahāvana, they waited
for Kṛṣṇa near Datihā on the other side of the Yamunā.
The village in which they stayed while waiting for Kṛṣṇa
is called Magerā or Magherā. After Śrī Kṛṣṇa killed
Śiśupāla, He returned to Braja and killed Dantavakra at
this place. He then crossed the Yamunā and met with His
parents and the other Brajabāsīs. Because Dantavakra was
killed here, this place is called Datihā.



                              40
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Āyore

As soon as the Brajabāsīs saw Śrī Kṛṣṇa, they happily
called out, Āyore! Āyore! (“He has come! He has come!”).
Nanda Bābā and Yaśodā met Kṛṣṇa with great affection.
During the Muslim rule, this village was named Ālīpura,
and is still known by this name today.


Gaurava (Gorvāī)

Gorvāī lies three miles north-east of Gokula. When Nanda
Bābā returned from Kurukṣetra, the zamīndār of this
village welcomed him with great honour. The name of this
place thus became Gaurava, which means ‘dignity’ or
‘respect’, and then later Gorvāī. Today, this village is
known as Guru.


Śakaṭīkarā

The current name of this place is Chaṭṭīkarā. It is
situated on the Delhi-Mathurā highway, four miles from
Mathurā and about two miles from Vṛndāvana. Becoming
concerned by the violence of the demons in Gokula-
Mahāvana, Nanda Bābā came to Śakaṭīkarā with all the
Brajabāsīs. The Brajabāsīs established their living
place here by arranging their hundreds of thousands of
bullock-carts in the shape of a crescent moon. This
place became known as Śakaṭīkarā because the Brajabāsīs
used bullock-carts (śakaṭa) to set up residence. Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Balarāma would go from here to sweet
Vṛndāvana and other nearby places to graze the calves
and cows. Kṛṣṇa performed rāsa-līlā and other braja-
līlās from here. At that time, Vṛndāvana, the place of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s līlā-vilāsa, was not a prosperous city, but
rather was a rural area ornamented with many varieties
of kuñjas, creepers and attractive forests.



Garuḍa-Govinda

Kṛṣṇa performed various pastimes (vihāra) at this place,
which lies near Śakaṭīkarā. One day while grazing the
cows, Śrī Kṛṣṇa was immersed in playing different games
here with the sakhās. In their play, Kṛṣṇa made Śrīdāma
Sakhā assume the role of Garuḍa. He then climbed on his
back, acting as if Lakṣmīpati Nārāyaṇa Himself had just
mounted Garuḍa’s back. Even today, one can take darśana
of Govindajī with Śrīdāma as Garuḍa.

This location is also connected with rāma-līlā. When the
serpents released by Meghanātha bound Rāmacandrajī in
their coils, He became helpless. Hearing of this from
Devaṛṣi Nārada, Garuḍa came to the rescue. As soon as
the serpents saw Garuḍa, they released Rāmacandrajī and
fled. This incident left Garuḍajī a little doubtful as
to whether Śrī Rāma was in fact Bhagavān. However, by
associating with Mahātmā Kakabhuṣuṇḍī and by receiving
darśana of Śrī Kṛṣṇa at the time of kṛṣṇa-līlā, this
delusion was later removed. The place where Garuḍa had
darśana of Śrī Govinda, the maintainer of the cows and
gopas, is known as Garuḍa-Govinda. At that time, Śrī

                              41
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa climbed upon his back and assured him that He was
indeed Bhagavān.


Gandheśvarī

The present name of this village is Gaṇeśarā Gaon. Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and the sakhās used to smear aromatic (gandha)
substances on their bodies while out grazing the cows.
It is said that Śrī Kṛṣṇa became intoxicated by the
fragrance emanating from the body of Śrīmatī Rādhikā,
who was hiding nearby with Her girlfriends.1 Seeing
Śrīmatījī, the flute slipped from His hands, His
peacock-feather crown fell at Her lotus feet, and He
fainted.2 This place is therefore called Gandheśvarī
Tīrtha, Gāndharvā being another name of Śrīmatī Rādhikā.
To this day, Gāndharvā Kuṇḍa continues to celebrate the
triumphant amorous pastimes of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. In
modern times, the name Gandheśvarī has degenerated to
Gaṇeśarā.


Khecarī Gaon

This village is situated two miles west of Mathurā and
one mile north-east of Śāntanu Kuṇḍa. Khecarī refers to
the rākṣasī Pūtanā who roamed the sky. Kaṁsa knew about
her power and adopted her as his sister. On his request,
the impure Pūtanā, who could transform herself into many
forms and who used to drink the blood and eat the flesh
of small children, came in the guise of a beautiful
mother to Nanda Bhavan to kill Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Although her
breasts were smeared with a deadly poison, Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
the ocean of causeless mercy, sucked out her life along
with the poison, and bestowed upon her the position of a
mother in the transcendental world. Khecarī Gaon is the
place of residence of the rākṣasī Pūtanā.


Śāntanu Kuṇḍa

This is the place where Mahārāja Śāntanu performed
tapasyā. Its present name is Satohā, and it is situated
on the Govardhana road about three miles from Mathurā.
Mahārāja Śāntanu worshipped Bhagavān here with the
desire to beget a son. This son was famous as grandsire
Bhīṣma. The name of Bhīṣma’s mother was Gaṅgā. However,
for a particular reason, Gaṅgājī left Śāntanu Mahārāja,
and the king then became attracted to Matsyagandhā
(Urvaśī’s daughter Satyavatī), or Matsyodarī, who
possessed great beauty. She was living in the house of a
fisherman across the Yamunā opposite Mathurā. Mahārāja
Śāntanu desired to marry her, but the fisherman,
Dāśarāja, was unwilling to give him his adopted daughter
in marriage. He said, “If you accept the condition that
the son born from my daughter will be the successor to
your kingdom, then you can marry her.” Mahārāja Śāntanu
refused this proposal for the sake of Crown-Prince
Devavrata (Bhīṣma), yet his heart felt great sadness.
When Prince Devavrata came to know of this, he went to
the house of that fisherman and vowed to remain a life-
long brahmacārī. He promised that the child born from
Matsyodarī, that is to say, the fisherman’s grandson,
would ascend the throne. Thus, he was able to arrange

                              42
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

for the fisherman’s daughter to marry his father
Mahārāja Śāntanu. It is believed that while Hastināpura
was Mahārāja Śāntanu’s capital, he also had a place of
residence here at Śāntanu Kuṇḍa.

Women who desire a child take bath in this kuṇḍa. They
make a svastika out of cowdung behind the temple and
perform pūjā to it. In the middle of Śāntanu Kuṇḍa, on a
raised hill, is the temple of Śāntanu’s worshipable
deity, Śrī Śāntanu-Bihārījī.




Chapter 5

Bahulāvana


Bahulāvana is a very beautiful forest. According to the
Skanda Purāṇa (Mathurā-khaṇḍa), Śrī Hari’s sakhī or gopī
Bahulā resides here — bahulā śrīhareḥ patnī tatra
tiṣṭhati sarvadā. This place is now called Bāṭī. It lies
seven miles west of Mathurā, between Rādhā Kuṇḍa and
Vṛndāvana. Saṅkarṣaṇa Kuṇḍa and Māna Sarovara are two
kuṇḍas situated in this forest. Once, when Śrīmatī
Rādhikā was in māna, She hid Herself in a kuñja in
Bahulāvana. In separation from Her, Kṛṣṇa became very
distressed. He was able to find Śrīmatī Rādhikā with the
help of the sakhīs, and with great difficulty He
pacified Her māna.

It is popularly believed that if a person has a
particular desire and takes bath here, that desire will
be fulfilled. In the temple on the bank of Saṅkarṣaṇa
Kuṇḍa are mūrtis of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, a tiger, a cow, its calf
and a brāhmaṇa. According to local lore, a cow named
Bahulā was once drinking water from this pond when a
fierce tiger attacked and caught her. She assured the
tiger that she would come back to be eaten after she had
first returned to the house of her master, a brāhmaṇa,
and fed milk to her hungry calf. Upon returning home,
she asked her calf to drink milk to his full
satisfaction and told him about her promise to the
tiger. The calf insisted on going with her without
drinking any milk. The brāhmaṇa also prepared himself to
go alone, leaving the cow and calf at home, with the
intention of giving himself over as food for the tiger.
In the end, all three approached the tiger, each willing
to sacrifice himself. At that moment, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
manifested Himself there, and the tiger underwent a
change of heart. By the mercy of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the brāhmaṇa
returned home safely with his cow and calf.

Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa lies within Bahulāvana, and it is
therefore customary to take bath in Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa on
the day of Bahulāṣṭamī. A huge assembly of people bathe
in Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa on that day.

When Bhagavān Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu wandered through
the different forests, He became overwhelmed upon seeing
the natural beauty of this place. A very beautiful and
heart-rending description of this is given in Śrī

                              43
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya, chapter 17) as follows.
When Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu entered Bahulāvana, the
beautiful cows grazing there surrounded him. They
stopped eating the grass and, overflowing with prema,
began to bellow and lick His body. Seeing the
affectionate vātsalya (motherly mood) of the cows,
Mahāprabhujī became completely absorbed in ecstatic
waves of prema. When He regained some external
consciousness, Mahāprabhu began caressing the cows, who
also did not want to give up His association but were
forced onwards with great difficulty by the cowherd-men.
Then, Mahāprabhu again became deeply absorbed in bhāva
and was weeping and calling out, Kothāya kṛṣṇa! Kothāya
kṛṣṇa! (“Where is Kṛṣṇa? Where is Kṛṣṇa?”). Herds of
deer and does gathered there and fearlessly began to
lick Mahāprabhu’s limbs with affection. The śukas,
sārīs, kokilas, papīhās and bees began singing in the
fifth note, and the peacocks proceeded to dance before
Mahāprabhu. The trees and creepers became jubilant and
covered themselves in buds, new leaves and flowers. With
their arm-like branches and twigs, they lovingly offered
their flowers and fruits at the lotus feet of
Mahāprabhu.

Seeing these ecstatic emotions of the moving and non-
moving entities of Vṛndāvana, Mahāprabhu became even
more absorbed in bhāva and called out in a loud voice,
“Chant ‘Kṛṣṇa’! Chant ‘Kṛṣṇa’!” All the moving and non-
moving entities of Braja echoed His words. Sometimes
Mahāprabhu clasped hold of the necks of the deer and
does and cried piteously. They gazed at Mahāprabhu’s
lotus face with love-filled glances and tearful eyes.

Advancing a little further, Mahāprabhujī saw a śuka and
sārī sitting on two opposite branches. A prema-kalaha
(loving quarrel) glorifying Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala
was taking place between them.


Śuka: My Kṛṣṇa is madana-mohana, the enchanter of
Cupid’s mind.

Sārī: Yes, He is — as long as my Rādhā is at His left
side. Otherwise, He is only madana.

Śuka: My Kṛṣṇa held Girirāja on His finger.

Sārī: Because my Rādhā transmitted śakti into Him;
otherwise, how could He have done so?

Śuka: My Kṛṣṇa is the life of the whole universe.

Sārī: My Rādhā is the life of that life.

Śuka: My Kṛṣṇa’s head is decorated with a peacock-
feather.

Sārī: Only because my Rādhā’s name is marked on that
feather.

Śuka: The peacock-feather on my Kṛṣṇa’s head leans to
the left.

Sārī: Because it wants to bow down to my Rādhā’s feet.

                              44
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                      5/5/2017


Śuka: My Kṛṣṇa is the moon.

Sārī: My Rādhā is the trap that captures that moon.

Śuka: There is no need to quarrel uselessly. Let us both
glorify Yugala Kiśora together.

Sārī: I accept with great pleasure.


This loving quarrel between śuka and sārī is also
described in Govindalīlāmṛta. Here, the śuka says
(13.29):


saundaryam lalanāli-dhairya-dalanaṁ līlā ramā-stambhinī

tīryām kandukitādri-varyam amalāḥ pāre-parārddhaṁ guṇāḥ

śīlaṁ sarvajanānurañjanam aho yasyāyam asmat-prabhur
viśvaṁ

viśva-janīna-kīrtir avatāt kṛṣṇe jagan-mohanaḥ


“May Prabhu Jagamohana, whose unparalleled beauty
plunders the wealth of patience of an innumerable
multitude of women, whose world-famous glory astounds
even Lakṣmīdevī, whose strength turns girivara
Govardhana into a child’s toy, who has unlimited
qualities, whose simple disposition entertains everyone,
and whose glory substantiates the welfare of the entire
universe, protect the entire world.”

Hearing this, the sārī replies (Govindalīlāmṛta 13.30):


śrī-rādhikāyāḥ priyatā svarūpatā

suśīlatā nartana-gāna-cāturī

guṇāli-sampata kavitā ca rājate

jagan-mohana-citta-mohinī


“Śuka! Śrī Rādhikā’s prema, beauty, dancing, excellent
calmness, expertise in music, wealth of good qualities,
and poetic compositions, or in other words, Her
erudition, are all so attractive that She steals away
the heart of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who enchants the heart of the
entire universe.”

The śuka then says (Govindalīlāmṛta 13.31):


vaṁśī-dhārī jagan-nārī

citta-hārī sa sārike

vihārī gopa-nārībhir

jīyān madana-mohanaḥ

                              45
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                       5/5/2017



“Sārike! All    glories to Śrī Madhana-Mohana, the
enchanter of    Cupid, who carries a vaṁśī. He steals the
heart of all    the women in the entire universe, and
wanders here    and there with the gopīs to enjoy with
them.”

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu became so overwhelmed upon
hearing this love-quarrel between śuka and sārī that He
could not maintain His equilibrium and fell down on the
earth in a faint. His companions somehow brought Him
back to consciousness, after which He continued His
parikramā of Braja.


Śaknā Gaon

This village is situated one mile from Bāṭī Gaon. Here,
one can take darśana of Balabhadra and Dāūjī.


Toṣa Gaon

Toṣa Gopa, an expert dancer, lived in this village. He
taught Śrī Kṛṣṇa how to dance expertly too, by which
Kṛṣṇa became very satisfied. Tarasa Kuṇḍa lies here.
Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma and the cows and cowherd boys used to
feel very satisfied when they drank the water of this
kuṇḍa. Toṣa means ‘satisfaction’, and this village is
therefore called Toṣa Gaon.


Jakhina Grāma

This village lies two miles from Toṣa Gaon. Its previous
name was Dakṣiṇa Grāma. While Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s vāmya
bhāva (leftist mood) is renowned and is most pleasing to
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, each and every bhāva in every nāyikā in fact
exists in Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Therefore, sometimes — under
some special circumstances — Kiśorījī pleases Śrī Kṛṣṇa
by manifesting the bhāvas of a dakṣiṇa nāyikā (right-
wing heroine). This village is thus also called Dakṣiṇa
Grāma. It is also known as Jakṣiṇa or Jakhina Grāma,
because Dāūjī once killed a yakṣiṇī who was obstructing
Kṛṣṇa’s vilāsa. Balabhadra Kuṇḍa lies here, and one can
take darśana of Baladeva and Revatī.


Vihāravana

This is the place of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala’s vihāra
where Śrīmatī Rādhikājī tested Kṛṣṇa’s dancing skills.


priya ko nacvan sikhavat rādhā pyārī!

mān gumān lakuṭ lie ṭhāḍhī

manthargati jab hi, ḍarpat kuñj-bihārī


“Rādhā-pyārī is holding a stick of pride and anger (mān-
gumān) and is teaching Her beloved Kuñja-bihārī to

                              46
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

dance. But when, according to Rādhā-pyārī’s
instructions, He makes a mistake in a swift movement of
the dance, the sharp glances shooting from Pyārījī’s
eyes punish Him.”

Vihāra Kuṇḍa lies here. This is where Kṛṣṇa and His
cowherd-boy friends performed water-sports and gave the
cows pure and sweet water to drink. Nearby is a very
attractive kadamba-khaṇḍī, or grove of kadamba trees, in
which one can see the imprints of Bhagavān’s lotus feet
under a small canopy.


Basauntī and Rāl Grāma

Basauntī currently goes by the name of Basatī, and Rāl
by the name of Rār Grāma. When Nanda Bābā left Gokula-
Mahā-vana with his family and moved to Chaṭṭīkarā, his
friend Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja resided in Basauntī Grāma.
This place received the name Basauntī because he resided
(bās karnā) here. Nearby is Rāl Gaon, where Śrīmatījī
performed Her childhood pastimes. Basauntī is where She
performed some of Her paugaṇḍa-līlās (girlhood
pastimes). Varsānā, Jāvaṭa and Rādhā Kuṇḍa are places of
Her kiśora-līlās. However, the place of Her highest and
most perfect līlā-vilāsa is Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa.

Balabhadra Kuṇḍa, Balabhadra Mandira and a kadamba-
khaṇḍī are nearby.


Aḍīṅga

This village is situated nine miles west of Mathurā on
the main road and four miles east of Govardhana. Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and His sakhās insistently took dāna (tax) from
the sakhīs here, and therefore the name of the village
is Aḍīṅga. The Hindi word for ‘to insist’ is aḍnā. Here,
in Killola Kuṇḍa, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma relished joyful
water-sports (jal-killola).


Mādhurī Kuṇḍa

Two miles south-east of Aḍīṅga is Mādhurī Khora, the
very attractive place of Rādhājī’s dear sakhī Mādhurījī.
It is also the place where the poet Mādhurī Dāsajī
performed his bhajana.


Mayūra Grāma

This place is situated two miles south-west of
Bahulāvana. After seeing the dancing of the peacocks
(mayūra) here, Śrī Kṛṣṇa started dancing with great
pleasure in the midst of His beloved gopīs. The peacocks
very happily gave one of their beautiful multicoloured
feathers to Kṛṣṇa, which He placed on His head. Mayūra
Kuṇḍa here is also worth seeing.


Chaknā Grāma

This village is situated near Mayūra Grāma. When Śrī

                              47
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa, Balarāma and the sakhās were out tending the
cows, the gopīs fed them chāch (buttermilk) here until
the boys were completely satisfied.




Chapter 6

Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa and

Śrī Śyāma Kuṇḍa


The Padma Purāṇa states:


yathā rādhā priyā viṣṇoḥ

tasyāḥ kuṇḍaṁ priyaṁ tathā

sarva-gopīṣu sevaikā

viṣṇoratyanta-vallabhā


“Among all the gopīs, Śrīmatī Rādhājī is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
principal prāṇa-vallabhā, and is thus the most dear to
Him. Similarly, Rādhājī’s dear kuṇḍa is also very dear
to Him.” The Varāha Purāṇa declares:


sarva-pāpa-haras tīrthaṁ

namaste hari-muktidaḥ

namaḥ kaivalya-nāthāya

rādhā-kṛṣṇa-bhidhāyine


“O Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa! O Śrī Kṛṣṇa Kuṇḍa! You destroy all
sins and award one-pointed prema. I bow down to you
again and again.” The Purāṇas are filled with
innumerable descriptions of the glories of these two
kuṇḍas.

In Vraja-vilāsa-stava (text 53), Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī prays:


śrī-vṛndāvipinaṁ suramyam api tac chrīmān sa govardhanaḥ

sā rāsa-sthalikāpy alaṁ rasamayī kiṁ tāvad anyat sthalam

yasyāpy aṁśa-lavena nārhati manāk samyaṁ va mukundasya
tat

prāṇebhyo ‘py adhika-priyeva dayitaṁ tat kuṇḍam evāśraye


“Not even Śrī Vṛndāvana, which is supremely delightful
because of places like the rasa filled rāsa-sthalī, or

                              48
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                      5/5/2017

Śrīman Govardhana, which is the arena of the nectarian
rāsa where the most confidential amorous pastimes (keli-
kriḍā) of the Divine Couple take place, are equal to
even a shadow of a particle of the glories of Śrī Rādhā
Kuṇḍa, what to speak of other pastime-places within
Braja Maṇḍala. I take shelter of this Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa,
which is more dear to Śrī Mukunda than His own life.”

Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa lies in a village named Āriṭa Gaon,
about three miles north-east of Govardhana and fourteen
miles from Mathurā and Vṛndāvana. Ariṣṭāsura was a
servant of Kaṁsa who assumed the form of a bull and
attacked Kṛṣṇa with the aim of killing Him, but Kṛṣṇa
killed him instead at this place.

At Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa, Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala perform Their
midday (madhyāhnik) līlā-vilāsa, enjoying a variety of
amorous pastimes freely and without any obstruction.
This is not possible anywhere else. Therefore, Rādhā
Kuṇḍa is considered to be the topmost place of bhajana,
superior even to Nandagaon, Varsānā, Vṛndāvana and
Govardhana. This most confidential place, surcharged
with the highest and most sublime loving sentiments, was
revealed by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu Himself, who is
endowed with the bhāva (sentiment) and kānti (lustre) of
Śrī Rādhā. Previously, Śrī Mādhavendra Purī, Śrī
Lokanātha Gosvāmī and Śrī Bhūgarbha Gosvāmī also came to
Braja, where they revealed various pastime-places of
Kṛṣṇa; but they did not reveal this confidential place,
which was personally manifested by Śrī Gaurasundara, who
is Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa combined.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa killed Ariṣṭāsura during the day. That same
night, He met with His beloved Śrī Rādhikā and the other
sakhīs here. Śrī Kṛṣṇa was very eager to embrace Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, but as soon as He reached out for Her, She
stepped back. Jokingly, She said, “Today, You have
killed a bull, which belongs to the cow family. You have
therefore committed the sin of killing a cow. Please
don’t touch My pure body.”

Smilingly, Kṛṣṇa answered, “Priyatame! It was a demon
that I killed, who had deceitfully assumed the form of a
bull; so how can sin even touch Me?”

Śrīmatījī   insisted, “Whatever he was, he was in the form
of a bull   when You killed him. Hence, you are definitely
guilty of   the sin of killing a cow.” The sakhīs
supported   Her words.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa asked how He could atone for this sin.
Śrīmatījī smiled and answered, “The only atonement is to
take bath in all the tīrthas of the entire Earth
planet.” Hearing this, Śrī Kṛṣṇa created an extensive
kuṇḍa simply by striking His heel on the ground. He then
summoned all the tīrthas of the entire planet to it.
Uncountable tīrthas immediately came before Kṛṣṇa in
their personified forms. Kṛṣṇa asked them to enter the
kuṇḍa in the form of water, and in a moment, the kuṇḍa
was filled with pure, sacred water. Śrī Kṛṣṇa took bath
in that kuṇḍa and again tried to touch Śrīmatījī. But,
in response to Her Priyatama’s bragging, Śrīmatī Rādhikā
now wanted to manifest a kuṇḍa full of water that was
larger and more exquisite than Kṛṣṇa’s. She and Her

                              49
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                      5/5/2017

sakhīs therefore stubbornly dug out a very attractive
kuṇḍa nearby with their bracelets. However, not so much
as a drop of water appeared in it. Kṛṣṇa joked that they
could take water from His kuṇḍa, but Śrīmatījī along
with Her innumerable sakhīs prepared themselves to bring
water from Mānasī Gaṅgā in clay pots. Śrī Kṛṣṇa
signalled to the tīrthas that they should insist that
Śrīmatījī and Her sakhīs fill up their kuṇḍa by taking
water from His kuṇḍa. The tīrthas personified offered
Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Her sakhīs many prayers and thus
pleased Her. Śrīmatī Rādhikā then gave them permission
to enter Her kuṇḍa. Immediately, the current of water
that had flowed into Kṛṣṇa Kuṇḍa also filled Rādhā
Kuṇḍa. With great pleasure, Śrī Kṛṣṇa bathed and played
in the water (jal-vihāra) with Śrīmatī Rādhikā and the
sakhīs in this dear kuṇḍa.

These two kuṇḍas manifested at midnight on Kṛṣṇāṣṭamī
(the eighth day of the dark moon) in the month of
Kārtika. Hundreds and thousands of people therefore
bathe here at midnight on this day known as Bahulāṣṭamī.

The Padma Purāṇa states:


govardhana girau ramye / rādhā-kuṇḍaṁ priyaṁ hareḥ

kārtika bahulāṣṭamyāṁ / tatra snātvā hareḥ priyaḥ

naro bhakto bhaved vitat / sthitasya tasya pratoṣaṇām


“Radiantly beautiful Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa is situated at the
foot of Govardhana Hill. Faithful persons who bathe here
on Kṛṣṇāṣṭamī in the Kārtika month receive premā-bhakti
filled with the sevā of Śrī Rādhā-Kuñjabihārī Śrī Hari.”

The Padma Purāṇa also states:


dīpotsave kārtike ca / rādhā-kuṇḍe yudhiṣṭhira

dṛśyate sakalaṁ viśvaṁ / bhṛtyair viṣṇu-parāyaṇaiḥ


“Ekāntika (one-pointed) bhaktas of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa who
go to Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa on the day of Dīpāvalī in the
month of Kārtika are granted a vision of the complete
Braja Maṇḍala and the entire universe as well.”

Some time later, when Śrī Kṛṣṇa had left for Dvārakā,
both kuṇḍas disappeared. While manifesting the pastime-
places of Braja, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s great-grandson, Mahārāja
Vajranābha, restored these two kuṇḍas under the guidance
of Śāṇḍilya and other ṛṣis. Five thousand years later,
however, they had again disappeared. When Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu came to this place, He inquired from the
local people about Rādhā Kuṇḍa and Śyāma Kuṇḍa, but they
could provide Him with no information. Instead, they
told Him about the two fields named Kālī Khet and Gaurī
Khet that lay before them, which contained a little
water. Mahāprabhu respectfully addressed Kālī Khet as
Śyāma Kuṇḍa and Gaurī Khet as Rādhā Kuṇḍa and offered
them His praṇāmas. Then, as He bathed in them, He became

                              50
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

overwhelmed. Losing all patience, He cried out, “Hā
Rādhe! Hā Kṛṣṇa!” and fainted. The place where He sat
down is now called Tamāla Talā; it is also known as
Mahāprabhu’s baiṭhaka (sitting-place).

After the disappearance of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Śrī
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī came from Jagannātha Purī and
performed bhajana at Rādhā Kuṇḍa. Once, the Mughal
emperor Akbara was making his way along this path with
his vast army. The emperor’s divisions of men,
elephants, horses and camels were very thirsty. Seeing
Dāsa Gosvāmī, Akbara asked, “Is there any big pond
nearby?” Dāsa Gosvāmī motioned to him to take water from
Kālī Khet and Gaurī Khet. The emperor thought, “This
water is not sufficient even for a single elephant. How
will it quench the thirst of my entire army?” However,
on the repeated requests of Dāsa Gosvāmī, Emperor Akbara
encouraged his men to drink. To his utter amazement, the
entire army together with horses, elephants and camels
drank to their full satisfaction, and yet the water in
these ponds did not reduce even slightly. The emperor’s
astonishment knew no bounds.

After performing bhajana here for some time, the thought
of restoring these two kuṇḍas entered the mind of Śrī
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī. However, when he remembered the
transcendental glories of Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa, he began to
reproach himself for thinking this. Just then, a wealthy
person arrived at that place from Badrikāśrama, looking
for that supreme renunciate Śrī Dāsa Gosvāmī. He offered
his daṇḍavat praṇāmas at the feet of Gosvāmījī and said,
“I am returning from a pilgrimage to Badarikāśrama.
Bhagavān Śrī Badrī-Nārāyaṇa has sent me to you. On His
order I am offering to cover all the expenses required
to restore these two kuṇḍas to their original, charming
forms. Kindly accept my offer.” Śrī Dāsa Gosvāmī became
overjoyed. At first he rejected the offer, but he later
relented, knowing it to be the desire of Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa. He thus began the work of reconstructing the two
kuṇḍas.

Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa easily manifested in the shape of an
elegant quadrangle. The construction work on Śyāma Kuṇḍa
then began, with the idea that it should also be
quadrangular. To achieve this, some trees on its bank
needed to be cut down. That night, while Śrī Dāsa
Gosvāmī was performing bhajana, he dozed off for a short
time. In a dream, he saw five persons standing in front
of him. “We are the five Pāṇḍavas,” they said. “As
trees, we are worshipping Yugala Kiśora here, so please
don’t cut us down. Rather, let the shape of the kuṇḍa be
crooked.” For this reason, Śrī Dāsa Gosvāmī did not have
the trees cut down and instead allowed the kuṇḍa’s shape
to be crooked, just as Śrī Kṛṣṇa is crooked. He only
deepened the kuṇḍa and had its ghāṭas properly restored.
Both kuṇḍas still have these shapes today, and over the
years only a few repairs have been carried out.

Śrī Girirāja-Govardhana stretches out from north to
south, taking the shape of a peacock. His tail in the
south is called Pūcharī, and his two eyes on his face in
the north are called Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa and Śrī Śyāma
Kuṇḍa.


                              51
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

In Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura describes Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa and Śrī Śyāma Kuṇḍa in
a delightful and charming way. Brajendra-nandana Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is the source of all avatāras; He is the origin of
everything and is yet without any origin; He is akhila
rasāmṛta-mūrti (the personification of all nectarean
mellows) and sarva-śaktimān (the source of all śaktis).
Even so, He is subservient to the prema of mahābhāva
svarūpā Śrīmatī Rādhikā, the topmost of all of Kṛṣṇa’s
beloveds. He always broadcasts the glories of His
priyatamā Śrī Kiśorījī, considering Her superior to
Himself. Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa and Śyāma Kuṇḍa are non-
different from the svarūpas of Śrī Rādhā and
Śyāmasundara, and thus Kṛṣṇa also attributes more
importance to Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa than to Śrī Śyāma Kuṇḍa.

In the northern part of Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa is the kuñja of
Śrī Lalitā-devī, Lalitānandada, which is shaped like a
golden, eight-petalled lotus. In the north-east is
Viśākhānandada, the bejewelled kuñja of Viśākhā Sakhī,
which is shaped like a sixteen-petalled lotus. In the
east is Citrānandada, the kuñja of Citrā Sakhī, which
displays an amazing variety of forms and colours. In the
south-east is the kuñja of Indulekhā Sakhī,
Indulekhānandada. It is shaped like an eight-petalled
lotus and is made of diamonds. In the south is the kuñja
of Campakalatā Sakhī, Campakalatānandada Kuñja, shaped
like a golden lotus. And in the south-west is the lotus-
like kuñja of Raṅgadevī, Raṅgadevī-sukhada, which is
inlaid with blue sapphires. Tuṅgavidyānandada is the
kuñja of Tuṅgavidyā Sakhī. This kuñja, in the west,
resembles a lotus made of red rubies. In the north-west
lies Ānandada or Sudevī-sukhada Kuñja, the lotus-shaped
kuñja of Sudevījī, which is inlaid with emeralds. In the
center of Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa is Anaṅgamañjarī-ānandada
Kuñja, shaped like a sixteen-petalled lotus inlaid with
moonstones. This kuñja, also known as Svānandasukhada
Kuñja, belongs to Anaṅga Mañjarī. It is connected with
the bank by a bridge made of moonstones.

Similarly, around Śrī Śyāma Kuṇḍa are the kuñjas of the
sakhās. In the north-western area of the kuṇḍa is a
delightful place made of diamonds, emeralds and other
precious stones where Śrīmatī Rādhikā daily takes bath.
North of this place is Subalānandada Kuñja, which Subala
Sakhā has offered to Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
perform resting pastimes (śayana-vihāra) here. In the
northern part of Śyāma Kuṇḍa is the kuñja of
Madhumaṅgalajī, Madhumaṅgalānandada, which is inlaid
with white jewels. He has offered this kuñja to
Lalitājī. Here Śrī Yugala-Kiśora enjoy all kinds of
joking and laughing. Ujjvala Sakhā’s Ujjvalānandada
Kuñja in the north-east, made of red jewels, has been
given to Viśākhā Sakhī. In the east is Arjuna Sakhā’s
Arjunānandada Kuñja, made of blue sapphires, which has
been donated to Citrā Sakhī. Gandharvānandada Kuñja in
the south-east displays a variety of colours and forms,
and belongs to Gandharva Sakhā. He has offered it to
Indulekhā Sakhī. In the south is the green emerald
Vidagdhānandada Kuñja, belonging to Vidagdha Sakhā. He
has given this kuñja to Campakalatā. Here Yugala Kiśora
play the game of chaupaḍa.1 Bhṛṅga Sakhā’s Bhṛṅgānandada
Kuñja lies is in the south-west, and he has given this
kuñja to Raṅgadevī. In the west is Dakṣasanandānanda

                              52
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Kuñja made of a variety of jewels. Kokila Sakhā’s
Kokilānandada Kuñja, also in the west, has been
presented to Sudevī. At the saṅgama, or juncture, of the
two kuṇḍas is a platform made of many kinds of jewels;
it is also called the Yogapīṭha of kṛṣṇa-līlā.

To the south of Śrī Kuṇḍa are jewelled swings hanging
from the branches of campaka trees. Swings inlaid with
precious stones hang from the branches of kadamba trees
to the east. To the west, swings made of jewels hang
from the branches of the mango trees, and to the north
jewelled swings hang from the branches of the maulśrī
trees. Rasika Śrī Kṛṣṇa plays on these swings with
Śrīmatī Rādhikā and the other sakhīs.

Surrounding both Rādhā Kuṇḍa and Śyāma Kuṇḍa are
kalpataru trees of mango, jackfruit, kadamba, maulśrī
and so forth, which are abundantly laden with flowers
and fruits. Around the bases of these trees are
platforms made of various precious stones. All seasons
are eternally serving Śrī Yugala under the guidance of
the spring season. Vṛndā-devī makes all kinds of
arrangements for the sevā of the Divine Couple. The
cuckoos coo and the peacocks dance and make the sweet
ke-kā sound. Blue and red lotuses and various kinds of
ketakī flowers frolic on the waves of the śrī kuṇḍas
while intoxicated, buzzing bees hover above. Royal
swans, cakravākas and cranes play in the water with
their consorts, making sweet sounds. Different kinds of
birds recite love poetry on the branches of the trees,
thus giving pleasure to Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala. Deer and
does roam about in the attractive kuñjas nearby. Except
for Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s most intimate girlfriends, no one
can enter this forest.


Jhūlana Talā

On the western side of Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa is Jhūlana Talā.
Once, Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī and Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī were
sitting near Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī’s bhajana kuṭī
on the north-eastern side of Rādhā Kuṇḍa, immersed in
kṛṣṇa-kathā. Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī asked Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī, “Rūpa, what are you writing these days?” Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī showed Sanātana Cāṭu-puṣpāñjali, a stotra
that he had composed. The first śloka in that stotra is:


nava-gorocanā-gaurīṁ

praverendīvarām barām

maṇi-stavaka-vidyoti

veṇī-vyālaṅgaṇā-phaṇāṁ


“He Vṛṇdāvaneśvarī! I pay my obeisances to You again and
again. You are gaurāṅgī, golden-complexioned like ever-
fresh gorocanā. Your cloth is the colour of a beautiful
blue lotus flower and the upper part of Your long hair-
braid is decorated with jewels, making it appear like
the hood of a black female serpent.”


                              53
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

When Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī read this, he said, “Rūpa! By
the phrase veṇī-vyālaṅgaṇā-phaṇāṁ you compare the
waving, black, curved, braided hair of Śrīmatī Rādhikā
to a poisonous black female serpent. The possessor of
all qualities Śrīmatī Rādhikā, who is extremely
charming, tender and sweet, is the beloved of Kṛṣṇa. I
don’t like this comparison.” Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī smiled and
humbly requested Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī to suggest a
better description, but at that moment Sanātana Gosvāmī
could think of no other suitable comparison. “I will
correct it later,” he said and went on his way,
contemplating the matter. When he reached this place to
the west of the kuṇḍa, he saw a gopa kiśorī swinging on
a beautiful swing hanging from the branches of a kadamba
tree. Her friends were pushing Her to and fro, singing a
mallāra rāga. Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī saw a black female
serpent with an expanded hood slithering on the swaying
black tresses of that swinging kiśorī. Thinking to save
Her from the bite of the serpent, he ran towards Her,
shouting, “Lālī! Lālī! Beware! There is a black female
serpent in Your hair.” When he came nearer, however, he
saw nothing — no kiśorī, no sakhīs and no swing.
Remembering that scene, he started to cry with happiness
and returned to Rūpa Gosvāmī saying, “Rūpa! Your simile
is most appropriate. Śrīmatī Kiśorījī granted me the
special favour of having darśana of Her curved braid.
There is no need for any correction.” It is at this
Jhūlana Talā that Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī had darśana of
Rādhājī.


Some of the surrounding mandiras

Near a kadamba tree in the south-western part of Śrī
Rādhā Kuṇḍa is an ancient mandira of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.
According to hearsay, akiñcana Śrī Dāsa Gosvāmī found
these deities of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa while he was renovating
the kuṇḍa and gave Them to the Brajabāsīs for sevā.

Nearby, in the north-western part of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Kuṇḍa is
the temple of Śrī Śyāmasundarajī, the worshipable deity
of Śrī Śyāmananda Prabhu. North of this temple is Śrī
Jīva Gosvāmī’s ārādhyadeva Śrī Rādhā-Dāmodarajī, and
north of that temple is the bhajana-kuṭī of Śrīnivāsa
Ācārya Prabhu. There is a vigraha of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu in that temple. East of Śrī Śyāmasundarajī’s
mandira, in the northern part of Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa, is the
ghāṭa and baiṭhaka of Śrī Jāhnavā Ṭhākurānī. Near her
ghāṭa is the temple of Śrī Gopīnāthajī. Adjacent to that
temple is Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī’s place of
residence and his puṣpa samādhi. Proceeding from here,
one comes to the temple of Śrī Govindadeva. Near this
temple is the śilā of Śrī Girirāja’s tongue. On the
eastern bank of Rādhā Kuṇḍa is the bhajana kuṭī of Śrī
Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, and near this place to the east,
on the bank of Śyāma Kuṇḍa, is the bhajana-kuṭī of Śrī
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī.


Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī’s bhajana-kuṭī

After coming from Jagannātha Purī, Śrī Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī used to live near Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa at Lagmohana
Kuṇḍa. Once, during kṛṣṇa-līlā, on the day of the Holī

                              54
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

festival, Śrīmatī Rādhikā was sitting here with Her
girlfriends when Śaṅkhacūḍa unexpectedly seized Her and
ran away with Her. Kṛṣṇa pursued and killed him and,
removing the jewel from his forehead, gave it to Śrī
Baladevajī. He in turn gave the jewel into the hands of
Dhaniṣṭhā to give to Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Although Śrī Dāsa
Gosvāmī first used to live at this Lagmohana Kuṇḍa, he
later began performing bhajana on the banks of Śrī Rādhā
Kuṇḍa.

One day, Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī was doing bhajana
under the open sky at Rādhā Kuṇḍa. He was so absorbed in
bhajana that he was not even conscious of his body and
mind, and streams of tears flowed from his eyes.
Occasionally, the words ‘Hā Rādhe! Hā Rādhe!’ would come
from his mouth. At this time, Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī would
regularly come to see him. From a distance, Śrī Sanātana
Gosvāmī once saw a ferocious tiger and tigress walk past
Raghunātha dāsa, drink water from the nearby kuṇḍa and
then return by the same path, as if they had not seen
him.

Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī approached Śrī Dāsa Gosvāmī and
very affectionately, like an elder brother, advised him
to do bhajana in a bhajana-kuṭī. Śrī Sanātana had a
leaf-hut built for Śrī Dāsa Gosvāmī, and instructed him
to perform bhajana there. That bhajana-kuṭī no longer
exists, but a solid bhajana-kuṭī made of cement has been
constructed in its place.

Near this bhajana-kuṭī, the five Pāṇḍavas — Yudhiṣṭhira,
Bhīma, Arjuna, Nakula and Sahadeva — and Draupadī
performed bhajana as trees. Some time ago, these trees
became aprakaṭa, or unmanifest, and disappeared from our
vision. Between this bhajana-kuṭī and the bhajana-kuṭī
of Śrī Gopāl Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī are the samādhis of
Bhūgarbha Gosvāmī, Dāsa Gosvāmī and Kavirāja Gosvāmī.
North of Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī’s bhajana-kuṭī is
the bhajana-kuṭī of Śrī Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī. It
is said that he wrote some portions of Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta here, but most of it was in fact written in
his bhajana-kuṭī at Śrī Rādhā-Dāmodara Mandira in
Vṛndāvana.

Nearby, in the north-eastern area, is the temple of Śrī
Gadādhara-Caitanya, and north-west of this temple is the
Śrī Rādhā-Govindajī Mandira. One may take darśana of the
Jihvā Śilā of Śrī Govardhana near the entrance of this
temple.


Jihvā Śilā and other nearby places

After finishing his daily morning ablutions, Śrī Dāsa
Gosvāmī used to take bath with the water of Gopī Kūpa,
situated to the east of Śrī Śyāma Kuṇḍa. He then bathed
in Śrī Kuṇḍa. Once, while drawing water from Gopī Kūpa,
he also drew a govardhana-śilā out of the well. After
taking his bath that day, Śrī Dāsa Gosvāmī went on his
way; but while doing bhajana in a cave at night, he saw
in a dream that the śilā was actually the tongue (jihvā)
of Śrī Girirājajī. He also received an order to worship
the śilā according to proper rules. He had a temple
constructed near the entrance of Śrī Govindadevajī

                              55
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Mandira and arranged for the śilā to be worshipped
there. This same śilā can be seen there today. After
this event, Śrī Dāsa Gosvāmī stopped taking bath with
the water of Gopī Kūpa, and had a new well constructed
on the eastern bank of Lalitā Kuṇḍa for taking bath.
This well remains there today.

Proceeding from this well, one arrives at the kuñja of
Narahari Sarakāra. Lalitā Kuṇḍa is situated on the
location of Lalitānandada Kuñja. Viśākhā Kuṇḍa and many
other kuṇḍas are included within Lalitā Kuṇḍa but many
of them have disappeared. Then come the temples of Śrī
Rādhā-Vinodavihārījī and Śrī Sītānāthajī. Near Lagmohana
Kuṇḍa, on the parikramā path, lies the samādhi of Śrī
Rājendra Gosvāmī. He gave up his life at this place
absorbed in separation from Kṛṣṇa.


Śrī Rādhā-Kuñjavihārī Gauḍīya Maṭha

On the western side of Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa is Śrī Rādhā-
Kuñjavihārī Gauḍīya Maṭha. The deities here, Śrī Rādhā-
Kuñjavihārījī, were installed by jagadguru paramahaṁsa
parivrājakācārya-varya oṁ viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Prabhupāda, who
propagated pure vaiṣṇava dharma and śrī-harināma-
saṅkīrtana as practised and preached by Śrīman
Mahāprabhu throughout the world. A little further away
from the samādhi-pīṭha of Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī is
the bhajana-kuṭī of Śrīla Saccidānanda Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura, renowned as ‘the Seventh Gosvāmī’, and of Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī.


Śivakhora

When coming to the village of Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa from
Uddhava Kuṇḍa, this place is situated on the right-hand
side of the parikramā path at the entrance to the
village. It is said that in ancient times a lost she-
jackal wandered to this place during the day, but the
dogs here killed her. Seeing this, the villagers
performed her last rites at this place and were struck
with wonder to see a kiśorī gopī manifest from the she-
jackal’s body and ascend into the sky. It is said that a
jīva who dies at Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa attains Goloka
Vṛndāvana.


Mālyahāriṇī Kuṇḍa

This kuṇḍa is situated on the western side of Rādhā
Kuṇḍa. Sitting in a mādhavī kuñja here, Śrīmatī
Rādhikājī strung necklaces of pearls. Śrī Dāsa Gosvāmī
has described this līlā very beautifully in his book
Muktā-carita.

Once, during the month of Kārtika on the occasion of the
Dīpāvalī festival at Girirāja-Govardhana, the Brajabāsīs
were busily absorbed in decorating their cows with
various kinds of ornaments. The gopīs were bringing
various ornaments from their homes to decorate the cows.
Śrī Rādhikājī and Her girlfriends were sitting on the
mādhavī terrace near Mālyahāriṇī Kuṇḍa making several

                              56
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

kinds of beautiful pearl ornaments. Meanwhile, having
heard of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s activities from the mouth of
the śuka Vicakṣaṇa, Śrī Kṛṣṇa arrived there and asked
for some pearls. However, Śrī Rādhikājī and Her gopī
friends refused, proudly giving several reasons why they
could not do so. Nonetheless, Śrī Kṛṣṇa insisted,
“Sakhīs! If you cannot give Me a large quantity of
pearls, then at least give Me a few, with which I can
decorate My beloved cows Haṁsinī and Hariṇī.” But the
headstrong gopīs rejected this request also. Lalitājī
collected a palmful of pearls of the very finest quality
and held them out to Kṛṣṇa, tauntingly saying, “Kṛṣṇa!
These pearls which You want to use to decorate Your cows
are not ordinary. They are very precious. Do You
understand?”

Disappointed, Śrī Kṛṣṇa returned home where He sulkily
took some pearls from mother Yaśodā. He then dug holes
in the soil near the bank of the Yamunā, put manure in
them and planted the pearls. He also fenced the area to
protect the growing plants from animals and birds.
Daily, Śrī Kṛṣṇa irrigated the field with a large
quantity of cow-milk. For this, He had asked the gopīs
to donate some milk but they refused this request as
well.

To everyone’s complete amazement, within two or three
days all the pearls began to sprout. These plants grew
right before everyone’s eyes and began to bear pearl
fruits, from which extremely beautiful pearls were
produced in abundance. When the gopīs went to the bank
of the Yamunā to fetch water, they saw this astonishing
field of pearls and started to whisper among themselves.
Śrī Kṛṣṇa happily harvested a huge quantity of pearls,
brought them home and placed them in the lap of His
mother. “Kanhaiyā! Where did You get such excellent
pearls?” she asked in amazement. Śrī Kṛṣṇa then told her
the whole story.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the sakhās now began stringing uncountable
pearl necklaces for all their cows, and, decorated with
these pearl necklaces, these cows began to wander
everywhere. Unable to tolerate this, the gopīs secretly
brought pearls from their respective homes and began to
sow them as Śrī Kṛṣṇa had done. They also irrigated the
field with an abundance of cow’s milk. Their pearls also
sprouted but, to their surprise, only into thorny
creepers. Seeing this, the gopīs became very worried.
They narrated this whole incident to Śrī Kṛṣṇa and asked
Him for some of His pearls, but Kṛṣṇa, the crown-jewel
of rasikas, scornfully rejected their request. Finally,
He asked to be able to feel the touch of their bodies
and enjoy their embraces and kisses in exchange for His
pearls.

Mālyahāriṇī Kuṇḍa received its name by virtue of the
confidential līlā that took place here. To become more
familiar with this līlā, one should study the book
Mukta-caritā, in which Śrī Dāsa Gosvāmī very beautifully
describes the intricacies of this pastime. The
confidential realizations of mahā-bhagavatas in samādhi
are completely true and transcendental.



                              57
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Famous ghāṭas of Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa & Śrī Śyāma Kuṇḍa 1)
Śrī Govinda Ghāṭa — This ghāṭa is situated on the
eastern bank of Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa and lies between the
bhajana-kuṭī of Śrī Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī and the temple
of Bihārījī. It is at this ghāṭa that Śrī Sanātana
Gosvāmī saw Śrīmatī Rādhikā playing on a swing and
realised in his heart the secret of the phrase veṇī-
vyālaṅgaṇā-phaṇā in Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī’s Cāṭu-puṣpāñjali.
2) Śrī Mānasa Pāvana Ghāṭa — This ghāṭa is situated on
the north-western side of Śyāma Kuṇḍa and is very dear
to Śrīmatī Rādhikā. 3) Pañca Pāṇḍava Ghāṭa — This ghāṭa
is joined to Mānasa Ghāṭa in the northern part of Śrī
Śyāma Kuṇḍa. The five Pāṇḍavas in the form of trees
disclosed themselves to Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī
above this ghāṭa. Here, at the entrance door of the Śrī
Gadādhara-Caitanya Mandira, is also an old choharā tree,
which disclosed itself to Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura to be a brāhmaṇa from Kāśī. 4) Madhumaṅgala
Ghāṭa — Above this ghāṭa is Śrī Madhumaṅgalajī’s kuñja,
named Madhumaṅgalānandada, which he offered to Śrī
Lalitā Sakhī. The baiṭhaka of Hitahari-vaṁśa Gosvāmī is
here.

5) Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī Ghāṭa — A little up from this place
is Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī’s bhajana-kuṭī. During his stay
here, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī daily took bath at this ghāṭa.


6) Gayā Ghāṭa — Another name for this ghāṭa is Dhana-
mādhava-gherā Ghāṭa. Just past this ghāṭa is Śrī
Mādhavendra Purī’s baiṭhaka and Śrī Harirāma Vyāsajī’s
place of bhajana. 7) Aṣṭa-sakhī kā Ghāṭa — This is the
ghāṭa of the eight sakhīs and lies between Gayā Ghāṭa
and Tamāla Talā. 8) Tamāla Talā Ghāṭa — This ghāṭa lies
on the southern bank of Śyāma Kuṇḍa. Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu sat under the tamāla tree here and inquired
about both kuṇḍas from the villagers, who could offer
Him no information. Instead, they pointed out Kālī and
Gaurī Khet nearby. Mahāprabhu declared these two fields
to be Rādhā Kuṇḍa and Śyāma Kuṇḍa and took bath in them.
This is how He manifested Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa and Śrī Śyāma
Kuṇḍa, which had been established by Mahārāja Vajranābha
for the benefit of the world. Later, Śrī Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī reconstructed them as we see them today. 9) Śrī
Vallabha Ghāṭa — This ghāṭa is situated west of Tamāla
Talā on the southern bank of Śyāma Kuṇḍa. Śrī
Vallabhācārya sat in the shade of a choharā tree here
with his associates and glorified both kuṇḍas. He
remained here for some time and would bathe at this
ghāṭa daily. He would also recite Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
here.

10) Śrī Madana-Mohana Ghāṭa — South of this ghāṭa is the
temple of Śrī Madana-Mohanajī.

11) Saṅgama Ghāṭa — This ghāṭa is situated between Rādhā
Kuṇḍa and Śyāma Kuṇḍa. The two kuṇḍas meet under this
platform. Saṅgama means ‘meeting’. This is the Yogapīṭha
of the eternal pastimes of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. Vaiṣṇavas
first take bath in Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa and then in Śrī Śyāma
Kuṇḍa. It is said that there was an old tamāla tree here
that disclosed itself to one devotee to be Agasta Ṛṣi.

12) Rāsavāḍī Ghāṭa — This ghāṭa is situated in the

                              58
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

southern part of Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa. It is the location of
a śrī rāsa-maṇḍala.

13) Jhūlana Ghāṭa — At this ghāṭa, which lies on the
western bank of Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa, Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa
used to swing (jhūlā jhūlanā). Even today, the braja-
ramaṇīs of Rādhā Kuṇḍa swing with great festivity here.
Another name for this ghāṭa is Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Ghāṭa.

14) Śrī Jāhnavā Ghāṭa — This ghāṭa lies on Rādhā Kuṇḍa’s
northern bank and is the bathing-place of Śrī Jāhnavā
Ṭhākurāṇī, the wife of Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu. Śrī
Jāhnavā Ṭhākurāṇī also used to perform bhajana here. Her
baiṭhaka remains here to this day.

15) Śrī Bajranābha Kuṇḍa — This kuṇḍa is situated in the
middle of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Kuṇḍa.

16) Śrī Kaṅkaṇa Kuṇḍa — This kuṇḍa was built by Śrī
Rādhājī with the help of Her sakhīs using their
bracelets (kaṅkaṇa). It is situated in the very middle
of Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa.


The rāsa-maṇḍalas of Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa 1) South of Śrī
Rādhā Kuṇḍa, where a rāsa-maṇḍala pavilion has been
constructed 2) North-east of Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa, behind
Govinda Mandira 3) In the northern part of the village,
south of Bhānukhora 4) In the northern part of Śrī Śyāma
Kuṇḍa, north of Rādhā-Vallabha Ghāṭa 5) In Nandinī-gherā
6) In Lalita-Vihārījī The kṣetra-pālas of Śrī Rādhā
Kuṇḍa

Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa has seven kṣetra-pālas, or area-
protectors:


1) Kuṇḍeśvara Mahādeva on the south-western side of Śrī
Rādhā Kuṇḍa 2) Mahādeva in the west of the village,
north of Śivakhora 3) Mahādeva in Śrī Rādhā-Ramaṇa
Mandira 4) Mahādeva on the northern side of Śrī Śyāma
Kuṇḍa 5) Bankhaṇḍī Mahādeva on the south-eastern side of
Śrī Śyāma Kuṇḍa 6) Mahīmeśvara Mahādeva at Mālyahāriṇī
Kuṇḍa 7) Mahādeva in the western part of Vallabhācārya’s
baiṭhaka




Chapter 7

Śrī Govardhana


Girirāja-Govardhana is situated some fourteen miles west
of Mathurā. Śrī Kṛṣṇa protected Braja by holding the
enormous Girirājajī on the little finger of His left
hand for seven days, thus shattering the pride of Indra.
Girirāja has descended from Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s aprākṛta Goloka
Vṛndāvana Dhāma to Braja on the earth planet. He came
with secluded nikuñjas, caves, pure sarovaras, and
various minerals, like gairika (red ochre), that are
useful in the sevā of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala. Girirāja-

                              59
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Govardhana is non-different from Kṛṣṇa in tattva, yet he
is considered to be hari-dāsa-varya, the best among all
the servants of Hari. The gopīs have addressed him as
follows:


hantāyam adrir abalā hari-dāsa-varyo

yad rāma-kṛṣṇa-caraṇa-sparśa-pramodaḥ

mānaṁ tanoti saha-go-gaṇayos tayor yat

pānīya-sūyavasa-kandara-kandamūlaiḥ

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.21.18)



“O my friends, this Girirāja is the topmost among Śrī
Hari’s servants and is absorbed in supreme bliss, always
being touched by Śrī Balarāma and Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus
feet. Girirāja serves and satisfies Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Balarāma,
the cowherd boys and the cows by providing them with
water from his pure sarovaras, lush grass, fruits,
roots, and various minerals like gairika.”


The Appearance of Śrī Govardhana in Braja

According to the Ādi Varāha Purāṇa, during the advent of
Rāmacandra, the monkeys and bears all brought large
rocks and stones from many places to construct a bridge
across the ocean. On the order of Śrī Rāmacandrajī,
Hanumānjī was carrying Govardhana to the ocean, having
uprooted him from Uttarāñcala, when he heard a divine
sound that announced, “The ocean bridge is now complete;
therefore, no more rocks are required.”

Hearing this, Hanumānjī became sad and put Śrī Giri-
rājajī down here, where he stands today. Girirājajī also
became very unhappy and said to Hanumānjī, “You have
deprived me of the touch of Śrī Rāma’s lotus feet. I
will curse you.”

Hanumānjī replied, “Please forgive me. In the next
Dvāpara-yuga, your desire will be fulfilled. At that
time, Svayaṁ Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa will stop the worship of
Indra and worship you instead. Angered, Indra will try
to destroy Braja by unleashing his vajra (thunderbolt)
and by sending torrential rains. At this time, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
will hold you on His hand to protect Braja and thus
fulfil your desire.” Saying this, Hanumānjī leapt into
the air and arrived at Śrī Rāmacandrajī’s side by the
aerial pathways.

After narrating the whole incident to Him, Śrī
Rāmacandrajī said, “All these rocks, which have been
assembled to build the bridge, have been delivered by
the touch of My feet. But I shall fulfil the desires of
Govardhana by holding him on My hand and touching him
with My whole body. At the close of Dvāpara-yuga, I
shall take birth in the dynasty of the Yadus and make
Govardhana famous as the best haridāsa by herding the
cows with My sakhās on his slopes and by enjoying with

                              60
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

My beloved gopīs in his kuñjas.”

The Garga Saṁhita relates the following history from a
different kalpa about the appearance of Govardhana in
Braja.

Once, in the course of his wanderings, Pulastya Ṛṣi
reached Droṇācala Hill. The son of Droṇācala,
Govardhana, was very beautiful, fragrant, smooth, and
full of luxuriant, green trees and creepers. Pulastya
Ṛṣi desired to bring this Govardhana to his place of
residence, Kāśī, because there was no such hill in Kāśī
on which he could peacefully perform his sādhana-
bhajana. He asked Droṇācala to give his son Govardhana
to him for this purpose. The father Droṇācala could not
refuse, as he feared being cursed. Govardhana agreed to
go, but on the condition that if Pulastya put him down
somewhere along the way, he would remain there and not
move again. The ṛṣi accepted his condition, and by
mystic power kept Govardhana on his palm as he proceeded
to Kāśī.

As they reached Braja, thoughts of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s future
līlās entered Govardhana’s mind, and he became so heavy
that the ṛṣi could no longer carry him and was forced to
put him down right there. After the ṛṣi took bath,
performed his sandhyā-vandana, took food and rested, he
tried to lift Girirāja again, but Girirāja refused to
move — remaining true to his previous condition. The ṛṣi
could not lift Govardhana, even when he employed all his
power. Finally, in great anger, he cursed Govardhana,
saying, “You will diminish in size by one sesame seed
daily.” Govardhanajī happily accepted this curse,
because he knew about the coming descent of Svayaṁ
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa. “Śyāmasundara will perform various
līlās on me, and I shall be blessed,” he thought.

Girirāja does, in fact, diminish in size every day, but
who can say whether this is due to the ṛṣi’s curse or
due to separation from Śrī Kṛṣṇa?


Pastime-places on the Govardhana Parikramā

Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa and Śrī Śyāma Kuṇḍa are the two eyes of
Girirāja Śrī Govardhana, and therefore the best part of
his body. The places of kṛṣṇa-līlā mentioned below are
in sequence as they appear on the Girirāja parikramā
starting from Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa and Śrī Śyāma Kuṇḍa.



Mukharāī

This place lies one mile south of Rādhā Kuṇḍa, along the
road to Vṛndāvana. It is where Mukharājī, the old
maternal grandmother of Rādhājī, resides. When Yaśodājī
was a baby, Mukharājī breast-fed her. Grandmother
Mukharā later joyfully arranged secret meetings between
Śrī Yugala Kiśora-Kiśorī. She is the mother-in-law of
Mahārāja Vṛṣabhānu and the mother of Kirtikā Maiyā. The
Brajabāsīs used to address her as Baḍhāī. With great
eagerness, she would take darśana of Śrīmatī Rādhikā and
Kṛṣṇa every morning. One can have darśana of Mukharā-

                              61
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

devī at this place.



Ratna Siṁhāsana

Ratna Siṁhāsana lies one mile south of Kusuma Sarovara
on the Govardhana parikramā path coming from Śrī Rādhā
Kuṇḍa. The following pastime took place here. On the
full moon day after Śiva Caturdāśī (Śiva-rātri), Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Balarāma were playing Holī with the gopīs
using syringes to squirt each other with water of many
colours. The sweet music of mṛdaṅgas, cymbals, vīṇas and
other instruments in vāsantī rāga and other melodious
rāgas filled the air. Śrīmatī Rādhikājī sat down on the
nearby ratna siṁhāsana (jewelled throne). At that time,
a servant of Kuvera named Śaṅkhacuḍa, who considered
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa to be an ordinary human being, tried
to abduct these extremely beautiful gopīs. In voices
full of distress, the gopīs began calling out, “Rāma!
Kṛṣṇa!” Kṛṣṇa ran to the call of the gopīs with great
speed and killed Śaṅkhacuḍa. He took the jewel from the
demon’s forehead and gave it to Śrī Balarāma, who sent
it to Śrīmatī Rādhikā through Dhaniṣṭhā. This is the
place where Rādhikājī sat on the ratna siṁhāsana.


Śyāma Kuṭī

This place is situated amidst a thick cluster of trees
near Ratna Siṁhāsana. Here Śrī Śyāmasundara smeared His
body with śyāma-coloured kastūrī (musk), dressed Himself
in śyāma-coloured clothes and ornaments, and entered a
śyāma-coloured nikuñja. Even the gopīs were unable to
recognise Him. When the gopīs finally did recognise Him,
He performed many attractive līlās with them. A bājanī-
śīla, which emits sweet sounds when tapped, is nearby.


Gvāla Pokharā

Beautiful, thick trees and creepers surround this
charming pastime-place near Śyāma Kuṭī. At the time of
cowherding, Śrī Kṛṣṇa used to rest here at noon. The
young cowherd boys (gvāla-bālas) lovingly served Kṛṣṇa
in sakhya-rasa and playfully snatched things away from
each other. These and other sweet, charming pastimes
have made this Bāla Pokharā (Gvāla Pokharā) very famous.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa, in the guise of a young priest, performed
Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s Sūrya-pūjā at Sūrya Kuṇḍa with Baṭu
Madhumaṅgala. After completing the pūjā, they sat down
here with the sakhās. Madhumaṅgala was carrying manohara
laḍḍūs and a gold ring, which he had received as
dakṣiṇā. He had pain-stakingly tied them in his cloth,
and was guarding them vigilantly. The mischievous
Balarāma asked Madhumaṅgala, “Bhaiyā Madhumaṅgala!
What’s in this bundle of yours?”

“Nothing.” Madhumaṅgala hesitatingly answered.
Baladevajī signalled to the sakhās, some of whom caught
hold of Madhumaṅgala’s two hands. One sakhā covered
Madhumaṅgala’s eyes with his palms, and another forcibly
snatched the bundle from his hands. Laughing loudly,

                              62
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                      5/5/2017

they shared the laḍḍus amongst themselves and proceeded
to eat them right in front of Madhumaṅgala. In this
commotion, Madhumaṅgala’s cloth loosened. He became very
angry and held out his sacred thread, ready to curse
Balarāma, Śrīdhāma and the other sakhās. Somehow or
other Kṛṣṇa pacified him, and finally Madhumaṅgala, also
beginning to laugh, asked the sakhās for some of the
remaining crumbs.

This Gvāla Pokharā still carries reminders of these
līlās. While doing parikramā of Girirāja-Govardhana, Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu took rest here for a short time and
remembered these pastimes.


Killola Kuṇḍa

This kuṇḍa lies near Gvāla Pokharā to the south. Killola
means ‘sport’ or ‘frolic’. As its name suggests, this
kuṇḍa is where Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala played in the
water. Kṛṣṇa and His sakhās also enjoyed playful sports
here.


Kusuma Sarovara

This sarovara is situated on the right-hand side of the
parikramā path, about one and a half miles south-west of
Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa. A kusuma-vana, or forest of flowers,
was here full of varieties of trees, creepers and
flowers like belī, camelī, jūhī, yūthī, mallikā and
campaka. Śrīmatī Rādhikā used to come here on the
pretext of picking flowers with Her girlfriends, but Her
real intent was to meet rasika Śrī Kṛṣṇa, with whom She
would have love-quarrels (keli-kalaha) and sarcastic
exchanges full of rasa.

Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta describes how one day Śrīmatī Rādhikā
was picking flowers here with Her girlfriends when Kṛṣṇa
arrived. The following exchange then took place between
Them:


Kṛṣṇa: Who is there?

Rādhājī: Nobody!

Kṛṣṇa: Tell Me honestly, who are You?

Rādhājī: Nobody!

Kṛṣṇa: You are speaking in a very crooked way.

Rādhājī: And You speak in a very straight way, don’t
You?

Kṛṣṇa: I am asking You who You are.

Rādhājī: Don’t You know?

Kṛṣṇa: What are You doing?

Rādhājī: Picking flowers for Sūrya-pūjā.


                              63
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa: Have You received permission from anyone?

Rādhājī: I don’t need anyone’s permission.

Kṛṣṇa: Aho! I have caught a thief today. I was wondering
who was completely ruining our garden by stealing
flowers. Today I have apprehended You and will
immediately punish You.

Rādhājī: Since when have You become the owner of this
flower garden? Have You ever sown a single plant here?
Have You ever even watered one? On the contrary, You
ruin this kusuma-vana with Your hundreds and thousands
of cows and wild, insolent friends. Indeed, since when
have You become the caretaker of this garden?

Kṛṣṇa: Don’t defame a pious, righteous person like Me.
Now I shall teach You a good lesson.

Rādhājī (smilingly): Aha-ha! You are a highly pious and
righteous person, are You? You killed a woman right
after Your birth; You lied to Your mother even in
childhood; You stole butter from the houses of the
neighbouring gopīs; and when You became a little older,
You stole the clothes of the young gopa girls. Only a
few days ago You killed a calf. This is the extent of
Your pious, saintly conduct.

Hearing the retort, Kṛṣṇa scratched His head and looked
towards clever Madhumaṅgala, who advised Him, “One’s
wellbeing lies in remaining quiet.” At this point, all
the sakhīs surrounded Śyāmasundara and began to clap.

The following pastime also took place here. One morning,
Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Her sakhīs arrived on the bank of
Kusuma Sarovara to pick the fragrant flowers that
bloomed here in abundance, such as belī, camelī, jūhī,
kanera and campaka. Seeing a branch full of flowers,
Śrīmatī Rādhikā pulled it down with one hand and started
picking its flowers with the other. Knowing that Śrīmatī
Rādhikā was coming to Kusuma Sarovara to pick flowers,
playful Kṛṣṇa had climbed that tree and had stationed
Himself on that very branch. Using all His weight to
push that branch down, He had hidden Himself in the
foliage so that Śrīmatījī would not see Him. Śrīmatī
Rādhikā became absorbed in picking flowers from that
branch when Kṛṣṇa suddenly shifted to another branch. At
once, the first branch sprung up, lifting up Śrīmatī
Rādhikā with it. The startled Śrīmatī Rādhikā cried out
for help. Śrī Kṛṣṇa immediately leapt from the tree and
caught the hanging Śrīmatījī in His arms. Seeing this,
the sakhīs began clapping and laughing loudly; but
Śrīmatī Rādhikājī, having released Herself from Kṛṣṇa’s
embrace, began to scold Him.

In modern times, this kusuma-vana has been completely
ruined. Javāhara Singh, the mahārāja of Bharatapura,
looted the treasury of Delhi in 1767 A.D. and with that
money built beautiful concrete ghāṭas with stairs at
Kusuma Sarovara. To the west of the sarovara is the tomb
of Rājā Sūrajamala flanked by the tombs of his two
queens. Nearby is the temple of Dāūjī.



                              64
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Nārada Kuṇḍa

About four hundred metres south-east of Kusuma Sarovara
is Nārada Kuṇḍa, where Nāradajī performed tapasyā, or
penance. After Nāradajī heard the glories of the supreme
gopī-bhāva from the mouth of Vṛndā-devī, the
adhiṣṭhātrī-devī of Vṛndāvana, a very intense desire to
serve Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala in the form of a gopī in
premamayī unnatojjvala-sevā arose in his heart. He
received the gopāla-mantra from Brahmā, the grandsire of
the world, and began to perform sādhana-bhajana in rāga-
mārga here under the guidance of the gopīs.

After performing worship for many yugas, Yogamāyā
Paurṇamāsī dipped Nāradajī in Kusuma Sarovara, by which
he received the body of a gopī. Thereafter, he received
the ekadāśa-bhāva of rāga-mārga and obtained the
qualification to perform sevā of the Divine Couple. It
is highly beneficial to have darśana of this Nārada
Kuṇḍa.


Pāleī

This village lies one and a half miles east of Nārada
Kuṇḍa, near the Mathurā Road. The Yamunā used to
sometimes flow here. Even today, if one digs up the
soil, one will find Yamunā sand. Kṛṣṇa herded the cows
with the sakhās at this place, and also had many kinds
of amorous exchanges with the sakhīs. This is also where
the poet Kumbhanadāsajī of Aṣṭachāpa resided. The
sarovara and gośālā here, which are named after him, are
well known.


Mānasī Gaṅgā

Driven by the gopīs’ insistence that He atone for the
sin of killing a bull (Vṛṣabhāsura), Śrī Kṛṣṇa created
Mānasī Gaṅgā by His mind. He became pure by taking bath
in its waters. According to a second story, Śrī Nanda
Mahārāja, Śrī Yaśodā and the other gopas and gopīs once
took Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma with them on a pilgrimage to the
Gaṅgā to take bath. At night, they rested near
Govardhana. Kṛṣṇa wondered why they should all travel so
far when all the tīrthas in fact reside in Braja itself.
In His mind, He summoned Gaṅgā-devī, and at once
Bhagavatī Bhāgīrathī Gaṅgā’s strong current reached this
spot, making a sweet sound. Śrī Gaṅgā-devī was mounted
on an alligator, and Nanda, Yaśodā, and the gopas, gopīs
and other Brajabāsīs became astonished to have her
darśana. Kṛṣṇa said, “All the tīrthas exist in Braja.
You all wanted to bathe in the Gaṅgā, and thus Gaṅgā-
devī has personally appeared before you today. Don’t
delay; take bath in her waters now!” Gaṅgā-devī appeared
here on the Amāvasyā of Kārtika on the day of Dīpāvalī.
Large numbers of faithful people therefore bathe here on
the day of Dīpāvalī and take darśana of Śrī Haridevajī.
They also offer ghee lamps from all sides of Mānasī
Gaṅgā and near Śrī Girirāja-Govardhana.

According to a third story, Kṛṣṇa used to sport in the
Yamunā, sometimes with His sakhās and sometimes with His
beloved gopīs. Beholding this great fortune of her

                              65
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

younger sister Yamunā, Bhagavatī Gaṅgā became
overwhelmed by a strong desire to also serve Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa Yugala. She expressed her heart’s desire to her
younger sister Yamunā and requested her help. Kṛṣṇapriyā
Śrī Yamunājī then entreated her beloved Kṛṣṇa to bestow
His mercy on her elder sister, Gaṅgā-devī. Thus, at an
appropriate time, Śrī Kṛṣṇa summoned Gaṅgājī to Braja
and blessed her by frolicking in her waters with the
gopīs.

The stone ghāṭas at Mānasī Gaṅgā were built by Rājā
Bhagavān Dāsa, the father of Mānasingh, the king of
Jaipura.


Śrī Harideva

Śrī Haridevajī, the presiding deity of Girirāja-
Govardhana, is present on the southern bank of Mānasī
Gaṅgā. Śrī Kṛṣṇa took one form as Giridhāri and held His
second form, Girirājajī, on His palm. The līlā of
lifting Govardhana (Govardhana-dhāraṇa) will be
described later, when we come to Ānyora Gaon.


Brahma Kuṇḍa

Seeing that Kṛṣṇa was in a good mood, Brahmājī came to
this place to seek forgiveness for his aparādha of
stealing away the calves and cowherd boys. He performed
abhiṣeka of Śrī Kṛṣṇa here and glorified Him with
mantras from the Sāma Veda. The holy water from the
abhiṣeka was called Brahma Kuṇḍa, and Brahmājī took bath
in it along with the other demigods.


Manasā-devī

This temple is situated on the southern bank of Mānasī
Gaṅgā, above Brahma Kuṇḍa. Manasā-devī is nobody else
but Māyā-devī (Yogamāyā) herself. One receives the
qualification to serve Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala only by the
mercy of Yogamāyā Paurṇamāsījī. Some Vaiṣṇavas also
address Mānasī Gaṅgā devī simply as Manasā-devī.


Go Ghāṭa

Śrī Kṛṣṇa used to bring the cows and calves (go) to this
ghāṭa to drink water.


Cakra Tīrtha

This place is situated north of Mānasī Gaṅgā. Cakreśvara
Mahādeva, currently known as Cakaleśvara, resides here.
When Indra poured torrential rains over Braja, Mahādeva
(who is Sadaśiva, and therefore viṣṇu-tattva) served
Girirāja and the Brajabāsīs by holding his trident up
like a cakra and protecting them. (Some devotees declare
that it was on Mahādevajī’s request that Sudarśana Cakra
protected Girirāja-Govardhana and Braja, and that hence
Mahādeva’s name is Cakreśvara Mahādeva.)


                              66
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

The ghāṭa on which Cakreśvarajī presides is also called
Pāraṅga Ghāṭa. The gopīs used to cross Mānasī Gaṅgā from
here. Śrī Kṛṣṇa would act as a boatman and enjoy
boating-pastimes (nauka-vilāsa) and other līlās while
ferrying the gopīs across Bhagavatī Mānasī Gaṅgā. Śrīla
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has given a very touching
description of this nauka-vilāsa-līlā in his prayer Śrī
Govardhanāṣṭakam (text 7):


yatraiva gaṅgām anu nāvi rādhām

ārohya madhye tu nimagna-naukaḥ

kṛṣṇo hi rādhānugalo babhau sa

govardhano me diṣatām abhīṣṭam


“In the middle of Mānasī Gaṅgā, Śrīmatī Rādhikā was
sitting in Kṛṣṇa’s boat. Kṛṣṇa, dressed like the
boatman, tried to sink the boat, and the terrified
Rādhikā caught Śrī Kṛṣṇa in Her embrace. May that Śrī
Govardhana fulfil all my desires.”


Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī’s bhajana-kuṭī

At Cakra Tīrtha, opposite Cakaleśvara Mahādeva, is Śrī
Sanātana Gosvāmī’s bhajana-kuṭī. Sanātana Gosvāmī
sometimes resided here to perform bhajana, but being
disturbed by its bothersome mosquitoes, he considered
moving elsewhere. At that time, Cakaleśvara Mahādeva
arrived there in the guise of a brahmāṇa and requested
him, “Bābājī, please do not move elsewhere. Stay here
and freely perform your bhajana. From today, the
mosquitoes will no longer trouble you.” Mosquitoes have
not caused a disturbance here since. Sanātana Gosvāmī
remained here for some time, and was able to perform his
bhajana untroubled.

Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī used to perform parikramā of
Govardhana every day, even in his old age. Once, while
doing parikramā in the heat of summer, the soil under
his feet was burning hot. Weary and drenched with sweat,
Gosvāmījī sat down, but there was no shade to be found.
Suddenly, a cowherd boy came and held a yellow shawl
over Sanātana to give him shade. With the other corner
of the shawl, He started fanning Gosvāmījī’s face.
Sanātana Gosvāmī’s whole body became cool and calm by
the touch of that boy, who said in a very sweet voice,
“Bābā! In this old age there is no need for you to
perform parikramā of Govardhana and undergo so much
hardship. I am giving you a śilā of Girirājajī that is
marked with the stick and lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Perform parikramā of this śilā every day and you will
receive the same benefit as doing Govardhana parikramā.”
Saying this, the boy gave the śilā to Sanātana Gosvāmī
and disappeared. This boy was none other than Giridhārī,
the lifter of Girirāja. This śilā used to reside in the
temple of Śrī Rādhā-Dāmodara in Vṛndāvana, but nowadays
it is in the temple of Śrī Rādhā-Dāmodara in Jaipura.
The pratibhū-vigraha of this śilā is present in the Śrī
Rādhā-Dāmodara Mandira in Vṛndāvana. One easily receives

                              67
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

the result of performing parikramā of Girirāja-
Govardhana by circumambulating Śrī Rādhā-Dāmodara
Mandira four times.

There is a temple of Śrī Gaura-Nityānanda Prabhu
opposite the temple of Cakaleśvara. While performing
parikramā of Govardhana, Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu and later
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu had darśana of Śrī Cakleśvara
Mahādeva and Pāraṅga Ghāṭa at Mānasī Gaṅgā. They also
took rest here.


Mukhāravinda

On the northern bank of Mānasī Gaṅgā is the mukhāravinda
(lotus face) of Śrī Govardhanajī. Govardhana’s form is
that of a sitting cow. His hind part is Pūcharī, or
Pūñcharī. He has turned his neck to place his lotus face
near his stomach, which is the town of Govardhana. His
two eyes are Rādhā Kuṇḍa and Śyāma Kuṇḍa. There is a
beautiful temple here with a śilā of Girirāja’s
mukhāravinda. He is given abhiṣeka, pūjā and offerings
of bhoga every day, and festivals are also organised on
Annakūṭa and Dīpāvalī.


Indradhvaja Vedī

This place is situated east of Govardhana. Previously,
Indra pūjā was performed here, but Śrī Kṛṣṇa changed the
form of this worship and conducted Govardhana pūjā
instead.


Ṛṇa Mochana and Pāpa Mochana Kuṇḍa

These two kuṇḍas used to lie south-east of Govardhana
near Indradhvaja Vedī, next to the present bus station,
but today they have disappeared. One kuṇḍa has been
filled with dirt, and an electricity office has been
built over it. Houses and shops have been erected over
the other kuṇḍa.


Dāna Ghāṭī

This place is situated in the middle of Govardhana on
the present-day road between Mathurā and Kāmyavana. Even
today, a toll must be paid to cross through here. At the
time of kṛṣṇa-līlā, Kṛṣṇa became a toll collector (dānī)
and performed dāna-līlā with the gopīs through loving
quarrels (prema-kalaha) and sarcastic remarks. This līlā
has been beautifully described in Dāna-kelī-kaumudī,
Dāna-kelī-cintāmaṇi and the other books of the Gauḍīya
Gosvāmīs.

Once, on the bank of Govinda Kuṇḍa, Śrī Bhāgurī Ṛṣi was
performing a yajña for the pleasure of Bhagavān. The
gopas and gopīs were bringing ingredients for the yajña
from distant places. From the other side of Dāna Ghāṭī,
Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Her sakhīs were also bringing
yoghurt, milk, butter, rabaḍī, and many other kinds of
milk-sweets. Śrī Kṛṣṇa, along with Subala, Madhumaṅgala
and other sakhās, obstructed the path and forcibly

                              68
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

demanded dāna (toll), and the sakhās and gopīs began to
taunt each other with sarcastic remarks.

Standing in His tribhaṅga-lalita form, Śrī Kṛṣṇa asked
mischievously, “What are you carrying?”

“Milk, yoghurt and butter for the yajña of Bhāgurī Ṛṣi,”
the gopīs replied.

Hearing the word ‘butter’, Madhumaṅgala’s mouth started
to water. He promptly said, “Quickly pay the dāna and
move on.”

Lalitā, filled with sarcasm, asked, “What dāna? We have
never paid any dāna before.”

But Śrī Kṛṣṇa was insistent. “You can pass only after
paying dāna.”

Śrīmatījī asked Him, “Since when have You become the
dānī here? Did You inherited this place from your
father?”

“Don’t be so insolent!” He replied. “I am
Vṛndāvaneśvara, the ruler of the kingdom of Vṛndāvana.”

“How is that?”

“Vṛndā is My wedded wife,” Kṛṣṇa asserted. “The property
of the wife is also the property of the husband.
Vṛndāvana is the kingdom of Vṛndā-devī, therefore it is
My kingdom.”

“Acchā?” Lalitā answered haughtily. “We have never heard
anything about this. Let us inquire from Vṛndājī about
this right now.” At once, she turned towards Vṛndā and
smilingly asked, “Vṛnde! Is this ‘black one’ your
husband?”

Vṛndā flared up in disgust: “Never! We have no relation
with this lying debauchee. Yes, this was my kingdom, but
I have handed it over to Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī
Rādhikā.” All the sakhīs burst out laughing and Śrī
Kṛṣṇa became a little embarrassed, but He was
nonetheless determined to collect the dāna. After this
prema-kalaha, or love-quarrel, the gopīs exchanged the
dāna of prema at Dāna Nivartana Kuṇḍa, some distance
from Dāna Ghāṭī. To find out more about this līlā, you
can read Dāna-kelī-kaumudī and Dāna-kelī-cintāmaṇi.


Dāna Nivartana Kuṇḍa

The gopīs reclaimed their dāna from Kṛṣṇa at this place.


Parāsaulī

This village lies about one and a quarter miles south-
east of the town of Govardhana in the lowlands of
Govardhana. During the Mughal reign, the Muslims changed
the name of the village to Mahammadpura. This is where
the vāsantī rāsa-līlā of Kṛṣṇa and His beloved gopīs
took place. This rāsa continued for an entire night of

                              69
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Brahmājī, but it seemed that it was over in only a few
moments. The moon in the sky had become stunned upon
seeing this rāsa-līlā, and was unable to move the whole
night. Because this rāsa-līlā took place in the light of
a brilliant full moon, this place is also called Candra
Sarovara, ‘Lake of the Moon’. In the south-western
corner of the sarovara is Śṛṅgāra Mandira, where Kṛṣṇa
personally decorated Śrīmatījī.

Near the sarovara under a choṅkara tree is the baiṭhaka
of Śrī Vallabhācārya. Sūradāsa’s kuṭī and samādhi, known
simply as Sūra-kuṭī and Sūra-samādhi, are also situated
within this area. Sūradāsa was a natural poet. His
collection of poems is famous as Sūra-sāgara or Sūra-
padāvalī. Sūradāsajī was blind, yet he would compose
poems with sweet, beautiful descriptions of the
different śṛṅgāras, or outfits and decorations, of Śrī
Nāthajī. One day, the pujārī did not dress Śrī Nāthajī,
who remained completely naked. He opened the doors of
the altar and asked Sūradāsa to quickly compose a poem
describing His śṛṅgāra. Sūradāsa remained silent for a
few moments, but the pujārī insisted. Sūradāsa laughed
loudly and proceeded to sing, Āj bhaye hari naṅgam
naṅgā. (“Today, Hari is undressed and naked.”) Everyone
became stunned upon hearing his song.

Sūradāsa spent his last days in Parāsaulī. One day, Śrī
Viṭṭhalācārya, the son of Śrī Vallabhācārya, asked him,
“Sūra! What are you thinking about?” Sūradāsajī then
composed his last song: Khañjan nain rūp ras māte /
atiśay cārū capal aniyāre pal piñjarā na samāte.
(“Kṛṣṇa’s beautiful eyes are like khañjana birds, full
of rasa, very restless, and slightly reddened due to
intoxication. My life cannot remain in the cage of this
body any longer.”) He then left his body. With tear-
filled eyes, Śrī Viṭṭhalācārya said, “The boat of puṣṭi-
mārga has departed today.”

In the south-eastern part of Parāsaulī is Saṅkarṣaṇa
Kuṇḍa, on whose bank is a temple of Śrī Baladevajī.


Paiṭhā Grāma

This village is situated two miles south of Parāsaulī.
When Śrī Kṛṣṇa disappeared from the rāsa-sthalī during
vāsantī rāsa, the grief-stricken gopīs began searching
for Him everywhere. Kṛṣṇa assumed a four-handed form at
this place, but when the gopīs saw this form, they
simply offered praṇāma and continued on their way.
Śrīmatījī arrived a little later, searching for Kṛṣṇa,
in separation. Beholding Śrīmatījī, Śrī Kṛṣṇa could no
longer maintain His four-handed form, and two hands
entered (paiṭha gaye) His body. He met Śrīmatījī in His
form as an ever-fresh, youthful cowherd boy and expert
dancer holding a flute in His hand. Śrī Kṛṣṇa begged
forgiveness from Śrīmatījī. He said, “Priye! When I
suddenly did not see You in the rāsa, I became aggrieved
in separation from You and began searching for You. This
rāsa is for You only. You should never go into māna and
leave Me ever again.”

Thus, vāsantī rāsa has its own speciality, in which
Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s superiority over the other gopīs is

                              70
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

established. The poet Śrī Jayadeva Gosvāmī has described
vāsantī rāsa in his Gita-Govinda. Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu gives vāsantī rāsa alone as proof of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā’s pre-eminence. This subject has been described
very sweetly in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta in the
conversation between Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda and Mahāprabhu
(Rāya-Rāmānanda Saṁvad). This place has a very special
significance for the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas. Kṛṣṇa has many
beloveds, but Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the crown-jewel of them
all, because She is the embodiment of mahābhāva and the
possessor of all good qualities. This is why Śrī Kṛṣṇa
was able to maintain His four-handed form before the
other sakhīs, but could not maintain His bhāva upon
seeing Śrīmatījī. His two extra arms entered (paiṭha
gaye) into His body. This is the special glory of
Rādhājī.

Places that may be seen in Paiṭha are Nārāyaṇa Sarovara,
Aiṇṭhā Kadamba, Khīra Sāgara, Balabhadra Kuṇḍa and
others.


Bacha Gaon

This place is situated three miles south of Paiṭha, and
is also called Vatsavana. This is one place where Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and the sakhās would herd the calves (bachḍa).
Kanaka Sāgara, Sahasra Kuṇḍa, Rāma Kuṇḍa, Aḍvāro Kuṇḍa,
Rāvari Kuṇḍa, and the temples of Mākkhana-chora Ṭhākura
and Vatsa-Vihārī Ṭhākura also lie here.

Brahmājī stole the cowherd boys and calves in order to
have further darśana of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s sweet līlās. Śrī
Kṛṣṇa personally took the forms of all the cowherd boys,
as well as the forms of their sticks, flutes, horns,
calves and so forth; and for one year He went cow-
grazing and performed other līlās that they had all
previously done.

One or two days before a full year had elapsed, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, Balarāma and the cowherd boys were grazing the
calves here. The adult gopas were grazing the cows
nearby on Govardhana Hill, and their newborn calves were
with them. When the cows saw their older offspring with
Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, they ran towards them bellowing
loudly, without caring for the thorns, sharp grass and
ditches on the way. The adult gopas tried their level
best to obstruct them using their sticks, but to no
avail. The cows did not even care for their newborn
calves. When they met their older calves at this place,
they began to lick them lovingly. The older gopas became
very angry that they could not restrain the cows, and
thought that their children had attracted the cows by
sounding their flutes and horns. Desiring to punish
their children, they went there quickly; but as soon as
they arrived, their anger completely vanished and they
embraced them instead.

Śrī Baladevajī was very surprised to see this incident.
He thought, “Why did the cows leave their younger calves
today and show more affection to their older ones?
Previously, they had more love for their younger calves,
and even more love for bhaiyā Kṛṣṇa. Also, the mothers
of the cowherd boys used to love Kṛṣṇa more than their

                              71
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

own sons, but now they love them both equally.”
Baladevajī sought the answer to this riddle through the
eyes of samādhi. Smiling, He said to Kṛṣṇa, “Bhaiyā, was
one mother’s milk not enough to fill Your stomach? Did
You have to become the children of hundreds and
thousands of mothers so that You could suck their milk
too? But even this did not fill Your stomach, so You
assumed the form of all these calves and drank the milk
of millions of cows. What is the secret of this līlā of
Yours?” Kṛṣṇa then revealed the entire mystery to
Baladevajī. Thus, because this forest is where Kṛṣṇa
revealed Himself to be all the calves (the Hindi word
for ‘calf’ is bachḍa), it is called Bachavana.


Gaurī Tīrtha

A little further east of Ānyora Grāma is Gaurī Kuṇḍa.
This attractive place is full of kadamba trees amidst
luxuriant, green kuñjas. It is where the secret vihāras
of Candrāvalī and Kṛṣṇa took place. The play Vidagdha
Mādhava gives a very sweet and beautiful description of
this.

Candrāvalījī is the daughter of Candrabhānu Gopa, the
elder brother of Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja. In regard to her
beauty (rūpa), qualities (guṇa), charm (lāvaṇya),
cleverness (vaidagdhya) and so forth, She is the topmost
gopī of the party that is opposed (vipakṣa) to Śrīmatī
Rādhikā. Padmā and Śaibyā are her principal sakhīs. On
the pretext of performing Gaurī pūjā with her sakhīs,
Candrāvalī used to meet Kṛṣṇa at this appointed place.
Śrī Kṛṣṇa would perform some pastimes (krīḍā-vinoda)
with her for a while. Sometimes, Rūpa and Rati Mañjarīs
of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s party would use clever tricks to
take Śrī Kṛṣṇa from here to meet with Śrīmatī Rādhikā at
Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa.

Once, while performing pastimes with Candrāvalī, Kṛṣṇa
became confused and inadvertently asked her, “Rādhe! Are
You alright?” Hearing Rādhājī’s name, Candrāvalī became
irritated and replied, “Mahārāja Kaṁsa! Are You
alright?”

Puzzled, Kṛṣṇa asked, “Sakhī! Where is Kaṁsa here?”

“Where is Your Rādhā here?” was Candrāvalī’s reply.

Kṛṣṇa understood His mistake and, feeling very ashamed,
begged Candrāvalī’s forgiveness.


Ānyora Gaon

This village lies on the parikramā path two miles south
of the town of Govardhana. Jatīpurā, or Gopālapurā
Grāma, lies to the west of the village, on the other
side of Govardhana. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam describes how on
the advice of Kṛṣṇa, Nanda Bābā and the other Brajabāsīs
began worshipping Girirājajī here instead of performing
Indra pūjā. It also describes how they performed the
Annakūṭa festival for Girirājajī here. They cooked many
delicacies in their homes, filled hundreds of carts with
milk, yoghurt, rabaḍī and many kinds of preparations,

                              72
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

and presented them before Girirājajī. Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself
offered everything to Girirājajī and at the same time
assumed a huge four-handed form, with which He devoured
all the offerings by extending His long arms. Begging
for more to eat, He called out in great happiness, Āno
re! Āno re! (“Bring more! Bring more!”) Kṛṣṇa folded His
hands and said, “We are poor Brajabāsīs. Whatever we
have, we have presented before You. Please be satisfied
with this.” In His four-handed form, Girirājajī drank
the water of Mānasī Gaṅgā, Kusuma Sarovara and other
kuṇḍas and exclaimed, Tṛpto ‘smi! Tṛpto ‘smi! (“I am
satisfied! I am satisfied!”), and wiped His hands and
mouth with His cloth. He told the Brajabāsīs to ask for
a boon. They requested for only one — “May this lālā of
ours always remain happy and live a very long life.”
When the four-handed form disappeared, Kṛṣṇa asked the
Brajabāsīs, “Did you ever have darśana of Indra Deva?
Girirājajī is very kind. He fulfils everyone’s desires.”
After performing Govardhana Pūjā, the Brajabāsīs
considered their lives successful.

This place has been named Ānyora Grāma because of
Girirājajī’s calling out, Āno re! Āno re! At the place
where the Brajabāsīs performed Annakūṭa, one can find
natural markings of their bowls on the rocks of
Girirājajī. Nearby is a bājanā-śilā, which emits a sweet
sound when tapped with a piece of rock, a stick or a
finger.


The place of Śrī Nāthajī’s appearance

This place is situated near the bājanā-śilā. Once, Śrī
Mādhavendra Purījī, the parama-guru of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu and the guru of Śrī Īśvara Purī, came to
Braja. Braja-prema is difficult to obtain even for
Brahmā and other demigods, but it has been distributed
freely in the world by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.
Mādhavendra Purīpāda is the seed or sprout of that
prema-kalpataru (desire-tree that bestows prema). He was
a sannyāsī who followed ayācaka vṛtti; in other words,
he never begged food from anyone. Once, he was
performing bhajana in a secluded place near Govinda
Kuṇḍa, surrounded by lush, green trees and creepers. For
two or three days, he was so absorbed in his bhajana
that he was even unconscious of his own body. On the
third day, at midday, a cowherd boy whose complexion was
of a śyāma colour arrived there, carrying a pot of milk
in his hand. The boy said, “Bābā! Nobody remains hungry
in Braja. My mother saw you as she passed by, carrying
water from the well. She understood that you are hungry
and thirsty, so she has sent this milk for you. I am
going cowherding now. When I return, I will collect the
pot.” Saying this, the boy quickly left.

Purījī pondered over the sweet talk, pleasant behaviour
and beauty of that boy. He thought, “In my whole life, I
have never seen such a beautiful boy.” Purījī completed
his bhajana, offered the milk to his ārādhya deva and
then drank it. The unequalled taste and fragrance of the
milk made Purījī ecstatic. He became overwhelmed in
kṛṣṇa-prema, but he could apply no concentration to his
bhajana. With tear-filled eyes, he began waiting for
that śyāma-complexioned boy to return. Night fell but

                              73
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

the boy did not come. During brahma-muhūrta he dozed off
a little and saw the same boy come near him and say, “I
am Gopāla, the son of Brajarāja Nanda. My other name is
Śrī Nāthajī. Mahārāja Vajranābha installed Me here on
top of Girirājajī. Long ago, My pujārīs hid Me under the
earth in the nearby valley of Govardhana because they
feared the mlecchas (barbarians). I have been thirsty
and hungry for many days and am now feeling very hot. I
have been waiting for you for a long time, thinking,
‘When will Mādhavendra take Me from here and serve Me?’”
Saying this, the boy indicated His hiding place and
disappeared.

In the morning, when Purījī narrated this incident to
the villagers, they all dug at the place specified in
the dream and found Gopālajī. This made Purī Gosvāmī and
the Brajabāsīs jubilant. An altar was built on top of
the hill by erecting three vertical stones in three
directions and placing a horizontal slab across them.
Gopālajī was seated on that throne. A mahābhiṣeka was
performed with an abundance of milk, yoghurt and other
pañcāmṛta ingredients. The Brajabāsīs offered an
annakūṭa, or pile of grains, made up of dāl, rice,
kaḍhī, pūrī, kacauḍī and many other delicious
preparations. The neighbouring people, especially the
wealthy merchants of Mathurā, participated in the
festival by body, mind and wealth. After serving
Gopālajī like this for some time, Mādhavendra Purījī, on
the order of Śrī Nāthajī, turned the responsibility of
the sevā over to his disciples and went to Jagannātha
Purī to procure malayaja candana, or sandalwood from the
Malaya Hills, for Him. This village is currently named
Jatīpurā after him, as the word jatī means sannyāsi.
This incident has been described very beautifully in Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta. Nowadays, Śrī Nāthajī presides in
Śrī Nāthadvāra.

Due to the atrocities of the fanatic Mughal ruler
Aurangzeb, the king of Jaipura brought Śrī Nāthajī to
his kingdom in Rājasthāna along with the deities of Śrī
Govinda, Śrī Gopīnātha and Śrī Madana-Mohana of
Vṛndāvana.


Govinda Kuṇḍa

When Indra saw that the Brajabāsīs had stopped
worshipping him and were worshipping Govardhana instead,
he became angry. Consequently, for seven days he poured
torrential rains on them and sent thunderbolts to
destroy them. However, he was unsuccessful in his
endeavour. Finally, being advised by Brahmājī to ask for
forgiveness for his aparādha, Indra performed abhiṣeka
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa with the milk of Surabhī-devī at this
place. Śrī Kṛṣṇa was named ‘Govinda’ here because He
nourished and gave ānanda, or pleasure, to all — the go
(cows), gopas, gopīs, and land of Braja. This place is
known as Govinda Kuṇḍa because the nāma-karaṇa and
abhiṣeka of Śrī Govinda were performed here. Śrī
Vajranābha established this kuṇḍa in memory of this
līlā.




                              74
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Pūñcharī

This place marks the southern border of Govardhana. We
have previously told that Govardhana’s form resembles a
cow, but it can also be likened to a peacock. This
furthest extremity is raised high like the peacock’s
tail (pūcha). One completes one’s parikramā of
Govardhana’s eastern side here, and from here one begins
parikramā of his western side. Apsarā Kuṇḍa and Navala
Kuṇḍa are situated here.



Apsarā Kuṇḍa and Navala Kuṇḍa

These two kuṇḍas lie near each other. Śrīmatī Rādhikā is
an extremely beautiful apsarā, or transcendental damsel.
Apsarā Kuṇḍa received its name after Her, and the
eternally youthful Nandanandana is present here as
Navala Kuṇḍa (navala means ‘young’). Nearby is a rāsa-
sthalī that is rendered very delightful and charming by
a grove of thousands of kadamba and tamāla trees. Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala melted in prema while dancing in the
rāsa-līlā here. Apsarā Kuṇḍa and Navala Kuṇḍa are Their
melted forms. Fortunate sādhakas obtain darśana of these
kuṇḍas.



Rāghava Paṇḍita’s cave

Adjacent to this rāsa-sthalī is a cave where an
associate of Mahāprabhu, the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Rāghava
Paṇḍita, used to perform nirjana bhajana (bhajana in
seclusion). Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī arranged for Śrīnivāsa
Ācārya and Śrīla Narottama Ṭhākura to perform parikramā
of Braja Maṇḍala with Rāghava Paṇḍita. He was a highly
realised soul and rasika Vaiṣṇava, and is mentioned in
Bhakti-ratnākara. Near this cave, on top of Govardhana
Hill, is an imprint of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s crown.



Śyāma Ḍhāka

This pastime-place of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is situated one mile
west of Pūñcharī and is filled with lush, green palāśa
trees. Adjacent to it is a very large kadamba-khaṇḍī.
The leaves of these kadamba trees resemble the shape of
cups. Śrī Kṛṣṇa used to drink buttermilk from these
leaf-cups along with His friends. This is also a rāsa-
sthalī.



Surabhi Kuṇḍa

This kuṇḍa, which is filled with clean, sweet water,
lies on the right-hand side of the parikramā path,
somewhat further along from Rāghava Paṇḍita’s cave. On
Indra’s request, Surabhījī performed abhiṣeka of Śrī
Govindajī at Govinda Kuṇḍa with the milk from her udder.
Later, out of greed to have darśana of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
cowherding līlās and especially of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa

                              75
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Yugala’s secret nikuñja-līlās, Surabhījī resided at this
place for the duration of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s manifest braja-
līlā. Mahārāja Vajranābha built this Surabhi Kuṇḍa in
her memory. By taking bath and performing ācamana here,
all one’s sins, aparādhas and anarthas are dispelled and
one obtains braja-prema.



Airāvata Kuṇḍa

On the order of Indra, his elephant carrier Airāvata
used his trunk to perform abhiṣeka of Śrī Kṛṣṇa with the
water of the heavenly Gaṅgā. Near the kuṇḍa on top of
the hill are the impressions of Airāvata’s feet.



Rudra Kuṇḍa

This kuṇḍa is also called Rudana Kuṇḍa. Here Mahādevajī
became so absorbed in meditation on Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s līlās
that he began to weep. Rudana means ‘weeping’. Sūrya
Kuṇḍa and Bilachū Kuṇḍa also lie here. Nearby is the
place where Kṛṣṇa used to play ball. In this area, one
can also see Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s baiṭhaka, jāna-ajāna
trees and a pūjanī-śilā.



Jatīpurā

This is where Śrī Mādhavendra Purī-yati resided and
performed bhajana. When the deity of Śrī Nāthajī
manifested Himself, He was placed on top of Govardhana.
Here Mādhavendra Purī performed the abhiṣeka and
annakūṭa festival of Śrī Nāthajī. On the order of Śrī
Nāthajī, Mādhavendra Purī then went to Purī Dhāma to
procure malayaja candana and camphor after entrusting
the sevā of Śrī Nāthajī to his disciples. When he
arrived at Remunā, the deity of Gopīnāthajī stole a pot
of khīra and sent it to him. By this action, Gopīnāthajī
received the name Khīra-corā Gopīnātha. When Mādhavendra
Purī was returning from Jagannātha Purī with the candana
and camphor, he received an order from Śrī Nāthajī of
Govardhana through a dream. Śrī Nāthajī told him that by
grinding the candana and camphor and smearing it on the
body of Khīra-corā Gopīnāthajī, the heat of His own body
would be dissipated. It is said that by performing this
sevā for Khīra-corā Gopīnāthajī every day for one month,
Śrī Nāthajī’s body became cool once more. It is not
mentioned whether or not Mādhavendra Purī returned to
Govardhana. His samādhi lies in Remunā near the temple
of Khīra-corā Gopīnātha.

The Six Gosvāmīs, especially Śrī Rūpa, Sanātana and
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmīs, had very good relations with
Śrī Viṭṭhalācārya, the son of Śrī Vallabhācārya. He had
an affectionate and friendly relationship with Śrī
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī. Śrī Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmīs
considered Raghunātha dāsa to be their younger brother,
and so they also regarded Śrī Viṭṭhalācāryajī as their
younger brother and loved him dearly. The topmost
niṣkiñcanas, the Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavācāryas, used to

                              76
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

remain absorbed in bhāva-sevā (meditation on the aṣṭa-
kālīya līlā) of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala by means of
harināma-saṅkīrtana. Therefore, they had entrusted the
responsibility of the sevā of Śrī Nāthajī to the sons of
Śrī Vallabhācārya. Our Gosvāmīs considered Śrī Girirāja-
Govardhana to be Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself, and therefore they
never used to climb on Govardhana to take darśana of Śrī
Nāthajī. Whenever the Gosvāmīs had a fervent desire to
see Him, Śrī Nāthajī would Himself descend on some
pretext or other to bestow His darśana, sometimes coming
to Gāṅṭholī Grāma and sometimes to Sataghaḍā in Mathurā.
This is mentioned in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta and Bhakti-
ratnākara. Śrīman Mahāprabhu did not climb upon
Govardhana either, and had darśana of Śrī Nāthajī in
Gāṅṭholī Grāma.



Annakūṭa-sthalī

The place adjacent to Govardhana in Jatīpurā is called
Annakūṭa-sthalī. Mādhavendra Purījī held the grand
Annakūṭa festival at this place for one month. Even now,
Annakūṭa festivals are held here on special occasions,
and each day of the year thousands of pilgrims perform
abhiṣeka of Girirājajī with thousands of litres of milk.



Bilachū Kuṇḍa

This kuṇḍa is also called Vilāsa-vadana, and is a place
of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s vilāsa.



Kadamba-khaṇḍī (Sakhī-sthalī)

Further on from Bilachū Kuṇḍa, after crossing Dāna
Ghāṭī, one enters the town of Govardhana and again
performs parikramā of Mānasī Gaṅgā and Cakreśvara.
North-west of Mānasī Gaṅgā is Sakhī-sthalī, the place of
Candrāvalī Sakhī. This village is now known as
Sakhītharā, and lies within Sakhīvana.

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī used to perform bhajana on
the bank of Rādhā Kuṇḍa. For his daily sustenance, he
would only drink a little buttermilk in a tiny kadamba-
leaf cup. He would remain absorbed in bhajana day and
night. One day, a Brajabāsī brought some buttermilk in a
larger kadamba-leaf cup. Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī
asked him from where he had procured it, and the
Brajabāsī joyfully responded, “I brought it from Sakhī-
sthalī.” At that time, Dāsa Gosvāmī was not in external
consciousness, so hearing the name Sakhī-sthalī
irritated him, and he angrily ordered the Brajabāsī to
leave. The Brajabāsī could not understand Dāsa Gosvāmī’s
mood and fled. Śrī Dāsa Gosvāmī is an intimate
maidservant in Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s own group (svapakṣa).
An ordinary person cannot comprehend his deep mood and
actions.




                              77
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Sauṅkarāī

At this place, Rādhikā’s svapakṣa gopīs made Kṛṣṇa
repeatedly swear that He knew no one other than Śrī
Rādhikā. Hence, this place is called Sauṅkarāī, from
śapatha karvāna, meaning ‘to get an oath to be taken’.
Sauṅkarāī is situated two miles west of Govardhana.



Śakravā Gaon

Currently called Śakravā, this village lies one and a
half miles north-west of Sakhītharā. This is where Indra
donated a Surabhī cow to Kṛṣṇa. Śakra Kuṇḍa and Gvāla
Kuṇḍa lie here.



Uddhava Kuṇḍa

This kuṇḍa is situated exactly west of Kusuma Sarovara
on the right side of the parikramā path. The Skanda
Purāṇa, quoted in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Māhātmya, gives a
very interesting description of this place. Vajranābha
Mahārāja manifested Uddhava Kuṇḍa under the guidance of
Śāṇḍilya and other ṛṣis. Uddhavajī always resides here
as grass and shrubs in order to be sprinkled by the
footdust of the gopīs. After the disappearance of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, His queens in Dvārakā were greatly afflicted by
sorrow. Once, Vajranābhajī came here with them, and they
performed a very loud saṅkīrtana. In that mahā-
saṅkīrtana, all the parikāras of Kṛṣṇa started to appear
one by one. The parikāras of Dvāraka all began to sing
kīrtana and dance in the saṅkīrtana maṇḍala, and Arjuna
began to dance and play mṛdaṅga. Suddenly, the mahā-
bhāgavata Uddhava emerged from the grass and shrubs, and
he also became immersed in dancing. How could Kṛṣṇa now
remain behind when this mahā-saṅkīrtana was taking
place? In that mahā-saṅkīrtana rāsa, Kṛṣṇa finally also
appeared along with Śrīmatī Rādhikā and the other sakhīs
and, after some time, disappeared again. Uddhavajī thus
pacified the queens at this place.


Pilgrims performing parikramā of Śrī Govardhana proceed
along the parikramā path till they arrive at Śrī Rādhā
Kuṇḍa. The parikramā and pastime-places in the vicinity
of Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa have already been described in the
chapter on Rādhā Kuṇḍa and Śyāma Kuṇḍa.


Pastime-places Visited After Parikramā of Govardhana

After completing parikramā of Girirāja Govardhana,
pilgrims performing parikramā of Śrī Braja Maṇḍala
proceed from the town of Govardhana or from Jatīpurā
towards Nīma Gaon.


Nīma Gaon

At this place, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s mother and grandmother, as
well as the local gopīs, worshipped (nirmañchana) Kṛṣṇa

                              78
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

and kissed His face. Kṛṣṇa is more dear to these gopīs
than their own sons and their own life. The name ‘Nīma
Gaon’ has degenerated from ‘Nirmañchana Gaon’. This
village is situated on the Govardhana-Varsānā highway,
two miles west of Govardhana, and is where Śrī
Nimbārkācārya performed bhajana. A temple of the
Nimbarka Sampradāya lies here, as well as a kuṇḍa. This
is also a place of bhajana for Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas.



Pāṭala Grāma

This village is situated two miles north of Nīma Gaon.
Śrīmatī Rādhikā and the sakhīs used to pick pāṭala
flowers, or roses, here; hence, this village became
known as Pāṭala Grāma. Its present name is Pāḍara.



Ḍerāvalī

While moving to Nandagaon, Śrī Nanda Mahārāja camped
(ḍerā ḍālā) here upon arriving from Chaṭṭīkarā. This
village is therefore known as Ḍerāvalī.



Navāgrāma

This pastime-place lies south-west of Rādha Kuṇḍa; its
present name is Kuñjerā. The boundary of the kuñjas of
Rādhā Kuṇḍa begins here. Navāgrāma received the name
Kuñjerā because of the presence of its many kuñjas.
Here, the gopīs arranged themselves in the form of an
elephant (kuñjara), and Kṛṣṇa climbed upon them. This
place is also known as Kuñjerā on account of this
playful event (kuñjara-krīḍā).



Sūrya Kuṇḍa (Choṭā Bharanā)

This kuṇḍa is situated about four miles north of Rādhā
Kuṇḍa. Śrīmatī Rādhikā used to come here with Her
sakhīs, especially on Sundays, on the pretext of
performing worship of Mitradeva, or Sūryadeva. At that
time, Śrī Kṛṣṇa would also come here disguised as a
priest, along with Madhumaṅgala, and would perform the
worship of Mitra-devatā with great merriment. Mitra has
two meanings: it refers to Sūrya-devatā (the Sungod) but
also to prāna-sakhā, or Kṛṣṇa Himself. Jaṭilā would
understand mitra to mean Sūrya-devatā only. She could
not comprehend the loving emotions of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
Yugala.

This līlā was performed in the third prahara of the day,
after which Śrīmatījī would return to Jāvaṭa along with
Her friends and mother-in-law Jaṭilā. Kṛṣṇa and
Madhumaṅgala would also return from here to the company
of the sakhās in the valley of Govardhana. Kṛṣṇa’s
friends would run and meet Him, as if He had been gone
for only a moment and was just returning from some
nearby place.

                              79
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017


The kuñja where the līlā of sūrya-pūjā would take place
is situated next to Sūrya Kuṇḍa. Since it is a place of
loving enjoyment for Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala, it is also
called Madana-raṇa-vāṭikā. A beautiful temple of
Sūryadeva can also be found here. Today, Sūrya Kuṇḍa is
also called Choṭā Bharanā.

On the west bank of this kuṇḍa is where the Gauḍīya
mahātma Śrī Madhusūdana Bābājī used to perform bhajana.
He was a greatly self-realised soul and rasika Vaiṣṇava.
Vaiṣṇavas used to come to him from distant places to
receive bhajana śikṣa. The famous Vaiṣṇava Sarvabhauma
Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja was a disciple of this
mahāpuruṣa. Śrī Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī also performed
bhajana here for a long time, before moving to Śrī
Navadvīpa Dhāma. His bhajana-kuṭī and samādhi are in Śrī
Koladvīpa. Śrī Saccidānanda Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura met Śrī
Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī at Sūrya Kuṇḍa. In the bhāgavata-
paramparā, this siddha bābājī is the guru (śikṣa guru)
of Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura.


Kyoṅ Nāī (Konāī)

This was an appointed meeting place of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
Yugala. Once, Śrī Kṛṣṇa was waiting for Śrīmatī Rādhikā
here. Some of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s friends hid Her in a
nearby kuñja and arrived here early to test Kṛṣṇa’s
eagerness to meet with Her. Very eagerly, Kṛṣṇa asked
the sakhīs, “Why has Kiśorījī not come?” (Kyoṅ nā āī?)

The sakhīs answered in a way that increased Kṛṣṇa’s
longing, “Abhimanyu is home today. Both Jaṭilā and
Kuṭilā are also very vigilantly keeping watch, so She is
unable to leave Her house. There is a very little
possibility of Her coming to see You today.”

Hearing this, a look of sadness fell upon Kṛṣṇa’s face
and He became very distressed. Seeing Him so seriously
afflicted by separation from Śrīmatījī pleased the
sakhīs, and they brought Śrīmatī Rādhikā out from the
nearby kuñja, thus arranging Her meeting with Kṛṣṇa.
Since Kṛṣṇa asked the question Kyoṅ nā āī? here, this
place was named Kyoṅ Nāī, which in time degenerated into
Konāī, its present name. This village is situated four
miles north of Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa. Gvāla Kuṇḍa and Go Kuṇḍa
are worth seeing here.


Bhadāvara

The present name of Bhadāvara is Bhadāhara, and it is
the residence of Bhadrā, who is one of the eight
yūtheśvarīs. She is taṭastha, or neutral, towards
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and is Śrīmatī Candrāvalī’s suhṛda-
pakṣa, in the party of her friends.


Gāṅṭholī

At this place, Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala played Holī while
seated on a throne, and thus became intoxicated in rāsa-
vilāsa. At that time, Śrī Lalitājī quietly tied the

                              80
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                       5/5/2017

corners of Their cloths in a knot (gāṅṭha). When They
stood up, They could not separate Themselves from each
other. Seeing this, the sakhīs began to laugh. On
account of this mysterious līlā, this place is called
Gāṅṭholī. It is situated on the Govardhana-Ḍīg highway.

Sometimes, to bestow His darśana to His devotees, Śrī
Nāthajī used to come to this village on the pretext of
escaping the hands of the mlecchas. When Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu came to Govardhana, He had an intense desire
to have darśana of Śrī Nātha Gopālajī. Simultaneously,
the pujārīs, who feared an attack by the mlecchas,
brought Śrī Nāthajī to Gāṅṭholī for three days. Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu never used to climb on Govardhana
because He considered him to be the svarūpa of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. This is why His followers, the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas,
do not climb on Govardhana Hill to have darśana of Śrī
Nāthajī. Śrī Rūpa and Sanātana never set foot on
Govardhana. When Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu came to know
that Gopālajī was present in Gāṅṭholī Grāma, He stayed
here for three days, performed His parikramā, chanted
prayers, and danced and performed saṅkīrtana
ecstatically before Gopālajī.

One can also take darśana of Gulāla Kuṇḍa here.


Gulāla Kuṇḍa

This kuṇḍa is situated near Gāṅṭholī on the left side of
the highway. During Vasanta (spring), one will observe
that the gulāla colour (the pink colour of Holī) mixes
with the water of this kuṇḍa. It is said that after
playing Holī, Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs took
bath in this kuṇḍa and washed off the gulāla from their
bodies and clothes. This is how it received the name
Gulāla Kuṇḍa.


Beheja

This place is situated on the Govardhana-Ḍīg highway
about six miles from Govardhana. Indra, although an
aparādhī of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, shamelessly approached Śrī Kṛṣṇa
here to apologise to Him, keeping Surabhī in front of
him. The Hindi word for ‘shameless’ is behāyā, and
therefore this place became known as Beheja. One can
have darśana of Sūrya Kuṇḍa, Revatī Kuṇḍa, Bihārījī
Mandira and Śrī Rādhā-Kāntajī here. From Beheja, the
parikramā proceeds on via Devaśīrṣa and Muniśīrṣa. Two
miles west of Beheja is Ḍīg.


Devaśīrṣa Sthāna

This is a place of Kṛṣṇa’s cowherding pastimes. The
topmost devatās offered stava-stutis, or hymns and
prayers, to Śrī Kṛṣṇa here. In Hindi and Sanskrit, one
word for ‘topmost’ is śīrṣa. Thus, this place became
known as Devaśīrṣa. It lies five miles north of
Laṭhāvana.


Muniśīrṣa Sthāna

                              81
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017


This place is situated west of Devaśīrṣa. Many prominent
ṛṣis and munis performed austerities here and received
the darśana of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Śīrṣa also means ‘prominent’.
Hence, this place has been called Muniśīrṣa Sthāna. Its
name today is Muḍaśerasa. An ancient and famous temple
of Candrāvalī-devī stands here.


Sūryapatanavana

This place lies three miles from Beheja, and is
currently called Sāṅvarīkherā. Sūryadeva worshipped
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa here. In this area, one can have
darśana of Sūrya Kuṇḍa, Gopāla Kuṇḍa, Gopāla Mandira,
Bihārījī Mandira and Gvāla Kuṇḍa.


Dīrghapura (Ḍīg)

Coming from Chaṭṭīkarā, Nanda Bābā camped at Ḍerāvalī;
from there, he came to this place and camped here. In
other words, he stayed here for some time before
proceeding to Kāmyavana. From Kāmyavana, Nanda Bābā went
to Nandagaon. At this place, Śrī Kṛṣṇa shook or loosened
(digā) the patience, religiosity and bashfulness of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā by the charm of His beauty and the
sweetness of His veṇu. Hence, this place has been named
Ḍīg.

This place was also famous during Tretā-yuga. Just as
Śatrughnajī and Bharatajī inhabited Mathurā and
Bharatapura respectively, so Lakṣmaṇajī resided in
Dīrghapura. There is a famous temple of Lakṣmaṇajī here.
Kṛṣṇa Kuṇḍa, Sākṣī Gopālajī Mandira and Rūpasāgara are
some the places to be seen here. The Braja-yātrā camps
here while performing parikramā.


Paramādanā

This place is currently called Paramadīrā. Its true name
is in fact Pramodavana. Here Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala became
very delighted upon meeting each other. The name
Pramodavana comes from the word pramoda, which means
‘delight’ or ‘happiness’. In the north of the village is
Kṛṣṇa Kuṇḍa, and in the east is Caraṇa Kuṇḍa.


Setu Kandarā

The present name of Setu Kandarā is simply Seū. Situated
in between two hills, this is a delightful place where
Śrī Kṛṣṇa herded the cows. Because it lies between two
hills, this place is also known as Seū Kandarā.
Badrīnārāyaṇa is one and half miles north of here.


Ādi Badrī

Once, Nanda and the other gopas and gopīs desired to go
to Badrīnārāyaṇa in the Himālayas. Understanding this to
be their heartfelt desire, Śrī Kṛṣṇa brought them here
for darśana of Ādi Badrī. Ādi Badrī is the source of

                              82
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

even Badrī Viśāla, located in the Himālayas. One may
have darśana of Badrīnārāyaṇa, Nara-Nārāyaṇa Ṛṣi,
Kuvera, Nārada Ṛṣi, Uddhavajī and others here. Indra
sent apsarās to break the tapasya of Nara-Nārāyaṇa Ṛṣi,
but Nara-Nārāyaṇa Ṛṣi manifested Urvaśī from their left
thigh and shattered the pride of Indra. Just as
Alakānandā and Tapta Kuṇḍa are situated in Badrī in the
Himālayas, they are also present here. The water of
Tapta Kuṇḍa in Badrī is hot, but the water of Tapta
Kuṇḍa here is presently cool.

A little further on from Ādi Badrī, on top of the hill,
is the divine darśana of Būḍhe Badrī, Gandhamādana Hill,
Tapovana, and so on. This very attractive place is
surrounded by lush, green mountain-ranges. This is the
place of worship of many ṛṣis and munis and also of
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas. The natural scenery of this place
resembles that of Badrīnārāyaṇa. Below the hills of Ādi
Badrī is the village of Ālīpura, inhabited by people of
the meva caste.


Ālīpura

The hills of Ādi Badrī ascend from this place.
Previously, this village was also named Ādi Badrī, but
the Muslims changed it to Ālīpura, just as they
converted the names of Ayodhyā to Faizābād, Vṛndāvana to
Fakīrābād, Mathurā to Mamīnābād and Prayāga to
Allāhābād.


Śāṅarā Śikhara

This place is also called Dhavala Parvata. Dhavala means
‘white’. It is also known as Navanīta Parvata, because
it has the whitish colour of navanīta, or ‘fresh
butter’. A kadamba-khaṇḍī lies nearby. Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
Yugala performed Their swing līlā and many other
pastimes here. Adjacent to the kadamba-khaṇḍī are Nīla
Parvata and Ānandādri (a ghāṭī, or passage between two
mountains). These places are all situated next to Khoha.

Information regarding the location of the various places
on the hill and the distance between them is marked upon
a stone. This is testimony to the untiring efforts of
the Gauḍīya Gosvāmīs to manifest the glories of these
places.



Indraulī

This is Indulekhā Sakhī’s village, and devarāja Indra
worshipped Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa here to free himself from
his aparādha. For these reasons this village is named
Indraulī or Indrolī. One can have darśana of Indra
Kuṇḍa, Indra Kūpa and Indulekhā’s kuñja here.


Godṛṣṭivana

Presently called Guhānā, this place lies one mile from
Paramodarā. It is a place of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s cowherding

                              83
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                     5/5/2017

pastimes. Kṛṣṇa used to stand on top of a high hillock
to check the whereabouts of His cows. From there, He
used to call them with His vaṁśī — Śyāmalī, Dhavalī,
Kālindī, and so on — and they would come running to Him.
Śrī Kṛṣṇa counted the cows on His maṇi-mālā, and only
when he was satisfied by a full count did He return with
them to the cowshed. Gopāla Kuṇḍa and Śyāma Kuṇḍa lie
here. This is also the birthplace of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s sakhā
Sudāma.


Kanovāro

This is another of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s cowherding places. It is
also Kaṇva Muni’s famous place of worship, which is why
it has been named Kanovāro. Nearby, one can have darśana
of Sunaharā Kadamba-khaṇḍī, Pānihārī Kuṇḍa, Kṛṣṇa Kuṇḍa
and other places.

After taking darśana of Badrīnārāyaṇa, some pilgrims go
straight to Kāmyavana via Seū Ghāṭī and Indraulī.
Kāmyavana lies two miles north-west of Indraulī. Some
pilgrims make their way from Badrīnārāyaṇa to Kāmyavana
via Guhānā, Khoha Gaon, Dhavala Parvata and so forth.
Other pilgrims go to Kāmyavana five miles north via Ādi
Badrī, Ālīpura and Paśapa Gaon. Some proceed to
Kāmyavana after having darśana of Ādi Kedāranātha, which
lies five miles west of Paśapa Gaon. Kāmyavana is
situated six miles north-east from Kedarnātha. Bilonda
Gaon lies two miles north-east of Kedāranātha, Caraṇa
Pahāḍī lies two miles north-east from Bilonda Gaon, and
Kāmyavana lies two miles north-east of Caraṇa Pahāḍī.




Chapter 8

Śrī Kāmyavana

(Kāmavana)


caturtha kāmyakavanaṁ / vanānāṁ vanam-uttamaṁ

tatra gatvā naro devi! / mama loke mahīyate

(Ādi Varāha Purāṇa)



Kāmyavana, the fourth forest, is one of the topmost
amongst the twelve forests of Braja Maṇḍala. That
fortunate person who performs parikramā of this forest
is revered within Braja Dhāma.”


tataḥ kāmyavanaṁ rājan! / yatra bālye sthito bhavān

snāna-mātreṇa sarveṣāṁ / sarva-kāma phala-pradam

(Skanda Purāṇa)


                              84
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017



“He Mahārāja! Thereafter lies Kāmyavana, where
Brajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa performed many childhood
pastimes. Bathing in Kāma and other sarovaras of this
forest fulfils all kinds of desires, even the desire for
Kṛṣṇa’s premamayī sevā — sevā to Kṛṣṇa that is imbued
with prema.”

The word kāma can only really be used to denote the
gopīs’ prema for Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Premaiva gopa-rāmānāṁ kāma
ity āgamata prathām.1 In other words, the pure prema of
the gopikās exists solely to give Kṛṣṇa happiness, and
does not carry even the slightest scent of worldly lust
(laukika kāma). Only this prema is referred to as kāma
in śāstra. The śuddha prema of the gopīs is wholly
opposite to the lusty desires in this world. The only
aim of the gopīs’ kāma, which is devoid of all varieties
of such lust, is to give happiness to Kṛṣṇa, the abode
of prema. Therefore, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and other śāstras
refer to the pure and unadulterated prema of the gopīs
as kāma. Kāmavana is the pastime-place where Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa Yugala express such transcendental prema. In the
forest called Kāmavana, one can easily attain even the
gopīs’ viśuddha prema in the form of śuddha kāma, what
to speak of being able to fulfil all kinds of worldly
desires.

The word kāmya means ‘extremely beautiful’, ‘very well
adorned’ or ‘highly attractive’. This very attractive
forest within Braja Maṇḍala is where Śrī Kṛṣṇa plays.
Many pleasant sarovaras, kūpas, kuṇḍas, trees, creepers,
flowers, fruits and species of birds contribute to its
extraordinary beauty. Hence, it is called Kāmyavana.


Pastime-places in Kāmyavana

According to the Viṣṇu Purāṇa, there are eighty-four
sacred kuṇḍas, eighty-four mandiras, and eighty-four
pillars in Kāmyavana. It is said that a famous king
named Śrī Kāmasena established them all. It is also
accepted that the devatās and asuras jointly constructed
168 pillars here.

Kāmyavana has countless small and large kuṇḍas and
tīrthas, as well as a parikramā of fourteen miles.
Vimala Kuṇḍa is the famous tīrtha or kuṇḍa of this
forest. After taking bath there, one proceeds to take
darśana of the other holy places in Kāmyavana. Those
places include Gopikā Kuṇḍa, Suvarṇapura, Gayā Kuṇḍa and
Dharma Kuṇḍa. The siṁhāsana (throne) of Dharmarājajī is
worth seeing at Dharma Kuṇḍa. Next come Yajña Kuṇḍa, the
Pañca Tīrtha Sarovara of the Pāṇḍavas, Parama Mokṣa
Kuṇḍa and Maṇikarṇikā Kuṇḍa. Just nearby are Nivāsa
Kuṇḍa and Yaśodā Kuṇḍa. Somewhat further on are
Manokāmanā Kuṇḍa, Gopikāramaṇa Kuṇḍa, Setubandha
Rāmeśvara Kuṇḍa, Dhyāna Kuṇḍa, Tapta Kuṇḍa, Jal-vihāra
Kuṇḍa, Jal-krīḍā Kuṇḍa, Raṅgīlā Kuṇḍa, Chabīlā Kuṇḍa,
Jakīlā Kuṇḍa, Matīlā Kuṇḍa, Datīlā Kuṇḍa, Pañca Kuṇḍa,
Ghoṣarānī Kuṇḍa, Vihvala Kuṇḍa, Śyāma Kuṇḍa, Gomatī
Kuṇḍa, Dvārakā Kuṇḍa, Māna Kuṇḍa, Lalitā Kuṇḍa, Viśākhā
Kuṇḍa, Dohanī Kuṇḍa, Mohinī Kuṇḍa, Balabhadra Kuṇḍa,
Caturbhuja Kuṇḍa, Surabhī Kuṇḍa, Vatsa Kuṇḍa, Luk-lukī

                              85
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Kuṇḍa, Govinda Kuṇḍa, Netramīcana Kuṇḍa, Phisalanī Śilā,
Vyomāsura’s cave, Bhojana Thālī, the marriage-place of
Sumanā Sakhī, and Lalitā Granthi-datta-sthāna.

Thereafter come Viṣṇu Cinha-pāda Parvata, Garuḍa Tīrtha,
Kapila Tīrtha, the place of Lohajaṅgha Ṛṣi, and Hoḍa-
sthāna (hoḍa means ‘wager’ or ‘bet’). North of these
tīrthas is the place of Indulekhā-devī, and nearby on
top of the hill is the place of Balarāma and the mark of
Balarāma’s plough. Further north is Kṛṣṇa Kūpa, and
nearby is Saṅkarṣaṇa Kuṇḍa. Beyond are the hidden
Lokeśvara Tīrtha, Varāha Kuṇḍa, Satī Kuṇḍa and
Candrasakhī Puṣkariṇī; and next to these places are the
mūrti of Candraśekhara Śiva and Śṛṅgāra Tīrtha. South of
the hill situated in that place is a bāvaḍī, or deep
tank with steps, named Prabhālallī. West of this tank is
Bhāradvāja Ṛṣi Kūpa. To its north is another Sankarṣaṇa
Kuṇḍa and to its east is Kṛṣṇa Kūpa. These three kūpas
all lie near the hill mentioned earlier. At the top of
the hill is the mūrti of Bhadreśvara Śiva. After this,
one comes to the mūrti of Alakṣa Garuḍa and the āśrama
of Pippalāda Ṛṣi.

After having darśana of these places, one proceeds to
Dihuhalī and Rādhā Puṣkariṇī. In the eastern, northern,
western and southern parts of this puṣkariṇī (large lake
or pond) lie Lalitā Puṣkariṇī, Viśākhā Puṣkariṇī,
Candrāvalī Puṣkariṇī, and Candrabhāga Puṣkariṇī
respectively. In the south-eastern part is Līlāvatī
Puṣkariṇī and in the north-western part is Prabhāvatī
Puṣkariṇī. Rādhā Puṣkariṇī is situated in the middle of
this large lake. The puṣkariṇīs of sixty-four sakhīs lie
here. Further on is Kuśa-sthalī. One can have darśana
here of Kameśvara Mahādeva and the place where
Śaṅkhacūḍa was killed. To the north are Candra-śekhara
Mūrti, Vimaleśvara, and a deity of Varāha. Here, one can
also visit the five Pāṇḍavas with Draupadī, Vṛndā-devī
with Govindajī, Śrī Rādhā-Vallabha, Navanīta Rāya,
Gokuleśvara, and Śrī Rāmacandra. Other places worth
visiting include Caraṇa Pahāḍī, Śrī Rādhā-Gopīnātha, Śrī
Rādhā-Mohana (Gopālajī) and Caurāsī Khambā. The most
well-known of these pastime-places are described below.


Vimala Kuṇḍa

This famous kuṇḍa is situated about four-hundred metres
south-west of Kāmavana Gaon. The following deities
preside around Vimala Kuṇḍa in this order: (1) Dāūjī,
(2) Sūryadeva, (3) Śrī Nīlakaṇṭheśvara Mahādeva, (4) Śrī
Govardhana-nātha, (5) Śrī Madan-Mohana and Kāmyavana
Vihārī, (6) Śrī Vimala Vihārī, (7) Vimala-devī, (8) Śrī
Muralī-Manohara, (9) Bhagavatī Gaṅgā, and (10) Śrī
Gopālajī.

According to the Garga Saṁhitā, in ancient times a
glorious king named Vimala lived in Campaka Nagarī in
the country of Sindhu. At first, none of his six
thousand queens bore him any children, but, by the mercy
of Śrī Yājñavalkya Ṛṣi, many beautiful girls took birth
from the wombs of those queens. In their previous
births, these girls had been the women of Janakapura who
had desired to obtain Śrī Rāmacandrajī as their husband.
The girls who took birth in King Vimala’s home

                              86
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

eventually reached a marriageable age. On the advice of
Maharṣi Yājñavalkya, the king sent his emissary to
Mathurā Purī to search for Śrī Kṛṣṇa, whom he deemed to
be a suitable husband for his daughters. While on his
way, the emissary was fortunate to meet Grandfather
Bhīṣma, who sent him to Śrī Vṛndāvana, since Śrī Kṛṣṇa
was there at that time. Upon arriving in Vṛndāvana, the
royal emissary gave Śrī Kṛṣṇa King Vimala’s letter of
invitation, which requested Śrī Kṛṣṇa to come to Campaka
Nagarī to marry the princesses. After receiving Mahārāja
Vimala’s invitation, Śrī Kṛṣṇa went to Campaka Nagarī
and brought the princesses back with Him to this
pleasing Kāmavana, situated within Braja Maṇḍala. He
assumed as many forms as there were princesses and
accepted them all. He performed rāsa and other playful
pastimes (krīḍā) with these kumārīs, thus fulfilling
their long-cherished desire. The tears of happiness that
flowed from their eyes filled a kuṇḍa, which became
known as Vimala Kuṇḍa. By bathing in this kuṇḍa, all
kinds of desires — both worldly and transcendental — are
fulfilled and one’s heart becomes pure and instilled
with braja-bhakti.

It is generally said that all the tīrthas of the
universe come to Braja during Cātur-māsya, but that
once, Tīrtharāja Puṣkara failed to come. Śrī Kṛṣṇa
remembered Yogamāyā. Merely by His recollection, a very
strong current of water shot out of the earth.
Astonishingly, a supremely beautiful and completely pure
kiśorī appeared from that sacred current. Śrī Kṛṣṇa
performed many kinds of games with that beautiful kiśorī
in the waters of that current. The kiśorī completely
satisfied parama rasika Śrī Kṛṣṇa with her beauty and
pure, prema-filled sevā, and He gave Her a boon: “From
today you will be known as Vimala-devī, and this kuṇḍa
will be named after you. By taking bath in this kuṇḍa,
one will receive seven times the pious merit of taking
bath in Tīrtharāja Puṣkara.” Since then, this kuṇḍa has
become known as Vimala Kuṇḍa.

Many great ṛṣis and maharṣis have resided on the bank of
this kuṇḍa to obtain kṛṣṇa-bhakti. It is well known that
Maharṣi Durvāsā and the Pāṇḍavas resided here. Every
Braja Maṇḍala parikramā party or pilgrim performing
parikramā stays at Vimala Kuṇḍa and begins parikramā of
Kāmyavana from here only.


Śrī Vṛndā-devī and Śrī Govindadeva

This is Kāmyavana’s most famous temple. Darśana of
Vṛndā-devī is rare in Braja Maṇḍala, but one can have
her special darśana here. Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Govindadeva are
also present here. Nearby is Śrī Viṣṇu Siṁhāsana, or the
siṁhāsana (throne) of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Close by is Caraṇa
Kuṇḍa, where the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā-Govinda Yugala
were bathed.

After Śrī Rūpa, Śrī Sanātana, and the other Gosvāmīs
disappeared from this world, the narrow-minded Mughal
emperor Aurangzeb destroyed the famous temples of
Vṛndāvana, Mathurā and other locations in Braja. At that
time, the Mahārāja of Jaipura, who was a great devotee,
brought the famous deities of Braja to Jaipura. These

                              87
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

included Śrī Govinda, Śrī Gopīnātha, Śrī Rādhā-Dāmodara
and Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava. On his way, he rested for some
days in Kāmyavana. The deities were taken from the
chariots and kept at various locations where regular
services to Them were performed, such as bathing,
offering bhoga and putting to rest. They were later
carried to Jaipura and other places. Eventually, large
temples were constructed at the places where the deities
of Śrī Rādhā-Govinda, Śrī Rādhā-Gopīnātha and Śrī Rādhā-
Madana-Mohana had stayed in Kāmyavana, and pratibhū-
vigrahas of the original deities were installed there.

Śrī Vṛndā-devī came as far as Kāmyavana, but she did not
leave Braja to go further. There is thus a special
darśana of Śrī Vṛndā-devī here.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and His parikāras, like Śrī Rūpa
and Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmīs, manifested the lost pastime-
places of Braja Maṇḍala. Before their arrival in Braja,
Kāmyavana was considered to be Vṛndāvana. However, Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu established the place situated near
Mathurā as Śrīdhāma Vṛndāvana. It is impossible for
Yamunājī, Cīra Ghāṭa, Nidhuvana, Kālīya Daha, Keśī
Ghāṭa, Sevā Kuñja, Rāsa-sthalī Vaṁśīvaṭa, and Śrī
Gopīśvara Mahādeva to be situated in Kāmyavana.
Therefore, that place where the pastime-places like
Vimala Kuṇḍa, Kāmeśvara Mahādeva, Caraṇa Pahāḍī,
Setubandha Rāmeśvara and others are present is
Kāmyavana, and it is without doubt separate from
Vṛndāvana. Vṛndā-devī resides in Vṛndāvana only. She is
the adhiṣṭhātrī-devī of the kuñjas of Vṛndāvana and of
the pastimes of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala in those kuñjas.
Therefore, she now resides in Śrī Rūpa-Sanātana Gauḍīya
Maṭha in Śrīdhāma Vṛndāvana, where she grants her divine
darśana.

In the vicinity of the Śrī Govindadeva Mandira, one can
have darśana of places like Garuḍajī, Candrabhāṣā Kuṇḍa,
Candreśvara Mahādevajī, Varāha Kuṇḍa, Varāha Kūpa, Yajña
Kuṇḍa and Dharma Kuṇḍa.


Dharma Kuṇḍa

This kuṇḍa lies in the eastern part of Kāmyavana. Śrī
Nārāyaṇa is present here in the form of dharma. Nearby
is a vedī (platform) named Viśākhā. There is a special
rule that one should take bath here on Kṛṣṇāṣṭamī (the
eighth day of the dark moon) on a Wednesday in the month
of Bhadra (Bhadrapada) during the Śravaṇā nakṣatra
(constellation). Within the area of Dharma Kuṇḍa, there
are many places one may visit for darśana, such as Nara-
Nārāyaṇa Kuṇḍa, Nīla Varāha, Pañca Pāṇḍava, Hanumānjī,
Pañca Pāṇḍava Kuṇḍa (Pañca Tīrtha), Maṇikarṇikā and
Viśveśvara Mahādeva.

The five Pāṇḍavas resided in this attractive Kāmyavana
for a long time during their exile to the forest. Once,
Mahārānī Draupadī and the Pāṇḍavas felt very thirsty. It
was summer and the nearby sarovaras and other sources of
water had dried up. Water was not available anywhere,
not even from distant places. Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira gave
one empty pot to his valiant brother Bhīmasena and told
him to fill it with clean water. The intelligent Bhīma

                              88
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

saw that birds were flying to and from a particular
place, so he headed in that direction. After some time,
he came to a beautiful sarovara full of clean, fragrant
water. Being very thirsty, he thought to quench his own
thirst first before carrying water back to his brothers.
However, as soon as he stepped in the lake, a Yakṣa
appeared before him and said, “Answer my questions
before daring to drink water, otherwise you will die.”
Ignoring the order of the Yakṣa, the great and valiant
Bhīmasena filled his palms with some water, but upon
doing so he immediately fainted to the ground.

Noting Bhīmasena’s delay in returning, Mahārāja
Yudhiṣṭhira sent his brothers one by one to go and fetch
water — first Arjuna, then Nakula, and then Sahadeva.
Upon reaching the sarovara, however, they all met the
same fate as Bhīma, having attempted to drink water
without following the Yakṣa’s command. Finally, Mahārāja
Yudhiṣṭhira went himself and found his brothers all
lying on the ground unconscious. He became very worried.
He decided to quench his thirst before trying to revive
them, but as soon as he went to do so, the Yakṣa
appeared and told Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira that he had to
correctly answer his questions before he could drink any
water. Very patiently, Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira requested
the Yakṣa to ask his questions.


Yakṣa: Who rises the sun?

Yudhiṣṭhira: Brahma rises the sun.

Yakṣa: What is heavier than the earth itself? What is
higher than even the sky? What travels faster than the
wind? And what is greater in number than blades of grass
or pieces of straw?

Yudhiṣṭhira: One’s mother is heavier than the earth.
One’s father is higher than the sky. The mind is swifter
than air, and the thoughts that spring from the mind are
more numerous than blades of grass.

Yakṣa: Which is the best dharma in the world? What is
the best kind of forbearance?

Yudhiṣṭhira: The best dharma in the world is mercy. To
tolerate the dualities of this world — like pleasure and
sorrow, profit and loss, and birth and death — is the
best kind of forbearance.

Yakṣa: Who is the invincible enemy of human beings? What
is their endless disease? Who is a sādhu, and who is not
a sādhu?

Yudhiṣṭhira: Anger is the invincible enemy of human
beings. Greed is their endless disease. One who does
good to all living entities is a sādhu, and a cruel
person who has no control over his senses is not a
sādhu.

Yakṣa: Who is happy? What is the greatest wonder? What
is life’s real path? What is newsworthy?

Yudhiṣṭhira: He who has no debt, he who is not in a

                              89
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

foreign land, and he who is able somehow or other to eat
leaves and herbs after cooking is happy. Every day,
living beings make their way to the abode of Yamārāja,
the god of death, but those who are left behind think
they will live forever. There is no greater wonder than
this. Argument has no place in determining the correct
path. The śrutis are diverse, and the opinions of the
ṛṣis divided. The tattva of dharma is thus very deep.
Therefore, the path that is followed by mahāpuruṣas is
the real path. Time is roasting all living beings in the
frying pan of illusion and allurement, which represents
this material world. It shuffles them with the ladle of
months and seasons and cooks them in the fire of the sun
planet, which burns up the fuel of day and night. This
is the only news in this world.

Yakṣa: O Rājan! You have answered all my questions
correctly. You may therefore select any one of your
brothers and he will return to life.

Yudhiṣṭhira: Among all my brothers, let dark-
complexioned and very powerful Nakula live again.

Yakṣa: Rājan! Why do you want Nakula to be brought back
to life? Why not Bhīma, who has the strength of ten
thousand elephants, or the invincible archer Arjuna?

Yudhiṣṭhira: I cannot give up dharma. I am of the
opinion that the supreme dharma is to have equal
feelings for everyone. My father had two wives, Kuntī
and Mādrī. In my opinion, both of them should have sons.
Kuntī and Mādrī mean the same to me. I want to preserve
this equality; therefore, Nakula should return to life.

Yakṣa: O topmost bhakta! You have more respect for
dharma than for time and wealth! Therefore, all your
brothers should live again.

That Yakṣa was none other than Dharmarāja (Śrī Nārāyaṇa)
Himself, who had desired to test the dharma of his son
Yudhiṣṭhira. Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira passed the
examination.

Once, when the Pāṇḍavas and Draupadī were living here
during their exile, Mahārānī Draupadī went alone one day
to take bath in Vimala Kuṇḍa. Meanwhile, the Pāṇḍavas
were at their residence, free of anxieties and deeply
absorbed in bhagavad-kathā. Jayadratha, the brother-in-
law of both Duryodhana and the Pāṇḍavas, was attracted
to Draupadī. He was waiting for an opportunity to find
Draupadī alone so he could kidnap her easily. In this
way, he would dishonour the Pāṇḍavas. On this day, fate
had it that he found Draupadī alone taking bath in
Vimala Kuṇḍa away from her residence. Jayadratha tried
to take Draupadī with him to his kingdom by threat and
guile, but Draupadī, the crest-jewel of chaste ladies,
firmly refused. Jayadratha then became very angry. He
forcefully pulled her up on his chariot and drove the
horses very fast.

Draupadī started loudly calling out to Arjuna, Bhīma and
Kṛṣṇa for protection. Somehow, her loud cries reached
the ears of Arjuna and Bhīma, and the two great warriors
immediately ran after the chariot with great speed.

                              90
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Mahārathī Arjuna stopped Jayadratha’s chariot by
shooting arrows of fire at it. Jayadratha jumped from
the chariot and fled for his life, but Bhīma outran him
and caught him. Both brothers submitted Jayadratha
before Draupadī and then before Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira.
Bhīma was furious, “This tyrant should be killed
immediately!” Arjuna supported Bhīma. However,
Dharmarāja Yudhiṣṭhira pacified them both. “This
degraded person has committed an offence at the feet of
Draupadī,” he said. “Therefore, she should choose a
suitable punishment for him.”

Draupadī, who was very grave, then spoke. “Needless to
say, he has committed a horrible offence, yet he is your
sister’s husband. I cannot bear to see my sister-in-law
cry for the rest of her life as a widow. It is therefore
best to release him.” Bhīma, however, was intent on
having him killed. They finally concluded that for a
respectable person dishonour is equal to death, and
therefore Jayadratha should have his head shaven clean,
but in such a way as to give him five śikhās. Similarly,
before releasing him, they would shave his face leaving
only a beard. Arjuna shaved Jayadratha’s head and face
as planned, thereby dishonouring him. He then released
him. Jayadratha went away greatly insulted and performed
severe austerities with the aim of killing the Pāṇḍavas.
However, Arjuna killed him in the Mahābhārata war, by
following the instructions of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

The wicked Duryodhana was always anxious to destroy the
Pāṇḍavas completely. Once, while the Pāṇḍavas and
Draupadī were living here during their exile, he invited
Maharṣi Durvāsā and fed him a sumptuous, delicious meal
with great honour. Durvāsājī was satisfied and requested
Duryodhana to ask for a boon. With folded hands,
Duryodhana said, “Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira is my elder
brother. Please accept his hospitality at his residence
together with your sixty-thousand disciples. But you
should go and be their guest after midday, during the
third prahara. The Pāṇḍavas are currently living in
Kāmyavana.”

Duryodhana knew very well that the Pāṇḍavas served their
guests very carefully. Draupadī had a pot that had been
given to her by Sūryadeva. The cooking done in that one
pot could feed innumerable persons to their
satisfaction, but once Draupadī ate and cleaned the pot,
that pot could no longer provide any further food.
Draupadī would feed any guests as well as the Pāṇḍavas,
and then clean the pot without fail before the third
prahara. Durvāsājī and his sixty thousand disciples were
to arrive there during the third prahara so that the
Pāṇḍavas would not be able to feed them. Duryodhana
expected that the very hot-tempered Durvāsā Ṛṣi would
curse the Pāṇḍavas and thus burn them to ashes.

Maharṣi Durvāsā is fully aware of the glories of the
Pāṇḍavas, who are kṛṣṇa-bhaktas. However, it is
difficult for even the demigods to understand his
contrary activities. Only he knows what, when and why he
does what he does. Thus, he and sixty thousand ṛṣis
reached the residence of the Pāṇḍavas in Kāmyavana in
the afternoon. Upon seeing him, the Pāṇḍavas became very
happy. Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira worshipped him and requested

                              91
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

him to accept his hospitality. Maharṣi said, “We are now
going to take bath in Vimala Kuṇḍa and will come back
very soon. You should arrange for our meals. We will eat
here.” Saying this, Durvāsājī left to take bath together
with his whole entourage.

The Pāṇḍavas now became very concerned. What arrangement
could be made to feed these ṛṣis? They called Draupadī
and asked her if she could arrange to feed a gathering
of sixty thousand, but her pot had already been cleaned
and turned upside down. She considered hard what to do
to save the Pāṇḍavas but could think of no plan. At
last, she began calling out to her dear friend Śrī Kṛṣṇa
in a very distressed voice. How could Dvārakānātha not
come upon hearing her call? He immediately appeared in
front of Draupadī and said, “Sakhī, I am very hungry!
Give Me something to eat.” Draupadī answered, “You are
hungry and I have nothing at home. My pot has been
cleaned and is lying upside down. The very hot-tempered
Maharṣi Durvāsā together with his sixty thousand
disciples are about to come to take their meal. When he
finds that there is nothing to eat, he will annihilate
the Pāṇḍavas. This will be unavoidable, therefore, first
please arrange for them to be fed.”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa said, “I cannot do anything without eating and
drinking, so please bring your pot.”

In a very sad voice Draupadī said, “There is nothing in
the pot. I have cleaned it very thoroughly.”

“Still, you please bring it. I want to see.”

Draupadī brought the pot and put it in Kṛṣṇa’s hands.
Kṛṣṇa looked into it and became joyful. A very tiny
piece of leafy vegetable was stuck to the side of the
pot. Śrī Kṛṣṇa scraped it off with His nail and put in
His mouth. He then filled His stomach with water poured
by Draupadī’s hands. Tṛpto ‘smi! Tṛpto ‘smi! (“I am
satisfied! I am satisfied!”) he exclaimed, and he began
to pat His stomach with His hand. He even belched in
satisfaction. Śrī Kṛṣṇa then sent Bhīma-sena to quickly
go and call the ṛṣis. The great warrior Bhīma, club in
hand, started towards Vimala Kuṇḍa.

Maharṣi Durvāsā and his disciples had been bathing in
Vimala Kuṇḍa when suddenly their stomachs felt so full
that they all started belching as if they had eaten a
meal. When Durvāsājī saw Bhīma coming towards them, the
memory of the incident with Ambarīṣa Mahārāja entered
his mind and he became very frightened. He and his sixty
thousand disciples quickly fled to Maharṣi Loka through
the celestial pathways. Upon arriving at Vimala Kuṇḍa,
Bhīma could not find the ṛṣis anywhere. He returned and
told Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira and Śrī Kṛṣṇa, “I searched
everywhere but could not find them.”

After learning what had happened from Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
Draupadī and the Pāṇḍavas became free from anxiety. If
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is satisfied, then the whole universe is
satisfied. This is indeed this episode’s message to the
world. This līlā of Śrī Kṛṣṇa took place here at
Kāmyavana.


                              92
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Another time, while the Pāṇḍavas were residing here, the
wicked Duryodhana discovered their whereabouts and
descended upon Kāmyavana with all his brothers,
associates like Karṇa and Śakuni, relatives, friends,
and an army of four divisions. For some days, he set up
a very festive camp on the bank of Vimala Kuṇḍa just to
humiliate the Pāṇḍavas.

When Indra came to know of this, he ordered his general
Citrasena to arrest Duryodhana. Citrasena defeated
Duryodhana’s entire army, arrested him and took him to
Indra by the aerial pathways, Duryodhana loudly shouting
and screaming all the while. Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja heard
his crying and ordered Bhīmasena to rescue him, but
Bhīmasena objected, “Mahārāja! Duryodhana wanted to harm
us, which is why our best well-wisher Citrasena has
caught him and is taking him away. It is best if we
remain quiet.” Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira could not tolerate
this. He looked at Arjuna and said, “Brother Arjuna! Our
brother Suyodhana2 is in danger, and it is our duty to
rescue him. We can quarrel and fight among ourselves
over some issue, but in regard to others we one hundred
and five brothers are one. Quickly rescue Suyodhana.”
The mahārathī Arjuna easily released Duryodhana from the
hands of Citrasena, the general of the demigods, and
brought him down to stand before Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira,
who met him very affectionately and respectfully sent
him back to his place of residence. But the blackness of
coal does not go away even if the coal is washed
millions of times with soap. The affectionate behaviour
of Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira pierced Duryodhana’s heart like
a sharp iron rod. He considered himself dishonoured, and
returned to Hastinapura very agitated. Whoever God
protects, no one can harm. Indeed, no one can so much as
twist a single hair of someone who is under Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
shelter.

Nearby, at Pañca Tīrtha Sarovara, were some wonderful
mūrtis of the Pāṇḍavas and Draupadī. This place is unin-
habited, and therefore a thief was able to steal a few
of the mūrtis here some time ago, while others have been
broken. Since then, the remaining mūrtis have been kept
in the nearby Kāmeśvara Mandira, where they are
neglected.

Dharma Kūpa and many other places that seem to be
connected with the Pāṇḍavas lie close by.


Yaśodā Kuṇḍa

This place in Kāmyavana was the residence of Śrī
Yaśodājī’s father. During His childhood, Śrī Kṛṣṇa would
sometimes come to stay at this very attractive place
with His mother. Sometimes, Nanda Bābā and his family
and associates used to camp here with their cows. Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and the sakhās also used to graze the cows here.

Bhakti-ratnākara mentions this tīrtha:


dekha yaśodā kuṇḍa parama nirmala

ethā gocāraṇe kṛṣṇa haīyā vihvala

                              93
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017



“See this supremely pure Yaśodā Kuṇḍa, where Kṛṣṇa
joyfully herded His cows.”


Gayā Kuṇḍa

At this place in Braja Maṇḍala, the tīrtha of Gayā
resides to perform worship of Kṛṣṇa. Agasta Kuṇḍa is
also here. Gayā Kuṇḍa’s southern bank is known as Agasta
Ghāṭa. Bathing here and performing tarpaṇa (offering of
water to the demigods, ṛṣis and forefathers) and piṇḍa-
dāna in the month of Āśvina on Kṛṣṇa-pakṣa (the dark
moon) are highly praised.


Prayāga Kuṇḍa

Tīrtharāja Prayāga worshipped Śrī Kṛṣṇa here. The two
kuṇḍas Prayāga and Puṣkara lie together here.


Dvārakā Kuṇḍa

Śrī Kṛṣṇa came to Braja from Dvārakā and resided here in
tents with His queens.


Dvārakā Kuṇḍa, Gomatī Kuṇḍa, Māna Kuṇḍa and Balabhadra
Kuṇḍa

These four kuṇḍas are situated alongside each other.


Nārada Kuṇḍa

This is Nāradajī’s place of ārādhanā. Devarṣi Nārada
became impatient here while singing about Kṛṣṇa’s sweet
pastimes. Bhakti-ratnakāra tells:


dekhaha nārada kuṇḍa nārada eī khāne

haila mahā adhairya kṛṣṇera līlā gāne


“See this Nārada Kuṇḍa, where Nārada lost his patience
while singing about Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes.”


Manokāmanā Kuṇḍa

This kuṇḍa and Kāma Sarovara are situated together
between Vimala Kuṇḍa and Yaśodā Kuṇḍa. By bathing here,
all desires of the heart are fulfilled. The Skanda
Purāṇa states:


tatra kāmasaro rājan! / gopikāramaṇaṁ saraḥ

tatra tīrtha sahasrāṇi / sarāṁsi ca pṛthak-pṛthak



                              94
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

“Gopikāramaṇa Kāma Sarovara is in Kāmyavana. There, all
desires of the heart are fulfilled. Thousands of other
tīrthas are present in that same Kāmyavana.”


Setubandha Sarovara

On the order of the gopīs, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, in the mood of Śrī
Rāma, had the monkeys construct a bridge (setu) here.
Even today, one can see the ruins of this bridge of
rocks (setu-bandha) in the sarovara. Rāmeśvara Mahādeva
presides north of this kuṇḍa. He was installed by Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, when He assumed the mood of Śrī Rāma. Laṅkāpurī,
as a hillock, is situated to the south of the kuṇḍa
across from Rāmeśvara Mahādeva.

One day, the supremely playful Śrī Kṛṣṇa was sitting in
the shade under the trees on the northern bank of this
kuṇḍa, together with the gopīs, and was joking and
laughing with vinodinī Śrī Rādhikā. At that time, many
monkeys from nearby places descended from the trees,
being attracted by Kṛṣṇa’s rūpa-mādhurī, His sweet
beauty. They offered pra-ṇāmas at His lotus feet, sang
in joy, jumped and danced. Several monkeys took very
long leaps from trees on the southern bank of the kuṇḍa
and landed near His lotus feet. Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa
praised the bravery of those monkeys. Watching this
wonderful līlā charmed the gopīs. They began to describe
the astonishing līlās of Bhagavān Śrī Rāmacandra and
said that He received help from monkeys. At that time,
Lalitājī said, “We have heard that in Tretā-yuga the
greatly powerful Hanumānjī crossed the ocean with one
jump, but today we are seeing with our own eyes monkeys
also cross this sarovara in a single jump.”

Hearing this, Kṛṣṇa proudly declared, “Do you know, I
was Śrī Rāma in Tretā-yuga. I performed all these līlās
as Rāma.”

Lalitā praised the amazing līlās of Śrī Rāmacandra and
said, “You are a liar. You were never Rāma. Such bravery
is impossible for You.”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa smiled and replied, “You don’t believe Me, but
I did take the form of Rāma, and I married Sītā after
breaking the bow of Śiva in Janakapurī. On the order of
My father, I roamed through Citrakūṭa and Daṇḍakāraṇya
with bow in hand, together with Sītā and Lakṣmaṇa, where
I killed cruel and tyrannical demons. Thereafter, I
wandered from forest to forest in separation from Sītā,
destroyed Rāvaṇa and Laṅkāpurī with the help of the
monkeys, and then returned to Ayodhyā. Now I carry a
vaṁśī, roam from forest to forest tending and grazing
the cows, and perform pastimes with My beloved Śrī
Rādhikā in the company of you gopīs. Previously, when I
came as Rāma, My bow and arrow made the three worlds
tremble. Now, however, all living beings, both moving
and non-moving, are becoming maddened by the sweet sound
of My veṇu.”

Smilingly, Lalitājī said, “We do not believe mere words.
If You can show some valour like that of Śrī Rāma, then
we may believe You. Śrī Rāmacandrajī arranged for a
bridge to be constructed by bears and monkeys so that He

                              95
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

could cross an ocean one hundred yojanas wide with His
entire army. If You can get these monkeys to construct a
bridge over this small sarovara, then we may believe
You.”

Hearing Lalitā’s words, Śrī Kṛṣṇa assembled all the
monkeys in a moment by sounding His veṇu. He ordered
them to construct a bridge over the sarovara using flat
stones. On the order of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, thousands of monkeys
immediately and eagerly started to help build the
bridge, bringing stones from distant places. This
occurred right before the gopīs’ eyes. Śrī Kṛṣṇa then
constructed the bridge with His own hands with the
stones brought by the monkeys. He installed Rāmeśvara
Mahādeva at the start of the bridge, on the northern
side of the sarovara. These places can still be seen to
this day. This kuṇḍa is also called Laṅkā Kuṇḍa.


Luk-lukī Kuṇḍa

Luk-lukī Kuṇḍa is another site of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s water-
sports (jal-krīḍā), and is therefore also known as Jal-
krīḍā Kuṇḍa. While grazing the cows, Kṛṣṇa would
sometimes leave His play with the sakhās for a while to
meet with the gopīs in this lovely, secluded place.
Kṛṣṇa played hide-and-seek here with the braja-ramaṇīs.
The gopīs closed their eyes, and Kṛṣṇa hid in a cave in
a nearby hill. The sakhīs searched for Him everywhere,
but were unable to find Him. They became very worried.
“Where could Kṛṣṇa have gone, leaving us behind?” they
thought, and they began to meditate on Him. That place
where they performed dhyāna (meditation) on Kṛṣṇa is
called Dhyāna Kuṇḍa, and the cave (kandarā) in which
Kṛṣṇa was hiding is called Luk-luka Kandarā.


Caraṇa Pahāḍī

After Śrī Kṛṣṇa entered the cave known as Luk-luka
Kandarā, He appeared on top of the hill in which the
cave is buried and played on His sweet flute. The sound
of the flute broke the sakhīs’ meditation on Him. They
looked up to see their beloved playing His flute on the
hill, and eagerly ran there to meet Him. The sound of
the flute somewhat melted the hill, and Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
footprints manifested there. Even today, one can see
these footprints very clearly. The stones on the nearby
hill where the sakhās were playing and the calves were
grazing also melted, leaving impressions of their feet
and hooves, which are still clearly visible today, even
after 5,000 years.


Vihvala Kuṇḍa

This kuṇḍa lies near Caraṇa Pahāḍī, as do the kuṇḍas of
five sakhās. The gopīs became overwhelmed (vihvala) with
prema here upon hearing the sound of Kṛṣṇa’s flute. This
place has therefore become famous as Vihvala Kuṇḍa. The
kuṇḍas of the five sakhās are named Raṅgīlā, Chabīlā,
Jakīlā, Matīlā and Datīlā Kuṇḍa. They are all situated
near Agrāvalī Grāma.


                              96
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017


Yaśodharā Kuṇḍa

This kuṇḍa is also named Ghoṣarānī Kuṇḍa. Ghoṣarānī was
Yaśodhara Gopa’s daughter. Yaśodhara Gopa gave her hand
in marriage here. This is the kuṇḍa of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
maternal grandmother, Pāṭalā-devī.


Śrī Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī’s bhajana-sthalī

Near Luk-lukī Kuṇḍa, in a secluded, marvellous location
is Śrī Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī’s place of bhajana. Śrī
Prabhodhānandajī was the guru and paternal uncle of Śrī
Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. He was a transcendental poet,
well-versed in all the śāstras. Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi,
Śrī Navadvīpa Śataka and Śrī Vṛndāvana Śataka are some
of the works of this mahāpuruṣa. In his famous Gaura-
gaṇoddeśa-dīpika, Śrī Kavi Karṇapūra has mentioned that
Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī is the very talented Tuṅgavidyā
Sakhī, one of the aṣṭa-sakhīs in kṛṣṇa-līlā.

After Prabodhānanda heard Śrīman Mahāprabhu speak kṛṣṇa-
kathā in Śrī Raṅgam, he left the Śrī-sampradāya to
become a follower of Mahāprabhu. When Mahāprabhu left
Śrī Raṅgam, Prabodhānanda came to Braja and stayed for
some time at this secluded place where he performed
bhajana. In his last days, he came to Kālīya Daha in
Vṛndāvana where he entered nitya-līlā while performing
bhajana. Today, one can take darśana of his bhajana and
samādhi-sthalīs there.


Phisalanī Śilā

This stone slide is situated on Indrasena Parvata near
Kalāvatā Grāma. While grazing the cows, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and
the sakhās used to slide here. Śrīmatī Rādhikā sometimes
used to slide here also, along with Her sakhīs. To this
day, the boys of the nearby village take great pleasure
in sliding down this hill while grazing their cows.
Pilgrims come to take darśana of this slide, where many
joyful episodes took place.


Vyomāsura’s cave

Just near the slide, in the middle of the hill is the
cave of Vyomāsura. Kṛṣṇa killed Vyomāsura here. This
cave is also referred to as Medhāvī Muni’s cave because
Medhāvī Muni worshipped Kṛṣṇa here.

The caraṇa-cihna, or footprint, of Śrī Baladeva Prabhu
lies nearby, at the foot of the hill. When Śrī Kṛṣṇa was
killing Vyomāsura, the earth began to tremble, so
Baladevajī pressed down on the earth with His foot and
thus stabilised it. His caraṇa-cihna can still be seen
today.

Once, Kṛṣṇa came to this place while grazing His cows.
The forest was filled with green grass, which the cows
happily ate. Without any care, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the sakhās
began to play a game of ‘cops and robbers’. Some sakhās
pretended to be sheep while others pretended to be their

                              97
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

keepers. Still others took on the role of thieves and
stole the sheep. Kṛṣṇa played the judge. The owners of
the sheep filed a lawsuit with the judge against the
thieves. Śrī Kṛṣṇa called both parties before Him and
proceeded to consider the case. All the cowherd boys
were thus deeply absorbed in their play.

Intending to kill Kṛṣṇa, Vyomāsura, one of Kaṁsa’s
spies, entered the group disguised as a sakhā and became
one of the thieves. He stole all the sakhās who were
playing the part of sheep and hid them in this cave. Śrī
Kṛṣṇa looked around and wondered, “Where have all our
sakhās gone?” Recognising Vyomāsura as a demon in
disguise, He understood that this was his work. He
therefore caught him and killed him. Kṛṣṇa and the
sakhās who were playing the sheeps’ owners then released
the other sakhās from the cave in the hill. This līlā
has been described in the Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam.


Bhojana Thālī

Some distance from Vyomāsura’s cave is Bhojana Thālī,
and near Bhojana Thālī is Kṣīrasāgara, or Kṛṣṇa Kuṇḍa.
After killing Vyomāsura, Śrī Kṛṣṇa bathed in this kuṇḍa
and ate here with the gopa sakhās. The marks of a plate
(thāla) and of cups are still visible on the hill where
they ate (bhojana kiyā). Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s siṁhāsana is also
nearby. After eating, Kṛṣṇa played with the sakhās on a
nearby hill, where they used a stone as a musical
instrument. This place can also still be found today. To
this day, various sweet sounds can still be produced by
playing on this stone, which is known as a bājana-śilā.

Nearby is Śāntanu Kuṇḍa, the place where Śāntanu
performed austerities. Gupta Gaṅgā, Naimiṣa Tīrtha,
Haridvāra Kuṇḍa, Avantikā Kuṇḍa, Matsya Kuṇḍa, Govinda
Kuṇḍa, Nṛṣiṁha Kuṇḍa and Prahlāda Kuṇḍa are also all
situated here. On the hill at Bhojana Thālī is the place
where Śrī Parasurāma performed austerities and
worshipped Bhagavān.

Deities of the Śrī Gauḍīya Sampradāya that are present
in Kāmyavana include Śrī Govindajī, Śrī Vṛndā-devī, Śrī
Gopināthajī and Śrī Madana-Mohanajī. Deities of the Śrī
Vallabha Sampradāya include Śrī Kṛṣṇa Candramājī,
Navanīta Priyājī and Śrī Madana-Mohanajī.



The gates of Kāmyavana

Kāmyavana has seven gates:


1) Ḍīg Gate — This gate is situated in the south-eastern
part of Kāmyavana. The road here leads to Ḍīg
(Dīrghapura) and Bharatpura.

2) Laṅkā Gate — This gate is the road to Setubandha
Kuṇḍa, which runs south from Kāmavana Gaon.

3) Āmera Gate — This gate is the road to Caraṇa Pahāḍī,

                              98
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

which runs south-west from Kāmavana Gaon.

4) Devī Gate — This gate is the road to Vaiṣṇavī-devī in
the Punjāb, which runs west from Kāmavana Gaon.

5) Delhi Gate — This gate lies in the north of
Kāmyavana, and the road to Delhi runs from here.

6) Rāmajī Gate — This gate is situated in the north-
eastern side of the village, and the road to Nandagaon
runs from here.

7) Mathurā Gate — This gate is situated in the east of
the village, and the road to Mathurā via Varsānā runs
from here.


Pastime-places Visited After Parikramā of Kāmyavana
Dhuleḍā Gaon

Every day, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the sakhās take the cows out to
graze, leaving the barns in the morning and returning in
the evening. At that time, dust kicked up by the feet of
lākhs of sakhās and by the hooves of countless cows
rises like a cloud filling the whole sky. By seeing this
dust (dhūla), the Brajabāsīs would at once know that
Kṛṣṇa and the sakhās were either going cow-grazing or
returning home. The village of Dhuleḍā, where the whole
sky would become full of this dust, is situated east of
Kāmyavana.


Ūdhā

When Uddhavajī was making his way to Nandagaon to
deliver Kṛṣṇa’s message from Mathurā, he stopped here to
rest for some time. This is why this place received the
name Ūdhā.



Āṭora

Śrī Kṛṣṇa happily played here with His prāṇapriya sakhās
like Dāma, Śrīdāma, Sudāma, Vasudāma, Stoka Kṛṣṇa,
Kokila, Bhṛṅga, Ujjvala, Arjuna, Subala, and
Madhumaṅgala throughout the eight praharas of the day.
The word āṭora means ‘to remain engaged in the pleasure
of playing games for all eight praharas of the day (āṭho
praharas)’. This place has therefore been named Āṭora.


Bajerā

This village, situated two miles east of Kāmyavana, is
the birthplace of the twin sisters Raṅgadevī and Sudevī,
who are two of the eight principal sakhīs (aṣṭa-sakhīs).
Their father is Raṅgasāra Gopa and their mother is
Karuṇā Gopī. Raṅga-devī’s husband is Vakrakhana Gopa,
and Sudevī’s husband is Vakrakhana Gopa’s younger
brother. Both sisters live in Jāvaṭa with Śrīmatī
Rādhikā and always serve Her.



                              99
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Sunaharā Gaon

This village lies four miles east of Kāmyavana and two
miles from Bajerā Gaon. Wearing a golden necklace,
Śrīmati Rādhikājī performed pūjā of Mahādevajī here.
Even to this day, this village is called Sunaharā or
Sunerā, meaning ‘golden necklace’. This village is also
called Sunaharā Gaon because it is established up on
Suvarṇācala Parvata.



Kadamba-khaṇḍī

Near Sunerā Gaon, to the south-west, is a vast kadamba-
khaṇḍī, or grove of kadamba trees. This is the location
of a rāsa-maṇḍala and of Ratna Kuṇḍa. In the month of
Bhādra on the Caturdaśī of the bright moon, rāsa-līlā is
enacted here according to būḍhī-līlā.

Nābhājī’s place of bhajana is also in the kadamba-
khaṇḍī. Nābhājī’s previous name was Catura-cintāmaṇi,
and he was born in Paya Gaon in Braja. From childhood,
he performed bhajana in this isolated grove of kadamba
trees, being detached from the material world. He was a
great ascetic. It is said that he would remain absorbed
in meditation on different pastimes. Once, while being
thus absorbed, he began to pick flowers for the service
of Priyā-Priyatama. He had very long matted hair, which
on this occasion became entangled in a thorny bush
(hīṅsa). He therefore remained standing in that same
position for three days. Kiśora and Kiśorī appeared
there and started disentangling his hair from the bush.

“Who are you?” Nābhājī asked.

Kiśorījī smiled, indicating with Her eyes that
Śyāmasundara Himself was disentangling his matted locks.
Then, suddenly, They both disappeared. Nābhājī’s life
had become successful. He rolled about on the ground,
weeping. He later came to Vṛndāvana to reside at Vihāra
Ghāṭa.


Ūñcāgaon

This village, situated three miles east of Sunerā Gaon
and one mile west of Varsānā, is the village of
Lalitājī. Braja-bhakti-vilāsa quotes Viṣṇu-rahasya,
which describes this place as follows:


sakhī-giri-parvato’sti tat-pārśve skhalinī śilā-
mandiraṁ, tatraiva lalitā-vivāha-sthalaṁ tat-parvatasya
dakṣiṇa-pārśve triveṇī-tīrthaḥ, tan-madhye rāsa-maṇḍalaṁ
tat-pārśve sakhī-kūpaṁ, tad-uttara-pārśve śilā-pṛṣṭha-
sthaḥ śrī-yugala-baladeva-mūrtiḥ hiṁsa-vṛkṣād adha-
sthaḥ.


“Nearby is Sakhīgiri Parvata, on which Phisalanī Śilā (a
stone slide), Lalitā-vivāha Maṇḍapa (the wedding
pavilion of Lalitā) and Sakhī Kūpa are situated. Also
nearby are Triveṇī Kūpa, a rāsa-maṇḍala, a deity of

                          100
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Dāūjī in a hīṅsa kuñja, Gopī Puṣkariṇī, Deha Kuṇḍa, and
other pastime-places.”



Sakhīgiri Parvata

Lalitā and other sakhīs, being attracted and enamoured
by Brajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s qualities as a nāyaka,
such as dhīra-lalita, performed rāsa-vilāsa and various
other pastimes with Him around and on top of this hill.3


Phisalanī Śilā

This stone slide is situated on Sakhīgiri Parvata, and
is adjacent to Lalitā-vivāha-sthala. Lalitā and other
sakhīs used to slide here. Even today, one can see the
mark of the slide on the hill, as well as the markings
of altā (red lac) from the gopīs’ feet. Nearby, on the
northern part of the hilltop, are some astonishing śilās
that appear multicoloured when the sun’s rays shine on
them. The gopīs would also paint wonderful pictures
(citra) on these śilās, and therefore these śilās are
called citra śilās. One who faithfully searches and
prays on this hilltop can sometimes even see the gopīs’
footprints there.


Lalitā-vivāha Maṇḍapa

This is Lalitā’s wedding pavilion. The gopīs performed
Lalitā’s wedding ceremony with seven-year-old Śrī Kṛṣṇa
here. One day, Lalitā and the sakhīs were sitting with
rasika Kṛṣṇa and talking sweetly with Him. Upon the
indication of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, Viśākhā and some other
sakhīs tied Śrī Śyāmasundara’s pītāmbara to the corner
of Śrī Lalitā’s veil. Raṅgadevī and other sakhīs started
to sing wedding songs while Tuṅgavidyā and others
uttered the wedding mantras. The remaining sakhīs
showered flowers on Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Lalitā. Becoming
somewhat suspicious, Lalitā quickly stood up and went to
run away, but she was unable to do so because of the
knot. The gopīs surrounded the couple and with great
celebration held a big festival. This place was named
Lalitā-vivāha-sthala after this līlā.


Gopī Puṣkariṇī

This sarovara is situated at Sakhīgiri Parvata. Lalitā
and other sakhīs used to play many kinds of water sports
(jal-krīḍā) while taking bath in this sarovara. This
place is rare to attain even for the demigods. Once,
while playing here, the sakhīs collected badrī fruit and
arranged them in the form of a mortar (okhal). This
place is still famous by the name Badrī-kā-okhal.


Sakhī Kūpa

This place lies near Sakhīgiri Parvata. Once, Lalitā and
the other sakhīs were eagerly awaiting Kṛṣṇa’s arrival.
Having remained restless for a long time, they now

                          101
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

became very thirsty. They therefore dug a well (kūpa)
with their own hands. Just as they began to drink its
water, Kṛṣṇa arrived, dressed in splendid attire. An
astonishing exchange then took place between Kṛṣṇa and
the gopīs, in which the gopīs’ mysterious words fully
satisfied Him. This well is called Sakhī Kūpa because it
was built by the sakhīs.


Triveṇī Kūpa

This well is situated some distance away on the right
side of the path from Sakhīgiri Parvata to Ūñcāgaon. Śrī
Dāūjī and Lalitājī daily bathed in Triveṇī Kūpa. Once,
in the month of Māgha (January to February), Lalitā and
the other sakhīs desired to take bath in Triveṇī
Saṅgama, which is the confluence of the Gaṅgā, Yamunā
and Sarasvatī Rivers. Śrī Kṛṣṇa therefore created this
well for them with the tip of His flute, right before
their eyes. Merely by His remembering them, the holy
waters of Triveṇī Saṅgama appeared in the well, and
within a second the gopīs could take their bath. A
person easily attains the fruit of taking bath in
Trivenī even by putting the dust surrounding the well on
his head, what to speak of actually bathing in the water
of this well.


Dāūjī Mandira

A large deity of Dāūjī resides nearby, to the east of
Triveṇī Kūpa, in the middle of dense thorny hīṅsa
bushes. This mandira was built by Rājā Ṭoḍaramala on the
order of Śrī Nārāyaṇa Bhaṭṭajī.

Śrī Nārāyaṇa Bhaṭṭajī was a Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava ācārya. He
took birth in the state of Madhurāpattana in South
India. His father, Śrī Bhaṭṭajī of the Bhaṭṭabhāskara
Tailaṅga brāhmaṇa-paramparā of that place, was famous
for his erudition. Śrī Nārāyaṇa Bhaṭṭajī became detached
from the material world at the age of fourteen and came
to Braja around saṁvat 1602 (1546 A.D.). He was
especially dedicated to Śrīmatī Rādhikā. It is well
known that the present śrī vigraha in the Śrījī Mandira
in Varsānā manifested as a result of the special prayers
of Śrī Nārāyaṇa Bhaṭṭajī. These deities manifested on
the second day of the bright moon in the month of Āṣāḍha
(July) in saṁvat 1626 (1570 A.D.).

Śrī Nārāyaṇa Bhaṭṭajī had undivided niṣṭhā in Braja. In
his famous work, Braja-bhakti-vilāsa, he describes all
the pastime-places of Kṛṣṇa in Braja in great detail.
Śrī Nārāyaṇa Bhaṭṭa inaugurated the enactment of rāsa-
līlā, which is still being carried out today. The
pujārīs and brāhmaṇas of Śrījī Mandira, Varsānā, take
initiation from the descendants of Nārāyaṇa Bhaṭṭa
Gosvāmī. Bhaṭṭajī’s main engagement was serving the
Dāūjī Mandira in Ūñcāgaon.


Lalitā-sthala (Aṭorā Parvata)

This hill is situated east of Deha Kuṇḍa, and adjacent
to and west of the Dāūjī Mandira. Ūñcāgaon is

                          102
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

established on this hill, and there one will find the
balcony (aṭārī) of Lalitājī and other places of her
childhood pastimes.

Lalitā Sakhī’s parents are Viśobha Gopa and Śāradī Gopī.
She was married in Jāvaṭa; her husband is Bhairoṅ Gopa.
Lalitājī is the foremost of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s aṣṭa-
sakhīs and the main leader of Her three groups of
sakhīs, dāsīs and dūtīs.4 Lalitājī is also known as
Anurādhā because she possesses all the bhāvas and
qualities of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Her nature is vāmā
prakharā (leftist and harsh) and she is expert in all
varieties of sevā to Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, such as dressing,
decorating, performing magic, making the bed, and
arranging meetings between Them. Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrīmatī
Rādhā Themselves cannot overrule her.


Deha Kuṇḍa

This kuṇḍa is situated to the west just below Lalitā’s
birthplace. Once, Śrī Rādhā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa together with
the sakhīs were taking bath here during a festival. As
they were dressing themselves after bathing, a poor
brāhmaṇa came there and in a piteous voice addressed Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, “I have a daughter of marriageable age, but due
to lack of money, I cannot offer her to a suitable
husband. Therefore, please give me some wealth.”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa thought, “Rādhā is My only and entire wealth.
But for Her, I possess nothing else of value.” So He
told the brāhmaṇa, “I want to give you My entire
fortune, not just a little money.” He then pointed
towards Śrī Rādhājī and said, “She is My entire property
and wealth. Please accept Her.”

When the poor brāhmaṇa heard this, he began to beat his
head in sadness. He said, “He Vrajeśanandana! I could
not even arrange a suitable husband for my one daughter;
how will I ever be able to marry off two? This is
disastrous for me. What should I do now?” The brāhmaṇa
only wanted gold. Understanding this, Śrī Kṛṣṇa put
Priyājī on one side of a scale and Her weight in gold on
the other. He then gave all this gold to the brāhmaṇa.
Śrīmatījī also became pleased with this arrangement,
which relieved Her of much trouble. The brāhmaṇa was
given an abundance of gold and very happily returned to
his home, where he completed the marriage of his
daughter with great celebration.

It is also said that once a wealthy person was suffering
severely from leprosy. He came here, took bath in this
kuṇḍa, and donated ten karṣa (160 grams) of gold to
qualified brāhmaṇas. After some time, his disease left
him.


Veṇīśaṅkara Mahādeva

On the bank of Deha Kuṇḍa is Veṇīśaṅkara Mahādeva, whom
the gopīs installed with their own hands. He who bathes
in this kuṇḍa with faith and takes darśana of
Veṇīśaṅkara Mahādeva gets the same result as that of
taking bath in the Triveṇī Saṅgama. All his problems are

                          103
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                       5/5/2017

eliminated and he attains pure bhakti for Kṛṣṇa.




Chapter 9

Varsānā

(Vṛṣabhānupura)


Varsānā is the pastime-place of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beloved
Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Lying at the heart of this village is a
multitude of the Divine Couple’s sweet and secret
amorous pastimes (sarasa-keli), together with Their
bhāvas and desires. The Vaiṣṇava community reveres
Varsānā. This venerable land with sarovaras, kuṇḍas,
gardens, and forests — like Gahvaravana, Sāṅkarī Khor
and other pastime-places — reminds one of Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa’s various specific līlās. In Braja, the grass,
small shrubs, creepers, trees, animals, birds, insects,
snakes and so forth are all composed of sac-cid-ānanda.
They assist Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in Their līlās and are very
dear to Them. It is said in śāstra that even siddha
mahā-puruṣas like Brahmā and Śaṅkara repeatedly pray to
attain a birth like theirs so that they too may be able
to serve Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

For instance, Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī says in Śrī
Vraja-vilāsa-stava (verse 102):


yat kiñcit tṛṇa-gulma-kīkaṭa-mukhaṁ goṣṭhe samasta hi
tat

sarvānandamaya mukunda-dayitaṁ līlānukūlam param

śāstrair eva muhur muhuḥ sphuṭam idaṁ niṣṭaṅkitaṁ
yāñcayā

brahmāder api sa-spṛhena tad idaṁ mayā vandyate


“All the grass, shrubs, insects and other creatures
found in Braja are very dear to He who is the very
embodiment of all transcendental bliss, Śrī Mukunda, and
they assist in His pastimes. All the scriptures have
repeatedly established this fact, and devotees ranging
from Brahmā to Uddhava have expressed a desire to take
birth in Braja amongst these species. For these reasons,
I worship all the creatures who reside in Braja.”

Varsānā’s original name is Vṛṣabhānupura. Vṛṣabhānu
Mahārāja, the father of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, lived here with
his family. Varsānā is situated fourteen miles west of
Govardhana and six miles east of Kāmyavana. According to
the Varāha and Padma Purāṇas, Brahmā pleased Śrī Hari at
the end of Satya-yuga by performing arduous worship.
Brahmā then asked for the following boon: “Please
perform Your sweet pastimes with the braja-gopīs on top
of me and allow me to take darśana of these līlās.
Please make me successful, especially in the rainy

                          104
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

season by performing līlās like jhūlana (swing pastimes)
and in spring by performing līlās like phāga (holī).” 1

Pleased with Brahmā, Śrī Hari instructed him, “Go to
Vṛṣabhānupura and take the form of a hill there. In that
form you will be able to take darśana of all Our sweet
pastimes.” 2 And so it happened that Brahmā assumed the
form of a hill at this place in Braja and fulfilled his
cherished desire.


Pastime-places in the Area of Varsānā

The parikramā of Varsānā is four miles long. Braja-
bhakti-vilāsa, quoting Padma Purāṇa, describes the
characteristics of Vṛṣabhānupura as follows:


viṣṇu-brahma-nāmānau parvatau dvau parasparau. dakṣiṇa-
pārśve brahma-nāma-parvataḥ vāma-pārśve viṣṇu-nāma-
parvataḥ. brahma-parvatopari śrī-rādhā-kṛṣṇamandiraṁ,
śrī-rādhā-kṛṣṇa-darśanaṁ, tad-adho-bhāge śrī-vṛṣabhānu-
gopa-mandiraṁ, vṛṣabhānu-kīrti-śrīdāmā-darśanaṁ, tat-
pārśve lalitā-śakhināṁ priyā-sahitānāṁ mandiraṁ rādhādi-
nava-sakhīnāṁ darśanam. brahma-parvatopari dāna-
mandiraṁ, hiṇḍola-sthalaṁ, mayūrakuṭī-sthalaṁ, viṣṇu-
brahma-nāmnor-ubhayoḥ sāṅkarī khori-sthalaṁ. brahma-
parvatopari śrī-rādhā-mandiram agre līlā-nṛtya-maṇḍalam.
viṣṇu-parvatopari-sthaṁ śrī-kṛṣṇāmandiram agre līlā-
nṛtya-mandiram, tat-pārśve vilāsa-mandiraṁ tat-pārśve
gahvarvanaṁ tad-adhaḥsthale rāsa-maṇḍalaṁ, rādhā-
sarovari dohanī-kuṇḍa, tat-samīpe citralekhyayā kṛta-
mayūra-saraḥ.


“According to the Padma Purāṇa, two hills face each
other here — one is Viṣṇu and the other is Brahma. Viṣṇu
Parvata is on the left and Brahma Parvata is on the
right. On top of Brahma Parvata is a mandira of Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. Close by to the north, on the lower side of
this hill, is the palace of Mahārāja Vṛṣabhānu, where
one can have darśana of Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja, Śrīmatī
Kīrtidā Mahārānī, Śrīdāma and Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Nearby is
a temple of Śrī Lalitā, in which one can have darśana of
Rādhikā along with nine sakhīs.

“Also on top of Brahma Parvata are Dāna Mandira, the
place of a swing (hiṇḍolā), Mayūra Kuṭī, a rāsa-maṇḍala,
and a temple of Śrīmatī Rādhājī. Further on between the
two hills is Sāṅkarī Khor. Near Sāṅkarī Khor is Vilāsa
Mandira, and next to Vilāsa Mandira is Gahvaravana.
Within Gahvaravana are Rādhā Sarovara and a rāsa-
maṇḍala, and nearby is Dohanī Kuṇḍa. Very close to this
kuṇḍa is Mayūra Sarovara, which was constructed by
Citralekhā.” Bhānu Sarovara is also nearby, and on its
bank is Vrajeśvara, a mūrti of Mahārudra. On its left
side is Kīrti Sarovara.

There are four sarovaras around Varsānā: (1) Vṛṣabhānu
Kuṇḍa in the east, (2) Kirtidā Kuṇḍa in the north-east,
(3) Vihāra Kuṇḍa (later named Tilaka Kuṇḍa) in the
south-west, and (4) Dohanī Kuṇḍa in the south, south-
west of the village of Ciksaulī.


                          105
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Sāṅkarī Khor lies north of Ciksaulī, and on Viṣṇu
Parvata, east of Sāṅkarī Khor, is Vilāsa Gaṛh. This is
the location of a rāsa-maṇḍala. Near Vilāsa Mandira is
where Rādhikā, as a child, played with the sand,
building palaces and so on. West of Sāṅkarī Khor, on top
of the mountain, is Dāna Gaṛh; and south-west of Sāṅkarī
Khor and west of the village of Ciksaulī are Gahvaravana
and Gahvara Kuṇḍa. Mayūra Kuṭī is to the right when
entering Gahvaravana. On the top of the hill, south-west
of Gahvaravana, are Māna Gaṛh and Māna Mandira; and
below and nearby is the village of Mānapurā. North of
Māna Gaṛh is the mandira of the Mahārāja of Jaipura, and
north of that mandira is Śrījī Mandira.

Just below Śrījī Mandira, still on the hill, one comes
to the mandira of Brahmājī and the palace of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā’s paternal grandfather, Mahībhānu. Below that
lies the village of Varsānā. West of Varsānā is Muktā
Kuṇḍa, or Ratna Kuṇḍa.

Among the places listed above, we will describe those
where prominent līlās took place.


Vṛṣabhānu Kuṇḍa

This kuṇḍa is situated east of the village of Varsānā.
Mahārāja Vṛṣabhānu used to take his bath in this kuṇḍa
every morning. He would also perform āhnika and other
morning duties here. It has been described that in a
previous kalpa Mahārāja Vṛṣabhānu found Rādhikājī in
this kuṇḍa while bathing. She was a newly-born baby girl
playing on a lotus flower in the water.

This charming sarovara is surrounded on all sides by
jiyala trees. Sometimes, Śrīmatī Rādhikā would bathe
here and enjoy water sports (jal-krīḍā) together with
Her sakhīs. Rasika Brajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa would
also bathe here, but at another ghāṭa. He would then
dive under the water, catch hold of the gopīs’ feet, and
again emerge on His side of the kuṇḍa. Sometimes,
Nandanandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa would also sport with these
gopīs, playing hide and seek. This kuṇḍa is named after
Mahārāja Vṛṣabhānu.


Sāṅkarī Khor

This narrow passage-way lies between Brahma Parvata and
Viṣṇu Parvata, and both gopas and gopīs would make their
way along it. After milking the cows, the gopas would
carry the milk on kāṁvars. A kāṁvar is a bamboo stick
with ropes attached to each end for carrying loads. They
used this pathway to cross from one side of the hills to
the other. Raṅgīle means ‘showy’, ‘merry’ or ‘jovial’.
Raṅgīle Kṛṣṇa would plunder the milk, yoghurt and butter
of the raṅgīlī gopīs here. Every year in the month of
Bhādra on Śuklā Trayodaśī (the thirteenth day of the
bright moon), būḍhī-līlā is enacted here, as inaugurated
by Śrī Nārāyaṇa Bhaṭṭa.

At this dāna-ghāṭī, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His gopa friends would
become tax collectors and demand milk, yoghurt and
butter from the gopīs. When the gopīs refused to give

                          106
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

any tax, Kṛṣṇa would forcibly plunder and relish their
milk products.

The gopīs, being tired of these daily encounters,
decided one day to retaliate strongly. They decided that
on a chosen day they would all hide in the caves and
dense kuñjas on the hill on both sides of the narrow
pathway. A few gopīs would then cross Sāṅkarī Khor
carrying pots of milk, yoghurt and butter on their
heads. The plan was that the moment Kṛṣṇa and His sakhās
would stop them and try to plunder their load, the gopīs
would call out to their friends hiding nearby, who would
at once descend from their hideouts. Then, under the
leadership of Lalitā, they would teach Kṛṣṇa and His
sakhās a good lesson.

And so it happened that the next day thousands and
thousands of gopīs divided into groups and hid
themselves in the dense kuñjas and large caves around
Sāṅkarī Khor. Then, as usual, a few gopīs placed pots of
milk and yoghurt on their heads and made their way
towards Sāṅkarī Khor. Kṛṣṇa, Madhumaṅgala and the other
sakhās obstructed their path and forcibly began to
plunder their milk and yoghurt. At once, these gopīs
signalled the gopīs who were hiding, and a wonderful
līlā took place. Five to ten gopīs forcefully caught
hold of Kṛṣṇa. Another five to ten caught hold of
Madhumaṅgala, and further groups captured Subala,
Arjuna, Lavaṅga and the other sakhās. They slapped their
cheeks till they were swollen. They then tied their
śikhās to the branches of the trees and asked them,
“What pleasure is there in plundering our yoghurt? Will
you ever do it again?” Madhumaṅgala folded his hands and
prayed at the feet of Lalitā. “Please spare me. I was
very hungry. I am a simple brāhmaṇa boy who fell under
the influence of that fickle Kṛṣṇa. I shall never behave
like this again.” The gopīs thus taught the sakhās a
lesson.

Śrīmatī Rādhikā, Viśākhā and some other gopīs had
captured Kṛṣṇa. They slapped His cheeks a few times and
then forcibly dressed Him like a woman with a blouse and
lahaṅgā (skirt). They even put sindūra in the parting of
His hair, bangles on His arms, anklets on His feet, and
so on. They covered half His face with a veil, placed a
pot of yoghurt on His head and began to make fun of Him
by demanding tax on the yoghurt. From the top of the
hill, Lalitā Sakhī aimed a stone at the pot of yoghurt
on Kṛṣṇa’s head, breaking it and drenching His whole
body. All the sakhīs began to laugh and clap, and Śyāma
felt very ashamed. “Will You dare to demand tax on our
yoghurt ever again?” they asked. “Hold your ears and
vow, ‘From today, I will never try to tax the gopīs’
yoghurt.’” They forced Kṛṣṇa to repeat this.

To this day, this līlā is enacted here annually on the
occasion of Rādhāṣṭamī, the appearance day of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, in the dramatic tradition of būḍhī-līlā.


Dāna Gaṛh

This beautiful place is on top of Brahmācala Parvata
(Brahma Parvata). One day, rasika Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Subala

                          107
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Sakhā were sitting here as tax collectors, eagerly
awaiting the arrival of Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Her friends,
who were to pass this way carrying various articles of
worship on the pretext of going to perform Sūrya-pūja.
Upon seeing Her, Śrī Kṛṣṇa obstructed Her path and
rebuked Her, saying, “Who are You? And where are You
going?”

Śrīmatī Rādhikā answered, “Don’t You know who we are?”
and She fearlessly continued forward.

Kṛṣṇa and Subala Sakhā again obstructed Her way. Kṛṣṇa
said, “Don’t You know that I have been appointed by the
king of this state to collect taxes here? You cannot
pass without paying tax. Every day, You carelessly strut
through here carrying a variety of valuable items, and
You never pay tax. Halt! Pay the tax and then You may
pass.”

Viśākhā then spoke in a stern voice: “This is Rādhikā’s
kingdom. Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Śrīmatī Rādhikā is Vṛndā-
vaneśvarī, not anyone else. How have You become the tax
collector here without receiving Her permission? Your
offence is inexcusable. You will suffer a punishment for
this.”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa replied, “Don’t talk so impudently. Kandarpa
Deva (Cupid) is the king of this place. Every day you
come and go through here, secretly carrying various
expensive items, but you never pay any tax. This has
angered Mahārāja Kandarpa, who has sent Me here. If you
refuse to pay tax, then I will arrest you all and bring
you before the king. You will have to suffer whatever
punishment he hands down to you.”

Hearing Kṛṣṇa’s words, Viśākhā replied, “What can Your
king do? Our queen is Vṛndāvaneśvarī, the queen of
Vṛndā-vana. In Her presence we fear no one. We are well
acquaint-ed with the prowess of Your king, whose pride
is shattered to pieces by the arrow-like sidelong
glances of Śrīmatī Rādhikā.” Having said this, all the
sakhīs moved forward, keeping Śrīmatī Rādhikā up front.

Kṛṣṇa stepped forward, stood in the middle of the narrow
path known as Sāṅkarī Khor. “O impertinent women of
Braja! You fearlessly cross this place daily, hiding
various kinds of jewels. Today, without fail, you must
pay the tax on these jewels.”

After such joking words and much laughter, Kiśora-Kiśorī
enjoyed various amorous pastimes (krīḍā-vilāsa) in a
solitary keli-kuñja, and all the sakhīs became filled
with ānanda. The temple here is called Dāna Mandira.3


Māna Gaṛh

Māna Gaṛh is a very attractive place on top of
Brahmācala Parvata. Śrīmatī Rādhikā displayed māna here,
but rasika Kṛṣṇa very skilfully broke it.

One day, Śrī Kṛṣṇa sent a message to Śrīmatī Rādhikā
through Subala, who is one of His priyanarma sakhās, and
through Vṛndā-devī that They should meet at a certain

                          108
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

time. Kṛṣṇa was on His way when He suddenly met Padmā,
Candrāvalī’s friend. Padmā described Śrīmatī
Candrāvalī’s state of separation and repeatedly
requested Him to meet with her. Śrī Kṛṣṇa could not
ignore her plea, and He went to Candrāvalī’s kuñja for
what He intended to be a short time. However, He became
so absorbed in sweet talks and playful pastimes with
Candrāvalī that He forgot everything else, and the time
for the arranged meeting with Śrīmatī Rādhikā elapsed.
Meanwhile, one of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s trained sārīs
arrived on a tree in the same kuñja. The sārī returned
to Śrīmatī Rādhikā and told Her the details of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
and Candrāvalī’s sweet conversations (rasālapa) and
playful pastimes (vilāsa). Rādhikā became deeply
distressed and went into a māna that was very difficult
to break. Within Her heart, She firmly resolved to have
no need for such an insolent Kṛṣṇa; so when Śrī Kṛṣṇa
finally arrived, long after the appointed meeting time,
Śrīmātijī turned Her face away from Him.

Seeing Her unwavering māna, Śrī Kṛṣṇa tried to appease
Her through all kinds of means and tricks, but Her māna
would not break. Becoming hopeless and feeling sad,
Kṛṣṇa left that place. On the road He met Viśākhā, who
advised Him to disguise Himself as a new sakhī playing a
vīṇa. He went to Śrīmatī Rādhikā together with Viśākhā,
who introduced this new sakhī as Śyāmā Sakhī. Viśākhā
profusely praised Śyāma Sakhī’s ability to play the
vīṇa, sing and perform many other skills. Śrīmatī
Rādhikā seated this new sakhī next to Her with great
honour and respect. Upon hearing Her exceptional
singing, She became filled with ānanda and embraced Her.
Śrīmatī Rādhikā recognised Her beloved merely by His
touch; and as soon as She had done so, Her māna was
broken. Surrounded by Her friends, She now became
absorbed in līlā-vilāsa with Her prāṇa-priyatama.4

In Māna Gaṛh, one can also have darśana of Māna Mandira,
a jhūlā (swing), a rāsa-maṇḍala, and Ratnākara Sarovara.
Just near Māna Gaṛh to the south is the village of
Mānapurā, which reminds one of all these līlās.


Mayūra Kūṭī

This place is situated on the top of Brahmācala Parvata.
Here, one can have darśana of the rāsa-maṇḍala where
Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Kṛṣṇa danced in the form of a
peacock and peahen.

Once, Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Kṛṣṇa came to this place
together with the sakhīs. Upon seeing them, the peacocks
became overjoyed with ecstasy and began to dance. A
light shower of rain fell from the cloud-filled sky.
Nature had decorated herself with sixteen kinds of
śṛṅgāras (decorations) and thirty-two ābharaṇas
(ornaments), as if she was a beautiful and charming
young woman. Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa could not check Their
feelings. Taking the form of a peacock and peahen, They
danced in an astonishing way along with the circle of
peacocks and peahens. All the sakhīs were astounded to
see Their skilful dancing. They began to sing different
kinds of rāgas, like malhāra, which increased Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa’s ānanda.5

                          109
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                      5/5/2017



Vilāsa Gaṛh

This place is situated on Viṣṇu Parvata. Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa
performed many playful pastimes (krīḍā-vilāsa) here.
Nearby is where Śrī Rādhā used to play in the dust
together with Her sakhīs.

One day, Kumārī Rādhikā was playing in the dust with Her
sakhīs when mischievous Kṛṣṇa suddenly arrived. The
sakhīs forbade Him to come inside the kuñja, but why
would Śrī Kṛṣṇa obey them? He entered by force. At that
moment, a dust-storm fell upon them by the wishes of the
devas, and the entire sky became covered with dust.
Nothing could be seen anywhere, and the sakhīs fearfully
covered their eyes with their hands. Kṛṣṇa took this
opportunity to embrace Kiśorī Rādhikā and kiss Her face.
This līlā took place at the time of vayaḥ sandhi, or the
period between childhood and youth. Today, Vilāsa
Mandira is situated where this līlā took place.

The Ādi Varāha Purāṇa states:


vilāsa rūpiṇe tubhyaṁ / namaḥ kṛṣṇāya te namaḥ

sakhīvarga sukhāptāya / krīḍā-vimala darśine


“I offer my obeisances to Śrī Kṛṣṇa in the form of He
who plays lovely pastimes. He performs these pastimes
simply to give pleasure to the sakhīs.”


Ciksaulī

This village is situated below Brahmācal Parvata and
between Saṅkarī Khor and Gahvaravana. It is the
birthplace of Citrā Sakhī, one of the aṣṭa-sakhīs. Citrā
Sakhī’s parents were Catura Gopa and Carcitā Gopī. She
was married to Pīṭhara Gopa in Jāvaṭa. She is very
expert at decorating and dressing Śrīmatī Rādhikā in a
variety of wonderful dresses and ornaments. She is also
skilled in many arts, such as painting and understanding
the language of animals and birds.

Once, Vṛṣabhānu Kumārī Rādhikā was playing here with Her
girlfriends when She heard the very sweet and alluring
sound of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s flute (muralī) in the distance. She
became so enchanted by that sound that She offered Her
mind, body and everything to the person playing this
sweet muralī, and became desirous to meet Him. Rādhikā
then saw an amazingly beautiful painting of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
that Citrā Sakhī had made. She forgot all else and
offered Her everything to this astonishingly beautiful
person. At this time, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the sakhās were
leaving to herd the cows. Upon seeing His supremely
heart-stealing tribhaṅga-lalita form, Rādhā could not
control Her feelings and offered Herself to this very
beautiful young man. Śrī Kṛṣṇa went far into the
distance to graze His cows.

Now in a state of great restlessness, Śrīmatījī began to

                          110
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

relate what was on Her mind to Her sakhīs. She told
Lalitā, “O sakhī! I don’t want to remain alive for a
moment longer. Honourable women dedicate their hearts to
one man only. When a young girl is engaged to someone,
she considers him to be her husband and thinks of no one
else. But today, I have become attached to three men —
the flute player, the young man in Citrā’s painting, and
the beautiful young man taking the cows out to graze. My
ārya-dharma (righteous conduct) has been destroyed. What
is the use of My remaining alive now?”

Hearing this, Śrī Lalitā burst into peels of laughter
and said, “Arī mugdhe! (O bewildered one!) There is no
need for You to die. These three are not different
people; they are one and the same person. The man
playing the sweet flute is none other than Nandanandana
Śrī Kṛṣṇa. He is also the one in the painting and the
one who went cowherding, so what need is there for You
to give up Your life?”


Gahvaravana

Gahvara means ‘deep’, ‘dense’, ‘inaccessible’ and
‘secret’. True to its name, this place is a dense forest
thick with trees, creepers, keli-kuñjas, and Priyā-
Priyatama’s sweet and intimate pastimes. It is shaped
like a conch. Situated here is the baiṭhaka of
Vallabhācārya, where he recited Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, as
well as Rādhā Sarovara and a rāsa-maṇḍala. One can also
see the places of bhajana of many bhaktas here.6

One famous devotee, Nāgarī Dāsa, has described the līlās
of this place in his songs. For instance, the following
līlā took place here one day, when Śrī Kṛṣṇa was out
grazing the cows with His sakhās:


caksaulīke canā curāye

gārī de daurī rakhvārin gvārin sahit gupāl bhagaye

hare būṭ dābe baglin meiṁ svās bhare van gahvar āye

kahat āture bol lol dṛg haṁsat-haṁsat sab baran caḍhāye

hare cabāt, koū horā kari, van kī līlā lāl lubhāye

nāgariyā baiṭhī chaki hārī chīl-chīl nandalālahiṁ khvāye


“Nearby in a field, green chickpea plants were growing.
Upon seeing them, Śrī Kṛṣṇa together with His sakhās
broke off some plants. The woman taking care of the
field came to know of this and ran to catch them, but
Kanhaiyā was too swift. Keeping the plants under His
arm, He ran very fast through crooked paths and finally
came to a stop in Gahvaravana, where He roasted the
green chickpeas and ate them with His sakhās. While they
were laughing and enjoying eating roasted chickpeas, the
cowherd woman arrived at that spot, but upon seeing the
splendour of Kṛṣṇa’s beauty, she forgot the incident and
her anger was pacified. Due to absorption in vātsalya-
bhāva, she began shelling the peas and personally fed

                          111
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                      5/5/2017

Kanhaiyā.”


Kṛṣṇa Kuṇḍa

This kuṇḍa is also called Gahvara Kuṇḍa. Canopied by
creepers on all sides and covered by thick trees, this
pond is the very beauty of Gahvaravana. Nearby are
beautiful kuñjas. Vaiṣṇavas perform parikramā of these
kuñjas with deep faith and roll in the dust there. This
kuṇḍa holds many memories of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s various
amourous exchanges (līlā-vilāsa).


Dohanī Kuṇḍa

This kuṇḍa is situated south of Gahvaravana and south-
west of the village of Ciksaulī. The cows were milked
here at the time of Kṛṣṇa’s prakaṭa-līlā. This was the
gośālā of the many lākhs of cows belonging to Vṛṣabhānu
Mahārāja.

One day, Kiśorī Rādhikā was watching the cows being
milked, and She too desired to milk them. Taking a clay
pot, She began to milk a cow. Mischievous Kṛṣṇa arrived
at that spot and said, “Sakhī! Don’t You even know how
to milk a cow? Come, I’ll teach You.” He sat down next
to Her.

Rādhikā said, “O Mohana! Teach Me!” and She placed
Herself in front of Him.

“All right. You milk from two udders and I’ll milk from
the other two, and keep looking at Me.” Laughingly,
Kṛṣṇa started to milk. Suddenly, He aimed a jet of milk
at Rādhā’s face, covering Her in milk. He and the other
sakhīs started laughing. This charming līlā has been
described in the following Brajabhāṣā poem:


āmeṁ sāmeṁ baiṭh doū dohat karat ṭhaṭhor

dūdh dhār mukh par paḍat dṛg bhaye candr cakor


Ḍabharāro

After taking darśana of Śrīmatī Rādhikā here, Kṛṣṇa’s
eyes brimmed with tears. The word ḍabharāro means ‘full
of tears’, and this village therefore became known by
that name. Ḍabharāro is situated two miles south of
Varsānā.


Rasolī

One and a half miles south-west of Ḍabharāro is Rasolī,
where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa performed the famous rāsa along
with the gopīs. This is the birthplace of Tungavidyā
Sakhī. Tungavidyā’s father is Puṣkara Gopa, her mother
is Medhā Gopī, and her husband is Vāliśa. She is one of
the aṣṭa-sakhīs, and is fully expert in dancing,
singing, playing instrumental music, astrology, writing
poetry, cooking, and various other arts. Tungavidyā

                          112
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Sakhī is also skilled in understanding the language of
birds and animals and in arranging for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s
meeting.


Muktā Kuṇḍa

Here Śrīmatī Rādhikā, in a controversy with Kṛṣṇa,
cultivated a field in which pearls grew in abundance.
This pastime has been narrated in detail by Śrīpāda
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī in his book Muktā-carita.


Pīlī Pokhara

Surrounding this kuṇḍa are pīlu trees, which produce
fruits in abundance. On the pretext of collecting pīlu
fruits, Śrīmatī Rādhikā would come here to perform
varieties of krīḍā-vilāsa. Śrī Kṛṣṇa would also come
here from Nandagaon and enact many līlās with Śrīmatījī.
Once, Kīrtikā-kumārī Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Her sakhīs went
to Nandagaon to see Yaśodā Maiyā. Charmed by Śrīmatī
Rādhikā’s beauty and qualities, Yaśodā Maiyā desired in
her heart to marry Rādhikā to her son Kṛṣṇa and thus
have Her as her daughter-in-law. So great was her desire
that she painted Kiśorī Rādhā’s hands yellow. Kiśorī’s
heart became very happy but, as She returned to Her
father’s house in Varsānā, She became quite embarrassed.
She washed and scrubbed Her hands in this pond, and the
pond’s water turned yellow. This pond is therefore
called Pīrī Pokhara or Pīlī Pokhara, the yellow pond. It
is also called Piyāla Kuṇḍa because piyāla trees
surround it.


Kīrtidā Kuṇḍa

This kuṇḍa is situated near Vṛṣabhānu Kuṇḍa, in the
north-east. Śrī Rādhikā’s mother, Śrī Kīrtidā, used to
take bath here daily. This kuṇḍa is also famous by the
name Kīrti Sarovara.7


Vrajeśvara Mahādeva

Near Bhānu Sarovara is a mūrti of devādhideva Mahādeva,
which was installed by Vṛṣabhānu Bābā and the other
gopas to fulfil their desires. The Brajabāsīs worship
him for their welfare. According to hearsay, some
Brajabāsīs once desired to remove this mūrti from here
and take him to a better place. As they dug, the form of
Mahādeva increased in depth, and they were unable to
reach the deity’s base. In the end, they gave up the
idea of removing this deity, understanding that this was
the appropriate place for him, and begged Mahādeva for
forgiveness.


Pastime-places Visited After Parikramā of Varsānā Prema
Sarovara

This kuṇḍa is situated on the road to Nandagaon, one
mile from Varsānā. It is shaped like a boat and is so
beautifully decorated on all sides with lush kadamba

                          113
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

trees that it seems prema itself has manifested as a
kuṇḍa. This charming place, which attracts the hearts of
the devotees, is where Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa
enjoy together. It is also where prema vaicittya
manifested in Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

Once, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, surrounded by Lalitā and the
other sakhīs, were immersed in various kinds of loving
pastimes (premamaya līlā-vilāsa) when a bumblebee
hovered around the beautiful lotus face of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā. Thinking Her face to be a lotus flower, the bee
wanted to sit there and drink its nectar; it therefore
continued to hover around Her face. Śrīmatījī became
afraid and covered Her face with Her palms. She also
tried to chase the bee away, but to no avail.
Madhumaṅgala saw Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s distress and chased
the bumble bee far away with his stick. Upon his return,
he announced, “I have chased madhusūdana far away from
here. He has gone and will not return.” When Śrīmatī
Rādhikā heard Madhumaṅgala’s words, She at once thought
that Madhusūdana Kṛṣṇa had gone away and had left Her,
although She was sitting directly in Kṛṣṇa’s lap. She
began to lament, deeply afflicted by separation from
Him. She could not, at that instant, understand that
madhusūdana also means ‘bumblebee’. She wept and
repeatedly cried out, “Hā Prāṇanātha! Where have You
gone? Hā Prāṇanātha! Where have You gone?”

Upon seeing this amazing bhāva, called prema vaicittya,
in His beloved Rādhikā, Kṛṣṇa also forgot that She was
sitting on His lap. He too wept and cried, “Hā Priye!”
The tears that flowed from Their eyes and the
perspiration that poured from Their bodies created this
pond, and Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa both fainted. When the sakhīs
saw Them in this state, they too became senseless.
Śrīmatī’s sārikā then began to loudly chant Śrī Rādhā’s
name, and the śuka began to loudly chant Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
name. As Their names entered Their ears, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa
regained external consciousness and gazed upon each
other with great yearning. Gradually, the sakhīs also
regained consciousness and in unlimited bliss began to
call out, Jaya! Jaya! The poet Śrī Mādhurījī describes
this līlā in a very charming way.

After this incident, Śrī Kṛṣṇa thought to Himself,
“Although I remain close by My beloved Śrīmatī Rādhikā,
I am unable to pacify the suffering She experiences in
separation. The heat of impending separation constantly
scorches Her, and I see no means to console Her. When I
am far away from Her, She constantly thinks of Me out of
separation. She becomes so absorbed in bhāva that She
laughingly talks to tamala trees, thinking them to be
Me, and plays with Her sakhīs. Sometimes She also
displays māna. In contrast, when I am nearby, a feeling
of separation from Me overcomes Her, and She becomes
distressed and cries. In this condition, I am unable to
console Her, even when I am right beside Her.

“Thus, Śrī Rādhā can be consoled only by My being far
away from Her. In this state of separation, Her fire of
separation can be somewhat pacified upon seeing My
sphūrti or beholding objects like the tamala tree that
possess a lustre similar to My own. This is because She
actually considers them to be Her Priyatama.” Thinking

                          114
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

in this way, Kṛṣṇa secretly decided to leave for a
distant place. This is the main reason why He left
Vṛndāvana to go to Mathurā and Dvārakā.

The bhāva that Śrīmatī Rādhikā displays here is the
topmost mādana bhāva, and is found only in Her. It does
not manifest even in Lalitā and the other sakhīs. In
this mādana bhāva, feelings of both vipralambha
(separation) and saṁbhoga (meeting), as well as all
other mutually opposed bhāvas, are present
simultaneously in an astonishing way.

Prema Sarovara is a manifestation of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s
bhāvas, as the following Brajabhāṣa poem explains:


prem sarovar prem kī bharī rahe din rain

jaṅh jaṅh pyārī pag dharat śyām dharat taṅh nain


“Day and night, Prema Sarovara is always filled with
prema. Pyārī, or Śrīmatī Rādhikā, keeps Her lotus feet
there, and Śyāma desires to keep those lotus feet in the
vision of His eyes. (In other words, Śyāma worships this
sarovara because Śrīmatī has placed Her feet in its
waters.)”

There is no doubt that by taking bath in this sarovara,
one attains prema for Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala. Here one can
take darśana of Lalitā-Mohanajī, a rāsa-maṇḍala, jhūlā-
sthala (the place of a swing), Prema-Vihārījī Mandira,
and the baiṭhakas of Śrī Vallabhācārya and Śrī
Viṭṭhalanātha. The village of Gājīpura lies east of this
kuṇḍa. On the day of Bhādra Śuklā Dvādaśī (the fourth
day from Rādhāṣṭamī), bhūḍhī-līlā is performed here.


Vihvala Kuṇḍa

This kuṇḍa lies near Saṅket, to the south-east. Here Śrī
Kṛṣṇa became restless and overwhelmed (vihvala) upon
hearing Śrī Rādhā’s name.

One day, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Subala Sakhā were engaged in
rasālāpa, or sweet rasika talk, as they sat in a
beautiful kuñja by this delightful kuṇḍa. A sārikā
sitting on the branch of a nearby tree began to sing the
glories of Śrī Rādhikā’s qualities. When Kṛṣṇa heard the
name and qualities of Rādhikā, many kinds of sentiments
arose in His heart and He saw manifestations of Rādhikā
wherever He looked. He began to anxiously run here and
there in an attempt to catch Her. Subala Sakhā saw the
very elevated aṣṭa-sāttvika bhāvas of mahābhāva on Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s limbs, and he started to contemplate how to
pacify Kṛṣṇa’s emotions. He thought that Kṛṣṇa would
never be pacified without actually meeting with Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, so he somehow sent news of Kṛṣṇa’s astonishing
state of restlessness to Viśākhā Sakhī and requested her
to bring Śrīmatī Rādhikā to Kṛṣṇa. Śrīmatī Rādhikā
arrived there with Viśākhā and some other sakhīs, and
from a distance Subala pointed towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who
was restless in separation. Being eager to meet, Rādhā
and Kṛṣṇa became extremely happy to have darśana of each

                          115
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

other. When Śrī Kṛṣṇa touched the body of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, He felt satisfied and content. That sādhaka who
affectionately performs bhajana here will definitely
become inundated by prema for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.


Saṅket

This place is situated between Nandagaon and Varsānā.
The first meeting of Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
after Their pūrva-rāga,8 took place here. Śrīmatī
Rādhikā would then come from the house of Her in-laws in
Jāvaṭa and Śrī Kṛṣṇa would come from Nandagaon, and They
would meet here. Vṛndā-devī, Vīrā-devī and Subala Sakhā
would act as messengers (dūtīs) and arrange the meeting
of Priyā and Priyatama by communicating through signals
(saṅkets). This is why this place is called Saṅket.
Sometimes, Śrīmatī Rādhikā would come here to meet with
Kṛṣṇa (abhisāra), and sometimes Kṛṣṇa would come here to
meet with Rādhikā.

In Govindalīlāmṛta and Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta, Śrīla
Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja and Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura describe Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s milana and vilāsa
here during naiśa (midnight) and niśānta (pre-dawn).
These descriptions are full of rasa. By Yogamāyā’s
desire, the principal dūtīs, Śrī Vīrā-devī and Vṛndā-
devī, arrange the meeting of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala. Śrī
Vṛndā-devī makes very sweet arrangements to awaken the
Divine Couple at niśānta, the end of the night, just
before dawn breaks. The śuka and sārī awaken Them with
enchanting words. The kokila helps to wake Them up with
her sweet kuhu-kuhu, and the peacock and peahen with
their ke-kā. Lalitā, Viśākhā and the other sakhīs
perform āratī to the Divine Couple. When Kakkhaṭī, the
old she-monkey, calls out “Jaṭilā!,” Śrī Rādhā and Śrī
Kṛṣṇa become embarrassed and make Their separate ways to
Their respective residences, where they fall asleep.

Delightful places worth visiting here are the mandira of
Saṅket-Vihārījī, a rāsa-maṇḍala, and the place of a
jhūlā (swing). The bhajana-kuṭira of Śrī Gopāla Bhaṭṭa
Gosvāmī stands in front of the rāsa-maṇḍala, to its
east. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu rested here while
travelling through the twelve forests of Braja. Just
near the rāsa-maṇḍala is the temple of Saṅket-devī (Śrī
Vīrā-devī); and nearby are Vihvalā-devī, Vihvala Kuṇḍa,
Raṅgamahala and Śayyā Mandira. Kṛṣṇa Kuṇḍa lies to the
west of the village. On the bank of Kṛṣṇa Kuṇḍa is a
baiṭhaka of Śrī Vallabhācārya.

Some people continue their pilgrimage of Braja Maṇḍala
by travelling from Saṅket to Nandagaon. Others visit and
perform parikramā of the following pastime-places before
continuing on to Nandagaon: Riṭhaura, Bhāṇḍokhora,
Śrīmeherāna, Sātoyā, Pāī, Tiloyāra, Śṛṅgāra Vaṭa,
Bichora, Andhopa, Sonda, Vanacārī, Hoḍal, Kuñjaravana,
Daīgaon, Lālpura, Hāroyāna, Sāñculī, Geṇḍo and so forth.


Riṭhaura

This village is situated one and a half miles west of
Saṅketvana, and is the village of Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja’s

                          116
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

elder brother, Śrī Candrabhānu Gopa. Candrāvalī, the
darling daughter of this same Candrabhānu, was born
here. In the south-east of the village, surrounded by
dense rows of trees, is Candrāvalī Kuṇḍa, where
Candrāvalī used to perform her childhood pastimes
(balya-krīḍā) with her sakhīs, take bath, and play in
the water (jal-krīḍā). Another baiṭhaka of Vallabhācārya
is here.


Bhāṇḍokhora

This place, situated four miles north-west of Riṭhaura
and four miles west of Nandagaon, is where Mahārāja
Nanda had his western gośālā. Earthen vessels (bhāṇḍa)
were filled with milk or washed here, which is why this
place is known as Bhāṇḍokhora.


Meherāna Gaon

This village lies two miles west of Bhāṇḍokhora. Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s uncle Abhinandana Gopa lived here, and his
gośālā was nearby. Abhinandana Gopa is the second eldest
among Brajarāja Nanda and his four brothers. Some people
also consider this place to be the home of Yaśodā’s
father. In the eastern part of this village is
Kṣīrasāgara. It is said that at midnight on Śiva-rātri,
a stream of milk emanates from the middle of this kuṇḍa,
which is why this kuṇḍa is named Kṣīrasāgara, or ‘Ocean
of Milk’.

Once, Yaśodā Maiyā and child Kṛṣṇa came to the house of
Abhinandana, Yaśodā Maiyā’s older brother-in-law. After
dinner, Yaśodā Maiyā sat on the bed lulling Kṛṣṇa to
sleep in her lap. Kṛṣṇa said, “Maiyā, please tell a
story.” Yaśodā proceeded to narrate a story as Kṛṣṇa
nodded ‘Yes, yes.’ Yaśodā said, “There was a king named
Daśaratha. He had four sons — Rāma, Lakṣmaṇa, Bharata
and Śatrughna. Rāma was married to Jānakī, the daughter
of Mahārāja Janaka, who was also known as Sītā. On the
order of His father, Rāma went to the forest with His
wife Sītā and younger brother Lakṣmaṇa.” Kṛṣṇa uttered
“Yes, yes” and Yaśodā Maiyā continued. “In the forest, a
demon named Rāvaṇa kidnapped Sītā.” Hearing this, Kṛṣṇa,
being absorbed in His previous incarnation as Rāma,
called out, “Lakṣmaṇa! Bring My bow! Lakṣmaṇa! Bring My
bow!” and jumped up from bed. Seeing this made Yaśodā
Maiyā fearful. This līlā took place here.


Sātoyā

This village lies two miles west of Meherāna Gaon. It is
also called Satvāsa. At this place, Mahārāja Satrājita,
the father of one of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s queens named
Satyabhāmā, worshipped the Sungod. Over the years, the
word satrā has evolved into the name Satvāsa.

North-east of this village is Sūrya Kuṇḍa, on the
northern bank of which is Sūrya Mandira. Mahārāja
Satrājita used to worship Sūryadeva here after taking
bath in the kuṇḍa. Sūryadeva became pleased and awarded
him a sūryakānta maṇi, a jewel which daily yielded him

                          117
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

an abundance of gold.


Pāīgaon

This village is situated five and half miles north-west
of Satvāsa. Once, Śrī Kṛṣṇa was playing hide and seek
with the sakhīs. Kṛṣṇa hid somewhere, and Rādhikā and
the sakhīs anxiously searched for Him. After great
endeavour, the gopīs found Kṛṣṇa here. Rādhikā and the
sakhīs became overjoyed to have spotted Kṛṣṇa, and they
cried out, Pāī-pāī! (“I have found! I have found!”).
This village thus became renowned as Pāī. All the
villages mentioned above lie on the border of Braja.


Tiloyāra

Here, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and the sakhīs became so absorbed
in līlā-vilāsa that they entirely forgot to eat, what to
speak of to return home. Somehow, Vṛndā-devī finally
reminded them to return home. This place became known as
Tiloyāra because Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs were not even
slightly conscious of the passage of time here. Tila
mātra means ‘very slightly’; it is used in Hindi to
denote a very slight amount of time or space. Tiloyāra
is also situated on the border of Braja Maṇḍala. Muslims
of the Meva caste reside in the villages around here.


Śṛṅgāra Vaṭa

This place is situated two miles north of Tiloyāra.
While playing here, the sakhās decorated Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
body with sixteen kinds of ornaments (śṛṅgāra).
Sometimes, Śrī Kṛṣṇa combed and decorated Śrīmatī
Rādhikā’s hair with sixteen kinds of ornaments. The vaṭa
tree that was once here has now disappeared, but the
village is still known by the name of Śṛṅgāra Vaṭa or
Śṛṅgāra Gaon.


Bichora

This pastime-place is situated one and half miles north-
east of Śṛṅgāra Vaṭa and ten miles south-west of Kosī.
Śrī Kṛṣṇa performed various kinds of līlā-vilāsa here
with Śrīmatī Rādhikā and the sakhīs. After enjoying
together, as They were about to return home, They both
became greatly distressed by Their impending separation.
This village has therefore become known as Bichora. The
word bichora derives from viccheda, meaning
‘separation’. This is the purport of the following verse
from Śrī Bhakti-ratnākara:


krīḍāvasānete doṅhe cale nijālaya

viccheda-prayukta e ‘bichora’ nāma haya


Andhopa

This village lies two miles north-west of Bichora and

                          118
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

three miles north of Śṛṅgāra Vaṭa. It too is situated on
the border of Braja.


Sonda

The village of Sonda lies four miles north-east of
Andhopa. It is the village where Nanda Mahārāja’s
younger brother Sananda used to live. He loved Kṛṣṇa
very much. Sometimes he would call Kṛṣṇa, bathe and
dress Him, seat Him next to himself, and feed Him
delicious preparations.


Vanacarī

This village is situated two miles north of Sonda and
east of the Mathurā-Delhi highway. It too lies on the
border of Braja. One can have darśana of Dāūjī here.



Hoḍal

Hoḍal lies four miles south-east of Vanacarī on the
Delhi-Mathurā highway. Near this village is Pāṇḍavavana,
where the Pāṇḍavas resided during their exile. Pāṇḍava
Kuṇḍa is also nearby, which is where the Pāṇḍavas used
to bathe and drink water.



Kuñjaravana

South-west of Hoḍal, about one mile away, is
Kuñjaravana, where Kṛṣṇa used to play with the sakhīs in
the kuñjas. Sometimes, many sakhīs would together make
themselves into an elephant (kuñjara) here, upon which
Śrī Kṛṣṇa would ride. Because this incident took place
here, this place became known as Kuñjaravana.



Daīgaon

This place lies three miles south of Hoḍal, and is where
Kṛṣṇa and His sakhās looted yoghurt from the gopīs on
the excuse of collecting tax. Here, one can have darśana
of Dadhi Kuṇḍa, Madhusūdana Kuṇḍa, Śṛṅgāra Mandira,
Śītala Kuṇḍa and Sapta Vṛkṣa Maṇḍalī. On the bank of
Śītala Kuṇḍa under a kadamba tree is a baiṭhaka of Śrī
Vallabhācārya.



Lālpura

This village is situated one and a half miles west of
Daīgaon. North of this village is the āśrama of Durvāṣā
Muni. Durvāṣā Kuṇḍa and the mandira of Durvāṣā are here.



Hāroyāna Grāma

                          119
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017


This village is currently called Pīparavāra. Here,
Śrīmatī Rādhikā defeated Kṛṣṇa in a game of dice and won
His vaṁśī.

Once, Śrīmatī Rādhikā consulted Lalitā and the other
sakhīs, saying, “Since Kṛṣṇa is physically more powerful
than us, He defeats us in the games which depend upon
bodily strength. Please think of a game based upon
intelligence by which we can easily defeat Him.” Lalitā
Sakhī advised Śrīmatījī to challenge Kṛṣṇa to a game of
dice. Following this meeting, the sakhīs challenged
Kṛṣṇa to play dice with them. As soon as the game had
started, Śrīmatī Rādhikā very easily defeated Kṛṣṇa and
snatched away His vaṁśī, which had been kept on stake.
Madhumaṅgala, who was sitting nearby, pretended to be
sad and said, “Kanhaiyā! The gopīs have just taken Your
vaṁśī, and they will now confiscate everything of Yours.
You are expert at grazing the cows, so go and do that. I
feel very unhappy when I see You defeated like this.”
Saying this, He started laughing. Kṛṣṇa rebuked him,
calling him a talkative brāhmaṇa, and told him to keep
quiet.

This village has been named Hāroyāna on account of this
līlā, in which Kṛṣṇa was defeated at dice. Hārnā means
‘to be defeated’.


Sāñculī

This place is situated four miles south of Hāroyāna
Grāma and six miles north-west of Nandagaon. In this
village, one can have darśana of the mandira of
Candrāvalī Sakhī and of Sūrya Kuṇḍa. Candrāvalī used to
meet Kṛṣṇa here on the pretext of performing Sūrya-pūjā.


Geṇḍo

This village lies three miles east of Sāñculī Grāma.
Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva used to play ball games here with the
sakhās. Geṅda means ‘ball’. This village has seven
kuṇḍas. Geṅda Kuṇḍa, which is where Śrī Balarāma used to
stand when they played ball games, is in the north of
the village; and Geṅda Khora, which is where Kṛṣṇa used
to stand, is in the north-west. Gaidharāvana is in the
east, Belvana Kuṇḍa is in the south, Gopī Kuṇḍa is in
the south-west, Jalbhara Kuṇḍa is in the west, and
Vihāra Kuṇḍa is in the north-west. The gopīs filled
their pots with water (jal bharnā) from Jalbhara Kuṇḍa.




Chapter 10

Nandagaon


The royal palace of Brajarāja Nanda Mahārāja is situated
in Nandagaon. This village is a source of happiness
because Śrī Nanda Rāya, Upānanda, Abhinanda, Sunanda and

                          120
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Nanda all lived here.1 Nandagaon is situated sixteen
miles north-west of Govardhana, eight miles south of
Kosī and twenty-eight miles west of Vṛndāvana. The
parikramā of Nandagaon is four miles. There are fifty-
six kuṇḍas related to Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s various līlās and it
takes about three to four days to have darśana of them
all.

Devādhideva Mahādeva Śaṅkara pleased his worshipable
deity Śrī Kṛṣṇa and asked for the boon to have darśana
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s childhood pastimes (bālya-līlā). Svayaṁ
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa ordered him to situate himself in
Nandagaon in the form of a hill. Śrī Śaṅkara Mahādeva
followed this order and became Nandīśvara Hill. He then
waited for the arrival of his worshipable deity. To
fulfil the desire of the exalted Vaiṣṇava Śaṅkara, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa performed His sweet bālya (childhood) and paugaṇḍa
(boyhood) pastimes on Nandīśvara Hill, along with the
Brajabāsīs like Nanda Bābā, Yaśodā Maiyā and His gopa
friends.

At the end of Dvāpara-yuga, there lived a muni named
Devamīḍha. He had two wives, one from a kṣatriya family
and the other from a gopa family. Śūrasena was born from
the kṣatriya wife, and Parjanya Gopa from his gopa wife.
Vasudeva and other kṣatriya sons were born from
Śūrasena. Parjanya Gopa maintained his life by
agriculture and rearing cows. He lived near Nandiśvara
Hill with his wife Varīyasī Gopī.

Once, Devarṣi Nārada came there, and Parjanya Gopa
pleased him by offering him appropriate worship. He then
requested Nārada to bless him with excellent progeny.
Nāradajī initiated him into the Lakṣmī-Nārāyaṇa mantra
and informed him, “You will have illustrious progeny by
meditating upon this mantra.” When Nāradajī left,
Parjanya Gopa set about repeating this mantra in his
mind. Daily, he would meditate upon it following the
proper process, after first taking his bath in the
nearby Taḍāga Tīrtha. One day while he was absorbed in
the mantra, a divine voice from the sky announced, “O
Parjanya! You are very fortunate to have performed one-
pointed worship of Me. You will have five highly
qualified sons. Of these, the middle son, Nanda, will be
greatly fortunate. All victorious Śrī Hari Himself, who
is fully endowed with six kinds of opulences and who
gives pleasure to all living beings, will appear as his
son.” Upon hearing this divine announcement, Parjanya
Gopa became overjoyed.

In due course of time, five sons and two daughters were
born. Parjanya Gopa and his family stayed near
Nandīśvara Hill for some time longer, but, fearing the
disturbances created by the Keśī demon, they left for
Gokula-Mahāvana. There, Svayaṁ Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra
appeared as the son of the middle brother, Nanda
Mahārāja. After some time, however, on account of the
disturbances of Pūtanā, Śakaṭāsura, Tṛṇāvarta and other
demons, Brajeśvara Śrī Nanda Mahārāja, together with his
sons, family members, relatives, cows, gopas and gopīs,
moved to Chaṭṭīkarā village. After that they moved to
Kāmyavana, Khelanvana and other places before finally
returning to live at Nandīśvara (Nandagaon). Many bālya
and paugaṇḍa pastimes of Kṛṣṇa took place here. It was

                          121
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

from here that on Gopāṣṭamī day, Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva
along with the sakhās first went out to graze the
calves, and after some years the cows.


Pastime-places Within the Compound of Nanda Bhavan

The compound of Nanda Bhavan is immense and holds many
delightful pastime-places. Śrī Raghupati Upādhyāya
glorifies Nanda Bābā and this compound in very sweet
words:


śrutim apare smṛtim itare

bhāratam anye bhajantu bhava-bhītāḥ

aham iha nandaṁ vande

yasyālinde paraṁ brahma

(Padyāvalī 126)



“Those who are afraid of the perplexities of worldly
life worship the śrutis and smṛtis, or maybe the
Mahābhārata. Let them do so. I myself will always
worship Nanda Bābā, in whose courtyard Parama Brahma is
crawling here and there on His knees.”



Nanda Bhavan (Nanda’s residence)

To the south, adjacent to Nandīśvara Hill, are a few
ruins of the staircase of Nanda Bhavan. Nanda’s
residence here was extensive, with separate bedrooms for
everyone including Nanda Bābā, mother Yaśodā, mother
Rohiṇī, Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva. It had a kitchen, storeroom
and dining hall, as well as resting-rooms and other
rooms for Rādhikā and Kṛṣṇa. Here, Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva
performed many of Their bālya, paugaṇḍa and kiśora
(youth) līlās. Daily, at forenoon (pūrvāhna), Śrīmatī
Rādhikā used to come here from Jāvaṭa with Her sakhīs on
the zealous and loving requests of mother Yaśodā, and
with great delight, She would prepare many tasty
foodstuffs for Kṛṣṇa together with mother Rohiṇī. Kṛṣṇa
used to eat lunch with His sakhās in the adjacent large
dining-hall and then rest in the bedroom situated one
hundred steps from the dining-hall.


Rādhikā’s Viśrāma Sthala

This is Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s resting place. After
completing Her cooking, Śrīmatī Rādhikā would, on the
request of mother Yaśodā, take prasāda mixed with the
remnants of Kṛṣṇa that Dhaniṣṭhā Sakhī would bring.
Mother Yaśodā then invited Her to take rest in this
garden. At that time, the sakhīs used to arrange for Her
secret meeting with Kṛṣṇa. This place is called Rādhā
Bāga, Rādhā’s garden.


                            122
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017


Vana-gamana Sthāna (the path for going to the forest)

Every day, mother Yaśodā used to decorate Rāma and Kṛṣṇa
in different ways, thus preparing Them to go to the
forest to graze the cows. She would then send Them and
the sakhās off from here with a heavy heart.


Gocarāṇa-gamana Mārga (the path for going cow-grazing)

Rāma and Kṛṣṇa, the best of dancers, used this path
along with Their friends when they went cow-grazing.


Rādhikā Bidā Sthala

Here, mother Yaśodā used to put Śrīmatī Rādhikā on her
lap before seeing Her off to Jāvaṭa with tearful eyes.
Bidā karnā means ‘to see someone off’.


Dadhi-manthana Sthala

Every day in the early morning, mother Yaśodā used to
churn yoghurt at this place. To this day, one can see an
enormous yoghurt pot here. Dadhi-manthana means ‘the
churning of dadhi (yoghurt)’.


Pūrṇamāsījī kā Āgamana Patha (Pūrṇamāsī’s arrival path)

Yogamāyā Pūrṇamāsī used to arrive at Nanda Bhavan along
this path to have darśana of baby Kṛṣṇa.

Other Pastime-places in Nandagaon


Nanda Kuṇḍa

Nanda Kuṇḍa lies a short distance to the south of Nanda
Bhavan. Daily, early in the morning, Mahārāja Nanda used
to bathe here and chant his sandhyā mantra and so forth.
Sometimes, he would bring Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma here on his
shoulders and bathe Them too. In the temple on the bank
of this kuṇḍa are very attractive deities of Nanda Bābā
with baby Kṛṣṇa and Dāūjī sitting in his lap.


Nanda Baiṭhaka

Brajeśvara Mahārāja Nanda would occasionally sit here
with his elder and younger brothers, as well as with the
elderly gopas, priests and so on, to discuss Kṛṣṇa’s
wellbeing. It is called a baiṭhaka because they would
sit here together for discussions. Baiṭhnā means ‘to
sit’. Nanda Mahārāja has several baiṭhakas in the
eighty-four kosas of Braja Maṇḍala. Wherever Nanda Bābā
used to reside with his cows, gopas, gopīs and others is
called Nanda-Gokula. There used to be periodic meetings
like this wherever he resided. Thus, other such
baiṭhakas include Choṭī Baiṭhana and Baḍī Baiṭhana. The
following pastime refers to this kind of baiṭhaka, or
assembly.

                          123
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017


Seven-year-old Kṛṣṇa held Girirāja Govardhana for seven
days on His little finger and smashed the pride of
Indra. All the elderly gopas became very astonished by
this incident and they called a baiṭhaka. Upānanda, the
eldest brother of Nanda Mahārāja, was the chairman of
this meeting to which Nanda Bābā had also been called.
The elderly gopas expressed their opinion that Śrī Kṛṣṇa
was not an ordinary boy. “Soon after taking birth, He
killed the terrible rākṣasī Pūtanā, as if He were simply
playing,” they said. “Afterwards, He killed Śakaṭāsura,
Tṛṇāvarta, Aghāsura and many other demons. He subdued
the terrible snake Kālīya and sent him out of Kālī Daha.
Just a few days ago, He held the huge mountain Girirāja
on His little finger for seven days and saved Braja from
the heavy downpour of rain and raging storms. These are
not the activities of an ordinary boy. It seems to us
that He must be either a siddha puruṣa, a demigod or
Nārāyaṇa Himself. It is not proper for us to consider
Him to be the son of Nanda and Yaśodā, to chastise or
threaten Him, or to address Him as ‘thief’, ‘willful’,
‘impertinent’ and so on. Therefore, Nanda, Yaśodā and
the other gopas and gopīs should always deal with Him
lovingly and respectfully.” All the gopas present there
took this statement very seriously and together they
cautioned Nanda Bābā on this matter.

Nanda Bābā laughingly dismissed their words. He said,
“Respected gentlemen! I have heard your statements, but
I do not see even the slightest demigod-like symptom or
symptom of bhagavattā (supreme godliness) in Him. I have
known Him from His very birth. Does Bhagavān feel hunger
or thirst? This boy cries fifty times a day for makkhana
and roṭī (bread and butter). Does Bhagavān steal and
tell lies? This boy goes to the homes of the gopīs and
steals their butter, speaks lies, and makes so much
mischief. The neighbouring gopīs play games with Him and
make Him dance for a hand-full of buttermilk and a
laḍḍū. Whoever He is, He has taken birth in our home as
our son; therefore, it is our duty to raise Him to
become an ideal man of excellent conduct who possesses
all good qualities. That said, there is one thing we
should remember. At the time of Kṛṣṇa’s name-giving
ceremony, Maharṣi Gargācārya predicted that this child
of ours would have qualities like those of Bhagavān
Nārāyaṇa. This fact explains everything.”

Baiṭhakas were held to discuss Kṛṣṇa’s wellbeing, His
betrothal and other such matters.


Yaśodā Kuṇḍa

This kuṇḍa is situated south of Nanda Bhavan. Mother
Yaśodā used to take her daily bath here. Sometimes, she
would bring Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma along and very happily
watch Their childhood games (bāl-krīḍā). After bathing,
mother Yaśodā would pray to Nṛsiṁhadeva, who is situated
in a temple on the bank of this kuṇḍa, for Kṛṣṇa’s
wellbeing. An ancient cave, where many great saints have
performed sādhana and attained Bhagavān, lies at a
secluded place near Yaśodā Kuṇḍa. To this day, this
place, where siddha mahātmas have performed their
bhajana, attracts nirapekṣa sādhakas who come here to

                          124
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                       5/5/2017

perform bhajana. Kāroharo Kuṇḍa lies near Yaśodā Kuṇḍa.


Hāū Bilāū

On the western bank of Yaśodā Kuṇḍa is a place of
Kṛṣṇa’s childhood pastimes with His friends. Here, the
brothers Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva would become so absorbed in
Their childhood games that They even forgot to come home
to eat and drink. Maiyā Yaśodā would first send Rohiṇījī
to get Them, but as Rohiṇījī approached, Kṛṣṇa and
Baladeva ran away, frustrating her attempts to catch
Them. Yaśodājī would then go herself. She would employ
various tricks and, with great difficulty, bring Them
home where she bathed and fed Them. Sometimes she told
Them about a hāūa, or hobgoblin, and filled Them with
fear. She would then catch Kṛṣṇa in her arms and bring
Him home. Once, Kṛṣṇa insisted on seeing the hāūa,
“Maiyā, I want to see the hāūa.” The following
Brajabhāṣā poem tells this delightful līlā:


dūr khelan mat jāu lāl yahāṅ hāū āye haiṅ

haṁskar pūcht kānh maiyā yah kinai paṭhāye haiṅ


“’Do not go far away, my child, the hāūa has come.’
Kṛṣṇa would smile and ask Maiyā who had sent him.”

Even today, the stone figures of the hāūa here are a
reminder of this sweet childhood pastime.


Madhusūdana Kuṇḍa

This kuṇḍa is situated south of Nandīśvara, near Yaśodā
Kuṇḍa, and lies within a grove of trees and creepers
that are laden with many kinds of flowers. Here,
intoxicated bumble bees always buzz around, drinking
nectar from the flowers. Kṛṣṇa plays with the sakhās in
this forest and imitates the buzzing of the bees. One of
the names for bumble bee is madhusūdana, and one of
Kṛṣṇa’s names is also Madhusūdana. This is where the two
Madhusūdanas buzz, and this pond is therefore known as
Madhusūdana Kuṇḍa.



Pānīhārī Kuṇḍa

The Brajabāsīs used to drink the pure and sweet water of
this kuṇḍa, and the gopa-ramaṇīs would come here to
fetch water. Therefore, this kuṇḍa is also known as
Panaghaṭa Kuṇḍa. A panaghaṭa is a place from which water
is taken, like a well, river or pond. Kṛṣṇa would come
to Panaghaṭa to meet with the gopīs, and they too would
very eagerly make their way here to meet Kṛṣṇa. While
drawing water, they would become so absorbed in looking
at Kṛṣṇa that they were unaware whether or not they had
filled their pots. The pot of their hearts, however,
would at once become filled with their beloved.

There is also another deep secret behind Panaghaṭa. The

                          125
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

gopīs would come here remembering Kṛṣṇa’s pana, or
promise: “I will certainly meet you there.” To fulfil
His promise, Kṛṣṇa ensured that He was present here,
waiting for them. Thus the pana (keeping of one’s
promise or drawing of water) of both Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs
would take place (ghaṭita) here. This is the other
reason why this place is known as Panaghaṭa.


Caraṇa Pahāḍī

This place is situated west of Nandagaon. During
cowherding, Kṛṣṇa played His flute on this hill (pahāḍī)
to assemble His lākhs and lākhs of cows. By the tender
and sweet sound of His flute, this hill melted and
became marked with the impressions of Kṛṣṇa’s footprints
(caraṇa cihna). Hence, this hill is called Caraṇa
Pahāḍī.

On Kaṁsa’s order, the great devotee Akrūra came to
Nandagaon to bring Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma to Mathurā. When
he saw Kṛṣṇa’s footprints on this hill and everywhere in
the sand nearby, he became filled with bhāva and began
crying and rolling around on them. To this day, devotees
become ecstatic upon seeing Kṛṣṇa’s footprints here.


Gāyoṅ kā Khūṅṭā (posts for binding the cows)

Near Caraṇa Pahāḍī are Rohiṇī Kuṇḍa, Mohinī Kuṇḍa and a
number of posts in a field for binding cows. This is the
site of Nanda Bābā’s gośālā, and his cows were tied to
these posts. Today, Brajabāsī ladies worship these posts
on special occasions.


Vṛndā-devī

Some distance north of Caraṇa Pahāḍī is the kuñja of
Vṛndājī. Vṛndā-devī resided here at the time of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s prakaṭa-līlā, manifest pastimes. From here, she
would arrange the meeting of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in the
kuñjas of Saṅket and other places. Sometimes, she would
consult Yogamāyā Pūrṇimādevī and by her order arrange
the meeting of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala through various tricks
and clever means. Here lies the kuṇḍa of Vṛndā-devī, in
which she used to take bath and so forth. Vṛndā-devī
wears beautiful clothes, and is decorated with many
kinds of ornaments. She is the adhiṣṭhātrī vanadevī of
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s kuñja-līlā. It is impossible for anyone to
enter Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes without Vṛndā-devī’s
mercy. Tulasījī is the worshipable form (arcāvatāra) of
the original Vṛndā-devī. Kṛṣṇa does not accept any
offering without tulasī leaves or mañjarīs.

Near Vṛnda Kuṇḍa, in the east, is Cauḍokhara, which is
also called Caraṇa Kuṇḍa. Near this kuṇḍa are Rohiṇī
Kuṇḍa, Mohinī Kuṇḍa, Gāyoṅ kā Khūṅṭā, Nanda Bābā’s
gośālā and Dohinī Kuṇḍa.


Pāvana Sarovara

This sarovara lies north of Nandagaon when coming down

                          126
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

from Nandīśvara Hill, and is situated on the side of the
highway leading towards Kāmyavana. The custom is to
bathe in this sarovara before taking darśana of Nanda,
Yaśodā and the others on the crest of the hill. It is
said that Pāvana Gopa, the father of Viśākhā Sakhī,
constructed this sarovara, thereby giving it its name.
When Kṛṣṇa and His friends would return from cow-
grazing, they would bring the cows here to drink. At
that time, Kṛṣṇa would call out “Nīrī-nīrī” and signal
to the cows to enter the sarovara. He would then call
out “Cūṅ-cūṅ” to induce the cows to drink water, and
“Tīrī-tīrī” to call them back to the bank. The boys
would satisfy the cows by having them drink water in
this way before returning them to their resting place in
the gośālā. The boys would then go back to their
respective homes.

The Brajabāsīs would also bathe in the fragrant and pure
water of Pāvana Sarovara. Kṛṣṇa used to bathe here and
frolic in the water (jala-krīḍā) with His friends. On
the far bank, Śrīmatī Rādhikā used to bathe and play in
the water with Her sakhīs. Sometimes Kṛṣṇa would dive in
from His bank like a crocodile, make His way unseen to
the bank of the sakhīs, and catch their feet. In this
way, He played with them (krīḍā-vilāsa). Mahārāja
Vṛṣabhānu had a beautiful palace built for his daughter
Śrīmatī Rādhikā on the northern bank of Pāvana Sarovara.
She played many games with Her sakhīs in this palace,
from which She could very easily have darśana of Her
beloved Śrī Kṛṣṇa.


Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī’s bhajana-kuṭī

On the south-eastern bank of Pāvana Sarovara is the
bhajana-kuṭī of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s parikara Śrīla
Sanātana Gosvāmī. Sometimes, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī
would perform bhajana here so as to remember the sweet
pastimes of Nandagaon, and sometimes he would go to
associate with Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmījī at his bhajana-kuṭī
near Kadamba Ṭer. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī also used to come
here to see Sanātana Gosvāmī. Even today, many Gauḍīya
bhaktas in Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī’s paramparā come to this
bhajana-kuṭī to perform bhajana.

Once, in the forest here, Sanātana Gosvāmī was very
distressed in separation from Kṛṣṇa. Restlessly crying
for Kṛṣṇa’s darśana, he went without eating and drinking
for three days. At that time, he had no bhajana-kuṭī
here. Kṛṣṇa came to Sanātana Gosvāmī as a cowherd boy
carrying some milk in a clay pot, and said, “Why are you
here hungry and thirsty? Nobody remains hungry and
thirsty here. My mother saw you in this condition and
has sent this pot of milk for you. You must drink it. I
will return later and collect the pot. Just see! My
mother has also said that since it distresses the
Brajabāsīs to see you here in the forest like this, you
should make a hut here and live in it.” Saying this, the
boy left. When Sanātana Gosvāmī drank the milkÇ he
became very restless due to kṛṣṇa-prema and cried
bitterly, calling out, “Hā Kṛṣṇa! Hā Kṛṣṇa! You gave me
darśana but have cheated me.” Although remaining
invisible to Sanātana Gosvāmī, Kṛṣṇa pacified him and
had a bhajana-kuṭī built for him through a Brajabāsī.

                          127
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Sanātana Gosvāmī remained in this bhajana-kuṭī, where he
began performing bhajana. Nearby is the temple of
Pāvana-Bihārī. The Brajabāsīs in the village bathe in
this sarovara in the morning and then take darśana of
Pāvana-Bihārī.

Nearby on the northern bank is the baiṭhaka of Śrī
Vallabhācāryajī where he recited Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam for
one month. In the west of Pāvana Sarovara is a kadamba-
khaṇḍī, where the beauty of the kadamba trees is
extraordinary. The bumble bees drink the nectar of the
kadamba flowers and buzz about intoxicated. This
kadamba-khaṇḍī is especially dear to Śrī Baladevajī, who
used to enjoy many games here with His younger brother
Kṛṣṇa and with the sakhās. This unique kadamba-khaṇḍī
reminds one of Kṛṣṇa and Dāūjī’s innumerable pastimes.
Even today, many sādhus perform bhajana here.



Taḍāga Tīrtha (Khunnāhāra Kuṇḍa)

This is Śrī Parjanya Gopa’s place of worship, and is
situated near Pāvana Sarovara towards the north-east.
Previously, Parjanya Gopa had no sons, so he took
initiation from Devarṣi Nārada in the Lakṣmī-Nārāyaṇa
mantra. Giving up eating and drinkingÇ he performed
severe austerities at this place. Morning, noon and
evening he bathed in this sarovara, worshipped the deity
and chanted the mantra he had received from his guru.
After some time, he heard a divine voice from the sky,
“O Parjanya! You will have five sons who will be endowed
with all good qualities. Bhagavān Śrī Hari Himself will
take birth as the son of Nanda, your middle son. He will
destroy the demons and perform many kinds of pastimes.”
This kuṇḍa is also called Khunnāhāra Kuṇḍa because
Parjanya performed austerities here. Khunnāhāra means
‘to give up grains and water’.



Dhovanī Kuṇḍa

This kuṇḍa is situated north-west of Nandagaon, below
Nandīśvara Hill, and somewhat near to Pāvana Sarovara.
It received the name Dhovanī Kuṇḍa because the pots of
milk and yoghurt were washed (dhonā) here.



Motī Kuṇḍa (Muktā Kuṇḍa)

This charming kuṇḍa, situated about one mile north of
Nandīśvara TaḍāgaÇ is surrounded by karīla and pīlū
trees. While cowherding with His friends, Kṛṣṇa used to
bring the cows here to drink. He and the sakhās also
drank water here and performed many pastimes together.
Once, Kṛṣṇa planted pearls (motī or muktā) here and
produced an abundant crop.

When Kṛṣṇa crossed from paugaṇḍa and entered kiśora,
Yaśodā Maiyā began to worry about His betrothal. She
very much liked the daughter of Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja,
Kiśorī Rādhikā, who was endowed with all good qualities.

                           128
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Kīrtikājī came to know of this fact and discussed it
with her husband, Vṛṣabhānujī. They then sent many
varieties of clothes and ornaments together with a
basketful of pearls to Nanda Bhavan for the engagement.
Brajarāja Nanda and Brajarānī Yaśodā became very pleased
to see this, but it also caused them anxiety. Custom
demanded that they send an even greater quantity of
pearls to Varsānā in exchange for the engagement gifts,
however, they simply did not have that many pearls. Just
then, Kṛṣṇa entered the house and, upon seeing His
parents in anxiety, He asked them what was the cause of
their concern. When Yaśodā Maiyā explained the
situation, Kṛṣṇa simply said, “Don’t worry. I will
quickly arrange something.”

When the right opportunity came, Kṛṣṇa stole all of His
parents’ pearls, dug a field near this kuṇḍa, and
planted them there. Every day, He irrigated the field
with cow’s milk. When Nanda Bābā and Yaśodā Maiyā could
not find the few pearls they had, they became even more
concerned and asked Kṛṣṇa if He knew where they might
be. “Yes!” Kṛṣṇa said, “I have planted those pearls, and
very soon we will get plenty of pearls from them.”
Hearing this, Bābā and Maiyā exclaimed, “Are lālā! Has
anyone ever farmed pearls?” Kṛṣṇa smiled and said, “Yes.
When My pearls will sprout and fructify, then you will
see for yourselves.”

Surprisingly, the pearls began to sprout after a few
days, and lush, green plants emerged. A few days later,
those plants bore fruit; and as these fruits ripened,
radiant and splendid divine pearls began to manifest.
Now there was a great abundance of pearls. Kṛṣṇa gave a
large amount to His mother, who was able to fill three
or four very beautiful baskets with pearls, golden
ornaments and clothes, and send them to Varsānā to
confirm the betrothal of Rādhājī to Kṛṣṇa.

When Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Her sakhīs heard that Śrī Kṛṣṇa
had planted pearls and reaped a huge crop, they asked
Him for some. However, Kṛṣṇa flatly refused. “When I
requested some milk from you to irrigate My pearls, you
refused to give Me any. Now I will decorate My cows with
ornaments made from these pearls, but I will not give
any to you.” Vexed, the gopīs stole pearls from their
own homes, dug a field and planted them. Although they
irrigated the field with cow-milk for many days, the
pearls did not sprout pearl plants — only thorny plants
completely devoid of fruit emerged from the soil. The
disappointed gopīs returned to Kṛṣṇa and narrated the
whole story to Him. Kṛṣṇa smiled and said, “Come! I want
to see your pearl field Myself.” Kṛṣṇa went there and
uprooted all the thorny plants. He planted His own
ripened pearls and irrigated the field with cow-milk.
Within a few days, these pearls sprouted and also bore
pearls, filling the gopīs hearts with joy.


Phulvārī Kuṇḍa

This kuṇḍa is situated near Muktā Kuṇḍa in the middle of
a dense grove of kadamba trees. One day, Śrī Rādhājī and
Her sakhīs were picking flowers here when Kṛṣṇa suddenly
arrived and said, “Who are you? Every day, you steal

                          129
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

flowers from My garden.”

Hearing this, Śrīmatī Rādhikā rebuked Him. “You don’t
know who I am?”

Saying no more, Kṛṣṇa placed His flute to His lips and
began to play, all the while glancing sweetly at Rādhājī
as He walked away. Watching Kṛṣṇa leave greatly
distressed Rādhājī, who fainted in separation from Him.
Lalitājī thought that Rādhājī had been stung by a black
serpent, and when She did not regain consciousness after
several attempts to revive Her, all the sakhīs became
very worried. Just then, Kṛṣṇa arrived disguised as a
snake charmer. He removed the effect of the poison by
chanting mantras and whispered in Śrīmatījī’s ear, “I
have come. Just see.” Hearing this, Śrīmatī Rādhikā
immediately sat up. When She saw Kṛṣṇa nearby, She began
to smile. An ocean of bliss welled up in the hearts of
the sakhīs. This līlā took place here.


Sāhasī Kuṇḍa

Some distance to the east of Phulvārī Kuṇḍa is Vilāsa
Vaṭa, and east of Vilāsa Vaṭa is Sāhasī Kuṇḍa. Here,
Kṛṣṇa used to meet with Śrīmatī Rādhikā and the sakhīs
encouraged and arranged for Rādhājī to meet with Kṛṣṇa.
Sāhasī means ‘bold’ or ‘resolute’. The sakhīs would hang
a beautiful swing from the nearby vaṭa vṛkṣa (banyan
tree), and swing Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa while singing songs
in malhāra and other rāgas.

Another name of Sāhasī Kuṇḍa is Sārasī Kuṇḍa. Kṛṣṇa and
Balarāma would always remain together. They would eat
together, play together, and even sleep together. Once,
the two brothers were playing here when Yaśodā Maiyā
came looking for Them. With great affection she
addressed Them as a pair of sāras, or swans. Since then,
this kuṇḍa has been called Sārasī Kuṇḍa.

Near this kuṇḍa are Śyāmapīparī Kuṇḍa, Vaṭa Kadamba,
Kyārī Vaṭa Kuṇḍa and numerous other kuṇḍas. There used
to be a kyārī (grove) of banyan trees here.


Ṭer Kadamba

This place is situated exactly half-way between
Nandagaon and Jāvaṭa. Being a place of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s
rāsa-līlā, a rāsa-maṇḍala platform has been constructed
here in memory of this līlā. While grazing the cows in
the afternoon, Kṛṣṇa used to climb this kadamba tree and
call Śyāmalī, Dhaulī, Pītāmbarī, Kālindī and His other
dear cows with His flute. Hearing Kṛṣṇa’s call, all the
cows would assemble here immediately, and Kṛṣṇa would
count them on His maṇi-mālā. If some cows were missing,
He would again call out their names by sounding His
flute, and only when they were all assembled would He
return home with the herd.

Sometimes, in the gentle light of the full-moon night,
Kṛṣṇa would climb this kadamba tree and call the sakhīs
by playing their names on the sweet notes of His flute.
These gopīs would forget their bodies, minds and worldly

                           130
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

cares, arriving to meet Kṛṣṇa in a spell-bound
condition. They would then perform rāsa-vilāsa with
Kṛṣṇa, which was full of singing and dancing.

Since Kṛṣṇa climbed a kadamba tree and called (ṭerā) the
cows and gopīs here, this place is known as Ṭer Kadamba.
There used to be many kadamba trees here, but they have
all disappeared on account of stagnant rainwater.
Mahātmās who perform bhajana here periodically plant
kadamba trees at this place.

On the day of Gopāṣṭamī, the Brajabāsīs bring small
Brajabāsī boys dressed up like Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma from
Nandagaon to this place and stage a programme of congre-
gational singing called samāja. They also worship the
cows beautifully and feed them grass and jaggery (guḍa).


Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī’s bhajana-kuṭī

Adjacent to Kadamba Ṭer, to the west, is the bhajana-
kuṭī of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī. He often performed bhajana
here at this secluded place, remembering Kṛṣṇa’s sweet
pastimes. He also composed many of his treasured books
here. Whenever the emotions of deep separation from
mahābhāvamayī Śrīmatī Rādhikā manifested in his heart,
ślokas of separation would emanate from his mouth. At
that time, all the leaves of the kadamba tree here would
dry up in the fire of separation and fall to the ground.
And when the meeting of the Divine Couple manifested in
his heart, he would recite ślokas of Their meeting. At
this time, the kadamba would sprout new leaves.

Once, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī came here to meet with
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. They began to talk about Kṛṣṇa’s
rasamayī līlā and became so absorbed in kṛṣṇa-kathā that
they forgot about the time. In the afternoon, when their
absorption abated somewhat, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī thought,
“It is time to honour prasāda, but I have nothing to
offer Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī.” He therefore became
somewhat concerned. Just then, a beautiful girl in an
ordinary dress came there and said to Rūpa Gosvāmī,
“Bābā, My mother has sent rice, milk and sugar with Me.
Quickly make khīra (sweet-rice) and eat.” Saying this,
the girl left. When a short while later She returned,
She said, “Bābā, because you have been talking, you have
no time to cook. Therefore, I will cook for you.” She
collected some dry cowdung patties that were nearby and
produced fire simply by Her breathing. In little time,
She presented Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī with very sweet and
fragrant khīra and said, “Bābā, offer this to Ṭhākurajī
and quickly take some yourself. I must go, or else My
mother will chastise Me for being late.” And the
beautiful girl departed.

Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī offered the khīra to Kṛṣṇa and placed
it before Sanātana Gosvāmī. When the two brothers drank
the khīra, sphūrtis of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa immediately
manifested in their hearts. They began to lament,
calling out, “Hā Rādhe! Hā Rādhe!” Sanātana Gosvāmī
said, “I have never eaten khīra like this before. Rūpa,
did you desire something to eat? That kiśorī was none
other than mahā-bhāvamayī kṛṣṇa-priyā Śrīmatī Rādhikājī.
In the future, please don’t trouble Her like this.” Śrī

                          131
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                      5/5/2017

Rūpa Gosvāmī began to lament, understanding his fault.
When he took a little rest, Śrīmatī Rādhikā appeared in
his dream and pacified him with sweet words.



Nanda Bāga

Nearby, south of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī’s bhajana-kuṭī is
Nanda Bāga, Nanda Mahārāja’s garden. This garden was
full of lush green trees and creepers laden with many
varieties of fruits and flowers. One of Nanda Mahārāja’s
gośālās was also here, where Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma milked
the cows and practised wrestling with the sakhās in its
wrestling ground. Śrīmatī Rādhikā used to come along
this path together with Her girlfriends on Her way from
Jāvaṭa to Nanda Bhavan.

OnceÇ Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Her sakhīs were coming to
Nanda Bhavan to cook. Some distance from this place,
they saw Kṛṣṇa and the cowherd boys milking the cows.
Lalitā Sakhī said, “We should take the other path.
Braja’s lampaṭa cūḍāmaṇi (crown-jewel among debauchees)
is looking towards us with greedy eyes as He milks the
cows. He will certainly tease us in one way or another.
We should avoid this place by using the other path.”

But Rādhikājī insisted, “What can that debauchee do? We
should fearlessly take this path.” Saying this, She and
her friends at once began to walk in Kṛṣṇa’s direction.
As Śrīmatī Rādhikā came close, Kṛṣṇa aimed a current of
milk at Her face and drenched it. Waves of pleasure
surged within the sakhās and sakhīs, who all began to
laugh. Śrīmatī Rādhikā knitted Her eyebrows and looked
towards Kṛṣṇa. As She proceeded a little further, Her
pearl necklace somehow broke and the pearls fell to the
earth, scattering here and there. She sat down and began
to collect them. The sakhīs, understanding Śrīmatījī’s
heart, knew that on the pretext of picking up pearls,
She was actually having a longer darśana of Her
priyatama.

Remembrance of this līlā is like an ocean,   and Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī has placed many such oceans in the   pot of his
Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi and other books. In other   words, in his
books he has described these vast pastimes   in a few
words.


Āśīṣeśvara Mahādeva

A short distance to the east of Nanda Bāga is Āśīṣeśvara
Mahādeva and Āśīṣeśvara Kuṇḍa. Parjanya Mahārāja used to
bathe here and worship Āśīṣeśvara Mahādeva who fulfills
all desires. Āśīṣeśvara Mahādeva easily becomes pleased
even by a little worship and bestows blessings (āśīṣa)
by which all of one’s desires may be fulfilled. Some
Brajabāsīs also say that it was by the blessings of
Āśīṣeśvara Mahādeva that Parjanya Mahārāja had five sons
endowed with all good qualities and had such a highly
qualified grandson as Śrī Kṛṣṇa.


Jalvihāra Kuṇḍa

                          132
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                       5/5/2017


This kuṇḍa lies to the west of Āśīṣeśvara Kuṇḍa. Kṛṣṇa
and the sakhās play in Jalvihāra Kuṇḍa.


Jogiyā Sthala

This very charming place, surrounded by trees and
creepers, lies north-east of Kṛṣṇa Kuṇḍa. Mahādeva
Śaṅkara worships Kṛṣṇa here, and therefore this place is
also known as Mahādevajī’s baiṭhaka. Once, Mahādeva
Śaṅkara, desiring to have Kṛṣṇa’s darśana, was wandering
throughout Braja like a madman. However, he was
unsuccessful even after making repeated attempts.
Sometimes, Kṛṣṇa would be sleeping when he arrived and
sometimes He would be sucking the breast of His mother.
Also, mother Yaśodā did not want to show her baby Kṛṣṇa
to this strange yogī, whose hair was matted, who was
adorned with a necklace of serpents, and who was riding
a bull and carrying a trident in his hand. She thought
that he might give her son the ‘evil eye’.

Finally, a defeated Śaṅkara sat down right here and
decided not to leave until his desire was fulfilled. He
started to beg by invoking the name of God, loudly
calling out, “Alakha nirañjana! Alakha nirañjana!” and
playing on his ḍamarū drum. Baby Kṛṣṇa in Nanda Bhavan
also started to bawl just as loudly as Śaṅkara was
calling out and playing his drum. The drum playing did
not stop; nor did Kṛṣṇa’s crying. Finally, the clever
elderly gopīs advised Yaśodājī, “This must be the work
of that yogī. He certainly knows some mantras, so why
not call him to pacify the child?” They went to the yogī
and said, “Are yogī! Nandarānī Yaśomatī is calling you
to Nanda Bhavan. Come!” Hearing this, Śaṅkarajī became
very happy and made his way to Nanda Bhavan, where he
took some mustard seeds and salt in his hands, touched
the head of baby KṛṣṇaÇ and blessed Him. When touched by
the hands of Śaṅkara, Nandalālā immediately stopped
crying and began to laugh and make a joyful sound.
Seeing this wonderful act of the yogī, Nandarānī became
very pleased with him and gave him her pearl necklace in
charity, saying, “Yogī, you should stay here at Nanda
Bhavan and, whenever my lālā cries, you should give Him
your darśana to pacify Him.”

Sūradāsa has described this pastime in the following
poem, which is filled with bhāva:


cal re jogī nandabhavan meiṅ yasumati tohi bulāve

laṭkat-laṭkat saṅkar āvai man meiṅ mod baḍhāve

nandabhavan meiṅ āyo jogī rāī non kar līno

bār pher lālāke ūpar hāth śīś par dīno

vithā bhaī ab dūr badan kī kilak uṭhe nandalālā

khuśī bhaī nandajū kī rānī dīnī motiyan mālā

rahure jogī nandabhavan meiṅ braj ko bāso kījai


                          133
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

jab-jab mero lālā rovai tab-tab darśan dījai

tum to jogī param manohar tum ko ved bakhāne

(śiv bole) būḍho bābā nām hamāro sūrśyām mohi jāneṅ


Kṛṣṇa Kuṇḍa

This very beautiful pond within a dense grove of kadamba
trees is situated near Nandīśvara Hill to the east. Śrī
Kṛṣṇa used to enjoy water-sports (jal-krīḍā) here with
His friends. On the northern bank of this kuṇḍa is the
path He took to go cow-grazing. Kṛṣṇa also used to bring
His thirsty cows here to drink water. Chīta Svāmī has
described this cow-grazing līlā in a very heart-touching
way:


āgeṅ gāy pācheṅ gāy it gāy ut gāy

govind ko gāyanhoṅ meṅ basvo ko bhāvai

gāyan ke saṅg dhāveṅ gāyan meṅ sacupāveṅ

gāyan kī khur raj aṅgsoṅ lagāveṅ

gāyan soṅ vraj chāyau vaikuṇṭh hu bisrāyau

gāyan ke het kar lai uṭhāve

chīt svāmī giridhārī viṭṭhleṣ vapudhārī

gvāriyā ko bheṣ dhareṅ gāyan meṅ āve


“The cows are in front of, behind and on either side of
Govinda, who likes to sit in their midst. He runs with
the cows, takes rest with them, and smears the dust of
their hooves over His body. He so much relishes the
company of the cows in Braja that He even forgets
Vaikuṇṭha. He lifted Govardhana with His own hand to
protect the cows. The lord of Chīta Svāmī, Giridhāri
Viṭṭhaleṣa, assumes the form of a cowherd boy and
appears in the dynasty of gopas.”

When Uddhavajī arrived in Nandagaon, he spent the entire
night consoling Nanda and Yaśodā at Nanda Bhavan. At the
brāhma-muhūrta hour, he came to this kuṇḍa, bathed, and
sat down on the southern bank to perform his morning
sandhyā āhnika. At that time, he saw the gopīs who were
hiding in the kadamba-kyārī nearby and, after completing
his āhnika, went there to meet them.



Chācha Kuṇḍa (Jhagaḍākī Kuṇḍa)

A short distance to the north-west of Kṛṣṇa Kuṇḍa is the
place where Kṛṣṇa and the sakhās used to beg the gopīs
for chācha, or buttermilk. The gopīs would offer them
this chācha with love, and the sakhās would drink it up
right on the spot. Sometimes, the boys used to fight and
quarrel (jhagaḍanā) among themselves, saying, “Let me

                          134
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

have some first! Let me have some first!” Because this
childhood līlā took place here, the name of this kuṇḍa
became Chācha Kuṇḍa, or Jhagaḍākī Kuṇḍa.



Sūrya Kuṇḍa

This kuṇḍa lies to the south of Kṛṣṇa Kuṇḍa, on the
right-hand side of the highway. Here, Sūrya-Nārāyaṇa
became restless after having darśana of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
exquisite threefold-bending form (tribhaṅga-lalita) and
forgot to move for some time.



Lalitā Kuṇḍa

To the east of Sūrya Kuṇḍa, within the lush, green
forest, lies a very attractive kuṇḍa. This is Lalitājī’s
bathing-place. Sometimes, Lalitājī, devising some clever
trick, would bring Rādhikā here to meet with Kṛṣṇa. This
kuṇḍa is situated east of Nandagaon.

Once, Kṛṣṇa warned Śrīmatī Rādhikā to be cautious of
Devarṣi Nārada. “Devarṣi is a ṛṣi whose nature is very
com-plicated,” He said. “Sometimes he causes disputes
between father and son, mother and father, husband and
wife. It is best to remain cautious of him.” But
Śrīmatījī did not take Kṛṣṇa’s words seriously.

So it happened that one day Lalitājī picked belī, camelī
and other flowers from the forest and began to string a
beautiful garland for Kṛṣṇa. After completing it, she
discarded it and began to string a new garland. She
repeated this many times. Nāradajī was hiding behind
some trees, watching this surprising scene. He
approached Lalitājī and asked her about her unusual
behaviour. Lalitājī said, “Every time I complete the
garland, I feel that it is either too short or too long
for Kṛṣṇa. This is why I keep starting again.”

The mischievous Nāradajī suggested, “Kṛṣṇa is playing
nearby. Why don’t you make Him sit beside you and string
your garland by measuring it against Him?” Lalitājī
agreed and called for Kṛṣṇa. Then she strung a beautiful
garland for Him that was just the right size, and placed
it around His neck. They waited for Rādhājī, who had
earlier asked Lalitājī to make a garland and had told
her that She would come as soon as the garland was
finished. However, Rādhājī was delayed because the
sakhīs were still busy decorating Her.

Previously, Śrī Kṛṣṇa had given a boon to Nāradajī, who
had wanted to have darśana of Kṛṣṇa swinging with
Lalitājī. Nārada now reminded Kṛṣṇa of His promise and
repeatedly requested Him to sit with Lalitājī on a
nearby swing. On Nāradajī’s request, they both sat down
and started swinging as they waited for Rādhikā.
Meanwhile, Devarṣi went to Śrīmatī Rādhikā, singing the
kīrtana, “Lalitā-Kṛṣṇa kī jaya ho! Lalitā-Kṛṣṇa kī jaya
ho!” Śrīmatī Rādhikā offered praṇāma to Devarṣi Nārada
and inquired, “Devarṣi! Today you are very happily
singing the glories of Lalitā and Kṛṣṇa. It seems that

                          135
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

you have some astonishing news. What is it?” Smiling,
Nāradajī exclaimed, “Oh, what a beautiful scene! Kṛṣṇa,
wearing a beautiful vanamālā, is swinging with Lalitājī.
If You don’t believe me, then go there and see for
Yourself.” Disbelieving Nāradajī’s words, Śrīmatījī went
there Herself. “How can He swing with Lalitā in My
absence?” She thought. From afar, She could see Kṛṣṇa
and Lalitā swinging together. Angered, She returned to
Her kuñja and sat down, deeply immersed in māna.

After waiting for Rādhājī for a long time, Kṛṣṇa finally
came to look for Her. He told Her about Nāradajī’s
activities and how it happened that He was swinging with
Lalitā, and thus somehow pacified Her māna. He took Her
to the swing and began to swing with Her, as Lalitā and
Viśākhā pushed Them. This sweet līlā took place here.
Nārada Kuṇḍa and the place where Lalitā and Kṛṣṇa swung
lie near this kuṇḍa.


Uddhava Kyārī (Viśākhā Kuñja)

This place, which is also known as Kadamba Kyārī, is
situated a short distance from Lalitā Kuṇḍa to the
south-east. Actually, this is the kuñja of Viśākhājī,
and nearby lies Viśākhā Kuṇḍa. In this secluded and
beautiful place surrounded by kadamba trees, Viśākhājī
used to arrange meetings between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.
Sometimes, Kṛṣṇa also used to perform rāsa-līlā here
with Rādhājī and Her friends. There is a rāsa-vedī here
reminding us of that rāsa-līlā. Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa also
enjoyed many kinds of jal-vihāra in the clear and
fragrant water of Viśākhā Kuṇḍa.

After Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s departure to Mathurā, all of Braja
drowned in an ocean of separation. What to speak of the
gopas and gopīs, even the birds and animals gave up
eating and drinking, feeling distressed in separation
from Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa’s beloved gopīs followed Akrūra’s
chariot to this point and then fell to the ground
unconscious. They never returned home again. Grievously
afflicted by separation from Kṛṣṇa, Rādhājī stayed in
this dense forest in seclusion. In the hope of Kṛṣṇa’s
return, She counted each passing day, remaining on the
verge of death. At that time, Kṛṣṇa’s messenger
Uddhavajī came here to console the gopīs but, upon
seeing Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s state of separation, he paid
his obeisances to Her from afar, unable to say anything.

Acutely afflicted by separation, Śrīmatī Rādhikā saw a
bumblebee and thought it to be Kṛṣṇa’s messenger. In the
state of divyonmāda, She started manifesting citrajalpa,
prajalpa and other moods of transcendental madness.
Sometimes She chastised the bee, and sometimes She
complained to it. Sometimes She gave the bee
instructions, sometimes respects and sometimes inquired
from it about the wellbeing of Her beloved. Uddhava was
amazed to see and hear all this. He had come as a guru
to give instructions, but instead he became a disciple.
To console the gopīs, he relayed some of Kṛṣṇa’s
messages to them, but this only intensified their pain
of separation. They said, udho man na bhayo das bīs, ek
huto so gayo śyām saṅga, ko ārādhe īśa. “Uddhava, we
don’t each have ten or twenty hearts. We had only one,

                          136
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

which has now gone away along with Śyāma. With which
heart shall we now worship God?” They also said, udho
joga kahāṅ rākheṅ yahāṅ rom rom śyām hai. “Uddhava, how
can we perform yoga when Śyāma pervades every particle
in our bodies?”

In the end, Uddhavajī desired to take birth in Braja in
the form of a small shrub, creeper or blade of grass so
that he could be blessed with the dust of the gopīs’
feet. He worshipped their footdust as follows:


āsām aho caraṇa-reṇu-juṣām ahaṁ syāṁ

vṛndāvane kim api gulma-latauṣadhīnām

yā dustyajaṁ sva-janam ārya-pathañca hitvā

bhejur mukunda-padavīṁ śrutibhir vimṛgyām

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.47.61)



“If I become a shrub, creeper or medicinal herb here in
Vṛndāvana, it will be my great fortune. Oh! I shall then
be able to serve the dust of these gopīs’ feet, and will
be blessed by bathing in that footdust. These gopīs are
the most fortunate of all. They have given up those
things that are extremely difficult to renounce — their
relatives, religious principles prescribed in the Vedas,
and acceptable social conduct. Having become so
completely absorbed in Kṛṣṇa, they have obtained His
supreme prema and become as worshipable as Him.”


vande nanda-vraja-strīṇāṁ

pāda-reṇum abhīkṣṇaśaḥ

yāsāṁ hari-kathodgītaṁ

punāti bhuvana-trayam

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.47.63)



“I bow down to the dust of the feet of the gopīs
residing in Nanda Bābā’s Braja. Oh! Whatever these gopīs
have sung about Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes is purifying the whole
world and will continue to do so.”

This pastime-place is filled with the rasa of topmost
meeting (mahā-sambhoga) and at the same time, it is
filled with the rasa of the highest degree of separation
(mahā-vipralambha). The life of a sādhaka becomes
successful by taking darśana of and touching this place.


Pūrṇamāsījī kī Gufā (Pūrṇamāsījī’s cave)

To the south-east of Viśākhā Kuñja, or Kadamba Kyārī,
and about one mile from Nandagaon is the kuṇḍa and

                            137
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

kuṭira of Pūrṇamāsījī. At the time of kṛṣṇa-līlā, she
lived at this secluded place away from the village as an
old tapasvinī wearing saffron cloth. Nanda and the other
Brajabāsīs had great respect for her and took her
blessings before under-taking any important activity.
Before coming to Braja, Pūrṇamāsījī used to live in
Avantīpurī with her husband and her son Sāndīpani Muni.
Madhumaṅgala and Nāndī-mukhī are Sāndīpani Muni’s son
and daughter. Pūrṇamāsījī came to Nandagaon before
Kṛṣṇa’s birth with her grandson Madhumaṅgala and her
granddaughter Nāndīmukhī. Every morning, she came to
Nanda Bhavan to have darśana of Kṛṣṇa and bless Him. In
prakaṭa-līlā, Kṛṣṇa’s manifest pastimes, she is
Nāradajī’s disciple. She is the personification of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s samaṣṭi līlā-śakti (collective pastime-potency),
which belongs to the svarūpa-śakti, and she nourishes
all of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala’s pastimes.


Nāndīmukhī’s place of residence

Near Pūrṇamāsī’s cave is the place of residence of
Nāndīmukhī, the granddaughter of Pūrṇamāsījī, who also
supports and nourishes Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes in various ways.


Ḍomanavana and Runakī-Jhunakī Kuṇḍa

Adjacent to Pūrṇamāsījī’s cave is Ḍomanavana, which is
also the location of Runakī-Jhunakī Kuṇḍa. The word
ḍomana means ‘by two minds’. Rādhā’s mind and Kṛṣṇa’s
mind met here, and therefore this place is known as
Ḍomana. The kuñja of the two sakhīs Runakī and Jhunakī
lies here. These two sakhīs used to arrange Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa’s meeting here by using various tricks. With great
happiness, they would sit Them on the jhūlā and swing
Them.

One devotee has described these līlās in his poem full
of prema:

it soṅ āī kumri kiśorī ut soṅ nandakiśor

do mil van krīḍā karat bolat paṅchī mor


“Kumārī Kiśorī came from one direction and Nandakiśora
from the other. They are playing together in the forest,
accompanied by the calls of the peacocks.”




Chapter 11

Jāvaṭa (Yāva Grāma)


JāvaṭaÇ or Yāva Grāma, lies approximately two miles east
of Nandagaon and is where Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala perform
Their secret pastimes (vilāsa). To describe all the
pastimes that took place here is impossible. Sometimes,
during vilāsa under a vaṭa tree, rasika Śrī Kṛṣṇa would

                          138
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

adorn His chest with the jāvaka, red paint, from Śrī
Rādhikājī’s lotus feet. That place which is decorated
with that same vaṭa tree is famous by the name Jāvaṭa or
Yāva Grāma.1

Jaṭilā Gopī used to live in this village with her son
Abhimanyu and daughter Kuṭilā. Mahārāja Vṛṣabhānu Gopa
married his beloved daughter, Śrī Rādhikā, to Jaṭilā’s
son Abhimanyu on the instruction of Yogamāyā
Purṇamāsījī. Although Abhimanyu had the conception of
being Śrī Rādhikā’s husband, by the power of Bhagavatī
Yogamāyā he was not able even to touch Her shadow.
Instead, out of embarrassment, he always kept himself
busy, looking after his cows in the gośālā or spending
time with his friends. Jaṭilā and Kuṭilā also remained
actively engaged in household chores. The clever sakhīs
would arrange meetings between Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Śrī
Kṛṣṇa by varieties of tricks and excuses. These meetings
were actually accomplished by Yogamāyā to nourish the
rasa of parakīyā-bhāva.

Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the embodiment of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
hlādinī-śakti (pleasure giving potency), and the crown-
jewel of Kṛṣṇa’s eternal beloveds. Fire and its power to
burn, or the sun and its light, are intrinsically one in
nature and cannot be separated from each other.
Similarly, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His parā-śakti Śrī Rādhājī are
eternally non-different and inseparable from each other;
one soul manifests into two forms solely to taste rasa-
vilāsa. Rāvaṇa could not so much as touch the original
Sītā. He was only able to kidnap her shadow. One can
reconcile Abhimanyu and Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s relationship
in the same way.

Mahārāja Vṛṣabhānu built a beautiful royal palace for
his darling daughter in Jāvaṭa, in which Śrīmatījī lived
happily with Her girlfriends. Every morning, Mukharājī
used to come here to see her beloved granddaughter.
Bhakti-ratnākara gives very sweet and touching accounts
of these līlās.2

One day, Śrī Kṛṣṇa could not meet with Rādhikā because
She was in māna, and He became very restless in
separation from Her. On the advice of Viśākhā, He
disguised Himself as a brāhmaṇa student. Wearing a
sacred thread across His shoulder and wooden shoes on
His feet, and carrying a begging bowl and daṇḍa in His
hands and a book under His arm, He arrived at the door
of Jaṭilā’s house in Jāvaṭa and began begging by calling
out God’s name. Since it was morning time and Jaṭilā and
Kuṭilā were making cowdung patties, they had not yet
taken bath. They could not give any bhikṣā, alms,
because they were unclean; they therefore called Rādhikā
and ordered Her to give bhikṣā to the brāhmaṇa. Rādhikā,
however, refused to come before a man other than Her
husband. The young beggar had His own unique style. He
said, “Maiyā! I cannot stay here very long. I can only
wait for as long as it takes to milk a cow and no
longer, so now it’s time for Me to go.”

Jaṭilā thought, “If this young brāhmaṇa leaves empty-
handed, it will be very inauspicious for my family. The
cows or any of my family members could die.” She entered
the house and very sweetly explained the situation to

                          139
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

her daughter-in-law and repeatedly requested Her to give
the mendicant some alms. She then returned to making
cowdung patties. Śrīmatī Rādhikā covered Her face with
Her veil and carried a plate of flour, lentils and
vegetables to the door. Lalitā, Viśākhā and the other
sakhīs accompanied Her. When She tried to offer the
beggar alms, He humbly petitioned Her: “I have no need
for these alms. Please place Your precious māna in My
begging bowl.” Now Priyājī understood everything. She
smiled, uncovered Her face a little and emptied the
whole plate on top of His head. Delighted, the young
beggar went His way, meditating upon the bhikṣā He had
just received from Rādhikā.

The following pastime also took place here. Once, mother
Yaśodā was in her storeroom, arranging some lahaṅgas
(skirts), colīs (blouses), shawls and other expensive
clothes and ornaments in a large chest, when mischievous
Kṛṣṇa burst into the room. He came up behind her, put
His arms around her neck and insisted on knowing what
she was doing. “Maiyā! Is it My birthday today?” He
asked. “Are you preparing all of these clothes and
ornaments for Me?”

“Go and play now,” Maiyā answered with some irritation.
“Don’t disturb me.” Hearing this, Kṛṣṇa felt somewhat
dejected and left, only to secretly observe what His
mother was doing. Mother Yaśodā was preparing this box
to send to Śrīmatī Rādhikā in Jāvaṭa. She would
occasionally send such gifts to please the hard-hearted
Jaṭilā, so that she would not prohibit her daughter-in-
law from coming to Nanda Bhavan. Clever Śrī Kṛṣṇa
understood this fact, so when Maiyā finished packing the
chest and became absorbed in other household chores,
Kṛṣṇa made His way with Subala Sakhā to the room in
which the chest lay. They unlocked the chest and removed
its contents, and Kṛṣṇa climbed inside instead. Subala
closed the lid and locked it as before. Yaśodājī had
requested Abhimanyu to personally come and collect the
box because it was filled with expensive gifts and
should not be given to anyone else. Abhimanyu put the
box on his head and with great difficulty carried it to
his mother in Jāvaṭa Grāma. Jaṭilā said, “My son, this
box is filled with very expensive clothes and ornaments
for my daughter-in-law, so put it in Her room.” He
happily placed the box in Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s room and
left. When the sakhīs eagerly opened the box and saw the
mischievous Śyāmasundara inside, they burst out
laughing. Their bliss knew no bounds. With intense
prema, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa met and the sakhīs felt great
satisfaction.

Once, Śrīmatī Rādhikā was in māna and did not meet Kṛṣṇa
for a few days. The sakhīs tried various means to
convince Her to give up Her māna, but this time Her māna
was very firm and therefore difficult to subdue. Kṛṣṇa’s
separation from Rādhā filled Him with great distress.
Seeing this, Subala Sakhā began to hatch a plan to help
Him meet with Rādhājī. Subala exactly resembles Śrīmatī
Rādhikā in age, beauty, speech and so forth and is
skilled in many arts. He consoled Kṛṣṇa, saying, “Why
are You so distressed? You should wait in this kuñja for
a short time while I arrange Your meeting with Priyājī.”
Saying this, he went to Yāva Grāma. When Jaṭilā saw him

                          140
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

there, she cried out, “Are Subala! You are the friend of
that licentious debauchee Kṛṣṇa; why are you hovering
around our house? Quickly go away from here!”

Subala replied, “Maiyā! One of my calves is lost and I
cannot find him anywhere. I have come to search for
him.”

Jaṭilā answered, “Your calf hasn’t come here. Leave at
once!” Subala repeatedly requested her to please allow
him to look until she finally relented. “I am going now
to make cowdung patties. Go to the cowshed and search
for your calf. If you find him, take him.”

Subalajī became very happy and reached Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s
balcony through the cowshed. He gave such a heart-
rending description of Kṛṣṇa’s condition of separation
that Śrīmatījī’s heart melted. She immediately gave up
Her māna and prepared Herself to go and console Kṛṣṇa,
but how would She be able to leave Her house? Subala
then gave Her his clothes and She disguised Herself as
him, carrying a stick and wearing a twisted turban on
Her head, a dhotī around Her waist, and a guñjā-mālā
around Her neck. Carrying a small calf in Her arms, it
appeared like Subala was happily leaving, having found
his lost calf. Śrīmatī Rādhikā was carrying the calf in
Her arms in such a way that no one would notice Her
breasts and become suspicious. Meanwhile, Subala,
disguised as Rādhikā, became immersed in conversation
with the sakhīs. When Jaṭilā saw Śrīmatījī disguised as
Subala leaving the cowshed, she asked, “So, did you find
your calf?”

Rādhikājī answered in Subala’s voice, “Maiyā! Just see,
I have found it.” Jaṭilā did not become even the
slightest bit suspicious. Śrīmatī Rādhikā finally
reached Kṛṣṇa, having made Her way to the location
hinted at by Subala. Distressed in separation, Kṛṣṇa
asked Her, “Sakhe, were you unable to bring My beloved?
My life is coming to an end! What should I do? Where
should I go?” Upon seeing Kṛṣṇa in such a miserable
condition, Śrīmatījī could not control Herself. She put
the calf down and embraced Him. By Her tender touch and
by the fragrance of Her body, Kṛṣṇa understood
everything and all His sorrow went far away. He praised
the intelligence of Subala again and again, and
proceeded to enjoy delightful pastimes (krīḍā-vinoda)
with His beloved. After some time, Subala also arrived
there and became very happy to see Their meeting.

Once, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s desire to meet Rādhikā was so intense
that He became restless and distressed. That evening,
with the hope of meeting Rādhikājī, He went to Jāvaṭa
and waited outside Jaṭilā’s mansion under a ber tree.
Climbing upon a branch of that tree, He started cooing
like a kokila (black cuckoo). Śrīmatī and Her
girlfriends understood that this kokila was none other
than Śrī Kṛṣṇa in the ber tree eagerly awaiting a
meeting. However, as soon as Kṛṣṇa tried to enter the
house, the vigilant Jaṭilā, hearing a sound, would call
out, Ko ai re? (“Who is there?”) and Kṛṣṇa would again
hide in the bushes. This continued all night long, and
thus Kṛṣṇa’s attempts to meet with Śrīmatī Rādhikā were
repeatedly foiled. In the end, He gave up hope and left,

                          141
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                      5/5/2017

dejected.

Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī has described this incident in his book
Ujjvala-nīlamaṇī (1.16):


saṅketī-kṛta-kokilādi-ninadaṁ kaṁsa-dviṣaḥ kurvato

dvāronmocana-lolaṅkhavalaya-kvāṇaṁ muhuḥ śṛṇvataḥ

keyaṁ keyam iti pragalbha-jaratī-vākyena dūnātmano

rādhā-prāṅgaṇa-koṇa-koli-viṭapi-kroḍe gatā śarvarī

In this verse, one sakhī is describing Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s
parādhīnatā3 of the previous night to her priya sakhī:
“Last night, Śrī Kṛṣṇa was standing under a ber tree in
Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s courtyard, cooing like a kokila again
and again. Śrīmatījī understood His signal but, as soon
as She went to open the door, Her bangles and ankle-
bells sounded. Śrī Kṛṣṇa also heard them. Then, from
inside the house, haughty old Jaṭilā would repeatedly
call out, ‘Who is there?’ Hearing her loud call, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, with a distressed heart, spent the whole night
under that ber tree.”

May Śrī Yāva Grāma be victorious as it conceals such
sweet memories.

Jaṭilā kī Havelī (Jaṭilā’s house)

In the western part of the village, on a high hillock,
is the havelī of Jaṭilā, in which there are mūrtis of
Jaṭilā, Kuṭilā and Abhimanyu. Now a temple of Rādhā-
Kāntajī is also there. The sakhīs arrange meetings
between Śrīmatījī and Kṛṣṇa here by deceiving Jaṭilā,
Kuṭilā and Abhimanyu.


Khiḍaka (Vatsakhora)

On the pretext of having   lost his calf, Subala Sakhā
deceived Jaṭilā and sent   Śrīmatī Rādhikā, disguised as
him, to meet with Kṛṣṇa.   Even today, this khiḍaka
(gośālā) of Abhimanyu is   known by the name Vatsakhora.


Beriyā

This place is situated near the gośālā. Within the dense
kuñjas here was a ber tree. Once, Kṛṣṇa waited here all
night long to meet with Śrīmatī Rādhikā.


Pānihārī Kuṇḍa

North of Beriyā is Pānihārī Kuṇḍa. The gopīs used to
come here to fetch water. Pāni means ‘water’, and hārī
means ‘taking’. Sometimes, Kṛṣṇa met with the gopīs
here.


Mukharā Mārga


                            142
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Every morning, Mukharājī joyfully trod this path (mārga)
to visit her granddaughter Rādhikā and bestow blessings
upon Her. She would then return by the same path.


Kuṭilā Dūṣaṇa Sthāna

This is where Jaṭilā’s daughter Kuṭilā, due to her
wicked nature, would always direct all kinds of
criticism (dūṣaṇa) at Śrīmatī Rādhikā. She would falsely
accuse Rādhikā of various transgressions. Once, she saw
Rādhikā meeting with Kṛṣṇa at this place. She locked
Them inside the room and created an uproar by which she
was able to gather together Pūrṇimā, as well as her
mother Jaṭilā, older brother Abhimanyu and younger
brother Durmada. She announced to them that she had
locked the disgraced young bride in this room together
with Kṛṣṇa. When the door was opened, however, everyone
saw Rādhājī worshipping a mūrti of Kālī. What happened
next? They all began to chastise Kuṭilā for making false
accusations. Kuṭilā pulled a long face and walked away.


Rādhikā Gamana Patha

Rādhikājī and Her sakhīs used to pass by here on their
way for Sūrya-pūjā, worship of the Sun god. Along the
road is Kadamba Kānana, where Kṛṣṇa would eagerly
approach Rādhikājī. As She tried to escape, He would tug
at the corner of Her cloth to stop Her. This pastime is
described in Bhakti-ratnākara.4


Pīvana Kuṇḍa

This kuṇḍa lies in the middle of Kadamba Kānana, where
the eager Kṛṣṇa, guided by the sakhīs, drank the nectar
of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s lips. This kuṇḍa is therefore
called Pīvana Kuṇḍa, and is the witness to the Divine
Couple’s amorous pastimes (vilāsa). The word pīvana
means ‘to drink’ or ‘water’. Bhakti-ratnākara describes
this incident.5


Kṛṣṇa Kuṇḍa

This kuṇḍa, which is surrounded by dense banyan trees,
provides a concealed setting for various līlā-vilāsa of
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala. It lies in the southern part of
Jāvaṭa.

Once, Śrī Kṛṣṇa came here to swing with Śrīmatī Rādhikā
and Her girlfriends under these closely-packed banyan
trees. The sakhīs arrived a little late, so rasika Kṛṣṇa
considered what type of mischief He could make. Today,
without waiting for the sakhīs, He Himself hung a swing
from the branch of a tree and then asked Śrīmatījī to
sit on it. However, the swing was so high that She was
unable to climb up on it. On the pretext of putting Her
on the swing, Śrī Kṛṣṇa lifted Her up in His arms and
embraced Her. Thus, even before the swing-festival
began, the Youthful Couple submerged Themselves in waves
of rasa. At that moment, the sakhīs arrived at this
swing-festival laughing and joking, and they too drowned

                          143
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

in rasa.


Lāḍalī Kuṇḍa

At this place, Lalitājī secretly arranged meetings
between Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala.


Nārada Kuṇḍa

Here, Durvāsā Ṛṣi gave Śrīmatī Rādhikā the boon that She
would become amṛta hastā. This meant that whatever She
cooked with Her own hands would at once become like
amṛta, or divine nectar, and whoever partook of this
food would become immortal, invincible, greatly valiant
and able to defeat everyone, including both demigods and
demons. This narration is found in Padma Purāṇa.


Gocāraṇa Patha

Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His sakhās used to go cowherding
(gocāraṇa) and return home along this path. At this
time, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, unobserved by everyone else,
would meet with each other. A deep reading of the
following śloka found in Śrī Padyāvalī reveals how They
would achieve this:


phullendīvara-kāntim indu-vadanaṁ barhāvataṁsa-priyaṁ

śrī-vatsāṅkam udāra-kaustubha-dharaṁ pītāmbaraṁ sundaram

gopīnāṁ nayanotpalārcita-tanuṁ go-gopa-saṅghāvṛtaṁ

govindaṁ kala-veṇu-vādana-paraṁ divyāṅga-bhūṣaṁ bhaje


“I worship Govinda, whose complexion is the colour of a
blossoming blue lotus, whose face is like the moon, who
is fond of wearing a peacock feather in His crown, whose
chest bears the mark of Śrīvatsa and is adorned with the
Kaustubha gem, who is attired in beautiful yellow
garments, whose handsome form the gopīs worship with
sidelong glances, whose companions are multitudes of
cows and gopas, who plays sweet melodies on the flute,
and whose body is decorated with glittering ornaments.”


Kiśorī Kuṇḍa (Rādhā Kuṇḍa)

In the eastern part of Jāvaṭa are Kiśorījī’s Mandira and
Kiśorī Kuṇḍa. Sometimes, Śrī Kṛṣṇa used to indulge in
jal-krīḍā here with Śrī Rādhikājī and the sakhīs. This
kuṇḍa is sprinkled with the kuṁkum, kesara (saffron) and
other aṅga-rāga (cosmetics) from the bodies of the
sakhīs and is still decorated with the memories of these
līlās, which are full of mādhurya.


Rāsa Maṇḍala

Here, Rādhikājī and Her sakhīs, being overwhelmed with

                             144
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

prema, played rāsa and other līlās with the seven-year-
old Kṛṣṇa.6


Padmāvatī Vivāha Sthala (the place of Padmāvatī’s
wedding)

In this place, the jovial girls of Braja celebrated the
wedding of Candrāvalī’s sakhī Padmāvatī with
Nandanandana. The heart of kiśorī Śrīmatī Rādhikājī is
very generous. On Her indication, Lalitā and the other
sakhīs decorated Padmāvatī as a bride and seated her on
Kṛṣṇa’s left. The sakhīs then tied the corner of
Padmāvatī’s veil with Kṛṣṇa’s pītāmbara and began
singing wedding songs. Padmāvatī felt very shy as She
gazed upon Kṛṣṇa.


Cīra Kuṇḍa and Hiṇḍolā Sthāna (the place of the swing)

These are very attractive places situated near Kiśorī
Kuṇḍa.


Pārala Gaṅgā

This place lies in the north-western part of Jāvaṭa.
Śrīmatī Rādhikājī manifested a stream of Bhagavatī Gaṅgā
here. It is said that this Pārala Gaṅgā is a sarovara
endowed with transcendental power. On the western bank
of this kuṇḍa is an ancient pārijāta tree, which
blossoms in the month of Vaiśākha (March-April). It is
accepted that this tree was planted by the hands of
Rādhājī Herself and still exists today.




Chapter 12

Kokilāvana and Other

Pastime-places


Kokilāvana lies three miles north of Nandagaon and one
mile west of Jāvaṭa. Even today, the sweet sounds of
many birds — such as peacocks, peahens, śukas, sārīs,
swans and cranes — can be heard in this protected and
enchanting forest, and animals like deer and nīla gāyas,
or blue cows, can be seen wandering about. The
Brajabāsīs bring their vast herds of cows here for
grazing. The sweet kuhū-kuhū of hundreds of kokilas
(cuckoo birds) resounds in this forest. Although most
forests of Braja have been destroyed, this one, with a
circumference of three and a half miles, remains
somewhat protected. According to Braja-bhakti-vilāsa,
Ratnākara Sarovara and a rāsa-maṇḍala are situated in
Kokilāvana.

Bhakti-ratnākara describes a magnificent pastime that
took place here:


                          145
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

jāvaṭera paścime e vana manohara

lakṣa-lakṣa kokila kūhare nirantara

eka dina kṛṣṇa eī vanete āsiyā

kokila-sadṛśa śabda kare harṣa haīyā

sakala kokila haīte śabda sumadhura

ye sune bāreka tāra dhairya jāya dūra

jaṭilā kahaye viśākhāre priyavāṇī

kokilera śabda aiche kabhu nāhi śuni

viśākhā khaye — eī mo sabhāra mane

yadi kaha e kokile dekhi giyā vane

vṛddhā kahe — jāo! śuni ullāsa aśeṣa

rāī sakhīsaha vane karilā praveśa

haīla mahākautuka sukhera sīmā nāī

sakaleī āsiyā mililā eka ṭhāṅī

kokilera śabde kṛṣṇa mile rādhikāre

e hetu ‘kokilāvana’ kahaye ihāre

Once, the very playful Śrī Kṛṣṇa eagerly desired to meet
Śrīmatī Rādhikā. However, because of the watchful eyes
of Her mother-in-law Jaṭilā, sister-in-law Kuṭilā and
husband Abhimanyu, Śrīmatī Rādhikā could not reach the
appointed meeting place. After waiting for a long time,
Kṛṣṇa climbed a tall tree and began to imitate the sound
of a kokila very sweetly. Hearing such an astonishingly
loud, enthralling sound, Śrīmatī Rādhikā and the sakhīs
understood that it was a signal from Kṛṣṇa and became
very eager and restless to meet with Him. At that time,
Jaṭilā addressed Viśākhā, saying, “Viśākhe! I have heard
kokilas make all kinds of beautiful sounds, but today
this kokila sang a wonderful melody for such a long
time. I have never heard anything quite like it.”

Viśākhā replied, “Dādījī, we heard it too, and we also
have never heard anything like it. This is one amazing
kokila. If you give us permission, we would like to go
out and see this extraordinary bird ourselves.” The old
woman gladly gave her permission for the sakhīs to enter
the forest. They very happily did this, and thus Kṛṣṇa
was able to meet with Rādhā. This is why this place has
become known as Kokilāvana.


Ratnākara Kuṇḍa

The sakhīs brought milk from their homes to manifest
this kuṇḍa. Many varieties of jewels appeared from this
sarovara, which the sakhīs used for Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s
śṛṅgāra.1 This sarovara, which destroys all sins and
bestows an abundance of wealth and affluence, can give

                          146
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

devotees the greatest jewel of all — Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
Yugala’s causeless bhakti.


Rāsa Maṇḍala

Śrī Kṛṣṇa performed rāsa-līlā with the gopīs here, after
which they played in the water of Ratnākara Kuṇḍa.


Āñjanauka

This is Śrī Viśākhā Sakhī’s place of residence. She is
famous among the eight prominent sakhīs. Her father was
Śrī Pāvana Gopa and her mother was Devadānī Gopī.2 This
place, situated five miles south-east of Nandagaon, is
where playful Kṛṣṇa applied kajala (añjana) to the eyes
on His prāṇa-vallabhā Śrīmatī Rādhikā. This līlā-sthalī
is therefore known as Āñjanauka.

Once, Śrīmatī Rādhikā was sitting in a secluded kuñja
with Her sakhīs, who were dressing and decorating Her
with various ornaments and jewels. The only thing left
to be done was to apply añjana to Her eyes, when
suddenly Kṛṣṇa played upon His sweet vaṁśī. As soon as
Śrīmatī Rādhikā heard that sound, She became overwhelmed
and with great eagerness, left to meet Her prāṇa-
vallabha without having applied añjana. Kṛṣṇa was also
anxiously waiting to meet Her, and when She arrived, He
sat Her on a flower-seat. He then put His hand around
Her neck and His eager eyes drank Her beauty. However,
when He noticed that there was no añjana on Her eyes, He
asked the sakhīs why. They answered, “We had fully
decorated Her except for the añjana but, as soon as She
heard the sweet sound of Your vaṁśī, She became so eager
to meet with You that She immediately ran off. Although
we repeatedly requested Her to wait so that we could
apply añjana, we were unable to stop Her.” Hearing this
filled Kṛṣṇa with rasa, and He applied añjana to Her
eyes with His own hands. He then held up a mirror to let
Rādhikā taste the beauty of Her form, which He also
relished in the mirror.

Bhakti-ratnākara says:


rasera āveśe kṛṣṇa añjana laīyā

dilena rādhikā netre mahā harṣa haīyā


“Kṛṣṇa was absorbed in rasa and happily applied añjana
to Rādhikā’s eyes.”

Also situated here is a rāsa-maṇḍala, where rāsa-līlā
took place. Kiśorī Kuṇḍa lies in the south of the
village, and on the west bank of this kuṇḍa is the
añjanī śīlā on which Śrī Kṛṣṇa seated Śrī Rādhā and
decorated Her eyes with añjana.


Bijavārī

This village lies one and a half miles south-east of

                          147
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                      5/5/2017

Nandagaon and one mile south of Khāyaro Gaon.

When Akrūra came to take the two brothers, Śrī Rāma and
Kṛṣṇa to Mathurā, They ascended his chariot here. The
gopīs, being so distressed from their impending
separation from Kṛṣṇa, cried out, “O Prāṇanātha!” and
fell to the ground unconscious. At that time, it
appeared as if lightening bolts (vidyutapuñja) were
striking the ground. The corrupted form of the word
vidyutapuñja is bijavārī.

Akrūra left Bijavārī with the two brothers and
travelling through Pisāī, Sahāra, Jainta and other
villages, reached Akrūra Ghāṭa. There he took bath
before finally reaching Mathurā. Akrūra-sthāna, where
you can see Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s footprint on a rock, lies
between Bijavārī and Nandagaon.


Parsoṁ

While Śrī Kṛṣṇa sat on Akrūra’s chariot waiting to
depart, He became disturbed upon seeing the condition of
the gopīs in their mood of separation. To pacify them,
He told them, “I promise that I will surely return the
day after tomorrow.” The day after tomorrow is called
parsoṁ in Hindi, so the name of this village has become
Parsoṁ.

Parsoṁ lies on the road between Govardhana and Varsānā,
close to the village of Sī. The following verse from
Bhakti-ratnākara describes how Kṛṣṇa repeatedly told the
gopīs that He would return soon, and thereby indicates
how Sī received its name:


mathurā haīte śīghra karibe gamana

eī hetu śīghra sī, kahaye sarvajana


The name Sī originates in the word śīghra, meaning
‘soon’.


Kāmaī

This is the birthplace   of Viśākhā, one of the main aṣṭa-
sakhīs. The village of   Kāmaī lies five miles from
Varsānā and four and a   half miles south-west of Umrāo.
South of Kāmaī are the   villages of Sī and Parsoṁ.


Karehlā

This is the birthplace of Lalitājī. The son of Karahālā
Gopī, Govardhana Malla, would sometimes stay here with
his wife Candrāvalī, and sometimes they would also stay
in Sakhītharā (Sakhī-sthalī) near Govardhana.
Candrāvalī’s father was Candrabhānu Gopa and her mother
was Indūmatī Gopī. Candrāvalī is the cousin-sister of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja had four brothers —
Candrabhānu, Ratnabhānu, Subhānu and Śrībhānu. Vṛṣabhānu
was the eldest. Since Śrīmatī Rādhikā is Vṛṣabhānu’s

                            148
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

daughter, She and Candrāvalī are considered sisters.
Padmā and other yūtheśvarīs stayed at this place, and
would try to arrange meetings between Candrāvalī and
Kṛṣṇa. Kaṅkaṇa Kuṇḍa, a kadamba khaṇḍī, a jhūla (swing),
and the baiṭhakas of Śrī Vallabhācārya, Śrī Viṭṭhaleśa
and Śrī Gokulanātha are located here. This place is
situated one mile north of Kāmaī. On Bhādra Pūrṇimā,
rāsa-līlā is staged here in the dramatic tradition of
būḍhī-līlā.


Ludhaulī

This place lies half a mile west of Pīsāī Gaon. Here
Lalitā arranged for Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa to meet. Both
were eagerly hankering (lubdha) to meet each other, and
so this place became known as Ludhaulī. Outside the
village to the north is Lalitā Kuṇḍa, where Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa’s meeting took place. On the eastern bank of this
kuṇḍa, one can take darśana of Lalitā-Bihārījī.


Pīsāī

Once, while herding the cows, Baladeva brought water
here for Kṛṣṇa, who was feeling very thirsty. Hence,
this village became known as Pyāsāī, meaning ‘thirst
came’ (pyās āī). Tṛṣṇa Kuṇḍa and Viśākhā Kuṇḍa also lie
here. Just near this village to the north-west is a
beautiful kadamba-khaṇḍī. Pīsāī is situated one and a
half miles north of Karehlā.


Sahāra

This is the residence of Nandajī’s eldest brother,
Upānanda. He was extremely wise and in every respect
Mahārāja Nanda’s guide and advisor. He loved
Nandanandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa more than his own life.
Upānanda’s son was Subhadra, whom Śrī Kṛṣṇa respected
like His elder brother. Subhadra Sakhā, who was also
very affectionate towards Kṛṣṇa, was expert in astrology
and all other arts. He was always zealous to protect
Kṛṣṇa from all types of hardships during cowherding.
Subhadra’s wife was Kundalatā, who accepted Kṛṣṇa as her
very life. Very witty and playful, she loved to laugh.
She was very expert in arranging meetings between Rādhā
and Kṛṣṇa. On the order of Yaśodā, she would bring
Śrīmatī Rādhikā with her from Jāvaṭa to cook for Kṛṣṇa.


Sāṅkhī

This pastime-place lies one mile west of Narī and two
miles north of Sahāra. It was here that Kṛṣṇa killed
Śaṅkha-chūḍa, removed the jewel from his forehead, and
gave it to Śrī Baladevajī.

One day, Kṛṣṇa and His sakhās were playing raṅgīlī holī
with Rādhā and Her sakhīs near Rādhā Kuṇḍa at the foot
of Govardhana. At that time, the demon Śaṅkhacūḍa caught
the gopīs and fled. With śāla trees in Their hands, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva ran after the demon to kill him.
Seeing Their raging speed, Śaṅkhacūḍa left the gopīs and

                          149
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

fled for his life. Kṛṣṇa left Dāū Bhaiyā to protect the
gopīs, and pursued the demon alone, whom He killed.
Kṛṣṇa then removed the jewel from Śaṅkhacūḍa’s forehead
and gave it to Baladeva, who sent it to Śrīmatī Rādhikā
through Dhaniṣṭhā. Śrīmatī Rādhikā accepted the jewel
with great honour.

Nearby is Rāma Kuṇḍa, which is also called Rāmatalā.


Chatravana (Chātā)

This place lies on the Mathurā-Delhī highway
approximately twenty miles north-west of Mathurā and
four miles south-west of Paya Gaon. Its present name is
Chātā. In the north-east corner of this village lies
Sūrya Kuṇḍa, and in its south-west is Candra Kuṇḍa, on
whose bank Dāūjī Mandira is situated. Here, Śrīdāma and
the other sakhās seated Śrī Kṛṣṇa on a throne and
declared Him the exalted king (chatra-pati) of Braja.
They thus performed a wonderful unprecedented līlā here.
Śrī Balarāma sat on Kṛṣṇa’s left side, and began
executing the duties of minister of state. Śrīdāma held
an umbrella (chatra) over Kṛṣṇa’s head; Arjuna fanned
Him with a cāmara; Madumaṅgala sat in front of Kṛṣṇa and
acted as court jester; Subala offered Him tāmbūla bīṭikā
(betel-nuts); and Subāhu, Viśāla and some other sakhās
assumed the roles of subjects. Through Madhumaṅgala,
Chatra-pati Mahārāja Kṛṣṇa proclaimed throughout the
land, “Mahārāja Chatra-pati Nandakumāra is the sole
emperor here. No one else has claim to any authority.
Daily the gopīs destroy this garden; therefore, they
should all be punished.” In memory of this līlā, this
village is named Chatravana, or Chātā.



Umrāo

This village is situated approximately four or five
miles east of Chatravana. When the sakhīs heard Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s procla-mation, they complained to Lalitā about
Him. Bhakti-ratnākara describes what ensued:


lalitādi sakhī krodhe kahe bāra bāra

rādhikāra rājya ke karaye adhikāra

aiche kata kahi lalitādi sakhīgaṇa

rādhikāre umrāo kailā īkṣaṇa


“Lalitā became angry and said, ‘Who is that person who
dares to claim authority over Rādhikā’s kingdom? We will
retaliate against Him.’ Saying this, she sat Rādhikā on
a beautiful throne and pronounced Her to be the
undisputed umrāva, or queen.” Umrāo means ‘lord of a
kingdom’.

Citrā Sakhī held an umbrella over Rādhikā’s head, and
Viśākhā fanned Her with a cāmara. Lalitājī sat on
Rādhikā’s left as Her minister of state. One sakhī

                          150
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

offered Her pān, and the remaining sakhīs acted as
subjects. Sitting on Her throne, Rādhikā ordered the
sakhīs:


mora rājya adhikāra kare yeī jana

parābhava kari tāre āna eī kṣaṇa

(Bhakti-ratnākara)



“Go and defeat the person who desires to usurp My
kingdom. Bind Him and bring Him before Me.”

Receiving the order of their Umrāva, thousands and
thousands of sakhīs with flower-sticks in their hands
left for battle. When Arjuna, Lavaṅga, Bhṛṅga, Kokila,
Subala and Madhumaṅgala saw them approaching, they fled
in all directions. One clever sakhī, however, caught
Madhumaṅgala, bound him with her flower garland, and
brought him to the lotus-feet of the Umrāva. Some gopīs
slapped Madhumaṅgala’s cheeks a few times and said,
“What audacity you have to try to unlawfully seize the
authority of this kingdom from our Umrāva. We will
punish you now.” Madhumaṅgala bowed his head low like a
defeated general and said, “That is befitting! We are
defeated, but hand down such a punishment that my
stomach will be filled.” Hearing this, Mahārānī Rādhikā
started laughing and said, “This is just some gluttonous
brāhmaṇa. Release him.” The sakhīs filled his stomach
with laḍḍūs and let him go.

Madhumaṅgala returned to Chatra-pati Mahārāja Kṛṣṇa and,
pretending to cry, gave Him a detailed report of his
humiliating detention. Hearing this, Kṛṣṇa together with
Madhumaṅgala and the sakhās invaded Umrāo. When Śrīmatī
Rādhikā saw Her prāṇa-vallabha Śrī Kṛṣṇa, She became
very embarrassed and wanted to take off Her umrāva
dress; but the sakhīs, laughing, would not let Her do
so. Madhumaṅgala seated Chatra-pati Śrī Kṛṣṇa on Umrāva
Rādhikā’s right side. They both made a treaty in which
Kṛṣṇa accepted Rādhikā’s sovereignty. Madhumaṅgala
folded his hands before Śrīmatī Rādhikā and said, “The
kingdom of Kṛṣṇa’s body is now under Your rule. You can
take whatever You desire from Him.” All the sakhīs and
sakhās became very blissful participating in this
pastime.

This village is called Umrāo after this umrāva-līlā, and
is also known as Rādhā-sthalī. Afterwards Pūrṇamāsī
enthroned Rādhikā here as Brajeśvarī, the Queen of
Braja. There is also a Kiśorī Kuṇḍa here, where Śrī
Lokanātha Gosvāmī performed bhajana. The worshipable
deities of Lokanātha Gosvāmī, Śrī Rādhā-Vinoda, who
appeared from this kuṇḍa, are now worshipped in Jaipura.


Dhanaśiṅga

This is the village of Dhaniṣṭhā Sakhī and lies near
Umrāo. Dhaniṣṭhā Sakhī is a kṛṣṇa-pakṣīya sakhī, always
engaged in various services in the home of Yaśodā. She

                          151
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                      5/5/2017

especially performs the tasks of a dūtī, or messenger,
and thus arranges for Kṛṣṇa to meet with Rādhikā.


Kosī (Kosīvana)

This place is situated on the Mathurā-Delhi highway
about thirty-five miles from Mathurā and some ten miles
from Chatravana. Here Śrī Kṛṣṇa arranged for Nanda Bābā
to have darśana of Kuśasthalī (Dvārakā Dhāma) at Gomatī
Kuṇḍa, situated west of the village.

Pretending ignorance and speaking in a taunting voice,
Śrīmatī Rādhikā asked Kṛṣṇa, Ko ‘sī? (“Who are You?”).
This place is therefore called Kosī or Kosīvana.

Once, Śrī Kṛṣṇa was so eager to meet Śrīmatī Rādhikā
that He knocked on Her door. From inside the house,
Śrīmatī Rādhikā asked, “Ko ‘sī?”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa replied, “I am Kṛṣṇa.”

The word kṛṣṇa also happens to mean ‘black snake’.
Rādhikā therefore said, “If You are a black snake, then
why do You need to be here? Do You want to bite Me? Go
to the forest. You have no purpose here.”

“No Priyatame! I am Ghanaśyāma.”

Rādhikā took ghanaśyāma to mean ‘black cloud’. “If You
are a black cloud, then You are not needed here either,”
She answered. “Don’t shower rain here and muddy My
courtyard. Go to the forests and fields to discharge
Your rain.”

“Priyatame! I am Cakrī.”

Cakrī also means ‘potter’. Rādhikā therefore said,
“There is no need for a cakrī here. No wedding festival
is being held in My house. Take Your clay pots and go to
where a marriage is being celebrated.”

“Priyatame! I am Madhusūdana.”

Rādhikā intentionally took the word madhusūdana to mean
‘bumblebee’ and said, “If You are madhusūdana, then
quickly fly from here to a flower-garden and taste the
rasa of the flowers. There is no flower-garden here.”

“Are! I am Your beloved Hari,” Kṛṣṇa insisted.

Rādhikā, taking hari to mean monkey or lion, laughingly
replied, “What is the need of a monkey or a lion here?
Do You want to scratch Me? You should quickly run away
to a dense forest. We are all scared of lions and
monkeys here.”

Thus, Śrīmatī Rādhikā jokes with Her beloved Hari in
various ways. May They be pleased with us. The pastime-
place where this joking took place is called Kosīvana.



Raṇavāḍī

                           152
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017


This village lies one mile north of Ārabāḍī and three
miles south-west of Chātā. Nandanadana Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
directly manmatha-manmatha, one who attracts even Cupid,
and Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the direct manifestation of
mahābhāva. Her function is to fulfil Kṛṣṇa’s kāma, or
desires. In Raṇa-vāḍī, they are both absorbed in
varieties of love-play (smara-yuddha) aimed at pleasing
each other. Raṇavāḍī means ‘the place of amorous
exchanges (smara-vilāsa) and playful games (krīḍā-
vilāsa)’.

Around 150 years ago, a Bengali bābā named Kṛṣṇadāsa
performed bhajana here. One day, an ardent desire to
visit all the tīrthas of India awakened in his heart.
Coincidentally, a brāhmaṇa was leaving from here to
Dvārakā at that same time, and he insisted that
Kṛṣṇadāsa Bābājī accompany him. Since Kṛṣṇadāsa already
had this desire in his heart, he prepared himself for
the journey. On the way, they took darśana of many
tīrthas before finally arriving at Dvārakā Dhāma.

To enter Dvārakā, one had to be branded with a cakra on
the skin (taptamūdrā), which Kṛṣṇadāsa Bābājī did. After
visiting other tīrthas, he made his way back to
Raṇavāḍī. However, to his surprise he discovered that he
could no longer absorb his mind in bhajana. Despite
great endeavour, he could not remember aṣṭakālīya-līlā,
the eight-fold pastimes of the day. This caused him
great distress, so he went to see his friend Siddha
Kṛṣṇadāsa Bābājī at Rādhā Kuṇḍa. When Siddha Bābājī saw
Kṛṣṇadāsa Bābājī, he turned his face away and said, “You
have been deprived of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s mercy. You have
left Her exclusive shelter and have taken the taptamūdrā
of Dvārakā. This means that you have accepted the
shelter of Śrī Rukmiṇī, Satyabhāmā and the other mahiṣīs
(queens) of Dvārakā. It is therefore impossible for You
to get Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s mercy while you are in this
body. Please leave this place at once, otherwise I will
also be deprived of Her mercy.”

Despondent, Kṛṣṇadāsa Bābājī returned to Raṇavāḍī. He
closed the doors of his bhajana-kuṭī and refrained from
water and food. His burning separation produced in his
body a fire that exploded inside him, and within three
days his material body had turned to ashes. After three
days, the villagers broke open the door of his bhajana-
kuṭī, and were astonished to find ashes instead of his
body. On the Amāvasyā in the month of Pausa, the
Brajabāsīs of that place annually celebrate the
disappearance festival of this bābājī with great
splendour.



Narīsemarī

The previous and correct name of this village is
Kinnarī-Śyāmarī. In fact, it comprises two villages,
namely Narī and Semarī, that border on each other so
closely that they are regarded as one. Semarī Gaon, the
residence of the yūtheśvarī Śyāmalā Sakhī, lies four
miles south-east of Chātā, and one mile south of Semarī
is Narī Gaon.

                          153
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017


Once, the māna of māninī Śrīmatī Rādhikā seemed
unbreakable. Lalitā, Viśākhā and the other sakhīs tried
their level best to pacify Her, but to no avail; instead
Her māna simply increased. Finally, Kṛṣṇa, on the advice
of the sakhīs, disguised Himself as Śyāmarī Sakhī and,
playing the vīṇā, arrived at that place. Upon seeing the
amazing beauty of Śyāmarī Sakhī and hearing her sing in
various exquisite rāgas to the vīṇā’s full range of
ascending and descending notes, Śrīmatī Rādhikā became
enchanted. She asked, “Sakhī, what is your name? Where
do you live?”

Kṛṣṇa, disguised as a sakhī, answered, “My name is
Śyāmarī. I am a kinnarī from Svarga.” Śrīmatī Rādhikā
became extremely overwhelmed upon hearing Śyāmarī
Kinnarī play the vīṇā and sing in her very beautiful
voice. Śrīmatī Rādhikā was just about to put Her
jewelled necklace around the neck of Śyāmarī Kinnarī,
when the sakhī folded her hands and made a request at
Her lotus feet: “Please give me the jewel of Your māna.”
When Śrīmatī Rādhikā heard this, She immediately
understood that this was Her Priyatama asking Her to
surrender Her precious sulky mood. Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa now
happily reunited, and the sakhīs were overjoyed to have
arranged this reconciliation.

Narīsemarī has taken its name from this sweet pastime:
‘Narī’ derives from the word kinnarī, and ‘Semarī’ from
‘Śyāmarī’. According to Vṛndāvana-līlāmṛta, the name
Narī is a corrupted form of the word hari.

Another pastime also took place here. When Kṛṣṇa and
Baladeva were about to leave for Mathurā, Akrūra seated
Them on his chariot and quickly drove the chariot away.
The gopīs stood watching with unblinking eyes as the
chariot gradually disappeared from their vision and as
the dust it had kicked up settled to the ground. Beside
themselves with grief and agony, they fell to the ground
calling out, “Hā Hari! Hā Hari!” To protect the memory
of this līlā, Mahārāja Vajranābha established a village
here known as Hari. Gradually, the word hari corrupted
to become Narī. Kiśorī Kuṇḍa, Saṅkarṣaṇa Kuṇḍa and a
mandira of Śrī Baladevajī are located in this village.



Khadiravana (Khāyaro)

The present name of this village is Khāyaro, and lies
three miles south of Chātā and three miles south-east of
Jāvaṭa. Kṛṣṇa would come to herd His cows here. Saṅgama
Kuṇḍa, where a meeting (saṅgama) between the gopīs and
Kṛṣṇa took place, is situated here. Lokanātha Gosvāmī
performed sādhana-bhajana on the bank of this kuṇḍa in a
solitary place. Occasionally, Bhūgarbha Gosvāmī would
also come here and perform bhajana together with
Lokanātha Gosvāmī. Nearby is a very charming kadamba-
khaṇḍī. Kṛṣṇa, Balarāma and the sakhās performed many
kinds of bālya-līlās (childhood pastimes) here. Every
year when the dates (khajūra) ripened, Kṛṣṇa and the
sakhās would come here to herd the cows and eat ripe
dates.


                          154
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Once, Bakāsura, a demon sent by Kaṁsa, appeared here as
a huge crane to swallow Kṛṣṇa. He opened wide his
massive beak, his lower beak touching the ground, and
his upper beak piercing the sky. He then ran at Kṛṣṇa
with great speed to swallow Him. When all the sakhās saw
this fearful form, they became filled with fright and
began to shout, Khāyo re! Khāyo re! (“He will eat Kṛṣṇa!
He will eat Kṛṣṇa!”). But Kṛṣṇa remained fearless. He
put His foot on the lower beak, and catching the upper
beak with His hand, split it just as one might split a
straw. The sakhās joyfully cried out, Khāyo re! Khāyo
re! (“Kṛṣṇa ate him! Kṛṣṇa ate him!”). The name of this
village became Khāyāre because of this līlā. This place
is also called Khadeḍavana or Khadīravana, because in
order to kill Bakāsura, Kṛṣṇa had to chase him. The
Hindi word for ‘to chase’ is khadeḍnā. Another reason
why this forest is called Khadīravana is the khadīra
trees growing here, the astringent extract of which is
used for making pān.



Bakatharā

Situated near Jāvaṭa, this village lies between Khāyaro
and Āñjanauka. It was here that Kṛṣṇa actually killed
Bakāsura. This village is also called Cillī because
Kṛṣṇa caught the beak of Bakāsura and split (cīrnā) it
down the middle.



Neochāka

Kṛṣṇa and the sakhās used to eat their lunch here at
midday when they were out tending the cows. Mother
Yaśodā would send lunch for Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma, and the
other mothers would do so for their own sons. Kṛṣṇa and
His friends would then eat in a playful mood, making
lots of jokes. The word chāka means ‘light meal’ or
‘food’, and neochāka means ‘to eat chāka’.



Bhaṇḍāgora

This place is situated two miles north-west of Raṇabāḍī,
and currently goes by the name of Bhādāvalī. Śrī Nanda
Mahārāja’s storeroom (bhaṇḍāra gṛha) was here. The cows
were also brought here for grazing.



Khāṁpura

This place lies one mile south of Bhādāvalī. Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa Yugala and the sakhīs ate various foodstuffs
(khādya) here after playing phāga, or holī, in Raṇabāḍī.



Baiṭhāna (Baiṭhana)

Baḍī Baiṭhāna is situated two and a half miles north of

                          155
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Kokilāvana, and Choṭī Baiṭhāna is half a mile north of
Baḍī Baiṭhāna. Thus, both villages lie near each other.
Nanda Mahārāja, Upānanda, and all other older gopas
would sit together here at a baiṭhaka and discuss the
welfare of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma.

Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī would occasionally stay here for a
few days at a time to perform bhajana and remember these
līlās. The Brajabāsīs were charmed by his affectionate
behaviour and would zealously request him to remain here
for longer, which he would do.

South-east of Baḍī Baiṭhāna is Kṛṣṇa Kuṇḍa, which Kṛṣṇa
holds very dear. He used to take bath and play here with
the sakhās. In Choṭī Baiṭhāna is Kuntala Kuṇḍa, where
the sakhās used to decorate Kṛṣṇa. In Baḍī Baiṭhāna is a
temple of Dāūjī, and in Choṭī Baiṭhāna is a temple of
Sākṣī Gopālajī.


Baḍokhora

The present name of this village is Baindokhara, but was
previously called Baḍokhora. It is situated west of
Baiṭhāna. Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa performed krīḍā-vilāsa here,
behind the closed doors of a kuñja. Caraṇagaṅgā and
Caraṇa Pahāḍī are located here.


Caraṇa Pahāḍī

This place is located one mile north of Choṭī Baiṭhāna.
It is called Caraṇa Pahāḍī because one can find Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva’s footprints (caraṇa cihna) here, as
well as imprints made by cows and gopas.

Once, while herding the cows, Kṛṣṇa reached this place
with His entourage of sakhās. The cows were grazing some
distance from where He stood, and the sakhās were also a
short distance away. In a playful mood, Kṛṣṇa stood
under a tree on top of Caraṇa Pahāḍī in His tribhaṅga-
lalita form. He played such a melody on His vaṁśī that
the entire hill melted upon hearing the sound. What to
speak of the cowherd boys and cows, even the deer, does
and other animals and birds were allured. They quickly
made their way to Kṛṣṇa, leaving imprints across the
melted stones. These imprints all point in one direction
only, because when Kṛṣṇa stopped playing His flute, the
stones regained their natural state, which meant the
gopīs, gopas and animals left no impressions behind when
they went their different ways.

Bhakti-ratnākara affirms:


śrī-kṛṣṇera pādapadma-cihna e rahila

eī hetu caraṇa pahāḍī nāma haīla


“This place is named Caraṇa Pahāḍī because Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
footprints are on top of the mountain.” The word caraṇa
means ‘foot’, and pahāḍī means ‘mountain’.


                            156
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Nearby is Caraṇagaṅgā, where Kṛṣṇa washed His feet.


Rasaulī

This village lies between Caraṇa Pahāḍī and Koṭvana.
Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs’ famous śāradīya rāsa-līlā took
place here.


Kāmara

Once, Śrī Kṛṣṇa was beside Himself with the desire to
meet with Śrīmatī Rādhikā. In great restlessness, He
gazed down the path along which He hoped She might
appear. Finally, He called Her name on His flute.
Śrīmatī Rādhikā and the sakhīs were very attracted by
that sound and they made their way to Kṛṣṇa, who was
overjoyed. The gopīs then thought to play a trick on
Kṛṣṇa. They very quietly picked up their beloved’s black
blanket (kārī kāmara) and hid it. Śrī Kṛṣṇa then began
to search for His dear blanket. The bhakta poet Śrī
Sūradāsajī has briefly described this pastime with much
rasa. In this poem, Kanhaiyā is complaining to Maiyā:


maiyā merī kāmar cor laī

maiṅ ban jāt carāvan gaiyā sūnī dekh laī

ek kahe kānhā terī kāmar jamunā jāt bahī

ek kahe kānhā terī kāmar surbhi khāy gaī

ek kahe nāco mere āge lai dehuṅ ju naī

sūrdāsa jasumati ke āge aṅsuvan dhār bahī


“Maiyā! I went to the forest to graze the cows. They had
wandered far away, so I put down My blanket and went
after them. But while I was gone some sakhī secretly
stole My blanket. When I returned and could not find it,
I asked the sakhīs, ‘Where is My blanket? If you have
taken it, then return it.’ One sakhī said, ‘Kanhaiyā!
Your blanket fell in the Yamunā and is floating
downstream. I saw it myself.’ Another sakhī said,
‘Kanhaiyā! I saw a cow eating Your blanket.’ Maiyā! Tell
Me, how could a kind-hearted cow eat My blanket? Another
sakhī said, ‘Kanhaiyā! If You dance in front of me, then
I will give You a new blanket.’ Maiyā! These sakhīs are
teasing Me in many ways.” Saying this, Kanhaiyā’s eyes
filled with tears. Maiyā lifted up her lālā and put Him
to her breast.”

This village is called Kāmara because Kṛṣṇa was
completely immersed in kāma (prema) here, as He eagerly
waited for Śrīmatī Rādhikā. It is also named Kāmara
because it was here that Kṛṣṇa complained about the
gopīs stealing His kāmara, or black blanket. One is
recommended to take darśana of Gopī Kuṇḍa, Gopī
Jalvihāra, Hari Kuṇḍa, Mohana Kuṇḍa, and the mandiras of
Mohanajī and Durvāsājī in this area.


                           157
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017


Bāsosi

This village is situated two miles north of Śeṣaśāī.
Here, the bees became intoxicated upon smelling the
beautiful fragrance of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s limbs and hummed all
around Him. The word bāsa means ‘fragrance’ and thus the
name of this place became Bāsosi. Here Rādhā, Kṛṣṇa and
the sakhīs became intoxicated in krīḍā-vilāsa. The
fragrance of Their limbs pervaded the air just as abīra,
gulāla and candana fill the air during the holī
festival.


Paya Gaon

This village lies six miles east of Kosī. Although the
mothers of Kṛṣṇa, Balarāma and the gopas would send
lunch for them, one day, their lunches arrived late. In
hunger, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the sakhās went to this village
and drank milk (paya). This village has therefore become
known as Paya Gaon. North of Paya Gaon is Paya Sarovara,
as well as a grove beautifully decorated with tamāla and
kadamba trees.


Koṭvana

This place is situated near the Delhi-Mathurā highway in
between Kosī and Hoḍal. It is four miles north and a
little east of Caraṇa Pahāḍī. It used to be called
Koṭarvana. One can take darśana of Śītala Kuṇḍa and
Sūrya Kuṇḍa here. Kṛṣṇa used to herd the cows and
perform krīḍā-vilāsa here.


Śeṣaśāī

This pastime-place lies one and a half miles south and
somewhat east of Bāsolī. Nearby is Kṣīrasāgara Grāma. In
a mandira on the west bank of Kṣīrasāgara is a deity of
Bhagavān Ananta reclining on His bed with Lakṣmījī
massaging His lotus feet (śayana-līlā).

One time, when the playful Kṛṣṇa was engaged in vilāsa
here with Śrīmatī Rādhikā and the sakhīs, the kathā of
Bhagavān Anantaśāyī Viṣṇu somehow came up in their
conversation. A strong desire to see the śayana-līlā of
Anantaśāyī Viṣṇu arose in Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s heart, so
Kṛṣṇa gave Her darśana of this līlā. Immersed in the
bhāva of Anantaśāyī, Śrī Kṛṣṇa laid down on a thousand-
petalled lotus in the middle of Kṣīrasāgara, and Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, in the mood of Lakṣmī, massaged His lotus feet.
All the assembled gopīs became quite astonished. Śrīla
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī alludes to this līlā in his
Vraja-vilāsa stava (śloka 91):


yasya śrīmac-caraṇa-kamale komale komalāpi

śrī-rādhoccair nija-sukha-kṛte sannayantī kucāgre

bhītā py ārādatha na hi dadhātay asya kārkaśaya-doṣāta


                          158
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

sa śrī-goṣṭhe prathayatu sadā śeṣaśāyī sthitiṁ naḥ


“Even though Śrīmatī Rādhikā has extremely soft limbs,
when She brought Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s very soft and charming
lotus feet near Her chest, She could not bring Herself
to place them on it as She feared that the touch of Her
hard breasts might cause Him pain. May I obtain
residence in the enchanting goṣṭha (Braja) of Śeṣaśāyī
Kṛṣṇa.”

When Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu travelled throughout Braja,
He came to take darśana of this place, and in doing so
became filled with prema. There is a charming kadamba
forest here, and one can also take darśana of
Prauḍhanātha and a hiṇḍola, swing. Nearby is a baiṭhaka,
or sitting-place, of Śrī Vallabhācārya.


Khāmī Gaon (Khambahara)

This village is situated on the border of Braja. To
establish the boundary of Braja, Śrī Vajranābha Mahārāja
constructed a stone pillar (khambā) here. Vanacarī Gaon
is nearby. These two villages are situated on the north-
west border of Braja, four miles north-east of Hoḍal.
Here, one can have darśana of Lakṣmī-Nārāyaṇa and
Mahādevajī.


Khayero (Kharero)

This place lies four miles south, and a little east, of
Śeṣaśāī. When Baladevajī came here from Dvārakāpurī, He
asked the sakhās for khaira, or good news. This place is
also a pasturing-ground for the cows.


Banachaulī

This village lies two and a half miles east of Kharero
and four miles north-west of Paya Gaon. Kṛṣṇa performed
rāsa-līlā here.


Ūjānī

This place is situated four miles north-east of Paya
Gaon and is near the main road between Chātā and
Śergarh. The word ūjānī means ‘opposite flow’. The
Yamunā started flowing upstream here upon hearing the
very sweet sound of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s flute. One can still
have darśana of this place today.


Khelanvana (Śergarh)

This place lies two miles south-east of Ūjānī. Śrī Kṛṣṇa
and Śrī Balarāma used to amuse themselves here with the
sakhās when they would come for cowherding. Śrīmatī
Rādhikā also played here with Her sakhīs. This place is
called Khelanvana because they would play (khelnā) here.

Nanda Bābā resided here for some time with the gopīs,

                          159
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

gopas and cows. Vṛṣabhānu Bābā also stayed here with his
whole family and herd of cows.

Jaṭilā and Koṭilā thought themselves to be the only
chaste women in Braja, and they considered Rādhikā to be
not even slightly chaste. They always spoke ill of
Rādhikā and made propaganda against Her. Kṛṣṇa was aware
of all this. One day, He pretended to be ill to the
point of death. Yaśodājī called all the vaidyas
(Ayurvedic doctors) and brāhmaṇas skilled in mantras,
but no one was able to help. Finally, Yogamāyā Pūrṇimājī
arrived on the scene. She said, “If a chaste lady brings
water from the Yamunā in this earthen water-pot, which
has hundreds of holes, and if I then perform abhiṣeka of
Kṛṣṇa with mantras and with that water, then Kanhaiyā
can become healthy. Otherwise, it will be impossible to
save Him.” Yaśodājī called Jaṭilā and Kuṭilā and
requested them to bring water from the Yamunā in that
special pot. They went separately to the Yamunā to fill
the pot, but were unable to retain even a drop of water
in it. Embarrassed, they left the pot on the Yamunā’s
shore and returned home by another path so as not to
meet anyone.

Yogamāyā Pūrṇimājī then advised Yaśodā Maiyā to request
Śrīmatī Rādhikā to bring water in that hundred-holed
pot. Upon being repeatedly requested, Śrīmatī Rādhikā
finally agreed to go to the Yamunā. She successful-ly
brought back water in that pot without spilling even one
drop. Pūrṇamāsījī sprinkled Kṛṣṇa with that water, and
He immediately regained His health. All the Brajabāsīs
were amazed to see this wonderful incident, and
Rādhikā’s chastity was praised everywhere.

Places of darśana here are Balarāma Kuṇḍa, Gopī Ghāṭa,
Śrī Rādhā-Govindajī, Śrī Rādhā-Gopīnāthajī and Śrī
Rādhā-Madana Mohana.


Rāma Ghāṭa

This place lies on the bank of Yamunā, two miles east of
Śergarh. Its present name is Obe. Baladevajī performed
rāsa-līlā here.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma had been living in Dvārakā for a
long time. The Brajabāsīs’ distress, caused by their
separation from Them, was so great that Śrī Kṛṣṇa sent
Śrī Baladeva to Braja to console them. At that time
Nanda-Gokula was nearby. Baladevajī spent the two months
of Caitra and Vaiśākha in Nanda-Braja, and tried His
utmost to console His parents, the sakhās and the
gopīs.3 In the end, to alleviate the agony of the gopīs’
separation, Baladevajī performed rāsa here, complete
with dancing and singing.

At that time, Varuṇadeva induced highly fragrant vāruṇī,
a sweet nectar found in trees, to start flowing.
Baladevajī and His beloveds drank this vāruṇī and,
becoming intoxicated, submerged in rāsa-vilāsa. To
perform jal-krīḍā and to quench the thirst of gopīs, He
called Yamunājī, who was flowing some distance away.
When she did not come, however, He dragged her over to
them with His plough. He and the gopīs then played jal-

                          160
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

vihāra and other games (krīḍā) in the Yamunā. Even
today, the Yamunā leaves her natural course and flows by
Rāma Ghāṭa.

A doubt may arise as to how Baladevajī could perform
rāsa with Śrī Kṛṣna’s beloved gopīs. This would be
wholly improper from the perspective of rasa. It also
seems improper for Baladevajī to have dragged the Yamunā
with His plough, since she is a manifestation of
Viśākhā, and therefore the beloved of Kṛṣṇa. Such
doubts, however, arise only in the minds of those who
lack tattva-jñāna. Ordinary people cannot understand
transcendental rāsa-tattva. Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma’s
rāsa does not contain even the slightest trace of
material licentiousness or desire for lusty enjoyment.
Furthermore, Baladevajī performed rāsa only with His own
group of braja-yuvatīs. This is clear from Śrī Murāri
Gupta’s Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Carita.4 Yamunājī is Viśākhā
herself. She is a beloved of Kṛṣṇa and one of the main
girlfriends of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. The Yamunā that flows
into the sea, however, is a manifestation of this
Yamunā. It was this manifestation, not Yamunā herself,
the beloved of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who Baladevajī dragged with
the nose of His plough. One can dispel one’s doubt on
this subject in this way.

Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu came here during His tour of
Braja-maṇḍala, and when He took darśana of this place,
He became absorbed in bhāva. Near the mandira of
Balarāmajī is an aśvattha tree, which is known to be a
sakhā of Balarāma. Balarāma’s rāsa-līlā took place here.



Brahma Ghāṭa

Near Rāma Ghāṭa lies the extremely enchanting Brahma
Ghāṭa, where Brahmājī worshipped Śrī Kṛṣṇa to beg
forgiveness for stealing the calves.



Kacchavana

This place is near Rāma Ghāṭa. Here, Kṛṣṇa and the
sakhās played as if they were tortoises (kachuā).



Bhūṣaṇavana

This place is situated near Kacchavana. While they
grazed their cows, the sakhās decorated (bhūṣita kiyā)
Kṛṣṇa here with various kinds of flowers. This place is
therefore called Bhūṣaṇavana.



Guñjāvana

Nearby Bhūṣaṇavana is Guñjāvana where the gopīs
decorated Kṛṣṇa in a wonderful way with a guñjā-mālā,
and Kṛṣṇa did the same to Śrīmatī Rādhikā.


                          161
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017



Bihāravana

This place lies one and a half miles south-west of Rāma
Ghāṭa. Darśana of Bihārījī Mandira and Bihāra Kuṇḍa is
recommended. Braja-bihārī Kṛṣṇa together with Rādhikā
and the gopīs performed rāsa-vihāra and other kinds of
krīḍā-vilāsa at this charming place near Śrī Yamunā.
Although most of the forests of Braja have been cut
down, Bihāravana remains somewhat protected. Even today,
cuckoos sing and thousands of peacocks make their ke-kā
sound here, and during the rainy season they dance and
drop their feathers. There are many beautiful kuñjas,
kadamba-khaṇḍīs and many kinds of creepers here. When
one takes darśana of this place, sweet remembrances of
Kṛṣṇa’s līlās will manifest in one’s heart. In the
gośālā here, the very beautiful cows, jumping calves and
intoxicated looking bulls awaken sweet memories of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s cow-grazing pastimes.


Akṣayavaṭa

This place is also called Bhāṇḍīravaṭa, and is situated
two miles south of Rāma Ghāṭa. Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Balarāma and
the sakhās played many games in the shade of this vaṭa
tree. They especially liked to wrestle here. This is the
place where Baladeva killed Pralambāsura.

Once during cowherding, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma left the
cows to graze in the lush, green fields and went off to
play with the sakhās. They divided themselves into two
groups, one headed by Kṛṣṇa and the other headed by
Baladeva. The game they played had a rule that each boy
in the group that lost had to carry the boy who had
defeated him on his shoulders from Bhāṇḍīravaṭa to a
fixed place some distance away and then back again.
Pralambāsura, a demon sent by Kaṁsa, assumed the form of
a beautiful sakhā and joined Kṛṣṇa’s team. Kṛṣṇa
knowingly encouraged the new sakhā to play and kept him
on His team. Śrī Kṛṣṇa was defeated by Śrīdāma and
Pralambāsura by Balarāma. According to the rules,
Śrīdāma sat on Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s shoulders and Balarāma on
Pralambāsura’s. Kṛṣṇa made his way towards the appointed
place, but the wicked Pralambāsura ran instead to a
place that was deep and isolated and, after some time,
assumed his hideous rākṣasa form. Kaṁsa had instructed
him to kill Baladevajī before killing Kṛṣṇa. At first,
Baladeva Prabhu was uncertain about what to do but, upon
receiving a clue from Kṛṣṇa, He split the head of the
demon with a blow of His fist. Pralambāsura vomited
blood and collapsed to the earth. When Kṛṣṇa and the
sakhās arrived there, they embraced Balarāma and praised
His strength and fortitude.

The following pastime also took place at Akṣayavaṭa. One
day, Śrīmatī Rādhikā, the sakhīs and Śrī Kṛṣṇa were
doing līlā-vilāsa here. The sakhīs said to Kṛṣṇa,
“Prāṇa-vallabha! You always boast that You have defeated
even experts wrestlers. But why is it that Śrīdāma
defeated You?”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa answered, “That is entirely untrue. No one in

                          162
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

the whole universe can defeat Me. I have never been
defeated by Śrīdāma.”

Hearing this, Rādhikājī replied, “If that is so, then we
gopīs are ready to wrestle with You. If You defeat us,
then we will understand that You are the topmost
wrestler.” The gopīs then dressed themselves as
wrestlers and Śrīmatī Rādhikā wrestled with Kṛṣṇa,
easily defeating Him. The sakhīs clapped their hands and
praised Her.

Since Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the sakhās wrestled and performed
physical exercise here, this village near Akṣayavaṭa is
called Kāśraṭa. The word kāśraṭa means kasrat karnā, or
‘to perform physical exercise’. It also means kuśtī
karnā, or ‘to wrestle’. When the ancient vaṭa tree that
stood here disappeared, a new one was planted in its
place. Note that Bhāṇḍīravaṭa situated in Bhāṇḍīravana
is a different pastime-place that lies on the other bank
of the Yamunā.


Āgiyārā Gaon (Ārā)

This village is situated two miles south-west of the
village of Kāśraṭa. It is located in the middle of
Muñjāṭavī, where Kṛṣṇa used to take the cows to pasture.

Once, Kṛṣṇa was playing with the sakhās in the shade of
Bhāṇḍīravaṭa. Nearby, the cows drank water from the
Yamunā and began to graze on the lush, green grass in
the fields. In doing so, they gradually wandered off to
Muñjāṭavī some distance away. It was a summer day, and
the scorching heat was drying up the muñja plants and
baking the sand on the ground. The cows had wandered off
without Kṛṣṇa, and they now entered this muñja forest,
which was devoid of water and shade. This Muñjāṭavī was
so dense that they lost track of the path by which they
had come. Overwhelmed with thirst and heat, the cows
became restless.

In their search for the cows, the sakhās had also left
Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma and, entering Muñjāṭavī, they too
became agitated by thirst and heat. It was then that the
followers of the wicked Kaṁsa set Muñjavana on fire.
Within a moment, the wind had spread the fire
everywhere, so that it surrounded the cows and the
cowherd boys. Seeing no other means of escape, they
began to cry out to Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva who heard their
call and immediately went to them. “Close your eyes for
just a moment,” Kṛṣṇa told them, and in that moment He
swallowed the terrible forest fire. Upon opening their
eyes, the sakhās saw that they were now standing with
Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva in the cooling shade of Bhāṇḍīravaṭa,
the cows peacefully lying nearby chewing their cud. The
jīva suffering in the forest fire of material existence
can similarly be easily delivered from this suffering
simply by taking shelter of Kṛṣṇa.

Another name for Muñjāṭavī is Īṣikāṭavī. On the other
side of the Yamunā is the village of Bhāṇḍīra, which is
also the location of Muñjāṭavī.



                          163
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Tapovana

This place is situated east of Akṣayavaṭa, one mile from
the bank of the Yamunā. Here, the young gopīs prayed for
the fulfillment of their desire, which was to have Śrī
Kṛṣṇa as their husband. It is said that in their
previous birth, these gopīs were the sages in the forest
of Daṇḍakāraṇya who were absorbed in austerities with
the desire to attain Śrī Kṛṣṇa. By the mercy of Śrī
Rāmacandrajī, they took birth from the womb of gopīs in
Dvāpara-yuga. The princesses of Janakapura are also
counted in this group. Like Sītā, they had wanted to
marry Śrī Rāmacandrajī, and therefore, by the mercy of
Śrī Rāmacandrajī, they took birth as gopīs in Braja at
the end of Dvāpara-yuga. This Tapovana is where these
young gopīs performed ārādhana to attain Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Śrī Lalitā, Viśākhā and other nitya-siddha gopīs are
kāya-vyūha expansions (direct bodily expansions) of
antaraṅga-svarūpa-śakti Śrīmatī Rādhikā; therefore,
there is no need for them to perform any tapasya.


Gopī Ghāṭa

This place is called Gopī Ghāṭa because here the above
mentioned gopīs used to bathe in the Yamunā.


Cīra Ghāṭa

This pastime-place lies two miles west of Akṣayavaṭa.
The young gopīs had worshipped Kātyāyanī-devī regularly
for one month, observing all vows to attain Śrī Kṛṣṇa as
their husband.5 At the end of their vrata, Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
along with some priyanarma sakhās stole the gopīs’
clothes and gave them the benediction that their desire
would be fulfilled. The mandira of Kātyāyanī-devī is
situated here on the bank of the Yamunā. The present
name of this village is Siyāro.


Nanda Ghāṭa

This place is situated two miles south of Gopī Ghāṭa and
one mile south-east of Akṣayavaṭa.

Once, Mahārāja Nanda performed an Ekādaśī-vrata and took
his bath here on Dvādaśī night. This was an inauspicious
time to take bath, and therefore the servants of Varuṇa
captured him and brought him before their master. News
of Mahārāja Nanda’s disappearance in the Yamunā so
distressed the Brajabāsīs that, upon seeing their
crying, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Balarāmajī went to Varuṇaloka to
look for him. When Varuṇadeva saw Kṛṣṇa before him, he
offered stava-stutis and presented Him with gifts of
various ornaments made of pearls, jewels and precious
stones. He begged Kṛṣṇa to forgive him for arresting
Nanda Bābā. When Śrī Kṛṣṇa returned with His father,
they met again with the Brajabāsīs at this place. Many
years later, the following pastime also occurred here.

Once, in a discussion on śāstra, Jīva Gosvāmī defeated a
digvijayī paṇḍita, a scholar who is victorious in debate

                          164
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

all over the world. This digvijayī paṇḍita had wanted to
edit the writings of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, but the young
Jīva Gosvāmī was unable to tolerate this and defeated
him at the Yamunā in Vṛndāvana. The scholar then
approached Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī to find out who this boy
was, greatly praising the boy’s erudition. With great
humility, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī said, “He is my brother’s
son as well as my disciple.” Understanding that Jīva had
debated with the digvijayī paṇḍita, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī
addressed Jīva as soon as the paṇḍita had gone: “Jīva!
Could you not even tolerate an event as insignificant as
this? Since you desire prestige, please leave this place
at once.”

Dejected upon hearing the harsh disciplinary words of
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, Jīva Gosvāmī left Vṛndāvana for
Nanda Ghāṭa where, on the bank of the Yamunā, in a dense
and desolate forest, he lived in a crocodile hole. He
maintained his life here somehow or other with great
difficulty. Feeling intense separation from his
Gurudeva, sometimes he would drink flour mixed with
water, and sometimes he would just fast. His body
gradually dried up and became very thin. At that time,
on the pretext of performing parikramā of Braja, Śrīla
Sanātana Gosvāmī came to Nanda Ghāṭa where he heard from
the mouths of the Brajabāsīs the abundant glories of the
young Gauḍīya sādhu and his severe austerities. He went
to Jīva Gosvāmī, consoled him, and took him back to
Vṛndāvana. Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī then went alone to
meet with Rūpa Gosvāmī, leaving Jīva in his bhajana-
kuṭī. At that time, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī was speaking to a
group of Vaiṣṇavas about bestowing mercy upon the jīvas.
Midway through this discussion, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī
said, “You are instructing others to show mercy to the
jīvas, but why aren’t you showing mercy to Jīva
himself?” Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī understood the hidden
meaning behind the puzzling words of his elder brother
and Guru, and called for Śrī Jīva. He saw to it that
Jīva received medical care and engaged him in his
service once again. It was while he was living in Nanda
Ghāṭa that Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī composed his famous work
known as the Ṣad-sandarbhas. Even today, the place where
Jīva Gosvāmī lived is known as Jīva Gosvāmī’s cave.



Bhaiyā (Bhaya Gaon)

Seeing the servants of Varuṇa, Śrī Nanda Mahārāja became
fearful (bhaya-bhīta). In memory of this, Vajranābha
named this village Bhaya Gaon. This village lies close
to Nanda Ghāṭa.



Gāṅgralī

This place is situated two miles south and slightly east
of Cīra Ghāṭa. It also lies two miles north of Bhaya
Gaon.



Basaī Gaon (Vatsavana)

                          165
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017


This place lies four miles south-west of Nanda Ghāṭa. It
was here that Brahmājī stole the cows and cowherd boys
and therefore this place is known as Vatsavana or
Bacchavana. The names of this place derive from the
words vatsa and bachḍā, which both mean ‘calf’. The
present name of the village is Basaī Gaon. Places of
darśana here are the mandira of Śrī Vatsa-Vihārījī, the
place of Gvāla Maṇḍalījī, Gvāla Kuṇḍa, Haribol Tīrtha
and Śrī Vallabhācārya’s baiṭhaka.

Once, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the cowherd boys were herding the
calves on the bank of the Yamunā. While grazing, the
calves wandered to this forest while Kṛṣṇa and the
sakhās played all kinds of games in the soft sand of the
Yamunā. Caturmukha Brahmā had been astonished to see
Aghāsura enter Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet and become liberated.
In order to see more of Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s sweet
pastimes, he stole the calves when they entered this
forest and hid them in a cave.

Kṛṣṇa and the cowherd boys became filled with anxiety
upon noticing that the calves were nowhere to be seen.
Leaving the sakhās there, Kṛṣṇa went out alone to search
for the calves but, unable to find them, He returned to
the bank of the Yamunā where He had left his sakhās. In
Kṛṣṇa’s absence, Brahmājī had also hidden away the
sakhās. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is sarva-śaktimāna and the possessor
of the six opulences, and He therefore understood
Brahmā’s actions. Personally assuming forms identical to
His calves and cowherd boys, including their sticks,
clothes, flutes, horns and so forth, He continued His
pastime as before. This went on for one year. Even
Baladeva could not understand the mystery of what had
occurred. Finally, after one year, Baladeva, who had
observed some extraordinary occurrence, was able to
understand that Kṛṣṇa had expanded Himself as the cows
and cowherd boys and was playing out a līlā. At that
same time, Brahmā was amazed to see that the same calves
and cowherd boys that he had put to sleep in a cave were
now performing pastimes with Kṛṣṇa just like before. He
was completely astonished. Śrī Kṛṣṇa then removed
Yogamāyā’s curtain of bewilderment. When Brahmājī
realized the bhagavattā, or supreme godliness, of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and saw His astounding activities, he offered
prostrated obeisances at His lotus feet and began to
recite stava and stutis.6 Brahmā prayed to take birth in
Braja-Gokula and to bathe in its dust.


Unāī (Janāī Gaon)

This place lies one and a half miles south of Bājanā.
This was the spot where Brahmā became bewildered upon
seeing Kṛṣṇa sitting and eating with his sakhās. In the
end, Kṛṣṇa kindly removed Brahmā’s bewilderment and
revealed Himself to him. At that time, Brahmā saw the
whole universe as kṛṣṇamaya, or filled with Kṛṣṇa.
Therefore, this place is called Janāī Gaon, which
derives from the verb jānnā meaning ‘to know’ or ‘to
understand’.


Bālahārā

                          166
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017


It was here that Brahmā stole away the cowherd boys.
This place is therefore called Bālahārā. Bāla means
‘boy’, and harnā means ‘to steal’.


Parkhama

This place is situated one mile west of Janāī Gaon.
Seeing Kṛṣṇa and the sakhās sitting and eating together,
Brahmājī wanted to test His bhagavattā. This place is
therefore known as Parkhama, from the verb parīkṣā
karnā, meaning ‘to test’.


Seī

This place is situated one and a half miles south-east
of Parkhama and four miles from Pasaulī. Brahmājī,
bewildered by Kṛṣṇa’s māyā, stole the cowherd boys and
the calves and hid them in a secret place. However, when
he returned after one year, he saw that Kṛṣṇa and the
cowherd boys were tending the calves just as before. At
that time, he began to wonder if the cowherd boys and
calves that he had hidden in the cave were still there
(seī). When he saw that they were indeed still there, he
doubted that they were with Kṛṣṇa. Kyā seī? (“Are they
there?”), he wondered. By Brahmājī’s saying seī over and
over again in this way, this place became known as Seī.
Seeing the cowherd boys and the calves together with
Kṛṣṇa as before, Brahmājī ascertained (seī), “This Kṛṣṇa
is definitely Svayaṁ Bhagavān.”


Caumā

Being fearful, Brahmājī repented and praised Śrī Kṛṣṇa
with his four mouths (cār mūkhā) at this place;
therefore, this village is called Caumuṅhā. It lies on
the Mathurā-Delhi highway one mile west of Parkhama and
approximately eight miles from Mathurā. One mile from
Caumuṅhā is a very beautiful village named Ajhaī, where
one can have darśana of an ancient deity of Brahmājī.
Today, Caumuṅhā is simply known as Caumā. Bhakti-
ratnākara affirms:


caumuṅhā grāme brahmā āṁsi kṛṣṇapāśe

karaye kṛṣṇa stuti aśeṣa viśeṣe


“Brahmā offered prayers to Kṛṣṇa in Caumuṅhā Grāma.”


Pasaulī

This place is also called Sapaulī, Aghavana and
Sarpasthalī. Here, Śrī Kṛṣṇa killed and delivered
Aghāsura, who had assumed the form of a python. Pasaulī
lies two miles north-west of Parkhama.

Once, Kṛṣṇa and the cowherd boys came to this forest
while grazing the cows. Aghāsura, the embodiment of

                          167
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

agha, or sin, also came here intent on avenging his
sister Pūtanā’s death. Taking the form of an enormous
and fearsome python, he lay on the road, his lower jaw
on the ground and his upper jaw touching the sky. His
mouth looked like a cave and his tongue like the road
entering it. The cowherd boys and the calves casually
entered his mouth, but he did not close his mouth
because he was specifically intent on swallowing Kṛṣṇa.
However Kṛṣṇa remained behind. From a distance, He had
signalled to the cowherd boys to not enter Agha’s mouth,
but they had fearlessly entered nonetheless, having not
the slightest doubt about Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s power to protect
them. To rescue the sakhās, Śrī Kṛṣṇa now also entered
Agha’s mouth, which thereupon closed. Śrī Kṛṣṇa became
an obstacle in Agha’s throat by expanding His body so
much that Agha’s breathing stopped and he choked. The
demon thus suffocated. Within a short time, the opening
at the top of his skull burst open and a light came out
and ascended into the sky.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa then glanced over the cowherd boys and calves,
bringing them back to life. They all emerged from
Aghāsura’s mouth. Brahmājī and other demigods saw the
light enter Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet. After Kṛṣṇa delivered
Aghāsura, He returned with the cowherd boys to
Vṛndāvana.


Jainta

After the killing of Aghāsura, the sound of the demigods
calling out, “Let there be all victory to Bhagavān Śrī
Kṛṣṇa! All victory!” reverberated throughout the sky and
the nearby forest area. In great joy, the cowherd boys
joined in, and the tumultuous sound of “All victory! All
victory!” filled the sky.7

This place is known as Jainta because it carries the
memory of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s victory over Aghāsura. Jaya means
‘victory’. There is a pond here with a mūrti of a snake
constructed in such a way that it is always visible
above the water, no matter how high the water is in the
pond. This place is situated three miles from
Chaṭṭīkarā.


Seyāno

The present name of this place is Sihonā. Upon receiving
the news of Aghāsura’s death, the old gopas and gopīs
glorified Kṛṣṇa again and again saying, Kṛṣṇa seyāno
hoya gayo hai, seyāno hoya gayo hai (“Kṛṣṇa is so
clever! He is so clever!”). Seyāno means ‘clever’ or
‘strong’, and thus Mahā-rāja Vajranābha named this place
Seyāno Gaon. This place lies two miles from Ajhaī. One
can have darśana here of a deity of the four Kumāras —
Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanata and Sanātana.


Taraulī

This village is situated two miles north-west of Basolī,
one mile east and a little north of Śyāmarī Gaon, and
one mile east of Baraulī.

                          168
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017



Baraulī

The villages of Taraulī and Baraulī lie side by side.
They are both places of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. Pīṭhara Gaon
lies on the road leaving from Baraulī.


Tamālavana and Kṛṣṇa Kuṇḍa Ṭīlā

Surrounded by a dense forest of tamāla trees, this is a
place where Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa met and became immersed
in nectar-filled loving pastimes. One time, rasika-
bihārī Śrī Kṛṣṇa met with Rādhājī and the sakhīs in this
tamāla kuñja. Many kinds of creepers and vines had wound
themselves around the tamāla trees, embracing them, and
had spread over the trees to create a truly exquisite
kuñja. Śrī Kṛṣṇa pointed to one creeper and asked
Priyājī, “Why is this creeper winding itself around the
tamāla tree?”

Śrīmatī Rādhikā smilingly answered, “It is the nature of
the creeper to cover the tamāla tree with its shoots,
leaves and flowers. Although this tree has no fruit or
flowers of its own, its fortune is that the creeper
enhances the tree’s beauty with its own leaves and
flowers.” Just then, a breeze caused the creeper to
quiver, the sight of which immersed Kiśora-Kiśorī in
bhāva. This Tamālavana is still present as a reminder of
these līlās.


Āṭasa

Only the Brajabāsīs are qualified to take darśana of and
fully relish Kṛṣṇa’s sweet līlās, which are filled with
topmost bliss (paramānanda). Nonetheless, Caturmukha
Brahmā, Mahādeva Śaṅkara, Devarṣi Nārada and many ṛṣis
and māharṣis reside in numerous pastime-places in
Brajabhūmi, performing ārādhanā of Svayaṁ Bhagavān Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. This place, called Āṭasa Gaon, is Aṣṭavakra
Muni’s place of ārādhanā. Āṭasa is a corrupted form of
the word aṣṭavakra. This village lies four miles from
Janāī Gaon and six miles from Vṛndāvana.


Devī Āṭasa

This village is situated one mile from Āṭasa, and is the
place of Ekānaṁśā-devī, Kṛṣṇa’s twin sister born from
Yaśodā’s womb. Vasudevajī took her with him from Gokula
to Kaṁsa’s jail. When Kaṁsa received the news that
Devakī had given birth to a child, he went to the jail,
snatched Ekānaṁśā from Devakī’s lap and lifted her
toward the sky in order to dash her on the ground. When
she was lifted into the air, she assumed an eight-handed
Durgā form, chastised Kaṁsa, and disappeared in the sky.
She then reappeared at this place. Vajranābha
established this village in the memory of this pastime.


Magherā


                          169
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                      5/5/2017

When Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva were seated on Akrūra’s chariot
as he was driving Them from Braja to Mathurā, the
distressed Brajabāsīs were overwhelmed in separation
from Them. Their eyes remained fixed on the road as they
saw the dust kicked up by the leaving chariot, and they
maintained that same gaze even after the dust had
settled back down again. In the memory of this līlā,
Vajranābha named this village Magherā. This name comes
from mag herā, which means ‘gazing in the direction of
the road’.


Chūnarāka

Saubharī Ṛṣi’s āśrama was here. This place lies one mile
west of Kālīya Hrada in Vṛndāvana.


Śakaroyā

Devarāja Indra had committed an offence at the lotus
feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the Brajabāsīs, and was therefore
an aparādhī, or offender. He performed ārādhanā of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa at this place to seek for forgiveness. One name of
Indra is Śakra, from which the name Śakaroyā is derived.
Indra’s place of worship thus became known as Śakaroyā.


Barāhara

At the time of cowherding, Śrī Kṛṣṇa played here with
the sakhās and assumed the form of Varāha. This village
lies one mile south-west of Hājarā Gaon, and its present
name is Barārā. Bhakti-ratnākara states:


eī barāhara grāme varāharūpe te

khelāīlā kṛṣṇapriyā sakhāra sahite


“Here in Barāhara, Kṛṣṇa assumed the form of Varāha and
played with His dear sakhās.”


Hārāsalī

This is a place of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s rāsa-līlā. Nearby is
Surukhurū Gaon. One and a half miles north-east of Seī
are the two villages of Māī and Basāī. Basāī lies north-
east of Māī.


bhadrāya bhadrārūpāya / sadā kalyāṇa-varddhane

amaṅgalacchide tasmai / namo bhadrāvanāya ca

(Bhaviṣyottare)




Chapter 13

                          170
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017


Śrī Bhadravana



“O Bhadravana, personification of auspiciousness! You
perpetually bestow auspiciousness upon all and destroy
inauspiciousness. I repeatedly offer my respects unto
you.”

This pastime-place, situated two miles south-east of
Nanda Ghāṭa and across the Yamunā, is one of the places
where Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Balarāma go to graze the cows.
The forest of Bhadravana is named after Śrī Balabhadra.
It is also beneficial to take darśana of Bhadra Sarovara
and Gocāraṇa Sthala.


Bhadra Sarovara

yajña-snāna svarūpāya / rājyākhaṇḍa-prade

tīrtharāja namastubhyaṁ / bhadrākhya sarase namaḥ

(Bhaviṣyottare)



“O Bhadra Sarovara! O Tīrtharāja! I offer you my
namaskāra. You are the personification of yajña, and you
bestow that post that is never destroyed (akhaṇḍa
rājyapada).”

That person who bathes in this sarovara obtains
unlimited wealth and enjoyment, and is finally
successful in attaining premā-bhakti to Śrī Kṛṣṇa and
Śrī Baladeva.




Chapter 14

Bhāṇḍīravana


Bhāṇḍīravana, where Śrī Kṛṣṇa performed a variety of
sweet pastimes, is prominent among the twelve forests.
Here it is of great value to take darśana of Bhānḍīra-
vaṭa, Veṇu Kūpa, Rāsa-sthalī Vaṁśīvaṭa, the place of
wrestling (malla-krīḍa sthāna), the mandira of
Śrīdāmajī, Śyāma Talaiyā, Chāherī Gaon and Āgiyārā Gaon.
That place where all kinds of tattva-jñāna fully
manifest and where līlās that are filled with aiśvarya
and madhurya manifest is called Bhāṇḍīravana. Some of
these pastime-places are described below.


Bhāṇḍīravaṭa

This vaṭa tree is famous in Bhāṇḍīravana as the site for
many different pastimes of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala.
At the time of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s prakaṭa-līlā a huge vaṭa tree

                          171
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

stood here full of long branches that spread in all
directions. Nearby, Śrī Yamunā made a sweet sound as she
followed her meandering course. Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Baladeva and
the sakhās used to perform various kinds of sports in
her waters, and they would cross the river by walking on
the branches of this tree. Śukas, sārīs, peacocks,
peahens, cuckoos and papīhās were always sitting on the
tree’s profuse branches and singing. They remained
satisfied by eating its fruit. Deer, does and other
forest animals drank the sweet water of the Yamunā and
took rest in the cool, pleasant shade of the vaṭa tree.

It was mostly to this Bhāṇḍīravaṭa that Śrīmatī Yaśodā
and the mothers of the other cowherd boys used to send
lunch with some gopas for their respective sons. While
grazing the cows, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Baladeva and the sakhās
used to allow the cows to drink water in the Yamunā and
freely graze on the lush, green grass of the forest. The
boys themselves bathed and engaged in water sports (jal-
krīḍā) in the Yamunā’s cool water. They would then sit
in the shade under this vaṭa tree and eat the various
tasty preparations sent by their mothers. Śrī Kṛṣṇa sat
in the midst of them all, and the sakhās would sit
around Him in thousands of rows that extended here and
there. Each and every sakhā, even those who sat at the
back or far away, experienced that Śrī Kṛṣṇa was sitting
right in front of him. Their eating was accompanied by
laughing and joking and they would play various games
together. Brahmā and other demigods in the sky became
astonished to see their festive and joyful picnics
(bhojana krīḍā-kautuka).

Brahmā performed the gāndharva marriage1 of Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa Yugala beneath this vaṭa tree. According to the
Garga Saṁhitā and Gita-Govinda, Nanda Bābā once took Śrī
Kṛṣṇa to Bhāṇḍīravana to graze the cows. This forest was
very attractively covered with densely foliated tamāla
and kadamba trees and lush creepers, and therefore it
was only lit by scant sunrays. Suddenly, black clouds
gathered from all directions and began to develop into a
raging rainstorm. Darkness pervaded. Nanda Bābā became
frightened of the bad omen and carefully hid Kanhaiyā on
his lap.

At that moment, the extraordinarily beautiful Vṛṣabhānu
Kumārī Śrī Rādhikā appeared. She was decorated from top
to toe. She held Her hands out to Nanda Bābā, indicating
that She wanted to take Kṛṣṇa in Her arms. The
astonished Nanda Bābā gave Śrī Kṛṣṇa to Her. Rādhikā
then took Kṛṣṇa to the inner part of Bhāṇḍīravana under
the shelter of Bhāṇḍīravaṭa. There Śrī Kṛṣṇa manifested
Himself as manmatha-manmatha kiśora, a beautiful youth
who bewilders the mind of Cupid. Meawhile, Lalitā,
Viśākhā, and the other sakhīs also appeared there with
Caturmukha Brahmā. Knowing the desire of Kiśora and
Kiśorī, Brahmājī performed Their gāndharva wedding by
reciting Vedic mantras and having Them exchange
beautiful flower garlands. The delighted sakhīs sang
wedding songs as the demigods showered flowers from the
sky. While everyone looked on, Brahmājī left that place.
The sakhīs also disappeared, and Kṛṣṇa again assumed the
form of a child. Śrīmatī Rādhikā lifted Kṛṣṇa up and
handed Him over into the arms of Nanda Bābā, who was
standing waiting for Him. Meanwhile, the clouds

                          172
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

dispersed and the storm abated. Nanda Bābā now returned
with Kṛṣṇa to his Nanda-Braja.

The following incident also took place here in Bhāṇḍīra-
vana. One summer’s day, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the sakhās brought
the cows to drink water at the Yamunā. They then let
them graze freely. The boys became so absorbed in their
delightful picnic (bhojana krīḍā-kautuka) that they were
unaware that their cows had wandered off. The cows made
their way to the completely parched Muñjavana, through
which even elephants could not force their way. It was
the month of Jeṭha (May-June), and the blazing sun
scorched the sand. The cows could not find shade
anywhere, and had for-gotten the pathway to lead them
back out of this wild muñja forest. Dying of thirst,
they began to cry out in distress. The sakhās went to
look for the cows without telling Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva
where they were going. Finally, they too arrived at the
muñja forest in the same dire condition as that of the
cows. Meanwhile, the servants of the wicked Kaṁsa set
Muñjavana on fire, and within a moment the wind had
spread it everywhere. The fire’s blazing flames
surrounded the cows and cowherd boys, who saw no other
means of rescue than to call out to Kṛṣṇa. They did so,
and Śrī Kṛṣṇa arrived immediately. Telling the sakhās to
close their eyes, He swallowed the forest-fire within a
second. Upon opening their eyes, the sakhās saw that
they were again under the cooling shade of Bhāṇḍīravaṭa,
immersed in festive eating pastimes with Kṛṣṇa and
Baladeva, the cows grazing peacefully nearby. The
distress of the forest-fire seemed like a dream.

The place where Śrī Kṛṣṇa swallowed the forest fire is
called Muñjāṭavī or Īṣikāṭavī, and its present name is
Agiyārā. We have already explained this earlier. Across
the Yamunā from here is Bhāṇḍīra Gaon, where Kṛṣṇa and
the sakhās had festive picnics, and where, after Kṛṣṇa
swallowed the forest fire, the sakhās again began to
joke and laugh while eating and the cows happily chewed
grass. This līlā took place at Bhāṇḍīravaṭa, and is
described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.19.12):


tatheti mīlitākṣeṣu / bhagavān agnim ulbaṇam

pītvā mukhena tāna kṛcchrād / yogādhīśo vyamocayat


“’All right,’ the boys replied, and immediately closed
their eyes. Then Bhagavān, the master of all mystic
power, opened His mouth and swallowed the terrible fire,
saving His friends from danger.”



Veṇu Kūpa

After killing Vatsāsura, Śrī Kṛṣṇa met the gopīs near
Bhāṇḍīravaṭa and boasted His strength. The gopīs accused
Kṛṣṇa of killing a cow and forbade Him to touch them.
Kṛṣṇa said, “I didn’t kill a cow. It was a demon in the
form of a calf.” But the gopīs did not accept His
arguments. Kṛṣṇa then inquired how His purity could be
restored and the gopīs answered, “If You take bath in

                          173
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

all the tīrthas on the earth, You will again become pure
and can touch us.” After hearing the words of the gopīs,
Kṛṣṇa created a beautiful well (kūpa) with His veṇu and
summoned all the tīrthas of the earth to enter it. He
then took bath in that well and met with the gopīs.

This well known as Veṇu Kūpa is situated near Bhāṇḍīra-
vaṭa. By taking bath in it, one obtains the same result
as by taking bath in every tīrtha. Even today, the women
of Braja worship this well on certain occasions. Those
who do not have a child or whose child has died untimely
make a vow to propitiate the deity here by their
worship. Their hearts’ desires are then fulfilled.


Śrī Baladevajī Mandira

Śrī Balabhadrajī, His younger brother Kanhaiyā and the
sakhās used to come to Bhāṇḍīravana to pasture the cows.
Śrī Balabhadrajī presides over the forests on the east
side of the Yamunā — Bhadravana, Bhāṇḍīravana, Baelvana,
Gokula-Mahāvana, Lohavana and so on. Therefore, all
these places have mandiras of Śrī Baladevajī. It is
recommended that one take darśana of the mandira of
Baladeva in Bhāṇḍīravaṭa.


Chāherī Gaon

The village located between Bhāṇḍīravaṭa and Vaṁśīvaṭa
is called Chāherī Gaon. After playing with the sakhās in
Bhāṇḍīravana, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His friends used to come
here, sit in the shade underneath the trees, and enjoy
their meals with much joy and laughter. The name Chāherī
is derived from the word chāyā, which means shade or
shadow. This village is also called Bijaulī Grāma.


Rāsa-sthalī Vaṁśīvaṭa

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s rāsa-sthalī at Vaṁśīvaṭa is situated a short
distance from Bhāṇḍīravaṭa. This Vaṁśīvaṭa is a
different place from the Vaṁśīvaṭa in Vṛndāvana. At the
time of cowherding, Śrī Kṛṣṇa would climb this vaṭa tree
and play His flute to call the cows. In this way, He
would gather them and bring them all back home.
Sometimes, on a beautiful, pleasant night, He would also
call His beloved gopīs from here — “Rādhike! Lalite!
Viśākhe!” Upon their arrival, rāsa-līlā would unfold
under this Vaṁśīvaṭa.


Śrīdāmajī’s Mandira

Beneath this Vaṁśīvaṭa is the mandira of Śrīdāma Bhaiyā.
When Śrī Kṛṣṇa went to Mathurā, Śrīdāma Sakhā was heart-
broken in separation. He went to this solitary
Vaṁśīvaṭa, where he remembered Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s sweet
pastimes, filling his heart with sorrow. Many days
later, when Śrī Kṛṣṇa returned to Gokula after killing
Dantavakra, He again met with Śrīdāma here and took
Śrīdāma with Him. One can have darśana of Śrīdāma in the
mandira here.


                          174
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017


Śyāma Talaiyā

This talaiyā, pond, is situated near Vaṁśivaṭa. When the
gopīs became thirsty during rāsa, Śrī Śyāmasundara
manifested this talaiyā with His vaṁśī and satisfied
each and every gopī with its luscious water. Nowadays,
this talaiyā lies in a completely dilapidated condition
with very little water, but still, people take ācamana
here with faith.




Chapter 15

Māṭavana


Māṭavana is one of the main forests of Braja Maṇḍala. It
is a wide and spacious area on the bank of the Yamunā.
Kṛṣṇa and Balabhadra would bring the cows to graze in
this enchanting forest full of lush trees and creepers,
green grass and untold varieties of fruits and flowers.
The many pastimes places here include Māṭa or Māṅṭa
Gaon, Kṛṣṇa Kuṇḍa, Ḍāṅgolī Gaon, Māna Sarovara, Pānī
Gaon and Durvāsā Āśrama.


Māṭa Gaon

The word māṭa refers to a large earthen pot meant for
churning yoghurt and other substances. During Kṛṣṇa’s
pastimes, these pots were made here and used by the
Brajabāsīs in their daily household chores; hence the
village is known as Māṭa. It lies two miles south of
Bhāṇḍīravaṭa and five miles north of Vṛndāvana on the
other side of the Yamunā. The land in Māṭavana is for
cow grazing, and there is a famous mandira of Baladevajī
here. In Bhakti-ratnākara, Māṭa Gaon is described as
follows:


eī ‘māṭhagrāma’ — mahā ānanda ekhāne

nānā krīḍā kare rāmakṛṣṇa sakhāsane

mṛttika-nirmita bṛhat pātra — māṭha nāma

māṭhotpatti-prasasta-e hetu māṭha grāma

dadhimanthanādi lāgi brajavāsīgaṇa

layena asaṅkhya māṭha — aise sabe kana


“In Māṭha Grāma, Rāma and Kṛṣṇa would play with their
friends. This place is so named after the huge earthen
vessel called a māṭha, which the Brajabāsīs would use to
churn their buttermilk from yoghurt.”


Pānī Gaon

                          175
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017


This village situated on the bank of the Yamunā is two
miles south of Māna Sarovara and a quarter of a mile
south-east of Vṛndāvana. It is also known as Pānī Ghāṭa.

At the time of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, Maharṣi Durvāsā stayed
at his āśrama near Pānī Gaon. Once, the gopīs of
Vṛndāvana wanted to please Maharṣi Durvāsā with a large
selection of very delicious food preparations, which
they were going to carry from Vṛndāvana across the
Yamunā to his āśrama. Yamunā was in flood due to the
monsoon season, and her waves were so high that no
boatman was courageous enough to ferry the gopīs across
the river. Suddenly, Kṛṣṇa appeared and smilingly asked
them why they were in anxiety. They told Him about their
dilemma. Kṛṣṇa said, “You can easily cross the river. Go
to the Yamunā’s shore and say to her in unison, ‘If
Kṛṣṇa has not seen the face of any woman, then, on the
strength of His firm brahmacarya (vow of celibacy), may
we easily cross the river on foot.’” The gopīs did as
Kṛṣṇa had told them and crossed the river on foot,
arriving at Maharṣi Durvāsā’s āśrama with all their
foodstuffs. There, the hundreds and thousands of gopīs
pleased Durvāsājī with a vast spread of delicious foods.
Being satisfied, he blessed them that their hearts’
desires would be fulfilled.

When they were ready to return, they told Maharṣi
Durvāsā the difficulty they faced in crossing the river.
He said, “Tell Yamunājī, ‘If Durvāsājī has not eaten any
cooked food, then, on the strength of his austerities,
may we cross over to Vṛndāvana on foot.’” They did so
and reached Vṛndāvana by walking upon the Yamunā’s
waters.

The gopīs were greatly astonished that they had been
able to cross the Yamunā on foot on the strength of
Kṛṣṇa and Maharṣi Durvāsā’s declarations. Śrī Kṛṣṇa had
been in the company of women since birth and Maharṣi
Durvāsā had devoured everything they had just brought
him. They enquired from Śrī Kṛṣṇa about this mystery.
Very seriously, He replied, “Although I stay with all of
you day and night, My brahmacarya nonetheless remains
intact, because I do not possess even the slightest
bhoktā abhimāna, or identity of being the enjoyer.
Durvāsājī is also free from bhoktā abhimāna; therefore,
although he has eaten everything, he has eaten nothing.
A person is attached to this material existence by
thinking himself to be the enjoyer.” The gopīs looked at
Kṛṣṇa in great astonishment. That place where the gopīs
crossed the Yamunā is called Pānī Gaon or Pānī Ghāṭa.


Durvāsā Āśrama

This place lies across the Yamunā one mile north of
Viśrāma Ghāṭa in Mathurā. It is Maharṣi Durvāsā’s place
of austerities. It was from here that Durvāsā crossed
the Yamunā on Dvādaśī and went to the palace of Ambarīṣa
Mahārāja in Mathurā just when the king was due to break
his Ekādaśī fast (pāraṇa). This pastime has been
narrated in detail in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (Ninth Canto,
Fourth Chapter). Just near Durvāsā Āśrama is the āśrama
of Maharṣi Parāśara. Śrī Vyāsa and other ṛṣis and munis

                          176
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                     5/5/2017

would visit Maharṣi Parāśara there. Close by, on the
bank of Yamunā, was the āśrama of Dattātreyajī.
Satyavatī, also known as Matsyagandhā, the mother of Śrī
Vyasādeva, stayed here with her father, the boatman who
had raised her. The island on which Kṛṣṇa-dvaipāyana Śrī
Vedavyāsa took birth is in the Yamunā nearby. At Durvāsā
Āśrama, the gopīs satisfied Maharṣi Durvāsā by offering
him various kinds of delicious foodstuffs.

Today a large and magnificent temple has been built here
that is unique in Braja.1 This mandira has deities of
Maharṣi Durvāsājī, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa and others.


Kṛṣṇa Kuṇḍa

This kuṇḍa is situated in Gāṅgrali Gaon, which lies
between Māṭa and Baelvana. Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the sakhās and the
cows would drink water here and delight in playful games
in the water (jal-vihāra).



Māna Sarovara

At the time of śāradīya rāsa, Śrīmatī Rādhikā saw Her
beloved Kṛṣṇa dancing on the bank of the Yamunā with the
other gopīs. This threw Her into such a state of māna
that was very difficult to subdue. She left the place of
rāsa on Her own, crossed the Yamunā, and came to this
solitary forest. Distressed in separation from Kṛṣṇa,
She began to cry, and the stream of tears that flowed
from Her eyes created this sarovara. Rasika-śekhara Śrī
Kṛṣṇa searched for Śrīmatījī and found Her here.
Offering His veṇu and His head at Her lotus feet, He
admitted His fault and assured Her that He would never
act like that again.

This charming place is embellished by the dense shade of
the pīlū, kadamba and tamāla trees and by the peacocks,
cuckoos, swans, deer and other birds and animals. It
remains visible to our eyes to this present day simply
to remind us of the pastimes of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala.

In the old mandira on the bank of Māna Sarovara, one can
have darśana of a painting that is worshipped there. In
the painting, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is offering His flute and His
head at the lotus feet of Śrīmatī Rādhikā in an effort
to break Her māna. Kṛṣṇa is looking at Her as if to say,
smara-garala-khaṇḍanaṁ mama śirasi maṇḍanam dehi pada-
pallavam udāram.2


tapaḥ siddhi pradāyaiva / namo bilvavanāya ca

janārdana namastubhyaṁ / bilveśāya namostu te

(Bhaviṣyottara Purāṇa)




                          177
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Chapter 16

Baelvana (Bilvavana)



“O Bilvavana, bestower of the perfection of austerities!
I bow down to you. O Janārdana! O master of Bilvavana!
Obeisances unto you.”

This forest is called Baelvana because, during Kṛṣṇa’s
prakaṭa-līlā, there was an abundance of bael (bilva)
trees here. While grazing the cows in this most
captivating and pleasant forest, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His
sakhās would play different kinds of sports and relish
the ripe bael fruits. This is described in Bhakti-
ratnākara:


rāmakṛṣṇa sakhā saha e bilvavanete

pakka bilvaphala bhuñje mahākautukete


“It was here that Rāma, Kṛṣṇa and the sakhās ate ripe
bael (bilva) fruits with great festivity.”

Once, Śrī Lakṣmī heard a description from the mouth of
Nārada about Brajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s sweet rāsa-
līlā and the good fortune of the gopīs. An eager desire
to see this rāsa-līlā arose in her heart. No one but the
gopīs has the qualification to enter rāsa-līlā, since
they are the true emblem of undivided viśuddha prema. It
is only possible to gain entrance into rāsa-līlā by
receiving the mercy of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, the embodiment
of mahābhāva and the crest-jewel of all Kṛṣṇa’s
beloveds, and by the mercy of Her true representatives,
the gopīs. At that time, one can gain entrance very
easily. Thus, Lakṣmī began performing severe austerities
at this place to enter into the rāsa-līlā, but to no
avail. To this day, she is performing austerities here
with this desire. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,1 the wives of
the serpent Kālīya refer to this pastime in their
prayers to Śrī Kṛṣṇa: “Bhagavān! We are unable to
understand what sādhana Kālīyanāga performed that He
became a proprietor of the dust of Your lotus feet. It
is so rare to procure this dust that even Your wife Śrī
Lakṣmī was unable to obtain it, even after giving up all
sense-pleasures and performing austerities for a very
long time in conformity with the prescribed rules and
regulations.”

Just nearby are Kṛṣṇa Kuṇḍa and a baiṭhaka of Śrī
Vallabhācārya. There is also a temple of Śrī Lakṣmī
here.




Chapter 17

Lohavana


                          178
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017


This place lies just across the Yamunā from Mathurā,
approximate two miles north-east of the Mathurā-Gokula
highway. Bhakti-ratnākara describes Lohavana as follows:


lohavane kṛṣṇera adbhuta-gocāraṇa

nānāpuṣpa sugandhe vyāpita ramyasthāna

ethā lohajaṅghāsure badhe bhagavān

lohajaṅghavana nāma hayata ihāra


“The forest of Lohavana is decorated with all types of
trees and flowers and is one of the places where Kṛṣṇa
pastures His cows. It is called Lohavana because, while
grazing the cows here, Śrī Kṛṣṇa killed Lohajaṅghāsura.”

At a Yamunā ghāṭa close to Lohavana, Kṛṣṇa enjoyed
boating-pastimes (naukā-vihāra) in the company of the
gopīs. This līlā has been beautifully described in
Bhakti-ratnākara:


yamunā-nikaṭe yāi śrīnivāse kaya

eī ghāṭe kṛṣṇa naukā-krīḍā ārambhayā

se ati kautuka rāī sakhīra sahite

dugdhādi laīyā āīsena pāra haite

dekhi, se apūrva śobhā kṛṣṇa mugdha haīyā

eka bhite rahilena jīrṇa naukā laīyā

śrī-rādhikā sakhīsaha kahe bāre-bāre

pāra kara nāvika-yāība śīghra pāre


“Lohavana is a charming and delightful place adorned
with attractive flowers of all kinds. Nearby, in the
virtuous Yamunā, Śrī Kṛṣṇa performs naukā-vihāra with
the gopīs. Disguised as a boatman, He seats the
beautiful young cowherd girls in His boat and takes them
out into the middle of the Yamunā’s flowing waters. Then
He says, ‘My old dilapidated boat is leaking, and water
is rushing in. Throw all your pots of milk and yoghurt
overboard; otherwise, it will surely sink.’ The gopīs
beg and beseech this boatman to quickly take them to the
other side of the river.”

This pastime-place still lies here today, and concealed
within it is Kṛṣṇa’s nauka-vihāra with the gopīs. One
can also have darśana of Kṛṣṇa Kuṇḍa, Lohāsura’s cave
and Śrī Gopīnāthajī here.


Āyore Grāma

This village lies near Lohavana. Its current name is

                          179
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Ālīpura. When Kṛṣṇa killed Dantavakra, He crossed the
Yamunā and started for Gokula, where He was to meet with
the Brajabāsīs — His mother, father, sakhās, gopas and
gopīs. They met Him at this place, crying out with great
love, Āyore! Āyore, kanhaiyā! (“He is coming! Kanhaiyā
is coming!”) This village therefore became known as
Āyore. Bhakti-ratnākara describes this poignant scene.1


Gaurava (Gorvāī Gaon)

Gorvāī Grāma lies near Āyore Grāma. Nanda Mahārāja
resided here for some days along with the other gopas
and gopīs after they had returned from Kurukṣetra.
Bhakti-ratnākara states that at the time of kṛṣṇa-līlā
there was a well-known village named Ṭānā in this very
area, where an exceptionally wealthy zamīndār lived. He
had a close, affectionate relationship with Nanda
Mahārāja. When Nanda Bābā and the gopas and gopīs were
journeying to Gokula, they arrived at this village. That
landlord happily welcomed them with great honour and joy
and accom-modated them in his village for several days,
serving them with much respect. This place has therefore
become famous as Gaurava or Gorvāī, deriving from the
word gaurava denā, meaning ‘to give honour’.


Bandī-Ānandī

A short distance to the south of Lohavana is the village
of Bandī-Ānandī. Bandī and Ānandī were two devīs who
would use the excuse of making cowdung patties at Śrī
Nanda Bābā’s place to get the darśana of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The
kuṇḍas of Bandī and Ānandī are still present today in
memory of these two devīs.


Dāūjī: the place of Baladeva

The village of Dāūjī is situated sixteen kilometres
south of Rāyā and twenty-four kilometres from Mathurā.
This village was originally called Rīḍhā, but is
currently known as Dāūjī. In the mandira here, there is
an extremely attractive śyāma-complexioned śrī vigraha
of Dāūjī. Revatījī is present here, but is hidden to the
side of Him behind the door. The confidential reason why
she is somewhat concealed is that Śrī Dāūjī’s marriage
took place while He was residing in Dvārakā and not
while He was living in Braja.

Vajranābha established the deity of Śrī Dāūjī. All the
famous deities of Braja left Braja, but Dāūjī did not
leave even after He revealed Himself to the yavanas
(Muslims). It is said that this deity was found lying
upside down in Kṣīrsāgara (Saṅkarṣaṇa Kuṇḍa) which is
situated on the western side of this temple. Devoted
persons took Śrī Dāūjī from the kuṇḍa and built this
temple, in which they duly seated and worshipped Him.
The pujārīs may have put the deity in the kuṇḍa out of
fear of an attack by the bigot Aurangzeb.

Dāūjī’s birth from the womb of mother Rohiṇī, eight days
before the birth of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, took place in Gokula-
Mahāvana. His nāma-karaṇa, cūḍā-karaṇa and other

                          180
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

saṁskāras were performed with those of baby Kṛṣṇa. Dāūjī
and Kṛṣṇa would also play and crawl around together.

Rīḍhā or Dāūjī Gaon is the pasturing ground for Śrī
Baladāūjī’s cows, being a forest area at the time of His
prakaṭa-līlā. This place is within Vidrumavana.




Chapter 18

Mahāvana-Gokula


Mahāvana is situated about six miles east of Mathurā. It
is also called Bṛhadvana, because it is the largest
(bṛhad) of all the forests (vanas). In fact this forest
has three names: Mahāvana, Gokula and Bṛhadvana. This
Gokula is non-different from Goloka.1

Parjanya Gopa, the father of Goparāja Nanda Bābā,
initially resided at Nandagaon where he had five sons —
namely Upānanda, Abhinanda, Śrī Nanda, Sunanda and
Nandana — and two daughters named Sanandā and Nandinī.
Also, while staying here he gave all his sons and
daughters in marriage. His middle son, Śrī Nanda, had no
offspring. This caused Parjanya Gopa some concern, so he
worshipped Nārāyaṇa in the hope that Nanda would father
a child. By a voice in the sky, he came to know that a
very brave son would soon be born to Śrī Nanda. This son
would possess all good qualities and annihilate every
demon.

Some time after this aerial prophecy, Keśī and other
demons began to cause a disturbance in Nandagaon.
Parjanya Gopa together with his family and all of his
relatives moved here to Bṛhadvana. The Yamunā flows
close by Bṛhadvana, or Mahāvana. This forest is
beautifully decorated with different kinds of trees,
creepers and flowers, and there are lush, green meadows
for the cows to graze on. Beholding this beauty, the
Brajabāsī gopas became very pleased and happily began to
reside here.

Yaśodā Maiyā gave birth to the twins Kṛṣṇa Kanhaiyā and
Yogamāyā at midnight, in the delivery room at Nanda
Bhavan in Mahāvana. The umbilical cord was cut
(nāḍīccheda) and other Vedic saṁskaras were performed
here in mother Yaśodā’s delivery room.

Kṛṣṇa killed the demons Pūtanā, Tṛṇāvarta and Śakaṭāsura
here, thus liberating them. Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva’s name-
giving ceremony also took place at Mahāvana, in the
nearby gośālā of Nanda Mahārāja. It was here that Rāma
and Kṛṣṇa started to crawl on Their knees, that mother
Yaśodā tied naughty baby Kṛṣṇa to a mortar, and that
Kṛṣṇa delivered the Yamalārjuna trees. The childhood
pastimes of Kṛṣṇa and Rāma up to the age of two and a
half to three years took place here in Mahāvana. These
pastimes are briefly described further on.



                          181
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                      5/5/2017

The Pastime-places of Mahāvana

The pastime-places of Bṛhadvana, or Mahāvana, are
mentioned in the Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa as follows:


ekaviṁśati tīrthānāṁ / yuktaṁ bhūriguṇānvitam

yamalārjuna puṇyātmānam / nanda-kūpaṁ tathaiva ca

cintāharaṇaṁ brahmaṇḍaṁ / kuṇḍaṁ sārasvataṁ tathā

sarasvatī-śilā tatra / viṣṇu-kuṇḍaṁ samanvitam

karṇa-kūpaṁ kṛṣṇa-kuṇḍaṁ / gopa-kūpaṁ tathaiva ca

ramaṇaṁ ramaṇa-sthānaṁ / tṛṇāvartākhya-pātanam

pūtanā-pātanasthānaṁ / tṛṇāvartākhya-pātanam

nanda-harmya nandageha / ghaṭaṁ ramaṇa-saṁjñakam

mathurānāthodbhavaṁ / kṣetraṁ puṇyaṁ pāpa-pranāśanam

janma-sthānaṁ tu śeṣasya / janma yogamāyayā


“In Mahāvana, there are twenty-one tīrthas, which are
filled with many good qualities. They include
Yamalārjuna-uddhāra-sthala, Nanda Kūpa, Cintāharaṇa
Ghāṭa, Brahmāṇḍa Ghāṭa, Sārasvata Kuṇḍa, Sarasvatī Śilā,
Viṣṇu Kuṇḍa, Karṇa Kūpa, Kṛṣṇa Kuṇḍa, Gopa Kūpa, Ramaṇa
Reti, Tṛṇāvārta-badha-sthala, Pūtanā-badha-sthala,
Nanda’s palace, Nanda Bhavan, Ramaṇa Ghāṭa and Mathurā
Kṣetra, the birthplace of Mathurānātha, Śeṣa (Balarāma)
and Yogamāyā. Visiting Mathurā Kṣetra dispels all one’s
sins and brings about all auspiciousness.”

The pastimes-places mentioned in both Braja-bhakti-
vilāsa and Bhakti-ratnākara are Yamalārjuna-uddhāra-
sthala, (the place where the Yamalārjuna trees were
delivered), Pūtanā-badha-sthala (the place where Pūtanā
was killed), Śakaṭa-bhañjana-sthāna (the place where the
cart was broken), Sapta-sāmudrika Kūpa, and Gopīśvara
Mahādeva. Additionally, Braja-bhakti-vilāsa mentions Śrī
Nanda Mandira, Yaśodā Śayana-sthala (Yaśodā’s resting-
place), Okhala-sthala (the place of the mortar),
Yogamāyā-janma-sthala (the birthplace of Yogamāyā), Bāla
Gokuleśvara and Rohiṇī Mandira. Bhakti-ratnākara further
mentions Janma-sthāna (Kṛṣṇa’s birthplace), Janma-
saṁskāra-sthāna (the place where the sanctifying
ceremonies took place at the time of birth), Gośālā
(cowshed), Nāma-karaṇa-sthāna (the place of the name-
giving ceremony), Agni-saṁskāra-sthala, Stanya-pāna-
sthala, Tṛṇāvarta-badha-sthala (the place where
Tṛṇāvarta was killed), the place where Kṛṣṇa and
Balarāma crawled on Their knees, Brahmāṇḍa Ghāṭa,
Yaśodājī’s courtyard, Navanīta-corī-sthala (the place
where navanīta, or the fresh butter, was stolen),
Dāmodaralīlā-sthala (the place where the Dāmodaralīlā
took place), Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī’s bhajana-sthalī, the
place of Madana-Mohanajī, Ramaṇa Retī, Gopa Kūpa, the
residences of Upānanda and the other gopas, the place of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s birth-ceremony and other ceremonies, Gopa

                          182
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Baiṭhaka, Vṛndāvana Gamana-patha (the path to go to
Vṛndāvana), Sakraulī, and so forth.

We will now describe those places of darśana that still
remain visible today.


Danta-dhāvana Ṭīlā

Nanda Mahārāja would sit on this small hill (ṭilā) and
clean his teeth (danta-dhāvana) with a twig.


Nanda Bābā kī havelī (Nanda Bābā’s house)

Around the base of Danta-dhāvana Ṭīlā stood the
residences of Nanda and his brothers and relatives. The
ruins of these houses can still be seen today, even from
a distance.


Nanda Bhavan (Kṛṣṇa’s birthplace)

Svayaṁ Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Yogamāyā took birth as
twins from the womb of mother Yaśodā in her room in
Nanda’s palace. They were born at midnight on Āṣṭamī
(the eighth day after the full moon) in the month of
Bhādra when the nakṣatra named Rohiṇī was visible in the
sky.

One can take darśana of Yogamāyā here. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
vividly describes how the most fortunate Nanda Bābā
became very joyful upon receiving a son. After the
ceremony known as nāḍīcheda-saṁskāra had been performed,
in which the umbilical cord is cut, baby Kṛṣṇa was
bathed and so on. Nanda Bābā then called the brāhmaṇas
to perform the various saṁskaras and other rites of
childbirth.2 Śrī Raghupati Upādyāya says:


śrutim apare smṛtim itare

bhāratam anye bhajantu bhava-bhītāḥ

aham iha nandaṁ vande

yasyālinde param brahma

(Śrī Padyāvalī, text 127)



“In a world frightened by birth and death, some people
take shelter of the śrutis, some of the smṛtis and some
of the Mahābhārata. But I pray to Śrī Nandarāya, in
whose courtyard Parabrahma is playing as a child.”


Pūtanā-uddhāra-sthala (the place where Pūtanā was
liberated)

Pūtanā disguised herself as a mother, smeared her
breasts with deadly poison, and came to this place in
Nanda Bhavan. Directly in front of Yaśodā and Rohiṇī,

                            183
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

she was able to very easily pick up sleeping baby Kṛṣṇa
from the cradle, put Him on her lap and begin to breast-
feed Him. Kṛṣṇa sucked out the deadly poison together
with her life, thus liberating her from the body of a
rākṣasī. He then gave her the position of a dhātrī, a
nurse or foster-mother, in Goloka.

In a previous life, Pūtanā was Ratnamālā, the daughter
of Bali Mahārāja. When, in the palace of her father, she
beheld the beauty of Lord Vāmanadeva, she desired to
have a son just like Him. But when Vāmanadeva took away
everything from Bali Mahārāja and bound him with a rope
of snakes (nāgapāśa), she began to cry. She thought, “I
would kill such a cruel son by feeding him breast milk
mixed with poison.” Knowing her desire, Lord Vāmanadeva
gave her this boon, saying, Evam astu. (“So be it.”).
Śrī Kṛṣṇa therefore killed her in that form and gave her
the proper identity of a dhātrī.


Śakaṭa-bhañjana-sthāna (the place where the cart was
broken)

Once, Kṛṣṇa was sleeping in a cradle under a cart while
mother Yaśodā busied herself with His birthday ceremony.
Just then, a demon sent by Kaṁsa entered into that cart
and began to press it down with the intention of
crushing and killing Kṛṣṇa. The naughty baby Kṛṣṇa,
however, made a joyous cry and, with a kick of His foot,
very easily killed that demon. The cart collapsed and
the pots that were filled with milk, yoghurt, butter and
other ingredients shattered to pieces. Hearing the
baby’s cry, mother Yaśodā rushed to the scene and became
struck with wonder. When she saw that her Kṛṣṇa was
safe, she called for the brāhmaṇas and donated many cows
in charity. The brāhmaṇas then performed Kṛṣṇa’s
abhiṣeka using the urine and dung of a black cow and
recited Vedic mantras for protection. To this day, the
memories of this līlā remain present at this place.

In his previous life, Śakaṭāsura was the son of the
demon Hiraṇyākṣa. His name was Utkaca and he was also a
demon. Once, he had trampled on and destroyed the lush,
green trees and creepers in Lomaśa Ṛṣi’s āśrama. The ṛṣi
became filled with anger and cursed him, saying,
“Villain, may you become bodiless!” Hearing this, Utkaca
fell at the lotus feet of the ṛṣi begging for
forgiveness. The ṛṣi said, “You will be liberated by the
touch of Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet during the reign of
Vaivasvata Manu.” That same demon who was concealed
within the cart tried to crush Kṛṣṇa but, by the touch
of Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet, he became liberated.
This līlā is described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (Tenth
Canto, Seventh Chapter).


Tṛṇāvarta-badha-sthala (the place where Tṛṇāvarta was
killed)

Once, Kaṁsa sent a demon named Tṛṇāvarta to Gokula to
kill Kṛṣṇa. Upon the advice of Kaṁsa, Tṛṇāvarta assumed
the form of a whirlwind and entered Gokula. The demon
seized Kṛṣṇa, who was sitting beside mother Yaśodā, and
flew into the sky. Baby Kṛṣṇa caught his neck as any

                          184
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

baby might, but this choked the demon. Tṛṇāvarta’s eyes
popped out from their sockets, and he fell to the earth
and died.3


Dadhi-manthana-sthala (the place where yoghurt was
churned)

Yaśodā would churn yoghurt here. Once, during the last
part of the night, baby Kṛṣṇa was sleeping on His bed.
The previous day, Yaśodā Maiyā had sent all of her
servants and maidservants to their respective homes for
the occasion of Dīpāvalī. In the morning, she churned
the yoghurt herself, so she would be able to feed fresh
butter to Kṛṣṇa. As she churned away, she absorbed
herself in singing about Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes in a high and
melodious voice. Kṛṣna awoke and, feeling hungry,
searched for His mother. He climbed out of His bed.
Crying and stumbling along with great difficulty, He
somehow managed to reach mother Yaśodā, who
affectionately placed Him on her lap and began to
breast-feed Him.

However, when she was only midway through feeding Him,
the milk on the fire nearby began to boil over. Mother
Yaśodā forcefully put Kṛṣṇa on the floor and went to
take care of the milk. Baby Kṛṣṇa was still unsatisfied
and He began to quiver in uncontrollable anger. Taking
up a stone pestle, He punched a hole in the churning pot
and liquid yoghurt flowed all over the floor. Kṛṣṇa
trampled through the stream of yoghurt before walking
into the house and climbing upon an upside-down mortar.
Taking butter from a hanging pot, He ate some Himself
and then began to feed some to the monkeys and crows.
Upon returning from the fire nearby, Yaśodā Maiyā saw
signs of her child’s activities and began to smile.
Creeping up behind Kṛṣṇa, she went to catch Him, but He
caught sight of her, jumped off the mortar and fled. But
mother Yaśodā ran faster than Kṛṣṇa and caught hold of
Him from behind. To punish Him, she tied Him to the
mortar and then busied herself with her household
duties.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.9.18) states:


sva-mātuḥ svinna-gātrāyā

visrasta-kabara-srajaḥ

dṛṣṭvā pariśramaṁ kṛṣṇaḥ

kṛpayā ‘sīt sva-bandhane


“Because of mother Yaśodā’s hard labour, her whole body
became covered with perspiration, and the flowers and
comb were falling from her hair. When the child Kṛṣṇa
saw His mother thus fatigued, He became merciful to her
and agreed to be bound.”

Kṛṣṇa and His sakhās began to drag the grinding mortar,
touching and delivering the sons of Kuvera, who had been
cursed in a previous life to become trees. This pastime

                           185
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

is described in detail in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (Tenth
Canto, Ninth and Tenth Chapters).

Mother Yaśodā had tied Kṛṣṇa to the mortar right here in
Nanda Bhavan, and the place where Nalakuvera and
Maṇigrīva were delivered lies just outside. The present
location of Caurāsī Khambā is where Kṛṣṇa’s umbilical
cord was cut, and nearby lies Nanda Kūpa, Nanda’s well.


Nanda Baba’s gośālā

Gargācārya performed Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva’s name-giving
ceremony (nāma-karaṇa saṁskāra) in this solitary gośālā.
During the ceremony, Gargācārya predicted that Śrī Bala-
rāma and Kṛṣṇa would possess astonishing prowess, would
annihilate demonsÇ and would perform other divine
pastimes. Nanda Mahārāja performed the name-giving
ceremony without any festivities because he feared
Kaṁsa’s atrocities.


Malla Tīrtha

Here, the naked babies Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma wrestled with
each other. The gopīs encouraged Them to wrestle by
offering to give the winner a laḍḍū. At this, the two
boys, each desiring to defeat the other, began to
wrestle. Today, Gopīśvara Mahādeva is here.


Nanda Kūpa

This well is also known as Saptasāmudrika Kūpa. Mahārāja
Nanda used to draw water from it. It is said that the
demigods manifested it for the service of Bhagavān Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. Its water stays warm in the winter and cool in
the summer, and liberates one who bathes in it from all
sins.


Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī’s place of bhajana

Below the temple of Caurāsī Khambā, near Sāmudrika Kūpa,
is Sanātana Gosvāmī’s bhajana-kuṭī situated inside a
cave. As recorded in Bhakti-ratnākara, Sanātana Gosvāmī
would come to Gokula occasionally. He would perform
bhajana at this place, and daily take darśana of Śrī
Madana-Gopāla.4

Once, Sanātana Gosvāmī was amazed by an extraordinary
child he saw playing in the pleasant sand on the bank of
the Yamunā. When the child had finished his game,
Sanātana Gosvāmī followed him into the temple of Śrī
Madana-Gopāla. Upon entering the temple, however,
Sanātana Gosvāmī could only see the deity. Some time
later in Mathurā, Sanātana Gosvāmī saw that same Śrī
Madana-Gopāla playing in the house of a Caubāin with her
son. Śrī Madana-Gopāla requested Sanātanajī to take Him
with him to Vṛndāvana. Sanātana Gosvāmī brought Him to
his bhajana-kuṭī, and later had a magnificent temple
constructed for Him, where he arranged for His sevā and
pūjā.


                          186
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017


Brahmāṇḍa Ghāṭa

This place lies approximately one mile east of Nanda
Bhavan, the birthplace of Kṛṣṇa. Here, Bāla Kṛṣṇa ate
earth while playing with the cowherd boys. The boys saw
this and told mother Yaśodā, who asked Balarāma about
it. Balarāma verified the fact. She went to Kṛṣṇa and
asked Him herself, “Have You eaten clay?”

He replied, “No, Maiyā! I did not eat clay.”

“Alright, Kanhaiyā, open Your mouth and show me.”

“You can see, Maiyā,” He said as He opened His mouth.

Looking into Kanhaiyā’s mouth, Maiyā became dumb-struck.
There, she saw innumerable brahmāṇḍas, countless
Brahmās, Viṣṇus and Maheśas, and all moving and non-
moving entities. She closed her eyes in fear and
thought, “What is this that I am seeing? Is it an
illusion or someone’s magical powers?” Upon opening her
eyes, mother Yaśodā saw that Kanhaiyā was sitting in her
lap. She returned to the house and called the brāhmaṇas,
who recited blessings to pacify the wrath of the
Supreme. She also donated cows and other valuables to
the brāhmaṇas.

Although Yaśodā Maiyā had directly witnessed Kṛṣṇa’s
bhagavattā in the form of countless universes and all
animate and inanimate objects situated within His mouth,
she never accepted Kṛṣṇa as Svayaṁ Bhagavān. Her
vātsalya-prema blossomed rather than weakened. By
contrast, when Devakī and Vasudeva beheld Kṛṣṇa’s four-
armed form, their vātsalya-prema weakened. Similarly,
Arjuna’s sakhya-bhāva weakened when he saw Kṛṣṇa’s
universal form. Devakī, Vasudeva and Arjuna folded their
hands and began to praise Kṛṣṇa and pray to Him. In
Braja, however, the prema of the Brajabāsīs does not
weaken even when Kṛṣṇa manifests Himself as Bhagavān.
Their sweet mood towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa never diminishes
because they never accept Him as Bhagavān.

Another time, Bāla Kṛṣṇa was playing here with His
companions, the cowherd boys, when the boys unexpectedly
began to tease Him and laugh and clap. At first,
Kanhaiyā did not understand why and was bewildered by
what was happening, but then He understood. Dāma,
Śrīdāma, Madhumaṅgala and the other cowherd boys were
saying, “Nanda Bābā is fair-complexioned and Yaśodā
Maiyā is fair-complexioned, but You are black. Why? The
fact is that You were not born from Yaśodā Maiyā’s womb.
You are not her child. Someone else gave birth to You,
but being unable to bring You up, they put You in the
hollow of a banyan tree. The supremely merciful Nanda
Bābā found You there crying helplessly. He picked You up
and placed You in the lap of mother Yaśodā, but, in
reality, You are not the son of Nanda and Yaśodā.”

Kanhaiyā stopped playing and went home weeping. He began
to roll around in the courtyard. Mother Yaśodā
affectionately picked Him up in her arms and tried to
find out why He was crying. But today Kanhaiyā refused
to sit in her lap. She then forcibly took Him in her

                          187
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

arms, brushed the dust from His limbs, and asked Him
what had happened. After Kanhaiyā calmed down a little,
He said, “Dāma, Śrīdāma and the other cowherd boys are
saying, ‘You were not born from Maiyā’s womb. Bābā is
fair-complexioned and Maiyā is fair-complexioned, so
where did You, who are black, come from?’”

Hearing this, Maiyā started laughing and said, “Are
lālā! Who else is saying this?”

“Dāū Bhaiyā.”

Maiyā, put her hand on Kṛṣṇa’s forehead and said, “I
take an oath before Śrī Nārāyaṇa that You are my son
born from my womb. I will chastise those children.” She
then began to breast-feed Kṛṣṇa.

In reality, Nanda Bābā was of a fair complexion, but
mother Yaśodā, who was a very beautiful gopī, was
slightly dark in hue. How else could Kṛṣṇa have been so
beautiful if He had not been born from mother Yaśodā’s
womb? But because Kanhaiyā was somewhat darker than His
mother, the boys teased Him about it. This place, which
treasures this pastime, can still be seen today.



Cintāharaṇa Ghāṭa

This place lies on the bank of Śrī Yamunājī near
Brahmāṇḍa Ghāṭa to its east. Cintāharaṇa Mahādeva, who
is worshipped by the BrajabāsīsÇ is present here. When
mother Yaśodā saw the brahmāṇḍas in Kanhaiyā’s mouth,
she became extremely anxious for His welfare and prayed
to Cintāharaṇa Mahādeva for Kṛṣṇa’s safety. Cintā-haraṇa
means ‘to remove anxieties’.



Kole Ghāṭa

This place is situated across the Yamunā from Brahmāṇḍa
Ghāṭa, towards Mathurā. Śrī Vasudeva, along with the
newborn baby Kṛṣṇa, crossed the Yamunā here on his way
to Nanda Bhavan in Gokula. When he was half way across,
the Yamunā rose up so that she could touch Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
feet. Vasudeva held Kṛṣṇa higher. When the water reached
Vasudeva’s neck, he became perplexed and anxious for the
child’s protection. He cried out, Ko leve? (“Who will
save Him?”). Vajranābha therefore named this ghāṭa Kole
Ghāṭa, which is derived from the phrase ‘ko leve’.

Seeing the level of the Yamunā rise, Bāla Kṛṣṇa touched
Yamunā-devī’s lap (kola) with His lotus feet, and at
once the Yamunā’s waters began to recede. The Yamunā’s
shifting waters created an island, which became the
location of Kole Gaon.

Uthaleśvara and Pāṇḍeśvara Mahādeva are situated on the
bank of Kole Ghāṭa.


Devanagara


                          188
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

This is the place of residence of Devasppati Gopa and is
situated about ten miles north of Dāūjī. Places of
darśana are Rāmasāgara Kuṇḍa, an ancient and large
kadamba tree, and the govardhana-śila worshipped by
Devasppati Gopa. Nanda Rāya’s baiṭhaka is in the village
of Hātaurā near Dāūjī.


Karṇa-chedana sthāna (the place where ears were pierced)

The karṇa-chedana saṁskāra, or ear-piercing ceremony, of
Bāla Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma took place here. This village is
currently known as Karṇāvala. One can have darśana of
Karṇabedha Kūpa, Ratnacauka, and of the deities of Śrī
Madana-Mohana and Mādhavarāyajī here.


Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu in Mahāvana

Before Śrī Rūpa and Śrī Sanātana’s arrival in Braja, Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu came to Braja and wandered
throughout its forests. At the place of Kṛṣṇa’s birth
festival in Mahāvana, Mahāprabhu took darśana of Śrī
Madana-Mohanajī and, overwhelmed with prema, began to
dance as streams of tears flowed from His eyes. Śrīman
Mahāprabhu’s darśana of Kṛṣṇa’s birthplace has been
described in Bhakti-ratnākara.5


Gokula

Mahāvana and Gokula are in fact one and the same place.
Nanda Bābā along with his family members journeyed from
Nandagaon to Bṛhadvana, or Mahāvana, where they settled
down. Mahāvana is called Gokula because go (cows),
gopas, gopīs and so forth resided here. At the time of
Nanda Bābā, Gokula was not a separate village or town.
In fact, the current village of Gokula is a recent
settlement. Nanda Bābā’s gośālā was in Gokula.

About five hundred years ago, after Śrī Caitanya Mahā-
prabhu’s arrival in Braja, Śrī Vallabhācārya sat on this
beautiful bank beside the Yamunā and read Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam from beginning to end. Śrī Vallabhācārya’s
son, Śrī Viṭṭhalācārya, and his son, Śrī Gokulanātha,
also have baiṭhakas here. In fact, Śrī Viṭṭhalācārya
leased this place in his own name after showing
Aurangzeb a miracle. It was actually he who founded
Gokula. After them, the son of Śrī Gokulanātha resided
here together with his family members. The gosvāmīs of
the dynasty of Śrī Vallabha only lived in Gokula, where
they established the deities of Mathureśajī,
Viṭṭhalanāthajī, Dvārikādhīśajī, Gokulacandramājī, Bāla-
Kṛṣṇajī and Śrī Madana-Mohanajī. Later, Śrī Mathureśa
went to Koṭā, Śrī Viṭṭhalanātha to Nāthadvārā, Śrī
Dvārakā-dhīśa to Kāṅkraulī, Gokulacandramā to Kāmavana,
Śrī Bāla-Kṛṣṇa to Sūrata and Madana-Mohanajī to
Kāmavana. Since the gosvāmīs in the dynasty of Śrī
Vallabha reside in Gokula, they are well known as
gokuliyā gosvāmīs.


Śrī Ṭhākurānī Ghāṭa


                          189
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

This is the main ghāṭa in Gokula and the place where Śrī
Vallabhācārya received darśana of Śrī Yamunā Mahārānī.
He began to give dīkṣā at this place. This ghāṭa is thus
a place of great significance to the Vaiṣṇavas of the
Vallabha Sampradāya.


Govinda Ghāṭa

When Śrī Vallabhācārya came to Braja, he took darśana of
this ghāṭa on Yamunājī, finding it extremely attractive.
He heard from the respectable elderly Brajabāsīs about
Nanda Bābā’s gośālā nearby. They informed him that the
ghāṭa where he was sitting was well known by the name of
Govinda Ghāṭa. Śrī Vallabhācārya became so delighted
that he performed a Bhāgavata Saptāha under the śamī
tree here.


Other places of darśana in Gokula include the garden of
Gokulanātha, Bājanaṭīlā, Siṁhapauḍī, Yaśodā Ghāṭa, the
nearby temple of Śrī Viṭṭhalanātha, Śrī Madana-Mohanajī
Mandira, Śrī Mādhavarāya Mandira, Śrī Gokulanātha
Mandira, Śrī Navanītapriya Mandira, Śrī Dvārakānātha
Mandira, the nearby brahmachokra tree, Śrī
Gokulacandramā Mandira, Śrī Mathurānātha Mandira, the
place where Śrī Nanda Mahārāja kept his cart, and so
forth.

In the village of Nauraṅgabāda, which lies across the
Yamunā facing Gokula, are Śrī Gaṅgājī Mandira and other
places of darśana.


Akrūra Ghāṭa

Akrūra Ghāṭa is situated four miles north of Mathurā and
one mile south of Vṛndāvana. Nearby is Akrūra Gaon.

Seated on Akrūra’s chariot were Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva,
whom Akrūra was bringing from Nandagrāma to Mathurā.
Akrūra stopped the chariot at this place and left Kṛṣṇa
and Baladeva on it, while he went alone to take bath in
Yamunā Hrada and perform sandhyā āhnika. He remained in
the water to remember the mantra of his worshipable
Lord, Sanātana Brahma (the four-armed Viṣṇu). On this
day, however, instead of having darśana of his
worshipful Sanātana Brahma in his meditation, he had the
darśana of Śrī Rāma and Kṛṣṇa. Akrūra became confused.
Looking toward the chariot, he saw Śrī Rāma and Kṛṣṇa
sitting there. Again he dipped in the water and saw them
there also. He now had full confidence that Śrī Rāma and
Kṛṣṇa truly are the complete Sanātana Brahma.

The Gauḍīya Gosvāmīs have explained the incident of
Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma’s departure from Braja with an
excellent siddhānta. Nandanandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Rohiṇī-
nandana Śrī Rāma never leave Vṛndāvana to go elsewhere.
Therefore, Nandanandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Rohiṇīnandana Śrī
Rāma only came with Akrūra as far as Akrūra Ghāṭa, which
marks the borderline between Mathurā and Vṛndāvana.
Thereafter, They both remained in Vṛndāvana in Their
aprakaṭa forms. So, who was it that travelled from
Akrūra Ghāṭa to Mathurā on the chariot with Akrūra and

                          190
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                       5/5/2017

performed pastimes there? It was Devakī-nandana or
Vasudeva-nandana Śrī Balarāma and Devakī-nandana or
Vasudeva-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

According to tattva, Yaśodā-nandana and Devakī-nandana
are actually one, but from the viewpoint of rasa there
is a difference between Them.

Once, Nanda Bābā was performing nirjala Ekādaśī when,
that same night, Dvādaśī began. During the night, Nanda
Bābā entered the water of the Yamunā to take bath and,
because he was bathing at a demoniac time the servants
of Varuṇadeva captured him and brought him to Varuṇa-
loka. Shortly after, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa also went to
Varuṇa-loka. Śrī Varuṇadeva worshipped the Supreme Lord
Śrī Kṛṣṇa with gifts, and handed over Śrī Nanda Bābā to
Him with honour.

This incident surprised Śrī Nanda Bābā, who narrated it
to the Brajabāsīs the next day. The Brajabāsīs requested
Śrī Kṛṣṇa to give them darśana of His parama dhāmaÇ or
supreme abode. At the same place where the most merciful
Bhagavān later gave Akrūra darśana of his iṣṭadeva, He
now gave the Brajabāsīs darśana of His eternal
Brahmaloka. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.28.14, 16) describes
this as follows:


iti sañcintya bhagavān / mahā-kārūṇiko hariḥ

darśayām āsa lokaṁ svaṁ / gopānāṁ tamasaḥ param

te tu brahma-hṛdaṁ nītā / magnāḥ kṛṣṇena coddhṛtāḥ

dadṛśur brahmaṇo lokaṁ / yatrākrūro’dhyagāt purā


“Thus, deeply considering the situation, the all-
merciful Bhagavān revealed to the cowherd men His abode,
which is beyond material darkness. The cowherd men were
brought by Śrī Kṛṣṇa to Brahma Hrada, made to submerge
in the water, and then lifted up. From the same vantage
point that Akrūra saw the spiritual world, the cowherd
men saw Brahmaloka.”

Crores of tīrthas are present in Akrūra Ghāṭa. There is
a sacred injunction to take a bath here at the time of a
solar eclipse.6

When Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu came to Vṛndāvana via the
Jhāḍīkhaṇḍa path, there was no village in Vṛndāvana,
only a deep forest. At night, He resided at Akrūra
Ghāṭa, and at dawn He would sit at Imlītalā Ghāṭa on the
bank of the Yamunā in Vṛndāvana. Being overwhelmed with
prema, Mahāprabhu would chant harināma there until the
third prahara in the afternoon. An uninterrupted stream
of tears flowed from His eyes, and sudīpta aṣṭa-sāttvika
vikāra, brightly shining aṣṭa-sāttvika transformations,
manifested on the limbs of His body. Śrī Balabhadra
Bhaṭṭācārya was the only person with Him at that time.
This pastime is described in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta in
a way that melts the heart.

In ancient times, Śānta Ṛṣi performed a yajña for King

                          191
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Bṛhadsena here. Another name of Akrūra Ghāṭa is Brahma
Hrada, because here Kṛṣṇa gave the gopas darśana of
Brahma Dhāma. Akrūrajī also received darśana of the
complete Sanātana Brahma here.


Yajña Sthala

Near Akrūra Ghāṭa is the sacrificial arena (yajña-
sthala) of the Mathurā brāhmaṇas. Once, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and
His cowherd friends were grazing the cows near Yajña
Sthala. Feeling hungry, Kṛṣṇa sent the sakhās to beg for
foodstuffs from the brāhmaṇas who were performing a
yajña at this place. However, because they were
engrossed in their yajña, those non-devotional brāhmaṇas
refused to give them anything. The sakhās were insulted
and returned to Kṛṣṇa, who told them to go and beg
something from the wives of those brāhmaṇas.


Bhojana Sthala (Bhātrola Gaon)

Here, Kṛṣṇa relished various delicious cooked grains and
foodstuffs brought by the yajña-patnīs, the wives of the
brāhmaṇas.

Having been persuaded by Kṛṣṇa, the cowherd boys had
gone to the residence of the yajña patnīs and begged for
some foodstuffs for Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva. Simply upon
hearing the names of Rāma and Kṛṣṇa, the yajña-patnīs
became overwhelmed with bhāva. They left their homes to
have darśana of Kṛṣṇa, eagerly bringing various
delicious cooked foodstuffs on large plates. Nothing
could stop them, not even the objections of their
husbands. Some yājñika brāhmaṇas forcefully locked their
wives in their houses, but these women gave up their
bodies in the fire of separation and went to meet Kṛṣṇa.
When the brāhmaṇīs approached Śrī Kṛṣṇa, they became
enchanted upon seeing His dark-complexioned form, which
resembles a fresh rain cloud. The yellow garments on His
śyāma-complexioned limbs wavered like steady lightening.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.23.22) relates:


śyāmaṁ hiraṇya-paridhiṁ vanamālya-barha-

dhātu-pravāla-naṭa-veṣam anuvratāṁse

vinyasta-hastam itareṇa dhunānam abjaṁ

karṇotpalālaka-kapola-mukhābja-hāsam


“His complexion was dark blue and His garment golden.
Wearing a peacock feather, coloured minerals, sprigs of
flower buds and a garland of forest flowers and leaves,
He was dressed just like a dramatic dancer. He rested
one hand upon the shoulder of a friend and with the
other twirled a lotus. Lilies graced His ears, His hair
hung down over His cheeks, and His lotus face was
smiling.”

The wives of the brāhmaṇas became so overwhelmed with

                          192
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

prema upon seeing Kṛṣṇa that they did not want to return
home to their husbands. After Kṛṣṇa instructed them to
go, however, they somehow readied themselves to do so.
Upon returning home, they found that the attitude of
their husbands had entirely changed. The brāhmaṇas now
began to praise their wives’ transcendental devotion to
Kṛṣṇa, and they condemned their three types of birth —
namely seminal, brahminical and sacrificial — and their
knowledge and expertise in Vedic rituals.7

There is a point to be considered here. Kṛṣṇa told these
dvija-patnīs to return home, and they obeyed Him. When
the gopa-ramaṇīs heard the sound of Kṛṣṇa’s flute, they
came to Kṛṣṇa, and He similarly told them to return to
their husbands. They did not return, however, and Kṛṣṇa
danced and performed rāsa-līlā with them. How is this?
The answer is that only the gopīs have the adhikāra to
participate in Kṛṣṇa’s rāsa-līlā and other such
pastimes. In Braja, Śrī Kṛṣṇa wears gopaveśa, or the
dress of a gopa, and He is gopāveśa, or absorbed in the
mood of a gopa. Therefore, only the gopīs who themselves
took birth from the wombs of gopīs have the adhikāra to
participate in Brajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s rāsa and
other nikuñja-līlās. Lakṣmī from Vaikuṇṭha and the
dvija-patnīs have no qualification to enter these
confidential līlās. They were therefore sent away. It
may be that after performing arduous worship for many
lifetimes under the guidance of the rāgātmikā gopīs,
such personalities may one day take a birth from the
wombs of gopīs in prakaṭa Braja. Then, by the influence
of their association with nitya-siddha gopīs, they may
one day become qualified for sevā in the nikuñjas and so
forth.




Chapter 19

Śrī Vṛndāvana


This supremely charming forest called Vṛndāvana is
expertly served by Śrī Vṛndā-devī and is densely filled
with many types of sevā-kuñjas and keli-kuñjas. Vṛndā-
devī, eternally reigning and residing here, is the
protector, nourisher and forest goddess (vanadevī) of
Śrī Vṛndāvana. All the trees, creepers, birds and
animals of Vṛndāvana are under her jurisdiction, and
they are dependent upon and obedient to her. She
constantly engages countless gopīs in service in the
kuñjas. She is therefore the adhiṣṭhātrī-devī of kuñja-
sevā.

It is important to understand Yogamāyā (samaṣṭibhūtā
svarūpa-śakti), Paurṇamāsī (parākhyā mahā-śakti) and
Vṛndā-devī and their different functions. Bhagavatī
Paurṇamāsī is the līlā-avatāra of Yogamāyā; in other
words, when Yoga-māyā takes a tangible form, she becomes
Paurṇamāsī. Paurṇamāsī’s function is to attend to all
the details of the various pastimes in the forests and
goṣṭhas. Vṛndā-devī, on the other hand, who is the
personification of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s līlākhyā mahā-śakti and

                          193
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

also a manifestation of Yogamāyā, makes all the
arrangements for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s nikuñja-vilāsa, rāsa-
vilāsa and so on.

Vṛndā-devī’s father is Candrabhānu, her mother is
Phullarā Gopī and her husband is Mahīpāla. All of them
eternally reside in Vṛndāvana. Vṛndā is the most
important among all the dūtī sakhīs, or messengers, like
Vṛndārikā, Mainā and Muralī. Her function is to
skilfully arrange the meeting of the Divine Couple
through various means and, therefore, she is the
vanadevī of Vṛndāvana. Vṛndā-devī has dedicated her
kingdom of Vṛndāvana, which she wonderfully serves,
protects and nourishes, at the lotus feet of Vṛṣabhānu-
nandinī Śrīmatī Rādhika, who is mahābhāva svarūpā, the
embodiment of mahābhāva. Therefore, Śrīmatī Rādhikā is
truly Vṛndāvaneśvarī, the Queen of Vṛndāvana.

The Purāṇas state that the following personalities are
all kāya-vyūhā svarūpā, bodily expansions, of sarva-
śaktimayī Śrīmatī Rādhikā: Mahārāja Kedāra’s daughter
who is described as Vṛndā-devī; king Kuśadhvaja’s
daughter whom the Brahma-vaivarta Purāṇa describes as
Tulasī, the wife of Śaṅkhacūḍa; and Vṛndā, or Tulasī,
the beloved of Hari who appears in the form of a plant
on the earth planet. They eternally reside in Vṛndāvana
and are the partial manifestations (kalā-svarūpā) of
Vṛndā-devī, who is always engaged in the service of the
Divine Couple in the nikuñjas of Vṛndāvana. Indeed,
Vṛndāvana is known by the name of this Vṛndā-devī.

Descriptions of the abundant glories of Śrī Vṛndāvana
are found throughout Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, which is the
crown-jewel of all pramāṇas (evidences). Śrī Nanda
Bābā’s minister and elder brother Śrī Upānanda says:


vanaṁ vṛndāvanaṁ nāma

paśavyaṁ nava-kānanam

gopa-gopī-gavāṁ sevyaṁ

puṇyādri-tṛṇa-vīrudham

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.11.28)



“We should not stay in this Gokula-Mahāvana which is
constantly in turmoil. As gopas and gopīs, our prime
duty is to immediately take up residence in Vṛndāvana,
whose charm is unrivalled, being enchanting in every
respect. It is covered with lush grass, beautified with
various trees, creepers and sacred mountains, and
protected in all respects to provide safety to cows and
other animals.”

Upon observing the wonderful, sweet pastimes of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, Caturmukha Brahmā became very astonished and
prayed with folded hands:


tad bhūri-bhāgyam iha janma kim apy aṭavyāṁ

                          194
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017


yad gokule ‘pi katamāṅghri-rajo-’bhiṣekam

yaj-jīvitaṁ tu nikhilaṁ bhagavān mukundas

tv adyāpi yat-pada-rajaḥ śruti-mṛgyam eva

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.14.34)



“Aho! It would be my great fortune to take birth as a
blade of grass, a shrub or any other species which can
be anointed with the dust falling from the lotus feet of
any of the Brajabāsīs of Vṛndāvana. Even the śrutis, who
have been searching for so long, have not yet received
the dust of the lotus feet of Bhagavān Mukunda, who is
the life and soul of these Brajabāsīs. If it is
impossible for me to take birth in any species in
Vṛndāvana, then let me take birth even as a rock on the
border of Nanda-Gokula. The ladies who sweep the streets
will then rub their feet on this rock to clean them, and
by this I will receive the good fortune of touching the
dust of their feet.”

Uddhava, the premātura bhakta, prays:


āsām aho caraṇa-reṇu-juṣām ahaṁ syāṁ

vṛndāvane kim api gulma-latauṣadhīnām

yā dustyajaṁ sva-janam ārya-pathaṁ ca hitvā

bhejur mukunda-padavīṁ śrutibhir vimṛgyām

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.47.61)



“I would consider it my greatest fortune (aho bhagya) to
take birth as a shrub, creeper, or any other plant in
this Vṛndā-vana and thus be sprinkled by the footdust of
these gopīs. They have given up everything, including
their husbands, sons and other family members, the path
of chastity (ārya-dharma), and their honour in society
(loka-lajjā), which are all very difficult to renounce.
Thus their prema has enchanted even Svayaṁ Bhagavān
Brajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is searched for by the
śrutis.”

The beautiful young women of Mathurā present in Kaṁsa’s
wrestling arena lavishly praised Vṛndāvana by saying:


puṇyā bata vraja-bhuvo yad ayaṁ nṛ-liṅga

gūḍhaḥ purāṇa-puruṣo vana-citra-mālyaḥ

gāḥ pālayan saha-balaḥ kvaṇayaṁś ca veṇuṁ

vikrīḍayāñcati giritra-ramārcitāṅghriḥ

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.44.13)

                          195
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                      5/5/2017




“Aho! In all three worlds, only Śrī Vṛndāvana and the
gopa-ramaṇīs living in Vṛndāvana are fortunate, because
in that place the parama purāṇa-puruṣa Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
disguised as a human being, performs human-like pastimes
under the arrangement of Yogamāyā. Adorned with a
multicoloured vana-mālā, He grazes the cows with
Baladeva and the sakhās, vibrating His sweet flute and
absorbed in various kinds of krīḍā-vilāsa.”

Being intoxicated by kṛṣṇa-prema, one gopī addresses
another gopī, saying:


vṛndāvanaṁ sakhi bhuvo vitanoti kīrtiṁ

yad devakī-suta-padāmbuja-labdha-lakṣmi

govinda-veṇum anu matta-mayūra-nṛtyaṁ

preksyādri-sānv-avaratānya-samasta-sattvam

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.21.10)



“O sakhī, this Vṛndāvana is spreading the fame of the
Earth planet even above that of Vaikuṇṭha because it is
splendidly decorated by the marks of the lotus feet of
Yaśodā-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Sakhī, when rasikendra Śrī
Kṛṣṇa plays on His muralī, which enchants the whole
world, the peacocks become intoxicated and, thinking the
sound of the flute to be the roaring thunder of the
clouds, spread their tail feathers and begin to dance.
Seeing this, the birds and animals roaming on the
mountain summits become completely stunned and relish
the sound of the flute with their ears and the dance of
the peacocks with their eyes.”

What to speak of others, even parama-rasika and bhavuka
Śukadeva Gosvāmī is mesmerised by Vṛndāvana, and thus
praises this land repeatedly:


barhāpīḍaṁ naṭa-vara-vapuḥ karṇayoḥ karṇikāraṁ

bibhrad vāsaḥ kanaka-kapiśaṁ vaijayantīṁ ca mālām

randhrān veṇor adhara-sudhayāpūrayan gopa-vṛndair

vṛndāraṇyaṁ sva-pada ramaṇaṁ prāviśad gīta-kīrtiḥ

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.21.5)



“Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the enchanter of the whole world, dressed as
a naṭavara, the best of dancers, entered the supremely
charming Vṛndāvana, beautifying it with the marks of His
lotus feet. His head was decorated with a peacock
feather. He wore fragrant yellow karnikara flowers
behind His ears, a radiant golden garment on His śyāma-

                          196
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

complexioned limbs, and around His neck a vana-mālā made
of five different coloured flowers, that extended down
to His lotus feet. He poured the nectar from His lips
through the holes of His flute, enchanting everyone by
its sweet sound, including both moveable and immovable
entities. The cowherd boys followed Him, singing His
glories.”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa never leaves this sweet Vṛndāvana, which is
inundated with akhila cidānanda rasa — vṛndāvanaṁ
parityajya pādamekaṁ na gacchati (Brahma-yāmala).

One poet who was a rasika bhakta extracted the essence
of the śrutis and Purāṇas in regard to Vṛndāvana. As if
putting the vast ocean into a water pot, he summed it up
accurately by saying:


braj samudr mathurā kamal vṛndāvan makarand

braj vanitā sab puṣp haiṅ madhukar gokulcand


“Braja is like the ocean, Mathurā like the lotus, and
Vṛndā-vana like the nectar-pollen. All the Braja gopīs
are like flowers, and Gokulacanda Kṛṣṇa is the
bumblebee.”


The Unique Glory of Śrī Vṛndāvana

Śrī Vṛndāvana is not merely a tīrtha, but is Bhagavān’s
own abode (dhāma), or His own home. It is no
exaggeration to say that Vṛndāvana is Kṛṣṇa’s svarūpa
because Kṛṣṇa and His dhāma are non-different.

According to thePurāṇas, Devarṣi Nārada was once singing
the glories of Śrī Hari on his vīṇa when he reached
Prayāga. This Prayāga is Tīrtharāja, or the king of all
holy places. Prayāga welcomed him with great honour and
narrated the story of how he became Tīrtharāja. Śrī
Nārada said, “Bhagavān has given you the post of
Tīrtharāja, but I have some doubt in this regard. Does
Vṛndāvana ever come to make offerings to you along with
the other tīrthas?”

Tīrtharāja replied, “No.”

Śrī Nārada asked, “Then, what kind of Tīrtharāja are
you?”

This statement pierced the heart of Tīrtharāja, who
understood it to be true. “How then am I Tīrtharāja?” he
wondered. Thinking in this way, he went to Bhagavān.

Seeing Tīrtharāja approaching, Bhagavān honoured him
appropriately and asked him why he had come. Tīrtharāja
humbly replied, “Prabhu, You have appointed me as
Tīrtha-rāja, but the tīrtha of Vṛndāvana never comes to
make any offering to me. How can it be that I am
Tīrtharāja? If a small tīrtha like Vṛndāvana does not
accept my jurisdiction, then it is not at all
appropriate for me to hold the title of Tīrtharāja.”


                            197
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                     5/5/2017

Upon hearing the statements of Prayāga Rāja, Bhagavān
became silent for a moment. His eyes brimmed with tears
as He remembered Braja. Cow-grazing, His sakhās, Nanda
Bābā and mother Yaśodā’s affection, His beloved Kiśorī
Śrī Rādhā, the gopīs and His rāsa-vilāsa — these
memories appeared in His heart along with many others
from Braja. Bhagavān’s heart melted. After composing
Himself a little, He spoke very gravely. “Tīrtharāja! It
is true that I have appointed you the king of all
tīrthas, but I have not made you the king of My own
home, Śrī Vṛndāvana. The land of Vṛndāvana is not only
My home, but is the supreme place of My beloved Śrī
Rādhā’s pastimes (vihāra). She is indeed the adhipati
(mistress) and īśvarī (sovereign) there. She is truly
Vṛndāvaneśvarī. I also reside there eternally. You are
Tīrtharāja, no doubt, but Vṛndāvana is not merely a
tīrtha. You too can worship and serve Vṛndāvana in some
way.”

Śrī Nārada has glorified Śrī Vṛndāvana not only in the
Padma Purāṇa, but also to Bhakti-devī in Śrīmad-Bhāgavat
Māhātmya (1.61):


vṛndāvanasya saṁyogāt / punastvaṁ taruṇī navā

dhanyaṁ vṛndāvanaṁ tena / bhaktir-nṛtyati yatra ca


“He Devī! By coming to Vṛndāvana, you have again become
a fresh young woman. Thus, this Vṛndāvana Dhāma, where
bhakti is dancing everywhere, is blessed.” The glories
of Śrī Vṛndāvana are also mentioned in the Mathurā
Khaṇḍa of the Skanda Purāṇa1 and in the Ādi Varāha
Purāṇa.2


Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s Unparalleled Gift: Śrī
Vṛndāvana

It has already been mentioned that when Kṛṣṇa’s līlās
became unmanifest, all the pastime-places in Braja
almost disappeared. Śrī Vṛndāvana, along with its rāsa-
sthalī and Vaṁśīvaṭa, became dense forest and
disappeared from sight. After some years, Śrī Vajranābha
Mahārāja manifested the various pastime-places of Braja
with the help of Śāṇḍilya, Bhāgurī Ṛṣi and others. They
did this by establishing temples, sarovaras, kuṇḍas and
so forth. About four and a half thousand years later,
however, these places had again vanished. It was then
that Śrī Kṛṣṇa appeared in this world as Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, immersed in the bhāva of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. He
manifested the lost pastime-places of Śrī Vṛndāvana and
Braja Maṇḍala, both directly Himself, and also through
Śrī Rūpa, Śrī Sanātana and other associates. The whole
universe, especially the community of Vaiṣṇavas, will
eternally remain indebted to these personalities for
this outstanding work. If they had not descended to this
earth, who would now know about the sweetness of
Vṛndāvana and who would be able to enter that sweetness?
If Gaurāṅgadeva had not come, then who would have
described the glories of Śrīmatī Rādhikā and the topmost
limit of prema-rasa? In ‘Yadi Gaurāṅga Nahito’, Narahari
dāsa sings with great feeling:

                          198
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017



(yadi) gaurāṅga nahito, tabe ki hoito

kemone dharita de?

rādhāra mahimā, prema-rasa-sīmā

jagate jānāto ke?

madhura vṛndā, vipina-mādhurī

praveśa cāturī sār

baraja-yuvati, bhāvera bhakati,

śakati hoito kār?


“If Śrīman Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu had not appeared, then
what would have become of us? How could we have
tolerated living? In this universe, who would ever have
come to know about the glories of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and
the topmost limit of prema-rasa? If Caitanya Mahāprabhu
had not come, who would have had the intelligence to
join the sweet madhura rasa of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s līlās
in Vṛndāvana? Who else but Mahāprabhu could have
bestowed the power to enter the braja ramaṇīs’ loving
mood of sevā to Yugala Kiśora?”

Upon the direct order of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu,
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava ācāryas manifested the pastime-places
of Braja. Taking the help of various śāstras, Śrī
Lokanātha Gosvāmī, Śrī Bhūgarbha Gosvāmī, Śrī Sanātana
Gosvāmī, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrī Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī,
Śrī Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, Śrī Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī and others manifested these
places through their untiring endeavours.


The Pastime-places of Śrī Vṛndāvana Bhagavatī Yamunā

Mahārānī Yamunā is śrī kṛṣṇa-svarūpinī, meaning that she
is a manifestation of Viśākhā. She is Bhagavatī because
she is dear to Kṛṣṇa, and she is Kṛṣṇā because she is
blackish in complexion. Yamunā-devī assists the amorous
pastimes (keli-vilāsa) of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala in
every respect, and flows on three sides of Vṛndāvana. To
fully support the rasa-vilāsa of Priyā and Priyatama,
she creates countless charming nikuñjas, dense with
various kinds of trees and creepers that are laden with
flowers and fruits.

She is ornamented and beautified with divine ghāṭas
bedecked with jewels, with kadamba, tamāla, āmra, bakula
and other types of trees, and with various kuñjas. Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala perform water pastimes (jal-keli) and
boating pastimes (naukā-vihāra) with the sakhīs in the
waters of Śrī Yamunā. This water is saturated with prema
and is always decorated with seven-petalled lotuses
(sapta-dala kamala). This Bhagavatī Yamunā, who serves
Yugala Kiśora eternally, is supremely worshipable.

The Śrī Yamunā-praṇāma (verse one) in Padma Purāṇa

                          199
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

glorifies her as follows:


cidānandabhānoḥ sadā nanda-sūnoḥ

para-prema-pātrī drava-brahma-gātrī

aghānāṁ lavitrī jagat-kṣema-dhātrī

pavitrī-kriyānno vapur-mitra-putrī


“I repeatedly offer prayers to Śrī Yamunā, the daughter
of the Sungod, who is the bestower of unnatojjvala prema
for cidānanda-sūrya-svarūpa Nandanandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa. She
embodies transcendental bliss and directly personifies
the melted form of Parabrahma. Simply remembering her
destroys all types of wickedness and great sins, thus
rendering the heart pure. She bestows all auspiciousness
upon the world, and can even infuse brajarasa into dry,
desert-like hearts. May she purify us.”


gaṅgādi-tīrtha-pariṣevita-pāda-padmāṁ

goloka-saukhya-rasa-pūramahiṁ mahimnā

āplāvitākhila-sudhāsu-jalāṁ sukhābdhau

rādhā-mukunda-muditāṁ yamunāṁ namāmi

(Padma Purāṇa, Śrī Yamunā-praṇāma)



“I offer praṇāmas time and again unto kṛṣṇa-priyā Śrī
Yamunā, whose lotus feet are always served by Gaṅgā,
Godāvarī, Narmadā, Sindhu and other tīrthas. Śrī Yamunā
is glorious due to being the bestower of sevā that is
saturated with rasa to Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala in
Goloka-Vṛndāvana. In her nectar-filled waters, Śrī
Rādhā-Mukunda remain immersed in an ocean of happiness.”



Sonaraka

This place is close to the present day Kālīya Daha.
Saubhari Ṛṣi’s āśrama was here. Before the time of
kṛṣṇa-līlā, Saubhari Ṛṣi performed austerities here for
thousands of years. To conquer his senses, he remained
standing in the water of the Yamunā during all seasons,
including summer and winter. One day Garuḍa, a parikara
of Bhagavān, arrived here. Following his nature as a
bird, he swallowed a big male fish right before
everyone’s eyes. Seeing this, the fish community
lamented and prayed to Saubhari Ṛṣi for retaliation.
Engrossed in dry austerities and unaware of the glories
of Bhagavān’s devotees, Saubhari Ṛṣi cursed Garuḍa,
saying that if he came here again, his head would be cut
off. Because Saubhari Ṛṣi had cursed a great devotee, a
desire arose in his heart to enjoy the material world.
He came out of the waters of the Yamunā, and by his
mystic power transformed himself into a young man. He

                            200
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

married the many beautiful young daughters of Mahārāja
Māndhāta, and remained entangled in worldly pleasures
for thousands of years.

By the desire of Bhagavān, the Kālīya serpent later
moved to that same Yamunā pond with his family, in order
to protect himself from the very powerful Garuḍa. This
rendered the water in the pond poisonous, and all the
fish living here, who had also committed an offence
towards Garuḍa, died. In this way, Saubhari Ṛṣi and all
the fish that had taken shelter of him faced total
destruction, because they had committed an offence
towards a bhakta. The śāstras therefore declare that one
should at all costs always refrain from committing
Vaiṣṇava aparādha.



Kālīya Hrada (Kālīya Daha)

Hrada means ‘lake’, and daha is the spot where the water
of a river runs deep. The current name of this place is
Kālīya Daha. Śrī Kṛṣṇa subdued the serpent Kālīya here.
The keli-kadamba tree from which Śrī Kṛṣṇa jumped with
great speed into the Kālīya Hrada stands nearby. All of
the trees and creepers around the hrada were burnt to
ashes by the poison of the Kālīya serpent. Only this one
keli-kadamba tree remained. This was because the mighty
and valiant Garuḍa was once carrying a pot of amṛta from
the heavenly planets in order to free his mother Vinatā
from the slavery of his stepmother Kadrū. He rested on
this keli-kadamba tree for some time, and the strength
of the nectar’s fragrance, or a drop of the nectar
itself that had spilled, was enough to save this keli-
kadamba tree.

Kālīya Nāga was also very valiant and powerful. When he
tied Kṛṣṇa in his coils, Kṛṣṇa became somewhat helpless
and motionless. At that time, the Nāgapatnīs, who were
great bhaktas of Kṛṣṇa, began to pray, “We would rather
be widows than be the wives of a husband opposed to
Bhagavān.” But when Kṛṣṇa freed Himself from the
serpent’s coils and began to dance on and kick Kālīya’s
hoods, Kālīya vomited blood from his thousands of mouths
and surrendered unto Bhagavān. At that time, the
Nāgapatnīs folded their hands and begged Kṛṣṇa to spare
their husband’s life, considering his surrendered mood.
Their prayers pleased Śrī Kṛṣṇa. He granted Kālīya Nāga
freedom from fear and ordered him to go to Ramaṇaka
Dvīpa with his family. He assured Kālīya of His
protection, saying, “You need no longer fear Garuḍa.
When he sees My footprints on your hoods, he will forget
his enmity towards you.”

The Nāgapatnīs prayed as follows:


kasyānubhāvo ‘sya na deva vidmahe

tavāṅghri-reṇu-sparśādhikāraḥ

yad-vāñchayā śrīr lalanācarat tapo

vihāya kāmān su-ciraṁ dhṛta-vratā

                             201
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017


(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.16.36)



“He Deva! Śrī Lakṣmī-devī gave up all her desires, took
a vrata and performed austerities for a long, long time
just to attain the dust of Your lotus feet. However, she
nonetheless failed to achieve her heart’s desire. Who
knows what pious deed Kālīya Nāga performed to become
qualified to receive that same rare footdust.”

The sole reason why Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa bestowed His
causeless mercy upon Kālīya was the spontaneous unmo-
tivated devotion (ahaitukī-bhakti) that Kālīya Nāga’s
wives had for Him. Bhagavān’s mercy follows and is
obedient to the mercy of the bhakta. The Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇava commen-tators on this śloka explain this
beautifully.


Śrī Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī’s bhajana-kuṭīra & samādhi

Śrī Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī is the author of Rādhā-rasa-
sudhā-nidhi, Vṛndāvana Mahimāmṛta, Śrī Caitanya-
candrāmṛta, Saṅgīta-mādhava and other scriptures. In his
earlier life, Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī was a resident of
Śrī Raṅgam and a devotee of Śrī Lakṣmī-Nārāyaṇa. He was
the paternal uncle and guru of the famous Gopāla Bhaṭṭa
Gosvāmī. However, by the mercy of Śrīman Mahāprabhu, he
became intoxicated with the rasa of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
Yugala. Shortly after Śrīman Mahāprabhu left Śrī Raṅgam,
he went to Vṛndāvana to perform bhajana. He also stayed
in Kāmyavana for some time. At the end of his life he
entered samādhi here while performing bhajana. In kṛṣṇa-
līlā, he is Tuṅgavidyā Sakhī.

Nowadays, some people say that Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī
and the advaitavādī Prakāśānanda Sarasvatī of Kāśī are
one and the same person. This is completely incorrect in
every respect. How is it possible for the same person to
first be the bhakta Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī, then the
māyāvādī Prakāśānanda and then the same Prabodhānanda
Sarasvatī once again? This modern doctrine is an
ignorant, mind-boggling thought and has been completely
refuted by the Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava ācāryas.


Dvādaśāditya Ṭīlā

It was winter when Kṛṣṇa subdued Kālīya. Kṛṣṇa, who was
performing His nara-līlā, came out of the water,
appearing to be very cold. He climbed upon a nearby
small hill and basked in the heat of the sun. To serve
Kṛṣṇa, the devotee Sūryadeva removed His shivering by
shining forth the full scorching heat of the complete
sun (dvādaśa kalā), as it appears at the time of the
dissolution of the universe. This place is therefore
known as Dvādaśāditya Ṭīlā.


Praskandana Kṣetra

The sun’s heat removed Kṛṣṇa’s shivering, but this heat

                          202
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                      5/5/2017

was excessive and Kṛṣṇa started to perspire. The name of
this place thus became Praskandana Tīrtha; the word
praskan-dana means ‘with perspiration’.


Advaita Vaṭa

Advaita Vaṭa is situated directly in Praskandana Tīrtha.
Just before the advent of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Śrī
Advaita Ācārya came to this place while wandering
throughout Braja. He resided under this same vaṭa tree
for several days. He had found Śrī Madana-Gopāla in
Mahāvana-Gokula, and now served Him here. Due to fear of
the yavanas (Muslims), and by His desire, He secretly
left Śrī Madana-Gopāla with a devoted caube brāhmaṇa and
went to Śāntipura, knowing that very soon Śacīnandana
Śrī Gaurahari would appear in the town of Nadiyā.

Later, that same Madana-Gopāla made His way to Sanātana
Gosvāmī, who had a large temple constructed just nearby
and established Him in it. Since then, Śrī Madana-Gopāla
became known as Śrī Madana-Mohana.



Dāna Galī, Māna Galī, Gumāna Galī & Kuñja Galī

Just near the famous Sevā Kuñja are four narrow galīs,
or alleys: Dāna Galī, Māna Galī, Gumāna Galī and Kuñja
Galī. Once, when Śrīmatī Rādhikā was in māna, She made
Her way to Māna Sarovara via this very Māna Galī. In the
narrow alley named Dāna Galī, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His sakhās
asked the gopīs for dāna, or tax, in the form of prema,
and the gopīs asked the same thing from Kṛṣṇa. This galī
is therefore known as Dāna Galī. Prema Galī is where
Kiśora-Kiśorī-jī’s first meeting took place. At that
moment, by the mu-tual play of Their eyes, a
relationship of prema was established between Them which
increased moment by moment. That is why this galī has
become known as Prema Galī. Some also call it Gumāna
Galī, because when Kṛṣṇa asked Śrī Priyājī for dāna,
exhibiting great pride (gumāna), She refused to give it.
The galī down which the sakhīs would make their way to
Sevā Kuñja, where Śrī Kṛṣṇa would massage the feet of
svādhīna-bhartṛkā Śrī Rādhā, is called Kuñja Galī. Śrī
Dāna-Bihārī and Śrī Rūpa-Sanātana Gauḍīya Maṭha are
situated at the crossing of these four galīs.



Sevā Kuñja

This place is also called Nikuñjavana. It lies just near
the temple of Śrī Rādhā-Dāmodara, to the south-west. A
painting of Śrīmatī Rādhikā with Śrī Kṛṣṇa massaging Her
feet is worshipped here in a small temple.

The Brajabāsīs say that even today Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
Yugala perform Their pastimes here every night. Everyone
therefore leaves this kuñja at dusk. Even the impudent
monkeys independently leave this kuñja as the evening
falls. It once happened that someone stubbornly tried to
remain here during the night, and in the morning he was
found dead. Others have by some means escaped death, but

                          203
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

have become completely insane.

Bhakta Rasakhāna searched for Kṛṣṇa all over Braja but
without success. Finally, he had darśana of rasika Śrī
Kṛṣṇa at this very place. He has revealed this in his
beautiful poetry (padas) as follows:


dekhyo duryo vah kuñj kuṭīr meṁ

baiṭhyo paloṭat rādhikā pāyan


“Standing in the doorway of the kuñja, I watch Kṛṣṇa as
He sits massaging Rādhikā’s feet submissively.” (The
word paloṭa here indicates that Kṛṣṇa is massaging in
the mood, ‘I will not go to Candrāvalī’s kuñja again.’)

In Sevā Kuñja, we also find Lalitā Kuṇḍa. When Lalitājī
was feeling thirsty during rāsa, Kṛṣṇa manifested this
beautiful kuṇḍa by digging it with His veṇu. Lalitā and
the sakhīs drank the kuṇḍa’s sweet, cool water and
refreshed themselves. There is a keli-kadamba tree
nearby whose every knot bulges out and resembles a round
śālagrāma.


Śrī Rūpa-Sanātana Gauḍīya Maṭha (Śrī Vinoda Kuñja)

This maṭha lies on Dāna Galī, very close to Śrī Sevā
Kuñja, the heart of Śrīdhāma Vṛndāvana, and has become a
famous place for darśana.

Prema-puruṣottama Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the ocean of
mercy, sent the brothers Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī and Śrī
Sanātana Gosvāmī to Śrī Vṛndāvana to (i) re-establish
the lost places of pastimes in Śrī Vṛndāvana, (ii)
establish śrī vigraha, (iii) compose literatures on
bhakti and (iv) establish vaiṣṇava-sadācāra, or proper
vaiṣṇava behaviour (smṛti). By the causeless mercy and
encouragement of Śrīman Mahāprabhu, Śrī Rūpa and Śrī
Sanātana Gosvāmīs established Śrī Govindadeva and Śrī
Madana-Mohana, re-discovered lost tīrthas, and composed
vaiṣṇava-smṛti and bhakti texts like Bṛhad-
bhāgavatāmṛta, Laghu-bhāgavatāmṛta, Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindhu, Ujjvala-nilamaṇi and Hari-bhakti-vilāsa.

To keep alive the memory of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī and Śrī
Sanātana Gosvāmī, who fulfilled Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s
mano’bhiṣṭa, or inner heart’s desire, Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktivedānta Vāmana Mahārāja and the author (Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja) established this maṭha.
They did this under the inspiration of the founder of
Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti, nitya-līlā praviṣṭa oṁ
viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, and under the direction of the
members of Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti.

The distinguishing feature of this maṭha is the presence
of Śrī Vṛndā-devī in one of the three prakoṣṭhas
(sections) of the altar. In the remaining two prakoṣṭhas
are Śrī Gaurasundara along with Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Vinoda
Bihārījī and gurupādapadma Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava
Gosvāmī Mahārāja. At the present time, the only other

                          204
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                       5/5/2017

prominent deity of Śrīmatī Vṛndā-devī can be found in
Kāmyavana.


Imlītalā

At the time of braja-līlā, the ancient imlī (tamarind)
tree that stood here was enormous. That tree has since
disappeared, and a new imlī tree stands in its place.

Midway through rāsa-līlā, Śrī Kṛṣṇa disappeared in order
to dispel the other gopīs’ saubhāgya-mada, pride in
their good fortune, and to embellish Priyājī’s māna.
(Kṛṣṇa did not try to break Priyājī’s māna, but simply
tried to give Her happiness by leaving the other gopīs.)
He followed Priyājī to Śṛṅgāra Vaṭa, where He began to
decorate Her with flowers. At that time, the other
gopīs, who were searching for Kṛṣṇa, came closer to the
place where Rādhikā and Kṛṣṇa were. Śrī Kṛṣṇa requested
Priyājī to leave with Him, but She said, “I am unable to
walk. You can carry Me on Your shoulders.” Kṛṣṇa
squatted down, indicating that Priyājī should sit on His
shoulders. Just as She went to do this, Kṛṣṇa
disappeared again. Now, She also called out in
separation, “Hā Nātha! Hā Ramaṇa!” and fell down
unconscious. The other gopīs became very distressed to
see Her in this condition.

Having left Śrīmatī Rādhikā, Śrī Kṛṣṇa began to feel
deep separation from Her. Sitting under an imlī tree on
the bank of the Yamunā, He became so absorbed in
thinking of Her that His bodily lustre turned golden
like Hers. In connection with this incident,
pāramārādhya oṁ viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja has presented a wonderful śloka
that penetrates the heart:


rādhā-cintā niveśeṇa / yasya kāntir vilopitā

śrī-kṛṣṇa-caraṇaṁ vande / rādhāliṅgita vigraham


(Śrī Śrī Rādhā Vinoda-bihārī Tattvāṣṭakam, text 1)



“I worship the lotus feet of the form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa that
manifests when He is thoroughly immersed in separation
from Śrīmatī Rādhikā (who is displaying māna, Her mood
of jealous anger), or when He is embraced by Śrīmatī
Rādhikā (after Her māna is broken). At these timesÇ His
own dark complexion vanishes and He assumes Her bright,
golden lustre. I worship the lotus feet of that Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.”

The bhāva that lies within the heart of Śrī
Gurupādapadma is profound and full of excellent
siddhānta. It is the bhāva of the mañjarīs, the
maidservants of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, who feel that Kṛṣṇa
should indeed feel great distress when He is separated
from Śrīmatī Rādhikā. They become very pleased to see
this distress, and arrange Kṛṣṇa’s abhisāra, or meeting,
with Rādhā at that time. This bhāva is prominent in Śrī

                          205
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Rūpānuga Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas.

While visiting Braja some five hundred and fifty years
ago, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu resided for several days at
Akrūra Ghāṭa. Daily, he would come to this very
beautiful Imlītalā Ghāṭa on the bank of the Yamunā,
where He was immersed in bhāva as He chanted harināma
kīrtana. He bestowed His mercy upon Kṛṣṇadāsa Rājapūta
here.

One day, while Mahāprabhu was staying here, some people
requested Him to come to Kālīya Hrada and take darśana
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa who they said was again manifesting His
līlā there at night. Mahāprabhu told them to wait for a
few days. Nonetheless, crowds of people began to throng
to Kālīya Daha at night. At last, it became evident that
the spectacle on the Yamunā was nothing more than some
Muslims in a boat catching fish. A light was burning on
the bow of the boat. When the fishermen on the bow stood
up and moved about, it appeared as if someone was
dancing. The boat looked like a serpent, and the burning
light like the serpent’s jewel. When the true facts were
revealed, Mahāprabhu said to the people, “Bhagavān Śrī
Kṛṣṇa does not manifest such pastimes before the masses
of ordinary people of Kali-yuga. Such pastimes appear
only in the hearts of śuddha bhaktas.” Some days later,
Śrī Caitanya Mahā-prabhu and Śrī Vallabha Bhaṭṭācārya
proceeded to Nīlācala via Sauroṁ and Prayāga.

It is said that several years ago someone cut into a
branch of the ancient imlī tree and blood oozed from it.
The person who severed the branch realised that he had
committed an offence and repeatedly prayed for
forgiveness. The dhāma-vāsīs believe that siddha
mahātmās are still performing bhajana in Vṛndāvana in
the form of the trees and creepers.


Jhāḍū Maṇḍala

The pastime connected with this place occurred at the
time of the famous Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī. Śrīla Śyāmānanda,
Śrīla Narottama Ṭhākura and Śrīla Śrīnivāsa Ācārya
studied Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and the Gosvāmī literatures
from the young Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, who gave Śyāmānanda
the service of sweeping this ancient place of Kṛṣṇa’s
līlā.

One day, while he was sweeping during the brāhma-
muhūrta, Śyāmānanda found a golden anklet. Previously,
Jīva Gosvāmī had instructed him to return any lost
object that he might find directly to its owner, not to
anyone else. If any others should try to claim a lost
item, he should inform them of Jīva Gosvāmī’s
instruction to him. Śyāmānanda therefore very carefully
tied the golden anklet in the corner of his upper
garment. A short while later, two braja-bālās (young
girls) came to him and said, “The anklet you found
belongs to our sakhī, and we have been looking for it.
Give it to us.”

Śrī Śyāmānandajī humbly replied, “Whomever the anklet
belongs to should personally come and collect it. I will
not give it to you.”

                          206
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017


The kiśorīs replied, “Do you feel no shame? How can you
dare desire to see the face of Kiśorī Bahū?” But
Śyāmānanda adhered to his words and did not give them
the anklet. The two kiśorīs then brought their
girlfriend to Śyāmānanda and said, “Tie the anklet
around Her foot.” Śrī Śyāmānanda’s hands trembled as he
affectionately tied the anklet around the foot of their
friend. These young girls were none other than Śrīmatī
Rādhikā Herself and Her two sakhīs, Lalitā and Viśākhā.
Śrīmatī Rādhikā ceaselessly desires to bestow mercy in
this way upon Her loving devotees (anurāgī bhaktas).

By this event, Śyāmānanda’s life became successful.
Previously his name was Duḥkhī Kṛṣṇa dāsa, but upon
receiving the mercy of Śrīmatījī, his name became
Śyāmānanda dāsa. Śrīmatī Lalitājī stamped that anklet on
Śyāmānanda’s forehead. Even today, those in the
spiritual family lineage of Śyāmānanda Prabhu wear a
tilaka in the shape of the anklet on their forehead.

The following incident also took place here. Once, a
long time ago, an old woman lived at Jhāḍū Maṇḍala, and
in her house she had a grinding-stone. She used this
stone to grind wheat for others and in this way carried
on her livelihood. But she was an ekāntika bhakta of
Kṛṣṇa. As she ground wheat, her beautiful voice sang the
sweet names of Kṛṣṇa, while the grindstone made a
rumbling gharr-gharr sound.

One day, as she was grinding during brāhma-muhūrta,
absorbed in singing the sweet names of Kṛṣṇa, a
beautiful dark-complexioned young boy appeared and put
one foot on the grindstone. He said, “Maiyā! Why do you
turn the grindstone so it makes this rumbling gharr-
gharr sound? I cannot sleep because of this sound.”

The old lady became a little fearful and said, “My dear
son, if I don’t work the grindstone, then how will I
maintain my life?”

The beautiful, dark-complexioned boy replied, “I will
put My footprint on your grindstone. People will come to
take darśana of this footprint and give generous
offerings. Their offerings will easily maintain you.
Thus, you won’t need to use the grindstone anymore.”
Saying this, the dark-complex-ioned boy disappeared.

When morning came, the old lady saw that the boy’s
footprint had fully appeared on her grindstone. A crowd
of people lined up, desirous to take darśana of the
footprint, and this crowd increased every day. The old
lady was able to maintain herself easily through the
donations she received, and she always remained
intoxicated (unmatta) remembering this līlā.


Śṛṅgāra Vaṭa

This place lies a little towards the east from Imlītalā
on the bank of the Yamunā. While out grazing the cows,
Subala and the other sakhās joyfully decorated Kṛṣṇa
here with diverse colours and ornaments. In turn, to
break Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s māna, Śrī Kṛṣṇa ornamented Her

                          207
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                       5/5/2017

with marvellously imaginative decorations made of
flowers that He had personally picked. This is very
wonderfully described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

During rāsa-līlā, when Śrīmatī Rādhikā saw Śrī Kṛṣṇa
dance with other gopīs as well as with Her, She left the
rāsa in māna. Wishing to hide Herself, She sat down in
this solitary place. Here, rasika Kṛṣṇa decorated Śrī-
matījī with belī, camelī and other flowers that He had
personally picked, and thereby pleased Her. When the
other sakhīs were searching for Śrī Kṛṣṇa, one sakhī
said, “O sakhīs, look! Look here! Priya Śrī Kṛṣṇa picked
flowers for His beloved here, standing on His toes, and
therefore the ground is marked with only the front
portion of His lotus feet.” 3

Kṛṣṇa was decorating Śrīmatī when He heard the loud
voices of the gopīs nearby. Kṛṣṇa requested Śrīmatījī to
quickly leave this place with Him, but She refused on
the excuse of being tired. Śyāmasundara then crouched
down and requested Her to sit on His shoulder, but just
as She was about to do so, He disappeared. Distressed in
separation, Śrīmatījī fainted, crying out:


hā nātha ramaṇa preṣṭha / kvāsi kvāsi māha-bhuja

dāsyās te kṛpaṇāyā me / sakhe darśaya sannidhim

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.30.39)



“O master! My lover! O dearest, where are You? Where are
You? Please, O mighty-armed one, O friend, show Yourself
to Me, Your maidservant who is very much aggrieved by
Your absence.”

When the sakhīs found Śrīmatī Rādhikā thus overwhelmed
in separation, they consoled Her and took Her with them
to the bank of the Yamunā.

The following pastime also took place here. While
wandering throughout Braja Maṇḍala, Śrīman Nityānanda
Prabhu stayed near ŚṛṅgāraVaṭa on the bank of the Yamunā
for a few days. He was always absorbed in the bhāva of
Śrī Baladeva. Sometimes He would be fully absorbed as an
avadhūta. Holding on to the necks of the cows, He would
cry and ask them, “Have you seen Kanhaiyā? Where is He?”
Sometimes He would catch hold of the cowherd men and ask
them with tears in His eyes, “Where is Kanhaiyā?” One
day, He heard a voice from the sky announce, “Your
Kanhaiyā as Śacīnandana Gaurahari in Nadiyā is waiting
for You to come to Him.”

Śṛngāra Vaṭa is thus also known as Nityānanda Vaṭa
because Nityānanda Prabhu resided here. The presiding
deities in the mandira are Nitāī-Gaura and Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.
Just near the mandira under the ancient vaṭa tree is a
unique painting in which Śrī Kṛṣṇa is decorating Śrīmatī
Rādhikā.


Cīra Ghāṭa

                          208
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                      5/5/2017


There is an ancient kadamba tree on the bank of the
Yamunā where Kṛṣṇa stole the clothes of the gopa-ramaṇīs
who were bathing here after having completed their
Kātyāyanī-vrata. These braja-kumārīs were daily bathing
in Śrī Yamunā at brāhma-muhūrta. They would make a deity
of Kātyāyanī, Yogamāyā, out of sand and worship her on
the bank of the Yamunā while reciting the following
mantra:


kātyāyani mahā-māye / mahā-yoginy adhīśvarī

nanda-gopa-sutaṁ devi / patiṁ me kuru te namaḥ

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.22.4)



“O goddess Kātyāyanī, O Mahā-māya, O Mahā-yoginī and the
mighty controller of all, please make the son of Nanda
Mahārāja my husband. I offer my obeisances unto you.”

At the end of the vrata, Kṛṣṇa Himself arrived there on
the excuse of stealing their clothes and bestowed upon
them their desired boon: “Your heart’s desires will be
fulfilled on the night of the next Śarada Pūrṇimā.”

Near Śergarh is another place which is famous as Cīra
Ghāṭa. A kadamba tree also stands there. There is no
doubt that both these places are Cīra Ghāṭa. The same
pastime takes place in different kalpas, and therefore
it can occur in more than one place.


Keśī Ghāṭa

This place lies a little east of Cīra Ghāṭa on the bank
of the Yamunā. Kṛṣṇa killed the Keśī demon here. Once,
Kṛṣṇa and His sakhās were grazing the cows here.
Madhumaṅgala joked with Him, “Dear Sakhā, if You give me
Your peacock feather, sweet flute and yellow garments,
then all the gopas and gopīs will love me and feed me
delicious laḍḍū. Nobody will even ask You if you would
like some.” Smilingly, Kṛṣṇa personally dressed
Madhumaṅgala up in His peacock feather and yellow
garments and handed him His flute and staff. Now all
dressed up, Madhumaṅgala began to strut about here and
there.

At this time, the very powerful Keśī demon assumed the
form of a huge horse. Neighing and whinnying, he
appeared there to kill Kṛṣṇa. Mahārāja Kaṁsa had
instructed him, “Whomever you see wearing a peacock
feather on his head and yellow garments on his limbs,
and holding a flute in his hand, know that person to be
Kṛṣṇa for certain and kill Him.” Upon seeing
Madhumaṅgala dressed as Kṛṣṇa, Keśī attacked him with
his two hind legs. Kṛṣṇa quickly came to save
Madhumaṅgala and killed the Keśī demon. Although the
demon’s legs did not so much as touch Madhumaṅgala, the
brāhmaṇa boy lost consciousness just by the breeze
created by the movement of Keśī’s legs. After Kṛṣṇa
killed Keśī, however, Madhumaṅgala became embarrassed.

                          209
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

He went to Kṛṣṇa and handed back His flute, peacock
feather and yellow cloth. He told Him, “I don’t want any
laḍḍūs. My life is worth lākhs of laḍḍūs.” The cowherd
boys began to laugh. Even today, the memory of this līlā
will enter our heart by taking darśana of Keśī Ghāṭa.


Nidhuvana

The word nidhu means sūrata-krīḍā, ‘amorous pastimes’.
Govindalīlāmṛta and other scriptures give beautiful
descriptions of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s sūrata-krīḍā in
Nidhuvana. These scriptures indicate that because the
keli-vilāsa during night (niśa) takes place in the keli-
kuñjas of Nidhuvana, so the śayana-vilāsa, or pastime of
sleeping, at the end of the night (niśānta) also takes
place here. Seeing dawn approaching, Vṛndā-devī becomes
alarmed and orders the śuka, sārī, peacocks, cuckoos,
bumblebees and so forth to make their sweet humming and
other sounds to wake up Kiśora and Kiśorī. The rāgānuga
bhaktas, and especially the eminent rūpānuga rasika
bhaktas, relish this niśānta-līlā in their hearts while
chanting nāma-saṅkīrtana. Śrīpāda Viśva-nātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura gives a nectarean description of this līlā in
his Svapna-vilāsa.

Once, when Śrī Śrī Rādhā-KṛṣṇaYugala were sleeping in a
keli-kuñja of Nidhuvana at the end of the night, Śrī
Vṛṣabhānu Nandinī had an amazing dream. Upon waking, She
woke Her Prāṇa-vallabha and said, “Priyatama, I just had
an amazing dream. In that dream I saw an incomparable
river, just like the Yamunā. Along that river I saw a
supremely charming bank, just like a bank along the
Yamunā. On that bank, which resembled a grove in
Vṛndāvana, I saw a wonderful golden-complexioned young
man singing and dancing very beautifully. Being absorbed
in an internal mood, He was carried away in dancing to
the rhythm of the mṛdaṅga and kartālas. That gaura
kiśora was crying and uttering ‘Hā Kṛṣṇa! Hā Kṛṣṇa!’ and
sometimes ‘Hā Rādhe! Hā Rādhe! Where are You?’ Sometimes
He rolled on the ground, and sometimes He became
unconscious. He distributed these sentiments of His
freely to the entire universe, from a blade of grass to
Lord Brahmā.

“Priyatama! Upon seeing Him, I began to think, ‘Who is
this golden-complexioned youth? Am I that gaura kiśora
who is constantly crying and uttering ‘Hā Kṛṣṇa! Hā
Kṛṣṇa!’? And is the golden-complexioned kiśora crying
out in a loud voice ‘Hā Rādhe! Hā Rādhe! Where are You?’
no one else but You, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, My Prāṇa-priyatama?”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa said, “He Priyatame! At different times I have
given You darśana of Nārāyaṇa and some of My other
forms, yet You were never astonished. Who this golden-
complex-ioned kiśora is who is bewildering Your mind I
cannot say.” Speaking in this way, He began to smile.

Rādhikā replied, “Prāṇa-vallabha! Now I understand that
this golden form is no one but You. No one other than
You is able to infatuate Me in this way.” Kṛṣṇa then
showed Śrī Rādhikā Her dream in His Kaustubha jewel,
just as She had seen it. Śrīmatī Rādhikā said, “In Your
childhood, the all-knowing Garga Ṛṣi informed Nanda Bābā

                          210
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

that in the beginning of the forthcoming Kali-yuga, his
son will appear as yellow-complexioned Gaurāṅga. A
prediction by Garga Ṛṣi can never be false. Therefore,
My dream must be true, and the golden youth I saw in the
dream must, in fact, be You.”

Hearing this, Śrī Kṛṣṇa said, “Prāṇeśvarī! I will assume
Your golden complexion and the sentiments of Your inner
heart to appear in the form of Gaurāṅga. I will thus
personally relish Your nectarean bhāvas. At the same
time, I will preach rāga-mārga bhakti through harināma-
saṅkīrtana. In fact, I will appear in the form of the
most merciful Gaurāṅga just to distribute My rare prema.
You will also appear on earth with Me as My associate.”
Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa thus gave an indication in this
pastime of the future appearance (avatāra) of Śrī Gaura.

In NidhuvanaÇ Śrīmatī Rādhikā, decorated in regal
apparel, sat on a royal throne in a kuñja. Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
dressed as a police officer, protected the entrance of
the kuñja and the area within it. This is called rāī-
rāja līlā. The poets in the Gauḍīya line have given very
beautiful descriptions of this līlā.

Viśākhā Kuṇḍa lies in Nidhuvana, just as Lalitā Kuṇḍa
lies in Sevā Kuñja. Śrī Rādhā-Bihārījī manifested this
kuṇḍa of sweet, delicious water with His flute to
relieve the thirst of His priya-sakhī Viśākhā as well as
that of the other sakhīs. Later, the famous Svāmī
Haridāsa, who was very skilled in devotional music,
found the deity of Śrī Bāṅke-Bihārī in this same Viśākhā
Kuṇḍa.

Svāmī Haridāsajī used to please Śrī Bihārījī by sweetly
singing devotional songs he had personally composed as
he played the vīṇā. While singing, he would become so
absorbed that he would forget his body and mind. The
famous Baiju-bāvara and Tānsena were his disciples. Upon
hearing about Svāmī Haridāsajī’s glories from the mouth
of Tānsena, who was the jewel among Emperor Akbara’s
ministers, Akbara himself desired to relish the nectar
of Haridāsa’s musical talent. But Svāmī Haridāsa had
firmly resolved not to entertain anyone but his
Ṭhākurajī.

Emperor Akbara therefore disguised himself one day as an
ordinary man and, along with Tānsena, appeared in the
kuṭī of Svāmī Haridāsa in Nidhuvana. Tānsena, who also
was very expert in music, had purposely brought his vīṇā
along and now began to sing a sweet song. His singing
enchanted Akbara. Svāmī Haridāsa then took the vīṇā from
the hands of Tānsena and began to sing the same song,
pointing out the errors Tānsena had made in singing it.
Svāmī Haridāsa’s singing was so sweet and attractive
that even the deer, birds and other animals of the
forest came to that spot, where they listened silently.
Emperor Akbara’s amazement knew no bounds. He was so
pleased that he immediately wanted to present something
to Svāmī Haridāsa, but the wise Tānsena indicated to the
emperor not to do so as it would alter Haridāsa’s mood.
The samādhi of this mahāpuruṣa is still present in
Nidhuvana.



                          211
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                      5/5/2017

Dhīra-samīra

This place is situated on the bank of Śrī Yamunā just
near Vaṁśī Vaṭa. It is the place of rāsa-līlā, where Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala perform Their eternal keli-vilāsa.
The breeze (samīra) itself would become so gentle
(dhīra) and calm here upon having the darśana of these
pastimes that it would be unable to move even an inch.
Therefore, this place has be-come known as Dhīra-samīra.

Śrī Gaurīdāsa Paṇḍita established the kuñja and temple
at Dhīra-samīra. He was the younger brother of Sūryadāsa
Sarkhela, who was Nityānanda Prabhu’s father-in-law, the
father of Jāhnavā and Vasudhā. Śrī Gauridāsa Paṇḍita is
one of the main associates of Śrīman Mahāprabhu. He came
to Vṛndāvana at the end of his life, where he
established Dhīra-samīra Kuñja and began the sevā-pūjā
of his ārādhyadeva, Śrī Śyāmarāya. His place of bhajana
and his samādhi are also here.

The famous Vaiṣṇava poet Śrī Jayadeva Gosvāmī has
mentioned this kuñja in Śrī Gīta-govinda in his well-
known song:

dhīra-samīre yamunā-tīre vasati vane vana-mālī

gopī-pīna payodhara-mardana cañcala-kara-yuga-śālī


The keli-vaṭa, under which Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa performed the
pastime mentioned in this śloka, is situated in this
Dhīra-samīra Kuñja.

Śrī Gopāla Guru Gosvāmī was the dear disciple of Śrī
Vakreśvara Paṇḍita, one of the well-known associates of
Śrīman Mahāprabhu. In his last days, he became so
distressed in separation from Kṛṣṇa that in the eyes of
worldly people he left his material body. His beloved
disciple Dhyānacanda Gosvāmī was also very learned and a
topmost rasika bhakta. During his time, government
officials committed some atrocities against Rādhā-Kānta
Maṭha and the bhajana-kuṭī of Haridāsa Ṭhākura. This
caused him great sorrow. At that time, a Vaiṣṇava from
Vṛndāvana gave him the following news, “Are! Why are you
so worried? We have seen your guru, Śrī Gopāla Guru
Gosvāmī, performing bhajana at Dhīra-samīra. Go to him.
He will settle everything.” Hearing this, Dhyānacanda
Gosvāmī became very joyful and immediately travelled to
Vṛndāvana on foot.

Dhyānacanda Gosvāmī reached Vṛndāvana in a few days and
upon entering Dhīra-samīra, he became astonished. He saw
Śrī Gopāla Guru Gosvāmī with nāma-mālā in his hand,
submerged in bhāva as he chanted nāma-saṅkīrtana. A
constant flow of tears streamed from his eyes as he
remembered various pastimes. Śrī Dhyānacandajī fell at
his feet like a rod and began to cry. He begged him to
return to Purī Dhāma. Śrī Gopāla Guru refused to go in
person but said, “Return to Purī without anxiety. The
disturbance of the government officials will end
forever.” By his order, Dhyānacanda Gosvāmī returned to
Rādhā-Kānta Maṭha in Purī. The government officials
apologised to him repeatedly for their deeds.


                          212
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

This is that same Dhīra-samīra where Śrī Dhyānacanda
Gosvāmī had a direct darśana of aprakaṭa Śrī Gopāla Guru
Gosvāmī. Dhīra-samīra gives ānanda to the devotees. Even
today, it treasures all these līlās in its heart.



Māna-Bhañjana Sthala

At this place, Kṛṣṇa subdued Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s māna,
jealous anger. The word bhañjana means ‘breaking’. Māna-
Bhañjana Sthala lies within Dhīra-samīra. In the book
Braja Parikramā, it is said that the sweet māna-bhañjana
līlā which Śrī Jayadeva Gosvāmī describes in Gīta-
govinda in his famous verse smara-garala-khaṇḍanaṁ mama
śirasi maṇḍanam dehi pada-pallavam udāram4 took place
here.



Vaṁśī Vaṭa

This is the place where Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala together with
the sakhīs performed rāsa-līlā as described in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, the pure and faultless authority. To bestow
the result of the Kātyāyanī-pūjā upon the gopa-kumārīs,
rasika-bihārī Śrī Kṛṣṇa granted them a boon. To fulfil
this boon, He played a sweet tune on His veṇu on a full
moon night. Hearing the wonderful flute-song, the gopīs,
being intoxicated in prema (premonmatta), came here.
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.29.4) describes this as follows:


niśamya gītāṁ tad anaṅga-vardhanaṁ

vraja-striyaḥ kṛṣṇa-gṛhīta-mānasāḥ

ājagmur anyonyam alakṣitodyamāḥ

sa yatra kānto java-lola-kuṇḍalāḥ


“When the young women of Vṛndāvana heard Kṛṣṇa’s flute
song, which arouses romantic feelings, their minds were
captivated by Him. They went to where their lover
waited, each unknown to the others, moving so quickly
that their earrings swung back and forth.”

Rasikendra-śekhara Śrī Kṛṣṇa gave His surrendered gopīs
many reasons why they should return home to serve their
husbands, based on the pretext of religious
transgression. But the clever gopīs very easily refuted
all His arguments.

Kṛṣṇa’s śāradīya-rāsa with countless gopīs took place
here. One Kṛṣṇa was dancing between two gopīs or one
gopī was dancing between two Kṛṣṇas. In this way, rāsa
took place with astonishing dancing and singing. Śrīmatī
Rādhikā entered into māna and the other gopīs became
saubhāgya-mada, proud of their good fortune. Seeing
this, rasika-śekhara Śrī Kṛṣṇa disappeared from that
place in order to decorate Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s māna and to
remove the pride of the other gopīs.


                          213
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Thereafter, the gopīs, suffering separation from Kṛṣṇa
and crying loudly, began to sing, jayati te ‘dhikaṁ
janmanā vrajaḥÖ5 Hearing their singing, Śrī Kṛṣṇa again
appeared, and at this place He expressed His gratitude
to the gopīs in sweet words:


na pāraye ‘haṁ niravadya-saṁyujāṁ

sva-sādhu-kṛtyaṁ vibudhāyuṣāpi vaḥ

yā mābhajan durjara-geha-śṛṅkhalāḥ

saṁvṛścya tad vaḥ pratiyātu sādhunā

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.32.22)



“You have performed an extraordinary deed: you have
given up everything for Me. For this sacrifice, I am
eternally indebted to you and can never repay you.” This
is the place where rāsa-līlā was performed, and is thus
the crest-jewel among all līlā-sthalīs.

Śrī Vajranābha Mahārāja planted a tree here in
remembrance of this rāsa-sthalī, but after some time the
Yamunā flooded that place. Five hundred and fifty years
ago, Śrī Mādhu Paṇḍita, a disciple of Śrī Gadādhara
Paṇḍita, took one of its branches and planted it here,
and that branch transformed into a vast tree. Śrī Mādhu
Paṇḍita found the deity Śrī Gopīnātha here while engaged
in bhajana. There are four very small temples in each of
the four corners of the quadrangular wall of Vaṁśī Vaṭa.
The deities of Śrī Rāmānujācārya, Śrī Madhvācārya, Śrī
Viṣṇusvāmī and Śrī Nimbārkācārya were established within
them. Nowadays, some other mūrtis have replaced them.
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas used to do sevā here, but then
Brahmacārījī, the guru of the King of Gvāliyor, bought
this place. Since then, it has been under the Nimbārka
Sampradāya.


Gopīśvara Mahādeva

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Mahādeva Śaṅkara, the deva of the
devas, has been called the foremost Vaiṣṇava. He and
Bhagavatī Pārvatī are always absorbed in meditation on
Kṛṣṇa’s aṣṭa-kālīya līlā. Once, during Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
manifest pastimes, Śaṅkara desired to take darśana of
Kṛṣṇa’s captivating rāsa-līlā with his own eyes. Being
very eager to do so, he came directly to Vṛndāvana from
Kailāśa. At the gate outside Vṛndāvana, some attendant
gopīs stopped him, because no male except for Śrī Kṛṣṇa
can enter rāsa. But since when has Śaṅkara easily agreed
to anything? He asked the attendant gopīs how he might
be admitted, and they told him to worship Bhagavatī
Yogamāyā Paurṇamāsī (Pūrṇimā).

Śaṅkara did so and received the darśana of Yogamāyā.
Knowing the desire of Śaṅkara, Pūrṇimā took his hands
and dipped him in Brahma Kuṇḍa nearby. When he came out
of the kuṇḍa, he had been transformed into an extremely
beautiful young gopī. Pūrṇimā seated Śaṅkara, now a

                          214
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                      5/5/2017

gopī, inside a kuñja north-east of the rāsa-sthalī. She
told him to take darśana of rāsa-līlā from there, and
then she disappeared. After a short while, the rāsa-līlā
began. The gopīs thought, “Today, for some reason or
other, we are not feeling any happiness in singing and
dancing.” They understood that some outsider had entered
the arena, and they began to search for that person. In
their search they came to this placeÇ where they saw a
new, unknown gopī sitting in a kuñja. They caught that
new gopī and began to question her, “What is your name?
What is the name of your village? Who is your husband?
Who is your father-in-law?” But the new gopī was unable
to answer any of their questions. Instead, she could
only cry. Yogamāyā had neither arranged her birth from
the womb of a gopī, nor given her any name. The new gopī
was not married to any gopa either, so what answers
could she give? When the gopīs received no answer, they
began to slap her cheeks till they became swollen.
Seeing Mahādeva’s misery, Pūrṇimā’s heart melted. She
went there and explained that this gopī was an object of
her mercy. She requested the gopīs and Kṛṣṇa to be
merciful to her. Śrī Kṛṣṇa, knowing the internal desire
of Pūrṇimā, gave Śaṅkara the name Gopīśvara and granted
him the boon that a sādhaka would be unable to enter
Vṛndāvana, and especially into Kṛṣṇa’s sweet pastimes
there, without first receiving his mercy.

The Gosvāmī literatures also describe that at the time
of Kṛṣṇa’s prakaṭa-līlā, the gopīs worshipped Gopīśvara
Mahā-deva with the desire to obtain sevā of Kṛṣṇa. For
instance, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī’s Śrī Vraja-vilāsa-
stava (verse 87) states:


mudā gopendrasyātmaja-bhuja-pariṣvaṅga-nidhaye

sphurada-gopī-vṛndairyamaiha bhagavantaṁ praṇayibhiḥ

bhajadbhisa tair bhaktyā svama bhilaṣitaṁ prāptuma cirād

yamī-tīre gopīśvaramanudinaṁ taṁ kila bhaje


“To obtain the jewel of being embraced by the arms of
Brajendra-nandana Śyāmasundara, the gopīs, who possess
firm, loving, intimate attachment for Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
joyfully worshipped Sadāśiva with great devotion and had
all their internal desires fulfilled without delay.
Daily I worship that Gopīśvara Mahādeva who resides on
the bank of the Yamunā.”

The praṇāma-mantra composed by Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura for Gopīśvara Mahādeva (Saṅkalpa Kalpadruma,
verse 103) clearly indicates that Gopīśvara Mahādeva is
the bestower of unadulterated (viśuddha) kṛṣṇa-prema:


vṛndāvanāvani-pate! jaya soma! soma-maule

sanaka-sanandana-sanātana-naradeḍya

gopīśvara! vraja-vilāsī-yugāṅghri-padme

prema prayaccha nirupādhi namo namste

                          215
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017



“O gatekeeper of Vṛndāvana! O Soma, all glories to you!
O you whose forehead is decorated with the moon, and who
is worshipable for the sages headed by Sanaka,
Sanandana, Sanātana and Nārada! O Gopīśvara! Desiring
that you bestow upon me prema for the lotus feet of Śrī
Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava, who perform joyous pastimes in Braja-
dhāma, I offer praṇāmas unto you time and again.”


Jñāna-Gudaḍī

When Śrī Kṛṣṇa returned to Mathurā from gurukula, He
sent His dear Uddhava to Nanda-Gokula to console His
parents and the gopīs. What consolation could Uddhava
actually give to the tormented hearts of Nanda Bābā,
Yaśodā Maiyā and the gopīs that would relieve them from
the fire of separation? Kṛṣṇa sent Uddhava on the excuse
of consoling the Brajabāsīs, but the hidden truth is
that there was no one in Mathurā who could console
Kṛṣṇa, who was scorching in separation from the gopīs.
What to speak of console Kṛṣṇa, who in Mathurā could
even understand His sentiments? Therefore, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
sent His dear Uddhava to that school where He Himself
had learned lessons on prema — Braja. Kṛṣṇa considered
Uddhava a qualified student for such lessons. In that
school, the principal was Rādhārānī, the embodiment of
mahābhāva; and Lalitā, Viśākhā and the other sakhīs were
the teachers.

Being an ocean of mercy, the gopīs admitted into their
school this student that Kṛṣṇa had sent them. Uddhava
delivered to the gopīs Kṛṣṇa’s message, which was full
of tattva-jñāna. But they tore it up so that it
resembled a tat-tered garment (gudaḍī) and threw it into
the water of the Yamunā. That jñāna-gudaḍī drifted
downstream and fell into the Gaṅgā at Prayāga. From
there it floated to the salt ocean where it was lost
forever. The place where the gopīs abandoned that
message filled with tattva-jnāna, leaving it to float
down the Yamunā like a torn garment (gudaḍī), is known
today as Jñāna-Gudaḍī.


Brahma Kuṇḍa

This kuṇḍa lies a little towards the south-west of
Jñāna-Gudaḍī. Śrī Yogamāyā Paurṇamāsījī gave Mahādeva
Śaṅkara a gopī-form by dipping him in this kuṇḍa. Śrī
Vṛndā-devī also gave Nārada the form of Nāradī Gopī by
bathing him here, thus fulfilling his desire to take
darśana of mahā-rāsa, which is very difficult to obtain.

There is an aśoka tree on the northern side of this
Brahma Kuṇḍa which blossoms with flowers at exactly
noontime on the Dvādaśī of Vaiśākha Śuklā. Only
extremely fortunate rasika bhaktas, however, can take
darśana of those flowers — no one else. This is stated
in Varāha Purāṇa.6


Veṇu Kūpa


                          216
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

While engaged in vihāra in Vṛndāvana, Śrī Kṛṣṇa knew
that His beloveds were thirsty, so He touched His veṇu
to the earth and blew into it. A stream of water which
pierced Pātāla, the lower regions, emerged by the sound
of Kṛṣṇa’s flute. The water was very cool and fragrant.
The gopīs drank this water, praising Kṛṣṇa and His
flute. They named this well Veṇu Kūpa (the flute-well).


Dāvānala Kuṇḍa

On the day Kālīya Nāga was subdued, Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma
and the gopas and gopīs could not return to their
residences in Chaṭṭīkarā as night had already fallen.
They moved away from the poisonous Kālīya Daha to a
sarovara a little distance away to the east. The water
of this lake was clean and sweet, and after drinking
water they rested here. Seeing a good opportunity to
kill Kṛṣṇa and His associates, the servants of the
wicked Kaṁsa set this forest ablaze in all directions.
Very soon, a devastating fire raged throughout the
forest. Kṛṣṇa told everyone to close his eyes. He also
closed His eyes, and at once swallowed that devastating
forest fire as if it were cool water. The sarovara where
this līlā took place is called Dāvānala Kuṇḍa, dāvānala
meaning ‘forest fire’.


The Temples of Śrī Vṛndāvana

There are currently thousands of temples in Vṛndāvana,
and therefore Vṛndāvana is also known as ‘The City of
Temples’. There is a temple in every home. The following
temples are some of the principal ancient ones: Śrī
Govinda Mandira, Śrī Sākṣī Gopāla, Śrī Gopīnāthajī, Śrī
Madana-Mohanajī, Śrī Rādhā-Ramaṇajī, Śrī Rādhā-Vinodajī,
Śrī Rādhā-Mādhavajī, Śrī Rādhā-Dāmodarajī, Śrī Rādhā-
Śyāmasundarajī, Śrī Rādhā-Gokulānandajī, Śrī Gaura-Nitāī
at Śṛṅgāra Vaṭa, Śrī Sītānātha Mandira, Śrī Rādhā-
Vallabha and Śrī Bāṅke-Bihārījī.

There are also many modern temples, like Śāhajī Mandira,
Lālā Bābū Mandira, Śrī Raṅgajī Mandira, Taḍāsa Mandira,
Jaipura Mandira, Hāḍābāḍī Kuñja, Śrījī Mandira,
Varddhmāna Rājamandira, Brahmacārījī Mandira,
Giridhārījī Mandira, Ṭīkārī Rānī Mandira, Śāhājāpura
Mandira, Mahārānī Svarṇamayī Mandira, Kālābābū Kuñja,
Śrī Rūpa-Sanātana Mandira, Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma Mandira,
and many others. To keep this book short, most of these
have not been mentioned in any detail. A short
description of some of the prominent temples is now
given below.


Śrī Govinda Svāmī Tīrtha

The present name of this temple is Śrī Govindadevajī
Mandira, and its ancient name was Gomāṭīlā. Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī used to perform sādhana-bhajana in a small
bhajana-kuṭī behind Śrī Rādhā-Dāmodara Mandira in Sevā
Kuñja. On the order of Śrīman Mahāprabhu, he composed
different literatures on bhakti like Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindhu and Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi while living here. Also,
following the instruction of Mahāprabhu, he wanted to

                           217
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

manifest the deity of Śrī Govinda that had previously
been installed by Śrī Vajranābha.

Daily, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī would perform the pañca-kosī
parikramā of Vṛndāvana. One day, during his parikramā,
he became very restless thinking about the deity of Śrī
Govinda. He sat down under a tree on the bank of the
Yamunā and wept, lamenting for His darśana. At that
time, a beautiful Brajabāsī boy who was also doing
parikramā walked past. He saw Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī weeping
under the tree, and asked him why he was crying. At
first, Rūpa Go-svāmī said nothing, but when the boy
persisted, he revealed to Him the pain in his heart. The
Brajabāsī boy brought Rūpa Gosvāmī to Gomā Ṭīlā and
said, “Look! Every day, just before noon, one cow comes
to this ṭīlā (mound). Standing here, she irrigates this
place with the milk from her udder. I think that your
desire will be fulfilled at this place.” Saying this,
the boy immediately disappeared.

Thinking of the beauty and sweet words of the boy, Śrī
Rūpa Gosvāmī fainted. Upon regaining consciousness, he
called the neighbouring Brajabāsīs, who very carefully
dug up the earth at that place. There, a little under
the ground, was Śrī Govindajī, more beautiful than
millions of cupids. They performed His abhiṣeka with
great ceremony. News of this spread quickly, and crowds
of people gathered to take darśana of Śrī Govindajī.

Śrī Govindadeva is Vṛndāvaneśvara — the īśvara, or Lord,
of Śrī Vṛndāvana. In the Skanda, Padma, Varāha and other
Purāṇas, He is said to be Vṛndāvana’s rāja-rājeśvara,
king of kings. Śrī Govindadeva is thus the ārādhya
devatā (worshipable deity) of Vṛndāvana. Caitanya-
caritāmṛta (Ādi 8.50-51) states:


vṛndāvane kalpa-drume suvarṇa-sadana

mahā-yogapīṭha tāhāṅ ratna-siṁhāsana

tāte vasi ‘āche sadā vrajendra-nandana

‘śrī-govinda deva’ nāma-sākṣāt madana


“At the mahā-yogapīṭha in Vṛndāvana, underneath kalpa-
drumas (desire trees), is a golden throne bedecked with
jewels. On that throne sits Brajendra-nandana, Śrī
Govindadeva, the transcendental Cupid.”

Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi 1.16) also says:


dīvyad-vṛndāraṇya-kalpa-drumādhaḥ

śrīmad-ratnāgāra-siṁhāsana-sthau

śrī-śrī-rādhā-śrīla-govinda-devau

preṣṭhālibhiḥ sevya-mānau smarāmi


“I meditate upon Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Govindadeva, who are

                          218
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                     5/5/2017

seated beneath a kalpa-vṛkṣa tree on an effulgent
bejeweled siṁhāsana in the supremely beautiful land of
Vṛndāvana. There, They are always being served by Their
beloved sakhīs, especially by Lalitā and Viśākhā.”

There are many famous statements regarding Śrī Govinda
in many different scriptures. For instance, Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (6.8.20) states: māṁ keśavo gadayā prātar
avyād / govinda āsaṅgavam ātta-veṇuḥ. “May Śrī Keśava
protect me with His club in the first portion of the
day, and may Govinda, who is always engaged in playing
His flute, protect me in the second portion of the day.”
The ṭīkā, commentary, on this śloka very nicely
elucidates its meaning.7 In the Gopāla-pūrvatāpanyām,
there are statements like tamekaṁ govindaṁ sac-cid-
ānanda-vigraham. The Urddhvāmnāya glorifies Śrī Govinda
in the following śloka:


gopāla eva govindaḥ / prakaṭāprakaṭaḥ sadā

vṛndāvane yogapiṭhe / sa eva satataṁ sthitaḥ

asau yuga-catuṣke’pi / śrīmad-vṛndāvanādhipaḥ

pūjito nanda-gopādyaiḥ / kṛṣṇenāpi supūjitaḥ


The Atharva Veda says, gokulāraṇye mathurā-maṇḍale
vṛndāvana-madhye sahasra-dala-madhye ‘ṣṭadala-keśare
govindo’pi śyāmaḥ dvibhujo, and so on. Furthermore, the
Skanda Purāṇa states:


govinda-svāmi nāmātra

vasatyarccayatmiko ‘cyutaḥ

gandharvair apsarobhiśca

krīḍa mānaḥ sa modate


Braja-bhakti-vilāsa also mentions Śrī Govinda in the
following śloka:


vṛndā-devī sametāya

govindāya namo namaḥ

loka-kalma-ṣanāśāya

paramātma-svarūpiṇe

Before Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī’s arrival in Śrīdhāma Vṛndāvana,
it was unheard of to place a vigraha of Śrīmatī Rādhikā
beside a vigraha of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. When Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī
reinstalled the vigraha of Śrī Govindadeva, it so
happened that a vigraha of Śrī Rādhikā, who was present
in the temple of Jagannāthajī in Purī Dhāma, at a place
named Cakrabeḍa was being worshipped by everyone as
Lakṣmījī. Śrīmatī Rādhikā instructed the son of Mahārāja
Pratāparudra, Puruṣottama Jānā, in a dream: “I am not

                             219
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                       5/5/2017

Lakṣmī; I am Rādhā, the beloved of Brajendra-nandana Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. I have been waiting for the manifestation of Śrī
Govindadeva in Vṛndāvana. Now that He has appeared, with
great care please send Me to Him.” The son of Mahārāja
Pratāparudra did this, and the contemporary gosvāmīs
placed this vigraha of Śrī Rādhā to the left of Śrī
Govindadevajī. After being united with Śrīmatī Rādhikā,
Śrī Govindajī became famous by the name of Śrī Rādhā-
Govinda.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu Himself sent His svarūpa
vigraha, His own mūrti form, Śrī Gaura-Govinda to
Vṛndāvana, with His associate Kāśīśvara Brahmacārī. That
same deity is nearby, in the southern part of the
Govindajī Mandira.

In 1590 A.D., a disciple of Śrī Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa
Gosvāmī, Mahārāja Mānasingh of Jaipura, built an
extensive seven-storey, red-stone temple, as inspired by
his guru. In 1670 A.D., the tyrannical Mughal emperor
Aurangzeb demolished this temple, destroying the top
four floors. When he was in the process of destroying
the lower part, he suddenly received some inauspicious
news and had to return to Delhi. Thus, the lower portion
of the temple was saved. Before the temples of Vṛndāvana
were destroyed, Śrī Govindajī and other worshipable
deities of the Gauḍīyas were sent to Jaipura. In 1748
A.D., the pratibhū vigraha of Śrī Govindadeva was
installed here. Then, in 1819 A.D., Śrī Nandakumāra Vasu
constructed the present temple. Situated in this temple
is Śrī Govindadeva with Śrī Rādhikājī to His left. The
ancient and original Govindadeva along with His beloved
Rādhikā now reside in a temple near the royal palace in
Jaipura.

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī jokingly forbids the darśana of
Govindadeva with the following words:


smerāṁ bhaṅgī-traya paripacitāṁ sāci-vistīrṇa dṛṣṭiṁ

vaṁśī-nyastādhara-kisalayām-ujjvalāṁ candrakeṇa

govindākhyāṁ hari-tanum itaḥ keśi-tīrthopakaṇṭhe

mā prekṣiṣṭhās tava yadi sakhe! bandhu-saṅge ‘sti raṅgaḥ

(Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.2.239)



“If you have even a slight desire to enjoy life with
your wife, sons, relatives and friends, then listen to
my advice. Never go to Keśi Ghāṭa in Vṛndāvana, even by
mistake. There, Śrī Hari as the vigraha of Govinda is
standing in His tribhaṅga-lalita, threefold bending
form, smiling. Raising His eyebrows, He looks here and
there with slightly crooked eyes. His pītāmbara (yellow
cloth) is shimmering on His body, and He is decorated
with a heart-stealing garland of forest flowers and
bunches of fresh young leaves. Aho! The vaṁśī, the root
cause of all troubles, is gracefully placed to His lips,
and the peacock feather on His head is increasing His
beauty. A person who even once takes darśana of this

                          220
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

vigraha of Govinda with his own eyes never returns to
his home, and his household life is ruined. Therefore, O
saṁsārī jīva, be cautious! Never ever go towards Keśī
Ghāṭa; otherwise an unthinkable disaster may occur.”


Śrī Madana-Mohana

Mahārāja Vajranābha installed the three vigrahas of Śrī
Govinda, Śrī Gopīnātha and Śrī Madana-Mohana in Śrī-
dhāma Vṛndāvana. In time, due to the oppression of the
mlecchas (barbarians), the pujārīs hid these deities in
various places and fled. Vṛndāvana turned into a dense
forest. It has already been described how Śrī
Govindadeva reappeared after many years by the
endeavours of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī. Now, we will briefly
describe how Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī manifested Śrī Madana-
Mohanajī.

In the morning, Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī used to walk
sixteen miles from Vṛndāvana to Govardhana to perform
the fourteen-mile long parikramā of Govardhana. From
there, he would walk another sixteen miles to Mathurā to
do mādhukarī and then again walk back to his bhajana-
kuṭī in Vṛndāvana. One day, he came to the house of a
Caube brāhmaṇa in Mathurā for mādhukarī. What did he see
there? In the house of Caubejī, two beautiful boys were
playing the game gullī-ḍaṇḍā. Madana, the restless,
fidgety boy with a śyāma-complexion defeated the son of
the Caube. Madana climbed upon the shoulders of the
defeated boy and enjoyed a ‘horse ride’. But when the
Caube’s son defeated Madana the second time they played,
and it was his turn to enjoy a ride on Madana’s
shoulders, Madana ran into the temple room. Seeing this,
the son of the Caube angrily abused and pursued Him. He
wanted to enter the temple, but the pujārī scolded him
and chased him away. Pointing his forefinger at Madana,
who had turned into the vigraha, the son of the Caube
said, “Acchā, I’ll see You tomorrow.”

This scene amazed Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī. The next day, he
arrived a little earlier, at breakfast time, desiring to
again have darśana. Although she had not yet taken bath,
the Caubāin was making khicrī for both boys, who were
sitting waiting for their breakfast. Maiyā was brushing
her teeth with one end of a stick and was stirring the
khicrī with the other end. When she had finished
cooking, she served the boys the hot khicrī in bowls,
cooling it down by blowing on it with her mouth. The
boys were relishing this khicrī with great love.

Sanātana Gosvāmī could not tolerate her improper
conduct. “Maiyā! It is not proper to cook khicrī without
taking bath, to stir it with the stick you use to brush
your teeth, and then to serve this contaminated
breakfast to the boys.”

The Caubāin realized her mistake, and replied, “Bābā!
From tomorrow, I will be clean when I cook and serve the
boys their breakfast.”

Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī wanted to see some more līlās of
the vigraha of Śrī Madana-Mohana, so on the third day he
went there again. Breakfast was delayed that day because

                          221
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Maiyā was taking bath. She then had to clean the pots.
The hungry boys were demanding breakfast. Maiyā pacified
them, and after completing her morning chores, she
started cooking khicrī. The two boys were pulling on her
cloth and insisting on eating at once. Sanātana Gosvāmī
was unable to tolerate this. He approached her and said,
“Maiyā, there is no need for you to be clean by bathing
and so forth. If this Madana is pleased with your
unclean and impure breakfast, then you should do as
such. I have committed an offence at your feet. From
tomorrow, you should do whatever you think is proper to
satisfy them.”

Just as Sanātana Gosvāmī was about to leave, the boy
Madana came out of the temple room and said, “Bābā! I
will come with you.”

But Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī replied, “I am completely
niṣkiñcana, a renunciate. I have neither a place to
live, nor any arrangement to cook palatable food. If
even Yaśodā Maiyā could not completely satisfy You, how
can I take care of You?” The child Madana nonetheless
insisted on coming with him. Sanātana Gosvāmī said, “If
You really want to come, then You will have to follow
me. I cannot carry You on my shoulders.”

The boy said, “I will walk behind you, but don’t turn
around along the way to look at Me. You can look at Me
only in your bhajana-kuṭī.”

When Sanātana Gosvāmī had reached his bhajana-kuṭī, he
turned around and saw the boy Madana smile and change
into His vigraha form. Sanātana Gosvāmī constructed an
altar by putting a board on top of a few stones and
seated Him there. Every day, he would cook some balls of
dough without salt on live coals, and offer them to the
deity. One day, as Sanātana Gosvāmī was making his
offering, Madana-Mohanajī asked him for some salt.
Sanātana Gosvāmī would happily have given salt if only
he had some, but there was no salt in the kuṭī. Madana-
Mohanajī told him, “I am not able to swallow this dry
dough-ball.” Upon hearing this, Sanātana Gosvāmī began
to repent.

At that time, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kapūra, a rich merchant from the
Multāna province, happened to be travelling along the
Yamunā carrying valuable articles for trade in large
boats. As the boats approached Sanātana Gosvāmī’s
bhajana-kuṭī, they got stuck in the sand. Despite
several efforts, the boats could not be released from
the sand. The merchant came ashore and saw the extremely
beautiful vigraha of Śrī Madana-Mohana in front of the
kuṭī. Sitting down on the invitation of Sanātana
Gosvāmī, the merchant began to weep and lament to him
about his circumstance. In his mind, he firmly vowed,
“As soon as my boats are freed from the sand, I will
construct a beautiful temple for Śrī Madana-Mohanajī
with the profits I make from this journey, and I will
also make proper arrangements for His sevā and bhoga.”
The moment he resolved this, his boats were dislodged
and started drifting again. He made an enormous profit
from his trade and, on the inspiration of Śrī Sanātana
Gosvāmī, constructed a huge temple for Śrī Madana-
Mohana. However, Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī entrusted all the

                          222
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

arrangements of sevā, pūjā, offering of bhoga and so
forth to the pujārīs and again began performing
mādhukarī in Braja. In this way, he maintained his life
by living under a different tree every night and
performing rigid sādhana-bhajana.

After the disappearance of Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī,
Aurangzeb, who was inimical to the Hindus, desecrated
this temple in 1670 A.D., destroying the dome and other
parts. Before he did this, Madana-Mohanajī and other
deities of Vṛndāvana were moved to Jaipura. Nowadays,
Madana-Mohanajī resides in Karaulī. In 1748 A.D., a
pratibhū vigraha of Madana-Mohanajī was established
here. Then, in 1819 A.D., Śrī Nandalāla Vasu constructed
the present temple.

The ancient hand-written scriptures Sevā Prākaṭya and
Iṣṭalābha mention that Sanātana Gosvāmījī obtained Śrī
Madana-Gopālajī from Paraśurāma Caube of Mahāvana in
saṁvat 1590 (1534 A.D.) and re-established the deity’s
sevā-pūjā in the same year on Dvitīyā Śuklā (the second
day of the bright moon) of Māgha (January-February). He
entrusted the duties of the sevā-pūjā to Kṛṣṇadāsa
Brahmacārī. At that time, there was no vigraha of Śrī
Rādhikā with Śrī Madana-Mohanajī. Upon hearing the news
of the manifestation of Śrī Madana-Mohanajī, Śrī
Puroṣottama Jānā, the son of King Pratāparudra of
Orissa, with great faith sent two vigrahas of Rādhā from
Purī Dhāma to Vṛndāvana. Śrī Madana-Mohanajī informed
the pujārī in his dream, “The taller of the two vigrahas
from Purī is Lalitājī, and the shorter is Rādhājī. You
should place the vigraha of Rādhikā on My left side and
the vigraha of Lalitā on My right side.” It is mentioned
in Bhakti-ratnākara that Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī built a
temple for Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu in the southern part
of Śrī Madana-Mohanajī’s temple, but Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu did not come to Vṛndāvana a second time.

In the new temple, Rādhikājī stands on Śrī Madana-
Mohanajī’s left side and Lalitājī stands on His right
side. A śalāgrāma-śilā is also there, and Śrī
Jagannāthajī presides in a separate room (prakoṣṭha).
Places of darśana to the west of the old temple are Śrī
Sanātana Gosvāmī’s bhajana-kuṭī, samādhi and the
grantha-samādhi.


Śrī Gopīnāthajī

Close to the famous Vaṁśī Vaṭa, on the bank of the
Yamunā, Śrī Paramānanda Bhaṭṭācarya and Madhu Paṇḍita
used to worship Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala with extreme
vairāgya. Once, the current of the Yamunā cut into her
bank and a very beautiful vigraha of Śrī Gopīnātha
manifested from under the sand. In the morning, when
bhakta Paramānanda came to the Yamunā to take bath, he
found this exceptional deity who stole his heart. He
entrusted the sevā of Śrī Gopīnāthajī to Śrī Madhu
Paṇḍita. First, Śrī Gopīnāthajī resided near Vaṁśī Vaṭa,
but later on a magnificent new temple was constructed
elsewhere and His sevā-pūjā continued there.

Once, Nityānanda Prabhu’s wife Jāhnavā Ṭhākurāṇī came to
Vṛndāvana. As she was having darśana of Śrī Rādhā-

                          223
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Gopīnāthajī, she thought that the vigraha of Rādhikā was
too small and thatÇ if Rādhikā had been a little taller,
the Couple would look much more beautiful. Jāhnavā
Ṭhākurāṇī returned to her residence after the śayana-
āratī darśana. That night, in a dream, Śrī Gopīnāthajī
asked Jāhnavā to arrange for a taller vigraha of
Rādhikā. She received similar instructions from Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, and had a vigraha of Her made that was a more
appropriate size for the deity of Gopīnātha. Bhaktamāla
describes that at the time of Jāhnavā Ṭhākurānī’s
disappearance, she manifested her own vigraha and
established herself in it. She instructed the pujārīs to
install her vigraha in the prakoṣṭha of Śrī Gopīnāthajī.
When this vigraha arrived at Gopīnātha Mandira in
Vṛndāvana, the pujārīs hesitated to install her along
side Śrī Gopināthajī. At that time, Gopīnāthajī Himself
instructed the pujārīs, “Don’t hesitate. This is My
beloved Anaṅga Mañjarī. Place her on My left and
Rādhikājī on My right.” And so it came to be that
Jāhnavā stands on Śrī Gopīnāthajī’s left side and
Rādhikājī stands on His right.

During the oppression of Aurangzeb, the original
vigrahas of Gopīnāthajī, Rādhikā and Jāhnavā also
proceeded to Jaipura together with other vigrahas. The
pratibhū vigrahas now preside in the temple built by
Nanda Kumāra Vasu. Jāhnavā Ṭhākurānī is seated on the
left side of Gopīnāthajī, and a small mūrti of Rādhikā
and Lalitā Sakhī are seated on His right. The vigraha of
Mahāprabhu Śrī Gaurasundara is in a separate prakoṣṭha.
In 1632 A.D., the old temple was built by Rāya Singha,
the son of the king of Bīkānera, Mahārāja Kalyāṇa-mala
of the Rāṭhaur dynasty. Aurangzeb destroyed this temple.
The pratibhū vigrahas were established in 1748 A.D., and
the new temple was built in 1819 A.D. Near the new
temple to the east is the samādhi of Madhu Paṇḍita.


Śrī Rādhā-Dāmodara

This temple is situated within the area of Sevā Kuñja.
Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmījī used to live here in his bhajana-
kuṭī. The contemporary Gosvāmīs and bhaktas assembled
here for iṣṭagoṣṭhīs and, in those gatherings of
Vaiṣṇavas, Śrī Raghu-nātha Bhaṭṭajī would elucidate on
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam in his melodious voice. Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī compiled Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, Ujjvala-
nīlamaṇi and other sacred bhakti texts at this place.
The young Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī was engaged in all kinds of
sevā to Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, who personally manifested the
vigraha of Śrī Rādhā-Dāmodara with his own hands and
offered the sevā-pūjā to Śrī Jīva. According to the book
Sevā-prākaṭya, Śrī Rādhā-Dāmodara were installed in
saṁvat 1590 (1543 A.D.) in the month of Māgha (January-
February) on Śuklā Daśamī (the tenth day of the bright
half of the month). The original Śrī Rādhā-Dāmodara are
now in Jaipura, and Their pratibhū vigrahas, which are
as potent as the original deities, are in Vṛndāvana. On
the altar with Them are Śrī Vṛndāvanacandra, Śrī
Chailacikaniyā, Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava and a few others. The
samādhis of Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī and Śrī Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja
Gosvāmī lie behind the temple, and in the northern area
of the temple are the samādhi and bhajana-kuṭī of Śrī
Rūpa Gosvāmī. Adjacent to this is the samādhi of Śrī

                          224
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Būgarbha Gosvāmī.

Sanātana Gosvāmī used to perform parikramā of Govardhana
daily. In his old age, when he became incapable of
performing parikramā, Kṛṣṇa came to him as a boy and
gave him a govardhana-śilā, which was one and a half
cubits long and shaped like a banyan leaf. He instructed
Sanātana Gosvāmī to perform parikramā of this śilā
instead. On this śilā, were imprints of Kṛṣṇa’s foot,
His vaṁśī, and a cow’s hoof. Sanātana Gosvāmī brought
that śilā to Vṛndāvana and would circumambulate it
daily. After his disappearance, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī
installed the śilā in Śrī Rādhā-Dāmodara Mandira and
began to worship it. Darśana of this śilā is available
on special request.


Śrī Rādhā-Ramaṇa

Śrī Rādhā-Ramaṇa is the deity of Śrī Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Go-
svāmī, the recipient of Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s mercy. Śrī
Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī initially used to perform sevā of one
śālagrāma-śilā. Once, he intensely desired to decorate
his śālagrāma, to seat Him on a swing and sway Him back
and forth, and to serve Him in many ways like a deity.
“If only He had arms and legs like a deityÇ” he thought.
Prabhu is very kind to His bhaktas. To fulfil the desire
of this bhakta, He transformed Himself that very night
into the attractive threefold bending form of Śrī Rādhā-
Ramaṇa. Śrī Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī decorated Him with many
ornaments, swung Him on a swing and offered bhoga-rāga
with great affection. If one has darśana of Śrī Rādhā-
Ramaṇa’s back, one will see that it resembles a
śālagrāma-śilā. Although the deity is only twelve
fingers tall, He is very attractive. Śrī Rādhā-Ramaṇa’s
lotus-face is like Śrī Govindajī’s, His chest is like
Śrī Gopīnāthajī’s, and His lotus-feet are like Śrī
Madana-Mohanajī’s. By taking His darśana, one receives
the benefit of taking darśana of these three deities.

According to the book Sevā-prākaṭya, Rādhā-Ramaṇajī
manifested from the śālagrāma-śilā in saṁvat 1599 (1543
A.D.). His abhiṣeka took place on Pūrṇimā in the month
of Vaiśākha (April-May) that same year. There is no
vigraha of Śrī Rādhājī with Rādhā-Ramaṇajī, but a
gomatī-cakra is worshipped on the altar to His left.
According to an injunction in Śrī Hari-bhakti-vilāsa, a
gomatī-cakra is to be worshipped along with a śālagrāma-
śilā.

Adjacent to Śrī Rādhā-Ramaṇa Mandira, to the south, is
the samādhi of Śrī Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī and the place
where Rādhā-Ramaṇajī manifested. Unlike other deities,
Śrī Rādhā-Ramaṇajī never left Vṛndāvana.


Śrī Rādhā-Vinoda & Śrī Rādhā-Gokulānandajī

Before the arrival of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu in Vṛndā-
vana, Śrī Lokanātha Gosvāmī and Bhūgarbha Gosvāmī came
here. Being very humble and without any possessions
(akiñcana), they used to perform bhajana at the many
pastime-places in Braja Maṇḍala. Śrī Lokanātha Gosvāmī
found the vigraha of Śrī Rādhā-Vinodajī in Kiśorī Kuṇḍa

                          225
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

in Umrāo Gaon near Chatravana and served Them there.
Later, on the request of Rūpa, Sanātana and the other
Gosvāmīs, he brought his ārādhya Śrī Rādhā-Vinodajī to
Vṛndāvana and began to worship Them near the Śrī Rādhā-
Ramaṇa Mandira. Nowadays, the original deities that were
worshipped by Śrī Lokanātha Gosvāmī are in Jaipura, and
their pratibhū vigrahas are worshipped in that same
temple in Vṛndāvana. Śrī Gokulānandajī, who manifested
at Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa through Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura, also arrived in this temple later on. The
govardhana-śilā given by Śrīman Mahāprabhu to Śrī
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī was also present here. The
original vigraha of Śrī Gokulānanda is now also situated
in Jaipura with Śrī Rādhā-Vinodajī. In the courtyard of
the temple are the samādhis of Śrī Lokanātha Gosvāmī,
Śrī Narottama Ṭhākura and Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura.


Śrī Sākṣī-Gopāla

West of the Śrī Govinda Mandira are the ruins of the
Sākṣī-Gopāla Mandira. Gopālajī went to Vidyānagara to
act as a witness. Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta narrates the
amazing story of Śrī Gopālajī, who is loving to His
bhaktas (bhaktavatsala), in this case, an older and a
younger vipra. Upon arriving at Vidyānagara, Śrī
Gopālajī testified before the assembled people. He said,
“The older vipra was very pleased with the sevā of the
younger vipra, and promised to give his daughter in
marriage to him. I am the witness to this statement.” In
time, this deity went to Śrī Jagannātha Purī and is now
present in Satyavādīpura, about twelve miles away from
Purī. Now, Satyavādīpura is famous by the name of Sākṣī-
Gopāla. Since then, the temple of Sākṣī-Gopāla in
Vṛndāvana has been deserted. Today, only its ruins
remain.


Śrī Madana-Mohana (the second)

The deity served by vāṇīkāra Śrī Gadādhara Bhaṭṭajī is
situated here. This temple lies in the Bhaṭṭa
neighbourhood opposite Śrī Rādhā-Vallabha Mandira. Here
samāja (the singing of līlās) is performed with great
celebration. The deity here is very beautiful.


Śrī Śyāmasundara

The temple of Śrī Śyāmasundarajī is situated near the
Śrī Rādhā-Dāmodara Mandira. Śrī Rādhā-Śyāmasundara, the
deities established and worshipped by gauḍīya
vedāntācārya Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa, are very
beautiful. Opposite the entrance door of the temple is
the samādhi of Śrī Śyāmānanda Prabhu.

Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa was born in a village near the
famous Remunā in Orissa. He studied grammar, alaṅkāra
(rhetoric) and nyāya śāstra (logic) in an academic
village on the bank of Cilkā Hrada. After this, he went
to Mysore to study the Vedas. In Uḍupī, he deeply
studied Madhva-bhāṣya along with Śaṅkara-bhāṣya,
Pārijāta-bhāṣya and other bhāṣyas of the Vedānta. After

                          226
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

some time, he studied the Ṣaṭ-sandarbhas under Śrī
Rādhā-Dāmodara, a disciple of Śrī Rasikānanda Prabhu. At
this time, he came to know of Śrī Rādhā-Dāmodara’s
profound scholarship and devout life and became his
disciple. Later on, in Vṛndāvana, he studied Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam and the books of the Gosvāmīs from the famous
gauḍīya rasikācārya Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura
and, on his instruction, went to Jaipura. At the well-
known Galtā in Jaipura, he defeated the scholars of the
Śrī Sampradāya and other opponents to the Gauḍīya line,
and established the vigraha of Śrī Vijaya Gopāla. To
increase the faith of the local scholars, he composed
his Śrī Govinda-bhāṣya on Brahmasūtra there, and
reinstalled Śrī Rādhājī beside Śrī Govindadevajī in the
famous Govinda Mandira. Some of the books he composed,
which have enlarged the treasure house of Śrī Gauḍīya-
Vaiṣṇava literature, are Govinda-bhāṣya, Siddhānta-
ratnam, Vedānta-syāmantaka, Prameya-ratnāvalī,
Siddhānta-darpaṇa, and a commentary on Ṣaṭ-sandarbha.


Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava

Śrī Jayadeva Gosvāmī’s deities used to reside in an
ancient temple on the old bank of the Yamunā at Bhramara
Ghāṭa, north of Śrī Gokulanānda Mandira. Nowadays, they
are being served in an extensive temple in Jaipura at a
hilly place known as Ghāṭī. This temple is prominent in
Jaipura and is called Kanaka Vṛndāvana.

North-east of Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava Mandira is the large
temple of Śrī Yugala-Kiśora. The dome of this temple is
broken.


Śrī Bāṅke-Bihārī

Svāmī Haridāsajī manifested Śrī Bāṅke-Bihārī from
Viśākhā Kuṇḍa in Nidhuvana. There is no vigraha of Śrī
Rādhikā beside Kṛṣṇa in this temple. On Akṣaya Tṛtīyā in
the month of Vaiśākha, one can have darśana of Śrī
Bāṅke-Bihārī’s lotus feet. Śrī Bāṅke-Bihārī previously
resided in Nidhuvana, but then moved to the present
temple. During the yavana oppression, Śrī Bāṅke-Bihārījī
secretly stayed in Vṛndāvana and did not leave. The
darśana of Śrī Bāṅke-Bihārī is performed in a very
special way. The curtain is drawn every few minutes,
thus making the darśana very short. This is known as
jhāṅkī darśana, ‘momentary darśana’. The reason for this
brief darśana is His bhaktavātsalya (kindness to His
devotees) and His rasika nature. The following pastime
demonstrates this.

Once, an eminent bhakta came for Śrī Bāṅke-Bihārī’s
darśana. He gazed intently at the deity for a long time.
Rasika Bāṅke-Bihārījī became so attracted to him that He
went with him to his village. Later, when the gosvāmīs
of Bihārījī came to know of this, they traced Him and,
after much pleading with both the bhakta and Ṭhākurajī,
brought Him back to the temple. After this incident, a
jhāṅkī darśana was introduced so that no one again can
gaze upon Him for a long time.

The unique feature of the Bāṅke-Bihārījī Mandira is that

                          227
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

there is no maṅgala-āratī. The gosvāmīs of this temple
say that because Ṭhākurajī performs rāsa-līlā every
night, He becomes exhausted and goes to sleep in the
early morning. It is therefore improper to wake Him at
that time.


Śrī Rādhā-Vallabha

This is the deity of Svāmī Śrī Hitahari-vaṁśajī, who
received the vigraha of Śrī Rādhā-Vallabha as dowry at
his wedding. There is no mūrti of Śrī Rādhikā with Śrī
Rādhā-Vallabha, but there is a crown on the altar
instead, which is worshipped as Śrī Rādhikā. This deity
is very attractive.


Śrī Yugala-Kiśorajī

Yugala-Kiśorajī is situated in Kiśorīvana, or
Vyāsagherā, near Śrī Sevā Kuñja. Mādhava Dāsajī, a
disciple of Śrī Mādhavendra Purī, was a famous bhakta
ācārya. Śrī Nābhādāsajī has described his character in
Bhaktamāla. His disciple, Abhi-rāma Vyāsa, a resident of
Orachā, manifested this deity through Harirāma Vyāsajī.
Nearby in the garden is the samādhi of Śrī Vyāsajī.

There is a second Yugala-Kiśorajī whose temple lies on a
hillock near Keśī Ghāṭa. Jhānnā-Pannā Rājā established
this temple. During the reign of Mughal emperor Akbara,
the two Rājapūta brothers Haridāsa Ṭhākura and Govinda
dāsa Ṭhākura built the temple of a third Yugala-
Kiśorajī. The brothers were from the family of Tomara
and belonged to the village of Nīmkāthānā in Jaipura.


Śrī Lālā Bābū Mandira

Śrī Lālā Bābū was a famous and wealthy landlord of East
Bengal. He used to go for walks a little distance from
his mansion on the other side of the river, along its
elegant bank. Once, as he was walking, he heard a
boatman remark, “O brother, the day is over. Go across.”
Hearing the boatman’s words, he became immersed in
thoughts of his own mortality. Lālā Bābū took the
boatman’s words to mean, “Life has reached its close.
Quickly cross over this material existence.” He crossed
the river by boat and returned home. The next day,
during his walk, he heard the voice of a washerman
addressing his wife, “The day is over; go and burn the
vāsanā.” (Washermen burn banana plants and prepare a
kind of alkali for washing clothes. In Bengali, the bark
of the banana plant is called vāsanā. But, vāsanā also
means ‘desire’ or ‘passion’.) Lālā Bābū took this remark
to mean, “The day is over; the days of your life are
also over. Quickly burn your lusty desires.” The
statements of the boatman and the washerman left a deep
impression on him. He abandoned his grandiose life and
family and came to Vṛndāvana, where he began performing
bhajana. The devotee Lālā Bābū installed the deity of
Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra in 1810 A.D. in this magnificent stone
temple.



                          228
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Śāhajī Mandira

A resident of Lucknow, Seṭha Kundanalāla Śāha,
constructed this grand, white marble-stone temple in
1835 A.D. at great expense. He was an unalloyed bhakta
of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. In present times, this
temple gives some idea of the incomparable grandeur of
Vṛndāvana.


Śrī Raṅgajī Mandira

In 1851 A.D.Ç Śrī Lakṣmīcanda Seṭha built this temple at
the expense of 4.5 million rupees. Following the style
of the famous Śrī Raṅgam Mandira in South India, Śrī
Raṅgajī presides in the main temple within many walls
with Lakṣmī-devī massaging His feet. At the eastern gate
of the temple is a huge Garuḍa-stambha, which is
completely covered with gold leaf. The general public
call it Sone kā Tāla Vṛkṣa, ‘The Golden Palm Tree’. Near
the main entrance, in the north, is a sarovara, which
displays the pastime of the fight between the elephant
Gajendra and the crocodile. It also depicts Śrī Hari
protecting the surrendered elephant. Near the western
door is a huge chariot, upon which Śrī Raṅgajī rides on
special occasions.


Śrījī Mandira

Mahārānī Ānanda-kumarī devī, the queen of Jayasingh, the
king of Jaipura, had this temple constructed in 1826
A.D. Two yugala-vigrahas are installed here, Śrī Ānanda-
Manohara and Śrī Vṛndāvanacandra.


Varddhamāna Mahārāja Kuñja

This kuñja is situated opposite Śrījī Mandira, on the
other side of the road. The devotee queen Rājarājeśvarī-
devī, wife of Śrī Kīrticānda, the mahārāja of Varddhamān
in Bengal, built the temple here. She also had the
ghāṭas of Pāvana Sarovara in Nandagaon constructed out
of stone.


Brahmacārī Ṭhākura-bāḍī

Mahārāja Jiyājī Sindhiyā of Gwalior built this
magnificent temple in 1860 A.D. He offered the sevā of
the deities to his guru, Śrī Giridhārī dāsa Brahmacārī.
In this temple are three vigrahas — Śrī Rādhā-Gopāla,
Haṁsa-Gopāla and Nitya-Gopāla — who preside in three
separate prakoṣṭhas. This grand, stone temple is
situated near the Lālā Bābū Mandira.


Śrī Ṭīkārīrānī kī Ṭhākura-bāḍī

This temple is located in the northern part of Vṛndāvana
on the bank of the Yamunā. It was built in 1871 A.D. by
Queen Indrajīta Kumārī. Her husband was Hitakāma
Ṭhākura, king of Ṭīkarī in the district of Gayā in
Bihāra. Three deities reside in this temple — Rādhā-

                             229
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Rādhā-Gopāla and Śrī Laḍḍū-Gopāla. This
temple is famous for its hospitality.


Śāhajāpura Mandira

This temple is located in Retiyā Bāzāra. The dīvāna, or
court-minister, of Śāhajāpura state, Lālā Braja-
kiśorajī, constructed it in 1873 A.D. The vigraha in
this mandira is Śrī Rādhā-Gopāla, whose beautiful
darśana is very grand.


Mahārānī Svarṇamayī Mandira

This temple is located near the bank of the Yamunā and
was built by Mahārānī Svarṇamayī, wife of Kumāra
Kṛṣṇanātha. He was the great grandson of the well-known
Kānta Bābū of Kāsīma Bāzāra. Previously, a vigraha of
Śrī Śyāmasundara was worshipped in this mandira. Now Śrī
Gopīnāthajī, installed by Mahārānī, resides here.


Jaipura-vālā Mandira

Mahārāja Mādhosinghajī of Jaipura had this grand temple
built over a period spanning almost thirty years and
expend-ed much money on it. The main temple has three
doors. In the northern chamber is Śrī Ānanda-Bihārījī;
in the central chamber is Śrī Rādhā-Mādhavajī; and in
the southern chamber are Śrī Nitya-Gopālajī, Śrī
Giridhārijī, and the mūrtis of Śrī Nāradajī and Śrī
Sanaka, Sanātana, Sanandana and Sanata Kumāra. The
deities in this temple were installed in 1916 A.D.


Savāmana Śālagrāma

The huge Savāmana Śālagrāma presides in a two-storey
temple in the corner of Loī Bāzār, opposite Śrī
Śyāmasundara Mandira. Savāmana refers to a weight of
nearly fourty-seven kilos. The deities of Śrī Sītā-Rāma
are also here. In the old temple of Śrī Govindajī is
another śālagrāma of savāmana.


Bankhaṇḍī Mahādeva

This temple is situated at the junction of three roads
at the end of Aṭhkhambā, coming from the famous Bāṅke-
Bihārī Mandira.

During his stay in Vṛndā-vana, Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī
resided in his bhajana-kuṭī near the old Śrī Madana-
Mohana Mandira, and would daily go for darśana of Śrī
Gopīśvara Mahādeva. When Sanātana Gosvāmī became old,
Śrī Gopīśvara Mahādeva instructed him one day in a
dream, “In your old age, please do not go to so much
trouble to take my darśana. I shall manifest myself at
Bankhaṇḍī near your bhajana-kuṭī.” That very next day,
Śrī Gopīśvara Mahādeva appeared in Bankhaṇḍī. Seeing
this, Sanātana Gosvāmī became overwhelmed in bhāva. From
that day on, he would take darśana of Bankhaṇḍī Mahādeva
each day before returning to his bhajana-kuṭī. Because

                          230
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Śrī Gopīśvara Mahādeva appeared in Bankhaṇḍī, Mahādeva
here became known by the name Bankhaṇḍī Mahādeva.


Aṣṭa-sakhī Kuñja

Aṣṭa-sakhī Kuñja is situated near the old temple of Śrī
Madana-Mohanajī. In the center is Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
Yugala, and surrounding Them are the vigrahas of eight
sakhīs, four on each side. In 1296 A.D., the mahārāja of
Hetamapura, Rāmarañjana Cakravartī, and his wife
Padmāsundarī had this temple built and installed the
vigraha of Śrī Rādhā-Rāsabihārī here.


Śrī Rādhā-Vinoda Jamāī Ṭhākura (Taḍāsa-vālā Mandira)

This temple is also called the Ṭhākura-bāḍī of Rājarṣi
Rāya Vanamālī Dāsa. It is situated on the left side of
an unpaved lane some distance from the main road that
leads from Vṛndāvana to Mathurā. Śrī Vāñchārāmajī, an
official in the Taḍāsa state in Bengal, was a great
devotee of Kṛṣṇa. Daily, he used to take bath in the
flowing water of a nearby river. Once, while taking his
morning bath, he heard a very sweet voice coming from
inside the river. “Please take Me out of the water and
take Me home,” the voice said. However Śrī Vāñchārāmajī
was unable to see the source of that voice in the nearby
vicinity. The next day, the same thing happened. While
bathing on the third day, he felt the touch of something
under the water at the same time that he heard the sweet
voice. When he picked up the object that touched him, he
saw that it was an amazingly beautiful vigraha of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. That same deity became famous by the name of Śrī
Vinoda-Ṭhākura.

By His own will, Śrī Ṭhākurajī arrived at the house of
the great devotee, Śrī Vanamālī Rāya, and the regular
sevā of the vigraha began there. The only daughter of
Śrī Vanamālī Rāyajī was very beautiful, very qualified,
and especially devoted. When the princess had darśana of
Śrī Vinoda-Ṭhākura, she became fascinated by His sweet
smile. Śrī Vinoda-Ṭhākurajī also began to play directly
with that girl whose name was Rādhā. One day, He caught
the corner of the princess’s sari and said, “You should
marry Me.” After some time, the princess became ill.
Ṭhākura Vinodajī told Rādhā’s mother in a dream, “Rādhā
will not survive now. You should make one mūrti of Rādhā
from the wood of the dry cedar tree in your garden and
marry Her to Me.” And so it happened that as soon as the
mūrti of Rādhā was installed, the princess Rādhā passed
away. The cremation of princess Rādhā was carried out as
Rādhā’s mūrti was being installed beside Ṭhākura
Vinodajī. Śrī Vinoda Ṭhākura now became Śrī Rādhā-
Vinoda-bihārī Ṭhākura. After some time, Śrī Vanamālī
Rāyabahādura went to Vṛndāvana and brought Śrī Rādhā-
Vinoda-bihārī Ṭhākurajī with him. He constructed a
temple at this place and established Ṭhākurajī there.
Rājarṣi Rāya Vanamālī Dāsa was a greatly pious
mahāpuruṣa of the Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Sampradāya. He
published one edition of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam with eight
commentaries in the devanāgarī script. In about 1954
A.D., paramārādhya oṁ viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti
Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja collected a copy of

                          231
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

this Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam with eight commentaries from the
Taḍāsa Mandira. This book is still well-kept in the
library of Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha in Mathurā.


Śrī Rūpa-Sanātana Gauḍīya Maṭha

This temple has been mentioned earlier in the book. It
is situated in Dāna, Māna and Sevā Kuñja Galīs near Sevā
Kuñja. Presiding here are the wonderful vigrahas of Śrī
Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu, Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Vinoda-bihārī, Śrī
Vṛndā-devī and Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Mahārāja. In
Vṛndāvana, Śrī Vṛndā-devī’s darśana is available only in
this temple. On the upper floor of the mandira, one can
have an exquisite darśana of Sevā Kuñja.


Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma Mandira

This temple was established in 1975 by Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja, and is situated in Ramaṇa
Reti on the Vṛndāvana-Chaṭṭīkarā road. The presiding
deities in this temple are Śrī Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma in the
middle prakoṣṭha, Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Śyāmasundara with Lalitā
and Viśākhā in the prakoṣṭha on the right and Śrī Śrī
Gaura-Nitāī in the prakoṣṭha on the left. At the side is
a mūrti of Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja. The
samādhi-mandira of Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja is
also here. In his last years, Śrīla Svāmī Mahārāja asked
the author to place him in samādhi, and thus this
ceremony took place during Kartika (November) in 1977.
Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja used to call
Bombay his office, Māyapura his sādhana-bhūmi, and
Vṛndāvana his nitya-siddha abode.


The Twelve Forests of Śrī Vṛndāvana

Within the pañca-kosī parikramā of Vṛndāvana, there are
twelve vanas, or forests. A brief description of them is
given below.


1. Śrī Aṭalavana

This vana lies in the southern part of Vṛndāvana. Aṭala
Tīrtha and Aṭala Bihārījī are situated here. At
Bhātrola, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the sakhās relished the many
palatable dishes that the wives of the brāhmaṇas gave
them. When they came to this place as they were
returning to Chaṭṭīkarā Nanda-Gokula, Kṛṣṇa’s friends
asked Him about the palatable foodstuffs they had taken
earlier that day. “He sakhe! How was the food today?”
they inquired.

With great delight, Kṛṣṇa replied, “I have become
immovable, having taken that food.” In other words,
Kṛṣṇa was feeling so full that He was unable to continue
further. Since then, this forest has become famous by
the name Aṭalavana (in Hindi, the word for ‘immovable’
or ‘stationary’ is aṭala). It is situated near the
junction of the Vṛndāvana-Mathurā road and the Vṛndāvana
pañca-kosī parikramā path.


                             232
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017


2. Kevārivana

This forest is situated north-west of Aṭalavana and
contains Dāvānala Kuṇḍa, which has been described
earlier. After Kṛṣṇa swallowed the forest fire
(dāvānala), the gopas and gopīs looked around with great
surprise and said, Ke nivāri? (“Who has saved us from
the hands of death?”). For this reason, this forest
became famous as Kevārivana.


3. Bihāravana

This forest is situated south-west of Kevārivana. It is
here that Rādhā Kūpa is found. The pilgrims performing
Vṛndāvana parikramā use to loudly call “Rādhe! Rādhe!”
into this well and hear the echo. Nearby in Ramaṇa Retī
are āśramas of renounced mahātmas. At Śrī Bhāgavat
Nivāsa, one can also have darśana of Śrī Giridhārī and
the guñjā-mālā worshipped by Śrī Dāsa Gosvāmī. Pūjyapāda
Śrī Bhaktihṛdaya Bon Mahārāja, a disciple of jagadguru
Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda, established
a spiritual ‘Viśva-vaiṣṇava-vidyālaya’ here.


4. Gocāraṇavana

This forest is situated to the west of Bihāravana on the
old bank of the Yamunā. A temple of Śrī Varāha Deva and
Gautama Muni’s āśrama are here.


5. Śrī Kālīya Damanavana

This forest lies north of Gocāraṇavana and contains many
ancient kadamba trees. Among them is the keli-kadamba
tree on which Śrī Kṛṣṇa climbed to a high branch, tied
His pītāmbara around His waist and jumped into the
Yamunā to subdue the Kālīya serpent. This tree is a
keli-kadamba tree and also known as Keli-Kadamba,
because Kṛṣṇa performed a pastime (keli) here. Adjacent
to this keli-kadamba is the bhajana-kuṭī and samādhi of
Śrī Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī. Nearby on the bank of
Kālīya Daha is Śrīla Bilvamaṅgalajī’s place of bhajana.

Śrī Bilvamaṅgalajī was a resident of a village on the
bank of the Kṛṣṇabenvā river in South India. In his
youth, he became so attached to Cintāmaṇi, a beautiful
prostitute, that he even went to meet her on the day of
his father’s śrāddha ceremony. With the help of a
decayed corpse, he crossed the fearsome river that had
overflowed its banks. Then after scaling a wall by
grasping a black snake, thinking it to be a rope, he
arrived at the prostitute’s house. The prostitute
scolded him, saying, “If you had the same deep
attachment for the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa that you have
for my bones, skin and body which is covered with foul
smelling dirt, then your auspiciousness would be
guaranteed.” When Bilvamaṅgala heard this, he became
detached from worldly existence and proceeded to
Vṛndāvana. On the wayÇ he met a young woman to whom he
became attracted. Taking a sharp pin, he pierced his
eyes and became blind. The playful rasika Kṛṣṇa then

                           233
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

bestowed His mercy upon Bilvamaṅgala and brought him to
Vṛndāvana, where he stayed for some time at Govardhana.
There, he received a momentary darśana of his iṣṭadeva
Śrī Kṛṣṇa and iṣṭadevī Śrī Rādhikā. After some time, he
came to Vṛndāvana and resided near Kālīya Daha, where he
performed bhajana. It is said that after about seven
hundred years, he transmitted his śakti into Śrī
Vallabhācārya and gave him the tattva (truth) of his
disciplic line. He performed his disappearance līlā
here.


6. Śrī Gopālavana

This forest is situated north of Kālīya Damanavana. The
deities of Śrī Nanda and Yaśodājī are in the temple
here. After Kṛṣṇa subdued the Kālīya serpent, Śrī Nanda
Bābā donated a vast number of cows to the brāhmaṇas for
Kṛṣṇa’s welfare.


7. Nikuñjavana

This forest is also named Sevā Kuñja. Nearby are four
galīs, or narrow lanes. They are Dāna Galī, Māna Galī,
Gumāna Galī and Kuñja Galī. This is where Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa enjoy Their eternal pastimes, and where parama
rasika Kṛṣṇa massages the lotus feet of the fatigued
Rādhājī. We have already described Lalitā Kuṇḍa and the
other places in this forest.


8. Nidhuvana

This famous forest is situated north of Nikuñjavana.
Viśākhā Kuṇḍa, from where Śrī Bāṅke-Bihārījī manifested,
is here. This was mentioned earlier.


9. Rādhāvana (Rādhā Bāga)

This forest is located in the north-east corner of
Vṛndāvana, on the bank of the Yamunā. It is said that
after Śrīmatī Rādhikā took bath, Lalitā and the other
sakhīs would comb Her hair and decorate Her here. Svāmī
Haridāsa’s place of bhajana as well as Ṭaṭīyā Sthāna,
which is very attractively decorated with densely-
foliated trees, are here. This place is very famous for
the sevā of the sādhus and saintly personalities.


10. Jhūlanavana

This forest is situated south of Śrī Rādhā Bāga and is
where the sakhīs used to swing Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala. Here,
raṅgile Kṛṣṇa would also seat Śrīmatī Rādhikā, Lalitā,
Viśākhā and the other sakhīs one by one beside Him on a
swing. He would then swing them with such a force that
they would no longer be able to keep their bodies
covered with their clothes and, out of fear, they would
cling to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The Gauḍīya Gosvāmīs have described
the jhūlana-līlā (swing pastime) of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in
their literatures.


                            234
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017


11. Śrī Gahvaravana

This forest is situated south of Jhūlanavana, and is
where the famous Pānī Ghāṭa lies. Here the gopīs, on the
advice of Kṛṣṇa, crossed the overflowing Yamunā on their
way to the āśrama of Maharṣi Durvāsā and fed him fifty-
six different kinds of preparations. This has been
described earlier.


12. Śrī Papaḍavana

This forest lies south of Gahvaravana. Ādi Badrīvana and
Ādi Badrīghaṭa are also situated here. At this place,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa arranged for the gopīs to take darśana of Ādi
Badrīnātha. It is also said that Śrī Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana
Vyāsadeva received the inspiration to manifest Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam here. In the rough and dry Badrikāśrama in
the Himālayas, it is impossible to manifest such a
literature which is filled with rasa and which is
saturated with the sweet līlās of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Even now,
an extensive forest of ber or badrī trees is found in
this area. It may be that Śrī Vyāsadeva also taught the
rasa-grantha Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam to Śukadeva Gosvāmī at
this place.



The Famous Ghāṭas of Śrī Vṛndāvana


There are numerous ghāṭas on the banks of Śrī Yamunā in
Vṛndāvana. Of them, those that are renowned are
described below.


Śrī Varāha Ghāṭa

This ghāṭa is situated in the south-western part of
Vṛndā-vana on the old bank of the Yamunājī. Śrī Varāha
Deva is also present on top of the bank. Nearby is the
āśrama of Gautama Muni.


Kālīya Damana Ghāṭa

This ghāṭa is also called Kālīya Daha, and is situated
on the old bank of the Yamunā about half a mile north of
Varāha Ghāṭa. The pastime of this place has already been
described. When Śrī Kṛṣṇa reached the riverbank after
subduing Kālīya, Brajarāja Nanda and Brajeśvarī Śrī
Yaśodā soaked Him with their tears, and very carefully
and thoroughly examined His body. They wondered, “Has
our lālā been hurt anywhere?” Here, Mahārāja Nanda
donated many cows to the brāhmaṇas for Kṛṣṇa’s welfare.


Sūrya Ghāṭa

This ghāṭa is also called Āditya Ghāṭa, and is situated
north of Gopāla Ghāṭa. The hillock above this ghāṭa is
called Āditya Ṭīlā. On this ṭīlā stands the temple of
Śrī Madana-Mohanajī, the life and soul of Śrī Sanātana

                          235
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                      5/5/2017

Gosvāmī. This has also been described earlier.
Praskandana Tīrtha is also here.


Yugala Ghāṭa

This ghāṭa is situated north of Sūrya Ghāṭa. Above this
ghāṭa is Śrī Yugala-Bihārī Mandira. It is in a
dilapidated state and is without a dome. A temple of Śrī
Yugala-Kiśora near Keśī Ghāṭa is in a similar
dilapidated condition.


Śrī Vihāra Ghāṭa

This ghāṭa is situated north of Yugala Ghāṭa and is
where Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala used to bathe, perform jal-
vihāra, and engage in many other games (krīḍā).


Śrī Āndhera Ghāṭa

This ghāṭa is found north of Yugala Ghāṭa. Kṛṣṇa and the
gopīs used to play ‘blind man’s bluff’ in the upavana
adjacent to this ghāṭa. The gopīs would cover their eyes
with their hands while Śrī Kṛṣṇa hid somewhere nearby.
The gopīs would then search for Him. Sometimes, Śrī
Kiśorījī would also hide in this way and everyone else
would look for Her.


Imlītalā Ghāṭa

This ghāṭa is north of Āndhera Ghāṭa. When Mahāprabhu
Śrī Caitanya Deva was residing in Vṛndāvana, He would
sit under the imlī tree here. This imlī tree was ancient
and had survived from the time of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Mahāprabhu
would perform harināma here, completely absorbed in
prema. Therefore, this ghāṭa is also known as Gaurāṅga
Ghāṭa. This pastime-place has also been mentioned
earlier.


Śṛṅgāra Ghāṭa

This ghāṭa is situated somewhat to the east of Imalītalā
Ghāṭa, on the bank of the Yamunā. Śrī Kṛṣṇa decorated
māninī Śrī Rādhikā at this place. During His visit to
Vṛndā-vana, Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu used to bathe here. He
stayed at the nearby Śṛṅgāra Vaṭa for some time.


Śrī Govinda Ghāṭa

This ghāṭa is situated near Śṛṅgāra Ghāṭa, to the north.
After Śrī Kṛṣṇa disappeared from śrī rāsa-maṇḍala, He
again appeared in front of the gopīs at this place.


Cīra Ghāṭa

The mischievous Śrī Kṛṣṇa stole the clothes of the young
gopīs while they were bathing and climbed up a kadamba
tree. Cīra means ‘clothes’. Kṛṣṇa also rested near here

                          236
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

after killing the Keśī demon. Therefore, another name
for this ghāṭa is Caina (caina means ‘rest’) or Cayana
Ghāṭa. Nearby is the well known Jhāḍū-maṇḍala.


Śrī Bhramara Ghāṭa

This ghāṭa is located north of Cīra Ghāṭa. When Kiśora
and Kiśorī performed krīḍā-vilāsa here, bumble bees
(bhramara) became intoxicated by the fragrance of Their
bodies and started humming. This ghāṭa is therefore
called Bhramara Ghāṭa.


Śrī Keśī Ghāṭa

This famous ghāṭa is situated north of Bhramara Ghāṭa in
the north-western part of Śrī Vṛndāvana, and has already
been described.


Dhīra-samīra Ghāṭa

This ghāṭa is situated in the northern part of Śrī
Vṛndāvana and near Keśī Ghāṭa, to the east. When the
breeze witnessed the vihāra of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala,
it at once became very cool and started to move very
slowly so that it could serve Them. This place has also
been described previously.


Śrī Rādhā Bāga Ghāṭa

This ghāṭa is situated in the eastern part of Vṛndāvana.
It has also been described before.


Śrī Pānī Ghāṭa

The gopīs crossed the Yamunā on foot from this ghāṭa and
fed Maharṣi Durvāsā delicious food. This too has been
described previously.


Ādibadrī Ghāṭa

This ghāṭa is situated a little south of Pānī Ghāṭa. Śrī
Kṛṣṇa gave darśana of Ādibadrī Nārāyaṇa to the gopīs at
this place.


Śrī Rāja Ghāṭa

Rāja Ghāṭa is situated in the south-eastern part of
Vṛndā-vana, to the south of Ādibadrī Ghāṭa and on the
bank of Yamunā’s old course. Dressed as a boatman, Kṛṣṇa
used to take Śrīmatī Rādhikā and the sakhīs across the
Yamunā from here. When they would reach the mid-point of
the Yamunā, Kṛṣṇa would make many excuses to delay their
crossing. The gopīs would order Him to cross the river
quickly, and try to scare Him by mentioning the name of
Mahārāja Kaṁsa. Thus, this ghāṭa is famous by the name
of Rāja Ghāṭa.


                          237
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                       5/5/2017

In addition to these famous ghāṭas already described,
the book Vṛndāvana-kathā mentions another fourteen
ghāṭas: (1) Mahāntajī Ghāṭa, (2) Nāmāovālā Ghāṭa, (3)
Praskandana Ghāṭa, (4) Kaḍiyā Ghāṭa, (5) Dhūsara Ghāṭa,
(6) Nayā Ghāṭa, (7) Śrījī Ghāṭa, (8) Bihārījī Ghāṭa, (9)
Dharoyāra Ghāṭa, (10) Nāgarī Ghāṭa, (11) Bhīma Ghāṭa,
(12) Himmata Bahādura Ghāṭa, (13) Cīra or Caina Ghāṭa,
and (14) Hanu-māna Ghāṭa.


Other Features of Śrī Vṛndāvana


Vṛndāvana’s quarters (muhallās)

1) Jñāna-Gudaḍī 29) Sukhanakhātā Galī

2) Gopīśvara 30) Purānā Śahara

3) Baṁśīvaṭa 31) Lārivālī Galī

4) Gopīnātha Bāga 32) Gāvadhūpa Galī

5) Gopīnātha Bāzār 33) Govardhana Darvāzā

6) Brahma Kuṇḍa 34) Ahīrapāḍā

7) Rādhā Nivāsa 35) Dumāīta Pāḍā

8) Keśī Ghāṭa 36) Varaoyāra Muhallā

9) Rādhā-Ramaṇa Gherā 37) Madana-Mohanajī Gherā

10) Nidhuvana 38) Bihārīpurā

11) Pāthara Purā 39) Purohitavālī Galī

12) Nāgara-gopīnātha 40) Manīpāḍā

13) Gopīnātha Gherā 41) Gautamapāḍā

14) Nāgara-gopāla 42) Aṭhkhambā

15) Cīra Ghāṭa 43) Govindabāga

16) Maṇḍī Darvāzā 44) Loī Bāzār

17) Nāgara-govindajī 45) Retiyā Bāzār

18) Ṭakśāla Galī 46) Bankhaṇḍī Mahādeva

19) Rāmajī Dvāra 47) Chīpī Galī

20) Kaṇṭhīvālā Bāzār 48) Rāya Galī

21) Sevā Kuñja 49) Bundelabāga

22) Kuñja Galī 50) Mathurā Darvāzā

23) Vyāsa Gherā 51) Savāī Jayasiṁha Gherā

24) Śṛṅgāra Vaṭa 52) Dhīra-samīra

25) Rāsa-maṇḍala 53) Ṭaṭṭīyā Sthāna

                          238
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017


26) Kiśorapurā 54) Gahvaravana

27) Dhobīvālī Galī 55) Govinda Kuṇḍa

28) Raṅgīlāla Galī 56) Rādhābāga



Vṛndāvana’s famous samāja-samādhis


1) Sanātana Gosvāmī’s samādhi lies near Āditya Ṭīlā, in
the southern part of the old Śrī Madana-Mohanajī
Mandira. The grantha-samādhi, or samādhi of the Gosvāmī
literatures is also here. 2) Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī’s samādhi
is near Śrī Rādhā-Dāmodara Mandira, to the left. The
samādhi-mandiras of Śrī Jīva Go-svāmī and Kṛṣṇadāsa
Kavirāja lie behind the main mandira. 3) Śrī Gopāla
Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī’s samādhi is near Śrī Rādhā-Ramaṇa
Mandira. 4) Lokanāntha Gosvāmī’s samādhi lies near Śrī
Gokulānanda Mandira. Next to Lokanātha Gosvāmī’s samādhi
are the samādhis of Śrī Narottama Ṭhākura and Śrī
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura. 5) Śrī Madhu Paṇḍita
Gosvāmī’s samādhi is near Śrī Gopī-nātha Mandira. 6) Śrī
Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī’s samādhi lies in the centre
of the puṣpa-samādhis of the sixty-four Gauḍīya mahantas
opposite Śrī Govinda Mandira. The samādhis of the six
cakravartīs and eight kavirājas are also there. 7) The
samādhis of Śrīnivāsa Ācārya and Śrī Rāmacandra Kavirāja
are in Dhīra-samīra. 8) Śrī Śyāmānanda Prabhu’s samāja-
bāḍī is near Śrī Śyāmasundara Mandira. 9) Śrī Gadādhara
Paṇḍita Gosvāmī’s danta-samāja (tooth-samādhi) is in
Keśī Ghāṭa. 10) Śrī Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī’s samādhi
lies near Kālīya Daha. 11) Svāmī Haridāsajī’s samādhi is
in Nidhuvana. 12) Śrī Hitahari-vaṁśa Gosvāmī’s place is
near Śrī Rādhā-Vallabha Mandira. 13) Sūradāsa Madana-
Mohanajī’s place lies near Śrī Madana-Mohana Mandira.

Vṛndāvana’s famous kuṇḍas


1) Dāvānala Kuṇḍa — in Kevārivana 2) Śrī Viśākhā Kuṇḍa —
in Nidhuvana 3) Śrī Gajarāja Kuṇḍa — in Śrī Raṅgajī
Mandira 4) Śrī Lalitā Kuṇḍa — in Nikuñjavana 5) Śrī
Brahma Kuṇḍa — to the north of Śrī Raṅgajī Mandira 6)
Śrī Govinda Kuṇḍa — near Śrī Raṅgajī Mandira, in the
eastern part of Vṛndāvana


Vṛndāvana’s famous wells (kūpas)


1) Veṇu Kūpa — near Śrī Raṅgajī Mandira 2) Sapta-
Sāmudrika Kūpa — near Gopīśvara Mahādeva 3) Śrī Gopa
Kūpa — in Jñāna-Gudaḍī 4) Śrī Rādhā Kūpa — in Bihāravana


Devīs in Vṛndāvana


1) Pātāla-devī, or Yogamāyā — to the south-west of the
ancient Govindajī Mandira 2) Annapūrṇa-devī — near Sevā
Kuñja 3) Paurṇamāsī-devī — near Sevā Kuñja, to the east

                            239
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt                       5/5/2017



Mahādevas in Vṛndāvana


1) Śrī Gopīśvara Mahādeva — near Vaṁśī Vaṭa, to the
north-east 2) Bankhaṇḍī Mahādeva — at the intersection
of Loī Bāzār and Athkhambā


Vṛndāvana’s banyan trees (vaṭas)


1) Advaita Vaṭa — near the ancient Madana-Mohana Mandira
2) Śṛṅgāra Vaṭa — on the bank of the Yamunā near Śrī
Rādhā-Dāmodara Mandira 3) Vaṁśī Vaṭa — in Rāsa-sthalī


Vṛndāvana’s kadamba trees


1) Keli Kadamba — on the bank of Kālīya Daha 2) Cīra
Kadamba — on the bank of the Yamunā, near Dhīra-samīra
3) Dolā Kadamba — in the Rādhā Bāga Jhūlanavana




Table of Contents

Part 1

Chapter 1The Nature of Braja

Chapter 2The Borders of Braja

Chapter 3How to Observe Braja Maṇḍala Parikramā

Chapter 4Places Visited on Braja Maṇḍala Parikramā

Part 2

Chapter 2Madhuvana

Chapter 3Tālavana

Chapter 4Kumudavana

Chapter 5Bahulāvana

Chapter 6Śrī Rādhā Kuṇḍa andŚrī Śyāma Kuṇḍa

Chapter 7Śrī Govardhana

Chapter 8Śrī Kāmyavana(Kāmavana)

Chapter 9Varsānā (Vṛṣabhānupura)

Chapter 10Nandagaon

Chapter 11Jāvaṭa (Yāva Grāma)

Chapter 12Kokilāvana and OtherPastime-places

                            240
Braja-Mandala-Parikrama.txt       5/5/2017


Chapter 13Śrī Bhadravana

Chapter 14Bhāṇḍīravana

Chapter 15Māṭavana

Chapter 16Baelvana (Bilvavana)

Chapter 17Lohavana

Chapter 18Mahāvana-Gokula

Chapter 19Śrī Vṛndāvana




                            241
