Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta Second Canto, Part One



Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

(2011)



Tags: Part One Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja Gaudiya vaishnava philosophy haer krishna, Śrī
Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta Second Canto

Part One Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja
Gaudiya vaishnava philosophy haer krishnattt Śrī Bṛhad-
bhāgavatāmṛta Second Cantottt



* * *




* * *




Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta

Second Canto, Part One

Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta (Canto 2, Part 1)

ISBN 978-1-935428-32-9

© 2010 Gaudiya Vedanta Publications. Some Rights
Reserved.

Except where otherwise noted, content in this book is
licensed under the Creative Commons Attribution-No
Derivative Works 3.0 Unported License.

To view a copy of this license, visit
http://www.creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/3.0/
Permissions beyond the scope of this license may be
available at www.purebhakti.com/pluslicense or write to:
gvp.contactus@gmail.com

For further information, free downloads of all titles,
world tour lectures, and more, please visit:
www.purebhakti.com, www.purebhakti.tv or
www.backtobhakti.com



śrī śrī gauraṅgau jayataḥ

Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī’s Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta


                              1
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

Second Canto Part One



Translated from the Hindi edition of

Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja



Dedicated to my Holy Master

śrī gauḍīya-vedānta-ācārya-kesarī nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa oṁ
viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata

Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti-prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī mahārāja

the best amongst the tenth generation of descendants in
the bhāgavata-paramparā from Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, and the founder of the Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta
Samiti and its branches throughout the world




Contents



Preface to the First Hindi Edition

Editor’s Preface



First Chapter: Vairāgya – Renunciation



Verses 1–24 Śrī Janamejaya asks about the conversation
between the mother and her son; In reply, Śrī Jaiminī
begins an explanation of the glories of Goloka; Śrī
Uttarā inquires about the realm attained by those who
aspire to serve the Vraja gopīs, and in particular, the
crest jewel of the Vraja gopīs, Śrī Rādhājī.



Verses 25–53 Śrī Parīkṣit relates his own glorious
fortune; In reply to the questions asked by his mother,
he describes the glories of Śrī Goloka with a story of a
brāhmaṇa who resided in Prāgjyotiṣa-pura; The brāhmaṇa
obtains the ten-syllable gopāla-mantra; He becomes
renounced; He develops firm faith in the chanting of the
mantra; He has a divine vision of the Deity of the
mantra; In a dream, Śrī Śiva orders him to go to Śrī
Mathurā.



Verses 54–87 The brāhmaṇa sees the festival of the
worship of Śrī Mādhava in Prayāga; He enters into
dialogue with the Vaiṣṇavas there, and he hears the

                              2
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

Purāṇas; He experiences uncertainty about his
worshipable Deity; In a dream, he obtains the order of
Śrī Mādhava to go to Mathurā without delay; He goes to
Mathurā; He bathes at Viśrānti-tīrtha (Viśrāma-ghāṭa);
He becomes happy to see the opulence of Vṛndāvana.



Verses 88–109 The brāhmaṇa hears the sound of weeping
coming from the east of Keśī-tīrtha, and he goes to a
grove of kadamba trees there; He has darśana of Śrī
Gopa-kumāra, who is youthful in appearance; He offers
obeisances to Gopa-kumāra and inquires from him about
what his goal should be and what practice he should
adopt to achieve it; Gopa-kumāra narrates his own story
to the brāhmaṇa to assure him that ‘only through śrī-
nāma-kīrtana’ can he directly see his worshipable Deity.



Verses 110–150 Śrī Gopa-kumāra obtains the gopāla-mantra
from a brāhmaṇa who is firmly attached to śrī-nāma-
kīrtana; Chanting the mantra, he cleanses his heart by
the mantra’s influence; He renounces home; After
receiving instruction from a brāhmaṇa who worships Śrī
Śālagrāma on the banks of the Gaṅgā River, Gopa-kumāra
sees the service of Śrī Nārāyaṇa in the royal capital of
that country.



Verses 151–182 Śrī Gopa-kumāra is accepted as the son of
the childless king, and he becomes absorbed in the
worship of Śrī Nārāyaṇa; Still, he is dissatisfied at
heart due to his connection with the kingdom; Saintly
persons arrive from South India on a tour of different
holy places. Gopa-kumāra hears from their lotus mouths
about the great mercy of Śrī Nīlācala-pati, and he
develops a desire to see this form of the Lord; He
travels to Śrī Jagannātha Purī and, upon witnessing the
great, ever-fresh festivals in Śrī Jagannātha Purī,
develops a desire to directly render some specific
service to Śrī Jagannātha.



Verses 183–219 On the shore of the ocean at Nīlācala,
Śrī Gopa-kumāra again has darśana of the brāhmaṇa who
gave him his mantra, and he receives his instruction;
Upon becoming monarch of that kingdom, Gopa-kumāra
manages the service of Śrī Jagannātha-deva very well; He
experiences dissatisfaction in his heart by dint of his
dealings with the kingdom; Upon receiving the order of
the Supreme Lord in a dream, he again goes to Mathurā.



Second Chapter: Jñāna – Knowledge

Verses 1–31 After residing in Mathurā for some time, Śrī
Gopa-kumāra develops the desire to see Śrī Jagannātha;
En route to Nīlācala, he hears from saintly persons how
opulent is the service of Śrī Upendra (Śrī Vāmana-deva);
By the influence of the chanting of his mantra, a

                              3
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

celestial airplane arrives, and he boards it to go to
heaven; At some point in time, in Indra’s absence, Gopa-
kumāra obtains the kingdom of heaven and makes formal
arrangements for Śrī Upendra’s service.



Verses 32–75 After residing among the demigods of heaven
for one year, Śrī Gopa-kumāra has audience of Bhṛgu and
other great sages; He hears Śrī Bṛhaspati describe
Maharloka, and he goes there on the strength of chanting
his mantra; He serves Śrī Yajñeśvara; He goes to
Janaloka; He sees Sanat-kumāra and hears the glories of
Tapoloka from the great sages; He goes to Tapoloka by
the influence of chanting his mantra.



Verses 76–128 Śrī Gopa-kumāra sees the four Kumāras in
Tapoloka and receives instruction from Śrī Pippalāyana
about smaraṇa (remembrance) and samādhi (deep
meditation); The four Kumāras display many forms of Śrī
Bhagavān in their practice of dhyāna-yoga (meditation);
Śrī Brahmā arrives in Tapoloka; Gopa-kumāra hears about
the fundamental reality of Brahmā and Satyaloka from the
four Kumāras.



Verses 129–159 Śrī Gopa-kumāra’s departs for Satyaloka;
He sees the Supreme Lord, Śrī Mahā-puruṣa; He obtains
the affectionate mercy of Śrī Lakṣmī-devī; He sees the
destruction of the three worlds at the end of Brahmā’s
day; He obtains the position of Brahmā when Brahmā
disappears due to fear of a demon; The personified Vedic
scriptures describe knowledge about the nature of
liberation and devotion.



Verses 160–240 The personified Vedic scriptures describe
the superiority of devotion over liberation; They
describe the distinction of devotion in comparison with
karma (fruitive work), jñāna (knowledge), vairāgya
(renunciation), and samādhi (yogic trance); They
describe the eight layers that comprise the egg of the
universe; Gopa-kumāra’s devotion increases upon hearing
the glories of devotion; He goes to Śrī Vṛndāvana,
directly ordered to do so by Śrī Bhagavān.



Third Chapter: Bhajana – Devotional Service

Verses 1–59 While wandering in Vṛndāvana, Śrī Gopa-
kumāra finds his gurudeva and receives instruction from
him; He obtains a spiritual body by the influence of
chanting his mantra, and he crosses the eight layers of
the universe and goes to the abode of liberation, known
as muktipada, which is beyond material nature; He has
darśana of Śrī Śiva and Śrī Pārvatī there.




                              4
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

Verses 60–83 Śrī Gopa-kumāra hears the truth about the
nondifference between Śrī Madana-gopāla and Śrī Śiva
from Śrī Nandīśvara; Gopa-kumāra reassures his mind; The
eternal associates of Vaikuṇṭha arrive; They have
obtained sārūpya, a type of liberation characterized by
possessing bodily features like the Lord’s.



Verses 84–186 Ordered by Śrī Pārvatī, Śrī Gaṇeśa
describes the glories of Vaikuṇṭha, which is situated
above the innumerable material universes; Hearing that
description, Gopa-kumāra yearns to reside in Vaikuṇṭha,
and Śrī Mahādeva praises and encourages that desire; The
Lord’s eternal associates glorify Śrī Śiva and instruct
Gopa-kumāra; They speak the glories of kīrtana; Gopa-
kumāra arrives in Vraja, as instructed by the eternal
associates.



Fourth Chapter: Vaikuṇṭha – the Spiritual World

Verses 1–19 Śrī Gopa-kumāra wanders in Vraja in an
ecstatic state of consciousness and absorbed in śrī-
nāma-saṅkīrtana; Upon seeing a divine vision of His
worshipable Deity, he faints; The eternal associates of
Śrī Bhagavān transport him to Vaikuṇṭha.



Verses 20–87 A description of the opulence of Vaikuṇṭha;
Śrī Gopa-kumāra sees the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha before his
eyes; Because of this vision, he experiences loving
bewilderment and swoons; The eternal associates bring
Gopa-kumāra back to consciousness; Gopa-kumāra
approaches the Lord, and the Lord orders him to stay in
Vaikuṇṭha.



Verses 88–107 Staying close to the Lord, Śrī Gopa-kumāra
plays the flute; He converses with the eternal
associates of Śrī Vaikuṇṭha.



Verses 108–200 His heart grows restless upon remembering
the mercy of Śrī Madana-gopāla; Śrī Nārada suddenly
arrives; Understanding the heart of Gopa-kumāra, Śrī
Nārada describes the transcendental truth about
Vaikuṇṭha.



Verses 201–235 Śrī Gopa-kumāra asks questions about
worship of the Deity of Śrī Bhagavān, and Śrī Nārada
describes the glory of Deity worship.



Verses 236–249 Understanding Gopa-kumāra’s desire to
directly see His worshipable Lord, Śrī Nārada instructs
him to have darśana of Śrī Rāmacandra.

                              5
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017




Verses 250–274 Gopa-kumāra arrives in Ayodhyā and
Hanumān welcomes him; Gopa-kumāra receives darśana of
Śrī Rāmacandra and glorifies Him; Śrī Rāmacandra
graciously summons Gopa-kumāra and orders him to go to
Dvārakā.




Glossary




Preface to the First Hindi Edition


It brings me great pleasure to publish Part One of the
Second Canto of Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta in the national
language of India [Hindi]. This book has been completed
by the causeless mercy and inspiration of the founder of
the Śrī Gaudiya Vedānta Samiti, ācārya keśarī (the
spiritual guide who is fearless like a lion) nitya-līlā
praviṣṭa oṁ viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti
Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja. It has been published
for his pleasure alone. Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta was
written by Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī, an eternal associate
of Śrī Sacinandana Gaurahari. Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī is
the sovereign monarch of the conclusive truths of
devotional service and is always eager to benefit
others.

Śrī Bṛhad-bhagavatāmṛta is divided in two cantos: Pūrva-
khaṇḍa, or first, and Uttar-khaṇḍa, or last. The name of
the First Canto is Śrī Bhagavat-kṛpā-sāra-nirdhāraṇa
khaṇḍa – Ascertaining the Essence of the Mercy of the
Supreme Lord. The later canto is known as Śrī Goloka-
māhātmya-nirūpaṇa khaṇḍa – Ascertaining the Glories of
Śrī Goloka. The First Canto has already been published,
and we are now publishing Part One of the Second Canto,
which contains four chapters:

(1) Vairāgya – Renunciation

(2) Jñāna – Knowledge

(3) Bhajana – Devotional Service

(4) Vaikuṇṭha – the Spiritual World

Each of the two cantos of this scripture is a separate
history. Our worshipful author has not merely written
two histories. Rather, for facilitating the worship of
the divine couple, Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, he has
thoroughly analyzed Their Lordships’ fundamental reality
and nature.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the essence of all scriptures, such
as the Vedas, Vedānta, Purāṇas, Itihāsas, and so on. By

                              6
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

churning that essence, this book, aptly named Śrī Bṛhad-
bhāgavatāmṛta – the Essential Nectar of the Bhāgavatam –
has become manifest. Throughout this book, all topics
regarding devotional service to Bhagavān have been
presented.

The original discourse of the book between Śrī Jaimini
and Janamejaya is based on a conversation between Śrī
Parīkṣit and Uttarā. After Śrī Parīkṣit had heard
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam from the lips of Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī,
and before the snake-bird Takṣaka arrived, Parīkṣit’s
mother, Śrī Uttarā-devī, said to him, “O my dear son,
please narrate to me, in simple, easy-to-understand
language, the essence of what you have heard from Śrī
Śukadeva Gosvāmī.” Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta begins with
this inquiry.

In this Second Canto, the author examines all the
manifestations and incarnations of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, beginning with Śrī Śālagrāma
Bhagavān and ending with Śrī Nandanandana, the beloved
son of Śrī Nanda Mahārāja. This volume begins with the
history of Gopa-kumāra. Gopa-kumāra receives the gopāla-
mantra from his gurudeva. Due to the influence of this
gopāla-mantra, it becomes possible for him to travel to
all abodes without restriction. First, he takes darśana
of the manifestations of Bhagavān that appear in this
earthly realm, or Bhū-maṇḍala, such as Śrī Śālagrāma
Bhagavān; the Deity manifestation of the Lord who is
ensconced in the palace of the king; and the ancient
Deity of Śrī Jagannāthadeva. He sequentially describes
their progressively greater glories. Then, by the
influence of the chanting of his mantra, he reaches the
planets of Svarga, Mahar, Janas, Tapas, and Satya, where
one by one he has divine vision of the worshipable
manifestations of the Lord who manifest in those abodes.
Thus he also experiences Their transcendental
excellences in succession. Yet Gopa-kumāra does not
experience complete happiness in those places.

Thereafter, he takes darśana of the manifestations of
Bhagavān that are present in the eight coverings of the
universe and arrives in the abode of liberation. In
mukti-loka, the realm of liberation, Gopa-kumāra sees
the manifestation of the brilliance of the Supreme
Person, but still, complete satisfaction eludes him.
After this, in accordance with regulative principles, he
performs saṅkīrtana of the holy name, the most prominent
of the nine processes of bhakti. By the potency of nāma-
saṅkīrtana, he travels first to Vaikuṇṭha, then to
Ayodhyā, and then to Dvārakā-purī. However, because in
those realms the mood of aiśvarya, or awe and reverence
for the Lord, is prominent, he cannot freely associate
with the worshipful manifestations of the Supreme Person
there.

Finally, Gopa-kumāra returns to Vṛndāvana manifest on
earth, where he executes rāgānugā bhakti, spontaneous
devotional service that follows the moods of the eternal
associates of Vraja. By the potency of his practice of
rāgānugā bhakti, he attains Goloka-Vṛndāvana. There, he
obtains his cherished goal—service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the son
of the king of Vraja.


                              7
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

One should not conclude from this history that there is
any difference in the tattva, or fundamental truth, of
the various manifestations of Bhagavān. All
manifestations of the Lord are complete, from Śrī
Śālagrāma Bhagavān to Śrī Nandanandana (Kṛṣṇa, the
darling son of Nanda Mahārāja). From the perspective of
tattva, They are one, yet from the perspective of rasa,
or the sweetness of transcendental relationships, Śrī
Nandanandana is the most excellent.

Śrī Nandanandana is distinct in two ways that make Him
unique among all of the manifestations of Bhagavān.
These are the distinction of His eternal companions and
that of the excellence of rasa.

tāratamyaṁ ca tac-chakti-vyaktya-vyakti-kṛtaṁ bhavet

(Premeya-ratnāvalī 1.21)

Although all of the transcendental forms of Viṣṇu and
Lakṣmī are always equally perfect and complete in all
circumstances, these forms are considered higher and
lower according to the different qualities and
potencies, which they manifest or refrain from
manifesting.

parikara-vaiśiṣṭyena āvirbhāva vaiśiṣṭyam

(Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu)

The unique characteristics of the different avatāras of
the Lord correspond to the character of the devotees who
invoke Their descent.

siddhāntatas tv abhede ’pi śrīśa-kṛṣṇa-svarūpayoḥ

rasenotkṛṣyate kṛṣṇa-rūpam eṣā rasa-sthitiḥ

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu pūrva, Eastern Division (2.59)

Although in siddhānta there is no difference between Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Nārāyaṇa, from the point of view of rasa
the form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is superior. This is the glory of
rasa.

In other words, although from the consideration of
tattva all manifestations of Bhagavān are nondifferent,
nevertheless, in those instances where scriptures
describe His plenary portions and portions of plenary
portions and so on, this book analyzes His different
manifestations from the perspective of the degree of
potency They manifest.

The potency of the Lord also manifests in regard to the
qualification of His associates. For example, a person
may be accomplished in the art of singing in accordance
with the six scriptures, but the manifestation of his
expertise is dependent on the expertise of his musical
ensemble. Accordingly, although each manifestation of
Bhagavān is replete with all of His qualities and is
complete in every way, His potencies manifest in
accordance with the qualification of His associates.

It is not possible to find associates who have more

                              8
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

affection than the companions of Śrī Nandanandana in
Vraja have for Him. It is for this reason that the
Lord’s associates in Vraja are unparalleled. Among them,
the foremost is Śrī Rādhikājī, who resides on the left
side of Śrī Nandanandana. The form of Śrī Nandanandana
is the manifestation of the entire potency of the Lord.
No other form of Bhagavān manifests His potency in all
its completeness. This has been described in the First
Canto of this book.

The second distinctive feature of Śrī Nandanandana is as
follows: In all the places Gopa-kumāra visited, He
tasted the specialities, or excellence, of rasa—the
sweet mellow of loving relationship—with all the
manifestations of Bhagavān who were present in each
place. However, aiśvarya, the mood of opulence, is
generally the prominent feature of all of those
manifestations of the Lord. Therefore, in those
manifestations, the Lord could not transgress the
boundaries of His aiśvarya by embracing Gopa-kumāra and
acting in ways that would enable Gopa-kumāra to relish
his relationship with Him in its entirety. But when
Gopa-kumāra attained the association of Śrī
Nandanandana, each and every one of his desires was
fulfilled. This proves that among all the manifestations
of Bhagavān, Śrī Nandanandana possesses the highest
excellence.

In this Part One of the Second Canto, the author, Śrīla
Sanātana Gosvāmī, has ascertained deep spiritual truths
(tattvas). We request the readers to study and
contemplate these confidential truths with patience and
constancy.

The life history of Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī has been
elaborately described in the preface to the First Canto.
He has personally written this book’s commentary, named
Dig-darśinī, and we have attempted to present a
bhāvānuvāda (translation in essence) of that commentary,
following the book’s particular style. In the
commentary, an objection, known as pūrva-pakśā, is
raised to what has been asserted, and then a resolution
or logical reply to the doubt is presented. The reader
should know that each verse is related to the previous
and following verses. Thus this entire book should be
understood to be an interconnected chain of verses.

We have attempted to keep the language of the book
simple and straightforward for easy comprehension.
Nevertheless, in some places, words with complex
meanings have been used to preserve the accuracy of the
ideas. For the benefit of the readers, easily-
understandable definitions of these words are given in
the glossary.

If our transcendental readers note any errors or
omissions within this book, we request that by dint of
their virtuous nature, they oblige us by overlooking or
correcting its faults. Thus, may they simply accept the
essence of the book.

I pray that faithful persons who are interested in
attaining the highest of all achievements read and
recite this book, and thus advance on the path to that

                              9
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

highest goal. I hereby conclude my preface.

An aspirant to a trace of the mercy of Śrī Guru and
Vaiṣṇavas,

Śrī Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa

The 108th anniversary of worship performed on the
Appearance Day of Śrī Śrī Guru-pāda-padma

Thursday, February 16, 2006

519 Gaurābda




Editor’s Preface


It is our great, good fortune to present to Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja the first
English edition of his translation of Śrīla Sanātana
Gosvāmīpāda’s Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta, with commentary
by Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmīpāda. Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta
is the first, and the foundation, of the famous Gosvāmī
granthas, or literature produced approximately 500 years
ago in Vṛndāvana by the followers of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu. This translation has come about only by
Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s ardent desire.
Whenever he has had time in the course of his traveling,
preaching, and writing, he has affectionately inquired
into the book’s progress and has given valuable guidance
and insights into the profound nature of this
incomparable treatise. It is our prayer that this
translation conveys the beauty and depth of Śrīla
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s realized understanding that
suffuses the Hindi edition.

The particular pūrva-pakśā style of Śrīla Sanātana
Gosvāmīpāda’s writing has already been explained in the
author’s Preface. In pursuance of the mood of this
question-and-answer format, which is expressed in the
Sanskrit with the word nanu and in the Hindi with the
term yadi kaho ki, we have presented the pūrva-pakśā as
a dialogue between the various personalities of this
story.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja has written a
bhāvānuvāda of Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmīpāda’s commentary
that is entitled Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā. Because the Sanskrit
is often very concise, explanatory terms make it more
accessible. Bhāvānuvāda is translated as an ‘expanded
commentary,’ or ‘translation in essence.’

It also bears mention that Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta is
simultaneously both the transcendental story of Śrī
Gopa-kumāra’s attaining the perfection of his heart’s
desire – his loving relationship with Śrī Kṛṣṇa – and a
presentation of fundamental spiritual truths, or
sambandha jñāna. To preserve the accuracy of the
sometimes complex aspects of the book, we have used many
of the original Sanskrit terms along with their

                              10
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

translated meanings. We hope this aids the reader in a
deeper understanding of the subject matter.

Where verses have not been fully referenced, it is
because Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmīpāda did not include their
details. In these cases, we have simply left them as
they are.

The production of Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta has been a
service of many years, and it is impossible to properly
acknowledge all those who have contributed their time
and talents. Out of humility, some have asked that their
names be withheld, but we are indebted to everyone. The
following persons are especially appreciated:

The English translation was done by Śrīpāda B.V.
Viṣṇudaivata Mahārāja. Our editorial consultants were
Śrīpāda B.V. Mādhava Mahārāja, Amala-kṛṣṇa dāsa,
Mādhava-priyā dāsa, Vijaya-kṛṣṇa dāsa, Prema-prayojana
dāsa, and Gaura-prīyā dāsī. English editors were Mañjarī
dāsī, Sarvabhavana dāsa, and Kundalatā dāsī.
Contributing editors were Vaijayantī-māla dāsī, Bhadra
dāsī, and Mādhavendra Purī dāsa. Hindi editors were
Śrīpāda B.V. Viṣṇudaivata Mahārāja, Viṣṇu dāsa, Janakī
dāsī, Akhileśa dāsa, Mukunda Datta dāsa, and Paṇkaja
dāsa. Sanskrit Editors were Śrīpāda B.V. Bhāgavata
Mahārāja, Śrīpāda B.V. Viṣṇudaivata Mahārāja, Giridhārī
dāsa, and Parameśvari dāsa. Proofreading was done by
Śyāmarāṇī dāsī, Vaijayantī-mālā dāsī, Śānti dāsī, Sulatā
dāsī, Bernie, and Vaṁśidhāra dāsa. Jaya-gopalā dāsa
provided technical support. Additional help was given by
Mukunda dāsa. Brajanātha dāsa has consistently supported
and encouraged the publication.

Our art director, designer, and print production
coordinator was Kṛṣṇa-prema dāsa. Layout was done by
Kṛṣṇa-karuṇya dāsa, who was assisted by Jayadeva dāsa
and Ananga-mohan dāsa. The art director was Śyāmarāṇī
dāsī, who was assisted by Premavatī dāsī and Śilpa-kari
ṇi dāsī. Vidhī-bhakti dāsī was a contributor. The cover
painting artist is Sarasvatī dāsī. The back cover is
from the British Library Oriental Office Collection, and
used with permission.

In addition, our translation endeavor has greatly
benefited from the meticulously edited BBT edition of
Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta by Śrī Gopīparanadhāna dāsa.

We hope our readers take transcendental pleasure in Śrī
Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta. If there are mistakes, may they
kindly overlook them. In this Kāratīka month of 2010,
may Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvami Mahārāja mercifully accept
this offering.



Dāsānudāsī,

Mañjarī dāsī

Editorial Coordinator




                              11
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

śrī śrī guru-gaurāṅgau jayataḥ



Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta

Second Canto, Part One



Śrī Goloka-māhātmyam

The Glories of Śrī Goloka

namaḥ śrī-kṛṣṇāya bhagavate śrī-rādhikā-ramaṇāya

“Abandoning any mood of ‘I and mine,’ I offer obeisance
before Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the all-attractive reservoir of
pleasure and the reservoir of limitless opulence, who
brings delight to Śrīmatī Rādhikā.”




First Chapter




Vairāgyam: Renunciation




Verse 1


śrī-janamejaya uvāca

satyaṁ sac-chāstra-vargārtha-sāraḥ saṅgṛhya durlabhaḥ

gūḍhaḥ sva-mātre pitrā me kṛṣṇa-premṇā prakāśitaḥ

śrī-janamejayaḥ uvāca – Śrī Janamejaya said; satyam –
true; sat-śāstra-varga – of the group of scriptures that
promote śuddha-bhakti; artha-sāraḥ – the essential
import; saṅgṛhya – having gathered; durlabhaḥ – rare;
gūḍhaḥ – confidential; sva-mātre – to his mother; pitrā
me – by my father; kṛṣṇa-premṇā – overwhelmed with love
for Kṛṣṇa; prakāśitaḥ – revealed.

Śrī Janamejaya said: O Gurudeva, truly, my father Śrī
Parīkṣit, who was overwhelmed with love for Kṛṣṇa,
gathered the confidential and rare essence of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam and all other scriptures that propound
devotional service to Bhagavān. He narrated this to his
mother, Śrī Uttarā-devī.

The Bhāvānuvāda of Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī’s Dig-darśinī

Commentary (henceforth known as Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā):


                              12
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

Maṅgalācaraṇa

namaḥ oṁ viṣṇupādāya ācārya-siṁha-rūpiṇe

śrī-śrīmad-bhakti-prajñāna-keśava iti nāmine

atimartya-caritrāya svāśritānāṁ pāline

jīva-duḥkhe sadārttāya śrī-nāma-prema-dāyine

First, I offer obeisances at the lotus feet my most
worshipable spiritual master, nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa oṁ
viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja. Although I am inept

in every way, having received a particle of his
causeless mercy, I have translated the original verses
of Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī’s Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta, and
I have also composed a bhāvānuvāda

(translation in essence) of Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta’s
commentary known as Dig-darśinī. Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī,
whose lotus feet are most worshipable, has composed this
Dig-darśinī as an exposition of his own work.
Thereafter, I bow down at the lotus feet of Śrīla
Sanātana Gosvāmī, who is both the author and commentator
of this book, and offer an eager prayer for his
causeless mercy.

This commentary has been composed by the author himself.
Because it describes the intended meanings of the
verses, it is therefore called Dig-darśinī (that which
surveys all directions).

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā Maṅgalācaraṇa

(Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī’s Auspicious Invocation

to his Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā)

śrīmac-caitanya-devāya tasmai bhagavate namaḥ

yad-rūpa-maṇim āśritya citraṁ nṛtyaty ayaṁ jaḍaḥ

I offer obeisances to the Supreme Lord, Śrī Caitanya-
deva. By taking shelter of the jewel of His rūpa
[meaning both His beautiful form and Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī], even a dull person like me can also dance
astonishingly on the dais of the narration of this book.

Considering all the meanings within this book to be
self-evident, the author, overcome with feelings of
great humility says, “Even a dull person like me is able
to dance wonderfully on the stage of the narration of
this book.”

In truth, however, the goddess Sarasvatī can never
tolerate words that denigrate devotion to the Lord
(bhakti), devotees of the Lord (bhaktas), and the Lord,
Śrī Bhagavān. For this reason, through the words of
Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī himself, Sarasvatī is praising
him. Thus, in [Sarasvatī’s] glorification, another
reading of this verse is, “I offer obeisances to
Bhagavān Śrī Caitanya-deva. Having taken shelter of the

                              13
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

jewel of His transcendental form (śrī-rūpa), even a dull
person like me, who had become inert, is dancing in a
wonderful way due to being overwhelmed in the great
bliss of divine love ( prema).”

śrī-kṛṣṇa-karuṇā-sāra-pātrāṇām atra gadyate

sadā-krīḍā-bharānanda-mādhurī-pūritaṁ padam

tasyaiva sarvataḥ śreṣṭhaṁ kaṇṭakoddhāra-pūrvakam

nirūpayitum utkarṣam adhyāyāḥ sapta kalpitāḥ

tatrādye hy uttarā-praśnottara-rūpetihāsitaḥ

vaktuṁ goloka-māhātmyaṁ bhūr loka-mahimocyate

grāmādhikāri-viprasya maṇḍaleśvara-bhū-pateḥ

samrājaś ca hareḥ pūjāty ucca-vaibhava-varṇanaiḥ

ato ’gre tanaye mātuḥ praśnāvataraṇāya hi

parīkṣitasya hṛṣṭasya praśno ’śobhata jaiminau

This Second Canto of Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta describes
the devotees who are the topmost beneficiaries of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s mercy. It also describes their abodes, which are
always brimming with the sweetness of blissful pastimes.
Desiring to present the excellence of those places and
the superiority of those greatest recipients of mercy,
the author, after dispelling all types of obstacles, has
composed seven chapters.

This First Chapter, which begins with answers to
questions posed by Śrī Uttarā-devī, presents the glories
of Bhūloka, the earth, in the course of extolling
Goloka, the ultimate spiritual destination. It describes
the worship of Śrī Hari, first as conducted by a
brāhmaṇa who rules a village; then by a provincial king
(manḍaleśvara), and finally by a sovereign emperor
(rāja-cakravartī). Each performs his worship of Śrī Hari
with greater opulence than the previous person. The
chapter starts with Janamejaya, the son of Parīkṣit,
happily asking a beautiful question to Jaimini in order
to reveal Śrī Uttarā-devī’s questions to her son, Śrī
Parīkṣit.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: [After hearing the account related in
the First Canto of Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta,] the
speaker, Śrī Janamejaya, in order to please his guru,
Śrī Jaimini, applauds the topic that he has just heard
and says, “O master, you have said that my father,
maddened by love for Kṛṣṇa, became controlled by the
affection of his mother and revealed the essence of
scriptures, such as Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, that expound
devotional service to the Supreme Lord, Śrī Bhagavān.
Thus, he disclosed the essential principles of pure
loving devotion. That scriptural essence is very
difficult to understand, even for those who study
numerous scriptures and deeply deliberate on their
purports (tātparya-vicāra).”

In the verse, the term sat-śāstra, or transcendental

                              14
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

scriptures, indicates the collection of scriptures such
as Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam that teach loving devotion to the
Lord.

Janamejaya says, “These books describe devotion to Śrī
Bhagavān and His eternal associates, which is the
process by which the ultimate goal is achieved. That
devotion and the essential means to achieve it – the
beneficial and uncontaminated passages in these
scriptures – are extremely rare. That aggregate of
knowledge, which is not possible to obtain even by
studying countless scriptures, and which is genuinely
incomprehensible, despite deliberating on the
commentaries of those scriptures – that unobtainable and
difficult-to-understand body of knowledge – was gleaned
by my father, Śrī Parīkṣit. Having done so, he
unequivocally established that the harmonious intention
of all scriptures is to propound bhakti. He narrated
this essence of all the devotional scriptures to his
mother, Śrī Uttarā-devī. Although these topics are
highly confidential, it is true that nevertheless, my
father revealed them. The cause of this revelation of
truth is the love that my father, Śrī Parīkṣit, and his
mother, Śrī Uttarā-devī, cherished for Śrī Kṛṣṇa.”



Verse 2

śrīmad-bhāgavatāmbhodhi-pīyūṣam idam āpiban

na tṛpyāmi muni-śreṣṭha tvan-mukhāmbhoja-vāsitam

śrīmat-bhāgavata – of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam; ambhaḥ-dhi –
the ocean; pīyūṣam – nectar; idam – this; āpiban –
heartily drinking; na tṛpyāmi – I am not satisfied;
muni-śreṣṭha – O topmost sage; tvat – your; mukha-
ambhaḥ-ja – by the fragrant lotus of your mouth; vāsitam
– scented.

O topmost sage, despite heartily drinking the nectar of
this great ocean of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, which is scented
with the fragrance of your lotus mouth, I am still not
satiated.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The first part of this book presents
narrations that describe the recipients of the mercy of
the Lord. Śrī Janamejaya was very pleased to hear from
his guru, Śrī Jaiminī, the essence of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
and the bhakti-śāstras, other scriptures that describe
devotion. Still, desiring to hear more, he speaks this
verse, beginning with śrīmad-bhāgavatāmbhodhi, to his
guru. Here, the adjective śrīmat, meaning ‘beautiful,’
precedes the word bhāgavat, signifying that the
scriptures about the Supreme Lord, Bhagavān, are full of
all varieties of beauty and treasures. The word
ambhodhi, meaning ‘ocean,’ indicates that Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam is like an ocean, as each word of the
Bhāgavatam can have myriad meanings.

Alternatively, ambhodhi indicates that as the Milk
Ocean, due to its unlimited and fathomless glories, is
superior to all other oceans, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the
best among all scriptures (śāstras). Just as the nectar

                              15
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

of immortality, known as amṛta, springs forth from of
the Milk Ocean (kṣīra-sāgara), so this narration, which
is endowed with meanings that are the sweetest essence
of nectar and which ascertains what is the essence of
the Lord’s mercy, emanates from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

Śrī Janamejaya says, “Despite fully drinking this
ambrosia, I am not satiated, and in fact, I am eager to
drink more and more. Why is this so? This bhāgavatāmṛta
(the nectar of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam) is extremely tasteful
because it is laden with the fragrance of the lotus-like
mouth of a topmost devotee like you. It is for this
reason that I am not satisfied although I have drunk it
repeatedly.”



Verse 3

tan-mātā-putrayor vidvan saṁvādaḥ kathyatāṁ tayoḥ

sudhā-sāramayo ’nyo ’pi kṛṣṇa-pādābja-lubdhayoḥ

tat – therefore; mātā-putrayoḥ – of the mother and son;
vidvan – O learned one; saṁvādaḥ – conversation;
kathyatām – please narrate; tayoḥ – of those two; sudhā
– of nectarean honey; sāra-mayaḥ – imbued with the
essence; anyaḥ api – still more; kṛṣṇa – of Śrī Kṛṣṇa;
pāda-abja – for the lotus feet; lubdhayoḥ – who were
greedy.

Therefore, O best of sages, please narrate more of the
nectarean conversation of both mother and son, who were
greedy for the honey of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Janamejaya says, “Mother and son
were greedy for the honey of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet.
Please narrate their nectarean conversation, which is
filled with many sweet stories and sub-stories. Why?
Because you are the person most conversant with the
topic discussed by these rasika devotees, who are
skilled in relishing the transcendental mellows of
loving relationship with the Lord.”



Verse 4

śrī-jaiminir uvāca

naitat sva-śaktito rājan vaktuṁ jñātuṁ ca śakyate

sarva-jñānaṁ ca durjñeyaṁ brahmānubhāvinām api

śrī-jaiminiḥ uvāca – Śrī Jaimini said; na – not; etat –
this; sva-śaktitaḥ – by one’s own power; rājan – O king;
vaktum – to describe; jñātum – to understand; ca – also;
śakyate – is able; sarva-jñānām – for the omniscient; ca
– also; durjñeyam – difficult to comprehend; brahma-
anubhāvinām – for Brahman realized persons; api – even.

Śrī Jaimini said: O King, it is not possible to describe
or understand that conversation by one’s own power. Even
the crest jewels of omniscient personalities and even

                              16
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

those who have realized Brahman find it hard to
comprehend.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: No one is capable of grasping this
conversation by the power of mind and words. To convey
this idea, Śrī Jaiminī speaks this verse beginning with
na. He says, “This narration of the glories of Goloka (
goloka-māhātmya) is the essence of the nectarean ocean
of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. It is incomprehensible even for
perfected beings who are trikāla-jña – who know past,
present, and future – and even for liberated souls who
have realized Brahman.” This statement indicates the
rarity of knowledge about the glories of Śrī Bhagavān
and His eternal associates.



Verse 5

kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasāmbhodheḥ prasādād bādarāyaṇeḥ

parīkṣid-uttarā-pārśve niviṣṭo ’śrauṣam añjasā

kṛṣṇa – to Śrī Kṛṣṇa; bhakti-rasa – of the mellows of
devotion; ambhodheḥ – of the ocean; prasādāt – by the
mercy; bādarāyaṇeḥ – of Vyāsa’s son, Śrī Śukadeva;
parīkṣit – Śrī Parīkṣit; uttarā – Uttarā-devī; pārśve –
beside; niviṣṭaḥ – sitting; aśrauṣam – I listened;
añjasā – with one-pointed attention.

By the mercy of Śrī Śukadeva, who is an ocean of the
nectar of devotion for Śrī Kṛṣṇa, I sat near Śrī Uttarā-
devī and Śrī Parīkṣit and listened to their conversation
with one-pointed attention.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Janamejaya might raise the
question, “Previously, how were you able to speak this
great narration [Part One of Bṛhad-bhāgavatamṛta]?” For
this reason, Śrī Jaimini says, “By the mercy of Śrī
Śukadeva, I received the good fortune of sitting near
Parīkṣit and Uttarā, and I directly heard their dialogue
with unwavering attention. Even though I have realized
Brahman and am omniscient (sarvajña), I am still
incapable of knowing or narrating this discussion on my
own strength. One cannot know the truth of the
Personality of Godhead (bhagavat-tattva) without the
mercy of a great soul.”

Despite the fact that Śrī Jaimini feels he is
inadequate, he alone is the most competent person to
narrate to Janamejaya this bhāgavatāmṛta, nectar of
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, which takes the form of this
conversation between Uttarā and Parīkṣit. This is
because by Śrī Śukadeva’s mercy, Śrī Jaimini sat near
Uttarā and Parīkṣit. He spoke what he had directly heard
and also realized. This was possible only by the mercy
of the great devotee, Śrī Śukadeva. This indicates that
when a subject is directly experienced by the speaker,
the listener understands it to a greater degree than
when the speaker has only understood it on the strength
of knowledge ( jñāna-śakti). A directly realized speaker
is the most effective.



                              17
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


Verse 6

paraṁ gopyam api snigdhe śiṣye vācyam iti śrutiḥ

tac chrūyatāṁ mahā-bhāga goloka-mahimādhunā

param gopyam – most confidential; api – although;
snigdhe śiṣye – to an affectionate disciple; vācyam –
can be spoken; iti – thus; śrutiḥ – the Vedas; tat –
that; śrūyatām – just hear; mahā-bhāga – O most
fortunate one; goloka-mahimā – the glory of Goloka;
adhunā – now.

O most fortunate one, it is the conclusion of the Vedas
that the spiritual master can describe to an
affectionate disciple even the most confidential truth.
Therefore, now you also should hear the glories of this
Goloka.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: “Although this is the most
confidential subject matter, still, I shall reveal it to
you.” With such intention, Śrī Jaimini speaks this verse
beginning with param. In the phrase, “O mahā-bhāga!” the
adjective mahā-bhāga, meaning ‘most fortunate,’
indicates that Janamejaya is a fit candidate to hear
these confidential topics. Śrī Jaimini says, “In
particular, you have already heard from me about the
glories of the Lord’s dearmost devotees ( priyatama-
jana). Now, hear from me about the glories of their
abode, Śrī Goloka. Since the glories of Goloka amount to
nothing less than the glories of Śrī Bhagavān and His
most exalted devotees, this narration is indeed like
nectar extracted from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.”



Verse 7

śrī-kṛṣṇa-karuṇā-sāra-pātra-nirdhāra-sat-kathām

śrutvābhūt paramānanda-pūrṇā tava pitāmahī

śrī-kṛṣṇa-karuṇā – of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s mercy; sāra – for
tasting the essence; pātra – the bonafide recipient;
nirdhāra – which ascertains; sat-kathām – sublime
history; śrutvā – having heard; abhūt – she became;
parama-ānanda – with the highest pleasure; pūrṇā –
filled; tava – your; pitāmahī – paternal grandmother.

When your grandmother, Śrī Uttarā-devī, heard the
excellent story about the quest to ascertain the topmost
recipients of the essence of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s mercy, she
experienced supreme pleasure.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Jaimini says, “The recipient of
the essence of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s mercy means the most exalted
recipient of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s mercy. Your grandmother, Śrī
Uttarā-devī, became overjoyed upon hearing the super-
excellent story about determining the identity of those
recipients of mercy.”




                              18
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

Verses 8–9

tādṛg-bhakti-viśeṣasya gopī-kānta-padābjayoḥ

śrotuṁ phala-viśeṣaṁ tad-bhoga-sthānaṁ ca sattamam

vaikuṇṭhād api manvānā vimṛśantī hṛdi svayam

tac cānākalayantī sā papraccha śrī-parīkṣitam

tādṛk – this kind; bhakti-viśeṣasya – of unique
devotion; gopī-kānta – for the beloved of the gopīs;
pada-abjayoḥ – to the lotus feet; śrotum – to hear;
phala-viśeṣam – special fruit; tat – of that; bhoga-
sthānam – abode of enjoyment; ca – and; sattamam –
transcendental; vaikuṇṭhāt – to Vaikuṇṭha; api – even;
manvānā – thinking; vimṛśantī – analyzing; hṛdi – in her
heart; svayam – herself; tat – that; ca – and;
anākalayantī – unable to ascertain; sā– she; papraccha –
inquired; śrī-parīkṣitam – from her son Śrī Parīkṣit.

Śrī Uttarā-devī had heard that the gopīs’ uncommon and
indescribable devotion for the lotus feet of Śrī
Gopīkānta, the Lord who is their beloved, yields a
distinctly special fruit: an abode of enjoyment even
superior to Vaikuṇṭha. Although she tried to analyze
this by her intelligence, she could not ascertain why
this abode is the best of all. She thus inquired from
her son, Śrī Parīkṣit.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Jaiminī says, “Your grandmother,
Śrī Uttarā-devī, was eager to hear about the specific
result of performing extraordinary, ineffable bhakti
(devotional service) to the lotus feet of Śrī Gopīkānta.
Considering the place where that particular fruit is
enjoyed (bhoga-sthāna) to certainly be far superior to
Śrī Vaikuṇṭha, she was eager to hear the glories of that
pleasure ground. ‘What kind of place is it?’ Thinking
this, your grandmother was unable to determine the
nature of that abode, despite thorough investigation and
reflection. She therefore inquired from her son, Śrī
Parīkṣit, as follows.”



Verses 10–11

śrīmad-uttarovāca

kāmināṁ puṇya-kartṛṇāṁ trai-lokyaṁ gṛhiṇāṁ padam

agṛhāṇāṁ ca tasyordhvaṁ sthitaṁ loka-catuṣṭayam

bhogānte muhur āvṛttim ete sarve prayānti hi

mahar-ādi-gatāḥ kecin mucyante brahmaṇā saha

śrīmad-uttarā uvāca – Śrī Uttarā-devī said; kāminām –
for those who have desire; puṇya-kartṛṇām – who perform
pious deeds; trai-lokyam –the three worlds; gṛhiṇām –
for householders; padam – the abode; agṛhāṇām – for the
non-householders; ca – also; tasya – that; ūrdhvam –
above; sthitam – situated; loka-catuṣṭayam – four
planetary systems; bhoga-ante – at the end of enjoyment;

                              19
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

muhuḥ – again; āvṛttim – return; ete – they; sarve –
all; prayānti – they attain; hi – certainly; mahaḥ-ādi –
the higher planets such as Maharloka; gatāḥ – having
attained; kecit – some; mucyante – are liberated;
brahmaṇā – Śrī Brahmā; saha – along with.

Śrī Uttarā-devī said: The three planetary systems: Bhū,
Bhuvar, and Svar, are the abodes of enjoyment of
householders who engage in pious activities with a
desire to enjoy material results. Above these realms are
the four planetary systems: Mahar, Janas, Tapas, and
Satya, which are the abodes obtained by non-
householders, namely brahmacārīs, or celibate students;
vānaprasthis, or those who have left household life for
spiritual advancement; and yatis, or renunciants.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Uttarā-devī says, “Surely there
must be a super-excellent abode for those who possess
topmost love for the lotus feet of Śrī Gopīnātha. This
abode must be superior to and more wonderful than all
other destinations, including the realms obtained by all
those who are devoted to fruitive activities (karma).”
Desiring to inquire about this abode, Śrī Uttarā
mentions many other destinations attainable by other
types of practitioners (sādhakas).

In the first two-and-half verses, she describes the
destinations reached by persons attached to fruitive
activities, depending on whether the practitioners are
renounced or not renounced. The word puṇya-karma means
‘auspicious activities such as regular, obligatory
duties (nitya) and occasional duties (naimittika).’
Householders who engage in these fruitive activities, or
kāmya-karma, reach the three planetary systems –
Bhūloka, Bhuvarloka, and Svargaloka – the places for
their enjoyment. What type of fruitive workers (karmīs)
obtain these three abodes?

Śrī Uttarā explains, “Those three realms are obtained by
persons who resolve to engage in pious activities in
order to achieve various results and by those who want
to enjoy the fruits of their work. Those householders
who are not motivated by desires for fruitive results,
and who are absorbed only in executing their particular
occupational duties, or sva-dharma, reach realms such as
Maharloka, which are situated above these three
planetary systems. There, they are progressively
liberated through the purification of their
consciousness (citta).”

This is corroborated by Śrī Rudra in the Fourth Canto of
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (4.24.29):

sva-dharma-niṣṭhaḥ śata-janmabhiḥ pumān

viriñcatām eti tataḥ paraṁ hi mām

avyākṛtaṁ bhāgavato ’tha vaiṣṇavaṁ

padaṁ yathāhaṁ vibudhāḥ kalātyaye

A person obtains the position of Brahmā after performing
his occupational duties for one hundred births. Then
after the great cosmic dissolution (mahā-pralaya),

                              20
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

Brahmā and all of us are liberated upon reaching
Vaikuṇṭha, the eternal, unchanging abode.

Non-householders, namely, lifelong celibates known as
naiṣṭhika brahmacārīs; those in the retired order of
life, or vānaprasthīs; and renunciants, or sannyāsīs,
attain the abodes named Mahar, Janas, Tapas, and Satya,
which are located above the three planetary systems,
Bhū, Bhuvar, and Svarga.

In the Second Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.6.20), Śrī
Śukadeva states:

pādās trayo bahiś cāsann aprajānāṁ ya āśramāḥ

antas tri-lokyās tv aparo gṛha-medho ’bṛhad-vrataḥ

Naiṣṭhika brahmacārīs, vānaprasthīs, and sannyāsīs do
not produce any progeny. The destination, or abode of
enjoyment, attained by them is situated above these
three worlds. Abṛhad-vrata, means ‘devoid of the great
vow of celibacy.’ So these abṛhad-vrata householders,
who are absorbed in sex life, stay within the three
planetary systems.

Among such persons, those who are materially motivated
take repeated birth. Those who are desireless, or
niṣkāma, and devoted to their occupational duties,
achieve liberation after enjoying sense pleasures. Among
them, some yogīs, whose renunciation is not complete and
who are attached to fruitive activities, experience
enjoyment in Maharloka and beyond. They are then
liberated along with Brahmā at the time of the cosmic
dissolution (mahā-pralaya). Others, by their own desire,
progressively, in stages, become liberated as they pass
through the sun line, known as the arcir-mārga. The two-
and-a-half verses beginning with bhogānte explain this
fact.

Those who engage in fruitive pious activities enjoy in
the heavenly planets and then repeatedly take birth in
Bhārata-varṣa. This is stated in Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā
(9.20–21):

trai-vidyā māṁ soma-pāḥ pūta-pāpā

yajñair iṣṭvā svar-gatiṁ prārthayante

te puṇyam āsādya surendra-lokam

aśnanti divyān divi deva-bhogān

te taṁ bhuktvā svarga-lokaṁ viśālaṁ

kṣīṇe puṇye martya-lokaṁ viśanti

evaṁ trayī-dharmam anuprapannā

gatāgataṁ kāma-kāmā labhante

Those who are engaged in fruitive activities as
described in the three Vedas worship Me by performing
sacrifice (yajña). After drinking the remnant of the
sacrifice, soma-rasa, they become free from sins and

                              21
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

pray for entry into heaven (Svarga). Then, when their
pious merit has become depleted after enjoying the
heavenly pleasures of Svarga, they fall to earth. In
this way, people engaged in the fruitive activities
described in the three Vedas repeatedly transmigrate in
this material world.

Śrī Bhagavān also states in Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā (8.16):

ā-brahma-bhuvanāl lokāḥ punar āvartino ’rjuna

O Arjuna, one is compelled to repeatedly return from all
the planets in this universe, even up to Brahmaloka
(Satyaloka).

In the phrase mahar-(loka)-ādi, the word ādi indicates
the Janas, Tapas, and Satya planetary systems. Kecit,
meaning ‘some of them,’ refers to those persons who are
desireless, who are engaged in their occupational
duties, and who are qualified for the position of
Brahmā. If they maintain such qualification until Brahmā
is liberated, then they are liberated along with him.
Therefore, it has been said:

brahmaṇā saha te sarve samprāpte pratisañcare

parasyānte kṛtātmānaḥ praviśanti paraṁ padam

When their consciousness is cleansed, all of them obtain
the topmost abode along with Brahmā at the time of the
great annihilation at the end of Brahmā’s lifespan.



Verse 12

kecit krameṇa mucyante bhogān bhuktvārcir ādiṣu

labhante yatayaḥ sadyo muktiṁ jñāna-parā hi ye

kecit – some; krameṇa – gradually; mucyante – become
liberated; bhogān – sense pleasures; bhuktvā – having
enjoyed; arciḥ-ādiṣu – in planets on the path to the
sun; labhante – attain; yatayaḥ – renounced ascetics;
sadyaḥ – at once; muktim – liberation; jñāna-parāḥ –
devoted to the pursuit of knowledge; hi – indeed; ye –
who.

Those yogīs who adhere to specific disciplines mentioned
in the Vedas, are guided to pathways such as arcir-
mārga, the line of the sun, by the presiding demigods of
those paths. After enjoying all the pleasures of those
places, they progressively become liberated. Fully
renounced ascetics, devoted to the pursuit of spiritual
knowledge, attain liberation instantaneously at the time
of death.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The word kecit in this verse refers to
yogīs who engage in activities mentioned in Vedas. Arci
refers to the demigod who is the presiding Deity of
fire, agni-abhimānī-devatā. The word ādi refers to
planets in the Śiśumāra circle, or the solar system.

In the Second Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.2.23–31),

                              22
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt              5/5/2017

Śrī Śukadeva states:

yogeśvarāṇāṁ gatim āhur antar-

bahis-tri-lokyāḥ pavanāntar-ātmanām

na karmabhis tāṁ gatim āpnuvanti

vidyā-tapo-yoga-samādhi-bhājām

vaiśvānaraṁ yāti vihāyasā gataḥ

suṣumṇayā brahma-pathena śociṣā

vidhūta-kalko ’tha harer udastāt

prayāti cakraṁ nṛpa śaiśumāram

tad viśva-nābhiṁ tv ativartya viṣṇor

aṇīyasā virajenātmanaikaḥ

namaskṛtaṁ brahma-vidām upaiti

kalpāyuṣo yad vibudhā ramante

atho anantasya mukhānalena

dandahyamānaṁ sa nirīkṣya viśvam

niryāti siddheśvara-juṣṭa-dhiṣṇyaṁ

yad dvai-parārdhyaṁ tad u pārameṣṭhyam

na yatra śoko na jarā na mṛtyur

nārttir na codvega ṛte kutaścit

yac cit tato ’daḥ kṛpayānidaṁ-vidāṁ

duranta-duḥkha-prabhavānudarśanāt

tato viśeṣaṁ pratipadya nirbhayas

tenātmanāpo ’nala-mūrtir atvaran

jyotirmayo vāyum upetya kāle

vāyv-ātmanā khaṁ bṛhad ātma-liṅgam

ghrāṇena gandhaṁ rasanena vai rasaṁ

rūpaṁ ca dṛṣṭyā śvasanaṁ tvacaiva

śrotreṇa copetya nabho-guṇatvaṁ

prāṇena cākūtim upaiti yogī

sa bhūta-sūkṣmendriya-sannikarṣaṁ

manomayaṁ devamayaṁ vikāryam

saṁsādya gatyā saha tena yāti


                              23
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

vijñāna-tattvaṁ guṇa-sannirodham

tenātmanātmānam upaiti śāntam

ānandam ānandamayo ’vasāne

etāṁ gatiṁ bhāgavatīṁ gato yaḥ

sa vai punar neha viṣajjate ’ṅga

“Unlike the movements of the karmīs, or those who work
for material results, the movements of mystics, or
yogīs, are unrestricted. Because their bodies are
subtler than air, these yogīs can enter and leave any
abode within the three planetary systems at will. When
they give up their material bodies at death, by the
power of the eightfold path called aṣṭāṅga-yoga, they
reach the presiding demigod of fire, through the medium
of the luminous suṣumnā-nāḍī, or the Milky Way, the
aerial path of Brahman (brahma-patha). Thereafter,
cleansed of all contamination, they attain Śrī Hari’s
luminous Śiśumāra circle of planets, or the zodiac.

“Aided by their purified subtle bodies, they cross over
that circle of Viṣṇu, which is like the navel of the
universe, and reach the planet of Maharloka, which is
worshipable even by those who have realized Brahman.
This place is the residence of divine sages such as
Bhṛgu, whose lifespan equals a day of Brahmā (one
kalpa).

“Sometimes, out of wonder or inquisitiveness, the yogīs
desire to continue residing there until the end of the
kalpa. However, at the end of a kalpa, the three worlds
are consumed by flames emanating from the mouth of
Ananta-deva, and Maharloka also becomes hot. The
transcendentalists then go to Satyaloka, which is
situated beyond Maharloka and which remains intact for
two parārdhas, the duration of Brahmā’s life. Airplanes
are waiting there, ready to serve those great perfected
souls. With the exception of mental distress, this place
is free from all suffering, including sorrow, old age,
death, disease, and anxiety.”

It may be asked what type of mental distress they
experience. In reply, it is said, “ ‘Alas! How the
residents of the three worlds suffer due to their
ignorance of bhāgavata-dharma, the path of devotional
service to Bhagavān, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.’ Although this sorrow of the perfected souls
stems from compassion, still it torments their
conscience.

“After the yogīs reach Satyaloka, they fearlessly
dissolve their subtle body in the element earth and then
steadily penetrate the seven layers of the universe.
From the layer made of earth, they reach the layer of
water. From there, they reach the layer of fire. Then
acquiring a fiery body made of light, they reach the
layer of air. From there, in due time, they reach the
layer of ether (ākāśa, or sky), which enables one to
perceive the unlimited nature of Brahman.

“While penetrating the gross layers, the yogis’

                              24
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

knowledge acquiring senses ( jñāna-indriya) also merge
into their subtle, causal source. The sense of smell
merges into the causality of smell ( gandha-tanmātra);
the sense of taste merges into the causality of taste
(rasa-tanmātra); the sense of vision merges into the
causality of form (rūpa-tanmātra); the sense of touch
merges into the causality of touch (sparśa-tanmātra),
and the sense of hearing merges into the causality of
sound (śabda-tanmātra). Furthermore, the five working
senses (karma-indriya) merge into their respective
active potencies, or kriyā-śakti, which is their subtle
source. Thus each sense attains its respective subtle
form.

“In this manner, the yogīs penetrate the coverings of
five gross and five subtle elements and enter into the
layer of ego (ahaṅkāra). There, they merge their
elements, which are in their subtle state, into the
layer of ego in the mode of ignorance; their senses into
the layer of ego in the mode of passion; and their minds
and the presiding deities of the mind and senses into
the layer of ego in the mode of goodness. After this,
the yogīs enter into mahat-tattva, the total material
energy layer, by merging their ego into that. Finally,
from mahat-tattva, they reach the layer of material
nature, or prakṛti, where all the modes of material
nature are in a state of equilibrium. Parīkṣit! At the
time of the great cosmic dissolution, even the layer of
prakṛti, or material nature, is dissolved. The yogīs
then acquire blissful forms free from of all coverings,
and in that condition they attain the Supreme Lord, the
embodiment of peaceful neutrality and bliss. Anyone
reaching this spiritual destination never again returns
to this material existence.”

Those who attain Satyaloka, or Brahmaloka, achieve three
different destinations, relative to the three varieties
of spiritual practices they adopted to attain it:

Those reaching Satyaloka by performing pious activities
obtain various destinations in accordance with the
gradation of their puṇya, or pious merit. The
practitioners who reach there by worshiping
Hiraṇyagarbha, the plenary expansion of Garbhodakaśāyī
Viṣṇu, become liberated when Brahmā attains liberation.

Fortunate souls who reach there by worshiping Bhagavān,
the Supreme Lord Nārāyaṇa, cross the coverings of the
material creation and at will enter Vaikuṇṭha. Various
types of sense enjoyment are also available while
penetrating the coverings of the material cosmos. They
relish bhoga-samaṣṭi, the aggragate of sensual
pleasures; in other words, they receive those pleasures
that on earth are experienced through taste, smell,
touch, sound, and so on. Having enjoyed this happiness,
they finally go to Vaiṣṇava-loka, the abode of devotees,
which is none other than Vaikuṇṭha.

The paramahaṁsas who are devoted to the pursuit of
knowledge achieve liberation, or mukti, at the time of
death.




                              25
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

Verse 13

bhaktā bhagavato ye tu sa-kāmāḥ svecchayākhilān

bhuñjānāḥ sukha-bhogāṁs te viśuddhā yānti tat-padam

bhaktāḥ – the devotees; bhagavataḥ – of Bhagavān; ye –
who; tu – indeed; sa-kāmāḥ – with desires; sva-icchayā –
by their own will; akhilān – all; bhuñjānāḥ – enjoying;
sukha-bhogān – pleasures; te – they; viśuddhāḥ –
purified; yānti – attain; tat-padam – His abode.

Sakāma devotees, or those who desire the fruit of their
action, worship the Lord with varieties of desires.
Although they enjoy all the pleasures of those desires,
they are purified by the power of bhakti and, even
during this period of material enjoyment, they are not
controlled by their activities. At the end of this
enjoyment, they enter the abode of Bhagavān.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Now, in two verses, beginning here
with bhakti, Śrī Uttarā describes the different
destinations attained by the Supreme Lord’s devotees
based on whether they pursue devotional service with
desire or free from desire.

She says, “Sakāma devotees worship Bhagavān with a
desire for sense enjoyment.” However, in the verse, the
term sva-icchayā, meaning ‘by their own will,’ indicates
that even these devotees are not controlled by fruitive
action. The word akhilān, meaning ‘entire,’ refers to
all sensual enjoyments that are available in the three
worlds –

Bhūr, Bhuvar, and Svar – as well as in Maharloka, realms
such as Arciloka, and Śvetadvīpa or the Ramāpriya
Vaikuṇṭha of this material universe. The prefix sukha,
meaning ‘happiness,’ used as an adjective before the
word bhoga, or ‘sense perception,’ implies that for
Bhagavān’s sakāma devotees, whatever suffering or sorrow
that is normally part of the sensual pleasures of the
three worlds is removed; they do not experience the
suffering that is inherent in those related sense
objects. The verb bhuñjānā, meaning ‘indulging,’ is in
the present tense, which implies that the sakāma
devotees remain pure even while they are gratifying
their senses.

Thus, she says, “By the power of devotion to Bhagavān,
they completely give up that desire in the course of
their enjoyment, and go to the Supreme Lord’s abode.”



Verse 14

vaikuṇṭhaṁ durlabhaṁ muktaiḥ sāndrānanda-cid-ātmakam

niskāmā ye tu tad-bhaktā labhante sadya eva tat

vaikuṇṭham – Vaikuṇṭha; durlabham – rarely achieved;
muktaiḥ – by the liberated souls; sāndra-ānanda –
intense bliss; cit – of cognizance; ātmakam – which is
of the nature; niṣkāmāḥ – who are free from material

                              26
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

desires; ye – they who; tu – certainly; tat-bhaktāḥ –
His devotees; labhante – attain; sadyaḥ – instantly; eva
– indeed; tat – that (abode).

Devotees who worship the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
giving up all material desires, are called niṣkāma-
bhaktas. They are promoted to Vaikuṇṭha immediately
after death. This abode, which is made of the
concentrated essence of happiness and of the nature of
consciousness, is rarely achieved even by liberated
souls.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: In this verse, the word tat indicates
Vaikuṇṭha. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.2.17–18), Śrī
Śukadeva Gosvāmī briefly describes its characteristics:

na yatra kālo ’nimiṣāṁ paraḥ prabhuḥ

kuto nu devā jagatāṁ ya īśire

na yatra sattvaṁ na rajas tamaś ca

na vai vikāro na mahān pradhānam

paraṁ padaṁ vaiṣṇavam āmananti tad

yan neti netīty atad utsisṛkṣavaḥ

visṛjya daurātmyam ananya-sauhṛdā

hṛdopaguhyārha-padaṁ pade pade

Even time personified, the master of all the demigods,
is incapable of exercising his control in Vaikuṇṭha.
How, then, can the power of ordinary demigods like
Indra, whose rule is limited to the material world,
extend there? The total material energy, mahat-tattva,
and material nature, prakṛti, cannot exert their
influence in Vaikuṇṭha because it is free from the
transformations of the three material modes: goodness,
passion, and ignorance.

Persons eligible for Vaikuṇṭha unceasingly cast off
attachment and identification with the gross body and
subtle mind through the process of gradual elimination
of the non-essential (neti neti). In a mood of absolute
affection, they permanently enthrone Śrī Viṣṇu’s
unparalleled lotus feet in their hearts and glorify His
topmost abode.

Furthermore, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.9.9–10) states:

tasmai sva-lokaṁ bhagavān sabhājitaḥ

sandarśayām āsa paraṁ na yat-param

vyapeta-saṅkleśa-vimoha-sādhvasaṁ

sva-dṛṣṭavadbhir puruṣair abhiṣṭutam

pravartate yatra rajas tamas tayoḥ

sattvaṁ ca miśraṁ na ca kāla-vikramaḥ


                              27
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

na yatra māyā kim utāpare harer

anuvratā yatra surāsurārcitāḥ

At that time, Śrī Bhagavān, being pleased with Brahmā’s
penance, showed him His abode. Vaikuṇṭha is devoid of
all distress (kleśa) and is free from illusion or fear
generated by that distress. No place is superior to that
abode, and pious, self-realized souls always desire to
go there. It is devoid of material passion and
ignorance, and even of material goodness, which is mixed
with passion and ignorance. Only pure goodness is
present, and there is no effect of the force of time.
What to speak of anger, envy, and so forth, even Māyā,
the illusory potency, the root cause of material
happiness and sorrow, does not exist there. It is the
permanent residence of Bhagavān’s eternal associates,
who are worshiped by both demigods and demons.

The Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.28.14–15)
states:

iti sañcintya bhagavān mahā-kāruṇiko hariḥ

darśayām āsa lokaṁ svaṁ gopānāṁ tamasaḥ param

satyaṁ jñānam anantaṁ yad brahma-jyotiḥ sanātanam

yad dhi paśyanti munayo guṇāpāye samāhitāḥ

After some deliberation, the most merciful and supremely
powerful Śrī Kṛṣṇa revealed to the cowherd men His
Vaikuṇṭha abode, which is fully spiritual in nature and
beyond material existence. It is purely conscious
(cinmaya), unlimited (ananta), absolute reality (satya),
self-effulgent (svaprakāśita), eternal (nitya), and the
very embodiment of transcendence (brahma-svarūpa). Sages
who have transcended the modes of material nature become
competent to perceive that abode in their perfect
trance, or samādhi.

That Brahman, the Absolute Truth, manifests as
Vaikuṇṭha. It does this through the specific function of
the Lord’s internal potency (svarūpa-śakti) and without
transgressing the real nature of Brahman. The phrase
beginning with satyam (in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.28.15)
specifically refers to the supramundane abode of
Vaikuṇṭha. It is the abode of Parabrahman, the Supreme
Absolute Truth, and therefore, everything manifests
there in its most essential, absolute form.

It may be asked, “What is the nature of that place?”

In reply, Śrī Uttarā says, “That place is difficult for
even liberated souls to attain.” This statement asserts
that Śrī Bhagavān’s abode, which is the ultimate
destination for His devotees, is superior to the abode
obtained by those desiring liberation.

“What is the nature of the superlative excellences of
that sacred abode?”

Śrī Uttarā responds with the phrase beginning with
sāndra. She says, “That abode is suffused with condensed

                              28
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

bliss and transcendental knowledge, and it embodies
Absolute Reality, or Brahman. On the other hand, the
happiness obtained by liberated persons is quite
insignificant.” This last point will be explained later.
The word tad-bhakta in the original verse means that
only the Lord’s devotees can achieve an abode such as
Vaikuṇṭha.



Verse 15

tatra śrī-kṛṣṇa-pādābja-sākṣāt-sevā-sukhaṁ sadā

bahudhānubhavantas te ramante dhik-kṛtāmṛtam

tatra – there; śrī-kṛṣṇa-pādābja – of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus
feet; sākṣāt – direct; sevā – service; sukham –
happiness; sadā – always; bahudhā – in many ways;
anubhavantaḥ – experiencing; te – they; ramante –
delight in; dhik-kṛta – reproaching; amṛtam – (the bliss
of) immortality.

Those devotees in Vaikuṇṭha always experience the
happiness of directly serving Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet in
many ways, and they are forever absorbed in
participating in His variegated pastimes. In comparison
to this happiness derived from service, the happiness of
liberation is insignificant.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: “What type of concentrated happiness
is available in Vaikuṇṭha?” To explain this briefly, Śrī
Uttarā speaks this verse beginning with tatra.

She says, “The devotees in Vaikuṇṭha always directly or
indirectly experience varieties of happiness through
service to Śrī Bhagavān.” The word sākṣāt, or directly,
means that they always perform pastimes with Him in
Vaikuṇṭha and they always experience the happiness of
this service. This subject matter will be further
elaborated upon in the description of Vaikuṇṭha. What is
the nature of that happiness? Śrī Uttarā says, “The
happiness of Vaikuṇṭha is infused with the utmost
intense ecstasy. In comparison, the happiness of
liberation is insignificant.”



Verse 16

jñāna-bhaktās tu teṣv eke śuddha-bhaktāḥ pare ’pare

prema-bhaktāḥ pare prema-parāḥ premāturāḥ pare

jñāna – in knowledge (of the Lord’s supremacy); bhaktāḥ
– devotees; tu – indeed; teṣu – amongst them; eke –
some; śuddha-bhaktāḥ – devotees purified (from all
material conception); pare – others; apare – still
others; prema– aspiring for love; bhaktāḥ – devotees;
pare – others; prema-parāḥ – absorbed in love; prema-
āturāḥ – overwhelmed by love; pare – others.

Among these devotees, some ( jñāna-bhaktas) know the
Lord’s supreme position, some (śuddha-bhaktas) are

                              29
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

actuated by a pure devotional aptitude, some ( premī-
bhaktas) are imbued with full loving devotion, some (
prema-para bhaktas) are absorbed in pure love, and some
( premātura bhaktas) are impelled by overwhelming love.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Devotees of Śrī Bhagavān nurture
different spiritual moods and, depending on their moods,
they obtain different results. The distinction of each
result is explained in four-and-a-half verses, beginning
here with jñāna.

(1) Jñāna-bhaktas are devotees such as Śrī Bharata
Mahārāja, who possess jñāna-bhakti, or devotion mixed
with the pursuit of know-ledge and the inclination
towards opulence. Here, the word jñāna, meaning
‘knowledge,’ indicates knowledge that encompasses both
the insignificance of liberation and the glories of
loving devotion to the lotus feet of Śrī Bhagavān. The
word bhakti refers to the nine processes of devotional
service to the Lord.

(2) Śuddha-bhaktas are pure devotees like Śrī Ambarīṣa,
who render and aspire for devotional service to the
Supreme Lord that is untainted by desire for fruitive
work, empirical knowledge, dry renunciation, etc.

(3) Premī-bhaktas are pure devotees such as Śrī Hanumān,
whose bhakti is endowed with prema, pure love of God.
These devotees always serve the lotus feet of their
beloved Lord with their entire being or ātmā, aspiring
only to develop deep affection for His lotus feet. In
other words, their singular wish is to meet the Lord and
render service to Him.

(4) Prema-para-bhaktas are pure devotees like Śrī Arjuna
and the Pāṇḍavas, whose devotion towards the Lord is
devoid of awe and reverence. They are bound by the
shackles of loving friendship with the Lord, and prema
is their only goal in life. Śrī Bhagavān’s unconditional
mercy creates in their hearts the acme of purest love,
binding them in complete friendship that is suffused
with eagerness to see Him and characterized by intimate,
jocular affection for Him.

(5) Premātura-bhaktas are devotees like Uddhava and the
Yādavas, who are overwhelmed with divine love. They are
always overcome by the super-excellent wealth of prema
for that always attracts their hearts in loving
relationships with the Supreme Lord.

Entrance into Vaikuṇṭha cannot be obtained without
possessing love for Bhagavān. However, based on
differences in the spiritual moods, or bhāvas, of the
devotees and according to the degree of their love, a
hierarchy of devotees must be recognized. Śuddha-bhakti
and prema-bhakti are essentially the same in nature, yet
due to the presence of absolute loving attachment
(prema-niṣṭhā) in prema-bhakti , the premī- bhakta is
considered superior. Although the śuddha-bhakta
ultimately reaches the stage of a premī-bhakta, it is
imperative to acknowledge the speciality or
distinctiveness of the premī-bhakta’s absolute loving
attachment that distinguishes him from the śuddha-
bhakta. Similarly, it must be recognized that prema-

                              30
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

para-bhaktas are more exceptional than premī-bhaktas,
and that premātura-bhaktas are more exceptional than
prema-para-bhaktas.



Verse 17

tāratamyavatām eṣāṁ phale sāmyaṁ na yujyate

tāratamyaṁ tu vaikuṇṭhe kathañcid ghaṭate na hi

tāratamya-vatām – having gradations; eṣām – of them;
phale – in the result; sāmyam – equality; na – not;
yujyate – appropriate; tāratamyam – gradation; tu – but;
vaikuṇṭhe – in Vaikuṇṭha; kathañcit – in any way;
ghaṭate – it is possible; na – not; hi – certainly.

In spite of all these devotees being equal in their pure
loving devotion, gradation is seen in their spiritual
sentiments. It would be inappropriate, therefore, if
they were all to receive the same results; there must be
gradation in the results they achieve. However, the
abode of Vaikuṇṭha is the realm of equality, and so it
is not possible that a hierarchy of results can exist
there.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: One must accept that although all
these devotees possess equal devotion, still, because of
gradation in their devotional sentiments (bhāvas), there
is gradation in the results they obtain. To explain
this, Śrī Uttarā speaks this verse beginning with
tāratamya. Here, tāratamya, meaning ‘proportionate
gradation,’ should be understood to refer to varying
degrees of love, from comparatively limited to abundant
manifestations.

She says, “Since there are gradations in the devotional
moods or sentiments (bhāvas), of these five types of
devotees, it is not appropriate that they all receive
equal results. When jñāna-bhakti and śuddha-bhakti are
compared, śuddha-bhakti must certainly yield a greater
result than jñāna-bhakti. Similarly, prema-bhakti must
yield a greater result than śuddha-bhakti, prema-para-
bhakti must yield a greater result than prema-bhakti,
and premātura-bhakti must yield a greater result than
prema-para-bhakti.

“If this were not so, the fault of an inadequate result
would be applied to bhakti. It would be especially
undesirable to accord the same result to all these
exalted devotees, who possess different transcendental
tastes (rūci) and who also do not desire the same
result. Distribution of results in this manner does not
befit the glories of the supremely merciful Bhagavān,
who is affectionate to all devotees. Therefore it must
be accepted that there is a gradation in the results.”

One might object, “If such gradation of reward were
present in Vaikuṇṭha, would this not be a defect?”

In reply, Śrī Uttarā says, “Being the embodiment of
knowledge, bliss, and eternity, Vaikuṇṭha is uniform in
nature. Consequently, any kind of differentiation or

                              31
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

inequality is not possible there.”



Verse 18

paryavasyati sārūpya-sāmīpyādau ca tulyatā

na śrūyate paraṁ prāpyaṁ vaikuṇṭhād adhikaṁ kiyat

paryavasyati – it is concluded; sārūpya – liberation,
such as having the same form as the Lord; sāmīpya –
liberation, such as living in the Lord’s proximity; ādau
– and so on; ca – also; tulyatā – equality; na – not;
śrūyate – is heard of; param – exalted; prāpyam – worthy
of attainment; vaikuṇṭhāt – than Vaikuṇṭha; adhikam –
more; kiyat – to such an extent.

The different types of liberation, such as having the
same form as the Lord, or sārūpya, and living in the
Lord’s proximity, or sāmīpya, are all on an equal
platform. Moreover, it is unheard of that a destination
more exalted than Vaikuṇṭha can be attained.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: One might raise an objection that in
Śrī Vaikuṇṭha, although all devotees reap equal
happiness from their worship of the Lord, there are
distinctions, as some attain different types of
liberations, such as sārūpya. Just as there are
different divisions of yajñas, or sacrifices – such as
the karma yajña or the brahma yajña (constant meditation
on the Supreme) – similarly, in order to continuously
manifest Śrī Bhagavān’s supremely grand pastimes,
according to necessity, some servants serving as
doorkeepers are

situated at a distance from the Lord, while some remain
in close proximity to render confidential services like
massaging His lotus feet. Thus, gradations are found
among the servitors, but in the transcendental sense,
all of them are equally placed. To express this, Śrī
Uttarā speaks this verse beginning with paryavasyati.

“Sārūpya means ‘to possess a form similar to Bhagavān’s
four-armed form.’ Sāmīpya means ‘to remain close to the
Lord as His eternal associate, or pārṣada.’ ” Here the
word ādi indicates different services, such as
commanding the army, massaging the Lord’s lotus feet,
and dressing His hair. However, this list does not
include sāyujya-mukti, the impersonal liberation of
merging into the Lord’s effulgence. Bhagavān rewards
demons who are inimical to Him with sāyujya-mukti
because of their constant meditation on Him. Those who
render even the smallest degree of service to the Lord
consider merging into Him to be loathsome and
despicable.

Now one might ask, “Do devotees obtain something extra,
also, in accordance with their individual spiritual
moods (bhāvas)?” In reply, Śrī Uttarā speaks the words
beginning with na śrūyate. “Out of the uncountable
destinations,” she says, “Śrī Vaikuṇṭha is the topmost.
Thus one does not hear of any higher abode that can be
attained.”

                              32
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017




Verse 19

tat – of that (Vaikuṇṭha); pradeśa-viśeśeṣu – within the
specific provinces; sva-sva-bhāva – respective moods;
viśeṣataḥ – in accordance with the unique; sva-sva-priya
– of their respective beloved Deities; viśeṣa-āptyā – in
accordance with the unique qualities; sarveṣām – for
everyone; astu – there must be; vā – or; sukham –
happiness.

In each specific section within Vaikuṇṭha, the five
types of perfected devotees, in accordance with their
individual moods, experience happiness that is specific
to their respective worshipable objects. If this is the
case, then let it be so.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: One may say, “It is in Vaikuṇṭha, by
the arrangement of Śrī Bhagavān’s transcendental energy,
that all devotees achieve their specific destinations
according to their respective bhāvas, or spiritual
moods. If this is the case, then there must also be a
special place worthy of attainment by the most
exceptional devotees who possess unique love for the
lotus feet of Śrī Gopī-ramaṇa, the Lord who is the
beloved of the gopīs.” Śrī Uttarā is inquiring about
this place in two verses, beginning here with tat. Śrī
Ayodhyā and Śrī Dvārakā are some of the special,
extraordinary places in that Vaikuṇṭha.

The Skanda Purāṇa states:

yā yathā bhuvi vartante puryo bhagavataḥ priyāḥ

tās tathā santi vaikuṇṭhe tat-tal-līlārtham ādṛtāḥ

Just as Bhagavān’s favored cities are manifest on earth,
similarly, in Vaikuṇṭha, these cities are present in
their exact forms as well, in honor of Bhagavān’s
pastimes connected to those abodes.

According to this statement, the extraordinary abodes
such as Ayodhyā and Dvārakā, which are obtained by the
five types of devotees [verse 16], are also present in
Vaikuṇṭha. However, the word vā in the original verse
indicates a feeling of incompleteness in the heart
because Vaikuṇṭha is not known for such differences. In
other words, Śrī Uttarā is saying, “Because it is hard
to believe that such differences exist in Vaikuṇṭha,
one’s heart cannot be satisfied that the most
exceptional devotees will obtain results appropriate to
their exalted status.”




Verse 20


parāṁ kāṣṭhāṁ gataṁ tat-tad-rasa-jātīyatocitam


                              33
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

athāpi rāsa-kṛt-tādṛg-bhaktānām astu kā gatiḥ

parām kāṣṭhām – the ultimate limit; gatam – reached;
tat-tad-rasa – of respective transcendental
relationships; jātīya-tā – to the qualities of the
transcendental group; ucitam – appropriate; atha – then;
api – also; rāsa-kṛt – of Rāsa-bihārī Śrī Kṛṣṇa; tādṛk –
such; bhaktānām – of the devotees; astu – is; kā –
what?; gatiḥ – destination.

There, every devotee’s bhāva (transcendental sentiment)
or rasa

(transcendental relationship) reaches its ultimate limit
and makes him experience the zenith of happiness.
However, what is the destination of Rāsa-bihārī Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s extraordinary rasika devotees, who are expert in
tasting transcendental loving exchanges?

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: One might object that if hierarchy
applies to the five types of devotees, it is possible
that some may be experiencing less happiness. This is
not correct, however, because devotees who attain
Vaikuṇṭha are more glorious then those who are
liberated, and it is only reasonable that they
experience far greater happiness than liberated souls.

To dispel this doubt, Śrī Uttarā speaks this verse
beginning with parāṁ kāṣṭhāṁ. Here the word parāṁ,
meaning ‘supreme,’ is an adjective modifying happiness.
The implication is that the quality of happiness in
Vaikuṇṭha is vastly superior and therefore reaches the
ultimate limit, or parāṁ kāṣṭhāṁ. If this is true, then
a hierarchy of the five categories of devotees seems
illogical. Therefore, in this context, the words tat-
tat, meaning ‘each according to his own,’ have been used
to say that it is appropriate that those devotees
achieve a level of happiness commensurate to their
natural, inherent rasa (their relationship with the
Lord) or their bhāva (their ecstatic mood). Each one
enjoys in his heart the ultimate limit of happiness
corresonding to his own spiritual relationship.

Śrī Uttarā says, “However, what is to be the destination
of devotees who have love for the lotus feet of He who
is the performer of rāsa-līlā, Śrī Gopī-ramaṇa, that
Lord who is the beloved of the gopīs? Their natural love
for Him is extraordinary and completely indescribable.
To which abode are they to be elevated?

“The śuddha-bhaktas experience a more unique happiness
in their devotional service than the jñānī-bhaktas,
whose devotion is tinged with knowledge of the Lord’s
opulence. In this regard, however, there is no scope for
rivalry or envy to be the cause of gradation in the
status of these devotees. This is because such defects,
which result in distress and lamentation, are removed in
the stage of sādhana-bhakti (initial devotional
practice) by dint of the nature of bhakti itself. These
devotees, who are absorbed in the supreme prema of
Vaikuṇṭha, obtain devotional happiness that is free from
material designations in accordance with their
individual capacity. Śuddha-bhaktas never hanker for the
happiness of residing in Vaikuṇṭha.

                              34
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


“More elevated than the śuddha-bhaktas are the premī-
bhaktas, who are indifferent to all types of external
situations (sarva-nirapekṣa) and are the best of all the
Lord’s transcendental servants. And superior to the
premī-bhaktas are the premapara-bhaktas, that is, the
Lord’s most intimate friends and well-wishers who are
special recipients of His natural mercy. Superior to
them are the premātura-bhaktas, those who have accepted
Śrī Kṛṣṇa as their very life and soul, or in other
words, those who are bound to Him in wonderful, loving
relationships. Is it possible for all these devotees to
achieve any appropriate abode other than Vaikuṇṭha?

“According to the authoritative words of the Skanda
Purāṇa, abodes such as Ayodhyā and Dvārakā are indeed
present in Vaikuṇṭha, and just like their earthly
counterparts, they are replete with the same family,
associates, and forms of the Lord. In other words, in
Ayodhyā of Vaikuṇṭha, devotees such as Hanumān, along
with Śrī Sītā, Śrī Lakṣmaṇa, and others always stay
absorbed in the service of Śrī Raghunātha. Thus, as
before, they experience their desired bliss of
servitorship in myriad ways, such as performing service,
having personal audience with the Lord, etc.

“Similarly, in Dvārakā (Dvārāvatī) of Vaikuṇṭha, when
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is Śrī Balarāma’s younger brother, Śrī
Rukmiṇī’s and Śrī Satyabhāmā’s husband, and Arjuna’s
dear friend, and who is the prince of the Yadus, arrives
in the palace, devotees like Śrī Yudhiṣṭhira serve Him
as they did before, in a mood of great friendship.
Likewise, Śrī Uddhava and his followers among the Yadus
render service in increasingly wonderful, variegated
ways unto the Lord of the Yadus, Yādavendra Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
who means more to them than their wealth, opulence, and
even their own lives. Thus, they always experience the
pinnacle of happiness externally and internally,
enjoying a wide variety of loving exchanges with the
Lord.”

In the paragraphs above, the words ‘as before’ indicate
that devotees presently relish the same happiness of
service that they had experienced in the past. Śrī
Uttarā says, “Previously, when the Lord manifested His
earthly pastimes in Dvārakā, these devotees had received
His kindness in the form of being able to serve His
beloved lotus feet. In other words, they had the good
fortune of participating in His pastimes of love (prema-
vilāsa). Now also in Vaikuṇṭha, they experience the same
bliss of serving the Lord. This indicates that Vaikuṇṭha
holds no distinction over – or in other words, is no
more special than – Dvārakā manifest on earth. Yet there
is no defect in this because the essential principle is
to engage in service to the Lord always and everywhere
and thus receive His topmost mercy. If Vaikuṇṭha
possesses a certain uniqueness, so be it. But that
uniqueness is not worthy of much respect, even though it
may be equal to or greater than the concentrated
happiness of devotional service that is obtained through
the most coveted and purest love of God.

“However, the wealth of love does not arise in the
hearts of jñānī-bhaktas because their prema is tinged

                              35
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

with knowledge of the Lord’s opulence and divinity.
Therefore, even in Vaikuṇṭha, their happiness
corresponding to their stage is merely joy derived from
mental service.

Compared to the jñānī-bhaktas, the śuddha-bhaktas obtain
greater happiness through all their senses by engaging
in hearing, chanting, remembering, and so on. Premī-
bhaktas always exhibit more profound love and
variegation in their service to the Lord compared to the
śuddha-bhaktas, and thus they receive greater external
and internal happiness. Prema-para-bhaktas, due to their
exceptional eagerness to obtain darśana and joking
camaraderie with Bhagavān, experience supreme happiness,
beyond that of the premī-bhakta. But the happiness of
the premātura-bhaktas is even greater because they
always lovingly see the Lord and perform pleasurable
pastimes with Him. Enjoying a remarkable intimacy with
Him, they experience rapturous joy.

“In this way, according to the gradation of spiritual
practice, or sādhana, there is commensurate gradation of
result. Therefore, in Vaikuṇṭha, which is the embodiment
of unlimited bliss, some experience higher ecstasy while
others experience less. One cannot say that this type of
comparison in Vaikuṇṭha is illogical or unreasonable; it
is indisputable that the highest practice, or sādhana,
must yield a result that reaches the ultimate limit of
excellence.

“Although devotees of all other categories are inferior
to the devotees steeped in prema at the lotus feet of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is the beloved of the gopīs,
nevertheless, due to Vaikuṇṭha’s transcendental nature,
each devotee obtains the ultimate limit of happiness
according to his respective spiritual mood and heart’s
desire.

“Yet, those devotees who are wholeheartedly surrendered
in love to the lotus feet of Śrī Nanda-kiśora are
incomparable and indescribable. It is therefore only
appropriate that they inherit the most marvellous result
compared to the result obtained by all other devotees.
What is the nature of that extraordinary result?” This
is the question being asked here.



Verses 21–22

ye sarva-nairapekṣyeṇa rādhā-dāsyecchavaḥ param

saṅkīrtayanti tan-nāma tādṛśa-priyatāmayāḥ

anyeṣām iva teṣāṁ ca prāpyaṁ ced hṛn na tṛpyati

aho nanda-yaśodāder na sahe tādṛśīṁ gatim

ye – who; sarva – to all (lesser goals); nairapekṣyeṇa –
because of indifference; rādhā-dāsya – for the service
of Śrī Rādhā; icchavaḥ – aspire; param – sublime;
saṅkīrtayanti – glorify; tat-nāma – Her name; tādṛśa –
such; priyatā – with loving sentiments; mayāḥ – embued;
anyeṣām – of others (general devotees); iva – like;

                              36
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

teṣām – of them; ca – also; prāpyam – to be obtained;
cet – if; hṛt – the heart; na – not; tṛpyati – is
satisfied; aho – oh!; nanda-yaśodā – of Nanda and
Yaśodā; ādeḥ – and the other Vrajavāsīs; na sahe – I
cannot tolerate; tādṛśīm – such; gatim – a situation.

These devotees, being indifferent to all other spiritual
practices and goals, aspire to become servants of Śrī
Rādhikā (rādhā-dāsya) only. To attain this service, they
constantly sing Her holy names, immersed in divine love.
If these devotees, like other general devotees, obtain a
special place in the same Vaikuṇṭha, our hearts will not
be satisfied. Alas! I cannot tolerate the idea that
Nanda and the other cowherdsmen and Yaśodā and the
cowherd women would have the same destination as
ordinary devotees.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: To present the destination achieved by
those exceptional devotees, their distinction is being
shown in these verses beginning with ye. Śrī Uttarā
says, “These devotees develop complete detachment
towards the happiness derived from the spiritual
practices (sādhanas) and goals (sādhyas) of the five
types of devotees mentioned earlier [verse 16].
Sacrificing all other practices and goals with a palmful
of water – or in other words, renouncing them completely
–

they exclusively strive for the servitorship of Śrīmati
Rādhikā, the most beloved of Madana-gopāla Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Their singular aspiration is, ‘I want to be Śrī
Rādhikā’s maidservant.’ Upon obtaining that position,
they automatically attain not only all their desires,
but the results of desires beyond imagination.” Thus
with the words beginning with saṅkīrtayanti, Śrī Uttarā
emphasizes how extraordinary that sādhana is that can
grant such an extraordinary result.

“These devotees glorify the names of rāsa-rasika Śrī
Kṛṣṇa – He who enjoys the rāsa dance – by performing
saṅkīrtana, singing in sweet voices with ecstatic loving
sentiment. The lovingly performed nāma-saṅkīrtana, or
chanting of the holy names, is imbued with overwhelming,
natural love for the Lord. Therefore, if their
destination is the same as those of all other devotees,
then our hearts will be filled with discontent.”

Here one may argue, “Just as Dvārakā and other abodes
are present in Vaikuṇṭha, Śrī Mathurā-maṇḍala is also
present there. And in Mathurā is Śrī Gokula. Let the
devotees of Śrī Rāsa-rasika enjoy pastimes with their
beloved Lord as they wish in that Gokula. Just as the
Yādavas, commensurate with their sādhana, experience
greater happiness than the Pāṇḍavas, similarly let the
devotees of rāsa-rasika Śrī Kṛṣṇa also obtain results
befitting their sādhana and reside in the Śrī Mathurā
Gokula of Vaikuṇṭha.”

Here, the term anyeṣām iva, meaning ‘like others,’
implies ‘like the Pāṇḍavas and Yādavas.’ Teṣām, meaning
‘of them,’ implies that devotees of Śrī Rāsa-vihārī Śrī
Kṛṣṇa also attain the topmost happiness, commensurate to
their sādhana.


                              37
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

Śrī Uttarā replies, “This, however, does not satisfy my
heart. That level of happiness is generally very
common.”

Another understanding of Śrī Uttarā’s words is, “This
may be the case, but if, by the influence of the great
mercy of the lotus feet of Gopīnātha Śrī Kṛṣṇa, those
most affectionate and highly perfected personalities
acheive the same destination, then so be it. However,
peerless personalities such as the gopas and gopīs like
Śrī Nanda, Śrī Yaśodā, and their followers, the other
residents of Vraja, possess paramount, unbounded love
for Śrī Kṛṣṇa that is eternal and ever-fresh. It is
absolutely unacceptable that they would obtain a
destination similar to others.” This is communicated in
the word aho, meaning ‘alas.’ She says, “Aho! It is
unbearable for me to think that they would also obtain
the same ordinary result as all other devotees. It is
inappropriate to equate the majestic with the
insignificant.”



Verse 23

vividhānāṁ mahimnāṁ hi yatra kaṣṭhāḥ parāḥ parāḥ

koṭīnāṁ paryavasyanti samudre sarito yathā

vividhānām – of various kinds; mahimnām   – glories; hi –
certainly; yatra – where; kaṣṭhāḥ parāḥ   parāḥ – the
ultimate limit of excellence; koṭīnām –   of countless;
paryavasyanti – merge; samudre – in the   ocean; saritaḥ –
rivers; yathā – as.

As rivers flow into and merge with the ocean, so,
countless, variegated glories, extended to their
ultimate limit of excellence, culminate in the divine
gopas and gopīs.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Uttarā recites this verse
beginning with vividhānām to explain her reason for not
accepting that Śrī Nanda, Yaśodā, and the other
residents of Vraja, or Vrajavāsīs, should also attain a
destination like others.

She says, “All the residents of Vraja possess unlimited
excellent qualities, such as beauty, sweetness,
erudition, etc. Their glories in relation to religion
(dharma), economic development (artha), enjoyment
(kāma), transcendental knowledge (vijñāna), devotion
(bhakti), and pure love for the Lord ( prema) have all
reached the peak of perfection.” Koṭīnāṁ means that they
possess glorious excellences that are unable to be
innumerated, and vividhānāṁ means that these excellences
are manifest in many different forms. “The glories of
the Vraja residents, which reach the ultimate extent
possible, are so astonishing that they are able to
constantly exhilarate the ocean of Kṛṣṇa’s joy, causing
it to expand millions of times over. Compared to the
ocean of the Vrajavāsīs’ glories, the glories of all
other goals, or sādhyas, are like a river, which flows
in one direction. In other words, just as all the rivers
merge into the ocean, the excellence of all that is

                              38
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

aspired for has culminated in and entered the Vrajavāsīs
such as Śrī Nanda.”



Verse 24

tad-artham ucitaṁ sthānam ekaṁ vaikuṇṭhataḥ param

apekṣitam avaśyaṁ syāt tat-prakāśyoddharasva mām

tat-artham – for this reason; ucitam – suitable; sthānam
– abode; ekam – one; vaikuṇṭhataḥ param – superior to
Vaikuṇṭha; apekṣitam – desired; avaśyam – necessarily;
syāt – there may be; tat – that; prakāśya – by
revealing; uddharasva – kindly deliver; mām – me.

For Śrī Nanda, Yaśodā, and the other Vrajavāsīs, there
must surely be an abode far superior to Vaikuṇṭha. That
place certainly exists. Therefore, kindly reveal that
abode and save me from an ocean of sorrow.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: This verse beginning with tad-artham

concludes the topic of this inquiry. Śrī Uttarā says,
“It is only appropriate that Śrī Nanda and Śrī Yaśodā
attain another destination far superior to Vaikuṇṭha.
For this abode to be suitable for all their enjoyment of
transcendental happiness, it should be free from even a
trace of the mood of opulence and majesty, or aiśvarya,
towards Śrī Bhagavān. In this realm, the perspective of
seeing the Lord with awe and reverence must be
abandoned. This realm must be without a scent of such
imperfection, which weakens the treasure of devotees’
pure love. It must embody ordinary, human-like
relationships, which are the heart’s desire of devotees
who are filled with love and who have disassociated
themselves from jñāna, or knowledge of the Lord’s
majesty. This realm must be served by the Lord’s beloved
devotees who are absorbed in and are relishing –
enthralled and delighted, with hair standing on end in
ecstasy – the nectar of loving exchanges with the Lord (
prema-rasa), which is transcendental to this world and
to the world beyond. It must be fully nourished by the
rasa of indescribable supreme bliss. It must be sweeter
than the sweetest, more excellent than the most
excellent abode, and it must possess the ultimate limit
of all captivatingly charming, variegated, supreme
excellence. The secret of this realm is revealed by Śrī
Nārada’s singing, accompanied by his vīṇā. Śrī Nārada is
always satisfied, fixed in the ultimate state of tasting
the honey of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet. It is reasonable
that such an appropriate and unique abode would exist,
and it is certainly possible that it does.

“However, due to it being a very confidential
destination, I am unable to grasp it with my meager
intelligence. Therefore, I am drowning in a fearsome
ocean of distress, filled with continuous waves of doubt
and great whirlpools of illusion. Please deliver me from
this terrible ocean of sorrow by revealing that
destination.

“On this very Bhū-maṇḍala, the divine Śrī Mathurā-purī

                              39
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

is present. It is the most suitable abode for the
residents of Vraja because it facilitates the pleasure
pastimes of Śrī Nanda and the other Vrajavāsīs with
their beloved Lord. However, since the abode of Mathurā
is within the material universe, ignorant people with
mundane vision witness that its residents are subject to
material transformations of the body, and thus they
suspect that the sacred Mathurā is a product of the
illusory (māyika) energy, like ordinary places.”

An alternate understanding of the divinity of Śrī
Mathurā is that one obtains all types of perfections
simply upon reaching Śrī Vaikuṇṭha. But since attainment
of such perfection may not be evident in Śrī Mathurā,
ignorant people may doubt whether Mathurā is able to
grant the ultimate goal of human life. Still another
reading of this verse is that since the holy abode of
Mathurā is on earth, which is the planet of mortals
(martya-loka), ignorant people suspect that it will be
destroyed at the time of the cosmic annihilation, just
as earth is. Alternatively, it can be said that since
Mathurā’s nature is confidential, people may doubt its
ability to manifest the same transcendental glories that
are found in such places as Śrī Vaikuṇṭha. Moreover,
they may not have heard that Bhagavān’s pastimes are
eternally manifest in Mathurā. Therefore, it is to be
understood that all these doubts leave them bewildered.

Further on, a series of questions and answers will
reveal the true nature of Goloka, which is the abode
suitable for Śrī Nanda and others. Within the discussion
on Goloka, the superiority of Bhagavān’s pleasurable
pastimes in earthly Mathurā will also be established.
Regarding the transcendental abode (dhāma) of Mathurā on
this earthly plane, it has been said that although it is
within the material world, nevertheless, it is the
pastime place of Śrī Bhagavān and His servants, and it
is as dear to Him as His servitors. Therefore, without a
doubt, this dhāma can never be considered māyika, or
illusory, in nature.

In this connection, there is a statement by Śrī Nārada
(Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta 2.5.55):

nānā-vidhās tasya paricchadā ye nāmāni līlāḥ
priyabhūmayaś ca

satyāni nityāny akhilāni tadvad ekānyanekāni ca tāni
viddhi

Śrī Bhagavān’s associates, names, various pastimes,
favored land for His pastimes, and so on are all
eternal, Absolute Reality, and they are all-pervading
and omnipotent (vibhu-vastu) like Him. Although they are
all one, they appear in many forms. Consequently, this
earthly Mathurā is also eternal, real, all-pervading,
and omnipotent.

Śrī Nārada’s words easily establish that Śrī Mathurā-
dhāma is transcendental and eternal. In spite of this,
those who are ignorant and neophyte will only notice the
residents’ external changes of body and so on.
Factually, these external symptoms are designed to cheat
the non-devotees and to increase the pleasure of the

                              40
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

devotees. For example, during Śrī Bhagavān’s manifest
pastimes on earth, even though non-devotees also
received His darśana, it should be understood that they
neither experienced happiness nor realized His divine
magnificence, despite His being the embodiment of the
highest bliss. These points shall be explained later in
the description of Tapoloka. Dhāma-tattva, the intrinsic
truth about the holy abode, is confidential in nature;
thus the deluding of non-devotees becomes an admirable
quality.

Śrī Uttarā continues, “Śrī Mathurā-dhāma is always
eternal. Even at the time of cosmic annihilation, it is
not destroyed. Especially, Mathurā is situated on the
top of Śrī Sudarśana cakra,which is the embodiment of
the time factor (kāla) – the destroyer of everything in
the material world. Therefore, time never affects Śrī
Mathurā, at all, what to speak of Śrī Mathurā’s having
any fear of it. Because the greatness of Śrī Mathurā-
dhāma is an esoteric secret, although everyone has heard
of Mathurā’s incomparable glories, ignorant people have
not realized them. It should be understood that these
types of doubts and questions arise because people have
not heard the Lord’s pastimes are going on in Mathurā
eternally.”

The point being made is that when one realizes the
glories of Śrī Goloka, one also realizes that bhauma-
dhāma, the holy abode of Mathurā on earth (the land of
Vraja), is equally glorious. In fact, the glories of
Mathurā on earth are somewhat superior even to those of
Śrī Goloka. Later Śrī Nārada will reveal this truth. The
reason for this is that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead Śrī Kṛṣṇa personally appears in this abode at a
special time along with all His other expansions and
manifestations in order to experience the pleasure of
His pastimes that He cannot experience anywhere else.

“Only at the time of total cosmic annihilation does this
abode of Mathurā disappear. But even though it cannot be
seen by people, it nevertheless remains manifest. In
other words, by the influence of the spiritual potency
named antardhāna, which is the power of disappearance,
earthly Mathurā-dhāma becomes one with Śrī Goloka.”
Another understanding is that earthly Mathurā remains
situated in its original place above Sudarśana cakra.
Alternatively, it is said that it does not remain
manifest at its usual place. “Therefore, because Mathurā
is not accessible to the vision of common people, it
seems that Śrī Bhagavān’s pastimes are not taking place
in earthly Vraja. However, Śrī Bhagavān is eternally
performing pastimes there with His associates.

“Therefore, since Goloka alone corresponds to this abode
of Mathurā, it is the only place where Śrī Bhagavān can
sport happily, performing pastimes unrestrictedly. This
proves that Śrī Goloka alone is the supreme abode to be
attained.”

Further on in the text, as has been done above, Śrī
Nārada will give examples to establish the superior
glories of the earthly Vraja-maṇḍala in comparison to
Śrī Goloka. Here it has been established that Goloka and
earthly Vraja are nondifferent from one another. Thus,

                              41
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

proving the greatness of one of these abodes
automatically validates the glories of the other. The
conclusion is that they are united. In this way, all
doubts have been properly reconciled.




Verse 25


śrī-jaiminir uvāca

mātur evaṁ mahā-ramya-praśnenānanditaḥ sutaḥ

tāṁ natvā sāśru-romāñcaṁ ārebhe pratibhāṣitum

śrī-jaiminiḥ uvāca – Śrī Jaimini said; mātuḥ – of his
mother; evam – thus; mahā-ramya – very pleasing;
praśnena – by the inquiry; ānanditaḥ – delighted; sutaḥ
– King Parīkṣit; tām – to her (his mother, Uttarā);
natvā – offering obeisances; sa-aśru – with eyes
brimming with tears; roma-añcam – and hairs standing on
end; ārebhe – began; pratibhāṣitum – to reply.

Śrī Jaiminī said: King Parīkṣit, delighted by his mother
Śrī Uttarā’s most beautiful and pleasing inquiry, first
offered obeisances to his worshipful Lord and then
prepared to reply. His bodily hair was standing on end
and his eyes were brimming with tears.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit applauded Mother Uttarā’s
very beautiful question, offered obeisances to his
worshipful Lord, and addressed her query with firm
resolve.



Verse 26

śrī-parīkṣid uvāca

śrī-kṛṣṇa-jīvite mātas tadīya-virahāsahe

tavaiva yogyaḥ praśno ’yaṁ na kṛto yaś ca kaiścana

śrī-parīkṣit uvāca – Śrī Parīkṣit said; śrī-kṛṣṇa – is
Śrī Kṛṣṇa; jīvite – whose life and soul; mātaḥ – O
mother; tadīya – from Him; viraha-asahe – who is unable
to tolerate separation; tava – your; eva – indeed;
yogyaḥ – qualified; praśnaḥ – question; ayam – this; na
– not; kṛtaḥ – done before; yaḥ – which; ca – and;
kaiścana – by any others.

Śrī Parīkṣit said: O Mother, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is your very life
and soul and you are unable to tolerate the pangs of
separation from Him. Thus, you alone are qualified to
ask this question. No one has ever asked such a question
before.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit heard his mother’s
question and wanted her to absorb her mind in listening
to his reply. Therefore, in speaking this verse

                              42
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

beginning with śrī-kṛṣṇa, he first gladdens her by
applauding her question. He says, “O śrī-kṛṣṇa-jīvite –
Śrī Kṛṣṇa protected your life by shielding your womb
from Aśvatthāmā’s brahmāstra (nuclear weapon).” His
address also means, “You are fully surrendered to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and therefore you are kṛṣṇa-jīvitā, one whose very
life is Śrī Kṛṣṇa, or one who is fully absorbed in Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.” This is the significance of kṛṣṇa-jīvitā.

He also says, “You are unable to tolerate separation
from Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and therefore you are kṛṣṇa-viraha-
asahe, one for whom separation from Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
unbearable.” This is substantiated by the statement of
Śrī Sūta Gosvāmī in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.10.9–10):

subhadrā draupadī kuntī virāṭa-tanayā tathā

gāndhārī dhṛtarāṣṭraś ca yuyutsur gautamo yamau

vṛkodaraś ca dhaumyaś ca striyo matsya-sutādayaḥ

na sehire vimuhyanto virahaṁ śārṅga-dhanvanaḥ

Dhaumya, Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Kṛpācārya, Nakula, Sahadeva,
Bhīma, Vidura, Yuyutsu, and women such as Subhadrā,
Draupadī, Kuntī, Mahārāja Virāṭa’s daughter named
Uttarā, Gāndhārī, and Matsya-kanyā (the daughter of the
king of Matsya province) were unable to tolerate
separation from Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and therefore they fainted.

Here, Uttarā is the same matsya-kanyā, the daughter of
Mahārāja Virāṭa, king of the Matsya province. Uttarā is
mentioned twice in the original verse. Her great love
for Śrī Kṛṣṇa is indicated by the fact that she swooned
due to separation from Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Similarly, that Śrī
Uttarā-devī’s name is stated twice in the vocative case
in these Bhāgavatam verses reveals the supreme level of
Śrī Uttarā-devī’s supreme devotion to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Therefore, it is said, “Such a question is fit to be
asked by you alone.” In the original verse, the word eva
implies that Śrī Uttarā was most extraordinary, and even
her question was extraordinary. Such a question had
never been asked by anyone in the past.



Verse 27

nija-priya-sakhasyātra śrī-subhadrā-pater aham

yena pautratayā garbhe tava saj-janma lambhitaḥ

nija – own; priya-sakhasya – of the dear friend; atra –
here; śrī-subhadrā-pateḥ – of Subhadrā’s husband; aham –
I; yena – by whom; pautratayā – because of being the
grandson of Śrī Arjuna; garbhe tava – in your womb; sat
– exalted; janma – birth; lambhitaḥ – received.

By my being born from your womb, He (Śrī Kṛṣṇa) granted
me the exalted human form as the grandson of Śrī Arjuna,
who is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s dear friend and Subhadrā’s husband.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Now, solely by Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s great
mercy, Śrī Parīkṣit will expertly reply to his mother

                              43
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

Uttarā’s questions. In five verses, beginning here with
nija, Śrī Parīkṣit first offers obeisances to Śrī Kṛṣṇa
by describing the favors the Lord has shown him. He
says, “I have obtained an exalted human birth in the
center of Bhārata-varṣa, in a mighty kṣatriya dynasty as
the grandson of the Lord’s dear friend, Arjuna. By Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s mercy, I had an excellent birth, emerging from
your womb with unimpaired, flawless limbs. I will
commence answering your questions by first offering
obeisance to that Śrī Kṛṣṇa.”

Here Arjuna has been addressed as the husband of
Subhadrā, who is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s sister. Since Śrī Arjuna’s
other wives are not mentioned, this signifies that
Subhadrā especially had an intense loving relationship
with Śrī Bhagavān.



Verse 28

garbhāntare ca dhṛta-cakra-gadena yena

brahmāstrato ’ham avitaḥ sahito bhavatyā

bālye nareṣu nija-rūpa-parīkṣaṇaṁ ca

nīto muhuḥ parama-bhāgavatocitaṁ yat

garbha – womb; antare – within; ca – and; dhṛta –
holding; cakra-gadena – the club and disk; yena – by
whom; brahma-astrataḥ – from the brahma weapon; aham –
I; avitaḥ – protected; sahitaḥ – together with; bhavatyā
– you; bālye – in childhood; nareṣu – among men; nija-
rūpa – the innate form of Śrī Bhagavān; parīkṣaṇam –
search; ca – also; nītaḥ – led; muhuḥ – again and again;
parama-bhāgavata – great devotees; ucitam – appropriate;
yat– by which.

When I was in your womb, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who was holding a
club and disc in His hands, protected both you and me
from the brahmāstra weapon. Throughout my childhood, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, who manifested a human-like form, made me search
for Him again and again. In truth, this form of the Lord
is obtainable only by great devotees.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
wielding a disc and club, protected us both.” Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam states:

kṣatajākṣaṁ gadā-pāṇim ātmanaḥ sarvato diśam

paribhramantam ulkābhāṁ bhrāmayantaṁ gadāṁ muhuḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.12.9)

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s eyes turned red with rage towards my
attackers. His club, like a fiery shooting star, was
revolving with extreme speed.

drauṇy-astra-vipluṣṭam idaṁ mad-aṅgaṁ

santāna-bījaṁ kuru-pāṇḍavānām


                              44
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

jugopa kukṣiṁ gata ātta-cakro

mātuś ca me yaḥ śaraṇaṁ gatāyāḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.1.6)

When my body, the body of the last remaining descendent
of the Kuru-Pāṇḍava dynasty, was being burnt by the fire
of Aśvatthāmā’s brahmāstra, Śrī Kṛṣṇa entered into your
womb along with His Sudarśana cakra because you were
surrendered to Him. In this way, He protected me and
gave me darśana of His original form (svarūpa) while I
was in your womb.

apīvya-darśanaṁ śyāmaṁ taḍid-vāsasam acyutam

śrīmad-dīrgha-catur-bāhuṁ tapta-kāñcana-kuṇḍalam

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.12.8–9)

Śrī Kṛṣṇa was wearing a yellow garment, brilliant as a
lightening streak. His four arms extended to His knees,
and shining golden earrings beautified His ears.

Śrī Parīkṣit says, “I thought, ‘Possessing all these
features… can this be Śrī Bhagavān?’ Thus, examining
everything, I remained absorbed in thinking about Him
throughout my infancy and childhood.”

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.12.30) also states:

sa eṣa loke vikhyātaḥ parīkṣid iti yat prabhuḥ

pūrvaṁ dṛṣṭam anudhyāyan parīkṣeta nareṣv iha

“When this very powerful Viṣṇurāta (Mahārāja Parīkṣit,
one who is always protected by Viṣṇu) was in the womb of
his mother, he saw someone. Later in life, he would
examine everyone with the motive of finding out, ‘Is
this the same person whom I saw in the womb of my
mother?’ Therefore, he became universally celebrated as
Parīkṣit, or ‘one who examines.’ ” Parīkṣit always
remained absorbed in meditating only on Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
form. Because of this, he became qualified as a topmost
devotee, fit to be addressed as a mahā-bhāgavata, a most
elevated devotee of Bhagavān.



Verse 29

yenānuvartī mahatāṁ guṇaiḥ kṛto

vikhyāpito ’haṁ kali-nigraheṇa

sampādya rājya-śriyam adbhutāṁ tato

nirvedito bhūsura-śāpa-dāpanāt

yena – by whom; anuvartī – follower; mahatām – of the
great souls; guṇaiḥ – by the qualities; kṛtaḥ – made;
vikhyāpitaḥ – famous; aham – I; kali-nigrahena – by
curbing the personality of Kali-yuga; sampadya –
attaining; rājya – royal; śriyam – opulence; adbhutām –

                              45
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

astonishing; tataḥ – then; nirveditaḥ – detached;
bhūsura-śāpa – through a brāhmaṇa’s curse; dāpanāt –
forced to give up.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa endowed me with sterling qualities and made me
the follower of great saints. He made me world famous by
choosing me to curb the personality of Kali-yuga, the
Iron Age of quarrel and hypocrisy. He bestowed upon me
royal opulence, and finally, on the pretext of a
brāhmaṇa’s curse, He made me detached from that
opulence.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “Śrī Kṛṣṇa bestowed
upon me exceptional qualities, like the ability to
protect and maintain the citizens, devotion to
brāhmaṇas, and the determination to uphold promises.
Thus He molded me to become a follower of great souls
such as Ikṣvāku.”

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.12.19–25), the brāhmaṇas tell
Śrī Yudhiṣṭhira:

pārtha prajāvitā sākṣād ikṣvākur iva mānavaḥ

brahmaṇyaḥ satya-sandhaś ca rāmo dāśarathir yathā

eṣa dātā śaraṇyaś ca yathā hy auśīnaraḥ śibiḥ

yaśo vitanitā svānāṁ dauṣyantir iva yajvanām

dhanvinām agraṇīr eṣa tulyaś cārjunayor dvayoḥ

hutāśa iva durdharṣaḥ samudra iva dustaraḥ

mṛgendra iva vikrānto niṣevyo himavān iva

titikṣur vasudhevāsau sahiṣṇuḥ pitarāv iva

pitāmaha-samaḥ sāmye prasāde giriśopamaḥ

āśrayaḥ sarva-bhūtānāṁ yathā devo ramāśrayaḥ

sarva-sad-guṇa-māhātmye eṣa kṛṣṇam anuvrataḥ

rantideva ivodāro yayātir iva dhārmikaḥ

dhṛtyā bali-samaḥ kṛṣṇe prahrāda iva sad-grahaḥ

Exactly like King Ikṣvāku, the son of Manu (the father
of mankind), this boy will be the protector of his
subjects. Just like Śrī Rāmacandra, the son of
Daśaratha, he will be faithful to his promise and will
be a benefactor of brāhmaṇas. Like Śibi, the son of
Uśīnara, he will be charitable and will protect
surrendered souls. Like Bharata, the son of Duṣyanta,
his reputation and fame will spread all over the earth.
Like Śrī Arjuna, the son of Kuntī, and like Kārtavīrya,
he will be the wielder of a bow. Like Agni, the fire-
god, he will be very difficult to conquer. He will be as
grave as the ocean and as brave as a lion. Like the
Himālaya Mountains, he will happily serve the saintly
persons. He will be forbearing like the earth. He will
be tolerant like a mother and a father. He will be
unbiased like Brahmā. He will be easily pleased like

                              46
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

Mahādeva, who is known as Āśutoṣa. Like Nārāyaṇa, the
husband of Ramā, the goddess of fortune, he will be the
shelter of all the living entities. Like Śrī Kṛṣṇa, this
boy will possess all glorious qualities. In magnanimity,
he will be like Mahārāja Rantideva. In adherence to
religious principles, he will be like Mahārāja Yayāti.
In patience and courage, he will be like Bali Mahārāja,
and like Prahlāda, he will be a devotee of Lord Hari.

Śrī Parīkṣit says, “At the time of my world conquest, I
saw the personality of Kali on Kurukṣetra’s eastern
flank, on the bank of the Sarasvatī River. He had
assumed the form of the husband of a fallen woman and
was torturing Mother Earth and religion personified, who
had taken the forms of a cow and a bull respectively. By
having me conquer the whole planet, Śrī Kṛṣṇa employed
me to subdue the spread of Kali-yuga’s influence, and
thus He made me illustrious throughout the entire world.
He granted me astonishing royal eminence – a vastly
prosperous kingdom free from disturbances.

“However, an even greater mercy was that He arranged for
me to be cursed by Śṛṅgī, the son of Sage Śamīka, who
swore, ‘takṣakaḥ saptame ’hani daṅkṣyati – Seven days
from now, the enormous snake Takṣaka will strike you’
(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.18.37). Factually, if Śrī Kṛṣṇa had
not been merciful by arranging this curse, the sage’s
son, residing in a solitary hermitage, could not have
developed the mental disposition to curse a king like
me. Nor could a king like me have had the desire to
offend a sage by placing a dead snake around his neck.
Without Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s mercy, it could never have been
possible for me on my own strength to become detached
from royal pleasures and the kingdom.”

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.19.14) states:

tasyaiva me ’ghasya parāvareśo

vyāsakta-cittasya gṛheṣv abhīkṣṇam

nirveda-mūlo dvija-śāpa-rūpo

yatra prasakto bhayam āśu dhatte

That Bhagavān, who is the controller of cause and the
effect, has certainly shown mercy unto me. First, I was
completely attached to household duties; and second, I
had committed the sin of insulting a brāhmaṇa. It seems
that the Lord thought, “Fear is indeed the cause of
detachment for a person immersed in sense gratification.
One cannot obtain Me (Bhagavān) by any means unless one
develops detachment.” Therefore, by assuming the form of
the brāhmaṇa’s terrifying curse, He personally showed me
mercy.

The purport of this verse is: “Absorbed as I was in
household duties, I was engaged in sinful activities.
Moreover, I was attached to family life. Therefore, the
Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa appeared to me in the form of a
brāhmaṇa’s curse. This curse, which indeed would terrify
any householder attached to family life, became the
cause of my detachment. So, this curse is certainly the
supreme mercy of the Lord, for it has acted for me as

                              47
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

the root cause of developing detachment to household
life. Due to fear of this curse, I developed
renunciation. Factually, Śrī Kṛṣṇa has sent me this
‘curse of a brāhmaṇa’ through Śṛṅgī.”



Verse 30

tac-chiṣya-rūpeṇa ca mat-priyaṁ taṁ

saṁśrāvya śāpaṁ nilayāndha-kūpāt

śrī-vāsudevena vikṛṣya nītaḥ

prāyopaveśāya matiṁ dyu-nadyām

tat-śiṣya-rūpeṇa – in the form of Śamīka Ṛṣi’s disciple;
ca – also; mat-priyam – a favour to me; tam – Him;
saṁśrāvya – made me hear; śāpam – curse; nilaya – of
householder life; andha-kūpāt – from the dark well; śrī-
vāsudevena – by Śrī Kṛṣṇa; vikṛṣya – pulled; nītaḥ –
brought; prāya – fasting until death; upaveśāya – for
sitting down; matim –

intelligence; dyu-nadyām – by the Gaṅgā.

It was Śrī Vāsudeva who, in the form of a disciple of
the

brāhmaṇa Śamīka, made me hear that curse, which was so
dear to me. By this, He pulled me out of the dark well
of household life and granted me the intelligence to
perform prāyopaveśana on the bank of the Gaṅgā. (This
means to sit, abstaining from food and water until
death.)

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “Bhagavān made me
hear that curse by appearing in the form of Śamīka Ṛṣi’s
disciple (Śṛṅgī). Thus, He induced me to sit on the
Gaṅgā’s bank, vowing to abstain from food and water
until death. Had I not known the details of that curse,
I could never have developed the inclination to sit by
the Gaṅgā like that. Hearing that curse did not make me
fearful; rather it exhilarated me, since I was praying
for such a situation. Therefore, this curse has proven
to be a blessing.” In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.19.2) Śrī
Parīkṣit prays:

dhruvaṁ tato me kṛta-deva-helanād

duratyayaṁ vyasanaṁ nāti-dīrghāt

tad astu kāmaṁ hy agha-niṣkṛtāya me

yathā na kuryāṁ punar evam addhā

I have certainly disobeyed Śrī Bhagavān by committing
the great sin of disrespecting that sage, who is as good
as a demigod. Therefore, there is no doubt that a
terrible calamity will soon befall me. I want to be
delivered from it, so may that calamity come upon me
without delay. In other words, my sons and others should
not suffer for this sin; the resultant calamity should

                              48
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

very quickly befall me alone. Personally undergoing the
punishment will be appropriate atonement, and I will
never again perform such a reprehensible act.

Śrī Parīkṣit says, “Household life is like a blind well
from which a trapped person cannot come out by himself.”
In the original verse, the name ‘Vāsudeva’ implies the
Supersoul within, the presiding Deity of consciousness
(citta). “Śrī Vāsudeva, the presiding Deity of
consciousness, infused my heart with His mercy, thus
pulling me out of the blind well of household life. He
brought me to the Gaṅgā’s bank and inspired me to
undertake a vow of abstaining from food and water until
death. Had I not been the recipient of Śrī Vāsudeva’s
mercy, I would have performed various sacrifices to
counteract the brāhmaṇa’s curse while remaining in
household life. Śrī Vāsudeva’s mercy was the only
impetus that saved me from doing that.” Alternatively,
the term ‘Śrī Vāsudeva’ indicates the supremely sweet
compassion of the son of Śrī Vasudeva. This, indeed, is
known as the complete and conclusive truth (siddhānta).



Verse 31

munīndra-goṣṭhyām upadeśya tattvaṁ

śukātmanā yena bhayaṁ nirasya

pramodya ca sva-priya-saṅga-dānāt

kathāmṛtaṁ samprati ca prapāyye

muni-indra-goṣṭhyām – in the assembly of grand sages;
upadeśya – instructed; tattvam – spirtual truth; śuka-
ātmanā – through the heart of Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī; yena
– by Him; bhayam – fear; nirasya – dissipated; pramodya
– delighting; ca – also; sva-priya – of His beloved
devotees; saṅga – of the association; dānāt – by the
gift; kathā – pastimes; amṛtam – nectar; samprati – now;
ca – and; prapāyye – He is making me take.

Previously, that same Śrī Kṛṣṇa appeared as Śrī Śukadeva
Gosvāmī in that august assembly of exalted sages and
instructed me on spiritual truth. He thereby dissipated
my fears and immersed me in bliss. And now, by granting
me the association of His beloved devotees like you, He
is making me drink the nectar of the narrations of His
pastimes.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “In the assembly of
sages such as Vaśiṣṭha, Parāśara, Vyāsa, and Nārada,
there was a debate regarding how to ascertain the
Absolute Truth, or tattva. In that assembly, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
manifested in the form of Śrī Śukadeva and instructed me
on this Absolute Truth.”

Śrī Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya states:

tena te devatā-tattvaṁ pṛṣṭā vādān vitenire

nānā-śāstra-vido viprā mithaḥ sādhana-dūṣaṇaiḥ


                              49
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

harirdaivaṁ śivo daivaṁ bhāskaro daivamityuta

kāla eva svabhāvastu karmaiveti pṛthag jaguḥ

An assembly of venerable brāhmaṇas, learned in different
scriptures and engaged in various spiritual practices,
were questioned as to who or what is the supreme
spiritual object of worship. Some proposed Śrī Hari,
some suggested Śrī Śiva, and others suggested Sūrya (the
sun-god), kāla (the supreme time factor), svabhāva
(natural sentiments according to one’s nature), and
karma (fruitive action).

Śrī Parīkṣit says, “In this way, while describing
various worshipable truths (upāsya-tattvas) they began
to debate with one another. In that august assembly of
great sages, Śrī Kṛṣṇa appeared in the form of Śrī
Vyāsa’s son Śrī Śukadeva and dispelled my fear. He
instructed me on paramārtha-tattva, the truth about
life’s ultimate goal, which was approved by all. That
is, he instructed me about the truth of the body and the
soul. He made me blissful by eradicating my fear of
imminent death in the form of the bite of the snake
Takṣaka, or in other words, by removing the fear of
material existence, which consists of repeated birth and
death. He did this by delighting me with his explanation
about the truth of the glories of bhagavad-bhakti,
devotional service to the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, invoking in me true knowledge about the science
of bhakti.

“Now, Śrī Gurudeva (Śrī Śukadeva) has disappeared from
my vision and the time of my death is near.
Nevertheless, since the essence of all goals is to
relish the rasa contained within the transcendental
topics about Śrī Kṛṣṇa, in the association of His
beloved devotees, the Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa is making
me drink the nectar of His pastimes in an excellent way
by granting me the association of you, a venerable
Vaiṣṇavī, who are indeed very dear to Him.”




Verse 32


kṛṣṇaṁ praṇamya nirupādhi-kṛpākaraṁ taṁ

saṁvardhya vipra-vacanād ādarato gṛhītam

svasyānta-kālam idam eka-manā bruve te

praśnottaraṁ sakala-vaiṣṇava-śāstra-sāram

kṛṣṇam – to Śrī Kṛṣṇa; praṇamya – I bow down; nirupādhi
– unconditional; kṛpā – of mercy; ākaram – the source;
tam – to Him; saṁvardhya – prolonged; vipra – of the
brāhmaṇa; vacana – for the words; ādarataḥ – because of
honoring; gṛhītam – taken; svasya – my own; anta-kālam –
the time of my death; idam – this; eka-manāḥ – with one-
pointed focus; bruve – I am replying; te – your; praśna
– to the question; uttaram – the reply; sakala – of all;

                              50
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

vaiṣṇava-śāstra – Vaiṣṇava scriptures; sāram – the
essence.

I bow down to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is the source of
unconditional mercy. Since I honored the brāhmaṇa’s
words, my final day will certainly be very much
prolongued. Therefore, I will respond to your question
with one-pointed focus, and you should understand that
my reply will incorporate the essence of all Vaiṣṇava
scriptures.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: One might raise the objection that it
is highly improper for great personalities to indulge in
self-praise. To address this, Śrī Parīkṣit says, “Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is the source of causeless mercy. Although a
person may be totally unqualified, Kṛṣṇa showers mercy
even on him. Therefore, it has been said that He is the
mine, or source, of unconditional mercy. If the quality
of the unconditional mercy is seen in anyone else, it
should be understood that it is a drop of the ocean of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s causeless mercy.

“I am a vile person, devoid of all good qualities.
Still, if any virtue is seen in me, it is simply a
display of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s grandeur. In that sense,
extolling my qualities is ultimately tantamount to
glorifying Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s divine splendor. For this reason
there is no fault in it, rather it is a commendable
quality. Because I accepted the brāhmaṇa’s curse with
respect and in a devotional mood, I have been allotted
extra time before giving up my body, and the duration of
my last day has been extended. Thus in my final hour,
having abandoned yoga and all other duties, I will
respond to your query with single-minded, resolute
consciousness and will recount a history that contains
the essence of all scriptures.”



Verses 33–34

śruti-smṛtīnāṁ vākyāni sākṣāt-tātparyato ’py aham

vyākhyāya bodhayitvaitat tvāṁ santoṣayituṁ kṣamaḥ

tathāpi sva-guroḥ prāptaṁ prasādāt saṁśaya-cchidam

atretihāsam ādau te vyaktārthaṁ kathāyāmy amum

śruti – statements directly heard from Śrī Bhagavān’s
mouth; smṛtīnām – of words by realized sages in
remembrance of Him; vākyāni – the words; sākṣāt-
tātparyataḥ – from the direct and primary meanings; api
– also; aham – I; vyākhyāya – in order to illuminate;
bodhayitvā – having first understood; etat – this; tvām
– you; santoṣayitum – fully satisfy; kṣamaḥ – am able;
tathā api – however; sva-guroḥ – from my guru, Śrī
Śukadeva; prāptam – attained; prasādāt – by the mercy;
saṁśaya-chidam – which eradicates doubts; atra – here;
itihāsam – famous history; ādau – at first; te – your;
vyakta-artham – for the clarification; kathayāmi – I
shall speak; amum – this.

In replying to your questions, I can delight you by

                              51
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

explaining the essence of Śruti and Smṛti scriptures,
and by citing their direct meanings (mukhya-vṛtti) and
purports and annotations (tātparya-vṛtti). First,
however, I want to describe a very famous history that I
came to know through the mercy of my guru, Śrī Śukadeva,
for it destroys all doubts and is unequivocal in
meaning. After that, I will quote from the Śruti and
Smṛti.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “I am confident
that I can satisfy you by replying to your questions in
two ways: I can explain the Vedic literature (Śruti) and
the supplements to the Vedas (Smṛti) based on their
direct and primary meanings, known as mukhya-vṛtti. In
other words, I can explain these scriptures based on
their literal meanings, as they were heard. And in
places, I can explain their purports, or tātparya-vṛtti,
by revealing commentaries that have been ascertained by
disciplic succession, or guru-paramparā, and garnered by
experience. However, I will initiate my reply by
describing a most illustrious history that I have
received by the mercy of my guru, Śrī Śukadeva.”

Śrī Uttarā may ask, “What is the nature of that
history?” In response Śrī Parīkṣit says, “This history
is able to destroy all doubts and establish the clear
and unambiguous meanings of the words of Śruti and
Smṛti.” Alternatively, the word ādau in this verse is an
adverb, and so the verse can be read, “First, I am
describing the history I received by the mercy of my
guru, and thereafter I will describe other subject
matters.”



Verses 35–37

vipro niṣkiñcanaḥ kaścit purā prāgjyotiṣe pure

vasann ajñāta-śāstrārtho bahu-draviṇa-kāmyayā

tatratya-devīṁ kāmākhyāṁ śraddhayānudinaṁ bhajan

tasyāḥ sakāśāt tuṣṭāyāḥ svapne mantraṁ daśākṣaram

lebhe madana-gopāla-caraṇāmbhoja-daivatam

tad-dhyānādi-vidhānāḍhyaṁ sākṣād iva mahā-nidhim

vipraḥ – a brāhmaṇa; niṣkiñcanaḥ – poor; kaścit – a
certain; purā – in ancient times; prāg-jyotiṣe pure – in
a city in the land of Assam; vasan – was living; ajñāta
– not knowing; śāstra-arthaḥ – teachings of the
scriptures; bahu-draviṇa – great wealth; kāmyayā –
because of desiring; tatratya – of that place; devīm –
the goddess; kāma-ākhyām – named Kāmākhya-devī;
śraddhayā – with faith; anu-dinam – every day; bhajan –
worshiping; tasyāḥ – from her; sakāśāt – directly;
tuṣṭāyāḥ – pleased; svapne – in a dream; mantram – a
mantra; daśa – ten; akṣaram – syllables; lebhe – he
received; madana-gopāla-caraṇa-ambhoja – of the lotus
feet of Śrī Madana-gopāla; daivatam– the Deity; tat – of
that; dhyāna-ādi – of meditation and so forth, including
nyāsa and ācamana; vidhāna – with the process; āḍhyam –

                              52
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

embellished; sākṣāt – directly; iva – like; mahā-nidhim
– great wealth.

In ancient times, a poor brāhmaṇa who lacked any
scriptural knowledge lived in Prāgjyotiṣa-pura (near
present-day Gauhātī, in the State of Assam). The goddess
Kāmākhyā-devī (Durgā-devī) is present there, and every
day, the brāhmaṇa faithfully worshiped her with a desire
for great wealth and opulence. Pleased with his worship,
the goddess appeared in his dream and gave him a mantra
–

the ten-syllable gopāla-mantra, whose Deity is Śrī
Madana-gopāla. This mantra embodies immense potency.
When conferring this mantra on the brāhmaṇa, the goddess
instructed him about the process of mantra meditation,
and also about nyāsa and other rituals and worship. She
told him that by the power of this mantra alone, he
would achieve the service of the lotus feet of Śrī
Madana-gopāla.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “A brāhmaṇa once
lived in the city of Prāgjyotiṣa-pura, in the country
known as Kāma-rūpa (Assam).” The brāhmaṇa’s history is
related in three verses. “This brāhmaṇa was poor.
Moreover, he was ignorant of the import of the
scriptures and did not know anything about his own
religious duties. Thus, he was quite foolish.” This is
an indication of the great power of the mantra. That all
the desires of a great fool like him were fulfilled
indicates the power of the mantra given by the goddess.

“Desiring fabulous wealth, the brāhmaṇa would serve
Kāmākhyā-devī, the goddess of Prāgjyotiṣa-pura. Pleased
by his service, the goddess

appeared in the brāhmaṇa’s dream and taught him a ten-
syllable

mantra. This mantra is found in the Krama-dīpikā Tantra,
and the

worshipful Deity of the mantra is Śrī Madana-gopāla
Himself. Upon

bestowing the mantra, the goddess also explained to the
brāhmaṇa

the mantra’s meditation (dhyāna), mental dedication of
the body to the Lord (nyāsa), symbolic hand gestures
(mudrā), and worship (pūjā).”

Śrī Uttarā may question, “After worshiping Devī, how did
he become free from his desire for wealth?” In reply,
Śrī Parīkṣit says, “That mantra is the absolute form of
infinite treasure. Therefore, by obtaining it, all his
desires were automatically fulfilled.”

Note: In the tantra named Krama-dīpikā (2.5), the ten-
syllable mantra is explained:

śārṅgī sottara-dantaḥ śūro vāmākṣi-yug-dvitīyārṇaḥ

śūlī śaurir bāno balānuja-dvayam athākṣara catuṣkam

                              53
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017


The ten-syllable mantra is actually for the worship of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is gopī-jana-vallabha, the beloved of the
gopīs.



Verse 38

devy-ādeśena taṁ mantraṁ vivikte satataṁ japan

dhanecchāyā nivṛtto ’bhūl lebhe ca hṛdi nirvṛtim

devī – of the goddess; ādeśena – by the instruction; tam
mantram – that mantra; vivikte – in a solitary place;
satatam – constantly; japan – chanting; dhana – for
wealth; icchāyā – to the desire; nivṛttaḥ – indifferent;
abhūt – he became; lebhe – he attained; ca – also; hṛdi
– in his heart; nirvṛtim – satisfaction.

On Devī’s instruction, the brāhmaṇa became absorbed in
recitation of the mantra. As he constantly chanted this
mantra in a solitary place, his desire for wealth
vanished and he became peaceful within.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “The brāhmaṇa
received the mantra in his dream, but because he was
extremely ignorant, he thought the dream was an
illusion, and so he did not immediately engage in the
process of japa, or chanting the mantra. For this
reason, Devī came to him again in a dream and ordered
him to chant the mantra.”



Verse 39

vastu-tattvānabhijño ’nyat sa kiñcit pāra-laukikam

sādhanaṁ kila sādhyaṁ ca vartamānam amanyata

vastu-tattva – Absolute Truth; anabhijñaḥ – ignorant;
anyat – another; saḥ – he; kiñcit – some; pāra-laukikam
– transcendental; sādhanam – means of attainment; kila –
indeed; sādhyam – the goal; ca – also; vartamānam –
existing; amanyata – he thought.

The brāhmaṇa was ignorant of the fundamental principles
of the Absolute Truth, and so he began to think, “In
addition to the chanting of the mantra, there must be
some other transcendental goal and some other process to
achieve it.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “That the brāhmaṇa
was ignorant of the principles of the Absolute Truth
(vastu-tattva) means that he was unaware of the
existence of anything superior or inferior to the
chanting of this mantra. He therefore thought, ‘Other
than chanting this mantra, there must be another method
of attainment (sādhana), and by focusing on that
practice, a concomitant goal (sādhya) can be obtained.’
This means that although initially he was indifferent to
transcendental (pāra-laukika) activities, now by the
power of that mantra, he developed an interest in them.

                              54
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

He had not heard about the glories of chanting the
mantra from Devī’s mouth, so he was ignorant about the
mantra’s greatness. He thought that other goals and
other disciplines to achieve those goals must surely
exist, and as a result, he had little real interest in
the mantra. But this situation actually reveals the
mantra’s potency. Even if this mantra is chanted without
faith, it still fulfills all desires.” The other glories
of chanting the mantra have not been mentioned here; at
this point, they are unmanifest.

“Upon receiving Devī’s order, in a solitary place the
brāhmaṇa

engaged in continuously chanting the mantra he had
received from her. The brāhmaṇa’s desire for wealth
vanished by the power of that mantra, and he soon
experienced peace in his heart. Although in the past,
due to his ignorance, he had no desire to pursue any
transcendental goal or follow any process to achieve it,
by the power of chanting that mantra, he developed
knowledge of this transcendental subject matter.”



Verse 40

gṛhādikaṁ parityajya bhramaṁs tīrtheṣu bhikṣayā

gato nirvāhayan dehaṁ gaṅgā-sāgara-saṅgamam

gṛha – home; ādikam – and so on; parityajya   –
renouncing; bhraman – wandering; tīrtheṣu –   in different
holy places; bhikṣayā – by begging; gataḥ –   went;
nirvāhayan – maintaining; deham – his body;   gaṅgā-sāgara
– of the Gaṅgā and the ocean; saṅgamam – to   the
confluence.

Some days later, the brāhmaṇa renounced his home life.
Begging just enough to maintain his bodily existence, he
wandered to the different holy places of pilgrimage and
finally reached Gaṅgā-sāgara, the confluence of the
river Gaṅgā and the ocean.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “Shortly
thereafter, the brāhmaṇa renounced his family, home, and
so on, and set out on pilgrimage to the holy places, or
tīrthas, maintaining his body simply by begging.” The
term bhramaṇa, meaning ‘wandering,’ indicates
apratigraha, ‘a lack of desire for acquisition.’ “While
traveling to holy places, the brāhmaṇa did not accept
anything except the bare necessities.” This reveals that
now he was free from sin and had developed renunciation.
“In this way, traveling through many holy places, he
arrived at the confluence, or saṅgama, named Gaṅgā-
sāgara, where the Gaṅgā meets the ocean.”



Verse 41

viprān gaṅgā-taṭe ’paśyat sarva-vidyā-viśāradān

sva-dharmācāra-niratān prāyaśo gṛhiṇo bahūn

                              55
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017


viprān – the brāhmaṇas; gaṅgā – of the Gaṅgā; taṭe – on
the banks; apaśyat – he observed; sarva-vidyā – in
various branches of knowledge; viśāradān – expert; sva-
dharma-ācāra – in executing their religious duties;
niratān – engaged; prāyaśaḥ – mostly; gṛhiṇaḥ –
householders; bahūn – many.

There on the banks of the Gaṅgā, he met many brāhmaṇas,
mostly householders, who were expert in various branches
of knowledge and engaged in executing their religious
duties.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “There, along the
banks of the Gaṅgā, he saw many brāhmaṇas from the Gauḍa
region, who were versed in all branches of knowledge.”

Erudition, according to Viṣṇu Purāṇa (3.6.27), entails
having expertise in the fourteen branches of knowledge:

aṅgāni vedāś catvāro

mīmāṁsā nyāya-vistaraḥ

dharma-śāstraṁ purāṇaṁ ca

vidyā hy etāś caturdaśa

The four Vedas, their six supplements (ṣaḍ-aṅga),

mīmāṁsā (the systematic study of the meaning of the
Vedas), nyāya (logic), dharma-śāstras (scriptures
delineating religious principles), and the Purāṇas
(Vedic history) comprise the fourteen divisions of
knowledge.

Śrī Parīkṣit says, “The brāhmaṇas strictly adhered to
following their individual occupational and religious
duties, known as dharma, and they were generally family
men, or gṛhasthas.”



Verse 42

tair varṇyamānam ācāraṁ nitya-naimittikādikam

āvaśyakaṁ tathā kāmyaṁ svargaṁ śuśrāva tat-phalam

taiḥ – by them; varṇyamānam – being described; ācāram –
duties; nitya – regular, daily; naimittika – occasional;
ādikam – and so on; āvaśyakam – necessity; tathā – then;
kāmyam – awarding sensual pleasure; svargam – heavenly
pleasure; śuśrāva – heard; tat – of that; phalam – the
result.

He heard from those brāhmaṇas about the necessity of
daily obligatory rites and of circumstantial rituals. He
also heard about ritualistic activities to fulfill
material desires and how one obtains heavenly pleasures
as a result of these activities.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “Upon arriving at
the bank of the river Gaṅgā, the newly-renounced

                              56
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

brāhmaṇa heard instructions from the brāhmaṇas of that
place who were devoted to executing their occupational
duties. They instructed him on performance of daily
obligatory rites (nitya-karma), circumstantial duties
(naimittika-karma), fruitive activities (kāmya-karma),
and the heavenly enjoyment (svarga-sukha) obtained by
the performance of these karmas.” The term nitya-karma
indicates activities such as the performance of fire
sacrifices (agnihotras). Naimittika-karma indicates
activities such as the offering of oblations to deceased
forefathers performed either on specific festival days
or on the new moon day. The word ādi indicates daily
activities, like awakening during the brahma-muhūrta, a
period before sunrise, as mentioned in Śrī Viṣṇu Purāṇa.
These kinds of religious practices are considered
essential duties, or nitya-karma. The term kāmya-karma
indicates vows of austerity (vratas), and so on.

Śrī Parīkṣit continues, “These brāhmaṇas, who were
absorbed in performing their prescribed occupational
duties, instructed:

ācāra-prabahvo dharmo, dharmasya prabhuracyutaḥ

‘Proper conduct (ācāra) alone is the father of religion
(dharma) and the Lord of religion is Acyuta, the
infallible Lord.’

sad-ācāravatā puṁsā, jitau lokāv-ubhāv-api

‘Thus, only persons who possess virtuous conduct
(sadācāra) can conquer both this world and the next.’

“The brāhmaṇa heard many such statements of effusive
praise. He also heard that heavenly pleasures are
attained by executing one’s occupational duties, or sva-
dharma. He heard topics about the varieties of happiness
available to the residents of the heavenly planets:

yanna duḥkhena saṁbhinnaṁ na ca grastamanantaram

abhilāṣo panītaṁ ca sukhaṁ tat svargavāsinām

‘Material enjoyment in Svarga is free from sorrow and is
available according to one’s desires.’

“Observing the visiting brāhmaṇa’s level of faith in
those topics, the Gaṅgā-sāgara brāhmaṇas instructed him
accordingly.”



Verse 43

nānā-saṅkalpa-vākyaiś ca tad-anuṣṭhāna-niṣṭhatām

dṛṣṭvā tatrodita-śraddhaḥ pravṛttaḥ śikṣitaḥ sa taiḥ

nānā – many; saṅkalpa – solemn vows; vākyaiḥ –
expressed; ca – also; tat-anuṣṭhāna – in the performance
of their rituals; niṣṭhatām – strong faith; dṛṣṭvā –
observing; tatra – there; udita – developed; śraddhaḥ –
faith; pravṛttaḥ – began to execute; śikṣitaḥ –
instructed; saḥ – that (brāhmaṇa); taiḥ – by them.

                              57
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017


Observing the brāhmaṇas’ strong faith in their rituals,
which they expressed in solemn vows, he also developed
faith in those rituals. And after receiving instructions
from them, he also began to perform the same rituals.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “He not only heard
the brāhmaṇas words, but he also witnessed with his own
eyes their devotion to those rituals. He thus engaged in
those same activities with great faith. Seeing the
brāhmaṇas’ observance of vows for ritual bathing in the
Gaṅgā, by uttering verses beginning with gaṅgā, and
observing their strong faith in those rituals, he also
engaged in the same activities.”

Here Śrī Uttarā-devī may ask, “He was such a great fool,
so how is it that he engaged in those activities?” In
reply, Śrī Parīkṣit says, “He was educated by the
brāhmaṇas residing on the shore of the Gaṅgā, and then
he undertook the practice of those activities.” In other
words, he developed faith in the scriptural injunctions
that delineate those activities and became dedicated to
them.



Verse 44

devy-ājñādarato mantram api nityaṁ raho japan

tat-prabhāvān na lebhe ’ntaḥ santoṣaṁ teṣu karmasu

devī – of the goddess; ājñā – for the order; ādarataḥ –
honoring; mantram – the gopāla-mantra; api – also;
nityam – daily; rahaḥ – in solitude; japan – chanting;
tat-prabhāvāt – by the power of that (mantra); na – not;
lebhe – obtained; antaḥ – of heart; santoṣam –
happiness; teṣu – their; karmasu – in the ritualistic
activities.

Honoring the goddess’s order, the brāhmaṇa continued to
chant his gopāla-mantra daily, in a solitary place.
Although he continued to engage in those ritualistic
activities, nevertheless, due to the power of the
mantra, his heart was not satisfied.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “By the potency of
devotional service to Bhagavān (bhagavat-upāsanā), the
brāhmaṇa did not develop any attachment to those
rituals, or karmas, and therefore he found no
satisfaction in them. This was solely due to the power
of chanting the mantra.”



Verse 45

sa nirvidya gataḥ kāśīṁ dadarśa bahu-deśa-jān

yati-prāyān janāṁs tatrādvaita-vyākhyā-vivādinaḥ

saḥ – he; nirvidya – indifferent; gataḥ – went; kāśīm –
to Śrī Śiva’s abode, Kāśī; dadarśa – he saw; bahu-deśa-
jān – people from different countries; yati –

                              58
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

renunciants; prāyān – mostly; janān – people; tatra –
there; advaita – of nondual monism; vyākhyā – the
various explanations; vivādinaḥ – debating.

Finally, becoming disinterested in those ritualistic
activities, the brāhmaṇa went to the sacred abode of
Kāśī. There, he met many sannyāsīs who had come from
different countries. These sannyāsīs were engaged in
debating the various explanations of advaita-vāda, the
theory of monism.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “Developing
disinterest in executing those ritualistic activities,
the brāhmaṇa went to Kāśī. There, he met many persons
from various countries who looked like renunciants, or
sannyāsīs. They would argue about the different
explanations of the impersonal aspect of the Absolute
Brahman, deliberating on the different interpretations
of the doctrine of advaita-vāda.”



Verse 46

viśveśvaraṁ praṇamyādau gatvā prati-maṭhaṁ yatīn

natvā sambhāṣya viśrāmaṁ teṣāṁ pārśve cakāra saḥ

viśveśvaram – to Śrī Viśveśvara; praṇamya – offering
respectful obeisances; ādau – in the beginning; gatvā –
having gone; prati-maṭham – to every monastery; yatīn –
to the sannyāsīs; natvā – bowing; sambhāṣya –
conversing; viśrāmam – rest; teṣām – of them; pārśve –
by the side; cakāra – took; saḥ – he.

First, he offered respectful obeisances to Śrī
Viśveśvara (Śrī Viśvanātha Mahādeva). Then, he visited
every maṭha, where he bowed down to the sannyāsīs there,
talked with them, and rested in their company.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “First, he offered
his respects to the presiding Deity of Kāśī, Śrī Śiva,
also known as Viśveśvara.”



Verse 47

vādeṣu śuddha-buddhīnāṁ teṣāṁ pāṇitala-sthavat

mokṣaṁ bodhayatāṁ vākyaiḥ sāraṁ mene sa tan-matam

vādeṣu – in philosophical debates; śuddha-buddhīnām –
who had pure intelligence; teṣām – of them; pāṇi – of
the hand; tala – in the palm; stha-vat – as if placed;
mokṣam – liberation; bodhayatām – who were explaining;
vākyaiḥ – with statements; sāram – the essence; mene –
began to think; saḥ – he; tat-matam – of that view.

The intelligence of all those sannyāsīs was expertly
applied purely in debate. Their statements on liberation
from material existence were presented logically, as if
liberation were a common gooseberry (āmalakī) in the
palm of their hands. Therefore, listening to their

                              59
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

discussions, the brāhmaṇa began to think that their
views were quintessential and supreme.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “The resident
sannyāsīs would say, ‘It is essential to enter the
sannyāsa order to attain liberation.’ The brāhmaṇa
gradually began to believe in the superiority of their
opinion. The reason was that those sannyāsīs’ statements
gave the impression that liberation, mokṣa, was sitting
in the palms of their hands, just like a little āmalakī
fruit. Those sannyāsīs were merely experts in debate and
logic; their intelligence in regard to the ultimate goal
of life, or paramārtha, was impure.”



Verses 48–49

śṛṇvann avirataṁ nyāsa-mokṣotkarṣa-parāṇi saḥ

tebhyo vedānta-vākyāni maṇikarṇyāṁ samācaran

snānaṁ viśveśvaraṁ paśyaṁs teṣāṁ saṅge ’prayāsataḥ

miṣṭeṣṭa-bhogān bhuñjānaḥ sannyāsaṁ kartum iṣṭavān

śṛṇvan – hearing; aviratam – regularly; nyāsa – of the
renounced order of life; mokṣa – of liberation; utkarṣa-
parāṇi – superiority; saḥ – he; tebhyaḥ – from them;
vedānta-vākyāni – the verses of Vedānta; maṇikarṇyam –
in the Gaṅgā at Maṇikarṇikā-ghāṭa; samācaran – taking;
snānam – bath; viśveśvaram – Śrī Viśveśvara; paśyan –
seeing; teṣām saṅge – in their company; aprayāsataḥ –
without having to work; miṣṭa-iṣṭa-bhogān – sweet
delectable food; bhuñjānaḥ – enjoying; sannyāsam – the
renounced order; kartum – to take; iṣṭavān – he had a
desire.

The brāhmaṇa regularly heard those sannyāsīs cite verses
from Vedānta declaring the superiority of the renounced
order of life (sannyāsa) and of impersonal liberation.
Daily, after bathing in the Gaṅgā at Maṇikarṇikā-ghāṭa,
he took darśana of Śrī Viśvanātha. Without having to
work, he ate delectable meals to his heart’s content
with those sannyāsīs. Thus, he developed an urge to
accept sannyāsa.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “By regularly
hearing from the sannyāsīs the statements from the
Vedānta establishing the superiority of impersonal
liberation (mokṣa) and the renounced order of life
(sannyāsa), the brāhmaṇa also developed a desire to
accept sannyāsa.” This is explained in these two verses.

There are reasons why the brāhmaṇa felt the urge to
accept sannyāsa: (1) he was hearing statements from the
Vedānta, (2) he was bathing daily in the Gaṅgā, and (3)
he was going for darśana of Śrī Viśvanātha. His daily
activities like bathing in Gaṅgā at Maṇikarṇikā-ghāṭa in
the company of sannyāsīs happened naturally and easily.
The word aprayāsataḥ, meaning ‘effortlessly,’ applies to
all three reasons, or to all the brāhmaṇa’s activities.



                              60
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


Verse 50

sva-japyaṁ gauravād devyās tathāntaḥ-sukha-lābhataḥ

atyajann ekadā svapne ’paśyat tan-mantra-devatām

sva-japyam – to be chanted by him; gauravāt – out of
respect; devyāḥ– from the goddess; tathā – then; antaḥ –
internal; sukha – happiness; lābhataḥ – because of
obtaining; atyajan – not giving up; ekadā – once; svapne
– in a dream; apaśyat – he saw; tat-mantra-devatām –
that mantra’s presiding Deity.

Due to the brāhmaṇa’s reverence for Kāmākhyā-devī and
his experience of internal happiness, he did not give up
chanting his mantra. Some days passed, and then one
night, in a dream he had a vision of his mantra’s
presiding Deity.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Now, after presenting the glories of
devotional service to Bhagavān, Śrī Parīkṣit speaks four
verses, beginning here with

sva-japyam, to explain why the brāhmaṇa declined to take
sannyāsa. He says, “By associating with those sannyāsīs,
the brāhmaṇa lost faith in chanting his mantra, but
still he did not give up the chanting. His reverence for
Kāmākhyā-devī was the reason behind this. He had faith
in her divine pre-eminence and so he respected her
instructions. Therefore, although he had a desire to
accept sannyāsa, he did not.”

Śrī Uttarā-devī may question, “Although he heard
statements from the Vedānta, why did he not respect
them?”

Śrī Parīkṣit replies, “Even though he heard quotes from
the Vedānta establishing the superiority of liberation,
the brāhmaṇa did not experience internal happiness. He
did, however, experience that happiness in chanting his
mantra. But if he had not received darśana of the
mantra’s presiding Deity, Śrī Madana-gopāla, in his
dream, it would have been impossible for him to
eliminate his urge for liberation.” Alternatively, it
may be said that the mantra’s Deity, Śrī Madana-gopāla,
appeared in his dream to reveal to him the glories of
the mantra. Feeling apathy toward impersonal liberation
is the natural and direct consequence of chanting the
mantra. Receiving audience of the Lord in a dream is
only an incidental or secondary result.



Verse 51

tan-mahā-ramyatākṛṣṭaḥ paramānanda-gocaraḥ

taj-japānya-pravṛttau hi na lebhe sa mano-balam

tat – of Him; mahā-ramyatā – by the extreme charm;
ākṛṣṭaḥ – captured; parama-ānanda – supreme rapture; go-
caraḥ – within perception of his senses; tat-japa – the
chanting of that; anya-pravṛttau – in other engagement;

                              61
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

hi– certainly; na – not; lebhe – obtained; saḥ – he;
manaḥ-balam – inspiration.

When the mantra’s presiding Deity appeared to him in the
dream, the Deity’s extreme beauty captured the
brāhmaṇa’s heart and filled him with supreme bliss. From
then on, except for his chanting of the mantra, all
other activities felt distasteful.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “After the brāhmaṇa
saw the most engaging beauty of the Deity of the mantra,
his heart was enchanted and captivated, and he
experienced supreme exultation. Now, aside from chanting
the mantra, he lost all enthusiasm and impetus for other
activities, such as accepting sannyāsa and bathing in
the Gaṅgā.”



Verse 52

iti kartavyatā-mūḍho dīnaḥ san svapnam āgataḥ

tayā devyā sahāgatya tatrādiṣṭaḥ śivena saḥ

iti – thus; kartavyatā – about what should be done;
mūḍhaḥ – confused; dīnaḥ – wretched; san – being;
svapnam – sleep; āgataḥ – came; tayā – her; devyā saha –
with the goddess; āgatya – appeared; tatra – there;
ādiṣṭaḥ – ordered; śivena – by Śrī Mahādeva; saḥ – he.

The brāhmaṇa then became confused about his duties. In a
state of despair, he fell asleep. Śrī Mahādeva, along
with Devī, appeared in his dream and ordered him as
follows.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “Then, the
bewildered

brāhmaṇa could not determine his actual duty, whether it
was to accept sannyāsa or to engage in chanting his
mantra. Because his mind had been rendered restless by
constantly associating with sannyāsīs and hearing their
words, he was unable to discern his real duty. In this
distressed condition, he finally fell asleep. The
goddess, who had initiated him into the mantra in his
dream and who later had ordered him to continue
chanting, and in whom the brāhmaṇa had strong faith, now
again appeared in his dream along with Śrī Mahādeva, who
spoke to him as follows.”



Verse 53

mā mūrkha kuru sannyāsaṁ drutaṁ śrī-mathurāṁ vraja

tatra vṛndāvane ’vaśyaṁ pūrṇārthas tvaṁ bhaviṣyasi

mā – do not; mūrkha – O fool; kuru – accept; sannyāsam –
the renounced order of life; drutam – quickly; śrī-
mathurām – to Śrī Mathurā-maṇḍala; vraja – go; tatra –
there; vṛndāvane – in Śrī Vṛndāvana; avaśyam –
certainly; pūrṇa-arthaḥ – complete fulfillment; tvam –

                              62
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

you; bhaviṣyasi – you will attain.

O fool! You must not accept sannyāsa. Quickly go to the
district of Śrī Mathurā. There in Śrī Vṛndāvana, your
desire will certainly be fulfilled.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “With words such as
mahā-mūrkha, meaning ‘big fool,’ the goddess and
Mahādeva ordered the brāhmaṇa, ‘Go immediately to the
district of Mathurā, within which exists the supremely
ineffable holy place, Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. There, you
will achieve all your goals, and all your desires will
surely be fulfilled.’”




Verse 54


sotkaṇṭho mathurāṁ gantuṁ muhus tāṁ kīrtayaṁs tataḥ

sa tad-deśa-diśaṁ gacchan prayāgaṁ prāpa vartmani

sa-utkaṇṭhaḥ – with eagerness; mathurām – Mathurā;
gantum – to go; muhuḥ – repeatedly; tam – that (word
‘Mathurā’); kīrtayan – singing; tataḥ – then; saḥ – he;
tat-deśa – of that country; diśam – in the direction;
gacchan – going; prayāgam – at Prayāga; prāpa – reached;
vartmani – on the road.

Hearing this, the brāhmaṇa became very eager to go to
Mathurā. Repeatedly singing “Mathurā, Mathurā,” he
walked in that direction. On the way, he came to
Prayāga.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “Upon hearing the
words of Devī and Mahādeva, the brāhmaṇa developed an
eagerness to go to Mathurā. While repeatedly performing
kīrtana of the name, singing ‘Mathurā, Mathurā,’ he
began to walk towards Mathurā from Kāśī.” Mathurā is the
kingdom of King Śūrasena and is situated west of Kāśī.
Traveling in this way towards Mathurā, he came to
Prayāga.



Verse 55

tasmil lasan-mādhava-pāda-padme

gaṅgāśrita-śrī-yamunā-manojñe

snānāya māghoṣasi tīrtha-rāje

prāptān sa sādhūn śataśo dadarśa

tasmin – there; lasat – decorated; mādhava – of Śrī
Mādhava; pāda-padme – at the lotus feet; gaṅgā – of the
Gaṅgā; āśrita – shelter; śrī – beautiful; yamunā –
Yamunā; manaḥ-jñe – charming; snānāya – to bathe; māgha
– in the month of Māgha; uṣasi – at dawn; tīrtha-rāje –
at the king of all the pilgrimage places; prāptān –

                              63
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

reaching; saḥ – he; sādhūn – saintly persons; śataśaḥ –
by the hundreds; dadarśa – he witnessed.

Prayāga, the king of all pilgrimage places, is decorated
with the lotus feet of Śrī Mādhava. It is very
attractive because there, the river Yamunā takes shelter
of the river Gaṅgā. Thousands of sādhus had congregated
there for the early morning ritual of bathing during the
month of Māgha. Reaching Prayāga-rāja, the brāhmaṇa
witnessed this huge gathering of saintly persons.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “Because bhakti,
devotion to the Supreme Lord, manifests in Prayāga, it
is considered superior to all other places of pilgrimage
(tīrthas) and is known as tīrtha-rāja, the king of all
tīrthas. Therefore, upon his arrival, the brāhmaṇa saw
thousands of Vaiṣṇava sādhus (saintly persons) gathered
there for the ritual of bathing at dawn during the month
of Māgha (January–February).” The two lines beginning
with lasat show Prayāga-tīrtha’s superiority as the king
of all holy places. Prayāga is adorned by the lotus feet
of Śrī Mādhava-deva, and it is charming because of the
presence of the river Yamunā, who takes shelter of the
Gaṅgā here. Alternatively, it may be said that because
both rivers, Yamunā and Gaṅgā, have deep devotion for
Bhagavān’s lotus feet, they have sought each other’s
association. The site of their confluence is the king of
pilgrimage places, Prayāga.



Verse 56

teṣāṁ sadā gīta-nati-stavādibhiḥ

śrī-viṣṇu-pūjotsavam aikṣatābhitaḥ

tan-nāma-saṅkīrtana-vādya-nartanaiḥ

premṇārta-nādai-ruditaiś ca śobhitam

teṣām – of them; sadā – constant; gīta – with singing;
nati – obeisances; stava – glorifications; ādibhiḥ – and
so on; śrī-viṣṇu – Śrī Viṣṇu; pūjā – of worship; utsavam
– a celebration; aikṣata – he saw; abhitaḥ – on all
sides; tat-nāma – the holy names of Śrī Viṣṇu;
saṅkīrtana – congregational chanting; vādya – playing on
instruments; nartanaiḥ – dancing; premṇā – out of divine
love; ārta-nādaiḥ – with cries (as if) in pain; ruditaiḥ
– with weeping; ca – also; śobhitam – beautiful.

A multitude of sages and holy men were assembled there.
They were engaged in devotional activities like
constantly singing, offering obeisances, uttering
glorifications, singing the names of God, playing on
instruments, and dancing. Some were crying out
ecstatically in divine love and some were weeping.
Arriving there, the brāhmaṇa witnessed this enormous
celebration dedicated to worshiping the Supreme Lord
Viṣṇu.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “That brāhmaṇa
witnessed a festival of the worship of Viṣṇu, replete
with singing and other practices, going on in all

                              64
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

directions.” The word ādi also indicates that the
festival was magnificent, with great varieties of
offerings made to the accompaniment of songs, and so
forth.



Verses 57–59

so ’budho vismayaṁ prāpto vaiṣṇavān pṛcchati sma tān

he gāyakā vandino re daṇḍavat-pātino bhuvi

bho vādakā nartakā re rāma-kṛṣṇeti-vādinaḥ

rodakā ramya-tilakāś cāru-mālā-dharā narāḥ

bhavataikaṁ kṣaṇaṁ svasthā na kolāhalam arhatha

vadatedaṁ vidhaddhve kiṁ kaṁ vārcayatha sādaram

saḥ – he; abudhaḥ – ignorant person; vismayam –
astonished; prāptaḥ – became; vaiṣṇavān – the Vaiṣṇavas;
pṛcchati sma – he inquired; tān – of them; he gāyakāḥ –
O singers; vandinaḥ re – O reciters of prayers;
daṇḍavat-patinaḥ – people offering prostrated
obeisances; bhuvi – to the ground; bhoḥ – oh!; vādakāḥ –
O musicians!; nartakāḥ re – O dancers!; rāma – Rāma;
kṛṣṇa – and Kṛṣṇa; iti – thus; vādinaḥ – O proclaimers;
rodakāḥ– O weepers!; ramya – beautiful; tilakāḥ – with
tilaka; cāru – beautiful; mālā – garlands; dharāḥ –
wearing; narāḥ – O men!; bhavatāḥ – be; ekam kṣaṇam –
for one moment; sva-sthāḥ – situated in your normal
state; na – not; kolāhalam – a tumult; arhatha – you
should do; vadata – please tell; idam – this; vidhaddhve
– you are doing; kim – what?; kam – whom?; vā – or;
arcayatha – you are worshiping; sa-ādaram – with
reverence.

Wonderstruck by this scene, the innocent and ignorant
brāhmaṇa addressed the saintly Vaiṣṇavas, saying, “O
singers, O reciters of prayers, O people offering
obeisances on the ground! O musicians, O dancers, O
people calling out the names of Rāma and Kṛṣṇa! O people
who are weeping, O you who are adorned with beautiful
tilaka and wearing beautiful garlands! Why don’t you
stop this tumultuous din for a moment? Quiet down and
tell me what you are doing. Whom do you worship so
reverentially?”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Here, the significance of addressing
the brāhmaṇa as abudhaḥ, meaning ‘unintelligent,’ is
that he had never before witnessed such behavior of holy
men (sādhus), nor had he heard about it, so he was
completely ignorant of their activities.

Śrī Parīkṣit says, “Thus astonished, the brāhmaṇa
addressed the devotees of Lord Viṣṇu, the Vaiṣṇavas, who
were engaged in singing, playing musical instruments,
and so on, by calling out to them, ‘O singers, … .’ The
naive young man was ignorant of the Vaiṣṇavas’ exalted
position and for this reason he addressed them according
to the activity he saw them performing. He said, ‘O
vandin, O you who are offering respectful obeisance

                              65
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

(this includes those who were offering praise), O people
who are playing instruments, O people who are calling
out Rāma and Kṛṣṇa.’ (He did know that Rāma and Kṛṣṇa
are names of the Lord, so imitating them, he simply
repeated those names.) He saw that on their forehead was
tilaka, a beautiful mark representing the Supreme Lord
Hari’s temple. Therefore, to them he called, ‘O people
with attractive tilaka,’ and so on.

“He said to them, ‘You should not be so loud and noisy.
Calm yourselves and sit down.’ The brāhmaṇa did not know
that their songs, prayers, and so on contained spiritual
truths about the Supreme Lord, and so he perceived their
singing as sheer cacophony. He addressed the Vaiṣṇavas
after also observing that they were dressed in a very
dignified fashion. ‘What are you doing?’ he asked, ‘Whom
are you worshiping with such reverence?’

“The Vaiṣṇavas may have replied, ‘This is not just a
curious pastime; rather we are worshiping the Deity.’
Therefore, the brāhmaṇa asked, ‘Why are you doing this,
and who is that Deity you are worshiping with such
honor?’ ”




Verse 60


tac chrutvopahasanti sma kecit taṁ kecid abruvan

re mūḍha tūṣṇīṁ tiṣṭheti ke ’py ūcur dīna-vatsalāḥ

tat – that; śrutvā – hearing; upahasanti sma – they
mocked; kecit – some; tam – him; kecit – some; abruvan –
said; re mūḍha – O fool; tūṣṇīm – silent; tiṣṭha – be;
iti – thus; ke api – still others; ūcuḥ – said; dīna-
vatsalāḥ – kind to the lowly.

Hearing the brāhmaṇa’s words, some of them laughed at
him. Others began to ridicule him, saying, “O fool, be
quiet!” In contrast, some saintly Vaiṣṇavas, who were
affectionately disposed toward the fallen and wretched,
began to speak as follows.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “Hearing the
brāhmaṇa’s words, some neophytes among those Vaiṣṇavas
mocked him, saying, ‘O mahā-muni, O great sage! O best
among scholars! Yes, we are certainly abnormal, and all
this is indeed meaningless uproar!’ The Vaiṣṇavas who
were situated in an intermediate stage of devotion, the
madhyama stage, and were devoted to worshiping the Deity
could not tolerate his disturbing words and behavior.
Becoming angry, they said, ‘Hey, ignorant fool! Be
quiet.’ However, the most advanced Vaiṣṇavas, those in
the uttama stage, who are very compassionate and
affectionate toward the wretched and fallen,
respectfully addressed the brāhmaṇa, saying ‘Aye,’
meaning ‘O,’ and spoke as follows.”




                              66
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

Verse 61

śrī-vaiṣṇavā ūcuḥ

aye vipra-ja jānāsi na kiñcid bata mūḍha-dhīḥ

viṣṇu-bhaktān punar maivaṁ sambodhaya na jalpa ca

śrī-vaiṣṇavāḥ ūcuḥ – the resplendent Vaiṣṇavas said; aye
vipra-ja – O son of a brāhmaṇa; jānāsi – you know; na –
not; kiñcit – anything; bata – indeed; mūḍha-dhīḥ – your
intelligence is bewildered; viṣṇu – of Śrī Viṣṇu;
bhaktān– the devotees; punaḥ – again; mā – not; evam –
in this way; sambodhaya – you should address; na – not;
jalpa – speak; ca – also.

Śrī Vaiṣṇavas said: O son of a brāhmaṇa, it seems that
your intelligence is very dull. Do you not know
anything? These are all devotees of Śrī Viṣṇu, and you
should never again address them like this or speak to
them in this way.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The Vaiṣṇavas say, “O vipra-ja, O you
who were born of a brāhmaṇa father, you may have taken
birth in a family of brāhmaṇas, but your intelligence is
dull.” Because of this, the exalted, or uttama,
Vaiṣṇavas mercifully instructed him, using such words as
“Viṣṇu.” “You should not address the devotees of Śrī
Viṣṇu as ‘O singers, O people offering prayers!’ and so
forth. Moreover, do not again order them to be quiet and
to refrain from making a commotion, and so on.”



Verse 62

bhagavantam ime viṣṇuṁ nityaṁ vayam upāsmahe

guror gṛhīta-dīkṣākā yathā-mantraṁ yathā-vidhi

bhagavantam – Supreme Lord; ime – they; viṣṇum – Śrī
Viṣṇu; nityam – always; vayam upāsmahe – we worship;
guroḥ – from śrī guru; gṛhīta – having accepted;
dīkṣākāḥ – spiritual initiation; yathā mantram – through
mantra; yathā vidhi – through purificatory regulative
principles.

O brāhmaṇa, we have all accepted spiritual initiation,
or dīkṣā, from our guru. Thus accordingly to our
respective mantras, we all worship Śrī Viṣṇu
appropriately.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Because the brāhmaṇa may question,
“What type of Viṣṇu devotees are you?” the Vaiṣṇavas
speak this verse beginning with bhagavantam ime.

They say, “O brāhmaṇa, we are all worshiping Śrī Viṣṇu
according to the appropriate rules and regulations,
associated with our individual mantras. We have received
spiritual initiation from śrī

guru.” The implication of this statement is, “You have
not received dīkṣā from śrī guru. As a result, even
though you are chanting a mantra, still, knowledge of

                              67
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

transcendental truth (tattva-jñāna) is not manifesting
quickly to you.”



Verse 63

śrī-nṛsiṁha-tanuṁ kecid raghunāthaṁ tathāpare

eke gopālam ity evaṁ nānā-rūpaṁ dvijottama

śrī-nṛsimha-tanum – the form of Śrī Nṛsimha-deva; kecit
– some persons; raghunātham – Śrī Rāma, Lord of the
Raghu dynasty; tathā – then; apare – others; eke – some;
gopālam – Śrī Gopāla-deva; iti – thus; evam – in this
way; nānā – various; rūpam – forms; dvija-uttama – O
best of the twice-born.

O best of the twice-born! Some of us are worshiping the
Lord as Śrī Nṛsiṁha-deva, others as Śrī Raghunāthajī
Rāma, and others

as Śrī Gopāla-deva. In this way, we worship various
manifestations of Śrī Viṣṇu.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: There are different types of mantras,
and the ultimate object of worship, or upāsya-tattva,
has many different forms that correspond to those
mantras. To explain this, the Vaiṣṇavas speak this verse
beginning with śrī-nṛsiṁha. They say, “Śrī Viṣṇu’s four-
armed forms are innumerable. We worship all such
manifestations of Śrī Viṣṇu, such as Śrī Nṛsiṁha, Śrī
Rāma, Śrī Gopāla, Matsya (the fish incarnation), Kūrma
(the tortoise incarnation), Varāha (the boar
incarnation), and Vāmana (the dwarf incarnation).”



Verse 64

śrī-parīkṣid uvāca

tato ’sau lajjito vipro ’pṛcchat sa-praśrayaṁ mudā

kuto vasati kīdṛk sa kaṁ vārthaṁ dātum īśvaraḥ

śrī-parīkṣit uvāca – Śrī Parīkṣit said; tataḥ – then;
asau – he; lajjitaḥ – embarrassed; vipraḥ – the
brāhmaṇa; apṛcchat – inquired; sa-praśrayam – with
humility; mudā – cheerfully; kutaḥ – where?; vasati –
resides; kīdṛk – in which manner?; saḥ – He; kam –
what?; vā – or; artham – benediction; dātum – bestow;
īśvaraḥ – is able.

Śrī Parīkṣit said: O mother, hearing this, the brāhmaṇa
became embarrassed. In a humble manner and in delight,
he enquired, “Where does Parameśvara, your worshipful
Lord, live? What is His form like? What benefit can He
bestow?”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says,   “After hearing from
those Vaiṣṇavas, the brāhmaṇa humbly   inquired, ‘In what
town or village does your worshipful   Deity, your upāsya-
deva, Viṣṇu, live? What form does He   have and how does

                              68
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

He look? What type of benefit or wealth (artha) can He
bestow?’ ” Here, the brahmana wants to know the Lord’s
ability to bestow benefit because by this, he will have
knowledge of their worshipful Deity’s opulence
(aiśvarya-jñāna). Alternatively, it conveys the idea
that every commodity or substance is obtained only by
the power of the Supreme Lord.



Verse 65

śrī-vaiṣṇavā ūcuḥ

sadā sarvatra vasati bahiś cāntaś ca sa prabhuḥ

kaścin na sadṛśas tena kathañcid vidyate kvacit

śrī-vaiṣṇavāḥ ūcuḥ – the Vaiṣṇavas said; sadā – always;
sarvatra – everywhere; vasati – exists; bahiḥ – outside;
ca – and; antaḥ – inside; ca – and; saḥ – He; prabhuḥ –
Lord; kaścit – anyone; na – not; sadṛśaḥ – comparable;
tena – with Him; kathañcit – in any way; vidyate – there
exists; kvacit – anywhere.

Śrī Vaiṣṇavas said: Our Lord is unconstrained by place,
time, and matter. He always exists everywhere, residing
inside and outside of everything. His equal is not to be
found anywhere.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: This verse beginning with sadā
sarvatra is the Vaiṣṇavas’ response to the brāhmana’s
query about where the Lord resides. They say, “Our Lord
and master, Śrī Viṣṇu, being beyond the boundaries of
time, place, and matter, is all-pervading.” The question
“What is He like?” is answered with the phrase beginning
with kaścit. They say, “Our Lord does not resemble any
object of any shape in this world. Moreover, since He is
omnipresent, He always exists inside and outside this
world that is made of five elements ( prapañca).”



Verse 66

sarvāntarātmā jagad-īśvareśvaro

yaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-ghano manoramaḥ

vaikuṇṭha-loke prakaṭaḥ sadā vased

yaḥ sevakebhyaḥ svam api prayacchati

sarva – of all beings; antaḥ-ātmā – indwelling
Supersoul; jagat – of the universe; īśvara-īśvaraḥ – the
Controller of all controllers; yaḥ – who; sat-cit-ānanda
– of eternality, cognizance, and bliss; ghanaḥ –
condensed form; manaḥ-ramaḥ – charming to the mind;
vaikuṇṭha-loke – in Vaikuṇṭha; prakaṭaḥ – manifested;
sadā – eternally; vaset – He may reside; yaḥ – Who;
sevakebhyaḥ – to His servitors; svam – His very self;
api – even; prayacchati – He awards.

He is the Supersoul within all living beings and is even

                              69
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

the controller of Brahmā and the other controllers of
the universe. By nature, He is the absolute embodiment
of eternity, knowledge, and bliss. With His qualities,
His beauty, and so on, He attracts everyone’s mind. He
eternally resides in Vaikuṇṭha, the transcendental
realm, and fully gives of Himself – even His own soul –
to all His surrendered devotees.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The brāhmaṇa might express a doubt,
“Even if it is a fact that He is all-pervasive, if one
does not have specific know-ledge about Him, how can one
possibly engage in devotional service to Him?”

Therefore, the Vaiṣṇavas speak this verse beginning with
sarva antar-ātmā. They say, “He is the indwelling
Supersoul of all living entities, residing in everyone’s
heart.” In this manner, the Vaiṣṇavas tell of the Lord’s
internal opulence. Now, they describe His awesome
external opulence, saying, “He is the Supreme
Controller, Jagad-īśvara, meaning He is the supreme
master of even the universal controller Brahmā and
others, and He thus enjoys opulence that is even greater
than theirs.” The Vaiṣṇavas had previously explained [in
verse 65] that the Lord’s svarūpa, His spiritual form or
nature, is the concentrated embodiment of Parabrahman,
the Supreme Absolute Truth. The word manorama, meaning
‘charming to the mind,’ indicates that He is also the
abode of super-excellent qualities, loveliness,
sweetness (mādhurya), and so on.

The brāhmana might ask, “How is it possible for the
Supersoul, who is the most concealed personality, to so
obviously possess opulence and so on? And where do
devotees go to see Him?” In response, the Vaiṣṇavas
speak the words beginning with vaikuṇṭha, describing the
extraordinary characteristics of the Lord’s residence in
Vaikuṇṭha.

To the question [from verse 64], “What wealth or benefit
can He bestow upon devotees?” the Vaiṣṇavas reply with
the line, “yaḥ sevakebhyaḥ svam api prayacchati – He
even bestows His own self in charity to His devotees.”
The significance of api, meaning ‘also’ or ‘even,’ in
this statement is that, what to speak of catur-varga –
the four goals of material life: religiosity, economic
development, sense gratification, and liberation – the
Lord bestows on His devotees devotion to Himself
(bhakti), residence in the spiritual world of Vaikuṇṭha,
and more. In the term prayacchati, meaning ‘bestows,’
the prefix pra indicates He even bestows His very self
in charity to His servants. This reveals that the
dealings between Him and His servants are devoid of
shyness and formality; rather they are supremely
blissful and continue completely without interruption.



Verse 67

śruti-smṛti-stūyamānaḥ kenāsya mahimocyatām

tad atra vācyamānāni purāṇāni muhuḥ śṛṇu

śruti – by the Vedas; smṛti – and the scriptures

                              70
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

following Vedic conclusions; stūyamānaḥ – being
extolled; kena – by whom?; asya – His; mahimā – glory;
ucyatām – which are described; tat – that; atra – here;
vācyamānāni – which are being spoken; purāṇāni – the
ancient scriptures; muhuḥ – repeatedly; śṛṇu – please
hear.

Who can narrate the glories of the Lord, who is extolled
in the Śrutis and the Smṛtis? Therefore, just stay here
and regularly hear the explanations of the Purāṇas and
other scriptures from the Vaiṣṇavas.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The brāhmaṇa might further request,
“Please specifically describe the Lord’s other unique
qualities and characteristics.”

In reply, the Vaiṣṇavas speak this verse beginning with
śruti. They say, “All the Śrutis (Vedas) and Smṛtis
(supplementary Vedic literature) effusively sing the
Lord’s glories, but none can ever fully describe them.
Yet it is also true that it is only through the Śrutis
and the Smṛtis that He can be glorified. Therefore, how
can I possibly describe His true magnificance?”

To emphasize this point, in the last half of the verse,
beginning with tad, the Vaiṣṇavas instruct the brāhmaṇa,
“Stay in Prayāga,

the king of all holy places, and continuously hear
explanations of the Purāṇas that reveal the glories of
Śrī Viṣṇu.”



Verse 68

mādhavaṁ nama cālokya pratirūpaṁ jagat-prabhoḥ

tato ’cirād idaṁ sarvaṁ paraṁ ca jñāsyasi svayam

mādhavam – Mādhava-deva; nama – offer obeisances; ca –
and; ālokya – beholding; pratirūpam – the Deity; jagat-
prabhoḥ – of the Master of the universe; tataḥ – then;
acirāt – without delay; idam – this; sarvam – all; param
– then; ca – also; jñāsyasi – you will understand;
svayam – naturally.

Moreover, you should behold Mādhava-deva, who is the
exact form of the Lord of the entire universe, Jagat-
prabhu, and offer Him obeisances. If you do this
continually, you will quickly come to understand all
these topics.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The Vaiṣṇavas say, “Take darśana of
the Deity Śrī Mādhava, who is the exact replica of Śrī
Vaikuṇṭha-nātha, the Lord of the universe, and
repeatedly prostrate yourself before Him. One can
receive His darśana only by hearing and meditating on
topics about Him. In this way, you shall personally
perceive everything about His glories, even beyond what
we have and have not narrated.”




                              71
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

Verse 69

śrī-parīkṣid uvāca

tataḥ śrī-mādhavaṁ vīkṣya namaṁs tasmin vyacaṣṭa saḥ

sārūpyaṁ svajape cintyamāna-devasya kiñcana

śrī-parīkṣit uvāca – Śrī Parīkṣit said; tataḥ –
thereafter; śrī-mādhavam – at Śrī Mādhava; vīkṣya –
gazing; naman – bowing down; tasmin – there; vyacaṣṭa –
observed; saḥ – he; sārūpyam – similar in appearance;
sva-jape – in the chanting of his mantra; cintyamāna –
upon whom he was meditating; devasya – of his Lord
Madana-gopāla-deva; kiñcana – somewhat.

Śrī Parīkṣit said: Thereafter, according to the
instructions of the Vaiṣṇavas, the brāhmaṇa took darśana
of Śrī Mādhava and bowed down to Him. He observed that
the Deity Śrī Mādhava was similar in appearance to his
Śrī Madana-gopāla-deva, whom he saw at the time of
chanting his mantra.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “Thereafter, in
accordance with the Vaiṣṇavas’ instructions, the
brāhmaṇa went to see Śrī Mādhava, offering Him
obeisances and so on. He was delighted to notice that
Śrī Mādhava’s face, eyes, and other features were
similar to those of Śrī Madana-gopāla, the object of his
meditation when he chanted his mantra.”



Verse 70

tatra kiñcit purāṇaṁ sa śṛṇoti saha vaiṣṇavaiḥ

tair arcyamānā vividhā viṣṇu-mūrtīś ca paśyati

tatra – there; kiñcit – something; purāṇam – ancient
historical narrations; saḥ – he; śṛṇoti – he would hear;
saha vaiṣṇavaiḥ – with the Viṣṇu-devotees; taiḥ – by
them; arcyamānāḥ – being worshiped; vividhāḥ –
variegated; viṣṇu – of Śrī Viṣṇu; mūrtīḥ – Deities; ca –
and; paśyati – he would behold.

In this way, the brāhmaṇa heard portions of the Purāṇas
in the association of those Vaiṣṇavas. In addition, he
also took darśana of the many Viṣṇu Deities they were
worshiping.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “In the company of
those Vaiṣṇavas, the brāhmaṇa sat in front Śrī Mādhava-
deva at Prayāga, the king of holy places, and heard
discussion of Purāṇas that establish the glories of the
month of Māgha.” The statement, ‘in the company of
Vaiṣṇavas,’ indicates that the brāhmaṇa experienced
bliss because he had developed strong faith by hearing
those Purāṇas.



Verse 71


                              72
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

tathāpi pratyabhijñeyaṁ tasya na syād acetasaḥ

mad-devo jagad-īśo ’yaṁ mādhavo ’pi satāṁ prabhuḥ

tathā api – nevertheless; pratyabhijñā – understanding;
iyam – this; tasya – by him; na – not; syāt – was;
acetasaḥ – unaware; mat-devaḥ – my worshipable Lord;
jagat-īśaḥ – the Supreme Lord of the universe; ayam –
He; mādhavaḥ – Śrī Mādhava; api – also; satām – of the
devotees; prabhuḥ – the Lord.

Nevertheless, due to ignorance, the brāhmaṇa did not
develop

complete knowledge. In other words, he was unable to
fully

comprehend the idea that “My worshipable Lord is in
truth nondifferent from Jagadīśvara, Supreme Lord of the
universe; from Śrī Mādhava; and from the Deities
worshiped by these Vaiṣṇavas.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “Seeing
similarities between his own worshipful Deity and Śrī
Mādhava, the brāhmaṇa understood that Śrī Mādhava is the
Supreme Lord of the universe. However, he could not
grasp that his own worshipable Lord was the same as
Jagadīśvara, the same as the Deity of Mādhava, and the
same as the Deities of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead worshiped by these Vaiṣṇavas. Because he was
ignorant and lacked discrimination, the brāhmaṇa could
neither realize Their oneness nor could he fathom the
transcendental connection between Them.”



Verse 72

idaṁ sa vimṛśaty eṣām upāsyo jagad-īśvaraḥ

sa eva mādhavaś cāyaṁ mayānyaḥ ko ’py upāsyate

idam – this; saḥ vimṛśati – he would think; eṣām – for
them; upāsyaḥ – the worshipable object; jagad-īśvaraḥ –
the Supreme Lord of the universe; saḥ – He; eva – only;
mādhavaḥ – Śrī Mādhava; ca – and; ayam – He; mayā – by
me; anyaḥ – another; kaḥ api – someone; upāsyate – is
worshiped.

Rather, he always thought, “The worshipable Lord of
these sādhus is indeed the Supreme Lord of the universe,
who is also Śrī Mādhava. However, the personality I
worship is someone else.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “He thought, ‘The
worshipable Deity (upāsya-deva) of these saintly
Vaiṣṇavas is Jagadīśvara, the Supreme Lord of the
universe, and is also Śrī Mādhava, whose darśana I have
been having. I accept the words of the saintly persons
as authoritative in this matter. However, the Supreme
Personality I worship is someone else.’ ”




                              73
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

Verse 73

śaṅkha-cakra-gadā-padma-vibhūṣita-catur-bhujaḥ

na mad-devas tataḥ kasmāt pratīyeta sa mādhavaḥ

śaṅkha – with conchshell; cakra – disc; gadā – club;
padma – and lotus; vibhūṣita – decorated; catuḥ – four;
bhujaḥ – arms; na – not; mat – my; devaḥ – worshipable
Lord; tataḥ – then; kasmāt – how?; pratīyeta – can He
appear; saḥ – He; mādhavaḥ – Śrī Mādhava.

“The Deity of Lord Śrī Mādhava’s four arms are decorated
with a conchshell, disc, club, and lotus. However, my
worshipable Lord is not like Him. Therefore, how can my
Lord be Śrī Mādhava? How I can repose my faith for my
worshipable Deity in Śrī Mādhava?

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The reason for the brāhmaṇa’s distress
is being explained in two-and-a-half verses, beginning
here with śaṅkha. In these verses, he is thinking, “My
worshipable Deity does not have four arms adorned with
conchshell, disc, etc., but Śrī Mādhava has four arms
that are holding those symbols. The scriptures also
describe the characteristics of the Deity of Śrī Mādhava
as follows: ‘gadā-śaṅkha-cakra-padman bibhran mādhava
ucyate – One who holds a mace (gadā), conch (śaṅkha),
disc (cakra), and lotus ( padma) is Śrī Mādhava.’ Since
Śrī Mādhava is different from my worshipable Lord, how
can I believe that He is truly my worshipable Lord?
Factually, I am unable to have this faith.”



Verse 74

nāyaṁ narārdha-siṁhārdha-rūpa-dhārī ca mat-prabhuḥ

na vāmano ’py asau mīna-kūrma-kolādi-rūpavān

na – not; ayam – He; nara-ardha – of half-man; siṁha-
ardha – half-lion; rūpa-dhārī – possess the form; ca –
also; mat-prabhuḥ – my Lord; na – not; vāmanaḥ – a
dwarf; api – also; asau – He; mīna – a fish; kūrma – a
tortoise; kola – a boar; ādi – and so forth; rūpavān –
possessing the form.

(Then he began to reflect,) “My Lord does not possess
the half-man–half-lion form, nor does He possess the
forms of Vāmana, Mīna, Kūrma, or Varāha.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: One might argue, “Your worshipful Lord
may be different from Śrī Mādhava, but because He is
similar to some Deities the Vaiṣṇavas worship, your Lord
is also Jagadīśvara, the Lord of the universe.” The
brāhmaṇa replies with the half-verse beginning with
nāyam. He says, “The Personality whose lower half
resembles a human being and whose upper half resembles a
lion – the Supreme Lord who has assumed the form of
Nṛsiṁha – is not my worshipable Deity. The other
manifestations of the Supreme Lord, such as Vāmana, are
also not the Deity whom I worship because Their forms
are different from that of my Lord.”


                              74
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017



Verse 75

nāpi kodaṇḍa-pāṇiḥ syād rāghavo rāja-lakṣaṇaḥ

keṣāñcid eṣāṁ pūjyena gopālenāstu vā sadṛk

na – not; api – also; kodaṇḍa – a bow; pāṇiḥ – in His
hand; syāt – there can be; rāghavaḥ – Śrī Rāghava; rāja-
lakṣaṇaḥ – endowed with signs of royalty; keṣāñcit – of
some; eṣām – amongst them; pūjyena – should be
worshiped; gopālena – with Gopāla-deva; astu – he should
be; vā – or; sadṛk – resembles.

“My worshipable Deity is also not Śrī Rāghava, who is
endowed with signs of royalty and who carries a bow in
His hand. However, my Lord certainly resembles Gopāla-
deva, who is worshiped by some of these Vaiṣṇava saints.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: One might venture, “Certainly Śrī
Raghunātha must be your worshipable Deity because His
form resembles that of your Lord.”

The brāhmaṇa replies, “No, my worshipable Deity does not
hold a bow, nor does He sit on a royal throne,
surrounded by royal signs like a white umbrella and yak-
tail whisks (cāmaras). Therefore, Śrī Rāghava, also, is
not my worshipable Deity.”

It may then be said, “Since your worshipful Diety
resembles the form of Śrī Gopāla, who is worshiped by
some of these sādhus, then the same Lord of the universe
is indeed your worshipful Lord.”

The brāhmaṇa replies in the half-verse beginning with
keṣāñcit, saying, “He does resemble my worshipable Lord
to some degree.” Here, the word vā, meaning ‘or,’
indicates the brāhmaṇa’s doubt or his inability to
ascertain the similarity.




Verse 76


manye ’thāpi madīyo ’yaṁ na bhavej jagad-īśvaraḥ

nāsti tal-lakṣaṇaṁ māgha-māhātmyādau śrutaṁ hi yat

manye – I think; athāpi – still; madīyaḥ – my; ayam –
He; na bhavet – He can not be; jagad-īśvaraḥ – the Lord
of the universe; na – not; asti – He is; tat-lakṣaṇam –
the characteristics of that Deity; māgha-māhātmya – in
the narration in Māgha-māhatmya; ādau – and so forth;
śrutam – heard; hi – certainly; yat – which.

“However, my worshipable Lord does not look like
Jagadīśvara. From the narration in Māgha-māhātmya and
other scriptures,

I have heard about the characteristics of the Lord of

                              75
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

the universe, and my Lord does not possesses them.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The brāhmaṇa says, “However, my
worshipable Deity does not appear to be like Jagadīśvara
because He does not possess the characteristics of the
Lord of the universe that I have heard in the Māgha-
māhātmya (a description of the excellences of the month
of Māgha).” The Māgha-māhātmya of the Padma Purāṇa
(Uttara-khaṇḍa 128.202, 129.44) states:

taṁ dṛṣtvā garuḍārūḍhaṁ pratyagra-jalada-cchavim

catur-bāhuṁ-viśālākṣaṁ sarvālaṅkāra-bhūṣitam

The Supreme    Personality of Godhead, Jagadīśvara, rides
on the back    of Garuḍa, His eagle carrier. His hue is
dark like a    raincloud, He has four arms and large eyes,
and all His    limbs are adorned with varieties of
ornaments.

Furthermore:

brahmādayaḥ surāḥ sarve yoginah sanakādayaḥ

tvāṁ sākṣāt kartum icchanti siddhāś ca kapilādayah

Brahmā and the other demigods, Sanaka and the other
yogīs, and Kapila and the other perfected mystics all
desire to receive His darśana.

The word ādi in the original verse, denoting ‘in
addition to Māgha-māhātmya,’ also refers to the glories
of Prayāga and other holy places described in the Skanda
Purāṇa.



Verse 77

gopārbha-vargaiḥ sakhibhir vane sa gā

vaṁśī-mukho rakṣati vanya-bhūsaṇaḥ

gopāṅganā-varga-vilāsa-lampaṭo

dharmaṁ satāṁ laṅghayatītaro yathā

gopa-arbha – of cowherd boys; vargaiḥ – with the groups;
sakhibhiḥ – with His friends; vane – in the forest; saḥ
– He; gāḥ – the cows; vamśī-mukhaḥ – the bamboo flute to
His mouth; rakṣati – he tends; vanya – with forest
flowers; bhūṣaṇaḥ – decorated; gopa-aṅganā – of the
cowherds’ wives; varga – with groups; vilāsa – pastimes;
lampaṭaḥ – greedy to enjoy; dharmam – religious
principles; satām – of saintly persons; laṅghayati – He
transgresses; itaraḥ – an ordinary man; yathā – as.

“Decorated with forest flowers and playing on His flute,
my worshipable Deity takes the cows for grazing, going
from forest to forest along with the cowherd boys.
Because He is a playful philanderer, greedy to enjoy
amorous pastimes, He forever roams about with the gopīs,
the cowherd damsels, and like an ordinary person, He
transgresses religious principles.

                              76
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017


Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: After expressing his views on the
Supreme

Lord of the universe, in this verse beginning with gopa,
the

brāhmaṇa describes the characteristics of his
worshipable Deity that he has perceived in his
meditation. These characteristics are the antithesis of
those of Lord of the universe mentioned in the previous
verses.

He says, “My worshipful Deity wanders from forest to
forest with His cowherd friends while tending the cows.
His flute rests on His lips and He is always absorbed in
playing it. He is adorned with a peacock feather crown,
guñjā berry earrings, a garland of kadamba flowers, and
red mineral tilaka (an auspicious marking on the
forehead). Saintly persons, in accordance with religious
principles (dharma), never intimately associate with
others’ wives. But in the same way that common people
transgress religious principles, my Lord seems to
transgress the laws of dharma. His friendship with the
cowherd boys and other such behavior do not correspond
to the status of the Supreme Lord of the universe.

“My Lord bears more resemblance to Gopāla-deva, the
worshipable Deity of the sādhus of this place, because
both hold a flute to Their lips and so on. Thus, it may
be possible that my Lord is Jagadīśvara. However, my
Lord’s activities of tending the cows and especially of
appearing to transgress religious principles make it
impossible for Him to be the Lord of the universe.”



Verse 78

devyāḥ prabhāvād ānandam asyāpy ārādhane labhe

tān na jahyāṁ kadāpy enam etan mantra-japaṁ na ca

devyāḥ – of the goddess; prabhāvāt – by the power;
ānandam – happiness; asya – of Him; api – however;
ārādhane – in the worship; labhe – I get; tat –
therefore; na jahyām – I shall not abandon; kadā api –
ever; enam – Him; etan – this; mantra-japam – chanting
of His mantra; na – not; ca – also.

“Although the qualities of being the Supreme Lord of the
universe are not fully manifest in my Lord, still, by
the potency of the goddess, I derive happiness from
worshiping Him. Therefore, I shall never abandon Him or
the chanting of His mantra.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The brāhmaṇa might be questioned, “Can
you not feel the same happiness in your heart through
the worship of any other?” He replies in this verse
beginning with devyā, saying, “Although my Lord does not
possess the characteristics of the Lord of the universe,
nevertheless, by Devī’s power, I experience joy in
worshiping Him.”


                              77
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

One might further object, “If your Prabhu does not have
the qualities of the Lord of the universe, then you
should give up worshiping Him and worship someone else
instead.” The brāhmaṇa answers this in the line
beginning with tat. Here tat means, “Because of my
respect for Devī’s order, – or, alternatively, “Because
I experience bliss,” – I can never give up either my
worshipable Deity or the chanting of His mantra.”



Verse 79

evaṁ sa pūrvavan mantraṁ taṁ japan nirjane nijam

devaṁ sākṣād ivekṣeta satāṁ saṅga-prabhāvataḥ

evam – thus; saḥ – he; pūrva-vat – as before; mantram –
the divine sound vibration; tam – that; japan –
chanting; nirjane – in seclusion; nijam – his own; devam
– Lord; sākṣāt – directly; iva – as if; īkṣeta – he
would perceive; satām – of the saints; saṅga – of the
association; prabhāvataḥ – by the influence.

Thus the brāhmaṇa made up his mind and began to chant
his mantra as before, sitting in a secluded place. By
the influence of saintly association, he was now able to
chant the mantra with a pure heart, and while chanting
he began to behold the Deity of the mantra as if He were
personally present.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “In this way, the

brāhmaṇa decided not to abandon Śrī Madana-gopāla-deva’s
illustrious ten-syllable mantra, which is supreme among
mantras.” Alternatively, it is understood that he was
fully absorbed in rapt meditation on Śrī Nanda-kiśora,
the unlimited and indescribable crest jewel of all
worshipable personalities. This purified his heart and
he began to see his worshipable Deity as if the Lord
were present in person.

Śrī Uttarā-devī might ask, “How was this possible, since
he chanted his mantra without faith (śraddhā)?” In
reply, Śrī Parīkṣit speaks the line beginning with
satām, saying, “This was possible only by the influence
of saintly association, or sādhu-saṅga.”



Verse 80

vastu-sva-bhāvād ānanda-mūrchām āpnoti karhicit

vyutthāya japa-kālāpagamam ālakṣya śocati

vastu – of the (transcendental) object; sva-bhāvāt –
because of the intrinsic nature; ānanda – from ecstatic
bliss; mūrchām – fainting; āpnoti – he experienced;
karhicit – sometimes; vyutthāya – upon awakening; japa –
of chanting; kāla – proper time; apagamam – elapsed;
ālakṣya – seeing; śocati – he would lament.

By the influence of the nature of that object (in other

                              78
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

words, by the influence of chanting the mantra) the
brāhmaṇa sometimes fell unconscious in ecstatic bliss.
Upon coming out of his unconscious state, he would
lament that the proper time for chanting his mantra had
elapsed.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “Thereafter,
sometimes the brāhmaṇa swooned in ecstasy, reaching a
state resembling deep, transcendental trance, or sat-
samādhi. In this state, all the external functions of
his sense organs would stop. By the very nature of the
object of his meditation – the mantra – he would obtain
darśana of his worshipable Deity. This is not possible
by deliberating on and analysing fundamental principles
of philosophy (tattva). When he would regain
consciousness after some time and see that the darkness
of evening had already set in, he would lament that the
prescribed time for quiet chanting, which is known as
japa, had slipped by.”



Verse 81

upadravo ’yaṁ ko me ’nujāto vighno mahān kila

na samāpto japo me ’dyatano rātrīyam āgatā

upadravaḥ – calamity; ayam – this; kaḥ – why?; me – for
me; anujātaḥ – keeps occuring; vighnaḥ – impediment;
mahān – great; kila – indeed; na – not; samāptaḥ –
completed; japaḥ – chanting; me – my; adyatanaḥ – for
today; rātrī - night; iyam – this; āgatā – has come.

“Why did this disturbance occur during my chanting time?
This is a huge impediment. It has become night and my
chanting is still

not finished.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The cause of the brāhmaṇa’s
lamentation is being described in this verse beginning
with upadrava. The word upadrava, meaning ‘disturbance,’
indicates the cause of distress or something painfully
disturbing. The brāhmaṇa’s missing his chanting time was
not only a huge disturbance but also a great impediment.
This is expressed in the line beginning with na samāpto,
meaning ‘not completed.’ The brāhmaṇa says, “I could not
complete the chanting I was supposed to perform.”



Verse 82

kiṁ nidrābhibhavo ’yaṁ me kiṁ bhūtābhibhavo ’thavā

aho mad-duḥsvabhāvo yac-choka-sthāne ’pi hṛt-sukham

kim – whether?; nidrā – by sleep; abhibhavaḥ –
overwhelmed; ayam – this; me – me; kim – whether?; bhūta
– by a ghost; abhibhavaḥ – being overcome; atha vā – or;
aho – Alas!; mat – my; duḥ-svabhāvaḥ – wicked nature;
yat– which; śoka-sthāne – instead of lamenting; api –
still; hṛt – in my heart; sukham – bliss.

                              79
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017


“Is this impediment due to my excessive sleep, or is it
because I am haunted by a ghost? Alas! What a wicked
nature I possess that, even while being despondent, I
experience happiness in my heart.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The brāhmaṇa says, “Alas, alas! Why
did this impediment arise?” This verse beginning with
kim describes that he began to reflect within himself,
“Is this due to the power of sleep? In deep slumber all
sense organs stop functioning, so was my state similar?
Or, has someone created a disturbance by casting a magic
spell, as in witchcraft, or by using incantation and
enchantment (tantra-mantra)? Or, is this happening
because I have been possessed by a ghost? This is truly
regretable! It must be due to my wicked nature that
although my chanting is incomplete, I am feeling happy
at heart instead of being depressed.”



Verse 83

ekadā tu tathaivāsau śocann akṛta-bhojanaḥ

nidrāṇo mādhavenedaṁ samādiṣṭaḥ sa-sāntvanam

ekadā – one day; tu – indeed; tathā – in this way; eva –
indeed; asau – he; śocan – lamenting; akṛta-bhojanaḥ –
having not eaten; nidrāṇaḥ – while sleeping; mādhavena –
by Śrī Mādhava; idam – this; samādiṣṭaḥ – he was
instructed; sa-sāntvanam – with a consoling (tone).

Lamenting in this way, one day, the brāhmaṇa fell asleep
without having eaten anything. In his dream, the Supreme
Lord Śrī Mādhava appeared and consoled him and
instructed him as follows.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “Because his
chanting was still unfinished due to his fainting in
ecstasy, the brāhmaṇa was afflicted with despondency and
fell asleep without having eaten his dinner. Bhagavān
Śrī Mādhava appeared in his dream and consoled him,
saying, ‘Why do you lament unnecessarily? Why inflict
suffering on yourself and on Me, your worshipable Lord?
Do not lament; your unbounded desire will soon be
fulfilled. Have firm faith.’ ” In this manner, with
benedictory and sweet words, the Supreme Lord Śrī
Mādhava began to speak the following.




Verse 84


vipra viśveśvarasyānusmara vākyam umā-pateḥ

yamunā-tīra-mārgeṇa tac chrī-vṛndāvanaṁ vraja

vipra – O brāhmaṇa; viśva-īśvarasya – of Lord Śiva, lord
of the universe; anusmara – remember; vākyam – words;
umā-pateḥ – of the husband of Umā; yamunā – of the

                              80
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

Yamunā; tīra – of the bank; mārgeṇa – by the path; tat –
that; śrī-vṛndā-vanam – to the forest of Vṛndā; vraja –
go.

“O brāhmaṇa! Remember the words of Viśveśvara, the
husband of Umā. Following the banks of the Yamunā River,
proceed to Vṛndāvana.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Bhagavān says, “Goddess Umā, who
instructed you to chant your mantra, is worshipable for
you. It is therefore improper for you to transgress the
order of her husband, Śrī Viśveśvara. Recall his words.
He personally ordered you, ‘Go to Vṛndāvana.’ ” Here,
Bhagavān Śrī Mādhava is not only reminding the brāhmaṇa
of Śrī Viśveśvara’s command, He is even personally
giving him an order. The word tat indicates Śrī
Viśveśvara’s ineffable words of instruction.



Verse 85

tatrāsādhāraṇaṁ harṣaṁ lapsyase mat-prasādataḥ

vilambaṁ pathi kutrāpi mā kuruṣva kathañcana

tatra – there; asādharaṇam – indescribable; harṣam –
happiness; lapyase – you shall attain; mat-prasādataḥ –
by My mercy; vilambam – delay; pathi – on the path;
kutrāpi – anywhere; mā – do not; kuruṣva – do;
kathañcana – in any way.

“There in Vṛndāvana, by My mercy, you shall attain
extraordinary joy, so do not stop or delay anywhere
along the way.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Bhagavān says, “You will receive
extra-ordinary bliss in Vṛndāvana.” This is to say,
“Your happiness will be incomparable, surpassing that
attained by the fulfillment of artha (economic
development), dharma (religiosity), kāma (sense
enjoyment), and mokṣa (liberation).”

The Lord continues, “On the way to Vṛndāvana, do not
delay or get side-tracked.” In other words, “Do not get
distracted by the path of jñāna (empiric knowledge) and
so forth.”

“In Vṛndāvana, by My mercy alone, you will receive
unlimited happiness. It is true that only by My mercy
you experienced happiness in Kāśī and here in Prayāga.
Similarly, in Vṛndāvana, also, you shall obtain bliss by
My mercy. However, because My special mercy manifests
there by the influence of exceptional place, exceptional
time, and exceptional association, happiness in
Vṛndāvana is known to be extraordinary.”



Verse 86

tataḥ sa prātar utthāya hṛṣṭaḥ san prasthitaḥ kramāt

śrīman-madhu-purīṁ prāptaḥ snāto viśrānti-tīrthake

                              81
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017


tataḥ – then; saḥ – he; prātaḥ – in early morning;
utthāya – arising; hṛṣṭaḥ – jubilant; san – being;
prasthitaḥ – he set out; kramāt – gradually; śrīman-
madhu-purīm – Śrī Mathurā; prāptaḥ – arrived; snātaḥ –
bathed; viśrānta-tīrthake – at the holy place of
Viśrāma-ghāṭa.

Getting up early the next morning, the brāhmaṇa began
walking towards Vṛndāvana in a jubilant mood. Gradually,
he arrived in Śrī Madhupurī (Mathurā), where he bathed
at Viśrāma-ghāṭa.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “Following Śrī
Mādhava’s order, the brāhmaṇa traveled continuously and
reached Śrī Mathurā-dhāma.”



Verse 87

gato vṛndāvanaṁ tatra dhyāyamānaṁ nije jape

taṁ taṁ parikaraṁ prāyo vīkṣyābhīkṣṇaṁ nananda saḥ

gataḥ – gone; vṛndāvanam – to Vṛndāvana; tatra – there;
dhyāyamānam – meditating; nije – his own; jape – in the
chanting; tam tam parikaram – the entire entourage of
Vraja; prāyaḥ – for the most part; vīkṣya – seeing;
abhīkṣṇam – continuously; nananda – enjoyed; saḥ – he.

He then proceeded to Vṛndāvana. There, he began to
almost always have sphūrtis (internal momentary
revelations) in which he would see the entire entourage
of Vraja – the cows, cowherd boys, and so

on – practically everything he used to picture in his
meditation during the chanting of his mantra. This
vision of those associates of Vraja filled the brāhmaṇa
with continuous, incomparable joy.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “He often saw the
incredible and illustrious entourage: the exquisitely
beautiful cows, cowherd boys, kadamba trees, and so on.
He would also almost always see the worshipable Deity of
his mantra accompanied by His associates.”




Verse 88


tasmin go-bhūṣite ’paśyan kam apītas tato bhraman

keśī-tīrthasya pūrvasyāṁ diśi śuśrāva rodanam

tasmin – there; gaḥ – with cows; bhūṣite – decorated;
apaśyan – not seeing; kam api – anyone; itaḥ tataḥ –
here and there; bhraman – wandering; keśi-tīrthasya – of
Keśī-tīrtha; pūrvasyām diśi – in the eastern direction;
śuśrāva – he heard; rodanam – weeping.


                              82
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

Not seeing any people in that solitary land of
Vṛndāvana, which was decorated with the presence of
cows, he began to roam hither and thither. Then, east of
Keśī-tīrtha, he heard the sound of someone weeping.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “Unable to see
another human being in Vṛndāvana he wandered here and
there.” The term go-bhūṣita, meaning ‘adorned with
cows,’ indicates that he did not see any people, only
cows. “He came to Keśī-tīrtha. The Supreme Personality
of Godhead Śrī Kṛṣṇa killed the demon Keśī in this place
and therefore it is known as Keśī-tīrtha.” Reference to
this is found in the Mathurā-māhātmya, the
‘Glorification of Mathurā,’ a section of the Varāha
Purāṇa (152.30–31):

gaṅgā-śata-guṇā proktā yatra keśī nipātitaḥ

keśyāḥ śata-guṇāḥ proktā yatra viśramito hariḥ

The place where the demon Keśī was killed grants one
hundred times more pious result than even the Gaṅgā, and
the place where Śrī Hari rested afterwards gives one
hundred times the result of Keśī-tīrtha.



Verse 89

tad-dig-bhāgaṁ gataḥ premṇā nāma-saṅkīrtanair yutam

tad ākarṇya muhus tatra taṁ manuṣyam amārgayat

tat-dik-bhāgam – in that direction; gataḥ – went; premṇā
– with love; nāma-saṅkīrtanaiḥ yutam – with loud
chanting of names of God; tat – that (weeping); ākarṇya
– hearing; muhuḥ – repeatedly; tatra – there; tam –
that; manuṣyam – for the person; amārgayat – he sought.

He followed the direction of the sound of crying.
Sensing that someone was crying in pure love of God
while chanting the holy name of the Lord, he began to
search here and there for that person.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “First, he had
heard the sound of crying from a distance. Then coming
nearer, he oriented himself to the sound of that crying
and advanced in that direction. Coming close, he
discerned that someone was weeping while chanting the
Lord’s names (saṅkīrtana), his heart melting with
intense affection. While weeping, that person was
articulately singing the Lord’s names in deep and
piteous tones. Then the brāhmaṇa began to earnestly
search for that person.”



Verse 90

ghanāndhakārāraṇyāntaḥ so ’paśyan kañcid unmukhaḥ

nirdhārya tad-dhvani-sthānaṁ yamunā-tīram avrajat

ghana – dense; andhakāra – darkness; āraṇya – the

                              83
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

forest; antaḥ – inside; saḥ – he; apaśyan – not seeing;
kañcit – anyone; unmukhaḥ – turned toward; nirdhārya –
ascertaining; tat-dhvani – sound of that (weeping);
sthānam – the place; yamunā-tīram – to the bank of
Yamunā; avrajat – he went.

When he did not see anyone in that dense, dark forest,
he ascertained where the weeping sound was coming from.
Heading in that direction, he reached the bank of Śrī
Yamunā.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “That forest was
very dense and terribly dark.” The verse can also be
read, “The forest was known as andhakāra, meaning
‘darkness.’ ” Or, “The forest had no break in its thick
foliage, allowing no sunlight to penetrate.” He
continues, “The brāhmaṇa could not see anyone in the
pitch black, dreadful darkness, and so he became eager
to know where the sound of crying was coming from.
However, despite searching here and there, he could not
find the origin of that sound, so he first ascertained
the direction of the chanting of the holy name.
Following it, he then reached the bank of the Yamunā.”



Verse 91

tatra nīpa-nikuñjāntar gopa-veśa-paricchadam

kiśoraṁ su-kumārāṅgaṁ sundaraṁ tam udaikṣata

tatra – there; nīpa – of kadamba trees; nikuñja – a
secluded grove; antaḥ – within; gopa-veśa – attire of a
cowherd boy; paricchadam – with the trappings; kiśoram –
a youth; su-kumāra – very delicate; aṅgam – whose limbs;
sundaram – handsome; tam – Him; udaikṣata – he saw.

In a secluded grove of kadamba trees on the bank of the
Yamunā, the brāhmaṇa saw a handsome, delicate youth
dressed as a cowherd boy.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “Arriving on
Yamunā’s bank, he beheld the person who was chanting the
holy name. What did this person look like? His attire
was that of a cowherd boy.” In other words, the brāhmaṇa
saw a cowherd boy with a youthful form and beautiful,
delicate limbs, who was adorned with a peacock feather
and who was carrying a flute, a buffalo horn, and a
stick.



Verse 92

nijeṣṭa-devatā-bhrāntyā gopāleti mahā-mudā

samāhvayan praṇāmāya papāta bhuvi daṇḍavat

nija – his own; iṣṭa-devatā – most beloved Deity;
bhrāntyā – mistakenly; gopāla – O Gopāla; iti – thus;
mahā-mudā – with great delight; samāhvāyan – crying out;
praṇāmāya – offering obeisances; papāta – he fell; bhuvi
– to the ground; daṇḍa-vat – like a stick.

                              84
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


Upon seeing that cowherd boy, the brāhmaṇa mistook him
for the worshipable Lord of his heart. Crying out in
great joy, “O Gopāla, O Gopāla!” he offered him
prostrated obeisance, falling to the ground like a
stick.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “To properly greet
the cowherd boy, the brāhmaṇa bowed down, prostrating
himself on the ground, offering daṇḍavat praṇāma. Seeing
that the cowherd boy’s dress and ornaments resembled
those of Śrī Madana-gopāla, the brāhmaṇa mistook him for
his iṣṭa-deva, the Lord of his heart. How did he offer
obeisance? In a sweet manner and by loudly calling out
his Lord’s name, ‘O Gopāla! O Gopāla!’ In a deep,
melodious voice, he sang the three syllables ‘Go-pā-la’
as if doing a full invocation,

and then he fell to the ground in respect.”



Verses 93–94

tato jāta-bahir-dṛṣṭiḥ sa sarvajña-śiromaṇiḥ

jñātvā taṁ māthuraṁ vipraṁ kāmākhyādeśa-vāsinam

śrīman-madana-gopālopāsakaṁ ca samāgatam

niḥsṛtya kuñjād utthāpya natvāliṅgya nyaveśayat

tataḥ – then; jāta – awoken; bahiḥ-dṛṣṭiḥ – his external
vision; saḥ – he; sarva-jña – of omniscient persons;
śiraḥ-maṇiḥ – crest jewel; jñātvā – understanding; tam –
him; mathurām – of Mathurā; vipram – a brāhmaṇa;
kāmākhyā-deśa – of the country of Kāmākhyā-devī; vāsinam
– a resident; śrīman-madana-gopāla – of the beautiful
enchanting cowherd; upāsakam – a worshiper; ca – and;
samāgatam – arrived; niḥsṛtya – coming out; kuñjāt– of
the grove; utthāpya – lifting up; natvā – bowing down to
him; āliṅgya – and embracing him; nyaveśayat – made him
sit down.

The cowherd boy was the crest jewel of omniscient
personalities. He could understand by his external
consciousness that the brāhmaṇa’s birthplace was
Mathurā, that he was a resident of the country of
Kāmākhyā-devī, and that he was a worshiper of Śrī
Madana-gopāla. That cowherd boy, Śrī Gopa-kumāra, then
came out of the grove. Lifting the brāhmaṇa from the
ground, he bowed down to him, embraced him, and sat him
by his side.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “Gopa-kumāra, the
crest jewel among the all-knowing, heard the brāhmaṇa’s
loud calling and regained external consciousness. He
could discern that the brāhmaṇa had either taken birth
in a brāhmaṇa family from Mathurā or was born in
Mathurā. He could also understand that the brāhmaṇa
resided in the country known as Kāma-rūpa in order to
daily worship the presiding Deity, Kāmākhyā-devī, and
that it must be on the goddess’s order that he had come
there on foot. In particular, Gopa-kumāra understood

                              85
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

that the brāhmaṇa was a devotee of Śrī Madana-gopāla-
deva.” Alternatively, it is understood that, “It was on
the order of Śrī Rādhā-devī that Śrī Gopa-kumāra had
gone to the grove early that morning. Therefore, to
fulfill that order, he came out of the grove, offered
obeisance to the brāhmaṇa, raised him from the ground,
embraced him, and had him sit beside him.”



Verse 95

athātithyena santoṣya viśvāsotpādanāya saḥ

kiñcit tenānubhūtaṁ yad vyañjayām āsa sa-smitam

atha – then; ātithyena – with hospitality; santoṣya –
satisfying him; viśvāsa – trust; utpādanāya – to invoke;
saḥ – he; kiñcit – some; tena – by him; anubhūtam –
experienced; yat – what; vyañjayām āsa – he described;
sa-smitam– with a smile.

First, Gopa-kumāra satisfied the brāhmaṇa by extending
appropriate hospitality to him. Then, to gain the
brāhmaṇa’s confidence, Gopa-kumāra, smiling, narrated
some of the brāhmaṇa’s experiences to him.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “Śrī Gopa-kumāra
pleased the brāhmaṇa by his convivial hospitality.” The
word ātithya, meaning ‘hospitality,’ indicates words and
acts of welcome appropriate to time and place. “Gopa-
kumāra also gave the brāhmaṇa a brief account of events
that had taken place in the brāhmaṇa’s life, beginning
with his worship of Kāmākhyā-devī until his arrival in
Śrī Vṛndāvana. Although these were the brāhmaṇa’s
personal inner experiences and realizations, Gopa-kumāra
very cleverly revealed them to him through his speech.
Why did he do so? Because Gopa-kumāra wanted the
brāhmaṇa to have faith in him. Otherwise, the brāhmaṇa
would have never realized the divine wonder of those
highly confidential topics.”



Verse 96

buddhvā gopa-kumāraṁ taṁ labdhvevātma-priyaṁ mudā

viśvasto ’kathayat tasmin sva-vṛttaṁ brāhmaṇo ’khilam

buddhvā – understanding; gopa-kumāram – the cowherd boy;
tam – him; labdhvā – having experienced; iva – as if;
ātma-priyam – dear to him, a friend; mudā – with
happiness; viśvastaḥ – with full trust; akathayat – he
narrated; tasmin – to him; sva-vṛttam – his own life
story; brāhmaṇaḥ – the brāhmaṇa; akhilam – entire.

Understanding Śrī Gopa-kumāra to be his friend, the
brāhmaṇa

experienced great joy, and with full trust, narrated his
entire life story to the cowherd boy.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “The brāhmaṇa saw

                              86
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

that Śrī Gopa-kumāra was endowed with all good qualities
and had beautiful features. Realizing, ‘He is not my
worshipable Lord,’ he reasoned that Gopa-kumāra must be
some other cowherd boy. Thus, able to distinguish Gopa-
kumāra from his Lord, the brāhmaṇa accepted Gopa-kumāra
like an affectionate friend.”



Verse 97

sa-kārpaṇyam idaṁ cāsau praśritaḥ punar abravīt

taṁ sarvajña-varaṁ matvā sattamaṁ gopa-nandanam

sa-kārpaṇyam – with compassion; idam – this; ca – also;
asau – he; praśritaḥ – humble; punaḥ – again; abravīt –
he said; tam – to him; sarva-jña-varam – the best of all
wise men; matvā – realizing him; sattamam – a highly
elevated saint; gopa-nandanam – the son of a cowherd.

Then, realizing that Śrī Gopa-kumāra was a highly
elevated saint and the wisest of wise men, the brāhmaṇa
became humble and began to speak modestly as follows.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: In five verses, beginning here with
śrutvā, the brāhmaṇa humbly and modestly recounts his
story to Śrī Gopa-kumāra. Why did he do so? Because
through deliberation, he realized that Gopa-kumāra was
the best of omniscient and saintly men.



Verse 98

śrī-brāhmaṇa uvāca

śrutvā bahu-vidhaṁ sādhyaṁ sādhanaṁ ca tatas tataḥ

prāpyaṁ kṛtyaṁ ca nirṇetuṁ na kiñcic chakyate mayā

śrī-brāhmaṇaḥ uvāca – the brāhmaṇa said; śrutvā –
hearing; bahu-vidham – many kinds; sādhyam – goals of
life; sādhanam – practices of attainment; ca – also;
tataḥ tataḥ – from many places; prāpyam – goal worthy of
achievement; kṛtyam – worthy deed to be done; ca – also;
nirṇetum – to determine; na – not; kiñcit – anything;
śakyate – able; mayā – by me.

The brāhmaṇa said, “On the banks of the Gaṅgā in Kāśī
and in other places, I have heard about many goals of
life and many practices to achieve them. Nevertheless, I
am unable to determine what is my spiritual goal and
what means I should adopt to achieve it.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The brāhmaṇa says, “On the bank of the
Gaṅgā, in places like Kāśī and Prayāga, I have heard
about different goals, such as heaven (Svarga), and
liberation from the bondage of this world (mokṣa). I
have also heard about the means to achieve them, such as
fruitive activities, or karma, and empirical knowledge,
or

jñāna. This has left me ridden with doubt. Which of

                              87
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

these goals and their means is the foremost? What
discipline, or sādhana, must one adopt to receive the
combined benefit of all practices put together? My mind
is bewildered by hearing innumerable propositions, and I
am unable to decide anything in this regard.”



Verse 99

yac ca devy-ājñayā kiñcid anutiṣṭhāmi nityaśaḥ

tasyāpi kiṁ phalaṁ tac ca katamat karma vedmi na

yat – what; ca – and; devī – of the goddess; ājñayā – by
the order; kiñcit – somewhat; anutiṣṭhāmi – I engage
under guidance; nityaśaḥ – daily; tasya – of that; api –
also; kim – what?; phalam – result; tat – that; ca –
and; katamat – of which kind?; karma – action; vedmi – I
know; na – not.

“What is the nature of the religious practice that I
engage in everyday as ordered by the goddess? What is
its result? I do not even know the answers to these
questions.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra may question, “Then
why do you chant your mantra?” In reply, the brāhmaṇa
speaks this verse beginning with yat ca. He says, “The
process of chanting the mantra is quick and easy in
comparison to the elaborate endeavors prescribed for
householders, renunciants, and fruitive workers. I
especially chant this mantra out of respect for Devī’s
order, even though I have no knowledge about its
fundamental reality (tattva-jñāna). What is the goal of
the activity known as japa (quiet chanting)? I do not
even know which path among those of dharma (religion),
jñāna (knowledge), bhakti (devotion), etc. will benefit
me. Therefore, although I am chanting, because I lack
faith in the process, it seems I am not really
chanting.”



Verse 100

tenedaṁ viphalaṁ janma manvānaḥ kāmaye mṛtim

paraṁ jīvāmi kṛpayā śivayor mādhavasya ca

tena – by this; idam – this; viphalam – useless; janma –
birth; manvānaḥ – considering; kāmaye – I desire; mṛtim
– death; param – still; jīvāmi – I live; kṛpayā – by the
mercy; śivayoḥ – of Śiva and Parvatī; mādhavasya – of
Śrī Mādhava; ca – and.

“For this reason, I consider my birth useless and would
like to die. The only reason I am still alive is the
mercy of Śrī Viśvanātha and Bhagavān Śrī Mādhava.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might ask, “Feeling so
indifferent and miserable because of not having
determined your ultimate goal and a way to achieve it
(sādhya-sādhana), how are you able to survive?”

                              88
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


In reply, the brāhmaṇa speaks these words beginning with
param. He says, “I am able to maintain my life only by
the mercy of Śrī Viśveśvara and Śrī Kāmākhyā-devī. Their
instructions and words of encouragement are keeping me
alive.”



Verse 101

tayaivātrādya sarvajñaṁ dayāluṁ tvāṁ svadevavat

prāpya hṛṣṭaḥ prapanno ’smi kṛpaṇaṁ māṁ samuddhara

tayā – because of that; eva – only; atra – here; adya –
today; sarva-

jñam – all-knowing; dayālum – compassionate; tvām – you;
sva-deva-vat – resembling my Lord; prāpya – obtaining;
hṛṣṭaḥ – jubilant; prasannaḥ – happy; asmi – I am;
kṛpaṇam – a wretch; mām – me; samuddhara – kindly
deliver fully.

“By their (Śrī Viśveśvara and Śrī Kāmākhyā-devī’s) mercy
alone I have met you. I am supremely happy because you
resemble my worshipable Lord. Kindly deliver me, as you
are omniscient and compassionate, and I am extremely
wretched and insignificant.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The brāhmaṇa realizes, “Now I am able
to percieve the signs of Śrī Kāmākhyā-devī and Śrī
Viśveśvara’s mercy.” This sentiment is revealed in this
verse beginning with tayā. He tells Gopa-kumāra, “I
could meet you only by the mercy of Śrī Kāmākhyā-devī
and Śrī Viśveśvara. Your form, dress, adornments, and so
on exactly resemble Śrī Madana-gopāla-deva’s. You are
omniscient and merciful and I am very wretched and
insignificant. Please instruct me on the ultimate
spiritual goal, and thus deliver me from my ocean of
doubts.”



Verse 102

śrī-parīkṣid uvāca

niśamya sādaraṁ tasya vacanaṁ sa vyacintayat

etasya kṛta-kṛtyasya jātā pūrṇārthatā kila

śrī-parīkṣit uvāca   – Śrī Parīkṣit said; niśamya –
hearing; sa-ādaram   – with respect; tasya – his; vacanam
– words; saḥ – he;   vyacintayat – thought; etasya – of
him; kṛta-kṛtyasya   – successful; jātā – attained; pūrṇa-
arthatā – complete   fulfillment; kila – indeed.

Śrī Parīkṣit said: O mother, after respectfully hearing
the brāhmaṇa’s words, Gopa-kumāra thought, “This
brāhmaṇa has attained success and the fulfillment of his
desire as well.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “After hearing the

                              89
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

brāhmaṇa’s words with respect and affection, Gopa-kumāra
began to ponder the situation. What was the subject of
his thoughts? The reply is given in this verse,
beginning here with the line starting with etasya, until
verse 108, ending with the words hitam bhavet.”

Gopa-kumāra thinks, “The desire of this Mathurā
brāhmaṇa, who is a devotee of Śrī Madana-gopāla-deva,
has been fulfilled.” Here the word

kila, meaning ‘indeed,’ implies ascertainment, or a
thing that is possible.



Verse 103

kevalaṁ tat-padāmbhoja-sākṣād-īkṣāvaśiṣyate

taj-jape ’rhati nāsaktiṁ kintu tan-nāma-kīrtane

kevalam – only; tat-pada-ambhoja – His lotus feet (Śrī
Madana-gopāla-deva’s); sākṣād-īkṣā – the direct vision;
avaśiṣyate – remains; tat – His; jape – in chanting the
mantra; arhati – it is necessary; na – not; āsaktim –
attachment; kintu – rather; tat – His; nāma-kīrtane – to
the chanting of Śrī Nāma.

“Now, the brāhmaṇa’s only remaining need is to directly
see Śrī Madana-gopāla-deva’s lotus feet. Therefore, it
is not necessary that he keep his attachment to the
quiet, solitary chanting of his mantra. Rather, he
should develop exclusive attachment to śrī-nāma-
saṅkīrtana, the singing and glorification of the names
of the Lord.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra thinks, “Now, the only
thing that remains for this brāhmaṇa is that he receive
direct vision of Śrī Madana-gopāla’s lotus feet. Nothing
but chanting and glorification of the names of the Lord
will fulfill his desire to receive that darśana, so it
will be appropriate for him to develop attachment to
chanting Śrī Madana-gopāla’s name.”



Verse 104

śrīman-madana-gopāla-pādābjopāsanāt param

nāma-saṅkīrtana-prāyād vāñchātīta-phala-pradāt

śrīman-madana-gopāla – of Śrī Madana-gopāla; pāda-abja –
of the lotus feet; upāsanāt – by worshiping; param – the
best form; nāma-saṅkīrtana – in chanting the holy names;
prāyāt – through engaging; vāñchā-atīta – beyond
expectations; phala – a result; pradāt – He awards.

“The best and highest form of worship of Śrī Madana-
gopāla’s lotus feet is that which is predominated by
nāma-saṅkīrtana. When the chanting of the holy names of
the Lord is executed with loving dedication, it grants a
result beyond all expectations.


                              90
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The doubt might be raised, “How could
Gopa-kumāra conclude that this brāhmaṇa had become
successful?”

Therefore, this verse, spoken by Śrī Gopa-kumāra, says,
“He has developed strong affinity for the foremost of
spiritual goals (sādhyas) and the means to attain it
(sādhana).” In three verses, beginning here with śrīmat,
Gopa-kumāra reiterates this point.

He says, “No other form of spiritual practice is
superior to the worship (upāsanā) of Śrī Madana-gopāla-
deva’s lotus feet, which are endowed with śrīmat, the
ultimate beauty and splendor of unlimited varieties of
services. Why is this so? Because such worship grants
all that is desired and even that which is not desired,
bestowing results beyond all expectation.”
Alternatively, it may be said, “This spiritual practice
fully bestows magnificent results that are beyond
expectation and that are inconceivable.”

It could further be asked, “What is the form of that
worship that bestows such a result?”

Gopa-kumāra says, “Worship that is predominated by
profuse

saṅkīrtana – meaning engaging in samyak, or
mellifluously singing narrations saturated with the
names of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Govinda, Gopāla, etc. – and kīrtana,
or loud recitation, results in receiving darśana of Śrī
Madana-gopāla’s lotus feet.” In other words, the worship
that emphasizes loud recitation or singing of the
Supreme Lord’s holy names results in vision of the
Lord’s lotus feet. The symptoms of Śrī Madana-gopāla’s
worship have been described in these statements.”



Verse 105

tal-līlā-sthala-pālīnāṁ śraddhā sandarśanādaraiḥ

sampādyamānān nitarāṁ kiñcin nāsty eva sādhanam

tat-līlā – of His pastimes; sthala-pālīnām – of the many
places; śraddhā – with faith; sandarśana – seeing;
ādaraiḥ – with respect; sampādyamānāt – being
accomplished; nitarām – fully; kiñcit – any; na – not;
asti – is; eva – at all; sādhanam – the spiritual
practice.

“If spiritual practices such as faithful worship of the
pastime places of Śrī Madana-gopāla and taking their
darśana are performed with reverence and zeal in
connection with śrī-nāma-saṅkīrtana, only then is it
possible to achieve such a goal. Therefore, no other
means of perfection is superior to this type of worship.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra emphasizes, “One
should have faith in the pastime places of Śrī Madana-
gopāla, traveling everywhere to visit and directly see
all of them with particular loving affection. This
should be accompanied by profuse singing of the holy

                              91
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

names of the Lord (nāma-saṅkīrtana). This practice can
cause prema in the mood of Vraja to arise in one’s
heart.”



Verse 106

sañjāta-premakāccāsmāc catur-varga-viḍambakāt

tat-pādābja-vaśī-kārād anyat sādhyaṁ na kiñcana

sañjāta – is awoken; premakāt – by which pure love of
God; ca – and; asmāt – than this; catuḥ-varga – the four
goals of life; viḍambakāt – to appear worthless; tat-
pāda-abja – (service) to His lotus feet; vaśī-kārāt –
which brings under control; anyat – other; sādhyam –
spiritual objective; na – not; kiñcana – any.

“This form of worship, which causes the four Vedic goals
– religiosity,

economic development, sense gratification, and
liberation – to appear worthless, is capable of
awakening love of God in the heart. Indeed, Śrī Madana-
gopāla can be brought under control only by such
worship, and therefore it is the best art of
subjugation. Thus, there is no goal superior to this
worship.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra thinks, “By the
execution of this worship, pure love for the Lord that
is perfect and complete arises in the heart. No other
attainment is superior to this devotion at the lotus
feet of Śrī Madana-gopāla. The reason is that this
worship trifles and mocks the four Vedic goals –
religiosity (dharma), economic development (artha),
sense gratification (kāma), and liberation (mokṣa). It
alone can enchant Śrī Madana-gopāla, and so it is the
special ingredient for controlling His lotus feet.”



Verse 107

iti bodhayituṁ cāsya sarva-saṁśayanodanam

sva-vṛttam eva nikhilaṁ nūnaṁ prāk pratipādaye

iti – thus; bodhayitum – to enlighten; ca – and; asya –
of him; sarva – all; saṁśaya – of doubts; nodanam –
eradication; sva-vṛttam – my own life story; eva –
indeed; nikhilam – entirely; nūnam – certainly; prāk –
first; pratipādaye – I should make him acquainted.

“To enlighten the brāhmaṇa about this truth, I shall
first narrate to him my entire life story, by which all
his doubts will be eradicated.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra thinks, “Therefore, in
order to remove the brāhmaṇa’s doubts regarding the
ultimate goal and the means to achieve it, the
existential truth (tattva) about these concepts will
have to be elucidated.” This is explained in this verse

                              92
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

beginning with iti. “To teach this brāhmaṇa the truth of
the ultimate goal and its process of achievement, first
I will relate my entire life history to him – all my
experiences from the time of accepting mantra initiation
until the present. This will remove all his doubts on
this subject. If, at the outset, I explain the
existential understanding of the goal and the process,
the brāhmaṇa may not consider it to be in the realm of
possibility and this conclusive truth may not manifest
completely in his doubt-ridden heart. Therefore, I must
first tell him my life-story. His heart will certainly
be completely purified by drinking the nectar of Śrī
Bhagavān’s pastimes and by hearing my experiences of
these sound truths. This aural reception will
automatically grant him realization of fundamental truth
(tattva-jñāna).”




Verse 108


svayam eva sva-māhātmyaṁ kathyate yan na tat satām

sammataṁ syāt tathāpy asya nānyākhyānād dhitaṁ bhavet

svayam – personally; eva – indeed; sva – of my own;
māhātmyam – glorification; kathyate – describing; yat –
which; na – not; tat – that; satām – for saintly
persons; sammatam – approved; syāt – it may be; tathāpi
– nevertheless; asya – of him; na – not; anya – another;
ākhyānāt – than this narration; hitam – benefit; bhavet
– there can be.

“It is true that sādhus are not accustomed to glorifying
themselves.

Nevertheless, I shall describe my glorious experience to
this

brāhmaṇa because there is no other narration that will
benefit him.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: An objection could be raised, “If you
describe how you received Bhagavān’s mercy by narrating
your life history, that will amount to singing your own
glories. How can saintly persons approve of self-praise?
It is inappropriate for sādhus to glorify themselves.”
The verse beginning with svayam addresses this doubt.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra considers, “Saintly persons do not
approve of broadcasting one’s own glories. There is a
well-known proverb in this connection: ‘sva-praśaṁsā
dhruvo mṛtyu – self-praise is as good as death.’ Given
these reasons, it is improper to narrate my own story.
Nevertheless, I will have to do it for this brāhmaṇa. If
I make him hear any other narrations, they will not
destroy his many doubts, nor will he realize any
essential truth (tattva). In particular, because he has
great faith in me and his nature is similar to mine in
many ways, he will immensely benefit by hearing these
truths I have realized. His doubts will be removed and

                              93
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

he will quickly make advancement by realizing conclusive
truth for himself. Importantly, by doing this, I will be
promptly executing Śrī Rādhā’s order to me, and any
impropriety will be transformed into a meritorious act.”



Verse 109

evaṁ viniścitya mahānubhāvo

gopātmajo ’sāv avadhāpya vipram

ātmānubhūtaṁ gadituṁ pravṛttaḥ

paurāṇiko yadvad ṛṣiḥ purāṇam

evam – thus; viniścitya – having deliberated; mahā-
anubhāvaḥ – great self-realised authority; gopa-ātma-jaḥ
– the son of a cowherd; asau – he; avadhāpya –
attracting the attention; vipram – of the brāhmaṇa;
ātma-anubhūtam – personally experienced; gaditum – to
narrate; pravṛttaḥ – began; paurāṇikaḥ – versed in the
ancient scriptures; yadvat – just as; ṛṣiḥ – a sage;
purāṇam – scriptures.

Coming to this conclusion, the noble Gopa-kumāra drew
the brāhmaṇa’s attention and began narrating his
personal experience, just as sages, or ṛṣis, the
teachers of the Purāṇas, speak those scriptures.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Parīkṣit says, “Gopa-kumāra made
the brāhmaṇa focus his attention by telling him to
concentrate his thoughts and hear with faith. Just as
ṛṣis, who are seers of Puranic mantras, narrate their
experiences in the Brahma Purāṇa, Padma Purāṇa and so
on, in that same way Gopa-kumāra described to the
brāhmaṇa everything he had experienced.”

Scripture describes the following qualities of a ṛṣi:

ūrdhva-retās tapasy ugro niratāśī ca saṁyamī

śāpānugrahayoḥ śaktaḥ satya-sandho bhaved ṛṣiḥ

A ṛṣi, or sage, must possess the following qualities: He
is urdhva-retā, meaning his semen rises upward towards
the brain due to continuous celibacy; he performs severe
austerities (ugra-tapā); he is regulated in eating; he
is self-controlled; he is able to curse and bless; and
he is fixed in truth (satya-sandha).

The original verse’s comparison of Gopa-kumāra’s
narration to that of the ṛṣis establishes that just as
all Purāṇas are approved by the scriptures as conclusive
truth (siddhānta), so the narration of the life history
of Gopa-kumāra is also approved by all scriptures as
conclusive truth because Gopa-kumāra sees the reality –
meaning the worshipable Deity – of his mantra, and
therefore he has the qualities of a ṛṣi. Moreover, this
demonstrates why the brāhmaṇa developed great faith.




                              94
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017



Verse 110


śrī-gopa-kumāra uvāca

atretihāsā bahavo vidyante ’thāpi kathyate

sva-vṛttam evānusmṛtya mohādāv api saṅgatam

śrī-gopa-kumāraḥ uvāca – Śrī Gopa-kumāra said; atra –
here; itihāsāḥ – histories; bahavaḥ – many; vidyante –
there are; atha api – nonetheless; kathyate – to be
said; sva-vṛttam – my personal experiences; eva –
indeed; anusmṛtya – recollecting; moha – during my
ecstatic swoon; ādau – and so on; api – also; saṅgatam –
what happened.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra said: There are many historical accounts
on this subject, but I will relate only my personal
experience. I shall certainly recount all those
experiences that I realized in my natural condition. In
regard to those that took place during my states of
ecstasy, I will first remember them, and then relate
them to you as well.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says:

dharmārtha-kāma-mokṣāṇām, upadeśa-samanvitam

pūrva-vṛtta-kathā-yuktam itihāsaṁ pracakṣate

The ancient scriptures, known as Itihāsas, present many
historical accounts in regard to determining the
essential truth of the highest goal of life and the
means to achieve it (sādhya-sādhana). This includes
advice for obtaining dharma (religiosity), artha
(economic development), kāma (sense gratification), and
mokṣa (liberation).

“However, I consider my practical experiences of sādhya-
sādhana to be evidential. Although there are many
examples from ancient texts, I will simply narrate that
which I have directly realized because personal
experience is the best form of evidence to evoke proper
faith. Moreover, although that which I experienced when
I fell into my ecstatic trance of love of God ( prema-
mūrcchā) is very confidential in nature, I will describe
even that to you.

“When I was overwhelmed with prema and had fallen
unconscious, wonderful ecstatic symptoms that were
evident to external vision appeared on my body. Even
though I was unconscious at the time, I could perceive
the extraordinary influence of those ecstatic emotions
(bhāvas) through the cognizance of my soul. Now, I will
take shelter of that knowledge of the self and describe
these topics from my past memories.”

This reveals Gopa-kumāra’s exalted potency of knowledge
( jñāna-śakti). Here, the word ādi indicates that this
account is most confidential in nature and therefore
inappropriate to be revealed publicly. Gopa-kumāra is

                              95
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

also shy to disclose his personal experiences, but for
the brāhmaṇa’s benefit, he feels it would certainly be
befitting to do so. Gopa-kumāra will personally describe
this in the Seventh Chapter (Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta 2.7.4),
wherein he says:

paśya yac cātmanas tasya tadīyānām ca sarvathā

vṛttaṁ parama-gopyaṁ tat sarvaṁ te kathitaṁ mayā

Whatever confidential topics there are in relation to
me; to the Supreme Person, Bhagavān; or to the devotees
of the Lord, I have described to you.



Verses 111–112

gopāla-vṛtter vaiśyasya govardhana-nivāsinaḥ

putro ’ham īdṛśo bālaḥ purā gāś cārayan nijāḥ

tasmin govardhane kṛṣṇā-tīre vṛndāvane ’tra ca

māthure maṇḍale bālaiḥ samaṁ vipra-vara sthitaḥ

gopāla-vṛtteḥ – having the livelihood of a cowherd;
vaiśyasya – of a mercantile community; govardhana-
nivāsinaḥ – of a resident of Govardhana Hill; putraḥ –
son; aham – I; īdṛśaḥ – like; bālaḥ – a child; purā –
before; gāḥ – cows; cārayan – tending; nijāḥ – my own;
tasmin – there; govardhane – on Govardhana; kṛṣṇā-tīre –
on the bank of the Yamunā; vṛndāvane – in Vṛndāvana;
atra – here; ca – and; māthure maṇḍale – within the area
of Mathurā-manḍala (Vraja); bālaiḥ – with boys; samam –
together; vipra-vara – O best of the brāhmaṇas; sthitaḥ
– situated.

O best of the brāhmaṇas! I am a resident of Govardhana
and my father, a cowherder, belonged to the mercantile
community that is occupied in tending cows. Just as I am
a child now, similarly, even in my childhood in the
past, I used to graze the cows with other boys the same
age. We took them pasturing within the Mathurā area: on
the banks of Śrī Yamunā at Śrī Govardhana and also here
in Śrī Vṛndāvana.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: This story begins here in verse 111 of
this chapter with the words gopāla-vṛtteḥ, and it
continues to the end of Chapter Six.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.24.21) states: “kṛṣi-vāṇijya-go-
rakṣā kusīdaṁ tūryam ucyate – four occupational duties
are appropriate for the mercantile class, known as
vaiśyas: agriculture, commerce, cow protection, and
money lending.”

Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “My vaiśya father made his living
tending cows. As his son, I grazed the cows in areas
such as Śrī Govardhana. How you see me now is how I
looked in my childhood when I tended the cows with boys
of my own age.” This reveals that Gopa-kumāra’s body had
not changed with the passage of time. Later, Gopa-kumāra
himself discloses his guru’s benediction (Bṛhad-

                              96
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

bhāgavatāmṛta 2.1.191). He says, “My guru’s blessing was
as follows.”

tvam etasya prabhāveṇa cira-jīvī bhavānv-aham

īdṛg gopārbha-rūpaś ca tat-phalāpty-arha-mānasaḥ

“I bless you that by the power of chanting the mantra
you will become immortal. Morevoer, always appearing in
this way as a cowherd boy, you will obtain the special
vision you need to receive the indescribable fruit of
directly seeing Śrī Madana-gopāla-deva.”

The adjective nija, meaning ‘own,’ in the original verse
alludes to Gopa-kumāra’s independence and wealth of
cows. He says, “I tended cows on the world-famous
Govardhana Hill, my previous place of residence, as well
on the river Yamunā’s banks, and here in Vṛndāvana.” The
word tasmin, meaning ‘there,’ is used in reference to
Govardhana, and atra, meaning ‘here,’ is used in
reference to Vṛndāvana. This is because Gopa-kumāra is
narrating this account while sitting in Śrī Vṛndāvana.
Mathurā-maṇḍala, which measures twenty yojanas [160
miles], is a vast tract that includes twelve forests
such as Mahāvana, as well as the places where Gopa-
kumāra tended the cows – Śrī Govardhana, Śrī Vṛndāvana,
and the banks of Śrī Yamunā. There is no place as
beneficial as the charming Gokula of Mathurā-maṇḍala.
Gopa-kumāra addressed the brāhmaṇa as ‘vipra-vara – O
best of brāhmaṇas’ because he had taken birth in
Mathurā-maṇḍala.



Verses 113–116

vana-madhye ca paśyāmo nityam ekaṁ dvijottamam

divya-mūrtiṁ virakty-āḍhyaṁ paryaṭantam itas tataḥ

kīrtayantaṁ muhuḥ kṛṣṇaṁ japa-dhyāna-rataṁ kvacit

nṛtyantaṁ kvāpi gāyantaṁ kvāpi hāsa-paraṁ kvacit

vikrośantaṁ kvacid bhūmau skhalantaṁ kvāpi mattavat

luṭhantaṁ bhuvi kutrāpi rudantaṁ kvacid uccakaiḥ

visaṁjñaṁ patitaṁ kvāpi śleṣma-lālāśru-dhārayā

paṅkayantaṁ gavāṁ vartma-rajāṁsi mṛtavat kvacit

vana – forest; madhye – within; ca – and; paśyāmaḥ – we
would observe; nityam – everyday; ekam – one; dvija-
uttamam – trans-

cendentally situated brāhmaṇa; divya-mūrtim – divine
appearance; virakti – with full renunciation; āḍhyam –
endowed; paryaṭantam – wandering; itaḥ tataḥ – here and
there; kīrtayantam – singing; muhuḥ – repeatedly; kṛṣṇam
– of Kṛṣṇa; japa – in chanting; dhyāna – in meditation;
ratam – absorbed; kvacit – sometimes; nṛtyantam –
dancing; kva api – sometimes; gāyantam – singing; kva
api – sometimes; hāsa-param – immersed in laughter;

                              97
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

kvacit – sometimes; vikrośantam – calling out loudly;
kvacit – sometimes; bhūmau – on the ground; skhalantam –
falling; kva api – sometimes; mattavat – as a madman;
luṭhantam – rolling; bhuvi – on the ground; kutra api –
sometimes; rudantam – wailing; kvacit – sometimes;
uccakaiḥ – loudly; visaṁjñam – unconscious; patitam –
fallen down; kva api – sometimes; śleṣma – of his mucus;
lāla – saliva; āśru – tears; dhārayā – with the stream;
paṅkayantam – make wet and muddy; gavām – of the cows;
vartma – the trail; rajāṁsi – the dust; mṛta-vat – as if
dead; kvacit – sometimes.

While tending the cows everyday in the forest, we would
observe an exalted brāhmaṇa of divine appearance and
great renunciation, who would wander here and there
singing Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s holy names. At times, he would be
absorbed in chanting or in meditation, and at other
times, like a madman, he would dance, sing, laugh, and
even roar. Or else, he would fall to the ground and
roll, wailing loudly. Sometimes, he would fall as if he
were unconscious. The saliva drooling from his mouth,
the mucous dripping from his nose, and the tears
streaming from his eyes would make the cows’ trail wet
and muddy. Sometimes, in an unconscious state, he would
lie still as if dead.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: In recounting this incident that
happened in the past, Śrī Gopa-kumāra is using verbs in
the present tense to describe the past, as seen with
words such as paśyāmaḥ, meaning ‘we see.’ He says,
“While grazing the cows in the forest, we would always
see that exalted brāhmaṇa.” Here, the illustrious
brāhmaṇa, who is being described in these three-and-a-
half verses, is addressed as dvijottama, which indicates
he was the best among twice-born personalities or was an
exalted brāhmaṇa.

Gopa-kumāra says, “That extraordinary brāhmaṇa possessed
a magnificent, divine form endowed with the most
exquisite, golden complexion. He always sang different
nectarean names of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in various melodies.
Sometimes wandering here and there, he repeatedly sang
the name of Kṛṣṇa, which is composed of two syllables,
‘kṛṣ-ṇa’. At times, he would sit down somewhere and
submerge himself in chanting or in meditation (dhyāna),
processes he performed with great affection. Although he
had perfected the mantra, nevertheless, to avoid the
offense of being ungrateful to it, he devotedly
continued to chant it with love and undeviated
attention. It is stated in tantra:

siddha-mantro ’pi pūtātmā tri-sandhyaṁ devam archayet

niyamenaika-sandhyaṁ vā japed aṣṭottaraṁśatam

Even when one has perfected the mantra, one should
continue to worship the mantra’s presiding Deity by
chanting with a pure mind at the three daily conjuctions
– sunrise, noon, and sunset. Furthermore, one should
chant the mantra a prescribed number of times or one
hundred and eight times.

“Sometimes, due to his regular practice [of touching and
rolling in the dust of Vraja], the brāhmaṇa would fall

                              98
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

to the ground. Sometimes this would happen due to the
arousal of prema. Then, his pure love would cause the
external activities of his senses to stop, and at that
time, his chanting and meditation would become
indistinguishable and he would fall to the ground. What
was his condition? He would lie there like an
unconscious person. How could this be known? From the
condition of the cow-trail. It would become muddied by
the stream of his tears and the saliva drooling from his
mouth. Other times, he would lay still like a dead
person, with no evidence of saliva and tears.”



Verse 117

kautukena vayaṁ bālā yāmo ’muṁ vīkṣituṁ sadā

sa tu gopa-kumārān no labdhvā namati bhaktitaḥ

kautukena – with curiousity; vayam – we; bālāḥ –
children; yāmaḥ – would go; amum – to him; vīkṣitum – to
watch; sadā – always; saḥ – he; tu – indeed; gopa-
kumārān – cowherd boys; naḥ – of us; labdhvā – knowing;
namati– would offer obeisance; bhaktitaḥ – with
devotion.

Being children, we were naturally curious and would
always go to watch him. However, knowing we were cowherd
boys, he would bow down to us with great devotion.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “We children,
out of curiosity, would always go to see him. Although
we did not approach him out of devotion or with any
faith, still, knowing we were cowherd boys, he offered
obeisance to us with devotion. The brāhmaṇa’s sublime
compassion is shown in this incident and will be
detailed later.”



Verse 118

gāḍham āśliṣyati premṇā sarvāṅgeṣu sa-cumbanam

parityaktuṁ na śaknoti mādṛśān priya-bandhu-vat

gāḍham – tightly; āśliṣyati – he would embrace; premṇā –
lovingly; sarva – all; aṅgeṣu – limbs; sa-cumbanam –
with kissing; parityaktum – to give up; na – not;
śaknoti – was able; mādṛśān – such as us; priya-
bandhuvat – like a beloved friend.

Sometimes, he would tightly embrace us and lovingly kiss
us all over. Considering us like his beloved friends, it
would become difficult for him to easily give up our
company.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Here, the word mādṛśa means ‘a form
similar to mine.’ It can also mean – and this is the
intention of Gopa-kumāra –

‘a form similar to the brāhmaṇa’s worshipable Deity, Śrī
Madana-gopāla.’ Priya-bandhu denotes having the loving

                              99
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

sentiment and affection of a father or other senior
relative. In other words, we see in mundane dealings
that if an elder brother meets a dear younger brother
after a long absence in a distant place, he will exhibit
loving behavior by embracing his younger brother and so
on. Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “In that mood of a priya-
bandhu, the brāhmaṇa would embrace us, treating us as if
we were his beloved friends. Thus, it would become
difficult for him to easily extricate himself from our
company.” The term priya-bandhu can also convey the idea
that, “Just as when an exalted devotee sees his beloved
friend, Śrī Bhagavān, he exhibits deep affection for
Him, so in the same way, the brāhmaṇa behaved lovingly
towards us.”



Verse 119

mayā go-rasa-dānādi-sevayāsau prasāditaḥ

ekadā yamunā-tīre prāpyāliṅgya jagāda mām

mayā – by me; go-rasa – milk, the nectar of the cows;
dāna – offering; ādi – and so forth; sevayā – by the
service; asau – he; prasāditaḥ – was pleased; ekadā –
once; yamunā – of the Yamunā; tīre – on the bank; prāpya
– meeting; āliṅgya – embracing; jagāda – he said; mām –
to me.

I rendered service to him by offering him milk, which is
the nectar of the cows, and other such things. One day,
he spotted me alone on the bank of the Yamunā and, being
pleased with me, he embraced me and spoke as follows.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “I engaged in
serving him by offering him milk, yogurt, etc.” The word
ādi implies, “I performed other humble services as well,
such as fetching water from the nearby lake.” He says,
“That most noble personality, the best of the twice-born
brāhmaṇas, showered me with his mercy, being pleased by
my service. This aroused in me a strong affinity for the
Lord.”



Verse 120

vatsa tvaṁ sakalābhīṣṭa-siddhim icchasi ced imam

prasādaṁ jagad-īśasya snātvā keśyāṁ gṛhāṇa mat

vatsa – O my dear child; tvam – you; sakala – all;
abhīṣṭa – of deeply felt desires; siddhim – fulfillment;
icchasi – you want; cet – if; imam – this; prasādam –
mercy; jagad-īśasya – of the Supreme Lord; snatvā –
bathing; keśyām – at Keśī-ghāṭa; gṛhāṇa – accept; mat –
from me.

“My dear child, if you want the fulfillment of all
desires, then bathe here in Keśī-ghāṭa and accept from
me this mercy of Śrī Jagadīśa, the Supreme Lord.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: “What type of mercy ( prasāda)?” To

                          100
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

describe this, in this verse, the brāhmaṇa says, “My
dear child, if you want to fulfill all your desires,
then accept from me this mantra, which is the direct
mercy of Jagadīśvara, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Consider that His mercy is coming right into
the palm of your hand.”



Verse 121

evam etaṁ bhavan-mantraṁ snātāyopādideśa me

pūrṇa-kāmo ’napekṣyo ’pi sa dayālu-śiromaṇiḥ

evam – thus; etam – this; bhavat – your; mantram –
divine, mind-enchanting sound vibration; snātāya –
having bathed; upādideśa – he instructed; me – me;
pūrṇa-kāmaḥ – a fully satisfied person; anapekṣyaḥ –
without a yearning for sense objects; api – although;
saḥ – he; dayālu – of kind-hearted persons; śiraḥ-

maṇiḥ – the crest jewel.

Every desire of that brāhmaṇa was already fulfilled and
he did not yearn for any sense object. However, he was
the crest jewel of the kind-hearted, and therefore,
after my bath, he instructed me in the same mantra you
have also received.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “After I bathed
in the Yamunā upon his order, the brāhmaṇa instructed me
in his worshipable ten-syllable mantra. Since he
bestowed his own worshipable mantra upon me, I developed
strong faith in it. This reveals that if an authentic
spiritual master, or sad-guru, grants the mantra of his
worshipable Lord to a bona fide disciple, or sat-śiṣya,
then the disciple develops unshakeable faith in the
mantra and affection for the worshipful Lord. It would
not be right to think that the brāhmaṇa had instructed
me in this mantra just because I had served him by
giving him milk and such things. The fact is that all of
the brāhmaṇa’s desires were already fulfilled and he
wished for nothing. Why then did he instruct me in the
mantra, if he did not desire anything? He did so because
he was the crest jewel of all merciful personalities.”



Verse 122

pūjā-vidhiṁ śikṣayituṁ dhyeyam uccārayan jape

premākulo gato mohaṁ rudan virahiṇīva saḥ

pūjā – of worship; vidhim – the process; śikṣayitum – to
instruct; dhyeyam – on the object of meditation;
uccārayan – training me to utter; jape – in soft
chanting; prema-ākulaḥ – aggrieved due to love; gataḥ –
became; moham– unconscious; rudan – crying; virahiṇī – a
woman separated from her husband; iva – as; saḥ – he.

However, while instructing me in the process of
worshiping the mantra, as soon as he mentioned the

                           101
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

object of one’s meditation while chanting this mantra,
he began to weep piteously in divine love, like an
aggrieved woman separated from her husband. Then he fell
unconscious.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “He began
explaining to me the process of worship. To instruct me
in processes like nyāsa (symbolic hand gestures), dhyāna
(contemplation), etc., he began to describe the object
of meditation, the beautiful form of Śrī Madana-gopāla.
But as soon as the description of Madana-gopāla’s form
reached the tip of his tongue, he was instantly
overwhelmed by prema. Just as a woman separated from her
husband cries when remembering him at the slightest
prompting, the brāhmaṇa wept remembering his Lord, and
then fell unconscious.”



Verse 123

saṁjñāṁ prāpto ’tha kiñcin na praṣṭuṁ śakto mayā bhiyā

utthāya vimanasko ’gāt kvāpi prāptaḥ punar na saḥ

saṁjñām – consciousness; prāptaḥ – regained; atha –
then; kiñcit – something; na – not; praṣṭum – to
question; śaktaḥ – able; mayā – by me; bhiyā – with
fear; utthāya – arising; vimanaskaḥ – distressed; agāt –
he left; kva api – somewhere; prāptaḥ – attained; punaḥ
– again; na – not; saḥ – he.

When he regained consciousness, out of fear I was unable
to question him any further. Also, he then arose and
left in a distressed mood. After this, I did not see him
again.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “When he
regained consciousness, I could not ask him anything
more, out of respect and fear. After witnessing his
extreme affliction and lamentation, I was afraid I might
commit some offence by my questions. Also, I was
frightened he might slide back into the same ecstatic
mood and faint again. Therefore, I restrained myself.”

The Mathurā brāhmaṇa may ask, “When the brāhmaṇa came to
his senses, why did he not just continue his instruction
as before, out of mercy?”

In reply, Gopa-kumāra uses the term vimanaskaḥ, meaning
‘distressed.’ He says, “Divine love, or prema, had
manifested in his heart and therefore, in his ecstasy,
he had become aggrieved. Having forgotten what he had
been doing, he left and went somewhere else. I did not
know where he had gone and could not find him again,
anywhere.”



Verse 124

mayā tu kim idaṁ labdhaṁ kim asya phalam eva vā

mantraḥ kathaṁ sādhanīya iti jñātaṁ na kiñcana

                          102
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


mayā – by me; tu – indeed; kim – what?; idam – this;
labdham – received; kim – what?; asya – of it; phalam –
fruit; eva – certainly; vā – or; mantraḥ – the divine
vibration; katham – how?; sādhanīyaḥ – to be practiced;
iti – thus; jñātam – known; na kiñcana – nothing.

I began to deeply ponder, “What have I received? Is this
a song or a mantra? What result can it bestow? If this
is a mantra, how should it be practiced? I could not
understand anything regarding these subject matters.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “What is the
meaning of this ten-syllable object? Is it a song, a
mantra, or something else? What are its specific
characteristics? If it is a mantra, what is its sādhana?
Does one practice it with quiet chanting ( japa), or
with singing (kīrtana)? If this is a perfected mantra,
what fruit does it yield?” Gopa-kumāra’s spiritual
master had told him that this mantra can fulfill any
kind of desire he might have. In other words, the result
of worshiping this mantra is that one attains all the
objects of one’s desires. However, since Gopa-kumāra was
ignorant and lacked resolute intelligence, he began to
speculate about what fruit the mantra would bear.



Verse 125

tad-vākya-gauraveṇaiva mantraṁ taṁ kevalaṁ mukhe

kenāpy alakṣito ’jasraṁ japeyaṁ kautukād iva

tat-vākya – for his words; gauraveṇa – out of respect;
eva – indeed; mantram – divine vibration; tam – it;
kevalam – exclusively; mukhe – in my mouth; kena api –
by anyone; alakṣitaḥ – not seen; ajasram – continuously;
japeyam – I would chant; kautukāt – out of curiosity;
iva – like.

Just as one performs an act simply out of curiosity, out
of respect for the brāhmaṇa’s words, I went to a
solitary place and began to continuously chant only that
mantra.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Although I was
unable to allay the doubts I had, nonetheless, out of
respect for the exalted brāhmaṇa’s words, I constantly
chanted this mantra, audibly speaking the words. In
other words, I would continuously repeat the mantra
softly in a solitary place, unnoticed by others. The
term ‘being unnoticed by others’ means that I chanted in
seclusion because I lacked tattva-jñāna, knowledge of
the Absolute Truth.” Gopa-kumāra can also be saying, “I
chanted in a solitary place to save myself from
embarrassment in public.” The phrase, ‘out of curiosity’
means “I developed eagerness for chanting because my
heart was astonished by that mantra.”



Verse 126


                          103
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

tan mahā-puruṣasyaiva prabhāvāt tādṛśena ca

japena citta-śuddhir me tatra śraddhāpy ajāyata

tat – in that (mantra); mahā-puruṣasya – of that exalted
personality; eva – certainly; prabhāvāt – by the
influence; tādṛśena – by such; ca – also; japena – by
chanting; citta – of the heart; śuddhiḥ – purification;
me – of me; tatra – thereafter; śraddhā – faith; api –
also; ajāyata – developed.

By the influence of that exalted personality, as soon as
I began chanting in this way, my heart became purified
and I developed faith in this mantra.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “I was chanting
the mantra but without faith, due to my lack of
knowledge of transcendental truth (tattva-jñāna). Even
so, my consciousness became purified. In other words,
the chanting cleansed my heart of the contaminations of
lust, anger, etc., and so I developed faith in the
mantra. Moreover, this faith gradually increased.”



Verse 127

tad-vākyaṁ cānusandhāya jagad-īśvara-sādhakam

taṁ mantraṁ manyamāno ’haṁ tuṣyan japa-paro ’bhavam

tat-vākyam – his words; ca – and; anusandhāya – aiming
at (following); jagat-īśvara – (the presence of) the
Supreme Lord of the universe; sādhakam – capable of
invoking; tam – that; mantram – divine vibration;
manyamānaḥ – considering; aham – I; tuṣyan – feeling
happy; japa-paraḥ – devoted to chanting; abhavam – I
became.

Thereupon, remembering the brāhmaṇa’s words, I concluded
that by means of this mantra, I would attain Śrī
Jagadīśvara, the Supreme Lord of the universe. I was
thus satisfied and began to chant it constantly.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Thereafter, I
remembered Śrī Gurudeva’s words, ‘Accept this mercy of
Śrī Jagadīśvara.’ After thoroughly deliberating upon
this, I concluded that this mantra could directly bring
me to Śrī Jagadīśvara, the Supreme Lord Himself, or
bestow His mercy upon me. Happy to have realized this, I
started chanting the mantra continuously.”



Verse 128

kīdṛśo jagad-īśo ’sau kadā vā dṛśyatāṁ mayā

tad-eka-lālaso hitvā gṛhādīn jāhnavīm agām

kīdṛśaḥ – of what nature?; jagat-īśaḥ – the Lord of the
universe; asau – He; kadā – when?; vā – and; dṛśyatām –
will be seen; mayā – by me; tat – that; eka – exclusive;
lālasaḥ – my desire; hitvā – leaving; gṛha-ādīn – home

                          104
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

and so forth; jāhnavīm – to the river Jāhnavī; agām – I
went.

“What is the nature of Supreme Lord of the universe?
When will I see Him?” Possessed by the desire to know
this, one day I renounced my home and went to the bank
of the river Jāhnavī (Gaṅgā).

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “I thought,
‘What is Jagadīśvara like? Is there anyone to whom His
form can be compared? When will I receive His darśana?’
” Having developed this type of longing, or eager
desire, one day, Gopa-kumāra abruptly renounced home and
left everything behind.



Verse 129

dūrāc chaṅkha-dhvaniṁ śrutvā tat-padaṁ pulinaṁ gataḥ

vipraṁ vīkṣyānamaṁ tatra śālagrāma-śilārcakam

dūrāt – from a distance; śaṅkha – of a conchshell;
dhvanim – the sound; śrutvā – having heard; tat-padam –
that place; pulinam – to the bank; gataḥ – went; vipram
– an enlightened brāhmaṇa; vīkṣya – seeing; ānamam – I
bowed down; tatra – there; śālagrāma-śilā – of
Śālagrāma-śilā; arcakam – worshipper.

Hearing the distant sound of a conchshell, I followed it
to its source on the bank of the Gaṅgā. There I saw a
brāhmaṇa worshiping Śrī Śālagrāma-śilā, and I bowed down
to him.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “I reached that
place on the Gaṅgā that was reverberating with the sound
of a conchshell. There I saw a brāhmaṇa engaged in
worshiping Śālagrāma-śilā, and I offered him
obeisances.”



Verse 130

kam imaṁ yajasi svāminn iti pṛṣṭo mayā hasan

so ’vadat kiṁ na jānāsi bālāyaṁ jagad-īśvaraḥ

kam – whom?; imam – this; yajasi – you are worshiping;
svāmin – O master; iti – thus; pṛṣṭaḥ – asked; mayā – by
me; hasan – smiling; saḥ – he; avadat – replied; kim –
why?; na – not; jānāsi – you know; bāla – O boy; ayam–
He; jagat-īśvaraḥ – the Lord of the universe.

I humbly asked him, “O master, who are you worshiping?”
Hearing my words, he smiled and replied, “O child, this
is Jagadīśvara, the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Do
you not know this?”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “I then asked
that brāhmaṇa, ‘O master, who are you worshiping?’
Laughing at my question, the brāhmaṇa said, ‘What? (This
type of speech could be expressing a doubt or a

                          105
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

question.) My child, you are asking who this is?! Do you
not know?’ ” (These questions are not in relation to
ignorance; rather, they reveal the brāhmaṇa’s feelings
regarding the fame of Śālagrāma-śilā.)

One might conjecture, “Is it possible that Gopa-kumāra,
being young and inexperienced, would be unaware of
something that is so widely known in all the planetary
systems?” To address this, Gopa-kumāra says, “Therefore,
the brāhmaṇa said, ‘This is Jagadīśvara, the Supreme
Lord of the universe. Do you not know this?’ ”



Verse 131

tac chrutvāhaṁ su-samprāpto nidhiṁ labdhveva nirdhanaḥ

naṣṭaṁ vā bāndhavo bandhuṁ paramāṁ mudam āptavān

tat – that; śrutvā – hearing; aham – I; su-samprāptaḥ –
happily attained; nidhim – immense wealth; labdhvā –
attained; iva – like; nirdhanaḥ – a penniless man;
naṣṭam – lost; vā – or; bāndhavaḥ – friend; bandhum –
friend; paramām – great; mudam – happiness; āptavān –
meeting.

When I heard this, I experienced the same joy a poor man
feels upon suddenly attaining immense wealth, or the
same happiness a person feels upon meeting a long-lost
friend.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra gives two examples to
explain the reason for his great happiness, saying, “I
felt the same happiness experienced by a poor person
when he receives unexpected wealth, or felt by a person
when he meets a long-lost relative.”



Verse 132

jagad-īśaṁ muhuḥ paśyan daṇḍavac chraddhayānamam

pādodakaṁ sa-nirmālyaṁ viprasya kṛpayāpnuvam

jagat-īśam – upon the Supreme Lord of the universe;
muhuḥ – for a long time; paśyan – gazing; daṇḍa-vat –
(prostrated) like a stick; śraddhayā – with faith;
anamam – I offered obeisance; pāda – from His feet;
udakam – the water; sa-nirmālyam – along with remnant of
the offerings; viprasya – of the enlightened brāhmaṇa;
kṛpayā – by the mercy; apnuvam – I obtained.

I gazed with faith upon Jagadīśvara and then I
repeatedly prostrated before Him. The brāhmaṇa
mercifully gave me the Lord’s sacred flower garland and
caraṇāmṛta, the holy water that had been used to bathe
the Lord.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: ‘Jagadīśvara’ here refers to the Deity
of the Supreme Lord in the form of Śālagrāma-śilā.
Śraddhayā means ‘with faith and affection.’ Nirmālya
indicates ‘flower garlands and tulasī leaves offered to

                          106
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

the Lord.’ Pādodaka means ‘water that has washed the
Lord’s lotus feet.’



Verse 133

udyatena gṛhaṁ gantuṁ karaṇḍe tena śāyitam

jagad-īśaṁ vilokyārto vyalapaṁ sāsram īdṛśam

udyatena – who had arisen; gṛham – to his home; gantum –
to go; karaṇḍe – in a small box; tena – by him; śāyitam
– laid to rest; jagad-īśam – the Lord of the universe;
vilokya – seeing; ārtaḥ – very upset; vyalapam – I
lamented; sa-asram – with tears; īdṛśam – like this.

After finishing the rituals of his worship, when the
brāhmaṇa was ready to go home, he lay the Lord of the
universe to rest in a small box. Seeing this I became
very upset. Weeping, I began to lament.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “After finishing
his worship, the brāhmaṇa prepared to go home and then
placed Śrī Bhagavān to sleep in a karaṇḍa, a container
or wooden box for keeping the Deity.



Verse 134

hā hā dhṛtaḥ karaṇḍāntar asthāne parameśvaraḥ

kim apy asau na cābhuṅkta nidrā tu kṣudhayā katham

hā hā – alas! alas!; dhṛtaḥ – placed; karaṇḍa-antaḥ –
inside a wooden box; asthāne – in an inappropriate
place; parama-īśvaraḥ – the Lord; kim api – anything;
asau – He; na – not; ca – also; abhuṅkta – has eaten;
nidrā – sleep; tu – indeed; kṣudhayā – while hungry;
katham – how?

“Alas! Alas! He has shut my Lord Jagadīśvara in a wooden
box. The Lord has not eaten anything. How will He sleep
if He is hungry?”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Dhṛta, or nikṣipta, means ‘has
deposited.’ Asthāne means ‘a place unfit for the Supreme
Lord.’ Responding to the previous verse, the Mathurā
brāhmaṇa might say, “After worshiping the Lord, one’s
duty is to place the Deity in a designated place.
Therefore, the brāhmaṇa did just that.”

In response, Gopa-kumāra speaks the line beginning with
kim apy asau. Not seeing any food offerings to allay the
Lord’s hunger, he thinks, “My Supreme Lord has not eaten
anything. How will He be able to sleep if He is hungry?”



Verse 135

prakṛtyaiva na jānāmi māthura-brāhmaṇottama


                          107
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

asmād vilakṣaṇaḥ kaścit kvāpy asti jagad-īśvaraḥ

prakṛtyā – due to my simple nature; eva – indeed; na –
not; jānāmi – I was not aware; māthura – of Mathurā;
brāhmaṇa-uttama – O exalted brāhmaṇa; asmāt – of him;
vilakṣaṇaḥ – separate (manifestation); kaścit – any; kva
api – somewhere else; asti – there is; jagad-īśvaraḥ –
the Supreme Lord of the universe.

O exalted brāhmaṇa of Mathurā, I really did not know if,
apart from this śālagrāma manifestation of the Supreme
Lord, whether any other manifestation of the Lord was
also present somewhere else.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The Mathurā brāhmaṇa might say, “The
Supreme Lord of the universe exists in various forms and
in different places, relishing many types of offerings,
so why were you lamenting?”

In reply, Gopa-kumāra speaks this verse beginning with
prakṛtyaiva. He says, “In truth, besides the form of
Jagadīśvara who was visible as Śālagrāma, I did not know
that any other form of the Lord also existed anywhere.”



Verse 136

ity akṛtrima-santāpaṁ vilāpāturam abravīt

brāhmaṇaḥ sāntvayitvā māṁ hrīṇavad vinayānvitaḥ

iti – thus; akṛtrima – genuine; santāpam – distress;
vilāpa-āturam – overcome by lamentation; abravīt – he
said; brāhmaṇaḥ – the brāhmaṇa; sāntvayitvā – having
consoled; mām – me; hrīṇa-vat – modestly; vinaya-anvitaḥ
– with humility.

Seeing my distress and helpless weeping, the revered
brāhmaṇa

consoled me. Full of humility and feeling ashamed, he
spoke.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “The brāhmaṇa
worshiping Śālagrāma understood that my anguish and
burning sorrow were not feigned, but were natural. I was
not acting out of insincerity or other faults. When in
anguish I spontaneously cried out, ‘The Lord must be
suffering from hunger and thirst!’ he was especially
embarrassed. When he saw my pained and helpless
condition, he said, ‘I am poor; I cannot afford various
types of food offerings.’ ” Actually, in that place it
was very difficult to make offerings of foodstuffs.
After witnessing Gopa-kumāra’s exceptional prema, the
brāhmaṇa begin to humbly speak as follows.



Verse 137

nava-vaiṣṇava kiṁ kartuṁ daridraḥ śaknuyāṁ param

arpayāmi sva-bhogyaṁ hi jagad-īśāya kevalam

                          108
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


nava-vaiṣṇava – O young devotee of Viṣṇu; kim – what?;
kartum – to do; daridraḥ – a poor man; śaknuyām – I can;
param – more; arpayāmi – I offer; sva-bhogyam – my own
meals; hi – indeed; jagad-īśāya – to the Lord of the
universe; kevalam – only.

“O young Vaiṣṇava! I am a poor man. What more can I do
than this? The only food I can offer to Jagadīśvara are
the meals I prepare for myself.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The brāhmaṇa says, “Have you never in
any other place seen anyone worshiping śālagrāma like I
do?” Because Gopa-kumāra was unaware of this worship,
the brāhmaṇa addresses him as a nava-vaiṣṇava, a new or
neophyte, devotee. The word param, meaning ‘more,’
implies, “What more can I do? I am a poor brāhmaṇa. I am
only able to offer to the Lord that food I prepare for
myself.”



Verses 138–140

yadi pūjotsavaṁ tasya vaibhavaṁ ca didṛkṣase

tadaitad-deśa-rājasya viṣṇu-pūjānurāgiṇaḥ

mahā-sādhoḥ purīṁ yāhi vartamānam adūrataḥ

tatra sākṣāt samīkṣasva durdarśaṁ jagad-īśvaram

hṛt-pūrakaṁ mahānandaṁ sarvathānubhaviṣyasi

idānīm etya mad-gehe bhuṅkṣva viṣṇu-niveditam

yadi – if; pūjā – of worship; utsavam – a festival;
tasya – His; vaibhavam – opulence; ca – and; didṛkṣase –
you are eager to see; tadā – then; etat – this; deśa –
of this kingdom; rājasya – of the king; viṣṇu – of Lord
Viṣṇu; pūjā – worship; anurāginaḥ – very fond; mahā-
sādhoḥ – of the great saint; purīm – to the capital;
yāhi – just go; vartamānam – present; adūrataḥ – not
distant; tatra – there; sākṣāt – directly; samīkṣasva –
you should behold; durdarśam – rare to see; jagad-
īśvaram – the Supreme Lord; hṛt – your heart; pūrakam –
will fill; mahā – immense; ānandam – happiness; sarvathā
– in all respects; anubhaviṣyasi – you will experience;
idānīm – now; etya – coming; mat-gehe – in my house;
bhuṅkṣva – eat; viṣṇu-niveditam – what was offered to
Śrī Viṣṇu.

“If you are eager to see Śrī Jagadīśvara worshiped with
opulence and great festivals, then go to the capital of
this kingdom, which is located nearby. The king is an
esteemed saint and is very fond of worshiping the
Supreme Lord Viṣṇu. There, directly behold the Supreme
Lord whose darśana is very rarely attained. You will
experience all varieties of joy, and your heart will be
filled with immense happiness. But now, come to my house
and accept some prasāda offered to Śrī Viṣṇu.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The brāhmaṇa says, “If you desire to
see how the Supreme Lord is worshiped with fabulous

                          109
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

festivals and magnificent arrangements, and if you wish
to see the Lord’s great opulence in the form of His
grand sleeping quarters, bed, and so on, then go to that
kingdom on the bank of the Gaṅgā. The king of that place
is devoted to Śrī Viṣṇu, and he worships Him with great
affection and attachment. What is the nature of that
king? He is an exalted sādhu, or saint, the best among
the sādhus who embrace the path of fruitive action
(karma), knowledge ( jñāna), and so on. Go to his
capital and directly and happily behold Jagadīśvara,
whose audience is very rare.”

Alternatively, the brāhmaṇa is saying, “He is directly
the Supreme Lord. Unlike Śālagrāma-śilā, all His bodily
limbs are manifest and He is exquisitely beautiful.
Directly behold that Jagadīśvara. You will experience
immense bliss of all kinds by His divine vision, which
will inundate your heart and mind with great joy.”

“The king’s capital is not far from here. Go there and
have the extraordinary darśana of the Lord’s beautiful
lotus feet and the unlimited opulence of His personal
paraphernalia, such as the vast variety of offerings to
Him, His opulent bed, etc. You will also hear songs in
glorification of Him, and you will obtain tremendous
pleasure honoring naivedya bhojana, the food that is
offered to Him.

“Even though Śālagrāma-śilā is also Śrī Jagadīśvara, the
Supreme Lord of the universe, His limbs are not
manifest. In particular, due to my modest circumstances,
I am unable to perform suitable worship and arrange
festivities, and thus His beloved devotees are not
satisfied. In spite of this, due to my enthusiasm, I
continue to worship Him. Now, come to my home and accept
some prasāda of grains and other preparations offered to
Viṣṇu. After that you can journey to the capital city.”



Verse 141

tad-vācānandito ’gatvā kṣudhito ’pi tad-ālayam

taṁ praṇamya tad-uddiṣṭa-vartmanā tāṁ purīm agām

tat – his; vācā – by the words; ānanditaḥ – made happy;
agatvā – not going; kṣuditaḥ – feeling hungry; api –
although; tat-ālayam – to his house; tam – to him;
praṇamya – after bowing down; tat-uddiṣṭa – pointed out
by him; vartmanā – by the path; tām purīm – to that
capital; agām – I went.

I became overjoyed to hear the brāhmaṇa’s words, and
although I was hungry, I did not go to his house. I
offered obeisances to the brāhmaṇa and, following the
path he had pointed out, finally reached that capital
city.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “I did not go to
the brāhmaṇa’s home because I became pleased just by
hearing his words. After that, I offered him repeated
obeisances, begging forgiveness for not visiting his
home and accepting the Lord’s prasāda, and seeking his

                          110
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

blessings for an auspicious journey and for an increase
in my devotion. I then proceeded to the capital city by
the path he had indicated.”



Verse 142

antaḥ-pure deva-kule jagad-īśārcana-dhvanim

apūrvaṁ tumulaṁ dūrāc chrutvāpṛccham amuṁ janān

antaḥ-pure – in center of the city; deva-kule – in the
abode of the Lord; jagat-īśa – of the Lord of the
universe; arcana-dhvanim – the sound of ceremonial
worship; apūrvam – extraordinary; tumulam – tumult;
dūrāt – from afar; śrutvā – after hearing; apṛccham – I
inquired; amum – this; janān – from the people.

In the heart of the city, the tumultuous sound of Śrī
Jagadīśvara’s ceremonial worship was emanating from the
Lord’s temple. Hearing that magnificent sound from afar,
I inquired from the local people about its source.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “The unique and
wonderful clangor was coming from a massive temple in
the middle of the king’s palace complex. I had never
before heard such a tumult. Listening to it, I thought
it might be the sound of the Śrī Jagadīśvara’s
ceremonial worship. I then inquired from the local
people, ‘Where is the Lord of the universe? Whose names
are being chanted here? Where is this sound coming
from?’ In this way, I asked many questions.”



Verse 143

vijñāya tatra jagad-īśvaram īkṣituṁ taṁ

kenāpy avārita-gatiḥ sa-javaṁ praviśya

śaṅkhāri-paṅkaja-gadā-vilasat-karābjaṁ

śrīmac-catur-bhujam apaśyam ahaṁ samakṣam

vijñāya – coming to know; tatra – there; jagat-īśvaram –
the Supreme Lord; īkṣitum – to see; tam – Him; kena api
– somehow; avārita-gatiḥ – without being stopped; sa-
javam – with speed; praviśya – entering; śaṅkha –
conchshell; ari – disk; paṅkaja – lotus; gadā – and
club; vilasat – brilliant; kara-abjam – with lotus
hands; śrīmat – beautiful; catuḥ – four; bhujam – arms;
apaśyam – beheld; aham – I; samakṣam – before my eyes.

Inquiring from the people, I came to know it indeed was
the sound of the Supreme Lord’s worship. I then hurried
to take darśana of Bhagavān Jagadīśvara. Since no one
stopped me or questioned me at the gate, I swiftly
entered the temple. There I beheld the four-armed Lord
of the universe holding conchshell, disc, club, and
lotus.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Inquiring about

                          111
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

the source of the sound, I came to know it indeed was
the sound of

the worship of Śrī Jagadīśvara. Then, eager for His
darśana, I ran into the temple. In keeping with the
brāhmaṇa’s words, I directly beheld

the Supreme Lord with these very eyes. No doorkeeper
stopped me from entering the temple.”

The Mathurā brāhmaṇa might ask, “How did the Supreme
Lord appear?” To this, Gopa-kumāra replies, “The
conchshell, disc, club, and lotus flower beautified His
four hands. The Supreme Lord’s four arms were endowed
with splendors, such as having the shape of serpents.”



Verse 144

sarvāṅga-sundarataraṁ nava-megha-kāntiṁ

kauśeya-pīta-vasanaṁ vana-mālayāḍhyam

sauvarṇa-bhūṣaṇam avarṇya-kiśora-mūrtiṁ

pūrṇendu-vaktram amṛta-smitam abja-netram

sarva-aṅga – every limb of His entire body; sundara-
taram – most beautiful; nava-megha – of a new
thundercloud; kāntim – complexion; kauśeya – silken;
pīta-vasanam – yellow garments; vana-mālayā – with a
garland of forest flowers; āḍhyam – enhanced; sauvarṇa-
bhūṣaṇam – with golden ornaments; avarṇya –
indescribable; kiśora-mūrtim – youthful form; pūrṇa-indu
– like the full moon; vaktram – whose face; amṛta-smitam
– a smile of nectar; abja-netram – eyes like blossoming
lotuses.

All His limbs were exquisitely beautiful, His complexion
was like a fresh raincloud, and He was wearing yellow
silk cloth. His splendid, youthful form was decorated
with a garland of forest flowers and golden ornaments.
His face was radiant like the full moon, with a gentle
smile that showered the nectar of immortality, eyes that
were like lotus petals, and fascinating eyebrows that
were raised playfully.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: In two verses, beginning here with
sarvāṅga, Śrī Gopa-kumāra describes his darśana of the
Supreme Lord of the universe. He says, “All parts of His
body, such as His lotus face and eyes, were extremely
comely and supremely enchanting. He was decorated with a
crown, earrings, and so on made of gold. His bodily
luster, which defeated the hue of fresh rainclouds, and
His divine youthful form are beyond the power of words
to describe.”

Although the Supreme Lord’s divine form was completely
full of exquisite beauty and sweetness, still, out of
eagerness, Gopa-kumāra specifically describes the Lord’s
beauty in relation to the enchanting natural beauty that
he has experienced. This is done in three padas
(sections of a verse), such as that beginning with

                          112
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

pūrṇa.



Verse 145

sampūjita-vividha-durlabha-vastu-vargaiḥ

sevānuṣakta-paricāraka-vṛnda-juṣṭam

nṛtyādikaṁ ca purato ’nubhavantam ārāt

tiṣṭhantam āsana-vare su-paricchadaugham

sampūjita – worshiped; vividha – various; durlabha –
rare; vastu-vargaiḥ – with myriad paraphernalia; sevā –
service; anuṣakta – devoted; paricāraka – of servitors;
vṛnda – by a multitude; juṣṭam – served; nṛtya –
dancing; ādikam – and so on; ca – also; purataḥ – before
Him; anubhavantam – experiencing; ārāt – nearby;
tiṣṭhantam – standing; āsana-vare – on a magnificent
throne; su-paricchada – sublime garments; ogham – with
profuse.

Śrī Jagadīśvara was being worshiped with a variety of
rare paraphernalia by many servitors who were eagerly
and devotedly serving Him. Adorned in various gorgeous
garments, He was splendidly ensconced on a magnificent
throne. A grand festival of dancing and singing was
being performed before Him, and the Lord was watching
the festivities with unblinking eyes.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Śrī Jagadīśvara
was being worshiped in that temple according to
scriptural injunctions, with various types of rare and
precious paraphernalia. Some servitors were fanning Him
with yak-tail fans, while others were preparing and
offering tāmbūla (spiced betel leaf). In this way,
various dedicated attendants were engaged in His
services. A grand gala of dance and

music was going on at some distance in front of Him, and
He was watching everything with unblinking eyes.
Ornamented with a variety

of magnificent raiments and jewelry, he was seated on a
divine throne that was beautified by moonbeams.” It is
to be understood that some things not mentioned here
were also seen by Gopa-kumāra. For example,

he saw the Lord’s domestic servants and the services
they each performed.



Verse 146

paramānanda-pūrṇo ’haṁ praṇaman daṇḍa-van muhuḥ

vyacintayam idaṁ svasyāpaśyam adya didṛkṣitam

paramānanda – with immense bliss; pūrṇaḥ – filled; aham
– I; praṇaman – while bowing down; daṇḍa-vat – falling
prostrate like a rod; muhuḥ – repeatedly; vyacintayam –

                          113
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

I concluded; idam – this; svasya – of my own (Lord);
apaśyam – I have seen; adya – today; didṛkṣitam – what I
have long hankered to see.

Seeing the Lord, I became overwhelmed with great joy and
prostrated before Him repeatedly. I thought, “Today, my
long-standing desire to see the Lord has finally been
fulfilled.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Here, Gopa-kumāra speaks about his
unfulfilled desire of many days. He says, “Today, my
long-standing desire and hankering to see the Lord has
been fulfilled; I have received His direct darśana.”



Verse 147

samprāpto janma-sāphalyaṁ na gamiṣyāmy ataḥ kvacit

vaiṣṇavānāṁ ca kṛpayā tatraiva nyavasaṁ sukham

samprāptaḥ – attained; janma – of my life; sāphalyam –
state of fulfillment; na gamiṣyāmi – I will not go; ataḥ
– away from here; kvacit – ever; vaiṣṇavānām – of the
devotees; ca – also; kṛpayā – by the mercy; tatra –
there; eva– only; nyavasam – I resided; sukham –
happily.

At that time, I considered my life successful and
decided that I would never leave that place to go
elsewhere. Then, by the mercy of the Vaiṣṇavas, I
happily took up residence there.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Desiring to elaborate on this subject,
Śrī Gopa-kumāra continues, “I decided, ‘Today my birth
is crowned with success –

I have received the benefit of my entire life in full
measure. Here in this place, I have achieved the desired
goal for which I renounced home and wandered throughout
the holy places. I shall never leave and go anywhere
else.’ ”

The Mathurā brāhmaṇa might ask, “How was it possible for
a destitute foreigner to reside near the king’s palace
and obtain meals and so on?”

Therefore, in this verse, Gopa-kumāra says, “It was by
the mercy of the Vaiṣṇavas only that I began to happily
reside there. Śrī Jagadīśvara’s servants kindly provided
me with the remnants of the Lord’s meals, His mahā-
prasāda, and the assurance of subsistence. Thus, I
happily began to live in the temple.”



Verse 148

bhuñjāno viṣṇu-naivedyaṁ paśyan pūjā-mahotsavam

śṛṇvan pūjādi-māhātmyaṁ yatnān mantraṁ raho japan

bhuñjānaḥ – eating; viṣṇu – of Śrī Viṣṇu; naivedyam –

                          114
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

the remnants of offerings; paśyan – viewing; pūjā – of
His worship; mahā-utsavam – the great festival; śṛṇvan –
hearing; pūjā – of worship; ādi – and so forth;
māhātmyam – glories; yatnāt – with attention; mantram –
my divine vibration; rahaḥ – in seclusion; japan –
chanting softly.

There, I daily accepted Bhagavān Viṣṇu’s mahā-prasāda,
viewed the great festival of His ceremonial worship, and
listened to the glories of worshiping Him, all the while
continuing to diligently chant the mantra of my
worshipable Deity while sitting in private.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: In this verse beginning with
bhuñjānaḥ, Gopa- kumāra explains why he was happy in his
stay in that place. He says, “I would hear statements
explaining the process of worship and firmly
establishing its glories. For example, ‘There is no
other duty or no greater imperative than to hear the
glories of the worship of the Lord.’ ”

The word ādi indicates that Gopa-kumāra would eat the
remnants of food offered to the Lord and perform other
activities as well. The glories of Bhagavān’s mahā-
prasāda are described in the scriptures:

ṣaḍbhir māsopavāsais tu yat phalaṁ parikīrtitam

viṣṇor naivedya-sikthānnaṁ bhuñjatāṁ tat kalau yuge

In Kali-yuga, the same benefit that one accrues by
observing the austerity of fasting for six months is
gained by just once honoring the mahā-prasāda of Śrī
Viṣṇu.

“Although I listened to the statements of these types of
scriptures, I did not learn about the heavenly planets,
which are described in those scriptures. Knowledge of
this remained unknown to me.”



Verse 149

asyās tu vraja-bhūmeḥ śrīr gopa-krīḍā-sukhaṁ ca tat

kadācid api me brahman hṛdayān nāpasarpati

asyāḥ – of that; tu – but; vraja-bhūmeḥ – of the land of
Vraja; śrīḥ – the beauty; gopa – with the cowherders;
krīḍā – of sporting; sukham – the happiness; ca – also;
tat – that; kadācit – ever; api – also; me – of me;
brahman – O brahman-realized person; hṛdayāt – from my
heart; na apasrpati – would not depart.

Despite all this, O brāhmaṇa, the beauty of the land of
Vraja and the happiness of playing with the cowherd boys
did not leave my heart. Rather, those memories always
remained awake within me.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Here, Śrī Gopa-kumāra exhibits
symptoms of having perfected the chanting of his mantra.
Although he experienced bliss in observing Deity
worship, festivals, and so on, still, the happiness of

                          115
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

wandering in the land of Vraja in Mathurā-maṇḍala was
greater. This is explained in this verse beginning with
asyā. The word tu, meaning ‘but,’ indicates that Vraja
is more special than any other place. The word śrī,
meaning ‘beauty,’ indicates, “I personally experienced
that beauty. The pastimes with the cowherd boys and the
special splendor of the land of Vraja are indescribable
and, whether awake or dreaming, I could never forget
those things. Even while experiencing great bliss in the
Lord’s grand, festive worship in the association of
Vaiṣṇavas, vivid impressions of the beauty of Vraja
still remained alive in my heart.”



Verse 150

evaṁ dināni katicit sānandaṁ tatra tiṣṭhataḥ

tādṛk-pūjā-vidhāne me paramā lālasājani

evam – thus; dināni – days; katicit – some; sa-ānandam –
with happiness; tatra – in that place; tiṣṭhataḥ – while
residing; tādṛk – in this way; pūjā-vidhāne – for
engaging in the process of worship; me – in me; paramā –
great; lālasā – eagerness; ajani – developed.

Passing some days there in great happiness, witnessing
the worship of Jagadīśvara, I also developed great
eagerness to perform that method of worship.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra has explained the
glories of chanting the mantra. Now, to describe how his
desire was fulfilled, he speaks three verses, beginning
here with evam. He says, “I became eager to perform that
same type of worship.” That is, he desired to worship
the Lord in the manner established by the king.




Verse 151


athāputraḥ sa rājā māṁ vaideśikam api priyāt

su-śīlaṁ vīkṣya putratve parikalpyācirān mṛtaḥ

atha – then; aputraḥ – sonless; saḥ – that; rājā – king;
mām – to me; vaideśikam – from another country; api –
although; priyāt – out of affection; su-śīlam – my good
character; vīkṣya – observing; putratve – as his son;
parikalpya – adopted; acirāt – before long; mṛtaḥ –
departed from his body.

The king of that land had no son, and although I was a
foreigner, having come from another land, because he saw
my amiable disposition and other good qualities, he
loved me. He adopted me as his son, but soon after, he
passed away from this world.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “After a few
days, the king, who was sonless, out of love for me,

                          116
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

accepted me as his own son.”



Verse 152

mayā ca labdhvā tad-rājyaṁ viṣṇu-pūjā mudādhikā

pravartitā tad-annaiś ca bhojyante sādhavo ’nv-aham

mayā – by me; ca – and; labdhvā – obtained; tat-rājyam –
his kingdom; viṣṇu-pūjā – of the worship of Śrī Viṣṇu;
mudā – joyfully; adhikā – greater pomp; pravartitā –
introduced; tat-annaiḥ – by His food-remnants
(prasādam); ca – also; bhojyante – they were fed;
sādhavaḥ – saintly devotees; anu-aham – daily.

Thus I effortlessly inherited the kingdom. I joyfully
commenced worship of Śrī Viṣṇu with even greater pomp
and grandeur than before. In addition, every day I fed
many saintly persons with Śrī Viṣṇu’s mahā-prasāda.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The word adhika indicates ‘many times
more than before.’ The term tad-annaiḥ indicates ‘mahā-
prasāda, or food offered to Śrī Viṣṇu.’



Verse 153

svayaṁ ca kvacid āsaktim akṛtvā pūrva-vad vasan

japaṁ nirvāhayan bhuñje prasādānnaṁ prabhoḥ param

svayam – personally; ca – and; kvacit – at any time;
āsaktim – material attachment; akṛtvā – not having;
pūrva-vat – as before; vasan – living; japam – chanting
of the divine vibration; nirvāhayan – continuing; bhuñje
– I ate; prasāda-annam – the remnants of offered food;
prabhoḥ – of the Lord; param – only.

Although engaged in this way, I did not develop
attachment to anything and remained as renounced as
before. Daily, I would complete chanting my mantra in a
solitary place and then accept only the Lord’s prasāda
as food.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Although the
kingdom had come into my hands, nevertheless, due to the
potency of chanting my mantra (mantra-japa), I remained
unaffected.” This is explained in this verse beginning
with svayam. “Despite obtaining that royal position, I
never became attached to wealth, objects, etc., and, as
in the past, I kept no material possessions.
Consequently, I would regularly complete chanting my
mantra-japa, and then, to maintain my body, I would
accept only remnants of food offered to Jagadīśvara. I
would do so in the knowledge that those foodstuffs were
prasāda, the mercy of the Lord.”



Verse 154


                          117
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

rājño ’sya parivārebhyaḥ prādāṁ rājyaṁ vibhajya tat

tathāpi rājya-sambandhād duḥkhaṁ me bahudhodbhavet

rājñaḥ – of the king; asya – of him; parivārebhyaḥ –
amongst the family members, relatives, and friends;
prādām – given; rājyam – kingdom; vibhajya – dividing;
tat – that; tathā api – nevertheless; rājya – to the
kingdom; sambandhāt – in relationship; duḥkham –
troubles; me – of me; bahudhā – many kinds; udbhavet –
would arise.

Although I had divided the kingdom appropriately among
the king’s family members, relatives, and friends,
nonetheless, due to my connection with the kingdom, I
suffered distress in so many ways.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The Mathurā brāhmaṇa might ask, “How
could the affairs of State go on without the king’s
command?” Śrī Gopa-kumāra replies in this verse
beginning with rājñaḥ. He says, “I divided the kingdom
lawfully among the family members, blood relatives,
friends, and ministers of the deceased king. Thus, all
the affairs of State were being conducted properly by
their mandate.”

However, Śrī Gopa-kumāra now wants an even superior
attainment, and therefore he says, “Despite this, my
involvement with the kingdom only brought me distress.”
In other words, such contact with a kingdom is never
pleasurable for prudent Vaiṣṇavas. Renunciation of the
throne is the only prescription for freedom from such
distress. In two-and-a-half verses, beginning above with
the word tathāpi, Śrī Gopa-kumāra explains the reason
for his detachment.



Verse 155

kadāpi para-rāṣṭrād bhīḥ kadācic cakra-vartinaḥ

vividhādeśa-sandoha-pālanenāsvatantratā

kadāpi – sometimes; para-rāṣṭrāt – from other kingdoms;
bhīḥ – fear; kadācit – sometimes; cakra-vartinaḥ – from
the emperor; vividha – various; ādeśa – edicts; sandoha
– many; pālanena – having to obey; asvatantratā – a
condition of dependence.

Sometimes I was fearful of other kingdoms (and their
kings). Other times, obliged as I was as a subordinate
king to comply with the sovereign emperor’s many edicts,
I suffered the distress of being dependent on others.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: “Being king, I faced many types of
distress.” In this verse beginning with kadāpi, Śrī
Gopa-kumāra explains this. He says, “I was fearful of
other countries, especially of their inimical kings and
the followers of those monarchs. The sovereign emperor,
ruler of all countries, would dictate, ‘You are obliged
to act in this way,’ or ‘You cannot act in this way.’ My
subordinate, dependent position caused me misery because
I was duty-bound to abide by his orders. Moreover, my

                          118
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

lack of freedom to act at will posed obstacles in my
service to the Lord, and this also made me suffer.”



Verse 156

jagad-īśvara-naivedyaṁ spṛṣṭam anyena kenacit

nītaṁ bahir vā sandigdho na bhuṅkte ko ’pi saj-janaḥ

jagat-īśvara – of the Supreme Lord; naivedyam – the
offered food; spṛṣṭam – touched; anyena kenacit – by
anyone; nītam – brought; bahiḥ – outside; vā – or;
sandigdhaḥ – dubious propriety; na – not; bhuṅkte – eat;
kaḥ api – certain; sat-janaḥ – respectable person.

Overseeing the temple services, I would become
distraught when I would notice that if anyone touched
the food offered to the Supreme Lord or took it outside
the temple, then some respectable people, questioning
its purity, would refuse to accept it.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The brāhmaṇa might argue, “But it is
one’s duty to accept all kinds of trouble in the service
of the Lord.” Therefore, Śrī Gopa-kumāra speaks this
verse beginning with jagad-īśvara.

He says, “If anyone other than authorized brāhmaṇas
touched the food offered to Jagadīśvara, or if the mahā-
prasāda were taken outside the temple, some respectable
people would doubt its purity, and even sādhus would not
want to accept it. Even if they accepted the mahā-
prasāda, still, they would remain doubtful and would
comment on its purity, saying, ‘Observing the strict
etiquette of honoring mahā-prasāda is not seen anywhere
except in the honoring of Śrī Jagannātha-deva’s mahā-
prasāda.’ Therefore, those who ate the mahā-prasāda did
so only on request and with apprehension, and they were
unable to abandon their doubts regarding its sanctity. I
would become distressed to see holy men acting in this
manner and thus grew apathetic about living in that
kingdom, especially considering these statements about
mahā-prasāda in the Bṛhad-viṣṇu Purāṇa:

naivedyam jagad-īśasya anna-pānādikaṁ ca yat

bhakṣyābhakṣya-vicāras tu nāsti tad-bhakṣaṇe dvija

brahma-van nirvikāraṁ hi yathā viṣṇus tathaiva tat

vicāraṁ ye prakurvanti bhakṣaṇe tad dvijātayaḥ

kuṣṭa-vyādhi-samāyuktāḥ putra-dāra-vivarjitāḥ

nirayaṁ yānti te viprā yasmān nāvartate punaḥ

In regard to the offerings of grains or any other type
of mahā-prasāda of Śrī Jagadīśvara, it is improper to
question whether it is fit to be accepted or not. Mahā-
prasāda, like Brahman, the Absolute Truth, is
unchangeable, and is thus as venerable as Śrī Viṣṇu
Himself. Therefore, even brāhmaṇas who hesitate to honor
mahā-prasāda contract leprosy, and their sons, wives,

                          119
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

and other family members are destroyed. In the future,
such brāhmaṇas are banished to hell, after which they
can never again be born in a brāhmaṇa lineage.

“Like this, there is much scriptural evidence.”



Verse 157

marma-śalyena caitena nirvedo me mahān abhūt

neśe didṛkṣitaṁ sākṣāt prāptaṁ tyaktuṁ ca tat-prabhum

marma – in the heart; śalyena – by the arrow; ca – and;
etena – by this; nirvedaḥ – despondent; me – of me;
mahān – very; abhūt – became; na iśe – I was unable;
didṛkṣitam – to see; sākṣāt – directly; prāptam –
obtained; tyaktum – to leave; ca – and; tat-prabhum –
the Supreme Lord.

Observing people’s skepticism towards prasāda caused me
excru-ciating pain, as if a dagger had pierced my heart.
Many such reasons made me strongly apathetic towards the
kingdom, but still, the opportunity to see the Supreme
Lord, whose direct darśana I had so long desired, made
me unable to leave.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The brāhmaṇa might ask, “What kind of
attitude did the people have towards honoring mahā-
prasāda?”

Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Their attitude towards the grains
of mahā-prasāda caused me unbearable pain, afflicting my
heart as if it were pierced by a dagger.”

The word nirveda, meaning ‘disgust or complete
indifference,’ denotes detachment from objects such as
the kingdom. The brāhmaṇa might ask, “Why did you not at
that very moment abdicate the kingdom?”

Śrī Gopa-kumāra answers, “How was this possible? After
much difficulty, I had finally met my cherished
Jagadīśvara, Lord of the universe, for whose darśana I
had been yearning so long. Now that I had obtained His
direct service, how could I suddenly just give it up? I
was unable to forsake the kingdom because in doing so I
would certainly have been deprived of both seeing and
serving the Lord.”



Verse 158

etasmin eva samaye tatra dakṣiṇa-deśataḥ

samāgataiḥ sādhu-varaiḥ kathitaṁ tairthikair idam

etasmin – at this; eva – indeed; samaye – time; tatra –
there; dakṣiṇa-deśataḥ – from a southern country;
samāgataiḥ – having come; sādhu-varaiḥ – eminent saints;
kathitam – it was said; tairthikaiḥ – by pilgrims; idam
– this.


                          120
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

At this time, some saintly Vaiṣṇavas from the south who
were touring the holy places came there and spoke to me
as follows.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “In this way,
with a heavy heart, I continued to reside there in that
kingdom. After some days, many saintly devotees of Śrī
Viṣṇu (Vaiṣṇavas) came there on their pilgrimage, having
just visited Śrī Puruṣottama-kṣetra.”

The brāhmaṇa might ask, “If the itinerant Vaiṣṇavas were
com-pletely devoted to the Supreme Lord Viṣṇu, why did
they leave Śrī Puruṣottama-kṣetra?”

Gopa-kumāra says, “They were tairthika, that is, they
were wandering pilgrims visiting the different tīrthas,
or holy places, to have darśana of the Deities of Śrī
Viṣṇu and to see the Vaiṣṇavas.” This indicates they had
visited almost all the holy places. Those saintly
persons recounted the glories of dāru-brahman, the
Supreme Lord Jagannātha who appears in the form of wood.
This will be narrated later on.



Verse 159

dāru-brahma jagannātho bhagavān puruṣottame

kṣetre nīlācale kṣārārṇava-tīre virājate

dāru-brahma – the Absolute Truth in the form of wood;
jagat-nāthaḥ – Lord of all the worlds; bhagavān – full
in six opulences; puruṣottame kṣetre – in the land of
the Supreme Person; nīla-acale – upon the blue mountain;
kṣāra-arṇava – of the salt ocean; tīre – on the shore;
virājate – is radiantly present.

“In Śrī Puruṣottama-kṣetra, on the blue mountain known
as Nīlācala, on the shore of the salt ocean, the Supreme
Lord of the universe Śrī Jagannātha is radiantly present
as dāru-brahma, the Absolute Truth in the form of wood.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Although the
Supreme Lord is brahma-svarūpa, the embodiment of
transcendence, He nevertheless appears as a Deity of
wood in order to dispel the endless suffering of
material existence. That selfsame Supreme Personality,
who is famous by the name of Śrī Jagannātha, resides on
the shore of the salt ocean at Nīlācala in Puruṣottama-
kṣetra.”

It is stated in Padma Purāṇa:

samudrasyottare tīre āste śrī-puruṣottame

pūrṇānanda-mayaṁ brahma dāru-vyāja-śarīra-bhṛt

On the northern shore of the ocean at Śrī Puruṣottama-
kṣetra resides the fully blissful Supreme Personality of
Godhead, who has deceptively assumed a wooden form
(dāru-brahma).

The Bṛhad-viṣṇu Purāṇa also states:

                          121
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017


nīlādrau cotkale deśe kṣetre śrī-puruṣottame

dāruṇy āste cid-ānando jagannāthākhya-mūrtinā

In the country of Utkala, at Nīlācala, which is in Śrī
Puruṣottama-kṣetra, the divine Deity of Jagannātha, who
is the embodiment of knowledge and bliss, is present in
wooden form.




Verse 160


mahā-vibhūtimān rājyaṁ autkalaṁ pālayan svayam

vyañjayan nija-māhātmyaṁ sadā sevaka-vatsalaḥ

mahā-vibhūtimān – exceptionally opulent and powerful;
rājyam – kingdom; autkalam – Utkala (Orissa); pālayan –
protecting; svayam – per-

sonally; vyañjayan – manifesting; nija – His own;
māhātmyam – glories; sadā – always; sevaka – to His
servants; vatsalaḥ – affectionate.

“Exceptionally opulent and powerful, Śrī Jagannātha-deva
personally protects the kingdom of Utkala. Personally
revealing His glories and showing mercy to His
servitors, He is their affectionate guardian.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “The Supreme
Lord of the universe Śrī Jagannātha possesses unlimited
potencies and opulences, and He personally maintains the
kingdom of Utkala (present-day Orissa), which is ruled
according to His decree.”

This is confirmed in Tattva-yāmala:

bhārate cotkale deśe bhū-svarge puruṣottame

dāru-rūpī jagannātho bhaktānām abhaya-pradaḥ

nara-ceṣṭām upādāya āste mokṣaika-kārakaḥ

The kingdom of Puruṣottama is in the Utkala region of
Bhārata, which is bhū-svarga, earthly heaven. There, the
Supreme Lord Śrī Jagannātha, assuming a wooden form,
bestows fearlessness on His devotees. That is to say, by
performing human-like pastimes, He frees everyone from
the fear of material existence.

This reveals Śrī Jagannātha’s magnificence and His
qualities such as compassion for the helpless. As He is
very affectionate and kindly disposed towards His
servitors, He never considers any of their offences.



Verse 161


                          122
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

tasyānnaṁ pācitaṁ lakṣmyā svayaṁ bhuktvā dayālunā

dattaṁ tena sva-bhaktebhyo labhyate deva-durlabham

tasya – His; annam – food; pācitam – cooked; lakṣmyā –
by the goddess of fortune; svayam – personally; bhuktvā
– after eating; dayālunā – by the merciful Lord; dattam
– given; tena – by Him; sva-bhaktebhyaḥ – to His
devotees; labhyate – is obtained; deva-durlabham –
rarely attained even by the gods.

“There, Lakṣmī-devī personally makes arrangements and
cooks for Him. The most merciful Lord Himself relishes
those preparations and then grants His remnants to the
devotees. Obtaining those remnants is extremely rare,
even for the demigods.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “By His mercy,
people obtain mahā-prasāda, which is rare for even the
demigods. What is the nature of that prasāda?
Parameśvarī, the sublime goddess Śrī Lakṣmī-devī,
personally cooks it, and the merciful Lord honors it and
then gives His remnants to His devotees.”

It may be asked, “If the Lord eats all the preparations,
then what is left over?” Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “The Lord
by nature is very merciful. Therefore to bestow
happiness upon His servitors, He keeps aside some
remnants of the food He has eaten.” Another
understanding is, “He eats the entire offering and then
replenishes every item for the happiness of His
devotees.”



Verse 162

mahā-prasāda-samjñaṁ ca tat-spṛṣṭaṁ yena kenacit

yatra kutrāpi vā nītam avicāreṇa bhujyate

mahā-prasāda-samjñam – known as mahā-prasāda; ca – and;
tat – that; spṛṣṭam – touched; yena kenacit – by anyone;
yatra kutra api – from anywhere; vā – or; nītam –
brought; avicāreṇa – without consideration; bhujyate –
it is worthy of being eaten.

“These remnants of the Lord are known as mahā-prasāda.
Mahā-prasāda is beyond consideration of whether anyone
has touched it or not touched it. Even though touched by
any person or taken anywhere, anyone can honor it
without question.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “This form of
the Lord’s mercy is called mahā-prasāda. Since the
nectar of the Lord’s lips has touched this mahā-prasāda,
it is famous as being supremely rare, even for the
demigods. Anyone can accept mahā-prasāda without
apprehension, for it never loses its spiritual potency,
even if touched by the lowest class of person or by an
unknown person. Mahā-prasāda may be taken anywhere, even
to a distant land. That is to say, even if it is taken
to an unfit or impure place, still it can be eaten
without any consideration. The purpose of saying

                          123
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

‘without any consideration’ is that mahā-prasāda is
transcendental to all considerations of purity or
impurity, proper or improper time, untouched or touched
(by an unfit or unknown person), and so on. Mahā-
prasāda’s divinity and glory never diminishes, and its
spiritual potency is never destroyed for any reason.
Therefore, everyone can honor it without consideration.”

The scriptures state:

yad annaṁ pācayel lakṣmīr bhoktā ca puruṣottamaḥ

spṛṣṭāspṛṣṭaṁ na mantavyaṁ yathā viṣṇus tathaiva tat

Lakṣmī-devī herself cooks this food and Bhagavān Śrī
Puruṣottama personally eats it. Therefore, it is
improper to consider whether this mahā-prasāda has been
touched by an unfit or unknown person. Just as the
Supreme Lord Śrī Viṣṇu is worshipable and worthy of
respect in all conditions, so His mahā-prasāda is
honorable and worshipable in all situations.

It is stated in the Skanda Purāṇa (Vaiṣṇava-khaṇḍa
2.38.16):

cira-stham api saṁśuṣkaṁ nītaṁ vā dūra-deśataḥ

yathā-yathopabhuktaṁ sat sarva-pāpāpanodanam

By accepting even completely dry, stale mahā-prasāda

prepared long before and brought from a distant land,
all sins are very easily dissipated and one obtains
bhakti.

It is stated in the Bhaviṣya Purāṇa:

antya-varṇair hīna-varṇaiḥ saṅkara-prabhavair api

spṛṣṭaṁ jagat-pater annaṁ bhuktaṁ sarvāgha-nāśanam

Even if mahā-prasāda is touched by a low class person
(antyaja), an outcaste (hīna-varṇa), or a persons of
mixed caste outside the four social divisions (varṇa-
saṅkara), it never loses its potency. Rather by
accepting that mahā-prasāda, all types of sins are
destroyed.

It is also stated in the Tattva-yāmala:

nāsti tatraiva rājendra spṛṣṭāspṛṣṭa-vivecanam

yasya saṁspṛṣṭa-mātreṇa yānty amedhyāḥ pavitratām

O King! When even the most impure person becomes
sanctified by the touch of mahā-prasāda, how can mahā-
prasāda become contaminated by contact?

It is also stated in the Garuḍa Purāṇa:

na kāla-niyamo viprā vrate cāndrāyaṇe yathā

prāpta-mātreṇa bhuñjīta yadīcchen mokṣam ātmanaḥ


                          124
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

Persons desiring liberation should eat mahā-prasāda as
soon as they receive it, abandoning all rules regarding
time, observance of vows of austerity like the
cāndrāyaṇa fast, etc.



Verse 163

aho tat-kṣetra-māhātmyaṁ gardabho ’pi catur-bhujaḥ

yatra praveśa-mātreṇa na kasyāpi punar-bhavaḥ

aho – oh!; tat-kṣetra – of that holy place; māhātmyam –
glories; gardabhaḥ – a donkey; api – even; catuḥ-bhujaḥ
– four armed; yatra – there; praveśa-mātreṇa – simply by
entering; na – not; kasya api – of anyone; punaḥ bhavaḥ–
rebirth.

(Those sādhus continued) “Ah! How can we possibly
describe the glories of Puruṣottama-kṣetra? Even a
donkey entering that abode attains a four-armed form,
and anyone who enters that region never has to take
birth again.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The sādhus say, “What to speak of the
glories of Śrī Jagannātha-deva’s mahā-prasāda, even the
glories of His abode, Puruṣottama-kṣetra, are
magnificent.” To communicate this, they exclaim in
amazement, “Aho!” saying, “Even if a base animal like a
donkey enters that sacred area, it attains a four-armed
form similar to the Supreme Lord.”

In Brahma Purāṇa, Śrī Brahmā states:

aho kṣetrasya māhātmyaṁ samantād daśa yojanam

divi-ṣṭhā yatra paśyanti sarvān eva catur-bhujān

Aho! How wonderful are the glories of Puruṣottama-
kṣetra! The demigods see that all the living beings
residing within its area, which spans ten yojanas
(eighty miles), possess four-armed forms.

Śrī Vedavyāsa states in Garuḍa Purāṇa:

yatra sthitā janāḥ sarve śaṅkha-cakrābja-pāṇayaḥ

dṛśyante divi devāṁś ca mohayanti muhur muhuḥ

All the residents of this land hold conchshell, club,
disc, and lotus in their hands. Seeing them, even the
demigods are repeatedly bewildered.

In the Bahvṛca-pariśiṣṭa, Śrī Nārada states:

catur-bhujā janāḥ sarve dṛśyante yan-nivāsinaḥ

All living beings in that abode are seen to be four-
armed.

Immediately upon entering that abode, any living being
coming from any other place becomes free from the cycle
of birth and death.

                          125
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


In the same Bahvṛca-pariśiṣṭa, Śrī Vedavyāsa states:

sparśanād eva tat-kṣetraṁ nṛṇāṁ mukti-pradāyakam

yatra sākṣāt paraṁ brahma bhāti dārava-līlayā

api janma-śataiḥ sāgrair duritācāra-tat-paraḥ

kṣetre ’smin saṅga-mātreṇa jāyate viṣṇunā samam

Parabrahman, the Supreme Absolute Truth, is personally
present in Śrī Puruṣottama-kṣetra, performing His
pastime of being a wooden Deity. Just by touching this
abode, all living entities are instantly liberated and
never again have to undergo rebirth. Even those who have
committed heinous acts over hundreds of lifetimes become
as venerated as Śrī Viṣṇu if they merely touch
Puruṣottama-kṣetra.



Verse 164

praphulla-puṇḍarīkākṣe tasminn evekṣite janeḥ

phalaṁ syād evam aśrauṣam āścaryaṁ pūrvam aśrutam

praphulla-puṇḍarīka – (like) full-blown lotuses; akṣe –
with eyes; tasmin – that (Lord); eva – indeed; īkṣite –
upon seeing; janeḥ – of his human birth; phalam – the
success; syāt – may be; evam – thus; aśrauṣam – I heard;
āścaryam – wonder; pūrvam – previously; aśrutam –
unheard.

Here is another wonder that I had never heard before:
“The lives of all people become crowned with success
simply by seeing Śrī Jagannātha-deva, whose eyes
resemble full-blown lotuses.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The Mathurā brāhmaṇa might argue, “Is
the Supreme Lord of the universe not directly present
here as well?”

Śrī Gopa-kumāra addresses this doubt in this verse
beginning with praphulla, saying, “When living beings
merely see the Supreme Lord of the universe who is
present in Puruṣottama-kṣetra and whose eyes resemble
full-blown lotuses, they experience relief from their
innumerable afflictions. Furthermore, it is known that
His beauty and sweetness are so unsurpassed that simply
by taking His darśana, one’s birth truly becomes
successful.”

In Padma Purāṇa, Śrī Nārada instructs Śrī Prahlāda:

śravaṇādyair upāyair yaḥ kathañcid dṛśyate mahaḥ

nīlādri-śikhare bhāti sarva-cākṣuṣa-gocaraḥ

tam eva paramātmānaṁ ye prapaśyanti mānavāḥ

te yānti bhavanaṁ viṣṇoḥ kiṁ punar ye bhavādṛśāḥ


                          126
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

Śrī Bhagavān resides on the peak of Nīlācala and is thus
visible to everyone. If anyone just once sees that
Supreme Lord, who is the Supersoul in all living
entities – nay, even if he somehow hears the Lord’s name
and somehow or other embraces Him in his heart – he
shall certainly attain Vaikuṇṭha, the Lord’s eternal
abode.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “I was amazed to hear these
glories.” The word āścarya, meaning ‘amazement,’
indicates the special ecstasy, or bhāva, that astonished
Gopa-kumāra’s heart. “I was wonderstruck because I had
never before heard such glories.” The purport is that,
although the Deity of Śrī Viṣṇu and Śrī Jagannātha are
both the Supreme Personality of Godhead, nevertheless,
Śrī Jagannātha-deva is indeed the source of all
incarnations. That is to say, darśana of the source of
all incarnations (avatārī) and His holy abode are more
glorious than the darśana of His incarnations
(avatāras). Therefore, darśana of avatārī and His abode
bestow greater benefit. “I considered, ‘Especially, if I
had had such authority over that kingdom of Purī as I
have here, then I would spend most of my time, day and
night, hearing the Lord’s marvelous qualities, engaging
in devotional service, and worshiping Him.’ By the power
of Śrī Gurudeva’s benediction I had already understood
this.” This topic will be elaborated upon further on.



Verse 165

tad-didṛkṣābhibhūto ’haṁ sarvaṁ santyajya tat-kṣaṇe

saṅkīrtayan jagannātham auḍhra-deśa-diśaṁ śritaḥ

tat – Him; didṛkṣā – with the desire to see; abhibhūtaḥ
– over-whelmed; aham – I; sarvam – everything; santyajya
– renouncing; tat-kṣaṇe – at that very moment;
saṅkīrtayan – loudly glorifying; jagannātham – Śrī
Jagannātha; auḍhra-deśa – of the land of Orissa; diśam –
to the direction; śritaḥ – took.

Hearing these glories of Śrī Jagannātha-deva, I became
restless with desire to see him. That very moment, I
renounced everything and left for the province of
Utkala, performing nāma-saṅkīrtana.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Hearing Śrī
Jagannātha-deva’s glories, I became obsessed with the
desire to see Him. Immediately, I completely
relinquished the kingdom and other sense objects. With
my mind absorbed in chanting, I began loudly calling out
His four-syllable name again and again, ‘Jagannātha,
Jagannātha.’ Thus, with the desire of going to His
place, I set out in a south-easterly direction, heading
for the land of Utkala.”



Verse 166

tat kṣetram acirāt prāptas tatratyān daṇḍavan naman


                          127
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

antaḥ-puraṁ praviṣṭo ’haṁ teṣāṁ karuṇayā satām

tat-kṣetram – that land; acirāt – before long; prāptaḥ –
reached; tatratyān – to the residents of that place;
daṇḍa-vat – flat like a rod; naman – falling down;
antaḥ-puram – within the temple; praviṣṭaḥ – having
entered; aham – I; teṣām – of them; karuṇayā – by the
mercy; satām – of the devotees.

Shortly, I reached Śrī Puruṣottama-kṣetra, where I
prostrated before all the residents of that holy abode.
Then, by the mercy of the saintly persons, I entered the
interior of the temple.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “I quickly
reached Śrī Puruṣottama-kṣetra. Then, by the mercy of
the Vaiṣṇavas who were present in that holy abode, I
entered the temple’s inner sanctum.”

Here, the brāhmaṇa might raise the question, “You were a
foreigner and knew nothing about Puruṣottama-kṣetra.
Having just arrived, how was it possible for you to
enter the temple’s inner sanctum so quickly?”

In reply, Śrī Gopa-kumāra speaks the line beginning with
teṣām.

He says, “I was able to enter the temple’s inner sanctum
by the immense mercy of the Vaiṣṇavas.”



Verse 167

dūrād adarśi puruṣottama-vaktra-candro

bhrājad-viśāla-nayano maṇi-puṇḍra-bhālaḥ

snigdhābhra-kāntir aruṇādhara-dīpti-ramyo

’śeṣa-prasāda-vikasat-smita-candrikāḍhyaḥ

dūrāt – from a distance; adarśi – I saw; puruṣa-ut-tama
– that person who is transcendental (ut) to darkness
(tamas); vaktra-candraḥ – moon-like face; bhrājat –
shining; viśāla – large; nayanaḥ – eyes; maṇi – made of
jewels; puṇḍra – His tilaka; bhālaḥ – on His fore-head;
snigdha – resplendent; abhra – (like) a cloud; kāntiḥ –
effulgence; aruṇa – ruddy; adhara – lips; dīpti –
brilliant; ramyaḥ – charming; aśeṣa – upon everyone;
prasāda – mercy; vikasat – radiated; smita – with a
smile; candrikā – like moonshine; āḍhyaḥ – enhanced.

Then, from a distance, I saw Puruṣottama-deva, who
bestows joy upon everyone. His moon-like face was
beautified by wide lotus eyes, and a

tilaka made of jewels shone on His forehead, His
complexion resembled a resplendent raincloud, and His
reddish lips were luminescent. His gentle smile, radiant
like moonshine, enhanced the exquisiteness of His
countenance and showered unlimited mercy on everyone.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Then, from a

                          128
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

far distance, I saw the moon-like countenance of Śrī
Puruṣottama-deva, the bestower of happiness to all. Two
large, bright eyes were resplendent on His lovely,
enchanting face; an enchanting tilaka of jewels sparkled
on His forehead; His complexion was like the glow of
fresh rainclouds; and His reddish lips resembled fully-
blossomed bāndhulī flowers. Those lips, which beautified
His exquisite face with a moon-like, radiant smile, were
showering the honey of His mercy on everyone.” This was
Śrī Gopa-kumāra’s first vision of the moon-like face of
Jagannātha, which he saw from afar. For this reason, he
describes the beauty of His eyes and so on in this
manner.



Verse 168

tatrāgrato gantu-manāś ca neśe

premṇā hato vepathubhir niruddhaḥ

romāñca-bhinno ’śru-vilupta-dṛṣṭiḥ

stambhaṁ suparṇasya kathañcid āptaḥ

tatra – there; agrataḥ – ahead; gantu-manāḥ – my mind
desired to go; ca – also; na iśe – I was unable; premṇā
– by the external symptoms of ecstatic love; hataḥ –
afflicted; vepathubhiḥ – with trembling; niruddhaḥ –
blocked; roma-añca – hairs standing erect; bhinnaḥ –
individually; aśru – by tears; vilupta – covered; dṛṣṭiḥ
– my vision; stambham – the pillar; suparṇasya – of
Garuḍa; kathañcit – somehow; āptaḥ – caught hold.

I was eager to go near Śrī Jagannātha but was unable to
walk forward. My mind had become helplessly deprived of
will and, due to ecstatic love, all my limbs were
trembling. My hairs stood erect and I lost control of my
body as tears blocked my vision. With great difficulty,
I somehow caught hold of the Garuḍa pillar and stood
there.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Although my
enchanting vision of śrī-mūrti, the divine Deity of the
Lord, made me yearn to go into the temple’s sanctum
sanctorum, I could not proceed. Overcome by intense
love, I became helpless and unable to move.” This
condition is described by two distinguishing attributes:
jāḍya and aśru. “Due to horripilation, I lost control
over my entire body.” This originates from the ecstatic
symptom of being stunned ( jāḍya). “And I was unable to
see, as streams of tears (aśru) obscured my vision.”

Alternatively, this verse is saying, “Unable to see, I
stood somehow by gripping the Garuḍa pillar, which was
present in front of Śrī Jagannātha-deva. Even though I
was not externally conscious, I managed to reach that
Garuḍa pillar, only by the mercy of Bhagavān.” This is
the actual essence of what is being said.



Verse 169

                          129
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017


divyāmbarālaṅkaraṇa-srag-āvalī-

vyāptaṁ mano-locana-harṣa-vardhanam

siṁhāsanasyopari līlayā sthitaṁ

bhuktvā mahā-bhoga-gaṇān mano-harān

divya – divine; ambara – clothes; alaṅkaraṇa –
ornaments; srak – garlands; āvalī – multitude; vyāptam –
seated; manaḥ – of the mind; locana – of the eyes; harṣa
– happiness; vardhanam – increasing; siṁha-āsanasya – a
lion throne; upari – upon; līlayā – playfully; sthitam –
situated; bhuktvā – accepting; mahā – huge amounts;
bhoga-

gaṇān – varieties of foodstuffs; manaḥ-harān –
enchanting.

From that very spot I saw the Lord. His bluish form,
smeared with sandalwood pulp, was bedecked with divine
clothes, ornaments, and garlands. Sitting playfully on a
throne, He was accepting huge amounts of delectable
foodstuffs. Thus, He was increasing the joy in the minds
and eyes of those who were seeing Him.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Reaching that spot near the Lord, Śrī
Gopa-kumāra had special darśana, causing him to faint in
ecstasy, which he explains in this verse beginning with
divya. He says, “The Lord’s transcendental body was
befittingly decorated with fabulous clothes, ornaments,
garlands, and so on. The loveliness of His entire divine
form increased the joy in the minds and eyes of
everyone. He gracefully sat on the throne, enjoying
varieties of transcendental, delicious foodstuffs that
were full of all good qualities.”



Verse 170

praṇāma-nṛtya-stuti-vādya-gīta-

parāṁs tu sa-prema vilokayantam

mahā-mahimnāṁ padam īkṣamāṇo

’pataṁ jagannātham ahaṁ vimuhya

praṇāma – obeisances; nṛtya – in dancing; stuti –
prayers; vādya – musical instruments; gīta – singing;
parān – absorbed; tu – indeed; sa-prema – with love;
vilokayantam – seeing; mahā-mahimnām – of great glories;
padam – abode; īkṣamāṇaḥ – seeing; apatam – I fell;
jagannātham – Śrī Jagannātha; aham – I; vimuhya –
fainting.

He was lovingly glancing at the people singing, playing
musical instruments, dancing, offering prayers, bowing
down, and so on before Him. When I saw the wonderful
opulence of Śrī Jagannātha-deva, the refuge of infinite
glories, I fell unconscious to the ground.


                          130
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Hundreds of
people

were prostrating before the Lord. Some were singing,
some were chanting prayers, some were playing
instruments such as mṛdaṅgas (drums) and karatālas (hand
cymbals), still others were dancing and so on, and some
were sitting, viewing the divine Deity. The Lord also
reciprocated with His merciful glance. Seeing the
splendor and opulence of Śrī Jagannātha-deva – He who is
the fountainhead of such extraordinary grandeur – I lost
consciousness and fell to the ground.”



Verse 171

saṁjñāṁ labdhvā samunmīlya locane lokayan punaḥ

unmatta iva taṁ dhartuṁ sa-vego ’dhāvam agrataḥ

saṁjñām – consciousness; labdhvā – regaining; samunmīlya
– opening; locane – my eyes; lokayan – seeing; punaḥ –
again; unmattaḥ – intoxicated; iva – as if; tam – Him;
dhartum – to embrace; sa-vegaḥ – swiftly; adhāvam – I
ran; agrataḥ – forward.

After some time, I regained consciousness and opened my
eyes. Beholding the Lord, I became maddened and rushed
to embrace Him.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “After a few
moments, when I regained consciousness, I again took
darśana of Śrī Jagannātha-deva and ran past the Garuḍa
pillar towards Him.”



Verse 172

cirād didṛkṣito dṛṣṭo jīvitaṁ jīvitaṁ mayā

prāpto ’dya jagad-īśo ’yaṁ nija-prabhur iti bruvan

cirāt – after a long time; didṛkṣitaḥ – having desired
to see; dṛṣṭaḥ – seen; jīvitam jīvitam mayā – I have
truly lived!; prāptaḥ – attained; adya – now; jagat-iśaḥ
– Lord of the universes; ayam – He; nija – my own;
prabhu – Lord; iti – thus; bruvan – I cried out.

Running ahead, I cried out, “Today my life has been
crowned with success! I have finally come before that
Supreme Person whom I have so long desired to see. Today
I have obtained my Lord, Śrī Jagadīśvara, the Lord of
the universe.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Because the Mathurā brāhmaṇa might
ask, “After that, what did you do?” Śrī Gopa-kumāra
speaks this verse starting with cirād. He says, “I
cried, ‘Today I have seen the Lord of my heart, who had
remained concealed for a such long time. Today I have
seen my worshipable Lord, whom I had for so long desired
to see. By His darśana, on this very day, my life has
become successful.’ ”

                          131
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


Alternatively, Gopa-kumāra is saying, “The absence of
the Lord’s darśana was like death for me.” The purport
is: “Today, I did not just receive His darśana, I also
received new life.” In this verse, the word jīvitam has
been repeated twice in succession but both have the same
meaning. Here, repetition represents a mistake in
speech, but it came about because of Śrī Gopa-kumāra’s
excessive bliss. So, not only did he have Śrī
Jagannātha-deva’s darśana, but he also embraced Him
within his heart as his very own. He thus says, “Today,
I have truly attained Śrī Jagadīśvara who is endowed
with all qualities of the Supreme Lord of the universe.
I did not perceive the complete characteristics of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead in any of the other
Deities of the Lord that I saw before.”



Verse 173

sa-vetra-ghāṭaṁ pratihāribhis tadā

nivārito jāta-vicāra-lajjitaḥ

prabhoḥ kṛpāṁ tām anumānya nirgato

mahā-prasādānnam athāpnavaṁ bahiḥ

sa-vetra – with canes; ghāṭam – beaten; pratihāribhiḥ –
by the guards; tadā – then; nivāritaḥ – prevented; jāta-
vicāra – considerations of externals being awoken;
lajjitaḥ – ashamed; prabhoḥ – of the Lord; kṛpām – the
mercy; tām – that; anumānya – considering; nirgataḥ –
left; mahā-prasāda – great mercy; annam – food, remnants
of the Lord; atha – then; āpnavam – I received; bahiḥ –
outside.

As soon as I moved forward to embrace the Lord, the
doorkeepers beat me with canes, barring me from entering
inside. Realizing what I had done, I felt ashamed, but I
considered being stopped in this manner to actually be
the mercy of the Lord. When I went outside, I received
mahā-prasāda without even asking for it.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “When I ran
towards the Lord to embrace Him, the doorkeepers (the
Lord’s pāṇḍās, or servitors) beat me with canes,
stopping me from going inside. At that point, my power
of discretion returned. I felt embarrassed and thought,
‘Alas! Alas! I am an unworthy person, a mere foreigner
and a newcomer. What made me act so brazenly?’
Reflecting in this way, out of embarrassment I went
outside. Though they caned me and stopped me from
entering, I did not feel dejected, rather, I felt
elated.” Therefore, in the verse, Gopa-kumāra says,
“Being stopped like this was the Lord’s mercy.
Otherwise, if I had acted insanely and caught hold of
Śrī Jagannātha-deva, it would have been a grievous
offence. I understood that their thwarting me was the
Lord’s special mercy. Thus I went outside and at that
very moment, I received mahā-prasāda from a kind
Vaiṣṇava, even without asking for it.”


                          132
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017



Verses 174–175

tad bhuktvā satvaraṁ brahman bhagavan-mandiraṁ punaḥ

praviśyāścarya-jātaṁ yan mayā dṛṣṭaṁ mudāṁ padam

hṛdi kartuṁ na śakyate tat kathaṁ kriyatāṁ mukhe

evaṁ tatra divā pūrṇaṁ sthitvānando ’nubhūyate

tat – that; bhuktvā – having eaten; sa-tvaram – with
haste; brahman – O you, who know the Supreme Brahman;
bhagavat – of the Lord; mandiram – the temple; punaḥ –
again; praviśya – entering; āścarya-jātam – wonder that
arises (in the heart); yat – which; mayā – by me; dṛṣṭam
– was seen; mudām – blissful; padam – state; hṛdi – in
the heart; kartum – to make; na – not; śakyate –
possible; tat – that; katham – how?; kriyate – it is
made; mukhe – in words; evam – thus; tatra – there; divā
– by day; pūrṇam – whole; sthitvā – staying; ānandaḥ –
ecstasy; anubhūyate – was experienced.

I quickly ate the mahā-prasāda and re-entered the
Supreme Lord’s temple. O brāhmaṇa! The bliss and wonder
at what I saw that time could not be contained in my
heart, so how can I possibly describe it in words? In
this way, I would spend the whole day in the temple and
would experience complete ecstasy.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “On re-entering
the temple, I witnessed a variety of long-standing
traditions, which struck me with wonder and amazement.
What were they like? They were mudāṁ, blissful, the
source of all types of happiness.

“My mind was incapable of remembering all the
extraordinary things I saw. They were of unlimited
variety and beyond logic and reason, so how can I
describe them in words?” The function of the organ of
speech is limited in scope compared to that of the mind.
Applying kaimutika-nyāya (the logic of ‘how much
more!’), it is understood that if the mind cannot
conceptualize that bliss, then it is impossible for the
spoken word to describe it. Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “One
after another, I gradually witnessed the most astounding
scenes of ancient traditional rituals in the temple, and
would spend my entire day inside.”



Verse 176

rātrau mahotsave vṛtte bṛhac-chṛṅgāra-sambhave

nirgamyate tu nirvṛtte puṣpāñjali-mahotsave

rātrau – at night; mahā-utsave – the great festival;
vṛtte – function; bṛhat-śṛṅgāra – gorgeously decorated;
sambhave – occurance; nirgamyate – I left; tu – indeed;
nirvṛtte – when completed; puṣpa-añjali – with offerings
of palmfuls of flowers; mahā-utsave – great festival.


                          133
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

Only at night would I leave the temple, after the the
grand festive ritual of gorgeously decorating the
Deities was completed, and puṣpāñjali, the offering of
palmfuls of flowers, was performed.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The brāhmaṇa might question, “You must
have been coming out at least at night.” In reply, Gopa-
kumāra says, “Bṛhat-śṛṅgāra, the festival of opulently
decorating the Lord, would take place in the first
prahara (three-hour period) of the night. The Deities
were adorned with exquisite dresses and offered a
variety of food items with magnificant celebration.
After that, the grand festival of puṣpāñjali, showering
flower petals on the Lord, would take place. Only after
that would I leave the temple.”



Verse 177

netthaṁ jñātaḥ satāṁ saṅge kālo nava-navotsavaiḥ

tadaivāsyā vraja-bhuvaḥ śoko me niragād iva

na – not; ittham – thus; jñātaḥ – knew; satām saṅge – in
the company of the saintly devotees; kālaḥ – the time;
nava-nava – ever-fresh and new; utsavaiḥ – festivals;
tadā – then; eva – indeed; asyāḥ – from this; vraja-
bhuvaḥ – from the land of Vraja; śokaḥ – pain (of
separation); me – my; niragāt – left; iva – as if.

In this way, in the association of saintly Vaiṣṇavas, I
witnessed ever-new festivals and did not realize how
much time had passed. I almost forgot my pain of
separation from the land of Vraja.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Thus immersed
in the bliss of witnessing spectacular festivals in the
company of saintly souls, I did not notice how much time
had elapsed. The reason is that every festival there
appeared new and ever-fresh to me, as if I had never
experienced it before.” Or else it may be said, “The
unending novelty of those festivals suffused my heart
with happiness.” Alternatively, “Because I witnessed
those ever-new festivities in the association of sādhus,
I simply could not perceive the passage of time; all
things of the past receded from my memory. As I was
intoxicated with bliss, the heartache I experienced in
my longing for Śrī Vṛndāvana somewhat dissipated.” This
statement makes it clear that Gopa-kumāra is saying,
“The happiness I experienced in Śrī Vṛndāvana did not
disappear completely from my heart; rather, it was still
subtly present.”



Verse 178

śrī-jagannātha-devasya sevakeṣu kṛpottamā

vividhājñā ca sarvatra śrūyate ’py anubhūyate

śrī-jagannātha-devasya – of Śrī Jagannātha-deva;
sevakeṣu – towards His servants; kṛpā-uttamā –

                          134
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

especially merciful; vividha-ājñā – various
authoritative statements; ca – also; sarvatra – from all
sides; śrūyate – was heard; api– also; anubhūyate –
personally perceived.

I often heard from others how Śrī Jagannātha-deva is
especially merciful towards His servitors. I also
personally perceived this.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Everywhere I
went, I heard that Śrī Jagannātha-deva bestows varieties
of sublime mercy upon His servitors. I not only heard
about this but also personally witnessed it. Śrī
Jagannātha-deva would fulfill His servants’ desires,
give them various orders, instruct them in their duties,
and so on. I also personally experienced the results of
Śrī Jagannātha-deva’s mercy.”



Verse 179

nānyat kim api roceta jagannāthasya darśanāt

purāṇato ’sya māhātmya-śuśrūṣāpi nivartate

na – not; anyat – other; kim api – anything; roceta –
(my mind) could be pleased; jagannāthasya – of Śrī
Jagannātha; darśanāt – other than the sight; purāṇataḥ –
from the Purāṇas; asya – of His; māhātmya – glories;
śuśrūṣā – the desire to hear; api – even; nivartate –
desisted.

I never acquired a taste for anything other than gazing
upon Śrī Jagannātha-deva. Even when the paṇḍitas sang
the glories of the Lord from the Purāṇas, I felt no
desire to hear them.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The brāhmaṇa might ask, “Does this
mean that on your own you achieved your desired goal?”

Śrī Gopa-kumāra replies, “I had no taste for anything
other than Śrī Jagannātha-deva’s darśana, not even for
hearing His glories. Even though I had no taste for
hearing the purports of the Brahma Purāṇa and other
Purāṇas, I sometimes had a desire to hear from Puranic
authorities inside the temple about glories of Śrī
Jagannātha-deva that had never been heard before. Yet
even though at times I had such a desire, my attachment
to seeing the Lord’s lovely lotus face was so strong
that it counteracted all such desires.”

This reveals that by hearing from the Purāṇas and so on
inside the temple, there had been the opportunity to
acquire knowledge about attaining the heavenly planets,
etc. [but Gopa-kumāra did not take it].



Verse 180

śārīraṁ mānasaṁ vā syāt kiñcid duḥkhaṁ kadācana

tac ca śrī-puṇḍarīkākṣe dṛṣṭe sadyo vinaśyati

                          135
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


śārīram – physical; mānasam – mental; vā – or; syāt –
may be; kiñcit – whatever; duḥkham – suffering; kadācana
– at any time; tat – that; ca – and; śrī-puṇḍarīka-akṣe
– the beautiful lotus-eyed Lord; dṛṣṭe – seen; sadyaḥ –
immediately; vinaśyati – disappeared.

If I experienced any physical or mental distress it
would disappear immediately upon seeing the lotus-eyed
Supreme Lord.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The brāhmaṇa might question, “The body
of every living being has inherent needs. Due to these
needs, did you not face any obstacle in the bliss of
receiving the darśana of the divine face of Śrī
Jagannātha?”

Śrī Gopa-kumāra replies, “I experienced neither body
ailments, such as diseases, nor distress that arises
from the mind, such as lust (kāma).” Another way of
understanding this verse is that the term syāt, meaning
‘perhaps,’ here indicates possibility. As it is in the
locative case, the implication is, “Impediments such as
desire for sensuality practically never had the chance
to develop in me.” Or, in other words, “Even if
sometimes I experienced a little distress, it instantly
dissipated by seeing the lotus-eyed divine Lord. The
reason is that I felt such exultation from seeing Him
that I forgot everything; all my distress vanished
naturally.”



Verse 181

phalaṁ labdhaṁ japasyeti matvodāse sma tatra ca

evaṁ cira-dinaṁ tatra nyavasaṁ paramaiḥ sukhaiḥ

phalam – the fruit; labdham – obtained; japasya – of
chanting; iti – thus; matvā – considering; udāse sma – I
became indifferent; tatra – there; ca – also; evam –
thus; cira-dinam – for many days; tatra – there;
nyavasam – I resided; paramaiḥ sukhaiḥ – because of
tasting superlative delights.

Considering that I had already received the ultimate
fruit of chanting my mantra, I gradually became
indifferent even towards chanting it. In this way, I
happily resided there for a long time.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “At that time, I
con-sidered I had received the result of chanting my
mantra in the form of being able to see Śrī Jagannātha,
and so I began to exhibit indifference towards chanting
the mantra and I gave up my attachment to chanting it.”
It can also be said, “I became unmindful about chanting
my mantra because I became proud that I was receiving so
much pleasure.” Or, “I became indifferent because I was
hopeful that I would enjoy varieties of happiness.”



Verse 182

                          136
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017


atha tasyāntarīṇāyāṁ sevāyāṁ karhicit prabhoḥ

jātā rucir me tato ’pi tasyā aghaṭanān mahān

atha – then; tasya – of Him; āntarīṇāyām – intimate;
sevāyām – in service; karhicit – something; prabhoḥ –
for the Lord; jātā – manifested; ruciḥ – desire; me – of
me; tataḥ – then; api – however; tasyāḥ – on account of
that; aghaṭanāt – because of unfulfillment; mahān –
great.

Thereafter, I began to yearn to perform some intimate
service to the Lord. I also began to experience deep
anguish in my heart when this desire was not fulfilled.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: After describing the happiness of that
place in a general manner, Śrī Gopa-kumāra now intends
to narrate how he yearned for the unique bliss of
rendering extraordinary service to the Lord, the method
of obtaining that happiness, and the mental torment he
suffered when his desire was not fulfilled. He speaks of
this in three verses, beginning here with atha.

He says, “After some time, I experienced in my heart the
longing to enter Śrī Jagannātha-deva’s temple and freely
engage in the services His confidential servitors
perform.” Because this wish was almost impossible to
realize, Gopa-kumāra might think, “Just as it is
impossible to touch the moon, similarly how can this
impossible desire of mine be fulfilled?” To address his
own doubt, he says, “prabhoḥ sarvaṁ kartuṁ samarthasyeti
– the Lord is capable of doing anything.” The intended
meaning is, “Although it was impossible for me to
receive such service, nevertheless, the Lord could make
it happen. In spite of my intense yearning, I was not
able to obtain such service, and I therefore experienced
extreme mental anguish.”




Verses 183–184


yaś cakravartī tatratyaḥ sa prabhor mukhya-sevakaḥ

śrī-mukhaṁ vīkṣituṁ kṣetre yadā yāti mahotsave

saj-janopadravodyāna-bhaṅgādau vārite ’py atha

mādṛśo ’kiñcanāḥ svairaṁ prabhuṁ draṣṭuṁ na śaknuyuḥ

yaḥ – who; cakravārtī – the emperor; tatratyaḥ – of that
land; saḥ – he; prabhoḥ – of the Lord; mukhya-sevakaḥ –
chief servitor; śrī-mukham – (the Lord’s) beautiful
face; vīkṣitum – to see; kṣetre – at that place; yadā –
when; yāti – he went; mahā-utsave – on the (occasion) of
a great festival; sat-jana – for the saintly persons;
upadrava – disturbances; udyāna – to the gardens; bhaṅga
– damage; ādau – and so forth; vārite – arrangements for
protection; api – also; atha – then; mādṛśaḥ – like me;
akiñcanāḥ – unattached (mendicants); svairam – freely;

                          137
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

prabhum – Lord; draṣṭum – to see; na śaknuyuḥ – were
unable.

The king of that country was Śrī Jagannātha’s chief
servitor. On occasions of grand festivals, when he
arrived there for darśana of Śrī Bhagavān, elaborate
arrangements were made to protect the saintly persons
from disturbances and the gardens from damage. Due to
this, the poor, common folk like me would not be able to
view the Lord freely.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “The king of
that country was also Śrī Jagannātha-deva’s chief
servitor, and he had obtained the opulence of the
kingdom by the mercy of the Lord.” Alternatively, it can
be said that the sovereign ruler, by dint of taking
birth in that country, was the main servitor, or
superintendent, of Śrī Jagannātha-deva’s attendants. He
says, “On principal festivals days, such as Ratha-yātrā,
he would come to Śrī Jagannātha Purī for Śrī
Jagannātha’s darśana. At that time, people like me, who
seemed to be penniless, wretched, insignificant, and
dependent could not freely see Śrī Jagannātha-deva.”

Because the Mathurā brāhmaṇa might object, saying that
it is improper to foster apprehensions about such a
saintly king, Gopa-kumāra speaks the line beginning with
sat. He says, “At that time, arrangements were made to
ensure that saintly persons not encounter any trouble,
that is, that they should not face obstacles in taking
darśana of Śrī Jagannātha-deva. Other arrangements were
made to ensure that the elephants and horses, etc., did
not trample the flower garden. Because of this,
destitute and unimportant persons like myself could not
freely see the Lord.” In the verse, the word ādi also
indicates that arrangements were made to ensure that the
water supply would not become contaminated, and so
forth.

This all indicates the mental distress that Gopa-kumāra
would feel whenever his solitary residence was
disrupted. He says, “The army, consisting of four ranks
– elephants, cavalry, chariots, and infantry –

disturbed poor persons like me, throwing us into great
anxiety. Our huts made of straw, thatch, and fronds
would be demolished, and there was no saving us from
distress.”



Verse 185

evam udbhūta-hṛd-rogo ’drākṣaṁ sva-gurum ekadā

śrī-jagannātha-devāgre parama-prema-vihvalam

evam – thus; udbhūta – manifested; hṛt-rogaḥ –
despondency; adrākṣam – I saw; sva-gurum – my gurudeva;
ekadā – one day; śrī-jagannātha-deva – Śrī Jagannātha-
deva; agre – in front of; parama-prema-vihvalam –
overwhelmed by the highest love.

Due to such concerns, I started to become despondent.

                          138
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

However one day, quite unexpectedly, I saw my gurudeva
in front of Śrī Jagannātha-deva, overwhelmed in the
highest ecstatic state of love of God.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “In this way, I
began to feel despondent at heart. Then, unexpectedly,
one day I saw my illustrious gurudeva, who had
instructed me on my mantra in Śrī Vṛndāvana. I saw him
in front of Śrī Jagannātha-deva submerged in the topmost
ecstasy of prema.”



Verse 186

na sa sambhāṣituṁ śakto mayā tarhi gataḥ kvacit

alakṣito jagannātha-śrī-mukhākṛṣṭa-cetasā

na – not; saḥ – he; sambhāṣitum – to speak; śaktaḥ –
able; mayā – by me; tarhi – at that time; gataḥ – left;
kvacit – somewhere; alakṣitaḥ – unseen; jagannātha – of
Śrī Jagannātha; śrī-mukha – by the resplendent face;
ākṛṣṭa-cetasā – my mind being attracted.

Therefore, at that time I could not speak with him.
Furthermore, my mind was also so absorbed in seeing the
divine face of Śrī Jagannātha-deva that I did not notice
that my gurudeva left and went somewhere.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “However, at the
time I could not speak with him, and then I did not know
where he went.”

The brāhmaṇa might ask, “Why did you not run after your
gurudeva?”

Śrī Gopa-kumāra replies, “I was unable to focus on him
because, at the time, my mind was completely attracted
to the beautiful lotus face of Śrī Jagannātha-deva. For
this reason I could not follow him, but there was no
offence on my part.”



Verse 187

itas tato ’mṛgyatāsau dine ’nyasmiṁs taṭe ’mbudheḥ

nāma-saṅkīrtanānandair nṛtyal labdho mayaikalaḥ

itaḥ tataḥ – here and there; amṛgyata – was sought; asau
– he; dine – day; anyasmin – on the next (day); taṭe –
on the shore; ambudheḥ – of the ocean; nāma-saṅkīrtana –
of loud chanting of Śrī Nāma; ānandaiḥ – in the bliss;
nṛtyan – dancing; labdhaḥ – found; mayā – by me; ekalaḥ
– alone.

After that, I tenaciously searched for him everywhere.
All of a sudden, one day, I found him dancing alone by
the shore of the ocean, steeped in the bliss of singing
the holy names of the Lord.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The brāhmaṇa might ask, “How was it

                          139
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

that you met your gurudeva on the shore of the ocean
after some days?”

Śrī Gopa-kumāra replies, “I searched for Gurudeva
everywhere. Then one day I unexpectedly saw him by the
ocean.”

“In what condition did you find him?”

“Gurudeva was dancing alone in the bliss of nāma-
saṅkīrtana.” This was due to his own sweet singing of
the names of Śrī Bhagavān, or due to his perceiving the
form of the Lord as he sang.



Verse 188

daṇḍavat praṇamantaṁ māṁ dṛṣṭvāśīrvāda-pūrvakam

āśliṣyājñāpayām āsa sarvajño ’nugrahād idam

daṇḍa-vat – like a fallen rod; praṇamantam – bowing
down; mām – me; dṛṣṭvā – seeing; āśīḥ-vāda-pūrvakam –
with benedictions; āśliṣya – embracing; ājñāpayām āsa –
instructed; sarva-jñaḥ – being all-knowing; anugrahāt –
out of mercy; idam – as follows.

I approached him and prostrated myself before him.
Seeing me, my

omniscient gurudeva benedicted me and embraced me. He
under-

stood my heart’s concern and mercifully instructed me as
follows.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Gurudeva, being
omniscient, understood my innermost desire. Pronouncing
a benedic-tion, he embraced me and mercifully instructed
me.” His advice is described in the next three-and-a-
half verses.



Verse 189

yad yat saṅkalpya bho vatsa nijaṁ mantraṁ japiṣyasi

tat-prabhāveṇa tat sarvaṁ vāñchātītaṁ ca setsyati

yad yat – whatever; saṅkalpya – after   making a firm
resolution; bho vatsa – O dear child;   nijam – your;
mantram – divine vibration; japiṣyasi   – you shall chant;
tat-prabhāvena – by it’s potency; tat   – that; sarvam –
everything; vañchā – desire; atītam –   beyond; ca – also;
setsyati – will be fulfilled.

“O child, with whatever resolve you chant this mantra,
by its power, not only will those desires be fulfilled,
but your desires in excess of that aspiration will also
be fulfilled.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gurudeva says, “O child, if you

                          140
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

chant this mantra by making a resolution (saṅkalpa) with
your mind and words, using the proper process, then by
the power of this chanting, you shall obtain your
desired object. Not only this, but all your desires
beyond your avowed aspiration will also be fulfilled.”



Verse 190

śrī-jagannātha-devasya sevā-rūpaṁ ca viddhi tam

evaṁ matvā ca viśvasya na kadācij japaṁ tyajeḥ

śrī-jagannātha-devasya – for Śrī Jagannātha-deva; sevā-
rūpam – a form of service; ca – also; viddhi – you
should understand; tam – that; evam – thus; matvā – so
considering; ca – and; viśvasya – with faith; na kadācit
– never; japam– chanting; tyajeḥ – you should give up.

“Know that chanting this mantra is also service to Śrī
Jagannātha-deva. Thus have faith in my words and never
give up the chanting of this mantra.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “I asked,
‘Beyond service to Śrī Jagannātha-deva, can there be
desire for any other results?’

“Śrī Gurudeva replied, ‘You should consider chanting of
the mantra to indeed be service to Śrī Jagannātha-deva,
and so you must chant your mantra.’

“I then asked, ‘But why do I not perceive in my heart
that chanting the mantra is also service to the Lord?’

“Śrī Gurudeva answered, ‘Have faith in my words and do
not abandon chanting of the mantra under any
circumstances. First develop faith in my words, and then
you will experience this for yourself.’

“In this way, Śrī Gurudeva, the crest jewel of
omniscient personalities, fulfilled my heart-felt
desire. Understanding my indifference to chanting, he
removed the obstacle that was blocking me from achieving
perfection in the chanting of the mantra.”

An alternate reading of this verse is, “Gurudeva wanted
to say that if I followed the process of making a
resolute determination (saṅkalpa), then very soon I
would obtain the desired goal. With this intention, he
mercifully said, ‘Whenever you make a resolution and
practice your chanting to that end, your avowed
aspiration will be fulfilled right then.’ ”

In the past, even without making a vow, Gopa-kumāra had
received a kingdom on the shore of the Gaṅgā, but the
priceless treasure of special service to Śrī Jagannātha-
deva is far greater than obtaining the position of a
king. Therefore, Gopa-kumāra could obtain this
magnificent result only by performing his chanting with
saṅkalpa. This instruction also constitutes a command of
śrī guru to the disciple.



                          141
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


Verse 191

tvam etasya prabhāveṇa cira-jīvībhavānvaham

īdṛg gopārbha-rūpaś ca tat-phalāpty-arha-mānasaḥ

tvam – you; etasya – of that (mantra); prabhāvena – by
the power; cira-jīvī – long-lived; bhava – may you be;
anu-aham – always; īdṛk – like this; gopa-arbha – of a
cowherd boy; rūpaḥ – in the form; ca – also; tat-phala –
for receiving that mantra’s fruit; āpti – for the
fortune; arha – worthy; mānasaḥ – having a mind.

“May you live long by the power of chanting this mantra.
May you always remain in this form of a cowherd boy. May
your mind become fit to experience the result of
chanting the mantra, or in other words, fit to directly
see Śrī Madana-gopāla-deva and experience all His
playful pastimes.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might say, “From your
words (beginning with yad yat, verse 189) one can infer
that mantra-japa (chanting to oneself) can fulfill all
desires. However, japa and other means to achieve
desires become perfected only after a long time. Then
what is so special about the power of japa to perfect or
obtain those desires in this very lifetime? Moreover,
what is the guarantee that the embodied soul will live
long enough to do so?”

Gopa-kumāra’s guru wants to remove all such doubts.
Therefore, to confer a blessing on Gopa-kumāra, he
speaks this verse beginning with tvam. He says, “By this
mantra’s potency you will have a long lifespan. However,
you may have a doubt that, due to old age and other
bodily transformations, you may not be able to
experience the complete happiness of perfection
(siddhi).” Blessing Gopa-kumāra, Śrī Gurudeva says,
“Therefore, always remain in this form of a cowherd boy.
May you continue in this same youthful, beautiful form
without aging. My second blessing is that your body of a
cowherd boy will not be limited by time, like the
lifespans of the residents of Brahmaloka (Satyaloka),
whose lives are measured in terms of kalpas (days of
Brahmā). Rather, your present form will always remain
intact. With the same form you will be able to enter
Vaikuṇṭha and the other spiritual abodes as well. [This
will be described later.] Factually, this form of a
cowherd boy is unchangeable; being born in Vraja, it is
transcendental.”

Śrī Gopa-kumāra might worry, “By pursuing various
ambitions (saṅkalpas), I will obtain wonderful varieties
of sense enjoyment that will distract my mind. Where,
then, is the chance to be happy?”

To dispel this doubt, Śrī Gurudeva says, “By the power
of japa, everything is possible. Your mind will become
suitably fit, and thus you will become qualified to
receive the fruit of directly meeting Śrī Madana-gopāla-
deva and joining His playful pastimes, a result that is
beyond the power of words to describe. The contaminated
desires (anarthas) that are unfavorable for attaining

                          142
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

the ideal result will never arise in your heart.
Furthermore, by my blessings, even upon attaining the
position of an emperor or of Indra, you will remain
unaware of the existence of planets such as Svargaloka
or Maharloka. This benediction is only to have you to
successively achieve happiness that is superior to that
which you previously experienced, and thus gradually
make you eager to achieve the topmost happiness.”

The words of Śrī Nārada in Chapter Five will clarify
this.



Verse 192

māṁ drakṣyasi kadāpy atra vṛndāraṇye kadācana

evaṁ sa mām anujñāpya kutrāpi sahasāgamat

mām – me; drakṣyasi – you shall see; kadāpi – sometimes;
atra – here; vṛndā-araṇye – in the forest of Vṛndā;
kadācana – sometimes; evam – thus; saḥ – he; mām – me;
anujñāpya – instructed; kutrāpi – elsewhere; sahasā –
suddenly; agamat – he departed.

“Sometimes you will see me here, and sometimes in Śrī
Vṛndāvana.” In this way, Śrī Gurudeva instructed me and
then suddenly went elsewhere.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might raise the
question, “Previously, you did not instruct me on the
method for chanting the mantra. Is it appropriate for me
to receive those instructions now?”

Śrī Gurudeva replies, “If time and place are unsuitable
for giving instructions about mantra, those instructions
are not given. However, from now on, you will see me
sometimes here and other times in Vṛndāvana. When the
time and place are right, you will receive further
instructions on this topic.” Gurudeva’s words indicate
that if time and place are unsuitable, there will be a
delay in achieving the result.

Gopa-kumāra says, “Speaking like this, Śrī Gurudeva
suddenly left. Where he went, I cannot say with
certainty.”



Verse 193

tad-viyogena dīnaḥ san śrī-jagannātham īkṣitum

gataḥ śāntim ahaṁ prāpto yatnaṁ cākaravaṁ jape

tat – from Him; viyogena – pain of separation; dīnaḥ –
dejected; san – being; śrī-jagannātham – Śrī Jagannātha;
īkṣitum – to see; gataḥ – I went; śāntim – peaceful;
aham – I; prāptaḥ – became; yatnam – with endeavor; ca –
and; akaravam – I engaged; jape – in contemplative
chanting.

Feeling the pain of separation from Śrī Gurudeva, I

                          143
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

became very distraught and entered the temple to see Śrī
Jagannātha-deva. I then became peaceful and began to
diligently absorb myself in chanting the mantra.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Aggrieved by
Śrī Gurudeva’s absence, I entered Śrī Jagannātha-deva’s
temple. Other than by taking shelter of Śrī Jagannātha-
deva, there was no other means of pacifying the distress
of this wretched soul.” These words imply that except
for darśana of Bhagavān, there is no other means to
remove distress and to experience happiness.



Verses 194–195

yadāsyā darśanotkaṇṭhā vraja-bhūmer abhūt-tarām

tadā tu śrī-jagannātha-mahimnā sphurati sma me

tat-kṣetropavana-śreṇī-vṛndāraṇyatayārṇavaḥ

yamunātvena nīlādri-bhāgo govardhanātmanā

yadā – when; asyāḥ – of that; darśana – for the sight;
utkaṇṭhā – eagerness; vraja-bhūmeḥ – land of Vraja;
abhūt – there was; tarām – a great; tadā – then; tu –
indeed; śrī-jagannātha – of Śrī Jagannātha; mahimnā – by
the glory; sphurati sma – there was a vision; me – to
me; tat-kṣetra – of that land (of Jagannātha); upavana –
gardens; śreṇi – the various; vṛndāraṇyatayā – as the
forests of Vṛndāvana; arṇavaḥ – ocean; yamunātvena – as
Yamunā; nīlādri – of Nīlādri; bhāgaḥ – the area;
govardhana-ātmanā – as the embodiment of Govardhana.

Whenever I felt a great eagerness to see the land of
Vraja, then by Śrī Jagannātha’s glorious grace, the
gardens of Jagannātha-purī would appear to my vision as
Vṛndāvana, the ocean as Śrī Yamunā, and the slopes of
Nīlādri (Caṭaka-parvata and other places) as those of
Govardhana.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Now, narrating the benefit of chanting
the mantra, Śrī Gopa-kumāra first describes the
extraordinary mercy of Śrī Jagannātha-deva in two
verses, beginning here with yadāsyā. He says, “Whenever
I developed intense eagerness to see Vraja-bhūmi, then,
due to the divine excellence of Śrī Jagannātha-deva, the
sight of the gardens in the sacred abode of Śrī
Jagannātha Purī inspired memories of Śrī Vṛndāvana. That
is, the gardens appeared as Vṛndāvana to me.”

The brāhmaṇa might ask, “What forms did the different
places take?”

In response, Gopa-kumāra speaks the verse beginning with
tat. He says, “By Śrī Jagannātha-deva’s mercy, the
groves and gardens of His holy abode of Śrī Kṣetra
appeared like Vṛndāvana; the salt ocean appeared like
the Yamunā River; and a portion of Nilādri Mountain –

namely Caṭaka-parvata, the big sand dune located west of
Śrī Jagannātha-deva’s mandira – appeared like Govardhana
Hill. In this way, my grief from not seeing the land of

                          144
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

Vraja would vanish. That sadness could not hinder my
happiness.”



Verse 196

evaṁ vasan sukhaṁ tatra bhagavad-darśanād anu

guru-pādājñayā nityaṁ japāmi sveṣṭa-siddhaye

evam – thus; vasan – living; sukham – happily; tatra –
there; bhagavat-darśanāt anu – after seeing Śrī
Jagannātha-deva; guru-pāda – of my spiritual guide;
ājñayā – by the order; nityam – regularly; japāmi – I
would chant; sva-iṣṭa – of my dearmost desire; siddhaye
– to attain perfection.

In this manner, I started to live happily in
Puruṣottama-kṣetra. And in accordance with Śrī
Gurudeva’s order, every day, after darśana of Śrī
Jagannātha-deva, I chanted my mantra to achieve my
desired perfection.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “In this way, I
continued to reside in Puruṣottama-kṣetra with great
joy. First, I would take

darśana of Śrī Bhagavān and then return to my residence
and chant my mantra. What I desired most was service to
Śrī Jagannātha-deva. Therefore, to accomplish this goal,
I chanted my mantra with saṅkalpa, a vow that affirmed
my ambition. Specifically with the understanding that
Śrī Gurudeva’s instruction was especially powerful for
obtaining my desired perfection, I chanted the mantra
every day.”

This statement indicates that even though Gopa-kumāra
did not have firm faith in Śrī Jagannātha-deva’s
darśana, still, he was free from fault. Moreover, his
deep devotion to his gurudeva, or guru-bhakti, reveals
his faith in his goal of chanting the mantra.



Verse 197

atha tasmin mahārāje kālaṁ prāpte ’sya sūnunā

jyeṣṭhenātiviraktena rājyam aṅgī-kṛtaṁ na tat

atha – then; tasmin mahā-rāje – when that great king;
kālam – his time of passing from the body; prāpte –
attained; asya – his; sūnunā – son; jyeṣṭhena – the
eldest; ati-viraktena – because of great detach-ment;
rājyam – kingdom; aṅgī-kṛtam – accepted; na – not; tat –
that.

Shortly thereafter, the king of Purī passed away. His
eldest son, being very detached from worldly affairs,
did not accept the kingdom.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Now, in five verses, Śrī Gopa-kumāra
describes the events leading up to the imminent

                          145
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

accomplishment of his desired goal. The first two verses
describe how he obtained the royal empire. He says, “The
king of that region soon died, and his eldest son, being
totally disinterested in material life, refused to
accede the throne.” Here, the word ati, meaning
‘greatly,’ indicates the prince was greatly detached
from all devotional services other than taking darśana
of Śrī Jagannātha-deva’s lotus face.



Verse 198

tatrābhiṣiktaḥ pṛṣṭasyānujñayā jagad-īśituḥ

samparīkṣya mahā-rāja-cihnāni sacivair aham

tatra – there; abhiṣiktaḥ – became sanctified by royal
bathing; pṛṣṭasya – being questioned; anujñayā – by the
order; jagat-īśituḥ – of Śrī Jagannātha-deva;
samparīkṣya – examining; mahā-rāja – of a great king;
cihnāni – the signs; sacivaiḥ – by the ministers; aham –
I.

The ministers of the kingdom then prayed to Śrī
Jagannātha-deva, “Who should be crowned as the next
king?” Hearing their prayer, Śrī Jagannātha-deva
instructed them in a dream that only the person whose
body bears signs of royalty should be installed on the
throne. Thereafter, the ministers, observing marks of
royalty on my person, anointed me as their king.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Why did the
ministers award me the royal crown? They scrutinized my
body for all the marks of a sovereign emperor.
Discovering these signs on me, they installed me on the
throne.”

The Mathurā brāhmaṇa might object, “It is impossible for
such a thing to happen to a foreigner, especially one
who is destitute.”

Gopa-kumāra replies, “The royal ministers, after
deliberating among themselves, concluded that since the
deceased king’s eldest son was always absorbed in seeing
Śrī Jagannātha-deva’s beautiful face and was completely
detached from material life, he would be unwilling to
accept imperial responsibilities. Furthermore, as long
as the eldest prince lived, the younger princes did not
have the right to inherit the kingdom. The king’s other
relatives also did not bear royal signs on their bodies.
The fact is, a kingless empire on this earth cannot
function even for a moment. In this way, after
consulting one another, the ministers prayed to Śrī
Jagannātha-deva, ‘Whom shall we now install as the
king?’

“Then Śrī Jagannātha-deva instructed them in dream,
saying, ‘My devotee Gopa-kumāra, who has come from
Govardhana, is living here as a pauper. He alone is fit
to become the king, and therefore you should establish
him on the royal throne.” Alternatively, the Lord’s
instruction may be read to say, “If any person is found
bearing signs of royalty on his body, he should be made

                          146
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

king.” Gopa-kumāra continues, “Following this order of
Śrī Jagannātha-deva, the ministers, seeing all the
appropriate royal marks on my body, coronated me king.”

Alternatively, it may be said, “Wanting to counteract
the back-biting and wicked natures of the young princes
and the deceased king’s relatives, the ministers
executed the command of Bhagavān Śrī Jagannātha-deva,
who is the crest jewel of all clever personalities and
the compassionate friend of the poor. Therefore, when
they noticed all the royal signs on my body, they
anointed me king.”

The physical signs of a king are described in the Ninth
Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (9.20.24) in relation to
Śakuntalā’s son Bharata, who was the sovereign emperor.
“Cakram dakṣiṇa-haste ’sya padma-koso ’sya pādayoḥ – his
right hand bore the mark of a discus and his two feet
bore the marks of a lotus whorl.”



Verse 199

vividhā vardhitās tasya mayā pūjā-mahotsavāḥ

viśeṣato mahā-yātrā dvādaśātrāpi guṇḍicā

vividhāḥ – variegated; vardhitāḥ – increased; tasya – of
Him; mayā – by me; pūjāḥ – the practices of worship;
mahā-utsavāḥ – grand festivals; viśeṣataḥ – especially;
mahā-yātrā – the Ratha-yātrā; dvādaśa – twelve; atra –
there; api – especially; guṇḍicā – Guṇḍicā.

After becoming king, I improved the standard of Śrī
Jagannātha-deva’s various festivals. Year round, twelve
grand monthly festivals such as dolā-yātrā are
celebrated. Among those, I especially expanded the great
festival known as Guṇḍicā Mahā-yātrā (Ratha-yātrā) to a
much greater extent.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: In verses 198 and 199, Śrī Gopa-kumāra
describes the result of obtaining the kingdom. He says,
“After accepting the role of king, I expanded the level
of Śrī Jagannātha-deva’s service and worship in all the
major annual festivals, especially the twelve great
monthly festivals, such as those in the month of
Phālguna. These included the Dola Festival (Swing
Festival), the festival of damanaka flowers, bathing
Lord Jagannātha in fragrant sandalwood water for
Candana-yātrā, the ceremonial bathing festival during
Rāma-navamī, Ratha-yātrā (Festival of the Chariots),
Herā-pañcamī, Śayana-ekādaśī, Pārśva-ekādaśī,
Janmāṣṭamī, Vāmana-

dvādaśī, Laṅkā-yātrā, Utthāna-ekādaśī, Oḍana-ṣaṣṭhī,
Puṣyā (Pauṣa), Makara-saṅkrānti, Vasanta-pañcamī, as
well as other great festivals.”

Gopa-kumāra says, “I made all these great festivals even
more attractive so that people from the entire world
would come to Puruṣottama-kṣetra (Śrī Jagannātha Purī).
Among all of these festivals, I made the grand Guṇḍicā
festival (Ratha-yātrā) especially opulent.”

                          147
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017


Guṇḍicā-yātrā, or Festival of Guṇḍicā, celebrates the
time when Śrī Jagannātha-deva ascends His chariot with
Śrī Balarāma and Śrī Subhadrā and travels to His home in
the abode of Śrī Guṇḍicā. Here the term vardhitā means
that among all the festivals, Gopa-kumāra made this the
paramount one, making it more opulent and attractive
than ever before.



Verse 200

pṛthivyāḥ sādhavaḥ sarve militā yatra vargaśaḥ

premṇonmattā ivekṣyante nṛtya-gītādi-tatparāḥ

pṛthivyāḥ – of the world; sādhavaḥ – saintly persons;
sarve – all; militāḥ – assembling; yatra – whereupon;
vargaśaḥ – in groups; premṇā – out of divine love;
unmattāḥ – extremely intoxicated; iva – as if; īkṣyante
– were seen; nṛtya – in dancing; gīta – singing; ādi –
and so forth; tat-parāḥ – absorbed in that (love).

At the time of that festival (Guṇḍicā-yātrā), almost all
the saintly persons and Vaiṣṇavas from all over the
world assembled in Puruṣottama-kṣetra. According to
rules of their own spiritual lineage, they danced and
sang in front of the Lord, either in groups or
individually. They could then be seen becoming maddened
in divine love.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The brāhmaṇa might ask, “How was this
festival celebrated?” In response, Śrī Gopa-kumāra
speaks the verse beginning with pṛthivyāḥ. He says, “For
this grand Guṇḍicā Mahā-yātrā, saintly persons and
Vaiṣṇavas of all spiritual lineages, or sampradāyas,
converged on Puruṣottama-kṣetra. Some stayed alone and
others stayed in groups, according to the principles of
each individual lineage. During the festival all of them
danced and sang in front of the Lord and became fully
submerged in ecstasy, reaching the state of divine
madness. The assembled pilgrims were immensely fortunate
to witness all this.”




Verse 201


rājyaṁ rājopabhogyaṁ ca jagannātha-padābjayoḥ

samārpyākiñcanatvena sevāṁ kurve nijecchayā

rājyam – kingdom; rāja – royal; upabhogyam – opulences;
ca – and; jagannātha – of Śrī Jagannātha; pada-abjayoḥ –
at the lotus feet; samārpya – offering; akiñcanatvena –
because of having no material possessions; sevām –
service; kurve – I rendered; nija-icchayā – by my own
desire.

I offered the kingdom and all royal opulences at Śrī

                          148
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

Jagannātha-deva’s lotus feet. Now being without material
possessions, I began to serve Him as I desired.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The brāhmaṇa might be thinking,
“Despite his contact with the sense objects of his vast
kingdom, how was Gopa-kumāra able to continue serving
his worshipable Deity Śrī Jagannātha?”

To address this doubt, Śrī Gopa-kumāra speaks this verse
beginning with rājyam. He says, “Offering the kingdom
and all objects of sense enjoyment at Śrī Jagannātha-
deva’s lotus feet, I began to serve Him as if I were in
a destitute condition, as before. As I had previously
behaved, I began to humbly serve the Lord like one
without possessions. I relinquished false pride and the
prestige connected with the kingdom, and whenever I had
the desire to serve the Lord, I did so as I wished.”
This statement proves that Gopa-kumāra ruled the kingdom
and was superintendent of all the Lord’s servitors.



Verse 202

nijaiḥ priyatamair nitya-sevakaiḥ saha sa prabhuḥ

narma-goṣṭhīṁ vitanute prema-krīḍāṁ ca karhicit

nijaiḥ – His own; priyatamaiḥ – most beloved; nitya-
sevakaiḥ – regular servitors; saha – with; saḥ – He;
prabhuḥ – the Lord; narma – joking; goṣṭhīm – words;
vitanute – would engage; prema – loving; krīḍām –
pastimes; ca – and; karhicit – sometimes.

Śrī Jagannātha-deva would sometimes engage in jolly
talks – smiling and joking – with His beloved regular
servitors and would perform various loving pastimes with
them.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Now, Śrī Gopa-kumāra explains how, by
the Lord’s desire, he developed indifference to residing
in Puruṣottama-kṣetra, and how he abandoned the kingdom
to go to Śrī Vṛndāvana to obtain Śrī Jagannātha-deva’s
special mercy.

He says, “The Lord would shower mercy on His beloved
servitors. That is, with His beloved, permanent
servitors – all indigenous residents of Utkala – He
would smile, joke, and perform loving pastimes. However,
since the Lord did not show that same favor to me, I
became unhappy and indifferent.”

In the next four verses, beginning here with nijaiḥ, he
reveals the cause of his mental distress. Here, the term
‘beloved, permanent servitors’ refers to those servants
of the Lord who had taken birth in a family lineage of
servants of Śrī Jagannātha-deva. Alternatively it can be
understood that since these servitors were constantly
engaged in the Lord’s loving service, they were His
permanent, beloved servants.



Verse 203

                          149
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


yadā vā līlayā sthāṇu-bhāvaṁ bhajati kautukī

prīṇanty athāpi sāścaryās te tal-līlānusāriṇaḥ

yadā – when; vā – or; līlayā – by His pastime; sthāṇu-
bhāvam – perfectly motionless; bhajati – He would
become; kautukī – being playful; prīṇanti– feeling love;
athāpi – then; sa-aścaryāḥ – astonished; te – they; tat-
līlā – of His pastimes; anusāriṇaḥ – following in the
mood.

Thus engaged in this loving play, the frolicsome Lord
would sometimes become perfectly motionless. His
servitors, becoming astonished at this wonder, would
follow in the mood of those pastimes and thus attain
supreme bliss.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Only sometimes
would the Lord perform His loving pastimes, not always.”
This is the purport of the word karhicit [from the
previous verse].

The brāhmaṇa might then ask, “If the Lord did not always
perform those loving pastimes, how can one understand
that His regular servants were supremely happy?”

To address this doubt, Gopa-kumāra says, “Although Śrī
Jagannātha-deva would be motionless and accept a mood of
silence, still the playful Lord would engage in various
jovial amusements with His beloved personal servants. In
other words, when the Lord, as a pastime, would
sometimes accept a silent mood or would become
motionless, even then with great wonder, His beloved
servants would follow in the moods of all those pastimes
and become immersed in paramount bliss. This is because,
in amazement, they would think, ‘Just now the Lord
exhibited the pastime of a restless child, which filled
our hearts with amazement, but now, here He has assumed
His stationary, silent disposition.’ ”

The brāhmaṇa might now wonder, “If this is the case, in
spite of losing their previous happiness, did the
distress of the Lord’s servants become mollified?”

Gopa-kumāra replies, “The devotees always follow the
Lord’s pastimes. Whatever pastimes the Lord performs,
the devotees recip-rocate with those same pastimes.
Therefore, they experience only great joy in their
hearts by the loving behavior of their Lord.”

Alternatively, it can be said, “How did the devotees act
in this situation?”

Gopa-kumāra answers, “The devotees acted in a manner
suitable to those pastimes. Whenever the Lord enacted
His static, silent pastime, the devotees acted in a
manner appropriate to that pastime.”



Verse 204

mamāpi tatra tatrāśā syād athāgantuko ’smy aham

                          150
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


tad-eka-niṣṭho nāpi syāṁ kathaṁ tat-tat-prasāda-bhāk

mama – of me; api – however; tatra tatra – occasionally;
āśā – the desire; syāt – may come; atha – then;
āgantukaḥ – a newcomer; asmi – I am; aham – I; tat – to
Him; eka-niṣṭhaḥ – exclusively devoted; na – not; api –
however; syām – I should be; katham – why?; tat-tat-
prasāda – of His variegated mercy; bhāk – a recipient.

Sometimes, I also would want to participate in those
pastimes of laughing and joking with the Lord, but I
would think, “Ah! I am just a newcomer, and besides, I
am not exclusively devoted to Him. How then can I become
the recipient of His special mercy?”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “I also yearned
sometimes to participate in similar amusing
conversations and pastimes of smiling and joking with
Śrī Jagannātha-deva. However, on reflection, I realized
it was inappropriate for an unfit person like me to have
such a desire. But because I was envious (īrṣā), I was
unable to control it. When I would think of the good
fortune of Śrī Jagannātha-deva’s beloved, permanent
servitors from Utkala, I would also develop a desire to
be like them.”

The brāhmaṇa might say, “Due to that desire you must
certainly have been experiencing distress in your
heart.”

To address this, Gopa-kumāra speaks seven verses,
beginning here with atha. He says, “As I had arrived
there only recently, I was not the Lord’s permanent
servitor. Moreover, I did not possess fixed devotion to
the Lord of Nīlācala because, in my heart, I was
extremely attached to the land of Vraja and Śrī
Vṛndāvana. So how could I receive the special mercy of
witnessing and participating in those indescribable
pastimes of joking words with the Lord of Nīlācala?”

Alternatively, Gopa-kumāra is also saying, “Witnessing
the great fortune of Śrī Jagannātha-deva’s beloved
devotees, I felt sad because I was not blessed in the
same way.”



Verse 205

tathāpy utkala-bhaktānāṁ tat-tat-saubhāgya-bhāvanaiḥ

sañjanyamānayā tat-tad-āśayādhiḥ kilodbhavet

tathāpi – still; utkala – of Orissa; bhaktānām – of the
devotees; tat-tat-saubhāgya – of their varied good
fortune; bhāvanaiḥ – on account of my thoughts;
sañjanyamānayā – manifesting; tat-tat-āśayā – desire for
those various good fortunes; ādhīḥ – distress; kila –
indeed; udbhavet – would arise.

When I thought about the good fortune of the Utkala
devotees, in my heart, I hankered to also receive it.
However, this desire also caused distress to my mind.

                          151
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “However, as
soon as I thought about the Utkala devotees’ good
fortune in being able to joke with Śrī Jagannātha-deva,
I would also develop a desire for similar special
mercy.”



Verse 206

nāma-saṅkīrtana-stotra-gītāni bhagavat-puraḥ

śrūyamāṇāni dunvanti mathurā-smārakāṇi mām

nāma-saṅkīrtana – loud chanting of the holy names;
stotra – recita-tion of prayers; gītāni – devotional
songs; bhagavat-puraḥ – before the Lord; śrūyamāṇāni –
while hearing; dunvanti – these would disturb; mathurā-
smārakāṇi – causing of remembering Vraja-bhūmi; mām –
me.

Whenever I heard nāma-saṅkīrtana, recitation of stotras
and devotional songs performed before Bhagavān Śrī
Jagannātha-deva, memories of Mathurā would flood my
mind, making me restless with yearning.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra continues, “Nāma-
saṅkīrtana, or congregational chanting of the holy names
of the Lord, comprised of names such as Śrī Mathurā-
nātha, Śrī Vṛndāvana-candra, and Śrī Govardhana-dhārī,
would be sung before Śrī Jagannātha-deva. There was also
recitation of prayers composed by ancient as well as
contemporary poets, and the singing of devotional
narrations and songs melodiously accompanied by
appropriate rhythm. Hearing these, I would remember
Mathurā, and my eagerness to go there would grow, and
then I would lose my composure and become agitated.
Thus, grieving in separation from Mathurā, my mind would
fill with pain.”



Verse 207

sādhu-saṅga-balād gatvā dṛṣṭe rājīva-locane

sarvaḥ śoko vilīyeta na syāj jigamiṣā kvacit

sādhu – of the devotees; saṅga – of the association;
balāt – by the power; gatvā – having gone; dṛṣṭe – was
seen; rājīva-locane – when the lotus-eyed Lord; sarvaḥ –
all; śokaḥ – my grief; vilīyeta – would vanish; na –
not; syāt – is; jigamiṣā – desire to go; kvacit – at
all.

However, by the influence of saintly association and by
seeing lotus-eyed Śrī Jagannātha, all my grief and
desire to go anywhere else would vanish.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra continues, “Due to the
mercy of the sādhus, all my anguish would dissipate when
I had darśana of Śrī Jagannātha-deva, who is the
embodiment of all types of bliss. Nevertheless, I was

                          152
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

still responsible for the kingdom, and therefore, the
happiness I experienced upon seeing Śrī Jagannātha would
not be complete, as it was before. However, by the
influence of saintly association (sādhu-saṅga), all my
distress would abate and simultaneously, my desire to go
elsewhere would also diminish.”



Verse 208

tathāpi mama sāmrājya-samparkeṇa hṛdi svataḥ

bhagavad-darśanānandaḥ samyaṅ nodeti pūrva-vat

tathāpi – however; mama – my; sāmrājya – with affairs of
the kingdom; samparkeṇa – due to connection; hṛdi – in
my heart; svataḥ – spontaneous; bhagavat-darśana – at
the sight of the Lord; ānandaḥ – joy; samyak – complete;
na – not; udeti – would arise; pūrva-vat – as in the
past.

However, due to my connection with the affairs of the
kingdom, in my heart, I would not experience the
complete joy of darśana of Bhagavān that I used to
experience naturally in the past.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “My grief would
diminish by the influence of sādhu-saṅga and the divine
vision of Śrī Jagannātha-deva, and I did not desire to
go elsewhere. But still, because of my imperial
responsibilities, the intensity of pleasure from Śrī
Jagannātha-deva’s darśana would not naturally and
spontaneously manifest in my heart, as it did before.
Only sometimes, by the influence of saintly association,
would I experience that same bliss when I saw the Lord.
As I had offered the kingdom and everything to Śrī
Jagannātha-deva’s lotus feet, I had only a nominal
relationship with the kingdom.” For this reason, the
word samparka, meaning ‘contact,’ has been used.



Verse 209

yātrā-mahotsavāṁś cāham āvṛto rāja-maṇḍalaiḥ

sukhaṁ kalayituṁ neśe svecchayā bahudhā bhajan

yātrā – at the Ratha-yātrā; maha-utsavān – and great
festivals; ca – also; aham – I; āvṛtaḥ – surrounded;
rāja-maṇḍalaiḥ – by royal entourage; sukham – happiness;
kalayitum – to engage; na iśe – I was not able; sva-
icchayā – as I pleased; bahudhā – in many ways; bhajan –
while practising devotional activities.

Always surrounded by royal entourage and unable to do as
I pleased, I could not fully enjoy the yātrās and other
such grand festivals. Moreover, in spite of engaging in
devotional service in so many ways, I did not experience
complete happiness.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra elaborates, “I began
to serve Śrī Jagannātha-deva in various ways, according

                          153
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

to my desire. I would offer many services, from sweeping
the path in front of His chariot up to washing His lotus
face and offering Him tāmbūla and so on. In spite of
serving and worshiping Him in a variety of ways, I did
not experience the joy I experienced before.”



Verse 210

rājño ’patyeṣv amātyeṣu bandhuṣv api samarpya tam

rājya-bhāraṁ svayaṁ prāgvad udāsīnatayā sthitaḥ

rājñaḥ – of the king; apatyeṣu – on the sons; amātyeṣu –
on the ministers; bandhuṣu – on the relatives; api –
also; samarpya – reposing; tam – that; rājya – of the
kingdom; bhāram – burden; svayam – voluntarily; prāk-vat
– as before; udāsīnatayā – because of my state of
detachment; sthitaḥ – situated.

So, I placed the burden of the kingdom on the sons,
relatives, and ministers of the previous king, and I
became as uninvolved and indifferent as before.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “I thought,
‘Therefore, it is appropriate to completely renounce all
responsibilities of the kingdom.’ Arriving at this
conclusion, I surrendered all imperial duties to the
king’s sons, relatives, and ministers and became as
detached as before. In other words, I freed myself from
all relationships and began to live in a humble mood.”



Verse 211

sukhaṁ raho japaṁ kurvan jagannātha-padābjayoḥ

samīpe svecchayā sevām ācarann avasaṁ tataḥ

sukham – happily; rahaḥ – in a solitary place; japam –
chanting; kurvan – doing; jagannātha – of Śrī
Jagannātha; pada-abjayoḥ – the lotus feet; samīpe –
near; sva-icchayā – by my own desire; sevām – service;
ācaran – performing; avasam – I resided; tataḥ – then.

Because I was chanting my mantra in a solitary place, my
mind remained peaceful, and I began to live there,
serving Śrī Jagannātha’s lotus feet as I desired.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “From then
onwards, I began chanting in solitude, as I had
previously contemplated doing.” Elaborating on this, he
says, “After relinquishing the burden of running the
kingdom, I began to live in a detached manner, as
before. Moreover, the result of chanting my mantra in a
solitary place was that, mentally, I began to become
peaceful.” This indicates that previously, due to Gopa-
kumāra’s connection with the affairs of the kingdom, he
was unable to happily accomplish his chanting in a
solitary place.



                          154
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


Verse 212

tathāpi loka-sammānādaratas tādṛśaṁ sukham

na labheya vinirviṇṇa-manās tatrābhavaṁ sthitau

tathāpi – still; loka – of the people; sammāna – honor;
ādarataḥ – because of respect; tādṛśam – such; sukham –
happiness; na labheya – I could not get; vinirviṇṇa-
manāḥ – extremely morose at heart; tatra – there;
abhavam – I became; sthitau – while staying.

However, because the citizens continued to respect and
honor me, I did not feel the happiness I felt before,
and therefore I began to feel indifferent to living
there.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Although I
began residing there, engaging in devotional service as
I liked, the indescribable happiness I had previously
experienced was gone. Although I refused to accept
people’s honor and worship, they still continued to
revere me, and for this reason, I could not feel the
same happiness as before. This is why I lost interest in
staying in Puruṣottama-kṣetra, and in my mind there
arose a strong urge to go to Śrī Vṛndāvana.”



Verse 213

gantuṁ vṛndāvanaṁ prātar ājñārthaṁ purataḥ prabhoḥ

gataḥ śrīman-mukhaṁ paśyan sarvaṁ tad vismarāmy aho

gantum – to go; vṛndāvanam – to Vṛndāvana; prātaḥ –
early in the morning; ājñā – take permission; artham –
intending to; purataḥ – before; prabhoḥ – the Lord;
gataḥ – gone; śrīmat-mukham – His lotus face; paśyan –
seeing; sarvam – all; tat – that; vismarāmi – I forget;
aho – oh.

Early one morning, I came before Śrī Jagannātha-deva,
intending to take His permission to go to Śrī Vṛndāvana.
Ah! As soon as I saw His lotus face, I forgot
everything.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The brāhmaṇa might ask, “If this was
the state of your heart, why did you not go to your
cherished Śrī Mathurā in the land of Vraja, which is so
charming it steals the mind?”

In reply, Śrī Gopa-kumāra speaks this verse beginning
with gantum. He says with amazement, “I thought, ‘Aho! I
renounced the land of Vraja simply to receive darśana of
this Lord of the universe. Now that I have obtained Him
in person, how can I abandon Him? If He showers special
grace by taking me to Śrī Vṛndāvana, His most beloved
place of pastimes, then the distress that my heart is
feeling because of living in Jagannātha Purī will
vanish. However, without His direct order, it is
improper to go anywhere.’ Pondering my thoughts in this
way, I would visit Śrī Jagannātha-deva. However, on

                          155
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

seeing His lotus face, I would immediately forget all my
mental agony as well as my intention to beg His
permission to go elsewhere. So how was it even possible
for me to go to the land of Vraja?”



Verse 214

evaṁ saṁvatsare jāte mayā tatraikadā śrutam

mathurāyāḥ prāyātebhyo ’tratya-vṛttaṁ viśeṣataḥ

evam – thus; saṁvatsare – one year; jāte – went by; mayā
– by me; tatra – there; ekadā – one day; śrutam – I
heard; mathurāyāḥ – from Mathurā; prāyātebhyaḥ – from
some pilgrims; atratya – from this place; vṛttam – an
account; viśeṣataḥ – in detail.

In this way, one year went by. Then, one day, I heard
news of Mathurā from some people who had come from
there.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “In this way,
when one year had passed, some people hailing from other
regions arrived in Śrī Puruṣottama-kṣetra after visiting
Mathurā, and I heard a detailed account of Śrī Mathurā
from them. Especially, I listened to descriptions of the
abundant beauty of the pastime places such as Śrī
Vṛndāvana and Govardhana, and the cows, cowherders
(gopas), deer, birds, and trees there.”



Verse 215

śoka-duḥkhāturaṁ rātrau śayānaṁ māṁ mahā-prabhuḥ

idam ājñāpayām āsa para-duḥkhena kātaraḥ

śoka – of grief; duḥkha – by distress; āturam –
tormented; rātrau – at night; śayānam – fell asleep; mām
– me; mahā-prabhuḥ – Śrī Jagannātha-deva; idam – this;
ājñāpayām āsa – gave an order; para – of others;
duḥkhena – by my suffering; kātaraḥ – pained.

After hearing those descriptions, I was tormented by
distress and grief, and fell asleep that night. As I was
sleeping, Śrī Jagannātha-deva, who is pained by the
suffering of others, gave me the following order.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “After hearing
those narrations, I was tormented at heart by sorrow and
anguish, and so I went to sleep. In a dream, Śrī
Jagannātha-deva, who is pained by the distress of
others, commanded me as follows.”

The order begins in this verse with the word idam and
continues through the next three verses. Here, para-
duḥkha kātara means “He who is anguished and compelled
by the distress of others, even of His enemies.” In
other words, the Lord cannot tolerate anyone’s distress.



                          156
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


Verse 216

bho gopa-nandana kṣetram idaṁ mama yathā priyam

tathā śrī-mathurāthāsau janma-bhūmir viśeṣataḥ

bhoḥ gopa-nandana – O son of a cowherd; kṣetram – holy
abode; idam – this; mama – My; yathā – just as; priyam –
dear; tathā – similarly; śrī-mathurā – Śrī Mathurā; atha
– so; asau – that; janma-bhūmiḥ – birthplace; viśeṣataḥ
– especially.

“O Gopa-nandana, O cowherd boy, just as this holy abode
is dear to Me, so is Śrī Mathurā. But since Śrī Mathurā
is My birthplace, it is even more dear to me.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Jagannātha-deva speaks two verses,
begin-ning here with bho gopa-nandana, with the
intention of, first, dispelling any misconception that
it is wrong to leave Śrī Puruṣottama-kṣetra to go to Śrī
Vṛndāvana, and, second, of affirming that He finds it
more pleasing to reside in Vraja-bhūmi than in Śrī
Puruṣottama-kṣetra. The purport of the Lord’s using the
address, ‘bho gopa-nandana –

O cowherd boy’ is: “Since you are the son of a
cowherder, it is more appropriate for you to reside in
Vraja.” Here, the word idam indicates Śrī Puruṣottama-
dhāma, the word atha means ‘rather,’ and the word asau
refers to Mathurā. The word viśeṣataḥ signifies:
“Mathurā is far superior or extraordinary.” Or, “Mathurā
is dear to Me because it is My birthplace.”



Verse 217

bālya-līlā-sthalībhiś ca tābhis tābhir alaṅkṛtā

nivasāmi yathātrāhaṁ tathā tatrāpi vibhraman

bālya – childhood; līlā-sthalībhiḥ – with My pastimes
places; ca – also; tābhiḥ tābhiḥ – with various;
alaṅkṛtā – adorned; nivasāmi – I reside; yathā – as;
atra – here; aham – I; tathā – so; tatra api – still;
vibhraman – wandering.

“Mathurā is adorned with the places of My childhood
pastimes. Just as I reside here, I also reside there.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Jagannātha-deva continues, “That
Mathurā-maṇḍala is totally indescribable because it is
beautified by My childhood pastimes (bālya-līlā). Since
Mathurā is the abode of those pastimes, it is also
famous as being most dear to Me.” Here, the term bālya-
līlā implies that this time period includes the pastimes
performed by the Lord during the stages prior to youth:
kaumāra, infancy; paugaṇḍa, childhood; and kaiśora,
puberty. The following is an example that describes the
stages of life:

janma bālyaṁ tataḥ sarvo jantuḥ prāpnoti yauvanam


                          157
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

avyāhataiva bhavati tato ’nu-divasaṁ jarā

After birth, all living beings experience childhood and
then youth. When youth elapses, old age gradually
arrives.

This statement affirms that the three main stages of
life are childhood, youth, and old age.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra might say to Śrī Jagannātha-deva, “Since
You are present here in manifest form, You are not seen
there (Mathurā-maṇḍala) in a manifest form.”

The Lord replies, “Just as I reside here (in Jagannātha
Purī), absorbed in pastimes, similarly, I also reside
there, engaged in My pastimes.” The word vibhramaṇa
denotes vihāra, sportive enjoyment, or roaming about in
a special way. This also reveals, as previously
mentioned, the uniqueness of the Lord’s residing in
Vraja.



Verse 218

sadā dolāyamānātmā kathaṁ tad anutapyase

tatraiva gaccha kāle māṁ tad-rūpaṁ drakṣyasi dhruvam

sadā – always; dolāyamāna – flickering; ātmā –   mind;
katham – why?; tat – that; anutapyase – do you   suffer?;
tatra – there; eva – indeed; gaccha – just go;   kāle – in
time; mām – Me; tat-rūpam – My form; drakṣyasi   – you
will see; dhruvam – surely.

“Why are you always lamenting and your mind always
wavering? Go to Mathurā, and when the time is right, you
will surely see My form as a cowherd boy.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The Lord says, “Why do you always
cause yourself grief by vacillating between, ‘Shall I
stay here, or shall I go to Vṛndāvana?’ Why are you
lamenting, confusing your mind with this doubt and
indecision? Why do you constantly blame your fate? You
should just go to Mathurā.”

Śrī Gopa-kumāra might raise the concern, “Here, I am
able to directly see You, which will not be possible
there.”

To allay this doubt, the Lord says, “When the time
comes, you will definitely be able to see Me there (in
Mathurā-maṇḍala), also.” Alternatively it means, “I am
always present there; I reside there eternally. In which
form do I reside? In My natural form (svarūpa) of Śrī
Madana-gopāla-deva.” This reveals that this form Śrī
Madana-gopāla is even more special than the form of Śrī
Jagannātha-deva. “When the suitable time comes,” says
the Lord, “you will certainly see Me there in the form
of Śrī Madana-gopāla. Therefore, why are you overcome
with distress and why do you consider yourself
inadequate? O My dearest, never give in to lamentation.”
This is the purport of the Lord’s speech.


                          158
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017



Verse 219

ājñā-mālāṁ prātar ādāya pūjā-

viprair vāse me samāgatya dattām

kaṇṭhe baddhvā prasthito vīkṣya cakraṁ

natvāthāpto māthuraṁ deśam etam

ājñā – indicating the order; mālām – a garland; prātaḥ –
in the morning; ādāya – bringing; pūjā-vipraiḥ – by the
inspired brāhmaṇa who worships the Lord; vāse – at my
residence; me – me; samāgatya – coming; dattām – given;
kaṇṭhe – around my neck; baddhvā – placing it;
prasthitaḥ – having set out; vīkṣya – gazing; cakram –
disk; natvā – bowing; atha – then; āptaḥ – came;
māthuram – Mathurā; deśam – land; etam – this.

The next morning, Śrī Jagannātha-deva’s pujārī came to
my residence and gave me the Lord’s flower garland,
which indicated the Lord’s order to go to Mathurā.
Wearing that garland around my neck, I took darśana of
Sudarśana cakra on top of the Lord’s temple. Prostrating
before it, I departed from Śrī Puruṣottama-kṣetra and
came to Mathurā.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The Mathurā brāhmaṇa might object,
“Dreams can be false, so why did you leave Puruṣottama-
kṣetra and come to Mathurā relying on a questionable
order received in a dream?”

Śrī Gopa-kumāra replies, “I was given the order to go to
Mathurā. Wearing the garland of flowers that symbolized
this command, I proceeded towards Mathurā.”

“How did you receive that ‘garland of command’ (ajñā-
mālā)?”

“I obtained it from the brāhmaṇa pujārī (priest) who
regularly worships Śrī Jagannātha-deva. Śrī Jagannātha-
deva instructed that brāhmaṇa, His permanent servitor,
and He Himself sent me that garland, to confirm His
permission.

“Factually, many brāhmaṇas invent unlimited ways to
serve and worship the Deities of Śrī Bhagavān. For this
reason, corresponding to those ways of worship, Śrī
Jagannātha-deva also manifests Himself in those Deity
forms, desirous of instigating pastimes to accept the
devotional aspirations and activities from those
authorized brāhmaṇas.

“One of those brāhmaṇas received the order of Śrī
Jagannātha-deva. Acting upon that order, he removed the
garland from the Lord’s neck in the morning and came
directly to my residence to give that ‘garland of
command’ to me. This incident dispelled my doubt that my
dream might be illusory. Then, from a distance I took
darśana of Sudarśana cakra, which is situated on the top
of the temple, and did not return to my residence.”


                          159
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

Alternatively, Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Wearing the ajñā-
mālā around my neck, I did not go again to the Lord’s
temple to see the divine lotus face of Śrī Jagannātha-
deva. I departed from Śrī Puruṣottama-kṣetra and
proceeded gradually, walking the path to Śrī Vṛndāvana
until I finally reached there again.”

Thus ends the translation of the bhāvānuvāda of

Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī’s Dig-darśinī-ṭikā

on the Second Canto, Chapter One,

of Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta.




Second Chapter




Jñānam: Knowledge




Verses 1–2


śrī-gopa-kumāra uvāca

māthurottama viśrāntau snātvā vṛndāvanaṁ gataḥ

atra govardhanādau ca yathā-kāmaṁ paribhraman

pibaṁś ca gorasaṁ pūrva-bāndhavais tair alakṣitaḥ

bhajan sva-japyam anayaṁ dināni katicit sukham

śrī-gopa-kumāraḥ uvāca – Śrī Gopa-kumāra said; māthura –
of the residents of Mathurā; uttama – O best; viśrāntau
– at Viśrāma-ghāṭa; snātvā – having bathed; vṛndā-vanam
– to the forests of Vṛndā; gataḥ – gone; atra – here;
govardhana – around Govardhana Hill; ādau – and so
forth; ca – also; yathā-kāmam – by my free will;
paribhraman – wandering; piban – drinking; ca – also;
go-rasam – milk, nectar of the cows; pūrva-bāndhavaiḥ –
by relatives and friends; taiḥ – by them; alakṣitaḥ –
unnoticed; bhajan – worshiping; sva-japyam – murmuring
my mantra; anayam – I passed; dināni – days; katicit –
some; sukham – happily.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra said: O topmost brāhmaṇa of Mathurā,
upon reaching Mathurā, I bathed at Viśrāma-ghāṭa and
then continued on to Vṛndāvana. There, I freely wandered
about Govardhana and other places as I desired,
maintaining my life by drinking the nectar of the cows
(milk). Concealing my presence from my kinsmen and
chanting my mantra with devotion, I happily passed some
days there.

                          160
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: This Second Chapter describes the
progressively greater glories of the upper planets,
beginning with Svarga, then Maharloka, etc. It
establishes that seeing the Lord externally, that is,
with one’s eyes anointed with devotion, is better than
seeing Him within, in the trance of samādhi. It also
compares liberation (mukti) and devotional service
(bhakti), and illustrates the superiority of bhakti in
every way.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “O best of the Mathurā brāhmaṇas,
reaching Mathurā-puri, I bathed at its main holy place,
Viśrāma-ghāṭa, and then came to Vṛndāvana. Here in Śrī
Vṛndāvana, I rambled all about – in Govardhana; on the
banks of the Yamunā; in Bhāṇḍīravana, Tālavana,
Mahāvana; and wherever else I was drawn. Because I was
dressed like an outsider, my previous friends did not
recognize me.” This statement exhibits Gopa-kumāra’s
detachment. “In this way, I remained incognito and
happily spent some days continuously chanting my
mantra.”



Verse 3

atha sandarśanotkaṇṭhā jagad-īśasya sājani

yayedaṁ śūnyavad vīkṣya puruṣottamam asmaram

atha – then; sandarśana – for a full vision; utkaṇṭhā –
a desire; jagat-īśasya – of Jagannātha-deva; sā – that;
ajani – manifested; yayā – where by; idam – this; śūnya-
vat – as if void; vīkṣya – seeing; puruṣa-uttamam – the
land of the Jagannātha-deva, the Transcendental Person;
asmaram – I remembered.

After some time, an intense eagerness arose within me to
see Śrī Jagadiśa as I did before. Because of this
desire, Śrī Vṛndāvana seemed void, and all I could think
of was Puruṣottama-kṣetra.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “As in the past,
I began to hanker for darśana of Śrī Jagadiśa, the Lord
of the universe. Thus this forest and the entire
Mathurā-maṇḍala became empty before my eyes.” Here, the
suffix vati, meaning ‘as if,’ has been used in the term
śūnya-vat, ‘as if void.’ This usage implies that
actually Śrī Hari is eternally present in that forest
and indeed, in all of Mathurā-maṇḍala. This is confirmed
in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam:

puṇyaṁ madhuvanaṁ yatra

sānnidhyaṁ nityadā hareḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (4.8.42)

Madhuvana is fully auspicious because Śrī Hari eternally
resides there.

mathurā bhagavān yatra


                             161
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

nityaṁ sannihito hariḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.1.28)

Bhagavān Śrī Hari always resides in Mathurā.

puṇyā bata vraja-bhuvo yad ayaṁ nṛ-liṅga

gūḍhaḥ purāṇa-puruṣo vana-citra-mālyaḥ

gāḥ pālayan saha-balaḥ kvaṇayaṁś ca veṇuṁ

vikrīḍayāñcati giritra-ramārcitāṅghriḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.44.13)

How pious is the land of Vraja! There, that primeval
Personality of Godhead, whose feet are worshiped by Śiva
and Ramā (Lakṣmī), is disguised as a human being.
Wearing an enchanting garland of forest flowers and
playing His flute, He wanders throughout Vraja, tending
the cows with Balarāma.

Here, the verb añcanti, meaning ‘He moves about,’ is in
the present tense. This usage reveals the eternality of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. It is to be understood that Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is forever performing pastimes in Vraja-bhūmi.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra recalls, “When remembering Puruṣottama-
kṣetra, the desperate yearning I felt to see Śrī
Jagadiśa made Vṛndāvana seem empty. In Puruṣottama-
kṣetra, Śrī Bhagavān is always present in His directly
manifest form, so I thought it would be best to live
there.”

Actually, Gopa-kumāra had not yet received the special
mercy of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; he had not experienced the
unprecedented sweet mellows (rasa) of the land of Vraja
in Śrī Mathurā-maṇḍala. Therefore, he desired to go
elsewhere. Later on, however, as Gopa-kumāra wandered
through various realms, he experienced the reality of
those other places. He then left them all and returned
here to Vraja, where he finally achieved his desired
goal and where he lived forever in full love.



Verse 4

ārtas tatra jagannāthaṁ draṣṭum oḍhrān punar vrajan

pathi gaṅgā-taṭe ’paśyaṁ dharmācāra-parān dvijān

ārtaḥ – feeling pain; tatra – there; jagannātham – Śrī
Jagannātha; draṣṭum – to behold; oḍhrān – to Orissa;
punaḥ – again; vrajan – traveling; pathi – on the path;
gaṅgā-taṭe – along the bank of the river Gaṅgā; apaśyam
– I saw; dharma-ācāra – to religious behavior; parān –
devoted; dvijān – twice-born persons.

Because I was unable to see Jagannātha, I became
anxious. But I was also distressed at heart to leave
Vraja. In this anguished condition, I proceeded towards
the land of Utkala (Puruṣottama-kṣetra) to have

                          162
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

Jagannātha’s darśana. On the way, by the bank of Śrī
Gaṅgā, I saw some brāhmaṇas engaged in their prescribed
religious duties.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Deeply
afflicted by separation from Śrī Jagannātha-deva, I
again set out for the country of Utkala. Although I was
aggrieved to leave Vraja, I continued my journey. On the
way, I saw some brāhmaṇas who were conscientiously
practicing their dharma on the bank of the river Gaṅgā.”

In this verse, the word dharma refers to the regular
(nitya) and occasional (naimitika) occupational duties
of those following varṇāśrama-dharma. The word ācāra,
meaning ‘virtuous behavior,’ refers to the conduct of
sādhus. The brāhmaṇas who Gopa-kumāra saw were convinced
that the execution of prescribed occupational duties
along with saintly conduct constitutes the most
excellent type of practice.



Verse 5

vicitra-śāstra-vijñebhyas tebhyaś cāśrauṣam adbhutam

svargo-nāmordhva-deśe ’sti deva-loko ’ntarīkṣitaḥ

vicitra – various; śāstra – in the scriptures;
vijñebhyaḥ – learned; tebhyaḥ – from them; ca – also;
aśrauṣam – I heard; adbhutam – astonishing; svarga –
Svargaloka; nāma – named; ūrdhva-deśe – in the upper
planets; asti – there is; deva-lokaḥ – the planet of the
celestials; antarīkṣitaḥ – in outer space.

From those brāhmaṇas who were learned in many
scriptures, I heard something completely new – that in
the firmament above the earth, there is a place called
Svarga where the demigods reside.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “All those
brāhmaṇas

were learned in many different scriptures, such as Śruti
(Vedic literature), Smṛti (Vedic injunctions), ṣad-
darśana (the six Vedic philosophical systems), Purāṇa
(supplementary Vedic literatures), and Itihāsa (epic
histories). From their lips, I heard something
surprising that I had never heard before. They said that
above this earth, which is the planet of death (martya-
loka), there is a place called Svarga, or heaven, where
demigods reside. That place is situated in outer space,
in a place that is not supported by land or anything.”

This topic is described in six-and-a-half verses,
beginning here with svarga.



Verse 6

vimānāvalibhiḥ śrīmān nirbhayo duḥkha-varjitaḥ

jarā-maraṇa-rogādi-doṣa-varga-bahiṣkṛtaḥ

                          163
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


vimāna – of airplanes; āvalibhiḥ – with multitudes;
śrīmān – glorious; nirbhayaḥ – fearless; duḥkha –
suffering; varjitaḥ – free from; jarā – old age; maraṇa
– death; roga – sickness; ādi – and so forth; doṣa-varga
– the group of faults; bahiḥ-kṛtaḥ – without.

That heaven, magnificently decorated with rows and rows
of celestial airships, is free from all defects, such as
fear, distress, old age, disease, and death.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The Mathurā brāhmaṇa might ask, “If
Svarga is not supported by earth, how is it possible to
reside there comfortably?” Śrī Gopa-kumāra replies,
“Svarga is adorned with splendid airplanes propelled by
the wind, and the demigods there are also
extraordinarily beautiful. It is a place free from fear
and distress, and it is thus not plagued by the defects
of life such as old age.” It can be said that because
Svarga is so far distanced from such defects, it is
virtually free from them.



Verse 7

mahā-sukhamayo labhyaḥ puṇyair atrottamaiḥ kṛtaiḥ

yasya śakro ’dhipo jyāyān bhrātā śrī-jagadīśituḥ

mahā-sukha-mayaḥ – imbued with great happiness; labhyaḥ
– obtain-able; puṇyaiḥ – by piety; atra – here; uttamaiḥ
– pious; kṛtaiḥ – by deeds; yasya – of which; śakraḥ –
Indra; adhipaḥ – the king; jyāyān – elder; bhrātā –
brother; śrī-jagad-īśituḥ – of the Lord of the worlds.

That Svarga, which is pervaded by the greatest
happiness, can be attained only by exceptionally pious
deeds. It is ruled by Indra-deva, the elder brother of
Śrī Jagadiśa.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “That place is
not just free from the defects of old age and death, it
is also the abode of the greatest enjoyment.” Words like
mahā, meaning ‘great,’ indicate this idea. “Because
Svarga is so exceptionally difficult to attain, its
superiority as the realm of supreme happiness is
compounded. It can be attained by residing on Bhārata-
varṣa (earth) and executing very pure and exalted
activities that give rise to pious merit.”

In this way, Gopa-kumāra has described the self-evident
glories of such devotional practices, or sādhana. He
then explains how Svarga is glorious due to being
maintained and governed by Mahendra (the great Indra),
the elder brother of the Supreme Lord of the universe,
Śrī Vāmana.



Verses 8–9

yadyapy asti bila-svargo viṣṇu-śeṣādy-alaṅkṛtaḥ


                          164
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

bhauma-svargaś ca tad-dvīpa-varṣādiṣu pade pade

vicitra-rūpa-śrī-kṛṣṇa-pūjotsava-virājitaḥ

tathāpy ūrdhva-taro loko divyas tābhyāṁ viśiṣyate

yadi api – although; asti – there is; bila-svargaḥ – a
subterranean heaven; viṣṇu – by Śrī Viṣṇu; śeṣa – by
Ananta Śeṣa; ādi – and others; alaṅkṛtaḥ – ornamented;
bhauma-svargaḥ – an earthly heaven; ca – also; tat dvīpa
– on its islands; varṣa – in the vast tracts of land;
ādiṣu – and so forth; pade pade – in various abodes;
vicitra – astonishing; rūpa – forms; śrī-kṛṣṇa – of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa; pūjā-utsava – in festivals of worship; virājitaḥ
– shines; tathā api – nevertheless; ūrdhva-taraḥ –
higher; lokaḥ – world; divyaḥ – divine; tābhyām – to
them; viśiṣyate – superior.

There are subterranean heavens (Bila-svargas), such as
Pātāla, which are beautified by Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s different
manifestations, like Viṣṇu and Śeṣa. In addition, there
are heavens on earth (Bhauma-svargas) located in various
tracts of land and islands where there are always great
festivals for the worship of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in His many
different forms. However, because the celestial heaven
(Divya-svarga) is resplendently situated above these two
other heavens, it is superior in quality.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The brāhmaṇa might ask, “What forms
does the Supreme Lord Śrī Viṣṇu accept in the
subterranean and earthly heavens, and what kinds of
great festivals and methods of worship are performed for
Him?”

Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Jagadiśa, who is present in the
form of Śrī Viṣṇu, is Mahārāja Bali’s doorkeeper in
Sutala, and Śeṣa-deva, who supports the earth as
dharaṇī-dhara, is present in the seventh abode of
Pātāla.” The word ādi, meaning ‘etc.’ indicates a host
of other Viṣṇu forms that adorn the subterranean
heavens, such as Śrī Kapiladeva on the Atala planet, who
is mentioned in the Rāmāyaṇa as having crushed the pride
of Rāvaṇa; and Śrī Rudra, who resides in Vitala.




He continues, “Similarly, many manifestations of the
Lord are present in Bhārata-varṣa and in the other eight
varṣas (tracts of land) of Jambu-dvīpa in Bhū-maṇḍala,
the earthly planetary system[1].” The word ādi indicates
the manifestations of Bhagavān within the Milk Ocean,
and the term pade pade indicates all His other
manifestations found elsewhere.


“In Plakṣa-dvīpa, Bhagavān is present as Sūrya-deva and
in other forms as well. For example, in Ilāvṛta-varṣa,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead Śrī Kṛṣṇa resides as
Śrī Saṅkarṣaṇa; and in Bhadrāśva-varṣa, He resides as
Śrī Hayaśīrṣa. In all these places, He is worshiped with
great pomp and ceremony. Similarly, in the other heavens
on earth also, the residents execute various types of

                          165
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

worship and festivals of Bhagavān, who is present in
different forms in different islands and areas.” An
excellent description of the various manifestations of
the Lord in all these places is found in the Fifth Canto
of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

“Although grand worship of Bhagavān exists in both
Bhauma and Bila-svargas, Divya-svarga is still the
topmost, like a crown above these two heavens, being
filled with extraordinary qualities not found in the
others.”

Alternatively, the celestial heaven Svarga is addressed
as divya, or divine, because its pada, or position, is
divine, meaning it is the cause of excellence. In other
words, it is fit to be the abode of demigods.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra concludes, “Because of my discussion
with the brāhmaṇas, I lost my desire to go to both the
different earthly heavens within those dvīpas (islands)
and varṣas (tracts of land) on Bhū-maṇḍala and the
subterranean heavens (Bila-svarga).”



Verse 10

yasmin śrī-jagadīśo ’sti sākṣād aditi-nandanaḥ

tasyopendrasya vārtā ca śrī-viṣṇor adbhutā śrutā

yasmin – wherein; śrī-jagat-īśaḥ – the resplendent Lord
of the worlds; asti – is situated; sākṣāt – directly;
aditi-nandanaḥ – the son of Aditi; tasya – of Him; upa-
indrasya – of the younger brother of Indra, Vāmana-deva;
vārtā – the narrations; ca – and; śrī-viṣṇoḥ – of Śrī
Viṣṇu; adbhutā – marvelous; śrutā – celebrated.

Śrī Jagadīśa personally resides in that Divya-svarga as
the son of Aditi. His name is Upendra (Vāmana-deva), and
He is celebrated for His marvelous glories.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra continues, “In this
divine heaven, Śrī Viṣṇu personally resides as Upendra,
the son of Aditi. Because He is the younger brother of
Indra, who is also Aditi’s son, He is called Upendra
[upa here means ‘younger’].” Alternatively, “He is
called Upendra [upa here means ‘upon or above’] because
He is resplendently situated there, manifesting great
glories and benedicting even Indra.” In another reading
of the text, when the prefix upa is taken to mean
‘superiority,’ it indicates, “Crowned with greater
majesty than the king of heaven, Indra himself, He is
known as Upendra.” Or, understanding upa to mean
‘inferior’ and Indra to refer to ‘king of the demigods,’
it says, “He is Upendra, the younger brother of the king
of the demigods.”

Therefore, Indra himself says in Hari-vaṁśa:

mamopari yathendras tvaṁ sthāpito gobhir īśvaraḥ

upendra iti kṛṣṇa tvāṁ gāsyanti divi devatāḥ


                          166
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

O Kṛṣṇa, the cows have established You as a greater king
than I am. Therefore, all the demigods in heaven call
You Upendra and glorify You with choice hymns.

Factually, all the pastimes of Upendra are extraordinary
and inconceivable.



Verse 11

āruhya pakṣīndram itas tato ’sau

krīḍan vinighnann asurān mano-jñaiḥ

līlā-vacobhī ramayann ajasraṁ

devān nija-bhrātṛtayārcyate taiḥ

āruhya – climbing; pakṣi-indram – upon Garuḍa, the king
of birds; itaḥ tataḥ – here and there; asau – He; krīḍan
– sporting; vinighnan – slaying; asurān – the demons;
mano-jñaiḥ – enchanting to the mind; līlā – playful;
vacobhiḥ – with words; ramayan – giving pleasure;
ajasram – incessantly; devān – the demigods; nija – own;
bhrātṛtayā – as a brother; arcyate – is worshiped; taiḥ
– by them.

There, Bhagavān Śrī Upendra climbs on the back of
Garuḍa, the lord of the birds, and enjoys pastimes of
traveling here and there. He kills troublesome demons
and, with enchanting activities and sweet words, He
perpetually delights the demigods, who worship Him as
their very own brother.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Now, Śrī Gopa-kumāra is relating the
glorious and most astonishing pastime of Śrī Upendra. He
says, “Śrī Upendra climbs on the back of Garuḍa and
roams throughout the skies, annihilating the demons. He
completely satisfies His darling brother Indra, as well
as Varuṇa and other demigods, with charming words. With
captivating, playful activities, He also delights all
the demigods, who worship Him with loving devotion.”

These are the wonderful pastimes of Śrī Upendra that
Gopa-kumāra heard. (Gopa-kumāra had already experienced
the Lord’s pastimes in Śrī Jagannātha-kṣetra, but these
pastimes of Śrī Vāmana-deva were even more
extraordinary.) In this way, ever-greater glories of the
Lord will be described.



Verse 12

tad-darśane jāta-manorathākulaḥ

saṅkalpa-pūrvaṁ sva-japaṁ samācaran

sv-alpena kālena vimānam āgataṁ

mudāham āruhya gatas tri-piṣṭapam

tat – of Him; darśane – for the sight; jāta – appeared;

                          167
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

manaḥ-ratha – of desires; ākulaḥ – anxious; saṅkalpa-
pūrvam – with determination; sva-japam – the chanting of
my iṣṭa-mantra; samācaran – performing; su-alpena kālena
– in very little time; vimānam – an airplane; āgatam –
arrived; mudā – joyously; aham – I; āruhya – having
mounted; gataḥ – went; tri-piṣṭapam – to Indra’s heaven.

Hearing all these wonderful pastimes from those
brāhmaṇas made me anxious to see Bhagavān Śrī Upendra.
With this goal in mind, I began to chant the mantra of
my worshipable Deity with great determination. And how
amazing! Very soon, an airplane came from Svarga. I
joyfully climbed aboard and went to that celestial
realm.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “After hearing
the wonderful pastimes of Śrī Viṣṇu, I was seized by an
ardent desire to have His darśana. To quickly obtain
this, I began to chant the mantra of my worshipable
Deity with great resolve, or saṅkalpa (while strictly
observing all the regulations of the chanting). By the
power of this mantra-japa, my objective was soon
fulfilled. An airplane descended from heaven to take me
there. I happily climbed aboard and thus reached
Svarga.”



Verse 13

pūrvaṁ gaṅgā-taṭa-nṛpa-gṛhe yasya dṛṣṭā pratiṣṭhā

taṁ śrī-viṣṇuṁ sura-gaṇa-vṛtaṁ sac-cid-ānanda-sāndram

tatrāpaśyaṁ rucira-garuḍa-skandha-siṁhāsana-sthaṁ

vīṇā-gītaṁ madhura-madhuraṁ nāradasyārcayantam

pūrvam – before; gaṅgā-taṭa – on the bank of the river
Gaṅgā; nṛpa-gṛhe – in the king’s palace; yasya – whose;
dṛṣṭā – seen; pratiṣṭhā – established; tam – Him; śrī-
viṣṇum – the all-pervasive Lord; sura-gaṇa – by the
demigods; vṛtam – surrounded; sat – eternality; cit –
cognizance; ānanda – felicity; sāndram – intense; tatra
– there; apaśyam – I beheld; rucira – charming; garuḍa –
of Garuḍa; skandha – on the shoulders; siṁha-āsana – on
a lion throne; stham – situated; vīṇā – of the stringed
musical instrument; gītam – through the music; madhura-
madhuram – intensely relishable; nāradasya – by Nārada
Muni; arcayantam – worshiped.

There I saw the very same Śrī Viṣṇu whose Deity form I
had previously seen in the king’s palace on the bank of
the Gaṅgā. Surrounded by the demigods in every direction
and sitting on the charming throne of Garuḍa’s
shoulders, the Lord manifested Himself as the
concentrated embodiment of knowledge, bliss, and
eternity. Just in front of the Lord, Śrī Nārada was
worshiping Him by singing sweetly and playing his vīṇā.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Previously, I
had seen the Deity of Śrī Viṣṇu in the king’s temple on
the bank of the Gaṅgā. I now saw the same Śrī Viṣṇu
being worshiped in heaven. I had previously been struck

                          168
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

by the beauty and sweetness of the Deity, but in heaven
the Lord was even more attractive. Here, I watched the
worship of the beautiful, dark-complexioned Lord, who
was adorned with ornaments and who was holding a conch,
disc, club, and lotus flower in each of His four hands.
Although He bore some similarity to the Deity in the
king’s temple, He had the additional features of being
surrounded in all directions by demigods worshiping Him
and of being splendidly enthroned on Garuḍa’s
exceedingly lovely shoulders. His form was fully sac-
cid-ānanda. The word sat indicates that He exists
everywhere, and therefore He is eternal by nature. Cit
and ānanda indicate that by nature He is full of
transcendental knowledge and concentrated bliss. Being
the concentrated embodiment of Parabrahman (the Supreme
Spirit), He was intensely effulgent like the sun. The
Lord was extolling the singing of Devarṣi Śrī Nārada,
who was worshiping Him with sweet songs accompanied by
the vīṇā.”



Verse 14

prāpya prāpyaṁ draṣṭum iṣṭaṁ ca dṛṣṭvā

tatrātmānaṁ manyamānaḥ kṛtārtham

dūrād bhūyo daṇḍa-vad vandamānas

tenāhūto ’nugraha-snigdha-vācā

prāpya – having attained; prāpyam – the object worthy of
attainment; draṣṭum – to behold; iṣṭam – my worshipable
Deity; ca – also; dṛṣṭvā – having seen; tatra – there;
ātmānam – myself; manyamānaḥ – thinking; kṛta-artham –
successful; dūrāt – from a distance; bhūyaḥ –
repeatedly; daṇḍa-vat – like a stick; vanda-mānaḥ –
offering prayers; tena – by Him; āhūtaḥ – called;
anugraha – of mercy; snigdha – affectionate; vācā – with
words.

Finally I attained the object of my desire. Seeing my
most worshipable Lord, I considered my life successful.
From a distance, I offered Him prostrated obeisances
repeatedly and worshiped Him with praise. Bhagavān Śrī
Upendra then called me to Him with kind and affectionate
words.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Thus I attained
my goal –

direct darśana of my worshipable Lord, whom I had been
yearning to see for such a long time. Now fully
satisfied, with all my desires fulfilled, I repeatedly
offered Him prostrated obeisances from a distance. With
words full of kindness, that most merciful Śrī Viṣṇu
affectionately called me over to Him.”



Verse 15

diṣṭyā diṣṭyā gato ’si tvam atra śrī-gopa-nandana

                          169
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


alaṁ daṇḍa-praṇāmair me nikaṭe ’nusarābhayam

diṣṭyā diṣṭyā – by great good fortune; gataḥ – come; asi
tvam – you are; atra – here; śrī-gopa-nandana – O
glorious son of a cowherd;

alam – enough; daṇḍa-praṇāmaiḥ – with bowing low like a
stick; me –

Me; nikaṭe – near; anusara – come; abhayam – without
fear.

Then Bhagavān Śrī Upendra told me, “O My dear son of a
gopa! You have done very well by coming here! Now, there
is no need of bowing down any more. Do not be afraid of
My opulence. Come to Me.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: This verse beginning with diṣṭyā (good
fortune) explains how Bhagavān Śrī Upendra called Gopa-
kumāra. The Lord says, “O gopa-nandana (son of a
cowherd), by your great fortune you have come to Me here
in Svarga. This is excellent. Now there is no need to
bow down any more. Do not be afraid to see My majesty.
Give up your fear and veneration and come close to Me.”



Verse 16

tasyājñayā mahendreṇa preritais tri-daśair aham

agrataḥ sādaraṁ nītvā prayatnād upaveśitaḥ

tasya – His; ājñayā – by order; mahā-indreṇa – by Indra;
preritaiḥ – instructed; tri-daśaiḥ – by the demigods;
aham – I; agrataḥ – before Him; sa-ādaram – with
respect; nītvā – was brought; prayatnāt – with
attention; upaveśitaḥ – sat down.

On Śrī Upendra’s order, Devarāja Indra sent some
demigods who respectfully led me to Him and seated me
with care.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “However, seeing
the opulence of the Lord, I was so overwhelmed with awe
and reverence that I could not approach Him. Therefore,
Bhagavān Śrī Viṣṇu ordered Mahendra, the great Indra,
king of the demigods, ‘This cowherd boy feels such
veneration towards Me that he will not come close and
sit near me. Gently bring him here. Welcome him with
amṛta (the nectar of immortality), which is the
enjoyment of demigods, and give him residence in your
pleasure garden Nandana-vana.’ Hearing this, Indra
signaled the demigods, who respectfully escorted me to
the Lord and seated me next to Him.”



Verse 17

divyair dravyais tarpito nandanākhye

’raṇye vāsaṁ prāpito ’gāṁ praharṣam

                          170
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017


vīkṣe kācit tatra bhīr nāsti śoko

rogo mṛtyur glānir ārtir jarā ca

divyaiḥ – by celestial; dravyaiḥ – paraphernalia;
tarpitaḥ – delighted; nandana – Nandana; ākhye – known
as; araṇye – in the forest; vāsam – residence; prāpitaḥ
– received; agām – I became; praharṣam – very happy;
vīkṣe – I could see; kācit – any; tatra – there; bhīḥ –
fear; na – not; asti – is; śokaḥ – lamentation; rogaḥ –
disease; mṛtyuḥ – death; glāniḥ – debility; ārtiḥ –
suffering; jarā – old age; ca – and.

The demigods then provided me a residence in the Nandana
forest, where they offered me heavenly nectar and all
the other celestial refreshments that they enjoy.
Partaking of these heavenly pleasures filled me with
delight and left me feeling completely satisfied. I
noticed that this realm was free from fear, distress,
disease, old age, death, bereavement, and so on.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “The demigods
arranged for my residence in Nandana-vana. Enjoying
amṛta, the nectar of immortality, and everything else
savored by the demigods, I became fully satisfied.”
Gopa-kumāra remained there for some time experiencing
tremendous rapture. In two-and-a-half verses, beginning
here with vīkṣe, he describes his observations. He says,
“I considered the situation at length...” In this verse,
the present tense has been used in the Sanskrit to
indicate past action, because the activity of seeing
goes on continuously. “I noticed that, because disease,
distress, death, grief, lamentation, and so on do not
exist in heaven, no one there lives in fear.”



Verse 18

santu vā katicid doṣās tān ahaṁ gaṇayāmi na

tādṛśaṁ jagad-īśasya sandarśana-sukhaṁ bhajan

santu – there must be; vā – or; katicit – some; doṣāḥ –
defects; tān – them; aham – I; gaṇayāmi – consider; na –
not; tādṛśam – such; jagat-īśasya – of the Lord of all
worlds; sandarśana – due to the sight; sukham –
happiness; bhajan – feeling.

There were also some defects in Svarga, but I paid them
no heed because I was overwhelmed by the bliss of seeing
Śrī Bhagavān.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “I witnessed
some rivalry and other anomalies in the demigods’
dealings with each other. However, because I was
experiencing the indescribable pleasure of devotional
service in seeing my Lord, I simply ignored those
faults.”



Verse 19

                          171
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


mahendreṇārcyate svarga-vibhūtibhir asau prabhuḥ

bhrātṛtveneśvaratvena śaraṇatvena cānv-aham

mahā-indreṇa – by Indra; arcyate – worshiped; svarga –
of heaven; vibhūtibhiḥ – with the heavenly opulences;
asau – He; prabhuḥ – the Lord; bhrātṛtvena – as a
brother; īśvaratvena – as his Lord; śaraṇatvena – as his
shelter; ca – also; anu-aham – day after day.

Offering pārijāta flowers and all the other opulences of
Svarga, Śrī Indra daily worshiped Bhagavān Śrī Upendra
as his brother, master, and protector, with affection,
reverence, and respect.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Now Śrī Gopa-kumāra speaks of the
opulence of the Supreme Personality of Godhead Śrī
Upendra, whom Mahendra, the great Indra, worships every
day with amṛta, pārijāta flowers, and other celestial
riches. In what mood does Indra worship Him? “Seeing Śrī
Upendra as his younger brother, Indra adores Him with
loving affection; seeing Him as the Supreme Lord, he
adores Him with awe and

reverence; and seeing Him as his refuge, he adores Him
with respect.”



Verses 20–21

manasy akaravaṁ caitad aho dhanyaḥ śata-kratuḥ

yo hi śrī-viṣṇunā dattaṁ sādhayitvā nirākulam

trai-lokaiśvaryam āsādya bhagavantam imaṁ mudā

upahāra-cayair divyair gṛhyamāṇaiḥ svayaṁ yajet

manasi – in my heart; akaravam – I made; ca – and; etat
– this; aho dhanyaḥ – oh, how fortunate!; śata-kratuḥ –
Indra, who made one hundred sacrifices; yaḥ – who; hi –
indeed; śrī-viṣṇunā – by Śrī Viṣṇu; dattam – given;
sādhayitvā – having conquered; nirākulam – peaceful;
trai-lokya – in the three worlds; aiśvaryam – opulence;
āsādya – having attained; bhagavantam – Lord; imam –
this; mudā – with joy; upahāra – of gifts; cayaiḥ – with
collections; divyaiḥ – divine; gṛhyamāṇaiḥ – being
accepted; svayam – personally; yajet – he can worship.

I began to think, “Ah! Indra is extremely fortunate.
With His own hands, Śrī Viṣṇu has vanquished all the
demons and bestowed upon him the opulence of the three
worlds, which are now free from all disturbances.
Moreover, Indra worships Śrī Bhagavān with heavenly
gifts that the Lord personally accepts.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Seeing the good fortune of the exalted
Indra, Gopa-kumāra developed an intense desire to obtain
Indra’s position. Therefore in two verses, beginning
here with manasi, he praises Indra’s wonderful fortune.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “I thought to myself, ‘Oh! Śata-

                          172
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

kratu Indra, he who has successfully performed one
hundred aśva-medhas (horse sacrifices) is greatly
blessed! Śrī Bhagavān personally killed all the demons,
freeing the three worlds from danger, giving dominion
over these three realms to Śrī Śata-kratu. In addition
to that, Indra enjoys an even more wonderful privilege:
with the rarest of heavenly gifts, he worships the Lord,
who extends His lotus hands and personally accepts all
these offerings.’ ”



Verse 22

evaṁ mamāpi bhagavān ayaṁ kiṁ kṛpayiṣyati

iti tatrāvasaṁ kurvan sva-saṅkalpaṁ nijaṁ japam

evam – thus; mama – for me; api – also; bhagavān – Lord;
ayam – this; kim – whether?; kṛpayiṣyati – will be
merciful; iti – thus; tatra – there; avasam – I lived;
kurvan – doing; sva-saṅkalpam – my own resolve; nijam –
my own (mantra); japam – chanting.

A desire then arose in my heart and I pondered, “Can I
also worship Śrī Bhagavān as Indra does? Will Śrī
Bhagavān mercifully satisfy my desire?” Accepting
whatever might happen, I remained there, chanting my
mantra with this aspiration.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “I pondered,
‘Will I be so fortunate as to serve the Supreme Lord as
Indra does, with the wealth of the three worlds? Will
Śrī Viṣṇu bestow His mercy unto me and make me fortunate
by fulfilling my desire, impossible as it may seem?’ I
then thought, ‘Śrī Bhagavān is the master of
inconceivable opulences, and at the same time He is
extraordinarily merciful – He can make the impossible
come to pass.’ Thinking like this, I took up residence
in Svarga and chanted the mantra of my Deity with
determination.”



Verse 23

athaikasya munīndrasya dūṣayitvā priyāṁ balāt

lajjayā śāpa-bhītyā ca śakraḥ kutrāpy alīyata

atha – thereafter; ekasya – of a certain; muni-indrasya
– of a exalted sage; dūṣayitvā – having violated; priyām
– the dear wife; balāt – by force; lajjayā – out of
shame; śāpa-bhītyā – out of fear of a curse; ca – and;
śakraḥ – Indra; kutra api – somewhere; alīyata – he hid.

After some time, it so happened that Indra forced
himself upon the wife of a great sage. Out of
embarrassment and fear of being cursed, Indra went into
hiding.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Soon
thereafter, my desire was fulfilled.” To explain how
this came about, Gopa-kumāra narrates three verses,

                          173
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

beginning here with athaikasya. While Gopa-kumāra was
living in Svarga, Indra kidnapped the wife of an eminent
sage and violated her, as he had done previously with
the wives of other ṛṣis, including Devaśarmā and
Gautama. Just as he had once hidden in a lotus-stem in
Māna-sarovara out of shame and in fear of being cursed,
Indra effectively hid himself again.



Verse 24

daivair anviṣya bahudhā sa na prāpto yadā tataḥ

arājakatvāt trai-lokyam abhibhūtam upadravaiḥ

daivaiḥ – by the demigods; anviṣya – having searched;
bahudhā – in many places; saḥ – he; na – not; prāptaḥ –
found; yadā – when; tataḥ – then; arājakatvāt – because
of being kingless; trai-lokyam – the three worlds;
abhibhūtam – overwhelmed; upadravaiḥ – by calamities.

The demigods searched relentlessly but to no avail. In
the absence of their ruler, the three worlds were
overrun with disturbances perpetrated by demons and
others.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Due to the
disap-pearance of Indra, the demons and others began to
wreak havoc and cause disasters throughout the three
worlds.”



Verse 25

śrī-viṣṇor ājñayā devair guruṇā preritair atha

aindre pade ’bhiṣikto ’ham adity-ādy-anumoditaḥ

śrī-viṣṇoḥ – of Śrī Viṣṇu; ājñayā – by the order; devaiḥ
– by the demigods; guruṇā – by their spiritual master;
preritaiḥ – urged; atha – thereafter; aindre pade – to
the post of Indra; abhiṣiktaḥ – crowned; aham – I; aditi
– by the mother of the demigods; ādi – and others;
anumoditaḥ – pleased.

Then, ordered by Śrī Viṣṇu and directed by their guru
Bṛhaspati, the demigods appointed me to the post of
Indra. Mother Aditi and Indra’s other well-wishers also
approved of this.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Thereafter, the
demigods received the order from Śrī Viṣṇu and were
urged by their preceptor, Bṛhaspati, to comply with it.
Thus, for the protection of the three worlds, they
installed me on the throne of Indra.”

Now the brāhmaṇa might ask, “How could Indra’s mother,
his wife Śacī, and his other well-wishers tolerate
this?”

Gopa-kumāra explains, “Due to the power of Bhagavān’s
order, no one raised any objection; rather, everyone

                          174
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

happily agreed.” Clearly, the root cause behind all this
was Śrī Viṣṇu’s desire alone.



Verse 26

tato ’ditiṁ śacīṁ jīvaṁ brāhmaṇān api mānayan

trai-lokye vaiṣṇavīṁ bhaktiṁ pūrṇāṁ prāvartayaṁ sadā

tataḥ – then; aditim – Aditi (Indra’s mother); śacīm –
Śacī (Indra’s wife); jīvam – Bṛhaspati (Indra’s guru);
brāhmaṇān – the persons who have realized Brahman; api –
also; mānayan – honoring; trai-lokye – throughout the
three worlds; vaiṣṇavīm – to Lord Viṣṇu; bhaktim –
devotion; pūrṇām – full (unadulterated); prāvartayam –
preached; sadā – incessantly.

Thereafter, I showed proper respect to Aditi, Śacī, and
the brāhmaṇas like Bṛhaspati, and throughout the three
worlds, I preached pure devotional service to Śrī Viṣṇu,
with my full energy.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: This verse beginning with tat explains
how Śrī Gopa-kumāra propagated devotional service to Śrī
Bhagavān everywhere. He says, “Although I became master
of the opulence of the three worlds, I did not become
overwhelmed by the intoxicating sense enjoyment
available to me, unlike kings such as Nahuṣa. Because of
this, I did not disrespect anyone; rather I gave special
honor to deva-mātā (mother of the demigods) Aditi, Śacī,
and to the brāhmaṇas, including Bṛhaspati, Agastya, and
Gautama. Moreover, I propagated bhakti in its complete
form – the ninefold process of devotional service to
Bhagavān – everywhere in the three worlds.”

This reveals the superiority of Gopa-kumāra over
Purandara (Indra), the son of Aditi.

Now, one might ask, “In which manvantara (lifespan of
Manu) of which kalpa (day of Brahmā) did Gopa-kumāra
fill the post of Indra?”

It may be answered, “Gopa-kumāra obtained the position
of Indra in the Vaivasvata manvantara of the present
Varāha kalpa.” However, this answer does not seem
consistent with a statement found in a verse spoken
later in this treatise (Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta 2.143):
“From Brahmaloka, Gopa-kumāra saw that the fire
emanating from the mouth of Saṅkarṣaṇa had consumed the
three planetary systems –

Svarga, martya-loka (earth, the planet of mortals), and
Pātāla (the lower

planetary system).” [This only happens during the night
of Brahmā.]

These two statements appear inconsistent because the
first half-portion of Brahmā’s lifespan has now elapsed,
and the present time period is within the first part of
the second half of Brahmā’s life. This time period is
within the particular kalpa in which the Lord’s Śveta-

                          175
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

varāha, or white boar incarnation, appears, and
therefore, this present day of Brahmā is called the
Śveta-varāha kalpa. Because the Śveta-varāha kalpa is
still going on, this means that the night of Brahmā has
not yet arrived. [With the night of Brahmā comes a
partial cosmic annihilation.] Therefore, it is not
possible that Gopa-kumāra could have seen the cosmic
annihilation (pralaya) that destroyed this kalpa. This
proves that Gopa-kumāra received the post of Indra in a
previous kalpa (day of Brahmā) and not in the Vaivasvata
manvantara of the present Varāha kalpa.

The commentary of this verse states: “evaṁ aditi-suta–
purandarāt api vaiśiṣṭyam dhvanitam – This reveals Gopa-
kumāra’s superiority over Purandara, the son of Aditi.”
From this statement, it seems that it was indeed during
the Vaivasvata manvantara that Gopa-kumāra had obtained
the position of the lord of heaven, because Purandara is
the name of Indra during the Vaivasvata manvantara. (By
the Lord’s desire, sometimes Indra has different names.)
Therefore, the conclusion is that this incident happened
during a Vaivasvata manvantara in some kalpa before this
present Varāha kalpa.

One more aspect of this topic is worthy of
consideration. Aditi, the wife of Kaśyapa, is the mother
of Indra in every kalpa. Similarly, the posts of Indra’s
wife Śacī-devī and those of the other presiding demigods
are manifested in every manvantara. So in every
manvantara, the name ‘Indra’ is found. Nevertheless, by
the desire of Bhagavān, in some manvantaras, Indra may
have a different name. For instance, the name of Indra
is ‘Purandara’ in the Vaivasvata manvantara and
‘Mantradruma’ in the Cākṣuṣa manvantara. Moreover, in
some manvantaras, superior living beings who are known
by different names can also become Indra.

During every day of Brahmā, the posts of all the
Prajāpatis, or progenitors of the living beings, are
filled as they appear along with their family members.
It is stated in Śrī Viṣṇu Purāṇa:

yuge yuge bhavanty ete dakṣādyā muni sattama

punaś caiva nirudhyante vidvāṁs tatra na muhyati

The great sages such as Dakṣa appear and disappear in
every millennium. Those who are intelligent are not
bewildered by this.

When the day of Brahmā comes to an end, the cosmic
annihilation, or pralaya, takes place, and again at the
beginning of the new creation, the religious duty of the
age (yuga-dharma) needs to be propagated.

Śrī Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya states:

sarva-kalpeṣu cāpy evaṁ

sṛṣṭi-puṣṭi-vinaṣṭayaḥ

During every kalpa (day of Brahmā), creation,
sustenance, and destruction take place.


                          176
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017



Verse 27

svayaṁ tasyāḥ prabhāveṇa svārājye ’pi yathā purā

sadākiñcana-rūpe ’haṁ nyavasaṁ nandane vane

svayam – personally; tasyāḥ – of that (bhakti);
prabhāveṇa – by the potency; svārājye – in my own
kingdom; api – although; yathā – as; purā – before; sadā
– always; akiñcana-rūpaḥ – in the manner of an
unattached mendicant; aham – I; nyavasan – dwelling;
nandane vane – in the Nandana forest.

In the past, when I received the kingdom [see Chapter
One], I disregarded worldly possessions due to the
potency of bhakti. Similarly, although I was now
established on the royal throne, I did not reside in
Indra’s capital, but rather chose to live like a
renunciant in the Nandana forest.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The brāhmaṇa might ask, “Considering
that pride comes automatically with being a king, how is
it possible to remain happy?”

To address this doubt, Śrī Gopa-kumāra speaks this verse
beginning with svayam. He says, “Although I was
enthroned on the seat of Indra, by the influence of
bhakti, I was as detached from material possessions
(akiñcana) as before. Ever indifferent to all types of
false ego, I chose not to reside in the royal palace in
Amarāvatī, a city devoted to pleasure. Disregarding the
sessions in the Sudharmā assembly hall, I remained
exclusively in the Nandana forest.”



Verse 28

atyajaṁś ca japaṁ svīyam akṛtajñatva-śaṅkayā

vismartuṁ naiva śaknomi vrajabhūmim imāṁ kvacit

atyajan – not giving up; ca – also; japam – the
chanting; svīyam – own (mantra); akṛta-jñatva – of being
ungrateful; śaṅkayā – out of fear; vismartum – to
forget; na – not; eva – indeed; śaknomi – I can; vraja-
bhūmim – the land of Vraja; imām – this; kvacit – ever.

As a result of chanting my mantra, I obtained direct
darśana of Śrī Viṣṇu and the kingdom of heaven. But,
even then, I did not give up chanting my mantra. To do
so would have been gross ingratitude on my part. And
even though I was staying in Nanda-kānana, I could not
forget my sweet memories of Vraja.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “It was
surprising that even while residing in the Nanda-kānana
garden, profuse with pārijāta flowers and other heavenly
delights, I still could not forget my stay in Śrī
Vṛndāvana, where I experienced much greater pleasure in
tending the cows.” This verse beginning with atyajam
aptly conveys this idea. He says, “I neither gave up

                          177
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

chanting my mantra nor did I ever forget the land of
Vraja. This was because the more I chanted Śrī Madana-
gopāla-deva’s mantra, the more His playful activities
appeared as sudden visions (sphūrtis) in my heart. Since
the chanting of this mantra by its nature increases
attachment for the Lord’s pastimes, my affection for
Vṛndāvana began to blossom more and more.

“Upon achieving perfection through sādhana (regulated
practice), there is no need to continue one’s practices.
By the power of my sādhana, Śrī Madana-gopāla gave me
the fruit of His mantra – vision of Śrī Upendra
Bhagavān. Even then, I could not give up chanting my
mantra, whose mercy had made my life successful. To do
so would have made me guilty of gross ingratitude toward
that which had given me the perfection of my desires.
This concern compelled me to continue my mantra-japa.”



Verse 29

tac-choka-duḥkhair anutapyamānaḥ

śuṣkānano ’haṁ jagad-īśvareṇa

saṁlakṣya toṣyeya muhuḥ karābja-

sparśena citrair vacanāmṛtaiś ca

tat – of that (remembrance); śoka – due to the anguish
(of separation); duḥkhaiḥ – by that suffering;
anutapyamānaḥ – tormented; śuṣka – dry; ānanaḥ – face;
aham – I; jagat-īśvareṇa – by the Lord of the worlds;
saṁlakṣya – noticing; toṣyeya – He would please; muhuḥ –

repeatedly; kara-abja – of His lotus hands; sparśena –
by the touch; citraiḥ – wonderful; vacana-amṛtaiḥ – with
nectarean words; ca – and.

The anguish I felt in separation from Vraja made me so
unhappy that gradually my face began to dry up. Seeing
my condition, Śrī Jagadīśvara Himself stroked me many
times with His lotus hands and sprinkled me with the
nectar of His wonderful words.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Unable to
forget Vraja-bhūmi, I was tormented by acute pain of
separation. Gradually my face became dry and lusterless.
Seeing this, the Supreme Lord Śrī Upendra understood the
condition of my heart; He pleased me by caressing me
with His lotus hands and sprinkling me with the nectar
of His fascinating words.”



Verse 30

jyeṣṭha-sodara-sambandham iva pālayatā svayam

mat-toṣaṇāya mad-dattaṁ bhogyam ādāya bhujyate

jyeṣṭha – elder; sodara – of a brother; sambandham – the
relationship; iva pālayatā – like a protector; svayam –

                          178
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

personally; mat-toṣaṇāya – to please me; mad-dattam –
that given by me; bhogyam – to be enjoyed; ādāya –
accepting; bhujyate – was eaten.

Regarding me as His elder brother and thus wanting to
satisfy me, Bhagavān Śrī Upendra began to respectfully
accept and eat the food I offered Him.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “In particular,
Śrī Upendra, manifesting the proper respect of a junior,
submissively and affectionately looked up to me as His
elder brother. It is proper to behave with honor and
respect towards an elder brother. By exhibiting this
respectful mood and allowing Himself to be taken care of
by me, the Lord satisfied me.” The word iva, meaning ‘as
if,’ means that even though there was factually no such
sibling relationship, the Lord still displayed that
mood. “He would respectfully accept and eat whatever
food I offered Him.”



Verse 31

tena vismṛtya tad duḥkhaṁ pūjayāpūrva-vṛttayā

prīṇayan sneha-bhāvāttaṁ lālayeyaṁ kaniṣṭhavat

tena – through this; vismṛtya – forgetting; tat – from
that (separation); duḥkham – the distress; pūjayā – with
worship; apūrva-vṛttayā – unprecedented fashion;
prīṇayan – giving pleasure; sneha-bhāvāt – with a mood
of affection; tam – Him; lālayeyam – I caressed;
kaniṣṭha-vat – like a younger brother.

Having obtained mercy in the form of the touch of His
hand, I forgot all the distress of my separation from
Vraja. I worshiped Him in an unprecedented way,
caressing Him affectionately as my younger brother, and
thus pleased Him.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Śrī Upendra’s
touching me with His lotus hands, His speaking nectarean
words full of love, His assuming the mood of being my
younger brother – all this made me forget the torment of
my separation from Vraja-bhūmi. I would satisfy Him with
unique ways of worship, always discovering new items to
offer, and I would affectionately stroke and embrace
Him, treating Him like my younger brother.”

The brāhmaṇa might object, “Such behavior with the
Supreme Lord is beyond propriety and does not look
good.”

Gopa-kumāra replies, “This is not so. What is not
auspicious when hearts are overwhelmed by great love and
affection? In such a condition, awe and reverence
automatically disappear. Because this mood of affection
is natural, pampering and caressing Jagadīśvara was not
inappropriate.”



Verse 32

                          179
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017


evaṁ māṁ svāsthyam āpādya sva-sthāne kutracid gataḥ

upendro vasati śrīmān na labhyeta sadekṣitum

evam – thus; mām – me; svāsthyam – well-being; āpādya –
restoring; sva-sthāne – to His own abode; kutracit –
somewhere; gataḥ – gone; upendraḥ – Upendra; vasati –
resided; śrī-mān – the glorious Lord; na – not; labhyeta
– could be obtained; sadā – always; īkṣitum – to see.

Bhagavān Śrī Upendra pacified me in this way and then
left for His own abode. I did not know where He lived,
and so I could not always see Him while I was in Svarga.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Gopa-kumāra had received mercy from
Bhagavān Śrī Upendra, but he still aspired for more.
Contemplating going elsewhere to fulfill this desire, he
became indifferent to living in Svarga. This is
explained in two verses, beginning here with evam.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Bhagavān Śrī Upendra arranged for
me to worship Him on a grand scale with all the opulence
of the three worlds, and He arranged for me to propagate
His devotional service throughout the three worlds. He
vanquished any pride I had in receiving the post of
Indra. What is more, by touching me with His lotus
hands, He relieved the extreme pain I was feeling in
separation from Vraja and filled me with happiness. He
completely pacified my mind and then returned to His own
abode. Whether this abode was Śvetadvīpa, Dhruvaloka or
Vaikuṇṭha-loka, I could not say. Once He left, no one,
including myself, could receive His direct darśana. And
when Śrī Bhagavān disappeared, Śrī Lakṣmī-devī would
also vanish.”

The brāhmaṇa might ask, “The Lord is the concentrated
embo-diment of eternity, knowledge, and bliss, and He is
omnipresent. Therefore, He can be seen everywhere. How,
then, can He disappear?”

In reply, Gopa-kumāra uses the word īkṣitum, meaning ‘to
be seen.’ He says, “O best of the Mathurā brāhmaṇas, put
aside your doubt. Although the Personality of Godhead is
present everywhere, material eyes cannot perceive Him.
It is therefore very difficult to have His direct
darśana. Only rarely can some fortunate living entity
achieve it.”



Verse 33

tato yo jāyate śokas tena nīlācala-prabhum

acalāśrita-vātsalyaṁ draṣṭum iccheyam etya tam

tataḥ – then; yaḥ – which; jāyate – is born; śokaḥ –
sorrow; tena – because of that; nīlācala-prabhum – the
Lord who resides on the blue mountain, Jagannātha-deva;
acala – unmoving; āśrita – for surrendered souls;
vātsalyam– affection; draṣṭum – to see; iccheyam – I
would desire; etya – going; tam – to Him.


                          180
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

But when I could not see Śrī Upendra, I again became
distressed and could not maintain my steadfastness. So,
I thought to go to Nīlācala-kṣetra (Jagannātha Purī) to
see the Lord of Nīlācala, who permanently resides there
out of His unwavering affection for those who have taken
shelter of Him.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Thereafter, the
pain of separation from Śrī Bhagavān intensified, making
me restless. Seeking solace, I hankered for darśana of
the Lord whom I had seen before, Śrī Jagannātha-deva,
the Lord of Nīlācala, who is beyond the power of words
to describe. ‘Now I will not stay in heaven;’ I thought,
‘I shall go to earth.’ ”

The brāhmaṇa might ask, “Why would you go to earth?”
Gopa-kumāra replies, “In Jagannātha Purī, the Lord of
Nīlācala’s unlimited affection for those who have taken
His shelter is steady like a mountain. Just as Mount
Sumeru is immovable, so Śrī Jagannātha-deva is always
fixed, and He permanently resides in Nīlācala.”



Verse 34

prādurbhūtasya viṣṇos tu tasya tādṛk-kṛpā-bharaiḥ

ādhiḥ sarvo vilīyeta pāścātyo ’pi tad-āśayā

prādurbhūtasya – reappearing; viṣṇoḥ – of Śrī Vāmana-
deva; tu – but; tasya – His; tādṛk-kṛpā – of such mercy;
bharaiḥ – by the profusion; ādhiḥ – the mental anguish;
sarvaḥ – all; vilīyeta – would vanish; pāścātyaḥ –
afterwards; api – however; tat-āśayā – because of the
prospect of His (association).

How wonderful is the mercy of Śrī Bhagavān! Seeing my
condition, from time to time He would appear before me
and accept my offerings with His own hands and pacify me
with sweet words. Thus, my lamentation and anguish would
be soothed, and the sorrow I would feel in anticipation
of imminent separation from Him would disappear.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The brāhmaṇa might wonder, “If, in the
absence of Śrī Upendra, Gopa-kumāra was so intensely
hankering to see Nīlācala-pati Śrī Jagannātha-deva, why
did he not just go to Nīlācala-kṣetra?” To address this
doubt, Śrī Gopa-kumāra speaks this verse beginning with
prādurbhūt.

He says, “The glories of Śrī Upendra are indescribable!
Under-standing the condition of my heart, with boundless
mercy He would again appear and manifest unprecedented
sweetness. With His own hands, He would accept my gifts
and worship, and He would eat all my offerings of food.
And especially wonderful were His soothing words to
relieve my mental distress and His playful dealings with
me. Naturally, I became infatuated with Śrī Upendra and
more devoted to Him than to Nīlācala-pati, whose
unquestionable excellence was now eclipsed by Śrī
Upendra’s superior qualities. Ah! By the power of His
indescribable mercy, all my anguish – the never-ending
sorrow I felt being apart from Vraja-bhūmi – would

                          181
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

immediately become pacified.”

Now the brāhmaṇa might ask, “If Śrī Upendra were to
disappear again, would you not have felt the same
distress?”

Gopa-kumāra answers, “True. But during His absence I
would always be hoping to attain His amazing grace and
see Him again, and thus all my misery would disappear.”



Verse 35

evaṁ nivasatā tatra śakratvam adhikurvatā

brahman saṁvatsaro divyo mayaiko gamitaḥ sukham

evam – thus; nivasatā – while living; tatra – there;
śakratvam – the post of Indra; adhikurvatā – having
accepted; brahman – O Brahman-realized one; saṁvatsaraḥ
– year; divyaḥ – celestial; mayā – by me; ekaḥ – one;
gamitaḥ – passed; sukham – happily.

O brāhmaṇa, thus I obtained the position of Indra and I
passed one celestial year happily.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Gopa-kumāra says, “I obtained the
position of Indra and executed his responsibilities. I
showered rains at the appropriate time and maintained
the kingdom of the three worlds perfectly by performing
different types of sacrifices (yajñas). According to
celestial time, which is time calculated by the
demigods, I passed a year in heaven with great delight.”
[One celestial year equals 360 earth years.]



Verse 36

akasmād āgatās tatra bhṛgu-mukhyā maharṣayaḥ

padbhyāṁ pāvayituṁ yāntas tīrthāṇi kṛpayā bhuvi

akasmāt – suddenly; āgatāḥ – come; tatra – there; bhṛgu
– by Bhṛgu; mukhyāḥ – headed; mahā-ṛṣayaḥ – the great
sages; padbhyām – on foot; pāvayitum – to purify; yāntaḥ
– traveling; tīrthāṇi – to pilgrimage places; kṛpayā –
out of mercy; bhuvi – on earth.

Then one day, unexpectedly, Bhṛgu and other great sages
from Maharloka mercifully stopped in Svarga on their way
to earth. They were on a mission to purify with the
touch of their lotus feet the holy places that had been
contaminated by contact with heinous sinners.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: In this verse beginning with akasmāt,
Śrī Gopa-kumāra describes the glories of the residents
of Maharloka. These glories shall become the cause of
his going from Svargaloka to Maharloka.

He says, “Because the river Gaṅgā and other holy places
become contaminated by contact with great sinners, Bhṛgu
and the other exalted sages were going to wander the

                          182
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

earth to purify those places with the touch of their
lotus feet. Out of their mercy, these great souls
suddenly arrived in Svargaloka.” The word akasmāt,
meaning ‘unexpectedly,’ indicates that there seemed to
be no reason for their coming to heaven. Alternatively,
it means that Gopa-kumāra was not aware of their
identity or the reason for their arrival.

The term bhṛgu-mukhyāḥ means that Bhṛgu is the best of
all the maharṣis, or great sages, including Marīci,
Atri, Aṅgirā, Pulastya, and Pulaha. Although Marīci is
the eldest, Śrī Bhṛgu is termed mukhya, or prominent,
because he is one of the opulences, or vibhūtis, of the
Supreme Lord, as well as a topmost Vaiṣṇava and the
father of Lakṣmī. Kṛṣṇa Himself says in Śrīmad Bhagavad-
gītā (10.25): “maharṣīṇāṁ bhṛgur ahaṁ – Among the great
sages, I am Bhṛgu.”

Similarly, in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.11.30) it is stated:

yānty ūṣmaṇā mahar-lokāj

janaṁ bhṛgv-ādayo ’rditāḥ

The fire emanating from the mouth of Śrī Saṅkarṣaṇa
represents the śakti of Bhagavān. When the three worlds
burn in that fire, the great sages headed by Bhṛgu
become distressed by the heat and go from Maharloka to
Janaloka.

Śrī Bhṛgu is celebrated throughout the scriptures for
all his special qualities. He is especially noted as a
leader among those who preach the glories of Bhagavān,
for he cannot bear even the slightest minimization of
the Lord’s magnificence. Once, for the benefit of all,
he examined the three lords, Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśa,
in order to establish Bhagavān Śrī Viṣṇu’s superiority.
During this incident, at the risk of his own detriment,
he performed the reprehensible act of kicking Śrī Viṣṇu
on the chest.

The brāhmaṇa might ask, “Those great sages are residents
of Maharloka, which is situated above Svarga. Why did
they come down to Svargaloka?”

In reply, Gopa-kumāra speaks the line beginning with
padbhyām, which explains that they stopped at Svarga on
their way to earth. “Why were they going there? The
Gaṅgā and other holy places had been contaminated by
contact with great sinners. They went to purify those
places with the touch of their lotus feet.”

The brāhmaṇa might counter, “But saintly persons who are
satyavāk can sanctify all the holy places.” Satyavāk
means ‘one whose words always come true.’ “So why did
they need to travel to earth?”

In reply, Gopa-kumāra used the word kṛpayā, meaning ‘out
of mercy.’ He says, “Those great sages wander freely,
only for the benefit of the people. Out of compassion,
they sanctify all the worlds by directly giving people
their darśana and touch.”



                            183
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


Verse 37

sa-sambhramaṁ suraiḥ sarvair ṛṣibhir guruṇā svayam

viṣṇunā cārcyamānās te mayā dṛṣṭāḥ sa-vismayam

sa-sambhramam – with respect; suraiḥ – by the demigods;
sarvaiḥ – all; ṛṣibhiḥ – by the sages; guruṇā – by
Bṛhaspati; svayam – personally; viṣṇunā – by Śrī Viṣṇu;
ca – and; arcyamānāḥ – worshiped; te – those maharṣis;
mayā– by me; dṛṣṭāḥ – seen; sa-vismayam – with wonder.

I was astounded to see the demigods, the sages, the
preceptor Bṛhaspati, and even Śrī Viṣṇu Himself worship
those maharṣis with great reverence.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “When the great
sages headed by Bhṛgu arrived in Svarga, I was amazed to
see that the demigods, sages, Śrī Nārada, the guru of
the demigods Śrī Bṛhaspati, and even Śrī Viṣṇu, who is
devoted to the brāhmaṇas, all began to worship those
exalted sages with great honor. In my astonishment, I
pondered, ‘What are the glories of those sages?’ ’’



Verse 38

ahaṁ cābhinavo viṣṇu-sevānanda-hṛtāntaraḥ

na jāne tān atha svīyaiḥ preritas tair apūjayam

aham – I; ca – and; abhinavaḥ – very new; viṣṇu – to Śrī
Viṣṇu; sevā – service; ānanda – by bliss; hṛta –
captured; antaraḥ – heart; na – not; jāne – I know; tān
– them; atha – then; svīyaiḥ – by my own (preceptors);
preritaḥ – encouraged; taiḥ – by them; apūjayam – I
worshiped.

I was new there and was always immersed in the bliss of
serving Śrī Viṣṇu, so I did not know proper etiquette.
But upon being directed by Guru Bṛhaspati and my other
superiors, I duly worshiped those maharṣis.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The brāhmaṇa might ask, “Considering
that you had been invested with the post of Indra, was
it not your duty to be the first to worship those
guests?”

In reply, Śrī Gopa-kumāra speaks this verse beginning
with aham. He says, “I had no idea who those great sages
were. I was astonished to see them and wondered, ‘Are
these some special demigods or celestial sages from
Svarga? Or perhaps they hail from another realm.’ They
had just arrived, and I could not ascertain anything
about their identity. Although I had resided in Svarga
for one full year, I was continuously engaged in serving
Śrī Viṣṇu and never paid a moment’s attention to
anything else.”

The brāhmaṇa might then argue, “Living beings become
omniscient by the potency of serving Śrī Viṣṇu. How did
you not know anything about the arrival of those great

                          184
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

sages?”

Gopa-kumāra explains, “O brāhmaṇa, by dint of serving
Bhagavān, one automatically receives all powers,
including omniscience, but by the strength of the
blessings of Śrī Gurudeva, I was not affected by any of
the mystic perfections, which are adverse to bhakti.
Especially in regard to the mystic potency of
omniscience, had I known everything, then all knowledge
of the true nature of Maharloka and other realms would
have become manifest in my heart. If in this state I had
gone to Maharloka, I would not have felt astonishment
upon seeing the glories of that abode, nor would I have
experienced the perfect bliss I felt upon going there.
Therefore, all those potencies remained covered by the
grace of Śrī Guru.” These ideas will be expressed by Śrī
Nārada at the end of the Fifth Chapter.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra concludes, “Instructed by the guru of
the demigods, Śrī Bṛhaspati, I worshiped those maharṣis
in a manner befitting their position.”



Verse 39

abhinandya śubhāśīrbhir māṁ te ’gacchan yathā-sukham

tiro ’bhavad upendro ’pi mayā pṛṣṭās tadāmarāḥ

abhinandya – greeting; śubha-āśīrbhiḥ – with auspicious
blessings; mām – me; te – they; agacchan – went; yathā-
sukham – at their sweet will; tiraḥ-abhavat –
disappeared; upendraḥ – Vāmana-deva; api – also; mayā –
by me; pṛṣṭāḥ – asked; tadā – then; a-marāḥ – the
immortals of Svargaloka (the demigods).

Bhṛgu and the other   great sages greeted me with delight
and blessed me, and   then they continued on their
journey. Meanwhile,   Bhagavān Śrī Upendra also
disappeared. I then   questioned the demigods.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “O brāhmaṇa, do
not think that I committed an offense by being
inattentive towards the maharṣis, for they showered me
with their blessings before leaving for earth.” This is
explained in this verse beginning with abhinandya. He
says, “Meanwhile, Śrī Bhagavān also disappeared. I then
questioned the demigods about the identity of those
sages.”

The brāhmaṇa might ask, “Why did you not inquire from
the demigods while Bhagavān was personally present?”
Gopa-kumāra replies, “I did not think it proper to
converse in the presence of the Lord. When one is
experiencing the bliss of directly seeing the Lord,
nothing else can remain in one’s mind. In Śrī Bhagavān’s
direct presence, even a desire to leave does not enter
the mind, what to speak of actually going anywhere.”



Verse 40


                            185
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

pūjyā devā nṛṇāṁ pūjyā devānām apy amī tu ke

kiṁ māhātmyā mahā-tejo-mayāḥ kutra vasanti vā

pūjyāḥ – worshipable; devāḥ – the demigods; nṛṇām – by
men; pūjyāḥ – to be worshiped; devānām – by the
demigods; api – even; amī – they; tu – certainly; ke –
who?; kim – what?; māhātmyāḥ – glories; mahā-tejaḥ-

mayāḥ – powerful persons; kutra – where?; vasanti –
live; vā – or.

“You are demigods, worshipable by mankind, but who are
these great sages whom even you worship? Why are they so
glorious? Where do these powerfully effulgent maharṣis
live?”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: “What did I ask the demigods?” In
explanation, Śrī Gopa-kumāra speaks this verse beginning
with pūjyā. “I asked them, ‘O venerable demigods, you
are adored by humans. But who are these maharṣis whom
even you worship?’ ” Astonished to see the sages being
honored by the worshipable demigods, Gopa-kumāra poses
this question. He knows the standards of social
convention – that the sons worship the father, and the
worshipable father worships the grandfather.
Nevertheless, he is still in doubt and thus asks what
makes those sages so worthy of honor.

“Because the sages were so effulgent, it occurred to me
that they were not native to Svarga, but must have come
from higher realms and were thus worshipable by the
demigods. Assessing the situation, I asked, ‘O demigods!
Where do these great sages reside?’ My intention was to
find out where they lived in order to go to their abode
and have darśana of the object of their devotion, the
Supreme Lord Parameśvara.”



Verse 41

mahābhimānibhir devair matsarākrānta-mānasaiḥ

lajjayeva na tad-vṛttam uktaṁ gurur athābravīt

mahā-abhimānibhiḥ – by great pride; devaiḥ – by
demigods; matsara – by envy; ākrānta – overcome;
mānasaiḥ – with hearts; lajjayā – out of shame; iva – as
if; na – not; tat – of that (incident); vṛttam – the
information about the inherent superiority of the
maharṣis; uktam – described; guruḥ – Bṛhaspati; atha –
then; abravīt – replied.

The demigods were full of pride and their hearts were
afflicted by envy. They were embarrassed to describe the
maharṣis’ inherent superiority and remained silent.
Their guru, Śrī Bṛhaspati, however, did reply.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “The demigods
were unable to endure the superiority of others because
their hearts were full of envy. So, although they heard
my question, they did not respond.”


                          186
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

The brāhmaṇa might ask, “But even if they were envious,
what would be their loss in their speaking about the
nature of the maharṣis?”

Gopa-kumāra replies, “Because all the demigods were very
proud, they did not describe the natural greatness of
the great sages headed by Bhṛgu. Doing so would have
indicated their inferiority. They thus kept quiet.” In
this verse, the word iva (lajjayā iva, meaning ‘as if
embarrassed’), shows the demigods’ disregard for the
maharṣis. Or it is used to indicate that their
embarrassment was nothing more than that seen in those
of an ordinary worldly disposition. “But Bṛhaspati, the
preceptor of the demigods, answered my question.” The
word guru is used because a spiritual master replies to
all of a disciple’s questions.



Verse 42

śrī-bṛhaspatir uvāca

ata ūrdhvaṁ mahar-loko rājate karmabhiḥ śubhaiḥ

prāpyo mahadbhir yo naśyet trai-lokya-pralaye ’pi na

śrī-bṛhaspatiḥ – the resplendent Bṛhaspati; uvāca –
said; ataḥ – from here; ūrdhvam – above; mahaḥ-lokaḥ –
Maharloka; rājate – shines; karmabhiḥ – with deeds;
śubhaiḥ – auspicious; prāpyaḥ – attainable; mahadbhiḥ –
great; yaḥ – which; naśyet – is destroyed; trai-lokya –
when the three worlds; pralaye – are destroyed; api –
even; na – not.

Śrī Bṛhaspati said: O king of the demigods! Radiantly
situated above Svarga is Maharloka, which is attained by
those who perform pious deeds. Only those who are
qualified to receive liberation reside there. Even when
the three worlds are annihilated at the time of the
cosmic dissolution, Maharloka is not destroyed.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: What types of planets are above
Svarga? To describe this, Śrī Bṛhaspati says, “Maharloka
exists above Svarga. Just as one reaches Svarga by
performing ordinary pious deeds, one reaches Maharloka
by executing an even higher class of righteous
activities, such as performing sacrifices and yogic
practices. At the time of the devastation of the three
worlds – the realms of Bhū, Bhuva, and Svarga –
Maharloka escapes destruction. Generally, only those who
are qualified for liberation reach that abode, which
exists for the entire duration of Brahmā’s life.”



Verse 43

yathā hi koṭi-guṇitaṁ sāmrājyāt sukham aindrikaṁ

tat-koṭi-guṇitaṁ tatra prājāpatyaṁ sukhaṁ matam

yathā – if; hi – indeed; koṭi – ten millions of times;
guṇitam – multiplied; sāmrājyāt – from the kingdom;

                          187
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

sukham – happiness; aindrikam – of Indra; tat – of that;
koṭi – ten millions of times; guṇitam – multiplied;
tatra – there; prājāpatyam – of those forefathers;
sukham – happiness; matam – considered.

As the happiness of Indra is millions of times greater
than that of an earthly emperor, so the happiness of a
prajāpati is millions of times greater than that of
Indra. Those who are wise have understood this.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra may ask, “One
experiences more happiness in heaven than on Martyaloka
(the earth planet). What, then, will the happiness be in
Maharloka?”

Śrī Bṛhaspati replies, “The happiness enjoyed by one in
the position of Indra is millions of times greater than
that of a sovereign ruler of the entire earth.
Similarly, the post of a prajāpati brings with it a
happiness millions of times greater than that of Indra.
The prajāpatis headed by Bhṛgu are posted in Maharloka.
This has been understood by persons of great wisdom.”



Verse 44

tenāmī sevitās tatra nivasanti mahā-sukhaiḥ

yajñeśvaraṁ prabhuṁ sākṣāt pūjayantaḥ pade pade

tena – by that (happiness); amī – they; sevitāḥ – are
served; tatra – there; nivasanti – live; mahā-sukhaiḥ –
with great pleasures; yajña-īśvaram – the Lord of
sacrifices; prabhum – the Master; sākṣāt – directly;
pūjayantaḥ – worshiping; pade pade – at every moment.

Endowed with such immense pleasure, Bhṛgu and the other
great sages reside in Maharloka, where at every moment
they relish directly worshiping Yajñeśvara Prabhu, the
Lord of sacrifice, by performing various sacrifices.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Bṛhaspati says, “Served by that
happiness, the great sages reside joyfully in Maharloka.
Sometimes, though, they also travel elsewhere for
special purposes. What more can I say about their
happiness? Yajñeśvara, who is manifest in Maharloka, is
worshiped by the execution of fire sacrifices (yajñas)
that are far more magnificent than the sacrifices
performed in all the three worlds. The Supreme Lord, the
predominating Deity of sacrifice who bestows their
results, appears everywhere in Maharloka. The residents
of that realm directly worship Him with these grand
yajñas.”



Verse 45

śrī-gopa-kumāra uvāca

tac chrutvaindra-pade sadyo nirvidyaicchaṁ tam īkṣitum

pūjya-pūjyair mahadbhis taiḥ pūjyamānaṁ mahā-prabhum

                          188
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017


śrī-gopa-kumāraḥ uvāca – Śrī Gopa-kumāra said; tat –
that; śrutvā – having heard; aindra-pade – in the abode
of Indra; sadyaḥ – at once; nirvidya – becoming
indifferent; aiccham – I wished; tam – Him; īkṣitum – to
see; pūjya-pūjyaiḥ – who is worshipable by the most
worshipable; mahadbhiḥ – by the great; taiḥ – them;
pūjyamānam – being worshiped; mahā-prabhum – the Supreme
Lord.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra said: O brāhmaṇa, simply by hearing this
wonderful narration from Bṛhaspati, the guru of the
demigods, I lost interest in the post of Indra and
desired to see Śrī Yajñeśvara Bhagavān – He who is
worshiped by the great sages such as Bhṛgu, who are
themselves worshiped by the worshipable demigods.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “After hearing
the extraordinary words of the spiritual preceptor of
demigods, Bṛhaspati, I lost all interest in being the
king of heaven, and developed a desire to see
Yajñeśvara.”

The brāhmaṇa might question, “But the Supreme Lord Śrī
Viṣṇu is personally present in heaven also. Why did you
long to go to Maharloka?”

Gopa-kumāra replies, “Humans adore the demigods, who in
turn venerate the great sages. And the worshipable Lord
of these sages is the Supreme Lord Yajñeśvara. It stands
to reason, then, that Śrī Yajñeśvara must be endowed
with exceptional glories. I had personally experienced
that Śrī Bhagavān in Svarga is sweeter and more opulent
than His manifestation on earth. Therefore, I concluded
that the Lord’s form in Maharloka must possess some
special sweetness in comparison with His form in heaven.
So it was sensible that I go to Maharloka to have
darśana of that form of the Supreme Lord.”



Verse 46

tat saṅkalpya japaṁ kurvann acirād ūrdhvam utthitaḥ

vyoma-yānena taṁ prāpto lokaṁ tatra vyalokayam

tat – that; saṅkalpya – fully determining; japam –
meditative chanting; kurvan – performing; acirāt –
without delay; ūrdhvam – above; utthitaḥ – arisen;
vyoma-yānena – by celestial airship; tam – that; prāptaḥ
– attained; lokam – planet; tatra – there; vyalokayam –
I saw.

Making this idea my conscious intention, I began to
chant my mantra. And by the power of this chanting, very
soon a celestial airship appeared. I climbed aboard and
was transported to Maharloka, where I witnessed the
wonders of that realm.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Following the
words of Bṛhaspati, the spiritual master of the
demigods, I first went to the residence of Śrī Bhṛgu,
the foremost among the great sages there, to have

                          189
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

darśana of the Supreme Lord Yajñeśvara. Upon reaching
his abode, I was astonished to see the tremendous
opulence of that place.” By then, Bhṛgu and the other
maharṣis had returned back to Maharloka after their tour
of the holy places of Bhū-maṇḍala (earth).



Verse 47

trai-lokye yat sukhaṁ nāsti vaibhavaṁ bhajanaṁ tathā

nirdoṣaṁ tatra tat sarvam asty anirvācyam āśu tat

trai-lokye – in the three worlds; yat   – what; sukham –
happiness; na – not; asti – there is;   vaibhavam –
opulence; bhajanam – adoration; tathā   – so; nirdoṣam –
faultless; tatra – there; tat – that;   sarvam – all; asti
– is; anirvācyam – indescribable; āśu   – directly; tat –
that.

The faultless and indescribable happiness, opulence, and
worship I witnessed there are not to be found anywhere
else in the three worlds.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The brāhmaṇa might ask, “What did you
see there?” Śrī Gopa-kumāra replies in three verses,
beginning here with trai-lokya.

He says, “In Maharloka, I witnessed unalloyed happiness,
opulence, and worship, the likes of which I had not seen
anywhere in Bhū, Bhuva, or Svarga. The happiness of
Maharloka is faultless for the following reasons: (1)
Because Maharloka escapes destruction when the three
worlds are annihilated at the end of the day of Brahmā,
the happiness there never ends. (2) In particular, the
happiness of Maharloka is free from the defect of
rivalry. Maharloka is free from the faults of rivalry
and envy, which are present in Svarga and which are the
cause of all unhappiness, so distress is absent there.
(3) The happiness of Maharloka is equally distributed.
Everyone in Maharloka has equal rights to the opulences
of that realm. Because no one has more or less than
anyone else and there is no other disparity, devotional
service performed there is not selfishly motivated, as
it is on earth, and thus it may be termed
unconditional.”

The brāhmaṇa might further request, “Please describe in
detail the happiness of Maharloka.” Gopa-kumāra replies,
“I am unable to find words to convey its glories.”



Verse 48

vitāyamāneṣu mahā-makheṣu tair

maharṣibhir bhakti-paraiḥ sahasraśaḥ

makhāgni-madhye prabhur utthitaḥ sphuran

makheśvaraḥ krīḍati yajña-bhāga-bhuk


                          190
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

vitāyamāneṣu – within extensive; mahā-makheṣu – great
sacrifices; taiḥ – by them; mahā-ṛṣibhiḥ – the great
sages; bhakti-paraiḥ – very devoted; sahasraśaḥ – by the
thousands; makha-agni-madhye – in the midst of the
sacrificial fire; prabhuḥ – the Lord; utthitaḥ – risen;
sphuran – manifesting; makha-īśvaraḥ – the Lord of
sacrifices; krīḍati – sports; yajña – of the sacrifice;
bhāga – the portion; bhuk – eating.

There, thousands of great sages absorbed in loving
devotion to Bhagavān were conducting lavish fire
sacrifices under Bhṛgu’s leadership. Yajñeśvara,
effulgent with sacred flames, was personally manifesting
from the sacrifices and enjoying the pastime of
accepting the offerings.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: With great eagerness, Śrī Gopa-kumāra
briefly describes the enchanting opulence of that place
in two verses, beginning here with vitāyamāneṣu. He
says, “Headed by Bhṛgu, thousands of maharṣis, free from
material desires and absorbed in loving devotion, were
engaged in performing magnificent sacrifices. From the
blazing fires of the yajñas, Yajñeśvara Himself, the
Lord of sacrifice, would manifest. Even more dazzling
than the flames themselves, He would appear and enjoy
His pastime of accepting and eating all the sacrificial
offerings.”



Verse 49

sa yajña-mūrti ravi-koṭi-tejā

jagan-mano-hāri-mahā-pratīkaḥ

prasārya hastāṁś carum ādadāno

varān priyān yacchati yājakebhyaḥ

saḥ – He; yajña – of sacrifice; mūrtiḥ – the Deity;
ravi-koṭi – like tens of millions of suns; tejāḥ –
having splendor; jagat – of the world; manaḥ – the
hearts; hāri – charming; mahā-pratīkaḥ – great shape;
prasārya – extending; hastān – hands; carum – the caru
offering; ādadānaḥ – accepting; varān – benedictions;
priyān – dear; yacchati – offers; yājakebhyaḥ – to the
worshipers.

As radiant as millions of suns, Yajña-mūrti, the
personification of sacrifice, enchanted the world with
His effulgent form. With His two outstretched arms, He
accepted the oblations and fulfilled the worshipers’
heartfelt desires.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: After briefly recounting the opulence
of Maharloka, Śrī Gopa-kumāra further describes the form
and character of Yajñeśvara, the Lord of sacrifice. He
says, “He was Yajña-mūrti, the embodiment of sacrifice,
in the sense that His very body was yajña. Holding the
sruk and sruva ladles and other implements used in
sacrifice, He appeared as the personified form of
yajña.”


                          191
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

In the description of Yajña-Varāha (the boar incarnation
of the Lord), Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.13.35–36) states:

rūpaṁ tavaitan nanu duṣkṛtātmanāṁ

durdarśanaṁ deva yad adhvarātmakam

chandāṁsi yasya tvaci barhi-romasv

ājyaṁ dṛśi tv aṅghriṣu cātur-hotram

sruk tuṇḍa āsīt sruva īśa nāsayor

iḍodare camasāḥ karṇa-randhre

prāśitram āsye grasane grahās tu te

yac carvaṇaṁ te bhagavann agni-hotram

O Lord! You are the embodiment of sacrifice. You reveal
Your form, which is made of sacrifices, to those who
perform yajña, and you conceal it from the wicked. O
Lord! All the Vedic scriptures, the Gāyatrī mantra, and
the various chandas (hymns) are in the skin of Your
transcendental form; the sacrificial kuśa grass in Your
hairs; the ghee used in fire sacrifice in Your eyes; and
the four types of fruitive acts (cāturhotra) in Your
lotus feet.

O Lord! The sruk ladle is in Your mouth; the smaller
sruva ladle in Your nostrils, the spoon (camas) in Your
two ears, the tray with oblations (iḍā) in Your belly,
and the chalice (soma-pātra) in Your divine mouth. O
Lord! Whatever You chew is the sacrificial fire
(agnihotra). What more shall I say? You alone are the
embodiment of all mantras, all demigods and all
paraphernalia offered as oblations. You are the
intention and You are the action.

Gopa-kumāra continues, “O Lord, even though You are
brilliant like millions of suns [and such brilliance
would ordinarily be impossible to look at], You still
captivate the whole world with Your bodily effulgence.
The parts of your transcendental form – Your head,
mouth, throat, chest, hands, belly, thighs, and feet –
are an impressive spectacle. You mercifully extend
thousands of arms to eat the sacrificial oblations, and
You fulfill the desires of Your dear sacrificial
priests.”

These two verses (BB 2.2.48–49) establish Śrī
Yajñeśvara’s superiority over Śrī Upendra.



Verse 50

tad-darśnojjṛmbhita-sambhramāya

harṣān namaskāra-parāya mahyam

datto nijocchiṣṭa-mahā-prasādas

tena sva-hastena dayārdra-vācā

                          192
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


tat-darśana – His vision; ujjṛmbhita – made visible;
sambhramāya – to me in awe; harṣāt – out of happiness;
namaḥ-kāra-parāya – who was absorbed in offering
obeisance; mahyam – to me; dattaḥ – giving; nija – His
own;ucchiṣṭa – in the form of chewed food remnants;
mahā-prasādaḥ – great mercy; tena – by Him; sva-hastena
– with His own hand; dayā-ardra – melting with mercy;
vācā – with a voice.

The astonishing majesty of Śrī Yajñeśvara filled me with
awe, and in great delight, I bowed down before Him.
Seeing this, Yajñeśvara called to me with tender and
compassionate words, and He gave me His mahā-prasāda
remnants with His own hands.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: In this verse beginning with tat, Śrī
Gopa-

kumāra describes Śrī Yajñeśvara’s extraordinary
kindness. He says, “With His own hands, Yajñeśvara gave
me His mahā-prasāda

remnants.”

The brāhmaṇa might ask, “How did you become the
recipient of His favor?” Therefore, Gopa-kumāra says,
“Seeing the amazing magnificence of the Lord, I was
struck with awe and became confused as to what to do in
that situation. Being unable to determine what my duty
was, I simply offered Him my obeisances with great joy.
Seeing my condition, the Lord called me close to Him
with affectionate words, ‘O Gopa-kumāra, come here and
accept My hospitality.’ In this way, He showed me
special mercy and gave me the remnants of His mahā-
prasāda.”



Verse 51

apūrva-labdham ānandaṁ paramaṁ prāpnuvaṁs tataḥ

kāruṇyātiśayāt tasya saṁsiddhāśeṣa-vāñchitaḥ

apūrva – never before; labdham – attained; ānandam –
bliss; paramam – great; prāpnuvan – I attained; tataḥ –
then; kāruṇya – mercy; atiśayāt – out of abundant; tasya
– of Him; saṁsiddha – full perfection; aśeṣa – of
all;vāñchitaḥ – desires.

By Śrī Jagadiśa’s boundless mercy, I felt unimaginable
joy, and my yearnings for His darśana were unlimitedly
satisfied.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “By Yajñeśvara’s
unlimitedly powerful mercy, I received consummate
bliss.” “What was the nature of that joy? It was
absolutely astonishing, beyond anything I had ever
experienced before. There, in being able to see Śrī
Jagadiśa, I received the unlimited fruit of my desires.
Therefore, this shows that the pinnacle of happiness of
Maharloka is superior to that of both heaven and earth.”


                          193
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017



Verse 52

dayālūnāṁ maharṣīṇāṁ saṅgatyetas tato bhraman

praty-āvāsaṁ tathaivāham adrākṣaṁ jagadīśvaram

dayālūnām – kind; mahā-ṛṣīṇām – of the great sages;
saṅgatyā – with the company; itaḥ tataḥ – here and
there; bhraman – wandering; prati-āvāsam – in every
home; tathā – thus; eva – indeed; aham – I; adrākṣam –
saw; jagad-īśvaram – the Lord of the worlds.

Wandering about with those kind-hearted sages, I saw
that in every house, the Lord of the universe was being
worshiped in the same manner.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: In this verse beginning with
dayālunām, Śrī Gopa-kumāra speaks about the opulence of
Maharloka, which is even superior to that of Svarga. He
says, “With those merciful sages, I wandered throughout
that whole region. In every home, I saw Bhagavān
Yajñeśvara manifest Himself from the sacrificial fire
pit and accept

and eat the sacrificial offerings with His own hands.
This kind of exhibition of the Lord’s mystic opulence
was not to be seen in Svarga.”



Verse 53

tataḥ kṛtārthatā-niṣṭhāṁ manvānaḥ svasya sarvathā

sānandaṁ nivasaṁs tatra prokto ’haṁ tair maharṣibhiḥ

tataḥ – then; kṛta-arthatā – in a state of fulfillment;
niṣṭhām – fixed; manvānaḥ – considering; svasya – of my
self; sarvathā – in every respect; sa-ānandam – with
bliss; nivasan – residing; tatra – there; proktaḥ – was
addressed; aham – I; taiḥ – by them; mahā-ṛṣibhiḥ – the
great sages.

Thus, I received immense mercy from Bhagavān Yajñeśvara
and began to consider myself successful in every way. I
was residing there in perfect happiness when one day,
the maharṣis spoke to me.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra explains the result of
seeing different manifestations of Yajñeśvara, the Lord
of the Universe, in the various homes of Maharloka. He
says, “Because of receiving the direct darśana of
Jagadīśvara everywhere and constantly being showered
with His inconceivable mercy, I considered that my birth
and chanting ( japa) had become completely successful.
In great delight, I took up residence there. Then one
day, Bhṛgu and other sages spoke to me.”



Verse 54


                          194
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

śrī-maharṣaya ūcuḥ

bho gopa-vaiśya-putra tvam etal-loka-svabhāva-jam

pradīyamānam asmābhir vipratvaṁ svī-kuru drutam

śrī-mahā-ṛṣayaḥ ūcuḥ – the great sages said; bhoḥ – O;
gopa-vaiśya-putra – son of a cowherd; tvam – you; etat –
that; loka – by this planet; svabhāva-jam – naturally
generated; pradīya-mānam – bestowed; asmābhiḥ – by us;
vipratvam – the state of a brāhmaṇa; svī-kuru – accept;
drutam – at once.

The maharṣis said: O Gopa-kumāra, you are the son of a
vaiśya. We are granting you brahminical status. Quickly
accept it. By the influence of this abode, one naturally
develops the qualities of a brāhmaṇa.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Here, Śrī Gopa-kumāra is called gopa-
vaiśya-putra because he was the son of a vaiśya, or one
whose profession is to protect the cows. This type of
address implies that Gopa-kumāra naturally possessed the
qualification of one who is twice-born [The twice-born
classes are brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas, and vaiśyas]. The
exalted sages say, “O son of a gopa-vaiśya! You ought to
accept the status of a vipra (priest). Become a
brāhmaṇa.”

Gopa-kumāra might object, “But I am the son of a vaiśya.
How can I ever become a brāhmaṇa?”

“Have no doubts. We maharṣis grant you this status.”

“Will this require some special endeavor on my part?”

“No, you will not be obliged to perform penances or any
other practices. By the inherent nature of this planet
of sages (ṛṣi-loka), the nature of a brāhmaṇa
automatically manifests. You will only have to follow
some external behavior. If you don’t, it will be
inappropriate for you to reside here.”



Verse 55

maharṣīṇām ekatamo bhūtvā tvam api pūjaya

jagad-īśam imaṁ yajñaiś ciram ātma-didṛkṣitam

mahā-ṛṣīṇām – among the great sages; ekatamaḥ – one;
bhūtvā – becoming; tvam – you; api – also; pūjaya –
should worship; jagad-īśam – the Lord of the worlds;
imam – this; yajñaiḥ – through sacrifices; ciram –
eternally; ātma – of your heart; didṛkṣitam – the
desired goal of sight.

For a long, long time you have yearned to see Yajñeśvara
Śrī Jagadiśa. Now, become a maharṣi like us and
constantly see and worship Him.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra may ask, “What would I
gain by becoming a brāhmaṇa?”


                          195
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

The great sages reply, “You would be accepted as one of
us, as a maharṣi. This is especially significant because
you have been desiring the divine vision of Lord
Yajñeśvara for such a long time. After accepting the
status of a brāhmaṇa, you will always be able to have
His darśana through the performance of sacrifices.”



Verse 56

śrī-gopa-kumāra uvāca

tac chrutvācintayaṁ brahman vaiśyatve syāt sukhaṁ mahat

prabhor eṣāṁ ca viprāṇāṁ tad-bhaktānām upāsanāt

śrī-gopa-kumāraḥ uvāca – Śrī Gopa-kumāra said; tat –
that; śrutvā – hearing; acintayam – I thought; brahman –
O Brahman-realized person; vaiśyatve – in the condition
of a merchant; syāt – there may be; sukham – happiness;
mahat – great; prabhoḥ – of the Lord; eṣām – of them; ca
– and; viprāṇām – of brāhmaṇas; tat-bhaktānām – of the
devotees; upāsanāt – through worship.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra says: O Mathurā brāhmaṇa, hearing this,
I thought, “There is great happiness in being a vaiśya,
because then I can serve both my Lord and His brāhmaṇa
devotees and receive unlimited delight.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “O best of the
Mathurā brāhmaṇas! I considered the maharṣis’ proposal
but thought, ‘I am really happy as a vaiśya. If I were
to accept the status of a brāhmaṇa, which is unsuitable
for the mood of servitorship (dāsya-bhāva), I would be
deprived of the right to serve. On the other hand, the
body of a vaiśya is especially suitable for serving
Yajñeśvara and the Vaiṣṇavas (the Lord and His
devotees). Therefore, as a vaiśya, I shall be able to
serve them properly and become even happier than these
exalted sages.’ ”



Verse 57

eṣāṁ yajñaika-niṣṭhānām aikyenāvaśyake nije

jape ca sad-gurūddiṣṭe māndyaṁ syād dṛṣṭa-sat-phale

eṣām – of them; yajña – to performing sacrifices; eka-
niṣṭhānām – exclusively devoted; aikyena – acquiescing
to their desire and accepting the status of a brāhmaṇa;
āvaśyake – necessarily; nije – own; jape – in meditative
chanting; ca – also; sat-guru – by my pure spiritual
guide; uddiṣṭe – taught; māndyam – slackness; syāt – may
be; dṛṣṭa – seen; sat – spiritual; phale – in the fruit.

Those maharṣis were solely dedicated to their fire
sacrifices and had no other interest in life. I thought
that if I agreed to their proposal and accepted the
status of a brāhmaṇa, I would inevitably become remiss
in chanting the mantra my divine master had taught me.
It would not be right to neglect a mantra that had

                          196
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

already proven itself by bestowing such good results so
quickly.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra continues, “These
great sages are single-mindedly dedicated to the
performance of fire sacrifices

and are uninterested in any other process. If I were to
accept the status of a brāhmaṇa, then like them, I would
also, become completely dedicated to only performing
fire sacrifices. I would inevitably become slack in my
essential duty – chanting the mantra given by my sad-
guru (bona fide spiritual master). I have directly
experienced the mantra’s effectiveness and have achieved
immediate results: a great empire, the position of
Indra, and now the opulence of Maharloka. Therefore, on
no account would it ever be appropriate to neglect the
chanting of this mantra.”



Verse 58

tatas tān anumānyāham anaṅgī-kṛtya vipratām

tatrāvasaṁ svato jāta-prājāpatya-mahā-sukhaiḥ

tataḥ – thus; tān – them; anumānya – respectfully; aham
– I; anaṅgī-

kṛtya – not accepting; vipratām – brāhmaṇa status; tatra
– there; avasam – I resided; svataḥ – according to my
own nature; jāta – manifested; prājāpatya – of the
forefathers; mahā-sukhaiḥ – with great pleasures.

Therefore, I did not accept the status of a brāhmaṇa and
humbly supplicated the maharṣis. They relented and began
to honor me as before. Thereafter, I also resided in
Maharloka, enjoying boundless happiness as they did.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Thus
deliberating, I refused to become a brāhmaṇa.”

The brāhmaṇa might then ask, “Is it not an offense to
disrespect the desires of great personalities?”

Gopa-kumāra replies, “Do not worry. Upon my humble
entreaty, those great sages relented and began to honor
me as before. Moreover, even though I did not become a
brāhmaṇa, my natural happiness in Maharloka was not
affected in any way. Rather, by the influence of that
realm, I automatically became the recipient of the great
pleasures that come with the post of a prajāpati
(progenitor of the universe), and like the prajāpatis, I
began to reside there most happily.”



Verse 59

na doṣās tatra śoko vā śaṅkā vā kāpi vidyate

nānyac ca kiñcid yajñeśa-prītyai yajñotsavān ṛte


                          197
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

na – no; doṣāḥ – fault; tatra – there; śokaḥ – sorrow;
vā – or; śaṅkā – anxiety; vā – or; kā api – any; vidyate
– is; na – not; anyat – other; ca – also; kiñcit –
anything; yajña – of sacrifices; īśa – of the Lord;
prītyai – for the pleasure; yajña-utsavān – festivals of
sacrifices; ṛte – without.

Maharloka is free from even a trace of the defects found
on Svarga, such as lamentation and fear. There, for the
pleasure of Śrī Yajñeśvara, only grand festivals of fire
sacrifice are celebrated. No other sense enjoyment
exists.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “The quality of
happiness in Maharloka is superior to that on Svargaloka
(heaven). Unlike heaven, Maharloka is free from rivalry,
envy, lust, anger, madness, and other

anomalies. There, one is not subject to censure,
contempt, and misery inflicted by rivals; one does not
dread the destruction of one’s abode at the time of the
cosmic inundation; and one does not fear occurrences
such as falling down from his position. Therefore, the
maharṣis have no interest in anything but the worship of
Bhagavān. Nothing but festivals of fire sacrifice that
are performed for the pleasure of Bhagavān Yajñeśvara
are celebrated; no other type of sense enjoyment takes
place.

Any enjoyment one does seek is dovetailed to the
pleasure of the Lord. Such beauty in serving the Lord is
not to be found in Svarga.”



Verse 60

kintu yajña-samāptau syād duḥkham antarhite prabhau

vṛtte yajñāntare cāsya prādurbhāvāt punaḥ sukham

kintu – however; yajña – of sacrifice; samāptau – at the
conclusion; syāt – it may be; duḥkham – unhappiness;
antarhite – disappeared; prabhau – when the Lord; vṛtte
– during the function; yajña – the sacrifice; antare –
during; ca – and; asya – His; prādurbhāvāt – because of
the appearance; punaḥ – again; sukham – happiness.

However, as soon as the sacrifice was over, Śrī
Yajñeśvara would disappear, leaving me grief-stricken.
Then, when He would reappear at the start of another
fire sacrifice, all my distress would be cast away.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: In three verses, beginning here with
kintu, Śrī Gopa-kumāra explains why he desired to find a
realm superior to Maharloka, and how, because of this,
he developed a sense of detachment from living there. He
says, “Śrī Yajñeśvara would vanish at the end of every
yajña, overwhelming my heart with anguish. Yet, the
Lord, who is submissive to His beloved servants, would
not go away for long. He would reappear as soon as the
next fire sacrifice would start, and I would again be
swept away in bliss. However, during the interim periods
when I could not see Him, I genuinely suffered great

                          198
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

mental distress.”



Verse 61

catur-yuga-sahasrasya tatratyaika-dinasya hi

ante trai-lokya-dāhena jana-loko ’dhigamyate

catuḥ-yuga – of the four ages; sahasrasya – of a
thousand; tatratya – for the residents; eka-dinasya – of
one day; hi – indeed; ante – at the end; trai-lokya – of
the three worlds; dāhena – due to the conflagration;
jana-lokaḥ – Janaloka; adhigamyate – must be entered.

At the end of one thousand catur-yugas (cycles of four
ages), which equal one day of Brahmā, a cosmic
annihilation would take place, consuming the three
worlds with fire and causing even Maharloka to become
hot. The scorching heat would force the great sages to
move to Janaloka.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra continues, “One day of
Brahmā is comprised of one thousand catur-yugas, and one
day of Maharloka is equally long. Maharloka exists for
the same duration as Brahmaloka. However, at the end of
Brahmā’s day, when the three worlds below Maharloka are
annihilated by fire emanating from the mouth of Śrī
Saṅkarṣaṇa, Maharloka also becomes heated. At that time,
Bhṛgu and the other maharṣis understand that night has
begun. Fearing the heat, they go to Janaloka, which is
situated above Maharloka.”



Verse 62

rajanyām iva jātāyāṁ yajñābhāvena tatra tu

yajñeśādarśanena syād dāhas tad-dāhato ’dhikaḥ

rajanyām – when night; iva – as; jātāyām – manifests;
yajña – of sacrifices; abhāvena – due to the absence;
tatra – there; tu – certainly; yajña-īśa – of the Lord
of sacrifices; adarśanena – by not seeing; syāt – there
may be; dāhaḥ – a fire; tat-dāhataḥ – than the fire of
that (of the three worlds); adhikaḥ – greater.

On Janaloka, as   if it were night, no fire sacrifices
were performed.   Consequently, there was no darśana of
Śrī Yajñeśvara.   For me, the burning heat of not seeing
Him was greater   than the fire of devastation.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “In the company
of Bhagavān, Brahmā would sleep in the kārṇava waters,
the ocean of inundation. At that time, no fire
sacrifices were performed, and it was like night in
Janaloka.” The word iva, meaning ‘as if,’ indicates that
factually there is no mode of ignorance (tama) in that
realm, so there is no darkness. However, because the
period is called night, there are no fire sacrifices and
it is not possible to see Bhagavān Yajñeśvara. Gopa-
kumāra says, “As a result, the fire of separation

                            199
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

scorching my heart was more intense than the heat of the
conflagration erupting from the mouth of Śrī Saṅkarṣaṇa
during the annihilation of the three worlds.”



Verse 63

tato ’kṣaya-vaṭa-cchāye kṣetre śrī-puruṣottame

āgatya śrī-jagannāthaṁ paśyeyam iti rocate

tataḥ – then; akṣaya – eternal; vaṭa – of the banyan
tree; chāye – in the shade; kṣetre śrī-puruṣottame – in
Puruṣottama-kṣetra; āgatya – coming; śrī-jagannātham –
Śrī Jagannātha; paśyeyam – I may see; iti – thus; rocate
– I desired.

In order to relieve the fever of separation from
Bhagavān, I longed to go to Śrī Puruṣottama-kṣetra,
where in the shade of the imperishable banyan tree I
would continuously see Śrī Jagannātha-deva.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “In order to
allay the burning pain arising from separation from
Bhagavān, I wanted to go to the shade of the
imperishable banyan tree (akṣaya-vaṭa). Because that
dearmost place, Śrī Puruṣottama-kṣetra (Śrī Jagannātha
Purī), remains untouched even at the time of the cosmic
annihilation, I wanted to go there and receive the
darśana of Śrī Jagannātha-deva. Since ancient times, Śrī
Jagannātha-deva has been splendidly situated there in
His immovable form. Because one can always receive the
Lord’s darśana, one never feels the distress of
separation.”



Verse 64

mahārloke gate ’py ātma-japād rahasi pūrvavat

sampādyamānāc chokaḥ syād asyā bhūmer didṛkṣayā

mahaḥ-loke – in Maharloka; gate – when gone; api – also;
ātma – my; japāt – from chanting; rahasi – in seclusion;
pūrva-vat – as before; sampādyamānāt – from being
established; śokaḥ – grief; syāt – there would be; asyāḥ
– of this; bhūmeḥ – the land (of Vraja); didṛkṣayā –
with the desire to see.

Despite being in Maharloka, when I would chant my mantra
in a solitary place as before, I would become aggrieved
by the desire to see Śrī Vraja-bhūmi, this land of
Vraja.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The Mathurā brāhmaṇa might ask,
“Knowing that at the end of night in Maharloka you would
again see Śrī Yajñeśvara and become happy, why did the
memory of your previous happiness not sustain you during
the night?”

Śrī Gopa-kumāra replies, “In Maharloka, I would chant my
mantra in a solitary place. At that time, I would become

                          200
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

griefstricken with longing to again behold Śrī
Vṛndāvana. I considered that supremely charming and
glorious Śrī Vraja-maṇḍala in the district of Mathurā to
be the favorite playground of Śrī Nīlācala-pati (Śrī
Jagannātha-deva).” This indicates the enchanting wonders
of Śrī Jagannātha and His beloved pastime place, Śrī
Vraja-maṇḍala.



Verses 65–66

prādurbhūto ’tha bhagavān ijyamāno dayā-nidhiḥ

yadā mām āhvayet prītyā man-nītaṁ līlayātti ca

tadānīyeta sarvārtis tamaḥ sūryodaye yathā

rātrāv api tad-ekāśā-baddho neśe kvacid gatau

prādurbhūtaḥ – appeared; atha – then; bhagavān – the
Lord; ijyamānaḥ – worshiped; dayā-nidhiḥ – an ocean of
mercy; yadā – when; mām – to me; āhvayet – would call;
prītyā – with love; mat-nītam – that offering brought by
me; līlayā – as a pastime; atti – He would eat; ca –
and; tadā – then; ānīyeta – He would take; sarva – all;
ārtiḥ – distress; tamaḥ – darkness; sūrya-udaye – at
sunrise; yathā – as; rātrau – at night; api – also; tat
– Him; eka-āśā-baddhaḥ – bound by one hope; na īśe – I
was unable; kvacit – at all; gatau – to depart.

However, Bhagavān Śrī Yajñeśvara, that ocean of mercy,
would then appear. Cordially summoning me, He would
affectionately accept my offerings, which would cause
all my anguish to be mitigated, just as the rising sun
dissipates the darkness. Even during the night, just the
hope of seeing Him again would relieve my distress.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The brāhmaṇa might wonder, “Being
disturbed by separation from Śrī Vraja-bhūmi, how could
you possibly describe the happiness and other glories of
Maharloka?”

To resolve this doubt, Śrī Gopa-kumāra speaks two
verses, beginning here with prādurbhūtaḥ. He says,
“Thereafter, at the end of night, Bhagavān Śrī
Yajñeśvara, who is an ocean of mercy, would appear and
accept worship as He did before. He would then invite me
to come to Him and would respectfully eat the foodstuffs
I had offered. This would dispel all my pain and
lamentation, just as darkness is dissipated by the
sunrise. Although it is true that sacrifices were not
performed during the night, the distress incurred in the
absence of the Lord’s darśana was rendered insignificant
with the expectation of seeing Him again at night’s
end.”

Here, the implication of the word api, meaning ‘and,’ is
that Gopa-kumāra is saying, “Throughout the night, I
would be feeling eager in my heart for morning to come –
that soon I would see Bhagavān, festive worship would
resume, and I would again have the good fortune of
receiving His extraordinary mercy. I was bound by the
rope of such hope, which allayed my distress. Such

                          201
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

eagerness was the cause of my happiness. I became
incapable of going to Śrī Vṛndāvana or Śrī Puruṣottama-
kṣetra. During the day, by directly seeing Yajñeśvara in
His festivals, and especially by receiving His
incomparable mercy, I would forget even my own self. Not
only was I incapable of going anywhere else, but I also
did not even have the desire to leave. My great hope for
supreme happiness saved me from being overcome by
anguish.” This is the purport of what Gopa-kumāra is
saying.



Verse 67

tatraikadā mahā-tejaḥ-puñja-rūpo dig-ambaraḥ

pāñcaśābdika-bālābhaḥ ko ’py āgād ūrdhva-lokataḥ

tatra – there; ekadā – once; mahā-tejaḥ – of splendor;
puñja-rūpaḥ – in the form of a mass; dik-ambaraḥ –
dressed by the directions (naked); pāñcaśa – five;
ābdika – years; bāla – of a boy; ābhaḥ – having the
appearance; kaḥ api – someone; āgāt – came; ūrdhva-
lokataḥ – from the higher planets.

Once, a dazzlingly effulgent person arrived there from a
higher planet. He appeared like a completely naked five-
year-old boy.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Maharloka and
Janaloka are practically the same, but because the
residents of Maharloka go to Janaloka during the
annihilation, it can be concluded that Janaloka has some
distinction. At the time of the cosmic annihilation, the
maharṣis of Maharloka, gripped by the fear of being
burned, strive to go elsewhere. The residents of
Janaloka, on the other hand, are not forced to seek
refuge elsewhere. I experienced this after going there.”

Next, Gopa-kumāra explains why he went to Tapoloka, the
planet above Janaloka, and what the glories of that
realm are. He says, “Once, a great personality arrived
in Maharloka from a higher abode. He looked like a
naked, five-year-old boy, but his body was an aggregate
of brilliance.” Not knowing anything about Tapoloka at
that time, Gopa-kumāra simply calls it a ‘higher abode.’
The arrival of this great personality hints at the
reason for Śrī Gopa-kumāra’s imminent departure to
Tapoloka.



Verse 68

vihāya yajña-karmāṇi bhaktyotthāya maharṣibhiḥ

praṇamya dhyāna-niṣṭho ’sau yajñeśvara-vad arcitaḥ

vihāya – abandoning; yajña – of sacrifice; karmāṇi – the
activities; bhaktyā – with devotion; utthāya – rising;
mahā-ṛṣibhiḥ – by the great sages; praṇamya – bowing;
dhyāna-niṣṭhaḥ – dedicated to meditation; asau – he;
yajña-īśvara-vat – like the Lord of sacrifices; arcitaḥ

                          202
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

– was worshiped.

Seeing that great personality, who was absorbed in
meditation, the maharṣis abandoned their sacrificial
rituals and prostrated themselves before him. With
loving devotion, they worshiped him in a manner equal to
their worship of Śrī Yajñeśvara.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “When Bhṛgu and
the other sages saw that child, they abandoned their
religious ritual of fire sacrifice, offered him daṇḍavat
praṇāmas (prostrated obeisance) and ardently worshiped
him in the same way that they worship Yajñeśvara. But
being rapt in meditation, he did not speak with them.”



Verse 69

yathā-kāmaṁ gate tasmin mayā pṛṣṭā maharṣayaḥ

kutratyaḥ katamo vāyaṁ bhavadbhir vārcitaḥ katham

yathā-kāmam – at his free will; gate – having left;
tasmin – that; mayā – by me; pṛṣṭāḥ – inquired; mahā-
ṛṣayaḥ – the great sages; kutratyaḥ – whence?; katamaḥ –
who?; vā ayam – or he; bhavadbhiḥ – by your good selves;
vā – or; arcitaḥ – worshiped; katham – why?.

After the departure of that child, who wanders at will,
I asked the great sages, “Who was that boy? Where does
he live? Why did you worship him?”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “After that
child, who wanders everywhere free from restraint, had
left Maharloka by his own sweet will, I asked the sages,
‘O maharṣis, you are worshipable even for the demigods;
there is no position more exalted than yours. And in
addition, you are always engaged in direct worship of
Śrī Yajñeśvara. It seems impossible, then, that someone
else would be worshiped by you. It is amazing that you
treated that naked boy with as much veneration as you
treat Śrī Yajñeśvara. You even left your worship of the
Lord to honor him. I am baffled by this, so kindly tell
me, who is that boy and where does he reside?’ ”



Verse 70

sanat-kumāra-nāmāyaṁ jyeṣṭho ’smākaṁ mahat-tamaḥ

ātmārāmāpta-kāmānām ādyācāryo bṛhad-vrataḥ

sanat-kumāra-nāmā – named Sanat-kumāra; ayam – he;
jyeṣṭhaḥ – most senior; asmākam – our; mahat-tamaḥ – a
very great soul; ātma-ārāma – and delights in the self;
āpta-kāmānām – for those whose desires are fulfilled;
ādya-ācāryaḥ – the first exemplary preceptor; bṛhat-
vrataḥ – he has undertaken ‘the great vow’ (celibacy).

The maharṣis replied, “His name is Śrī Sanat-kumāra, and
he is the eldest and most exalted of all of us. He is
the original preceptor of those who are self-satisfied

                          203
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

(ātmā-rāma) and those whose desires have been satiated
(āpta-kāma), and he maintains a powerful vow of lifelong
celibacy.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The exalted sages say, “We are all the
sons of Brahmā, and he is our eldest brother and chief,
excelling us in all good qualities. He is the original
preceptor, or ācārya, of those who rejoice in the self
(ātmā-rāma) and who are self-content (āpta-kāma). He
observes a great vow of lifelong celibacy (naiṣṭhika
brahmacārī). His name is Śrī Sanat-kumāra.”



Verse 71

ita ūrdhva-tare loke tapaḥ-saṁjñe vasaty asau

bhrātṛbhis tribhir anyaiś ca yogīndraiḥ sva-samaiḥ saha

itaḥ – from here; ūrdhva-tare – in a higher; loke –
planet; tapaḥ-saṁjñe – named Tapaḥ; vasati asau – he
lives; bhrātṛbhiḥ – with his brothers; tribhiḥ – three;
anyaiḥ – others; ca – also; yogī-indraiḥ – best amongst
yogīs; sva-samaiḥ – like himself; saha – with.

“Above this Maharloka is Janaloka, and above that is
Tapoloka. It is there that he resides with his three
brothers, who, like him, are masters of yoga.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra has asked, “Where does
he live?”

The maharṣis reply, “Janaloka is located above
Maharloka. He lives above even Janaloka in a realm
called Tapoloka.”

He might further inquire, “Does Śrī Sanat-kumāra live
there all alone?”

To this, the sages say, “No, he resides there with his
three brothers –

Sanaka, Sanandana, and Sanātana – who, like him, are
masters of yoga. Many other equally great yogīs, such as
Kavi, Havi, Antarīkṣa, Prabuddha, and Pippalāyana, also
live there.”



Verse 72

bṛhad-vrataika-labhyo yaḥ kṣemaṁ yasmin sadā sukham

prājāpatyāt sukhāt koṭi-guṇitaṁ cordhva-retasam

bṛhad-vrata – by one who takes a great vow (celibacy);
eka – only; labhyaḥ – attained; yaḥ – which; kṣemam –
prosperity; yasmin – wherein; sadā – always; sukham –
happiness; prājā-patyāt – of the forefathers; sukhāt –
than the happiness; koṭi – ten millions of times;
guṇitam – multiplied; ca – and; ūrdhva – upwards
flowing; retasam – semen.


                          204
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

“Tapoloka is attained only by observing a vow of
lifelong celibacy, and it is a realm that is always full
of auspiciousness, tranquility, and bliss. The happiness
that the lifelong celibate residents enjoy in Tapoloka
is billions of times superior to the happiness of the
prajāpatis.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The glorification of Śrī Sanat-kumāra
indicates the glories of all the residents of Tapoloka.
The maharṣis say, “That realm is attained only by
following bṛhad-vrata, the ‘formidable vow’ of the path
of naiṣṭhika-brahmacarya, in which one promises to
adhere to sexual abstinence for life.” This reveals that
Tapoloka is superior to Maharloka and Janaloka.

“Auspicious tranquility always prevails in Tapoloka.
Maharloka is marred by some inauspiciousness because its
residents have to flee out of fear of the heat of the
searing flames of the cosmic devastation. Although the
heat does not reach Janaloka, its residents nevertheless
suffer mentally when the three worlds below Maharloka
inauspiciously go up in flames. All such miseries are
absent in Tapoloka, which is always radiant with good
fortune. Only the best of yogīs who are lifelong
celibates are fit to go there, where one experiences a
happiness that is billions of times greater than the
happiness enjoyed by the prajāpatis of Maharloka.”



Verse 73

yathā yajñeśvaraḥ pūjyas tathāyaṁ ca viśeṣataḥ

gṛha-sthānām ivāsmākaṁ sva-kṛtya-tyāgato ’pi ca

yathā – just like; yajña-īśvaraḥ – the Lord of
sacrifices; pūjyaḥ – is worshipable; tathā – similarly;
ayam – He; ca – also; viśeṣataḥ – specially; gṛha-
sthānām – of householders; iva – like; asmākam – us;
sva-kṛtya – our duties; tyāgataḥ – by giving up; api –
and; ca – also.

“As Śrī Yajñeśvara is worshipable by everyone, Śrī
Sanat-kumāra is also worshipable. He is an incarnation
of Śrī Bhagavān and is an exalted Vaiṣṇava. As such, he
is to be worshiped, especially by householders like us.
We have abandoned even our sacrificial rituals to
worship him.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra may have wondered,
“Why did you stop your worship of Bhagavān to honor that
naked boy?”

Here, the maharṣis reply, “Just as Śrī Yajñeśvara is
worshipable by everyone, Śrī Sanat-kumāra is also
worshipable. Any guest is considered a manifestation of
the Lord. However, Śrī Sanat-kumāra is not only our
guest, he is also a śaktyāveśa-avatāra, an incarnation
of the Lord invested with transcendental potency, and he
is an exalted Vaiṣṇava, superior to us in all respects.
For these reasons, we gave up our prime duty of
worshiping Bhagavān to worship him. Everywhere it is
stated that a naiṣṭhika-brahmacārī, or lifelong

                          205
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

celibate, is more eminent than a householder. So, it is
the duty of householders to serve such guests.”

Actually, the residents of Maharloka, such as Bhṛgu, are
never attached to household life. They are brāhmaṇas,
dedicated to performing fire sacrifices out of their
love for Śrī Bhagavān. Therefore, the word iva, meaning
‘as if,’ has been used in the verse above.



Verse 74

śrī-gopa-kumāra uvāca

tato ’kārṣam ahaṁ citte tatrāho kīdṛśaṁ sukham

īdṛśāḥ kati vānye syur eṣāṁ pūjyaś ca kīdṛśaḥ

śrī-gopa-kumāraḥ uvāca – Śrī-Gopa-kumāra said; tataḥ –
thereafter; akārṣam aham – I was attracted; citte – in
my heart; tatra – there; aho – oh!; kīdṛśam – what
kind?; sukham – happiness; īdṛśāḥ – of this nature; kati
– how many; vā – whether?; anye – others; syuḥ – there
may be; eṣām – their; pūjyaḥ – their worshipable object;
ca – and; kīdṛśaḥ – of what nature?.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra said: Hearing this, I wondered, “What
kind of happiness is found on Tapoloka? How many great
yogīs like Sanat-kumāra live there? And which form of
the Lord do they worship?”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Listening to
the maharṣis convinced me that I had to go to Tapoloka.
I wondered, ‘What kind of happiness do they enjoy there?
How many powerful masters of yoga (yogendras) like
Sanat-kumāra live there? What is their worshipable Lord
like?’ Above all else I considered, ‘If these exalted
yogīs have glories like those of the Lord, then it
follows that their worshipable Lord must be endowed with
even more exalted qualities than them. Therefore, it is
imperative that I go to their abode to see that
manifestation of Bhagavān.’ ”



Verse 75

evaṁ tān ca didṛkṣuḥ san samāhita-manā japan

bhūtvā parama-tejasvī taṁ lokaṁ vegato ’gamam

evam – thus; tān – them; ca – and; didṛkṣuḥ – desiring
to see; san – being; samāhita-manāḥ – with fixed mind;
japan – chanting (mantra); bhūtvā – having become;
parama-tejasvī – supremely powerful; tam – to that;
lokam – world; vegataḥ – swiftly; agamam – I went.

Then, eager to see that manifestation of Bhagavān, I
began to chant my mantra with one-pointed attention. By
the potency of japa, I also became as supremely
effulgent as Sanat-kumāra and swiftly reached Tapoloka.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “I resolved to

                          206
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

see Sanaka and the other Kumāras and their beloved Lord.
To achieve this, I began to chant my worshipable mantra
with one-pointed attention, with mind devoted to
Bhagavān.” Alternatively, the verse is saying, “I had
observed Śrī Sanat-kumāra’s deep meditation and surmised
that such samādhi, or profound meditation, is the only
process (sādhana) for reaching his abode. Therefore,
withdrawing within myself and continuously chanting my
mantra, I became qualified to know that abode. In other
words, I became supremely radiant like Sanat-kumāra and
the others and proceeded to Tapoloka at lightning
speed.”



Verse 76

tatra dṛṣṭo mayā śrīmān sanako ’tha sanandanaḥ

asau sanat-kumāro ’pi caturthaś ca sanātanaḥ

tatra – there; dṛṣṭaḥ – seen; mayā – by me; śrīmān –
glorious; sanakaḥ – Sanaka; atha – then; sanandanaḥ –
Sanandana; asau – he; sanat-kumāraḥ – Sanat-kumāra; api
– also; caturthaḥ – the fourth; ca – also; sanātanaḥ –
Sanātana.

There, I again saw Sanat-kumāra, as well as Śrīmān
Sanaka, Sanandana, and the fourth Kumāra, Sanātana.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “In Tapoloka, I
saw Śrīmān Sanaka, Sanātana, and Sanandana, as well as
Śrī Sanat-kumāra, whom I had seen before in Maharloka.
Sanat-kumāra, who freely wanders everywhere, had
returned to Tapoloka.”



Verse 77

sammanyamānās tatratyais tādṛśair eva te mithaḥ

sukha-goṣṭhīṁ vitanvānāḥ santy agamyāṁ hi mādṛśaiḥ

sammanyamānāḥ – nicely worshiped; tatratyaiḥ – by the
residents of that place; tādṛśaiḥ – similar to them; eva
– indeed; te – they; mithaḥ – together; sukha – happy;
goṣṭhīm – in conversation; vitanvānaḥ – engaging; santi
– they are; agamyām – not under-standable; hi – indeed;
mādṛśaiḥ – by those such as I.

I saw that the residents of Tapoloka were honoring those
incarnations of Bhagavān, Sanaka and his brothers, who
were happily conversing among themselves. However,
ignorant as I was, I could not understand that blissful
discussion.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Describing the glories of the four
brothers, Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “I saw that although the
residents of Tapoloka were as glorious as the four
brothers, they were worshiping the Kumāras as
incarnations of Bhagavān. The Kumāras were happily
engaged in iṣṭa-goṣṭhī, conversing together on spiritual
topics.” The topics of their spiritual discourse are

                          207
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

celebrated in ‘Veda-stuti – Prayers by the Personified
Vedas,’ Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.87).

The brāhmaṇa might ask, “What sort of subjects were they
discussing?”

Gopa-kumāra replies, “Since I was such a neophyte and
ignorant Vaiṣṇava, the topics were beyond my
comprehension. I could not even discern whether they
were talking about liberation or sense gratification.”



Verse 78

bhagaval-lakṣaṇaṁ teṣu tādṛṅ nāsti tathāpy abhūt

teṣāṁ sandarśanāt tatra mahān modo mama svataḥ

bhagavat – of the Personality of Godhead who is full in
six opulences; lakṣaṇam – the symptoms; teṣu – in them;
tādṛk – such; na – not; asti – is; tathā api – however;
abhūt – there was; teṣām – of them; sandarśanāt – from
fully seeing; tatra – there; mahān – great; modaḥ –
happiness; mama – of me; svataḥ – spontaneously.

Although the four Kumāras did not have the
characteristic attributes of Bhagavān, still great
euphoria spontaneously filled my heart whenever I saw
them.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The brāhmaṇa might question, “You were
fully engrossed in the beautiful vision of Jagadīśa, so
why did you desire to see anyone else? Does this mean
that Śrī Jagadīśa’s darśana brought no happiness?”

Śrī Gopa-kumāra replies, “I certainly never doubted that
Śrī Jagadīśa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Still, the darśanas of Sanaka

and his brothers were also unparalleled. They were
naiṣṭhika-

brahmacārīs. They did not have the distinguishing
attributes of Godhead – extraordinary features like four
arms, or powerful opulences like the conch and disc.
Nonetheless, whenever I saw those four brothers, a
feeling of great happiness spontaneously arose in my
heart.” The purport of the word svataḥ, meaning
‘automatically,’ or ‘of its own accord,’ is that, being
incarnations of Bhagavān, the Kumāras are naturally
embodiments of consummate joy.

Gopa-kumāra says, “In contrast, I did not experience
this happiness when I first saw Śrī Sanat-kumāra on
Maharloka. Only in Tapoloka does seeing the Kumāras
bestow such astonishing happiness.”

This illustrates the natural magnificence of the realm
of Tapoloka. Indeed, just like this, it is seen
everywhere that there are special glories to a
particular place, a certain time, and a special,
deserving person.


                          208
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017



Verse 79

yathā-sthānaṁ prayāteṣu dhyāna-niṣṭheṣu teṣv atha

draṣṭuṁ bhramāmi sambhāvya pūrva-vaj jagad-īśvaram

yathā-sthānam – to their respective residences;
prayāteṣu – having departed; dhyāna – in meditation;
niṣṭheṣu – who were fixed; teṣu – they; atha –
thereafter; draṣṭum – to see; bhramāmi – I would wander;
sambhāvya – supposing; pūrva-vat – as before; jagad-
īśvaram – Lord of the universes.

When Sanaka and the other masters of yoga, who were
devoted to

meditation, went to their respective domiciles, I
thought to myself, “Here also, just as in Svarga, Śrī
Bhagavān must be present somewhere in a manifest form.”
Thus, I began to wander about in search of Him.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “After this,
those masters of yoga (yogendras), the eminent Sanaka
and his brothers, as well as the yogendras who worship
them, disappeared by their mystic power, returning to
their respective abodes.

“Then the thought came to my mind, ‘Just as Śrī Jagadiśa
is personally present in Svarga and Maharloka, He must
be present here as well, in some confidential place. If
I search for Him, certainly I should be able to receive
His darśana.’ With this hope, I began to roam all over
Tapoloka.”

The brāhmaṇa might ask, “Why didn’t you just ask the
exalted mystic yogīs?”

Gopa-kumāra says, “They were absorbed in meditation, so
I had no chance to ask them. Only at the time of worship
did they come together, breaking their silence to engage
in joyful discussions. Because they were so dedicated to
meditation, they would usually return to their own
residences immediately after their discussions, leaving
no opportunity for me to ask questions.”



Verse 80

itas tato na dṛṣṭvā tam apṛcchaṁ tān mahā-munīn

na te stuvantaṁ mām agre namantaṁ lokayanty api

itaḥ tataḥ – here and there; na – not; dṛṣṭvā – seeing;
tam – Him; apṛccham – I asked; tān – them; mahā-munīn –
great sages; na – not; te – they; stuvantam – offering
prayers; mām – me; agre – before; namantam – bowing
down; lokayanti – they looked; api – even.

I wandered everywhere, but I did not find Śrī
Jagadīśvara. Having no other recourse, I inquired from
the great sages, but they did not reply. Although I even

                          209
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

prostrated myself before them and offered prayers, they
still did not even look at me.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “I searched
everywhere but was not able to see Śrī Jagadīśvara. I
then inquired from those great sages, ‘Where in Tapoloka
does Śrī Jagadīśvara reside?’ Not only did they not
respond, but they also did not even look at me. Even
though I prostrated myself before them and glorified
them, they still completely ignored me.”



Verse 81

prāyaḥ sarve samādhi-sthā naiṣṭhikā ūrdhva-retasaḥ

svātmārāmāḥ pūrṇa-kāmāḥ sevyamānāś ca siddhibhiḥ

prāyaḥ – generally; sarve – all of them; samādhi-sthāḥ –
situated in trance; naiṣṭhikāḥ – firmly established;
ūrdhva-retasaḥ – in celibacy; sva-ātma-ārāmāḥ – finding
happiness in their own self; pūrṇa-kāmāḥ – their desires
were already fulfilled; sevyamānāḥ – they were rendered
service; ca – also; siddhibhiḥ – by the mystic powers.

Although the sages would occasionally have loving
discussions with one another or would worship Bhagavān,
they were virtually always absorbed in samādhi. They
were resolute celibates, wholly self-satisfied with all
their desires fulfilled, and they were served by mystic
perfections like aṇimā.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: In this verse beginning with prāyaḥ,
Śrī Gopa-kumāra explains why the sages did not look at
him. He says, “Although at times the munis came together
for spiritual discussions and worship of Bhagavān, they
were almost always rapt in the trance of samādhi (deep
meditation). Those unwavering lifelong celibates were
able to be so absorbed because they were self-satisfied
and enjoyed within themselves (ātmā-rāma). They were
fully focused on the soul with no attraction for
anything else. Especially, they were completely
satisfied because all their material desires and
passions were finished (pūrṇa-kāma). All the mystic
perfections, such as aṇimā, the power of becoming
infinitesimally small, had assumed personal forms and
were serving them.”



Verse 82

bhagavad-darśanāśā ca mahatī phalitā na me

utābhūd viramantīva teṣāṁ saṅga-svabhāvataḥ

bhagavat-darśana – for the sight of the all-opulent
Lord; āśā – desire; ca – also; mahatī – great; phalitā –
fulfilled; na – not; me – for me; uta – indeed; abhūt –
it was; viramanti – it ceased; iva – apparently; teṣām –
their; saṅge – in the association; sva-bhāvataḥ –
because of their nature.


                          210
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

There, my ardent desire for darśana of Bhagavān was not
fulfilled. Indeed, by the influence of the association
of the self-satisfied sages, it actually began to wane.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “My long-
cherished, great hope of seeing Bhagavān did not bear
fruit in Tapoloka; rather, the association of the ātmā-
rāma sages gradually weakened it. By associating with
those who are self-satisfied, one’s desire for his
constitutional position (sahaja-dharma) – to see the
Lord and to perform loving pastimes with Him – naturally
becomes subdued. That is how my ardent desire also ebbed
away.”



Verse 83

tatrāthāpy avasaṁ teṣāṁ prabhāva-bhara-darśanāt

guru-vāg-gauravād dṛṣṭa-phalatvāc cātyajan japam

tatra – there; atha api – nevertheless; avasam – I
stayed; teṣām – their; prabhāva – power; bhara –
immense; darśanāt – because of seeing; guru – of my
spiritual guide; vāk – for the words; gauravāt – out of
respect; dṛṣṭa-phalatvāt – because of having seen its
result; ca – also; atyajan – not abandoning; japam –
chanting of my mantra.

Nevertheless, I remained in Tapoloka. Being impressed by
the great power of those sages, I could go nowhere else.
At the same time, out of reverence for the words of my
guru and because I had clearly experienced the benefit
of my mantra, I did not abandon my chanting.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The brāhmaṇa might ask, “If this were
the case, why did you not return to Maharloka?”

Śrī Gopa-kumāra replies, “It is true that my desire for
darśana of Bhagavān virtually faded away in Tapoloka.
Nonetheless, I was compelled to stay there because I
directly experienced the unlimited, unobstructed force
of the mystic powers, such as aṇimā, which were
manifested by Śrī Sanaka and his brothers and which were
attending them like maidservants. Thus, I could not
leave.”

The brāhmaṇa might also wonder, “By associating with the
ātmā-rāma sages, your desire to see the Lord almost
disappeared. Did you stop chanting your mantra, which is
the real cause of receiving the darśana of Bhagavān?”

Gopa-kumāra replies, “When Śrī Gurudeva gave me the
mantra, he ordered, ‘Never give up chanting this
mantra.’ On the strength of this instruction and out of
respect for Śrī Gurudeva, I somehow managed to maintain
my chanting, but not with the same affection and
attachment as before.”



Verse 84


                          211
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

sthāna-svabhāva-jāc citta-prasādānandato ’dhikam

tena sampadyamānena sā didṛkṣā vivardhitā

sthāna – of that place; sva-bhāva-jāt – generated from
the nature; citta-prasāda – of the purity of
consciousness; ānandataḥ – in comparison to the bliss;
adhikam – more; tena – by that (chanting of mantra);
sampadyamānena – by engaging; sā – that; didṛkṣā –
desire to see (Bhagavān); vivardhitā – increased.

Due to the glorious nature of that realm, as I
continuously chanted my mantra, my attachment to seeing
the Lord began to increase. The bliss and joy I would
experience in my heart made the pleasure of being with
Sanaka and the other sages appear vapid.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The brāhmaṇa might question, “Since
your desire to see the Lord progressively weakened, how
were you able to experience the special glories of
Tapoloka?”

In reply, Śrī Gopa-kumāra first reveals the glories of
Tapoloka and then explains how the desire for being
ātmā-rāma can be expunged by lovingly performing mantra-
japa. He says, “While chanting my

mantra, I   began to feel the great bliss that is the
intrinsic   nature of Tapoloka. As a result, I began to
chant the   mantra more than ever, and this in turn vastly
increased   my long-standing desire for darśana of
Jagadiśa.   Now, the happiness of associating with the
ātmā-rāma   sages began to feel tasteless.”



Verse 85

sadā nīlācale rājaj jagannātha-didṛkṣayā

yiyāsuṁ tatra saṁlakṣyābravīn māṁ pippalāyanaḥ

sadā – always; nīlācale – on a blue mountain, the temple
in Purī; rājat – who shines; jagannātha – Śrī
Jagannātha; didṛkṣayā – because of a desire to see;
yiyāsum – my intense desire to depart; tatra – there;
saṁlakṣya – noticing; abravīt – spoke; mām – to me;
pippalāyanaḥ – Pippalāyana Muni.

When my attachment became overwhelming, it sparked in me
the desire to go to Nīlācala to see the eternally
manifest Śrī Jagannātha-deva. Understanding my
intention, the omniscient sage Śrī Pippalāyana came to
me.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Unable to have

darśana of Bhagavān in Tapoloka, I decided to go to
Nīlācala to see

Śrī Jagannātha-deva, who is always present there. At
that time, the

yogendra Pippalāyana approached me. Bhagavān Śrī

                            212
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

Ṛṣabhadeva’s nine

sons are powerful mystic yogīs (known as the nava-
yogendras), headed by Kavi. The middle yogendra Śrī
Pippalāyana, being omniscient, came to know my desire.
Observing my behavior – aimlessly wandering about,
looking dejected and lamenting – he remarked, ‘Śrī
Jagannātha is always present in Nīlācala. This does not
mean that He sometimes disappears from Svarga and
Maharloka, or that His presence in those places is not
guaranteed.’ ”



Verse 86

śrī-pippalāyana uvāca

idaṁ mahat padaṁ hitvā katham anyad yiyāsasi

kathaṁ vā bhramasi draṣṭuṁ dṛgbhyāṁ taṁ parameśvaram

śrī-pippalāyana uvāca – Śrī Pippalāyana said; idam –
this; mahat – great; padam – abode; hitvā – giving up;
katham – why?; anyat – to another; yiyāsasi – you desire
to go; katham – why?; vā – or; bhramasi – you travel;
draṣṭum– to behold; dṛgbhyām – with your eyes; tam –
that; parama – the Supreme; īśvaram – Lord.

Śrī Pippalāyana said: Why do you want to leave this
exalted realm and go elsewhere? Why do you roam about
trying to see the Supreme Lord, who cannot be seen with
material eyes?

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Pippalāyana says, “Tapoloka is the
abode of the greatest masters of yoga who are strictly
celibate. The happiness enjoyed here is billions of
times greater than that of the prajāpatis. Why would you
abandon all this and go elsewhere? The Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Parameśvara, is imperceptible to
material eyes; why are you wandering all over trying to
see Him?”



Verse 87

samādhatsva manaḥ svīyaṁ tato drakṣyasi taṁ svataḥ

sarvatra bahir antaś ca sadā sākṣād iva sthitam

samādhatsva – fix in meditation; manaḥ – mind; svīyam –
your; tataḥ – then; drakṣyasi – you will see; tam – Him;
svataḥ – automatically; sarvatra – everywhere; bahiḥ –
without; antaḥ – within; ca – also; sadā – eternally;
sākṣāt – before your eyes; iva – as if; sthitam –
situated.

Fix your mind in deep meditation, because it is by
meditation alone that can one see Parameśvara. He is
everywhere, within and without, but by the potency of
samādhi you will see Him as if directly before you in
person.


                          213
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might say, “Darśana of
the Lord can be had only with one’s eyes. To search for
Him, it is essential that I wander.”

In response to this, in this verse Śrī Pippalāyana
replies, “The Supreme Lord can never be seen by external
vision. Turn your mind inwards and deeply absorb
yourself in meditation (samādhi). Just as when a mirror
is cleaned, the reflection of one’s face is
automatically visible, so, when the consciousness is
cleansed by the power of samādhi, one can easily see the
Supreme Lord, Parameśvara.”

“Can the Lord not be seen everywhere?”

“Parameśvara is always present everywhere, as if
directly visible without and within.” But here, the
import of the word iva (‘sadā sākṣād iva sthitam – as if
always directly visible before you’) is that one cannot
actually see the Lord with his eyes. “Therefore, there
is no use roaming about trying to see the Supreme Lord
with your external vision.”



Verse 88

paramātmā vāsudevaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ

nitāntaṁ śodhite citte sphuraty eṣa na cānyataḥ

parama-ātmā – the Supreme Self; vāsudevaḥ – Lord
Vāsudeva; sat – eternal; cit – full of knowledge; ānanda
– and full of bliss; vigrahaḥ – His form; nitāntam –
completely; śodhite – pure; citte – in the heart;
sphurati – manifests; eṣaḥ – He; na – not; ca – also;
anyataḥ – by any other way.

Vāsudeva, the Supersoul and presiding Deity of
consciousness, is sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha, the embodiment
of eternity, knowledge, and bliss. He only appears in a
consciousness that has been completely cleansed of the
contamination of material urges and is surcharged with
viśuddha-sattva (pure spiritual goodness). There is no
other way to see Him.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Pippalāyana had said, “He cannot
be seen by the eyes.” In this verse, he explains the
reason for this. He says, “Vāsudeva is the presiding
Deity of consciousness who resides in the heart as the
Supersoul. He reveals Himself only in a heart that is
surcharged with the mode of transcendental goodness, or
viśuddha-sattva.”

This viśuddha-sattva is defined in the Fourth Canto of
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (4.3.23): “sattvaṁ viśuddhaṁ vasudeva-
śabditaṁ – the quality of transcendental goodness
(viśuddha-sattva) is known by the name vasudeva.” Only
in the pure, unstained consciousness (vasudeva) will the
Supreme Person Vāsudeva (He who comes from vasudeva)
manifest.

“Material urges are like dirt on the heart. When the
consciousness is completely cleansed of this

                          214
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

contamination, then Vāsudeva manifests in such a heart.
Vāsudeva is the embodiment of eternality, cognizance,
and joy. He is the Supreme Brahman, self-luminous and
unlimited. His darśana is not to be had with the eyes or
any of the external senses.”



Verse 89

tadānīṁ ca mano-vṛttyantarābhāvāt su-sidhyati

cetasā khalu yat sākṣāc cakṣuṣā darśanaṁ hareḥ

tadānīm – then; ca – also; manaḥ – of the mind; vṛtti –
activities; antara – of the internal; abhāvāt – on
account of an absence;

su-sidhyati – is perfected; cetasā – through the mind;
khalu – indeed; yat – what; sākṣāt – directly; cakṣuṣā –
with the eyes; darśanam – sight; hareḥ – of Śrī Hari.

Do not think that meditation is the only activity of the
mind. It is the mind that facilitates direct vision of
Śrī Hari through the eyes. This is because when Bhagavān
manifests in one’s heart, the mind can do nothing but
think of Him. Thus, the eyes actually see only through
the faculty of the mind.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might question, “The
mind can only engage in meditation; it has no power to
see. Seeing is an activity of the organ of sight. So how
is it that you have said, ‘In the conscious mind, you
shall have darśana.’ (Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta 2.2.87)?”

In reply, Śrī Pippalāyana speaks this verse, saying,
“Direct darśana

of Śrī Hari can be had by the mind alone. It is not true
that the only function of the mind is dhyāna, or
meditation. You may have heard that it is possible to
directly view Śrī Hari with your eyes, but that sight
actually takes place in the mind. This is the absolute
conclusion. The reason is that when Bhagavān manifests
in the consciousness,

the mind can think of nothing else. When one’s mind is
absorbed

in the Deity of Śrī Bhagavān, the Lord manifests there.
At that time, one may not realize, ‘I am seeing Bhagavān
only in my mind, not with my eyes,’ and may rather
think, ‘It is with my eyes that I am having darśana.’
Even if one has this misconception, however, the

act of seeing the Lord is performed by the mind alone,
and

darśana through the mind is the same as darśana with the
eyes.”

In the term su-sidhyati, meaning ‘fully realized, or
perfect,’


                          215
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

su signifies that darśana of the form of the Lord that
is seen through the mind is much more beautiful than
that seen with the eyes. The reason is that the limited
external senses are incapable of simultaneously seeing
all the limbs of Bhagavān and completely capturing His
incomparable charming loveliness. But with the mind, on
the other hand, one’s darśana of Bhagavān becomes su-
sidhyati, perfectly realized.



Verse 90

manaḥ-sukhe ’ntar-bhavati sarvendriya-sukhaṁ svataḥ

tad-vṛttiṣv api vāk-cakṣuḥ-śruty-ādīndriya-vṛttayaḥ

manaḥ – of the mind; sukhe – within the happiness;
antaḥ-bhavati – are inherent; sarva – all; indriya – of
the senses; sukham – happiness; svataḥ – automatically;
tad-vṛttiṣu – in those functions; api – also; vāk – of
words; cakṣuḥ – eyes; śruti – ears; ādi – and so forth;
indriya – of the senses; vṛttayaḥ – the functions.

When joy arises in the mind, all the senses
automatically become pleased. The functions of the eyes
and other senses are accomplished by the mind, so when
the mind is happy, all the senses are happy.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might counter,
“Although

darśana of Bhagavān may be had in the mind, there is
immeasurably greater happiness in seeing the Lord with
one’s eyes.”

Pippalāyana replies, “When the mind becomes happy, the
eyes and all the senses also become happy. Because the
mind includes the senses in its pleasure, it is not true
that only darśana with one’s eyes brings happiness. Just
as by watering the root of a tree, all its branches,
twigs, leaves and flowers naturally flourish and
blossom, similarly, when the mind becomes happy,
automatically all the senses, which are controlled by
the mind, also enjoy. Conversely, when one’s mind is
unhappy, even the tendency to enjoy with one’s senses
vanishes, what to speak of actually trying to pursue
such pleasure.”

Gopa-kumāra might object, “This proves that one achieves
mental happiness when he remembers Bhagavān. But
activities such as kīrtana and darśana (glorifying and
seeing the Lord) are functions of the tongue and eyes.
The happiness had by the mind is limited compared with
the greater enjoyment one experiences through all the
varied functions of the senses.”

Pippalāyana replies, “Although it is true that the
variegatedness of the senses affords greater happiness,
still, the functions of the ears, tongue, etc., are
included within the function of the mind. It is the mind
that performs the activities of all the senses. So
kīrtana, darśana, and so forth are accomplished only by
the mind.”

                          216
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017




Verse 91

mano-vṛttiṁ vinā sarvedriyāṇāṁ vṛttayo ’phalāḥ

kṛtāpīhākṛteva syād ātmany anupalabdhitaḥ

manaḥ-vṛttim – the action of the mind; vinā – without;
sarva – all; indriyāṇām – of the senses; vṛttayaḥ – the
functions; aphalāḥ – fruitless; kṛtā – made; api –
although; īhā – an endeavor; akṛtā – not done; iva – as
if; syāt – may be; ātmani – in the mind; anupalabdhitaḥ
– because of not being perceived.

Without the mind’s activity, the functions of the senses
are futile –

for as long as the mind does not experience the
activities of the senses, they are as if never
performed. Therefore, actual darśana of Śrī Bhagavān
takes place when He manifests in the supremely pure
consciousness of the mind and heart.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: After first explaining this subject
with positive propositions, or in other words, with
logical consequence, Śrī Pippalāyana now uses negative
logic. He says, “Without the function of the mind, the
actions of the senses are useless. Although the senses
may attempt to enjoy their designated sense objects,
without the function of the mind, the functions of the
senses cannot be effected – they are as if not performed
– and they cannot experience enjoyment of their objects.
Why is this so? It is because the embodied soul cannot
experience sense objects without the volition of the
mind. This can be understood by examining the statement,
‘sukha-pāṭhyamāna bhagavat-stotra – I happily recited
the prayers glorifying Bhagavān.’ The pleasure
experienced here comes from absorption of the mind, not
action of the eyes. Therefore, darśana of Śrī Bhagavān
takes place when the Lord manifests Himself within a
transcendentally pure state of mind. As He is
imperceptible to the senses, seeing Him is impossible
with the eyes alone.”



Verse 92

kadācid bhakta-vātsalyād yāti ced dṛśyatāṁ dṛśoḥ

jñāna-dṛṣṭyaiva taj jātam abhimānaḥ paraṁ dṛśoḥ

kadācit – sometimes; bhakta – for His devotees;
vātsalyāt – out of affection; yāti – he becomes; cet –
if; dṛśyatām – visible; dṛśoḥ – through the eyes; jñāna
– of knowledge; dṛṣṭyā – by the sight; eva – indeed; tat
– that; jātam – takes place; abhimānaḥ – a conception;
param – afterwards; dṛśoḥ – through the eyes.

It is true that sometimes the Lord, out by special
affection for His devotees, appears to their external
eyes. However, He is really made visible by the eyes of

                          217
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

knowledge. Only by the compassion of Śrī Bhagavān does
the living being feel that he has received darśana with
his eyes.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might say, “Although
the function of the mind is superior, it is a well known
fact that devotees of the Lord such as Śrī Dhruva and
Prahlāda directly saw Bhagavān with their eyes. Why are
these incidents celebrated?”

To resolve this doubt, Pippalāyana says, “It is true
that because of bhakta-vātsalya, or the Lord’s love and
affection for those devoted to Him, He directly reveals
Himself to the eyes of some fortunate devotees such as
Śrī Dhruva and Prahlāda, in order to make their vision
successful. However, that darśana occurs through the
vision of

knowledge, not with the eyes. It is impossible for the
senses, which are

limited by their very nature (dharma), to ever grasp the
unlimited Truth.”

The doubt might be pressed, “Then why are devotees like
Dhruva and Prahlāda famous for directly seeing the Lord
with their eyes? Why are there such narrations about the
affectionate relationship (bhakta-vātsalya) of Śrī
Bhagavān and His devotees?”

Pippalāyana replies, “The statement, ‘I had direct
darśana of Śrī Bhagavān with my eyes,’ reveals the
living being’s false self-conception (abhimāna) in
regard to his eyes. However, this misconception arises
due to the Lord’s love for His devotees. On the strength
of the affection of the Lord, a devotee entertains the
idea that, ‘With these very eyes, I saw Śrī Bhagavān.’
Thus, although the eyes cannot perceive an object that
is beyond their functional range, it is improper to
think that the eyes are incapable of receiving darśana
of Bhagavān.”



Verse 93

tasya kāruṇya-śaktyā vā dṛśyo ’stv api bahir-dṛśoḥ

tathāpi darśanānandaḥ sva-yonau jāyate hṛdi

tasya – His; kāruṇya – of mercy; śaktyā – by the power;
vā – or; dṛśyaḥ – he may be seen; astu – that surely is
a fact; api – indeed; bahiḥ dṛśoḥ – to external vision;
tathā api – still; darśana – of the vision; ānandaḥ –
the bliss; sva-yonau – in his own origin; jāyate –
appears; hṛdi – in the mind.

Because nothing is impossible for Śrī Bhagavān, by His
kāruṇya-śakti, His mercy potency, He sometimes appears
to external vision. Even so, the joy of this darśana is
transmitted by the mind alone, which is its source.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might argue, “What is
impossible to achieve by the grace of the Supreme Lord?”

                          218
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


Pippalāyana replies, “Yes, this is true, but the wise
have concluded that consciousness (citta) alone enjoys
the fruit of such darśana. Śrī Bhagavān becomes visible
to the eyes by His mercy. In other words, by His potency
of mercy, He gives the capacity by which He can be
perceived. So, at certain times and to some persons, He
becomes visible externally. This is because nothing is
impossible for Him.”

It is said, “mūkaṁ karoti vācālaṁ paṅguṁ laṅghayate
girim – by the power of His mercy, even the dumb can
speak eloquently and the lame can cross mountains.”
[Bhāvārtha-dīpikā, Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī]

Pippalāyana continues, “However, the joy of His darśana
is experienced in the mind, as the mind is the place
where joy manifests. The reason is that it is the
nature, or dharma, of the mind to generate sorrow,
bliss, pain and so forth – it is not the nature of the
other

senses – so the place for the manifestation of joy is in
the mind.”



Verse 94

anantaraṁ ca tatraiva vilasan paryavasyati

mana eva mahā-pātraṁ tat-sukha-grahaṇocitam

anantaram – afterwards; ca – also; tatra – there; eva –
indeed; vilasan – delighting; paryavasyati – it
diffuses; manaḥ – the mind; eva – indeed; mahā – great;
pātram – receptacle; tat – of that vision; sukha –
happiness; grahaṇa– for perceiving; ucitam –
appropriate.

Even after Śrī Bhagavān disappears, the bliss of seeing
Him continues to radiate in one’s mind in various forms.
Although the eyes have seen the Lord, the joy of that
vision belongs to the mind. Therefore, darśana of
Bhagavān is achieved by the mind, which is the matchless
receptacle for experiencing the happiness of that
vision.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Pippalāyana continues, “After one
has seen the Lord face to face, in His absence, the joy
of that vision sports in many ways within one’s heart.
This means that even when the Lord disappears, in the
mind one experiences happiness that is equal to directly
seeing Him. Then the thought comes, ‘Ah! Did I see
Bhagavān with my eyes?’ In myriad ways, the bliss of
seeing the Lord manifests. But even while seeing the
Lord, the happiness one feels advents in the mind.
Therefore, the wise have concluded that darśana with the
eyes in effect means vision through the mind. To think,
‘I had darśana with my eyes,’ is only imagination.”

Śrī Gopa-kumāra might object, “But the eyes are a
knowledge-acquiring sense (jñānendriya), so the joy of
darśana can arise within them and be sustained by them.”

                          219
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


Pippalāyana responds, “Self-realized sages have
ascertained that the bliss of Bhagavān’s darśana is
achieved by the mind, which is the perfect receptacle
(mahā-pātra) for the happiness of that vision.” The term
mahā-pātra, meaning ‘worthy receptacle or prime
minister,’ is a double entendre. Its significance is
that just as a prime minister is the only worthy person
to accept a valuable object meant for the king, so the
mind alone is the suitable agent to enjoy the greatest
treasure for the living entity – the joy of darśana of
Bhagavān.”



Verse 95

tat-prasādodayād yāvat sukhaṁ vardheta mānasam

tāvad vardhitum īśīta na cānyad bāhyam indriyam

tat-prasāda – of His mercy; udayāt – from the rising;
yāvat – as much; sukham – happiness; vardheta – may
expand; mānasam – mind; tāvat – that much; vardhitum –
to expand; īśita – ability; na – not; ca – also; anyat –
another; bāhyam – external; indriyam – sense.

By the mercy of Śrī Bhagavān, as the happiness within
the mind caused by seeing Him increases further and
further, the mind expands to the magnitude of that joy.
No external sense can expand like the mind.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might say, “The mind
may be the most suitable of the senses to enjoy the
bliss of seeing Bhagavān, but still it is limited.”

Pippalāyana replies, “True, the mind is limited.
Nevertheless, to the extent that the mind is pure,
Bhagavān manifests within it. When the Lord by His
special kindness becomes directly visible, the joy one
has in seeing Him increases more and more, and the
capacity of the mind correspondingly expands to
experience that pleasure. Out of all the senses, only
the mind has the power to do this. The other senses are
external and inert. Only the pure mind, being subtle, is
capable of expanding to the magnitude of the soul.”



Verse 96

antar-dhyānena dṛṣṭo ’pi sākṣād dṛṣṭa iva prabhuḥ

kṛpā-viseṣaṁ tanute pramāṇaṁ tatra padmajaḥ

antaḥ dhyānena – by internal contemplation; dṛṣṭaḥ –
seen; api – although; sākṣāt – directly; dṛṣṭaḥ – seen;
iva – as if; prabhuḥ – the Lord; kṛpā – mercy; viśeṣam –
special; tanute – bestows; pramāṇam – the evidence;
tatra – in this instance; padma-jaḥ – the lotus-born,
Brahmājī.

Seeing Bhagavān in one’s meditation is like seeing Him
directly. When seen in meditation, He bestows special

                          220
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

mercy by giving boons and blessings. The lotus-born
Brahmā is evidence of this.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might say, “The bliss
of seeing the Lord in meditation (dhyāna) may be greater
than the bliss of direct darśana, but it is a well-known
fact that the incomparable delight of receiving a
blessing from Bhagavān or conversing with Him can only
be had when you see Him personally.”

Pippalāyana replies, “When Bhagavān reveals Himself to
His meditating devotee, by His special mercy, He can
bestow desired boons and give His devotee pleasures like
conversing with Him and touching Him. All this is
possible due to Śrī Bhagavān’s special potencies.”

“Is there anyone who has ever received this mercy?”

“The lotus-born Brahmā is evidence of this.”

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam states:

tasmai sva-lokaṁ bhagavān sabhājitaḥ

sandarśayām āsa paraṁ na yat-param (2.9.9)

dadarśa tatrākhila-sātvatāṁ patiṁ (2.9.15)

tad-darśanāhlāda-pariplutāntaro

hṛṣyat-tanū prema-bharāśru-locanaḥ

nanāma pādāmbujam asya viśva-sṛg

yat pāramahaṁsyena pathādhigamyate

taṁ prīyamāṇaṁ samupasthitaṁ kaviṁ

prajā-visarge nija-śāsanārhaṇam

babhāṣa īṣat-smita-śociṣā girā

priyaḥ priyaṁ prīta-manāḥ kare spṛśan (2.9.18–19)

sampradiśyaivam ajano janānāṁ parameṣṭhinam

paśyatas tasya tad rūpam ātmano nyaruṇad dhariḥ (2.9.38)

This verse is famous: “Śrī Bhagavān was pleased with
Brahmā’s devout austerities. In Brahmā’s state of
samādhi, Śrī Bhagavān showed him His supremely
attractive abode, above which no superior realm exists.”
(2.9.9)

Then, Brahmājī saw: “Śrī Bhagavān, the Lord of all the
devotees, was present there, served by His eternal
associates.” (2.9.15)

Next, it is explained: “Seeing that form of the Lord,
Brahmā became overwhelmed with joy. His hairs standing
on end and tears of love flowing from his eyes, he fell
down at the Lord’s lotus feet. Śrī Bhagavān caught his
hand and smiling with pleasure, said, ‘O Brahmā, without
following the path of the paramahaṁsas (perfected

                            221
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

souls), no one can have darśana of this planet. You are
the recipient of My exclusive mercy and are qualified to
receive My orders. You have pleased Me with your
austerities to procreate living beings, so ask for
whatever you wish.’ ” (2.9.18–19)

Hearing this, Brahmājī asked for a boon, and thus
received the instruction contained in catūḥ-ślokī
bhāgavata, the four seed verses of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.
Then, it is stated: “After Śrī Bhagavān instructed
Brahmā in this manner, and as Brahmā watched, the Lord
disappeared.” (2.9.38)

This narration demonstrates the Lord’s supreme mercy by
showing how Bhagavān shows Himself to a devotee who is
in samādhi and further benedicts him by conversing with
him and touching him.

This subject is continued in the Third Canto of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, Chapters Eight and Nine:

kālena so ’jaḥ puruṣāyuṣābhi-

pravṛtta-yogena virūḍha-bodhaḥ

svayaṁ tad antar-hṛdaye ’vabhātam

apaśyatāpaśyata yan na pūrvam

mṛṇāla-gaurāyata-śeṣa-bhoga-

paryaṅka ekaṁ puruṣaṁ śayānam (3.8.22–23)

astaud visargābhimukhas tam īḍyam

avyakta-vartmany abhiveśitātmā (3.8.33)

mā veda-garbha! gās tandrīṁ

sarga udyamam āvaha

tan mayāpāditaṁ hy agre

yan māṁ prārthayate bhavān (3.9.29)

prīto ’ham astu bhadraṁ te (3.9.39)

It is stated: “When a fraction of a moment had elapsed
for the Supreme Lord, and a hundred of Brahmā’s years
had elapsed, Brahmā concluded his meditation. True
knowledge about Bhagavān then manifested in his heart.
Previously, with the greatest endeavor he had searched
everywhere for Bhagavān but to no avail. Now, in the
trance of samādhi, Brahmājī saw that the Supreme Person
was seated in his heart. The Lord, who had a lustrous
dark complexion, was resting in the waters of the cosmic
inundation on a bed of the lotus-like white coils of the
snake Ananta-deva’s vast body.” (3.8.22–23)

It is further stated: “Brahmā absorbed his mind in the
inconceivable Lord, who is most mysterious, and in order
to acquire the strength to manifest the creation, he
began to praise Him.” (3.8.33)


                          222
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

After Brahmā offers his praises, Śrī Bhagavān says: “O
Veda-garbha, O depth of Vedic wisdom, do not lament. The
creation you are praying for has already been completed
by Me.” (3.9.29)

Bhagavān also says: “Your praise has pleased Me. May
everything be auspicious for you.” (3.9.39)



Verse 97

sākṣād darśanam apy asya bhaktānām eva harṣa-dam

kaṁsa-duryodhanādīnāṁ bhaya-doṣādinocyate

sākṣāt – direct; darśanam – sight; api – also; asya – of
Him; bhaktānām – for the devotees; eva – indeed; harṣa-
dam – awards jubilation; kaṁsa – of Kaṁsa; duryodhana –
Duryodhana; ādīnām – and others; bhaya – fear; doṣa –
wickedness; ādinā – and so forth; ucyate – it is said.

Direct darśana of Śrī Bhagavān is a source of delight
for all the Lord’s devotees, but not for those without
devotion. In spite of seeing the Lord personally, Kaṁsa
felt fear and Duryodhana and others developed wickedness
in their hearts.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might argue, “The
topmost happiness comes from seeing Śrī Bhagavān
personally. This is the fruit of meditation (dhyāna) and
other forms of bhakti.” Pippalāyana answers, “The direct
vision of Śrī Bhagavān may be the source of joy for His
devotees, but it is not so for the non-devotees.”

Gopa-kumāra might then ask, “How do you know this?”
Pippalāyana says, “Fear arose in the heart of Kaṁsa and
wickedness in Duryodhana and others like him when they
personally saw Śrī Bhagavān. Just like them, demons such
as Madhu, Kaiṭabha, and Kālanemi experienced fear,
hatred, anger, envy, etc., in their hearts.” The word
ādi, meaning ‘etc.,’ indicates that those demons also
experienced distress, lamentation, and so on.



Verses 98–99

parānanda-ghanaṁ śrīmat sarvendriya-guṇāñjanam

nārāyaṇasya rūpaṁ tat sākṣāt sampaśyatām api

madhu-kaiṭabha-mukhyānām asurāṇāṁ durātmanām

na līno duṣṭa-bhāvo ’pi sarva-pīḍā-karo hi yaḥ

para-ānanda – transcendental bliss; ghanam – intense;
śrīmat – glorious; sarva-indriya – for all the senses;
guṇa – of sublime qualities; añjanam – an ointment;
nārāyaṇasya – of Śrī Nārāyaṇa; rūpam – form; tat – the;
sākṣāt – directly; sampaśyatām – of those who behold;
api – also; madhu – by Madhu; kaiṭabha – and Kaiṭabha;
mukhyānām – chief; asurāṇām – of demons; dur-ātmanām –
wicked; na – not; līnaḥ – eradicated; duṣṭa-bhāvaḥ –

                          223
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

wicked nature; api – although; sarva – to all; pīḍā-
karaḥ – causing torment; hi – indeed; yaḥ – which.

Śrī Nārāyaṇa epitomizes all beauty (śrī). His form, the
essence of concentrated bliss, radiates unlimited
loveliness. The luster and sweetness of His magnificent
form drown the senses of one beholding them in an ocean
of bliss. Yet, even though wicked demons like Madhu and
Kaiṭabha saw this form of the Lord in person, they still
could not give up their heinous nature, the root of all
suffering.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Demons such as Madhu and Kaiṭabha are
indicated by the word ādi, meaning ‘etc.,’ in the phrase
kaṁsa-duryodhanādi of the previous verse. Although these
demons personally saw Bhagavān, instead of joy, evil
sentiments like anger and envy arose in their hearts.
The current verse elaborates on this idea. Madhu,
Kaiṭabha, Maya, Tāraka, Kālanemi, and other demons had
unrestricted vision of the indescribable and unlimited
beauty of Śrī Nārāyaṇa. However, not only were their
hearts untouched by any bliss, but also, their
malevolence did not diminish.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra might ask, “What was the nature of their
malevolence?”

Śrī Pippalāyana replies, “It should be understood that
the symptom of their evil natures was that even after
having darśana of Bhagavān, their wickedness that
afflicted the world did not decrease.” Alternatively, it
can be said, “Their malevolence was the root of all
miseries, and consequently they could not even be
relieved of their own personal misery. As they were
devoid of bhakti, their consciousness was impure, and
thus they were depraved and hostile to Bhagavān.”

Gopa-kumāra might ask, “What was Bhagavān’s form like?”

Pippalāyana replies, “His form was the embodiment of
supreme delight and the unlimited loveliness known as
śrī. Therefore, His lustrous beauty and charming
sweetness immerse all those who see Him in an ocean of
happiness, bringing genuine sense enjoyment to the
senses.”

In this verse, Madhu and Kaiṭabha have been mentioned
instead of Kaṁsa, Duryodhana, and others, who were
mentioned in the previous verse. The reason is that
Gopa-kumāra’s disciple had not yet developed the
qualification to hear the pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa which
took place in that brahmāṇḍa – pastimes that are the
pinnacle of perfection and the most glorious of all
topics. Therefore, here, Gopa-kumāra does not refer to
Kaṁsa and Duryodhana.

In the wrestling arena in Mathurā, when Śrī Nanda
Mahārāja and other unalloyed and dear associates of Śrī
Nanda-nandana saw His charming moonlike face, the ocean
of their love swelled. On the other hand, Kaṁsa and his
followers, who were born in the same Yadu dynasty as Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, did not experience any pleasure in their hearts
upon seeing Him. Rather, their hearts burned with
intense pain, fear, and anger.

                          224
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017


Similarly, in the assembly of the Kauravas, when Śrī
Vidura and Śrī Bhīṣmadeva saw the moon-like face of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and drank the nectar of His words, their hearts
were filled with the most sublime happiness. Duryodhana
and his associates, however, who were Śrī Bhagavān’s
kinsmen by dint of being born in the Pūru dynasty,
conversed with Him, sat with Him, and even married into
His family. Nevertheless, not only did they not
experience bliss, but seeing the Lord did not purify
their hearts of their gravely offensive attitude towards
His dearmost Pāṇḍavas. As a result, their multitude of
faults, such as unremitting anger, envy, and self-
conceit, acted as fuel, kindling a great conflagration
of their offenses that ultimately consumed them all.



Verse 100

ānandaka-svabhāvo ’pi bhakti-māhātmya-darśanāt

bhaktān harṣayituṁ kuryād durghaṭaṁ ca sa īśvaraḥ

ānandaka – delightful; svabhāvaḥ – nature; api –
although; bhakti – of devotional service; māhātmya – the
glory; darśanāt – in order to show; bhaktān – the
devotees; harṣayitum – to delight; kuryāt – he may
perform; durghaṭam – the impossible; ca – and; saḥ – He;
īśvaraḥ – the Supreme Lord.

Śrī Nārāyaṇa, who delights the   world, sometimes hides
His nature (from non-devotees)   to reveal the glories of
bhakti and to give pleasure to   His devotees. He is the
Supreme Lord, and so it is not   amazing that He can make
even the impossible possible.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might question, “Upon
achieving self-realization, one is freed from even a
trace of fault and suffering. How is it possible, then,
that despite seeing the Supreme Spirit Parabrahman Śrī
Bhagavān, the shortcomings and distress of those

personalities were not eradicated?” This verse addresses
that doubt.

In reply to that doubt, Śrī Pippalāyana speaks this
verse beginning with ānandaka. He says, “As it is
impossible for fire to give up its nature of being hot,
so also it is impossible for Bhagavān to renounce His
nature of bestowing happiness to the world. However, as
He can make possible even that which is impossible,
certainly He can conceal His nature that delights the
world.”

“But why would He do that?”

“Bhagavān does this so that non-devotees do not
experience the blissful nature that is the natural glory
of bhakti; rather, they should understand the opposite.
This way, by revealing the natural glories of bhakti to
practicing devotees, the Lord gives them great
happiness. Particularly, if the faithful and the
inimical were to be given the same result, then people

                          225
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

would not develop a propensity to engage in the Lord’s
service. But when the glories of devotion are revealed
like this, everyone will want to follow the path of
bhakti.”

Following this line of thought, some advanced devotees
sanction the fact that those non-devotees whose natures
are particularly evil have to endure terrible fear,
agony and so on when they come before the Lord. This is
because whatever torment the offenders suffer acts to
mitigate the reactions to the egregious sins they have
committed against Bhagavān and His devotees. Thus, the
offender ultimately achieves supreme auspiciousness.
Because of this, some great devotees are in favor of
offenders undergoing distress. For instance, in relation
to Śiśupāla and Dantavakra, Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira says
(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 7.1.19):

śvitro na jāto jihvāyāṁ nāndhaṁ viviśatus tamaḥ

Why have the tongues of these people not contracted
leprosy? Why have they not yet fallen into dreadful
hell?

The reason the king took this position was that although
Śiśupāla and others were unrelenting in their
aggressive, offensive, and envious behavior towards
Bhagavān, and as a result were tortured by intense fear
and suffering, their various ways of suffering actually
served as atonement (prāyaścitta) for their heinous
sins. Such atonement can be seen as ultimately bestowing
the inestimable benefit of awakening the propensity to
engage in devotional service.

Gopa-kumāra might object, “As fire can never relinquish
its heat, how can Śrī Bhagavān suppress His self-
manifest nature?”

Pippalāyana says, “The inconceivable and astonishing
power of Śrī Bhagavān cannot be analyzed by logic and
argument (tarka). Although one may directly see
Bhagavān, the bliss of that darśana is received through
bhakti alone, with eyes that are anointed with the salve
of love. One cannot receive that joy by any other means.
This is the conclusion.”



Verse 101

bhaktau nava-vidhāyāṁ ca mukhyaṁ smaraṇam eva hi

tat samagrendriya-śreṣṭha-mano-vṛtti-samarpaṇam

bhaktau – in devotional service; nava-vidhāyām – amongst
the nine kinds; ca – also; mukhyam – the best; smaraṇam
– remembering; eva – only; hi – indeed; tat – through
that (the mind); samagra – all; indriya-śreṣṭha – which
is the best of the senses; manaḥ-vṛtti – of the
activities of the mind; samarpaṇam – offering.

Of the nine processes of bhakti, smaraṇa, or
remembrance, is the foremost because only through
remembrance can the function of the mind, the best of

                          226
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

the senses, be offered to Śrī Bhagavān.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might ask, “Why did
the topic of bhakti arise?”

Śrī Pippalāyana replies in this verse beginning with
bhaktau. He says, “Among the nine processes of bhakti,
remembrance (smaraṇa) is the principal process, or limb.
This is because through remembrance, the mind, the best
of the senses, is dedicated to Śrī Bhagavān, thereby
enabling one to become completely absorbed in Him.
Speech and the other senses are also dedicated to
Bhagavān through kīrtana and the other limbs, but
because these senses are dependent on the mind for their
function, smaraṇa is superior to the other eight
processes.”



Verse 102

antar-aṅgāntar-aṅgān tu prema-bhaktiṁ yathā-ruci

dātum arhaty aviśrāmaṁ mana eva samāhitam

antaḥ-aṅga antaḥ-aṅgām – supremely confidential; tu –
but; prema – loving; bhaktim – devotion; yathā ruci –
according to one’s taste; dātum – to give; arhati – one
should; aviśrāmam – without being weary; manaḥ – the
mind; eva – indeed; samāhitam – fixed.

When the mind is fixed, prema-bhakti, which is more
confidential than the practices of knowledge and
renunciation, continuously manifests in the heart of the
practitioner according to his natural predilection
(ruci).

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Pippalāyana elaborates, “Among all
the

confidential practices, such as jñāna (knowledge) and
vairāgya

(renunciation), which enable one to attain Śrī Bhagavān
or bring one close to Him, prema is the most
confidential means. The mind alone, when it is focused
and one-pointed, is capable of radiantly manifesting
causeless devotional service in pure love (prema-
bhakti). Just as the mind, which is the driver of the
other senses, is capable of impelling them towards their
respective objects, so only a focused mind can bring
forth unconditional prema-bhakti according to the
predilection, or taste (ruci), of the practitioner.
Furthermore, since obstacles generally do not arise when
one worships with the mind, or in other words, when one
performs bhajana, one can achieve full absorption in
Bhagavān. When that takes place, prema manifests.”



Verses 103–105

aśeṣa-sādhanaiḥ sādhyaḥ samastārthādhikādhikaḥ


                          227
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

yo vaśī-karaṇe gāḍho-pāyo bhagavato ’dvayaḥ

tat-prasādaika-lābhyo yas tad-bhaktaika-mahā-nidhiḥ

vicitra-paramānanda-mādhurya-bhara-pūritaḥ

mahānirvācya-māhātmyaḥ padārthaḥ prema-saṁjñakaḥ

pariṇāma-viśeṣe hi ceto-vṛtter udeti saḥ

aśeṣa – all; sādhanaiḥ – through methods; sādhyaḥ – to
be attained; samasta-artha – of all objectives; adhika-
adhikaḥ – the greatest of the great; yaḥ – who; vaśī-
karaṇe – in controlling; gāḍha – powerful; upāyaḥ –
means; bhagavataḥ – of the Lord; advayaḥ – non-dual;
tat-prasāda – through His mercy; eka-labhyaḥ – solely
attainable; yaḥ – which; tat-bhakta – His devotees; eka
– only; mahā-nidhiḥ – great treasure; vicitra –
astonishing; parama-ānanda – of transcen-dental bliss;
mādhurya – of sweetness; bhara – with an abundance;
pūritaḥ – flooded; mahā – great; nirvācya –
indescribable; māhātmyaḥ – glory; pada-arthaḥ – the
entity; prema – love; saṁjñakaḥ – named; pariṇāma –
transformation; viśeṣe – in a specific; hi – certainly;
cetaḥ – of the mind; vṛtteḥ – from the function; udeti –
rises; saḥ – that.

That which is the object of attainment of an infinite
number of disciplines, which is even superior to the
worship of Bhagavān, the topmost of all goals, and which
is the unparalleled means to control the supremely
independent Lord – that is prema. It can be obtained
only by the mercy of Bhagavān and not by one’s own
endeavors. Therefore, being saturated with the wonderful
sweetness of paramount bliss, it is an incomparable,
priceless treasure that devotees diligently protect. Its
glories are indescribable. Prema is a specific
transformation of the function of consciousness that
arises only when one’s consciousness is transcendentally
pure.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Pippalāyana continues, “The
extraordinary object known as prema, or love of God, is
a special outcome of the condition of one’s
consciousness (citta-vṛtti). When the condition of one’s
consciousness transforms into a state of transcendental
purity, or superexcellence, prema naturally manifests.”
These three verses describe the characteristics of prema
with seven adjectives. Each idea is connected with the
next, and each verse can be seen as the meaning –

or the cause – of the one before it.

[Verse 103] “(1) Prema is the goal of innumerable
practices, such as fruitive activities (karma),
knowledge (jñāna), and renunciation (vairāgya). (2) It
is even higher than the worship of Bhagavān, which is
superior to the four puruṣārthas, or achievements of
life: religion (dharma), economic development (artha),
sense gratification (kāma), and liberation (mokṣa, also
known as mukti). This is because prema is the glorious
fruit of all practices and the ultimate goal of the
worship of Bhagavān. (3) What more need be said? Prema
is the means to subjugate even the absolutely

                          228
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

independent Supreme Lord. Just as shackles bind and
control a mad elephant, so ropes of love can bring Śrī
Bhagavān under the control of His beloved devotees.

[Verse 104] “(4) That prema can be obtained only by the
munificence of Śrī Bhagavān, and not by one’s own
endeavors. (5) Therefore, the Lord’s devotees consider
prema to be an incomparable, priceless treasure. (6)
This is because prema is blissful by nature and can
fulfill all heartfelt desires. The taste of prema is so
replete with varieties of sweetness and paramount
pleasure that it makes brahmānanda (the

joy of impersonal realization) seem utterly worthless.

[Verse 105] “(7) Therefore, prema is unlimited and
indescribable; words are powerless to express its
glories.” This last adjectival phrase, mahā anirvācya
māhātmyaḥ, means ‘whose glories are ineffable,’ This
indicates that just as the glories of prema are
unlimited and indescribable, so are the glories of the
loving pastimes enjoyed by devotees and the Lord, and
they are not being revealed due to their confidential
nature.

Later, Śrī Bhagavān’s personal associates will reveal
the actual meaning of Śrī Pippalāyana’s philosophical
analysis and instructions to Gopa-kumāra. Because the
practice of samādhi predominates in Tapoloka, it would
not have been appropriate to reveal the
confidentialities of bhakti there.



Verse 106

manaso hi samādhānaṁ manyase duṣkaraṁ yadi

cakṣuḥ sāphalya-kāmo vā bhagavantaṁ didṛkṣase

manasaḥ – the mind; hi – indeed; samādhānam – composing;
manyase – you think; duṣkaram – difficult to perform;
yadi – if; cakṣuḥ – through the eyes; sāphalya –
fulfillment; kāmaḥ – desire; vā – or; bhagavantam – the
Lord; didṛkṣase – you wish to see.

If you consider concentrating the mind to be too
arduous, or if you desire to fulfill the purpose of your
eyes by directly seeing Śrī Bhagavān, ….

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Pippalāyana says, “When one’s mind
becomes fixed, then wherever one is, darśana of Śrī
Bhagavān can easily be attained. However, you may
consider it difficult to keep your mind steady. Or, you
may surmise that even though the nature of Tapoloka or
the potency of your mantra-japa may steady the mind, it
is only the mind that is satisfied by seeing the Lord,
and not the eyes. If you have these conceptions, even
though the eyes actually lack the potency to see the
Lord, if you are still resolutely determined to satisfy
your eyes with the sight of Bhagavān, … .” (continued in
the next verse)



                          229
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017


Verse 107

tad gaccha bhārataṁ varṣaṁ tatra no ’tratyam īśvaram

nārāyaṇaṁ nara-sakhaṁ paśyādrau gandhamādane

tat – then; gaccha – go; bhāratam varṣam – to the land
of Bhārata; tatra – there; naḥ – of you; atratyam –
staying there; īśvaram – the Lord; nārāyaṇam – Nārāyaṇa;
nara – of Nara; sakham – the friend; paśya – see; adrau
– on the mountain; gandhamādane – Gandhamādana.

… then go to Gandhamādana Mountain in Bhārata-varṣa,
where you can have darśana of Śrī Nara-Nārāyaṇa, the
Supreme Lord of this planet (Tapoloka).

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Pippalāyana continues, “…Go to
Bhārata-varṣa and have darśana of our Lord and Master
Śrī Nara-Nārāyaṇa, the presiding Deity of Tapoloka.” Śrī
Gopa-kumāra might ask, “Where in Bhārata-varṣa does He
reside?” Pippalāyana specifies, “He lives on the
Gandhamādana Mountain.”



Verse 108

antar bahiś ca paśyāmas taṁ samādhi-parāyaṇāḥ

nāto viccheda-duḥkhaṁ syād ity agāt tatra sa prabhuḥ

antaḥ – within; bahiḥ – without; ca – also; paśyāmaḥ –
we see; tam – Him; samādhi-parāyaṇāḥ – absorbed in
trance; na – not; ataḥ – hence; viccheda – through
separation; duḥkham – suffering; syāt – may be; iti –
thus; agāt – went; tatra – there; saḥ – He; prabhuḥ –
the Lord.

Being fixed in samādhi, we see Him everywhere, within
and without, and never feel pangs of separation from
Him. Aware of our capabilities, the Lord has gone to
Bhārata-varṣa.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might ask, “Why do you
live here separated from Bhagavān? Moreover, why has
Bhagavān, who is so affectionate (bhakta-vatsala) to His
devotees, abandoned you and gone there?”

Pippalāyana replies, “By the power of our samādhi, the
Lord is always visible to us internally and externally,
thus we do not feel the distress of being separated from
Him. Knowing our qualifications, Bhagavān Śrī Nārāyaṇa
has gone to Gandhamādana Mountain [on the earth
planet].”



Verse 109

loka-śikṣā-hitārthaṁ tu kurvann āste mahat-tapaḥ

dhanur-vidyā-gurur brahmacāri-veśo jaṭā-dharaḥ


                          230
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

loka – to the people of the worlds; śikṣā – giving
instruction; hita – of the welfare work; artham – for
the purpose; tu – indeed; kurvan – acting; āste – He
remains; mahat-tapaḥ – performing intense austerity;
dhanuḥ – of archery; vidyā – of the science; guruḥ – a
teacher; brahmacāri-veśaḥ – in the garb of a celibate
student; jaṭā-dharaḥ – wearing matted locks of hair.

In order to educate and benefit the people of the world,
He is performing severe austerities there, having taken
the form of a guru of weaponry, dressed as a brahmacārī
with matted

locks.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Now, after indicating the reason Śrī
Nārāyaṇa has gone to Mount Gandhamādana, Pippalāyana is
explaining the Lord’s characteristics. He says, “The
Lord resides there performing austerities because He
wants to bestow auspiciousness on the people of world by
instructing them in the practice of asceticism. As the
guru of dhanurvidyā (the art of archery or weaponry), He
wields a bow and arrow.”



Verse 110

śrī-gopa-kumāra uvāca

tatraiva gantu-kāmaṁ māṁ catvāraḥ sanakādayaḥ

paśyātraiva tam ity uktvā bahu-rūpāṇy adarśayan

śrī-gopa-kumāraḥ uvāca – Śrī Gopa-kumāra said; tatra –
there; eva – indeed; gantu-kāmam – having a desire to
depart; mām – to me; catvāraḥ – the four; sanaka-ādayaḥ
– headed by Sanaka; paśya – behold; atra – here; eva –
indeed; tam – Him; iti – thus; uktvā – saying; bahu –
many; rūpāṇi – forms; adarśayan – showing.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra said: O brāhmaṇa, as I prepared to go to
Gandhamādana Mountain, the four sages led by Sanaka
understood the restlessness of my heart and said, “Gopa-
kumāra, you can see Śrī Bhagavān right here,” upon which
they showed me many manifestations of Bhagavān.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “When I became
eager to go to Gandhamādana Mountain, the four Kumāras –
Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanātana, and Sanat-kumāra –
manifested multifarious forms of Śrī Bhagavān.”

The brāhmaṇa might ask, “Why did they do that?”

Gopa-kumāra replies, “The four ṛṣi-kumāras told me, ‘Now
there is no need to go to Gandhamādana Mountain. You can
see Śrī Bhagavān right here in Tapoloka.’ ”



Verse 111

eko nārāyaṇo vṛtto viṣṇu-rūpo ’paro ’bhavat


                          231
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

anyo yajñeśa-rūpo ’bhūt paro vividha-rūpavān

ekaḥ – one; nārāyaṇaḥ – of Nārāyaṇa; vṛttaḥ – took the
form; viṣṇu – of Viṣṇu; rūpaḥ – the form; aparaḥ –
another; abhavat – was; anyaḥ – another; yajña-īśa – of
the Lord of sacrifices; rūpaḥ – the form; abhūt –
became; paraḥ – another; vividha – many; rūpa-vān –
having forms.

Sanaka, who is chief among the four Kumāras, assumed the
form of Nārāyaṇa, another exhibited the form of Viṣṇu,
another took the form of Yajñeśvara, and the last
manifested the form of Nṛsiṁha and many different forms
of Bhagavān.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: In this verse beginning with eko, Śrī
Gopa-kumāra describes the forms of Bhagavān he saw. He
says, “Sanaka, the leader of the four sages, took the
form of Śrī Nārāyaṇa. One brother manifested as the
exalted Nara. Of the other two Kumāras, one took the
form of Upendra, whom I had seen in heaven, and the
other appeared as Yajñeśvara, who is worshiped in
Maharloka. The forms they assumed were similar to those
manifestations of Bhagavān. Gradually, they manifested
various forms of the Lord such as Nṛsiṁha and Vāmana.”



Verse 112

bhayena vepamānas tān avocaṁ sāñjalir naman

aparādhaṁ mayā bāḍhaṁ kṣamadhvaṁ dīna-vatsalāḥ

bhayena – with fear; vepamānaḥ – trembling; tān – to
them; avocam – I said; sa-añjaliḥ – with folded hands;
naman – bowing; aparādham – offense; mayā – by me;
bāḍham – extreme; kṣamadhvam – please forgive; dīna – to
the lowly; vatsalāḥ – O you who are kind.

Seeing this astonishing sight, I began trembling in
fear. I offered obeisances to them with folded hands and
said, “O dīna-vatsala – O you who are affectionate to
the fallen! I have committed a great offense. Please
forgive me.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “After
witnessing this incredible scene, I began shaking in
fear. With folded palms I addressed Sanaka and the
others, ‘I have committed a great offense, O dīna-
vatsala! Please pardon me.’ ”



Verse 113

spṛṣṭo ’haṁ tair mūrdhni labdhvā samādhiṁ

dṛṣṭāni prāk tāni rūpāṇy apaśyam

vyutthāne ’pi dhyāna-vegāt kadācit

pratyakṣāṇīvānupaśyeyam ārāt


                          232
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

spṛṣṭaḥ – touched; aham – I; taiḥ – by them; mūrdhni –
on the head; labdhvā – attained; samādhim – trance;
dṛṣṭāni – seen; prāk – before; tāni – those; rūpāṇi –
forms; apaśyam – I beheld; vyutthāne – arising; api –
also; dhyāna– of meditation; vegāt – by the power;
kadācit – sometimes; pratyakṣāṇi – directly; iva – as
if; anupaśyeyam – I would see; ārāt – near.

Then Sanaka and his brothers touched my head and, by the
potency of that touch, I became absorbed in samādhi. In
that state, too, I directly saw all the same forms of
Śrī Viṣṇu that I had just seen. And even after my
samādhi broke, by the influence of that meditation, I
continued to see all those forms of the Lord as if They
were right before my eyes.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Then the four
Kumāras touched my head and, by their power, I
instantaneously entered samādhi. In that samādhi-yoga, I
beheld all the forms of Bhagavān Śrī Viṣṇu that I had
previously seen in Maharloka and other realms. When I
came out of samādhi and returned to external vision,
sometimes I would also clearly see all those
manifestations as if they were nearby. How was that? It
happened by the momentum created by my absorption in
meditation.”



Verse 114

tato jape ’pi me niṣṭhām avindata sukhaṁ svataḥ

kintv asyā mādhurī bhūmer vyākulī-kurute manaḥ

tataḥ – thereafter; jape – in chanting mantra; api –
also; me – I found; niṣṭhām – determination; avindata –
found; sukham – happi-ness; svataḥ – naturally; kintu –
but; asyāḥ – of that; mādhurī – of sweetness; bhūmeḥ –
because of the land (Vraja); vyākulī-kurute – became
troubled; manaḥ – mind.

Due to this, my mind became peaceful. Therefore, when I
saw Bhagavān’s beautiful form or when I engaged in my
chanting, which had completely matured, I spontaneously
experienced great joy. Nevertheless, whenever I chanted
my mantra, I would also become distressed at heart and
tormented by feelings of separation from the sweetness
of Vṛndāvana.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Now, as before, Śrī Gopa-kumāra
desires to proceed to an even higher abode. In four
verses, beginning here with tata, he explains some of
his reasons for leaving Tapoloka. He says, “Because my
mind had become pacified, because I was able to have
darśana of Bhagavān, and because my natural conviction
in chanting my mantra had increased – in other words,
because my chanting had reached maturity – I would
effortlessly become blissful.”

To reveal the characteristics of the mature, ripened
state of his chanting, Gopa-kumāra says, “In this way, I
truly enjoyed all varieties of pleasure like that of the
residents of Tapoloka. Still, even then, when I chanted

                          233
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

my mantra, the sweetness of Śrī Vṛndāvana would bewilder
my mind and I felt intense separation remembering the
land of Vraja.”



Verse 115

suṣuptir iva kācin me kadācij jāyate daśā

tayā jape ’ntarāyaḥ syāt tat-tad-rūpekṣaṇe tathā

suṣuptiḥ – deep sleep; iva – as if; kācit   – a certain;
me – of me; kadācit – sometimes; jāyate –   took place;
daśā – a state; tayā – through that; jape   – in chanting;
antarāyaḥ – a distraction; syāt – may be;   tat-

tat-rūpa – the various qualities of His form; īkṣaṇe –
in perceiving; tathā – and.

In samādhi, my mind would enter a state of deep
absorption. This became an obstacle in my chanting and
an obstruction to my seeing the indescribable form of
Bhagavān.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra continues, “Sometimes
during samādhi, the activities of my senses and mind
became suspended and I experienced a void similar to
that of deep sleep (suṣupti). This became an obstacle to
my japa. When I would chant my mantra, I used to see the
indescribably beautiful form of Bhagavān, but this
sleep-like state obstructed that darśana.”



Verse 116

vilapāmi tato nīlācalaṁ jigamiṣāmi ca

tatratyais tais tu tad-vṛttaṁ pṛccheyāhaṁ sa-sāntvanam

vilapāmi – I would lament; tataḥ – then; nīlācalam – to
the shelter of Jagannātha-deva; jigamiṣāmi – I would
desire to go; ca – there; tatratyaiḥ – by the residents
of that place; taiḥ – by them; tu – indeed; tat – of
that (lamentation); vṛttam – the internal cause;
pṛccheya – inquiring; aham – I; sa-sāntvanam –
reassuring.

Therefore, I would simply weep. I longed to go to
Nīlācala to see Śrī Jagannātha. The great sages there
consoled me with sweet words and inquired about the
cause of my discontent.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “In the course
of my chanting, when I experienced obstacles to seeing
the indescribable beauty of Bhagavān’s radiant form, I
would lament, ‘Oh, how unfortunate I am! What is this
sudden disturbance?’ Because of these interruptions, I
decided to go to Nīlācala to see Śrī Jagannātha. These
kinds of disturbances to seeing the Lord do not occur
there. When Pippalāyana and the other sages of Tapoloka
saw me lamenting, they consoled me with sweet words and
asked the reason for my anxiety.”

                          234
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017




Verse 117

sa-śokaṁ kathyamānā sā śrutvāmībhiḥ praśasyate

mayā tathā na budhyeta duḥkham evānumanyate

sa-śokam – lamenting; kathyamānā – relating; sā – that;
śrutvā – after heard; amībhiḥ – by them; praśasyate –
praised; mayā – by me; tathā – then; na budhyeta – it
would be understood; duḥkham – suffering; eva – indeed;
anumanyate – it was considered.

When I described my feelings of distress to them, they
praised me highly. Because I could not understand this
praise, those very words of commendation became the
cause of my distress.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “In great
distress, I described what I was feeling to the four
ṛṣi-kumāras, Pippalāyana, and the other exalted yogīs.
Understanding my situation, they lavished me with
praise, saying, ‘Ah! How wonderful it is that Gopa-
kumāra has so quickly developed such an extremely rare
and completely pure state.’ However, I could not grasp
the meaning of what they were saying. Actually, either
because I was ignorant of the reality (tattva) of what I
was experiencing or due to the potency of the nature of
bhakti, I could not comprehend those words of praise. In
spite of that praise, the pain of separation caused by
my inability to see Bhagavān always left me unhappy at
heart.”



Verse 118

athābhyāsa-balenāntar bahiś ca jagad-īśvaram

tat-tad-rūpeṇa paśyāmi pratyakṣam iva sarvataḥ

atha – then; abhyāsa-balena – on the strength of my
practice; antaḥ – within; bahiḥ – without; ca – and;
jagad-īśvaram – the Lord of the worlds; tat-tat-rūpeṇa –
in His respective forms; paśyāmi – I would see;
pratyakṣam – before my eyes; iva – as if; sarvataḥ –
everywhere.

On the strength of my practice of meditation, I would
see Śrī Jagadīśvara within and without, as if He were
directly before me in all His various forms that I had
seen before.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The Mathurā brāhmaṇa might object,
“How

did your constant suffering from the lack of Bhagavān’s
darśana

demonstrate the glories of Tapoloka?”

Therefore, Śrī Gopa-kumāra speaks this verse, saying,

                          235
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

“By dint of my constant and intense practice of
meditation, I would see the Lord of the universe
everywhere, internally and externally. He appeared in
the forms that I had seen previously as if directly
before my eyes.”



Verse 119

kadācit sanakādīṁś ca dhyāna-niṣṭhā-vaśaṁ gatān

vindatas tāni rūpāṇi dṛṣṭvāpnomi parāṁ mudam

kadācit – sometimes; sanaka-ādīn – the sages headed by
Sanaka; ca – also; dhyāna – in meditation; niṣṭhā – of
their determination; vaśam – by the power; gatān –
attained; vindataḥ – attaining; tāni – these; rūpāṇi –
forms; dṛṣṭvā – seeing; āpnomi – I would attain; parām –
supreme; mudam – happiness.

Sometimes I would observe that when Sanaka and his
brothers were deeply absorbed in meditation on Śrī
Bhagavān, they would assume forms similar to the form of
the Lord they were meditating upon. I became supremely
elated to see their dedication to their practice and the
level of their absorption, which reflected the power of
their meditation.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “I would also
see that sometimes Śrī Sanaka and the other Kumāras,
while meditating on different forms of Bhagavān, would
assume forms like His. They were so resolute and so
intensely absorbed in their practice that they would
actually assume the same shape as their object of
meditation. This is similar to the insect who, trapped
by the peśaskṛt bee, is so intensely absorbed in
thoughts of his captor that he takes on the form of a
peśaskṛt bee. Seeing the sages’ staunch meditation and
the deep absorption that arose from their steadfast
determination, I was transported with ecstasy.”



Verse 120

tat-tad-rahita-kāle ’pi na sīdāmi tad-āśayā

itthaṁ cira-dinaṁ tatra sukhenevāvasaṁ sadā

tat-tat-rahita – when I was not able to perceive Śrī
Sanaka and the others in their forms of Bhagavān; kāle –
at the time; api – even; na – not; sīdāmi – I would
lament; tat – for them; āśayā – because of a hope;
ittham – thus; cira-dinam – for many days; tatra –
there;

sukhena – in happiness; iva – as if; avasam – I lived;
sadā – always.

Even when Śrī Sanaka and his brothers were not visible
in forms of Bhagavān, the hope of seeing these
manifestations again kept me from becoming disconsolate.
Thus, I stayed there happily for many days.

                          236
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “When Śrī Sanaka
and his brothers did not give me darśana of those forms
of Bhagavān, I would live with the hope of seeing those
forms again, and so I was not distressed at heart.” The
word iva, from sukhena iva, meaning ‘as if happily’ in
this verse indicates that sometimes Gopa-kumāra
experienced distress even in Tapoloka. It is used in the
specific sense of prāya, meaning ‘almost,’ to say,
“Gopa-kumāra resided there almost happily.”



Verse 121

kadācit puṣkara-dvīpe sva-bhaktān kṛpayekṣitum

prasthito haṁsam ārūḍhas tatrāyātaś catur-mukhaḥ

kadācit   – once; puṣkara-dvīpe – in Puṣkara-dvīpa; sva-
bhaktān   – his devotees; kṛpayā – by the mercy; īkṣitum –
to see;   prasthitaḥ – set out; haṁsam – on a swan;
ārūḍhaḥ   – mounted; tatra – there; āyātaḥ – came; catur-
mukhaḥ–   the four-headed Brahmā.

Once, Śrī Brahmājī, mounted on a swan, went to Puṣkara-
dvīpa to mercifully grace his devotees with his darśana.
On the way, he stopped in Tapoloka.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Now Śrī Gopa-kumāra begins to explain
his reason for going to Satyaloka. To establish the
excellence of Satyaloka, in three verses he describes
the glories of that planet’s ruler, Śrī Brahmā. He says,
“Once, the four-headed Śrī Brahmā, seated on the back of
a swan, was going to see his devotees in Puṣkara-dvīpa.
On the way, he stopped in Tapoloka.” Alternatively, the
verse can be read to say, “Śrī Brahmā was going to
Puṣkara-dvīpa to let his devotees see him.” At the time,
Gopa-kumāra did not know who Śrī Brahmā really was, and
so he described him just as he saw him: seated on a
swan, four-headed, etc.



Verse 122

paramaiśvarya-sampannaḥ sa vṛddhaḥ sanakādibhiḥ

sa-sambhramaṁ praṇamyābhi-pūjito bhakti-namritaiḥ

parama – immense; aiśvarya – with opulence; sampannaḥ –
endowed; saḥ – he; vṛddhaḥ – most wise; sanaka-ādibhiḥ –
by Sanaka and the others; sa-sambhramam – with full
respect; praṇamya – having bowed down; abhipūjitaḥ –
well worshiped; bhakti – out of devotion; namritaiḥ –
with activities of humility.

When Sanaka and other sages saw that the venerable and
supremely opulent Śrī Brahmā had arrived, they
reverently bowed down to him and worshiped him with
great devotion.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra now describes four-
headed Brahmā, who is the topmost authority in the

                            237
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

universe. He says, “He was endowed with supreme
opulence. Gorgeously dressed, he had a retinue of
associates and servants, and, as a sign of his judicial
authority, he sported a long white beard. Although he
appeared elderly, because he is an incarnation of
Bhagavān and an embodiment of knowledge, bliss, and
eternity, his body was actually untouched by age.”



Verse 123

āśīrbhir vardhayitvā tān snehenāghrāya mūrdhasu

kiñcit samanuśiṣyāsau taṁ dvīpaṁ vegato ’gamat

āśīrbhiḥ – with blessings; vardhayitvā – having
gladdened; tān – them; snehena – with affection; āghrāya
– by smelling; mūrdhasu – their heads; kiñcit –
something; samanuśiṣya – after giving complete
instructions; asau – he; tam dvīpam – to that island;
vegataḥ – quickly; agamat – went

Śrī Brahmā in turn repeatedly blessed Sanaka and the
other Kumāras and tenderly smelled their heads. After
giving some instructions about the secrets of loving
service to Bhagavān, he left quickly for Puṣkara-dvīpa.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Śrī Brahmā
repeatedly bestowed his loving blessings on Sanaka and
his brothers and gave them some instructions about the
secrets of bhagavad-bhakti, loving service to Bhagavān.”
Here, the sense of the word kiñcit, meaning ‘a little,’
is that, in particular, the Kumāras were unable to
understand all the details of the confidential secrets
of bhakti. “Because they were not qualified to hear
those secrets with faith and deep resolve and to protect
such confidentialities in their hearts, Brahmā spoke
only in a general manner, describing the mysteries of
pure love of God according to their capabilities.
Nevertheless, he repeated his instructions several times
and then quickly left for Puṣkara-dvīpa.”



Verse 124

tat-tattva-vṛttaṁ sampṛṣṭā mayāvocan vihasya te

atrāgatyādhunāpīmaṁ gopa-bālaka vetsi na

tat – his; tattva-vṛttam – the identity; sampṛṣṭāḥ –
questioned; mayā – by me; avocan – they said; vihasya –
laughing; te – they; atra – here; āgatya – having come;
adhunā – now; api – still; imam – him; gopa-bālaka – O
cowherd boy; vetsi – you know; na – not.

Thereafter, I asked Sanaka and his brothers who that
four-headed personality was. Heartily laughing, they
answered, “O cowherd boy! You have been living here for
so long, and you still don’t know the identity of this
very famous Brahmājī?

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Thereafter, I

                          238
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

asked Sanaka and his brothers to explain the truth, or
tattva, about Śrī Brahmā.” Their reply is given in four-
and-a-half verses, beginning here with atra. “Laughing,
they said, ‘O Gopa-bālaka! Really, you are just a
cowherd boy. After all this time in Tapoloka, you still
do not know the reality of who the four-headed Brahmā
is!’ They found this humorous.”



Verse 125

prajāpati-patir brahmā sraṣṭā viśvasya naḥ pitā

svayam-bhūḥ parame-ṣṭhy eṣa jagat pāty anuśāsty api

prajāpati – of the universal forefathers; patiḥ – the
master; brahmā – Brahmā; sraṣṭā – the creator; viśvasya
– of the universe; naḥ – our; pitā – father; svayam-bhūḥ
– self-born; parame-ṣṭhī – the supreme entity; eṣaḥ –
he; jagat– the universe; pāti – protects; anuśāsti –
rules; api – and.

“He is Śrī Brahmā, the master of all the progenitors of
the universe. He is our father, although he himself is
self-born and fatherless. He is the supreme authority
and the creator and maintainer of the universe. By
spreading the message of the Vedas, he teaches religious
principles.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: “Who is he?” asks Śrī Gopa-kumāra.

The Kumāras reply with this verse beginning with prajā,
saying, “He is the lord, protector, and maintainer of
even Bhṛgu and all the other progenitors (prajāpatis),
and he is our father.” Since all the prajāpatis are
brothers of the four Kumāras, Śrī Brahmā is their father
as well. “However, Śrī Brahmā is svayam-bhū (self-born);
he simply manifested from the lotus navel of Śrī
Bhagavān and has no father. He is parameṣṭhi, the
supreme authority; he is pāti, the maintainer of the
universe, supplying all living entities with their means
of sustenance; and he is anuśāsti [meaning ‘one who
governs,’ in the sense of giving direction], guiding
everyone by disseminating the religious principles of
the Vedas.”

Alternatively, the words sraṣṭā viśvasya indicate that
Śrī Brahmā has the ability to create, while the two
words pāti and anuśāsti indicate he also has the ability
to maintain and protect (pāti) and annihilate as well.
[Anuśāsti here also means ‘one who governs,’ but in the
sense of a giver of chastisement.]



Verse 126

asya lokas tu satyākhyaḥ sarvopari virājate

śata-janma-kṛtaiḥ śuddhaiḥ sva-dharmair labhyate hi yaḥ

asya – his; lokaḥ – realm; tu – indeed; satya-ākhyaḥ –
named Satya; sarva-upari – above all; virājate – shines;

                          239
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

śata – a hundred; janma – births; kṛtaiḥ – by
performing; śuddhaiḥ – faultlessly; sva-dharmaiḥ – their
religious duties; labhyate – attained; hi – indeed; yaḥ
– which.

“He resides in Satyaloka, which is located above all
other worlds. Those who faultlessly execute their
prescribed occupational duties (sva-dharma) for one
hundred lifetimes attain this planet.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra may ask, “Where does
Brahmā reside?”

Sanaka and the others reply in this verse beginning with
asya. They say, “Śrī Brahmā lives in Satyaloka, a planet
above all others at the far boundary of the top of the
universe (brahmāṇḍa). One attains that planet after
flawlessly executing his prescribed duties for one
hundred births.” Śrī Rudra confirms this in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (4.24.29): “sva-dharma-niṣṭhaḥ śata-janmabhiḥ
pumān viriñcatām eti – When one faithfully executes his
prescribed duties for one hundred lifetimes, he attains
the position of Brahmā (viriñcitva).”



Verse 127

tatra vaikuṇṭha-loko ’sti yasmin śrī-jagad-īśvaraḥ

sahasra-śīrṣā varteta sa mahā-puruṣaḥ sadā

tatra – there; vaikuṇṭha-lokaḥ – Vaikuṇṭha-loka; asti –
exists; yasmin – wherein; śrī-jagad-īśvaraḥ – the Lord
of the universes; sahasra-

śīrṣā – with a thousand heads; varteta – stays; saḥ –
He; mahā-puruṣaḥ – the Supreme Person; sadā – always.

“Within Satyaloka is a Vaikuṇṭha planet where the Lord
of the universe, Śrī Jagadīśvara, resides eternally as
Sahasra-śīrṣā, the thousand-headed Mahā-puruṣa.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: “There, your heartfelt desires will
surely be fulfilled.” With the intention of presaging
Gopa-kumāra’s imminent success in Satyaloka, the sages
explain the glories of that place. They say, “Somewhere
in Satyaloka is an abode called Śrī Vaikuṇṭha. There
resides Śrī Jagadīśvara, who is the indescribable Mahā-
puruṣa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead known as
Sahasra-śīrṣā (one who has a thousand heads).”



Verse 128

tasya putra iva brahmā śrūyate na ca bhidyate

brahmaiva līlayā tatra mūrtibhyāṁ bhāti no matam

tasya – of Him; putraḥ – the son; iva – like; brahmā –
Brahmā; śrūyate – it is heard; na – not; ca – indeed;
bhidyate – is divided; brahmā – Brahmā; eva – indeed;
līlayā – by a pastime; tatra – there; mūrtibhyām – with

                          240
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

two forms; bhāti – shines; naḥ – our; matam – opinion.

“The Śrutis tell us that Brahmājī is like the son of
that Mahā-puruṣa, and thus there is no difference
between them. It is our opinion that it is Śrī Brahmā
who manifests in these two forms as a pastime.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might object, “If the
Supreme Lord of the universe, Śrī Jagadīśvara, is
directly present in Satyaloka, how can you glorify Śrī
Brahmā as the master and supreme authority of that
planet?”

To address this, Sanaka and other great sages speak this
verse beginning with tasya. In the first line, they use
the word iva, meaning ‘like,’ to indicate: “It is
traditionally accepted and we have heard from the Śrutis
that Śrī Brahmā is like a son to that thousand-headed
Personality of Godhead, but there is no proof of this.
We are all his sons, and so we are junior to him. We
have not seen his birth; we have only heard about it.”

The doubt could be furthered, “If Brahmā is the son of
the Supreme Person, then it is clear that there has to
be a difference between the two of them. A son regards
his father with reverence, so one is the worshiper and
the other is the worshiped.”

The sages reply, “We are not of that opinion. Brahmā
alone, as part of his self-determined activities, has
manifested two forms of the Personality of Godhead:
Catur-mukha, the Lord with four heads, and Sahasra-śīrṣā
Mahā-puruṣa, the Lord with a thousand heads. Śrī Brahmā
also possesses the qualities of the Lord of the
universe. So our firm conclusion is that they are
nondifferent.”




Verses 129–130


śrī-gopa-kumāra uvāca

tac chrutvā tatra gatvā taṁ mahā-puruṣam īkṣitum

japaṁ kurvaṁs tapo-loke niviṣṭo ’ntaḥ-samādhinā

muhūrtānantaraṁ dṛṣṭī samunmīlya vyalokayam

brahma-lokāptam ātmānaṁ taṁ ca śrī-jagad-īśvaram

śrī-gopa-kumāraḥ uvāca – Śrī Gopa-kumāra said; tat –
that; śrutvā – hearing; tatra – there; gatvā – going;
tam – Him; mahā-puruṣam – the Supreme Person; īkṣitum –
to see; japam – chanting mantra; kurvan – doing; tapaḥ-
loke – Tapoloka; niviṣṭaḥ – entered; antaḥ-samādhinā –
through a state of trance; muhūrta-anantaram – after a
moment; dṛṣṭī – eyes; samunmīlya – opening; vyalokayam –
I looked around; brahma-loka – in Brahmaloka; āptam –
arrived; ātmānam – Supreme Self; tam – Him; ca – and;
śrī-jagad-īśvaram – the resplendent Lord of all the

                          241
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

worlds.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra said: O brāhmaṇa, after hearing this
from Sanaka and the other Kumāras, I resolved to go to
Satyaloka to see that Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Therefore, I began chanting my

mantra and entered deep into samādhi. After a moment, I
opened my eyes and found myself in Satyaloka, face-to-
face with Śrī Jagadīśvara.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Hearing the
words of Sanaka and the others, I desired darśana of
Mahā-puruṣa Śrī Jagadīśvara in Satyaloka. So, sitting in
Tapoloka, I absorbed my mind in chanting my mantra and
entered deep into my samādhi. After one muhūrta [either
a moment or forty-eight minutes], when I opened my eyes
I saw that I had reached Brahmaloka, and there was Śrī
Jagadīśvara, right in front of my eyes.”



Verse 131

śrīmat-sahasra-bhuja-śīrṣa-padaṁ mahāntaṁ

nīlāmbudābham anurūpa-vibhūṣaṇāḍhyam

tejo-nidhiṁ kamala-nābham ananta-bhoga-

talpe śayānam akhilākṣi-mano-’bhirāmam

śrīmat – glorious; sahasra – thousands; bhuja – arms;
śīrṣa – heads; padam – and feet; mahāntam – great; nīla
– dark blue; ambuda – of a rain cloud; ābham – hue;
anurūpa – suitable; vibhūṣaṇa – with orna-

ments; āḍhyam – enriched; tejaḥ – of brilliance; nidhim
– an ocean; kamala-nābham – a lotus (blossomed) on His
navel; ananta – of Śrī Ananta; bhoga – of the coils;
talpe – on the couch; śayānam – reclining; akhila – of
all; akṣi – eyes; manaḥ-abhirāmam – charming to the
mind.

I saw that Śrī Jagadīśvara had a huge body with
thousands of arms, heads and feet. His complexion was
like that of a dark blue cloud, and He was adorned with
varieties of ornaments. His form was an ocean of
brilliance, and His navel was the resting place of a
fully blossomed lotus. Reclining on the bed of Śeṣa-
nāga, He was delighting the eyes and minds of everyone.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The brāhmaṇa might ask, “What is
Jagadīśvara like?” Three verses, beginning here with
śrīmat explain this.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “I saw Jagadīśvara as śrīmanta,
possessed of all splendor. He had assumed a huge form
with thousands of hands, heads and feet. He was adorned
with divine garments and ornaments just suitable to His
splendid form. Although He is the reservoir of all
effulgence, His complexion was like a soft blue cloud.
In that reservoir, a lotus was blooming from His navel.
He was resting on a bed of the coils of the serpent

                          242
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

Ananta and was giving supreme pleasure to the eyes and
minds of all the living beings in the universe. Despite
His transcendental body being so gigantic with its
thousands of hands and heads, He was sublimely graceful
and attractive.”



Verse 132

saṁvāhyamāna-caraṇaṁ ramayā suparṇe

baddhāñjalau kṛta-dṛśaṁ vidhinārcyamānam

bhūyo-vibhūtibhir amuṁ bahu lālayantaṁ

śrī-nārada-praṇaya-bhaktiṣu datta-cittam

saṁvāhyamāna – were being massaged; caraṇam – whose
feet; ramayā – by the goddess of fortune; suparṇe – on
Garuḍa; baddha-añjalau – with folded hands; kṛta-dṛśam –
cast a glance; vidhinā – by Brahmā; arcyamānam –
worshiped; bhūyaḥ – repeatedly; vibhūtibhiḥ – with great
opulences; amum – Him; bahu – much; lālayantam –
caressing; śrī-nārada – performed by Śrī Nārada; praṇaya
– loving; bhaktiṣu – in the activities of devotion;
datta – absorbed; cittam – mind.

I also saw that Śrī Ramā-devī was massaging His feet.
Garuḍa was standing before Him with hands folded in
prayer while Śrī Jagadīśvara cast a merciful glance at
him. Śrī Brahmājī was worshiping Him with abundant
varieties of his opulences, and the Lord was
reciprocating by caressing him and showing him other
kinds of affection. Śrī Nārada was showing his pure
loving devotion by dancing and singing, and Śrī
Jagadīśvara was engrossed in this service performed by
Śrī Nārada.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra continues, “I saw that
Śrī Ramā-devī (Lakṣmī-devī) was massaging His feet. With
joined palms, Garuḍa was waiting to render service to
Him, and Śrī Jagadīśvara was affectionately gracing him
with His glance. Brahmā was worshiping Him with his
incredible grandeur, and sometimes Śrī Bhagavān was
caressing him by gently touching him with His soft lotus
hands. Śrī Nārada was displaying his prema-bhakti in his
singing and dancing, as Śrī Bhagavān was fully relishing
his service.”



Verse 133

mahā-rahasyaṁ nigamārtha-tattvaṁ sva-bhakti-mārgaṁ
kamalāsanāya

śanair vivṛtyopadiśantam antar nijālayendrasya
virājamānam

mahā-rahasyam – very   confidential; nigama – of the
Vedas; artha-tattvam   – the esoteric truths; sva-bhakti-
mārgam – the path of   His devotional service; kamala-
āsanāya – to Brahmā,   who sat upon a lotus; śanaiḥ –

                            243
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

gradually; vivṛtya – revealing; upadiśantam – teaching;
antaḥ – within; nija – own; ālaya – of abodes; indrasya
– of the best; virājamānam – illuminating.

The lustrous Śrī Jagadīśvara, ensconced in His abode
illumined by His own bodily radiance, was speaking to
Brahmā, who was seated on the lotus. Śrī Jagadīśvara was
meticulously explaining to Brahmā the esoteric and
mysterious truths of bhakti-mārga, the path of pure
devotion, which is the most confidential essence of the
Vedas.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra continued, “Brahmā,
whose seat is the lotus emanating from the Lord’s navel,
finished worshiping the Lord and sat near Him. Then Śrī
Bhagavān slowly explained in detail the most
confidential process, bhakti-mārga, by which one is able
to obtain Him. That topic is the greatest of esoteric
secrets, and therefore the Lord spoke softly into the
ears of Brahmā, who had inquired, ‘What is the nature of
bhakti-mārga?’ Śrī Jagadīśvara, whose radiant presence
had illumined His abode, replied, ‘Bhakti-mārga, the
path of pure loving devotion, is the essence of all the
Vedic texts (nigamas) and is the means (abhidheya-
tattva) by which the ultimate goal is achieved. Because
it is the most esoteric of all topics, it is very
confidential.’ ”



Verse 134

atho tad ākarṇya catur-mukhaṁ ca

pramoda-sampad-vivaśī-bhavantam

anūdya nīcair anumodamānaṁ

muhus tad-aṅghrīn abhivandamānam

athau – thereafter; tat – that; ākarṇya – after hearing;
catuḥ-mukham – Brahmā; ca – and; pramoda – of supreme
happiness; sampat – by the treasure; vivaśī-bhavantam –
being overwhelmed; anūdya nīcaiḥ – in a low voice;
anumodamānam happily; muhuḥ – repeatedly; tad-aṅghrīn –
to His feet; abhivandamānam – offering profuse prayers
of praise.

Upon hearing about the real nature of bhakti, four-
headed Brahmā experienced the great treasure of supreme
happiness and became overwhelmed. Quietly, he profusely
praised the nectarean words of Śrī Jagadīśvara and began
to offer Him repeated obeisances.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Then I looked
at Śrī Brahmā.”

“What was he doing?” asks the brāhmaṇa.

“In hearing about bhakti-tattva, the nature of
devotional service, Brahmā received the treasure of the
greatest happiness and became overwhelmed with joy.
Softly, he applauded the nectarean words of the Lord,
and with loving devotion glorified Śrī Jagadīśvara’s

                             244
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

beautiful lotus feet again and again.” As he was sitting
on the lotus emanating from Śrī Bhagavān’s navel, he
praised the Lord with verbal offerings. Or, it may be
that he climbed down from his lotus in order to offer
repeated prostrations to the Lord.



Verse 135

pramoda-vegāt patitaṁ visaṁjñaṁ vilokya sā mām abhigamya
lakṣmīḥ

nināya samjñāṁ bahu lālayitvā sva-bāla-vat pārśvam uta
sva-bhartuḥ

pramoda-vegāt – by the flood of happiness; patitam –
fallen; visaṁjñam – unconscious; vilokya – seeing; sā –
she; mām – me; abhigamya – coming near; lakṣmīḥ – the
goddess of fortune; nināya – brought; saṁjñām – to
consciousness; bahu lālayitvā – showing much affection;
sva-bāla-vat – as I were her own little boy; pārśvam –
to the side; uta – also; sva-bhartuḥ – of her husband.

Seeing all this, I was overcome with joy and fell
unconscious due to the intensity of my rapture. Noticing
this, Śrī Lakṣmī came to me. Coddling and caressing me,
she tenderly brought me back to consciousness. Loving me
as if I were her own child, she then took me to her
husband Śrī Bhagavān.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Now, describing himself, Śrī Gopa-
kumāra says, “Beholding these indescribable activities,
I experienced such great joy that I fell to the ground
in a faint. When the beloved consort of Bhagavān, Śrī
Lakṣmī-devī, noticed my condition she immediately came
and began to caress me like her own child. She revived
me by sprinkling me with water and touching me with her
cooling hands. Then she took me to her husband Śrī
Jagadīśvara.”



Verse 136

bhagavantaṁ muhuḥ paśyan praṇamann avadaṁ manaḥ

nijepsitāntam adyāgā niścalaṁ tvaṁ mudaṁ bhaja

bhagavantam – the Lord; muhuḥ – repeatedly; paśyan –
looking; praṇaman – bowing low; avadam – I said; manaḥ –
O mind; nija – own; īpsita – desired; antam – objective;
adya – now; agāḥ – become; niścalam – steadfast; tvam –
you; mudam – happiness; bhaja – enjoy.

Gazing at Śrī Bhagavān and repeatedly offering
obeisances to Him, I told myself, “O mind! Today you
have attained the ultimate fulfillment of your treasured
desires. Now be steady and enjoy your happiness.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Thereafter, I
took darśana of Śrī Bhagavān and offered praṇāma to Him
over and over again. While doing this, I was speaking to
my mind.”

                          245
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


“What did you say?”

To explain this, Gopa-kumāra speaks four-and-a-half
verses, beginning here with nija. He says, “O mind! You
have finally obtained the ultimate object of your
desires. Now give up your restlessness. Steadfastly
worship the Supreme Lord and be joyful.”



Verse 137

aśeṣa-śoka-santrāsa-duḥkha-hīnam idaṁ padam

paramarddhi-parānanda-nicitaṁ jagad-arcitam

aśeṣa – all; śoka – lamentation; santrāsa – fear; duḥkha
– distress; hīnam – without; idam – this; padam – abode;
parama-ṛddhi – supreme opulence; para-ānanda – of
greatest exultation; nicitam – full; jagat-arcitam –
worshiped by the people of all the worlds.

“Satyaloka is free from any trace of distress, fear, and
lamentation. Supremely situated and filled with the
greatest bliss, this best of all realms is worshiped by
the whole universe.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: “What is Satyaloka like?”

Śrī Gopa-kumāra replies, “This planet named Satyaloka is
free from all forms of fear and distress, and it
encompasses the greatest perfection, opulence, and joy.
Therefore, it is the most excellent abode and is
worshiped throughout the entire universe.”



Verse 138

yādṛśaḥ sambhaved bhrātar jagad-īśaś ca tādṛśaḥ

bhāty aśeṣa-mahattāyāḥ parāṁ kāṣṭhāṁ gataḥ sphuṭam

yādṛśaḥ – as much; sambhavet – it may be; bhrātaḥ – O
brother; jagat-īśaḥ – the Lord of the worlds; ca – also;
tādṛśaḥ – that much; bhāti – shines; aśeṣa-mahattāyāḥ –
of perfect glory; parām kāṣṭhām – to the extreme limit;
gataḥ – attained; sphuṭam – manifestation.

“O my dear brother mind! Śrī Jagadīśvara, possessing the
ultimate limit of grandeur that befits His preeminent
manifestation, is resplendently present in this
Satyaloka.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: “And not only this, your long-
treasured desire has been fulfilled.” With this hope,
Śrī Gopa-kumāra continues his thoughts in this verse
beginning with yādṛśaḥ. “O brother mind! In Satyaloka,
Śrī Jagadīśvara has clearly manifested the majesty of
His form in the most delightful way possible and in a
manner that befits His position as the Supreme Lord. The
reason is that here, Śrī Bhagavān possesses His topmost
glories, such as endless forms, infinite beauty,

                          246
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

unbounded qualities, unlimited opulence, etc. Thus He is
present in the most glorious manner possible. No other
form of Bhagavān can match the excellence of His
manifestation in Satyaloka.”



Verse 139

sneham anvabhavo lakṣmyā dṛgbhyāṁ paśyādhunā prabhum

māthura-vraja-bhū-śokaṁ yiyāsāṁ cānyato jahi

sneham – love; anvabhavaḥ – experienced; lakṣmyā – of
the goddess of fortune; dṛgbhyām – with your eyes; paśya
– behold; adhunā – now; prabhum – the Lord; māthura-
vraja-bhū – for Mathurā and Vraja-bhūmi; śokam –
lamentation; yiyāsām – the desire to go; ca – also;
anyataḥ – from anything else; jahi – give up.

“O mind! You have personally experienced the affection
of Śrī Lakṣmī-devī. Now, see the Lord directly with your
eyes. Do not lament for Vraja-bhūmi. Be steady. Stay
here and give up even the desire to go anywhere else.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra has described what he
experienced before, and now in this verse beginning with
sneham, He describes the special characteristics of his
experience. “O mind! You have experienced how Śrī
Lakṣmī-devī affectionately caressed you back to
consciousness when you fainted. Now with your eyes
behold Śrī Jagadīśvara.” This reveals that Śrī
Jagadīśvara’s abode, Satyaloka, is superior even to
Tapoloka. Gopa-kumāra continues, “Therefore, give up
your grief in being separated from Mathurā and Vraja-
bhūmi and abandon your desire to go to Nīlācala as
well.”



Verse 140

jagad-īśād vidhāteva lālanaṁ ced abhīpsasi

tan mahā-puruṣādiṣṭa-mantra-śaktyā phaliṣyati

jagat-īśāt – from the Lord of the worlds; vidhātā – the
creator; iva – like; lālanam – for affection; cet – if;
abhīpsasi – you hanker; tat – then; mahā-puruṣa – by
that great personality (your gurudeva); ādiṣṭa – taught;
mantra-śaktyā – by the power of your mantra; phaliṣyati
– the result will come.

“O mind, if you desire to be pampered with the same
affection that Śrī Jagadīśvara lavishes on Śrī Brahmā,
then that good fortune can also be yours by the power of
the mantra taught to you by that great soul (your
gurudeva).”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “O mind, if you
desire the tender loving care that Śrī Jagadīśvara gives
to Śrī Brahmā, then chant the mantra taught to you by
that indescribably great personality (śrī gurudeva). By
the power of chanting, you, too, will achieve that good

                          247
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

fortune.”



Verse 141

nidrā-līlāṁ prabhur bheje loka-padme ’sya nābhi-je

sṛṣṭi-rītiṁ vidhir vīkṣya sva-kṛtyāyābhavad bahiḥ

nidrā – of sleep; līlām – pastimes; prabhuḥ – the Lord;
bheje – revealed; loka – which contains all the planets;
padme – in the lotus flower; asya – His; nābhi-je – born
from His navel; sṛṣṭi-rītim – the process of creation;
vidhiḥ – Brahmā; vīkṣya – after understanding; sva-
kṛtyāya – for the performance of his own duties; abhavat
– he became situated; bahiḥ – in the external world.

O brāhmaṇa, thereafter, the Lord exhibited His pastime
of sleep. Śrī Brahmā meanwhile studied the lotus that
had emanated from the Lord’s navel and was able to
acquire the knowledge required for generating the
material universe. Then he left to perform his duty of
creation.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The brāhmaṇa may ask, “Then what
happened? What pastime did the Lord manifest?”

Śrī Gopa-kumāra replies in this verse beginning with
nidrā. He says, “The Lord performed the pastime of
sleeping.” Factually, though, Śrī Bhagavān, who is the
embodiment of consciousness, never sleeps. “The lotus
emanating from the navel of the Lord contains the
fourteen planetary systems in their essential forms. Śrī
Brahmā studied that lotus and was thereby able to
understand the process of fulfilling his duty of
creating the universe and how to complete the work
quickly. Thereafter, to execute his duties, he left the
abode of Bhagavān and went to his own residence.”



Verse 142

paśyan – beholding; prabhoḥ – of the Lord; rūpam – the
form; adaḥ – that; mahā-adbhutam – very wonderful; tat-
nābhi-padme – in the lotus born from His navel; yugapat
– at the same time; tathā – and; jagat – of the
universe; gūḍha – confidential; upadeśa – teachings;
śravaṇāt – from hearing; catuḥ-mukha – of Brahmā; prema
– of love; pravāham – the powerful flow; ca – also;
sukham – happily; tataḥ – thereafter; avasam – I
resided.

I saw that most wonderful form of the Lord and at the
same time observed the presence of all the fourteen
worlds in subtle form in the lotus emanating from His
navel. Witnessing how the four-headed Brahmā was
overwhelmed with divine love upon hearing the
confidential secrets of bhakti from the Lord, I began to
reside there happily.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: To explain why he lived in Satyaloka
in utter happiness, Śrī Gopa-kumāra speaks this verse

                          248
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

beginning with paśyan. He says, “There, as I beheld that
most wondrous form of the Lord, which is famous for its
matchless glory, I observed the universe, comprised of
fourteen planetary systems, situated in its subtle,
elemental form within the lotus that had arisen from the
Lord’s navel. When four-headed Brahmā heard Bhagavān’s
instructions about the deep secrets of bhakti, he became
overwhelmed with prema while tears streamed from his
eyes. Having witnessed all this, I started to live
happily in Brahmaloka.” This statement reveals that
Gopa-kumāra’s stay in Brahmaloka was even more
extraordinary than and far superior to his delightful
sojourns on Svarga and the other planets.



Verse 143

kṛtsne loka-traye naṣṭe rātrāv ekārṇave sati

śeṣopari sukhaṁ śete bhagavān brahmaṇā samam

kṛtsne – all; loka – worlds; traye – three; naṣṭe –
destroyed; rātrau – at night; eka – one; arṇave – in
ocean; sati – being; śeṣa upari – upon Śrī Śeṣa; sukham
– happily; śete – reposed; bhagavān – the abode of six
opulences; brahmaṇā samam – with Śrī Brahmā.

At the end of the day of Brahmā and the beginning of his
night, when the three worlds are annihilated in the
cosmic inundation, Śrī Bhagavān would take Brahmājī with
Him and happily sleep on Śeṣa-nāga.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: To point out the special difference
between Brahmaloka and the other planets such as Svarga,
Śrī Gopa-kumāra speaks two verses, beginning here with
kṛtsne. He says, “A day of Brahmā lasts for the duration
of one thousand yuga cycles. When Brahmā’s day ended and
his night began, Bhagavān Sahasra-śīrṣā, along with
Brahmā, slept on the bed of the serpent Śeṣa-nāga.”



Verse 144

stūyate citra-vākyaiḥ sa jana-lokādi-vāsibhiḥ

tan-mahā-kautukaṁ vīkṣye brahma-loka-prabhāvataḥ

stūyate – offered prayers; citra – wonderful; vākyaiḥ –
with statements; saḥ – He; janaloka-ādi-vāsibhiḥ – by
the denizens of Janaloka and other planets; tat – of
that (scene); mahā-kautukam – very fascinating; vīkṣye –
I would see; brahma-loka – of Brahmaloka; prabhāvataḥ –
by the potency.

At that time, the residents of Janaloka and other
planets began to glorify Śrī Bhagavān with excellent
prayers. By the power of Brahmaloka, I saw this
fascinating spectacle.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “At that time,
by the influence of Brahmaloka, I was able to witness
the spectacular scene of the residents of Janaloka,

                          249
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

Tapoloka, and Satyaloka glorifying Śrī Bhagavān with
choice words. Previously in Janaloka, I had also seen
this event, but I had not derived so much pleasure from
it. I was a newcomer then, engrossed in my duties, and I
really did not understand what was happening. Now,
however, by the influence of Brahmaloka, I realized
great joy in it all.”



Verse 145

antardhāya kadācic cet kutrāpi bhagavān vrajet

śokaḥ syād āgate cāsmin sa-mūlaḥ kṣīyate sa naḥ

antardhāya – having disappeared; kadācit – at times; cet
– if; kutra api – somewhere; bhagavān – the Lord; vrajet
– would go; śokaḥ – grief; syāt – may be; āgate – when
returned; ca – and; asmin – He; sa-mūlaḥ – together with
the root; kṣīyate – is destroyed; saḥ – that; naḥ – our.

When Śrī Bhagavān would sometimes disappear and go
elsewhere, I would suffer deeply. But as soon as He
returned, all that grief would be eradicated.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: “Although there was cause for
distress, I never experienced any suffering in
Satyaloka.” To explain this, Śrī Gopa-kumāra speaks this
verse beginning with antardhāya. He says, “At certain
times, Śrī Bhagavān would disappear and go somewhere
else, at which time, I would experience great distress.
Where would He go? I have not disclosed the name of that
particular place because, at that time, I was unaware of
it.” Śrī Nārada shall explain this topic later. “As soon
as Śrī Bhagavān would return, all my distress would be
completely vanquished, and so I was not especially eager
to know the actual reason for His going elsewhere.”



Verse 146

ittham ahnāṁ katipaye prayāte prātar ekadā

kautukād brahmaṇā spṛṣṭaḥ pheṇa-puñjo ’suro ’bhavat

ittham – thus; ahnām – days; katipaye – some; prayāte –
past; prātaḥ – in the early morning; ekadā – one day;
kautukāt – out of curiosity; brahmaṇā – by Brahmā;
spṛṣṭaḥ – touched; pheṇa-puñjaḥ – a mass of foam; asuraḥ
– a demon; abhavat – it became.

In this way, a few days of Brahmā elapsed. One day at
dawn Śrī Brahmā, out of curiosity, touched a mass of
foam from which an enormous demon manifested.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Now, Śrī Gopa-kumāra chanted his
mantra with great resolve (saṅkalpa), and by the power
of this chanting, he obtained the post of Brahmā, the
topmost position in the universe. To explain how this
came about, Gopa-kumāra speaks two verses, beginning
here with ittham. He says, “And so passed several of
Brahmā’s days. Then early one morning, Śrī Brahmā

                          250
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

touched a mass of foam out of curiosity, and an
incredible thing happened! From that foam arose a
gargantuan demon, terrifying like the masses of foam on
the ocean of cosmic annihilation, and fearsomely
strong.”



Verse 147

tad-bhītyālīyata brahmā daityo bhagavatā hataḥ

bhayākrānto vidhir naiti tat-pade ’yuṅkta māṁ prabhuḥ

tat – of it; bhītyā – out of fear; alīyata – fled and
hid; brahmā – Brahmā; daityaḥ – the demon; bhagavatā –
by the Lord; hataḥ – was slain; bhaya – by terror;
ākrāntaḥ – overwhelmed; vidhiḥ – Brahmā; na – not; eti –
return; tat-pade – in His position; ayuṅkta – appointed;
mām – me; prabhuḥ – the Lord.

Terrorized, Śrī Brahmā fled and hid. Śrī Bhagavān killed
the demon, but Brahmājī remained overcome with fear and
did not return. In the end, the Lord appointed me to the
post of Brahmā.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Terrified of
that demon, Brahmājī hid in a secluded place in an
invisible form. Even though Bhagavān Śrī Nārāyaṇa
destroyed the demon, still Brahmā, who is the creator of
the entire universe, was still overcome by fear and did
not return. Eventually, Lord Śrī Jagadīśvara assigned me
to the post of creator (vidhātā), making me the supreme
entity in the universe (parameṣṭhī) and giving me the
authority of Brahmā.”



Verse 148

ahaṁ tu vaiṣṇavān eva sṛjaṁs tad-bhakti-vṛddhaye

nyayuñjam adhikāreṣu vaiṣṇavān eva sarvataḥ

aham – I; tu – indeed; vaiṣṇavān – the devotees; eva –
indeed; sṛjan – creating; tat-bhakti – His devotional
service; vṛddhaye – to expand; nyayuñjam – I engaged;
adhikāreṣu – in posts of authority; vaiṣṇavān – devotees
of Viṣṇu; eva – indeed; sarvataḥ – in every situation.

When I became lord of the universe, in order to increase
loving service to Bhagavān, I only created Vaiṣṇavas and
I only appointed Vaiṣṇavas to the various positions of
authority, such as those of progenitors ( prajāpatis)
and Indra.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Invested with
the authority of Brahmā, I wanted to spread the practice
of devotion to the Supreme Lord (bhagavad-bhakti). Thus,
I created only Vaiṣṇavas, and I appointed only Vaiṣṇavas
to all the positions of responsibility, such as those of
the prajāpatis, Indra, Candra (the moon-god), and Sūrya
(the sun-god).”


                          251
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017



Verse 149

itas tato mahā-yajñair aśvamedhādibhir vibhum

sampūjayan mudāṁ pūrair brahmāṇḍaṁ samapūrayam

itaḥ tataḥ – here and there; mahā-yajñaiḥ – through
immense sacrifices; aśva-medha – by the horse
sacrifices; ādibhiḥ – and so forth; vibhum – the all-
pervasive Lord; sampūjayan – fully worshipping; mudām –
of bliss; pūraiḥ – with floods; brahma-aṇḍam – the
universe; samapūrayam – I overfilled.

In place after place, I exclusively arranged for the
worship of Śrī Bhagavān by causing the performance of
grand sacrifices such as the Aśvamedha, by which the
entire cosmos was immersed in bliss.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra received the authority
of Brahmā and performed duties such as maintaining the
universe. In this verse beginning with itas, he
describes his other activities. He says, “Worship of the
Supreme Lord Jagadīśvara began to be performed
everywhere, immersing the entire brahmāṇḍa in sheer
joy.”



Verses 150–152

pārameṣṭhyena saṁruddho vedair mūrti-dharair makhaiḥ

purāṇair itihāsaiś cāgamais tīrthair maharṣibhiḥ

brahmarṣibhiś ca bahudhā stūyamāno mahā-madaiḥ

grasyamāno ’pi muñcāmi na smākiñcanatāṁ nijām

tathāpi brāhmya-kṛtyābdhi-bhaṅga-magno na pūrva-vat

lebhe bhagavato bhakti-sukhaṁ cintāturāntaraḥ

pārameṣṭhyena – by the post of the supreme entity, Lord
Brahmā; saṁruddhaḥ – entangled; vedaiḥ mūrti-dharaiḥ –
by the personified Vedas; makhaiḥ – by the sacrifices;
purāṇaiḥ – by the eighteen ancient histories of the Lord
and His devotees; itihāsaiḥ – by the other historical
compositions; ca – and; āgamaiḥ – by the śāstras spoken
by Śrī Śiva; tīrthaiḥ – by the holy places; mahā-ṛṣibhiḥ
– by the great sages; brahma-ṛṣibhiḥ – by the saintly
brāhmaṇas; ca – and; bahudhā – in many ways; stūyamānaḥ
– being praised; mahā – great; madaiḥ – by various
pleasures; grasyamānaḥ – being engulfed; api – although;
muñcāmi na – I did not give up; sma – indeed;
akiñcanatām – state of being unattached; nijām – own;
tathā api – however; brāhmya – of Śrī Brahmā; kṛtya – of
the duties; abdhi – of the ocean; bhaṅga – in the waves;
magnaḥ – floundering; na – not; pūrva-vat – as before;
lebhe – attained; bhagavataḥ – to the Lord; bhakti-
sukham – the happiness of devotional service; cintā –
with anxiety; ātura – overcome; antaraḥ – within.


                          252
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

Because I occupied the supreme post of Brahmā, all the
personified Vedas, sacrifices, Purāṇas, Itihāsas,
Tantras, and holy places came to serve me, and eminent
maharṣis and brahmarṣis would praise me in various ways.
Although I possessed great opulence and was completely
surrounded by intoxicating comforts, I still did not
abandon my natural detachment from material life. But,
trapped in the waves of the immense ocean of
responsibilities of being Brahmā, I could not experience
the happiness of devotional service to the Lord as I had
before, and my mind became anxious and disturbed.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: In four verses, beginning here with
pārameṣṭhyena, Śrī Gopa-kumāra explains why he became
detached from staying in Brahmaloka and, as before,
desired to move on to a superior position. He says,
“Having been appointed the supreme ruler of the
universe, I had unlimited opulences. But in spite of
being surrounded by such luxuries that could easily have
caused my becoming intoxicated with hubris, I did not
abandon my natural sense of detachment. Even so, in
Satyaloka I was not able to relish the happiness of
bhakti.” This is described in these three verses [150–
152]. “The personified Vedas, maharṣis (great sages),
and brahmarṣis (saintly brāhmaṇas) sang my praises, but
this gave me no satisfaction. I was submerged in the
deep ocean of Brahmā’s duties and forever distressed
with anxious concerns. The overwhelming responsibilities
of this post prevented me from enjoying the bliss of the
Lord’s loving service.”



Verse 153

dvi-parārdhāyuṣi svasya śrūyamāṇo ’pi kālataḥ

bhayaṁ syāt kriyamāṇe ca jape bhūr-iyamārti-dā

dvi-parārdha – of two parārdhas, totaling
311,040,000,000,000 years; āyuṣi – within the lifetime;
svasya – of myself; śrūyamāṇaḥ – hearing; api –
although; kālataḥ – from time; bhayam – fear; syāt – may
be; kriyamāṇe – while performing; ca – and; jape – in
chanting; bhūḥ – land (Vṛndāvana); iyam – this; ārti-dā
– gives pain.

And even though I would hear that my lifespan was two
parārdhas, I would still be afraid of the force of time.
To allay this fear, I would chant my mantra. This,
however, would stir up remembrance of Śrī Vṛndāvana,
which brought on the pain of separation.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Although my
lifespan was two parārdhas (311 trillion, 40 billion
years), I was still overwhelmed by fear of the time
factor. To overcome this, I would chant my mantra. As
soon as I chanted, though, I would become agitated with
intense longing for Śrī Vṛndāvana and all the places in
the land of Vraja.”



Verse 154

                          253
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


jagad-īśvarataḥ putra-lālanaṁ tu mahā-sukham

mamānubhavataś citta-vaikalyaṁ tad vinaśyati

jagad-īśvarataḥ – from the Lord of the worlds; putra –
for a son; lālanam – affection; tu – indeed; mahā-sukham
– boundless happi-

ness; mama – my; anubhavataḥ – through experiencing;
citta – of the heart; vaikalyam – the distress; tat –
that; vinaśyati – it would eradicate.

However, Śrī Jagadiśa would caress me like a son,
causing me boundless delight and eradicating the
distress of my heart.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “In this way,
even though I was distressed from separation, by the
potency of Brahmaloka I actually experienced no sorrow
at all.” To describe how this was possible, he speaks
this verse beginning with jagat. “The special reason was
that Śrī Jagadīśvara would pamper me lovingly just like
a son, and because of this, my happiness knew no bounds.
Consequently, the deep misery agitating my mind and
heart vanished and I was not disturbed in any other
way.”



Verse 155

atyanta-sannikarṣeṇa pitṛ-buddhyā ca sevayā

kadāpy āgāṁsi jātāni mṛṣyante prabhuṇā mama

atyanta – very; sannikarṣeṇa – by coming close; pitṛ –
of a father; buddhyā – in the mood; ca – also; sevayā –
while rendering service; kadā api – sometimes; āgāṁsi –
offenses; jātāni – were generated; mṛṣyante – forgiven;
prabhuṇā – by the Lord; mama – my.

I always stayed in close proximity to Śrī Jagadiśa and
would serve Him in the mood of His being my father. When
it sometimes happened that I committed offenses in His
service, the Lord mercifully forgave them all.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: “Any offense I committed to Śrī
Jagadīśvara was cast aside by the mercy of the Lord and
the affection of Śrī Mahā-Lakṣmī.” This is explained in
the two verses beginning with atyanta. Śrī Gopa-kumāra
says, “Because I served Śrī Jagadīśvara in such intimate
proximity, there was the possibility that I might
transgress propriety out of a lack of reverence.
Nevertheless, because in the mood of our relationship, I
saw Him as my father and served Him like this, I never
had any fear. If I did sometimes commit offenses, my
compassionate Lord forgave them all.”



Verse 156

tathāpy antar-mahodvegaḥ syāt tato vyañjite śriyā

                          254
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


snehe mātreva hṛṣṭaḥ syām evaṁ tatrāvasaṁ ciram

tathā api – still; antaḥ – within my mind; mahā – great;
udvegaḥ – disturbance; syāt – there might be; tataḥ –
then; vyañjite – manifest; śriyā – by the goddess of
fortune; snehe – love; mātrā – a mother; iva – like;
hṛṣṭaḥ – content; syām – I would become; evam – thus;
tatra – there; avasam – I lived; ciram – for a long
time.

Śrī Jagadīśvara forgave me, but I still considered
myself an offender and was always troubled. Knowing
this, Śrī Lakṣmī-devī would console me, reassuring me
with loving words like a mother. This would fill my
heart with joy and thus I stayed there happily for a
very long time.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Although Śrī
Jagadiśa forgave my transgressions, I still considered
myself an offender. I was aware of the shortcomings in
my service to Him and was thus always dejected.
Understanding my troubled heart, Śrī Lakṣmī-devī would
comfort me lovingly with motherly affection, and then I
would become joyful again. In this way, although my
distress had a cause, I lived most happily in Satyaloka
for a long time.”



Verse 157

ekadā muktim atrāptam ekaṁ tal-loka-vāsibhiḥ

saṁślāghyamānam ākarṇya tān apṛcchaṁ tad adbhutam

ekadā – once; muktim – liberation; atra – once; āptam –
attained; ekam – one person; tat-loka-vāsibhiḥ – by the
residents of that planet; saṁślāghyamānam – being
praised; ākarṇya – hearing; tān – them; apṛccham – I
inquired; tat – that (liberation); adbhutam –
astonishing.

Once, I heard some residents of Satyaloka glorify
someone who had attained liberation. Hearing their
genuine praise, I was astounded and, out of curiosity,
asked, “What is liberation?”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Now, to explain his reason for leaving
Brahmaloka, Śrī Gopa-kumāra speaks this verse beginning
with ekadā. He says, “Once, with great devotion, the
brahmarṣi residents of Satyaloka were extolling a jīva
(living being) from the Earth planet who had attained
liberation (mukti). I had never heard such glorification
before. Amazed, I inquired, ‘O residents of Brahmaloka!
What is mukti? Why you are praising that person so much?
Do you also want to attain liberation?’ ”



Verse 158

mukteḥ paramam utkarṣaṁ daurlabhyaṁ ca niśamya tān


                          255
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

sarva-jñān punar aprākṣaṁ tad-upāyaṁ tad-īpsayā

mukteḥ – of liberation; paramam utkarṣam – supreme
excellence; daurlabhyam – difficulty of attainment; ca –
and; niśamya – hearing; tān – those; sarva-jñān – all-
knowing persons; punaḥ – repeatedly; aprākṣam – I
inquired; tat – that; upāyam – means to achieve; tat-
īpsayā – with a desire for it.

The brahmarṣis described to me the super-excellence and
rarity of liberation. Hearing them, I desired it myself
and asked the omniscient personified Vedas and others
present there about the method for attaining it.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Thereafter, the

brahmarṣis (brāhmaṇa sages) of Brahmaloka described to
me the excellence, importance and rarity of that exalted
state of liberation, or mukti. Hearing this, I again
asked the omniscient Vedas and others living in
Brahmaloka how to achieve that state.”

The brāhmaṇa might wonder, “Why did you inquire again?”
Gopa-kumara replies, “Because I wanted to attain mukti.”



Verse 159

bahulopaniṣad-devyaḥ śruti-smṛtibhir anvitāḥ

ūcur ekena sādhyo ’sau mokṣo jñānena nānyathā

bahula – many; upaniṣat-devyaḥ – goddesses of the
Upaniṣads; śruti – the Vedas; smṛtibhiḥ – with the
literatures in pursuance of the Vedic version; anvitāḥ –
with; ūcuḥ – said; ekena – with one voice; sādhyaḥ –
object of attainment; asau – this; mokṣaḥ – liberation;
jñānena – through knowledge; na – not; anyathā – other
way.

Many Upaniṣads, present in the form of goddesses and
accompanied by Śrutis (Vedas) and Smṛtis (supplementary
Vedas), replied in unison, “Liberation is attained only
by knowledge – there is no other way of achieving this
goal.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Many Upaniṣads,
the essence of all the Vedas, were present as devyaḥ,
meaning they had assumed brilliantly effulgent forms as
the upaniṣad-devīs (goddesses). They joined the
personified Purāṇas, the Āgamas, and others and spoke as
one voice, saying, ‘Mokṣa, or liberation, is the most
exalted goal and also the most difficult to achieve. It
is attained exclusively by advaya-jñāna, or
transcendental knowledge that is beyond duality, and not
by any other means.’

“One of the Śrutis said, ‘ “tam eva viditvāti-mṛtyum eti
nānyaḥ panthā vidyate ’yanāya – Only through knowledge
of Brahman can death be transcended. There is no other
way to attain liberation.” (Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 3.8,
6–15). However, advaya-jñāna, knowledge of the non-dual
Absolute, arises from devotion, or bhakti, and therefore

                          256
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

should be understood as a form of bhakti. This is
because it is not possible to achieve liberation by
other types of knowledge, specifically by nirviśeṣa-
jñāna, or knowledge that only encompasses an impersonal
conception of the Absolute Truth.’ ”

This subject will be thoroughly analyzed in later
verses.



Verse 160

kaiścid uktaṁ sa-gāmbhīryaṁ purāṇair āgamair api

janyate bhagavad-bhaktyā sukhaṁ jñānaṁ su-durghaṭam

kaiścit – by certain; uktam – it was said; sa-gāmbhīryam
– with gravity; purāṇaiḥ – Purāṇas; āgamaiḥ – Āgamas;
api – also; janyate – is generated; bhagavat-bhaktyā –
through devotion to the all-opulent Lord; sukham –
easily; jñānam – through knowledge; su-durghaṭam – very
difficult to attain.

Some of the Purāṇas and Āgamas gravely said that
although it is true that one can attain liberation
through knowledge, that knowledge is exceedingly
difficult to obtain. However that same knowledge may be
attained simply by practicing bhagavad-bhakti,
devotional service to the Supreme Lord. By no other
means is it so easily acheived.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Those Purāṇas,
Āgamas, and Pañcarātras who were expert in establishing
the superiority of loving service to the Lord solemnly
spoke, saying ‘It is true that one can attain liberation
by knowledge, or jñāna, but that knowledge is
practically impossible to attain. Still, although such
knowledge is extremely difficult to attain, by the
potency of devotion to the Supreme Lord, it is easily
realized. No other means can so easily yield that
knowledge.’ ”



Verse 161

kiṁ vānuṣṭhitayā samyak tayaiva su-labho ’sti saḥ

śruti-smṛtīnāṁ kāsāñcit sammatis tatra lakṣitā

kiṁ vā – furthermore; anuṣṭhitayā – by the execution;
samyak – proper; tayā – by that (bhakti); eva – indeed;
su-labhaḥ – easily attained; asti – it is; saḥ – that;
śruti-smṛtīnām – of the Śrutis and Smṛtis; kāsāñcit – of
some; sammatiḥ – agreement; tatra – there; lakṣitā –
indicated.

Alternatively, one may easily attain liberation by
properly executing devotional service alone (with no
need of knowledge). This opinion was also supported by
some of the Śrutis and Smṛtis.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Those Purāṇas

                          257
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

and Āgamas further their argument with the following
alternative: ‘Liberation is easily achieved if one
becomes completely free from desires and attachments and
practices bhagavad-bhakti by following the path of the
saints.’ ”

In the verse, the word eva, meaning ‘only’ or ‘alone,’
indicates the full independence of loving service to the
Lord. Bhakti is by nature free from desires and does not
depend on any other than practice. It is stated in the
Bṛhan-nāradīya Purāṇa (32.6, 4.30):

bhaktir dṛḍhā bhaved yasya deva-deve janārdane

śreyāṁsi tasya sidhyanti bhaktimanto ’dhikās tataḥ

Those who have unshakeable devotion to the lotus feet of
Śrī Janārdana, who is God even of the gods, effortlessly
achieve all auspiciousness and good fortune. Therefore,
bhakti alone is the super-excellent process.

jīvanti jantavaḥ sarve yathā mātaram āśritāḥ

tathā bhaktim samāśritya sarvā jīvanti siddhayaḥ

Just as all living beings survive under the care of
their mothers, similarly, all the mystic perfections, or
siddhis, exist by taking shelter of bhakti alone.

Here, the word siddhi is to be understood as liberation.
Although liberation is not directly mentioned in these
two verses, it has been implied.

It is stated in Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā (11.54):

bhaktyā tv ananyayā śakya aham evaṁ-vidho ’rjuna

jñātuṁ draṣṭuṁ ca tattvena praveṣṭuṁ ca parantapa

Only by performing unalloyed service (ananyā-bhakti)
unto Me can one understand the truth about Me and see Me
before his very eyes. Then one can enter into Me, that
is, one can associate with Me and reside in my company.

Mokṣa is implicit in the phrase ‘entrance into Me
(Bhagavān),’ meaning that liberation can be attained
effortlessly by the performance of bhakti.

Gopa-kumāra continues, “Some Śrutis and Smṛtis devoted
to Bhagavān nodded their heads and gestured in agreement
of the statement that liberation can be attained only by
loving devotion to the Lord.” The meaning of their
gesturing is that the words of those Śrutis and Smṛtis
do not directly or explicitly establish bhakti as the
cause of liberation, but this conclusion can be
ascertained from their purports. A subject matter is
more highly respected when its principles are
ascertained in its commentaries.

It is stated in Padma Purāṇa (Pātāla-khaṇḍa 92.26):

apatyaṁ draviṇaṁ dārā hārā harmyaṁ hayā gajāḥ

sukhāni svarga-mokṣau ca na dūre hari-bhaktitaḥ

                          258
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


In this world, one derives happiness from sons,
grandsons, wealth, women, objects of enjoyment, palaces,
horses, elephants, etc. And in Svarga, much higher
varieties of enjoyment are found. However, all such
pleasures, even up to the pleasure of mokṣa, are easily
accessible (na dūre) by devotion to Śrī Hari.

In this verse, the term na dūre (not far) signifies
‘quite close.’ All these types of happiness are readily
bestowed by bhakti to Śrī Hari.



Verse 162

vyaktaṁ tāsāṁ vaco ’śrutvā kruddhāḥ svair āgamādibhiḥ

mahopaniṣadaḥ kāścid anvamodanta tat sphuṭam

vyaktam – clearly; tāsām – their; vacaḥ – statement;
aśrutvā – not hearing; kruddhāḥ – angry; svaiḥ – own;
āgama – by the Āgamas; ādibhiḥ – and other scriptures;
mahā-upaniṣadaḥ – great Upaniṣads; kāścit – certain;
anvamodanta – concurred; tat – that; sphuṭam – clearly.

Angry at all those Śrutis and Smṛtis who did not clearly
support bhakti as the direct cause of liberation, the
great Upaniṣads, as well as the Āgamas and Purāṇas who
followed them, spoke together as one and affirmed that,
indeed, bhakti is the cause of liberation.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Some Śrutis and
Smṛtis agreed internally, but they did not externally
make it clear that they supported bhakti as the direct
cause of liberation. Seeing this, the great Upaniṣads,
who are devoted to singing the glories of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and their followers, the
religious scriptures such as the Purāṇas and Āgamas,
became angry at them. In unison, they unequivocally
declared bhakti to be the cause of liberation. Boldly
they affirmed, ‘Bhakti is the only means for the
effortless attainment of liberation. This is
substantiated in the Bṛhan-nāradīya Purāṇa (1.79):

dharmārtha-kāma-mokṣākhyā puruṣārthā dvijottamāḥ

hari-bhakti-parāṇāṁ vai sampadyante na saṁśayaḥ

O best of the brāhmaṇas, the four goals of life:
Religiosity, economic development, sense gratification,
and liberation –

dharma, artha, kāma, and mokṣā – are undeniably achieved
by the devotee engaged in loving service to Śrī Hari.

“ ‘It is also stated in the Viṣṇu Purāṇa:

dharmārtha-kāmaiḥ kiṁ tasya muktis tasya kare sthitā

samasta-jagatāṁ mūle yasya bhaktiḥ sthirā tvayi

What to speak of religiosity, economic development, and
sense gratification, one who has unshakable faith in

                          259
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

Bhagavān, who is the origin of the entire universe,
holds even liberation in the palm of his hand.’ ”



Verse 163

gūḍhopaniṣadaḥ kāścit kaiścid gūḍhair mahāgamaiḥ

samaṁ mahā-purāṇaiś ca tūṣṇīm āsan kṛta-smitāḥ

gūḍha – confidential; upaniṣadaḥ – Upaniṣads; kāścit –
certain; kaiścit – with some; gūḍhaiḥ – confidential;
mahā-āgamaiḥ – great Āgamas; samam – with; mahā-purāṇaiḥ
– great Purāṇas; ca – also; tūṣṇīm – silent; āsan –
being; kṛta-smitaḥ – smiled.

Thereafter, some of the confidential Upaniṣads dedicated
to bhakti, several confidential Mahā-āgamas, the
Vaiṣṇava Tantras such as Sātvata-siddhānta and other
Vaiṣṇava Tantras, and Śrīmad-Bhāgavat Mahā-purāṇa smiled
gravely while remaining silent.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Those rare and
most confidential scriptures, who are devoted to the
loving service of Bhagavān, including some very
confidential Upaniṣads; some of the major, esoteric
Āgamas; Vaiṣṇava Tantras such as Sātvata-siddhānta; and
the Mahā-purāṇa Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, all smiled slightly
and became silent. “They thought, ‘Ah! Is the opulence
of the illusory potency (Māyā) of Bhagavān not
astonishing? It is dismaying that even omniscient
personalities cannot comprehend essential principles of
truth that are unmistakably established in the
scriptures. Or, another way of understanding this
situation is that these omniscient personalities are
disregarding bhakti by merely

establishing that its point of exaltation lies in the
glory of bestowing liberation. Whatever the case may be,
there is no point in speaking with these scriptures.’
Thus, considering it useless to engage in discussion
with someone of disparate opinion, and considering it
improper to reveal supremely confidential truths about
bhakti in such an assembly, those confidential and
esoteric scriptures refrained from speaking.”

In essence: To ascend the highest peak of bhagavad-
bhakti, one has to sequentially climb the lower steps of
fruitive activities, speculative knowledge, and then
liberation. The glories of these lower rungs culminate
in the exaltation of bhakti, and thus, while expounding
their greatness, one might also eventually glorify
bhakti. However, that does not do justice to the real
glories of devotion in pure love. As a great treasure
that has fallen into some unfit place does not belong
there, so it is unbefitting that bhakti be included in
the ranks of karma, jñāna, and so on.



Verses 164–165

mokṣo nu bhagavan-mantra-japa-mātrāt susidhyati

                          260
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017


na veti kaiścid āmnāya-purāṇādibhir ulbaṇaḥ

āgamānāṁ vivādo ’bhūt tam asoḍhvā bahir gatāḥ

te purāṇāgamāḥ karṇau pidhāyopaniṣad-yutāḥ

mokṣaḥ – liberation; nu – certainly; bhagavat – of the
Lord; mantra – the mind-delivering names; japa – by
chanting; mātrāt – simply; su-sidhyati – is easily
effected; na – not; vā – or; iti – so; kaiścit – by
certain; āmnāya – of Śrutis; purāṇa – Purāṇas; ādibhiḥ –
and others; ulbaṇaḥ – powerful; āgamānām – of the
scriptures; vivādaḥ – debate; abhūt – took place; tam –
that; asoḍhvā – not able to endure; bahiḥ – outside;
gatāḥ – went; te – they; purāṇa-āgamāḥ – the Purāṇas and
Āgamas; karṇau – ears; pidhāya – blocking; upaniṣat –
the Upaniṣads; yutāḥ – together with.

One set of scriptures argued, “One can attain liberation
merely by the potency of chanting the mantras of
Bhagavān,” while others countered, “That is not the way;
there are other ways to achieve it.” In this way, a
heated dispute ensued between the Āgamas and others and
the Vedas and Purāṇas. Unable to endure this quarrel,
the esoteric Mahā-Purāṇas, along with the Āgamas and
Upaniṣads, blocked their ears with their fingers and
went outside.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Then a vehement
debate broke out as the Vedas, Purāṇas, and others
(Itihāsas, and so on) began to quarrel with the host of
Āgamas, namely Pañcarātra and the other Tantras.”

The brāhmaṇa might ask, “What was the topic of that
argument?”

Gopa-kumāra replies, “They argued about whether or not
one can attain liberation simply by the chanting of
Bhagavān’s mantras. The confidential Mahā-Purāṇas,
Āgamas, and Upaniṣads had previously smiled gravely and
maintained silence, but now they could tolerate neither
the debate nor the doubt it engendered regarding the
potency of the mantras of the Lord, so they left the
assembly. They did so because it is improper to even
hear doubts about the exalted nature of bhakti.
Significantly, in all these confidential scriptures,
there is not even a scent of distrust about the glories
of devotion to the Lord.”

Initially, the above-mentioned esoteric Upaniṣads were
addressed as prominent, and scriptures such as Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam were addressed as secondary. The Bhāgavat and
other Purāṇas had been silent, following the example of
the Upaniṣads. Now, however, when the debate became
intolerable, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and other Purāṇas were
the first to leave the assembly, followed by the
Upaniṣads. This topic will be clearly explained later
on.



Verse 166


                          261
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

tato mahā-purāṇānāṁ mahopaniṣadāṁ tathā

mādhya-sthyād āgamānāṁ tu jayo jāto mama priyaḥ

tataḥ – then; mahā – great; purāṇānām – of the Purāṇas;
mahā – great; upaniṣadām – of the Upaniṣads; tathā –
then; madhya-sthyāt – as mediators; āgamānām – of the
Āgamas; tu – indeed; jayaḥ – victory; jātaḥ – took
place; mama – for me; priyaḥ – pleasing.

Thereafter, those Mahā-Purāṇas and Mahā-Upaniṣads
intervened to mediate in the debate, and after careful
deliberation, they

declared the Āgamas to be victorious. At that decision,
I also became joyful.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “The reason for
the departure of all those scriptures was that they
wanted to maintain impartiality and avoid siding with
any party. Then, by listening to the thoughts and
arguments of both parties, they could come to a proper
understanding. Ultimately, the Mahā-Purāṇas and Mahā-
Upaniṣads, being selected as arbiters, awarded victory
to the Āgamas. Because I was partisan to the chanting of
Śrī Bhagavān’s mantra, I took great delight in this
decision.”

In this regard, it is stated in Śrī Viṣṇu Purāṇa
(1.6.40):

gatvā gatvā nivartante candra-sūryādayo grahāḥ

adyāpi na nivartante dvādaśākṣara-cintakāḥ

Planets such as the moon and the sun are repeatedly
created and destroyed. However, those persons who
meditate on the twelve-syllable mantra of Lord Viṣṇu
have never, even to this day, had to return.

It is stated in the Padmanābhīya of the Śrī Padma
Purāṇa:

japena devatā nityaṁ stūyamānā prasīdati

prasannā vipulān bhogān dadyān muktiṁ ca śāśvatīm

When the presiding Deities of the mantras are praised by
regular chanting of Their mantras, They become pleased.
Not only do They award abundant sense enjoyment to those
who chant, but They also bestow eternal liberation.

Why does the chanting of a mantra please Bhagavān? The
Lord thinks, “Because this person is devoted only to
chanting My mantra, he is very dear to Me.”



Verse 167

mayābhipretya tad-bhāvaṁ te purāṇāgamādayaḥ

anunīya sabhā-madhyam ānītāḥ stuti-pāṭavaiḥ


                          262
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

mayā – by me; abhipretya – ascertaining; tat-bhāvam –
the mood of that (group of personified scriptures); te –
their; purāṇa-āgama-ādayaḥ – the Purāṇas, Āgamas, and
other scriptures; anunīya – con-ciliating; sabhā-madhyam
– to the midst of the assembly; ānītāḥ – brought; stuti
– of prayers of praise; pāṭavaiḥ – with recitations.

Discerning the mood and intention of the Mahā-Purāṇas
such as Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, as well as the Āgamas and
other Tantras, that had led them to smile so gravely and
step outside, I humbly pacified them and brought them
back into the assembly.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “The grave mood
and slight smiles of Śrī Bhāgavat, Sātvata-Siddhānta,
and the others revealed their profound purpose.
Discerning their fundamental aim, I humbly praised them.
Being pleased, they agreed to come back into the
assembly house.”



Verse 168

tat-tattvaṁ sādaraṁ pṛṣṭās te śrī-bhāgavatādayaḥ

ūcuḥ sātvata-siddhāntādy-āgamāḥ śruti-maulibhiḥ

tat – of that (mukti); tattvam – the scientific truth;
sa-ādaram – with respect; pṛṣṭāḥ – they were asked; te –
they; śrī-bhāgavata-ādayaḥ – headed by Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam; ūcuḥ – they said; sātvata-siddhānta – a
Vaiṣṇava scripture; ādi – and others; āgamāḥ – the
Āgamas; śruti – of the Śrutis; maulibhiḥ – with the
crowns.

When I respectfully inquired about the essential truth
of liberation (mokṣa-tattva), the Upaniṣads, the most
exalted of the Śrutis, and Sātvata-siddhānta and other
Āgamas joined Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and replied.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “I then
respectfully inquired from those great Purāṇas about the
true nature of liberation, or mokṣa-tattva. I asked the
reason for their behavior – why they had kept silent and
smiled so seriously, and why they had covered their ears
and left the assembly. Gathered there were Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam and others, who are the most excellent and
steadfast of scriptures, and who are supremely dedicated
to loving service of the Lord. Also in the assembly were
the aggregate of Āgamas, such as Sātvata-siddhānta, who
are devoted to bhakti and who are the prominent Vaiṣṇava
scriptures. They were all joined by the confidential
Upaniṣads, who are the exalted crowns of the Śrutis, and
together they replied.”



Verse 169

śrī-bhakti-śāstrāṇy ūcuḥ

labdha-brahmādhikāredaṁ mahā-gopyaṁ nidher api


                           263
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

bhavat-sad-guṇa-sandohair ākhyāmo mukharī-kṛtāḥ

śrī-bhakti-śāstrāṇi ūcuḥ – the glorious scriptures of
devotion said; labdha – having attained; brahma-adhikāra
– the post of Brahmā; idam – this; mahā-gopyam – supreme
confidentiality; nidheḥ – of this treasure; api –
although; bhavat – your; sad-guṇa-sandohaiḥ – because of
many pure qualities; ākhyāmaḥ – we are describing;
mukharī-kṛtāḥ – extensively.

The devotional scriptures said: O you who have newly
achieved the post of Brahmā, this truth is more secret
than the most precious jewels. However, impelled by your
virtues and worship of Bhagavān, we will personally
reveal it to you.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The personified bhakti-śāstras say, “O
you, who are newly appointed to the post of Brahmā.” The
implication of this address to Śrī Gopa-kumāra is,
“Because you have qualified yourself for the position of
Brahmā, you deserve to hear this confidential truth,
which is more valuable than a great treasure (mahā-
nidhi).” If the word nidhi is read as vidhi, then the
meaning is, “This truth is so confidential that even
Brahmā is not qualified to hear it.”

Gopa-kumāra might then object, “But I have merely
attained the qua-

lification of being Brahmā, so why are you revealing
this secret to me?”

The bhakti-śāstras reply, “Although it may not be
appropriate to divulge this confidential truth to you,
we are overwhelmed and inspired by your outstanding
qualities and eager attempts to worship Śrī Bhagavān.
Therefore, we will personally reveal it to you.”



Verse 170

kvacit prastūyate ’smābhir bhagavad-bhakti-tat-paraiḥ

mokṣas tyājayituṁ samyag vinindya sa-paricchadaḥ

kvacit – sometimes; prastūyate – it is eulogized;
asmābhiḥ – by us; bhagavat-bhakti – to devotion to the
Lord; tat-paraiḥ – by us who devoted; mokṣaḥ –
liberation; tyājayitum – to be given up; samyak –
completely; vinindya – censuring; sa-paricchadaḥ – and
the means to attain it.

Although we scriptures are devoted to the loving service
of Bhagavān, in some places we have examined liberation.
But this is only to expose its insignificance and, by
all means to condemn both liberation and the processes
of attaining it.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The bhakti-śāstras say, “Although it
is improper for us to describe liberation (mokṣa), for
various reasons we must.” Two verses, beginning here
with kvacit, explain why. “While we have firm faith in
and are devoted to bhagavad-bhakti, at times we examine

                          264
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

liberation.”

Gopa-kumāra might ask, “Why is this?”

“It is only to expose its worthlessness. We specifically
condemn it and the processes to attain it, such as
speculative knowledge (jñāna). Our intention is that no
one respects liberation; rather, it should be
contemptuously rejected as insignificant. If the nature
of something undesirable is not first explained, then no
one will be inclined to reject it. Therefore, we
describe the nature of mokṣa and then criticize it.”



Verse 171

nirvaktuṁ bhakti-māhātmyaṁ kathyate ’syāpi tat kvacit

na tu sādhya-phalatvena sukha-gandho ’pi nāsti yat

nirvaktum – to articulate; bhakti – of devotion;
māhātmyam – the glory; kathyate – it is spoken of; asya
– of it (mukti); api – also; tat – that; kvacit –
somewhere; na – not; tu – but; sādhya-phalatvena – in
terms of the ultimate result; sukha – of happiness;
gandhaḥ – a slight trace; api – even; na asti – there is
not; yat – which.

In the course of describing the glories of bhakti, we
have also sometimes praised liberation. But this is not
to indicate that liberation is the ultimate attainment,
for there is not even a scent of real happiness in it.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Gopa-kumāra might ask, “Why, then,
have you glorified liberation in certain places?”

In reply, the bhakti-śāstras speak this verse beginning
with

nirvaktum. They say, “When describing the glories of
bhakti, it is also necessary to discuss something of the
glories of liberation. For example, we say, ‘Bhakti, or
loving devotional service to the Lord, is the most
exalted reality and is billions and billions of times
more joyful than mokṣa.’ In this way, we have described
the bliss of liberation while explaining bhakti, and the
happiness of mokṣa is used to demonstrate the
comparatively greater glories of the happiness of
bhakti.

“However, in reality, from the standpoint of essential
truth, or tattva-vicāra, there is not even a trace of
happiness in liberation. Only salvationists (mumukṣus)
feel that there is happiness to be had in it, and thus,
our depiction of happiness in liberation is valid only
from the point of view of these adherents. Therefore,
because it does not even have a scent of real happiness,
liberation has not been described as equal to bhakti in
being the desired goal, or fruit of attainment.”



Verse 172

                          265
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


yathārogye suṣuptau ca sukhaṁ mokṣe ’pi kalpyate

paraṁ tv ajñāna-saṁjño ’yam anabhijña-prarocakaḥ

yathā – just as; ārogye – when free from disease;
suṣuptau – in deep sleep; ca – and; sukham – happiness;
mokṣe – in liberation; api – also; kalpyate – is
considered; param tu – indeed; ajñāna-saṁjñaḥ – known as
ignorance; ayam – this; anabhijña – to the ignorant;
prarocakaḥ – giving great happiness.

Just as one considers himself to be happy when relieved
from a painful disease or when sleeping soundly, in the
same way, the supposed happiness of liberation is only
the absence of suffering. Moreover, the designation
‘liberation’ is symbolic of non-cognizance. That is, as
the bondage of illusion or ignorance is unreal (like
that of a dream), so that which liberates one from such
bondage is also devoid of reality. Therefore, only the
ignorant are interested in liberation.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Now, in this verse beginning with
yathā, the

bhakti-śāstras give examples to establish the
inferiority of liberation. They say, “Just as one
imagines himself to be happy in a healthy condition,
free from the suffering of disease, similarly, one
imagines himself to be happy in liberation. Or, the
happiness of mokṣa can be likened to that of deep sleep.
Although one does not experience any happiness during
deep sleep, which is in the mode of ignorance,
nevertheless, one supposes that there is some sort of
pleasure to be had in sleeping soundly.”

Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī has given the following example to
illustrate this mentality: “etāvantaṁ kālaṁ sukham aham
asvāpsam, na kiñcid avediṣam – I slept happily and was
not aware of anything at all.”

They say, “In this state of deep sleep, because one is
free from the mental perturbation arising from his many
cherished desires, and one is not agitated by dreams
that are full of yearnings and doubts, he imagines he is
happy. The pleasure of mokṣa is similar to this.”

Śrī Gopa-kumāra might question, “When one wakes up from
a sound sleep, he remembers, ‘I had a pleasant sleep.’
How can this happiness be considered imaginary?”

The bhakti-śāstras reply, “One does not experience
happiness during deep sleep, so there is no question of
remembering it. At the same time, one does not
experience misery either, as the mind is not being
disturbed by dreams. It is only in the absence of such
distress that one presupposes a memory of happiness.
Similarly, in the state of liberation material miseries,
such as birth and death, are absent. In this complete
void arising from this absence of suffering, one
imagines that there is happiness, but in reality, there
is not even an iota of happiness in liberation.”

Śrī Gopa-kumāra might ask, “If this is the case, why

                          266
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

have the residents of Brahmaloka and omniscient sages
praised liberation so highly?”

The bhakti-śāstras reply in the line beginning with
parama. They say, “Only unintelligent people take an
interest in the principles of liberation (mokṣa-tattva).
[Just as day and night have no existence or reality in
the sun, similarly…] there is no factual reality or
existence of liberation [or bondage] for the living
being (who is transcendental by constitution). These
terms or concepts have arisen out of ignorance [of
unintelligent people]. Therefore, if liberation, which
is characterized by non-cognizance, or ignorance
(ajñāna), is unreal, it is established that liberation
which brings about freedom from bondage is also unreal.

“Śrī Brahmā affirms this in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(10.14.26):

ajñāna-saṁjñau bhava-bandha-mokṣau

dvau nāma nānyau sta ṛta-jña-bhāvāt

ajasra-city ātmani kevale pare

vicāryamāṇe taraṇāv ivāhanī

The concepts of material bondage and liberation are both
based on ignorance. They have no place in perfectly pure
transcendental awareness, just as day and night have no
meaning on the sun.”



Verse 173

kathañcid bhagavan-nāmābhāsasyāpi sa sidhyati

sakṛd-uccāra-mātreṇa kiṁ vā karṇa-praveśataḥ

kathañcit – somehow; bhagavat – of the all-opulent Lord;
nāma – of the name; ābhāsasya – of the reflection; api –
even; saḥ – that; sidhyati – it is effective; sakṛt –
once; uccāra – uttering; mātreṇa – by merely; kim vā –
how much more?; karṇa – into the ear; praveśataḥ – after
it enters.

What to speak of the glories of the name of Śrī
Bhagavān, if one merely utters – even once – or just
hears a semblance (ābhāsa) of the Lord’s name, or if the
name merely enters one’s ears, he effortlessly attains
liberation.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might ask, “What are
the means of achieving that liberation?”

The personified bhakti-śāstras reply in this verse
beginning with

kathañcit. They say, “Bhakti is so glorious that words
cannot do it justice. Why, the devotees of Bhagavān
attain mokṣa without even trying. What to speak of
chanting the pure name of the Lord, simply chanting
nāmābhāsa, the semblance of His name, delivers mokṣa.

                          267
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

What more can be said about serving the name of the
Lord? If one chants in jest or even disrespectfully, or
if the name somehow enters one’s ears, he attains
liberation very easily. Thus, it is stated in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (6.3.24):

vikruśya putram aghavān yad ajāmilo ’pi

nārāyaṇeti mriyamāṇa iyāya muktim

When the heinously sinful Ajāmila, even in an impure
condition at the time of death, cried out in distress to
his son Nārāyaṇa, he was able to attain liberation.

“In Śrī Varāha Purāṇa, in the beginning of the story of
Satyatapa, it is stated: ‘kañcit jale magnaṁ japa-paraṁ
brāhmaṇaṁ bhakṣayitum āgatasya vyāghrasya tenaiva
vyādhena hatasyākasmād udgata-bhagavān-nāma-śravaṇenaiva
muktir jātā – Once, as a brāhmaṇa was chanting the names
of Bhagavān while standing in the water, a tiger
approached to eat him. At that very moment, a hunter
shot an arrow that felled the tiger. As the wounded
animal was giving up his body, he happened to hear the
name of the Lord from the mouth of the brāhmaṇa, and
thus he attained liberation.’ ”



Verse 174

vicārācāturī-ramyo mokṣo ’yam avadhāryatām

teṣāṁ veda-purāṇādi-śāstrāṇāṁ hi yathā-matam

vicāra – in discrimination; acāturī – to those who are
inexpert; ramyaḥ – charming; mokṣaḥ – liberation; ayam –
this; avadhāryatām – should be understood; teṣām – of
them; veda-purāṇa – of the Vedas and Purāṇas; ādi-
śāstrāṇām – and other śāstras; hi – indeed; yathā –
according; matam – to the opinion.

Factually, only those without discriminating
intelligence find liberation enchanting. If one
considers this subject from any point of view, the
attractiveness of liberation cannot be substantiated.
This is the determination of the Vedas, Itihāsas,
Purāṇas, and all other scriptures, and it is what we are
explaining to you.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might wonder, “But why
do yogīs undergo so much endeavor to attain liberation?”

In response, the bhakti-śāstras speak this verse
beginning with

vicāra. They say, “This is only because they lack
discrimination (vicāra acāturī). From any point of view,
when one actually examines mokṣa, it has no charm. When
the seekers of liberation establish it as the ultimate
goal of human life, this is only their own conjecture.”

Gopa-kumāra might question, “But what is the evidence
for this?”


                          268
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

The bhakti-śāstras reply with the line beginning with
teṣām. They say, “Now, we will display the beauty of the
facts conceptually established and proven (vicāra
cāturī) by the Vedas, Itihāsas, Purāṇas, and others. In
other words, we will speak the substance of the opinions
we have collected from all other scriptures.”



Verse 175

so ’śeṣa-duḥkha-dhvaṁso vāvidyā-karma-kṣayo ’tha vā

māyā-kṛtānyathā-rūpa-tyāgāt svānubhavo ’pi vā

saḥ – it; aśeṣa-duḥkha – all distress; dhvaṁsaḥ –
nullifying; vā – or; avidyā – in ignorance; karma – of
activities; kṣayaḥ – destruction; atha vā – or; māyā –
by the illusory potency; kṛta – done; anyathā – other;
rūpa – forms; tyāgāt – through giving up; sva-anubhavaḥ
– realizing oneself; api – indeed; vā – or.

In the opinion of some, liberation is the complete
vanquishing of all types of suffering. Others believe it
is the destruction of ignorance and termination of
action and reaction (karma). And yet others accept it as
escape from the illusion of Māyā, in which one mistakes
one object for another, upon which one experiences the
true self as a conscious reality. However, there is no
happiness in any of these ideas of liberation.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: In this verse beginning with saḥ, the
bhakti-śāstras explain the different definitions of
mokṣa, or mukti, given by advocates of liberation.

They say, “According to the school of nyāya (logic),
liberation is the total eradiction of the twenty-one
types of suffering. In their view, ‘ātyantikī duḥkha
nirvṛttiḥ muktiḥ – Mukti, or liberation, is the complete
cessation of distress.’ According to philosophers who
accept only one portion of the Vedas (vaidāntika eka-
deśa-vāda), ‘Mokṣa is the cessation of both ignorance
(avidyā) and fruitive work (karma).’ The opinions of the
Vaiśeṣika, Mīmāṁsaka, and Sāṅkhya philosophers have not
been presented here because the primary characteristics
of mokṣa that they ascertain are quite insignificant and
in all regards too incomplete. On the other hand, in the
opinion of the propounders of vivarta-vāda (the Māyāvāda
theory of the illusion of the Supreme), who are
prominent among Vedic scholars, ‘Material existence –
the cycle of birth and death –

is generated by the illusory energy Māyā. One achieves
liberation when one rejects the false distinction caused
by Māyā and realizes his own spiritual nature (that is,
who one realizes himself as Brahman).’

“Māyāvādīs sometimes quote Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.10.6):
‘muktir hitvānyathā-rūpaṁ svarūpeṇa vyavasthitiḥ – When
the soul gives up his other identities – the false forms
(ānyathā-rūpa) generated by Māyā – and becomes
established in his pure, constitutional identity
(svarūpa), that is mukti.’ ”


                          269
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017



Verse 176

jīva-svarūpa-bhūtasya sac-cid-ānanda-vastunaḥ

sākṣād-anubhavenāpi syāt tādṛk sukham alpakam

jīva – of the individual soul; sva-rūpa – the personal
form; bhūtasya – experiencing; sat-cit-ānanda – eternal,
cognizant, and blissful; vastunaḥ – of the substance;
sākṣāt – direct; anubhavena – by having realization; api
– also; syāt – may be; tādṛk – such; sukham – happiness;
alpakam – meager.

The happiness of pure loving devotion experienced by
directly perceiving the lotus feet of Śrī Bhagavān, the
complete form of eternal reality, cognizance, and bliss,
is like a boundless ocean. The happiness of liberation
experienced upon realizing the soul to be an eternally
abiding particle of eternality, cognizance, and bliss is
very meager. In comparison, it is just a tiny drop.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: According to the opinion of the first
two parties – the logicians following nyāya philosophy
(naiyāyikas), and the scholars who accept only one
portion of the Vedas (eka-deśa-vādī vaidāntikas) – the
experience of liberation is one of absence – the absence
of suffering and the absence of the cause of suffering.
By this definition, it is self-evident that there is no
happiness in this state. Further, in the view of the
third party – the adherents of vivarta-vāda (Māyāvāda
theory of the illusion of Divinity) – the happiness of
liberation is that of realizing the spiritual identity
of the soul (ātma-svarūpa). However, this joy is so
small as to be insignificant.

The bhakti-śāstras expound this idea in twenty-one
verses (2.2.176–196), beginning here with jīva. They
say, “In actuality, the happiness of self-realization –
that is, of experiencing the spiritual nature of the
soul (the svarūpa of the jīva) is negligible. When one
realizes the lotus feet of Śrī Bhagavān, who is the
complete embodiment of sac-cid-ānanda, or pure eternal
reality, knowledge, and bliss, one experiences the
unparalleled joy of bhakti, or devotion in pure love.
Compared with this ocean of bliss of bhakti, the
happiness of mokṣa that arises from self-realization is
no greater than the amount of water contained in the
hoof-print of a cow.

“Although there may be nominal happiness in liberation,
factually, that happiness should merely be regarded as
the absence of suffering. Nevertheless, using the logic
of ‘tuṣyatu durjanaḥ – Let the wicked be satisfied,’
something unacceptable may be allowed as a concession.
In other words, after ascertaining the conclusive truth,
it is only with great difficulty that the scriptures use
the word sukha, meaning ‘happiness,’ as an attribute of
mokṣa. However, this usage is also merely to highlight
the glories of the joy of bhagavad-bhakti.” This should
be understood in the context of the logic described in
this verse.


                          270
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017



Verse 177

śuddhātma-tattvaṁ yad vastu tad eva brahma kathyate

nirguṇaṁ tac ca niḥsaṅgaṁ nirvikāraṁ nirīhitam

śuddha – purified; ātma – of the self; tattvam – the
truth; yat – which; vastu – substance; tat – that; eva –
indeed; brahma – Brahman; kathyate – is said; nirguṇam –
without qualities; tat – that; ca – and; niḥsaṅgam –
without attachment; nirvikāram – without trans-
formation; nirīhitam – without desire.

(Those who consider liberation to be experience of the
self as conscious reality have the following opinion:)
The entity that is pure conscious reality is indeed
called Brahman, which is devoid of attrib-utes
(nirguṇa), free from attachment (niḥsaṅgaṁ),
unchangeable (nirvikāra), and desireless (nirīha).

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might posit, “In the
state of liberation, one experiences the unlimited
Absolute, or Brahman, so one should also experience
commensurate unlimited happiness.”

To address this point, the bhakti-śāstras speak this
verse beginning with śuddha. They say, “One should not
entertain such an idea. The pure, spiritual, conscious
reality (śuddha ātma-svarūpa, or cit-tattva) is the
entity, or vastu, known as Brahman. Brahman is nirguṇa,
devoid of mercy and other qualities. It is niḥsaṅga,
devoid of associates and relationships. It is nirvikāra,
without change, which means that it does not undergo any
transformation that causes the heart to melt upon
hearing the pitiful lamentation of the devotees. Nor can
it display the opulences of the Lord’s beautiful form.
Finally, it is nirīha, neutral, inert, and desireless,
so it has no wonderful, sweet pastimes with which to
steal the hearts of devotees. Therefore, such an entity
that is devoid of bhagavattā (the quality of being the
Supreme Person) can never be sac-cid-ānanda-ghana, the
concentrated embodiment of eternal reality, cognizance,
and bliss. It follows, then, that realization of nirguṇa
Brahman can only grant happiness corresponding to its
being. It cannot grant the unlimited happiness of
realizing the form (svarūpa) of sac-cid-ānanda-ghana,
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.”



Verse 178

bhagavāṁs tu paraṁ brahma parātmā parameśvaraḥ

su-sāndra-sac-cid-ānanda-vigraho mahimārṇavaḥ

bhaga-vān – the Lord, possessor of six opulences in
full; tu – rather; param brahma – the Supreme Spirit;
para-ātmā – the Supersoul; parama-īśvaraḥ – the Supreme
Controller; su-sāndra – sublime intense; sat-cit-ānanda
– of eternality, cognizance, and felicity; vigrahaḥ –
the form; mahimā-arṇavaḥ – an ocean of glories.

                          271
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


However, Śrī Bhagavān is Parabrahman (the Supreme
Absolute Spirit), Paramātmā (the Supersoul), and
Parameśvara (the Supreme Controller). His form is the
concentrated essence of pure eternal reality, knowledge,
and bliss, and He is an ocean of variegated glories.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might ask, “How can
one realize the true essence of happiness?”

In reply, the personified bhakti-śāstras say, “This is
accomplished by the potency of bhagavad-bhakti,
devotional service to the Lord in pure love.” This is
explained in the four verses, beginning here with

bhagavāṁs tu. “Śrī Bhagavān is the Supreme Spirit
Parabrahman, and the Supersoul, Paramātmā. He is the
controller of all, even of Brahmā, for He is the
indwelling presiding Deity of the consciousness of all
living beings. As the Lord of Śrī Vaikuṇṭha, His form is
the ultimate embodiment of pure eternality, cognizance,
and joy, and He is an

ocean – a perpetual, boundlessly deep shelter – of
myriad inconceivable astonishing splendors. In this way,
the glorious Śrī Bhagavān is also sometimes addressed as
Para, meaning ‘supreme,’ Brahman.

“For example, it is stated in the Bhagavad-gītā (10.12):
‘paraṁ brahma paraṁ dhāma pavitraṁ paramaṁ bhavān – You
are the Supreme Spirit and the ultimate abode. You alone
are supremely pure.’ Generally, the words Brahman and
Parabrahman are used in two ways. Parabrahman is used to
mean the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Bhagavān, as in
the phrase ‘parabrahma narākṛti – the Supreme Brahman in
human form.’ Brahman is used to signify the Absolute
Truth, ātma-tattva, as shown in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(10.87.1):

brahma brahmaṇy anirdeśye nirguṇe guṇa-vṛttayaḥ

kathaṁ caranti śrutayaḥ sākṣāt sad-asataḥ pare

O brāhmaṇa, that which cannot be described directly is
devoid of all material qualities (nirguṇa), beyond cause
and effect, and untouched by the modes of goodness,
passion, and

ignorance. How will the Śrutis (Vedas) describe the
nature of that Brahman that is devoid of material
qualities?

“In addition, in the Bhagavad-gītā (14.27), Bhagavān
personally states: ‘brahmaṇo hi pratiṣṭhāham – I am the
basis of the all-cognizant Brahman.’ In other words,
just as the concentrated embodiment of brilliance, the
sun, is the source of the sunrays and illumination,
similarly the concentrated embodiment of knowledge, Śrī
Bhagavān, is the source of the all-cognizant Brahman.”
In this last statement, only the word Brahman has been
used. In some places, the adjective para (supreme) is
used as a prefix, and the word becomes Parabrahman. This
is to indicate an object that is even superior to
Brahman. If Brahman who possesses a personal form is the

                          272
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

object of reference, the adjective para is always used.



Verse 179

sa-guṇatvāguṇatvādi-virodhāḥ praviśanti tam

mahā-vibhūtir brahmāsya prasiddhetthaṁ tayor bhidā

sa-guṇatva – with qualities; aguṇatva – without
qualities; ādi – beginning; virodhāḥ – contradiction;
praviśanti – enters; tam – Him; mahā-vibhūtiḥ – great
opulence; brahma – Brahman; asya – His; prasiddhā –
famous; ittham – thus; tayoḥ – between the two; bhidā –
with the difference.

Śrī Bhagavān, who is glorious like the unfathomable
ocean, simultaneously displays contradictory
characteristics, such as the presence of qualities (sa-
guṇatva) and the absence of qualities (nir-guṇatva).
Brahman, on the other hand, is famous as Śrī Bhagavān’s
infinite opulence. Thus the difference between Them is
clearly established.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The bhakti-śāstras say, “As waves
merge in the ocean, so Śrī Bhagavān, who is glorious
like the ocean, incorporates contradictory
characteristics, such as possessing attributes
(saguṇatva) and being devoid of attributes
(nirguṇatva).” The word ādi, meaning ‘etc.,’ indicates
other contrarieties – He is attached and detached, He
changes and does not change, He is full of desire and is
desireless, He is one and many, He possesses
distinguishing characteristics and does not possess
qualities, etc.

“One should understand that only Bhagavān simultaneously
accommodates all opposites. As Brahman, He is devoid of
material qualities (nirguṇa). As Paramātmā, He is
connected with the material energy Māyā, as Parameśvara,
He is full of transcendental qualities (saguṇa), and so
on. All these characteristics are simultaneously and
harmoniously conjoined in the Lord. In some places, it
is described that He has no name and no form, but this
is refuted by the evidence of Vāsudeva-adhyātma:

aprasiddhes tad-guṇānām anāmāsau prakīrtitaḥ

aprākṛtatvād rūpasyāpy arūpo ’yaṁ pracakṣate

Bhagavān is known as anāma (nameless) because His
qualities are not revealed to the illusory material
senses. He is called arūpa (formless) because His
transcendental form is imperceptible to the eyes and
other senses. Because the transcendental qualities of
the Lord cannot be compared to any person or object, it
is impossible to name Him according to material
qualities. Therefore, He is known as anāma. His form is
similarly transcendental, and thus He is known as arūpa.

“So, an assumption like that of the Māyāvādīs – who
espouse the concept that just as mundane forms and
qualities are illusory, so are the personal form and all

                          273
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

other qualities of the Lord – is proved contrary to
conclusive truth. The Lord’s supreme opulence is an
eternal truth; it is not illusory or false or temporary
like material existence. Therefore, as stated in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, since the very same eternal non-dual reality
(advaya-tattva-vastu), like Brahman, is beyond material
qualities, He is known as nirguṇa.

“At the same time, though, just as the material world is
variegated, so the Lord possesses vast transcendental
variegatedness. Thus, He is also saguṇa, or possessed of
attributes and personhood. As inconceivable, unlimited,
amazing, and extraordinary potencies coexist

in Bhagavān, unending types of seemingly contradictory
characteristics also reside in Him. Śrī Bhagavān is
therefore known as an ocean of manifold glories.

“It is stated in the Mokṣa-dharma section of Mahābhārata
(Śānti-parva 335.10.11):

yat kiñcid iha loke vai deha-bandhaṁ viśām-pate

sarvaṁ pañcabhir āviṣṭam bhūtair īśvara-buddhi-jaih

īsvaro hi mahad bhūtaṁ prabhur-nārāyaṇo virāṭ

bhūtāntar-ātmā vijñeyaḥ saguṇo nirguṇo ’pi saḥ

The conditioned souls in this world have become    bound by
the functions of the body comprised of the five    elements
that have been created by the will of Bhagavān.    That
Lord – the ultimate source of all creation, the    Supreme
Master, the body of

the universe, Śrī Nārāyaṇa – is both saguṇa and nirguṇa,
full of transcendental qualities and at the same time
devoid of material qualities. Know that He is the inner
Soul within all living beings.

“It is stated in the Kūrma Purāṇa:

asthūlaś cānaṇuś caiva sthūlo ’ṇuś caiva sarvataḥ

avarṇah sarvataḥ proktaḥ śyāmo raktānta-locanaḥ

aiśvarya-yogād bhagavān viruddhārtho ’bhidhīyate

tathāpi doṣāḥ parame naivāhāryāḥ kathañcana

guṇā viruddhā api tu samāhāryāś ca sarvataḥ

Although in every way He is subtle, He is also tangible.
He is large, and at the same time minute. He has no
color, but He is śyāma, the color of a dark raincloud,
and His eyes are tinged with red. By Śrī Bhagavān’s
inconceivable mystic opulence, these mutually
contradictory qualities are ever-present within Him.
Still, one cannot fault Him for lacking constancy,
because in Him all contrary qualities coalesce.

“It is stated in Viṣṇu-dharmottara:

guṇāḥ sarve ’pi yujyante hy aiśvaryāt puruṣottame

                          274
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


doṣāḥ kathañcin naivātra yujyante paramo hi saḥ

guṇa-doṣau māyayaiva kecid āhur apaṇḍitāh

na tatra māyā māyī vā tadīyau tau kuto hy ataḥ

tasmān na māyayā sarvaṁ sarvaiśvaryasya sambhavam

amāyo hīśvaro yasmāt tasmāt taṁ paramaṁ viduḥ

By Śrī Puruṣottama’s supreme power, all qualities
conjoin in Him, but this does not mean that He possesses
rejectable, mundane attributes. As He is the Supreme, no
defect can ever be ascribed to Him. He eternally
possesses transcendental qualities, such as all
knowledge (jñāna), energy (śakti), strength (bala),
majesty (aiśvarya), prowess (vīrya), glory (tejas), and
so on. Some less intelligent people claim that both the
virtues and defects of the illusory energy exist in
Bhagavān. However, the Supreme Lord can never be subject
to Māyā (illusion). He is effulgent like the sun, and
Māyā is like darkness. How can darkness exist in the
light? The essential understanding is that the Lord is
beyond the range of the illusory energy, and therefore
He is addressed by the name ‘Parameśvara, the Supreme
Controller.’ ”

This topic will be analyzed specifically later on.

The bhakti-śāstras continue, “Some people say that the
yogīs’

worshipable Bhagavān – in the form of impersonal
Brahman, devoid of

attributes – is one entity, and the Lord worshiped by
the devotees – resplendent with personality and
qualities, with a four-handed form,

etc. – is another entity. Nevertheless, they admit that
these two conceptions of the Lord, being concentrated
embodiments of transcendental goodness (śuddha-sattva),
are eternal. However, even in their opinion, the
Personality of Godhead (saguṇa Bhagavān) is established
as superior. This is because the Lord in His personal
form can be attained by unalloyed devotees. He is
invisible to yogīs who are dedicated to realizing
Brahman.

“In this regard, we see that the Personality of Godhead,
who is supremely glorious, performs pastimes that
increase the delight of His devotees. An example is
found in the Śrī Nārāyaṇa Upākhyāna of Mokṣa-dharma. In
the sacrifice conducted by Uparicara Vasu, Bhagavān
personally appeared and accepted the first offering.
Uparicara Vasu had darśana of the Lord, but the priests
of that same sacrifice – Bṛhaspati and other sages who
were dedicated to realizing impersonal Brahman – were
unable to see Him. Similarly, although Brahmā’s sons,
the great sages Ekata, Dvita, and Trita, went to
Śvetadvīpa and strongly endeavored to have darśana of
Bhagavān, they were unsuccessful.


                          275
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

“Śrī Sanaka Kumāra and his brothers, on the other hand,
once went to Vaikuṇṭha to see Bhagavān. Even though they
are the paragons of self-satisfied personalities who
constantly experience Brahman, they received the Lord’s
darśana, upon which they experienced the most intense
joy and their bodies became adorned with various
sāttvika (ecstatic) transformations.

“Evidence for this is found in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(3.15.43):

tasyāravinda-nayanasya padāravinda-

kiñjalka-miśra-tulasī-makaranda-vāyuḥ

antar-gataḥ sva-vivareṇa cakāra teṣāṁ

saṅkṣobham akṣara-juṣām api citta-tanvoḥ

When those sages offered obeisances to the lotus feet of
Śrī Bhagavān, a breeze fragrant with pollen and tulasī
from the feet of the lotus-eyed Bhagavān entered their
nostrils. Although they had realized Brahman and were
always immersed in brahmānanda, still, the fragrance of
that tulasī stimulated unparalleled joy in their hearts,
causing them to experience the standing of hairs on
their bodies and other sāttvika transformations of
ecstasy.

“Therefore, the impersonal Brahman and the living beings
are both celebrated as Śrī Bhagavān’s great opulences
(mahā-vibhūti). In support of this, the premier
devotional authorities, the mahājanas, have stated:
‘parāt paraṁ brahma ca te vibhūtayaḥ – O Bhagavān,
Brahman is transcendental to material existence and is
indeed Your opulence.’ And in the Vibhūti-yoga chapter
of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā (10.20), it is stated: ‘aham
ātmā guḍākeśa sarva-bhūtāśaya-sthitaḥ – O Arjuna, I am
the Soul situated in the hearts of all living

beings.’ Here it is explained that Brahman and ātmā (in
this case, ātmā means ‘Bhagavān’) are nondifferent, or
in other words, Śrī Govinda and Brahman are one Absolute
Truth. However, according to the gradation of the
manifestation of His extraordinary potency, Śrī Govinda
is dharmī (the possesser of a constitutional nature),
whereas the impersonal Brahman is dharma (the
constitutional nature that one possesses). This is
stated in Śrī Brahma-saṁhitā (5.40):

yasya prabhā prabhavato jagad-aṇḍa-koṭi-

kotiṣv aśeṣa-vasudhādi vibhūti-bhinnam

tad brahma niṣkalam anantam aśeṣa-bhūtaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, the radiant luster
of whose body is the source of the impersonal,
nondifferentiated Brahman, which is distinct from the
majestic opulence of the billions of worlds that
comprise the mundane realm, and which appears as the
indivisible, unlimited, and infinite truth.

                          276
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017


“In this verse, Brahman has been described as the
plenary portion (aṁśa) or the portion of the plenary
portion (kalā) of Śrī Govinda’s effulgence. The verse
expounds the attributes of Brahman – which

is itself a kalā, or part of a part, of Śrī Govinda – in
three words:

niṣkalam (undivided), anantam (unlimited), and aśeṣa-
bhūtam (infinite truth). Therefore, one should
understand the difference between Bhagavān and Brahman
in this manner.

“In the Eleventh Canto it is stated:

anārambhaṁ tamo yānti paramātma-vinindanāt

parādhīnaś ca baddhaś ca svalpa-jñāna-sukhe hitaḥ

alpa-śaktiḥ sa-doṣaś ca jīvātmā nedṛśaḥ paraḥ

vadatā tu tayor aikyaṁ kiṁ tair na duṣkṛtaṁ kṛtam

antaryāmy-aikya-vācīni vacanānīha yāni tu

tāni dṛṣṭvā bhramantīha durātmāno ’lpa-cetasaḥ

asy asmi tvam ahaṁ svātmety abhidhā gocaro yataḥ

sarvāntaratvāt puruṣas tv antar-yāmī bhidām ayan

ato bhramanti vacanair asurā moha-tatparaiḥ

tan-mohane parā prītir devānāṁ paramasya ca

ato mahāndha-tamasi narake yānty abhedataḥ

Those who malign Paramātmā (the Supersoul) enter into a
fearsome darkness. The jīva soul is entirely dependent
upon others; shackled by the material energy; possessed
of limited intelligence, happiness and power; and full
of defects. Paramātmā, however, is just the opposite.
Therefore, what depravity is not possible for those who
claim that the Supreme Soul and the jīva soul are one?
They blaspheme Paramātmā by such statements. Demoniac
persons who proclaim the oneness of the soul and the
Supersoul are contemptible and are forced to accept
repeated birth and death. Only the demoniac become
bewildered by such illusory statements and thus wander
in the cycle of birth and death (saṁsara-cakra). Their
delusion, however, causes the demigods to develop great
love and affection for Bhagavān. Those who do not accept
that there is a difference between the minute living
being and the Supersoul go to the darkest regions of
hell.”



Verse 180

ataḥ sāndra-sukhaṁ tasya śrīmat-pādāmbuja-dvayam

bhaktyānubhavatāṁ sāndram sukhaṁ sampadyate dhruvam

                          277
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


ataḥ – therefore; sāndra – essence; sukham – of bliss;
tasya – His; śrīmat – splendid; pāda – feet; ambuja –
lotus; dvayam – pair; bhaktyā – through devotional
service; anubhavatām – this is experienced; sāndram –
intense; sukham – happiness; sampadyate – is brought
forth; dhruvam – factually.

Therefore, the beautiful lotus feet of Śrī Bhagavān are
the concentrated essence of happiness that is realized
by bhakti alone. Those who experience the sweetness of
Bhagavān through bhakti surely attain this concentrated
transcendental happiness.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: This verse beginning with ataḥ
explains that the happiness enjoyed by the Lord’s
devotees is much greater than the happiness of brahma-
sukha, that experienced by those who have realized
impersonal Brahman. The bhakti-śāstras say, “One
realizes the concentrated essence of happiness only by
experiencing an object that, by its very nature,
possesses complete and concentrated bliss. Therefore,
the wise have ascertained that Śrī Bhagavān’s two
supremely glorious lotus feet, the vessel of that
concentrated joy, are the most resplendent forms of
spiritual bliss.

“In the Viṣṇu Purāṇa (1.22.53) Śrī Parāśara states:

eka-deśa-sthitasyāgner jyotsnā vistāriṇī yathā

parasya brahmaṇaḥ śaktis tathedam akhilaṁ jagat

Just as a localized fire   spreads its rays far and wide,
the Supreme Brahman, who   is full of attributes,
manifests throughout the   entire world by His energy,
although situated in one   place.

“And in Śrī Bhagavad-gītā (14.27), Śrī Bhagavān states:
‘brahmaṇo hi pratiṣṭhā ’ham amṛta-syāvyayasya ca – I
alone am the basis and ultimate support of the formless
Brahman, everlasting immortality, and unalloyed
happiness (bhakti).’ ”

It is to be understood from the evidence of these two
verses that Śrī Bhagavān’s lotus feet are the embodiment
of concentrated happiness. His lotus feet radiate Their
splendor everywhere like fire, and They are the
foundation of even the immortal, inexhaustible Brahman.
Therefore, those who realize Them by serving Them with
devotion in pure love attain corresponding concentrated
happiness.

Thus the happiness experienced in serving Bhagavān’s
lotus feet, which are compared with fire itself, cannot
be attained in the realization of Brahman, which is like
rays emanating from that fire. Explaining this point
again with an example, the bhakti-śāstras say,
“Bhagavān’s sat-cid-ānanda-ghana lotus feet are the
concentrated essence of transcendence, just as the moon
and the sun are dense spheres of concentrated
brilliance. These transcendental lotus feet are realized
through the practice of bhakti-yoga, which bestows an
intense happiness that corresponds to that of the source

                            278
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

itself.

“On the other hand, the happiness realized from the rays
of the moon and sun (as opposed to the brilliant spheres
of the planets themselves); or from the cultivation of
knowledge of the soul’s position as a part and parcel of
Brahman, which is like that of a particle of moonbeam or
sunray (as opposed to the cultivation of bhakti, which
is the eternal constitutional occupation of the living
being, or jīva-svarūpa-bhūta jñāna); or from realization
of the all-pervading Brahman (as opposed to realization
of the lotus feet of Bhagavān) is indeed, comparatively
minuscule. This is because the source and possessor of
all qualities and attributes is known as dharmī, whereas
dharma refers to the individual qualities of the whole.
Here, Bhagavan, who is compared to the moon or sun, is
dharmī, and Brahman, the Lord’s effulgence that is
compared to the moon or sun’s rays, is dharma.
Realization of the possessor of qualities brings
complete happiness, but realization of the qualities
themselves, which are only a part or effulgence of the
whole, does not bestow the same degree of joy.

“Brahma-sukha, the happiness experienced in realizing
the impersonal Brahman effulgence, is not born of the
illusory material creation, and thus it has been
compared to a moonbeam.

“Just as the atomic particles of the rays of the moon
and sun have characteristics such as self-radiance like
their sources, similarly, the atomic living beings
(jīvas), are endowed with qualities such as eternity,
knowledge, and bliss like the Lord Himself, but in
minute quantity. Therefore, they are called the
separated aṁśas (parts) of the Lord. This material
world, on the other hand, being devoid of qualities such
as eternality, all-cognizance, and supreme pleasure,
cannot be regarded as an aṁśa (nondifferent or different
portion) of Parabrahman. Therefore, the term śakti
(power) is used, meaning this world has been created
from the potency of Bhagavān.

“It is also stated in Brahma-saṁhitā (5.40):

yasya prabhā prabhavato jagad-aṇḍa-koṭi-

koṭiṣv aśeṣa-vasudhādi-vibhūti-bhinnam

tad brahma niṣkalam anantam aśeṣa-bhūtaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

I worship that Govinda, the primeval Lord, the radiance
of whose limbs is the indivisible, infinite, all-
encompassing Brahman. That effulgence is distinct from
the unlimited opulences, such as the earth and other
planets, of the millions of universes.”

This verse establishes that the effulgence of Śrī
Bhagavān, which is the formless, all-pervading Brahman
that is devoid of attributes, is a plenary portion (kalā
or aṁśa) of Śrī Bhagavān.”



                          279
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


Verse 181

sukha-rūpaṁ sukhādhāraḥ śarkarā-piṇḍa-van-matam

śrī-kṛṣṇa-caraṇa-dvandvaṁ sukhaṁ brahma tu kevalam

sukha-rūpam – the form of happiness; sukha-ādhāraḥ – the
basis of happiness; śarkarā-piṇḍa-vat – like a piece of
sugar; matam – consi-dered; śrī-kṛṣṇa-caraṇa – of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet; dvandvam – the pair; sukham –
happiness; brahma – Brahman; tu – but; kevalam – only.

Just like a lump of sugar (which is sweet and is also
the source of sweetness), the lotus feet of Bhagavān Śrī
Kṛṣṇa are the form of bliss and are also the origin of
bliss. Brahman, however, is only blissful; it is not its
origin.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Now in this verse beginning with
sukha, the nature of the happiness derived from Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet is being described.

The bhakti-śāstras say, “Those who know fundamental
truth have ascertained that while Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet
are concentrated Brahman, and therefore are the
embodiment of happiness, they are the foundation of that
happiness as well. Consider a lump of sugar. It is made
of sweetness and it is also the source of that
sweetness. Similarly, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is full of joy just as
sugar is full of sweetness, and He is also the source of
joy. Brahman only consists of joy; it is not the source
of it.” This verse makes clear the distinction between
Brahman, which consists of bliss, and Śrī Bhagavān, who
is the origin and support of that bliss. “Rivers of
wonderful antitheses – rivers of oneness (abheda) and
rivers of difference (bheda) – enter into and find
perfect shelter in the glorious Śrī Bhagavān, who is
deep like millions of oceans.” This has been discussed
previously.



Verse 182

jīva-svarūpaṁ yad vastu paraṁ brahma tad eva cet

tad eva sac-cid-ānanda-ghanaṁ śrī-bhagavāṁś ca tat

jīva – of the minute spirit soul; sva-rūpam – the
original form; yat – which; vastu – as a eternally
abiding substance; param brahma – the Supreme Brahman;
tat – that; eva – certainly; cet – if; tat – that; eva –
certainly; sat-cit-ānanda-ghanam – intense eternity,
knowledge, and bliss; śrī-bhagavān – the all-opulent
Person; ca – and; tat – that.

If the entity known as the jīva (the finite self) were
Parabrahman (the Supreme Self), then the jīva would be
called Śrī Bhagavān, the Supreme Spirit who is the
embodiment of eternity, cognizance, and joy.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Some people think that Śrī Bhagavān,
who is the non-dual Absolute Truth, has the same nature

                          280
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

as Brahman. They posit that just as the intensely
pleasurable moon illuminates the entire sky, so Brahman
illuminates the entire world with the light of all-
pervading consciousness. To substantiate this, they
quote Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.11): “brahmeti paramātmeti
bhagavān iti śabdyate – The Absolute Truth is one, but
is known as Brahman, Paramātmā, and Bhagavān.” But even
if one accepts such an opinion, it can still be
logically established that there is very little pleasure
in liberation.

To explain this, the bhakti-śāstras speak seven verses
beginning with jīva. They say, “If that which is
identified as the finite living being, or the jīva, were
to be the Supreme Brahman, then it would have to be
accepted that the jīva, indeed, is sac-cid-ānanda Śrī
Bhagavān. If one were to be of that opinion, it would
have to be countered … .”



Verse 183

tathāpi jīva-tattvāni tasyāṁśā eva sammatāḥ

ghana-tejaḥ-samūhasya tejo-jālaṁ yathā raveḥ

tathā api – however; jīva – the individual spirit souls;
tattvāni – as factual entities; tasya – of Him; aṁsāḥ –
parts; eva – indeed; sammatāḥ – considered; ghana-tejaḥ
– concentrated power; samūhasya – of the aggregate;
tejaḥ-jālam – the net of energetic sunrays; yathā – as;
raveḥ – of the sun.

However, all jīvas are parts (aṁśas) of Bhagavān just as
rays of concentrated brilliance are parts of the mass of
effulgence that is the sun. This is the opinion of the
seers of the Absolute Truth.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The bhakti-śāstras say, “Yet, the
opinion of Śrī Parāśara and others is that in reality,
all jīvas, by principle (tattva) – in other words, by
their nature, or svarūpa – are parts and parcels (aṁśas)
of Brahman. However, in the antonym of the word ghana
(concentrated, referring to Bhagavān, who is the
concentrate of bliss), in the word aghana (dilute),
there is an indication of another entity also, which, in
comparison [to ghana], represents proportionately less,
or a mere amount, of bliss. That other, aghana entity
must be understood to be ātmā-tattva (pure, conscious
reality), or the jīvas. The plurality of that other
entity – ātmā-tattva – is due to the variegated natures
of the jīvas. An example using the sun clarifies this.
As the diffused rays of light (aghana) are part of the
dense sphere (ghana) of the radiance of the sun, in the
same way, the living beings are parts of Brahman.
Nothing exists apart from Him.”



Verse 184

nitya-siddhās tato jīvā bhinnā eva yathā raveḥ


                          281
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

aṁśavo visphuliṅgāś ca vahner bhaṅgāś ca vāridheḥ

nitya-siddhāḥ – eternally established; tataḥ –
therefore; jīvāḥ – the individual spirit souls; bhinnāḥ
– separated; eva – certainly; yathā – as;

raveḥ – of the sun; aṁśavaḥ – rays; visphuliṅgāḥ –
sparks; ca – also;

vahneḥ – of a fire; bhaṅgāḥ – waves; ca – and; vāri-dheḥ
– of the ocean.

Because the jīvas have existence that is eternal (nitya-
siddha), they appear to be distinct from Parabrahman.
Just as sunrays are distinct from the sun, sparks are
distinct from the fire, and waves are distinct from the
ocean, so the eternally existent jīvas are distinct from
Parabrahman.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: It might be argued, “Only due to the
illusion of Māyā do the living beings appear to be
numerous and distinct parts of Brahman. When they become
liberated and are free from Māyā’s influence, there will
be no difference between the jīvas and Brahman, and the
form of Brahman alone shall exist.”

To refute this, the bhakti-śāstras speak two verses,
beginning here with nitya-siddhā. They say, “In the
opinion of the Tattva-vādī sampradāya, the difference
between the jīvas and the Supreme Brahman is not an
imagined delusion created by the illusory potency Māyā;
rather, all jīvas are eternally related to Parabrahman
as eternally existent separated parts (aṁśas).
Therefore, the living being is always, and in all
respects, different from the Supreme Lord Parameśvara.
Just as the difference between the sun and its rays, the
fire and its sparks, and the ocean and its waves are
eternally established distinctions, so the difference
between Parameśvara and the jīva is also eternally
established (nitya-siddha).”



Verse 185

anādi-siddhayā śaktyā cid-vilāsa-svarūpayā

mahā-yogākhyayā tasya sadā te bheditās tataḥ

anādi – since time without beginning; siddhayā – due to
being established; śaktyā – by the potency; cit-vilāsa –
of spiritual pastimes; sva-rūpayā – by the original
form; mahā-yoga-ākhyayā – named mahā-yoga (great union);
tasya – of Him; sadā – eternally; te – they (the jīvas);
bheditāḥ – divided; tataḥ – for that reason.

From time without beginning, the jīva is always separate
from Bhagavān. This is due to the arrangement of Mahā-
yoga, Bhagavān’s eternal, spiritual pleasure potency,
who can make even the impossible possible.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might ask, “How is the
eternal distinction between the jīva and the Lord
possible if it is not brought about by the illusory

                          282
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

energy (Māyā)?”

The bhakti-śāstras reply in this verse beginning with
anādi. They say, “The personal form of the Supreme
Brahman is Śrī Bhagavān, and the personal energy of Śrī
Bhagavān is His svarūpa-śakti. By the potency of this
personal energy, all living beings, who are the Lord’s
parts and parcels, remain eternally separate from Him.”

“How can one prove the eternality of the individual
self?”

“The eternality of the jīvas is established on the basis
of their existing as parts and parcels (aṁśas) of Śrī
Bhagavān from time immemorial (anādi).”

“What is the nature of these jīvas who are eternally
existing parts of the Supreme Brahman?”

“Spiritual pleasure is the very nature of their
existence. They are manifestations of the splendor and
opulence of the Supreme living force (caitanya), and are
therefore pure and free from illusion.”

“How are the jīvas eternally distinct from the Lord?”

“Bhagavān possesses a potency known as Mahā-yoga or
Yoga-māyā, who is endowed with such mastery that she can
make even the impossible possible. By the influence of
this potency, Parabrahman and the jīva remain eternally
distinct. In Bhagavad-gītā (7.25), Śrī Bhagavān says,
‘nāhaṁ prakāśaḥ sarvasya yoga-māyā-samāvṛtaḥ – My
transcendental form is covered by Yogamāyā and cannot be
seen by mundane vision. Only eyes anointed with the
salve of love can behold Me.’ Therefore, even though it
is impossible to separate a whole (aṁśī) and its parts
(aṁśa), the Yogamāyā potency of Bhagavān makes this
possible. Thus, they are eternally distinct.”



Verse 186

atas tasmād abhinnās te bhinnā api satāṁ matāḥ

muktau satyām api prāyo bhedas tiṣṭhed ato hi saḥ

ataḥ – then; tasmāt – from Him; abhinnāḥ – nondifferent;
te – they; bhinnāḥ – different; api – also; satām – of
the devotees; matāḥ – consi-

deration; muktau – in a liberated state; satyām –
actually; api – also; prāyaḥ – generally; bhedaḥ –
difference; tiṣṭhet – may remain; ataḥ – then; hi –
certainly; saḥ – that.

Therefore, great personalities are of the opinion that
because the jīvas and Parabrahman both have
characteristics of sac-cid-ānanda, they are nondifferent
from one another, but because the jīvas are a portion of
Parabrahman, they are also different. Even when the
jīvas are liberated, as a rule, this difference remains.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The bhakti-śāstras say, “The living

                          283
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

being, or the jīva, and Parabrahman, or the Supreme
Brahman, are nondifferent from one another because they
share the same nature – that of eternality, knowledge,
and bliss. But as the jīva is a part, or aṁśa, of
Parabrahman, they are different also. This concept is
illustrated in the three examples [from verse 184] of
the sun and its rays, the fire and its sparks, and the
ocean and its waves. The sun and its parts – its rays –
are nondifferent in that they share radiance and other
similar attributes. But unlike the sun, the rays are
multifarious and diffusive. Therefore, the sun and its
rays are different.

“This difference between the parts and the whole exists
eternally. The significance of this example is that just
as the sun has an inherent relationship with its rays,
so the living beings have an integral relationship with
the Lord. However, one cannot equate a ray of the sun
with the sun itself. Rather, the sun is of a superior
nature, and it is from the sun that rays emanate.
Similarly, the Lord’s nature is superior to that of the
living being.

“Śrī Bhagavān possesses an innate, inconceivable potency
named Yoga-māyā, who makes the impossible possible. By
the effect of this potency, the simultaneous oneness and
difference between Bhagavān and the living beings
manifests. As rays emanate from the sun, all jīvas
manifest from the Lord. The Lord and the jīvas are
nondifferent from one another in that they are both
conscious by nature, but since the jīvas are also parts
(aṁśa) of Bhagavān, they are simultaneously different as
well. It follows that this difference is eternal and
continues even when the jīvas are liberated.”

Śrī Śaṅkarācārya-pāda has stated, “muktā api līlayā
vigrahaṁ kṛtvā bhagavantaṁ bhajanti – For the sake of
performing pastimes, even liberated souls accept a body
and worship Śrī Bhagavān.” According to this statement,
salvationists first attain the stage of jīvana-mukta, in
which they remain in a material body but are free from
identification with it. Later, at the stage of mukti, in
which they no longer have bodies, some liberated jīvas,
out of their own free will, accept bodies that are
suitable for serving Bhagavān and thus worship Him.

The bhakti-śāstras continue, “In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(6.14.5), Śrī Parīkṣit says to Śrī Śukadeva:

muktānām api siddhānāṁ nārāyaṇa-parāyaṇaḥ

su-durlabhaḥ praśāntātmā koṭiṣv api mahā-mune

O great sage, among millions of perfected and liberated
souls, one may be devoted to Lord Nārāyaṇa. Such a
devotee, who is completely peaceful, is rarely found.

“These words of the Mahā-Purāṇa also establish the
separate existence of Śrī Bhagavān and the jīva who is
His servant. Otherwise, if one merges into Brahman at
the time of liberation, who is there to accept a body as
a pastime? Who is there to become devoted to Nārāyaṇa on
the strength of bhakti? If the soul’s existence merges
into Brahman forever, how can the separate identity of

                          284
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

the liberated jīva be explained?

“One might object that both the examples cited above
apply to jīvana-mukta souls who are liberated even
within their material bodies. However, this assumption
is not correct because the salvationists, even in the
jīvan-mukta stage, have bodies. Going back to the verse
above, it can be asked, why did Śrī Śaṅkarācārya-pāda
use the words ‘vigrahaṁ kṛtvā – upon accepting a body
[they will perform worship of Bhagavān]’? These words
make no sense in relation to those jīvan-mukta souls,
who are liberated while still present in their bodies.
Neither can one say that the stanza of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, muktānām api siddhānām, refers to the
position of being jīvan-mukta.

“It is stated in the Kārtika-māhātmya of the Padma
Purāṇa: ‘There was a great sage in human form who merged
into Bhagavān. Then he again became manifest in a form
similar to that of Lord Nārāyaṇa.’ The Bṛhan-nārasiṁha
Purāṇa, describing the vow of Nṛsiṁha-caturdaśī, tells
of how a prostitute and a brāhmaṇa merged into Bhagavān.
They then manifested again, the brāhmaṇa as Prahlāda and
the woman as his wife. There are many similar narrations
of how liberated souls have again accepted bodies.”

In the original verse above, the significance of prāyaḥ,
meaning ‘for the most part’ or ‘as a general rule,’ is
that, occasionally, by the desire of the Lord, some
living beings attain nirvāṇa, the extinction of the
self, which is known as sāyujya liberation. Therefore,
prāyaḥ has been used to indirectly indicate nirvāṇa.



Verse 187

sac-cid-ānanda-rūpāṇāṁ jīvānāṁ kṛṣṇa-māyayā

anādy-avidyayā tattva-vismṛtyā saṁsṛtir bhramaḥ

sat-cit-ānanda – of the eternal, cognizant, and
blissful; rūpāṇām – forms; jīvānām – of the minute
spirit souls; kṛṣṇa-māyayā – by Śrī Kṛṣṇa&apos;s
illusory potency; anādi – beginningless; avidyayā – due
to ignorance; tattva – of the truth; vismṛtyā – by
forgetfulness; saṁsṛtiḥ – transmigration through
repeated birth and death; bhramaḥ –

ignorance or delusion.

All living beings are embodiments of eternality,
knowledge, and bliss, but because they are minute parts
of the Supreme Brahman, they have forgotten their true
nature. Being thus deluded, they have fallen into the
cycle of repeated birth and death – the beginningless
ignorance created by Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s potency of illusion,
Māyā.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra may question, “If even
in the liberated state the living being remains
different from the Lord, what is necessity for that
liberation, which has taken lifetimes to achieve?”


                          285
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

The personified bhakti-śāstras reply in two verses,
beginning here with sac-cid. They say, “Although all
jīvas are by nature embodiments of transcendence,
nevertheless they are also atomic in nature, and
therefore are bound in saṁsāra, the cycle of birth and
death. By the influence of Kṛṣṇa’s energy, Māyā, which
has created illusion from time immemorial (anādi-
avidyā), the jīva forgets the truth of his own
constitutional nature: ‘I am part and parcel of
Parabrahman, the Supreme Lord. My nature is to be
eternally existent, full of knowledge and joy.’ Thus,
deluded in forgetfulness of this, he falls into material
existence. The living being’s identification with the
material world – an ego that is the product of illusion
– is not only erroneous, but according to the
consideration of conclusive truth (tattva), it is
impossible; the jīva can never be in a conditioned state
of material existence.”



Verse 188

muktau sva-tattva-jñānena māyāpagamato hi saḥ

nivartate ghanānanda-brahmāṁśānubhavo bhavet

muktau – in the liberated state; sva – of his identity;
tattva – of the truth; jñānena – through knowledge māyā
– of the illusory potency; apagamataḥ – because of the
departure; hi – indeed; saḥ – bhrama, or delusion;
nivartate– is removed; ghana-ānanda – intensely
blissful; brahma – of Brahman; aṁśa – as a part;
anubhavaḥ – experience; bhavet – there can be.

When the jīva attains liberation by knowledge of his
true identity, his illusion about his connection to the
material world is eradicated. At that time, he
experiences that he is a particle of the all-blissful
Brahman.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The bhakti-śāstras say, “One attains
liberation by realizing his true identity as pure
spirit. This knowledge puts an end to his delusion –
that is, forgetfulness of his real nature – and frees
one from the illusion of Māyā. He then experiences, ‘I
am a part (aṁśa) of that Supreme Spiritual Entity,
Parabrahman or Bhagavān, who is by nature all-blissful.’

“One should understand that the conception expressed
here is that Brahman and Bhagavān are one. However, when
one attains liberation by just realizing, ‘The identity
of the soul (myself) is indeed to be a part of the
Lord,’ the happiness he experiences is only partial.
Although bhaktas are also parts of Parabrahman or
Bhagavān, by their bhajana, or serving the Lord in love,
they achieve divine happiness (bhakti-sukha) by
experiencing the unlimited sweetness of His lotus feet.
This is how devotees of the Lord are distinctly superior
to those who are merely liberated.”



Verse 189

                          286
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017


sva-sādhanānurūpaṁ hi phalaṁ sarvatra sidhyati

ataḥ svarūpa-jñānena sādhye mokṣe ’lpakaṁ phalam

sva-sādhana – with one’s practice; anurūpam – in
accordance; hi – certainly; phalam – a result; sarvatra
– in every case; sidhyati – is effected; ataḥ –
therefore; sva-rūpa – of his form (as a tiny spirit
soul); jñānena – by knowledge; sādhye – the goal; mokṣe
– of liberation; alpakam – (bestows) a tiny; phalam –
happiness.

It is seen everywhere that one obtains a result
according to the practice he adopts to achieve it. Thus,
the liberation that is attained by understanding one’s
spiritual nature affords meager happiness.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Now, to further strengthen the idea
that there is scant happiness in liberation, the bhakti-
śāstras speak three verses, beginning here with sva-
sādhana, giving examples of mundane pro-cesses of
achievement (sādhana) and goals (sādhya). They say, “In
this world and in the next, one achieves results
according to his sādhana, or the means he employs. For
example, a knife or scissors cannot cut certain things
that can only be cut by a large, sharp axe. Similarly,
the jīva may become liberated by realizing that the soul
is a particle of Brahman, but the happiness attained by
that liberation is utterly insignificant. One can only
become partially happy, never completely happy, by
performing sādhana for a goal that is itself
incomplete.”



Verse 190

saṁsāra-yātanodvignai rasa-hīnair mumukṣubhiḥ

bahudhā stūyate mokṣo yathā dyauḥ svarga-kāmibhiḥ

saṁsāra – of worldly illusions; yātanā – by the
torments; udvignaiḥ – by those agitated; rasa – of
taste; hīnaiḥ – bereft; mumukṣubhiḥ – by those desiring
liberation; bahudhā – in many ways; stūyate – is
glorified; mokṣaḥ – liberation; yathā – just as; dyauḥ –
heaven; svarga – Svarga; kāmibhiḥ – by those desiring.

Tormented by material existence, troubled at heart, and
bereft of spiritual taste and relationship, seekers of
liberation take its shelter to extinguish the fire of
repeated birth and death. They regard liberation as the
ultimate aim of human life, just as those who aspire for
heaven consider heaven, impermanent as it is, to be the
pinnacle of happiness.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra may ask, “But why do
some people say that the ultimate pleasure is to be
found in liberation?”

The bhakti-śāstras reply in this verse beginning with
saṁsāra. They say, “Those who praise liberation do so
because their minds are tormented by the material world,

                          287
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

which is saturated with the pain of birth and death. In
this condition, deprived of the sweet taste of
transcendental affection (rasa), they never enjoy that
special object of affection that melts the heart with
love. Because such persons cannot taste any object
saturated with sweet, transcendental love, the fire of
material existence (saṁsāra) burns their hearts. To
escape that suffering, salvationists take shelter of
liberation. Although they consider mokṣa to be the
epitome of happiness and praise it in various ways,
factually, such happiness does not exist. For example,
even though heaven is full of miseries such as rivalry,
degeneration, and insecurity about one’s tenure there,
those who aspire for heaven consider it to be the
ultimate bliss. Similarly, those who aspire for
liberation consider liberation to be the highest degree
of happiness.”



Verse 191

sukhasya tu parā-kāṣṭhā bhaktāv eva svato bhavet

tan-maya-śrī-padāmbhoja-sevināṁ sādhanocitā

sukhasya – of happiness; tu – indeed; parā kāṣṭhā – the
highest pinnacle; bhaktau – in devotional service; eva –
certainly; svataḥ – spontaneously; bhavet – there may
be; tat-maya – which are identical with Him; śrī-pada-
ambhoja – of His resplendent lotus feet; sevinām – for
the servants; sādhana – with their practice; ucitā – in
accordance.

In reality, though, the unalloyed devotees are fully
dedicated to the service of the divine lotus feet of Śrī
Bhagavān. Indeed, they automatically experience the
ultimate limit of happiness that is suitable for their
means of devotional service.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: By bhakti of Śrī Bhagavān, one quite
easily experiences paramount happiness corresponding to
one’s devotional practice. To explain this, the bhakti-
śāstras speak this verse beginning with sukhasya. They
say, “The devotees are eagerly engaged in loving service
of the divine lotus feet of the Lord, and by dint of
this experience, the highest level of happiness
naturally arises. As a goal (sādhya) is directly related
to the means (sādhana) to achieving it, so the results
devotees achieve accord with their spiritual practice.”



Verse 192

paramātiśaya-prāpta-mahattā-bodhanāya hi

parā kāṣṭheti śabdyeta tasyānantasya nāvadhiḥ

parama-atiśaya – supreme preeminence (of that joy);
prāpta – attained; mahat-tā – the greatness; bodhanāya –
in order to comprehend; hi – indeed; parā kāṣṭhā –
ultimate limit, pinnacle; iti – thus; śabdyeta – it can
be said; tasya – of that; anantasya – of the limitless;

                          288
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

na avadhiḥ – without limitation.

This happiness reaches the ultimate limit of greatness
and none can surpass it. To explain this with certainty,
the phrase ‘the highest degree’

(parā-kāṣṭhā) has been used. This happiness is infinite
and limitless.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Saying, “Bounded happiness can never
be boundless,” Śrī Gopa-kumāra could raise the doubt
that the word parā-kāṣṭhā, meaning ‘extreme limit,’
which is used to describe that happiness, indicates that
this happiness has a limit or boundary.

To refute this idea, the personified bhakti-śāstras
speak this verse beginning with parama. They say, “That
happiness is the highest; nothing exceeds its
greatness.” In order to incontrovertibly convey the
supreme magnificence of this happiness, the word parā-
kāṣṭhā has been employed. In reality, though, this
happiness is not bound by space or time; it is infinite
and limitless.



Verse 193

tat sukhaṁ vardhate ’bhīkṣṇam anantaṁ paramaṁ mahat

na tu brahma-sukhaṁ muktau vardhate sīmavad yataḥ

tat – of that (bhakti); sukham – joy; vardhate –
increases; abhīkṣṇam – incessantly; an-antam – without
end; paramam – supreme; mahat – great; na – not; tu –
however; brahma – of Brahman; sukham – the happiness;
muktau– in liberation; vardhate – it increases; sīma-vat
– in a limited manner; yataḥ – as.

Devotees experience that supremely great, infinite
happiness of

bhakti in perpetually increasing, ever-fresh ways. But
the happiness of Brahman is bounded, and so liberated
souls do not experience it in these ways.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: In this way, it is demonstrated that
the happi-ness derived from devotion is far superior to
the bliss of Brahman realization. To explain this, the
bhakti-śāstras speak this verse beginning with tat,
saying that the happiness of serving the Lord with love
increases at every moment to higher and higher levels.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra may point out, “The phrase tat-vṛddhi
(tat vardhate), meaning ‘that which expands or
increases,’ seems to indicate that at times, that
happiness may also be confined or limited.”

The bhakti-śāstras explain, “The bliss of bhakti is
infinite and unlimited. Although it reaches the ultimate
limit of greatness, at every moment devotees still
experience it to be ever-new, ever-sweet, and ever more
excellent. However, the happiness of Brahman realization
is different; it has limits and cannot develop to

                          289
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

progressively higher degrees of bliss. Therefore, when
those devoted to liberation say, ‘Liberation alone is
the ultimate limit of happiness,’ it is they themselves
who have determined its limit.”



Verse 194

paramātmā para-brahma sa eva parameśvaraḥ

ity evam eṣām aikyena sajātīya-bhidā hatā

parama-ātmā – Supersoul; para-brahma – Supreme Brahman;
saḥ – He; eva – indeed; parama-īśvaraḥ – Supreme
Controller; iti – thus; evam – in this way; eṣām –
their; aikyena – on account of sameness;

sa-jātīya – of the same category; bhidā – the division;
hatā – nullified.

The Supreme Lord is the Supreme Soul and the Supreme
Brahman. In other words, it is the Supreme Lord alone
who manifests in various ways due to His different
qualities (guṇa), pastimes (līlā), and divine
appearances (avatāra). The Supersoul, the Supreme
Brahman, and the Supreme Lord are all the one Absolute
Truth. Being of the same category, or sa-jātīya, there
is no difference among Them.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra may express a doubt,
saying, “It has been previously stated that the living
beings, or jīvas, [being vibhinnāṁśa, or separated
expansions] have the eternal distinction of existing
separately from Parabrahman. If this were so,
Parabrahman would incur the fault of sajātīya-bheda, or
difference of things belonging to the same category.”
The jīvas and Parabrahman are of the same category
because both have the quality of consciousness.
“Sajātīya-bheda would also nullify the Vedic statements
describing Parabrahman, such as ‘ekam-eva-advitiyam –
one without second.’ ”

To address this, the personified bhakti-śāstras speak
two verses, beginning here with paramātmā. They say,
“Not only are the distinctions of sajātīya (belonging to
the same family or category) and vijātīya (belonging to
a separate family or category) not found within
Parabrahman, but such differences can never exist within
the Absolute Truth. The Supreme Absolute Truth alone is
the indwelling Supersoul residing in the heart
(Paramātmā), He is the Supreme Brahman (Parabrahman),
and He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead
(Parameśvara). The different guṇa-avatāras (qualitative
incarnations), līlā-avatāras (pastimes incarnations),
and many other special forms are also manifestations of
the Supreme Lord.

“One should understand that sajātīya-bheda (differences
in the same category) does not apply to these
categories. The Supersoul, the Supreme Brahman, and the
Supreme Person and all His incarnations may appear to be
different, but actually They are all nondifferent. Each
of Them is full with eternality, cognizance, and bliss.

                          290
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

By reason of this oneness, and because of the
nondifference of Their very being, They are all
identical despite appearing in a variety of forms.”

In this first of a two-part response, the personified
scriptures refute the charge that there is any
distinction (sajātīya-bheda) between the Supreme Lord
and His expansions, or in other words, those who are in
the same category as He is.



Verse 195

sadā vaijātyam āptānāṁ jīvānām api tattvataḥ

aṁśatvenāpy abhinnatvād vijātīya-bhidā mṛtā

sadā – always; vaijātyam – of a different category;
āptānām – attained; jīvānām – of the minute spirit
souls; api – although; tattvataḥ – factually; aṁśatvena
– because of having the nature of a part; api – also;
abhinnatvāt – because of being nondifferent; vijātīya –
due to a difference in category; bhidā – division; mṛtā
– is refuted.

All living beings are always distinctly separate parts
(vibhinnāṁśa) of Parabrahman. But in reality, as they
are parts of Him, they are also nondifferent from Him.
Since the characteristics of the source of all parts are
found within its parts, this rules out vijātīya-bheda,
the difference between members of separate categories.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The bhakti-śāstras now establish the
non-duality, advayam, of the Supreme Brahman in this
verse beginning with sadā.

They say, “All living beings, being limited, are
perpetually in a separate category (vijātīya) from
Parabrahman, who is unbounded. While this separateness,
or vijātīya-bhāva, is ever-existent in the jīvas,
factually they are all integral parts, or aṁśas, of
Parabrahman and are therefore nondifferent from Him. The
living beings appear different from Parabrahman because
of cid-vilāsa-śakti, the Lord’s potency that assists His
variegated transcendental pleasure pastimes, but
actually they are His parts. The qualities of the
source, or aṁśī, are also shared by the parts, or aṁśas.
Therefore, from the standpoint of conclusive truth
(tattva), both the source and the expansion (aṁśī and
aṁśa) are nondifferent. This, then, negates the
supposition that there is difference between members of
separate categories (vijātīya-bheda).”



Verse 196

asmin hi bhedābhedākhye siddhānte ’smat-su-sammate

yuktyāvatārite sarvaṁ niravadyaṁ dhruvaṁ bhavet

asmin – in this regard; hi – certainly; bheda-abheda –
different and nondifferent; ākhye – named; siddha-ante –

                          291
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

in the philosophical conclusion; asmat – of our
(spiritual preceptors); su-sammate – concurred; yuktyā –
through logic; avatārite – received through disciplic
succession; sarvam – all; niravadyam – flawless; dhruvam
– certainly; bhavet – it may be.

However, the principle of simultaneous oneness and
difference (bhedābheda) as it relates to the Supreme
Brahman is beautifully consistent and faultless. Great
personalities who are devoted to the Lord have
established the principle of bhedābheda using
definitive, irrefutable logic.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The bhakti-śāstras say, “Such
philosophic principles (siddhānta) or specific arguments
elucidate the scriptures in supremely consistent and
harmonious ways. Moreover, when the principle of
bhedābheda, or simultaneous oneness and difference, is
presented with logical supporting arguments, everything
spoken and unspoken becomes absolutely free from defects
and contradictions and the flawless siddhānta that is
approved in every way by bhakti-mārga, the path of
devotion, is established.” The word dhruva, meaning
‘definite,’ indicates the ability to remove all doubts.

“Some people hold that living beings, or jīvas,
originate from Brahman and merge into Brahman. They say
that Brahman and the jīvas are actually nondifferent
from one another. However, even in the opinion of those
who think this way, in the state of liberation, or
mukti, one does not realize the infinite nature of
Brahman. Therefore, the happiness experienced in that
state is meager.

“An analogy to this type of mukti is that of a wave that
manifests from a part of the ocean and then merges into
it again. Because there is only water in all directions,
the wave cannot be considered an entity separate from
the ocean. It merges and becomes one with the ocean.
Thus, from this perspective, all waves are nondifferent
from the ocean. Yet certain qualities of the ocean, such
as extreme depth and the presence of precious gems, are
not found in waves. Thus, as waves do not contain all
the ocean’s characteristics, they are different from the
ocean. Just because they merge into the ocean, they
appear inseparate from it. They merge into the same
place they emerge from, and so are not seen as a
separate form. Therefore, it is said that waves have the
same nature as the ocean and they are one.

“Similarly, in the state of liberation, the living
beings merge into a distinct part of the effulgent
Brahman from which they originated, and therefore it is
said that the jīva has become one with Brahman. However,
because the living being is limited by his very nature,
whereas Brahman is constitutionally unlimited, liberated
jīvas cannot obtain the intense, boundless happiness
found in the unbounded Brahman. So, the reason the jīvas
are nondifferent from Brahman is just that their
individuality is not visible in the state of liberation.
Because they are finite, they are separate and distinct,
even though they are situated as if merged in some
portion of Brahman. By the special mercy of Śrī
Bhagavān, at a certain point, some liberated living

                          292
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

beings, because of their individuality, desire a
separate existence to experience the joy of loving
devotional service (bhakti-sukha). They are able to
attain this in a body that is fit for worshiping the
Lord, a sac-cid-ānanda body comprised of eternality,
knowledge, and bliss.” This has been explained before.

In this regard, Śrī Śaṅkarācārya-pāda has said
(Prārthanā-ṣaṭpadī 3):

saty api bhedāpagame nātha! tavāhaṁ na māmakīnas tvam

sāmudro hi taraṅgaḥ kva-ca na samudras tāraṅgaḥ

O Lord! I am Yours even when   our difference (bheda)
comes to an end. But You are   not mine. When a wave
merges into the ocean, it is   said to belong to the
ocean, but certainly, it can   never be said that the
ocean belongs to the wave.

This statement of Śrī Śaṅkarācārya-pāda, which presents
the basic philosophy of oneness and difference
(bhedābheda), is completely logical. The distinction
between the jīva and Brahman is a product of ignorance
(avidyā, or Māyā) by which the living being is
bewildered and made forgetful of his real identity. When
this illusion of self-forgetfulness is destroyed, the
differentiation between the jīva and Brahman is removed.
Although this is true, still, difference exists in the
form of tadīyatā, the literal belonging of the living
being to Brahman. In other words, the above prayer,
“Nātha! tavāham – O Lord! I am Yours,” establishes
distinction between the jīva and Brahman. If the jīva
were to become one with Brahman, these words of Śrī
Śaṅkarācārya would be inconsistent and meaningless.




The purport is that the limited stream of a river can
never become the unlimited source of water and origin of
exquisite jewels that is the ocean. The river only
appears to be nondifferent from the ocean because, when
they meet, its external presence disappears into the
ocean. Therefore, if one carefully considers these
ideas, he can certainly ascertain that because one’s
existence vanishes in the state of liberation just like
the flame of a lamp is extinguished, there is merely the
absence of distress in that state. There is nothing but
the absolute cessation of distress; there is no
attainment of happiness. Further, the superior qualities
of the self that are present during the state prior to
liberation, such as the ability to think (buddhi), are
not manifest in the state of liberation. Thus, of the
four types of annihilation [constant, occasional,
material, and final][2], even in the ultimate or final
annihilation (ātyantika-pralaya), the jīvas’ liberation
in the sense of becoming one with Brahman cannot be
established.




                          293
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

Verse 197

sadā pramāṇa-bhūtānām asmākaṁ mahatāṁ tathā

vākyāni vyavahārāś ca pramāṇaṁ khalu sarvathā

sadā – eternally; pramāṇa-bhūtānām – embodiments of
śāstric evi-dence; asmākam – our; mahatām – of the great
teachers; tathā – so; vākyāni – statements; vyavahārāḥ –
behavior; ca – also; pramāṇam – evidence; khalu –
indeed; sarvathā – in all respects.

In order to confirm this subject matter, scriptures such
as Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, words of great personalities such
as Śrī Nārada and Prahlāda, and the conduct of great
souls such as Śrī Śuka and Sanaka unfailingly give
evidence to authoritatively establish the excellence of
devotional service.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Some posit the following opinion: “The
eternally existing Brahman, who is one without a second,
falsely appears to various living beings due to the
designation of Māyā. But when this false appearance of
differentiation is destroyed by knowledge of the self
(tattva-jñāna), one perceives only the one Brahman.
Thus, it can be said that when the illusion of the
designation of being a jīva who has fallen from both the
position of Brahman and liberation is obliterated, then
in liberation, as before, the condensed happiness of the
true nature of Brahman is realized.”

The proponents of mukti further believe: “In liberation,
there is not even a trace of the mundane ego, and
therefore the very person who experiences happiness does
not exist. This absence of existence notwithstanding,
because the state of liberation itself constitutes
realization of the joy of one’s real identity, it
nevertheless accords the most concentrated happiness. As
salvationists achieve joy from liberation, those who are
devoted to serving the Lord feel that Śrī Bhagavān, who
is the embodiment of eternity, knowledge, and bliss,
continually manifests in their hearts, giving them
experience of the greatest intensity of happiness. As it
is established that one also experiences the greatest
intensity of happiness in liberation, one can understand
that bhakti’s special glories are not superior to those
of liberation.”

However, such a philosophical conclusion (siddhānta)
cannot be logical.

In order to refute the inconsistent siddhānta of the
proponents of liberation, the bhakti-śāstras speak eight
verses beginning with

sadā (197–204). They say, “We devotional scriptures such
as

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam give evidence with the following
words. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.7.10) states:

ātmārāmāś ca munayo nirgranthā apy urukrame

kurvanty ahaitukīṁ bhaktim ittham-bhūta-guṇo hariḥ

                          294
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


‘Although self-satisfied sages are free from bondage
(their knots of false ego having been severed, they are
beyond rules and regulations) and have no material
desires, nevertheless, they still become enchanted by
the qualities of Śrī Hari, who is endowed with great
prowess, and thus they serve the Lord with unalloyed
devotion.’ This is because the qualities of Śrī Bhagavān
are so powerful that everyone, both liberated and
conditioned, is attracted to Him.

“Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.25.32) states: ‘bhaktiḥ siddher
garīyasī – Among all types of perfections, bhakti should
be regarded as the best.’ Here, the word siddhi
signifies liberation.

“Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.17.28) states:

nārāyaṇa-parāḥ sarve na kutaścana bibhyati

svargāpavarga-narakeṣv api tulyārtha-darśinaḥ

Those who are wholly devoted to Nārāyaṇa never become
over-whelmed by fear. To them, heaven, liberation, and
hell are all equal.

“In praise of Śrī Bhagavān, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.87.21)
states:

duravagamātma-tattva-nigamāya tavātta-tanoś

carita-mahāmṛtābdhi-parivarta-pariśramaṇāḥ

na parilaṣanti kecid apavargam apīśvara te

caraṇa-saroja-haṁsa-kula-saṅga-visṛṣṭa-gṛhāḥ

O omnipotent One! You have manifested Yourself before
our eyes to reveal to us Your bhakti, which is so
difficult to understand. Your foremost devotees,
immersed in the ocean of the pure ambrosia of Your
pastimes and tasting the nectar of Your lotus feet, have
even forgotten their own bodies. What to speak of those
great devotees, even those influenced by them to abandon
their households and pursue devotional service have no
desire for liberation.

“Moreover, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (5.14.44) states: ‘…mahatāṁ
madhudviṭ-sevānurakta-manasām abhavo ’pi phalguḥ –
Liberation is completely insignificant for devotees
absorbed in the service of Madhusūdana.’

“Thousands of such examples are available, as well as
evidence in the form of the realizations of the great
authorities of ancient times, such as Śrī Nārada, Śrī
Prahlāda, and Śrī Hanumān. Śrī Hanumān states (Śrī
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.2.49):

bhava-bandha-cchide tasmai spṛhayāmi na muktaye

bhavān prabhur aham dāsa iti yatra vilupyate

O Lord, even though liberation cuts the bondage of
material existence, I do not aspire for it. In that

                          295
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

state, our relationship that You are the Lord and I am
Your servant would be destroyed.

“Among the modern ācāryas, Śrī Śaṅkarācārya-pāda, the
most exalted personality and foremost preceptor, is
omniscient and expert in presenting scriptural exegesis.
He has said: ‘muktā api līlayā vigrahaṁ kṛtvā
bhagavantam bhajanti – To perform pastimes, liberated
souls also accept bodies and thus engage in the loving
service of Śrī Bhagavān.’

“In the Vedānta-darśana (sūtra 1.3.2), it is stated:
‘muktopasṛpyāt – the Supreme Brahman Śrī Hari is the
worshipable object of liberated souls.’

“Even though Śrī Śuka, Śrī Sanaka, and others were
absorbed in the Brahman conception of the Absolute
Truth, it is evident that they developed a taste for
glorifying the pastimes of Śrī Bhagavān. In fact, the
superiority of bhakti over liberation should be regarded
as conclusively proven by the examples of all the great
ancient authorities, including Śrī Prahlāda and Śrī
Hanumān, who rejected the liberation offered by Śrī
Bhagavān.

“The scriptural conclusions and examples presented here
have been established after refuting all evidence based
on artha-vāda (exaggerated praise), imagination, etc.
Thus in the original verse, the word khalu is used to
indicate certainty. Therefore, due to the existence of
these ageless and self-evident examples of proof, it
would be inappropriate for us to search for more
evidence.”



Verse 198

tathaitad-anukūlāni parā-vṛttāni santi ca

naiva saṅgacchate tasmād artha-vādatva-kalpanā

tathā – so; etat – to this; anukūlāni – favorable; parā-
vṛttāni – historical accounts; santi – exist; ca – also;
na – not; eva – certainly; saṅgacchate – agree; tasmāt –
with that; artha-vādatva – that such historical accounts
are merely exaggeration; kalpanā – imaginative
speculation.

Many ancient histories support this truth. A presumption
that these accounts are simply exaggerated praise would
reveal fallacious reasoning.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The bhakti-śāstras say, “Thus, by
self-evident examples [given in the previous verses and
commentaries] it is proven that pure devotion is vastly
superior to liberation. This conclusion is substantiated
by many ancient histories that support the scriptural
statements and examples of the conduct of great
personalities.

“Once in Dvārakā there lived a brāhmaṇa who was devoted
to the loving service of Bhagavān. This brāhmaṇa had
sons who died and attained liberation, but this did not

                          296
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

give any comfort to the brāhmaṇa. Therefore, he quite
intelligently criticized the strength of Arjuna [who
then vowed to protect the brāhmaṇa’s next-born son]. In
order to protect the words of Arjuna, Śrī Bhagavān
brought those sons of the brāhmaṇa back from the abode
of mukti to the abode of bhakti, the city of Dvārakā.
[An elaborate description of this pastime is found in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.89).]

“The great sages, Ekata, Dvita, and Trita, who were
absorbed in Brahman (brahma-niṣṭhā) like Sanaka and
other the Kumāras, once went to Śvetadvīpa to have
audience of Śrī Bhagavān. However, in spite of their
assiduous efforts to see the Lord, they were unable to
do so.

“The Lord attempted to bestow the most exalted
benediction upon His own devotee incarnation, Mahārāja
Pṛthu, but Pṛthu Mahārāja, refused, saying (Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam 4.20.31): ‘yathā cared bāla-hitaṁ pitā svayaṁ
tathā tvam evārhasi naḥ samīhitum – O Lord, Your words,
“Accept a boon,” are bewildering for the whole universe.
Therefore, O Lord, as a father personally desires to
benefit his son, after considering my welfare, please
give me any benediction You think best.’

“Śrī Bhagavān replies to Śrī Pṛthu’s prayers, saying
(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 4.20.32): ‘…mayi bhaktir astu te – My
beloved son, as you have desired bhakti, may you be
blessed with loving devotion to Me.’

“There are many such historical accounts of the conduct
of great personalities that constitute evidence for the
superiority of bhakti over liberation. It is incorrect
to dismiss these historical accounts as mere
exaggeration. If one imagines that such thousands upon
thousands of authoritative statements are only
exaggerations, then his thinking only reveals the defect
of atyanta-vyāpakatā (overextention) or fallacious
reasoning (kutarka).”



Verse 199

athāpy ācaryamāṇā sā nāstikatvaṁ vitanvatī

kṣipet kalpayitāraṁ taṁ dustare narakotkare

atha api – thus; ācaryamāṇā – behaving; sā – that;
nāstika-tvam – atheism; vitanvatī – spreads; kṣipet – it
may throw; kalpayitāram – the speculator; tam – that;
dustare – in a horrible; naraka – hell; utkare – in a
rubbish.

One who considers this body of scriptural evidence, the
conduct of great authorities, and famous historical
accounts to be simply exaggerations reveals his
faithless mentality. His fabrication of such an
atheistic position will cause him to fall into a
dreadful hell.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The bhakti-śāstras say, “However, one
who disrespects the words and behavior of great

                          297
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

personalities and declares the evidence approved by the
ācāryas, or spiritual preceptors, to be imaginary is
opposed to the Vedic scriptures. In other words, if one
alleges those authoritative statements to be embellished
overstatements (merely words of hollow praise) in order
to establish his own scholarship, then those
fabrications will force him into hell.

“This is corroborated in Śrī Nāradīya Purāṇa:

purāṇeṣu dvija-śreṣṭhāḥ sarva-dharma-pravaktṛṣu

pravadanty artha-vādatvaṁ ye te naraka-bhājanāḥ

O topmost brāhmaṇas, the words of the Purāṇas expound
all aspects of religious life. Those who consider those
teachings to be mere exaggeration (artha-vāda) will
surely fall into hell.

“Therefore, one should carefully deliberate on these
examples of scriptural evidence. Abandoning one’s
preconceived ideas and false cleverness in presenting
fallacious and stubborn arguments, one should accept the
viewpoint which establishes that bhakti is more glorious
than liberation. Otherwise, one will have to suffer in
terrible hell.”

Here, Śrī Gopa-kumāra might ask, “Which position should
be accepted?”

In reply, the personified bhakti-śāstras say, “One
should accept that position which sets forth the four
verses beginning with bhagavāṁstu parabrahma (Śrī Bṛhad-
bhāgavatāmṛta 2.2.178–181), as well as others. There are
persons who have accepted suffering for many lives in
their ongoing endeavor for liberation. The message here
is that they should be careful to abandon the conception
that the glories of loving devotion to the Lord are
exaggerated praises (artha-vāda).”



Verse 200

aho ślāghyaḥ kathaṁ mokṣo daityānām api dṛśyate

tair eva śāstrair nindyante ye go-viprādi-ghātinaḥ

aho – oh!; ślāghyaḥ – worthy of praise; katham – how?;
mokṣaḥ – liberation; daityānām – of the demons; api –
even; dṛśyate – it is seen; taiḥ – by them; eva – even;
śāstraiḥ – by the scriptures; nindyante – who are worthy
of censure; ye – which; go – cows; vipra – and
brāhmaṇas; ādi – and so forth; ghātinaḥ – slaying.

Ah! How can liberation be praiseworthy? It is attained
even by demons who are killers of cows and brāhmaṇas,
demons who are castigated by liberation’s own adherents.
Therefore, can such an object that is attained by the
wicked be acceptable for the noble?

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Despite this discussion, someone might
still raise a doubt as to whether bhakti is superior to
mukti. Therefore in these two verses, beginning here

                          298
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

with aho, the bhakti-śāstras present another argument
based on logic. They say, “Oh! Demons such as Kaṁsa and
Aghāsura were monstrously evil. If such atrocious demons
attain liberation, how can that state be considered
praiseworthy?”

Here it is pointed out that while demons like Kaṁsa
achieved liberation – something which is only extremely
rarely attained – even those who hold liberation dear
criticize such demoniac persons. How can something
obtained by those who are despicable be considered
acceptable by the cultured?

Śrī Gopa-kumāra might ask, “Why would those who are
devoted to liberation criticize the demons?”

The bhakti-śāstras reply, “Because they (the demons) are
killers of cows and brāhmaṇas and destroyers of Vedic
sacrifices (yajñas) and scriptures. This is seen in the
words of the ministers of Kaṁsa, as stated in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.4.40):

tasmāt sarvātmanā rājan brāhmaṇān brahma-vādinaḥ

tapasvino yajña-śīlān gāś ca hanmo havir-dughāḥ

O King! We will then totally destroy all the brāhmaṇas
who are learned in the Vedas, as well as the ascetics,
those who perform fire sacrifices, and the cows that
supply ghee for the sacrifices.

“There are many such examples of proof. Therefore it is
said that whatever is attained by despicable people is
similarly despicable.”



Verse 201

sarvathā pratiyogitvaṁ yat sādhutvāsuratvayoḥ

tat sādhaneṣu sādhye ca vaiparītyaṁ kilocitam

sarvathā – in every respect; prati-yogitvam – are
opposite; yat – what; sādhutva – the divine nature;
asuratvayoḥ – the demonic nature; tat sādhaneṣu – in
their practices; sādhye – in the goal; ca – also;
vaiparītyam – the reverse; kila – indeed; ucitam –
suitable.

Devotees and demons are in every respect the antithesis
of one another in nature. So they must certainly also be
opposite in their goals and the means of achieving those
goals.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The bhakti-śāstras say, “Saintly
persons and demoniac persons are the antithesis of one
another in terms of behavior, character, and countless
other ways. It follows, then, that their goals (sādhya)
and practices to attain those goals (sādhana) will
certainly be opposite. The sādhana of saintly persons is
exclusively to worship the lotus feet of Śrī Bhagavān,
whereas the sādhana of the demons is to contemplate the
soul’s nondifference from Brahman (advaita ātma-tattva-

                          299
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

jñāna). The only goal of saintly personalities is prema-
bhakti (loving devotional service), and the only goal of
demons is mukti (liberation).

“Some people equate the outcome of devotion with that of
maintaining a mood of enmity toward the Lord. For
example, in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.87.23) the Śrutis
offer prayers, saying:

nibhṛta-marun-mano-’kṣa-dṛḍha-yoga-yujo hṛdi yan

munaya upāsate tad arayo ’pi yayuḥ smaraṇāt

striya uragendra-bhoga-bhuja-daṇḍa-viṣakta-dhiyo

vayam api te samāḥ sama-dṛśo ’ṅghri-saroja-sudhāḥ

O Bhagavān, controlling their life-air (prāṇa), mind,
and senses, great sages become impenetrably fixed in
yoga and are able to hold the Absolute Truth in their
hearts. But even demons who are envious of You are able
to reach that same Truth by the power of thinking of
You. The young damsels of Vraja are attracted to Your
two long arms that resemble the body of the king of
serpents, and they relish the sweet nectar of Your lotus
feet. Therefore, we, the presiding goddesses of the
Śrutis, have become followers of those damsels, and,
having attained the bodies of gopīs, we also relish the
nectar of Your lotus feet.

“Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.1.30) also states:

kāmād dveṣād bhayāt snehād yathā bhaktyeśvare manaḥ

āveśya tad-aghaṁ hitvā bahavas tad-gatiṁ gatāḥ

Both by absorbing their minds in the Lord with lust,
envy, and fear; and also by absorbing their minds in the
Lord with appropriate devotion, many people have become
free from sins such as lust and have attained Bhagavān.

“The significance of this example is that those who envy
Bhagavān as well as those who are devoted to Him are
absorbed in thinking about the Lord, and as a result
they both become freed from the cycle of repeated birth
and death. Therefore, the example reveals a type of
similarity. It may also be said that remembrance of the
Lord, vision of Him, and experience of His mercy and
other qualities are extremely powerful. The example
above serves to celebrate the potency of these
interactions.

“Further, in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.1.27), Śrī Nārada
states:

yathā vairānubandhena martyas tan-mayatām iyāt

na tathā bhakti-yogena iti me niścitā matiḥ

By bhakti-yoga, one does not achieve the same absorption
in Bhagavān that mere mortals achieve through enmity.
This is my firm conviction.

“Here, it is enmity that is being praised. This

                          300
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

statement of Śrī Nārada can be understood as a way of
expression arising from the boldness and confidence of
his deep love that naturally arises from the
satisfaction he experiences by relishing bhakti-rasa,
the mellow of pure love. Śrī Nārada is the preceptor of
mischief-makers who are greedy to taste bhakti-rasa.
Otherwise, how is it be possible that he could utter
such words right in front of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in the assembly
of that mahā-bhāgavata devotee, Śrī Yudhiṣṭhira
Mahārāja?

“Another understanding is that Śrī Nārada’s statement –
that one can become absorbed in Śrī Bhagavān through
enmity – is intended to ridicule sāyujya-mokṣa, or
merging into the existence of the Lord. The result of
hostility to the Lord is derided because there is
nothing as worthless and base as merging into Brahman
(brahma-sāyujya).”



Verse 202

kṛṣṇa-bhaktyaiva sādhutvaṁ sādhanaṁ paramaṁ hi sā

tayā sādhyaṁ tad-aṅghry-abja-yugalaṁ paramaṁ phalaṁ

kṛṣṇa-bhaktyā – through devotion to Śrī Kṛṣṇa; eva –
indeed; sādhutvam – saintly quality; sādhanam – means;
paramam – supreme; hi – certainly; sā – she (bhakti);
tayā – by her; sādhyam – attainment; tat-aṅghri-abja –
His lotus feet; yugalam – pair; paramam – supreme;
phalam – reward.

Devotion unto the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the primary
characteristic of saintliness, and one becomes saintly
by this kṛṣṇa-bhakti alone. Such devotion is the
foremost means to attain the service of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
lotus feet, and such attainment is, in turn, the
ultimate fruit of bhakti.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might ask, “Can those
who observe their ritualistic religious duties or those
who cultivate empirical knowledge (jñāna) not also be
regarded as saintly?”

To refute this, the bhakti-śāstras explain, “Only by
serving Śrī Kṛṣṇa with pure love (kṛṣṇa-bhakti) can one
attain saintliness. Without devotion for Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
righteousness accrued by performing activities such as
regulated religious duties is to be regarded as
inferior, or gauṇa. Other than devotion for Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
no other quality can be regarded as saintly.

“In the story of Śrī Ambarīṣa Mahārāja (Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam 9.4.63), Śrī Bhagavān says to Śrī Durvāsā,
‘ahaṁ bhakta-parādhīno hy asvatantra iva dvija – I am
controlled by My devotees and have no

independence in their presence.’ The Lord concludes by
saying

that saintly persons control His heart. He says
(9.4.68), ‘sādhavo

                          301
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017


hṛdayaṁ mahyaṁ sādhūnāṁ hṛdayaṁ tv aham – Sādhus are My
heart, and I am the heart of the sādhus.’ Since loving
service to the Lord is the best means to attain His
lotus feet, with these words, Śrī Bhagavān has
personally established the saintliness of His devotees.

“Although in the beginning stage of bhakti, fruitive
activities (karma), speculative knowledge (jñāna),
renunciation (vairāgya), etc. are sometimes counted as
limbs of pure devotional service, one should still
understand that processes such as karma and jñāna are
subsidiary, or gauṇa, and bhakti alone is primary, or
mukhya. Therefore bhakti

is the supreme spiritual practice. The goal of this
topmost spiritual practice is the service of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
lotus feet. This is the ultimate, or parama, result.”
Alternatively, the word parama indicates that when
bhakti and liberation are compared, the very nature of
pure loving devotion is superior to the experience of
Brahman.



Verse 203

tad-bhakti-rasikānāṁ tu mahatāṁ tattva-vedinām

sādhyā tac-caraṇāmbhoja-makarandātmikaiva sā

tat – to Him; bhakti – of devotional service; rasikānām
– for those expert in tasting the mellow; tu – but;
mahatām – great souls; tattva-vedinām – who know the
truth; sādhyā – the objective; tat-caraṇa-ambhoja – of
His lotus feet; makaranda – of the honey; ātmikā –
embodiment; eva – certainly; sā – she (devotion).

Understand that for those exalted souls who know the
truth and who relish the mellows of pure devotional
service, the bhakti they practice – that nectar of
serving Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet – is itself the goal.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might question,
“Although liberation is considered the foremost
achievement of human life, pure devotional service is
said to be even more beneficial. So isn’t bhakti the
goal rather than the means to attain it?”

The personified bhakti-śāstras reply, “Truly, bhakti is
both the goal as well as the means. Loving devotion for
the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is both a practice and an
objective of those great personalities who are bhakti-
rasika, or connoisseurs of the mellows of devotion.”

Gopa-kumāra might say, “Is it not true that viewing the
lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is celebrated as the entire
fruit of bhakti?”

The bhakti-śāstras say, “Know that goal, bhakti, to be
identical in nature to the honey emanating from the
lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. In other words, it is like
supreme bliss that is the essence of sweetness,
fragrant, cooling, and full of rasa.

                          302
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017


“The purport is that one obtains more happiness in that
wonderful process of serving Śrī Bhagavān than in
directly meeting with Him. Understand this to be the
ultimate result of bhakti.” This will be thoroughly
explained in the future.

“There are many people who have realized impersonal
Brahman. They are self-satisfied (ātmā-rāma), liberated
even in this world (jīvan-mukta), and perfected beings
(siddha-jana). However, all of them think that achieving
freedom from distress is the goal of life. Devotees of
Bhagavān, on the other hand, may not go to Vaikuṇṭha –

they may have bodies made of the five material elements
– but, continuously enjoying the essence of happiness,
they obtain the mercy of Bhagavān.”



Verse 204

sā karma-jñāna-vairāgyāpekṣakasya na sidhyati

paraṁ śrī-kṛṣṇa-kṛpayā tan-mātrāpekṣakasya hi

sā – she (bhakti); karma – fruitive work; jñāna –
knowledge; vairāgya – renunciation; apekṣakasya – one
who desires; na – not; sidhyati – is perfected; param –
only; śrī-kṛṣṇa-kṛpayā – by the mercy of glorious Śrī
Kṛṣṇa; tat – that (devotional service); mātra –
exclusively; apekṣakasya – one who desires; hi – indeed.

That devotion to the Lord does not depend on processes
such as fruitive work, knowledge, and renunciation, and
therefore, those who desire those things cannot perfect
their bhakti. Only those who exclusively desire the
loving service of Śrī Kṛṣṇa obtain bhakti on

the strength of the Lord’s mercy.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might ask, “How does
one obtain that bhakti?”

The personified bhakti-śāstras reply, “Those who desire
karma (fruitive action), jñāna (knowledge), vairāgya
(renunciation), etc. can never attain bhakti.” Here,
karma indicates activities such as the execution of
one’s religious principles or prescribed occupational
duties (dharma). Jñāna indicates the ability to perceive
the truth of the soul (ātma) and that which is not
spirit (anātma). Vairāgya refers to being devoid of
desire for sense objects. Only those who give up all
these desires and exclusively desire pure loving service
to Śrī Kṛṣṇa obtain that bhakti by the strength of the
mercy of the Lord.

Gopa-kumāra might then question, “Since the very nature
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is to be supremely merciful, why doesn’t
everyone’s devotion become perfected by His mercy?”

The bhakti-śāstras answer, “Although Śrī Kṛṣṇa is most
merciful, He does not give the fruit of bhakti to
everyone. Those who are particularly eligible give up

                          303
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

processes related to karma and jñāna as well as the
results of those processes, such as the attainment of
heaven and liberation. They pray only for pure loving
devotion, and without a doubt Śrī Kṛṣṇa gives them the
gift of service to Himself. In the words of Śrī Brahmā
(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.14.8):

tat te ’nukampāṁ susamīkṣamāṇo

bhuñjāna evātma-kṛtaṁ vipākam

hṛd-vāg-vapurbhir vidadhan namas te

jīveta yo mukti-pade sa dāya-bhāk

Those who, knowing well the power of Your mercy,
earnestly await it, all the while experiencing the
results of activities that they themselves have
performed in the past, and at the same time live in such
a way that with body, mind, and speech they continuously
offer obeisances to Your lotus feet, those alone are
qualified to attain liberation.

“This means that just as one who is not alive cannot be
eligible to receive the inheritance of his ancestors,
similarly, unless one practices a life of bhakti, he
cannot in any other way attain liberation (mukti). Here,
mukti indicates the opulence of paramount bliss. The
pada, or place, it can be found is either the abode of
Śrī Vaikuṇṭha or the lotus feet of Śrī Bhagavān, both of
whose natures are comprised of that bliss.

“Another reading is that mukti-pada (pada here means
‘topmost

result’) indicates bhakti, which is the fruit of
liberation. Additionally,

mukti indicates the path of devotional service, or
bhakti-mārga,

that is situated above liberation or which mocks
liberation (pada here means ‘feet,’ ‘liberation is at
its feet’). Yet another meaning is the conventional
definition of mukti, which is apavarga, or freedom.

“In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (5.19.19-20), it is stated, ‘…
apavargaś ca bhavati yo ’sau bhagavati sarva-bhūtātmany
anātmye ’nirukte ’nilayane paramātmani vāsudeve ’nanya-
nimitta-bhakti-yoga-lakṣaṇa – He who is the soul (ātmā)
of all living beings, who is free from defects such as
desire and attachment, who is indescribable, and who is
not dependent on anything, is the Supersoul, Bhagavān
Vāsudeva. Unflinching, unalloyed devotion to Him is
known as apavarga (liberation) or mokṣa-pada (ultimate
salvation). When the knot of ignorance in the heart,
which manifests varied destinations for the living
beings, is cut, and one receives intimate association
with those whose love for the Lord is pure (premī-
bhaktas), then and only then can one attain the yoga of
unalloyed devotion, bhakti-yoga.’ Therefore, the word
apavarga, or liberation, indicates bhakti, or loving
devotion.


                          304
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

“This is also stated by Śrī Bhagavān in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (11.20.35):

nairapekṣyaṁ paraṁ prāhur niḥśreyasam analpakam

tasmān nirāśiṣo bhaktir nirapekṣasya me bhavet

(In this verse, the word param means ‘exclusive,’ or
‘the ultimate goal,’ and nairapekṣyam means ‘being
devoid of any desire to enjoy sense objects.’) The
topmost object of achievement for those who are
nirapekṣa, or who are devoid of any desire to enjoy
sense objects, is liberation, which is an extraordinary
achievement. Therefore, those who do not desire even
such liberation – or in other words, those who are
disinterested in pursuing the means of obtaining
liberation such as knowledge and renunciation – are
qualified to receive My bhakti.

“In Śrī Viṣṇu Purāṇa (3.8.9), Urva Muni tells Mahārāja
Sagara:

varṇāśramācāra-vatā puruṣeṇa paraḥ pumān

viṣṇur ārādhyate panthā nānyat tat-toṣa-kāraṇam

The Supreme Personality Śrī Viṣṇu is worshiped by those
who follow the rules and regulations of the four social
and four spiritual orders of life (varṇāśrama).
Factually, other than the execution of varṇāśrama, there
is no way to please Śrī Viṣṇu.

“The prime duty of a person executing varṇāśrama is to
worship Śrī Viṣṇu. Giving up all other processes, one
should become successful by practicing varṇāśrama-
dharma, which is based on the worship of Viṣṇu. Then
only can one obtain the full result of varṇāśrama-
dharma, which is worship of Viṣṇu. Following prescribed
religious or occupational duties and the path of
philosophical inquiry – the processes of karma and jñāna
– within varṇāśrama-dharma in a manner that excludes
worship of Śrī Viṣṇu will not satisfy the Lord.
Factually, the fruit or desired consequence of
varṇāśrama-dharma is only worship of Śrī Viṣṇu. Without
that, varṇāśrama is without value.

“In this way, it can be seen that those who have not
developed strong faith in bhakti are unqualified to
engage in it. For the benefit of such people, Śrī
Bhagavān instructs:

śruti-smṛtī mamaivājñe yas te ullaṅghya vartate

ājñā-cchedī mama drohī mad-bhakto ’pi na vaiṣṇavaḥ

The Śrutis and Smṛtis are My orders. Those who
transgress the injunctions in these scriptures are
inimical to Me, and even though they might engage in
devotional practices, they are not Vaiṣṇavas.

“The purport of this statement of the Lord is that to
help those persons who are devoted to the varṇāśrama
system enter the path of bhakti, He has in various
places given instructions in relation to neophyte stages

                          305
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

of bhakti (guṇī-bhūtā bhakti, meaning ‘bhakti that is
predominated by the modes of material nature’). Thus, in
the beginning stage, the Lord has advised that one not
completely give up the prescribed duties of the
varṇāśrama system. It may also be understood that the
Lord employs such edicts for the protection of the Vedic
path known as pravṛtti-mārga, the path of regulated
material development and sense enjoyment. Alternatively,
as faith is required for executing bhakti, it should be
understood that such instructions are given for those
who lack faith.

“It is well known that the scope of karma is limited.
Therefore, if those who are devoted to bhakti abandon
prescribed religious duties and other activities that
constitute karma, they are not to be considered fallen.
This is corroborated in the Padma Purāṇa, where Śrī
Bhagavān states:

mat-karma kurvatāṁ puṁsāṁ kriyā-lopo bhaved yadi

teṣāṁ karmāṇi kurvanti tisraṁ koṭyo maharṣayaḥ

If one who is acting on My behalf or who is performing
My devotional service is unable to execute any
prescribed duty, three hundred million great sages who
are expert in the Vedas are appointed to complete that
karma.

“Also in the Padma Purāṇa, it is stated in the prayers
by Devadyuti:

yasmin jñāte na kurvanti karma caiva śrutīritam

nireṣaṇā jagan-mitrāḥ śuddhaṁ brahma namāmi tam

Those who realize that Parabrahman do not need to
perform material duties. Giving up all desires and
maintaining a mood of friendship towards all the living
beings of this world, they worship the Lord. I offer
obeisances to that Supreme Brahman.

“If this is the result of realizing Him, what can be
said of taking

shelter of Him and rendering service unto Him? In
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.20.9), Śrī Bhagavān states:

tāvat karmāṇi kurvīta na nirvidyeta yāvatā

mat-kathā-śravaṇādau vā śraddhā yāvan na jāyate

‘Until one actually develops detachment in his heart
from sense objects, or until he develops faith in
hearing narrations of My pastimes, he should continue to
perform all prescribed religious and occupational duties
(karma).’ Here the word karma indicates all prescribed
religious and occupational duties, both nitya (regular)
and naimittika (occasional), mentioned in scriptures.
The word vā, meaning ‘or,’ indicates that one should
become detached from performing all other obligatory
duties. This signifies the particular importance of
rejecting karma, jñāna, and so on.


                          306
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

“Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (5.5.2–3) also states:

mahāntas te sama-cittāḥ praśāntā

vimanyavaḥ suhṛdaḥ sādhavo ye

ye vā mayīśe kṛta-sauhṛdārthā…

Great personalities are well-wishers of all living
beings. They are peaceful and free from anger, their
conduct is virtuous, and they look upon everyone with
equal vision. Those who love Me as the Supreme Lord and
who understand that I am the ultimate goal of human life
are truly great souls.

The meaning of the word śraddhā in the above context is
‘faith.’

“In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.20.36), Śrī Bhagavān states:

na mayy ekānta-bhaktānāṁ guṇa-doṣodbhavā guṇāḥ

sādhūnāṁ sama-cittānāṁ buddheḥ param upeyuṣām

My unalloyed devotees, saintly persons who see all
living beings as equal, are free from the sin and piety
that accrue from observing or not observing rules and
regulations. This is because, as I am transcendental to
illusion and they are absorbed in My qualities and
pastimes, they are are situated in the stage that is
beyond intelligence.

“Śrī Śiva also says:

smartavyaḥ satataṁ viṣṇur vismartavyo na jātucit

sarve vidhi-niṣedhāḥ syur etayor eva kiṅkarāḥ

Always remember Śrī Viṣṇu. Never forget Him. All rules
and regulations are subservient to these two
injunctions.”

The bhakti-śāstras conclude by saying, “Therefore, all
the rules and regulations mentioned in the scriptures
are subservient to these. It is true that one
automatically follows all rules by remembering Viṣṇu,
because simply by that remembrance, one receives the
benefit of following all rules. Moreover, by forgetting
Śrī Viṣṇu, one incurs all types of sins that are
described in the scriptures. Therefore, always carefully
remember Viṣṇu and do not do anything else other than
this.”



Verse 205

karma vikṣepakaṁ tasyā vairāgyaṁ rasa-śoṣakam

jñānaṁ hāni-karaṁ tat-tac-chodhitaṁ tv anuyāti tām

karma – fruitive work; vikṣepakam – makes unsteady;
tasyāḥ – of that (bhakti); vairāgyam – renunciation;
rasa – the relishable mellows; śoṣakam – dries up;

                          307
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

jñānam – knowledge; hāni-karam – causes harm; tat-tat –
each of them; śodhitam – when purified; tu – however;
anuyāti – follow after; tām – her.

Ritualistic activities make one’s bhakti unsteady,
renunciation dries up its nectar, and speculative
knowledge harms it. But even so, when all these are
bhakti’s obedient followers, they can sometimes be
beneficial.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Therefore, ritualistic activities
performed for fruitive gain (karma), speculative
knowledge (jñāna), renunciation (vairāgya), etc. that
are opposed to bhakti should be totally abandoned by
those who are practitioners of devotional service to the
Lord. To explain this, the bhakti-śāstras say, “All
karma is a distraction from bhakti. When one’s mind
becomes agitated by the hundreds of details involved in
performing the prescribed religious and occupational
duties that are enjoined by scripture, one’s devotion to
the Lord is diminished. The feeling of indifference to
all things material that is concomitant with
renunciation dries up the sweet nectar of loving
relationship with the Lord (bhakti-rasa). It withers
one’s attachment towards bhakti and ultimately causes
one to develop the fault of indifference towards serving
the Lord. Therefore, it is inappropriate to combine
bhakti with karma, vairāgya, and the other practices
that are opposed to it. It is stated in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (11.2.42):

bhaktiḥ pareśānubhavo viraktir

anyatra caiṣa trika eka-kālaḥ

prapadyamānasya yathāśnataḥ syus

tuṣṭiḥ puṣṭiḥ kṣud-apāyo ’nu-ghāsam

As a person who is eating experiences happiness,
nourishment, and relief from hunger with every bite,
similarly, a devotee of the Lord experiences three
things simultaneously: devotion, direct experience of
the loving form of Bhagavān, and detachment from other
objects.

“Similarly, the pursuit of knowledge is detrimental
because it weakens one’s disposition for devotion. Upon
realizing the divine truth about the soul (ātma-tattva),
one becomes like a jñānī, one whose goal is
transcendental knowledge. Feeling completely satisfied
and successful in the state of a jīvana-mukta, in which
one is liberated even while living, such a person does
not have an inclination towards devotional service. In
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.20.31–33), Śrī Bhagavān states:

tasmān mad-bhakti-yuktasya yogino vai mad-ātmanaḥ

na jñānaṁ na ca vairāgyaṁ prāyaḥ śreyo bhaved iha

yat karmabhir yat tapasā jñāna-vairāgyataś ca yat

yogena dāna-dharmeṇa śreyobhir itarair api


                          308
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

sarvaṁ mad-bhakti-yogena mad-bhakto labhate ’ñjasā

svargāpavargaṁ mad-dhāma kathañcid yadi vāñchati

Because bhakti alone is the ultimate goal of human life,
My devotees are devoted to Me and absorbed in
contemplating Me. Therefore, the pursuit of knowledge
and renunciation are generally not beneficial for them.
People achieve many

different types of results from fruitive activities
(karma),

penance (tapasyā), cultivation of knowledge (jñāna),
detachment (vairāgya), deep meditation (samādhi),
religious merit garnered by charity (dāna), and all
kinds of other beneficial activities. However, My
devotees effortlessly achieve all these results through
bhakti alone. If they desire, they can even attain
heaven, liberation, or residence in My abode.

“From these examples, it can be understood that
knowledge and renunciation are generally not beneficial.
In these statements of Bhagavān, the word prāyaḥ,
meaning ‘generally or mostly,’ indicates that, at times,
renunciation, knowledge, and the performance of
prescribed duties can be helpful to some extent. When is
that? Only when they are related to bhakti. Only when
they are purified of their faults, can karma, vairāgya,
and jñāna become subservient to bhakti. Then they are
accepted as preliminary aspects of devotional practice
(bhakti-sādhana). It is stated in the Yoga-vāśiṣṭha:

janmāntara-sahasreṣu tapo-dāna-samādhibhiḥ

narāṇāṁ kṣīna-pāpānāṁ kṛṣṇe bhaktiḥ prajāyate

Only those sinless, pure persons who have performed
austerities by giving in charity and engaging in the
discipline of samādhi for thousands and thousands of
lifetimes may develop devotion for Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

“The underlying principle here is that the activities of
those who perform them only for the Lord’s pleasure,
without desiring to enjoy the results but as an offering
to Him, are known as śodhita-karma, purified activities.
Renunciation is purified when one relinquishes even the
desire for liberation and becomes subservient to the
desire to serve the Lord. Knowledge is purified when one
gives up the conception of total oneness of the soul
with Brahman and meditates on being a servant of the
Lord. This process is the glory of bhakti.”



Verse 206

ātmārāmāś ca bhagavat-kṛpayā bhakta-saṅgataḥ

santyajya brahma-niṣṭhatvaṁ bhakti-mārgaṁ viśanty ataḥ

ātma-ārāmaḥ – one who take pleasure in the self; ca –
also; bhagavat – of the all-opulent Personality of
Godhead; kṛpayā – by the mercy; bhakta-saṅgataḥ –

                          309
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

through association with devotees; santyajya – fully
renouncing; brahma-niṣṭhatvam – determination to attain
impersonal Brahman; bhakti-mārgam – the path of
devotional service; viśanti – they enter; ataḥ –
thereafter.

When those who take pleasure in the self obtain the
association of devotees by the mercy of Bhagavān, they
are able to completely give up attachment for Brahman
and enter the path of bhakti.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The bhakti-śāstras say, “Because
devotional service is far more glorious than liberation,
even self-satisfied (ātmā-rāma) sages completely abandon
their brahma-niṣṭhā – steadiness in the realization of
impersonal Brahman that is obtained in the deep
meditation of samādhi. Forsaking the path of liberation,
they enter the path of loving service to the Lord. In
other words, distanced from liberation, the self-
satisfied sages reject it and embrace bhakti. In Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (11.29.3), Śrī Uddhava says to Śrī Bhagavān:

athāta ānanda-dughaṁ padāmbujaṁ

haṁsāḥ śrayerann aravinda-locana

O lotus-eyed Lord, the topmost swan-like
transcendentalists who have realized impersonal Brahman
take shelter of Your lotus feet, from which all bliss
emanates.”

Śrī Gopa-kumāra might ask, “How do these
transcendentalists develop this inclination towards
devotional service?”

The bhakti-śāstras reply, “By the mercy of the Lord,
they obtain the association of devotees, and in this way
develop such an inclination. This means that as Śrī
Bhagavān is always busy revealing the glories of
Hisbhakti and His bhaktas (devotees), sometimes even
those who are ātmā-rāma receive the mercy of these
activities of the Lord and are able to associate with
devotees. Influenced by that association, they develop
the wisdom to reflect on the most subtle spiritual
topics. In their wisdom, they thoroughly understand the
insignificance of liberation, completely rejecting it
and all the processes to attain it, and become attracted
to the glories of the transcendental attributes of Śrī
Bhagavān. Thus, they enter the path of pure devotion and
worship the Lord in so many ways.”



Verse 207

muktāś cāsya tayā śaktyā sac-cid-ānanda-dehitām

prāpitās te bhajante taṁ tādṛśaiḥ karaṇair harim

muktāḥ – being liberated; ca – also; asya – His; tayā
śaktyā – by that potency; sat-cit-ānanda-dehitām – a
body of eternity, cognizance, and felicity; prāpitāḥ –
having attained; te – they; bhajante – worship; tam –
Him; tādṛśaiḥ – with similar; karaṇaiḥ – senses; harim –

                          310
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

Śrī Hari.

By the influence of the Lord’s potency, all these
liberated persons obtain bodies comprised of eternity,
knowledge, and bliss. With these transcendental bodies
and senses, they worship Śrī Hari with hearing,
chanting, and other processes of bhakti.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might raise the
following doubt, “It is true that perfected and
liberated souls worship Bhagavān. But without bodies and
senses, how can they practice bhakti by the processes of
hearing, chanting, praying, performing Deity worship,
and so on? Those who are fixed in the conception of
impersonal Brahman and who are jīvan-mukta (liberated in
this life) still possess bodies, so it is possible for
them to undertake devotional practice. However,
perfected beings who attain liberation merge into
Brahman and lose their bodies, senses, and so on. How
can they worship the Lord?”

Addressing the question, the bhakti-śāstras speak this
verse, saying, “O virtuous soul! Do not entertain such a
doubt. Although all liberated beings (following the
philosophy expressed previously) merge into Brahman,
still they continue to exist as different individuals.
Therefore, it is stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.14.5):

muktānām api siddhānāṁ nārāyaṇa-parāyaṇaḥ

su-durlabhaḥ praśāntātmā koṭiṣv api mahā-mune

O great sage, one may search among millions of perfected
and liberated souls and rarely find one who is devoted
to Lord Nārāyaṇa. Such a devotee is completely
peaceful.”

“In this verse, the word siddhānāṁ, meaning ‘perfected
beings,’ indicates that perfected beings also worship
Bhagavān. Moreover, the phrase ‘among perfected
liberated souls’ indicates that, even after merging in
Brahman, they exist as separate individuals. This has
been proven in many places.

“Having been given, by the Lord’s spiritual potency,
bodies made of eternity, knowledge, and bliss, or sac-
cid-ānanda, even liberated souls worship the supremely
attractive qualities and glories of Bhagavān Śrī Hari
with senses suitable for transcendental bodies. The Lord
cannot be served with body and senses that are material.
The truth is, only liberated personalities by means of
spiritual bodies and senses can perform services to the
Lord, such as hearing and chanting.”



Verse 208

svārāmatā tv ahaṅkāra-tyāga-mātreṇa sidhyati

su-karo ’tīva tat-tyāgo matas tat-tattva-vedibhiḥ

sva-ārāma-tā – the quality of delighting in the self; tu
– indeed; ahaṅkāra – false ego; tyāga – giving up;

                          311
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

mātreṇa – by merely; sidhyati – becomes perfect; su-
karaḥ – easily attained; atīva – very; tat – of this;
tyāgaḥ – renunciation; mataḥ – considered; tat-tattva –
with the truth of that (false ego); vedibhiḥ – by they
who are conversant.

If one just gives up his false ego, he attains self-
satisfaction. This abandonment of the false ego is quite
easy – this has been determined by knowers of the truth.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Voicing impersonalist arguments, Śrī
Gopa-kumāra might posit, “Persons absorbed in bhakti are
of the opinion

that ‘Nothing can be obtained without devotion to the
Lord. Without bhakti, how can one attain the state of
self-satisfaction (ātmā-rāmatā), which is an even
greater achievement than attaining Brahmaloka and such
magnificent opulences? Only by engaging in bhakti is
self-satisfaction achieved.’ But if that is so, then the
statement that ‘those who are ātmā-rāma ought to become
devotees and engage in bhakti,’ will be contradictory
because they will have already been engaged in bhakti to
reach that position.”

Alternatively, the same statement: “The state of self-
satisfaction, which is the ultimate goal of human life,
is attained by bhakti alone,” can be understood to mean
that at the time of the great cosmic annihilation, the
existence of the infinitesimal living beings (jīva-
sattā) is merged in Brahman. However, even during that
state, the jīvas carry past impressions, or saṁskāras,
of desire for sense objects, and when the time comes for
a new creation, all their previous desires and
impressions reawaken. Similarly, those who have achieved
self-satisfaction continue to carry impressions of their
past practices of bhakti. When that desire for bhakti is
again awakened, its nature again manifests and induces
those persons to describe the qualities, glories, and so
on of Bhagavān.

This being the case, Gopa-kumāra might express the
doubt, “If it is only because of the nature of their
past desire that those who are self-satisfied again
engage in bhakti, what need is there to glorify the
greatness of the qualities of Bhagavān so extensively?”

In reply, the bhakti-śāstras say, “Ah, the state of
self-satisfaction may be the supreme destination, but
the mercy of Bhagavān makes even that seem
insignificant. By the influence of the association of
Vaiṣṇavas, that mercy of Bhagavān makes the ātmā-rāma
sages realize the sweetness of His transcendental
attributes and greatness, causing them to completely
abandon their self-satisfaction and become engaged in
devotion to the Lord’s lotus feet. In this manner, the
process of the transformation of the ātmā-rāma sages
reveals the greatness of the unlimitedly attractive
qualities of Bhagavān.

“It is said, ‘The fruition of bhakti is self-
satisfaction. In other words, this state is the
culmination of bhakti,’ but this thought is completely
absurd and against established truth, or siddhānta. In

                          312
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

the opinion of Vaiṣṇavas, liberation is only the
secondary result of bhakti. The principal result of
bhakti is attaining the wealth of love for the lotus
feet of the Lord.”

The bhakti-śāstras speak four verses (208 through 211),
beginning here with svārāmatā, in which they dispel
doubts about the state of self-satisfaction. They say,
“Just by giving up false ego, one attains self-
satisfaction. There is no need for bhakti in that
process.”

Gopa-kumāra may ask, “Without bhakti, how can one
renounce false ego?”

The bhakti-śāstras say, “It is very easy to give up that
false ego.”

“How has this been deduced?”

“Knowers of the truth, such as Śrī Vaśiṣṭha, have
analyzed the process of abandoning false ego. It is said
in the Yoga-vāśiṣṭha: ‘api puṣpāvadalanād api netra-
nimīlanāt su-karo ’haṅkṛti-tyāgo matas tat-tattva-
vedibhiḥ – As utterly simple as it is to pick flowers or
to close your eyes, it is just as easy to abandon false
ego.’ ”

“But all action is performed because of ego. Without
ego, how can one develop an inclination for the Lord’s
service, of which the ego, or self-consciousness, is
inherently a part?”

“In the same way that a special potency of Bhagavān
enables devotees to obtain bodies comprised of eternity,
knowledge, and bliss, another special potency of the
Lord enables devotees to have the self-conception that
they are sac-cid-ānanda servitors of the Lord. Bhakti is
easily attained with this self-conception, or true ego.”



Verse 209

avāntara-phalaṁ bhakter eva mokṣādi yady api

tathāpi nātmārāmatvaṁ grāhyaṁ prema-virodhi yat

avāntara-phalam – the secondary results; bhakteḥ – of
devotional service; eva – certainly; mokṣa – liberation;
ādi – and so forth; yadi api – although; tathā api –
still; na – not; ātma-ārāma-tvam – the state of taking
pleasure in the self; grāhyam – should be accepted;
prema – in attaining love; virodhi – an impediment; yat
– which.

Self-satisfaction, liberation, and so on are secondary
results of bhakti. But since they are opposed to prema,
which is the principal result of devotion, the devotees
never accept them.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might ask, “Can the
state of self-satisfaction (ātmā-rāmatā) be regarded as
bhakti or not?”

                          313
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


The bhakti-śāstras reply, “The state of being self-
satisfied is a secondary result of devotion.” The word
ādi, meaning ‘and so on,’ indicates that devotional
service bestows secondary results such as self-
satisfaction, mystic perfections and knowledge. “An
example is that a cooking fire may also destroy darkness
and cold, but these results are only secondary to the
primary function of cooking. Similarly, liberation is
the secondary, not primary, result of bhakti, which
includes hearing (śravaṇa) and chanting (kīrtana).
Devotees of the Lord, however, not only do not accept
ātmā-rāmatā and all these secondary results of bhakti,
they actively reject them. This is because these
secondary results are opposed to the principal result,
which is prema, or pure love for the Lord.”



Verse 210

bhakteḥ phalaṁ paraṁ prema tṛpty-abhāva-svabhāvakam

avāntara-phaleṣv etad ati-heyaṁ satāṁ matam

bhakteḥ – of devotion; phalam – result; param – great;
prema – love; tṛpti-abhāva – not satisfied; sva-bhāvakam
– nature; avāntara-phaleṣu – in secondary results; etat
– this; ati-heyam – to be utterly renounced; satām – of
saints; matam – the opinion.

The supreme fruit of devotion to the Lord is prema,
which by its very nature is never satiated. Therefore,
saintly persons have ascertained that the state of self-
satisfaction is the most worthless among all the
secondary results of bhakti.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: This verse beginning with bhakteḥ
establishes the excellence of prema, or pure love of
God, the principal result of devotion to the Lord. Prema
is the unique, most excellent and most honored result of
devotional service. Narrating the characteristics of
this divine love, the bhakti-śāstras say, “Total
satisfaction is not experienced in prema. When one
achieves ātmā-rāmatā, however, he experiences complete
satisfaction. This state of satisfaction is a hindrance
to the wealth of prema. The reason is, in prema, one is
never satiated because it continually expands to ever-
higher states. As contentment (tṛpti) is the nature of
the state of self-satisfaction, and lack of satiation
(atṛpti) is the nature of prema, they are perpetually at
variance with one another. Therefore, saintly persons
who are experts in the mellows of devotional love have
ascertained that among all the secondary results of
bhakti, self-contentment (ātmā-rāmatā) is most
undesirable and worthless.”

In this verse, the implication of the word ati, meaning
‘great,’ is that sometimes there is a need to satisfy
the desires of a devotee whose material desires are not
yet satiated (sakāma-bhakta), to attract externally-
oriented non-devotees to the path of bhakti, or to
manifest the great opulence of devotion to the Lord. In
order to do this, some-times the secondary results of

                          314
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

bhakti such as Brahman realization, yoga, and mystic
perfections (siddhi) are accepted.



Verse 211

bhaktiṁ vināpi tat-siddhāv asantoṣo bhaven na tat

śrīmad-bhāgavatendrāṇāṁ mate sa hi guṇo mahān

bhaktim – devotional service; vinā – without; api –
even; tat-siddhau – in achieving perfection in that;
asantoṣaḥ – dissatisfied; bhavet na – one should not be;
tat – that; śrīmad-bhāgavata – of the glorious devotees
of Śrī Bhagavān; indrāṇām – of the best; mate – in the
opinion; saḥ – that; hi – indeed; guṇaḥ – good quality;
mahān – great.

The principle that one can attain the state of self-
satisfaction even without performing bhakti should not
disturb anyone because, in the opinion of those devotees
who are great connoisseurs of the mellows of bhakti,
this is actually one great quality of bhakti.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The bhakti-śāstras say, “One should
not feel any dissatisfaction with the philosophic
principle: ‘one can perfect the extremely worthless
state of self-satisfaction (ātmā-rāmatā) even without
performing bhakti, devotional service to the Supreme
Lord,’ because this statement does not indicate any
shortcoming in bhakti whatsoever. Rather, understand
this to be a great quality of bhakti, as indeed, it has
been so described by the topmost devotees of Bhagavān –
the best of the Vaiṣṇavas.”

[Following statement is given by Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī
to validate this:]

An objection may be raised, “How can an insignificant
and vile state like self-satisfaction be attained
independently without bhakti?”

In response, it is said, “What fault will befall bhakti
if self-satisfaction is attained independently? It is
like saying, ‘How can an insignificant particle of chaff
be obtained independently without an invaluably great
jewel?’ Such illogical statements are never accepted by
the learned.

“Furthermore, bhakti unto the lotus feet of Śrī Bhagavān
is like a magnificent touchstone, or cintāmaṇi jewel. In
the presence of such devotion for the Lord, the most
base, vile, and tormenting state of self-satisfaction,
which is sought after by ignorant, injudicious people,
and which is like hellish suffering, can never be equal
to or worthy of honor like the great cintāmaṇi of
bhakti. Therefore, that such a state of self-
satisfaction [which is like hellish suffering] is
attained without the help of bhakti indeed demonstrates
a great quality of bhakti. [In other words, it is indeed
a great quality of bhakti that it has no place for such
insignificant things.]


                          315
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

“Therefore, understand the principle that one can attain
the state of self-satisfaction without performing bhakti
is one way of establishing the special greatness of
bhakti, and it is approved by those who know the truth
(tattva) of the glory of bhakti.”



Verse 212

tad-dhetuś citta-śuddhir vā sva-dharmācāra-bhaktitaḥ

bāhyāyās tv alpakaṁ bhakter āntaryāḥ su-mahat phalaṁ

tat-hetuḥ – the reason for this; citta – a heart;
śuddhiḥ – pure; vā – or; sva-dharma-ācāra – for one’s
prescribed duties in accordance with varṇāśrama;
bhaktitaḥ – through devotion; bāhyāyāḥ – external; tu –
however; alpakam– slight; bhakteḥ – of the practices of
devotion; āntaryāḥ – internal; su-mahat-phalam – very
great result.

The reason is that by executing bhakti by following
one’s prescribed occupational or religious duties, one’s
consciousness is cleansed, whereupon one achieves the
state of self-satisfaction. Thus, the state of self-
satisfaction is a most insignificant result of the
superficial practice of devotional service that is based
on the execution of one’s prescribed duties. However,
pure love for the Lord is the exalted result of bhakti
that is performed by processes such as hearing and
chanting.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Although the principle of the
preceding verse is established, some Vaiṣṇavas
nevertheless posit that without bhakti, one cannot
attain any kind of perfection. In order to protect their
assertion, in this verse the personified bhakti-śāstras
establish conclusive understanding on this matter. They
say, “Self-satisfaction, or ātmā-rāmatā, the result of
purity of heart, is of little value because it arises
from the performance of prescribed occupational and
religious duties, or sva-dharma, which are external
devotional practices. In other words, adherence to
prescribed social and religious duties is following the
orders of Lord, and so it is bhakti, but the result is
the inferior state of self-satisfaction.”

Śrī Gopa-kumāra might raise the following objection,
“The assertion that the only result of bhakti is this
very insignificant state of self-satisfaction is
inappropriate; it does not recognize the greatness of
bhakti. The proper understanding is that prema, or
unalloyed devotion to the Lord, is the result of
bhakti.”

The bhakti-śāstras reply, “In this regard, conclusive
understanding is that the insignificant state of self-
satisfaction is a very minute result of external
devotional service in the form of the execution of one’s
prescribed occupational duties. Moreover, within this
execution of prescribed duties, there is also
confidential devotion in the form of hearing (śravaṇa),
chanting (kīrtana), and so on. The exalted and supremely

                          316
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

excellent result of this confidential devotion is the
wealth of pure love for the Lord, prema-sampada. This
perspective eliminates all discord.”



Verse 213

nijātmārāmatā paścād bhajatāṁ tat-padāmbujam

nirvighnam acirāt sidhyed bhakti-niṣṭhā-mahā-sukham

nija – own; ātma-ārāma-tā – achieving the quality of
self-

satisfaction; paścāt – after; bhajatām – for those who
worship; tat-

pada-ambujam – His lotus feet; nirvighnam – without
impediment; acirāt – quickly; sidhyet – one may become
perfect; bhakti – in devotional service; niṣṭhā – faith;
mahā-sukham – great happiness.

If one achieves self-satisfaction and worships the lotus
feet of Śrī Bhagavān, he quickly and without impediments
develops fixed determination in bhakti and experiences
great happiness.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The bhakti-śāstras say, “After having
fully achieved the state of self-satisfaction (ātmā-
rāmatā), if by the mercy of Śrī Bhagavān, one totally
abandons it and serves the Lord, he can very quickly
obtain the complete happiness of bhakti.” Alternatively,
it can be said, “When one attains the state of self-
satisfaction, the distress of material existence is
completely destroyed. Then, in one’s ineffable liberated
form, one can freely serve the lotus feet of Śrī
Bhagavān, the embodiment of sac-cid-ānanda, and very
quickly obtain the great happiness of unwavering faith
(niṣṭhā) in bhakti.”

They continue, “The significance of the word nirvighna,
meaning ‘unimpeded,’ is that bhakti cannot be performed
continuously by persons whose hearts are disturbed by
varieties of worldly distress. When, by dint of
knowledge of self-satisfaction, one actually becomes
self-satisfied and free from distress, then by
continuously worshiping Śrī Kṛṣṇa, one quickly achieves
great happiness. Therefore, some people conclude, ‘Those
who are ātmā-rāma are extremely qualified for bhakti.’
They also say, ‘Just as everyone has a right to bathe in
the river Gaṅgā, similarly, everyone is qualified to
perform bhakti.’ In their opinion, it is unnecessary to
depend on performing occupational duties such as
varṇāśrama-dharma in order to attain bhakti. In our
opinion, however, one can become perfect in the practice
of bhakti only by the mercy of Bhagavān.

“For instance, it is said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(10.14.8):

tat te ’nukampāṁ susamīkṣamāṇo bhuñjāna evātma-kṛtaṁ
vipākam


                          317
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

hṛd-vāg-vapurbhir vidadhan namas te jīveta yo mukti-pade
sa dāya-bhāk

Those persons are qualified to attain bhakti who, in
their hearts, fully understand the power of the Lord’s
mercy and earnestly await it, all the while experiencing
the results of their past activities, and at the same
time, living in such a way that they continuously offer
obeisances to the lotus feet of Bhagavān with their
body, mind and speech.

“From these words of Mahā-Purāṇa (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam), it
can be understood that if one just awaits the mercy of
Śrī Bhagavān, he can very easily obtain complete
happiness. One also hears the scriptural conclusion that
pure devotion is very easily accomplished: ‘bhaktir eva
bhaktiṁ utpādayati – bhakti alone is the cause of
bhakti.’ Therefore, according to this logic, if one
simply aspires for the mercy of Śrī Bhagavān, all
happiness comes without difficulty.” This subject matter
has already been discussed.



Verse 214

tatrānubhavitā so ’nubhavanīyo ’nubhūtayaḥ

vṛttayaḥ karaṇānāṁ ca bahudhā prasphuranti hi

tatra – in this regard; anubhavitā – whose who have
perceived or experienced; saḥ – that; anubhavanīyaḥ –
the worthy object of perception or experience;
anubhūtayaḥ – the perceptions or experiences; vṛttayaḥ –
actions; karaṇānām – of the senses; ca – also; bahudhā –
in many ways; prasphuranti – are brilliantly manifested;
hi – certainly.

In such happiness of bhakti, the devotees who realize or
experience it; Bhagavān, who is the object of that
realization; the realization itself; and the
instruments, or cause, of the realization – in other
words, the disposition of the internal sense, meaning
the mind, as well as the [external] senses – all
manifest in various ways.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: “Happiness experienced in the state of
samādhi by the best of those who are self-satisfied is
really just a semblance of happiness, whereas the
happiness of loving devotion to the Lord is far superior
and glorious.” The bhakti-śāstras now substantiate this
idea with another type of logic. They say, “In the
matter of devotional happiness (bhakti-sukha), the
devotees are the subjects of the experience or
realization and the ineffable Śrī Bhagavān is its
object. When one performs bhakti, all the means of
personal experience – the processes of perceiving and
experiencing and all the functions of the external and
internal senses – all manifest excellently and
wonderfully in variegated ways.

“This occurs in the following process: first, the person
– the subject of realization – has the self-conception
that ‘I am a servant of Bhagavān.’ With this self-

                          318
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

conception, he perceives a glimse, or sphūrti, of his
actual spiritual form (svarūpa) that corresponds to
myriad services such as massaging the Lord’s lotus feet,
fanning Him with a cāmara, and so on. Then, the
wonderful, intensely sweet form and playful pastimes
(vilāsa) of Śrī Kṛṣṇa – the object of realization – are
revealed to him. Thereafter, different sense functions
manifest, such as hearing (śravaṇa) and singing
(kīrtana), as well as different objects that correspond
to the propensities of the senses.

“Based on the distinctions of form, qualities, pastimes,
etc. of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the object of perception, there are
concomitant distinct elements, such as śravaṇa and
kīrtana. For instance, form can be remembered, form’s
loveliness can be glorified, descriptions of qualities
and narrations of pastimes can be heard – in this way, a
multiplicity of divisions manifest. Thus, as the true
nature of the object of realization is full of
variegatedness, and the happiness realized also
manifests infinite variegatedness, it is therefore
naturally of great significance.

“The purport of this is that the three subjects – the
person who is experiencing, the object of experience,
and the experience itself – are full of unlimited
variegatedness. Because of this, and by means of the
unlimited external and internal sense functions that
manifest during the experience, the happiness of bhakti
manifests an enormous degree of variegatedness.
Consequently, its extreme importance is automatically
established.

“One cannot say, ‘When one has realization, or sphūrti,
of his constitutional nature (such as that of being a
servant), and concomitantly, the manifestation, or
sphūrti, of the functions of his internal and external
senses (such as śravaṇa and kīrtana) occurs, at that
time he does not have the realization, or sphūrti, of
the lotus feet of Śrī Bhagavān, and therefore, there is
hindrance in experiencing the continuous concentrated
bliss of the Lord’s lotus feet. So it is impossible to
have both kinds of realization at the same time.’ ”

To substantiate this refutation, the bhakti-śāstras say,
“The manifestation of one’s transcendental
constitutional nature as well as that of the activites
of bhakti – that is, the functions of his internal and
external senses – indeed depend upon steadfast
attachment to the lotus feet of Bhagavān, and therefore,
such manifestations are not completely independent, but
rather manifest in a secondary manner. The appearance of
such manifestations are a secondary result of the
primary result of manifestation of the lotus feet of
Bhagavān.

“Yet, if one asserts that the above-mentioned
manifestations appearing in a secondary manner are as
good as not achieved, or in other words, they only
culminate in the non-manifestation of the constitutional
nature of the self as well as the function of the
senses, then the answer is: ‘No, this is not so.’ This
is because when experience of the lotus feet of Śrī
Bhagavān exists, at that time the person who

                          319
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

experiences, as well as the means and tools of
experience, that is the senses, certainly also exist in
a fully-revealed manner. This means that the permanent
ecstasy (sthāyī-bhāva) of a devotee simultaneously
manifests all the ingredients, such as the special
ecstasies (for example, vibhāva). Sthāyī-bhāva also
mixes with all those ingredients and reaches the state
of rasa, or relationship in love. Therefore, the ability
of a devotee to have this experience [which
simultaneously, fully encompasses the nature and form of
the self, the Lord, the ingredients of rasa, and all the
senses] is to be understood to be a special power of
sthāyī-bhāva. Otherwise, in the absence of experience,
the object achieved becomes as good as not achieved, as
in the logic of ‘asmṛta kaṇṭha-maṇi – the jewel around
the neck which, having been forgotten, is as good as not
there.’

“The word anubhūti, meaning ‘experience, perception, and
realization,’ is used ubiquitously in the scriptures, as
in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.12.11): itthaṁ satāṁ brahma-
sukhānubhūtyā. When a devotee experiences the happiness
of bhakti, his ability to experience does not disappear,
as it does in the nirvikalpa-samādhi of the self-
satisfied souls.”



Verse 215

paraṁ samādhau sukham ekam asphuṭaṁ

vṛtter abhāvān mānaso na cātatam

vṛttau sphurad vastu tad eva bhāsate

’dhikaṁ yathaiva sphaṭikācale mahaḥ

param – furthermore; samādhau – in trance; sukham –
happiness; ekam – one; asphuṭam – indistinct; vṛtteḥ –
of action; abhāvāt – because of the absence; manasaḥ –
of the mind; na – not; ca – and; ātatam – illuminated;
vṛttau– in action; sphurat – clearly manifest; vastu –
entity; tat – that; eva – indeed; bhāsate – shines;
adhikam – greater; yathā – as; eva – indeed; sphaṭika –
of crystal; acale – in a mountain; mahaḥ – splendor.

During the state of samādhi, the functions of the mind
and senses of those (self-satisfied souls) cease, and so
the happiness they experience is without variety,
indistinct or void-like, and does not increase. However,
the same happiness that appears indistinct due to the
cessation of the mind manifests abundantly in the
completely pure consciousness of devotees, just as the
brilliance of sunlight reflected off a crystal mountain
is intensified. Therefore, the happiness experienced in
bhakti is far more intense than the void-like happiness
of samādhi.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: When persons who are self-satisfied
reach the state of deep trance (samādhi), their ego
(ahaṅkāra) as well as the functions of their internal
and external senses cease. Therefore, during samādhi,
due to the absence of personal experience, realization

                          320
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

of Brahman is also absent and the happiness of that
state also becomes correspondingly vague or void-like.
This thought is further clarified in this verse
beginning with parama.

The bhakti-śāstras say, “Since the mind is the root of
all the senses, when the function of the mind ceases
during samādhi, all the activities that depend on the
mind also disappear. When the mind and the sense
activities of the person who is experiencing samādhi
cease, only that which is called sukha (happiness)
remains. However, because at that time the mind is not
active, one does not have a comprehensive experience of
that happiness, and so it appears indistinct or void.

“In the ‘Prayers by the Personified Vedas,’ Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam

(10.87.29), it is stated: ‘viyata ivāpadasya tava śūnya-
tulāṁ dadhataḥ – O Bhagavān, in the trance of those who
are self-satisfied, You appear void-like the sky.’ ”

Śrī Gopa-kumāra may present the following argument: “In
samādhi, one indeed experiences Brahman, and it does not
follow that Brahman –

the basis of the entire universe and always brilliantly
self-manifest everywhere – would be experienced as
void.”

The bhakti-śāstras reply, “This may be true, yet, in
that case, experience of Brahman culminates in void due
to the lack of capacity to experience it. Otherwise,
since Brahman is brilliantly omnipresent, why don’t all
living beings, who are naturally related to its
omnipresence, perceive it and thus become liberated?

“Great personalities of ancient times state:

sadā sarvatrāste nanu vimalam ādyaṁ tava padaṁ

tathāpy ekam stokaṁ na hi bhava-taroḥ patram abhinat

kṣaṇam jihvā-grastaṁ tava tu bhagavan nāma nikhilaṁ

sa-mūlaṁ saṁsāraṁ kaṣati katarāt sevyam anayoḥ

Śrī Bhagavān is all-pervading in the form of Brahman.
Nevertheless, the aspect of Brahman cannot break off
even one small leaf from the tree of the living entity’s
material existence. However, if for even a moment the
name of Śrī Bhagavān appears on the tongue of the living
entity, that tree is destroyed at its root. So, between
Brahman and hari-nāma, which is more worthy of the
service of the jīva? This can be easily determined.

“Even though Brahman is all-pervading, those who exist
the state of self-satisfaction lack the functions of
their senses and so their material existence is not
destroyed. However, if the tongue just speaks the name
of Śrī Bhagavān, it destroys saṁsāra, or material
existence, at its very root. In this way, during the
process of bhakti, at every moment the capacity of the
internal and external senses increases millions and

                          321
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

millions times. With all the variegated faculties of the
senses, one naturally and continuously experiences
consummate happiness that is both variegated and
astonishing.” This is being explained with kaimutika-
nyāya (the logic of ‘even more so’).

“Without the function to perceive it, an object
(Brahman) appears indistinct or void, but that very
object manifests vividly when consciousness is awakened.
For example, sunshine radiates more brilliantly on a
crystal mountain than it does in the vault of the sky,
or ākāśa-maṇḍala. Similarly, while the happiness of
bhakti – serving the lotus feet of Śrī Bhagavān, who is
the very embodiment of bliss – is ever-fresh and
wonderful, the self-realization (ātma-tattva)
experienced in samādhi is empty. The happiness of bhakti
manifests in a more concentrated way through the
external and internal senses.

“By the influence of bhakti, when the wealth of divine
love of God manifests in a person, sometimes the
activities of a particular sense or of his entire body
may stop. The devotee sometimes almost forgets his own
limbs, and senses sometimes lose their ability to
perceive their objects. The reason is that when a sense
becomes agitated by the bliss of prema, it becomes
merged into some other sense of the inner consciousness,
known as antaḥ-karaṇa.

“According to functionality, the inner consciousness has
four divisions: mind (mana), intelligence (buddhi),
false ego (ahaṅkāra), and consciousness (citta).
Therefore, through the activities of the divisions of
the fourfold inner consciousness – sometimes in the
mind, sometimes in the intelligence, in the false ego,
or in the conscious-ness – one continues to taste
happiness. In the same way, happiness is also
experienced through the other senses, such as hearing,
sight, and speech. In addition, sometimes the functions
of two, three, or even more senses combine and cause the
experience of variegated, wonderful happiness. All the
senses are equal and nourish each other, but
nevertheless they are subsumed within the inner
consciousness. There can be no doubt about this because,
factually, those who have achieved prema have realized a
transcendental form, full of eternity, knowledge, and
bliss, and consequently their mind and the senses become
completely identified, or tādātmya, with that
transcendental form. Therefore, even though the mundane
material mind is minute, it nevertheless expands
according to the shape of the soul (ātmā) and thus
performs the activities of all the senses.”



Verse 216

itthaṁ samādhi-jān mokṣāt sukhaṁ bhaktau paraṁ mahat

tad-bhakta-vatsalasyāsya kṛpā-mādhurya-jṛmbhitam

ittham – thus; samādhi-jāt – as compared to that born
from trance; mokṣāt – from liberation; sukham – the
happiness; bhaktau – in devotional service; param –

                          322
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

superior; mahat – great; tat-bhakta-vatsalasya – who
loves His devotees; asya – His; kṛpā – of mercy;
mādhurya – sweetness; jṛmbhitam – the expanding.

Thus, by the influence of the sweet mercy of Śrī
Bhagavān, who is affectionate to His devotees, one
obtains abundant happiness in bhakti that is far
superior to the happiness of liberation achieved in
samādhi.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The personified devotional scriptures
conclude their analysis with this verse beginning with
ittham. They say, “Śrī Bhagavān, who is supremely
astonishing, incomprehensible, wonderful, and the
enjoyer of astonishing pastimes is bhakta-vatsala. This
means that He is so greatly affectionate to His devotees
that by their serving Him in love they receive supreme
happiness. That happiness, which is even greater than
the joy of the liberation experienced by one in samādhi,
manifests by the potency of the sweet mercy of Śrī
Bhagavān, who adores His devotees. Because both Śrī
Bhagavān and His devotees are embodiments of eternity,
knowledge, and bliss, they are one in nature (eka-rūpa),
so there is no possibility that varieties of difference
exist between them. Still, due to the Lord’s natural
affection for His devotees, He particularly desires to
give all of them the greatest joy, and to do that, He
manifests His great energy and distributes the wealth of
happiness.”



Verse 217

sadaika-rūpaṁ bahu-rūpam adbhutaṁ

vimukti-saukhyāt pratiyogi tat sukham

harer mahā-bhakti-vilāsa-mādhurī-

bharātmakaṁ tarkyam atad-vidāṁ na hi

sadā – eternally; eka-rūpam – one form; bahu-rūpam –
many forms; adbhutam – astonishing; vimukti – of
liberation; saukhyāt – than the happiness; prati-yogi –
opposite; tat – that; sukham – happiness; hareḥ – of Śrī
Hari; mahā-bhakti – of glorious devotional service;
vilāsa – pastimes; mādhurī – sweet; bhara – of profuse;
ātmakam – having the nature; tarkyam – subject to logic;
atat-vidām – for those unaware of the truth; na – not;
hi – indeed.

The happiness of liberation is always of one form, but
the happiness of bhakti, by the influence of the
opulence of Śrī Bhagavān, manifests in many forms and is
astonishing. The happiness of bhakti is the complete
opposite of the happiness of liberation, and its
variegated nature is filled with the sweetness of
playful pastimes performed with the highest loving
devotion to the enchanting Śrī Hari. Those who are
unacquainted with this essential truth of pure
devotional service cannot conceive of this happiness by
means of logic and reason.


                          323
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: In this verse beginning with sad, the
bhakti-śāstras indicate the characteristics and great
importance of the happiness of devotion, or bhakti-
sukha, which stands in contrast to the happiness of
liberation, or mukti-sukha. The happiness of devotional
service is extraordinary and completely indescribable.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra might ask, “How is this happiness
extraordinary?”

The personified bhakti-śāstras explain, “The bliss of
liberation is of the nature of the Supreme Brahman, and
it therefore always remains uniform, or eka-rūpa. But
the happiness of bhakti, by the potency of the opulence
of Śrī Bhagavān, is always variegated in nature, or
aneka-rūpa. Thus the happiness that arises from merging
into Brahman, which is known as sāyujya-mukti, is the
absolute antithesis of the happiness of bhakti. The
happiness of liberation, in reaching its ultimate limit,
is one in nature, complete in itself, and giving of
absolute contentment. The happiness of bhakti, on the
other hand, has unlimited forms and variegatedness and
never bestows satiation. Despite enjoying that
happiness, the ardent longing to enjoy one’s desired
object never goes away.

“In this way, bhakti-sukha is diametrically opposed to
mukti-sukha. It is of particular importance that
although the happiness of devotional service is always
also eka-rūpa, or one in nature, nevertheless it
increases at every moment in various forms (aneka-rūpa)
that are ever-fresh and ever-sweet.”

Gopa-kumāra might say, “Without doubt, this is a matter
of great wonder. But how does one obtain this
happiness?”

The bhakti-śāstras reply, “This variegated happiness of
bhakti is the sweetest form of the magnificence of the
pastimes of loving devotion that are so enchanting they
steal the heart. Know this to be the specific glory of
devotional service to Bhagavān.”

Gopa-kumāra might question, “Although the happiness of
bhakti is of one form, it has many forms. Although it is
boundless, it is ever-increasing. Do these statements
not contradict one another?”

They answer, “True. But those who are not familiar with
the essential truth of bhakti and who have not
experienced the bliss of the sweetness of the enjoyable
pastimes of devotion can never comprehend the variegated
nature of this happiness because it cannot be determined
by speculative arguments. Therefore, as it is said, ‘tad
hi-vijānanti tad-vidaḥ – only those who know this
understand it.’ Know that the sweetness of the pastimes
of devotion is very difficult to understand.”



Verse 218

sadaika-rūpo ’pi sa viṣṇur ātmanas


                          324
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

tathā sva-bhakter janayaty anu-kṣaṇam

vicitra-mādhurya-śataṁ navaṁ navaṁ

tayā sva-śaktyetara-durvitarkyayā

sadā – always; eka-rūpaḥ – one form; api – although; saḥ
– He; viṣṇuḥ – Śrī Viṣṇu; ātmanaḥ – of the self; tathā –
so; sva-bhakteḥ – through His devotional service;
janayati – creates; anu-kṣaṇam – at every moment;
vicitra – wonderful; mādhurya – sweetness; śatam –
hundreds; navam – newer; navam – and newer; tayā – by
that;

sva-śaktyā – His own potency; itara – of others;
durvitarkayā –

beyond the power of logic.

Although sac-cid-ānanda Śrī Viṣṇu is always situated in
one form, by the potency of His śakti, at every moment
He manifests Himself and His bhakti in hundreds of ever-
fresh varieties of sweetness. This variegatedness is
inconceivable for non-devotees, and therefore they
cannot comprehend it.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might ask, “The object
of realization, Śrī Bhagavān, who is the personification
of the Supreme Brahman and the embodiment of eternity,
knowledge, and bliss, is always present in one form. His
devotional service (bhakti), His devotees (bhaktas) and
their activities (vṛttis) correspond to Him. How can it
be imagined, then, that they would be manifest in so
many varieties of forms?” This doubt is resolved in
three verses, beginning here with sad.

The bhakti-śāstras say, “By the influence of His power,
or śakti, at every moment, Śrī Bhagavān manifests
hundreds upon hundreds of

ever-fresh varieties of sweetness. How does He do this?
He does it in a manner that is different from the way
material variegatedness is mani-fest, and in a way that
is difficult for anyone but devotees to understand.
Thus, the activities performed by the Lord are
incomprehensible.”



Verse 219

pāra-brāhmyaṁ madhura-madhuraṁ pārameśyaṁ ca tad vai

bhakteṣv eṣa pravara-karuṇā-prānta-sīmā-prakāśaḥ

teṣāṁ caiṣā niviḍa-madhurānanda-pūrānubhūter

antyāvasthā-prakṛtir uditā dhik-kṛta-brāhma-saukhyā

pāra-brāhmyam – the Supreme Divinity; madhura-madhuram –
sweeter than the sweetest; pārama-īśyam – supremely fit
to be accepted as Lord; ca – also; tat – that; vai –
indeed; bhakteṣu – amongst the devotees; eṣaḥ – He;
pravara – excellent; karuṇā – of mercy; prānta-sīmā –

                             325
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

the last limit; prakāśaḥ – manifesting; teṣām – for
them; ca – also; eṣaḥ – He; niviḍa – intense; madhura –
of sweetness; ānanda – of bliss; pūra – as a flood;
anubhūteḥ – which is perceived; antya-avasthā – of the
ultimate situation; prakṛtiḥ – nature; uditā – arisen;
dhik-kṛta – reproaches; brāhma-saukhyā – the happiness
of the spiritual effulgence.

That Parabrahman possesses supreme opulence that is
sweeter than the sweetest. His manifesting the ultimate
limit of extreme compassion towards His devotees is also
exceedingly sweet. The concentrated ecstasy that His
devotees experience – realization of the highest degree
– is also so extremely sweet that it even reproaches the
happiness of Brahman realization.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: To explain the difference between
brahma-tattva, the truth about impersonal Brahman, and
bhagavat-tattva, the truth about the Supreme Personality
of Godhead; between liberation and devotion; and between
a liberated person and a devotee of the Lord, the
bhakti-śāstras speak this verse beginning with pāra.

They say, “The word vai indicates certainty. It is the
very nature of the Parabrahman that He manifests
hundreds of ever-fresh varieties of charming beauty and
sweetness at every moment. Similarly, the nature of the
Lord as Parameśvara, the Supreme Controller, is also to
be sweeter than the sweetest. His form (rūpa), pastimes
of transcendental enjoyment (vilāsa), and opulence
(vaibhava), which are confidential for all, are the
essence of sweetness. The ultimate limit of the most
excellent compassion, which He manifests towards His
devotees, is similarly sweet. And the concentrated sweet
ecstasy that all His devotees experience to the highest
degree is also supremely sweet.”

Śrī Gopa-kumāra might ask, “What is the nature of that
experience of ecstasy?”

The personified bhakti-śāstras reply, “It even
repudiates the bliss of Brahman realization.”



Verse 220

sva-bhaktānāṁ tat-tad-vividha-madhurānanda-laharī-

sadā-sampatty-arthaṁ bahutara-viśeṣaṁ vitanute

yathā svasmiṁs tat-tat-prakṛti-rahite ’pi dhruva-taraṁ

tathā teṣāṁ citrākhila-karaṇa-vṛtty-ādi-vibhavam

sva-bhaktānām – of His devotees; tat-tat – of His
various pastimes; vividha – various; madhura –
sweetness; ānanda – of bliss; laharī – waves; sadā –
eternally; sampatti – of bringing forth; artham – for
the purpose; bahu-tara – manifold; viśeṣam –
variegatedness; vitanute – manifests; yathā – as;
svasmin – Himself; tat-tat-prakṛti – the various aspects
of material nature; rahite – free from; api – even;
dhruva-taram – very firmly established; tathā – so;

                          326
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

teṣām – for them; citra – wonderful; akhila-karaṇa – of
all the senses; vṛtti – functions (such as śravaṇa,
kīrtana, etc.); ādi – beginning with; vibhavam – the
development

Śrī Bhagavān, being naturally free of all material
characteristics, is not limited by time, place, and so
on, and so He manifests countless incarnations that are
consummately eternal. Similarly, to give the experience
of varieties of sweet waves of bliss to all His
devotees, He manifests countless amazing features, such
as the devotional processes of hearing and chanting.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Gopa-kumāra might ask, “Why does Śrī
Bhagavān reveal the ultimate limit of His mercy?” To
address this, in this verse beginning with sva-
bhaktānām, the bhakti-śāstras describe the intention of
the Lord and use examples to show how He manifests
Himself to His devotees.

They say, “Although the totally indescribable Śrī
Bhagavān always has one form, still, not bound by time
and place, He manifests diverse incarnations and reveals
His special qualities. In the same way, to perpetually
establish varieties of waves of bliss among His
devotees, the Lord expands His many special features,
such as hearing (śravaṇa), devotional chanting
(kīrtana), and other processes of bhakti.

“The purport of this is that the devotees, being
embodiments of eternity, knowledge, and bliss, are all
one in kind, or eka-rūpa. But still, differences are
seen among them because they possess countless
distinctive personal attributes, such as maintaining
special attachment for certain aspects of devotion,
which include hearing, singing, remembering (smaraṇa),
or offering obeisances (vandana). What is the nature of
those distinctive attributes? They are perfectly
eternal: beginningless and endless. The functions of the
various devotees’ senses as well as the expanding and
mystic capabilities of those sense functions are also
eternal.” Here the word ādi, in reference to the many
functions of the senses, indicates form, luster,
transcendental sportive pastimes, and so on.

Gopa-kumāra might question, “As fire is naturally hot
and can never be cool, how can something that is
perpetually one in nature manifest an opposite nature of
having multiple forms?”

The bhakti-śāstras explain this with an example, saying,
“Being naturally free from various material attributes
and not limited by time, place, and so on, Śrī Bhagavān
manifests a multitude of special features that are
supremely eternal. Alternatively, it may be understood
that while the Lord in His form of the Supreme Brahman
is devoid of variegated qualities, in His form of
Supersoul (Paramātmā), He manifests the various
incarnations and living beings that are His own
fragmental portions (aṁśas). These are His various
distinctive features.

“Similarly, Śrī Bhagavān creates a multiplicity of
wonderfully sweet devotional activities for His

                          327
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

devotees, such as hearing, chanting, seeing the Deity
form, conversing, embracing, and other aspects of
devotional service. Then, in every single aspect in each
of these forms of bhakti, at every moment, and in ever-
fresh distinctive forms, He manifests in the heart of
every devotee.”

(For instance, just as the process of recitation, or
kīrtana, manifested itself in Śrī Śukadeva’s heart and
the act of hearing, or śravaṇa, became manifest in Śrī
Parīkṣit’s, so the kalpa-latā, the desire vine, of
loving affection assumes a variety of forms in the
hearts of devotees. Unlimited diversity is found in the
infinite divisions of bhakti.)

“As stated, because devotees are embodiments of
knowledge, bliss, and eternity, they are always one in
nature. However, Śrī Bhagavān desires that His devotees
taste the unlimited sweetness of ecstatic moods (bhāvas)
– happiness that is far superior to the happiness of
Brahman realization – and so He manifests newer and
newer varieties of happiness with the help of His
special potency. Accordingly, the external and internal
senses of the devotees manifest variegatedness and
experience hundreds of varieties of great joy. Thus, it
is established that oneness (abheda) is present in
difference (bheda), and difference is present in
oneness. It is also established that the happiness of
liberation, or mokṣa-sukha, is paltry, and the happiness
of devotion, or bhakti-sukha, is supremely excellent and
unlimited.”



Verse 221

nityaiśvaryo nitya-nānā-viśeṣo

nitya-śrīko nitya-bhṛtya-prasaṅgaḥ

nityopāstir nitya-loke ’vatu tvāṁ

nityādvaita-brahma-rūpo ’pi kṛṣṇaḥ

nitya-aiśvaryaḥ – eternal opulence; nitya – eternal;
nānā-viśeṣaḥ – many varieties; nitya-śrīkaḥ – who is
eternally absorbed in sporting pastimes with Śrī Lakṣmī;
nitya-bhṛtya – of His eternal servants; prasaṅgaḥ –
company; nitya-upāstiḥ – eternal worship; nitya-loke –
in the eternal realm; avatu – may He protect; tvām –
you; nitya-advaita – eternally non-dual; brahma-rūpaḥ –
the form of Brahman; api – although; kṛṣṇaḥ – Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

(O Gopa-kumāra!) May that Śrī Kṛṣṇa who, in spite of
eternally being the concentrated essence of non-dual
Brahman, still possesses a divine form that is eternally
full of opulence; has all varieties of distinctive
characteristics eternally present within Himself; is
eternally absorbed in sportive pastimes with Śrī
(Lakṣmī); eternally associates with His servants in an
excellent manner; and whose worship and abode are also
eternal – may that Śrī Kṛṣṇa protect you from all the
dangers of desiring liberation.


                          328
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Having explained the subject matter
Śrī Gopa-kumāra had desired to know in his inquiries,
the personified bhakti-śāstras now conclude this
chapter. The personified Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and other
scriptures, having sung the glories of loving devotion
to Bhagavān, speak this verse beginning with nitya to
bless Gopa-kumāra with great happiness.

They say, “The transcendental body, or śrī-murti, of Śrī
Bhagavān is the eternal, non-dual, nondifferentiated
(advaita) Brahman. Śrī Bhagavān is the concentrated
essence or embodiment of the Supreme Brahman, but at the
same time, He is eternally full of opulent qualities. He
eternally possesses a host of extraordinary features
exemplified by a multitude of attributes, such as beauty
(saundarya), splendor (kānti), sweetness (mādhurya),
qualities (guṇa), and pastimes (līlā). Because His
Supreme Lordship is perpetually immutable, these
qualities, pastimes and so on are eternally present in
Him; His consort Śrī Lakṣmī eternally enjoys (vilāsa) on
His chest; and He remains eternally with His servitors.

“The term nitya-bhṛtya-prasaṅgaḥ means that the Lord
forever remains in the company of His eternal
associates, the nitya-pārṣadas. This refers not only to
the Lord’s eternal associates of Vaikuṇṭha, but also to
the sādhaka-bhaktas, those devotees in the practicing
stage of Kṛṣṇa consciousness. This idea is also found in
Śrī Bhagavad-gīta (9.31): ‘kaunteya pratijānīhi na me
bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati – O Arjuna! Declare it boldly that My
devotee never perishes.’ These words of Śrī Bhagavān
establish that He is eternally merciful to all His
devotees. Because there is never a fear that they will
fall down from bhakti, the eternality of the devotees
even in the stage of practice is established.

“In the worship of Śrī Bhagavān, śravaṇa (hearing),
kīrtana

(chanting), and the other forms of bhakti are also
eternal. The adjective nitya upāsti, meaning ‘eternal
worship,’ indicates that worship of the Lord through
hearing, chanting, etc. is not mundane. Rather, only by
the mercy of the Lord do these activities manifest in
the functions of material senses.” This topic shall be
thoroughly described in the future.

The bhakti-śāstras conclude, “May that Bhagavān Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, whose abode known as Śrī Vaikuṇṭha is also
eternal, protect you from obstacles such as the desire
for liberation (mukti).”



Verse 222

mahā-rase ’smin na budhaiḥ prayujyate

su-komale karkaśa-tarka-kaṇṭakam

tathāpi nirvāṇa-rata-pravṛttaye

navīna-bhakta-pramude pradarśitam


                          329
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

mahā-rase – to the great mellow; asmin – this; na – not;
budhaiḥ – by the wise; prayujyate – should be applied;
su-komale – very soft; karkaśa-tarka – of harsh logic;
kaṇṭakam – thorns; tathā api – how-

ever; nirvāṇa – to impersonal liberation; rata – for
attachment; pravṛttaye – who have an inclination;
navīna-bhakta – to the new devotees; pramude – for the
delight; pradarśitam – shown (logic).

Learned scholars do not apply sharp, thorn-like logic to
the gentle, most excellent mellow of loving service to
Bhagavān. However, because neophyte devotees are busy
endeavoring for liberation from material suffering, to
remove this defect of desire for liberation and to grant
them happiness, we have simply used thorn-like logic.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The bhakti-śāstras say, “Logical
arguments are categorized in four ways: pratyakṣa, or
direct understanding; anumāna, or hypothetical
understanding; aitihya, or historical understanding; and
śabda, or understanding through sound. Although within
these categories, there are many brilliant arguments
that establish bhakti to be more glorious than
liberation, we have used them sparingly. This is because
great souls who understand the conclusive truth of that
supremely sweet nectar (mahā-rasa) of devotion to
Bhagavān know that bhakti is supersoft and gentle in
nature, and therefore unfit for the use of the hard
thorn of logical argument.”

Śrī Gopa-kumāra might ask, “Why is that?”

“It is not only great foolishness to use sharp, thorn-
like logical arguments on this very gentle topic, but
according to the logic of rasa-kaṇṭakatā (a thorn in
sweet nectar), they also diminish the happiness of
bhakti. Nevertheless, logic has been sparingly used.”

“Why?”

“Because neophyte practitioners, whose discrimination is
immature, may have some attachment for the liberation of
merging into oneness (sāyujya-mukti), to obtain relief
from the suffering of material existence (nirvāṇa).
Without hearing strong logical arguments, they will not
be able to give up that desire, and unless they give it
up, they will not be able to enter the path of bhakti.
Therefore, following the logic of kaṇṭaka kaṇṭakenaiva
(removing one thorn with another), the thorn of incisive
logic has been used to remove the thorn of impersonal
liberation from the hearts of neophyte devotees. This
thorn of logic has also been used to give incalculable
joy to all new devotees whose faith is not yet firm.
Hearing how bhakti is more glorious than liberation will
totally uproot the thicket of thorns of doubt from their
hearts and enable boundless, resplendent joy to manifest
in their minds, causing the treasure of their devotion
(bhakti-sampatti) to continuously increase.

“Significantly, in the Nyāya texts that deal with
dualism, or dvaita, there are many examples of hard-
hitting logical analyses in the four categories
mentioned above. Scriptures in relation to Vedānta that

                          330
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

are devoted to the philosophy of non-dualism (advaita)
do not contain such strong logical arguments, but rather
give prominence to evidence based on personal experience
and only contain gentle (komala) logical reasoning. The
bhakti scriptures (bhakti-śāstras), on the other hand,
contain even softer and gentler (su-komala), as well as
fewer, logical arguments than the monistic Vedānta
scriptures.

“No sooner is the mind immersed in all the logical
arguments of the followers of Nyāya and monism than it
becomes bewildered, causing an obstacle in the complete
ripening of the mellow of bhakti. Therefore, the wise
sparingly use very tender logic to expound the
philosophic principles of bhakti.”



Verses 223–224

bhavāṁs tu yadi mokṣasya tucchatvānubhavena hi

viśuddha-bhagavad-bhakti-niṣṭhā-sampattim icchati

tadā nijaṁ mahā-mantraṁ tam eva bhajatāṁ param

atrāpīdaṁ mahā-gūḍhaṁ śṛṇotu hṛdayaṅ-gamam

bhavān – you; tu – indeed; yadi – if; mokṣasya – of
liberation; tucchatva – the insignificant nature;
anubhavena – by experiencing; hi – indeed; viśuddha –
fully pure; bhagavat-bhakti – in devotion to the all-
opulent Lord; niṣṭhā– of firm faith; sampattim – the
opulence; icchati – you desire; tadā – then; nijam –
own; mahā-mantram – great transcendental sound
vibration; tam – that; eva – indeed; bhajatām – just
worship; param – hereafter; atra – here; api – also;
idam – this; mahā – very; gūḍham – confidential; śṛṇotu
– you should hear; hṛdayam-gamam – captivating, that
which touches the heart.

(O Gopa-kumāra!) If you realize the insignificance of
liberation and desire the wealth of firm faith in
supremely pure devotion to Bhagavān, then simply chant
your mahā-mantra with great loving affection. Hear this
most confidential secret and hold it in your heart:

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The personified bhakti-śāstras say,
“Thus, many fortunate people have abandoned liberation,
realizing it to be worthless and insignificant, and have
become devoted to pure devotional service of the Lord,
or śuddha-bhakti. If you also experience the
insignificance of liberation and desire to achieve firm
faith in devotion to Bhagavān (bhagavad-bhakti), which
is characterized by pure love –

or in other words, if you desire the ultimate limit of
unalloyed devotion and the treasure of divine love
(prema) – then simply chant the transcendental mantra
(mahā-mantra) that you worship. This great mantra has
been received through exalted persons and it can fulfill
all your desires.

“The purport of this is that although the conduct and

                          331
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

instructions of great personalities are always
authoritative, unless one has personal experience, he
can neither thoroughly realize the truth they are
imparting, nor can he develop the fixed determination
required to abandon his attachment to inferior objects,
nor can he develop firm faith in prema-bhakti with
single-minded focus. Therefore, to receive that
experience, you should go to the abode of liberation and
chant your mantra with faith. By doing this, your mantra
will be perfected.

“Now, to realize the truth about liberation, you should
hold this captivating and supremely confidential secret
in your heart. Even though this truth is related to
liberation, it will not be unpleasant for someone like
you who is devoted to bhakti.”



Verse 225

brahmāṇḍāt koṭi-pāñcāśad-yojana-pramitād bahiḥ

yathottaraṁ daśa-guṇāny aṣṭāv āvaraṇāni hi

brahma-aṇḍāt – of the universe; koṭi-pañcāśat – five
hundred million;

yojana – a distance of eight miles; pramitāt – in
measurement; bahiḥ – outside; yathā – as; uttaram –
higher; daśa – by ten; guṇāni – multiplied; aṣṭau –
eight; āvaraṇāni – coverings; hi – indeed.

This universe is five hundred million yojanas in
diameter and is surrounded by eight coverings. Each
covering is ten times larger than the previous one.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: What is the great secret regarding the
truth of liberation? The bhakti-śāstras speak five
verses, beginning here with brahmāṇḍāt to explain this.
They say, “This universe is surrounded by eight causal
layers: earth, water, fire, air, sky, false ego, mahat-
tattva (the total material energy), and pradhāna (the
sum total manifestation of the three modes of material
nature). Beyond these eight causal layers is the abode
of liberation, or mukti-pada.”

Some people regard the earth layer to be a covering that
is part of the universe, and so imagine that there are
seven outer coverings. However, this is not logical. As
just stated, the earth layer should be ten times bigger
than the brahmāṇḍa. Therefore, if the brahmāṇḍa and the
earth layer were one, and both of them measure 500
million yojanas, then this calculation would be
contradictory. Furthermore, if they are one, then how
can the transformation of the primordial element earth
[in the earth layer] become the cause of the brahmāṇḍa?



Verse 226

tāny atikramya labhyeta tan nirvāṇa-padaṁ dhruvam


                          332
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

mahā-kāla-purākhyaṁ yat kārya-kāraṇa-kālanāt

tāni – them; atikramya – crossing; labhyeta – it can be
attained; tat – that; nirvāṇa-padam – the abode of
extinguishing the self, impersonal liberation; dhruvam –
factually; mahā-kāla-pura-ākhyam – named the region of
Great Time; yat – because; kārya – of effect; kāraṇa –
of cause; kālanāt – because of the absence.

After crossing those eight layers, one reaches that
unchanging realm of liberation. There, material causes
and effects disappear, and therefore, it is also called
Mahākāla-pura, the abode of the great time factor.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The bhakti-śāstras say, “After
crossing those eight coverings, one reaches the abode of
liberation known as sāyujya, or mukti-pada. The
scriptures tell the famous story of Arjuna going there
with Śrī Bhagavān to retrieve the son of the Dvārakā
brāhmaṇa. Although from the spiritual perspective,
liberation is not restricted to any particular place or
by any boundary, because the abode of liberation is
beyond material existence, or prapañca, it is assumed to
be outside the eight coverings.” This same conclusion
should be applied to all the places Gopa-kumāra will
later visit.

“As this abode of liberation is beyond material
existence, it is imperishable and stable. This realm is
known as Mahākāla-pura, the abode of the great time
factor. The material realm consists of cause (kāraṇa)
and effect (kārya), which are respectively, subtle and
gross. It can be understood that the five basic elements
consitute cause, and the body and sense organs
constitute effect. As cause and effect are vanquished,
or extinguished, in the abode of liberation, it is known
as Mahākāla-pura.”



Verse 227

tat-svarūpam anirvācyaṁ kathañcid varṇyate budhaiḥ

sākāraṁ ca nirākāraṁ yathā-maty-anusārataḥ

tat-svarūpam – that form; anirvācyam – indescribable;
kathañcit – sometimes; varṇyate – is described; budhaiḥ
– by the learned; sa-ākāram – with form; ca – and; nir-
ākāram – without form; yathā-mati – as understood;
anusārataḥ – in accordance with.

The true nature of the lord of Mahākāla is beyond words
to describe, but scholars nevertheless describe Him to
some degree. According to their personal views, some
portray Him as possessing form and others describe Him
as formless.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The bhakti-śāstras say, “Words cannot
do justice to the real nature of the lord of Mahākāla.
It is said, ‘na śītaṁ na coṣṇaṁ suvarṇāvadātaṁ prasannaṁ
sadānanda-saṁit-svarūpam – He is neither hot nor cold,
but He is effulgent like gold, the ever-satisfied Self
with an eternally blissful, cognizant form.’ His actual

                          333
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

identity cannot be understood merely by empirical
knowledge (jñāna), and therefore, some learned persons
who have perceived Him by their intelligence, describe
Him as having a form. An example of this is found in the
Hari-vaṁśa, wherein Arjuna says: “Beyond the dense
darkness, I see the shining, brilliant form of that
great Personality. He is situated in one place but His
effulgence spreads throughout all the planets.” Others
describe the abode of liberation as formless. Here the
word yathā-mati, meaning ‘according to their
intelligence,’ implies that, although Mahākāla-puruṣa
has a personal form, He appears formless to persons
absorbed in dry knowledge. However, Bhagavān’s devotees
have ascertained His real identity as possessing a
form.”



Verse 228

bhagavat-sevakais tatra gataiś ca svecchayā param

hṛdy ākāraṁ ghanī-bhūtaṁ brahma-rūpaṁ tad īkṣyate

bhagavat – of the Lord; sevakaiḥ – by the servants;
tatra – there; gataiḥ – having gone; ca – also; sva-
icchayā – by their own desire; param – thereafter; hṛdi
– that is pleasing to their heart; ākāram – the form;
ghanī-bhūtam – condensed; brahma-rūpam – form of
Brahman; tat – that; īkṣyate – is seen.

If sometimes, servants of Bhagavān go to the abode of
liberation by their own volition, then, according to
their heart’s sentiments, they see that abode of
liberation as the embodiment of condensed Brahman, or
Absolute Truth.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: This verse beginning with bhagavat
describes the Personality of Mahākāla as possessing a
definite form. The bhakti-śāstras say, “The servants of
Bhagavān might go to the abode of libera-tion, but there
they directly experience that abode as having a
beautiful form according to the proclivity of their
hearts. Why do they go to Mahākāla-pura? They go there
only out of their independent desire, because there is
no other reason to go there.” Or, it may be said, “In
order to observe, they go there of their own volition
and have darśana of the Lord who resides there as the
personification of concentrated Brahman.”



Verse 229

atas tatrāpi bhavato dīrgha-vāñchā-mahā-phalam

sākṣāt sampatsyate svīya-mahā-mantra-prabhāvataḥ

ataḥ – thereafter; tatra – there; api – also; bhavataḥ –
on account of your; dīrgha – long; vāñchā – of the
desire; mahā – great; phalam – result; sākṣāt –
directly; sampatsyate – will be attained; svīya – your
own; mahā-mantra – of the great transcendental sound
vibration; prabhāvataḥ – by the power.

                          334
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


Therefore, by the potency of your exalted mantra, your
long-cherished desire to obtain that great wealth will
be directly fulfilled.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The bhakti-śāstras say, “You have
desired to see the Lord for a long time, and you will
receive that great result.”

Śrī Gopa-kumāra might object, “I do not have a proper
service attitude toward Śrī Bhagavān, so how can I
receive His darśana?”

The bhakti-śāstras reply, “You will obtain that exalted
fruit of your desires just by the power of chanting Śrī
Madana-gopāla-deva’s ten-syllable mantra.”



Verse 230

bahu-kāla-vilambaṁ ca bhavān nāpekṣate ’tra cet

tadā śrī-mathurāyās tāṁ vraja-bhūmiṁ nijāṁ vraja

bahu-kāla-vilambam – a long time; ca – also; bhavān –
you; na – not; apekṣate – because of desiring; atra –
here; cet – if; tadā – then; śrī-mathurāyāḥ – of Śrī
Mathurā; tām – that; vraja-bhūmim – land of Vraja; nijām
– your very own; vraja – go.

If you do not want a long delay in receiving that
result, then you should immediately return to your land
of Vraja in Śrī Mathurā-maṇḍala.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The personified devotional scriptures
say, “If you are eager to reach that abode of liberation
quickly, go right away to Vraja in Śrī Mathurā to engage
in your devotional practices. That land of Vraja is
supremely enchanting, and because of your relationship
with it, you have become known as most fortunate. The
reason for returning to Vraja-bhūmi right now is that at
the time of the cosmic annihilation, or mahā-pralaya,
which takes place at the end of the two parārdhas (311
trillion, 40 billion years) of Brahmā’s – meaning your –
lifespan, those residents who are still attached to
sense gratification will have to return to the lower
planets, but those who are detached will become
liberated along with Brahmā. If you wait for this, it
will take you a long time to attain liberation. In other
words, you can endeavor to obtain liberation while in
this post of Brahmā, but you will have to enjoy the vast
opulences of Brahmaloka for all that time. Therefore,
you should quickly return to that playground of
Bhagavān, Śrī Vṛndāvana and Govardhana, which is so very
dear to you and which fulfills unlimited types of
desires.”



Verse 231

śrī-gopa-kumāra uvāca


                          335
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

teṣām etair vacobhir me bhakti-vṛddhiṁ gatā prabhau

vicāraś caiṣa hṛdaye ’jani māthura-bhūsura

śrī-gopa-kumāraḥ uvāca – Śrī Gopa-kumāra said; teṣām –
of them; etaiḥ – with these; vacobhiḥ – words; me – of
me; bhakti – in devotion; vṛddhim – increased; gatā –
became; prabhau – to the Lord; vicāraḥ – a thought; ca –
also; eṣaḥ – this; hṛdaye – in the heart; ajani –
manifested; māthura-bhūsura – O Brahman-realized person
from Mathurā.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra said: After hearing these words of the
Vedas and Purāṇas, my devotion for Śrī Bhagavān
increased even more. O Mathurā brāhmaṇa, then the
following thought arose in my heart.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “My devotion to
the Lord deepened even more because of hearing the words
of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and all the other scriptures that
establish the glories of service to Bhagavān.”



Verse 232

bhaktir yasyedṛśī so ’tra sākṣāt prāpto mayā pitā

taṁ parityajya gantavyam anyatra bata kiṁ kṛte

bhaktiḥ – devotion; yasya – for whom; īdṛśī – such; saḥ
– He; atra – here; sākṣāt – before my eyes; prāptaḥ –
attained; mayā – by me; pitā – father; tam – Him;
parityajya – abandoning; gantavyam – I should go;
anyatra – elsewhere; bata – alas!; kim – what?; kṛte –
what is the purpose?.

“All scriptures directly prescribe this type of devotion
unto the Lord. However, I have obtained Him directly as
my father, so why should I abandon Him and go
elsewhere?”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “However, the
thought came to me, ‘All the scriptures prescribe the
performance of such bhakti unto Śrī Bhagavān. Moreover,
the ineffable, extraordinarily blissful liberation is
His maidservant. But, I have obtained that Lord as my
father, and even more, He indulges me with the affection
of a loving father. Alas! Why should I give Him up and
go somewhere else?’ ”



Verse 233

ittham udvigna-cittaṁ māṁ bhagavān sa kṛpākaraḥ

sarvāntar ātma-vṛtti-jñaḥ samādiśad idaṁ svayam

ittham – thus; udvigna – agitated; cittam – at heart;
mām – to me; bhagavān – the Lord; saḥ – He; kṛpā-karaḥ –
merciful, a mine of compassion; sarva-antaḥ – within all
beings; ātma-vṛtti – the workings of the minds; jñaḥ –
knowing; samādiśat – He instructed; idam – this; svayam

                          336
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

– personally.

Thinking thus, I became very perturbed. However,
Bhagavān, the indwelling Supersoul of all the living
beings, knows what takes place in everyone’s heart. Out
of mercy, He personally instructed me.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “In this way,
even though I was very eager to go to the land of Vraja
in the district of Śrī Mathurā, the idea of abandoning
Śrī Bhagavān’s association made me very disturbed.
However, Śrī Mahā-puruṣa, the presiding Deity of
Brahmaloka, knows the internal feelings of all living
beings. Thus, He personally instructed me, speaking
directly to me with His own divine mouth.”



Verse 234

śrī-bhagavān uvāca

nija-priyatamāṁ yāhi māthurīṁ tāṁ vraja-kṣitim

tat-tan-mat-parama-krīḍā-sthaly-āvali-vibhūṣitām

śrī-bhagavān uvāca – the Supreme Lord said; nija-priya-
tamām – most dear to Me; yāhi – go; māthurīm – the land
of Mathurā; tām – that; vraja-kṣitim – to the land of
Vraja; tat-tat – various; mat-parama-krīḍā – connected
with My most exalted pleasure-pastimes; sthalī-āvali –
by the multitude of places; vibhūṣitām – adorned.

Śrī Bhagavān said: You should go the land of Vraja in
Mathurā, which is very dear to Me and which is decorated
with My excellent pastime places.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The Mathurā brāhmaṇa may ask, “What
instruction did Śrī Bhagavān give?”

The Lord’s instructions are narrated in six verses,
beginning here with nija-priyatamām. Śrī Bhagavān says,
“You should go to that most indescribable and celebrated
land of Vraja in Mathurā, which is decorated with the
excellent pastime places of the rāsa dance and other
sweet līlās.” This proves that Vraja-bhūmi is far
superior even to Brahmaloka.



Verse 235

yasyāṁ śrī-brahmaṇāpy ātma-tṛṇa-janmābhiyācyate

parivṛtte ’pi yā dīrgha-kāle rājati tādṛśī

yasyām – where; śrī-brahmaṇā – by Śrī Brahmā; api –
even; ātma – for himself; tṛṇa – as a grass plant; janma
– for a birth; abhiyācyate –

abjectly begged; parivṛtte – transpired; api – although;
yā – which; dīrgha-kāle – a long time; rājati – it
shines; tādṛśī – in the same way.


                          337
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

Śrī Brahmā also prayed to take birth in that land of
Vraja as a blade of grass. Although that happened a long
time ago, the land of Vraja is still just as beautiful
now as it was then.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might ask Śrī
Bhagavān, “I am the head of the universe (in the post of
Brahmā), and I am engaged directly in Your service. So,
why should I go somewhere else, giving up all of this?”

Śrī Bhagavān replies, “That’s true, but a special bliss
comes in receiving My darśana in a particular place, and
so, it is right for you to go to Vraja-bhūmi. That’s why
Śrī Brahmā himself also prayed to take birth in Vraja as
a blade of grass. Thus, it is more beneficial to stay in
Vraja than to be the ruler of the universe.”

Gopa-kumāra might raise another doubt, “I am going to
Vraja after an extended absence. It may be that the
beauty of Vraja-bhūmi has been lost with the passing of
time and it may not appear pleasing to the mind now.”

Śrī Bhagavān replies, “Do not fear. A long time has
elapsed but the land of Vraja is still the same as
before. She is just as beautiful as she was in the past.
The reason is that Vraja is free from the decay of time,
which proves that Vraja is even superior to Brahmaloka.”




Verse 236


tatra mat-parama-preṣṭhaṁ lapsyase sva-guruṁ punaḥ

sarvaṁ tasyaiva kṛpayā nitarāṁ jñāsyasi svayam

tatra – there; mat-parama-preṣṭham – most dear to Me;
lapsyase – you will attain; sva-gurum – your spiritual
preceptor; punaḥ – again; sarvam – all; tasya – his; eva
– indeed; kṛpayā – by mercy; nitarām – fully; jñāsyasi –
you will understand; svayam – spontaneously.

In that land of Vraja, you will again meet your
gurudeva, who is very dear to Me. By his mercy, you will
become conversant with all fundamental truths.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might say to Śrī
Bhagavān, “You are present here in person and are
directly instructing me on my innumerable duties. By
Your mercy, I am able to execute them. But in Vraja I
will have no such shelter.” Therefore, Śrī Bhagavān
speaks this verse beginning with tatra.

He says, “In that land of Vraja, you will again meet
your gurudeva, who is very dear to Me. By his mercy, you
will automatically become familiar with all essential
truths, or tattvas.” Śrī Bhagavān has used the word
parama-preṣṭha, meaning ‘dearest,’ to indicate that His
devotees are more glorious than Himself. He is saying,
“You will learn more of the truth through the mercy of
your gurudeva than through Me.” Three words: sarvam, or

                          338
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

all; nitarām, or fullness; and svayam, or automatically,
reveal the superiority of the mercy of guru.



Verse 237

mahā-kāla-pure samyag mām eva drakṣyasi drutam

tatrāpi paramānandaṁ prāpsyasi sva-manoramam

mahā-kāla-pure – in the region of Great Time; samyak –
completely; mām – Me; eva – certainly; drakṣyasi – you
will see; drutam – soon; tatra api – in that very place;
parama-ānandam – transcendental bliss; prāpsyasi – you
will attain; sva-manaḥ-ramam – your own desire.

Then, very soon, you will again see Me in Mahākāla-pura,
where you will obtain an abundance of supreme bliss that
will fulfill the desires of your heart.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Bhagavān says, “After that, very
soon you will reach Mahākāla-pura, the abode of
liberation. There, you will have darśana of a form that
is nondifferent from Me.”

Śrī Gopa-kumāra might say, “If there is no particular
difference between Your form here (in Brahmaloka) and
Your form there (in Mahākāla-pura), why should I take
the trouble to go there?”

Bhagavān replies, “Although one can perceive the glories
of that abode excellently from here, nevertheless you
should go there and receive complete darśana.
Furthermore, in that abode of liberation, you will
attain an excellent happiness, much greater than what is
found here, that will deeply satisfy your heart.”



Verse 238

mat-prasāda-prabhāveṇa yathā-kāmam itas tataḥ

bhramitvā paramāścarya-śatāny anubhaviṣyasi

mat – My; prasāda – of mercy; prabhāveṇa – by the power;
yathā-

kāmam – at your wish; itaḥ tataḥ – here and there;
bhramitvā – wandering; parama-āścarya – of wonders;
śatāni – hundreds; anubhaviṣyasi – you will experience.

By the influence of My mercy, you will freely wander
here and there, experiencing hundreds of the most
glorious wonders.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might object to Śrī
Bhagavān, “My ultimate desire is to enjoy wonderful
pastimes with You in Śrī Vṛndāvana. This is the only
thing that pleases me.”

Śrī Bhagavān replies, “Truly, you will indeed obtain
that happiness at the appropriate time. Now, by My

                          339
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

mercy, you should freely wander about as you desire.
Crossing the eight layers of the brahmāṇḍa, travel to
the abode of liberation, Śrī Vaikuṇṭha, and beyond, and
experience hundreds of marvelous wonders.”



Verse 239

kālena kiyatā putra paripūrṇākhilārthakaḥ

vṛndāvane mayā sārdhaṁ krīḍiṣyasi nijecchayā

kālena kiyatā – after some time; putra – O son;
paripūrṇa – fully satisfied; akhila – all; arthakaḥ –
desires; vṛndā-vane – within the forest of Vṛndā; mayā –
by Me; sārdham – with; krīḍiṣyasi – you will sport; nija
– your own; icchayā – by the desire.

O son, after some time, your desire will be fulfilled.
Then, you will sport with Me in Vṛndāvana just as you
desire.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Kiyatā means ‘after a short time.’ Śrī
Bhagavān calls Śrī Gopa-kumāra, ‘O son.’ This loving
address indicates the truth of what is being discussed,
namely, that the Lord is saying, “After just a short
while, the desire of your heart will be fulfilled and
you will see Śrī Madana-gopāla-deva in Śrī Goloka.”
Alternatively, the Lord is saying. “You will sport with
Me as you desire in Vṛndāvana, which is located
simultaneously both in Śrī Goloka and on the earth
(Bhūloka).”



Verse 240

śrī-gopa-kumāra uvāca

evaṁ tad-ājñayā harṣa-śokāviṣṭo ’ham āgataḥ

etad vṛndāvanaṁ śrīmat tat-kṣaṇān manaseva hi

śrī-gopa-kumāra – Śrī Gopa-kumāra; uvāca – said; evam –
thus; tat-ājñayā – by His order; harṣa – in jubilation;
śoka – in lamenta-tion; āviṣṭaḥ – absorbed; aham – I;
āgataḥ – came; etat – this; vṛndā-vanam – to Vṛndāvana;
śrīmat – resplendent; tat-kṣaṇāt – at that very moment;
manasā – by the speed of the mind; iva – as if; hi –
indeed.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra said: O brāhmaṇa, overwhelmed with
happiness and distress by the command of Śrī Bhagavān,
at that very moment by the speed of mind, I reached this
attractive Vṛndāvana.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “In this way, by
the order of Śrī Bhagavān, I reached this most beautiful
Vṛndāvana instantaneously. Manasā eva, meaning ‘as if by
mind,’ indicates the incredible speed of my journey. I
had heard from the lips of Śrī Bhagavān, ‘You will sport
with Me in Śrī Vṛndāvana according to your desire.’ This
statement filled me with joy, but at the same time, I

                          340
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

was distressed that I would be separated from Him. In
such a state, at that very moment, I reached this
Vṛndāvana.”

śrīmad-caitanya-rūpāya tasmai bhagavate namaḥ

yat-kāruṇya-prabhāveṇa pāṣāṇo ’pyeṣya nṛtyati

I offer obeisances to that Bhagavān who has come as Śrī
Caitanya. By the power of His mercy, even a stone-like
person like me is dancing in this way.

Thus ends the translation of the bhāvānuvāda of

Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī’s Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā

on the Second Canto, Chapter Two,

of Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta.




[1] This earth planet is divided into seven dvīpas, or
islands, by seven oceans. The central dvīpa, called
Jambū-dvīpa, is divided into nine varṣas, or parts, by
eight huge mountains. Bhārata-varṣa is one of the above-
mentioned nine varṣas.


[2] The four types of annihilation are: the constant
degradation of matter (nitya-pralaya), the partial
destruction of the universe at the end of Brahmā’s day
(naimittika-pralaya), the total destruction of the
universe at the end of Brahmā’s life (prākṛtika-
pralaya), and the liberation of individual souls or
final annihilation (ātyantika-pralaya).




Third Chapter




Bhajanam: Loving Service



Verse 1

śrī-gopa-kumāra uvāca

brahma-lokād imāṁ pṛthvīm āgacchan dṛṣṭavān aham

pūrvaṁ yatra yadāsīt tad-gandho ’py asti na kutracit

śrī-gopa-kumāra uvāca – Śrī Gopa-kumāra said; brahma-
lokāt – from Brahmaloka; imām – this; pṛthvīm – to
earth; āgacchan – returning; dṛṣṭavān – observed; aham –
I; pūrvam – before; yatra – where; yadā – when; āsīt –

                           341
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

there was; tat – of that; gandhaḥ – the slightest trace;
api – even; asti – is; na – not; kutracit – anywhere.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra said: O brāhmaṇa, when I returned to
this earth from Brahmaloka, I observed there was no sign
whatsoever, not even a scent, of what had been here
before.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: This Third Chapter describes how Śrī
Gopa-kumāra crosses the eight coverings of the universe
and reaches the abode of liberation. It also narrates
how, in the presence of Śrī Śiva, the eternal associates
of the Lord in Vaikuṇṭha describe to Gopa-kumāra the
characteristics of bhakti, pure loving devotion to the
Lord.

First, Gopa-kumāra wants to show the authority of the
words that came directly from the divine mouth of Śrī
Bhagavān: “When the agitation of the time factor
destroys the entire universe, Śrī Mathurā-maṇḍala always
remains as it is because of My eternal presence there
along with My associates.” Gopa-kumāra commences his
narration of the glories of Śrī Mathurā in two verses,
beginning here with brahma. In the first half of this
verse, he says, “Having returned to earth after a long
time in Brahmaloka, I observed the condition of the
planet.” In the second half, he says, “Previously,
demigods, human beings, and other beings were present,
but now there was no sign of them anywhere at all.”



Verse 2

paraṁ śrī-mathurā tādṛg vanādri-sarid-anvitā

virājate yathā-pūrvaṁ tādṛśair jaṅgamair vṛtā

param – only; śrī-mathurā – Śrī Mathurā-maṇḍala; tādṛk –
like that; vana – forests; adri – hills; sarit – rivers;
anvitā – with; virājate – was splendid; yathā – as;
pūrvam – before; tādṛśaiḥ – with them; jaṅgamaiḥ –
moving creatures; vṛtā – filled.

However, only Śrī Mathurā-maṇḍala, graced with its
forests, mountains, rivers, and moving and non-moving
living beings, was still present, looking as splendid as
before.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Only the
beautiful Mathurā-maṇḍala was present exactly as before,
with the same Vṛndāvana and other forests, the same
trees, creepers, and shrubs, the same Govardhana and
other hills, and the same Śrī Yamunā and other rivers.
And as in previous times, it was adorned with people,
animals, birds, and other moving and non-moving living
entities.”



Verse 3

ājñāṁ bhagavataḥ smṛtvā bhraman vṛndāvanāntare


                          342
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

anviṣya kuñje ’trāpaśyaṁ sva-guruṁ prema-mūrchitam

ājñām – the order; bhagavataḥ – of the Lord; smṛtvā –
remembering; bhraman – wandering; vṛndāvana-antare –
throughout Vṛndāvana; anviṣya – entering; kuñje – within
a grove; atra – here; apaśyam – I saw; sva-gurum – my
guru; prema – in the ecstasy of love; mūrchitam – fallen
unconscious.

Remembering Śrī Bhagavān’s order, I wandered here and
there, throughout this Vṛndāvana. Then, in a grove, I
saw my gurudeva. He was in an unconscious state,
overwhelmed with prema.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Śrī Bhagavān
had instructed me, ‘In that land of Vraja, you will
again see My very dear devotee, your gurudeva.’
Remembering that instruction, I again received darśana
of Śrī Gurudeva here in a grove (kuñja).”



Verse 4

prayāsair bahubhiḥ svāsthyaṁ nīto ’sau vīkṣya māṁ natam

parirebhe ’tha sarva-jño bubudhe man-manoratham

prayāsaiḥ – efforts; bahubhiḥ – with many; svāsthyam –
to external condition; nītaḥ – brought; asau – he;
vīkṣya – seeing; mām – me; natam – bowing down;
parirebhe – he embraced; atha – then; sarva-jñaḥ –
omniscient; bubudhe – knowing; mat – my; manaḥ-ratham –
heart’s desire.

Reviving him with great effort, I offered obeisances at
his feet. Seeing me bowing down, he embraced me. Śrī
Gurudeva was omniscient, and so he understood the desire
in my heart (to go to mukti-pada, the abode of
liberation).

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “I saw him lying
unconscious in trance on the ground, overwhelmed with
love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa. I sprinkled water on him and with
great effort brought him back to consciousness. Seeing
me bowing down before him, he embraced me. Since he was
omniscient, he understood my desire to go to the abode
of liberation.”



Verse 5

snātvā sva-datta-mantrasya dhyānādi-vidhim uddiśan

kiñcin mukhena kiñcic ca saṅketenābhyavedayat

snātvā – having bathed; sva-datta – given by him;
mantrasya – of the mantra; dhyāna – with meditation; ādi
– beginning; vidhim – rules; uddiśan – instructing;
kiñcit – some things; mukhena – with his mouth; kiñcit –
some things; ca – also; saṅketena – by gestures;
abhyavedayat – he indicated.


                          343
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

After that, he bathed and then instructed me in the
rules of meditation and the worship of the mantra he had
given me. Some rules he spoke, and others he indicated
by gesture.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “When he was
experi-encing the ecstatic symptoms of divine love
(prema), mucus, saliva, and tears flowed from his nose,
mouth, and eyes. These became mixed with dust and stuck
to his face. To wash, he went to bathe in the Yamunā.
Afterwards, he instructed me on the rules for the mantra
he had previously given, explaining nyāsa (applying
names of the Lord to the limbs of the body), mudrā
(symbolic hand gestures), and other practices. He
revealed some of those rules by words and

others by signs and indications. While he was explaining
dhyāna, or meditation on the Deity of the mantra, he
remembered his worshipable Lord and became overwhelmed
with intense prema.

Unable to speak, he instructed me by gesturing with his
hands.”



Verse 6

jagāda ca nijaṁ sarvam idaṁ preṣṭhāya te ’dadām

sarvam etat-prabhāveṇa svayaṁ jñāsyasi lapsyase

jagāda – he said; ca – and; nijam – own; sarvam – all I
have; idam – this; preṣṭhāya – who are very dear; te –
to you; adadām – I have given; sarvam – all; etat-
prabhāveṇa – by the power of the this mantra; svayam –
automatically; jñāsyasi – you will know; lapsyase – you
will attain.

After this, Śrī Gurudeva told me, “O son, you are very
dear to me, and therefore, I am giving you my entire
wealth. By the power of chanting this mantra, all other
secrets will automatically be revealed to you.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The Mathurā brāhmaṇa might raise the
doubt, “If Śrī Gurudeva instructed you for only a
moment, and through gestures, how could such brief
instruction have enabled you to understand the endless
types of rules and regulations?” This doubt is valid,
but is there anything that cannot be perfected by one
who has received the mercy of śrī guru? To explain this,
Śrī Gopa-kumāra speaks this verse beginning with jagāda.

After instructing him, Śrī Gurudeva benedicted Gopa-
kumāra, telling him, “O son, I have given you
everything. There may be some other secrets as well, but
by the power of chanting the mantra given by me while
practicing nyāsa and other regulations, you will
understand all of these confidential matters. By
chanting this mantra, you will automatically understand
all goals and their means of attainment. This applies to
those I have explained and those yet to be described.”



                          344
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


Verse 7

harṣeṇa mahatā tasya pādayoḥ patite mayi

so ’ntarhita ivāgacchad yatra kutrāpy alakṣitam

harṣeṇa mahatā – with great joy; tasya – his; pādayoḥ –
at the feet; patite – fallen; mayi – I; saḥ – he;
antarhitaḥ – disappeared;

iva – apparently; agacchat – he left; yatra kutra api –
anywhere;

alakṣitam – unseen.

Overjoyed, I fell at his lotus feet. However, suddenly,
he disappeared. He went elsewhere, unnoticed.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Overwhelmed
with joy, I fell at his divine feet. Upon getting up, I
saw that he had disappeared without my even noticing. I
could not determine where he had gone.”



Verse 8

ahaṁ ca tad-viyogārtaṁ mano viṣṭabhya yatnataḥ

yathādeśaṁ sva-mantraṁ taṁ pravṛtto japtum ādarāt

aham – I; ca – and; tat-viyoga – in separation from him;
ārtam – afflicted; manaḥ – heart; viṣṭabhya – composing;
yatnataḥ – with effort; yathā – as; ādeśam – I had been
instructed; sva-mantram – my mantra; tam – that;
pravṛttaḥ – engaged; japtum – to chant; ādarāt – with
respect.

Although, in my separation from Śrī Gurudeva, my mind
was distressed, I managed to compose myself with great
effort. Then I began to respectfully chant my mantra
just as instructed.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “My mind was
distressed by separation from Śrī Gurudeva, but
nevertheless, I composed myself with great effort and
began to chant the mantra according to his order,
following his instructions on the process of japa
(solitary chanting). Although one can naturally achieve
liberation by chanting the mantra of the Lord just a few
times, in order to achieve happiness quickly, I began to
chant following the correct procedure explained by
Gurudeva.”



Verse 9

pāñca-bhautikatātītaṁ sva-dehaṁ kalayan raveḥ

nirbhidya maṇḍalaṁ gacchann ūrdhvaṁ lokān vyalokayam

pañca-bhautikatā – to the world of five material

                          345
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

elements; atītam – transcendental; sva – own; deham –
body; kalayan – observed; raveḥ – of the sun; nirbhidya
– crossed; maṇḍalam – the circle; gacchan – going;
ūrdhvam – up; lokān – the fourteen planetary systems;
vyalokayam – I saw.

By the power of chanting, I felt my body transform into
an unearthly body that was transcendental to the five
material elements. Proceeding toward the upper planets,
I crossed the sun globe and saw the fourteen worlds.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “While chanting
the mantra, I felt that my body had relinquished the
five material elements (earth, water, fire, air, and
ether). In other words, I transcended the form that had
been made of the five material elements and became
qualified to enter the abode of liberation.” Gopa-
kumāra’s qualification did not entail his giving up his
body; he only transcended the material coverings of the
soul, thus becoming qualified to achieve the abode of
liberation. He says, “Now qualified for liberation, or
mukti, I crossed through the sun globe, which is the
gateway to liberation. Progressing upwards, I glanced at
the fourteen worlds.”



Verse 10

dūṣitān bahu-doṣeṇa sukhābhāsena bhūṣitān

māyā-mayān mano-rājya-svapna-dṛṣṭārtha-sammitān

dūṣitān – riddled; bahu-doṣeṇa – with many types of
defects; sukha – of true happiness; ābhāsena – with only
shadows; bhūṣitān – adorned; māyā-mayān – illusory;
manaḥ-rājya – in the realm of fancy; svapna – and
dreams; dṛṣṭa – seen; artha – in significance; sammitān
– resembling.

I saw that all the planets, decorated with only shadows
of real happiness, are riddled with all kinds of
defects. They are simply creations of Māyā and are
unreal, like objects seen in a dream.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: What did Śrī Gopa-kumāra observe? To
explain this, he speaks this verse beginning with
dūṣitān. He says, “I saw that all the planets were
filled with flaws, having only a semblance, or shadow,
of happiness but no spiritual joy. All the happiness in
those abodes was illusory. Just as one enjoys objects in
a dream, so the happiness of those places was as
illusory as such mental fabrications.”



Verse 11

pūrvaṁ ye bahu-kālena samprāptāḥ kramaśo ’dhunā

sarve nimeṣataḥ krāntā yugapan manaseva te

pūrvam – before; ye – which; bahu – great; kālena – with
time; samprāptāḥ – attained; kramaśaḥ – one by one;

                          346
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

adhunā – now; sarve – all; nimeṣataḥ – in the blink of
an eye; krāntāḥ – passed; yugapat – simul-taneously;
manasā – with the speed of the mind; iva – as if; te –
they.

Previously, it took me a long time to reach these
planets, which I had crossed one after another. Now I
passed them by all at once, in the blink of an eye, at
the speed of mind.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Previously, I
spent a long time successively passing through all these
planets. First I went to Svarga, then Maharloka,
Janaloka, and so on, one after another. Now though, on
my way to the abode of liberation, mukti-pada, I passed
over all those realms at the speed of mind.”

All those planets, which are illusory in nature, are
seen as false as soon as one tames the mind. Therefore,
it is correct to say, “Gopa-kumāra crossed those planets
by his mind alone.” However, in reality, it takes
tremendous physical velocity to cross the sun globe and
rise above it. Therefore, Gopa-kumāra uses the word iva,
meaning ‘like,’ to say that the velocity was like the
speed of mind.



Verse 12

brahma-lokāt sukhaiḥ koṭi-guṇitair uttarottaram

vaibhavaiś ca mahiṣṭhāni prāpto ’smy āvaraṇāny atha

brahma-lokāt – than Brahmaloka; sukhaiḥ – with
happiness; koṭi – millions of times; guṇitaiḥ –
intensified; uttara-uttaram – progressively; vaibhavaiḥ
– with opulences; ca – also; mahiṣṭhāni – great; prāptaḥ
– attained; asmi – I have; āvaraṇāni – the coverings;
atha – then.

I then entered the excellent coverings of the universe.
The happiness and the opulences there were progressively
millions of times superior to those on the planet of Śrī
Brahmā.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Then I entered
all the layers of the brahmāṇḍa, the universal egg. What
were these layers like? These coverings were each
endowed with bliss and excellent opulences that were
successively millions and millions of times greater than
those on Brahmaloka. Every covering was progressively
ten times larger than the previous one, and each
subsequent covering was millions upon millions of times
more excellent in terms of happiness and opulence than
the preceding one.”



VerseS 13–14

kāryopādhim ati-krāntaiḥ prāptavya-krama-muktikaiḥ

liṅgākhyaṁ kāraṇopādhim ati-kramitum ātmabhiḥ

                          347
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


praviśya tat-tad-rūpeṇa bhujyamānāni kāmataḥ

tat-tad-udbhava-niḥśeṣa-sukha-sāra-mayāni hi

kārya – of gross material elements; upādhim –
designation; ati-krāntaiḥ – surpassing; prāptavya –
attainable; krama-muktikaiḥ – with gradual, systematic
liberations; liṅga – subtle; ākhyam – named; kāraṇa – of
causes; upādhim – designation; ati-kramitum – to
surpass; ātmabhiḥ – by the souls; praviśya – having
entered; tat-tad-rūpeṇa – with their respective bodies;
bhujyamānāni – enjoyed; kāmataḥ – at will; tat-tat
udbhava – the respective manifestations; niḥśeṣa –
complete; sukha-sāra-mayāni – imbued with the very
essence of happiness; hi – certainly.

Those who attain gradual, systematic liberation first
transcend the active, or gross, designation (the body
made of five cosmic elements: earth, water, fire, air,
and ether). Then they reach these coverings of the
universe, where they transcend the subtle designations
(mind, intelligence, and false ego). Entering each
covering in succession, they obtain bodies suitable for
that stratum, where they enjoy at will immense pleasures
greater than those generated by the fundamental elements
(tattvas), such as earth. Since cause (kāraṇa) is
superior to effect, or action (kārya, gross material
elements), it follows that happiness generated by the
cause is vastly superior to happiness coming from its
effect.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Now, in two verses, beginning here
with kārya, Śrī Gopa-kumāra shows the superiority of the
causal layer (kāraṇa-rūpa āvaraṇa) over the gross, or
active, layer (kārya-rūpa āvaraṇa).

He says, “To obtain liberation in a gradual manner, the
aspirants first abandon the active designation (kārya-
upādhi), or the gross body (sthūla-deha). Then, entering
into the coverings of the universe, such as earth, they
receive appropriate bodies for each layer, thus ensuring
their bodies will not be subject to rotting, burning,
etc. in those coverings. There, according to their
desire, they enjoy a multitude of concentrated pleasures
that arise from the fundamental elements (in their
subtle form), such as earth. While enjoying, they
transcend the finer designation (sukṣma-upādhi) known as
the subtle body (liṅga-śarīra) and enter the abode of
liberation. However, those whose cover-ings of the soul
are not destroyed are never able to attain liberation.
The coverings of the soul take the form of the active
designation, which is the gross body; and the causal
designation, which is the subtle, astral body. In the
process of gradually crossing every covering, the living
beings enjoy the happiness of each stratum, and
eventually, after giving up the subtle body, enter the
abode of liberation. However, those who obtain immediate
liberation do not have to experience the happiness of
those layers.

“The reason every layer is blissful is that unlimited
happiness is generated by the fundamental element, or
tattva, of that stratum. In other words, the very

                          348
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

essence of happiness arises from the ingredients of that
stratum. Since cause (kāraṇa) is superior to effect
(kārya, gross material elements), it follows that the
happiness arising from the cause will be superior to the
happiness coming from the effect. All types of happiness
and the means to enjoy them are present in every layer,
but still, the happiness enjoyed from the principal
element in each layer is progressively higher. In
comparison to Brahmaloka (Satyaloka), each layer has
progressively greater happiness, and also the opulence
of each subsequent layer is ten times greater than the
previous one.”



VerseS 15–16

pṛthivy-āvaraṇaṁ teṣu prathamaṁ gatavān aham

tad-aiśvaryādhikāriṇyā dharaṇyā pūjitaṁ prabhum

brahmāṇḍa-durlabhair dravyair mahā-śūkara-rūpiṇam

apaśyaṁ prati-romānta-bhramad-brahmāṇḍa-vaibhavam

pṛthivī – of earth; āvaraṇam – the covering; teṣu – of
them; prathamam – the first; gatavān – went; aham – I;
tat-aiśvarya-adhikāriṇyā – the proprietress of the
opulence of that layer; dharaṇyā – by the earth goddess
Dharaṇī-devī; pūjitam – worshiped; prabhum – the Lord;
brahmāṇḍa – from the unlimited universes; durlabhaiḥ –
rare; dravyaiḥ – with articles; mahā-śūkara-rūpiṇam –
the form of a great boar; apaśyam – I saw; prati-roma-
anta – within every pore; bhramat – spinning; brahmāṇḍa
– universes; vaibhavam – power.

First I entered the covering composed of earth, and
there I saw the Lord in the form of the great boar (Śrī
Varāha-deva). The earth goddess, Dharaṇī-devī, the
proprietress of the opulence of that layer, was
worshiping Him with rare, exotic items, while the
opulences of many brahmāṇḍas (universes) were spinning
in every pore of His body.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra has described the
coverings in a general way, and now he is describing
them specifically, having crossed them one after another
in order to learn the speciality of each. In five
verses, beginning here with pṛthvī, he begins his
description with the covering composed of earth.

He says, “First, having entered the covering of earth, I
had darśana of Bhagavān in the form of the great boar,
Śrī Varāha. What was He like? The opulence of the entire
brahmāṇḍa, which comprises fourteen planetary systems,
was rotating in causal form in every one of His pores.”

This signifies that Śrī Varāha is superior even to Śrī
Mahā-puruṣa, the presiding Deity of Brahmaloka. This is
an indication of the progressive superiority of each
subsequent covering. Goddess earth, Śrī Dharaṇī-devī,
the presiding Deity of all the elements in that earth
layer, was worshiping Śrī Varāha Bhagavān with precious
ingredients that were rare in the universe. In this way,

                          349
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

the goddess earth’s superiority to Brahmā is also shown.



Verse 17

tasyāṁ kāraṇa-rūpāyāṁ kārya-rūpam idaṁ jagat

tad-upādānakaṁ sarvaṁ sphuritaṁ ca vyalokayam

tasyām – within her; kāraṇa-rūpāyām – who embodies the
subtle causes of creation; kārya-rūpam – in the form of
the material ingredients; idam – this; jagat – universe;
tat-upādānakam – its ingredients; sarvam – all;
sphuritam – manifest; ca – and; vyalokayam – I saw.

Within the goddess earth, who embodies the causal
principle (kāraṇa-rūpā), I saw the effective, or active,
principle (kārya-rūpa) being manifest, or in other
words, I saw all the ingredients of the universe being
manifest.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Just as clay is
the ingredient cause (material, or upādāna, cause) of an
earthen pot, similarly, the covering composed of earth,
which embodies the causal principle, is the ingredient
cause – the cause of the material ingredients –

of this manifest universe. Since the effect (kārya) is
perceived in the cause (kāraṇa), all the pleasures of
the universe, or brahmāṇḍa, are present in the earth
layer.”



Verse 18

vidhāya bhagavat-pūjāṁ tayātithyena sat-kṛtaḥ

dināni katicit tatra bhogārtham aham arthitaḥ

vidhāya – having completed; bhagavat – of the Lord;
pūjām – worship; tayā – by her; ātithyena – as an
honored guest; sat-kṛtaḥ – welcomed; dināni – days;
katicit – some; tatra – there; bhoga – of pleasure;
artham – for the purpose; aham – I; arthitaḥ – was
requested.

As soon as Dharaṇī-devī finished her worship of Śrī
Bhagavān, she honored me as a welcome guest and
requested me to stay for a few days and enjoy the
pleasures there.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “After
completing her worship of Bhagavān, Dharaṇī-devī honored
me, considering me to be her guest. She requested me to
stay for a few days to relish the pleasures there.”



Verse 19

tām anujñāpya kenāpy ākṛṣyamāṇa ivāśu tat


                          350
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

atītyāvaraṇaṁ prāptaḥ parāṇy āvaraṇāni ṣaṭ

tām – from her; anujñāpya – taking permission; kenāpi –
somehow; ākṛṣyamāṇaḥ – being pulled; iva – as if; āśu –
quickly; tat – that; atītya – passing through; āvaraṇam
– covering; prāptaḥ – attained;

parāṇi – other; āvaraṇāni– coverings; ṣaṭ – six.

However, I requested permission from the earth goddess
to depart. At that time, I felt as if I were being
pulled away by the attraction of some unknown force, and
I quickly crossed the other six layers.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Having no
desire to stay there, I humbly begged Dharaṇī-devī to
allow me to leave. Taking her permission, I crossed that
earth stratum.”

The Mathurā brāhmaṇa might ask, “You were requested by
that topmost Vaiṣṇavī to stay, so why did you not spend
a few days there?”

Śrī Gopa-kumāra replies, “Being pulled by some force of
attraction, I crossed the other layers very quickly.”
This indicates that it is not proper to delay elsewhere
while engaging in sādhana (practice) to achieve the
abode of liberation.



VerseS 20–21

mahā-rūpa-dharair vāri-tejo-vāyv-ambarais tathā

ahaṅkāra-mahadbhyāṁ ca sva-svāvaraṇato ’rcitam

krameṇa matsyaṁ sūryaṁ ca pradyumnam aniruddhakam

saṅkarṣaṇaṁ vāsudevaṁ bhagavantam alokayam

mahā – great; rūpa – forms; dharaiḥ – assuming; vāri –
water; tejaḥ –

fire; vāyu – air; ambaraiḥ – ether; tathā – then;
ahaṅkāra - false ego; mahadbhyām – with the total
material energy; ca – and; sva-sva-āvaraṇataḥ – from
their respective coverings; arcitam – worshiped; krameṇa
– in sequence; matsyam – Matsya; sūryam – Sūrya; ca –
also; pradyumnam – Pradyumna; aniruddhakam – Aniruddha;
saṅkarṣaṇam – Saṅkarṣaṇa; vāsudevam – and Vāsudeva;
bhagavantam – the Lord; alokayam – I saw.

In their respective layers, I saw that the presiding
Deities of water, fire, air, ether, ego, and the total
material energy (mahat-tattva) had assumed gigantic
forms and were worshiping Bhagavān’s respective
manifestations: Matsya, Sūrya, Pradyumna, Aniruddha,
Saṅkarṣaṇa, and Vāsudeva.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “I saw that the
presiding Deities of the six coverings (water, etc.) had
accepted massive bodies. I also saw that Bhagavān was
being worshiped in the forms of Matsya, Sūrya, etc., one

                          351
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

after another.” A different form of Bhagavān was visible
in each successive layer – Matsya in the layer of water,
Sūrya in the layer of fire, and so on – according to the
names as listed in the verse.



Verse 22

sva-kāryāt pūrva-pūrvasmāt kāraṇaṁ cottarottaram

pūjya-pūjaka-bhoga-śrī-mahattvenādhikādhikam

sva-kāryāt – its effect; pūrva-pūrvasmāt – than the
preceding one; kāraṇam – cause; ca – and; uttara-uttaram
– progressively; pūjya – objects of worship; pūjaka –
worshipers; bhoga – enjoyment; śrī-mahattvena – with
great opulence; adhika-adhikam – greater and greater.

Every layer is the cause of the one before it. For
instance, the layer of

water is the cause (kāraṇa) of the earth layer, which
represents the effect

(kārya). Each successive layer possesses progressively
more magnifi-cent objects of worship, worshipers,
enjoyment, opulence, and glories.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The brāhmaṇa might ask, “What is the
nature of all those layers, their respective presiding
demigods, such as water personified, and their
worshipable forms of the Lord, such as Śrī Matsya?”

Śrī Gopa-kumāra describes this briefly, rather than
elaborately as he did in the past. He says, “A different
manifestation of Bhagavān is worshiped in each layer by
the presiding demigod of that realm. For example, Śrī
Matsya is worshiped by the personification of water. One
should understand that every successive layer is more
glorious in terms of happiness derived from the sense
enjoyment, majesty, power, and riches that are obtained
there. That is, each causal layer is superior to the
preceding layer for which it is the cause.”



Verse 23

pūrva-vat tāny atikramya prakṛty-āvaraṇaṁ gataḥ

mahā-tamo-mayaṁ sāndra-syāmikākṣi-manoharam

pūrva-vat – as before; tāni – them; atikramya –
crossing; prakṛti – of material energy; āvaraṇam – to
the covering; gataḥ – gone; mahā – great; tamaḥ-mayam –
with ignorance; sāndra – dense; śyāmika – blue darkness;
akṣi – to my eyes; manaḥ-haram – enchanting.

I successively crossed all the layers as before, and at
last I entered the layer of great primordial ignorance,
which was the embodiment of the material energy,
prakṛti. The dense, dark blue splendor of that place
stole my eyes and mind.

                          352
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “While crossing
all those coverings of the universe, I was received
hospitably and honored by the presiding authority of
each layer, just as I was in the first. In every layer,
the demigod in charge urged me to stay and enjoy the
pleasures there, but impelled by the desire in my heart
for some other, indescribable happiness, I did not
accept their offers. Rather, humbly taking their consent
to leave, I finally arrived in the covering of prakṛti,
or material nature, which consisted of primordial
ignorance, tamo-maya. That densely dark layer was
totally concealing in nature and its concentrated dark
splendor, which was the transformation of prakṛti, stole
my eyes and heart.”

There is an example of this in Śrī Harivaṁśa, wherein
Śrī Arjuna says:

paṅka-bhūtaṁ hi timiraṁ

sparśād vijñāyate ghanāḥ

atha parvata-bhūtaṁ

tu timiraṁ samapadyata

In the beginning, that darkness appears like mud; but on
touching it, it feels solid like a mountain.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.89.47) also states: “lokālokaṁ
tathātītya viveśa su-mahat tamaḥ – Having crossed the
Lokāloka boundary, [the Lord’s chariot] entered the
region of terrible dense darkness.” Here loka means ‘the
brahmāṇḍa, the cosmic egg that is the universe
consisting of the fourteen planetary systems,’ and aloka
refers to the eight layers, or shells, of the brahmāṇḍa.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra concludes, “With her dense, sapphire
(śyāma) splendor, that prakṛti steals the mind and eyes
of everyone.”



Verse 24

tasmin nijeṣṭa-devasya varṇa-sādṛśyam ātate

dṛṣṭvāhaṁ nitarāṁ hṛṣṭo naicchaṁ gantuṁ tato ’grataḥ

tasmin – in that place; nija – own; iṣṭa-devasya –
dearmost Lord; varṇa – hue; sādṛśyam – similar; ātate –
illuminating; dṛṣṭvā – having seen; aham – I; nitarām –
greatly; hṛṣṭaḥ – overjoyed; na – not; aiccham – I
desired; gantum – to go; tataḥ – then; agrataḥ –
further.

Seeing that the hue of the prakṛti layer was similar to
that of my beloved Lord, I was overjoyed and did not
wish to go any further.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Seeing the
śyāma-colored splendor of the prakṛti layer that
resembled the lotus feet of Śrī Madana-

                           353
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017


gopāla-deva, I became overwhelmed in bliss. That prakṛti
was immensely vast and was devoid of any kind of
inferior or unworthy elements. Therefore, the sight of
its all-pervasive, deep blue luster brought me such
extreme joy I lost all desire to leave that layer and go
forward.”



Verse 25

śrī-mohinī-mūrti-dharasya tatra

vibhrājamānsya nijeśvarasya

pūjāṁ samāpya prakṛtiḥ prakṛṣṭa-

mūrtiḥ sapady eva samabhyayān mām

śrī-mohinī-mūrti-dharasya – having the form of Śrī
Mohinī-devī; tatra – there; vibhrājamānasya – of the
splendid; nija – personal; īśvarasya – of the Lord;
pūjām – worship; samāpya – having completed; prakṛtiḥ –
material nature personified; prakṛṣṭa-mūrtiḥ – in an
attractive form; sapadi – at once; eva – indeed;
samabhyayāt – approached; mām – me.

The goddess Śrī Prakṛti-devī, charmingly attired,
appeared before me after she finished the worship of her
Lord, who was personally present there as Śrī Mohinī-
mūrti.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “The
attractively attired Prakṛti-devī welcomed me with
outstretched arms after she finished the worship of her
Lord, who was present in that covering. What was her
Lord like? Ah! The Lord’s Śrī Mohinī form was so
enchanting that she was even worshipable for Māyā, who
herself is supremely bewitching. In other words, even
the enchanting manifestation, or mohinī-mūrti, of Māyā,
the deluding potency, was put to shame by the
manifestation of the Lord, Śrī Mohinī-mūrti. The beauty
of this attractive form of the Lord was radiating in
that dense darkness.”



Verse 26

upānayan mahā-siddhīr aṇimādyā mamāgrataḥ

yayāce ca pṛthivy-ādi-vat tatra mad-avasthitim

upānayat – she brought; mahā – great; siddhīḥ – mystic
powers; aṇima-ādyaḥ – the power of becoming minute and
so forth; mama – me; agrataḥ – before; yayāce – she
implored; ca – also; pṛthivī-ādi-

vat – just like Dharaṇī-devī and the other Deities;
tatra – there; mat – of me; avasthitim – to reside
there.

Just as Dharaṇī-devī and the Deities of the other

                          354
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

coverings had done, that goddess of the material energy
respectfully placed before me a collection of gifts,
such as aṇimā and the other mystic perfections, and
implored me to stay there for some time.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “That Prakṛti-
devī also offered me gifts of mystic perfections such as
aṇimā, by which one becomes as small as an atom. She
asked that I stay in her layer, just as Pṛthvī, the
goddess earth, and the others had done.”



Verse 27

sa-snehaṁ ca jagādedaṁ yadi tvaṁ muktim icchasi

tadāpy anugṛhāṇemāṁ māṁ tasyāḥ pratihāriṇīm

sa-sneham – with affection; ca – also; jagāda – she
said; idam – this; yadi – if; tvam – you; muktim –
liberation; icchasi – desire; tadā api – then; anugṛhāṇa
– conciliate; imām – this person; mām – me; tasyāḥ – of
liberation; pratihāriṇīm – guard to the door.

Then, Prakṛti-devī affectionately told me, “If you
desire to obtain liberation, then you must show me your
favor, since I alone guard the door to liberation.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Then, Prakṛti-
devī, the goddess of material energy, lovingly told me,
‘If you desire liberation, you must be kind to me and
enjoy all these mystic perfections. If you reject me,
then you will not obtain liberation, since I alone guard
its door. Therefore, only when I free you from the mode
of passion and the other material modes will you be able
to enter the abode of mukti, for I alone guard its
door.’ ”



Verse 28

bhaktim icchasi vā viṣṇos tathāpy etasya ceṭikām

bhaginīṁ śakti-rūpāṁ māṁ kṛpayā bhaja bhakti-dām

bhaktim – devotional service; icchasi – you wish; vā –
or; viṣṇoḥ – to Lord Viṣṇu; tathā api – then; etasya –
of Him; ceṭikām – the maidservant; bhaginīm – sister;
śakti-rūpām – and potency; mām – me; kṛpayā – with
kindness; bhaja – worship; bhakti-dām – the giver of
devotional service.

“And if you want the loving service of Viṣṇu, still you
should kindly serve me, the bestower of bhakti, for I am
Śrī Viṣṇu’s maidservant, His sister, and His energy.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra may raise a doubt,
saying. “What is the need of liberation for those who
are engaged in bhakti? I desire bhakti, and therefore I
do not yearn for mukti.”

Prakṛti-devī replies, “Please listen. If you desire

                          355
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

bhakti to Viṣṇu, then also, you should graciously serve
me.”

“Why should I serve you?”

“You should worship me, considering me to be the
maidservant of Viṣṇu and subservient to Him. Or, worship
me because I am His sister, having taken birth from the
womb of Yaśodā. Or, worship me as the embodiment of His
energy. In these ways, I alone grant and nourish bhakti
to Viṣṇu.”

Although the illusory potency Māyā and the potency of
Viṣṇu that increases bhakti are mutually exclusive,
nevertheless, because the illusory potency is the shadow
of Viṣṇu’s energy, the two have been described as one.



Verse 29

śrī-gopa-kumāra uvāca

tad aśeṣam anādṛtya viṣṇu-śakti-dhiyā param

tāṁ natvāvaraṇaṁ ramya-varṇaṁ tad draṣṭum abhramam

śrī-gopa-kumāraḥ – Śrī Gopa-kumāra; uvāca – said; tat –
that; aśeṣam – everything; anādṛtya – ignoring; viṣṇu-
śakti – the energy of Śrī Viṣṇu; dhiyā – considering;
param – then; tām – to her; natvā – bowing down;
āvaraṇam – the covering; ramya – beautiful; varṇam –
color; tat – that; draṣṭum – to see; abhramam – I
wandered.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra said: I accepted neither the mystic
perfections such as aṇimā presented by Prakṛti-devī, nor
her words, but I bowed before her, considering her only
to be the energy of Viṣṇu. Then I began wandering around
to see the beautiful luster of her layer.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “The goddess of
material energy had brought me many gifts, including
aṇimā and the other mystic perfections. But I did not
accept those offerings, nor did I regard her words.
Considering her to be merely the energy of Viṣṇu, I
offered her obeisances. Then I began to wander here and
there to look at the enchanting hue of her layer.”



Verse 30

prādhānikair jīva-saṅghair bhujyamānaṁ mano-ramam

sarvataḥ sarva-māhātmyādhikyena vilasat svayam

prādhānikaiḥ – consisting of the aggregate of material
elements; jīva – of individual spirit souls; saṅghaiḥ –
by hosts; bhujyamānam – enjoyed; manaḥ-ramam –
beautiful; sarvataḥ – everywhere; sarva – all; māhātmya
– glories; ādhikyena – with superiority; vilasat svayam
– self-effulgent.


                            356
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

There, I saw enjoying in that enchanting layer
innumerable living beings whose bodies were made of
primordial, undifferentiated matter (the gross pradhāna)
and who were devoid of material designations. That
prakṛti, the material layer, in addition to being
delightful, was self-effulgent, manifesting varieties of
opulences that were more magnificent than any cause or
effect, subtle or gross.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: In two verses, beginning here with
prādhānikaiḥ, Śrī Gopa-kumāra describes what he saw in
that layer of prakṛti. He says, “There were innumerable
living beings with bodies made of primordial matter
(pradhāna) that were free from the designation of
action, or effect (kārya-upādhi). In other words, the
living beings had obtained qualitative oneness with
pradhāna, the ingredient, or material cause of the
causal material energy (kāraṇa-rūpa prakṛti), which
consists of the five sense objects (tan-mātras). These
living beings were enjoying the immensely beautiful and
pleasing layer of prakṛti. Being far more glorious than
all types of gross and subtle causes and effects, that
layer of prakṛti was self-effulgent. It is the cause of
the entire material world made of five elements.”

Because she is inert and dull ( jaḍa), prakṛti, the
material energy, is actually not self-luminous. However,
out of fear that she would become dissipated or merged
if knowledge of her foundation (adhiṣṭhāna) – the
Supreme Lord – were to be acquired by the living beings
[or in other words, if the living beings were to realize
their real constitutional position, or svarūpa-jñāna],
she covers knowledge of her adhiṣṭhāna by her concealing
nature, thereby appropriating the eligibility to be

self-luminous.



Verse 31

bahu-rūpaṁ durvibhāvyaṁ mahā-mohana-vaibhavam

kārya-kāraṇa-saṅghātaiḥ sevyamānaṁ jagan-mayam

bahu-rūpam – displaying many forms; durvibhāvyam –
indescribable; mahā – greatly; mohana – captivating;
vaibhavam – opulence; kārya – of gross material
elements; kāraṇa – and subtle elements; saṅghātaiḥ – by
the assembly; sevyamānam – being pervaded; jagat-mayam –
consisting of the material universes.

That layer of prakṛti had countless forms. It was
indescribable and full of captivating opulences. The
whole material creation, furnished by the combination of
effect (kārya) and cause (kāraṇa) pervades this prakṛti.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “That layer of
prakṛti had myriad forms. Because prakṛti is the root
cause of the multitude of activities that arise from all
material transformations, it manifests in unending
varieties of forms that are beyond words, and thus it is
an inconceivable state. Therefore, this layer is endowed
with opulence that completely bewitches the mind and

                          357
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

heart.

“In that layer, prakṛti, the goddess of material energy,
was pervaded by effects (kārya) such as earth; causes
(kāraṇa) such as sense objects in their most subtle,
abstract form (tan-mātras) like the sense of smell; and
by their combinations. In subtle form, she was pervading
the entire condensed material manifestation of five
elements, or in other words, the entire creation.”

Although here, the sense objects (tan-mātras) such as
form, taste, and smell are not clearly described, it is
to be understood that Gopa-kumāra also crossed these
five tan-mātras successively, because they are the
distinct elements included within prakṛti.

Alternatively, it can be understood that because the
five tan-mātras are intrinsically tied to effect or
action, as causal forms, they are already combined with
prakṛti. Therefore, crossing over prakṛti also means
passing over the elements that are included in it.
Otherwise, it is not possible to go to the abode of
liberation.



Verse 32

atheśvarecchayātītya durantaṁ tad ghanaṁ tamaḥ

tejaḥ-puñjam apaśyantaṁ dṛṅ-nimīlana-kārakam

atha – then; īśvara – of the Lord; icchayā – by the
desire; atītya – crossing over; durantam – endless; tat
– that; ghanam – intense; tamaḥ – ignorance; tejaḥ-
puñjam – mass of effulgence; apaśyam – I saw; tam –
that; dṛk-nimīlana – to close my eyes; kārakam – forced.

After that, by the Lord’s will, I passed through that
dense darkness of primordial ignorance (which is
incredibly arduous to cross). Then I saw a gigantic mass
of effulgence so blinding that it made me tremble with
fear and close my eyes.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “The very dense
darkness manifesting from the transformation of that
material nature was such a beautiful color that I did
not want to leave. However, because of my desire to go
to the abode of liberation, I crossed that densely dark
region by the will of Bhagavān and came to a mass of
indescribable effulgence. Beholding that vast,
overwhelming brilliance, I trembled with fear and shut
my eyes.”



Verse 33

bhaktyā paramayā yatnād agre dṛṣṭī prasārayan

sūrya-koṭi-pratīkāśam apaśyaṁ parameśvaram

bhaktyā – devotion; paramayā – great; yatnāt – with
effort; agre – before; dṛṣṭī – my sight; prasārayan –

                          358
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

stretching; sūrya – suns; koṭi – tens of millions;
pratīkāśam – resembling; apaśyam – I beheld; parama-
īśvaram – the Supreme Controller.

I crossed that layer with supreme devotion. As I
struggled to look ahead, I saw the Supreme Lord, who was
as effulgent as billions of suns.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The Supreme Lord’s form possessed the
concentrated effulgence of billions of suns.



Verse 34

mano-dṛg-ānanda-vivardhanaṁ vibhuṁ

vicitra-mādhurya-vibhūṣaṇācitam

samagra-sat-pūruṣa-lakṣaṇānvitaṁ

sphurat-para-brahma-mayaṁ mahādbhutaṁ

manaḥ – of the mind; dṛk – and eyes; ānanda – bliss;
vivardhanam – increasing; vibhum – all-powerful; vicitra
– amazing; mādhurya – sweet-

ness; vibhūṣaṇa – by ornaments; ācitam – covered;
samagra – all; sat-pūruṣa – of saintly persons; lakṣaṇa
– the characteristics; anvitam – having; sphurat –
effulgent; para-brahma-mayam – the Supreme Spirit; mahā
– very; adbhutam – wonderful.

Although effulgent like billions of suns, the Supreme
Lord increased the bliss of the mind and eyes. Decorated
with varieties of beautiful ornaments and endowed with
all saintly qualities, He revealed Himself in the most
amazing form of Parabrahman, the Supreme Absolute Truth.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra speaks two verses,
beginning here with mana, to clearly describe the
densely concentrated brilliance of the Supreme Lord
Parameśvara. He says, “Although Parameśvara was as
effulgent as billions of suns, still, He increased the
bliss of one’s mind and words and was all-pervasive. He
was excellently decorated with varieties of
astonishingly lovely ornaments and displayed all the
thirty-two marks of a great personality – reddish palms,
reddish soles, and so on. Untouched by the covering of
material energy, the entirely effulgent transcendental
form of Parabrahman was wonderfully astonishing and
completely extraordinary.”



Verse 35

sadā-guṇātītam aśeṣa-sad-guṇaṁ

nirākṛtiṁ loka-manoramākṛtim

prakṛtyādhiṣṭhātṛtayā vilāsinaṁ

tadīya-sambandha-vihīnam acyutam

                          359
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017


sadā – eternally; guṇa – to the binding influences
(modes) of material nature; atītam – transcendental;
aśeṣa – entire; sat – transcendental; guṇam – qualities;
nirākṛtim – without material form; loka – of the people
of the world; manaḥ – the hearts; rama – delights;
ākṛtim – whose form; prakṛti – of the material energy;
adhiṣṭhātṛtayā – as the predominating Deity; vilāsinam –
splendid; tadīya – with that (nature); sambandha – a
relationship; vihīnam – without; acyutam – the
infallible Supreme Lord.

Although He is beyond material qualities, He is the
abode of unlimited qualities, such as affection for His
devotees (bhakta-vātsalya). Although He has no mundane
form, He has a transcendental form that attracts the
world. Being infallible, although He performs pastimes
as the predominating Deity of material nature, He has no
relationship with the material energy.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra now describes the
extra-

ordinary qualities of the Supreme Lord in this verse
beginning with sadā. He says, “Being the embodiment of
the Supreme Brahman, that Supreme Lord Parameśvara is
beyond the qualities of material nature. At the same
time, however, He is the abode of unlimited good
qualities, such as affection for the devotees. Although
He is formless, or nirākāra, He has a form that
captivates the hearts of all. In other words, although
as Parabrahman He is without material form and
qualities, still, He possesses a form that attracts the
world.”

The scriptural truth that reconciles all dualities in
regard to God-hood has been explained previously (Bṛhad-
bhāgavatāmṛta 2.2.179): “As the presiding Deity of the
layer of pradhāna (Śrī Mohinī-mūrti), She [the Lord in
female form] enjoys pastimes with prakṛti, the material
energy. At the same time, the Lord [in male form] is the
presiding Deity of prakṛti, Bhagavān Śrī Mahā-puruṣa,
who resides in the previously-described Brahmaloka. The
presiding Deity of this abode of liberation, being the
embodiment of Parabrahman, is the only shelter of
prakṛti. Since He is acyuta, meaning ‘infallible,’ He
has no relationship with the material energy; He never
compromises His nature for any reason.”



Verse 36

mahā-sambhrama-santrāsa-pramoda-bhara-vihvalaḥ

tadā kiṁ karavāṇīti jñātuṁ neśe kathañcana

mahā – great; sambhrama – of reverence; santrāsa – fear;
pramoda – and bliss; bhara – by an excess; vihvalaḥ –
overwhelmed; tadā – then; kim – what?; karavāṇi – shall
I do?; iti – thus; jñātum – to know; na īśe – I was
unable; kathañcana – at all.

Upon receiving darśana of the Supreme Lord, I was

                          360
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

overwhelmed by awe, fear, and bliss, and simply could
not figure out what to do.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “At that time, I
could not ascertain what was my duty: what I should do
or what I should not do. Why not? Because upon seeing
Lord Acyuta, I became helplessly overwhelmed with
feelings of immense awe, fear, and joy.”



Verse 37

yadyapi sva-prakāśo ’sāv atītendriya-vṛttikaḥ

tat-kāruṇya-prabhāveṇa paraṁ sākṣāt samīkṣyate

yadi api – although; sva-prakāśaḥ – self-manifesting;
asau – He; atīta – beyond; indriya – of the senses;
vṛttikaḥ – the actions; tat-kāruṇya – of His mercy;
prabhāveṇa – by the power; param – only; sākṣāt –
directly; samīkṣyate – He is seen.

Although He manifests only by His own wish, and He is
beyond the function of the senses, still by the power of
His mercy I was able to see Him directly.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “That Supreme
Lord is sva-prakāśa, meaning ‘self-effulgent’ or ‘self-
manifesting’. He reveals Himself; no one can make Him
visible. Therefore, He is beyond the function of the
senses and inconceivable to them. However, by the
influence of His mercy, I not only had His direct
darśana but also fully tasted the sweetness of the
beauty of His body.”



Verse 38

naitan niścetum īśe ’yaṁ dṛgbhyāṁ cittena vekṣyate

kiṁ vātikramya tat-sarvam ātma-bhāvena kenacit

na – not; etat – this; niścetum – to discern; īśe – I am
able; ayam – Him; dṛgbhyām – with the eyes; cittena –
with the mind; vā – or; īkṣyate – is seen; kim –
whether?; vā – or; atikramya – surpassing; tat-sarvam –
all that; ātma-bhāvena – by my own soul; kenacit –
somehow.

But was I seeing that Supreme Lord with my eyes or with
my mind? I was unable to discern this. Or, surpassing
the functions of both external and internal senses, was
my very soul beholding Him?

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Still, was I
beholding Parameśvara with my eyes or my mind? I could
not decide.” Alter-natively, it may be understood that
all the functions of consciousness, having become one,
were indistinct. Or else it says, “Having transcended
the external and internal senses, was I having the
Lord’s darśana with some special indescribable
consciousness of the soul (ātma-bhāva)?”

                          361
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017




Verse 39

kṣaṇān nirākāram ivāvalokayan

smarāmi nīlādri-pater anugraham

kṣaṇāc ca sākāram udīkṣya pūrvavan

mahā-mahaḥ-puñjam amuṁ labhe mudam

kṣaṇāt – for a moment; nirākāram – formless; iva – as
if; avalokayan – seeing; smarāmi – remembering; nīlādri-
pateḥ – of Śrī Jagannātha-deva, the Lord of Nīlādri;
anugraham – the mercy; kṣaṇāt – for a moment; ca – also;
sa-ākāram – in His personal form; udīkṣya – seeing;
pūrva-vat – as before; mahā-mahaḥ-puñjam – vast mass of
effulgence; amum – this; labhe – I attained; mudam –
joy.

After a moment, when I again observed that vast, intense
effulgence as formless and impersonal, I was pained at
heart. I thus remembered the mercy of Śrī Jagannātha,
the Lord of Nīlādri, and the very next moment, I again
saw the Lord in personal form. This brought me great
joy.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “After a moment,
I observed that great radiance as a formless mass. I
became unable to discern His distinct form, which was
blocked by His blinding, condensed effulgence.”
Alternatively, it may be said, “Factually He was not
formless, but due to the nature of the abode of
liberation, I saw Him in His impersonal, formless
feature.”

He continues, “I immediately remembered the mercy of Śrī
Jagannātha, the Lord of Nīlādri, and reflected that
because He always displays His personal form, no one
surpasses Him in mercy. Then, after another moment, I
saw that effulgent mass again in a personal form.

In other words, when I glanced upwards that great
effulgent mass assumed a personal form. Thus the Lord
increased my bliss.”

This went on repeatedly over a long time, and so Śrī
Gopa-kumāra has described it in the present tense even
though it took place in the past. This idea will be
discussed again further on in the text.



Verse 40

kadāpi tasminn evāham līyamāno ’nukampayā

rakṣeya nija-pādābja-nakhāṁśu-sparśato ’munā

kadā api – sometimes; tasmin – in that; eva – indeed;
aham – I; līyamānaḥ – merging; anukampayā – by the
mercy; rakṣeya – I would be protected; nija – His own;

                          362
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

pāda-abja – of the lotus feet; nakha – of the nails;
aṁśu – rays; sparśataḥ – by the touch; amunā – by that.

Sometimes, the mercy of the Supreme Lord would save me
as I would begin to merge into that effulgent mass. The
radiance emanating from the jewel-like toenails of His
lotus feet would touch me and protect me from that
calamity.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Since becoming
one with Brahman is the very nature of that abode,
sometimes I felt as if I were obtaining sāyujya-mukti
and merging into that vast effulgence. However, at that
time as well, I would be saved by the mercy of the
Supreme Lord and remain in my original body. How was
this possible? The Supreme Lord protected me from that
calamity by granting me the touch of the radiance from
the jewel-like toenails of His beautiful lotus feet.
That luster also prevented the idea of liberation from
ever finding a place in my heart.”



Verse 41

bhinnābhinnair mahā-siddhaiḥ sūkṣmaiḥ sūryam ivāṁśubhiḥ

vṛtaṁ bhaktair ivālokya kadāpi prīyate manaḥ

bhinna – different; abhinnaiḥ – and not different; mahā-
siddhaiḥ – by the great perfected souls; sūkṣmaiḥ –
subtle; sūryam – the sun; iva – like; aṁśubhiḥ – with
its rays; vṛtam – surrounded; bhaktaiḥ – by the
devotees; iva – as if; ālokya – seeing; kadā api –
sometimes; prīyate – delighted; manaḥ – my heart.

Just as the sun is surrounded on all sides by the minute
particles of its rays, similarly Parameśvara was also
surrounded in all directions by different exalted,
perfected souls appearing to be His devotees. Seeing
this, I sometimes felt blissful at heart.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: As previously explained, the address
‘Parameśvara’ indicates the relationship of master
(sevya) and servant (sevaka). Therefore, Śrī Gopa-kumāra
says, “Highly perfected souls, who were both different
and nondifferent from the Supreme Lord, surrounded Him
just like servants. I felt elated to see this.”

The Mathurā brāhmaṇa might ask, “How is it that those
souls ( jīvas) were both different and nondifferent from
the Supreme Lord?”

Gopa-kumāra says, “Being part and parcel of Parameśvara,
the souls are both different and nondifferent from Him.
The Supreme Lord is the infinitely great conscious being
(vibhu-caitanya), and the living being is an atomic,
infinitesimal conscious being (aṇu-caitanya). Thus,
although they are nondifferent in that both have the
constitutional quality of consciousness, they are
different in size – Parameśvara being infinite and the
jīvas being atomic – and so they are also different.
However, the liberated jīvas here are not seen as
different from the Lord, because they are free from the

                          363
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

designations of illusion, and by nature, they are the
minute portion of the Supreme Lord.”

Gopa-kumāra describes the liberated beings, saying it
was ‘like they were all devotees.’ Factually,
previously, those liberated souls never exhibited any
devotion towards the Supreme Lord. However, because
there they completely surrounded the Supreme Lord like a
covering, they appeared to be like servants. Thus, the
analogy is made that they are ‘like devotees.’

However, there is no useful service for devotees in the
abode of liberation. An appropriate comparison is the
sun, which is completely surrounded by minute particles
of the sunrays. Similarly, that Supreme Lord was
surrounded by His followers, the living beings, who are
His minute parts and parcels. The nature, or dharma, of
these jīvas is simultaneously the same and different
from the Lord’s. This concept of the difference and the
nondifference is presented in Chapter Two in the
discourse on liberation.



Verse 42

ittham ānanda-sandoham anuvindan nimagna-dhīḥ

ātmārāma ivābhūvaṁ pūrṇa-kāma ivāthavā

ittham – thus; ānanda-sandoham – immense bliss;
anuvindan – feeling; nimagna – submerged; dhīḥ – my
mind; ātma-ārāmaḥ – self-satisfied; iva – as if; abhūvam
– I became; pūrṇa-kāmaḥ – one whose desires are
fulfilled; iva – as if; atha vā – or.

In this way, my mind became   submerged in an ocean of
bliss. At that time, I also   felt like one who is
ātmārāma – satisfied in the   self, or who is pūrṇa-kāma –
whose every desire has been   fulfilled.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “My mind was
inundated by the [above-mentioned] ocean of bliss, and
therefore, at that time, I also became like one whose
internal and external desires have been fulfilled
(ātmārāma and pūrṇa-kāma).” The word iva, meaning
‘like,’ refutes the idea that Gopa-kumāra had actually
obtained the stage of self-satisfaction. When one
attains this stage, he does not have

the propensity to want to see the Lord directly. Gopa-
kumāra, on the other hand, says, “I had a powerful
inclination to see the Lord.”



Verse 43

tarkārcita-vicāraughair idam eva paraṁ padam

parāṁ kāṣṭhāṁ gataṁ caitad amaṁsi paramaṁ phalam

tarka – logically; arcita – examining; vicāra –
thoughts; oghaiḥ – my flow of; idam – this; eva –

                          364
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

indeed; param – supreme; padam – destination; parām –
supreme; kāṣṭhām – pinnacle; gatam – attained; ca –
also; etat – this; amaṁsi – I concluded; paramam –
ultimate; phalam – achievement.

At that time, with logic and reason, I deliberated
within my mind and concluded that this alone is the
supreme destination and the ultimate limit of supreme
perfection.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra explains the reason
why he became similar to one who has attained the states
of being self-satisfied, or ātmārāma, and totally
fulfilled, or pūrṇa-kāma. He says, “I carefully examined
and meditated on all varieties of logical argument and
concluded in my heart that this Mahākāla-pura was the
topmost abode and the ultimate limit of consummate
perfection.”



Verse 44

pada-svābhāvikānanda-taraṅga-kṣobha-vihvale

citte tad-anya-sva-prāpya-jñānam antar-dadhāv iva

pada – of that place; svābhāvika – spontaneous; ānanda –
of bliss; taraṅga – waves; kṣobha – by the turbulent;
vihvale – overwhelmed; citte – in the heart; tat-anya –
another; sva – own; prāpya – having attained; jñānam –
knowledge; antar-dadhau – disappeared; iva – as if.

My heart became overwhelmed and was thus unsteady due to
the waves of bliss that were natural to Mahākāla-pura.
Knowledge of all other things that I had previously
acquired automatically almost disappeared, leaving only
knowledge of Parameśvara.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The Mathurā brāhmaṇa may question,
“You are Śrī Madana-gopāla’s devotee, and by now you are
well aware of His beauty and sweetness also. Therefore,
how could you possibly consider this abode of liberation
to be topmost?”

In this verse, Śrī Gopa-kumāra replies, “Mahākāla-pura
is filled with waves of joy that are natural to that
abode and that agitate the consciousness, making one
extremely restless. This change in the state of one’s
consciousness causes loss of constancy, which makes one
forgetful of everything. At that time, all knowledge
pertaining to all revered objects other than the Supreme
Lord automatically disappears from

the heart. It is the extreme happiness obtained in that
abode that makes the experience of other objects seem to
disappear from one’s heart.”

The word iva indicates that this knowledge does not
disappear altogether.



Verse 45

                          365
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


śrīman-mahā-bhāgavatopadeśataḥ

san-mantra-sevā-balato na kevalam

līnā kadācin nija-pūjya-devatā-

pādābja-sākṣād-avaloka-lālasā

śrīmat-mahā-bhāgavata – of the glorious great devotee;
upadeśataḥ – through the instruction; sat-mantra – to
the transcendental mantra; sevā – of service; balataḥ –
on account of the power; na – not; kevalam – in
impersonal liberation; līnā – merged; kadācit – ever;
nija – my own; pūjya – adorable; devatā – of the Deity;
pāda-abjaḥ – of the lotus feet; sākṣāt – direct; avaloka
– for the sight; lālasā – desire.

By the influence of the instructions of mahā-bhāgavata
Śrī Gurudeva, and by the power of service to the mantra
he gave me, my desire to directly see my worshipable
Deity’s lotus feet never left me.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “That abode of
liberation was capable of making one forget everything.
However, due to the mercy of the lotus feet of Śrī
Gurudeva and by the influence of service to the mantra
given by him, my desire to see the lotus feet of my

worshipable Deity, Śrī Madana-gopāla, did not go away.
Therefore, although I stayed there in order to obtain
the topmost position, just

as I had done in the other realms, I nevertheless
remained detached as always.” He explains this in three
verses beginning with śrīman-mahā-bhāgavata. “Due to the
instructions of Śrī Gurudeva and the influence of
chanting the mantra given by him, my ardent longing to
directly see my worshipable Deity, Śrī Madana-gopāla,
never disappeared.”



Verse 46

utāsya tejo-maya-pūruṣasya cirāvalokena vivardhito ’bhūt

nijeṣṭa-sandarśana-dīrgha-lobhaḥ smṛteḥ sṛtiṁ nīta iva
prakarṣāt

uta – rather; asya – of Him; tejaḥ-maya – splendid;
pūruṣasya – of the Supreme Person; cira – for a long
time; avalokena – by seeing; vivardhitaḥ – increased;
abhūt – became; nija – own; iṣṭa – worshipable Lord;
sandarśana – seeing; dīrgha – profound; lobhaḥ – greed;
smṛteḥ – of my memory; sṛtim – on the path; nītaḥ –
brought; iva – like; prakarṣāt – by forceful pulling.

Rather, by seeing that effulgent Personality for a long
time, my greed for direct darśana of my worshipable
Deity Śrī Madana-gopāla increased even more, and He
seemed to be forcing Himself on the path of my memory.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The brāhmaṇa may ask, “Why is that

                          366
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

abode of liberation more glorious than Brahmaloka?”

In reply, Śrī Gopa-kumāra speaks this verse beginning
with utā. He says, “I observed the effulgent Deity of
the abode of liberation, Parameśvara, for a long time,
which only increased my long-standing

eagerness to have direct darśana of my worshipable
Deity, Śrī Madana-gopāla. That eagerness was never
extinguished; rather, seeing Parameśvara stimulated my
recollection so that Śrī Madana-gopāla started
manifesting in my memory by force. Memory is a special
function of the mind. Just as memory is drawn to that
which is excellent, similarly, the extended audience of
that effulgent Personality increased remembrance of my
worshipable Deity.”

The intent of the word iva is, ‘factually, I never
forgot Him.’



Verse 47

tena taṁ prakaṭaṁ paśyann api prīye na pūrva-vat

sīdāmy atha layaṁ svasya śaṅkamānaḥ svayam-bhavam

tena – by that; tam – Him; prakaṭam – manifested; paśyan
– seeing; api – although; priye – happy; na – not;
pūrva-vat – as before; sīdāmi – I would feel distressed;
atha – then; layam – merging; svasya – of myself;
śaṅkamānaḥ– feeling apprehensive; svayam-bhavam – self-
manifest.

Therefore, although I was seeing the Lord of the abode
of liberation, Parameśvara, in His personal form, I
could not be happy as before. Rather, I was always
disturbed and frightened, thinking, “I might merge into
Him.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Constant
darśana of the Lord of the realm of liberation in His
personal feature of Parameśvara increased my greed to
see my own worshipable Lord, my iṣṭa-deva, but still I
could not become happy as I was before. Rather, I
remained perpetually disturbed by the fear that I could
merge into that effulgent Personality. The reason for
this was that all the living beings would enter into
that effulgent Lord, the presiding Deity of mukti-pada,
because of their extreme proximity to Him. This was the
nature of that abode. I was also very near Him. Thus I
was always miserable, fearing that if I merged into Him,
my longstanding desire to see my worshipable Deity would
die forever.”



Verse 48

vraja-bhūmāv ihāgatya sādhaye ’haṁ sva-vañchitam

vimṛśann evam aśrauṣaṁ gīta-vādyādbhuta-dhvanim


                          367
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

vraja-bhūmau – in the land of Vraja; iha – now; āgatya –
coming; sādhaye – I shall execute the limbs of bhakti;
aham – I; sva-vāñchitam – desired by me; vimṛśan – while
considering; evam – in this way; aśrauṣam – I heard;
gīta – singing; vādya – of musical instruments; adbhuta
– extraordinary; dhvanim – sound.

Just as I was thinking, “When shall I go to Vraja-bhūmi
and perform the devotional practices I desire?” I heard
the sound of extraordinary singing and instrumental
music.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “I resolved,
‘Therefore, I shall return to Vraja and do what I desire
– perform my devotional practices (sādhana) to have
darśana of my worshipable Deity.’ Meditating in this
way, I went a little ahead and heard the wonderful sound
of singing and musical instruments. This special sound,
which I had never heard before, indicated the meeting of
Lord Śiva with the Lord of the abode of liberation,
Mahā-puruṣa.”



Verse 49

hṛṣṭo ’haṁ paritaḥ paśyan vṛṣārūḍhaṁ vyalokayam

kam apy ūrdhva-padāt tatrāyāntaṁ sarva-vilakṣaṇam

hṛṣṭaḥ – thrilled; aham – I; paritaḥ – all around;
paśyan – looking; vṛṣa – on a bull; ārūḍham – mounted;
vyalokayam – I saw; kam api – someone; ūrdhva-padāt –
from a higher realm; tatra – there; āyāntam – coming;
sarva – amongst all others; vilakṣaṇam – unique.

Thrilled to hear that sound, I looked all around and saw
a completely extraordinary person sitting on a bull and
descending from a higher realm.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Then I saw an
all-wonderful and unparalleled personality. He was
descending into

mukti-pada from the upper region of the abode of
liberation, riding on a bull.” Here, the reason Gopa-
kumāra says ‘one personality’ is

because at that time, he did not know the real nature
(tattva) of that person. “What was this form of Bhagavān
like? It was more extraordinary and unique than all
other forms of Bhagavān I had ever seen in the past.”



Verse 50

karpūra-gauraṁ tri-dṛśaṁ dig-ambaraṁ

candrārdha-mauliṁ lalitaṁ tri-śūlinam

gaṅgā-jalāmlāna-jaṭāvalī-dharaṁ

bhasmāṅga-rāgaṁ rucirāsthi-mālinam

                          368
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


karpūra – camphor; gauram – white; tri-dṛśam – three-
eyed; dik-ambaram – dressed by the directions, i.e.
naked; candra-ardha – by a half-moon; maulim – crowned;
lalitam – graceful; tri-śūlinam – holding a trident;
gaṅgā – of the Gaṅgā; jala – water; amlāna – bright;
jaṭā-āvalī – rows of matted hair; dharam – wearing;
bhasma – of crematorium ashes; aṅga-rāgam – smeared with
the cosmetic; rucira – enchanting; asthi – of bones;
mālinam – with a garland.

That three-eyed personality was as white as camphor and
clad only in the directions. Charming, and adorned with
a half-moon on his forehead, he looked beautiful, with
matted locks washed by Gaṅgā water. His body was coated
with ashes, he sported an enchanting garland of bones,
and he was carrying a trident in his hand.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: With two verses, beginning here with

karpūra, Śrī Gopa-kumāra indicates the extraordinary
nature of that personality. He says, “His complexion was
white like camphor and he was gorgeous. He held a
trident in his hand and Gaṅgā water was washing his
matted hair. Śrī Gaṅgā-devī had become more beautiful by
taking shelter in those matted locks. His body was
smeared with ashes and he was wearing a beautiful
garland of bones that had been taken from the bodies of
the crest jewels of Vaiṣṇavas after they had abandoned
those bodies upon departing from this world.”



Verse 51

gauryā nijāṅkāśritayānurañjitaṁ

divyāti-divyaiḥ kalitaṁ paricchadaiḥ

ātmānurūpaiḥ parivāra-sañcayaiḥ

saṁsevyamānaṁ rucirākṛtīhitaiḥ

gauryā – with Gaurī; nija-aṅka – on his lap; āśritayā –
by taking shelter; anurañjitam – pleased; divya-ati-
divyaiḥ – with supremely divine items; kalitam –
offered; paricchadaiḥ – with paraphernalia; ātma-
anurūpaiḥ – suitable for his service; parivāra – of
associates; sañcayaiḥ – by his assembly; saṁsevyamānam –
being rendered all kinds of service; rucira-ākṛti –
whose charming forms; īhitaiḥ – by the activities.

Sitting on his lap was a woman of golden complexion, who
was satisfied with his affection. That great personality
was surrounded by suitable attendants who were serving
him with celestial umbrellas, cāmaras, and other items
that were even more divine than that of heaven. These
servants, whose forms and actions were most enchanting,
were perfectly suited to their master.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Śrī Gaurāṅgī
(Pārvatī-devī) was sitting on his lap, and they were
delighting one another with their mutual love.” Gopa-
kumāra does not know her identity, and so he uses the

                          369
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

word gaurāṅgī (one with a golden hue), referring to her
by complexion. “The most divine, super-excellent
umbrellas, yak-tail fans (cāmaras), and other
paraphernalia adorned Mahādeva, and attendants just
suited to him were serving him. Some of his devotees
were fanning him with the yak-tail fans, another held up
the umbrella, and so on. What were his followers like?
Their forms and the movements of their bodies were very
pleasing. For instance, Śrī Gaṇeśa had a big belly and
the head of an elephant.”

By worshiping Gaṇeśa and other demigods, one obtains a
bodily shape like them. However, it is explained in Śrī
Vāmana Purāṇa, in the episode of the war between Lord
Śiva and Andhaka, that by worshiping Śiva with the
sentiment that he is nondifferent from Śrī Kṛṣṇa, one
receives a very beautiful body on Śrī Śiva’s planet.



Verse 52

paramaṁ vismayaṁ prāpto harṣaṁ caitad acintayam

ko ’nv ayaṁ pārivārāḍhyo bhāti mukti-padopari

paramam – extreme;   vismayam – wonder; prāptaḥ –
attained; harṣam –   joy; ca – and; etat – this; acintayam
– I thought; kaḥ –   who?; nu – indeed; ayam – this
person; parivāra –   by entourage; āḍhyaḥ – en-

hanced; bhāti – shines; mukti – of liberation; pada –
the abode; upari – above.

Seeing him, I was astonished and elated, and I thought,
“Who is this personality coming from above the abode of
liberation and surrounded by such an entourage?”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “He was the
cause of delight and astonishment. I wondered, ‘Who is
this male personality ( puruṣa), surrounded by such a
retinue and coming from the region above the abode of
liberation?’ ”



Verse 53

jagad-vilakṣaṇaiśvaryo mukta-vargādhiko ’pi san

lakṣyate ’ti-sad-ācāro mahā-viṣayavān iva

jagat – to the material world; vilakṣaṇa –
extraordinary; aiśvaryaḥ – opulences; mukta – of
liberated souls; varga – than the assembly; adhikaḥ –
superior; api – even; san – being; lakṣyate – appearing;
ati-sat-ācāraḥ – transcendental to the codes of good
conduct; mahā-viṣaya-vān – a great sensualist; iva –
like.

His distinctive opulences far surpassed anything of this
world. Although he is far superior to all liberated
souls, at the same time, he gave the impression of being
a great hedonist who transgresses virtuous conduct.

                            370
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017


Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra continues, “That
person, with his incomparable power and opulences, was
extraordinary and distinct from this world. Still, he
seemed to transgress the boundaries of acceptable
behavior. He was fully renounced and naked, yet he
always kept his beloved on his lap. He was the best of
liberated personalities, freed from any connection to
sense objects, yet he was using luxuries of an great
enjoyer, such as an umbrella and yak-tail fans.
Therefore, all his opulence and majesty seemed
extraordinary and surprising.” Here the word iva,
meaning ‘as if,’ factually refutes the possibility of
his being a hedonist. This becomes apparent when one
deliberates on the truth about him. “He was the Supreme
Lord, or Parameśvara, who protects religious principles,
but he seemed to be violating societal norms.
Additionally, the nature he exhibited was that of a
highly liberated person, yet he was enjoying sense
objects. I became very surprised to observe such
peculiar behavior.”



Verse 54

parānanda-bharākrānta-cetās tad-darśanād aham

naman sa-parivāraṁ taṁ kṛpayālokito ’munā

para-ānanda – of transcendental bliss; bhara – by an
excess; ākrānta – overwhelmed; cetaḥ – heart; tat-
darśanāt – from seeing him; aham – I; naman – offering
obeisances; sa-parivāram – with his associates; tam – to
him; kṛpayā – with mercy; ālokitaḥ – glanced; amunā – by
him.

Seeing the husband of Gaurī, my consciousness was
overwhelmed with great bliss. I offered obeisances to
him along with all his associates, and he cast his
merciful glance upon me.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The verse translation is clear.



Verse 55

harṣa-vegād upavrajya śrīman-nandīśvarāhvayam

apṛcchaṁ tad-gaṇādhyakṣaṁ tad-vṛttāntaṁ viśeṣataḥ

harṣa – of bliss; vegāt – because of the influence;
upavrajya – approaching; śrīmat-nandīśvara – Śrīman
Nandīśvara; āhvayam – named; apṛccham – I asked; tat-
gaṇa – of their group; adhyakṣam – the leader; tat-
vṛttāntam – His (Lord Śiva’s) history; viśeṣataḥ – in
detail.

Feeling supreme joy, I approached and specifically
inquired about him from the leader of his associates,
Śrīman Nandīśvara.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Bursting with

                          371
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

joy, I approached Gaurīpati. Addressing Śrīman
Nandīśvara, who is Gaurī-pati’s foremost servant, I
specifically inquired, ‘Who is he? Where does he live
and where is he going?’ ”



Verse 56

sa sa-hāsam avocan māṁ gopālopāsanā-para

gopa-bāla na jānīṣe śrī-śivaṁ jagad-īśvaram

saḥ – he; sa-hāsam – with a laugh; avocat – said; mām –
to me; gopāla – of Śrī Gopāla; upāsanā-para – devoted to
the worship; gopa-bāla – O cowherd boy; na – not; jānīṣe
– you know; śrī-śivam – Lord Śiva; jagat – of the
universe; īśvaram – the Lord.

He (Śrī Nandī) laughed and told me, “O cowherd boy, you
are devoted to the worship of Gopāla! You don’t know
that this is Jagadīśvara Lord Śiva, the lord of the
universe?

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nandīśvara says, “O one attached
to the worship of Gopāla!” This address dispels any
possibility of such a person’s being ignorant about Śrī
Śiva, for it is impossible that someone devoted to
worshiping Gopāla would not know about

Śrī Śiva. “But still you don’t know about Lord Śiva?”
Therefore, laughing, Śrī Nandīśvara again says, “O gopa-
bāla!” The meaning is: “Since you are simply a cowherd
boy, you may be unaware of śiva-tattva, the essential
truth about Lord Śiva.”

Śrī Nandīśvara’s use of the address ‘Jagadīśvara,’
meaning ‘controller of the universe,’ indicates that Śrī
Mahādeva is completely independent, and therefore, even
the fault of transgressing moral conduct does not touch
him.



Verse 57

bhukter mukteś ca dātāyaṁ bhagavad-bhakti-vardhanaḥ

muktānām api sampūjyo vaiṣṇavānāṁ ca vallabhaḥ

bhukteḥ – of material pleasure; mukteḥ – of liberation;
ca – and; dātā – the giver; ayam – he; bhagavat-bhakti –
devotion to the Lord; vardhanaḥ – increasing; muktānām –
of the liberated souls; api – even; sampūjyaḥ – fully
worshipable; vaiṣṇavānām – to the Vaiṣṇavas; ca – also;
vallabhaḥ – dear.

“He is the giver of both material pleasure and
liberation, and he increases the devotees’ love for
Bhagavān. He is worshipable by all liberated souls and
is very dear to the Vaiṣṇavas.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrīman Nandīśvara says, “Śrī Śiva
displays ever-increasing devotion and affection for Śrī

                          372
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa, and this makes Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s love for him increase
further. Although he is bhagavān, a worshipable lord
himself, he increases one’s devotion for Śrī Kṛṣṇa.” It
may also be said, “Although he bestows sense pleasure
and liberation, he also increases devotion (bhakti),
which is the crest jewel of all the goals of human life
(puruṣārthas).”

Here, when Śrī Nandīśvara, who is Śrī Śiva’s devotee,
uses the words bhagavad-bhakti-vardhana, it conveys the
following meaning: Śrī Śiva augments the devotee’s love
for him when the devotee regards him (Śiva) as
nondifferent from Śrī Kṛṣṇa. However, by his words and
his behavior, Lord Śiva only increases devotion to
Bhagavān in this world. For this reason, he is dear to
the Vaiṣṇavas. He is also dear to all Vaiṣṇavas because
he is nondifferent from Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Or, it can be said
that because the Vaiṣṇavas receive Śrī Śiva’s
association, he is dear to them.



VerseS 58–59

śiva-kṛṣṇāpṛthag-dṛṣṭi-bhakti-labhyāt sva-lokataḥ

svānurūpāt kuberasya sakhyur bhakti-vaśī-kṛtaḥ

kailāsādrim alaṅkartuṁ pārvatyā priyayā’nayā

samaṁ parimitair yāti priyaiḥ parivṛtair vṛtaḥ

śiva – Śrī Śiva; kṛṣṇa – and Śrī Kṛṣṇa; apṛthak –
nondifferent; dṛṣṭi – vision; bhakti – devotional
service; labhyāt – because of being attained; sva-
lokataḥ – from his own realm; sva-anurūpāt – suitable

for him; kuberasya – of Kubera; sakhyuḥ – friend; bhakti
– by devotion; vaśī-kṛtaḥ – controlled; kailāsa-adrim –
the mountain of Kailāsa; alaṅkartum – to adorn; pārvatyā
– with Pārvatī; priyayā – his beloved; anayā – her;
samam – with; parimitaiḥ – ascetic; yāti – goes; priyaiḥ
– dear; parivṛtaiḥ – with associates; vṛtaḥ –
surrounded.

“When bhakti is performed with the perspective that Śrī
Śiva and Śrī Kṛṣṇa are nondifferent, one attains that
abode, Śivaloka, which perfectly corresponds to Lord
Śiva. Now, captivated by the devotion of his friend
Kuvera for him, Lord Śiva has left this abode. With his
beloved Pārvatī and some of his followers, he is
traveling to Mount Kailāsa to increase its beauty with
his presence.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra may ask, “Where is he
coming from? Where is he going?”

Nandīśvara replies, “Lord Śiva is going from his abode
of Śivaloka to Mount Kailāsa to beautify it with his
presence.”

“Why is he going?”

“He is going there because Śrī Śiva is captivated by the

                          373
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

power of Kuvera’s friendship and devotion to him.”

“What is Lord Śiva’s abode like?”

“When the devotee performs bhakti, considering Śrī Śiva
and Śrī Kṛṣṇa to be nondifferent, he attains Śivaloka.
Lord Śiva’s abode, being eternal and full of unlimited
varieties of opulences and wealth, is perfectly suited
for Śrī Śiva’s pleasure. From that abode, he has come
with his beloved Pārvatī and a small number of his
associates.”

Gopa-kumāra had said, “Śrī Pārvatī was sitting on the
lap of Śrī Śiva.” This is an introduction of Śrī Pārvatī
based on truth. When it is said, “Lord Śiva always keeps
his beloved on his lap,” the words mean that because
Pārvatī is Śiva’s śakti, or potency, there is no
difference between them, and improprieties such as
embracing one’s beloved in public do not apply to them.

“Why is he going with only a few followers, leaving
behind his vast opulence and unlimited associates
present on Śivaloka?”

“Mount Kailāsa is limited, being situated within the
material universe. Therefore, he is going with only a
handful of associates for relaxed and unreserved
enjoyment.”



Verse 60

śrī-gopa-kumāra uvāca

tad ākarṇyā prahṛṣṭo ’ham aicchaṁ tasmān maheśvarāt

prasādaṁ kam api prāptum ātmano hṛdayaṅ-gamam

śrī-gopa-kumāraḥ uvāca – Śrī Gopa-kumāra said; tat –
that; ākarṇya – hearing; prahṛṣṭaḥ – very joyful; aham –
I; aiccham – desired; tasmāt – from him; maheśvarāt –
Śrī Maheśvara; prasādam – mercy; kam api – something;
prāptum – to obtain; ātmanaḥ – of the self; hṛdayam-
gamam – pleasing to the heart.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra said: I was extremely pleased to hear
Nandīśvara’s words. When I understood that Śiva and
Kṛṣṇa are nondifferent, I began to desire to obtain some
special mercy from Maheśvara that I could perceive and
experience.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “I was delighted
to hear Śrī Nandīśvara’s words. Having understood that
Lord Śiva and Śrī Madana-gopāla are nondifferent, I
desired some special mercy from Śrī Śiva. I was
naturally attached to the lotus feet of Śrī Madana-
gopāla. Nevertheless, when I witnessed the supreme
opulence of

Śiva, I became unable to abandon him either. I thought
that since Śrī Mahādeva was nondifferent from my Śrī
Madana-gopāla, my mind would be satisfied.”


                          374
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017



Verse 61

jñātvā bhagavatā tena dṛṣṭyādiṣṭasya nandinaḥ

upadeśena śuddhena svayaṁ me sphurad añjasā

jñātvā – understood; bhagavatā – by the omniscient
bhagavān Śrī Mahādeva; tena – him; dṛṣṭyā – with a
glance; ādiṣṭasya – who was instructed; nandinaḥ – of
Nandīśvara; upadeśena – by the guidance; śuddhena –
pure; svayam – naturally; me – to me; sphurat –
manifested; añjasā – at once.

The omniscient bhagavān Śrī Mahādeva understood my
intention and ordered Śrī Nandīśvara to instruct me. By
Nandīśvara’s pure guidance, the truth of oneness easily
manifested in my heart.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “The crest jewel
of all omniscient personalities, the great lord Śrī
Maheśvara, understood my intention and, with a glance,
he ordered his foremost follower,

Śrī Nandīśvara – or alternatively, the bull named Śrī
Nandī, who

is born from a portion of Śrī Bhagavān – to impart
knowledge of the nondifference between Śrī Śiva and Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. Due to his pure instructions, this understanding
automatically manifested in

my heart.”



Verse 62

śrīman-madana-gopālān nija-prāṇeṣṭa-daivatāt

abhinnaḥ śrī-maheśo ’yam uta tad-bhāva-vardhanaḥ

śrīmat-madana-gopālāt – the beautiful enchanting
cowherd; nija-prāṇa – who is dearer than my own life;
iṣṭa-daivatāt – from the worshipable Lord of my life;
abhinnaḥ – nondifferent; śrī-mahā-īśaḥ – the great Lord
(Śiva); ayam – he; uta – indeed; tat-bhāva – the loving
devotional service for Him (Madana-gopāla); vardhanaḥ –
inspires.

Then I could understand that this Śrī Maheśvara is
nondifferent from Śrī Madana-gopāla, the worshipable
Deity of my very life, and he alone causes all devotees
to increase their devotion to the Lord.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “This truth
manifested in my heart: Śrī Maheśvara is nondifferent
from my iṣṭa-devatā Śrī Madana-gopāla, who is more dear
to me than life. Thus it is right to love Śrī Maheśvara
also. In addition, by worshiping Śrī Maheśvara, I will
worship Madana-gopāla. Significantly, since Śrī Mahādeva
increases the devotees’ love for Śrī Madana-gopāla, one
can obtain love for Śrī Madana-gopāla by devotion to Śrī

                          375
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

Mahādeva.”



Verse 63

sukhaṁ tad-gaṇa-madhye ’haṁ praviṣṭaḥ prīṇito ’khilaiḥ

śaivaiḥ śrī-nandino ’śrauṣaṁ vṛttam etad vilakṣaṇam

sukham – happily; tat-gaṇa-madhye – in the midst of his
associates; aham – I; praviṣṭaḥ – entered; prīṇataḥ –
increased my pleasure; akhilaiḥ – all; śaivaiḥ – Lord
Śiva’s associates; śrī-nandinaḥ – of Śrī Nandī; aśrauṣam
– I heard; vṛttam – an account; etat – this; vilakṣaṇam
– extraordinary.

I cheerfully joined Śrī Śiva’s followers, who increased
my pleasure even more. Then I heard an extraordinary
account from the bull named Śrī Nandī, Lord Śiva’s
carrier.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “With great
happiness I joined Śrī Śiva’s associates, who all
delighted my heart. Then I heard the narration of the
bull Śrī Nandī. As I was a cowherd boy who loves the
cows, naturally I developed affection for that bull. I
was very happy to stay with him and hear his
instructions.”



Verse 64

sadaika-rūpo bhagavān śivo ’yaṁ vasan sva-loke prakaṭaḥ
sadaiva

vilokyate tatra nivāsa-tuṣṭais tad-eka-niṣṭhaiḥ satataṁ
nijeṣṭaiḥ

sadā – eternally; eka-rūpaḥ – in one form; bhagavān
śivaḥ – Lord Śiva; ayam – this; vasan – residing; sva-
loke – in his own realm; prakaṭaḥ – manifested; sadā –
eternally; eva – indeed; vilokyate – is seen; tatra –
there; nivāsa – by his residence; tuṣṭaiḥ – by those who
are pleased; tat – to him; eka-niṣṭhaiḥ – having
exclusive attachment; satatam – always; nija – own;
iṣṭaiḥ – worshiped.

This bhagavān Śrī Śiva exists eternally in one form, and
he is always manifest in his beloved Śivaloka, where his
unalloyed devotees, who also reside there perpetually,
see him with great happiness.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: “What did I hear from Śrī Nandī?” To
explain this, Śrī Gopa-kumāra speaks the three verses,
beginning here with sadā-eka-rūpaḥ. He says, “Bhagavān
Śrī Śiva always remains in one form. He does not appear
in a personal form at some times and in an impersonal
form at other times, as does the Supreme Lord of the
abode of liberation.”

Alternatively, eka-rūpa, meaning ‘one form,’ denotes
that “He does not manifest in different forms, like

                          376
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

Matsya (the fish incarnation), Kūrma (the tortoise
incarnation), and so on. Thus, his loving devotees do
not have to suffer from the distress of seeing some
other form of their worshipable lord, and so there is no
obstacle to the wealth of their happiness.

“He is always visible in his abode; He does not
disappear like Śrī Viṣṇu to go elsewhere. His unalloyed
devotees, the special recipients of his affection,
continuously reside with him and gaze upon him with
great happiness.”

Lord Śiva’s devotee, Śrī Nandī, is implying, “This
indicates the specialty of Śrī Śiva over Śrī Viṣṇu,
Yajñeśvara, etc., the predominating Deities of Svarga,
Maharloka, and so on.”

“Śrī Śiva is always in one form.” This statement
actually means that Śrī Śiva’s body is sac-cid-ānanda,
comprised of eternity, knowledge, and bliss, and is thus
not subject to transformation. His abode, Śivaloka, is
beyond even the abode of liberation, which is above the
illusory material creation made of five elements. His
perpetual presence there increases pleasure within the
minds of his associates and delights their vision. Those
who eternally reside in that Śivaloka remain happy in
their exclusive, unwavering love for Śrī Śiva.



Verse 65

svābhinna-bhagavad-bhakti-lāmpaṭyaṁ grāhayann iva

sadā ramayati svīyān nṛtya-gītādi-kautukaiḥ

sva-abhinna – nondifferent; bhagavat-bhakti – devotion
to Śrī Kṛṣṇa; lāmpaṭyam – eagerness to relish; grāhayan
– motivating; iva – as if; sadā – always; ramayati –
delights; svīyān – own; nṛtya-gīta – with dancing,
singing; ādi – and so forth; kautukaiḥ – with festivals.

Śrī Śiva is always personally engaged in an ongoing
festival of dancing, singing, and chanting the Lord’s
names. With his instructions he makes his devotees
happy, kindling their greed for devotional service to
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is nondifferent from himself.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Śrī Śiva is
always enjoying a festival of dancing and singing with
his devotees, and thus he makes them happy.” The word
ādi indicates that Śrī Śiva always engages in saṅkīrtana
(chanting) of Bhagavān’s names and sheds tears out of
reverence and love for the Lord. “Why does he chant the
names of Śrī Bhagavān? Śrī Śiva practices bhakti himself
and instructs all people to accept this path, thus
making them happy. However, this is to stimulate his own
greed to relish devotion to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is
nondifferent from him.” The word iva has the following
meaning: “Like Śrī Nārada, Śrī Śiva is a devotee
incarnation, or bhakta-avatāra, an empowered incarnation
of the Lord who is always absorbed in devotion to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.”


                          377
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017



Verse 66

bhagavantaṁ sahasrāsyaṁ śeṣa-mūrtiṁ nija-priyam

nityam arcayati premṇā dāsa-vaj jagad-īśvaraḥ

bhagavantam – the Lord; sahasra-āsyam – who has a
thousand heads; śeṣa – of Śeṣa; mūrtim – form; nija-
priyam – his own beloved; nityam – eternally; arcayati –
worships; premṇā – with love; dāsa-vat – like a servant;
jagad-īśvaraḥ – Śrī Śiva, lord of the world.

Although Śrī Śiva is the lord of the world, like a
servant, he always lovingly worships the thousand-hooded
Śeṣa, his beloved form

of Bhagavān.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Although Śrī
Śiva is the lord of the universe, he always
affectionately worships the Śeṣa manifestation of
Bhagavān, as a servant. The only reason for this worship
is that he loves Bhagavān Śeṣa. As a līlā, or pastime,
the worshiped (upāsya – Śrī Śeṣa) and the worshiper
(upāsaka – Śrī Śiva) are both predominating Deities of
the mode of ignorance. Because of that, Śrī Śiva
eternally worships his beloved Bhagavān Śrī Śeṣa with
love.”

In the account of Ilāvṛta-varṣa, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(5.17.16) describes Śaṅkara as a worshiper:

bhavānī-nāthaiḥ strī-gaṇārbuda-sahasrair

avarudhyamāno bhagavataś catur-mūrter

mahā-puruṣasya turīyāṁ tāmasīṁ mūrtiṁ

prakṛtim ātmanaḥ saṅkarṣaṇa-saṁjñām

ātma-samādhi-rūpeṇa sannidhāpyaitad

abhigṛṇan bhava upadhāvati

In this varṣa (tract of land), Bhagavān Śaṅkara is
always served by Pārvatī and her millions of
maidservants. The Supreme Lord has four manifestations:
Vāsudeva, Pradyumna, Aniruddha, and Saṅkarṣaṇa. The
fourth one, Saṅkarṣaṇa, is the direct cause of Śrī
Śiva’s existence and predominates over the mode of
ignorance, or tamas. In the yoga of ātma-samādhi, the
mystical practice of resolute meditation on the
Supersoul, Śaṅkara meditates on Saṅkarṣaṇa’s form in his
heart and always worships Him with prayers and
glorifications.

This Śeṣa Saṅkarṣaṇa, who is worshiped by Śrī Śiva, is
the presiding Deity of the mode of ignorance, or tama-
guṇa, and, at the time of the cosmic annihilation, He
sets this mode into motion. Factually, His completely
pure and transcendental form is turīya, meaning it is of
the fourth dimension, which is beyond the three modes of

                             378
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

material nature. Śeṣa Saṅkarṣaṇa has special qualities
and characteristics in relation to Saṅkarṣaṇa who is the
presiding Deity of the layer of false ego around the
material universe. For this reason, the term sahasra-
āsyam

(thousand-hooded) is being used in the original verse.
Reference to Śeṣa is also found in the Śiva-stuti, the
prayers of Śrī Śiva [Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam

5.17.21]. Śeṣa Saṅkarṣaṇa generally has four arms like
Śrī Saṅkarṣaṇa, Śrī Pradyumna, Śrī Aniruddha, etc. of
the quadruple expansion.

In this way, the exultation and superiority of Śivaloka
has

been revealed.



Verse 67

jñātvemaṁ śiva-lokasya viśeṣaṁ sarvato ’dhikam

pramodaṁ paramaṁ prāpto ’py apūrṇaṁ hṛd alakṣayam

jñātvā – knowing; imam – this; śiva-lokasya – of
Śivaloka; viśeṣam – special; sarvataḥ – than all;
adhikam – better; pramodam – happiness; paramam –
transcendental; prāptaḥ – attained; api – also; apūrṇam
– incompleteness; hṛt– in the heart; alakṣayam – I felt.

I became most happy to learn that Śivaloka is more
special and more glorious than all other abodes. Still,
I felt my heart was not full.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Hearing the
special glories of Śivaloka made me greatly happy, and I
became keen to go there. But my eagerness to see the
lotus feet of Śrī Madana-gopāla obstructed my happiness.
I understood this because I was feeling troubled by an
incompleteness, or underlying dissatisfaction, and also
because I was unable to experience any special
happiness.”



Verse 68

tan-nidānam anāsādya sadyo ’jñāsiṣam āmṛśan

śrīmad-guru-prasādāpta-vastu-sevā-prabhāvataḥ

tat-nidānam – the reason for that; anāsādya – not
attaining; sadyaḥ – at once; ajñāsiṣam – I understood;
āmṛśan – while thinking; śrīmat-guru – of my glorious
guru; prasāda – by the mercy; āpta – attained; vastu –
to the substantial item; sevā – of service rendered;
prabhāvataḥ – by the power.

At first I could not discern even a trace of the reason
for my discontent, but as soon as I reflected on it,
everything immediately became clear by the influence of

                          379
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

my service to the mantra that

Śrī Gurudeva had mercifully given me.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “At first, I
could not grasp why I was dissatisfied. However, as soon
as I pondered the situation, I could immediately
understand everything. How is that? It was possible by
the influence of my service to the ten-syllable mantra
that Śrī Gurudeva had mercifully given me.”



Verse 69

śrīman-madana-gopāla-deva-pāda-sarojayoḥ

līlādy-anubhavābhāvo mām ayaṁ bādhate kila

śrīmat-madana-gopāla-deva – of the lovely enchanting
cowherd; pāda-sarojayoḥ – to the lotus feet; līlā – of
the divine pastimes; ādi – and so forth; anubhava – of
experience; abhāvaḥ – the lack; mām – me; ayam – this;
bādhate– this troubled; kila – indeed.

I was dissatisfied because I was not experiencing the
glories and pastimes of the lotus feet of Śrīman Madana-
gopāla.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: What was the reason for that
dissatisfaction? Śrī Gopa-kumāra explains this here in
this verse beginning with śrīmat. He says, “Although
there is no difference between Śrī Śiva and Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
still I was unable to experience Śrī Madana-gopāla’s
sweetness, and so I was not content.” The word ādi
indicates Madana-gopāla’s qualities – His beauty
(saundarya), His sweetness (mādhurya), His mercy
(kāruṇya), and so on. “It was especially painful for me
not to experience His pastimes. This was the cause for
my dissatisfaction.”



Verse 70

abodhayaṁ mano ’nena maheśenaiva sā khalu

līlā-viśeṣa-vaicitrī kṛtā mūrti-viśeṣataḥ

abodhayam – I instructed; manaḥ – my mind; anena – by
this; maheśena – by Lord Śiva; eva – indeed; saḥ – he;
khalu – indeed; līlā – pastimes; viśeṣa – unique;
vaicitrī – astonishing; kṛtā – done; mūrti-viśeṣataḥ –
through the speciality of his form.

Having determined this, I explained to my mind, “It is
Śrī Maheśvara himself who, having assumed some other
form that is supremely attractive, is manifesting all
those special varieties of pastimes.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “After this, I
pacified my mind. How did I do so? I said, ‘O mind, Śrī
Mahādeva, who I am seeing here, expands his wonderful
pastimes by manifesting another form that is supremely

                          380
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

beautiful.’ ”

However, the question might arise in Gopa-kumāra’s mind,
“That supremely beautiful form of Śrī Madana-gopāla-deva
is one person and this Maheśa, whom I am seeing here, is
someone else. If these are two different forms, how can
the sweetness of those special pastimes be experienced?”

To reconcile this doubt, Gopa-kumāra says, “It is this
Mahādeva alone who is manifesting the most beautiful
form and performing these extraordinary and special
pastimes.”



VerseS 71–72

tathāpy asvastham ālakṣya sva-cittam idam abruvam

yady asmin nānubhūyeta sā tad-rūpādi-mādhurī

tathāpi dīrgha-vañchā te ’nugrahād asya setsyati

acirād iti manyasva sva-prasāda-viśeṣataḥ

tathā api – still; asva-stham – dissatisfied; ālakṣya –
seeing; sva-cittam – my mind; idam – this; abruvam – I
said; yadi – if; asmin – in him (Śrī Śiva); na
anubhūyeta – is not experienced; sā – it; tat-

rūpa – that form (of Madana-gopāla); ādi – and so forth;
mādhurī – the sweetness; tathā api – however; dīrgha-
vañchā – this long-standing desire; te – your; anugrahāt
– because of the compassion; asya – his; setsyati – it
will be fulfilled; acirāt – before long; iti – thus;
manyasva – just consider; sva-prasāda – his mercy;
viśeṣataḥ – because of special.

Seeing that my mind remained dissatisfied despite my
instructions, I told it, “O mind, although you are not
able to experience the sweetness of the pastimes of Śrī
Madana-gopāla in His form as Śrī Mahādeva, still, by the
mercy of Śrī Mahādeva, your long-cherished desire will
soon be fulfilled. There is no doubt about this.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “However, my
mind was still not pacified, and I remained as unhappy
as before. Again I said, ‘O brother mind, if by
consideration of the philosophical truth (tattva-vicara)
you are unable to taste that same sweetness in this form
of Śrī Śiva, then listen to what I say. Although in Śrī
Rudra you do not directly experience Śrī Madana-gopāla’s
extraordinary qualities, pastimes, and so on, still,
your desire to enjoy those sweet human-like pastimes
will be soon fulfilled by Śrī Śiva’s uncommon mercy. O
mind! Have faith and steady yourself. Do not vacillate.
If you doubt this, he will never show you such mercy.’ ”



Verse 73

evaṁ tuṣṭa-manās tasya tatra kenāpi hetunā


                          381
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

viśrāntasya maheśasya pārśve ’tiṣṭhaṁ kṣaṇaṁ sukham

evam – thus; tuṣṭa – satisfied; manāḥ – mind; tasya – of
him; tatra – there; kenāpi – for some; hetunā – reason;
viśrāntasya – who was resting; maheśasya – Lord Śiva;
pārśve – nearby; atiṣṭham – I stood; kṣaṇam – for a
moment; sukham – pleasantly.

For some reason, Śrī Śiva rested in the abode of
liberation for a few moments. I also stood there, near
him, and pacified my mind with these words of wisdom.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Thus I
satisfied my mind with these instructive words. Then to
experience the glories of Śrī Maheśvara, I happily
remained with him for a moment.”

The brāhmaṇa could raise the doubt, “Mahādeva was going
to Mount Kailāsa, so how could you be with him?”

Gopa-kumāra replies, “For some reason, he had come to
Mahākāla-pura to rest.” The reason for that will be
explained later. Soon the eternal associates of
Vaikuṇṭha would be arriving there for Gopa-kumāra.
Hoping for their association, Śrī Śiva rested in the
abode of liberation for a moment. Here the phrase kṣaṇa-
kāla, meaning ‘for a moment,’ hints that another event
is just about to take place.



Verse 74

tarhy eva bhagavan dūre keṣām api mahātmanām

saṅgīta-dhvanir atyanta-madhuraḥ kaścid udgataḥ

tarhi eva – just then; bhagavan – O fortunate one; dūre
– far away; keṣām api – from some; mahā-ātmanām – great
souls; saṅgīta-

dhvaniḥ – the sound of singing; atyanta – very; madhuraḥ
– sweet; kaścit – something; udgataḥ – arose.

O bhagavan, O greatly fortunate one! Just then I heard
the very sweet singing of some exalted personalities in
the distance.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: To narrate this event, Śrī Gopa-kumāra
speaks six verses, beginning here with tarhi eva. He
says, “O bhagavan, at that

time we heard the indescribable sound of some great
personalities singing.”

Here Gopa-kumāra has addressed the Mathurā brāhmaṇa as

bhagavan, meaning ‘lord,’ or ‘one who has all fortune.’
Such an address indicates that, as the worshiper of Śrī
Madana-gopāla-deva, the brāhmaṇa was enjoying supremely
good fortune.




                          382
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

Verse 75

taṁ śrutvā paramānanda-sindhau magno maheśvaraḥ

mahā-prema-vikārāttaḥ pravṛtto nartituṁ svayam

tam – that; śrutvā – having heard; parama-ānanda – of
intense bliss; sindhau – in an ocean; magnaḥ – plunged;
maheśvaraḥ – Śrī Śiva; mahā-prema – of great love;
vikāra – by transformations; āttaḥ – being seized;
pravṛttaḥ – began; nartitum – to dance; svayam –
spontaneously.

Hearing the sound of that music, Maheśvara was plunged
into an ocean of intense bliss. Maddened by the stirring
of great love within himself, he spontaneously began to
dance, alone.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Hearing that
sound, Maheśvara became maddened by the transformations
(vikāra) of intense divine love, mahā-prema. Because his
heart was melting in love, he became covered by
transcendental transformations (sāttvika-vikāras) such
as perspiring (sveda), trembling (kampa), horripilating
(pulaka), choking of the voice (gadgada vacana), and
shedding tears (aśru), and he spontaneously began to
dance, alone.”



Verse 76

pati-vratottamā sā tu devī nandy-ādibhiḥ saha

prabhum utsāhayām āsa vādya-saṅkīrtanādibhiḥ

pati-vratā – chaste; uttamā – best; sā – she; tu – also;
devī – the goddess Pārvatī; nandi-ādibhiḥ saha – with
Nandī and the others; prabhum – the Lord; utsāhayām āsa
– encouraged; vādya – instrumental music; saṅkīrtana –
singing; ādibhiḥ – beginning with.

Śrī Pārvatī-devī – the crest jewel of chaste wives – and
Nandī, along with other associates, increased the
enthusiasm of their lord by playing musical instruments,
singing the names of the Lord, and so on.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Ah! Seeing her
lord lose his composure, Śrī Pārvatī-devī was not
irritated in the least. Rather, because she is the best
of chaste ladies, she joined him in his enthusiasm even
while still sitting on his lap and encouraged him by
playing musical instruments and singing glorifications
of the Lord (saṅkīrtana).”



Verse 77

sadya evāgatāṁs tatrādrākṣaṁ cāru-catur-bhujān

śrīmat-kaiśora-saundarya-mādhurya-vibhavācitān

sadyaḥ – suddenly; eva – indeed; āgatān – who had

                          383
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

arrived; tatra – there; adrākṣam – I saw; cāru –
beautiful; catuḥ-bhujān – with four arms; śrīmat-kaiśora
– of enchanting youth; saundarya – beauty; mādhurya –
sweetness; vibhava – glory; ācitān – covered with.

Then I saw that four attractive male persons had arrived
there. They had four arms and they were enchanting,
bearing the beauty and sweetness of blossoming youth.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “At that very
moment, great personalities arrived before Śrī Śiva. I
saw that they had four arms and were very attractive.”
Here the purport of the word cāru, meaning ‘beautiful,’
is that although some of Śrī Śiva’s associates had four
arms, they were not as beautiful as the Vaikuṇṭha
associates, or pārṣadas. The distinction of the
Vaikuṇṭha associates is described in Śrī Vāmana Purāṇa:
“They are endowed with the beauty and sweetness of
adolescence and are served by unlimited opulences.”



Verse 78

bhūṣā-bhūṣaṇa-gātrāṁśu-cchaṭācchādita-śaivakān

nijeśvara-mahā-kīrti-gānānanda-rasāplutān

bhūṣā – of their ornaments; bhūṣaṇa – ornaments; gātra –
of their limbs; aṁśu-chaṭā – by the splendor; ācchādita
– concealed; śaivakān – the followers of Śrī Śiva; nija
– of own; īśvara – Lord; mahā – great; kīrti-gāna –
singing the glories; ānanda – of bliss; rasa – in the
mellows; āplutān – plunged.

Those Vaikuṇṭha associates were themselves the ornaments
of their ornaments, and the effulgence of their limbs
was so brilliant that the associates of Śiva were
concealed by it. Singing the super-excellent glories of
their Lord, they were submerged in the mellow of bliss.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “They were the
ornaments even of their own ornaments, and their bodily
luster eclipsed the auspicious luster of Śiva’s
devotees. They were immersed in the blissful mellow of
singing the great glories of their Lord, Śrī Vaikuṇṭha-
nātha.”



Verse 79

anirvācya-tamāṁś ceto-hāri-sarva-paricchadān

saṅgatān pūrva-dṛṣṭais taiś caturbhiḥ sanakādibhiḥ

anirvācya-tamān – most indescribable; cetaḥ – the heart;
hāri – stealing; sarva – all; paricchadān – ornaments;
saṅgatān – accompanied; pūrva – before; dṛṣṭaiḥ – seen;
taiḥ – by them; caturbhiḥ – the four boy sages; sanaka-
ādibhiḥ – headed by Sanaka.

They are beyond the power of words to describe. Their
clothes and ornaments were so beautiful as to steal your

                          384
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

mind. Accompanying them were the four brothers headed by
Sanaka, whom I had previously seen in Tapoloka.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Their clothes
and ornaments were enchanting, and they were accompanied
by Śrī Sanaka and his three brothers, whom I had
previously seen in Tapoloka. Although the four Kumāras
always reside in Tapoloka, they are no less than the
residents of Brahmaloka (Satyaloka, the realm of Śrī
Brahmā) because they are incarnations of Bhagavān.”



Verse 80

tad-darśana-svabhāvottha-praharṣākṛṣṭa-mānasaḥ

nājñāsiṣaṁ kim apy antar bahiś cānyan nija-priyam

tat-darśana – the sight; svabhāva – naturally; uttha –
risen; praharṣa – intense joy; ākṛṣṭa – attracted;
mānasaḥ – mind; na – not; ajñāsiṣam – I knew; kim api –
anything; antaḥ – within; bahiḥ – without; ca – and;
anyam – anything; nija – own; priyam – dear.

As a natural result of their darśana, prema welled
within me and captured my mind so completely that
everything I had held dear – internal or external – was
thrust from my consciousness.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Upon receiving
their direct darśana, which captivated my mind, I was
overwhelmed with a joy so intense that I lost the
ability to understand all other matters I had held dear
– internal or external, either related to myself or to
others.”



Verse 81

kṣaṇāt svastho ’py aho teṣāṁ dāsatvam api cetasā

nāśakaṁ yācituṁ bhītyā lajjayā ca su-durghaṭam

kṣaṇāt – after some time; sva-sthaḥ – my composure; api
– although; aho – oh; teṣām – their; dāsatvam – service;
api – however; cetasā – in the heart; na aśakam – I was
unable; yācitum – to beg; bhītyā – out of fear; lajjayā
– and shyness; ca – also; su-durghaṭam – difficult to
attain.

After some time, I regained my composure. However,
fearful and embarrassed, I did not deem myself fit to
beg them for the rare boon of serving them.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “How
astonishing! After a moment, I returned to my normal
condition, but even then, I found myself unable to
request, even in my mind, the rare privilege of serving
those beautiful four-armed personalities.”

The Mathurā brāhmaṇa might ask, “Why not?”


                          385
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

“Because I was fearful and embarrassed.”

“Why should you be fearful and shy in praying for your
desire?”

“Unqualified persons, afraid that they will incur some
offense, naturally feel shy in praying for some object
or position beyond

their station.”



Verse 82

eṣā hi lālasā nūnaṁ kṛpaṇaṁ mām abādhata

sambhāṣerann ime kiṁ māṁ śivasya kṛpayā sakṛt

eṣā – this; hi – indeed; lālasā – longing; nūnam –
indeed; kṛpaṇam – wretched; mām – me; abādhata –
checked; sambhāṣeran – they may speak; ime – they; kim –
whether?; mām – me; śivasya – of Śrī Śiva; kṛpayā – by
the mercy; sakṛt – once.

It is extremely difficult to fulfill the desire of being
the servant of Bhagavān’s personal associates. Because I
was unable to pray for that position even in my mind,
feelings of great wretchedness and humility filled my
heart. In addition, the longing to attain this
servitorship began to grow and torment my heart even
more. I thought, “If Śrī Śiva gives me his mercy, maybe
there is a chance that they will speak to me just once.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “I became very
distressed because of being unable to pray to serve them
even in my mind. Deeply troubled, I wondered with great
longing, ‘Will these four-armed great souls talk with
me, even once?’ ”



Verse 83

kutratyāḥ katame vaite kṛpāpāṅgena pāntu mām

yān āliṅgya bhṛśaṁ rudraḥ prema-mūrcchām ayaṁ vrajet

kutratyāḥ – what is their residence?; katame – who?; vā
– or; ete – they; kṛpā – of mercy; apāṅgena – by their
glance; pāntu – may protect; mām – me; yān – whom;
āliṅgya – embracing; bhṛśam – greatly; rudraḥ – Śrī
Śiva; prema – in love; mūrcchām – swooned; ayam – this
person; vrajet – may become.

Where do they reside? Who are they? Whoever they are,
may they save me by their merciful sidelong glance. How
astonishing! Upon embracing them, even Śrī Rudra swooned
in great love.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “ ‘May they
protect me by their merciful sidelong glance. Otherwise,
I will die.’ This was how I felt. Upon embracing them,
even Śrī Rudra fainted in mahā-prema.” This is a preview

                          386
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

of what great reward is coming in the future.



Verse 84

ity-ādi-man-mano-vṛttaṁ jñātvā devyomayeritaḥ

śiva-cittānuvartinyā gaṇeśo ’kathayac chanaiḥ

iti – thus; ādi – beginning; mat – my; mano-vṛttam –
thoughts; jñātvā – understanding; devyā – by the
goddess; umayā – Umā; īritaḥ – ordered; śiva – of Śrī
Śiva; citta – the heart; anuvartinyā – who always
faithfully follows; gaṇa-īśaḥ – Gaṇeśa; akathayat –
said; śanaiḥ – softly.

Knowing the disposition of my mind, Śrī Umā-devī, who
follows the heart of Śrī Śiva, ordered Gaṇeśa to say
something to me.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The word ādi denotes the touch of
their

feet. Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “ ‘Aho! Am I qualified to
touch their feet?’ Understanding my inner sentiments,
Śrī Pārvatī-devī, who could read the mind of Śrī Śiva,
indicated to Gaṇeśa with her eyes to instruct me. Then,
in a low voice, Gaṇeśajī began to speak to me
confidentially.”

The word gopana, meaning ‘secretly,’ indicates that
because of its confidential nature, it was improper to
reveal such an esoteric topic in front of Mahādeva’s
followers. The term śiva-citta-anu-vartini, meaning
‘follower of the heart of Śiva,’ implies that Śrī Śiva’s
sanction was there in this matter.



Verse 85

śrī-gaṇeśa uvāca

ete vaikuṇṭha-nāthasya śrī-kṛṣṇasya mahā-prabhoḥ

pārṣadāḥ prāpta-sārūpyā vaikuṇṭhād āgatāḥ kila

śrī-gaṇeśaḥ uvāca – Śrī Gaṇeśa said; ete – they;
vaikuṇṭha-nāthasya – of the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha; śrī-
kṛṣṇasya – of the all-attractive Śrī Kṛṣṇa; mahā-prabhoḥ
– of the Great Master; pārṣadāḥ – the associates; prāpta
– attained; sārūpyāḥ – forms similar to Nārāyaṇa;
vaikuṇṭhāt – from Vaikuṇṭha; āgatāḥ – come; kila –
indeed.

Śrī Gaṇeśa said: These are the personal associates of
Mahāprabhu, the Supreme Lord, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of
Vaikuṇṭha. They have received forms like His and have
come here from Vaikuṇṭha.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gaṇeśa says, “These are the
eternal associates (pārṣadas) of Vaikuṇṭha-nātha Śrī
Kṛṣṇa who have received forms like His through the

                          387
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

liberation of sārūpya. Understand this absolutely; there
is no scope for impossibility here.”



VerseS 86–87

paśyeme ’py apare yānti brahmaṇo ’dhikṛte ’lpake

brahmāṇḍe catur-āsyasya tathāmī dūrataḥ pare

amī cāṣṭa-mukhasyaitad-dvi-guṇe yānti vegataḥ

amī tu ṣoḍaśāsyasya brahmāṇḍe dvi-guṇe tataḥ

paśya – look; ime – they; api – and; apare – others;
yānti – are going; brahmaṇaḥ – of Brahmā; adhikṛte –
ruled; alpake – small; brahmāṇḍe – in the universe;
catuḥ-āsyasya – of four heads; tathā – still; amī –
they; dūrataḥ – far away; pare – others; amī – they; ca
– also; aṣṭa-mukhasya – with eight heads; etat – that;
dvi-guṇe – twice as big; yānti – they go; vegataḥ –
speedily; amī – they; tu – indeed; ṣoḍaśa-āsyasya – of
sixteen heads; brahmāṇḍe – in the universe; dvi-guṇe –
twice as big; tataḥ – similarly.

Look! Some of them are going to the small universe that
is ruled by the four-headed Brahmā. Look over there.
Others are going further and further away to the bigger
universes, which are ruled by the Brahmās who have many
more heads. This eight-headed Brahmā is twice as big as
the four-headed Brahmā, and his universe is also double
in size. The sixteen-headed Brahmā is twice the size of
the eight-headed Brahmā and his universe is also double
the size.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gaṇeśa reveals the uncommon
glories and exalted position of the Vaikuṇṭha associates
in two verses, beginning here with paśya. He says, “Look
here! These associates are going to the very small
brahmāṇḍa ruled by the four-headed Brahmā. This
brahmāṇḍa is very limited in comparison to the others.
And just look further! Other associates are entering
brahmāṇḍas that are double the size of the small one and
are one billion yojanas [eight billion miles] in
diameter. There are many other pārṣadas also, quickly
entering progressively bigger brahmāṇḍas further and
further away that are ruled by bigger Brahmās. The
eight-headed Brahmā is bigger than the four-headed
Brahmā and his brahmāṇḍa is also twice as big.” In this
way, Gaṇeśa begins to show the Brahmās further and
further away, who had more and more heads.



VerseS 88–89

ity evaṁ koṭi-koṭīnāṁ brahmaṇāṁ mahatāṁ kramāt

koṭi-koṭi-mukhābjānāṁ tādṛg-brahmāṇḍa-koṭiṣu

gacchato līlayā tat-tad-anurūpa-paricchadān

gaṇeśo ’darśayat tān māṁ bahuśo dṛṅ-manoharān

                          388
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


iti – thus; evam – in this way; koṭi-koṭīnām – of
billions upon billions; brahmaṇām – of Brahmās; mahatām
– great; kramāt – in sequence; koṭi-koṭi – billions of
billions; mukha-abjānām – having lotus faces; tādṛk –
appropriate; brahmāṇḍa – of universes; koṭiṣu – in
millions; gacchataḥ – going; līlayā – by pastimes; tat-
tat-anurūpa – appropriate for each one; paricchadān –
paraphernalia; gaṇeśaḥ – Gaṇeśa; adarśayat – showed; tān
– them; mām – to me; bahuśaḥ – many; dṛk – eyes; manaḥ –
and minds; harān – charming.

In this way, there are Brahmās who possess heads ranging
from sixteen all the way up to billions upon billions,
each Brahmā dwelling in his proportionately larger
universe. Śrī Gaṇeśa pointed out to me, “O highly
fortunate one, just see these Vaikuṇṭha associates.Their
beauty enchants the eyes. They are entering those
universes, manifesting garments, ornaments, and
opulences suitable to the vastness of each universe.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra heard Śrī Gaṇeśa’s
description of the Vaikuṇṭha associates and witnessed
them personally. In two verses, beginning here with iti,
he presents this in Gaṇeśa’s own words. He says, “Śrī
Gaṇeśa told me, ‘O most fortunate one, just see these
Brahmās who have so many heads. Starting from sixteen,
they increase to thirty-two heads, then sixty-four, one
hundred and twenty-eight, and so on up to the billions
upon billions. Each one is situated in his own
brahmāṇḍa.”

Just as the Brahmās he saw were uncountable, the
universes ruled by them were also billions in number.
The term koṭi-koṭi, meaning ‘billions and billions,’
implies that just as the Brahmās are countless, the
universes ruled by them are also infinite and unlimited.
This is described in Brahmā’s prayers to Śrī Kṛṣṇa in
the Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.11):

kvāhaṁ tamo-mahad-ahaṁ-kha-carāgni-vār-bhū-

saṁveṣṭitāṇḍa-ghaṭa-sapta-vitasti-kāyaḥ

kvedṛg-vidhāvigaṇitāṇḍa-parāṇu-caryā-

vātādhva-roma-vivarasya ca te mahitvam

O Bhagavān, this universe, surrounded by the coverings
made of material energy (prakṛti), mahat-tattva, false
ego, ether, air, fire, water, and earth is my very body.
But You are so vast that innumerable universes such as
this come in and out of every pore of Your body, just
like particles of dust seen floating in the sunrays
coming through a latticed window. What am I? An
insignificant person whose body measures three-and-a-
half cubits. And what is Your unlimited glory?

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.87.41), in the prayers of the
personified

Vedas (Śruti) it is stated:

dyu-pataya eva te na yayur antam anantatayā

                          389
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


tvam api yad-antarāṇḍa-nicayā nanu sāvaraṇāḥ

kha iva rajāṁsi vānti vayasā saha yac chrutayas

tvayi hi phalanty atan-nirasanena bhavan-nidhanāḥ

O Bhagavān, the rulers of the heavenly abodes, like
Indra and Brahmā, cannot fathom Your limit. But the
astonishing thing is that You also do not know it. How
can anyone know Your limit if it is endless? O Lord,
just as small particles of dust are kept aloft by the
wind, so by the speed of time, innumerable universes,
each with a shell of seven layers, each layer ten times
larger than the previous one, simultaneously revolve
within You. And finally these universes enter into You
alone. Even we Śrutis cannot describe Your nature fully.
All we can do is to give some idea of Your glories while
rejecting everything other than You.

In the Sixth Canto (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 6.16.37),
Citraketu prays to Bhagavān Śrī Saṅkarṣaṇa:

kṣity-ādibhir eṣa kilāvṛtaḥ

saptabhir daśa-guṇottarair aṇḍa-kośaḥ

yatra pataty aṇu-kalpaḥ

sahāṇḍa-koṭi-koṭibhis tad anantaḥ

O Bhagavān, every universe is covered by seven elements
(earth, etc.), and each element is ten times larger than
the previous one. Billions of universes of this nature
revolve in the pores of Your skin like subatomic
particles. Therefore, just as You are unlimited, so is
Your opulence.

Gopa-kumāra says, “In this way, Śrī Gaṇeśa showed me how
the Lord’s associates from the innumerable Vaikuṇṭha
planets were performing the pastime of visiting
countless universes. I could see all these things
without obstruction because the abode of liberation has
no material coverings.

“What were those Vaikuṇṭha associates like? They were
appropriate to the universe to which they were going.
Those associates, who were enchantingly beautiful to the
eyes, were adorned with garments, ornaments, and
opulences proportionately suitable to the enormity of
the respective universes. If they did not manifest vast
opulences appropriate to all those gigantic universes,
then the residents of those universes, seeing them with
external vision, might become guilty of disrespecting
the eternal associates of Vaikuṇṭha.”



VerseS 90–91

ete hi mṛtyu-kāle ’pi jihvāgre śrotra-vartma vā

kathañcit sakṛd-āptena nāmābhāsena ca prabhoḥ


                          390
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

bhaktān kṛtsna-bhayāt pāntas tanvanto bhaktim ujjvalām

sarvatra vicaranty ātmecchayā bhakty-eka-vallabhāḥ

ete – they; hi – certainly; mṛtyu-kāle – at the time of
death; api – also; jihvā-agre – on the tip of the
tongue; śrotra – of the ears; vartma – the path; vā –
or; kathañcit – somehow; sakṛt – once; āptena –
obtained; nāma – of the holy name; ābhāsena – by the
reflection; ca – also; prabhoḥ – of the Lord; bhaktān –
the devotees;

kṛtsna – all; bhayāt – from fear; pāntaḥ – protecting;
tanvantaḥ – spreading; bhaktim – devotional service;
ujjvalām – glorious; sarvatra – everywhere; vicaranti –
they roam; ātma-icchayā – by their own desire; bhakti –
devotional service; eka – sole; vallabhāḥ – dear.

Śrī Gaṇeśa continued: The Vaikuṇṭha associates of Śrī
Nārāyaṇa are ardent lovers of devotional service.
Warding off dangers that impede devotion, they protect
the devotees who, at the time of death, utter with their
tongues or hear with their ears even a semblance of the
holy name of Śrī Nārāyaṇa, the Master of Vaikuṇṭha.
Under the guise of protecting those devotees who on
their deathbed chant or hear the Lord’s holy name, they
wander everywhere at will to spread pure devotion to Śrī
Nārāyaṇa.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might wonder, “Why do
the Vaikuṇṭha associates go to all those universes?”

In reply, Gaṇeśa narrates two verses, beginning here
with ete. He says, “The Lord’s associates go there
completely of their own accord.”

“What do they do after going to those universes?”

“They wander everywhere freely to protect all devotees
from the fear of anything obstructing their bhakti. If
someone chants even just the semblance of Lord Śrī
Vaikuṇṭha-nātha’s holy name, or nāmābhāsa, they come to
his rescue.”

“What is the meaning of nāmābhāsa?”

“Nāmābhāsa occurs when anyone just once utters with his
tongue or hears with his ears the name of Śrī Vaikuṇṭha-
nātha, even at the time of death, or jokingly
(parihāsa), or disdainfully (avahelā). For the benefit
of such souls, the Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas move around
spreading pure devotional service, or viśuddha-bhakti,
because they are bhakti-eka-vallabha, meaning they are
inspired by exclusive love for bhakti.”



Verse 92–93

bhaktāvatārās tasyaite catvāro naiṣṭhikottamāḥ

paribhramanti lokānāṁ hitārthaṁ pārṣadā iva

vasanti ca tapo-loke prabhuṁ nārāyaṇaṁ vinā

                          391
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


anāthānām iva kṣemaṁ vahantas tan-nivāsinām

bhakta – devotee; avatārāḥ – incarnations; tasya – of
Him; ete – they; catvāraḥ – four; naiṣṭhika – of
unbroken celibates; uttamāḥ – the best; paribhramanti –
they wander; lokānām – of all people; hita-artham – for
the benefit; pārṣadāḥ – associates; iva – as if; vasanti
– they reside; ca – and; tapaḥ-loke – on Tapoloka;
prabhum – Lord; nārāyaṇam – Nārāyaṇa; vinā – without;
anāthānām – of they who have no master; iva – like;
kṣemam – well-being; vahantaḥ – carrying; tat-nivāsinām
– for the residents of that world.

Like the Vaikuṇṭha associates, the four Kumāras headed
by Sanaka, who are the best of life-long celibates
(naiṣṭhika-brahmacārīs) and who are devotee incarnations
of Bhagavān, wander everywhere for the welfare of all.
They also reside in Tapoloka, where they disseminate the
pastimes of Bhagavān to nourish and protect the many
brahmacārīs there who appear orphaned, unable to see
Śrīman Nārāyaṇa.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might say, “It is
wonderful that the Vaikuṇṭha associates wander
everywhere to spread pure devotional service. However,
why do these self-satisfied (ātmārāma) sages accompany
them?”

Gaṇeśa replies in four verses, beginning here with
bhakta. He says, “Śrī Sanaka and his three brothers are
the devotee incarnations of Śrī Vaikuṇṭha-nātha and they
also wander everywhere for the benefit of all.”

The Mathurā brāhmaṇa might say to Gopa-kumāra, “You had
seen them previously while residing on Tapoloka.”

Gopa-kumāra says, “This is true; the reason for this is
that although the residents of Tapoloka always see
Bhagavān in their meditation, in the absence of direct
darśana, they appear like helpless orphans without a
master. Therefore, these four Kumāras reside in Tapoloka
as the guardians of all other naiṣṭhika-brahmacārīs
(life-long celibates) who are urdhva-retā, or whose
semen flows upwards to nourish the brain. They stay
there in order to bestow auspiciousness upon those
brahmacārīs by narrating the pastimes of Bhagavān,
performing saṅkīrtana, and so on.”

The purport of the word iva (like) is that these
brahmacārīs are like orphans, but actually, they always
receive darśana of Bhagavān in their meditation
(dhyāna). However, in the absence of directly seeing the
Lord, there is the possibility of developing feelings of
helplessness. This proves that there is a vast
difference between the two types of darśana: direct and
contemplative.



VerseS 94–95

gatvā samprati vaikuṇṭhe sarvākarṣaka-sad-guṇam


                          392
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

bhagavantaṁ tam ālokya mokṣānanda-viḍambinā

nirbharānanda-pūreṇa saṁyojyātmānam āgatāḥ

pibanto bhakta-saṅgatyā harer bhaktyā mahā-rasam

gatvā – having gone; samprati – recently; vaikuṇṭhe – in
Vaikuṇṭha; sarva – all; ākarṣaka – attractive; sat-guṇam
– transcendental qualities; bhagavantam – the Supreme
Lord; tam – Him; ālokya – seeing; mokṣa – of impersonal
liberation; ānanda – the bliss; viḍambinā – taunting;
nirbhara-ānanda-pūreṇa – with streams of immense bliss;
saṁyojya – engaging; ātmānam – the self; āgatāḥ –
arrived; pibantaḥ – drinking; bhakta-saṅgatyā – through
the association of devotees; hareḥ – of Śrī Hari;
bhaktyāḥ – of devotional service; mahā – great; rasam –
ambrosia.

These four Kumāras are just coming from Vaikuṇṭha, where
they saw the all-attractive Śrī Bhagavān, who is adorned
with transcendental qualities. With their hearts
overflowing with streams of joy that taunt the bliss of
liberation, they are traveling with Bhagavān’s personal
associates. Now they are drinking the ambrosia of bhakti
in the close association of devotees of Śrī Hari.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might ask, “How did
they join the Vaikuṇṭha associates?”

Śrī Gaṇeśa answers, “These four Kumāras are just coming
from Vaikuṇṭha, where they had direct darśana of the
all-attractive

Lord of Vaikuṇṭha. Having derived extreme joy from this,
they

are now relishing the nectar of devotion, or bhakti-
rasa, with the eternal associates, who are devoted to
Lord Hari. Traveling with them, they are singing the
glories of Śrī Bhagavān and drinking mahā-amṛta, the
sublime nectar of immortality arising from singing His
glories.”

Gopa-kumāra might question, “How is it possible that
those who are ātmārāma, who have attained the stage of
experiencing satisfaction in the self, go to Vaikuṇṭha?”

Śrī Gaṇeśa replies, “Śrī Bhagavān is ornamented with
all-attractive, virtuous attributes, but His most
excellent quality is that He attracts those who are
completely self-satisfied. Therefore His name is ‘Hari.’
Even the self-satisfied sages describe the topmost
excellence of Bhagavān Hari’s direct darśana. In the
association of the devotees, they are relishing the
nectar of devotion, or bhakti-rasa, in order to
experience the bounteous, paramount ecstasy that
reproaches the bliss of impersonal liberation (mokṣa).”



VerseS 96–97

nityāparicchinna-mahā-sukhāntya-


                          393
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

kāṣṭhāvatas tādṛśa-vaibhavasya

sākṣād-ramā-nātha-padāravinda-

krīḍā-bharājasra-vibhūṣitasya

tat-prema-bhaktaiḥ sulabhasya vaktuṁ

vaikuṇṭha-lokasya paraṁ kim īśe

advaita-durvāsanayā mumukṣā-

viddhātmanāṁ hṛdy api durlabhasya

nitya – eternal; aparicchinna – unlimited; mahā-sukha –
of great happiness; antya – last limit; kāṣṭhā-vataḥ –
with the pinnacle; tādṛśa-vaibhavasya – of such
opulence; sākṣāt – direct; ramā-nātha – of the Lord of
Lakṣmī; pada-aravinda – of the lotus feet; krīḍā – of
pastime places; bhara – a multitude; ajasra – incessant;
vibhūṣitasya – ornamented; tat-prema-bhaktaiḥ – by His
loving devotees; su-labhasya – easily obtained; vaktum –
to speak; vaikuṇṭha-lokasya – of the Vaikuṇṭha world;
param – more; kim īśe – who is able?; advaita – for
merging in the oneness of the Lord’s transcen-

dental effulgence; durvāsanayā – on account of the evil
desire; mumukṣā – by the desire for liberation; āviddha
– contaminated; ātmanām – of those souls; hṛdi – in the
heart; api – also; durlabhasya – difficult to attain.

What more can I describe about Vaikuṇṭha? It is
eternally endowed with the ultimate limit of unlimited
happiness and is perfect with corresponding opulence.
The entire Vaikuṇṭha is decorated with the various
pastime places of the lotus feet of Śrī Ramā-nātha, and
it is easily attained by the Lord’s loving devotees.
However, those whose hearts are pierced by the thorn of
the desire for sāyujya liberation, having been
contaminated by an inclination towards monism, cannot
imagine its glories even in their dreams.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gaṇeśa now comes back to the main
topic, having explained why the four Kumāras are with
the Vaikuṇṭha associates, and having expressed his
inability to narrate the glories of Vaikuṇṭha in full.
In two verses, beginning here with nityā, he describes
the essence of Vaikuṇṭha with five adjectives.

He says, “That place is endowed with the ultimate in
eternal, unlimited bliss and is filled with magnificence
and opulences, such as the Lord’s entourage and
servants, who are also suitable to that abode. What more
can be said about that Vaikuṇṭha, which is clearly
decorated with the pastime places of the lotus feet of
the Lord of Lakṣmī and is easily achieved only by the
devotees who are lovingly attached to the Lord of Ramā
(Lakṣmī)?

“The hearts of those who are disposed towards monism are
pierced by the thorn of desire for liberation. In other
words, their hearts are polluted by an evil inclination
and they consider themselves nondifferent from Bhagavān.
Thus they can never comprehend Vaikuṇṭha, even in their

                          394
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

dreams. What then is the possibility of them ever
attaining it?”

The author of Yoga-vaśiṣṭha has expressed the same
philosophical conclusion:

ajñasyārdha-prabuddhasya sarvaṁ brahmeti yo vadet

mahā-naraka-jāleṣu tenaiva viniyojitaḥ

Those who instruct ignorant, half-awake persons that
“sarvaṁ brahma – everything is Brahman (spirit)” become
bound in the snare of tremendous hell for their offence
and suffer there for eternity.

The Brahmā-vaivarta Purāṇa also states:

viṣaya-sneha-saṁyukto brahmāham iti yo vadet

kalpa-koṭi-sahasrāṇi narake sa tu pacyate

Anyone who is attached to illusory objects and claims,
“ahaṁ brahman – I am Brahman,” rots in hell for ten
billion kalpas (ten billion days of Brahmā).

It is clearly stated in other Purāṇas also:

saṁsāra-sukha-saṁyuktaṁ brahmāham iti vādinam

karma-brahma-paribhraṣṭaṁ taṁ tyajed antyajaṁ yathā

A person who is absorbed in the happiness of material
life and who claims, “I am Brahman,” has fallen from the
prescribed Vedic duties as well as Brahman realization.
He is like the lowest-born dog-eater and should be
rejected.

Śrī Gaṇeśa continues, “When we hear about such persons
going to hell, then it is not hard to imagine what
horrible destination is obtained by those who consider
themselves to be nondifferent from the Supreme Brahman.”



Verse 98

yady asya mat-pituḥ samyak karuṇā syān tadā tvayā

śroṣyate mahimā tasya gatvā cānubhaviṣyate

yadi – if; asya – of him; mat – my; pituḥ – father;
samyak – full; karuṇā – mercy; syāt – it may be; tadā –
then; tvayā – by you; śroṣyate – it will be heard;
mahimā – the glory; tasya – of that place; gatvā –
having gone; ca – also; anubhaviṣyate – it will be
experienced.

If you receive the full mercy of my father (Śrī Śiva),
you will also hear the glories of the realm of
Vaikuṇṭha. Then you will directly experience them by
going there.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra may ask Śrī Gaṇeśa,
“Can you tell me something special about the glories of

                          395
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

that Vaikuṇṭha?”

In reply, Gaṇeśa speaks this verse beginning with yad.
He says, “If you receive the full and perfect mercy of
my father, you will hear the glories of Vaikuṇṭha in a
special way and will also directly experience those
glories by going there.”

The words ‘directly experience’ indicate the possibility
that Gopa-kumāra will receive Śrī Śiva’s mercy. Here the
word samyak, meaning ‘complete’ indicates genuine mercy,
not the mercy of going to Śivaloka. Gaṇeśa concludes,
“So you need not worry. My father will certainly show
you his mercy.”



Verse 99

śrī-gopa-kumāra uvāca

brahmaṁs tat-prāptaye jāta-mahā-lālasayā bhṛśam

ahaṁ cintārṇavāpāra-bhaṅga-raṅge pranartitaḥ

śrī-gopa-kumāraḥ uvāca – Śrī Gopa-kumāra said; brahman –
O brāhmaṇa; tat-prāptaye – to attain that place; jāta –
was born; mahā – great; lālasayā – by the desire; bhṛśam
– great; aham – I; cintā-arṇava – ocean of anxiety;
apāra – shoreless; bhaṅga-raṅge – on the pleasure waves;
pranartitaḥ – uncontrollably dancing.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra said: O brāhmaṇa, a great desire to go
to Vaikuṇṭha arose in me and drove me to dance
uncontrollably on a stage of the waves of a boundless
ocean of anxiety.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “After that, a
great greed to reach Vaikuṇṭha began to make me dance
uncontrollably on a stage made of the waves in a
boundless ocean of anxious thoughts. In other words, I
became agitated with tremendous worry as to whether or
not I would be able to reach my desired destination,
Vaikuṇṭha.”



Verse 100

vicāra-jātataḥ svasya sambhāvya tad-ayogyatām

prarudan śoka-vegena mohaṁ prāpyāpataṁ kṣaṇāt

vicāra-jātataḥ – by thinking; svasya – of myself;
sambhāvya – considering; tat-ayogyatām – being
unsuitable for that; prarudan – weeping severely; śoka –
of lamentation; vegena – by the power; moham prāpya – I
fainted; apatam – I collapsed; kṣaṇāt – instantly.

But thinking about it, I concluded I was unfit to reside
in Vaikuṇṭha. Overwhelmed by severe grief, I fell to the
ground unconscious.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “After

                          396
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

deliberating on the idea, I realized I was utterly unfit
to go to Vaikuṇṭha. I began to weep, afflicted by acute
distress, and I fell to the ground unconscious.”



Verse 101

mahā-dayālunānena para-duḥkhāsahiṣṇunā

vaiṣṇavaika-priyeṇāham utthāpyāśvāsya bhāṣitaḥ

mahā-dayālunā – very merciful; anena – by him (Śrī
Śiva); para-duḥkha – the sufferings of others;
asahiṣṇunā – not able to tolerate; vaiṣṇava – to the
devotees; eka-priyeṇa – exclusively affectionate; aham –
I; utthāpya – being lifted up; āśvāsya – after
consoling; bhāṣitaḥ – spoke.

The extremely merciful Śrī Mahādeva, who cannot bear the
distress of others and who is especially affectionate to
the Vaiṣṇavas, then lifted me from the ground and
consoled me with the following words.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The verse translation is clear.



Verse 102

śrī-mahādeva uvāca – the great god said; he – O; śrī-
vaiṣṇava – honor-able Vaiṣṇava; pārvatyā – Pārvatī; saha
– with; aham – I; api – also; kāmaye – desire; tasmin –
there; vaikuṇṭha-loke – in the realm of Vaikuṇṭha; tu –
certainly; sadā – eternal; vāsam – residence; bhavān –
you; iva – as.

Śrī Mahādeva said: O honorable Vaiṣṇava! Just like you,
Pārvatī and I also desire to reside forever in
Vaikuṇṭha-loka.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Mahādeva says, “I also always long
to reside with Pārvatī in Vaikuṇṭha. So, since you and I
share the same desire, come now to my abode and happily
spend some time there.”



Verse 103

so ’tīva-durlabho lokaḥ prārthyo muktair api dhruvam

sādhyo brahma-sutānāṁ hi brahmaṇaś ca mamāpi saḥ

saḥ – that; atīva – very; durlabhaḥ – difficult to
attain; lokaḥ – realm; prārthyaḥ – prayed for; muktaiḥ –
by the liberated souls; api – even; dhruvam – indeed;
sādhyaḥ – endeavored for; brahma-sutānām – by the sons
of Brahmā; hi – indeed; brahmaṇaḥ – by Brahmā; ca –
also; mama – by me; api – also; saḥ – it.

That realm is rarely attained. Indeed, even liberated
souls always pray to go there. Brahmā’s sons like Bhṛgu
and other great sages, Brahmā himself, and even I,

                          397
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

endeavor to attain it.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Mahādeva says, “That realm of
Vaikuṇṭha, however, is extremely difficult to reach.
Even the sons of Brahmā like Bhṛgu and other great sages
cherish it as their goal (sādhya), but so far they have
not achieved success.”



VerseS 104–106

niṣkāmeṣu viśuddheṣu sva-dharmeṣu hi yaḥ pumān

parāṁ niṣṭhāṁ gatas tasmin yā kṛpā śrī-harer bhavet

tasyāḥ śata-guṇā cet syād brahmatvaṁ labhate tadā

tasyāḥ śata-guṇāyāṁ ca satyāṁ mad-bhāvam ṛcchati

śrīmad-bhagavatas tasya mayi yāvān anugrahaḥ

tasmāc chata-guṇottāne jāte vaikuṇṭham eti tam

niṣkāmeṣu – desireless; viśuddheṣu – pure; sva-dharmeṣu
– in one’s own duties of varṇāśrama; hi – indeed; yaḥ –
who; pumān – a person; parām – great; niṣṭhām – faith;
gataḥ – gone; tasmin – to him; yā – which; kṛpā – mercy;
śrī-hareḥ – of Lord Hari; bhavet – is; tasyāḥ – of that;
śata-guṇā – multiplied one hundred times; cet – if; syāt
– it may be; brahmatvam – the post of Brahmā; labhate –
attains; tadā – then; tasyāḥ – of that; śata-guṇāyām–
multiplied one hundred times; ca – and; satyām – it may
be; mat-bhāvam – my nature; ṛcchati – he attains;
śrīmad-bhagavataḥ – of the Lord; tasya – of Him; mayi –
in me; yāvān – so much; anugrahaḥ – mercy; tasmāt – from
that; śata-guṇa-uttāne – multiplied one hundred times;
jāte – received; vaikuṇṭham – to Vaikuṇṭha; eti – goes;
tam – to that.

Those pure-hearted persons with no material desire, and
who with great conviction adhere to varṇāśrama-dharma,
achieve Bhagavān’s mercy. When this mercy is multiplied
a hundred times, one attains the position of Brahmā.
When one receives a hundred times more mercy than that,
he obtains my position, or Śiva-pada. And when one
receives mercy that is again a hundred times greater,
only then can he proceed to the abode of Vaikuṇṭha.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: In three verses, beginning here with
niṣkāmeṣu, Śrī Mahādeva explains why the abode of
Vaikuṇṭha is so rarely

achieved. He says, “The word sva-dharmeṣu, meaning
‘one’s own religious duties,’ indicates that one who
achieves the position of

Brahmā has been blessed by Śrī Hari with a hundred times
more mercy than is received by one executing varṇāśrama-
dharma, the Vedic socio-religious system, with full
faith. When the Lord’s favor towards that person
increases a hundredfold, he attains my position, or
śivatva.”


                          398
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (4.24.29), Śrī Śiva tells the
Pracetās:

sva-dharma-niṣṭhaḥ śata-janmabhiḥ pumān

viriñcatām eti tataḥ paraṁ hi mām

avyākṛtaṁ bhāgavato ’tha vaiṣṇavaṁ

padaṁ yathāhaṁ vibudhāḥ kalātyaye

By resolutely executing one’s prescribed duties (sva-
dharma) for a hundred lifetimes, one achieves the post
of Brahmā. Only after that can one proceed to attain my
position. However, those devoted to Śrī Bhagavān
immediately attain the abode of Vaikuṇṭha after
abandoning their mortal forms.

The purport is this: “Just as I maintain others as the
ruling demigod Rudra, similarly Brahmā and other
demigods also maintain the living beings. When our long
reigns finally come to an end, our subtle bodies will be
destroyed and we will attain the abode of Vaikuṇṭha,
having received one hundred times more of Bhagavān’s
mercy.”

In this regard, the Mudgala-upākhyāna of Itihāsa-
samuccaya clearly states:

brahmaṇaḥ sadanād ūrdhvaṁ tad viṣṇoḥ paramaṁ padam

śuddhaṁ sanātanaṁ jyotiḥ para-brahmeti yad viduḥ

nirmamā nirahaṅkārā nirdvandvā ye jitendriyāḥ

dhyāna-yoga-parāś caiva tatra gacchanti sādhavaḥ

ye ’rcayanti hariṁ viṣṇuṁ kṛṣṇaṁ jiṣṇuṁ sanātanam

nārāyaṇam ajaṁ kṛṣṇaṁ viṣvaksenaṁ catur-bhujam

dhyānanti puruṣaṁ divyam acyutaṁ ca smaranti ye

labhante te ’cyutaṁ sthānaṁ rutir eṣā sanātanī

Above the realm of impersonal Brahman (brahma-sadana)
lies the topmost realm, the abode of Viṣṇu known as
Parabrahman, which is a pure, eternal abode of light far
beyond the illusory world of Māyā. Only saints who
harbor no false ego or attachment for their body or
possessions, who are unaffected by the dualities of cold
and heat, sorrow and joy, who have conquered their
senses, who are immersed in dhyāna-yoga, or deep
meditation, and especially those who forever worship,
remember, and meditate on the infallible Supreme Person
(Acyuta-puruṣa) in His divine, four-armed forms of Hari,
Viṣṇu, Kṛṣṇa, Sanātana, Nārāyaṇa, Aja, and Viṣvaksena –
only they can obtain that infallible realm, the topmost
abode of Viṣṇu. This is the opinion of the revealed
scriptures, the sanātanī-śrutis.

Here, the term brahma-sadana, meaning ‘the dwelling
place of Brahman,’ refers to mukti-pada, the realm of
liberation, because only in the state of sāyujya-mukti

                          399
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

(when one’s existence is merged in the Absolute) does
one experience Brahman.

Thus the residents of Vaikuṇṭha are established as being
far more glorious than Śrī Maheśa (Lord Śiva) himself.
Although these are Śrī Mahādeva’s exact words, they must
be understood as an expression of his humility because
he is a bhakta-avatāra, a devotee incarnation of the
Lord. Factually, being an incarnation of Śrī Bhagavān,
he is worshipable by even the Lord’s personal
associates. Later, the words of the Lord’s associates
themselves will prove this.

All the incarnations of Bhagavān should be regarded in
this manner. Any hierarchy seen among Them depends only
on the varying manifestations of their divinity, or
bhagavattā, but in fact, there is no relative
superiority. Later, Śrī Nārada will elaborate in detail
on these topics, but for now, we continue with the
present subject matter.



Verse 107

athāpi govardhana-gopa-putras tam arhasi tvaṁ mathureśa-
bhaktaḥ

tad-eka-bhakti-priya-vipra-śiṣyas tadīya-tan-mantra-paro
’nuraktaḥ

atha api – however; govardhana – of Govardhana Hill;
gopa – of a cowherd; putraḥ – the son; tam – for that;
arhasi – are worthy; tvam – you; mathurā-īśa-bhaktaḥ – a
devotee of the Lord of Mathurā-maṇḍala; tat-eka-bhakti –
unalloyed devotion to Him; priya – dear; vipra – of a
brāhmaṇa; śiṣyaḥ – disciple; tadīya – his; tan-mantra –
to His mantra; paraḥ – deeply; anuraktaḥ – affectionate.

But you, O son of a cowherdsman from Govardhana, are
qualified to go to Vaikuṇṭha because you are a devotee
of the Lord of Mathurā, a disciple of a brāhmaṇa who
cherishes unalloyed devotion to the Lord, and one who is
deeply attached to chanting the Lord’s mantra.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Mahādeva says, “That abode of Śrī
Vaikuṇṭha is most difficult to achieve, yet you are
qualified to go there.” The five verses beginning here
with athāpi govardhana describe why this is so. He says,
“O gopa-putra, O son of a cowherder from Śrī Govardhana,
you are a devotee of Mathurā-nātha, the Lord of Mathurā;
you are a disciple

of a brāhmaṇa who cherishes exclusive and unalloyed
bhakti to Him; and you are also very devoted to chanting
the ten-syllable mantra imbued with the indescribable
glories of Śrī Madana-gopāla. Thus, you are exclusively
attached to Śrī Gopāla-deva.”



VerseS 108–111

catur-vidheṣu mokṣeṣu sāyujyasya padaṁ tv idam

                          400
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017


prāpyaṁ yatīnām advaita-bhāvanā-bhāvitātmanām

mahā-saṁsāra-duḥkhāgni-jvālā-saṁśuṣka-cetasām

asāra-grāhiṇām antaḥ-sārāsārāvivekinām

mayaiva kṛṣṇasyādeśāt patitānāṁ bhramārṇave

nija-pādāmbuja-prema-bhakti-saṅgopakasya hi

bhagavad-bhajanānanda-rasaikāpekṣakair janaiḥ

upekṣitam idaṁ viddhi padaṁ vighna-samaṁ tyaja

catur-vidheṣu – amongst the four kinds; mokṣeṣu – of
liberation; sāyujyasya – of becoming one with the Lord;
padam – the state; tu – indeed; idam – this; prāpyam –
to be attained; yatīnām – by sannyāsīs; advaita-bhāvanā
– the monistic conception; bhāvita-ātmanām – by those
souls who contemplate; mahā – great; saṁsāra – of the
world of birth and death; duḥkha – of sufferings; agni-
jvālā – by flames of the fire; saṁśūṣka-cetasām – whose
hearts are dried up; asāra – the valueless; grāhiṇām –
who have grasped; antaḥ – between; sāra – meaningful;
asāra – and meaningless; avivekinām – who cannot
distinguish; mayā – by me; eva – indeed; kṛṣṇasya – of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa; ādeśāt – by the order; patitānām – of the
fallen; bhrama-arṇave – in the ocean of illusion; nija –
own; pāda-ambuja – lotus feet; prema – love; bhakti –
devotion; saṅgopakasya – hiding; hi – certainly;
bhagavat-bhajana – worship of the Lord; ānanda – bliss;
rasa-eka – only for sweet mellows; apekṣakaiḥ – by those
who hanker; janaiḥ – by persons; upekṣitam – abandoned;
idam – this; viddhi – you should understand; padam – the
state; vighna-samam – like an impediment; tyaja – just
leave.

This is the realm of sāyujya-mukti, one of the four
kinds of liberation. Only those sannyāsīs whose hearts
are steeped in the monistic sentiment of oneness with
the Absolute attain this place. Their hearts dried up by
the fire of suffering in material existence, bereft of
any ability to discriminate between what has value and
what is worthless, they reach this abode of sāyujya.
Ordered by Śrī Kṛṣṇa to conceal the path of loving
devotion to His lotus feet, I have cast those sannyāsīs
into an ocean of illusion and perplexity. Therefore,
those eager to relish the bhakti-rasa of blissfully
worshiping Śrī Bhagavān avoid this abode. You should
also abandon this place, seeing it as an obstacle to
your path.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Mahādeva says, “Therefore, it does
not befit you to stay here in mukti-pada, the abode of
impersonal liberation.” This is explained in four
verses, beginning here with catur-vidha. He says,
“Please listen to the reason for this. Of the four types
of liberation, sāyujya-mukti, or nirvāṇa, presides here,
and only those sannyāsīs whose hearts are engrossed in
feelings of oneness (advaita) between themselves and the
Supreme Absolute attain this abode of sāyujya.”

In Śrī Hari-vaṁśa, Śrī Bhagavān says to Śrī Arjuna:

                          401
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


brahma-tejo-mayaṁ divyaṁ mahad yad dṛṣṭavān asi

ahaṁ sa bharata-śreṣṭha mat-tejas tat sanātanam

prakrtiḥ sā mama parā vyaktāvyaktā sanātanī

tāṁ praviśya bhavantīha muktā yoga-vid-uttamāḥ

sā sāṅkhyānāṁ gatiḥ pārtha yogināṁ ca tapasvinām

tat paraṁ paramaṁ brahma sarvaṁ vibhajate jagat

mamaiva tad ghanaṁ tejo jñātum arhasi bhārata

O best of the Bharata dynasty, the divine, brilliant
manifestation of Brahman that you are seeing is My
eternal splendor. That manifest and unmanifest parā-
prakṛti (superior spiritual potency) is also My eternal
potency. The best of yogīs obtain liberation by entering
this prakṛti (potency). This abode of mukti is attained
by jñānīs: those who reach the state of liberation by
knowledge and renunciation; yogīs: those who attain it
by mysticism; and tapasvīs: those who attain it by
austerity and asceticism. I am Parabrahman, and that
which illuminates the entire universe is nothing but the
luster of My body. O Bhārata! Understand this to be My
concentrated effulgence.

Although some claim that Śrī Kṛṣṇa took Arjuna to the
Lokāloka Mountain situated at the center of the
universe, the above passage is referring to another
incident that took place at another time. Alternatively,
it can be said that loka refers to the fourteen
planetary systems and aloka refers to the region beyond
them that is surrounding this universe. The abode of
mukti-pada, also known as Mahākāla-pura, is obtained by
traversing loka and aloka.

In the original verse, five adjectives beginning with
advaita are used in Śrī Mahādeva’s explanation of why
liberation is suitable expressly for those renunciants,
or sannyāsīs. He says, “This abode of sāyujya-mukti is
suitable for those renunciants who ignorantly accept
that

which is nonessential (asāra-grāhī). Lacking
discriminating intelli-gence (viveka), they are absorbed
in oneness and nondifference (advaita). Such renunciants
have no discrimination between what is real and what is
unreal (sāra-asāra). In other words, despite
contemplating the real and apparent, they fail to
identify that which is of true value

and cannot understand what is the spiritual essence
(sāra-vastu).”

Therefore, in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.4), Śrī Brahmā
states:

śreyaḥ-sṛtiṁ bhaktim udasya te vibho

kliśyanti ye kevala-bodha-labdhaye


                          402
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

teṣām asau kleśala eva śiṣyate

nānyad yathā sthūla-tuṣāvaghātinām

Just as by beating empty husks of grain, one reaps only
fatigue, those who abandon bhakti, the inexhaustible
lake of all auspiciousness, and simply endeavor to
obtain speculative knowledge, find only distress.

Śrī Mahādeva says, “Thus, those whose hearts have been
withered by the flames of suffering in this world
worship the abode of liberation where they hope to find
nirvāṇa, freedom from material distress

in the annihilation of individual existence. Ordered by
Śrī Bhagavān to conceal loving devotion to His lotus
feet, I have drowned in

an ocean of delusion those persons influenced by the
concept of absolute oneness (advaita).”

In Padma Purāṇa, Śrī Śiva himself states:

māyā-vādam asac-chāstraṁ pracchannaṁ bauddham ucyate

mayaiva vakṣyate devi kalau brāhmaṇa-rūpiṇā

brahmaṇaś cāparaṁ rūpaṁ nirguṇaṁ vakṣyate mayā

sarvasya jagato ’py asya mohanārthaṁ kalau yuge

O Devī, in the age of Kali, in the form of a brāhmaṇa,

I propagate impersonalism (Māyāvāda), or concealed
Buddhism, by the means of impure scriptures. That
philosophy propounds as the topmost conception the
oneness of the jīvātmā (the minute, individual soul) and
Paramātmā (the Supersoul), and the nature of Brahman to
be without qualities. In order to destroy the entire
world by bewildering people’s intelligence, I have
concealed the genuine meanings of the Vedas by the non-
Vedic, fabricated philosophy of Māyāvāda.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra might question Śrī Śiva, “How could you
commit such a contemptible act?”

Śrī Śiva replies, “I acted on Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s order.”

As stated in the beginning of the Bṛhad-sahasra-nāma-
stotra, Śrī Kṛṣṇa says, “svāgamaiḥ kalpitais tvaṁ ca
janān mad-vimukhān

kuru – O Śaṅkara, conceal Me by turning these people
against Me, using the fabricated tantra-śāstras.”
Therefore, Śrī Śiva says, “O Devī, thus ordered by the
Lord, I have propagated the false scriptures among those
averse to Śrī Hari.”

Śrī Mahādeva concludes, “Thus, those eager to relish the
blissful taste of devotional service, or bhajana, to
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, always scrupulously avoid this abode
of liberation. In particular, because there is not even
a scent of devotion in sāyujya liberation, you (Gopa-
kumāra) should immediately abandon this place. Sāyujya-

                          403
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

mukti is an impediment to loving devotion to the Lord.”



Verse 112

dvārakā-vāsi-vipreṇa kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasārthinā

ito nītāḥ sutās tatra sa-cāturya-viśeṣataḥ

dvārakā-vāsi – living in Dvārakā; vipreṇa – by a
brāhmaṇa; kṛṣṇa – to Śrī Kṛṣṇa; bhakti – of devotional
service; rasa – for the nectar; arthinā – by praying;
itaḥ – from here; nītāḥ – brought; sutāḥ – his sons;
tatra – there; sa-cāturya-viśeṣataḥ – through special
intelligence.

A brāhmaṇa residing in Dvārakā, desirous of the nectar
of devotion to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, devised a clever scheme to
retrieve his sons from this realm of liberation and
bring them back to Dvārakā.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: In addition to scriptural evidence,
the virtuous behavior of exalted personalities also
proves the insignificance of impersonal liberation
(sāyujya-mukti). For this reason, Śrī Mahādeva speaks
this verse beginning with dvārakā. He says, “A brāhmaṇa
of Dvārakā in a particularly clever way had his sons
retrieved from mukti-pada, the abode of liberation, and
brought back to bhakti-pada, the abode of devotion known
as Dvārakā. Those who resided in Dvārakā during the
Lord’s pastimes in this world had bodies that were fully
sac-cid-ānanda. Moreover, forever relishing the nectar
of wonderful loving service to the lotus feet of Śrī
Devakī-nandana Himself, they despised the pleasure of
liberation. It was therefore impossible that any
resident of Dvārakā would desire to go to the abode of
liberation.”

There are those who posit an argument, saying, “We hear
of the births and so on of the residents of Dvārakā, so
they must have been ordinary human beings with bodies
made of the five material elements. But on the strength
of their precious and deep, pure love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
residents of Dvārakā enjoyed a special relationship with
Him.”

Also according to this opinion, it is said, “The
residents of Dvārakā only seemed to have material
bodies, but factually their bodies were not material
because it is impossible to interact with Śrī Bhagavān,
the embodiment of eternity, knowledge, and bliss, in a
body consisting of the five material elements.”

Otherwise, it can be said, “If the various ingredients
that are the instruments of the Lord’s play were not
fully sac-cid-ānanda, they would not be fit to
participate in His pastimes. That is, if those who
resided in Dvārakā during the Lord’s pastimes in this
world had bodies that were not fully sac-cid-ānanda,
there would be a contradiction between this and the
established fact that ‘by the power of devotion to the
Lord (bhagavād-bhakti), material bodies completely
transform into spiritual ones.’ ” [Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta

                          404
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

2.3.139, Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā]

If someone says, “Śrī Bhagavān’s form also imitates the
human form,” that is an absurd assumption because all of
Śrī Bhagavān’s forms are eternally true and all-
pervading. (This will be discussed later in detail.)
Especially since the Lord’s divine form, which is
eternally real in nature, perpetually manifests
according to the unlimited moods

of His countless devotees, this form cannot possibly be
an imitation of the human body. Even when some residents
of Dvārakā or any other sacred abode of the Lord seem to
quit their human-like bodies that are imitations of
material forms, this is seen as a function of their sac-
cid-ānanda form.

Thus, according to the previously-mentioned opinions,
the meaning of the following passage of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.29.9–11) is:

antar-gṛha-gatāḥ kāścid gopyo ’labdha-vinirgamāḥ

kṛṣṇaṁ tad-bhāvanā-yuktā dadhyur mīlita-locanāḥ

duḥsaha-preṣṭha-viraha-tīvra-tāpa-dhutāśubhāḥ

dhyāna-prāptācyutāśleṣa-nirvṛtyā kṣīṇa-maṅgalāḥ

tam eva paramātmānaṁ jāra-buddhyāpi saṅgatāḥ

jahur guṇa-mayaṁ dehaṁ sadyaḥ prakṣīṇa-bandhanāḥ

“The gopīs who were prevented from leaving their homes
on the night of rāsa-līlā abandoned their bodies
consisting of modes of material nature (guṇa-maya deha)
[1] and immediately attained transcendental forms of
eternity, knowledge, and bliss, which surpassed the
modes of material nature. Thus, as they had desired,
they happily enjoyed amorous pastimes with Śrī Bhagavān,
unhindered.” Some also say that according to the lines:
tam eva paramātmānaṁ jāra-buddhyāpi saṅgatāḥ, those
gopīs received fully sac-cid-ānanda bodies and became
similar to Bhagavān – in other words, they intimately
associated with Him.

Therefore, in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.47.37), in the
message sent by the Lord to the Vrajavāsīs through Śrī
Uddhava, it is stated:

yā mayā krīḍatā rātryāṁ vane ’smin vraja āsthitāḥ

alabdha-rāsāḥ kalyāṇyo māpur mad-vīrya-cintayā

When I performed rāsa-līlā at night in Vṛndāvana, the
gopīs who were checked from coming by their husbands and
other superiors were most fortunate because they
obtained Me by meditating on Me.

A similar incident is seen in the episode of Jaya and
Vijaya, the gatekeepers of Vaikuṇṭha who were cursed by
Śrī Sanaka Kumāra and his three brothers. When, during
their third birth as Śiśupāla and Dantavakra, they met
their deaths at the hands of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the curse ended

                             405
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

and their souls directly entered into Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
effulgence. It appears that they achieved sāyujya-mukti,
but actually they did not merge into the Lord. Rather,
they were reinstated in their service as Jaya and
Vijaya. Indeed, how can the most odious liberation be
suitable for those who had been living in Vaikuṇṭha as
Śrī Bhagavān’s devotees? In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.1.47),
Nārada explains how Jaya and Vijaya again regained their
positions as the Lord’s personal associates:

vairānubandha-tīvreṇa dhyānenācyuta-sātmatām

nītau punar hareḥ pārśvaṁ jagmatur viṣṇu-pārṣadau

They used to continuously meditate on Śrī Kṛṣṇa with
feelings of extreme enmity. As a result of that intense
absorption, they again attained Bhagavān and returned to
be near Him as His associates.

When gold is melted in fire, only the impurities in the
gold are destroyed, not the gold itself. Similarly, only
Jaya and Vijaya’s offence, or the curse that represented
their external contamination, was destroyed. Therefore,
their effulgent souls entered into Śrī Kṛṣṇa and they
returned to Vaikuṇṭha. That they merged with

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is only popular belief; it is not the actual
fact. Because they are the personal associates of
Bhagavān, it is inconceivable that

they would receive sāyujya-mukti, the most undesirable
type of liberation. Indeed, the merciful Bhagavān had
told them when they ‘fell’ from Vaikuṇṭha, “You will
obtain Me after three births.” Therefore, the advent of
Jaya and Vijaya in this world due to the curse of Śrī
Sanaka and his brothers was just like a divine
appearance.

However, it is our [Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī’s] belief
that, although the forms of the devotees in this world
are human in appearance, just as Bhagavān’s forms seem
to be human, they are nevertheless fully sac-cid-ānanda.
They appear and disappear from public vision just like
the Lord. Their advent, departure, and other activities
occur only in accordance with the pastimes of their
Lord, or sometimes due to their intense love for
Bhagavān. In scripture, sages use the words jahu or
deha-tyāga, meaning ‘to unmanifest or to give up

the body,’ to describe the disappearance of the
transcendental bodies of the devotees.

Therefore, the meaning of the three verses quoted above
beginning with antar-gṛha-gatāḥ (Śrīmad Bhāgavatam
10.29.9–11) is as follows: Guṇa-maya indicates that the
gopīs immediately abandoned their bodies that were
endowed with all good – that is, transcendental –

qualities. In other words, by the power of Yogamāyā
(līlā-śakti, the pastime potency) their transcendental
bodies disappeared without anyone noticing.

One might ask, “How is this possible?” Śukadeva Gosvāmī
therefore says, “Those gopīs considered the Supreme

                          406
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

Personality of Godhead (Paramātmā) to be their paramour,
or upa-pati. Therefore they obtained saṅgatā, or direct
association with Kṛṣṇa.” Considering Kṛṣṇa their
paramour was the prime cause of the gopīs being able to
enjoy with Him. They had been bound by the constraints
of social etiquette. Now it was simply that their
bondage was dissolved, as they were special recipients
of Śrī Bhagavān’s mercy. As proof of this, we see the
words of Śrī Nārada in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (4.29.46):

yadā yasyānugṛhṇāti bhagavān ātma-bhāvitaḥ

sa jahāti matiṁ loke vede ca pariniṣṭhitām

When Bhagavān Vāsudeva shows mercy to someone by
manifesting Himself in a person’s heart, then that
person becomes free from allegiance to material affairs
and to the path of Vedic fruitive activities.

[As revealed in Śrīmad Bhāgavatam 10.29.10] Thereafter,
in their meditation, the gopīs obtained nivṛtti, or
distinct joy, in receiving the embrace of Acyuta, the
infallible Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Or, it can be said, the gopīs
received the unbroken (acyuta) embrace of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The
auspiciousness of the gopīs, in the form of the bliss of
embracing Śrī Kṛṣṇa, remained undiminished (akṣīṇa-
maṅgala). Even their tilaka and other marks of their
worship of the Lord were not destroyed.

Another understanding is that despite obtaining the
great good fortune of Kṛṣṇa’s embrace in their hearts,
due to the intolerable, burning pain of being physically
separated from their beloved, the gopīs quickly lost
(dhutā) their luster. Alternatively, it can be said that
inauspiciousness in the form of the gopīs’ future
separation from their beloved Śrī Kṛṣṇa was eliminated
(dhutaṁ).

Furthermore, because the gopīs nourished paramour love
for Śrī Kṛṣṇa, they were able to obtain His association.
Since their prema is extremely confidential and secret,
Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī did not openly speak about it in
the assembly. This indescribable, most famous paramour
love, known as jāra-bhāva or parakīyā-bhāva, has been
revealed in the verses of Śrī Gīta-govinda: “nibhṛta
nikuñja-gṛhaṁ gatayā – In the mood of illicit love
(parakīyā-bhāva), Śrī Rādhā and the gopīs secretly went
to rendezvous with their paramour Śrī Kṛṣṇa in the
secluded love-bower.”

How did the gopīs meditate upon Śrī Kṛṣṇa? In the
[three] Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam verses under discussion,
Śukadeva Gosvāmī says, “mīlita-locanāḥ – with eyes half-
closed or else fully-closed in meditation.” Another
understanding of their eyes being closed is that with
the two eyes of Śruti and Smṛti (the Vedas and the
Purāṇas) shut, those gopīs turned their backs on the
words of the scriptures, which consist of regulative
principles and directions (vidhi-mārga), and giving up
their regard for public opinion (loka-lajjā), entered
the path of spontaneous love (rāga-mārga) with deep love
(anurāga). This is the purport of their meditation.
Then, because they were locked inside their houses and
could not go out, the gopīs gave up their bodies, or in

                          407
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

other words, their transcendental bodies disappeared
[from their homes].

This is an overall understanding (dig-darśana) of this
discourse.



Verse 113

atrāpi bhagavantaṁ yad dṛṣṭavān asi tādṛśam

sad-guroḥ kṛpayā kṛṣṇa-didṛkṣā-bhara-kāritam

atra – here; api – even; bhagavantam – the Lord; yat –
which; dṛṣṭavān – seen; asi – you have; tādṛśam – such;
sat-guroḥ – of your exalted guru; kṛpayā – by the mercy;
kṛṣṇa – Śrī Kṛṣṇa; didṛkṣā – by the desire to see; bhara
– great; kāritam – accomplished.

Only by the mercy of a bona fide guru have you seen the
indescribably beautiful form of Bhagavān here. Indeed,
you should understand that the desire to see Śrī Kṛṣṇa
that has blossomed in you is also the result of your
guru’s mercy.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Mahādeva says, “Even here in the
abode of liberation you had the darśana of Śrī
Bhagavān’s indescribably beautiful form. You should
understand that this happened only by the mercy of sad-
guru, your divine spiritual master, and that same mercy
has also ignited your eagerness to see Śrī Kṛṣṇa.”



Verse 114

śrī-gopa-kumāra uvāca

tac-chaṅkara-prasādena parānanda-bharaṁ gataḥ

kiñcid icchann api brahman nāśakaṁ vadituṁ hriyā

śrī-gopa-kumāraḥ uvāca – Śrī Gopa-kumāra said; tat –
that; śaṅkara – of Śaṅkara (śaṁ karoti iti śaṅkaraḥ –
one who awards well-being is known as Śaṅkara);
prasādena – by the mercy; para-ānanda-bharam –
overwhelmed by great bliss; gataḥ – attained; kiñcit –
something; icchan – desiring; api – also; brahman – O
brāhmaṇa; na aśakam – I was unable; vaditum – to speak;
hriyā – out of shyness.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra said: I was overjoyed to receive the
mercy of Śrī Śaṅkara. At that point I desired to speak
(to the Vaikuṇṭha associates), but out of shyness, I
could not.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “I was submerged
in supreme ecstasy due to the mercy of Śrī Śaṅkara. At
that time I wanted to converse a little with Śrī
Bhagavān’s associates but, feeling shy, I could not
utter a word.”



                          408
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017


Verse 115

bhagavat-pārṣadāḥ śrūtvā tāṁ tāṁ vācam umā-pateḥ

praṇamya sādaraṁ prītyā tam ūcur vinayānvitāḥ

bhagavat – of the Lord; pārṣadāḥ – the associates;
śrutvā – having heard; tām tām vācam – those words; umā-
pateḥ – of Lord of Umā; praṇamya – bowing down; sa-
ādaram – with respect; prītyā – with love; tam – to him;
ūcuḥ – they said; vinaya-anvitāḥ – with humility.

Hearing the words of Lord Śiva, Śrī Bhagavān’s eternal
associates respectfully offered him obeisances and
humbly began to speak.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Before
explaining the reason for their arrival, the Lord’s
associates offered obeisances to Śrī Umāpati (Śrī Śiva,
Umā-devī’s husband) with devotion, and then they spoke
words of solace to relieve my inconsolable grief, which
arises with love for the Lord.”



Verse 116

śrī-bhagavat-pārṣadā ūcuḥ

tena vaikuṇṭha-nāthena samaṁ ko ’pi na vidyate

bhagavan bhavato bhedo gauryāś ca ramayā saha

śrī-bhagavat-pārṣadāḥ ūcuḥ – the Lord’s associates said;
tena – by Him; vaikuṇṭha-nāthena – the Lord of
Vaikuntha; samam – with; kaḥ api – in any way; na – not;
vidyate – is; bhagavan – O Lord; bhavataḥ – between you;
bhedaḥ – difference; gauryāḥ – between Gaurī; ca – and;
ramayā – the goddess of fortune; saha – with.

Śrī Bhagavān’s personal associates said: O bhagavan,
there is no difference between the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha and
you, nor between Ramā and Gaurī.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas say, “O
bhagavan, there is no difference between Vaikuṇṭha-nātha
and you, and there is no difference between Ramā and
Gaurī. Just as you are the incarnation of the Lord,
similarly Śrī Gaurī is also the incarnation of Śrī
Lakṣmī.”



Verse 117

tal-loke bhavato vāso devyāś ca kila yujyate

khyātaḥ priya-tamas tasyā-vatāraś ca bhavān mahān

tat loke – in that world; bhavataḥ – for you; vāsaḥ –
residence; devyāḥ – of the goddess; ca – also; kila –
certainly; yujyate – appropriate; khyātaḥ – renowned;
priya-tamaḥ – most beloved; tasya – of Him; avatāraḥ –

                            409
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

incarnation; ca – and; bhavān – you; mahān – great.

You and Gaurī are fit to live in Vaikuṇṭha because you
are renowned as the most dear to the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha
and are His exalted incarnation.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas say,
“Therefore, both of you are fit to reside in Vaikuṇṭha
because you are celebrated as Vaikuṇṭha-nātha’s exalted
incarnation and are loved by Him.” Here the word kila,
meaning ‘certainly,’ is used to indicate conviction.



Verse 118

tathāpi yad idaṁ kiñcid bhāṣitaṁ bhavatādhunā

svabhāvo bhagavat-preṣṭha-tamataupayiko hy ayam

tathā api – still; yat idam kiñcit – whatever; bhāṣitam
– said; bhavatā – by you; adhunā – now; svabhāvaḥ –
natural; bhagavat-preṣṭha-tamatā – because of being
beloved to the Lord; aupayikaḥ – suitable; hi – indeed;
ayam – this.

Nevertheless, your describing yourself as a fallen soul,
as you just did, is certainly natural for such an
immensely beloved devotee of Bhagavān.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas say,
“Nevertheless, just now you have declared that you,
Brahmā, and Brahmā’s sons headed by Bhṛgu all strive for
the goal of Vaikuṇṭha. This disposition is completely
worthy of Bhagavān’s beloved devotee.”



Verse 119

tad-bhakti-rasa-kallola-grāhako vaiṣṇaveḍitaḥ

ataḥ sarvāvatārebhyo bhavato mahimādhikaḥ

tat – to the Supreme Lord; bhakti-rasa – of the
essential mellows of devotional service; kallola –
waves; grāhakaḥ – one who seizes; vaiṣṇava – by the
devotees; īḍitaḥ – eulogized; ataḥ – thus; sarva – all;
avatārebhyaḥ – than other incarnations; bhavataḥ – your;
mahimā – glories; adhikaḥ – superior.

Because you are the perceiver and knower of the waves of
śrī-kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasa, the Vaiṣṇavas praise you.
Therefore, your glories are superior to all other
incarnations of Śrī Bhagavān.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Glorifying the nature of Śrī Śiva, Śrī
Bhagavān’s associates say, “You are the knower and
instigator of the waves of the nectar of devotion
(bhakti-rasa) to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, the Vaiṣṇavas
always offer prayers to you.”




                          410
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

Verse 120

śrī-gopa-kumāra uvāca

nija-stutyā tayā tasmin hriyā tūṣṇīṁ sthite prabhau

bhagavat-pārṣadās te mām āśliṣyocuḥ suhṛd-varāḥ

śrī-gopa-kumāraḥ uvāca – Śrī Gopa-kumāra said; nija –
own; stutyā tayā – by this glorification; tasmin – of
him; hriyā – out of shyness; tūṣṇīm sthite – remained
silent; prabhau – the Lord; bhagavat-pārṣadāḥ – the
associates of the Lord; te – they; mām – me; āśliṣya –
embracing; ūcuḥ – said; suhṛd-varāḥ – the best well-
wishers.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra said: Embarrassed to hear himself
praised, Śrī Śiva remained silent. Then, Bhagavān’s
associates, who are the crest jewels of well-wishers,
embraced me and spoke.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Hearing Śrī
Bhagavān’s personal associates praise him, the saintly
Śrī Śiva, out of modesty, kept silent. Great
personalities are embarrassed to hear their glories
spoken, and therefore it is not surprising that Śrī
Mahādeva, who is the crest jewel of great personalities,
became shy. Then the Vaikuṇṭha associates, who are the
foremost of those who are causelessly merciful, embraced
me and began to speak to me.”



Verse 121

śrī-bhagavat-pārṣadā ūcuḥ

asmad-īśvara-san-mantropāsakomā-pati-priya

gopa-nandana bhakteṣu bhavantaṁ gaṇayema hi

śrī-bhagavat-pārṣadāḥ ūcuḥ – the Lord’s associates said;
asmat – our; īśvara – of the Lord; sat-mantra – of the
eternal mantra; upāsaka –

O worshipper; umā-pati-priya – dear to the lord of Umā;
gopa-

nandana – O son of a cowherd; bhakteṣu – among the
devotees; bhavantam – you; gaṇayema – we consider; hi –
certainly.

The personal associates of Śrī Bhagavān said: O son of a
gopa who is dear to Umāpati! You worship our Lord by the
transcendental mantra, and therefore, we certainly count
you as one of His devotees.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas say, “O son of
a gopa, you are qualified to go to Vaikuṇṭha.” To
encourage Gopa-kumāra, the Vaikuṇṭha associates speak
this verse beginning with asmad. They say, “You worship
our Lord Vaikuṇṭha-nātha with the eternal mantra, and
you are the beloved of Śrī Umāpati (Śrī Śiva).
Therefore, be assured that, indeed, we count you as one

                            411
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

of the Lord’s devotees.”



Verse 122

gauḍe gaṅgā-taṭe jāto māthura-brāhmaṇottamaḥ

jayanta-nāmā kṛṣṇasyāvatāras te mahān guruḥ

gauḍe – in Bengal; gaṅgā-taṭe – on the bank of the
Gaṅgā; jātaḥ – born; mathurā-brāhmaṇa-uttamaḥ – a
transcendental Mathurā brāhmaṇa; jayanta-nāmā – named
Jayanta; kṛṣṇasya – of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; avatāraḥ – an
incarnation; te – your; mahān – exalted; guruḥ –
spiritual guide.

You have received as your exalted guru the incarnation
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa named Jayanta. He is a high-class Mathurā
brāhmaṇa born on the banks of the Gaṅgā in Gauḍadeśa
(Bengal).

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas continue, “Your
exalted guru is an incarnation of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.”



Verse 123

satyaṁ pratīhi vayam atra bhavan-nimittam

evāgatāḥ śṛṇu hitaṁ nija-kṛtyam etat

vaikuṇṭham icchasi yadi pravihāya sarvaṁ

sa-prema-bhaktim anutiṣṭha nava-prakārām

satyam – the truth; pratīhi – please understand; vayam –
we; atra – here; bhavat – of you; nimittam – because;
eva – indeed; āgatāḥ – come; śṛṇu – hear; hitam –
welfare; nija-kṛtyam – own duty; etat – this; vaikuṇṭham
– Vaikuṇṭha; icchasi – you desire; yadi – if; pra-vihāya
– completely renouncing; sarvam – everything; sa-prema-
bhaktim – with His loving devotion; anutiṣṭha – execute
under guidance; nava-prakārām – the nine limbs.

Know this truth: we have come here to the abode of
liberation just for you. Now, if you want to go to
Vaikuṇṭha, listen to what must be done. Renounce
everything, and with deep love, execute the nine forms
of bhakti.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas say,
“Understand this truth: we have come to this abode of
liberation for you alone. Therefore, do not consider
yourself unfit to attain Vaikuṇṭha. (More shall be said
in this connection further on.) If you desire to enter
Vaikuṇṭha, then, first, give up your attachment to the
regulated chanting of your mantra, or mantra-japa, and
execute the nine types of bhakti (navadhā-bhakti), such
as hearing (śravaṇa) and chanting (kīrtana). This advice
is, indeed, for your benefit. To begin with, leave this
abode of liberation. Then, give up your attachment to
performing mantra-japa along with nyāsa (rituals to

                           412
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

spiritualize the body), dhyāna (meditation), and other
formal practices, and with pure love perform śravaṇa,
kīrtana, and the other the practices of bhakti.”



Verse 124

taj-jñāpakaṁ ca bhaja bhāgavatādi-śāstraṁ

līlā-kathā bhagavataḥ śṛṇu tatra nityam

tā eva karṇa-vivaraṁ praṇayāt praviṣṭāḥ

sadyaḥ padaṁ bhagavataḥ prabhavanti dātum

tat-jñāpakam – to His glorification; ca – and; bhaja –
be devoted; bhāgavata-ādi – beginning with Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam; śāstram – to the Vaiṣṇava scriptures; līlā-
kathā – the narrations of Their pastimes; bhagavataḥ –
of the Lord; śṛṇu – hear; tatra – there; nityam –
regularly; te – of you; eva – indeed; karṇa-vivaram –
the ear holes; praṇayāt – with love; praviṣṭāḥ –
entered; sadyaḥ – at once; padam – the abode; bhagavataḥ
– of the all-opulent Lord; prabhavanti – have the power;
dātum – to award.

Devote yourself to Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and other
scriptures that teach loving devotion to the Lord, and
regularly listen to the narrations of Śrī Bhagavān’s
pastimes. When those descriptions enter the holes of
your ears and you hear them with love, they will
immediately bring you to the abode of Śrī Bhagavān.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might ask, “What is
the nature of the ninefold practice of devotional
service, and how does one execute it?”

In reply, the Vaikuṇṭha associates of the Lord speak
this verse beginning with tat. They say, “You should
continuously study Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and other bhakti
scriptures, and regularly hear the narrations of the
pastimes of Bhagavān. Of the nine practices of
devotional service, the most excellent is hearing
Bhagavān’s pastimes. This is most beneficial because it
greatly attracts the mind. As soon as those descriptions
enter the heart through the medium of the ears, they
immediately deliver one to the abode of Śrī Bhagavān.”

Śrī Śukadeva clearly states this in the Twelfth Canto
(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 12.4.40):

saṁsāra-sindhum ati-dustaram uttitīrṣor

nānyaḥ plavo bhagavataḥ puruṣottamasya

līlā-kathā-rasa-niṣevaṇam antareṇa

puṁso bhaved vividha-duḥkha-davārditasya

For those who have been burnt by the forest fire of
distress and who desire to cross over the insurmountable
ocean of material existence, the only boat that can
deliver one is one’s taste for the nectarean rasa of the

                          413
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

narrations of Bhagavān’s pastimes. There is no other
recourse.

It is stated in the Second Canto (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
2.2.37):

pibanti ye bhagavata ātmanaḥ satāṁ

kathāmṛtaṁ śravaṇa-puṭeṣu sambhṛtam

punanti te viṣaya-vidūṣitāśayaṁ

vrajanti tac-caraṇa-saroruhāntikam

When those whose hearts are contaminated by mirage-like
illusory sense objects, such as form and taste, drink
deeply through their ears the nectar of the descriptions
of Śrī Bhagavān’s pastimes, which are manifest from the
spiritual nature of saintly personalities, their hearts
become purified. Thus they happily obtain the personal
association of the lotus feet of the Lord.



Verse 125

teṣāṁ nava-prakārāṇām ekenaiva su-sidhyati

sarva-sādhana-varyeṇa vaikuṇṭhaḥ sādhya-sattamaḥ

teṣām – of them; nava-prakārāṇām – of the nine kinds;
ekena – by one; eva – only; su-sidhyati – one attains
complete perfection; sarva-sādhana-varyeṇa – because of
this best of all practices; vaikuṇṭhaḥ – Vaikuṇṭha;
sādhya-sat-tamaḥ – the highest objective.

Bhakti is the best of all means of spiritual attainment.
Therefore, the abode of Vaikuṇṭha, which is the best of
all the goals of human life, can be obtained by simply
following any one of the nine processes of bhakti.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The Vaikuṇṭha associates reply by
speaking three verses, beginning here with teṣām. They
say, “Following any one aspect of the nine processes of
bhakti can bring one happily to Vaikuṇṭha. The reason is
that every single form of navadhā-bhakti is superior to
all other spiritual practices, such as the quest for
knowledge ( jñāna) and the path of action (karma). And
every form of navadhā-bhakti bestows a goal that is
superior to goals such as liberation (mukti) and sense
enjoyment (bhukti). Although it has been ascertained
that practices such as jñāna and karma result in
liberation and sense enjoyment, respectively, great
personalities reject them, considering those results to
be insignificant. The reason is that the quality of the
result depends on the quality of the practice to attain
it, and the best practice will yield the best result.”

It is stated in Brahma Purāṇa:

dikṣā-mātreṇa kṛṣṇasya narā mokṣaṁ labhanti vai

kiṁ punar ye sadā bhaktyā pūjayanty acyutaṁ narāḥ


                          414
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

When a person obtains liberation simply by receiving
initiation in the kṛṣṇa-mantra, who then can describe
the glorious fortune of those who always worship Acyuta
with devotion?

Here, the understanding of the word mokṣa, or
liberation, is “mokṣyati iti mokṣaḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa – One who
grants liberation is none but Śrī Kṛṣṇa.”

Moreover:

śāṭhyenapi narā nityaṁ ye smaranti janārdanam

te ’pi yānti tanuṁ tyaktvā viṣṇu-lokam anāmayam

Those who always remember Janārdana, even while they are
engaged in cheating and deception, achieve the faultless
abode of Viṣṇu after giving up their material bodies.



Verse 126

mahat-tamatayā śrūyamāṇā api pare ’khilāḥ

phala-vrātāvicāreṇa tucchā mahad-anādṛtāḥ

mahat-tamatayā – because of the supreme greatness;
śrūyamāṇāḥ – hearing; api – although; pare – other;
akhilāḥ – all; phala – benefits; vrāta – of vows;
avicāreṇa – without consideration; tucchāḥ –
insignificant; mahat – by the great souls; anādṛtāḥ –
disregarded.

Without consideration, rasika devotees, who are expert
in discriminating between what is of substance and what
is worthless, regard as insignificant the entire corpus
of great rewards that are described, except for the
abode of Vaikuṇṭha.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might raise the doubt,
“Don’t we also hear about other excellent rewards?” In
reply, the Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas speak this verse beginning
with mahat. They say, “Other than the abode of
Vaikuṇṭha, whatever is claimed as a great goal is truly
insignificant. The connoisseurs of devotion to the Lord,
those who are bhakti-rasika, who know the difference
between the real and the unreal (sāra-asāra), have
determined that all those goals (sādhyas) and means to
attain them (sādhanas) are insignificant.”



Verse 127

tathāpi tad-rasa-jñaiḥ sā bhaktir nava-vidhāñjasā

sampādyate vicitraitad-rasa-mādhurya-labdhaye

tathā api – however; tat – of that (spiritual reality);
rasa-jñaiḥ – by those conversant with spiritual mellows;
sā – that; bhaktiḥ – devotional service; nava-vidhā –
nine kinds; añjasā – at once; sampādyate – is
accomplished; vicitrā – wonderful; tat – of that; rasa –

                          415
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

of the essential mellows; mādhurya-labdhaye – to achieve
the sweetness.

However, rasika devotees happily execute the ninefold
process of bhakti to taste the wonderful varieties of
the sweetness of bhakti-rasa.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas say, “Although
Vaikuṇṭha can be obtained by executing any one of the
aspects of bhakti’s ninefold process, nevertheless, in
order to relish the wonderful, sweet rasa – the
nectarean taste of relationship with the Lord – those
advanced devotees perform all nine, which are
indescribable and full of the most exalted mellows. They
do so in order to taste all the pleasing varieties of
bhakti-rasa.”

Here the word vicitra, meaning ‘varieties,’ implies
tasting the mellows of all the nine limbs of bhakti,
such as hearing (śravaṇa), chanting (kīrtana),
remembering (smaraṇa), and so on.



Verse 128

teṣāṁ kasmiṁścid ekasmin śraddhayānuṣṭhite sati

svayam āvirbhavet premā śrīmat-kṛṣṇa-padābjayoḥ

teṣām – of them; kasmiṁścit – in anyone; ekasmin – in
one; śraddhayā – with faith; anuṣṭhite – situated under
guidance; sati – being; svayam – automatically;
āvirbhavet – it can manifest; premā – pure love; śrīmat
– splendid; kṛṣṇa-pada-abjayoḥ – for the lotus feet of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Still, by the faithful execution of any one aspect of
the ninefold process of bhakti, pure love for the lotus
feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa automatically manifests in the heart.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas say, “As soon
as one develops niṣṭhā (unwavering dedication) for any
one of the nine processes of bhakti, while executing it
with faith and trust, prema for Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet
automatically arises.”



Verse 129

tathāpi kāryā premṇaiva parihārāya hṛd-rujaḥ

phalāntareṣu kāmasya vaikuṇṭhāpti-virodhinaḥ

tathā api – nevertheless; kāryā – it should be done;
premṇā – with love; eva – certainly; parihārāya – for
removing; hṛt – of the heart; rujaḥ – the disease;
phala-antareṣu – for extraneous benefits; kāmasya – one
who has desire; vaikuṇṭha – of Vaikuṇṭha; āpti –
attains; virodhinaḥ – obstacle.

Even so, because any extraneous desire poses a great
obstacle to attaining Vaikuṇṭha, in order to remove the

                          416
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

disease of material desires in the heart, it is
necessary to perform that ninefold devotional process
with a loving, devotional mood.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas say, “However,
it is crucial to execute navadhā-bhakti with prema, a
mood of pure love. Why? It will remove worldly desires,
which are opposed to the goal of achieving residence in
Vaikuṇṭha. Prema, which is blissful by nature, has no
other objective, and thus it destroys all extraneous
desires, which are obstacles to entering Vaikuṇṭha.

“Factually, the desire for anything other than residence
in Vaikuṇṭha is a sign of a diseased heart. Such desire
ignites the heart with the fever of anxiety, and if one
enjoys the results of his material desires, he then
faces grave obstacles blocking him from Vaikuṇṭha. Such
desires, relating to this world and the next (paraloka),
are certainly against one’s better interests. Prema,
however, being naturally devoid of material ambition,
bestows bliss in both worlds and is the only means to
attain great joy.”



Verse 130

yadyapy etādṛśī bhaktir yatra yatropapadyate

tat-tat-sthānaṁ hi vaikuṇṭhas tatra tatraiva sa prabhuḥ

yadi api – although; etādṛśī – such; bhaktiḥ –
devotional service; yatra yatra – wherever; upapadyate –
is manifested; tat-tat-sthānam – in those places; hi –
indeed; vaikuṇṭhaḥ – is Vaikuṇṭha; tatra tatra – there;
eva – indeed; saḥ – He; prabhuḥ – the Master.

Although this bhakti can be obtained anywhere, wherever
it is achieved becomes Vaikuṇṭha, and the Lord is indeed
present there,

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might question,
“Prema-bhakti is full of the greatest bliss and the
sweetest nectar, and it

reproaches the bliss of impersonal Brahman realization,
or

brahmānanda. If it can be obtained anywhere, then why
should one aspire for Vaikuṇṭha-loka?”

Acknowledging the truth that such bhakti may be obtained
anywhere, the Vaikuṇṭha associates speak three verses,
beginning here with yad, to analyze the matter. They
say, “That place where such ninefold processes of bhakti
are lovingly executed is indeed Vaikuṇṭha-loka.”

Gopa-kumāra might ask, “Certainly Śrī Bhagavān is
personally present in Vaikuṇṭha, is He not?”

The Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas agree, “The Lord is always
present in all those places also.”

In this connection, in the Padma Purāṇa, Bhagavān

                          417
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

Himself states:

nāhaṁ vasāmi vaikuṇṭhe yogināṁ hṛdaye na ca

mad-bhaktāh yatra gāyanti tatra tiṣṭhāmi nārada

O Nārada, I neither reside in Vaikuṇṭha nor in the
hearts of yogīs. However, I do reside where My devotees
sing of My pastimes.



Verse 131

tathāpi sarvadā sākṣād anyatra bhagavāṁs tathā

na dṛśyeteti vaikuṇṭho ’vaśyaṁ bhaktair apekṣyate

tathā api – still; sarvadā – always; sākṣāt – directly;
anyatra – in other places; bhagavān – the Lord; tathā –
so; na dṛśyeta – may not be seen; iti – thus; vaikuṇṭhaḥ
– Vaikuṇṭha; avaśyam – necessarily; bhaktaiḥ – by the
devotees; apekṣyate – is aspired for.

However, Śrī Bhagavān is not directly visible in all
those places; therefore, devotees aspire for the abode
of Vaikuṇṭha.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas say, “Even if
this is the case, Śrī Bhagavān is not always visible
everywhere else as He

is in Vaikuṇṭha, where He is always expanding His
wonderful beauty, sweet qualities, and pastimes.
Therefore, the devotees certainly desire Vaikuṇṭha.”



Verse 132

sarva-prakārikā bhaktis tādṛśī ca sadānyataḥ

na sampadyeta nirvighnā tan-niṣṭhair bahubhiḥ saha

sarva-prakārikā – all the varieties; bhaktiḥ –
devotional service; tādṛśī – like this; ca – also; sadā
– always; anyataḥ – in other places; na – not;
sampadyeta – it can be found; nirvighnā – without
obstacles; tan-niṣṭhaiḥ – by the staunch; bahubhiḥ –
many; saha – by.

Besides Vaikuṇṭha, no other place exhibits all the
varieties of bhakti. There, countless staunch devotees
are resolutely performing such bhakti unhindered by
impediments like material time.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The Vaikuṇṭha associates elaborate on
this point. They say, “Devotion that is endowed with
fully-blossomed divine love (prema) as seen in Vaikuṇṭha
is not found anywhere else. The reason is that all the
residents there have unwavering dedication, or niṣṭhā,
for bhakti. Elsewhere it is not so, and obstacles
constantly hinder the execution of bhakti in those
places. In particular, in Vaikuṇṭha, the time factor or

                          418
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

any other material restriction presents no obstacle;
whereas other places are full of such impediments.
Because in Vaikuṇṭha one receives the association of
countless numbers of like-minded (sama-jātīya) devotees
whose bodies are eternally sac-cid-ānanda and who are
naturally rasika, expert in relishing prema-bhakti, one
can automatically perform unhindered worship of the
Lord. Therefore, we see that devotees aspire to go
there.”



Verse 133

nijendriya-manaḥ-kāya-ceṣṭā-rūpāṁ na viddhi tām

nitya-satya-ghanānanda-rūpā sā hi guṇātigā

nija – own; indriya – senses; manaḥ – mind; kāya – body;
ceṣṭā – activities; rūpām – form; na viddhi – do not
consider; tam – that; nitya – eternal; satya – reality;
ghana-ānanda – of intense bliss; rūpā – form; sā – that;
hi – indeed; guṇa-atigā – beyond the binding influences
of material nature: goodness, passion, and ignorance.

Specifically, do not think that bhakti is an endeavor of
the dull senses, mind, and body. Being eternal reality
and concentrated bliss, bhakti is beyond the modes of
material nature and thus cannot be grasped by the
material senses.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: From the statement spoken by the
Vaikuṇṭha associates to Śrī Gopa-kumāra in verse 123,
“bhaktim anutiṣṭha – You should practice bhakti,” it
appears that devotional service is accomplished by human
effort. Refuting this idea in two verses, beginning here
with nija, the Vaikuṇṭha associates describe the
intrinsic nature (svarūpa) of bhakti. They say,
“Devotional service cannot be achieved by the endeavors
of the material senses, mind, and body. In addition, the
limbs of bhakti, such as hearing about the Lord
(śravaṇa) and singing His names (kīrtana) are also not
the objects (viṣayas) of one’s sense of hearing, sense
of speech, and so on. In other words, śravaṇa appears as
a function of the ears; kīrtana appears as a function of
the tongue; smaraṇa as a function of the mind; and
vandana (offering obeisances), intimate service, etc.
appear as functions of the body. However in actuality,
the material senses are unable to undertake all these
spiritual activities. Understand these activities to be
transcendental, beyond the material qualities.”

Gopa-kumāra might ask, “Then what is the nature of
bhakti?”

They reply, “You should know pure devotional service to
be the eternal truth and the essence of pure joy.”



Verse 134

nirguṇe sac-cid-ānandātmani kṛṣṇa-prasādataḥ


                          419
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

sphurantī vilasaty ātma-bhaktānāṁ bahudhā mude

nirguṇe – beyond the modes of nature; sat-cit-ānanda –
eternal and full of knowledge and bliss; ātmani – in the
personality (of bhakti); kṛṣṇa-prasādataḥ – by the mercy
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; sphurantī – manifests; vilasati – shines;
ātma-bhaktānām – for the devotees of the Lord; bahudhā –
in numerous ways; mude – in happiness.

That bhakti is singular in nature, but by the mercy of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, it manifests in numerous forms such as
śravaṇa (hearing and kīrtana (singing) for the pleasure
of the confidential devotees who are transcendental to
the modes of nature.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Now Śrī Gopa-kumāra might question,
“If that devotional service is transcendental to
material qualities, how can the conditioned soul
approach it?”

In reply, the Vaikuṇṭha associates speak this verse
beginning with nirguṇa. They say, “That nirguṇa-bhakti,
or devotion devoid of material qualities, which is by
nature full of eternity, knowledge, and bliss (sac-cid-
ānanda), manifests by the mercy of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in the
heart. That is, it manifests in pure spirit souls and it
sports within them in the form of hearing, chanting, and
so on. Although this bhakti is one in nature, or eka-
rūpa, nevertheless it manifests in many forms (such as
śravaṇa, kīrtana, etc.) because Bhagavān wants to
increase the wonderful bliss of His confidential
servitors.”

This topic has been discussed before and will be
discussed again.



Verse 135

viśuddhe tu vivekena saty ātmani hareḥ padam

gate ’py aprākṛtaṁ bhakti-vidhayo vilasanti hi

viśuddhe – completely pure; tu – but; vivekena – through
discrimi-nation; sati – becoming; ātmani – the heart;
hareḥ – of Śrī Hari; padam – to the abode; gate – gone;
api – although; aprākṛtam – not material; bhakti – of
devotional service; vidhayaḥ – processes; vilasanti –
shine; hi – certainly.

When the practitioner’s heart is completely cleansed by
pure discrimination, the nine processes of bhakti sport
within that completely purified soul. Only then does he
obtain the abode of Śrī Hari (Vaikuṇṭha-loka).

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Having explained the general
characteristics of bhakti in this verse beginning with
viśuddha, the Vaikuṇṭha associates dialectically
establish its transcendental nature by direct (anvaya)
and indirect (vyatireka) deliberation. The word
viśuddha-viveka, meaning ‘pure intelligence,’ indicates
that the living being becomes free from false ego by
realizing the idea stated in Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā (5.9):

                          420
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

“indriyāṇīndriyārtheṣu vartanta iti dhārayan – The
living being actually does not do anything; rather it is
his senses that interact with their respective sense
objects.” Then, freed from false ego, he no longer has
to suffer the reactions of his past deeds. When with
unalloyed intelligence the living being frees himself
from identifying with the body, senses and so on, he
becomes qualified to enter Śrī Vaikuṇṭha, Lord Hari’s
transcendental abode. At that time, bhakti, in all of
her varieties, sports in the heart of that jīva.



Verse 136

anyathetara-karmāṇīvaite ’pi syur na saṅgatāḥ

kāyendriyātma-ceṣṭāto jñānenātmani śodhite

anyathā – otherwise; itara-karmāṇi – other activities;
iva – like; ete – they; api – also; syūḥ na – they can
not be; saṅgatāḥ – because of contact; kāya – with the
body; indriya – and senses; ātma-

ceṣṭātaḥ – from the activities of the soul; jñānena –
through knowledge; ātmani – in the self; śodhite –
purified.

If bhakti to the Lord were also to be an activity of the
senses like all other mundane activities, then it could
not be the function of the soul. Alternatively, it may
be said that if by knowledge, the soul were to be
cleansed of the entanglement of activities with

the body and senses, then the nine processes of bhakti,
like material activities, could not be functions of the
soul. This is because the process of bhakti, unlike
material activities, is not rooted

in the living being’s false ego of being the doer.
Bhakti mercifully sports on her own accord in the soul
that is purified of the false ego of being the doer.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas say,
“Otherwise, if navadhā-bhakti were just activity of the
mundane senses, then were the soul to be cleansed of its
entanglement of activities with the body and senses
through knowledge ( jñāna) or wisdom (viveka), the
process of navadhā-bhakti would also be reproachable
like all other mundane activities, both regular (nitya)
and occasional (naimittika). In other words, if navadhā-
bhakti was just activity of the mundane senses, it could
not be the function, or dharma, of the soul.”

“Indriyāṇīndriyārtheṣu vartante – All the senses are
engaged with their respective sense objects.” According
to this logic of Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā (5.9), the truth
of the self (ātma-tattva) can be obtained by the
knowledge of being free from the false ego of being the
doer. Jñanīs (persons advanced in such knowledge) also
discard all mundane objects through this very wisdom.
However, the process of devotion (bhakti-vidhi) is not
within the jursdiction of mundane nitya and naimittika
activities, nor can it be separated from the soul

                          421
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

through the culture of knowledge or wisdom.



Verse 137

anyebhya iva karmabhyo bhagavad-bhakti-karmataḥ

viviktaḥ san kathaṁ yātu vaikuṇṭhaṁ muktim arhati

anyebhyaḥ – from others; iva – like; karmabhyaḥ –
actions; bhagavad-bhakti-karmataḥ – from the actions of
devotional service to the Lord; viviktaḥ –
distinguished; san – being; katham – how?; yātu – can he
go?; vaikuṇṭham– to Vaikuṇṭha; muktim – of liberation;
arhati – he is worthy.

Devotional service to Bhagavān is not an activity of the
body and senses, as are other activities. How can a soul
go to Vaikuṇṭha if he is bereft of any activity of
devotion to the Lord? Without bhakti, such a person is
fit only for liberation.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might question, “Is
there any fault to bhakti not being the function of the
soul, or ātma, but rather an activity of the material
senses like other duties?”

The Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas reply in this verse beginning
with

anyebhya. They say, “If the soul were to become cleansed
of bhakti, activities of devotion, in the same way that
it becomes cleansed of karma, fruitive activities
performed with the body and senses, how could the soul
be completely purified (visuddha)? And without becoming
thoroughly purified, how could the soul enter Vaikuṇṭha?
Bereft of devotion, the soul would be unfit to enter
that realm. It is possible, however, that the soul who
becomes cleansed of karma – that is, who has achieved
freedom from desire for the results of action – may be
fit for liberation. Therefore, it is to be understood
that bhakti is essential for attaining the spiritual
realm of Vaikuṇṭha. As evidenced by this reasoning, this
transcendental abode cannot be attained through any
mundane means. It follows that bhakti, being the process
to attain that transcendental realm, must also be
transcendental.”



Verse 138

na hy anya-karma-vad bhaktir api karmeti manyatām

bahir-dṛṣṭyaiva jalpyeta bhakta-dehādi-vat kvacit

na – not; hi – certainly; anya-karma-vat – like other
activities; bhaktiḥ – devotional service; api – also;
karma – action; iti – thus; manyatām – for those who
think; bahiḥ dṛṣṭyā – by external vision; eva – indeed;
jalpyeta – it may be said; bhakta – of a devotee; deha-
ādi-vat – like the body and so forth; kvacit –
sometimes.

                          422
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


Some people think that devotion to the Lord is also a
karmic activity like performing one’s prescribed
occupational duties, but this can

never be so. This is an external conception, not based
on the underlying truth of bhakti. Although the term
deha is used to refer both to the bodies of devotees who
reside in Vaikuṇṭha and to bodies made of five material
elements, nevertheless the first usage is transcendental
and the second is material. Similarly, although bhakti
is independent of karma, nevertheless, due to an
external perspective, it is sometimes regarded as karma.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might say, “The
execution of one’s prescribed occupational duties, or
sva-dharma, is mundane karmic activity. Similarly, can
we not say that bhakti is also a particular type of
karma?”

The Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas reply, “Devotional service
performed with intimate feelings for Bhagavān can never
be a fruitive or mundane activity like the execution of
one’s prescribed occupational duties. This is because
intimate and confidential service is not at all an
activity of the material senses. Even if it appears to
be a mundane activity from an external perspective,
factually it is not.” When the term bhakti-karma,
meaning ‘devotional activities,’ is used, some people
take it to be material. Bhakti, however, is not an
activity of the mundane senses. Thus, in two verses,
beginning here with na hi, the Vaikuṇṭha associates
quote conclusive truth, or siddhānta, to refute the
claim that bhakti is indeed karma.

Gopa-kumāra might posit, “Devotional service to Bhagavān
is the best of all virtuous activities meant for
cleansing the con-sciousness.” This is the opinion of
those who are adherents of the philosophy known as
mīmāṁsā (also, known as karma-mīmāṁsā).

The Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas speak the line beginning with
bahiḥ to refute this opinion. They say, “Occasionally,
bhakti is called karma and assumed to be material
activity. However, this is only from an external
perspective; it is not based on actual truth (tattva-
vicāra). There is an example in this regard. Just as the
word deha, meaning ‘body,’ is used for the sac-cid-
ānanda forms of the devotees residing in Vaikuṇṭha,
similarly, the term karma is sometimes applied to
bhakti, although it is different from the fruitive
activities known as karma.

“Here the word deha has been used both for a body
comprised of eternity, knowledge, and bliss and for a
body comprised of the five material elements. Similarly,
the word maṇi, meaning ‘jewel,’ can refer to both the
spiritual wish-fulfilling gem cintāmaṇi and a jewel made
of glass. Also, the word sattva indicates existence
consisting of the three modes of material nature and
also śuddha-sattva, the nature of Parabrahman, who is
the support of entire existence and the basis

of the qualities of saintly persons.”

                          423
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.2.35), Śrī Brahmā states:

sattvaṁ na ced dhātar idaṁ nijaṁ bhaved

vijñānam ajñāna-bhidāpamārjanam

O Lord, there would have been no means of overcoming
ignorance if You had not manifested Your transcendental
form (sattva-vapu).

The Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas continue, “In the same way, one
who sees with only an external perspective will see as
karma both types of action: mundane activities – such as
the execution of one’s prescribed occupational duties
(sva-dharma) – and the intimate service (paricaryā) of
the Lord.”



Verse 139

bhaktānāṁ sac-cid-ānanda-rūpeṣv aṅgendriyātmasu

ghaṭate svānurūpeṣu vaikuṇṭhe ’nyatra ca svataḥ

bhaktānām – of the devotees; sat-cit-ānanda – made of
eternality, cognizance, and bliss; rūpeṣu – in forms;
aṅga – limbs; indriya – senses; ātmasu – in the bodies;
ghaṭate – manifests; sva-anurūpeṣu – suitable for them;
vaikuṇṭhe – in Vaikuṇṭha; anyatra – elsewhere; ca – and;
svataḥ – spontaneously.

In Vaikuṇṭha or anywhere else a devotee may reside, a
suitable body manifests of its own accord. This body and
its senses are comprised of eternity, knowledge, and
bliss.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas say, “Bhakti is
not an object of the senses; it is the function (sva-
dharma) of the soul and it manifests of its own accord
in a pure heart.” Although it has been established that
bhakti is self-manifest, someone might raise a doubt,
saying that śravaṇa and kīrtana and the other aspects of
bhakti are activities of the senses. If this is so, then
how can bhakti be regarded as transcendental and self-
manifest? To remove this doubt, the Vaikuṇṭha associates
speak this verse beginning with bhaktānām.

They say, “Whether a pure devotee resides in Vaikuṇṭha
or anywhere else, a suitable body comprised of sac-cid-
ānanda naturally manifests. How does this transcendental
body manifest? As bhakti arises, the body of five
material elements (pāñca-bhautika) is transformed and
becomes like a body made of eternity, knowledge, and
bliss. Just as iron transforms into gold by contact with
a touchstone, similarly, due to the manifestation of
bhakti, the material body of the practicing devotee also
becomes transcendental.”

Alternatively, it can be said that, through the mercy
potency of Śrī Bhagavān, the material senses of the
sādhaka can be spiritualized.


                          424
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

It can additionally be understood that the Lord’s mercy
potency (kṛpā-śakti) first appears within the pure soul,
and then it manifests the form consisting of limbs and
senses that are suitable for His service. This is a
general overview (dig-darśana).



Verse 140

vayam atra pramāṇaṁ smo ’niśaṁ vaikuṇṭha-pārṣadāḥ

tanvanto bahudhā bhaktim aspṛṣṭāḥ prākṛtair guṇaiḥ

vayam – we; atra – here; pramāṇam – evidence; sma – are;
aniśam – incessantly; vaikuṇṭha-pārṣadāḥ – the Lord’s
associates in Vaikuṇṭha; tanvantaḥ – spreading; bahudhā
– in many ways; bhaktim – devotional service; aspṛṣṭāḥ –
unaffected; prākṛtaiḥ – by the material; guṇaiḥ – modes
of nature.

Loving service to the Lord and to the Lord’s devotees
are both transcendental. Indeed, we eternal residents of
Vaikuṇṭha are evidence of this. We wander everywhere
freely to spread devotion in various ways, and we are
never affected by material qualities or even touched by
them.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: “Our own experience is special
evidence in this regard.” In this verse beginning with
vayam, the eternal associates of Vaikuṇṭha present
themselves as evidence of the transcendental nature of
devotional service. They say, “We pārṣadas, who have
attained Vaikuṇṭha, are endowed with transcendental
forms.

We freely wander everywhere, continuously spreading
devotional service in many ways, without touching
anything made of the twenty-three material elements.”

In this regard, in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.1.35) Śrī
Yudhiṣṭhira states: “dehendriyāsu-hīnānāṁ vaikuṇṭha-
pura-vāsinām – The residents of Vaikuṇṭha, whose bodies
are purely spiritual (śuddha-sattva), have no
relationship with the material body, senses, etc.”



Verse 141

navīna-sevakānāṁ tu prītyā samyak-pravṛttaye

nijendriyādi-vyāpāratayaiva pratibhāti sā

navīna – new; sevakānām – of the servants; tu – but;
prītyā – with satisfaction; samyak – completely;
pravṛttaye – for engaging; nija-indriya – of their own
senses; ādi – and so forth; vyāpāratayā – by the
function; eva – indeed; pratibhāti – manifests; sā – she
(bhakti).

To arrange that neophytes engage in bhakti with complete
satisfaction, bhakti manifests simply as the activities
of their

                          425
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017


own senses.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might raise the doubt,
“One can directly experience Bhagavān’s kīrtana as the
function of

the tongue just like any other ordinary talk. How can
this perception be denied?” To reconcile this, the
Vaikuṇṭha associates speak the two verses, beginning
here with navīna.

They say, “For all new devotees, devotional service
certainly seems to be an activity of the senses. Why?
This is to engage the neophytes completely in devotion
and to allow them to experience some happiness in it.
They think, ‘Oh! My ears are hearing the names of Śrī
Bhagavān and my tongue is chanting His names.’ In this
way, they develop a joyful, steady faith (niṣṭhā). If
this does not happen, they will feel that all their
efforts are ineffective and they will all lose
interest.”



Verse 142

mahadbhir bhakti-niṣṭhaiś ca na svādhīneti manyate

mahā-prasāda-rūpeyaṁ prabhor ity anubhūyate

mahadbhiḥ – by the great souls; bhakti-niṣṭhaiḥ – who
are fixed in devotional service; ca – also; na – not;
sva-adhīnaḥ – dependent on themselves; iti – thus;
manyate – considered; mahā – great; prasāda – mercy;
rūpā – form; iyam – this; prabhoḥ – of the Lord; iti –
thus; anubhūyate – is experienced.

However, great devotees who are fixed in bhakti do not
consider devotional service to be subservient to their
own power. Rather, they experience it as the supreme
mercy of the Lord.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The experience of great personalities
fully proves this point. Therefore, this verse beginning
with mahadbhiḥ is spoken. The Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas say,
“The great personalities fixed in devotional service do
not regard bhakti to be under the control of their
senses. Rather, they consider it to be the great mercy
of Bhagavān; they do not think it achievable by their
own power.”



Verse 143

tvarā ced vidyate śrīmad-vaikuṇṭhālokane tava

sarvābhīṣṭa-prada-śreṣṭhāṁ tāṁ śrī-vraja-bhuvaṁ vraja

tvarā – quickly; cet – if; vidyate – is; śrīmad-
vaikuṇṭha – of splendid Vaikuṇṭha; ālokane – in seeing;
tava – your; sarva – all; abhīṣṭa – intense hankerings;
prada – fulfilling; śreṣṭhām – excellent; tām – that;

                          426
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

śrī-vraja-bhuvam – to Śrī Vraja-bhūmi; vraja – go.

Therefore, O Śrī Gopa-kumāra! If you desire to reach
Vaikuṇṭha quickly, then go to Śrī Vraja-bhūmi. That land
of Vraja is excellent in fulfilling all desires.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Having concluded the secondary topic
under discussion, the Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas present the
essence of the main

topic. They say, “After reaching Śivaloka by the mercy
of Śrī Maheśvara,

one gradually moves on to Vaikuṇṭha. However, if you are
unable to tolerate the delay, then go to that celebrated
Śrī Vraja-bhūmi, which is dear to you. Why? The land of
Vraja is the best of those places that can quickly
fulfill all desires, and it does so in an unparalleled
way.”



Verse 144

paraṁ śrīmat-padāmbhoja-sadāsaṅgaty-apekṣayā

nāma-saṅkīrtana-prāyāṁ viśuddhāṁ bhaktim ācara

param – engrossed in; śrīmat-pada-ambhoja – of the
Lord’s lotus feet; sad-āsaṅgati – for pure association;
apekṣayā – with hankering; nāma – of Śrī Nāma;
saṅkīrtana – to congregational chanting; prāyām – with
prominence; viśuddhām – utterly pure; bhaktim –
devotion; ācara – practice.

Upon reaching the land of Vraja, practice pure bhakti
that is devoid of jñāna and karma with the hope of
attaining the lotus feet of Śrī Bhagavān. Do this,
giving prominence to nāma-saṅkīrtana.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas say, “If you
want to achieve Vaikuṇṭha quickly and if you desire to
associate continuously with the lotus feet of Śrī
Bhagavān, then upon reaching the land of Vraja, execute
pure devotional service (viśuddha-bhakti) that is devoid
of karma (fruitive activities) and jñāna (philosophical
speculation), and primarily dedicate yourself to nāma-
saṅkīrtana.”



Verse 145

tayāśu tādṛśī prema-sampad utpādayiṣyate

yayā sukhaṁ te bhavitā vaikuṇṭhe kṛṣṇa-darśanam

tayā – by that; āśu – quickly; tādṛśī – such; prema – of
love; sampat – the wealth; utpādayiṣyate – will be
aroused; yayā – by which; sukham – easily; te – your;
bhavitā – there will be; vaikuṇṭhe – in Vaikuṇṭha;
kṛṣṇa-darśanam– the sight of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Due to the influence of devotion in which nāma-

                          427
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

saṅkīrtana is prominent, the wealth of prema will arise
in your heart very quickly, and by that power you will
easily be able see Śrī Kṛṣṇa right in Vaikuṇṭha.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas say, “By
performing

bhakti that is predominated by nāma-saṅkīrtana, you will
attain the wealth of prema very quickly, and by the
power of that prema you will easily be able to have
darśana of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in Vaikuṇṭha.”

In this regard, in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.15.25), in
describing Vaikuṇṭha, Śrī Brahmā states:

yac ca vrajanty animiṣām ṛṣabhānuvṛttyā

dūre yamā hy upari naḥ spṛhaṇīya-śīlāḥ

bhartur mithaḥ su-yaśasaḥ kathanānurāga-

vaiklavya-bāṣpa-kalayā pulakī-kṛtāṅgāḥ

Only those people who continuously sing the qualities of
Śrī Hari can go to Vaikuṇṭha. Meeting together, they
manifest such deep affection in singing the great
glories of Śrī Bhagavān that they neglect the rules and
regulations (yama and niyama) of behavior and exhibit
symptoms of transcendental ecstasy. At times they shed
tears helplessly, and at times their hair stands on end.
Therefore, we pray for mercy in the form of compassion
from such devotees.



Verse 146

premṇo ’ntar-aṅgaṁ kila sādhanottamaṁ

manyeta kaiścit smaraṇaṁ na kīrtanam

ekendriye vāci vicetane sukhaṁ

bhaktiḥ sphuraty āśu hi kīrtanātmikā

premṇaḥ – of love; antaḥ-aṅgam – confidential; kila –
indeed; sādhana – means for spiritual perfection;
uttamam – best; manyeta – it is thought; kaiścit – by
certain persons; smaraṇam – remembering; na – not;
kīrtanam – chanting; eka-indriye – on one of the senses;
vāci – the organ of speech; vicetane – unconscious;
sukham – easily; bhaktiḥ – devotional service; sphurati
– is manifested; āśu – quickly; hi – indeed; kīrtana-
ātmikā – the nature of chanting.

[Because previously, Śrī Gopa-kumāra had heard the
following from the Yogendras of Tapoloka, the Vaikuṇṭha
pārṣadas speak as follows:] Some hold that of all the
types of bhakti, smaraṇa (remembering), rather than
kīrtana (chanting), is the foremost, and it is the best
of the most confidential means to attain pure love for
the Lord. Their reasoning is that kīrtana manifests only
as a function of speech in one of the inert senses.
Further, it manifests very easily and quickly.

                          428
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

Therefore, it can only give a slight result.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might present the

counter argument, “I heard from the Yogendras of
Tapoloka that smaraṇa is the foremost of all the limbs
of bhakti.” In this verse beginning with premṇa, the
Vaikuṇṭha associates explain the truth of this
conception. Pippalāyana and the other sages have argued
that smaraṇa, not kīrtana, is indeed the most excellent
and confidential means to attain prema. Bhakti, in the
form of kīrtana, manifests quickly and quite
effortlessly in speech, which is only one of the dull
working senses. Therefore, one could conclude that a
method that is accomplished so effortlessly must indeed
yield a very trifling result.



Verse 147

bhaktiḥ prakṛṣṭā smaraṇātmikāsmin

sarvendriyāṇām adhipe vilole

ghore baliṣṭhe manasi prayāsair

nīte vaśaṁ bhāti viśodhite yā

bhaktiḥ – devotional service; prakṛṣṭā – superexcellent;
smaraṇa-ātmikā – consisting of remembering; asmin – in
this; sarva-

indriyāṇām – of all the senses; adhipe – the king;
vilole – tremulous; ghore – violent; baliṣṭhe –
turbulent; manasi – the mind; prayāsaiḥ – with great
endeavors; nīte – brought; vaśam – under control; bhāti
– it is splendidly eminent; viśodhite – purified; yā –
which.

(The nine Yogendras said:) Smaraṇa, on the other hand,
is a function of the mind, which is the king of all the
senses. The turbulent, volatile mind is not easily
restrained or withdrawn from sense objects. Therefore,
smaraṇa-bhakti, which is accomplished by a mind that is
purified only after tremendous endeavor and diligence,
is superior to kīrtana. Particularly, that which is
accomplished by subjugation of the mind must be the most
excellent. Who can doubt this?

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Those Yogendras say, “Devotional
service in the form of remembrance (smaraṇa) is the most
excellent sādhana. The reason is that the mind, the
ruler of all the senses, is very powerful, extremely
restless, capable of quickly creating hundreds of
terrible anarthas (undesirable experiences or habits),
and most difficult to control. When, only after heroic
effort, one purifies and controls the mind, smaraṇa-
bhakti manifests there. Therefore, this is the best of
all the limbs of devotional service.”

This is confirmed in the Bhikṣu-gītā, ‘The Song of the
Renunciant,’ of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.23.47 and 45):


                          429
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

mano-vaśe ’nye hy abhavan sma devā

manaś ca nānyasya vaśaṁ sameti

bhīṣmo hi devaḥ sahasaḥ sahīyān

yuñjyād vaśe taṁ sa hi deva-devaḥ

All the senses are under the control of the mind; the
mind is not under the control of any one of the senses.
The mind is stronger than the strongest and is the most
fearsome god. One who subjugates the mind is indeed the
conqueror of the senses and worshipable even for the
demigods.

dānaṁ sva-dharmo niyamo yamaś ca

śrutaṁ ca karmāṇi ca sad-vratāni

sarve mano-nigraha-lakṣaṇāntāḥ

paro hi yogo manasaḥ samādhiḥ

The topmost benefit that comes from giving charity,
executing prescribed occupational duties, following
rules and regulations, studying the Vedas, performing
pious deeds, and observing purifying vows is that the
mind becomes subdued and absorbed in Bhagavān.
Therefore, conquering the mind is the topmost yoga.

They say, “How can anyone doubt the superexcellence of
smaraṇa, which is accomplished by subjugation of the
mind?”



Verse 148

manyāmahe kīrtanam eva sat-tamaṁ

lolātmakaika-sva-hṛdi spurat-smṛteḥ

vāci sva-yukte manasi śrutau tathā

dīvyat parān apy upakurvad ātmya-vat

manyāmahe – in our opinion; kīrtanam – chanting; eva –
indeed; sat-

tamam – better; lola-ātmaka – with the flickering mind;
eka – one; sva-hṛdi – in the heart; sphurat-smṛteḥ –
than tremulous contemplation; vāci – in the voice; sva-
yukte – connected with oneself; manasi – the mind;
śrutau – the sense of hearing; tathā – also; dīvyat –
illuminating; parān – others; api – also; upakurvat –
satisfies; ātmya-vat – like oneself.

(Now the Vaikuṇṭha associates express their view.)
However, in our opinion, kīrtana is superior to smaraṇa,
which manifests only in one’s own heart via the restless
mind. Kīrtana, on the other hand, manifests on the
tongue and automatically connects with the mind. The
sound of kīrtana then satisfies both one’s own sense of
hearing and that of other listeners.

                          430
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Having described the opinions of
others, the Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas present their own opinion
in this verse beginning with manyāmahe. They say “We
believe that kīrtana, or singing the praises of the
Lord, is indeed superior to the aspect of bhakti known
as smaraṇa, or remembrance of the Lord. Smaraṇa
manifests only in one of the senses – the restless mind
– but kīrtana manifests on the tongue and dances there,
and also spontaneously becomes conjoined with the mind
and sports within it. Therefore, because it is the mind
that connects the sense objects of all the senses in a
subtle form – that is, without the mind there is no
question of any sense perception – ultimately, the sound
of kīrtana, bringing satisfaction to the sense of
hearing, controls all the other senses as well, like its
own servants.

“What more can we say about the glories of kīrtana?
Automatically entering the ears, kīrtana benefits all
its servants, meaning everyone

who is listening. Smaraṇa, however, does not have this
potency. Therefore, kīrtana is the only means capable of
bringing the restless mind under control. In addition,
the mind has no strength to remember the Lord in the
absence of loud glorification. The confidential meaning
of this is that kīrtana focuses the mind. Without
kīrtana, the mind cannot be fixed by any other means,
and if the mind is unsteady, one will not be able to
perform smaraṇa properly.”

Here, what has been refuted is the idea that one can
determine the superiority or inferiority of any object
(like smaraṇa or kīrtana) based on whether it is
obtained by one’s endeavor or without any endeavor. In
this connection, the Parāśara Smṛti (Viṣṇu Purāṇa
6.8.57) states:

yasmin nyasta-matir na yāti narakaṁ svargo ’pi yac-
cintane

vighno yatra niveśitātma-manaso brāhmo ’pi loko ’lpakaḥ

muktiṁ cetasi yaḥ sthito ’mala-dhiyāṁ puṁsāṁ dadāty
avyayaḥ

kiṁ citraṁ yad aghaḥ prayāti vilayaṁ tratrācyute kīrtite

When one absorbs the mind in the infallible Supreme
Lord, one is saved from hell, and even attains heaven
and other excellent abodes. Furthermore, all types of
obstacles are destroyed and Brahmaloka becomes
insignificant. That imperishable Supreme Personality of
Godhead resides in the consciousness of pure-hearted
sādhakas and grants all their desires, including
liberation. Therefore, how can anyone doubt that all
sins are destroyed and all auspiciousness comes when
Lord Acyuta’s names are chanted in nāma-kīrtana?

In this verse, the word agha, meaning ‘sin,’ indicates
that even the sinful Ajāmila obtained liberation.
Employing the logic of kaimutika-nyāya (how much more?),
it is established that the glories of kīrtana are

                          431
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

greater than those of smaraṇa.

The Viṣṇu Purāṇa states:

dhyāyan kṛte yajan yajñais tretāyāṁ dvāpare ’rcayan

yad āpnoti tad āpnoti kalau saṅkīrtya keśavam

Whatever result one obtains in Satya-yuga by meditation
(dhyāna), in Tretā-yuga by sacrifice (yajña), in
Dvāpara-yuga by Deity worship (arcana) – the results of
all those practices are obtained effortlessly in Kali-
yuga just by the kīrtana of the holy names of Bhagavān.

These statements conclusively establish that the
benefits of meditation, sacrifice, worship, and so on
are indeed included in kīrtana. Therefore, kīrtana is
effulgently the most excellent practice.



VerseS 149–150

bahyāntarāśeṣa-hṛṣīka-cālakaṁ

vāg-indriyaṁ syād yadi saṁyataṁ sadā

cittaṁ sthiraṁ sad-bhagavat-smṛtau tadā

samyak pravarteta tataḥ smṛtiḥ phalam

evaṁ prabhor dhyāna-ratair mataḥ ced

buddhyedṛśaṁ tatra vivecanīyam

dhyānaṁ parisphūrti-viśeṣa-niṣṭhā

sambandha-mātraṁ manasā smṛtir hi

bāhya – without; āntara – within; aśeṣa-hṛṣīka – of all
senses; cālakam – driver; vāk – voice; indriyam –
senses; syāt – may be; yadi – if; saṁyatam – controlled;
sadā – always; cittam – mind; sthiram – steady; sat-
bhagavat – on the pure Lord; smṛtau – in remembrance;
tadā – then; samyak – completely; pravarteta – one can
engage; tataḥ – then; smṛtiḥ – memory; phalam – result;
evam – thus; prabhoḥ – of the Lord; dhyāna-rataiḥ – by
they who are devoted to contemplation; matam –
considered; cet – if; buddhyā – by intelligence; īdṛśam
– like that; tatra – there; vivecanīyam – worthy of
consideration; dhyānam – meditation; parisphūrti –
appearance; viśeṣa – special; niṣṭhā – deter-

mination; sambandha-mātram – simply by the connection;
manasā – through the mind; smṛtiḥ – remembrance; hi –
indeed.

When the faculty of speech, which drives the external
and internal senses, is brought under control, only then
does the mind become steady. And only when the mind is
steady can one remember Bhagavān. Therefore, kīrtana is
favorable to remembrance, and this remembrance is the
fruit of the devotional service of kīrtana.


                           432
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Even if one accepts, with
discriminating intelligence, the opinion of all
Vaiṣṇavas who are adept in meditation on the Lord, and
thus regards dhyāna to be the fruit of kīrtana, still,
in the end, kīrtana reigns supreme. To explain this, the
associates of Vaikuṇṭha speak two verses, beginning here
with bāhya-āntara.

They say, “Advocates of meditation, or dhyāna, say, ‘All
the senses, both internal (such as the mind) and
external (such as the ears), are propelled by the sense
of speech (the tongue). If this one sense is engaged in
the kīrtana of Bhagavān, or if one observes silence,
only then may remembrance of Bhagavān arise in the
heart. From this statement, one can understand that
kīrtana is favorable for remembrance (smaraṇa) and
smaraṇa alone is the crest jewel of all the practices of
bhakti. Smaraṇa is achieved solely through the means of
kīrtana, whose only fruit is remembrance.

“ ‘Furthermore, although it has been said that the
result of meditation is included within saṅkīrtana in
Kali-yuga, this should be understood

as a statement meant for a particular time. Some say
that the extraordinarily great defects of Kali-yuga can
be removed by the exceptional power of saṅkīrtana alone,
not by meditation or other practices, and this proves
that kīrtana is more glorious than dhyāna. However, it
can be countered, “What is the particular greatness of
nāma-saṅkīrtana in removing defects, such as the great
sins of the age of Kali, that is not found in
meditation? Is dhyāna alone not enough to destroy the
defects of Kali?” The supremacy of kīrtana cannot
necessarily be established as absolute in the face of
other scriptural evidence in favor of the power of
meditation. In the scriptures, kīrtana has been
recommended during Kali-yuga with a particular
intention, and with the same intention, the scriptures
state: “The innumerable defects and sins of Kali are
fully destroyed by simply remembering Bhagavān somehow
or other.” There are hundreds of other such statements
establishing dhyāna as best.’ ”

The Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas continue, “This is the opinion of
those who are partial to meditation. It is one’s duty to
intelligently examine the opinion of those who are
expert in dhyāna. When one’s unwavering faith develops
to the fully-ripened stage, the charm and sweetness of
Bhagavān’s divine form, from His hair down to the jewel-
like toenails of His lotus feet, manifest completely in
the heart, and it seems as if He has personally appeared
before one’s very eyes – this is dhyāna. Remembrance
(smaraṇa), however, is a conviction of the mind that
‘The Supreme Lord exists’ and ‘I am the Lord’s servant.’
In this way, remembrance comprises a mental connection
with Bhagavān.”



Verse 151

ced dhyāna-vegāt khalu citta-vṛttāv


                          433
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

antar-bhavantīndriya-vṛttayas tāḥ

saṅkīrtana-sparśana-darśanādyā

dhyānaṁ tadā kīrtanato ’stu varyam

cet – if; dhyāna – of meditation; vegāt – by the force;
khalu – indeed; citta – of the mind; vṛttau – within the
activities; antaḥ-bhavanti – become contained within;
indriya – of the senses; vṛttayaḥ – the activities; tāḥ
– they; saṅkīrtana – chanting; sparśana – touching;
darśana – seeing; ādyāḥ – beginning with; dhyānam –
meditation; tadā – then; kīrtanataḥ – than chanting;
astu – is; varyam – better.

If the functions of the senses – saṅkīrtana
(glorification), sparśana

(touching), darśana (seeing the Deity), and so on –
permeate the mind due to the force of dhyāna, then
certainly the superiority of meditation over kīrtana can
be accepted.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Having accepted the superiority of
dhyāna over

saṅkīrtana as per the logic of abhyupagama (an admitted
axiom or proposition), the Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas speak this
verse beginning with ced.

They say, “If by the strong momentum of dhyāna,
activities such as glorifying (kīrtana), feeling
(sparśana), and seeing (darśana) the Lord that are the
functions of speech, touch, and sight, naturally
manifest in the heart – that is, if in his meditation
one begins to experience the chanting, vision, and touch
of the Lord – then only can dhyāna be considered
superior to kīrtana.”



Verse 152

prītir yato yasya sukhaṁ ca yena

samyag bhavet tad-rasikasya tasya

tat-sādhanaṁ śreṣṭha-tamaṁ su-sevyaṁ

sadbhir mataṁ praty uta sādhya-rūpam

prītiḥ – love; yataḥ – from which; yasya – whose; sukham
– happiness; ca – and; yena – by which; samyak –
completely; bhavet – it may be; tad-rasikasya – for one
expert in relishing that mellow; tasya – his; tat-
sādhanam – that practice; śreṣṭha-tamam – best; su-
sevyam – should be nicely practiced; sadbhiḥ – by the
saints; matam – considered; prati uta – indeed; sādhya-
rūpam – the ultimate objective.

That practice which a devotee absorbed in transcendental
taste thoroughly loves and by which he derives his
happiness is the topmost method for him. It is incumbent
upon him to execute that practice with faith and

                          434
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

respect, and such practice is his ultimate goal.

Those who are saintly concur with this opinion.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might ask, “It may be
that

saṅkīrtana, touching (sparśana), and other functions of
the senses do not manifest during dhyāna. If one’s mind
becomes submerged exclusively in the divine form of the
Lord and one derives increasing happiness from that
meditation, then what should be done?”

Anticipating this doubt, the Vaikuṇṭha associates speak
this verse beginning with prītiḥ. They say, “Whichever
method gives the practitioner joy and happiness is the
best sādhana for him. It is his duty to practice it
well, with faith and respect, for by doing this with
affection, he will achieve the perfection of his
cherished desires very quickly. Moreover, it is this
perfection that is his desired goal, and it is this
conclusion that is accepted by saintly persons.”



Verse 153

saṅkīrtanād dhyāna-sukhaṁ vivardhate

dhyānāc ca saṅkīrtana-mādhurī-sukham

anyonya-saṁvardhakatānubhūyate

’smābhis tayos tad dvayam ekam eva tat

saṅkīrtanāt – through congregational chanting; dhyāna-
sukham – the happiness of contemplation; vivardhate –
increases; dhyānāt – through contemplation; ca – and;
saṅkīrtana – of united loud chanting; mādhurī-sukham –
the sweet bliss; anyonya – mutually; saṁvardhakatā –
nourishing; anubhūyate - it is experienced; asmābhiḥ –
by ourselves; tayoḥ – of the two; tat-dvayam – that two;
ekam – one; eva – indeed; tat – that.

Saṅkīrtana increases the bliss of dhyāna, which in turn
increases the bliss of the sweetness of kīrtana. As they
mutually nourish and amplify each other, we actually
consider saṅkīrtana and dhyāna to be one.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: “However, we regard both the
meditation on the Lord and chanting His holy names to be
worth practicing.” This is the opinion of the personal
associates of Vaikuṇṭha expressed in this verse
beginning with saṅkīrtanād. They say, “The happiness of
dhyāna increases by saṅkīrtana and the happiness of
sweet saṅkīrtana is augmented by dhyāna. Thus, they
nourish and support one another. This being the case,
their mutual interdependence according to time and place
is not a defect. Therefore, since either saṅkīrtana or
dhyāna could be the cause or the effect, we consider
them to be one and the same, or nondifferent.”




                          435
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

Verse 154

dhyānaṁ ca saṅkīrtana-vat sukha-pradaṁ

yad vastuno ’bhīṣṭa-tarasya kasyacit

citte ’nubhūtyāpi yatheccham udbhavec

chāntis tad ekāpti-viṣakta-cetasām

dhyānam – contemplation; ca – also; saṅkīrtana-vat –
like chanting; sukha – happiness; pradam – awards; yat –
which; vastunaḥ – of the item; abhīṣṭa-tarasya – of
one’s dearly beloved Lord; kasyacit – of someone; citte
– in the mind; anubhūtyā – by experience; api – and;
yathā iccham – according to one’s desire; udbhavet – it
can bring forth; śāntiḥ – peace; tat – to Him; eka-āpti
– in achieving exclusivity; viṣakta-cetasām – for those
whose minds are absorbed.

Dhyāna is also pleasing like saṅkīrtana, because one
feels happiness in the experience of every single matter
concerning one’s beloved, and because one becomes
peaceful when the mind is truly absorbed in anything
related to Him.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Having accepted meditation, the
Vaikuṇṭha associates praise it in this verse beginning
with dhyānam. They say, “Meditation is also pleasing
like saṅkīrtana, because when a person experiences
anything related to his cherished beloved, he feels
happy and peaceful. His mind becomes absorbed in that
object and he is eager to attain only that. Such
attachment alleviates distress and brings peace and
happiness.”



Verse 155

yathā jvara-rujārtānāṁ śītalāmṛta-pāthasaḥ

manaḥ-pānād api truṭyet tṛḍ-vaikulyaṁ sukhaṁ bhavet

yathā – as; jvara – of fever; rujā –    with disease;
ārtānām – of those afflicted; śītala    – cool; amṛta –
nectarean; pāthasaḥ – water; manaḥ –    in the mind; pānāt
– by drinking; api – also; truṭyet –    can break (the
fever); tṛṭ – of thirst; vaikulyam –    disturbance; sukham
– happiness; bhavet – it can be.

For instance, a person suffering from fever gets relief
from his thirst and experiences happiness merely by
imagining himself drinking cool, ambrosial water.
Similarly, the performer of saṅkīrtana also receives
happiness and peace from glorifying his cherished
object.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Here in this verse beginning with
yathā, the Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas present an example to
clarify the topic under discussion. They say, “The
thirst and agitation of a person suffering from fever is
alleviated by his imagining that he is drinking cool,
ambrosial water, and thus he obtains happiness.

                          436
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

Similarly, one who performs saṅkīrtana also obtains
happiness and peace from chanting the glories of his
cherished object.”



Verse 156

tat-tat-saṅkīrtanenāpi tathā syād yadi śakyate

satām atha vivikte ’pi lajjā syāt svaira-kīrtane

tat-tat-saṅkīrtanena – by glorifying the Lord for His
unique form, qualities, pastimes, etc.; api – although;
tathā – as He is; syāt – it may be; yadi – is; śakyate –
it is possible; satām – for the devotees; atha – thus;
vivikte – in solitude; api – however; lajjā – shy; syāt
– he may be; svaira-kīrtane – in freely describing.

But although one can also attain happiness by performing
kīrtana of one’s beloved object, still it is not
possible to express all one’s sentiments through
chanting out loud. Even if that were possible by
endeavor, there are so many confidential moods that
saintly devotees may feel shy to sing about, even in a
secluded place.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might say, “According
to the logic of nivedya duḥkhaṁ sukhino bhavanti, by
describing one’s distress to a compassionate friend, the
distress is removed and one becomes happy. Similarly,
one experiences happiness by glorifying one’s desired
object.” To address this, the Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas speak
this verse beginning with tat-tat.

They say, “It is true that peace is obtained by the
saṅkīrtana of one’s dearmost Lord. However, saṅkīrtana
is not capable of capturing or expressing all the moods
of the mind. In other words, all the inner moods cannot
be put into words, as the functions of the mind are
unlimited. Vāk-śakti, or the power of speech, cannot
accommodate the unlimited mind. Although these moods
somehow come to be revealed, there are confidential
moods pertaining to certain intimate subjects that many
saintly devotees are shy to speak about even in private.
Therefore, to experience their desired pleasure, these
devotees meditate in their minds on all those moods. In
this light, dhyāna is certainly esteemed.”



Verse 157

ekākitvena tu dhyānaṁ vivikte khalu sidhyati

saṅkīrtanaṁ vivikte ’pi bahūnāṁ saṅgato ’pi ca

ekākitvena – in solitude; tu – but; dhyānam –
meditation; vivikte – in seclusion; khalu – indeed;
sidhyati – it can be effected successfully; saṅkīrtanam
– chanting; vivikte – in a secluded place; api –
however; bahūnām – of many; saṅgataḥ – in association;
api – even; ca – and.


                          437
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

Dhyāna can only be accomplished in seclusion, when one
is alone. Saṅkīrtana, however, can be performed
successfully whether alone or in an assembly.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: They say, “Meditation can only be done
in solitude, while saṅkīrtana can be performed whether
alone or with many others, and even in the midst of all
types of distractions. Therefore, there are many
obstacles in the perfection of dhyāna, but success in
saṅkīrtana is easily attained.”



Verse 158

kṛṣṇasya nānā-vidha-kīrtaneṣu

tan-nāma-saṅkīrtanam eva mukhyam

tat-prema-sampaj-janane svayaṁ drāk

śaktaṁ tataḥ śreṣṭha-tamaṁ mataṁ tat

kṛṣṇasya – of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; nānā – many; vidha – types;
kīrtaneṣu – in glorification; tan-nāma – of His names;
saṅkīrtanam – the joint loud chanting; eva – certainly;
mukhyam – best; tat – for Him; prema-sampat – the
treasure of love; janane – in producing; svayam –
personally; drāk – speedily; śaktam – able; tataḥ –
then; śreṣṭha-tamam – best; matam – considered; tat –
that.

Among different types of chanting or glorification, the
saṅkīrtana of the names of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is prominent
because His nāma-saṅkīrtana is capable of generating the
treasure of prema very quickly. Therefore, scholars have
deemed nāma-saṅkīrtana the most excellent process of
bhakti.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The Vaikuṇṭha associates speak this
verse beginning with kṛṣṇasya to explain that saṅkīrtana
of the names of Śrī Bhagavān is the foremost process.
They say, “Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s nāma-saṅkīrtana alone is
prominent among other types of kīrtanas, such as
recitation of the Vedas and Purāṇas, pastimes, songs,
and panegyrics. The reason for this is that through
saṅkīrtana of the names of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the opulence of
prema for Śrī Kṛṣṇa manifests very quickly in the heart,
by itself. It does not depend on any other means or
glorification. Therefore, śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma-saṅkīrtana
alone is the most excellent among all the limbs of
bhakti. Saintly personalities have indeed ascertained
this fact.”



Verse 159

śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmāmṛtam ātma-hṛdyaṁ

premṇā samāsvādana-bhaṅgi-pūrvam

yat sevyate jihvikayāvirāmaṁ


                          438
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

tasyātulaṁ jalpatu ko mahattvam

śrī-kṛṣṇa – of Lord Kṛṣṇa; nāma – holy name; amṛtam –
the nectar; ātma-hṛdyam – pleasing to the heart; premṇā
– with love; samāsvādana – thoroughly relished; bhaṅgi –
by His curving form; pūrvam – with; yat – what; sevyate
– is cherished; jihvikayā – by the tongue; avirāmam –
uninterruptedly; tasya – His; atulam – incomparable;
jalpatu – can speak; kaḥ – who?; mahattvam – of the
greatness.

Who can describe the glories of the incomparable
happiness that the tongue savors by constantly serving
with heartfelt love the nectar of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beloved
names?

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Having given a general account of the
glories of saṅkīrtana, the Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas are
presenting its special mood in this verse beginning with
śrī-kṛṣṇa. They say, “Who can describe the incomparable
glories of the joy of relishing with one’s tongue, with
love and in wonderful ways, the mellow of continuously
drinking the nectar of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s names? In other
words, no one can adequately describe the glories of
śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma-saṅkīrtana.”



Verse 160

sarveṣāṁ bhagavan-nāmnāṁ samāno mahimāpi cet

tathāpi sva-priyeṇāśu svārtha-siddhiḥ sukhaṁ bhavet

sarveṣām – all; bhagavat – of the Lord; nāmnām – of the
names; samānaḥ – equal; mahimā – in glory; api – indeed;
cet – if; tathā api – however; sva-priyeṇa – by uttering
the name of one’s beloved Deity; āśu – quickly; sva-
artha – of one’s own internal objective; siddhiḥ – the
fulfillment; sukham – easily; bhavet – can be.

Although all of Bhagavān’s names are equally glorious,
the desired goal is obtained quickly and easily by
chanting the names of the Lord that one cherishes the
most.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might raise the doubt,
“Some people do not accept any hierarchy in the glories
of the names of

Śrī Bhagavān. They consider all His names to be equally
and unlimitedly glorious.”

The Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas answer, “It is true that all the
Lord’s

names are equally glorious. However, one’s desired goal
is obtained effortlessly and happily by chanting the
names that are one’s

favorites.” To explain this fact, they speak this verse
beginning with sarveṣāṁ.

“Just as one cintāmaṇi (wish-fulfilling touchstone) can

                          439
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

grant

unlimited varieties of desires to its petitioner,
similarly kīrtana

performed according to variegated taste – in other
words, with the name for which one has special taste –
brings perfection. It is only because of their
variegated tastes that devotees form either an
attachment for or lack of fondness for a name of the
Lord.

Some devotees have taste for one name, some for two or
three, and some devotees relish many. Indeed, it is
possible to love all of Bhagavān’s names, but although
each of His names possesses inconceivable and unlimited
glories, still, distinctions are made.

“However, it is best to perform the kīrtana of the name
that one finds most dear and charming. Therefore, Śrī
Mahādeva, who likes the holy name of Śrī Rāma, says,
‘sahasra-nāmabhis tulyaṁ rāma-nāma varānane – One name
of Rāma is equal to one thousand names of Viṣṇu.’

“The purport is: What is the need for many touchstones
if one touchstone can fulfill all desires? Be that as it
may, devotees do not become satisfied by just once
uttering the name of Bhagavān that they find most dear
and charming; they utter it repeatedly, never

becoming satiated.”



Verse 161

vicitra-ruci-lokānāṁ kramāt sarveṣu nāmasu

priyatā-sambhavāt tāni sarvāṇi syuḥ priyāṇi hi

vicitra – various; ruci – tastes; lokānām – people have;
kramāt – gradually; sarveṣu – in all; nāmasu – names;
priyatā – of love; sambhavāt – from the appearance; tāni
– they; sarvāṇi – all; syuḥ – they may become; priyāṇi –
dear; hi – indeed.

People who are of different tastes first develop loving
attachment for only one name among the many names of
Bhagavān, but gradually they begin to cherish all His
names.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might question, “It
may be that some people like some names of Śrī Bhagavān,
but are not attracted to other names. Even so, are not
all of the names of the Lord worthy of being served?”

The Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas reply, “People, who have
variegated tastes, first develop a liking for one name,
and then gradually they develop attraction for all the
names. In other words, due to diversity in taste, some
have affinity for one name, some for two or three names,
and some for many. In this way, gradually, taste for all
the names arises. This is the definite conclusion.”


                          440
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017



Verse 162

ekasminn indriye prādurbhūtaṁ nāmāmṛtaṁ rasaiḥ

āplāvayati sarvāṇīndriyāṇi madhurair nijaiḥ

ekasmin – in one; indriye – sense; prādurbhūtam –
manifested; nāma – name; amṛtam – of the nectarean;
rasaiḥ – with the essence; āplāvayati – inundates;
sarvāṇi – all; indriyāṇi – the senses; madhuraiḥ – with
sweetness; nijaiḥ – His own.

By manifesting on one sense organ (the tongue), the
nectarean mellow of Bhagavān’s name inundates all the
senses with its sweetness.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might ask, “But how
should one

serve the name of Śrī Bhagavān so that the full range of
happiness manifests?”

In reply, the Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas speak this verse
beginning with ekasmin. They say, “As soon as the nectar
of Bhagavān’s name manifests on the tongue, it indeed
inundates all the senses with its naturally sweet mellow
and special happiness.”



Verse 163

mukhyo vāg-indriye tasyodayaḥ sva-para-harṣa-daḥ

tat prabhor dhyānato ’pi syān nāma-saṅkīrtanaṁ varam

mukhyaḥ – the primary; vāk – of the tongue; indriye –
upon the sense; tasya – of it; udayaḥ – place of
arising; sva – to oneself; para – and others; harṣa-daḥ
– gives happiness; tat – that (name); prabhoḥ – of the
Lord; dhyānataḥ – than contemplation; api – even; syāt –
may be; nāma-saṅkīrtanam – congregational chanting of
the holy names of the Lord; varam – best.

The name primarily appears in the sense of speech (the
tongue). When it is glorified aloud, both the chanter
and others experience happiness. However, in dhyāna,
only the meditator benefits and receives pleasure.
Therefore, nāma-saṅkīrtana is certainly superior to
meditation.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: It is essential that glorification of
the name of the Lord, or nāma-saṅkīrtana, be performed
with faith (śraddhā). To explain this, the Vaikuṇṭha
associates speak this verse beginning with mukhyo. They
say, “The sense of speech (the tongue) is the place from
which śrī-nāma-saṅkīrtana arises, because the holy name,
śrī-nāma, consists of syllables. When this name is sung
in a loud voice, it delights both the singer and others,
benefiting and giving happiness to all. But in dhyāna,
only the meditator benefits and receives happiness.
Therefore, by this reasoning, loud glorification

                          441
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

(kīrtana) is superior to meditation on the Lord.”



Verse 164

nāma-saṅkīrtanaṁ proktaṁ kṛṣṇasya prema-sampadi

baliṣṭhaṁ sādhanaṁ śreṣṭhaṁ paramākarṣa-mantra-vat

nāma-saṅkīrtanam – congregational chanting of the holy
name;

proktam – is said; kṛṣṇasya – of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; prema – of
love; sampadi – in

attaining the treasure; baliṣṭham – most powerful;
sādhanam – practice;

śreṣṭham – best; parama-ākarṣa – supremely magnetic;
mantra-vat –

like a mantra.

Nāma-saṅkīrtana is the best and most powerful method for
obtaining the treasure of divine love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa
because it is like a supremely magnetic mantra.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Therefore, it is stated in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam

(11.2.39):

śṛṇvan su-bhadrāṇi rathāṅga-pāṇer

janmāni karmāṇi ca yāni loke

gītāni nāmāni tad-arthakāni

gāyan vilajjo vicared asaṅgaḥ

Many auspicious stories of the birth and pastimes of
Bhagavān Cakra-pāṇi (He who brandishes a chariot wheel)
are famous in this world. The Lord has many such famous
names, reminding one of His qualities and pastimes.
Without desire or attachment, giving up shyness and
hesitation, one should wander about, hearing and singing
these names.

Having said this, the Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas also explain
the most

excellent means to obtain the wealth of prema. In
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.40), Śrī Kavi, one of the nine
Yogendras, tells King Nimi:

evaṁ-vrataḥ sva-priya-nāma-kīrtyā

jātānurāgo druta-citta uccaiḥ

hasaty atho roditi rauti gāyaty

unmāda-van nṛtyati loka-bāhyaḥ


                          442
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

O King! One who avowedly dedicates himself to chanting
the names of his beloved Lord experiences the sprout of
love growing inside him. His heart melts, and becoming
intoxicated, sometimes he laughs loudly and sometimes he
weeps. Sometimes he calls out to Bhagavān in a loud
voice, sometimes he sweetly sings of His qualities, and
sometimes, experiencing Him, he dances. In this way,
maddened by love of God, he wanders everywhere.

This is evidence that kīrtana, or singing one’s favorite
names of Bhagavān, is the most excellent and powerful
spiritual practice.



Verse 165

tad eva manyate bhakteḥ phalaṁ tad rasikair janaiḥ

bhagavat-prema-sampattau sadaivāvyabhicārataḥ

tat – that (the holy name); eva – indeed; manyate – is
considered; bhakteḥ – of devotional service; phalam –
the fruit; tat – that; rasikaiḥ – those expert at
tasting the flavors of bhakti; janaiḥ – by persons;
bhagavat – of the Lord; prema – of love; sampattau – in
giving the treasure; sadā – always; eva – indeed;
avyabhicārataḥ – because of its unfailing nature.

Therefore, because nāma-saṅkīrtana never fails to bestow
the treasure of prema, or love for Bhagavān, those who
are expert in tasting the mellows of devotion (bhakti-
rasika) regard it as the fruit of bhakti.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: “Aho! What more can we say about the
glories of nāma-saṅkīrtana, the best of the means to
attain devotion? Those who are rasika, who know the
mellows of devotion and who are greedy for bhakti, have
ascertained nāma-saṅkīrtana alone to be the goal
(sādhya).”

However, Śrī Gopa-kumāra might question, “Isn’t prema
the goal of all types of sādhana-bhakti?”

The Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas reply, “What you are saying is
true. But because there is no question about the power
of nāma-saṅkīrtana to quickly and unfailingly bestow
prema, they are considered practically the same. Thus,
nāma-saṅkīrtana is indeed counted as the fruit of
bhakti. Saintly persons endorse this because nāma-
saṅkīrtana never fails to bestow the wealth of prema.”



Verse 166

sal-lakṣaṇaṁ prema-bharasya kṛṣṇe

kaiścid rasa-jñair uta kathyate tat

premṇo bhareṇaiva nijeṣṭa-nāma-

saṅkīrtanaṁ hi sphurati sphuṭārtyā


                          443
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

sat – excellent; lakṣaṇam – characteristic; prema – of
love; bharasya – of an abundance; kṛṣṇe – for Śrī Kṛṣṇa;
kaiścit – by certain; rasa-jñaiḥ – connoisseurs of
essential mellows; uta – certainly; kathyate – is said;
tat – for Him; premṇaḥ – of love; bhareṇa – because of
the abundance; eva – indeed; nija – own; iṣṭa –
worshipable Lord; nāma – of Bhagavān’s names;
saṅkīrtanam – congregational chanting; hi – indeed;
sphurati – is manifest; sphuṭa– blossomed; ārtyā –
anxiousness.

Some knowers of rasa consider nāma-saṅkīrtana alone to
be the embodiment and the most excellent symptom of śrī-
kṛṣṇa-prema, because, while absorbed in chanting the
name of one’s beloved Lord with an anxious, open heart,
prema automatically manifests in that nāma-saṅkīrtana.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas say, “Indeed,
those expert in rasa accept nāma-saṅkīrtana to be the
very nature, or svarūpa, of pure love of God. According
to them, śrī-nāma-saṅkīrtana is the most excellent
characteristic of śrī-kṛṣṇa-prema because by singing the
name of one’s beloved Lord with the distress of one’s
aggrieved heart fully-manifest, one experiences prema.
Prema manifests when saṅkīrtana is performed in this
way, and also, saṅkīrtana is perfected when it is
performed with prema. Therefore, since nāma-saṅkīrtana
and prema have a mutual relationship of cause and
effect, they are proven to be nondifferent.”



Verse 167

nāmnāṁ tu saṅkīrtanam ārti-bhārān

meghaṁ vinā prāvṛṣi cātakānām

rātrau viyogāt sva-pate rathāṅgī-

vargasya cākrośana-vat pratīhi

nāmnām – of the holy names; tu – indeed; saṅkīrtanam –
chanting; ārti-bhārāt – from the weight of distress;
megham – a cloud; vinā – without; prāvṛṣi – in the
monsoons; cātakānām – of cātaka birds; rātrau – at
night; viyogāt – out of separation; sva-pateḥ – from
their husband; rathāṅgi-vargasya – of cakravākī birds;
ca – and; ākrośana – crying; vat – like; pratīhi – you
should know.

Just as the cātaka bird calls out in grief in a
cloudless rainy season, or the cakravākī (kurarī) bird
cries piteously at night in separation from her husband,
so devotees perform saṅkīrtana of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s names when
they are agitated by the distress of separation in love.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: There is nothing, however, that
compares with the special agony experienced in nāma-
saṅkīrtana performed with pure love for the Lord. To
explain this, the Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas use examples in
speaking this verse beginning with nāmnām. They say,
“The cātaka bird calls out in distress at the absence of
clouds in the rainy season. The cakravākī (kurarī) bird,

                          444
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

separated from her husband, also piteously cries in
grief for her beloved at night. Similarly, aggrieved by
the pain of pure love for the Lord that arises from deep
separation from Him, devotees perform nāma-saṅkīrtana.”

This narrative of the excellence of that topmost prema,
which manifests in separation from the Lord, has been
frequently told in the past and will be discussed again
in the future. One should fully dedicate himself to
sweetly and plaintively singing in proper sequence the
names of Bhagavān and His glories; this indeed is the
conclusion of all the scriptures. It is said: “siddhasya
lakṣaṇam yat syāt sādhanaṁ sādhakasya tat – The
character of the perfected soul is indeed the goal of
the practitioner’s discipline.” By this logic, the
characteristic of perfection, meaning prema in the form
of nāma-saṅkīrtana, is itself the goal of the
practitioner’s practice, which is also nāma-saṅkīrtana.



Verse 168

vicitra-līlā-rasa-sāgarasya prabhor vicitrāt sphuritāt
prasādāt

vicitra-saṅkīrtana-mādhurī sā na tu sva-yatnād iti sādhu
sidhyet

vicitra – wonderful; līlā – of pastimes; rasa – of
ambrosial; sāgarasya – of an ocean; prabhoḥ – of the
Master; vicitrāt – astonishing; sphuritāt – manifested;
prasādāt – from the mercy; vicitra – amazing; saṅkīrtana
– of congregational chanting; mādhurī – sweetness; sā –
that; na – not; tu – indeed; sva-yatnāt – from one’s own
endeavor; iti – thus; sādhu – properly; sidhyet – it can
be achieved.

Wonderful varieties of sweet saṅkīrtana manifest
happiness through the amazing grace of the Lord, who is
an ocean of wonderful varieties of ambrosial pastimes.
By one’s own endeavors, one can never achieve this
happiness.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might question, “When
one performs nāma-saṅkīrtana in public, there is the
possibility of running into obstacles – opposition from
a skeptical audience, the defect of receiving worship
from favorable people, and being hard-pressed due to
bodily weakness. However, there are no such dangers in
effortless performance of solitary meditation.
Therefore, what is the purpose of loud kīrtana?”

Anticipating this doubt, the Vaikuṇṭha associates speak
this verse beginning with vicitra. They say, “The
wonderful and varied sweetness of saṅkīrtana manifests
through the extraordinary mercy of the Lord, who is an
ocean of astonishing varieties of ambrosial pastimes.
The pleasure of this sweetness cannot be achieved by
one’s own efforts or strength. No faults or obstacles
can block that which is obtained by the mercy of
Bhagavān. In other words, nothing can block the sweet
happiness of saṅkīrtana, which is obtained only by
Bhagavān’s mercy. This holds true not only for nāma-

                          445
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

saṅkīrtana, but for all the nine processes of bhakti as
well.”



Verse 169

icchā-vaśāt pāpam upāsakānāṁ

kṣīyeta bhogonmukham apy amuṣmāt

prārabdha-mātraṁ bhavatītareṣāṁ

karmāvaśiṣṭaṁ tad-avaśya-bhogyam

icchā – by their desire; vaśāt – influenced; pāpam –
sin; upāsakānām – of the worshipers; kṣīyeta – it can be
destroyed; bhoga-

unmukham – the inclination for material enjoyment; api –
however; amuṣmāt – from that; prārabdha – already
manifest; mātram – only; bhavati – becomes; itareṣām –
for others; karma – of their fruitive work; avaśiṣṭam –
remaining results; tad-avaśya – that inevitably; bhogyam
– to be suffered.

In accordance with the desire of those worshipers who
are always attached to serving the names of Bhagavān,
their sinful reactions that are imminent are destroyed.
However, for non-worshipers who occasionally engage in
nāma-kīrtana, only the sinful reactions from which they
are presently suffering ( prārabdha-karma) remain, and
it is necessary that they experience them.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might doubt, “Despite
performing the powerful process of nāma-kīrtana, why are
the devotees still seen to be subject to different forms
of distress?” In response, the Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas speak
this verse beginning with icchā.

They say, “Although all the fructified sinful reactions
(prārabdha karma-phala) of those who are devoted to
serving the names of Śrī Bhagavān may be visible in the
form of distress, nevertheless, their sinful reactions
are destroyed according to their own desire and only the
pious merit ( puṇya) that bestows auspiciousness remains
intact. Why? It is up to the person engaging in nāma-
saṅkīrtana whether he wants to alleviate his prārabdha-
karma or not.”

It is mentioned in Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya:

karma-cakraṁ tu yat proktam

avilaṅghyaṁ surāsuraiḥ

mad-bhakti-prabalair martyair

viddhi laṅghitam eva tat

The cycle of karma, which even the demigods and the
demons are unable to transcend, is easily surmounted by
the devotees due to the influence of bhakti.


                           446
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

“Those who do not worship the names of the Lord must
suffer the sinful reactions ( prārabdha-karma) that are
presently manifesting even if they have somehow, at some
time, engaged in nāma-saṅkīrtana. However, although
their manifest ( prārabdha) karma can only be exhausted
by undergoing it, that karma which is not yet manifest
(aprārabdha), as well as that which is latent (kūṭa-
stha), and so on are destroyed.”



Verse 170

mahāśayā ye hari-nāma-sevakāḥ

su-gopya-tad-bhakti-mahā-nidheḥ svayam

prakāśa-bhītyā vyavahāra-bhaṅgibhiḥ

sva-doṣa-duḥkhāny anudarśayanti te

mahā-āśayāḥ – great souls; ye – who; hari-nāma-sevakāḥ –
the servants of the holy name of Śrī Hari; su-gopya –
very confidential; tat – of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; bhakti – in
devotional service; mahā-nidheḥ – of their great
treasure; svayam – personally; prakāśa – of revealing;
bhītyā – out of fear; vyavahāra – activities; bhaṅgibhiḥ
– with deceptive; sva-doṣa – as their own faults;
duḥkhāni – sufferings; anudarśayanti – show according to
spiritual authorities; te – they.

The great souls,   who render service to the name of Hari,
are reluctant to   reveal their vast, secret treasure of
bhakti. Thus, in   public they behave as if they are
suffering due to   their own fault.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might question, “Why
were the imminent karmic reactions (bhoga-unmukha karma)
of Bharata and other devotees not destroyed?” In reply,
the Vaikuṇṭha associates speak the verse beginning with
mahā.

They say, “The great souls who are attached to the
service of hari-nāma have deep and mysterious moods.
Externally, they appear to be suffering materially, but
this is just to delude others. Actually, their behavior
is difficult to understand. To alert everyone to the
perils encountered in the development of one’s bhakti,
Bharata Mahārāja made a display of suffering. Looking
after a baby deer, he ended up obtaining an unfortunate
birth as the result of that lower association. What was
his intention? Not willing to reveal the vast,
confidential treasure of bhakti, such great souls
exhibit distress to the public eye in order to conceal
the happiness of devotion hidden in their hearts. Thus,
they keep hidden their most intimate devotion to
Bhagavān.”



Verse 171

tan-nāma-saṅkīrtana-mātrato ’khilā


                            447
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

bhaktā hareḥ syūr hata-duḥkha-dūṣaṇāḥ

kecit tathāpi prabhu-vat kṛpākulā

lokān sad-ācāram imaṁ praśāsati

tan – of Him; nāma-saṅkīrtana-mātrataḥ – merely by
collective chanting of holy names; akhilāḥ – all;
bhaktāḥ – devotees; hareḥ – of Śrī Hari; syuḥ – are;
hata-duḥkha-dūṣaṇāḥ – free from the bad results of
sufferings; kecit – some; tathāpi – nevertheless;
prabhu-

vat – like the Lord; kṛpā-ākulāḥ – eagerly absorbed in
compassion; lokān – to the people; sat-ācāram – pure
conduct; imam – this; praśāsati – instruct.

Although merely by performance of saṅkīrtana of the
names of Śrī Bhagavān, the sufferings and faults of all
devotees are destroyed, still, some devotees who are
merciful just like the Supreme Lord accept distress or
exhibit flaws just to instruct ordinary people about
proper conduct.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might object, “Is it
not their duty to manifest that great treasure of nāma-
saṅkīrtana for the deliverance of the whole world?”

The Vaikuṇṭha associates reply in this verse beginning
with tan-nāma. They say, “All the faults and distresses
of the devotees of Hari are indeed destroyed by the
chanting of the name of the Lord (nāma-saṅkīrtana).
However, being merciful like Bhagavān, some devotees
give instruction on virtuous conduct (sadācāra), for
instance, in the form of rejecting bad association. If
one does not adopt proper behavior, one’s heart will be
tainted by sin, and the inclination for devotional
service will not arise naturally.”



Verse 172

duḥsaṅga-doṣaṁ bharatādayo yathā

durdyūta-doṣaṁ ca yudhiṣṭhirādayaḥ

brahma-sva-bhītiṁ ca nṛgādayo ’malāḥ

prādarśayan sva-vyavahārato janān

duḥsaṅga – of bad association; doṣam – the fault;
bharata-ādayaḥ – beginning with King Bharata; yathā –
as; durdyūta-doṣam – the faults related to the evils of
gambling; ca – and; yudhiṣṭhira-ādayaḥ – beginning with
Yudhiṣṭhira; brahma-sva – of taking a brāhmaṇa’s
property; bhītim – fear; ca – and; nṛga-ādayaḥ –
beginning with King Nṛga; amalāḥ – pure; prādarśayan –
showed; sva-vyavahārataḥ – by their own behavior; janān
– the people.

For example, even though devotees such as Mahārāja
Bharata were thoroughly pure at heart, they demonstrated
the fault of bad association. Śrī Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja,

                          448
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

being the embodiment of dharma (Dharmarāja), exhibited
the mistake of gambling, and the sinless King Nṛga and
others displayed the sin of stealing from a brāhmaṇa,
all just to give instruction to the common people.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: In this verse beginning with duḥsaṅga,

the Vaikuṇṭha associates give examples of how devotees
show the unfavorable results of taking bad association.
They say, “Although a devotee such as Bharata Mahārāja
was pure-hearted, just for

the purpose of instruction, he personally raised a baby
deer, and due to his apparent attachment, took birth in
a lower species. In this way, he demonstrated the
consequences of wrong association.” The word ādi,
meaning ‘others,’ indicates devotees such as Saubhari
Muni. “All of them were pure-hearted and free from
defects, but they acted improperly just to instruct the
entire world.”



Verse 173

bhakti-prabhāveṇa vicāra-jātaiḥ

sañjāyamānena sadedṛśais tvam

vighnāti-vighnān kila jeṣyasīha

sarvatra te hanta vayaṁ sahāyāḥ

bhakti – devotional service; prabhāveṇa – by powerful;
vicāra-jātaiḥ – by reflecting on the truths;
sañjāyamānena – born; sadā – always; īdṛśaiḥ – by such;
tvam – you; vighna-ati-vighnān – over the greatest of
obstacles; kila – indeed; jeṣyasi – will be victorious;
iha – here; sarvatra – in every circumstance; te – they;
hanta – indeed; vayam – we; sahāyāḥ – helpers.

(O Gopa-kumāra!) By the power of bhakti, which is
obtained by continuously reflecting on these truths, you
will always be victorious over the greatest of
obstacles. Rest assured, we will also help you all along
the way.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might present the
doubt, “Since I am bewildered by many obstacles, how I
can develop unwavering dedication (niṣṭhā) for nāma-
saṅkīrtana?”

The Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas reply in this verse beginning
with bhakti. They say, “By the power of your bhakti,
which has been accumulated by thoroughly deliberating on
these truths in the continuous association of saintly
persons, you will always overcome your obstacles, no
matter how formidable.”

Śrī Gopa-kumāra might ask, “How can one achieve anything
without the mercy of great personalities?”

The Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas happily answer, “By inspiring
truth in your heart to conquer your impediments, and in

                          449
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

other ways as well, we will help you everywhere along
the way.”



Verse 174

śrī-kṛṣṇacandrasya mahānukampā-

smābhiḥ sthirā tvayy avadhāritāsti

līnā na sākṣād-bhagavad-didṛkṣā

tvattas tapo-loka-nivāsi-vākyaiḥ

śrī-kṛṣṇa-candrasya – Śrī Kṛṣṇa who is brilliant like a
full moon; mahā-anukampā – great mercy; asmābhiḥ – by
us; sthirā – firm; tvayi – in you; avadhāritā –
convinced; asti – there is; līnā – dissolve; na – not;
sākṣāt – directly; bhagavad-didṛkṣā – the desire to see
the Lord; tvattaḥ – from you; tapaḥ-loka-nivāsi – of the
residents of Tapoloka; vākyaiḥ – by the words.

We are firmly convinced that Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s full grace is
always upon you, because even upon hearing the words of
the residents of Tapoloka, you did not become bewildered
and your desire to directly see Bhagavān was not shaken.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: “In our view, you are automatically
successful, being the recipient of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s great
mercy.”

Śrī Gopa-kumāra might ask, “What makes you say this?”

The Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas reply, “When you were in
Tapoloka, you heard the praise of meditation (mānasa-
dhyāna) by Pippalāyana and the other Yogendras when they
said, ‘Seeing the Lord in meditation is superior to
seeing Him directly.’ But still you could not give up
your desire to meet with Bhagavān personally. On the
contrary, this longing of yours increased and is
continuing to increase more and more.”



Verse 175

rūpaṁ satyaṁ khalu bhagavataḥ sac-cid-ānanda-sāndraṁ

yogyair gāhyaṁ bhavati karaṇaiḥ sac-cid-ānanda-rūpam

māṁsākṣibhyāṁ tad api ghaṭate tasya kāruṇya-śaktyā

sadyo labdhyā tad-ucita-gater darśanaṁ svehayā vā

rūpam – form; satyam – truth; khalu – indeed; bhagavataḥ
– of the Lord; sat – eternal; cit – full of knowledge;
ānanda – and bliss; sāndram – condensed; yogyaiḥ –
suitable; gāhyam – should be received; bhavati – is;
karaṇaiḥ– by the senses; sat – eternality; cit –
cognizance; ānanda – and bliss; rūpam – form; māṁsa – of
flesh; akṣibhyām – with eyes; tat – that; api – also;
ghaṭate – happens; tasya – His; kāruṇya – of His mercy;
śaktyā – through the power; sadyaḥ – at once; labdhyā –

                          450
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

by the attainment; tat – that (form); ucita-gateḥ – of
the suitable goal; darśanam – sight; sva-īhayā – by
one’s own endeavor; vā – or.

The form of Śrī Bhagavān, the condensed essence of
eternity, knowledge, and bliss, is the topmost Absolute
Truth. To perceive this form, one must be endowed with
senses that correspond to

His senses that are also made of eternity, knowledge,
and bliss.Therefore, having received the ability to see
Bhagavān by the power of His mercy, one can directly see
the Lord’s limitless, transcendental form even with
material eyes.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: First, in two verses, beginning here
with rūpam, the Vaikuṇṭha associates repeat the opinion
of Pippalāyana. They say, “Śrī Bhagavān’s form, which is
fully sac-cid-ānanda and eternally true, can be
perceived by senses that are also sac-cid-ānanda like
those of the Lord. Nevertheless, material eyes can also
see Him, either by the influence of Śrī Bhagavān’s mercy
potency, in which the material eyes become
spiritualized, or by His knowledge potency, in which the

eyes become qualified to have direct darśana of the Lord
upon receiving transcendental knowledge of His sac-cid-
ānanda form. Without the power of Bhagavān’s mercy,
one’s eyes will not be empowered to have His audience.
Darśana of Bhagavān’s unlimited and self-effulgent form
becomes possible only through the power of His mercy
potency (kṛpā-śakti), so it is not incorrect to say that
Bhagavān can be perceived by the limited and dull
senses.”



Verse 176

tad-darśane jñāna-dṛśaiva jāya-

māne ’pi paśyāmy aham eṣa dṛgbhyām

māno bhavet kṛṣṇa-kṛpā-prabhāva-

vijñāpako harṣa-viśeṣa-vṛddhyai

tad-darśane – in seeing Him; jñāna – of knowledge; dṛśā
– with eyes; eva – indeed; jāyamāne – in bringing forth;
api – also; paśyāmi – I see; aham – I; eṣaḥ – this;
dṛgbhyām – with eyes; mānaḥ – the mind; bhavet – may be;
kṛṣṇa-kṛpā – of Kṛṣṇa’s mercy; prabhāva – the power;
vijñāpakaḥ – it makes known; harṣa – bliss; viśeṣa –
special; vṛddhyai – for causing to flourish.

Although Śrī Bhagavān is seen only with eyes of
knowledge, sometimes, by the Lord’s potency of mercy, He
becomes visible to the external eyes of the living
being. Then, by dint of the Lord’s affection, the living
being is able to entertain the conception that he has
seen Śrī Bhagavān with his eyes. At that time, through
the joy that blossoms in his heart, he can perceive the
influence of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s mercy potency right in his own
heart.

                          451
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas say, “It is
true that with material eyes one can see the form of
Bhagavān, who is exalted by an unlimited capability to
give mercy, a capability that is beyond empiric
speculation. However, some persons, doubting the Lord’s
ability to become self-manifest to material eyes, only
accept that He can be seen by eyes enlightened with
knowledge. In their opinion, even the special happiness
of seeing Bhagavān with material eyes is actually
experienced in the mind, not elsewhere, because the mind
is the seat of the manifestation of pleasure. Without
the assistance of the mind, there is no possibility of
the material eyes experiencing the happiness of seeing.”

Alternatively, knowing that vision of the Lord according
to one’s desire – that is, direct darśana – is virtually
impossible, Śrī Bhagavān’s associates, to indicate the
nature of such a vision, present a line of thought
[previously given in Chapter Two] in this verse
beginning with tad-darśane.

They say, “In this case, the conception that ‘I am
seeing Śrī Bhagavān with my two eyes’ arises. This
conception indicates Kṛṣṇa’s special mercy potency in
that it causes the seer to experience, ‘Ah! Even though
it is very difficult to see Bhagavān like this, still I
am directly seeing Him with my eyes.’ The conception
enhances the joy of the seer as he realizes the special
mercy of Bhagavān. He understands, ‘He who is beyond the
perception of the faculty of all senses is being seen by
me directly, with my material eyes.’ ”



Verse 177

prabhoḥ kṛpā-pūra-balena bhakteḥ

prabhāvato vā khalu darśanaṁ syāt

ataḥ paricchinna-dṛśāpi sidhyen

nirantaraṁ tan manaseva samyak

prabhoḥ – of the Lord; kṛpā – of mercy; pūra – a flood;
balena – by the power; bhakteḥ – of devotional service;
prabhāvataḥ – by the power; vā – or; khalu – indeed;
darśanam – vision; syāt – may be; ataḥ – then;
paricchinna dṛśā – with limited eyes; api – also;
sidhyet – may be effected; nirantaram – constant; tat –
that; manasā – by the mind; iva – as if; samyak –
thorough.

By the power of the Lord’s abundant mercy or by the
influence of bhakti, the Lord can be seen even with the
limited material eyes. That vision is as constant and
thorough as that held in vision of the mind.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might posit, “Even if
one sees Bhagavān with his eyes, which are limited in
function and small in size, at times the Lord may
disappear from one’s sight and one will experience
separation from Him. However, when one receives darśana

                          452
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

of Bhagavān in the mind, no obstacle comes to frustrate
the bliss of seeing Him. This is because the mind, due
to the potency of being subtle, is all-pervading.”

To dispel this apprehension, the Vaikuṇṭha associates
speak this verse beginning with prabhoḥ, concluding
their commentary on

the opinion of Pippalāyana. They say, “Without the
Lord’s mercy one cannot see Him. Whether divine vision
comes by His grace or by the influence of bhakti,
without mercy, there is no darśana. This being

the case, one can then say that the material eyes and
the mind are equally qualified to receive continuous and
complete darśana

of Bhagavān.”

Alternatively, the Vaikuṇṭha associates are speaking
about the magnificence and power of Bhagavān’s mercy. To
show the glories of bhakti, which is unlimitedly
powerful, in the reasoning mentioned above, it is said
that vision of the Lord is to be had by the influence of
bhakti alone.

“Therefore, the limited sense of vision has the ability
see the full beauty of all the limbs of Bhagavān without
any hindrance, just as that beauty is seen in the vision
of the all-pervading, subtle mind.”



Verse 178

na cet kathañcin na manasy api syāt

svayam-prabhasyekṣaṇam īśvarasya

ghanaṁ sukhaṁ sañjanayet kathañcid

upāsitaḥ sāndra-sukhātmako ’sau

na – not; cet – if; kathañcit – somehow; na – not;
manasi – in the mind; api – even; syāt – may be; svayam-
prabhasya – of the personally mani-fested; īkṣaṇam –
vision; īśvarasya – of the Lord; ghanam – intense;
sukham – happiness; sañjanayet – can create; kathañcit –
somehow; upāsitaḥ – worshiped; sāndra – intense; sukha-
ātmakaḥ – the embodiment of happiness; asau – He.

If the Lord were not to show mercy, then no one would be
able to see Him, even with the mind, what to speak of
with any other sense. This is because He is Parameśvara,
the Supreme Lord, self-manifest and imperceptible to the
mind and eyes. He is completely independent and the
controller of everything. Yet when He is worshiped in
any meager way, He bestows unlimited joy.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might say, “Bhagavān
manifests of His own volition and He is inconceivable to
the function of the mind, so if His mercy potency or the
potency of bhakti were not the cause of receiving His
darśana, then even seeing Him in the mind would be

                          453
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

impossible. He is Īśvara, the completely independent
supreme controller. But the doubt can be raised that the
mind is unlimited, and therefore it follows that the
happiness received in seeing that infinite object
through the mind is naturally boundless. The eyes, on
the other hand, are limited. So in comparison, darśana
with the eyes yields only meager happiness.”

Examining this idea, the Vaikuṇṭha associates reply,
“The Lord is the embodiment of concentrated joy from
whom concentrated happiness is obtained. So, in whatever
way He is worshiped, whether by mind through meditation
or by the eyes through seeing Him, and so on, His
worshiper receives the topmost happiness.”



Verse 179

dṛgbhyāṁ prabhor darśanato hi sarvatas

tat-tat-prasādāvali-labdhir īkṣyate

sarvādhikaṁ sāndra-sukhaṁ ca jāyate

sādhyaṁ tad eva śravaṇādi-bhaktitaḥ

dṛgbhyām – with the two eyes; prabhoḥ – of the Lord;
darśanataḥ – from the sight; hi – indeed; sarvataḥ – by
all means; tat-tat-

prasāda – of various aspects of His mercy; āvali – of
the range; labdhiḥ – the attainment; īkṣyate – is seen;
sarva-adhikam – better than everything; sāndra –
intense; sukham – happiness; ca – also; jāyate –
appears; sādhyam – the goal; tat – that; eva – indeed;
śravaṇa-ādi – beginning with hearing; bhaktitaḥ – from
devotional service.

Darśana with one’s eyes affords all varieties of
Bhagavān’s mercy, and the bliss derived from seeing the
Lord with one’s eyes is much more intense than that of
meditation. Indeed, darśana with one’s eyes is the fruit
of śravaṇa and the other processes of the ninefold path
of bhakti.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: When Śrī Gopa-kumāra was on Tapoloka,
the great sage Pippalāyana described to him how Śrī
Brahmā gained the mercy of Bhagavān by receiving the
Lord’s darśana in his trance of samādhi. The
significance of this is that it is only a rare person
who, by Bhagavān’s mercy, sees Him during meditation.
Very seldom, and not continuously, might a person see
Bhagavān during trance (samādhi) or receive the mercy
Śrī Pippalāyana described Śrī Brahmā receiving. However,
the superiority of directly seeing the Lord with one’s
eyes over seeing Him in trance is universally accepted,
as direct darśana yields a more concentrated happiness.
Therefore, seeing Bhagavān with one’s eyes is the goal
of the ninefold process of devotion (navadhā-bhakti)
consisting of śravaṇa, etc. The word ādi (as in
śravaṇādi) indicates glorification (kīrtana),
remembrance (smaraṇa), and so on. Seeing the Lord with
one’s eyes is also the goal of bhakti in the form dhyāna

                          454
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

(meditation), dhāraṇā (concentration), and so on.



Verse 180

sarveṣāṁ sādhanānāṁ tat-sākṣāt-kāro hi sat-phalam

tadaivā-mūlato māyā naśyet premāpi vardhate

sarveṣām – of all; sādhanānām – practices for
transcendental realization; tat – with Him; sākṣāt-kāraḥ
– causing direct meeting; hi – indeed; sat-phalam – the
ultimate benefit; tadā – then; eva – indeed; ā-mūlataḥ –
from the root; māyā – illusion; naśyet – can be
destroyed; premā – love; api – also; vardhate –
flourishes.

The reason for this is that direct meeting with Śrī
Bhagavān is the consummate result of all processes of
attainment, and by the power of seeing the Lord, all
illusion is destroyed at the root, allowing prema to
blossom.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: In this verse beginning with sarveṣāṁ,
the Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas explain that direct darśana of
Śrī Bhagavān is

the ultimate fruit of the nine processes of bhakti and
of the devotional practices of meditation (dhyāna),
concentration (dharaṇā), etc. They say, “Meeting with
Śrī Bhagavān is the most excellent result of all
devotional practices because as soon as one directly
sees the Lord, all illusion (Māyā) is uprooted. In other
words, ignorance in the form of forgetfulness of
Bhagavān is destroyed.”

This is stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.21):

bhidyate hṛdaya-granthiś chidyante sarva-saṁśayāḥ

kṣīyante cāsya karmāṇi dṛṣṭa evātmanīśvare

Just by receiving direct darśana of Bhagavān, all the
knots of false ego in the devotee’s heart are severed.
Fears and doubts, such as feelings of hopelessness and
hostility, are shattered and the reactions of past
activities, such as prārabdha-karma (the sinful
reactions which one is presently suffering), are
destroyed.

Here, the word ātmani, meaning ‘within the self,’
indicates the destruction of attachments that are
binding the heart, of doubts, and of reactions to past
activities. Alternatively, it indicates that the
destruction of doubts and knots of fruitive activities
takes place upon seeing the supremely lovable Lord
either in the mind or directly by one’s eyes.

However, prema, or in other words, the special ecstasies
(bhāvas) related to the Lord, also increases when one
experiences His beauty, sweetness, and so on, by
directly seeing Him. Here, it is worthy of consideration
that the severing of the knots in the heart, the

                          455
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

destruction of doubts, and the eradication of all types
of fruitive reactions are not the main results of seeing
Bhagavān, but are only secondary results. The main
result of directly meeting the Lord is love for His
beautiful lotus feet.



Verse 181

kāyādhavāder hṛdi paśyato ’pi prabhuṁ sadākṣnā kila tad-
didṛkṣā

tatra pramāṇaṁ hi tathāvalokanād anantaraṁ bhāva-viśeṣa-
lābhaḥ

kāyādhava-ādeḥ – beginning with Prahlāda, the son of
Kayādhu;

hṛdi – in the heart; paśyataḥ – by seeing; api – also;
prabhum – the Lord; sadā – always; akṣnā – with external
vision; kila – indeed; tad-didṛkṣā – the desire to see
Him; tatra – there; pramāṇam – evidence;

hi – indeed; tathā – thus; avalokanāt – through the
eyes; anantaram – after; bhāva – ecstasy; viśeṣa –
special; lābhaḥ – attainment

Although Śrī Prahlāda, the son of Kayādhu, saw the Lord
within his heart, still, he always hankered to see the
Lord externally with

his eyes. The evidence of this is that when he directly
saw the Lord on the shore of the ocean, he experienced
an extraordinary state of love for Him.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Using the example of saintly persons
as specific evidence, the Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas speak this
verse beginning with kāya. They say, “Although many
devotees, including Śrī Prahlāda, the son of
Hiraṇyakaśipu’s wife Kayādhu, received darśana of the
Lord in their heart, still they always yearned to see
the Lord in person. This proves the unsurpassed value of
direct darśana, which increases one’s special ecstasy
(bhāva) or pure love for the Lord ( prema). The evidence
for this is the incident described in the Hari-bhakti-
sudhodaya, in which Śrī Prahlāda felt special ecstasy
when he had darśana of Śrī Bhagavān on the shore of the
ocean.”



Verse 182

kṛṣṇasya sākṣād api jāyate yat

keṣāñcid akṣi-dvaya-mīlanādi

dhyānaṁ na tat kintu mudāṁ bhareṇa

kampādi-vat prema-vikāra eṣaḥ

kṛṣṇasya – of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; sākṣāt – directly; api – even;
jāyate – is born; yat – which; keṣāñcit – for some

                          456
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

persons; akṣi-dvaya – of the two eyes; mīlana – closing;
ādi – and so forth; dhyānam – meditation; na – not; tat
– that; kintu – however; mudām – happiness; bhareṇa –
with profuse; kampa – trembling; ādi – and so forth; vat
– like; prema-vikāraḥ – a transformation due to love;
eṣaḥ – this.

If someone closes his eyes upon directly seeing Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, it may seem like meditation, but actually, it is
not. Rather, you should understand this closing of the
eyes to be an ecstatic transformation of prema. Such
transformations include trembling and so forth, and are
experienced out of overflowing bliss.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.15.44) states:

te vā amuṣya vadanāsita-padma-kośam

udvīkṣya sundaratarādhara-kunda-hāsam

labdhāśiṣaḥ punar avekṣya tadīyam aṅghri-

dvandvaṁ nakhāruṇa-maṇi-śrayaṇaṁ nidadhyuḥ

Śrī Sanaka and his brothers, the best of yogīs, looked
up and became very pleased to see the blue lotus of Śrī
Bhagavān’s face, with His attractive reddish lips and
sweet smile that resembled kunda (jasmine) flowers. Then
they looked down and saw His lotus feet, reddish in
color, with toenails that resembled jewels. Desiring to
experience the treasure of the beauty of His full body
all at once, they repeatedly glanced up and down.
However, because it is impossible to see up and down
simultaneously, their desire was frustrated. Thus, they
closed their eyes and entered into meditation, whereupon
Śrī Bhagavān let them witness His whole body – that
treasure of loveliness – all at once.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra might question, “From this narration, we
hear about Śrī Sanaka and his brothers entering into
meditation even after seeing Bhagavān directly before
them in Vaikuṇṭha. From this, it seems that meditation
is superior to direct darśana.”

To clarify their standpoint on this matter, the
Vaikuṇṭha associates speak this verse beginning with
kṛṣṇasya. They say, “In this case, closing of the eyes
despite having directly seen Śrī Kṛṣṇa cannot be
regarded as dhyāna, because the actual fruit of
meditation is to obtain the desired object, namely
direct darśana of the Lord. Activities such as closing
the eyes should be understood to be a transformation of
pure love ( prema-vikāra), or as one of the external
symptoms of prema. Symptoms such as perspiring,
horripilation, shedding tears, and trembling are
generated from the great joy of meeting Śrī Kṛṣṇa. In
this instance, closing of the eyes appears like
meditation (dhyāna), and therefore it is addressed as
such, but in fact it is not. Thus, the superiority of
directly seeing the Lord is established.”



Verse 183

                          457
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


dhyānaṁ parokṣe yujyeta na tu sākṣān mahā-prabhoḥ

aparokṣe parokṣe ’pi yuktaṁ saṅkīrtanaṁ sadā

dhyānam – meditation; parokṣe – in absence; yujyeta – it
may be proper; na – not; tu – but; sākṣāt – in direct
presence; mahā-prabhoḥ – of the great Lord; aparokṣe –
in the presence; parokṣe – in the absence; api – also;
yuktam – proper; saṅkīrtanam – congregational chanting;
sadā – always.

It is appropriate to meditate on Bhagavān in His
absence, not in His direct presence. Saṅkīrtana, on the
other hand, is always acceptable, whether the Lord is
present personally or not.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: “Not only is seeing the Lord in
dhyāna-yoga inferior to directly seeing the Lord, but it
is universally seen that meditation is inferior to
kīrtana.” Concluding the discussion in a sweet manner,
or madhureṇa samāpayet, the Vaikuṇṭha associates speak
two verses, beginning here with dhyānam, repeating the
logic of their glorification of nāma-saṅkīrtana.

They say, “Meditation on the Lord is appropriate
everywhere and at all times, but only when He is not
visible; it is not appropriate in His direct presence.
However, there is sound evidence in the experience of
common practice that kīrtana is suitable for every
situation – in Bhagavān’s direct presence or absence.”

The rāsa-pañca-adhyāya section of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(10.33.7) [the five chapters that discuss Śrī Kṛṣṇa
amorous sports with the vraja-gopīs] gives special
evidence of this. At the time of rāsa-līlā, the gopīs
performed saṅkīrtana right in front of Śrī Kṛṣṇa:
“gāyantyas taṁ taḍita iva tā megha-cakre virejuḥ –
Surrounding Śrī Kṛṣṇa and singing ‘Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa,’
all the gopīs shone dazzlingly, like a garland comprised
of streaks of lightening in a circle of clouds.”

It is also stated in the Viṣṇu Purāṇa (5.13.52, and 56):

kṛṣṇaḥ śarac-candramasaṁ kaumudī-kumudākaram

jagau gopī-janas tv ekaṁ kṛṣṇa-nāma punaḥ punaḥ

Śrī Kṛṣṇa began to sing the glories of the autumn moon,
whose brilliance blossoms the lilies in the lake, while
all the gopīs repeatedly sang only the name, ‘Kṛṣṇa,
Kṛṣṇa’.

rāsa-geyaṁ jagau kṛṣṇo yāvat tārāyata-dhvaniḥ

sādhu kṛṣṇeti kṛṣṇeti tāvat tā dvi-guṇaṁ jaguḥ

Śrī Kṛṣṇa sang as loudly as possible all the songs
appropriate for the rāsa-līlā. Applauding Him and
saying, ‘Well done, well done!’ all the gopīs began to
sing the words ‘Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa’ only, and twice as loud.

Kīrtana performed in Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s absence is well-known
everywhere. Instances in the Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-

                          458
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

Bhāgavatam include Gopī-gīta (The Song of the Gopīs),
and Bhramara-gīta (The Song to the Bumble-bee), which
was sung at the time of Uddhava’s arrival in Vraja.



Verse 184

śrīman-nāma prabhos tasya śrī-mūrter apy ati-priyam

jagad-dhitaṁ sukhopāsyaṁ sa-rasaṁ tat-samaṁ na hi

śrīmat-nāma – the beautiful name; prabhoḥ – of the Lord;
tasya – His; śrī-mūrteḥ – than the beautiful form; api –
even; ati-priyam – more dear; jagat – to the world;
hitam – causing welfare; sukha – easily; upāsyam –
worshiped; sa-rasam – filled with sweet mellows; tat –
to that; samam – comparable; na – not; hi – indeed.

Bhagavān’s holy name is even dearer to Him than His own
divine form because it benefits the entire world, it is
easily worshiped, and it is saturated with rasa. Indeed,
nothing is comparable to that name.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: “Therefore, we always glorify the
nāma-

saṅkīrtana of Śrī Bhagavān, considering it to be both
sādhya and

sādhana, the most excellent goal and the most excellent
means to achieve that goal.” To explain this, the
Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas speak this verse beginning with
srīman-nāma. They say, “What more can we say about the
glories of the holy name? Bhagavān loves His holy name
more than His divine form. There is no consideration of
qualification or disqualification in uttering the Lord’s
name, and so it has been universally described as hitam,
or ‘most beneficial.’ ” Here, the purport of the word
srīman, meaning ‘beautiful,’ is that, being endowed with
all types of brilliant opulences, the holy name indeed
radiates its own glories everywhere and in all
circumstances. Therefore, the Lord loves His holy name
even more than His divine form (śrī-vigraha).

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.14.15) states:

na tathā me priyatama ātma-yonir na śaṅkaraḥ

na ca saṅkarṣaṇo na śrīr naivātmā ca yathā bhavān

O Uddhava, Brahmā, Śaṅkara, Saṅkarṣaṇa, Lakṣmī, and even
My own Self are not as dear to Me as you are.

From this statement, it is understood that Śrī Bhagavān
loves His devotee more than He cares for His own self.
However, it is not stated anywhere that the devotee is
dearer to Him than His holy name

(śrī-nāma).

In summary, nāma (the holy name) is even more precious
to the Lord than nāmī (the possessor of the name), the
Lord’s own divine person. This is the significance of

                          459
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

the word śrīmat. Having revealed this, the Vaikuṇṭha
associates explain the reason why Bhagavān cherishes His
name so much.

They say, “The holy name benefits the whole world
without consideration of whether one is qualified or
unqualified. Similarly, the name benefits everyone when
it is uttered with the tongue or even

when it is heard with the ears. Worship of the name is
easily accomplished simply by nicely vibrating it on the
tip of the tongue.

“These names, being made of sweet syllables, are full of
nectar and soft and tender, or sa-rasa (full of rasa).
It can also be said that the names are sa-rasa because
they are embodiments of transcendence – eternity,
knowledge, and bliss (sac-cid-ānanda). Another
explanation of their nectarean nature – or sa-rasa – is
that śrī-nāma-saṅkīrtana is endowed with many mellows,
or rasas. In other words, singing and glorifying the
names of the Lord can be performed in śṛṅgāra-rasa
(amorous love) and in all the rasas (here meaning
devotional relationships). It can also be performed in
bhakti-rasa, the mellow of devotional service, and
prema-rasa, the mellow of mature love. In conditions of
meeting and separation, because nāmī Bhagavān manifests
in śrī-nāma-kīrtana, śrī-nāma is the bridge for the
devotee to meet with Kṛṣṇa and the consoling friend of
one feeling separation from Him.

“Another meaning of rasa is rāga, or spontaneous
attraction to Kṛṣṇa. The holy name is sa-rasa, filled
with rasa, because it is filled with rāga. Furthermore,
the holy name is filled with rasa because the Lord
Himself is permanently present in the kīrtana of His
sacred names, which bestow pure love for Him very
quickly, without a doubt. Alternatively, since among its
servants (all the worshipers), this holy name creates
prema for the Lord, a powerful attraction, or anurāga,
arises between itself and its servants. Moreover, it
also instills affection, or anurāga, in all people.

“The word rasa also means ‘exceptional potency’ (vīrya-
viśeṣa). Sa-rasa indicates that the name of the Lord is
extremely powerful. Rasa also means quality, or guṇa.
Śrī-nāma is indeed of exceptional quality –

sa-rasa – because it has the quality to deliver all
wretched people of this world. Another meaning of the
word rasa is sukha, meaning ‘happiness.’ Śrī-nāma is sa-
rasa because, being sac-cid-ānanda, it is joyful by
nature. Rasa also means special sweetness. The holy name
is sa-rasa because it is full of the sweetest ambrosia.”

Therefore, in the Skanda Purāṇa, Bhagavān Vedavyāsa
states:

madhura-madhuram-etan maṅgalaṁ maṅgalānāṁ

sakala-nigama-vallī-sat-phalaṁ cit-svarūpaṁ

sakṛd api parigītaṁ śraddhayā helayā vā


                          460
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

bhṛgu-vara nara-mātraṁ tārayet kṛṣṇa-nāma

O best of the Bhṛgu dynasty, kṛṣṇa-nāma is the sweetest
of all that is sweet and the most auspicious of all that
is auspicious. It is the fully ripened fruit of the
wish-fulfilling vine that is the Vedas and is the
embodiment of transcendence. If a person utters the holy
name only once, with indifference or with faith, he very
quickly becomes qualified to receive the personal
association of Śrī Bhagavān, even without his making an
effort to be delivered from his great distress.

The Vaikuṇṭha associates conclude, “This is proof of the
incom-parable auspiciousness of śrī-nāma. There is
nothing that can equal it.”



Verse 185

tan mānayañ chivasyājñām ito niḥsara satvaram

kṛṣṇa-priyatamāṁ śrīman-mathurāṁ tvāṁ namāma tām

tat – that; mānayan – respecting; śivasya – of Śiva;
ājñām – the instruction; itaḥ – from here; niḥsara –
leave; sa-tvaram – swiftly; kṛṣṇa-priya-tamām – most
dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa; śrīmat – beautiful; mathurām – to
Mathurā; tvām – you; namāma – we bow down; tām – to
that.

Therefore, now, as we have instructed and Śrī Śiva has
ordered, quickly leave this abode of liberation and go
to Śrī Mathurā-purī, which is most dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. We
offer our praṇāma to

that Mathurā.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: In this way, having finished their
beneficial instructions to Śrī Gopa-kumāra, the
Vaikuṇṭha pārṣadas indicate the purpose of their visit
in this verse beginning with tan mānayan. They say,
“Therefore, according to the line of reasoning that we
have conveyed, please immediately depart from this abode
of liberation and go to Śrī Mathurā-dhāma. For Śrī
Śiva’s pleasure, you should respect his order: ‘This
abode is an obstacle to bhakti. Quickly abandon it.’ ”

Śrī Gopa-kumāra might argue, “I have reached this very
distant abode of liberation only after great difficulty,
so why should I quickly go to Mathurā?”

The Vaikuṇṭha associates reply, “Being most dear to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Mathurā-purī very quickly bestows all types
of perfections.”



Verse 186

śrī-gopa-kumāra uvāca

nipīya hṛt-karṇa-rasāyanaṁ tat


                          461
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

pramoda-bhāreṇa bhṛto namaṁs tān

śivau ca sadyo vraja-bhūmim etāṁ

taiḥ prāpito ’haṁ bata mugdha-buddhiḥ

śrī-gopa-kumāraḥ – Śrī Gopa-kumāra; uvāca – said; nipīya
– after drinking; hṛt – for the heart; karṇa – for the
ears; rasa-ayanam – a reservoir of nectar; tat – that;
pramoda-bhāreṇa – profuse joy; bhṛtaḥ – felt; naman –
bowing before; tān – them; śivau – Śiva and Pārvatī; ca
– also; sadyaḥ – at once; vraja-bhūmim – to the land of
Vraja; etām – that; taiḥ – by them; prāpitaḥ – attained;
aham – I; bata – Oh, how astonishing; mugdha-buddhiḥ –
bewildered intelligence.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra said: O brāhmaṇa, drinking the nectar of
the Vaikuṇṭha associates’ instructions, which delight
the ears and the heart, I joyfully offered obeisance to
them and to Śrī Śiva and Śrī Pārvatī. By their mercy, at
that very moment I found myself in Vraja-bhūmi. I was
stunned by how this happened.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “On hearing the
words of the Vaikuṇṭha associates, which filled my ears
and heart with nectar (amṛta), I became elated. As soon
as I offered obeisances to them and to Śrī Śiva with Śrī
Pārvatī, I quickly reached this land of Vraja. This
completely amazed me and filled me with joy. While
offering obeisances, I had closed my eyes, but when I
opened them, I saw that I was already in Vraja. I was
stunned by the mystery of this.”

Thus ends the translation of the bhāvānuvāda of

Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī’s Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā

on the Second Canto, Chapter Three,

of Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta.

[1] This is from the perspective of the other persons
whose arguments are being presented. Guṇa-maya deha can
also be translated as ‘remaining material attachments.’




Fourth Chapter




Vaikuṇṭha: the Spiritual World



Verse 1

śrī-gopa-kumāra uvāca

ekākinātra bhramatā mayā ’syā


                          462
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

bhūmeḥ śriyaṁ kutracid apy adṛṣṭām

sampaśyatā saṁvasatā vanāntaḥ

sarvaṁ vimohād iva vismṛtaṁ tat

śrī-gopa-kumāraḥ – Śrī Gopa-kumāra; uvāca – said;
ekākinā – alone; atra – here; bhramatā – wandering; mayā
– by me; asyāḥ – of this; bhūmeḥ – of the land; śriyam –
beauty; kutracit – anywhere; api – also; adṛṣṭām –
unseen; sampaśyatā – by beholding; samvasatā – residing;
vana – the forest; antaḥ – within; sarvam – all; vimohāt
– out of fascination; iva – as if; vismṛtam – forgotten;
tat – that.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra said: O brāhmaṇa, I began to wander
alone throughout this Vrajabhūmi and beheld its
unprecedented splendor. Nowhere else had I ever
witnessed such beauty. Residing in a forest there, I
became so fascinated that I even forgot the spiritual
practices required to reach Śrī Vaikuṇṭha, the spiritual
world.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: This Fourth Chapter describes the
fundamental reality (tattva) of the true nature
(svarūpa) of Vaikuṇṭha and its residents, as well as the
glories of those residents. It concludes with the
episode of Śrī Gopa-kumāra’s visit to Ayodhyā, which is
situated beyond Vaikuṇṭha, and his subsequent departure
for Dvārakā, which is above Ayodhyā.

The land of Vraja in the district of Mathurā is more
glorious than the entire material realm and even more
glorious than the abode of liberation. Gopa-kumāra first
explains this fact in this verse beginning with ekākin,
wherein he says, “O brāhmaṇa! I began to wander alone in
this land of Vraja, where I observed unparalleled beauty
and many other splendorous qualities. I had not seen
such extraordinary beauty in the entire brahmāṇḍa, not
even outside it in the abode of liberation, mukti-pada.

“Residing in this forest and beholding its beauty, I
became so enchanted that I even forgot about the
spiritual discipline (sādhana) and the rituals and other
practices performed to achieve Śrī Vaikuṇṭha that had
been taught to me by the Lord’s personal associates.
Indeed, I had not experienced such beauty or joy
anywhere else, and so the loveliness of Vrajabhūmi
completely captivated my mind.” The implication of the
name Mathurā (math, ‘to churn’) is that this land
‘churns’ everyone’s minds, making them forget everything
else but itself.



Verse 2

śrīman-madhu-purīṁ krīḍā-

bhramaṇa-kramato gataḥ

tatra māthura-viprebhyo

’śrauṣaṁ bhāgavatādikam

                            463
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


śrīmat-madhu-purīm – the city of Śrī Mathurā; krīḍā-
bhramaṇa – playful wanderings; kramataḥ – gradually;
gataḥ – arrived; tatra – there; māthura – of Mathurā;
viprebhyaḥ – from the brāhmaṇas; aśrauṣam – I heard;
bhāgavata – Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam; ādikam – and other
scriptures.

In the course of my playful wanderings, I arrived in Śrī
Mathurā-purī, where I heard the recitation of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam and other devotional scriptures from the
local brāhmaṇas.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: “By the mercy of Śrī Mathurā-nātha,
the Lord of Mathurā, all my desires were fulfilled.” To
explain this, Śrī Gopa-kumāra speaks this verse
beginning with śrīman.

He says, “Once, as I blithely roamed about, I arrived in
Śrī Madhu-purī (Mathurā).” Here the term ‘roaming
blithely’ indicates that Gopa-kumāra did not follow any
particular sequence as he wandered through the land of
Śrī Vraja. “By the mercy of the brāhmaṇas in the city of
Śrī Mathurā, I heard narrations from the Bhāgavatam and
other sacred texts. For the most part, I heard from
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, the best of all scriptures, but I
also heard a little from other devotional books that
expound loving service to the Lord (bhagavad-bhakti) in
accordance with Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.”



Verse 3

bhaktiṁ nava-vidhāṁ samyag

jñātvedaṁ vanam āgataḥ

apaśyaṁ sahasaivātra

śrīmad-guru-varaṁ nijam

bhaktim – of devotional service; nava-vidhām – the nine
limbs; samyak – properly; jñātvā – having understood;
idam – this; vanam – Vṛndāvana; āgataḥ – returned;
apaśyam – I saw; sahasā – suddenly; eva – indeed; atra –
here; śrīmad-guru-varam – glorious and exalted guru;
nijam – my own.

Hearing those scriptural discourses, I came to properly
understand the fundamental truth of the ninefold process
of bhakti. Thereupon, I returned here to Śrī Vṛndāvana,
where I unexpectedly had darśana of my gurudeva.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “After clearly
under-standing the established truth of the ninefold
process of bhakti, I was able to discern activities that
are favorable and sanctioned for the execution of
bhakti, and those that are unfavorable and proscribed. I
then returned to Śrī Vṛndāvana, at which time my
gurudeva unexpectedly appeared before me here at Keśī-
tīrtha, where I am now seated.”



                             464
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


Verse 4

pūrvavad rājamāno ’sau dṛṣṭvā māṁ praṇataṁ mudā

sāśirvādaṁ samāliṅgya sarvajño ’kṛpayattarām

pūrva-vat – as before; rājamānaḥ – resplendent; asau –
he; dṛṣṭvā – seeing; mām – me; praṇatam – bowing down;
mudā – joyfully; sa-āśirvādam – with benedictions;
samāliṅgya – warmly embracing; sarva-jñaḥ – omniscient;
akṛpayat – showed mercy; tarām – extreme.

There was no change in Śrī Gurudeva’s bodily appearance.
As soon as I saw him, I offered him daṇḍavat praṇāma,
and he embraced and blessed me. Then, my omniscient
gurudeva bathed me with his immense mercy by instructing
me in the confidential truths of bhakti.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Śrī Gurudeva
was present before me as he had been before. His body
had not changed or undergone any transformation, which
indicated that he was an incarnation of Bhagavān and was
actually relishing the mellows, or rasa, of Mathurā’s
Vraja-bhūmi. As soon as I saw him, I respectfully
prostrated myself before him on the ground, and he
embraced and blessed me. Thereafter, my omniscient
gurudeva mercifully instructed me on the complete truths
of the highly confidential science of devotion from his
personal realizations.”



Verse 5

tasya prasādam āsādya mahā-gūḍha-prakāśakam

anvatiṣṭhaṁ yathādiṣṭaṁ bhakti-yogam anāratam

tasya – his; prasādam – the mercy; āsādya – having
attained; mahā-gūḍha – most confidential truths;
prakāśakam – which reveals; anvatiṣṭham – I followed;
yathā – as; ādiṣṭam – instructed; bhakti-yogam – the
yoga of devotional service; anāratam – without
interruption.

By Śrī Gurudeva’s mercy, which reveals the most
confidential truths of bhakti, I learned about the
essential principles of devotional service (bhakti-
tattva). Then, following his instructions, I began
practicing bhakti-yoga without interruption.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “The mercy of
Śrī Gurudeva reveals the most hidden, highly
confidential science of bhakti. I received this mercy,
and following his order, I began to execute
uninterrupted bhakti-yoga, which is the means for
reaching the abode of Vaikuṇṭha as well as for
establishing one’s personal connection with the lotus
feet of Śrī Bhagavān.”



Verse 6

                          465
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017


sañjātenācirāt prema-pūreṇa vivaśo ’bhavam

na kartum aśakaṁ kiñcit paraṁ taṁ samakīrtayam

sañjātena – by the arising; acirāt – without delay;
prema – of love; pūreṇa – by the flood; vivaśaḥ –
helpless; abhavam – I became; na – not; kartum – to do;
aśakam – I was able; kiñcit – anything; param – else;
tam – His names; samakīrtayam – I loudly sang.

By this practice, prema (pure love of God) quickly arose
within me. Due to the unrestrained nature of prema, I
could neither perform worship nor do anything else at
all; I could only loudly sing the Lord’s names.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: “By the influence of that bhakti-yoga,
devotion in pure love very quickly appeared within me.”
Śrī Gopa-kumāra explains this fact in three verses,
beginning here with sañjātena. “Due to the overwhelming
nature of prema, I became unable to execute my worship
or do anything else. I could only perform nāma-
saṅkīrtana (singing the names of God) of my worshipable
Lord, singing in a loud and beautiful voice.”



Verse 7

śrī-kṛṣṇa gopāla hare mukunda

govinda he nanda-kiśora kṛṣṇa

hā śrī-yaśodā-tanaya prasīda

śrī-ballavī-jīvana rādhikeśa

śrī-kṛṣṇa – O all-attractive bestower of the highest
bliss together with Śrī (Śrīmatī Rādhikā); gopāla – O
cowherd; hare – O thief; mukunda – O bestower of freedom
from the bondage of repeated birth and death; govinda –
O Govinda; he nanda-kiśora – O naughty youth, the son of
Nanda; kṛṣṇa – O Kṛṣṇa; hā – alas (in a mood of
separation); śrī-yaśodā-tanaya – O illustrious son of
Śrī Yaśodā; prasīda – please be kind; śrī-ballavī – of
the beautiful gopīs; jīvana – O life; rādhikā – of
Rādhikā; īśa – O Lord.

O Śrī Kṛṣṇa! Gopāla! Hari! Mukunda! Govinda! O Nanda-
kiśora Kṛṣṇa! O beloved son of Yaśodā, be pleased with
me! O life of the gopīs! O Lord of Rādhikā!

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra speaks this verse
starting with śrī kṛṣṇa to explain the nature of nāma-
saṅkīrtana. “I would sing Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Gopāla, Hari,
Mukunda, and so on because I considered all those names
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa that are connected with His most beloved
associates to be the most dear to Him.”



Verse 8

evaṁ sa-gānaṁ bahudhāhvayaṁs taṁ

                          466
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017


kṣaṇaṁ pranṛtyan kṣaṇam udrudaṁś ca

unmattavat kāmam itas tato ’haṁ

bhramāmi dehādikam asmaran svam

evam – thus; sa-gānam – while singing; bahudhā – in
numerous ways; āhvayan – calling out; tam – to Him;
kṣaṇam – sometimes; pranṛtyan – dancing with abandon;
kṣaṇam – sometimes; udrudan – crying out loudly; ca –
also; unmatta-vat – like a person totally enmaddened;
kāmam – at my whimsy; itas tataḥ – hither and thither;
aham bhramāmi – I wander; deha-ādikam – the body and so
forth; asmaran – forgetting; svam – own.

Thus, singing and calling out to my worshipful Lord in
various ways, I would sometimes dance, sometimes weep,
and sometimes wander like a madman, forgetting even my
own body and everything else.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: “After continuously singing the holy
name, finally, my external consciousness vanished.” To
describe this, Śrī Gopa-kumāra speaks this verse
beginning with evam. “Therefore, sometimes I would
dance, or cry, or sometimes sing in a melodious voice,
or praise the qualities of my Lord. I would call out to
Śrī Bhagavān, ‘O mahā-bhuja, O mighty-armed one! Where
are You? Please appear before me.’ Sometimes I would
wander freely, just like a madman, unaware of my body
and everything else.” The word ādi indicates, “I even
forgot everything related to the body.”



Verse 9

ekadā taṁ nija-prāṇa-nāthaṁ paśyann ivāgrataḥ

dhartuṁ dhāvan gato mohaṁ nyapataṁ prema-vihvalaḥ

ekadā – once; tam – Him; nija – my own; prāṇa-nātham –
the Lord of my life breath; paśyan – beholding; iva – as
if; agrataḥ – in front; dhartum – to catch; dhāvan –
running; gataḥ – become; moham – un-conscious; nyapatam
– I fell; prema – by love; vihvalaḥ – overwhelmed.

Once I saw my beloved Lord right in front of me. I ran
to catch Him but fell unconscious, overwhelmed by the
ecstasy of love.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Wherever he went, Śrī Gopa-kumāra
fainted, helplessly overwhelmed and shaking with the
emotions of pure love.



Verse 10

tāvat taiḥ pārṣadair etya

vaikuṇṭhaṁ netum ātmanaḥ

yānam āropitaḥ sadyo

                            467
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


vyutthāyācālayaṁ dṛśau

tāvat – at that time; taiḥ – by them; pārṣadaiḥ – the
associates of the Lord; etya – having come; vaikuṇṭham –
to Vaikuṇṭha; netum – to bring; ātmanaḥ – their; yānam –
airplane; āropitaḥ – placed on; sadyaḥ – at that very
moment; vyutthāya – awaking; acālayam – I opened; dṛśau
– my eyes.

At that time, the eternal associates of Vaikuṇṭha came
to take me to their abode. They quickly brought me
aboard their airplane. I regained my consciousness and
began to look around in astonishment.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “At that time,
the eternal residents of the spiritual world, Vaikuṇṭha,
who in Mukti-dhāma had instructed me on the means to
reach Vaikuṇṭha, came to take me to their abode. They
quickly brought me aboard their airplane. Then my swoon
broke, and in great astonishment I began to look all
around me.”



Verse 11

sarvam anyādṛśaṁ dṛṣṭvā vismitaḥ svasthatāṁ gataḥ

pārśve ’paśyaṁ purā dṛṣṭāṁs tān evātma-priyaṅkarān

sarvam – everything; anyādṛśam – different; dṛṣṭvā –
having seen; vismitaḥ – astonished; sva-sthatām –
composure; gataḥ – having recovered; pārśve – beside me;
apaśyam – I saw; purā – before; dṛṣṭān – seen; tān –
them; eva – indeed; ātma-priyaṅ-karān – who favored me.

I was stunned to see that everything was different, but
after some time I regained my composure. I saw that the
same personal associates of Bhagavān from Vaikuṇṭha,
those personalities who had previously favored me by
indicating the means to attain Vaikuṇṭha, were beside
me.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “I saw that all
places except the land of Vraja were transformed into
new forms. This was the reason for my astonishment.
Afterward, I noticed that those eternal residents of
Vaikuṇṭha, who had previously helped me by showing me
how to attain my beloved Śrī Vaikuṇṭha, were beside me,
and I felt comforted.”



Verse 12

mahā-tejasvināṁ tejo muṣṇato ’nupamaṁ varam

vimānaṁ yogyam ārūḍhān anirūpyaṁ su-rūpavat

mahā-tejasvinām – of the most splendid luminaries; tejaḥ
– the splendor; muṣṇataḥ – eclipsing; anupamam –
incomparable; varam – excellent; vimānam – airplane;
yogyam – appropriate; ārūḍhān – seated; anirūpyam –

                          468
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

indescribable; su-rūpavat – very beautiful.

They sat on an excellent, incomparably decorated, and
extremely beautiful airplane. Its splendor put to shame
even the effulgence of the most radiant sun.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra speaks this verse
beginning with mahā-tejasvinām to detail the glories of
that airplane. He says, “The eternal associates
(pārṣadas) of Vaikuṇṭha were seated on a super-excellent
airplane whose brilliance reproached even that of the
most powerful sun.”

The Mathurā brāhmaṇa might ask, “What was the nature of
that airplane?”

Gopa-kumāra says, “It was effulgent like the residents
of Vaikuṇṭha, that is, it was very beautiful and
wonderfully decorated. However, because it was the
embodiment of Brahman (pure spirit), its shape and
opulence cannot actually be described. Thus the airplane
was beyond words and beyond compare.”



Verse 13

sambhramāt praṇamantaṁ mām

āśliṣyāśvāsayan muhuḥ

aicchan sva-sadṛśaṁ rūpaṁ

dātuṁ yukti-śatena te

sambhramāt – out of reverence; praṇamantam – offering
obeisance; mām – me; āśliṣya – embracing; āśvāsayan –
comforting; muhuḥ – again and again; aicchan – desiring;
sva-sadṛśam – like their own; rūpam – a form; dātum – to
give; yukti – of reasons; śatena – with hundreds; te –
they.

As I reverentially offered obeisances to those personal
associates of the Lord, they embraced me and repeatedly
comforted me. Then they plied me with hundreds of
logical arguments to convince me to accept a form
similar to theirs.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “I reverentially
offered obeisances to those personal associates of the
Lord. Seeing me offer them respects, they embraced me
and repeatedly reassured me, saying, ‘O Gopa-kumāra,
give up your astonishment and veneration. We are your
friends and we will take you to Vaikuṇṭha.’ Then they
gave many reasons to convince me to accept a four-armed
form like theirs, arguing, ‘The human body is not
suitable for living in Vaikuṇṭha; in particular, the
happiness of Vaikuṇṭha cannot be experienced in such a
body.’ ”



Verse 14


                             469
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

tad asvīkṛtya tu svīyaṁ

govardhana-bhavaṁ vapuḥ

teṣāṁ prabhāvatas tādṛg-

guṇa-rūpādy alambhayam

tat – that; asvī-kṛtya – not accepting; tu – but; svīyam
– my own; govardhana-bhavam – born in Govardhana; vapuḥ
– body; teṣām – as theirs; prabhāvataḥ – with the
radiance; tādṛk – similar; guṇa – qualities; rūpa –
form; ādi – and so forth; alambhayam – I received.

I did not agree to accept an opulent four-armed form
like theirs, but since my body was born in Govardhana,
it became full of the same majesty, beauty, and
qualities as theirs.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Although I
refused to accept a four-armed form (sārūpya) like that
of the Vaikuṇṭha associates, because I had taken birth
in Govardhana, my body was able to take on their
qualities, becoming eternal, pure, lustrous, and endowed
with all kinds of powers and capabilities. The main
reason I would not accept the identity they offered was
that I had no desire to change my body that was born in
Govardhana for any other form.”



Verses 15–17

paramānanda-yuktena durvitarkyeṇa vartmanā

jagad-vilakṣaṇenāhaṁ vaikuṇṭhaṁ taiḥ saha vrajan

teṣu lokeṣv alokeṣv āvaraṇeṣv api sarvataḥ

dṛṣṭi-pāte ’pi lajjeyaṁ pūjye tad-adhikāribhiḥ

loka-pālādibhiś cordhva-mukhaiḥ sāñjali-mastakaiḥ

vegād utkṣipyamāṇābhiḥ puṣpa-lājādi-vṛṣṭibhiḥ

paramānanda-yuktena – endowed with supreme bliss;
durvitarkyena – incomprehensible; vartmanā – by a
pathway; jagat – the material world; vilakṣaṇena –
completely extraordinary; aham – I; vaikuṇṭham – to
Vaikuṇṭha; taiḥ saha – with them; vrajan – going; teṣu
lokeṣu – in the heavenly worlds; alokeṣu – in the Aloka
planets; āvaraṇeṣu – amongst the eight coverings; api –
also; sarvataḥ – from all sides; dṛṣṭi-pāte – glance;
api – also; lajjā – embarassment; iyam – this; pūjye –
being worshipable; tad-adhikāribhiḥ – by the
authorities; loka-pāla – protectors of the planets;
ādibhiḥ – and others; ca – also; ūrdhva-mukhaiḥ – with
faces raised upwards; sa-añjali – with folded hands;
mastakaiḥ – to their heads; vegāt – forcefully;
utkṣipyamānābhiḥ – casting; puṣpa – of flowers; lāja –
of puffed rice; ādi – and so forth; vṛṣṭibhiḥ – with
rains.

While traveling to Vaikuṇṭha in their company, I again

                           470
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

passed over all the planets along a path that was
incomprehensible, supremely blissful, and unlike
anything in this world. Feeling embarrassed, I could not
even look at planets such as Svarga, or at Aloka, the
area outside the fourteen planetary systems, or at the
eight layers covering the universe. However, Indra and
other demigods, who are the presiding authorities of all
those planets, began to worship me. Looking up, they
joined their palms above their foreheads and then
vigorously cast flowers, parched rice, and other
auspicious items upon me.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The Mathurā brāhmaṇa might wonder,
“First, you went to the abode of liberation by
penetrating the sun globe. Now, how did you go to
Vaikuṇṭha?” Addressing this question, Śrī Gopa-kumāra
speaks two verses, beginning here with paramānanda. He
says, “I went to the abode of Vaikuṇṭha by a path that
was full of great bliss, unlike anything in this world,
and absolutely inconceivable.”

The word durvitarkya is used to indicate that the path
is different from anything in this world and is
extraordinary. In other words, the name of this route is
‘the path of bhakti.’ It is totally distinct from this
world because in all circumstances it is supremely
blissful. Alternatively, durvitarkya means that when one
traverses this path, the entire world is seen from a
radically different perspective, and this path is
realized to be even more special than the all-excellent
Mukti-pada, the abode of liberation.

“When I reached the point of traversing that path, such
an immense joy arose within me that, out of shame and
aversion, I could not even glance at the places I had
formerly visited, such as the fourteen planetary
systems, including planets like Svarga; outside them,
including Aloka, the sun, and other planets which are
located near the Lokāloka mountain; Anāloka, the abode
untouched by the rays of the sun; and even the eight
coverings that comprise the shell of the universe. In
the past, while ascending to the abode of liberation, I
had seen those planets as allurements of Māyā, but now I
considered even Mukti-pada to be completely
insignificant, and the idea of glancing anywhere else
became repugnant. Therefore, the presiding rulers of
each of those planets, including Indra and other
demigods, looked up and offered me obeisances by joining
their palms above their foreheads, and then they began
to worship me by offering flowers, parched rice, and
other auspicious items.”



Verse 18

taiḥ stūyamāno jaya-śabda-pūrvakaṁ

praṇamyamānaś ca pade pade calan

tucchaṁ puro mukti-padaṁ ca locayan

ūrdhvaṁ tataḥ śrī-śiva-lokam avrajam


                          471
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

taiḥ – by them; stūyamānaḥ – being offered praise; jaya
– of victory; śabda-pūrvakam – with utterances;
praṇamyamānaḥ – being offered obeisance; ca – also; pade
pade – at every place; calan – while going; tuccham –
worthless; puraḥ – ahead; mukti-padam – state of
monistic liberation; ca – also; locayan – glancing;
ūrdhvam – above; tataḥ – then; śrī-śiva-lokam – to the
planet of Lord Śiva; avrajam – I traveled.

Uttering “Jaya!” the predominating rulers of all those
planets praised me and offered me obeisances at every
place I went. On the way, I glanced at the abode of
liberation and considered it to be worthless. Then I
traveled above the abode of liberation to Śivaloka.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “I passed
through different places on the way. The presiding
authorities of all those planets glorified me by
chanting ‘Jaya,’ offered me obeisances, and performed
other acts of respect. Traveling along, I glanced at the
abode of liberation, but I now considered it utterly
worthless.”

Alternatively, this verse can be read, “I saw the abode
of Lord Śiva and entered it, pondering the
insignificance of Mukti-pada.”



Verse 19

somaṁ śivaṁ tatra mudā praṇamya

tenādara-prema-sad-ukti-jālaiḥ

ānandito vākya-mano-durāpa-

māhātmya-mālaṁ tam agāṁ vikuṇṭham

sa-umam – with Umā; śivam – to Lord Śiva; tatra – there;
mudā – with jubilance; praṇamya – bowing; tena – by him;
ādara – respect; prema – and love; sat-ukti – of pure
words; jālaiḥ – by arrangements; ānanditaḥ – enlivened;
vākya – words; manaḥ – and the mind; durāpa –
inaccessible; māhātmya – of glories; mālam – whose
series; tam – there; agām – I reached; vikuṇṭham – the
land without worry.

In the abode of Śrī Śiva, I jubilantly offered
obeisances to Śrī Mahādeva, who was seated with Śrī Umā-
devī. They filled me with happiness by speaking sweet
words of respect and love. Thereafter, I reached the
abode of Vaikuṇṭha, whose garland of glories is beyond
the grasp of one’s mind and words.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “In Śivaloka, I
offered obeisances to Lord Śiva, who was accompanied by
Umā, and they pleased me with exceedingly sweet words
that revealed their respect and love. After this, I
reached the indescribably glorious abode, my most
cherished Vaikuṇṭha, whose innumerable glories are
impenetrable by words and mind.”



                          472
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


Verse 20

pārṣadair idam ukto ’haṁ tvaṁ tiṣṭheha kṣaṇaṁ bahiḥ

vijñāpya prabhum asmābhiḥ purīṁ yāvat pravekṣyase

pārṣadaiḥ – by the associates of the Lord; idam – this;
uktaḥ – said; aham – I; tvam – you; tiṣṭha – must stay;
iha – here; kṣaṇam – for a moment; bahiḥ – outside;
vijñāpya – having informed; prabhum – the Master;
asmābhiḥ – by us; purīm – the city; yāvat – after which;
pravekṣyase – you will enter.

Arriving there, the group of eternal Vaikuṇṭha
associates told me, “Please wait at the outer gate for a
moment. We shall announce your arrival to the Lord,
after which you shall enter the city.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Upon arrival in
Vaikuṇṭha, the Lord’s associates had me sit at the outer
gate of the city and told me, ‘Please wait here for some
time. We shall personally give the news of your arrival
to Lord Vaikuṇṭha-nātha or we shall send the news
through some special officer. Only then shall you enter
the city.’ ” Such etiquette reflecting supreme majesty
is commonplace everywhere in Vaikuṇṭha.



Verse 21

atrādṛṣṭāśrutāścaryasamudrormi-paramparām

bhagavad-bhakti-dīptābhyāṁ netrābhyāṁ gaṇaya sthiraḥ

atra – here; adṛṣṭa – never seen; aśruta – never heard;
āścarya – of wonders; samudra – of an ocean; ūrmi –
waves; paramparām – one after the other; bhagavat-bhakti
– by devotional service to the all-opulent Lord;
dīptābhyām – illuminated; netrābhyām – with eyes; gaṇaya
– count; sthiraḥ – remaining steadfast.

“With your mind steady and your eyes illuminated by
loving devotion to the Lord, behold the multitude of
uncommon opulences in Vaikuṇṭha. Count the waves in the
ocean of astonishing wonders that have never been seen
or heard of before.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The eternal Vaikuṇṭha associates
jokingly speak this verse beginning with atra to remove
any possible distress of separation that Gopa-kumāra
might suffer. They say, “Sit here with a calm heart, and
with your sight illuminated by loving service to the
Lord (bhagavad-bhakti), count the sets of waves in the
ocean of wonders – wonders unseen and unheard of
before.”

They say this for a particular reason. By directly
witnessing the endless succession of extraordinary
wonders, Gopa-kumāra will experience the special glories
of the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha, and thus his eagerness to have
the Lord’s darśana will greatly increase. Another reason
the Vaikuṇṭha associates asked Gopa-kumāra to sit near

                          473
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

the outer gate of the city is that they wanted him to
understand what it means to be a servant of the Lord in
Vaikuṇṭha’s mood of great opulence.

“Count the endless flow of waves in the ocean of
astonishing wonders.” This sentence has a double meaning
and should be seen as joking words. Gopa-kumāra might
ask, “What power do human eyes have to see such
astonishing phenomena?” Therefore the associates say,
“Such wonders spontaneously manifest in eyes that are
illuminated by bhagavad-bhakti. It is only with these
eyes that one can behold the Lord.”



Verse 22

śrī-gopa-kumāra uvāca

teṣu cāntaḥ-praviṣṭeṣu dvārā-prānte bahiḥ-sthitaḥ

apaśyam ekam āyāntaṁ praviśantaṁ ca tāṁ purīm

śrī-gopa-kumāraḥ uvāca – Śrī Gopa-kumāra said; teṣu –
they; ca – and; antaḥ-praviṣṭeṣu – having entered
inside; dvārā-prānte – near the door; bahiḥ – outside;
sthitaḥ – remaining; apaśyam – I saw; ekam – someone;
āyāntam – approaching; praviśantam – entering; ca –
also; tam – that; purīm – city.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra said: After those eternal associates
entered the city, I stayed at the outer gate and saw
someone else entering the city.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “When all the
Lord’s personal associates who had accompanied me
entered the city, I remained at the gate. At that time,
I saw that one man was entering the city.” ‘Someone’
refers to one of the residents of Śrī Vaikuṇṭha.



Verse 23

brahmāṇḍa-śata-bhūty-āḍhya-sad-yānārūḍham adbhutaiḥ

gītādibhir mudāviṣṭaṁ kānty-ādyaiḥ sadṛśaṁ prabhoḥ

brahmāṇḍa – of universes; śata – hundreds; bhūti – with
the opulences; āḍhya – enriched; sat – a transcendental;
yāna – airplane; ārūḍham – riding; adbhutaiḥ –
wonderful; gīta – by songs; ādibhiḥ – and so forth; mudā
– with delight; āviṣṭam – absorbed; kānti – in bodily
luster; ādyaiḥ – and so forth; sadṛśam – similar;
prabhoḥ – to the Lord.

I saw that the person was seated on a splendid aerial
craft endowed with the opulences of hundreds of
brahmāṇḍas, and he was absorbed in the pleasure of
hearing wonderful songs and so on. His bodily luster,
beauty, and other features were similar to those of the
Lord.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra speaks this verse

                          474
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

beginning with brahmāṇḍa specifically to describe that
person. He says, “I witnessed that this person was
seated on a celestial vehicle that had the opulence of
hundreds of brahmāṇḍas, and he was blissfully absorbed
in hearing extraordinary songs, etc.” The word ādi also
indicates kīrtana, dramas, and so on. “His body was
astonishingly lustrous. His features – his śyāma-colored
beauty, the lustrous hue of a blue raincloud or a blue
lotus flower, and his age, dress, ornaments, and limbs –
were as lovely as the Lord’s.”



Verse 24

taṁ matvā śrī-hariṁ nātha pāhīti muhur ālapan

naman karṇau pidhāyāhaṁ samjñayānena vāritaḥ

tam – him; matvā – considering; śrī-harim – Śrī Hari;
nātha – O master; pāhi – please protect; iti – thus;
muhuḥ – repeatedly; ālapan – saying; naman – bowing
down; karṇau – his two ears; pidhāya – covering; aham –
I; samjñayā – with gestures; anena – by him; vāritaḥ –
prohibited.

Taking that person to be Śrī Hari Himself, I repeatedly
offered him obeisances while saying, “O Lord, please
protect me.” As soon as he heard “O Lord,” he put his
fingers in both ears and gestured for me to stop.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Therefore,
thinking that he was the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha, Śrī Hari
Himself, I began to bow down over and over again, while
exclaming, ‘O Lord! Lord of the universe! Please protect
me.’ Unable to tolerate this inappropriate address, that
Vaikuṇṭha resident who was entering the city covered his
ears with his hands. He pressed the tip of his tongue
under his teeth and waved his hands, indicating that I
stop speaking like that. He covered his ears because it
was unbefitting for him to hear himself addressed as ‘O
Lord!’ ”



Verse 25

dāso ’smi dāsa-dāso ’smīty uktvā tasmin gate ’ntaram

anyaḥ ko ’py āgato ’muṣmān mahīyān vaibhavādibhiḥ

dāsaḥ – a servant; asmi – I am; dāsa – of the servant;
dāsaḥ – a servant; asmi – I am; iti – thus; uktvā –
saying; tasmin – in there; gate – having gone; antaram –
within; anyaḥ – another; kaḥ api – someone; āgataḥ –
come; amuṣmāt – than him; mahīyān – greater; vaibhava-
ādibhiḥ – in terms of opulence and so forth.

He entered the city saying, “I am a servant, a servant
of the servants.” After this, another person arrived
there who was even more opulent than him.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Entering the
city, he said, ‘I am a servant, a servant of the

                          475
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

servants.’ After this, another person arrived who
possessed even greater opulences than the first. When I
addressed him, saying ‘O Lord!’ as I had done with the
previous person, he similarly prohibited me by his
gestures.”

When Śrī Gopa-kumāra reached Vaikuṇṭha, the associates
of the Lord who were accompanying him went inside the
city to give news of Gopa-kumāra’s arrival to the Lord.
Gopa-kumāra was aware of this, so why did he believe
that the Lord had gone outside? The reason for this is
not mentioned herein and will be revealed soon.
Alternatively, it can be understood that due to his
overwhelming sense of awe and reverence, Gopa-kumāra
could not ascertain who the Lord actually was.



Verse 26

taṁ dṛṣṭvā sarvathāmaṁsi jagad-īśam ahaṁ purīm

praviśantaṁ nijām etya gatvā kutrāpi līlayā

tam – him; dṛṣṭvā – having seen; sarvathā – in every
way; amaṁsi – I thought; jagat-īśam – the Lord of the
universe; aham – I; purīm – the city; praviśantam –
entering; nijām – own; etya – having returned; gatvā –
having gone; kutra api – somewhere; līlayā – to perform
a pastime.

Seeing him, I thought, “Surely He must be the Lord of
the universe. He had gone somewhere as part of His
pastimes and is now returning to the city.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “In this way, I
was completely convinced that whomever I saw was Śrī
Vaikuṇṭheśvara, the Lord of the universe Himself.” The
brāhmaṇa might raise the doubt, “The associates who
accompanied you entered the inner portion of the city
because Śrī Vaikuṇṭha-nātha was present there.
Therefore, how could you assume that the Lord was
outside?”

To this, he replies, “I thought the Lord had gone
somewhere as a pastime, and He was just now returning to
the city. Out of great respect, my sense of
discrimination ceased to function. It could have also
been possible that the eternal associates of the Lord
who had accompanied me entered the city without knowing
that the Lord had gone out.”



Verse 27

sambhramaiḥ praṇamantaṁ māṁ pūrvavat stuti-pūrvakam

dṛṣṭvā so ’pi tathaivoktvā sa-snehaṁ prāviśat purīm

sambhramaiḥ – with reverence; praṇamantam – bowing down;
mām – me; pūrva-vat – as before; stuti-pūrvakam – with
prayers of glorification; dṛṣṭvā – having seen; saḥ –
he; api – also; tathā – thus; eva – indeed; uktvā –

                          476
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

saying; sa-sneham – lovingly; prāviśat – entered; purīm
– the city.

I then bowed down before him, reverentially praising him
as I had honored the other person. However, he also
blocked his ears with his fingers. Lovingly, he forbade
me from such glorification and then entered the city.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “With great
veneration I glorified this person as I had the one
before. Bowing down, I said, ‘O Lord, please protect
me.’ However, he blocked his ears with his fingers and
affectionately prohibited my behavior by saying, ‘I am
only a servant of the servants.’ Then he entered the
city. When I first saw this person, I addressed him with
praises and hymns because compared to the previous
person, for a particularly special reason, I truly
believed him to be Jagadīśa.”



Verses 28–29

ke ’py ekaśo dvandvaśo ’nye yugapad bahuśo ’pare

pūrva-pūrvādhika-śrīkāḥ praviśanti purīṁ prabhoḥ



tāṁś ca paśyan purevāhaṁ majjan sambhrama-sāgare

naman stuvan nivārye taiḥ snigdha-vāg-amṛtais tathā

ke api – some; ekaśaḥ – singly; dvandvaśaḥ – in pairs;
anye – others; yugapat – at the same time; bahuśaḥ – in
large groups; apare – others; pūrva-pūrva – than the
previous ones; adhika-śrīkāḥ – each more glorious;
praviśanti – enter; purīm – the city; prabhoḥ – of the
Lord; tān – them; ca – and; paśyan – seeing; purā – as
before; iva – as if; aham – I; majjan – merging;
sambhrama – of awe; sāgare – in an ocean; naman – bowing
down; stuvan – offering prayers; nivārye – being
prohibited; taiḥ – by them; snigdha – affectionate; vāk
– words; amṛtaiḥ – with nectarean; tathā – similarly.

There was another amazing phenomenon. Many other persons
who were just like those first few entered the city of
the Lord – some alone, some in pairs, and some in
groups. Each was more magnificent than the previous.
Upon seeing them, I was again plunged into the ocean of
awe and wonderment, and I offered them obeisances and
glorified them. But with affectionate, nectarean words,
they too prohibited me from doing so.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “In this way, I
saw many residents of Vaikuṇṭha entering the city of the
Lord. Considering them to be Bhagavān, I again offered
praṇāma and other respects. Yet, as before, I was
prohibited from doing so. Some of these residents were
alone, others in pairs, and still others in groups. Each
was endowed with more opulence and was accompanied by
more military force than the last. That is to say, they
were highly-placed ministers; and corresponding to their
positions, generals, troops, and such were in their

                          477
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

cavalcades.”

Alternatively, the verse can be read to mean that these
residents, being eager to render their respective
services, were progressively manifesting greater
displays of magnificence and beauty as they entered the
city.

The brāhmaṇa might ask, “You saw them once, twice, many
times –

and each time they stopped you from worshiping them. Why
did you still offer obeisances, considering them to be
Bhagavān?”

Gopa-kumāra replies, “I was submerged in an ocean of awe
and bewilderment. My mind at that time was overcome by
an enormous sense of reverence, and I did not have the
ability to think.” This demonstrates the glories of the
supremely enchanting sight of the residents of
Vaikuṇṭha.

Another way of understanding this verse is, “I realized
that the residents were not Jagadīśa, the Lord of the
universe, as I had thought with the first arrivals.
However, I could not find the proper words to address
them. Understandably, due to my awe and admiration upon
seeing their glories, I offered them obeisances,
praises, and so on as before. They could not tolerate my
obeisances and other acts of respect, and with
affectionate, nectarean words, they prohibited me from
doing so. Such behavior was their particular
speciality.”



Verse 30

teṣu sva-sevā-sāmagrīṁ

gṛhitvā ke ’pi kām api

dhāvanti purataḥ kecin

mattā bhakti-sudhā-rasaiḥ

teṣu – amongst them; sva-sevā – for their own service;
sāmagrīm – paraphernalia; gṛhitvā – carrying; ke api –
some; kām api – something; dhāvanti – they were running;
purataḥ – ahead; kecit – some of them; mattāḥ –
maddened; bhakti – of devotional service; sudhā-rasaiḥ –
by the nectarean mellows.

Some of them were carrying umbrellas, yak-tail fans, and
other paraphernalia for their service to the Lord.
Others were hurrying in, maddened by the nectar of
bhakti.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: “How were they entering the city?” To
explain this, Śrī Gopa-kumāra speaks four verses,
beginning here with teṣu.

He says, “Some of them carried their respective
paraphernalia for service, such as umbrellas and yak-

                            478
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

tail fans (cāmaras), and quickly ran towards the city.
Others did not desire such objects, but were simply full
with the sweetness of the nectar of their pure love for
the Lord. Having forgotten everything else, they were
running towards the city in a maddened condition,
delirious with bhakti-rasa, the nectar of devotion.” By
these symptoms, one can understand that these devotees
were also performing similar services. These services
will be described in successive verses.



Verse 31

evam ātmātma-sevāsu vyagrāntaḥ-karaṇendriyāḥ

vicitra-bhajanānanda-vinoda-bhara-bhūṣitāḥ

evam – thus; ātma-ātma-sevāsu – in their respective
services; vyagra – eager; antaḥ-karaṇa – minds; indriyāḥ
– senses; vicitra – wonderful; bhajana – of devotional
service; ānanda – the pleasure of; vinoda – pleasure;
bhara – by the abundance; bhūṣitāḥ – ornamented.

In this way, all those residents of Vaikuṇṭha had their
minds and senses eagerly absorbed in their respective
services. All were ornamented with wonderful, abundant
pleasure generated by their worship of the Lord.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Three verses, beginning here with
evam, describe the distinctive ways in which service is
performed by the Vaikuṇṭha residents.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “As mentioned, they were all
intently absorbed in their respective services –
completely engrossed with their hearts and minds as well
as with their senses such as speech and sight. Because
their senses were experiencing the bliss of various
types of services, the senses expanded those pastimes to
an extreme degree. In other words, their senses were
decorated with the wonderful bliss of devotion and the
innumerable pastimes suitable for that bliss.”



Verses 32–33

bhūṣā-bhūṣaṇa-sarvāṅgā nija-prabhu-varocitāḥ

praṇamantaḥ stuvantaś ca kurvāṇāś citram īhitam



vitanvato mahā-līlā-kautukaṁ cakravartivat

lakṣmī-pater bhagavataś caraṇābja-didṛkṣavaḥ

bhūṣa – of the ornaments; bhūṣaṇa – the ornaments; sarva
– all; aṅgāḥ – limbs; nija – their own; prabhu-vara –
for the exalted Lord; ucitāḥ – appropriate; praṇamantaḥ
– bowing down; stuvantaḥ – offering prayers; ca – also;
kurvāṇāḥ – performing; citram – astonishing; īhitam –
activity; vitanvataḥ – expanding; mahā-līlā-kautukam – a
festival of great pastimes; cakravarti-vat – like an

                          479
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

emperor; lakṣmī-pateḥ – of the husband of the goddess of
fortune; bhagavataḥ – of the Lord; caraṇa – feet; abja –
lotus; didṛkṣavaḥ – eager to see.

All their limbs were actually decorating the ornaments
they were wearing, and thus, they were fit to serve
their Master. They were offering obeisances to the Lord,
glorifying Him with choice prayers and hymns, and
performing many other activities to please Him. The Lord
of Lakṣmī, like a sovereign emperor, was expanding the
festival of His great pastimes, and His associates were
eager to receive darśana of His lotus feet.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “All the limbs
of those eternal associates were like decorations to
their own ornaments. Thus, they were all fit to serve
their Lord, Śrī Vaikuṇṭheśvara.” Although beauty
(saundarya) and other fine qualities are not mentioned
here, it is to be understood that they possessed them.

“They were increasing the happiness of service to the
Lord by performing many varieties of wonderful
activities, such as dancing and singing. The reason for
this blissful service was that the Lord was enacting the
great pastime of being the sovereign emperor of the
universe. That is to say, He had given His servitors
food, drink, appropriate accommodation, and everything
else they needed, according to their qualification. In
turn, He was accepting their personal service and, in
this way, expanded these special pastimes that astonish
the heart. Therefore, those associates who were entering
the gates had great desire to receive darśana, the
divine vision, of His lotus feet.

“The reason for manifesting such pastimes is that
Bhagavān is Lakṣmī-pati, Lord of the goddess of fortune,
and only such pastimes manifest His complete opulence
and Godhood (bhagavattā). It is befitting that His
servants are as devoted to Him as He is affectionate to
them. Therefore, the servants’ hearts were agitated by
the excitement of seeing their Lord, and their ecstasies
maddened them.”



Verse 34

kecit sa-parivārās te kecic ca sa-paricchadāḥ

kecid bahir-dhṛta-svīya-parivāra-paricchadāḥ

kecit – some; sa-parivārāḥ – with families; te – they;
kecit – some; ca – and; sa-paricchadāḥ – with
paraphernalia; kecit – some; bahiḥ – outside; dhṛta –
held; svīya – their; parivāra – associates; paricchadāḥ
– and paraphernalia.

Some were accompanied by their families; others carried
paraphernalia with them. Some left their paraphernalia
and had their families stay outside the city, and then
they entered the city.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra speaks two verses,
beginning here with kecit, to describe those servants

                          480
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

from a different perspective. Some of them were running
to the city of Śrī Vaikuṇṭha-nātha with their families –
their sons, wives, and servants. Some were entering the
city with their paraphernalia – cāmaras, weapons,
vehicles, and so on. Others left their opulences –
retinue, paraphernalia, and families –

outside and entered the city alone.



Verse 35

svasminn eva vilāpyaike kṛtsnaṁ parikaraṁ nijam

akiñcanā ivaikākitayā dhyāna-rasāplutāḥ

svasmin – in themselves; eva – certainly; vilāpya –
merging; eke – some; kṛtsnam – completely; parikaram –
associates; nijam – own; akiñcanāḥ – possessionless
sages; iva – as if; ekākitayā – all alone; dhyāna – of
meditation; rasa – in the mellows; āplutāḥ – immersed.

Some merged their associates, paraphernalia, and
opulences within themselves and entered the city like
possessionless sages, immersed in the nectar of
meditation.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Some absorbed
their associates, family members, paraphernalia, and
other opulences within themselves and entered the city
absorbed in the nectar of meditation.” This indicates
the immense power of the Vaikuṇṭha associates. It also
shows the wonderful variegatedness of their special
pastimes of serving their Lord in great bliss. In their
service to the Lord, they exhibit wonderful moods.



Verse 36

kecid vicitra-rūpāṇi dhṛtvā dhṛtvā muhur muhuḥ

vicitra-bhūṣaṇākāra-vihārāḍhyā manoharāḥ

kecit – some; vicitra – amazing; rūpāṇi – forms; dhṛtvā
dhṛtvā –continuously manifesting; muhuḥ muhuḥ – again
and again; vicitra – astonishing; bhūṣaṇa – ornaments;
ākāra – forms; vihāra – pastimes; āḍhyāḥ – decorated;
manaḥ-harāḥ – mind-enchanting.

Some of the Vaikuṇṭha residents stole my heart and mind
by repeatedly assuming many different wonderful forms
with amazing ornaments and bodily features. They were
engaged in playful pastimes appropriate to their form.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra is again describing
the varieties of forms of the Vaikuṇṭha associates in
three verses, beginning here with kecid. He says, “Some
kept on changing their bodies over and over again,
becoming animals, birds, trees, and other wonderful
forms.” The words muhuḥ muhuḥ, meaning ‘again and
again,’ indicates that they repeatedly manifested these
shapes and then made them disappear again. He continues,

                          481
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

“Enchanting the mind with their wonderful ornaments,
forms, and amusing pastimes, they entered the city.”



Verse 37

kecin narā vānarāś ca devā daityās tatharṣayaḥ

pare varṇāśramācāra-dīkṣā-lakṣaṇa-dhāriṇaḥ

kecit – some; narāḥ – humans; vānarāḥ – monkeys; ca –
and; devāḥ – demigods; daityāḥ – demons; tathā – as;
ṛṣayaḥ – sages; pare – others; varṇāśrama-ācāra – the
activities of varṇāśrama (the social and spiritual
orders of society); dīkṣā – of initiation; lakṣaṇa –
symbols; dhāriṇaḥ – accepting.

They all accepted various forms – human beings, monkeys,
demigods, demons, and sages. After that, some adopted
the conduct of those practicing varṇāśrama-dharma, and
others bore stamped symbols and other signs related to
dīkṣā.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Thereafter, Śrī Gopa-kumāra says,
“They assumed various forms, such as human beings,
monkeys, demigods, demons, and sages. However, because
the bodies of the residents of Śrī Vaikuṇṭha are sac-
cid-ānanda (made of eternity, knowledge, and bliss), all
of the forms were worshipable. It is not possible for
the residents to really become human beings, monkeys,
etc.

“Then, some adopted the conduct of those of the social
orders (varṇas), such as brāhmaṇa, and the spiritual
divisions (āśramas), such as brahmacarya. Some exhibited
the signs of dīkṣā related to the Sun mantra, sāvitrī,
and so on, which means that they accepted the sacred
thread and kamaṇḍalu (waterpot). Also, some accepted the
signs of dīkṣā related to Bhagavān’s mantra, such as a
seat of pure kuśa grass, beads of sacred tulasī wood,
and various stamped symbols (mudrās).”



Verse 38

indra-candrādi-sadṛśās tri-netrāś catur-ānanāḥ

catur-bhujāḥ sahasrāsyāḥ kecid aṣṭa-bhujās tathā

indra – Indra; candra – Candra (the moon-god); ādi – and
so forth; sādṛśāḥ – like; tri-netrāḥ – three-eyed Śiva;
catur-ānanāḥ – four-headed Brahmā; catur-bhujāḥ – four-
armed; sahasra-āsyāḥ – having a thousand faces; kecit –
some; aṣṭa-bhujāḥ – eight arms; tathā – also.

Some looked like Indra, some like Candra, and some like
other demigods. Some had three eyes, some had four
heads. Some had four arms, some had eight arms, and some
had a thousand heads.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Some of the
Vaikuṇṭha residents bore the marks of Indra, the king of

                          482
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

heaven who has a thousand eyes and who weilds a
thunderbolt, while others assumed forms similar to
Candra, the moon-god, and other demigods.” The word ādi
indicates they assumed the forms of demigods such as
Sūrya (the sun-god), Agni (the fire-god), and Vāyu (the
wind-god), and others as well. It should be understood
that they adopted forms resembling all the demigods. He
says, “Among the Vaikuṇṭha residents, some had forms
similar to Indra and some were similar to Candra, while
others had three eyes (as does Śiva).”

Generally, Indra and all other demigods are not
incarnations of Bhagavān. This is made clear by the word
sadṛśa, meaning ‘similar,’ indicating that in appearance
only, the residents of Vaikuṇṭha were similar to the
demigods. However, three-eyed Śiva and four-headed
Brahmā are actually guṇa-avatāras, or qualitative
incarnations, of Bhagavān. As such, when referring to
Vaikuṇṭha residents who had three eyes and those who had
four heads, only some difference in their forms is
indicated.



Verse 39

etat parama-vaicitrī-hetuṁ

vakṣyāmi te ’grataḥ

kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasāsvāda-vatāṁ

kiṁ syān na sundaram

etat – this; parama – supremely; vaicitrī –
variegatedness; hetum – the cause; vakṣyāmi – I will
tell; te – you; agrataḥ – in the future; kṛṣṇa – to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa; bhakti – of devotion; rasa – the mellows; āsvāda-
vatām – for those who taste; kim – what; syāt – it can
be; na – not; sundaram – beautiful.

Later on, I will tell you the cause of this great
variety of forms. What does not become beautiful for one
who is tasting the mellows of kṛṣṇa-bhakti?

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The brāhmaṇa might say, “It seems
logical that if one were to receive a form similar to
Bhagavān, then it would be a four-armed form like the
Lord’s. So, why did you see various forms, such as those
of a human being, and especially lower forms, such as
those of monkeys, in Vaikuṇṭha?”

In reply to this, Gopa-kumāra speaks this verse
beginning with etat. He says, “Later on, Śrī Nārada will
give a philosophical explanation revealing the reason
for this variety.”

It could further be argued, “Although Vaikuṇṭha may have
a vast array of forms, it does not seem appropriate that
it would have monkeys and other forms devoid of beauty.”

Therefore, in this verse, Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “What is
not beautiful to one who is relishing the rasa (sweet
taste) of kṛṣṇa-bhakti?” In the material world, it is a

                             483
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

well known fact that there are special elixirs that can
make one very beautiful, give one a celestial form, and
so on. The examples of Śrī Hanumān, Śrī Jāmbavān, and
others can be understood as evidence in this connection.
Of their own volition, they accept such external
appearances because they know that these forms will in
no way decrease their special love for Śrī Bhagavān. In
other words, these forms of monkeys and so forth give
pleasure to Śrī Bhagavān and His devotees.



Verses 40–41

sarva-prapañcātītānāṁ

teṣāṁ vaikuṇṭha-vāsinām

tasya vaikuṇṭha-lokasya

tasya tan-nāyakasya ca

tāni māhātmya-jātāni

prapañcāntar-gataiḥ kila

dṛṣṭāntair nopayujyante

na śakyante ca bhāṣitum

sarva – the entire; prapañca – material world; atītānām
– beyond; teṣām – for those; vaikuṇṭha – of Vaikuṇṭha;
vāsinām – the residents; tasya – of that; vaikuṇṭha-
lokasya – the planet of Vaikuṇṭha; tasya – of Him; tat –
of that; nāyakasya – of the hero; ca – also; tāni –
they; māhātmya – from the glories; jātāni – born;
prapañca – the material world; antaḥ-gataiḥ – derived
from; kila – indeed; dṛṣṭa-antaiḥ – with examples; na –
not; upayujyante – be used; na śakyante – can not; ca –
and; bhāṣitum – to describe.

The unlimited glories of the residents of Vaikuṇṭha, the
realm of Vaikuṇṭha, and the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha are
transcendental to the material world. Mundane logic and
the language of examples drawn from this world can never
adequately be used to describe these glories.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The Mathurā brāhmaṇa might ask, “Since
there is such multiplicity of form, can it be said that
Vaikuṇṭha also has the defects of vast gradation of
hierarchy and, as in the residents of Svarga, adverse
qualities such as envy that are caused by various types
of inequality?”

In reply, Śrī Gopa-kumāra says that there is no chance
of such defects existing in the Vaikuṇṭha residents.
However, in the process of satisfying the doubt as to
whether the sac-cid-ānanda body of a Vaikuṇṭha resident
can possess numerous natures, and also to examine and
explain the principle of sac-cid-ānanda, Gopa-kumāra is
afraid of committing the offense of citing mundane
examples. Therefore, asking for forgiveness from Śrī
Bhagavān, he speaks four verses, beginning here with
sarva-prapañca.

                           484
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017


He begins: “The glories of the Vaikuṇṭha residents; the
abode of Vaikuṇṭha; and Śrī Vaikuṇṭha-nātha, the Lord of
Vaikuṇṭha, which are all beyond this entire material
realm, can never be described by examples drawn from
this material world. However, no one can comprehend the
glories of Vaikuṇṭha without utilizing material
examples. Therefore,

to enable this truth (tattva) to be understandable and
to enter the hearts of common people, scholars quote
mundane examples. However, in reconciling and adjusting
tattva for mundane examples, there is

the possibility of sometimes modifying in gender and
number that which is transcendental to the material
world. In Vaikuṇṭha, all its objects are indescribable;
that is, they are imperceptible by the material mind and
intelligence, they are beyond mundane words, and any
attempt to describe their intrinsic glories using
material examples is only a mockery. Due to the absolute
difference between the spiritual and material realms,
the glories of Vaikuṇṭha cannot be expressed in any
language. No one has the power to thoroughly comprehend
that reality. So, even if one were to make an attempt to
describe a little bit of those glories, it would not be
possible.”



Verses 42–43

tathāpi bhavato brahman

prapañcāntar-gatasya hi

prapañca-parivārāntar-

dṛṣṭi-garbhita-cetasaḥ

tad-dṛṣṭānta-kulenaiva

tat tat syād bodhitaṁ sukham

tathety ucyeta yat kiñcit

tad-āgaḥ kṣamatāṁ hariḥ

tathā api – however; bhavataḥ – your; brahman – O
brāhmaṇa; prapañca – in the material world; antaḥ-
gatasya – residing; hi – indeed; prapañca – of the
material world; parivāra – associates; antaḥ – within;
dṛṣṭi – sight; garbhita – born; cetasaḥ – mind; tad-
dṛṣṭānta-kulena – by those kinds of examples; eva –
indeed; tat tat – the respective meanings; syāt – it can
be; bodhitam – understood; sukham – easily; tathā – so;
iti – thus; ucyeta – it may be said; yat kiñcit –
whatever; tat – that; āgaḥ – offense; kṣamatām – may He
forgive; hariḥ – Śrī Hari (who takes away).

However,   O brāhmaṇa, because you live within the
material   world made of five elements and can therefore
perceive   and envisage material objects only, I have
utilized   examples from this material world so that you

                            485
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

can easily understand the abode of Vaikuṇṭha. If I have
committed any offence by this, then may Śrī Hari, who
destroys all offences, forgive me.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “O brāhmaṇa, you
are directly the embodiment of the Vedas. Nevertheless,
you still reside within the material world made of five
elements ( prapañca). Moreover, as your awareness is
bound by conscious and unconscious material objects,
your inner vision has also become absorbed in these
things. Therefore, I have explained a little about the
transcendental abode of Vaikuṇṭha by citing examples
from the material world. If I have committed any offence
in doing so, then may Śrī Hari, who takes away all
offences, forgive me. Those whose vision and mind are
absorbed in the conscious and inert objects within the
mundane realm can never grasp the essential truth, or
tattva, of transcendental objects. Although you are
unqualified and incapable of understanding the reality
of existence (vastu) in Vaikuṇṭha, there is still good
reason to say something about it. By introducing a
person’s mind to the ultimate existence beyond the
material domain by using examples from this world,
material absorption, or illusion (Māyā), is gradually
removed from his consciousness.”

Using the same reasoning, the word cakravarti-vat, ‘like
the sovereign emperor of the universe,’ has been used in
verse 33 to give some idea of the opulence of the Lord
of Vaikuṇṭha.



Verse 44

tatratyānāṁ ca sarveṣāṁ

teṣāṁ sāmyaṁ parasparam

tāratamyaṁ ca lakṣyeta

na virodhas tathāpi ca

tatratyānām – of the residents of that place; ca – also;
sarveṣām – all; teṣām – of them; sāmyam – equality;
parasparam – mutual; tāratamyam – gradations of
hierarchy; ca – also; lakṣyeta – it may be seen; na –
not; virodhaḥ – incongruity; tathā api – still; ca –
also.

Among all the residents of Vaikuṇṭha, both equality and
hierarchy are seen, yet there is no incongruity in this.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: In the next nine verses, beginning
here with tatratyānām, Śrī Gopa-kumāra explains the
tattva of Vaikuṇṭha, which appears contradictory.

He says, “Although all the previously-mentioned
residents of Vaikuṇṭha are equal and each one of them is
all-powerful there seems to be a hierarchy of inferiors
and superiors among them. However, this is not
inconsistent. They all share the same nature and have
equal strength, but some of them have revealed great
opulence and others have revealed less. Since all of

                          486
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

them, according to their free will, are capable of
manifesting all kinds of opulence, no observable
contradiction exists in the hierarchy.”



Verse 45

na mātsaryādayo doṣāḥ

santi kasyāpi teṣu hi

guṇāḥ svābhāvikā bhānti

nityāḥ satyāḥ sahasraśaḥ

na – not; mātsarya-ādayaḥ – envy and so forth; doṣāḥ –
faults; santi – are; kasya api – anyone; teṣu – in them;
hi – indeed; guṇāḥ – virtues; svābhāvikāḥ – natural;
bhānti – shine; nityāḥ – eternal; satyāḥ – real;
sahasraśaḥ – thousands.

No defect such as envy is found in anyone in Vaikuṇṭha.
Rather, they possess thousands of good qualities, such
as friendliness, humility, and respect. These virtues
are eternal and real.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Actually, there
is no hierarchy among the Vaikuṇṭha residents. Although
externally there seems to be hierarchy, there is no envy
among them, and so no discord arises. Envy (matsara)
means the inability to tolerate the excellence of
others. Similarly, they do not possess the defects of
rivalry (spardhā), jealousy (asūyā), contempt
(tiraskāra), and so on. Rather, they are full of
thousands of virtues, including mutual friendliness,
courtesy, and respect, and all these qualities are
eternal.”

The brāhmaṇa might raise the following doubt, “As Māyā
is beginningless, cannot illusory qualities also be
eternal?”

To address this, Gopa-kumāra says, “All the qualities of
the residents of Vaikuṇṭha are real, or satya. They are
not false or momentary like illusory, or māyika,
qualities.” The reason for this is that all those
qualities are innate; they are neither created nor
destroyed.”

Śrī Brahmā states in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.15.18–19):

pārāvatānyabhṛta-sārasa-cakravāka-

dātyūha-haṁsa-śuka-tittiri-barhiṇāṁ yaḥ

kolāhalo viramate ’cira-mātram uccair

bhṛṅgādhipe hari-kathām iva gāyamāne

When the bumblebees sweetly hum in Vaikuṇṭha, it seems
as if they are singing the pastimes of Lord Hari.
Hearing this, all the birds – such as pigeons, cuckoos,
cranes, cakravāka, cātaka, swans, parrots, partridges,

                           487
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

and peacocks – cease the clamor of their cries and
singing for a moment and become absorbed in listening to
those narrations of pastimes of

the Lord (hari-kathā).

mandāra-kunda-kurabotpala-campakārṇa-

punnāga-nāga-bakulāmbuja-pārijātāḥ

gandhe ’rcite tulasikābharaṇena tasyā

yasmiṁs tapaḥ sumanaso bahu mānayanti

Śrī Bhagavān adorns His divine form with tulasī and
honors her fragrance. Seeing this, all the flowers –
mandāra, pārijāta, kunda, kuvara, kurabaka, campaka,
punnāga, nāga-keśara, bakula, utpala, and kamala – who
themselves are full of fragrance, acknowledge the
superiority of tulasī’s austerities, and thus they
praise her.

These two verses show that the ability to tolerate the
superiority of others fully manifests the quality of
friendliness. In Vaikuṇṭha, the eternal associates are
present in forms such as pigeons, etc. Therefore, their
qualities are innate, eternal, and true. Feeling that
they are all equal with each other, those residents of
Vaikuṇṭha serve the Lord in innumerable forms in small
ways and in great ways. This subject will be discussed
later.



Verse 46

prapañcāntar-gatā bhoga-

parā viṣayiṇo yathā

bahir-dṛṣṭyā tathekṣyante

te hi muktārcitāṅghrayaḥ

prapañca – the material world; antaḥ-gatāḥ – within;
bhoga – to mundane pleasure; parāḥ – dedicated;
viṣayiṇaḥ – sense enjoyers; yathā – as; bahiḥ dṛṣṭyā –
by external vision; tathā – so; īkṣyante – are seen; te
– they; hi – indeed; mukta – by liberated souls; arcita
– worshiped; aṅghrayaḥ – their feet.

Although, the residents of Vaikuṇṭha externally appear
like the sense enjoyers of the material world who are
eager for mundane pleasure, they are in fact not sense
enjoyers. Their feet are worshiped even by liberated
souls who have abandoned the happiness of all sense
enjoyment.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The brāhmaṇa might wonder, “Since the
residents of Vaikuṇṭha have extraordinary opulences, how
do they not become addicted to these objects of the
senses?”

To address this doubt, Śrī Gopa-kumāra speaks this verse

                            488
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

starting with prapañca. He says, “The residents of
Vaikuṇṭha enjoy dancing and singing and wonderful types
of sense pleasures that are celestial or even more
divine. As a result, from an external perspective, they
may appear like materialistic people of this world who
are attached to gratifying their senses, but they are
not really so. This is made clear by the fact that even
the liberated personalities (mukta-gaṇa), who are
dedicated to the impersonal Brahman and who have
transcended this material existence by abandoning the
happiness of sense gratification, worship their lotus
feet. Therefore, how is it possible that the residents
of Vaikuṇṭha would, like materialists, be attracted to
sense enjoyment, which is more insignificant than the
most worthless thing imaginable?”

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.15.17) states:

vaimānikāḥ sa-lalanāś caritāni śaśvad

gāyanti yatra śamala-kṣapaṇāni bhartuḥ

antar-jale ’nuvikasan-madhu-mādhavīnāṁ

gandhena khaṇḍita-dhiyo ’py anilaṁ kṣipantaḥ

The residents of Vaikuṇṭha and their beloved consorts,
flying in their airplanes, remain continuously immersed
in singing about Śrī Bhagavān’s auspicious pastimes,
which can destroy one’s entire storehouse of sins. At
that time, the honey-laden mādhavī vines, blossoming in
the ponds, attempt to attract those residents of
Vaikuṇṭha with their sweet fragrance, but the residents
ignore this fragrance and continue singing. Rather, they
reproach the fragrant breeze that carries that sweet
aroma in their direction.

This shows that although great sense pleasures are
available to the residents of Vaikuṇṭha, they reject
that happiness to relish the joy of performing
devotional service (bhajanānanda).

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.15.20) states:

tat saṅkulaṁ hari-padānati-mātra-dṛṣṭair

vaidūrya-mārakata-hema-mayair vimānaiḥ

yeṣāṁ bṛhat-kaṭi-taṭāḥ smita-śobhi-mukhyaḥ

kṛṣṇātmanāṁ na raja ādadhur utsmayādyaiḥ

The abode of Vaikuṇṭha is replete with aircrafts made of
lapis lazuli (vaidūrya), emeralds (marakata-maṇi), and
gold (hema). These airplanes, which the devotees of Śrī
Bhagavān consider inferior, cannot be obtained by karma,
jñāna, yoga, etc., but they are immediately available by
simply offering obeisances to the lotus feet of Śrī
Bhagavān. The minds of all those Vaikuṇṭha residents
remain so fixed on the lotus feet of Śrī Hari that the
gentle smiles and natural laughter and jokes of the most
beautiful, full-hipped women do not arouse even a drop
of passion in them. This is because they have dedicated
their souls to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

                          489
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017




Verse 47

te nirvikāratā-prānta-

sīmāṁ prāptāś ca tanvate

vikārāl līlayā citrān

prabhu-līlānusāriṇaḥ

te – they; nirvikāratā – of immutability; prānta-sīmām –
the ultimate limit; prāptāḥ – attained; ca – and;
tanvate – they display; vikārān – forms; līlayā – as a
pastime; citrān – wonderful; prabhu – of the Lord; līlā
– for the pastimes; anusāriṇaḥ – suitable.

Although they have reached the ultimate limit of
immutability, a state devoid of transformation, they
still accept transformations in a sporting way, assuming
a variety of forms that are suitable for the pastimes of
the Lord.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “The residents
of

Vaikuṇṭha accept various types of forms. As they do this
for the Lord’s pleasure, one should not think that they
undergo any transformation. Even though these devotees
have reached the ultimate limit of changelessness, which
is a state devoid of transformation, the wonderful,
multifarious forms they assume are suitable for the
Lord’s pastimes, which increase His sweet opulence.”



Verse 48

atas te ’nyonyam ekatvaṁ

gatā api pṛthag-vidhāḥ

tat-sthānaṁ sa vimānaughas

tatratyaṁ sarvam īdṛśam

ataḥ – thus; te – they; anyonyam – together; ekatvam –
oneness in spiritual quality; gatāḥ – attained; api –
although; pṛthag-vidhāḥ – of different kinds; tat-
sthānam – that place; saḥ – that; vimāna-oghaḥ – the
multitude of airplanes; tatratyam – located there;
sarvam – all; īdṛśam – such.

Although the residents of Vaikuṇṭha are all equal to one
another, they appear in different forms. Similarly, even
though the abode of Vaikuṇṭha, its airplanes, and all
its other paraphernalia are embodiments of concentrated
Brahman, everything appears in different forms for the
sake of the Lord’s pastimes.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “In keeping with
the Lord’s pastimes, although the Vaikuṇṭha residents

                             490
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

are identical to one another because of their being
embodiments of eternity, knowledge, and bliss, still
they appear in different forms. The forms they have
assumed (i.e. their bodies), their residences, the
airplanes, and all the objects in Vaikuṇṭha are all
homogeneous, or one in nature (eka-rūpa), in that they
are all embodiments of transcendence (Brahman).
Nevertheless, they appear in different forms. Therefore,
all the Vaikuṇṭha residents are one in that they are
sac-cid-ānanda, concentrated Brahman, but corresponding
to the pastimes of Bhagavān, they have many varieties of
forms.”



Verse 49

kadācit svarṇa-ratnādi-

mayaṁ tat tat pratīyate

kadācic ca ghanī-bhūta-

candra-jyotsneva kakkhaṭī

kadācit – sometimes; svarṇa – gold; ratna – and jewels;
ādi – and so forth; mayam – consisting of; tat tat – all
of the various items; pratīyate – appear; kadācit –
sometimes; ca – also; ghanī-bhūta – condensed; candra-
jyotsnā – moonlight; iva – like; kakkhaṭī – chalk-white.

Sometimes that place appears to be full of gold and
jewels, and sometimes it appears chalk-white, like
condensed moonlight.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Sometimes it
appears that the place and the airplanes there are made
of gold, jewels, and other precious substances.
Sometimes they resemble the concentrated splendor of the
moon, appearing like solid white lime. Actually,
Vaikuṇṭha and all of its objects appear like this
because they are pure, sweet, and full of concentrated
effulgence.”



Verse 50

kathañcit tat-prabhāveṇa

vijñātaṁ syān na cānyathā

grahītuṁ kila tad-rūpaṁ

manasāpi na śakyate

kathañcit – somehow; tat-prabhāveṇa – by His influence;
vijñātam – understood; syāt – it can be; na – not; ca –
also; anyathā – otherwise; grahītum – to have access;
kila – indeed; tad-rūpam – its form; manasā – through
the mind; api – also; na – not; śakyate – is able.

However, the nature of that place can be understood only
by the mercy of the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha and not by any

                            491
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

other means. This is because its form, or truth, is
inaccessible to the mind.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “The nature,
opulence, and so on of Vaikuṇṭha can be understood only
by the potency of the mercy of the Lord of Śrī Vaikuṇṭha
or by the benevolence of His eternal associates. At the
same time, a devotee can get some idea about Vaikuṇṭha
by seeing or touching anything of this material world
that is similar to Vaikuṇṭha. However, no one can
understand the fundamental truth (tattva) about
Vaikuṇṭha or its objects by his own ability or with
external vision. This is because the objects there are
spiritual; they are made of concentrated Brahman, and
therefore, even with the mind, one cannot conceive of
their form and truth. This being the case, how can I
describe them?”



Verse 51

na kaścit prabhaved boddhuṁ

samyak svānubhavaṁ vinā

etan mātraṁ hi śakyeta

nirūpayitum añjasā

na kaścit – no one; prabhavet – is able; boddhum – to
understand; samyak – completely; sva-anubhavam –
personal experience; vinā – without; etat – this much;
mātram – only; hi – certainly; śakyeta – is able;
nirūpayitum – to ascertain; añjasā – properly.

One can understand a little bit about Vaikuṇṭha by
hearing its glories, but without personal experience,
its reality cannot be properly grasped. Therefore, I can
really explain only this much about the truth of that
realm.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The brāhmaṇa might ask, “How can one
know about Vaikuṇṭha?” In reply, Śrī Gopa-kumāra speaks
this verse beginning with na. He says, “Without direct
personal experience, no one can properly know the
reality of Vaikuṇṭha. One can understand a little about
that tattva by hearing the words of realized souls, but
one cannot enter into that reality until he thoroughly
has experience (anubhava) of it himself. This will only
happen when one’s dedication (niṣṭhā) for one’s
worshipable Deity fully matures – then one can receive
the total experience of the tattva of Vaikuṇṭha.”

The word anubhava, meaning ‘experience,’ indicates that
the tattva, or reality, of Vaikuṇṭha can be understood
only when one surrenders to the abode of Vaikuṇṭha and
its residents, and when one continually meditates on
their moods (bhāvas) to the point that one does not
remember anything other than those moods or perceive any
other object. Besides this process, there is no other
means of understanding this reality. Moreover, one can
receive knowledge of vaikuṇṭha-tattva only by personal
experience, or in other words, through direct experience

                          492
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

received by the soul. One cannot experience it just by
hearing the instructions of the guru. Rather, it can be
thoroughly realized when one puts those instructions
into practice in one’s life.

The question may arise, “Unless the practitioner knows
the real nature of the goal (sādhya-vastu tattva), how
can he have the faith and inclination to perform his
spiritual practice?”

In reply to this, Gopa-kumāra speaks the second half of
the verse, which begins with etad. He says, “I can tell
you only this much about the truth of Vaikuṇṭha. That
transcendental truth (or object) possesses such
inconceivable potency that when one hears about it with
faith and contemplates it within the heart, then by the
influence of the mercy-potency, the practitioner
(sādhaka) effortlessly receives the ability to perform
the practice (sādhana) and achieves realization.”



Verse 52

teṣu vai dṛśyamāneṣu

tad brahmānubhave sukham

gacchat su-tucchatāṁ sadyo

hriyeva viramet svayam

teṣu – when these; vai – indeed; dṛśyamāneṣu – are seen;
tat – that; brahma – of impersonal Brahman; anubhave –
through experience; sukham – the happiness; gacchat –
becomes; su-tucchatām – very insignificant; sadyaḥ –
instantly; hriyā – out of embarrassment; iva – as if;
viramet – ceases; svayam – itself.

When one receives darśana of Vaikuṇṭha and all the
objects there, then the bliss of Brahman realization
seems insignificant, and out of embarrassment, the
desire for that bliss disappears on its own.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: To explain the glories of experiencing
Vaikuṇṭha, Śrī Gopa-kumāra speaks this verse beginning
with teṣu. He says, “When one attains direct darśana of
that famous Vaikuṇṭha and all the objects there, he
experiences their supreme greatness. Thus, one’s desire
to taste the happiness arising from Brahman realization
automatically ends. In other words, during the course of
one’s experiences, when one gets a glimpse of the
delight found in Vaikuṇṭha, then, what to speak of the
bliss arising from the realization of one’s soul
(svarūpa), even the joy of the experience of Brahman
seems insignificant. Therefore, out of embarrassment,
the desire for the happiness of Brahman realization
ceases of its own accord.”



Verses 53–54

svārāmāḥ pūrṇa-kāmā ye sarvāpekṣa-vivarjitāḥ

                             493
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017


jñātaṁ prāptaṁ nijaṁ kṛtsnaṁ tyaktvā vaiṣṇava-saṅgataḥ

sārāsāra-vicārāptyā bhakti-mārgaṁ viśanti yat

tad-dhetus tatra yātenānubhūto dārḍhyato mayā

sva-ārāmāḥ – satisfied in their own selves; pūrṇa-kāmāḥ
– desires are fulfilled; ye – who; sarva – all; apekṣā –
of hankerings; vivarjitāḥ – devoid; jñātam – understood;
prāptam – experienced; nijam – their own; kṛtsnam –
everything; tyaktvā – having abandoned; vaiṣṇava – of
devotees; saṅgataḥ – through association; sāra – of the
essential; asāra – and the nonessential; vicāra –
discrimination; āptyā – by attainment; bhakti – of
devotional service; mārgam – the path; viśanti – they
enter; yat – what; tat – for that; hetuḥ – the reason;
tatra – there; yātena – by going; anubhūtaḥ –
experienced; dārḍhyataḥ – firmly; mayā – by me.

When, by the association of Vaiṣṇavas, those who are
self-satisfied, fulfilled in all their desires, and free
from all types of hankering come to know what is
essential and what is non-essential, they abandon the
bliss of Brahman, which they have already understood and
experienced, and they enter the path of bhakti. When I
went to Vaikuṇṭha, I personally experienced this.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The brāhmaṇa might raise the following
doubt, “In addition to personal experience, with the
strength of an abundance of special faith, is there no
other way to understand the tattva of Vaikuṇṭha?”

In reply, Śrī Gopa-kumāra speaks two verses, beginning
here with svārāmāḥ. Svārāmāḥ means ātmā-rāmāḥ, one who
rejoices in the self. Such persons are pūrṇa-kāma,
meaning that all their desires have been completely
achieved and they are therefore free from all kinds of
hankering. They also give up their condition of being
absorbed in the satisfaction of the self, or ātmārāmatā,
which they have learned and experienced. In other words,
they completely renounce the transcendental bliss of
becoming one with the impersonal Brahman. Why? In the
association of Vaiṣṇavas, they receive the ability to
discriminate between the real and the unreal; thus, they
all enter the path of bhakti.

Gopa-kumāra says, “When I entered Vaikuṇṭha-loka, I
personally experienced in a powerful way the reason why
people who realize the happiness of impersonal Brahman
(brahma-sukha) abandon their self-satisfaction and enter
the path of devotion. As one experiences the happiness
of Vaikuṇṭha, brahma-sukha automatically becomes
repulsive. Therefore, the knowers of impersonal Brahman
abandon their attachment to Brahman and enter the path
of devotional service (bhakti-mārga).

“Therefore, the devotees’ experience of the happiness of
Vaikuṇṭha is most glorious according to the logic of
anyathā-anupapatti (‘no other proof,’ the presumption of
cause upon seeing the effect). You should experience
this by inference because this tattva cannot be
understood completely until one experiences it
personally in a proper manner.”

                          494
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017




Verse 55

gacchad-āgacchato ’haṁ tān paśyann idam acintayam

īdṛśāḥ sevakāḥ yasya sa prabhur nāma kīdṛśaḥ

gacchat-āgacchataḥ – going and coming; aham – I; tān –
they; paśyan – observing; idam – this; acintayam – I
considered; īdṛśāḥ – such; sevakāḥ – servants; yasya –
whose; saḥ prabhuḥ – that Master; nāma – indeed; kīdṛśaḥ
– of what nature.

In this way, I observed the comings and goings of Śrī
Vaikuṇṭha-nātha’s servants, who were replete with
tremendous opulence. I pondered, “If His servants are so
glorious, then what must be the glory of their Master?”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Ending the incidental discussion, Śrī
Gopa-kumāra now comes back to the main topic and relates
his personal story in the following verses, beginning
here with gacchat.

He says, “Watching the splendid servants arriving and
departing from the city, I pondered, ‘If the Lord’s
servants are so extraordinarily beautiful and opulent,
then who knows what their Lord is like?’ I started
feeling intense eagerness to know the Lord because, just
by seeing His servants, I could understand something of
His glories.”



Verses 56–57

itthaṁ harṣa-prakarṣeṇottiṣṭhann upaviśan bhṛśam

gopure vartamāno ’haṁ tair javenaitya pārṣadaiḥ

antaḥ praveśyamāno yat dṛṣṭavān adbhutādbhutam

vaktuṁ tad-dvi-parārdhena sahasrāsyo ’pi na kṣamaḥ

ittham – thus; harṣa – elation; prakarṣeṇa – by immense;
uttiṣṭhan – standing; upaviśan – sitting; bhṛśam –
great; gopure – in the gateway; vartamānaḥ – staying;
aham – I; taiḥ – by them; javena – swiftly; etya –
going; pārṣadaiḥ – with the associates of the Lord;
antaḥ – within; praveśyamānaḥ – entering; yat – what;
dṛṣṭavān – seen; adbhuta-adbhutam – supremely
astonishing; vaktum – to speak; tad – about that; dvi-
parārdhena – with the lifetime of Brahmā; sahasra-āsyaḥ
– the thousand-headed serpent, Ananta Śeṣa; api – even;
na kṣamaḥ – is unable.

I was feeling so elated while waiting at the city gate
that I kept standing up and sitting down over and over
again. After some time, the Vaikuṇṭha residents who had
accompanied me returned and escorted me inside the city.
Everything I saw there was amazing and wonderful, so
much so that even the thousand-headed Ananta-deva would
be unable to describe it all, even in an entire lifetime

                          495
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

of Brahmā.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “I waited at the
outer gate (gopura) while the Lord’s associates who had
accompanied me went inside the city. In great
exhilaration, I kept standing up and sitting down
repeatedly. Upon their return, they took me inside the
city. After entering the city, the amazing things that I
directly experienced were all wonderful. Even the
thousand-headed Śeṣa-deva, with His hundreds of mouths,
would be unable describe it all, even in a lifetime of
Brahmā.”



Verse 58

dvāre dvāre dvāra-pālās tādṛśā eva māṁ gatam

praveśayanti vijñāpya vijñāpyaiva nijādhipam

dvāre dvāre – at every door; dvāra-pālāḥ – doorkeepers;
tādṛśāḥ – similar (four-armed, etc.); eva – indeed; mām
– me; gatam – gone; praveśayanti – ushered in; vijñāpya
vijñāpya – repeatedly informing; iva – in the same
manner; nija – their respective; adhipam – masters.

At every gate, the guards informed their superintendents
about me, thus facilitating my entry.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Now, with three verses, starting here
with dvāre, Śrī Gopa-kumāra explains the process of his
entry into the inner areas of the city. He says, “At
each new gate, the doorkeepers informed their
superintendents about my arrival and thus facilitated my
passage. In this way, I passed through many gates.”



Verses 59–60

prati-dvarāntare gatvā gatvā tat-pratihāribhiḥ

praṇamyamāno yo yo hi tat-pradeśādhikāravān

dṛśyate sa sa manyeta jagadīśo mayā kila

pūrvavat sambhramāveśāt namyate stūyate muhuḥ

prati-dvāra-antare – at each gate; gatvā gatvā – going;
tat-pratihāribhiḥ – by the gatekeepers; praṇamyamānaḥ –
being offered obeisance; yaḥ yaḥ – whoever; hi – indeed;
tat-pradeśa – of that place; adhikāra-vān – the ruler;
dṛśyate – is seen; saḥ saḥ – each of them; manyeta – was
considered; jagat-īśaḥ – the Lord of the universe; mayā
– by me; kila – indeed; pūrva-vat – as before; sambhrama
– in reverence; āveśāt – on account of absorption;
namyate – bowed down to; stūyate – glorified; muhuḥ –
again and again.

The doorkeepers from every gate would proceed to the
next and would offer obeisances to the superintendents
of that region. Thinking that every superintendent was
the Lord of the universe, I also reverentially offered

                          496
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

them repeated obeisances and prayers as I had done
previously.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Furthermore, I
saw that while passing through every gate, the
doorkeepers offered obeisances to the superintendents of
that region. I mistook those superintendents for the
Lord of Vaikuṇṭha and therefore, as before, I also
respectfully offered repeated obeisances and prayers to
each one of them.”

The brāhmaṇa might wonder, “The doorkeepers offered
obeisances to the superintendent of each gate as their
superior, but why did you offer obeisances and prayers
to those superintendents repeatedly, considering them to
be Śrī Vaikuṇṭheśvara?”

Gopa-kumāra replies, “Actually, I was not able to
comprehend things because, being bewildered by the
glories of their extraordinary opulence, I lost my sense
of discrimination.”

This discourse reveals why Gopa-kumāra considered those
superintendents to be the Jagadīśa, Supreme Lord of the
universe, how the eternal associates of Śrī Vaikuṇṭha
resemble Bhagavān, and Gopa-kumāra’s intense eagerness
and determination to see the Lord.



Verse 61

atha taiḥ pārṣadaiḥ snigdhair asādhāraṇa-lakṣaṇam

prabhor vijñāpito ’haṁ ca śikṣitaḥ stavanādikam

atha – then; taiḥ – by them; pārṣadaiḥ – by the Lord’s
associates; snigdhaiḥ – affectionate; asādhāraṇa –
unique; lakṣaṇam – symptoms; prabhoḥ – of the Lord;
vijñāpitaḥ – described; aham – I; ca – and; śikṣitaḥ –
taught; stavana-ādikam – prayers and so forth.

Those Vaikuṇṭha associates were very affectionate to me.
They described the extraordinary signs that are unique
to the Lord and also taught me the prayers to offer Him.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “The eternal
associates escorting me saw my condition. Therefore,
they described the Lord’s uncommon signs, such as the
Śrīvatsa[1], the curl of white hair signifying the
goddess of fortune, on His chest. They also taught me
how to offer prayers and so on. They did this out of
affection for me.”

The word ādi, indicates that they gave various
instructions to Gopa-kumāra, which Gopa-kumāra
describes: “After I have bowed down before the Lord, I
should glance at the tips of His lotus feet. Then I
should stand at a distance, not moving at all. I should
conceal all transformations of bliss that arise from
having His darśana. And I should always stand with
joined palms while before Him.”



                          497
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


Verses 62–63

mahā-mahā-citra-vicitra-geha-

dvāra-pradeśān atigamya vegāt

śrīman-mahalla-pravarasya madhye

prāsāda-vargaiḥ pariṣevitāṅghrim

prāsādam ekaṁ vividhair mahattā-

pūrair viśiṣṭaṁ para-sīma yātaiḥ

prāpto ’ham āditya-sudhāṁśu-koṭi-

kāntiṁ mano-locana-vṛtti-coram

mahā-mahā-citra-vicitra – extremely wonderful and
astonishing; geha – of the homes; dvāra-pradeśān – the
entrances; atigamya – passing through; vegāt – swiftly;
śrīman-mahalla-pravarasya – of the most excellent
palace; madhye – in the midst; prāsāda-vargaiḥ – by host
of palaces; pariṣevita – served; aṅghrim – feet;
prāsādam – palace; ekam – one; vividhaiḥ – with
variegated; mahattā – of great qualities; pūraiḥ – with
a flood; viśiṣṭam – distinguished; para-sīma – the
ultimate limit; yātaiḥ – attained; prāptaḥ – arrived;
aham – I; āditya – of suns; sudhā-aṁśu – and moons; koṭi
– tens of millions; kāntim – effulgence; manaḥ – heart;
locana – and eyes; vṛtti – activities; coram – stealing.

I passed swiftly through many vastly wonderful and
amazing gates and districts. Finally, I entered the most
excellent inner courtyard of a palace that was so
extraordinary that it seemed as if all the other palaces
were serving the feet of that palace. It was adorned by
tremendous variety of glories and gorgeous decorations,
the likes of which are not to be found anywhere else.
That palace, which was splendidly effulgent like
millions of suns and at the same time softly luminous
like millions of moons, completely stole the function of
my mind and eyes.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “After this, I
rapidly crossed mansions, gateways, and districts that
were great and even greater, variegated and even more
variegated, astounding and

even more astounding.” Here, the tautology of terms like
‘great and even greater’ is used to indicate that,
having rushed past mansions, gateways, and courtyards
that were progressively more enormous, wonderfully
variegated, and astonishing to a supreme degree, Gopa-
kumāra then enters a palace that is the most glorious
and eminent – the best of all the palaces.

He says, “What kind of palace was this? In the four
directions, it was surrounded by hundreds of other,
wonderful palaces that were situated as if they were
serving the feet of this one most glorious and amazing
palace. Such an extent of glories is never seen anywhere
else. That splendid palace, whose effulgence reproached

                          498
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

that of millions of moons and suns, spread its
enchanting luster everywhere, giving pleasure to the
hearts and eyes of all. Consequently, after taking
darśana of that unique palace, which steals away the
power of one’s mind and eyes, I had no interest in
looking at anything else.”



Verses 64–65

tad-antare ratna-varāvalī-lasat-

suvarṇa-siṁhāsana-rāja-mūrdhani

su-jāta-kāntāmala-haṁsa-tūliko-

pari-prasannākṛśa-candra-sundaram

mṛdūpadhānaṁ nija-vāma-kakṣa-

kaphoṇinākramya sukhopaviṣṭam

vaikuṇṭha-nāthaṁ bhagavantam ārād

apaśyam agre nava-yauvaneśam

tat-antare – inside of that; ratna-vara-āvalī – with
rows of exquisite gems; lasat – shining; suvarṇa – gold;
siṁha-āsana – lion throne; rāja – king; mūrdhani – on
the head; su-jāta – well designed; kānta – lovely; amala
– faultless; haṁsa – swan; tūlika – cushion; upari –
above; prasanna – happy; akṛśa – well built; candra –
moon; sundaram – beautiful; mṛdu – soft; upadhānam –
pillows; nija – own; vāma – left; kakṣa-kaphoṇinā – on
the elbow; ākramya – reaching; sukha – comfortably;
upaviṣṭam – reclining; vaikuṇṭha – of Vaikuṇṭha; nātham
– the Lord; bhagavantam – the all-opulent; ārāt – from
far; apaśyam – I saw; agre – before; nava-yauvana-īśam –
the Lord of ever-fresh youth.

Inside that palace, at a distance I saw a golden royal
throne, radiant with precious jewels. The mattress and
pillows on that throne were very soft, as white as a
swan, and as beautiful as a spotless full moon. Bhagavān
Śrī Vaikuṇṭha-nātha, the Lord of ever-fresh new youth,
was happily reclining there, resting on His left side
with His elbow on those soft pillows.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “From far away,
I saw that in the middle of the immense court of that
palace there was the king of thrones – beautiful,
golden, and sparkling with inlaid jewels. On that
throne, there was a lovely, soft, and effulgent swan-
white mattress, upon which the Lord of Śrī Vaikuṇṭha was
comfortably seated.”

It may be asked, “What was the manner in which Śrī
Vaikuṇṭha-nātha was seated?” He says, “There was a soft
pillow giving off a white luster that was more beautiful
than the spotless full moon. Bhagavān Śrī Vaikuṇṭha-
nātha, the Lord of ever-fresh youth, was contentedly
leaning His left side against that soft round bolster,
with His elbow resting on top of it.”

                          499
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


The word nava-yauvana, meaning ‘ever-fresh youth,’
indicates that there is never any change in the Lord’s
divine, fresh, youthful appearance. He is Bhagavān and
all opulences are under His control, so He is eternally
in the transcendental prime of youth. This beautiful
form of the Lord was much more attractive than Gopa-
kumāra had expected. The reason for this shall be
explained further on.



Verse 66

saundarya-mādhuryamayāṅga-kāntyā

nūtnāmbuda-śrī-harayā sphurantyā

ratnācita-svarṇa-vibhūṣita-srag-

vastrānulepādi-vibhūṣayantam

saundarya – of beauty; mādhurya-maya – sweet; aṅga – of
His body; kāntyā – by the luster; nūtna – new; ambuda –
of a cloud; śrī – glory; harayā – stealing; sphurantyā –
by the glittering; ratna – with jewels; ācita – studded;
svarṇa – gold; vibhūṣita – decorated; srak – garlands;
vastra – clothing; anulepa – unguents; ādi – and so
forth; vibhūṣayantam – enhancing.

I saw that He possessed an appealing, lovely bodily
luster which stole away the beauty of fresh rain-clouds.
This luster enhanced the beauty of His jewel-studded
golden ornaments, garlands, clothes, oinments, throne,
and so on.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: In the next ten verses, beginning here
with saundarya, Śrī Gopa-kumāra details the beauty of
the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha. Saundarya, or beauty, refers to
an attractive physique suitable to one’s age. Mādhurya
denotes qualities such as loveliness.

He says, “The bodily luster of Śrī Vaikuṇṭha-nātha was
full of beauty and sweetness, defeating the beauty of
even fresh rainclouds. He was decorated with forest-
flower garlands, opulent raiments, unguents, and golden
ornaments bedecked with a variety of jewels. The golden
ornaments included His crown, earrings, bangles,
bracelets, girdle, jingling anklets, and so on.”

Even speaking thus, Gopa-kumāra was not satiated in
describing the Lord. Therefore, he continues, “His very
beautiful, dark luster was spreading in all directions.
This luster was illuminating His clothes, ornaments,
ointments, swan-white cushions and pillows, throne, and
so on. Śrī Bhagavān was wearing a vaijayantī-mālā or
vana-mālā around His neck.” Vaijayantī-mālā means ‘a
garland strung from flowers of five different colors
which extends down to the knees.’ Vana-mālā means ‘a
special garland made from leaves and flowers which
reaches down to the feet.’




                          500
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

Verse 67

kaṅkaṇāṅgada-vibhūṣaṇāyata-sthūla-vṛtta-vilasac-catur-
bhujam

pīta-paṭṭa-vasana-dvayāñcitaṁ cāru-kuṇḍala-kapola-
maṇḍalam

kaṅkaṇa – bangles ; aṅgada – armlets; vibhūṣaṇa –
ornamenting; āyata – wide spread; sthūla-vṛtta – strong
and rounded; vilasat – shining; catuḥ-bhujam – four-
armed; pīta – yellow; paṭṭa-vasana – silken garments;
dvaya – two; añcitam – distinguished; cāru-kuṇḍala –
beautiful earrings; kapola-maṇḍalam – His round cheeks.

The Lord’s four arms were so strong, well-built and
lustrous that they enhanced their own ornaments –
bangles, armlets and all. Two yellow silk garments
looked very beautiful on His body, and attractive
earrings were swinging on His cheeks.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “The Lord’s
elegantly long, stout, and rounded four arms were a
special feature of His beauty. These limbs were so
attractive that they were actually the ornaments of His
bangles and armlets. The two pieces of yellow silk
(lower dhotī and upper uttarīya) that served as garments
on His body reproached the splendor of the sun. His
cheeks were adorned with curling locks of hair and a
pair of captivating, swinging earrings.”



Verse 68

kaustubhābharaṇa-pīna-vakṣasaṁ

kambu-kaṇṭha-dhṛta-mauktikāvalim

sa-smitāmṛta-mukhendum adbhuta-

prekṣaṇollasita-locanāmbujam

kaustubha – the Kaustubha gem; ābharaṇa – ornament; pīna
– broad; vakṣasam – chest; kambu – resembling a
conchshell; kaṇṭha – neck; dhṛta – held; mauktika – of
pearls; āvalim – a strand; sa-smita – with a smile;
amṛta – nectarean; mukha – face; indum – moon; adbhuta –
novel; prekṣaṇa – glances; ullasita – merry; locana –
eyes; ambu-jam – lotus.

The Kaustubha jewel adorned His broad chest, a pearl
necklace decorated His conch-like neck, and a gentle
nectarean smile filled His moon-like face. He glanced
about with merry, sporting eyes that resembled fully-
blossomed lotuses.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “The Kaustubha
jewel ornamented His broad chest. His nicely rounded
neck was marked with three lines like a conchshell. A
pearl necklace also decorated His beautiful neck. Śrī
Nārāyaṇa’s moon-like face – sweet with His gentle,
nectarean smile – gave everyone more happiness than the
famous elixir of the moon. His merciful, reddish lotus

                          501
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

eyes appeared graceful due to His amazing, playful
glances.”



Verse 69

kṛpā-bharodyad-vara-cilli-nartanaṁ

sva-vāma-pārśve-sthitayātma-yogyayā

nivedyamānaṁ ramayā sa-vibhramaṁ

pragṛhya tāmbūlam adantam uttamam

kṛpā – compassion; bhara – profuse; udyat – arched; vara
– excellent; cilli – eyebrows; nartanam – dancing; sva-
vāma-pārśve – on His left side; sthitayā – situated;
ātma-yogyayā – suitable for Himself; nivedyamānam –
being offered; ramayā – by the goddess of fortune; sa-
vibhramam – with reverence; pragṛhya – taking; tāmbūlam
– pān mixed with a variety of spices; adantam – chewing;
uttamam – excellent.

I also saw that Śrī Bhagavān’s eyebrows, arched like
bows, were dancing to distribute mercy. On His left side
was His ideal match, Mahā-Lakṣmī, who with special
reverence was offering Him tāmbūla. The Lord
respectfully accepted and chewed that excellent pān.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “There was more
to see. His excellent bow-shaped eyebrows, being full of
compassion, were dancing. Mahā-Lakṣmī Śrī Rāmā-devī was
reverently offering Him

the most excellent, highest quality   pān (betel leaf
prepared with betel nut and spices)   with her right hand.
And Śrī Bhagavān, having gracefully   accepted it with the
tips of His thumb and index finger,   was chewing it in an
excellent manner.”

The brāhmaṇa might ask, “What was Mahā-Lakṣmī like?”
Gopa-kumāra says, “As she was standing on Bhagavān’s
left side, she was certainly His perfect and equivalent
match, that is, she was beyond compare. She was well
suited to Bhagavān in every respect and was decorated
with innumerable qualities, such as beauty analogous to
His. The goddess Earth, Śrī Dharaṇī-devī, was also
gracefully serving the Lord with reverence in the same
manner.”



Verse 70

tad-rāga-kāntādhara-bimba-kānti-

sambhinna-kundāmala-danta-paṅktyoḥ

dīpti-prakāśojjvala-hāsa-rāsaṁ

narmokti-bhaṅgī-hṛta-bhakta-cittam

tat-rāga – red color of that [tāmbūla]; kānta – lovely;

                          502
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

adhara – lips; bimba – like bimba fruit; kānti – hue;
sambhinna – very distinct; kunda – jasmine flowers;
amala – faultless; danta – of teeth; paṅktyoḥ – of rows;
dīpti-prakāśa – brilliant splendor; ujjvala – luminous;
hāsa – of laughter; rāsam – uproar; narma – joking; ukti
– words; bhaṅgī – waves; hṛta – stole; bhakta – of the
devotees; cittam – the hearts.

As the Lord smiled, His lips, like bimba fruit, now
doubly red after having been colored by that pān,
reflected against the two rows of His spotless teeth,
more luminous than kunda flowers. With His brilliant
smile, He spread the radiant mellow of humor, and with
His joking words, He was stealing the hearts of His
devotees.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “The red color
of the pān offered by Mahā-Lakṣmī stained the Lord’s
lips, which were pleasingly splendid like crimson bimba
fruits. The combined redness increased the beauty of His
radiant teeth twofold, which crushed the pride of white
kunda flowers. Revealing His beautiful teeth, the Lord
joked brilliantly with His beloved consort, thus further
increasing the sweet taste of their relationship, or
rasa. His sweet, pleasing words stole the hearts of His
servants.”



Verse 71

kare patad-grāha-bhṛtā dharaṇyā

kaṭākṣa-bhaṅgyā muhur arcyamānam

sudarśanādyair vara-mūrtimadbhiḥ

śirastha-cihnaiḥ pariṣevyamāṇam

kare – in His hand; patat-grāha – a spittoon; bhṛtā –
was held; dharaṇyā – by the goddess of earth; kaṭā-akṣa
– of sidelong glances; bhaṅgyā – by the waves; muhuḥ –
repeatedly; arcyamānam – worshiped; sudarśana – by the
Sudarśana cakra; ādyaiḥ – and the others; vara-mūrti-
madbhiḥ – with beautiful embodiments; śira-stha –
situated on their heads; cihnaiḥ – with symbols;
pariṣevyamāṇam – served.

His beloved Dharaṇī-devī, holding a spittoon in her
hands, was worshiping Him with her graceful sidelong
glances. His weapons, such as Sudarśana cakra and the
club, were present in their beautiful personified forms,
holding their respective emblems on their heads. In this
way, they were serving the Lord.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Śrī Dharaṇī-
devī is Śrī Nārāyaṇa’s second beloved consort. Carrying
a spittoon in her hands, she was repeatedly worshiping
the Lord with her graceful sidelong glances. All of
Bhagavān’s weapons, such as Sudarśana cakra and His
club, sword, and bow, were serving the Lord in their
most excellent personified forms, carrying their
respective emblems on their heads.”


                          503
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

The Mathurā brāhmaṇa might ask Gopa-kumāra, “How did you
recognize them?” He answers, “I identified them through
their emblems. For example, Śrī Sudarśana’s head had the
impression of a cakra.” It should be understood that the
other weapons similarly had their respective marks on
their heads.



Verse 72

cāmara-vyajana-pādukādika-

śrī-paricchada-gaṇollasat-karaiḥ

sevakaiḥ sva-sadṛśair avasthitair

āvṛtaṁ paricaradbhir ādarāt

cāmara – yak-tail whisks; vyajana – fans; pāduka –
sandals; ādika – and so forth; śrī-paricchada-gaṇa –
with a host of exquisite paraphernalia; ullasat –
shining; karaiḥ – with hands; sevakaiḥ – by servants;
sva-sadṛśaiḥ – similar to Himself; avasthitaiḥ –
situated; āvṛtam – surrounded; paricaradbhiḥ – rendering
service; ādarāt – with respect.

The servants, whose forms resembled the Lord’s, were
surrounding Him on all sides, deferentially attending
Him, their hands adorned with beautiful items used in
His service, such as yak-tail whisks, fans, and sandals.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “The Lord’s
servants had beauty and shapes similar to His own. They
stood all around Him, serving Him respectfully in
various ways, their hands beautified by magnificent
paraphernalia such as cāmaras (yak-tail whisks), fans,
and sandals.”



Verse 73

bhaktyā nataiḥ śeṣa-suparṇa-viṣvak-

senādibhiḥ pārṣada-varga-mukhyaiḥ

kṛtvañjaliṁ mūrdhny avatiṣṭhamānair

agre vicitroktibhir īḍyamānam

bhaktyā – with devotion; nataiḥ – bowing down; śeṣa –
Śeṣa; suparṇa – Garuḍa; viṣvaksena – Viṣvaksena; ādibhiḥ
– and so forth; pārṣada-varga-mukhyaiḥ – by the chiefs
of the group of His associates; kṛtvā añjalim – folding
their hands; mūrdhni – on their heads; avatiṣṭhamānaiḥ –
standing; agre – ahead; vicitra – wonderful; uktibhiḥ –
with statements; īḍyamānam – worshiped.

Śeṣa, Suparṇa (Garuḍa), Viṣvaksena, and other principle
attendants were standing in front of the Lord. With
bowed heads and hands folded in devotion, they were
glorifying the Lord with most wonderful prayers.


                             504
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Śeṣa and others
who are foremost among the Lord’s associates were
glorifying the Lord with wonderful hymns.” The Mathurā
brāhmaṇa might ask, “How were they doing this?” Gopa-
kumāra replies, “With great devotion, they stood in
front of the Lord with bowed heads, holding their joined
palms to their foreheads.”

The word ādi indicates eternal associates such as Nanda,
Sunanda, Jaya, Vijaya, Prabala, and Bala. Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (8.21.16–17) states:

nandaḥ sunando ’tha jayo

vijayaḥ prabalo balaḥ

kumudaḥ kumudākṣaś ca

viṣvaksenaḥ patattri rāṭ

jayantaḥ śrutadevaś ca

puṣpadanto ’tha sātvataḥ

“Nanda, Sunanda, Jaya, Vijaya, Prabala, Bala, Kumuda,
Kumudākṣa, Viṣvaksena, Garuḍa, Jayanta, Śrutadeva,
Puṣpadanta, Sātvata.” All of them are accepted as
principle associates of the Lord.



Verse 74

śrī-nāradasyādbhuta-nṛtya-vīṇā-

gītādi-bhaṅgīmaya-cāturībhiḥ

tābhyāṁ priyābhyāṁ kamalādharābhyāṁ

sārdhaṁ kadācid vihasantam uccaiḥ

śrī-nāradasya – of the sage, Nārada; adbhuta –
astonishing; nṛtya – dancing; vīṇā – stringed
instrument; gīta – singing; ādi – and so forth; bhaṅgī-
maya – graceful; cāturībhiḥ – with dexterous movements;
tābhyām – by them; priyābhyām – two dear associates;
kamalā – by the goddess of fortune; dharābhyām – and the
goddess of the earth; sārdham – with; kadācit –
sometimes; vihasantam – laughing; uccaiḥ – loudly.

Sometimes, upon seeing Śrī Nārada’s wonderful dancing,
as well as his clever poses in singing and playing the
vīṇā, the Lord and His beloved consorts, Kamalā (Mahā-
lakṣmī) and Dharaṇī, would laugh heartily.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Sometimes the
Lord, along with His most virtuous, beloved consorts,
Kamalā and Dharaṇī-devī, would laugh loudly.” The
Mathurā brāhmaṇa might ask, “Why was this?” Gopa-kumāra
replies, “Śrī Nārada would dance in a most wonderfully
unique way and would play on his vīṇā and sing. The Lord
would laugh to see the entertaining cleverness of Śrī
Nārada’s amusing performance.”


                           505
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017



Verse 75

sva-bhakta-vargasya tad-eka-cetasaḥ

kadācid ānanda-viśeṣa-vṛddhaye

prasārya pādāmbuja-yugmam ātmanaḥ

samarpaneṇaiva lasantam adbhutam

sva – own; bhakta – of devotees; vargasya – of the
group; tat – to Him; eka-cetasaḥ – whose hearts were
exclusively devoted; kadācit – sometimes; ānanda –
rapture; viśeṣa – special; vṛddhaye – to increase;
prasārya – extending; pāda-ambuja-yugmam – two lotus
feet; ātmanaḥ – Self; samarpaṇena – by offering; eva –
indeed; lasantam – shining; adbhutam – astonishing.

Sometimes, desiring to increase the rapture of His
unalloyed devotees, the Lord would extend His lotus feet
as if offering them to His bhaktas. In this way, He
exhibited His astonishing pastimes.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Sometimes,
desiring to increase the bliss of His devotees, He would
stretch His feet in a wonderful manner, as if He were
offering His lotus feet to His devotees. In this way, He
performed very enchanting acts. The lotus feet of the
Lord are the wealth of the devotees. However, factually,
it is not possible for the Lord to give up His lotus
feet, and so He extended them as if He were offering
them to the devotees.”

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.8.26), Śrī Brahmā states:

puṁsāṁ sva-kāmāya vivikta-mārgair

abhyarcatāṁ kāma-dughāṅghri-padmam

pradarśayantaṁ kṛpayā nakhendu-

mayūkha-bhinnāṅguli-cāru-patram

In order to satisfy their cherished desires, Bhagavān
mercifully shows His lotus feet, which are wish-
fulfilling desire trees, to those devotees who worship
Him by following the path of pure bhakti. The beautiful
toes of the Lord resemble tender flowers and leaves, and
His moon-like toenails are effulgent.

Gopa-kumāra continues, “To attain Bhagavān, some people
execute the limbs of bhakti – hearing and so on – and
thus worship His lotus feet, which fulfill all types of
desires. The Lord shows mercy to such devotees and
extends His lotus feet towards them. If someone performs
devotional service to Śrī Bhagavān while nurturing the
hope, ‘Will Bhagavān similarly extend His lotus feet
towards me and gesture for me to serve Him?’ then Śrī
Bhagavān displays pastimes in accordance with that
devotee’s cherished desire.”



                          506
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


Verse 76

tad-darśanānanda-bhareṇa teṣāṁ

vismṛtya śikṣāṁ bata pārṣadānām

gopāla he jīvitam ity abhīkṣṇaṁ

krośann adhāvaṁ parirambhaṇāya

tad-darśana – from seeing Him; ānanda-bhareṇa – by the
influence of bliss; teṣām – their; vismṛtya – completely
forgetting; śikṣām – instruction; bata – indeed;
pārṣadānām – of the associates; gopāla – Gopāla; he – O;
jīvitam – my life!; iti – thus; abhīkṣṇam –
continuously; krośan – shouting; adhāvam – I ran;
parirambhaṇāya – to fully embrace.

I was absorbed in the bliss of the Lord’s darśana and
forgot what His associates had instructed me. Thus,
loudly shouting over and over again, “O Gopāla, O my
life and soul!” I ran to embrace the Lord.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “I was filled
with joy upon seeing Śrī Bhagavān. Although the Lord’s
eternal associates had advised me regarding the special
custom of offering prayers and so on in front of Him,
forgetting all of their instructions, I ran with
outstretched arms towards the Lord to embrace Him.”

“How is it you did that?” the brāhmaṇa might ask.

Gopa-kumāra says, “Eager with intense desire, I
repeatedly cried out, ‘O Gopāla! O my life and soul!’
Saying this again and again, I

was seized by bewilderment. Actually, by worshiping the
Lord with the ten-syllable mantra, one experiences
maddening ecstasy which makes one lose all fear and
reverence towards one’s worshipable Lord.”



Verse 77

pṛṣṭhe sthitair vijña-varair dhṛtas tair

dīno mahā-kāku-kulaṁ prakurvan

premātirekeṇa vinirjito ’haṁ

samprāpya mohaṁ nyapataṁ tad-agre

pṛṣṭhe – at the back; sthitaiḥ – standing; vijña-varaiḥ
– very perceptive; dhṛtaḥ – held back; taiḥ – by them;
dīnaḥ – wretched; mahā-kāku-kulam – many cries of
distress; prakurvan – making; prema-atirekeṇa – because
of great love; vinirjitaḥ – subjugated; aham – I;
samprāpya moham – fainting; nyapatam – I fell; tat –
Him; agre – before.

Observing my condition, those perceptive associates
restrained me. This threw me into great distress.

                          507
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

Helplessly overcome with prema, I piteously lamented and
humbly entreated them, and then fell unconscious in
front of the Lord.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Those
associates of the Lord were standing behind me, and when
they saw my maddened condition, they held me back. My
consciousness had become completely subjugated by prema
and therefore I cried in distress and most humbly
petitioned those associates. Then I fainted in front of
Śrī Bhagavān.”



Verse 78

utthāpya tair eva balāc cireṇa

samjñāṁ praṇīto ’śru-nipāta-vighnam

sammārjanenābhibhavan karābhyāṁ

netre prayatnād udamīlayaṁ dve

utthāpya – picked up; taiḥ – by them; eva – certainly;
balāt – forcibly; cireṇa – speedily; samjñām – to
consciousness; praṇītaḥ – brought; aśru-nipāta – of the
showers of tears; vighnam – obstacle; sammārjanena – by
wiping; abhibhavan – overcoming; karābhyām – with both
hands; netre – both eyes; prayatnāt – carefully; uda-
mīlayam – opened; dve – both.

The Lord’s eternal associates picked me up with effort
and brought me back to consciousness. However, tears
streamed from my eyes, blocking my vision of the Lord.
With great effort, I wiped away the tears with my hands
and opened my eyes.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “The Lord’s
eternal associates forced me to get up and brought me
back to consciousness. Using both hands, I wiped away
the flood of tears because those tears were obstructing
my darśana of Bhagavān. Wiping my tears, I opened my
eyes with great effort.”



Verse 79

tāvad dayālu-pravareṇa tena

snehena gambhīra-mṛdu-svareṇa

svastho bhavāgaccha javena vatsety

ādy-ucyamānaṁ śrutavān vaco ’ham

tāvad – so much; dayālu-pravareṇa – by the crest jewel
of the compassionate; tena – by Him; snehena – with
affection; gambhīra – deep; mṛdu-svareṇa – with gentle
tones; svasthaḥ bhava – be well; āgaccha – come; javena
– quickly; vatsa – dear boy; iti – thus; ādi – and so
forth; ucyamānam – speaking; śrutavān – heard; vacaḥ –
the voice; aham – I.

                          508
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


The Lord, the crest jewel of the kind-hearted, spoke
affectionately in His deep, gentle voice. “Dear boy,” He
said, “Be well, and quickly come to Me.” Hearing these
words of Śrī Bhagavān…

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “From the moment
I fainted until I came back to consciousness, Śrī
Bhagavān, the foremost of the kind-hearted, had been
tenderly calling to me in a soft, deep voice, ‘O dear
one, be composed and well, and quickly come to Me.’
Using the word ādi, the implication of His words was,
‘Give up your awe and reverence towards Me. Let go of
all your fears. Meet Me and talk to Me.’ Being the
topmost of all merciful personalities, the Lord spoke in
this way to me.”



Verse 80

harṣasya kāṣṭhāṁ paramāṁ tato gato

nṛtyan mahonmāda-gṛhītavan muhuḥ

bhraśyann amībhiḥ parama-prayāsataḥ

samprāpitaḥ sthairyam atha prabodhitaḥ

harṣasya – of bliss; kāṣṭhām – the penultimate; paramām
– supreme; tataḥ – then; gataḥ – experienced; nṛtyan –
dancing; mahā-unmāda – by immense madness; gṛhīta-vat –
seized; muhuḥ – repeatedly; bhraśyan – giving up;
amībhiḥ – by them; parama-prayāsataḥ – through much
endeavor; samprāpitaḥ – attained; sthairyam –
equilibrium; atha – then; prabodhitaḥ – instructed.

I experienced the ultimate in divine bliss. Seized by
great madness, I began to dance, and then I fell. I did
this repeatedly. Then with great effort, the eternal
associates calmed me down and gave me some instruction.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “When I heard
Śrī Bhagavān speak in this way, my joy knew no bounds.
Submerged in an ocean of bliss, I began to dance non-
stop, like someone suffering from lunacy. However, my
feet kept slipping and I kept falling on the ground.
With great endeavor those associates helped me to regain
my composure. After some time, they began to advise me
by speaking many pacifying words.”



Verse 81

śrī-bhagavān uvāca

svāgataṁ svāgataṁ vatsa

diṣṭyā diṣṭyā bhavān mayā

saṅgo ’tra tvad-īkṣāyāṁ

ciram utkaṇṭhitena hi

                            509
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


śrī-bhagavān – the Lord; uvāca – said; svāgatam svāgatam
– a hearty welcome; vatsa – O my child; diṣṭyā diṣṭyā –
by very good fortune; bhavān – you; mayā – with Me;
saṅgaḥ – meeting; atra – here; tvat-īkṣāyām – for your
sight; ciram – for a long time; utkaṇṭhitena – with
eager longing; hi – indeed.

Śrī Bhagavān said: Dear boy, welcome, welcome! It is My
good fortune, My very good fortune. For a long, long
time I have been eagerly waiting to see you here.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Śrī Bhagavān,
the crest jewel of the kind-hearted, desiring to put me
at ease, honored me according to the proper etiquette
for greeting a guest, saying, ‘My dearest, welcome,
welcome!’ Out of happiness, Bhagavān repeated His
greeting twice. ‘I have been eagerly awaiting your
arrival for a long time. It is a matter of great fortune
that today I am seeing you face to face here in
Vaikuṇṭha.’ ”



Verse 82

bahūni gamitāny aṅga

janmāni bhavatā sakhe

kathañcid api mayy ābhi-

mukhyaṁ kiñcid akāri na

bahūni – many; gamitāni – passed; aṅga – dear one;
janmāni – lifetimes; bhavatā – by you; sakhe – O friend;
kathañcit – somehow; api – also; mayā – in Me;
ābhimukhyam – friendly interest; kiñcit – in any way;
akāri – you showed; na – not.

O friend! You have passed through many lifetimes, but
you never showed even a little interest in Me, in any
way at all.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Now, in two verses, beginning here
with bahūni, the Lord describes the cause of His
longtime eagerness. He says, “My dearest boy, you passed
through many lifetimes, but you never even demonstrated
the slightest inclination towards Me.”



Verses 83–84

asminn asminn ihenaiva

bhave bhāvī mad-unmukhaḥ

ity āśayā tavātyantaṁ

nartito ’smi sadājñavat

chalaṁ ca na labhe kiñcid


                            510
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

yenādyaṁ paripālayan

nibandhaṁ sva-kṛtaṁ bhrātar

ānayāmy ātmanaḥ padam

asmin asmin – in whichever; iha iha – in this world; eva
– indeed; bhave – in material existence; bhāvī – you may
be; mad-unmukhaḥ – favorable to Me; iti – thus; āśayā –
with this hope; tava – for you; atyantam – endlessly;
nartitaḥ – danced; asmi – I am; sadā – always; ajña-vat
– like a fool; chalam – a pretext; ca – and; na – not;
labhe – I find; kiñcit – any; yena – by which; ādyam –
today; paripālayan – while protecting; nibandham – the
statements of the Vedas; sva-kṛtam – which I Myself
wrote; bhrātaḥ – O brother; ānayāmi – I can bring;
ātmanaḥ – My own; padam – to the place.

“Perhaps in this lifetime you will turn towards Me.”
With this desire, I danced like a fool in every single
birth that you took. Dear brother, I could not find any
pretext whatsoever to bring you here without
transgressing My own previous commands set down as Vedic
laws.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Bhagavān always eagerly awaits the
living entities of the world. To describe this, the Lord
speaks the verse beginning with asmin.

Śrī Bhagavān says, “ ‘In this very lifetime, you will
turn towardMe’ – with this hope I would dance like a
fool in every single birth that you took.” The term
asminn eva implies, “ ‘In this present life, you will
turn towards Me’ – this desire would keep Me in a
constant state of anxiety.” The word asmin, meaning ‘in
this one,’ has been used twice in this verse. Though
both occurrences convey the same meaning, the repetition
should be understood to indicate the Lord’s longing.

Another way of understanding the repetition is that the
Lord is saying, “If you do not turn towards Me in this
lifetime, thus accepting different births in the future,
then I, also, will have to be affected.” Both meanings
are therefore appropriate. He says, “ ‘You will turn
towards Me in this very lifetime’ – with this hope I
danced like a fool for many days.” Śrī Bhagavān, in
comparing Himself to a fool, shows His intense eagerness
to see Gopa-kumāra face to face. (Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā of
verse 83 ends here.)

Śrī Gopa-kumāra might question, “You are all powerful.
If You were always so anxious, desiring to bring me to
You, then why did You not come Yourself to rescue me and
personally take me to Vaikuṇṭha?” In reply, the Lord
speaks the verse beginning with chalam.

Śrī Bhagavān says, “I could not find any means to
attract you. In order to bring you here, I could not
even use the kīrtana of My names as an excuse to
transgress the regulative principles – principles I
Myself established in the Vedas.”

Alternatively, the Lord is saying, “I did not have even
the tiniest opportunity to use any trick to violate the

                          511
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

Vedic regulative principles, which are My own words. O
brother, I was therefore not able to bring you to
Vaikuṇṭha. You never spoke My name (nāma-kīrtana) –

either indirectly or even in jest – and thus you did not
establish any relationship with Me. If you had, then I
could have used that relationship to overstep My own
Vedic rules and regulations and attract you and then
bring you here to Vaikuṇṭha, just as I did with Ajāmila.
Alas! When this never happened, I was always distressed
with fear that you would fall into undesirable
association and develop bad habits.”



Verses 85–86

tat te mayy akṛpāṁ vīkṣya vyagro ’nugraha-kātaraḥ

anādiṁ setum ullaṅghya tvaj-janmedam akārayam

śrīmad-govardhane tasmin nija-priyatamāspade

svayam evābhavaṁ tāta jayantākhyaḥ sa te guruḥ

tat – that; te – to you; mayi – to Me; akṛpām – without
mercy; vīkṣya – seeing; vyagraḥ – distracted; anugraha –
by mercy; kātaraḥ – agitated; anādim – eternal; setum –
bridge (of Vedic injunctions); ullaṅghya –
transgressing; tvat-janma – your birth; idam – this;
akārayam – I arranged; śrīmat-govardhane – at Govardhana
Hill; tasmin – there; nija – own; priyatama – beloved;
āspade – in the abode; svayam – personally; eva –
indeed; abhavam – I became; tāta – O dear one; jayanta –
Jayanta; ākhyaḥ – named; saḥ – he; te – your; guruḥ –
spiritual guide.

O dear boy, agitated at seeing the way you were
neglecting Me, I was compelled to bestow My mercy on
you. Therefore, I transgressed the timeless boundaries
of religion and arranged for you to take birth in the
land of My beloved Śrī Govardhana. Then I personally
descended as your guru, Jayanta.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might ask, “How did
You show mercy to me?”

In reply, the Lord speaks this verse beginning with tat.
He says, “When I saw the way you continued to neglect
Me, I realized that you would never show Me any kind of
favor. Seeing that your heart was closed to Me, I fell
into great anxiety, and therefore I was forced to show
you mercy. It is for this reason that I transgressed the
timeless boundaries of religion and granted you birth in
the land of My treasured Śrī Govardhana. In addition, O
my dear boy, I personally came as your guru, Jayanta.”

The purport of this is that only by Bhagavān’s mercy can
one attain Him; without His mercy, it is not possible.
In this regard Śrī Brahmā has said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(2.7.42):

yeṣāṁ sa eṣa bhagavān dayayed anantaḥ


                          512
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

sarvātmanāśrita-pado yadi nirvyalīkam

te dustarām atitaranti ca deva-māyāṁ

naiṣāṁ mamāham iti dhīḥ śva-śṛgāla-bhakṣye

If the unlimitedly powerful Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa
personally shows His genuine mercy to someone who has
taken exclusive shelter at His lotus feet, then that
person can easily transcend the illusory energy (deva-
māyā), which is otherwise insurmountable. But one who
has the false ego of ‘I’ and ‘mine’ in this temporary
body, which will only be eaten by dogs and jackals,
cannot easily transcend Māyā.

The ordinary mercy of the Lord is enough to fulfill
every desire of all the living entities, and so here in
this Bhāgavatam verse, the word nirvyalīkam (without
pretention), which means niṣkapaṭa (without duplicity,
or genuine), indicates the special mercy of Bhagavān.
Therefore, this mercy, being without duplicity, has the
special potency to turn a person’s heart towards the
Lord’s lotus feet while vanquishing his desire for
religiosity (dharma), economic development (artha),
sense gratification (kāma), and liberation (mokṣa). The
word ca, meaning ‘also,’ in the same verse is used to
indicate that this mercy makes one realize the
insignificance of liberation and takes him all the way
to Vaikuṇṭha.

The Bhāgavatam verse beginning with yeṣāṁ explains how
one can cross over Māyā. That person who has obtained
Śrī Bhagavān’s mercy no longer identifies his temporary
body, which is fit to be eaten by dogs and jackals, to
be his real self. Rather, he identifies with the objects
that are related to Bhagavān and with those persons who
are absorbed in the Lord.



Verse 87

kāmaṁ dīrghatamaṁ me ’dya

cirāt tvaṁ samapūrayaḥ

svasya me ’pi sukhaṁ puṣṇann

atraiva nivasa sthiraḥ

kāmam – desire; dīrgha-tamam – very long-felt; me – of
Me; adya – today; cirāt – quickly; tvam – you;
samapūrayaḥ – have fulfilled; svasya – your own; me – of
Me; api – also; sukham – happiness; puṣṇan – nourishing;
atra – here; eva – certainly; nivasa – reside; sthiraḥ –
permanently, with a steady mind.

You have finally fulfilled My long-cherished desire.
Now, you should live here permanently with a steady
mind, thus nourishing your happiness and Mine.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The Lord humbly says in this verse
beginning with kāmam, “What have I done to benefit you?
Rather, it is you who have done Me a great favor. By

                            513
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

coming here you have fulfilled My long-standing desire.
So, to increase your happiness and Mine, stay here with
a steady mind. Do not exhibit any kind of unease.”



Verse 88

śrī-gopa-kumāra uvāca

etac chrī-bhagavad-vākya-mahā-pīyūṣa-pānataḥ

matto ’haṁ nāśakaṁ stotuṁ kartuṁ jñātuṁ ca kiñcana

śrī-gopa-kumāraḥ uvāca – Śrī Gopa-kumāra said; etat –
this; śrī-bhagavad-vākya – of the Supreme Lord’s words;
mahā – rich; pīyūṣa – nectar; pānataḥ – on account of
drinking; mattaḥ – intoxicated; aham – I; na aśakam – I
could not; stotum – to offer prayers; kartum – to do;
jñātum – to understand; ca – also; kiñcana – anything.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra said: O Mathurā brāhmaṇa, drinking the
rich nectar of Śrī Bhagavān’s words, I became
intoxicated. I forgot to offer any prayers and could not
remember what my duty was.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Drinking the
immense nectar of Śrī Bhagavān’s words, I became so
maddened that – what to speak of praying – I forgot
everything else, including who I was and where I was. At
that time, I simply did not have the strength to do or
understand anything.”



Verse 89

agre sthitā tasya tu veṇu-vādakā

gopārbha-veśāḥ katicin mayā samāḥ

āśvāsya viśvāsya ca veṇu-vādane

prāvartayan snigdhatarā vikṛṣya mām

agre – in His presence; sthitāḥ – standing; tasya – of
Him; tu – indeed; veṇu – on the bamboo flute; vādakāḥ –
players; gopa-arbha – as cowherd boys; veśāḥ – dressed;
katicit – a few; mayā – to me; samāḥ – similar; āśvāsya
– pacifying; viśvāsya – giving confidence; ca – also;
veṇu-vādane – to play my flute; prāvartayan – inducing;
snigdha-tarāḥ – very affectionate; vikṛṣya – pulling;
mām – me.

After some time, I saw several boys dressed like me, as
cowherd boys, playing the flute in front of the Lord.
Pacifying me and giving me confidence with their loving
words, they forcibly pulled me into their midst and had
me play my flute.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “After some
time, I saw several boys who were dressed like me – as
cowherd boys (gopas) – playing the flute before Śrī
Bhagavān. They forcibly pulled me into their party and

                          514
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

had me play my flute with them. Why did they do this?
Because they had the attire of cowherd boys like me,
they had affection for me. Thus, they treated me like a
friend, pacifying me and giving me confidence.”



Verse 90

etāṁ sva-vaṁśīṁ bahudhā ninādayan

govardhanādri-prabhavāṁ mahā-priyām

śrī-mādhavaṁ taṁ samatoṣayaṁ mahā-

vaidagdhya-sindhuṁ sa-gaṇaṁ kṛpā-nidhim

etām – this; sva – my own; vaṁśīm – bamboo flute;
bahudhā – in many ways; ninādayan – vibrating;
govardhana-adri – on Govardhana Hill; prabhavām – born;
mahā-priyām – very dear; śrī-mādhavam – Lord Mādhava;
tam – Him; samatoṣayam – I pleased; mahā-vaidagdhya –
immense expertise; sindhum – an ocean; sa-gaṇam – with
His associates; kṛpā – of mercy; nidhim – a treasure-
house.

In various ways, I played my extremely precious flute,
which was born on Govardhana Mountain, and thus pleased
Śrī Mādhava, the ocean of expertise and the reservoir of
mercy, and His associates.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Even when Śrī Gopa-kumāra went to
Vaikuṇṭha, he had his flute in his hand. Also, when he
narrated his history to the Mathurā brāhmaṇa, he was
holding the same flute in his hand. This indicates that
the flute was imperishable and not subject to decay. The
reason is that Gopa-kumāra’s flute was crafted from
bamboo grown on Govardhana Mountain. Its origins made it
extremely dear to him. Gopa-kumāra played his flute for
Śrī Mādhava, who is the ocean of great skill in all the
fine arts, and thus pleased Him. The phrase ‘Śrī
Mādhava’ means the ‘Lord of Śrī Lakṣmī.’ It indicates
that she was also charmed by the sound of Gopa-kumāra’s
flute.

Gopa-kumāra has used the term mahā-vaidagdhya-sindhu,
meaning ‘the ocean of great expertise,’ which indicates
Śrī Mādhava’s particular expertise in playing the flute.
The adjective kṛpā-nidhi, or reservoir of mercy, means
that the Lord abandoned the pride of His greatness,
namely that He is Śrī Mādhava, the Lord of Śrī Lakṣmī.
Gopa-kumāra says, “Therefore, although He is the ocean
of great expertise, my flute playing pleased Him. This
indicates His quality of being a reservoir of mercy
(kṛpā), since the nature of mercy is to accept even a
small achievement as something substantial.”



Verse 91

yathā-kālaṁ tataḥ sarve niḥsaranto mahā-śriyaḥ

ājñayā nirgamānicchuṁ yuktyā māṁ bahir ānayan

                          515
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


yathā-kālam – in accordance with the time; tataḥ – then;
sarve – everyone; niḥsarantaḥ – went out; mahā-śriyaḥ –
of Mahā-Lakṣmī; ājñayā – by the order; nirgama – to go;
anicchum – not desiring; yuktyā – skillfully; mām – me;
bahiḥ – outside; ānayan – led.

When it was time to leave, all of the Lord’s eternal
associates went out. I had no desire to go, but on the
order of Śrī Mahā-Lakṣmī, a group of associates deftly
escorted me out.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “At the
appointed time, all of the Lord’s eternal associates
left Śrī Bhagavān’s private chamber. Although I had no
desire to leave, those associates very cleverly escorted
me out. As ordered by Mahā-Lakṣmī, no one can be present
when Bhagavān takes His meal; only she has that right.”

Another way of understanding this is that, according to
the general custom, everyone other than Mahā-Lakṣmī left
the Lord’s chamber in order to allow the Him the
opportunity to enjoy unrestricted happiness. It was His
desire that she stay. Thus, even though the residents of
Vaikuṇṭha possess great opulence and power, each has
designated privileges in regard to the happiness and
enjoyment of life in Vaikuṇṭha.



Verse 92

tatrāparasyeva mahā-vibhūtīr

upasthitās tāḥ parihṛtya dūre

svayaṁ satīr ātmani cāprakāśya

gopārbha-rūpo nyavasaṁ pureva

tatra – there; aparasya – of the other (residents of
Vaikuṇṭha); iva – like; mahā-vibhūtīḥ – great opulences;
upasthitāḥ – presented; tāḥ – themselves; parihṛtya –
shunning; dūre – far away; svayam – personally; satīḥ –
existing; ātmani – within myself; ca – also; aprakāśya –
not manifesting; gopa-arbha-rūpaḥ – the form of a
cowherd boy; nyavasam – I lived; purā iva – as before.

At that time, all varieties of great opulences
manifested in front of me, but I shunned them, carefully
keeping them at a distance. Concealing all the opulences
that I had within me, I began to live in Vaikuṇṭha
dressed as I always had in the past – as a cowherd boy.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “All varieties
of indescribable opulences (mahā-vibhūtis) offer
themselves to the Vaikuṇṭha residents. They presented
themselves to me as well, but keeping myself distant
from them, I did not accept any. Keeping my appearance
as a destitute cowherd boy, I took up residence there.
Not only did I reject the great opulences offered by
others, but I also concealed the special powers that,
due to the inherent nature of Vaikuṇṭha, had
spontaneously arisen in me when I had arrived there. I

                          516
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

kept these great opulences hidden and began to reside in
Vaikuṇṭha like a person who possesses nothing
(akiñcana).”



Verse 93

sac-cid-ānanda-rūpās tāḥ sarvās tatra vibhūtayaḥ

svādhīnā hi yathā-kāmaṁ bhaveyuḥ samprakāśitāḥ

sat-cit-ānanda – of eternity, knowledge, and bliss;
rūpāḥ – forms; tāḥ – they; sarvāḥ – all; tatra – there;
vibhūtayaḥ – opulences; sva-adhīnāḥ – submissive; hi –
indeed; yathā-kāmam – according to desire; bhaveyuḥ –
they can become; samprakāśitāḥ – manifested.

All the opulences of Vaikuṇṭha are sac-cid-ānanda,
possessing full eternity, knowledge, and bliss. They are
completely submissive to the will of the residents of
Vaikuṇṭha and manifest in full form according to the
desire of those residents.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The special quality of Vaikuṇṭha is
that all the opulences there have the same
transcendental nature. That is, they are sac-cid-ānanda,
comprised of eternity, knowledge, and bliss. To explain
this, Śrī Gopa-kumāra speaks this verse beginning with
sat. The words yathā-kāmam, meaning ‘as one desires,’
indicate that all those opulences, which are completely
at the beck and call of the residents of Vaikuṇṭha,
manifest in their full form when desired. Because these
powers are sac-cid-ānanda, although they remain
perfectly manifest in the residents of Vaikuṇṭha, the
residents are never subject to any fault that comes from
association with material sense objects.



Verse 94

itthaṁ tu vaibhavābhāve

vaibhavaṁ vaibhave ’pi ca

akiñcanatvaṁ ghaṭate

vaikuṇṭhe tat-svabhāvataḥ

ittham – thus; tu – indeed; vaibhava – of opulence;
abhāve – in the absence; vaibhavam – opulence; vaibhave
– in opulence; api – still; ca – and; akiñcanatvam – the
state of detachment; ghaṭate – happens; vaikuṇṭhe – in
Vaikuṇṭha; tat-svabhāvataḥ – by the nature of that
(abode).

Therefore, even when the opulences in Vaikuṇṭha do not
manifest themselves, they are all still existing there,
and when they do become manifest, the residents of
Vaikuṇṭha remain unattached and unaffected. This is the
extraordinary nature of Vaikuṇṭha.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Even when the

                            517
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

opulences in Vaikuṇṭha remain unmanifest, they are still
present, being contained within the residents of
Vaikuṇṭha and always under their control. Furthermore,
when the opulences expand, the detachment of the
residents does not diminish. Because the residents of
Vaikuṇṭhaare transcendental – full of eternity,
knowledge, and bliss – the opulences or the lack of
opulences are factually nondifferent from them.

“How is this possible? This happens due to the
extraordinary nature of Vaikuṇṭha. All the opulence, the
associates, and so on of Vaikuṇṭha are indeed fully
transcendental – sac-cid-ānanda – and so they all share
the same nature. However, as previously explained, the
residents experience varieties of bliss from the
different ways in which they serve Śrī Bhagavān, and
therefore the opulence seems to be variegated.”



Verse 95

tathāpi pūrvābhyāsasya

balena mahatā prabhoḥ

bhajanaṁ khalu manye ’haṁ

dīna-vṛttyā sadā sukham

tathā api – however; pūrva-abhyāsasya – of my previous
practice; balena – by the strength; mahatā – great;
prabhoḥ – of the Lord; bhajanam – the worship; khalu –
indeed; manye – I would consider; aham – I; dīna-vṛttyā
– with humble mood; sadā – always; sukham – happiness.

Regardless, by the strong influence of my previous
practice, I always remained in a humble mood and
continued to believe that loving devotional service
(bhajana) to Śrī Bhagavān is the source of all
happiness.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Everything about Vaikuṇṭha is
completely transcendental. Thus, the residents are
qualitatively one with its attributes, such as
possession of and detachment from complete opulence.
Gopa-kumāra says, “Even so, I continued to take pleasure
in performing non-stop loving service to Śrī Bhagavān in
a meek and humble mood. How could I do this? I could do
so on the strength of my previous habit of rendering
devotional service in a modest and unassuming fashion.
Although the residents of Vaikuṇṭha execute service to
the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha in ways that correspond to His
moods and personal dealings, I had experienced from the
beginning that the bliss of devotion increases greatly
by maintaining a niṣkiñcana mood, or in other words, a
mood of material detachment, simplicity, and humility.”



Verse 96

tadā hṛdīdaṁ pariniścitaṁ mayā


                            518
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

dhruvaṁ svakīyākhila-janma-karmaṇām

phalasya labhyasya kilādhunā parā

sīmā samāptā bhagavat-kṛpā-bharāt

tadā – then; hṛdi – in the heart; idam – this;
pariniścitam – concluded; mayā – by me; dhruvam –
factually; svakīya – my own; akhila – all; janma – of
births; karmaṇām – of actions; phalasya – of the fruit;
labhyasya – to be attained; kila – indeed; adhunā – now;
parā – ultimate; sīmā – pinnacle; samāptā – obtained;
bhagavat-kṛpā – of the Lord’s mercy; bharāt – by the
influence.

At that time, I concluded in my heart that by the Lord’s
mercy I had obtained the ultimate result of the fruits
of my endeavors from all my previous births.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra now reveals his
thoughts in the lines beginning with dhruvam. He says,
“Then I concluded in my heart, ‘Now, on the strength of
Bhagavān’s immense mercy, I have achieved the topmost
result of the fruits of the activities of all my
previous lives. Surely I have obtained Śrī Vaikuṇṭha to
the fullest degree.’ ”



Verse 97

aho sukhaṁ kīdṛg idaṁ durūham

aho padaṁ kīdṛg idaṁ mahiṣṭham

aho mahāścaryataraḥ prabhuś ca

kīdṛk tathāścaryatarā kṛpāsya

aho – Oh; sukham – happiness; kīdṛk – how great; idam –
this; durūham – inconceivable; aho – Oh; padam – abode;
kīdṛk – how much; idam – this; mahiṣṭham – great; aho –
Oh; mahā-āścarya-taraḥ – most astonishing; prabhuḥ – the
Lord; ca – also; kīdṛk – how great; tathā – then;
āścarya-tarā – very astounding; kṛpā – mercy; asya – of
Him.

Oh, how great this Vaikuṇṭha-loka is! The inconceivable
joy here is beyond words and belief. Oh, how
extraordinary the Lord of this abode is – and His mercy
is also astounding!

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Here, Śrī Gopa-kumāra describes his
experience of attaining Vaikuṇṭha in this verse
beginning with aho (an expression of astonishment). He
says, “Oh, how wonderful! With what should I compare the
joy that I am experiencing here? It is beyond comparison
because this abode is unimaginable; it cannot be
perceived by the mind nor penetrated by logic.” This
will be elaborated later on. “How excellent is Śrī
Vaikuṇṭha! How completely extraordinary is the Lord of
Vaikuṇṭha! And how even more astonishing is His mercy!”



                          519
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


Verse 98

atha prabhoś cāmara-vījanātmikāṁ

samīpa-sevāṁ kṛpayādhilambitaḥ

nijāṁ ca vaṁśīṁ raṇayan samāpnavaṁ

tad-īkṣaṇānanda-bharaṁ nirantaram

atha – thereafter; prabhoḥ – of the Lord; cāmara-vījana
– of yak-tail fanning; ātmikām – of the nature; samīpa –
intimate; sevām – service; kṛpayā – with mercy;
adhilambhitaḥ – achieved; nijām – own; ca – and; vaṁśīm
– flute; raṇayan – playing; samāpnavam – I attained;
tad-īkṣaṇa – of His glance; ānanda-bharam – immense
bliss; nirantaram – incessant.

Then, by the mercy of the Lord, I was given the intimate
service of fanning the Lord with a cāmara, in addition
to playing the flute for Him. Serving the Lord in these
two ways, I was able to constantly see Him, and was thus
continually submerged in immense bliss.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Another day, I
was entrusted with fanning the Lord with a yak-tail
whisk. I received this intimate service only by the
strength of the Lord’s mercy, not by my own ability. I
had naturally been assigned the service of playing the
flute from the very beginning. When I would fan the Lord
with the cāmara or play the flute, I would be submerged
in bliss from His constant sidelong glances.”



Verse 99

pūrvābhyāsa-vaśenānu-

kīrtayāmi kadāpy aham

bahudhoccair aye kṛṣṇa

gopāleti muhur muhuḥ

pūrva-abhyāsa – of previous practice; vaśena – by the
influence; anukīrtayāmi – I describe; kadā api –
sometimes; aham – I; bahudhā – by numerous names; uccaiḥ
– loudly; aye kṛṣṇa – O Kṛṣṇa!; gopāla – O cowherd boy!;
iti – thus; muhuḥ muhuḥ – repeatedly.

Sometimes, out of previous habit, I would repeatedly
call out in a loud voice, “O Kṛṣṇa! O Gopāla!” Thus,
continually I performed different kinds of kīrtana.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Now, ever eager to attain the supreme
destination, in this verse beginning with pūrva, Śrī
Gopa-kumāra reveals the reason for his indifference to
residence in Vaikuṇṭha also. He says, “While residing in
Vaikuṇṭha, sometimes, due to my previous practice, I
would engage in different types of kīrtana, calling out
‘O Kṛṣṇa, O Gopāla’.”


                          520
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017



Verse 100

gokulācaritaṁ cāsya

mahā-māhātmya-darśakam

parama-stotra-rūpeṇa

sākṣād gāyāmi sarvadā

gokula – in Gokula; ācaritam – pastimes; ca – also; asya
– of Him; mahā-māhātmya – greatest glories; darśakam –
revealing; parama-stotra-rūpeṇa – with excellent
prayers; sākṣāt – personally; gāyāmi – I would sing;
sarvadā – always.

I would always sing excellent prayers describing the
Lord’s Gokula pastimes, which reveal His greatest
glories.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “In a superb
manner, I would perform saṅkīrtana (loud glorification),
singing splendid songs that glorify the Lord’s childhood
pastimes which take place in Gokula, in the land of
Vraja, in the area of Mathurā. I always glorified those
pastimes that exhibit the Lord’s greatness.”



Verse 101

tatratyair bahir āgatya tair hasadbhir ahaṁ muhuḥ

snehārdra-hṛdayair uktaḥ śikṣayadbhir iva sphuṭam

tatratyaiḥ – by the residents of that place; bahiḥ –
outside; āgatya –having come; taiḥ – by them; hasadbhiḥ
– laughing; aham – I; muhuḥ – repeatedly; sneha – with
affection; ārdra – melting; hṛdayaiḥ – with hearts;
uktaḥ – said; śikṣayadbhiḥ – by the teachers; iva – as
if; sphuṭam – clearly.

When the residents of Vaikuṇṭha would hear my songs,
they would come out laughing. With hearts melting in
affection, they would instruct me very clearly and
frankly.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Actually, the topics of those
childhood pastimes were not of interest to Bhagavān’s
Vaikuṇṭha servants.



Verse 102

śrī-vaikuṇṭha-vāsina ūcuḥ

maivaṁ sambodhayeśeśaṁ

mā ca saṅkīrtayes tathā

upaślokaya māhātmyam

                            521
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


anantaṁ tv adbhutādbhutam

śrī-vaikuṇṭha-vāsinaḥ ūcuḥ – the residents of Vaikuṇṭha
said; mā – do not; evam – in this way; sambodhaya –
address; īśa-īśam – the Lord of lords; mā – do not; ca –
and; saṅkīrtayeḥ – you should sing loudly; tathā – in
this way; upaślokaya – offer praise in Sanskrit verses;
māhātmyam – glories; anantam – limitless; tu – indeed;
adbhuta-adbhutam – the most amazing of all that is
amazing.

The residents of Śrī Vaikuṇṭha said: Our master is the
Supreme Lord of all lords. You should not address Him by
saying, ‘O Kṛṣṇa, O Gopāla!’ Do not sing His glories in
this manner. He has unlimited astonishing glories. Sing
these in verses and measured stanzas.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The Vaikuṇṭha residents say, “The Lord
is the supreme controller of even Brahmā and the other
demigods. Therefore, do not keep calling out to Him, ‘O
Kṛṣṇa, O Gopāla!’ It is especially inappropriate to
address Him by directly taking His name. Do not sing or
perform saṅkīrtana of the Lord’s Gokula childhood
pastimes in His presence. Rather, in nicely composed
verses, you should sing about the Lord’s extraordinary
glories, which are unlimited and thoroughly marvelous.”



Verse 103

saṁhārāyaiva duṣṭānāṁ śiṣṭānāṁ pālanāya ca

kaṁsaṁ vañcayatānena gopatvaṁ māyayā kṛtam

saṁhārāya – for annihilating; eva – indeed; duṣṭānām –
of the demons; śiṣṭānām – of saintly persons; pālanāya –
for protecting; ca – also; kaṁsam – Kaṁsa; vañcayatā –
for deceiving; anena – by this; gopatvam – His state of
becoming a cowherd; māyayā – through His illusory
potency; kṛtam – performed.

To annihilate the demons, to protect the saintly
persons, and to deceive Kaṁsa, the Lord Himself assumes
the dress of a gopa, by His illusory potency.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might wonder, “What is
wrong with singing the Lord’s names connected with His
childhood pastimes?” In answer to this, the residents of
Vaikuṇṭha speak two verses, beginning here with
saṁhārāya.

They say, “Only to cheat Kaṁsa did He manifest pastimes
as a cowherd boy in Gokula. Performing such pastimes was
only a trick because actually He is the Supreme Lord. He
assumed this cowherd form only to kill Kaṁsa, Pūtanā,
and the other demons, and to protect Vasudeva and other
saintly persons. Otherwise, it is absurd that the Lord
would come as a cowherd boy just to tend cows.”



Verse 104

                            522
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


māyāyā varṇanaṁ cāsya

na bhaktair bahu manyate

bhakty-ārambhe hi tad yuktaṁ

tena na stūyate prabhuḥ

māyāyāḥ – with His illusory energy; varṇanam –
description; ca – and; asya – of Him; na – not; bhaktaiḥ
– by devotees; bahu manyate – is considered great;
bhakti – of devotional service; ārambhe – in the
beginning; hi – indeed; tat – that; yuktam –
appropriate; tena – by that; na stūyate – is not to be
glorified; prabhuḥ – the Lord.

Devotees have little regard for the narrations of these
pastimes of the Lord, which are performed just to
deceive others. Glorifying these pastimes may be
appropriate in the beginning stages of bhakti, but such
narrations do not truly glorify the Lord.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra could argue, “What is
the harm in describing these Gokula pastimes?” In
response, the Vaikuṇṭha associates speak this verse
beginning with māyāyā, in which they state that devotees
of the Lord do not take any special interest in
narrations of the Supreme Lord’s kapaṭa-līlās, or
deceptive pastimes. But in response to that, one could
quote this verse from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.7.53), in
which Śrī Brahmā tells Śrī Nārada:

māyāṁ varṇayato ’muṣya

īśvarasyānumodataḥ

śṛṇvataḥ śraddhayā nityaṁ

māyayātmā na muhyati

If anyone regularly hears with faith or praises the
descriptions of even the illusory potency of Bhagavān,
he will never be bewitched by His Māyā.

Devotees accept the verdict spoken by the supreme guru
Śrī Brahmā, and thus consider the narration and hearing
of these pastimes to be proper. Therefore, to protect
and avoid contradicting the import of this evidence from
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, the residents of Vaikuṇṭha say, “It
is suitable to describe the Supreme Lord’s illusory
energy in the beginning stages of bhakti. However, when
one reaches Śrī Vaikuṇṭha, as the result of this
devotional service, then it is no longer appropriate to
describe the Lord’s illusory energy. Therefore, singing
of the Lord’s Gokula pastimes does not constitute real
glorification of the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha.”



Verse 105

teṣv eva kecid avadan


                            523
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

durbodhācaritasya hi

līlaikā sāpi tat tasyā

na doṣaḥ kīrtane mataḥ

teṣu – amongst them; eva – indeed; kecit – some; avadan
– said; durbodha – are difficult to comprehend;
ācaritasya – whose activities; hi – certainly; līlā –
pastimes; ekā – one; sā – that; api – also; tat – that;
tasyāḥ – of that (pastime); na – not; doṣaḥ – fault;
kīrtane – in glorifying; mataḥ – it is considered.

Some other residents of Vaikuṇṭha said, “The pastimes of
the Supreme Lord are difficult to understand, including
that of His tending cows. But it is indeed His pastime
and therefore, there is no defect in performing its
kīrtana.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Another group of Vaikuṇṭha residents
propose, “The Lord’s cowherd pastimes are unprecedented
and are not the product of Māyā, as is the creation of
the material universe.” The first group might counter,
“Śrī Kṛṣṇa ran from His mother in fear, wept for her
breast milk, wandered in forests full of thorns, and
worked to tend the cows. What happiness can there be in
these activities that they should be considered
Bhagavān’s pastimes?”

In reply to this, the second group retorts, “The
character of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
inconceivable. Therefore, who can fathom the reason
behind His activities?”



Verses 106–107

kaiścin mahadbhis tān sarvān

nivāryoktam idaṁ ruṣā

āḥ kim evaṁ nigadyeta

bhavadbhir abudhair iva

kṛṣṇasya bhakta-vātsalyād

yasya kasyāpi karmaṇaḥ

saṅkīrtanaṁ mahān eva

guṇaḥ śrī-prabhu-toṣaṇaḥ

kaiścit – by certain; mahadbhiḥ – great souls; tān – to
them; sarvān – all; nivārya – refuting; uktam – said;
idam – this; ruṣā – with wrath; āḥ – Oh!; kim – how;
evam – thus; nigadyeta – this can be spoken; bhavadbhiḥ
– by you; abudhaiḥ – fools; iva – as if; kṛṣṇasya – of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa; bhakta-vātsalyāt – out of affection for
devotees; yasya – whose; kasya api – of any; karmaṇaḥ –
of His activities; saṅkīrtanam – loud glorification;
mahān – great; eva – certainly; guṇaḥ – virtue; śrī-
prabhu – to our glorious Lord; toṣaṇaḥ – pleasing.

                            524
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


There were some particularly distinguished servants
among those residents of Vaikuṇṭha who became displeased
with this dispute. They rebuked all of them, saying,
“Why are you all speaking nonsensically like fools? Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is so affectionate to His devotees that it is
certainly a great quality to loudly chant any of His
activities. Such saṅkīrtana greatly pleases our Lord
also.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The main servitors of the Lord of
Vaikuṇṭha, aware of Bhagavān’s special glories, were
displeased by this dispute. Thus, in this verse they
tell the other servitors, “Why do you speak so
foolishly? It is certainly auspicious to glorify all of
Bhagavān’s activities. Why is this? Bhagavān is bhakta-
vatsala, affectionate to His devotees. Therefore, He
performs variegated pastimes only to give pleasure to
the different types of devotees. There is no other
reason for these pastimes.”

Śrī Bhagavān Himself has said to Brahmā (Padma Purāṇa):

muhūrttenāpi saṁhartuṁ

śakto yady api dānavān

mad-bhaktānāṁ vinodārthaṁ

karomi vividhāḥ kriyāḥ

darśana-dhyāna-saṁsparśair

matsya-kūrma-vihaṅgamāḥ

svāny apatyāni puṣyanti

tatrāham api padmaja

Simply by My desire I can destroy all the demons in a
moment. However, I perform My various pastimes of
killing the demons in order to give pleasure to the
devotees. Just as the fish nourish their offspring by
their glances, the tortoises by remembering them, and
the birds by touching them, I similarly maintain My
devotees by seeing, remembering, and touching them.

None of Bhagavān’s pastimes are creations of the
illusory potency, nor are they trivial like the play of
a child. Therefore, glorification of the Gokula pastimes
also satisfies Śrī Vaikuṇṭha-nātha.

In this way, the residents of Vaikuṇṭha exhibit three
types of behavior according to their moods. The first
group of residents does not find the Vraja pastimes
suitable for the mood of Vaikuṇṭha. The second group is
a little more open-minded. And the third group does not
differentiate between any of Bhagavān’s pastimes.

There are reasons for these differences. One is that the
residents of Vaikuṇṭha have a particular devotional
perspective based on the longtime execution of one
particular limb of bhakti, such as the practice of
knowledge. Another reason is that in accordance with the

                             525
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

variegated pastimes of Bhagavān, the residents of
Vaikuṇṭha also exhibit a wide variety of behavior. There
is no fault in this variegated behavior as it is only
through pure loving devotion to Bhagavān that one can
enter that abode. This idea has already been established
with a reason and will be elaborated further on.



Verse 108

śrī-gopa-kumāra uvāca

teṣām etādṛśair vākyair ādau lajjā mamājani

paścāt toṣas tathāpy antar mano ’tṛpyan na sarvataḥ

śrī-gopa-kumāraḥ uvāca – Śrī Gopa-kumāra said; teṣām –
their; etādṛśaiḥ – by such; vākyaiḥ – words; ādau – at
first; lajjā – embarrass-ment; mama – my; ajani – arose;
paścāt – afterwards; toṣaḥ – pleasure; tathā api –
however; antaḥ – within; manaḥ – the heart; atṛpyat – it
could be satisfied; na – not; sarvataḥ – in every way.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra said: At first, I felt embarrassed to
hear the words of the Vaikuṇṭha residents. Then later,
although my mind undoubtedly became pacified, my heart
was still not completely satisfied.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “I was extremely
embarrassed to hear those residents of Vaikuṇṭha speak,
especially the first speaker. Although the words of the
other speakers certainly made me happy, my heart was
still not completely satisfied. This is because they
were not unanimous that Śrī Bhagavān’s Gokula pastimes
should be glorified. Observing this, my heart
experienced extreme pain as if pierced by a thorn.”

An alternate understanding of why Gopa-kumāra remained
dissat-isfied is that he could not hear the glories of
his favorite pastimes – the pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in
Vraja – from the residents of Vaikuṇṭha. Further on,
Gopa-kumāra will become extremely pleased and satisfied
by hearing from Śrī Nārada about those spiritual
conclusions and principles in which he has firm faith
(niṣṭhā) and which are his heart’s desire.



Verse 109

nijeṣṭa-daivata-śrīmad-gopāla-caraṇābjayoḥ

tādṛg-rūpa-vinodāder anālokāc ca dīnavat

nija – my own; iṣṭa – beloved; daivata – Deity; śrīmad-
gopāla – of Śrī Gopāla; caraṇa-abjayoḥ – of His lotus
feet; tādṛk – such; rūpa – form; vinoda – delightful
pastimes; ādeḥ – and so forth; anālokāt – because of not
seeing; ca – also; dīna-vat – somewhat disheartened.

Because in Vaikuṇṭha I could not receive darśana of the
extraordinary form and pastimes of the lotus feet of my
worshipable Deity, Śrī Madana-gopāla, I was somewhat

                          526
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

disheartened.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “In Vaikuṇṭha I
could not experience the unique qualities of my
worshipable Deity, Śrī Madana-gopāla, the Lord of
Vaikuṇṭha. I could not experience His extraordinary
beauty, pleasurable pastimes, associates, paraphernalia,
playful activities, and special compassion, and
therefore I felt somewhat miserable.”

Here the idea of the suffix vati, meaning ‘as if’ is
that actually it is impossible to remain distressed in
Vaikuṇṭha. Therefore, Gopa-kumāra’s condition is termed
dīna-vat, meaning ‘as if miserable.’



Verse 110

tarhy eva sarvajña-śiromaṇiṁ prabhuṁ

vaikuṇṭha-nāthaṁ kila nanda-nandanam

lakṣmīṁ dharāṁ cākalayāmi rādhikāṁ

candrāvalīṁ cāsya gaṇān vrajārbhakān

tarhi – then; eva – indeed; sarva-jña – of they who are
omniscient; śiraḥ-maṇim – the crest jewel; prabhum – the
Master; vaikuṇṭha-

nātham – the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha; kila – indeed; nanda-
nandanam – the son of Nanda Bābā; lakṣmīm – the goddess
of fortune; dharām – the

goddess of earth; ca – also; ākalayāmi – I would see;
rādhikām – as Rādhikā; candrāvalīm – Candrāvalī; ca –
and; asya – His; gaṇān – the group; vraja-arbhakān – as
the boys of Vraja.

At that very moment, I began to see the crest jewel of
all omniscient personalities, the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha, in
the form of Nanda-nandana. I saw Lakṣmī-devī as Rādhikā,
Dharaṇī-devī as Candrāvalī, and all the other associates
as cowherd boys.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “There is no
distress in Vaikuṇṭha. However, when that pain swelled
in my heart, Lord Vaikuṇṭha-nātha understood my feelings
right away. Then I saw the Lord Himself appearing as
Nanda-nandana, the goddess of fortune Lakṣmī-devī as
Rādhikā, the goddess of earth Dharaṇī-devī as
Candrāvalī, and the other associates as cowherd boys.
This vision was not just my imagination. Rather, Lord
Vaikuṇṭha-nātha, the crest jewel of all omniscient
personalities, understood my distress and manifested
that form, thus gratifying me. This is because He is
all-powerful.”



Verse 111

tathāpy asyāṁ vraja-kṣmāyāṁ

                          527
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


prabhuṁ sa-parivārakam

viharantaṁ tathā nekṣe

khidyate smeti man-manaḥ

tathā api – still; asyām – in that; vraja-kṣmāyām – land
of Vraja; prabhum – the Lord; sa-parivārakam – with His
associates; viharantam – sportive pastimes; tathā – as;
na – not; īkṣe – I saw; khidyate sma – I became
saddened; iti – thus; mat – my; manaḥ – heart.

However, the Lord does not sport in Vaikuṇṭha in the
same way that He enjoys playful pastimes with His
companions in Vraja. Seeing this saddened me.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “While in
Vaikuṇṭha, I saw the Lord in the form of Śrī Nanda-
nandana. But I also noticed that He was not enjoying His
playful pastimes of tending the cows and so on as He
does in Śrī Vṛndāvana. Thus, I became depressed.”



Verse 112

kadāpi tatropavaneṣu līlayā

tathā lasantaṁ niciteṣu go-gaṇaiḥ

paśyāmy amuṁ karhy api pūrvavat sthitaṁ

nijāsane sva-prabhuvac ca sarvathā

kadā api – sometimes; tatra – there; upavaneṣu – in the
gardens; līlayā – enacting pastimes; tathā – so;
lasantam – diverting Himself; niciteṣu – which were
filled; go-gaṇaiḥ – with herds of cows; paśyāmi – I
would see; amum – Him; karhi api – sometimes; pūrva-vat
– as before; sthitam – standing; nija – His; āsane – on
the throne; sva-prabhu-vat – like my Master; ca – also;
sarvathā – in all respects.

Sometimes the Lord would go to the gardens in Vaikuṇṭha
where He would enact pastimes similar to those of Vraja,
and I would see the gardens full of cows. Other times I
would see Him sitting majestically on His throne as
before. At that time, He would appear just like my Lord
Gopāla in all respects.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Sometimes I saw
that Śrī Vaikuṇṭha-nātha, for His pastime pleasure,
would go to the garden in Vaikuṇṭha and would tend cows
and exhibit other charming sports.”

The Mathurā brāhmaṇa might ask, “What was the nature of
those pastimes?”

He says, “Sometimes He would herd the cows in the
company of the cowherd boys. At other times, like
before, He would sit in His palace on the jeweled throne
with Lakṣmī, Dharaṇī, Śeṣa, Garuḍa, and other
associates. And sometimes I would see Him exactly

                           528
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

resembling my Lord Śrī Madana-gopāla in every respect –
His dress, form, paraphernalia, companions, and so on.”



Verse 113

tathāpi tasmin parameśa-buddher

vaikuṇṭha-lokāgamana-smṛteś ca

sañjāyamānādara-gauraveṇa

tat-prema-hānyā sva-mano na tṛpyet

tathā api – still; tasmin – in Him; parama-īśa – as the
Supreme Lord; buddheḥ – because of the conception;
vaikuṇṭha-loka – to the world devoid of anxiety; āgamana
– of having come; smṛteḥ – because of remembrance; ca –
also; sañjāyamāna – being born; ādara-gauraveṇa –
because of awe and reverence; tat-prema – that love;
hānyā – because of injuring; sva-manaḥ – my heart; na –
not; tṛpyet – could be satisfied.

Still, I accepted the Lord as Parameśvara, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Also, when I would remember, “I
have come to Vaikuṇṭha,” sentiments of awe and reverence
would arise, and my feelings of pure love for the Lord
would slacken. Thus, my mind was not satisfied.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Accepting Śrī
Vaikuṇṭha-nātha as the Supreme Personality of Godhead, I
never felt completely satisfied. Each time I saw Him as
my Lord Śrī Madana-gopāla, I did not consider Him to be
Parameśvara. But then I would recollect where I was –
that I had come to Vaikuṇṭha – and again respect and
veneration for the Lord would arise in my heart, causing
my love and affection for Him to diminish. For this
reason, I was not satisfied or completely happy.”



Verse 114

gopāla-devāt karuṇā-viśeṣaṁ

dhyāne yam āliṅgana-cumbanādim

prāpto ’smi taṁ hanta samakṣam asmād

īpsan vidūye tad-asiddhito ’tra

gopāla-devāt – from the Lord of the cowherds (Gopāla-
deva); karuṇā – mercy; viśeṣām – special; dhyāne – in
meditation; yam – which; āliṅgana – hearty embracing;
cumbana – kissing; ādim – and so forth; prāptaḥ asmi – I
would attain; tat – He; hanta – alas!; samakṣam – before
my very eyes; asmāt – from Him; īpsan – desiring; vidūye
– I was distressed; tad – that; asiddhitaḥ – because of
not being fulfilled; atra – there.

In my meditation, Gopāla-deva had given me His special
mercy, allowing me the happiness of receiving His
embraces, kisses, and so on. But alas! Although I was

                            529
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

living close to the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha, my desire was not
fulfilled. Thus, I felt anxious and distressed.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra continues, “Previously
during meditation, I had obtained the special mercy of
Śrī Madana-gopāla, receiving His embraces, kisses,
laughing, joking, and so on. But alas! Now, even though
I was directly near the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha, my desire was
not being fulfilled. I desired the same mercy from Śrī
Vaikuṇṭha-nātha and became greatly distressed upon
realizing that such special mercy is not possible in
Vaikuṇṭha.”



Verse 115

kadācid īśo nibhṛtaṁ prayāti

kuto ’pi kaiścit samam antarīṇaiḥ

tadākhilānāṁ khalu tatra śoko

bhaved abhāvāt prabhu-darśanasya

kadācit – at times; īśaḥ – the Lord; nibhṛtam – to a
solitary place; prayāti – would go; kutaḥ api –
somewhere; kaiścit – with some;

samam – with; antarīṇaiḥ – confidential associates; tadā
– then; akhilānām – of everyone; khalu – indeed; tatra –
there; śokaḥ – grief; bhavet – it would be; abhāvāt –
because of the absence; prabhu – of the Lord; darśanasya
– of the sight.

Sometimes Śrī Vaikuṇṭha-nātha would go to some solitary
place with His confidential servitors. At that time, all
the residents of Vaikuṇṭha, unable to see the Lord,
would be submerged in distress.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The brāhmaṇa might ask, “Residence in
Vaikuṇṭha is glorious by nature, and so it was certain
that your desire would be fulfilled in due course.
Knowing this, how was the happiness that you had
previously experienced in your meditation lost?”

Śrī Gopa-kumāra replies, “It is true that no desire goes
unfulfilled in this realm of Vaikuṇṭha. Nevertheless,
there was a special reason for my unhappiness.” To
explain this, he speaks this verse beginning with
kadācit. He says, “Sometimes, Śrī Vaikuṇṭha-nātha would
go to some solitary place with His confidential
associates such as Śeṣa and Garuḍa, at which time all
the residents of Vaikuṇṭha, unable to see the Lord,
would become griefstricken.”



Verse 116

mayā sampṛcchyamānaṁ tad-vṛttaṁ vara-rahasyavat

saṅgopayan na kaścin me samudghāṭayati sphuṭam


                          530
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

mayā – by me; sampṛcchamānam – asked; tat – that; vṛttam
– subject matter; vara-rahasya-vat – like a great
secret; saṅgopayan – concealing; na kaścit – no one; me
– to me; samudghāṭayati – would reveal; sphuṭam –
openly.

I would ask the residents of Vaikuṇṭha, “Where did the
Lord go? Why did He leave?” But they would guard the
truth like a great secret and would not speak openly.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “At that time,
unable to get any information about Śrī Vaikuṇṭha-nātha,
I would ask, ‘Where did the Lord go? Why did He go
privately? Why can’t I see Him now?’ Although I would
ask such questions in a courteous manner, no one could
give me a clear answer.” The verse can also be
understood to say, “Considering me an outsider, they
would not totally reveal such confidential matters to
me.”

Why not? The Lord’s most confidential pastimes are
secret – the topmost of mysteries – and not fit to be
revealed. Revealing such mysteries could disrupt the
mood of reverence in Vaikuṇṭha.



Verse 117

tasminn eva kṣaṇe tatro-dite śrī-jagad-īśvare

dṛśyamāne sa santāpo naśyed dharṣābdhir edhate

tasmin – at that; eva – very; kṣaṇe – moment; tatra –
there; udite – appeared; śrī-jagad-īśvare – the
illustrious Lord of the universe; dṛśyamāne – when seen;
saḥ – that; santāpaḥ – grief; naśyet – would be
destroyed; harṣa – of bliss; abdhiḥ – the ocean; edhate
– would expand.

Then, just as I would ask about Him, Śrī Jagadīśa would
reappear before the residents of Vaikuṇṭha, thus
mitigating their grief and expanding their ocean of
bliss.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The brāhmaṇa might ask, “Does one feel
distress even living in Śrī Vaikuṇṭha?” Addressing this
doubt, Gopa-kumāra speaks two verses, beginning here
with tasmin. He says, “Just as Śrī Jagadīśvara would
disappear, similarly He would return within the batting
of an eyelid.” This indicates that there was no
possibility of experiencing absence of the Lord’s
darśana. But the smallest fraction of time in Vaikuṇṭha
also seems like a very long period on earth.

For instance, in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.11.38), Śrī
Maitreya says:

kālo ’yaṁ dvi-parārddhākhyo nimeṣa upacaryate

avyākṛtasyānantasya hy anāder jagad-ātmanaḥ

The duration of the two halves of Brahmā’s life is equal
to only a nimeṣa (an instant) for Śrī Bhagavān, who is

                          531
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

the cause of the entire universe and who is unchanging,
unlimited, and beginningless, beyond the limits of time.

The lifespan of Brahmā within this material universe is
simply a nimeṣa, or moment. In Vaikuṇṭha, there is no
increase or diminution of time; time exists there in the
eternal present. To accommodate the stream of Śrī
Bhagavān’s sweet pastimes, the idea of time is only
metaphorical; the passage of time is implied. But
actually, since the abode of Vaikuṇṭha is inherently
imperishable, this passage of time is not based on the
estimatation of the lifespan of the residents of
Vaikuṇṭha. Time (kāla) exerts its supremacy over the
material realm only; it has no potency to rule
Vaikuṇṭha. Nevertheless, if one does not accept a
conception of time, he will not be able relish the
mellows of Bhagavān’s pastimes. In reality, though, the
time factor has no power to bring about any
transformation in Vaikuṇṭha.

Now Gopa-kumāra comes to the topic under discussion. He
says, “As soon as Śrī Jagadīśvara returns, by His
darśana an indescribable bliss arises in the hearts of
the Vaikuṇṭha residents and they become free from all
distress. But this is not all. Just as the ocean swells
with the rising of the moon, similarly the entire
Vaikuṇṭha spills over with joy and happiness at the
sight of the Lord, submerging everyone in an ocean of
bliss.”



Verse 118

yāvat tāvac ca vaikalyaṁ manaso ’stu svabhāvajam

tal-loka-mahimodrekāt kṣīyate ’rkād yathā tamaḥ

yāvat – as; tāvat – so; ca – also; vaikalyam – distress;
manasaḥ – of the heart; astu – there must be; sva-bhāva-
jam – natural; tat-loka – of that place; mahimā – of
glories; udrekāt – because of the vastness; kṣīyate –
dissipates; arkāt – by the sun; yathā – as; tamaḥ – the
darkness.

Whenever my mind by its own nature would become
despondent, the vast splendors of that abode would
remove that contamination, just as the rising sun
dissipates darkness.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The brāhmaṇa might raise the following
doubt, “When you could not obtain the object of your
heart, did you not experience distress and suffering in
that separation?” In reply, Gopa-kumāra speaks this
verse beginning with yāvat.

He says, “Just as the rays of the rising sun destroy
darkness, similarly the majestic glory of Vaikuṇṭha
would remove the gloomy torment that naturally appeared
in my mind.”



Verse 119

                          532
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


yadā kadācin nija-labhya-vastuno

’nāptyeva hṛt sīdati pūrva-pūrvavat

tadā tadīyā paripūrṇatā rujāṁ

nidānam ājñāya nirasyate svayam

yadā kadācit – whenever; nija – through my life; labhya
– to be obtained; vastunaḥ – from the substance; anāptyā
– because of not attaining; iva – just as; hṛt – the
heart; sīdati – would feel distressed; pūrva-pūrva-vat –
as many times before; tadā – then; tadīyā – of that
(Vaikuṇṭha); paripūrṇatā – the state of complete
perfection; rujām – for the pain; nidānam – the cause;
ājñāya – by knowing; nirasyate – it became dispelled;
svayam – naturally.

Whenever I could not obtain the desired object of my
life, I would feel as distressed as in the past.
However, I would show myself the complete excellence of
Vaikuṇṭha to try to relieve my mind of its worrisome
feeling of uneasiness.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: One attains the most cherished,
special abode as the consummate result of worshiping the
lotus feet of Śrī Madana-gopāla. But Śrī Gopa-kumāra had
not yet been able to achieve that realm. Therefore, he
had developed a feeling of indifference towards his stay
in Vaikuṇṭha. With the idea of pacifing his afflicted
mind, he first speaks about the esoteric glories of
residing in Vaikuṇṭha that he has realized by
intelligent discrimination. He explains this in four
verses, beginning here with yadā, saying, “Sometimes, as
before, I would experience distress in my heart.”

The brāhmaṇa might ask, “When you reached Vaikuṇṭha,
your innumerable desires were fulfilled, so how is it
possible that you were feeling so pained at heart?”

Gopa-kumāra answers, “This is true. However, I felt some
semblance of distress because I had not achieved my
ultimate goal.” To indicate the apparent nature of
distress, he uses the suffix iva, meaning ‘as if.’ “Then
properly apprehending that the cause of my heartache was
my desire for something superior even to Vaikuṇṭha, I
would attempt to remove my anxiety myself.”



Verse 120

etādṛśāt prāpyatamaṁ na kiñcid

vaikuṇṭha-vāsāt kila vidyate ’nyat

sandeham īṣat tvam apīha kartuṁ

nārhasy ato ’nyaḥ kim u pṛcchyatāṁ tat

etādṛśāt – than such as this; prāpya-tamam – a supreme
attainment; na kiñcit – nothing; vaikuṇṭha-vāsāt –
beyond residence in Vaikuṇṭha; kila – indeed; vidyate –

                          533
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

exists; anyat – another; sandeham – doubt; īṣat –
slight; tvam – you; api – even; iha – now; kartum – to
do; na arhasi – you should not; ataḥ – thus; anyaḥ –
other; kim u – what indeed; pṛcchyatām – to be desired;
tat – than that.

“O mind, you have reached Vaikuṇṭha, so how can you
still be restless? There is nothing greater than
residence in Vaikuṇṭha. Have no doubt about this. What
more could you possibly desire?

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra’s mind was afflicted
by uncertainty and unease. In this verse starting with
etādṛśa, he explains the method he employed to remove
this affliction.

He says, “O mind, residence in Vaikuṇṭha is beyond the
scope of mere words to describe. Understand with
certainty that there is nothing more desirable than
living here. This is established truth (siddhānta) – do
not doubt it even for a moment. The opportunity to stay
here is the topmost of all achievements. What else do
you want to know except how to reside in Vaikuṇṭha?”



Verse 121

tasmād are cañcala-citta buddhyā-

dyāpi sva-bhāvaṁ tyaja dūrato ’tra

asmāt paraṁ nāsti paraṁ phalaṁ tat

śāntiṁ parāṁ yukti-śatena gaccha

tasmāt – from this; are cañcala-citta – O flickering
mind; buddhyā – through intelligence; adya – now; api –
also; sva-bhāvam – your nature; tyaja – give up; dūrataḥ
– far away; atra – here; asmāt – than this; param –
greater; na – not; asti – is; param – greater; phalam –
fruit; tat – thus; śāntim – peace; parām – supreme;
yukti – of reasons; śatena – with hundreds; gaccha –
receive.

“O flickering mind, therefore, use your intelligence and
give up your restless nature. There is nothing more
excellent than this abode of Vaikuṇṭha, so you should
know it to be the ultimate destination. Deliberate on
the hundreds of reasons that support this truth and thus
find peace.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: “O flickering mind!” says Śrī Gopa-
kumāra, “Now, here in Vaikuṇṭha, using your intelligence
and careful consideration, give up your fickle nature.”
To reinforce this line of thought, he speaks this verse
beginning with tasmāt.

He says, “No other reward is superior to residence in
Vaikuṇṭha. Accept that this is the topmost goal. There
are hundreds of arguments that support this. Consider
them well and obtain the highest peace and happiness
that will soothe your distress.”


                          534
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017



Verse 122

tad bodhayann eva vilokayāmy ahaṁ

svaṁ sac-cid-ānandamayaṁ tathā prabhoḥ

vaikuṇṭha-loke bhajanāt paraṁ sukhaṁ

sāndraṁ sadaivānubhavantam adbhutam

tat – this; bodhayan – advising; eva – indeed;
vilokayāmi – would perceive; aham – I; svam – own
(body); sat-cit-ānanda-mayam – of the nature of
eternity, knowledge, and bliss; tathā – as; prabhoḥ – of
the Lord; vaikuṇṭha-loke – in Vaikuṇṭha; bhajanāt – from
the worship; param – great; sukham – happiness; sāndram
– condensed; sadā – always; eva – indeed; anubhavantam –
experienced; adbhutam – wonderful.

Just as I would be advising my mind in this way, I would
look and see that my own body was sac-cid-ānanda, and I
would always experience how serving the Lord of
Vaikuṇṭha in His abode bestowed the most wonderful,
intense happiness.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “When I would
advise my mind in this way, then I would immediately see
that by nature I was sac-cid-ānanda. Worshiping the Lord
of Vaikuṇṭha in His abode, I would continually
experience the most wonderful, intense bliss. But when
my heart would somehow be drawn to Śrī Madana-gopāla,
and I would lose the ability to think in this way, my
mind would become as if distressed.”



Verse 123

evaṁ kadācid udvignaḥ kadācid dharṣavān aham

vaikuṇṭhe nivasan dṛṣṭo nāradenaikadā rahaḥ

evam – thus; kadācit – sometimes; udvignaḥ – disturbed;
kadācit – sometimes; harṣa-vān – happy; aham – I;
vaikuṇṭhe – in Vaikuṇṭha; nivasan – living; dṛṣṭaḥ –
noticed; nāradena – by Nārada; ekadā – once; rahaḥ – in
a secluded place.

In this way, while living in Vaikuṇṭha, sometimes I was
disturbed and sometimes I was happy. Then one day Śrī
Nārada noticed me in a solitary place.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “When I was
residing in Vaikuṇṭha in those ways that have been
described, sometimes I would feel sorrowful and
sometimes joyful. One day, Śrī Nārada saw me in a
secluded place.”



Verse 124


                          535
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

dayālu-cūḍā-maṇinā prabhor mahā-

priyeṇa tad-bhakti-rasābdhināmunā

śubhāśiṣānandya kareṇa bhāṣitaḥ

saṁspṛśya vīṇā-suhṛdā śirasy aham

dayālu – of merciful persons; cūḍā-maṇinā – by the crest
jewel; prabhoḥ – of the Lord; mahā-priyeṇa – very dear;
tat – to Him; bhakti – of devotional service; rasa – of
mellows; abdhinā – by the ocean; amunā – by him; śubha-
āśiṣā – by auspicious benedictions; ānandya –
delighting; kareṇa – with his hand; bhāṣitaḥ – said;
saṁspṛśya – touching; vīṇā-suhṛdā – with his friend, the
stringed instrument; śirasi – on the head; aham – I.

Śrī Nārada is the crest jewel of all merciful
personalities. He is very dear to the Lord, and he is an
ocean of bhakti-rasa. With his hand that holds his
precious vīṇā, he touched my head and blessed me. Then,
he spoke to me as follows.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Śrī Nārada
greeted me with praises and gave me auspicious
blessings. In joy, he touched my head with his hand that
holds his dearmost vīṇā and began to speak. He did all
this because he is the crest jewel of merciful
personalities.”

The brāhmaṇa may ask, “Why is he so merciful?”

Gopa-kumāra says, “As he is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s greatly beloved
devotee, he is an ocean of bhakti-rasa, the mellows of
loving devotion.” It can also be said, “He is submerged
and completely absorbed in this ocean of bhakti-rasa.”



Verse 125

śrī-bhagavan-nārada uvāca

bho gopa-nandana śrīmad-vaikuṇṭheśānukampita

mukha-mlāny-ādinā kiñcicchocan dīna ivekṣyase

śrī-bhagavat – the great preceptor and sage; nāradaḥ
uvāca – Nārada said; bho – O dear; gopa-nandana – son of
a cowherd; śrīmat vaikuṇṭha-īśa – by the illustrious
Lord of Vaikuṇṭha; anukampita – cherished; mukha – of
your face; mlāni – by the moroseness; ādinā – and so
forth; kiñcit – somewhat; śocan – lamenting; dīnaḥ –
wretched; iva – as if; īkṣyase – you appear.

Bhagavān Śrī Nārada said: O son of a gopa, O you who
have received the mercy of the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha! Seeing
your morose face, I surmise that you are suffering some
kind of distress.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Here,   Śrī Nārada addresses Gopa-
kumāra, “O recipient of   Śrī Vaikuṇṭha-nātha’s mercy!”
This address indicates,   “Although it is impossible to be
unhappy in Vaikuṇṭha, I   observe moroseness and other

                            536
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

symptoms of sadness on your face. From this, I gather
that there is something causing you to despair, and it
seems like you are in distress.” The word ādi also
indicates symptoms such as staring into space and deeply
sighing.



Verse 126

śoka-duḥkhāvakāśo ’tra katamaḥ syān nigadyatām

paraṁ kautūhalaṁ me ’tra yan na dṛṣṭaḥ sa kasyacit

śoka – distress; duḥkha – unhappiness; avakāsaḥ –
opportunity; atra – here; katamaḥ – where; syāt – can it
be; nigadyatām – tell; param – great; kautūhalam –
curiosity; me – of me; atra – in this regard; yat –
what; na – not; dṛṣṭaḥ – seen; saḥ – that; kasyacit – in
anyone.

There is no scope for distress and unhappiness here in
Vaikuṇṭha. Therefore, you should tell me clearly how
these feelings have arisen in your heart. Until today, I
have never seen anyone experience sadness here, and I am
very curious to know the reason for your pain.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might say, “Like any
unhappy person, I have cause for lamentation.”
Therefore, Śrī Nārada speaks this verse beginning with
śoka. He says, “How did sorrow manifest in you in
Vaikuṇṭha? I have never seen this kind of sadness or
distress here before, and I am quite curious to know the
reason. Please tell me clearly about the underlying
cause of your sorrow.”



Verse 127

śrī-gopa-kumāra uvāca

paramāptaṁ suhṛc-chreṣṭaṁ taṁ prāpya sva-gurūpamam

hārdaṁ tad-vṛttam ātmīyaṁ kārtsenākathayaṁ tadā

śrī-gopa-kumāraḥ uvāca – Śrī Gopa-kumāra said; parama-
āptam – the most authoritative source of knowledge;
suhṛt – of friends; śreṣṭham – best; tam – him; prāpya –
attaining; sva-guru – my own guru; upamam – like; hārdam
– of the heart; tat-vṛttam – the events; ātmīyam – own;
kārtsnena – entirely; akathayam – I told; tadā – then.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra said: Śrī Nārada is fully trustworthy.
He is the greatest among well-wishers and is like my own
guru. As soon as I met him, I confided in him the story
of my heart.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “I met Śrī
Nārada.”

The brāhmaṇa may ask, “How did you find him to be?”

Gopa-kumāra says, “I found him to be a completely

                          537
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

trustworthy person and the best of selfless benefactors.
For this reason, I accepted him as equal to my guru and
disclosed to him everything that was in my heart.”



Verse 128

śrutvā tad akhilaṁ kiñcin

niśvasya parito dṛśau

sañcāryākṛṣya māṁ pārśve

’bravīt sa-karuṇaṁ śanaiḥ

śrutvā – having heard; tat – that; akhilam – all; kiñcit
– somewhat; niśvasya – sighing; paritaḥ – all around;
dṛśau – his eyes; sañcārya – moving; ākṛṣya – drawing;
mām – me; pārśve – to his side; abravīt – he said; sa-
karuṇam – kindly; śanaiḥ – softly.

Śrī Nārada sighed a few times after hearing my story.
Then, he looked all around, drew me close to him, and
kindly spoke to me in a soft voice.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Śrī Nārada
listened to the entire tale of my heart. He himself was
always disconsolate because he also was not able to
obtain that very objective. Now, remembering his
worshipable Lord, he sighed a few times out of sadness,
knowing that this subject matter is indescribable. He
was afraid that if he were to speak even a little bit
about the object of his desires, it would only increase
my grief. Therefore, with great effort, he concealed his
own unhappiness and cast his glance in the four
directions. Śrī Nārada looked all around because he was
about to reveal the most confidential truths to me, then
he drew me close to him. Overcome by karuṇa-rasa, the
mellow of compassion, he began to speak softly.”



Verse 129

śrī-nārada uvāca

itaḥ parataraṁ prāpyaṁ

kiñcin nāstīti yat tvayā

manyate yukti-santatyā

tat satyaṁ khalu nānyathā

śrī-nāradaḥ – Śrī Nārada; uvāca – said; itaḥ – beyond
this; para-taram – higher; prāpyam – to be attained;
kiñcit – anything; na asti – there is not; iti – thus;
yat – what; tvayā – by you; manyate – it is ascertained;
yukti – reasoning; santatyā – by different avenues of;
tat – that; satyam – the truth; khalu – indeed; na –
not; anyathā – otherwise.

Śrī Nārada said: Following different avenues of

                            538
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

reasoning, you have ascertained that there is no place
more exalted than Vaikuṇṭha. This is true. Do not doubt
it at all.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The translation of the verse is clear.



Verse 130

yaṁ ca svīyeṣṭa-devasya

vinodaṁ dhyāna-saṅgatam

sākṣād atrānubhavituṁ

tathaivecchasi sarvathā

yam – what; ca – and; svīya – your; iṣṭa-devasya –
worshipable Deity; vinodam – the delightful pastimes;
dhyāna-saṅgatam – through the medium of meditation;
sākṣāt – directly; atra – here; anubhavitum – to
experience; tathā – also; eva – indeed; icchasi – you
desire; sarvathā – in every way.

But just as you have experienced the pastimes of your
worshipable Deity in your meditation, you want to
directly experience them here in Vaikuṇṭha. I will say
something in reference to that.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nārada says, “But, just as in your
meditation you met with your worshipful Lord (iṣṭa-
deva), Śrī Madana-gopāla, and personally experienced
pleasing pastimes with Him, so now here in Vaikuṇṭha,
you desire to directly experience those same pastimes –
the embraces and kisses of Śrī Madana-gopāla. I will
comment on this.”



Verse 131

tasyāpi so ’tyanta-sukha-pradāyakaś

ceto-haraḥ prīti-viśeṣa-gocaraḥ

gopyottamas tad vraja-lokavan-mahā-

premaika-labhyo ’sulabho hi mādṛśām

tasya – of Him; api – also; saḥ – that; atyanta-sukha-
pradāyakaḥ – giving limitless delight; cetaḥ-haraḥ –
mind-enchanting; prīti-viśeṣa-gocaraḥ – perceivable by
special love; gopya-uttamaḥ – most confidential; tat –
that; vraja-loka-vat – like that of the residents of
Vraja; mahā – great; prema – love; eka – only; labhyaḥ –
achieved; asu-labhaḥ – rarely attained; hi – indeed;
mādṛśam – by those such as me.

Such pastimes are also very pleasing for the Lord
Himself. They delight the heart but can be percieved
only if one possesses an exceptional kind of affection
for the Lord. These pastimes are most confidential and
are rarely attained even by sages like myself. Entrance

                          539
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

into these pastimes can only be achieved by a powerful
prema like that of the residents of Vraja.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nārada says, “These enchanting,
pleasurable pastimes bring the greatest happiness to the
Lord as well. They can be witnessed only if one
possesses extraordinary affection for the Lord.
Certainly, even persons like me are also rarely
privileged to experience these pastimes, as they are
amongst the most confidential of all.” He concludes,
“These pastimes can be experienced only on the strength
of the highest degree of prema like that of the most
celebrated and glorious residents of Vraja.”

As stated in the beginning of this section, the
residents of Vaikuṇṭha had imaginary opinions about the
position of the Gokula pastimes,but here Śrī Nārada
indisputably presents the true conclusion.



Verse 132

sa vai vinodaḥ sakalopariṣṭāl

loke kvacid bhāti vilobhayan svān

sampādya bhaktiṁ jagadīśa-bhaktyā

vaikuṇṭham etyātra kathaṁ tvayekṣyaḥ

saḥ – that; vai – indeed; vinodaḥ – pastime; sakala –
all; upariṣṭāt – above; loke – in a world; kvacit –
somewhere; bhāti – shines; vilobhayan – enchanting; svān
– His own people; sampādya – bringing about; bhaktim –
devotional service; jagat-īśa-bhaktyā – through devotion
to the universal Lord; vaikuṇṭham – to the world devoid
of anxiety; etya – coming; atra – here; katham – how;
tvayā – by you; īkṣyaḥ – it may be experienced.

In a sequestered realm that is situated above all other
worlds, the Lord sports in such pastimes that steal the
hearts of all devotees. You have come to Vaikuṇṭha
because your devotion has been in the mood that the Lord
is Jagadīśa, the Supreme Lord of the Universe.
Therefore, how can you experience the happiness of those
playful pastimes here?

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might ask Śrī Nārada,
“Where can one experience such pastimes of the Lord?”

In reply, Śrī Nārada speaks this verse beginning with
sa. He says, “Beyond the material universe are the
spiritual planets. Those famous pastimes that steal the
minds of all the devotees take place in an
indescribable, most confidential place that is even
above the spiritual planets. You have arrived here in
Vaikuṇṭha by performing devotional service to the Lord
with the mood that He is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. Therefore, how would you be able to experience
those pleasing pastimes in Vaikuṇṭha? When one
contemplates Bhagavān as his most beloved friend, then
he develops special love for Him. It is on the strength
of that love that he can reach the Lord’s most

                          540
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

confidential abode and experience the nectar, or rasa,
of those pastimes.”



Verse 133

bhagavat-paramaiśvarya-prānta-sīmā prakāśane

vaikuṇṭhe ’smin mahā-gopyaḥ prakaṭaḥ sambhavet katham

bhagavat – of the Supreme Lord; parama-aiśvarya – of the
great opulence; prānta-sīmā – the topmost limit;
prakāśane – is displayed; vaikuṇṭhe – within the realm
of no anxiety; asmin – in this; mahā-gopyaḥ – very
confidential; prakaṭaḥ – manifest; sambhave – it can be;
katham – how.

This abode of Vaikuṇṭha is the only place where Bhagavān
displays the topmost limit of His opulence. Therefore,
how can those most confidential, sweet pastimes possibly
manifest here?

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Such pastimes are not found in
Vaikuṇṭha. Śrī Nārada explains the reason for this in
this verse beginning with bhagavat. He says, “These
pleasing pastimes are most confidential and secret. How
can such pastimes be revealed here in Vaikuṇṭha? This is
the exclusive place in which Bhagavān displays His
supremacy and grandeur to the maximum degree. In
contrast, Bhagavān’s most delightful pastimes can only
be experienced where His devotees exhibit the mood of
being His dearmost friends.”



Verse 134

śokaṁ sarvaṁ vihāyemaṁ

śrīmad-vaikuṇṭha-nāyakam

nijeṣṭa-deva-buddhyaiva

vīkṣasva bhaja mā bhidām

śokam – distress; sarvam – all; vihāya – giving up; imam
– this; śrīmad-vaikuṇṭha-nāyakam – the hero of glorious
Vaikuṇṭha; nija – your own; iṣṭa-deva – worshipable
Deity; buddhyā – with the understanding; eva – indeed;
vīkṣasva – just behold; bhaja – worship; mā – do not
(make); bhidam – differentiation.

Do not think that the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha and your
worshipable Lord are different from one another.
Understand that Śrī Vaikuṇṭha-nātha really is your
worshipable Deity. Therefore, give up all your distress
and worship Him.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nārada says, “Therefore, give up
all your lamentation. See your worshipable Deity Śrī
Madana-gopāla in the form of Śrī Vaikuṇṭha-nāyaka, the
Hero of Vaikuṇṭha. Serve Him here, considering Them
nondifferent from one another. Never think that They are

                           541
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

two separate personalities.”



Verse 135

tato ’trāpi sukhaṁ tat-tad-

anantaṁ paramaṁ mahat

vardhamānaṁ sadā svīya-

manaḥ-pūrakam āpsyasi

tataḥ – then; atra – here; api – also; sukham –
happiness; tat tat – each and everything; anantam –
endless; paramam – supreme; mahat – great; vardhamānam –
increasing; sadā – always; svīya-manaḥ – of your mind;
pūrakam – fulfillment; āpsyasi – you will achieve.

If you do so, then even here you will experience that
utmost bliss, which is unlimited and ever-increasing and
which will satisfy your mind.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nārada says, “When you see that
Śrī Madana-gopāla and Śrī Vaikuṇṭha-nātha are
nondifferent, then you will enjoy an indescribable
happiness right here in Śrī Vaikuṇṭha, and your heart
will be appeased. What is the nature of that happiness?
It is always increasing, manifesting fresh and new
sweetness at every moment.”

Yet, Gopa-kumāra might question, “Will the novelty of
that happiness not wear off?” Therefore, Śrī Nārada
says, “That happiness is very great and it has no limit
– it is infinitely vast.” This has already been
explained.



Verse 136

śrī-gopa-kumāra uvāca

tataḥ kān api siddhāntān sva-prajñā-gocarān api

aicchaṁ tad-ānanāc chrotuṁ śrotreṇa prerite haṭhāt

śrī-gopa-kumāraḥ uvāca – Śrī Gopa-kumāra said; tataḥ –
then; kān api – some; siddhāntān – philosophical
conclusions; sva-prajñā – through my intelligence;
gocarān – were comprehensible; api – further; aiccham –
I desired; tat-ānanāt – from his mouth; śrotum – to
hear; śrotreṇa – with the ear; prerite – being inspired;
haṭhāt – forcefully.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra said: After this, although my
intelligence could perceive some of the Vaiṣṇava truth
heard from Śrī Nārada’s lips, still, I wanted to hear
more, inspired by my sense of hearing.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Śrī Nārada
skillfully pacified me with his words.” In verse 39,
Gopa-kumāra had promised, “I will explain the cause of

                          542
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

this great wonder later.” Now, about to fulfill his
promise, Gopa-kumāra wants to reveal the great jewels of
Śrī Vaiṣṇava siddhānta, spiritual conclusions in the
worship of Śrī Viṣṇu, which will remove the many doubts
disturbing the Mathurā brāhmaṇa. Therefore, he begins to
relate another incident in the verses beginning here
with tat, thereby accomplishing all the above-mentioned
objectives.

He says, “By the mercy of Śrī Nārada, my intelligence
could perceive some of the established truths that are
held dear by the Vaiṣṇavas, and I became eager to hear
something more from his lips. Why did I develop that
desire? My tenacious sense of hearing inspired me to
hear the narration from Śrī Nārada’s lips. Ears can only
derive pleasure from such narrations of the pastimes of
the Lord (hari-kathā).”



Verses 137–138

śaknomi ca na tān praṣṭuṁ

amuṁ gaurava-lajjayā

abhipreyāya sarvajña-

varo bhāgavatottamaḥ

madīya-karṇayoḥ svīya-

jihvāyāś ca sukhāya saḥ

vyañjayāmāsa saṅkṣepāt

sarvāṁs tān mad-dhṛdi sthitān

śaknomi – I was able; ca – also; na – not; tān – about
(these philo-sophical conclusions); praṣṭum – to ask;
amum – of him; gaurava – out of reverence; lajjayā – and
bashfulness; abhipreyāya – for the meaning; sarva-jña-
varaḥ – best of the omniscient; bhāgavata-uttamaḥ – best
of the devotees; madīya-karṇayoḥ – to my ears; svīya-
jihvāyāḥ – for his own tongue; ca – and; sukhāya – to
give happiness; saḥ – he; vyañjayāmāsa – revealed;
saṅkṣepāt – in brief; sarvān – all; tān – those topics;
mat-hṛdi – in my heart; sthitān – situated.

Due to reverence and bashfulness, I could not ask Śrī
Nārada anything. However, he, the greatest among
omniscient personalities and the best of devotees,
understood my mind. To give pleasure to my ears and to
his own tongue, he began speaking briefly on all the
topics that I had been contemplating within my heart.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Eager as I was
to hear all the Vaiṣṇava siddhāntas (spiritual
conclusions) from Śrī Nārada, since he was my
respectable teacher and elder, I was overcome with
feelings of awe and reverence and was unable to ask him
any questions. Furthermore, I was feeling shy and could
only think about these matters. Śrī Nārada, however,
being the best of omniscient person-alities, understood

                            543
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

my heart’s desire and thus discussed these topics
briefly. Why did he do this? Being the best among
devotees (bhāgavat), he spoke to increase the happiness
of my ears and his tongue.”



Verse 139

śrī-nārada uvāca

paśu-pakṣi-gaṇān vṛkṣa-

latā-gulma-tṛṇādikān

atra dṛṣṭān na manyasva

pārthivāṁs tāmasān iva

śrī-nāradaḥ – the sage Nārada; uvāca – said; paśu –
animals; pakṣi – and birds; gaṇān – multitudes; vṛkṣa –
trees; latā – creepers; gulma – bushes; tṛṇa – grass;
ādikān – and so forth; atra – here; dṛṣṭān – seen; na –
not; manyasva – you should consider; pārthivān – made of
the dull matter; tāmasān – the ignorant species; iva –
like.

Śrī Nārada said: O Gopa-kumāra, please do not consider
the animals, birds, trees, creepers, bushes, grass, and
other living entities that you see here in Vaikuṇṭha to
be like the ignorant species in the dull material world.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: At first, when Śrī Gopa-kumāra saw the
many animals, such as cows, horses, and elephants; birds
such as pigeons and cuckoos; and trees and creepers,
such as mandāra and kunda, he might have been
bewildered, considering them to be the living entities
in the mode of ignorance. To remove this illusion, Śrī
Nārada speaks this verse beginning with paśu. He says,
“When you see the animals and other living beings in Śrī
Vaikuṇṭha, do not consider them to be ignorant creatures
like those in the material world.” The word ādi
indicates worms and flying insects like grasshoppers and
moths.



Verse 140

ete hi sac-cid-ānanda-

rūpāḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-pārṣadāḥ

vicitra-sevānandāya

tat-tad-rūpāṇi bibhrati

ete – they; hi – indeed; sat – eternality; cit –
cognizance; ānanda – and felicity; rūpāḥ – bodies; śrī-
kṛṣṇa – of Lord Kṛṣṇa; pārṣadāḥ – the associates;
vicitra – variegated; sevā – service; ānandāya – for
tasting pleasure; tat-tat – their respective; rūpāṇi –
forms; bibhrati – they accept.


                           544
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

All these living entities are Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s eternal
associates and, indeed, their forms are sac-cid-ānanda.
They have taken these bodies to taste the joy of the
Lord’s service in a variety of wonderful ways.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nārada says, “All these living
entities are Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pārṣadas, eternal associates,
and their forms are spiritual – the embodiments of
eternality, knowledge, and bliss. They have assumed
these bodies as animals and birds. Why? In order to
taste the varieties of extraordinary bliss in service.”
Śrī Brahmā has explained this in the Third Canto of
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam in the description of Śrī Vaikuṇṭha.
Here, Śrī Nārada removes any doubt that the birds,
bumblebees, trees, and creepers in Vaikuṇṭha belong to
species in the mode of ignorance.



Verse 141

yad-varṇavad yad-ākāraṁ

rūpaṁ bhagavato ’sya ye

nija-priyatamatvena

bhāvayanto ’bhajann imam

yat varṇa-vat – according to color; yat ākāram –
accordance with the appearance; rūpam – shape;
bhagavataḥ – of the Lord; asya – His; ye – who; nija –
own; priya-tamatvena – because of having qualities that
endear; bhāvayantaḥ – meditating; abhajan – worshiping;
imam – that.

Worshiping Śrī Vaikuṇṭha-nātha by meditating upon a
particular color, shape, and appearance of the Lord that
is dear to them, the devotees obtain that same form.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: All the residents of Vaikuṇṭha have
the same form as Śrī Bhagavān, but still there is great
variety in their shapes. Śrī Nārada explains the reason
for this variegatedness in one and half verses,
beginning here with yad varṇa.

He says, “Being attracted to one particular
manifestation of the Lord, devotees perform their
bhajana (worship) by meditating on that specific form
and color of their beloved Vaikuṇṭha-nātha. Such
devotees obtain sārūpya, a beautiful body similar in
color, shape, and so on to that particular manifestation
of Śrī Bhagavān, which may be a golden, black, white,
red, or some other color.”



Verses 142–144

tādṛśaṁ te ’sya sārūpyaṁ prāptā nānākṛti-śriyaḥ

manuṣyā munayo devā ṛṣayo matsya-kacchapāḥ

varāhā narasiṁhāś ca vāmanāś ca tri-locanāḥ

                           545
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


catur-mukhāḥ sahasrākṣāḥ mahā-puruṣa-vigrahāḥ

sahasra-vaktrāḥ sūryendu-vāyu-vahny-ādi-rūpiṇaḥ

catur-bhujādi-rūpāś ca tat-tad-veśādi-rūpiṇaḥ

tādṛśam – similar; te – they; asya – of Him; sārūpyam –
the state of having a similar form; prāptāḥ – attained;
nānā – various; ākṛti – forms; śriyaḥ – opulences;
manuṣyāḥ – humans; munayaḥ – sages; devāḥ – demigods;
ṛṣayaḥ – sages; matsya – fish; kacchapāḥ – tortoises;
varāhāḥ – hogs; nara-siṁhāḥ – half-man–half-lions; ca –
also; vāmanāḥ – dwarfs; ca – and; tri-locanāḥ – three-
eyed Śivas; catur-mukhāḥ – four-headed Brahmās; sahasra-
akṣāḥ – thousand-eyed Indras; mahā-puruṣa – of the
Supreme Person; vigrahāḥ – forms; sahasra-vaktrāḥ –
Śeṣas, having thousands of mouths; sūrya – sun-gods;
indu – moon-gods; vāyu – wind-gods; vahni – fire-gods;
ādi – and so forth; rūpiṇaḥ – having forms; catur-bhuja
– four-armed Viṣṇu; ādi – and so forth; rūpāḥ – forms;
ca – and; tat-tad-veśa – with their respective attire;
ādi – and so forth; rūpiṇaḥ – having forms.

Thus, attaining sārūpya, a form similar to any one of
Bhagavān’s manifestations, they take varieties of
appearances, shapes, beauty, and so on. They accept
different forms, such as human beings, munis, demigods,
ṛṣis, fish, tortoises, and so on. Depending upon their
worship, they take a form similar to the boar (Varāha)
incarnation, the half-lion–half-man (Nṛsiṁha)
incarnation, the dwarf (Vāmana) incarnation, the three-
eyed Lord Śiva, the four-headed Śrī Brahmā, the
thousand-eyed Indra, the Mahā-puruṣa Deity, the
thousand-headed Śeṣa, the sun-god (Sūrya), the moon-god
(Candra), the wind-god (Vāyu), the fire-god (Agni), and
so on. Some have forms with four arms and some have
forms with more, each accepting the symbols, attire, and
so on that are suitable to their respective forms.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: It is stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(2.9.11–12):

śyāmāvadātāḥ śata-patra-locanāḥ

piśaṅga-vastrāḥ surucaḥ supeśasaḥ

sarve catur-vāhava unmiṣan-maṇi-

praveka-niṣkābharaṇāḥ suvarcasaḥ

pravāla-vaidūrya-mṛṇāla-varcasaḥ

parisphurat-kuṇḍala-mauli-mālinaḥ

All the eternal associates of Śrī Hari in Śrī Vaikuṇṭha
have brilliant, dark complexions; their eyes are long
and large like lotus petals; their garments are golden
colored; their effulgence steals the heart with its
beauty and all their limbs are delicate; they are all
four-armed and decorated with excellent, beautiful
ornaments made of invaluable jewels; their boundless
splendor eclipses the radiance of coral, Vaidurya gems,
and celestial lotuses; and they are adorned with

                          546
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

effulgent earrings, garlands, and other decorations.

The Second Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam describes how the
eternal associates obtain many forms that resemble
Bhagavān and possess a great variety of shapes, attire,
and complexions. Śrī Nārada explains the reason for this
variegatedness by speaking three-and-a-half verses,
beginning above with manuṣyā.

He says, “Those who have achieved sārūpya by worshiping
Śrī Raghunātha have human forms. Those who worship Śrī
Kapila and others like him receive forms like munis.
Those who worship the manvantara incarnations such as
Śrī Vibhu and Satyasena accept forms similar to the
demigods. Those who worship Śrī Paraśurāma and so on
have the forms of ṛṣis. In this way, according to their
worship, some obtain a form similar to the fish
incarnation (Matsya), the tortoise incarnation (Kūrma),
the boar incarnation (Varāha), or the dwarf incarnation
(Vāmana). Some consider the very famous and exalted
three-eyed incarnation, Śrī Śiva, and the four-headed
personality, Śrī Brahmā, as incarnations of Bhagavān and
worship them accordingly. Such devotees obtain forms
similar to those incarnations. Thus, the devotee obtains
a thousand-eyed form by worshiping Indra. One obtains a
thousand-headed form by the worship of Śeṣa-deva. By
worshiping the sungod, the devotees obtain forms similar
to Sūrya-deva. In this way, we have to understand that
devotees obtain forms similar to the other demigods
also.”

The worship of Indra and others as the Lord of the
Universe is described in the Aindra and other Śrutis. In
the Fifth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, there are similar
references to the worship of the sun-god and others as
representatives of Bhagavān, performed by the
inhabitants of Plakṣadvīpa.

This summarizes two verses.

“One can reach Vaikuṇṭha only on the strength of direct
loving devotion to the lotus feet of Śrī Bhagavān.
Therefore, Śrī Vāmana Purāṇa mentions that those
worshipers of Lord Śiva and other demigods, who
understand the principle of nondifference, perform their
worship with the mood that there is no difference
between Śrī Bhagavān and His other manifestations such
as Śiva and Brahmā. Such devotees have also obtained
superior positions similar to and as glorious as the
eternal associates of Bhagavān. They reside on the
planet of Śiva or of whomever they worship, or they
reside in Vaikuṇṭha. Those eternal associates who
worship the Mahā-puruṣa, the first puruṣa incarnation of
Bhagavān, obtain a form similar to His, with thousands
of hands, thousands of feet, and thousands of heads.”

In verse 144, the word ādi is found twice. The first ādi
refers to all the demigods that represent Bhagavān’s
vibhutis (opulences), such as Yama and Aryamā, the lord
of Pitṛloka, planet of the ancestors. The second ādi
refers to the eternal associates of the Lord who possess
many arms –

eight, twelve, and more. Those eternal associates have

                          547
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

human-like forms, dresses, decorations, ornaments, and
so on. The word ādi also indicates that those associates
possess variegated characteristics, natures, and so on
that are appropriate to their respective forms.



Verses 145–146

rasena yena yenānte veśākārādinā tathā

sevitvā kṛṣṇa-pādābje yo yo vaikuṇṭham āgataḥ

tasya tasyākhilaṁ tat-tac-chrīmad-bhagavataḥ priyam

tasmai tasmai praroceta tasmāt tat-tad-rasādikam

rasena – by the mood; yena yena – by which; ante – at
the end of life; veśa – dress; ākāra – form; ādinā – and
so forth; tathā – so; sevitvā – having rendered service;
kṛṣṇa-pāda-abje – to Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet; yaḥ yaḥ –
whoever; vaikuṇṭham – to Vaikuṇṭha; āgataḥ – having
come; tasya tasya – for him; akhilam – everything; tat
tat – various; śrīmad-bhagavataḥ – of the Lord; priyam –
dear; tasmai tasmai – in those; praroceta – he takes
great pleasure; tasmāt – because of that; tat-tad-rasa –
with their respective mellows; ādikam – and so on.

In his internal meditation, the sādhaka serves the lotus
feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in a particular rasa, with a form,
dress, and so on that are suitable for his service.
Achieving perfection at the end of his life, he enters
Vaikuṇṭha. At that time, his heart is attracted to that
previous rasa in which, while he was in the sādhaka
stage, he worshiped the Lord, and he accepts an
identical dress and form, knowing them to be dear to Śrī
Bhagavān.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might question, “One
sees that the eternal associates in Vaikuṇṭha possess
human forms like Śrī Raghunātha, forms resembling sages
such as Kapila, and other forms that are even more
wonderful. At the same time, one sees that some have the
forms of monkeys, demons, and other lower species that
are quite different from the forms of Bhagavān’s
incarnations. Why do they have those forms?”

In reply, Śrī Nārada speaks two verses, beginning here
with rasena. He says, “We have mentioned that there are
different rasas (individual moods, or tastes) in which
the devotees serve Bhagavān. Difference in rasa is the
only reason for the variety of the Vaikuṇṭha associates’
forms.

“At the end of a sādhaka’s (practitioner’s) material
existence, at the time of his death, he may have been
performing some aspect of bhakti. He may have been
tasting the nectar of kīrtana, chanting the names of the
Lord, in a particular mood, and he may have envisioned
himself serving Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet, having adorned
himself mentally with a particular form, dress, and
various characteristics. Having decorated himself in
that way, if by serving Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet, he
arrives in Vaikuṇṭha, such a devotee would consider that

                          548
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

this particular form – which is in line with his chosen
rasa – is dear to Śrī Bhagavān. Therefore, he accepts
this exact form in Vaikuṇṭha, since that form, being
precious to Bhagavān, is capable of controlling the
Lord.

“By dint of the devotee’s loving relationship with the
Lord, or prema-bhakti, by which he has reached Śrī
Vaikuṇṭha, his dress, ornaments, and all of his
attributes are indeed supremely lovely. Since Bhagavān
finds the devotee’s particular mood of relationship, or
rasa, to be dear to Him, the devotee also finds that he
is most attracted to that rasa. The devotee may have
performed mānasika-sevā (service in contemplation) in
his final birth as a sādhaka, having meditated on the
body of an eternal associate of the Lord, including that
associate’s dress, individual mood, etc. that are
suitable for service. Upon the demise of that final
body, he arrives here in Vaikuṇṭha and directly obtains
that body upon which he had been meditating as a
sādhaka.

“This is the reason it seems that sometimes, by the will
of Bhagavān, eternal associates of the Lord who reside
in Vaikuṇṭha perform activities like Indra, Candra, and
other demigods of the mundane realm. After all, every
single thing, along with its branches and sub-branches,
that is found within and beyond the material world is
present in its real and true form in Śrī Vaikuṇṭha.”



Verse 147

te ca sarve ’tra vaikuṇṭhe śrī-nārāyaṇam īśvaram

tat-tad-varṇādi-yuktātma-deva-rūpaṁ vicakṣate

te – they; ca – and; sarve – everyone; atra – here;
vaikuṇṭhe – in the land devoid of anxiety; śrī-nārāyaṇam
– Śrī Nārāyaṇa; īśvaram – the Supreme Lord; tat-tat-
varṇa-ādi – the respective bodily complexions and so
forth; yukta – endowed; ātma – whose nature; deva – of
the Lord; rūpam – the form; vicakṣate – sees.

In Vaikuṇṭha, every devotee sees Śrī Nārāyaṇa only in
the particular form of the Lord that he worships, along
with that form’s complexion and other attributes.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might ask, “Surcharged
with topmost prema, the devotees would have previously
worshiped particular forms of Śrī Bhagavān. Now, having
attained Vaikuṇṭha and having achieved sārūpya (a form
similar to the Lord, in this case similar to those forms
they had worshiped), they will receive darśana of those
same manifestations of Bhagavān that they worshiped, who
are endowed with particular shapes and colors, since the
Lord in those forms is their beloved. But then, why do
they all feel the pleasure of love by seeing the four-
armed form of Śrī Vaikuṇṭheśvara?”

In reply, Śrī Nārada speaks two verses, beginning here
with te ca. He says, “Here in Vaikuṇṭha, they all see
Śrī Nārāyaṇa possessing the same form, color,

                          549
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

associates, devotees, and so on as their respective
beloved worshipable Deities. Their own worshipable Lords
appear to them within the body of Śrī Vaikuṇṭheśvara.”
It might be asked, “How is such an amazing thing
possible?” In reply, Śrī Nārada says, “The Lord of
Vaikuṇṭha is the Supreme Lord. He is all-powerful and
can do absolutely anything.”



Verse 148

pūrvavad bhajanānandaṁ

prāpnuvanti navaṁ navam

sarvadāpy aparicchinnaṁ

vaikuṇṭhe ’tra viśeṣataḥ

pūrva-vat – as before; bhajana – of devotional service;
ānandam – bliss; prāpnuvanti – they obtain; navam navam
– ever new; sarvadā – forever; api – also; aparicchinnam
– unlimited; vaikuṇṭhe – in Vaikuṇṭha; atra – here;
viśeṣataḥ – unique.

In Vaikuṇṭha, those devotees obtain the same unlimited
bliss of loving service to Śrī Bhagavān as they did
before, in newer and newer, unique ways, at every
moment.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nārada says, “Even previously, as
sādhakas, all the devotees were always relishing the
unlimited and ever-fresh bliss of devotional service.
For some special reason, though, now in Vaikuṇṭha, the
bliss they obtain from their bhakti is even greater.”



Verses 149–150

ye tv asādhāraṇaiḥ sarvaiḥ

pūrvair ātma-manoramaiḥ

parivārādibhir yuktaṁ

nijam iṣṭataraṁ prabhum

sampaśyanto yathā-pūrvaṁ

sadaivecchanti sevitum

te ’tyanta-tat-tan-niṣṭhāntya-

kāṣṭhāvanto mahāśayāḥ

ye – who; tu – indeed; asādhāraṇaiḥ – extraordinary;
sarvaiḥ – by all; pūrvaiḥ – previous; ātma-manaḥ-ramaih
– pleasing the heart; parivāra-ādibhiḥ – with associates
and so forth; yuktam – endowed; nijam – own; iṣṭa-taram
– cherished; prabhum – Lord; sampaśyantaḥ – seeing;
yathā – as; pūrvam – before; sadā – always; eva –
indeed; icchanti – they desire; sevitum – to serve; te –

                             550
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

they; atyanta – complete; tat-tat-niṣṭhā – of their
respective dedications; antya – ultimate; kāṣṭhā-vantaḥ
– because of attaining the pinnacle; mahā-āśayāḥ – great
souls.

By the previous worship of their particular cherished
Deity, whose extraordinary characteristics captured
their hearts, these devotees have come to Vaikuṇṭha.
Even here they still desire to always see and serve that
same manifestation of the Lord, who is accompanied by
His associates and who is rich with pleasurable
pastimes. From this, one should understand that these
great souls’ staunch dedication unto their worshipable
Lord has reached full maturation.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nārada says, “Having performed
bhajana of the unprecedented and completely wonderful
Śrī Raghunātha, along with Jānakī, Lakṣmaṇa, the Lord’s
entourage, and extraordinary pastimes, some devotees
have achieved Vaikuṇṭha. Here, also, those devotees
meditate with the same mood on the pastimes of Śrī
Kodaṇḍa-pāṇi (Śrī Rāmacandra, with bow in hand) in
Ayodhyā, in the forest while in exile (vanavāsa), and in
other places. They desire the opportunity to serve and
to have full darśana of their charming and most beloved
worshipable Lord, as in the past. Such devotees are
mahāśaya, noble personalities blessed with a grave and
serene disposition. Due to their resolute faith in their
particular worshipable Deities, they have achieved the
pinnacle of unalloyed, one-pointed devotion.”



Verse 151

te cāsyaiva pradeśeṣu tādṛśeṣu purādiṣu

tathaiva tādṛśaṁ nāthaṁ bhajantas tanvate sukham

te – they; ca – and; asya – His; eva – indeed; pradeśeṣu
– in regions; tādṛśeṣu – such; pura – cities; ādiṣu –
and other abodes; tathā – as; eva – indeed; tādṛśam –
like that; nātham – the Lord; bhajantaḥ – worshiping;
tanvate – they experience; sukham – joy.

Therefore, these devotees enter special regions of
Vaikuṇṭha, such as the city of Ayodhyā, where they
experience increasing joy by serving in the pastimes of
their cherished form of the Lord just as they had
before.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nārada says, “This abode of
Vaikuṇṭha has many confidential regions, such as
Ayodhyā, that resemble the previous abodes of the
devotees’ worshipable Deities.” The word ādi also
indicates Puruṣottama-kṣetra (Jagannātha Purī) and other
sacred realms. “Now in Vaikuṇṭha, the Lord’s servitors
continue loving service to their worshipable Deity in
the same mood they had in the past. They derive great
pleasure in serving their Lord, with His family members,
associates, paraphernalia, and so on, and thus, they
never feel bereft of their treasure of unlimited bliss.

“The omnipotent Lord of Śrī Vaikuṇṭha sits on an

                          551
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

excellent throne in His great palace, surrounded by His
unlimited associates. There He bestows pleasure upon His
unalloyed devotees – those with unwavering devotion – by
granting them the audience of His charming,
transcendental form. The Lord is accompanied by His
paraphernalia and entourage, such as His family members
and associates.

“Now, one might argue that all these manifestations of
Bhagavān are not real – that they are just imaginary
forms for the sake of cultivating faith. But really,
such a doubt is baseless because, according to
established truth, the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha has full
ability to manifest all these forms. Furthermore, there
is no relationship between Vaikuṇṭha and the illusory
energy.

“However, special regions such as Ayodhyā and other
cities are certainly present within Vaikuṇṭha in
separate forms, and the Lord’s charming paraphernalia,
entourage, and so on remain present in those abodes
according to the moods of their respective devotees.
Those abodes may appear different, but in fact they are
nondifferent. The manifestation of Ayodhyā and other
special abodes actually increases the glories of the
Lord of Vaikuṇṭha. Due to the manifestations of these
different abodes, the unalloyed devotees of Bhagavān,
who have devotion for His different manifestations,
receive the opportunity to serve Him without any
obstacle. Thus, both the devotees and Bhagavān
experience the highest bliss. Actually, there is no
special distinction between Ayodhyā and these other
abodes that are within Vaikuṇṭha, and Vaikuṇṭha itself;
the only difference is the degree to which opulence and
such are manifest.”



Verse 152

ye caikatara-rūpasya

prīti-niṣṭhā bhavanti na

aviśeṣa-grahās tasya

yat-kiñcid-rūpa-sevakāḥ

ye – who; ca – also; ekatara-rūpasya – of one form as
superior; prīti – in love; niṣṭhāḥ – firm attachment;
bhavanti – they become; na – not; aviśeṣa-grahāḥ – non-
specialist acceptors; tasya – of Him; yat-kiñcit-rūpa –
of any form; sevakāḥ – the servants.

Those devotees who are unable to accept the specialty of
any one specific form of Bhagavān become servants of any
form of Bhagavān. They are not exclusively dedicated to
Him in one form, but rather feel the same affection for
all His manifestations.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might raise the doubt,
“Almost all devotees show firm devotion towards their
respective worshipable Deities, but do all of them
achieve the same abode of Vaikuṇṭha?”

                           552
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


In reply, Śrī Nārada speaks the two verses, beginning
here with ye. He says, “Vaikuṇṭha contains innumerable
regions ( prakoṣṭhas). Śrī Bhagavān resides in each of
these special regions, where He manifests His pastimes,
associates, and so on that are suitable for the
innumerable varieties of moods of the uncountable
numbers of devotees.

“Some devotees, however, do not have one-pointed
affection for a particular manifestation of Bhagavān.
Rather, they feel loving attachment to all of His forms.
They believe that Śrī Bhagavān has unlimited
incarnations and unlimited forms, and that one can
obtain Him by worshiping any one of these. Having
affection for all of the Lord’s manifestations without
special preference, they submit to any of Śrī Bhagavān’s
forms. Others serve one, two, or more particular
manifestations.”



Verse 153

ye ca lakṣmī-pater aṣṭākṣarādi-manu-tat-parāḥ

te hi sarve sva-dehānte vaikuṇṭham imam āśritāḥ

ye – who; ca – also; lakṣmī – of the goddess of fortune;
pateḥ – of the husband; aṣṭa-akṣara – eight-syllable;
ādi – and so forth; manu – combination of mind-
enchanting names of God; tat-parāḥ – dedicated to Him;
te – they; hi – indeed; sarve – all; sva-deha – of their
bodies; ante – at the end; vaikuṇṭham – Vaikuṇṭha; imam
– this; āśritāḥ – taken shelter.

When those devotees who worship the husband of Lakṣmī
with His eight-syllable mantra, or with any of His
mantras, give up their present material bodies, without
doubt they obtain the shelter of Vaikuṇṭha.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nārada says, “The devotees who
worship Śrī Lakṣmī-pati with His eight-syllable, five-
syllable, twelve-syllable, or any other of His mantras
obtain staunch loving devotion to one or more of His
forms and thus arrive in Vaikuṇṭha.”

Śrī Parāśara states in Śrī Viṣṇu Purāṇa:

gatvā gatvā nivartante candra-sūryādayo grahāḥ

adyāpi na nivartante dvādaśākṣara-cintakāḥ

The planets, including the moon and the sun, undergo
creation and destruction over and over again. However,
those who meditate on the twelve-syllable mantra, having
reached Vaikuṇṭha, have not returned to the material
world, even till this day.

Here the term ‘twelve-syllable mantra’ implies all the
mantras of Bhagavān in a generic sense. This means that
every mantra of Bhagavān, such as the eight-syllable and
five-syllable mantras that consist of the Lord’s names,
can grant residence in Vaikuṇṭha. If the devotee

                          553
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

develops unwavering faith in any particular worshipable
Deity, considering Him the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and serves Him, then at the time of death he
shall obtain shelter in Vaikuṇṭha. This has already been
explained.



Verse 154

yathā-kāmaṁ sukhaṁ prāpuḥ

sarvato ’py adhikaṁ sukhāt

teṣāṁ sva-sva-rasānaikyāt

tāratamye ’pi tulyatā

yathā kāmam – according to their desire; sukham –
happiness; prāpuḥ – they attain; sarvataḥ – in all
respects; api – also; adhikam – greater; sukhāt – than
the happiness; teṣām – of them; sva-sva-rasa –
respective tastes; anaikyāt – despite a lack of oneness;
tāratamye – in degrees of better and best; api – still;
tulyatā – equality.

The devotees of Vaikuṇṭha relish different rasas, and
there is gradation among those devotees based on those
rasas. But still, all those devotees are equal to one
other. They each feel that the happiness they had been
longing for and that corresponds to their worship is
greater than what all the others are experiencing.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Here, Śrī Nārada says, “Upon coming to
Vaikuṇṭha, devotees experience a greater happiness than
they had relished while performing devotional service in
their previous life.”

He speaks in this way because Gopa-kumāra might have
expressed a doubt, saying, “Because all of Bhagavān’s
devotees who have attained Vaikuṇṭha are absorbed in
loving service to Him, they are sac-cid-ānanda (fully
spiritual in nature) and are thus equal. Therefore, it
is not proper to differentiate between them.”

To resolve this, Śrī Nārada says, “Even though there is
variety and hierarchy among the respective rasas in
which the devotees perform their worship – here, rasas
refers to the special moods related to śravaṇa, kīrtana,
etc. – the devotees are nevertheless all equal, since
each one attains the pinnacle of happiness according to
his particular rasa.” Therefore, it is said that they
all obtain the happiness that they had desired. This has
already been explained and will be discussed again
further on.



Verses 155–157

yathā dharālambana-ratna-bhūtā

nārāyaṇo ’sau sa naro ’tha dattaḥ


                             554
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

śrī-jāmadagnyaḥ kapilādayo ’pi

ye kautukāc ca pratimā-sarūpāḥ

ye svargalokādiṣu viṣṇu-yajñe-

śvarādayo ’mī bhavataiva dṛṣṭāḥ

matyso ’tha kūrmaś ca mahā-varāhaḥ

śrīman-nṛsiṁho nanu vāmanaś ca

anye ’vatārāś ca tathaiva teṣāṁ

pratyekam īhābhidayā prabhedāḥ

te sac-cid-ānanda-ghanā hi sarve

nānātva-bhājo ’pi sadaika-rūpāḥ

yathā – as; dharā – earth; ālambana – the shelter; ratna
– jewel; bhūtāḥ – manifest; nārāyaṇaḥ – Lord Nārāyaṇa,
the ayaṇa (shelter) of nāra (all living beings); asau –
He; sa-naraḥ – with Nara; atha – then; dattaḥ –
Dattātreya; śrī-jāmadagnyaḥ – Śrī Paraśurāma; kapila –
incarnation as a sage; ādayaḥ – beginning with; api –
and; ye – who; kautukāt – out of eagerness; ca – also;
pratimā – Deity; sa-rūpāḥ – with forms; ye – who;
svargaloka – in Svargaloka; ādiṣu – and so forth; viṣṇu
– Lord Viṣṇu; yajña – of sacrifices; īśvara – the Lord;
ādayaḥ – beginning with; amī – they; bhavatā – by you;
eva – indeed; dṛṣṭāḥ – seen; matysaḥ – fish; atha –
then; kūrmaḥ – the tortoise; ca – also; mahā-varāhaḥ –
the great boar; śrīman-nṛsiṁhaḥ – the half-man–half-lion
incarnation; nanu – indeed; vāmanaḥ – the dwarf brāhmaṇa
incarnation; ca – also; anye – others; avatārāḥ –
incarnations; ca – and; tathā – so; eva – indeed; teṣām
– of them; pratyekam – each; īhā – here; abhidhāya –
naming; prabhedāḥ – different; te – they; sat-cit-ānanda
– eternal, cognizant, and blissful; ghanāḥ –
concentrated; hi – certainly; sarve – all; nānātva-
bhājaḥ – having variegatedness; api – still; sadā –
eternally; eka – one; rūpāḥ – form.

The various incarnations of Śrī Bhagavān who descend on
earth are the shelter and jewels of the planet. Although
They display differences, They are all of the same
nature. These manifestations of the Lord include Nara-
nārāyaṇa, Dattātreya, Paraśurāma (son of Jamadagni),
Kapila, and so on. His incarnations in Svarga and other
planets take the forms of Viṣṇu, Yajñeśvara, and so on.
(On your way here, you took darśana of those abodes.)
Matsya, Kūrma, the great Varāha, Śrīman Nṛsiṁha, Vāmana,
and so on are also expansions of Bhagavān. Although all
these incarnations and manifestations are different from
one another – with different names, activities, and
qualities that indicate Their particular specialities –
at the same time, They are of one kind and are all fully
sac-cid-ānanda.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might question, “The
Lord’s different incarnations are full of unending
varieties. If this is the case, then how can They be
considered one?”

                          555
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017


Śrī Nārada reconciles this dilemma by giving examples in
three verses, beginning above with yathā. He says,
“Nara-Nārāyaṇa and all of the Lord’s other
manifestations and incarnations are the shelter and
jewels of the earth. This means that They sustain the
planet and are the real wealth of this realm. In
addition, to increase His playful pastimes, Bhagavān
comes in Deity form in different places on this planet:
as Śrī Saṅkarṣaṇa in Ilāvṛta-varṣa and other regions; as
Śrī Jagannātha-deva in Puruṣottama-kṣetra, or Purī; and
as Śrī Raṅga-nātha in Śrī Raṅgam. In Svarga and other
heavenly planets, He comes as Viṣṇu, Yajñeśvara, and so
on. On your way here, you saw all of Them. In addition,
there are the very wonderful and famous incarnations
like Matsya, Kūrma, Mahā-varāha, Śrīman Nṛsiṁha, and
Vāmana, and also Hayagrīva and Haṁsa.

“Just as Bhagavān has unique forms, natures, and
qualities in His many incarnations, so He has different
Deity forms. Since each of these manifestations and
incarnations has His own name and activities, it might
seem that They are different from each other. Variation
in shape and activities indicate multifold specialties.
However, despite these differences, They all have the
same nature, being embodiments of concentrated eternity,
knowledge, and bliss.”

Mahā-saṁhitā states:

tasya sarvāvatāreṣu na viśeṣo ’sti kaścana

deha-dehi-vibhedaś ca na pare vidyate kvacit

sarve ’vatārā vyāptāś ca sarve sūkṣmāś ca tattvataḥ

aiśvarya-yogād bhagavān krīḍaty eṣa janārdanaḥ

The body (deha) and soul (dehī) of Śrī Bhagavān are
nondifferent, so, all of His various incarnations are
alike with no specialty or distinction between Them. In
truth, all incarnations are all-pervasive and infinitely
subtle. In this way, the Supreme Lord Janārdana sports
with the help of His inconceivable opulence (aiśvarya-
yoga).

Śrī Nārāyaṇa is the son of Dharma. He and His younger
brother Nara are the spiritual masters of the ascetics
living in Badrikāśrama, which is located in Bhū-maṇḍala.
The first instance of the word ādi (kapila-ādayaḥ) in
verse 155 indicates Vyāsa, Dhanvantari, and other
incarnations. The second instance of the word ādi
(svargaloka-ādiṣu) in verse 156 indicates the presiding
Deities of Maharloka, Satyaloka, and the coverings of
the earth. The third instance of the word ādi (viṣṇu-
yajñeśvara-ādayaḥ) indicates the Mahā-puruṣa and
manifestations of Bhagavān, such as Varāha-deva, who are
worshiped in the layers of elements such as earth
(Pṛthvī). The word amī indicates that many types of
incarnations of Viṣṇu are to be seen there.

Scriptural authorities have determined that Śrī Vāmana-
deva is different from the four-armed Śrī Viṣṇu, the
presiding Deity of Svarga. Śrī Nārada has indicated this

                          556
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

by mentioning Him separately. Similarly, all other
incarnations of Bhagavān, such as Matsya, the Lord in
the form of a fish, have multiple manifestations in
relation to the different ages in which the Lord appears
and the activities He performs or according to the
descriptions found in various Purāṇas. It is famous in
the scriptures that one huge and most excellent fish
appeared at the end of the millennium in the ocean of
pralaya (cosmic inundation) and protected the Vedas and
other sacred writings. Another great fish manifested
suddenly in the māyika ocean of cosmic inundation and
bestowed His favor on Satyavrata Muni. One tortoise
incarnation, known as Kūrma, carried Mandara Mountain on
His back when the milk ocean was being churned to
produce the nectar of immortality. Another Kūrma always
carries the earth on His back.

Similarly, one finds description of five types of boar
incarnations (Varāhas). One Varāha manifested in the
beginning of the material creation from the nostril of
Śrī Brahmā. He lifted the earth, placed it on the water,
and disappeared. The second Varāha came to deliver the
earth when it was submerged in the ocean of pralaya, and
after killing Hiraṇyākṣa, He departed for heaven. The
third Varāha, established methods of sacrifice and then
lifted Dharaṇī (the earth) on His tusks. As He was
kindly narrating the Purāṇas and other scriptures to
her, He suddenly disappeared. The fourth manifestation
of Varāha descended to smooth out the jagged earth and
make the land level. He crushed all the mountains to
pieces by striking them with His tusks. He performed
various pastimes with Dharaṇī-devī (goddess earth), who
had taken the form of a female boar, and produced two
sons with her. In the end, He merged into Śrī Nṛsiṁha-
deva. The fifth manifestation of Varāha always holds up
the earth.

In Bṛhat-sahasra-nāma-stotra, one sees descriptions of
various incarnations of Śrī Nṛsiṁha-deva also. One
manifestation of Śrī Nṛsiṁha-deva defeated the divine
mothers (deva-mātās). The second manifestation killed
Hiraṇyakaśipu. Another time, He took the form of a cat.
Śrī Vāmana-deva also manifested twice, once to chastise
Bali and a second time to show mercy to Dhundha.
Similarly, two incarnations each of Hayagrīva and Haṁsa
are also famous.



Verse 158

nānātvam eṣāṁ ca kadāpi māyikaṁ

na jīva-nānātvam iva pratīyatām

tac-cid-vilāsātmaka-śakti-darśitaṁ

nānā-vidhopāsaka-citra-bhāva-jam

nānātvam – variegatedness; eṣām – their; ca – also; kadā
api – at any time; māyikam – illusory; na – not; jīva –
of the minute souls; nānātvam – variegatedness; iva –
like; pratīyatām – appears; tat – His; cit-vilāsa –
spiritual pastimes; ātmaka-śakti – own internal potency;

                          557
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

darśitam – revealed; nānā-vidha – many kinds; upāsaka –
worshipers; citra – various; bhāva-jam – born of the
moods.

The appearance of Bhagavān’s incarnations in various
forms is not illusory like the variety of living beings
in the material world. Rather, the variety of pastimes
the Lord enacts in various forms is manifest by His
svarūpa-śakti (the internal potency). These pastimes
arise from the diverse moods of the many devotees. In
other words, Bhagavān’s different manifestations take
Their respective forms only according to the moods of
His devotees, who have different preferences.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might say, “Only Māyā,
or the illusory potency, can make something appear in
different forms.”

To refute this, Śrī Nārada speaks this verse beginning
with nānātva. He says, “Bhagavān manifests Himself in
many different forms, but these are not illusory like
the different forms of the jīvas (living beings). The
eka-jīva-vādī-gaṇa – those who believe that there is
only one jīva – say that through the false designation
of ignorance, the one living entity ( jīva-tattva)
appears in different forms. Another interpretation is
that that the one Brahman reflects Itself into false
designations (avidyā-upādhi) and appears as the various
living beings.

“But factually, the diversity in the forms of the Lord
is not merely a manifestation of Māyā. Rather, these
forms manifest through the Lord’s internal potency, or
svarūpa-śakti. This internal potency is imbued with the
cognizance and opulence of Bhagavān’s pastimes, which
are fully sac-cid-ānanda. Bhagavān manifests as various
personalities because of the different sentiments of His
worshipers. The Lord’s variegated pastimes manifest an
ocean of amazing and wonderful rasas (loving
relationships). To reciprocate with the loving moods of
His worshipers, with all their variegated tastes and
preferences, the Lord comes in so many forms.

“In their worship of the Lord in a particular mood, the
devotees desire darśana of one or many forms according
to their special sentiments. When they become intensely
eager to see one particular form, at that very moment,
the Lord becomes manifest to them in that cherished
form. This manifestation is also full of inconceivable
potency, being eternal, real, and all-pervasive. With
the fulfillment of their desires, all the worshipers
experience happiness corresponding to their bhāvas, the
moods of their relationship with the Lord.

“If the Lord did not reciprocate in this way, Bhagavān,
who is glorified as bhakta-vatsala, one who loves His
devotees, would be guilty of not being affectionate to
His devotees. If any one of the manifest forms of the
Lord were non-eternal, unreal, and limited in any
respect, this would be intolerable to the devotee who
worshiped that form and it would cause him great
distress. Therefore, this is an impossibility. Moreover,
the different forms of Bhagavān have no relationship
with Māyā and are never influenced by this illusory

                          558
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

potency.”



Verse 159

ato na bimba-pratibimba-bhedato

vicitratā sā salile raver iva

kintv eṣa kha-stho ’dvaya eva sarvataḥ

sva-sva-pradeśe bahudhekṣyate yathā

ataḥ – as; na – not; bimba – of an object; pratibimba –
and its reflection; bhedataḥ – from the difference;
vicitratā – the quality of variety; saḥ – it; salile –
in water; raveḥ – of the sun; iva – like; kintu –
rather; eṣaḥ – He; kha-sthaḥ – situated in the sky;
advayaḥ – nondual; eva – certainly; sarvataḥ – in every
respect; sva-sva-pradeśe – in the respective places;
bahudhā – as many; īkṣyate – is seen; yathā – as.

Therefore, the difference seen in the forms of Bhagavān
is not just a matter of perception, like the difference
between an object and its reflection – the sun, for
example, and its reflection in water. Rather, all the
incarnations are like the one, undivided sun globe that
is situated in the sky and simultaneously seen
everywhere, but in different ways in different
locations.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nārada continues, “Therefore, when
one considers the variegatedness of Bhagavān’s forms, it
seems illogical that the difference between His forms is
like the difference between the sun and its reflections.
The sun globe, situated in the sky, reflects in various
bodies of water, but all those reflections are
temporary, unreal, and illusory. None of the Lord’s
incarnations, though, are similarly illusory. If one
were to accept bimba-pratibimba-nyāya, or the logic of
an object and its reflection [which posits that reality
exists only in the object], it follows that the source
of all incarnations (avatārī) would be like the sun
globe and all the incarnations would be its reflections.
But this would mean that all these manifestations of
Bhagavān are illusory and temporary. This idea pierces
the hearts of the devotees. The truth is that all the
incarnations, which are analogous to the object (bimba),
are fully sac-cid-ānanda.

“There is an appropriate example in this regard.
Everyone sees the same sun differently, according to
their country and their prospect. From their vantage
point, they see the sun as if it were in close proximity
to the trees and mountains that are situated in that
region. Similarly, the various types of worshipers of
the sun also set forth the sun’s form, color,
characteristics, etc. in relation to their own moods and
thus receive its darśana. For example, some visualize it
as an orb full of concentrated brilliance; some envision
it as a red, four-armed form; and some see it as a two-
armed form holding a lotus. Thus, the same sun is
perceived in many different ways. Just as what is

                          559
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

explained in this example is not tinged with even a
trace of illusion, in the same way, when the devotees of
Bhagavān directly experience all the incarnations and
view Them with eyes imbued with devotion, these forms
always appear as topmost reality, devoid of any
connection with Māyā.”



Verse 160

yathaiva ca pṛthag jñānaṁ sukhaṁ ca pṛthag eva hi

tathāpi brahma-tādātmye tayor aikyaṁ su-sidhyati

yathā – as; eva – indeed; ca – also; pṛthak – different;
jñānam – knowledge; sukham – happiness; ca – also;
pṛthak – different; eva hi – indeed; tathā api –
nevertheless; brahma – with the Supreme Spirit; tādātmye
– in qualitative nondifference; tayoḥ – of them both;
aikyam – oneness; su-sidhyati – is clearly proved.

Although knowledge and the happiness obtained by the
cultivation of knowledge are two different things, still
they are one, since both knowledge and its resultant
happiness are nondifferent from Brahman. Similarly,
although all of Bhagavān’s incarnations are different
from one another, They are one in reality.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Now in the verses starting with
yathaiva, Śrī Nārada is clarifying the subject matter
with another famous example. Here, the word hi signifies
jñāna, or knowledge. This knowledge is distinct from
knowledge obtained from the mahā-vākyas [Vedic
statements designated as special by Śrīpāda
Śaṅkarācārya] such as “tat tvam asi – You are that (of
the same nature).” The goal of the practice of this
knowledge is happiness, which is also distinct from the
knowledge itself. This distinction of cause and effect
can certainly be understood, and it is eternally true
because it is transcendental – of the intrinsic nature
of the Absolute Truth (brahma-svarūpa). But although the
distinction between knowledge and happiness is real,
because they are nondifferent from the Absolute, their
oneness is undeniably established. As Brahman is advaya-
tattva, the non-dual Absolute Reality, distinction
between knowledge and happiness is invalid, because if
such distinction were there, difference that destroys
non-duality would arise in Brahman. In this way,
nondifference and difference and the reality of
knowledge and happiness are established. Similarly, it
is true that Bhagavān has one form as well as many
forms.

Therefore, the Varāha Purāṇa states:

na tasya prākṛtā mūrtir māṁsa-medo ’sthi-sambhavā

na yogitvād īśvaratvāt satya-rūpo ’cyuto vibhuḥ

None of Bhagavān’s manifestations are made from flesh,
fat, bones, or anything material. Also, He does not
assume His forms the way great mystics do for their own
satisfaction. He is Īśvara, the Supreme Controller;

                          560
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

therefore, all of His forms are fully sac-cid-ānanda,
always existing in infallible and omnipotent Absolute
Reality.

The Mahā-varāha Purāṇa also states:

sarve nityāḥ śāśvatāś ca dehās tasya parātmanaḥ

hānopādāna-rahitā naiva prakrtijā kvacit

paramānandasandohā jñānamātrāśca sarvataḥ

sarve sarvaguṇaiḥ pūrṇāḥ sarvadoṣavivarjitāḥ

anyūnānadhikāścaiva guṇaiḥ sarvaiśca sarvataḥ

dehi-deha-bhidācātra neśvare vidyate kvacit

tatsvīkārādiśabdastu hastasvīkāravat smṛtaḥ

vailakṣaṇyānna vā tatra jñānamātrārthamīritam

kevalaiśvaryasaṁyogādīśvaraḥ prakṛteḥ paraḥ

jāto gatastvidaṁ rūpaṁ tadityādi-vyavasthitiḥ

All of Bhagavān’s forms are eternal and unchanging. They
never undergo diminution or growth, nor are They
composed of illusory ingredients. All His forms are
always full of supreme bliss and pure consciousness.
They possess all auspicious qualities and are devoid of
defects. As They are endowed with all transcendental
qualities, there is no consideration of superior and
inferior in these forms. Therefore, there is never a
distinction between the body and soul (deha and dehī) of
Īśvara, the Supreme Lord.

It is written in scriptures that Bhagavān accepts a body
in the way that one friend extends his hand to another
out of affection, and the other accepts it. This is how
the Lord’s accepting a body is conceptualized. When it
is said, ‘He is completely different from everyone,’ it
does not mean that He is only pure knowledge. He is
endowed with His power of opulence, or aiśvarya-śakti,
and is therefore beyond material nature. The reason He
appears in this world is to exhibit the greatness of His
mercy.



Verses 161–162

evaṁ vicitra-deśeṣu svapnādāv apy anekadhā

dṛśyamānasya kṛṣṇasya pārṣadānāṁ padasya ca

ekatvam apy anekatvaṁ satyatvaṁ ca su-saṅgatam

ekasmiṁs toṣite rūpe sarvaṁ tat tasya tuṣyati

evam – thus; vicitra – different; deśeṣu – in places;
svapna-ādau – in dreams and other special visions; api –
though; anekadhā – in many ways; dṛśyamānasya – seen;
kṛṣṇasya – of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; pārṣadānām – of the associates;

                          561
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

padasya – of the abode; ca – and; ekatvam – oneness; api
– also; anekatvam – variety; satyatvam – eternality; ca
– and; su-saṅgatam – associated; ekasmin – one; toṣite –
pleased; rūpe – form; sarvam – all; tat – that; tasya –
of Him; tuṣyati – is pleased.

Although Vaikuṇṭha-nātha Śrī Kṛṣṇa is seen in many forms
in different places or even in dreams and other special
visions, still, all of His forms are one. In the same
way, it can be reconciled that His eternal associates,
His Vaikuṇṭha abode, and so on are simultaneously one
and different and also eternally real. Therefore, when
any one form of Bhagavān is pleased, all of His forms
are pleased.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nārada says, “It has already been
established by the reasoning of the previous verse that
all the forms of Śrī Bhagavān are eternal. Therefore,
sādhakas see many holy abodes, eternal associates, and
Deities of Bhagavān in dreams and other special visions.
All of these are simultaneously one and manifold.
Therefore, it is logical that Śrī Kṛṣṇa in His many
excellent forms, His associates (Śeṣa, Garuḍa, etc.),
and His abode Śrī Vaikuṇṭha are all simultaneously one
and different. As such, when any one form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
is pleased, all of His forms are pleased. It follows
that when one worships any form, one develops love for
all the forms. Therefore, all devotees of these various
forms have mutual affection – one can experience this
fact everywhere.



Verse 163

eko vaikuṇṭha-nātho ’yaṁ

śrī-kṛṣṇas tatra tatra hi

tat-tat-sevaka-harṣāya

tat-tad-rūpādinā vaset

ekaḥ – one; vaikuṇṭha – of the land free from anxiety;
nāthaḥ – Lord; ayam – He; śrī-kṛṣṇaḥ – Śrī Kṛṣṇa; tatra
tatra – wherever; hi – certainly; tat-tat-sevaka – of
His devotees; harṣāya – for the pleasure; tat-tad-rūpa –
His respective forms; ādinā – and so forth; vaset – He
may reside.

The one Vaikuṇṭha-nātha Śrī Kṛṣṇa resides in separate
forms in different places to give pleasure to His
servants.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: If one particular form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
pleased, then all His forms are pleased. Nārada speaks
this verse beginning with eka to explain this. He says,
“The same Vaikuṇṭha-nātha Śrī Kṛṣṇa resides in many
places to please His servants, such as Nārada and
others. Adorned by ornaments and accompanied by His
eternal pastime entourage, He resides in Badarikāśrama
in the forms of Nara and Nārāyaṇa, the sons of Dharma.”

In this way, the special glories of Vaikuṇṭha-nātha have

                            562
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

been described. Śrī Goloka-nātha and Śrī Vaikuṇṭha-nātha
are both sources of incarnations (avatārīs) and are
therefore nondifferent. In this sense of nondifference,
Nārada uses the name Śrī Kṛṣṇa here in the place of Śrī
Vaikuṇṭha-nātha, foreshadowing that further on he will
describe Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s glories to be the greatest.



Verse 164

etac ca vṛndā-vipine ’gha-hantur

hṛtvārbha-vatsān anubhūtam asti

śrī-brahmaṇā dvāravatī-pure ca

prāsāda-vargeṣu mayā bhramitvā

etat – this; ca – and; vṛndā-vipine – in Vṛndāvana;
agha-hantuḥ – of the slayer of Aghāsura; hṛtvā – having
stolen; arbha – the boys; vatsān – and calves; anubhūtam
– experienced; asti – it is; śrī-brahmaṇā – by Lord
Brahmā; dvāravatī-pure – in Dvārakā city; ca – also;
prāsāda-vargeṣu – among the palaces; mayā – by me;
bhramitvā – having wandered.

Śrī Brahmā experienced this in Vṛndāvana after he stole
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s calves, and I also experienced this when I
wandered through all the palaces in Dvārakā-purī.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Now in this verse beginning with etat
ca, Śrī Nārada firmly establishes this subject matter by
citing the experiences of learned scholars as proof. He
says, “Śrī Bhagavān is actually one Absolute Truth but
He manifests in many forms. Śrī Brahmā experienced this
in the Śrī Vṛndāvana pastimes. How was that? When Śrī
Brahmā kidnapped the cowherd friends of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
killer of Aghāsura, along with all the calves under
their care, he experienced the oneness and
variegatedness of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s forms.”

This is described in the Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam. At that time, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa personally
expanded as the calves and cowherd boys, and thereby
increased the happiness of all the gopīs and cows who
had parental love for Him. In this way, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
enacted His pastime as their sons and calves for one
year. At the end of that year, when Brahmā returned to
Vraja, he saw all those cowherd boys and calves as
Bhagavān. Those forms were not illusory; Brahmā actually
witnessed that They were real. Therefore, one cannot say
that the original object, the original form of Bhagavān
[as with the sun globe in the previous example in verse
159], is the only real form and that all others are the
play of Māyā.

Brahmā explains the reason for this in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(10.13.54):

satya-jñānānantānanda-mātraika-rasa-mūrtayaḥ

aspṛṣṭa-bhūri-māhātmyā api hy upaniṣad-dṛśām


                          563
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

All those Viṣṇu forms – real, unlimited, and full of
knowledge and bliss – appeared completely alike in
nature. Even jñānīs devoted to studying the Upaniṣads
have widely sung the glories of all those forms of the
Lord.

One should understand that all these forms,
simultaneously one and many, are real and devoid of
illusion. Śrī Brahmā again glorifies the Lord in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.14.18):

adyaiva tvad ṛte ’sya kiṁ mama na te māyātvam ādarśitam

eko ’si prathamaṁ tato vraja-suhṛd-vatsāḥ samastā api

tāvanto ’si catur-bhujās tad akhilaiḥ sākaṁ mayopāsitās

tāvanty eva jaganty abhūs tad amitaṁ brahmādvayaṁ
śiṣyate

O Bhagavān, You have shown me that, except for You, the
entire world is illusory. First You were alone, and
later You accepted the forms of all the cowherd boys and
calves. That is, when I transferred Your friends and
calves to another place, I first saw You alone, and then
after that, I saw You in the forms of innumerable
cowherd boys and calves. Later, I saw all those forms of
Yours transformed into four-armed Viṣṇus. Along with
Them, I saw an equal number of brahmāṇḍas. All the
living entities and elements and I myself were
worshiping all those forms. After this, I saw You again
as Your human-like Parabrahman (Śrī Kṛṣṇa) form –
unlimited and nondual.

Therefore, Śrī Brahmā asks Śrī Kṛṣṇa whether He had not
indeed at that moment shown him the illusory nature of
all objects other than Himself. He says, “O Supreme
Lord, how much more can I glorify Your inconceivable
potency? This visible world, which is manifest by Your
illusory energy, is momentary like an object seen in a
dream. However, the living entity, absorbed in this
visible world, forgets his own constitutional position
(svarūpa). At the same time, because this world is
situated in You, no one can regard it as temporary and
full of ignorance. Due to Your eternality, this world
also appears ever-lasting.

“You alone are the eternal, self-effulgent, supremely
blissful Deity who supports this entire universe. O
Supreme Lord! What should I say about others, today You
mercifully showed me the potency of the vast opulence of
that Mahā-māyā, the great illusory potency, which is
astonishing. The unlimited visible universes are Your
creation. Do they exist without You? If there is nothing
but You, then everything is only Your form (svarūpa).
Therefore, You did not show me illusion, but rather You
showed me the transcendental nature of this world.”

Because it might be questioned, “How is that so?” Śrī
Brahmā says, “Previously, You were one. Then by Your
personal energy, Your svarūpa-śakti, You took the forms
of cowherd boys and calves. Thereafter, You covered all
those pastimes by Your Yogamāyā (internal potency) and
accepted an unlimited number of four-armed forms. What

                          564
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

were they like? Each four-armed viṣṇu-mūrti was
surrounded by and was being served by all living beings.
These living beings, from the smallest insect up to
Brahmā; all inert objects, from the particles of dust up
to Mount Sumeru; and their presiding Deities were all
serving according to their qualification. Then, before
my very eyes, all these forms vanished, and like an
innocent child, You started wandering through the
forests searching for the calves and cowherd boys.
Although You are all-pervading, I am able to have Your
direct darśana due to my good fortune; Yogamāyā has
removed her curtain and has brought You in front of my
eyes. By Your mercy, today I have experienced with my
own eyes that You alone are the mūla-tattva, the root
cause of the entire creation. You are the one Original
Being, and by the potency of Yogamāyā, You manifest in
different forms.”

The word abhūḥ, meaning ‘You became,’ is used in the
above verse (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.14.18) to establish
that Māyā has no relationship with Śrī Bhagavān’s abode,
eternal associates, pastimes, and divine form. These are
all manifest by the influence of Yogamāyā, who is the
Lord’s svarūpa-śakti. Śrī Brahmā explains, “Ignorant
people cannot understand the difference between
Yogamāyā, the internal potency, and guṇa-māyā, the
illusory potency consisting of three modes of material
nature, and therefore they consider everything about
You, such as Your pastimes, to be illusory.”

Śrī Nārada concludes, “One should understand from all of
Śrī Brahmā’s statements that Śrī Bhagavān has one
original form, and all the innumerable forms He assumes
are also eternal and primeval. This is what I
experienced when I visited the palaces of all the queens
in Dvārakā.”

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.69.41) clearly describes this:

tam eva sarva-geheṣu santam ekaṁ dadarśa ha

Śrī Nārada visited the palace of every queen and
observed Śrī Kṛṣṇa separately in each and every palace.

Here, one should not think that Śrī Bhagavān’s presence
in one place was real and His presence elsewhere was
illusory, or māyika. If this were so, it would indicate
a display of Bhagavān’s complete neglect of His beloved
devotees who are His eternal associates residing there.
It would be as if Śrī Bhagavān had cheated them through
illusion. In particular, because Bhagavān is the crest
jewel of all kind-hearted personalities and the
affectionate guardian of His devotees who keep Him under
their control, it does not seem reasonable that He would
behave in this way.

Although Śrī Nārada saw that Śrī Kṛṣṇa was
simultaneously present in a distinct form in the palace
of every queen, still, because all great souls have
experienced and are still experiencing the oneness of
Śrī Bhagavān’s form, one cannot reject His oneness. If
one were not to accept that Śrī Kṛṣṇa has only one form,
then this would admit the defect of inconsistency in the
Lord’s dealings with the Yādavas with His numerous

                          565
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

forms.

In addition, by the mercy of Bhagavān, Śrī Nārada saw
Śrī Kṛṣṇa emerging in separate forms from the palace of
every queen and entering the assembly hall in a single
form. Then, when departing from the assembly, only one
Bhagavān came out and entered into all of the palaces in
separate forms. Moreover, in each palace He was
performing pastimes in different varieties of wonderful
moods.

Therefore, in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.69.41) Śrī Śukadeva
states:

ity ācarantaṁ sad-dharmān pāvanān gṛha-medhinām

Śrī Nārada saw that in the palaces of all the queens,
one form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa was executing all the religious
activities that purify household life.

Similarly, in the beginning of that same chapter (in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.69.2–3), Śrī Śukadeva says:

citraṁ bataitad ekena

vapuṣā yugapat pṛthak

gṛheṣu dvy-aṣṭa-sāhasraṁ

striya eka udāvahat

ity utsuko dvāravatīṁ

devarṣir draṣṭum āgamat

‘Ah! It is extraordinary that one Śrī Kṛṣṇa in a single
form simultaneously married sixteen thousand girls in
different palaces.’ Hearing of this feat, Śrī Nārada
eagerly departed for Dvārakā-purī to take His darśana.

The idea that it was ‘only one Kṛṣṇa in only one body
who accepted the hands of sixteen thousand girls in
different palaces’ became the subject of Śrī Nārada’s
great wonder. An omniscient, great soul like Śrī Nārada
would not have been amazed if Śrī Kṛṣṇa had married

the sixteen thousand one hundred eight queens by
manifesting multiple forms through the power of mystic
yoga. Śrī Nārada knows that by mystic power, perfected
sages like Saubhari can assume multiple forms by
personal expansion (kāya-vyūha).

Therefore, this example illustrates that Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
different forms are not illusory like the personal
expansions of Saubhari and others; rather, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
forms are most wonderful, real, and self-manifest
(svataḥ-siddha). Śrī Nārada knows that Śrī Bhagavān’s
eternal associates also possess the same inconceivable
power. With his own eyes, Nārada saw that Vasudeva,
Devakī, Uddhava, and other eternal associates had
assembled in every palace with Śrī Kṛṣṇa and were
participating in His weddings. Thus, the logical
conclusion is, “Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His eternal associates,
abodes, and pastimes are actually one, and at the same

                           566
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

time unlimited and real.”



Verse 165

durvitarkyā hi sā śaktir

adbhutā pārameśvarī

kintv asyaikānta-bhakteṣu

gūḍhaṁ kiñcin na tiṣṭhati

durvitarkyā – inconceivable; hi – certainly; sā – that;
śaktiḥ – potency; adbhutā – wonderful; pārama-īśvarī –
of the Supreme Lord; kintu – however; asya – of Him;
eka-anta-bhakteṣu – among the unalloyed devotees; gūḍham
– hidden; kiñcit na – nothing; tiṣṭhati – remains.

Although Bhagavān’s wonderful potency, which establishes
this difference and nondifference, is beyond logic, His
unalloyed devotees still experience the mystery of this
power completely.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: As all of Śrī Bhagavān’s pastimes are
directed by His inconceivable potency, which is beyond
logic and beyond description, they are practically
impenetrable. Nevertheless, by the special mercy of the
Lord, the secret nature of that inconceivable potency
manifests in the hearts of His unalloyed devotees. Śrī
Nārada explains this in this verse beginning with
durvitarkyā. He says, “Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
extraordinary power of Supreme Lordship is inconceivable
(durvitarkyā). Because it is absolutely astounding, it
cannot be determined by logic and rationalization
(tarka).”

Gopa-kumāra might question, “How can one obtain bhakti
without first receiving special knowledge of that
potency?”

Nārada replies, “The secret of that potency is
inconceivable for others, but it manifests automatically
in the hearts of His unalloyed devotees. Those who take
shelter of the devotees of the Lord with full faith,
obtain unalloyed devotion and are able to fathom this
mysterious potency. Then, gradually, supported by this
faith, their one-pointed bhakti becomes ever stronger.”



Verse 166

patnī-sahasrair yugapat praṇītaṁ

dravyaṁ sa bhuṅkte bhagavān yadaikaḥ

paśyanti tāny atra yathā pratisvam

ādau mamādatta tad eva me ’tti

patnī – of wives; sahasraiḥ – with thousands; yugapat –
simultaneously; praṇītam – offered; dravyam – an item;

                            567
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

saḥ – He; bhuṅkte – enjoys; bhagavān – the Lord; yadā –
when; ekaḥ – one; paśyanti – they see; tāni – them; atra
– here; yathā – as; prati-svam – own; ādau – first; mama
– from me; ādatta – has taken; tat – that; eva – indeed;
me – my; atti – He eats.

When the one Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa simultaneously enjoys
the food preparations offered to Him by His thousands of
wives, every wife feels, “Prabhu is accepting my
offering first.” In this way, every one of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
beloved consorts sees the Lord separately enjoying only
her preparations.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: In this verse beginning with patnī,
Śrī Nārada demonstrates the influence of the
inconceivable potency by citing the example of Śrī
Bhagavān’s loving behavior with His beloved consorts.

He says, “Although Śrī Rādhā and the other beautiful
Vraja damsels, or Śrī Rukmiṇī and the thousands of other
queens, all offer food preparations to Bhagavān at the
same time, still Śrī Kṛṣṇa eats all those preparations
simultaneously while thousands of His beloveds watch the
Lord’s bhojana-līlā, His pastime of eating. What do they
see? Every beloved feels, ‘Aho! I am so fortunate that
my Lord is eating my offering first.’ ” In this verse,
the word yathā indicates that Bhagavān cannot behave in
any illusory way. Being expert in expanding His special
love, Śrī Kṛṣṇa acts affectionately with all of them.
Actually, this is not so unusual because His very goal
is to shower His affection on all. Therefore, such
loving behavior can never be māyika, or unreal.



Verse 167

kvacit keṣv api jīveṣu tat-tac-chakti-praveśataḥ

tasyāveśāvatārā ye te ’pi tadvan matā budhaiḥ

kvacit – sometimes; keṣu api – within certain; jīveṣu –
souls; tat-tat-śakti – of His respective potencies;
praveśataḥ – because of the entrance; tasya – His;
āveśa-avatārāḥ – empowered incarnations; ye – who; te –
they; api – also; tadvat – like Him; matāḥ – considered;
budhaiḥ – by the wise.

Sometimes, Bhagavān’s special potency enters into a
qualified living being, who is then known as an āveśa-
avatāra. The wise accept such āveśa-avatāras to be as
good as and as real as Bhagavān Himself.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: To demonstrate the special opulence of
the Lord’s potency, Śrī Nārada says, “Sometimes
Bhagavān’s potency enters into some great living being,
who becomes known as an āveśa-avatāra, or empowered
incarnation. These āveśa-avatāras are also completely
real. Because they manifest Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s unlimited
opulence and sweetness in their character and
activities, learned scholars have generally accepted
them as incarnations of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.” Here, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
topmost glories as the avatārī, source of all
incarnations, have been told, and later on they will be

                          568
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

further discussed. Thus, instead of using the term
‘Vaikuṇṭheśvara Śrī Nārāyaṇa’ in those places, the Lord
is instead called ‘Śrī Kṛṣṇa.’



Verse 168

yādṛśo bhagavān kṛṣṇo mahā-lakṣmīr apīdṛśī

tasya nitya-priyā sāndra-sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahā

yādṛśaḥ – just as; bhagavān – Lord; kṛṣṇaḥ – Kṛṣṇa;
mahā-lakṣmīḥ – the supreme goddess of fortune; api –
also; īdṛśī – like that; tasya – to Him; nitya –
eternal; priyā – beloved; sāndra – condensed; sat-cit-
ānanda – eternality, cognizance, and felicity; vigrahā –
form.

Just as Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa is glorious, so is His
eternal, beloved consort Mahā-Lakṣmī, who is the
concentrated embodiment of eternity, knowledge, and
bliss.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nārada has already presented the
essential principles (tattvas) of Śrī Bhagavān’s
manifestations. Now, in the natural progression of
topics, he is explaining the tattva of the Lord’s
beloved consort, Śrī Mahā-Lakṣmī. Thus he speaks four
verses, beginning here with yādṛśaḥ. He says, “Mahā-
Lakṣmī is the potency of Śrī Nārāyaṇa, who has again
been addressed as Kṛṣṇa in this verse. Vaikuṇṭheśvara,
being the avatārī, or source of all of Bhagavān Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s incarnations, is superior to incarnations such
as Śrī Viṣṇu, and therefore He is known as Mahā-Viṣṇu.
His eternal beloved consort is similarly known as Śrī
Mahā-Lakṣmī.”

It is stated in Śrī Viṣṇu Purāṇa (1.8.17):

nityaiva sā jagan-mātā viṣṇoḥ śrīr anapāyinī

yathā sarva-gato viṣṇus tathaiveyam dvijottama

O best of the brāhmaṇas, Śrī Mahā-Lakṣmī is the eternal
mother of the universe. She always resides with Viṣṇu
and is also all-pervasive like Him.

It is also stated in Śrī Viṣṇu Purāṇa (1.9.145):

devatve deva-deheyam manuṣyatve ca mānuṣī

viṣṇor dehānurūpāṁ vai karoty eṣātmanas tanum

When Śrī Viṣṇu manifests as a demigod, Mahā-Lakṣmī comes
as a goddess. When He performs pastimes in human form,
she also always enjoys with Bhagavān in the form of a
woman. Manifesting a form that perfectly matches
whichever body Śrī Viṣṇu assumes, she performs pastimes
with Him.



Verse 169

                          569
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017


sā sadā bhagavad-vakṣaḥ-sthale vasati tat-parā

tasyā evāvatārās tāḥ kṛṣṇasyevāparā hi yāḥ

sā – she; sadā – always; bhagavat – of the Lord; vakṣaḥ-
sthale – on the chest; vasati – resides; tat-parā –
devoted to Him; tasyāḥ – of Her; eva – indeed; avatārāḥ
– incarnations; tāḥ – they; kṛṣṇasya – from Lord Kṛṣṇa;
iva – like; aparāḥ – nondifferent; hi – certainly; yāḥ –
who.

Śrī Lakṣmī always resides on Bhagavān’s chest, ever
intent on rendering service to Him. Just as Śrī Kṛṣṇa
and all His incarnations are nondifferent, Mahā-Lakṣmī
and all her incarnations are also nondifferent.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nārada speaks this verse beginning
with sā to explain how Śrī Mahā-Lakṣmī serves Śrī Viṣṇu
by accepting a body that matches Śrī Viṣṇu’s.

He says, “Whenever Śrī Viṣṇu incarnates in Svarga and
other places, His beloved Mahā-Lakṣmī also manifests
herself, eager to engage in service to Him. All her
incarnations correspond to His.” A pertinent example is
that all of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s incarnations are similar to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. Those incarnations, manifesting in different
forms, are nondifferent from Śrī Kṛṣṇa. A hierarchy
exists among Them, depending on the degree of bhagavattā
(divinity) They manifest. A similar gradation is found
among all the incarnations of Mahā-Lakṣmī as well.



Verse 170

yā mahā-siddhivat tāsu sarva-sampad-adhīśvarī

mumukṣu-mukta-bhaktānām upekṣyā saiva bhūtidā

yā – who; mahā-siddhi-vat tāsu – amongst the possessors
of great perfections; sarva-sampat – of all opulences;
adhīśvarī – the queen; mumukṣu – by they who desire
liberation; mukta – the liberated souls; bhaktānām – and
the devotees; upekṣyā – neglected; sā – she; eva –
indeed; bhūti-dā – the awarder of prosperity.

Among all those Lakṣmīs, there is   one who is the
controlling deity of all types of   wealth and opulence.
She possesses aṇimā and the other   mystic perfections,
and she can grant all prosperity.   This particular
goddess is shunned by the seekers   of liberation, those
who have achieved liberation, and   the devotees.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The scriptures describe the glories of
Śrī Lakṣmī. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.38.8) states:

yad arcitaṁ brahma-bhavādibhiḥ suraiḥ

śriyā ca devyā munibhiś ca-sātvataiḥ

Brahmā, Śiva, and the other demigods, Lakṣmī-devī, and
all the sages and devotees worship the lotus feet of Śrī
Bhagavān.

                          570
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


These words of praise indicate that the worshipers of
Bhagavān consider Śrī Lakṣmī to be more glorious than
the liberated souls and other devotees. Why, then, do we
hear about her inferiority?

To address this doubt, Śrī Nārada speaks the two verses
beginning with yā. He says, “Among all those
manifestations of Mahā-Lakṣmī, there is one who is the
presiding deity of all material prosperity – she
controls the wealth and opulence of even the guardians
of all the planets, and she bestows aṇimā (the power to
become infinitesimal) and the other great mystic
perfections. It is this Lakṣmī who grants material
opulences and it is she who is shunned by those who
aspire for liberation (mumukṣus), those who are
liberated (muktas), and those who serve the Lord in love
(bhaktas). The reason is that, although

she grants specific mystic powers (vibhūtis) and
opulences (vaibhava) as a result of worshiping her, such
opulences, which are used for acquiring sense objects
and sense enjoyment, are an impediment for both mukti
and bhakti.”



Verse 171

yasyā eva vilolāyāḥ prāyaḥ sarvatra kathyate

navānām api bhaktānāṁ bhagavat-priyatādhikā

yasyāḥ – than whom; eva – certainly; vilolāyāḥ – fickle;
prāyaḥ – generally; sarvatra – everywhere; kathyate – it
is said; navānām – of the new; api – even; bhaktānām –
devotees; bhagavat – to the Lord; priyatā – dearness;
adhikā – more.

It is said everywhere that new devotees are dearer to
Śrī Bhagavān than this Cañcalā-Lakṣmī.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nārada says, “This manifestation
of Lakṣmī is supremely restless (parama-cañcalā). On the
pretext of being cursed by Durvāsā, she wanders here and
there, suddenly abandoning those who take her shelter.
Śrī Bhagavān loves even the new devotees more than this
mercurial manifestation of the goddess of fortune, what
to speak of Bhagavān’s affection for His older devotees
who are deeply entrenched in their bhakti. This fact is
mentioned everywhere in the Purāṇas and other
scriptures. However, since this Cañcalā-Lakṣmī is an
incarnation of Mahā-Lakṣmī, she is also similar to her.
Therefore, it is said that when the ocean of milk was
being churned to obtain the nectar of immortality,
Cañcalā-Lakṣmī manifested and Śrī Bhagavān held her on
His chest. However, the Mahā-Lakṣmī, who is Śrī
Bhagavān’s dearmost beloved, permanently resides on His
chest and is always worshiped by the devotees. She
should not be disregarded in any way.”



Verse 172

                          571
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


evaṁ dharaṇy api jñeyā parāś ca bhagavat-priyāḥ

tathaiva bhagavac-chaktir api sā jñāyatāṁ tvayā

evam – thus; dharaṇī – the goddess of the earth; api –
also; jñeyā – is understood; parāḥ – others; ca – and;
bhagavat-priyāḥ – dear to the Lord; tathā – so; eva –
also; bhagavat-śaktiḥ – the potency of the Lord; api –
also; sā – she; jñāyatām – should be known; tvayā – by
you.

Just as Mahā-Lakṣmī is Bhagavān’s beloved, so is
Dharaṇī-devī. One should understand that this is so for
all the śaktis of the Lord.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The course of this discussion has
brought Śrī Nārada to speak about Bhagavān’s other
beloveds in this verse beginning with evam. He says,
“Just as Śrī Mahā-Lakṣmī is the beloved of Bhagavān, so
is Dharaṇī-devī His beloved consort, and she is also the
embodiment of eternity, knowledge, and bliss. The Lord’s
most beloved sac-cid-ānanda Śrī Mahā-Lakṣmī eternally
resides close to Śrī Vaikuṇṭha-nātha. All other
potencies (śaktis) that one hears about are incarnations
of Mahā-Lakṣmī only.”

Similarly, it should be understood that Lord Śiva’s
consort, Durgā, and her variegated pastime expansions,
like the goddess Cāmuṇḍā, the consort of Bhairava, are
also the śaktis of Bhagavān.



Verse 173

mahā-vibhūti-śabdena yoga-śabdena ca kvacit

yogamāyādi-śabdena yā kvacic ca nigadyate

mahā-vibhūti – great opulence; śabdena – by the word;
yoga – yoga; śabdena – by the word; ca – also; kvacit –
sometimes; yoga-māyā – by Yogamāyā; ādi – and so forth;
śabdena – by the word; yā – who; kvacit – sometimes; ca
– also; nigadyate – is spoken of.

The Lord’s śakti is known variously in different places
by such names as mahā-vibhūti, yoga, and Yogamāyā.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: After describing the nature of
Bhagavān’s śakti in four verses, beginning here with
mahā, Śrī Nārada now introduces this śakti’s different
names, which are based on her activities. He says,
“Sometimes this potency is addressed as mahā-vibhūti
(inconceivable potency or goddess of fortune) and
sometimes as Yogamāyā (internal potency).” Here the word
ādi indicates that this potency is also called prakṛti
(nature), śakti, and so on. For instance, the Mahā-
saṁhitā states:

śrī-bhū-durgeti yā bhinnā jīvamāyā mahātmanaḥ

ātmamāyā tad-icchā syād guṇamāyā jaḍātmikā


                          572
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

That Māyā of Bhagavān is also known as Śrī, Bhū, and
Durgā, whose activities, respectively, are to manifest
the jīvas; to manifest ātma-māyā, the desires of
Bhagavān; and to manifest the material world consisting
of the three modes of material nature.

The Śabda-mahodadhi dictionary also states:

triguṇātmikātha jñānañca viṣṇuśaktistathaiva ca

māyāśabdena bhaṇyante śabdatattvārthavedibhiḥ

As per the opinion of scholars who understand the true
meaning of words, the word ‘Māyā’ indicates tri-guṇa-
ātmikā śakti (the potency which consists of the three
modes of material nature), jñāna (knowledge), and Viṣṇu-
śakti (the potency of Viṣṇu).

It is also stated in the Skanda Purāṇa:

māyāmayety avidyeti niyatir mohinīti ca

prakṛtir vāsanety evaṁ tavecchānanta kathyate

Śrī Bhagavān’s potency of desire (icchā-śakti) has innu-
merable names such as Māyā (illusion), avidyā
(ignorance), jaḍa (dull matter), mohinī (enchantress),
prakṛti (nature), and vāsanā (material desire).

Therefore, the Lord’s single potency has many names
according to the functions she performs.



Verse 174

yā sāndra-sac-cid-ānanda-vilāsābhyudayātmikā

nityā satyāpy anādy-antā yā ’nirvācyā svarūpataḥ

yā – who; sāndra – condensed; sat-cit-ānanda –
eternality, cognizance, and bliss; vilāsa – pastimes;
abhyudaya – manifests; ātmikā – whose self; nityā –
eternal; satyā – real; api – also; anādī-antā – without
beginning or end; yā – who; anirvācyā – beyond
description; svarūpataḥ – by her constitutional nature.

This śakti of Śrī Bhagavān, which is the concentrated
essence of eternality (sat), cognizance (cit), and
pleasure (ānanda), manifests the glorious opulence of
the Lord’s pastimes. She has no beginning and no end,
and she is beyond description, being eternal, absolutely
real, and unlimited.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nārada says, “It is this śakti
that makes Bhagavān’s transcendental pastimes
brilliantly attractive. Their gran-deur is this
potency’s very nature. She is eternal, real,
beginningless, unlimited, and indescribable. Being the
mahā-śakti of Bhagavān, who is the Supreme Brahman, she
cannot be perceived by logic and reason, and therefore
no one can elucidate the truth of her nature.”



                          573
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


Verse 175

bhagavad-bhajanānanda-vaicitrī-jananī hi sā

nānā-vidho bhagavato viśeṣo vyajyate yayā

bhagavat-bhajana – of devotional service to the Lord;
ānanda – of bliss; vaicitrī – of the varieties; jananī –
the generator; hi – certainly; sā – she; nānā-vidhaḥ –
many forms; bhagavataḥ – of the Lord; viśeṣaḥ – special;
vyajyate – is manifested; yayā – by whom.

This śakti manifests all of the Lord’s incarnations and
Their distinct characteristics, and because of this, she
is known as the mother of the varieties of pleasure of
bhajana. In other words, she expands the bliss of loving
service to the Lord in ever-fresh forms.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: In the previous two verses, Śrī Nārada
explained the svarūpa-lakṣaṇa (intrinsic
characteristics) of Bhagavān’s potency, Lakṣmī. Now in
two verses, beginning here with bhagavat, he describes
her taṭastha-lakṣaṇa (marginal, or extrinsic,
characteristics).

He says, “She is the mother of the various sweet wonders
that are relished in the bliss of devotional service.
Although that śakti, Lakṣmī, being similar to sac-cid-
ānanda Śrī Bhagavān, is nondifferent from Him, still,
she manifests the wonderful variety of differences among
the Lord’s devotees. Bhagavān and the jīva are both sac-
cid-ānanda, sharing the same spiritual reality known as
brahma-tattva. At the same time, however, jīva-brahma
(the individual soul) and Parabrahman (Supreme Soul) are
different, just as the sun and sunshine are different.

“That same potency, Lakṣmī, also manifests the different
stages of bhakti – sādhana-bhakti (the stage of
practice), bhāva-bhakti (the initial stage of pure love
of God), and prema-bhakti (fully manifest pure love of
God). In addition, she manifests the various special
rasas, or loving relationships with the Lord –
neutrality, servitorship, friendship, parental
affection, and other mellows. In this way, she
constantly increases the novelty and sweetness of the
bliss of worshiping and serving the Lord.

“Bhagavān, who is Parabrahman, is one without a second,
but He manifests in multiple forms through her auspices.
She is the agent for the beauty and sweetness of His
every form and for the variegatedness of all His
wonderful pastimes.”



Verse 176

tathaiva lakṣmyā bhaktānāṁ

bhakter lokasya karmaṇām

sā sā viśeṣa-vaicitrī


                             574
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

sadā sampadyate yataḥ

tathā – so; eva – indeed; lakṣmyā – through Lakṣmī;
bhaktānām – of the devotees; bhakteḥ – of devotion;
lokasya – of the Vaikuṇṭha world; karmaṇām – of His
pastimes; sā sā – whatever; viśeṣa – distinct; vaicitrī
– varieties; sadā – forever; sampadyate – is manifested;
yataḥ – whence.

Through the agency of that śakti, Lakṣmī, the distinct
varieties of Bhagavān’s devotees, His devotional
service, His abodes, and all His pastimes are forever
manifest.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nārada says, “The agency of
Bhagavān’s powerful śakti alone manifests the
indescribable wonder of difference in the form of Lord’s
devotees such as Śrī Śeṣa and Śrī Garuḍa; His bhakti in
the form of śravaṇa, kīrtana, and so on; His abodes such
as Śrī Vaikuṇṭha; and the variegated activities He
performs. In other words, this śakti manifests wonderful
diversity. If it were not for this śakti, such
variegatedness of numerous forms would not be produced
from the single form that is concentrated sac-cid-
ānanda.

“This means that even though bhakta (the devotee),
bhakti (devotional service), loka (the transcendental
abode), and līlā (the pastimes of the Lord) are all of
the same spiritual nature, and are thus one, at the same
time, great variety manifests in each one of them by the
influence of this śakti.” The word sadā used in this
verse indicates an unending manifestation of ever-new
varieties.

Śrī Viṣṇu-saṁhitā states:

icchā-śaktir jñāna-śaktiḥ kriyā-śaktir iti tridhā

śakti-śaktimatoś cāpi na bhedaḥ kaścid iṣyate

This śakti has three different aspects: the energy of
desire (icchā-śakti), the energy of knowledge (jñāna-
śakti), and the energy of action (kriyā-śakti). However,
as there is no difference between śakti, the energy, and
śaktimāna, the energetic, this potency by nature is one.

At the end of the Second Chapter, the different
varieties were described: different devotees such as
Śeṣa, the son of Kadru, and Garuḍa, the son of Vinatā;
different limbs of devotional service such as śravaṇa
and kīrtana; different abodes such as Ramāpriya,
Śvetadvīpa, and Vaikuṇṭha; and different activities such
as Bhagavān’s appearing in this world out of affection
for His devotees, drinking breast milk, crawling on the
ground, and His performance of other such pleasurable
pastimes. One should understand that all these
differences are eternally present in these different
forms.



Verse 177


                            575
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

sā ca tasyāś ca sā ceṣṭā jñeyā tac-chuddha-sevakaiḥ

atarkyā śuṣka-dustarka-jñāna-sambhinna-mānasaiḥ

sā – she; ca – and; tasyāḥ – her; ca – and; sā – it;
ceṣṭā – activities; jñeyā – understood; tat – His;
śuddha-sevakaiḥ – by the pure servitors; atarkyā –
inconceivable; śuṣka – dry; dustarka – through
contaminated logic; jñāna – through adherence to
speculative knowledge; sambhinna – completely impaired;
mānasaiḥ – by those whose minds.

Only Bhagavān’s pure devotees can understand this śakti
and her strength and activities. Those whose minds are
contaminated by dry knowledge can never understand her.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might ask, “What is
the nature of this śakti? How does such variegatedness
arise through her?”

Addressing this, Śrī Nārada speaks this verse beginning
with sā. He says, “Only Śrī Bhagavān’s pure servants who
are endowed with unalloyed devotion can understand her
and her indescribable activities. Those whose minds have
become polluted due to contact with knowledge arising
from duṣṭa-nyāya (faulty logic) cannot understand the
truth of that potency through argument.”

In verse 165, when explaining that Śrī Bhagavān’s
different forms are simultaneously one and many, Śrī
Nārada had said, “durvitarkyā hi sā śaktiḥ – that
potency is certainly inconceivable.” Śrī Nārada wanted
to clearly establish that variegatedness in the material
and spiritual realms is very difficult to understand.
Therefore, according to ukta-poṣa-nyāya (the logic of
repetition), in order to emphasize this subject matter,
he is repeating it even though it has already been
discussed before. These principles are so difficult that
one will not understand them unless he hears them
repeatedly.



Verse 178

sā parāparayoḥ śaktyoḥ

parā śaktir nigadyate

prabhoḥ svābhāvikī sā hi

khyātā prakṛtir ity api

sā – she; para – superior; aparayoḥ – and inferior;
śaktyoḥ – of the two potencies; parā – superior; śaktiḥ
– potency; nigadyate – is called; prabhoḥ – of the Lord;
svābhāvikī – innate; sā – she; hi – indeed; khyātā –
known; prakṛtiḥ – the primordial potency; iti – as; api
– also.

Of the two potencies of Śrī Bhagavān, known as parā
(superior) and aparā (inferior), she is classified as
the superior potency. She is svābhāvikī (innate), having
arisen from the Lord’s inherent nature, and in some

                           576
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

places she is known as prakṛti (nature).

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nārada says, “There are two types
of potencies, parā (superior) and aparā (inferior). Śrī
Prahlāda and other great personalities have glorified
this mahā-śakti as the parā potency.” These two
potencies are described in the prayers offered by Śrī
Prahlāda in Śrī Viṣṇu Purāṇa (1.19.176–177):

sarva-bhūteṣu savarvātman yā śaktir aparā tava

guṇāśrayā namas tasyai śāśvatāyai sureśvara

yātīta-gocarā vācāṁ manasāṁ ca viśeṣaṇā

jñāni-jñāna-paricchedyā vande tām īśvarīṁ parām

O Soul of all beings! O God of gods! I offer obeisances
to

Your eternal aparā-śakti, or inferior energy, who is the
shelter of the three modes of material nature. However,
to that śakti who is devoid of material distinctions,
who is beyond mind and words, who differentiates between
the knower and his knowledge, to that parā-śakti, that
topmost potency of the Supreme Lord, I offer praise.

Śrī Nārada says, “The inferior potency, famous as Māyā,
is dull by nature. Because the superior potency is
devoid of distinguishing attributes such as class (
jāti), qualities (guṇa), and activities (kriyā), and
because it is of the nature of Parabrahman, it is beyond
words and inconceivable to the mind. Even so, this parā-
śakti illuminates everything. She manifests the division
between the living being ( jīva), who is the knower, and
his knowledge ( jñāna) or intelligence (buddhi). She
does this the same way she illuminates the distinctions
between external objects like clay pots.”

Alternatively, another understanding is: “Due the effect
of this potency, the knowledge of hardened philosophers
who lack the ability for sound reasoning becomes
restricted, or limited, and yet knowledge automatically
manifests in the hearts of the pure devotees.”

Śrī Nārada continues, “You should understand this śakti
to be the Lord’s svarūpa-bhūtā potency, the energy that
is born from His very nature. Because this potency has
the same characteristics as the Lord, such as
eternality, she is nondifferent from Him and is known as
īsvarī, or divine.”

Alternatively: “Because she has the great power to
manifest all kinds of wonderful varieties, she is parā
and she is also known as cid-vilāsa-rūpā, one who
manifests transcendental pastimes full of enjoyment.”

Alternatively: “All scholars expert in the Purāṇas have
addressed her as prakṛti because she is the natural
(svābhāvikī) potency of Bhagavān. The meaning of the
word prakṛti is ‘intrinsic nature,’ or svabhāva. Since
this potency is nondifferent from Bhagavān, you should
understand this potency to be the true nature, or
svarūpa, of the Lord.”

                          577
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017




Verse 179

aṁśāḥ bahu-vidhās tasyā lakṣyante kārya-bhedataḥ

tasyā eva praticchāyā-rūpā māyā guṇātmikā

aṁśāḥ – plenary portions; bahu-vidhāḥ – many kinds;
tasyāḥ – of her; lakṣyante – appear; kārya-bhedataḥ – by
the divisions of activity; tasyāḥ – of her; eva –
indeed; praticchāyā – of a shadow; rūpā – the form; māyā
– illusory; guṇa-ātmikā – consisting of the modes of
nature.

Based on the variety of activities she performs, the
elements or divisions of this parā-śakti appear in many
different forms. Illusory Māyā, which comprises the
three modes of material nature, is her shadow.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nārada says, “Based on her
activities, this parā-śakti, superior potency, is
characterized by many wonderful variations, such as the
different types of devotional service, devotees, and
objects of devotion. Moreover, in relation to these
three, she also creates the varieties of rasas (the
mellows of love), bhāvas (ecstatic moods), rūpas
(forms), and so on. Additionally, the material
manifestation known as kāraṇa-rūpa-śakti (the
instrumental, or causal potency) also has many
specialities based on divisions and further sub-
divisions of knowledge ( jñāna), actions (karma), and so
on.”

Parāśara Muni has described her plurality of facets in
this way (Viṣṇu Purāṇa 1.3.2):

śaktayaḥ sarva-bhūtānām acintya-jñāna-gocarāḥ

yato ’to brahmaṇas tās tu sargādyā bhāva-śaktayaḥ

bhavanti tapatāṁ śreṣṭha pāvakasya yathoṣṇatā

All existent entities have their own potencies, which
can be understood only by divine knowledge. These
potencies are inconceivable by mundane logic or
knowledge. The Supreme Brahman has many variegated
potencies that perform the activities of creation and so
on. These are all nondifferent from Him, just as heat is
nondifferent from fire.

Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī has commented on this verse: “In
this world, one can perceive the potencies of precious
stones, mantras, and so on through inconceivable
knowledge, which is beyond logic and which can be
understood only through the evidence of anyathā-
anupapatti. Here, the meaning of anyathā-anupapatti is
that although one might directly witness only the
effect, one should know that the effect cannot be
separate from the cause. Thus, one should assume the
cause upon seeing the effect. Another way of
understanding the idea of inconceivable potency is that
because the difference and nondifference of these

                          578
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

potencies is ambiguous, they cannot be analyzed. It is
conceivable only through arthāpatti, that proof in which
the establishment of one fact automatically proves
another fact. Just as within fire there is the potency,
or power, to burn, so by nature, Parabrahman Śrī Viṣṇu
possesses inconceivable potencies to accomplish
creation.”

Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (6.8) also states:

na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇaṁ ca vidyate

na tat-samaś cābhyadhikaś ca dṛśyate

parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate

svābhāvikī jñāna-vala-kriyā ca

He has neither activities to perform nor material senses
to accomplish His activities. No one is seen to be equal
to Him or greater than Him. One hears that this Supreme
Brahman has different potencies like jñāna (knowledge),
bala (power), and kriyā (action).

For instance, fire has the potency of heat. Similarly,
all objects have their own potencies that can be
perceived only by inconceivable knowledge. Brahman also
possesses potencies that are nondifferent from its
nature. The Śrutis give evidence for this:

parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate

One hears about Parabrahman’s various types of
potencies.

Just as the energy of heat cannot be removed from fire
by any agency, such as jewels or mantras, similarly
Bhagavān’s natural potencies cannot be separated from
Him. Therefore, His opulence is eternal and autonomous.

It is also stated in Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad (4.4.22):

sadā ayam asya sarvasya vaśī sarvasyeśānaḥ
sarvasyādhipatiḥ

That Parabrahman is the Lord of everyone, the controller
of everyone, and the ruler of everyone.

That Parabrahman alone is the cause behind the creation,
maintenance, and destruction of this material universe.
He accomplishes this through the agency of His māyā-
śakti, which is the shadow or semblance (prati-chāyā) of
His spiritual pleasure potency. This Māyā, consisting of
the three modes of material nature, produces all the
vast varieties of the creation, and because she is the
shadow of the spiritual potency that manifests the
Lord’s spiritual pastimes, this material universe,
created by that Māyā, appears to be like Vaikuṇṭha.



Verse 180

mithyā-prapañca-jananī mithyā-bhrānti-tamo-mayī

                          579
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


ato ’nirūpyā ’nityādyā jīva-saṁsāra-kāriṇī

mithyā – of the illusory world; prapañca – of the five
gross elements; jananī – the mother; mithyā-bhrānti –
with false delusions; tamaḥ-mayī – imbued by darkness;
ataḥ – then; anirūpyā – indescribable; anityā –
transitory; ādyā – original; jīva – the minute spirit
souls; saṁsāra – of the cycle of transmigration of
species; kāriṇī – the cause.

This inert ( jaḍa) Māyā is the mother of the illusory
material world. As she is the embodiment of ignorance
and delusion, her nature is beyond description. Although
she has imprisoned the living beings in the repeated
cycle of birth and death from time without beginning,
Māyā is destroyed when the living being receives
knowledge of

his constitutional position, and therefore, she is
understood to be non-eternal. She is known as
beginningless because she is the shadow of the internal
spiritual energy, cit-śakti-māyā.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Now Śrī Nārada speaks three verses,
beginning here with mithyā, to introduce the subject
matter of the nature and activities of Māyā.

He says, “Māyā, who alone is the mother of the cause
(kāraṇa) and effect (kārya) of the illusory material
world, generates the delusion of unreality in the form
of knowledge and ignorance, liberation and bondage, and
other dualities. Being the embodiment of ignorance, she
covers knowledge of the Absolute Truth. She is therefore
indefin-able (anirūpyā) because her form or nature
cannot be described.

She is also non-eternal (anityā), because when the
living being receives knowledge of his constitutional
position (svarūpa-jñāna), the influence of Māyā is
destroyed for that particular soul. Furthermore, she is
the shadow of the spiritual potency (cit-śakti) of the
Lord and so is named ādyā, or beginningless. Because she
is the cause of the living being’s material existence,
she is known as avidyā, or ignorance. By spreading
ignorance, she becomes the cause of the repetition of
birth and death for a living being within the material
world.”



Verse 181

aṣṭamāvaraṇasyādhiṣṭhātrī mūrtimatī hi yā

kāryākāra-vikārasyāprāptyā prakṛtir ucyate

aṣṭama – eighth; āvaraṇasya – of the covering;
adhiṣṭhātrī – presiding Deity; mūrti-matī – embodied
form; hi – indeed; yā – who; kārya-ākāra – of her
occupations and form; vikārasya – transformation;
aprāptyā – because of not undergoing; prakṛtiḥ –
primordial nature; ucyate – she is called.


                          580
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

This Māyā takes a personal form and resides as the
presiding Deity of the eighth covering of the universe.
Because her nature is not affected by transformations of
material creation, she is also known as prakṛti, or
primordial nature.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nārada continues, “When she
assumes a form, she becomes the presiding Deity of the
eighth covering of the universe and is known as prakṛti.
Why is she known as such? Because she never undergoes
transformation, being untouched by the workings of
material nature. As this prakṛti is the cause of
transformation, or change (vikāra), she herself is the
antipathy of change and never subject to transformation.
This illusory potency, being part and parcel of cid-
vilāsa-rūpa-śakti (the spiritual potency that manifests
Bhagavān’s transcendental pastimes), is nondifferent
from the spiritual potency.”

Therefore, when Śrī Gopa-kumāra reaches Māyā’s abode in
the eighth covering of the brahmāṇḍa, she tells him (Śrī
Bṛhad-Bhāgavatāmṛtam 2.3.28):

bhaktim icchasi vā viṣṇos tathāpy etasya ceṭikām

bhaginīṁ śakti-rūpāṁ māṁ kṛpayā bhaja bhakti-dām

If you desire loving devotion for Bhagavān Śrī Viṣṇu,
then worship me, considering me to be His maidservant,
sister, or śakti. Because I am His potency, I increase
bhakti unto Śrī Viṣṇu. Because I am His sister, I
satisfy the desires of His devotees by bestowing bhakti.



Verse 182

yasyās tv ati-krameṇaiva muktir bhaktiś ca siddhyati

utpāditaṁ yayā viśvam aindra-jālikavan mṛṣā

yasyāḥ – of whom; tu – indeed; ati-krameṇa – by crossing
over; eva – certainly; muktiḥ – liberation; bhaktiḥ –
devotional service; ca – and; sidhyati – is attained;
utpāditam – established; yayā – by whom; viśvam – the
material universe; aindra-jālika-vat – like a magical
show; mṛṣā – through illusion.

When one crosses over this Māyā, one attains liberation
and devotional service. Just like the magic created by a
magician, this unreal material universe is the creation
of Māyā.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nārada says, “This Māyā is like a
magician. A magician may manifest various types of
objects in front of his audience, but they are all
unreal; they are only illusions. In the same way, since
it is Māyā’s duty to bewilder everyone, just as a
magician produces his illusions, she creates this unreal
universal creation.”



Verse 183

                          581
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017


śaktyā sampāditaṁ yat tu sthiraṁ satyaṁ ca dṛśyate

kardama-prabhṛtīnāṁ tat-tapo-yogādi-jaṁ yathā

śaktyā – by the spiritual potency; sampāditam – created;
yat – what; tu – indeed; sthiram – permanent; satyam –
real; ca – and; dṛśyate – is seen; kardama-prabhṛtīnām –
of Kardama Muni and others; tat – that; tapaḥ – by
austerity; yoga – by yoga; ādi – and so forth; jam –
generated; yathā – as.

Similarly, all objects created by Bhagavān’s cit-śakti,
or spiritual potency, are known to be real and
permanent, like the objects created by the austerities
and mystic yoga practices of Kardama and other sages.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: All the activities performed by
Bhagavān’s spiritual pleasure potency, the cid-vilāsa-
śakti, are permanent and real. Śrī Nārada illustrates
this with examples and logic in two verses, beginning
here with śaktyā.

He says, “All objects created by this cit-śakti are
acknowledged to be real and permanent. Examples include
the famous airplane that moves as one pleases, and the
palaces and all the objects created by the austerities
of Kardama, Saubhari, and other sages that appeared to
be permanent and real. Here the word ādi indicates the
precious stones, mantras, and so on that also have the
power to create things.

“The purport is that a magician, by his expertise in
deception, sows bewilderment in the vision of his entire
audience and creates different types of objects that are
actually false. All those objects seem to be real, but
they are temporary, and in a moment they are destroyed.
Specifically, those objects cannot be used by anyone in
any way. The creations obtained by the austerities of
yoga, on the other hand, are always seen to be real and
they can be enjoyed at will. Therefore, they are known
as permanent.”



Verse 184

niḥśeṣa-sat-karma-phalaika-dātur

yogīśvarair arcya-padāmbujasya

kṛṣṇasya śaktyā janitaṁ tayā yan

nityaṁ ca satyaṁ ca paraṁ hi tadvat

niḥśeṣa – all; sat – pious; karma – of deeds; phala –
fruit; eka – sole; dātuḥ – of the bestower; yogi-
īśvaraiḥ – by the masters of yoga; arcya – worshipable;
pada-ambujasya – of the lotus feet; kṛṣṇasya – of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa; śaktyā – by the potency; janitam – born; tayā –
by her;yat – what; nityam – permanent; ca – and; satyam
– real; ca – and; param – superior; hi – indeed; tadvat
– similarly.


                          582
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

Even the best of the yogīs worship the lotus feet of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, who alone bestows the fruits of penances and
other pious activities. Whatever is produced by Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s parā-śakti is permanent and real, just as He is.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nārada says, “One can see that
ordinary living entities are empowered to produce
permanent and real objects from their performance of
austerities, yoga, and other pious activities. But the
best of yogīs worship the lotus feet of the Supreme Lord
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and He alone bestows the results of their
pious activities, such as penances (tapasya). Therefore,
the objects that are created by His mahā-śakti must be
completely and automatically superior to the objects
created by penances and mysticism.” To explain this, he
speaks this verse starting with niḥśeṣa. He says,
“Everything manifested by this indescribable spiritual
pleasure potency is known to be completely permanent and
real like that very potency herself or like the all-
powerful Śrī Kṛṣṇa.”



Verse 185

evaṁ bhagavatā tena śrī-kṛṣṇenāvatāriṇā

na bhidyante ’vatārās te nityāḥ satyāś ca tādṛśāḥ

evam – thus; bhagavatā – from the Lord; tena – by Him;
śrī-kṛṣṇena – by Śrī Kṛṣṇa; avatāriṇā – from the source
of all incarnations; na bhidyante – are nondifferent;
avatārāḥ – incarnations; te – they; nityāḥ – eternal;
satyāḥ – real; ca – and; tādṛśāḥ – similarly.

Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa is avatārī, the source of all
avatāras, so all incarnations are nondifferent from Him.
As the source is eternal and real, so are the
incarnations.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Finishing his secondary point, Śrī
Nārada now comes back to the original topic of
discussion. It is stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.3.28),
“kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam – Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme
Personality of Godhead Himself.” Nārada intends to
establish through this evidence that Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s glories
are greater than the glories of all the incarnations.
However, the incarnations are also eternal and real like
Him. He is concluding this last point with this verse
beginning with evam. Badrī-nātha Śrī Nārāyaṇa and other
incarnations are nondifferent from avatārī Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
Lord of Goloka. Thus, They also are nitya (eternal) and
satya (real).



Verse 186

ekaḥ sa kṛṣṇo nikhilāvatāra-

samaṣṭi-rūpo vividhair mahattvaiḥ

tais tair nijaiḥ sarva-vilakṣaṇair hi


                          583
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

jayaty anantair bhaga-śabda-vācyaiḥ

ekaḥ – one; saḥ – He; kṛṣṇaḥ – Kṛṣṇa; nikhila – all;
avatāra – of incarnations; samaṣṭi – aggregate; rūpaḥ –
form; vividhaiḥ – with variegated; mahattvaiḥ – glories;
taiḥ taiḥ – by them; nijaiḥ – own; sarva – from
everything; vilakṣaṇaiḥ – distinguished; hi – indeed;
jayati – He is triumphant; anantaiḥ – unending; bhaga –
opulence; śabda – by the word; vācyaiḥ – described.

All the incarnations are nondifferent from Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
and They are all present within Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
transcendental form. However, He is always triumphant,
surpassing all of Them with His unending, manifold
glories, which are indicated by the word bhaga.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: “Although the source of all the
incarnations is nondifferent from His incarnations,
avatārī Śrī Kṛṣṇa is supremely excellent.” This is being
established here in this verse beginning with ekaḥ. Śrī
Nārada says, “Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the aggregate of all
incarnations, meaning that all of them are present in
subtle form within His transcendental body. Therefore,
He is the seed of all the incarnations. Being more
extraordinary than Them, He is clearly addressed as
bhaga, meaning ‘all-opulent.’ ”

It is stated in the Viṣṇu Purāṇa (6.5.74):

aiśvaryasya samagrasya dharmasya (vīryasya)yaśasaḥ
śriyaḥ

jñāna-vairāgyayoś cāpi ṣaṇṇāṁ bhaga itīṅganā

Six categories – complete supremacy, or wealth; complete
strength; complete fame; complete beauty; complete know-
ledge; and complete renunciation – are known as bhaga.

Due to His natural and variegated glories, which are
eternal, boundless, indescribable, and extraordinary,
Goloka-nātha Śrī Kṛṣṇa is supremely victorious in every
respect.



Verse 187

nārāyaṇād apy avatāra-bhāve

saṁvyajyamānair madhurair mano-jñaiḥ

tat-prema-bhakty-ārdra-hṛd-eka-vedyair

māhātmya-vargair vividhair viśiṣṭaiḥ

nārāyaṇāt – than Lord Nārāyaṇa; api – although; avatāra
– of an incarnation; bhāve – in the mood;
saṁvyajyamānaiḥ – manifested; madhuraiḥ – sweet; manaḥ-
jñaiḥ – enchanting; tat – for Him; prema-bhakti – with
devotion in pure love; ārdra – melting; hṛt – by the
heart; eka – only; vedyaiḥ – to be experienced;
māhātmya-vargaiḥ – with manifold glories; vividhaiḥ –
various; viśiṣṭaḥ – distinguished.


                          584
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

With special, ever-increasing glories that are sweeter
and more enchanting than those of the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha
Śrī Nārāyaṇa, Śrī Kṛṣṇa attracts everyone’s heart and is
superior to all His incarnations. But only those whose
hearts have been melted with prema-bhakti can experience
these glories.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might raise the doubt,
“One hears that the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha Śrī Nārāyaṇa is
also avatārī, the source of all incarnations. This being
so, how can we establish that Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s glories are
different from and superior to the glories of Śrī
Nārāyaṇa?”

In reply to this, Śrī Nārada speaks this verse beginning
with nārāyaṇāt. He says, “Goloka-nātha Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
glories are superior to and more variegated than Śrī
Nārāyaṇa’s. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is glorious in a super-excellent
manner. The reason is that although both of Them are
avatārī, Śrī Kṛṣṇa possesses avatāra-bhāva, or the mood
of being an incarnation. In other words, when Goloka-
nātha Śrī Kṛṣṇa descends to this world as an avatāra, He
possesses complete and ever-expanding sweetness, charm,
and the power to attract the hearts of all.”

Gopa-kumāra might also ask, “How can Śrī Kṛṣṇa be more
glorious than all the incarnations and even avatārī Śrī
Nārāyaṇa?”

Śrī Nārada replies, “Only the devotees whose hearts have
melted with Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s prema-bhakti can comprehend His
glories.”

The purport is that Badrī-nātha Śrī Nārāyaṇa and other
expansions are incarnations, or avatāras. The Supreme
Lord Vaikuṇṭha-nātha Śrī Nārāyaṇa is Parameśvara, the
source of all incarnations, or avatārī. However, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is Himself both avatārī and avatāra, and in both
these forms He is the supermost. As an incarnation, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa displays the sweetness and loveliness of His
various pastimes, and as the source of incarnations, He
displays His Supreme Lordship. Śrī Kṛṣṇa simultaneously
incorporates both of these aspects, and thus He is the
topmost. The glories of this simultaneous display of His
opulence and sweetness will be discussed further on.

Although the sweetness that arises in Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
pastimes of subduing and killing wicked demons cannot be
apprehended by reason, still, when one deliberates on
it, he can understand that the Lord indeed displays His
great mercy in a very sweet manner through the
activities of subduing the wicked. Even while dealing
with the wicked, His special sweetness is never
diminished. For instance, when He killed Pūtanā on the
pretext of drinking her breast milk, He awarded her the
eternal post of His wet-nurse. If He gives His topmost
mercy to the wicked, then what can be said of the mercy
He bestows upon His devotees? Śrī Kṛṣṇa reciprocates
with them according to their particular mellow – eating,
drinking, and sleeping with them; playing the flute for
them; and dancing in rāsa-līlā. All this will be
discussed in more detail further on.



                          585
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


Verse 188

teṣām apy avatārāṇāṁ sevakaiḥ paramaṁ mahat

labhyate sukham ātmātma-priya-sevā-rasānugam

teṣām – of them; api –   also; avatārāṇām – of the
incarnations; sevakaiḥ   – by the servants; paramam – the
most; mahat – supreme;   labhyate – is obtained; sukham –
happiness; ātma – own;   ātma-priya – beloved; sevā – of
service; rasa-anugam –   in accordance with their moods.

The servitors of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s incarnations, serving their
beloved Lord according to their own moods, obtain the
greatest happiness.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might question, “If
Śrī Kṛṣṇa-deva is the ocean of the greatest glories,
then why doesn’t everyone serve Him and receive the most
excellent happiness of all?”

In reply, Śrī Nārada speaks this verse beginning with
teṣām. He says, “When the devotee serves his worshipable
Deity, he becomes completely happy at heart in a way
that corresponds to his mood. Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa has
unlimited incarnations. That form of the Lord who
bestows His mercy upon a devotee is accepted by that
devotee as his worshipable Deity, and he serves that
form of the Lord in the appropriate rasa, or mood. All
obtain the ultimate happiness related to their
respective rasa, and thus their heart-felt desires are
completely fulfilled.”



Verse 189

upāsanānusāreṇa datte hi bhagavān phalam

na tatrāparitoṣaḥ syāt kasyacit sādhya-lābhataḥ

upāsanā – with the worship; anusāreṇa – in accordance;
datte – He gives; hi – indeed; bhagavān – the Lord;
phalam – the fruit; na – not; tatra – there; aparitoṣaḥ
– dissatisfaction; syāt – there can be; kasyacit – of
anyone; sādhya – the goal, or attainment; lābhataḥ –
from the reward.

Śrī Bhagavān bestows the appropriate result to everyone
according to their particular mode of worship. Upon
attaining that reward of perfection, no one feels
dissatisfied.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might raise the doubt,
“Śrī Bhagavān is the crest jewel of all the omniscient
personalities, and He is supremely kind. Why then does
He not distribute the best happiness to all of His
servants equally?”

To address this, Śrī Nārada speaks this verse beginning
with upāsanā. He says, “Śrī Bhagavān grants results
according to the mood in which the devotees worship
Him.” In other words, in whatever mood a devotee

                            586
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

worships the Lord, in that same mood the Lord grants him
the appropriate result.

Gopa-kumāra might ask, “If there is gradation, one
servitor would receive less happiness and another more.
Therefore, will some of them not feel dissatisfied?”

Nārada replies, “When one worships the Lord with a
particular desire, then upon the maturity of his
bhajana, he receives the desired result. Thus, each and
every devotee receives the service he prays for. No one
is discontent or displeased at heart with either his
desired goal or with the happiness that Bhagavān
bestows.”



Verse 190

vicitra-līlā-vibhavasya tasya

samudra-koṭī-gahanāśayasya

vicitra-tat-tad-ruci-dāna-līlā-

vibhūtim uttarkayituṁ prabhuḥ kaḥ

vicitra-līlā – astonishing pastimes; vibhavasya –
greatness; tasya –His; samudra-koṭī – as millions of
oceans; gahana – deep; āśayasya – of His heart; vicitra
– amazing; tat-tat-ruci – of respective tastes; dāna –
endowing; līlā – of pastimes; vibhūtim – the opulence;
uttarkayitum – to comprehend through logic; prabhuḥ –
capable; kaḥ – who.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes expand with ever-new variety. His
heart is as deep as millions of oceans. By logic no one
can understand the purpose for which He has placed
different tastes in the hearts of His devotees and
expanded the opulence of His pastimes accordingly.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra may raise the doubt,
“The Supreme Lord, the source of all knowledge and the
originator of actions, is known as Hṛṣīkeśa, the
controller of the senses. So why does He not equally
inspire all devotees to have a taste for the topmost
worship?”

In answer, Śrī Nārada speaks this verse beginning with
vicitra. He says, “Śrī Kṛṣṇa wants to taste wonderful,
variegated nectarean rasas. Therefore, He has placed a
variety of extraordinary desires in the hearts of the
devotees, endowing them with special moods.
Significantly, because the heart of the Lord is
unfathomably deep like millions of oceans, no one can
ascertain the opulence of His pastimes by means of
reason and logic.

“Bhagavān has bestowed a vast variety of tastes among
His devotees. The reason is that by constantly expanding
His pastimes in ever-new ways, He gets the opportunity
to relish all these sweet flavors. Otherwise, it would
not be possible to taste such sweetness. In this way, as
the Lord expands the opulence of His manifold pastimes,

                             587
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

His devotees experience His grace according to their
respective tastes. Considering their respective moods to
be topmost, and tasting the mellows related to those
moods, they are fully satisfied.”



Verse 191

sidhyet tathāpy atra kṛpā-mahiṣṭhatā

yat-tāratamye ’pi nija-svabhāvataḥ

spardhādy-avṛttair nikhilair yathā-ruci

prāpyeta sevā-sukham antya-sīma-gam

sidhyet – it can be established; tathā api – however;
atra – here; kṛpā – of mercy; mahiṣṭhatā – the supreme
greatness; yat-tāratamye – in gradations of higher and
lower; api – although; nija-svabhāvataḥ – according to
one’s own nature; spardhā – because of rivalry; ādi –
and so forth; avṛttaiḥ – without transformations;
nikhilaiḥ – by all; yathā-ruci – according to taste;
prāpyeta – one can obtain; sevā-sukham – happiness
through service; antya-sīma-gam – attaining the ultimate
limit.

This bestowal of results according to His devotees’
particular inclinations indeed confirms the immense
glories of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s mercy. Although there is
gradation in the results they receive, the devotees
obtain the utmost happiness of service. Each engages in
devotion according to his propensity, free from feelings
such as rivalry and envy, and they inspire each other
out of mutual affection.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might raise the doubt,
“How will the glories of Śrī Bhagavān’s mercy be
established if His devotees receive unequal results from
their devotion?”

In reply, Śrī Nārada speaks this verse beginning with
sidhyet. He says, “Bhagavān inspires different tastes in
the hearts of His devotees and then grants them the
distinct types of appropriate results. This does not
diminish the greatness of His glories; rather, it is
proof of His supreme mercy. Even though there is
gradation in the fruits He bestows, the devotees still
obtain the ultimate limit of the happiness of service
suitable for their particular rasa, or loving
relationship with Him. None of them are ever
dissatisfied in their service to Bhagavān.”

Another question might arise, “Since the devotees
experience different levels of happiness, it seems that,
just like the residents of heaven, they may be subject
to rivalry, envy, and so on. If this is the case, then
will these feelings not interfere with the joy they
experience in their service?”

In response, Nārada says, “It is in the inherent nature
of those following the path of bhakti that any negative
emotions like rivalry and envy will be completely

                          588
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

absent, and they will naturally feel affection for each
other.” Here the word ādi means that even in the
beginning stages of bhakti, all defects such as
arrogance and malice are destroyed due to the nature of
this path. Therefore, non-envious devotees do not face
any obstacle in obtaining their desired happiness.



Verse 192

na sac-cid-ānanda-ghanātmanāṁ hi

svalpe ’pi saukhye bahu-saukhya-buddhiḥ

sāṁsārikāṇām iva nāpi tuccha-

sukhānubhūtir yatinām iva syāt

na – not; sat-cit-ānanda – who experience eternality,
cognizance, and bliss; ghana – intense; ātmanām – for
those persons; hi – certainly; su-alpe – very
insignificant; api – even; saukhye – in happiness; bahu
– great; saukhya – of happiness; buddhiḥ – concept;
sāṁsārikāṇām – for those attached to mundane existence;
iva – like; na – not; api – also; tuccha – trifling;
sukha – of happiness; anubhūtiḥ – experience; yatinām –
of renunciants; iva – like; syāt – it may be.

Worldly sense enjoyers regard their insignificant
material happiness to be complete, and hosts of
sannyāsīs find full satisfaction in the paltry happiness
of liberation through knowledge of the self, but pure
devotees, who are endowed with the nature of sac-cid-
ānanda, do not regard such trifling happiness as
anything great.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might raise the
following doubt, “One considers small pleasures to be
total happiness only by the influence of ignorance.”

In answer to this, Śrī Nārada speaks this verse
beginning with na. He says, “Hedonists regard the paltry
happiness of sense enjoyment as all-in-all, but devotees
do not consider such trifling happiness to be complete.
Sannyāsīs, hoping to experience the insignificant
happiness of liberation through the cultivation of
knowledge of the self (ātma-jñāna), are hardly ever
successful in directly experiencing even that. Both
types of persons – the mundane materialist and the
impersonalist sannyāsī – are unable to realize the
nature of the soul, which is transcendental, an
embodiment of eternity, knowledge, and bliss, and thus
they regard their petty pleasures as ultimate. Once one
attains knowledge of one’s true self, all ignorance is
certainly dispelled. Because devotees of the Lord are
themselves utterly full of bliss, there is no question
of their being attracted by any lesser enjoyment.”



Verse 193

tāratamyaṁ tu kalpyeta sva-sva-sevānusārataḥ

                          589
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017


tat-tad-rasa-sajātīya-sukha-vaicitry-apekṣayā

tāratamyam – comparative gradations of higher and lower;
tu – indeed; kalpyeta – one can consider; sva-sva-sevā –
one’s respective service; anusārataḥ – according to;
tat-tat-rasa – of the respective relationship (with the
Lord); sajātīya – inborn; sukha – happiness; vaicitrī –
with the devotee’s unique nature; apekṣayā – in
accordance.

One infers gradation among devotees based on their
respective services to the Lord and according to the
different types of happiness they attain based on their
loving relationship with the Lord.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra may ask, “If all the
devotees obtain the ultimate limit of happiness allotted
to their respective rasas, or loving relationships with
the Lord, how can it be reasonably said that there is a
hierarchy to their happiness?”

To reconcile this doubt, Nārada speaks this verse
beginning with tāratamyam. He says, “Devotees experience
different types of rasas, or special ecstasies,
according to their respective devotional services
(sevā). Therefore, one may assume that there is a
gradation in the happiness they experience based on
those respective rasas, but actually there is no
hierarchy of happiness.

“The idea is that in performing the different aspects of
bhakti such as hearing and chanting, and in lovingly
engaging in direct services to Śrī Bhagavān in His
abodes like Vaikuṇṭha – such as massaging His feet,
arranging and decorating His hair, and guarding the gate
– a

particular, special love arises in the heart of the
devotee for his chosen form of the Lord. In this way,
each devotee obtains the ultimate happiness
corresponding to his service.

“Seeing hierarchy according to respective taste among
the services the devotees perform – services such as
śravaṇa, kīrtana, and massaging the Lord’s lotus feet –
one can assume that there are different levels of
devotees and different levels of happiness. Some people
think that there is also a gradation in the devotees’
worship of their particular worshipful Deities (iṣṭa-
devas). However, from an impartial philosophical
perspective, or tattva, one cannot accept this view
because this hierarchy of happiness is based on one’s
subjective opinion of the various services. In reality,
there is no deficiency in regard to the happiness
devotees experience in their particular rasa. As a
result, because their minds are fully satisfied, they
all certainly experience complete bliss. Thus it is
self-evident that the conception of a gradation of
happiness according to devotees’ services is a
subjective assumption.”




                          590
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

Verse 194

vaikuṇṭha-vāsino hy ete kecid vai nitya-pārṣadāḥ

pare kṛṣṇasya kṛpayā sādhayitvemam āgatāḥ

vaikuṇṭha-vāsinaḥ – the residents of Vaikuṇṭha; hi –
indeed; ete – they; kecit – some; vai – certainly;
nitya-pārṣadāḥ – eternal associates; pare – others;
kṛṣṇasya – of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; kṛpayā – by the mercy;
sādhayitvā – having executed the limbs of bhakti; imam –
this; āgatāḥ – have arrived.

O Gopa-kumāra, some of the Vaikuṇṭha residents are
Bhagavān’s eternal associates, and some have arrived
here by the mercy of Śrī Kṛṣṇa through the practice of
sādhana.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might question, “As
Bhagavān’s servants in Vaikuṇṭha and Śrī Bhagavān
Himself are all embodiments of sac-cid-ānanda, there is
no difference between them. Then how is Bhagavān the
worshipable object of service (sevya) and how are the
Vaikuṇṭha residents His servants (sevaka)?”

In reply to this, Śrī Nārada speaks six verses,
beginning here with vaikuṇṭha. He says, “Among
Bhagavān’s Vaikuṇṭha servants, some are eternal
associates like Śrī Śeṣa and Śrī Garuḍa. However, Jaya,
Vijaya, Bharata, Priyavrata, and others have arrived in
Vaikuṇṭha after successfully performing their devotional
practices, or sādhana. Therefore, they are known as the
recent associates of Bhagavān.”



Verse 195

bhajanānanda-sāmye ’pi bhedaḥ kaścit prakalpyate

bāhyāntarīṇa-bhāvena dūra-pārśva-sthatādinā

bhajana – of worship; ānanda – of bliss; sāmye –
equality; api – although; bhedaḥ – division; kaścit –
some; prakalpyate – it is ascertained; bāhya – of
external; āntarīṇa – of internal; bhāvena – by the
states; dūra – distant; pārśva – near; sthatā – by the
situation; ādinā – and so forth.

All the residents of Vaikuṇṭha experience equal
happiness in their service. However, one can presume
some degree of difference in their bliss, considering
that some associates perform external service (bāhya-
sevā) from a distance, while others remain close and
render intimate service (antaraṅga-sevā). In this way,
the difference of proximity and distance is conceived.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might raise the
question, “If one presumes some difference among these
eternal associates, then there is also a possibility of
difference in the results they receive. Otherwise, would
not recognition of the distinction between the eternal
associates and new associates be illogical?”


                          591
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

To settle this point, Śrī Nārada speaks this verse
beginning with bhajana. He says, “Both types of eternal
associates receive equal happiness from their bhajana.
Nevertheless, sometimes one can imagine that there is
some small difference. What kind of difference? Their
external condition depends on their external emotions,
and their internal condition depends on their internal
emotions. In other words, due to their external moods,
some render service from a distance, while others stay
nearby the Lord in a mood of intimacy.”

Here the word ādi indicates that some associates
accompany the Lord when He descends to places such as
the earthly plane. Thus, although there is no difference
in the results, there are differences in their services.
According to the opinion of some, since the associates’
services are different, the results will also be
different. However, as already mentioned, in essence,
there is no appreciable difference in the results.



Verse 196

yady apy eṣāṁ hi nityatvāt sāmyaṁ bhagavato bhavet

sevya-sevakatāpy āste nityā satyā sva-bhāvataḥ

yadi api – although; eṣām – amongst them; hi – indeed;
nityatvāt – because of both being eternal; sāmyam –
equality; bhagavataḥ – of the Lord; bhavet – is; sevya –
of the served; sevakatā – the condition of being a
servant; api – also; āste – is; nityā – eternal; satyā –
real; sva-bhāvataḥ – because of their respective
natures.

Although there is equality between Śrī Bhagavān and all
His eternal servitors due to their eternal natures, His
servitors’ feeling that He is the master and they are
the servants is both real and eternal. Thus, there is
difference between them.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might ask, “It is
obvious that there is a difference between Bhagavān and
the recently arrived associates, whose servitorship is
naturally established due to their previous devotional
practices. But how can one establish the difference
between Bhagavān, who is the object of service (sevya),
and the eternal associates, who are His servitors
(sevakas)?”

Śrī Nārada replies, “Just as the eternal associates such
as Śeṣa, Garuḍa, and others, being completely sac-cid-
ānanda in nature, are eternally identical to Bhagavān
and are eternally real (nityā satyā); nevertheless they
naturally possess the mood and feelings of servitorship
towards Bhagavān who is the object of their service.
Bhagavān always possesses the disposition of being the
master and the eternal associates always possess the
disposition of being the servants. This fact exists
beyond all logic and reasoning.”




                          592
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

Verses 197–198

sac-cid-ānanda-sāndratvāc caiṣāṁ bhagavatā saha

sāmye ’pi bhajanānanda-mādhuryākarṣa-vidyayā

kayācid anayātarkya-nānā-madhurimārṇave

tasmin śrī-kṛṣṇa-pādābje ghaṭate dāsatā sadā

sat-cit-ānanda – eternality, cognizance, and bliss;
sāndratvāt – because of being condensed; ca – and; eṣām
– they have; bhagavatā saha – with the all-opulent Lord;
sāmye – in equality; api – although; bhajana-ānanda – of
the bliss of devotion; mādhurya ākarṣa – of the
fascinating sweetness; vidyayā – because of knowledge;
kayācit – by some; anayā – by that; atarkya –
unfathomable; nānā-madhurima – of manifold sweetnesses;
arṇave – in the ocean; tasmin – in that; śrī-kṛṣṇa-pāda-
abje – to the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; ghaṭate – one is
busy; dāsatā – servitude; sadā – always.

Bhagavān and His eternal associates are similar in that
they both possess forms of sac-cid-ānanda. Yet, although
it is beyond logic, the sweetness of the bliss of
serving Bhagavān casts a spell on His associates,
keeping them always immersed in their natural mood as
servitors of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet, which are an ocean
of unfathomable, variegated sweetness.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Now, in order to present the logic of
the previously-mentioned subject matter, Śrī Nārada
speaks two verses, beginning here with sat. He says,
“The new associates have experienced the indescribable
sweetness of worshiping the Lord in their past,
regulated practices, so they automatically possess the
mood of service to Śrī Bhagavān.”

Alternatively the verse can be read to say, “The eternal
associates always directly experience the sweetness of
the bliss of service, being naturally attracted by its
magnetic spell. Therefore, the difference between
Bhagavān as the master and the eternal associates as the
servants remains intact. Thus, like the new associates,
the eternal servitors are also always submerged in the
mood of service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s indescribably glorious
lotus feet.”

The reason for this is that Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet are
an unfathomable ocean of variegated sweetness. If Śrī
Kṛṣṇa did not possess such inconceivable, wonderful, and
variegated sweetness, then He would be unable to attract
the hearts of the eternal associates. Moreover, the
master/servant mood would not remain eternally intact.”



Verse 199

taiḥ sac-cid-ānanda-ghanair aśeṣaiḥ

śrī-kṛṣṇa-devasya yathāvatāraiḥ

khyāto ’vatāritvam ṛte ’pi sāmye

                          593
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


tais tair mahattvair madhurair viśeṣaḥ

taiḥ – by them; sat-cit-ānanda-ghanaiḥ – by condensed
eternality, cognizance, and bliss; aśeṣaiḥ – by all;
śrī-kṛṣṇa-devasya – of beautiful Śrī Kṛṣṇa; yathā – as;
avatāraiḥ – by incarnations; khyātaḥ – renowned;
avatāritvam – the state of being the source of all
incarnations; ṛte – excepting; api – also; sāmye – in
equality; taiḥ taiḥ – by them; mahattvaiḥ – by glories;
madhuraiḥ – by sweet; viśeṣaḥ – distinguished.

Although avatārī Śrī Kṛṣṇa is nondifferent from all His
incarnations, who are all sac-cid-ānanda, due to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s variegated, indescribable, and eminent
greatness, He possesses natural distinction. In the same
way, even though Bhagavān and all His eternal associates
are also nondifferent, as both are sac-cid-ānanda, the
Lord’s sweet, glorious, and wonderful pastimes
automatically establish His superiority over them.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might ask, “Since both
avatārī Bhagavān, the Supreme Lord who is the source of
all incarnations, and His avatāras, or incarnations, are
embodiments of eternity, knowledge, and bliss, They
appear to be nondifferent. How can one understand that
They are different?”

In answer, to explain how Their difference and
similarity can co-exist, Śrī Nārada gives an example in
this verse starting with taiḥ. He says, “Avatārī Goloka-
nātha Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His innumerable incarnations such as
Śrī Nārāyaṇa are similar in the sense that They both
possess forms that are a concentration of sac-cid-
ānanda. Nevertheless, Goloka-nātha possesses greatly
renowned and variegated glories that are indescribable,
indicating that there is a special sweetness to them.
This natural distinction sets Śrī Kṛṣṇa apart from His
incarnations.” This truth is substantiated by all the
scholars of the Purāṇas. Therefore, in answer to the
question, “Is there any distinction or excellence in
being avatārī?” Śrī Nārada says, “As avatārī, His
excellence is self-evident.”

The purport is that although Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His
incarnations are similar due to Their forms of sac-cid-
ānanda, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is avatārī, the basis of all
incarnations. He also manifests wonderful, sweet
pastimes when He Himself incarnates. Thus, His specialty
is renowned over all the other incarnations. In the same
way, the eternal associates and Bhagavān are also
similar, as both are sac-cid-ānanda. Nevertheless, Śrī

Kṛṣṇa naturally possesses a special opulence greater
than that of His eternal associates, which establishes
His status as the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
Moreover, He possesses special glories such as beauty
that are sweeter than sweet and full of astonishing
variety. Such glories are not manifest in any other
expansion of Bhagavān. These special glories
automatically establish Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s excellence over
other incarnations. If this were not so, His eternal
associates would not relish the topmost ecstasies that
come from the many varieties of service to Him.

                          594
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017




Verse 200

vadanti kecid bhagavān hi kṛṣṇaḥ

su-sac-cid-ānanda-ghanaika-mūrtiḥ

sa yat paraṁ brahma pare tu sarve

tat-pārṣadā brahma-mayā vimuktāḥ

vadanti – they say; kecit – some; bhagavān – the all-
opulent; hi – only; kṛṣṇaḥ – the all-attractive; su-sat-
cit-ānanda – of sublime eternity, cognizance, and bliss;
ghana – condensed; eka – alone; mūrtiḥ – the embodiment;
saḥ – He; yat – therefore; param brahma – the Supreme
Spirit; pare – the others; tu – indeed; sarve – all;
tat-pārṣadāḥ – His associates; brahma-mayāḥ – spiritual;
vimuktāḥ – fully liberated.

Some say that Śrī Kṛṣṇa alone is Parabrahman because He
is the exclusive embodiment of perfect eternity,
knowledge, and bliss, and all of His eternal associates
are completely liberated souls who are also embodiments
of Brahman.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nārada has previously given his
own opinion, and now he presents another opinion in two
verses, beginning here with vadanti. He says, “Bhagavān
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s extraordinary, sac-cid-ānanda form is
beautiful and sweeter than sweet. Just as Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
fully Parabrahman, the Supreme Spirit, similarly all of
His eternal associates such as Śrī Śeṣa and Śrī Garuḍa
are also Brahman, completely spiritual.”

Gopa-kumāra might ask, “If this is the case, then what
is the specialty of the eternal associates over those
who have achieved liberation?” Addressing this doubt,
Śrī Nārada says, “The eternal associates of the Lord are
vimukta, completely liberated. This means that by having
obtained the abode of Vaikuṇṭha, the Vaikuṇṭha
associates are qualified for a more special type of
liberation compared to those who achieve ordinary
mukti.”



Verse 201

bhakty-ānanda-viśeṣāya līlā-vigraha-dhāriṇaḥ

tayā bhagavataḥ śaktyā cid-vilāsa-sva-rūpayā

bhakti – of devotional service; ānanda – bliss; viśeṣāya
– for special; līlā-vigraha – pastime forms; dhāriṇaḥ –
they accept; tayā – by that; bhagavataḥ – of the Lord;
śaktyā – through the potency; cit – spiritual; vilāsa –
for pastimes; sva-rūpayā – the internal.

Just to experience the special bliss of pure loving
service to the Lord, devotees assume forms at will in
accordance with the necessity of particular pastimes.

                          595
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

This is arranged by Bhagavān’s internal pastime potency.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might ask, “What is
the nature of this special liberation? In reply, Nārada
speaks this verse beginning with bhakti. He says,
“Desiring the special bliss of service to Bhagavān,
devotees assume spiritual bodies in accordance with

the necessity of particular pastimes.”

But Gopa-kumāra might object, “These liberated souls
have obtained oneness with Brahman. How can they assume
different bodies for the sake of performing pastimes?”
Śrī Nārada replies, “The devotees assume bodies by the
influence of Bhagavān’s transcendental pastime potency.”
This opinion clearly establishes the master/servitor, or
sevya-sevaka, relationship between Bhagavān and His
devotees.

Gopa-kumāra might express another doubt, saying, “If the
devotees were to attain oneness with Brahman (brahma-
rūpa), then they would receive only minute happiness
like the liberated souls receive, no more than that. In
other words, if the devotees’ forms were not condensed
embodiments of sac-cid-ānanda, they would receive
approximately the same amount of happiness as the
liberated souls.” In this regard, the established truth
is that since the devotees’ forms are actually condensed
embodiments of sac-cid-ānanda, they automatically
experience intense happiness much greater than that of
the liberated souls. This has been explained earlier in
Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛtam (2.2.176). The happiness of
liberated souls arises from knowledge – knowledge that
they are spiritual beings by nature. Therefore, the
bliss they receive is minute.

In this way all opposing arguments are reconciled or
harmonized.



Verse 202

śrī-gopa-kumāra uvāca

pṛṣṭaṁ mayedaṁ bhagavan dharā-tale

tiṣṭhanti yāḥ śrī-pratimā mahā-prabhoḥ

tāḥ sac-cid-ānanda-ghanās tvayā matā

nīlādri-nāthaḥ puruṣottamo yathā

śrī-gopa-kumāraḥ – Śrī Gopa-kumāra; uvāca – said; pṛṣṭam
– questioned; mayā – by me; idam – this; bhagavan – O
lord; dharā-tale – on the earth planet; tiṣṭhanti –
stay; yāḥ – who; śrī-pratimāḥ – the splendid Deity
forms; mahā-prabhoḥ – of the Supreme Lord; tāḥ – they;
sat-cit-ānanda-ghanāḥ – concentrated eternity,
knowledge, and bliss; tvayā – by which; matāḥ –
considered; nīlādri-nāthaḥ – the Lord of Nīlācala;
puruṣottamaḥ – Lord Jagannātha; yathā – in the same way
as.


                          596
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

Śrī Gopa-kumāra said: O brāhmaṇa, I again asked Śrī
Nāradajī, “O my lord, in your opinion, are all the
Deities of Bhagavān on earth also comprised of eternity,
knowledge, and bliss, as is Śrī Puruṣottama, the Lord of
Nīlācala?

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: In the course of events prior to this,
Śrī Gopa-kumāra had heard the glories of Śrī Bhagavān’s
non-moving Deity forms and was convinced that tremendous
result could be obtained by worshiping those Deities.
Now, to remove the doubts that have just come up by
hearing the aforementioned contrary ideas, he raises
another philosophical issue in this verse beginning with
pṛṣṭam. He says, “O Śrī Nārada, are all the Deities of
Bhagavān present on earth sac-cid-ānanda like
Puruṣottama Śrī Jagannātha?”



Verse 203

eko ’pi bhagavān sāndra-sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ

kṛpayā tatra tatrāste tat-tad-rūpeṇa līlayā

ekaḥ – one; api – indeed; bhagavān – Supreme Lord;
sāndra – condensed; sat-cit-ānanda-vigrahaḥ – whose form
is eternity, knowledge, and bliss; kṛpayā – out of
compassion; tatra tatra – in various places; āste –
stays; tat-tat-rūpeṇa – according to His respective
original forms; līlayā – in accordance with His pleasure
pastimes.

“For the sake of performing His pastimes and to grant
mercy to all the devotees, that one Bhagavān, whose form
is sac-cid-ānanda, takes many different forms and
appears in different places.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: To explain why all those Deities are
also embodiments of concentrated eternity, knowledge,
and bliss, Śrī Gopa-kumāra speaks this verse beginning
with eko ’pi. He says, “While Bhagavān Śrī Puruṣottama,
or Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is sac-cid-ānanda, is one, He is
nevertheless present in different regions and in
different holy abodes, such as Jagannātha Purī, in
different Deity forms. He performs this pastime in order
to distribute His mercy to all of His devotees and to
benefit all living beings.”



Verse 204

tat sarva-nairapekṣyeṇa ko doṣaḥ syāt tad-arcane

kathañcit kriyamāṇe ’pi mahā-lābho ’pi budhyate

tat – that; sarva – from everything; nairapekṣyeṇa –
with detachment; kaḥ – what; doṣaḥ – fault; syāt – can
there be; tad-arcane – in worshiping Him; kathañcit –
somehow; kriyamāṇe – in the performance; api – even;
mahā – great; lābhaḥ – benefit; api – rather; budhyate –
it is understood.


                          597
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

“Therefore, what is wrong if one gives up all other
practices and worships those Deities? After pondering
the issue, one can understand that nothing but great
benefit is accrued by worshiping the Deity in any
manner.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Is there any
fault in abandoning all other practices, including
dharma, karma, and yoga (Vedic ritualistic ceremonies,
fruitive activities, and mystic yoga practice), and
engaging in the worship of those Deities? There is
absolutely no fault; rather, one receives the greatest
advantage, in other words, enormous reward, from any
type of Deity worship. If one considers it deeply, then
one will realize that all types of bhakti are
simultaneously included and perfected in arcana, or
Deity worship.”



Verse 205

tataḥ kathaṁ purāṇebhyaḥ

śrūyante tat-tad-uktayaḥ

apramāṇaṁ ca tā na syur

mahan-mukha-viniḥsṛtāḥ

tataḥ – then; katham – how; purāṇebhyaḥ – from the
Purāṇas; śrūyante – are heard; tat-tat-uktayaḥ – various
statements; apramāṇam – not evidence; ca – also; tāḥ –
they; na syuḥ – they can not be; mahat – of great souls;
mukha – from the mouths; viniḥsṛtāḥ – coming.

“O Bhagavān Śrī Nārada, why is it that sometimes we find
unfavorable statements about Deity worship in the
Purāṇas? As all these words have emanated from the
mouths of great souls, they do not seem
unauthoritative.”

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: A doubt might arise, “Why is it
mentioned that there is fault in arcana?” To address
this, Śrī Gopa-kumāra speaks the verse beginning with
tataḥ. He says, “Why do the Purāṇas and other scriptures
mention the defects of Deity worship when we hear that
it confers enormous benefit?” For instance, it is stated
in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.47):

arcāyām eva haraye

pūjāṁ yaḥ śraddhayehate

na tad-bhakteṣu cānyeṣu

sa bhaktaḥ prākṛtaḥ smṛtaḥ

If a person faithfully worships Hari through His Deity
form but does not worship His devotees or respect
others, such a person is a prākṛta-bhakta, a
materialistic devotee of ordinary rank.

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.29.22), Bhagavān Śrī Kapiladeva

                             598
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

tells His mother:

yo māṁ sarveṣu bhūteṣu

santam ātmānam īśvaram

hitvārcāṁ bhajate mauḍhyād

bhasmany eva juhoti saḥ

I am present in all objects, and I am the soul and Lord
of all beings. If anyone ignores My form as Paramātmā
out of ignorance and only worships My Deity, then his
worship is like offering oblations of ghee into ashes.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.29.24) also states:

aham uccāvacair dravyaiḥ

kriyayotpannayānaghe

naiva tuṣye ’rcito ’rcāyāṁ

bhūta-grāmāvamāninaḥ

O mother, a person may worship My Deity form with
various ingredients and with proper rituals, but if he
disrespects other living beings, his worship is not
pleasing to Me.

Moreover, we hear the words “pratimā manda-buddhīnām –
The Deity is for the unintelligent.”

The authenticity of all these statements can never be
questioned because they have emanated from the mouths of
great souls. The words of authoritative persons in
particular are free from pramāda, illusion or the
misunderstanding of reality, and other errors. In other
words, the Vedas and Śrutis constitute the topmost
evidence. Since Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam has manifested from
the mouth of Śrī Śukadeva, those words are called
‘statements of great souls.’ The word mahat in the
original verse, meaning ‘great soul,’ indicates Bhagavān
Himself and His devotees like Śrī Śukadeva and other
great sages.

Śrī Saṅkarṣaṇa and other Deities who reside in the
various tracts of land of Bhū-loka (earth), and Śrī
Jagannātha and Śrī Raṅga-nātha who are present in the
holy places and cities of Bhārata-varṣa, such as Purī,
are indeed directly Bhagavān. These Deities are being
worshiped with faith, and no one doubts the authenticity
of Their worship. Nevertheless, people are aware of
these statements of the great souls and have heard the
word pratimā, or statue, ascribed to the Deity form.
Having accepted mauna-mudrā (an attitude of silence) as
Their pastime, those Deities appear like statues.
Therefore, some people infer that They are nothing more
than that. To remove these doubts about Deity worship,
Gopa-kumāra asks this question.



Verse 206

                             599
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


tac chrutvoktaṁ prabhoḥ pūjā-mārgādi-guruṇāmunā

utthāya paramānandān mām āśliṣyedam uttaram

tat – that; śrutvā – having heard; uktam – statement;
prabhoḥ – of the Deity; pūjā – of worship; mārga – of
the path; ādi – and so forth; guruṇā – by the preceptor;
amunā – by that; utthāya – having arisen; parama-ānandāt
– out of transcendental bliss; mām – me; āśliṣya –
embracing; idam – this; uttaram – answer.

Hearing this, Śrī Nārada Muni, the original guru of the
path of pūjā of Śrī Bhagavān, stood up, joyfully
embraced me, and began to reply.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “After hearing
my question, Śrī Nārada stood up, embraced me in great
happiness and began to reply. The reason for this is
that Śrī Nārada initiated the pañcarātra system of Deity
worship; thus, he is the original guru of the path of
worship of Bhagavān ( pūjā-mārga).” Alternatively, the
word mārga (path) comes from the verb mṛgyate, which
means ‘to strive after.’ In this sense, the verse is
saying that Deity worship is the goal to be attained by
everyone. And Śrī Nārada is the first preceptor of this
path.



Verse 207

śrī-nārada uvāca

pratimā yā mayoddiṣṭāḥ

sākṣād bhagavatā samāḥ

tāsām arcana-māhātmyaṁ

tāvad āstāṁ su-dūrataḥ

śrī-nāradaḥ uvāca – Śrī Nārada said; pratimāḥ – Deities;
yāḥ – who; mayā – by me; uddiṣṭāḥ – described; sākṣāt –
direct; bhagavatā – with the Lord; samāḥ – equal; tāsām
– of Them; arcana – of worship; māhātmyam – the glories;
tāvat – so much (questioning); āstām – is; su-dūrataḥ –
very far (irrelevant).

Śrī Nārada said: Those Deities I described before are
all directly Bhagavān Himself, and there is no question
about the glories of worshiping Them.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nārada says, “I previously
discussed the sac-cid-ānanda Deities, which are as good
as Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself. Their arcana is glorious,
so how can there be anything wrong with worshiping Them?
Firm faith in this is a great quality. What more need be
said?”



Verses 208–209


                          600
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

ādyām ādhunikīṁ vārcāṁ sva-dharmādy-anapekṣayā

sākṣāc chrī-bhagavad-buddhyā bhajatāṁ kṛtrimām api

na pātityādi-doṣaḥ syād guṇa eva mahān mataḥ

sevottamā matā bhaktiḥ phalaṁ yā paramaṁ mahat

ādyām – ancient; ādhunikīm – recent; vā arcām – worship;
sva-dharma – own’s position in varṇāśrama-dharma; ādi –
and so forth; anapekṣayā – without consideration; sākṣāt
– directly; śrī-bhagavat – of being the all-attractive
Supreme Personality of Godhead; buddhyā – with the
conception; bhajatām – for those who worship; kṛtrimām –
a form fashioned by oneself; api – even; na – not;
pātitya – degradation; ādi – and so forth; doṣaḥ –
fault; syāt – there may be; guṇaḥ – virtue; eva –
indeed; mahān – great; mataḥ – is considered; sevā –
service; uttamā – highest; matāḥ – is considered;
bhaktiḥ – devotional service; phalam – result; yā –
which; paramam – supreme; mahat – great.

If one gives up his prescribed social and religious
responsibilities to engage exclusively in worshiping the
Deity – whether the Deity be ancient or new, or even
fashioned by oneself – he is not accountable for the
fault of abandoning varṇāśrama-dharma if he has the
understanding that the Deity is directly Bhagavān.
Rather, he accumulates tremendous merit. This is the
opinion of great personalities. Deity worship is indeed
considered uttamā-bhakti (the highest level of devotion)
and it bestows the supreme result.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nārada says, “In their worship,
devotees consider the Deity to be the direct
manifestation of Bhagavān, whether the Deity’s image be
ancient or new, recently manifest or created by someone.
In the course of their worship, the worshipers may
become detached from their prescribed occupational
duties (sva-dharma) or may naturally begin to give it
up. Even though they have abandoned their prescribed
occupational duties, these people never fall down and
are not guilty of transgressing sadācāra, or proper
conduct.” Here the word ādi refers to people who lack
both qualification in Deity worship and knowledge of the
method of worship. Śrī Nārada makes the point, “Even so,
there is no basis for present society to criticize them,
nor is there any worry of their falling down to hell in
the future.”

Śrī Bhagavān Himself has said:

mat-karma kurvatāṁ puṁsāṁ kriyā lopo bhaved yadi

teṣāṁ karmāṇi kurvanti tisraḥ koṭyo maharṣayaḥ

If persons who render devotional service unto Me neglect
any obligatory duties, then three hundred million great
sages are appointed to complete those tasks on their
behalf.

One can understand from this statement in Padma Purāṇa
that those who engage in devotional service need never
again engage in fruitive activities (karma).

                          601
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


Śrī Nārada says, “In this way, we have heard that there
is a point when it is no longer valid to engage in
karma. That is to say, one has the right to perform
fruitive activities only as long as one has not
developed faith in bhakti. As previously mentioned,
after developing faith (śraddhā) in devotional service,
one should renounce karma. According to saintly persons,
one who does so and worships the Deity is not at fault
for his renunciation; rather, he accumulates great
merit. The reason is that worship of the Deity is
accepted by devotees as uttamā-bhakti, the most exalted
service. The primary meaning of the word bhakti is sevā,
or service. Therefore, when one serves the Deity by
performing pūjā, all the aspects of bhakti are
automatically included in one’s worship. Such devotional
service bestows the highest perfection and is vastly
superior to the four mundane goals of human life,
namely, religiosity, economic development, sense
gratification, and liberation.”



Verse 210

siddhiḥ syād bhagavad-dṛṣṭyā tṛṇa-sammānanād api

sakṛd-uccāraṇān nāmābhāsasya śravaṇāt tathā

siddhiḥ – perfection; syāt – may take place; bhagavat –
Bhagavān; dṛṣṭyā – through beholding; tṛṇa – a grass
plant; sammānanāt – by giving proper honor; api – even;
sakṛt – once; uccāraṇāt – by utterance; nāma – of the
name; ābhāsasya – of the dim reflection; śravaṇāt – by
hearing; tathā – also.

What to speak of the glories of worshiping the Deity of
Śrī Bhagavān, if one even respects a blade of grass with
the awareness of Bhagavān’s presence, or one once simply
utters or hears the semblance of the holy name
(nāmābhāsa), his innermost desires will be fulfilled and
perfection will be attained.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nārada speaks two verses,
beginning here with siddhiḥ, to establish his argument
by using kaimutya-nyāya (the logic of ‘how much more!’).

He says, “What to speak of the glories of worshiping the
Deity of Bhagavān, if one honors even a blade of grass
as the Lord with the feeling that the indwelling
Supersoul, antaryāmī parameśvara, is present in all
living entities, then one achieves perfection. All the
moving and non-moving beings in the world are Bhagavān’s
potencies, His opulences (vibhūtis). With this
understanding, when one serves even an insignificant
blade of grass by watering it or offering obeisances to
it, he receives all perfections, namely liberation or
the fulfillment of all desires. Moreover, if one
achieves perfection or even greater results by uttering
or hearing the semblance of the Lord’s name even once,
then what need be said about the worship of His Deity
form?”



                          602
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


Verse 211

kutas tat-smārake tasyādhiṣṭhāne mantra-saṁskṛte

sarva-bhakti-pade pūjyamāne doṣādi-tarkaṇam

kutaḥ – how is it possible; tat – of Bhagavān; smārake –
to the Deity form which brings about remembrance; tasya
– of Him; adhiṣṭhāne – in the process of consecration;
mantra – by auspicious mantras; saṁskṛte – who is
sanctified; sarva-bhakti – all the ninefold processes of
devotional service exist; pade – at whose lotus feet;
pūjyamāne – who is worshipped; doṣa – faults; ādi – and
so forth; tarkaṇam – speculation.

How can there be any possibility of finding fault in
worshiping the Deity, who directly reminds one of the
Lord, in whom the Lord dwells, and who is consecrated by
Vedic mantras? Especially, such Deities of the Lord are
the shelter of all types of devotional service.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nārada says, “Considering even
grass and other insignificant objects to be Bhagavān
brings perfection. If this is so, how can one think that
there is any defect in worshiping the Deity, who is the
seat of Bhagavān? One cannot conceive of any defects in
the Deity because once the Deity is consecrated by
mantras, āvāhana (invitation), and so on in the process
of installation, and when one no longer considers Him to
be wood, stone, or any other material element, the Deity
manifests in the form of Bhagavān. There is no scope for
false argument on this point. In the material world,
jewels, mantras, medicinal herbs, and so on have
inconceivable potencies. If the potency of mantras can
sanctify wood or stone, then an intelligent person will
not consider an installed Deity of the Lord to be
material.

“In particular, because the Deities have shapes similar
to that of Bhagavān, they remind one of the Lord and
help stimulate the devotee’s meditation on Him. They
allow the devotee to get direct darśana of Bhagavān’s
beautiful major and minor limbs simultaneously, which
inspires him with wonderful devotional sentiments
without difficulty. The Deities are also the object of
the nine practices of bhakti. By Their worship, one
automatically accomplishes hearing (śravaṇa), chanting
(kīrtana), remembering (smaraṇa), service (paricaryā),
offering obeisances (vandana), and the rest.”



Verse 212

kadāpi kṛṣṇa-pratimārcanāvatāṁ

na sambhavet kṛṣṇa-pareṣv anādaraḥ

ghaṭeta cet karhy api tad-viṣaktito

gṛṇanti nāgas tad amī stuvanty atha

kadā api – at any time; kṛṣṇa – of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; pratimā –

                          603
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

Deity; arcana-vatām – of those who worship; na – not;
sambhavet – it may be possible; kṛṣṇa-pareṣu – towards
those devoted to Śrī Kṛṣṇa; anādaraḥ – disrespect;
ghaṭeta – it may be; cet – if; karhi api – some-how; tad
– to Him; viṣaktitaḥ – due to devotion; gṛṇanti – they
proclaim; na – not; āgaḥ – sin; tat – that; amī – they;
stuvanti – praise; atha – thereafter.

It is quite impossible for those engaged in offering
pūjā to the Deity of Śrī Kṛṣṇa to ever disrespect any
devotee. Even if they accidentally neglect the Vaiṣṇavas
due to being absorbed in their Deity worship, the
Vaiṣṇavas will never take offence, but rather will
praise them.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: One might fear that if one commits an
offence to Vaiṣṇavas, he will not get the result of his
worship of Bhagavān. To address this doubt, Śrī Nārada
speaks this verse beginning with kadāpi. He says, “What
to speak of those who worship the Deity of Śrī Kṛṣṇa as
directly Bhagavān Himself, even those who consider Him
just a statue and worship Śrī Kṛṣṇa through the Deity
will never disrespect or neglect the Vaiṣṇavas, devotees
of Kṛṣṇa. This is because they naturally develop
affection for all devotees through their practices of
devotional service. A person might accidentally
disrespect a Vaiṣṇava when he is absorbed in his Deity
worship, but the Vaiṣṇavas do not take offence. Rather,
they are pleased to see his attachment to the Deity and
they praise and glorify him.”



Verse 213

ye tu tat-pratimāṁ nūtnām adhiṣṭhānaṁ harer iti

bheda-dṛṣṭyātha śailyādi-buddhyā sampūjayanti hi

ye – who; tu – but; tat-pratimām – His Deity form;
nūtnām – new; adhiṣṭhānam – consecration; hareḥ – of Śrī
Hari; iti – thus; bheda-dṛṣṭyā – due to vision of
differentiation; atha – then; śaila – of stone; ādi –
and so on; buddhyā – with a conception; sampūjayanti –
they worship; hi – indeed.

However, some people believe that because certain images
of Śrī Hari are newly made, they are different from the
Lord. They worship them considering them to be stone,
wood, or some other material element.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might raise the
following doubt, “If this is the case, why do the
Purāṇas condemn those who worship the Deity?”

To reconcile this, Nārada speaks three verses, beginning
here with ye tu. He says, “Some people do not consider
the Deity as the direct manifestation of Śrī Hari, but
only a substitute representation or symbol of Him. In
this way, they see the Deity as different from Bhagavān
and made of stone, wood, or metal. Or, they worship the
Deity, thinking that He is newly fabricated or is an
artificial statue. These are the people condemned in the
Purāṇas.”

                          604
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017




Verse 214

na mānayanti tad-bhaktān sarva-bhūtāvamāninaḥ

pūjā-garveṇa vedājñāṁ atikrāmanti ca prabhoḥ

na – not; mānayanti – respect; tad-bhaktān – His
devotees; sarva-bhūta – of all living beings; avamāninaḥ
– disrespect; pūjā – of worship; garveṇa – out of pride;
veda – of the Vedas; ājñām – the orders; atikrāmanti –
they neglect; ca – and; prabhoḥ – of the Lord.

Such persons not only disrespect devotees, but they
disrespect all jīvas in general. Proud of their worship,
they do not recognize the authority of the Lord’s Vedic
injunctions.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nārada says, “It is such people
who disrespect the devotees of Hari and censure all
living entities as well. Being maddened in the pride of
their worship, they transgress the Lord’s orders in the
Vedas and neglect their own occupational duties.”



Verse 215

ta eva sarva-bhaktebhyo nyūnās te manda-buddhayaḥ

pūjā-phalaṁ na vindanti ta eva hi yathoditam

te – they; eva – indeed; sarva-bhaktebhyaḥ – out of all
devotees; nyūnāḥ – the lowest; te – they; manda-
buddhayaḥ – having weak intelligence; pūjā – of worship;
phalam – the fruit; na – not; vindanti – attain; te –
they; eva – thus; hi – indeed; yathā – as; uditam –
spoken.

Such unintelligent persons are the lowest among all the
devotees of the Lord. They do not attain even the real
fruits of worship promised in the scriptures.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nārada says, “All these dull-
headed people are the lowest of all types of devotees,
including those who are nirguṇa, or free from material
qualities, and those who are saguṇa, or situated in the
three material modes of nature: goodness (sattva),
passion (rajas), and ignorance (tamas).” Therefore, it
is stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.47):

arcāyām eva haraye pūjāṁ yaḥ śraddhayehate

na tad-bhakteṣu cānyeṣu sa bhaktaḥ prākṛtaḥ smṛtaḥ

Those who only worship Śrī Hari’s Deity form but
disrespect the Vaiṣṇavas and all other living entities
are materialistic (prākṛta) devotees. They belong to the
lowest category. This statement is the accepted evidence
in this regard. It will be explained in detail further
on.


                          605
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

“Pratimā manda-buddhīnām – Deity worship is for fools.”
According to this scriptural statement, those who have
dull intelligence do not obtain the results of worship
as mentioned in the scriptures.

“Bhasmany eva juhoti saḥ – Their worship is like giving
an oblation of clarified butter in the ashes.” In other
words, one should understand that Śrī Bhagavān does not
accept their worship.

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, in his prayers to Lord Nṛsiṁha,
Śrī Prahlāda Mahārāja states (7.9.11):

naivātmanaḥ prabhur ayaṁ nija-lābha-pūrṇo

mānaṁ janād aviduṣaḥ karuṇo vṛṇīte

yad yaj jano bhagavate vidadhīta mānaṁ

tac cātmane prati-mukhasya yathā mukha-śrīḥ

My Lord is most merciful. Because He is complete within
Himself, He does not accept the worship of ignorant
people. One whose face is charmingly beautiful will see
the same charming beauty reflected in the mirror.
Similarly, the personal happiness one obtains is a
reflection of his mood in worshiping Bhagavān.

The purport is, “My Lord, the Lord of all the living
beings ( jīvas), Śrī Nṛsiṁha-deva, is most merciful.
Whatever the jīvas are able to acquire in their worship
is actually controlled by Śrī Nṛsiṁha-deva alone, and He
does not accept the worship of all jīvas. What is the
nature of those whose worship He does not accept? Out of
ignorance, those persons worship the Deity, considering
Him to be stone, wood, or metal. They become full of
false pride and thus they disrespect all Vaiṣṇavas and
censure all living entities. My Lord certainly does not
accept the worship of such persons.”

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (4.31.21), Śrī Nārada also states:

na bhajati kumanīṣiṇāṁ sa ijyāṁ

harir adhanātma-dhana-priyo rasajñaḥ

śruta-dhana-kula-karmaṇāṁ madair ye

vidadhati pāpam akiñcaneṣu satsu

The selfless (akiñcana) devotees who consider Bhagavān
to be their only possession are very dear to the Lord.
Bhagavān is rasajña, or the knower of rasa, the
sweetness of loving relationships. He knows how much
sweetness there is in the one-pointed, unconditional
devotional service of such devotees. Bhagavān does not
accept the worship of foolish people who, being
intoxicated by the false pride of education, wealth,
high birth, and fruitive activities, disrespect selfless
sādhus, who are free from material desires.

The reason for this is that Bhagavān is complete within
Himself and fully content in tasting His own natural,
condensed bliss. Although He is self-satisfied, because

                          606
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

He is also bhakta-vatsala, or affectionate to His
devotees, He accepts their worship. In this way, He is
fond of His devotees. It can also be understood that
because of His bhakta-vatsala quality, He even
transgresses His own nature.

Alternatively, another understanding is that the Lord is
fully satisfied by accepting the offering He desires –
the treasure of the devotees’ love offered through their
worship. Thus, being fully satisfied with that, He does
not desire the offerings and worship of non-devotees.

Scripture states that one definitely attains the fruit
of his worship of the Lord, regardless of the manner in
which it is performed. Therefore, one should not think
that worship performed lavishly by spending wealth is
futile. In a general way, Śrī Prahlāda indicates the
reason for this with the words yat yat (in whatever way
they offer) in the verse quoted above (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
7.9.11), and in a specific way with the word mānam
(worship). The worshiper’s expenditure of wealth and
energy for Bhagavān’s pūjā never goes in vain – he is
rewarded in a way that is proportionate to what he has
offered.

The ingredients of worship offered by materialistic men
(viṣayīs) are not offered for the pleasure of Bhagavān;
the materialists are worshiping out of desire for their
own benefit, and consequently the results they receive
are simply for their own pleasure. For example, based on
the specific way in which one puts on tilaka to increase
the beauty of his face, he will see the reflection in
the mirror accordingly. That is to say, with whatever
desire one expends his wealth in worshiping the Lord,
one shall receive a result according to that desire.
However, such a result is only the secondary fruit of
pūjā; it is not the chief or most excellent result. That
is because such worship is not performed for the
pleasure of Bhagavān; it is offered with the desire for
happiness in this lifetime and the next. During worship,
Śrī Bhagavān only accepts the items which are offered
for His pleasure, and His acceptance of the items of
worship is the primary, or topmost, fruit of pūjā.

Another way to understand the logic of the phrase yat
yat is that whatever the unintelligent people offer is
done for their own benefit, not for the happiness of
Bhagavān. Therefore, Bhagavān fulfills their desire only
to show mercy to such foolish persons, but He does not
accept their offering.

Because the question might arise, “How can one receive
personal benefit from worshiping Bhagavān?” Śrī Prahlāda
speaks the phrase prati-mukhasya (the reflection of the
face) in the same verse (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 7.9.11). In
other words, without offering something to Bhagavān, the
living entity can never obtain any of his desires.

Alternatively, the verse can be understood to say that
the Lord mercifully accepts the offerings of intelligent
devotees because

those offerings are for His pleasure. However, if such
intelligent persons also offer something to Bhagavān for

                          607
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

their own benefit, they receive

a most insignificant result, like the reflection of the
face in the

mirror. This cannot be called the spiritual
(pāramārthika) or primary result.

Thus, it becomes clear that the result of whatever is
done for the pleasure of Bhagavān is alone worthwhile.
This type of worship grants the supreme wealth of prema-
bhakti, by which one attains Bhagavān’s abodes like Śrī
Vaikuṇṭha. There, one experiences the indescribable
happiness of the Lord’s darśana and the enjoyment of
personal exchanges with Him.

Another understanding of the prayer by Śrī Prahlāda is
that this Lord is Īśvara, the Supreme Controller. He is
always complete within Himself and has no desire to
receive services from the living entities. However, it
might be questioned that even though He may not need
anything, why does He not accept these services for the
desire of others or the benefit of all those worshipers?

To explain this, the term aviduṣa, meaning ‘ignorant of
the goal of life,’ has been used in the same verse
(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 7.9.11) to describe unintelligent
people who spend their wealth for the worship of
Bhagavān but who do not have the wisdom to know what is
beneficial for them and what is not. After worshiping,
they lament over their expenditures and thus sometimes
become distressed. Being subdued by compassion, although
Śrī Bhagavān does not desire their worship, He
completely satisfies them by granting material results.
Alternatively, the word aviduṣa also refers to ignorant
persons unaware of the methods and process of pūjā. Such
ignorant people worship by killing animals for
sacrifice, but Śrī Bhagavān does not accept their
worship.

One might say, “This Lord is the crest jewel of all the
demigods and the benefactor of all living entities. So
why does He not benefit all of those worshipers?”

Addressing this point, Śrī Prahlāda uses the word
karuṇaḥ (compassionate) in the quoted verse (Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam 7.9.11). He says, “Because the Lord is most
merciful, He does not bestow benefits on those
worshipers. If the Lord did accept the worship of those
who are malevolent to other living beings, that would
harm those entities and would not be appropriate for the
most merciful Bhagavān. Moreover, because the Lord is
complete within Himself, He does not fulfill the desires
of the malevolent worshipers for their own good.
Additionally, He acts in this way for the benefit of
society. The reason for this behavior of Bhagavān is
that those worshipers are foolish, and He is parama-
karuṇa, most merciful. Those unintelligent persons do
not know that they receive benefit also by pleasing the
Lord. Ignorant of this truth, they undergo many
hardships to collect varieties of paraphernalia for
worship. Being very kind, Śrī Bhagavān cannot tolerate
the misery or pain of those unintelligent people;
therefore, He has no desire to accept their worship.”

                          608
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017


One might ask, “How does satisfying Śrī Bhagavān bring
about one’s own welfare?”

Śrī Prahālda speaks the phrase yat yat (in whatever way
they offer) to explain this. “Whatever one offers to Śrī
Bhagavān is done for one’s self-interest only, not for
any other reason.” There is an example in this regard.
“The beauty of one’s face is reflected in the mirror. If
one does not beautify his face, the mirror cannot
reflect back the beauty of one’s face. Similarly, if one
does not offer loving worship to Śrī Bhagavān, who is
likened to the face, then how will the Lord’s love
reflect back in the living entities, who are His
separated portions?”

One might also question, “Why does the Lord not accept
the worship of the non-devotees? Is it because the Lord,
who is the Soul of all souls, has obtained the treasured
love that His devotees offer Him? Or is it because His
own desires are fulfilled through His devotees? In other
words, is it because He is completely absorbed in
bhakti-rasa, the mellows of devotion, which are situated
in the hearts of His devotees, whose very object is
Himself?”

The reply is, “Bhagavān definitely accepts the non-
devotees’ worship, because He is merciful. If Bhagavān
did not accept their offering, they would not obtain the
result of their worship.” Therefore, Prahlāda uses the
term yat yat. Unless one offers all of one’s possessions
to Śrī Bhagavān, the living being does not accomplish
his ultimate self-interest. If Śrī Bhagavān did not
accept their worship, then they could not obtain even an
insignificant result.

This concludes the overview of these thoughts.



Verse 216

yady apy aśeṣa-sat-karma-phalato ’dhikam uttamam

teṣām api phalaty eva tat-pūjā-phalam ātmanā

yadi api – although; aśeṣa – all; sat-karma – of
ordinary pious deeds; phalataḥ – than the results;
adhikam – better; uttamam – transcendental; teṣām – of
them; api – even; phalati – bears fruit; eva –
certainly; tat – of Him (the Deity); pūjā-phalam – the
result of worship; ātmanā – by itself.

Although the result of worshiping the Deity of Bhagavān
in this way is superior to and more excellent than the
fruit of unlimited ordinary pious acts, …

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might ask, “How is it
possible that the worship of Bhagavān will not yield
some result? If it is successful, how can it be
criticized?” In reply to this, Śrī Nārada speaks two
verses, beginning here with yadi api. He says, “Those
who worship the Deity of Bhagavān for their personal
interest naturally receive pure, immense, uninterrupted

                          609
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

sense enjoyment. What is the nature of this sense
enjoyment? It is superior to the results of all pious
acts. This means that it is devoid of the defect of the
enjoyment of heaven.”



Verse 217

tathāpi bhagavad-bhakti-yogyaṁ na jāyate phalam

iti sādhu-varais tat tat tatra tatra vinindyate

tathā api – nevertheless; bhagavat-bhakti – devotional
service to the Lord; yogyam – favorable; na – not;
jāyate – generated; phalam – the fruit; iti – thus;
sādhu-varaiḥ – by pure saints; tat tat – those
practices; tatra tatra – in various instances;
vinindyate – is specifically condemned.

Nevertheless, this result is not favorable for bhakti.
Therefore, unalloyed devotees condemn this worship.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nārada continues, “However, the
real fruit of devotional service is the attainment of
the vast treasure of love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet, by
the strength of which one gains entrance into Bhagavān’s
abodes, where one gets to meet directly with the Lord
and engage in loving exchanges with Him. However,
because this result is not achieved by the type of
worship mentioned above, pure devotees denounce such
worship and its results. This same condemnation is also
found in many places in the Purāṇas.”



Verse 218

tāni tāni purāṇādi-vacanāny akhilāny api

tat-tad-viṣayakāny eva manyasva na tu sarvataḥ

tāni tāni – various; purāṇa – beginning with the
Purāṇas; ādi – and so forth; vacanāni – statements;
akhilāni – all; api – although; tat tat – various;
viṣayakāni – related to this subject; eva – indeed;
manyasva – you should understand; na – not; tu – indeed;
sarvataḥ – in every way.

The Purāṇas have indeed reproached such Deity
worshipers; however, it does not mean that all types of
Deity worshipers are condemned.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nārada says, “Therefore, one sees
that the statements in the Purāṇas and other scriptures
establish the inferiority of such Deity worshipers who
cannot obtain the treasure of the great love that
bhagavad-bhakti bestows. These words are not meant to
criticize all Deity worshipers.”



Verse 219


                          610
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

te ’pi nūnaṁ na tāṁ pūjāṁ tyajeyur yadi sarvathā

tadā tan-niṣṭhayā citte śodhite guṇa-darśinām

te – they; api – also; nūnam – indeed; na – not; tām –
this; pūjām – worship; tyajeyuḥ – they may renounce;
yadi – if; sarvathā – in all respects; tadā – then; tat
– of them; niṣṭhayā – by their commitment; citte –
consciousness; śodhite – purified; guṇa-darśinām – for
those who perceive the qualities.

Even if such a neophyte does not give up Deity worship
and instead continues to perform it, then by his
commitment to his pūjā, his heart will gradually become
purified.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might say, “With
whatever sentiment one worships Bhagavān, the result
will never be something insignificant and mundane.”
There is evidence to support this:

vāsudeve mano yasya japa-homa-arcanaādiṣu

tasyāntarāyo maitreya devendratvādikaṁ phalam

O Maitreya, for those whose minds remain fixed on
Vāsudeva while chanting ( japa), or while performing
sacrifice (homa) or Deity worship (arcana) – for such
persons, achieving the position of Indra, the king of
heaven, or other such results is an obstacle to their
bhajana.

From this evidence, one can understand that just by
Deity worship alone, one achieves a glorious result.
Therefore from all angles, the insignificant results
mentioned in the Purāṇas and other scriptures do not
seem logical. To clarify this, Śrī Nārada speaks two
verses, beginning here with te ’pi.

He says, “Third-class devotees consider the Deity to be
made of stone, wood, or some other material element, and
so they worship Him with the feeling that the image is
different from Bhagavān. Those who worship a newly made
image, those whose false pride has pulled them away from
the path of religion, those who scorn living beings, and
those who disrespect the Vaiṣṇavas are all considered
third-class. Still, if such third-class Deity worshipers
do not give up their worship, but rather diligently
continue their practice, then due to the influence of
their dedication to Deity worship, or due to the mercy
of some devotee who has noticed their dedication, their
hearts become purified, their shortcomings are
surmounted, and soon they develop pure devotion.
However, those who worship out of pride and hypocrisy
and give up their worship the moment they receive their
reward, are counted among the high-class worshipers only
after a long time.”



Verse 220

kṛpayā kṛṣṇa-bhaktānāṁ prakṣīṇāśeṣa-dūṣaṇāḥ


                          611
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

kālena kiyatā te ’pi bhavanti paramottamāḥ

kṛpayā – by the mercy; kṛṣṇa – of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; bhaktānām –
of the devotees; prakṣīṇa – eradicated; aśeṣa – all;
dūṣaṇāḥ – faults; kālena kiyatā – after some time; te –
they; api – also; bhavanti – become; parama-uttamāḥ –
great souls.

By the mercy of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s devotees, who acknowledge
only the good qualities of others, all the defects of
those Deity worshipers will shortly be eradicated, and
they will be counted as high-class devotees in due time.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra may ask, “How will
they become great devotees if they commit the offense of
disrespecting Vaiṣṇavas?” Śrī Nārada speaks this verse
beginning with kṛpayā to point out that such worshipers
are freed of their shortcomings and become elevated very
quickly by the grace of great personalities, meaning
Kṛṣṇa’s devotees.

Gopa-kumāra could object, “But one sees that all great
saintly personalities simply neglect those who commit
offences unto the Vaiṣṇavas.” Therefore, Śrī Nārada
says, “It is the nature of Vaiṣṇavas to acknowledge only
the virtues of others. Since the Vaiṣṇavas see Bhagavān
everywhere, they see only the good qualities of the
Deity worshipers. Therefore, what to speak of punishing
the offenders, these great souls rather shower mercy on
them.”



Verse 221

yathā sakāma-bhaktā hi bhuktvā tat-kāmitaṁ phalam

kāle bhakti-prabhāveṇa yogyaṁ vindanti tat-phalam

yathā – as; sa-kāma-bhaktāḥ – materially motivated
devotees; hi – indeed; bhuktvā – having enjoyed; tat –
that; kāmitam – desired; phalam – fruit; kāle – in due
course of time; bhakti-prabhāveṇa – by the influence of
devotional service; yogyam – proper; vindanti – they
attain; tat – that; phalam – the beneficial result.

In the beginning, sakāma devotees, those who worship for
personal desires, do not receive the result befitting
bhakti. Rather, they receive only the insignificant
sense gratification that they desired. However, in due
course of time, by the influence of bhakti they
eventually attain the real fruit of devotion.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nārada speaks two verses beginning
with yathā to show that neophyte, or kaniṣṭha, devotees
also become elevated in due course of time. He says,
“Materially motivated, or sakāma, devotees first obtain
an insignificant result in the form of sense
gratification, according to their respective desires.
Later on, they are transformed into high-class devotees
and obtain the real fruit of bhakti, which is beyond any
self-interest. In due course of time, their superiority
is also established.”


                          612
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017



Verse 222

yathā ca tatra tat-kālaṁ bhakter yogyaṁ na sat-phalam

sañjātam iti tac chuddha-bhaktimadbhir vinindyate

yathā – as; ca – also; tatra – there; tat-kālam – at
that time; bhakteḥ – of devotional service; yogyam –
proper; na – not; sat-phalam – the transcendental
result; sañjātam – born; iti – thus; tat – that; śuddha-
bhakti-madbhiḥ – by pure devotees; vinindyate – it is
condemned.

In the stage of possessing material desires (sakāma-
avasthā), one does not obtain the principal result of
devotional service immediately. Therefore, pure devotees
condemn sakāma-bhakti (fruitive devotion).

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nārada says, “By the practice of
sakāma-bhakti, or devotion with the desire for material
reward, the topmost result is not achieved in the
beginning, but it does come after some delay. In other
words, the appropriate result of worship is not received
during the self-interested, sakāma stage of devotion.
Therefore, unalloyed devotees condemn the fruitive
desires of sakāma worshipers. Similarly, high-class
worshipers also reproach the neophytes who see Bhagavān
as separate from His Deity.”



Verse 223

te hi bhakteḥ phalaṁ mūlaṁ bhagavac-caraṇābjayoḥ

sadā sandarśana-krīḍānanda-lābhādi manvate

te – they; hi – certainly; bhakteḥ – of devotional
service; phalam – result; mūlam – the primary; bhagavat
– of the Lord; caraṇa-

abjayoḥ – of the lotus feet; sadā – always; sandarśana –
of beholding; krīḍā – pastimes; ānanda – bliss; lābha –
attainment; ādi – and so forth; manvate – consider.

Pure devotees consider having constant darśana of
Bhagavān’s lotus feet and attaining the happiness of
engaging in pastimes with Him to be the primary result
of devotional service.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might ask, “What is
the actual fruit of bhakti, which is praised so much by
the pure devotees?” In answer, Śrī Nārada speaks this
verse beginning with te hi. He says, “Pure devotees
always want to see the lotus feet of Bhagavān directly.
They want the happiness of serving Him (seva-ānanda) by
sporting together and by performing other pastimes with
Him. They consider these to indeed be the real fruits of
bhakti, because prema-bhakti alone is dear to Bhagavān.”
The word ādi indicates the pure devotees’ desire to
obtain the Lord’s special mercy and taste the bliss of
direct service.

                          613
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017




Verse 224

nāpi tatra sahante te vilambaṁ lava-mātrakam

bhagavān api tān hātuṁ manāg api na śaknuyāt

na – not; api – also; tatra – there; sahante – tolerate;
te – they; vilambam – delay; lava-mātrakam – of even a
moment; bhagavān – the all-opulent Lord; api – also; tān
– them; hātum – to abandon; manāk – slightly; api –
even; na śaknuyāt – is unable.

Those pure devotees are unable to tolerate even a
moment’s delay in receiving darśana of Bhagavān, and Śrī
Bhagavān also cannot give them up for even a second.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: The fruitive sakāma devotees receive
their desired sense gratification, and in due course of
time, they obtain bhakti, the real fruit. If this is the
case, why are the sakāma devotees subject to criticism?
To reconcile this, Śrī Nārada speaks this verse
beginning with nāpi. He says, “Premī devotees (those
experiencing pure love) cannot tolerate even a moment’s
delay in obtaining the main result, namely divine vision
of Śrī Bhagavān. Also, Śrī Bhagavān, unable to endure
their distress of separation from Him, cannot leave them
for even a second. Therefore, the pure devotees condemn
fruitive desires because they cause delay in obtaining
Bhagavān.”



Verse 225

ato ’nyāny ati-tucchāni sarva-kāma-phalāni hi

muktiś ca su-labhāny asmāt tad-bhaktir na tu tādṛśī

ataḥ – then; anyāni – other; ati-tucchāni – very
insignificant; sarva-kāma – awarding all desires;
phalāni – the fruits; hi – indeed; muktiḥ – liberation;
ca – also; su-labhāni – easily attained; asmāt – as
compared to that; tat-bhaktiḥ – His devotional service;
na – not; tu – certainly; tādṛśī – in the same way.

Therefore, Śrī Bhagavān easily gives all other types of
insignificant fruitive results and liberation as well,
but He does not readily give His pure devotional
service.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nārada says, “Other than darśana
of the Lord, all other results of worshiping Śrī
Bhagavān are totally insignificant. Bhakti, pure loving
devotion, is the primary result of such worship.
Bhagavān easily gives other results, even up to
insignificant mukti, but He does not easily grant bhakti
that has the quality of prema, pure love. Therefore,
prema-bhakti for Śrī Kṛṣṇa is considered even more rare
to attain than liberation.” In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(5.6.18), Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī states:


                          614
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

rājan patir gurur alaṁ bhavatāṁ yadūnāṁ

daivaṁ priyaḥ kula-patiḥ kva ca kiṅkaro vaḥ

astv evam aṅga bhajatāṁ bhagavān mukundo

muktiṁ dadāti karhicit sma na bhakti-yogam

O King, Bhagavān Mukunda is the guardian, guru,
worshipable Lord, well-wisher, and master of both your
dynasty and and that of the Yādavas. Even so, sometimes
He acts like your servant, carrying messages for you.
Śrī Bhagavān behaves intimately like this with you, but
to others who worship Him, He generally bestows
liberation; He does not easily give His devotional
service.

The purport is that Śukadeva Gosvāmī is saying, “O King,
O Parīkṣit, for you and the Yādavas, Bhagavān Mukunda
acts as the master and guardian, the guru and counselor,
the Lord and Deity, the beloved and close friend, the
patriarch and governor. What is more, sometimes He is
even your messenger and follows your orders like a
servant. O dear friend, to others who worship Him, He
only grants liberation, what to speak of being all these
things; He never easily gives bhakti-yoga to anyone.”

The reason is that He is Mukunda – He who bestows mukuṁ,
‘the happiness of liberation.’ Another reading is that
mu means mukti (liberation) and kuṁ means bhukti (sense
gratification). He also bestows sense enjoyment.
However, He never easily gives prema-bhakti to anyone.

Śrī Nārada continues, “He is Bhagavān Parameśvara, the
Supreme Person, and therefore He is wholly independent.
However, when He bestows prema-bhakti, He comes under
the control of His loving devotees and becomes
completely dependent. Being the crest jewel of the all-
omniscient souls, He does not see fit to bestow His
prema-bhakti on unqualified persons who are unaware of
prema-rasa, the mellows of love.” The reason for this
will be discussed in detail further ahead.



Verse 226

tat-prasādena bhaktānām adhīno bhagavān bhavet

iti svātantrya-hānyeva na tāṁ dadyān maheśvaraḥ

tat-prasādena – by Bhakti-devī’s mercy; bhaktānām – to
His devotees; adhīnaḥ – subordinate; bhagavān – the
Lord; bhavet – can become; iti – thus; svātantrya – on
His independence; hānyā – infringing; iva – as if; na –
not; tām – that (pure devotion); dadyāt – is inclined to
give; maheśvaraḥ – the Supreme Lord.

By the mercy of bhakti, Śrī Bhagavān, the Supreme Lord,
becomes subordinate to His devotees. Coming under their
control, He loses His independence. Therefore, He does
not easily grant His pure loving service.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nārada wants to explain why

                          615
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

Bhagavān does not grant devotional service easily. In
six verses, beginning here with tat, he first explains
the opinion of others (4.226), and then he gives his own
opinion (4.227–231). He says, “By the mercy of prema-
bhakti, Bhagavān comes under the control of His
devotees, and so He does not easily grant bhakti-yoga to
anyone. By nature, the Supreme Lord Parameśvara is never
ever under anyone’s control. How then would He agree to
surrender His independence and come under the control of
His devotees?” (This is the opinion of others.)



Verse 227

manye mahā-preṣṭha-janānuvaśyatā

na duḥkha-doṣau vidadhīta kaucana

kintu pramodaṁ nija-bhakta-vatsala-

tvādīn mahā-kīrti-guṇāṁs tanoti sā

manye – I think; mahā-preṣṭha-jana – by His dearly
beloved devotees; anuvaśyatā – being controlled; na –
not; duḥkha – unhappiness; doṣau – or inconvenience;
vidadhīta – create; kaucana – any; kintu – rather;
pramodam – great bliss; nija – own; bhakta – for
devotees; vatsalatva – the quality of affection; ādīn –
and so forth; mahā – great; kīrti – renown; guṇān –
virtues; tanoti – broadcasts; sā – that (the activity of
being subjugated by His devotees).

However, we think that Śrī Bhagavān does not experience
distress or inconvenience when subjugated by His
dearmost devotees. Rather, He finds great bliss when
under their control. In this way, Bhagavān broadcasts
His glorious quality of being affectionate to His
devotees.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: After having expressed the opinion of
others, Śrī Nārada refutes it and conveys his own view
in two verses, beginning here with manye.

He says, “When Bhagavān agrees to submit to His intimate
devotees, neither party experiences any distress or
inconvenience. Also, the subsequent decrease of awe and
reverence does not give rise to any defect. Accepting
this subjugation, Bhagavān brings joy to the world and
expands His illustrious reputation for being
affectionate to His devotees.” The word ādi indicates
qualities such as the great munificence the Lord
displays towards His devotees.

He continues, “In this way, the mutual bliss of Bhagavān
and the devotees grows, manifesting the pastimes of
ever-increasing affection that wipe out any last trace
of distress. There is nothing wrong with the Supreme
Controller submitting to the control of His devotees;
rather, this increases His celebrity of being bhakta-
vatsala (affectionate to His devotees) and is a sign of
His greatness.”



                          616
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


Verse 228

viśeṣato nāgara-śekharasya svārāmatādi-sva-guṇāpavādaiḥ

apekṣaṇīyā parama-priyā sā kāṣṭhā parā śrī-bhagavattva-
sīmnaḥ

viśeṣataḥ – especially; nāgara – of heroes; śekharasya –
the crown; sva-ārāmatā – the quality of being self-
satisfied; ādi – and so forth; sva-guṇa – His own
virtues; apavādaiḥ – by the contradictions; apekṣaṇīyā –
desirable; parama-priyā – supremely endearing; sā – it;
kāṣṭhā parā – highest summit; śrī-bhagavattva – of being
the Supreme Lord; sīmnaḥ – of the ultimate limit.

It is especially noteworthy that the crest jewel of
clever heroes, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, can forego His ātmārāmatā
(self-satisfaction) and all His other qualities, but He
cannot give up His quality of coming under the control
of His beloved devotees; He accepts their control
graciously. This alone is the ultimate limit of His
Godhood (bhagavattā).

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: It is appropriate that all of
Bhagavān’s incarnations are controlled by Their beloved
devotees. Yet being subordinate to His devotees is
especially appropriate for Śrī Kṛṣṇa because He is
exceedingly skillful in His dealings with His dear ones.
To explain this, Śrī Nārada speaks this verse beginning
with viśeṣataḥ.

He says, “Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the crest jewel of clever ones,
experiences happiness when His beloved devotees control
Him. Śrī Bhagavān’s willingness to be controlled is His
best and favorite asset, and it increases to the
greatest extent the glories of all His other qualities,
such as His fame. Therefore, such subjugation by the
devotees is most dear to Śrī Bhagavān. Śrī Kṛṣṇa, being
the ultimate expression of Bhagavān’s nature, manifests
to the highest degree the wonderful quality of being
affectionate to His devotees. Bhagavān can renounce all
His qualities, such as being self-satisfied
(ātmārāmatā), being one whose every desire has been
fulfilled (pūrṇa-kāmatā), and having mastery of all
mystic powers (mahā-yogeśvaratā), but He cannot give up
His subservience to His beloved devotees; rather, He
especially honors this quality and keeps it in His
heart.”

All these thoughts have been expressed in Śrī Hari-vaṁśa
and other scriptures in the māna-bhañjana incident where
Śrī Satyabhāmā-devī’s indignant mood is pacified.



Verse 229

sa-prema-bhakteḥ paripākataḥ syāt

kācin mahā-bhāva-viśeṣa-sampat

sā vai narīnarti mahā-praharṣa-


                          617
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

sāmrājya-mūrdhopari tattva-dṛṣṭyā

sa-prema-bhakteḥ – of loving devotion; paripākataḥ – in
the full maturity; syāt – it may be; kācit – a certain;
mahā-bhāva – of great ecstasy; viśeṣa-sampat – special
opulence; sā – that; vai – indeed; narīnarti – dances
with intense momentum; mahā-praharṣa – of immense
happiness; sāmrājya – of the empire; mūrdha – the head;
upari – upon; tattva – of philosophical truth; dṛṣṭyā –
from the perspective.

In the fully matured stage of prema-bhakti, the
indescribable, special treasure of bliss, mahā-bhāva,
arises and from the perspective of tattva, is seen to
dance ecstatically on the very head of the empire of all
happiness.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might ask, “If
Bhagavān is affectionate to His devotees (bhakta-
vatsala), why does He not grant that wealth to all the
devotees?”

Nārada speaks two verses, beginning here with sa-prema,
to satisfy this doubt. He says, “The mature state of
prema-bhakti transforms into an indescribable, special
ecstasy called mahā-bhāva, which manifests a distraught
condition due to the fire of separation (viraha-agni).
This is the special opulence of mahā-bhāva. From the
point of view of the principles of truth, that opulence,
which is most joyful by nature, dances on and on in
happiness upon the head of the topmost opulences of the
empire of great bliss.”



Verse 230

svabhāvato ’thāpi mahārtti-śoka-santāpa-cihnāni bahis
tanoti

bāhyāpi sā preṣṭhatamasya soḍhuṁ daśā na śakyeta kadāpi
tena

sva-bhāvataḥ – naturally; atha api – however; mahā –
great; ārtti – of distress; śoka – lamentation; santāpa
– of great pain; cihnāni – the symptoms; bahiḥ –
outwardly; tanoti – manifests; bāhyā – externally; api –
also; sā – that; preṣṭha-tamasya – of His most dearly
beloved; soḍhum – to tolerate; daśā – the condition; na
– not; śakyeta – may be able; kadā api – ever; tena – by
Him.

In the state of mahā-bhāva, external symptoms such as
great distress, lamentation, and pain manifest
naturally. Even though indescribable happiness also
enters the hearts of His beloved devotees, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
cannot tolerate seeing this pained external condition.
Therefore, He does not easily grant His prema-bhakti.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nārada says, “However, the
treasured mahā-bhāva naturally manifests the external
symptoms of extreme distress, lamentation, and pain, as
well as pathetic crying and bitter weeping, in the
devotees. Yet, in their hearts, they experience great

                          618
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

bliss, as prema-bhakti is supremely blissful by nature.
If this were not the case, then that treasured mahā-
bhāva would be found reprehensible for claiming that it
can definitely make the experience of brahmānanda seem
insignificant by its very nature.

“Although the signs of the devotees’ suffering and
lamentation are only external, Śrī Bhagavān still cannot
tolerate seeing them. Why not? The lover cannot bear
even the false distress of his beloveds.” Here, the word
Bhagavān means ‘the most loving.’



Verse 231

lokā bahir-dṛṣṭi-parās tu bhāvaṁ

taṁ bhrāmakaṁ prema-bharaṁ vilokya

bhaktāv akāmā vihasanti bhaktāṁs

tat-prema-bhaktiṁ bhagavān na datte

lokāḥ – the general populace; bahiḥ-dṛṣṭi-parāḥ – who
are absorbed in external vision; tu – indeed; bhāvam –
love; tam – this; bhrāmakam – bewildering; prema-bharam
– weight of love; vilokya – seeing; bhaktau – for
devotion; akāmāḥ – they give up desire; vihasanti –
ridicule; bhaktān – the devotees; tat – to Himself;
prema-bhaktim – loving devotion; bhagavān – the Lord; na
– not; datte – gives.

When worldly people see the premī-bhaktas’ signs of
distress and lamentation that arise due to the matured
stage of prema-bhakti, they become perplexed and have no
desire to engage in bhakti. They even ridicule such
devotees. Therefore, Śrī Bhagavān does not grant His
prema-bhakti.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: In this verse beginning with lokā, Śrī
Nārada says that it is also for the benefit of foolish
people that Bhagavān does not grant the wealth of prema-
bhakti to everyone.

He says, “The reason for this is that people who only
see things externally cannot understand the truth of
pure devotion. Therefore, when they see the distress-
filled emotions of the premī-bhaktas, such as weeping,
they lose faith in bhakti and sneer at these advanced
devotees. What type of emotions do the devotees
experience? With their external vision, the materialists
wonder, ‘Are these sentiments (bhāvas) of the devotees
the greatest distress or the highest bliss?’ The ecstasy
simply bewilders them. Unable to ascertain what it is
and unable to understand the true nature of bhakti, they
ridicule the devotees. This is the reason that Śrī
Bhagavān, being most merciful and knowing everyone’s
welfare, does not easily grant His prema-bhakti.”



Verse 232


                          619
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

sa-premakā bhaktir atīva durlabhā

svargādi-bhogaḥ sulabho ’bhavaś ca saḥ

cintāmaṇiḥ sarva-janair na labhyate

labhyeta kācādi kadāpi hāṭakam

sa-premakā – with love; bhaktiḥ – devotion; atīva
durlabhā – extremely rare; svarga-ādi – of Svargaloka
and so on; bhogaḥ – enjoyment; su-labhaḥ – easy to
attain; abhavaḥ – cessation of material existence, or
liberation; ca – and; saḥ – that; cintāmaṇiḥ – wish-
fulfilling gem;

sarva-janaiḥ – by everybody; na – not; labhyate – is
obtainable; labhyeta – may be obtained; kāca-ādi – glass
and so forth; kadā api – sometimes; hāṭakam – gold.

Anyone can obtain a piece of glass and sometimes a piece
of gold, but not everyone can obtain a cintāmaṇi because
it is most rare. Similarly, the pleasures of heaven and
liberation are easily achieved, but prema-bhakti is
extremely rare.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might ask, “How did
devotees like you (Śrī Nārada) attain that prema-
bhakti?”

In reply, Śrī Nārada speaks this verse beginning with
sa-prema. He says, “The enjoyment of heaven is easily
acheived.” Here, the term Svarga (heaven) indicates that
all the excellent objects for sense enjoyment are
available there. The word ādi indicates bhū-svarga
(heaven on the earthly plane), bila-svarga (subterranean
heavenly planets, or the seven lower pātāla planets),
and the abodes situated above divya-svarga (the upper
heavenly planets), such as Maharloka, the planet of the
sages.

He continues, “The seekers of liberation (mumukṣus)
maintain that liberation is extremely difficult to
achieve, but actually liberation is also easily
achieved. In this connection, there is an example –
enjoyment in the heavenly planets is like a piece of
glass, liberation is like a piece of gold, and prema-
bhakti is like a desire stone (cintāmaṇi). Just as gold
is more difficult to obtain than glass, similarly,
liberation is more rare than material enjoyment. With
little endeavor, anyone can get a piece of glass. Gold
is not as easy to procure, but with substantial effort,
some are able to obtain it. The cintāmaṇi touchstone,
however, is far more rare than gold. What to speak of
actually obtaining a cintāmaṇi stone, hardly anyone ever
even gets a chance to see it.

“The purport is that everyone can obtain the pleasures
of the heavenly planets, which are comparable to common
glass. Liberation cannot be had if one maintains any
desire for heavenly enjoyment. Therefore, liberation is
more difficult to obtain than Svarga. Finally, cintāmaṇi
is far more rare than gold, and so loving devotional
service has been compared to cintāmaṇi. One cannot
attain prema-bhakti if there is even a scent of desire

                          620
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

for sense gratification (bhukti) or liberation (mukti).
When one abandons all types of desires, one can
sometimes obtain the cintāmaṇi of prema-bhakti by the
mercy of Bhagavān.”



Verse 233

kadācid eva kasmaicit tad-ekārtha-spṛhāvate

tāṁ dadyād bhagavān bhaktiṁ loka-bāhyāya dhīmate

kadācit – sometimes; eva – indeed; kasmaicit – unto
someone; tad – that; eka-artha – one-pointedly; spṛhā-
vate – unto one who desires; tām – that; dadyāt – He may
give; bhagavān – the Lord; bhaktim – devotional service;
loka-bāhyāya – to one who has nothing to do with the
world; dhī-mate – to an intelligent person.

Only rarely does Śrī Bhagavān give this prema-bhakti,
and then, only to one who is highly elevated, who
desires nothing other than loving devotional service to
Him, and who is beyond the realm of social convention.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: In this verse beginning with kadācit,
Śrī Nārada explains that Bhagavān grants this loving
devotional service only rarely to that noble-hearted
person who is indifferent to the behavior of ordinary
men and who, due to his strong desire for prema-bhakti,
has, in the manner of one vomiting poison, given up all
comforts. Because of his indifference to social custom,
people consider him mad and therefore, although they may
not deride him, they disregard him.



Verse 234

śakyaṁ na tad-bhāva-viśeṣa-tattvaṁ

nirvaktum asmābhir atho na yogyam

bhakti-pravṛtty-artha-paraiḥ prabhoḥ sac-

chāstrair ivājñeṣu viruddhavat syāt

śakyam na – unable; tad-bhāva – of that ecstasy; viśeṣa
– the special; tattvam – true nature; nirvaktum – to
describe; asmābhiḥ – by us; athau – then; na – not;
yogyam – suitable; bhakti – of devotional service;
pravṛtti – to the practice; artha-paraiḥ – by they who
are devoted; prabhoḥ – of the Lord; sat-śāstraiḥ – the
true scriptures; iva – like; ajñeṣu – amongst the fools;
viruddha-vat – in a contrary way; syāt – it may be.

Even we are not able to describe the real nature of the
special transcendental state of ecstacy that manifests
in the fully mature stage of prema-bhakti. Although we
can describe some of that special ecstasy’s marginal
symptoms, there would still be some discrepancy in our
description. Therefore, just as the pure scriptures do
not reveal the nature of that special ecstasy, devotees
dedicated to practicing bhakti also do not reveal it

                          621
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

because foolish people would take it in a contrary way.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might ask, “What is
the nature of the special transcendental state of
ecstasy (bhāva) that arises in that fully matured stage
of pure loving service to the Lord?”

Śrī Nārada replies here in this verse beginning with
śakyaṁ na. He says, “Even we are unable to describe the
true nature of the special bhāva that arises in the
fully matured state of prema-bhakti because that ecstasy
is beyond mind and words.”

Gopa-kumāra could question further, “Can one not
ascertain some of its marginal characteristics
(taṭastha-lakṣaṇa)?”

Śrī Nārada answers, “Artful words cannot express that
truth. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and other scriptures and the
sādhus who are exclusively devoted to the pursuit of
loving devotion to the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa have
described or experienced that tattva (truth) as fully
matured topmost bliss. However, when one hears that the
nature of that prema-bhakti is like ‘millions of
conflagrations at the time of the cosmic annihilation,’
in fear, no one will desire to pursue it.” Therefore,
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.40) states: “hasaty atho roditi
rauti gāyati – The devotees sometimes laugh, sometimes
cry, and sometimes shout.”

In his commentary on this Bhāgavatam verse, Śrīla
Śrīdhara Svāmipāda has cleverly avoided touching the
devotees’ wailing and other symptoms of distress.
Rather, he says, “The laughing, crying, or shouting of
devotees has the following meaning: When a devotee meets
Kṛṣṇa, he tells Him, ‘O Lord! For such a long time, You
have neglected me.’ ” In this way, Śrīdhara Svāmipāda
has not mentioned the distress and pain experienced in
separation from Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

The point could be made that such bhāva is in fact the
ripened state of topmost happiness. Although this bhāva
manifests externally as great distress, there is no
fault in describing it. Therefore, Nārada explains,
“This is true, but an ignorant person will misunderstand
the truth and it will have a negative effect. When he
hears of the external symptoms of the ecstasy, he will
fear the distress that comes with prema-bhakti and will
not be able to focus on the process of achieving bhakti.
Rather, he will endeavor for liberation, which is devoid
of distress. In other words, prema-bhakti is not for
unworthy, foolish people, so they naturally have no
inclination for it.”



Verse 235

tad-bhāvotkarṣa-mādhuryaṁ vidus tad-rasa-sevinaḥ

tatratyas tvam api jñāsyasy acirāt tat-prasādataḥ

tat-bhāva – of that love; utkarṣa – super-excellence;
mādhuryam – sweetness; viduḥ – they experience; tat-

                          622
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

rasa-sevinaḥ – they who taste the mellows of devotional
service; tatratyaḥ – His associate; tvam – you; api –
also; jñāsyasi – can know; acirāt – soon; tat-prasādataḥ
– by His mercy.

Only those who taste the nectar of prema-bhakti can
experience its sweetness and excellence. O Gopa-kumāra,
you are also an eternal associate of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Therefore, by His mercy you will soon understand this
confidential matter.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might request of Śrī
Nārada, “Out of your kindness for the fallen, please
reveal to me some sweet glories of that special
ecstasy.”

Anticipating this, Śrī Nārada speaks this verse
beginning with tad. He says, “Only those persons whose
very nature is to relish the rasa of that special
ecstasy understand its excellent glories and sweetness.
No one else can understand it. I myself am unable to
comprehend that truth.” (Factually, these words only
indicate Śrī Nārada’s humility.) Then he tells Gopa-
kumāra, “By the mercy of Śrī Gokula-nātha, you took
birth in the land of Gokula and therefore, you can
understand this essential truth.”



Verse 236

śrī-gopa-kumāra uvāca

evaṁ nijeṣṭa-deva-śrī-gopāla-caraṇābjayoḥ

nitarāṁ darśanotkaṇṭhā tad-vācā me vyavardhata

śrī-gopa-kumāraḥ uvāca – Śrī Gopa-kumāra said; evam –
thus; nija – my own; iṣṭa – worshipable; deva – Deity;
śrī-gopāla – of the all-attractive cowherd; caraṇa-
abjayoḥ – of the lotus feet; nitarām – intensely;
darśana – for the sight; utkaṇṭhā – eagerness; tad-vācā
– by his words; me – my; vyavardhata – increased.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra said: Śrī Nārada’s words increased my
eagerness to have darśana of the lotus feet of my
worshipable Deity, Śrī Madana-gopāla-deva.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra offers praṇāma to Śrī
Nārada with these words:

gūḍhā vaiṣṇava-siddhānta-maṇi-mañjuṣikā haṭhāt

sphuṭam-udghāṭitā yena taṁ prapanno ’smi nāradam

I take shelter of Śrī Nārada who has forced open the
treasure chest of very confidential Vaiṣṇava conclusions
and revealed the jewels of Vaiṣṇava siddhānta.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra says to the Mathurā brāhmaṇa, “On
hearing Śrī Nārada’s words, I was overwhelmed with
eagerness to have darśana of the lotus feet of my
worshipable Deity, Śrī Madana-gopāla. In fact, he had
described Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s topmost qualities just to increase

                          623
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

my eagerness.”



Verse 237

tādṛg-bhāva-viśeṣāśā-vātyāpy ajani tat-kṣaṇāt

tābhyāṁ śokārṇave kṣiptaṁ mām ālakṣyāha sāntvayan

tādṛk – such; bhāva-viśeṣa – for the special ecstasy;
āśā – of desire; vātyā – by the tempestuous gale; api –
although; ajani – was manifested; tat-kṣaṇāt – from that
moment; tābhyām – by them; śoka – of lamentation; arṇave
– in an ocean; kṣiptam – thrown; mām – me; ālakṣya –
noticing; āha – he said; sāntvayan – consoling.

That very moment, I was submerged in a stormy ocean of
lamentation that had two vortexes – the desire for that
special ecstasy of prema-bhakti and the darśana of Śrī
Madana-gopāla. Seeing this, the great sage Śrī Nārada
consoled me with the following words.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Therefore, I
became submerged in the whirlpool of desire to obtain
the special ecstasy (bhāva) of fully ripened prema-
bhakti, and at the same time I also became frantic for
darśana of my worshipable Deity, Śrī Madana-gopāla. Both
these desires were so intense that they turned me into a
complete madman, submerging me in an ocean of
lamentation. When the merciful great sage Śrī Nārada
witnessed this, he began to console me.”



Verse 238

śrī-nārada uvāca

yady apy etan mahā-gopyaṁ yujyate nātra jalpitum

tathāpi tava kātarya-bharair mukharito bruve

śrī-nāradaḥ – the glorious sage Nārada; uvāca – said;
yadi api – although; etat – this; mahā – very; gopyam –
confidential; yujyate – it is appropriate; na – not;
atra – here; jalpitum – to speak; tathā api – still;
tava – your; kātarya-bharaiḥ – because of the immense
weight of your distress; mukharitaḥ – from the beginning
(to the end); bruve – I am speaking.

Śrī Nārada said: Even though it is not proper to discuss
all these highly confidential topics here in Vaikuṇṭha,
seeing your aggrieved condition, I am compelled to tell
you this secret.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nārada says, “Although in this
abode of Vaikuṇṭha it is not fit to describe the
confidential topic about which I am going to speak,
nevertheless I am speaking it. This is because, seeing
your painful distress, I am compelled to speak out.”




                          624
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

Verse 239

ito ’dūre ’yodhyā vilasati purī śrī-raghupates

tato dūre śrīman-madhura-madhu-puryaiva sadṛśī

purī dvārāvaty ullasati dayitā śrī-yadupates

tam evāsyāṁ gatvā nija-dayita-devaṁ bhaja dṛśā

itaḥ – from here; adūre – not far; ayodhyā – Ayodhyā;
vilasati – shines; purī – the city; śrī-raghu-pateḥ – of
Śrī Rāma, Lord of the Raghu dynasty; tataḥ – from there;
dūre – far; śrīmat-madhura – beautiful and delightful;
madhu-puryā – to the city of Mathurā; iva – like; sadṛśī
– similar; purī – the city; dvārāvatī – of Dvārakā;
ullasati – shines; dayitā – dear; śrī-yadu-pateḥ – to
the Lord of the Yadus; tam – Him; eva – indeed; asyām –
in that place; gatvā – having gone; nija-dayita-devam –
your own beloved Lord; bhaja – worship; dṛśā – with your
eyes.

A short distance from here is the city of Ayodhyā, where
Śrī Raghupati resides. Some distance from there is
Dvārakā-purī, which, like Śrī Mathurā-purī, is supremely
beautiful and effulgent. This place is very dear to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, the Lord of the Yadus. Go there and have the
direct darśana of your beloved Lord.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: In the next eight verses, starting
here with itaḥ, Śrī Nārada describes to Gopa-kumāra the
way to get direct darśana of his worshipable Deity.

He says, “The Lord of the Raghu dynasty, Raghupati Śrī
Rāmacandra’s especially beautiful city of Ayodhyā is
just a short distance from this Śrī Nārāyaṇa-purī in
Vaikuṇṭha. Some distance from Ayodhyā is Yadupati Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s beloved city named Dvārāvatī. What is that city
like? It is like Śrī Madhupurī, the city of Śrī
Mathurā.”

According to the statements of Śrī Vikadru, mentioned in
Śrī Hari-vaṁśa, Dvārakā is a special region of Mathurā
only, and therefore the Yādavas of Mathurā live there.
Nārada says, “In attaining Dvārakā, one also attains
Mathurā. Therefore, go to Dvārāvatī and receive direct
darśana of your worshipable Deity, Śrī Yadupati, and
serve Him with love.”



Verse 240

prāg ayodhyābhigamane sad-upāyam imaṁ śṛṇu

śrī-rāmacandra-pādābja-sevaika-rasikair matam

prāk – first; a-yodhyā – the unconquerable (city of the
Raghu dynasty); abhigamane – for swiftly going; sat-
upāyam – a good procedure; imam – this; śṛṇu – listen;
śrī-rāmacandra-pāda-abja – to Śrī Rāmacandra’s lotus
feet; sevā – service; eka – exclusive; rasikaiḥ – by
they who relish transcendental mellows; matam –
approved.

                          625
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017


First, however, listen carefully to an excellent
procedure for going to Ayodhyā. This is approved by the
great devotees who relish the transcendental humors and
are devoted to serving Śrī Rāmacandra’s lotus feet.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might wonder, “How can
I go to Dvārakā?” Instructing Gopa-kumāra in the step-
by-step method for reaching Dvārakā, Śrī Nārada first
explains the way to reach Ayodhyā. This is related in
four verses, beginning here with prāg, He says, “First,
listen to this excellent method that I will narrate to
you. It is a method approved by the rasika servitors who
are devoted to the lotus feet of Śrī Rāmacandra.”



Verse 241

sākṣād-bhagavatas tasya śrī-kṛṣṇasyāvatāriṇaḥ

upāsanā-viśeṣeṇa sarvaṁ yady api labhyate

sākṣāt – directly; bhagavataḥ – of the Supreme Lord;
tasya – Him; śrī-kṛṣṇasya – Śrī Kṛṣṇa; avatāriṇaḥ – the
origin of all incarnations; upāsanā – worship; viśeṣeṇa
– special; sarvam – everything; yadi api – although;
labhyate – is attained.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is avatārī, the source of incarnations, and
directly Bhagavān. Everything can be obtained by
rendering special devotional service to Him.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: In two verses, beginning here with
sākṣāt, Śrī Nārada removes Śrī Gopa-kumāra’s worry that
he will instruct him on some other specific means for
going to Ayodhyā. Śrī Nārada herein explains that
everything, including the lotus feet of Śrī Raghunātha,
can be obtained by the special worship of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who
is directly Bhagavān and the Lord of Goloka. That
special worship means taking shelter of Śrī Madana-
gopāla’s ten-syllable mantra, the king of all mantras.
The reason for this is that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the source, the
seed, of all incarnations. He is directly Bhagavān and
is therefore endowed with unlimited opulences.

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.3.28), Śrīla Sūta Gosvāmī
states:

ete cāṁśa-kalāḥ puṁsaḥ kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam

Among all the incarnations of Bhagavān whom I have
described, some are His plenary portions (aṁśas) and
some are portions of the plenary portions (kalās).
However, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the original form of Godhead.



Verse 242

tathāpi raghu-vīrasya śrīmat-pāda-sarojayoḥ

tayo rasa-viśeṣasya lābhāyopadiśāmy aham


                          626
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

tathā api – still; raghu-vīrasya – of the hero of the
Raghu dynasty; śrīmat-pāda-sarojayoḥ – of the beautiful
lotus feet; tayoḥ – of them; rasa-viśeṣasya – the
special flavor; lābhāya – to attain; upadiśāmi – am
describing; aham – I.

Nevertheless, I am giving this instruction separately,
so that you may obtain the special rasa of the lotus
feet of Śrī Raghuvīra, the hero of the Raghu dynasty.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nārada says, “I am giving you
separate instructions to obtain the special rasa – the
extraordinary bliss of devotion – of Śrī Raghuvīra’s
extraordinary lotus feet that are decorated with marks
of thorns from the Daṇḍakāraṇya forest.”

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (9.11.19), Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī
states:

smaratāṁ hṛdi vinyasya viddhaṁ daṇḍaka-kaṇṭakaiḥ

sva-pāda-pallavaṁ rāma ātma-yonir agāt tataḥ

The lotus feet of Śrī Rāmacandrajī are decorated by
marks of thorns that pierced them while He was residing
in the forest of Daṇḍakāraṇya. The devotees remember
these lotus feet, and by establishing them in their
hearts, they attain the abode of Śrī Raghunātha.

Śrī Nārada continues, “Although everything can be
obtained by bhakti to Śrī Madana-gopāla, who is the
original cause of all the incarnations, nevertheless,
there is some specialty in the incarnation of Śrī
Raghunātha. Unless one has special devotion for Śrī
Raghuvīra, one cannot experience the special rasa
connected with Him. Therefore, I am instructing you
separately about devotion to Him.”



Verse 243

“sītā-pate śrī-raghunātha lakṣmaṇa-

jyeṣṭha prabho śrī-hanumat-priyeśvara”

ity ādikaṁ kīrtaya veda-śāstrataḥ

khyātaṁ smaraṁs tad-guṇa-rūpa-vaibhavam

sītā-pate – O Lord of Sītā; śrī-raghunātha – O Lord of
the Raghus; lakṣmaṇa-jyeṣṭha – O elder brother of
Lakṣmaṇa; prabho – O Lord; śrī-hanumat-priya – beloved
of Hanumān; īśvara – O Lord; iti – thus; ādikam – and so
forth; kīrtaya – sing loudly; veda-śāstrataḥ – from the
Vedic scriptures; khyātam – described; smaran –
remembering; tat – His; guṇa – qualities; rūpa – form;
vaibhavam – and opulences.

You should perform nāma-kīrtana, singing loudly, “O
Sītāpati! O Raghunātha! O elder brother of Lakṣmaṇa! O
Lord! O beloved master of Hanumān!” In this way, you
should remember Śrī Raghunāthajī’s renowned form,
qualities, pastimes, and so on, which are mentioned in

                          627
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

the Vedic scriptures.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Instructing Śrī Gopa-kumāra, Śrī
Nārada speaks this verse beginning with sītā-pate. He
says, “Names such as Śrī Hanumat-priya-īśvara are the
Lord’s sambodhana names (names used to address
someone).” The word ādi also refers to names such as Śrī
Kauśalyā-nandana (son of Kauśalyā), Dāśarathi
(descendent of Daśaratha), Bharat-agraja (elder brother
of Bharata), and Sugrīva-sakhā (friend of Sugrīva), etc.
“You should perform kīrtana of all these names that are
sambodhana.

“What more should you do? You should also remember or
contemplate within your mind Śrī Raghuvīra’s renowned
qualities such as His modesty and humility; His beauty;
His dark-colored complexion, greenish like durvā grass;
His magnificent activities like wielding a bow; His
majesty; and His glories.”

Gopa-kumāra might ask, “What is the nature of Śrī
Raghuvīra’s opulences and deeds?” Śrī Nārada replies,
“They are celebrated in the Vedas, Purāṇas, and other
scriptures. Therefore, you already know these.”



Verse 244

yena prakāreṇa nijeṣṭa-devo

labhyeta tasyānusṛtiḥ kṛtitvam

yatrāsya gandho ’pi bhavet kriyeta

prītiḥ parā tatra tad-eka-niṣṭhaiḥ

yena – by which; prakāreṇa – method; nija – own; iṣṭa –
worshipable; devaḥ – Deity; labhyeta – can be obtained;
tasya – of Him; anusṛtiḥ – following; kṛtitvam – action;
yatra – where; asya – of Him; gandhaḥ – a slight trace;
api – even; bhavet – it can be; kriyeta – one should do;
prītiḥ – affection; parā – great; tatra – there; tad –
in Him; eka-niṣṭhaiḥ – by those with one-pointed
determination.

It is imperative that one performs whatever activity
leads him to the service of his worshipable Deity.
Devotees with single-pointed focus feel tremendous
affection for anything that has even a slight trace of
relationship with their beloved Lord.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might raise the doubt,
“Śrī Madana-gopāla stole my mind long, long ago; I have
no taste in anyone or anything else. In my heart, how
can I accept any other Deity with love?”

To reconcile this doubt, Śrī Nārada speaks this verse
beginning with yena. He says, “A wise person will
undertake any endeavor that helps him attain his
worshipable Deity. ‘Sva-kāryam uddharet prājñaḥ kārya-
dhvaṁsena mūrkhatā – To complete one’s work is a sign of
intelligence, and to destroy one’s work is foolishness.’
” According to this logic, one should accept those

                          628
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

personalities whose mercy helps one to reach his desired
goal.

“After crossing this region, you will first enter
Ayodhyā. From there, you will depart for Dvārakā, where
you will meet your worshipable Lord. Just as one can
obtain Śrī Viṣṇu by the special mercy of Lord Śivajī,
similarly, one can obtain Bhagavān Śrī Gopāla-deva by
the special mercy of Śrī Raghunātha.”

Śrī Gopa-kumāra might wonder, “Will this break my one-
pointed devotion to my worshipable Lord?”

To remove his doubt, Śrī Nārada speaks the line
beginning with yatra. He says, “Have no such doubt. Like
a chaste woman, an unalloyed devotee will accept with
great love any object that has even a slight scent of
his worshipable Deity. This type of special love shows
one’s dedication to his worshipable Deity, and thereby
one receives the topmost happiness.”



Verse 245

śrī-rāma-pādābja-yuge ’valokite

śāmyen na cet sā tava darśanotkatā

tenaiva kāruṇya-bharārdra-cetasā

praheṣyate dvāravatīṁ sukhaṁ bhavān

śrī-rāma – of Lord Rāmacandra; pāda-abja-yuge – the two
lotus feet; avalokite – beholding; śāmyet – it is
pacified; na – not; cet – if; sā – that; tava – your;
darśana – for seeing; utkatā – the eagerness; tena – by
Him; eva – indeed; kāruṇya – of mercy; bhara – with an
abundance; ārdra – melts; cetasā – by He whose heart;
praheṣyate – will be sent; dvāravatīm – to Dvārakā;
sukham – happily; bhavān – my dear sir.

Despite having the darśana of the lotus feet of Śrī
Rāmacandra, if your eagerness to see your beloved
worshipable Deity is not pacified, then that Śrī
Rāmacandrajī, whose heart melts with great compassion,
will happily send you to Dvārāvatī (Dvārakā).

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Nārada says, “When you reach
Ayodhyā, you will have darśana of the lotus feet of Śrī
Rāmacandrajī. If that darśana does not pacify your
eagerness to meet with Śrī Madana-gopāla, then Śrī
Rāmacandrajī Himself will happily send you to Dvārakā,
because His tender heart always melts with compassion.
As soon as He sees your great eagerness to have darśana
of Śrī Madana-gopāla, He will show you such special
mercy that you will quickly and happily reach Dvārakā.”



Verse 246

saṅkīrtanaṁ tasya yathoditaṁ prabhoḥ


                          629
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

kurvan gatas tatra nija-priyeśvaram

śrī-kṛṣṇa-candraṁ yadubhir vṛtaṁ ciraṁ

didṛkṣitaṁ drakṣyasi taṁ manoharam

saṅkīrtanam – loud chanting; tasya – of Him; yathā – as;
uditam – rising; prabhoḥ – of the Lord; kurvan – while
performing; gataḥ – gone; tatra – there; nija-priya-
īśvaram – your own dear Lord; śrī-kṛṣṇa-candram – the
moon of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; yadubhiḥ – by the Yadus; vṛtam –
surrounded; ciram – for a long time; didṛkṣitam –
desired to see; drakṣyasi – you will see; tam – Him;
manaḥ-haram – mind-enchanting.

Chanting the holy names of your Lord is the only way to
reach Dvārakā. When you get there, you will finally
receive what you have been anxiously awaiting for such a
long, long time – darśana of your most attractive,
beloved Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra, surrounded by the Yādavas.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: “How will I reach that Dvārāvatī?” In
reply, Śrī Nārada speaks this verse beginning with
saṅkīrtanam. He says, “Arriving at Dvārāvatī, you will
have darśana of your indescribably glorious Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
who is surrounded by the Yādavas. You have been anxious
to see Him for such a long time.”

Śrī Gopa-kumāra might say, “I have been waiting all this
time only to see my worshipable Lord Śrī Madana-gopāla.”
Śrī Nārada assures him, “Indeed, that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is your
beloved Lord, your charming worshipable Deity, Bhagavān
Śrī Madana-gopāla-deva, who fully captivates everyone’s
heart.”

Śrī Gopa-kumāra might ask, “What is the quickest and
easiest way to reach Dvārakā?” Śrī Nārada replies, “The
saṅkīrtana of Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra’s name is the only means
to get there. Therefore, as the scriptures enjoin, you
should sweetly sing of His qualities, glorify Him in
verse, call out His names loudly, and praise Him.”

Śrī Gopa-kumāra might wonder, “How will I know how to
properly glorify Him?” Śrī Nārada tells him, “The
glories of your Lord are never secret; they are
celebrated in the scriptures.” In other words, Nārada is
instructing, “Chant the holy names in a manner such that
those glories manifest in your heart. Then there will be
no need to follow the scriptural injunctions.”

Gopa-kumāra might question, “How can I happily receive
darśana of my worshipable Deity if I transgress
scriptural injunctions?” Śrī Nārada answers, “Do not
think like this. The Lord forgives the innumerable
offences of His servitors. Because Śrī Kṛṣṇa is so
powerful, if one somehow chants His holy names, all
one’s desires will be fulfilled.”



Verse 247

vaikuṇṭhasyaiva deśās te


                           630
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

kośalā-dvārakādayaḥ

tat tatra gamanāyājñā

tad-bhartur na hy apekṣyatām

vaikuṇṭhasya – of Vaikuṇṭha; eva – indeed; deśāḥ – the
lands; te – they; kośalā – Ayodhyā; dvārakā – Dvārakā;
ādayaḥ – and so forth; tat – therefore; tatra – there
(Ayodhyā and Dvārakā); gamanāya – to go; ājñā – the
order; tad – of that (Vaikuṇṭha); bhartuḥ – of the Lord;
na – not; hi – certainly; apekṣyatām – required.

Ayodhyā, Dvārakā, and other such abodes are special
provinces of Vaikuṇṭha itself. Therefore, there is no
need of taking Śrī Vaikuṇṭha-nātha’s consent to go
there.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might inquire, “Do I
need to ask Śrī Vaikuṇṭha-nātha for permission to go to
Ayodhyā?” Anticipating this, Śrī Nārada speaks three
verses, beginning here with vaikuṇṭhasya. He says, “The
abodes mentioned by me – Ayodhyā, Dvārakā, etc. – are
special districts within Vaikuṇṭha itself.” The word ādi
refers to abodes such as Śrī Puruṣottama-kṣetra also. He
says, “So, there is no need to take permission of Śrī
Vaikuṇṭha-nātha to go there. After all, you are not
abandoning His Vaikuṇṭha-loka.”



Verse 248

tasyājñayāgato ’trāhaṁ sarva-hṛd-vṛtti-darśinaḥ

man-mukhenaiva tasyājñā sampannnety anumanyatām

tasya – of Him; ājñayā – by the order; āgataḥ – come;
atra – here; aham – I; sarva-hṛt – of the hearts of all;
vṛtti – the activities; darśinaḥ – of He who sees; mat-
mukhena – through my mouth; eva – indeed; tasya – His;
ājñā – order; sampannā – effected; iti – thus;
anumanyatām – it should be considered.

I have come here only by the order of Śrī Vaikuṇṭha-
nātha, who knows the desire of everyone’s heart.
Therefore, you should accept that everything I am saying
is nothing but His direct order.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might say,
“Nevertheless, I will be successful in reaching Ayodhyā
if Śrī Vaikuṇṭha-nātha approves my departure.”

Śrī Nārada replies to this doubt with this verse
beginning with tasya. He says, “Indeed, I have come to
you only on the order of Śrī Vaikuṇṭha-nātha. He
instructed me, ‘O Nārada, quietly go to Gopa-kumāra and
fulfill his desire.’ The Lord, who always knows the
desires of everyone’s heart, has understood that your
mind is not satisfied residing here in Vaikuṇṭha, and
that is why He has given this order to me. Therefore,
you should regard my words as the direct permission of
Śrī Vaikuṇṭha-nātha.”


                          631
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017



Verse 249

ekaṁ mahā-bhaktam anugrahītuṁ

svayaṁ kutaścid bhagavān gato ’yam

soḍhuṁ vilambaṁ na hi śakṣyasi tvaṁ

tan-nirgame te ’vasaro varo ’yam

ekam – one; mahā – great; bhaktam – devotee; anu-
grahītum – to show mercy; svayam – personally; kutaścit
– somewhere; bhagavān – the all-opulent Lord; gataḥ –
gone; ayam – He; soḍhum – to tolerate; vilambam – delay;
na – not; hi – indeed; śakṣyasi tvam – you will be able;
tat – there; nirgame – to depart; te – of you; avasaraḥ
– opportunity; varaḥ – good; ayam – this.

Presently, Bhagavān Śrī Vaikuṇṭha-nātha has gone
somewhere to bestow mercy upon one of His great
devotees. Because you will not be able to tolerate the
delay until He returns, this is just the right moment
for you to depart.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra might wonder,
“Shouldn’t I have direct darśana of Śrī Bhagavān before
I go far away?”

Expecting Śrī Gopa-kumāra to insist on this because of
his great devotion for the Lord, Śrī Nārada speaks this
verse beginning with ekam. He says, “However, now the
Lord has gone somewhere to bless one of His great
devotees.”

“But I just saw Him in this Vaikuṇṭha.”

“The Lord left right after you met with Him.”

“I will wait here until He returns.”

“Śrī Bhagavān will definitely take quite some time to
give His mercy to that devotee. You will not be able to
tolerate that delay. Because of your intense eagerness
to obtain your desired goal, you cannot wait anywhere,
not even for moment.”

“Alas! Śrī Bhagavān is just nearby. Can I not go and
offer Him my final praṇāma?”

“Do not lament like this. As Śrī Vaikuṇṭha-nātha was
leaving, He gave me an order regarding your departure.
Therefore, this is the proper time for you to leave for
another place. Otherwise, if you again meet Śrī
Vaikuṇṭha-nātha, you might change your mind and lose
your determination to leave. The happiness that you will
receive by seeing Him again will pacify your desire to
leave, and will prevent you from fulfilling your long-
cherished goal.”

It should be understood that Śrī Bhagavān Himself was
advising Gopa-kumāra through Śrī Nārada.


                          632
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017




Verse 250


śrī-gopa-kumāra uvāca

śrutvā tan nitarāṁ hṛṣṭo muhuḥ śrī-nāradaṁ naman

tasyāśir-vādam ādāya śikṣāṁ cānusmarann ayām

śrī-gopa-kumāraḥ uvāca – Śrī Gopa-kumāra said; śrutvā –
having heard; tat – this; nitarām – intensely; hṛṣṭaḥ –
joyous; muhuḥ – again and again; śrī-nāradam – to the
glorious sage Nārada; naman – bowing down; tasya – his;
āśīḥ-vādam – blessing; ādāya – taking; śikṣām –
teaching; ca – also; anusmaran – remembering again and
again; ayam – this.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra said: O brāhmaṇa, I became overjoyed to
hear these words from Śrī Nāradajī. I offered him
repeated obeisances and, upon taking his blessings and
thinking of his instructions, I proceeded from there.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “I became very
pleased to hear Śrī Nārada’s words. Following his
instructions, I proceeded towards Ayodhyā, chanting and
remembering the names of the Lord such as ‘Jaya Śrī
Sītāpati, husband of Śrī Sītā! Jaya Śrī Raghunātha, Lord
of the Raghu dynasty!’ ”



Verse 251

dūrād eva gato ’drākṣaṁ vānarāṁs tān itas tataḥ

plavamānān mahā-lolān rāma rāmeti vādinaḥ

dūrāt – from a distance; eva – indeed; gataḥ – having
traveled; adrākṣam – I saw; vānarān – monkeys; tān –
them; itaḥ tataḥ – hither and thither; plavamānān –
jumping; mahā-lolān – very restless; rāma rāma – O Rāma,
O reservoir of pleasure; iti – thus; vādinaḥ – saying.

From a distance, I saw many very restless monkeys
jumping about and repeatedly chanting the names of Śrī
Rāma.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Those
rambunctious monkeys were the eternal associates of Śrī
Rāmacandrajī and because of His indescribable sweetness,
they were jumping here and there.”



Verse 252

taiḥ sahāgre gato vaṁśīm ākarṣadbhiḥ karān mama

narān apaśyaṁ vaikuṇṭha-pārṣadebhyo ’pi sundarān


                          633
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

taiḥ saha – by them; agre – in front; gataḥ – taken;
vaṁśīm – the flute; ākarṣadbhiḥ – by the snatchers;
karāt mama – from my hand; narān – men; apaśyam – I saw;
vaikuṇṭha – of Vaikuṇṭha; pārṣadebhyaḥ – than the
associates; api – even; sundarān – more handsome.

As soon as I came close, those monkeys snatched the
flute from my hands. As I entered the city with them, I
saw human beings who were even more beautiful than the
eternal associates of Vaikuṇṭha.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Now, he describes some of the
characteristics of Ayodhyā. Śrī Gopa-kumāra says,
“First, those monkeys grabbed my flute. They snatched it
away either because the flute indicated I was different
from them and, being devotees of Śrī Raghunāthajī, they
were intolerant of a mood different from theirs, or
because they considered it very attractive.

“While going ahead with those monkeys, I saw groups of
Śrī Raghunāthajī’s associates who had human forms. What
were those personal associates like? They were far more
beautiful than the eternal associates of Śrī Vaikuṇṭha.
The Vaikuṇṭha associates were four-handed (caturbhuja),
having attained the specific opulence known as sārūpya,
having a form similar to Śrī Nārāyaṇa. All these Ayodhyā
associates were two-handed because they had attained
forms similar to Śrī Raghunāthajī and this made them
look more beautiful than the Vaikuṇṭha associates.”



Verse 253

tair evārya-varācārair man-naty-ādy-asahiṣṇubhiḥ

purīṁ praveśito bāhyaṁ prāk-prakoṣṭham agām aham

taiḥ – with them; eva – certainly; ārya-vara – of the
most noble; ācāraiḥ – with conduct; mat – my; nati –
respectful homage; ādi – and so forth; asahiṣṇubhiḥ –
unable to endure; purīm – the city; praveśitaḥ – having
entered; bāhyam – external; prāk – first; prakoṣṭham –
courtyard; agām – went; aham – I.

Those servants of Śrī Rāmacandrajī, who were exemplary
in their conduct, were the best of virtuous persons.
When I offered obeisances and prayers to them, they
became very embarrassed and prevented me from doing so.
Then, with them, I entered in the first part of the
city.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Accompanied by
all those human beings and monkeys, I entered the city
and came to a large outer area, or prakoṣṭha. The import
of the word eva (indeed) is that the bliss generated by
seeing those personal associates suffused my body, and
so I could never have entered the city on my own.
However, Śrī Raghunāthajī’s own associates came forward
and led me in. It seems that all this took place
specifically by the order of Śrī Raghunāthajī, because
otherwise it would have been impossible for His
servants, who are devoted to the uninterrupted service
of His lotus feet, to have left that service even for a

                          634
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

moment and go outside the city to receive me.

“Furthermore, just as I was unable to offer respects to
the residents of Śrī Vaikuṇṭha as I desired, I was
similarly unable to greet the residents of Ayodhyā.” To
elaborate on this, Gopa-kumāra says, “Being humble and
unassuming like excellent āryas (cultured persons), they
would not accept my obeisances, prayers, praise, and
touching of their feet.”



Verse 254

sugrīvāṅgada-jāmbavat-prabhṛtibhis tatropaviṣṭaṁ sukhaṁ

śrīmantaṁ madhurair naraiś ca bharataṁ śatrughna-yuktaṁ
puraḥ

dṛṣṭvāhaṁ raghunātham eva nitarāṁ matvā stuvaṁs tat-
stavaiḥ

karṇau tena pidhāya dāsya-parayā vācā niṣiddho muhuḥ

sugrīva – Sugrīva; aṅgada – Aṅgada; jāmbavat – Jāmbavān;
prabhṛtibhiḥ – and the others; tatra – there; upaviṣṭam
– seated; sukham – comfortably; śrīmantam – splendid;
madhuraiḥ – charming; naraiḥ – with men; ca – also;
bharatam – Bharata; śatrughna – Śatrughna; yuktam –
joined; puraḥ – before; dṛṣṭvā – seeing; aham – I;
raghunātham – Śrī Rāmacandra; eva – indeed; nitarām –
completely; matvā – thinking; stuvan – praising; tat-
stavaiḥ – with prayers to Him (Śrī Rāmacandra); karṇau –
ears; tena – by Him; pidhāya – blocking; dāsya – in
service; parayā – absorbed; vācā – with words; niṣiddhaḥ
– prohibited; muhuḥ – repeatedly.

There I saw Śrī Bharata and Śrī Śatrughna happily
seated, sur-rounded by personal associates such as
Sugrīva, Aṅgada, Jāmbavān, and the most beautiful human
beings. I thought that Bharata was Śrī Raghunāthajī, and
thus I began to offer prayers of glorification suitable
for Śrī Raghunāthajī. Śrī Bharata blocked His ears and
said, “I am His servant, I am His servant,” and thus he
repeatedly stopped me from reciting the prayers.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “When I saw Śrī
Bharata, who was happily seated in that area, I mistook
Him for Śrī Rāmacandra and began to praise Him with
prayers befitting Śrī Rāmacandra, ‘Jaya! Victory unto
you, O emperor of exalted kings! Jaya Śrī Rāghavendra!
Jaya O beloved of Śrī Jānakī!’ Śrī Bharata put his
fingers in both His ears, forbidding me to praise Him,
and repeatedly insisted, ‘I am His servant, I am His
servant!’ I mistook Śrī Bharata for Śrī Raghunātha
because He was surrounded by Lord Rāma’s personal
associates – Sugrīva, Aṅgada, and other beautiful
monkeys, as well as the human residents of Ayodhyā.”

Another reason for Gopa-kumāra’s mistake is that Śrī
Bharata was comfortably ensconced on a grand throne
within the royal palace grounds, sitting gracefully like
an emperor. Gopa-kumāra says that Śrī Bharata was
śrīmanta (handsome) – meaning that in form, dress, and

                          635
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

beauty, He closely resembled Śrī Rāmacandrajī – and so
He was very beautiful.

Alternatively, it can be said that Śrī Bharatajī, who is
the plenary portion of Bhagavān, was seated with His
wife, the plenary portion of Śrī Lakṣmījī. Therefore,
because Śrī Bharata’s wife looked similar to Śrī Sītā-
devī, and Śrī Śatrughna looked similar to Śrī Lakṣmaṇa,
it appeared that Śrī Bharata was Śrī Rāmacandrajī.



Verse 255

bhītas tad-agre ’ñjalimān avasthito

niḥsṛtya vegena hanumatā balāt

praveśito ’ntaḥ-puram adbhutādbhutaṁ

vyalokayaṁ taṁ nṛ-varākṛtiṁ prabhum

bhītaḥ – afraid; tad-agre – in His presence; añjali-mān
– with folded hands; avasthitaḥ – standing; niḥsṛtya –
coming out; vegena – quickly; hanumatā – by Hanumān;
balāt – forcefully; praveśitaḥ – brought in; antaḥ-puram
– the inner palace; adbhuta-adbhutam – extra-ordinarily
wonderful; vyalokayam – I beheld; tam – him; nṛ-vara-
ākṛtim – excellent human form; prabhum – the Supreme
Lord, having superlative existence.

Frightened, I stood in front of Bharata with folded
hands. At that time, Śrī Hanumānjī appeared with great
speed and, catching me by the hand, forcibly took me
inside the palace. There, I had darśana of Bhagavān Śrī
Raghunāthajī, whose splendid human form was
extraordinarily beautiful.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “In this way, I
understood that Śrī Bharata did not approve of my
prayers. Feeling like an offender, I stood fearfully in
front of Him with folded hands. At that very moment, Śrī
Hanumān came running from his position near the lotus
feet of Śrī Rāmacandrajī, who was seated in the inner
chambers of the palace. Hanumān grabbed my hand and
forcibly took me inside, where I had direct darśana of
Śrī Rāmacandrajī. What was the Lord like? Like the
wonder of wonders. He possessed a magnificent human form
of exquisite beauty never seen and never heard of
before.”



Verse 256

prāsāda-mukhye ’khila-mādhurī-maye

sāmrājya-siṁhāsanam āsthitaṁ sukham

hṛṣṭaṁ mahā-pūruṣa-lakṣaṇānvitaṁ

nārāyaṇenopamitaṁ kathañcana

prāsāda-mukhye – in the chief palace; akhila-mādhurī-

                          636
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

maye – endowed with all sublime attributes; sāmrājya –
imperial; siṁha-āsanam – lion throne; āsthitam –
sitting; sukham – comfortably; hṛṣṭam – happy; mahā-
pūruṣa – of a great personality; lakṣaṇa-anvitam –
having the signs; nārāyaṇena – Lord Nārāyaṇa; upamitam –
resembling; kathañcana – somewhat.

In the middle of an exquisitely beautiful palace, He was
joyfully seated on an enchanting throne, befitting an
emperor of emperors. He was adorned with all the
qualities of a great personality and was in a happy
mood. Thus, He seemed somewhat like Śrī Nārāyaṇa.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: In two verses, beginning here with
prāsāda, Śrī Gopa-kumāra describes the Lord’s wonderful
opulence. He says, “The ever-blissful Bhagavān Śrī
Rāmacandra was comfortably seated on a royal throne,
which was fit for the emperor of all exalted kings. His
moon-like face was always joyful, and He was endowed
with the symptoms of a mahā-puruṣa: ‘vyūḍhorasko vṛṣa-
skandhaḥ śāla-prāṁśur mahā-bhujaḥ – a broad chest,
shoulders of a bull, and arms extending to His knees.’
Therefore, no one can fully describe His sweetness.”

Still, one might request Gopa-kumāra, “Kindly attempt to
describe some of His specialties.” Gopa-kumāra replies,
“One can compare Him to Vaikuṇṭha-nātha Śrī Nārāyaṇa
only to some degree, not completely. He was similar to
Śrī Nārāyaṇa only in the loveliness of His limbs and His
age, complexion, and ornaments.”



Verse 257

tato ’pi kaiścin madhurair viśeṣair

mano-ramaṁ cāpa-vilāsi-pāṇim

sa-praśraya-hrī-ramitāvalokaṁ

rājendra-līlaṁ śrita-dharma-vārtam

tataḥ – than Him (Nārāyaṇa); api – even; kaiścit – with
some; madhuraiḥ – charming qualities; viśeṣaiḥ –
special; manaḥ-ramam – mind-enchanting; cāpa – bow;
vilāsi – shining; pāṇim – hand; sa-praśraya – with
modesty; hrī – shy; ramita – delightful; avalokam –
glances; rāja-indra – of the king of kings; līlam –
pastimes; śrita – preoccupied; dharma – of virtue;
vārtam – topics and deeds.

However, distinguished by some special sweetness, He was
even more captivating than Śrī Nārāyaṇa. An enchanting
bow graced His hand, and His glances were charmingly
modest and shy. His pastimes are those of one who is the
king of all kings, and thus He was busy in overseeing
the well-being of His subjects. With His lotus mouth, He
was conversing with his citizens on principles of
religion and proper conduct.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Now, in this verse beginning with
tataḥ, Śrī Gopa-kumāra describes Śrī Raghunātha’s
excellence, which was implied by the word kathañcana,

                          637
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

meaning ‘somewhat,’ in the previous verse.

He says, “By dint of some unique sweetness, Śrī
Raghunāthajī was even more attractive than Śrī Nārāyaṇa.
His sweet, two-handed form looked especially beautiful,
and a charming bow graced His hand. He was full of
humility, and He was glancing sweetly with His eyes cast
down out of shyness. Exhibiting the pastimes of a
sovereign emperor, He was looking after the welfare of
His subjects and instructing them on the subject matter
of religious behavior.”



Verse 258

tad-darśanānanda-bhareṇa mohito

daṇḍa-praṇāmārtham ivāpataṁ puraḥ

tataś ca tenārtha-vareṇa vañcito

vyutthāpitas tat-kṛpayā vyalokayam

tat – of Him; darśana – of the sight; ānanda-bhareṇa –
because of the weight of bliss; mohitaḥ – swooned; daṇḍa
– like a stick; praṇāma-artham – to offer homage by
bowing; iva – as if; apatam – I fell; puraḥ – before;
tataḥ – then; ca – also; tena – by Him; artha-vareṇa –
from the valuable goal of life; vañcitaḥ – cheated;
vyutthāpitaḥ – awoken; tat-kṛpayā – by His mercy;
vyalokayam – I saw.

Overcome with the bliss of seeing Him, I swooned and
fell before Him as if offering prostrated obeisances.
While unconscious, I lost that feeling of bliss.
Nevertheless, by His mercy, my consciousness returned
and I again had His darśana.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Due to the
bliss generated by the Lord’s darśana, I fainted and
fell on the ground as if offering prostrated obeisances
unto Him. However, because I could not behold the Lord
while I was in that totally unconscious state, it
deprived me of the bliss I was feeling from His direct
darśana.”

The Mathurā brāhmaṇa might question, “Although you were
unable to see the Lord directly while unconscious, still
you must have been experiencing the bliss of seeing Him
within your heart. So why were you so insistent upon
seeing the Lord directly?”

Gopa-kumāra replies, “Darśana of the Lord received
externally with one’s eyes is the foremost among all the
goals of human life (puruṣārthas). It is the desired
goal, or ripened fruit, of the process of realizing the
Lord within one’s heart. Far more mercy is required to
see the Lord directly than within one’s heart. Later on,
by the power of the Lord’s mercy, I regained
consciousness and my eyes were again blessed by His
darśana.”



                          638
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


Verse 259

māṁ tatra hitvā nija-sevayāhṛtaḥ

plutyaikayā śrī-hanumān gato ’ntikam

sītānurūpā ramate priyā prabhoḥ

savye ’sya pārśve ’nuja-lakṣmaṇo ’nyataḥ

mām – me; tatra – there; hitvā – gave up; nija-sevayā –
by service; āhṛtaḥ – taken; plutyā – by a leap; ekayā –
one; śrī-hanumān – Śrī Hanumān; gataḥ – gone; antikam –
nearby; sītā – Sītā; anurūpā – counterpart; ramate –
enjoys; priyā – the beloved; prabhoḥ – of the Lord;
savye – on the left; asya – of Him; pārśve – at the
side; anu-ja – younger brother; lakṣmaṇaḥ – Lakṣmaṇa;
anyataḥ – on the other side.

Śrī Hanumānjī, being attached to his service, left me in
that condition and returned to the Lord in just one
leap. I saw that Lord Rāma’s beloved Śrī Sītā-devī, His
perfect counterpart, was seated on His left side, and
His younger brother Lakṣmaṇa sat with some other eternal
associates on His right.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: In three verses, beginning here with
mām, Śrī Gopa-kumāra describes what he saw upon
regaining consciousness. He says, “Śrī Hanumān was
standing right next to me, pacifying me. Then suddenly
he left me, and due to his nature as a monkey, he took
one leap and reached his Lord.”

One might ask, “Why did he abandon you like that?” Gopa-
kumāra answers, “He left me, being attracted by his
natural, eternal service. Because service alone was his
sole source of bliss, it was as if service itself
attracted him and brought him near the Lord.”

“My eyes were benedicted with another wonderful vision.
Although darśana of Lord Rāma is naturally blissful,
seeing Him with Śrī Jānakī-devī (Sītā-devī) sitting on
His left, Śrī Lakṣmaṇa on His right, and His best
servant Śrī Hanumān rendering service in front of Him
was especially magnificent and gave me great happiness.
There is no comparison to how the Lord was showering His
most intimate associates with His matchless affection.
His beloved consort and perfect match, Śrī Jānakī-devī,
even more beautiful than Śrī Lakṣmī-devī, was decorating
the Lord’s left side and was serving Him by offering
tāmbūla. His younger brother, Śrī Lakṣmaṇa, graced His
right side. Receiving such a charmingly beautiful
darśana, I was submerged in an ocean of bliss.”



Verse 260

kadāpi śubhrair vara-cāmaraiḥ prabhuṁ

gāyan guṇān vījayati sthito ’grataḥ

kadāpy upaślokayati sva-nirmitaiś

                          639
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


citraiḥ stavaiḥ śrī-hanumān kṛtāñjaliḥ

kadā api – sometimes; śubhraiḥ – spotless white; vara-
cāmaraiḥ – with excellent yak-tail whisks; prabhum – the
Lord; gāyan – singing; guṇān – the auspicious qualities;
vījayati – he fans; sthitaḥ – standing; agrataḥ –
before; kadā api – at times; upaślokayati – praises in
verse; sva-nirmitaiḥ – self-composed; citraiḥ – unique;
stavaiḥ – by verses of praise; śrī-hanumān – Śrī
Hanumān; kṛta-añjaliḥ – with folded hands.

Sometimes, Śrī Hanumānjī would fan the Lord with a white
cāmara while singing His glories. Sometimes, he would
stand in front of the Lord and with folded hands praise
the Lord with verses he had composed himself.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Now, in two verses beginning with
kadāpi, Śrī Gopa-kumāra describes Śrī Hanumānjī’s
service. He says, “Sometimes Śrī Hanumān would stand
behind the Lord and fan Him with a beautiful, white yak-
tail fan, sometimes he would stand in front, glorifying
the Lord’s qualities, and sometimes with palms joined,
he would praise the Lord with wonderful verses he
personally composed.”



Verse 261

śvetātapatraṁ ca bibharty asau kṣaṇaṁ

saṁvāhayet tasya pādāmbuje kṣaṇam

sevā-prakārān yugapad bahūn kṣaṇaṁ

tasminn avaiyagryam aho tanoti ca

śveta – a white; ātapatram – parasol; ca – also;
bibharti – holds; asau – he; kṣaṇam – at one moment;
saṁvāhayet – he can massage; tasya – His; pāda-ambuje –
lotus feet; kṣaṇam – at another moment; sevā-prakārān –
many different services; yugapat – simultaneously; bahūn
– many; kṣaṇam – at one moment; tasmin – in that
(service); avaiyagryam – without being distracted; aho –
oh!; tanoti – he accomplishes; ca – and.

One moment he would hold a white umbrella over the Lord,
the next moment he would massage the Lord’s lotus feet,
and sometimes, fixing his attention, he would perform
many services simultaneously.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Sometimes, Śrī
Hanumān would hold a white umbrella over the head of the
Lord. The next moment, he would begin massaging the
Lord’s lotus feet. Sometimes, with great dexterity, he
would simultaneously perform several different services,
such as singing out the Lord’s virtues, praying to Him,
fanning Him, and massaging His feet. Ah! It seemed as if
he were rendering all these variegated services by
accepting many forms.”




                          640
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

Verse 262

parama-harṣa-bharāt kramito hy ahaṁ

jaya jayeti vadan praṇaman muhuḥ

mṛdula-vāg-amṛtaiḥ paramādbhutair

bhagavatārdra-hṛdā paritarpitaḥ

parama-harṣa – of the highest happiness; bharāt –
because of an abundance; kramitaḥ – overcome; hi –
indeed; aham – I; jaya jaya – Glory! Glory!; iti – thus;
vadan – uttering; praṇaman – bowing down completely;
muhuḥ – repeatedly; mṛdula-vāg-amṛtaiḥ – with ambrosial
gentle words; parama-adbhutaiḥ – supremely amazing;
bhagavatā – by the Lord; ārdra – melting; hṛdā – whose
heart; paritarpitaḥ – fully satisfied.

With great happiness, I called out, “Jaya! Jaya!” and
offered repeated obeisances to Bhagavān Śrī Rāmacandra.
Then Śrī Bhagavān, whose heart is melted with
compassion, pleased me with the most wonderful, tender
words.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Seeing the
sweet exchange between master and servant, I was
overcome with great bliss and offered praṇāma to the
Lord while calling out “Jaya! Jaya!” Śrī Bhagavān, His
compassionate heart overflowing with affection, fully
satisfied me with His tender, nectarean words. What sort
of nectarean words? Those words were indescribably
wonderful, bestowing a mercy I had never experienced
before.”



Verse 263

śrī-bhagavān uvāca

bho gopa-nandana suhṛt-tama sādhu sādhu

snehaṁ vidhāya bhavatā vijayaḥ kṛto ’tra

viśramyatām alam alaṁ bahubhiḥ prayāsair

etair na duḥkhaya ciraṁ nija-bāndhavaṁ mām

śrī-bhagavān uvāca – the Supreme Lord said; bhoḥ – O;
gopa-nandana – son of a cowherd; suhṛt-tama – O best of
friends; sādhu sādhu – excellent!; sneham vidhāya –
showing love; bhavatā – by you; vijayaḥ kṛtaḥ – well
done; atra – here; viśramyatām – just rest; alam alam –
enough; bahubhiḥ – with so much; prayāsaiḥ – endeavors;
etaiḥ – these; na – not; duḥkhaya – taking pain; ciram –
long time; nija-bāndhavam – your own friend; mām – Me.

Śrī Bhagavān said: O Gopa-kumāra! O best of friends!
Sādhu, sādhu! (Excellent, excellent!) It is a matter of
great auspiciousness that out of love for Me you have
come here. Now take rest and do not trouble yourself
with things like offering obeisances – I am your very
old friend.

                          641
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Two verses, beginning here with bho,
tell how Bhagavān Śrī Rāma showered Śrī Gopa-kumāra with
His soft, nectarean words. Śrī Bhagavān said, “O best
friend, your arrival in Ayodhyā is very pleasing. To
show Me your affection, you have finally come here.
Sādhu! Sādhu! (Bravo! Bravo!) This is an auspicious
event.” Expressing His jubilation, the Lord has repeated
the word sādhu twice. “So, give up your efforts to
wander here and there and peacefully stay here only.
Also, kindly stop offering obeisances. Indeed, I am
completely satisfied merely by your arrival here.”
Nevertheless, Gopa-kumāra continued to offer obeisances.
Then Śrī Bhagavān said, “Do not distress yourself or Me
by offering obeisances. I am your bosom friend.”



Verse 264

uttiṣṭhottiṣṭha bhadraṁ te gauravāt sambhramaṁ tyaja

tvadīya-prema-rūpeṇa yantrito ’smi sadā sakhe

uttiṣṭha uttiṣṭha – arise!; bhadram – good fortune; te –
to you; gauravāt – out of awe; sambhramam – reverence;
tyaja – give up; tvadīya – your; prema – of the love;
rūpeṇa – by the nature; yantritaḥ – controlled; asmi – I
am; sadā – always; sakhe – O friend.

O friend, get up, get up! May you be showered with
auspiciousness. Abandon this mood of awe and respect for
Me. I am eternally controlled by your pure love.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Bhagavān respectfully requested
me, “O friend! Get up, get up.” Nevertheless, I did not
comply. He then greeted me with a blessing, saying, “May
your life be filled with auspiciousness.” However, when
He saw that I was still offering obeisances with great
respect, He said, “O friend! Give up your formalities. I
am always controlled by your affection, so there is no
question of your being reverential toward Me.”



Verse 265

śrī-gopa-kumāra uvāca

atha tasyājñayāgatyotthāpito ’haṁ hanūmatā

śrīmat-pādābja-pīṭhasya nītaś ca nikaṭaṁ haṭhāt

śrī-gopa-kumāraḥ – Śrī Gopa-kumāra; uvāca – said; atha –
then; tasya – His; ājñayā – by the order; āgatya –
coming; utthāpitaḥ – lifted; aham – I; hanūmatā – by
Hanumān; śrīmat-pāda-abja – for His beautiful lotus
feet; pīṭhasya – to the footstool; nītaḥ – brought; ca –
and; nikaṭam – nearby; haṭhāt – forcibly.

Śrī Gopa-kumāra continued: Then, on the Lord’s order,
Śrī Hanumānjī approached me. He lifted me up and brought
me by force to the footstool on which Śrī Bhagavān was
resting His lotus feet.

                          642
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017


Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “However, being
beside myself with bliss, I was completely helpless and
could not stop bowing down to Him. Then, on the order of
Śrī Raghunāthajī, Śrī Hanumān came near me, and picking
me up, he forcibly brought me to the square footstool at
the base of the royal throne on which Śrī Raghunāthajī
was resting His lotus feet.”



Verse 266

tadākārṣaṁ manasy etad dīrghāśā phalitādhunā

vāñchātītaṁ ca sampannaṁ phalaṁ tat kutra yānyataḥ

tadā – then; ākārṣam – I thought; manasi – in the mind;
etat – this; dīrgha – long; āśā – desire; phalitā –
borne fruit; adhunā – now; vāñchā – desire; atītam –
beyond; ca – and; sampannam – fructified; phalam –
fruit; tat – that; kutra – where; yā – which; anyataḥ –
anywhere else.

Then, in my mind I considered, “Today, my long-standing
desire has finally borne fruit.” I felt that I had
received something far beyond my wildest dreams,
something I had not found anywhere until that day.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “When Śrī
Hanumānjī pulled me by force, I began to think, ‘Today,
not only has my long-standing desire finally reached
fruition, but I have also received something totally
beyond my greatest expectations.’ Experiencing Śrī
Raghunāthajī’s vast compassion, I decided that I would
never abandon this city of Ayodhyā and go anywhere
else.”



Verse 267

gopa-bālaka-veśena svakīyenaiva pūrva-vat

kiyantaṁ nyavasaṁ kālaṁ tatrānanda-bharārditaḥ

gopa-bālaka-veśena – with the dress of a cowherd boy;
svakīyena – my own; eva – indeed; pūrva-vat – as before;
kiyantam – for some; nyavasam – I resided; kālam – time;
tatra – there; ānanda-bhara – by immense bliss; arditaḥ
– moved.

Still dressed as a cowherd boy, I resided there for some
time, absorbed in full bliss.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Just as I had
previously fanned Śrī Vaikuṇṭha-nātha with a cāmara and
rendered other services, I stayed in Ayodhyā for some
time, performing the same services such as fanning.”

The Mathurā brāhmaṇa might ask, “You had the desire to
go to Dvārāvatī. So, why did you decide to settle in
Ayodhyā?” Gopa-kumāra replies, “The natural, profuse
bliss of Ayodhyā took over my entire being. Drinking the

                          643
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

stream of honey flowing from the lotus feet of Śrī
Raghunāthajī, I forgot everything else.”



Verse 268

atha śrī-raghu-siṁhasya mahārājādhirājatām

līlāṁ tad-anurūpāṁ ca vīkṣe dharmānusāriṇīm

atha – thereafter; śrī-raghu-siṁhasya – of the lion of
the Raghu dynasty; mahā-rāja-adhirājatām – of a great
emperor; līlām – pastimes; tat-anurūpām – in accordance;
ca – also; vīkṣe – I saw; dharma – the principles of
religion; anusāriṇīm – following.

In Ayodhyā, I saw Śrī Raghunāthajī performing regal
pastimes befitting a grand emperor, a king of exalted
kings. I also saw His strict adherence to religious
conduct.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra has thus far presented
the nature of Ayodhyā. Now, in two verses, beginning
here with atha, he explains how, due to his desire for a
superior abode, he developed a feeling of detachment
from Ayodhyā.

He says, “I witnessed Śrī Raghunāthajī perform His
pastimes of executing religious conduct in a manner
suitable for the sovereign emperor of exalted kings.
However, I never saw Him transgressing religious codes
out of affection for His devotees. That is to say, in

His pastimes, I was unable to experience the level of
sweetness I desired.”



Verse 269

na ceṣṭa-deva-pādānāṁ tat-tat-krīḍānusāriṇīm

vihāra-mādhurīṁ kāñcin nāpi tāṁ tāṁ kṛpāṁ labhe

na – not; ca – and; iṣṭa-deva – of my worshipable Lord;
pādānām – of the lotus feet; tat-tat-krīḍā – with the
respective pastimes; anusāriṇīm – in accordance; vihāra
– of pleasure pastimes; mādhurīm – sweetness; kāñcit –
anything; na – not; api – even; tām tām – that; kṛpām –
mercy; labhe – I received.

In Ayodhyā, I never experienced the varieties of sweet
pastimes of the lotus feet of my worshipable Lord, nor
did I ever receive His mercy in the form of His
embraces, kisses, and so on.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “I never
witnessed Śrī Raghunāthajī’s sweet pleasure-filled
pastimes in Ayodhyā.” What kind of blissful, sweet
pastimes is he referring to? Influenced by the mood of
extreme reverence there, Gopa-kumāra does not utter Śrī
Gopāla-deva’s name, but rather addresses Him as iṣṭa-
deva-pādānām, ‘the lotus feet of my worshipable Lord.’

                          644
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


He says, “The sweetness of Bhagavān Śrī Madana-gopāla’s

pastimes – the indescribable way He plays the flute, the
way in which He charms the gopīs, and so on – these, I
did not witness in Śrī Raghunāthajī’s activities. In my
meditation, I used to experience Śrī Madana-gopāla-
deva’s embraces, kisses, and so on, but in Ayodhyā, I
could not directly experience His mercy in a similar
way.”



Verses 270–271

tataḥ śokam ivāmutrāpy

āpnuvan śrī-hanūmataḥ

śrī-rāmacandra-pādābja-

mahimnāṁ śravaṇena hi

sākṣād-anubhavenāpi

mano-duḥkhaṁ nivāraye

tasmin nijeṣṭa-devasya

sarvam āropayāmi ca

tataḥ – for this reason; śokam – lamentation; iva – as
if; amutra – there (in Ayodhyā); api – also; āpnuvan –
attained; śrī-hanūmataḥ – from Śrī Hanumān; śrī-
rāmacandra-pāda-abja – of Lord Rāma’s lotus feet;
mahimnām – of the glories; śravaṇena – by hearing; hi –
certainly; sākṣāt-anubhavena – by direct experience; api
– however; manaḥ – of the mind; duḥkham – unhappiness;
nivāraye – I would ward off; tasmin – on Him (Śrī Rāma);
nija – own; iṣṭa-devasya – of my worshipable Lord;
sarvam – completely; āropayāmi – I would superimpose; ca
– and.

Thus, I felt like I was stricken by grief in Ayodhyā.
Nevertheless, after hearing from Śrī Hanumān about the
glories of Śrī Rāmacandra’s lotus feet, and by directly
experiencing those glories, I would ward off the agony
in my heart. Like this, I began to superimpose the form
and attributes of my worshipable Śrī Madana-gopāla upon
Śrī Rāmacandrajī.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Therefore, even
though I lived like a grief-stricken person in Ayodhyā,
I was still able to mitigate the pain in my heart.” Here
the purport of the word iva is explained by Gopa-kumāra.

He says, “The distress I was undergoing was factually
created by my love for Bhagavān, and therefore that
distress was really a special form of extreme bliss.
Externally that distress appeared like the pain of
lamentation, but internally I was experiencing great
joy. In what way? Śrī Hanumān would describe the glories
of Śrī Rāmacandra’s lotus feet, His modesty, humility,
politeness, simplicity, and other virtues, and I was

                          645
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

able to directly experience those qualities. I would
assuage the agony of my mind by hearing and personally
experiencing those glories. I also began to see my
worshipable Lord Śrī Madana-gopāla’s form, qualities,
and other attributes in Śrī Rāmacandra.”



Verse 272

pūrvābhyāsa-vaśeneyaṁ vrajabhūmir yadā balāt

sā tal-līlānukampāśāpy ākramed dhṛdayaṁ mama

pūrva – previous; abhyāsa – practice; vaśena – by the
influence; iyam – this; vraja-bhūmiḥ – the land of
Vraja; yadā – when; balāt – forcefully; sā – that; tat –
His; līlā – pastimes; anukampā – for His sympathy; āśā –
hankering; api – also; ākramet – it would seize; hṛdayam
– heart; mama – my.

However, when I remembered this Vraja-bhūmi by the
influence of past practice, I would be aggrieved at
heart with the hope of experiencing the pastimes of my
worshipable Śrī Madan-gopāla.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Any forceful superimposition is
generally not long-lasting. Śrī Gopa-kumāra would force
himself to see Śrī Rāmacandrajī as Śrī Madana-gopāla,
but this contemplation did not last long. To explain
this, Gopa-kumāra speaks this verse beginning with
pūrva. He says, “Due to the influence of previous
practice, I cherished the hope of receiving the mercy of
my worshipable Deity and harbored the desire to
experience His pastimes in Śrī Vṛndāvana. When this
ardent desire would forcibly attack my heart, I would
experience great distress, and my desire to leave
Ayodhyā for Dvārāvatī would become stronger.”



Verse 273

tadā mantri-vareṇāhaṁ ālakṣya śrī-hanūmatā

vicitra-yukti-cāturyai rakṣyeyāśvāsya tatra hi

tadā – then; mantri-vareṇa – by the best of counselors;
aham – I; ālakṣya – being observed; śrī-hanūmatā – by
Śrī Hanumān; vicitra-yukti – by clever logic; cāturyaiḥ
– by tricks; rakṣyeya – in order to protect; āśvāsya –
comforting; tatra – there; hi – certainly.

At times like that, Śrī Hanumānjī, the best of Śrī
Rāmacandrajī’s ministers, could understand my heart. He
would stop my torment by pacifying me with various
tricks and clever arguments.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “Seeing my
morose face and other symptoms, Śrī Hanumānjī could
understand that I was extremely tormented. He would
console me by various types of tricks and logic and thus
keep me in Ayodhyā.” The brāhmaṇa might ask, “How was
this possible?” Gopa-kumāra replies, “Śrī Hanumān, the

                          646
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

best of Śrī Raghunāthajī’s ministers, could read my
heart. Pacifying me with words that were favorable to my
heart, he would convince me to stay there. In this way,
I was simply unable to leave Ayodhyā. However,

when I was again struck by distress, merciful Śrī
Rāmacandrajī affectionately consoled me, telling me, ‘O
friend! You should happily go to Dvārāvatī.’ ”



Verse 274

atha śrī-rāmeṇa prakhara-karuṇā-komala-hṛdā

jagac-citta-jñena praṇaya-mṛdunāśvāsya vacasā

vraja dvārāvatyāṁ sukham iti samādiśya gamitaḥ

samaṁ tāṁ bhallūkāvali-parivṛḍhenāham acirāt

atha – then; śrī-rāmeṇa – by Śrī Rāma; prakhara-karuṇā –
with intense mercy; komala-hṛdā – with His heart soft;
jagat – of all the world; citta-jñena – by He who knows
the hearts; praṇaya-mṛdunā – soft with love; āśvāsya –
consoling; vacasā – with words; vraja – go; dvārāvatyām
– to Dvārakā; sukham – joyfully; iti – thus; samādiśya –
instructing; gamitaḥ – going; samam – with; tām – that
(Dvārakā); bhallūka-āvali-parivṛḍhena – in the company
of the associate of Lord Rāmacandra, Jāmbavān, who
expands the dynasty of bears; aham – I; acirāt – without
delay.

Śrī Rāmacandrajī, who knows the hearts of everyone in
the entire world, and whose own heart is always soft
with immense kindness, personally lovingly consoled me
with sweet words, saying, “O Gopa-kumāra, joyfully
proceed to Dvārakā.” He ordered the king of bears, Śrī
Jāmbavān, to quickly take me there.

Thus ends the verse translation of the Fourth Chapter of
the Second Canto of Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā: Śrī Gopa-kumāra says, “By Śrī
Rāmacandra’s inspiration, I quickly reached the city of
Dvārakā, accompanied by the king of bears, Śrī Jāmbavān.
Śrī Jāmbavān is the maternal grandfather of Śrī Sāmba,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s son, and therefore he has close ties to
Dvārakā as well as to Ayodhyā.

“How did Śrī Rāmacandra encourage me? His heart was
melting with affection as He consoled me by sweetly
saying, ‘O friend, you should happily go to Dvārakā.’
Otherwise, I would have never been able to leave Ayodhyā
to go elsewhere. Śrī Rāmacandrajī ordered me in this
fashion because He knows the disposition of everyone’s
heart. He knew I was a worshiper of the lotus feet of
Śrī Madana-gopāla-deva and was exclusively devoted to
loving Him (Śrī Madana-gopāla). I wanted to be with Him
only, not anyone else. Therefore, even though I was
experiencing a special joy in Ayodhyā, and even though
Śrī Hanumān had mercifully encouraged me, I was still
not happy. Rather, I was filled with increasing regret.
Because my eagerness to go to Dvārāvatī was gradually

                          647
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

becoming stronger, my heart was filled only with
remorse; I could not find any peace. Therefore, it was
proper that Śrī Raghunāthajī send me only to Dvārāvatī,
and not anywhere else. His heart is always tender with
superexcellent compassion, and so He cannot tolerate
even the slightest amount of lamentation and distress in
others. Thus, for my happiness, Śrī Rāmacandrajī
ordered, ‘Quickly go to Dvārakā,’ and He instructed Śrī
Jāmbavān to take me there.”

Thus ends the translation of the bhāvānuvāda of

Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī’s Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā

on the Second Canto, Chapter Four,

of Śrī Bṛhad-Bhāgavatāmṛta.

[1] Śrīvatsa is a curl of white hair on the chest of the
Lord which is a special sign of His being the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. In Vaikuṇṭhaloka or in Goloka
Vṛndāvana, the inhabitants are exactly of the same form
as the Personality of Godhead, but by this Śrīvatsa mark
on the chest of the Lord He is distinguished from all
others.




Glossary


ābhāsa Semblance; reflection.

abhidheya Means of attainment; process.

abhidheya-tattva The means or process by which the
soul’s ultimate goal is achieved.

abhimāna Ego; self-conception.

ācamana A ritual of purification in which one sips
sanctified water while uttering names of Śrī Krṣṇa
together with bīja-mantras.

ācārya Spiritual preceptor; guru; one who teaches by his
life’s example.

Acyuta The Infallible One; name of God.

Aditi Wife of Prajāpati Kaśyapa; mother of the twelve
Ādityas; her eldest son was Indra and her youngest was
Upendra or Vāmana-deva, the dwarf incarnation of the
Lord.

advaya-tattva The non-dual nature of Absolute Reality.

Agastya A great sage, the son of Mitra and Varuṇa, who
was born in a water pot. He composed Vedic hymns, drank
the entire ocean to help the demigods defeat the
dānavas, and obliged the Vindhya mountain range to bow
down before him. Agastya also refers to the mind.


                          648
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

Aghāsura A mystic demon who assumed the form of a large
serpent and swallowed Kṛṣṇa and his cowherd boy friends,
but was killed by Kṛṣṇa. He was the younger brother of
the demons Pūtanā and Bakāsura.

Agni The god of fire; son of Brahmā; the divine
personification of fire sacrifice; regarded as the
mouthpiece of the demigods and their messenger to
mankind.

agnihotra A purificatory ritual in which mantras are
chanted and fruits, etc. are offered to the fire; fire
sacrifice.

ahaṅkāra False ego.

aiśvarya-śakti The power of opulence, splendor,
magnificence, majesty.

Aja A name of God; the Unborn One.

Ajāmila A highly qualified brahmaṇa who became attracted
to a prostitute and fell into a life of sin. He was
saved at the time of death by calling out to his
favorite child, Nārāyaṇa, whose name is a name of the
Lord. At that time, the messengers of Śrī Nārāyaṇa saved
him from the messengers of Yamarāja, the lord of death.

akiñcana Without possessions.

Amarāvatī City of pleasure, Indra’s capital city in
Svarga.

Amṛta Nectar of immortality.

aṁśa A portion; an expansion of the Lord.

anādi That which is without beginning; a concept of
eternality.

ananta That which is without end; unlimited; a concept
of eternality.

Ananta Śeṣa (Śeṣa Saṅkarṣaṇa, Śeṣa) A manifestation of
the Lord who appears as a thousand-hooded serpent who
serves as a bed for Śrī Viṣṇu; as Śeṣa Saṅkarṣaṇa, He is
the presiding Deity of the mode of ignorance and the
second of the original quadruple expansion in Dvārakā;
son of Kadru.

anartha Unwanted things, obstacles.

Aṅgada A monkey chieftain of the kingdom of Kiṣkindhā
who assisted Śrī Rāma in the battle against the demon
Rāvaṇa.

Aṅgirā One of six sons born of Brahmā’s mind; the father
of Bṛhaspati.

aṇimā The mystic power of becoming infinitesimally
small; as small as an atom.

Aniruddha The son of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s son, Pradyumna; the
fourth of the original quadruple expansion in Dvārakā;

                          649
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

the fourth of the second quadruple expansion in
Vaikuṇṭha; the deity of intelligence.

antaraṅga Internal; confidential.

anubhāva A stage in the development of pure love for Śrī
Kṛṣṇa; deep spiritual emotion which is expressed
externally; one of the five ingredients of rasa. There
are thirteen anubhāvas: dancing, rolling on the ground,
singing, crying loudly, writhing, roaring, yawing,
breathing heavily, neglecting others, drooling, laughing
loudly, staggering about, and hiccupping.

anurāga A stage in the development of pure love of God;
a sense of ever-fresh attraction and attachment to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.

aparā-śakti The inferior or material energy of the
Supreme Lord; inert matter.

aprārabdha The accumulated stock of reactions to
activities, which are lying dormant and which will later
bear fruit.

arcana Deity worship.

Arjuna Third of the five Pāṇḍava brothers. He was Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s intimate friend, brother-in-law, and devotee,
and it was to him that Śrī Kṛṣṇa spoke the Bhagavad-gītā
on the Battlefield of Kurukṣetra.

artha Acquisition of wealth; economic development; one
of the four goals of human life.

artha-vāda Exaggerated praise.

asat-śāstra False, untrue, or unreal scripture.

Aśvatthāmā The son of the great military chief
Dronācārya who fought on the side of the Kauravas in the
Battle of Kurukṣetra. He murdered the sleeping sons of
the Pāṇḍavas and tried to murder the Pāṇḍava heir,
Parīkṣit, in his mother’s womb.

ātmā The soul; it may also refer to the body, mind,
intellect, or the Supreme Self; it usually refers to the
living being.

ātma-jñāna Knowledge of the self.

ātmārāma One who takes delight in the true self, and is
thus satisfied in all circumstances.

Atri One of the ten sages born of Brahmā.

ārya Spiritually cultured person.

atala A planet.

āvaraṇa Coverings or layers of the universe.

avatāra A partially or fully empowered incarnation of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa who is described in the scriptures and who
descends to the material universe with a particular

                          650
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

mission; Literally, ‘one who descends.’

avatārī The fountainhead of all avatāras, the source of
all incarnations; Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

āveśa-avatāra A special living being empowered by Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s potency, also known as śaktyāveśa.

avidyā Ignorance.

Ayodhyā The capital of the dynasty of Śrī Rāma; a city,
holy to devotees of Śrī Rāma, located in Uttar Pradesh,
North India; a realm in Vaikuṇṭha, the spiritual world.

Badrikāśrama The abode of Śrī Nara-Nārāyaṇa and Veda-
vyāsa; a sacred place in the Himālayas on the banks of
the Alakanandā.

Balarāma Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s brother and first expansion,
renowned for His strength.

Bali Mahārāja King of the demons, defeated by Śrī
Vāmana, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s dwarf incarnation.

bhagavad-bhakti Devotion to God.

Bhagavad-gītā The song of God; a conversation in which
Śrī Kṛṣṇa teaches His disciple Arjuna the science of the
Absolute Truth and the importance of devotional service.

Bhagavān Supreme Lord; the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.

Bhāgavat The essential reality of the Supreme
Personality.

bhagavattā The specific characteristics or the qualities
of being the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

bhagavat-tattva Categorical knowledge of realization of
God; the principles taught by the Lord.

bhakta-avatāra An incarnation of Śrī Kṛṣṇa as a devotee.

bhaktas Devotees of the Lord; types of devotees include:

jñānī-bhaktas Those who worship in the mood of awe and
reverence, and whose devotion is tinged with knowledge
of the Lord’s power and opulence.

śuddha-bhaktas Those who obtain happiness through all
their senses by engaging in hearing, chanting,
remembering and so on, and who never hanker for the
happiness of residing in Vaikuṇṭha.

premī-bhaktas Those who are indifferent to all types of
external situations and are the best of all the Lord’s
transcendental servants.

prema-para-bhaktas Those who are the Lord’s most
intimate friends and well-wishers, and who are special
recipients of His natural mercy.

premātura-bhaktas Those who have accepted Śrī Kṛṣṇa as

                          651
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

their very life and soul, or in other words, those who
are bound to Him in wonderful, loving relationships.

bhakta-vatsala Śrī Kṛṣṇa who is affectionate to His
devotees and who relishes blessing them, hearing their
prayers, and interacting with them.

bhakta-vātsalya The quality of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s affection for
His unalloyed devotees.

bhakti, bhagavad-bhakti Loving devotion for Śrī Kṛṣṇa;
from the root bhaj, which means to serve; the primary
meaning is to render service.

bhakti-mārga The path of pure loving devotion.

bhakti-rasa The mellow derived from devotional service.

bhakti-rasika A connoisseur of mellows of devotion; an
expert in devotional service.

bhakti-śāstrā Devotional scripture.

bhakti-tattva The essential reality of devotional
service.

Bhāṇḍīra-vana One of the most prominent of the twelve
forests of Vraja; pastime place of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Bharata Brother of Śrī Rāmacandra.

Bhārata, Bharata-varṣa The ancient name for the earth
planet and present Sanskrit name for India, named after
Bharata Mahārāja, son of Ṛṣabhadeva.

Bharata Mahārāja Son of Ṛṣabhadeva. He became very
spiritually advanced, but due to becoming attached to a
pet deer, he took birth as a deer in his next life. In
the life following that, as Jaḍa Bharata, he attained
spiritual perfection.

bhāva Spiritual emotions, moods, sentiments, or love;
the initial stage of perfection in devotion.

bhāvānuvāda A translation of the essence of the
original, also known as free translation. It is used to
express complex feelings and sentiments.

Bhāvārtha-dīpikā Commentary of Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī on
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

Bheda Difference; multiplicity.

Bhīma Second of the five Pāṇḍava brothers, renowned for
his strength.

Bhīṣmadeva Grandfather of the Pāṇḍavas and Kauravas; one
of the twelve mahājanas, or Vedic authorities;
Commander-in-chief of the Kuru army during the battle of
Kurukṣetra.

bhrama Bewilderment; delusion.

Bhṛgu One of the seven sages born from the mind of Śrī

                          652
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

Brahmā. He resides on Maharloka and worships the Lord as
Śrī Yajñeśvara. He once tested Śrī Brahmā, Śrī Śiva, and
Śrī Viṣṇu, and found Śrī Viṣṇu to be superior to the
others.

Bhukti Sense enjoyment.

Bhū-loka Planet earth.

Bhū-maṇḍala The middle planetary system within the
universe; earth.

Bṛhaspati The spiritual master of King Indra and priest
of the demigods.

Brahmā Creator of the material universe and deity
presiding over the quality of passion; the original guru
of the Brahmā-Mādhva sampradāya.

Brahmaloka, Satyaloka The abode of Lord Brahmā within
this material universe.

brāhma-muhūrta The time early in the morning, one and a
half hours before sunrise, is called brāhma-muhūrta.

Brahman, Brahma The impersonal, all-pervasive aspect of
the Supreme; the spiritual effulgence emanating from the
transcendental body of the Lord; Kṛṣṇa, who is the
source of Brahman; the mahat-tattva, or total material
substance.

brāhmaṇa Highest of the four varnas, or social orders of
life, in the varṇāśrama system; priest or teacher; one
who has realized Brahman.

brahmānanda The bliss of one who is Brahman realized.

brahmāṇḍa Material universe, which is compared to an
egg.

brahmaṛṣi Brahman-realized sage.

brahmāstra Atomic weapon powered by mantra. The most
powerful weapon in Vedic military science, it is
released by mantra and only kills the person whose name
is uttered in conjunction with the mantra.

cāmara Yaktail fan.

Caitanya Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu; consciousness; the
universal soul or spirit.

catur-yuga One set of the four yugas, or ages: Satya,
Tretā, Dvāpara, and Kali.

cintāmaṇi Wish-fulfilling gem.

cit Spiritual consciousness; pure cognition; knowledge
potency; spirit.

cit-śakti The internal spiritual energy of the Lord.

citta Consciousness, mind, heart.


                          653
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

daṇḍavat-praṇāma Prostrated obeisance.

Dantavakra A demonic relative of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who in his
rage about the death of his friends Śalva and Śiśupāla,
attacked Kṛṣṇa and met his death.

darśana A view or audience of a Deity or saintly person.

Dāru-brahma Śrī Jagannātha-deva; transcendence within
wooden form.

Daśaratha The father of Śrī Rāmacandra.

dāsya-bhāva Love or attraction to Śrī Kṛṣṇa which is
expressed in the mood of a servant.

Dattātreya An incarnation of the Lord who is Brahmā,
Viṣṇu and Śiva combined, who appeared as the son of
Anasuyā by Atri Muni to teach the path of mystic yoga.

deha The physical body.

Devakī The mother of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Vasudeva.

Devakī-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the pleasure and darling son
of Devakī.

deva-rāja Indra, king of demigods.

dhāma The Lord’s abode.

Dhanvantari The incarnation of the Supreme Lord as the
father of Ayurveda, the medical science of life.

Dharaṇī-devī The eternal consort of Śrī Nārāyaṇa;
goddess earth.

dharma Constitutional nature; individual duty;
principles of religious conduct; religiosity.

Dhaumya The priest of the Pāṇḍavas.

Dhṛtarāṣṭra A blind Kaurava king, brother of Pāṇḍu and
father of Duryodhana and his ninety-nine brothers.

Dhruva A devotee who, when only five years old,
performed severe austerities and realized the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, who awarded him the Pole Star.

Dhruvaloka The Pole, or North, Star, a spiritual planet
within the material universe that is presided over by
Dhruva Mahārāja.

dhyāna Meditation.

dig-darśinī The name of Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī’s
commentary on Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta; that which points
the way to direct knowledge.

dīkṣā Spiritual initiation.

divya Divine.

Dola-yatra The swing festival of Śrī Śrī Rādhā and

                          654
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa.

Draupadī The daughter of King Drupada and wife of the
Pāṇḍavas.

Durvāsā A powerful mystic yogī known for his fearsome
curses; a partial incarnation of Śrī Śiva.

Duryodhana Kaurava king; the eldest of Dhṛtarāṣṭra’s one
hundred sons, known for his antagonism toward the
Pāṇḍavas.

Dvārakā Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s capital city where He performed His
household and kṣatriya (warrior) pastimes. Modern-day
Dvārakā is a small city located on the western tip of
the Gujarat peninsula on the Arabian Sea.

Gaṇeśa Son of Śrī Śiva; demigod with the head of an
elephant who is worshiped for wealth and freedom from
misfortune. He removes obstacles on the path of bhakti.

Gaṅgā The holy Ganges River, which flows southeast from
the Himālayan Mountains to the Bay of Bengal. Other
names include Jāhnavī, Bhāgīrathī, and Alakānanda.

Gaṅgā-devī The goddess Gaṅgā, personification of the
river Gaṅgā.

Gaṅgā-sāgara The confluence of the river Gaṅgā and the
ocean.

Garuḍa Śrī Viṣṇu’s eternal carrier who takes the form of
an eagle; the son of Vinatā and Kaśyapa.

gauṇa Subordinate; secondary.

Gautama One of the seven sons born from the mind of
Brahmā; the author of Nyāya-śāstra, the science of logic
that propounds the combination of atoms as the cause of
everything.

Gīta-govinda A Sanskrit masterpiece of highly esoteric
and confidential nature about the pastimes of Śrī Śrī
Rādhā Kṛṣṇa, composed in the twelfth century by Śrī
Jayadeva Gosvāmī.

Gokula The aspect of Vṛndāvana situated in the highest
realm of the spiritual world; the abode where Śrī Kṛṣṇa
manifests His original and topmost feature as a cowherd
boy, surrounded by His intimate and loving servitors,
the gopas and gopīs of Vraja.

gopa A cowherd boy or man; one who protects the cows;
one who serves Kṛṣṇa in the mood of intimate friendship.
Gopa may also refer to the senior gopas headed by Nanda
Mahārāja, who serve Kṛṣṇa in the mood of parental
affection.

Gopāla A name of Kṛṣṇa as a young cowherd; the protector
of the cows.

Gopāla-mantra A ten-syllable mantra of which Śrī Madana-
gopāla-deva is the Deity.


                          655
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

gopī A young cowherd maiden of Vraja. The gopis, headed
by Śrī Rādhā, who serve Kṛṣṇa in the mood of amorous
love and represent the epitome of unalloyed devotion to
Kṛṣṇa. Gopi may also refer to the senior gopis headed by
Mother Yaśodā, who serve Kṛṣṇa in the mood of parental
affection.

Gopī-gīta The gopīs’ song of separation, appearing in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.31).

Gopīnātha A name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; the Lord of the gopīs;
one of whom the gopīs are the lords.

Gopī-ramaṇa A name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; one who gives pleasure
to the gopīs.

Govardhana A mountain dear to Lord Kṛṣṇa and His
devotees. Kṛṣṇa held the hill up on the little finger of
His left hand for seven days, to protect His devotees in
Vṛndāvana from devastating storms sent by Indra. It is
located in the middle of Vraja Maṇḍala, about 16 miles
(26 km) north-west of Mathurā.

Govinda A name of Kṛṣṇa;

one who pleases the gopīs, gopas, cows, senses, the
earth, and Govardhana Hill.

Guṇa Quality; modes of material nature: goodness,
passion, and ignorance.

guṇa-avatāra A deity or demigod presiding over a mode of
nature, such as goodness, passion, or ignorance.

guru Spiritual master.

guru-bhakti Devotion to guru.

gurudeva A title by which disciples refer to and address
their guru.

guru-jana Venerable persons.

guru-paramparā The disciplic succession through which
spiritual knowledge is transmitted by bona fide
spiritual masters.

Hanumān The most famous monkey devotee of Śrī
Rāmacandra, who assisted the Lord in defeating the demon
Rāvaṇa.

Hari A name of God; one who takes away; one who removes
all obstacles to spiritual progress.

hari-kathā Narration and discussion on the holy names,
form, qualities and pastimes of Śrī Hari (Kṛṣṇa) and His
associates.

hari-nāma Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s holy name, such as the maha-
mantra:

Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa,

Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare,

                           656
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma,

Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.

Hari-vaṁśa Dynastic history of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; an appendix to
the Mahābhārata describing Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes.

hāsya-rasa The radiant mellow of humor, one of the
indirect relationships with Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Hayaśīrṣa The horse-headed incarnation of the Lord who
spoke the Vedas to Śrī Brahmā.

Herā-pañcamī Celebration of the goddess of fortune’s
journey to the Guṇḍicā Temple.

Hiraṇyākṣa The son of Kaśyapa who fought with and was
killed by the boar incarnation of the Lord, Śrī Varāha.

homa Ritual sacrificial fire.

icchā-śakti Desire potency of the Lord.

Ikṣvāku The son of Vaivasvata Manu, who was the first
king of the earth.

Ilāvṛta-varṣa The central portion, or nucleus, of the
galaxy; where Śrī Śiva meditates; location of Mount
Meru.

Indra, Mahendra King of the demigods, who rules from
Amarāvati in the heaven known as Svarga.

iṣṭa-deva One’s worshipable Deity.

Iṣṭagoṣṭhī Group discussion of spiritual topics.

Iśvara Supreme Lord.

Itihāsa A history.

Jāḍya Dullness, inertia.

Jagadīśvara, Jagadiśa The Supreme Personality of
Godhead; the Supreme Lord of the universe.

Jagannātha The Lord of the universe; He appears in a
Deity form fashioned from wood and painted brightly, and
has been worshiped in this form for thousands of years
in Jagannātha Purī in Orissa on the shore of the Bay of
Bengal.

Jaimini Narrator of Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta to Śrī
Janamejaya, the son of Śrī Parīkṣit. He is a prominent
disciple of Śrī Dvaipāyana Vyāsa-deva and author of the
Pūrva-mimāṁsā.

Jāmbavān The chief of monkeys, also known as the chief
of bears. He fought for Śrī Rāmacandra in the battle
against the demon Rāvana. He fought against Śrī Kṛṣṇa
for the Syamantaka jewel, and upon his defeat, presented
the Lord with his daughter, the beautiful Jāmbavatī.


                           657
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                      5/5/2017

Jambu-dvīpa The island of Jambu, situated in the earthly
planetary system Bhū-maṇḍala.

Janaloka One of the uppermost planets in the material
universe. The inhabitants of Maharloka take shelter
there from the heat of the universal devastation at the
end of Brahmā’s day.

japa Meditation in the form of uttering a mantra to
oneself; often referring to the practice of chanting the
holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa on tulasi beads

Jāti One’s class or social classification based on
birth; community; sub-division of a varṇa.

Jaya and Vijaya Two gatekeepers of Vaikuṇṭha, who were
cursed due to offending the four Kumāras, and who then
took three births in the material world as great demons:
Hiraṇyakaśipu and Hiraṇyākṣa in Satya-yuga, Rāvaṇa and
Kumbhakarṇa in Tretā-yuga, and Śiśupāla and Dantavakra
at the end of Dvāpara-yuga.

Jīva, jīvātmā The living being, or spirit soul; the
eternal, individual soul who, in the conditioned state
of material existence, assumes a material body in any of
innumerable species of life.

jīvan-mukta One who is liberated from material existence
even in this world.

jīva-tattva The science of the nature and position of
the living being.

jñāna Knowledge; knowledge that leads to impersonal
liberation; transcendental knowledge of one’s
relationship with Kṛṣṇa.

jñāna-bhakti Devotion tinged with knowledge of the
Lord’s opulence and divinity.

jñānendriya A knowledge-acquiring sense, such as sight,
hearing, etc.

jñānī One who pursues the path of jñāna, or knowledge,
directed towards impersonal liberation; one in search of
knowledge, impersonal or transcendental.

kaimutika-nyāya The logic of ‘even more so.’

Kailāsa Mountain The abode of Śrī Śiva in the Himālayas.

kaiśora Early adolescence; the prime of youth.

Kaiṭabha A demon killed by Śrī Viṣṇu.

Kālanemi A demon killed by Śrī Viṣṇu.

Kalā A portion of a portion.

Kāla The time factor.

Kali-yuga The present age of quarrel and hypocrisy which
began five thousand years ago; the fourth of a cycle of
four ages that repeat to form universal time.

                          658
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


kalpa One day in the life of Brahmā, lasting 4 billion
320 million years; equivalent to one thousand divya-
yugas, or sets of the four yugas.

kāma Lust; sensual desire; sense gratification;
transcendental desire.

Kāmākhyā-devī (Also see Pārvatī) The goddess Durgā who
is worshiped in an ancient temple in Prāgjyotiṣa-pura
(near Gauhati, Assam); in a dream she taught the gopāla-
mantra to the brāhmaṇa who becomes a disciple of Gopa-
kumāra.

Kaṁsa Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s uncle who usurped the throne of his
father, Ugrasena, the king of the Yadus, who ruled from
the city of Mathurā. He tried repeatedly to kill Kṛṣṇa,
but was instead killed by Kṛṣṇa.

Kapila-deva An incarnation of the Lord who appeared in
Satya-yuga as the son of Devahūti and Kardama Muni, and
expounded the devotional Sāṅkhya philosophy. (There was
also an atheist named Kapila, who was not an incarnation
of the Lord.)

karatālas Brass hand cymbals.

Kardama Ṛṣi The father of Kapila-deva and one of the
primary progenitors of the universe.

karma Fruitive work or mundane activity; the results of
such activity.

Karma-kāṇḍa A division of the Vedas that deals with
ceremonial acts and sacrificial rites directed toward
material benefits or liberation.

karma-phala Results of or reactions to past deeds.

kāruṇya-śakti The Lord’s potency of compassion.

Kāśī The city of Vārāṇasī, or Benares in Uttar Pradesh
located on the banks of the River Gaṅgā; a city sacred
to Śrī Śiva and famous as a place of learning.

kaumāra The time of life from infancy to five years.

Kaurava A descendant of King Kuru; although in reality
all were descendants of Kuru, the name is used to
differentiate the sons of Dhṛtarāṣtra from the sons of
Pāṇḍu.

kaustubha A prominent jewel on the chest of the Lord.

kavi A poet or great thinker.

Kayādhu The wife of Hiraṇyakaśipu and the mother of the
famous devotee, Śrī Prahlāda.

kāya-vyūha A direct expansion, from either Śrīmatī
Rādhikā’s or Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s personal forms.

Keśī-tīrtha The place where the Supreme Personality of
Godhead Śrī Kṛṣṇa killed the horse demon Keśī; where the

                          659
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

brāhmaṇa of Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta meets Śrī Gopa-
kumāra.

kīrtana Chanting, singing, describing, and reciting the
names and glories of the Supreme Lord.

Krama-dīpikā Tantra See Appendix.

kriyā Activities.

kriyā-śakti The Lord’s potency of action.

Kṛpācārya The spiritual master of the Kuru dynasty.

kṛpā Mercy.

kṛpā-śakti The Lord’s potency of mercy.

Kṛṣṇa The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Bhagavān; the
Supreme Lord in His original transcendental form who
enjoys pastimes in Vṛndāvana, Mathurā, and Dvārakā.

Kṛṣṇa-bhakti Devotion to Kṛṣṇa.

Kṛṣṇa-prema Love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa that is extremely
concentrated, that completely melts the heart, and that
gives rise to a deep sense of attachment and feelings of
possessiveness for the Lord.

Kumāras Four sages – Sanaka, Sanat, Sanātana and
Sanandana – who were the first sons of Brahmā but always
appear as children of only five years. They were
absorbed in impersonal Brahman but became great devotees
of the Lord and authorities on devotional service.

kunda A variety of jasmine.

kuñja Grove or bower.

Kuntī, or Pṛthā Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s aunt. She was the daughter
of Śūrasena, the sister of Vasudeva, the wife of Pāṇḍu,
and the mother of the three eldest Pāṇḍavas and Karna.

Kūrma The incarnation of the Lord in the form of a
tortoise.

Kurukṣetra Also known as Dharmakṣetra, the field of
religion, where Śrī Kṛṣṇa spoke the Bhagavad-gītā to His
friend Arjuna, just before the beginning of the great
Mahābhārata war. It is located nearly 100 miles (160 km)
north of New Delhi.

Kuvera, also Kubera The treasurer of the demigods and
great devotee of Śrī Śiva; father of Nalakūvara and
Maṇigrīva.

lakṣaṇa Quality or characteristic.

Lakṣmī-devī The eternal consort of Śrī Nārāyaṇa in
Vaikuṇṭha; the consort of the Lord in all His
expansions; the goddess of fortune.

līlā The Lord’s activities, or pastimes, of both cosmic
creation and transcendental exchanges of love with His

                          660
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

devotees.

līlā-avatāras These are incarnations of the Lord who
descend to the material world to perform specific
activities and to display certain pastimes.

līlā-śakti The pastime potency of the Lord; Vṛndā-devī.

loka Planet; world; region.

Lokāloka Enormous mountains that separate the fourteen
planetary systems of the universe, which are illuminated
by the sun, from that part of the universe (aloka) which
is in darkness.

Madana-gopāla-deva Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the attractor of Cupid;
the worshipful Lord of Śrī Gopa-kumāra.

Mādhava A name for Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the consort of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā; Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who possesses the sweetness of both
the spring season and of honey; one who is in the Madhu
dynasty.

mādhavī A fragrant, honey-laden creeper; a name for Śrī
Rādhā.

madhu Honey; sweetness; loveliness.

Madhu A demon killed by Śrī Viṣṇu.

madhurya Sweetness; sweet human-like pastimes; the
relationship, or rasa, of conjugal love.

Madhuvana One of the twelve principal forests of
Vṛndāvana, situated on the western side of the river
Yamunā, where Śrī Kṛṣṇa performed pastimes; where the
demon Madhu was killed.

madhyama Intermediate.

Māgha January/February.

mahā-bhagavata Great devotee.

Mahādeva (see Śiva)

Mahākāla-pura The abode of the great time factor; the
Brahmajyoti; the abode of liberation; Brahman. A realm
that is the spiritual effulgence of the body of the Lord
of Mahākāla-pura. It is beyond material cause and
effect.

Mahā-Lakṣmī (see Lakṣmī)

mahā-prasāda Literally, ‘great kindness’ or ‘mercy’;
remnants of food offered to the Deity; other articles
offered to the Lord, such as incense, flowers, garlands,
and clothing.

Mahā-purusa The Supreme Lord, who is the supreme
enjoyer; the presiding Deity of Brahmaloka; a great
personality who is expert in the imports of scripture,
detached from the world, and who has realized Kṛṣṇa.


                           661
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

Maharloka A planet of great sages such as Bhṛgu, located
above Svarga in the upper reaches of the universe. It is
below Janaloka and Tapoloka.

mahaṛṣi Great sage.

Mahat-tattva The total material energy.

mahotsava Joyous spiritual festival.

Maitreya A disciple of Mahaṛṣi Parāśara, the father of
Vyāsadeva, and a great sage and learned philosopher; one
of the speakers of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

mamatā A sense of possessiveness.

Māna-sarovara A beautiful lake in Vṛndāvana created by
the tears of Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

Mandara Mountain The mountain that was carried on the
back of Kurma, the tortoise incarnation of the Lord,
during the churning of the Milk Ocean.

mandira A temple.

maṇi A jewel.

mantra A verse possessing extraordinary power, which
purifies the mind and is chanted to serve the deity of
the mantra and fulfill desires.

mantra-devatā The Deity of the mantra.

Manu Universal rulers, lawgivers, and progenitors.
Fourteen Manus appear in each day of Brahmā. The present
Manu is Vaivasvata Manu.

manvantara The lifespan of Manu; 306,720,000 years.

Martya-loka Earth; planet of mortals.

maṭha Āśrama; monastery.

Mathurā The divine abode of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, where He appeared
as the son of Vasudeva and Devakī, and where He
performed His pastimes as a prince. Also refers to
Mathurā-maṇḍala.

Mathurā-maṇḍala The area known as Vraja, nondifferent
from Śrī Goloka in the spiritual world.

mātsarya Jealousy; envy.

Matsya Śrī Viṣṇu’s form as a giant fish who appeared to
save the Vedas from the ocean of devastation; one the
daśāvatāras, ten famous incarnations of the Lord.

Māyā The inferior energy of the Lord; material nature;
illusion; the enchanting illusory potency; the state of
forgetfulness of one’s relationship with the Lord.

Māyāvāda Proponents of a philosophy that posits that
qualities such as personhood, form and name are an
illusion, or Māyā, imposed on the Absolute Truth, who is

                           662
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

in reality changeless and formless, or impersonal. The
foremost advocate of this philosophy, also known as
Adaitavāda, was Śrīpād Śaṅkarācharya, an incarnation of
Śrī Śiva.

Mīmāṁṣa Systematic study of the meaning of the Vedas;
Pūrva-mīmāṁṣa, composed by Jaimini, explains the ritual
meaning of the Vedas and emphasizes karma. Uttara-
mīmāṁṣa, otherwise known as Vedānta-sūtra, composed by
Vyāsadeva, explains the nature of the Absolute Truth.

Mohinī-mūrti The worshipable Deity of Prakṛti-devī, the
goddess of the final layer of primordial ignorance
surrounding the material world; the manifestation of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s illusory potency in the form of an enchantingly
beautiful woman.

mokṣa Impersonal liberation.

mṛdaṅga A two-headed clay drum made for the saṅkīrtana
of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

mudrā Hand gestures used in Vedic dance and rituals.

muhūrta A time period of forty-eight minutes.

mukta A liberated soul.

mukti Liberation.

Mukti-dhāma The abode of liberation.

mūla-tattva The original reality.

mumukṣus Those seeking liberation.

muni A sage.

mūrcchā Ecstatic swoon.

mūrti A form; Deity.

Mukunda A name for Śrī Kṛṣṇa; the giver of liberation.

naimitika Occasional occupational duties induced by
specific circumstances.

naiṣkarmya Freedom from karma.

naiṣṭhika brahmacārī Life-long celibate.

Nakula The son of Mādri and Paṇḍu, and the fourth of the
five Pāṇḍava brothers.

Nāma The holy name of the Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa;
recitation of nāma is the main limb of the practice of
sādhana-bhakti.

nāma-bhāsa A semblance of the holy name; the stage of
chanting in which sins and offenses are cleared.

nāma-saṅkīrtana Congregational chanting of the holy
names of the Supreme Lord; chanting that is complete,
i.e., imbued with divine love.

                          663
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


nāmī Śrī Bhagavān; the person addressed by the name.

Nanda-kiśora The beautiful, youthful son of Nanda.

Nandī Śrī Śiva’s bull carrier.

Nandīśvara This name refers to a foremost devotee of Śrī
Śiva; Śrī Śiva’s bull carrier; and a hill in Vraja.
Devādhideva Mahādeva Śaṅkara pleased his worshipful
Deity Śrī Kṛṣṇa and asked for the boon to have darśana
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s childhood pastimes (bālya-līlā). Svayaṁ
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa ordered him to situate himself in
Nandagaon in the form of a hill.

Nārada Great sage among the demigods who was born from
the mind of Brahmā. He is a liberated associate of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, who travels throughout the material and spiritual
worlds broadcasting His glories.

Nārāyaṇa The shelter (ayana) for mankind (nāra); an
expansion of Kṛṣṇa; the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha.

navadhā-bhakti The ninefold practices of devotional
service: hearing, chanting, remembering, serving,
worshiping the Deity, offering prayers, carrying out
orders, serving Kṛṣṇa as a friend, sacrificing
everything for the Lord.

nava-yauvana Ever-fresh youth, Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

nigamas Vedic texts.

Nīlācala, Nīlādri Literally, the blue mountain. Located
in Purī, it is in the shape of a tortoise or a
conchshell and is the eternal residence of Śrī
Jagannātha, Śrī Baladeva, Śrī Subhadrā and Sudarśana
cakra.

nirguṇa Devoid (nir) of material qualities (guṇa),
transcendental; free from the influence of the material
qualities of goodness, passion, and ignorance. In
relation to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, this implies that He is endowed
with transcendental qualities.

nirvāṇa Extinction of existence; liberation from the
suffering of material existence.

nirviśeṣa jñāna Knowledge of the Supreme Lord’s
impersonal feature.

niṣkāma Free from desire.

niṣkapaṭa Without duplicity.

nīṣṭhā Fixed determination; the stage of sādhana-bhakti
wherein all the unwanted desires of the practitioner
have been cleared and he maintains a constant intensity
of endeavor by his intelligence.

nitya Eternal; invariable; daily; that which has no
beginning and no end.

nitya-karma Obligatory religious duties.

                            664
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017


nitya-siddha Eternally liberated; with distinctions that
are eternally established.

nivṛtti-mārga The path of renunciation.

Nṛga A king who was cursed to become a lizard because,
by a slight discrepancy in his service to a brāhmaṇa, he
became guilty of stealing. He was delivered by Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.

Nṛsiṁha Avatāra of Śrī Viṣṇu in a half-man half-lion
form. He killed the demoniac King Hiraṇyakaśipu, and
saved his devotee Prahlāda; one the daśāvatāras, ten
famous incarnations of the Lord.

nyāsa Touching various parts of the body and at the same
time pronouncing a mantra and visualizing a devata or a
bīja mantra in order to spiritualize the body of the
worshiper.

nyāya Logic, reasoning; the philosophy dealing with a
logical analysis of reality, also known as nyāya-
darśana.

padma Lotus.

Padma Purāṇa One of the six sāttvika Purāṇas.

pāñca-bhautika There are five material elements: earth,
water, fire, air, ether. The ingredients of matter are
also counted as twenty-three: the total material energy,
false ego, sound, touch, form, taste, smell, earth,
water, fire, air, sky, eyes, ears, nose, tongue, skin,
hands, legs, evacuating organs, genitals, speech and
mind.

Pañcarātra System of Deity worship initiated by Śrī
Nārada; a group of scriptures that support of the
process of bhakti.

Pāṇḍavas The five sons of Pāṇḍu: Yudhiṣṭhira, Bhīma,
Arjuna, Nakula, and Sahadeva.

paṇḍita A learned person.

pāramārthika That which relates to the supreme spiritual
truth or ultimate attainment of reality; real,
essential, true; that which relates to a higher object.

parā Superior.

Parabrahman The Supreme Brahman.

paraloka The transcendental world.

parama Ultimate.

paramahaṁsa An exalted soul.

parama-karuṇa Most merciful.

paramānanda Supreme transcendental bliss.


                            665
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

paramārtha The ultimate spiritual attainment.

Paramātmā The Supersoul situated in the hearts of all
living entities as a witness and the source of
remembrance, knowledge, and forgetfulness.

Parameśvara The Supreme Controller.

parārdha Half of Brahmā’s life.

parā-śakti The Lord’s superior potency. See svarūpa-
śakti.

Paraśurāma The sixth of the ten avatāras of Śrī Viṣṇu;
son of Jamadagni and Renukā.

pārijāta A fragrant flower from heaven.

Parīkṣit One who is inquisitive. Son of Abhimanyu and
grandson of the Pāṇḍava Arjuna. He succeeded Yudhiṣṭira
Mahārāja as emperor of the world. Śrī Kṛṣṇa saved his
life when he was attacked by a brahmāstra weapon while
he was still in the womb of his mother. In his maturity,
he was cursed to die of snake-bite within seven days. He
left his kingdom to fast to death on the banks of the
Gaṅgā. At that time Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī spoke Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam to him.

parivāra Family; lineage.

pārṣada An eternal associate of the Lord.

Pārvatī Lord Śiva’s consort; daughter of Parvata (the
Himālayas); another name for the goddess Kāmākhyā-devī;
also known as Durga, Gauri, Kali.

Pātāla The lowest of the seven lower planetary systems.

paugaṇḍa Boyhood; age six to ten.

peśaskṛt A species of bee or wasp.

phala The fruit, or result.

Phālguna February-March.

Pippalāyana Ṛṣi Son of Ṛṣabhadeva and a resident of
Tapoloka, who explains to Gopa-kumāra in great detail
that seeing Śrī Bhagavān within the mind is more
rewarding than seeing Him with one’s eyes.

Plakṣa An island surrounding Mount Meru.

prabhu Master; lord; ruler.

pradhāna The sum total manifestation of the three modes
of material nature; the original, dormant state of
material nature, prior to the creation, when the
material elements are unmanifest. In this state the
three modes of nature are in balance and thus inactive.

Pradyumna Son of Śrī Kṛṣṇa who resides in Dvārakā;
samaṣṭi-kāmadeva, the cupid of Dvārakā and Mathurā; the
third of the original quadruple expansion in Dvārakā; in

                            666
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

the second quadruple expansion, he is the lord of the
mind.

Prāgjyotiṣa-pura (see Kāmākhyā-devī)

Prahlāda A most exalted devotee of the Lord; son of
Hiraṇyakaśipu.

prajāpati A progenitor of the universe.

prakoṣṭha Chamber; section; area.

prākṛta Material.

prakṛti Predominated potencies; predominated principle;
external energy; material nature.

Prakṛti-devī Goddess of material energy.

pralaya Annihilation of the universe; cosmic inundation;
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam describes four kinds of annihilation:
continuous, occasional, elemental and final.

Nitya-pralaya (continuous annihi-lation): the
transformations of time and the annihilation of birth
and death.

Naimittika-pralaya (occasional annihilation):
Annihilation at the end of one day of Brahmā that occurs
during his night. All the three planetary systems, with
the exception of some of the highest planets, are
destroyed. Śrī Nārāyaṇa, lies down on the coils of
Ananta Śeṣa and absorbs the entire universe within
Himself while Brahmā sleeps.

Prākṛtika-pralaya (natural annihilation): The total
material annihilation that occurs at the end of Brahmā’s
one hundred years. The elements of material nature
(earth, water, fire, air, ether, false ego and the total
energy or mahat-tattva) as well as the universe composed
of them are entirely destroyed.

Ātyantika-pralaya (final annihi-lation): The ultimate
annihilation occurs when the illusory false ego that
binds the soul is cut with knowledge and one realizes
Lord Acyuta, the Supreme Soul.

pramāda An illusion; misunderstanding of reality.

pramāṇa Evidence, authority.

prāṇa The life-energy; life-air; out-going breath.

Prāṇanātha The lord of one’s life; it carries the sense
of one who is infinitely more dear to one than one’s own
life.

prapañca Five constituent elements; the material world
made of five elements; matter; material existence.

prārabdha karma The results of previous activities that
are presently manifesting.

prasāda (see mahā-prasāda)

                             667
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


pratyakṣa Direct sense perception.

pravṛtti-mārga The path of fruitive action or
ritualistic religion that yields material piety and the
facility to enjoy this material world.

Prayāga The King of all pilgrimage places; the rivers
Śrī Gaṅgā and Śrī Yamunā join at Prayāga, which is also
known as Allahabad.

prāyaścitta Atonement.

prema Extremely concentrated love for the Supreme
Personality of Godhead that completely melts the heart
and gives rise to a deep sense of mamatā
(possessiveness) in relation to the Lord.

prema-bhakti A stage of bhakti characterized by the
appearance of prema (see Prema); the perfectional stage
of devotion; the eighth and fully-blossomed state of the
creeper of devotion.

prema-mūrcchā Loss of conscious-ness in the state of
ecstatic love of God.

prema-rasa The nectar of loving exchanges.

prema-sampada The wealth of divine love.

prema-vikāra Transformations of love.

premī One imbued with prema.

priya-bandhu Having the sentiment and affection of a
father, or another senior relative.

Priyavrata The first son of Svāyambhuva Manu and a
powerful king who harnessed the power of the sun.

Pṛthvī Earth; goddess earth.

pujā Worship.

pūjārī A temple priest.

Pulaha One of seven sages who were grandsons of Brahmā

Pulastya One of the the seven sages who were grandsons
of Brahmā; according to the Garga Saṁhitā, Pulastya Ṛṣi
brought Girirājajī to Vraja-bhūmi.

puṇya Pious results of studying the Vedas and of
performing yajña, tapasya, dāna, karma and so on.

Purāṇa Eighteen historical supplements to the Vedas.

puṣpāñjali An offering of flowers.

puruṣārtha The four goals of human life: sense enjoyment
(kāma), economic development (artha), religiosity
(dharma), and liberation (mokṣa).

puruṣa The Supreme Personality of Godhead; the primeval

                          668
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

being as the soul and original source of the universe,
the Supreme Being; the animating principle in living
beings, the soul, spirit as opposed to prakṛti, or
matter; a male or mankind.

Puruṣottama-kṣetra The kingdom of Purusottama Sri
Jagannatha.

Pūtanā King Kaṁsa’s demoniac associate who tried to kill
newborn baby Kṛṣṇa by nursing Him with breasts smeared
with poison, but who died when Kṛṣṇa sucked out her life
air.

Rādhā The eternal consort of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the
embodiment of the hlādinī potency, known as mahābhāva-
svarūpinī, the personification of the highest ecstacy of
divine love. She is the source of all the gopīs, the
queens of Dvārakā, and the Lakṣmīs of Vaikunṭha.

Rādhā-dāsya The servitorship of Rādhā.

rāga Deep attachment for the object of one’s affection.

rāga-mārga The path of spontaneous attraction or
attachment.

Rāghava A name of Śri Rāmacandra who appeared in the
Raghu dynasty.

Raghupati A name of Śri Rāmacandra meaning “Lord of the
Raghu dynasty.”

Ramānātha The master of Ramā, another name for Lakṣmī,
the goddess of fortune.

Rāmacandra / Rāma A līlā-avatāra, or pastime avatāra, of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa; also known as Rāmacandra, Raghunātha,
Dāśarathi-Rāma, and Rāghava-Rāma.

Rāma-navamī The appearance day of Śrī Rāma which occurs
on the ninth day of the light lunar fortnight of the
month of Caitra (March-April).

Rāmāyaṇa The original epic history about Lord Rāmacandra
and Sītā, written by Vālmīki Muni.

Raṅganātha The ancient Deity of Śrī Nārāyaṇa in Śrī
Raṅgam, South India.

rasa Transcendental mellow or taste; the astonishing
experience of sublime liquid emotion when the five
ingredients of love, beginning with sthāyibhāva, combine
in the heart of the pure devotee.

rāsa-līlā Svayam Bhagavān’s supremely immaculate pastime
of dancing with unlimited gopīs.

rasika One who is expert in relishing bhakti-rasa within
his heart, which is resplendent with transcendence, or
śuddha-sattva.

Ratha-yātrā, Guṇḍicā-yātrā The Festival of the Chariots;
an annual procession held in Purī in which Śrī
Jagannātha-deva, His brother Śrī Balarāma, and Their

                          669
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

sister Subhadrā travel from their temple to Guṇḍicā in
the company of their innumerable devotees.

ruci Taste; luster; the stage of sādhana-bhakti wherein
one has become free from all anarthas and the taste for
the process of bhajana has awakened; the fifth stage in
the development of the creeper of bhakti.

Rudra An expansion of Śrī Śiva.

Rukmiṇī Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s principal queen in Dvārakā.

śabda Sound vibration; words.

sac-cid-ānanda Sat – Pure eternal reality, cit –
knowledge, and ānanda –

bliss.

Śacī The wife of Indra.

sadācāra Virtuous conduct.

sad-guru Bona fide spiritual master.

sādhaka One who follows a spiritual discipline, or
sādhana.

sādhana Practice or discipline; the method one adopts in
order to obtain a specific goal, or sādhya.

sādhana-bhakti Engaging one’s senses in serving the
Lord.

sādhu A saintly person or devotee; a highly-realized
soul who knows the aim of life (sādhya), who is himself
practicing sādhana, and who can engage others in
sādhana.

sādhu-sanga Association of advanced devotees; the first
stage in the development of the creeper of devotion and
the most important factor for advancement in bhakti.

sādhya An object or goal; the different types of
sādhyas, or objects of attainment, are generally grouped
into four categories: dharma (religiosity), artha
(economic development), kāma (material enjoyment), and
mokṣa (liberation). The sādhya-vastu, or object of
attainment, for the bhaktas is bhagavat-prīti, love for
the Supreme Lord. This is also known as prema.

sādhya-sādhana The goal and the practice to attain it.

saguṇatva Possession of attributes.

sakāma With desire; materially motivated.

sakhā Friend; companion.

sākṣāt Directly.

śakti Power; energy; potency.

śaktyāveśa-avatāra An incarnation of the Lord invested

                             670
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

with a specific transcendental power, or śakti.

Sahadeva Son of Mādri and Paṇḍu and youngest of the five
Pāṇḍava brothers.

Śālagrāma-śilā Deity of Śrī Nārāyaṇa or Śrī Kṛṣṇa
appearing as a stone found in the Gaṇḍakī River, whose
divinity is evident by the imprint of the symbols of Śrī
Nārāyana, such as the disc.

samādhi Meditative trance; sama means ‘equal’ and dhī
means ‘complete absorption of intelligence.’ A person in
samādhi has the same level of consciousness as his
worshipful deity.

Śamīka Ṛṣi The great sage who, absorbed in meditation,
did not honor the arrival of Emperor Parikṣit in his
home.

sampradāya A line of disciplic succession.

saṁskāra A sacred purificatory ceremony; reformation or
training of the mind; impression on the mind of any
experience or acts done in a former state of existence.

saṁvit The knowledge portion, or cognizant aspect, of
the Lord’s spiritual potency; the potency by which He
knows Himself and causes others to know Him.

Sanaka One of the four Kumāras.

Sanātana Gosvāmī An eternal associate of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu and elder brother of Rūpa Gosvāmī. Śrīmān
Mahāprabhu personally instructed him on the principles
of bhakti and ordered him to write books explaining
these principles and to excavate the lost places of
kṛṣṇa-līlā in Vraja. His Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta is
considered to be the earliest of the Gosvāmī writings
and the source of inspiration for many other works. He
wrote a famous commentary on the Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, originally titled Vaiṣṇava-toṣanī, which
later became known as Bṛhad-Vaiṣṇava-toṣaṇī after Śrīla
Jīva Gosvāmī wrote a commentary on the Tenth Canto known
as Laghu-Vaiṣṇava-toṣaṇī. He also enumerated the basic
principles of bhakti in the book Haribhakti-vilāsa.
According to Gaura-gaṇoddeṣa-dīpikā (181), he is Lavaṅga
Mañjarī in kṛṣṇa-līlā.

Sanat-kumar One of the four Kumāras.

saṅkalpa Great resolve or determination; a vow.

Śaṅkara A name of Śrī Śiva.

Śaṅkarācharya (see Māyāvāda)

Saṅkarṣaṇa (see Ananta Śeṣa) Name of Baladeva Prabhu.

Sāṅkhya The process of enumeration. Two major sāṅkhya
philosophies are found in Vedic literature. An elaborate
description of theistic sāṅkhya philosophy is given in
the teachings of Śrī Kapiladeva, found in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, Third Canto. Atheistic sāṅkhya philosophy
involves an analysis of spirit and matter.

                          671
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


saṅkīrtana (see nāma-saṅkīrtana)

sannyāsī A member of the renounced order of life; a
renunciant.

Ṣat-śiṣya A bona fide disciple.

Śatrughna Śri Rāmacandra’s youngest brother and an
incarnation of Aniruddha.

Saubhari Muni A great sage who lived in the waters of
the Yamunā River for many years. He showed the dangers
of offending a devotee of the Lord when he cursed the
Lord’s carrier Garuḍa. For this act, he lost his spirit
of renunciation and became attracted to household life.

Satyabhāmā Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s favorite queen in Dvārakā and the
daughter of Satrājit.

Satyaloka The topmost planetary system within the
material world, and the residence of Śri Brahmā; also
called Brahmaloka.

Sāvitrī Wife of Śri Brahmā; a name for the Sun.

sāyujya The liberation of merging into Brahman; a
liberation abhorrent to Vaiṣṇavas.

sevā Service rendered with affection.

sevaka Servitor.

sevya Master or worshipable Lord; one who is served.

siddhānta The consummate truth or perfect conclusion of
all knowledge; philosophical doctrine or precept;
demonstrated conclusion; established end.

siddhi Mystic perfection.

Śiṣupāla A demon killed by Śrī Kṛṣṇa. (see Jaya and
Vijaya)

Sītā-devī The daughter of Janaka Mahārāja and the
eternal consort of Śrī Rāmacandra.

Śiva An expansion of the Lord in a category of His own:
Śiva-tattva, which is that neither of God nor jīva; one
of the three guṇa-avatāras, in charge of the mode of
ignorance; both the material creation and destruction
are enacted through him.

Skanda Purāṇa One of the eighteen Purāṇas. It
elaborately describes Kali-yuga.

smaraṇa Meditative remembrance of the Lord’s names,
forms, qualities, and pastimes. Smaraṇa should be done
in connection with nāma-saṅkīrtana.

Smṛti The word smṛti means ‘that which is remembered.’
It refers to the body of Vedic literature that is
remembered, in contradistinction to Śruti, or that which
is directly heard by or revealed to the ṛṣis. Smṛti

                            672
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017

includes the six Vedāṅgas, the dharma-śāstras such as
Manu-saṁhitā, the Purāṇas and the Itihāsas such as
Rāmāyaṇa and the Mahābhārata.

sphūrti Manifestation or temporary vision of
transcendental reality.

śraddhā Faith; the firm conviction that all of one’s
obligations will be fulfilled by performing kṛṣṇa-
bhakti.

śravaṇa Hearing the transcendental descriptions of
Bhagavān’s names, forms, qualities, pastimes, and
associates from the mouths of advanced bhaktas; one of
the three most important limbs of bhakti.

Śrī Beauty; Śrīmātī Rādhārānī; Śrī Lakṣmī-devī.

Śrīdhara Svami His commentary on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,
known as Bhāvārtha-dīpīka, was greatly revered by
Mahāprabhu. It is the oldest existing commentary on
Bhāgavatam.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Of the eighteen Purāṇas, Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam is most prominent and is known as the
spotless Purāṇa. It represents the essence of all
knowledge and the truth established in the Upaniṣads.

śrīvatsa The emblem of the goddess of fortune, is
usually described as a distinct, white hair, on the
chest of Śrī Bhāgavan.

Śruti Literally, ‘that which is heard;’ Vedic
literature, such as the four Vedas and the Upaniṣads,
that has been directly heard by or revealed to saints
and sages.

sthāyī-bhāva One’s eternal, fixed mode of service; the
five sthāyī-bhāvas are śānta (tranquility), dāsya
(servitorship), sakhhya (friendship), vātsalya (parental
affection), and mādhurya (conjugal love); one of the
five ingredients of rasa.

Subhadrā Sister of Śrī Kṛṣna, wife of Arjuna, and mother
of Abhimanyu. She is worshiped with Śrī Jagannātha-deva
in Purī.

Sudarśana cakra The disc weapon of Viṣṇu.

śuddha-bhakta One who is actuated by a pure devotional
aptitude.

śuddha-bhakti Pure, unalloyed devotion.

śuddha-sattva The state of transcendence. Also known as
pure goodness or pure existence.

Sudharmā Royal assembly house in Dvārakā capable of
accommodating unlimited numbers of people.

Sugrīva The monkey king in the Ṛṣya-mūka mountains who
received Rāma and Lakṣmaṇa when they were searching for
Sitā; the brother of Vāli.


                          673
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                     5/5/2017

Śukadeva The son of Vyāsa-deva and the original speaker
of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, which he spoke to instruct
Parīkṣit Mahārāja at the time of Śrī Parīkṣit’s death.

Śūrasena A king born in the Vṛṣṇi dynasty. His son
Vasudeva was Kṛṣṇa’s father and his daughter Pṛthā was
Arjuna’s mother.

Sūrya The sun-god; one of the five deities worshiped by
the pañcopāsakas, impersonalists who worship deities to
ultimately transcend worship of form.

suṣupti Deep sleep.

Sūta Gosvāmī In the sacred forest of Naimiṣāraṇya, he
narrated Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam as he had heard it.

Sutala The third of the seven lower planetary systems

svabhāva One’s nature; natural, spiritual sentiments;
the true nature of a thing.

svābhāvikī The Lord’s natural potency.

sva-dharma One’s own duty; prescribed occupational
duties; religious duties.

Sva-prakāśa Self-manifest; self-illuminating.

Svarga The celestial heaven, greatest of all heavens,
that is characterized by material opulence, enjoyment,
and duration of life far exceeding those of the planet
earth. Svarga is attained by strictly carrying out the
pious activities recommended in the karma-kāṇḍa section
of the Vedas.

svarūpa Intrinsic form and nature; true nature; natural
position,

svarūpa-jñāna The knowledge of the constitutional
position of one’s self.

svarūpa-lakṣaṇa Primary characteristics.

Svayambhū Self-born; Śrī Brahmā.

Śvetadvīpa The abode of Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu in the
material creation.

śyāma Transcendental dark color; the color of a dark
raincloud, sapphire, or blue lotus; a name for Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.

tadātmya A sense of oneness. An example of something
that has attained tadātmya is an iron rod heated by fire
to such a degree that it acts as fire and burns other
objects. The iron is said to have obtained oneness, or
tadātmya, with the fire.

Takṣaka The name of the snake-bird who, impelled by the
curse of the brāhmaṇa, bit Mahārāja Parīkṣit.

Tālavana One of the twelve main forests of Vraja; where
Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Balarāmajī killed Dhenukāsura, an ass-

                          674
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

demon.

Tāmbūla, pān Betel leaf; a preparation of betel leaves
with lime, catechu, and other spices, which is chewed as
a refreshment.

Tapaloka A planet situated above Janaloka. Topmost
yogendras, or masters of mystic yoga, like the four
Kumāras and Pippalāyana Ṛṣi, reside in this realm, which
is reached only by naiṣṭhika-brahmacarīs.

tapas Asceticism, austerity.

tarka Logic and argument.

taṭastha-lakṣaṇa Secondary characteristics.

tātparya-vṛtti Purports and annotations.

tattva Truth; reality; axiomatic truth; fundamental
element; conclusive truth; factual position;
philosophical principles; principle; the essence or
substance of anything (e.g. the truths relating to
bhakti are known as bhakti-tattva).

tattva-jñāna Knowledge or realization of the Absolute
Truth.

tattva-vicāra Consideration of the truth regarding a
subject; considering the truth.

tilaka Clay markings applied to the forehead and other
parts of the body by Vaiṣṇavas, signifying their
devotion to Śrī Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu and consecrating the body
as the Lord’s temple.

tīrtha Sacred place, pilgrimage place.

tulasī A sacred plant most dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, whose
leaves and blossoms are used by Vaiṣṇavas in the worship
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; tulasī wood is also used for chanting
beads and neck beads (tulasī-mālā).

Uddhava A member of the Yadu dynasty. In Mathurā and
Dvārakā he is Kṛṣṇa’s dearmost friend. In Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, he is called hari-dāsa, the most dear
servant of Śrī Hari.

Upaniṣads 108 principal philosophical treatises that
appear within the Vedas.

upa-pati A paramour.

upādhi A designation.

upāsakas Worshipers or devotees.

upāsanā Spiritual practices, especially worship of the
Deity. Upāsanā literally means ‘to sit near.’ It refers
to all those activities by which one approaches the Lord
in order to offer worship.

Upendra Śrī Vāmana-deva, an incarnation of Lord Viṣṇu.


                            675
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

Utkala Orissa.

uttama That which is topmost.

uttamā-bhakti The highest level of devotion.

Uttarā The daughter of Mahārāja Virāṭa and wife of
Arjuna’s son Abhimanyu. She prayed to Śrī Kṛṣṇa to save
her son, who was being attacked within her womb, and
Kṛṣṇa entered her womb and saved him. Later, after her
son had heard Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, on the last day of his
life, Śrī Uttarā requested him to tell her the essence
of what he had learned. His answer constitutes the
Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta. (see Mahārāja Parīkṣit)

vaibhava Opulence; wealth.

Vaijayantī-mālā A garland made of five different-colored
flowers worn by Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Vaikuṇṭha Literally, ‘a place with no anxiety.’ This is
the majestic realm of the spiritual world that is the
kingdom of Śrī Nārāyaṇa and His various expansions. All
the residents of Vaikuṇṭha have eternal, spiritual
bodies. They possess four arms and a darkish complexion
like that of Śrī Bhagavān and are fully engaged in His
service in pure love and devotion. This devotion is
imbued with the mood of awe and reverence, and
therefore, the sense of intimacy with the Lord is
somewhat restricted there.

vairāgya Renunciation, detachment, or indifference to
this world; a spiritual discipline involving acceptance
of voluntary austerities to achieve detachment from
sense objects.

vaiśeṣika A later division of the nyāya school of
philosophy, also known as vaiśeṣika-darśana. It was
founded by Kaṇāda Ṛṣi.

Vaiṣṇava Literally, ‘one whose nature is of Viṣṇu’, in
other words, one in whose heart and mind only Viṣṇu or
Kṛṣṇa resides; a devotee of Śrī Kṛṣṇa or Viṣṇu.

vaiśya Agriculturalist or businessman; the third of the
four varṇas (occupational orders of life) in the
varṇāśrama system.

Vaivasvata manvantara In one day of Brahmā, there are
fourteen manvantaras, each living as long as 30,720,000
years. The current manvantara, Vaivasvata manvantara, is
the seventh manvantara.

Vāmana-deva Avatāra of Śrī Viṣṇu in the form of a
beautiful dwarf brahmaṇa boy; one the daśāvatāras, ten
famous incarnations of the Lord; the worshipable Lord of
Indra in Svarga.

Vāmana Purāṇa One of the

eighteen Purāṇas, Vedic supplementary literatures.

vana-mālā A garland made from leaves and forest flowers
that reaches down to the Lord’s lotus feet.

                             676
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017


vandana Offering prayers.

Varāha Purāṇa One of the eighteen Purāṇas, Vedic
supplementary literatures

Vāsudeva The Supreme Lord, the embodiment of eternity
knowledge, and bliss; the son of Vasudeva.

Varāha Avatāra of Lord Viṣṇu in the form a boar; one the
daśāvatāras, ten famous incarnations of the Lord.

varṇāśrama-dharma The Vedic social system, which
organizes society into four occupational divisions and
four stages of spiritual development.

varṣa Tract of land.

vastu Thing, existent object.

Veda Knowledge; the four primary books of knowledge
compiled by Śrīla Vyāsadeva: the Ṛg Veda, Sāma Veda,
Atharva Veda, and Yajur Veda.

vibhūti Great opulences; mystic powers.

Vidhātā The creator.

vidhi-mārga The path of regulation.

vikāra Transformation.

vilāsa Enjoyment, playful pastimes.

vīṇā A stringed musical instrument of melodious sound;
the instrument of Śrī Rādhā, Nārada Muni, and other
celestial personalities.

viṣaya Object; an object of the senses; an object of
affection, concern, or attention; sensual enjoyment;
matter; the person who is the object of love; one of the
three components of vibhāva.

Viṣṇu The Supreme Personality of Godhead; one who is
all-pervading; the Supreme Lord of the cosmos who
presides over the material mode of goodness.

Viśrāma-ghāṭa, Viśrānti- ghāṭa Śrī Varāha-deva’s place
of rest (viśrama) after killing Hiraṇyākṣa.

Virāṭa A pious king of the country of Matsya; the father
of Uttarā.

viveka Discriminating intelligence.

Vraja The one hundred and sixty-eight square mile tract
of land where Śrī Kṛṣṇa enacted His earthly pastimes.

Vrajavāsī Resident of Vraja.

Vṛndāvana The forest of Vṛndā; the famous place where
Śrī Kṛṣṇa enacted His enchanting līlās, such as rāsa-
līlā. Vṛndāvana is situated approximately 12 kilometers
northeast of Mathurā, along the western bank of the

                            677
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                    5/5/2017

Yamunā River. It is one of the twelve forests of Vraja.

vṛtti Function, activity.

Vyāsa A great sage and empowered incarnation of the
Lord, son of Parāśara Muni and Satyavatī. He is also
known as Bādarāyaṇa, Dvaipāyana, and Veda-Vyāsa.
Although the Vedas are eternal, because it was he who
dictated them at the beginning of this age of Kali, he
is known as the author of the Vedas and all Śruti and
Smṛti literature.

Yāma, prahāra One of the eight periods of the day. Each
yāma consists of approximately three hours.

Yamunā A sacred river flowing through the land of Vraja.
She is considered the holiest of rivers because Kṛṣṇa
performed many sublime pastimes in her waters with the
gopīs and gopas. In this world, she appears at
Yamunottarī in the Himālayas. Yamunā is described as an
expansion of Viśākhā Devī.

Yogamāyā The internal potency of Bhagavān that arranges
and enhances all His pastimes.

yojana Approximately 8 miles.

Yudhiṣṭhira The personification of dharma, he is the
eldest of the five Pāṇḍavas. After winning the Battle of
Kurukṣetra, he became the emperor of the world. He, Śrī
Uddhava, and Gīrīrāja Govardhana are known as hari-dāsa,
or dear devotees of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.




Table of Contents

First Chapter

Second Chapter

Third Chapter

Fourth Chapter

Preface to the First Hindi Edition

Editor’s Preface

First Chapter: Vairāgya – Renunciation

Verses 1–24

Verses 25–53

Verses 54–87

Verses 88–109

Verses 110–150

Verses 151–182

                            678
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


Verses 183–219

Second Chapter: Jñāna – Knowledge

Verses 1–31

Verses 32–75

Verses 76–128

Verses 129–159

Verses 160–240

Third Chapter: Bhajana – Devotional Service

Verses 1–59

Verses 60–83

Verses 84–186

Fourth Chapter: Vaikuṇṭha – the Spiritual World

Verses 1–19

Verses 20–87

Verses 88–107

Verses 108–200

Verses 201–235

Verses 236–249

Verses 250–274

Glossary

[1]

[2]

1

2




Table of Contents

First Chapter

Second Chapter

Third Chapter

Fourth Chapter

Preface to the First Hindi Edition

                          679
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt                       5/5/2017


Editor’s Preface

First Chapter: Vairāgya – Renunciation

Verses 1–24

Verses 25–53

Verses 54–87

Verses 88–109

Verses 110–150

Verses 151–182

Verses 183–219

Second Chapter: Jñāna – Knowledge

Verses 1–31

Verses 32–75

Verses 76–128

Verses 129–159

Verses 160–240

Third Chapter: Bhajana – Devotional Service

Verses 1–59

Verses 60–83

Verses 84–186

Fourth Chapter: Vaikuṇṭha – the Spiritual World

Verses 1–19

Verses 20–87

Verses 88–107

Verses 108–200

Verses 201–235

Verses 236–249

Verses 250–274

Glossary

[1]

[2]

1

2

                          680
Brhad-bhagavatamrta-2.1.txt     5/5/2017




                          681
