Camatkara-candrika.txt                           5/5/2017

Camatkāra-candrikā



Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

GVP (2011)



Tags: Camatkāra-candrikā Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura

Camatkāra-candrikā Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākurattt



* * *




* * *




Camatkāra-candrikā

A Moonbeam of Complete Astonishment



Contents



The Meeting in the Box -- The First Mischievous Playful
Pastime



The Meeting of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Disguised as Abhimanyu --The
Second Mischievous Playful Pastime

The Meeting of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Disguised as a Female Doctor --
The Third Mischievous Playful Pastime

The Meeting of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Disguised as a Female Singer --
The Fourth Mischievous Playful Pastime


Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s Camatkāra-candrikā




Introduction



                           1
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017


(to the Hindi edition)

I feel supremely happy today that the faithful reader is
being presented with this Hindi edition of Śrī
Camatkāra-candrikā, composed by Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura. He is the highly exalted preceptor
(mahā-mahopādhyāya) and crown-jewel of the Śrī Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇava ācāryas. Among all artists who depict Śrī
Rādhā-Govinda’s pastimes, he is the most expert. This
incomparable narrative poem have been painted with the
soft brush of his supremely sweet and natural prema-
bhakti and the colour of the all enchanting nectar of
rasa. This literary composition consists of four
astonishing and delightfully charming stories of the
mischievous meetings of the Divine Couple, Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa. It is presented for rasika and bhāvuka readers,
as well as sādhakas who desire to taste vraja-rasa.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has cleverly crafted
this poem with simple yet profound language, in such a
way that the charming transcendental sentiments of these
four pastimes will astound and infatuate the hearts of
all devotees who are expert in tasting transcendental
sentiments. These pastimes are filled with the
transcendental mellow of laughter (hāsya-rasa), which
will submerge all readers in an ocean of blissful
delight. The scriptures on rhetoric say, “rase sāraḥ
camatkāraḥ — the essence of rasa is astonishment.” This
book is the very essence of rasa, and thus it derives
its name, Camatkāra-candrikā — a moonbeam of complete
astonishment.

“Ramyavastu samāloke lolatā syāt kautūhalam —
ëeagerness’ (kautūhala) means that a sense of desire, or
longing, is born when one simply sees a charming, heart-
stealing object.” The essence of this saying will
automatically be realised in the heart of the readers.

The variegated playful pastimes in this book are all the
more astonishing because those who constantly oppose Śrī
Rādhā having any association with Śrī Kṛṣṇa, actually
assist in Their meeting each other.

The first mischievous playful pastime is the meeting in
the box. In the second pastime, Śrī Kṛṣṇa disguises
Himself as Abhimanyu to meet with Śrī Rādhā. In the
third pastime, He disguises Himself as a female doctor
and goes to treat Śrī Rādhā. Finally, in the fourth
pastime, Śrī Kṛṣṇa disguises Himself as a beautiful
female singer in order to meet with Śrī Rādhā.

These pastimes are alluded to in abundance in the poetry
and songs of self-realised personalities. It is said
that these four pastimes have been written for the four
parts (yāmas) of the night, to facilitate a person’s
staying awake during the night of Ekādaśī. Moreover,
Vaiṣṇavas of former times would taste and deliberate
upon the pastimes described in this book. They would
share a variety of transcendental moods and experience
astonishment. In this way they would become supremely
blissful.



                           2
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017




The Life History of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura



Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura appeared in a family
of brāhmaṇas from the Rāḍhīya community of the Nadiyā
district, West Bengal. He was celebrated by the name
Hari-vallabha, and had two older brothers, Rāmabhadra
and Raghunātha. During his childhood he completed his
study of grammar in the village of Devagrāma, and then
studied devotional scriptures at the home of his
spiritual master in Śaidābāda village in the Murṣidābād
district. During his time in Śaidābāda he wrote Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindu-bindu, Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi-kiraṇa and
Bhāgavatāmṛta-kaṇā. Soon after this he renounced
household life and went to Vṛndāvana, and there he wrote
many other books and commentaries.

After the disappearance of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and
His followers, the Six Gosvāmīs of Vraja, the current of
unalloyed devotion (śuddha-bhakti) continued to flow
through the influence of three great personalities:
Śrīnivāsa Ācārya, Śrī Narottama Ṭhākura and Śrī
Śyāmānanda Prabhu. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura
is fourth in the line of the disciplic succession from
Śrīla Narottama Ṭhākura. Śrīla Narottama Ṭhākura had a
disciple named Śrīla Gaṅgā-nārāyaṇa Cakravartī Mahāśaya
who lived in Bālūcara Gambhilā in the Murṣidābād
district. Gaṅgā-nārāyaṇa had a daughter named
Viṣṇupriyā, but he had no sons. Therefore he adopted a
devotee called Kṛṣṇa-caraṇa as his son. This Kṛṣṇa-
caraṇa was the youngest son of another disciple of Śrīla
Narottama Ṭhākura named Rāmakṛṣṇa Bhaṭṭācārya, who came
from the brāhmaṇa community of Vārendra. Śrī Kṛṣṇa-
caraṇa’s disciple was Rādhā-ramaṇa Cakravartī, who was
the spiritual master of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has written the
following verse in Sārārtha-darśinī, his commentary on
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, at the beginning of the five chapters
describing Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s rāsa dance (rāsa-pañcādhyāya):



śrī-rāma-kṛṣṇa-gaṅgā-caraṇān natvā gurūn uru-premnaḥ

śrīla-narottama-nātha-śrī-gaurāṅga-prabhuṁ naumi

In this verse the name “Śrī Rāma” refers to Śrīla
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s spiritual master, Śrī
Rādhā-ramaṇa; “Kṛṣṇa” refers to his grand spiritual
master (parama-gurudeva), Śrī Kṛṣṇa-caraṇa; “Gaṅgā-
caraṇa” refers to his great grand spiritual master
(parātpara-gurudeva), Śrī Gaṅgā-caraṇa; “Narottama”
refers to his great-great grand spiritual master
(parama-parātpara-gurudeva), Śrīla Narottama Ṭhākura;
and the word “nātha” refers to Śrīla Narottama Ṭhākura’s
spiritual master, Śrī Lokanātha Gosvāmī. In this way he
is offering obeisances to his disciplic succession
(guru-paramparā) up to Śrīman Mahāprabhu.

                           3
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017


Once, an estranged disciple of Hemalatā Ṭhākurāṇī named
Rūpa Kavirāja concocted his own doctrine, which opposed
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava conclusions. He taught that only those
in the renounced order could act as ācārya; householders
could never do so. Rūpa Kavirāja disregarded the
devotional path of regulation (vidhi-mārga), and
propagated a doctrine of spontaneous attraction (rāga-
mārga) in a way that was undisciplined and disorderly.
His new doctrine stated that one could abandon the
practices of hearing (śravaṇa) and chanting (kīrtana),
and practise rāganuga-bhakti by remembrance (smaraṇa)
alone. Hemalatā Ṭhākurāṇī, the daughter of Śrīnivāsa
Ācārya, was extremely learned and a great Vaiṣṇavī, and
she ensured that Rūpa Kavirāja was expelled from the
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava community. Since then the Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavas have known him as an atibāḍī [a person from
one of the eleven unauthorized, sahajiyā communities
that concoct their own method of devotional service].

Fortunately, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura was
present at that time, and he refuted Rūpa Kavirāja’s
false conclusions in his Sārārtha-darśinī commentary on
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam’s Third Canto. The householder
disciples in the disciplic succession of Śrī Nityānanda
Prabhu’s son, Vīrabhadra, and those who are the
descendants of the rejected sons of Śrī Advaita Ācārya
award and accept the title of “Gosvāmī”. Such action is
completely improper according to the line of ācāryas.
Rūpa Kavirāja’s conclusion was false. Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura proved that a qualified householder
descendant of an ācārya may act as an ācārya. He also
proved that it is unlawful and contrary to the
statements of the scriptures for unfit descendants of
ācārya families to adopt the title “Gosvāmī” out of
greed for disciples and wealth. Although he acted as
ācārya, he personally never used the title “Gosvāmī”
with his name. He did this just to instruct the foolish
and unfit descendants of ācārya families of modern
times.

In his old age, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura
spent most of his time in a semi-conscious or internal
state, deeply absorbed in bhajana. During that time, a
debate broke out in Jaipur between the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas
and Vaiṣṇavas who supported the doctrine of svakīyāvāda,
or wedded love in the Lord’s pastimes.

The Vaiṣṇavas of the antagonistic camp had led King Jaya
Singh II of Jaipur to believe that the worship of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā along with Śrī Govindadeva is not
supported by the scriptures. Their contention was that
Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s name is not mentioned anywhere in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam or the Viṣṇu Purāṇa, and that She was
never married to Śrī Kṛṣṇa according to Vedic ritual.
Another objection was that Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas did not
belong to a recognised line of disciplic succession
(sampradāya).

Since time immemorial there have been four Vaiṣṇava
sampradāyas: the Śrīsampradāya, the Brahma sampradāya,
the Rudra sampradāya and the Sanaka (Kumāra) sampradāya.
In the age of Kali, the principal ācāryas of these four
sampradāyas are respectively Śrī Rāmānuja, Śrī Madhva,

                           4
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017

Śrī Viṣṇusvāmī and Śrī Nimbāditya. The Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas
were thought to be outside these four sampradāyas and
were not accepted as having a pure lineage. In
particular, the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas were not accepted as a
bona fide line of Vaiṣṇava disciplic succession because
they did not have their own commentary on the Brahma-
sūtra [also known as the Vedānta-sūtra].

Mahārāja Jaya Singh knew that the prominent Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇava ācāryas of Vṛndāvana were followers of Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī, so he summoned them to Jaipur to take up
the challenge with the Vaiṣṇavas from the line of Śrī
Rāmānuja. Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura was quite aged and he
was fully absorbed in the transcendental bliss of
bhajana. He therefore sent his student Śrīla Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa to address the assembly in Jaipur. Śrī
Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa was the greatest among the exalted
teachers of Vedānta and therefore known as the Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇava vedāntācārya mahā-mahopādhyāya. He was also the
crown of the assembly of learned scholars (paṇḍita-kula-
mukuṭa). He was accompanied by Śrīla Cakravartī
Ṭhākura’s disciple Śrī Kṛṣṇadeva.

The caste gosvāmīs had completely forgotten their
connection with the Madhva sampradāya. Furthermore they
were disrespectful of the viewpoint of the Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavas’ Vedānta and created a great disturbance for
the true Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas. Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa
used irrefutable logic and powerful scriptural evidence
to prove that the Gauḍīya sampradāya is a pure Vaiṣṇava
sampradāya coming in the line of Madhva. This sampradāya
is called the Śrī Brahma-Madhva-Gauḍīya-Vaiṣṇava
sampradāya. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, Śrīla Kavi Karṇapūra and
other previous ācāryas accepted this fact. The Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavas accept Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam as the genuine
commentary on the Vedānta-sūtra. For this reason no
separate commentary for Vedānta-sūtra had been written
in the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sampradāya.

The name of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, the personification of the
pleasure-giving potency (hlādinī-śakti) and the eternal
beloved of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is mentioned in various Purāṇas.
Throughout Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, specifically in the Tenth
Canto in connection with the description of the Lord’s
Vṛndāvana pastimes, Śrīmatī Rādhikā is referred to in a
way that is highly concealed and indirect. Only rasika
and bhāvuka devotees, who are conversant with the
conclusions of the scriptures, can understand this
confidential mystery.

In the learned assembly in Jaipur, Śrīla Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa refuted all the arguments and doubts of the
opposing party, who were silenced by his presentation.
He solidly established the position of the Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavas as following in the line of disciplic
succession descending from Madhva. Nonetheless, the
contesting party did not accept the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava
sampradāya as being a pure line of Vaiṣṇava disciplic
succession because the latter did not have a commentary
on Vedānta-sūtra. Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa then and
there composed the famous Gauḍīya commentary on the
Vedānta-sūtra named Śrī Govinda-bhāṣya. Once again the
worship of Śrī Rādhā-Govinda began in the temple of Śrī
Govindadeva, and the validity of the Śrī Brahma-Madhva-

                           5
Camatkara-candrika.txt                            5/5/2017

Gauḍīya sampradāya was accepted.

It was only on the authority of Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura that Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa was
able to write the Śrī Govinda-bhāṣya and prove the
connection of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas with the Madhva
sampradāya. There should be no doubt in this regard.
This accomplishment of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura, performed on behalf of the sampradāya, will be
recorded in golden letters in the history of Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavism.

In his Mantrārtha-dīpikā, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura describes a special event. Once, while reading
Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, he came upon a verse (Madhya-
līlā 21.125) describing the meaning of the kāma-gāyatrī-
mantra.



kāma-gāyatrī-mantra-rūpa, haya kṛṣṇera svarūpa,

sārdha-cabbiśa akṣara tāra haya

se akṣara ëcandra’ haya, kṛṣṇe kari’ udaya,

trijagat kailā kāmamaya



The kāma-gāyatrī is identical with Śrī Kṛṣṇa. In this
king of mantras there are twenty-four-and-a-half
syllables, and each syllable is a full moon. This
aggregate of moons has caused the moon of Śrī Kṛṣṇa to
rise and fill the three worlds with prema.



This verse proves that the kāma-gāyatrī is composed by
twenty-four-and-a-half syllables. Despite much
deliberation, however, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura could not ascertain which syllable in the kāma-
gāyatrī was considered a half-syllable. He carefully
scrutinised grammar books, the Purāṇas, the Tantra, the
scriptures dealing with drama (nāṭya) and rhetoric
(alaṅkāra), and other scriptures, but found no mention
of any half-syllable. He found that all these scriptures
only mention the vowels and consonants that make up the
fifty letters of the alphabet; nowhere did he find any
evidence for a half-syllable.

In Śrī Harināmāmṛta-vyākaraṇa, the grammar system
composed by Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī, he found mention of only
fifty letters in the section dealing with the names of
the various groups of vowels and consonants
(saṅjñāpāda). He also studied the arrangement of letters
(mātṛkā) in the Mātṛkānyāsa and other books, but still
found no mention anywhere of a half-syllable.
Furthermore, in the Rādhikā-sahasra-nāma-stotra found in
the Bṛhan-nāradīya Purāṇa, one of the names of
Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhikā is given as Pañcāśad-
varṇa-rūpiṇī, one whose form is composed of fifty
syllables.


                           6
Camatkara-candrika.txt                            5/5/2017

Seeing this, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s doubt
only increased. He began to consider whether Śrīla
Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī might have made a mistake
while writing. This was not possible, because Śrīla
Kavirāja is omniscient and thus completely devoid of the
material defects of mistakes, illusion and so forth. If
the fragmented letter “t” (the final letter of the kāma-
gāyatrī) is taken as a half-syllable, then Śrīla
Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī would be guilty of the fault
of disorder, for he has given the following description
in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 21.126—8):



sakhi he! kṛṣṇa-mukhaódvija-rāja-rāja

kṛṣṇa-vapu-siṁhāsane, vasi’ rājya-śāsane,

kare saṅge candrera samāja



dui gaṇḍa sucikkaṇa, jini’ maṇi-sudarpaṇa,

sei dui pūrṇa-candra jāni

lalāṭe aṣṭamī-indu, tāhāte candana-bindu,

sei eka pūrṇa-candra māni



kara-nakha-cāndera hāṭa, vaṁṣī-upara kare nāṭa,

tāra gīta muralīra tāna

pada-nakha-candra-gaṇa, tale kare nartana,

nūpurera dhvani yāra gāna

In these lines, Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī has
described Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s face as being the first full moon.
His two cheeks are the next two full moons and the dot
of sandalwood on the upper portion of His forehead is
the fourth full moon. The region of His forehead below
that dot of sandalwood is the moon of the eighth day
(aṣṭamī), in other words, a half-moon. According to this
description, the fifth syllable is a half-syllable. If
the fragmented “t”, which is the final letter of the
mantra, is taken as a half-syllable, then the fifth
syllable could not be a half-syllable.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura was in a great
dilemma because of not being able to decipher the half-
syllable. He concluded that if the syllables of the
mantra would not reveal themselves, then it would also
not be possible for the worshipable deity of the mantra
to reveal himself. He therefore decided that, since he
could not obtain the audience of the worshipable deity
of the mantra, it would be better to die. Thinking thus,
he went to the bank of Rādhā-kuṇḍa at night with the
intention of giving up his body.

After the second period (prahara) of the night had

                             7
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017

passed, he began to doze off when suddenly the daughter
of Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja, Śrīmatī Rādhikā, appeared to him.
She very affectionately said, “O Viśvanātha, O Hari-
vallabha, do not lament! Whatever Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa
Kavirāja has written is the absolute truth. By My grace,
he knows all the inner sentiments of My heart. Do not
maintain any doubt about his statements. The kāma-
gāyatrī is a mantra to worship Me and My dearly beloved.
We are revealed to the devotees by the syllables of this
mantra. No one can know us without My kindness. The
half-syllable is described in the book Varṇāgama-
bhāsvat. It was after consulting this book that Śrī
Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja determined the actual identity of the
kāma-gāyatrī. You should examine this book and then
broadcast its meaning for the benefit of faithful
persons.”

After hearing this instruction from Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī
Śrīmatī Rādhikā Herself, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura arose. Calling out, “O Rādhā, O Rādhā!” he began
to cry in great lamentation. When he regained his
composure, he set himself to carrying out Her order.

According to Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s indication, the letter
“ya” that precedes the letter “vi” in the mantra is
considered a half-syllable. Apart from this, all other
syllables are full syllables, or full moons.

By Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s mercy, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura became acquainted with the meaning of the
mantra. He obtained the direct audience of his
worshipable deity, and in his internal perfected
spiritual body (siddha-deha), he was able to participate
in the Lord’s eternal pastimes as His associate. After
this, he established the deity of Śrī Gokulānanda on the
bank of Rādhā-kuṇḍa. While residing there, he
experienced the sweetness of the eternal pastimes of Śrī
Vṛndāvana. It was at this time that he wrote his
Sukhavarttinī commentary on Śrīla Kavi Karṇapūra’s
Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū. He stated there:



rādhā-parastīra-kuṭīra-vartinaḥ



prāptavya-vṛndāvana-cakravartinaḥ



ānanda-campū-vivṛti-pravartinaḥ



sānto-gatir me sumahā-nivartinaḥ




I, Cakravartī, completely leaving aside everything else,
desire to attain Śrī Vṛndāvana. Residing in a simple hut
on the bank of Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa, which is the topmost

                           8
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017

place of pastimes for Śrī Rādhā, I am now writing this
commentary on Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campū.



In his old age, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura
spent most of his time in a fully internal state or in a
semi-conscious state, deeply absorbed in bhajana. His
principal disciple Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa, took over
the responsibility of teaching the scriptures in his
place.




Re-establishing the doctrine of parakīyāvāda



Because of a slight decline in the influence of the Six
Gosvāmīs in Śrīdhāma Vṛndāvana, a controversy arose
regarding the doctrines of wedded love (svakīyāvāda) and
paramour love (parakīyāvāda) in the Lord’s pastimes. To
dispel the misconceptions regarding svakīyāvāda, Śrīla
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura wrote two books, Rāga-
vartma-candrikā and Gopī-premāmṛta, which are both
filled with all the conclusions of the scriptures.
Thereafter, in his Ānanda-candrikā commentary on the
laghutvam atra verse of Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi (1.21), he
soundly refuted the theory of svakīyāvāda with
scriptural evidence and irrefutable arguments, and
established the conception of parakīyā. Further, in his
Sārārtha-darśinī commentary on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, he
gave strong support to parakīyā-bhāva.

At the time of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura there
were some scholars who opposed his conclusions regarding
worship in the mood of parakīyā, but he defeated them
with his deep scholarship and irrefutable logic. On
account of this, these envious scholars resolved to kill
him. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura used to
circumambulate Śrī Vṛndāvana every day in the very early
morning, and they made a plan to kill him at that time
in some dense, dark grove. When he was approaching the
spot where his adversaries desired to kill him, he
suddenly disappeared. In his place, they saw a beautiful
young girl of Vraja picking flowers with some of her
friends.

The scholars asked the girl, “Dear child, just a moment
ago a great devotee was coming this way. Did you see
where he went?” The girl replied that she had seen him,
but that she did not know where he had gone. Her
astonishing beauty, sidelong glancing, gentle smiling
and graceful manner captivated and melted the hearts of
the scholars, and all the impurities in their minds were
vanquished. They asked her who she was, and she said, “I
am a maidservant of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. She is presently at
Her in-law’s house at Yāvaṭa. She sent me here to pick
flowers.” So saying the girl disappeared, and in her
place the scholars saw Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura once again. They then fell at his feet and
prayed for forgiveness, and he forgave them all. There

                           9
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017

are many such astonishing events in the life of Śrī
Cakravartī Ṭhākura.

In this way he refuted the theory of svakīyāvāda and
established the truth of pure parakīyā, an achievement
which is very important for the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura not only protected
the integrity of the Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava dharma, but he
also re-established its influence in Śrī Vṛndāvana.
Anyone who evaluates this accomplishment of his will be
struck with wonder by his uncommon genius. The Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇava ācāryas have composed the following verse in
praise of his extraordinary work:



viśvasya nātha-rupo ‘sau



bhakti-vartma-pradarśanāt



bhakta-cakre vartitatvāt



cakravarty ākhyayābhavat



Because he indicates the path of bhakti, he is known by
the name Viśvanātha, the lord of the universe, and
because he always remains in the assembly (cakra) of
pure devotees, he is known by the name Cakravartī (the
person round whom the circle or assembly turns).
Therefore, his name is Viśvanātha Cakravartī.

In 1754, on the fifth day of the light phase of the moon
of the month of Māgha (January—February), when Śrīla
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura was about a hundred years
old, he left this material world in Vṛndāvana while
deeply absorbed in internal consciousness. Today his
samādhi can be found next to the temple of Śrī Rādhā-
Gokulānanda in Śrīdhāma Vṛndāvana.

Following in the footsteps of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrīla
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura composed abundant
transcendental literatures on bhakti and thus
established in this world Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s innermost
heart’s desire. He also refuted various faulty
conclusions opposed to the genuine following of Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī (rūpānuga). He is thus revered in the Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇava society as an illustrious ācārya and as an
authoritative mahājana (self-realised soul). He is
renowned as a great transcendental philosopher and poet,
and a rasika devotee. A Vaiṣṇava poet named Kṛṣṇa dāsa
has written the following lines at the conclusion of his
translation of Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s Mādhurya-
kādambinī:



                            10
Camatkara-candrika.txt                            5/5/2017


mādhurya-kādambinī-grantha jagata kaila dhanya

cakravartī-mukhe vaktā āpani śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya

keha kahena-cakravartī śrī-rūpera avatāra

kaṭhina ye tattva sarala karite pracāra

ohe guṇa-nidhi śrī-viśvanātha cakravartī

ki jāniva tomāra guṇa muñi mūḍha-mati



Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has benedicted the
whole world by writing Mādhurya-kādambinī. In reality,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu is the speaker of this
book through the mouth of Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura. Some
say that Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura is an incarnation of
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. He is expert in the art of
describing extremely complex truths in a way that is
easy to understand. O ocean of mercy, Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura! I am a very foolish person. Kindly
reveal the mystery of your transcendental qualities in
my heart. This is my prayer at your lotus feet.



Very few Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava ācāryas wrote as many books as
Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura. Even today, the following
proverb regarding three of his books is quoted in the
general Vaiṣṇava community: “kiraṇa-bindu-kaṇā, ei tina
niya vaisnava-panā — the Vaiṣṇavas take these three
books — Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi-kiraṇa, Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-
bindu and Bhāgavatāmṛta-kaṇā — as their wealth.”

Below is a list of his books, commentaries and prayers,
which are a storehouse of incomparable wealth of Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇava devotional literature:

(1) Vraja-rīti-cintāmaṇi

(2) Śrī Camatkāra-candrikā

(3) Śrī Prema-samputaḥ (Khaṇḍa-kāvyam)

(4) Gītāvalī

(5) Subodhinī (commentary on Alaṅkāra-kaustubha)

(6) Ānanda-candrikā (commentary on Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi)

(7) Commmentary on Śrī Gopāla-tāpanī

(8) Stavāmṛta-laharī, which includes:

(a) Śrī Guru-tattvāṣṭakam

(b) Mantra-dātṛ-guroraṣṭakam

(c) Parma-guroraṣṭakam

(d) Parātpara-guroraṣṭakam

                             11
Camatkara-candrika.txt                          5/5/2017


(e) Parama-parātpara-guroraṣṭakam

(f) Śrī Lokanāthāṣṭakam

(g) Śrī Śacīnandanāṣṭakam

(h) Śrī Svarūpa-caritāmṛtam

(i) Śrī Svapna-vilāsāmṛtam

(j) Śrī Gopāladevāṣṭakam

(k) Śrī Madana-mohanāṣṭakam

(l) Śrī Govindāṣṭakam

(m) Śrī Gopināthāṣṭakam

(n) Śrī Gokulānandāṣṭakam

(o) Svayaṁ-bhagavattāṣṭakam

(p) Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍāṣṭakam

(q) Jaganmohanāṣṭakam

(r) Anurāgavallī

(s) Śrī Vṛndādevyāṣṭakam

(t) Śrī Rādhikā-dhyānāmṛtam

(u) Śrī Rūpa-cintāmaṇiḥ

(v) Śrī Nandīśvarāṣṭakam

(x) Śrī Vṛndāvanāṣṭakam

(y) Śrī Govardhanāṣṭakam

(z) Śrī Sankalpa-kalpa-drumaḥ

(aa) Śrī Nikuñja-keli-virudāvalī (Virutkāvya)

(bb) Surata-kathāmṛtam (Āryaśatakam)

(cc) Śrī Śyāma-kuṇḍāṣṭakam

(9) Śrī Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛtam Mahākāvyam

(10) Śrī Bhāgavatāmṛta-kaṇā

(11) Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi-kiraṇa

(12) Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu

(13) Raga-vartma-candrikā

(14) Aiśvarya-kādambinī (unavailable)

(15) Śrī Mādhurya-kādambinī

(16) commentary on Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu

                              12
Camatkara-candrika.txt                           5/5/2017


(17) commentary on Śrī Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campūḥ

(18) commentary on Dāna-keli-kaumudī

(19) commentary on Śrī Lalita-mādhava-nāṭaka

(20) commentary on Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (incomplete)

(21) commentary on Brahma-saṁhitā

(22) Sārārtha-varṣiṇī commentary on Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā

(23) Sārārtha-darśinī commentary on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam



My most revered Śrī Gurudeva, ācārya-keśarī aṣṭottara-
śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja,
is the guardian of the Śrī Gauḍīya sampradāya and the
founder ācārya of the Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti and of
the Gauḍīya maṭhas established under its auspices. Aside
from publishing his own books, he republished the books
of Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura and other previous ācāryas
in the Bengali language. Today, by his heartfelt desire,
enthusiastic blessings and causeless mercy, books such
as the following have been printed in Hindi, the
national language of India: Jaiva-dharma, Śrī Caitanya-
śikṣāmṛta, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhukī Śikṣā, Śrī
Śikṣāṣṭaka, Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindu-bindu, Ujjvala-
nīlamaṇi-kiraṇa, Bhāgavatāmṛta-kaṇā, Śrī Gīta-govinda,
Bhajana-rahasya, Gauḍīya-gīti-guccha, Śrīmad Bhagavad-
gītā, Śrī Veṇu-gīta, Bhakti-tattva-viveka, Vaiṣṇava-
siddhānta-mālā, Śrī Brahma-saṁhitā, Rāga-vartma-
candrikā, Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛtam, Gauḍīya-kaṇṭhahāra
and Śrī Prema-samputaḥ. Gradually, other books are being
published as well.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura composed this book
originally in Sanskrit, and many editions have been
published in Bengali. Among these, the one translated
and edited by Śrī Hari-bhakta dāsa of Śrīdhāma Vṛndāvana
is particularly full of transcendental moods, and the
language in which it is written is easy to understand.
This Hindi translation is based on Śrī Hari-bhakta
dāsa’s edition.

I have full faith that rasika and bhāvuka sādhakas, who
are eager for vraja-rasa rāgānugā bhakti, will have
great veneration for this book. Faithful persons who
study this book will be able to enter the prema-dharma
of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

May my most worshipable Śrīla Gurupādapadma, who is the
embodiment of the Supreme Lord’s compassion, shower upon
me abundant mercy by which I can attain ever-increasing
qualification to serve his innermost desire. This is my
humble prayer at his lotus feet, which can bestow prema.

Due to the speed of the production of this first edition
there are naturally bound to be some insignificant
faults, therefore we ask the faithful readers to please
inform us of such mistakes so we can correct following
editions.

                           13
Camatkara-candrika.txt                            5/5/2017


An aspirant for a particle of mercy from Śrī Hari, Guru
and Vaiṣṇavas,



humble and insignificant,

Tridaṇḍibhikṣu Śrī Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa



Śrī Mokṣadā Ekādaśī tithi

11th December, 2005




The Meeting in the Box




The First Mischievous Playful Pastime




mātāḥ prātaḥ kim iha kuruṣe nahyate peṭikeyaṁ

yatnād asyāṁ kim iha nihitaṁ kiṁ tavānena sūno!

jñātavyena praṇāyi-sakhibhiḥ khela gehād bahis tvaṁ

jijñāsā me bhavati mahitī brūhi no cen na yāmi (1)




Early one morning, Śrī Yaśodā, the queen of Vraja, was
busy arranging clothes and various ornaments in a box.
At that time, Śrī Kṛṣṇa came and asked her, “Mother,
what are you doing so early in the morning?”

“My dear son,” replied Yaśodā, “I am packing a box.”

“And what is it that you are so carefully putting in
this box?” He asked.

“You don’t need to know that,” she told Him. “Go outside
and play with Your dear friends.”

“But mother,” Śrī Kṛṣṇa insisted, “I really want to
know. Please tell Me! I will not go out until you do
so.” (1)



asyāṁ candana-candra-paṅkaja-rajaḥ-kasturikā-kuṅkumādy-


                            14
Camatkara-candrika.txt                           5/5/2017

aṅgānām anulepanārtham atha tan nepathya-hetos tathā

kāñcī-kuṇḍala-kaṅkaṇādy-anupamaṁ vaiduryya-muktāharid-

ratnādy-ambara-jātam apy atimahān arghyaṁ kramād
varttate (2)

“My dear son,” explained Yaśodā, “in this box I am
placing sandalwood, camphor, lotus-pollen, musk and
kumkuma to apply to the limbs. I am also packing ornate
belts, earrings, bracelets and unparallelled jewelled
ornaments of lazuli, pearls, emeralds and other precious
gems; and fine, valuable garments.” (2)



atredaṁ nidadhāsi kiṁ mama kṛte rāmasya vā nandana!

brūmas tvām avadhehi yā tu bhavatoḥ hetuḥ kṛtā peṭikā

sā ‘nyā ‘to ‘pi bṛhaty anarghya-maṇi-bhāg evaṁ
balasyāparā

tat kasmiṁścana te janany urur iyān sneho yato yāsyati
(3)

“Mother, is everything in this box for Me,” asked Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, “or is it for My brother Balarāma?”

“Listen, my son, and I will tell You. There is another
box of even more exquisite garments and precious
ornaments for You. That box is much bigger than this
one, and I have prepared a similar box for Balarāma as
well.”

“But Mother, if you are not preparing this box for My
elder brother or for Me, who is it for? Who else is the
object of your love and affection?” (3)



asmat-puṇya-tapaḥ phalena vidhinā datto ‘si mahyaṁ yathā

mat-prāṇāvana-hetave vraja-purālaṅkāra sūno tathā

kanyā kācid ihāsti man-nayanayoḥ karpūra-varttiḥ parā

tasyā ambara-maṇḍanādi-dhṛtaye seyaṁ kṛtā peṭikā (4)

“O son, O ornament of Vraja!” said Śrī Yaśodā, “You are
the protector of our lives. Providence has kindly
bestowed You upon us as the result of some virtue of
ours, or some austerities that we have performed. In the
same way, here in Gokula lives a young girl who is our
very life. She is like an incomparable camphor ointment
that soothes our distressed and burning eyes. It is for
Her that I am preparing this box by filling it with
clothing and ornaments.” (4)



kā ‘sau kasya kutastarāṁ janani! vā tasyām atisnihyasi

kvā ‘ste tad vada sarvam eva śṛṇu bho yā me sakhī

                           15
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017

kīrttidā

tasyāḥ kukṣi-khaner anarghyam atulaṁ māṇikyam etat
svabhā-

vīcībhir vṛṣabhānum ujjvalayate mūrttaṁ tadīyaṁ tapaḥ
(5)

“Mother, who is this young girl? Whose daughter is She?
Where does She live? Why are you showering so much love
and affection upon Her? Please tell Me everything!”

“Listen, my son, I have a friend named Kīrtidā, and it
was from her womb that this priceless and unequalled
jewel of young girls manifested. This young girl’s
father is Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja, the King of the cowherds,
and She is truly the personified result of the
austerities he has performed. Her effulgence illuminates
even the sun [bhānu] in the hottest summer month of
Jeṣṭha [which according to the Vedic calendar comes in
the astrological sign of Taurus, or the bull (vṛṣa)].
This girl thus manifests Her father’s fame everywhere.
(5)



saundaryāṇi suśīlatā guru-kule bhaktis trapā-śālitā

sāralyaṁ vinayitvam ity adhidharaṁ ye brahma-sṛṣṭā guṇāḥ

te yatraiva mahatvam āpur atha me snehas tu naisargikaḥ

sā rādhety atha gātram utpulakitaṁ kṛṣṇo ‘ṁśukenāpy
ādhāt (6)

“Dear child, Lord Brahmā has created numerous elevated
feminine qualities in this world, including extreme
beauty, sweetness in nature, devotion to elders,
shyness, simplicity and humility. Usually, a person
becomes great upon attaining such noble qualities; but
these qualities have themselves attained greatness by
taking shelter of this young girl. This is the amazing
truth, and it is why I have a natural affection for Her.
Her name is Rādhā.”

When Śrī Yaśodā glorified Śrī Rādhā’s qualities and then
spoke Her name, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s immeasurable delight caused
the hairs of His body to stand on end, but He managed to
conceal these symptoms of ecstasy with His cloth. (6)



sā patyuḥ sadane ‘sti samprati patiś cāsyā ihaivāgato

goṣṭhendreṇa samaṁ svagaihika-kṛti-vyāsaṅga-hetor bahiḥ

āste saṁsadi yarhi vīkṣitum ayaṁ mām eṣyati prītito

vakṣyāmy enam imāṁ vahan nija-gṛhaṁ tāṁ prāpayan yāsyāti
(7)

Śrī Yaśodā continued: “This young bride is married to
Abhimanyu. At the moment She is in Her husband’s house,
but Abhimanyu himself is here. He is just outside in the

                           16
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017

assembly hall, seeking advice about household affairs
from Śrī Nandarāya, the King of the pasturing lands.
When he enters the inner chambers to greet me, I will
say affectionately, ëAbhimanyu, take this box home and
present it to Rādhā.’” (7)



atrāntare nikaṭam āgatayā lavaṅga-

vallyā drutaṁ nija-gade śṛṇu goṣṭha-rājñi!

āhūta-pūrvam iha yat tad idaṁ suvarṇa-

kāra-dvayaṁ kalaya raṅgaṇa-ṭaṅgaṇākhyam (8)

At that moment, the maidservant Lavaṅgalatā hurriedly
entered and announced to Vrajeśvarī Śrī Yaśodā: “O Queen
of the pasture lands, the two goldsmiths you summoned,
Raṅgaṇa and Ṭaṅgaṇa, have arrived.” (8)



śrutvaitad ā ‘tta mṛd uvāca tato vrajeśā

kṛṣṇasya kuṇḍala-kirīṭa-padāṅgadādi

nirmāpayanty acirato bahiremi yāvat

tvā peṭikāṁ naya gṛhāntarito dhaniṣṭhe (9)

Śrī Vrajeśvarī was happy to hear this and told
Dhaniṣṭhā, “I am going outside to arrange for earrings,
crowns, bracelets and other ornaments to be made for
Kṛṣṇa. I will not be long. You must keep a close watch
over this box until I return.” (9)



ity uktvāsyāṁ gatāyāṁ subala-mukha-suhṛt-svāgateṣv ātta-
modas

taiḥ sākaṁ mantrayitvā kim api rahasi tāṁ peṭikām
udghaṭaya

niṣkāśyātaḥ samastaṁ maṇi-vasana-kulādy-arpayitvā
dhaniṣṭhā-

pāṇau tasyāṁ praviśya svayam atha sakhibhir mudrayām āsa
tāṁ saḥ (10)

After Vrajeśvarī Śrī Yaśodā had gone to talk to the
goldsmiths, Subala and some of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s other nearest
and dearest cowherd boy friends came in. Śrī Kṛṣṇa was
overjoyed to see them. After some discussion, He and His
friends took the box to a lonely place. There they
opened it, took out the jewels, decorations and clothes,
and handed them all to Dhaniṣṭhā. Then Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself
climbed into the box and, with the help of His friends,
closed the lid. (10)




                           17
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017


dvi-tri-kṣaṇoparamataḥ praṇamantam etya

tatrābhimanyum abhivīkṣya puro yaśodā

pṛṣṭvā śamāha śṛṇu bho bhavato gṛhiṇyā

hetoḥ kṛtādya maṇi-maṇḍana peṭikeyam (11)



Before long, Śrī Vrajeśvarī returned, and Abhimanyu came
in and offered his respects to her. She asked about his
health and well-being, and then said, “Abhimanyu, I have
prepared this box, full of jewelled ornaments, for your
wife. (11)



asyām anarghya-maṇi-kāñcana-dāma-vāsaḥ

kastūrikādy-atimanoharam asti vastu

nānyatra viśvasimi tena vahaṁs tvam eva

gatvā gṛhaṁ nibhṛtam arpaya rādhikāyai (12)

“This box is full of many enchanting articles, such as
valuable jewels, golden necklaces, lovely clothes and
musk. You must take it home, and personally present it
to Śrī Rādhikā in a private place. I do not trust anyone
to do this except you. (12)



sandeṣṭavyam idaṁ mad-akṣi-sukhade śrī-kīrttidā-kīrttide

rādhe preṣita-peṭikāntara-gatenātyujjvalaṁ jyotiṣā

tvad-gātrocita-maṇḍanena nitarāṁ tvad-vallabhena sphuṭaṁ

tvaṁ śṛṅgāravatī sadā bhava cirañjīveti saubhāgyataḥ
(13)

“You should also give Her this message from me: ëO
Madakṣi-sukhadā (You who give happiness to my eyes), O
Kīrtidā-kīrtidā (You who magnify the fame of Your mother
Kīrtidā)! O Rādhā, I am sending You this most effulgent
box, which contains ornamentation [Śrī Śyāmasundara]
that is very dear to You. This ornamentation is
befitting Your body. May You always be thus
decorated[i]1 [in other words, immersed in ujjvala-
rasa]. May You attain great fortune and live forever.’”
(13)



śrutvaitat tvaritaṁ vrajeśvarī! yathaivājñā taveti
bruvan

dhṛtvā mūrdhaṇi peṭikāṁ sva-bhavanaṁ prītyā ‘bhimanyur
yadā

gantuṁ prakramate sma tarhy abhisaran kṛṣṇas tam āruhya

                           18
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017

tad-

bhāryāṁ hanta! nija-priyāṁ smitam adhāt svaṁ
kautukābdhau kiran (14)

“O Queen of Vraja, I will carry out your order
implicitly,” replied Abhimanyu. He immediately lifted
the box on to his head, and full of bliss, set off for
home.

Mounted upon Abhimanyu’s head, Śrī Kṛṣṇa drowned in an
ocean of mischievous playfulness. He laughed softly and
sweetly to Himself as He was carried off to meet His
beloved Śrī Rādhikā — Abhimanyu’s own wife. (14)



gopaḥ so ‘pi mudā hṛdāha tad ahaṁ dhanyaḥ kṛtārtho ‘smi
yan

mañjūṣāntar ihāsti kāñcana-maṇi-rāśīr mahādurlabhaḥ

bhārād eva mayānumīyata itaḥ krīṇāmi koṭir gavāṁ

yad govardhana-mallavan mama gṛhe lakṣmīr bhavitrī parā
(15)

The gopa Abhimanyu thought, “Today I am blessed and
successful! From the weight of this box, I can tell it
must be filled with extremely rare jewels. I will use
them to buy thousands of cows, and then I will become as
wealthy as Govardhana Malla. Our home will become the
very residence of Lakṣmī, the supreme Goddess of Fortune
herself.” (15)



goṣṭhādhīśa-purād vrajan sva-nīlayābhyāsāvadhi-sthānam

apy ārohat pulakollasat-tanur atiprīti-plutākṣi-dvayaḥ

tādṛg bhāra-śirā api kṣaṇam api glāniṁ sa naivānvabhūt

pūrṇānanda-ghanaṁ vahan katham aho jānātu vartma-śramam
(16)

Thinking in this way, Abhimanyu started his journey from
Nandagrāma, the abode of Śrī Nanda Mahārāja, the King of
the pasturing grounds. He walked home in total ecstasy.
His whole body was filled with happiness, and tears
flowed from his eyes due to great bliss. Although he was
carrying such a heavy load upon his head, he felt no
more fatigue than if he had lifted it for only an
instant. Who for a moment would feel the burden of
carrying an object that is brimming with such entire
delight? (16)



gatvā puraṁ sva-jananīṁ jaṭilām uvāca

mātaḥ! śubha-kṣaṇata eva gṛhād agaccham

paśyādya kāñcana-maṇī-vasanādi-pūrṇā

                           19
Camatkara-candrika.txt                          5/5/2017


labdhā ‘tibhāgya-bharataḥ kila peṭikeyam (17)

As soon as Abhimanyu arrived home, he told his mother,
Jaṭilā, “Mother, today I must have left home at an
auspicious moment. Just see! By some good fortune I have
received this box of gold, jewels and other valuables.
(17)



datvā svayaṁ vrajapayaiva tava snuṣāyai



śṛṅgāra-hetava ihāpratima-prasādam



kurvāṇayā sapadi tāṁ pratipādyam ekaṁ



proce ca tat kalaya sāpi śṛṇotv adūre (18)



“Out of her incomparable kindness, Śrī Vrajeśvarī
herself has sent this gift, solely to decorate your
daughter-in-law. She also composed a verse and told me,
ëPlease listen to this verse, and then recite it to Śrī
Rādhā. (18)



sandeṣṭavyam idaṁ mad-akṣi-sukhade śrī-kīrttidā-kīrttide

rādhe preṣita-peṭikāntara-gatenātyujjvala-jyotiṣā

tvad-gātrocita-maṇḍanena nitarāṁ tvad-vallabhena sphuṭaṁ

tvaṁ śṛṅgāravatī sadā bhava cirañjīveti saubhāgyataḥ
(19)

“ëO You who give pleasure to my eyes! O You who increase
the fame of Your mother Kīrtidā! O Rādhā, I have sent
You this box with this most brilliantly radiant
ornament. You will cherish this ornament which will be
suitable for Your body. May it perpetually decorate You.
May You attain great fortune and live forever.’” (19)



hṛdāha tuṣṭā jaṭilātibhadram



abhūd idaṁ sāmpratam eva diṣṭyā



vadhūr bhaviṣyaty ati-suprasannā



                           20
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017


putre ‘tra me labdhā nijopakārā (20)



Hearing these blessings, Jaṭilā became most pleased and
thought, “By good fortune, we have attained great
auspiciousness today. Our daughter-in-law will be
exceedingly delighted with Abhimanyu when She receives
this gift.” (20)



smitvā ‘tha sā spaṣṭam uvāca sūno!



snuṣā tathāhaṁ bhavataḥ svasā vā



na pārayiṣyaty atibhāram etad



itaḥ samutthāpayituṁ kadāpi (21)



Jaṭilā smiled somewhat, and said aloud, “O son, neither
your wife, nor your sister, nor I myself can lift this
heavy box. (21)



mañjuṣikāṁ tattvam ito gṛhītvā



śayyā-gṛhāntar-vṛṣabhānu-putryāḥ



vedyāṁ nidhāyaihi yathodghaṭaya



semāṁ priyaṁ maṇḍanam āśu paśyet (22)



“You will have to take it to Vṛṣabhānu-kumārī’s bedroom
yourself. She can then open it straight away and behold
these most dear ornaments and decorations.” (22)



atrāntare sahacarīṣv atiharṣiṇīṣu



rādhā rahasya-mala-dhīr lalitām uvāca



                           21
Camatkara-candrika.txt                           5/5/2017


adyāli! vāma-kuca-dor-nayanoru-cāru



kiṁ spandate mama vadety atha sā jagāda (23)




manye manoharam ihāsti maṇīndra-bhūṣā-



jātaṁ svayaṁ vraja-payā hy ata eva dattam



tat-prāpti-rūpa-śubha-sūcaka eva rādhe!



spando ‘tisaubhaga-bharāvadhi-hetur eṣaḥ (24)



Abhimanyu delivered the box to Śrī Rādhā’s bedroom and
then left. Śrī Rādhā’s girlfriends began to feel
incomparable joy. Śrī Rādhā, the embodiment of purity
and intelligence, inquired in confidence from Lalitā,
“My friend, why is it that today My left breast, left
arm, left eye and left thigh are all trembling in
delight? Considering the time and place, such auspicious
signs would seem unlikely. Please explain this to Me!”

Lalitā answered, “Śrī Rādhā! It seems to me that an
ornament made of the most precious jewels [in other
words, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who dresses in ornaments made of
jewels] is in this box, which after all, was sent by Śrī
Vrajeśvarī herself. My dear friend, Your left side and
all Your limbs tremble as an auspicious sign that You
will attain this ornament, the ultimate limit of all
good fortune.” (23—24)



dṛṣṭvaiva man-manasi kañcana bhāvam eṣā

mañjūṣikaiva lalite! vitanoti bāḍham

udghāṭayāmi tad imām adhunaiva vīkṣe

saubhāgya-daṁ kim iha bhūṣaṇa-ratnam asti (25)

Śrī Rādhā replied, “Oh, Lalitā, merely by My seeing this
box, an indescribably mischievous playfulness is welling
up and overflowing within Me. Open it quickly, and let
us see the treasure of jewelled ornaments inside.” (25)



itthaṁ sakhīṣu sakalāsu tadotsukāsu


                           22
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017

tāṁ peṭikām abhita eva samāsitāsu

draṣṭuṁ gatāsu nibiḍatvam atha svayaṁ sā

dāmāny udasya rabhasād udaghāṭayat tām (26)

Eager to see the secret contents of the box, Śrī Rādhā’s
sakhīs gathered around it. Śrī Rādhā removed all Her
ornaments, and then quickly opened the box. (26)



yāvat kim etad iti tā ahaheti hocur



yāvad bhṛśaṁ jahasur eva sva-hasta-tālam



yāvat trapā sahacarī pratibodham āpa



yāvat pramoda-laharī-śatam ullalāsa (27)




yāvan nirāvaraṇam aṅgam anaṅga-nakro



jagrāsa yāvad atisambhramam āpa puṣṭim



tat-pūrvam eva sahasā tataḥ utthitaḥ sa



sarvāḥ kalā-nidhir aho yugapac cucumba (28)



As soon as Śrī Rādhā opened the lid, Her friends began
to laugh loudly and clap their hands. “Aaah! What is
this?” they cried. At that same moment, Śrī Rādhikā’s
companion known as shyness awoke and hundreds of waves
of bliss rippled over Her limbs. The crocodile-like
Cupid seized Rādhikā’s unornamented body, and She became
perplexed due to embarrassment. Astonishingly, just
before this, He who is the abode of all arts, Kalānidhi
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, had suddenly sprung out of the box and then
simultaneously kissed the face of each and every young
girl. (27—28)



dhanyaṁ bhūṣaṇa-vastu te gṛha-patir dhanyo yadānītavān

dhanyā goṣṭha-maheśvarī sakhi! yayā snehād idaṁ preṣitam


                           23
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017

tvaṁ śṛṅgāravati bhaveti ca puna dhanyaiva sandeśa-vāg

dhanyaṁ geham idaṁ yad etya nibhṛtaṁ mañjūṣikā khelati
(29)

Lalitā said to Śrī Rādhā, “Sakhī, this ëdecoration and
clothing’ is most glorious! Your husband, who delivered
it, is glorious! The house into which this box has come
to perform pastimes is glorious! Goṣṭha-maheśvarī Śrī
Yaśodā, who sent it with so much love and affection, is
glorious! And her message: ëO Rādhā, may You always be
adorned with this decoration sent by me,’ is also
glorious!” (29)



goṣṭheśā nidideśa te bahutara-snehāt tatas te patiḥ

śvaśrūr āli tad anvatīva rabhasād datvaiva mañjūṣikām

tvaṁ śṛṅgāravatī bhavet ayi guru-trayyā vacaḥ-pālanaṁ

gāndharvve! kuru sarvatheti lalitā-vāṇyātha sā tatrape
(30)

Lalitā continued, “Oh, sakhi, Goṣṭheśvarī Śrī Yaśodā
affectionately told You, ëMay You be beautifully adorned
with this gift.’ Moreover, Your husband and mother-in-
law have also approved of it. Gāndharvika, You should
therefore act in full obedience to the order of these
three superiors.” When Śrī Rādhā heard Lalitā’s words,
shyness overwhelmed Her. (30)



mañjūṣikāntar iha me bahu-ratna-bhūṣā

āsan svayaṁ vraja-payā sakhi! yā vitīrṇāḥ

saṁrakṣya tāḥ kvacana dhūrtta iha praviṣṭaś

caurā ‘yam asti tad idaṁ vada bho mad-āryām (31)

Śrī Rādhā replied, “My friend, Śrī Vrajeśvarī must
certainly have put a collection of jewelled ornaments
for Me in this box. But a cunning thief has stolen them
and hidden them somewhere, and then He has crawled into
the box Himself! Quickly go and tell My mother-in-law
what has happened!” (31)



rādhābhisārinn abhimanyu-vāhana!



kṣitiṁ satī-śūnyatamāṁ cikīrṣo!



prayaccha ratnābharaṇāni śīghraṁ




                           24
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017

no ced ihāryām aham ānayāmi (32)



Lalitā said to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, “O You, who desire to meet Śrī
Rādhā! O You who used Abhimanyu as Your carrier! By
riding on Abhimanyu’s head with the desire to meet his
own wife, Rādhā, You have revealed Your eagerness to rid
the earth of all chaste women. Give back all the
jewelled ornaments quickly, otherwise I will call the
noble Jaṭilā!” (32)



dhūrttā sakhī te lalite! svakṛtye



dakṣāvahitthām adhunā lalambe



mām ānayat preṣya patiṁ balād yā



mañjūṣikāntaḥ kutukād vasantam (33)



“Listen, Lalitā,” replied Śrī Kṛṣṇa, “this friend of
yours, Śrī Rādhā, is cunning and skilled in getting Her
own way. I got into this box merely out of curiosity,
and then She sent Her husband to bring Me here by force.
Now She is concealing this truth from all of you.” (33)



mañjūṣāyāḥ saurabhaṁ vīkṣa tasyā



vastūdasya prāpayaṁs tāṁ dhaniṣṭhām



tatra prītyā prāviśaṁ svaṁ sugandhī-



karttuṁ daivād ānayan māṁ patis te (34)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa then turned to Śrī Rādhikā and said, “Oh,
Rādhā, I removed everything from the box and gave it to
Dhaniṣṭhā so that she could affectionately send it to
You. Then I climbed into the box only to savour its
fragrance and to make My own body just as aromatic. Just
at that moment, Your husband came unexpectedly and
brought the box here with Me inside!” (34)




                           25
Camatkara-candrika.txt                            5/5/2017

nyāyaṁ sakhyo nau kurudhvaṁ yad asyā



doṣaḥ syāc ced astu daṇḍyā mameyam



no ced yuṣmad-dor-bhujāṅgogra-pāśair



baddhaḥ sthāsyāmy atratāmāṁs tri-rātram (35)



Then Kṛṣṇa said to the young girls, “Sakhīs, please
judge this case and give your verdict. If Śrī Rādhikā is
at fault, I will punish Her. However, if it is I who am
at fault, then I will spend three distressing nights
here, bound in the fierce noose of your snake-like
arms.” (35)



yasyaivaṁ vibhavena tan-nava-yuva-dvandvaṁ sphurad
yauvanaṁ

sakhyāly-akṣi-cakorikāḥ śara-tatiṁ kāmorasāḥ svādanām

dhyānaṁ bhakta-tatiḥ sadā kavi-kulaṁ svīyā vicitrā giraḥ

kīrttiṁ kṣmā bhuvaneṣu sādhu saphalī-cakre numas tat-
param (36)

We offer our obeisances to that eternally youthful
couple of Vraja, Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, who are constantly
absorbed in playful pastimes. Through Their majestic
influence, the sakhīs have completely fulfilled the
desire of their cakora bird-like eyes; Cupid has made
his arrows fully successful; the devotees have made
their meditation completely fruitful; rasa has made
enjoyment complete; the poets have made their amazing
verses successful; and the fame and glory of this
earthly Vṛndāvana has been broadcast throughout the
fourteen worlds. (36)




The Meeting of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Disguised as Abhimanyu

The Second Mischievous Playful Pastime




prātaḥ pataṅga-tanayā manayā padavyā



snānāya yāti kim iyaṁ vṛṣabhānu-putrī


                           26
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017



ity ākulaiva kuṭilā vraja-rāja-veśma



kṛṣṇaṁ vilokitum agān miṣato ‘timandā (1)




Once, Śrī Rādhā, the young daughter of Vṛṣabhānu
Mahārāja, took a vow to regularly bathe in the Yamunā
River early in the morning. This filled the less
intelligent Kuṭilā with suspicion because it was the
month of Māgha (January—February), which is the coldest
part of the winter.

One morning, when Śrī Rādhā had left for the river,
Kuṭilā became curious to know what She was really doing.
Kuṭilā made an excuse to go to the house of Nanda
Mahārāja, the King of Vraja, as she was eager to find
out if Śrī Rādhā had actually taken the path that led to
the Yamunā, and to know whether Śrī Kṛṣṇa was at home or
not. She was also eager at heart to see Kṛṣṇa. Thus
Kuṭilā set out for the residence of Vraja’s king. (1)



snātuṁ sa cāpi nijamātur anujñayaiva



tad yāmunaṁ taṭam agāditi samvidānā



gantuṁ tadīya pada-lakṣmadiś aicchad eṣā



tatraiva yatra sa tayā suvilālasāti (2)



Kuṭilā learned from some servants there that Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
mother, Yaśodā, had sent Him to bathe in the river. Her
suspicion redoubled and she set off, tracking His unique
footprints to the riverside. Kuṭilā wanted to go to the
place where Śrī Kṛṣṇa was enjoying beautiful pastimes
with Śrī Rādhā. (2)



atrāntare sahacarī tulasī praviśya



kuñjaṁ vilokya lalitādi-sakhī-sametām



rādhāṁ priyeṇa saha hāsa-vilās-līlā-

                           27
Camatkara-candrika.txt                            5/5/2017




lāvaṇya-majjita-hṛdaṁ mumude ‘vadac ca (3)



Tulasī, one of Śrī Rādhā’s dear maidservants, noticed
Kuṭilā approaching the kuñja. Tulasī entered that kuñja
to find Śrī Rādhā surrounded by Lalitā and the other
sakhīs. All were deeply immersed in enchanting laughter
and play with their beloved. Brimming with boundless
happiness, Tulasī said: (3)



bho bhoḥ prasūna-dhanuṣo januṣo ‘tibhāgya-



vikhyāpanāya yad imaṁ mahamātanudhve!



tat sāmprataṁ śṛṇuta sāmpratam enam eva



draṣṭuṁ vrajāllaghutaraṁ kuṭilā sameti (4)



“O gopīs, please listen. Your celebration of this
charming festival here today has made the birth of
Kāmadeva, the god of love, unlimitedly successful.
Nonetheless, there is something you need to know. Kuṭilā
is coming here from Vraja, just to catch a glimpse of
your wonderful festival. She is almost here.” (4)



sā kva kva hanta! kathayeti saśaṅka-netraṁ



pratyāśam ālibhir iyaṁ nijagāda pṛṣṭā



saṭṭīkarāṭavim asau samayā vyaloki



tarhy eva samprati tu vo ‘ntikam apy upāgāt (5)



When the sakhīs heard this, they looked here and there
with eyes full of fear, and cried, “Oh, no! Where is
she, Tulasī? Tell us!”

“I just saw her in front of the Chaṭṭīkarā (Śakaṭīkarā)
forest,” answered Tulasī. “She must be almost here.” (5)


                           28
Camatkara-candrika.txt                           5/5/2017



proce hariḥ kṣaṇam udarkam ihaiva kuñje



sthitvālayaḥ kalayatāham ito jihānaḥ



tāṁ vañcayan pratibhayā racitā ‘bhimanyu-



veśaḥ kutūhalam ito ‘py adhikaṁ vidhāsye (6)



“Sakhīs,” said Śrī Kṛṣṇa, “you just stay here in the
kuñja. I am going to disguise Myself as Abhimanyu. With
My brilliant intelligence I shall cheat Kuṭilā, and thus
further increase our mischievous merrymaking. You will
see the end of this affair, as surely as you will see
the rising of the sun.” (6)



ity uktvā rahasi praviśya vipinādhīśātta tat tat pṛthaṅ

nepathyaḥ pihita-sva-lakṣma-nicayaḥ kaṇṭha-svaraṁ taṁ
śrayan

niṣkramyāṇusasāra tāṁ sṛtimayaṁ sā ‘yāti dūrād yayā

nārthe hanta! vicakṣaṇaḥ kva nu bhaven nana-kalā-kovidaḥ
(7)

Śrī Kṛṣṇa went into another kuñja, where Vṛndā-devī, the
goddess of the forest, gave Him clothes and ornaments
that exactly resembled Abhimanyu’s. He dressed Himself
in them, and attentively covered all of His
distinguishing characteristics. Adopting Abhimanyu’s
voice, He set off down the path on which Kuṭilā was
approaching. Aah! Can a person who is fully adept in all
varieties of arts ever fail to accomplish His desired
goal? Certainly not! (7)



kasmāt tvaṁ kuṭile! vrajād bhramasi kiṁ vadhvā
ihānveṣaṇā

yāyātā kva nu sārkajāpasu makara-snānaṁ miṣaṁ kurvatī

atraivāsti gatā kvacit kva ramaṇī-cauraḥ sa cāpy āgataḥ

snātuṁ bhrātar ato ‘nvayāsmi gamitā kurve kim ājñāpaya
(8)

A little way along the path, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, disguised as
Abhimanyu, met Kuṭilā. In Abhimanyu’s voice He asked, “O
Kuṭilā, why are you wandering around this part of Vraja
at this time of day?”


                           29
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017

“To search for Your wife,” replied Kuṭilā.

“Why would She come here?” He asked.

“To bathe in the river Yamunā — or so She says,” replied
Kuṭilā. “But it is just a pretext. She is somewhere
close by.”

“And where is that thief of women?” asked the Abhimanyu-
disguised Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

“He also came here to bathe, and He is somewhere nearby
too. When our mother heard about this she sent me here
to investigate. Tell me, brother, what shall I do?” (8)




yady apy adya paricyuto mama vṛṣo navyo hale yojanād

anveṣṭuṁ tam ihāgato ‘smi tad api svalpaiva sā hṛd-
vyathā

mad-dāreṣv api lampaṭatvam iti yat soḍhyuṁ kim etat
kṣame

gatvā kaṁsam itaḥ phalaṁ tad-ucitaṁ dāsyāmi tasmai
svasaḥ (9)

“Sister,” replied Śrī Kṛṣṇa, “I came here to look for My
new bull. He broke loose and ran away when I was yoking
him to plough the field. My heart has been troubled
because he has probably been stolen, but that pain does
not compare to the anguish I am experiencing on account
of that rake stealing My wife! That, no man can
tolerate. I shall go straight to King Kaṁsa in Mathurā.
He will punish that thief in a way that He deserves.”
(9)



yuktiṁ kām api me śṛṇu prathamato nihnutya tiṣṭhāmy ahaṁ

kuñje ‘smin paritas tvayā ‘tra rabhasād anviṣyatāṁ
rādhikā

sā kṛṣṇena vināsti ced iha miṣeṇānīyatāṁ so ‘pi ced

āste ‘lakṣitam eva tatra naya māṁ vīkṣyaiva taṁ dūrataḥ
(10)

“Please hear My plan. I will hide in this kuñja, while
you quickly search for Rādhikā. If you find Her alone,
bring Her here on some pretext, but if you find Her with
Kṛṣṇa, observe Them from a distance and then take Me
there secretly.” (10)



bhrāmaṁ bhrāmaṁ phaṇi-hrada-taṭād vīkṣya vīkṣyaiva
kuñjā-

nantaḥ prodyat-kuṭilā-madhurā keśi-tīrthopakaṇṭhe

                           30
Camatkara-candrika.txt                            5/5/2017


puṣpodyāne ‘mala-parimalāṁ kīrttidā-kīrttivallīṁ

prāpālīnāṁ tatibhir abhitaḥ sevyamānāṁ śanaiḥ sā (11)

When Kuṭilā, whose nature is exceedingly crooked
(kuṭila), heard these instructions, she began to search
all the kuñjas from Kāliyā-hrada to Keśī-ghāṭa. There,
near Keśī-ghāṭa, she came to a flower garden where she
found Śrī Rādhā, who is endowed with pure fragrance, and
who is the flower vine of Her mother Kīrtidā’s fame. She
was surrounded by Her sakhīs, who were serving Her
attentively. (11)



kiṁ snātum eṣi kuṭile! na hi tat kim arthaṁ

yuṣmac-caritram avagantum ihānvagaccham

jñātaṁ tad āśu lalite! vada tad bravīmi

kinvā ‘tra vakti nikhilaṁ hari-gandha eva (12)

Lalitā saw Kuṭilā coming, and asked, “Ah, Kuṭilā, have
you come to take bath?”

“No,” replied Kuṭilā.

“Then why have you come?” asked Lalitā.

“I have come to learn about your moral character,”
answered Kuṭilā.

“Very good,” said Lalitā. “Then you should learn.”

“I have already understood everything, Lalitā.”

“Understood? What have you understood? Please tell me.”

“The fragrance of Hari tells all. What more can I say?”
(12)



siṁhasya gandham api vetsi sa ced ihāsti

nihnutya kutracana, tad bibhimo ‘ti mugdhāḥ

tūrṇaṁ palāya tad ito gṛham eva yāmaḥ

snehaṁ vyadhās tvam amalaṁ yad ihaivam āgāḥ (13)

Lalitā took the word hari to mean “lion” and replied,
“Kuṭilā! If you can smell a lion here, it must be hiding
somewhere. We are simple, tender, young girls, and
therefore fearful. We will run home! You have shown us
such pure affection by coming to give us this warning.”
(13)



yāsyanti gehamayi dharma-ratā bhavatyaḥ


                           31
Camatkara-candrika.txt                          5/5/2017

kīrttiṁ vaneṣu viracaya kula-dvayasya

kintv agrato ya iha rājati nīpa-kuñjas

tad-dvāram udghaṭayatāsmi didṛkṣur etam (14)

Kuṭilā became full of anger and exclaimed sarcastically,
“O you chaste girls! And will you proclaim the good name
of your families from forest to forest as you go? Open
the door to that kadamba-kuñja and let me look inside!”
(14)



etat kayā ‘pi vana-devatayā sva-veśma

ruddhā gataṁ śara-śalāka-kavāṭikābhyām

kā nāma sāhasavatī parakīya geha-

dvāraṁ vinudya bata doṣam aśeṣam icchet (15)

Lalitā said, “A forest-god has closed the entrance of
His bower-house with a door of reeds. He has gone
elsewhere, and it is not appropriate to open the door to
His kadamba grove. What woman would dare commit the sin
of trying to open the door to another’s house?” (15)



satyaṁ bravīṣi lalite! kulajā ‘si mugdhā

naivāviśaḥ para-gṛhaṁ januṣo ‘pi madhye

kintu praveśayasi bhoḥ sva-gṛhaṁ paraṁ yat

tac-chāstra-pāṭhana-kṛte tvam ihāvatīrṇā (16)



ity uktvāruṇitekṣaṇā drutam iyaṁ gatvā kuṭirāntikaṁ

bhitvā puṣpa-kavāṭikām atijavād antaḥ praviśya sphuṭam

dṛṣṭvā kausuma-talpam atra ca harer mālyaṁ tathā
rādhikā-

hārañ ca truṭitaṁ para-gṛhya rabhasād agārād bahiḥ (17)

Kuṭilā said to Lalitā, “What you say is true. You are
just a pure and simple girl, and you have never walked
into anyone else’s house in your life. However, you know
very well how to invite a paramour into your house. You
have come to this world to teach from the scripture that
explains how to facilitate a paramour’s entrance into
the house of a young lady from a respectable family.”

Then, red-eyed with anger, she stormed up to the flower-
door of the kuñja, which had been locked with reeds, and
kicked it open. There on a bed of flowers she saw a
flower garland left by Śrī Hari, and a broken pearl-
necklace belonging to Śrī Rādhā. Snatching them up, she
came outside. (16—17)


                           32
Camatkara-candrika.txt                          5/5/2017



māgha-snānam idaṁ yathā vidhi-kṛtaṁ puṇyaṁ tathopārjitaṁ

putaṁ yena kula-dvayaṁ ravi-sutā-tīre raviś cārcitaḥ

tad yūyaṁ lalite! yiyāsatha gṛhaṁ kiṁvātra rātrin-divaṁ

dharmaṁ karttum abhīpsatheti vada me śrotraṁ
samutkaṇṭhate (18)

Holding them up before Lalitā, Kuṭilā said, “Your vow of
bathing in the holy river Yamunā during the cold of
winter will result in so much religious merit! Such
austerities will enable you to purify the families of
both your father and your father-in-law. I see that here
on the riverbank you are also worshipping the Sun-god
properly. Tell me, do you want to return to your homes,
or would you rather stay here day and night earning
pious merit? My ears are most eager to hear your
answer.” (18)



kiṁ kupyasīha kuṭile! na mamaiṣa hāro



bhrātus tavaiva śapathaṁ karavai prasīda



ity uktavaty amala-candramukhī sakampa-



śīraṣaṁ sa-huṁkṛti kaṭu-bhrutayā tatarje (19)



When the spotless, moon-faced Śrī Rādhā heard Kuṭilā’s
taunt, She said, “Kuṭilā, why are you becoming angry
unnecessarily? I swear by your brother that this
necklace is not Mine. Please calm down!” Then Śrī Rādhā
angrily frowned, shook Her head, and loudly scolded
Kuṭilā. (19)



netaḥ prayāsyata gṛhaṁ yadi na prayāta



rājyaṁ kurudhvam iha tāvad ahaṁ tu yāmi



tāṁ mātaraṁ bhagavatīm api hāra-mālye



sandarśya yuṣmad uciteṣṭa-vidhau yatiṣye (20)



                           33
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017


“If You do not want to go home, then don’t,” said
Kuṭilā. “Stay in this forest, and rule Your kingdom. But
I am going home to show this necklace and garland to my
mother and Bhagavatī Paurṇamāsī. I will see to it that
You are properly punished.” (20)



kāmaṁ prayāhi kuṭile! kaṭu kiṁ bravīṣi



hāraṁ pradarśaya gṛhaṁ gṛham eva sarvāḥ



nāsmākam eṣa yad ato na bibhemi kiñcan



mithyā-pravādam api no na kadā dadāsi (21)



“You are free to go Kuṭilā,” said Śrī Rādhā, “but what
good are your harsh words? You can go from house to
house showing everyone this necklace. I do not fear this
in the least because it is not Mine. Do not make false
accusations against Me.” (21)



sā kruddhā drutam eva goṣṭha-gamanaṁ svasya pradarśyaiva
tā

yatrāste harir ājagāma śanakais tatraiva nihnutya sā

bhrātar mālyam agha-dviṣaḥ kalaya bho vadhvāś ca hāraṁ
mayā

prāptaṁ saurata-talpa-gaṁ rahasi tā dṛṣṭāḥ sa nālokitaḥ
(22)

Kuṭilā pretended to angrily leave for home, but actually
she hurried to where Śrī Hari, disguised as Abhimanyu,
was waiting. “My dear brother,” she whispered, “look
what I have found! This garland belongs to Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
the enemy of Agha, and this broken pearl-necklace
belongs to Your wife. I found these on Their bed of
amorous pleasure. Rādhikā and the others were there in
that secret place, but I did not see that woman-thief
anywhere.” (22)



bhadraṁ bhadraṁ babhūva mathurāṁ gacchāmi tūrṇaṁ bhaginy

etāvād dvayam eva lambanam abhūd vijñāpane rājani

kintu svīya-gṛhasya vaktum ucito na syāt kalaṅko mahāṁs

tasmin vṛṣṇi-sadasy ataś caturimāmnātavya eko mayā (23)


                           34
Camatkara-candrika.txt                            5/5/2017

Śrī Kṛṣṇa said, “Dear sister, you have done very well.
Now I will quickly go to Mathurā. Hand Me the garland
and the broken necklace. I will show them to the king
and petition him. He will certainly believe Me. I shall
have to use some clever trickery so that our infamy is
not disclosed before the assembly of the Yadus. (23)



govarddhanaṁ priya-sakhaṁ prativācyam etac

candrāvalīm api bhavad-gṛhiṇīṁ nikuñje

ānīya dūṣayati nanda-sutas tad etad

vastu-dvayaṁ kalaya tan-mithunasya labdham (24)

“Actually, I will not approach the king Myself. Instead,
I will request My dear friend Govardhana Malla to go. I
will say, ëMy dear friend, the son of Nanda called your
wife, Candrāvalī, to a bower and polluted her. Look,
this is her broken necklace and His flower garland. (24)



itthaṁ lampaṭatāṁ vraje pratigṛhaṁ dṛṣṭveva tasyādhikāṁ

tvām ājñāpayam adya tattvam adhunā vijñāpya rājñi drutam

pattīnāṁ śatam aśvavāra daśakaṁ preṣyaiva nandīśvarān

nandaṁ sātmajam ānayan madhu-purīṁ taṁ tat phalaṁ
prāpaya (25)

“ëListen, My friend, Kṛṣṇa has performed this licentious
act with your wife today, and tomorrow He will perform
it with all of our wives! I urge you to go petition King
Kaṁsa to send one hundred foot soldiers and ten
cavalrymen to Nandagrāma to arrest Nanda and his son,
and take them to Mathurā for punishment.’ (25)



ity uktvaiva mayā punaḥ sva-bhavanaṁ pūrvāhna evaiṣyate

madhyāhne khalu rājakīya-puruṣā yāsyanti te tu vrajam

tvaṁ gatvā gṛha eva mātṛ-sahitā tiṣṭheriti procivān

kṛṣṇo dakṣiṇā-diṅ-mukho ‘vrajad atho sā tāś ca
veśmāyayuḥ (26)

“That is what I shall say to Govardhana Malla. Then I
will return home before noon, because the royal forces
should arrive in Vraja around midday. Now, you go home
and stay with Mother.” Śrī Kṛṣṇa, disguised as
Abhimanyu, left on the southward path heading towards
Mathurā, while Kuṭilā went home. The gopīs also returned
to their respective residences. (26)



kṛṣṇo vilambya ghaṭikā-trayato ‘tha tādṛg-


                           35
Camatkara-candrika.txt                          5/5/2017



veśaḥ svayaṁ sa jaṭilā-gṛham āsasāda



bhoḥ kvāsi māta rayi bho kuṭile! sametya



jānīhi vṛttam iti te prati kiñcid ūce (27)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa let an hour or so pass. Then, still in His
disguise, He went to Jaṭilā’s house and called out,
“Mother! Kuṭilā! Where are you? Please come and hear
what I have to say.” (27)



vijñāpitaḥ sa nṛpatiḥ prajighāya yad yad



drag aśvavāra-daśakaṁ tad ihaiti dūre



kintv atra lampaṭa-varo dhṛta-mat-svarūpo



mad-geham eti tad-alakṣita āgato ‘smi (28)



When Jaṭilā and Kuṭilā came, Śrī Kṛṣṇa said, “King Kaṁsa
has been told everything, and ten cavalrymen are on
their way here. But that licentious cheater has
disguised himself as Me, and right now he is on his way
to this very house. I will hide inside. (28)



bahir-dvāraṁ ruddhā bhagini! saha mātrā drutam itaḥ

samāruhyaivāṭṭaṁ kalaya taruṇī-lampaṭa-patham

tam eṣyantaṁ tarjanty atikaṭu-girā tiṣṭha suciraṁ

vadhūṁ rundhan vartte tala-sadana evāham adhunā (29)

“My dear sister, you should lock the outside gate, and
then quickly go up to the balcony with Mother. Keep a
lookout for that young debauchee. When he comes, attack
him with sharp and cutting words. Meanwhile, I will wait
with your sister-in-law on the ground-floor of the
house.” (29)



athāyāntaṁ dṛṣṭvā tvaritam abhimanyuṁ kaṭu-raṭanty


                           36
Camatkara-candrika.txt                            5/5/2017

are dharma-dhvaṁsin vraja-kula-bhuvāṁ kiṁ nu yatase

praveṣṭuṁ mad bhrātūr bhavana-mayi loṣṭrālibhir itaḥ

śiro bhindantī te bata capala dāsye pratiphalam (30)

Śrī Kṛṣṇa went to the ground floor with Śrī Rādhikā.
Some time later Abhimanyu arrived home. As soon as
Kuṭilā saw him she began to shout, “O you who destroys
the piety of the chaste girls of Vraja! How dare you try
to enter my brother’s house! Listen, O fickle one, if
you come in here, I will break your head with this
stone! Such would be your just reward. (30)



tavānyāyāṁ śrutvā kupita-manasaḥ kaṁsa-nṛpater

bhaṭā āyānty addhā sa-pitṛkam api tvāṁ sukhayitum

yadā kārāgāre nṛpati-nagare sthāsyasi ciraṁ

niruddhas tarhi tvac-capalataratā yāsyati śamam (31)

“King Kaṁsa was infuriated to hear of your wicked
behaviour, and he has sent his royal guards to make you
and your father ëhappy’. They are coming any moment.
They are going to take you to Mathurā City and throw you
in jail for the rest of your life. That will pacify your
fickleness.” (31)



iti śrutvā jalpaṁ vikalam abhimanyuḥ katham aho

svasāraṁ me preto ‘lagad ahaha kacit kaṭuraḥ

tadānetuṁ yāmi tvaritam iha tan-māntrika-janān

iti grāmopāntaṁ vitata-bahu-cintaḥ sa gatavān (32)

When Abhimanyu heard all these confusing words from his
sister, he became quite perturbed, and thought, “Alas,
my sister has become possessed by a fearsome ghost. I
had better call an exorcist.” He thus went to find the
mantra-doctor who lived on the outskirts of the village.
(32)



evaṁ hari sa jaṭilā gṛha eva tasyā

vadhvā sahāramata citra-caritra-ratnaḥ

yatnaḥ ka eva phalavattvam agān na tasya

kimvā phalaṁ para-vadhū-ramaṇād ṛte ‘sya (33)

In this way, that amazing and astonishing jewel known as
Śrī Hari engages in all sorts of pastimes with Jaṭilā’s
daughter-in-law in Jaṭilā’s own house. He is always
sporting with the wives of others; He has no other
occupation. His endeavours are always successful; they
always bear fruit. (33)

                           37
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017




The Meeting of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Disguised as a Female Doctor

The Third Mischievous Playful Pastime




athaikadā sā jaṭilā vivikte



cintāturā kiñcid uvāca putrīṁ



na rakṣituṁ hā prabhavāmi kṛṣṇād



vadhūṁ tataḥ kiṁ karavāṇy upāyam (1)




Śrī Rādhā’s deep love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa was apparent by its
numerous symptoms. As Jaṭilā became aware of it, she
became increasingly anxious. One day she called for her
daughter Kuṭilā and spoke to her privately. “Listen, my
dear daughter, I am not able to protect Rādhā from that
Kṛṣṇa. What shall we do? (1)



tvaṁ putri! tasmād gṛha eva rundhi



vadhūṁ bahir yāti kadāpi neyam



yathā yathāyāti harir na gehaṁ



tathā tathā hā bhava sāvadhānā (2)



“O Kuṭilā, I have one solution. Somehow, we must prevent
Rādhā from leaving the house for any reason, and at the
same time, by any means, we must prevent that Kṛṣṇa from
entering our home. You must remain fully alert.” (2)



mātar bhavatyā na vadhūr niroddhuṁ


                              38
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017



śakyā yataḥ pratyaham eva yatnāt



vrajeśvarī bhojayituṁ sva-putraṁ



pākārtham etāṁ nayati sva-geham (3)



Upon hearing her mother’s words, Kuṭilā replied,
“Mother, it is not possible to check the movements of
your daughter-in-law. How can we stop Her from leaving
the house, when every day without fail, Vrajeśvarī Śrī
Yaśodā summons Her to cook for her son?” (3)



putri! tvam adya vraja tāṁ vadaitan



nātaḥ paraṁ kvāpi vadhūḥ sva-gehāt



prayāty atas tvaṁ suta-bhojanārthaṁ



pāke niyuktāṁ kuru rohiṇīṁ tām (4)



“Daughter,” Jaṭilā answered, “go to Vrajeśvarī now, and
tell her that starting from today, my daughter-in-law
will not be leaving our house to go anywhere. Tell
Vrajeśvarī that she can engage Rohiṇī to cook for her
son.” (4)



mātas tayā vakṣyata eva tasyai



durvāsasā ko ‘pi varo vitīrṇaḥ



tvad-dhasta-pakkaudana-bhoktur āyuḥ



nirvighnam astv ity adhikā prasiddhiḥ (5)



Kuṭilā replied, “But Mother, Vrajeśvarī will surely say,
ëŚrī Rādhā has been granted an extraordinary boon by

                           39
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017

Durvāsā Muni. It is a blessing that words alone cannot
describe. Everyone in Vraja-maṇḍala knows that because
of this boon, those who partake of Śrī Rādhā’s cooking
will live long and have all of their obstacles
destroyed.’ (5)



ekaḥ suto me bahu-duṣṭa-dānavādy-



ariṣṭavattve ‘pi kuśaly-abhūd yataḥ



tatas tvayā sādhita-modanādikaṁ



nityaṁ sutaṁ bhojayituṁ prayatsyate (6)



“Vrajeśvarī will then say, ëKṛṣṇa is my only son. Eating
the food cooked by Rādhā enables Him to remain safe and
well and free from the obstacles created by wicked
demons. That is why I try to ensure that daily He eats
food cooked by Her hand.’

When she says that, what answer should I give?” (6)



putri! tvayā vācyam idaṁ para-śvaḥ



śvo vā sa āgatya muniḥ pradadyāt



rādhā spṛśed yaṁ sa cirāyur astv



ity evaṁ varaṁ ced ayi tarhi kiṁ syāt (7)



“O daughter,” said Jaṭilā, “you should say to
Vrajeśvarī, ëAnd what if the best of sages comes along
tomorrow, or the day after, and blesses Rādhā that
whomever She touches will have a long life? Then what
will happen? Tell me that! (7)



kiṁ sparśayantī nija-putram etām



ākārayiṣyasy ayi nīti-vijñe!


                           40
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017



kulāṅganā yat para-veśma gatvā



nityaṁ paced ity api kiṁ nu nītiḥ (8)



“ëO Vrajeśvarī, who are learned in ethics, will you then
call Rādhā to your home and have Her touch your son? And
another thing: what kind of moral code states that any
well-bred girl may daily go to another man’s house to
cook for him? (8)



vadhvāḥ kalaṅkaḥ pratideśam eṣa



bhūyān abhūd yat kim u sahyam etat



sneho yathā te nija-putra evaṁ



sneho mamāpy asti nija snūṣāyām (9)



“ëMy daughter-in-law’s ill repute has spread throughout
Vraja. How can I tolerate that? Don’t I have as much
affection for my daughter-in-law as you have for your
son?’ (9)



tathāpi te prauḍhir iyaṁ bhavec ced



dhaniṣṭhayā preṣitayaiva nityam



vadhu-kṛtaṁ modaka-laḍḍukādi



tri-sandhyam evānaya putra-hetoḥ (10)



“You should then say, ëSo now you have heard my reasons
for not sending my daughter-in-law to your house. If you
remain determined to feed your son with food that Rādhā
has cooked, then send Dhaniṣṭhā to my house three times
a day to fetch modaka, laḍḍu and other sweets that She
has made for Him.’ (10)


                           41
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017



ity evam ukte ‘pi yadi vrajeśā



kupyet tadā tan-nagarīṁ vihāya



kṛtvaiva deśāntara eva vāsaṁ



vadhum aviṣyāmi tadīya-putrāt (11)




evaṁ nirodhe sati tau viṣaṇṇau



parasparādarśana-dāva-tāpitau



babhūvatur hanta! yathā tathā svayaṁ



sarasvatī varṇayituṁ kṣameta kim (12)



“Explain everything to Vrajeśvarī. If she becomes
infuriated, we will leave her town and move elsewhere. I
will do anything to save my daughter-in-law from that
licentious son of hers.”

After this discussion, Jaṭilā and Kuṭilā confined Śrī
Rādhā to the house so as to thwart any chance of Her
meeting with Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Alas, not even Sarasvatī, the
goddess of speech and learning, could describe the
sorrow of the young Couple, who were consumed by the
forest fire of not being able to see each other. (11—12)



saroja-patrair vidhu-gandha-sāra-



paṅka-praliptai racitāpi śayyā



rādhāṅga-saṁsparśanataḥ kṣaṇena



hā hanta hā murmuratāṁ prapede (13)


                           42
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017



To extinguish Śrī Rādhā’s burning fire of separation
from Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the sakhīs made Her a cooling bed of
lotus petals smeared with a paste of camphor and
sandalwood. However, when Śrī Rādhā touched that bed,
the petals instantly withered and dried with the heat of
Her fevered body. (13)



ninded vidhiṁ pakṣma-kṛtaṁ bhṛśaṁ yā



vāñched apakṣmottama-mīna-janma



nandātmajālokamṛte kathaṁ sā



yāmāṣṭakaṁ yāpayituṁ kṣameta (14)




nāvekṣate nāpi śṛṇoti kiñcid



acetanā sīdati puṣpa-talpe



dhaniṣṭhayāthaitya tathāvidhā sā



vrajeśvarī-preṣitayā vyaloki (15)



How will Śrī Rādhā be able to pass twenty-four hours
without seeing Śrī Nanda-nandana? She cannot tolerate
even those brief moments when Her eyelids blink and Her
vision of Him is obstructed. She condemns Brahmā, the
creator, for creating eyelids, and prays to be born as a
fish with eyes that never close.

Śrī Rādhā fell unconscious on the bed of flowers, unable
to see or hear anything. When, on Vrajeśvarī’s order,
Daniṣṭhā arrived there, she saw Śrī Rādhā’s condition of
burning in separation from Śrī Kṛṣṇa. (14—15)



adya prabhāte lalite papāca



śrī-rohiṇī kṛṣṇa-kṛte yad annam

                              43
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017




tat prāśya so ‘gāda vipinaṁ vrajeśā



māṁ prāhiṇod atra viṣaṇṇa-cetāḥ (16)



“O Lalitā,” Dhaniṣṭhā said, “Śrī Rādhā did not come to
cook for Śrī Kṛṣṇa this morning, so Śrī Rohiṇī cooked
for Him instead. After He had eaten His breakfast, He
went out to graze the cows. Vrajeśvarī could see that
Kṛṣṇa had not eaten with the same relish that He usually
does, so she became extremely sad at heart and sent me
here. (16)



sāyaṁ rajanyām api yat tathā śvaḥ



sa bhokṣyate tasya kṛte ‘ham āgām



iyan tu saṁjñā-rahitaiva paktuṁ



kathaṁ kṣametādya karomi hā kim (17)



“I have come to get modaka and other preparations for
Śrī Kṛṣṇa to eat tonight and also tomorrow morning
before He takes the cows out to graze. But, alas, how
can Śrī Rādhā possibly make sweets in this unconscious
condition? Oh, dear, what will I do now?” (17)



kṛṣṇaḥ puras te kalayeti tad-vāk



tāṁ bhagna-mūrcchām akarod yadaiva



tadā dhaniṣṭhā sahasā vrajeśā-



sandiṣṭam āha sma saroruhākṣīm (18)




kaṭāha mātrānaya rūpa-mañjari!

                           44
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017




pralipya cullīm iha vahnim arpaya



yathā vrajeśādiśad evam eva tat



kṛṣṇasya bhakṣyaṁ kila sādhayāmy aham (19)



Unable to see any other solution, Dhaniṣṭhā went over to
Śrī Rādhā and loudly spoke into Her ear, “O Rādhā, just
look; Śrī Kṛṣṇa is standing right here before You!” As
soon as these words entered Her ears, lotus-eyed Śrī
Rādhā regained consciousness. Dhaniṣṭhā told Her that
Vrajeśvarī had sent her to ask Rādhā that She prepare
modaka and other sweetmeats for Kṛṣṇa.

Although Śrī Rādhā was burning in the fire of separation
from Kṛṣṇa, as soon as She heard Vrajeśvarī’s request
from the lips of Dhaniṣṭhā, abundant strength suddenly
entered Her body. “Rūpa-mañjarī,” She said, “quickly
prepare the stove and kindle a fire in it. Bring the
small pan, and I will make all the preparations that
Vrajeśvarī desires for Śrī Kṛṣṇa. (18—19)



karomi yāvat sakhi! nityam etac



catur-guṇaṁ kurva iti bruvāṇā



cullī-taṭe divya-catuṣkikāyāṁ



rādhopaveśaṁ sahasā cakāra (20)



“Sakhī, today I will make four times the amount of
modaka and other foodstuffs that I usually make. Do not
worry in the least for My health.” With these words, Śrī
Rādhā promptly sat down on a splendid seat by the stove.
(20)



yat-sparśanāt paṅkaja-patra-śayyā



yayau kṣaṇān murmuratāṁ tadeva



                           45
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017


pakvānna-karmaṇy analārciṣaiva



rādhā-vapuḥ śītalatāṁ prapede (21)



How amazing! A moment earlier Śrī Rādhā’s bed of lotus
petals had withered and dried with Her burning touch,
but now, as She makes sweets for Her beloved, the flames
of the stove cool Her body. (21)



premottamo ‘tarkya-vicitra-dhāmā



yato janaṁ tāpayate śaśāṅkaḥ



vahniḥ punaḥ śītalayaty atas taṁ



tad-āśrayaṁ vā kim u ko ‘pi vetti (22)



The uppermost realm of prema possesses amazing and
inconceivable potency, in which the cooling moon can
radiate scorching heat and fire can cool. How can anyone
ever understand such prema? And how can one who has
taken the shelter of such prema ever be understood? (22)



jagāda kiñcil lalitā dhaniṣṭhe!



vidyud-ghanāvagraha eṣa bhūyān



samaṁ kim eṣyaty adhunā sakhīnām



ānanda-śasyāni vināśam īyuḥ (23)



Śrī Lalitā then said, “O Dhaniṣṭhā! Will abundant rain
not fall from the lightening-filled cloud? Will the
fresh new rain cloud [Śrī Kṛṣṇa], inlaid with the
creeper of lightning [Śrī Rādhā], appear no more? If
this rain cloud does not appear, there will be no shower
of rasa, and the sakhīs’ harvest of ecstatic bliss will
wither and be utterly destroyed.” (23)


                           46
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017



bravīṣi satyaṁ lalite vayasyaiḥ



saha svayaṁ sīdati so ‘pi kṛṣṇaḥ



vṛndāvana-sthāḥ śuka-keki-bhṛṅga



mṛgādayo’py ākulatām avāpuḥ (24)



“You are speaking the truth,” Dhaniṣṭhā replied. “Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and His sakhās are suffering the same distress as
you sakhīs of Śrī Rādhā. What more can I say? Even the
deer, peacocks, parrots, bumble-bees and other creatures
of Vṛndāvana are afflicted by this great distress.” (24)



tataś ca rādhā lalitādi karṇe



kāñcit kathāṁ procya yayau gṛhaṁ sā



sāyaṁ viśākhā jaṭilām upetyā-



līkaṁ rurodādhidharaṁ luṇṭhantī (25)




hā kiṁ viśākhe! kim u rodiṣi tvaṁ



rādhāṁ dadaṁśāhir alakṣya-rūpaḥ



kathaṁ kva vā koli-tale tadīya-



ratne gṛhīte nija-ratna-buddhayā (26)



When Śrī Rādhā had finished making the sweets, She gave
them to Dhaniṣṭhā. Dhaniṣṭhā whispered something into
the ears of Śrī Rādhā, Lalitā and the other sakhīs, and
then returned to the house of Nanda Mahārāja.

                           47
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017


That evening Viśākhā went to Jaṭilā and before her, made
a show of wailing in grief and rolling about on the
ground. Seeing her in such a state, Jaṭilā asked,
“Viśākhā, why are you crying?”

“Śrī Rādhā has been bitten by a black snake. She did not
see it,” Viśākhā answered through her tears. Notably
perturbed, Jaṭilā asked, “Where did it happen? How did
it bite Her?”

“The snake was hiding under the badrī-tree,” sobbed
Viśākhā. “Śrī Rādhā mistook the jewel on its head for
one of Her own. As She reached to take the jewel, the
serpent bit Her on the hand.” (25—26)



hā mūrdhni ko ‘yaṁ mama vajra-pāta



iti bruvāṇā tvarayā yayau sā



vilokya rādhāṁ bhuvi vepamānāṁ



tatāḍa soccaiḥ svam uraḥ karābhyām (27)



“Oh, no! Woe is me!” Jaṭilā lamented. “A thunderbolt has
struck my head.” Sobbing, she rushed to Śrī Rādhā’s
chamber where Rādhā lay trembling on the ground. When
Jaṭilā saw her daughter-in-law in this state, she wailed
loudly and pounded her breast with both hands in
anguish. (27)



gavāṁ gṛhād ānaya putri! tāvat



sva-bhrātaraṁ śīghram itaḥ prayātu



sa māntrikān ānayatu prakṛṣṭāṁs



te me vadhuṁ nirviṣayan tu mantraiḥ (28)




Jaṭilā called out to Kuṭilā, “Quickly, my daughter, run
to the cowshed. Tell your brother to bring a person who
knows the art of removing snake-venom by mantra. He can

                           48
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017

remove the poison from my daughter-in-law.” (28)



ity evam uktvā jaratī jagāda



snuṣe tanuḥ samprati kīdṛśī te



sandahyamānāṁ viṣa-vahninenam



avaimi vaktuṁ prabhavāmi nārye (29)




mantraiḥ karābhyāṁ mama māntrikāś



ced ekāṁ padasyāṅgulikām apīha



spṛśet tadāsūn sahasā tyajāmi



kulāṅganāyā niyamo mamaiṣaḥ (30)



Jaṭilā then asked Śrī Rādhā, “Daughter-in-law, how are
You feeling now?”

“O Mother-in-law,” Śrī Rādhā replied, “all I know is
that My body is burning with the poison. I do not know
more than that and I cannot say more than that. But, if
any male who is learned in mantras touches even one toe
on My foot, I will immediately leave this body. I am a
chaste wife and My vow of chastity is firm.” (29—30)



snuṣe! kim evaṁ vadasīha bhakṣayed



abhakṣyam aspṛśyam api spṛśen naraḥ



mantrauṣadhādau na hi dūṣaṇam bhaved



āpad-gatasyeti vidāṁ śruti-smṛtī (31)


                           49
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017



“My dear daughter-in-law, do not speak like that. In an
emergency, a virtuous person may eat something that is
ordinarily forbidden or touch something he normally
would not touch. When danger threatens, there is no
fault in using mantras or other remedies. This is the
prescription of those learned in the scriptures.” (31)



ājñāṁ tavemāṁ na hi pālayāmi



praṇān pura-sthe kalaya tyajāmi



śrutveti vadhvā vacanaṁ sa-cintāṁ



jagāda kācit prativāsinī tām (32)




yaḥ kāliyāghādi-bhujaṅga-marddī



dṛṣṭyaiva tāḥ pīta-viṣodakā gāḥ



ajīvayat taṁ harim ānayārye!



sa te vadhūṁ nirviṣayed vilokya (33)



Śrī Rādhā replied, “Please listen to Me. I will give up
My life right now, before your very eyes. I am unable to
obey your order under any circumstance.” When Jaṭilā
heard this from her daughter-in-law, she became filled
with excessive anxiety.

Just then a neighbour came and advised her, “Dear noble
lady, you should call Śrī Hari. It was He who subdued
the powerful poisonous serpents, Kāliya and Agha. And
with a mere glance He brought back to life the cows that
had died from drinking Kāliyā-hrada’s poisoned water. He
can remove the poison just by glancing upon your
daughter-in-law.” (32—33)



rādhābravīd yat parivāda-pīḍāṁ



                           50
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017


viṣānalād apy adhikām avaimi



tam eva yā darśayituṁ yatante



tā vairīṇīr eva cireṇa vedmi (34)



Overhearing this, Śrī Rādhā said, “The pain caused by
the false accusations I have suffered regarding that
Kṛṣṇa is far more painful than this burning poison.
Anyone who tries to have Him come anywhere near Me is My
lifelong enemy.” (34)



tarhi snuṣe ‘haṁ sa-sutā prayāmi



tāṁ paurṇamāsīṁ drutam ānayāmi



tan-mantra-tantrāgama-śāstra-vijñā



sā susthayiṣyaty alam anya-yuktyā (35)



“Listen,” Jaṭilā told Śrī Rādhā, “Kuṭilā and I will
quickly go to see Paurṇamāsī. She is well-versed in the
tantric and āgama scriptures, and knows excellent snake-
mantras. She will come and cure You. Now, You should not
object to this.” (35)



proce viśākhā tad alaṁ vilambair



viṣaṁ mayāruddham avaihi sūtraiḥ



yamārddha-paryantam ataḥ parantu



śiro ëdhirūḍhaṁ tad asādhyam eva (36)



Viśākhā said, “Noble lady, that is an excellent idea.
Please do not delay! Quickly go there. I will tie a
string around Rādhā’s wrist to keep the poison from

                           51
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017

moving through Her body, but it will only work for an
hour and a half. Once the poison reaches Her head,
nothing will save Her.” (36)



sā paurṇamāsyāḥ sthalam abhyupetya



natvā ‘khilaṁ vṛttam avedayat tām



papraccha gārgīm atha paurṇamāṣī



tvaṁ sarpa-mantrān pitur adhyagīṣṭhāḥ (37)




kiṁ putri! sākhyan na hi vedmi kiñca



kanīyasī me bhaginī tu vetti



kva sā kim ākhyā kila kin nivāsā



kāśī-purāt sā śvaśurasya gehāt (38)




pitur gṛhaṁ vṛṣṇi-pūre gatā ‘bhūt



tato ‘pi mām atra didṛkṣamānā



pūrvve dyur evāgamad asti nāmnā



vidyāvalir mad-gṛha-madhya eva (39)



Jaṭilā immediately went to Paurṇamāsī, paid her
respects, and told her everything that had happened.
Paurṇamāsī turned to Gargācārya’s daughter, Gārgī, and
asked, “O my daughter, have you learnt the art of
reciting snake-mantras from your father?”


                           52
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017

“No, I have not,” Gārgī replied, “but my younger sister
has.”

“What is your sister’s name?” asked Paurṇamāsī. “Where
does she live, and where is she right now?”

“Her name is Vidyāvali,” replied Gārgī. “She lives with
her husband’s family in Kāśīpura. At the moment she is
visiting our parents’ home in Mathurā, and she came to
visit me here yesterday. It just so happens that she is
in my house right now.” (37—39)



jaraty athoce bahu-viklavāśru-



siktānanā gārgi! natā’smy ahaṁ tvām



tām ānayāsmad bhavanaṁ sa-putrāṁ



kṛīṇīhi māṁ svīya-kṛpāmṛtena (40)



When old Jaṭilā heard this, she turned her tear-soaked
face to Gārgī and anxiously said, “O Gārgī, I fall at
your feet. Please come to our house with your sister,
and purchase me and my son with the charity of your
nectarean mercy.” (40)



gārgi! tvam ādau sva-gṛhaṁ prayāhi



tataḥ sa-kanyā jaṭilā prayātu



prasādya tām ānayatāṁ tataḥ sā



rādhāṁ dhruvaṁ nirviṣayiṣyate drāk (41)



“Gārgī,” said Paurṇamāsī, “first, you go home, and
later, Jaṭilā and Kuṭilā will go there. If they are able
to please Vidyāvali and take Her to their house, Rādhikā
will immediately be freed from the effect of the
poison.” (41)



pūrvvaṁ dhaniṣṭhā-vacasaiva gārgī


                           53
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017



strī-veśinaṁ kṛṣṇam agāra-madhye



asthāpayat tarhi tu sā jaratyā



sahaiva tat-pārśva-gatā jagāda (42)



Earlier that day, Dhaniṣṭhā had told Gārgī to dress up
Śrī Kṛṣṇa as a beautiful young girl. Gārgī had already
done so and had taken Him to her house, so she did not
see any necessity to go there before Jaṭilā.
Accordingly, they all went together to the house, where
Gārgī addressed Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who was disguised as a
beautiful young girl. (42)



vidyāvale! bho bhagini! vraje ‘smin



yā nitya-rājad-guṇa-rūpa-kīrttiḥ



tvayā śrutā śrī-vṛṣabhānu-putrī



tasyā vipattim arhatī batādya (43)




kenāpi daṣṭā maṇi-dhāriṇā sā



sarpeṇa hālāhala-pūritā ‘bhūt



śvaśrur amuṣyāḥ sa-sutā prapannā



tvāṁ tat tvam etad bhavanaṁ jihīthāḥ (44)




“Sister Vidyāvali, You have heard the name of Śrī
Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī. She is famous throughout Vraja and
She is endowed with all good qualities. Today, a great
calamity has befallen Her. She has been bitten by a

                           54
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017

jewelled serpent and now Her body is filled with its
poison. That is why Her mother-in-law and sister-in-law,
Kuṭilā, have come to see You. You should go with them to
their house at once.” (43—44)



vidyāvaliḥ prāha bhaginy ayi tvaṁ



vijñāpya vijñeva giraṁ tanoṣi



kulāṅganā vipra-vadhūr ahaṁ kiṁ



bhavan-mate jāṅgalikī bhavāmi (45)



“O sister,” replied Vidyāvali, “you are learned, and yet
you speak like an ignorant person. Alas, alas, I am a
chaste and pure girl, and also the wife of a brāhmaṇa,
but according to you, I am knowledgeable in the
uncivilised art of snake charming. (45)



pituḥ kulaṁ vṛṣṇi-pūre ‘sti patyuḥ



kulan tu kāśyāṁ prathitaṁ nṛ-loke



kalaṅka-paṅkena nimajjayantī



māṁ tvaṁ kathaṁ snihyasi tan na budhye (46)



“Please listen to Me. My father’s family in Mathurā is
renowned, and My husband’s illustrious family is pre-
eminent in Kāśī. Who in this world has not heard of
these two families? I cannot understand how you can cast
such noble lineages into the mud of infamy. Is this how
you show your affection?” (46)



jaraty avocet tava pāda-padme



natā ‘smi sañjīvya vadhūṁ madīyām




                           55
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017

māṁ tvaṁ sa-putrāṁ nija-pāda-dhūli-



krītāṁ vidhehīty atha kiṁ bravīmi (47)



Old Jaṭilā then addressed Vidyāvali, saying, “I pay my
respects at Your feet. If You restore my daughter-in-law
to health, You will purchase me and my son with the dust
of Your feet. What more can I say?” (47)



vidyāvaliḥ prākhyad ayi vraja-sthe



jānāsi na brahma-kulasya rītim



gṛhaṁ gṛhaṁ gopya iva bhramanti



na vipra-vadhvaḥ su-mahābhijātyāt (48)




provāca gārgī śṛṇu bho śruti-smṛti-



proktaṁ niṣiddhaṁ vihitañ ca yad bhavet



jñātvāpi tat sarvam idaṁ bravīṣi



na te ‘sti dṛṣṭiḥ kila pāramarthikī (49)



“Old woman of Vraja,” replied Vidyāvali, “you are not
aware of the tradition of our brāhmaṇa family. Wives of
brāhmaṇas do not wander from house to house like common
cowherd girls, because of the nobility of their exalted
family lineage.”

Thereupon Gārgī told Vidyāvali, “Sister, You are well-
versed in the standards and prohibitions given in śruti
and smṛti scriptures, yet You put forward opinions about
caste and family. This shows You have no transcendental
vision. (48—49)



vraje sthitāḥ kīrtti-dayānvitā yā

                           56
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017




gopyas tathā ye vṛṣabhānu-tulyāḥ



gopā na teṣāṁ tvam avaiṣi tattvaṁ



nāpy ābhijātyaṁ na ca viṣṇu-bhaktim (50)



“And listen to me, the gopīs of Vraja are endowed with
highly respectable qualities, such as fame and
compassion, and the gopas are equal to Vṛṣabhānu
Mahārāja. You do not understand anything about their
real nature, their family lineage and their devotion to
Lord Viṣṇu. (50)



kāśyāṁ sthitā viṣṇu-bahirmukhā ye



viprā bhavatyāḥ śvaśurādayas tān



jānāmi no vācaya māṁ taveyaṁ



kāśyāṁ sthiter buddhir abhūt kaṭhorā (51)



“I know all about those brāhmaṇas of Kāśī, especially
Your in-law’s family. They are all against Lord Viṣṇu.
Do not tell me anything more about them. Ever since You
moved to Kāśīpura, Your outlook has become as harsh as
theirs.” (51)



mā kupya śāntiṁ bhaja tāvad ārye



bhaginy ahaṁ te hanta tavāśritā ‘smi



yathā bravīṣy evam ahaṁ karomi



kintv atra śaṅkā mama kācid asti (52)




                           57
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017

“Good sister, please do not be angry with Me,” pleaded
Vidyāvali. “Do calm down. I am utterly dependent on you.
I shall do whatever you ask Me to, but in this regard I
have one great apprehension. (52)



pure śrutā kācana kiṁ vadantī



nandasya putro ‘jani ko ‘pi vīraḥ



sa svaira-caryyo bata lampaṭatvān



na brahma-jāter api bhītim eti (53)



“In Mathurā I heard a rumour that Nanda Mahārāja has a
mighty son, who is both self-willed and licentious, and
who has no respect even for the brāhmaṇas. (53)



atretya nārīṣv iva mayy api drāk



sa lobha-dṛṣṭi yadi vartmani syāt



sadyas tadāsūn visṛjāmi naiva



kula-dvayaṁ hanta! kalaṅkayāmi (54)



“If, as I walk on the path, He suddenly looks at Me with
the same lusty glance He casts upon all the women of
Vraja, I will immediately give up My life. Alas, I
cannot in any way disgrace My two aristocratic
families.” (54)



na tatra śaṅkā tava kāpi yasmād



ahaṁ svayaṁ tvat-sahitā prayāmi



ity eva gārgyā vacanāc calantī



                           58
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017


vidyāvalir vartmani kiñcid ūce (55)



“My dear sister,” said Gārgī, “there is no need to be
afraid, for I myself will travel with You.” Vidyāvali
then agreed, and She and Gārgī set off for Jaṭilā’s
house with the others. On the way Vidyāvali said to
Jaṭilā, (55)



mantrauṣadhābhyāṁ garalasya nāśas



tatrāsti mantro mama kaṇṭha eva



yac cauṣadhaṁ tat tv ahi-valliparṇaṁ



mantraṁ japantyā rada-piṣṭam eva (56)




tat te vadhūḥ sā mama bhakṣayet kiṁ



na vetti pṛṣṭā jaṭilā jagāda



sā me snuṣā brāhmaṇa-jāti-bhaktā



tad bhakṣayed eva kim atra citram (57)




provāca gārgī na kilauṣadhādāv



abhakṣya-bhakṣyasya bhaved vicāraḥ



tatrāpi bhūdeva-kulasya śeṣaṁ



rājā ‘pi bhuṅkte kim utānya-jātiḥ (58)



                           59
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017


“Please listen to me. The snake poison is to be removed
by both mantra and medication. The mantras are in My
throat and the medication is the tāmbūla that I will
chew, which will become sanctified by the mantras in My
throat. Good woman, will your daughter-in-law take this
medication?”

“My daughter-in-law is very devoted to the brāhmaṇas,”
replied Jaṭilā. “Of course She will eat Your chewed
tāmbūla. There is no doubt about that.”

“When it comes to medicine,” said Gārgī, “there is no
consideration regarding what is edible and what is
inedible. Even a great emperor who rules over other
powerful kings takes the remnants of the brāhmaṇas, what
to speak of those from other castes.” (56—58)



praviṣṭavatyāḥ sva-gṛhaṁ tataḥ sā



vidyāvaleḥ pāda-yugaṁ sa-putrā



adhāvayat tat-salilaṁ sva-vadhvāś



cikṣepa mūrddhākṣi-mukhorasi drāk (59)



Vidyāvali soon arrived at Jaṭilā’s house. When She came
inside, Jaṭilā and Abhimanyu respectfully bathed Her
feet. Then Jaṭilā went to Śrī Rādhā and sprinkled the
bathing water on Her head, eyes, mouth and breast. (59)



proce snuṣe! kāpi mahānubhāvā



gargasya putryāgamad atra bhāgyāt



sā susthayiṣyaty acireṇa vijñā



mantrais tvad-aṅgāni muhuḥ spṛśantī (60)




kiñcāhi-vallī-dala-vīṭikāñ ca



                           60
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017


sañcarvavya dantaiḥ paṭhitaiḥ sva-mantraiḥ



nidhāsyate tan-mukha eva tatra



ghṛṇā na kāryā śapatho mamātra (61)



Jaṭilā said to Śrī Rādhā, “O daughter-in-law, by some
great fortune, this noble soul, the daughter of
Gargācārya has just arrived. She is expert in the
science of removing snake poison. She will touch all of
Your limbs while chanting mantras, and soon You will
become healthy. One more thing, be prepared for Her to
place in Your mouth Her chewed tāmbūla that has been
sanctified by mantras. Please do not object to this.”
(60—61)



vidyāvalis tan-nilayaṁ praviṣṭā



vilokya rādhāṁ vasanāvṛtāṅgīm



vadhvāḥ padān mastakataś ca vastram



udañcayādau jaratīty avocat (62)




bhujaṅga-mantrair abhimantrya pāṇiṁ



sañcālayāmy aṅghrita urddhva-gātre



yad yāvad aṅgaṁ viṣam āruroha



jñātvaiva tan nirviṣayāmi mantraiḥ (63)



When Vidyāvali entered Śrī Rādhā’s room, She saw that
Rādhā’s body was covered from head to foot with cloth.
She told Jaṭilā, “Old woman, remove the cloth that
covers your daughter-in-law’s body. I need to move My
hands over Her body, starting from Her feet, while

                           61
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017

chanting a snake-mantra. My hands will detect what parts
of Her body the poison has reached, and when My hands
come to those places, I will repeat mantras that will
remove the venom.” (62—63)



tataś calan pāṇir agād amuṣyā



vakṣaḥ-sthalaṁ norddham ataḥ paraṁ yat



tad ghaṭṭayām āsa muhuḥ karābhyām



asyā uro gāruḍa-mantra-pāṭhaiḥ (64)



Jaṭilā removed the cloth, and Vidyāvali began to move
Her hands over Śrī Rādhā. She started with Her feet,
gradually moving up Her body. When She reached Śrī
Rādhā’s breasts, She went no further, but kept both
hands on them as She chanted the incantation to Gāruḍa
over and over again. (64)



vidyāvaliḥ prākhyad aho kim etad



viṣaṁ na śāmyet karavai kim atra



vṛddhā ‘bravīt svāsyata auṣadhaṁ tad-



āsye snuṣāyāḥ kṣipa bhojayāmum (65)



Vidyāvali then turned to Jaṭilā and said, “Old woman,
something is wrong! The poison is not leaving. What
shall I do now?”

Jaṭilā replied, “Kindly take some of that chewed
medicine from Your mouth and put it into Hers, then see
what happens.” (65)



muhur muhuḥ prākṣipam auṣadhaṁ tad-



āsye amuṣyāḥ kṛta-mantra-pāṭhā


                           62
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017



tathāpi vaivarṇavatī vadhus te



prakampate niḥśvasiti pragāḍham (66)




sarvā bahir yāta-gṛhaṁ kavāṭen-



āvṛtya sarpasya japāmi mantram



muhūrtta-mātreṇa tam eva sarpam



āhūya tenāpi sahālapāmi (67)




cintā na kāryā tila-mātry api drāk



sañjīvayiṣyāmi vadhūṁ tvadīyām



ekāgra-cittā ghaṭikā-trayānte



mantraṁ prajapyākhilam īkṣayāmi (68)



“I keep putting that purified medicine into Her mouth,”
Vidyāvali said, “but She continues to tremble and
breathe deeply. She is still yellow with the poison. I
shall have to change the treatment. All of you please
leave the room. I will lock the door and recite a snake-
mantra to summon the snake that bit your daughter-in-
law. The snake will arrive within a moment and I will
talk with him. Do not worry in the slightest; I will
very soon revive your daughter-in-law. After I have been
reciting this mantra with focused mind for three hours I
will show all of you the result.” (66—68)



gārgī-girā tā yayur anya-gehaṁ




                           63
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017

muhūrttataś cāyayur apy athātra



vidyāvaler vācam aheś ca gopyo



gṛhāntare bhoḥ śṛṇutety athocuḥ (69)



On Gārgī’s advice everyone went to another room, and
after a while they returned to the courtyard outside Śrī
Rādhā’s room. The gopīs, who knew Vidyāvali’s real
identity, spoke within the hearing of Jaṭilā and Kuṭilā,
“Come on,” they said, “let us listen to the conversation
between Vidyāvali and the snake!” (69)



svara-dvayenaiva jagāda kṛṣṇo



yat tat tu sakhyaḥ sahasā ‘vajagmuḥ



yāḥ kautukānanda-samudrayor drāg



āvartta-magnāḥ su-bhṛśaṁ virejuḥ (70)




bho sarpa-rājātra kutas tvam āgāḥ



kailāsataḥ kasya nideśa-kṛt tvam?



candrārddha-mauleḥ sa ca kīdṛśo ‘bhūd



bhuṅkṣvābhimanyuṁ jaṭilā-sutaṁ drāk (71)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa feigned two different voices: that of
Vidyāvali and that of the snake. The sakhīs, who
understood everything, were immersed in merriment,
caught in a whirlpool in the ocean of festive bliss. A
wonderful splendour began to spread forth.

In Vidyāvali’s voice, Śrī Kṛṣṇa asked, “O king of
snakes, where have you come from?”


                           64
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017

With the voice of a snake, He replied, “From Kailāśa.”

“On whose order have you come?”

“Candrārdhamauli[ii]1 Śiva ordered me to come here.”

“What was his instruction?”

“To bite Jaṭilā’s son Abhimanyu.” (70–71)



aghaḥ kim etasya, na kiñca kintu



tan-mātur evāsty aparādha-yugmam



sā kiṁ na daṣṭā, garalānalād apy



apatya-śokāgnir atīva-tīvraḥ (72)




tayā ‘nubhūto bhavatu pragāḍham



ity etad arthaṁ na hi daśyate sā



tyaktvā ‘bhimanyuṁ katham asya jāyā



daṣṭā ‘tra sādhavya-vara-pradānāt (73)




durvāsasāsau prathamaṁ na tasmād



daṣṭaḥ sa daṣṭavya iha prabhāte



putrasya vadhvāś ca yathā ‘tiśoke



jājjvalyate sā nikhilaṁ svam āyuḥ (74)




                              65
Camatkara-candrika.txt                            5/5/2017

“What is Abhimanyu’s crime?” Vidyāvali asked.

“He has not committed any offence,” replied the snake.
“But his mother has committed two.”



“Then why did you not bite Abhimanyu’s mother?”

“Because Jaṭilā will experience a greater burning when
she mourns her son than she would through the fire of my
venom,” replied the snake. “That is why I did not bite
her.”

“Then why did you bite Abhimanyu’s wife instead of him?”
inquired Vidyāvali.

The snake explained: “Durvāsā, the best of sages, has
given the blessing of saubhāgyavatī to Śrī Rādhā, the
crown jewel of chaste ladies. Because he has given Her
that blessing — to be a woman whose husband is alive —
Abhimanyu cannot die as long as She remains alive.
Durvāsā’s boon and Śrī Rādhā’s chastity are extremely
powerful. That is why I cannot kill Abhimanyu without
first biting Śrī Rādhā and killing Her. Today I bit Śrī
Rādhā, and at dawn tomorrow I will bite Abhimanyu. The
rest of Jaṭilā’s life will be filled with fearsome
suffering as she mourns both her son and her daughter-
in-law.” (72—74)



kiṁ hanta tasyāḥ aparādha-yugmaṁ



durvāsasi śrīla-hara-svarūpe



kaṭākṣa eko’sty aparan tu śambhor



ya iṣṭadevo harir asya cāṁśe (75)




nandātmaje ‘līka mahāpravādas



tad-bhojane bādha-karaḥ sva-vadhvāḥ



nirodhatas tan-nija-kanyayā sā



sārddhaṁ vraje roditu sarva-kālam (76)


                           66
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017



Vidyāvali then asked, “Please tell Me, what are the old
woman Jaṭilā’s two crimes?”

The snake replied, “Jaṭilā’s first offence was to defame
the sage Durvāsā, who is a manifestation of Lord Śiva
himself. The second offence was to falsely accuse Nanda
Mahārāja’s son, who is even the source of Śrī Hari, the
worshipable deity of Lord Śiva. By confining her
daughter-in-law to Her room, Jaṭilā has created an
obstacle for Nanda-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa to get His meals.
Because of these two offences, Jaṭilā and her daughter
Kuṭilā will weep in lamentation for Śrī Rādhā and
Abhimanyu for the rest of their lives here in Vraja-
maṇḍala.” (75—76)



hā putra! hā prāṇa-same snuṣe kiṁ



śṛṇomi hā hanta! cirāyuṣaus tam



vidyāvale! tvac-caraṇau prapannā



prasādayāmuṁ bhujagādhirājam (77)




vadhūṁ na rotsyāmi kadāpi seyaṁ



prayātu nandasya puraṁ yatheṣṭam



sambhojayitvaiva hariṁ prakāmaṁ



paktā punar mad-gṛham etu nityam (78)



When old Jaṭilā heard this, she began to weep loudly.
She cried in grief, “Alas, alas, O my son, O daughter-
in-law, who are my very life air! Will I never again
hear you receive the blessing, ëMay you both live
long’?” She then implored Vidyāvali: “O Vidyavāli, I am
surrendering at Your feet. Please satisfy this king of
snakes, somehow or other. From now on, I will never
prevent my daughter-in-law from daily going to Nanda
Mahārāja’s house to cook for Śrī Kṛṣṇa. She is free to
go according to Her desire. She will return home only
when She has completed all Her duties there. (77—78)

                           67
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017




durvāsasaṁ taṁ śataśo namāmi



mune ‘parādhaṁ mama hā kṣamasva



jarāturāyā atimanda-buddher



ājanma-bātulatayā sthitāyāḥ (79)



“O Durvāsā, best of sages! I pay my obeisances at your
feet hundreds and hundreds of times. I am praying to you
to please forgive my offence. I am renowned for being
old, feeble-minded and quite mad since birth. (79)



kanyā mameyaṁ tu sadā kubuddhir



vadhūḥ suśīlāṁ prasabhaṁ dunoti



śrutveti mātur vacanaṁ dharaṇyāṁ



nipatya soce kuṭilā ‘pi natvā (80)




kṣamasva sarpendra-kṛpāṁ kuruṣva



mad-bhrātaraṁ mā daśa naiva rotsye



vadhūṁ na cāpi pravadāmi jātu



tatrālibhir yatra bhavet tad-icchā (81)



“The mind of my daughter Kuṭilā has always been devious
and crooked. Śrī Rādhā’s character and disposition are
good, but my daughter has caused Her much suffering for
no reason.” Hearing her mother’s words, Kuṭilā fell to

                              68
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017

the ground to offer her respects to the snake. “O king
of snakes, please forgive me! Please be kind and do not
bite my brother! I will never again make any accusations
against Rādhā, and I will never again prevent Her from
leaving the house. From now on She can go wherever She
wants with Her sakhīs.” (80—81)



sarpo ‘vadad bhoḥ śṛṇutāśu gopyaḥ



sādhvy eva rādhā śapatho ‘tra śambhoḥ



tvañ cāpi kṛtvā śapathaṁ sva-sūnor



mūrddhṇo vadātrāstu mama pratītiḥ (82)



The king of snakes said, “O gopīs, carefully hear My
words. I swear by Lord Śambhu that Śrī Rādhā is a
virtuous and chaste wife. O Jaṭilā, I will only trust
you if you accept this as fact and swear an oath upon
the head of your son.” (82)



tvad-ukta itthaṁ śapathaḥ kṛto ‘yaṁ



vadhūṁ na rotsyāmi kadāpy ahīndra!



snuṣā ca putraś ca cirāya jīvatv



imaṁ varaṁ me kṛpayā prayaccha (83)



On hearing this, Jaṭilā placed her hand on her son’s
head, and swore the oath. She then said, “O king of
snakes, I have full faith in Your words. I will never
again confine my daughter-in-law to the house. Please
bestow Your mercy upon me this once by blessing my son
and daughter-in-law with long life.” (83)



bāḍhaṁ prasanno ‘smi jaraty ayi tvaṁ



durvāsasaṁ pūjaya bhojayasva


                           69
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017



rādhāṅgataḥ svaṁ garalaṁ gṛhītvā



vrajāmi kailāsam ito ‘dhunaiva (84)




kṛṣṇa-pravādaṁ yadi te snuṣāyai



dadāsi dehy atra na me ‘sti kopaḥ



ruṇatsi tāṁ cet sahasāgatas te



vadhūñ ca putrañ ca ruṣā daśāmi (85)



The snake then said, “So be it. I am completely
satisfied with you, old lady. You should also worship
Sage Durvāsā and offer him good food. I shall now remove
the poison from Śrī Rādhā’s body and return to Kailāśa.
If you wish, you may falsely accuse your daughter-in-law
of having some relationship with Śrī Kṛṣṇa; I will not
be angry with you for that. But from this day forth, if
you ever prevent Her from going here and there, I will
be so enraged I will immediately bite your son and
daughter-in-law, and they will both die.” (84—85)



provāca vidyāvalir ātta-modā



bho gopikā dhatta-mudaṁ mahiṣṭhām



viṣaṁ gṛhītvānta radhād ahīndro



nirāmayābhūd vṛṣabhānu-putrī (86)



Thereafter, Vidyāvali’s voice joyfully exclaimed, “O
gopīs, now you can be supremely blissful! The snake has
removed the poison and disappeared, and Vṛṣabhānu-
nandinī is completely cured.” (86)




                           70
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017

udghāṭayām āsa yadā kavāṭaṁ



tadaiva sarvā viviśur gṛhāntaḥ



papracchur etām ayi! kīdṛśī tvaṁ



susthā ‘smi tāpo mama nāsti ko ‘pi (87)



They opened the door and entered the room. “Rādhā,” they
asked, “how are You feeling now?”

“I am feeling well,” She replied. “I do not feel any
burning sensation any more.” (87)



vidyāvaler aṅghri-yugaṁ praṇemur



dhanyaiva vidyā tava dhanya-kīrtte



sañjīvya rādhām ayi puṇya-vīthīṁ



dhanyām avindas tava dhanyam āyuḥ (88)



Everyone bowed respectfully at Vidyāvali’s feet and
said, “O Vidyāvali, all glories to You! You have gained
limitless pious credit by restoring Śrī Rādhā’s life,
and Your life has become completely auspicious.” (88)



lalāga karṇe kuṭilā jaratyaḥ



sā prāha kanye kim idaṁ bravīṣi



ekena hāreṇa kim adya sarvā-



laṅkāram asyā adhunaiva dāsye (89)



Kuṭilā whispered in Jaṭilā’s ear, “Mother, give Śrī

                              71
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017

Rādhā’s necklace to Vidyāvali as a reward.”

“What are you saying, Kuṭilā?” Jaṭilā responded. “Why
only a necklace? I will give Her all of Śrī Rādhā’s
jewellery!” (89)



snuṣe! prasīda sva-kareṇa sarvā-



laṅkāram etāṁ paridhāpaya tvam



vrajeśvarī tvaj-jananī ca śīghraṁ



dāsyaty anekābharaṇāni tubhyam (90)



“Daughter-in-law,” Jaṭilā said, “with a happy heart
adorn Vidyāvali with all Your ornaments. Your mother and
Vrajeśvarī Śrī Yaśodā will soon give You many new ones.”
(90)



vidyāvale! mac-chapatho na neti



mā brūhyato maunavatī tava tvam



tatas tu rādhā paridhāpayantī



bhūṣāmbarādi-svagataṁ jagāda (91)



“Vidyāvali, my daughter-in-law will personally adorn You
with these decorations. Please accept them for my sake;
do not say that You cannot accept these gifts.” Śrī
Rādhā proceeded to use Her clothes, ornaments and so
forth to decorate Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who was disguised as
Vidyāvali. As She did so, She thought: (91)



yo māṁ sakhīnāṁ purato ‘pi naiva



śaśāka sambhoktum ayaṁ priyo me




                           72
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017

śvaśrvā nanānduś ca samakṣam eva



māṁ nirvivādaṁ sama-bhuṅkta bāḍham (92)



“My beloved and I cannot enjoy in front of My sakhīs,
even though they are as close to Me as My own soul; yet
today He has freely enjoyed with Me to His heart’s
content, right in front of My mother-in-law and sister-
in-law! (92)



vāmyañ ca karttum mama nāvakāśo



ëbhūvaṁ paraṁ kevala-dakṣiṇaiva



kintv adya vāñchā januṣo ‘py apūri



tac-carvitaṁ bhuktam aho muhur yat (93)



“Today I had no opportunity to display My contrary
nature (vāmya-bhāva); I could only remain in a
submissive mood (dakṣiṇa-bhāva). But let it be. Today,
the desire I have held dear birth after birth has been
fulfilled, because today, over and over again, I tasted
the tāmbūla chewed by My beloved. (93)



pāde nipatyaiva madīya-kāntam



ānīya sākṣāt samabhojayan mām



vadhūṁ tad asyāś caraṇe nanānduḥ



śvaśrvāś ca me bhaktir avicyutā ‘stu (94)



“For such a long time I have considered My mother-in-law
and sister-in-law to be My enemies, but today they have
brought My Prāṇa-kānta, the beloved of My life, to our
very house. They have bowed down and worshipped His
feet, and they were the cause of Him meeting and even
enjoying openly with Me. Because of this, I pray to have
firm devotion to their feet. (94)

                           73
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017




sambhoga-paścād api tan-nideśāc



chṛṅgāvayāmi priyam agrato ‘pi



asyā aye dhanya vidhe numas tvāṁ



vṛttaṁ tavaitat kva nu varṇayāmi (95)



“Today We met each other, and now I am decorating My
beloved Prāṇa-vallabha directly in front of My mother-
in-law; and on her order as well! O Providence, you are
blessed! I offer you My homage and sing your glories.
Where and to whom could I possibly narrate this incident
that was orchestrated by you?” (95)



vidyāvalīḥ prāha bhaginy ataḥ kim



ārye! tvad-ājñāṁ karavai vadaitat



yā vo gṛhaṁ śīghram ataḥ paran tu



rātrir niśīthād api hy adhikā ‘bhūt (96)



“Noble Jaṭilā,” said Vidyāvali, “it is already after
midnight. Please tell us what you want us to do now. If
you have no more instructions, we two sisters should
quickly return home.” (96)



jaraty avādīd ayi gārgi! vidyā-



valis tathā tvañ ca haṭhād iyatyām



rātrau kathaṁ yāsy atha āḥ sukhena



mamaiva gehe svapitaṁ kathaṁ na? (97)

                           74
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017




Old Jaṭilā said, “Gārgī and Vidyāvali, how can you
return to your home in the middle of the night? Why do
you not happily rest in our house tonight?” (97)



jagāda gārgī jaṭile! tvad-uktam



avaśyam etat karavāva bāḍham



na yāti cittād viṣa-śeṣa-gandha-



sambhāvanā me khala-sarpa-jāteḥ (98)



Gārgī replied, “I will certainly obey your words,
because a trace of that deceitful snake’s poison is
still left in our hearts and has not been completely
dispelled. When someone has been bitten by this black
snake (kṛṣṇa-sarpa), their fever may seem to go down at
first, but there is a chance that it may rise again. It
is necessary for the patient to remain near the one who
is learned in mantras.” (98)

provāca bāḍhaṁ jaṭilā sa-kanyā



tad adya vadhvā saha puṣpa-talpe



ekatra vidyāvalir iddha-mantrā



sukhaṁ balabhyāṁ svapitu prakāmam (99)



Both Kuṭilā and Jaṭilā said, “So be it. Let Vidyāvali,
who is learned in mantras, rest happily together with
Śrī Rādhā on the flower-bed in the room on the roof.”
(99)



iddaṁ vilāsa-rasikau rata-sindhū cāru



hillola-khelana-kalāḥ kila tena tuṣṭau



                           75
Camatkara-candrika.txt                          5/5/2017


premābdhi-kautuka-mahiṣṭha-taraṅga-raṅge



sakhyaḥ sukhena nanṛtur na virāmam āpuḥ (100)



Śrī Rādhā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa are most adept in relishing
divine pastimes. The ingenious, artistic sports They
manifest are magnificent waves in the ocean of pure,
spiritual amorous love. The sakhīs also dance
incessantly in this sporting arena in the waves of
merriment in the ocean of prema. (100)




The Meeting of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Disguised as a Female Singer

The Fourth Mischievous Playful Pastime




rādhā kadācid atimānavatī babhūva

tāṁ na prasādayitum aiṣṭa hariḥ praṣahya

sāmādibhir bahu-vidhair vitatair upāyaiḥ

kaundyā sahātha kim api pratatāna mantram (1)




One day, Śrī Rādhā was in deep māna (sulky mood).
Although Śrī Kṛṣṇa brought Her gifts, praised Her and
tried to pacify Her in every way possible, nothing He
did had any effect. At last He went to see Kundalatā, to
consult with her privately about what to do. (1)



bhūṣāmbarādi paridhāya vidhāya nārī-

veśaṁ vikasvara pika-svara-mañju-kaṇṭhaḥ

sārddhaṁ tayā mṛdu-raṇan-maṇi-nūpurābhyāṁ

padbhyāṁ jagāma jaṭilā-nilayaṁ nilīya (2)

After discussing the situation with Kundalatā, He
disguised Himself as a beautiful young girl. He donned
young girl’s clothing and jewellery, and assumed a voice
so sweet and enchanting that it put the melodious song
of the cuckoo bird to shame. In this way, He went with
Kundalatā to the house of Jaṭilā, His jewelled ankle-
bells tinkling softly as He walked. (2)



                           76
Camatkara-candrika.txt                            5/5/2017


ārād vilokya sahasā sahasā sahāliḥ



saundarya-vismita-manā avadan mṛgākṣī



ehy ehi kundalatike! vada vṛttam āśu



kiṁ hetukaṁ gamanam etad abhūd akasmāt (3)



Śrī Rādhā was in the company of Her sakhīs. The moment
Śrī Rādhā set Her doe-like eyes upon this
extraordinarily attractive young woman approaching in
the distance with Kundalatā, Her mind became completely
enchanted. Smiling, She addressed Kundalatā: “Come, come
Kundalatā and tell us right now why you are paying us a
surprise visit today. (3)



keyaṁ kutaḥ kim abhidhānavatīti pṛṣṭā

śrī-rādhayāvadad imāṁ prati kundavallī

nāmnā kalāvalir iyaṁ mathurā-pradeśād

atrāgatā śruta-bhavad-guṇa-nāma-kīrttiḥ (4)



gānair girāṁ gurum api prabhaved vijetuṁ

kim vācyam etad avagacchata gāpayitvā

kasmād aśikṣad iyatīm ayi! gāna-vidyāṁ

sākṣāt purandara-guroḥ kva nu tat-prasaṅgaḥ (5)

“And who is this beautiful young woman with you? Where
does She come from, and what is Her name?”

“Rādhā,” replied Kundalatā, “Her name is Kalāvali.
Having heard of Your name, fame and qualities, She has
come from Mathurā to meet You. Her expertise in singing
surpasses that of even Indra’s guru, Bṛhaspati. What
more can I say? You will only understand what I mean if
You hear Her sing.”

“My friend, Kundalatā,” Śrī Rādhā then asked, “from whom
has Kalāvali learned such skill?”

“From Bṛhaspati himself,” replied Kundalatā.

“And how did She get the chance to meet him?” (4—5)




                           77
Camatkara-candrika.txt                          5/5/2017

satraṁ yad āṅgirasam atra varāṅgi! vṛṣṇi-

puryāṁ vyatanyata nu māthura vipra-varyaiḥ

tarhy eva so ‘mara-purāt sahasaitya māsaṁ

vāsaṁ vidhāya paramādṛta ānananda (6)

“Beautiful-limbed Rādhā,” replied Kundalatā, “once, when
the brāhmaṇas of Mathurā were performing a great
āṅgirasa sacrifice, Bṛhaspati came there from the abode
of the demigods and stayed in Mathurā for one month. He
received great honour at that place, and this pleased
him immensely. (6)



madhye satāṁ sa hi kadācid agāyad evaṁ



gītaṁ yad etad adadhād iyam āli! sadyaḥ



medhāvatī tad aparedyu raho jagau tat



tena svareṇa bata tair api tāla-tānaiḥ (7)



“Sakhī Rādhā, one day in that respected assembly,
Bṛhaspati performed a recital of a celestial song. This
song is extremely difficult to sing, but Kalāvali is so
astute that amazingly She immediately memorised it, and
the next day She sang it with precisely the same complex
rhythm and subtle melody as he used. (7)



śrutvā bṛhaspatir aho mama gītam ārāt



kā gāyatīti bahu-vismayavān avādīt



martyo ‘py aśikṣad ayi mat-sakṛd-uktito yad



durgaṁ dyu-gānam api vipra! tad-ānayaitām (8)



“When Bṛhaspati heard Her sing, he was filled with
amazement and inquired from one of the Mathurābrāhmaṇas,
ëWho is this young woman who is singing my intricate
celestial song? I am astonished! She is a mere resident
of this mortal world, and yet She has learnt this song
after hearing it only once. Please bring Her to me.’ (8)

                           78
Camatkara-candrika.txt                           5/5/2017




viprādeśam avāpya gīṣpati-puro yātām imāṁ so ‘bravīt

tvām dyāpayitā ‘smi dhīmati! parāṁ gāndharva-vidyām aham

medhā te ‘nupamā pikāli-vijayī kaṇṭho yadā dṛśyate

naivādṛṅ manu-jeṣu labdha-januṣāṁ no kinnarīṇām api (9)

“On Bṛhaspati’s order, the brāhmaṇa brought Kalāvali
before him. ëMost intelligent of young girls,’ said
Bṛhaspati, ëYour genius is matchless and Your voice
defeats the cooing of cuckoos. How wonderful! I will
therefore instruct You in the topmost knowledge of the
Gandharvas. Such a fine intelligence and sweet voice
cannot be found in the realm of human beings, or even
Kinnaras.’ (9)



adhāpya māsam iha varṣam api svayaṁ svar-



nītām apāṭhayad imam iyam āśvinānte



prāpyāvanīṁ madhu-purīm agamad vraje hyaḥ



sāyaṁ tathādya tu tavāgrataḥ āgatā ‘bhūt (10)



“Bṛhaspati instructed this girl for the duration of his
month’s stay in Mathurā. Then he took Her with him when
he returned to the heavenly planets and taught Her there
for yet another year. She returned to the Earth planet
at the end of the month of Āśvina, and came to Mathurā
only yesterday. Now, today at dusk, She has come before
You here in Vraja.” (10)



tad gīyatāṁ kim api bhāvini kaṁ nu rāgaṁ



gāyāni mālava-hima-praṇaya-pradoṣe



kaṁ vā svaraṁ su-mukhi! ṣaḍ-jam atha śrutiṁ vā



kāṁ tasya vacmi catasṛṣv iti cādiśa tvam (11)




                           79
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017

Upon hearing Kundalatā’s story, Śrī Rādhā said, “O
Bhāvini (beautiful lady), sing something for Me.”

“Vṛndāvaneśvarī,” replied Kalāvali, “which rāga would
You like to hear Me sing?”

Śrī Rādhā replied, “It is twilight, so You may sing a
mālava rāga.”

“Sumukhi (beautiful-faced one), in which melody should I
sing?”

“Please sing in ṣaḍaja,” replied Śrī Rādhā.

Kalāvali then asked, “Rādhā, in which of the four
different śrutis of that melody will I sing?” (11)



kaṇṭhe śrutir na tava vāta-kaphādidoṣā



śuddhā bhaviṣyati kadāpi vinaiva vīṇām



tad-rāga-tāla-gamaka-svara-jāti-tāna-



grāma-śriyā madhuram ātanu gītam ekam (12)



“O beautiful one,” replied Śrī Rādhā, “if one has a
bodily disorder in which the kapha or vāta in the throat
is out of balance, it is not possible to sing purely. In
the same way, it is not possible to sing pure notes
without the backing of a vīṇā. Nonetheless, I would like
to hear You sing a sweet song full of the various
attributes of music such as scale (rāga), rhythmic
cycles (tāla), musical notes (svara), ornaments
(gamaka), the particular class of rāga (jāti),
improvised variations (tāna) and the Vedic system of
melody (grāma).” (12)



rādhe! vinaiva bhavatīm iha gāna-vidyāṁ



jānanti kāḥ kalayatā ‘militāḥ śrutīs tāḥ



procyettham ātanuta keky-ali-vṛnda-nindi-



tānā-nanā-tanana-rīti surīti-gānam (13)



                           80
Camatkara-candrika.txt                          5/5/2017


“Rādhā,” said Kalāvali, “who in this universe is as
expert in music and song as You are? I can only sing
simple melodies. Please listen.” Saying this, Kalāvali
began to sing, “Tā nā na nā ta na na ṛ,” in such a
beautiful voice that She put to shame both the peacocks
and the bumblebees. (13)



ādau priyāli-vitater nayanāśru-nadyaḥ



sasrus tataḥ sthagitatāṁ yayur eva madhye



antya-kṣaṇe tu kara-kopalatām avāpya



petuṣ ṭhanaṭ-ṭhanad iti kṣiti-pṛṣṭha eva (14)



When Śrī Rādhā’s dear sakhīs heard Kalāvali’s sweet
singing, rivers of tears flowed from their eyes. As the
song progressed, their rapture and enchantment became
such that their tears even stopped flowing. Then, at the
song’s completion, those tears pattered to the ground
like a shower of small stones. (14)



tasyāḥ kaṭhoratara-mānajuṣas tu citta-



hīropalaṁ dravam avāpa yadaiva sadyaḥ



sāścaryam ākhad ayi hanta! kalāvale tvad-



gānaṁ sudhāṁ sura-purasya tiraskaroti (15)



Śrī Rādhā’s heart had become as hard as a diamond
because of Her māna, but now it was melting, and this
surprised Her. “Devī, Kalāvali,” She said, “Your song is
so sweet it far surpasses the sweetness of the nectar of
the demigods. (15)



tvādṛg jano yadi mamāstika eva tiṣṭhed

bhāgyāj janus tad akhilaṁ saphalī-karomi

nandātmajo yadi punaḥ śṛṇuyād guṇan te

                           81
Camatkara-candrika.txt                           5/5/2017


kaṇṭhād bahir na hi karoti tadā kadāpi (16)

“If only someone with Your skills would always stay with
Me. Oh, then I would be so fortunate! Only then would My
entire life become successful. But listen, Devī, if the
son of Nanda Mahārāja hears of Your singing, He will
certainly always wear You as an ornament around His
neck.” (16)



abruta kundalatikā na vadaitad etāṁ

sādhvīṁ tvam eva nija-kaṇṭha-taṭīṁ nayainām

naivānyathā kuru tatas tu parārddha-niṣkaṁ

ditsuḥ sukhena parirabdhūm iyeṣa rādhā (17)



karṇe lalāga lalitā ‘tha vimṛśya subhrū

rūce bravīṣi vara-varṇini satyam etat

sammānanaṁ samucitaṁ na hi niṣka-dānāt

syāt tena sarva-vasanābharaṇāni dāsye (18)

“Rādhā,” Kundalatā said, “among women, Kalāvali is the
very epitome of virtue, so do not speak to Her like
this. You should personally embrace Her; don’t do
anything else.” Śrī Rādhā then stepped forward to
embrace Kalāvali and to present Her with a precious
necklace, but Lalitā whispered in Śrī Rādhā’s ear,
“Rādhā, who is this person You are about to embrace? It
is none other than that wicked and deceitful lover of
Yours in the guise of a lovely woman.”

“My dear friend Lalitā,” Śrī Rādhā replied out loud,
“you give supremely valuable advice. Indeed, after
careful consideration you are speaking the truth. I was
going to express My appreciation by simply presenting
Her with a necklace, but that would not show Her proper
respect. I shall therefore present Her with all sorts of
jewelled ornaments and fine garments.” (17—18)



tad rūpa-mañjari! mad-agrata eva yūyaṁ

citrāmbarāṇi paridhāpayata prayatnaiḥ

udghātya samprati-purātana-kañcukaṁ drāṅ

navyaṁ samarpayata tuṅga-kuca-dvaye ‘syāḥ (19)

Śrī Rādhā then turned to Rūpa-mañjarī and said, “O Rūpa-
mañjarī, carefully dress Kalāvali right before Me in a
bright new outfit of many colours. Take off Her old
bodice, and quickly cover Her raised breasts with a new
one.” (19)


                           82
Camatkara-candrika.txt                            5/5/2017



kaundy abravīt sumukhi! nodghaṭayāṅgam asyāḥ

saṅkocam āpsyati paraṁ bhavad agra eṣā

tad dehi yad yad ayi ditsasi sarvam eta

gatvā sva-dhāma paridhāsyati na tv ihaiva (20)

Kundalatā promptly spoke up. “Beautiful-faced Rādhā,”
she said, “please do not take off this beautiful young
girl’s clothes, for She will feel shy and embarrassed in
front of You. Just present Her with whatever You want to
give Her, and let Her take it home to try on there.”
(20)



na strī-sadasy api bhiyaṁ kurute hriyañ ca

strīti prasiddhir adhikā sakhi! sarvadeśe

ānanda-vartmani kathaṁ na yiyāsasi tvaṁ

saṅkoca-kaṇṭakam ihārpayasi svayaṁ kim (21)

“Sakhī Kalāvali,” said Śrī Rādhā, “everyone knows that
women never feel bashful or fearful when there are only
other women around. Tell Me, are You not creating the
thorny obstacle of shyness on this very happy occasion?”
(21)



rādhe! na mālya-vasanābharaṇādi kiñcid

aṅgī-karomi kim u gāyaka kanyakāham?

tvañ cet prasīdasi sakṛt parirambham ekaṁ

dehy ehi māṁ na dhana-gṛdhnu mavehi mugdhe (22)

“Oh, Rādhā,” Kalāvali said, “I will not accept any
garlands, clothes or ornaments. Naive girl, I am not the
daughter of a singer! If You are pleased with Me, then
only once give Me the wealth of Your embrace. Do not
think I am greedy for any other treasure.” (22)



vāmyaṁ kim atra kuruṣe paridhehi sādhu

no ced balād api vayaṁ paridhāpayāmaḥ

ekā tvam atra śataśo vayam ity atas te

svātantryam astu katham ity avadhehi mugdhe (23)

“Oh, sakhī,” Śrī Rādhikā then replied, “why are You so
contrary? Why do You refuse My offer? Please put on
these fine garments and jewelled ornaments. If You do
not comply willingly, I will dress You Myself by force.
Look, You are alone, and I have hundreds of sakhīs with

                           83
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017

Me. Silly girl, I warn You not to act so independently
before Me. I am telling You, just be careful!” (23)



dve skandhayor dadhatur añcalam agrato ‘syāḥ

pṛṣṭhe vyamocayata kañcuka-bandham ekā

vakṣaḥ-sthalād apatatāṁ subṛhat-kadamba-

puṣpe tadā sapadi karttita-kiñcid aṁśo (24)

Having said this, Śrī Rādhā ordered the sakhīs to dress
Kalāvali in the new bodice. Two sakhīs in front of
Kalāvali firmly seized the veil on Her shoulders, while
another sakhī went behind Her to unfasten Her bodice. As
the bodice loosened, two very big kadamba flowers, each
somewhat flattened on one side, slipped out and fell to
the ground. (24)



kiṁ hanta kiṁ patitam etad ayīti pṛṣṭā



dāsyo ‘khilā jahasur eva sa-hasta-tālam



labdhāvaguṇṭhana-paṭī yadi jihrati sma



pṛṣṭhī-cakāra tam atho vṛṣabhānuputrī (25)



“Aha!” cried Śrī Rādhā. “What has fallen out of Her
bodice?!” Rūpa-mañjarī and all the other maidservants
clapped their hands with glee, and then shyly covered
their laughing moon-like faces with their veils.
Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Śrī Rādhā turned Her back on Śrī Kṛṣṇa
and sat down. (25)



ālī-kulasya sudurāvara eva vaktre



vastrāvṛto ‘py ajani sa-svana eva hāsaḥ



rādhāpy adhān nibhṛtam asvanam eva hāsyaṁ



kṛṣṇaś ca kundalatikā ca jahāsa paścāt (26)




                           84
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017

When the sakhīs saw what Śrī Kṛṣṇa had done, they tried
to suppress their mirth by holding their veils over
their mouths. Unable to control themselves, however,
they burst into loud peals of laughter. Without uttering
a word, Śrī Rādhā also joined in, and at last, so did
Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Kundalatā. (26)



mūrtto hāsya-raso muhūrttam abhavat svādyas tataḥ
procire

sakhyo hanta! bṛhat-kadamba-kusume dhanye yuvāṁ bhū-tale

dhūrtte prāpita-kaitave api punar niṣkaitave antato

bhūtvā hāsya-rasāmṛtābdhim anu ye sarvā nidhattaḥ sma
naḥ (27)

Then, the personified form of the transcendental mellow
of laughter (hāsya-rasa) manifested for a moment in
their midst, for everyone’s supreme enjoyment. The
sakhīs began to address the two kadamba flowers, saying,
“O great big kadamba flowers, of everyone on the face of
this Earth, it is you who are truly blessed. You are not
usually duplicitous, but you have become so by your
association with this cunning person. As flowers of a
tree, you know no cunning. But now that you are in the
hands of this cheater, you are showing such
shamelessness that you have assumed the form of a young
girl’s breasts. We are all drowning in an ocean of the
nectar of laughter because of you.” (27)



bho bhoḥ kundalate! kva te sahacarī lajjā na sā dṛśyate

pātālasya tale mamajja salile sā kundavallyā saha

tucchāyaiva bhavāmi hanta vigata-cchāyātra vaḥ kiṁ bruve

tad yuṣmad-vadaneṣu nṛtyatu girāṁ devī yatheṣṭaṁ muhuḥ
(28)

The sakhīs asked Kundalatā, “Oh, Kundalatā, where has
your companion Bashfulness gone now?”

“She and Kundalatā have both drowned in the depths of
the water of Pātāla-loka,” said Kundalatā. “You cannot
see her now.”

“If Kundalatā and her sakhī named Bashfulness have
drowned and passed away, then who are you?” they asked.

“Oh, I am only her shadow.”

“But if Kundalatā has departed, how can we see her
shadow?” the sakhīs persisted.

“I have nothing to say,” said Kundalatā. “May the
goddess of speech dance upon your tongue.” (28)




                              85
Camatkara-candrika.txt                          5/5/2017

premā gīṣpati-śiṣyayā saha sadā sat-saṅga ājanmato

mithyā-vāṇ na hi jihvayā paricitā sādhvīḥ sva-dharmaṁ
muhuḥ

adhyāpyātanu karma kārayasi te khyātir vraje bhūyasī

nādyā ‘bhūt tava vāñchitaṁ yadiyatī kāpi vyathā sahyatām
(29)

Lalitā then spoke. “Kundalatā, your love for Bṛhaspati’s
disciple and your good association with Her has been
increasing steadily since your childhood. There is no
trace of a false statement on your tongue. Your glories
are heard again and again throughout Vraja, and it is
proclaimed that you instruct chaste girls in their own
righteous activities. Thus you perform great deeds on
behalf of Kāmadeva. Unfortunately, your desire was not
fulfilled today, and consequently you have to tolerate
great pain. (29)



ānītā vividha-prayatna-racitā vidyā ‘tidūrād guror

vikretuṁ sudhiyā tvayā ‘dya rabhasād ālī-sadasyāpaṇe

vikrītā na hi sābhavat punar aho hāsyāspadī-bhūtatāṁ

prāptā drag aśu bhakṣaṇaḥ sa hi yadāyātaṁ bhavadbhyām
iha (30)

“Sakhī Kundalatā, how supremely intelligent you are.
Today you proudly came to our assembly from far away and
have with great endeavour tried to sell this knowledge
you received from your ëguru’. But alas, you have not
been able to sell your knowledge, and instead you have
quickly become a laughing stock. Maybe you came at an
inauspicious time.” (30)



atrāpaṇe drutam imāṁ lalite ‘dya vidyāṁ

vikrīya vāñchitam ahaṁ yadi sādhayiṣye

tat kañcukīṁ vitarasīha na ced dadāmi

tubhyaṁ sva-kañcukam ahaṁ kriyatāṁ paṇo ‘yam (31)

Śrī Kṛṣṇa responded, “Lalitā, I can easily sell this
knowledge in the market place of the sakhīs and fulfil
My desires. Now give Me that bodice, or I will dress you
up in it.” (31)



śuṣkaṁ prasūnamayi korakatāṁ na gacchet

prāṇe gate na khalu ceṣṭata eva dehaḥ

dambhī kathaṁ vidita-tattva upaiti pūjāṁ

svāmin! mṛṣā pratibhayā na malaṁ prayāhi (32)

                           86
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017


When Lalitā heard this, she said, “O king of rogues! Can
a dried-up flower become a fresh bud? Can a body
function after its life-airs have left it? Who will
continue to worship a proud and deceitful person once
his deceit has been revealed? Oh, Svāmī, do not take
part in this disgraceful event by exercising Your
talents in lying.” (32)



kṛṣṇaḥ sva-vakṣasi puna kusuma-dvayaṁ tad

dhṛtvā jagāma jaṭilā-gṛham eva sadyaḥ

soccaiḥ svaraṁ bhuvi nipatya tathā ruroda

yenākulaiva jaṭilā muhur āpa khedam (33)

Śrī Kṛṣṇa picked up the two kadamba flowers. Putting
them back on His chest as false breasts, He went to
Jaṭilā’s quarters. There He fell to the ground, wailing
loudly. This distressed Jaṭilā and she repeatedly
expressed her concern. (33)



kā tvaṁ, rodiṣi kiṁ kuto ‘si, kim abhūt te vipriyaṁ
putri tat

sarvaṁ brūhi vimṛjya locana-jala-klinnaṁ mukhāmbhoruham

hā hā hanta bhavāmi bhāgya-rahitā dhiṅ me janur dhik
tanuṁ

dhiṅ māṁ dhig dhig iti pravṛddha-davathuḥ prace ‘rddham
arddhaṁ vacaḥ (34)

“Who are You, my daughter? Where have You come from? Why
are You crying? Has someone harmed You? Wipe the tears
from Your lotus-face and tell me everything.”

Trembling, Kalāvali told Her sad story in a faltering
voice. “O noble lady. Alas, alas, how unfortunate I am!
Fie upon My body. Fie upon My very birth. Hundreds upon
hundreds of curses have fallen upon My head. (34)



vāso me vṛṣabhānu-bhūpa-nagare śrī-kīrttidāyāḥ svasuḥ

kanyāhaṁ saha rādhayā sama sadā saṁprītir ābālyataḥ

āyātā ‘smi cirād ahaṁ nija-gṛhāt tāṁ draṣṭum utkaṇṭhayā

sā māṁ naiva vilokate na vadati premnā na cāliṅgati (35)

“I reside in King Vṛṣabhānu’s town, and I am the
daughter of Kīrtidā’s sister. I have had a close, loving
relationship with Rādhā since My childhood. I came from
My home, eagerly looking forward to meeting Her again
after a long time. Alas! Rādhā will not so much as
glance My way, what to speak of embrace Me with love and
affection. (35)

                           87
Camatkara-candrika.txt                            5/5/2017




māṁ dṛṣṭvā smayate na naiva kuśala-praśnaṁ karoty ādarāt

tat prāṇair mama kiṁ prayojanam imāṁs tyakṣyāmy ahaṁ
tvat-puraḥ

ārye! tvaṁ vimṛśāvadhāraya kadā ko me ‘parādho ‘bhavat

tāṁ tvaṁ pṛccha muhuḥ pradāya śapathaṁ sā me kathaṁ
kupyati (36)

“When She saw Me, She would not smile sweetly at Me, not
even once. Nor was She attentive to even once inquiring
about My well-being. What is the use of My staying
alive? I shall give up My life right now before you.
Noble lady, please try to recall whether you know of any
offence I have committed against Śrī Rādhā. And please
ask Her again and again why She is angry with Me.” (36)



vatse! samāśvasihi ko ‘pi na te ‘parādho



gacchāmi sarvam adhunaiva samādadhāmi



taṁ snehayāmi bhavatīṁ parirambhayāmi



saṁlāpayāmi rajanīṁ saha śāyayāmi (37)



Upon hearing Kalāvali’s pitiful speech, Jaṭilā said, “O
daughter, calm down and do not be afraid. You have not
committed any offence. I am going to settle this right
now. I will arrange that Rādhā soon gives You all Her
love and affection. I will see to it that She embraces
You and talks to You. And what is more, this very night
You will both rest together on the same bed.” (37)



ity uktvā sahasā snuṣālayam agād dṛṣṭvālipālīḥ puraḥ

prāvocal lalite! kim īdṛg abhavad vadhvāḥ sva-bhāvo
‘dhunā

tasyās tāta-purād iyaṁ sva-bhaginīṁ tāṁ draṣṭum
utkaṇṭhayaiv

āgāt sā katham atra sa-praṇayam āśvenāṁ na sambhāṣate
(38)

With these words, Jaṭilā burst into her daughter-in-
law’s quarters. Seeing the sakhīs there, she turned to
Lalitā and said, “Lalitā, why is my daughter-in-law in
such a contrary mood today? Her own cousin-sister has

                           88
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017

come from Her father’s town, eager to see Her, but She
is neglecting Her. Why will She not speak kindly to
Her?” (38)



paśyaiṣā nayanāśru-sikta-sicayā khinnā ‘smad antarmahā

kāruṇyaṁ janayaty ataḥ su-carite! sād-guṇya-pūrṇe snuṣe

enāṁ sādhu pariṣvajasva kuśalaṁ pṛccha priyaṁ kiñcana

bruhyasyā hṛdaya-vyathāpasaratu prīṇīhi māṁ prīṇaya (39)

Jaṭilā then addressed Śrī Rādhā, “O Sucaritā (girl of
good conduct), O my daughter, You are full of good
qualities. My dear daughter-in-law, just look. This
unhappy girl’s clothes are wet from Her tears. My heart
is filled with deep compassion for Her. Remove the pain
from Her heart: embrace Her properly, ask Her about Her
well-being, and speak to Her affectionately. Make Her
happy as She was before, and then I will also be
satisfied.” (39)



ārye! yāhi gṛhaṁ yathā ‘‘diśasi tat kurve sukhenādhunā

śeṣvai tāvati bālikā-jana-vṛthā-vāde svayaṁ māpata

bālālyaḥ sadṛśo ‘lpa-buddhi-vayaso ‘bhīkṣa-prasākrudhas

tāsu tvādṛg apāra-buddhir atulā pramāṇikī kiṁ patet (40)

“Mother-in-law,” replied Śrī Rādhā, “I shall certainly
follow your instructions, so please return to your
quarters and rest happily. It does not befit you to
become involved in the petty quarrels of young girls.
All young sakhīs are the same; their age is small and so
is their intelligence. They swing between quarrel and
mutual affection from one moment to the next. Your
intelligence, on the other hand, is unsurpassed, and you
are highly authoritative. Is it appropriate for you to
become involved in these childish quarrels?” (40)



uttiṣṭha mā vada paraṁ mama mūrdhna eva

datto mayā śapatha śmāśru-gale gṛhāṇa

ātma-svasāram anayā saha bhuṅkṣva śeṣva

mā bhindhi me guru-janasya nideśam etat (41)

“O daughter-in-law, say nothing more,” Jaṭilā said.
“Stand up and immediately embrace Your sister. Have Your
meal together and then take rest together. I am Your
senior and elder, so do not disobey my order.” (41)



ārye! sa-prauḍhi mām ādiśāsi yadi tato vacmi satyaṁ yad
eṣā

                           89
Camatkara-candrika.txt                          5/5/2017


prāvocat kundavallīṁ kaṭutaram adhikaṁ duḥsahaṁ tena
kopāt

nāsyāḥ vaktraṁ viloke yadi punar adhunā seyam asyāṁ
prasīdet

tarhy evāhaṁ prasannā diśasi yad akhilaṁ tat karomy eva
bāḍham (42)

“O mother-in-law,” replied Śrī Rādhā, “you have
instructed Me with firmness and seriousness; but before
I obey your order, please hear one thing. This girl has
spoken harshly to Kundalatā, and that is why I feel so
indignant that I do not even want to look at Her. If She
makes up with Kundalatā, then I will also be satisfied;
and I will certainly do as you have told Me.” (42)



ārye! vakti mṛṣā snuṣā tava na mām eṣā kaṭu-vyāharan

nāpy asyai kupitā ‘smi tāṁ prati tataḥ provāca rādhā
sphuṭam

kiṁ mithyā vadasīha kupyasi na ced asyai prasīdasy alaṁ

kaṇṭha-grāham iyaṁ tvayādya rabhasād āliṅgyatām agrataḥ
(43)

“O noble lady,” Kundalatā said, “your daughter-in-law is
lying. Kalāvali has not spoken harshly to me, and I do
not feel angry towards Her at all.”

Śrī Rādhā boldly said to Kundalatā, “How can you lie in
front of My mother-in-law? If you are not angry with
Kalāvali, and if you are really happy with Her, then
embrace Her now for us all to see.” (43)



tūṣṇīṁ sthitāṁ sapadi kundalatāṁ vilokya

prāha sma sapratibham eva tadā mṛgākṣī

ārye! parāmṛśa ciraṁ katarābravīn nau

mithyeti tāṁ paribhavasya vidhehi pātrīm (44)

Upon hearing Śrī Rādhā’s words, Kundalatā fell silent.
When doe-eyed Śrī Rādhā saw this, She immediately spoke
the following clever words: “Mother-in-law, you please
decide which of us is lying, and then reproach that one.
(44)



etāṁ yad atra na pariṣvajate sa-harṣaṁ

tat kopa-liṅgam iha kaḥ khalu saṁśayaḥ syāt

vṛddhā ‘vadan mama vadhūr iha vakti satyam

antaḥ prasīdati na kundalatā yad asyām! (45)

                           90
Camatkara-candrika.txt                           5/5/2017


“Surely, if Kundalatā is not delighted to embrace this
pretty young girl, there must be something wrong. She
must be angry with Her. Who could doubt that?”

“My daughter-in-law is speaking the truth,” the old
woman said. “Kundalatā, why don’t you forgive Kalāvali
and be pleased with Her? (45)



yena prasīdasi tad eva karomi kaundi

mānyā ‘smi te ‘dya racitā ‘ñjali rasmi tubhyam

vīkṣyaiva man-mukham imāṁ parirabdhum esi

nātaḥ paraṁ vada ha hā śapatho mamātra (46)

“Oh, Kundalatā, I will do whatever it takes to make you
happy with Kalāvali. Now listen to me. I am your
worshipable superior, but I am begging you with folded
hands to embrace this girl before my eyes. Do not say
another word. Aah! For this end I take an oath upon my
head!” (46)



āryā dadāti śapathaṁ na vibheṣyato ‘pi



kā dhīr iyaṁ tava tad ehi pariṣvajasva



ity ālayaś ca jaṭilā-kuṭile ca dhṛtvaiv



āliṅgayan bata mitho hari-kundavalyau (47)



When Kundalatā made no move to embrace Kalāvali, the
sakhīs called out, “O Kundalatā, are you not afraid of
this good woman’s oath? Just see! What kind of
intelligence do you have? Just embrace Kalāvali right
now.” Saying this, Jaṭilā, Kuṭilā and all the sakhīs
caught Kundalatā and forced Her to embrace Śrī Hari in
His disguise as Kalāvali. (47)



vṛddhā tadā kila na bheda-bhaviṣyad ārād

ālī-tater hasa-raso na virāmam aiṣyat

tāś cela-ruddha-vadanās tad api prahāsaṁ

niḥśabdam eva vidadhuś ca dadhuś ca modam (48)

If old Jaṭilā had not been present, the sakhīs would not
have been able at all to stop themselves from plunging

                           91
Camatkara-candrika.txt                          5/5/2017

into hāsya-rasa. As it was, they just covered their
faces with their veils and drowned in silent blissful
laughter. (48)



vṛddhā vadhūm atha jagāda nija-svasāraṁ

brūhi priyaṁ parirabhasva ca nirvivādam

ity ātmāpāṇi-vidhṛtau drutam eva rādhā-

kṛṣnau mitho ‘tiparirambham avāpayat tau (49)

Thereafter, the old woman told Śrī Rādhā, “Daughter-in-
law, now You should speak lovingly with Your sister and
warmly embrace Her.” Jaṭilā suddenly caught Śrī Kṛṣṇa
with one hand and Śrī Rādhā with the other, and drew
Them together in the snare of a tight embrace. (49)



harṣāśru-bindu-nikaraṁ nudataṁ pratisva-

celena bhoḥ sukhayatañ ca mitho bhaginyau

sambhujya kiñcana sukhena kṛtaika-talpa-

svāpe dṛḍha-praṇayato nayataṁ tri-yāmām (50)

“O sisters,” she told Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, “I see that You
are crying from the bliss of Your embrace. Now share
Your mutual happiness by using Your cloth to wipe away
each others’ tears. After that, go and happily enjoy a
meal together, and then very affectionately spend the
night with each other.” (50)



vṛddhā jagāma śayituṁ nija-geham ārāt

kṛṣṇaḥ pragalbhataratāṁ dadhad ākhyad ālīḥ

vidyāṁ vigītata-matāṁ gamitām api drāg

vikrīya vāñchitam avindam ato jitāḥ stha (51)

Having said this, the old woman left to take rest in her
chambers some distance away. Śrī Kṛṣṇa then spoke to the
sakhīs even more boldly and arrogantly than before:
“Look, sakhīs, you thought that this knowledge of Mine
was contemptible, but I have quickly sold it and thus
attained the result I desired: victory over you all.”
(51)



bhrātar vadhūr yad iha bhoḥ samabhoji tasmād

adyaiva vāñchitam alambhi jayaś ca bhūyān

setur yadi truṭita eva tad-ārddha-bhuktā

naivāstv iyaṁ bhavatu pūrṇa-manorathaiva (52)

                           92
Camatkara-candrika.txt                            5/5/2017


“O king of all gallants,” Lalitā said, “You have indeed
achieved Your desired result by enjoying Kundalatā, who
is your own sister-in-law, and thus You have gained the
greatest victory. Now that the rules of social conduct
are broken, why keep Kundalatā only half-enjoyed? Why
not fulfil all her inner desires?” (52)



bhrātrāpi śuddha-manasā bhaginī sutāpi

pitrā ‘tra kiṁ na parirabhyata eva loke

yuṣmākam ānakha-śikhaṁ smara-bhāva eva

tīvras tad-ātma-samam eva jagac ca vettha (53)

Kundalatā said, “Lalitā, cannot a brother embrace his
sister with a pure heart, or a father his daughter? Your
whole body is burning from head to toe with intense
amorous desire, so you think that everyone else in the
world burns with that same desire.” (53)



ity uktavaty atiruṣeva nivedya kunda-



vallī bahir-bhavanam eva yadādhyatiṣṭhat



tasyāḥ prasādana-kṛte niraguś ca sakhyas



tatraika eva kusumesur apād yuvānau (54)



Saying this, Kundalatā left the room, as if full of
anger. All the sakhīs followed her to try to pacify her.
The only one left inside was the flower-archer Cupid,
who engaged in protecting the youthful Couple, Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. (54)



subhrū-vibhaṅga-kuṭilāsya-saroja-sīdhu-

mādyan madhu-vrata-vilāsa-susaurabhāni

samprāpya jāla-vivareṣu jughūrnur eva

preṣṭhālayaḥ pratipadaṁ pramadormi-puñjaiḥ (55)



iti śrila-viśvanātha-cakravarti-pāda-viracitaḥ

śrī-śrī-camatkāra-candrikāḥ sampūrṇaḥ


                           93
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017

From outside, Śrī Rādhā’s dear sakhīs peeped in through
the patterned, latticed windows and inhaled the
beautiful fragrance of the amorous pastimes of
Madhusūdana Śrī Kṛṣṇa. He Himself was intoxicated by
drinking the honey of Śrī Rādhā’s frowning lotus-face,
which was decorated with arched eyebrows. The sakhīs
felt themselves falling deeper and deeper into the waves
of an ocean of bliss. (55)



Thus ends the bhāvānuvāda of the Śrī Camatkāra-candrikā
of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura by Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja.




* * *




[i] The word used here is “śṛṅgāravatī”, which can mean
both “being decorated” and “engaged in amorous love”.




[ii] “He who wears a half-moon on his head.”




Table of Contents

The Meeting in the Box -- The First Mischievous Playful
Pastime

The Meeting of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Disguised as Abhimanyu --The
Second Mischievous Playful Pastime

The Meeting of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Disguised as a Female Doctor --
The Third Mischievous Playful Pastime

The Meeting of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Disguised as a Female Singer --
The Fourth Mischievous Playful Pastime

[i]

[ii]




Table of Contents

The Meeting in the Box -- The First Mischievous Playful
Pastime

                           94
Camatkara-candrika.txt                         5/5/2017


The Meeting of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Disguised as Abhimanyu --The
Second Mischievous Playful Pastime

The Meeting of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Disguised as a Female Doctor --
The Third Mischievous Playful Pastime

The Meeting of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Disguised as a Female Singer --
The Fourth Mischievous Playful Pastime

[i]

[ii]




                           95
