Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

Śrī Dāmodarāṣṭakam



Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

GVP (2011)



Rating:   ★★★★★

Tags: Śrī Satyavrata Mun Śrī Dāmodarāṣṭakam Sanātana
Gosvāmī's commentary Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa

Śrī Satyavrata Mun Śrī Dāmodarāṣṭakam Sanātana Gosvāmī's
commentary Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇattt



* * *




* * *




Śrī Dāmodarāṣṭakam

Śrī Satyavrata Muni’s

Śrī Dāmodarāṣṭakam

Kṛṣṇa — Controlled by Love and Affection

written by Śrī Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana Vedavyāsa



Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā by the crest jewel among Śrī Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavas

Śrīla Śrī-yukta Sanātana Gosvāmī



verse and ṭīkā translations and annotations by nitya-
līlā praviṣṭa-oṁ-viṣṇupāda-paramahaṁsa-svāmī

Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja



and Dig-darśinī-vṛtti by the best among his followers

Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja




                           1
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

Appendix —

Śrī Dāmbandhana līlā from Śrī Gopāla-campuḥ

by Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmīpāda



Contents

Foreword

A few words on Śrī Dāmodarāṣṭakam

Verse One

Verse Two

Verse Three

Verse Four

Verse Five

Verse Six

Verse Seven

Verse Eight

Appendix




Foreword


Śrī Dāmodara-vrata, which is observed for the entire
month of Kārtika, is the most important vrata for
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas. It has become famous by the name
Dāmodara because Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastime of being bound with
rope by His mother took place during this month. Dāma
means rope and bandhana means to bind, thus this pastime
is known as śrī dāma-bhandana-līlā.

Śrī Satyavrata Muni’s eternally perfect Śrī
Dāmodarāṣṭakam is part of the Padma Purāṇa, which was
recorded by Śrī Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana Vedavyāsa. This
aṣṭakam, or prayer comprising eight verses, reveals many
deep and fundamental secrets about this beautiful
pastime. Therefore all of our Gauḍīya ācāryas have
prescribed that we sing it every day during the month of
Kārtika if we are serious about pleasing Kārtikī Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, the presiding Goddess of the month of Kārtika.

Singing this aṣṭakam every day during the month of
Kārtika is so vital that Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī, the
crest jewel among Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, has written a
lucid and penetrating commentary on it, known as the
Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā. In 1954, nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa oṁ
viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, the founder of Śrī Gauḍīya

                            2
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

Vedānta Samiti, published this book in the Bengali
language after very carefully translating and annotating
Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī’s commentary. And our own beloved
Śrīla Gurudeva, parivrājakācārya tridaṇḍi-svāmī Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja, who is
the best among the disciples of Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti
Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, has translated the
former edition into Hindi with an additional commentary
called the Dig-darśinī-vṛtti. Under his guidance this
English rendition is now being presented.

Once, during the month of Kārtika, Śrīla Gurudeva read
śrīdāmabhandana-līlā from Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmīpāda’s
Gopāla-campūḥ to his spiritual master, Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti
Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja. Upon hearing the
pastime narrated by Śrīla Gurudeva, Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti
Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja exhibited rare ecstatic
symptoms. With Śrīla Gurudeva’s permission, we have
included that same excerpt from Gopāla-campūḥ,
translated into English for the first time, as an
appendix to the present edition of Śrī Dāmodarāṣṭakam,
along with Śrīla Gurudeva’s brief recount of the afore-
mentioned history.

In the Bengali edition by Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, there are many footnotes and
parenthetical statements clarifying the Dig-darśinī-
ṭīkā. In this English edition therefore, all of these
clarifications are marked by square brackets with the
exception of two pāda-ṭīkās (footnotes) in Verse Four,
one in Verse Six and one in Verse Eight. Where direct
English translations of Sanskrit terms have been
provided, standard parentheses have been used.



- The editors




A few words on Śrī Dāmodarāṣṭakam


Preface to the original Bengali Edition

Svayam Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra, the original Supreme
Lord, who possesses unlimited inconceivable potencies,
allows Mother Yaśodā to bind His waist with rope. In
this way He fully relishes the very essence of the
sweetness of her immaculate humour of parental love
(vātsalya-prema-rasa) for Him, and graces the world with
the ultimate example of His subservience to His
devotees. He manifests that supremely charming pastime
of being bound around His waist (śrīdāmabhandana-līlā)
during the month of Kārtika on the first day of the
bright fortnight. This is the principle reason why the
supremely blessed month of Kārtika has become famous by
the name “Dāmodara”[i]1.

Ācāryapāda Śrī Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī compiled Śrī Hari-
bhakti-vilāsa, which is the smṛti-śāstra, or “law-book”
of the Vaiṣṇavas. There, he has outlined the devotional

                           3
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

activities to be observed during the month of Kārtika.
He points out the injunction to daily worship Śrī Rādhā-
Dāmodara and to recite the stotra (prayer) Śrī
Dāmodarāṣṭakam:



rādhikāṁ pratimāṁ viprāḥ pūjayet kārttike tu yaḥ

tasya tuṣyati tat-prītyai śrīmān dāmodarau hariḥ

Śrī Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (16.197)

O learned brāhmaṇas, one who worships the deity of Śrī
Rādhikā for Her pleasure during the month of Kārtika,
equally satisfies Śrī Dāmodara Hari.



“dāmodarāṣṭakaṁ” nāma stotraṁ dāmodarārcanaṁ

nityaṁ dāmodarākarṣi paṭhet satya-vratoditam

Śrī Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (16.198)

One who worships Śrī Dāmodara during Kārtika month by
daily reciting the prayer Śrī Dāmodarāṣṭakam, which was
uttered by Śrī Satyavrata Muni as it arose in his heart,
will perpetually attract Śrī Dāmodara Himself.



As stated above, Śrī Dāmodara Hari becomes pleased with
those who worship Śrī Rādhikā for Her pleasure during
the month of Kārtika.[ii]2

This Śrī Dāmodarāṣṭakam stava is narrated in the Padma
Purāṇa, where it is spoken by Śrī Satyavrata Muni in the
context of a conversation between Śrī Nārada and other
sages headed by Śrī Śaunaka Ṛṣi. In his commentary on
this Śrī Dāmodarāṣṭakam, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmipāda has
stated,

“This prayer is nitya-siddha, which means ‘eternally
perfect’. It has manifested through Śrī Satyavrata Muni
and is capable of attracting Śrī Dāmodara-Kṛṣṇa.”



In his extensive explanation, which is replete with his
personal realizations, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī has
thoroughly revealed this prayer’s ability to attract Śrī
Dāmodara.

For a long time, I have been nurturing the desire to
publish this Śrī Dāmodarāṣṭakam. When we used to gather
together, especially every Kārtika month while observing
Dāmodara-vrata, we would regularly become absorbed in
singing this Śrī Dāmodarāṣṭakam in unison. At such a
time, the strong desire to make its secrets bloom within
the hearts of all the sādhakas would arise within me.
Furthermore, many bhakti-sādhakas have also insistently
requested me to publish it. Now after so long, Śrī
Dāmodarāṣṭakam’s original Sanskrit verses, their

                           4
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

Sanskrit anvaya and Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmīpāda’s
Sanskrit commentary called Dig-darśinī have been
published. For readers who do not know Sanskrit, the
Bengali translations of the original verses and the
above-mentioned commentary by Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī
have been included in this book.

In the present age it is noticed that many scholars
whose intelligence has been spoiled by Kali have a
spiteful outlook towards the propagation of the Sanskrit
language. Nevertheless, we have still published this
Sanskrit work, Śrī Dāmodarāṣṭakam, desiring to benefit
the entire country. Literary scholars of the Bengali
language must always keep in mind that if we are to
promote the Bengali language, Sanskrit is our only
support. As Sanskrit literature is promoted, Bengali
literature is also certain to progress. Those who
imagine that Bengali will be promoted while overstepping
Sanskrit literature are gravely mistaken. We notice that
the language of such scholars is unsystematic in every
respect. The freedom of the Bengali language is
subordinate to Sanskrit. In other words, it is not
absolutely autonomous, rather it is paratantra-
svatantra, its independence relies on Sanskrit. With
this principle in mind, we are presenting this book to
intellectual circles.

If one examines the manner in which Śrī Dāmodarāṣṭakam
conveys philosophical concepts, the excellence of its
composition, the astonishing way in which it unfolds
this pastime, and other aspects of this aṣṭaka, which
was written down by Śrī Vyāsadeva, it is obvious that it
is an excellent work in the world of literature.

Jagad-guru Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmipāda has written the
detailed Dig-darśinī commentary on this aṣṭaka or prayer
of eight verses.

Therein, based on the sādhakas’ different eternal
temperaments, he has revealed the deliberation on the
gradation found within the realm of sādhana.
Furthermore, he has established from every perspective
the supremacy of vātsalya-rasa (parental love) and
finally mādhurya-rasa (conjugal love).

Prākṛta-sahajiyās[iii]3 discuss rāsa-līlā
indiscriminately here and there in what ever way they
please. To expose the immorality of such activities,
Gosvāmipāda has written as follows at the end of his
commentary on the eighth verse:



“tataś ca tayā saha rāsa-krīḍādikaṁ parama-stutitvenānte
varṇayitum icchan tac ca parama-gopyatvenānabhivyañjayan
‘madhureṇa samāpayed iti nyāyena kiñcid eva
saṅketenoddiśan praṇamati.”

The translation of this part of the commentary, as well
as a footnote, has been printed on page 160 of this
book. There, an excellent deliberation is given in
regard to such inappropriate discussions within sahajiyā
congregations.


                           5
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

Since the sahajiyās are utterly unqualified, they cannot
in any way be considered highly eligible candidates for
relishing rāsa-līlā. As we know, bhakti is
transcendental to the three worlds of material existence
so topics like rāsa-līlā cannot be understood within any
worldly realm of analysis. The prākṛta-sahajiyās think,
“Dull matter can become cit, spiritual, and by the power
of one’s sādhana, Bhagavān can be seen with one’s
material eyes.” This is their conception. They say,
“Just as bell metal transforms into gold when mercury is
added to it, this prākṛta (material) body becomes
aprākṛta (transcendental) by the power of bhajana. Then,
with these same material eyes, Bhagavān can be seen.”

Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī has completely refuted this
statement of the prākṛta-sahajiyās in Śrī Bṛhad-
bhāgavatāmṛta, as well as in his Dig-darśinī commentary
on this Śrī Dāmodarāṣṭakam.




Seeing Bhagavān within the Mind and Seeing Him Directly

In this regard, it is essential to carefully deliberate
on the commentaries of Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī on Verse
Four and Verse Six of this book. From the concepts
presented in those two verses, the prākṛta-sahajiyās may
infer that Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmipāda explained that
seeing Bhagavān with one’s eyes is superior to seeing
Him within the mind during meditation. That Gosvāmipāda
has established Gopa-kumāra’s direct perception of
Bhagavān with his eyes as superior to Brahmā’s vision of
Bhagavān through meditation, must be carefully
considered. In this example, Gosvāmipāda is not
referring to Gopa-kumāra seeing Bhagavān with material
eyes. Only after Gopa-kumāra was situated within the
realm of Vaikuṇṭha, the transcendental platform, is it
described that he saw Bhagavān with his eyes. In the
realm of Vaikuṇṭha the material senses do not exist.
Therefore, the gopas’ and gopīs’ direct proximity with
Śrī Bhagavān is in every respect transcendental and
beyond the grasp of the material senses. This matter
cannot be perceived by the senses of the prākṛta-
sahajiyās.

I have already mentioned that Śrī Dāmodarāṣṭakam is to
be sung and discussed daily while observing Ūrja-vrata,
also known as Kārtika-vrata or Dāmodara-vrata. Those who
wish to please Śrī Dāmodara in the month of Dāmodara
should certainly read Śrī Dāmodarāṣṭakam daily and in
its entirety. This is the specific injunction of Śrī
Hari-bhakti-vilāsa. Various ways of observing Dāmodara-
vrata are found in the scriptures.

Ūrja-vrata comes within Cāturmāsya-vrata. It begins from
Ekādaśī, Dvādaśī or Pūrṇimā and ends on those very days
one month later. However, if these days are viddhā
(penetrated) they should never be counted. Śrīla
Sanātana Gosvāmipāda states, “In vratas observed by
Vaiṣṇavas, viddhā tithis should be strictly rejected.”
Therefore, even the days on which the Cāturmāsya and
Ūrja-vratas begin or end, should be observed, discarding

                           6
Damodarastakam.txt                                5/5/2017

the viddhā tithis. The opinion of Śrī Hari-bhakti-vilāsa
is that if Sūrya (the sun) rises and penetrates the
beginning or final tithis of the Cāturmāsya-vrata and
Ūrja-vrata, then they should not be counted.

In the following passages we are quoting a short article
by Śrīla Ṭhākura Bhaktivinoda regarding Kārtika-vrata.
This article clearly determines the day on which the
duties involved in completing the vrata should be
performed. The injunction given for those who begin
their vrata on the day of Ekādaśī also applies to those
who start on Dvādaśī or Pūrṇimā. The article is as
follows:



“To observe Kārtika-vrata is a primary duty of a
Vaiṣṇava.

āśvinasya tu māsasya yā śuklaikādaśī bhavet



kārttikasya vratān iha tasyāṁ kuryād atandritaḥ

Śrī Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (16.168)




Kārtika-vrata begins from the Ekādaśī that comes within
the bright fortnight of the month of Āśvina (September —
October), and should be observed with great self-
restraint and discipline.

According to this statement, every year, from the
Ekādaśī that follows Vijayā Daśamī, one should begin
one’s vrata and end it on the day of Utthāna Ekādaśī.
The vrata observed during this particular month is
called niyama-sevā. The rules of niyama-sevā are as
follows: On every day of that month, during the last
period of the night, one should purify oneself and
perform the maṅgala-ārati of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Later on in the
morning, after bathing, one should perform arcana of Śrī
Dāmodara. At night, one should offer burning wicks of
ghee or sesame oil in Bhagavān’s temple, at the base of
Tulasī, and towards the sky. In the month of Kārtika one
should eat food that is strictly vegetarian and offered
to Bhagavān. One should not take stale rice or grains,
sleep on another’s bed, take oil or honey, or use bell-
metal utensils. After honouring Bhagavān’s remnants one
should hear or study Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and other
scriptures in the association of Vaiṣṇavas. One should
incessantly perform nāma-kīrtana of Śrī Hari and
remember Him. Following these rules, one should pass the
entire month.

Then, on the day of Utthāna Ekādaśī, one should fast,
even from water, and spend that night awake, absorbed in
hearing and chanting topics about Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The next
day, in the morning, one should purify oneself and then
perform hari-kīrtana. Afterwards, one should distribute
the Lord’s prasāda among one-pointed, intimate Vaiṣṇavas

                           7
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

and finally honour some oneself. That day, at the end of
the night, one will end the vrata.”

To please Śrī Rādhā-Dāmodara is the primary purpose of
observing Ūrja-vrata. Śrīmatī Rādhārānī is addressed as
Ūrjeśvarī. Therefore, to please Śrī Śrī Dāmodara, Śrī
Satyavrata Muni added the statement namo rādhikāyai
tvadīya-priyāyai, thereby implying that in observing Śrī
Dāmodara-vrata, worship of Śrī Rādhā-Dāmodara is one’s
exclusive obligation.

Among the sixty-four limbs of bhakti that are to be
followed by the Gauḍīya-Vaiṣṇavas, we find mention of
ūrjādāra — honouring, or observing, Ūrja-vrata. One
should understand that ūrjādāra refers to following the
complete Cāturmāsya-vrata. Some say, “Since there is no
mention of observing Cāturmāsya-vrata among the sixty-
four limbs of bhakti, we will only observe Ūrja-vrata.
We will not undergo the trouble of observing this four
month vrata.” People who try to perform bhajana in this
manner, being unacquainted with the profound meanings of
the scriptures, indulge in whimsical, undisciplined
behaviour. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu instructed us to
observe this Cāturmāsya-vrata through His own example by
following it Himself while in Śrī Raṅga-kṣetra (Śrī
Raṅgam). We cannot count those who are unable to follow
the teachings that were demonstrated and preached by Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu as śuddha Vaiṣṇavas. We want to
substantiate our above statement with an example. Of the
six limbs of surrender (śaraṇāgati), only ātmā-nivedana
(submission of one’s very self) is mentioned among the
nine types of bhakti, or navadha-bhakti. Will it then be
concluded that the other five limbs of śaraṇāgati are
prohibited or to be excluded from one’s sādhana? Since
ātmā-nivedana is topmost among the six ways of
surrendering, one must understand that simply by its
mention all the other ways of surrender have also been
prescribed for the practising devotee. The six limbs of
surrender are accepted as only one method of spiritual
practice, although one is primary (aṅgī) and the others
are its elements (aṅga).

Śrī Dāmodarāṣṭakam is eternal; therefore we should study
it, sing it out loud and discuss it, not just during the
month of Kārtika, but every day throughout Cāturmāsya.
It is so important that it is worth reading every month
and indeed every day of the year. If this Śrī
Dāmodarāṣṭakam is glorified in a sublimely pure way, Śrī
Dāmodara will become pleased. It is with this intention
that with great effort we have compiled this book.

In doing so, we are especially indebted to the revered
Paṇḍita Śrī-yuta Navīna-candra “smṛti-vyākaraṇa-tīrtha”
Mahodaya. He has given valuable assistance in
translating the Dig-darśinī commentary into Bengali and
in the presentation of the synonyms and so forth. In
some places, the Dig-darśinī commentary seemed so
incomprehen-sible that it was almost impossible to
unearth its true meaning. He therefore personally
underwent great pains to consult paṇḍitas from Navadvīpa
and many other places and discuss these sections with
them, thereby ascertaining a perfectly relevant meaning.
We are therefore especially indebted to him. The above-
mentioned commentary has been published in several

                           8
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

editions of Hari-bhakti-vilāsa, Chapter Sixteen. After
comparing the original verses with these commentaries,
we have published everything in such a way so as to be
consistent.

In his commentary on this book, Śrīla Sanātana
Gosvāmīpāda has mentioned the concepts presented in his
ŚrīBṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛtam. We have included those concepts
as footnotes. There, we have published the original
verses of Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛtam along with their
translations, explicitly conveying their deeper meaning
for the readers’ easy understanding.

Finally, my anguished prayer to the śuddha Vaiṣṇavas is
that they become pleased by reading and discussing this
book during Cāturmāsya and Ūrja-vrata. I will then
consider my efforts successful.



Thus I conclude,




Śrī Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava




First day of Kārtika, 1954




Śrī Dāmodarāṣṭakam




namāmīśvaraṁ saccidānanda-rūpaṁ

lasat-kuṇḍalaṁ gokule bhrāja-mānam

yaśodā-bhiyolūkhalād-dhāvamānaṁ

parāmṛṣṭam atyaṁ tato drutya gopyā

I offer obeisances unto Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the possessor of all
potencies, whose beautiful form is the entirety of
concentrated existence, knowledge and bliss. On His
cheeks, makara-shaped earrings are swinging playfully.
His infinite brilliance shines forth from His most
splendid residence, the transcendental abode, Śrī
Gokula. He was afraid of Mother Yaśodā (because He
smashed the earthen pot of yoghurt). When He saw her
coming He leapt down from the grinding mortar and ran
away. Nevertheless, Mother Yaśodā ultimately caught hold
of Him from behind, for she ran more swiftly than He
did. (1)

                             9
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017




rudantaṁ muhur netra-yugmaṁ mṛjantaṁ

karāmbhoja-yugmena sātaṅka-netram

muhuḥ svāsa-kampa-tri-rekhāṅka-kaṇṭha-

sthita-graiva-dāmodaraṁ bhakti-baddham

[Seeing the stick in His mother’s hand and fearful of
being beaten] He is weeping incessantly and rubbing His
eyes again and again with His two lotus-like hands. His
eyes are extremely restless and filled with fear. He
takes heavy breaths again and again that cause the
pearls and other ornaments around His neck, which is
marked by three gracefully curving lines, to tremble. O
Dāmodara, You have been bound by Your mother’s vātsalya-
bhakti. [I offer my obeisances unto that Dāmodara]. (2)



itīdṛk sva-līlābhir-ānanda-kuṇḍe



sva-ghoṣaṁ nimajjantam-ākhyāpayantam

tadīyeśita-jñeṣu bhaktair-jitat-tvaṁ

punaḥ prema-tas-taṁ śatāvṛtti vande

By His childhood pastimes such as this dāma-bandhana-
līlā, He perpetually drowns all the residents of Gokula
— His gopas, gopīs, cows, calves and so forth, who are
all manifested by His pastime potency — in pools of
bliss. He thus informs those who have knowledge of His
absolute divinity that only the pure and simple love of
these devotees can conquer Him. Again, hundreds of
times, I offer loving obeisance unto Śrī Dāmodara Kṛṣṇa.
(3)



varaṁ deva mokṣaṁ na mokṣāvadhiṁ vā



na cānyaṁ vṛṇe ‘haṁ vareśād apīha

idaṁ te vapur nātha gopāla-bālaṁ

sadā me manasy āvirāstāṁ kim anyaiḥ

O supremely effulgent and playful divinity, I do not ask
You for freedom from mortal suffering (the fourth of
human goals), nor do I ask for the ultimate limit of
freedom (residence in Vaikuṇṭha, the abode of
extraordinary, concentrated happiness). Nor do I seek
any other benediction from You (even attaining bhakti
characterized by śravaṇa, kīrtana, etc.) even though, as
the supreme benefactor, You can easily grant all
benedictions. O Lord of my life, may Your beautiful form

                           10
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

as Bāla-gopāla (a little cowherd boy) in Vraja always
remain visible within my heart. I have no use for any
benediction other than this. (4)



idaṁ te mukhāmbhojam avyakta nīlair

vṛtaṁ kuntalaiḥ snigdha raktaiś ca gopyā

muhuś cumbitaṁ bimba-raktādharaṁ me

manasy āvirāstām alaṁ lakṣa-lābhaiḥ



O Deva, Your lotus-like face, encircled by soft,
blackish-blue curly locks of hair that have a reddish
glow, is repeatedly kissed by the gopī Śrī Yaśodā. May
Your supremely charming lotus face with lips like red
bimba-fruit, always remain manifest in my heart. I do
not care about millions of other attainments. (5)



namo deva dāmodarānanta viṣṇo



prasīda prabho duḥkha-jālābdhi-magnam

kṛpā-dṛṣṭi-vṛṣṭyāti-dīnaṁ batānu

gṛhāṇeśa mām ajñam edhy akṣi-dṛśyaḥ

O Deva, O You who have a divine form, I offer my
respectful obeisances to You. O You who are bhakta-
vatsala, affectionate to Your devotees! Śrī Dāmodara, O
Ananta, Lord of inconceivably magnificent potencies! O
all-pervasive Viṣṇu, O Prabhu, my Master, be pleased
with me. I am drowning in an ocean of incessant worldly
miseries. Alas, I am extremely miserable and I do not
know what to do. O Īśa, supremely independent
controller, please deliver me by the nectarean shower of
Your merciful glance and enliven me by becoming directly
visible to my eyes. (6)



kuverātmajau baddha-mūrtyaiva yadvat

tvayā mocitau bhakti-bhājau kṛtau ca

tathā prema-bhaktiṁ svakāṁ me prayaccha

na mokṣe graho me ‘sti dāmodareha

O Dāmodara, even though You were bound with a rope to
the grinding mortar by Your mother, You set the two sons
of Kuvera, Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva, free (from Śrī
Nārada’s curse that they live as twin arjuna trees), and
enabled them to become recipients of the highest
possible attainment — bhakti. In the same way, please
profusely bestow upon me prema-bhakti for You. I long

                           11
Damodarastakam.txt                                5/5/2017

for this alone; I do not want any other kind of
liberation. (7)



namas te ‘stu dāmne sphurad dīpti-dhāmne

tvadīyodarāyātha viśvasya dhāmne

namo rādhikāyai tvadīya-priyāyai

namo ‘nanta--līlāya devāya tubhyam

O Dāmodara, I offer my respectful obeisances to the
celebrated rope binding Your belly, for it is an abode
of brilliant effulgence. I offer my respectful
obeisances to Your belly, which supports the entire
universe of moving and non-moving entities. I offer my
respectful obeisances again and again to Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, Your most beloved, and I offer my respectful
obeisances to You, my divine Lord who performs unlimited
transcendental pastimes. (8)




Verse One




namāmīśvaraṁ saccidānanda-rūpaṁ

lasat-kuṇḍalaṁ gokule bhrāja-mānam

yaśodā-bhiyolūkhalād-dhāvamānaṁa

parāmṛṣṭam atyaṁ tato drutya gopyā

SYNONYMS



namāmī — obeisances; īśvaram — to the Supreme
Controller, the possessor of all potency; sat-cit-
ānanda-rūpam — the origin of all incarnations, the very
embodiment of eternity, knowledge and bliss, Śrī Kṛṣṇa;
lasat-kuṇḍalam — on whose cheeks makara-shaped earrings
are frolicking; gokule — in the transcendental abode of
Gokula, the home of the gopas, gopīs, cows, calves and
so forth; bhrāja-mānam — He is splendidly situated as
the brilliant conception; yaśodā-bhiyā — out of fear of
Mother Yaśodā; ulūkhalād — after jumping from the the
grinding mortar; dhāvamānam — running away; parāmṛṣṭam —
forcefully seized from behind; atyantataḥ — ultimately;
drutya — running very swiftly; gopyā — by Mother Yaśodā.



TRANSLATION




                           12
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

I offer obeisances unto Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the possessor of all
potencies, whose beautiful form is the entirety of
concentrated existence, knowledge and bliss. On His
cheeks, makara-shaped earrings are swinging playfully.
His infinite brilliance shines forth from His most
splendid residence, the transcendental abode, Śrī
Gokula. He was afraid of Mother Yaśodā (because He
smashed the earthen pot of yoghurt). When He saw her
coming He leapt down from the grinding mortar and ran
away. Nevertheless, Mother Yaśodā ultimately caught hold
of Him from behind, for she ran more swiftly than He
did.



Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā

śrī rādhā-sahitaṁ natvā śrī-dāmodaraṁ īśvaram

‘dāmodarāṣṭaka’-vyākhyā digeṣā darśyate’dhunā



tatrāgre kim api prārthayitum ādau tasya
‘tattva’-’rūpa’-’līlā’-’guṇādi’-viśeṣeṇotkarṣa-viśeṣaṁ,
“gokula-prakaṭita-nija-bhagavattā-sāra-’sarvasva-bhūtaṁ’
“ varṇayan bhaktyādau namaskaroti — namāmīti. tacca
maṅgalārthaṁ sarva-karmasu prāgeva dāsya-viśeṣeṇa
vidhānādādau nirdiṣṭam. kam? īśvaraṁ — sarva-
śaktimantaṁ, jagadeka-nāthaṁ, nija-prabhuṁ vā.tatrādya-
pakṣaḥ — stuty-ādi-śakty-arthaḥ, dvitīyaḥ — parama-
vandyatārthaḥ, antyaśca — bhakti-viśeṣeṇeti dik. katham-
bhūtaṁ? sat-cit-ānanda-rūpaṁ sat-cit-ānanda-ghana-
vigraham ity arthaḥ — iti ‘tattva’-viśeṣenotkarṣa-viśeṣa
uktaḥ.

[rūpa]-saundarya-viśeṣeṇotkarṣa-viśeṣam āha — lasantī
śrī-yaśodā-bhiyā dhāvamānāt, satata-bālya-kṛīḍā-viśeṣa-
paratvāt vā nirantaraṁ lolatayā gaṇḍayoḥ krīḍantī
kuṇḍale yasya tam — iti ‘śrī-mukha-śobhā’-viśeṣa uktaḥ;
yadvā, śrī-gaṇḍa-cumbana-mahā-saubhāgyataḥ kuṇḍalayoḥ
sarva-bhūṣaṇeṣu mukhyatvāt tābhyāṁ tāni
sarvāṇyevopalakṣyante; tataśca lasantī śobhamāne kuṇḍale
yasmāt taṁ bhūṣaṇa-bhūṣaṇāṅgam ity arthaḥ.

ataevoktaṁ śrī-gopībhiḥ daśama-skandhe — “trailokya-
saubhagam-idañca nirīkṣya rūpaṁ, yad-go-dvija-druma-
mṛgāḥ pulakānya-vibhran.” Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.29.40)
iti, uddhvena ca tṛtīya-skandhe — “vismāpanaṁ svasya ca
saubhagarddheḥ, paraṁ padaṁ bhūṣaṇa-bhūṣaṇāṅgam” Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (3.2.12) iti.

‘parivāra’-viśeṣenotkarṣa-viśeṣam āha — gokule gopa-
gopī-govatsādi-nivāse, bhrājamānaṁ yogya-sthāna-viśeṣe
pūrvato’piutkarṣa-viśeṣa-prakaṭanena gokulasya
svābhāvika-śobhā-viśeṣeṇa vā śobhamānam; tacca śrī-
daśama-skandhādau — “cakāsa-gopī-pariṣad-gato’arcitas-
trailokya-lakṣmy-eka-padaṁ vapur dadhat.” Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.32.14) ityādinoktam.

‘līlā’- viśeṣenotkarṣa-viśeṣam āha — yaśodeti sārddhena.
yaśodāyā mātuḥ sakāśāt, bhiyā dadhi-bhāṇḍa-
bhedanādyaparādha-kṛta-bhītyā, udūkhalāt śik-sthita-
navanīta-cauryārthamudvarttya tale samārūḍhāt

                           13
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

udūkhalataḥ dhāvamānaṁ tvarayāpasarantam. atra ca
viśeṣāpekṣakaiḥ daśama-skandha-navamādhyāyoktam —
“udūkhalāṅghrerupari vyavasthitaṁ, markāya kāmaṁ dadataṁ
śici sthitaṁ. haiyaṅgavaṁ caurya-viśaṅkitekṣaṇaṁ,
nirīkṣya paścāt sutam āgamacchanaiḥ. tāmāttayaṣṭiṁ
prasamīkṣya satvaras-tato’varuhyāpasasāra bhītavat.
gopyanvadhāvan na yamāpa yogināṁ, kṣamaṁ praveṣṭuṁ
tapaseritaṁ manaḥ” Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.9.8—9) ityādy-
anusandheyam.

tataśca atyanta-tatodrutya vegena dhāvitvā; samāsaika-
padyena yap-ādeśaḥ, gopyā śrī-yaśodayā, parā āmṛṣṭam
pṛṣṭhato dhṛtam; atra ca atyantato-drutyetyanena śrī-
yaśodāyā api stana-nitamba-gauravādi-saundarya-viśeṣaḥ
sneha-viśeṣaśca sūcitaḥ. gopyeti premokti-paripāṭyā
gopa-jātīnām eva tādṛśaṁ mahā-saubhāgyam iti dhvanitam.
parāmṛṣṭam ityanena tasyāṁ bhagavataḥ sneha-viśeṣo
dhvanita iti dik. atra ca — “anvañcamānā jananī bṛhac-
calac-chroṇī-bharākrānta-gatiḥ sumadhyamā, javena
visraṁsita-keśa-bandhana-cyuta-prasūnānugatiḥ
parāmṛśat.” Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.9.10)
ityartho’anusandheyaḥ. (1)

iti śrī-dāmodarāṣṭake prathama-śloke śrīla-sanātana-
gosvāmi-kṛtā digdarśinī-nāmnī ṭīkā samāptā.



THUS ENDS THE DIG-DARśINī ṭīKā ON THE FIRST VERSE

Maṅgalācaraṇa

ajñāna-timirāndhasya jñānāñjana śalākayā

cakṣur-unmīlitaṁ yena tasmai śrī-gurave namaḥ



I offer my humble obeisances to śrī guru. With the
torchlight of divine knowledge he has opened my eyes
which were blinded by the darkness of ignorance.



namaḥ oṁ viṣṇu-pādāya ācārya-siṁha-rūpiṇe

śrī-śrīmad-bhakti-prajñāna-keśava iti nāmine

atimartya-caritrāya svāśritānāñca pāline

jīva-duḥkhe sadārttāya śrī-nāma-prema dāyine

I offer my humble obeisances to the lion-like ācārya,
jagad-guru Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī
Mahārāja, who always resides at the lotus feet of the
Supreme Lord. His character, which is completely beyond
mortality, is such that he nurtures those who take
shelter of him with immense divine affection. But
moreover, he always feels distress because of the
suffering of the conditioned souls, and he blesses them
with prema for the holy name.




                           14
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

gaurāśraya vigrahāya kṛṣṇa-kāmaika-cāriṇe

rūpānuga-pravarāya vinodeti svarūpine

He is the personification of one who has taken complete
shelter (āśraya) of Śrī Gaura and he is solely committed
to satisfying the loving desires (kāma) of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, he
is the foremost follower of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, and by
his constitutional identity (svarūpa) he is the pleasure
(vinoda)[iv]4 of Śrī Rādhā Kṛṣṇa.

prabhupādāntaraṅgāya sarva-sad-guṇa-śāline

māyāvāda-tamoghnāya vedāntartha-vide namaḥ




He is the intimate associate of Śrīla Prabhupāda and he
is endowed with all auspicious qualities. He devours the
dark ignorance of impersonalism by his knowledge of the
true meaning of Vedānta. I offer my obeisances to him.



vairāgya-yug-bhakti-rasaṁ prayatnair-

apāyayan-mām-anabhipsum-andham

kṛpāmbudhiryaḥ para-duḥkha-duḥkhī

sanātanaṁ taṁ prabhuṁ āśrayāmi

Due to being blinded by ignorance, I was unwilling to
drink bhakti-rasa, the nectar of devotion imbued with
intense attachment for Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the consequent
detachment from worldly existence. But Śrīla Sanātana
Gosvāmī, with great effort, induced me to drink it
because he is an ocean of causeless mercy and he cannot
tolerate seeing the suffering of others. I therefore
take complete shelter of him.



namo mahā-vadānyāya kṛṣṇa-prema-pradāyate

kṛṣṇāya kṛṣṇa-caitanya-nāmne gaura-tviṣenamaḥ

I offer my humble obeisances to that supremely
magnanimous personality, Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya. He is the
original form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, but now, as Śrī
Gaurasundara, He has assumed the golden complexion of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā and He is freely bestowing śrī kṛṣṇa-
prema. I bow to Him.



I offer prostrated obeisances again and again at the
lotus feet of my Śrī Gurudeva, āṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad
Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, who is an ocean
of causeless mercy; to the ācāryas of the śrī guru-
paramparā; and especially to jagad-guru Śrīla Sanātana
Gosvāmīpāda, who is very distressed by the sorrow of

                           15
Damodarastakam.txt                               5/5/2017

others; as well as to the greatly magnanimous Śrī
Śacīnandana Gaurahari, who is imbued with the mood and
complexion of Śrīmati Rādhikā. After begging for their
mercy, I am now presenting the bhāvānuvāda of Śrīla
Sanātana Gosvāmī’s Dig-darśinī commentary on Śrī
Dāmodarāṣṭakam.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā Bhāvānuvāda

śrī rādhā-sahitaṁ natvā śrī-dāmodaram-īśvaraṁ

‘dāmodarāṣṭaka’ vyākhyā digeṣā darśyate ‘dhunā



After offering obeisances to the Supreme Controller, Śrī
Dāmodara accompanied by Śrī Rādhā, this explanation of
Śrī Dāmodarāṣṭakam, known as Dig-darśinī (the insight
that guides us toward the inner meaning), is herewith
presented.

With the intention of making his prayer, Śrī Satyavrata
Muni first offers his devoted obeisances to Bhagavān Śrī
Kṛṣṇa with the word, namāmī, which invokes
auspiciousness. He offers his obeisances by extolling
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s supremacy through descriptions pertaining to
the speciality of His tattva (profound fundamental
truths related to Him), His form, His pastimes and His
qualities. Thus, Śrī Satyavrata Muni declares the unique
supremacy manifested by Śrī Kṛṣṇa in Gokula, to be the
very essence and entirety of Godhead.

It is vital to offer respects to one’s worshipful deity
before beginning any task. Also, by this gesture Śrī
Satyavrata Muni exhibits his special feeling of dāsya-
bhakti, devotion to Śrī Bhagavān in the mood of a
servant. For this reason, he began his prayer by
offering his obeisances to the Supreme Lord.




[The commentator, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī, first
discusses the pro-found fundamental truths underlying
the identity of Śrī Bhagavān (kṛṣṇa-tattva). Herein he
relates Śrī Satyavrata Muni’s thoughts:]

“To whom am I offering obeisances? To Īśvara, the
supreme controller. He is (1) sarva-śaktimān — the
possessor of all potency; (2) jagat-eka-nātha — the sole
Lord of the entire world; and (3) nija-prabhu — my own
dear master. I am offering my obeisances to that
Īśvara.” In the first facet of Īśvara, “the possessor of
all potency”, Śrī Satyavrata Muni seeks the potency to
offer prayers in glorification of Śrī Bhagavān, the
Supreme Lord. The second facet, “the sole Lord of the
entire world”, conveys that Īśvara is alone his topmost
worshipful and praiseworthy Lord. Finally, in relation
to the last facet of Īśvara, that He is “my own dear
master”, Śrī Satyavrata Muni expresses his own, special
bhakti for his Lord.

How is Īśvara manifest? Addressing this question Śrī

                           16
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

Satyavrata Muni says, “Īśvara is manifest as the
beautiful form of concentrated pure, eternal existence,
full knowledge and unlimited bliss (saccid-ānanda-
rūpam).” Thus the sage has explained the unrivalled
supremacy of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the object of his prayers, by
narrating the special, profound fundamental truths
(tattva) underlying His identity.




[Now, the commentator discusses Śrī Bhagavān’s beautiful
form.]

Śrī Satyavrata Muni shows the exceptional supremacy of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa by describing the unique beauty of His form.
He describes how His earrings are swinging, lasat-
kuṇḍalam. Because He is running away from His mother,
Śrī Yaśodā, out of fear; or else because it is His
nature to always make transcendental childish mischief
due to unceasing restlessness; makara-shaped earrings
constantly swing near His cheeks and seem to be playing
there. In this way, the sage describes the speciality of
the extraordinary splendour of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s worshipful
face.

Yet another meaning of lasat-kuṇḍalam is, “Those two
makara-shaped earrings have achieved the celebrated
fortune of kissing Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s cheeks and are therefore
the most exalted of all His ornaments. Consequently,
simply by mentioning Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s earrings, the special
fortune of all other ornaments adorning His various
limbs is implied.”

For this reason Śrī Satyavrata Muni is indicating, “I am
offering obeisances to that personality whose bodily
lustre beautifies His earrings.” In other words, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s limbs even beautify their own ornaments. For
this reason the gopīs have said:



trailokya-saubhagam idaṁ ca nirīkṣya rūpaṁ

yad go-dvija-druma-mṛgāḥ pulakāny abibhran

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.29.40)

Dear Kṛṣṇa, as a result of beholding Your beautiful
form, which has enhanced the fortune of the three
worlds, even the bodies of the cows, birds, trees, deer
and others have erupted with horripilation. [Is it at
all surprising, then, if Your beautiful form bewilders
us?]



Also, while Śrī Uddhava was describing Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
beautiful form to Vidura, he said:

vismāpanaṁ svasya ca saubhagarddheḥ



                           17
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017


paraṁ padaṁ bhūṣaṇa-bhūṣaṇāṅgam



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.2.12)

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s form is so captivating that even He is
astonished when He sees Himself. His beautiful form
embodies the topmost limit of exceedingly good fortune
and opulence. Indeed, ornaments usually beautify the
person wearing them, but Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s form is so
beautiful that He actually beautifies His ornaments. [In
other words, compared to all other divine forms in
existence, the beauty of His form is supremely divine.]




Next, Śrī Satyavrata Muni shows the extraordinary
excellence of Śrī Kṛṣṇa by describing His special
associates present with Him in Gokula. He says, gokule
bhrāja-mānam — how splendid it is when Śrī Kṛṣṇa is in
Gokula (gokule), the home of His gopas, gopīs, cows,
calves and others. In this place, which is particularly
befitting, He manifests the exceptional supremacy
(bhrāja-mānam) of His pastimes which He has never
manifested anywhere else [in any of the pastimes
performed by His previous incarnations]. Another meaning
is that the outstanding environment of Gokula is
effulgent with the mood of natural love, so when Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is situated there He is certainly most splendid
(bhrāja-mānam).

This is also described in various places in śāstra. In
the Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is described as
follows:

cakāsa gopī-pariṣad-gato ‘rcitas



trailokya-lakṣmy-eka-padaṁ vapur dadhat



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.32.14)

Śrī Kṛṣṇa [for whom perfected mystic yogis prepare a
seat in their purified lotus-like hearts] appeared as
the reservoir of all beauty unequalled within the three
worlds. He accepted the seat offered by the gopīs and
was worshipped by them. When He sat in their midst He
appeared even more splendorous.




Now, in the remainder of this line, beginning with
yaśodā as well as in the whole next verse, Śrī
Satyavrata Muni affirms the unparalleled excellence of
his worshipful Lord by describing His extraordinary

                             18
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

pastimes. Due to its surrounding context, yaśodāyā means
“from His mother, Śrī Yaśodā”. The meaning of bhiyā is
that “Śrī Kṛṣṇa feared being punished for breaking the
earthen pot of butter, as well as raiding its contents
and making other mischiefs”. A pot of butter had been
hung from the ceiling, high above the ground for
protection, but Kṛṣṇa had climbed upon an overturned
grinding mortar and was stealing butter from it. The
meaning of ulūkhalāt is, “When He saw His mother coming
with a stick in her hand, He immediately leapt from the
grinding mortar” and, dhāvamānam, “ran away very
quickly”.

The Ninth Chapter, of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam’s Tenth Canto
con-tains a detailed narration of this pastime. It is
recommended that one reflect upon it.



udūkhalāṅghrer-upari vyavasthitaṁ



markāya kāmaṁ dadataṁ śici sthitaṁ



haiyaṅgavaṁ caurya-viśaṅkitekṣaṇaṁ



nirīkṣya-paścāt sutamāgamacchanaiḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.9.8)

After climbing on top of the overturned grinding mortar,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa began feeding the monkeys to His great
satisfaction, giving them the butter from a pot that had
been hung from the ceiling in order to protect it.
Because He was stealing, He was anxiously looking here
and there. Seeing Him like this, Mother Yaśodā slowly
approached Him from behind.



tām ātta-yaṣṭiṁ prasamīkṣya satvaras



tato ‘varuhyāpasasāra bhītavat



gopy anvadhāvan na yam āpa yogināṁ



kṣamaṁ praveṣṭuṁ tapaseritaṁ manaḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.9.9)

                             19
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017


As soon as Śrī Kṛṣṇa saw His mother with a stick in her
hand, He hastily jumped from the grinding mortar and
began running away, as if completely overcome by fear.
Great mystics whose hearts have been completely purified
by performing austerities, are qualified to merge with
brahma, yet they fail to catch Śrī Kṛṣṇa. On the other
hand, considering Him to be her little child, Yaśodā-
devī ran after that same Śrī Kṛṣṇa in order to catch
Him.



Seeing her son fleeing after being caught making
mischief, Mother Yaśodā ran after Him. She ran much
faster than He did, and seized Him from behind. By
describing that she ran much faster than Śrī Kṛṣṇa with
the words atyanta-tato-drutya, Śrī Satyavrata Muni
alludes to the exceptional beauty of Mother Yaśodā’s
breasts, hips and full-figured body, and also indicates
her special affection for her son.

The use of the loving address gopyā, instead of
yaśodayā, signifies that only those who are born in
cowherd families have the great fortune of seeing these
pastimes. Furthermore, by saying parāmṛṣṭa, that she
caught Him from behind, Śrī Satyavrata Muni indicates
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s special affection for Mother Yaśodā. In
other words, he is declaring that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is bhakta-
vatsala, He has particular affection for His devotees.

Here also, it is beneficial to carefully study the
following verse from the Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam:



anvañca-mānā jananī bṛhac-cala-



chroṇībharā-krānta gatiḥ sumadhyamā



javena vistraṁsita-keśa-bandhana-



acyuta-prasūnānugatiḥ parāmṛṣat



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.9.10)

As slender-waisted Yaśodā chased Śrī Kṛṣṇa, her pace was
slowed down by the weight of her large swaying hips. As
she ran after Him, her hair loosened and the flowers
that were woven into her braid fell to the ground, as if
following behind her. Despite all of this, she continued
to chase Kṛṣṇa and at last she caught hold of Him from
behind.



                              20
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017




~ THUS ENDS THE ENGLISH RENDITION OF THE

DIG-DARŚINĪ-ṬĪKĀ ON THE FIRST VERSE ~




Dig-darśinī-vṛtti

In order to glorify his worshipful Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa and
hopeful of attaining his most cherished desire, Śrī
Satyavrata Muni starts his prayer with maṅgalācaraṇa, an
auspicious invocation, beginning with the word namāmī.
Invocations of auspiciousness are of three types: those
which offer respects, those which point out the subject
being discussed, and those which grant a benediction.
Here, the sage invokes auspiciousness by first offering
his respects through the word namāmī, and then continues
his maṅgalācaraṇa by indicating the subject being
discussed.

Īśvara — Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the original Lord (īśvara) of all
lords. Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī provides the evidence for
this in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam:

ete cāṁśa-kalā puṁsaḥ




kṛṣṇastu bhagavān svayam




indrari-vyākulaṁ lokaṁ




mṛḍayanti yuge yuge




Śrīmad-Bhagavatam (1.3.28)



Among the incarnations described in the preceding
verses, some are expansions of the puruṣa-avatāra,
Kāraṇārṇava-śāyī Mahā-Viṣṇu, and some are āveśa-
avatāras. All of these incarnations descend in each age
to protect the world when it is tormented by the demons.
However, Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the son of the
King of Vraja, is Svayam Bhagavān, the only form of

                             21
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

Bhagavān with no other source than Himself. He is the
original, primeval personality, and Mahā-Viṣṇu is His
expansion.



Śrī Brahmā, the original guru for our sampradāya, states
in his prayers:



īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ




saccidānanda vigrahaḥ




anādir-ādir-govindaḥ



sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam



Śrī Brahma-saṁhitā (5.1)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Lord and Master of all other
lords and He is the embodiment of pure eternal
existence, full knowledge and unlimited bliss. He is the
primeval Lord, Govinda, for He has no beginning or
origin, as He Himself is the source of everything,
including all the incarnations of Viṣṇu and all His
empowered servitors. He is the ultimate cause of all
consequent causes.



Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the Lord of the masters of creation who are
worshipped by the whole world, and He is the origin of
all incarnations. However, in Vraja, He offers respects
to his father Nanda Bābā, Mother Yaśodā and His other
elders. He becomes blissful when He loses the games He
plays with His friends, and when He eats their remnants
and feeds them His own. Even when He is defeated again
and again in the assembly of the gopīs, He considers it
His great fortune. It was because of His own desire to
obtain the pleasing association of the beautiful damsels
of Vraja that He called them at the time of the rāsa-
līlā; they did not call Him. This Śrī Kṛṣṇa is sat-cit-
ānanda, pure eternal existence, full knowledge and
unlimited bliss.

Sat means “existence”. Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s inherent nature is
that He exists as a fresh youth who is the best of
dancers. His extremely charming form as a tender youth

                           22
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

is even more attractive than Dvārakādhīśa, the form of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa when He resides in Dvārakā. It is only because
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s original form, Vrajendra-nandana, exists
that all other lords, as well as this whole world, have
their existence.

Cit means “that knowledge which manifests all
relationships (sambandha) and permanent spiritual
emotions (bhāva)”. As bhāva condenses it gradually
passes through the progressive stages of prema, sneha,
māna, praṇaya, rāga, anurāga and bhāva, and finally
transforms into mahābhāva. Mahābhāva is Śrī Rādhā
Herself. She is therefore known as mahābhāva-svarūpiṇī,
the embodiment of mahābhāva.

When the three components — pure eternal existence
(sat), full knowledge (cit) and unlimited bliss (ānanda)
— are manifest in one combined form then the identity of
that form is Śrī Rādhā-Kānta, the basis and entirety of
sat, cit and ānanda, and the beloved of Śrīmatī Rādhikā.
This very entity is Himself the sublimely pure
existential substance (viśuddha-sattva).

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the object (the viṣaya) of all rasas
(loving sentiments) and His devotees (the āśraya) are
the abodes of love for Him. As the object of love He
cannot comprehend the topmost transformations exhibited
by His devotees, the abodes of love for Him, when they
experience their various moods, such as rūḍa and
adhirūḍa. Therefore, Śrī Kṛṣṇa accepts the form of Śrī
Śacīnandana Gaurahari and becomes radiant with the mood
and bodily complexion of Śrī Rādhā, the supreme abode of
love for Kṛṣṇa. In that form He fulfils His three
longings[v]5.

In many places throughout Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, the
sweetness of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beautiful form (rūpa) has been
described. However, among all of them, three specific
descriptions are extraordinarily wonderful and touch the
heart. The first description was spoken by Śrī Brahmā,
the Grandfather of the universe:



naumīḍya te ‘bhra-vapuṣe taḍid-ambarāya

guñjāvataṁsa-paripiccha-lasan-mukhāya

vanya-sraje kavala-vetra-viṣāṇa-veṇu-

lakṣma-śriye mṛdu-pade paśupāṅgajāya

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.1)



O master, in the entire universe, only You are worthy of
being praised. O Vrajendra-nandana, son of the king of
Vraja, Your body, appearing like a fresh rain-cloud, is
adorned with a yellow cloth that glistens like
lightening and appears amazingly brilliant.

Because You are wearing makara-shaped earrings and a
peacock feather on Your head, Your lotus face radiates

                              23
Damodarastakam.txt                               5/5/2017

an uncommon splendour. Around Your neck is a garland
made of innumerable kinds of forest flowers and leaves.
Tucked under Your arm are a cane and a buffalo horn.
Your flute, which is tied by Your waist-belt, looks very
beautiful. In Your lovely, soft hands is a morsel of
yoghurt and rice. Even You are attracted by this cowherd
boy attire of Yours. I simply fall to the ground like a
stick again and again at Your feet, which are softer
than lotuses, and which are marked with all the
auspicious signs.



The second description was spoken by the wives of the
brāhmaṇas of Mathurā:

śyāmaṁ hiraṇya-paridhiṁ vanamālya-barha-

dhātu-pravāla-naṭa-veṣam anavratāṁse

vinyasta-hastam itareṇa dhunānam abjaṁ

karṇotpalālaka-kapola-mukhābja-hāsam

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.23.22)

His complexion was dark bluish like a fresh monsoon
rain-cloud, and the glistening yellow cloth that was
draped on His shoulders subdued the splendour of gold.
There was a garland of forest flowers around His neck
and a beautiful peacock feather splendidly adorned His
head. Playful designs were painted on His limbs with
coloured minerals and He had decorated Himself with
bunches of newly sprouted leaves. He looked just like a
dramatic dancer. He was resting one hand on the shoulder
of His friend, and with the other hand He was playfully
twirling a lotus flower. Ornaments decorated His ears
and curls of black hair were cascading down His cheeks
as His lotus face blossomed with a playful, mild smile.



The third description found in Veṇu-gīta (when the gopīs
sang about Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s flute) was spoken by Śrīla
Śukadeva Gosvāmī. Here, he is describing the sweetness
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beautiful form as revealed in the hearts
of the vraja-gopīs:

barhāpīḍaṁ naṭa-vara-vapuḥ karṇayoḥ karṇikāraṁ

bibhrad vāsaḥ kanaka-kapiśaṁ vaijayantīṁ ca mālām

randhrān veṇor adhara-sudhayāpūrayan gopa-vṛndair

vṛndāraṇyaṁ sva-pada-ramaṇaṁ prāviśad gīta-kīrtiḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.21.5)

(Within their hearts, the damsels of Vraja began to see
that) Śrī Kṛṣṇa entered the charming forest of Vṛndāvana
accompanied by His cowherd boyfriends. A peacock feather
decorated the top of His head and yellow karṇikāra
(oleander) flowers were resting above His ears. He wore
a golden yellow garment on His body, and a beautiful,

                              24
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

fragrant garland strung from five kinds of forest
flowers circled His neck and hanged down to His knees.
Śrī Kṛṣṇa appeared like the best of dancers performing a
supremely captivating drama upon a stage. He filled up
the holes of His flute with the nectar of His lips as
the cowherd boys followed behind Him singing His
glories, which purify the entire world. In this way, the
forest of Vṛndāvana, which is more charming than the
divine realm of Vaikuṇṭḥa, has become even more splendid
from the impressions of His adorable lotus feet, which
are marked with all the auspicious symbols like the
conch and disc.



There is yet another description of His beauty within
the five chapters of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam that recount
rāsa-līlā. The gopīs, allured by the bewildering potency
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s flute song, left their homes in the
middle of the night and went to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Yet when they
came before Him, He teased them and told them to return
to their homes. At that time, the gopīs described the
sweetness of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beautiful form:



kā stry aṅga te kala-padāyata-veṇu-gīta-

sammohitārya-caritān na calet tri-lokyām

trailokya-saubhagam idaṁ ca nirīkṣya rūpaṁ

yad go-dvija-druma-mṛgāḥ pulakāny abibhran

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.29.40)

O Śrī Śyāmasundara, from Your flute come the most
endearing, slowly rolling melodies. Your beautiful form
brings auspiciousness upon the entire universe!
Moreover, upon seeing Your beautiful form, even the
bodies of the cows, birds, trees and deer erupt with
horripilation. After hearing the sweet melodies of Your
flute and beholding Your captivating form, is there any
woman in all the three worlds who would not deviate from
her religious principles and, leaving aside all proper
conduct and shyness, become attached to You?



Upon hearing the sound of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s flute, the gopīs
of Vraja forgot everything — their fear, hesitation,
patience, dignity and so forth. Regardless of the
condition they were in, they eagerly ran to meet Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. Without even calling their dear most girlfriends,
the prāṇa-priya sakhīs, they ran to Him. Each gopī
thought, “Śrī Kṛṣṇa is calling only me.” When Śrī Kṛṣṇa
saw that the gopīs, the incomparable treasures of Vraja,
had come to Him, He tried to bewilder them with His
delightful art of speaking.

O beautiful cowherd girls, why have you come here alone
at this time of night? Have you come to see nature’s
splendour and the beauty of this forest? If so, then
return to your homes now. The duty of a lady of noble

                           25
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

descent is to serve her husband, father, brothers and
friends. Even if her husband is bad-natured,
unfortunate, foolish, old, diseased or poor, her duty is
to serve him. Go back to your homes.[vi]6



Hearing these unpleasant words from their dear most
beloved, the gopīs became morose and pained at heart.
They answered:



Dear Śyāmasundara, Your advice is correct, but by
instructing us, You have become our guru, and one should
first serve one’s guru. Now, please accept our service.
Till this moment, our hearts were absorbed in household
duties, but now You have stolen our hearts. How will we
return to our homes?[vii]7

When Śrī Kṛṣṇa was concluding His manifest pastimes, He
called upon Śrī Uddhava and told him, “Soon I will leave
you behind in this world to propagate bhagavat-dharma.”
After Śrī Kṛṣṇa actually disappeared, Śrī Uddhava set
out for Vraja, overwhelmed by separation from Him. On
the way, he met Śrī Vidura and told him that Śrī Kṛṣṇa
had concluded His pastimes. In that context, Śrī Uddhava
described Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beautiful form as follows:



yan martya-līlaupayikaṁ sva-yoga-



māyā-balaṁ darśayatā gṛhītam



vismāpanaṁ svasya ca saubhagarddheḥ



paraṁ padaṁ bhūṣaṇa-bhūṣaṇāṅgam



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.2.12)

By the power of His internal potency (yoga-māyā), Śrī
Kṛṣṇa exhibited His original, eternal form within this
mortal sphere — a form which is perfectly suited for His
human-like pastimes, a form so captivating that even He
is astonished when He sees Himself. His beautiful form
is the embodiment of the topmost limit of exceedingly
good fortune and opulence. Indeed, ornaments usually
beautify the person who wears them, but Kṛṣṇa’s form is
so beautiful that He actually beautifies His ornaments.
In other words, compared to all other divine forms in
existence, the beauty of His form is supremely divine.



Furthermore, when Śrī Kṛṣṇa disappeared from the gopīs

                             26
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

at the time of the rāsa-līlā, the gopīs sang about their
separation from Him in deep lamentation. Hearing that
kīrtana, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, unable to restrain Himself, again
appeared in their midst. Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī
describes His beauty at that time:



tāsām-āvirbhuc-chauriḥ



smaya-māna-mukhambujaḥ



pītāmbara-dharaḥ stragvī



sākṣān-manmatha-manmathaḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.32.2)

When Śrī Kṛṣṇa appeared before the gopīs, His lotus face
blossomed with a mild smile. A beautiful forest flower
garland decorated His neck and chest, and a yellow cloth
graced His shoulders. He churned the mind of even Cupid
who agitates the minds of all, for He was directly the
original transcendental Cupid.



He says, pītāmbara-dharaḥ. At first, Kṛṣṇa was clasping
the yellow cloth He wore as an upper-garment between His
hands. The import of this is as follows:

When Śrī Kṛṣṇa saw the gopīs’ moods of separation from
Him, He wiped away their tears with His yellow cloth. He
realised that He had given so much trouble to His dear
beloveds, and thus He considered Himself an offender.
Begging pardon for His offence, He placed part of his
yellow garment between His teeth as though biting a
piece of straw (a sign of great humility). The
appearance of His beautiful form at that time was
capable of agitating the minds of millions and millions
of Cupids.

When Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī spoke this verse, he became
absorbed in the moods of the gopīs. In that state,
forgetful of himself, He became perturbed and addressed
Śrī Kṛṣṇa as śauri. By calling Kṛṣṇa śauri in the mood
of an irritated gopī, Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī was saying
“You are cruel like a warrior. You are not from the
soft-hearted cowherd dynasty, otherwise You would not
have left all of us.”

When Śrī Kṛṣṇa, manifesting all the splendour of His
incomparable form, appeared in the assembly of the
gopīs, they became completely overwhelmed with love for
Him. The love that Śrī Bhagavān’s associates have for
Him within their hearts determines how much His

                              27
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

immaculate beauty is revealed. Śrī Bhagavān manifests
His personal sweetness according to the greatness of His
associates’ love for Him. Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī further
clarifies this:



cakāsa gopī pariṣad-gato ‘rcitus



trailokya-lakṣmyeka-padaṁ vapur-dadhat



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.32.14)

As Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa sat among thousands upon thousands
of gopīs who were all worshipping Him, He certainly
appeared most splendid. All the beauty throughout the
three worlds, all the beauty ever manifest in the past,
all the beauty manifest now, and all the beauty that
will ever manifest in the future, is only the dim glow
from a drop of Śrī Bhagavān’s own beauty. He alone is
the abode of all beauty.



Śrī Nārāyaṇa is also beautiful. Attracted by His
beautiful form, Lakṣmī remains engaged in the service of
His worshipful feet, day and night. However, as soon as
she remembers the sweetness of Śrī Kṛṣṇa within her
heart, she longs to see His sweet form directly so she
resolves, “Since I cannot obtain entrance into rāsa-
līlā, I will watch it from a distance.” What is the
reason for this eagerness? It has been said that the
incomparable form that Śrī Kṛṣṇa manifested within the
rāsa-līlā in the assembly of the gopīs was never
exhibited anywhere else. What is that form like? His
form churns the mind of even Cupid who agitates the
minds of all, for He is directly the original
transcendental Cupid.

In the first verse of Śrī Dāmodarāṣṭakam, Śrī Satyavrata
Muni describes the very same enchanting form of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa as a two and a half-year-old baby running away
from Mother Yaśodā. As He fled from His mother, He
repeatedly looked behind Him with terrified glances. His
earrings shimmered on His cheeks, and His neck was
decorated by three graceful lines. Other than the
auspicious gold cord around His waist and the pair of
ankle-bells clasping His worshipful lotus feet, reso-
nating with unsurpassed charm, His tiny form was
completely naked.

The conclusion that the manifestation of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
beauty is relative to His devotee’s love for Him is also
established by Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī in his Śrī Bṛhad-
bhāgavatāmṛta: “The unique qualities of Śrī Bhagavān’s
beauty manifest in accordance with the unique qualities
of His associates.”

In order to bestow His mercy upon the souls who were
indifferent to Him and to bless them with vraja-prema

                           28
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

(the love exhibited by the eternal inhabitants of
Vraja), Śrī Kṛṣṇa manifested His beautiful form as a
fresh youth, the best of dancers, dressed as a cowherd
boy holding a flute in His hands. This very form of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is the origin and basis of all His forms in
Mathurā and Dvārakā and is also the source of all other
avatāras.

Even though the main subject of Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī’s
commentary on this verse is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s childhood
pastimes, he has quoted a description of Śrī Kṛṣna’s
beautiful form exhibited at the time of the rāsa-līlā in
order to convey the extraordinary glory of that
particular form.




In Chapter Nine of the Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,
there is a description of Śrī Dāmodara-līlā:

Many gopīs constantly complained to Śrī Yaśodā, “Your
son steals from our houses and eats our butter. O
Yaśodā, worse than that, He throws milk, yoghurt and
butter everywhere. If He actually ate it, it would be
all right, but He doesn’t. He smashes our pots of milk
and yoghurt and unties the calves. How can we tolerate
this daily loss of milk and yoghurt any longer? We have
all decided to leave your settlement of Vraja and live
elsewhere.”

Mother Yaśodā heard these complaints every day. She
began to wonder, “Could it be that my darling boy finds
the butter that comes from His own home not tasty? Is it
sour? Is that why He doesn’t eat it, but instead sneaks
into the houses of other gopīs to steal their butter? If
that is the case, then today I will prepare sweet butter
for my dear son with my own hands. He will surely eat
that, and not go to others’ houses to steal their
butter.” It was the festival of Dīpāvalī so she gave
leave to all her servants and maidservants. She
personally milked Maṅgalā, Gaṅgā, Piśaṅgī and other
cows, and then boiled the milk until it started
condensing. When it was the right warmth she added
yoghurt culture to it, and then, in the early morning,
she personally set to churning the freshly cultured
yoghurt. As she was churning, she became completely
immersed in love for her darling son and began to sing.

As the churning rod rotated back and forth it made a
deep reverberating sound, dhik, like the large drum-head
of a mṛdaṅga and also a tapping sound, tān, like the
small drum-head. Thus, the full sound was dhik-tān,
dhik-tān. The meaning implied is that any soul who does
not worship and remember Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa leads a life
that is so dull (tān) that he is no better than an
animal. Such a soul is condemned (dhik).

As she churned, the ringing of her bangles sounded like
the ringing of kārtalas. Lost in thoughts of her darling
son, she started to sing. In his stotram, Śrī
Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura has also described how Mother
Yaśodā began to sing in this pastime:

                           29
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017




kvacit prabhāte dadhi-pūrṇa-pātre

nikṣipya manthaṁ yuvatī mukundam

ālokya gānaṁ vividhaṁ karoti

govinda-dāmodara-mādhaveti

Śrī Govinda-Dāmodara Stotram (19)

Once, at dawn as Yaśodā-devī was about to place the
churning rod in a pot of yoghurt,[viii]8 she gazed upon
her child, Mukunda.



At once she became overwhelmed with love and sang this
wonderful song, “O my Govinda, my Dāmodara, O my dear
Mādhava.”



Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the darling son of Mother Yaśodā, forever
begs parental love from His mother. Mother Yaśodā was
completely absorbed in the moods of her song and was
brimming with affection for Kṛṣṇa. When He heard her
singing, her voice saturated with love for Him, He could
not restrain Himself. He began to think, “Every day,
Mother sings little songs with great tenderness to
awaken Me, but today she has not come and I am so
hungry.” The Supreme Lord of everything, who is
independently blissful and self-satisfied (ātmarāma and
āptakāma), was hungry. He began to cry loudly for His
mother’s breast-milk.

My dear Lord, how glorious You are! On this day, the
effect of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s crying remained unknown to anyone.
It simply merged into the fathomless ocean of Mother
Yaśodā’s parental affection, for she was so absorbed in
her saṅkīrtana that she was unable to hear Him.

With great difficulty, Kanhaiyā, who was lying on His
belly, moved little by little to the side of His bed and
then got down. Rubbing His eyes and crying, He somehow
made it to where His mother was churning, tottering like
an intoxicated elephant along the way. He caught hold of
the churning rod and stopped it from twirling. Mother
Yaśodā’s absorption broke. Seeing her darling son at her
side, she immediately sat Him on her lap and began
breast-feeding Him. Just by seeing her dear Kṛṣṇa, her
limbs became decorated by all of the aṣṭa-sāttvika
bhāvas (the eight types of bodily transformations
arising from ecstatic love of God). Furthermore, the
special emotion of motherly affection manifested —
namely, milk began to flow from her breasts.

According to Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, baby Kṛṣṇa is the
object upon which motherly love (vātsalya-rasa) depends
(viṣaya-ālambana); His mother, Śrī Yaśodā, is the
reservoir of love for Him (āśraya-ālambana); baby
Kṛṣṇa’s gorgeous face is the stimulus which rouses that

                             30
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

love (uddīpana); and Mother Yaśodā’s tears, the standing
on end of her bodily hairs, the flowing of milk from her
breasts and so on are the sāttvika-bhāvas,
transformations of ecstasy in her body.

All of these ingredients of love, namely vibhāva
(viṣaya-ālambana, āśraya-ālambana and uddīpana),
anubhāva (deep emotions that are realized through
outward expressions on the body)and so forth then
combined with Mother Yaśodā’s own sthāyī-bhāva, namely
vātsalya-rati, and began to make her relish vātsalya-
rasa.

Suddenly, the milk started boiling over as if it were
thinking, “Mother Yaśodā’s breasts are the source of all
the milk contained within all the universes. Her supply
of breast milk is inexhaustible and the stomach of baby
Kanhaiyā is not at all small; all the universes can fit
inside it. She will never tire of breast-feeding Him,
and He can drink forever. In that case, I will always
remain bereft of the opportunity to serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Therefore, it is pointless to maintain my worthless
life, a life devoid of service.” Thinking like this, the
milk began to sacrifice himself into the fire.

Practising devotees (sādhakas) should also have this
type of anxiousness. They should think, “If while
performing bhajana, we do not gain even a glimpse of Śrī
Bhagavān, or realize the mercy of His pastimes and
divine abode, then our lives are worthless.” Deprived of
seeing Śrī Gaurasundara and His associates, Śrī
Narottama Ṭhākura says:



pāṣāṇe kuṭiba māthā, anale paśiba



gaurāṅga guṇera nidhi kothā gele pābo



Prārthanā (Song 41)



I shall dash my head upon a stone or enter into a
blazing fire. Where will I find that treasure-house of
all wonderful qualities, Śrī Gaurāṅga?



In this regard it is important to carefully deliberate
on Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s definition of uttama-bhakti, or
pure devotion:



anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādhy anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanaṁ bhaktir-uttamā

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.1.11)

                           31
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017


When bhakti is performed without any other desire than
the aspiration to bring happiness to Kṛṣṇa; when it is
not covered by the endeavour to accumulate dry
knowledge, result-oriented work, or any other practice
for attaining a goal unrelated to Him, and when it is
cultivated solely with a favourable disposition towards
Him and for His benefit, then it is uttama-bhakti,
supremely pure devotion.



In this verse, the characteristics which describe bhakti
are divided into two categories: svarūpa-lakṣaṇa and
taṭastha-lakṣaṇa. The first category, svarūpa-lakṣaṇa,
includes the intrinsic qualities of bhakti. The second
category, taṭastha-lakṣaṇa [ix]9, includes the marginal
qualities of bhakti.

To communicate how our bhakti can be perfected, the
modifier ānukūlyena (with a favourable disposition) has
been used because one cannot perform bhakti with an
unfavourable disposition. That is to say, one who acts
in opposition to Śrī Kṛṣṇa cannot be performing bhakti.

Certain exalted, realized personalities have stated that
ānukūlyena means the tendency to perform activities that
bring pleasure to Śrī Kṛṣṇa and that the inclination to
please Him with a favourable disposition is bhakti.
However, if this latter definition is accepted, one of
two faults may arise. Some things are encompassed by
this definition which should not be included within a
description of bhakti. This is called ativyapti-doṣa
(the fault of over-extending the definition). Similarly
it excludes things that should be included within the
description. This is called avyapti-doṣa (the fault of
under-extending the definition).

For example, in the wrestling match, Cāṇura, Muṣṭika and
other demons were striking Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s limbs. Śrī Kṛṣṇa
was certainly enlivened by their attack and began to
relish the mood of being a great hero (vīra-rasa). How
can the attacks of the demons be understood as
pleasurable for Śrī Kṛṣṇa? The answer to this is found
in part of a verse from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.13.30):
“manasvinām-iva sat-saṁprahāra — Although in the eyes of
ordinary people a terrifying battle with an enemy seems
torturous, it is in fact exhilarating for the fighters.”

In that case, if we conclude that the demons’ horrible
attacks during the wrestling match were acts of bhakti
because they gave pleasure to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, then the fault
of ativyapti (over-extension of the definition) arises.
Even though these malevolent endeavours caused Śrī Kṛṣṇa
to feel pleasure which is apparently the quality of
bhakti, they were actually strictly opposed to bhakti.

Conversely, consider the example of Mother Yaśodā
breast-feeding Śrī Kṛṣṇa as He lay on her lap. At the
same time, the milk she had kept on the stove was
boiling over into the fire. After taking Kṛṣṇa, who was
not yet satisfied, off of her lap, she went to save the
milk. This caused Him to experience much displeasure. As
stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.9.6), “sañjāta-kopaḥ

                           32
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

sphuritārūṇādharam — His tiny reddish lips began
quivering from anger.” Mother Yaśodā’s action greatly
displeased Śrī Kṛṣṇa, but if we conclude that her
endeavour does not come within the definition of bhakti,
then the fault of avyapti (under-extension of the
definition) arises.




The nature of exalted devotees (mahā-bhāgavatas) is that
they want to engage every soul in Kṛṣṇa’s service. When
Mother Yaśodā saw that the milk was sacrificing himself
into the fire by boiling over because he was bereft of
Kṛṣṇa’s service, she immediately removed her darling boy
from her lap and tried to save it.

With both of His hands, baby Kṛṣṇa firmly caught hold of
His mother’s breast and with His legs He clung to her
waist. He held on to His mother in this way with all His
might. Pūtanā, who had the strength of ten thousand
elephants, could not free herself from His grip, but in
the presence of Mother Yaśodā’s vātsalya-prema, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, the possessor of all potency, could not stop her
from putting Him down.

With one hand, Mother Yaśodā easily pushed Him from her
breast. Then she removed Him from her lap, sat Him down
nearby, and went to save the milk.

The siddhānta (perfect philosophical conclusion) behind
this incident is that Mother Yaśodā’s love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa
is much greater than His love for her. Indeed, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
comes under the control of her love. In the presence of
this motherly love imbued with deep possessiveness, all
of Bhagavān’s unlimited majestic potencies are defeated.

Here, another point is to be considered. Although the
superlative manifestation of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s unlimited
opulence (aiśvarya) is found only in Vraja, it remains
submerged in the fathomless ocean of sweetness contained
within the Vraja pastimes. That is to say, even when Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s infinite opulence is fully revealed, it easily
fits within the all-accommodating embrace of Vraja’s
sweetness.

Mother Yaśodā splashed cold water into the pot of
boiling milk as if to pacify it. “I am going to use you
in Kṛṣṇa’s service right now,” she said. “Don’t give up
your life like this.”




In the other room, however, baby Kṛṣṇa was in a fit of
rage. He picked up a stone pestle lying nearby and hit
the base of the earthen pot of yoghurt that His mother
was churning, and made a hole in it. A thick stream of
yoghurt began flowing all over the floor as Kṛṣṇa
watched with fascination. Although He was captivated by
the sight of the stream of yoghurt spilling onto the
ground, it made Him remember His mother. Consequently,

                           33
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

He fearfully ran into a nearby room that had a doorway
leading outside. Hanging from the ceiling was a pot of
butter which enticed His mind. He climbed on top of an
overturned grinding mortar and started eating the butter
out of the pot and at the same time feeding some of it
to the crows and monkeys who had come.

When Mother Yaśodā returned to the pot of yoghurt to
continue her churning, she saw the stream of yoghurt
flowing from the broken pot. She thought, “This is
surely the work of my clever son.” Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura says in his commentary on Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.9.7), “Kṛṣṇa was highly skilful in
breaking the earthen pot, for He did not make a sound,
nor did His ornaments. Nor did He make any sound in the
other room as He climbed on top of the grinding mortar
to take butter.” Indeed, this could only have been the
accomplishment of her intelligent son. By the tiny
footprints of yoghurt on the floor, the sweet smell of
butter coming from the room nearby and various other
clues, Mother Yaśodā easily guessed: “My beloved son has
entered that very room.” Peering inside, she saw Śrī
Kṛṣṇa standing on the grinding mortar, stealing fresh
butter. She took a small stick in her hand to punish her
clever child, and tip-toed into the room like a cat. But
as soon as she entered, the crows and monkeys fled. Śrī
Kṛṣṇa immediately understood, “Mother has come!” He
leapt from the grinding mortar and fled outside towards
the royal lane. Mother Yaśodā also ran on to the road,
pursuing her son.

The silk cloth on Mother Yaśodā’s somewhat full, bluish
limbs fluttered as she swiftly ran and the beautiful
fragrant flowers that were woven into her braid began to
fall as if to say, “Mother, you are not alone; we also
are with you. Catch Him, quickly!” Mother Yaśodā’s pace
exceeded Kṛṣṇa’s, and thus she caught Him from behind.




If we are to obtain Śrī Kṛṣṇa, then we must love Him
more than He loves us. Only then can He be controlled.
We will also have to love Him with great intimacy
(viśrambha-bhāva) and with the same simple, natural
attachment (laukika-sadbandhuvat) as the residents of
Vraja, especially the gopas and their wives. Śrī Kṛṣṇa
may be pleased by love that is mixed with the moods of
awe and reverence (aiśvarya), but He cannot be
controlled by it.

Just see, with the mood of a simple mother, Śrī Yaśodā
naturally regards Śrī Kṛṣṇa as her son and chastises
Him. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is offered worship everywhere else, but
when He is in Vraja He is the servant and the
inhabitants of Vraja are His masters. On the command of
the gopīs He begins to dance. He puts Nanda Bābā’s
slippers on His head and delivers them to him. Under
Yogamāyā’s influence, He forgets His supremacy and
enacts His pastimes as an ordinary human being. This is
called mādhurya-līlā, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s honey-like pastimes.
Although Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes in Vraja are full of
opulence, it does not even slightly stifle the love that

                           34
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

the inhabitants of Vraja have for Him. Instead, it
invigorates their honey-like love causing it to condense
even more. This is the speciality of the love in Vraja.

The practising devotee (sādhaka) should also desire to
perform activities that will melt Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s heart. Śrī
Kṛṣṇa will not be able to resist him for very long. He
will accept that devotee with His whole heart and
immerse him in His own sublime service.



THUS ENDS THE DIG-DARśINī-VṛITTI ON THE FIRST VERSE




Verse Two




rudantaṁ muhur netra-yugmaṁ mṛjantaṁ

karāmbhoja-yugmena sātaṅka-netram

muhuḥ svāsa-kampa-tri-rekhāṅka-kaṇṭha-

sthita-graiva-dāmodaraṁ bhakti-baddham



SYNONYMS



rudantam — weeping; muhuḥ — incessantly; netra-yugmam —
two eyes; mṛjantam — and rubbing both simultaneously;
kara-ambhoja-yugmena — with two lotus hands; sātaṅka-
netram — with fear-filled eyes; muhuḥ — again and again;
śvāsa — heavy sobbing; kampa — trembling; tri-rekha-aṅka
— with three curved lines that resemble the ringed
grooves encircling the neck of a conch-shell; kaṇṭha-
sthita — upon His neck; graiva — necklace; dāmodaram —
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who’s waist (udara) is bound by rope (dāma);
bhakti-baddham — bound by loving devotion.



TRANSLATION



[Seeing the stick in His mother’s hand and fearful of
being beaten] He is weeping incessantly and rubbing His
eyes again and again with His two lotus-like hands. His
eyes are extremely restless and filled with fear. He
takes heavy breaths again and again that cause the
pearls and other ornaments around His neck, which is
marked by three gracefully curving lines, to tremble. O
Dāmodara, You have been bound by Your mother’s vātsalya-
bhakti. [I offer my obeisances unto that Dāmodara].


                           35
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā

tadanantara ‘līlā’-viśeṣaṁ vadan — “kṛtāgasaṁ taṁ
prarudantam akṣiṇī karṣantam añjan-maṣiṇī sva-pāṇinā,
udvīkṣamāṇā bhaya-vihvalekṣaṇaṁ haste gṛhītvā
bhiṣayanty-avāgurat.” Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.9.11)
ityartham āha — rudantam iti.

[rudantam] mātṛ-haste yaṣṭiṁ dṛṣtvatayā tāḍanam āśaṅkya
bhītatvādi-pradarśanena tat-pariharaṇāya krandantam,
ataeva karāmbhoja-yugmena netra-yugmaṁ mṛjantaṁ —
yugapan mārjayantaṁ, etacca bālya-līlā-viśeṣa-
svabhāvataḥ. yad vā — bhayāveśena
sadyo’anugacchato’śruṇo niṣkāsanārthaṁ, yadvā,
aśrudhārāpasāranārtham iti dik. yataḥ sātaṅke saśaṅke
netre api, kim punar mano yasya tam; yadvā, sabhaya-
nirīkṣaṇa-netra-yugam ity arthaḥ. tataśca tāḍana-
parihārārtham idam api līlāntaram ūhyam. kiñca, muhuḥ
śvasena rodanāveśa-kṛtena, kampat kampamānaṁ, tri-
rekhāṅke kambuvad-rekhā-traya-cinhe, kaṇṭhe sthitaṁ
graivaṁ graiveyakaṁ sarvaṁ grīvābhūsaṇaṁ muktā-hārādi
yasya. [dāmodaraṁ] dāma udare yasya; anena ca —
“gopikolūkhale dāmnā babandha prakṛtaṁ yathā” Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.9.14) ityuktam.

dāmnodare ulūkhale cobhayato bandhana-muktaṁ,
tadevābhivyañjayan bhakta-vaśyatā-viśeṣeṇotkarṣa-viśeṣam
āha — bhaktyaiva matuḥ sva-viṣayakayā tasya vā mātṛ-
viṣayakayā, baddhaṁ svīkṛta-bandhanaṁ, na tu pāśa-varga-
balāt, sarvataḥ samuccitairapy-anantaḥ pāśairnyūna-dvy-
aṅgulāpūraṇāt. taccoktaṁ — “tad-dāma-badhyamānasya
svārbhakasya kṛtāgasaḥ, dvy-aṅgulonam abhūt tena
sandadhe’nyacca gopikā. yadāsīt tadapi nyūnaṁ
tenānyadapi sandadhe, tad-api dvy-aṅgulaṁ nyūnaṁ yad-
yad-ādatta bandhanam. evaṁ sva-geha-dāmāni yaśodā
sandadhatyapi” Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.9.15—7) — ityādi.
yadvā, dāmodaratve hetuḥ — bhaktyaiva baddhaṁ vaśīkṛtaṁ,
tathāpi sa evārthaḥ paryavasyati. kiñca, “sva-mātuḥ
svinna-gātrāyā visrasta-kabara-srajaḥ, dṛṣṭvā pariśramaṁ
kṛṣṇaḥ kṛpayāsīt sva-bandhane. evaṁ sandarśitā hyaṅga
hariṇā bhakta-vaśyatā, sva-vaśenāpi kṛṣṇena yasyedaṁ
seśvaraṁ vaśe. nemaṁ viriñco na bhavo na śrīrapyaṅga-
saṁśrayā, prasādaṁ lebhire gopī yat tat prāpa vimukti-
dāt. nāyaṁ sukhāpo bhagavān dehināṁ gopikā-sutaḥ,
jñānināṁ cātma-bhūtānāṁ yathā bhaktimatām iha.” Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.9.18—21) ityeṣām arthaḥ. tathā —
“devarṣir me priyatamo yadimau dhanadātmajau, tat tathā
sādhayiṣyāmi yad-gītaṁ tan-mahātmanā.” Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(10.10.25) — ityāderartho’pi śrī-nārada-bhakty-apekṣayā
yamalārjuna-bhañjanādi-tat-tal-līlā-rūpo’nena sūcitaḥ.
(2)

iti śrī dāmodarāṣṭake dvitīya-śloke śrīla-sanātana-
gosvāmī-kṛtā digdarśinī-nāmnī ṭīkā samāptā.



~ THUS ENDS THE DIG-DARśINī ṭīKā ON THE SECOND VERSE ~

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā Bhāvanuvāda

The excellence of Kṛṣṇa’s extraordinary līlā is depicted
in this impor-tant verse from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(10.9.11):

                           36
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017




kṛtāgasaṁ taṁ prarudantam akṣiṇī



kaṣantam añjan-maṣiṇī sva-pāṇinā



udvīkṣamāṇaṁ bhaya-vihvalekṣaṇaṁ



haste gṛhītvā bhiṣayanty avāgurat



Mother Yaśodā watched as Her naughty child cried
bitterly and rubbed His eyes with both His hands. The
black ointment from around His eyes mixed with His tears
and spread everywhere. Seeing her son with His eyes full
of fear at the sight of the stick she was brandishing,
Yaśodā took Him by the hand and began to gently reproach
Him in order to instil fear in Him.



In the stanza beginning with rudantam Śrī Satyavrata
Muni fully captured the meaning of this Bhāgavatam
verse. In following with the second half of the previous
stanza, he continues to establish his worshipful Lord’s
supremacy through descriptions of His unique pastimes.
Appreciating the same pastime that is described in the
above verse from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, he spoke the present
stanza thus: “When He saw His mother holding a stick, He
became apprehensive, fearing that she would surely beat
Him. Now He is hoping that by showing her how afraid He
is, He can avoid being punished. So rudantam, He cries
bitterly, and karāmbhoja-yugmena netra-yugmaṁ mṛjantam,
He rubs His eyes again and again with both His lotus-
like hands.”

That He just keeps rubbing His eyes with both His hands
is in keeping with the natural behaviour of a child.
This is the special characteristic of His balya-līlā and
it is one explanation of karāmbhoja-yugmena netra-yugmaṁ
mṛjantam, but this phrase also indicates two alternative
meanings. The first of these is that there are actual
tears that instantly came to His eyes due to His fear.
In order to make these tears fall from His eyes, He
continuously rubs them with both His hands. The second
alternative meaning is that continuous streams of tears
are already flowing from His eyes so He rubs His eyes
with both His hands to wipe away the tears.

The meaning of sātaṅka-netram is that if even His eyes
are expressing that He is afraid of being punished, His
mind must be overwhelmed with fear. Otherwise, it may be
taken to mean “He is casting His glance in all
directions because He is greatly agitated by fear”. His
attempt to avoid being beaten by His mother is another
of His unique confidential pastimes.

                           37
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017


And moreover, muhuḥ-svasena, because of His continuous
crying and constant heavy sobs, kaṇṭha-sthita-graivam,
the pearl necklace and other ornaments around His neck,
which is marked with tri-rekhāṅka, three graceful lines
like the ringed grooves on a conch, are also trembling
(kampat). Śrī Dāmodara, whose belly becomes bound by
ropes, appeared thus. By this description, Śrī
Satyavrata Munī has captured the meaning of another
verse from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.9.14):



taṁ matvātmajam avyaktaṁ



martya-liṅgam adhokṣajam



gopikolūkhale dāmnā



babandha prākṛtaṁ yathā



Just as an ordinary mother in this world may bind her
mischievous son, so Mother Yaśodā, simply considering
Śrī Kṛṣṇa to be her son, tied Him to the grinding mortar
with a rope as if He was an ordinary child.



The above verse mentions that the rope was knotted both
at His belly and at the grinding mortar.[x]10 Thus the
sage has revealed Śrī



Kṛṣṇa’s unique supremacy by describing His bhakta-
vaśyatā-viśeṣa, His special quality by which He allows
His devotees to control Him.

Śrī Satyavrata Muni says bhakti-baddham. The meaning is
“bhaktyaiva baddham — Śrī Kṛṣṇa is only bound by bhakti
and nothing else.” In other words, it was not the
strength of all the ropes that was able to bind Him.
Rather, He submitted to being bound, on one hand,
because of the power of Śrī Yaśodā’s bhakti for Him in
the form of motherly affection, and on the other hand,
because of His own special quality of willingly being
controlled by His bhaktas, like His mother, in the form
of His bhakti for her. That is why, even when Mother
Yaśodā tied all the ropes she had gathered together, she
still failed to bind Him. There always remained an
inexplicable gap of two fingers.

This is described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.9.15—7):




                           38
Damodarastakam.txt                                5/5/2017

tad dāma badhyamānasya



svārbhakasya kṛtāgasaḥ



dvy-aṅgulonam abhūt tena



sandadhe ‘nyac ca gopikā



When Mother Yaśodā tried to bind her mischievous child,
the rope was two fingers too short, so she added another
rope to it. (15)




yadāsīt tad api nyūnaṁ



tenānyad api sandadhe



tad api dvy-aṅgulaṁ nyūnaṁ



yad yad ādatta bandhanam



However, that also was two fingers short. In this way,
each and every time she tied on another rope, it was
always two fingers short. (16)



evaṁ sva-geha-dāmāni



yaśodā sandadhaty api



Although she had tied together all the ropes in her
home, Mother Yaśodā could not bind Kṛṣṇa. (Seeing this,
the gopīs started giggling. Utterly perplexed, she also
began to laugh.) (17)

The other reason that    His belly became bound with rope
(dāmodaratva) is that    “bhakti-baddham — He is completely
enchanted exclusively    by the bhakti of His devotees.”
This meaning actually    leads to the previous one: that he
becomes bound because    of His bhakta-vaśyatā (His

                              39
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

willingness to be controlled by His devotees). In regard
to this, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.9.18—21) further states:



sva-mātuḥ svinna-gātrāyā



visrasta-kabara-srajaḥ



dṛṣṭvā pariśramaṁ kṛṣṇaḥ



kṛpayāsīt sva-bandhane



She had become exhausted by tying so many ropes together
and her body had become covered with perspiration. The
flowers woven into her hair had fallen from her loosened
braid, and had scattered here and there. Seeing His
mother’s fatigue and feeling compassionate, small Kṛṣṇa
then allowed His mother to bind Him. (18)



evaṁ sandarśitā hy aṅga



hariṇā bhakta-vaśyatā



sva-vaśenāpi kṛṣṇena



yasyedaṁ seśvaraṁ vaśe



O Mahārāja Parīkṣit, this entire universe, along with
the powerful demigods who control it, is completely
under the control of the supremely independent
personality of Godhead, Śrī Hari. Yet He has allowed
Himself to be bound in order to show that He is
willingly controlled by His devotees. (19)



nemaṁ viriñco na bhavo



na śrīr apy aṅga-saṁśrayā



prasādaṁ lebhire gopī

                            40
Damodarastakam.txt                                5/5/2017




yat tat prāpa vimuktidāt



The Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who bestows salvation upon
all, never showed Lord Brahmā, Maheśvara (Śiva) or even
His eternal consort Lakṣmī-devī, who is half of His
body, the kindness He showed this gopī, Yaśodā. (20)



nāyaṁ sukhāpo bhagavān



dehināṁ gopikā-sutaḥ



jñānināṁ cātma-bhūtānāṁ



yathā bhaktimatām iha



Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the son of a gopī (gopikā-sutaḥ), is
not at all easy to attain for the aṣṭaṅga-yogīs who
identify themselves with the body and who perform severe
austerities. Nor is He easy to attain for self-realized
jñānīs who are absorbed in all-pervading, non-dual
knowledge. But these loving associates who are absorbed
in serving Him, simply considering Him to be the darling
son of a gopī, have easily attained Him. [In other
words, although the ascetics and impersonalists undergo
great trouble, instead of attaining the Supreme Lord,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, they merely attain an incomplete, or partial,
expansion of Him.] (21)



These verses have conveyed the aforementioned reason for
being bound.[xi]11

Later in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Śrī Kṛṣṇa declares:



devarṣir me priyatamo



yad imau dhanadātmajau



tat tathā sādhayiṣyāmi




                           41
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

yad gītaṁ tan mahātmanā



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.10.25)

Devarṣi Nārada is my dear devotee. Therefore, even
though these two brothers, the sons of the most wealthy
demigod Kuvera, had no devotion for me, still I must
fulfil



Śrī Nārada’s words by appearing directly before them and
granting them My devotional service.



The deep meaning of this statement spoken by Śrī Kṛṣṇa
is that He enacted the pastime of delivering the two
sons of Kuvera in the form of twin arjuna trees, because
He was pleased by Śrī Nārada’s devotion to Him. Indeed,
He enacts all His pastimes because He is pleased with
the bhakti of His devotees. This is yet another
important meaning of bhakti-baddham — He is bound by
bhakti.



~ THUS ENDS THE ENGLISH RENDITION OF

THE DIG-DARŚINĪ-ṬĪKĀ ON THE SECOND VERSE ~



Dig-darśinī-vṛtti

On this day, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the personality who causes the
three worlds to tremble merely by the movement of His
eyebrows, has become overwhelmed by fear of His mother.
Seeing the tiny stick in her hand, He is trembling and
stammers, “Mother, look, do not hit Me! I did not break
the pot of yoghurt.”




Mother Yaśodā is slightly full-figured. As she was
running, her braid came undone, and the flowers woven in
her hair began falling out. It is as if the flowers were
saying, “Mother, you are not alone; we are also with
you.”

Those devotees who make their hearts spotless by
endlessly drinking the nectar of devotion to Śrī Kṛṣṇa
imbued with extreme attachment and laced with
renunciation of the material world, attain a state of
meditating on Śrī Kṛṣṇa deep within their immaculate
hearts, which are fully saturated by loving service.

The Supreme Personality of Godhead in the form of
Nārāyaṇa sometimes appears in the meditations of Lord
Brahmā (the creator of the universe) and the four

                           42
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

Kumāras (the original sages). Still, even in their
deepest meditation, they cannot capture Him in the form
of Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Yet, Mother Yaśodā
actually bound Him — the complete embodiment of all
nectarean humours of transcendental love. Unimaginably
powerful warriors, despite their greatest valour, pose
no threat to Kṛṣṇa. But Mother Yaśodā not only captured
Him, she brandished a small stick in her hand and
threatened Him, “Shall I beat You now?”

As Kanhaiyā rubbed His tear-filled eyes and tried to
hide behind His mother, He cried out, “Mother, do not
hit Me!” He did not look directly at her, He only looked
fearfully at the stick in her hand.

“You monkey-friend!” she exclaimed. “Cora! Thief!”

To this, Śrī Kṛṣṇa replied, “Mother, there is no cora in
My dynasty; there is only a ‘Cora’[xii]12 in your
dynasty.”

“Oh, really?” she retorted. “If You did not steal the
butter, then who was feeding the monkeys?”

Kanhaiyā replied, “He who made the monkeys was feeding
them.”

“Is that so?” she said. “Tell me frankly, who broke this
pot?”

“Look, Mother, when you ran to save the milk, your large
ankle-bells hit the pot and it broke.”

“Then how did You get butter all over Your face?” she
asked.

“Mother, the monkeys were eating the butter, so I was
trying to scare them away. As they were running, they
smeared butter all over My mouth.”

Hearing this exchange, all the gopīs began to laugh.

“I am not about to set You free so easily,” Mother
Yaśodā said. “I am going to tie You up.”

Mother Yaśodā’s mood was grave. “If I don’t chastise
Him,” she thought, “He will become quite a trouble
maker.” With this in mind, she decided to bind Him.
Although Śrī Kṛṣṇa started to cry, she did not let Him
go. She thought to herself, “I will keep Him tied up for
awhile, and when I have finished churning the yoghurt, I
will untie Him and feed Him butter and breast-milk to
calm Him down.”

Mother Yaśodā considered, “Kṛṣṇa is khala, a cunning and
mischievous thief, and His accomplice is ulūkhala, this
grinding mortar. Both deserve to be punished. I will tie
them together in such away that Kṛṣṇa cannot untie
Himself from the mortar.”

Thinking thus, she proceeded to bind Him.




                           43
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

tad-dāma badhyamānasya



svārbhakasya kṛtāgasaḥ



dyaṅgulonamabhūttena



sandadhe ‘nyacca gopikāḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.9.15)

“When Mother Yaśodā tried to bind her mischievous child,
the rope was two fingers too short, so she tied it to
another rope.”



She had removed the silk ribbon from her braid in order
to bind Kṛṣṇa with it. Other than the gold chain around
His waist, Kṛṣṇa was quite naked. Although His tiny
waist measured no more than twelve fingers, the ribbon
could not be made to bind Him; it was two fingers too
short. Mother Yaśodā asked her friend for another rope,
but that was also too short. Time and again she gathered
and added more rope, but it was always too short — and
only two fingers too short — not more, not less.

There is an esoteric meaning in this. One finger
represents the sādhaka’s endeavours and the other finger
represents the Lord’s mercy. Śrī Bhagavān becomes
controlled by His devotee only when both of these
elements are present together.




The Rāmānuja sampradāya is divided in two according to
whether they emphasize the Vedic scriptures or the Tamil
scriptures. The former are known as Vaḍakalai and the
latter as Teṅkalai. They have distinct opinions
regarding the means of ultimate attainment. The view of
Vaḍakalai Rāmānujas is based on grace arising from a
cause. Their stance is compared to markaṭa-nyāya, the
analogy of the baby monkey clinging to his mother for
protection.

When the mother monkey moves about with her baby, she
makes no effort to hold him. Instead, the baby clings on
to her as she leaps from tree to tree, and if he falls,
his mother will never accept him again.

Conversely, the view of Teṅkalai Rāmānujas is based on
causeless grace. Their stance is compared to mārjāra-
nyāya, the analogy of the cat carrying the kitten in her
mouth. The mother-cat picks her kitten up with her teeth
and carries him about. The kitten does not make any

                              44
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

effort, and goes wherever she takes him.

Thus the followers of the Vaḍakalai school strive for
the grace of Bhagavān by their own efforts, and
conversely, the followers of the Teṅkalai school rely
solely on faith in the causeless grace of Bhagavān,
considering their own endeavours ineffective.

The Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava school asserts that both views are
necessary. The following analogy is given to illustrate
this stance. A person who has fallen into a well will
cry, “Please help me! Pull me out!” Then, from above,
someone may lower a rope into the well and say, “I am
lowering down a rope. Catch hold of it and I will pull
you out.” However, if the person in the well does not
catch hold of the rope, he will not be freed. From his
end, he must hold on to the rope, and from above, he
must be pulled out.

In this example, the person in the well cries out for
help and later firmly catches hold of the rope. These
endeavours are the means of his deliverance. In other
words they are his sādhana. From above, the person who
is trying to pull him out is bestowing causeless mercy.
For someone helplessly fallen in the well of material
existence, Śrī Bhagavān’s causeless mercy descends, just
like this rope, and by performing sādhana, one takes
hold of that rope and achieves service to His lotus
feet.

Mother Yaśodā did not give up in her attempt to bind
Kṛṣṇa; she kept trying. All the gopīs began to clap
their hands and say, “O Mother, the creator has not
written on this boy’s forehead that He will be bound, so
how can you tie Him up?” Mother Yaśodā felt ashamed.
“This is so embarrassing,” she thought. “I have not been
able to bind the child that came from my own womb.”

Taking shelter of Bhagavān Śrī Nārāyaṇa, she silently
began to pray: “O Nārāyaṇa, please help me. If I cannot
bind this boy today, it will be so shameful for me.
Protect my honour.” Her face had become reddish like the
rising sun, and drops of perspiration had begun to roll
down her face, like pearls. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.9.18)
describes this as follows:

sva-mātuḥ svinna-gātrāyā




visrasta-kabara-srajaḥ




dṛṣṭvā pariśramaṁ kṛṣṇaḥ




                           45
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

kṛpayāsīt sva-bandhane




Śrī Kṛṣṇa saw that His mother’s body had become drenched
with perspiration. The garlands woven into her braid had
fallen out, and she had become utterly exhausted. Seeing
His mother’s fatigue, little Śrī Kṛṣṇa compassionately
allowed Himself to be bound.



Sādhakas should perform sādhana-bhajana with the same
unwavering determination and hard endeavour. Then Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s heart will melt and He will be compelled to
bestow His sublime devotional service upon them. Indeed,
when Kṛṣṇa saw his mother’s firm resolve, His heart
melted and His topmost potency — His mercy, the totality
of all His powers combined — then manifested as His
bhakta-vātsalyata, His affection for His devotees. At
that very moment, His aiśvarya-śakti (His potency of
supreme majesty) disappeared and He allowed Himself to
be bound.

Mother Yaśodā made an intense endeavour with unflinching
resolve. Following her example, sādhakas should try to
melt Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s heart and compel Him to engage them in
loving service to Him by practising devotional service
that is imbued with characteristics like sincere loving
emotions (bhāva), great enthusiasm and anxiousness
(utkaṇṭha), a deep sense of closeness and relationship
(sambandha), a feeling of possessiveness for Him
(mamatā) and intense affection for Him (prīti).



Regarding the previously mentioned verse from Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam beginning with sva-mātuḥ, an important point
must be considered. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura
explains in his commentary on this verse:



Kṛṣṇa’s waist measures only twelve fingers and the
length of the rope continually increased. Why, then,
could His mother still not bind Him? Kṛṣṇa was thinking,
“My important daily activities of stealing butter and
playing with My friends will be stopped, so My mother
should not tie Me up.” Immediately, His aiśvarya-śakti,
which makes the impossible possible, manifested herself
within Him and proceeded to serve Him. Consequently,
although the size of His waist remained the same, and
although the rope was made so long, His mother could not
bind Him.



The vraja-gopīs who were witnessing this pastime along
with Mother Yaśodā could not understand its mystery. Why
was the rope two fingers too short?

Śrī Kṛṣṇa could not be bound by ordinary rope because

                           46
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

all arrangements for His pastimes are made exclusively
by His own intrinsic potency, yogamāyā. Furthermore,
there is no outside or inside of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, nor is there
any beginning or end of Him. He exists eternally in His
svarūpa, both before the creation of the phenomenal
universes and after their total destruction. In the
interim, He pervades all the universes, residing within
each of their atoms, yet all the while He remains
akhila-rasāmṛta-mūrtiḥ, the original form of condensed
transcendent nectar in its totality. In fact, raso vaiḥ
saḥ, He is nectar. Thus, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, being forever beyond
the purview of mundane sense perception, is thoroughly
inconceivable. Yet, Mother Yaśodā simply regards Him as
her son.

Thinking of Him in that way, she behaves with Him in
such a natural and seemingly ordinary way that her
relationship with Him may even appear to be like a
relationship from this world. But because of that simple
loving relationship, she was actually able to bind Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. Śrī Kṛṣṇa can never be bound by someone who has
not abandoned all separate interests for selfish
enjoyment, which are in opposition with the tendency to
please Him. He will only become bound by someone who
cultivates uttama-bhakti, which is the inherent function
of one’s perfected constitutional identity and which is
uninhibited by fruitive acts, mystic yoga and dry
knowledge. Therefore, Śrī Bhagavān’s power of compassion
and mercy, the topmost among all His potencies, only
becomes manifest by the performance of such uttama-
bhakti. In its presence, His aiśvarya-śakti, the power
by which He displays His supreme majesty, becomes
powerless. When Śrī Kṛṣṇa manifests His mercy potency,
He is controlled of His own accord.

In their previous lives, Devakī and Vasudeva performed
extremely severe penances, but even they could not bind
Śrī Kṛṣṇa.[xiii]13 What, then, can be said of others who
try to bind Him? He may willingly come under the control
of a sādhaka when He sees them eagerly perform loving
service to Him with great persistence, but He cannot be
attracted by austerities alone. He is only attracted by
sincere love.

Before the advent of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, bhakti was
evident within the world, but not bhakti-rasa. Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī ful-filled the inner desire of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu. Within the sacred texts he compiled,
especially Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu and Śrī Ujjvala-
nīlamaṇī, he perfectly delineated the meaning of bhakti-
rasa, describing all of its divisions and subdivisions
in full detail. Śrīman Mahāprabhu has propagated bhakti-
rasa through His most confidential associates: Śrī
Svarūpa Dāmodara, Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī,
Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī, Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, Śrīla
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, the
author’s own Śrīla Gurudeva — Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja — and others.




                           47
Damodarastakam.txt                               5/5/2017

Mother Yaśodā wound the rope around Kṛṣṇa’s belly, tied
Him to the grinding mortar, and then went to churn the
yoghurt, her mind remaining on her son all the while.
Just then, Dāma, Śrīdāma, Sudāma, Madhumaṅgala and
Kṛṣṇa’s other sakhās arrived. Mother Rohiṇī also
returned to Nanda-bhavana from the house of Upananda,
along with her son Śrī Baladeva Prabhu, who then entered
the group of sakhās. When He saw that His little brother
was tied up and that He was crying, He became furious.
Tears mixed with black cosmetic ointment were streaming
from Kṛṣṇa’s eyes. On one side, where the ointment had
totally



washed away, it looked like the clear river Gaṅgā. And
on the other, where His tears were dark from mixing with
the ointment, it looked like the blackish Yamunā. Thus
the two rivers were cascading on to His chest. Enraged,
Baladeva Prabhu asked Kanhaiyā and the sakhās, “Who
bound Him?!” Baladeva Prabhu thought, “Whoever has bound
My Kanhaiyā, I will punish on this very day!” Then
Madhumaṅgala whispered into Baladeva’s ear, “It was
Mother Yaśodā who bound Kṛṣṇa.” As soon as He heard
Mother Yaśodā’s name, He became silent.

After a few moments, He tried to open the knot. However,
He was unable to untie Mother Yaśodā’s strong knot. This
is because the love of devotees in vātsalya-rasa
(parental love) is superior to the love of devotees in
sakhya-rasa (friendship). Incidentally, had Baladeva
Prabhu been situated in His form as Anaṅga Mañjarī,
wherein He is devoted to Kṛṣṇa in the highest rasa,
madhura-rasa (conjugal love), He could have untied the
knot. But although all the sakhās kept working together
to untie Him, they were not successful.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa gradually stopped crying. Even He was unable
to set Himself free. “Come on,” the sakhās told Him, “we
will tip over the grinding mortar and drag it out of the
courtyard and play.” At that moment He remembered the
incident that occurred long ago between the two sons of
Kuvera and His dear devotee and He thought:



devarṣir-me priyatamo yadimau dhanadātmajau

tat-tathā sādhiyiṣyāmi yad-gītaṁ tan-mahātmanā

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.10.25)

Devarṣi Nārada is my most dear devotee. Therefore, even
though these two brothers, the sons of the most wealthy
demigod Kuvera, had no devotion for me, still I must
fulfil Śrī Nārada’s words by appearing directly before
them and granting them My devotional service.



Kuvera was the dear friend of Devarṣi Nārada, and his
two sons were Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva. One day, while
they were bathing in the Mandākinī (celestial Gaṅgā)
with heavenly damsels, their intoxication from being

                           48
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

wealthy, beautifully figured, youthful and of noble
birth, became further inflamed by drinking wine. At that
time Devarṣi Nārada passed by. When the ladies saw that
he had come, they hurried out of the water, dressed
themselves and offered him obeisances. But Nalakūvara
and Maṇigrīva, blinded by arrogance, did not offer
obeisances. In fact, they stood there naked and mused
“Where has this person come from?” Ignoring the great
sage, they shamelessly proceeded to call for the
heavenly damsels to return.

When Śrī Nārada beheld the degraded behaviour of
Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva, he was overwhelmed with
compassion for them. Outwardly, he feigned anger and
shouted a curse: “Your behaviour befits that of trees.
So be it! Become trees.”

Upon hearing the curse uttered by Devarṣi Nārada, they
were filled with fear. Falling at his feet and weeping,
they begged for pardon. “How can we be delivered?” they
asked.

Śrī Nārada replied, “Both of you will become twin arjuna
trees near the house of Nanda Mahārāja in Gokula. At the
end of Dvāpara-yuga, Svayam Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, will
deliver you in the course of enacting His childhood
pastimes.”

When Śrī Kṛṣṇa remembered His devotee’s curse, He was
overwhelmed with compassion for the two sons of Kuvera.
Just to deliver them, He dragged the heavy grinding
mortar toward the extremely large arjuna trees[xiv]14,
with all of His friends. The trees were fused at their
base, but somehow Śrī Kṛṣṇa passed between them. The
grinding mortar, however, became lodged between the
trees. As soon as Śrī Kṛṣṇa tugged at the grinding
mortar with some force, the two trees were completely
uprooted. At once, they began falling over and finally
struck the ground producing a deafening crash.

Then, from within the ancient trees, two divine
personalities emerged. They circumambulated Śrī Kṛṣṇa
and submitted prayers in



glorification of Him. After they begged to be forgiven
for their offence, Śrī Kṛṣṇa explained:

“The unfailing result of seeing Śrī Nārada is that even
such rogues as the two of you are able to see Me face to
face, and the sum total of all the sins you have
committed in your countless births has fled far away
from you. May you attain bhāva-bhakti for Me.”

By Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s causeless mercy, they resided in Goloka
Vṛndāvana from that point onward. They became the famous
reciters, Madhu-kaṇṭha and Snigdha-kaṇṭha. Thus, as Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s special associates, they eternally narrate His
unlimited pastimes in the assemblies of Śrī Nanda Bābā
or the gopīs.

That which cannot be obtained even after accumulating
pious credit (sukṛti) for millions of lifetimes, can be

                           49
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

achieved very quickly by the causeless mercy of Śrī
Guru, Vaiṣṇavas and Śrī Hari. The devotees who are
expert in relishing the loving moods of the vraja-gopīs
are the treasure-house of lobhamaya-bhakti, devotion to
Śrī Kṛṣṇa that is full of intense longing. Among them,
some exemplify one’s own desired mood and are
affectionate towards oneself (sa-jātīya-snigdha). If one
gets their association then he should realize that they
are the most dear friends of his soul. With his life and
soul he should serve them and endeavour to purchase
their mood.

But how can such moods be attained? When a person
hankers for the same relationship (sambandha) that these
great rasika devotees have with their svāminī, Śrī
Rādhā, and with Her companions and when he hankers to
have the same deep, possessiveness (mamatā) for Her, and
the same intense inclination to serve Her (seva-vasanā),
then he can attain these moods. Only then can one truly
serve such rasika personalities, and then is one’s life
successful. There is no other way.




Nanda Bābā came running after he heard the deafening
crash made when the massive arjuna trees fell. He saw
Kanhaiyā, still tied up, standing between the fallen
trees. Nanda Bābā was shaken to see Kṛṣṇa standing so
close to the fallen trees and thought, “Today, Śrī
Nārāyaṇa has given us so much protection. What would
have happened if Kanhaiyā had been underneath these
trees when they fell!?”

Mother Yaśodā also came running. When she saw the
horrible scene she became shocked. Aghast, she thought,
“Alas! What has happened?”

Nanda Bābā asked the children, “How did this happen?”

In their broken language, the children explained, “Bābā,
as soon as Kanhaiyā pulled the grinding mortar against
the two trees they fell over and two very beautiful
people came out. They looked like demigods. They folded
their hands and offered prayers to Kanhaiyā. Then they
circumambulated Him and went north.”

But Nanda Bābā was not convinced. He took Kṛṣṇa on his
lap. Kṛṣṇa had been keeping silent till now, but as soon
as He sat on His father’s lap, He burst into tears and
began to wail. When Nanda Bābā and the cowherd boys saw
Kṛṣṇa crying, tears also started streaming from their
own eyes. Nanda Bābā pacified his darling son, and
untied the knot.

The knot that bound Kṛṣṇa was factually made of
vātsalya-rasa, not rope. Consequently, only His
associates in vātsalya-rasa or madhura-rasa (conjugal
love) have the power to untie such a knot. Kṛṣṇa’s
friends and servants who are in sakhya-rasa and dāsya-
rasa respectively or those situated in a passive or
neutral relationship with Him in śānta-rasa, could not
have untied the knot tied by Mother Yaśodā. Even within

                           50
Damodarastakam.txt                               5/5/2017

vātsalya-rasa there is a gradation. The love of Mother
Yaśodā, who actually bound Kṛṣṇa, is superior to the
love of Nanda Bābā, who released Him.

When Mother Yaśodā saw what had happened to her
Kanhaiyā, she could not move; she simply stood there
like a statue. She could not even cry. Nanda Bābā made
Kanhaiyā a little peaceful and then gave Him a sweet
laḍḍu from his cloth bag.

“Kanhaiyā,” he asked. “Tell me, who tied You up?”

“Mother,” Kanhaiyā replied.

Becoming silent, Nanda Bābā then resolved to punish
Mother Yaśodā with the greatest punishment a loved one
can give. For the entire remainder of the day, Nanda
Bābā did not speak a single word to her. In a grave mood
He took Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma in his arms and went to bathe
in Brahmāṇḍa-ghāṭa. After everyone had bathed, he
returned with them to the gośālā (the grand shelter for
the cows). Meanwhile Mother Yaśodā had become as dry and
lifeless as a piece of dry wood.

In the gośālā, Nanda Bābā filled Kṛṣṇa’s and Balarāma’s
bellies by giving Them rock candy and squirting milk
into Their mouths directly from the cows’ udders. When
they came home, Mother Rohiṇī served them the food she
had prepared and Nanda Bābā silently fed the children.
After They had finished, he took some himself. Then they
returned to the gośālā.

In the evening, Upananda’s wife came to Nanda Bābā along
with Mother Rohiṇī and the other elderly ladies of
Vraja. Mother Rohiṇī told Balarāma, “Go now, and bring
Kṛṣṇa.”

That day, however, Kṛṣṇa had given Balarāma such a push
that He fell quite far backward. Finally, Upananda’s
wife and Mother Rohiṇī spoke to Kanhaiyā.

“Look, Kanhaiyā,” they said, “Your mother is crying so
much; go to her.”

“No. I will not go,” He answered.

“Then come to me,” Rohiṇī said.

But Kanhaiyā answered strongly, “No! I won’t go near
you. When Mother was tying Me up I called to you so
loudly, but you did not come. I won’t even go near you.”

“With whom will You eat?” asked Mother Rohiṇī.

“With father.” He answered.

“With whom will You play?” she asked.

“With Dāu Bhaiyā — My big brother Balarāma.”

“But with whom will You sleep?”

“With father.”


                              51
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

Rohiṇī said, “Until now, You have always slept next to
Your mother, but today You will sleep by Your father?
Your mother is crying for You.”

Then Nanda Bābā said, “Should I beat your mother?” Upon
hearing these words Kanhaiyā grabbed His father’s raised
hand in answer.

Then Rohiṇī said, “And if Mother suddenly dies,
then...?” As soon as Kṛṣṇa heard this, He burst into
loud sobs and ran into Mother Rohiṇī’s lap. She brought
Him to Mother Yaśodā and when she placed Him on Yaśodā’s
lap Yaśodā began to weep loudly. Śrī Kṛṣṇa also cried.
Nanda Bābā’s heart melted and he began to cry. Rohiṇī
and all the other resident of Vraja who were gathered
there also began to cry. Weeping filled the entire
atmosphere. Finally, the respected elders of Vraja
pacified everyone.

That night, when it was time for dinner, Nanda Bābā told
Kanhaiyā, “Go and bring your mother to me.” Śrī Kṛṣṇa
immediately went and caught hold of His mother’s veil
and, although she hesitated to go, Kṛṣṇa brought her to
Nanda Bābā. She served dinner to everyone and they all
took their meal with great joy. Thereafter, Mother
Yaśodā took Śrī Kṛṣṇa up in her arms and went to her
bedroom.



~ THUS ENDS THE DIG-DARŚINĪ-VṚTTĪ ON THE SECOND VERSE ~




Verse Three




itīdṛk sva-līlābhir-ānanda-kuṇḍe

sva-ghoṣaṁ nimajjantam-ākhyāpayantam

tadīyeśita-jñeṣu bhaktair-jitat-tvaṁ

punaḥ prema-tas-taṁ śatāvṛtti vande



SYNONYMS



itīdṛk — like this (His supremely enchanting childhood
pastimes such as dāma-bandhana-līlā, in which His belly
was bound); sva-līlābhiḥ — by His unique and uncommon
pastimes; ānanda-kuṇḍe — in fathomless pools of bliss;
sva-ghoṣam — all the inhabitants of His abode of Gokula,
or all the entities manifested by his pastime potency;
nimajjantam — completely and incessantly submerging;
ākhyāpayantam — informing; tadīya-īśita-jñeṣu — His
associates those who have knowledge of His absolute

                           52
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

divinity; bhaktaiḥ — by His loving devotees; jitatvam —
He is conquered; punaḥ — again; premataḥ — with love;
tam — unto Him; śata-āvṛtti — hundreds of times; vande —
obeisance.



TRANSLATION



By His childhood pastimes such as this dāma-bandhana-
līlā, He perpetually drowns all the residents of Gokula
— His gopas, gopīs, cows, calves and so forth, who are
all manifested by His pastime potency — in pools of
bliss. He thus informs those who have knowledge of His
absolute divinity that only the pure and simple love of
these devotees can conquer Him. Again, hundreds of
times, I offer loving obeisance unto Śrī Dāmodara Kṛṣṇa.

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā

‘guṇa’-viśeṣeṇotkarṣa-viśeṣam āha — itīti. evaṁ bhakta-
vaśatayā, yadvā, iti anayā dāmodara-līlayā, īdṛśībhiśca
dāmodara-līlā-sadṛśībhiḥ parama-manoharābhiḥ
śaiśavībhiḥ, svasya svābhirvā asādhāraṇībhiḥ līlābhiḥ
krīḍābhiḥ. “gopībhiḥ stobhito’nṛtyad-bhagavān bālavat
kvacit, udgāyati kvacin mugdhas tad-vaśo dāru-yantravat.
bibharti kvacid ājñaptaḥ pīṭhakonmāna-pādukam, bāhu-
kṣepaṁ ca kurute svānāṁ prītiṁ samudvahan” Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.11.7—8) ityādy-uktābhiḥ

sva-ghoṣaṁ nija-gokula-vāsi-prāṇijātaṁ sarvam eva,
ānanda-kuṇḍe ānanda-rasamaya-gabhīra-jalāśaya-viśeṣe,
nitarāṁ majjantaṁ majjayantaṁ. etadevoktam (Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam 10.11.8): “svānāṁ prītiṁ samudvahan” iti.
yadvā, ghoṣaḥ kīrttiḥ māhātmyotkīrttanaṁ vā, svasya
svānāṁ vā, gopa-gopy-ādināṁ ghoṣo yathā syāt tathā
svayam evānanda-kuṇḍe nimajjantaṁ parama-sukha-viśeṣam
anubhavantam ity arthaḥ.

kiñca, tābhireva tadīyeśita-jñeṣu bhagavad-aiśvarya-
jñāna-pareṣu, bhaktair-jitatvam ātmano bhakta-vaśyatāṁ,
ākhyāpayantaṁ bhakti-parāṇām eva vaśyo’haṁ, na tu jñāna-
parāṇām iti prathayantam. anena ca (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
10.11.9) — “darśayaṁstad-vidāṁ loke ātmano bhṛtya-
vaśyatām” ityasyārtho darśitaḥ. tasyārthaḥ — taṁ
bhagavantaṁ, vidantīti tathā teṣāṁ taj-jñāna-parāṇām
ityarthaḥ; tān prati darśayan iti.

yadvā, tadīyānāṁ bhāgavatānāṁ prabhāvābhijñeṣveva, na ca
anyeṣu ākhyapayantam, vaiṣṇava-māhātmya-viśeṣānabhijñeṣu
kevala-jñāna-pareṣu bhakterviśeṣatastan-māhātmyasya ca
parama-gopyatvena prakāśanāyogyatvāt. evañca “tad-vidām”
iti bhṛtya-vaśyatā-vidām ity artho draṣṭavyaḥ. ataḥ
premataḥ bhakti-viśeṣeṇa śatāvṛtti yathā syāt tathā
śata-śata-vārān tam īśvaraṁ punaḥ vande.

ato bhaktānāṁ avaśya-kṛtyaṁ bhakti-prakāra-viśeṣa-rūpaṁ
vandanam-eva mama prarthyaṁ, na tvaiśvarya-jñānādīti
bhāvaḥ.

iti śrī-dāmodarāṣṭake tṛtīya-śloke śrī-sanātana gosvāmi-
kṛtā dig-darśinī-nāmnī ṭīkā samāptā

                           53
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017




~ THUS ENDS THE DIG-DARśINī ṭīKā ON THE THIRD VERSE ~

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā Bhāvanuvāda

Śrī Satyavrata Muni begins this verse with itīdṛk sva-
līlābhiḥ to establish His worshipful Lord’s unique
glory. He accomplishes this by illustrating His
wonderful character. In this verse, iti is used to mean
“like this”.

Thus he begins: “Like this, by His bhakta-vaśyatā” and
thus reiterates that it is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s nature to come
under the control of His devotees.

Alternatively, iti means “by this dāmodara-līlā” and
īdṛśībhiś ca adds that “by His supremely enchanting,
extraordinary childhood pastimes like dāmodara-līlā, He
is immersing all the residents of Gokula in great
bliss”. The addition of sva in the phrase sva-līlābhiḥ
relates the greatness of His own pastimes, or it relates
the uncommon excellence of the playfulness of His
pastimes. This has been described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(10.11.7) in statements such as the following:



gopībhiḥ stobhito ‘nṛtyad



bhagavān bālavat kvacit



udgāyati kvacin mugdhas



tad-vaśo dāru-yantravat



The gopīs would encourage Kṛṣṇa to dance in various
ways. They would clap their hands or say, “If You dance
then we will give You a laḍḍū.” Although Kṛṣṇa is
Bhagavān, the Supreme Omnipotent Godhead and the master
of all opulences, baby Kṛṣṇa would dance for them, like
an innocent human child. Sometimes they would make Him
sing, and like a bewildered ordinary child, He would do
so. Thus becoming enchanted by them, He became like a
wooden puppet in their hands.



bibharti kvacid ājñaptaḥ pīṭhakonmāna-pādukam

bāhu-kṣepaṁ ca kurute svānāṁ ca prītim samudvahan

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.11.8)

Sometimes the gopīs would order Śrī Kṛṣṇa to bring them

                              54
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

someone’s shoes, wooden seats, measuring cups or the
weights used for scales. At such times, He would act as
if He was unable to lift these articles, and would
simply stand there touching them, and then He would
repeatedly strike His arms to show His mightiness. By
such gestures He would fill His own kin with boundless
joy.



It was in sole reference to the above statements of
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam that Śrī Satyavrata Muni said Śrī
Kṛṣṇa causes sva-ghoṣam, His own kin, the residents of
Gokula, to be totally submerged (nimajjantam) in a
nectarean and incredibly deep pool of extra-ordinary
happiness — ānanda-kuṇḍa. That is the indication of this
verse from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, ‘‘svānāṁ prītiṁ samudvahan
— He thoroughly arouses deep love in His own dear kin.”

Alternatively, the word ghoṣameans “loudly proclaiming
the glory of something”. Directing the word ghoṣa either
to Himself (svasya) or to His own (svānām) the meaning
becomes either “by broadcasting His own glories” or “by
broadcasting the glories of His gopas and gopīs”.
Certainly, by becoming absorbed in the mood of spreading
His extraordinary glories, as well as the glories of His
own loved ones, even Śrī Kṛṣṇa sinks in ānanda-kuṇḍa,
and as a result He feels the highest limit of happiness.

Śrī Satyavrata Munī, in order to further describe the
extraordinary qualities of Śrī Bhagavān, then says, “By
these pastimes, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is making it known
(ākhyāpayantam) to all who are tadīya-iśīta-jñeṣu[xv]15,
who worship Him as the Supreme Controller and the master
of all souls, that He is Himself controlled and defeated
by the love of His pure devotees — bhaktair-jitatvam.”
In other words, Kṛṣṇa is declaring, “I willingly become
controlled by My bhaktas alone, who are intent on
serving Me with pure devotion. I am never controlled by
those who are inclined to worship Me while considering
My supreme position and opulence.” Thus, the sage
captures the meaning of the following statement from
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.11.9):



darśayaṁs tad-vidāṁ loka



ātmano bhṛtya-vaśyatām



Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa showed the community of those who
know about His supreme position, that He only remains
under the full control of His loving servants.



[The commentator, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī, personally
interprets the above statement of Bhāgavatam, as
follows.] Here, the word tad (about that, or about Him)
is connected to Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s position as Bhagavān, and

                           55
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

when it is combined with vidām (knowledge of) it becomes
“knowledge of His position as Bhagavān”. Thus the
meaning is clear: He is showing (darśyaṁs) those who
know about His supreme opulence, that He willingly comes
under the control of His loving servants.

[In other words, the original Supreme Lord, Śrī
Kṛṣṇacandra, is exhibiting that, in every respect, He is
only controlled by His loving servants in Vraja, and
among them, He is especially controlled by those in
unnata-ujjvala-rasa, the supremely pure humour of
mādhurya-rasa, conjugal love. He is not controlled by
devotees who worship Him on the path of aiśvarya-bhakti,
which is characterized by the mood of reverence. Nor is
He controlled by jñānīs, who know Him to be the self-
sufficient, supremely powerful Lord, or by those whose
bhakti is mixed with such jñāna.]

But there is another meaning of tadīyeśita-jñeṣu
bhaktair-jitatvam. Śrī Kṛṣṇa only reveals
(ākhyāpayantam) that He is willingly controlled
(jitatvam) by His loving devotees only to those who have
proper knowledge of such beloved devotees’ exalted
position. This is because bhakti, and especially its
glories, are very confidential, so He does not reveal it
to everyone. It is inappropriate to explain it to anyone
who is not specifically acquainted with the exalted
glories of the Vaiṣṇavas and who is only interested in
impersonal knowledge. From this perspective, the
previously cited verse should be interpreted by
connecting vidām with bhṛtya-vaśyatā. Thus the general
meaning of tad-vidām — those who know Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
supreme position — becomes bhṛtya-vaśyatā-vidām — those
who know that Śrī Kṛṣṇa willingly comes under the
control of His loving servants. Therefore Śrī Satyavrata
Munī prays,

“Overwhelmed with premataḥ, incomparable pure loving
devotion for You, I offer You vandanā, my prayers of
adoration, hundreds of times (śata-āvṛtti). To You
(tam), the Supreme Lord, I offer vandanā again and again
(punaḥ).

Thus, in this verse the sage wishes to say, “Among the
limbs of bhakti, which are required for all devotees, I
only pray to perform one special limb of bhakti:
vandanā, or expressing my adoration for Śrī Bhagavān. I
do not pray for knowledge of Śrī Bhagavān’s opulence or
anything else.”



~ THUS ENDS THE ENGLISH RENDITION OF

THE DIG-DARŚINĪ-ṬĪKĀ ON THE THIRD VERSE ~

Dig-darśinī-vṛtti

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes are lakes of inexhaustible bliss in
which He drowns the entire village of Gokula. The
village of Gokula is known as ghoṣa-pallī, which refers
to the place where all the animals, birds, cows, gopas
and gopīs loudly sing the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa without
cessation. It is constantly resounding with the calls of

                           56
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

the gopas and gopīs: “Milk the cows! Untie the calves!
Bring the milk-pail.” And all is entirely for the
pleasure of Śrī Gopāla-kṛṣṇa.

When Śrī Kṛṣṇa became a little bit bigger He discovered
that He could go beyond the doorstep leading out of the
house. One day, when He and His big brother Balarāma
went outside, They saw that some bright red flowers had
blossomed nearby. However, the flowers were surrounded
by a fence of dry ber thorns. Somehow, They moved the
thorny branches aside and went through to pick flowers.
Meanwhile, the thorny branches fell back into place,
blocking Their way out.

“How will We get out of here?” They wondered, and burst
into loud sobbing. Mother Yaśodā heard Their crying and
came out of the house. Finding Them trapped, she managed
to move the thorny branches to the side and take Them
out.

Sometimes Śrī Kṛṣṇa would hold on to the horns of huge
bulls and swing on them. Other times, He would become
astonished when He saw Himself reflected in the jewelled
pillars of His home and He would even try to speak with
that reflection.

One day His mother said, “Kṛṣṇa, go fetch a calf and we
will worship him.” Kṛṣṇa found a calf and caught hold of
him, but when He tried to bring him to His mother, the
calf refused to move. Kṛṣṇa struggled to bring him
along, tugging and pulling all the way. He finally
reached the house, but when He noticed a pot of butter
hanging from the ceiling, His mouth began to water. He
climbed on to the calf’s back and, taking hold of the
pot, He began to empty it of its contents. Seeing his
chance to escape, the calf fled from the spot, leaving
Kṛṣṇa dangling. “Maiyā, Maiyā!” He cried. Mother Yaśodā,
finding Kṛṣṇa in that position, took Him down and
scolded Him.




Early each morning the gopīs used to crowd into Mother
Yaśodā’s home just to see Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Sometimes, some
gopīs would say, “Kṛṣṇa is so strong,” while others
would argue, “No, Balarāma is much stronger.”

“How shall we definitely find out who is stronger? Let
the two boys wrestle and the winner will get a big lump
of butter.”

On these occasions, just by seeing the butter, the two
boys’ mouths would water and They would start wrestling.
The gopīs siding with Kṛṣṇa would clap their hands if He
won, but if He lost, then the gopīs on Baladeva’s side
would clap victoriously.

Sometimes a gopī would tempt Kṛṣṇa with a laḍḍū, saying,
“Kanhaiyā, if You dance for us I will give You this
laḍḍū.” Putting His hand on His waist, He would dance to
the rhythm, tā thaī, tā thaī, and even sing a sweet
little song. In various ways, the vraja-gopīs would make

                           57
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa dance. He became just like their puppet, for He
came under their full control.

At other times, the gopīs who came to visit Mother
Yaśodā would order Kṛṣṇa:

“Kṛṣṇa, bring us that wooden seat.”

Their darling little Kṛṣṇa would try to lift the small
seat, but when they saw that He could not, they swelled
with sweet affection for Him. The same Śrī Kṛṣṇa, in His
Varāha incarnation, lifted the entire earth on His
tusks. Also, when Śrī Kṛṣṇa was a little older, He
easily lifted Govardhana Hill on His little finger as if
it were no more than a toy ball. But in His childhood
pastimes in the same Vraja-dhāma, He could not even lift
a small wooden seat. This is the nature of His sweet,
human-like pastimes. He controls and maintains
everything in creation, yet He is controlled by the
residents of Vraja.

Although He is the master of unlimited potencies,
including His ghaṭana-aghaṭana-śakti, which makes the
impossible possible and the possible impossible, in
Vraja He is unaware of His supreme, absolute position.
There He is an innocent and simple child, nourished and
cared for by His affectionate mother. As befitting an
obedient son, He brings His father’s shoes, carrying
them on His head, and considers, “Father will wear these
shoes to attend the assembly of gopas.”

What is the meaning of ītīdṛk sva-līlābhir-ānanda-kuṇḍe,
sva-ghoṣaṁ nimajjantam? Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s sweet childhood
pastimes are an ocean of rasa. That ocean is
inexhaustible and it has no boundary for it is
absolutely unlimited. He drowns all of the gopas, gopīs,
cows, calves and the entire settlement of Vraja in the
vast ocean of these pastimes. Moreover, even He
certainly drowns in the ocean of the sweetness of His
own pastimes. Why does Śrī Kṛṣṇa perform these pastimes?
Śrī Satyavrata Muni answers this question in relation to
tadīyeśīta-jñeṣu, those who always retain knowledge of
Bhagavān’s supreme position.

A tattva-jñānī sees Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Śyāmasundara
as the source of all incarnations and the essence and
ultimate limit of Godhead. They know Him as the
possessor of all six opulences in their fullness, and
the Supreme Lord who has the power to make the
impossible possible. Devotees such as Nārada and the
four Kumāras have full knowledge of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s true
position. Through these pastimes Śrī Kṛṣṇa is explaining
to them, “Although I possess the potency to make the
impossible possible, I am nonetheless controlled by the
residents of Vraja. I am simply playing here in the mood
of an ignorant child.”




“Itīdṛk sva-līlābhiḥ — His uncommon childhood pastimes,
like this dāmodara-līlā, are supremely charming.” One
day, a fruit-seller from Mathurā came to Vraja to sell

                           58
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

her fruit. She had heard of the pre-eminent sweetness of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes in Gokula and had become
exceedingly eager to see Him directly. Although she came
to Vraja often, whenever she came she could not see
Kṛṣṇa. He was either asleep or in the lap of His mother.
At other times He was surrounded by His friends or busy
playing inside His home. She tried again and again, but
she was always unable to see Him.

Direct vision of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is easily available to the
residents of Vraja, but it is quite rare for the people
of Mathurā. Still, the heart of the fruit-seller became
so full of anxiety that she resolved, “If I do not see
Kṛṣṇa today, I will not return to Mathurā.”

The sādhaka’s resolve should be exactly the same. He
should think, “Day and night I will execute the limbs of
devotion as instructed by Śrīman Mahāprabhu and Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī. With love, I will chant a fixed number of
Śrī Hari’s names and serve Śrī Guru and the Vaiṣṇavas.
Every day I will study Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and other
devotional literatures. Every day I will recite Gopī-
gīta, Veṇū-gīta, Bhramara-gīta and Yugala-gīta. If I
come across a rasika Vaiṣṇava I will give my life to
serving him. I will visit the places where Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa performed Their confidential pastimes, in the
groves and forests of Vraja. I will pray very piteously
there and recite hymns and prayers that are full of
longing. Then, Śrī Kṛṣṇa will surely give me His
darśana; He is not far away.”

Having made her vow, the fruit-seller came to Nanda
Mahārāja’s cowherd settlement and wandered about near
his house. She began crying out, “Come, take fruits!
Phala lo, take fruits! Come, take mangoes, bananas and
guavas! Phala lo, phala lo!” But within moments, she
became so absorbed in thinking about Kṛṣṇa that instead
of calling the names of the fruits, she cried out,
“Come, take Gopāla, Govinda lo, Mādhava lo, Dāmodara
lo!” At first she had been balancing the basket of fruit
on her head with one hand, but eventually she forgot to
hold the basket altogether. It kept from falling only
due to her natural expertise. Finally, she sat down
before the doorstep of Nanda’s house.

When Śrī Kṛṣṇa heard the cries of the fruit-seller, He
could not remain sitting quietly on His mother’s lap so
He climbed down and went to a nearby mound of grain.
After taking as much grain as He could hold in His
joined palms, He started toward the fruit-seller, but
His hands were so tiny that all the grain fell from them
as He walked. When He reached the fruit-seller, all He
had left were a few grains that were wedged between His
palms and fingers. He poured them into her basket and
demanded, “Oh, give Me some fruit!” The fruit-seller
became completely enchanted by the beautiful form of
little Kṛṣṇa and just sat there looking at Him for some
time.

The import of this pastime is that unless someone is
intensely eager to see Śrī Kṛṣṇa and is absorbed in
remembering Him, just as the fruit-seller was, He does
not give them His darśana. Śrī Kṛṣṇa only gives His
darśana to those sādhakas who desire nothing but to see

                           59
Damodarastakam.txt                               5/5/2017

Him and serve Him. In other words, He only appears
before those who have become completely free from
anarthas.

When the fruit-seller returned to external consciousness
she said, “Lālā, my darling baby boy, I will only give
You fruit if You sit on my lap just once, and call me
Mā.”

Little Kṛṣṇa carefully looked in all directions, to make
sure no one was watching. When He was sure no one could
see, He jumped on to her lap:

“Mā!”

And then quickly jumped off again.

“Give Me fruit!”

All of the deepest desires within the heart of the
fruit-seller had now been fulfilled. She wanted to give
Kṛṣṇa all of her fruit, but she could only give Him as
much as He could hold in His tiny arms and hands. When
Kanhaiyā returned to where Mother Yaśodā was sitting in
the courtyard, He placed the fruit in her veil.

“Lālā, where did You get these fruits from?” she asked.

Kṛṣṇa simply pointed toward the door. Mother Yaśodā
became delighted to see such succulent and tasty fruits.
She began to distribute them to all the gopīs present,
but amazingly, even though there were only a few fruits,
the quantity did not diminish.

When Kṛṣṇa left the fruit-seller near the doorstep of
His house, she completely lost external awareness. Śrī
Kṛṣṇa had stolen her heart and she simply sat in the
very same spot until a gopī passing by shook her and
brought her back to external consciousness. She slowly
picked up her basket of fruit, placed it upon her head,
and then set off for Mathurā.

As the fruit-seller walked along the bank   of the
Yamunāriver, she realized that her basket   had become
much heavier than before. When she set it   down and
looked inside she was struck with wonder.   Her basket was
filled with a variety of valuable jewels.   She picked up
the basket, threw it into the Yamunā, and   burst into
tears.

“Śrī Kṛṣṇa has cheated me,” she cried. “I have been
completely deprived of His real mercy.” Overwhelmed by
love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa, she lamented bitterly and never
returned to her home. When Śrī Kṛṣṇa steals anyone’s
heart, invariably, this becomes their condition.



evaṁ-vrataḥ sva-priya-nāma-kīrtyā



jātānurāgo druta-citta uccaiḥ


                           60
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017



hasaty atho roditi rauti gāyaty



unmāda-van nṛtyati loka-bāhyaḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.40)

Saintly people who have firmly devoted themselves to
serving Bhagavān with deep love, constantly engage in
kīrtana of their most beloved names of Kṛṣṇa. When deep
attachment (anurāga) arises in them, their hearts
thoroughly melt and they become mad in love of God. They
laugh and cry loudly. Agitated by love, they sing about
their Lord in sweet voices and just like madmen, without
a trace of shyness, they dance and sing unaffected by
the opinions of ordinary people.




The evil demoness Pūtanā, who would murder small
children and drink their blood, beautifully disguised
herself as a mother and entered Vraja intending to kill
baby Kṛṣṇa. Despite her wicked deceit, merely on the
basis of her motherly appearance, Śrī Kṛṣṇa granted her
a position as a real nursemaid in Goloka. And in
exchange for a morsel of worthless chipped rice, just
see what He gave Sudāmā Vipra[xvi]16. Then what will he
not give this fruit-seller who was ready to give Him all
her fruit? Even four-headed Śrī Brahmā, the creator of
the universe, cannot imagine the answer to this
question. Lord Brahmā says:



eṣāṁ ghoṣa-nivāsinām uta bhavān kiṁ deva rāteti naś

ceto viśva-phalāt phalaṁ tvad-aparaṁ kutrāpy ayan
muhyati

sad-veṣād iva pūtanāpi sa-kulā tvām eva devāpitā

yad-dhāmārtha-suhṛt-priyātma-tanaya-prāṇāśayās tvat-kṛte

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.35)

O Master who is most worshipful even for the demigods,
now my mind is becoming bewildered by a doubt. How will
You be able to reward the residents of Vraja for their
service? You are the condensed form of the highest
benediction; there is no reward superior to obtaining
You. But even if You give Your very self to the
Vrajavāsīs, You will not be freed from Your debt to them
because You have even given Yourself to Pūtanā. She was
extremely cruel at heart, yet by deceitfully appearing
before You in the form of a virtuous nursemaid, she has
obtained You. Even her relatives, like Aghāsura and
Bakāsura, have now obtained You. How can You give the

                              61
Damodarastakam.txt                               5/5/2017

same reward to the Vrajavāsīs who have given You
everything? They have offered You their homes, wealth
and relatives. They have even offered their own bodies,
children, life and mind — everything — at Your lotus
feet.



Every day, Śrī Kṛṣṇa would perform beautiful, sweet
pastimes like these and immerse the residents of Vraja
in an ocean of bliss.

There are those who know Him as the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, and the controller of all others. They know
Him as the possessor of all potencies; as the causeless,
original cause of all other causes; as the Supreme Being
who has no equal what to speak of a superior; and as He
who makes the impossible possible. Yet, by these
pastimes, He is showing such knowledgeable personalities
that He can only be controlled by bhakti.

What kind of bhakti can control Him? The four Kumāras,
Dhruva Mahārāja, Prahlāda Mahārāja, Śrī Nārada, Śrī
Uddhava and the Yādavas, as well as many others all have
some form of bhakti, but their bhakti can never control
Him: “aiśvarya-śithila preme nāhi mora prīta — I am not
pleased by love that is weakened by awe and reverence
(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā 3.16).” Devotees who
have reverential love for Kṛṣṇa stand before Him and,
with folded hands, offer Him prayers. But if someone
loves Him with a mood similar to one of the Vrajavāsīs,
like Subala, Śrīdāma, Madhumaṅgala, Mother Yaśodā, Nanda
Bābā or, above all, one of the vraja-gopīs, then Śrī
Kṛṣṇa will come under his control. Among these
Vrajavāsīs the vraja-gopīs are supreme, and among them
Śrīmatī Rādhikā is topmost. If someone’s devotion to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is like the devotion of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s
maidservants, then he can control Śrī Kṛṣṇa completely.
The following verses celebrate these facts:



anaṅga-raṅga-maṅgala-prasaṅga-bhaṅgura-bhruvāṁ

savibhramaṁ sasambhramaṁ dṛganta-bāṇa-pātanaiḥ

nirantaraṁ vaśī-kṛta pratīti nanda-nandane

kadā kariṣyasīha māṁ kṛpā-katākṣa-bhājanam

Śrī Rādhā-kṛpā-katākṣa Stava-rāja (3)

O Sarveśvarī (mistress of all controllers) Rādhikā, on
the stage of amorous sport, in the course of an
auspicious discussion, You express amazement by curving
Your eyebrows like bows and then suddenly firing the
arrows of Your sidelong glances, piercing the son of Śrī
Nanda with amorous delusion, and bringing Him under Your
perpetual control. When will You make me the recipient
of Your merciful sidelong glance?



Even Śrī Sītā, the wife of Bhagavān Śrī Rāma, could not

                           62
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

control Śrī Rāma by her love. Śrī Rāma gave her up and
sent her to the forest to live in exile. Could Śrī Kṛṣṇa
ever banish Śrīmatī Rādhikā from His house in Nandagaon?
Śrīmatī Rādhikā does not even live in His house with
Him. He becomes so nervous in Her presence that He could
never even ask Her to leave His house, what to speak of
banishing Her from it. The reason He gets so nervous is
because He is always impassioned with love for Her. When
She instructs Him in the various arts, such as dancing,
He fears that He may make some mistake.



priya ko nacavata sīkhavatī pyārī



māna gumāna lakuṭi liye ṭhārī



ḍarapata kuñja bihārī



While instructing Her beloved in the art of dancing, Śrī
Rādhikā watches Him with a cane in hand, ready to
chastise Him. Her cane is Her sulky, contrary mood,
which causes Śrī Kuñja-bihārī to fear making any
mistake.



When Śrī Rādhikā spontaneously becomes inflamed with
māna (jealous anger), either with or without any cause,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa prays:



smara-garala-khaṇḍanaṁ mama śirasi maṇḍanaṁ

dehi pada-pallavam-udāraṁ

Śrī Gīta-govinda (10.8)

O My beloved, Cupid’s powerful poison is devastating me.
Please be merciful to Me and place upon My head the
cooling, tender petals of Your lotus feet.



What to speak of bowing at the lotus feet of Sarveśvarī
Śrī Rādhā, Śrī Kṛṣṇa falls at the feet of Śrī Rūpa
Mañjarī and Śrī Rati Mañjarī, Her maidservants, when, on
their svaminī’s order, they forbid Him to enter Śrī
Rādhā’s kuñja. He begs them for permission to enter,
pleads with them and flatters them just to pacify them.
Just see the position of Śrī Rādhā’s maidservants! Our
worshipful Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī says:

pādābjayos tava vinā vara dāsyam eva

nānyat kadāpi samaye kila devi yāce


                            63
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

sakhyāya te mama namo’stu namo’stu nityaṁ

dāsyāya te mama raso’stu raso’stu satyam

Śrī Vilāpa-kusumāñjali (16)

O Goddess, You are capable of bestowing all
benedictions, but I do not want anything other than
service to Your lotus feet. I offer my obeisances —
obeisances forever — to sakhya (the mood of friendship),
but the essence of my life — the real essence of my life
— is dāsya (the mood of service).



Śrī Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī’s eternal identity in Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes is Tuṅgavidyā Sakhī, one of Śrī Rādhā’s
eight principle sakhīs. But he is also praying to attain
the position of being Śrī Rādhā’s maidservant:

yat-kiṅkarīṣu bahuśaḥ khalu kāku-vāṇī,

nityaṁ parasya puruṣasya śikhaṇḍa-mauleḥ

tasyāḥ kadā rasa-nidheḥ vṛṣabhānu-jāyās

tat-keli-kuñja-bhavanāṅgana-mārjanī syām

Śrī Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi (8)



O daughter of Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja, ocean of rasa, that
beautiful boy who wears a gracefully tilting peacock
feather in His hair is actually the original Personality
of Godhead. Still, He is always falling at the feet of
Your maidservants and pitifully begging them with many
humble words to gain entrance into Your kuñja where the
two of You engage in Your playful loving pastimes. My
life would be successful if I could even be one stick in
the broom Your maidservants use to clean Your delightful
kuñja.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa rises when the gopīs order Him to rise, and He
sits when they order Him to sit.



chachiyā-bhara chāca-para hari ko nacāveṅ

by Rasakhāna

Just see the glories of these ladies of Vraja, they make
Śrī Hari dance for a mere handful of buttermilk.



No other kind of bhakti has the power to control Kṛṣṇa
in this way.




                              64
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

Mother Yaśodā may tell Kṛṣṇa, “Today, Kanhaiyā, do not
take the cows to graze in the forest; it is Your
birthday.” But He will not follow Her order. He will
eagerly go out to graze the cows. What is in the forest
that attracts Him so much? Within the forest, He can
meet the young vraja-gopīs and play freely with them —
especially with Śrī Rādhā. They meet together in secret
places like Rādhā-kuṇḍa, Sūrya-kuṇḍa and Kusuma-
sarovara.

The amorous love that the young vraja-gopīs have for Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is greater even than parental love for Him. In
fact, their love includes all the qualities of parental
affection. Therefore, playing with the gopas or grazing
His cows is not the primary reason He takes the cows
into the forests every day. The main reason He enters
the forest is to play with His dear most gopīs.

In Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 8.201—4), Śrīla
Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī explains that without the
help of Śrī Rādhā’s sakhīs, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s amorous pastimes
will never develop in someone’s heart:



rādhā-kṛṣṇera līlā ei ati gūḍhatara



dāsya-vātsalyādi-bhāve nā haya gocara



Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣna’s pastimes in the groves of Vṛndāvana
are extremely confidential. Such pastimes are beyond the
grasp of anyone in the mood of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s affectionate
servant, friend or parent. (201)



sabe eka sakhī-gaṇera ihāṅ adhikāra



sakhī haite haya ei līlāra vistāra



Only the damsels of Vraja are qualified to see these
secret pastimes, and only they can expand these
pastimes. (202)



sakhī vinā ei līlā puṣṭa nāhi haya



sakhī līlā vistāriyā, sakhī āsvādaya



Only the sakhīs are qualified to nourish these secret
pastimes and they take great pleasure in expanding them.

                           65
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

(203)



sakhī vinā ei līlāya anyera nāhi gati



sakhī-bhāve ye tāṅre kare anugati



rādhā-kṛṣṇa-kuñja-sevā-sādhya sei pāya



sei sādhya pāite āra nāhika upāya



No one can see or participate in these pastimes without
the help of the young vraja-gopīs. Only those fortunate
souls who follow in their footsteps by adopting their
exalted mood of amorous love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa will attain
the ultimate goal of directly serving Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in
the kuñjas of Vṛndāvana. There is no other way to obtain
this.




One day Mahādeva Śiva, the chief demigod, set off to see
his supremely worshipful Lord who had just appeared in
Vraja. Arriving at the gate of Nanda Mahārāja’s home, he
sang loudly, “alakha nirañjana, alakha
nirañjana!”[xvii]17 and played his damru (a kind of
hand-drum).

Mother Yaśodā came to the door when she heard him
singing and playing his drum, but when she saw the
appearance of this unusual yogī, she became afraid. He
wore robes of tiger-skin and a garland of human-skulls.
Dangerous serpents adorned his hands, feet and neck, and
he held a tall, fearful trident by his side. His body
was smeared from head to toe with ashes from a cremation
ground and his thoroughly matted hair made him look
ancient and even more dreadful. His carrier, Nandī, a
massive bull, accompanied him. Seeing that the terrible
looking yogī was approaching her accompanied by Nandī,
Yaśodā became utterly terrified. Nonetheless, she asked
him dutifully, “Do you want some alms? Just wait and I
will bring them to you.”



Mahādeva Śaṅkara replied, “O Mother, I have walked so
far to come here from my home in Kailāśa. Just show me
your baby; I just want to see your darling child.”

“Eat or drink whatever you like, and then go,” she said.
“And do not play your damru so loudly. My child is
sleeping.”


                           66
Damodarastakam.txt                               5/5/2017

Śaṅkarajī said, “O innocent Mother, I do not want your
flour and beans, or silk clothes and bags, nor do I want
anything to eat, drink, wear or rest upon. I have come
to see your darling son just once. This is the only
donation I need.”

Mother Yaśodā hesitated, and then said to him, “I am an
adult, yet your appearance terrifies me. My darling boy
is so young. He will become too afraid if He sees your
form, so I will not show Him to you.” And she went
inside the house.

Śrī Śaṅkara, the foremost demigod, was not about to
leave without seeing Śrī Kṛṣṇa. He sat down by the door
and lit a ceremonial fire.

“When your beautiful son grows a little older,” he
thought, “He will come outside to play and I will
finally be able to see Him. I will not return to Kailāśa
without seeing Him.”

To this day, the place near Nanda’s home where Mahādeva
Śrī Śaṅkara was sitting is known as Yogiyā-kuṇḍa.

Mother Yaśodā entered the house and found her darling
baby boy crying loudly. Nothing she tried would pacify
Him so she consulted her friends. A respected elder gopī
spoke.

“This is not an ordinary yogī; he is from   the sacred
mountains of Kailāśa. When your boy heard   him playing
his drum, He became afraid and now He has   started to cry
more and more loudly. It would be wise to   show him your
dear son at least once.”

Seeing no other recourse but to show her son to the
extra-ordinary yogī, Yaśodā-maiyā placed Kṛṣṇa in a
black basket and covered all of His limbs with black
cloth to protect Him from inauspiciousness. She anointed
His eyes with thick black eyeliner and marked His
forehead with a black dot. Then she reluctantly brought
Kṛṣṇa outside and allowed the yogī just a brief glimpse
of Him. To her astonishment, when she was turning to
enter her house, she noticed that Kṛṣṇa had stopped
crying. Śrī Śaṅkara, the king of mystics, spoke to her.

“Mother, I will light a ceremonial fire and stay nearby.
If ever your beloved child falls prey to some evil, just
call for me. I will chant mantras and ward off any evil
effects with mustard seeds and salt and He will be
restored to health.”

Thereafter, whenever Kṛṣṇa would cry she would call the
yogī from his dwelling.



yogī! calo nanda-bhavana meṅ,

yaśomatī maiyā tumheṅ bulāve

vāke lāla ko najara lagī hai,

tai pai rāī nūn karavāveṅ

                            67
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017


raha raha yogī! nanda-bhavana meṅ,

vraja meṅ vāsa sadā tū kījo

jaba jaba vāko lālā rove,

taba taba darasana dījo

Yogī, come to Nanda-bhavana; Kṛṣṇa’s devoted mother,
Yaśodā Maiyā, is calling you. Her dear son has come
under an evil eye. Ward off its effect with mustard and
salt. Stay here, yogī, just stay here in Nanda-bhavana.
Please live in Vraja forever. Whenever her darling son
cries, come and give Him your darśana.



Thus, the life of that ‘yogī’ became successful.




In his Padyāvalī, an anthology of verses written by many
different ācāryas, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī quotes the
following pastime:



rāmo nāma babhuva huṁ tad-balā sīteti huṁ tāṁ pitur

vācā paṅcavaṭī-vane nivasatas tasyāharad-rāvaṇaḥ

kṛṣṇayeti purātanīṁ nija-kathām ākarṇya mātreritāṁ

saumitre! kva dhanur dhanur dhanu-iti vyaghrā giraḥ
pāntu vaḥ

Padyāvalī (150) Author Unknown

One night, Mother Yaśodā was tenderly stroking Kṛṣṇa and
lulling Him to sleep with a story.

“Once there was a king,” she said.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa eagerly responded, “Yes, and...?”

“His name was Daśaratha,” she continued, “and he had
four sons. When they grew up, Viśvāmitra took them to
protect the arena of his sacred fire-sacrifice.”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa murmered, “Mmm. Yes, and...?”

“After they saved the fire sacrifice, Viśvāmitra took
them to Mithilā. The King of Mithilā, Mahārāja Janaka,
had vowed to give his daughter’s hand in marriage only
to the one who could string Śiva’s bow and break it, and
not to anyone else.”

Again Śrī Kṛṣṇa murmured, “Mmmm.”

“Kings came from many far off lands,” she continued,
“but they all failed. Finally, Śrī Rāma strung Śiva’s

                              68
Damodarastakam.txt                                 5/5/2017

massive bow and broke it. Then Princess Sītā was married
to Lord Rāma.”

Kṛṣṇa murmured as she spoke, and whenever she paused,
even for a brief moment, He eagerly inquired, “Mother,
what happened next?”

“To carry out His father’s order, Śrī Rāma had to enter
the forest in exile and Sītā and Lakṣmaṇa went with Him.
When they were residing at a place called Pañcavaṭī, the
demon Mārīca tricked Rāma and led Him into the forest.
Meanwhile, back at their cottage, Rāvaṇa came and
kidnapped Sītā.”

Just hearing this, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, absorbed in the mood of
Rāma, sprang up from the bed, crying, “Lakṣmaṇa! Bring
Me My bow! Where is My bow? My bow!”

May Śrī Hari’s impassioned cries when He is absorbed in
this mood protect You.



One day, while Mother Yaśodā was churning yoghurt in an
earthen pot, she attracted her darling son to her with
sweet words. Then for a short time, she left to do
something else. When Kṛṣṇa’s eyes suddenly fell upon the
earthen pot, He saw the moon reflected on the surface of
the yoghurt. When Mother Yaśodā returned, He repeatedly
demanded, “Mother, I want the moon. Give me that toy.”

Mother Yaśodā took a lump of butter from the pot and
gave it to Him. At first He became happy, but when He
looked back into the pot, He saw that the moon was still
there. Again, He began restlessly demanding it.

Mother Yaśodā said, “Look up, that is the moon.”

“I want it,” He demanded.

“There is poison on it,” she said.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa asked, “How did it get poison on it?”

“A long time ago, when the demigods and demons churned
the great ocean of milk, poison came to the surface.
That poison is on the moon. Do You see those black
impressions on the moon? That is the poison. Tell me,
who would play with that?”

Hearing this explanation, Śrī Kṛṣṇa became frightened.

Such are Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s unlimited pastimes. He drowns the
residents of Vraja in the ocean of their sweetness, and
even He Himself drowns in that ocean.



~ THUS ENDS THE DIG-DARŚINĪ-VṚTTĪ ON THE THIRD VERSE ~




                            69
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

Verse Four




varaṁ deva mokṣaṁ na mokṣāvadhiṁ vā

na cānyaṁ vṛṇe ‘haṁ vareśād apīha

idaṁ te vapur nātha gopāla-bālaṁ

sadā me manasy āvirāstāṁ kim anyaiḥ



SYNONYMS



varam — benedictions; deva — O supremely effulgent and
playful divinity; mokṣam — emancipation from the
sufferings of transient existence (the fourth ultimate
goal of human life); na — not; mokṣa-avadhim — the
pinnacle of salvation: residence in Śrī Vaikuṇṭha-loka,
the abode of extraordinary concentrated happiness; vā —
or; na — not; ca — and; anyam — other [benedictions such
as navadhā-bhakti characterized by śravaṇa and kīrtana];
vṛṇe aham — I pray for; vara-īśāt — [from] You, the
Supreme Controller, who can grant any benediction; api —
even though; iha — here [in Vraja]; idam — this; te —
Your; vapuḥ — beautiful divine form; nātha — supreme
refuge; gopāla-bālam — young cowherd boy; sadā — always;
me — my; manasi — in the heart; āvirāstām — remain
manifest; kim — of what use do I have for; anyaiḥ —
other [benedictions].



TRANSLATION



O supremely effulgent and playful divinity, I do not ask
You for freedom from mortal suffering (the fourth of
human goals), nor do I ask for the ultimate limit of
freedom (residence in Vaikuṇṭha, the abode of
extraordinary, concentrated happiness). Nor do I seek
any other benediction from You (even attaining bhakti
characterized by śravaṇa, kīrtana etc.) even though, as
the supreme benefactor, You can easily grant all
benedictions. O Lord of my life, may Your beautiful form
as Bāla-gopāla (a little cowherd boy) in Vraja always
remain visible within my heart. I have no use for any
benediction other than this.



Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā

evam utkarṣa-viśeṣa-varṇanena stutvā prārthayate — varam
iti dvābhyām. deva he parama-dyotamāna! he madhura-
krīḍā-viśeṣa-pareti vā, vareśāt sakala-vara-pradāna-
samarthāt, api tvattaḥ mokṣaṁ caturtha-puruṣārthaṁ,
mokṣasyāvadhiṁ vā parama-kāṣṭhā-rūpaṁ ghana-sukha-

                           70
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

viśeṣātmakaṁ śrī vaikuṇṭha-lokaṁ, anyañca śravaṇādi-
bhakti-prakāram ahaṁ varaṁ prārthyam. yadvā,
anyairvaraṇīyam api, yadvā, varatayā iha vṛndāvane na
vṛṇe. ihetyasya pareṇāpi sambandhaḥ.

atra ca mokṣādi trayasya yathottara-śreṣṭhyamuhyam.
tatra mokṣād-vaikuṇṭha-lokasya śraiṣṭhyaṁ ‘śrī
bhāgavatāmṛtottara-khaṇḍe’ [1.14—5] vyaktam evāsti.
vaikuṇṭha-lokācchravaṇādi-prakārasya ca śraiṣṭhyaṁ —
“kāmaṁ bhavaḥ sva-vṛijinairnirayeṣu nastāt” (Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam 3.15.49) ityādi-vacanataḥ śravaṇādi-siddhyā
narakādiṣvapi yatra tatra sarvatraiva vaikuṇṭha-vāsa-
siddheriti dik.

tarhi kiṁ vṛṇuṣe? tadāha — he nātha! iha vṛndāvane idaṁ
varṇitaṁ ‘gopāla-bāla-rūpaṁ’ te vapuḥ, sadā me manasi
āvirāstāṁ; antaryāmitvādinā sthitam api sākṣādiva
sarvāṅga-saundaryādi-prakāśanena prakaṭaṁ bhūyāt.

nanu, mokṣādayo’pi paramopādeyāstān api vṛṇu? tatrāha —
kim anyairiti; [arthāt] anyair-mokṣādibhir mama
prayojanaṁ nāstītyarthaḥ, tasya sarvānanda-
kadambātmakatvāt-tat-siddhyaiva sarva-siddheḥ. tathā
tad-alābhe nijepsitāsiddhyā viśeṣataśca tuccha-lābhena
śoka-viśeṣotpādanād-anyairapi kim iti bhāvaḥ.

yadvā, nanu mokṣādayo na vriyantāṁ nāma, paramāpekṣāṇi
madīya-śrī-caturbhujādi-mūrtti-darśana-sambhāṣaṇādīni
vriyatāṁ? tatrāha — kim anyairiti. citte
tvadetacchrīmad-vapuṣa sadā sphūrttāveva mamātyanta-
prītirnānyatreti bhāvaḥ. antardarśana-māhātmyañca ‘śrī
bhāgavatāmṛtottara-khaṇḍe’ [2.86—96] tapo-loke
śrīpippalāyanena vivṛtyoktam asti. evaṁ tasya
[satyavratasya] prārthanāpi stutāveva paryavasyati,
tasyaiva sarvotkṛṣṭatvena prārthanāt, evam-agre’pi.

iti śrī-dāmodarāṣṭake caturtha-śloke śrī-sanātana
gosvāmi-kṛtā dig-darśinī-nāmnī ṭīkā samāptā.



~ THUS ENDS THE DIG-DARśINī ṭīKā ON THE FOURTH VERSE ~

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā Bhāvanuvāda

Up until this point, Śrī Satyavrata Muni has been
praising Śrī Bhagavān by describing the supremacy of His
unique characteristics. Now in Verse Four, beginning
with varaṁ, and in Verse Five, Śrī Satyavrata Muni
begins to pray to obtain his most cherished object. “O
Deva” means either “O supremely effulgent divinity” or
“O Lord who always loves to perform certain charming
pastimes.” Here vara-īśat api means: “Even though You
can grant any benediction, I do not ask You for freedom
from mortal suffering, mokṣa, the ultimate goal among
the four goals of human life. Beyond the attainment of
ordinary mokṣa is the attainment of the utmost limit of
mokṣa, residence in Your transcendental abode, Śrī
Vaikuṇṭhaloka. That abode is comprised of unending,
concentrated bliss. I do not even ask You for residence
in Vaikuṇṭha. Nor do I ask for anyañ ca.”

The words anyañ ca, “others also”, can be understood to
mean either “the other benediction of performing the

                           71
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

celebrated nine-fold system of devotional service
(navadhā-bhakti) beginning with the process of śravaṇam
(hearing about the Personality of Godhead); or simply
“any other attainment generally considered worth asking
for or considered superior by others”. However
considering the word iha, “in this place”, the meaning
is “Because I am in Vṛndāvana, I do not have the
slightest desire to accept all these
benedictions.”[xviii]18

The word iha is also related to the latter half of the
verse.

Here, the progressive superiority of the three
benedictions is self-evident. The Uttara-khaṇḍa of Śrī
Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta clearly explains the superiority of
residence in Vaikuṇṭhaloka over mokṣa.[xix]19 and the
performance of navadhā-bhakti, the celebrated nine-fold
system of devotional service beginning with śravaṇam, is
even superior to that. This is also described in the
following verse from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam:



kāmaṁ bhavaḥ sva-vṛjinair nirayeṣu naḥ stāc

ceto ‘livad yadi nu te padayo rameta

vācaś ca nas tulasivad yadi te ‘ṅghri-śobhāḥ

pūryeta te guṇa-gaṇair yadi karṇa-randhraḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.15.49)

Śrī Sanat-kumāra and the other Kumāras prayed, “O Lord,
if (because of the offence we made by cursing Your
devotees, Jaya and Vijaya) we have to take birth in an
extremely condemned species or even in hell, no harm. As
long as our hearts and minds, like bees, are immersed in
relishing the sweetness of serving Your lotus feet; our
words are made beautiful by glorifying You, just as
tulasī leaves are beautified when they are offered at
Your feet; and our ears are eternally filled with
descriptions of all Your transcendental qualities; then
we do not care about where we take birth. In other
words, may we eternally have the fortune of hearing
(śravaṇa) and singing (kīrtana) about You.”



This statement specifically demonstrates that regardless
of where one resides [as a result of his actions], even
if he resides in hell, once he has attained final
perfection, or prema-bhakti, by appropriately performing
the limbs of navadhā-bhakti such as śravaṇa, he always
experiences the fulfilment of residing in Vaikuṇṭha.

[Śrī Kṛṣṇa may have asked:] “If you do not want any of
these benedictions, then what is it that you do want?”
To this question, the

sage replies: “O Master, may Your Bāla-gopāla form in
Vṛndāvana, which I have just described, always remain
manifest within my heart. Although You are present as

                              72
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

the Supersoul, the omniscient witness in the cave-like
hearts of all beings, kindly remain manifest in my heart
in such a way that You seem to be appearing directly in
front of me, and in that way reveal to me the beauty of
Your entire form.”

[As though Śrī Kṛṣṇa is personally addressing His
devotee, He speaks thus:] “Aho! Liberation, residence in
Vaikuṇṭha, and eligibility to engage in navadhā-bhakti
are also exceedingly worthy and rare benedictions. Why
not accept them as well?” In reply, Śrī Satyavrata Muni
says, “Kim anyaih? — Of what use to me are these three
boons?” In other words, Śrī Satyavrata Muni says,
“Although these attainments are eagerly sought after by
others, they are of no use to me.”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the essence of all bliss. If one attains
Him, then everything has been attained. However, the
result of attaining something as insignificant as
liberation instead of one’s most cherished form of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is only intense sorrow. It is for this reason that
Śrī Satyavrata Muni has implied that all other
benedictions are of no use.

[Now, In the following passages, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī
reveals another meaning of kim anyaih.] Śrī Bhagavān
asks the sage: “You may not want liberation and other
boons, but why do you not accept the benediction of
seeing Me and conversing with Me in any of My opulent,
four-armed forms like Śrī Nārāyaṇa — a privilege greatly
cherished by all?”

In this context, when Śrī Satyavrata Muni replies that
he has no use for any other benediction, he means “I
will only experience the greatest bliss if Your Bāla-
gopāla form, the crown jewel of all beauty, remains
forever manifest in my heart, and not otherwise.”

In Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta’s Uttara-khaṇḍa (2.86—96) we
find the statements of Śrī Pippalāyana Ṛṣī. Therein, he
extensively discusses the glories of beholding Śrī
Bhagavān within the heart (antara-darśana).[xx]20



In the previous stanzas, the sage has been singing the
glories (stuti) of his Lord, yet this stanza is
apparently a prayer (prārthana). However, even this
prayer has culminated in glorifying Śrī Bhagavān. The
sage’s prayer for inner vision of Śrī Bhagavān shows
that such vision is the highest goal.[xxi]21 This should
also be understood while considering the next verse.

.

~ THUS ENDS THE ENGLISH RENDITION OF

THE DIG-DARŚINĪ-ṬĪKĀ ON THE FOURTH VERSE ~




Dig-darśinī-vṛtti

                           73
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017


Up till now, Śrī Satyavrata Muni has been describing the
sweet pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and specifically the
pastimes characterized by vātsalya-rasa. Consequently,
his heart has been melting and he is becoming fully
absorbed in them. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is not especially pleased
with the prayers offered by Lord Brahmā or the other
demigods. On the other hand, if one sings about the
pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s devotees, and especially about
the pastimes of the Vrajavāsīs, then Śrī Kṛṣṇa will not
only be pleased, but He will even be controlled by them.

Śrī Satyavrata Muni then prayed, “O Dāmodara, Your
mother has so much affection for You and above all
others, You are by far her favourite. She is the very
embodiment of boundless vātsalya-prema for You. With
profound motherly affection, she cares for You and
nurtures You considering You to be her dependent child.
Naturally, just as a mother’s qualities ordinarily
appear in her children, her motherly quality of
forgiveness and compassion also appears in You. Kindly
ignore my offences, my sins, my anarthas and my bad
qualities, and just be pleased with me. Kindly just
grant me Your causeless mercy.”

It is as though Śrī Kṛṣṇa, being pleased by Śrī
Satyavrata Muni’s prayer, had asked the sage to accept
his desired boons. And now, in the beginning of this
stanza, the sage says, “varaṁ devamokṣaṁna mokṣāvadhiṁ
vā — I do not want liberation or even the utmost limit
of freedom — residence in Vaikuṇṭha-loka. Nor have I any
need for other such benedictions.”

Śrī Satyavrata Muni prays, “O Bhagavān, You are the
original Lord of all lords and the source of everything.
Therefore, You are capable of granting all benedictions.
Nothing is impossible for you. Although liberation is
the cherished attainment of one who has realized the
temporary nature of worldly existence and has
consequently become detached, I have no need for the
benediction of attaining liberation.”




There are five kinds of mukti described in the
scriptures: sālokya, sāmīpya, sārūpya, sārṣṭi and
sāyujya.[xxii]22 The definition of mukti is found in
Sāṇkhya śāstra: “ātyantikī duḥkha nivṛttir eva mukti —
the final cessation of all forms of misery suffered
during the endless cycle of birth and death is mukti.”

Resolving to permanently end their suffering, some
people aspire for sāyujya-mukti — merging into the
impersonal feature of brahma. This form of mukti is
actually offensive and is fully opposed to bhakti.
Previously, even the four Kumāras — Śrī Sanaka, Śrī
Sanandana, Śrī Sanātana and Śrī Sanat-kumāra — desired
this kind of mukti.[xxiii]23 However, as Śrī Satyavrata
Muni prays for his desired boon, he discards the goal of
mokṣa (sāyujya-mukti) with the words varaṁ deva mokṣam,
and with the words na mokṣāvadhiṁ vā he expresses that
he does not even want the unending, concentrated

                           74
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

happiness of residing in Vaikuṇṭha, the ultimate limit
of freedom.

We should carefully consider the meaning of mokṣāvadhim.
Unlike sāyujya-mukti, the other four kinds of mukti are
not entirely unfavourable to bhakti. Those who accept
these four kinds of mukti exist within the realm of
Vaikuṇṭha in two classifications: In one class, sva-
sukhaiśvarya-uttarā-mokṣa, the desire for one’s own
happiness and opulence predominates, whereas in the
other class, prema-seva-uttarā-mokṣa, one’s longing to
render loving service to Śrī Bhagavān predominates over
all other desires.



Those who long for prema-sevottarā-mokṣa never desire
the inferior sva-sukhaiśvaryottarā-mokṣa. The example of
the four Kumāras illustrates this. When the four Kumāras
experienced the fragrance of the tulasī leaves that had
been placed upon the lotus feet of Śrī Nārāyaṇa, they
utterly abandoned their previous desires for impersonal
liberation. They at once became jñānī-bhaktas (devotees
who have knowledge of the Lord’s absolute divinity) and
began seeking after prema-sevottarā-mokṣa.




Śuddha-bhaktas, however, have one-pointed attachment for
the loving service of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. They do not even aspire
for prema-sevottarā-mokṣa wherein some desire for one’s
own happiness is still present. When Śrī Bhagavān offers
such one-pointed devotees either of these classes of
mokṣa, they never accept. Therefore, in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (3.29.13) Śrī Bhagavān says, “dīyamānaṁ na
gṛhṇanti vinā mat-sevanaṁ janāḥ — a pure devotee never
accepts any kind of mokṣa, even if I personally offer it
to him.” The unalloyed devotee’s only desire is to
engage in loving service to Śrī Bhagavān. In the history
of Vṛtrāsura narrated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Vṛtrāsura
rejected all varieties of mokṣa and prayed to be able to
render service to the lotus feet of Śrī Bhagavān:



na nāka-pṛṣṭhaṁ na ca pārameṣṭhyaṁ

na sārva-bhaumaṁ na rasādhipatyam

na yoga-siddhīr apunar-bhavaṁ vā

samañjasa tvā virahayya kāṅkṣe

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.11.25)

O ocean of all good fortune, apart from serving Your
lotus feet I do not wish for anything. I do not wish to
obtain the summit of heaven (Dhruvaloka — the Vaikuṇṭha
planet situated at the zenith of the material cosmos)
nor the highest seat of power within the universe (the
seat of Lord Brahmā); nor have I any desire for
sovereignty over all the earth, nor sovereignty of all

                              75
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

the planets down to Rasātala, which are flooding with
sense-enjoyment; I do not long for mastery over all the
yoga-siddhīs nor even for the end of repeated birth and
death (mokṣa).



In the same way, Śrī Satyavrata Muni is not even asking
for a boon related to the utmost limit of mokṣa —
residence in Vaikuntha.




Śrī Satyavrata Muni continues: “na ca anyam —
furthermore, I have no desire to obtain any other
benediction.” By the word anya (other) in this phrase,
Śrī Satyavrata Muni implies, “I do not even want the
result of performing the nine kinds of vaidhi-navadhā-
bhakti: hearing about Śrī Bhagavān (śravaṇa), chanting
His names (kīrtana), remembering Him (viṣṇu-smaraṇa),
serving His lotus feet (pāda-sevana), worshipping Him
(arcana), praising Him (vandana), maintaining the
attitude of serving Him (dāsya), nurturing a friendship
with Him (sakhya), and submitting one’s very self to Him
(ātma-nivedana).”

His response astonishes Śrī Kṛṣṇa who then asks, “The
nine-fold system of devotional service (navadhā-bhakti)
has been abundantly praised in the scriptures, yet you
do not want to accept even that. What, then, is your
desire?”

Then Śrī Satyavrata Muni utters his prayer: “My only
desire is that Your form as little Bāla-gopāla manifest
in my heart forever — that small cowherd boy who is
afraid of His mother and who is looking here and there
with fearful, suspicious eyes.” In the phrase
vareśadapīha (vara-īśatapi-iha), the word iha means
“here”, or “in this place”. Thus the sage is praying,
“May Your form as a little cowherd boy, which is present
here in Vṛndāvana, appear within my heart. I have no
need for any other benediction besides this.”

The form of Bāla-gopāla will only appear in one’s heart
as a result of prema-bhakti. Sādhakas who perform
śravaṇa, kīrtana and smaraṇa of Śrī Kṛṣṇa do not care if
they go to heaven or hell. Their only desire is to
engage in cultivating prema-bhakti under the guidance of
tattvajñā, rasika Vaiṣṇavas — Vaiṣṇavas who have
realized the Absolute Truth and who are expert in
relishing loving emotions. It is therefore said:



tan-nāma-rūpa-caritādi-sukīrtanānu-

smṛtyoḥ krameṇa rasanā-manasī niyojya

tiṣṭhan vraje tad-anurāgi-jana anugāmī

kālaṁ nayed akhilam ity upadeśa-sāram


                           76
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

Śrī Upadeśāmṛta (8)

The bhakti-sādhakas should perform kīrtana and smaraṇa
(remembrance) of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s name, form, character and
pastimes. Thus they should gradually engage their
tongues and minds, withdrawing them from absorption in
sense objects which cause aversion to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Residing in Vraja-maṇḍala they should follow in the
footsteps of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s associates who have deep
attachment for Him, and fully utilize every moment of
their time like this. This is the essence of all
teachings.

Similarly, in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.47.58), Śrī Uddhava
says:



etāḥ paraṁ tanu-bhṛto bhuvi gopa-vadhvo

govinda eva nikhilātmani rūḍha-bhāvāḥ

vāñchanti yad bhava-bhiyo munayo vayaṁ ca

kiṁ brahma-janmabhir ananta-kathā-rasasya



The young wives of the gopas, embodied here on earth,
lead the topmost lives because they have mahābhāva, or
full-blown selfless love for Śrī Govinda, the very soul
of all. Their pure love is sought after by those sages
who fear repeated birth and death, as well as by us.
What is the use of being born even as Lord Brahmā if one
does not have any taste for hearing the nectarean
descriptions of Śrī Hari.

Vṛtrāsura also prays that he may gain the association of
the Vaiṣṇavas and cultivate prema-bhakti under their
guidance:



mamottamaśloka-janeṣu sakhyaṁ



saṁsāra-cakre bhramataḥ sva-karmabhiḥ



tvan-māyayātmātmaja-dāra-geheṣv



āsakta-cittasya na nātha bhūyāt



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.11.27)



O Master of my life, I am not seeking liberation. I am

                              77
Damodarastakam.txt                               5/5/2017

not concerned if I must repeatedly roam about in this
vicious circle of birth and death as a result of my
actions. However, wherever I go, and in whichever
species I take birth, please grant me the loving
friendship of Your dear devotees, for in their
association I can cultivate prema-bhakti. My Lord, I
only pray that I will not have to mingle with those who,
bewildered by Your illusory potency, are always attached
to their bodies, homes, children, families and so on.




Although the position of navadhā-bhakti is so elevated,
Śrī Satyavrata Muni has no desire for it. Why? Śrīla
Sanātana Gosvāmī reconciles this wonder. He explains
that the fruit of one’s practice of navadhā-bhakti
depends upon the nature of one’s practice. When the nine
limbs of bhakti are performed according to vaidhi-mārga
(the path of strict adherence to scriptural regulations
based on fear), they enable the sādhaka to attain
Vaikuṇṭha. On the other hand, when the same limbs of
bhakti are performed in rāga-mārga (the path of
spontaneous love), they enable the sādhaka to reach the
abode of Vṛndāvana where they attain loving service to
Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

It is important to carefully understand the meaning of
rāga. Rāga is defined as one’s attraction to an object.
If the soul’s inherent capacity to be attracted is
directed towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa — if He becomes the exclusive
object of that attraction — it is called rāgātmikā-
bhakti. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmipāda has defined rāgātmikā-
bhakti in the following verse:



iṣṭe svārasikī rāgaḥ paramāviṣṭatā bhavet

tan-mayī yā bhaved bhaktiḥ sātra rāgātmikoditā

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.272)

Rāga is the unquenchable loving thirst for the object of
one’s affection that in turn gives rise to spontaneous
and intense absorption in that object. Devotion that is
performed with such rāga is known as rāgātmikā-bhakti.



Spontaneous, intense absorption in the object of one’s
love is referred to as rāga and when kṛṣṇa-bhakti
reaches this state of intense attachment, it is called
rāgātmikā-bhakti. Thus, in brief, rāgātmikā-bhakti is
the loving thirst for Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The topmost example of
rāgātmikā-bhakti is found in the deeply loving emotions
that the Vrajavāsīs feel for Śrī Kṛṣṇa and devotion that
is aimed at attaining this stage of rāgātmikā-bhakti- is
called rāgānugā-bhakti (bhakti following in the wake of
rāgātmikā-bhakti). Since the devotion of one following
the vaidhi-mārga is dependent on the dictation of rules
and regulations, it is weak. On the other hand,
rāgānugā-bhakti is entirely independent, and therefore

                           78
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

it is powerful by nature.

The topmost example of anurāga (incessant, deep loving
attachment) for Śrī Kṛṣṇa only exists in the hearts of
the Vrajavāsīs. The devotee should meditate on the
associates of his beloved Lord Kṛṣṇa, who have the same
mood for which he aspires. Furthermore, he should remain
absorbed in hearing, chanting and remembering the names
and pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in Vraja that are conducive to
his own particular mood. Each devotee should reside in
Vraja-maṇḍala following the associate who shares his own
favoured mood in the manner just described.

Those who aspire for a mood of friendship with Śrī Kṛṣṇa
should follow the footsteps of His associates such as
Śrīdāma and Subala; those who desire to have parental
affection for Him should follow Śrī Nanda and Śrī
Yaśodā; and those who hanker for conjugal love with Śrī
Kṛṣṇa should follow Śrī Lalitā, Śrī Viśākhā and so on.
Thus, each devotee, according to his own mood, should
immerse himself in the pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and live in
Vraja. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmipāda has outlined this process
of bhajana in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.294—5):



kṛṣṇaṁ smaran janaṁ cāsya



preṣṭhaṁ nija-samīhitam



tat-tat-kathā-rataś cāsau



kuryād vāsaṁ vraje sadā



The devotee should constantly remember Śrī Kṛṣṇa along
with the dear most associates of Śrī Kṛṣṇa whom he
chooses to follow. While permanently living in Vraja, he
should become attached to always hearing about them. (If
one is unable to live in Vraja by body, then one should
live in Vraja by mind.) (294)



sevā sādhaka-rūpeṇa




siddha-rūpeṇa cātra hi




tad-bhāva-lipsunā kāryā

                            79
Damodarastakam.txt                                 5/5/2017




vraja-lokānusārataḥ




He who has developed greed for rāgātmikā-bhakti should
closely follow in the footsteps of the particular
associates in Vraja whose moods he aspires for. Under
their guidance, he should engage in service both in his
external form as a sādhaka, and internally with his
perfected spiritual body. (295)



If the sādhaka longs to attain the fully blossomed,
mature state of prema, he should take to heart the
instruction of Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī:



yadīccher āvāsaṁ vraja-bhuvi sa-rāgaṁ prati-janur

yuva-dvandvaṁ tac cet paricaritum ārād abhilaṣeḥ

svarūpaṁ śrī rūpaṁ sa-gaṇam iha tasyāgrajam api

sphuṭaṁ premṇā nityaṁ smara nama tadā tvaṁ śṛṇu manaḥ

Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā (3)



If you wish to live in the land of Vraja birth after
birth, and if you crave the chance to perform direct
service to the eternally youthful Divine Couple in their
parakīya affairs, full of rāga, then, my dear mind,
listen to me. Realize deep love for Śrī Svarūpa
Dāmodara, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, his older brother Śrī
Sanātana Gosvāmī and all their associates. Remember them
for all eternity and offer your obeisance to them in
adoration. My dear mind, please listen to me.



It is thus clear that attaining vraja-bhakti is only
possible by being under the guidance of the Vrajavāsīs.
This is the opinion of the ācāryas.



Someone who wants vraja-bhakti will hear and chant
according to his own specific mood. The following
mantra, for example, enables devotees of all moods to
relish the names especially dear to them. According to
their specific rasa, devotees will cherish one name in
particular within this mantra:



                           80
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017


śrī kṛṣṇa gopāla hare mukunda



govinda he nanda-kiśora kṛṣṇa



hā śrī yaśodā-tanaya prasīda



śrī vallavī-jīvana rādhikeśa



Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta (2.4.7)

Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Gopāla! Hari, Mukunda, Govinda, O youthful
son of Nanda! O darling son of Śrī Yaśodā, be pleased
with me. O life of the gopīs! O master of Śrī Rādhikā!



All five moods beginning from dāsya and culminating in
mādhurya are present in the holy names that make up this
mantra and the devotee will chant one particular name
according to his own eternal mood. The instruction is
that although it is essential to engage in śravaṇam,
kīrtanam and smaraṇam of Śrī Bhagavān, one should do so
in connection with the particular names, form, qualities
and pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in Vraja. Moreover, one should
perform these limbs of bhakti while following in the
footsteps of rūpānuga Vaiṣṇavas (followers of Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī). One will only attain Bāla-gopāla, Yaśodā’s
darling son in Vraja, by this process. He can never be
attained by performing the limbs of vaidhi-bhakti.

Śrī Satyavrata Muni rejects the results of vaidhi-
navadhā-bhakti. When the form of Bāla-gopāla manifests
in one’s heart, what else is there to attain? If one has
achieved the abode of Vṛndāvana and the association of
exalted rasika Vaiṣṇavas — the residents of Vraja —
one’s performance of śravaṇa and kīrtana in such
association will naturally result in the highest
attainment and all of one’s cherished desires will be
fulfilled.



Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura chanted three hundred thousand
holy names every day. Consequently, Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu Himself awarded him the title “Nāma-ācārya” —
the most exemplary teacher of chanting the holy name.
Although Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī and
Śrī Dāsa Gosvāmī also performed bhajana, it is not
written anywhere that they regularly chanted this many
holy names. Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura’s chanting and the
chanting of the Gosvāmīs each has their own unique
speciality.

In a similar sense, the descriptions of the love
exhibited by Lakṣmī-devī and the love exhibited by

                           81
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

Śrīmatī Rādhikā, by Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita, the crown jewel of
devotees and Mahāprabhu’s intimate associate, and by Śrī
Svarūpa Dāmodara respectively, each have their own
unique specialities. At the time of the Rathā-yātrā
festival, Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita tried to establish the glories
of Lakṣmī-devī’s love for the Lord, but in response Śrī
Svarūpa Dāmodara established the supremacy of the love
of his own svāmīni Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

It is also seen that when Pradyumna Miśra came to
Jagannātha Purī, Śrīman Mahāprabhu sent him to hear
kṛṣṇa-kathā from Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda, not from Śrīla
Haridāsa Ṭhākura even though he was present in Purī at
the time. Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura is the combined form of
Śrī Brahmā and Śrī Prahlāda and his chanting of the holy
name is absolutely pure. However, in any consideration,
the particular moods, or bhāvas, of the Vaiṣṇavas are
always the main factor in determining their exalted
positions. Everything depends on mood. Śrī Prahlāda
Mahārāja is a jñāni-bhakta, and can never ascend beyond
Vaikuṇṭha. Although those with a thirst for vraja-bhakti
offer their deepest respects to the bhajana performed by
Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura, they always choose to follow
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī and Śrīla
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī.

These topmost rasika Vrajavāsī Gosvāmīs always remained
absorbed in vraja-bhāva and, in a mood of intense
separation they bathed in the nectarean ocean of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s Vraja pastimes day and night. Our sole aim is to
perform bhajana under their guidance.

The following statement has been heard directly from the
mouths of some bygone worshipful Vaiṣṇavas:



bahiraṅga laiyā kare nāma-saṅkīrtana



antaraṅga laiyā kare premāsvādana



In public, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu would perform nāma-
saṅkīrtana, and privately, with His most intimate,
internal associates, He would relish vraja-prema.



In the Gambhirā, Śrīman Mahāprabhu would relish vraja-
rasa exclusively with Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara and Śrī Rāya
Rāmānanda. These two most intimate associates of His
would recite verses and songs according to His internal
moods:

ayi dīna-dayārdra nātha



he mathurā-nātha kadāvalokyase



                           82
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017


hṛdayaṁ tvad-aloka-kātaraṁ



dayita bhrāmyati kiṁ karomy aham



Śrīla Mādhavendra Purī




(quoted from Śrī Padyāvalī, 334)




O Master, Your heart always melts because of Your
compassion for the destitute! O Lord of Mathurā, when
will I see You again? O beloved Lord of My life, because
I am hankering so fervently to see You, My heart has
become intensely restless. What shall I do now?

he deva! he dayita! he bhuvanaika-bandho!

he kṛṣṇa! he capala! he karuṇaika-sindho!

he nātha! he ramaṇa! he nayanābhirāma!

hā hā kadā nu bhavitāsi padaṁ dṛśor me

Śrī Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta (40)



O my worshipful Lord, O dearest one, You are the only
friend of the entire universe. O Kṛṣṇa, O restless one,
You alone are the ocean of mercy. O my master, O my
lover, O charmer of my eyes! Alas, alas, when will I
behold Your lotus feet?



Only Śrī Rāya Rāmananda and Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara could
understand the deep meanings of these verses, and only
they could console Mahāprabhu when He was overwhelmed by
the sharp pangs of His intense mood of separation from
Kṛṣṇa. In his commentary, Śrila Sanātana Gosvāmīpāda has
certainly indicated the great importance and speciality
of the moods rāgānuga-bhakti over those of vaidhi-
bhakti.




The rūpānuga-sādhakas should remember that our Gosvāmīs
are all rādhā-pakṣīya (those who identify themselves as
being part of Śrī Rādhā’s intimate group). They are only
pleased when Śrī Kṛṣṇa becomes so absorbed in thinking

                             83
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

about Śrī Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī, Śrī Rādhā, that His darkish
complexion becomes golden like Hers.



rādhā-cintā-niveśena yasya kāntir-vilopitā

śrī kṛṣṇa caraṇaṁ vande rādhāliṅgita-vigraham

Śrī Rādhā-Vinoda-bihārī-tattvāṣṭakam (3)

When Śrīmatī Rādhikā was in māna, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, in the mood
of intense separation from Her, became so completely
immersed in thinking about Her that His own darkish
complexion became golden like Hers. I adore the lotus
feet of that most glorious form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.



The sādhaka should develop an intimate relationship with
his guru. He should have such profound affection for his
guru’s external, sādhaka form as well as for his
internal, siddha (perfected) form, that he becomes
intensely attached to him. His attachment should be
similar to the natural, worldly attachment one
ordinarily has for well-wishing relatives or close
friends. This type of natural relationship with one’s
guru is called laukika sat-bandhuvat sambandha. The
sādhaka should accept that it is his guru alone who can
fulfil all his most cherished spiritual desires. That is
the only way he can enter into rūpānuga-bhajana; there
is no other way.[xxiv]24

Śrīman Mahāprabhu instructs sādhakas who are inclined
towards this high class of bhajana:

tṛṇād api su-nīcena taror api sahiṣṇunā

amāninā māna-dena kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ

Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka (3)



In every respect the sādhaka should see himself as more
lowly and helpless than the most insignificant, trampled
blade of grass, and, becoming even more tolerant than a
tree, expecting no honour for himself, he should give
due respect to all. In this way the sādhaka should
always perform harināma-saṅkīrtana.




During His pastimes in Dvārakā, Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself
exemplified this instruction of Śrī Gaurahari. In one
incident in particular, His conduct exemplifies this
instruction. That incident goes like this:

Once, Durvāsā Ṛṣi arrived in Dvārakā. Durvāsā literally
means “he who subsists solely on the juice of durvā
grass”. At that time, Śrī Kṛṣṇa was sitting in His
palace. As soon as Durvāsā Ṛṣi arrived before Śrī Kṛṣṇa,

                           84
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

he exclaimed, “I am very hungry. Make arrangements to
feed me!” However, the moment his meal was ready, he
went away. At midnight, he suddenly returned and asked
for his meal, which was then served to him. When he had
eaten only a little of it, he turned to Śrī Kṛṣṇa and
said, “Smear this half-eaten sweet rice on Your body.”
Silently, Śrī Kṛṣṇa smeared the half-eaten sweet rice
over His entire body. He smeared the sweet rice
everywhere except on the soles of His feet. The
residents of Dvārakā looked on infuriated, but they
could not say a word.

“I want to ride around in a chariot pulled by Rukmiṇī,”
said Durvāsā Ṛṣi. After Śrī Kṛṣṇa made the arrangements
for this, Durvāsā Ṛṣi demanded that Śrī Kṛṣṇa become the
charioteer. Śrī Rukmiṇī dragged the chariot along until,
on the verge of fainting, she fell to the ground. Upon
seeing this, the residents of Dvārakā were unable to
tolerate any more, so Durvāsā Ṛṣi abruptly jumped from
the chariot and fled. Śrī Kṛṣṇa began searching for him
and calling out his name.

Durvāsā Ṛṣi again appeared. “O Dvārkādhīśa,” he said,
“even among the demigods, I have never seen anyone so
self-composed and tolerant. Surely You are the Lord and
benefactor of the brāhmaṇas (brahmaṇya-deva). I have
enacted this pastime just to establish Your honour
throughout the three worlds. O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, on my order
You smeared my remnant sweet rice all over Your body —
everywhere except for the soles of Your feet. Your whole
body has now become as strong as a thunderbolt, but the
soles of Your feet are weak, and susceptible to being
wounded.”

“O Rukmiṇī-devī,” he continued, “I am very pleased with
you. Seeing your devotion for the Supreme Lord and your
extreme tolerance, I am compelled to bless you.” Durvāsā
Ṛṣī then blessed her saying, “You will be the most
exalted of all the chaste ladies in the world and you
will have everlasting fortune.”

This pastime teaches the sādhaka the importance of
tolerance and patience. Even the slightest mistake in
one’s dealings can result in an offence to the Vaiṣṇavas
and thus cause bhakti to disappear forever.




Leaving aside all other benedictions, Śrī Satyavrata
Muni is praying that the Bāla-gopāla form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
remain manifest within his heart forever. He only wants
the form of Śrī Dāmodara to appear there.



~ THUS ENDS THE DIG-DARŚINĪ-VṚTTĪ ON THE FOURTH VERSE ~




Annotation by Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī

                           85
Damodarastakam.txt                                5/5/2017

Mahārāja

(from the footnote on page 81):



Verses 2.86 through 2.96 of Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta’s
Uttara-khaṇḍa are presented herein:



śrī pippalāyana uvāca

idaṁ mahat-padaṁ hitvā katham anyad yiyāsasi

kathaṁ vā bhramasi draṣṭuṁ dṛgbhyāṁ taṁ parameśvaram

The son of Ṛṣabhadeva, Śrī Pippalāyana Ṛṣi, said to
Gopa-kumāra: Why do you want to leave Tapoloka and go
elsewhere? The best of exalted yogīs, the unadulterated
celibates reside here. And why are you wandering to
various places trying to see the Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
who is beyond the grasp of the eyes and other senses,
with your eyes? (86)



samādhatsva manaḥ svīyaṁ tato drakṣyasi taṁ svataḥ

sarvatra bahir antaś ca sadā sākṣād iva sthitam

Fix your mind within meditation (samādhi) and you will
naturally see Bhagavān. Although Svayam Bhagavān, the
original Supreme Lord, resides everywhere, within and
without, by the potency of samādhi you will always see
Him as if He is directly present before you. (87)



paramātmā vāsudevaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ

nitāntaṁ śodhite citte sphuraty eṣa na cānyatāḥ

Vāsudeva is Paramātmā (the Supersoul), the presiding
deity of the heart. He only reveals Himself in a heart
that has been completely purified by viśuddha-sattva and
nowhere else. In other words, because He is sat-cit-
ānanda vigraha — the embodiment of pure existence,
cognizance and bliss — He does not manifest before the
eyes and other senses. (In other words, it is not
possible to comprehend Him with the external senses
because He manifests of His own accord and is
unlimited.) (88)



Śrī Gopa-kumāra could argue: “Perceiving Śrī Bhagavān in
the heart is only meditation. It cannot be considered
the same as taking darśana of Him with one’s eyes. To
see Him with my eyes, I must leave this Tapoloka and go
elsewhere.” In response, Śrī Pippalāyana Ṛṣi speaks the
following verse:



                           86
Damodarastakam.txt                                5/5/2017


tadānīñ ca mano-vṛtty-antarābhāvāt su-sidhyati

cetasā khalu yat sākṣāc-cakṣuṣā darśanaṁ hareḥ

Furthermore, direct vision of Śrī Hari with one’s eyes
(darśana) is in fact also accomplished by the mind
alone. When Śrī Bhagavān reveals Himself within
someone’s heart, their mind becomes completely absorbed
in Him and they can think of nothing else. Consequently,
they feel that they are perceiving Him directly with
their eyes. (89)



In case someone argues, “I agree with this, but it is
more pleasurable to see Śrī Bhagavān with one’s eyes,”
then Śrī Pippalāyana Ṛṣi makes the following assertion:



manaḥ sukhe ‘antar-bhavati sarvendriya sukhaṁ svataḥ

tad-vṛttiṣv api vāk-cakṣuḥ-śruty-ādīndriya-vṛttayaḥ

If joy arises in the mind, then it is not only the eyes
that are pleased, rather all the senses become pleased.
This is because the happiness of all the senses rests in
the happiness of the mind. Moreover the actions of
speech, eyes, ears and other senses rest in the actions
of the mind. In other words, unless the mind grasps
form, taste and other sense objects, the senses will
fail to independently experience them. (90)



mano-vṛttiṁ vinā sarvendriyāṇāṁ vṛttayo ‘phalāḥ

kṛtāpīhā’ kṛtaiva syād ātmany anulabdhitaḥ

Without the mind’s activity, the functions of all the
senses are futile. Even if the senses do contact their
respective objects of enjoyment, they have no effect.
This is because the embodied soul cannot experience
anything without the mind’s involvement. Therefore,
actual darśana of Śrī Bhagavān occurs within the heart
when its disposition is completely pure (viśuddha-citta-
vrttti visesa). Direct darśana of Him with the eyes is
not real darśana, because He is beyond the perception of
the senses. (91)



Although this may be so, we hear that Śrī Dhruva and Śrī
Prahlāda have seen Śrī Bhagavān with their eyes. What
was that? In response, Śrī Pippalāyana Ṛṣi gives the
following explanation:



kadācid bhakta-vātsalyād yāti ced dṛśyatāṁ dṛśoḥ

jñāna-draṣṭyaiva taj-jātam abhimānaḥ paraṁ dṛśoḥ


                           87
Damodarastakam.txt                                5/5/2017

It is true that Śrī Bhagavān possesses qualities such as
bhakta-vātsalya (affection for His devotees), and on
occasion He may make Himself visible to someone’s
external eyes, but such an incident is occasional and
not a standard occurrence or rule. It is really their
consciousness that enables this vision, not their
physical eyes. [This is because the senses, being
limited, cannot perceive something unlimited. Seeing Śrī
Bhagavān with the eyes is of such repute because] When
the living entity sees Śrī Bhagavān within the heart,
which has become resplendent with viśuddha-sattva
(supremely pure spiritual existence), he proudly assumes
that he has seen Śrī Bhagavān with his eyes. In reality,
however, he has not. (92)



tasya kāruṇya-śaktyā vā dṛśyo’stv api bahir-dṛśoḥ



tathāpi darśanānandaḥ sva-yonau jāyate hṛdi

[Someone may say that] By His mercy potency (kāruṇya-
śakti), Śrī Bhagavān sometimes becomes visible to the
living entity’s external eyes. Since He possesses all
potency, what is not possible for Him? Although this may
be so, the bliss of that darśana is found only in the
heart or the mind. (93)



anantarañ ca tatraiva vilasan paryavasyati



mana eva mahāpātraṁ tat-sukha-grahaṇocitam

Even after Śrī Bhagavān disappears, the bliss of His
darśana continues to play in one’s heart resulting in
the experience of many further visions there. Although
the eyes have seen the Lord, the vision culminates in
the mind. Furthermore, because darśana of Bhagavān is
achieved by the mind, which is the only receptacle for
experiencing the happiness of that vision, it is of no
use to attempt to see Him with one’s eyes. (94)



Someone may reason, “The eyes and other external senses
are limited, but the mind is also limited. Therefore, it
is impossible for the mind to see the absolutely
unrestricted form of Śrī Bhagavān.” Śrī Pippalāyana Ṛṣi
responds to this conclusion in the following verse:



tat-prasādodayād yāvat sukhaṁ vardheta mānasam

tāvad-vardhitum īśīta na cānyad bāhyam indriyam

Although the mind is limited, when it becomes pure or
when one receives the mercy of Śrī Bhagavān, the
happiness within the mind caused by His darśana

                           88
Damodarastakam.txt                               5/5/2017

increases more and more and the mind expands to
accommodate the magnitude of that joy. Only the subtle
mind can expand like this because it is not gross like
the external senses. (95)



In other words, the purified mind is so subtle that it
has the ability to become transparent and attain
resemblance with the soul. Then the mind can perceive
the form of Śrī Bhagavān. It is well known that
knowledge of an object only arises when the mind
perceives its form. This attribute is not applicable to
the other senses, because they are external, gross and
confined by material limitations.

Someone may further argue, “It is agreed that vision of
Śrī Bhagavān in the mind is superior to seeing Him with
the eyes, but the supreme joy of requesting benedictions
from Him and conversing with Him can only come when one
sees Him with one’s eyes.” Śrī Pippalāyana Ṛṣi replies
to this in the following verse:



antar-dhyānena dṛṣṭo’pi sākṣād-ḍṛṣṭa iva prabhuḥ

kṛpā-viśeṣaṁ tanute pramāṇaṁ tatra ‘padma-jaḥ’

When the mind becomes absorbed in uninterrupted
meditation, and Śrī Bhagavān becomes visible within the
heart, that vision is just like direct vision with the
eyes. Only then, the all-potent Lord becomes pleased and
bestows special mercy upon the jñānī-bhaktas in
different ways, like granting them boons. The evidence
of this is Śrī Bhagavān’s behaviour toward the first
created being, the lotus-born Lord Brahmā himself. (96)

When Lord Brahmā desired to create the universe full of
living beings, he first became absorbed in meditating on
Śrī Bhagavān. When he attained the final stage of
meditation, samādhi, the Lord granted him darśana.
Beholding Him in the ecstasy of his trance, Lord Brahmā
offered prostrated obeisances. Śrī Bhagavān personally
caught hold of his hand and said, “I am pleased with
your austerity; ask for a benediction.” When Brahmā then
requested a boon, he directly heard the catuḥ-śloki, or
four original verses of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, from Śrī
Bhagavān. This incident shows that after beholding Śrī
Bhagavān in the state of samādhi, one experiences His
most compassionate blessings like Him revealing His form
to the devotee, granting benedictions, conversing with
the devotee, touching the devotee, and so forth. For
detailed information on this, one may deliberate on
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Canto Two, Chapter Nine and Canto
Three, Chapter Eight.




Verse Five



                           89
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017



idaṁ te mukhāmbhojam avyakta nīlair

vṛtaṁ kuntalaiḥ snigdha raktaiś ca gopyā

muhuś cumbitaṁ bimba-raktādharaṁ me

manasy āvirāstām alaṁ lakṣa-lābhaiḥ



SYNONYMS



idam — this [supremely charming]; te — Yours; mukha-
ambhojam — lotus face; avyakta-nīlaiḥ — very dark blue;
vṛtam — encircled; kuntalaiḥ — by curls of hair; snigdha
— soft; raktaiḥ — reddened; ca — and; gopyā — by Śrī
Yaśodā Gopī; muhuḥ — repeatedly; cumbitam — kissed;
bimba-rakta — red like bimba fruit; adharam — lips; me —
my; manasi — in the mind [or the heart which has been
purified by viśuddha-sattva]; āvirāstām — may [that
face] manifest; alam — I have no use for; lakṣa-lābhaiḥ
— millions of other attainments.

TRANSLATION



O Deva, Your lotus-like face, encircled by soft,
blackish-blue curly locks of hair that have a reddish
glow, is repeatedly kissed by the gopī Śrī Yaśodā. May
Your supremely charming lotus face with lips like red
bimba-fruit, always remain manifest in my heart. I do
not care about millions of other attainments.



Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā

tatra ca tava śrī-mukhaṁ parama-manoharaṁ viśeṣeṇa
didṛkṣe, ityāha — idam iti. kadācit dhyāne’nubhūyamānam-
anirvacanīya-saundaryādikaṁ, tadeva nirdiśati — mukham
evāmbhojaṁ praphulla-kamalākaratva-nikhila-santāpa-
hāritva-paramānanda-rasavattvādinā, tanme manasi
muhurāvirāstām.

kathambhūtaṁ? atyanta-nīlaiḥ parama-śyāmalaiḥ,
snigdhaiśca raktaiśca kuntalaiḥ keśairalakairvā vṛtaṁ
kamalaṁ bhramarairivopariveṣṭitam. gopyā śrī-yaśodayā,
śrī-rādhayā vā cumbitaṁ, muhurityasyātrāpi sambandhaḥ,
yathā pāṭha-kramam-atraiva sambandhaḥ; tataśca tayā
mahā-dhanyayā muhuḥ cumbitam api mama manasi
sakṛdapyāvirāstām-ityarthaḥ.

yadvā, sadeti pūrva-gatasyātrāpyartha-balāt anvaya eva
syāt.

bimba-vad-raktau adharau yasmin tat, tataśca lakṣa-
lābhaiḥ anyairlakṣa-saṅkhyairlabdhairapi [alaṁ]
prayojanaṁ nāstītyarthaḥ. likhitārtham evaitat.


                           90
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

iti śrī-dāmodarāṣṭake pañcama-śloke śrī-sanātana
gosvāmi-kṛtā dig-darśinī-nāmnī ṭīkā samāptā



~ THUS ENDS THE DIG-DARśINī ṭīKā ON THE FIFTH VERSE ~

Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā Bhāvanuvāda

[In the previous verse, Śrī Satyavrata Muni prayed for
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s whole form as Bāla-gopāla in Vṛndāvana to
forever manifest in his heart. In this verse, he prays:]
“Among all the limbs of Your worshipful form (Śrī
Vigraha) I especially yearn to behold Your supremely
enchanting lotus face.” Śrī Satyavrata Muni speaks this
verse beginning with idaṁ te in order to convey his
desire to Śrī Bhagavān. Once, in his meditation, Śrī
Satyavrata Muni had a momentary glimpse, or sphūrti, of
the indescribable beauty of His worshipful Lord’s lotus
face. Now he expresses his experience in words by
saying, “mukhāmbhojaṁ — Your face is just like a lotus
flower. In fact Your face is the original source of the
beauty found in the fully bloomed lotus flower. It
soothes all suffering and it is permeated by the sweet
nectar of supreme bliss.” Then, he prays, “me manasi
muhur āvirāstām — May that lotus face manifest within my
heart again and again.”

What is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus face like? Śrī Satyavrata Muni
continues, “Your lotus face is encircled by curls of
extremely black, soft hair that have a reddish lustre.
The word vṛtam suggests “Those curly locks seem like
bumblebees around the lotus flower of Your face.” He
continues, “Your lotus face is kissed again and again by
a gopī.” The gopī mentioned here can be conceived of as
either Śrī Yaśodā or Śrī Rādhā. Although the word muhuḥ,
“again and again”, can be applied to me manasi āvirāstām
as before, it can also be applied here to gopyā. Thus it
can be used twice: once regarding the gopī’s kisses
(gopyā muhuḥ cumbitam) and once regarding the sage’s
vision of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus face (me manasi muhur
āvirāstām). Also, if we restrict the use of muhuḥ to
gopyā based on its position within the verse, then a
third sense is derived: “Your lotus face is kissed again
and again by extremely fortunate Śrī Yaśodā, or by Śrī
Rādhā Gopī. May that lotus face manifest in my heart —
even if I can only see it one time.”

Alternatively, the phrase me manasy āvirāstām is a
partial repetition of the phrase sadā me manasy
āvirāstām from the pre-vious verse. Therefore, the word
sadā (always) can also be applied here to derive the
meaning: “May the vision of Your lotus face being kissed
again and again by Śrī Yaśodā or by Śrī Rādhā remain
manifest in my heart forever.”

Śrī Satyavrata Muni describes another beautiful feature
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus face with the words bimba-vat
raktādharam, “May Your lotus face, with lips like red
bimba-fruit, remain visible in my heart forever. Then my
life will be successful.” He ends the verse with lakṣa-
lābhaiḥ, “Besides this, millions and millions of other
attainments are of no importance to me.” The
reconciliation of Śrī Satyavrata Muni’s rejection of

                           91
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

millions of other attainments is the same as the one
presented in the previous verse.



~ THUS ENDS THE ENGLISH RENDITION OF

THE DIG-DARŚINĪ-ṬĪKĀ ON THE FIFTH VERSE ~



Dig-darśinī-vṛtti

In the previous verse, it was as though Śrī Bhagavān had
become pleased by Śrī Satyavrata Muni’s devotional
sentiments and said, “O sage, I am satisfied with you.
Ask a benediction from Me.” In response, Śrī Satyavrata
Muni prayed: “O Prabhu, O Master of all those who grant
benedictions, You are the most exalted. There is no
limit to the benedictions You can grant. But, my dear
Lord, none of those benedictions are of any use to me.”

In the present verse, Śrī Satyavrata Muni prays “idaṁ te
mukhāmbhojam — All I want is to see Your exquisitely
beautiful lotus face in my heart again and again.” He is
remembering the indescribable beauty of Śrī Bhagavān’s
lotus face in His form as Bāla-gopāla. Śrī Satyavrata
Muni only had a glimpse of that form within his heart
(sphūrti) during his meditation. What was it like? At
first, the sage uses the word avyakta. “It is beyond the
grasp of the material mind or material words.” Further
reflecting on what he saw in his sphūrti, he says, “His
lotus face is encircled (āvṛtam) by dark-black curls of
hair, which have a soft red glow that makes them look
like bumblebees. Mother Yaśodā and the gopīs kiss that
lotus face again and again.”

In the previous verse, Śrī Satyavrata Muni prayed to see
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s Bāla-gopāla form within his heart, but now
he is praying specifically to see His beautiful lotus
face, which he yearns to kiss. He wonders, “I want to
achieve something so rare. Will this hope of mine ever
be fulfilled?” The present verse marks an escalation of
the intense longing developing within Śrī Satyavrata
Muni’s heart.




At first, by the power of sādhu-saṅga, an inclination to
serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa enters the heart. When one’s anarthas
are gradually driven away by performing bhajana in
sādhu-saṅga, the inclination to serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa will
continue to increase and one’s consciousness will
blossom more and more through the progressive stages of
love of God, beginning from niṣṭha, then through ruci,
āsakti and bhāva and finally prema.

However, a profound concept must be considered regarding
each soul’s ultimate development of love for Kṛṣṇa. If
the intrinsic and eternal inclination of a particular
soul is to dedicate himself to Śrī Bhagavān in the mood
of a servant (dāsya-rasa), then his deepest inner

                           92
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

hankerings will only be fulfilled by that mode of
service. His service tendency will never proceed beyond
dāsya-rasa.

Śrī Satyavrata Muni’s prayers reveal that his mood is
destined to develop beyond dāsya-rasa, and that is why
this verse expresses increasing longing within his
heart. We can understand his situation by considering
the history of Gopa-kumāra. Even when Gopa-kumāra had
attained residence in Vaikuṇṭha, his inner hankering was
not satisfied. It was not even satisfied when he reached
Ayodhyā or Dvārakā within Vaikuṇṭha. Finally he reached
Goloka Vṛndāvana and when he experienced loving
exchanges with Kṛṣṇa in the mood of friendship (sakhya-
bhāva) all his desires were at last fulfilled. His mood
never went any further. Similarly Śrī Satyavrata Muni’s
longing is advancing through progressive levels of
bhakti.

Each sādhaka will relish the sweetness of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
pastimes according to his own relationship (sambandha)
with Him and also according to his qualification
(adhikāra). Thus, in the description of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
lotus face being kissed again and again, Śrīla Sanātana
Gosvāmī explains that the word gopyā can refer to either
Mother Yaśodā or Śrī Rādhikā.

The phenomenon of relishing Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes
according to one’s own mood is illustrated in the
following example. Once, upon seeing scratch marks on
her son’s limbs, Mother Yaśodā exclaimed, “Oh, where did
all these scratches come from?” Kuṇḍalatā, who was
standing nearby, heard this and commented, “Your son
performs rāsa at night. These marks are from that.”

Rāsa-līlā is the prominent pastime in mādhurya-rasa
(conjugal love), so how could Mother Yaśodā be privy to
this amorous pastime? The answer is that Mother Yaśodā
was simply inquiring like an ordi-nary mother who was
worried about the scratches on her son. Still,

she is not necessarily unaware that her son is in fact
performing rāsa-līlā. Vātsalya-rasa assists and
nourishes mādhurya-rasa. Neverthe-less, as soon as
Mother Yaśodā heard Kuṇḍalatā’s reply, she at once said,
“My darling boy is still breast-feeding. He does not
even have His milk teeth! He can barely speak; He just
talks in broken, childish language. But you are saying
He engages in amorous affairs at night!? My dear young
lady, you do not know. I will tell you how He got these
marks. When He takes the cows into the forest to graze,
He loses Himself in play with the other boys. Sometimes,
while chasing stray calves, He runs through thorny
bushes. He is so absorbed in playing at such times that
He is not even aware that He is being scratched. That is
where these marks actually come from.”




The devotee will hanker for a particular rasa according
to his own eternal mood. Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī presents
Śrī Satyavrata Muni as a perfect example of this.

                           93
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

According to his own mood, Śrī Satyavrata Muni is trying
to awaken the bhāva of one of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s eternal
rāgātmika-jana within his own heart by performing
sādhana-bhajana under their guidance.

Following in the footsteps of Śrī Satyavrata Muni, a
sādhaka should think, “If earrings, which are only gold,
can kiss the cheeks of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, then why can’t I?
Certainly, I will also do this.” With this yearning, he
should endeavour to attain his goal with the conviction
that he does not need any other benediction. Such
endeavour is called abhidheya. When he at last attains
his own eternal, constitutional mood of service in one
of the five rasas, then he will attain the ultimate
goal, the stage of prayojana.

Whose prema is stronger? Mother Yaśodā’s prema for her
darling son is certainly stronger than His prema for
her. Her prema can control Kṛṣṇa and bind Him. If any
devotee hears the pastimes of Mother Yaśodā binding
Kṛṣṇa with her prema and of her kissing His lotus face
again and again, a longing will enter his heart: “If I
follow in the footsteps of Mother Yaśodā, perhaps I will
also be able to kiss the lotus face of her darling boy.”

But who kisses Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s face the most? More than
anyone else, Śrīmatī Rādhikā drinks the nectar of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s lotus face by kissing it again and again.

At the beginning of this aṣṭakam, Śrī Satyavrata Muni
was praying in the mood of dāsya-rasa. Now, in this
verse, his prayers are imbued with a desire to enter the
mood of vātsalya-rasa: “May that supremely charming
lotus face, which is kissed again and again by Mother
Yaśodā, manifest within my heart forever.” In the same
way, every sādhaka will initially consider himself to be
the servant of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, in a general sense. However,
by performing intimate service and by acquiring Śrī
Bhagavān’s mercy, he will gradually progress and a deep
longing to perform service under the guidance of one of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s eternal associates (anugatya-mayī sevā) will
begin to manifest within his heart.




Just like the omniscient Supersoul present in the core
of everyone’s heart, the guru has the special
characteristic of perfectly knowing our heart. He knows
the eternal constitutional mood of our soul — our
eternal relationship with Bhagavān — and accordingly, he
connects us with Him. Then, by supplying the water of
hearing, chanting and remembering, he nourishes that
relationship and cuts down anything that obstructs that
nourishment with the sharp axe of his words. He does
this so expertly that the sādhaka barely notices, but
all the while the needful is accomplished.

This is what the bona fide guru and genuine Vaiṣṇavas
do. They do not have bodies of flesh and bone, which are
subject to change, and which may die at any moment. They
are the eternal associates of the most merciful
incarnation of Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who

                           94
Damodarastakam.txt                               5/5/2017

descended to deliver the fallen souls in this age of
Kali. Guru and Vaiṣṇavas are among the intimate
companions of the Divine Couple, Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. The
way Śrī Bhagavān extends His loving mercy to the souls
bound by māyā is by sending associates like these in the
form of Vaiṣṇavas.




Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lips have been compared to red bimba-fruits
— bimba-rakta-adharam. Although ripened bimba-fruit is
extremely soft and beautiful, in reality, it is far
excelled by the softness and beauty of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lips.
Still, even though Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lips are so beautiful, He
constantly hankers to drink the nectar of the lips of
His beloved gopīs. Then what must their lips be like?
The most clear example of how Śrī Kṛṣṇa hankers to drink
the nectar of the gopīs’ lips is found in Bhramara-gīta,
in the conversation between Śrīmatī Rādhikā and a
bumblebee:



sakṛd adhara-sudhāṁ svāṁ mohinīṁ pāyayitvā

sumanasa iva sadyas tatyaje ‘smān bhavādṛk

paricarati kathaṁ tat-pāda-padmaṁ nu padmā

hy api bata hṛta-cetā hy uttamaḥ-śloka-jalpaiḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.47.13)

Just as you abandon a flower after drinking its honey,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa completely bewildered us by making us drink
the nectar of His lips only once and then suddenly
abandoned us. Why does Goddess Padma (Lakṣmī-devī), who
Herself is just like a lotus flower, serve His lotus
feet? It seems that Her mind has certainly been stolen
by His cunning words. However, we are not naive like
Lakṣmī-devī.



Śrīmati Rādhikā spoke these words to the bumblebee in
intense separation from Kṛṣṇa.

“O bumblebee, messenger of Śrī Kṛṣṇa,” she said, “your
master knew that when He would leave us in the future to
go to Mathurā and elsewhere, we, the young damsels of
Vraja, would die from being separated from Him. He likes
to see us writhing in the pain of separation so much
that He forcefully made us drink the nectar of His lips
just once, for only a few moments. He knew that death
cannot come to anyone who drinks that nectar, and knew
that later, unable to die from the pain of separation,
we would simply writhe in agony.”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s eyes, His eyebrows, His smile and His lips
are the sharp arrows of Cupid. Once someone has seen
them, he will remain wounded forever. Devotees who
cultivate rāgānuga-bhakti (bhakti following in the wake

                           95
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

of rāgātmikā-bhakti) or who are rūpānuga (followers of
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī) remember all these moods of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā in separation as they perform sādhana, and thus
lose all awareness of their bodies, their homes and so
on.

Śrī Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī continued to angrily lament to the
bumblebee as She burned in the blazing fire of
separation:



yad-anucarita-līlā-karṇa-pīyūṣa-vipruṭ-

sakṛd-adana-vidhūta-dvandva-dharmā vinaṣṭāḥ

sapadi gṛha-kuṭumbaṁ dīnam utsṛjya dīnā

bahava iha vihaṅgā bhikṣu-caryāṁ caranti

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.47.18)

O messenger, descriptions of your master’s pastimes are
exactly like nectar. If someone accepts even one drop of
that nectar through his ears, even once, then his sense
of obligation to worldly dualities is utterly ruined.
Because of that nectar, many people have quit their
homes and families leaving them utterly miserable only
to become miserable themselves. They live as mendicant
beggars wandering through these forests of Vraja like
birds without shelter.



As if Śrī Rādhikā heard the bumblebee ask for an example
of this, she said, “We are the unavoidable proof that
this is true, there is no need to look for evidence
anywhere else. Simply by hearing about His pastimes we
have become homeless.”

What becomes of such a miserable, homeless person? In
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.40) it is described:

evaṁ-vrataḥ sva-priya-nāma-kīrtyā



jātānurāgo druta-citta uccaiḥ

hasaty atho roditi rauti gāyaty

unmāda-van nṛtyati loka-bāhyaḥ



Saintly people who have firmly devoted themselves to
serving Śrī Bhagavān with deep love, constantly engage
in kīrtana of their most beloved names of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
When deep attachment (anurāga) arises in them, their
hearts thoroughly melt and they become mad in love of
God. They laugh and cry loudly. Agitated by love, they
sing about their Lord in sweet voices, and, just like
madmen without a trace of shyness, they dance and sing
unaffected by the opinions of ordinary people.

                           96
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017




Even Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s flute, a dry piece of bamboo, drives
the three worlds mad when it is touched by the powerful
nectar of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lips. However, the gopīs regard
the flute with spite as if it were their co-wife.



gopyaḥ kim ācarad ayaṁ kuśalaṁ sma veṇur

dāmodarādhara-sudhām api gopikānām

bhuṅkte svayaṁ yad avaśiṣṭa-rasaṁ hradinyo

hṛṣyat-tvaco ‘śru mumucus taravo yathāryaḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.21.9)

O dear sakhīs! We cannot imagine what sort of sādhana
and bhajana the flute must have performed in previous
births that in our very presence it is drinking the
nectar of Dāmodara’s lips, which rightfully belongs to
us alone. It is not even sparing a drop of that rasa for
us. On the pretext of their blossoming lotus flowers,
the rivers, which have nourished the flute with their
water (rasa), are exhibiting symptoms of ecstatic
horripilation. The trees, who are forefathers of the
flute, are equal to the best of men. Seeing their
descendant filled with such intense love for the Lord,
they have become overjoyed, and tears of ecstasy are
flowing from their eyes.




The strength to attain these exalted feelings will enter
our hearts by reciting the prayers of the exalted
ācāryas in our guru-varga headed by Śrī Rūpa and Śrī
Raghunātha. Then, step by step we will make progress on
the path of bhakti. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī prays:



rādhe! jaya jaya mādhava-dayite



gokula-taruṇī-maṇḍala mahite



O Rādhā! All glories to You, all glories to You, the
most beloved of Mādhava. You are the most celebrated
among all the young damsels of Gokula. (1)



dāmodara-rati-vardhana-veśe




                              97
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

hari niṣkuṭa-vṛndā-vipineśe



The beautiful way You dress causes Śrī Dāmodara’s
attachment to You to swell. You are the presiding
Goddess of Śrī Hari’s pleasure groves in the forests of
Vṛndāvana. (2)



vṛṣabhānu-dadhi-nava-śaśīlekhe



lalita-sakhi-guṇa ramita viśākhe



From the milk ocean of Śrī Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja’s
affection, You have arisen like a beautiful young moon.
O dear friend of Lalitā, by Your qualities of
playfulness and friendship You have enchanted the heart
of Your intimate sakhī, Viśākhā. (3)



karuṇāṁ kuru mayi karuṇā-bharite



sanaka-sanātana--varṇita-carite



You are so full of mercy that great yogīs and
brahmacārīs like Śrī Sanaka Kumāra and Sanātana Kumāra
are always engaged in describing Your exalted nature, so
please be merciful to me! (4)



hā devi! kāku-bhara gad-gadayādya vācā

yāce nipatya bhuvi daṇḍa-vad udbhaṭārttiḥ

asya prasādam abudhasya janasya kṛtvā

gāndharvike! nija-gaṇe gaṇanāṁ vidhehi

Śrī Gāndharvā-samprārthanāṣṭakam (2)

O Devī Gāndharvikā, I am suffering greatly. I have
fallen at your feet and I am lying on the ground in
front of you just like a stick. With a choked voice I am
begging You, please be merciful to this fool and count
me as one of Your own.



As we sing these verses, we should meditate on our guru-
varga and consider, “It is you who are actually
submitting these prayers, it is you who are singing
them. Without your mercy I will never be qualified to

                              98
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

make such prayers.” It is only by their mercy that we
can follow in their footsteps and pray like this and
thus gradually attain loving service to the Divine
Couple in Vraja.




There are two modes of meditation: mantramayī upāsanā
and svārasikī upāsanā. When one deliberately
concentrates on remembering only one particular pastime
while performing bhajana, it is called mantramayī
upāsanā. But when Śrī Bhagavān’s pastimes manifest in
one’s heart spontaneously, one after another, it is
called svārasikī upāsanā. When performing bhajana in
Vraja, only svārasikī upāsanā is present. In Vraja,
wherever the sādhaka goes he has sphūrtis (momentary
visions) of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s eternally new pastimes.

Beholding new sphūrtis everywhere he looks he exclaims,
“Oh, Śrī Kṛṣṇa performed this pastime here.” He then
beholds another sphūrti: “And He performed that pastime
over there!” In an unbroken chain, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes
are stirred up in his heart. Svārasikī upāsanā is called
rāgānugā or lobhamayī-bhakti (bhakti imbued with intense
hankering). All our guru-varga are immersed solely in
this mode of meditation.




Śrī Satyavrata Muni has prayed alam-lakṣa-lābhaiḥ,
“Millions of other attainments are of no use to me.” His
prayers till now reflect the mood of someone absorbed in
vātsalya-rasa, but we should not mistake these words to
mean he rejects the attainment of something higher than
vātsalya-prema. Fortunately, however, if one obtains the
association of one of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s companions, her
mood will enter his heart and cause him to implore Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, “O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, if You are pleased with me and want
to give me something” and then he will submit this
prayer:



śyāmasundara śikhaṇḍa śekhara



smera---hāsa muralī-manohara



rādhikā-rasika māṁ kṛpā-nidhe



sva-priyā-caraṇa-kiṅkarīṁ kuru



(Śrī Viṭṭhalācārya)

                           99
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017


O Śyāmasundara, O beautiful dark boy with a peacock-
feather crown, Your playful smile and Your flute
completely bewilder our minds. You are expert at tasting
the nectar of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s love, and You are an
ocean of mercy. Please make me a maidservant of Your
beloved.



When Śrī Kṛṣṇa is truly satisfied, He considers it His
own success to bestow this benediction upon the sādhakas
and sādhikās. This is how the process of rūpānuga-
bhajana gradually unfolds. We pray that the fruit of our
bhajana will be that He gives us this topmost
benediction.



~ THUS ENDS THE DIG-DARŚINĪ-VṚTTĪ ON THE FIFTH VERSE ~




Verse Six




namo deva dāmodarānanta viṣṇo

prasīda prabho duḥkha-jālābdhi-magnam

kṛpā-dṛṣṭi-vṛṣṭyāti-dīnaṁ batānu

gṛhāṇeśa mām ajñam edhy akṣi-dṛśyaḥ



SYNONYMS



namaḥ — respectful obeisance; deva — He who has a divine
form; dāmodara — O bhakta-vatsala (You who are
affectionate to Your devotees) Śrī Dāmodara; ananta — O
Lord of inconceivable magnificent potencies; viṣṇo — O
all-pervasive Lord; prasīda — be pleased; prabho — O my
Master; duḥkha — sufferings ; jāla — a network; abdhi —
in an ocean; magnam — drowning; kṛpā-dṛṣṭi — of Your
compassionate glances; vṛṣṭyā — by the rain; atidīnam —
extremely miserable; bata — alas!; anugṛhāṇa — treat me
with kindness or enliven me by delivering me; īśa — O
supremely independent controller; mām — me; ajñam —
ignorant; edhi — please become; akṣi — my eyes; dṛśyaḥ —
visible.



TRANSLATION




                          100
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

O Deva, O You who have a divine form, I offer my
respectful obei-sances to You. O You who are bhakta-
vatsala, affectionate to Your devotees! Śrī Dāmodara, O
Ananta, Lord of inconceivably magnificent potencies! O
all-pervasive Viṣṇu, O Prabhu, my Master, be pleased
with me. I am drowning in an ocean of incessant worldly
miseries. Alas, I am extremely miserable and I do not
know what to do. O Īśa, supremely independent
controller, please deliver me by the nectarean shower of
Your merciful glance and enliven me by becoming directly
visible to my eyes.



Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā

evaṁ stuti-prabhāvāt sadyaḥ samuditena prema-viśeṣeṇa
sākṣād-didṛkṣamānas tatra caikaṁ nāma-saṅkīrtanam eva
parama-sādhanaṁ — manyamānas tathaiva sakātaryaṁ
prārthayate — nama iti. tubhyam — ity adhyāhāryam eva,
tac ca bhaya-gauravādinā prema-vaikalyena vā sākṣān na
prayuktam.

he prabho! — he mad-īśvara! prasīda — prasādam evāha,
duḥkhaṁ — sāṁsārikaṁ tvad-darśana-jaṁ vā, tasya jālaṁ —
paramparā, tad evābdhiḥ ānanty-ādinā, tasmin-magnaṁ māṁ,
ataeva ati-dīnaṁ — paramārttaṁ.

yad vā — tatra sat-sahāya-sādhanādi-hīnatvāt
paramākiñcanaṁ. yad vā — mumūrṣuṁ jīvan mṛtaṁ vā, tatra
cājñaṁ tat-pratikārādy-anabhijñaṁ.

kṛpayā dṛṣṭir nirīkṣaṇaṁ, tasya vṛṣṭyā — paramparayā
kṛpā-dṛṣṭi-rūpāmṛta-vṛṣṭyā vā, anugṛhāṇa — samuddhṛtya
jīvayety arthaḥ. tad evābhivyāñjayati. akṣi-dṛśyo — mal-
locana-gocavaḥ, edhi — bhava.

evaṁ prārthanā-krameṇa prārthanaṁ kṛtaṁ, prārthyasya
parama-daurlabhyena sahasā prāg eva nirdeśārṇahatvāt.
antar-darśanāt sākṣād-darśana-mahātmyañ ca śrī-
bhagavat-pārṣadaiḥ sanyāyam uktaṁ śrī bṛhad-
bhāgavatāmṛtottara-khaṇḍato [3.179—182] viśeṣato jñeyam.

tatra deva — he divya-rūpeti, didṛkṣāyāṁ hetuḥ.
dāmodareti — bhakta-vātsalya-viśeṣeṇākṣi-darśana-
yogyatāyāṁ. ato nānto yasmād ity ananteti kṛpā-dṛṣṭy-
anugrahaṇe. prabho! — he acintyānantādbhuta-mahā-śakti-
yukteti, indriyāgrāhyasyāpy akṣi-dṛśyatā-sambhāvanayām.
īśa! — he parama-svatantreti, ayogyaṁ prati
tādṛśānugraha-karaṇe kasyacid anapekṣatāyāṁ jñeyaḥ.
kiñca — viṣṇo! — he sarva-vyāpaka! yad vā — he
vṛndāvana-nikuñja-kuharādi-praveśa-śīla! — iti cākṣi-
dṛśyatārthaṁ dūrāgamana-śramādikaṁ nāstīti.

athavā, he ananta! — aparichinna! viṣṇo! — sarva-vyāpin!
tathāpi he dāmodarety evaṁ parama-vātsalya-viśeṣeṇa
tavākṛtaṁ kim api nāstīti dhvanitam. anyat samānam ity
eṣā dik.



~ THUS ENDS THE DIG-DARśINī ṭīKā ON THE SIXTH VERSE ~



                          101
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017




Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā Bhāvanuvāda

By the power of his prayers, an uncommon type of prema
instantly arose within Śrī Satyavrata Muni’s heart and
he now expresses his intense longing to see Śrī Bhagavān
directly. Within his mind, he concluded that the best
means to attain direct darśana of Śrī Bhagavān is indeed
śrī nāma-saṅkīrtana and therefore, in this verse
beginning with namo deva, he submits himself to his Lord
through fervent prayers in the form of śrī nāma-
saṅkīrtana.

One should understand that even though the sage intended
to use the word tubhyam (unto You) after the word namaḥ
to complete the grammatical construction, he left it out
either because of apprehension, reverence, or because he
simply lost control of himself due to the prema arising
within his heart. Consequently, he was unable to address
Śrī Bhagavān so directly.

Śrī Satyavrata Muni addresses his Lord, “O Prabhu, my
Master! O Īśvara, O supreme controller!” He next says
prasīda, “be pleased with me”. In other words, he
explains what gracious favour he seeks from his Lord, if
his Lord is pleased with him (prasīda). The reason he
seeks the favour of his Lord is described in the words
duḥkha-jālābdhi-magnam. Śrī Satyavrata Muni says, “I am
drowning (magna) in an unbroken series (jāla) of
miseries (duḥkha).” The miseries, or duḥkha, described
here may be considered either the miseries born of
material existence in the form of repeated birth and
death or else the suffering he feels by not being able
to see his Lord. Such miseries are boundless and are
therefore compared to an ocean (abdhi). He says ait-
dīnam, “Tormented by such incessant misery, I am
suffering greatly.” [“Therefore be pleased with me.”]

[Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī now illuminates further meanings
of ati-dīnam:] Śrī Satyavrata Muni also indicates,
“Because I am deprived of the support of saintly
association, I cannot perform sādhana-bhajana. I
therefore remain extremely wretched and destitute.” Or,
“Although I am somehow still alive, I am nearly dead
because of my intense hankering to see You. I have no
idea how to alleviate such incessant suffering.”

“Therefore,” he continues, “kṛpā-dṛṣṭi — please cast
upon me Your uninterrupted compassionate glance, which
is like a downpour (vṛṣṭyā) of nectar. In this way,
anugṛhāṇa — revive me by completely delivering me from
this ocean of misery.”

With the words edhi akṣi-dṛśyaḥ, the sage explains
exactly what gracious favour he seeks from his master.
He prays, “Please become directly visible to my eyes.”

Since there is nothing more rarely achieved than direct
darśana of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, it would not have been appropriate
for Śrī Satyavrata Muni to request it at the very
beginning of his prayers. This is the reason for the
sequence of his prayers.[xxv]25

                          102
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017


[Regarding direct darśana] With sound logic, Śrī
Bhagavān’s associates have personally established how
direct vision of Bhagavān is more glorious than vision
of Him within the heart. The excellence of this goal is
explained in Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta’s Uttara-khaṇḍa
(3.179—182)[xxvi]26.

At the beginning of this stanza, Śrī Satyavrata Muni
addresses the Lord with various names, beginning with
the name Deva. Now the sage’s inner intention for using
these addresses is revealed:

Deva — “O You whose form is divine, O most beautiful
Lord.” The sage addresses Śrī Bhagavān in this way with
the desire to see Him directly.



Dāmodara — “O Bhagavān, You are known by the name
Dāmodara because of Your exceptional quality of bhakta-
vātsalyatā, deep affec-tion for Your devotees. Because
of this special quality, You agreed to be bound around
Your waist by Your mother, and by this same quality You
appear before the eyes of Your devotees and let them
meet You face to face.” [Śrī Satyavrata Muni therefore
considers, “Because of His bhakta-vātsalyatā, I too will
be able to directly see Him with my own eyes.”]

Ananta — “O unlimited, endless Lord,” or, “O Lord, there
is no end or limit to Your mercy.” The sage addresses
Śrī Bhagavān with this name because he desires to attain
His Lord’s favour in the form of His merciful glance.

Prabhu — “O Lord, Your inconceivable potencies are
unlimited, astonishing and immensely powerful.” By
addressing the Lord thus, the sage implies, “O Lord, by
the influence of Your inconceivable potency, You can
become visible to my eyes, even though You are beyond
the grasp of the senses.”

Īśa — “O supremely independent controller.” By this, the
sage implies, “You are the absolutely independent
controller so You never rely on anyone or anything to
exhibit mercy, even to such an unqualified person as
me.”

Viṣṇu — “O all-pervasive One.” Or, “O You who are always
inclined to enter the secluded caves and groves of
Vṛndāvana.” Here the sage implies, “You are omnipresent
so You do not have to undergo the diffi-culty of
travelling a long distance to appear directly before my
eyes.”

[Next, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī reveals another meaning
implied by these names.] The sage says, “Although You
are ananta (boundless) and viṣṇu (all-pervading) You are
also dāmodara — You willingly became bound around Your
waist by Your devotee.” The meaning is: “out of extreme
affection for Your devotees, there is nothing You will
not do.” Thus the sage has indicated that this special
meaning is present when the names Ananta, Viṣṇu and
Dāmodara are considered together. The meanings of the
remaining names are the same as before.

                          103
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017




~ THUS ENDS THE ENGLISH RENDITION OF

THE DIG-DARŚINĪ-ṬĪKĀ ON THE SIXTH VERSE ~

Dig-darśinī-vṛtti

In the fourth verse, Śrī Satyavrata Muni refused to
accept the results of performing vaidhi-bhakti, but in
this verse, he expresses that he desires to attain the
result of rāgānuga-bhakti: vraja-prema. He desires
nothing else.

Those in the line of Śrīman Mahāprabhu, and especially
those who aspire for the type of prema conceived by
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī (rūpānuga bhaktas) must have this
same kind of determination. This determination of the
bhakta is exactly like that of the cātaka bird. The only
water the cātaka bird accepts is the rainwater that
falls when the svāti-nakṣatra constellation is prominent
in the night sky. The cātaka bird thinks, “I do not care
if I die of thirst. I do not even care if I am struck by
a thunderbolt! I will only drink the water falling from
the svāti-nakṣatra.”

The devotee should think, “I only want deep love for Śrī
Rādhā- Kṛṣṇa. I do not want anything else. I especially
yearn to become the maidservant of Śrī Rādhā. May I
serve Her under the guidance of Her intimate friends —
Her prāṇa-sakhīs and priya-narma-sakhīs[xxvii]27 — and
may I serve Her beloved Śrī Kṛṣṇa under Her direction. I
only want this. I do not need any other benediction.”




As streaks of kājjala (black cosmetic ointment) ran down
His face along with His tears, Kṛṣṇa breathed heavily
out of fear of His mother. On that day, Śrī Yaśodā bound
Śrī Kṛṣṇa by her motherly affection. The Lord of all
lords, the possessor of all potencies, He who makes the
whole universe tremble by the slightest movement of His
eyebrows, on that day, trembled out of fear of His
mother. He



cried, “Maiyā, don’t hit Me!” This is the nature of the
immaculate and sweet vātsalya-prema of Vraja.

In his meditation Śrī Satyavrata Muni saw how Mother
Yaśodā was kissing Kṛṣṇa’s cheeks, how His earrings were
doing the same, and especially how the gopīs were
kissing Kṛṣṇa so sweetly. He yearns to see this little
Gopāla directly. Astonishingly, even after such a sweet
vision, his hankering has still not been satiated.
Therefore, he will eventually express an even higher
desire than what he expresses in this stanza.

He wonders, “How can I attain love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and
consequently, darśana of Mother Yaśodā’s darling son

                          104
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

with my eyes?” It is well known that loving service to
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is only attained by chanting His holy names.
Therefore, in this stanza, Śrī Satyavrata Muni performs
nāma-saṅkīrtana.




In the previous verse, Śrī Satyavrata Muni prayed, “May
Your lotus face in Your form as little Gopāla, the same
form in which You shed streams of tears in fear of Your
mother, forever appear in my heart. I especially long to
see Your face in my heart perpetually, as it is being
kissed again and again by Your mother or by Śrī Rādhā.
May that Śrī Kṛṣṇa who holds a flute to His lips and
attracts the entire world — and even Himself — forever
appear in my heart. Upon seeing His form, all moving
beings become stunned and motionless, and all non-moving
things give up their nature and begin to move.”

In this stanza however, Śrī Satyavrata Muni wishes to
directly behold Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beautiful form with his own
eyes. He realized that Śrī Kṛṣṇa will not appear before
him unless he performs nāma-kīrtana, so now he prays
through the medium of nāma-kīrtana beginning with namo
deva dāmodara.




Śrī Satyavrata Muni had heard about the kīrtana
performed by the vraja-gopīs. When Śrī Kṛṣṇa disappeared
from the rāsa dance, the gopīs were unable to bear
separation from Him and began to cry. The song they sang
while weeping is famous by the name Gopī-gīta and is
found in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. With deep love, Śrīman
Mahāprabhu used to relish this song, especially during
the period of His life when He remained in the Gambhirā.
The following verse is from Gopī-gīta:



tava kathāmṛtaṁ tapta-jīvanaṁ



kavibhir īḍitaṁ kalmaṣāpaham



śravaṇa-maṅgalaṁ śrīmad ātataṁ



bhuvi gṛṇanti ye bhūri-dā janāḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.31.9)

O Kṛṣṇa, we are always suffering in this material world,
but just hearing the immortal nectar of Your words and

                          105
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

narrations of Your pastimes gives us life. These
narrations, coming from the lips of Your pure devotees,
eradicate one’s sinful reactions and bestow the ultimate
benediction, kṛṣṇa-prema, upon whoever hears them with
faith. Your pure devotees broadcast these narrations,
which are full of spiritual beauty and opulence, all
over the world. There is certainly no one more kind and
compassionate than those souls who distribute this
nectar.



But the gopīs were being tortured by the pain of
separation from Kṛṣṇa. They were actually saying, “The
descriptions of Your pastimes are not nectar (amṛta);
they are deadly poison (mṛta). If anyone hears them,
their life becomes one of suffering. Poets have sung the
glories of narrations about You in vain. At first the
narrations seem to be full of charm and sweetness, but
instead of bringing joy to someone’s life, they plague
him with sorrow. In fact, the people who recite Your
pastimes are ruining everyone’s lives.”

In this verse, the word bhūridāḥ (most munificent)
indicates that those who broadcast narrations about Śrī
Kṛṣṇa all over the world are the greatest of all
generous people. However, in divine madness (divyonmāda)
brought about by the severe pain of being separated from
Kṛṣṇa, the gopīs spoke about Him sarcastically:

“Just see how these people are blazoning the activities
of that black boy. They carry a copy of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam and roam from street to street exclaiming,
‘We do not want money; we just want you to listen to
us.’ For no charge they cast the net of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes
over the living entities. Those people, now captured,
are left to writhe in agony, weeping and wailing.
Eventually they leave their homes, wealth, possessions,
relatives and families. Like beggars or like birds, they
live without any permanent residence and maintain
themselves with whatever meagre eatables are given to
them by others, and they sleep wherever they can find a
place to lie down. They spend their days and nights in
this way, constantly tortured by the pain of being
separated from Śrī Kṛṣṇa.”

“My dear friend,” one gopī said, “those who recite
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam are actually not to blame. The
sweetness of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus face, beautiful form,
flute, qualities and pastimes are responsible for these
calamities. Even just hearing about His sweetness, one
will enter this miserable condition.”

Another gopī exclaimed, “O sakhī, what to speak of
others in this condition just look at you! There are no
hunters more merciless than those who narrate the
pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Persons who hear their narrations
weep, and then they make their families weep by
abandoning them.”

Yet another gopī protested, “Actually, Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself
is the greatest of all those who spread this propaganda.
He is the one who made us run away from our homes to
meet Him when He played on His flute. He drove us mad

                          106
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

with love, turned us all into beggars, and then left us!
Who is more ungrateful than He?”

When Śrī Kṛṣṇa heard them say all this, He burst into
their midst, crying, “Oh, no, no! I am not ungrateful!
You are My beloveds and I am yours. I only left all of
you to make your remembrance of Me more intense. Do you
know where I went? I did not actually leave you; I was
right behind you, listening to your song of separation.”

Conversing in the indirect mode of communication called
parokṣa-vāda[xxviii]28, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs relished
their prema for each other. From this example it is
clear that parokṣa-vāda, which is common throughout the
Vedas, is also employed in the verses of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam.

If anyone tries to adopt the moods of the gopīs and,
hoping to achieve Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s mercy, performs nāma-
saṅkīrtana with great humility, Kṛṣṇa will not be able
to restrain Himself; He will surely appear directly
before that person.




Remaining conscious of one’s relationship with Śrī Kṛṣṇa
and free from all anarthas, the sādhaka should perform
saṅkīrtana of the holy names that are bestowed upon him
by Śrī Guru. All of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes with their
inherent sweetness, as well as one’s relationship with
Śrī Kṛṣṇa in that particular pastime, are associated
with His corresponding holy names. By the mercy of
Kṛṣṇa’s holy names, the corresponding pastime will begin
to manifest in one’s heart. It is for this reason that
Śrī Śacīnandana Gaurahari who is absorbed in relishing
mahābhāva, Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s highest mood, propagated
the holy name.

hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare

hare rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare

In the groves of Vṛndāvana, Śrī Rādhikā steals away Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s mind. The word haraṇa means “to steal” and harā
is the feminine form of “one who steals”. According to
Sanskrit grammar, when harā is uttered as a personal
address to someone it becomes hare. The root kṛṣ means
“to attract” and ṇa means “bliss”. Therefore, He who
gives bliss to everyone with the sweetness of His
beautiful form, qualities, flute and pastimes is known
by the name “Kṛṣṇa”.

The rāma in this mantra is not Śrī Rāma, son of
Daśaratha. He who enjoys (ramaṇa) with Śrī Rādhā is
known as Rādhā-ramaṇa. The name rāma in this mantra is
an abbreviated form of the name Rādhā-ramaṇa.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa plays on His flute and attracts (ākarṣaṇa) the
minds of the gopīs to Him. He is therefore called
“Kṛṣṇa”.

This mantra embodies so many sweet moods. There is no

                          107
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

transcendental emotion or pastime of Kṛṣṇa that is not
included within this mahā-mantra, but they will only
dawn in one’s heart by the mercy of Śrī Guru and the
Vaiṣṇavas. Initially, by the mercy of these great
personalities, one realizes the sweetness of the holy
name: “Oh, these holy names are sweeter than the
sweetest. Nothing is sweeter.” Thereafter, the possessor
of the name (nāmī) personally awakens within one’s heart
and enables one to enter into His pastimes.

What should the sādhaka do if he is not achieving
perfection in bhakti? Regarding himself to be very
fallen and destitute, he should piteously perform
kīrtana of the mahā-mantra. For this reason it is said:



harer nāma harer nāma



harer nāmaiva kevalam



kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva



nāsty eva gatir anyathā



Bṛhan-nāradīya Purāṇa (Ādi 17.21)

The name of Hari, the name of Hari, the name of Hari is
the only way. In this age of Kali, there is no other
way, there is no other way, there is absolutely no other
way to achieve the ultimate destination.



This mahā-mantra is the infallible remedy for all the
ill effects of Kali-yuga. By chanting this mantra, all
of one’s desires are fulfilled without fail. What to
speak of achieving something in this mundane realm, by
this mantra one cannot help but achieve the highest
spiritual attainment. Such is the glory of nāma-
saṅkīrtana.

As already mentioned, when Śrī Kṛṣṇa disappeared at the
time of the rāsa dance, the gopīs sang Gopī-gīta with
the desire to see Him directly. When Śrī Kṛṣṇa heard
their song He could not check Himself and finally
appeared before them. With this in mind, Śrī Satyavrata
Muni also prays to directly behold Śrī Kṛṣṇa through
nāma-saṅkīrtana: “O Deva, You whose form is divine and
astonishing; O bhakta-vatsala Dāmodara, You who were
bound by the rope of Your mother’s love; O Ananta, You
who have unlimited potencies; O Viṣṇu, You who pervade
everything and reside as the witness in the hearts of
all beings; O Prabhu, You who possess infinite,
inconceivable potencies; O Īśa, my Master, You who are
supremely independent.”

                            108
Damodarastakam.txt                                5/5/2017




It is always advised that one should offer respects to
one’s worshipful Lord before beginning a prayer or
before beginning any other activity. Therefore, Śrī
Satyavrata Muni first offers respects to his iṣṭadeva
with the words namo deva. Deva means “He whose form is
divine”. What is that divine form like?



kastūrī-tilakaṁ lalāṭa-paṭale vakṣaḥ-sthale kaustabhaṁ

nāsāgre vara-mauktikaṁ kara-tale veṇūḥ kare kaṅkaṇaṁ

sarvāṅge hari-candanaṁ sulalitaṁ kaṇṭhe ca muktāvalī

gopa-strī pariveṣṭito vijayate gopāla-cūḍāmaṇiḥ

Śrī Gopāla-sahasra-nāma-stotra (28)

His forehead is decorated with musk tilaka, the
Kaustubha jewel rests upon His broad chest, and an
exquisite pearl hangs from the tip of His nose. The
flute gracefully rests in His lotus hands and bracelets
adorn His wrists. His entire form is anointed with
candana, and a necklace of pearls graces His attractive
neck. All glories to the crest jewel of the gopas who is
surrounded by all the young vraja-gopīs.



This form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, surrounded by the young ladies
of Vraja, is most beautiful and enchanting. Mother
Yaśodā has bound Deva, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. She wrapped a rope
around His waist, brought it behind His back, and tied
it to the grinding mortar.

Deva can also mean “He who is playing”. In other words,
in this pastime Śrī Kṛṣṇa is playing in a form of a
child. Śrī Satyavrata Muni therefore says, “I want to
see the divine beauty of this Gopāla, who has appeared
as a little child, directly with my own eyes.”




Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī explains several meanings of
dāmodara in his commentary. One way to understand this
name is in relation to Mother Yaśodā. Śrī Kṛṣṇa wanted
to relish Śrī Yaśodā’s motherly affection, so He
submitted to being bound by the rope of her love. He
thus became known as Yaśodā-Dāmodara, He whose waist is
bound by Śrī Yaśodā.

Another way to understand this name is in relation to
Śrī Rādhā. When Śrī Kṛṣṇa eventually reappeared after
leaving the rāsa dance, He somehow pacified Śrī Rādhā’s
anger. One time this happened at Sevā-kuñja and another
time at Māna-sarovara. Just before they started the rāsa

                          109
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

dance again, Śrī Lalitā and Viśākhā tied Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
yellow pītāmbara to Śrī Rādhā’s veil, binding Them and
making it impossible for Him to escape.

Another time when Śrī Kṛṣṇa was on His way to meet with
Śrī Rādhā, Padmā somehow brought Him to Gaurī-kuṇḍa and
united Him with Candrāvalī. Meanwhile, Śrī Rādhā’s
maidservants headed by Śrī Rūpa Mañjari noted that Śrī
Rādhā was becoming increasingly anxious to meet with Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. They began to search for Him and finally found
Him at Gaurī-kuṇḍa. “O Aghāri (slayer of the giant snake
demon)” they exclaimed, “a demon has entered Vraja and
is destroying everything!” (The demon was actually Śrī
Rādhā’s separation from Śrī Kṛṣṇa.)

As soon as Śrī Kṛṣṇa heard this, He spoke to Candrāvalī,
comforting her, “My dear one, I will return immediately
after killing the demon; just wait for Me.” In this way,
the mañjarīs cleverly took Śrī Kṛṣṇa from Candrāvalī’s
grove and united Him with Śrī Rādhā. There, the mañjarīs
tied the ends of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s cloth in a knot.

On yet another occasion, Śrī Rādhā’s friends tied the
ends of Her and Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s cloth in a knot. To this
day, the place where that pastime occurred is called
Gāṅṭholī[xxix]29. It is because of all these pastimes
that Śrī Kṛṣṇa became known as Rādhā-Dāmodara.




Generally, viṣṇu means “the all-pervading being”. Thus,
it is understood that the sage is saying, “There is no
place where You are not situated, and no heart in which
You do not dwell; You are everywhere.” However, in his
commentary, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmīpāda has revealed
another meaning of viṣṇu: “Śrī Kṛṣṇa eternally performs
His confidential pastimes in all the secluded caves and
groves of Girirāja-Govardhana.”

Although even the demigods are unable to see Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
pastimes in those kuñjas, Śrī Satyavrata Muni addresses
the Lord as Viṣṇu with the hope that he may see Śrī
Kṛṣṇa directly: “In Your pastimes, You reside in every
grove and cave throughout this Vṛndāvana. Therefore, You
do not have to undergo any pain by travelling a long
distance to appear before my eyes.”

The name Viṣṇu is used in a similar way in a verse from
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.33.39): vikrīḍitaṁ vraja-vadhūbhir
idaṁ ca viṣṇoḥ. In this verse, Viṣṇu refers to that
Kṛṣṇa who, with the desire to relish the gopīs’ love for
Him, sounded His flute and lured all the gopīs from
their homes. By pervading their hearts, He entirely won
their love. Similarly, in Śrī Satyavrata Muni’s prayer,
Viṣṇu refers solely to Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa.




Śrī Satyavrata Muni says duḥkha-jālābdhi-magnaṁ, “I am
oppressed by the miseries of material existence. For an

                          110
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

incalculable period of time I have been trapped in this
vicious circle of birth and death, and subsequently, I
mistake this body to be my actual self. I am wretched
and utterly foolish. I am drowning in the fathomless
ocean of material existence and I am unable to rescue
myself.” Furthermore the sage says, “I am suffering
because I am not being supported by the mercy of saints
and I do not have any strength to perform sādhana.”

In this regard Śrīman Mahāprabhu asked Śrī Rāya
Rāmānanda, “duḥkha madhye kona duḥkha haya gurutara — of
all sorrows, which is the most severe?” Śrī Rāya
Rāmānanda replied, “kṛṣṇa-bhakta-viraha vinā duḥkha nāhi
dekhi para — Other than the pain of being separated from
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s devotees, I see no actual sorrow.” The
sorrow of being separated from Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s devotees is
in fact the greatest agony. Therefore, from Śrī
Satyavrata Muni’s words, “duḥkha-jālābdhi-magnaṁ — I am
drowning in an ocean of misery,” we can understand that
he prays to attain sādhu-saṅga, the company of saintly
personalities.

One can only attain Śrī Bhagavān’s mercy by the
causeless compassion of saints. Śrī Nanda Mahārāja tells
Śrī Gargācārya:



mahad-vicalanaṁ nṝṇāṁ



gṛhiṇāṁ dīna-cetasām



niḥśreyasāya bhagavan



kalpate nānyathā kvacit



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.8.4)

Saintly personalities like you wander about visiting the
homes of ordinary people and wretched and destitute
householders like us. O exalted devotee, you never have
any other reason to do this except to bestow mercy on
us.



One should note that it is because Nanda Mahārāja was
acting like an ordinary human being that he addressed
Gargācārya in this way. In reality, there is a vast gulf
of difference between Nanda Bābā and Gargācārya. This
kind of behaviour is exhibited by Śrī Bhagavān’s
associates in the course of performing their human-like
pastimes in order to show everyone that Śrī Bhagavān can
only be achieved by the immense mercy of sādhus.

When even Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s eternal associate, His mother, had

                             111
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

to undergo so much endeavour to bind Him, then on what
grounds can the conditioned souls complain about the
troubles they encounter in trying to achieve Him?

There is no need to make a pompous display of devotion.
We should simply act according to the method of sādhana
taught to us by guru and Vaiṣṇavas, and in this way
perform bhajana following in the footsteps of our six
Gosvāmīs:



rādhā-kuṇḍa-taṭe kalinda-tanayā-tīre ca vaṁśī-vaṭe,

premonmāda-vaśād aśeṣa-daśayā grastau pramattau sadā

gāyantau ca kadā harer-guṇa-varaṁ bhāvābdhi-bhūtau mudā,

vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau

Śrī Ṣad-Gosvāmyāṣṭākam (7)

I worship Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī,
Śrīla Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī and Śrīla Gopāla Bhaṭṭa
Gosvāmī. Intoxicated with love and gripped by the
countless ecstasies arising from separation, they always
used to roam the banks of Rādhā-kuṇḍa and the Yamunā, or
the forest near Vaṁśī-vaṭa. They remained overwhelmed
with spiritual ecstasies while incessantly enraptured by
singing about Śrī Hari’s most excellent qualities.



The words aśeṣa-daśayā in the above verse describe the
six Gosvāmīs as being “gripped by the countless
ecstasies arising from separation”. In other words,
their bodies would erupt with horripi-lation, trembling
and other ecstasies. They would even reach the stage in
which one verges on death due to the intense pain of
separation and begin to faint. How exalted is the
bhajana of these great personalities? In comparison,
where is our sādhana-bhajana? Not one single tear comes
to our eyes, what to speak of us fainting. Therefore, we
must strive to perform bhajana in sādhu-saṅga in such a
way that we are constantly immersed in serving our
worshipful Lord.

The Gosvāmīs, acting as rāgānuga-sādhakas, were
suffering because they could not see Śrī Bhagavān and
His associates:



he rādhe! vraja-devike! ca lalite! he nanda-sūno! kutaḥ?

Śrī Ṣad-Gosvāmyāṣṭakam (8)

The six Gosvāmīs would cry out, “O Rādhā! O Goddess of
Vṛndāvana! O Lalitā-devī! O Son of Nanda! Where are
you?”




                             112
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

Far beyond the pain of separation experienced in the
stage of sādhana is the indescribable pain of separation
experienced by Śrī Bhagavān’s rāgātmika-jana (those
whose hearts are imbued with rāga) in the stage of
prema. In Gopī-gīta and Bhramara-gīta within the Tenth
Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī has
illustrated such separation by indirect hints. In the
same way, Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī in his
written work has merely alluded to the condition of
someone separated from Śrī Kṛṣṇa

Even bhāva-bhakti is extraordinary, for even after
performing millions and millions of arduous spiritual
practices one cannot achieve it. For example, Śrī
Uddhava went to Nandagrāma where he closely associated
with rāgātmika-jana of all five rasas. However, he could
only get the association of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, the most
exalted of all those associates, from a distance.
However he was able to achieve the company of Her
friends, who are Her kāya-vyūha, or bodily
manifestations. He had so much good fortune, but did he
ever succeed in becoming a single plant in Vraja, or a
creeper, or even a piece of straw? In the end, he could
only praise the gopīs:



āsām aho caraṇa-reṇu-juṣām ahaṁ syāṁ

vṛndāvane kim api gulma-latauṣadhīnām

yā dustyajaṁ sva-janam ārya-pathaṁ ca hitvā

bhejur mukunda-padavīṁ śrutibhir vimṛgyām

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.47.61)

Aho, the vraja-devīs have given up everything for Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. They have abandoned the path of chastity, their
families and their children, which are all extremely
difficult to give up. Now they have taken shelter of
prema-bhakti for Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The personified scriptures
(Śrutis) constantly search for that same prema-bhakti
but rarely attain it. Let me just become a bush, a
creeper, or a blade of grass in Vṛndāvana. Then I might
attain the dust from the lotus feet of one of these
gopīs.



vande nanda-vraja-strīṇāṁ



pāda-reṇum abhīkṣṇaśaḥ



yāsāṁ hari-kathodgītaṁ



punāti bhuvana-trayam


                            113
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.47.63)

I bow down to the dust of the feet of the gopīs who
reside in Nanda Bābā’s Vraja. Oh, whatever these gopīs
have sung about Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes always has and always
will purify the entire world.



Why is that we feel cheated of this rasa and cheated of
these exalted moods even after we have obtained sādhu-
saṅga? The reason is that we do not really want to taste
what the saints long for us relish. Otherwise, why do we
not become full of anxiety when we are separated from
them? Why do we not perform bhajana with great
eagerness?

When Śrī Kṛṣṇa concluded His pastimes in this world, a
desire to attain vraja-bhāva awoke within Śrī Uddhava’s
heart. This desire came by the mercy of the Vrajavāsīs,
and especially by the mercy of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Because
Uddhava desperately wanted to become a particle of dust
at Śrī Rādhā’s lotus feet, it is presumed that he is
performing bhajana at Uddhava-kuṇḍa in Govardhana to
this day. However, we do not know if he was able to
become even a particle of dust in Vraja-dhāma.

Śrī Tulasī dāsa has said: “aba pachatāye hota kyā, jaba
ciḍiyā cuga gaī kheta — What is the use of lamenting
now? It is because of your own carelessness that birds
have eaten your crops.” In other words, by Śrī
Bhagavān’s grace you have taken a rare birth in the
human species. If you waste it simply eating and
sleeping like an animal, then you will have to remain
wandering in the material world, taking birth in one of
the eighty-four million species of life. Therefore, you
should realize how trivial it is to simply exist like an
animal and you should stay determined to permanently be
in sādhu-saṅga.

But our situation is so sad that even though we have
attained the great fortune of associating with saints,
our hearts remain unaffected. This is because we do not
have full faith in Śrī Hari, Guru and Vaiṣṇavas and, as
a result, we remain deprived of the grace of Śrī Guru
and Śrī Bhagavān.




Śrī Satyavrata Muni prays prasīda prabhu, “O You who
possess all inconceivable potencies! O Master, please be
kind to me. Deliver me from my pitiable mundane
existence and grant me the association of Your devotees.
I have no hope but You.” We must also pray like this.

“O Prabhu, cast Your compassionate glance upon us. When
we chant Your names, no tears come to our eyes, and our
bodies do not tremble. We are unable to perform sādhana.
We are only sustaining our ambition of attaining vraja-
prema — and especially gopī-bhāva, the prema which Śrī

                          114
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

Caitanya Mahāprabhu came to give — on the hope that we
will receive Your merciful glance. It is only by the
strength of that glance that we have any chance of
attaining our goal. Even if we continue performing
sādhana-bhajana as we are now doing for millions and
millions of lifetimes, it will be in vain. It will still
be completely impossible for us to attain vraja-prema,
especially gopī-bhāva, the topmost love in Vraja. O
Master, have mercy on us!”

With great anguish we should cry, “Let me attain just a
drop of gopī-bhāva.” How can such a drop be obtained? It
is obtained by the mercy of sādhus who are absorbed in
the mood of Vraja. Thus Śrī Satyavrata Muni says, “O
Prabhu, kindly grant me the association of pure-hearted
saints. In their association all of my cherished desires
will be fulfilled.”




Śrī Satyavrata Muni addresses Śrī Bhagavān as Īśa, “You
who are supremely independent” — in order to petition
Him: “You are the master and controller of all, so I
need not seek the mercy of others to achieve Your grace.
[xxx]30 O Lord, be kind to me — You do not depend on
anyone or anything. If the sādhaka is completely
surrendered, then You do not even pay attention to the
formalities of his sādhana.”

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is the best example of how the
Lord distributes His causeless mercy while completely
ignoring all considerations of qualification. If someone
merely saw Him, even from a distance, prema would
spontaneously manifest in their heart. Śrīman Mahāprabhu
did not consider anyone’s qualifications or frailties.
Without even considering the quality of anyone’s
spiritual practices, He distributed prema to everyone.

A brilliant example of this is found in Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta. On His way to Vṛndāvana, Śrīman Mahāprabhu
journeyed through the Jharikhaṇḍa forest. As he passed
through the forest, He caused prema to awaken in the
hearts of all the wild animals, birds, worms, insects,
trees, and plants and creepers. All the creatures of the
jungle were instantly granted prema. Alas, will the
world ever see anyone else so merciful?

“Therefore, have mercy on me and grant me direct darśana
of You.”




Śrī Satyavrata Muni entreats Śrī Bhagavān: “It is not
enough for me to have but a momentary vision within my
heart of little Gopāla crying out in fear of His mother
as she binds Him to the grinding mortar. O master, I
pray to see that form directly with my own eyes.”

In Verse Four, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī quoted Śrī
Pippalāyana Ṛṣi’s explanation of antara-darśana found

                          115
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

within Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta: “One first sees Śrī
Bhagavān within one’s mind and then with one’s eyes.
Brahmājī beheld Śrī Kṛṣṇa within his mind and received a
benediction from Him, which fructified as the ability to
create the material universe.” However, in reply to
Pippalāyana Ṛṣi’s reasoning, Śrī Gopa-kumāra said, “Your
thoughts are excellent, but my desire is to see Śrī
Madana-gopāla directly with my eyes.”

Prabhupāda Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura
states:

“First, Śrī Bhagavān is seen within the soul, and then
that vision reflects in the mind. The form of the deity
is the externally manifest reflection of the moods that
Śrī Guru and the Vaiṣṇavas experience at such times. Śrī
Guru and the Vaiṣṇavas mercifully plant the tendency to
perform service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa in a person’s heart as a
seed. That seed gradually matures through the stages of
śraddhā, niṣṭhā, āsakti and on, until it finally reaches
its destination. But the seed can only develop like this
if the sādhaka carefully proceeds in sādhu-saṅga without
interruption.

“Even if Śrī Bhagavān personally appears to a devotee
who is in the advanced stages of prema, he will think
that he is seeing his worshipful Lord within his heart
due to being overwhelmed with bhāva. For example, when
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu left Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma, He
would personally come to eat the foodstuffs His mother
cooked for Him, but she always considered her visions of
Him to be hallucinations. Similarly, after Śrī Kṛṣṇa
left Vṛndāvana, He personally appeared before the gopīs
again and again but they also dismissed those meetings
as mere visions.

“A devotee who progresses through the stages of bhakti
by performing nāma-saṅkīrtana finally attains prema.
Leaving this world behind, he enters the divine realm
where he sees Śrī Bhagavān directly. This darśana
eradicates the slightest scent of any remaining anarthas
and gives him entrance into Bhagavān’s eternal pastimes
in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma.”



~ THUS ENDS THE DIG-DARŚINĪ-VṚTTĪ ON THE SIXTH VERSE ~




Annotation by Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī
Mahārāja

(from the footnote on page 121):

In the fourth verse of this aṣṭaka, verses 2.86 through
2.96 of Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta’s Uttara-khaṇḍa were
cited. Therein, Śrī Pippalāyana Ṛṣi, a resident of
Tapoloka, explained to Gopa-kumāra that seeing Śrī
Bhagavān within the mind is more rewarding than seeing
Him with one’s eyes. In the following verses however,
Śrī Bhagavān’s personal associates, who are residents of

                          116
Damodarastakam.txt                                 5/5/2017

Vaikuṇṭha, prove that directly seeing Śrī Bhagavān is
actually superior to seeing Him in meditation for it
grants the ultimate success of life.

Verses 3.179 through 3.182 of Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta’s
Uttara-khaṇḍa are presented herein:

dṛg bhyāṁ prabhor darśanato hi sarvata



stut tat-prasādāvali-labdhir īkṣyate



sarvādhikaṁ sāndra-sukhañ ca jāyate



sādhyantad eva śravaṇādi-bhaktiḥ




Śrī Bhagavān’s personal associates addressed Gopa-
kumāra: Only when one beholds Śrī Bhagavān directly,
with his own eyes, does one attain His complete mercy
without fail. [Kardama Ṛṣi, Dhruva and others who saw
Śrī Bhagavān with their own eyes and won His abundant
mercy are examples of this]. By this mercy alone, we are
also directly realizing that seeing Śrī Bhagavān with
our eyes is the ultimate success of life. The most
profound joy is only experienced when one sees Śrī
Bhagavān in this way, directly, which can only be
accomplished by performing navadhā-bhakti, the nine-fold
system of devotional service beginning with śravaṇa
(hearing) and kīrtana (chanting). (179)



Direct darśana of Śrī Bhagavān is the ultimate success
of life for the following reason:

sarveṣāṁ sādhanānāṁ tat-sākṣātkāro hi sat-phalam

tadaivāmūlato māyā naśyet premāpi vardhate

The consummate result of all types of sādhana is to meet
Śrī Bhagavān face to face. Thus meeting Him, one’s
entanglement in māyā will be completely destroyed at the
root and simultaneously prema will swell within one’s
heart.



In the next verse, the personal associates of Śrī
Bhagavān further establish the unrivalled excellence of
meeting the Lord face to face by citing an incident from
ancient times.

kāyādhavāder-hṛdi paśyato ‘pi prabhuṁ sadākṣnā kil tad-
didṛkṣa


                          117
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

tatra pramāṇaṁ hi tathāvalokanād anantaraṁ bhāva-viśeṣa-
lābhaḥ



Even though devotees like Śrī Prahlāda Mahārāja, the son
of Hiraṇyakaśipu and Kayādhu, were able to behold the
Lord within their heart, it is a fact that they always
hankered to see Him, the master of all power, directly
with their eyes. The evidence for this is that on the
shore of the ocean one day, by seeing Śrī Bhagavān face
to face Śrī Prahlāda Mahārāja attained an extraordinary
state of love for Him. (181)



One should refer to Śrī Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya for more
details about this incident.

At this point, one may argue against this conclusion by
quoting Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.15.44): “When Śrī Sanaka
and the other Kumāras met Śrī Bhagavān face to face,
they first looked upward at His smiling lotus face, and
then cast their vision down to see the splendour of His
toenails. When they realized that, due to the
limitations of their eyes and other senses, they could
not perceive the charm and splendour of all of Śrī
Bhagavān’s limbs at one time, they closed their eyes and
began meditating on His entire form; they meditated on
all of His limbs at once, from His head to His lotus
feet.” This shows that after seeing Śrī Bhagavān
directly with their eyes, the sages became absorbed in
meditation. Is this not proof that meditation is more
excellent than direct visual perception? This argument
is countered by Śrī Bhagavān’s personal associates in
the next verse beginning with kṛṣṇasya:

kṛṣṇasya sākṣād api jāyate yat keṣāñcid-akṣi-dvaya-
milanādi

dhyānaṁ na tat kintu mūdāṁ bhareṇa kampādi-vat prema-
vikāra eṣaḥ



If someone’s eyes close due to being overwhelmed by joy
after directly seeing Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and his other senses
become stunned or inactive, it should not be assumed
that he is meditating. Rather, this behaviour should
simply be recognized as identical to the extraordinary
transformations of prema. These transformations include
trembling, crying and horripilation and are known as the
aṣṭa-sāttvika bhāvas, or the eight ecstatic symptoms of
love of God. (182)



Considering these statements, the unquestionable
conclusion is that the profound happiness of seeing Śrī
Bhagavān directly or perceiving Him directly with one’s
other senses is far greater than the happiness of
perceiving Him within one’s mind through the process of
meditation.


                          118
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017




Verse Seven




kuverātmajau baddha-mūrtyaiva yadvat

tvayā mocitau bhakti-bhājau kṛtau ca

tathā prema-bhaktiṁ svakāṁ me prayaccha

na mokṣe graho me ‘sti dāmodareha



SYNONYMS



kuvera-ātmajau — the two sons of Kuvera (Nalakūvara and
Maṇigrīva); baddha-mūrtyā — by the divine form (śrī
vigraha) which was bound; eva — certainly; yadvat — just
as; tvayā — by You; mocitau — delivered both of them
[from the species of tree as well as from bondage to the
cycle of birth and death]; bhakti-bhājau — both
recipients of bhakti; kṛtau — made them both; ca — and;
tathā — similarly; prema-bhaktim — loving devotion;
svakām — His own; me — upon me; prayaccha — please
profusely bestow; na mokṣe — not for liberation; grahaḥ
— yearning; me — for me; asti — there is; dāmodara — O
bhakta-vatsala Dāmodara; iha — only for this.

TRANSLATION



O Dāmodara, even though You were bound with a rope to
the grinding mortar by Your mother, You set the two sons
of Kuvera, Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva, free (from Śrī
Nārada’s curse that they live as twin arjuna trees), and
enabled them to become recipients of the highest
possible attainment — bhakti. In the same way, please
profusely bestow upon me prema-bhakti for You. I long
for this alone; I do not want any other kind of
liberation.



Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā

itthaṁ prema-viśeṣeṇa paramotkaṇṭhayā saha sākṣād-
darśanaṁ prārthya tata eva sadyo jāta-prema-bhakti-
viśeṣeṇa tasya parama-daurlabhyaṁ manyamānas tatra ca
paramopāya-bhūtāṁ prema-bhaktim abhijñāya. yadvā, sakṛd-
darśane mano’tṛptiṁ viraha-duḥkhottaratāñcāśaṅkya sadā
tad-vaśī-karaṇāya prema-bhaktim evaikam upāyam
abhijñāya. tatra ca paramāparādhino mama kathaṁ sā
sambhavet ity āśaṅkya śrī-bhagavad-vātsalya-mahimnā
cāsambhāvyam api sarvam eva sambhaved iti niścitya,
mokṣa-tyāgena prema-bhaktim eva prārthayate — kuvereti.

                          119
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017


baddhayā gopyā pāśairudūkhale śṛṅkhalitayā mūrtyā śrī-
vigraheṇaiveti, tayormadhye svayaṁ praveśāt parama-
sundara-līlādi-viśiṣṭasya bhagavataḥ sākṣād-darśana-
śparśanādikaṁ sūcitaṁ. [kuverātmajau] mocitau śrī-
nārada-śāpāt saṁsārācca. na kevalaṁ tāvadeva, parama-
bhaktiśca tābhyāṁ dattetyāha — [bhakti-bhājau] bhaktiṁ
bhajataḥ parama-sādhyatvenāśrayataḥ na kathañcidapi
tyajata iti tathā tau. evañca prema-bhaktireva
dattetyabhipretaṁ.

tathā ca śrī-bhagavad-vacanaṁ (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
10.10.42) — “sañjāto mayi bhāvo vāmīpsitaḥ paramo
‘bhavaḥ” — iti. asyārthaḥ — vāṁ yuvayorīpsito ‘pekṣitaḥ,
paramo bhāvaḥ premā, mayi samyagjāta eva. na bhavaḥ
punar-janma saṁsāra-duḥkhaṁ vā yasmāt sa iti. he
dāmodara! tathā tadvat svakaṁ tvac-
caraṇāravindaikāśrayāṁ etad rūpaika-viṣayāṁ vā [prema-
bhaktiṁ] me mahyaṁ, prakarṣeṇa yaccha dehi.

nanu kim atrāgraheṇa? kuberātmajavan-mokṣo ‘pi gṛhyatāṁ,
anyathā janma-maraṇādi-saṁsārāpatteḥ. tatrāha — neti.
iha asyāṁ prema-bhaktāveva, mama graha āgraho ‘sti na ca
mokṣe graho ‘sti.

ayam arthaḥ — prema-bhaktyā saṁsāra-dhvaṁso bhavati
cettarhi bhavatu nāma, na syāccet tarhi māstu nāma.
tatra mamāpekṣā nāstīti. atra gūḍho ‘yaṁ bhāvaḥ —
cintāmanau karasthe, sarvameva svayaṁ setsyati; kiṁ tad-
eka-mātra-tuccha-dravya-grahaṇeneti.

yad-vā, he dāmodara! svakām prema-bhaktiṁ
prayacchetyevaṁ pāśa-baddhodara-bhagavad-viṣayaka-prema-
bhakti-prārthanayā nityam udare pāśa-
bandhanāgrahamāśaṅkyāha — mokṣe pāśa-bandhanāt tava
mocane mamāgraho nāsti kiṁ? kākvā asty-evety-arthaḥ.
kintu iha asminneva rūpe svakām asādhāraṇāṁ prema-
bhaktiṁ prayaccheti.

yadvā, iha vṛndāvane prema-bhaktiṁ prayacchetyanvayaḥ.
tataśca tatraiva tasyāḥ sukha-viśeṣāvirbhāvakatvāt
prādurbhāva-viśeṣāc-ca tathā tasya sākṣād-darśana-
viśeṣākāratvācca tathā tatraiva tad-vihāri-śrī-bhagavad-
didṛkṣā-viśeṣācca tatra sadā nivāso ‘pi prārthitaḥ ity
ūhyaṁ. anyacca pūrvavadeva.

iti śrī-dāmodarāṣṭake saptama-śloke śrī-sanātana
gosvāmi-kṛtā dig-darśinī-nāmnī ṭīkā samāptā.



~ THUS ENDS THE DIG-DARśINī ṭīKā ON THE SEVENTH VERSE ~



Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā Bhāvanuvāda

In the previous verse Śrī Satyavrata Muni prayed for
direct darśana of Śrī Bhagavān with great eagerness
because he was overcome by a special kind of prema
(prema-viśeṣa). However, due to the extraordinary
longing in his prayers, a form of prema-bhakti instantly
awakened [indicating the sprout of prema, or the stage
of bhāva-bhakti], causing him to realize that such

                          120
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

direct darśana is only rarely accomplished. Therefore,
having determined that prema-bhakti is certainly the
only means to attain that darśana, he now prays to Śrī
Bhagavān with the hope of attaining prema-bhakti.

Alternatively, the sage fears that his mind will not be
satiated after having Śrī Bhagavān’s darśana only once
and at the same time he dreads the agony of separation
from Śrī Bhagavān when he will not be able to see Him
the very next moment. He therefore prays to attain
prema-bhakti, having ascertained that prema-bhakti is
the sole means of capturing the Lord forever.

Despite this conclusion, he still felt apprehensive:
“How can such a severe offender like me attain the most
rare treasure of prema-bhakti?” However, he was
comforted when he remembered Śrī Bhagavān’s glorious
quality of bhakta-vātsalya, by which Śrī Bhagavān makes
the impossible possible. With this conviction he
rejected all varieties of mokṣa, and now, in this verse
beginning with kuverātmajau, he exclusively prays for
prema-bhakti.

With the words baddha-mūrtyaiva the sage says, “Despite
exhibiting the exceptional characteristic of allowing
Śrī Yaśodā Gopī to bind You to a grinding mortar with
rope, in Your divine form (śrī vigraha) of Śrī Dāmodara,
[in other words, even in this exceptional form in which
You are Yourself bound] You delivered the two sons of
Kuvera from their bondage.” This statement reveals the
incomparable fortune of the twin arjuna trees who were
able to see and touch Śrī Kṛṣṇa personally while He
enacted His supremely enchanting pastimes.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa had pulled the grinding mortar behind Him and
crawled between the two trees. Although He was Himself
in a state of being bound, He liberated (mocitau) the
two sons of Kuvera, Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva. But He did
not just free them from Śrī Nārada’s curse and liberate
them from material existence, He also gave both of them
prema-bhakti for Him.

If someone is addressed by the phrase bhaktiṁ-bhājataḥ
(recipients of bhakti), it is understood that they have
taken irrevocable shelter of bhakti as the ultimate goal
and they will never neglect bhakti in any way.
Therefore, when the sage says, “bhakti bhājau kṛtau ca —
You made (kṛtau) both of them so dedicated to bhakti,”
he is clearly indicating that Śrī Bhagavān granted them
prema-bhakti.

In this regard, a statement found in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(10.10.42), spoken to Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva by Śrī
Bhagavān Himself is evidence of this:



sañjāto mayi bhāvo vāmīpsitaḥ paramo ‘bhavaḥ...”

The prema for Me that you both greatly desired has now
fully arisen within your hearts. Because of this prema,
you will never again become trapped in material
existence.


                          121
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017



[Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī explains this verse as follows:]
Śrī Bhagavān is saying, “O Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva, the
prema (parama-bhāvaḥ) for Me (mayi) that the two of you
(vām) desired (īpsitaḥ) has now fully arisen (sañjāto)
in you. Therefore, you will no longer have to suffer the
pain of repeated birth and death in material existence
(abhavaḥ).”

Śrī Satyavrata Muni prays, “O Dāmodara, [just as You
granted prema-bhakti to the two sons of Kuvera without
any cause] similarly, please profusely bestow upon me
prema-bhakti for You which is characterized by taking
absolute shelter of Your lotus feet.” Or, “Please grant
me prema-bhakti for Your beautiful form as a small child
who is bound by Your mother’s rope.”

If Śrī Kṛṣṇa asks, “Why are you insisting on prema-
bhakti to the exclusion of everything else? Why will you
not accept liberation (mokṣa) as well, just as the two
sons of Kuvera did? Otherwise, you have to repeatedly
suffer miseries like birth and death within material
existence.” Then in reply to this, Śrī Satyavrata Muni
explains: “I only insist on attaining this prema-bhakti;
I do not want to accept moksa.”

The meaning of Śrī Satyavrata Muni’s words is, “If my
repeated birth and death within material existence is
destroyed by prema-bhakti, then let it be destroyed. And
if it is not, then I do not care. I have no expectation
either way.” The sage’s deep mood is understood by a
simple example: If someone obtains a wish-fulfilling
cintāmaṇi gem, then he will easily attain everything
else. Therefore, in the presence of prema-bhakti, what
is the use of accepting a single insignificant boon like
moksa?

These words of the sage may also be understood in
another way. He prays, “O Dāmodara, please grant me
prema-bhakti specifically to You (svakām).” Here, by
addressing his Lord as Dāmodara, the sage prays for
prema-bhakti that is specifically related to the form of
Bhagavān whose belly is bound by rope. It is possible to
interperet this to mean that the sage selfishly wants
Śrī Bhagavān’s waist to remain uncomfortably bound by
rope forever. Fearing his prayer may be misunderstood in
this way, he says, “na mokṣe graho me ‘sti — Do You
think that I want you to remain tied, that I do not want
You to be released from the bondage of Your mother’s
rope?” Overwhelmed with regret, the sage says, “I am
certainly concerned for You. However, kindly grant me
that uncommon prema-bhakti, which I fervently cherish,
in relation to Your exceptional form as Dāmodara, who is
bound by the prema of Mother Yaśodā.”

[Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī reveals yet another meaning of
this verse:] One can also interpret the word iha (in
this) to mean “here in Vṛndāvana”. By this
interpretation, it is understood that the sage prays,
“Please grant me prema-bhakti in Vṛndāvana.”

Accordingly, the special joy of prema-bhakti only
appears in Śrī Vṛndāvana. Because such prema-bhakti

                          122
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

manifests predominantly in Śrī Vṛndāvana, the sage prays
to see the bound form of Śrī Bhagavān there. This
special form of Śrī Bhagavān when He is bound up can
only be seen there. So in order to see this form
directly, and also because of his extraordinary desire
to see Vṛndāvana-bihārī [Śrī Bhagavān as He who
blissfully enjoys in Vṛndāvana in His three-fold bending
form], the sage is praying to reside in Śrī Vṛndāvana
forever. All this is indirectly conveyed through the
word iha. The other portions of this verse are not
affected by this and should be understood according to
the explanation already given.



~ THUS ENDS THE ENGLISH RENDITION OF

THE DIG-DARŚINĪ-ṬĪKĀ ON THE SEVENTH VERSE ~



Dig-darśinī-vṛtti

In the previous verse, Śrī Satyavrata Muni performed
nāma-saṅkīrtana with a melted heart. By the potency of
nāma-saṅkīrtana he received direct darśana of his
worshipful Dāmodara for just a moment. It is as if Śrī
Kṛṣṇa said to him, “O sage, I am pleased with you.
Request anything you wish.” Satyavrata Muni now says,
“Even though You were Yourself bound, You freed the two
sons of Kuvera, Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva, who had been
cursed by Śrī Nārada to live as twin arjuna trees and
You also delivered them from the repeated cycle of birth
and death within material existence. Furthermore, You
made them the recipients of the highest form of bhakti
to You by granting them prema-bhakti. In the same way,
please profusely bestow upon me prema-bhakti for You.




Kuvera is the treasurer of the demigods, and his two
sons, because of their vast wealth, became intoxicated
by pride. The scriptures describe four characteristics
that intoxicate a man who possesses them. Great opulence
and wealth is one of these. The other three are beauty,
learning and noble birth.

A curse given by a saint is identical to his blessing.
Both are meant for our ultimate benefit, but we cannot
always understand this. Śrī Nārada apparently cursed the
sons of Kuvera, Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva: “Intoxicated
by the pride of wealth, you have become so dull that you
are acting like trees. So be it. Become trees!” The
moment these words issued from Śrī Nārada’s mouth, the
two sons of Kuvera could feel their bodies turning into
trees. They fell at Śrī Nārada’s lotus feet and begged
him to arrange for their deliverance. Śrī Nārada
consoled them: “Listen, at the end of Dvāpara-yuga,
Svayam Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the original personality of
Godhead, will appear in Gokula and deliver you.” Saying
this, Śrī Nārada left that place, and subsequently the
two brothers took birth as twin arjuna trees in the

                          123
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

courtyard of Śrī Nanda Mahārāja’s house.

After tying up Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Mother Yaśodā returned to the
house to churn yoghurt. At that time Śrī Kṛṣṇa recalled
this incident and the statement made by His dear
devotee, Śrī Nārada, ordaining the deliverance of the
two sons of Kuvera. Pretending that He was simply
playing with His friends, He crawled over to the two
arjuna trees to deliver them, pulling the grinding
mortar behind Him. When He crawled between the two
trees, the grinding mortar became lodged between them
and as Śrī Kṛṣṇa pulled it with great force, the massive
trees came crashing to the ground, making a tumultuous
sound.

From the ancient trees, two heavenly personalities at
once emerged, circumambulated Śrī Kṛṣṇa and began
offering prayers to Him. Śrī Kṛṣṇa then blessed them
both with prema-bhakti. Those two personalities became
the famous narrators, Madhu-kaṇṭḥa and Snigdha-kaṇṭha in
aprakaṭa Vraja (the unmanifest Vraja-dhāma situated in
the heart of the spiritual sky). There, they eternally
recite the sweet pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in Śrī Nanda
Maharāja’s assembly.




Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmipāda explains how one can attain
prema-bhakti:



ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-saṅgo ‘tha bhajana-kriyā

tato ‘nartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt tato niṣṭhā rucis tataḥ

athāsaktis tato bhāvas tataḥ premābhyudañcati

sādhakānām ayaṁ premṇaḥ prādurbhāve bhavet kramaḥ

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.4.15—6)

In the heart of the sādhaka, first śraddhā (faith)
develops. After that come sādhu-saṅga (association with
saints), bhajana-kriyā (regulated devotional activities)
and then anartha-nivṛtti (the clearing of unwanted
habits). Next the sādhaka develops niṣṭhā in bhajana
(fixed determination in devotional service), followed by
ruci (taste). Then he develops āsakti (intense
attachment) to bhajana and to the object of bhajana,
Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa. After this, śuddha-sattva
(pure unalloyed transcendental existence) descends in
the heart of the sādhaka in the form of bhāva (spiritual
emotions) and finally prema arises. This is the gradual
development of love of Godhead.



Prema-bhakti actually develops in many sequences but the
most celebrated process and the one that is delineated
in the scriptures is described here. From time
immemorial, all the souls who are averse to Śrī Bhagavān

                          124
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

have been tossed about by the countless waves of misery
in the fathomless ocean of material existence. They have
simply been wandering aimlessly. However, when, by the
special grace of Śrī Bhagavān, the time comes for their
worldly entanglement to end, they attain the company of
devotees. In the association of saints, a sādhaka
obtains the great fortune of hearing the glories of the
bhaktas, of bhakti and of Bhagavān, directly from the
mouths of exalted personalities.

Next, as a result of bhakti-unmukhī-sukṛti (pious merits
related to bhakti), transcendental faith, or
parmarthika-śraddhā, arises within the sādhaka’s heart.
The indication that this kind of śraddhā has awakened in
his heart is that he firmly believes in the statements
of the scriptures and longs to hear hari-kathā. Upon the
dawning of such faith, in a sincere way, he begins to
associate with devotees. At this point he begins to
practise bhajana and his anarthas start to vanish. His
bhajana soon becomes steadfast (niṣṭhā) and he
subsequently acquires a taste (ruci) for the process.
Eventually he develops profound attachment (āsakti) for
his bhajana and for the object of his bhajana, his
worshipful Lord. When this stage matures it becomes
bhāva, the sprouting stage of ecstatic loving emotions.
Then prema finally arises in his heart. This is the
sequence in which prema appears within the heart of a
sādhaka.

Hearing the prayers of Satyavrata Muni Śrī Kṛṣṇa says,
“O sage, you should accept liberation, which includes
complete freedom from all the miseries of material
existence.” The sage responds, “O my Lord, I may
encounter innumerable troubles in this life, and
according to my past deeds and impressions I may have to
take birth in any species of life or even in hell, but I
have no concern for my material fate. I just beg You to
give me abundant prema-bhakti for You. This is my only
prayer.”

All of our ācāryas explain that if a sādhaka wants to
attain this prema-bhakti, he must always seek the
association of those who have prema-bhakti for Śrī
Bhagavān in their heart. Vṛtrāsura’s prayer found in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.11.27) illustrates such a strong
aspiration for this type of association:



mamottamaśloka-janeṣu sakhyaṁ



saṁsāra-cakre bhramataḥ sva-karmabhiḥ



tvan-māyayātmātmaja-dāra-geheṣv-



āsakta-cittasya na nātha bhūyāt



                          125
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017


O Master, I do not want liberation. I am not concerned
if I must repeatedly roam about in this vicious circle
of birth and death as a result of my actions. But I pray
that wherever I go, and in whichever species I take
birth, may I maintain loving friendships with Your dear
devotees who have prema-bhakti for You. O master, I pray
that I will not have to maintain any relation with those
who are subjected to Your illusory potency and are
therefore attached to their bodies, homes, wives,
children, families and others.



A genuine sādhaka should aspire to have such lobha
(intense greed) to attain prema-bhakti for Śrī Bhagavān.
This lobha can appear in anyone in any stage of life. If
rāgānuga-bhakti (spontaneous loving devotion), which is
characterized by intense greed, arises in someone’s
heart, he becomes worshipful for the whole world.
Furthermore, by his prema-bhakti, he even brings Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, who is unconquerable, under his control.

Thus, Śrī Satyavrata Muni prays, “O master, You are
bound by the rope of Your mother’s love. Please
profusely bestow upon me prema-bhakti for Your form as
Dāmodara who is bound by His devotee.”



~ THUS ENDS THE DIG-DARŚINĪ-VṚTTĪ ON THE SEVENTH VERSE ~




Verse Eight




namas te ‘stu dāmne sphurad dīpti-dhāmne

tvadīyodarāyātha viśvasya dhāmne

namo rādhikāyai tvadīya-priyāyai

namo ‘nanta--līlāya devāya tubhyam



SYNONYMS



namaḥ — respectful obeisance; te — Your; astu — let it
be so; dāmne — to the celebrated rope binding Your
belly; sphurat — splendrous; dīpti-dhāmne — an abode of
spiritual effulgence; tvadīya-udarāya — unto Your belly;
atha — furthermore; viśvasya — of the entire universe
[of moving and non-moving entities]; dhāmne — to the
support; namaḥ — I bow down; rādhikāyai — unto Śrīmatī
Rādhikā; tvadīya-priyāyai — unto Your most beloved;
namaḥ — respectful obeisance; ananta--līlāya — to Your

                          126
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

unlimited pastimes; devāya — to the divine Lord; tubhyam
— to You.



TRANSLATION



O Dāmodara, I offer my respectful obeisances to the
celebrated rope binding Your belly, for it is an abode
of brilliant effulgence. I offer my respectful
obeisances to Your belly, which supports the entire
universe of moving and non-moving entities. I offer my
respectful obeisances again and again to Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, Your most beloved, and I offer my respectful
obeisances to You, my divine Lord who performs unlimited
transcendental pastimes.



Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā

evaṁ stutiṁ samāpayan sva-prārthita-siddhaye bhakti-
viśeṣeṇa vā tadīyāsādhāraṇa-parikarāvayava-parivārādīn
api pratyekaṁ pṛthak praṇamati — namaste ‘stviti. te
tava, dāmne udara-bandhana-mahāpāśāya namo ‘stu. katham
bhūtāya? sphurantyā dīptestejaso dhāmne āśrayāya. evaṁ
tasyāpi brahma-ghana-rūpatābhipretā.

athānantaraṁ tvadīyāya udarāya namo ‘stu. pāśa-bandhane
tenaiva saundaryādervātsalya-līlādeśca viśeṣataḥ
prakāśanāt. katham bhūtāya? viśvasya carācara-prapañca-
jātasya, dhāmne ādhārāya. tata eva caturdaśa-
bhuvanātmaka-kamalotpatteḥ. tatraiva ca mātaraṁ prati
vāra-dvayaṁ viśva-rūpa-pradarśanāditi dik. evam udara-
bandhanena viśvasyāpi bandhanāpatteḥ. śrī-yaśodayā
viśvam api vaśī-kṛtam iti dhvanitaṁ.

tathā īśasya bandhanāsambhave ‘pi bandhana-svīkāreṇa
bhakta-vātsalya-viśeṣas tathā bandhanena
prapañcāsaṅkocāvasthityādi-samāveśasya tarkāgocaratvat
aiśvarya-viśeṣaśca dhvanita iti dik.

dāma-namaskārānantaram udara-namaskāraścodaropari-dāmno
varttamānatvāt, yathottaram utkarṣa-vivakṣayā vā.

idānīṁ tadīya priyatama-jana-kṛpayaiva vāñchitaṁ
vāñchātītam api sarvam eva su-siddhyed ityāśayena
bhagavatīṁ śrī-rādhāṁ praṇamati nama iti. tathā ca sarvā
eva gopikā upalakṣyante, kimvā tāsu mukhyata-mātra
saivaikoktā. rādhiketi sarvadaiva śrī-bhagavad-ārādhana-
viśeṣādanvartha-saṅjñā. ataeva tvadīya-priyeti.

yad-vā — rādhiketi rūḍhi-saṅjñā. tataścārādhanādy-
anapekṣayā sā nitya-priyaiveti. tatra ca tvadīyā api
sarve janāḥ priyāstvatprītyā yasyāḥ kimuta vaktavyaṁ
tvamiti. evaṁ tasyās-tasmin prema-viśeṣaḥ sūcitaḥ.
tasyai namaḥ, yadvā, tvat-priyāyai iti tataś-ca yasya
tvam priyo ‘si so’pi jagad-vandyaḥ syāt. eṣā ca tavaiva
priyā atas-tasyai namo’stu.

tataśca tayā saha rāsa-krīḍādikaṁ parama-stutitvenānte
varṇayitum icchan tac ca parama-gopyatvenānabhivyañjayan

                          127
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

— ‘madhureṇa samāpayediti’ nyāyena kiñcideva
saṅketenoddiśan praṇamati.

devāya lokottarāyeti. līlānām api lokottaratābhipretā.
yadvā, śrī-rādhikayā saha nirantara-kṛīḍāparāya,
ataevānanta-līlāya tubhyaṁ nama iti. evaṁ gokula-
viṣayikā sarvāpi līloddiṣṭā, tasmai ca nama iti. bhāva
ityeṣā dik.

iti śrī-dāmodarāṣṭake aṣtama-śloke śrī-sanātana gosvāmi-
kṛtā dig-darśinī-nāmnī ṭīkā samāptā



~ THUS ENDS THE DIG-DARśINī ṭīKā ON THE EIGHTH VERSE ~



Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā Bhāvanuvāda

Now, in this verse beginning with namas te ‘stu, Śrī
Satyavrata Muni concludes his prayers. Either for the
purpose of attaining his cherished goal, or else due to
the exuberance of the uncommonly excellent form of
bhakti that has arisen in his heart, he offers separate
respectful obeisances to the extraordinary rope binding
Śrī Bhagavān’s waist, to His bodily limbs and to His
associates.[xxxi]31

The sage says, “I offer my respectful obeisances to the
wondrous rope binding Your waist.” What is that rope
like? Considering this question, he adds, “It is the
abode or refuge of all splendid effulgence.” Here, he
intends to establish that [due to being replete with
unlimited effulgence] this extraordinary rope consists
of the very nature of concentrated brahma.

The sage continues, “Next, I offer my obeisances to Your
belly because Your beauty and Your vātsalya-līlā only
manifest in matchless magnificence when Your belly is
bound by rope in this way.” What is Your belly like? The
sage says, “Your belly is the basis of the entire
universe consisting of all created beings both moving
and non-moving. In fact, the lotus of the fourteen
planetary systems arose from the lotus-like navel in the
centre of Your belly.” Furthermore, on two occasions,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa showed His mother, Śrī Yaśodā-devī, His viśva-
rūpa, or universal form[xxxii]32, while enacting His
childhood pastimes in Vṛndāvana. It is therefore clearly
understood that simply by binding Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s belly, the
entire universe becomes bound. In other words, the sage
declares that by binding Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Yaśodā-devī had
in fact brought the entire cosmos under her control.

Furthermore it is impossible to bind the all-pervading
unlimited Lord, but He allowed Himself to be bound,
thereby displaying His bhakta-vātsalya, or His
exceptional affection for His devotees. By logic, it
cannot be understood how all the unlimited universes are
encompassed within Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s belly, yet even this
wonderful belly of His was bound! Thus, the sage implies
here that by allowing Himself to be bound, and thereby
allowing all the universes to be bound — a pastime
completely beyond all logical considerations — Śrī

                          128
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

Bhagavān displayed His unparalleled opulence and
grandeur (aiśvarya).

After the sage offers obeisances to the rope, He next
offers obeisances to the Lord’s belly, thus implying
that the rope is resting there. Also, it is implied that
he is offering obeisances in order of increasing
superiority.

At this point, the sage understands that only by the
mercy of Śrī Bhagavān’s loved ones can he attain his
cherished goal and that which he cannot even conceive
of. With this understanding, he offers obeisances to Śrī
Bhagavān’s most beloved, bhagavatī Śrīmatī Rādhikā, by
the words namo rādhikāyai. In fact, by offering
obeisances to Śrī Rādhikā, the sage actually conveys his
obeisances to all the gopīs. Or, a different
understanding is that the sage is offering his pranāma
to Śrīmatī Rādhikā alone because he regards Her as the
foremost of all the gopīs.

[Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī now sheds light on why the sage
uses the word rādhikā:] Śrī Rādhā is constantly immersed
in Śrī Bhagavān’s worship (ārādhanā). That is, She is
forever rapt in arousing His pleasure. It is through
this word alone, ārādhanā, that one can understand the
profound meaning of Śrī Rādhikā’s name. Therefore, the
sage says to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, “Śrī Rādhikā is tvadīya-priyāyai
— Your most beloved.”

Alternatively, “Rādhikā” can be understood by its
conventional sense without any consideration of
etymology. In that case, it is understood that the sage
says, “Even without considering Her worship (ārādhanā)
of You, She is simply Your nitya-priyā (eternal
beloved).”

Furthermore, the sage says, “Due to the love that all
Your devotees (tvadīya) have for You, they are very dear
to Her, so what can be said about how dear You must be
to Her!? In other words, You are Her nitya-priya
(eternal beloved).” In this way, the sage is proclaiming
Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s exceptional love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

His words can be understood in two ways: “I offer my
respectful obeisances to You, the beloved of Rādhikā.”
Or, “I offer my obeisances to Your most beloved, Śrī
Rādhikā. Whoever loves You is worthy of adoration by the
whole universe. Therefore, since Śrī Rādhikā is Your
most beloved, I offer my most respectful obeisances to
Her.”

At the end of his prayers, he wanted to describe Śrīmatī
Rādhikā’s pastimes with Śrī Kṛṣṇa, such as rāsa-līlā,
which are most worshipful. However, recognizing that
such pastimes are extremely confidential, he did not
describe them explicitly.[xxxiii]33 Instead, according
to the popular adage “madhureṇa samāpayet — all should
conclude sweetly,” he submitted his obeisances to
madhura rasa through a slight hint, with the words namo
‘nanta līlāya.

Next, Śrī Satyavrata Muni says “devāya — I offer my
respectful obeisances to the playful divinity or to He

                          129
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

who is supra-mundane — Śrī Bhagavān.” By mentioning Śrī
Dāmodara-Kṛṣṇa’s divinity, the sage implies that all of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes are similarly aprākṛta
(transcendental).

Otherwise, [since the word deva is derived from div, “he
who is ever rejoicing in playful sports”] the sage says,
“O Deva, because You are eternally engaged in playful
pastimes with Śrī Rādhikā, I offer my obeisances to You,
the performer of unlimited pastimes (ananta-līlā).”

Here the word ananta-līlā certainly refers to all of Śrī
Bhagavān’s pastimes in Gokula as well. Thus, yet another
meaning of the sage’s words is illuminated: “I offer my
respectful obeisances to each and every one of Your
transcendental pastimes.”



~ THUS ENDS THE ENGLISH RENDITION OF

THE DIG-DARŚINĪ-ṬĪKĀ ON THE EIGHTH VERSE ~



Dig-darśinī-vṛtti

As Śrī Satyavrata Muni was offering prayers to Śrī
Dāmodara-Kṛṣṇa, he considered, “In order to please Śrī
Dāmodara-Kṛṣṇa, I must first please His associates, and
especially His most beloved, Śrīmatī Rādhikā. If I
please Her, I will easily attain the mercy of Śrī
Dāmodara-Kṛṣṇa.” With this consideration in mind, the
sage proceeded to offer his respects to Śrīmatī Rādhikā
with the words namo rādhikāyai tvadīya-priyāyai.

In the fifth verse, in the course of Śrī Satyavrata
Muni’s prayer, we notice an escalation in his mood of
deep longing. The escalation of this mood culminates in
this verse in which he prays to Śrīmatī Rādhikā with
wholehearted devotion for the perfection of his
cherished goal. Following his example, the rāgānuga
sādhaka, after determining his cherished goal, should
engage his time in praying, remembering and worshipping
Śrī Bhagavān along with those associates of His who have
the same sort of love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa as he longs to
attain. Therefore, it is stated in the scriptures:



kṛṣṇaṁ smaran janaṁ cāsya



preṣṭhaṁ nija-samīhitam



tat-tat-kathā-rataś cāsau



kuryād vāsaṁ vraje sadā


                            130
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017



Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.294)

The devotee should constantly remember Śrī Kṛṣṇa along
with Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s dear most associates whom he chooses to
follow. While permanently living in Vraja, he should
become attached to always hearing the narrations of
their pastimes with Śrī Kṛṣṇa.



The methodology of rāgānuga-bhakti is as follows: the
devotee should remember his beloved, worshipful Lord,
the youthful Nanda-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and the Lord’s
dear associates (such as Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī or any other
associate) who possess the mood that the devotee aspires
for. Absorbed in hearing about their pastimes with Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, he should reside forever in the cowherd
settlement of Śrī Nanda — including Śrī Vṛndāvana, Śrī
Govardhana, Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa and so on — which are
saturated with the particular humours of those pastimes.
These pastime-places of Śrī Kṛṣṇa are enriched with the
vrajavāsīs’ love, especially śṛṅgāra-rasa (conjugal
love). Moreover, they act as stimulus to evoke a
sādhaka’s emotions in his own specific mood (rasa-
uddipaka) and prompt his remembrance of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
pastimes (līlā-uddipaka). Therefore, it is prescribed
that, if possible, one should physically reside in
places such as Śrī Vṛndāvana within the area of Śrī
Nanda’s Vraja. But if it is not possible for him to
reside there physically, he should always reside there
by mind:



sevā sādhaka-rūpeṇa



siddha-rūpeṇa cātra hi



tad-bhāva-lipsunā kāryā



vraja-lokānusārataḥ



Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.295)

Desiring to obtain their particular bhāva, he should
closely follow in the footsteps of a particular
associate in Vraja. Under their guidance, he should
engage in service both in his external form as a
sādhaka, and internally with his perfected spiritual
body.



The devotee should mentally serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa (manasī-

                          131
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

sevā) in the way that he most cherishes in his
internally conceived, perfected spiritual body (siddha-
rūpa), which is perfectly suited for rendering such
service. He should perform such manasī-sevā under the
guidance and direction of the sakhīs such as Śrī Lalitā
and Śrī Viśākhā, and of the mañjarīs like Śrī Rūpa
Mañjarī. With his physical body in which he performs
sādhana (sādhaka-rūpa), he should serve in the footsteps
of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī and the other
Gosvāmīs in their line.

Śrī Satyavrata Muni realizes that Śrī Bhagavān has never
allowed Himself to be bound in any of His other
incarnations. Even Śrī Baladeva Prabhu, despite living
in Vraja where He is always absorbed in natural human-
like pastimes, has never allowed Himself to be bound.
Yet the Lord of all lords, Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa —
the son of Śrī Nanda and Yaśodā — was bound with the
rope of His mother’s affection (vātsalya-prema) for Him.
Therefore, that rope is not an ordinary piece of string.
Rather it is the direct embodiment of Śrī Yaśodā’s
maternal affection. Eager to fulfil his cherished desire
or to become as fortunate as the rope, the sage begins
this verse by first praying to that rope — namas te ‘stu
dāmne.

The sage says tvadīyodarāyātha viśvasya dhāmne, which
indicates that Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s belly is boundless, endless,
fathomless and indivisible. It has no limit, neither
above nor below, so no one can bind it. Once when Śrī
Kṛṣṇa was drinking His mother’s breast milk, He yawned
and showed her the countless universes present within
His mouth. On another occasion, He ate some dirt while
playing with His friends. After they complained to His
mother, she forced open His mouth to see whether or not
He had actually eaten any. When she looked inside His
mouth she saw countless universes. She began to wonder,
“Am I asleep or awake? Perhaps some illusion has
overwhelmed me.” She then bathed Kṛṣṇa with cow dung and
cow urine in order to ward off any evil spirits. She
called for brāhmaṇas to recite special mantras in order
to protect her child, and she also gave in charity to
everyone so He would live a long, healthy life. Just
see, the Vrajavāsīs give in charity so that Kṛṣṇa will
be blessed with a long and healthy life, yet Śrī Kṛṣṇa
is He who blesses all the inhabitants of the three
worlds. They perform so many rituals with vows and
fervent prayers for His protection. Such are the sweet,
intimate pastimes of Vraja. It is this intimacy that
controls Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s belly is the shelter of all the universes
full of moving and non-moving entities. It is therefore
not possible to bind His belly. Yet, although it is
boundless, it became limited because of His bhakta-
vātsalya, and was bound. Therefore, Śrī Satyavrata Muni
says, “I offer my obeisances to Your glorious belly.”

Near the very end of his aṣṭaka, the sage pays his
obeisances to Śrī Rādhikā: namo rādhikāyai tvadīya-
priyāyai. Who is Śrīmatī Rādhikā? It is said:




                          132
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

kṛṣṇa-vāñchā-pūrti-rūpa kare ārādhane



ataeva ‘rādhikā’ nāma purāṇe vākhāne



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 4.87)

Because She worships Śrī Kṛṣṇa by fulfilling all His
desires, She has been called “Rādhikā” in all the
Purāṇas.



rādhā-kṛṣṇa eka ātmā, dui deha dhari’



anyonye vilase rasa āsvādana kari’



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 4.56)

Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa are one soul, but They have manifested
two forms just to relish each other’s love by performing
various sweet pastimes.



Śrī Prabhodānanda Sarasvatī glorifies Śrī Rādhā as
follows:



yasya kadāpi vasanāñcala-khelanottha-

dhanyāti-dhanya-pavanena kṛtārtha-māni

yogīndra-durgama-gatir madhusūdano ‘pi

tasya namo ‘stu vṛṣabhānu-bhuvo diśe ‘pi

Śrī Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi (2)

I offer my obeisances to even the direction facing the
daughter of Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja — Śrī Rādhikā. She
completely captivates the heart of Madhusūdana Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, the performer of honey-like pastimes whom the
greatest yogīs rarely attain. When a gentle gust of wind
playfully touches Her cloth and carries its sweet
fragrance towards Kṛṣṇa and touches His body, He
embraces it to His heart and feels that His life has
become blessedly fulfilled.




He also prays:

venuṁ karān nipatitaṁ skhalitaṁ śikhaṇḍaṁ

                          133
Damodarastakam.txt                                5/5/2017


bhraṣṭaṁ ca pīta-vasanaṁ vraja-rāja-sūnoḥ

yasyāḥ kaṭākṣa-śara-ghāta-vimūrcchitasya

tāṁ rādhikāṁ paricarāmi kadā rasena

Śrī Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi (39)



When the heart of Vrajarāja’s son, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is pierced
by the arrows of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s sidelong glance, He
drops His flute, His peacock feather falls from His
turban, and His upper cloth becomes dishevelled as He
begins to faint. Oh, when will I render Her loving
service that is saturated with rasa?

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.30.28), it is described that
while the gopīs were anxiously searching for Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
they saw a young lady’s footprints next to His, and
exclaimed:



anayārādhito nūnaṁ



bhagavān harir īśvaraḥ



yan no vihāya govindaḥ



prīto yām anayad rahaḥ



Surely this gopī (Śrīmatī Rādhikā) has truly worshipped
(ārādhito) Bhagavān Śrī Hari, the supreme autocrat.
Otherwise why has Govinda left us all and only taken Her
with Him?



Śrī Rādhā is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s eternal beloved. Śrīla Sanātana
Gosvāmī confirms this in his commentary by saying,
“tataś-cārādhanādyanapekṣayā sā nitya-priyaiveti — Even
without consi-dering Her worship of You, She is
eternally Your dear most beloved (nitya-priyā).”
Consequently, Śrī Rādhā is dear to all.

Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī displays his firm
dedication to Śrī Rādhā in Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā (9):

madīśa nāthatve vraja-vipina-candraṁ vraja-vaneśvarīṁ

tan nāthatve tad atula-sakhītve tu lalitām

viśākhāṁ śikṣālī-vitaraṇa-gurutve priya-saro


                          134
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

girindrau tat-prekṣā lalita-rati datve smara manaḥ

O mind, always regard vraja-vipina-candra Śrī Kṛṣṇa to
be the life and soul of my worshipful Goddess, Śrī
Rādhikā, the Queen of Vṛndāvana. Meditate on Her as my
worshipful Goddess, and consider Śrī Lalitā to be Her
peerless friend. Respect Śrī Viśākhā as my instructor in
serving the Divine Couple, and regard Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa
and Girirāja-Govardhana to be those who grant darśana of
Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and bestow sublime attachment to Their
lotus feet.



Here, Śrīla Dāsa Gosvāmī’s inner feeling is: “My most
worshipful Goddess is Śrī Rādhikā alone, and Śrī Kṛṣṇa
is the beloved of Her life. My relation with Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
and my love for Him is based on my relationship with
Śrīmatī Rādhikā.”




Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s unlimited intimate pastimes with Śrī Rādhikā
are especially difficult to describe. For this reason,
Śrī Satyavrata Muni uses the words namo ‘nanta līlāya in
order to offer his obeisances to the quintessence of all
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s unlimited pastimes: rāsa-līlā. Śrīla Jīvā
Gosvāmī writes, “Sporting in the water, feeding each
other, roaming about in the forest, drinking honey-
liquor and dancing are all included in rāsa-līlā.”
Moreover, by saying namo ‘nanta līlāya Śrī Satyavrata
Muni is offering his obeisances to the performer of
ananta-līlā, or to He whose pastimes have no end: Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.”

Nothing but the mercy of the associates of Śrī Rādhikā
and Śrī Kṛṣṇa can fulfil our longing. Even if Śrī Kṛṣṇa
wanted to give us prema, He could only give us the prema
that resides within His own heart, which is viṣaya-
jātiya prema (or the type of love that is felt by He who
is the object of everyone’s devotion). But our aim is to
attain the prema that the gopīs have, which is āśraya-
jātiya prema (or the type of love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa that is
felt by the devotees). Especially for those of us
following the rūpānuga line, only Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī and
other mañjarīs, the maidservants of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, can
make our deepest hopes come true because they know the
perfect art of serving Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.

Our final prayer is:



bhajāmi rādhām aravinda-netraṁ



smarāmi rādhāṁ madhura-smitāsyām



vadāmi rādhāṁ karuṇā-bharādraṁ

                          135
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017




tato mamānyāsti gatir na kāpi



Śrī Viśākhānandadābhidhā Stotram (131)

I worship Śrīmatī Rādhikā who has lotus-petal eyes, I
remember Śrīmatī Rādhikā whose face is sweetly smiling,
and I speak of Her whose heart is melting with
compassion. My life has no other purpose than serving
Her.



~ THUS ENDS THE DIG-DARŚINĪ-VṚTTĪ ON THE EIGHTH VERSE ~




Appendix


The following account is an excerpt from Śrīla Bhakti
Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī — His Life and Teachings by Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja:



“Once, during the month of Kārtika, Śrīla Gurupādapadma
had brought his noble presence to Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya
Maṭha. One day, he was sitting in his bhajana-kuṭīra
chanting harināma, absorbed in transcendental emotions.
I had sat down nearby and was silently reading the
chapter on Śrī Dāma-bandhana-līlā from Śrī Gopāla-
campūḥ. As I read, I became completely fascinated with
Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī’s beautiful description of this
pastime. Finally, unable to restrain myself, I ran over
to Śrīla Gurudeva and said, ‘Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī was a
mahāpuruṣa, a most exalted personality, and an
unrivalled philosopher. At the same time, he was a
transcendental, rasika poet, whose work is eloquent,
touching and descriptive. Although such a combination of
vast erudition and poetic artistry is rarely found in
this world, when we read his narration of Śrī Dāma-
bandhana-līlā, we see the two unified in an astonishing
manner.’

“I began to read that description aloud. As I neared the
end of the story, my Śrīla Gurudeva suddenly began
weeping. An incessant flow of tears cascaded down his
cheeks, and other symptoms of spiritual ecstasy were
clearly visible in his form. I have only seen such an
expression of extraordinary spiritual emotions once or
twice in my life.”



Dāma-bandhana-nibandhanam

The determination to bind Śrī Kṛṣṇa with rope

                            136
Damodarastakam.txt                                5/5/2017




&

Yamala-arjuna-mocanam

The deliverance of the twin arjuna trees



From Chapter Eight of Śrī Gopāla-campūḥ (pūrva)



by Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmīpāda



Editor’s note: Every morning before Śrī Kṛṣṇa takes the
cows out to graze an assembly of Vrajavāsīs gather
together at Śrī Nanda Bābā’s palace. For the pleasure of
Śrī Nanda Bābā and his four brothers, as well as for Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Balarāma, and the other Vrajavāsīs, Snigdha-
kaṇṭha and Madhu-kaṇṭha narrate Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. What
these twin brothers narrated one day is about to be
described.



The next morning in that assembly when all the gopas,
who are part of the vaiśya community, had gracefully
taken their seats Śrī Snigdha-kaṇṭha began:

The month of Kārtika was nearing conclusion. Early one
morning, Śrī Yaśodā gladly beheld her sleeping little
Gopāla whose eyes, now closed, resemble two blue lotus
flowers. Mother Yaśodā contentedly gazed upon her child
and began to gently and lovingly stroke Him with her
hands which are as soft as fresh budding leaves. When
she noted with relief that He was again in deep sleep
she slowly and silently left His bedside. She entered
the courtyard on her own, tied her cloth tightly around
her and started churning some yoghurt to use in her
home.

Today, on the affectionate and insistent invitation of
Śrī Nanda Mahārāja’s elder brother Śrī Upananda, Śrī
Rohiṇī-devī, accompanied by her son Baladeva, mounted a
magnificent chariot and went to his home. The
maidservants were also coming and going while performing
their different services. There was quite a lot to do
because the month of Mārga-śīrṣa, the topmost month of
the year, was approaching and the annual festival of
Indra-pūjā, which is observed by the people in general,
and which has long been celebrated in traditional
culture, was at hand. (1)

When all the maidservants were thus engaged in their
respective tasks, the queen of Vraja, Śrī Yaśodā,
personally set to churning the yoghurt with great care.
To encourage her son’s pleasant slumber she sang sweetly
as she churned. Absorbed in thoughts of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, with
her mind and her soul fully offered to Him, she sang

                            137
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

detailed descriptions of His childhood pastimes, as her
eyes admired His lovely face. (2)

Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī has mentioned this in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.9.2): “One day when all the maidservants
were engaged in various tasks, Śrī Yaśodā, the wife of
Śrī Nanda, personally began to churn yoghurt. At that
time songs about Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s childhood pastimes came to
her mind, and she began to sing them.” (3)

As dark complexioned Vrajeśvarī Śrī Yaśodā churned, her
arms repeatedly moved back and forth. A series of
girdles embedded with jewels encircled her waist-cloth,
and beautiful bangles adorned her arms. Her ornaments
sounded in time with the vigorous movement of her waist
and arms. Meanwhile, her son drowsily opened His eyes a
little. As Śrī Vrajeśvarī beheld the charm of His lotus
face, she churned with greater intensity and sang: (4)



gokula-pati-kula-tilakaṁ tvam asīha

kṛta-sukṛta-vraja racita-sukha-vraja! nayanānandi-
samīha!

O my darling son, You are the crest ornament of the
dynasty of gokula-pati Śrī Nanda Mahārāja. The
Vrajavāsīs must have performed greatly pious acts to
witness You bringing joy to their hearts. Your
activities delight the eyes of all.



ānandodbhava-janma-mahotsava nandita-gopa-samāja!

pūtanikā-mṛti-nava-maṅgala-kṛti valayita gokula-rāja!

You rouse the joy of the cowherd community by the
blissful festival of Your birth. And by the recent and
auspicious act of killing Pūtanā, You have spread the
glory of Your father, the king of Gokula, far and wide.



dhairya-nivartana-śakaṭa-vivartanam anubhavyena parīta!

sa-tṛṇāvartaka-vāyu-nivartaka parameśenānīta!

After eliminating Śakaṭāsura, who had caused everyone to
lose all composure, You were blessed by the auspicious
rituals of the brāhamaṇas. Later, Śrī Nanda’s worshipful
deity, Parameśvara, returned You to us after destroying
Tṛṇāvarta along with His storm.



madhura-prāṅgaṇa-viracita-riṅgaṇa jalaja-nayana supuṇya!

nānā-keliṣu nṛtya-kalāliṣu darśita-vara naipuṇya!

O lotus-eyed boy of incomparable piety, You used to
crawl about on Your tiny hands and knees in our charming
courtyard. You have shown great expertise in playing

                          138
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

various games and demonstrating many varieties of dance.

tarṇaka-bāladhi śabalita-tanvadhi valayita mañjula-
śobha!

jaratī-nivahe kautuka-kalahe prabalita-mithyā-lobha!

When You used to grab the tails of the calves they would
run away, dragging You along. At those times Your
gorgeous form was pulled through the dust and cow-dung,
which gave You an even more enchanting splendour. While
playfully quarrelling with the elderly gopīs, You would
fruitlessly increase the confusion created by Your
antics.



māṁ mātaram anu-sukham udvitanu pratataṁ satataṁ kṛṣṇa!

drutam urarī kuru tanu-vṛddhiṁ puru-khelāvali-kṛta-
tṛṣṇa!

O Kṛṣṇa, since I am Your mother, forever continue to
expand my already boundless joy. Quickly grow healthy
and strong, and fulfil our desire by delighting our eyes
with Your many, lively pastimes.



tribhuvana-darśana vismaya-marśana niścita-vaiṣṇava-māya

hari-varivasyā sukha-datamaḥ syā vigata-jarāmara-kāya

At first, You caused bewilderment by displaying the
three worlds within Your mouth. Later however, it was
understood that by doing so, You confirmed the existence
of Lord Viṣṇu’s spiritual illusory potency — vaiṣṇavī
māyā.[xxxiv]34 O Kṛṣṇa, may Your body be free from
ageing and death, and may You become the bestower of
bliss by serving Śrī Hari. (5)



Then, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the ocean of eternal charm, woke up and
climbed down from the bed, crying. (6)



As He stretched His body, He took long breaths and
rubbed His sleepy eyes. Now fully awake, He cried, “Mā,
Mā.” Hearing the sound of the churning rod, Śrī Gopāla,
tottered over to His mother. (7)

Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the best of the blessed and the king of
beauty stopped the rod from churning. Śrī Yaśodā’s
motherly affection for Śrī Kṛṣṇa expanded within her
heart, completely filling it with the desire to cradle
Him, and in her mood there was a trace of fear and
grief. As her motherly affection surged, she fed her
young child the milk that spontaneously poured from her
breasts in a stream. (8)

Mother Yaśodā is gracious and splendrous like the rainy
season. Her breasts began to shower streams of milk that

                          139
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

resembled a continuous downpour and Śrī Kṛṣṇa, like a
cātaka bird, fittingly and gleefully began to drink that
downpour. (9)

With great eagerness, Śrī Kṛṣṇa drank the milk of that
blessed breast. He had only half satisfied his hunger
when Mother Yaśodā noticed that the milk in the next
room was boiling over. Although her child was eager for
her breast-milk, she immediately put Him down, although
it was apparently unwise of her to do so, and hastened
inside to save the milk. She did not carry Him as she
ran, fearing that He might fall. (10)

Madhu-kaṇṭha interrupted, “Snigdha-kaṇṭha, what are you
saying, my brother? That is illogical. How could it be
that Śrī Yaśodā left her starving baby to go elsewhere?
She is the faultless ideal among all loving mothers
within this universe.”

Snigdha-kaṇṭha laughed and said, “My dear elder brother,
just wait and listen to me attentively. In reality, her
leaving her child to save the milk is also a lovely
pastime of motherly affection.”

Madhu-kaṇṭha was sceptical. “How?” he asked.

Snigdha-kaṇṭha replied:

In the absence of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the residents of Vraja see
that their bodies, homes and other possessions are more
or less waning. From the day He was born, His parents,
Śrī Nanda and Śrī Yaśodā, considered that all those
residents of Vraja, as well as all the items used to
serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa, have abundant mamatā for Him. Even Śrī
Brahmā confirms this in his prayers in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(10.14.35): “O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the residents of Vraja have
completely offered their homes, their wealth, their
relatives, their beloveds, their soul, their bodies,
their children, their lives and their minds — everything
— at Your feet. How, in all fairness, could You not
award them a result superior to what you awarded Pūtanā
and other demons?”

What can be said of the love that Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s own mother
and father have for Him, when Śrī Brahmā himself has
glorified the love of the other Vrajavāsīs? All of the
Vrajavāsīs’ rich milk and yoghurt, as well as their
bodies, homes and other possessions are exclusively
meant for the service of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Thus, in Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
service it is befitting to have more mamatā, or
attachment, for the objects used to serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa than
for Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself.

Thus it is specifically understood that Mother Yaśodā’s
intention in leaving Kṛṣṇa to save the milk was most
exalted. This has been sanctioned in the scriptures that
advocate bhakti. The import is that it is appropriate
for Mother Yaśodā to have more attachment for the
objects that are dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa than for Śrī Kṛṣṇa
Himself. Indeed, this is the eternal nature of an
affectionate mother. (11)

Having concluded this, it is only fitting that Śrī
Yaśodā first attend to those objects used in the service

                          140
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. At such times, she tolerates many personal
inconveniences and remains unaware of her various
household duties. With the loving mood born of her
permanent emotion (sthāyībhāva) that “this is my son”,
she is always aware of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s needs more than her
own bodily or household needs. She is always conscious
of His complete dependence on her and her perpetual
attitude is, “Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s necessities are my
necessities; and fulfilling them is my sole obligation.”
Only the residents of Vraja know what is involved in
expressing this type of affection. Even when they
chastise Śrī Kṛṣṇa and punish Him, He knows that they
are just taking looking after Him. This is because a
parent’s chastisement is considered part of loving and
raising their children. There is no limit to what I can
say about the boundless expression of their parental
affection. (12)

And if the residents of Vraja feel angry with Kṛṣṇa out
of their affection for Him, being the object of their
extreme mamatā, He is even prepared to undergo bondage.
Just see, even fire in the form of lightening sometimes
appears in dense rain clouds.[xxxv]35 (13)

The evidence for the above statement is that both Mother
Yaśodā and her son benefit each other by their mutual
love. Listen as I describe their affectionate dealings.
When Mother Yaśodā went to take the milk off the stove,
for the pleasure of her son, she first comforted Him
saying, “My darling son, may all Your problems and
difficulties come to me. Watch this pot of yoghurt for
just a minute while I check on the boiling milk. I will
return quickly.” (14)

Ahh, just as swiftly as she put her son aside and left
that churning place, she returned. Even in that time,
milk poured from her breasts out of deep motherly
affection, wetting her blouse. It poured so much that it
made the floor slippery. (15)

Still, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s wishes had been checked and He was
most perturbed. In anger He bit His trembling reddish
lips and burst into tears. Then, picking up a small
grinding stone, which was lying nearby, He broke the pot
of half churned yoghurt. However He did not even get the
slightest bit of butter from it. (16)

Poets have described His beauty at that time: “Little
Kṛṣṇa’s white teeth, a series of moons, were enveloped
by the reddish hue reflecting from His lips. His two
eyes, resembling restless partridges, were full of
tears, and His lotus hands shone as they vigorously
sloshed yoghurt here and there. (17)

In this way when the half churned yoghurt from the pot
covered the entire floor, another type of festival
manifested. (18)

Just then His eyes caught sight of a pot of fresh butter
hanging from the ceiling in the adjoining room. He ran
to the door, slid the latch aside, and pushed it open.
Then, moving the door-stopper back into place, He
slipped into the room and closed the door behind Him. He
used a nearby cot as a step, lowered the pot of butter

                          141
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

and started to eat it. Thereafter, he took the remaining
butter and secretly sneaked out through the window of
that room. (19—20)

Meanwhile, Mother Yaśodā had stopped the milk from
boiling over into the fire. The milk cooled down to a
simmer within seconds, and she took it off the stove.
She dashed back to where she had left her son only to
find that He was gone! However, seeing evidence of her
son’s activities, she laughed in mixed anger and
amusement. (21)

At first, out of suspicion, she became perturbed. But
then Yogamāyā manifested an aerial voice, which gave her
knowledge and made her laugh. (22)

The aerial voice said, “Feeling hungry and thirsty, your
little bumblebee made a hole in the bud of a lotus
flower that had no pollen. When He saw that it was
merely water that began dripping from that flower, He
became disappointed and went to another lotus flower
where He has found a big supply of honey. The import is
that in order to get fresh butter, your son performed
all these deeds. He first broke the churning pot, but
did not find butter there. He then found it hanging in
the next room. (23)

“You have displayed your intelligence by deciding to
leave your baby and go cool down the milk, but if you
can calm the anger of your child, you will receive even
more praise.” (24)

Upon hearing the aerial voice Mother Yaśodā laughed and
followed the thief’s conspicuous yoghurt-footprints to
the next room. She managed to force the doors open. Then
she stepped inside only to behold her son’s other
matchless mischief. Tracing His path of escape, she
finally spotted Him. His restless eyes were full of
fear. (25—26)

He was thinking, “I have just stolen fresh butter. If My
mother sees Me here, how will I face her?” His eyes
moved about so frantically that they seemed to be on the
verge of leaping into His ears. In other words His eyes
and His ears were watching out for His mother. (27)

Mother Yaśodā saw Him sitting restless-eyed atop the
grinding mortar that He had overturned with all His
strength, feeding butter to the monkeys. Astonished by
this, she smiled softly. (28)

She quietly crept up behind her guilty son. It is said
that a wealthy person only has two eyes, but a thief has
a hundred. That is to say, a wealthy person only has two
eyes to look after his treasures, but a thief has a
hundred to spot that person’s wealth and steal it.
Although a person may be extremely careful to protect
his wealth, it is not inaccessible to a thief. (29)

By nature, monkeys are proud of exhibiting their
strength, but today their bellies were fully satisfied
so when they saw Mother Yaśodā advancing, holding a
stick covered with cloth, they immediately scampered up
the nearby trees. This alerted Kṛṣṇa to what was

                          142
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

happening, and He also fled. (30)

Seeing her son fleeing, Mother Yaśodā broke into a run
and began to chase Him. A shower of flowers fell from
her braid. “O king of thieves,” she loudly called,
“where are You going? Stop! Stop!” Hearing this, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa uttered a faint cry and a smile appeared on His
face, enhancing His beauty. Mother Yaśodā ran quickly
after Him. Although she came close, she could not catch
Him. It was as if two clouds, one big and one small,
were being chased by the wind from west to east, across
the sky, the larger cloud unable to catch up with the
smaller one. Similarly, this mother could not catch her
son.[xxxvi]36 (31—32)

Little Kṛṣṇa was confident that His mother would never
pursue Him beyond the main gate, for she would be seen
running in public. Therefore, He intentionally ran in
that direction. Mother Yaśodā knew that at that time of
day no one would be outside the gate so she just kept
chasing Him. (33)



As long as Kṛṣṇa ran without looking back, His mother
was unable to catch Him, but as soon as He turned His
head back in fear, she caught Him by His hand. (34)

He frantically moved His eyes about as if trying to
continue running away. He began crying in an attempt to
reduce Mother Yaśodā’s anger, and out of impudence He
started trembling artificially, but He did not give up
His childish pranks. Whenever she forcefully held His
face so that she could look Him in the eye, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
turned His face in such a way as to wipe the oily gloss
of butter from His mouth and make it look dry. (35—36)

Threatening Him, Mother Yaśodā said, “O Kṛṣṇa, You have
given me so much trouble. Before You steal from Your
home, first look at this stick in my hand.” When she saw
her lotus-eyed son’s terror upon hearing these words,
Śrī Vrajeśvarī tossed that stick aside. (37)

“Don’t beat me, Mother!” Kṛṣṇa beseeched her.

The queen of Vraja scorned Him, “But You are a thief, a
thief!” Laughing to herself, she suddenly and forcefully
instigated a quarrel with Him. (38)

“Ahh, You are the king of thieves (cora)!”

Kṛṣṇa protested, “No Mother, Cora took birth in your
dynasty, not mine.[xxxvii]37 Why would we have a cora
(thief) in our home?” In this way, Mother Yaśodā and her
butter-stealing son argued with each other. (39)

“Oh, really? Well, who broke the pot of yoghurt?” she
again inquired.

Kṛṣṇa replied, “The Supreme Lord. He was punishing you.”

“But,” she continued, “who fed butter to the monkeys?”

“He who created them.”

                          143
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017


“No!” she exclaimed, “I suspect that You always feast
with great relish on the fresh butter we prepare for use
in religious sacrifices.”



Mother Yaśodā scolded her son as she would a thief, but
finally her heart softened. She laughed with anger and
said, “Just admit Your theft; give up Your arrogance.”

Thus pressed by His mother, Śrī Kṛṣṇa burst into tears.
“Look, Mā,” He sobbed, “when you anxiously rushed to
save the milk, your ankle-bells struck the pot of
yoghurt and it broke. How is this My fault?” (40—43)

“And the monkeys,” He continued, “were inspired by the
Supreme Lord to sneak into the house to steal. When they
began taking the butter, I caught them. What did I do
wrong?” (44)

“And then,” He retorted, “the stick in your hand
frightened Me, so even though I am completely innocent,
I fled like a thief. You saw I was so afraid, but still
you mercilessly chased Me, all for no reason!” (45)

Mother Yaśodā spoke as if lamenting: “Oh, You who are
the king of those skilled in argument.” she said. “You
are the best of thieves. Although You are the son of Śrī
Vraja-rāja, the most noble of men, Your nature has
become like monkeys’ because You are fond of them.” When
fearful Śrī Kṛṣṇa heard this, He pointed to the forest
and said, “If I am a monkey, then I will live in the
forest,” which slightly frightened His mother. (46)

“Who knows?” she thought, “this arrogant boy could
easily put His threat into action. To keep Him from
running into the forest, I must tie Him up; otherwise,
it will be very difficult for me to single-handedly
manage my household duties and this child.”(47)

Turning to Kṛṣṇa, she openly said, “You thief! You
restless boy! You who bewilder one and all by the charm
of Your flickering eyes, why don’t You simply accept my
prohibitions? Look! I will tie You up and then quickly
return to the house. If You have any strength left You
can show it to me by trying to steal something else.”
(48)

As she started to bind Him, His eyes became moist, and
in fury He began to loudly cry out, “O Mother Rohiṇī!”
He shrieked, “where have you gone with My big brother?
Because you are not here today, this mother is tying Me
up. Come quickly!” (49)

Since Śrī Rohiṇī was far away, she could not hear His
cries. But the ladies from neighbouring homes who had
previously complained about Kṛṣṇa and who had chastised
Him, did hear His cries. They informed each other of the
fun and assembled there. As if taunting her, they
reminded Śrī Yaśodā of their complaints. “Has this thief
done something mischievous in your home also?” they
laughed. (50)


                          144
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

Mother Yaśodā, however, was bent on teaching her son a
lesson, so she paid no heed to their remarks. Snatching
up a silk ribbon that had fallen from her braid, she
immediately began binding her son’s waist to a grinding
mortar lying in the courtyard, with the same persistence
it takes to bind the neck of a calf. But that silk
ribbon was two fingers too short. (51)

She took another ribbon from her hair and joined it to
the first one, but still the same problem confronted
her. Amazed, she then tried to bind Kṛṣṇa’s waist with
several churning ropes that the gopīs handed her, but
still Vrajeśvarī could not make up that gap of two
fingers. (52)

From a distance, a cloud that is actually touching the
peak of a mountain may be mistakenly perceived as being
quite far beyond it. In a similar sense, although the
full length of rope was actually touching Śrī Kṛṣṇa, it
could not bind His apparently tiny waist. The rope was
always two fingers too short.[xxxviii]38 (53)

Observing this, the ladies of Vraja laughed and
remarked, “O Vrajeśvarī, we already told you that this
boy surely has some extraordinary illusory potency. On
account of it, He even surpasses Kaphallak, the foremost
among thieves. He seems to be satisfied simply by eating
stolen goods, or, by such acts He delights both the
donors of those goods and the enjoyers of them. He is
gradually gaining quite a reputation as one who steals
others’ possessions.

Mother Yaśodā responded “What does this recently born
child know [about being a theif]? He does not know good
from bad. But it seems that you are the ones who know
some evil trickery. Although you actually favour Him,
externally you behave in a contrary way.”

At this, the ladies laughed. “O respected Śrī Yaśodā,”
they said. “we take an oath at your feet, that we have
nothing to do with these astonishing powers.”(54)

Finally, Śrī Yaśodā reasoned, “As Śrī Gargācārya said,
surely some potency of Śrī Bhagavān surrounds my son.
This infant boy cannot know what He is doing.” (55)

Just to put an end to this bewilderment Śrī Yaśodā
repeatedly called for more and more churning ropes from
the homes of those gopīs. Despite her persistence in her
endeavour to bind her son, she could not find any way to
accomplish the seemingly impossible task. Instead, Śrī
Yaśodā, the queen of Vraja, dripped with perspiration
and curls of hair fell over her face again and again.
Finally she became completely exhausted. (56-57)

As long as Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who was born in the Yadu dynasty,
[xxxix]39 stubbornly refused to be bound, Mother
Yaśodā’s persistent efforts were fruitless, just as one
whose fate is grasped by an unfavourable star is always
unsuccessful in his endeavours. Finally Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
heart was touched by the sight of His mother being so
overwhelmed, and almost immediately she successfully
bound Him with the two ribbons she had initially used
from her hair. It was clear to all present that it was

                          145
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

only these two ribbons that bound Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The other
ropes she had used to tie Him simply lay there. (58)



It was actually Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s maidservant, His yogamāyā
potency, who had understood His mind and accomplished
the task of binding Him. This made Mother Yaśodā feel
that all those astonishing activities of Śrī Kṛṣṇa were
an illusion. When that rope was finally tied tightly
around Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s waist, Mother Yaśodā knotted it to
another long rope, which she then tied around the middle
of the grinding mortar. (59)

She had taught her son Kṛṣṇa a lesson by tying Him up
and thus showed Him how unmoved she could be by His
stubbornness. To protect Him, she seated the other
little boys around Him and, happily went inside with the
giggling gopīs to complete her household chores. (60)

Within a moment of the vraja-gopīs’ departure, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
manifested His pastime of crying, but He soon cheered up
at the thought of pulling the grinding mortar around. He
was tied up, but because He was surrounded by other
little boys, He stimulated their desire for adventure.
As He laughed and played with them, He slowly began to
tug at the grinding mortar.

The gopīs who had gleefully brought ropes from their
homes to bind Śrī Kṛṣṇa were now in Nanda-bhavana with
Śrī Yaśodā. This meant that their homes were empty.
Seizing that excellent opportunity, Śrī Kṛṣṇa directed
His friends to steal the fresh butter hanging from the
ceilings of their deserted homes and then eat it.
Because Śrī Kṛṣṇa found pulling the grinding mortar so
entertaining, He never even wanted to free Himself by
His own hands, nor by the hands of His friends. (61)

Just then, His eyes fell on the twin arjuna trees which
stood facing the main gate and which swayed, as if
dancing, whenever there was a strong wind. As Śrī Kṛṣṇa
pulled the mortar along, He eventually crawled towards
the middle of the two trees. (62)

At this point, Snigdha-kaṇṭha, who had been loudly
narrating all this with great excitement, suddenly
realised, “If I tell them that Śrī Hari is the cause of
the two trees falling, I will be glorifying His
aiśvarya, or opulence. That would not at all be
appropriate in this assembly of Vrajavāsīs, who are
absorbed in Śrī Hari’s mādhurya, or sweetness. I will
conceal this fact and just tell them another reason why
the trees fell.” (63)

He continued:

Just as Śrī Kṛṣṇa came between the trees, He became
filled with eagerness to proceed further and quickly
crawled between them. The passage between the trees was
narrow, and as He crawled away the mortar became stuck.
(64)

Śrī Kṛṣṇa jerked and tugged at the mortar with the
conscious intention of breaking the rope that bound Him

                          146
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

to it, but instead the two trees made a crackling sound
as they were uprooted and came crashing to the ground,
falling in opposite directions. The sound was so
tumultuous that it made the Vrajavāsīs feel more
disoriented than deaf people, and it made their minds
restless. (65—66)

Although Śrī Kṛṣṇa had uprooted the twin arjuna trees,
which were more powerful than thunderbolts, amazingly He
was still unable to break the rope that embodied His
mother’s intense attachment and relentless
determination, born of vātsalya-prema. (67)

In this regard, poets praise Śrī Kṛṣṇa as follows:



śyāmāṅga-dyuti-kiṅkiṇi-dhvani-dharaṁ riṅgātiraṅga-pradaṁ

karṣac chaśvad-udūkhalaṁ khara-kharatkāra-prakāra-
pratham

visphūrja-pratimārjuna-dvaya kaṭatkārārjitāt kautukāt

paryāvṛtta-nirīkṣaṇaṁ vraja-vadhū-lālyasya bālyaṁ stuve

I adore the childhood mood (bālya-bhāva) of Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
who is nurtured by the ladies of Vraja. He is gloriously
situated in His childhood mood and endowed with dark
blue limbs and the tinkling sound of His ankle-bells. He
bestows the greatest bliss as He crawls on His knees and
repeatedly pulls at the grinding mortar, which clatters
as He drags it along. Excited by the thunderous
crackling of the two falling arjuna trees, He looks all
around with His restless eyes. (68)



Terrified by that thunderous sound, all the inhabitants
of Gokula fainted and remained unconscious for one daṇḍa
(twenty-four minutes). Only the children who had
gathered around Śrī Kṛṣṇa did not faint. Being immersed
in the utmost sweetness of His pastimes, they, like the
figures in a painting, remained unaffected by fear. (69)

From a distance Śrī Vrajarāja and other cowherd men
heard that tumultuous and terrifying sound. Fearing some
calamity, they all rushed to the spot, speculating to
each other along the way about what had happened. When
they reached the spot, they became overcome with fear
and doubt. “Oh, what could have uprooted these two
trees?” they all cried. “There is no wind or rain, nor
was there any lightening, nor has an elephant attacked
them. Who has uprooted them?” (70—71)

Some remarked, “This is such a disaster, yet no one is
here but us.”

“Well,” reasoned another, “that is probably because the
tumultuous sound of the crashing trees knocked everyone
in Vraja unconscious.” (72)

Just then, they noticed their little Gopāla near the
trees, a playful smile beautifying His face as He tugged

                          147
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

the grinding mortar, freely showering the bliss of His
pastimes upon all. “What happened? What happened?” they
asked as they surrounded Him, discussing the cause of
the disaster. (73)

Seeing His father approaching from behind, little
Mukunda began to cry. Although Śrī Nanda Mahārāja was
still bewildered, he beamed a smile to pacify His
darling child and quickly untied Him. (74—75)

Śrī Nanda Mahārāja kissed the face of his son Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
who spoke to Nanda Bābā while crying, and although he
knew why Kṛṣṇa had been bound, he repeatedly asked, “O
my son, where is the wicked person who forcefully bound
You to this grinding mortar?” Eventually, Kṛṣṇa, who was
devoted to His father, climbed into his lap. With His
arms around His father’s neck and His voice quivering,
He slowly spoke into his ear, “Father, it was Mother who
bound Me.” (76)

When Śrī Yaśodā heard the deafening crash, she fainted.
After regaining consciousness, she pitifully began to
repent. Śrī Nanda Mahārāja came to know this, and
therefore he did not want to immediately question her,
even in private. He did not even bother to ask the
little children present. “What could these little
infants possibly know about it?” he wondered.

But then the children spoke up. “Father, we saw
everything ourselves. We clearly saw your son go between
the trees. He saw that open space over there and wanted
to play there. As He moved away from the trees, the
grinding mortar became caught in between them. From an
angle, He tugged at the grinding mortar. Immediately the
trees made a loud cracking sound and came crashing to
the ground. Two divine personalities adorned with
armour, crowns and earrings emerged from the trees,
their stout figures as bright as fire. After
circumambulating your Kṛṣṇa and offering Him obeisances
they said something to please Him and then set off to
the north.” Śrī Nanda Mahārāja and others who were
completely absorbed in parental affection for Kṛṣṇa
discarded the boys’ words as silly prattling. Others,
however, were left doubtful. (77)

All the people of Vraja came there in ones and twos;
gradually a large crowd gathered. Decorating his chest
with his son, Śrī Vrajarāja went with all of them to the
Yamunā to finish his morning activities. He bathed in
the river with his son on his lap, and after dressing,
he arranged for the brāhmaṇas to chant svasti-vācana
(specific mantras to invoke auspiciousness) in that very
place. Afterwards he donated great wealth to them. He
then returned to his home, ready to take his breakfast.
(78)

Śrī Yaśodā, the wife of Śrī Nanda Mahārāja, felt so sad
and embarrassed that she had bound Kṛṣṇa that she
refused to leave the inner chambers of the house. She
could not even speak with the gopīs who had come to see
her. So, after they had all left, the respected Śrī
Rohiṇī, who was expert in reconciling all situations,
directed the head kitchen maids, who were all held in
high esteem, in serving the morning meal. (79)

                          148
Damodarastakam.txt                                5/5/2017


Beckoning Śrī Vasudeva’s son, Śrī Balarāma, and his own
son Kanhaiyā to join him, Śrī Vrajarāja ate with Them in
the midst of the endearing and indescribably sweet
tumult They had made. He then rested for nearly an hour
with the two brothers, who were the personifications of
supreme bliss. Soon it was evening, the charming time
when the cows return from the fields. Having rested
well, he felt happy and content. After coming to the
gośālā, he directed the cowherds in milking the cows and
caring for them. (80)

Since Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma were quite young, They
still needed Their mother’s breast-milk, and cows’ milk
is the best representative of breast-milk. Śrī Vrajarāja
first asked for some excellent, white rock-candy to be
brought from the house. After distributing it to Them
and the other little boys like Subala, Nanda Bābā began
squirting nourishing cow’s milk from the cows’ udders
directly into the brothers’ mouths. Then, as They sat in
the cowshed, he taught Them how to make leaf cups and
how to write letters on leaves. (81)

After some time, he returned home and in a blissful
gathering he took his evening meal with the two boys.
The wise elderly gopīs, who adorned their respective
dynasties like jewels, or goddesses of wealth, always
desired Śrī Vrajarāja’s happiness. Therefore, after he
had finished his meal, they approached him along with
Śrī Rohiṇī and said, “O King, Kṛṣṇa’s mother has not
eaten anything all day, nor has she spoken with anyone.
Seeing her condition, all the maids and other gopīs have
also been sitting silently and they also have not eaten
anything.” (82)

Śrī Vrajarāja was both sorry and amused. “What can I
do?” he asked. “She herself can see the detrimental
effect of submitting to her anger.”

At this, tears began streaming down the gopīs’ faces,
and they sobbed, “Oh, no, she is so soft, internally and
externally. Hearing these painful words of yours she
will become even more aggrieved.” Smiling, Śrī Vrajarāja
asked his son, “My dear boy, do You want to go to Your
mother?”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa promptly responded, “No, no! I will stay with
you only.”

Giggling, the wife of Śrī Vrajarāja’s elder brother, Śrī
Upananda, questioned Him: “If You are only ever with
Father, whose breast-milk will You drink?”

“I will drink warm squirts of cow’s milk mixed with rock
candy.” Kṛṣṇa replied.

“With whom will You play?” all the gopīs asked.

“I will play with Father and My brother too.” He
answered.

Śrī Vrajarāja then asked, “Why don’t You go to Your
brother’s mother, Rohiṇī?”


                          149
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

Tears welled up in Kṛṣṇa’s eyes and He angrily said,
“She was not there for Me when I needed her.”

At this, tearful eyed Śrī Rohiṇī spoke gently, “My dear
son, why are You so harsh? Your mother is in so much
anguish.” Kṛṣṇa pretended not to hear her words and,
with moist eyes, simply gazed at the face of His father.
(83)

Upon the motioning of Śrī Rohiṇī, Balarāma ran forward
and seized Kṛṣṇa’s hand to bring Him to her, but He
wrestled out of Balarāma’s grip, ran back to His
father’s lap and tightly hugged him. While on the lap of
Vrajarāja, He stood up and draped His arms around His
father’s neck. Kṛṣṇa gazed into his eyes, which were now
releasing a stream of tears, and absolutely captivated
His father. (84)

Śrī Vrajarāja knew that really, Kṛṣṇa dearly loved His
mother from the core of His heart. To unearth that inner
love, he raised his hand and said, “If You tell me to, I
will beat Your mother!” Śrī Kṛṣṇa could not tolerate
this and tightly grabbed His father’s arm with both
hands. This made Nanda Bābā laugh. Because he had the
inherent vātsalya-bhāva of being a father, he
compassionately thought of the condition of Mother
Yaśodā’s heart, and said, “Son, what will You do if Your
mother just...?” In this statement, Śrī Nanda Mahārāja
jokingly indicated the opposite meaning of “to live”.
(85)

Śrī Kṛṣṇa had the nature of a child, and therefore He
became overwhelmed for want of His mother. With tear-
filled eyes He said, “Where is My mother? I am going to
her!” In this anxiety, He stumbled into Śrī Rohiṇī’s
arms and a din arose as everyone began to laugh. Mean-
while, Śrī Rohiṇī, who bestows supreme joy upon all,
entered into the house with teary-eyed Kṛṣṇa, who
joyously embraced His mother. (86)

Śrī Yaśodā let forth deep sighs that resembled the
lowing of a cow. She rested her chin on her darling
child’s head and began to weep. Her crying, which was
full of love, completely melted her heart. Upon seeing
her condition, everyone there also began to weep. (87)

The elderly gopīs consoled Śrī Yaśodā in various ways.
Gradually, her heart began to feel relief, and the charm
of her face began to reappear. Then Śrī Yaśodā, the
daughter of Śrī Sumukha Gopa, fed her darling son her
breast-milk to His great delight. After this, she took
her meal with the wife of Śrī Upananda and the other
ladies, who were her greatest well-wishers. As she ate,
she kept Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His elder brother Śrī Balarāma
right beside her. (88)

Śrī Yaśodā felt so utterly ashamed that for three days,
she did not come before the eyes of Śrī Vrajarāja.
Finally, Śrī Bāla-gopāla, who is the follower of His
father’s order, personally brought her before him,
pulling her by her upper cloth. Also, from that day
onward, the ladies of Vraja jokingly and blissfully
began calling Śrī Kṛṣṇa “Dāmodara”, and remarking, “Ah,
this is our same enchanting blue boy, Śrī Śyāma-

                          150
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

manohara.” (89)

Although Śrī Yaśodā repeatedly witnesses Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
superhuman majesty, this majesty never even slightly
affects her vātsalya, or motherly affection, for Him.
Which scholar on earth is really able to praise her? Śrī
Śukadeva Gosvāmī has even stated that what to speak of
others, Śrī Brahmā, Śrī Śaṅkara and Śrī Lakṣmī have
failed to achieve even a hundredth of the satisfaction
and happiness of what Śrī Bāla-mukunda, He who bestows
liberation, has awarded Śrī Yaśodā. In other words, from
the perspective of bhakti, Śrī Brahmā, Śrī Śaṅkara and
Śrī Lakṣmī have failed to achieve even a small fraction
of a fraction of Śrī Yaśodā’s bhakti. (90)

Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī has thoroughly disclosed the
splendrous fame of Śrī Yaśodā, which reverberates like a
drum throughout the three worlds. The Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(10.9.20) and other scriptures verify this. (91)

At this point, Śrī Balarāma turned to His younger
brother, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and excitedly remarked, “Do You
remember when We used to live in Mahāvana-Gokula?”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa smiled. “Yes, yes. We had such fun sporting
there.” (92)

Snigdha-kaṇṭha then concluded the day’s narration: “O
King of the cow-herders, your divine son is so amazing,
He was even able to make twin arjuna trees His dedicated
devotees.”

The author, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, comments: “As all the
members of the assembly returned to their respective
homes after hearing śrī dāmodara-līlā, they felt as if
they had directly witnessed that festive pastime.” (94)




The next day, while seated amidst that effulgent
assembly, Śrī Vrajarāja asked, “My dear son Snigdha-
kaṇṭha, those two trees in Vraja that you mentioned used
to grant all of one’s cherished desires. In that way,
they were like demigods. Who were these trees in their
previous births, and why did they come to Vraja?
Moreover, when they gave up their lives as trees, what
form did they take, and where did they go?” (1)

Snigdha-kaṇṭha replied, “Those two trees were the sons
of Śrī Śiva’s friend, Śrī Kuvera, the king of the
Yakṣas. Once, they behaved outrageously with the best of
ṛṣis, Devaṛṣi Śrī Nārada. Consequently, he punished them
to live as trees. This punishment was Śrī Nārada’s
extreme favour upon them because they achieved bhakti
for Śrī Bhagavān. Whenever you descend to this world,
they also come as twin arjuna trees in front of your
home in Mahāvana. These trees later attained their
ultimate destination and became the best of Śrī
Bhagavān’s devotees. However, at present they are
illustriously situated in the abode of premī-bhaktas,
where they reveal to others the results of performing
bhakti to Śrī Bhagavān.” (2)

                          151
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017


His curiosity aroused, Śrī Vrajarāja again inquired.
“Tell me frankly, son, where are they at present?”

At this moment Snigdha-kaṇṭha bowed his head and became
silent. Then he started glancing at Madhu-kaṇṭha from
the corners of his eyes. Śrī Vrajarāja pressed Snigdha-
kaṇṭha even further. “Why are you embarrassed to speak?”

With great respect, Snigdha-kaṇṭha replied, “O King,
what more can we say? Your distinguished self can
understand everything.”

Śrī Vrajarāja beamed. “It is true that your words will
merely repeat what your silence is trying to say. By
your virtuous disposition certainly we have all
understood your meaning, but still, we want you to
satisfy us by telling us yourselves.”

Snigdha-kaṇṭha said, “The twin trees, or the sons of
Kuvera, Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva, received the supreme
destination of residing in Vraja in exchange for their
insolence at the lotus feet of Devaṛṣi Śrī Nārada, which
are a shower of all types of bliss. Those two are none
other than we, the two present before you.” (3)

Hearing this with mixed feelings of curiosity and
pleasure, Śrī Vrajarāja and all others present began
gazing at their faces and happily embraced them, as if
meeting them for the first time. (4)

After hearing his brother’s reply to Śrī Vrajarāja’s
inquiry, Madhu-kaṇṭha took the opportunity to begin that
day’s narrationÖ (5)




* * *




[i] Editorís footnote: Dāmodara means ìHe who has been
bound by dāma (rope) around His udara (belly)î.




[ii] Editorís footnote: ìBy performing worship of Śrī
Rādhikā for Her pleasure during the month of Kārtika,
Śrī Dāmodara Hari becomes very pleased. This is because
Ūrjeśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, the controller of all
potency, is the sole presiding Goddess of this month.
Unless someone worships His svarūpa-śakti (internal
potency), or hlādinī-śakti (pleasure potency), Dāmodara
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the possessor of all potencies, does not
accept anyoneís worship. Moreover, Śrī Rādhā-devī, Śrī
Kṛṣṇaís antaraṅga-śakti, discards everything if She is
worshipped alone without the Lord of Her life.
Therefore, svarūpa rūpānuga gauḍīya-vaiṣṇavas (Gauḍīya

                          152
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

Vaiṣṇavas in the line of Śrī Rūpa and Śrī Svarūpa
Dāmodara Gosvāmīs) have exclusively adopted the worship
of Yugala (the Divine Couple) in rādhā-liṅgita-vigraha ñ
the form of Kṛṣṇa when He is tightly embraced by Śrīmatī
Rādhikā. For the very same reason, Śrī Kṛṣṇa Dvaipāyana
Vedavyāsa has also offered his obeisances to
Vārṣabhānavī Śrī Rādhikā and Her beloved Śrī Dāmodara-
Kṛṣṇa, the orchestrators of unlimited pastimes, in the
last verse of this Śrī Dāmodarāṣṭakam. In other words,
he has established the supremacy of śakti- and
śaktimāna-tattva (the tattva regarding the potency and
the potent) on one basis.î ñ From the preface of the
Bengali edition, by Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Vāmana
Gosvāmī Mahārāja.




[iii] Editorís footnote: Śrīla Sarasavatī Ṭhākura
Prabhupāda states: Endowed with material intelligence,
sahajiyās cannot understand the topics concerning the
transcendental, spontaneous occupation of the living
entity. Their misdeeds invite immorality and prevent the
proper delineation of the true variegatedness of the
supremely pure (viśuddha-sattva) realm of Goloka. Such
acts simply degrade their contaminated consciousness to
indulge in sense gratification. As soon as confusion
occurs about sādhana and siddhi (the stages of practice
and perfection), the jīva becomes a prākṛta-sahajiyā.




[iv] Editorís footnote: In Śrī Kṛṣṇa līlā, Śrī Śrīmad
Bhakti PrajÒāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārājaís eternal
identity is Śrī Vinoda MaÒjarī.




[v] Editorís footnote: Śrī Kṛṣṇaís three longings are
described by Śrīla Kṛṣṇa dāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī in
ŚrīCaitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 1.7): ìDesiring to know
the glory of Rādhārāṇīís love for Him, what it is in Him
that makes Her maddened with love, and the nature of the
pleasure She experiences by loving Him, Bhagavān Śrī
Hari, fully resplendent with Her emotions, appeared from
Śrīmatī Śacī-devīís womb, just as the moon appeared from
the ocean.î




[vi] Editorís footnote: Paraphrased from Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.29.19, 21ñ2, 24ñ5).




                          153
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

[vii] Editorís footnote: Paraphrased from Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.29.31, 32, 34).




[viii] Editorís footnote: It is to be noted that there
is a slight variation in Śrī Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākuraís
description of this pastime because of his personal
realization.




[ix] Editorís footnote: The subtle meaning of taṭastha-
lakṣaṇa in this context is those qualities which must
not cover bhakti but the absence of which does not
itself constitute bhakti if the svarūpa-lakṣaṇa are not
present.




[x] Editorís footnote: Mother Yaśodā first tied one end
of the rope around a heavy grinding mortar and then
began to tie the other end around her childís belly in
order to keep Him securely bound.




[xi] Editorís footnote: The reason is that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
bound due to His quality of bhakta-vaśyatā.




[xii] Editorís footnote: Cora-ghoṣa Gopa was the name of
one of Śrī Yaśodāís ancestors. Cora literally means
ìthiefî.




[xiii] Editorís footnote: Although Śrī Kṛṣṇa awarded
them their desired benediction by becoming their son, He
performed all of His sweet childhood pastimes in Vraja,
away from their vision. When He returned to them in His
later pastimes, His identity as the Supreme Lord was
revealed.




[xiv] Editorís footnote: Ancient arjuna trees grow
extremely large. According to Śrī Nāradaís curse,
Nalakūvara and Maṇigrīva remained in the form of arjuna

                          154
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

trees for one hundred celestial years, or about fifteen
million earth years.




[xv] Editorís footnote: The phrase tadīya-iśīta-jÒeṣu
refers to those among His worshippers (tadīya) who know
(jÒeṣu) about His absolute supremacy (iśīta).




[xvi] Editorís footnote: In exchange for a few pieces of
broken chipped rice,

Śrī Kṛṣṇa awarded Sudāmā Vipra unimaginable opulence.
See Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.81).




[xvii] Editorís footnote: This phrase is used to beg
alms in the name of Śrī Bhagavān or simply to make one
remember Him. It is a description of Paramātmā, who is
invisible (alakha) and aloof from māyā (niraÒjana).




[xviii] Editorís footnote translated from the Bengali
edition:

At the end of the Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā of Verse Three, it
was said, ìAmong the limbs of bhakti, which are required
for all devotees, I only pray to perform one special
limb of bhakti: vandana, or expressing my adoration for
Śrī Bhagavān. I do not pray for knowledge of Śrī
Bhagavānís opulence or anything else.î

Now, in this stanza, it has been said that the even the
above-mentioned limbs of bhakti, such as śravaṇa,
kīrtana, vandana and so forth, are also not desirable.
The meaning is that, from the perspective of gradated
excellence, the sphūrti of Śrī Bhagavānís beautiful form
within the heart (as revealed only in Vṛndāvana) is a
superior sādhya.



Previously, Śrī Satyavrata Muni resolved to perform
sādhana of vaidhi-bhakti characterized by śravaṇa and so
forth. However, in this stanza, even the above said
vaidhi-sādhana is being discarded because it is devoid
of the intense eagerness to serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa which
eventually results in a sphūrti of His beautiful form.
Śrī Satyavrata Muni has offered this special prayer
through kīrtana-bhakti saturated by intense attachment
and eagerness to serve (rāgānuga-bhakti) in order to
bring about the sādhya of perpetually seeing such

                          155
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017

sphūrtis of Śrī Bhagavānís beautiful form within the
heart. This is because without the mercy of Śrī
Bhagavān, such a sphūrti will never occur.




[xix] Annotation by Śrīla Bhakti PrajÒāna Keśava Gosvāmī
Mahārāja:

Verses 1.14 and 1.15 of Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛtaís
Uttara-khaṇḍa are presented herein:

vaikuṇṭhaṁ durlabhaṁ muktaiḥ



sāndrānanda-cid-ātmakam



niṣkāmā ye tu tad-bhakto



labhante sadya eva tat




Those who perform bhajana of Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa devoid
of any personal motive (niṣkāma-bhaktas), immediately
achieve the abode of Vaikuṇṭha. That abode of Vaikuṇṭha
is the embodiment of concentrated happiness, and it is
made of transcendental cognizance. In other words, it is
the concentrated embodiment of brahma (absolute reality)
in His aspect of transcendental consciousness. That
abode of Vaikuṇṭha is rarely achieved even by liberated
personalities. (The deep meaning here is that those who
propound oneness with the Absolute and arrogantly regard
themselves as liberated souls can never attain that
abode.) (14)



tatra śrī-kṛṣṇa-pādābja-




sākṣāt-sevā sukhaṁ sadā




bahudhā nubhavantas te




                           156
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017


ramante dhik kṛtāmṛtam




In Vaikuṇṭha, the devotees, who are free from all
hankering (niṣkāma-bhaktas), perpetually experience the
variegated happiness of directly serving Śrī Kṛṣṇaís
lotus feet. By performing various pastimes with Him they
become immersed in an ocean of bliss. The happiness
resulting from Śrī Bhagavānís service is the
concentrated form of supreme bliss. Compared to this,
the amṛta (the nectar of immortality) or the happiness
of liberation seems extremely insignificant. (15)




[xx] Annotation by Śrīla Bhakti PrajÒāna Keśava Gosvāmī
Mahārāja (see page 97).




[xxi] Editorís footnote: In Verse Six however, Śrīla
Sanātana Gosvāmī sites further examples from his Śrī
Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta to prove that the superiority of
darśana within the mind only applies to jÒānī-bhaktas.
In relation to śuddha-bhaktas or premī-bhaktas, the
conclusion is that darśana of Bhagavān with oneís
spiritually perfected senses is superior to darśana
within the mind




[xxii] Editorís Footnote: The five kinds of mukti grant
the following opulences: sālokya grants residence on the
same planet as Bhagavān, sāmīpya grants constant
nearness to Him, sārūpya grants a form like His, and
sārṣṭi grants boundless fortune similar to His. The
fifth type of liberation, sāyujya, is attained at the
exclusion of the other four as it grants total cessation
of the individual ego by merging into the existence of
Bhagavān.




[xxiii] Editorís Footnote: In Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmīís
Dig-darśinī-ṭīkā, the prayer from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(3.15.49) beginning with kāmaṁ bhavaḥ is spoken by the
four Kumāras during their first direct darśana of Lord
Nārāyaṇa at the gates of Vaikuṇṭha. Needless to say, by
the time they spoke that prayer, they had long since
abandoned their desire for sāyujya-mukti.



                          157
Damodarastakam.txt                              5/5/2017




[xxiv] Editorís footnote:Rūpānuga Vaiṣṇavas are those
who follow in the footsteps of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. The
internal devotional service they perform in accordance
with Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmīís teachings is called rūpānuga-
bhajana.




[xxv] Editorís footnote adapted from the Bengali
edition:

In the first and second verse Śrī Satyavrata Muni offers
praṇāma to Śrī Dāmodara, who is controlled by the prema
of His devotees. In the third verse he offers repeated
vandana, or prayers, unto Him. In the fourth and fifth
verses, he condemns all the goals of life beginning with
mokṣa, and prays for the Bāla-gopāla form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
to forever manifest within his heart. Only now, in the
sixth verse, is he praying for direct darśana of
Bhagavān. The sequence of prayers in this verse is as
follows: prasīda ñ ìkindly be pleased with meî;
anugṛhāṇa ñ ìby the shower of your compassionate glance
upon me, completely deliver me from the ocean of
sufferingsî; and akṣi-dṛśyaḥ edhi ñ ìplease become
visible to my eyes.î




[xxvi] Annotation by Śrīla Bhakti PrajÒāna Keśava
Gosvāmī Mahārāja (see page 139).




[xxvii] Editorís footnote: Śrī Rādhāís prāṇa-sakhīs are
Her maÒjarīs, whom She considers more dear to Her than
Her own life, and Her priya-narma-sakhīs, like Lalitā
and Viśākhā, are Her most affectionate friends who are
always dedicated to pleasing Her.




[xxviii] Editorís footnote: In the same way that Śrī
Bhagavān does not reveal Himself to unqualified people,
the Vedas express confidential knowledge in an indirect,
or concealed, manner because it is not meant to be
openly distributed. This indirect form of communication
is called parokṣa-vāda.




[xxix] Editorís footnote: The name Gāṅṭholī comes from

                          158
Damodarastakam.txt                                 5/5/2017

the Hindi word gāṅṭha which means ìknotî.




[xxx] Editorís footnote: It is generally seen that one
obtains kṛṣṇa-prema by the mercy of Śrī Guru and the
Vaiṣṇavas (bhakta-prasāda-ja-kṛpā) although occasionally
one receives the direct mercy of the Lord (kṛṣṇa-
prasāda-ja-kṛpā).




[xxxi] Editorís footnote: Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī has
indicated these three (the rope binding Śrī Kṛṣṇa, His
limbs and His associates) with the words parikara,
avayava, and parivāra, respectively.




[xxxii] Editorís footnote: See Śrīmad Bhāgavatam
10.7.35ñ6 and 10.8.37ñ9.




[xxxiii] Annotation by Śrīla Bhakti PrajÒāna Keśava
Gosvāmī Mahārāja:



Generally, the statement namo ínanta--līlāya is
understood to mean ìI offer my obeisances exclusively to
ananta-līla Bhagavān ñ that Śrī Kṛṣṇa whose pastimes
have no end.î However, directing his attention towards
Śrī Satyavrata Muniís inner intention, and driven by his
own personal bhāva, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī has revealed
a confidential meaning of the above phrase. He explains
that the sage is actually offering his obeisances
directly to śrī rāsa-līlā.

The word ananta means ìthat which has no limit, or endî,
or in other words, ìeternal, unending, or innumerable.î
According to Sanskrit grammar, the word līlāya is the
singular fourth case of the word līla because it is
conjuncted with namaḥ. The syllable lī means ìto
embraceî, and la means ìto acceptî. Thus with the word
līla, it is understood that the sage is saying, ìI offer
my obeisances to rāsa-līlā and other pastimes in which
Śrī Kṛṣṇa accepts the gopīsí embraces.î

Therefore, in his above explanation, Śrīla Sanātana
Gosvāmī explains that ananta-līlāya also refers to all
of Śrī Bhagavānís pastimes in Gokula, and thus it is
understood that the sage is offering his obeisances to
all of Śrī Bhagavānís pastimes. In this way, Śrīla
Sanātana Gosvāmī has also made meaningful his own
statement, ìmadhureṇa samāpayet ñ all should end

                          159
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

sweetly.î

Here, one more point must be carefully noted. In this
final verse of Dāmodarāṣṭakam, Śrīla Sanātana
Gosvāmīpāda is informing that although Śrī Kṛṣṇaís
pastimes such as rāsa-līlā are the most exalted of all
His līlās, they are highly confidential and therefore
not to be described directly. For this reason, Śrī
Satyavrata Muni has offered his obeisances to such
pastimes by just hinting at them. By this it is clearly
understood that it is completely improper to hear and
sing rāsa-līlā here and there, wherever and whenever one
pleases. Moreover, if on the pretence of eradicating
their lust, unqualified persons contemplate or imitate
rāsa-līlā, even if only within their minds, they will
commit the offence of diminishing its honour and
sanctity and will surely become degraded. Then, like the
immature prākṛta-sahajīyas, they will become lusty and
attached to a sensuous lifestyle.

In order to determine whether a person who desires to
hear and sing rāsa-līlā has the proper motive and
eligibility, one must carefully study what has been
explained at the end of the description of rāsa-līlā
itself found in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam:



naitat samācarej jātu



manasāpi hy anīśvaraḥ



vinaśyaty ācaran mauḍhyād



yathārudro íbdhi-jaṁ viṣam



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.33.30)

Those who are not īśvaras, who are powerless and
helplessly controlled by the laws of karma, should never
imitate the Lordís pastimes even within their minds.
Like a person who foolishly imitates Lord Śiva by
drinking poison generated from the churning of the
ocean, they will certainly be destroyed.



This means that if a person is not truly qualified and
competent, he should never contemplate, perform or
imitate rāsa-līlā even within his mind. For example,
when the demigods and demons were churning the ocean of
milk and poison rose to its surface, only lord Śiva
himself was capable of consuming that poison.î

So, if an ineligible person pretends to be extremely
qualified and hears and sings rāsa-līlā which will act

                             160
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017

just like poison for him, he will immediately die. That
is, he will surely become entangled in the deadly grip
of worldly life.

Since rāsa-līlā is the crown jewel of all of Śrī
Bhagavānís pastimes, the fruit of hearing about it,
singing it and remembering it is the crest jewel of all
attainments. Therefore, those who are eligible to
devotedly honour it must undoubtedly be the crest jewels
of all exalted devotees. Someone who is diseased at
heart, who is lusty and unqualified, should not, in any
way, indulge in discussing rāsa-līlā. For example, in
order to dispel nescience it is compulsory to attain
complete knowledge by seeking the highest education in a
university. A kindergarten student, however, will not be
allowed admission directly into the highest level of
study. Similarly, it is inappropriate to impart the
foremost transcendental teaching ñ the description of
rāsa-līlā ñ to an ignorant person who is attached to
gratifying his senses.




[xxxiv] Editorís footnote: Even when Śrī Yaśodā saw the
universe within Kṛṣṇaís mouth, she did not regard Him
with awe and respect. Instead, as is shown here, she
simply attributed everything to the Lordís spiritual
potency, which she considered had been invoked by her
and Nanda Mahārājaís sincere worship.




[xxxv] Editorís footnote: Affection is part of the
permanent emotion (sthāyibhāva) of vātsalya-rasa, and
anger is a transitory emotion (saÒcārī-bhāva) of that
rasa. The superiorsí mood of vātsalya-rasa is nourished
by the transitory emotion of anger, and it is part of
their affection. Just as rain clouds become charming
when lightening appears in them, sometimes anger appears
in those with vātsalya-rasa making their mood more
charming. Actually, without anger the mood of parenthood
would not be complete.




[xxxvi] Editorís footnote: Here Śrī Yaśodā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa
are appropriately compared to clouds because both of
their complexions are dark, like rain clouds.




[xxxvii] Editorís footnote: In the dynasty of Śrī
Yaśodāís father, there was a gopa named Cora-ghoṣa. The
literal meaning of cora is ìthiefî. Thus Śrī Kṛṣṇa
denounced Śrī Yaśodāís dynasty, considering Himself to
belong exclusively to His fatherís dynasty.

                          161
Damodarastakam.txt                             5/5/2017




[xxxviii] Editorís footnote: Just as the cloud may
appear to be far beyond the mountainís peak when seen
from a distance, it appeared to everyone present that
there was so much rope being used to bind Śrī Kṛṣṇa that
it could not possibly have all been touching His waist.
However, just as the cloud is actually touching the
mountain, the full length of rope was actually touching
Śrī Kṛṣṇaís waist. But no length of rope could equal the
actual circumference of His waist, because, in truth, it
is unlimited.




[xxxix] Editorís footnote: Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has
employed a simile by stating that Śrī Kṛṣṇa was born in
the Yadu dynasty. Just as Yadu Mahārāja stubbornly
refused to accept the order of his father, Yayāti
Mahārāja, similarly Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who was born in that same
Yadu dynasty, stubbornly refused to be bound by His
mother.




Table of Contents

Foreword

A few words on Śrī Dāmodarāṣṭakam

Verse One

Verse Two

Verse Three

Verse Four

Verse Five

Verse Six

Verse Seven

Verse Eight

Appendix

[i]

[ii]

[iii]

[iv]


                          162
Damodarastakam.txt         5/5/2017

[v]

[vi]

[vii]

[viii]

[ix]

[x]

[xi]

[xii]

[xiii]

[xiv]

[xv]

[xvi]

[xvii]

[xviii]

[xix]

[xx]

[xxi]

[xxii]

[xxiii]

[xxiv]

[xxv]

[xxvi]

[xxvii]

[xxviii]

[xxix]

[xxx]

[xxxi]

[xxxii]

[xxxiii]

[xxxiv]

[xxxv]

[xxxvi]


                     163
Damodarastakam.txt         5/5/2017

[xxxvii]

[xxxviii]

[xxxix]




                     164
