Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                  5/4/2017

The Essence of all advice

A collection of discourses on the nectar of instruction

Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja



Introduction

Maṅgalācaraṇa

Chapter One: Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Śloka 5

Chapter Two: Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Śloka 5

Chapter Three: Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Ślokas 5-6

Chapter Four: Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Ślokas 6-7

Chapter Five: Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Ślokas 7-8

Chapter Six: Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Śloka 8

Chapter Seven: Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Śloka 8

Chapter Eight: Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Śloka 8

Chapter Nine: Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Ślokas 8-9

Chapter Ten: Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Ślokas 9-10

Chapter Eleven: Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Ślokas 10-11




Introduction



During his second tour to America in May 1997, our most
worshipable Gurudeva, Oṁ Viṣṇupāda Paramahaṁsa
Parivrājakācārya Aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, delivered a series of eleven lectures
on Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, as presented by
Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Prabhupāda in his Nectar of
Instruction. Starting with the fifth śloka, our holy
master read directly from the purports of Śrīla
Prabhupāda (whom he affectionately calls “Swāmījī” 1) in
order to illuminate all the deep meanings of these most
important instructions. Śrīla Mahārājī stresses that the
aspiring sādhaka must deeply enter into these
instructions if he sincerely expects to progress on the
path of bhakti. Therefore, he spoke these lectures with
the aim of encouraging Swāmījī's disciples and followers
to move forward in their devotional practices by
elucidating their Guru’s words for them. He has also
taken the opportunity to point out how many devotees are
deviating from Śrīla Prabhupāda’s Nectar of Instruction,
especially in the area of honoring higher class
Vaiṣṇavas and respecting the principle of sādhu saṇga.
Our Gurudeva is also emphasizing the importance of

                            1
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

understanding the meaning of rūpānuga. We hope that
anyone who hears or reads these lectures will find new
inspiration to seriously endeavor in their bhakti
practices and closely follow the path enunciated by our
rūpānuga ācāryas.

In preparing these lectures for presentation, a special
effort has been made to retain the charm, spontaneity,
and freshness of our Gurudeva’s spoken words. Śrīla
Mahārājī himself is always apologizing that his English
is very poor and lame. We have changed some of his
language but purposely have not used “Queen's English”
throughout because we want to communicate his very
particular mood. For example, Śrīla Mahārājī uses the
expression “brooming” rather than “sweeping,” because he
does not want this sevā equated with the work of the
common street sweeper. We hope that the devotees will
appreciate our Gurudeva’s personal use of the English
language.

We humbly pray at the lotus feet of our most kind
Gurudeva, Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja,
our śikṣā guru, Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Prabhupāda,
and Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmīpāda that we may be inspired to
sincerely embrace these teachings and thereby become
eligible to someday enter rāgānugā-bhakti.

The aspiring servants of

The Gauḍīya Vedānta Publications



5 October 1998

Śaradīya Rāsa Yatra

Disappearance of

Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja




Maṅgalācaraṇa



gurave gauracandrāya

rādhikāyai tadālāyai

kṛṣṇāya kṛṣṇa bhaktāya

tad-bhaktāya namo namaḥ

“I offer praṇāma to Śrī Gurudeva, Śrī Gauracandra,
Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Her associates, Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His
devotees, and to all of Their devotees.”



śrī caitanya mano'bhīṣṭaṁ sthāpitaṁ yena bhūtale

                           2
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                   5/4/2017


svayaṁ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaṁ dadāti sva-padāntikam

“When will Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, the dear associate of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu, bestow upon me the shelter of his
lotus feet? He has established in this world the method
for obtaining love of Kṛṣṇa, according to the innermost
heart’s desire of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.”



ādadānas tṛṇaṁ dantair

idaṁ yāce punaḥ punaḥ

śrīmad rūpa-padāmbhoja

dhūliḥ syāṁ janma-janmani

“Taking a straw between my teeth, I beg again and again,
“Oh, I want to become the dust of the lotus feet of
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmīpāda so that I may serve him birth
after birth.”



bhaktyā vihīnā aparādha-lakṣaiḥ

kṣiptāś ca kāmādi-taraṇga-madhye

kṛpāmayi! tvāṁ śaraṇaṁ prapannā

vṛnde! numaste caraṇāravindam

“Devoid of devotion and guilty of unlimited offences, I
am being tossed about in the ocean of material existence
by the turbulent waves of lust, anger, greed, and other
inauspicious qualities. Therefore, O merciful Vṛndā-
devī! I take shelter of you and offer praṇāma unto your
lotus feet.”




Chapter One: Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Śloka 5


New Braja, 18 May 1997

Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja has written a ṭīkā,
an explanation, on Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Nectar of
Instruction. These instructions are for all devotees,
from neophytes up to the highest stage. Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu inspired Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī Mahārāja at
Prayāga, giving him many instructions, especially for
performing sādhana in rāgānugā-bhakti. He gave outlines
of all types of bhakti, culminating in prema-bhakti—how
to enter it and how to cultivate it.

Kṛṣṇa came and tasted all kinds of bhakti-rasa, but He
did not give the process by which neophtye devotees
(kaniṣṭha-adhikārīs) practice and how the prākṛta or
kaniṣṭha devotee can advance into madhyama-adhikāra, how

                            3
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

a madhyama-adhikārī will gradually cultivate his bhakti
to uttama-adhikārī, how the uttama-adhikārī can come
into svarūpa-siddha-bhakti, and how someone in svarūpa-
siddha-bhakti can come into sādhana-siddha and become
vastu-siddha, a premī-bhakta.

We will begin here with the fifth śloka. We should not
give our attention to anything else. Our whole
meditation should be focused here. If you read
something, you should get absorbed in it, having the
attitude that “I am serving this grantha (sacred text)
and am taking all these instructions in my heart.” We
should not read superficially, hearing with one ear and
letting it go out from the other.

There is a very beautiful story which illustrates this
point. In India there was once a king named
Vikramāditya. He had so many “jewels”—his counselors—
nine court jewels. All nine were highly learned, but
among them Kalidāsa was supremely intelligent. One day a
person looking like a madman came, holding a skull in
his hand. He was quite naked and very dirty. He came in
the council of Vikramāditya and put that skull on the
desk, saying, “I have heard there are many intelligent
jewels in your court, your council. Let them come here
and test whether the person whose skull this is was
intelligent or a fool and rascal.”

Eight jewels were there, very learned persons, and the
whole council was full, but none of them were able to
reply. Only the skull was there, nothing else, so how
could they test it? Then that madman began to laugh and
said, “You are all bogus, foolish persons with no sense.
I had heard this, and now I have found out that it is
true. So I am going.” And he took the skull, preparing
to leave. In the meantime, Kalidāsa came. The King
requested the madman, “Oh, wait a little. Another one of
my counselors is coming, and he will answer your
question”. That person put the skull on the desk again,
and Kalidāsa came. Again this same question was asked to
Kalidāsa, who then took a long coconut stick made of
very fine, long strands used for sweeping and went to
the skull. He put the stick in one ear and it came out
the other side, through the other ear. Then he said,
“Your question is answered. Do you understand ?” “Oh,
you should clarify more,” the King said. “I do not
understand.” Kalidāsa explained, “If anything comes in
one ear and goes out the other, that person is surely
foolish. And if something goes in one ear and does not
come out the other, but instead goes into the heart,
then he is surely a very intelligent person. Thus, from
his skull we can understand that this dead person was
very foolish.”

So, if we hear so many things but do not take them into
the heart, if we do not cultivate all these teachings,
then we are like a foolish person and cannot develop our
kṛṣṇa-prema. You have come from many distant, far-away
places. So don’t merely take these teachings in one ear
and let them go out the other, but keep them in your
heart and follow them.

Not one of us has come for any worldly gain. We have
come here only to see how we can develop our kṛṣṇa-

                           4
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                  5/4/2017

bhakti. Generally we are kaniṣṭha-adhikārīs. It may be
rare that some of us are madhyama-adhikārī, but not
uttama-adhikārī in any case. As kaniṣṭhas and madhyamas,
we should try to develop by hearing the instructions of
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, as explained by Śrīla Swāmījī. When
I say “Swāmījī” or “Bhaktivedānta Swāmījī Mahārāja,” you
should understand that I am speaking of my śikṣā-guru,
Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja, your Prabhupāda.

Do not think that Swāmījī Mahārāja is not in the line of
Rūpa Gosvāmī. And do not think that Swāmījī is telling
anything different from Rūpa Gosvāmī, even though
Swāmījī has sometimes used different words and has
elaborated further. What Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has told in
two lines, in one śloka, Swāmījī has explained in ten
pages, but he is not telling anything different. He is
only illuminating the same thing for the benefit of
those he is helping, those who are not understanding. So
understand that Swāmījī is in the same line as Rūpa
Gosvāmī. I am reading Swāmījī's commentary, and I will
explain it. Don't think that, because his words are not
the same as Rūpa Gosvāmī's, he is saying something
different. Swāmījī is not actually repeating the same
words that Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has used, but the meaning
and the eternal motive are exactly the same.

I shall begin reading from text 5:

kṛṣṇeti yasya giri taṁ manasādriyeta

dīkṣāsti cet praṇatibhiś ca bhajantam īśam

śuśrūṣayā bhajana-vijñam ananyam anya-

nindādi-śūnya-hṛdam īpsita-saṅga-labdhyā

You should read the translation.

Devotee reads from The Nectar of Instruction:

One should mentally honor the devotee who chants the
holy name of Lord Kṛṣṇa, one should offer humble
obeisances to the devotee who has undergone spiritual
initiation (dīkṣā) and is engaged in worshiping the
Deity, and one should associate with and faithfully
serve that pure devotee who is advanced in undeviated
devotional service and whose heart is completely devoid
of the propensity to criticize others.

Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: In this
translation or even in the text, has Swāmījī mentioned
anywhere that “the devotee must be initiated by me,
myself only?” Has he said this? “We should deal with
only those devotees initiated by me?” Has he told this?
Or has he said, “We should consider that only my
disciples and the disciples of my disciples are bona
fide Vaiṣṇavas”? In the whole world no others are to be
considered as Vaiṣṇavas? Has he said this? Is there any
indication for this? No! We should not think that he is
speaking about only “my disciples in my society.” No, he
is speaking about the whole Vaiṣṇava community. This
verse applies to someone who may not even be in Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s sampradāya. He may be from the Śrī or
Rāmānuja sampradāya or in one of the other sampradāyas.

                           5
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

Even a person outside the four Vaiṣṇava sampradāyas is
to be accepted as a Vaiṣṇava if he has heard anything
about Kṛṣṇa's glory. He may not even have taken
initiation but he knows the glory of Kṛṣṇa's name and is
uttering Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare.

Swāmījī has given the example of his friend who was not
in the Kṛṣṇa conscious society. He had not even taken
any kind of initiation. He was a famous English musician
who had not left all his bad habits in eating, drinking,
and smoking, but in his house he had some photos of
Kṛṣṇa that he was respecting. In some of his famous
songs, he used to sing Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa
Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. Swāmījī is saying in his explanation
that we should think of such a person as a member of our
family, and he should be respected, even if he is
drinking, taking intoxication, or anything else. And if
he is initiated by a Vaiṣṇava or is in Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s family, we must respect him. If he is
coming to our temples or programs, do not criticize him.

So here Rūpa Gosvāmī is saying kṛṣṇeti yasya giri taṁ
manasādriyeta. Yes, you should read the purport.

Devotee reads:

We can see from practical experience that there are
different types of Vaiṣṇavas. The prākṛta-sahajiyās
generally chant the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, yet they are
attached to women, money and intoxication.



BVNM: You should know the definition of sahajiyā. Some
devotees are telling that Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja is a pakkā
(complete) sahajiyā. But you should hear the definition
of sahajiyā. Repeat what you just read.

Devotee reads:

The prākṛta-sahajiyās generally chant the Hare Kṛṣṇa
mahā-mantra, yet they are attached to women, money and
intoxication.



BVNM: What things? Women, money and intoxication. But
you should not think that by “women” Swāmījī is
referring only to men who are attached to women; it also
includes women who are attached to men. For men it is
women, and for women it is men. Otherwise it will be
misunderstood, and it will be an offense for women
devotees.

Devotee reads:

Although such persons may chant the holy name of the
Lord, they are not yet properly purified.



BVNM: Wait a little. Can anyone say that I am involved
with women? Do I drink and smoke, or have any bad
habits? Do I wear my sannyāsī dress when I come to my

                           6
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

room in the mandira but change my cloth when I go to
other countries? And about money—I want pure hearts
only, I don't want money. So who is the sahajiyā ,
myself or those who are saying this? You can decide.
Those who are saying this and who are not following all
these instructions are sahajiyās.

Kṛṣṇa has given you the intelligence to deliberate on
all these matters. Don't accept blindly. Don't believe
their rumors and propaganda. Today, in Kali-yuga,
propaganda and rumors are the most prominent weapons,
but a Vaiṣṇava is not affected by all these things.

Read on.

Devotee reads:

Although such persons may chant the holy name of the
Lord, they are not yet properly purified. Such people
should be respected within one’s mind, but their
association should be avoided. Those who are innocent
but simply carried away by bad association should be
shown favor if they are eager to receive proper
instructions from pure devotees, but those neophyte
devotees who are actually initiated by the bona fide
spiritual master and are seriously engaged in carrying
out the orders of the spiritual master should be offered
respectful obeisances.



BVNM: Now come to the purport. We will try to properly
re-esta blish what Swāmījī is saying.

Devotee reads:

In order to intelligently apply the sixfold loving
reciprocations mentioned in the previous verse, one must
select proper persons with careful discrimination. Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī therefore advises that we should meet with
the Vaiṣṇavas in an appropriate way, according to their
particular status.



BVNM: What is the paribhāṣā, the definition, of
Vaiṣṇava? He has used the term Vaiṣṇava. What is the
definition? Vaiṣṇava is one who has taken mantra, kṛṣṇa
or rāma mantra, and is worshiping his deities by that
mantra and following the Vaiṣṇava rules and regulations.
Is Swāmījī saying that he is my disciple so he is
Vaiṣṇava, and all others are not Vaiṣṇavas? This would
be an offense. We should not make offenses like this. We
should adopt this complete paribhāṣā of Vaiṣṇava.
Regardless of birth, caste or creed, we should accept
anyone who is chanting, who is initiated in Vaiṣṇava
mantra and worshiping deities by that mantra, following
the rules—all these persons are Vaiṣṇavas. The
worshipers of Rāma, Nṛsiṁha, Viṣṇu, Kṛṣṇa—all who are
worshiping in the proper way—are Vaiṣṇavas. Māyāvādīs
also chant Kṛṣṇa’s name, but they are not in a proper
Vaiṣṇava process.

Then?

                           7
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017


Devotee reads:

In this verse he tells us how to deal with three types
of devotees—the kaniṣṭha-adhikārī, madhyama-adhikārī and
uttama-adhikārī. The kaniṣṭha-adhikārī is a neophyte who
has received the hari-nāma initiation from the spiritual
master and is trying to chant the holy name of Kṛṣṇa.



BVNM: If someone has taken harināma, what is the need of
his taking dīkṣā? Can anyone reply?

Devotee: In Caitanya-Caritāmṛta, Prabhupāda says to
bring one closer to the spiritual master.

BVNM: What is the difference, I want to know, between
harināma and dīkṣā? Which is prominent? Name or dīkṣā?

Devotee: Name is non-different from nāmi, Kṛṣṇa.

BVNM: Suppose I went to cook somewhere. Was there a
stove? Yes, a stove was there, a pot was there, the fire
was there, water was there, everything was there, but no
rice. So will cooking be done or not? So take this nāma
as rice. Without the help of a stove, water, fire, and
pot, the rice cannot be boiled. If all things are there,
but there is no rice, then we cannot cook. But if there
is rice and all other needed items, then we can boil the
rice, and we will take it. Understand my example?

You should think that nāma is Himself Kṛṣṇa, or Rādhā
and Kṛṣṇa. This is like rice, and fire and all other
things are like the dīkṣā-mantras. To actually realize
that the name is Himself Kṛṣṇa, all items are required
to purify ourselves, not to purify Kṛṣṇa's name. Kṛṣṇa's
name is always pure:



nāma-cintāmaṇiḥ kṛṣṇaś

caitanya-rasa-vigrahaḥ

pūrṇaḥ śuddho nitya-mukto

'bhinnatvān nāma-nāminoḥ

(Padma Purāṇa, quoted in CC. Mad. 17.133 )



The holy name of Kṛṣṇa is transcendentally blissful. It
bestows all spiritual benedictions, for it is Kṛṣṇa
Himself, the reservoir of all pleasure. Kṛṣṇa's name is
complete, and it is the form of all transcendental
mellows. It is not a material name under any condition,
and it is no less powerful than Kṛṣṇa Himself. Since
Kṛṣṇa's name is not contaminated by the material
qualities, there is no question of its being involved
with māyā. Kṛṣṇa’s name is always liberated and
spiritual. Because the name of Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa Himself
are identical, His name is never conditioned by the laws

                            8
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

of material nature.

Kṛṣṇa is the same as His name—there is no difference.
His name cannot be impure. It is always pure, always
cinmaya, sac-cid-ānanda-maya. But in our stage, we
cannot chant the pure name. Understand? If we are full
of ignorance, full of all kinds of worldly desires,
anarthas and offenses, then what we utter as kṛṣṇa-nāma
will not actually be kṛṣṇa-nāma. At this time you are
standing on the platform of māyā, avidyā, so that name
will not be pure. To purify our hearts and to get a real
taste in chanting name, dīkṣā is needed. It is needed
for so many other reasons as well: to have a link, a
relationship between Kṛṣṇa and oneself, His name and
oneself, and to give up all kinds of anarthas and
avidyā. Fire is needed to boil water, but boiling water
alone is not enough. Rice is also required. Dīkṣā is
given to purify our heart and develop a link with Kṛṣṇa
so that very soon we can realize that the name is
Himself Kṛṣṇa.

Dīkṣā helps to establish the relationship between Kṛṣṇa
and the devotee. Gopī-jana vallabhāya svāhā. Svāhā means
I am offering myself, I am dedicating myself fully at
the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. Which Kṛṣṇa? Name Kṛṣṇa. Name
of brahma. With what relationship? That same
relationship as the gopīs have with Gopī-jana-vallabha.
By this relationship we should chant name, giving up all
kṣa, unwanted things. Dī-kṣa: dī means divya jñānaṁ
dadāti, giving divya-jñāna, transcendental knowledge.
What is this divya relationship? Kṛṣṇa is my beloved. It
makes no difference whether one is male or female. Dīkṣā
gives this relation. If you do not take dīkṣā, this
relationship will not come, and you will not be able to
give up all your worldly desires and bad habits. So it
helps. But we see examples of devotees who have taken
only the name, not dīkṣā, like Hariḍāsa Ṭhākura. There
are so many examples of this—no initiation. But yet by
chanting and chanting and being in the association of
highly realized devotees, they have received kṛṣṇa-
prema. But these cases are rare. So we should follow
rules and regulations in this matter. We must take
dīkṣā.

If you are thinking that “I am like Hariḍāsa Ṭhākura,”
then nothing will come. So now I think that you have
properly realized this point—what is the difference
between harināma and dīkṣā. And if you have only taken
dīkṣā but not the name, what will you have? If you are
not taking the name but only dīkṣā-mantra, taking out
the Kṛṣṇa name from the gopāla-mantra, what remains?
Svāhā, svāhā. Nothing remains—no liberation, nothing,
zero. So the name has two functions. Kliṁ and śriṁ are
the bīja mantras, and mixing with svāhā, namaḥ or
namaskāra, they give us a special kind of power to give
up all our bad habits. Without dīkṣā you cannot give
them up. The name can also work, but why should you use
it for this? You should not use the name in this way.
Something less powerful can be used instead. The name
alone can do everything, but it will take a very long
time. So our ṛṣis have manifested these mantras by which
our kṛṣṇa-nāma will quickly develop into śuddha-nāma,
pure name. That is why dīkṣā is given in our disciplic
order. Swāmījī has explained this, and I am not telling

                           9
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

anything different. You should not think, “Oh, if you
are saying that but not using the same words, then we
will not accept what you say.” I find that if I am using
the same words as Swāmījī, you will not understand what
his deeper moods are. They are very hard to explain.

Now go on.

Devotee reads:

A madhyama-adhikārī has received spiritual initiation
from the spiritual master and has been fully engaged by
him in the transcendental loving service of the Lord.
The madhyama-adhikārī should be considered to be
situated midway in devotional service. The uttama-
adhikārī, or highest devotee, is one who is very
advanced in devotional service. An uttama-adhikārī is
not interested in blaspheming others, his heart is
completely clean, and he has attained the realized state
of unalloyed Kṛṣṇa consciousness. According to Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī, the association and service of such a
mahā-bhāgavata, or perfect Vaiṣṇava, is most desirable.

BVNM: Again I am repeating: should he be the disciple of
the same guru or any other guru? Swāmījī is not saying,
“among my disciples only.” He would never write like
this. Never. Nor will you find this idea in any books,
in Caitanya-Caritāmṛta, in Upaniṣad, or in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam. Who initiated Parīkṣit Mahārāja? Who was the
guru of Parīkṣit Mahārāja?

Devotee: Śukadeva.

BVNM: He did not initiate him. But Parīkṣit Mahārāja is
saying that Śukadeva is his Gurudeva. He is taking his
saṅga and hearing hari-kathā from him. So you should not
think that only one's initiating guru is a Vaiṣṇava and
no one else. This mood is offensive. We should not think
like this. It is not found anywhere. It is asat-
sampradāya. Especially if someone coming in Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu's sampradāya is qualified, he is a Vaiṣṇava.
Even a madhyama-adhikārī should be honored and heard
from.

Go on. Listen very carefully to this line.“One should
...”

Devotee reads:

One should not remain a kaniṣṭha-adhikārī.



BVNM: I am always repeating this. Some are saying that
you should always be distributing books, always, always,
always, and making money, money, money for your whole
life and this will take you to Goloka Vṛndāvana in the
service of gopī-prema. This is quite absurd, quite
absurd. I am thinking that those who are saying this are
foolish. Swāmījī is not saying this. These activities
are meant for building up one's sukṛti. They are for
newcomers, neophytes, who must do all these activities
that Swāmījī has approved, but they should know that
this book distribution alone will not be sufficient to

                           10
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                  5/4/2017

achieve the final goal. They should go deep into
Swāmījī’s purports, then they will have success. If a
devotee is only distributing lākhas and lākhas of books,
he will continue coming and going in the cycle of birth
and death. By these activities he will only accumulate
some sukṛti.

Swāmījī has not told that one should always remain as a
kaniṣṭha-adhikārī. Rather, he has said that one should
not remain a kaniṣṭha-adhikārī forever. But some are
insisting that we should be like that, and that this is
the highest level of service! They are simply bluffing.
Quite bluffing. We should not bluff anyone. Why are they
falling down? They are blaspheming persons for their own
gain, and when collecting donations in the name of guru,
they give 25% to the temple and 75% profit goes into
their own pockets. Swāmījī is seeing everything, and he
cannot tolerate this. So we should advance. One should
not remain a kaniṣṭha-adhikārī; he should try to move
on, by hearing from a bona fide Vaiṣṇava. Greed will
come if he is hearing in this way If he is cultivating
and obeying the orders of bona fide Vaiṣṇavas, like
Swāmījī, he will surely become a madhyama-adhikārī, the
madhyama-adhikārī will go to uttama-adhikārī, and
uttama-adhikārī will go to kṛṣṇa-prema, in vastu-siddhi.
We have not come here to always be in the same kaniṣṭha-
adhikārī stage and make offenses. Anyone who perpetually
remains as kaniṣṭha-adhikārī will have limited
satisfaction.

Then, “one who is situated on the lowest ...”

Devotee reads:

One should not remain a kaniṣṭha-adhikārī, one who is
situated on the lowest platform.



BVNM: You should all try to become madhyama-adhikārī,
and those who are in madhyama-adikārī should come to
madhyama-madhyama-adhikārī, those who are in madhyama-
madhyama should come to madhyama-uttama, and those in
uttama should try to realize svarūpa-siddhi. And after
svarūpa-siddhi, vastu-siddhi. Swāmījī has written
everything, everything—śravaṇa-daśā (stage), varaṇa-
daśā, smaraṇa-daśa, then āpana-daśā, and sampatti-daśā.
He has explained all of this. But we have no chance to
go through these books, because we are always only
distributing and distributing, but this will not take us
to that higher goal.

Devotee: Gurudeva, so if one is hearing from a rasika,
tattvajña madhyama-adhikārī Vaiṣṇava, and advancing from
kaniṣṭha to madhyama stage, then if that person is still
distributing books, is that merely acquiring sukṛti?

BVNM: No harm, no harm. At that time to distribute books
is bhakti.

Devotee: It is the level of consciousness of the person
who is distributing that makes the difference?

BVNM: Yes, in any activity. A man is brooming but this

                           11
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

is not mentioned in the 64 kinds of bhakti, but brooming
in the kuñja will be the highest type of sevā. So all
our activities can be utilized—what we are doing and
even what we should not do. Sometimes the nonsense of
worldly persons, when performed by a devotee, can be the
highest service to Kṛṣṇa. But it depends on our stage.
So we must try to come to madhyama-adhikārī, and
madhyama-adhikārī must try to come to uttama-adhikārī.
Swāmījī Mahārāja is not saying that one should remain a
kaniṣṭha-adhikārī forever; he should go forward. He must
make some endeavor to progress. If he is not trying,
then we should think that he is not in good association.
There is some weakness, some leakage there, either in
his guru or in himself. If his guru is not qualified,
then he should give up that guru. If our eagerness or
enthusiasm is not coming, and we are not trying to
develop our Kṛṣṇa consciousness from kaniṣṭha- to
madhyama-adhikarī, then that guru should be given up.

Devotee reads:

One should not remain a kaniṣṭha-adhikārī, one who is
situated on the lowest platform of devotional service
and is interested only in worshiping the Deity in the
temple.



BVNM: Only worshiping and worshiping for thousands of
years, but not serving a high-class Vaiṣṇava, will not
be sufficient. If you want to develop, you can perform
deity worship, but at the same time you will have to
develop your Kṛṣṇa consciousness by the association of
uttama rasika Vaiṣṇavas. Otherwise you will not advance.

Devotee: Gurudeva, I was wondering what is the minimum
qualification of a ...

BVNM: You should hear all these things and gradually all
your doubts will be resolved. But hear very patiently
and very deeply. Try to absorb yourself in one thing.
Don’t let your mind go to other subjects. You should try
to become absorbed in what we are doing now. Concentrate
on one thing only, on what I am giving here, what
Swāmījī is saying. Don't get off the subject. Try to
understand these words, the deep meaning of his
statements and his mood, then you can develop.

Devotee reads:

A person who is very faithfully engaged in the worship
of the Deity in the temple, but who does not know how to
behave toward devotees or people in general is called a
prākṛta-bhakta, or kaniṣṭha-adhikāri.



BVNM: You should know what is kaniṣṭha-adhikārī, and
then take your hand here (pointing to his heart) and
judge for yourself what kind of adhikāra you have, what
stage you are in. You can easily judge this for
yourself. Otherwise you cannot advance. And then try to
develop. Who is kaniṣṭha-adhikārī? One who has no
association of any advanced Vaiṣṇava and is only

                           12
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

worshiping the Deity may think that he is more advanced
than all others. If someone comes who may give so much
money, the pujarī will think, “If I do not honor him, he
may leave and not give money. So I should honor him.” He
will take the garland of Ṭhākurajī, but how will he give
it? He will not touch the person, he will throw it. If
you go to Bihārījī Mandira, or any mandira of Vṛndāvana
where all the gosvāmīs are kaniṣṭha-adhikārī, you will
see that they throw garlands even to devotees who are
uttama-mahā-bhāgavata. If Śukadeva Gosvāmī or Nārada
Muni will come, they will throw the garland like this,
because they don't know anything. They think, “Oh, that
Deity is not mine so He can be dishonored, but this is
my Ṭhākura, and only He is to be honored—not all others.
Why are those people giving donations to that Deity?
They should all give to my Deity.” He is not thinking
that my Deity is everywhere, that my Deity is fully
Kṛṣṇa. They cannot think like this because they have not
developed their Kṛṣṇa consciousness. You should try to
develop your Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

I think it will be interesting for you to genuinely
realize Swāmījī’s teachings. I am not saying anything
new; I am only explaining the words of Swāmījī here. Do
not think that I am saying anything separate here and
there. You will also see this in all other authentic
books. You should try to hear, because I think that you
did not have much opportunity to be with Swāmījī and to
serve him practically in a direct relationship. I have
had that opportunity. I was lucky to serve him
personally for more than 30 years, so you can safely
hear something from me to develop your bhakti.

Gaura premānande!




Chapter Two: Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Śloka 5


New Braja, 19 May 1997

BVNM: What are the special characteristics in the
writings of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī?

Devotee: Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī fully understood the
internal mood and desire of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu to
taste the moods of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and his writings
specifically expressed all of these pastimes of Rādhā
and Kṛṣṇa. He expounded upon what was there in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, and expanded upon that by his own internal
realizations, and he also presented to the world the
science of bhakti-rasa. He provided all of the
ingredients which the devotees require to go deeply into
experiencing this bhakti-rasa.

BVNM: Very good. But because of my poor knowledge of
English, I am not expressing my real intention in my
question. The point I want to express is that whatever
Rūpa Gosvāmī has written, he has first practiced himself
and then realized it. He has not written anything which
he has not practiced, fully realized, and established in

                           13
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

his life. He has practiced everything first. Beginning
from Nectar of Instruction—vāco vegam, Bhakti-Rasāmṛta-
Sindu and Ujjvala-Nīlamaṇi, he has practiced everything
in his life perfectly. Then after realizing the truth,
he wrote his books. But for us this is not the case.

Can you tell from your realization that Kṛṣṇa’s name and
Kṛṣṇa are the same thing? By chanting the holy name of
Kṛṣṇa, we will be happy in this life and in future
lives. Have you practiced and realized this? Yet we want
to write books, so many volumes, volumes, and volumes.

For example, take the five Pāṇḍavas and the hundred sons
of Dhṛtaraṣṭra—Duryodhana and all. Altogether Droṇācārya
had one hundred and five students. Droṇācārya was highly
qualified in archery and also in all the Vedas and
Upaniṣads. He knew all the śāstras and he used to teach
them to his students. One day he gave an assignment that
they should practice speaking the truth. They should
meditate on this and then come back the next day.

Duryodhana told him, “Oh, I have already learned this.
This is not such a difficult or complicated philosophy.
I already practice this.”

“No. You should go and deeply think about this and come
back tomorrow.”

The next day they all assembled. Droṇācārya asked
Duryodhana, “Do you remember what I asked?”

“Yes, yes, so well. You told us to speak the truth.”

“No. You have not remembered.” Droṇācārya asked the
others, “In this class, is there anyone else who has not
understood or remembered this instruction?”

Only one hand came up. Whose hand was that?
Yudhiṣṭhira’s. “I have not realized it practically in my
life, so it is not possible for me to speak the truth.”

“Oh, then you alone will be able to realize it, but for
the others it will be very hard.”

The specialty of Rūpa Gosvāmī is that every word and
letter he has written cannot be changed. No one can ever
change it. Once Sanātana Gosvāmī was reading one of
Rūpa’s poems, and he found what he thought was a
mistake. He ordered Rūpa, “You should correct this.”
What was that? Veṇī vyālāṇganā phaṇām. Rūpa Gosvāmī had
described Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s venī, braid, as a very
poisonous, black snake—a female snake, because the
female becomes furious very quickly and is easily moved
to attack. Male snakes do not become so furious as
easily as the females. So he was describing that Her
braid was waving in the air, veṇī vyālāṇganā phaṇām.

Sanātana Gosvāmī asked, “Why did you use this word?
Vyālā means serpent, black snake. Why did you use this
word?” Being the elder brother and guru, Sanātana
Gosvāmī advised, “You should correct it.” Then very
humbly Rūpa Gosvāmī replied, “Brother, I think that it
would be better if you correct it. I will rely on you to
do it.”

                           14
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017


Sanātana Gosvāmī was intensely searching here and there
for an alternative word that would be very smooth and
sweet. He was giving his mind and heart to this matter
but he could not think of anything, so he decided,
“Acchā, I will do it tomorrow.” They were staying at
Rādhā-kuṇḍa at that time in separate cottages. As he was
returning to his own cottage, he was attracted by the
sight of a very beautiful kadamba tree. Hanging from the
branches of this tree were four ropes holding a
magnificent swing. On the swing was sitting a very
beautiful village girl, but like a normal Indian girl,
she was not so extraordinary. And some other girls were
there singing a sweet song and pushing the swing.

From far away Sanātana Gosvāmī saw that some very
poisonous she-snakes were waving here and there in the
air behind the head of that beautiful girl. The bottom
of her braid was also moving back and forth. He at once
ran towards her calling, “O lālī, O lālī, O lālī.” Lālī
means darling girl. “O lālī, serpents are there in your
hair. Be careful.” And he took his stick to remove those
snakes. But when he came nearer, the girl smiled and at
once vanished with all Her sakhīs and everything. Only
the tree was there, no swing, nothing else. Then he
realized that Rūpa Gosvāmī, having had the same vision,
had written the full truth. There was not any word or
even a letter to be corrected. His work is “as it is,”
just like Gīta As It Is. He had practiced and realized
what he had written.

But we write volumes and volumes on so many topics, even
while not having practiced or realized anything. We will
write about Śukadeva Gosvāmī, and at the same time have
four girlfriends. Or a girl will produce so many books,
but having four boyfriends. We are uncontrolled in our
eating and speaking, but yet we think we are qualified
to write. But Rūpa Gosvāmī has never written anything
which he has not practiced.

Realizing the truth, Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja never spoke
anything which he had not realized. But we cannot
realize Kṛṣṇa by material consciousness. Spiritual truth
can be realized only by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa Himself. In
the Mahābhārata War, Kṛṣṇa told Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja to
shout loudly that Aśvatthāmā was dead. But Yudhiṣṭhira
said, “ I have not realized that he is dead. I am seeing
that he is fighting here. How can I say this?” Kṛṣṇa was
repeatedly telling him to say this, but he would not.
After that, Kṛṣṇa told Bhīmasena to kill an elephant
named Aśvatthāmā, and he did. Then Kṛṣṇa asked, “Now,
you can say it?”

He replied, “No. I can tell only that Aśvatthāmā the
elephant is dead, only the elephant.”

“Then you should announce loudly that ‘Aśvatthāmā is
dead, Aśvatthāmā the elephant.’”

He began to shout very loudly, “Aśvatthāmā is dead,” and
as soon as he finished this sentence, Kṛṣṇa at once told
Bhīma, Arjuna, Nakula and Sahadeva to blow their five
conchshells very loudly so that no one could hear,
“Aśvatthāmā the elephant.” Only “Aśvatthāmā is dead”

                           15
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

could be heard.

Until that time, Yudhiṣṭhira’s chariot never rode on the
earth; it was always levitating. But at this time his
chariot came down to the earth because he had made a
very big offense in disobeying Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa had already
shown Arjuna that everyone would be killed; all were
within the teeth of death. All bodies were killed, but
not the ātmā—it never dies. So Yudhiṣṭhira had made an
offense. We should try to obey Kṛṣṇa, śāstra and guru.
Otherwise, we cannot realize this truth. I think that
all truths in this world are lies. What is your name?
Please tell truly, what is your name?

Devotee: Paramahaṁsa.

BVNM: But when? It is not true. The name of your ātmā is
not Paramahaṁsa, or the name of five elements. Water and
air have no name, so actually it is all false. We cannot
speak a word in this world that is true.

So Rūpa Gosvāmī’s specialty was that whatever he said
from beginning to end was realized first. Like
Vyāsadeva, he saw everything while in samādhi. He
realized, and then he wrote. In Kali-yuga we don’t do
this. We take something from here and there, from this
author and that one, and we put it all together and win
the Nobel Prize. So we should try to realize what we
say. However, as a peon we can use the teachings of our
Gurudeva and śāstra and have very strong faith in these.

Now let us come back to the text. Yesterday what were we
reading? Text 5. Perhaps we are on page 50. Swāmījī has
described the symptoms of the kaniṣṭha-, madhyama- and
uttama-adhikārī. Can you tell something about all three?
Do you remember?

Devotee: Kaniṣṭha-adhikārī. Primarily he has a vision
that Kṛṣṇa, God, is in the temple, and I can see him if
I go to the temple only, elsewhere not. And neither does
he recognize who is bhakta, who is not bhakta, who is
innocent, who is guilty. He doesn’t see gradations. So
he is a lower-class devotee.

Madhyama means he has conviction of the existence of
Kṛṣṇa as God, but the scriptural backing is not
complete. He is not fully learned in the science, not
śāstra-vit. Also, the madhyama-adhikārī sees different
grades of devotees—he sees the innocent person, and to
that person he preaches. He sees the guilty or non-
devotee, the atheist, and he avoids that person. He sees
his peer as a friend and with that devotee he is
intimate and friendly, and then he sees the higher
adhikārī, the advanced mahā-bhāgavata, as worshipable
and serves his every wish.

Then the uttama-adhikārī is a mahā-bhāgavata who sees
Kṛṣṇa everywhere. He sees everything happening according
to Kṛṣṇa’s plan and everybody acting as kṛṣṇa-bhakta. He
does not discriminate between different levels. He has
only the highest vision of pure devotion, and everywhere
he sees that. So the beginning adhikārī, the kaniṣṭha,
cannot discriminate because of ignorance. The highest
adhikārī, mahā-bhāgavata, does not discriminate because

                           16
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

of pure bhakti. But in the middle, the madhyama-adhikārī
sees the different levels and can discriminate for
preaching purposes.

BVNM: Anything more?

Devotee: Also, it is explained in Caitanya-Caritāmṛta
that according to faith one can understand the different
devotees.

BVNM: Swāmījī has described this. We will read it
afterwards. Go on.

Devotee: For the kaniṣṭha it is stated: yāhāra komala-
śraddhā, se ‘kaniṣṭha’ jana, krame krame teṅho bhakta
haibe ‘uttama’ (CC. Mad. 22.69). He has komala-śraddhā,
soft and pliable faith.

BVNM: What is the meaning of soft? Soft is so good.

Devotees: Delicate. Weak.

BVNM: Weak.

Devotee: Yes. It is weak, it waivers. When one comes in
contact with someone who may present some opposing
argument, his faith becomes weak. But krame teṅho bhakta
ha-ibe ‘uttama’—by proper association, by sādhu-saṅga
with high-class devotees, then krame krame, step by
step, one ultimately can come to the platform of uttama.

Then next is madhyama. It is stated that the madhyama
bhakta has full faith, and he is mahā-bhāgyavān, very
fortunate.

BVNM: No. No.

Devotee:

śāstra-yukti nāhi jāne dṛḍha śraddhāvān

‘madhyama-adhikārī’ sei mahā-bhāgyavān

(Cc. Madhya 22.67)



His understanding of śāstra is not to the level of the
uttama-mahā-bhāgavata.

BVNM: He does not know śāstra perfectly. He knows it to
some extent. That which he knows, he knows well but not
perfectly. He has only partial understanding, but dṛḍha
śraddhāvān. Understand? Again what am I saying?

Devotee: Śāstra-yukti nāhi jāne dṛḍha śraddhāvān. His
understanding of śāstra is not perfect, but he has dṛḍha
śraddhāvān, very strong faith.

BVNM: In other words, he can be defeated in arguments.
But his śraddhā, his honor for Kṛṣṇa, his belief in
guru, śāstra and Bhagavān is so strong that he will not
give up his worshiping, chanting, remembering or
anything. He is firmly established in his practices.

                            17
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

Clear? Acchā. Then?

Devotee: So dṛḍha śraddhāvān. He is firmly established;
he is fixed up.

BVNM: Any example? Like Haridāsa Ṭhākura. He was beaten
in twenty-two market places, but he never said, “O
Allah! O Huḍā!” No. “Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa
Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare
Hare.” He never stopped chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. Khaṇda-
khaṇḍa hai deha jāya yadi prāṇa (Caitanya-bhāgavata Adi
16.94). Even if someone cuts me in lākhas and lākhas of
pieces, I cannot change my habit of chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa,
Hare Kṛṣṇa.” Like Prahlāda Mahārāja—his śraddhā and his
siddhānta, established truth, were both so strong.

Devotee: So such a devotee is mahā-bhāgyavān. He is
greatly fortunate.

BVNM: And then?

Devotee: And then the uttama-adhikārī. He has prauḍha
śraddhā, that is, deep faith. The madhyama-adhikārī has
firm faith but the uttama-bhāgavata has very, very deep
faith which is fully realized.

BVNM: Deep faith and second? Śāstra-yukte sunipuṇa. What
is the meaning of sunipuṇa?

Devotee: He has fully realized the Vedic conclusions,
the Śāstric conclusions, he is very expert and he is ...

BVNM: ...realized, with realization. And his śraddhā is
also very strong.

Devotee: And he is able to convince all others by
Śāstric arguments and reasoning.

BVNM: Acchā. Sit down. Very good. And thirdly, anyone?
Anyone? More?

Devotee: Śrīla Prabhupāda also mentions that sometimes
the uttama-adhikārī will come down to the madhyama-
adhikārī platform.

BVNM: Oh, I am not asking that. It is true. Uttama-
adhikārī comes to the middle stage and then he becomes
guru. An uttama-adhikārī always sees that all are
serving Kṛṣṇa, but he alone is not serving. Therefore he
cannot teach anything. Never. Like Śrīmatī Rādhikā. She
is sitting on the top level of prema but thinking, “Oh,
this deer is serving Kṛṣṇa so much. I cannot serve like
him. These clouds are serving Kṛṣṇa, but I cannot.” Like
this.

What is the next way to distinguish a devotee’s
adhikāra? Caitanya Mahāprabhu has told three ways. We
have described two; you can tell one more.

Devotee: Kaniṣṭha-adhikārī, it was described yesterday
that he thinks, “I am worshiping the Deities, only God.”

BVNM: No, no, not this. One’s stage depends first on
śraddhā, not name. According to one’s śraddhā he is

                           18
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

kaniṣṭha, madhyama or uttama. What is told in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam? Prākṛta madhyama uttama. Secondly it depends
on one’s realization of śāstra, and thirdly it depends
on chanting of the name, especially in Kali-yuga. We
should honor those who are chanting only one name as
kaniṣṭha. Yāṅra mukhe śuni eka-bāra kṛṣṇa-nāma. Even if
he is uttering only one name, whether he is dīkṣita or
not, initiated or not, no harm.

Secondly, those who are always chanting continuously are
madhyama-adhikārī. And that person whose sight
automatically awakens kṛṣṇa-nāma in our heart is uttama—
like Haridāsa Ṭhākura. So many people saw him and were
inspired to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa,
Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare—
only by seeing him. He was uttama-bhāgavata, a very
great personality, and he inspired people in this way.

Swāmījī has spoken all these things here. So now you
should read on. “One should not accept a spiritual
master without following his instructions”—page 52
bottom.

Devotee reads:

One should not accept a spiritual master without
following his instructions. Nor should one accept a
spiritual master just to make a fashionable show of
spiritual life.



BVNM: What is the meaning of “one should not accept a
spiritual master without following his instructions”?

Devotee: Without putting yourself at his lotus feet,
taking his every word as life and soul, and following
with all energy.

BVNM: Yes.

Devotee: One should not see the spiritual master as a
show bottle, boasting that has accepted a spiritual
master, just to show off.

BVNM: Yes. “My spiritual master is so high, so I am also
high.” This will not do. You will have to practice and
obey him. If you are not obeying his instructions, then
you are like a show bottle. We have realized this fact.
“I am disciple of Maunī Bābā, he never speaks anything,
only he writes.” Or, “I am the disciple of Vaṁśī dāsa
Bābājī Mahārāja, living under a cart. So renounced I am
and, like my Guru, I also smoke a hooka (gāñjā).” No,
this will not do. We must follow our guru’s inner
motives, not imitating externals. Vaṁśī dāsa Bābājī
Mahārāja was a paramahaṁsa. He was not subject to rules
and regulations. He may have smoked a hooka and kept
fish bones outside his door to keep worldly people away
so that his solitary bhajana would not be disturbed. We
cannot even know all the reasons why he smoked a hooka
or did anything else. But we will have to practice
sādhana, trying to catch the inner mood. Not that one
should accept a spiritual master to make a fashionable
show of spiritual life. Those who have done this are

                           19
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

certainly bound to fall. They are already fallen, even
without doing anything improper. But outwardly we will
see that after some days they will give up the practice
of chanting the name. Only wearing tilaka, neckbeads and
saffron cloth, looking like a devotee, will not suffice.
It indicates something, but not everything. Those
persons who take on the external dress but do not obey
the orders of gurudeva are sahajiyā.

Yesterday we read in Swāmījī’s book, “One must be
jijñāsu (inquisitive).” What is the meaning of jijñāsu?
Can you tell a similar śloka from Gītā? Anyone?

Devotee:

tad viddhi praṇipātena

paripraśnena sevayā

upadekṣyanti te jñānaṁ

jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ



BVNM: Yes. You should all know these facts. If you are
not jijñāsu, then you cannot gain anything. You must be
serving, thinking about your Gurudeva’s teachings, and
reading the books thoroughly. Then some questions will
come in your mind. If you are thinking deeply, reading
thoroughly and hearing from him, a paripraśna will come.
What is the meaning of paripraśna?

Devotee: Inquiry.

BVNM: No, not inquiry. What is the meaning?

Devotee: Submissive inquiry. Submissive question.

BVNM: Having full faith in his guru. After serving him,
asking, “If I am qualified, please mercifully answer my
question.” Like this. Then we can know something. Why do
we want to know? To become established in the truth, to
realize the facts.

Go on.

Devotee reads:

One must be jijñāsu, very much inquisitive to learn from
the bona fide spiritual master. The inquiries one makes
should strictly pertain to transcendental science
(jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam). The word uttamam refers to
that which is above material knowledge.



BVNM: What is the symptom of uttama-adhikārī? Do you
remember? Uttama-adhikārī from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

Devotee: He sees that all living entities are equal. He
has non-dual vision, he is able to see all living
entities as parts and parcels of Kṛṣṇa. He does not
discriminate. He sees all living entities equally.

                           20
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017


BVNM: No, not like this. This does not mean that all are
equal— some are fat, some young, some beautiful. And
also in Vaikuṇṭha some are ladies, some are gentlemen,
some are friends, mothers, animals, cows...

Devotee: He sees:

sarva-bhūteṣu yaḥ paśyed

bhagavad-bhāvam ātmanaḥ

bhūtāni bhagavaty ātmany

eṣa bhāgavatottamaḥ

(SB. 11.2.45)



He sees within all living entities their relationship
with the Supreme Lord. And bhūtāni. He sees always the
living entities, the Lord and the jīva. He has the
highest love for Kṛṣṇa and he sees that all living
entities have that same love for Kṛṣṇa as himself, even
if they don’t have it. Like the gopīs saw the trees and
the birds and the clouds having the same love for Kṛṣṇa
that they have. But he thinks, “I don’t have such love.”

BVNM: Yes. But here is the meaning, like Prahlāda
Mahārāja. He is tattva-jñānī. Kṛṣṇa is the highest
tattva, advaya-jñāna-parama-tattva. Vadanti tat tattva-
vidas tattvam yaj jñāmam advayam. Kṛṣṇa is advaya-jñāna-
para-tattva. Here an uttama-adhikārī devotee sees his
own worshipable deity in each living entity, and he sees
that all are related to Kṛṣṇa in the same way as he is.
Śloka? Sarva bhūteṣu, in all living entities paśyed, he
sees, bhagavad bhāvam, the relationship to Kṛṣṇa.
Ātmanaḥ, myself.

Devotee: Bhāvam means relationship?

BVNM: Yes. Bhagavad bhāvam. The bhāva of Kṛṣṇa, that
relationship which he himself has with Kṛṣṇa, he sees in
everyone. If he is situated in sakhya-rasa, he will
think, “Oh, all are friends of Kṛṣṇa.” And if he is
situated in mādhurya-rasa, “Oh, all are gopīs. All are
serving Kṛṣṇa like gopīs.” Kṛṣṇa is gopī-jana-vallabha.
If the devotee feels his own relationship, then
everywhere he will see that all are like this. A cheater
sees all others as cheaters, a thief sees that all are
thieves, a lusty person sees that all are lusty. If a
brother and sister are going together in a car, a lusty
person will think, “Oh, they are very lusty, very wicked
persons. They are going in the car somewhere.” He will
not consider that they may be brother and sister. “Oh,
as lovers they are going.” In this way he thinks. So,
the uttama-mahā-bhāgavat sees his own mood towards Kṛṣṇa
in all.

And second line, bhagavad-bhāvam ātmanaḥ bhūtāni
bhagvaty ātmany. He is seeing that all are related to
Kṛṣṇa in his same mood. And here he sees the same Kṛṣṇa
is in everyone. Clear? Sarva-bhūteṣu yaḥ paśyed bhagavad

                           21
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                   5/4/2017

bhāvam ātmanah. His iṣṭadeva is everywhere. All the
living entities are in Kṛṣṇa. And next, in all living
entities he sees the same Kṛṣṇa. First he sees everyone
in Kṛṣṇa, and within all he sees Kṛṣṇa. But what does he
see? Ātmani bhāvam.

Devotees: His own mood.

BVNM: His own mood. Understand now? He is uttama-
adhikārī. If you have an uttama-adhikārī like this, you
should serve him fully, putting your head and everything
at his feet.



kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasa-bhāvitā matiḥ

krīyatāṁ yadi kuto ‘pi labhyate

tatra laulyam api mūlyam ekalaṁ

janma-koṭi-sukṛtair na labhyate

(Padyāvalī 14, quoted in CC. Mad. 8.70)



(Intelligence which is infused with taste for kṛṣṇa-
bhakti cannot be had even by pious activity in hundreds
and thousands of lives. It can be attained only by
paying one price—intense greed to obtain it. If it is
available, purchase it without delay at any cost!)



This bhāva-bhakti cannot be achieved only by past
impressions or in the association of general sādhus,
general devotees. It will be achieved only by the
association of Rāya Rāmānanda, Svarūpa Dāmodara, Rūpa
Gosvāmī, and Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī—association like
this. Swāmījī has clarified all these things.

Read more. “Out of many such Vaiṣṇavas ...” Where we
are?

Devotee reads: We’re at the bottom of page 52.

Uttamam refers to that which is above material
knowledge. Tama means “the darkness of this material
world,” and ut means “transcendental.” Generally people
are very interested in inquiring about mundane subject
matters ...



BVNM: What is the meaning?

Devotee: Mundane subject matters?

BVNM: Hm. That, “Kindly marry my girl to that person.
Can you look at my palms? What is in my future? Will I
be rich? Will I gain some wealth?” Like this. And, “He
has acted against me. What should I do? Should I take
revenge? What should I do?” We are asking all these

                             22
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

silly worldly questions. “How are you?” “I am so well.
But are you well?” We don’t practice Vaiṣṇava etiquette,
ask any Vaiṣṇava theory, or think, “I am so wretched.
How can I progress?” These questions we don’t ask.

Then?

Devotee reads:

... but when one has lost such interest and is simply
interested in transcendental subject matters, he is
quite fit for being initiated.



BVNM: What is he saying? Again you should repeat.

Devotee reads:

... but when one has lost such interest and is simply
interested in transcendental subject matters, he is
quite fit for being initiated.



BVNM: What is the meaning?

Devotee: When one has lost interest in all of the
material topics of this world, and he is interested in
divya-jñāna, then at that time he has some qualification
for dīkṣā, for initiation.

BVNM: But we see that nowadays you are not accepting
this. Devotees may canvass for new members, especially
trying to attract anyone who is rich, very beautiful,
coming in an aristocratic family, or so learned. “Oh,
come on, come on.” They send a special representative to
enlist such persons by hook or crook, because in the
future they can help in so many ways. But this is not
proper motivation. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.3.21) it is
written: tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam.
Same thing. Those who have realized that worldly life is
not good, who want to come across the ocean of birth and
death, sorrows and suffering, and realize kṛṣṇa-prema
should seek a good guru. This is the process and Swāmījī
is explaining it. But sometimes we overlook important
aspects of the process, and that is why insincere
devotees fall down. Even many who took the renounced
order had no firm belief in all these things. But those
who have given up worldly desires and want to develop
their kṛṣṇa-prema, or perhaps are just looking for
happiness in this world and the next, are qualified to
have initiation. They can realize this ātmā and
Paramātmā.

Next, go on.

Devotee reads:

When one is actually initiated by the bona fide
spiritual master and when he seriously engages in the
service of the Lord, he should be accepted as a
madhyama-adhikārī.


                             23
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

The chanting of the holy names of Kṛṣṇa is so sublime
that if one chants the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra
offenselessly, carefully avoiding the ten offenses, he
can certainly be gradually elevated to the point of
understanding that there is no difference between the
holy name of the Lord and the Lord Himself.



BVNM: We should try to realize this. We are conditioned
souls, so how can we realize? But it is possible. Where
does the spirit to serve Kṛṣṇa come from? By the grace
of Kṛṣṇa, guru comes to us. We cannot go to guru. So
this spirit comes from Kṛṣṇa in the heart of gurudeva,
and then to us. Kṛṣṇa is so merciful. We see that to
maintain one’s life a person has to labor hard from
morning to night. And even in the night there are so
many problems. But for devotees like Haridāsa Ṭhākura,
who was always chanting three lākhas harināma, there are
no problems at all. So many people used to bring him
delicious food, but he accepted very little. They would
also bring him clothes and so many tasteful things, but
he never took them. He never hankered for these things.

We know that Kṛṣṇa gives His mercy. We are chanting the
name and the whole world is keeping their head on our
lotus feet. Why? A devotees thinks, “It is not due to
any ability I may have. But I am chanting harināma. Thus
all are serving me and placing so much faith in me. The
whole world is coming.” Why? Swāmījī realized this. In a
very short time he preached over the whole world and
everyone was coming to him. How was he able to preach?
Kṛṣṇa did it. So nāma and nāmī are the same thing.
Sometimes the mercy of name is superior to nāmī.

When a devotee becomes madhyama-adhikārī, he realizes a
little something. As he gradually goes up, he will
realize so much more. For example, Haridāsa Ṭhākura was
never afraid of death. Mahārāja Ambarīṣa was also like
this—no concern for death. Death was threatening, but
they were never afraid. Mahārāja Ambarīṣa was worried
only for Durvāsā, not for himself. And when Durvāsā saw
that death was coming, that Cakra Sudarśana was
following him, he fled. But he didn’t realize that this
Cakra Sudarśana was everywhere. Wherever he went, Cakra
followed him. Everywhere! He could not protect himself,
and Ambarīṣa Mahārāja knew this fact. Name and nāmī are
the same. So if a devotee realizes this, he will not
fall down. He will always be absorbed in chanting the
name and he will realize pade pade (step by step).

ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanaṁ bhava-mahā-dāvāgni-nirvāpaṇaṁ

śreyaḥ-kairava-candrikā-vitaraṇaṁ vidyā-vadhū-jīvanam

ānandāmbudhi-vardhanaṁ prati-padaṁ pūrṇāmṛtāsvādanaṁ



He will realize the mercy of Kṛṣṇa and he will see that
nāma is Himself divine Kṛṣṇa. He will play with that
name. He will see all of the pastimes in Him,
everything. Pūrṇāmṛtāsvādanaṁ. He will realize all these
things.

                           24
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                  5/4/2017


Then. Go on, go on.

Devotee reads:

One who has reached such an understanding ...



BVNM: You should all realize this fact. If you are
kaniṣṭha-adhikārī, no harm. According to your faith you
should realize something, that He is always protecting
and inspiring you. You should know, “Gurudeva has given
me Kṛṣṇa Himself.”

And if he is madhyama-adhikārī, he is seeing so many
more things. And the uttama-adhikārī is seeing that
Kṛṣṇa is playing, the name is playing. Everything is
there. The whole of Vraja, all kinds of rasa and all
kinds of powers are in nāma.



nāmnām akāri bahudhā nija-sarva-śaktis

tatrārpitā niyamitaḥ smaraṇe na kālaḥ

etādṛśī tava kṛpā bhagavan mamāpi

durdaivam īdṛśam ihājani nānurāgaḥ



So beautiful is the name! It is Kṛṣṇa Himself, having
all His qualities. “But I am so wretched that I have no
taste for Him.” So try to weep with tears, folding your
hands, and then you will realize all these things. This
is the process of taking harināma.

Devotee reads:

One who has reached such an understanding should be very
much respected by neophyte devotees. One should know for
certain that without chanting the holy name of the Lord
offenselessly, one cannot be a proper candidate for
advancement in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.



BVNM: Swāmījī has always encouraged everyone to advance:
“One should not remain a kaniṣṭha-adhikārī.” He is
telling punaḥ punaḥ, again and again, “Do not be in one
stage. Try to advance.” Don’t think that Kṛṣṇa will come
if we remain only on the beginning level. “We are the
head of the society for supporting cows, milking and
serving them. This service alone will take us to Goloka-
Vṛndāvana and award us the highest affection of Rādhā
and Kṛṣṇa.” No! It will only make some sukṛti, spiritual
merit. From there you will have to associate with
Vaiṣṇavas and take initiation from an authorized guru.
After that you will practice sādhana, and all kinds of
anarthas will go. Next niṣṭhā will come, then ruci,
āsakti and gradually your bhakti will develop.


                           25
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

But by serving a bona fide rasika, tattva-jñā, bhāvuka
bhakta, like Svarūpa Dāmodara and Rāya Rāmānanda, at
once āsakti will come, or ruci with greed. This will be
due to past sukṛti. Then he will have the association of
a very advanced rasika Vaiṣṇava. He will not take any
ordinary guru, but he will select someone who is rasika
in our line of Rūpa Gosvāmī. He will not accept someone
blindly. He will deliberate and listen for some time and
when he will be convinced, then he will surrender to
him. This association is everything, like with śikṣā-
guru. He may or may not take initiation.

Do you know who was the guru of Svarūpa Dāmodara? He was
a Māyāvādī brahmacārī. Svarūpa Dāmodara had gone to
Kāśī, but really he was not a Māyāvādī. He was the
associate of Bāla Gaura, Gauracandra. He had been the
friend of Caitanya Mahāprabhu from babyhood. He was a
resident of Navadvīpa and was the bosom friend of
Gauracandra. He only played a role, going to Kāśī and
taking initiation from a Māyāvādī sannyāsī. We can study
his character and decide. Caitanya Mahāprabhu was not a
Māyāvādī sannyāsī, even though he had taken sannyāsa
from a renowned Māyāvādī sannyāsī, Keśava Bhāratī. So
don’t be satisfied with external appearances.

Devotee reads:

In Śrī Caitanya-Caritāmṛta it is said:

yāhāra komala śraddhā, se ‘kaniṣṭha’ jana

krame krame teṅho bhakta haibe ‘uttama’

(CC. Madhya 22.69)

“One whose faith is soft and pliable is called a
neophyte, but by gradually following the process, he
will rise to the platform of a first-class devotee.”



BVNM: Ah, we have explained this. Only one stanza you
should read. Page 54, from beginning.

Devotee reads:

People in the Western countries cannot concentrate for
long periods while chanting on beads. Therefore the
minimum number of rounds is prescribed.



BVNM: Why has he told that you should chant only sixteen
rounds? He is giving the answer here. What is he saying?

Devotee reads:

The people in the Western countries cannot concentrate
for long periods while chanting on beads.



BVNM: But they can do worship for two, three hours.
There is nothing to meditate or concentrate on, so they

                           26
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

can do it. As a fashion they can go on the streets,
jumping, dancing, singing very loudly and very
affectionately. No harm. Twenty-four hours they can do
this. But when you tell them, “Please sit down, stay
erect and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa. Don’t look around. See Kṛṣṇa
everywhere and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa,” they can
do this only for ten minutes and then they will start
looking around. They are bound to. And if they can sit
for twenty minutes, then they will sigh, stand up and
will walk while chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa very
fast. Then if someone comes along, they will start
conversing, “Oh, come on, come on. How are you? Hare
Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa.”

This is not the process. So Swāmījī has said to chant
sixteen rounds because the westerners are busy, very
busy. Busy doing what? Making so many things, making
money, making so many material arrangements. They are
making bombs to destroy the whole world in a second. In
this way they are so busy.

Devotee reads:

Therefore the minimum number of rounds is prescribed.
However, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura used to
say that unless one chants at least sixty-four rounds of
japa (one hundred thousand names), he is considered
fallen (patita).



BVNM: Yes. Kṛṣṇa does not accept any offering if we are
not chanting sixty-four rounds. So we should chant with
quality. “O Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa.” Like this.
“Where is my beloved Kṛṣṇa? Where is Nanda-nandana?
Where is Yaśodā-nandana? Where is Rādhā-ramaṇa?” Weeping
and chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, seeing Kṛṣṇa
somewherein the bushes, we will at once run to catch
hold of Him. But Kṛṣṇa is so naughty. He goes one, two
feet behind, and sometimes here and there. And when He
comes very near, then He disappears. Then the devotee
falls flat on the earth, rolling down, “O Kṛṣṇa, where
have You gone, where have You gone?” Chanting like this,
Kṛṣṇa will certainly come. This is the process Swāmījī
has described.

Devotee:

According to his calculation, practically every one of
us is fallen, but because we are trying ...



BVNM: After some days we see that someone has fallen, he
has left harināma, he has left all these bhakti
activities, and has again become involved in all worldly
affairs. But someone who has tolerance will never give
up. Gradually they will develop. They will do sixteen
rounds, after that thirty-two, then forty-eight, and
after that sixty-four. Even then they will not be
satisfied, and will try to chant two lākhas, three
lākhas! After that they will chant pure, śuddha-nāma.
This is the process of doing harināma. What is he
telling?

                           27
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017


Devotee reads:

... but because we are trying to serve the Supreme Lord
with all seriousness and without duplicity, we can
expect the mercy of Lord Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who is
famous as patita-pāvana, the deliverer of the fallen.



BVNM: Swāmījī realizes our position so he has given us
some concession, especially for Western devotees,
because they are always engaged in worldly affairs. So
he has set a net and enticed us, that if we will chant
sixteen rounds even, we will be happy here now and there
in the future. He has set a lovely trap for us. After
that, we will gradually develop some taste and will not
have to be told anything. And even after completing
three lākhas, still we will not be satisfied! “Oh, there
is no kṛṣṇa-prema here.” And we will always be weeping,
lamenting, and praying:

nayanaṁ galad-aśru-dhārayā

vadanaṁ gadgada-ruddhayā girā

pulakair nicitaṁ vapuḥ kadā,

tava nāma-grahaṇe bhaviṣyati

(Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka 6)



(O Prabhu! When will my eyes be filled with a stream of
tears? When will my voice choke up? And when will the
hairs of my body stand erect in ecstacy as I chant Your
holy name?)

And we can pray like this:

na prema-gandho’sti darāpi me harau

krandāmi saubhāgya-bharaṁ prakāśitum

vaṁśī-vilāsy-anana-lokanam vinā

vibharmi yat prāṇa-pataṇgakān vṛthā

(CC. Madhya 2.45)

“Oh, I do not have even a little smell of prema for
Hari. I am crying to make a show of my good fortune.
Fish that are taken out of the water at once die,
without doubt. I am not seeing my beloved Kṛṣṇa, who
plays upon His flute, but still I am alive. Dhik mām,
dhik mām, fie on me, fie on me.” Thus, we will go on
chanting and remembering.

Gaura premānande!




                             28
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017


Chapter Three: Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Ślokas 5-6


New Braja, 20 May 1997

We started reading from Text 5 but did not finish. You
should read from page 57, last stanza.

Devotee reads:

When a person realizes himself to be an eternal servitor
of Kṛṣṇa . . .



BVNM: I want to emphasize that you should hear all these
things very carefully. Swāmījī has explained everything
that Rūpa Gosvāmī has written, and I am further
elucidating so that we can adopt all these practices and
thus be established in śuddha-bhakti, pure bhakti. So we
should hear very minutely and carefully.

I told something the other day about nāma and dīkṣā. I
know that generally many devotees have had
misunderstandings regarding these subjects which I
clarified yesterday. I think that these explanations
should go all over the whole world, and they can create
a spiritual revolution. Rūpa Gosvāmī has originally
written these instructions, and in his book Swāmījī has
revealed many of the deep meanings. I am only
illuminating Swāmījī’s words. This is our duty—to give a
proper understanding of all these subjects. So when I
read Swāmījī’s Nectar of Instruction, I think, “Oh, Rūpa
Gosvāmī is writing so deeply.” Without the help of the
explanation of any pure devotee like Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura, Swāmījī or Śrīla Prabhupāda Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī, we cannot realize all these things, although
everything is written in the books. And that is why the
ācāryas and all other pure devotees realize these facts
and write further commentaries. So writing never stops.
If Swāmījī were still here, he would have written so
many more books, more and more.

“So when a person realizes himself . . .”

Devotee reads:

. . . to be an eternal servitor of Kṛṣṇa, he loses
interest in everything but Kṛṣṇa’s service.



BVNM: What does this mean?

Devotee: He gives up his desire for sense gratification
and just wants to serve Kṛṣṇa.

BVNM: He believes only in Kṛṣṇa’s service, and he
forgets about other things.

Devotee reads:

Always thinking of Kṛṣṇa, devising means by which to

                             29
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                    5/4/2017

spread the holy name of Kṛṣṇa, he understands that his
only business is in spreading the Kṛṣṇa consciousness
movement all over the world. Such a person is to be
recognized . . .



BVNM: The symptom of a pure Vaiṣṇava is that he spreads
the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement. This is his business.
What is the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement? Was this Kṛṣṇa
consciousness existing before Swāmījī or not?

Devotee: Yes. It was the society of pure devotees.

BVNM: Was it existing before Caitanya Mahāprabhu or not?

Devotee: Yes.

BVNM: Yes, it is eternal. Nārada Ṛṣi is one of them. He
is the greatest ISKCON devotee.

Devotee: (laughing) ISKCON member, life member.

BVNM: I think that no one can argue this point. Our
catur-mukha Brahmā is our first guru. Nārada is in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness. Vyāsa and Śukadeva Gosvāmī also. After
that, Suta Gosvāmī, Madhvācārya, Rāmānujācārya,
Viṣṇusvāmī, Nimbāditya, Mādhavendra Purīpāda, Īśvara
Purīpāda, Svarūpa Dāmodara, Rāya Rāmānanda, and up to
Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī and his bona fide
disciples—all are in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Later Swāmījī
will clarify what is Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Is it simply a
sect or a certain cult or group? It is not sectarian.

“Anyone who is spreading Kṛṣṇa consciousness all over
world...”

Devotee reads: Such a person is to be recognized as an
uttama-adhikārī, and his association should be
immediately accepted according to the six processes
(dadāti pratigṛhṇāti, etc.).

BVNM: Anyone! He need not be from a specific sect,
movement, group or anything. Anyone who is preaching
like that is accepted as an uttama-adhikārī. I know that
I am not in that class. It may be that I am madhyama-
kaniṣṭha, bas, not more than that. This I know.
Sometimes I am in the stage of kaniṣṭha and sometimes
entering into madhyama, so madhyama-kaniṣṭha.

Devotee: But we know that you are . . .

BVNM: But you cannot realize it because you are not
liberated.

Devotee: Mahārāja, if you’re saying that you are
kaniṣṭha, then you cannot tell him that he is not
liberated.

BVNM: What can we do! Acchā.

Devotee: So you are revealing your own glories.

BVNM: So anyone who is actually spreading bhakti never

                           30
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

falls down. But if after some time a person falls down,
then does that mean that he has gone from uttama-
adhikārī to a fallen stage? An uttama-adhikārī cannot
fall in any way, in any condition. We must have this
understanding. If he falls down, then we can understand
that he was not an uttama-adhikārī. Swāmījī explains
this point later on. If anyone is bona fide and is
actually giving inspiration to everyone and following in
our line, then he should be treated as an uttama-
adhikārī. But some persons, even though they may be
madhyama-adhikārī, only preach for their own gain. They
can easily fall down.

Devotee: Some gurus are preaching all around the world
and making many disciples. They have not fallen, but
they do not possess the qualities of uttama-adhikārī.

BVNM: Swāmījī will explain further. I do not have to
tell anything more, Swāmījī will explain everything. I
am following behind him. He is so expert that he will
not leave any point unanswered. He touches every point.
I only have to show you where he is writing something.

Devotee reads:

Indeed, the advanced uttama-adhikārī Vaiṣṇava devotee
should be accepted as a spiritual master.



BVNM: “Indeed, the advanced uttama-adhikārī Vaiṣṇava
should be accepted as a spiritual master.” And if he has
some doubts, then he is not an uttama-adhikārī. He will
never change his siddhānta, sometimes saying this,
sometimes that, sometimes jumping on this branch,
sometimes on that one, sometimes falling down, again
jumping up. The established truth is one. They should
always be fixed on this point.

Devotee reads: Everything one possesses should be
offered to him, for it is enjoined that one should
deliver whatever he has to the spiritual master. The
brahmacārī in particular is supposed to beg alms from
others and offer them to the spiritual master. However,
one should not imitate the behavior of an advanced
devotee or mahā-bhāgavata without being self-realized .
. .

BVNM: “An advanced devotee like Śukadeva Gosvāmī never
wears shoes, so I also will not wear any.” This does not
demonstrate proper understanding. We should not imitate
any mahā-bhāgavata. A mahā-bhāgavata may act in an
unusual way, sometimes wearing only sandals and nothing
else on his body. Then a kaniṣṭha-adhikārī will think,
“People will honor me if I am following that behavior.”
Thus, to attract others he will wear wooden sandals, and
he becomes so expert that he can walk a mile in them. We
cannot do that but he can—one, two miles, he can walk
that far. In severe cold he can survive without warm
cloths, but we cannot. But this is imitation. We should
try to follow the mahā-bhāgavata’s inner motives. We
should not adopt just his external behavior. Otherwise,
we will be quickly exposed. These are not the real
symptoms of advanced devotees.

                           31
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017


Devotee reads: For by such imitation one will eventually
become degraded.

BVNM: Yes. They will not advance, but they will degrade.

Devotee reads:

In this verse Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī advises the devotee to
be intelligent enough to distinguish between the
kaniṣṭha-adhikārī, madhyama-adhikārī and uttama-
adhikārī.



BVNM: This is the conclusion.

Devotee reads:

The devotee should also know his own position and should
not try to imitate a devotee situated on a higher
platform.

BVNM: Now this is going on, and that is why so many are
falling.

Devotee reads: Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has given some
practical hints to the effect that an uttama-adhikārī
Vaiṣṇava can be recognized by his ability to convert
many fallen souls to Vaiṣṇavism. One should not become a
spiritual master unless he has attained the platform of
uttama-adhikārī.

BVNM: What does this mean?

Devotee 1: If one is still a madhyama or kaniṣṭha, he
should not become a spiritual master.

Devotee 2: A person’s adhikāra is always determined by
faith. Śrīla Prabhupāda quoted earlier in Madhya-līlā to
that effect. And as the faith increases, the adhikāra
increases up to uttama. The kaniṣṭha-adhikārī’s faith is
limited, seeing Kṛṣṇa in one place only. The madhyama-
adhikārī’s faith grows, and by discrimination he can
determine how to judge people’s levels, but uttama-
adhikāra means that he sees everything and everybody is
Kṛṣṇa, as we discussed yesterday, everything Kṛṣṇa and
everybody.

BVNM: Not everything is Kṛṣṇa, but everything is in
Kṛṣṇa.

Devotee 2: Everything in Kṛṣṇa, and everybody worshiping
Kṛṣṇa as he worships his own iṣṭadeva, in his mood. So
that is the uttama-adhikārī that we should take shelter
of.

BVNM: Yes. One should not become a spiritual master
unless he has attained the platform of uttama-adhikārī.
Unless he is an uttama-adhikārī, he cannot
satisfactorily answer all questions. If two points are
contradictory, he cannot reconcile them. How can he help
those devotees who are in a dilemma about what to do or
what not to do? He is saying that when one has attained

                             32
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

the platform of uttama-adhikārī, then he can initiate
and is actually qualified to preach. Otherwise, one
cannot actually perform all these activities. We are
seeing the results of unqualified persons acting as
guru. Someone accepts disciples. Then a very beautiful
lady devotee comes along and he becomes involved with
her. He will give up his position as guru and go off
with her, sometimes not even bothering to get married.
We have seen so many examples of devotees involved in
collecting money and self-praise and all these things.

“A neophyte Vaiṣṇava . . .”

Devotee reads:

A neophyte Vaiṣṇava or a Vaiṣṇava situated on the
intermediate platform can also accept disciples, but
such disciples must be on the same platform, and it
should be understood that they cannot advance very well
toward the ultimate goal of life under his insufficient
guidance.



BVNM: Yes. We should explain something here. An uttama-
adhikārī like Nārada and others is actually guru.
Sometimes such a guru, being uttama-adhikārī, will come
in the stage of madhyama-adhikārī for preaching. But a
madhyama-adhikārī, perhaps in the stage of madhyama-
madhyama or madhyama-uttama, after having become
knowledgeable in all kinds of śāstra siddhānthas, and
his śraddhā is very thick and strong, can initiate a
limited number of disciples, but not too many. And very
carefully he should select such disciples who are on the
same platform. What platform? Madhyama platform. He
considers about himself, “I am still in madhyama stage.
I am not high and I cannot help my disciples so much.”
He should understand his position in this way, thinking,
“There are no high-class Vaiṣṇavas available now, so I
am filling in, simply giving letters like a peon, like a
postman.” He should understand in which stage he is
situated and not be proud that “I am making lākhas and
lākhas of disciples.” Otherwise, he becomes fallen, and
then he must fall down. He is already fallen, so what to
speak of falling down. If he is humble, he may advance
into uttama-adhikārī, and surely, very soon he will be
able to really preach and initiate.

It should be understood that his disciples cannot
advance very well towards the ultimate goal of life
under his insufficient guidance. Their progress will be
very limited. He should know this. Who should know? Any
madhyama who is giving initiation. He should not be
proud, thinking, “I am the same as Nityānanda Prabhu and
you should obey me like Nityānanda Prabhu.” This will be
an offense. He should know that he is not like Rūpa
Gosvāmī or Nityānanda Prabhu. He should not have this
false pride. He should always realize his own position
and should pray, “Oh, I know that I am only helping them
a little.” But we see that so many disciples accepted
such a guru. Having made about two thousand disciples
and himself becoming Bhagavān, then what happened? He
went to hell. So we should not think, “Oh, think of me
as Nityānanda—sākṣād-dharitvena samasta-śāstrair. I am

                              33
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

that person, sākṣād-dharitvena.” But a guru who is
sincere will not think like this. He will think that he
is simply a messenger of Nityānanda Prabhu. He will not
say, “I am the same person. I will come again and again,
and I will take you to Goloka.” Nityānanda Prabhu and an
uttama-adhikārī can speak like this. But don’t imitate
them and say that “I am uttama-adhikārī.”

Those who imitate put themselves in a very dangerous
position. We have seen how so many have fallen away from
their positions and have even suffered violent
reactions. Why? And some disciples, even while their
gurudeva is still present in the world, begin initiating
so many people themselves without their guru’s order.
Why are they doing this? This is very bad behavior.

So the madhyama guru should know that his disciples
cannot advance very well, and he should realize that he
himself should take guidance from an advanced spiritual
master. Then he will not commit any aparādha against
high-class Vaiṣṇavas. But if he does not take such
shelter, then he will make so many offenses at the lotus
feet of higher devotees—he is bound to do so. “Therefore
a disciple should be careful to accept an uttama-
adhikārī as a spiritual master.” So we should be very
careful in these matters.

Now we come to Text 6:



dṛṣṭaiḥ svabhāva-janitair vapuṣaś ca doṣair

na prākṛtatvam iha bhakta janasya paśyet

gaṇgāmbhasāṁ na khalu budbuda-phena-paṇkair

brahma-dravatvam apagacchati nīra-dharmaiḥ

(Śrī Upadeśāmṛta 6)



First we should try to honor three classes of Vaiṣṇavas.
Thus, it has been explained: kṛṣṇeti yasya giri taṁ
manasādriyeta. Even those who have taken Kṛṣṇa’s name
just once should be respected. Whether someone is our
Godbrother or not, he should be seen as a Vaiṣṇava, and
we should honor him as such. In the case that he is not
our Godbrother, then what should we do? Should we try to
take him by the back of the neck and say, “Go away from
here. Don’t come into our territory!”? And such devotees
may pass a resolution, “No one should go to this
Vaiṣṇava. He is out of our society. He is not in the
line of our guru.” They may advise like this even if
that Vaiṣṇava is a very, very high-class devotee.

So we should honor all these instructions that Rūpa
Gosvāmī is giving. Those who are chanting even one name
should be honored within the mind. Those who are
actually initiated and always chanting the holy names
should be honored by mind and also by body and speech.
And those who are higher, who do not criticize anyone,
who have no anarthas, who are free of nindā (criticizing

                           34
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

propensity) and dveṣa (enviousness) and are always
chanting and remembering the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa’s aṣṭa-
kālīya-līlā, should be honored from the core of the
heart. Give your head, your heart, your everything at
that person’s lotus feet and serve him. Serve his words,
his lotus feet, everything!



kṛṣṇa bhakti-rasa-bhāvitā matiḥ

krīyatāṁ yadi kuto ‘pi labhyate

tatra laulyam api mūlyam ekalaṁ

janma-koṭi-sukṛtair na labhyate

(Padyāvalī 14, quoted in CC. Mad. 8.70)



By serving him you can develop a very thick greed in
spontaneous service for Kṛṣṇa. It will surely come.

Next he is explaining that a Vaiṣṇava may be of that
high standard, but the kaniṣṭha-adhikārī cannot
distinguish whether he is uttama, madhyama or kaniṣṭha.
The madhyama-adhikārī can determine this but sometimes
he may be mistaken. If he sees a very beautiful, young,
energetic person chanting or delivering a speech, he may
think, “Oh, he is a very bona fide Vaiṣṇava guru.” And
if a Vaiṣṇava is more advanced and is preaching, but,
like Aṣṭavakra, is so ugly and does not have a sweet
voice, he will think, “Oh, he’s a bogus person.” So for
them Rūpa Gosvāmī is telling:



dṛṣṭaiḥ svabhāva-janitair vapuṣaś ca doṣair

na prākṛtatvam iha bhakta janasya paśyet

gaṇgāmbhasāṁ na khalu budbuda-phena-paṇkair

brahma-dravatvam apagacchati nīra-dharmaiḥ



You can read the translation.

Devotee reads:

Being situated in his original Kṛṣṇa conscious position,
a pure devotee does not identify with the body. Such a
devotee should not be seen from a materialistic point of
view. Indeed, one should overlook a devotee’s having a
body born in a low family.



BVNM: You should note one thing here. A lower-stage
devotee does not see things with spiritual vision.
Because of his worldly outlook, he sometimes turns
against a pure devotee. So he should be careful—very,

                           35
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

very careful. The pure Vaiṣṇava does not have any
worldly vision. Rūpa Gosvāmī is warning in this śloka
that we should not judge the Vaiṣṇavas by our worldly
criteria.

Devotee reads:

Indeed, one should overlook a devotee’s having a body
born in a low family, a body with a bad complexion, a
deformed body, or a diseased or infirm body. According
to ordinary vision, such imperfections may seem
prominent in the body of a pure devotee, but despite
such seeming defects, the body of a pure devotee cannot
be polluted. It is exactly like the waters of the
Ganges, which sometimes during the rainy season are full
of bubbles, foam and mud. The Ganges waters do not
become polluted. Those who are advanced in spiritual
understanding will bathe in the Ganges without
considering the condition of the water.



BVNM: Once a ṛṣi named Aṣṭavakra went into the council
of the learned jñānī Mahārāja Janaka. So many high-class
ṛṣis, munis and brahmavādīs having realized brahma were
there. And this Aṣṭavakra, whose body was crooked in
eight places, managed to come to the council of Mahārāja
Janaka. In one month he traveled the path that would
ordinarily take only one day. So very slowly and with
great difficulty he came with the help of only a walking
stick. Seeing him, everyone began to laugh. Mahārāja
Janaka also laughed. “Oh, this person is so bold and
desperate. Here are so many learned counselors, and
without any fear he has entered. His skin is so rough
and black. Here something is crooked, there something is
crooked, his mouth is twisted, everything about him is
distorted. So how has he dared to come here? He has no
good clothes, nothing. There are also cracks in his
feet.” The whole assembly began to laugh. For a moment
Aṣṭavakra was silent but then he also laughed—even more
than the others. All were struck dumb, “Why is he
laughing?” and their laughter stopped. Then Mahārāja
Janaka approached him and asked, “Who are you, and why
are you laughing so much?”

He said, “Who am I? I will tell afterwards. Why am I
laughing? But I am not laughing, I am weeping, crying. I
have come from very far away, and you see my condition.
I cannot walk. I have only come here to see the
counselors of Mahārāja Janaka. I have heard that they
are so learned. Here are assembled brahma-jñānīs who are
like Yājñavalkya and so many others. I came to hear
their discourses and teachings. But instead I have
become hopeless.”

Mahārāja Janaka asked, “Why have you become hopeless?
Everyone here is so learned.”

He replied, “But I don’t see anyone who is learned. I
see that all are cobblers, shoemakers.”

Then Mahārāja Janaka became grave, “Oh, they are all
cobblers? Why are all of them cobblers? Totally all? You
do not see that they are very learned persons, coming in

                           36
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

the brāhmaṇa-vamśa (dynasty of learned brāhmaṇas), and
very learned brahmavādī-ṛṣis?”

“No, no. All are cobblers. Do you know why? Cobblers
work with skins. They only know, ‘Oh, this skin is such
rough leather; this skin is such fine leather, good
quality. That one is very soft and smooth.’ So they are
of the same class as cobblers. They cannot see whether
the ātmā is pure or not; they cannot realize ātmā and
Paramātmā—only body, this skin. They are expert in skin,
but not in ātmā.”

Then all of them became ashamed, and at once Mahārāja
Janaka approached the lotus feet of that ṛṣi. The king
placed him on his own throne and began to apologize.

Here is the same principle. You should not apply your
worldly vision to any devotees. Always be careful. Don’t
criticize any Vaiṣṇava for your bodily or mental gain,
for money, for reputation, or for any other thing. But
generally we are acting against these instructions. “If
a high-class Vaiṣṇava will come and exert his influence
in our area, then we will lose our material benefits—
income, disciples, position, power and all other things,
and it will be extremely harmful for us.” So we should
understand in this way. This is Rūpa Gosvāmī’s view, not
only Swāmījī’s.

Then in the purport, come to page 63, last stanza.

Devotee reads:

If we consider the bodily defects of a Vaiṣṇava, we
should understand that we are committing an offense at
the lotus feet of the Vaiṣṇava.



BVNM: We should always be careful for this.

Devotee reads:

An offense at the lotus feet of a Vaiṣṇava is very
serious. Indeed, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has described
this offense as hātī-mātā, the mad elephant offense. A
mad elephant can create a disaster, especially when it
enters into a nicely trimmed garden. One should
therefore be very careful not to commit any offense
against a Vaiṣṇava. Every devotee should be ready to
take instructions from a superior Vaiṣṇava, and a
superior Vaiṣṇava must be ready to help an inferior
Vaiṣṇava in all respects.



BVNM: Swāmījī is telling this for all levels of
devotees. What is he saying? That all devotees—lower
grade as well as upper-grade sādhakas, those who are
initiating and those who are initiated—all should be
ready to take instructions from a superior Vaiṣṇava. And
a superior Vaiṣṇava must be ready to help the junior
Vaiṣṇavas. This is the symptom of an uttama-madhyama-
adhikārī—he is helping the less advanced devotees. And
if he is not doing this, then he is committing offenses.

                           37
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

He must help them.

One is superior or inferior according to his spiritual
development in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. If you are madhyama-
adhikārī, you should always consider a devotee’s stage—
whether he is superior or inferior. Then you can
progress. Otherwise your progress will be stopped. So
always be careful about this.

Devotee reads:

One is forbidden to observe the activities of a pure
Vaiṣṇava from a material point of view.



BVNM: But now we are seeing that certain devotees are
viewing the Vaiṣṇavas with their material vision. We
should change this view if we want to advance. And if we
are not changing, then we make more and more offenses,
and finally we will be ruined.

Devotee reads:

For the neophyte especially, considering a pure devotee
from a material point of view is very injurious.



BVNM: “For neophytes especially, considering a pure
devotee from a material point of view is very
injurious.”

Devotee reads:

One should therefore avoid observing a pure devotee
externally, but should try to see the internal features
and understand how he is engaged in the transcendental
loving service of the Lord.



BVNM: He should always be careful and observe how the
pure Vaiṣṇava is engaged in his transcendental loving
service to Kṛṣṇa. If he is always offending, he cannot
see the Vaiṣṇava with proper vision. But we should try.

Devotee reads:

In this way one can avoid seeing the pure devotee from a
material point of view, and thus one can gradually
become a purified devotee himself.

Those who think that Kṛṣṇa consciousness is limited. . .



BVNM: This is a very important point. You should
underline this. Those who have a liberal view can see
that Nārada is in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Also Vyāsa, all
the Vaiṣṇavas like Rāmānuja, Viṣṇusvāmī, Nimabāditya,
and their disciples—all are in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Oh,
they have some vaiśiṣṭha, some specialty, but this is
another thing. We will have more honor for those in our

                           38
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

own line, but we will have to honor all. So those who
think that Kṛṣṇa consciousness is limited to a certain
section of people are wrong.

“Oh, only us, and all others are rejected. We should not
have any saṅga, association, with any others.” This is
not a proper mentality. If you cannot associate with
them, at least you can have honor for them. What harm is
there to honor others? But don’t dishonor any Vaiṣṇavas.
If he is in the same line that I am following, sajātīyā
snigdha aśrāya, then I should associate with him.
Sajātīyā means having the same mood that I want, like-
minded. For instance, I want to be a friend of Kṛṣṇa, so
I should find a superior Vaiṣṇava who has that mood. If
I want to be fixed in the line of Rūpa Gosvāmī, I will
select someone who is superior to me and in this line of
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. Then I should always associate with
him with great honor. But I should not dishonor anyone
else.

gurau-goṣṭhe goṣṭālayiṣu sujane bhūsura-gaṇe

(Śrī Manaḥ Śikṣā, verse1)



Even the brāhmaṇas who are living in Vṛndāvana should
not be dishonored. They may not be one-pointed to Kṛṣṇa.
Sometimes they may also worship Viṣṇu, Vaikuṇṭha,
Dvārakādhiśa and Kṛṣṇa in the same line, no harm. They
are maintaining some proper form of worship, so we
should not dishonor them or make any offense. But we
cannot associate with them because they are not in the
line of Rūpa Gosvāmī. But if we tell them, “Oh, go away.
We cannot meet with you,” this is very offensive and
will harm our bhakti.

Those who think that Kṛṣṇa consciousness is limited to a
certain section of devotees are mistaken. They think
that those within the ISKCON society are bona fide and
all those outside the ISKCON society are not. Then what
will happen? We find this mentality going on now, and
this will create very big problems for them.

Devotee reads:

. . . or a certain tract of land are generally prone to
see the external features of the devotee.



BVNM: What is the meaning of “certain tract of land”?

Devotee: An area of land—America or Europe—territory.
This is our land.

BVNM: They should understand these things, and then they
will be sincere Vaiṣṇavas, being qualified to preach and
to receive honor. So they will have to change their
vision.

Devotee reads:

They are generally prone to see the external features of

                            39
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                   5/4/2017

the devotee. Such neophytes, unable to appreciate the
exalted service of the advanced devotee, try to bring
the mahā-bhāgavata to their platform.



BVNM: What is the   meaning? Neophytes will think, “The
mahā-bhāgavata is   also on my platform. I have envy and
he also has envy,   I am a thief and he is also. He is
nothing more than   I.”

Devotee: Whatever I am thinking, everyone must think the
same as me.

BVNM: Neophytes will also think, “I can control him
also.” These are very great offenses.

Devotee reads:

We experience such difficulty in propagating this Kṛṣṇa
consciousness all over the world. Unfortunately, we are
surrounded by neophyte Godbrothers . . .



BVNM: He has said “neophyte.” They don’t know all the
rules of etiquette and all these siddhāntas. They do not
know what is a Vaiṣṇava. Only they have heard the mantra
but actually they are not yet Vaiṣṇava, madhyama-
adhikārī, and that is why they are making so many
blunders. Swāmījī experienced this. He saw that some
Godbrothers were quarreling with each other, not
honoring the higher-class Vaiṣṇavas. They were not
understanding what Swāmījī was doing. Some of his
Godbrothers were criticizing him, so he is warning his
disciples to keep away from their disciples and to be
careful.

Devotee reads:

. . . who do not appreciate the extraordinary activities
of spreading Kṛṣṇa consciousness all over the world.
They simply try to bring us to their platform, and they
try to criticize us in every respect.



BVNM: History is repeating itself. The same thing is
happening now. So we should be very careful about these
things.



Devotee reads:

We very much regret their naive activities and poor fund
of knowledge. An empowered person who is actually
engaged in the confidential service of the Lord should
not be treated as an ordinary human being, for it is
stated that unless one is empowered by Kṛṣṇa, one cannot
spread the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement all over the
world. When one thus criticizes a pure devotee, he
commits an offense (vaiṣṇava-aparādha).


                             40
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017



BVNM: “When one thus criticizes a pure devotee, he
commits an offense (vaiṣṇava-aparādha).” This is very
destructive and dangerous for those who desire to
advance in Kṛṣṇa consciousness. They cannot progress.
Where there is envy and worldly vision, material vision,
they are bound to commit offenses. So sometimes ācāryas
like Śrīla Prabhupāda Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī descend
to this world.

Devotee reads:

A person cannot derive any spiritual benefit when he
offends the lotus feet of a Vaiṣṇava. Everyone should
therefore be very careful not to be jealous of an
empowered Vaiṣṇava, or a śuddha-vaiṣṇava.



BVNM: They should not have any envy, not even a little
smell of it. You should always be careful—don’t be
envious! Be liberal and broad-minded. Try to honor all.
Don’t just try, you should honor all Vaiṣṇavas. Don’t
criticize them. If you cannot associate with them, no
harm, but don’t dishonor them. If you know that some
Vaiṣṇava is acting improperly, going to a prostitute and
mixing with bad society, do not associate with that
Vaiṣṇava, but do not dishonor him. Otherwise his bad
qualities will come to you.

Devotee reads:

It is also an offense to consider an empowered Vaiṣṇava
an object of disciplinary action.



BVNM: What is the meaning?

Devotee: Actually Vaiṣṇavas are to be honored in all
cases, and never are we to be in a critical mood of any
of them. It is not our duty. They all belong to Kṛṣṇa,
and Kṛṣṇa is taking care of everyone. It is not our duty
to criticize or to rebuke them in these ways.

BVNM: “. . . an object of disciplinary action”—what does
this mean?

Devotee: Specifically, it was stated before that an
empowered person who is actually engaged in the
confidential service of the Lord should not be treated
as an ordinary human being. For it is stated that unless
one is empowered by Kṛṣṇa, one cannot spread the Kṛṣṇa
consciousness movement. So this part of the text is
speaking about the uttama-bhāgavata. Such a person
should not be considered the object of discipline.
Rather he is directly empowered by the Supreme Lord.

BVNM: (with sarcasm) You should control them by
disciplinary rules and regulations. “Oh, you should
come. We have made some rules that you should also
follow. Śukadeva Gosvāmī, come on, come on. You should
first get dressed, put on tilaka and keep a tulasī-mālā.

                             41
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

Otherwise we will not hear from you and we will tell you
to go out from here.” And to control him: “Haridāsa
Ṭhākura, have you accepted any guru? From whom have you
taken initiation?” What will he say? He will smile and
say that he doesn’t know anything and then the neophyte
will want to control him. So don’t give any instruction
or any advice to the uttama-bhāgavata if you want to
gain something and don’t try to control him. I know that
a kaniṣṭha-adhikārī wants to control the madhyama and
uttama. Sometimes, out of their ignorance madhyama-
adhikārīs also want to control others.

Swāmījī told me when he was in a very worried mood,
“Now, I am controlled. So many persons want to control
me.” He confided in me so many concerns that I cannot
reveal here, but we should be careful.

Devotee reads:

It is offensive to try to give him advice or to correct
him.



BVNM: Now you are correcting your guru. “Oh, Gurudeva
should be corrected. He should be advised. He does not
know worldly things. He has no practical knowledge. He
has not gone to Oxford University. He has only gone to
Haridāsa Ṭhākura University and the school of Gaura
Kiśora dāsa Bābājī. He does not know the etiquette for
worldly dealings. ‘Gurudeva, I was expert at the
university, so I know so much more than you for
practical affairs. You only know how to chant Hare
Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, and to tell hari-kathā. It is not
sufficient. So sometimes you should follow my advice.’”
Don’t give advice to the guru.

There was an old person in our maṭha named Muni
Mahārāja. He took sannyāsa with Swāmī Mahārāja. He
always helped me in so many ways, and I also served him
when I was with him. When he was about one hundred years
old, he was once sitting in a very little room attached
to mine. He was telling me, “All the devotees call me a
very old giddha, vulture (meaning a person so old that
he cannot move or do anything, a useless person). But I
am sitting here, watching everything. I know everything
that is going on, because I was expert in all these
things.” He was telling me so many things, “They think
that I am like them. They want to regulate me, but they
don’t know me.” He was smiling, but he was worried for
this. So we should be very careful to avoid this
mentality.

These are very important lines where Swāmījī is giving
instruction. We should try to follow if we want to
progress in our bhakti. This is called iṣṭagoṣṭhī. I am
seeing that no one here is sleeping. All are inspired.
Everyone has been hearing for ten or twenty years, but
some are very worried, because they cannot follow these
instructions. Yet they should make an effort. Read that
line again.

Devotee reads:


                           42
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

It is offensive to try to give him advice or to correct
him.



BVNM: Don’t try to give any advice to your superiors.
They are superior in all ways. Not just in spirituality,
but also in worldly knowledge.

Devotee reads:

One can distinguish between a neophyte Vaiṣṇava and an
advanced Vaiṣṇava by their activities.



BVNM: No, all cannot. Only madhyama-adhikārīs and
sincere devotees can distinguish, others cannot. A
kaniṣṭha will think, “I am the only advanced one and all
others are inferior.” But an advanced devotee will
think, “I am inferior and all others are advanced.”

Devotee reads:

The advanced Vaiṣṇava is always situated as the
spiritual master, and the neophyte is always considered
his disciple.



BVNM: We should think like this. We should always think
that we are his disciple. I observed Swāmījī. He was
preaching all over the world. He wrote so many books,
including an explanation of Caitanya-Caritāmṛta, and he
published Gītā As It Is in about sixty languages. And he
made thousands of disciples. But he was weeping at the
time of my Gurudeva’s departure and he wrote us a letter
quoting a verse of Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī with a small
change:



vairāgya-yug-bhakti-rasaṁ prayatnair

apāyayan mām anabhīpsum andham

kṛpāmbudhir yaḥ para-duḥkha-duḥkhī

śrī-keśava-bhakti-prajñāna-nāma



He changed the name of Sanātana Gosvāmī, and in its
place he added the name of our Guru Mahārāja. How he was
honoring his sannyāsa-guru! He was not a disciple of my
Gurudeva, but my Gurudeva had given him sannyāsa.
Swāmījī always treated him like his śīkṣā-guru. And he
was always giving honor to all the Vaiṣṇavas, to Śrīla
Śrīdhara Mahārāja and so many others.

Just before his divine disappearance, weeping, he took
my hands in his and told me, “I have made so many
mistakes and offenses at the lotus feet of Vaiṣṇavas. I
have said so many things that I should not. So please,

                           43
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

you should excuse me.” I am his śīkṣā-śiṣya, so much
lower than him and he was taking my hands and weeping,
begging me to excuse him. How he was liberal! How he was
humble! A common person cannot do this because of his
false ego, but Swāmījī had no false ego. He is a
realized soul. That is why he is advising us not to make
all these mistakes. He also requested me, “You should
convey this prayer of mine to all my Godbrothers.”

I told him, “You cannot speak like this. You cannot make
any offense. Some people may think you committed
offenses, but you had your reasons for what you said,
and if you have spoken anything out of line, still it is
not an offense.”

So Swāmījī is warning, “The spiritual master must not be
subjected to the advice of a disciple.” What is the
meaning?

Devotee 1: The spiritual master is not under the
jurisdiction or control of the disciples; he is not
subject to their advice.

Devotee 2: The disciple may offer something for the
spiritual master’s consideration, but the spiritual
master is not obliged to take that.

BVNM: Yes. Go on from, “The spiritual master must not be
. . .”

Devotee reads:

The spiritual master must not be subjected to the advice
of a disciple, nor should a spiritual master be obliged
to take instructions from those who are not his
disciples.



BVNM: What is the meaning?

Devotee: That the spiritual master is not required to
accept the advice of his disciple. If his disciple wants
to give him advice, he is not required to accept that.
If someone is not the disciple of the guru, but he also
wants to give advice to guru, the guru is not required
to accept his advice.

BVNM: Yes. So, we should be very careful in these
matters. And this is called Nectar of Instruction. Then
Swāmījī’s final words:

Devotee reads:

This is the sum and substance of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s
advice in the sixth verse.



BVNM: Yes. Gaura premānande!




                             44
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017


Chapter Four: Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Ślokas 6-7


New Braja, 22 May 1997

BVNM: When you come here, what will you do?

Devotee: Listen.

BVNM: What will you listen to? You will first have to
pay some dakṣiṇā for listening. But you are not first
giving dakṣiṇā, and that is why you are not hearing
deeply and keeping here in your heart. Those who will
not give dakṣiṇā in the form of śraddhā don’t know the
value of śraddhā and the value of hearing. I have learnt
it by serving my guru and the Vaiṣṇavas very laboriously
day and night, by reading and by doing austerities. All
these things which I have gained from them I am giving
to you without taking any dollars or anything like that
in return. So you are thinking that this hari-kathā is
of no use, having no value at all. But if I tell you
that I will take $1,000 or $10,000 for one hour, even
that will be a very small amount for you. But you are
not responding at all. Then what is the use of spending
so much money to come here from England if you are
wasting your time and not really hearing anything? I
worry for this. We should try to take in all these
things. Otherwise, what is the use? This is a very
unfortunate situation. And I am so unfortunate that I
cannot give you anything lasting. Don’t give me cause to
worry. If I will be very worried, then I will not be
able to give classes here, and I will return to
Vṛndāvana. What is the use if no one is gaining
anything?

You will all have to repay me. Sanātana Gosvāmī has
written in his Hari-bhakti-vilāsa that if there is no
dakṣiṇā, then initiation will be false. So this śikṣā is
like initiation. What is the meaning of śikṣā? It is a
form of initiation. By this hari-kathā I am giving
initiation. What is the point of hearing? Śikṣā-guru is
to be considered the same as dīkṣā-guru, even more so. I
have left Vṛndāvana, Mathurā, my sādhana, bhajana,
everything, only to give you some new thing, that which
I have realized. But I am unhappy to see that I am not
being paid. I should be paid. How can you pay me? By
learning what I want to give you.

We have finished Ślokas 5 and 6. What is the purport of
Śloka 6? Can anyone answer?



dṛṣṭaiḥ svabhāva-janitair vapuṣaś ca doṣair

na prākṛtatvam iha bhakta janasya paśyet

gaṇgāmbhasāṁ na khalu budbuda-phena-paṇkair

brahma-dravatvam apagacchati nīra-dharmaiḥ




                           45
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                    5/4/2017

Very briefly you can tell the meaning of this śloka. You
don’t remember? This means you are not tasting what I am
giving.

Devotee: Just like the Ganges has foam and some
impurities in it, the Vaiṣṇava looks like he is impure
but we should never consider the advanced devotee in a
material way. We should see that he is actu-ally pure
cent-per-cent.

BVNM: Who can answer? Those who cannot reply should hide
their heads so that Mahārāja will not see them. But
Mahārāja is seeing everything, everyone. You should tell
the meaning of this śloka— dṛṣṭaiḥ svabhāva-janitair
vapuṣaś ca doṣair.

Devotee: In this śloka Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmīpāda is telling
how we should be careful when associating with
Vaiṣṇavas. He has told us about the three levels of
Vaiṣṇavas.

BVNM: He has explained kaniṣṭha, madhyama and uttama.
Now he is telling how to honor the three. What is he
saying?

Devotee: We have to be very careful when meeting with
uttama-adhikārī Vaiṣṇavas because their dealings,
behavior and all their activities are on a completely
transcendental platform. Outwardly they act like normal
human beings. Sometimes we see that they are having some
disease or they are unable to speak, that there is
something wrong with their voice. Yesterday in the drama
we saw that all the sages in Mahārāja Janaka’s assembly
started laughing at Aṣṭavakra Ṛṣi because his body was
so deformed. That was not proper etiquette because a
pure devotee is completely situated in transcendental
consciousness. He laughed back at them and then they
were all ashamed of their behavior. We should not try to
estimate the activities of pure Vaiṣṇavas with our
material intelligence.

In this verse Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī is explaining about the
Gaṅgā. The water has come from the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa,
so it is like brahma; it is very pure. By the touch of
the Gaṅgā we get purified. That is the power it has. But
when we go there, we see some impurities and some foam
lying on that water. If we say, “Oh, this water is not
good. I’m not going to touch that water. I’ll become
more dirty,” this will be an offense to that holy river.
But those who know that and who have full faith, despite
seeing all those impurities on the surface of the water,
dip in it. Then they are blessed with the mercy of the
Ganges.

BVNM: What is the meaning of svabhāva-janitair? Due to
the nature of the body. What does this mean?

Devotee: If he has a deformed body or diseased body.

BVNM: No, disease is not svabhāva.

Devotee: He is always situated in his original
constitutional position in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.


                           46
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

BVNM: svabhāva-janitair vapuṣaś. Vapu, the body, is
separate.

Devotee: If his nature is . . .

BVNM: What nature?

Devotee: If he seems to have something wrong with his
character.

BVNM: Yes! Sometimes he will become angry, speaking
roughly or giving some slap, like Rāmadāsa Abhirāma
Ṭhākura. He would use his whip on everyone. This is
svabhāva, nature. By the nature of the body, sometimes
they become angry without any reason. Don’t be put off
by seeing this rough behavior or rough speech. If there
is some gold but it has fallen down inside a drain where
all pass stool and is very filthy, what will you do? You
will look all around to see if anyone is watching you.
Then you will pour some water into the drain and take
the gold. Understand? An intelligent person will take
that gold anyway. There is no consideration whether it
is in a clean or dirty place. Gold never becomes impure.
It is the same with bhakti. If someone has bhakti and is
really a Vaiṣṇava, but sometimes becomes angry, uses
rough, harsh words, or exhibits rough behavior, still
you should try to serve and please him, and try to take
bhakti from him. Do you understand? If you think, “He is
a rough-speaking person, so I will not go to hear from
him,” then you will lose out. So we should be very
careful about this.

Svabhāva and then vapuḥ. Svabhāva-janitair vapuṣaś ca
doṣair and other things.



kibā vipra, kibā nyāsī, śūdra kene naya

yei kṛṣṇa-tattva-vettā, sei ’guru’ haya

(CC. Madhya 8.128)



Go to any person who is tattva-vettā, whether he is a
brahmacārī, gṛhaṣṭha, vanapraṣṭhī or out of varnāśrama
society, no harm. He may be Mohammedan like Haridāsa
Ṭhākura, no harm. You should go and take bhakti from
him. If you have any bad thoughts about him, considering
that he is ugly or black, his teeth are crooked, or he
is a rough-speaking person, then you will be making an
offense at his lotus feet and you will be cheated. So do
not look at his “negative” qualities. And do not try to
give him advice. Why? You will only give him advice if
you think that he is a fool, and this is an offense.
Don’t advise and don’t try to correct him by saying,
“You are incorrect. You should do it in this way.”

You know Hemalatā Ṭhākurāṇī, the daughter of Śrīnivāsa
Ācārya? She was sitting in an assembly of hari-kathā.
While the speaker was reciting Bhāgavatam, she was
chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare.
The speaker was thinking that now he had become uttama-

                           47
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

mahā-bhāgavata, and he told Hemalatā Ṭhākurāṇī, “It is
very bad to chant harināma when Bhāgavata is going on.
Don’t you know that Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is Himself Kṛṣṇa,
and you are chanting here?” At once the whole assembly
was very much offended. Everyone boycotted him, telling
him, “We don’t want to hear from you.” Hemalatā
Ṭhākurāṇī is beyond the control of anyone, beyond all
rules and regulations. She can manifest lākhas and
lākhas of forms, being here and there at the same time.
Chanting, remembering, hearing—she can do everything at
the same time. So there is no need or possibility of
controlling such a person. Finally, this Rūpa Kavirāja
was boycotted by the whole Vaiṣṇava community and became
known as atibāḍī (pretender) Rūpa. So we should not try
to correct those who are advanced. Rather we should try
to be corrected by them.

In addition, do not think that Kṛṣṇa consciousness is
limited to a certain section of people, a certain group
of devotees or a certain tract of land. “We will hear
only from those who belong to a particular group of
devotees.” Don’t make all these offenses. Be broad-
minded and try to honor all the Vaiṣṇavas.

We should not avoid all these regulations, thinking,
“Oh, I am now madhyama-adhikārī, and these instructions
are meant only for kaniṣṭha-adhikārīs. There is no harm
if we don’t follow them.” Don’t do this. Otherwise, you
will be making an offense at the lotus feet of Rūpa
Gosvāmī. You should try to always be established in
these truths. They are very helpful. Up to bhāvāvasthā
(the stage of bhāva), we will still have some anarthas.
If we displease the Vaiṣṇavas, bhakti and Bhagavān, then
we will lose our status as madhyama-adhikārī. So don’t
be deluded like this. Try to read these ślokas again and
again and try to follow. If you are not following all
these instructions, it means that you are not advancing
in bhakti but are actually gradually regressing back to
your worldly activities. Those who understand will
practice and progress.



Text 7

syāt kṛṣṇa-nāma-caritādi-sitāpy avidyā-

pittopatapta-rasanasya na rocikā nu

kintv ādarād anudinaṁ khalu saiva juṣṭā

svādvī kramād bhavati tad-gada-mūla-hantrī



Read the translation.

Devotee reads:

The holy name, character, pastimes and activities of
Kṛṣṇa are all transcendentally sweet like sugar candy.
Although the tongue of one afflicted by the jaundice of
avidyā (ignorance) cannot taste anything sweet, it is
wonderful that simply by carefully chanting these sweet

                           48
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

names every day, a natural relish awakens within his
tongue, and his disease is gradually destroyed at the
root.



BVNM: Will the disease first be destroyed and then taste
will come, or will taste first come and then the disease
will go away?

Devotee: First taste comes and then the disease goes
away.

BVNM: Is she speaking correctly?

Devotees: Yes.

BVNM: I think that the disease must first go and then
sweetness will come, or is it that some taste will come
first and then the disease will go? Which is it?

Devotee: Both are taking place at the same time,
simultaneously both are going on.

BVNM: But must medicine be given first, or will the
disease go away gradually without medicine?

Devotee: Medicine must be there.

BVNM: Yes, first comes the medicine. Harināma is the
medicine and everything. Harināma should be taken first,
then the disease will go. But if you think, “First the
disease will go and then I will take the medicine. Then
I will taste it,” this is not correct. You can progress
from whatever stage you are in, no harm. You may be
lusty or a liar. You may have so many worldly desires
and bad qualities. Just take that medicine first. Try to
leave all your bad habits, but the medicine should be
taken regardless. So the medicine is harināma. By
chanting harināma, gradually the disease will go away
and a little taste will come for the medicine. How? By
taking, taking, taking, taking, and having good
association—as we are doing kīrtana and hearing so much
hari-kathā here. Old people, young people, even all the
little boys and girls—all are energetic. Everyone is
dancing, chanting, hearing and doing so many kinds of
bhakti services. So we must adopt this process.

Now read the purport.

Devotee reads:

The holy name of Lord Kṛṣṇa, His quality, pastimes and
so forth are all of the nature of absolute truth, beauty
and bliss.



BVNM: The holy name, character, pastimes, and activities
of Kṛṣṇa —everything is transcendental. And
transcendentally they are sweet. But we are taking
harināma—Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare—
and falling asleep. Why? No taste!


                           49
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

We are hearing hari-kathā, but our minds are going here
and there. How do I know? I know, because if I ask any
questions, you will answer, “I don’t understand.” But if
I will say, “I want to arrange your marriage with a
very, very, very beautiful lady devotee,” then
immediately your ears will perk up, “Oh! Where is she?”
This is very tasteful. But when I am telling hari-kathā,
actually everyone’s mind is anywhere else but here, and
then you fall asleep.

But if someone really wants to know the sweetness of
this medicine, he will be convinced to take it and will
be careful. It is very sweet, but now you are thinking
otherwise. In Mathurā, there was a devotee who never
joined in the kīrtana. We used to begin kīrtana very
loudly with the mṛdanga, first dik, dik, dik, and then
ta. With the first dik he would fall asleep and start
snoring. He never used to come to our classes. After
some time he returned to his home. He bought a rickshaw,
and after that he was badly engaged in worldly
activities and even began to eat fish again.

So if you have no taste in hari-kathā, then you will not
find any taste in harināma. First taste should come in
hearing, but if it does not, then you should think, “I
will sit and hear again.”

Once Bhāgavatam was being spoken in Vṛndāvana. Who was
the speaker? Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. So many persons
were sitting there hearing the pastimes of the gopīs
when Kṛṣṇa went to Mathurā. All were weeping from
hearing his narration and feeling separation mood. But
one person was not. His heart was not melting, so he
took some chilli powder from his pocket and put it in
his eyes. Tears started flowing. Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa was
watching this. After class he approached that person and
embraced him. “Oh, I have heard that a chaste devotee
will think that he has not served the Vaiṣṇavas or
Bhāgavatam, so he punishes his body. Tears are not
coming from my eyes, so my eyes should be punished. I
saw that you took something and put it in your eyes and
tears were coming. Surely you are a very fortunate
person. Surely.”

Hearing this and having been embraced by Raghunātha
Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, that devotee began to weep. He was
repenting, knowing that he was so full of offenses and
anarthas that his heart was not melting. He was feeling,
“I am not qualified to be in this assembly of Vaiṣṇavas
who are all weeping, so I should do something to punish
myself.”

We should realize all these things. If tears are not
coming, our hairs are not standing on end and our heart
is not melting, then we should know that we are very
unfortunate. We must have made some offenses and we are
full of anarthas. Everything about Kṛṣṇa is
transcendentally sweet, more than sugar or honey, but
yet we have no taste at all. So there must be some
reason for this.

Then?

Devotee reads:

                           50
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                   5/4/2017


Naturally they are very sweet, like sugar candy, which
appeals to everyone. Nescience, however, is compared to
the disease called jaundice, which is caused by bilious
secretions. Attacked by jaundice, the tongue of a
diseased person cannot palatably relish sugar candy.
Rather, a person with jaundice considers something sweet
to taste very bitter. Avidyā (ignorance) similarly
perverts the ability to relish the transcendentally
palatable name, quality, form and pastimes of Kṛṣṇa.
Despite this disease, if one with great care and
attention takes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, chanting the
holy name and hearing Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental pastimes,
his ignorance will be destroyed and his tongue enabled
to taste the sweetness of the transcendental nature of
Kṛṣṇa and His paraphernalia.



BVNM: Take an example. Kṛṣṇa is like sugar candy. His
names are like sugar candy, and so are His pastimes.
Akrūra brought Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva to the council of
Kaṁsa at Raṅgasthāli. Cāṇūra, Muṣṭika, Kaṁsa, and many
evil persons were there. Twelve kinds of people saw
Kṛṣṇa in twelve different ways. It was always the same
sugar candy, Kṛṣṇa, but everyone tasted it in different
moods. How did Kaṁsa taste this?

Devotee: He saw Kṛṣṇa as death personified.

BVNM: Yes. Actually he began to shake upon seeing Kṛṣṇa.
And the other courtiers of Kaṁsa, his associates, how
did they see Kṛṣṇa? Aśanir—the wrestlers saw Kṛṣṇa as a
thunderbolt. Nṛṇāṁ nara-varaḥ—all the common persons saw
that Kṛṣṇa was so beautiful, marvelous. Among all
persons He is the most beautiful and sublime, having all
good qualities and opulences. Strīṇāṁ smaro—all the
wives of Yādava saw Kṛṣṇa like Kāmadeva, Cupid. All were
charmed by Him. Gopānāṁ sva-jano—all the gopas saw Him
as their friend. Subala and Śridama were there. Sva-
pitroḥ śiśuḥ—and Nanda Bābā, Vasudeva and Devakī saw Him
as their son. The jñānis, brahma-jñānis and all others
saw tattvam paraṁ yogināṁ, tattva, paratattva. Mṛtyur
bhoja pater—Kaṁsa saw Him as his death. Asataṁ kṣiti-
bhujāṁ—all the evil kings who had been invited by Kaṁsa
saw Him as their controller and they feared Him. And
vṛṣṇīnāṁ para-devatā—the members of the Vṛṣṇi dynasty
saw Kṛṣṇa as their paradevatā, iṣṭadeva (supreme
worshipable deity).

So there were twelve kinds of persons and each one had a
different vision of Kṛṣṇa. Kaṁsa was a rogī (diseased
person) with this jaundice and his courtiers were also
jaundiced, but to different degrees. They were bhaktas
of different levels. All of them tasted the same Kṛṣṇa,
but Kaṁsa and his courtiers became angry, and His
parents, the Yādus, Yādavīs, Vaiṣṇavas and all others
became overjoyed to see Kṛṣṇa.

Kṛṣṇa is like sugar candy. But when you   first take it,
it will be very bitter, very bitter. If   you take it
gradually, the disease will go and then   you will find it
very sweet. When this happens, then you   can understand
that your roga (disease) has gone.

                           51
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017


Devotee reads:

Such a recovery of spiritual health is possible only by
the regular cultivation of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.



BVNM: We should not give up. If it is not tasteful, no
harm. You should continue anyway. If sleep is coming, no
harm. Chant loudly, very loudly. There was a Vaiṣṇava,
our śikṣā-guru, who said, “When I first came in touch
with Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura in the
beginning of my career, I used to sleep while chanting.
So I discovered a way to stay awake. Above me there was
a hook. I took a rope and tied my śikhā to that rope and
chanted harināma. And if sleep came and my head fell
down, the rope would jerk my head up again. So the whole
night I spent chanting harināma like this.” After that
we saw that in his old age he was always chanting,
always chanting. Even if he had no mālā, no harm, he was
chanting anyway. He was very beloved to Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī, and a close bosom
friend of our Gurudeva. All sannyāsīs and senior
Vaiṣṇavas used to call him Narahari Dādā (big brother),
just as they used to call my Gurudeva “Vinoda Dādā.”
Narahari Dādā was the mother of the whole Gauḍīya
Mission. He used to tie his śikhā to the ceiling in
order to chant harināma. If you are sleeping, you can
tie your śikhā to something and then you will stay
awake. Some measure should be taken, anything, to keep
sleep away. Then when sleep or alasya, laziness, comes,
loudly chant, “Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare
Hare / Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.” You
can also jump. So like this, nidrā, sleep, will go away.
And then sit down and remember Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, such as
Dāmodara-līlā and others, or by mind go on Govardhana
and Vṛndāvana parikramā while chanting.

Then?

Devotee reads:

When a man in the material world takes more interest in
the materialistic way of life than in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, he is considered to be in a diseased
condition.



BVNM: Almost all of us are like that. I think that it is
a rare person who has taste in all these things. They
are not concerned with worldly matters like how to
maintain their lives, how to be happy, how to have a
very beautiful house or anything else. They don’t go
toward these things. “How to make our love and affection
so qualified?” They only endeavor for this!

Devotee reads:

The normal condition is to remain an eternal servant of
the Lord (jīvera ‘svarūpa’ haya – kṛṣṇera ‘nitya-dāsa’).
This healthy condition is lost when the living entity
forgets Kṛṣṇa due to being attracted by the external

                           52
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

features of Kṛṣṇa’s māyā energy. This world of māyā is
called durāśraya, which means “false or bad shelter.”
One who puts his faith in durāśraya becomes a candidate
for hoping against hope. In the material world everyone
is trying to become happy, and although their material
attempts are baffled in every way, due to their
nescience they cannot understand their mistakes. People
try to rectify one mistake by making another mistake.
This is the way of the struggle for existence in the
material world. If one in this condition is advised to
take to Kṛṣṇa consciousness and be happy, he does not
accept such instructions.

This Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is being spread all
over the world just to remedy this gross ignorance.
People in general are misled by blind leaders. The
leaders of human society —the politicians, philosophers
and scientists—are blind because they are not Kṛṣṇa
conscious. According to Bhagavad-gītā, because they are
bereft of all factual knowledge due to their atheistic
way of life, they are actually sinful rascals and are
the lowest among men.



na māṁ duṣkṛtino mūḍhāḥ

prapadyante narādhamāḥ

māyayāpahṛta jñānā-

āsuraṁ bhāvam āśritāḥ

(Bg. 7.15)

“Those miscreants who are grossly foolish, lowest among
man-kind, whose knowledge is stolen by illusion, and who
partake of the atheistic nature of demons, do not
surrender unto Me.”

Such people never surrender to Kṛṣṇa, and they oppose
the endeavor of those who wish to take Kṛṣṇa’s shelter.
When such atheists become leaders of society, the entire
atmosphere is surcharged with nescience. In such a
condition, people do not become very enthusiastic to
receive this Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, just as a
diseased person suffering from jaundice does not relish
the taste of sugar candy. However, one must know that
for jaundice, sugar candy is the only specific medicine.
Similarly, in the present confused state of humanity,
Kṛṣṇa consciousness, the chanting of the holy name of
the Lord—Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare
/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare—is the only
remedy for setting the world aright.



BVNM: One thing I want to tell you. Once I took a stone,
and I threw it in a very big pond, two or three miles in
diameter. When I threw the stone, some ripples came,
first, second, third, fourth, fifth, and reached the far
side of the lake. Those ripples went here, there,
everywhere. If the stone hits very near to one shore,
from there the ripples spread everywhere in the lake. In

                           53
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

this way, if anyone chants Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, what
happens? It vibrates in the air, and it goes to the far
end of the world. Not only this world, but it covers the
whole universe, Svarga, Martya, Patala, even to
Vaikuṇṭha and beyond. There is no end to it. All are
touched by this vibration. It purifies the atmosphere of
the whole world.

Suppose I am sitting here singing, or any famous singer
may be singing. I can be anywhere in any far corner of
the world, and singing into some machine there. If
others in another part of the world are listening to
their radios or any other good machine, my voice will
vibrate more there, and they will hear clearly. But
those who have no machines, will they get any effect?
Yes, the vibration will go there, even though they
cannot hear it. It will purify the atmosphere in the
whole world. If you chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa more,
especially when all are singing in a large congregation,
this sound will go everywhere, and the whole atmosphere
will be purified. So don’t think that it is useless to
do kīrtana. Everyone in the whole world will receive the
effect and be purified so much by it.

If we chant like Gaura Kiśora dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja,
Śrīla Prabhupāda, our Narottama Ṭhākura, our Rūpa
Gosvāmī, who were chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa
Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, what will it do? It has two functions—
internal and external. For instance, when we throw a
stone in the water, we see outwardly some ripples going
everywhere—one, two, three, four, five, there. But
internally there is a power doing this. So if you will
chant, outwardly you will see its effect, going here and
there, making the whole atmosphere very pure. But
internally what will it do? It will change your heart,
not only your heart, but it will touch everyone’s heart
in the whole world. In this way you will develop kṛṣṇa-
prema. We are not realizing this, but still it is
working.

So you should know that this name is very powerful. If
you have no ruci yet but still continue chanting, you
will see that a taste will come and your heart will be
changed. Your kṛṣṇa-prema will develop, and the whole
atmosphere will become very, very pure. So always keep
firm faith in this.

This world can never help you. Don’t attempt to enjoy
anything here. Try to develop a spiritual mood. This is
Kṛṣṇa consciousness. We see how Swāmījī was preaching
Kṛṣṇa consciousness so strenuously. But what has
happened? Devotees practicing Kṛṣṇa consciousness for a
long time, even twenty or twenty-five years, who were
chanting, remembering and doing so many bhakti
activities, gave up and went away. Why? It must be due
to some offenses. Or from the beginning they had no
taste. They wanted to taste worldly things, and misused
kīrtana and hari-kathā for their mundane purposes. They
didn’t want to develop kṛṣṇa-prema. They were thinking,
“By this chanting, everyone will come and honor me and
then I will taste all worldly pleasures very easily. All
will offer praṇāma to me. They will give me what I want,
one lākha, two lākhas dollars, and then I will buy a car
for one lākha, and decorate my room in gold.” Thus they

                           54
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                    5/4/2017

will be deprived of bhakti. So always remember these
things and chant only to have bhakti and be in
Vṛndāvana.

Go on from, “The real disease is in the heart.”

Devotee reads:

The real disease is in the heart. If the mind is
cleansed, however, if consciousness is cleansed, a
person cannot be harmed by the material disease.



BVNM: We do not fear or worry for material diseases.
They cannot harm us. It is this heart disease that will
harm us. But we are concerned only for our outer
diseases and not for our inner diseases. Instead we are
indulging in all material enjoyments, and thus our
disease will gradually increase.

Devotee reads:

To cleanse the mind and heart from all misconceptions,
one should take to this chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-
mantra.



BVNM: They should enter into the authorized process.
Otherwise it will not be fruitful and the outer disease
will develop.

Devotee reads:

This is both easy and beneficial. By chanting the holy
name of the Lord, one is immediately freed from the
blazing fire of material existence.



BVNM: Those who are following and always chanting say,
“I am daily chanting sixteen rounds. Our holy master has
told us to do this.” So if they are chanting and
preaching all day here and there, why are they falling?
What is the cause? We should wonder why. There must be
some loophole. We should try to discover where it is and
stop the leakage. Otherwise, the water will not be
retained and all will leak out through these holes. So
our water is going out like this. We should try to be
careful in all these matters.

Devotee reads:

There are three stages in chanting the holy name of the
Lord— the offensive stage, the stage of lessening
offenses, and the pure stage. When a neophyte takes to
the chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, he generally
commits many offenses. There are ten basic offenses, and
if the devotee avoids these, he can glimpse the next
stage, which is situated between offensive chanting and
pure chanting. When one attains the pure stage, he is
immediately liberated. This is called bhava-mahā-
dāvāgni-nirvāpanam. As soon as one is liberated from the

                           55
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

blazing fire of material existence, he can relish the
taste of transcendental life.

The conclusion is that in order to get freed from the
material disease, one must take to the chanting of the
Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra. The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is
especially meant for creating an atmosphere in which
people can take to the chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa
mantra.



BVNM: Now, something is going on that is very wrong.
Devotees who are coming from hearing from Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja, wanting to take darśana of the Deity and hear
hari-kathā, are being banned from visiting certain
temples. Why? If someone is chanting, and you go and
tell him, “Oh, you cannot come here. You are a bogus
person,” this is an offense and a serious cause for
concern. You should always be careful not to do this.

One hour is over and we will finish it tomorrow.

Gaura premānande!




Chapter Five: Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Ślokas 7-8


New Braja, 23 May 1997

Internally and externally we should be the same. Our
hearts should be at one with our words. There are some
politics behind someone saying, “Oh, I know you. You are
a very good devotee.” And when that devotee goes away,
the one who was praising him says, “He is a very wicked
person.” Don’t do this. Be the same inside and outside.

If you have goodwill for someone of bad character and
want to help him, you can advise him very politely. If
you are qualified and he knows you have some goodwill
for him, then he will listen to your instructions;
otherwise, he will never listen. First purify your own
heart. Then you can try to help others. Every year
Caitanya Mahāprabhu was cleaning Guṇḍicā Mandira. He was
brooming more than anyone else in order to give
instruction to all others. So we should follow His
example.

We have read in Swāmījī’s explanation that we are all
diseased persons. Our diseases are of two kinds: one is
of this material body and the other is in the heart.
Those who are real devotees do not worry about worldly
disease. Their only concern is for their heart disease.
And what is that heart disease? If the mind is clean,
then everything is okay. The mind should be cleansed of
duplicity, hypocrisy and diplomacy. So, our real disease
is in the heart. And what is that heart disease? Hṛd-
roga. Śrīla Vyāsadeva and Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī have
clarified it. Here in the heart there is such a strong
disease, that hṛd-roga. Roga means kāma-roga. What is

                           56
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

kāma-roga? Lust. Lust for worldly things. So, if
duplicity, hypocrisy, diplomacy, and the tendency to
cheat others are there, then this is dangerous for us.
Even if someone is full of ignorance and is weak, there
is no harm as long as he is sincere. And if a man’s
heart is full of duplicity and other bad propensities,
then he cannot progress. Never. He may do one lākha of
harināma, spending the whole day engaged in bhakti
activities, but when the chance comes, he still tries to
cheat others in worldly dealings. Because he is not
sincere, he will always be motivated to gain money and
praise, and be concerned that his name and fame should
be spread here and there for his self-gain.

Especially lust, hṛd-roga, how will it go away? There is
only one way—to chant the name in the association of a
higher Vaiṣṇava whose heart is pure. His heart has been
completely cleansed and he has developed his kṛṣṇa-prema
to a high degree. Being under his guidance always‚
obeying him, living in Vṛndāvana (if not by body then
internally by mind), our hearts will be cleansed. First
bhakti will come and then the heart will be cleaned.
Don’t think that first we will clear our hearts, that
first everything will go away, and then bhakti will
come. It will never happen like this. This is not
authentic siddhānta. Bhakti will come gradually by its
own power, and then without any effort this hṛd-roga
will go. Vikrīḍitaṁ vraja- vadhūbhir idañ ca viṣṇoḥ
śraddhānvito ‘nuśṛṇuyād (SB. 10.33.39) means with
śraddhā, with great honor, sincerely. Anuśṛṇuyād means
always, continuously hearing. How? With so much
affection and love and honor. We must be established in
this consciousness always, continuously without break.

Atha varṇayed yaḥ. And after this, what is he
describing? At the end of the narration of rāsa-līlā-
prasaṅga, when rāsa-līlā had stopped, Śukadeva Gosvāmī
is telling Parīkṣit Mahārāja about those who will not
hear, that actually they must hear! The verb used is
anuśṛṇuyād—you must! If you are not doing śravaṇa, not
hearing, then you are actually commiting an offense,
because both the author Vyāsa and Śukadeva Gosvāmī are
advising this, and you are not obeying. So you must
hear. And after hearing, anuśṛṇuyād atha varṇayed yaḥ
bhaktiṁ parāṁ bhagavati pratilabhya—you will first have
bhakti. And then, pratilabhya kāmaṁ hṛd-rogam āśv
apahinoty acireṇa dhīraḥ. Then kāma comes. What kāma?
Kāma meaning prema of Kṛṣṇa. First this kāma appears and
all hṛd-roga, all bad desires and all ignorance will go
away. You must hear the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa. Satām
prasaṇgān mama vīrya- saṁ-vido (SB. 3.25.25) (Trans.—“In
the association of pure devotees, discussion of Kṛṣṇa’s
pastimes is very pleasing to the ear and heart.”)
Hearing Kṛṣṇa’s līlās is so powerful that you do not
have to do any other sādhana. Parīkṣit Mahārāja never
did anything else. He only heard and by hearing, he went
to Goloka Vṛndāvana and served Kṛṣṇa. So anuśṛṇuyād, you
will have to hear these līlās, and by this you will
learn all tattvas—jīva-tattva, māyā-tattva, kṛṣṇa-
tattva, yogamāyā-tattva, bhakti-tattva, prema-tattva,
sādhana-tattva— everything will come automatically to
you. Then gradually sādhana-bhakti will come, and after
that bhāva-bhakti, prema-bhakti, and then Kṛṣṇa will be
controlled by that very bhakta.

                           57
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017


If we are trying to give up this disease, but instead
our disease is increasing, developing more and more, we
should understand that we are doing something wrong. We
should enter into the pro-per process, which is to hear.

So Swāmījī is telling that the disease is in the heart.
If mind and heart are cleaned, then everything is
cleaned. It does not help to take bath twenty times in
the sea, because fish live in the water and they are so
impure and give off such a bad smell. If a fish jumps
from the water and lands on someone, he will cry out,
“Oh, such a bad smell has come!” So always bathing will
not work. There is only one medicine for cleaning the
heart. What is that?



nivṛtta-tarṣair upagīyamānād

bhavauṣadhāc chrotra-mano-‘bhiramāt

ka uttamaśloka-guṇānuvādāt

pumān virajyeta vinā paśughnāt

(SB. 10.1.4)



[Glorification of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
performed in the paramparā system. Such glorification is
relished by those no longer interested in the false,
temporary glorification of this cosmic manifestation.
Descriptions of the Lord are the right medicine for the
conditioned soul undergoing repeated birth and death.
Therefore, who will cease hearing such glorification of
the Lord except a butcher or one who is killing his own
self?]



This is the way. Whether one is a bhakta, nirveśeṣa-
vādī, viṣayī, kāmī having so many desires, or aparādhī,
having committed so many offenses, everyone should hear
and chant the holy name. This is told in a śloka in
Bhāgavata (SB. 2.1.11) also.



etan nirvidyamānānām

icchatām akuto-bhayam

yogināṁ nṛpa nirṇītaṁ

harer nāmānukīrtanam



[O King, constant chanting of the holy name of the Lord
after the ways of the great authorities is the doubtless
and fearless way of success for all, including those who
are free from all material desires, those who are

                             58
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

desirous of all material enjoyment, and also those who
are self-satisfied by dint of transcendental knowledge.]



Ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanaṁ bhava-mahā-dāvāgni-nirvāpaṇaṁ.

Purification will come from the name. We want to clear
our hearts: ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanaṁ bhava-mahā-dāvāgni-
nirvāpaṇaṁ. If we do all these unfavorable activities
and after that chant harināma, this is absurd. You
should be whatever you are, wherever you are situated,
in whatever stage you are—kāmī, viṣayī, bhogī, durjana
(scoundrel)—whatever you are you should be— no harm. But
be sincere, and then chant harināma under the guidance
of a pure-hearted Vaiṣṇava. Then, after that, ceto
darpana marjanam will work. Bhava-mahā-dāvāgni—the fire
of the world will be extinguished, and all virtues will
come—vidyā-vadhū-jīvanam.

Then, vidyā-vadhū-jīvanam. Who is Kṛṣṇa? He is the
jīvanam of vidyā-rūpī-vadhū, of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. The
essence of all vidyā is Śrīmatī Rādhikā. She is hlādinī-
śakti. Without nāma, She will not come. Vidyā-vadhū-
jīvanam ānandāmbudhi-vardhanaṁ. The ocean—the endless
ocean of ānanda, pleasure—will come. Then we will play
here and there in the waves forever. And at last we will
dive into the ocean of love and affection. Never again
will we come to this mortal world. So begin harināma
from wherever you are, from whatever stage you are in,
and try to be sincere. Don’t be duplicitous. Don’t
desire any money, fame or other worldly things. Only by
chanting, remembering and hearing will we gain strength
in cultivating our bhakti. First hear. If you are not
hearing all these things, you will not become strong. So
we must hear and try to follow in order to free
ourselves from material desires. This is the conclusion.

You should read.

Devotee reads:

The conclusion is that in order to get freed from the
material disease, one must take to the chanting of the
Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra.

BVNM: Don’t try any other process. Don’t say that we
should first become purified by chanting harināma and
then we will hear. Nowadays this is going on. “We should
not hear hari-kathā, we should not associate with higher
Vaiṣṇavas, but we should clean our hearts only by
chanting harināma.” Never. We have heard the correct
procedure in Swāmījī’s text. We have not come to remain
in one stage forever. We should try to advance from
kaniṣṭha to madhyama, from madhyama to uttama. If you
are not trying, and you think you want to be always,
forever and eternally in the kaniṣṭha stage, thinking,
“Oh, it is good for me,” that is all right. You can
remain there if you like, but we will never wait like
this. Always we should endeavor with great desire to
develop our Kṛṣṇa consciousness. And the key to
advancing is in the hand of the uttama Vaiṣṇava. So we
should try to take his association, always hearing from
him. This is the process, and very quickly we will move

                           59
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

onwards.

Devotee reads:

The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is especially meant for
creating an atmosphere in which people can take to the
chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra.



BVNM: But in trying to create a Kṛṣṇa conscious
atmosphere, if you are quarreling amongst yourselves and
not honoring higher Vaiṣṇavas, or not having faith in
anyone else, the atmosphere will be ruined. Then those
who are bona fide and sincere will leave that false
bhakti path. Now we see this happening. So we should try
to reform ourselves and to honor all Vaiṣṇavas and all
others as well. Then all who come will feel, “Oh, this
is a very nice atmosphere. We should chant harināma.”
But if you are engaged in self- enjoyment, visitors will
know because they are not so foolish. They will know.
They will not respect you and will go away. Only bogus
persons will come. They will join you, make some money,
and afterwards they will also go away. So we should
behave like chaste, bona fide Vaiṣṇavas. Especially
those who are preaching should be like this. Swāmījī
intended that his Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement would
especially create an atmosphere in which people would be
inspired to take to the chanting of the Hare Kṛṣṇa
mantra.

One must begin what?

Devotee reads:

One must begin with faith, and when this faith . . .



BVNM: What faith? What is faith here? That my chanting
of Kṛṣṇa’s names will give everything to make my life
fully successful. Then there will be no need of going to
any impersonalist university. We should only go to the
school of Gaura Kiśora dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja and to the
university of Haridāsa Ṭhākura. That is enough! Kṛṣṇa
can give us anything in this world. We have seen
Vālmīki. He had faith in Kṛṣṇa’s names, and his life was
miraculously transformed.

The holy name is so powerful. Agastya took one drink of
sea water, and he ended up drinking all the water from
the entire sea. Śaṅkara and Brahmā are performing all
their functions only by the grace of the name. Swāmī
Mahārāja served his holy master by preaching everywhere
and by himself chanting Kṛṣṇa’s names. He had no worldly
qualification. The world had rejected him; his wife and
sons had rejected him because he could not make any
money. They all rejected him. But he took shelter only
in the name, and everywhere in the whole world he is now
worshiped for this. We should try to be like that.

Our faith should be like Haridāsa Ṭhākura’s. He was
beaten in twenty-two market-places and his blood
splattered everywhere.

                           60
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017


His face was battered, and only his bones remained, but
he was still chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa
Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. His tormentor said to him, “O Prabhu,
please die. Otherwise my whole family will die.” So
Haridāsa said, “Yes, I am dying.” And he became like a
dead person. They threw his body in the Ganges. Then
they were so satisfied, and they told the Kazi, “Oh, we
have done a marvelous job! He is now dead, and we have
thrown his dead body into the Ganges.” But after one
hour they saw Haridāsa Ṭhākura again in such a healthy
state, chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa,
Hare Hare / Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.
He came out from the Ganges still chanting and went to
his place. Everyone there wondered how this could have
happened. He had been dead. Every bone had been broken.
And still he came out like before, even more healthy!
Then they declared that he was a jindapira (Muslim
saint), a person who is like a demigod in this life. A
man can be jindapira by his saṁskāra (his activities)
after so many millions of births, but in this present
lifetime Haridāsa became like a demigod.

Do you know Agastya Ṛṣi? He did the following: a bird
told him that the sea had taken her eggs and would not
return them. The bird was weeping. Agastya Ṛṣi went and
told the sea, “Oh, she is weeping so much. You should
return her eggs.” But the sea would not listen. Agastya
Ṛṣi took a palmful of water and drank it, and the whole
sea dried up, and those eggs were returned to that bird.

You know the history of Sanātana Gosvāmī? He threw his
cintāmaṇi stone in the Yamunā and he was chanting Hare
Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare. He never
remembered that he had had a cintāmaṇi. He had no use
for it, because he had so many cintāmaṇis. What were
those cintāmaṇis? Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa,
Hare Hare / Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.
When you have a firm belief that everything can be
achieved by the name, then you don’t need anything else—
liberation, svarga, vaibha (wealth), rājya (kingdom),
anything. You may want to be president of North America
only, but you can be president of the whole world by
chanting harināma. Have strong faith in this. But
actually we have no faith. When we go to serve gurudeva,
seventy-five percent of our collection we keep in our
pocket and twenty-five percent we give to him. Does
gurudeva know or not? Does Kṛṣṇa know or not? If we are
cheating Kṛṣṇa and gurudeva, how will we be successful
in our chanting? So have faith in the name. Then?

Devotee reads:

. . . and when this faith is increased by chanting, a
person can become a member of the Society.



BVNM: But how Swāmījī’s mood was so high! If he could
see what is happening now, that his disciples are not
honoring the Vaiṣṇavas, he would be very sad. What to
speak of kaniṣṭha-adhikārī, they are not going to honor
anyone.


                           61
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                   5/4/2017

So, “we are sending . . .”

Devotee reads:

We are sending saṅkīrtana parties all over the world,
and they are experiencing that even in the remotest part
of the world, where there is no knowledge of Kṛṣṇa, the
Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra attracts thousands of men to our
camp. In some areas, people begin to imitate the
devotees by shaving their heads and chanting the Hare
Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, only a few days after hearing the
mantra. This may be imitative, but imitation of a good
thing is desired. Some imitators gradually become
interested in being initiated by the spiritual master
and offer themselves for initiation.

If one is sincere, he is initiated . . .



BVNM: But if one is not sincere, he will be cheated. He
will think, “Gurudeva has given me a mantra and I am
initiated. Now I can initiate others.” How can he know
the process? Only outwardly he knows something. He
brings a tulasī plant and keeps it by him. He brings a
very, very big, big chanting mālā from the market, very
big. Sometimes when I give a smaller mālā, disciples
bring a very large mālā for Rs. 500 from the market or
from Rādhā-Kuṇḍa. It is so big that I cannot even hold
it in my hand. They think that by this big, big mālā
Kṛṣṇa will at once come. But Kṛṣṇa will not come for Rs.
1000 or for any amount.

So, if anyone is sincere, he will chant like Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, on his kaupīna, making knots in the cloth.
But for us the tulasī-mālā is very sacred and powerful,
so we should use tulasī. But don’t use such big, big,
big ones! Use something smaller, medium size, but very
easy to chant on. And try to take the mood of your
gurudeva. Serve him and his words. “I took initiation,
and after some months I left my Gurudeva and I became a
guru myself.” No, this is not initiation.

“If one is sincere . . .”

Devotee reads:

If one is sincere, he is initiated, and this stage is
called bhajana-kriyā. One then actually engages in the
service of the Lord by regularly chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa
mahā-mantra, sixteen rounds daily . . .



BVNM: He has told the meaning of sixteen rounds before.

Devotee: Minimum sixteen rounds, nothing less.

BVNM: Swāmījī set this standard to bring the devotees
in. It is only for Western devotees, not for Indians. We
never heard our Gurudeva say this. We have heard minimum
sixteen rounds only from Swāmījī, because the Westerners
are always engaged in so many other activities. Thus
they have no time at all. So at least you should chant

                             62
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

sixteen rounds. But it does not mean that if you are
chanting seventeen rounds, then you are making an
offense. Some devotees have told me, “It is a very big
offense to disobey Swāmījī and he has instructed that we
should chant only sixteen rounds.” No, this is a wrong
understanding. It was Swāmījī’s desire that everyone
should chant at least thirty-two rounds, if not one
lākha, but he saw that his disciples could not meet such
a high standard.

Devotee reads:

. . . chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, sixteen
rounds daily, and refraining from illicit sex,
intoxicants, meat-eating and gambling.



BVNM: This is clearing of the heart. We should try to
realize all these things properly. What? And refraining
from illicit sex, what else?

Devotee reads:

. . . refraining from illicit sex, intoxicants, meat-
eating and gambling. By bhajana-kriyā one attains
freedom from the contamination of materialistic life. He
no longer goes to a restaurant or hotel to taste so-
called palatable dishes made with meat and onions . . .



BVNM: But we see that prominent devotees are secretly
going to restaurants and doing so many bad things. We
should be satisfied with mahā-prasāda only.

Devotee reads:

. . . nor does he care to smoke or drink tea or coffee.
He not only refrains from illicit sex, but avoids sex
life entirely. Nor is he interested in wasting his time
in speculating or gambling. In this way it is to be
understood that one is becoming cleansed of unwanted
things (anartha-nivṛtti). The word anartha refers to
unwanted things. Anarthas are vanquished when one
becomes attached to the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement.



BVNM: First know what is sādhya. What is our object?
First know our object, then sādhana, then sādhana-
bhakti. We should know all these things. What is bhāva?
What is prema? Then you can do what is needed for
attaining bhāva. Then that will be sādhana. And if you
have a desire to attain prema from the stage of bhāva,
then you are doing bhāva-bhakti, otherwise not. You must
know all these things. You may have been doing sādhana-
bhakti your whole life, but that sādhana-bhakti is not
real if it has not been done to achieve bhāva-bhakti.
What you have been doing cannot be considered svarūpa-
siddha-bhakti. Rather, it will come in the category of
aropa-siddha or saṅga-siddha, contaminated with karma,
jñāna, yoga, tapasya and all other things. It is not
pure. If you are not hearing from the highest class of

                           63
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                    5/4/2017

Vaiṣṇavas, how can you know all these things? And how
can you enter into actually practicing svarūpa-siddha-
bhakti? So Swāmījī has called bhāva “the preliminary
awakening of dormant love of Godhead.”

Next?

Devotee reads:

When a person is relieved from unwanted things, he
becomes fixed in executing his Kṛṣṇa activities. Indeed,
he becomes attached to such activities and experiences
ecstasy in executing devotional service. This is called
bhāva, the preliminary awakening of dormant love of
Godhead. Thus the conditioned soul becomes free from
material existence and loses interest in the bodily
conception of life, including material opulence,
material knowledge and material attraction of all
varieties. At such a time one can understand who the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is and what His māyā is.
Although māyā may be present, it cannot disturb a
devotee once he attains the bhāva stage.



BVNM: Māyā cannot touch that devotee. Sometimes there
will be an occasion that he has reason to become angry,
but he does not. There are some symptoms of bhāva by
which you can determine whether you have really attained
bhāva or not. That śloka is:



kṣāntir avyartha-kālatvaṁ viraktir māna-śūnyatā

āśābandhaḥ samutkaṇṭhā nāma-gāne sadā-ruciḥ

āsaktis tad-guṇākhyāne prītis-tad-vasati-sthale

ityādayo ‘nubhāvāḥ syur-jāta-bhāvāṇkure jane

(Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.3.25-26)

[Tolerance, effectual use of one’s time, detachment from
worldly enjoyment, absence of pride, steadfast hope that
Kṛṣṇa will bestow His mercy, intense longing to obtain
one’s goal, always having a taste to chant the holy
name, attachment to hearing narrations of the Lord’s
qualities, and affection for the transcendental
residences of the Lord—these are the nine sprouts of
prīti, or the symptoms of the appearance of bhāva.]



If bhāva is there, you will see some symptoms. If you
are doing sādhana-bhakti, there will be other symptoms.
Kṛṣṇa-prema has its own symptoms. We will know the
different stages by the various symptoms. And what are
the symptoms? You will have to go to Rūpa Gosvāmī in
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu to see. Or you will have to hear
from a living bona fide Vaiṣṇava. This is the way to
know all these things.



                           64
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                   5/4/2017


‘sādhu-saṅga’, ‘sādhu-saṅga’—sarva-śāstre kaya

lava-mātra sādhu-saṅge sarva-siddhi haya

(Cc. Madhya 22.54)



[The verdict of all revealed scriptures is that by even
a moment’s association with a pure devotee, one can
attain all success.]



Even a very brief association with a real sādhu will
change your whole life. So what is Swāmījī saying?

Devotee reads:

Māyā cannot disturb a devotee when he attains the bhāva
stage.



BVNM: Māyā cannot touch him. Kṣāntir avyartha-kālatvaṁ
viraktir māna-śūnyatā. An incident may occur that is
just cause for anger, but you will not react. Sometimes
you may be disturbed by worldly things, but another time
you will not be affected at all. Like Ambarīṣa Mahārāja—
he was only standing with folded hands. Death was
coming, and he was completely silent. Prahlāda Mahārāja
and Haridāsa Ṭhākura were the same. You can see all
these examples.

Go on.

Devotee reads:

This is because the devotee can see the real position of
māyā. Māyā means forgetfulness of Kṛṣṇa, and
forgetfulness of Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa consciousness stand
side by side like light and shadow. If one remains in
shadow, he cannot enjoy the facilities offered by light,
and if one remains in light, he cannot be disturbed by
the darkness of shadow. By taking to Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, one gradually becomes liberated and
remains in light. Indeed, he does not even touch the
darkness. As confirmed in Caitanya-Caritāmṛta (Madhya
22.31):



kṛṣṇa – sūrya-sama; māyā haya andhakāra

yāhāṇ kṛṣṇa, tāhāṇ nāhi māyāra adhikāra



“Kṛṣṇa is compared to sunshine, and māyā is compared to
darkness. Wherever there is sunshine, there cannot be
darkness. As soon as one takes to Kṛṣṇa consciousness,
the darness of illusion, the influence of the external
energy, will immediately vanish.”

                           65
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017




BVNM: Actually I have been reading and giving class on
this book, The Nectar of Instruction, only to come to
the eighth śloka. My main purpose is to give a deep idea
of this śloka. It is the essence of all kinds of
teachings. Here teachings means the instructions of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu and Rūpa Gosvāmī. The first seven
ślokas have been presented only to help us follow and
realize this śloka:



tan-nāma-rūpa-caritādi-sukīrtanānu-

smṛtyoḥ krameṇa rasanā-manasī niyojya

tiṣṭhan vraje tad-anurāgi janānugāmī

kālaṇ nayed akhilam ity upadeśa-sāram

(Śrī Upadeśāmṛta 8)



Rūpa Gosvāmī has expressed his idea in this way. I am
now explaining the sum and substance of all upadeśa
taught by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. By following this
śloka, you can easily attain kṛṣṇa-prema. This is the
goal and object of our life. So he is saying tan-nāma-
rūpa-caritādi. Read Swāmījī’s translation.

Devotee reads:

The essence of all advice is that one should utilize
one’s full time—twenty-four hours a day—in nicely
chanting and remembering the Lord’s divine name,
transcendental form, qualities and eternal pastimes,
thereby gradually engaging one’s tongue and mind. In
this way one should reside in Vraja (Goloka Vṛndāvana-
dhāma) and serve Kṛṣṇa under the guidance of devotees.
One should follow in the footsteps of the Lord’s beloved
devotees, who are deeply attached to His devotional
service.



BVNM: We will explain it. I want to read one stanza on
page 75, “in the transcendental realm . . .” Today in
the evening so many persons will leave, so I want to
touch that mood.

Devotee reads:

In the transcendental realm of Vraja (Vraja-dhāma) one
should serve the Supreme Lord, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, with a feeling
similar to that of His associates, and one should place
himself under the direct guidance of a particular
associate of Kṛṣṇa and should follow in his footsteps.
This method is applicable both in the stage of sādhana
(spiritual practices executed while in the stage of
bondage) and in the stage of sādhya (God realization),
when one is a siddha-puruṣa, or a spiritually perfected

                           66
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

soul.

BVNM: Swāmījī is quoting here one śloka of Rūpa Gosvāmī
from Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.295). That śloka is:



sevā sādhaka-rūpeṇa

siddha-rūpeṇa cātra hi

tad-bhāva-lipsunā kāryā

vraja-lokānusārataḥ



The meaning is so deep. Rūpa Gosvāmī says that if you
want to serve Kṛṣṇa, then you should perform sādhana
like Caitanya Mahāprabhu has instructed. What is that
sādhana? What is the process? He is sayling sevā
sādhaka-rūpeṇa. You should serve as a sādhaka, and also
as a siddha. We will give an example.

Rūpa and Sanātana, all our Six Gosvāmīs, and all our
ācāryas, especially Rūpa-Raghunātha—how are they
serving?



saṅkhyā-pūrvaka-nāma-gāna-natibhiḥ kālāvasānī-kṛtau

nidrāhāra-vihārakādi-vijitau cātyanta-dīnau ca yau

rādhā-kṛṣṇa-guṇa-smṛter madhurimānandena sammohitau

vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau



[I offer my prayers to the Six Gosvāmīs, who passed all
their time in chanting the holy names, singing songs and
offering daṇḍavat-praṇāmas, thereby humbly fulfilling
their vow to complete a fixed number daily. In this way
they utilized their valuable lives and conquered over
eating, sleeping and other such pleasures. Always seeing
themselves as completely worthless, they became
enchanted in divine rapture by remembering Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa’s sweet qualities.]



Swāmījī always used to recite this song with tears in
his eyes, very, very honorably with deep love and
affection.

Saṅkhyā-pūrvaka-nāma-gāna-natibhiḥ—this is sādhana. For
what purpose? To attain bhāva. Saṅkhyā-pūrvaka, not less
than one lākha, two lākhas, three lākhas. All the
associates, like Rūpa-Raghunātha, were doing this daily,
saṇkhyā-pūrvaka-nāma. Gāna, what gāna (singing)?




                           67
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

rādhe jaya jaya mādhava-dayite

gokula-taruṇī-maṇḍala-mahite

rādhe jaya jaya mādhava-dayite



govinda-dāmodara-mādhaveti

namāmi-nanda-nandanam



Like this. Two, three, four hours at a time they were
absorbed. Saṅkhyā-pūrvaka-nāma-gāna-natibhiḥ. And
vandanā (praying):



bhajāmi rādhām aravinda-netrāṁ

smarāmi rādhāṁ madhura-smitāsyām

vadāmi rādhāṁ karuṇa-bharārdrāṁ

tato mamānyāsti gatir na kāpi

(Śrī Stavāvali, Śrī Viśakhānanda-stotra 131, Raghunātha
dāsa Gosvāmī)



[I worship Rādhā who has lotus-eyes. I meditate on Rādhā
who has a sweet smile. I glorify Rādhā who melts with
compassion. She is the only goal of my life—I have no
other refuge.]



Always I am doing bhajana. I am doing bhajana of
Rādhikā, always remembering Her lotus feet. With my
mouth I am uttering “Rādhe, Rādhe, jaya jaya Śrī Rādhe.”
Why? Śrīmatī Rādhikā is unlimitedly merciful, more than
Kṛṣṇa. Tavaivāsmi tavaivāsmi (O Rādhe, I am Yours, I am
Yours). You should always do vandanā like this. After
that, offer praṇāma, saṣṭaṇga-praṇāma. Do you know what
is sāstanga-praṇāma? Offering eight parts of body on the
ground like a rod (head, hands, feet, knees, chest). And
heart, inner heart. By speech saying Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare
Kṛṣṇa, and doing praṇāma like this. These eight parts
should be offered.

Sāṣṭaṇga-praṇāma to whom? Rādhā-Govinda, Rādhā
Gopinātha, Rādhā-Madana-Mohana, Rādhā-Dāmodara, Rādhā-
Śyāmasundara, Rādhā-Ramaṇa, Rādhā-Gokulānanda, Rādhā-
Mādhava, Rādhā-Vinoda-bihārī, Rādhā-Bankī-bihārijī,
Rādhā-Vallabha, Rādhā-Giridharī and so on, and to the
places of pastimes with Nanda Bābā Mahārāja—ki jaya ho.
Nanda Bābā—ki jaya ho, Yaśodā Maiyā—ki jaya ho, Kṛṣṇa-
kanhaiyā—ki jaya ho, Dāū bhaiyā—ki jaya ho, Rohinī Maiyā
—ki jaya ho, Rasilī-rasoiyā (cook expert in making very
sweet preparations)—ki jaya ho, and all these things. To
Varsānā, Varsānā—ki jaya ho, Vṛṣabhānu Bābā—ki jaya ho,

                             68
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

Kīrtidā Maiyā—ki jaya ho, Śrīdāma bhaiyā—ki jaya ho.
Hlādhinī mahābhāva svarūpa mama arādhya Śrīmatī Rādhikā—
ki jaya ho. Anaṅga Mañjarī—ki jaya ho. Jaya to all the
places there, to Vṛndāvana, Nidhuvana, Vaṁśī-vaṭa, Keśī-
ghāṭa, Dhīra-samīra, Sevā-kuñja, doing praṇāma to
Bhāṇḍīravana where Rādhikā was married to Kṛṣṇa and
where They were playing on a swing, to Yamunā, to
Girirāja Govardhana, to Rādhā-kuṇḍa, Śyāma-kuṇḍa, lākhas
and lākhas of these glorifications— four hours!

Devotee: Twenty-four hours.

BVNM: No. Four hours! If they do for twenty-four hours,
they will remember and they will fall flat, they will
faint, and they will roll down, always saying, “Ha
Rādhe!” and singing:



he rādhe vraja-devīke ca lalite he nanda-sūno kutaḥ

śrī-govardhana-kalpa-pādapa-tale kālindī-vane kutaḥ

ghoṣantāv iti sarvato vraja-pure khedair mahā-vihvalau

vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī jīva-gopālakau



[I am doing vandanā to the Six Gosvāmīs, who were always
calling out, “He Rādhe! O Queen of Vṛndāvana! Where are
You? He Lalite! O son of Nanda Mahārāja! Where are You?
Are You seated beneath the kalpa-vṛkṣa trees of Śrī
Govardhana Hill? Or are You roaming in all the forests
along the soft banks of the Kalindī?” They were always
lamenting, overwhelmed and burning in feelings of great
separation as they wandered throughout all Vraja-
maṇḍala.]



This is called sādhana. These instructions are for outer
sādhana, not inner. Inner sādhana is more, more
developed. Always sitting, playing in the waves of
Rādhā’s and Kṛṣṇa’s love, in the unlimited ocean of
prema. This is sādhana-bhajana. And internally where?
Rūpa Gosvāmī is Rūpa Mañjarī, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī is
Rati Mañjarī. They are always serving Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
conjugal, sometimes fanning, sometimes massaging Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, sometimes offering betelnut. Sometimes Kṛṣṇa is
telling them, “Come on,” and they will say, “No, we will
not come.” They are hiding behind Śrīmatī Rādhikā. This
is doing service. Which service is greater? Raghunātha
dāsa Gosvāmī states in his Stavāvali (Vraja Vilāsa-stava
38):



tambūlārpaṇa-pāda-mardana-payo-dānābhisāradibhir

vṛndāranya-maheśvariṁ priyataya yas toṣayanti priyah

prāṇa-preṣṭha-sakhi-kulād api kilāsaṇkocītā bhūmikāh


                              69
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

keli-bhūmiṣu rūpa-mañjarī-mukhās tā dāsikā saṁśraye



[By offering Her betel nuts, massaging Her feet,
bringing Her water, arranging for Her secret meetings
with Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and performing various other services,
countless gopī maidservants constantly please Śrī Rādhā,
the queen of Vṛndāvana forest. In their service to the
Divine Couple, they are even less shy than the prāṇa
preṣṭha sakhīs, for whom Śrī Rādhā is more dear than
life. I take shelter of these gopī maidservants, who
have Śrīmatī Rūpa Mañjarī as their leader.]



These are services in siddha-rūpeṇa. And what is
sādhaka-rūpeṇa? Saṇkhyā-pūrvaka-nāma-gāna-natibhiḥ.
Always engaging in all these activities—twenty-four
hours a day weeping bitterly, rolling down on the bank
of Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa, sometimes in Vṛndāvana,
Sevā-kuñja, Vaṁśī-vaṭa, on the bank of Yamunā. This is
sādhana. Sādhana is not distributing books for the rest
of our lives and keeping seventy-five percent of our
collection in our pockets. For the beginning stage
Swāmījī approved all these activities—without them we
cannot progress. But if we are engaged like this forever
and do not come in the line of real sādhana, we will
never advance. That is why Swāmījī sent me. He told me,
“Go and help my devotees. Otherwise they will dry up,
and giving up this Kṛṣṇa consciousness, they will be
derailed.” If the devotees will not taste these things
and advance, how can they stay in this movement? If a
river is not flowing, and the water has stopped, then
the water will become stagnant, and after that it will
dry up. Bhakti is like a current. Our bhakti will surely
go up, up, up, up. And if it is not going up by this
process that Swāmījī is describing, then we are not
doing real sādhana.

We should try to realize all these instructions and
perform bhajana like this. I have given only a very
little taste. If I reveal more to you, some will say
that Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja is sahajiyā and is telling so
many confidential things that should not be heard.
Blatantly they will say this!

I have been speaking on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam for the last
seven or eight days. What have I told? I have spoken
about Prahlāda Mahārāja, Bali Mahārāja, Ajāmila,
Citraketu, Nṛsiṁha Bhagavān, from the beginning. But if
I am not touching vraja-līlā, then it is all bogus, all
bogus. So I must mention a little from the Tenth Canto
and give you some taste so that you will not fall down.
Otherwise, if you do not hear Kṛṣṇa’s līlās, you will
fall down. I have given only a very little touch. You
should develop a very strong greed to hear more of
vraja-līlā. And if you develop some greed, then I will
give so much more.

Swāmījī has written “that even in the stage of bondage.”
What is the meaning? The stage of bondage means the
conditioned stage. So you should hear dāmodara-līlā now.
We must hear how Kṛṣṇa took birth in both places, in

                           70
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

Mathurā and also in a hidden way in Gokula, how He
tasted vātsalya-rasa and other things. We are meant to
hear about vraja-līlā in the stage of bondage. To think,
“we will be liberated and then we will be qualified to
hear Kṛṣṇa’s līlās,” is wrong and totally false!

Gaura premānande!




Chapter Six: Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Śloka 8


New Braja, 24 May 1997

We have finished our seventh śloka of The Nectar of
Instruction. I have given some outline for the eighth
śloka but I want to start from the beginning again. This
eighth śloka is the sum and substance, the essence, of
all the teachings of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmīpāda. What is this śloka teaching? It is
teaching how we should cultivate our activities for the
pleasure of Kṛṣṇa and how we can advance. First of all,
Swāmījī is telling us that we have not come to spiritual
life only to remain forever in the kaniṣṭha-adhikāra
stage, that we should try to develop our Kṛṣṇa
consciousness. We should not still be doing the same
practices and cultivating the same mood that we were
twenty-five years ago. We should not be satisfied to
remain in the same stage. We will have to develop our
Kṛṣṇa consciousness. For this reason he is explaining
this śloka.

When we first came to this Kṛṣṇa consciousness, we were
chanting harināma. And today we are still chanting
harināma, but it is not the same thing. It is like the
difference between geometry for beginners and for
Ph.D.’s. Let A,B,C be a triangle. For the beginners and
for those in the upper classes, in Ph.D. classes,
A,B,C,D is not the same thing. So now after twenty
years, should we still be chanting the same way we were
in the beginning? No! Our chant-ing and our mood should
be so much more developed. How can we develop? For this
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has given the first seven ślokas. Now
he is coming to the internal mood, and he is saying tan-
nāma-rūpa.

You should read the translation first and then we will
explain.

Devotee reads:

The essence of all advice is that one should utilize
one’s full time—twenty-four hours a day—in nicely
chanting and remembering the Lord’s divine name,
transcendental form, qualities and eternal pastimes . .
.



BVNM: Why twenty-four hours? Why? You will have to do
something to maintain your life—you will have to take

                           71
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

some sleep, you will have to care for your families,
your children—so why is he saying twenty-four hours? How
can we reconcile all these things? You will have to
reconcile. This is the difference between your beginning
stage of chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa and what you are doing now.
Swāmījī will explain further in his purport. But can we
do what is expected of us? It is possible. For those
persons who have difficulty chanting sixteen rounds,
Swāmījī said, “I am giving some concession because
Western devotees cannot easily do more. They are always
engaged in bodily activities.” So for them he is telling
sixteen rounds, but this instruction is not for advanced
devotees. What is he telling for advanced devotees? For
them he is saying twenty-four hours a day. Now, senior
devotees will ask, “How can this be? Oh, this is
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja’s idea, not Swāmījī’s. He never told
us this.” But Swāmījī has told this very clearly, and
because of this wrong understanding I am now telling all
these things again. One day you will have to come up to
this higher stage; otherwise, your love and affection
for Kṛṣṇa will not be strong. For neophyte devotees he
has said, “Oh, you should begin from two, three, four,
up to sixteen rounds.” But when you will progress, you
will give up all your worldly attachments, keeping no
worldly desires at all. Then you can actually advance.
So he is telling us how to do this.

Then, “pastimes, thereby gradually . . .”

Devotee reads:

. . . thereby gradually engaging one’s tongue and mind.
In this way one should reside in Vraja . . .



BVNM: Oh, then he is saying that you should all give up
your homes and come to Vraja? How is this possible? Oh,
it will be possible if you have no worldly desires. Then
you will be pure devotees and you will have no reason to
be anywhere else. You will only want to be in Vraja.
Those who are not qualified to be in Vraja should live
there by mind. This is another concession. But after
some time you will have to go to Vraja and give up all
these worldly desires. Where will you have to go? Goloka
Vṛndāvana. He has written “Goloka Vṛndāvana” in
brackets: “One should reside in Vraja (Goloka Vṛndāvana-
dhāma).”

For a sādhaka it is absurd to think that he can be in
Goloka Vṛndāvana. Do you understand this? A sādhaka
cannot go to Goloka Vṛndāvana. After liberation, after
prema, he can go there. But the sādhaka’s goal is to go
there, so Swāmījī has written “Goloka Vṛndāvana” in
brackets, meaning that our object is to go there. But in
sādhana-avasthā we will never be in Goloka Vṛndāvana.
Some devotees will say, “Oh, our Guru Mahārāja has
written Goloka Vṛndāvana, in sādhanāvasthā? This is for
sādhaka-avasthā?” This śloka is for sādhana. You know
what sādhana means? It is for one in the stage of
bondage. Then how can one be in Goloka Vṛndāvana? So has
Swāmījī written falsely? No, you will have to reconcile
all these things. Otherwise you cannot advance. If you
say, “Oh, he has written ‘Goloka Vṛndāvana’, so we will

                           72
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

go to Goloka Vṛndāvana-dhāma in the stage of bondage,”
you must ask how is this possible! You will have to use
your intelligence, and that intelligence will come from
the association of a bona fide Vaiṣṇava or guru.
Otherwise you will always be confused and have so many
doubts. So you will have to reconcile this
contradiction. But only highly developed and realized
Vaiṣṇavas can reconcile all these things.

Then again, “In this way one should reside . . .”

Devotee reads:

In this way one should reside in Vraja (Goloka
Vṛndāvana-dhāma) and serve Kṛṣṇa under the guidance of
devotees.



BVNM: What is the difference between devotee and
associate, pārṣada, parikara? Can anyone say?

Devotee: A devotee is a sādhaka and an associate is an
eternal nitya-siddha.

BVNM: Eternal, he is liberated. Who is liberated?
Kṛṣṇa’s associates. They are called parikaras. They are
not devotees, they are not sādhakas. If the word
“devotee” is used, you should always consider that he is
a sādhaka. How can a sādhaka be in the eternal dhāma,
Goloka Vṛndāvana? After liberation. After receiving
prema, then Yogamāyā will take him there for eternity.
But devotees cannot go there. When will they go? When
they will attain kṛṣṇa-prema —sneha, māna, praṇaya,
rāga, anurāga, etc. After that they can go, otherwise
not. Only serving cows, only distributing books but not
going deeply into them, or only making life members—
these activities will create some sukṛti but they are
not considered pure devotional activities. But what
Swāmījī is referring to here is pure devotion. We will
have to come to this platform one day, and then we can
attain kṛṣṇa-prema. Otherwise, never, never, even in
lākhas and lākhas of births will we get kṛṣṇa-prema. And
if we do not

seriously endeavor for pure devotion, then we are bound
to make some offenses. Swāmījī is telling that
throughout our whole day, twenty-four hours, we should
chant and remember. But some are saying you should not
follow this instruction.

Once I went to one of my maṭhas in India and was
expressing all these ideas. Everyone became happy to
hear this, but afterwards the maṭha commander called all
the devotees and said, “Don’t follow what Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja is telling. You should serve the cows. You
should go out here and there and make bhikṣā (begging),
and do all these other activities. Chant only sixteen
rounds, not more. If you will follow Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja,
then you will be deviated. You cannot live, you cannot
maintain your life by his instructions and thus
everything will be upset.” All the boys came to tell me,
“Our maṭha superintendent is saying this.”


                           73
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

“So one should follow . . .”

Devotee reads:

One should follow in the footsteps of the Lord’s beloved
devotees, who are deeply attached to His devotional
service. Since the mind may be one’s enemy or one’s
friend, one has to train the mind to become his friend.



BVNM: Mana eva manuṣyāṇāṁ kāraṇaṁ bandhā mokṣayoḥ. Mind
is the cause of bondage and liberation. He is our enemy
and our friend, so you should try to train the mind
first. If your mind is not on friendly terms, then he is
your enemy. And if you follow the mind when he is your
enemy, you will go to hell. In the state of bondage, we
cannot take shelter of, or take any advice from, the
mind. What should we do? Follow Rūpa Gosvāmī, Raghunātha
dāsa Gosvāmī, gurudeva, and all the disciplic ācāryas.
Do not follow what the mind is whispering. Keep a whip
and control your mind with it. Ten times daily, take a
broom and beat the back of your mind. Ten times! Then
you may become pure. Otherwise, your mind will always be
like a dog’s tail, always curved. If you take one
hundred kilos of ghee and rub it on the dog’s tail to
make it straight, when you let go it will again become
curved. The mind is like this. So, always weeping and
weeping, by taking the shelter of a realized rasika
tattva-jña Vaiṣṇava, you may be able to bring the mind
under control. Otherwise not. You will have to be very
careful of the mind. If your mind has become your
friend, then it is very easy to remember the pastimes of
Kṛṣṇa. So Swāmījī and Rūpa Gosvāmī are telling that
first of all we will have to train our mind. Then all
our bodily activities and senses will follow in line.

Go on.

Devotee reads:

The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is especially meant for
training the mind to be always engaged in Kṛṣṇa’s
business.



BVNM: Jīva Gosvāmī established this Kṛṣṇa consciousness
movement, the Viśva-vaiṣṇava-rāja-sabhā, and all our
ācāryas are members of this assembly. Jīva Gosvāmī was
the first president, and after him Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja
was president. After that came Śyāmananda Prabhu,
Narottama Ṭhākura and Śrīnivāsa Ācārya. And then the
next famous president of this Viśva-vaiṣṇava-rāja-sabhā
was Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura. This is the Kṛṣṇa
Consciousness movement. After some time Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa became another powerful president. After
that came a very deep andhakāra yuga, a period of
darkness, but that darkness ended when Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura became very prominent. As the
Saptama Gosvāmī he became the president of the assembly
and he preached everywhere. And after that came Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī, who preached all over the
world just by his arms, like Swāmījī. In a very short

                           74
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

time his one hand preached all over the whole world.

Swāmījī was one of the very greatest preachers of this
Kṛṣṇa Consciousness and president of that Viśva-
vaiṣṇava-rāja-sabhā. He brought a new bottle but it was
the same wine inside. The new bottle was the name of
that branch of Kṛṣṇa Consciousness— International
Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness. Intelligent persons
know it is the same wine but in a new bottle. Some of
Swāmījī’s followers are now deviated and they don’t want
to accept this theory, but I think that they are not
very intelligent. The Kṛṣṇa Consciousness movement is
eternal, you should know this. It is not anything new.
Its followers are also eternal. Third-class bogus
kaniṣṭha-adhikārīs are not members of this movement.
They only appear to be doing some bhakti activity. The
members of this society are all liberated souls, like
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. So if you will be like
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, Śrīla Prabhupāda, Bhaktivedānta
Swāmī Mahārāja and our Gurudeva, then you will also be
members. Otherwise, you will be like the simple
chaukidāra, gatekeeper, like dogs sitting at the gate,
doing some semblance of sādhana. Does the chaukidāra
have the independent power to reject anyone? Never! When
we become pure, we will remember this Viśva vaiṣṇava-
rāja-sabhā, alias Kṛṣṇa Consciousness, as it is!

Then?

Devotee reads:

The mind contains hundreds and thousands of impressions,
not only of this life but also of many, many lives of
the past.



BVNM: Can anyone explain how the mind has hundreds and
thousands of impressions? Anyone?

Devotee: The mind contains the impressions of past lives
which are carried within that subtle body.

BVNM: How are there thousands and thousands of
impressions? How? In a moment lākhas and lākhas of
impressions are going on in the mind. You may be
thinking so many different things, “I will beat that
person. He is very wicked.” Or “I love that person.” You
will feel affection for some and have an opposite mood
for others, sometimes even abusing them. All these
thoughts create impressions in your mind. And even for
only a moment’s impression you will have to taste some
reaction for lākhas and lākhas of births. Do you
understand this clearly or not? In your own words you
should explain.

Devotee: That all the impressions of previous
experiences are stored in our mind like a tape recorder.

BVNM: Also the present, whatever you are doing now. If
your age is fifty or sixty, can you estimate how many
impressions you have stored in your mind? Unlimited
numbers! No one can calculate. And you will have to
taste all these impressions for lākhas and lākhas and

                           75
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

koṭis of births. Unknowingly or knowingly, you killed an
ant when you were passing on the road. Will it come as
an impression or not?

You were going on a path and so many ants were there.
Wearing very hard shoes you unknowingly placed your foot
on so many ants. You caused about a hundred ants to die,
and you never even noticed. But, even if this act was
done unknowingly, the impression from it will come.

Innocently your son is putting his hand in fire. He does
not know that it is fire and that it will burn. But if
he puts his hand in the fire, will it burn him or not?
Even if it is done unknowingly, it will still burn. If
you are keeping some kerosene oil in a tin, will there
be some smell or not? Keeping it knowingly or
unknowingly, it will have some bad smell. So if you are
doing anything knowingly or unknowingly, you will have
to taste the reactions. It will come as an impression.

If a bull came and took you on his horns, injured you
and caused some pain, and if you took a very big stick
and gave him three, four daṇḍas (blows), will it make an
impression or not? Can you tell? It will. The bull will
have no impression because he is an animal, karma-yonī
(animal species). They are all suffering. If the bull
butts you like this, this is a reaction coming from your
past births’ impressions. If you are silent, thinking,
“He has done this because of my past activities,” then
you will not incur any new impression. But if you are
retaliating with a stick again, then new impressions are
made. And that bull will come to you as a man, and he
will have to beat you. If you are taking the flesh of
any cows, the cows will take birth as humans, and you
will come as a cow for so many births, and the cows as
humans will take your flesh again and again and again.
In this way we are tasting impressions coming from
lākhas and lākhas of past births. And because of these
we are also making so many new impressions. Try to avoid
making any new bad impressions. Rather, what impression
should you make? You should always chant and remember
Kṛṣṇa. If anyone is disturbing you, there is no harm. Be
like Haridāsa Ṭhākura. He was powerful enough that he
could have prevented the Muslims from beating him in
twenty-two market places, whether he had prayed to Kṛṣṇa
or not. He was Brahmā, and he could have easily resisted
them. With a curse he could have destroyed those Muslims
who were beating him. But he did not exercise his power.

So in this way always chant and remember. Swāmījī is
explaining that the time of death is especially crucial.
If you will chant and remember Kṛṣṇa in the last
moments, you will be liberated from this world.
Otherwise, if you have chanted your whole life, but at
the time of death you are thinking of some prostitute or
any other bad thing, then you will have to take a lower
birth in a miserable condition. So be very careful.

Go on.

Devotee reads:

These impressions sometimes come in contact with one
another and produce contradictory pictures.

                           76
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017




BVNM: What is the meaning?

Devotee: Like a dream. In a dream you may have an
impression of a mountain, and another impression may
come up of gold, so you dream of a gold mountain.

BVNM: In this life?

Devotee: This life and previous lives.

BVNM: How is it that in this life these impressions
sometimes come in contact with one another and produce
contradictory pictures?

Devotee: One may have performed impious activities and
pious or spiritual activities, and by nature they are
contradictory.

BVNM: What is an example?

Devotee: I might plant some trees, give some charity,
but then I might do something sinful, and perhaps I
might come into good association and do something
spiritual. So my mind is not fixed. I’m involved in so
many contradictory activities.

BVNM: You have performed so many good and bad activities
in your life. If remembrances of both are coming
simultaneously, you will be confused and be in doubt as
to what you should or should not do. For example, a very
beautiful lady, or for ladies a very handsome man,
caught your eye and you were attracted, but you already
had a good, chaste wife. So you are thinking, “What to
do?” Two feelings are coming from past activities,
impressions, and now you are deciding what to do.
“Should I enter a relationship with this new lady and
give up my old wife or not? This new lady is so
beautiful and my first wife is somewhat aged and not so
good-looking, so what should I do? It is not right to
leave my wife but this new lady is very young, very
beautiful, and very sweet. What should I do?” Thus you
find yourself in a dilemma. It may be that four, five,
six impressions will come at a time—what to do? That
impression which is most prominent will defeat all the
others.

Your wife tells that you should not follow Kṛṣṇa
Consciousness and threatens, “If you do that, I will
take poison and die.” So you have to decide whether you
will follow the bhakti path, chanting, remembering and
doing sevā or not. And your wife is saying that you
should take flesh and eggs and enjoy with her. “If you
are not coming to me, and if you are going to be a pure
devotee, at once I will take poison and I will give
poison to all our children.” “Oh, what to do? This is a
very big problem! What should I do?” This confusion of
purpose is coming from your past activities which have
created varieties of impressions. They may come one,
two, three, four, five at a time, and then it is very
hard to discern what is proper behavior. However, any
devotee can save you. So we should try to take the

                             77
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                  5/4/2017

association of any good, realized soul. He will show you
in an instant what is the proper path to take.

There is the story of Nārada who saw a hunter with his
bow and poisoned arrows in a big forest. He shot one
deer, who was now doing chaṭ-paṭ, chaṭ-paṭ (flapping
around). He was only half-dead and rolling down. When
Nārada saw this, he thought, “Oh, the deer is half-dead
and is suffering so much, and doing chaṭ-paṭ, chaṭ-paṭ.”
A little while later he saw another deer, a rabbit, and
some birds that were also flapping like that. At last he
approached that hunter who came with bow and arrow in
hand and challenged Nārada, “Why have you come here like
this and disturbed me? All my prey are running here and
there, and you have frightened them off. I will kill
you.”

Nārada replied, “You cannot kill me. You have no power
to do so. You have no power to even touch me. Look close
by you.” And Nārada took some drops of water from his
pot and sprinkled them. The hunter at once saw lākhas
and lākhas of these animals ready to kill him. He cried
out, “They are killing me and again I am taking birth
and again they are killing me. And they are in rows,
lākhas and lākhas of them waiting to kill me.” He at
once fainted and was rolling down on the earth. Again
Nārada took some water and sprinkled it. The hunter came
back to his senses and fell flat at the lotus feet of
Nārada Ṛṣi, “Save me! Save me! Save me!”

Nārada told him to break his arrows and bows.

“Then what will I do? How will I maintain my life?”

“Oh, do not worry about this. All necessities will come
to you in huge quantities, but you should take only a
little. First you should distribute all your
possessions.”

In a moment that hunter was changed, and he became a
great saint. After some days Parvata Ṛṣi and Nārada Ṛṣi
were returning the same way. Now this hunter had become
so pious that he used to watch the path so that no ant
would be harmed when he offered praṇāma to Nārada Ṛṣi.
He had become so pious! Parvata Ṛṣi asked, “Who is he?”

“Oh, he is my disciple. He was a very big hunter and so
niṣṭhura, cruel-hearted. Now he has become so pious.”

“Oh, you are a touchstone. In a moment you can change
anyone.”

So, if a person like Nārada Ṛṣi will touch us, then our
mind can be controlled, otherwise not. So go to
Vṛndāvana.

What is the śloka?

Devotee reads:

yaṁ yaṁ vāpi smaraṇ bhāvaṁ

tyajaty ante kalevaram


                             78
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

taṁ taṁ evaiti kaunteya

sadā tad-bhāva-bhāvitaḥ

(Bg. 8.6)

“Whatever state of being one remembers when he quits his
body, that state he will attain without fail.”



At the time of death, the mind and intelligence of a
living entity create the subtle form of a certain type
of body for the next life. If the mind suddenly thinks
of something not very congenial, one has to take a
corresponding birth in the next life. On the other hand,
if one can think of Kṛṣṇa at the time of death, he can
be transferred to the spiritual world, Goloka Vṛndāvana.

BVNM: Any example for both?

Devotee: Bharata Mahārāja by thinking of a deer, he
became a deer.

BVNM: Yes. He was thinking of a deer. So, if you think
of Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa’s associates, certainly you will be
like that. Is there any example? Yes, Ajāmila became
like this, and so many others. Śrutis have done like
that. Śruti means Veda, and it is not a book, not only a
piece of paper. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is not a piece of
paper, Gītā is not a piece of paper. Without these
literatures we cannot see, because we are blind, mortal.
But Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Gītā and all Vedas are immortal,
like Kṛṣṇa. But at present we cannot see this.His
teachings are immortal. We cannot realize all these
things now. Only by cultivating all our activities to
please Kṛṣṇa can we begin to understand. This
realization will come in the stage of bhāva. Then we can
realize a little. So we should try to develop our Kṛṣṇa
Consciousness and perform our sādhana to develop bhāva.

The Vedas and Śruti mantras became gopīs. The
Daṇḍakaraṇya ṛṣis became gopīs because they were praying
for this at the time of death. From the very beginning
they were meditating in this way. In their last moments
they thought like this and thus received birth as gopīs.

There are so many lākhas and lākhas of examples of this.
So if you are always thinking of and remembering the
gopīs, or thinking of Śrīdāma and Subala, you will take
birth as gopas. Don’t think of Kṛṣṇa alone. Then you
will be annihilated in Brahman, and it will go against
you. So we should remember Kṛṣṇa with His associates,
with special emphasis on Śrīmatī Rādhikā. This is
bhakti. Try to realize this fact. We should chant and
remember whom? We should remember those who are serving
Kṛṣṇa. If you want to love Kṛṣṇa like His mother and
father, you will have to follow Nanda Bābā and Yaśodā
and treat Kṛṣṇa like your son. If you are doing so at
the time of death, then you will be the servant of Nanda
and Yaśodā, and you will serve Kṛṣṇa like a mother and
father.

If you want to serve like the gopīs, then you will have

                              79
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

to think in that way. You will have to follow their
example and learn how to serve them. You will have to be
expert in all these things in this life and gradually
develop your thinking of how the gopīs are serving
Kṛṣṇa. At the time of death, if you are remembering
these things, then you will be a servant of the gopīs.
This is the hidden secret.

Swāmījī has not told all these things explicitly, but he
has given it in code form. This is like a sūtra.

Go on.

Devotee reads:

This process of transmigration is very subtle; therefore
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī advises devotees to train their minds
in order that they will be unable to remember anything
other than Kṛṣṇa.



BVNM: You should note all these things in your heart if
you want to advance. If you are advancing only in
worldly desires and meditating on those things, then you
cannot progress in bhakti. You are not following
Swāmījī. You will have to develop according to the

prescribed process, gradually adopting all these
teachings and

coming in line. “This process of transmigration is very
subtle.” Here subtle means sūkṣma. You will have to take
to this process. Don’t always focus on externals,
adopting all these things only artificially, outwardly.
Instead you should go in deeply. Otherwise you cannot
understand the teachings of Rūpa Gosvāmī.

Go on.

Devotee reads:

This process of transmigration is very subtle; therefore
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī advises devotees to train their minds
in order that they will be unable to remember anything
other than Kṛṣṇa.



BVNM: Is he saying that half of your thoughts should be
on Kṛṣṇa and the other half can be in māyā? What is he
saying? If anyone is not fully devoting his mind to
Kṛṣṇa, and is meditating more on worldly affairs, then
even a sannyāsī can fall down—he is bound to fall down.
But if someone is a gṛhastha yet is gradually developing
his mind towards Kṛṣṇa, he will go up to Goloka
Vṛndāvana.

Devotee reads:

Similarly, the tongue should be trained to speak only of
Kṛṣṇa and to taste only kṛṣṇa-prasāda.

BVNM: Is he telling that even in the upper stages you

                           80
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

should still be doing all these external activities,
aropa-siddha-bhakti, like making a garden or a
restaurant or an incense factory? These instructions
were given for the initial stages, only so that the very
neophyte devotees could build up some sukṛti, some
impressions, but for the advanced stage what is he
instructing? Swāmījī is saying what I am saying, and I
am saying what he is saying—we are saying the same
thing! There is no difference at all. How some of his
disciples are seeing differences I don’t know! We are
both giving the same thing, in the same bottle, not even
in another new bottle. I have not brought any new
bottle. What I am telling is the same bottle, same wine,
the same thing as our whole disciplic line of ācāryas
has given.

Devotee reads:

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī further advises, tiṣṭhan vraje: one
should live in Vṛndāvana or any part of Vraja-bhūmi.



BVNM: Why is he saying this and for whom? For devotees
or non-devotees?

Devotees: Devotees.

BVNM: So why are they saying that Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja is
stating something different? I am saying the same thing,
but this instruction is not for everyone. Those who are
qualified should be in Vraja. Those who are giving up
all their worldly attachments will gradually come to be
in Vṛndāvana, forever in Vṛndāvana. Is Swāmījī not
declaring this same thing?

Devotee reads:

Vrajabhūmi, or the land of Vṛndāvana, is supposed to be
eighty-four krośas in area. One krośa equals two square
miles. When one makes Vṛndāvana his residence, he should
take shelter of an advanced devotee there.



BVNM: Who will be there? Is any advanced devotee there?
Always it was Swāmījī’s desire that his disciples should
hear from the advanced Vaiṣṇavas. It was not his
intention that his disciples should set themselves up
like kings in a very beautiful rāja palace with all
facilities. They should not move in that direction. No,
they should give up all desires and develop the
mentality only to serve, not to be served. Only to
serve! To serve whom? The pure devotees there. They
should not seek worldly things in Vṛndāvana and should
not quarrel. We are only to follow these instructions.
It is very harmful to live in Vṛndāvana and maintain
attachments. If you are doing some sinful activity, it
is like a thunderbolt. So don’t do all these things. You
should practice all these things here, and then reside
in Vṛndāvana.

Go on.


                           81
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

Devotee reads:

In this way one should always think of Kṛṣṇa and His
pastimes.



BVNM: If a man has so many problems, he will wonder,
“Oh, what to do? My wife has left me for someone else.
What will happen to my children? How will I earn my
living? What to do?” Living in Vṛndāvana but always
worrying about these things, quarreling with others and
being involved in so much diplomacy and politics, then
how is he in Vṛndāvana? He is not in Vṛndāvana, but
rather he is simply engaged in sinful activities.

“This is . . .”

Devotee reads:

This is further elucidated by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī in his
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu.



BVNM: I will explain it tomorrow. It is a very, very
good thing. I wanted to finish this śloka. I will try to
finish it tomorrow.

Gaura premānande!




Chapter Seven: Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Śloka 8


New Braja, 25 May 1997

I want to be the footdust of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī forever,
janmani janmani means birth after birth. If I have to
take birth, no harm, but I want only to be the footdust
of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. This is the highest object, the
highest object. And we can attain that highest object.
What is that object?



tavaivāsmi tavaivāsmi na jivāmi tvayā vinā

iti vijñāya rādhe tvaṁ naya māṁ caraṇāntikam

(Śrī Vilāpa Kusumāñjali 96, Raghunātha dāsa)



[I am Yours! I am Yours! I cannot live without You! O
Rādhe, please understand this and bring me to the
service of Your lotus feet.]



This is the highest, to serve Śrīmatī Rādhikā. It can be

                           82
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                   5/4/2017

attained only by being the dust of the lotus feet of
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī.

ādadānas tṛṇaṁ dantair

idaṁ yāce punaḥ punaḥ

śrīmad rūpa-padāmbhoja

dhūliḥ syāṁ janma-janmani

(Śrī Dāna Keli Cintāmani 175, Raghunātha dāsa)



Taking a dry grass between my teeth, I am folding my
hands and deeply praying from the core of my heart.
Unconditionally, thoroughly, completely, I am offering
myself and devoting myself fully at the lotus feet of
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. In all future births I want to serve
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmīpāda so I want to be the dust of his
lotus feet.

We will explain his eighth śloka in The Nectar of
Instruction. What has Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī said in his
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.294)?



kṛṣṇaṁ smaran janañ cāsya

preṣṭhaṁ nija-samīhitam

tat-tat-kathā-rataś cāsau

kuryād vāsaṁ vraje sadā



He has said in the main śloka, ‘tiṣṭhana vraje,’ to
always be in Vṛndāvana. But that is not enough. You must
also be under the guidance of Vaiṣṇavas. This means that
you will always be hearing their hari-kathā, obeying
their instructions, and staying in Vṛndāvana. But then
something more is needed. What is that? Tan-nāma-rūpa-
caritādi—always chanting His name, and doing what else?
Hearing about and meditating on all the pastimes of
Kṛṣṇa related to that name. What name? Like Dāmodara.
When you are calling Dāmodara’s name, then you should
remember the pastimes of Dāmodara. There are two
Dāmodaras—Yaśodā-Dāmodara and Rādhā-Dāmodara. They are
not the same. You should remember how Śrīmatī Yaśodā was
binding unlimited Kṛṣṇa, how He was weeping, and also
how the gopīs tied Kṛṣṇa with Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s veil so
that He could not go here and there and leave the rāsa.
That is why He became Rādhā-Dāmodara.

When you are chanting Kṛṣṇa’s name, what should you
remember? You should always remember the pastimes
related to Kṛṣṇa— how He attracted peacocks, kokils
(cuckoo birds), deer, all the creepers, trees, rivers,
mountains, gopas, gopīs, cows, and charmed them with His
sweet voice and flute. So when chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, we
should remember all these things. But instead, what is

                            83
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

in our minds? We are thinking, “Where am I going in this
world? How can I control this situation?” No, no, we
should never chant with this mentality. Always remember
the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa when you are chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa,
and follow this process. Gradually we must train the
mind to always remember Kṛṣṇa. The high-class devotees
can do this.

Remember and chant Kṛṣṇa’s name in the right process.
Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa. The eyes are closed, and the
mind is concentrated. Automatically a pastime comes.
Kṛṣṇa is in Keśī-ghāṭa in Vṛndāvana with lākhas and
lākhas of cows and cowherd boys, playing on His flute
and doing śṛṅgāra, playing so many different games.
Sometimes the sakhās play like monkeys, putting on tails
like Hanumān. When they catch hold of the tail of one
big Hanumān, he jumps from this tree to the next one.
Holding onto that tail very tightly, they also go
jumping from one tree to the next, here to there. All
are clapping and laughing. In so many ways they are
joking and playing and passing the time. Sometimes they
are making jokes and imitating frogs. They squat down
and jump, and again jump, and all are jumping like this
and sounding like frogs. Sometimes Kṛṣṇa suddenly goes
far away and all run after Him. Who will catch Kṛṣṇa
first? So they are doing all these things.

One time Madhumaṅgala came to Kṛṣṇa and said, “You are
very svārthī, selfish, very selfish You are. All the
gopīs come with so many preparations. They give all
these things and so much honor to You, and give nothing
to us. Everything is always only for You. I know why.
Because You have a pītāmbara, You have a sweet vaṁśī,
and a peacock feather on Your head. But anyone can take
these things and appear more beautiful and more
honorable to all others. It is only because of these
three things that You look so beautiful and attract
everyone. You can take my cloth and give me Yours. Give
me Your vaṁśī and You take my śṛṅgāra. You should also
give me Your peacock feather. Then we will see that all
gopīs will love me more, and give me rasagula, pera,
burfi and everything. They will give me so many things,
makkhana and miśrī also. No one will ask for You and
everyone will come to me.” Kṛṣṇa began to smile and
said, “We should test this. Let us change our clothes!”

A devotee is chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, and all
these moods are coming in his mind. He sees them
exchanging their clothes. Kṛṣṇa gave His flute and
peacock feather to Madhumaṅgala, and He Himself took
Madhumaṅgala’s clothes. At that time a very big horse,
the Keśī demon, came. He was whinnying so loudly that
the whole of Vraja was upset. Everyone was afraid and
wondering whether a storm had come or what? All the dust
of Vraja went up in the sky. Everything was covered by
deep darkness, like andhakara, and everyone was so
afraid. They could not imagine what was happening. And
Kṛṣṇa was now nowhere to be found. Only Madhumaṅgala was
there. Keśī was searching for Kṛṣṇa, who had gone some
distance away. Kaṁsa had told him, “You should go and at
once kill Kṛṣṇa.”

Keśī said, “I don’t know what Kṛṣṇa looks like. How can
I recognize Him?”

                           84
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                    5/4/2017


“Oh, very easily you will know Him. If someone is
wearing a pītāmbara vastra around His neck and a
pītāmbara dhoti below, a flute on His lips, a peacock
feather on His head, and having a somewhat blackish
complexion, you should know that He is Kṛṣṇa.”

Madhumaṅgala was also somewhat blackish. He had
exchanged his dress with Kṛṣṇa and was looking just like
Him, with the flute, peacock feather and pītāmbara. From
very far off Keśī spotted him and thought, “Oh, there is
Kṛṣṇa.” But Madhumaṅgala was not that Kṛṣṇa. Keśī saw
him and began to whinny and jump very high. He jumped
from far away and reached that brāhmaṇa boy, wanting to
kill him. Just the air moving from Keśī’s tail caused
Madhumaṅgala to fall flat on the earth! He was rolling
down on the ground and calling out, “Are bābā!” Do you
know what ‘are bābā’ is? It means, “O father, father,
father.” Like this. “O mother, save me! O God, save me!”
Madhumaṅgala threw his vaṁśī far away, he dropped the
peacock feather here and the pītāmbara there, and he was
rolling down. It was Madhumaṅgala’s greatest fortune
that Keśī’s legs could not reach him. Otherwise what
would be his destination? He started to fly away from
there, but luckily Kṛṣṇa was very nearby. He caught hold
of that brāhmaṇa boy and said, “You should keep My
clothes for one or two days more.”

“No, no, I don’t want. Take all Your things.” He gave
everything back to Kṛṣṇa. “And give me my belongings.”

Kṛṣṇa said, “No, no. I will not give them to you.”

“Oh, you must give them to me. Otherwise I will   be
killed. I was practically finished, but luckily   just in
the nick of time I was saved. God has saved me.   So I
will take my things. I don’t want any lāḍḍus or   anything
else!”

He is remembering and smiling. Who? That devotee who was
chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare.
Why is he laughing? No one knows why he is laughing, but
he had gotten some taste in seeing these pastimes.

I have told only one pastime but Kṛṣṇa has performed
lākhas and lākhas of various kinds of pastimes. I am
giving another very little sample.

Once Kṛṣṇa was in Govardhana. He had gone there with His
cowherd friends for cow grazing. Lākhas and lākhas of
friends were there with Him. The cows were peacefully
taking grass, and Kṛṣṇa was playing with His friends. He
was at that time at Dāna Ghātī. Do you know Dāna Ghātī
in Govardhana? It is a narrow passage between two
mountains. So He was playing there, and suddenly He
heard a very sweet voice. He asked, “Who is coming? Oh,
the gopīs are coming. They are going somewhere.” Kṛṣṇa
told His friends, “Today, we will have to collect a tax
from them. Otherwise, we will not let them pass.”

The devotee is chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, and this
whole pastime is coming automatically like a chain of
pictures on the cinema reel. He sees that Śrīmatī
Rādhikā was with Her gopī friends, and She was coming

                           85
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                   5/4/2017

very close to Kṛṣṇa.

Kṛṣṇa asked, “Who are You?”

She would not answer.

Again He asked, “Who are You?”

Śrīmatī Rādhikā spoke very gently, but Kṛṣṇa harshly
repeated, “Who are you?” like some men have a habit of
speaking harshly. She said very gently, “You don’t know
who I am?”

“No, I don’t know who You are.”

“You don’t know?”

“Why are you not answering My question? Instead You are
asking Me a question. You don’t know who I am?”

She was silent.

Again Kṛṣṇa spoke, “Daily I am seeing that My Vṛndāvana
garden is being ruined. You are crushing so many plants.
I didn’t know where all the flowers were going or who
was stealing them, but now I have caught You red-handed,
and I will punish You for trespassing. I am a very
dharmika-puruṣa.” Do you know dharmika-puruṣa? “I am a
religious person. Do You know that I am the owner of
this garden?”

Śrīmatī Rādhikā very sweetly and gently answered, “Have
You planted any of the plants here, ever? And You have
become the master?”

The sādhaka is hearing this exchange. The taste is very
sweet and he becomes very absorbed in chanting Hare
Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa. And in a chain all these images are
coming.

Then Śrīmatī Rādhikā asked, “Have You planted any plant?
Any very little plant?”

Kṛṣṇa was silent.

“Have You given water to any of these plants?”

“No,” Kṛṣṇa answered in an undertone.

“But with lākhas and lākhas of cows You come and destroy
all the plants Yourself. We provide the plants and
water. My sakhī Vṛndā-devī is always planting and
planting and serving Vṛndāvana. So it is named
Vṛndāvana, not Kṛṣṇavana. How can You be the master of
this Vṛndāvana? Your forefathers, Your father, Your
father’s father, grand-father—were they the masters of
this Vṛndāvana? How can You claim this? So You are
ruining Vṛndāvana, not protecting and nursing it or
doing anything productive.”

“Oh, don’t tell Me this,” Kṛṣṇa answered. “I am the
owner of this place. I am a very sādhu-puruṣa, religious
person.”


                              86
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

Śrīmatī Rādhikā said, “What is Your name, please?”

Kṛṣṇa told, “My name is Kṛṣṇa.”

“Oh, Kṛṣṇa is always a very irreligious person. I have
heard that there was a boy named Kṛṣṇa. He killed a lady
when He was only six days old, still an infant. Oh, is
this the sign of being a religious person—to kill
someone’s wife, a lady? I also know of a boy named
Kṛṣṇa, who from His boyhood used to enter others’ houses
and steal curd, milk and butter. Are You that very same
Kṛṣṇa? Oh, He was so religious! He always spoke the
truth! I’ve heard that He had eaten some earth, and
Yaśodā Maiyā asked Him, ‘Have You taken earth?’ ‘No,
mother, I have not taken.’ ‘Then, why are Baladeva and
all others complaining to me?’ Are You that same liar
Kṛṣṇa?

“I once heard of one boy who was not satisfied with his
lies. He was such a religious person that when the girls
of Vṛndāvana were taking bath and had put their clothes
on the bank nearby, that boy Kṛṣṇa took all their cloth
and climbed up on the branches of a high tree. Then He
told the girls, ‘You should come naked and offer praṇāma
to Me.’ Oh, are You this religious person, Kṛṣṇa? Very
religious, very religious! But still that religious
person was not satisfied. Next He played on His flute
and called all the gopīs and told them, ‘You should
dance with Me and join My rāsa.’ Oh, are You that
religious person? And after that He left all the gopīs,
His mother and father also, Nanda-Yaśodā, and went to
search for another father, mother, and 16,000 wives, and
even then He was not satisfied. He wanted more and more
new ladies. Are you that very Kṛṣṇa, so religious?” So
all the gopīs were clapping and Kṛṣṇa became
embarrassed.

The sādhaka is still chanting and smiling a little,
“Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare.” This
sādhaka was Rūpa Gosvāmī. A lame devotee came by and saw
that he was smiling. He thought, “Oh, perhaps he has
seen that I am lame, and that is why he is laughing.”
But actually, why was he laughing? Because he had
witnessed this līlā. He had been chanting for about
three, four hours, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa,
Hare Hare/Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma Hare Hare, and
was quite absorbed.

So anyone can see these pastimes. Those who are in a
higher stage of devotion will automatically witness
these episodes. When chanting they will never think, “I
should go to the shoe shop because my shoes have become
dirty. I need a new pair.” Or, “I will have to purchase
a very beautiful golden chain for my wife and my elder
daughter.” And then while chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, the
neophyte devotee goes marketing and enters a very
opulent gold shop. No, we should not do harināma like
this. Instead we should be absorbed in chanting Hare
Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa. All our senses and especially the
mind must be absorbed in chanting. That is what Rūpa
Gosvāmī is telling, and Swāmījī is repeating the same
thing.

Go on, “A devotee should . . .”

                           87
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017


Devotee reads:

A devotee should always reside in the transcendental
realm of Vraja.



BVNM: Yes. This is being in Vraja. How can a devotee
always be in Vraja? How? Anyone can be in Vraja by body,
pulling rickshaws, cheating people, especially cheating
devotees and making money. If someone is not giving any
money to the brāhmaṇas of Mathurā and Vṛndāvana, they
will tell you, “You will go to hell if you are not
giving us money. Your father also will go to hell, so
you should pay us some dakṣinā. First give us our
dakṣinā, then you can receive blessings.” But this is
not living in Vṛndāvana. A devotee may come from very
far away to be in Vṛndāvana and set up a shop, doing
business, buying and selling shares and all other
things, being so active in the market. And sometimes he
also chants Hare Kṛṣṇa, but his mind is always in the
shop. This is not Vrajavāsa.

If you want to be in Vrajavāsa, be like Rūpa Gosvāmī and
Sanātana Gosvāmī, always chanting and remembering all
these things.



saṅkhyā-pūrvaka-nāma-gāna-natibhiḥ kālāvasānī-kṛtau

nidrāhāra-vihārakādi-vijitau cātyanta-dīnau ca yau

rādhā-kṛṣṇa-guṇa-smṛter madhurimānandena sammohitau

vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau



[I offer my prayers to the Six Gosvāmīs, who passed all
their time in chanting the holy names, singing songs and
offering daṇḍavat-praṇāmas, thereby humbly fulfilling
their vow to complete a fixed number daily. In this way,
they utilized their valuable lives and conquered over
eating, sleeping and other such pleasures. Always seeing
themselves as completely worthless, they became
enchanted in divine rapture by remembering Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa’s sweet qualities.]

Don’t take a large sum of money to deposit in the bank
and from that money plan on maintaining yourself very
easily for the rest of your life. Don’t come to
Vṛndāvana and arrange to have so many luxurious
facilities, attached bathrooms, fan, heater, so many
costly things, table, watch, so many sitting
arrangements, and on and on. Don’t take pride in
accumulating luxurious goods from abroad, from Chicago,
New York, from America, England, London. This is not the
way to do bhajana in Vṛndāvana. Only take ḍora-kaupīna
and, being niṣkiñcana, do bhajana. Otherwise, you cannot
follow these instructions and progress. So this is the
symptom and this is the process for being in Vṛndāvana.
Swāmījī is saying, “He should reside in the

                           88
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                   5/4/2017

transcendental realm of Vṛndāvana,” and then?

Devotee reads:

. . . and always engage in kṛṣṇaṁ smaran janaṁ cāsya

preṣṭham . . .



BVNM: Smaraṇam. What is smaraṇam? If you are chanting
nāma but not remembering the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa in your
heart, then how are you in Vṛndāvana, Vraja? You should
have the mood of Vṛndāvana, actually feeling that, “I am
in Vṛndāvana.” So engage in smaraṇam—it is so important.
Why? Of all the senses, who is the king? The mind. For
example, we walk. From what sense do we walk? By the
feet. No, not the feet. If your mind is not giving
consent, you cannot walk. Rather, you will fall down. If
you are taking something, it seems that you are taking
with your hand. But actually it is not by the hand. It
is by the mind. If the mind is not in accord, then you
will not be able to take anything. If you are going
anywhere, the mind must agree. There is one incident
with our assistant headmaster. He was our history
teacher and a very good philosopher. One time he was on
his way to school, but he went about two miles past the
school, thinking about something else. The boys saw him
and caught up with him, asking, “O master, where you are
going?”

“I am going to school.”

“But you have gone two miles past the school.”

“Oh, certainly I am here at the school!”

So, we are walking and all the senses are following the
mind. If the mind is not there, then we will miss
everything. If we are doing anything with the mouth, the
hands, or any of the other senses, it is actually the
action of the mind, that bhāva, that is dominant. You
may be chanting, but if your mind is not there, then
that chanting goes almost in vain. And if the mind is
there, then automatically the mood is there. If someone
is chanting but he is not having the mood of a
Vrajavāsī, then there is no relation with Kṛṣṇa, because
this relation comes from the proper mood. In what mood
are you chanting this name? And what are you thinking?
Gopī-jana-vallabha. In this way, Kṛṣṇa is my beloved,
Kṛṣṇa is my child, son, or Kṛṣṇa is my friend. There
should be some relation that your guru has given to you.
And if you are not realizing that, you have not really
been initiated by your gurudeva. He has cheated you
because you were not qualified. Or else the guru is also
not qualified, he does not know anything himself, so how
can he help his śiṣya? But to any qualified person the
guru must give this relation; this is the meaning of
dīkṣā. And the guru will help you to give up all bodily
desires. This is initiation. So the activities of the
mind are more powerful and more significant than the
activities of our senses. Do you follow this?

Take the example of a man who sees a naked girl. He does

                           89
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

not directly approach her, but he becomes so much
attracted. His mind will become absorbed in thoughts of
her and he will see her everywhere. But in reality he is
not actually connected with her. That girl will be gone,
but still he will think of her. This happened in the
case of Ajāmila. He saw a low-class prostitute drinking
wine and embracing a man, and he could not control his
mind. And after that you know what happened? He became
involved with a prostitute. He gave up his father,
mother, children, chaste wife, everything. And he became
that rascal Ajāmila. But due to his previous saṁskara he
named his son Nārāyaṇa, and that name saved him. So you
should understand how powerful the mind is and train it,
as Swāmījī has recommended. We will have to train our
mind because it is the root of all evils and all good
activities as well. An uncontrolled mind is our enemy,
but when it is controlled it is our friend. So we should
try to discipline it, to influence it.

Devotee: I have a question. What if you are chanting and
the mind is thinking of service to gurudeva on the
bodily platform? For example, “I have to cook for
Gurudeva. I have to go to the store for Gurudeva.”

BVNM: This is the service of Kṛṣṇa.

Devotee: While you are chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa?

BVNM: Yes, no harm. In the beginning when chanting, you
may think of your service, no harm. But when you will
advance, you will be seeing a chain of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes
automatically coming. You may not want them to come, but
you cannot stop them. For instance the gopīs are
thinking, “I should forget Kṛṣṇa. We want to forget
Kṛṣṇa, this black person, but we cannot.” In a chain of
images Kṛṣṇa is always coming, always coming. “We don’t
want to go to Yamunā, but our feet are not obeying us.
What to do? They are automatically going there. Our ears
are always in curiosity to hear the very sweet sound of
His vaṁśī. Then I want to give a slap to these ears,
they are not obeying. ‘Don’t hear, don’t go to Kṛṣṇa.’
But why are they not obeying us? We want to forget Kṛṣṇa
because He has forgotten us. Why is He not thinking of
us? But we cannot forget Him.”

This is the situation of high devotees. Sometimes they
want to forget Kṛṣṇa, but they cannot. A chain of
pastimes, of beauty and all sweet things of Kṛṣṇa, are
automatically coming. Gradually this will happen. So we
will have to train our mind.

Here Swāmījī is saying that smaraṇa is better. But how
it will come? Only by kīrtana prabhāve smaraṇa haibe—if
your chanting is very good, automatically all these
smaraṇa, remembrances, will come without interruption.
Smaraṇa will come like the current of a river, always
flowing. Then all the senses will be controlled
automatically, very easily. I am telling that it is
easy, but actually it is not so easy. You will have to
give up all worldly desires. First do it, whether you
are in family or in renounced order. No harm in being in
family life. The gopīs are all in family life, Śrīvāsa
Paṇḍita and all the prominent associates of Mahāprabhu,
Mādhavī devī, Sikhī Mahitī, all were like this. No harm.

                           90
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

So don’t be worried or hopeless for this.

Then. “And always engage in kṛṣṇa-smaraṇa.” What?

Devotee reads:

. . . kṛṣṇaṁ smaran janaṁ cāsya preṣṭham, the
remembrance of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His beloved associates.



BVNM: Which associates? Like friends, like father,
mother, Nanda, Yaśodā, like the gopīs, like Lalitā,
Viśākhā, like Rūpa Mañjarī and all others. We should
remember those personalities for whom we have a little
greed. Don’t only remember Kṛṣṇa, otherwise you will be
an impersonalistic jñānī. So always see Kṛṣṇa with His
associates. We will have to take the moods of His
associates, not of Kṛṣṇa. We cannot be like Kṛṣṇa. Who
is Kṛṣṇa’s dearest associate? Who? The gopīs. So if
anyone is so fortunate to have greed to serve Kṛṣṇa like
the gopīs, he should meditate on them always,
remembering their activities and how they serve Kṛṣṇa.
“The remembrance of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His beloved
associates. By following . . .”

Devotee reads:

By following in the footsteps of such associates . . .



BVNM: You will have to follow the steps of whom? Not of
Kṛṣṇa, because he is kartā, taster. What are the gopīs,
friends, and servants?

Devotee: They are tasted by Kṛṣṇa, enjoyed by Kṛṣṇa.

BVNM: Yes. They are serving Kṛṣṇa, so you will have to
serve like them. Only “by following . . .”

Devotee reads:

By following in the footsteps of such associates and by
entering under their eternal guidance, one can acquire
an intense desire to serve the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.



BVNM: How can we get their guidance? “O Rūpa Gosvāmī, O
Sanātana Gosvāmī, be kind to me. I am not qualified to
have a particle of your lotus dust. I know that you are
causelessly merciful. I have not done anything to
receive it, but I am always awaiting your mercy and
nothing else.” Kṛṣṇa will say, “You should do something.
Otherwise, how I can give you My mercy?” We will reply,
“O Kṛṣṇa, don’t cheat me. What has Kālīya done, what has
Aghāsura done, what have Jagāi and Mādhāi done for You?
But yet You have given mercy to them. I am more wretched
than them, so I am qualified for Your mercy. You cannot
find another person more wicked than I. I am the most
wretched in the whole world. I am very fallen, so I am
most qualified to have Your mercy. You are causelessly

                           91
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

merciful. Where will You use this? Where? You will not
find another like me, so I am very qualified for Your
mercy. Besides, I know some tricks. If You are not
merciful to me, then I will defame You. I will broadcast
everywhere that Kṛṣṇa is not merciful. He has forgotten
to bestow His mercy. And then all will know that You are
so niśṭura, cruel-hearted, merciless. Then what will You
do? So You must give mercy to me. You are causelessly
merciful.” We must pray like this, weeping for the
mercy. “O Kṛṣṇa, O devotees, I am waiting only for your
mercy.”

This is their guidance. If you are offering yourself and
fully surrendering, Kṛṣṇa is bound to give mercy, and if
you are not praying like this, then there is no hope.
You will have to do something. If you will go a step
further, He will come lākhas of steps to you, and if you
are going back one step, He will go lākhas of miles far
away from you. So we must pray very deeply. Then?

Devotee reads:

“. . . under their eternal guidance, one can acquire an
intense desire to serve the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.”

Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura has commented as
follows upon this verse:



BVNM: This point is very essential and important. You
should try to underline Swāmījī’s explanation in your
hearts. I am not telling anything new. I know nothing. I
am simply trying to follow what Swāmījī has written
here, and I am telling you my understanding of his
words. No new thing, only I am repeating the words that
Swāmījī has written here. Some say that Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja is giving lectures very far away from Swāmījī’s
meanings and instructions. But I assert very strongly
that I have no separate interest. I am only following
Swāmījī’s words. Here also you will hear that I am
preaching the same thing. What is Swāmījī saying? “In
the transcendental realm of . . .”

Devotee reads:

In the transcendental realm of Vraja (Vraja-dhāma) one
should serve the Supreme Lord, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, with a feeling
similar to that of His associates . . .



BVNM: Which associates? Four kinds of associates, and of
all the associates, the gopīs are the best, having the
top mood. “And one should . . .”

Devotee reads:

. . . and one should place himself under the direct
guidance of a particular associate of Kṛṣṇa and should
follow in his footsteps. This method is applicable both
in the stage of sādhana (spiritual practices executed
while in the stage of bondage) and in the stage of

                           92
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                   5/4/2017

sādhya (God realization), when one is a siddha-puruṣa,
or a spiritually perfect soul.

BVNM: This instruction is given for the stage of
sādhana, bondage, when one is full of anarthas, no harm.
What is the meaning of bondage, full of anarthas? It may
be that even if one has so many worldly desires, no harm
if there is śraddhā in the words of guru, Vaiṣṇava and
Kṛṣṇa. He can follow this instruction. At the time of
death Bharata Mahārāja was remembering a deer, and he
became a deer. If anyone is thinking of Rūpa Gosvāmī and
following his instructions at the time of death, what
will he be? He will be the servant of Rūpa Gosvāmī. If
he is thinking of Rūpa Mañjarī’s service, then surely he
will have a body like Rūpa Mañjarī. Why not? Surely he
will. If it does not happen like that, then Gītā is
false, Bhāgavatam is false, all our literatures are
false! So if we are going to do something with our
lives, why not follow this? It’s easy. Swāmījī is saying
that this instruction applies for the conditioned soul
in the stage of bondage as well as for the siddha mahā-
puruṣa—it is meant for both the sādhaka and siddha. So
we should try to follow it. Swāmījī has never said,
“When we will be liberated, then we will think of Kṛṣṇa
and His associates.” He has never said this anywhere!
Now, so many devotees are sounding an alarm, “Don’t hear
the pastimes of the Tenth Canto, otherwise you will be
ruined. Swāmījī has told us not to hear these things.”
Where has he warned like this? I want to see the places.
He may have said this only for bogus persons who do not
want to serve Kṛṣṇa. But he will not tell this to any
person who has even a little honor for Kṛṣṇa. He cannot
go against any śāstra, and all śāstras declare this.



satataṁ kīrtayantomāṁ yatantaś ca dṛḍha-vratāḥ

(BG 9.14)



[Always chanting My glories, endeavoring with great
determination, bowing down before Me, these great souls
perpetually worship Me with devotion.]

He has written like this.

So, it is not the true fact that we cannot hear the
pastimes of Kṛṣṇa in this world—that we must first be
liberated from all worldly desires and will go to Goloka
Vṛndāvana, and only there we will hear the pastimes of
Kṛṣṇa. This is quite false, quite false, quite false!

I think that we will finish this śloka tomorrow. It is
very important and we will have to finish this. I wanted
to tell the sweet pastimes of Kṛṣṇa, but I have been
engaged only up to the Ninth Canto. Only yesterday I
touched some boyhood pastimes of Kṛṣṇa, but I could not
continue. I wanted to tell at least Kṛṣṇa’s very sweet
boyhood pastimes, Dāmodara-līlā, Govardhana-dhara and
all His other important pastimes, but I can touch only
Dāmodara-līlā here, today or tomorrow.


                            93
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

Gaura premānande!




Chapter Eight: Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Śloka 8


New Braja, 26 May 1997



tan-nāma-rūpa-caritādi-sukīrtanānu

smṛtyoḥ krameṇa rasanā-manasī niyojya

tiṣṭhan vraje tad-anurāgi janānugāmī

kālaṁ nayed akhilam ity upadeśa-sāram



Once there were two Vaiṣṇavas who went to a town. One of
them made his living arrangements under a banyan tree.
Near that tree lived a prostitute in the second story of
a very beautiful building. And the other Vaiṣṇava was
hosted at a temple in the middle of town. The Vaiṣṇava
who was living near the prostitute was thinking in one
mood, and the Vaiṣṇava who was staying in the temple was
thinking in another mood. The Vaiṣṇava in the temple was
thinking, “That Vaiṣṇava is staying with a prostitute.”
And he was observing that so many persons were coming
and going from there. And the Vaiṣṇava living near the
prostitute was thinking, “I am so foolish, so
unfortunate that I cannot live in the temple. My friend
is so fortunate that he is always living with the
Deities, doing kīrtana, and chanting and remembering.”
And the Vaiṣṇava who was living in the temple was always
thinking of that prostitute and criticizing the other
Vaiṣṇava. “I am so lucky that I am in the temple, and he
is such a wretched person that he is there.” In this way
his mind was always absorbed in criticizing.

In the meantime, the time of death came. The Vaiṣṇava
who was in the temple saw that three very dangerous
looking forms were coming towards him. “Who are you?” he
asked.

“We are death. We are Yamadūtas and have come to take
you.”

“Oh, I am not the person you are looking for. He is
there with the prostitute. I am not that person. I am
such a holy person living in the temple.”

“No, no. We know all these things. You are the person
that we have come for.”

“Then where will you take me? To Svarga?”

“No, no. We will take you to the most wretched place and
punish you. You are always criticizing that Vaiṣṇava.
But he is like a sādhu, always thinking of you being so

                           94
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

fortunate, living in the temple and always chanting the
holy name.”

So I advise you to follow Rūpa Gosvāmī’s instruction and
never criticize anyone. If someone is performing bad
activities, he is simply doing harm to himself. If you
will criticize anyone, looking at the bad side of his
character, then all his bad qualities will come to you,
and Yama will come to punish you first. So always try to
see the good qualities of the Vaiṣṇavas, and always
absorb yourself in hearing, chanting and remembering
Kṛṣṇa. Even if people are out of caste and creed, if
they are bad, still you should not criticize them. Try
to always remember their good qualities and to glorify
devotees. This is the way. Rūpa Gosvāmī and Swāmījī are
advising that we should guard against criticizing.

What is the last teaching of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī that
Swāmījī explains? Sevā sādhaka-rūpeṇa siddha-rūpeṇa.

Devotee:

sevā sādhaka-rūpeṇa

siddha-rūpeṇa cātra hi

tad-bhāva-lipsunā kāryā

vraja-lokānusārataḥ

(Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.2.295)



[On the path of ragānugā-bhakti, a sādhaka, being
enchanted by the intense love of Kṛṣṇa’s beloved
Vrajavāsīs, should serve Kṛṣṇa both in the sādhaka-rūpa
(the present physical body) and the siddha-rūpa (the
internally conceived spiritual form which is suitable to
serve Kṛṣṇa according to one’s cherished desire). In the
sādhaka-rūpa he should follow the sādhana executed by
the rāgānuga-bhaktas (our Gosvāmīs and ācāryas), and in
the siddha-rūpa he should emulate the moods of Kṛṣṇa’s
dearmost rāgātmika associates, like Lalitā, Viśakhā,
Rūpa Mañjarī, Rati Mañjarī and so on.]



A devotee in his sādhaka-rūpa, in his devotee form,
should be serving Kṛṣṇa outwardly, but inwardly in his
siddha...

BVNM: No. Can you explain the meaning of sevā sādhaka-
rūpeṇa?

Devotee: That we serve the ācāryas like Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī according to how he was doing sādhana in his
sādhaka-rūpa, and also how Rati Mañjarī was serving
Śrīmatī Rādhikā in her siddha-rūpa. So like this,
following the Gosvāmīs in our sādhaka-rūpa ...

BVNM: Outwardly what?

Devotee: saṅkhyā-pūrvaka-nāma-gāna-natibhiḥ.

                           95
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017


BVNM: Yes, this is sādhaka-rūpeṇa—how Rūpa Gosvāmī has
done sādhana, always remembering and chanting. Saṅkhyā-
pūrvaka-nāma-gāna-natibhiḥ. These are the outward
activities of sādhana. So that sādhana Rūpa Gosvāmī has
done as a sādhaka we should try to follow. And what is
the meaning of siddha-rūpeṇa?

Devotee: That is like Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī in Śrī
Vilāpa-Kusumāñjali, śloka 72—śrī rūpa mañjarī karārcita
pādapadma.

BVNM: Very good. Another śloka?

Devotee:

tambūlārpaṇa-pāda-mardana-payo-dānābhisāradibhir

vṛndāranya-maheśvariṁ priyataya yas toṣayanti priyaḥ

prāṇa-preṣṭha-sakhi-kulād api kilāsaṇkocītā bhūmikāḥ

keli-bhūmiṣu rūpa-mañjarī-mukhās tā dāsikā saṁśraye

(Vraja-vilāsa-stava 38, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī)



[By offering Her betel nuts, massaging Her feet,
bringing Her water, arranging for Her secret meeting
with Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and performing many other services, many
gopī maidservants constantly please Śrī Rādhā, the queen
of Vṛndāvana forest. In their service to the Divine
Couple, they are even less shy than the prāṇa preṣtha
sakhīs, for whom Śrī Rādhā is more dear than life. I
talk shelter of these gopī maidservants, who have
Śrīmatī Rūpa Mañjarī as their leader.]



BVNM: The first śloka describes what Rūpa Gosvāmī was
doing in sādhaka-rūpa. Now in siddha-rūpa he is always
serving Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Tambūlārpaṇa—giving betel nuts,
pāda-mardana— massaging, helping Rādhikā to meet Kṛṣṇa.
In all activities Rūpa Mañjarī is expert.



nikuñja-yūno rati-keli-siddhyai

yā yālibhir yuktir apekṣaṇīyā

tatrāti-dākṣyād ati-vallabhasya

vande guroḥ śrī-caraṇāravindam



This is siddha-sevā of gurudeva. And what is external
sevā?—the second śloka of Guruvāṣṭaka:



mahāprabhoḥ kīrtana-nṛtya-gīta

                           96
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017


vāditra-mādyan-manaso rasena



This is outer—gurudeva as sādhaka-rūpeṇa. And when
thinking of gurudeva in siddha-rūpeṇa—nikuñja-yūno rati-
keli siddhyai.

Sādhaka-rūpeṇa is what Rūpa Gosvāmī was doing as a
gosvāmī, living like a sādhaka. Gurudeva is like a
sādhaka when he is doing śravaṇam, kīrtanam and all his
bhakti practices. And internally, Rūpa Gosvāmī is Rūpa
Mañjarī. Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī is Rati Mañjarī. They
are sad-siddha, and in that form what sevā are they
doing?



śrī rūpa mañjarī karārcita pādapadma

goṣṭendra-nandana bhujārpita mastakāyāḥ

hā modataḥ kanaka-gauri padāravinda

samvāhanāni śanakais tava kiṁ kariṣye

(Vilāpa-Kusumāñjali 72, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī)



“When will that day come when Rūpa Mañjarī will call me
and order me to do this sevā, when Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are
both tired from walking here and there in Vṛndāvana?”
Rādhikā is more soft, so She is more tired. She has put
Her head in Kṛṣṇa’s lap, and Her feet in the lap of Rūpa
Mañjarī. Kṛṣṇa is gently massaging Her head. And
sometimes with His pītāmbara He is wiping Śrīmatī
Rādhikā’s face very affectionately. And Rūpa Mañjarī is
massaging Her feet very gently, softly and sweetly.

Nearby Rati Mañjarī is standing and fanning with a
cāmara. Rūpa Mañjarī calls her with her eyes, “Come on,
come on. I will give you a remnant of mahā-mahā-mahā-
prasādam. You should take these feet and gently massage
them. I am going to bring water, very beautiful water
because They are thirsty.” Saying this, Rūpa Mañjarī
placed those feet in the hands of Rati Mañjarī. “When
will I have a chance to serve like this? When will Rūpa
Mañjarī and Rati Mañjarī give me this remnant of this
mahā-mahā-mahā-prasādam?” This is siddha-rūpeṇa.

So he is saying:



siddha-rūpeṇa cātra hi

tad-bhāva-lipsunā kāryā

vraja-lokānusārataḥ




                           97
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

Lipsunā means that those who have some, even just a
little greed to serve, should pray like this. What is
the meaning of vraja-lokānusārataḥ?

Devotee: Following the footsteps.

BVNM: They should follow like the Vrajavāsīs. How? Can
you explain vraja-lokānusārataḥ?

Devotee: How His dear devotees in Vṛndāvana are serving
Him.

BVNM: Like who?

Devotee: Like Rādhārāṇī and the gopīs. Like Rūpa
Mañjarī, Rati Mañjarī, Labanga-Mañjarī.

BVNM: No, not them. Lokānusārataḥ refers to Rūpa
Gosvāmī, Sanātana Gosvāmī and others as Vrajavāsīs
observing Ekādaśī. There are so many persons who don’t
follow Ekādaśī. But Rūpa Gosvāmī is following. Those who
don’t observe Ekādaśī are saying that they are following
gopas and gopīs. But actually, they are not following
them because we have heard that Nanda Bābā and all the
boys went to Mathurā on Ambikā-karaṇa and honored
Ekādaśī. But some Nimbarka-sampradāyī or other Rādhā-
vallabhīs say that they have no need to follow Ekādaśī.
So vraja-lokānusārataḥ means that Rūpa Gosvāmī, Sanātana
Goswāmī, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, and all our disciplic
ācāryas are Vrajavāsīs. We should follow them. They
never worshiped Rukminī-Ramaṇa. Vraja-lokānusārataḥ
means worshiping exclusively in Vraja, not Dvārakā, not
Purī or any other places. Vraja-lokānusārataḥ means what
Rūpa Gosvāmī has done in Vṛndāvana we will have to
follow. We will not follow Rūpa Mañjarī or Rati Mañjarī
outwardly. In siddha-bhāva we can follow them by mind.
We can cultivate the desire to be like them, but we will
have to follow and practice as sādhakas.

Did Rūpa Gosvāmī and our other Gosvāmīs follow Rukminī-
Ramaṇa or Jagannātha, Balarāma and Subhadrā? They prayed
only for Their mercy, so we also can pray for Their
mercy but we will not worship Them. You cannot be
devoted to two, three, four, five iṣṭadevas. Only Kṛṣṇa
and Śrīmatī Rādhikā should be in your heart. We want to
serve only Them as our iṣṭadeva, but we will honor all.
We will honor Śrī Gopīśvara Mahādeva, no harm. We can
honor Hanumān, no harm. We can honor Balarāma,
Jagannātha and Subhadrā, because they are the same as
Kṛṣṇa in tattva. But we can take only Śrīmatī Rādhikā
and Kṛṣṇa in our hearts. Lalitā, Viśākhā, all the
associates of Kṛṣṇa, Girirāja Govardhana, Yamunā as well
can come in our hearts, no harm. But Yamunā-maiyā cannot
come. She cannot go to Vraja, only Yamunā-sakhī can go.
You should think about these matters very deeply.
Rādhikā-maiyā will not go in Vraja—she is Rukminī. But
who is Śrīmatī Rādhikā? The beloved of Kṛṣṇa. Is She
married to Kṛṣṇa? No need of marriage. Their
relationship is far beyond all these other
relationships.

If there is anything you desire, Girirāja is there to
supply you. Don’t go to Gaṇeśa or to anyone else. We
have no one else, only Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. We should not want

                           98
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

anything from Kṛṣṇa, because He is our beloved. And
Kṛṣṇa is only Nanda-nandana, Yaśodā-nandana, and Rādhā-
kānta. He is not Īśvara, that He can fulfill our
desires. In Vṛndāvana Vraja, Kṛṣṇa is not their Īśvara.
He is not like a god or demigod or the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. What is He? He is only the son
of Yaśodā, Yaśodā-nandana, controlled by Yaśodā. He is
Rādhā-kānta, not Kṛṣṇa. If the gopīs have to ask
something, they will go to Girirāja Govardhana. Nanda
Bābā will worship śālagrāma and request, “My boy should
always be happy. My son should always be happy.”

So, this mood should come. This is vraja-lokānusārataḥ.
We should accept only those practices which Vrajavāsīs
like Rūpa and Sanātana have done for their sādhana-
bhajana. Do not think that you can surpass them in any
way, thinking that you are very generous, more than Rūpa
and Sanātana. So we will have to know what Rūpa Gosvāmī,
Sanātana Gosvāmī, all Six Gosvāmīs, and our all ācāryas
have done and how to follow them. And if you think you
do not need to hear these things from any good Vaiṣṇava
who is superior to you, then you will not get this
thing. “My Gurudeva has written everything in his books,
so we should not read anything else. He has written
everything we need.” Then why did Vyāsa publish so many
books? And if Vyāsa has given everything, then why did
Rūpa Gosvāmī write so many books? And if Rūpa Gosvāmī
has written everything, then why did Jīva Gosvāmī
compile so many more books? Why did Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura write so much? Why did Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura write more than one hundred books? Why? If
everything has been done before, then why did Swāmījī
write so many hundreds of books? And I think that if he
were still here with us, he would have written so many
more books. Kṛṣṇa’s glories cannot be counted. He is
immeasurable, unlimited, transcendental.

So, I think that it is true that Swāmījī has given
everything in his books, but to understand his writings
and his moods, you need some further explanation.
Swāmījī has not written any new books. He has only given
explanations of Caitanya-Caritāmṛta, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,
Gītā—nothing new. These books are general. So when any
of our ācāryas come, being very powerful, they write so
many books, because, even though everything has already
been given, sometimes the truth is covered by ignorance,
by Kali. They come to clear away all these doubts. What
is vartamān, our present day position? So many new, new
questions are coming in the minds of Kali-yuga persons,
so to explain all these truths, our ācāryas have to
publish many more books.

Then vraja-lokānusārataḥ. We will have to cultivate all
our activities in the mood of Vraja. In Vṛndāvana, all
are not necessarily Vrajavāsīs. There are some rickshaw
pullers who keep a knife. In the night they will take
you in their rickshaw, and midway they will attack and
loot you. They are not Vrajavāsīs. The paṇḍas always
wanting money are not Vrajavāsīs. In Vraja, some rare
Vrajavāsīs can be found, but all are not like them. Rūpa
Gosvāmī, Sanātana Goswāmī, Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura and
Śrīla Prabhupāda are the real Vrajavāsīs. Swāmījī has
told, “My home is in Vṛndāvana, my office is in Bombay,
and my practice is in Māyāpura.” His home is Vṛndāvana,

                           99
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

so he is a Vrajavāsī. No? We should try to follow his
internal moods. Oh, some are saying that “Nārāyaṇa
Mahājāra is undermining him, not glorifying him.” What
could be more glorious than what I am saying? I think
that no one can glorify Swāmījī like this.

Then “Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura ...”

Devotee reads:

Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura has commented as
follows upon this verse: “One who has not yet developed
an interest in Kṛṣṇa consciousness should give up all
material motives and train his mind by following the
progressive regulative principles, namely chanting and
remembering Kṛṣṇa and His name, form, quality, pastimes
and so forth.”



BVNM: He has told us to give up all material motives.
Are we doing this? Those who are not doing this are not
actually following Swāmījī. But those who are actually
following all these instructions are the real members of
ISKCON. Otherwise they are not really ISKCON. I say this
with great conviction. We should try to follow and obey
Swāmījī not only by words but with our hearts.

Go on.

Devotee reads:

In this way, after developing a taste for such things,
one should try to live in Vṛndāvana and pass his time
constantly remembering Kṛṣṇa’s name, fame, pastimes and
qualities under the direction and protection of an
expert devotee.



BVNM: This is a very special point—“under the direction
and protection of an expert devotee.” You are living in
Vṛndāvana, chant-ing and remembering. But if you are not
taking association of these expert devotees, then what
do you have? So many zeros without a one. What does this
mean? Zero without one equals nothing. All your
practices are like zero, zero, zero—Kṛṣṇa consciousness
is not there. Then all your efforts—chanting and
remembering—are like zero, yielding no fruit. If you
think, “I am expert. I don’t need the protection of an
expert devotee,” you are not following Rūpa Gosvāmī.
Then?

Devotee reads:

This is the sum and substance of all instruction
regarding the cultivation of devotional service.



BVNM: After that he is explaining something else. He has
told the sum and substance, but still he wants to
explain something more. What is it?


                          100
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

Devotee reads:

In the neophyte stage one should always engage in
hearing kṛṣṇa-kathā. This is called śravaṇa-daśā, the
stage of hearing. By constantly hearing the
transcendental holy name of Kṛṣṇa and hearing of His
transcendental form, qualities and pastimes, one can
attain to the stage of acceptance called varaṇa-daśā.

BVNM: What are these pastimes? We are not qualified to
hear kṛṣṇa-kathā? Someone may ask, “What are the
pastimes? Oh, he has written Kṛṣṇa Book. All the
pastimes are there.” For whom has he written Kṛṣṇa Book?
For whom? For all who are neophyte. Who are neophyte? I
am chanting for about fifty years—am I neophyte or
advanced?

Devotee: Advanced.

BVNM: No. If you have not advanced your Kṛṣṇa
consciousness to the stage of uttama-adhikārī or
madhyama-adhikārī, you are still neophyte. Only talking
about something is not enough. A certain level must be
reached. So Swāmījī is saying this for neophytes and all
others that we should first engage in śravaṇa-daśā,
hearing. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has explained all
these five stages in the last part of Jaiva Dharma.
These explanations are for advanced devotees as well as
for neophytes. Then what is the difference? Any
difference? There is no difference; it is the same
thing. You will have to reconcile all these things. If
you cannot reconcile, then you are bogus. You should try
to be in the association of good devotees, hearing
kṛṣṇa-kathā and all the pastimes that Swāmījī has
written in his books. You should hear what has been
written in Caitanya-Caritāmṛta, what has been explained
in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Tenth Canto, all these things.
What is the qualification? The only qualification is
honor for guru vākya, kṛṣṇa vākya, śāstra vākya. If you
have honor and greed to develop your Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, then you are qualified to hear these
things.

Go on.

Devotee reads:

Then one can attain to the stage of acceptance called
varaṇa-daśā. When one attains this stage . . .



BVNM: What stage? Varaṇa-daśā. Varaṇa means to decide to
practice something properly. After hearing about
something, you will have to make a conscious decision to
embrace and cultivate what you have heard. You become
quite convinced that “I should do this. I should
definitely do this. I should be like this.” To make a
decision and to dedicate yourself to the prescribed
practice is varaṇa-daśā. Gurudeva tells that you should
chant one lākha of harināma and always remember. If you
say, “I heard but I could not follow,” then you have not
come to varaṇa-daśā. But if you are actually doing it,
then you are in varaṇa-daśā. Now Swāmījī will explain.

                          101
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017


Devotee reads:

When one attains this stage, he becomes attached to the
hearing of kṛṣṇa-kathā.



BVNM: Varaṇa-daśā, now he has some attachment to hearing
hari-kathā. He will have some taste for that.

Devotee reads:

When one is able to chant in ecstasy, he attains the
stage of smaraṇā vasthā, the stage of remembering.
Recollection, absorption, meditation, constant
remembrance and trance are the five items of progressive
kṛṣṇa-smaraṇa. At first, remembrance of Kṛṣṇa may be
interrupted at intervals, but later remembrance proceeds
uninterrupted. When remembrance is uninterrupted, it
becomes concentrated and is called meditation. When
meditation expands and becomes constant, it is called
anusmṛti. By uninterrupted and unceasing anusmṛti one
enters the stage of samādhi, or spiritual trance. After
smaraṇa-daśā or samādhi has fully developed, the soul
comes to understand his original constitutional
position.



BVNM: This is svarūpa-siddhi. Then?

Devotee reads:

At that time he can perfectly and clearly understand his
eternal relationship with Kṛṣṇa. That is called
sampatti-daśā, the perfection of life.

BVNM: Has Swāmījī warned that you should not go through
these five stages and that you should not hear all these
things? He has said that bhakti is like the current of a
river. We should try to develop śravaṇa-daśa, varaṇa-
daśā, then smaraṇa-daśā, bhāvāpaṇa-daśā and, finally,
sampatti-daśā. “Oh, we are not qualified for this.”
Certainly you are not qualified. But why are you
presenting opposition to those who are qualified? Have
you reason or power to do this? You have no right to do
this. You simply want to control all others; thus you
say, “You are not qualified to hear this. You are not
qualified to think of anything about the gopīs or about
Vraja. Only what we are speaking is appropriate for
you.” In this way they try to control others. Swāmījī
has not taken this approach. He has given freedom to go
through all these stages. In fact, he is ordering us to
do this. And if you are not following and obeying him,
this is your weakness. So, to truly obey him is to
follow all these things. This is the way established by
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and certified by all our Gosvāmīs, up
to Swāmījī.

Go on.

Devotee reads:


                          102
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

Caitanya-Caritāmṛta advises those who are neophytes to
give up all kinds of motivated desires and simply engage
in the regulative devotional service of the Lord
according to the directions of scripture.



BVNM: In what stage can we give up all our desires? In
the beginning there is no niṣṭhā. When niṣṭhā comes, so
many desires go away. When ruci comes, some desires
still remain but I think that seventy-five percent have
gone. In the stage of āsakti, almost all kinds of
anarthas have been removed, but still there are some. In
the stage of bhāva, all have gone but a slight smell is
there. That smell can bring anyone down again. But when
Kṛṣṇa gives His darśana and prema comes, even that
slight smell totally goes away. Then one can never fall.

Citraketu Mahārāja, Bharata Mahārāja, Jaya and Vijaya
are examples of this. They were not conditioned souls.
They have come only as examples to give us instruction.
They were in the stage of bhāva, still having a scent of
anarthas. That is why, because of that scent, Bharata
Mahārāja treated that deer with so much affection and he
became attached. Then for three births he went down. But
where will we go? Nowhere—we may get lost forever! They
were realized souls and had gone up to bhāva. That is
why they returned after only three births. But we cannot
return so easily. They took the roles that they were
fallen just to set examples for us. Actually they were
not fallen. We should not treat them as fallen, but we
should realize that we can easily fall. So we should be
very careful.

Even up to the stage of bhāva there is some material
attraction. But we should endeavor to progress. We
should not be discouraged that we are not qualified,
thinking, “Oh, we are not even in niṣṭhā.” Don’t think
like this. Try to develop and follow all the orders of
our Rūpa Gosvāmī and all the ācāryas in our line.

Devotee reads:

One should give up all kinds of motivated desires and
simply engage in the regulative devotional service of
the Lord according to the directions of scripture.



BVNM: What is ‘regulative?’ Vaidhī-bhakti. Actually we
have no

natural desire to serve. But we have realized the
sufferings and

sorrows of this world, and we have the śraddhā to know
that by serving Kṛṣṇa we can be liberated from these
things. So we are doing regulative bhakti, following the
regulations and rules.

Devotee reads:

In this way a neophyte can gradually develop attachment
for Kṛṣṇa’s name, fame, form, qualities and so forth.

                          103
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                   5/4/2017

When one has developed such attachment, he can
spontaneously serve the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa even without
following the regulative principles. This stage is
called rāga-bhakti, or devotiona ser-vice in spontaneous
love.



BVNM: What is he saying? “He can spontaneously serve the
lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa even without following the
regulative principles.” Can anyone explain this line?

Devotee: He doesn’t have to hear from śāstra that he
should serve Kṛṣṇa.

BVNM: No, no. He knows that he must serve Him.

Devotee: But he doesn’t have to hear. Spontaneously from
the heart he wants to serve.

BVNM: There are some rules and regulations he can omit.
Only this. He need not follow those regulations which
are not helpful for spontaneous service to Kṛṣṇa.

Devotee reads:

This stage is called rāga bhatki, or devotional service
in spontaneous love.



BVNM: Here Swāmījī has written about this rāgānugā-
bhakti for his devotees. Swāmījī explained rāgānuga-
bhakti before me, and I am only repeating his words. I
am following him, so how can I be considered a culprit?
Is Swāmījī a culprit for writing about rāgānugā-bhakti?
No, he is not culprit—he is guru-tattva. He is like Rūpa
and Sanātana Gosvāmī. He has done something so marvelous
for us, and you should follow all his instructions. We
cannot criticize him. He has done nothing for which he
can be criticized.

I think that one of the greatest grievances against me
is that I am speaking about rāgānugā-bhakti sometimes,
but I have given classes here two times daily for twelve
days. What have I said that they are alleging against
me? Nothing, actually nothing. Go on.

Devotee reads:

At that stage the devotee can follow in the footsteps of
one of the eternal associates of Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana.
This is called rāgānugā-bhakti.

BVNM: What is rāgānugā-bhakti? For whom is he writing?
For everyone? Everyone who wants to serve Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa. And for those who don’t want to serve Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa, it is not applicable. So I think it is Swāmījī’s
desire that all the devotees who have left their homes
to enter the bhakti way should follow this. But if they
are not qualified to follow rāgānugā, then they should
follow regulative bhakti.

Devotee reads:

                          104
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017


Rāgānugā-bhakti, or spontaneous devotional service, can
be executed in the śānta-rasa when one aspires to be
like Kṛṣṇa’s cows or the stick or flute in the hand of
Kṛṣṇa, or the flowers around Kṛṣṇa’s neck.



BVNM: This is correct. But we will have to reconcile
this. In Vraja, Rūpa Gosvāmī says that there is no
śānta-rasa. But if there is no śānta-rasa, then
something is lacking in Vraja. So there is some śānta-
rasa, but it is mixed. The creepers become so ashamed
when Kṛṣṇa picks their flowers—they love Kṛṣṇa like a
beloved and blush, “He touched us.” The trees are like
the friends of Kṛṣṇa. The cows want to serve Kṛṣṇa like
a mother. The calves are like brothers—Kṛṣṇa embraces
them around their necks. In Vṛndāvana the flute is not
in śānta-rasa. The gopīs have so much envy for vaṁśī
because vaṁśī and Kṛṣṇa are always kissing each other.
If you take vaṁśī out of Vraja, then what happens? It
becomes like Dvārakā. There Kṛṣṇa has no flute. He asks,
“Why will I take vaṁśī from Vraja to Dvārakā? I have to
control the gopīs, so I will need it in Vraja. But when
I go to Dvārakā, I will tell My queens, ‘Oh! You should
go out of My palace.’ And by My saying this, they will
be controlled. There is no use for vaṁśī there. There is
no reason that I should fall flat at the feet of the
Dvārakārāṇīs. No reason at all, only My words will be
needed. They will see My eyes, My mouth, like this, and
they will become so afraid that they will be controlled
at once.”

But in Vraja, Kṛṣṇa is working so hard to please the
gopīs, and the gopīs are saying, “Oh, go away from our
kuñja. Do not let Kṛṣṇa come to Śrīmatī Rādhikā.” This
is Vraja. This is rāgātmikā-bhakti! Those who are
following this are called rāgānuga bhaktas. So here I am
saying that no one in Vraja is in śānta-rasa—not the
calves, cows, Kṛṣṇa’s vaṁśī, His flute which is just a
stick. No one! All are like friends, beloved, mother,
father, like this. But Rūpa Gosvāmī has mentioned śānta-
rasa in Vraja in his book, just as Swāmījī has written
here for ordinary persons who have no taste in all these
things. Śānta-rasa is one-sided. A tree in śānta-rasa
cannot serve Kṛṣṇa if He does not go under that tree and
taste its shadow or take some of its fruits. Only then
it is serving. Otherwise it cannot serve, so it is one-
sided. Just by the sight of Kṛṣṇa he is taking something
from Him, although he is actually not qualified to serve
Kṛṣṇa. This is called śānta-rasa. But in Vraja when any
tree sees Kṛṣṇa, oh! his branches become full of
flowers, mañjarīs and fruits—they appear just upon
catching sight of Him! At once they extend their hands
up towards Kṛṣṇa. As trees they will treat Him like a
friend and as creepers like a beloved. And they will
relish so many bhāvas. It seems that Girirāja Mountain
is in śānta-rasa, but we have a different view. So we
will have to reconcile all these things.

In this vision, so much love and affection is there.
When the creepers see Kṛṣṇa, they become so happy that
many new mañjarīs and green leaves sprout. They smile by
showing their flowers and beckon to Kṛṣṇa like this, as

                          105
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

if to say, “Come on. Come on. Come on.” So they are not
in śānta-rasa. If they are in śānta-rasa and feel
pleasure in the mood of love, then what to tell of
sakhya-rasa,

vātsalya-rasa and mādhurya-rasa! So there is a taste. If
anyone has a very little, thin greed to taste all these
things in the service of Kṛṣṇa, he is qualified to enter
into rāgānugā-bhakti. And he cannot be controlled by any
rules and regulations.

Go on.

Devotee reads:

In the dāsya-rasa one follows in the footsteps of
servants like Citraka, Patraka or Raktaka.



BVNM: If we hear of anyone who wants to serve Kṛṣṇa like
dāsa, he will take the names of Citraka, Patraka and
Raktaka. We will ask, “Who are they?” Are they mentioned
in any śāstra? How did he hear about them? Is this
correct or not? If Swāmījī is telling about them, some
curiosity will arise to know who they are and what
service they do for Kṛṣṇa. If you make no inquiry, then
it means that you are not attached to this. If Swāmījī
has written the meaning of rāgānugā-bhakti, you may
inquire, “O Prabhujī, what is rāgānugā? I have not heard
of it before, but here Swāmījī has mentioned it.” Will
you inquire or not? And if you inquire, then some may
accuse you of being sahajiyā! Do not think like this.
Try to understand the writings of Swāmījī. This is the
duty of any good, bona fide disciple. So many questions
will arise.

Then?

Devotee reads:

In the friendly sakhya-rasa one can become a friend like
Baladeva, Śrīdāmā or Sudāmā. In the vātsalya-rasa,
characterized by parental affection ...



BVNM: Why has he not given the name of only one sakhā?
He has named three, four, five. Why? Because Baladeva
Prabhu’s mood is not like Subala’s, not like
Madhumaṅgala’s, not like Ujjvala’s or Śrīdāma’s. There
are five kinds of sakhās, all having different moods, so
Swāmījī has written many names. Otherwise, he would have
mentioned only Baladeva, the elder brother of Kṛṣṇa.
Everything is not manifested in Him—Baladeva Prabhu will
not joke and laugh with Kṛṣṇa the same way the sakhās
do, nor will He climb on Kṛṣṇa’s shoulders. And Baladeva
has some vātsalya mood that the sakhās don’t have. If
you will go deeply, you will be full of love and
affection. If it will touch your hearts, then you will
develop some interest in this.

Devotee reads:


                          106
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

In the vātsalya-rasa, characterized by parental
affection, one can become like Nanda Mahārāja and
Yaśodā.



BVNM: Oh, one thing Swāmījī has perhaps done wrong. Why
did he not take the name of Kṛṣṇa’s actual father and
mother? Who were they? Devakī and Vasudeva. But he has
omitted their names. Oh, I cannot hear this.

I know that Swāmījī Mahārāja has accepted Nanda and
Yaśodā as Kṛṣṇa’s real mother and father, so he is
giving their names. For those who are in very lower
grades he will say, “Oh, actually His father and mother
were Vasudeva and Devakī. Kṛṣṇa was only the foster son
of Nanda and Yaśodā.” Swāmījī makes this point clearly —
he does not admit that Devakī and Vasudeva were Kṛṣṇa’s
real parents. So you will have to accept this point.

Devotee: In mādhurya-rasa, characterized by conjugal
love, one can become like Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī or Her lady
friends such as Lalitā and Her serving maids (mañjarīs)
like Rūpa and Rati.

BVNM: There are three kinds of personalities in
mādhurya-rasa. There are not just the gopīs. And amongst
the gopīs there are so many kinds of moods. But we
cannot have Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s mood. Lalitā’s and
Viśākhā’s mood is very rare also. Jīvas cannot have it—
they can come only as Rādhikā’s serving maids, like Rūpa
and Rati. Oh, again Swāmījī has written the word
mañjarī. This is a very bad thing! If I had printed this
book, I would have taken this name out; I would have
published without the name mañjarī. Who published this
book? Any outside person? Or Swāmījī has done it?
Perhaps nothing is wrong with this name mañjarī. No, no,
don’t hear this mañjarī name, otherwise you will all be
sahajiyā!

Our object is to become this mañjarī. It is the very
highest, very highest! Our mood and our goal is that.
But do not think prematurely that you are a mañjarī,
otherwise you will be finished. We can have greed to
marry a princess, Elizabeth perhaps, no harm. But do not
go to Elizabeth and tell her, “I am going to marry you.”
Otherwise they will cut off your head at once! Keep it
in your heart only. Do not tell anyone. We should keep
our greed for the goal hidden in our hearts like
camphor.

Then?

Devotee reads:

This is the essence of all instruction in the matter of
devotional service.



BVNM: Gaura premānande haribol! Rūpa Gosvāmī ki jaya!
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī ki jaya! All Six Gosvāmīs ki
jaya! Our guru-paramaparā ki jaya! Gaura premānande!


                          107
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017




Chapter Nine: Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Ślokas 8-9


New Braja, 29 May 1997

Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī is saying, “I want to serve the
dust of the lotus feet of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. I cannot
serve Rūpa Gosvāmī personally. I am not so qualified. So
I want to serve the lotus foot-dust only—and only one
particle—birth after birth, janmani, janmani, for so
many births. And if I become liberated, then in Vraja
also I want to serve the lotus dust of Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī’s lotus feet. Why? These dusts are so loving, so
sweet. So, in this world and after liberation, or after
going to Vraja, I want to serve his lotus foot-dust.”

We have explained the sum and substance of the teachings
of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī as presented in The Nectar of
Instruction. What is the meaning of sukīrtanānu?
Sukīrtanānu means?

Devotee: The kīrtana of the holy names which is done
especially under the guidance of rasika-bhakta
Vrajavāsīs, so that that holy name can take proper
effect under their appropriate guidance.

BVNM: Here, anu comes first. Anu means under the
guidance of, hearing from gurudeva—śikṣā-guru and
gurudeva. If one has not heard from his gurudeva or
śikṣā-gurudeva, then he cannot do sukīrtanānu. Anu
implies nirantar, always, spontaneously, not breaking,
and that person is uttama-adhikārī.

So, by first hearing from gurudeva or śikṣā-gurudeva in
the line of Rūpa Gosvāmī and Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī,
then it is sukīrtanānu. Here, one expression is also
used—tad-anurāgi janānugāmī. What does he mean by tad-
anurāgi?

Devotee: Someone who has anurāga, attachment for Kṛṣṇa.

BVNM: Can you give any example?

Devotee: Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, Rūpa Gosvāmī.

BVNM: Yes. Is he telling correctly who are tad-anurāgi?

Devotee: Basically, Rūpa Gosvāmī, Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī.

BVNM: You should ponder what I am asking and then
answer. I am asking about tad-anurāgi. Those who have
natural rāga, affection, in their ātmā—who are they?
Śrīdāma, Subala, Madhumaṅgala. And more than them? Nanda
Bābā. And more than Nanda Bābā? Yaśodā Maiyā. And more
than them? Lalitā, Viśākhā and all the gopīs. So they
are anurāgi jana. We cannot be like this. In this world,
Rūpa Gosvāmī, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī are tad-anurāgi
janānugāmī. Anurāgi jana? Here it means the gopīs. And
janānugāmī? They are Rūpa, Raghunātha, all our Gosvāmīs

                          108
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

and those who are associates of Mahāprabhu. They are
playing the role of a ragānuga bhakta here. Rāgi are
Vrajabāsī jana. With their spontaneous love they are
always serving Kṛṣṇa, their prāṇa. Prāṇa means life and
soul. We have heard anurāgi-jana. And anugāmī? We cannot
have the association of tad-anurāgi. We want to follow
them. So we must associate with tad-anurāgi-janānugāmī,
such as Rūpa Gosvāmī, Sanātana Gosvāmī and Raghunātha
dāsa Gosvāmī, especially Rūpa-Raghunātha:

śrī-rūpa-raghunātha-pade yāra āśa

caitanya-caritāmṛta kahe kṛṣṇadāsa

rūpa-raghunātha-pade haibe ākuti

kabe hāma bujhaba se yugala-pīriti



When will I know all these things? When we will have
real love and affection for Rūpa and Raghunātha, then we
will be able to understand something.

So, devotees should live in Vṛndāvana under the guidance
of tad-anurāgi janānugāmī jana, like Rūpa Gosvāmī and
others in his line, always chanting and remembering,
hearing from their gurudeva or śikṣā-guru. They should
be chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, and sometimes:



śrī kṛṣṇa gopāla hare mukunda,

govinda he nanda kiśora kṛṣṇa

hā śrī yaśodā tanaya-prasīda,

hā śrī yaśodā tanaya-prasīda

śrī ballavī-jīvana rādhikeśa

(Bṛhad Bhāg. 2.4)



rādhā ramaṇa hari govinda jaya jaya

rādhā ramaṇa hari govinda jaya jaya



he rādhe vraja-devīke ca lalite he nanda-sūno kutaḥ

śrī-govardhana-kalpa-pādapa-tale kālindī-vanye kutaḥ

ghoṣantāv iti sarvato vraja-pure khedair mahā-vihvalau

vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī jīva-gopālakau



Like this, always doing kīrtana, but with minds where?
Manasī niyojya (mind always engaged) in Vraja, playing

                          109
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

with tad-anurāgi jana. Sometimes Kṛṣṇa is controlled by
His mother, sometimes He is joyfully playing with the
cowherd boys. Sometimes He is dancing with peacocks very
sweetly, and sometimes playing with the gopīs. I have
told of some of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. Where will the mind
go? The mind will also be absorbed in those līlās. So
practice like this for twenty-four hours daily, quite
absorbed, with tears coming. This is the sum and
substance of The Nectar of Instruction of Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī.

Next, he is coming to a topic even more important than
this. What is the symptom of an intelligent man? Those
who have accepted Rādhā-kuṇḍa as non-different from
Śrīmatī Rādhikā Herself can be considered intelligent.
We should understand what is the mood of Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja in his explanation of this
śloka. He wants everyone to advance and know what Rādhā-
kuṇḍa is. The symptom of an intelligent devotee is to
serve Rādhā-kuṇḍa as if it is Śrīmatī Rādhikā Herself.
Here he has not given any explanation for Kṛṣṇa-kuṇḍa.
Why not? Because he is somewhat inclined towards Śrīmatī
Rādhikā. And kṛṣṇa-prema and Kṛṣṇa’s service are
included in Rādhā-kuṇḍa, the embodiment of Rādhā.
Everything is in Śrīmatī Rādhikā—Kṛṣṇa as well. There
may be some occasion when Kṛṣṇa is not with Rādhikā. In
Mathurā, He was not with Rādhikā. In the battle of
Kurukṣetra, Rādhā was not with Kṛṣṇa. In Dvārakā, He is
Rukminī-Ramaṇa, Satyabhāmā’s friend, not Śrīmatī
Rādhikā’s, for all external appearances. Inwardly it may
be that She is there in His heart. But Śrīmatī Rādhikā
cannot be alone—She is always with Kṛṣṇa. Even if Kṛṣṇa
has gone to Dvārakā or Mathurā, still He remains with
Śrīmatī Rādhikā. So Rūpa Gosvāmī is telling who Śrīmatī
Rādhikā is, how we should behave with Her‚ and who is
the most intelligent devotee.



vaikuṇṭhāj janito varā madhu-purī tatrāpi rāsotsavād

vṛndāraṇyam udāra-pāṇi-ramaṇāt tatrāpi govardhanaḥ

rādhā-kuṇḍam ihāpi gokula-pateḥ premāmṛtāplāvanāt

kuryād asya virājato giri-taṭe sevāṁ vivekī na kaḥ



We should read how Swāmījī is translating this śloka. If
there is anything you do not understand, you can ask.

Devotee reads:

Nectar of Instruction, Text 9

The holy place known as Mathurā is spiritually superior
to Vaikuṇṭha, the transcendental world, because the Lord
appeared there. Superior to Mathurā-Purī is the
transcendental forest of Vṛndāvana because of Kṛṣṇa’s
rāsa-līlā pastimes. And superior to the forest of
Vṛndāvana is Govardhana Hill, for it was raised by the
divine hand of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and was the site of His various
loving pastimes. And, above all, the superexcellent Śrī

                          110
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

Rādhā-kuṇḍa stands supreme, for it is overflooded with
the ambrosial necta-rean prema of the Lord of Gokula,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Where, then, is that intelligent person who
is unwilling to serve this divine Rādhā-kuṇḍa, which is
situated at the foot of Govardhana Hill?



BVNM: Then who are the persons who are not willing to
serve this Rādhā-kuṇḍa and how would you describe them?
Those who are wishing to serve Rādhā-kuṇḍa are
intelligent. And those who don’t want to serve Her, what
will they be called?

Devotees: Fools.

BVNM: Swāmījī is not saying this word directly, but he
is certainly implying that those who are not willing to
serve Rādhā-kuṇḍa are ... Oh, I will not say the word
‘fools’, but you can say it. But actually this is the
point. So those of us who are doing vaidhī-bhakti,
regulative bhakti, are not so wise, not so intelligent.
But those who are accepting the process given in the
last śloka are intelligent. And among them, those who
are most intelligent want to serve Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa
conjugal on the bank of Rādhā-kuṇḍa. They want to be
there, and if not by body, at least by mind, by heart.
They are most intelligent. Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, Rūpa
Gosvāmī, Jīva Gosvāmī, Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, Raghunātha
Bhaṭṭa, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī are always there. All
our Gosvāmīs have permanent seats Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Have you
gone there? If you have gone there with any high-class
devotee, you may have seen their places—everything is
there. The Pāñca (five) Pāṇḍavas and Draupadī are also
there, doing arādhanā of the gopīs. So they are all
intelligent. And those who are actually superior, having
their transcendental bodies, are always there in the
guidance of Rūpa and Rati Mañjarī and all the others,
serving Śrīmatī Rādhikā. And sometimes they are serving
Yugala Kiśora. They are most, most intelligent,
supremely intelligent. We want to follow them. Rūpa
Gosvāmī also wants to follow them, as well as Raghunātha
dāsa Gosvāmī, all, and Swāmījī also.

I have heard from so many of Swāmījī’s devotees that in
his last days, two or three days before he departed, he
requested them, “Take me to Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Just now today,
I want to go to Rādhā-kuṇḍa in a bullock cart. I do not
want to go by car. Bring a bullock cart, and in that I
will go, like Nanda, Yaśodā, like all Vrajavāsī gopīs.”
This was his desire, and I know this fact. But he was
controlled. His disciples would not arrange for him to
go. But actually no one can control him, and I know he
went with his soul, in his transcendental body. He is
always there among Rūpa, Sanātana, Raghunātha, as tad-
anurāgi-janānugāmī. Like janānugāmī (follower of the
residents of Vraja) he is there. So this was his last
wish.

This is actually the glory of Swāmījī. If anyone does
not understand Swāmījī’s real glory, he is also a fool,
because he is not actually touching Swāmījī’s greatness.
And they cannot properly glorify him. They do not
understand that Swāmījī was endowed with such high-class

                          111
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                    5/4/2017

qualities, especially having the highest love and
affection for Śrīmatī Rādhikā. But instead they will see
an uttama-bhakta and say, “Oh, he’s a sahajiyā. He’s a
nonsense.” They want to bring all high-class devotees,
uttama-bhāgavatas, down to the kaniṣṭha-adhikārī level,
because they have no real idea.

I know that Swāmījī wanted to serve there forever,
because he had realized this poem of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī.
Now he is giving his mood in the purport. We can hear.

Devotee reads:

The spiritual world is three-fourths of the total
creation of the Supreme Personality of Godhead.

BVNM: In Gītā it has been told. What has been told? Do
you remember this śloka? That this world is only one-
fourth of the spiritual world. Where is the śloka in
Gītā? Ekāṁśena sthito jagat (Gītā 10.42).

This world is not so big. This is only one world. There
are lākhas and lākhas of worlds coming from the
Karaṇovārī of Mahā-Viṣṇu, Kāraṇodakśāyī Viṣṇu, lākhas
and lākhas of universes are floating on the Karaṇovārī.
All the universes taken as a whole are only one-fourth.
It has been told one-fourth, but I think that lākhas and
lākhas are a little reflection of the whole creation.
So, “it is the most ...”

Devotee reads:

And it is the most exalted region. The spiritual world
is naturally superior to the material world; however,
Mathurā ...



BVNM: We fear that if we are liberated, doing bhajana,
then we will be lost. Actually, Indra, by thinking like
this, once committed some offense at the lotus feet of
his Gurudeva, Bṛhaspati. Immediately he was removed to
this world as a hog. In this form he was tasting worldly
desires and playing with so many she-hog wives. And he
had so many children, sons and daughters! Gradually they
were growing up, so many, many, many of them, and Indra
was quite happy. There was no problem for taking food,
or acquiring a very good palatial building to live in,
or getting any luxurious possessions. He was so happy
living as a pig.

One day Brahmā came on his way to Puṣkara. He saw that
pig and recognized him. “Oh, this hog is not a hog.
Actually it is Indra in this hog body because he
insulted his Gurudeva.” Brahmā became very merciful to
him and told him, “You are not a hog. These are not your
wives and children. You should come with me to your
original place, heaven.”

He was filled with wonder. “I cannot go there.”

“Why?”

“Oh, leaving my most beautiful family, sons, daughters

                          112
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                   5/4/2017

and my wives? I have so many, not only one but more than
sixty thousand, so many! How can I leave them? I cannot
go there. I am so happy here. You should go. I will not
go.”

Brahmā was astonished. “You are not going? But there
everything is so wonderful. Here is only some nonsense.
Immersed in nonsense, you are here with the pigs, taking
stool from here and there and sleeping in the stinking,
rotting drains. So you should come with me.”

Indra asked, “May I go with my children and my wives?
And will we have some new, new fresh stools to eat
there?”

“No, no. You will have nectar there, nectar!”

“I do not want nectar, I want these things.”

“Acchā. I will give you.” And thus saying, he sprinkled
some water from his kamaṇḍalu and spoke, “Maṅgalam
bhavatū, maṅgalam bhavatū.”

As Brahmā began to take him, Indra began to jump and
attack Brahmā. “I will never go.” But mercifully Brahmā
sprinkled some water on him. Indra could then see the
truth. “Oh really, how bad this place is. In heaven
there are so many apsarās. My wife is waiting for me and
all are worried for me. There are very beautiful apsarās
like Menakā, Urvasī and all others. Nectar is there. I
can play there in the beautiful Nandana-kānana which is
filled with parijata puṣpa, and so many other wonderful
things. Oh, I must go there.” Then he prayed to Brahmā,
who again sprinkled some water. He became pure Indra,
giving up his inauspicious body, and at once he went to
heaven.

So our condition is like that. We   are thinking that we
are most happy with “my very dear   wife. If she is not so
beautiful, then I can manage some   new arrangement. I can
divorce and take a new wife. Then   after some time when
she becomes old, then again I can   change.” And the wives
are also thinking, “I will change   my husband one, two,
three times if I like!”

But there are so many problems in human life, more than
for pigs and hogs. They can sleep but we cannot. We are
so much involved in problems. The biggest one is that
now we are moving into old age. Old age is coming on,
and now white hairs are appearing here and there. If
there are one or two, I will pluck them out. But if they
are scattered here and there, everywhere, then what to
do? If one tooth falls out, no harm, I will replace it
with a golden tooth. But all? And at last we will die,
giving up everything here. So we should be very sober.

We think that we are quite okay, that we will have a
beautiful husband or wife, but there exists something
much greater than this happiness. Especially in Goloka
Vṛndāvana, only Kṛṣṇa is beloved. We must pray that we
can serve Him. We cannot imagine what

nectar is there. If a man realizes this, then he will
become very detached. He will take the renounced order

                          113
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

and he won’t even see all these things, whether she is
beautiful, he is beautiful, that is beautiful, or
anything in this world is beautiful. Like Śukadeva
Gosvāmī, like Caitanya Mahāprabhu, like Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī. One day we will have to be like Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī. One day we w ill have to be like the prostitute
who became a very high-class devotee. Giving all her
possessions to others, she became niṣkiñcana, akiñcana,
only serving Tulasī and keeping no desires at all. We
will have to be like her. Otherwise we cannot serve
Rādhā-kuṇḍa.

(Reading from NoI): “So Mathurā and the adjoining area,
however, although appearing in the material world, are
considered superior to this spiritual world because the
Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself appeared at
Mathurā,” not any other place. In Dvārakā, there was no
birth of Kṛṣṇa. Father and mother are there, but no
human birth. He took birth in Mathurā. Specifically
where in Mathurā? In Gokula, in Vṛndāvana, the site of
his real birth. His birth in jail in Mathurā was a
manifestation of Vāsudeva and has been told only for
those who love Dvārakā or Mathurā. It has been told for
Parīkṣit. But after associating with Śukadeva Gosvāmī
and becoming more advanced, then Parīkṣit said that
Kṛṣṇa is the son of Nanda, Vrajendra-nandana
Śyāmasundara.

In Dvārakā there are so many good pastimes of Kṛṣṇa.
Once Kṛṣṇa was in the rāja palace of Rukmiṇī. At that
time Rukmiṇī was the most wonderful, beautiful woman in
the whole world. She was like a kiśorī and possessed all
transcendental qualities. One day Kṛṣṇa was sitting on
the bed of Rukmiṇī-devī. She took a cāmara from the
hands of her maidservants and in a very loving mood,
very sweetly and gently, was fanning Kṛṣṇa.

That day, Kṛṣṇa was so grave, very gambhīra. He told
Rukmiṇī, “O Rukmiṇī-devī,” (but not addressing her like
His beloved), “I know that you are the most beautiful
queen in the whole world. All the handsome young kings
and their sons want

to marry you. You have so many qualities and are so
beautiful. But I am black and ugly, not beautiful like
you. You are the daughter of a very big king, Bhīṣmaka.
I am not a king’s son. I am not a rāja-kumara, a prince.
I am only a common person. My father is not so
distinguished. Kaṁsa put My father and mother in jail.
So I am a very general, ordinary person. I have no
beauty nor any qualities like you. Only those persons
who are so poor and have fallen in misery and suffering
call on Me. I am the prince and friend of unfortunate
persons who are always in distress and are especially
poor, akiñcana, niṣkiñcana. Only those persons like Me.
I know that so many rich kings, even Śiśupāla, wanted to
marry you. You say that they only want to marry you in
order to defeat and insult Me, not because they really
want to marry you. But I know better, so I am telling
you that you should come with Me, sit on My chariot, and
I will take you to that very king whom you really wish
to marry.”

Hearing this, Rukmiṇī at once fell down flat on the

                          114
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

earth. One could not tell whether her life and soul was
there or not. Kṛṣṇa became worried. He took some cotton
and put it under her nose and saw that she was barely
alive. He began to tell Rukmiṇī-devī, “My beloved
Rukmiṇī, I did not really mean all those things I was
telling you. I was only joking. Family life is the only
happiness in this world. But sometimes the husband wants
to make his wife angry to test her love. So he will
purposely provoke her to taste her anger. When the
husband finally comes home in the evening, tired after
working the whole day, he forgets his day’s labor and
his fatigue if the wife speaks sweetly. I was enjoying
all these things. But I also wanted to enjoy your
anger.” (If a husband cannot do this, then his family
life is not so happy.) “I wanted to see how beautiful
you are when you are angry. Like this, I wanted to taste
your mood. You are My beloved, without you I cannot
live.

“I am accustomed from boyhood to act like this. I wanted
to tell you that in Vraja sometimes I used these words
with the gopīs. But they were more expert than Me. In
angry voices they used to tell Me, ‘Get out from our
kuñjas. O Rūpa Mañjarī, tell this black one not to enter
My kuñja.’ And She told two gopīs, Rūpa and Rati
Mañjarīs, to stand at the gate of that kuñja, ‘He should
never come in any way. He knows so many tricks. He may
come disguised as a woman making very beautiful flower
mālās, like Mohinī, and sometimes in other disguises.
Kṛṣṇa’s friend Subala can make Him look like a woman, a
kiśorī, so always be careful that this rogue should not
come anytime.’

“I come with folded hands, telling the gopīs, ‘I want to
see Śrīmatī Rādhikā,’ and they reply, ‘You cannot come.
Go away. Go back to where You came from. Don’t come
here.’ I was accustomed to this type of behavior and
that is why I joked with you in that way, expecting to
enjoy your response. But I think that you cannot joke
like this. You are very soft hearted.”

Hearing this, gradually her life came back again and she
began to play so many pastimes with Kṛṣṇa. In Dvārakā
there are so many intimate līlās, but yet Kṛṣṇa has no
birth there. And especially in Mathurā, there is
Vṛndāvana, Gokula.

Raghunātha dāsa also glorifies Rādhā-kuṇḍa:



vaikuṇṭhād api sodarātmaja-vṛtā dvārāvatī sā priyā

yatra śrī-śata-nindi-paṭṭa-mahiṣī-vṛndaiḥ prabhuḥ
khelati

prema-kṣetram asau tato ‘pi mathurā preṣṭhā harer
janmato

yatra śrī-vraja eva rājatitarāṁ eva nityaṁ bhaje

(Vraja-vilāsa-stava 5, Raghunātha dāsa)



                          115
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017


Mathurā is superior because in it is Vṛndāvana. In
Mathurā-maṇḍala, Vraja-maṇḍala is situated. Mathurā is
so superior, just as in this universe this planet,
Pṛthivī-devī, is superior because of the presence of
Bhārata-bhumī. So, in Mathurā there is Vṛndāvana, and
Vṛndāvana is more exalted because of the presence of
Govardhana. And Govardhana is blessed because of the
presence of Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa. The progression
takes place gradually—first the body, then the mind,
man, buddhi, ahankāra, citta (mind, intelligence, false
ego, heart), and after that, the soul. Kṛṣṇa is there in
the soul, and in Kṛṣṇa Śrīmatī Rādhikā is there. That is
why this human body is so supreme, because we can go to
the highest destination. Rādhā-kuṇḍa is the life and
soul of all these things. And this is what Swāmījī is
telling us.

Devotee reads:

The interior forests of Vṛndāvana are considered
superior to Mathurā because of the presence of the
twelve forests (dvādaśa-vana).



BVNM: Yes, quite superior. Because the twelve forests
are in Mathurā-maṇḍala, and among the twelve forests is
Vṛndāvana. In an area of sixteen square miles, krośas of
space, Govardhana, Nandagāoṇ, Varsānā, all are included
there.

Devotee reads:

... the twelve forests (dvādaśa-vana), such as Tālavana,
Madhuvana and Bahulāvana, which are famous for the
various pastimes of the Lord. Thus the interior
Vṛndāvana forest is considered superior to Mathurā, but
superior to these forests is the divine Govardhana Hill
because Kṛṣṇa lifted Govardhana Hill like an umbrella
...



BVNM: Swāmījī is telling something hidden here. He is
not speaking openly, because we are not qualified. Not
only is he telling the reason that Kṛṣṇa lifted
Govardhana on His hand, but he is also describing the
lushness of Govardhana. There are so many groves, so
many ponds, so many fountains and caves where the gopas
play with Kṛṣṇa, and places where they go for
cowherding. Govardhana is serving by all his senses, all
his means, giving grasses, giving sweet fruits, very
sweet water, providing a throne for Yugala Kiśora, and
making groves where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa can play. And among
all these places are Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa, which
are like Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa Themselves. So Govardhana is so
superior to Vṛndāvana. Vṛndāvana is only renowned for
what thing? Rāsa-līlā took place in the shade of Vaṁśī-
vaṭa. But that rāsa-līlā was not prominent because it
was pañcayatī-rāsa. Pañcayatī-rāsa means all kinds of
gopīs were there, even the gopīs who were at first
sādhana-siddha. This includes the sixteen-thousand sages
from Daṇḍa-karaṇya, from Janaka-purī, from Ayodhya, and

                          116
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

so many other kinds of gopīs were there. Even those who
were not associates of Rādhikā, who were not Her bodily
manifestations, were there, as were svapakṣā, vipakṣā,
suhṛta, and taṭasthā gopīs. So many kinds of gopīs. Also
among those gopīs were some who were qualified but had
been checked by their husbands. They gave up their
bodies, taking Kṛṣṇa by their eyes and keeping Him in
their hearts. They embraced Him in such a way that all
inauspiciousness was dispelled. These gopīs were also
there. They have all participated in that rāsa.

But at Govardhana or Rādhā-kuṇḍa, special gopīs, only
the party of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, were there, not anyone
else. So this rāsa is superior to the one in Vṛndāvana.
Swāmījī is telling about Kṛṣṇa lifting Govardhana like
an umbrella here, but it is ...

Devotee reads:

It is also at Govardhana Hill that Kṛṣṇa tends the cows
with His cowherd friends, and there also He had His
rendezvous with His most beloved Śrī Rādhā and engaged
in loving pastimes with Her. Rādhā-kuṇḍa, at the foot of
Govardhana, is superior to all because it is there that
love of Kṛṣṇa overflows. Advanced devotees prefer to
reside at Rādhā-kuṇḍa ...



BVNM: Advanced devotees. What does he mean by advanced
devotees? Those who are serving their gurudeva by
hearing, who have come into the madhyama-adhikāra stage
and are always remembering, chanting and doing all these
activities. We must become advanced devotees. We should
not be practicing for a long, long time, fifteen,
twenty-five, fifty years, one hundred years, lākhas of
years, and still be kaniṣṭha-adhikārīs. Swāmījī does not
want us to stagnate like this. He has previously told
that we have not come here to remain kaniṣṭha-adhikārīs.
We must try to advance. So, the “advanced devotee
prefers to reside at Rādhā-kuṇḍa because this place is
the site of many memories of eternal loving affairs
between Kṛṣṇa and Rādhārāṇī (rati-vilāsa).”

We can continue tomorrow, because one hour has gone. It
seems that we have spoken for only five minutes. I think
that it will take so much time to explain all these good
things that Swāmījī is telling us. I want to read his
explanations, and also I want you to taste all these
things. By knowing all these things you can try to
advance. Not that you should be only kaniṣṭha-adhikārī.
Our way to Kṛṣṇa should not be blocked by surrendering
to the idea that you are not, and you will not at any
time be qualified to read this. “Don’t read Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, Tenth Canto.” Then why has Vyāsa written all
these things? Why? In the council of Parīkṣit Mahārāja,
when he was hearing Bhāgavatam, all kinds of karmīs,
jñānīs, yogīs and tapasvīs were there, and by the words
of Śukadeva Gosvāmī all were purified. Then why will we
not be purified if we have come in the line of Caitanya
Mahāprabhu and Swāmījī? Why not? We are also qualified
to have this thing. We will be qualified. So we should
try to understand the deep meanings of Swāmījī, the deep
meanings of Rūpa Gosvāmī, Sanātana Gosvāmī and Caitanya

                          117
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

Mahāprabhu. I pray to Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Rūpa Gosvāmī,
and all our disciplic ācāryas to be merciful to you all
and also to me. They should sprinkle their mercy on all
of us.

Gaura premānande!




Chapter Ten: Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Ślokas 9-10


San Francisco, 30 May 1997

vaikuṇṭhāj janito varā madhu-purī tatrāpi rāsotsavād

vṛndāraṇyam udāra-pāṇi-ramaṇāt tatrāpi govardhanaḥ

rādhā-kuṇḍam ihāpi gokula-pateḥ premāmṛtāplāvanāt

kuryād asya virājato giri-taṭe sevāṁ vivekī na kaḥ

We have already read the translation and half of the
purport. Now let us read the rest of the purport, which
has been taken from Caitanya-Caritāmṛta.

Devotee reads:

In Caitanya-Caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā), it is stated that
when Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu first visited the area of
Vraja-bhūmi, He could not at first find the location of
Rādhā-kuṇḍa. This means that Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu was
actually searching for the exact location of Rādhā-
kuṇḍa. Finally He found

the holy spot, and there was a small pond there. He took
His bath in that small pond and told His devotees that
the actual Rādhā-kuṇḍa was situated there. Later the
pond was excavated by Lord Caitanya’s devotees, headed
first by the Six Gosvāmīs, such as Rūpa and Raghunātha
dāsa. Presently there is a large lake known as Rādhā-
kuṇḍa there. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has given much stress to
Rādhā-kuṇḍa because of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s desire
to find it. Who, then, would give up Rādhā-kuṇḍa and try
to reside elsewhere? No person with transcendental
intelligence would do so. The importance of Rādhā-kuṇḍa,
however, cannot be realized by other Vaiṣṇava
sampradāyas, nor can persons uninterested in the
devotional service of Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu
understand the spiritual importance and divine nature of
Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Thus Rādhā-kuṇḍa is mainly worshiped by the
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, the followers of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa
Caitanya Mahāprabhu.



BVNM: Reading all these explanations, one may question
why Caitanya Mahāprabhu glorified this Rādhā-kuṇḍa so
much. What is Rādhā-kuṇḍa? It is merely a lake, not so
big, and very small in comparison with the ocean or any
great lake like the Caspian Sea. In India, there are
many lakes that are thousands of times bigger, like

                             118
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

Cilka Hrada (Lake) and others. Why is Caitanya
Mahāprabhu glorifying Rādhā-kuṇḍa? Just by asking, some
may accuse you of being a sahajiyā. But if someone wants
to know about the glories of Rādhā-kuṇḍa and reads this
description from Caitanya-Caritāmṛta, automatically this
question will arise.

He will see that Rādhā-kuṇḍa is closely connected to
Śrīmatī Rādhikā. What is the glory of Śrīmatī Rādhikā?
This understanding will come naturally if someone has a
desire to know all these things. Swāmījī is telling that
Rādhā-kuṇḍa is worshiped almost exclusively by the
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, the followers of Caitanya Mahāprabhu.
Other sampradāyas, like Nimbārka, Rāmānuja and Madhva,
have no connection with Rādhā-kuṇḍa. They don’t know the
secret things about this special lake. But those in the
family of Caitanya Mahāprabhu have deep honor and regard
for Rādhā-kuṇḍa. They esteem Rādhā-kuṇḍa more than
Varsānā, Rāval (the birthplace of Śrīmatī Rādhikā),
Nandagāon, Govardhana, Vṛndāvana or anywhere else. Why?
What is there? Is there any beautiful mountain, river or
well decorated forest? We see nothing extraordinary
there. Curiosity will naturally arise to know why. Its
uniqueness is that this kuṇḍa is directly Śrīmatī
Rādhikā Herself. Śyāma-kuṇḍa is the embodiment of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, that is, Vrajendra-
nandana, Rādhā-kanta, Kṛṣṇa Himself. There is no
difference at all. Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa meet together in
Vṛndāvana and also at Govardhana. They perform rāsa in
both of those places also, so what is so special about
Rādhā-kuṇḍa? It is here that Kṛṣṇa is always controlled
by Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and here that Śrīmatī Rādhikā is
called svādīna-bhartṛkā. If we don’t know about these
things, how can we properly glorify Rādhā-kuṇḍa? It is
very rare to be able to appreciate these glorifications.
So if you are not even hearing these things, you will
not be qualified in lākhas and lākhas of births.

If someone has not yet become very pure or developed so
much love and affection that he is qualified to hear,
then what should he do? Should he be forever hopeless
for this? No, do not ever be hopeless. Someone may still
have many anarthas but if he has some interest and greed
to hear this, then he is considered qualified. That
greed alone constitutes the qualification to hear.

A devotee born in a brāhmaṇa family may have cultivated
his regulative bhakti for lākhas of births and may have
very few anarthas. Still, if he has no honor, no ruci,
to hear, then he is disqualified from hearing. But a
third class bogus person, like Bilvamaṅgala, entangled
always in lust for a prostitute, immediately awoke when
his prostitute was singing:



rādhā-ramaṇa-hari govinda jaya jaya

govinda jaya jaya gopāla jaya jaya

rādhā-ramaṇa-hari govinda jaya jaya

rādhe rādhe rādhe jaya jaya jaya sri rādhe


                          119
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

rādhā-ramaṇa-hari govinda jaya jaya



When the prostitute would be quite absorbed in singing
this kīrtana, Bilvamaṅgala would be attracted and would
also become absorbed. So this is the qualification,
regardless of whether one is a lusty, wretched person
with no qualifications, no education, or any positive
quality. This taste for hearing about these topics is
itself the only required qualification.



kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasa-bhāvitā matiḥ

krīyatāṁ yadi kuto ’pi labhyate

tatra laulyam api mūlyam ekalaṁ

janma-koṭi-sukṛtair na labhyate



Sukṛti accumulated over lākhas and lākhas of births will
not help. But the qualification can come easily if we
hear from a devotee like Rāya Rāmānanda, Svarūpa
Dāmodara, Rūpa Gosvāmī, or their followers who tell the
pastimes of Kṛṣṇa so sweetly. Their mati, their hearts,
are always immersed in this ocean of love and affection
for Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Eligibility does not require any
worldly qualification or any spiritual quality. The only
requirement is some taste, ruci, to hear, and this ruci
can come either from impressions from past lives or it
can be newly formed in this life, no harm. Ruci coming
from past lives is much stronger. But if it is coming
from newly acquired impressions, it will still yield so
many fruits. So only to have some taste to hear these
topics is of any value, nothing else.

Swāmījī is explaining that other sampradāyas have
nothing to do with Rādhā-kuṇḍa. But then why is Rādhā-
kuṇḍa so supermost? Premāmṛtāplāvanāt kuryād asya
virājato giri-taṭe sevāṁ vivekī na kaḥ.
Premāmṛtāplāvanāt.

Sometimes a river may flood. Why does a flood come? What
is the reason?

Devotee: The river cannot contain so much water, so the
water overflows. This is called a flood.

BVNM: Yes, the river is very small and narrow, and then
so much heavy water comes. Then the river cannot contain
all the water so it overflows here and there. Similarly,
here in Vṛndāvana, there is a controlled flow. At
Govardhana the flow is greater, but it can still be
controlled. But in Rādhā-kuṇḍa, oh, so much flood! The
whole of Vraja Vṛndāvana is inundated. Even Kṛṣṇa comes
and is submerged in the flood, sometimes playing in the
waves and going here and there. Śrīmatī Rādhikā is
floating on that flood, and both of Them are controlled
only by premāmṛtāplāvanāt. Prema is Their karta, supreme
doer. So by prema Kṛṣṇa is dancing, Rādhā is dancing,

                          120
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

the gopīs are dancing, all Vrajavāsīs are dancing. Prema
herself is also dancing, and whoever it touches will
also dance.

So premāmṛtāplāvanāt—prema is in Vṛndāvana, in Vraja,
and in Gokula. In Gokula there is plenty of vātsalya-
rasa, in Nandagāon plenty of vātsalya plus sakhya.
Sometimes separation mood is also there. In Govardhana
all rasas are there but they are controlled. But in
Rādhā-kuṇḍa prema cannot be controlled. Herein lies the
glory of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. In Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-
kuṇḍa, Kṛṣṇa is not prominent So who is prominent?
Śrīmatī Rādhikā! Feeling separation, sometimes Kṛṣṇa
goes there and, praying to Śrīmatī Rādhikā, takes bath
three times in Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Kṛṣṇa becomes just like a
devotee, praying to Śrīmatī Rādhikā for Her mercy by
chanting Her mantra with folded hands, and humbly begs
Her, “When will You be pleased? When will You be
pleased?”



agha-ripur api yatnād atra devyāh prasāda-

prasara-kṛta-kaṭākṣa-prāpti-kāmaḥ prakāmam

anusarati yad uccaiḥ snāna-sevānu-bandhais

tad ati-surabhi rādhā-kuṇḍam evāśrayo me

(Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍāṣṭakam 3, Raghunātha dāsa)

Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī has said, “O Rādhā-kuṇḍa, you
are Śrīmatī Rādhikā Herself. You are visible as a kuṇḍa
only to give mercy to the devotees serving here. You can
give so much mercy, even more than Śrīmatī Rādhikā
Herself. You are always present here as a kuṇḍa. Anyone
can touch you, take bath in you, or pray to you.” Even
Kṛṣṇa Himself prays like this.

Why is Śrīmatī Rādhikā always there? Why? So many
pastimes take place at Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa that
Brahmā, Śaṅkara and all others want to live there but
they cannot. Have you ever heard that Hanumān wants to
come to Vraja? But he never does. Can you say why? He
fears, “I may do some offense there.”

One time Brahmā went to Vraja to witness the glories of
Kṛṣṇa, but he wanted to see His glory by his own effort
rather than by Kṛṣṇa’s mercy. That is why he stole the
cowherd boys and calves and thus behaved very badly. So
Hanumān says, “I am bandar, a monkey. I may commit some
offenses. If I see that Yaśodā Maiyā is twisting Kṛṣṇa’s
ears, then I may take my gadā (club) in my hand and what
will happen if I act like that?” So he fears, “I should
not go to Vṛndāvana, otherwise I may do so many wrong
things.” That is why general devotees don’t go to Rādhā-
kuṇḍa and cannot know the glory of Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

Do you want to see Rādhā-kuṇḍa? Come with me, follow
me... First we come to Kusuma-sarovara, and from there
the fabulously beautiful Rādhā-kuṇḍa begins. In the very
middle of Rādhā-kuṇḍa, in the water, is Svānanda-
sukhada-kuñja—very beautiful groves with fragrant

                          121
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

flowers, peacocks and cuckoos. Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s younger
sister, Anaṅga Mañjarī, has decorated it for Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa most beautifully. And at the eight corners of
Rādhā-kuṇḍa are the eight spectacular kuñjas of Lalitā,
Viśākhā, Citrā, Campakalatā, Tungavidyā, Indulekhā,
Raṅgadevī, and Sudevī. Then, surrounding this inner
circle are thousands and thousands of more beautiful
groves. In addition to all these, Rūpa, Rati, Labaṅga,
Guṇa Mañjarī, Mañjulālī Mañjarī, Kasturi Mañjarī, Vilāsa
Mañjarī and so many other mañjarīs have their kuñjas
everywhere around the kuṇḍa!

Around Śyāma-kuṇḍa, the eight prominent sakhās, Dāma,
Śrīdāma, Vasudāma, Stoka-Kṛṣṇa, Labaṅga, Arjuna and all,
have their kuñjas, but they have given them to the
sakhīs. The sakhās do not live there. Sometimes they
come but very rarely, only when Kṛṣṇa wants them to.
There Kṛṣṇa and Śrīmatī Rādhikā with all Her sakhīs are
singing, dancing, and enjoying in so many ways. Śrīmatī
Rādhikā lives there with all Her sakhīs, pleasing and
serving Kṛṣṇa, but especially Kṛṣṇa is serving Śrīmatī
Rādhikā there. This place is called mahā-yogapīṭha. In
Vṛndāvana, where is the yogapīṭha?—At Vaṁśī-vaṭa, the
site of rāsa-līlā, where Kṛṣṇa was dancing and singing
with the gopīs. But Rādhā-kuṇḍa, being the mahā-
yogapīṭha, is much more prominent than Vaṁśī-vaṭa. These
pastimes are so fantastic and are always going on. You
cannot even imagine them. So, among all the līlā-
sthalīs, Rādhā-kuṇḍa is most exalted.

When Caitanya Mahāprabhu came to Vṛndāvana, Rādhā-kuṇḍa
was just a small pit, having only a very small amount of
water. Caitanya Mahāprabhu discovered the village and
asked, “Where are Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa?” The name
of that village was Aritgāon. Aritgrama means
Ariṣṭāsura-gāon (Ariṣṭāsura, Vṛṣabhāsura), thus the name
became Aritgāon. “So this is Aritgāon, but where are
Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa?” He asked so many old
persons, but they all answered, “We do not know where
Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa are, but we know that this
is Kālī-kheta and that is Gaurī-kheta.” Kālī-kheta means
black field and Gaurī-kheta means golden field. So
Mahāprabhu thought, “Oh, Kālī? Kālī means Kṛṣṇa, so here
is Kṛṣṇa’s kuṇḍa. It is not kheta but kuṇḍa.” And Rādhā-
kuṇḍa they were calling Gaurī-kheta. It is not actually

Gaurī-kheta but Gaurī-kuṇḍa. Mahāprabhu took bath there
and declared that this is Śyāma-kuṇḍa and the other is
Rādhā-kuṇḍa.

Then Mahaprabhu left and discovered Vṛndāvana-dhāma. We
know that at first Kāmyavana was called Vṛndāvana.
Caitanya Mahāprabhu explained that in Kāmyavana Yamunā
is not there, nor is Govardhana nearby. Here, there is
no Kālīya-hrada, nor Brahmā-hrada, Brahmā-kuṇḍa, Vaṁśī-
vaṭa, nor Keśī-ghāṭa, so how can it be Vṛndāvana?
Vallabhācārya came to Caitanya Mahāprabhu, saying that
Kāmyavana is Vṛndāvana. But Caitanya Mahāprabhu
corrected him, “No. This is Kāmyavana and there is
Vṛndāvana.” Caitanya Mahāprabhu discovered all the
forests and all the pastime places.

One day Emperor Akbar, the Mohammedan king, was coming
with his armies of lākhas and lākhas of horses and

                          122
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

soldiers. His horses and elephants were so thirsty. The
Emperor himself was also thirsty. As he was passing that
way, he asked someone, “Is there any big pond where we
can take water?” The villagers said, “No. There isn’t
any big pond, but you can take water from this Kālī-
kheta and Gaurī-kheta.” The Emperor objected, “There is
not enough water for even one horse or any elephant.
They will finish all the water!”

The villagers said, “Do not worry. You should bring them
all here.” So the Emperor came with all his soldiers,
elephants and horses. There were lākhas and lākhas of
horses and elephants.They began to drink, but the water
was never finished. All were satisfied, and still there
was more water. The Emperor was very impressed and he
wanted to enlarge the pond, but he could not do so at
that time. After this, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī came to
Rādhā-kuṇḍa and wanted to restore the ponds, but he was
very worried because the kuṇḍas are cintāmaṇi. The water
is svayaṁ āmṛtam, nectar. So he was repenting, “Why do I
wish to improve the kuṇḍas?” At that time a very big
businessman, a paisa-wālā, came there and said,
“Badrinārāyaṇa has sent me and told me in a dream that
‘you should go to Rādhā-kuṇḍa and tell Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī that I have ordered you to give money to restore
the kuṇḍas and make them very nice.’” The businessman
went directly to Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī and told him,
“I want to help you in this work.”

Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī refused, “I don’t want to do
this sort of thing.” Then Badrinārāyana came in
Raghunātha’s dream and told him, “You must do this.”

So Raghunātha accepted some money and managed the work.
First he dug Rādhā-kuṇḍa in four corners, making it very
square, because Śrīmatī Rādhikā is so sarala, simple.
When he began to excavate Śyāma-kuṇḍa, he wanted to make
it square also, but there were so many trees here and
there that needed to be cut down. That night the trees
wept and prayed, “O Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, don’t cut
us down. We are here doing ārādhanā of Kṛṣṇa on the bank
of Śyāma-kuṇḍa, so don’t disturb us.” Therefore,
Raghunātha concluded, “Oh, Kṛṣṇa wants His kuṇḍa to be
crooked like Himself.” Kṛṣṇa is always crooked,
everything about Him is crooked. Thus Raghunātha gave
Śyāma-kuṇḍa its irregular form which is the very shape
that we see today.

One time Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa were playing here. At once a
demon in the shape of a bull came and wanted to kill
Kṛṣṇa and all the others. Kṛṣṇa very suddenly took the
two hind legs of the bull, whirled him around in the sky
and threw him. Immediately he died. The gopīs were there
and told Kṛṣṇa, “You cannot touch us because you have
done go-hatya, killing a cow.”

“I have not killed a cow. He was a demon in the shape of
a bull.”

“But You have killed it, so You cannot touch us.”

“Then what will I do? Without touching you I cannot
live.”


                          123
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

“You should become purified.”

“How?”

“Go to the sāgara (ocean) and all the tīrthas of the
world. Take bath and then come.”

Kṛṣṇa smiled and called all the tīrthas there. They came
in their personified forms and were praying, “What
service may we do for You?”

“You should become the water in this place.” And with
His heel Kṛṣṇa made an impression, and that became a
very big pond.

Then at once, pāṣniṁ prakhāta, all the tīrthas became
water and the pond was filled. Kṛṣṇa took bath and said,
“Now I am pure. Can I touch you?”

“Never, never. We will make our own pond without Your
help. You should take bath there and then You will be
pure.” Śrīmatī Rādhikā easily dug the hole for Rādhā-
kuṇḍa with Her toes, and all Her sakhīs were engaged in
helping. Rādhikā was dancing and sweating, but yet it
was so sweet. It became a very big pond, but there was
no water. Where should the water come from? Kṛṣṇa
offered, “Take it from My pond.” And He told all the
tīrthas that in a hidden way they should go in this new
kuṇḍa.

The gopīs refused, “We don’t want to touch any of the
water from Your kuṇḍa. We will go to Mānasī Gaṅgā in
Govardhana, bring water from there, and we will fill up
our kuṇḍa ourselves.”

They took lākhas and lākhas of pots and began to go, but
all the tīrthas lay down on the path, weeping, “Śrīmatī
Rādhike, we want to serve You. Why are You going there?”

Their humble prayer touched Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s heart. She
was so pleased that She allowed them to fill Her kuṇḍa.
At once they made a channel between the two ponds and
the waters of Śyāma-kuṇḍa entered Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Kṛṣṇa
took His bath, and then He touched all the gopīs. This
is Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Here, Śrīmatī Rādhikā Herself is Rādhā-
kuṇḍa and Kṛṣṇa is Kṛṣṇa-kuṇḍa, but the suprem-acy of
Rādhā-kuṇḍa prevails.

Rūpa Gosvāmī has glorified Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Everywhere there
is glorification of Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Swāmījī is also telling
that if anyone goes and touches the water and takes
ācamana, or if anyone goes and takes bath, he will have
the mercy of Śrīmatī Rādhikā to serve Her there. We
cannot tell any greater glory of Rādhā-kuṇḍa than this.
So we should try to know what is Rādhā-kuṇḍa. It is
superior to any other place in Vraja. It has been said:

śrī vṛndāvipinaṁ suramyaṁ api tac chriman-sa govardhanaḥ

sa rāsa-sthālīkapy alam rasamayi kiṁ tvada anyat sthalam

yasyapi aṁśa-lavena narhati manak samyaṁ mukundasya tat

pranebhyo ‘py adhika-priyeva dayitām tat kuṇḍam evāśraye

                          124
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017


(Vraja-vilāsa-stava 53, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī)



Vṛndāvana is so beautiful, rāsa is going on there, and
Girirāja Govardhana is so glorious, what to speak of
other tīrthas of Vraja. But they are not equal to even
one lākha’s (one hundred-thousandth) of a part of Rādhā-
kuṇḍa. Never. Let me take shelter of Rādhā-kuṇḍa which
is more dear to Kṛṣṇa than His own life’s breath!

The glory of Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa is so rare, so high.
Swāmījī is saying that if someone is intelligent, he can
begin to touch a little of the glory of Śrīmatī Rādhā-
kuṇḍa. Then he will develop the desire to serve Śrīmatī
Rādhikā. Kṛṣṇa may be ready to give His service, but if
Rādhikā’s mercy is not there, they will say that there
is nothing to do.

In his Śrī Svaniyama Daśaka, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī has
written, “I have no attraction for Kṛṣṇa. If He
personally invites me to come to Dvārakā, I will not go—
I do not like to serve Kṛṣṇa if Rādhikā is not there.
But if I hear that Śrīmatī Rādhikā has gone to Dvārakā
to serve Kṛṣṇa, at once I will fly there without any
invitation. And if I know that Śrīmatī Rādhikā is alone
at Rādhā-kuṇḍa without Kṛṣṇa, no harm, I will also be
there. I want to be in Rādhā-kuṇḍa, even if I’m hearing
the chattering and pattering of all the villagers, I
want to be there. I want to take their remnants and hear
their worldly talks, gramya-kathā, but I don’t want to
go to heaven or anywhere in Vaikuṇṭha, anywhere in
Vraja, leaving this place.” Rādhā-kuṇḍa is so glorious!

Then:



karmibhyaḥ parito hareḥ priyatayā vyaktiṁ yayur jñāninas

tebhyo jñāna-vimukta-bhakti-paramāḥ premaika-niṣṭhās
tataḥ

tebhyas tāḥ paśu-pāla-paṇkaja-dṛśas tābhyo ’pi sā
rādhikā

preṣṭhā tadvad iyaṁ tadīya-sarasī tāṁ nāśrayet kaḥ kṛtī

(Śrī Upadeśāmṛta 10)



What is the translation?

Devotee reads:

In the śāstra it is said that of all types of fruitive
workers, he who is advanced in knowledge of the higher
values of life is favored by the Supreme Lord Hari. Out
of many such people who are advanced in knowledge
(jñānīs), one who is practically liberated by virtue of
his knowledge may take to devotional service. He is
superior to the others. However, one who has actually

                           125
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                   5/4/2017

attained prema, pure love of Kṛṣṇa, is superior to him.
The gopīs are exalted above all the advanced devotees
because they are always totally dependent upon Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, the transcendental cowherd boy. Among the gopīs,
Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is the most dear to Kṛṣṇa. Her kuṇḍa
(lake) is as profoundly dear to Lord Kṛṣṇa as this most
beloved of the gopīs. Who, then, will not reside at
Rādhā-kuṇḍa and, in a spiritual body surcharged with
ecstatic devotional feelings (aprākṛtabhāva), render
loving service to the divine couple Śrī Śrī Rādhā-
Govinda, who perform Their aṣṭakālīya-līlā, Their
eternal eight-fold daily pastimes. Indeed, those who
execute devotional service on the banks of Rādhā-kuṇḍa
are the most fortunate people in the universe.



BVNM: I see that so many devotees go to Varsānā, and
they like it more than Rādhā-kuṇḍa. They want to go to
Gahavarvana. Māna-ghara, Dāna-ghara, Vilāsa-ghara, Mor-
kuṭī are all there. Śrīmatī Rādhikā plays with Kṛṣṇa in
so many ways there. I think that all the Vrajavāsīs
think that this Varsānā is superior to any other place.
But they don’t know all these mysteries. They can never
know. If anyone wants to know the glories of Rādhā-
kuṇḍa, they should read Bṛhad-Bhāgavatāmṛta, Seventh
Chapter of first volume and also Seventh Chapter of
second volume.

Why is Rādhā-kuṇḍa so significant? Why has Kṛṣṇa come
from Vṛndāvana to live in Dvārakā? An ordinary devotee
cannot answer all these questions. Those who know the
glories of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s prema can tell something.
Rohiṇī-devī (the mother of Baladeva), Baladeva Prabhu
and Uddhava (because he went there) can tell something
about this Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Vraja. Why did Kṛṣṇa leave
Vṛndāvana, Vraja, and come to Dvārakā? There are many
hidden reasons behind His going. Kṛṣṇa wanted to satisfy
the gopīs, but in Vraja He could not.

Na pāraye ‘haṁ niravadya-saṁyujāṁ. Why? You know there
are two elements in prema—separation mood (vipralamba)
and meeting (sambhoga). When meeting with Kṛṣṇa, the
gopīs become so happy, and in separation from Him they
become so unhappy. At that time no one can touch the
glories of the gopīs—they are very high. When Uddhava
went to Vraja, he saw the glories of the gopīs to be
like the Himālaya Mountains, so high, and he felt as
insignificant as a particle of dust. Kṛṣṇa sent him to
see the gopīs’ behavior and to realize all their moods.
Kṛṣṇa tells his friends in Dvārakā, “I want to be in
Vṛndāvana, Vraja, and always stay at Rādhā-kuṇḍa, but I
cannot. Why? Because the love and affection of the gopīs
is so high that even in separation they feel sambhoga,
and when

meeting   with Me they feel viraha. This is very, very
painful   for Me. Just like one time Śrīmatī Rādhikā was
sitting   in My lap and Madhumaṅgala came along. A bee was
humming   around and

Śrīmatī Rādhikā became afraid. Madhumaṅgala saw Śrīmatī
Rādhikā’s fear, so with a stick he chased that bee very
far away. When he returned he said, ‘I have driven

                            126
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

Madhusūdana away and he can never come again.’ Hearing
this, She fainted and cried, ‘O Kṛṣṇa, O Kṛṣṇa, where
are You?’ even though She was in My lap.”

Though She was in Kṛṣṇa’s lap, She was feeling so much
separation that She fainted. Once Kṛṣṇa had gone
somewhere else, and Śrīmatī Rādhikā was feeling
separation. Kṛṣṇa could understand that in separation
from Him She became so absorbed that upon seeing a
tamāla tree, She embraced it and said, “Oh, You have
returned!” And She was laughing and joking and taunting
that tree as if it were Kṛṣṇa. Sometimes He saw that in
separation Śrīmatī Rādhikā was kissing the darkness,
“Oh, this darkness is Kṛṣṇa.“ She wanted to embrace that
darkness, thinking that it was Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīmatī Rādhikā is telling to her sakhīs, “Sakhī, I feel
better when I become senseless. At that time when I am
senseless, I can forget all these things, so why do you
try to bring Me back to My senses? At that time I am
okay, but when I return to My senses, again I become
distressed. So why do you do this? You are like My
enemy.”

Thus Kṛṣṇa became so astonished. “Such high-class prema
is in Rādhā-kuṇḍa, in Śrīmatī Rādhikā!” He cannot
satisfy the gopīs, because when He comes to meet with
them, playing with Him they think of future separation.
Thus they are always feeling pain. He said, “I cannot
bear to see their pain. If they see Me, they will feel
pain because they are more absorbed in separation, so I
should not stay here. I cannot satisfy them. At Rādhā-
kuṇḍa this mood will increase. They will weep bitterly
and will faint.”

Can any of you imagine these things? This is the special
glory of Rādhā-kuṇḍa, where all these moods are being
experienced, and prema is like a flood, where prema
vaicittya is manifested. In Bhramara-gītā (SB. 10.47)
many of these moods are described—prajalpa, sujalpa,
abhijalpa, anujalpa2 and so many more. You cannot
imagine!

So I think that to only do vaidhī-bhakti amalgamated
with karma and jñāna will not be sufficient to come into
the family of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, in His sampradāya. If
you want to be in Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s sampradāya, you
will have to do rūpānugā-bhakti. What is rūpānuga?
Because they don’t know the meaning of rūpānuga and the
meaning of sahajiyā, some are fearing, “Oh, if I take
the name of rūpānuga, I will become a sahajiyā.” No! We
are daily saying “rūpānuga varga ki jaya!” We should
understand the significance of rūpānuga. We will have to
know who was Rūpa Gosvāmī, what he did, what was his
special service, what were his moods, and then we can be
rūpānuga.

Rūpānuga means to serve Śrīmatī Rādhikā, nothing else.
This book is just an outline giving some light on the
subject. To enter this realm more deeply, you must hear
a realized soul explain all these things, and he can
give you a deeper impression of this book. Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī has written it for only this purpose. Swāmījī
did not have time to write any explanation of

                          127
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                  5/4/2017

Śikṣaṣṭaka, Manaḥ-śikṣa, and many others, but he saw
that this particular book was so important that he wrote
his commentary. But those who will only look at the
first śloka, vāco vegaṁ manasaḥ ... vāco vegaṁ manasaḥ
... vāco vegaṁ manasaḥ, and then close the book,
thinking, “It is all right. This is sufficient for us.
We are not qualified even to do vāco vegam manasaḥ, so
how we can read any further?”—how will they advance?

Swāmījī has come to give this rūpānuga line to us. So we
should not be hopeless. We should try to develop our
Kṛṣṇa consciousness in this line.

Gaura premānande!




Chapter Eleven: Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Ślokas 10-11


San Francisco, 31 May 1997

We have read this śloka and also some of the purport. I
want you to read page 87, second paragraph, “After
taking to devotional service...”

Devotee reads:

Śloka 10, purport

After taking to devotional service under the regulative
principles, a person may come to the platform of
spontaneous love of Godhead, following in the footsteps
of great devotees like Nārada and Sanaka and Sanātana.



BVNM: Can you explain why he has said, “service under
the regulative principles, a person may come to the
platform of spontaneous love of Godhead”? Why has he
said “may”?

Devotee: Because it is not guaranteed that just by
practicing the vaidhī-bhakti process that they will
automatically come to ...

BVNM: I think that everyone here is understanding this
fact. He has said, “may.” He has not given any guarantee
for this. Those who will cultivate regulative principles
and then come in the association of a realized rasika-
bhakta in the line of Rūpa Gosvāmī will get spontaneous
love. Otherwise, simply by following these regulative
principles for lākhas and lākhas of births, one cannot
come to the platform of spontaneous love. But we hope to
be fortunate to come in the line of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu. We like to be called rūpānuga Vaiṣṇavas.
Why? Can anyone answer? Why do we want to be rūpānuga
Vaiṣṇavas and glorify Swāmījī as rūpānuga?

Devotee: Because Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī appeared in this
world most recently. He is Rūpa Mañjarī and is so close
to Kṛṣṇa and Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Following very closely in

                             128
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

his footsteps as rūpānuga Vaiṣṇava is the only way to
attain that kind of closeness, that kind of intimacy,
that kind of bhakti.

BVNM: Can you tell what is the difference between
rāgānuga and rūpānuga?

Devotee: Rāgānuga means to follow the real Vrajavāsīs in
any of the rasas, such as dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya and
mādhurya. The real Vrajavāsīs, who have rāga, are called
ragātmika bhaktas. But rūpānuga specifically means those
following Rūpa Mañjarī, who is serving Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

BVNM: Rūpānuga means especially Rūpa Gosvāmī’s own mood.
In his books he has explained all kinds of rasa and all
kinds of

rati, but what was his special mood towards Kṛṣṇa? How
did he serve and in what mood? If anyone will follow
Rūpa Gosvāmī’s mood, then he will advance in mañjarī-
bhāva, otherwise not. Vallabhācārya is not rūpānuga.
Svarūpa Dāmodara is not rūpānuga. What is he? Svarūpa
Dāmodara himself is Lalitā. He is Rūpa Gosvāmī’s guru
and Rūpa serves under him, but yet Rūpa has a special
service to Śrīmatī Rādhikā which Lalitā does not have.
Svarūpa Dāmodara serves Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Kṛṣṇa
equally, but with some partiality for Rādhikā. But Rūpa
is totally absorbed in serving Śrīmatī Rādhikā. This is
the mood of Rūpa Gosvāmī.

If anyone has the mood of Yaśodā Maiyā, if anyone has
the mood of friends, like Subala and Śrīdāma, or if they
have any mood of Lalitā, Viśākhā, Citrā, the aṣṭa-
sakhīs, they are not rūpānuga—they are rāgānuga. They
are superior to Rūpa Gosvāmī. Svarūpa Dāmodara and Rāya
Rāmānanda are superior to Rūpa Gosvāmī because they are
Lalitā and Viśākhā. But we cannot follow Svarūpa
Dāmodara and Rāya Rāmānanda, we cannot follow Lalitā and
Viśākhā—their mood is separate. They are above our
touch, and we are not aspiring for that mood. What do we
want? The mood of Rūpa Gosvāmī, Rūpa Mañjarī, always
serving Śrīmatī Rādhikā, happy in Her happiness and
unhappy in Her distress.

Sometimes Lalitā can chastise Śrīmatī Rādhikā. How?



dhūrte vrajendra-tanaye tanu suṣṭhu vāmyaṁ

mā dakṣiṇā bhava kalaṇkini lāghavāya

rādhe giraṁ śṛṇu hitām iti śikṣayantīṁ

devīm guṇaiḥ su-lalitāṁ lalitāṁ namāmi

(Śrī Lalitāṣṭakam 4)



[I offer praṇāma unto Śrī Lalitā-devī, the charming
treasure-house of all good qualities, who instructs
Śrīmatī Rādhikā in this way: “O Kalaṇkini (unchaste
one)! Rādhe! Listen to my good instructions which are

                          129
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                  5/4/2017

favorable for you! Vrajendra-nandana is very crafty
(dhūrta). Do not display Your mood of gentle submission
to Him; instead, in all circumstances, always be
contrary.]



She can say, “dhūrte vrajendra-tanaye, don’t have any
link with dhūrta Vrajendra-nandana.” To whom is she
telling this? Rādhikā. “Do not speak. When He comes, You
should sit like this, frowning. And if He wants to keep
His head on Your feet, You should move Your feet away,
like this, not looking at Him.” Lalitā can speak to
Rādhikā like this.

When Rādhikā is quite absorbed in viraha (separation),
Lalitā will pacify Her, saying, “Oh, you should not
weep. Kṛṣṇa is here.” In the same way, Svarūpa Dāmodara
was telling Caitanya Mahāprabhu, “Why are You lamenting
for Vrajendra-nandana? Vrajendra is not far away from
here. He is here.” At once Caitanya Mahāprabhu took His
nails, scratched the earth, and said, “Oh, I will see.
Oh, Vrajendra-nandana is here?” He became so happy and
took Svarūpa Dāmodara’s hands in His. Rūpa Gosvāmī will
not do this. If Śrīmatī Rādhikā is weeping, then Rūpa
Mañjarī also will weep. She will do the same thing as
Rādhikā. When Rādhikā is meeting with Kṛṣṇa, then Rūpa
Mañjarī thinks that she is meeting with Kṛṣṇa. If
Śrīmatī Rādhikā is unhappy, then Rūpa Mañjarī will be
unhappy—equally! This is rūpānuga.

Rūpānuga, not rāgānuga. All rūpānugas are rāgānugas, but
all rāgānugas are not rūpānugas. You should know this
fact. What am I saying?

Devotee: All rūpānugas are rāgānuga, but not all
rāgānugas are rūpānuga.

BVNM: Who are rūpānuga? Those who are actually following
the mood of Rūpa Gosvāmī. All our ācāryas are rūpānuga,
not only rāgānuga. So it is a very, very important
point.

Our Gurudeva has composed Rādhā-Vindodāṣṭakam. The first
śloka is:

rādhā-cintā-niveśena yasya kāntir vilopitā

śrī kṛṣṇa-caraṇaṁ vande rādhāliṇgita-vigraham



[I worship the lotus feet of that form of Kṛṣṇa when,
due to being thoroughly immersed in separation from
Śrīmatī Rādhikā (who is displaying māna, Her jealous
anger), His own dark complexion vanishes and He assumes
Her bright, golden luster.]



The meaning is this. Sometimes Śrīmatī Rādhikā becomes
so absorbed in separation, weeping so bitterly that She
faints, but Rūpa Gosvāmī does not want this. Our
Gurudeva, who is rūpānuga, or any of our ācāryas

                          130
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

including Rūpa Gosvāmī, will not want this. What will
they want? Rādhā-cintā-niveśena yasya kāntir vilopitā.
Kṛṣṇa should weep in separation from Śrīmatī Rādhikā,
no? Kṛṣṇa should weep. Our Śrīmatī Rādhikā is so soft,
Her feet are so soft, She should not walk here and there
to search for Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa should search for Her,
because He is a cowherd boy. His feet are so hard, hard,
hard. He should walk so much, so much.

So, rādhā-cintā-niveśena yasya kāntir vilopitā. Śrīmatī
Rādhikā disappeared from the rāsa and Kṛṣṇa was
searching, searching, searching. He could not get
Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s darśana, so He was searching and
weeping. At last Kṛṣṇa sat down at Imlī-tālā in
Vṛndāvana, near Yamunā in Seva-kuñja. He was bitterly
weeping and was absorbed in thinking, “Oh, where can I
find Śrīmatī Rādhikā? Where can I find Rādhikā? She has
left Me here. Where has She gone?” Drowned in these
thoughts, Kṛṣṇa lost His black color, and at once His
complexion became golden. He was still Kṛṣṇa, but He
became golden like Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and His mood was
changed into Rādhikā’s. He was crying bitterly, “O
Kṛṣṇa, where are You? O Kṛṣṇa, where are You?” Do you
understand this? He was not calling “Rādhike, Rādhike,”
in Kṛṣṇa’s mood. Rather. at once Her color and mood came
in Him, and He began to call, “Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, where are
You?”

In all the maṭhas in the Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti, our
Guru has established our Deities, Vinoda-bihārī, with
this mood — rādhā-cintā-niveśena yasya kāntir vilopitā.
Kṛṣṇa’s color went out and He became golden, taking the
color and mood of Rādhikā — that is Caitanya Mahāprabhu!
Rādhāliṇgita-vigraham. I am doing vandanā to that very
form of Kṛṣṇa, which has been embraced by Rādhikā with
all Her parts. Rādhikā’s whole body is there, and
Kṛṣṇa’s body has been completely covered by all the
parts of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. So Caitanya Mahāprabhu is
rādhāliṇgita-vigraham. This is rūpānuga. Kṛṣṇa should
weep, Kṛṣṇa should search for Rādhikā. Why should our
sweet, innocent, very simple Śrīmatī Rādhikā go here and
there, in mountains, across rivers, through thorns? Why
should She go? Kṛṣṇa should go all over searching for
Her. This is rūpānuga. So all rūpānuga Gosvāmīs are like
this. They have come only to bestow their mercy in this
way.

Swāmījī cut jungles, but he did not come only for this.
In this rūpānuga Nectar of Instruction, Rūpa Gosvāmī’s
teachings, he is giving all these tattvas. You should
patiently hear. And then you can understand what is the
mood of this special rūpānuga Vaiṣṇava ācārya, Śrīla
Swāmījī, who is in the line of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī.

Then, “after ...”

Devotee reads:

After taking to devotional service under the regulative
principles, a person may come to the platform of
spontaneous love of Godhead, following in the footsteps
of great devotees like Nārada and Sanaka and Sanātana.



                          131
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017


BVNM: Why is he mentioning Nārada? Why? And Sanaka and
Sanātana? They were all following regulative bhakti. But
Nārada and Uddhava, by the association of the gopīs, and
Sanaka by both Nārada and by the grace of Umā Devī (the
wife of Śaṅkara) all received spontaneous love and
service for Kṛṣṇa. Originally they were not in this
mood. So Swāmījī is giving examples. If anyone is
performing regulative principles of bhakti, then by
chance from one’s past impressions or by luck without
any cause, Kṛṣṇa can mercifully send His devotees to
give their association. By hearing from them and
following their instructions, one will attain
spontaneous love, just as Nārada, Sanaka, and Sanātana
did.

Devotee reads:

The Supreme Personality of Godhead then recognizes him
to be superior. The devotees who have developed love of
Godhead are certainly in an exalted position.

Of all these devotees, the gopīs are recognized as
superior because they do not know anything other than
satisfying Kṛṣṇa.



BVNM: He has written, “of all devotees,” but we should
know that the gopīs are not devotees. What are they?
They are expansions of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, special
expansions. Some of them are sādhana-siddha, like the
Vedas, Śrutī-mantras, and others. But they are as
honorable as the gopīs, becoming like their expansions.
Regarding the degree of their grace there is no
difference between them. They are to be considered the
same.

Devotee reads:

... the gopīs are recognized as superior because they do
not know anything other than satisfying Kṛṣṇa. Nor do
the gopīs expect any return from Kṛṣṇa. Indeed,
sometimes Kṛṣṇa puts them into extreme suffering by
separating Himself from them. Nonetheless, they cannot
forget Kṛṣṇa. When Kṛṣṇa left Vṛndāvana for Mathurā, the
gopīs became most dejected and spent the rest of their
lives simply crying in separation from Kṛṣṇa. This means
that in one sense they were never actually separated
from Kṛṣṇa. There is no difference between thinking of
Kṛṣṇa and associating with Him.



BVNM: What is the meaning? What?

Devotee: Thinking of Kṛṣṇa is the same as directly
associating with Him. Kṛṣṇa manifests Himself to the
devotee who is fully absorbed in Him.

BVNM: But why are the gopīs crying? Why are they crying?
If they are both the same, then why are they crying so
much, weeping and sometimes fainting? We cannot explain
this, but Kṛṣṇa can. And Kṛṣṇa has explained all these

                          132
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

things in Bṛhad-Bhāgavatāmṛtamto Nārada himself. Has
Swāmījī written anywhere about Bṛhad-Bhāgavatāmṛtam?
What has he written?

Devotee: In Ādi-līlā, chapter 5, he writes that if one
wants to get an understanding of Kṛṣṇa in relation to
His devotees, he must read Bṛhad-Bhāgavatāmṛta3.

BVNM: One cannot easily know the difference between
kaniṣṭha, madhyama and uttama, and also uttama-kaniṣṭha,
uttama-madhyama and uttama-uttama. And in these three,
uttama kaniṣṭha, uttama-madhyama and uttama-uttama,
there are lākhas of gradations. If we can hear Bṛhad-
Bhāgavatāmṛtam from a bona fide Vaiṣṇava in the line of
Rūpa Gosvāmī and Sanātana Gosvāmī, then we can
understand these things. But now we have nothing to do
with Bṛhad-Bhāgavatāmṛta: “If anyone reads Bṛhad-
Bhāgavatāmṛta, he will very easily become a sahajiyā.
And if you will read Tenth Canto, you will be a
sahajiyā.” If anyone just says the words, “gopī, gopī,”
or “rāgānuga,” he will be accused of being a sahajiyā,
and that is why they are falling down. Thus, all paths
have been blocked for them and, if they want to advance
in bhakti, they must return to where they were before.
Sometimes these persons make offenses against bhakti,
against this rāgānugā-bhakti, and that is why they never
become qualified to hear, to read and to enter it. They
are disqualified forever and thus they are deprived of
these things. I think that they have never read about
rāgānugā-bhakti, never, never. Otherwise they would not
speak like this.

Then?

Devotee reads:

Rather, vipralambha-sevā, thinking of Kṛṣṇa in
separation, as Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu did, is far
better than serving Kṛṣṇa directly.



BVNM: This separation mood is very important, very, very
important. Not necessarily in all cases, but sometimes
the separation mood of the gopīs is superior to meeting
because they are seeing Kṛṣṇa in their hearts. In
meeting they lose sight of Kṛṣṇa in their hearts, but in
separation, losing Kṛṣṇa outwardly, they are always
meeting with Him internally. So sometimes separation
becomes superior. But you should know that the gopīs
cannot be satisfied without meeting Kṛṣṇa and serving
Him directly. They do not want to be separated from
Kṛṣṇa. But Kṛṣṇa does it anyway. Why? Why does He
arrange so much separation? There are some reasons, but
you can know them only by doing bhajana. So you should
try to develop your Kṛṣṇa consciousness and deeply enter
into your bhajana. Then you will be able to understand
and realize something. Only my telling you will not be
sufficient. Never. No, we will have to practice and
chant more with love and affection, following the
example of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, and then we can realize
something.

We are saying “rūpānuga guru varga ki jaya” daily. But

                          133
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

have you ever questioned what is rūpānuga? Why are you
glorifying? Your Gurudeva was rūpānuga, or rāgānugā
only? Or not even both? They are saying, “He was only
doing regulative bhakti and preaching. He never preached
rūpānuga.” But I am assuring you that he was rūpānuga.
Why rūpānuga? We will have to try to understand what
rūpānuga is, who Rūpa is, what his mood is, and how we
can adopt it. This is not offensive. If we are not doing
this, it is offensive, being in the line of Caitanya
Mahāprabhu.

Go on.

Devotee reads:

Thus of all the devotees who have developed unalloyed
devotional love for Kṛṣṇa, the gopīs are most exalted,
and out of all these exalted gopīs, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is
the highest. No one can excel the devotional service of
Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. Indeed, even Kṛṣṇa cannot understand
the attitude of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī ...



BVNM: She is the highest, the highest! If one cannot
become qualified to hear all these things and to have a
mood like this, then what will he do? Some will say,
“Oh, we are not qualified and will never be qualified in
the future.” This is an offense at the lotus feet of
bhakti, Kṛṣṇa Himself and Rādhārāṇī also. That is why
they will become more and more opposite.

Devotee reads:

... therefore He took Her position and appeared as Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu, just to understand Her
transcendental feelings. In this way Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī
gradually concludes that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is the most
exalted devotee of Kṛṣṇa and that Her kuṇḍa (lake), Śrī
Rādhā-kuṇḍa, is the most exalted place. This is verified
in a quotation from Laghu-bhāgavatāmṛta (Uttara-khaṇḍa
45), as quoted in Caitanya-Caritāmṛta:



yathā rādhā priyā viṣṇos

tasyāḥ kuṇḍaṁ priyaṁ tathā

sarva-gopīṣu saivaikā

viṣṇor atyanta-vallabhā



“Just as Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is dear to the Supreme Lord
Kṛṣṇa (Viṣṇu), so Her bathing place (Rādhā-kuṇḍa) is
equally dear to Kṛṣṇa. Among all the gopīs, She alone
stands supreme as the Lord’s most beloved.”

Therefore everyone interested in Kṛṣṇa consciousness
should ultimately take shelter of Rādhā-kuṇḍa and
execute devotional service there throughout one’s life.


                             134
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                   5/4/2017



BVNM: What is he saying? “Everyone.” What is the meaning
of everyone? “If anyone has been liberated and gone to
Vṛndāvana in their transcendental form, only those
persons can have this idea.” Has he written like this?
No, he has written, “Therefore anyone interested in
Kṛṣṇa consciousness.” And those who are not inter-ested
in Kṛṣṇa consciousness are bogus persons and will never
have this idea. But everyone who is interested in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness should ultimately take shelter of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā and Rādhā-kuṇḍa. He is saying ‘everyone’, and we
are making so many walls, divisions in these
instructions. There are no walls—the walls are false. So
anyone who is certainly interested in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness will follow this idea, and those who not
interested in Kṛṣṇa consciousness will not follow. This
is the guideline. So those who are not interested in
taking shelter of Rādhā-kuṇḍa are not Kṛṣṇa conscious.
And actually those who are following this statement are
really in Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Go on.

Devotee reads:

Therefore everyone interested in Kṛṣṇa consciousness
should ultimately take shelter of Rādhā-kuṇḍa and
execute devotional service there throughout one’s life.



BVNM: Their whole life they will do this. This is a very
helpful line, very helpful. Those who are not following
these lines are going down. They must go down, there is
no path for them. All ways are blocked.

“This is the conclusion ...”

Devotee reads:

This is the conclusion of Rūpa Gosvāmī in the tenth
verse of Upadeśāmṛta.



BVNM: Yes. Very good.



Text 11

kṛṣṇasyoccaiḥ praṇaya-vasatiḥ preyasībhyo ’pi rādhā

kuṇḍaṁ cāsyā munibhir abhitas tādṛg eva vyadhāyi

yat preṣṭhair apy alam asulabhaṁ kiṁ punar bhakti-bhājāṁ

tat premedaṁ sakṛd api saraḥ snātur āviṣkaroti



This is the last śloka. What is the translation?


                          135
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

Devotee reads:

Of the many objects of favored delight and of all the
lovable damsels of Vrajabhūmi, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is
certainly the most treasured object of Kṛṣṇa’s love.

BVNM: What is the meaning? Can you explain the meaning
of “object of Kṛṣṇa’s love”?

Devotee: She is the most lovable object. Kṛṣṇa has so
many objects, so many cowherd boys, cows, so many Vraja
gopīs, the trees, Yamunā, everything ...

BVNM: Kṛṣṇa’s love. What is the meaning here? The love
that the Vrajavāsīs have for Kṛṣṇa. Śrīmatī Rādhikā has
that—She knows how to love and please Kṛṣṇa. So this
should be our object, as Rūpa Gosvāmī has written. First
we should know who is Kṛṣṇa. He is

the beloved of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Do not take Kṛṣṇa as
your beloved. We should think that my arādhya-devī is
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and

we want Her mood. We cannot take Her mood fully, only in
part. What is that part? The mood of Rūpa. We can take
only this. So

the object of our whole devotion is to serve Śrīmatī
Rādhikā and Kṛṣṇa like Rūpa Gosvāmī. Rūpa Gosvāmī has
not served Kṛṣṇa

solely as Śrīmatī Rādhikā does. Rather, he has served
Śrīmatī Rādhikā. If he had wanted, he could have served
Kṛṣṇa directly, because he was himself nāyikā, not less
than any gopī. But he never thought to be any nāyikā. Do
you know what nāyikā means?

It means heroine, like Lalitā, Viśākhā, Citrā,
Campakalātā, Śyāmalā, Bhadrā, Candra—they are all
nāyikās. But Rūpa Gosvāmī and all

of our Gosvāmīs never wanted to serve Kṛṣṇa like them,
only like Rūpa Mañjarī, who was always serving Śrīmatī
Rādhikā. In Her guidance, if She gave an order, they
would follow it. This is rūpānuga-bhāva.

So what is the treasured object of Kṛṣṇa’s love?
Treasure means treasury. They have so much opulence and
wealth. We cannot take all of it, but rūpānuga-jana,
those who are following Rūpa Gosvāmī, want to give us
something of Rādhikā’s treasure. It is the most valuable
thing, and everything is included in it. We can realize
this if we will serve any Vaiṣṇava here who has these
moods. Then we can have it and our lives will be
successful. The object of all our bhakti is that. What
is it? Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura has said,
“What is our object? We want to be the dust of the lotus
feet of Rūpa Mañjarī.”

I sang this song upon the departure of Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Swāmī in his samādhi place in Vṛndāvana.
Why did I sing it? Because I saw that he used to
appreciate this song so much whenever I used to sing it
in Mathurā and other places. This song was very, very

                          136
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017

dear to Swāmījī, so at the very time of his departure I
sang, and he was hearing, “śrī rūpa mañjarī pada sei
mora sampada.” Sampada means? Oh, the sampada
(treasure), he has that sampatti, precious wealth from
Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s treasury—and we can have it. How? By
serving Rūpa Mañjarī. Śrīmatī Rādhikā will meet this
challenge.

How was Swāmījī able to take all these things from Rūpa
Gosvāmī and from all the epics and produce all his
books? I was amazed at his achievement, and I wondered
how he did this. This is Swāmījī’s real glory. The
glories which we ordinarily praise are not his real
glories. “He was so vairāgi, renounced. He had nothing
to do with any worldly things.” These are not glories.
In some people’s eyes they may be glories, but these are
secondary. He preached the name all over the world. This
is a glory, but it is secondary, thirdly, fourthly. We
cannot realize this thing which is described here. He
wants to give a jewel from the treasured object of
Kṛṣṇa’s love. Where is he? In Rādhikā’s heart. And he
has come to give this special thing. Who else has
glorified Swāmījī in this way? This is the highest glory
of Swāmījī. But I think they are very rare in this world
who can touch even a little of the glory of Swāmījī.

This jewel was given by Svarūpa Dāmodara to Rūpa
Gosvāmī, and Rūpa Gosvāmī gave it to Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī and Jīva Gosvāmī. Kindly, mercifully, Raghunātha
dāsa gave it to Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, and it went
into the hands of Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura and thus
came in the hands of Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura and
Śrīla Prabhupāda Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī, and from his
hands he gave some of these jewels to Swāmījī, “Oh, go
give these to the world.” Those jewels we want to take,
but very rare are those who can accept. Our Gosvāmīs are
willing to give, but some persons will not take—they
refuse. If they do not take, no harm—some little
something they are getting. I think that only when they
will be in the association of any of these kinds of
bhaktas, then they can receive something of this
treasury and understand the glory of Swāmījī.

Go on.

Devotee reads:

And, in every respect, Her divine kuṇḍa is described by
great sages as similarly dear to Him. Undoubtedly Rādhā-
kuṇḍa is very rarely attained even by the great
devotees; therefore it is even more difficult for
ordinary devotees to attain. If one simply bathes once
within those holy waters, one’s pure love of Kṛṣṇa is
fully aroused.



BVNM: He has given hope and we should trust in his
words. Purport.

Devotee reads:

Why is Rādhā-kuṇḍa so exalted? The lake is so exalted
because it belongs to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, who is the most

                          137
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                   5/4/2017

beloved object of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.



BVNM: I think that this kuṇḍa is Herself Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, not that it belongs to Her. He has written this
only so that we can easily understand this thing. Rādhā-
kuṇḍa is Herself Rādhikā, and Kṛṣṇa-kuṇḍa is Himself Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. Rūpa Gosvāmī has said that these kuṇḍas are even
more merciful than Kṛṣṇa and Rādhikā, because these
kuṇḍas are manifest. We can touch them and take bath in
them. We cannot realize transcendental Kṛṣṇa and
Rādhikā, so these kuṇḍas are most merciful to us.

Even if we do not know the glory of Rādhā-kuṇḍa and
Śyāma-kuṇḍa, but go there and with honor take water and
sprinkle it on us, take bath, or glorify Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, Rādhikā will be very pleased, certainly. And we
can have the mercy of Rādhā-kuṇḍa by going there, or
living here and in our minds taking bath and doing a
very simple meditation, “Rādhā-kuṇḍa, Rādhā-kuṇḍa.” In
this way something will come to us.

Devotee: In our conditioned state are we really touching
Rādhā-kuṇḍa when we bathe there?

BVNM: Really or not, the heart touches a little, no
harm, no harm. Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa are so
powerful. Nārada has received the benediction that if
anyone touches, sees or hears about any place of Kṛṣṇa’s
pure pastimes, Kṛṣṇa will have to give prema. “You are
bound to give.” Kṛṣṇa vows, “Yes, I am bound.”

Devotee reads:

The conclusion is that to live on the banks of the
Rādhā-kuṇḍa and to bathe there daily constitute the
highest perfection of devotional service. It is a
difficult position to attain, even for great sages and
devotees like Nārada. Thus there is no limit to the
glory of Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa. By serving Rādhā-kuṇḍa, one
can get an opportunity to become an assistant of Śrīmatī
Rādhārāṇī under the eternal guidance of the gopīs.



BVNM: This is the conclusion. We have no time to explain
all these words. Each and every word of The Nectar of
Instruction should be explained, but we have no time to
do this. Without understanding and following, we cannot
realize the meaning of rūpānuga and the glory of Rādhā-
kuṇḍa. But at least we should hear and know that this is
the object of our whole devotional life, and this is the
highest goal. Keeping this object in our heart, we
should start from the beginning, following what
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī has told in Manaḥ Śīkṣā:



gurau goṣṭhe goṣṭālayiṣu sujane bhūsura-gaṇe

sva-mantre śrī-nāmni vraja-nava-yuva-dvandva-śaraṇe

sadā dambhaṁ hitvā kuru ratim apūrvām atitarā-

                          138
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                 5/4/2017


maye svāntar bhrātaś caṭubhir abhiyāce dhṛta-padaḥ



[O my dear brother, my foolish mind! Taking hold of your
feet, I humbly implore you with sweet words. Please give
up all pride and quickly develop sublime and incessant
rati for Śrī Gurudeva, Śrī Vraja-dhāma, the residents of
Vraja, the Vaiṣṇavas, the brāhmaṇas, your dīkṣā-mantras,
the holy names of the Supreme Lord, and the shelter of
Kiśora-Kiśorī, Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, the eternally
youthful divine couple of Vraja.]



This śloka is so important. If we do not follow it, we
cannot enter in all these moods. Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī
is a most dear rūpānuga Vaiṣṇava and if we will take
shelter of him, he will show us the way to enter in this
Nectar of Instruction. Otherwise we cannot enter. So we
should remember this śloka and keep it always in our
throats and try to do all these things. This is the
mercy. “Mahārāja, you should be merciful to me.
Mahārāja, you should be merciful to me. Gurudeva, you
should be merciful to me.” This is the mercy. You should
take this, then all your problems will go away. For
those who want to serve Kṛṣṇa, their only problem is how
to get Kṛṣṇa’s service—there is no problem other than
this. And if it is solved, everything is solved! So we
should not be absorbed so much in problems. Always
problems, problems, problems! The only problem is to get
Kṛṣṇa’s service—nothing else. People may reject us—no
harm. The whole world can reject us— no harm. But I know
that Kṛṣṇa will never forget us, never! He has promised,
“One may be rejected by one’s mother, father, husband,
wife, children, by the whole world, even by one’s guru
(so-called guru if he gives up his most qualified
devotees), but those who are giving up all these things
for Me, I can never give them up.” You will have to have
faith in Kṛṣṇa’s words:



sarva-dharmān parityajya

mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja



Mām ekaṁ. Surrender to Me only and there will never be
any problem for you. If you are Arjuna and you are
killing Bhīṣma Pitāmahā, you are killing your Gurudeva,
Dronācārya and Kṛpācārya, Aśvattāmā, you are killing
Duryodhana, Duḥśāsana and all of your hundred brothers,
if you are killing your relatives who are in
Duryodhana’s party and opposed to you, if you are
killing everyone, still you will get no reaction,
nothing! I will take all these reactions and burn them.
Don’t be worried about this.

How can Kṛṣṇa make this good promise? We will have to
trust His words. Otherwise, how can we go forward in
bhakti? Kṛṣṇa has said so many things more wonderful

                           139
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                   5/4/2017

than this, so we should follow these instructions if we
want to be like this. This is the mercy—my mercy, Rūpa
Gosvāmī’s mercy, gurudeva’s mercy, Mahāprabhu’s mercy—
everything is there.



gurau goṣṭhe goṣṭālayiṣu sujane bhūsura-gaṇe

sva-mantre śrī-nāmni vraja-nava-yuva-dvandva-śaraṇe

sadā dambhaṁ hitvā



Dambhaṁ means false ego. “I am a very beautiful lady. I
am a very handsome youth. I am so intelligent. I am so
wealthy. I am so qualified. I am Indian. I am
Vrajavāsī.” Give up all these false identifications. “If
you are not paying dakṣiṇā, I will give you a curse. You
should be a tortoise, like this (arms withdrawn). Your
sarvanāśa is happening.” Do you know what sarvanāśa
means?

Devotee: Destruction. You will be completely destroyed.

BVNM: Some Vrajavāsīs say, “First pay dakṣiṇā, lākṣmī,
lākṣmī.” These people are not really Vrajavāsīs. Gurau
goṣṭhe goṣṭālayiṣu sujane bhūsura. Guru. Who is guru?
Those who have taken some jewels from the treasury of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā. And what is that jewel? Here Swāmījī
has told—to serve Śrīmatī Rādhikā like Rūpa Mañjarī.
This is the jewel! Only those who have this jewel can
give it to you. Otherwise, those who have no jewels like
this, how can they give anything? They can only tell
what they have realized: “Bring money to build a
mandira.” Or, “I am giving you a visa for Goloka
Vṛndāvana and you will directly go there.” What is the
value of such a promise? To give this jewel is the main
reason why Prabhupāda came, but I think that those who
are making false promises have not understood their
guru’s true glory. So guru is he who has the jewel from
the treasure-house of Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

Gurau goṣṭhe: Guru is giving these things. He who is
taking everything—all wealth, all reputation, all
services from devotees— but not clearing our hearts, not
making them pure to offer at the lotus feet of Rādhikā,
then he is actually not guru. But to gurau—him you will
have to honor and serve.

Gurau goṣṭhe: What is the meaning of goṣṭha? Where Kṛṣṇa
lives—Nandagāon, Varsānā, Māyāpura, Gambhīra, all are
goṣṭha, but especially in Vraja-bhumī—Nandagāon,
Varsānā, Rādhā-kuṇḍa. These places are goṣṭha and you
will have to honor them.

Goṣṭhe goṣṭālayiṣu: goṣṭālayiṣu   are those who live in
goṣṭha, like Nanda Bābā, Yaśodā   Maiyā, Śrīdāma, Subala,
Madhumaṅgala, and all the gopas   and gopīs. Devotees like
Rūpa Gosvāmī, Sanātana Gosvāmī,   Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī,
and all following in their line   are also goṣṭālayiṣu.
The Vrajavāsīs of today are not   in this category. You
should serve goṣṭālayiṣu.

                          140
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                   5/4/2017


Goṣṭālayiṣu sujane: Sujane means devotees from other
sampradāyas like Madhvācārya, Rāmānuja. They are sujane,
serving Kṛṣṇa in His other forms. They may be residing
in Vṛndāvana, but they are not Vrajavāsī. What are they?
Sujana, sajjana, but not Vrajavāsī. Who are the
Vrajavāsīs? Those in the mood of the gopas and gopīs—
they are Vrajavāsīs. Those who have taken birth in
Vṛndāvana, Vraja-bhumī, are not necessarily Vrajavāsīs.
Real Vrajavāsīs can be anywhere in this world, but they
must have the mood of the gopas and gopīs. Sujane
bhūsura-gaṇe: Who is bhūsura? They are the brāhmaṇas,
serving Kṛṣṇa, but along with Him they are also serving
so many demigods. Still, they should be given some
honor.

Then bhūsura-gane sva-mantre. If you want to develop
your Kṛṣṇa consciousness, try to know the moods of the
mantras given by your Gurudeva. Punctually, daily, you
should try to say them as he has instructed you. And
then mahā-mantra, the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra, sva-mantre.
Guru has given that mantra. What mantra? Himself Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa:



Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare

Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare



This mantra and Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa conjugal. Giving up all of
your false ego, false walls and everything unfavorable,
you should say these mantras with so much honor, with
prīti, rati. You should serve all these persons and
places that Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī has told and that we
have explained. Then you will see that very soon you
will develop Kṛṣṇa consciousness. This is mercy. If you
want to take my mercy or of any rūpānuga Vaiṣṇava, this
is the mercy you should try to attain. This will solve
all our problems.

Gaura premānande!




Table of Contents

Chapter One: Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Śloka 5

Chapter Two: Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Śloka 5

Chapter Three: Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Ślokas 5-6

Chapter Four: Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Ślokas 6-7

Chapter Five: Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Ślokas 7-8

Chapter Six: Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Śloka 8

Chapter Seven: Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Śloka 8

                          141
Essence-of-All-Advice_-The.txt                  5/4/2017


Chapter Eight: Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Śloka 8

Chapter Nine: Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Ślokas 8-9

Chapter Ten: Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Ślokas 9-10

Chapter Eleven: Śrī Upadeśāmṛta, Ślokas 10-11




                          142
