Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

Prabandha Pañcakam - Five Essential Essays



Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

GVP (2011)



Rating:   ★★★★★

Tags: Prabandha Pañcakam Five Essential Essays Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

Prabandha Pañcakam Five Essential Essays Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmīttt



* * *




* * *




Śrī Śrī Guru Gaurāṇgau Jayataḥ



Prabandha Pañcakam

Five Essential Essays



Refuting Common Misconceptions In our Vaiṣṇava Community
Today

The Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Sampradāya & Sannyāsa

Pañcarātrika & Bhāgavata Guru-paramparā

The Gauḍīya Sampradāya is in the Line of Madhavācārya

Bābājī Veśa & Siddha-praṇalī

The Eligibility to Hear Rāsa-līlā Kathā



Electronic Edition

December 2003

Vṛndāvana, Uttar Pradesh, India

Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī

                           1
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

Mahārāja




Prabandha Pañcakam

Contents



Preface to the Electronic Edition

Chapter One The Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Sampradāya &
Sannyāsa

Chapter Two Pañcarātrika & Bhāgavata Guru-paramparā

Chapter Three The Gauḍīya Sampradāya is in the Line of
Madhavācārya

Chapter Four Bābājī Veśa and Siddha Pranālī

Chapter Five The Eligibility to Hear Rāsa-līlā Kathā

Addendum One “The Appearance Day Of Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Prabhupada”

Addendum Two “Boycott The Sahajiyā Bābājīs”




Preface to the Electronic Edition


The first print edition of Sri Prabandha Pañcakam was
presented to the devotee community in the year 1999,
through the efforts of Prema Rasa prabhu, Madhurika Dasi
and Śrīpād BV Araṇya Mahārāja. Our deepest thanks to
Srila Gurudeva for presenting this tattva siddhānta,
which is the cure for the disease of ignorance.

There are many mistaken ideas circulating in the devotee
community, which are especially prevalent on the
internet. Innocent devotees who do not have the ability
to refute apāsiddhānta are falling prey to the purveyors
of bogus conceptions and are leaving the path of bhakti.
This electronic edition of Sri Prabandha Pañcakam – Five
Essential Essays has been prepared for distribution on
the internet for the benefit of those devotees.

Included in this edition are two lectures by Srila
Gurudeva which glorify and follow the example of Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Prabhupāda who boldly
re-established the true conceptions of Śrīman Mahāprabhu
and the gosvāmis, and began the preaching mission which
is today bringing this pure bhakti tattva siddhānta to
every country in the world.

An excerpt from the lecture entitled “Boycott The
Sahajiyā Bābājīs”: “About ten years ago I went on Vraja

                           2
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

Maṇḍala Parikramā with Pujyapāda Janardana Mahārāja. We
went to Rādhā-Kunda, and there we challenged the
bābājīs. We had a discussion for three hours, but no one
came. I have also challenged those bābājīs in my book,
Five Essential Essays, but no one responded. After
reading that book they wanted to take us to court, and I
challenged them, "Yes, we will see you in court." But
they never came. Their lawyers had advised them not to
go to court, as they would have lost everything.” —
Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja


Aspiring for the service of Śrī Guru and Vaiṣṇavas


Kishore Krishna Dasa Brahmacari


Sri Gour Govinda Gauḍīya Math Birmingham, UK


Śrī Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Prabhupāda
Tirobhāva Tithi Samvat 2060, Nārāyan, Kṛṣṇa-cāturthī
12th December 2003




Introduction

Śrī Śācīnandana Gaura-hari descended upon the surface of
this world adorned with the sentiments and bodily lustre
of Śrī Rādhā and mercifully bestowed in charity a type
of Kṛṣṇa-prema which had not been given at any time
before in this kalpa. By also instigating the appearance
in this world of His eternal pastime associates such as
Śrī Svarūpā Dāmodara, Rāya Rāmānanda and the Six
Gosvāmīs headed by Śrī Rūpa and Raghunātha, He
distributed that very aspect of transcendental love for
Kṛṣṇa. By encouraging devotees from all sectors of
society such as Ṭhākura Haridāsa, Śrīvasa Paṇḍita,
Murāri Gupta, Paramānanda Purī and Brahmānanda Bhāratī
to engage in the activities of preaching śuddha-bhakti,
He made a success of the siddhanta: "kibā vipra, kibā
nyāsī śudra kene naya." Although Śrī Svarūpā Dāmodara
was a brahmacārī wearing saffron cloth and was
considered to be under the authority of the Dvārakā
Pīṭha in the Śaṇkara sampradāya at the time of his
residence in Vārāṇasī, he later became Śrīman
Mahāprabhu's chief assistant. Śrī Haridāsa Ṭhākura
appeared in a family of yavanas (mohammedans) and was
not initiated into any particular sampradāya, yet Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu conferred upon him the title
"Nāmācārya". Being extremely magnanimous, He accepted
into His fold devotees who had appeared in different
castes and creeds and in various countries of Bhārat
Varṣa. In this way śuddha-bhakti was preached throughout
the entire world in a matter of days.

However nowadays, as in the field of politics, we find
that envy, hatred, bickering, insubordination or
reluctance in the matter of accepting the guidance of
senior authorities and other anomalies, have also

                           3
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

entered the arena of dharma. In former times everyone
used to deeply revere the axiom “mahājano yena gataḥ sa
panthā” and honour the principle of ānugatya, (accepting
the guidance of one's respectable superiors). Due to the
deteriorating influence of time, some narrow-minded
modernists want to cut away at the holy thread of
ānugatya in the ancient paramparā-system and destroy
friendship between the pure sampradāyas. They consider
themselves important by inventing an imaginary process
of bhajana and then establishing it as authentic. These
people who are creating factions within the sampradāya
cannot understand that by their ignoble endeavours,
contrary to serving the mano 'bhiṣṭa or innermost
heart’s desire of Kali-yuga pāvana āvātārī Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, they are digging up the roots of the Śrī
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Sampradāya.

Those who accept Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu's philosophy of
acintya-bhedābheda-tattva and engage in sādhana-bhajana
under His guidance, who are cultivating devotional
service according to the conceptions of Śrī Nityānanda
Prabhu, Śrī Advaita Ācārya, Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara, Rāya
Rāmānanda and the Six Goswāmīs, those who accept the
"Hare Kṛṣṇa" mahā-mantra and the method of bhajana
prescribed by them, are all included within the family
of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. There may be many branches
among them such as the branches of Śrī Nityānanda,
Advaita, Narottama and Syāmānanda, however they are all
included in this Gaura-parivāra, the family of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Among them some may be
householders, some renunciates, others sannyāsīs some
may wear saffron cloth and others white cloth. However,
if they subscribe to the aforementioned conceptions, how
can they be excluded from the family of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu? The principal instruction of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu is:

tṛṇād api sunīcena taror api sahiṣṇunā amāninā mānadena
kīrtanīya sadā hariḥ

"Thinking oneself to be even lower and more worthless
than insignificant grass which has been trampled by
everyone's feet, being more tolerant than a tree, being
prideless and offering respect to all others according
to their respective positions, one should continuously
chant the holy name of Śrī Hari."

In the light of this verse, where is there any place for
enmity and ill-feeling among the members of the pure Śrī
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Sampradāya? What to speak of the other
Vaiṣṇava Sampradāyas of today, even in the Śaṇkara
sampradāya we see a unity and anugatya, or adherence to
t he principles of predecessors, which is lacking
everywhere in our Gauḍīya Sampradāya.

Therefore, with folded hands, it is our earnest prayer
that, after deeply and seriously studying this Prabandha
Pañcakam, the camaraderie within the pure sampradaya may
be protected and preserved.

In this book there are five essays. 1) The Śrī Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇava Sampradāya and Sannyāsa. 2) Pañcarātrika and
Bhāgavata Guru-paramparā. 3) The Gauḍīya Sampradāya is
in the Line of Madhavācārya. 4) Bābājī Veśa and Siddha-

                           4
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

praṇalī. 5) The Eligibility to Hear Rāsa-līlā Kathā. I
wrote the first of the essays fourteen years ago and it
was published in Śrī Bhāgavata Patrikā in the Hindi
language (year 4, issues 2 to 4). The second, third, and
fourth essays have been selected from my composition
entitled "Ācārya Kesarī Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī – His Life and Teachings." The fifth
essay was written as an introduction to my commentary on
the Veṇu-gīta if Śrīmad Bhāgavatam entitled "Ānanda
Varddhinī".

In the course of writing these essays, it was inevitable
that the names of persons, past and present, who have
encouraged various unfavorable opinions, would be
mentioned therein. Nevertheless, it was not my intention
to make anyone look insignificant or minimize anyone out
of malice. If reading these essays causes pain in
anyone's heart then I beg for forgiveness.

Praying for a slight trace of the mercy of Śrī Śrī Hari,
Guru and Vaiṣṇavas.

Śrī Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja

Śrī Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī Tirobhāva Tithi Samvat 2056,
Śravaṇa, Kṛṣṇa pañcami 2nd August 1999




Chapter One

The Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Sampradāya & Sannyāsa


Nowadays, as in the field of politics, we find that
envy, hatred, bickering, insubordination or reluctance
in the matter of accepting the guidance of senior
authorities and other anomalies, have also entered the
arena of dharma. In former times everyone used to deeply
revere the axiom “mahājano yena gataḥ sa panthā” and
honour the principle of ānugatya, (accepting the
guidance of one's respectable superiors). Due to the
deteriorating influence of time, some narrow-minded
modernists want to cut away at the holy thread of
ānugatya in the ancient paramparā-system and destroy
friendship between the pure sampradāyas. They consider
themselves important by inventing an imaginary process
of bhajana and then establishing it as authentic. These
people who are creating factions within the sampradāya
cannot understand that by their ignoble endeavours,
contrary to serving the mano 'bhiṣṭa or innermost
heart’s desire of Kali-yuga pāvana āvatārī Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, they are digging up the roots of the Śrī
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Sampradāya.

Recently Śrī Śyāmalāl Hakīm of Śrīdhāma Vṛndāvana edited
a commemorative publication entitled “Mahāprabhu Śrī
Gaurāṅga”. Beautiful articles, full of excellent
siddhānta, by some of Vṛndāvana's most respectable
scholars, gosvāmīs and vaiṣṇava ācāryas were included in
this publication. However, some essays by the editor and
a few new authors were actually contrary to śāstra and

                           5
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

based on a futile malice meant to ruin camaraderie
within the pure sampradāyas. In these essays they have
tried hard to advertise their own erudition in the
matter of establishing the pure, unfettered truth of the
sampradāyika conception, simply to procure a following
among those who might accept them as ācāryas. Their
completely misguided and groundless viewpoint is nothing
but an ill-motivated attempt to conceal the sun.
Therefore these articles are a disturbance to vaiṣṇavas
of the unalloyed Śrī Gauḍīya tradition.

The publication in question contains a number of
incoherent remarks such as, “In Kali-yuga, acceptance of
the renounced order of sannyāsa is invalid and against
the vedic injunctions.”“It is forbidden for Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavas to wear gairika (saffron) cloth.”“The sannyāsa
of Śrī Śañkarācārya, Śrī Rāmānujācārya, Śrī Madhvācārya
and others is not vedic.”“Those who observe varṅāśrama-
dharma cannot enter the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava bhajana-praṅālī
unless they renounce their social position.”“The Śrī
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Sampradāya has no connection with the
Śrī Madhva Sampradāya.”“There is a difference between
the conceptions of Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī and Śrī Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṅa.”“On receiving the mercy of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu, Prakāśānanda Sarasvatī became famous by the
name of Śrī Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī.”

After reading these mistaken viewpoints, the worshipful
vaiṣṇavas encouraged this poor and insignificant person
to present the opposing arguments. Carrying the order of
those worshipful vaiṣṇavas upon my head, I am beginning
this holy task. First of all, holding within my heart a
particle of dust from the lotus feet of the protector of
the Śrī Brahma Mādhva Gauḍīya Sampradāya, who is
situated in the tenth generation of the spiritual
hierarchy from Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, my
Paramārādhyatama Gurudeva, Ācārya Kesarī Nitya-līlā
Praviṣṭa Oṁ Visnupāda Aṣṭottaraśata Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti
Prajṇāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, I am presenting this
essay entitled, “The Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Sampradāya and
Sannyāsa.”

The varṅāśrama social order is the backbone of Indian
sanskṛti or sanātana dharma and its heart is bhagavata-
prema. The relationship between the varṅāśrama-system
and bhagavata-prema is the same as the relationship
between the body and the ātmā. Although the ātmā is of
primary importance, the body is not to be entirely
neglected in the conditioned stage. Similarly
varṅāśrama-dharma is not to be completely neglected
while in the conditioned stage of life. However it is
not correct to propose that varṅāśrama-dharma is the
ultimate word in dharma. On becoming situated in ātmā-
dharma, that is bhagavata-sevā, the aim and object of
varṅāśrama is fulfilled. Only in that stage is it
possible to be completely indifferent to varṅāśrama-
dharma and remain absorbed in unalloyed bhagavata-
bhajana. Wherever there is no varṅāśrama-system we also
see a lack of ātmā-dharma or pure bhagavata-bhakti. At
the most we see a semblance or perverted reflection of
bhakti. Therefore respect for daiva-varṅāśrama is
evident in all the sampradāyas of dharma in India. The
practitioner of bhakti can remain in whichever āśrama is
favourable for his sādhana-bhajana or, when he is

                           6
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

qualified, he can completely renounce varṅāśrama. It
should be especially noted that the regulations of
varṅāśrama have no control over those who are beyond
anartha-nivṛtti and in whom bhāva has made its
appearance. As long as such a stage is not attained, it
is desirable for Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas in the line of
Śrīman Mahāprabhu to externally accept varṅāśrama while
remaining detached and keeping the false ego of
identifying oneself with it far away. However, the
astonishing and novel conception of Śrī Hakīmjī does not
turn out to be genuine on the testing stone of this
siddhānta.

The main arguments presented by Śrīyukta Hakīmjī in
opposition to Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas accepting sannyāsa
and saffron cloth are as follows:

Objection 1) In the Vedas sannyāsa is described as the
fourth āśrama. One can enter this āśrama only after
passing through the other three āśramas, namely
brahmacarya, gṛhastha and vānaprastha. There is no
mention of any other type of sannyāsa in the Veda
śāstra. Buddhadeva, who was opposed to the Vedas,
initiated a new method of sannyāsa. The covered
Buddhist, Śrīpād Śañkarācārya then imitated him by
accepting sannyāsa at the age of only eight years old
without having first entered the other three āśramas.
Thus his sannyāsa was not vedic. More recently some
ācāryas initiated this same system of sannyāsa in their
own sampradāyas. Actually this sannyāsa is not
prescribed by the Vedas.

Objection 2) It is forbidden to accept sannyāsa in Kali-
yuga: aśvamedham gavālambham sannyāsam palapaitṛkam
devareṅa sutotpatti kalau paṇca vivarjayet

“Five practices are forbidden in Kali-yuga: horse
sacrifices, cow sacrifices, accepting sannyāsa, offering
oblations of flesh to one's forefathers and conceiving a
child in the womb of one's elder brother's wife.” (Śrī
Brahmavaivarta Purāṅa, Kṛṣṇajanmakhanda 185.180)

Objection 3) The custom of sannyāsa is not in current in
the sampradāya founded by Śrīman Mahāprabhu. From among
the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas who have taken shelter at the
lotus feet of Mahāprabhu such as Śrī Rūpa and Sanātana,
no one has ever accepted sannyāsa. Until the very end of
their lives they kept the same names by which they were
known before renouncing their homes.

Objection 4) After delivering Śrī Sārvabhauma
Bhattācārya, Śrīman Mahāprabhu, alluding to Himself
through the words of Śrī Sārvabhauma, expounded the
conclusion that sannyāsa is unnecessary, detrimental and
above all opposed to bhakti-dharma. (Śrī Caitanya-
bhagavata 3.3.30)

Objection 5) Śrīman Mahāprabhujī never instructed anyone
to accept sannyāsa. Rather He has given the instruction
to renounce the system of varṅāśrama: eta saba chāḍi āra
varṅāśrama dharma, akiṇcana haṇā laya kṛṣṇaika śaraṅa:
“Without hesitation, one should take exclusive shelter
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa with full confidence, giving up all bad
association and even neglecting the regulative

                           7
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

principles of varṅāśrama-dharma.” (Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta 2.22.93)

Objection 6) Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī has stated that it is
forbidden for Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas to wear saffron
cloth: rakta vastra vaiṣṅavera parite nā yuyāya. (Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta 3.13.61)

Objection 7) The acceptance of sannyāsa has not been
mentioned anywhere among the sixty-four añgas of bhakti.

Objection 8) In his commentary on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(11.18.22), Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has
established the fact that devotees are not members of
the āśrama system by the phrase:
“bhaktasyānāśramitvaṇca”.

Being ignorant of the pure principles of the sampradāya
and even offering a palm-full of water for the passing
away of common courtesy in spiritual matters, the
honourable Śrī Hakīmjī is pointlessly creating frivolous
controversy and factions in the Gauḍīya Sampradāya by
imitating the apasiddhāntic conceptions of authors who,
though expert in mundane knowledge and dry logic, are
completely bereft of genuine realisation and are thus
not even slightly fearful of committing severe vaiṣṇava-
aparādha. As if this were not sufficient, he does not
hesitate to present thoroughly false and perverse
explanations of scriptures such as Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta by hiding the facts mentioned therein.
Neither does he hesitate to refer to ācāryas of the pure
bhakti-sampradāyas such as Śrī Rāmānujācārya and Śrī
Madhvācārya as muktivādīs (salvationists) and non-vedic
sannyāsīs. Furthermore, he is not even afraid to
proclaim that Śrī Mādhavendra Purī and others are
advaita-vādī-sannyāsīs. Now we will systematically
expose the insubstantiality of the aforementioned
statements which are all offensive and contrary to
śāstra.

Refutation 1) Upon seeing the ideas of Śrī Hakīmjī it
appears that he has derived his understanding of the
Vedas from the statements written in the supplement to
Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta published by Śrīyukta Rādhā-
govindanātha. If he had personally read the vedas,
upaniṣads, smṛti, purāṅas and other śāstras then he
would never have written such assertions which have no
basis in scripture. It may be that his lack of knowledge
of the Sanskrit language poses an obstacle to his
personally reading the śruti, smṛti and so on. If so,
then it is absolutely improper to write anything without
having personally studied those śāstras. He should have
understood that by writing against the scriptural
conclusion, he would become a laughing stock among the
community of learned scholars who know śāstra. Sannyāsa
is a vedic custom which is applicable at all times. To
illustrate this we are presenting several examples from
śruti, smṛti and purāṅa on the subject of sannyāsa. The
verdict of śruti is as follows:

(a) sa hovāca yājṇavalkyaḥ/ brahmacaryam samāpta gṛhī
bhavet/ gṛhī bhūtvā vanī bhavet/ vanī bhūtvā pravrajet/
yadi vetarathā brahmacaryādeva pravrajed gṛhād vā vanād
vā/ atha punaravratī vā vratī vā snātako va'snātako vā

                           8
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt    5/5/2017

utsannāgniranagniko vā yadahareva virajet tadahareva
pravrajet.

Variations of this mantra, with only one or two words
different, can be found in

(i) Jāvālopaniṣad (4.1), (ii) Yājṇavalkyopaniṣad
(sañkhyā 1) and (iii) Paramāhāmsa Parivrājakopaniṣad
(sañkhyā 2). The meaning is:

“The saintly king Janaka Mahārāja inquired from the
great sage Yājṇavalkya, ‘O Bhagavān! Please explain to
me the qualifications and regulations governing the
acceptance of sannyāsa.’ Yājṇavalkya replied, ‘First of
all, strictly observing the vow of brahmacarya, one
should study the Vedas in the home of one's guru. Then,
after appropriately observing the occupational duties of
the gṛhastha-āśrama, one should accept vānaprastha.
Finally, after vānaprastha one should accept sannyāsa.
Before entering the gṛhastha-āśrama, if` one develops a
powerful sense of detachment from material life while
still in the stage of brahmacarya, then one should
accept sannyāsa directly from the brahmacarya-āśrama.
Otherwise, as soon as one's vairāgya is very strong, it
is quite appropriate to accept sannyāsa from the stages
of gṛhastha or vānaprastha. In other words, the
principle is that one may accept sannyāsa from the
position of any āśrama upon developing genuine
detachment. Whether one's study of the six limbs of the
Vedas is complete or not; having completed one's study
of the Vedas, whether one has taken bath as prescribed
by the Vedas or not; having ignited the sacrificial
fire, whether one has duly dismissed the presiding deity
of the sacrificial fire or not; whether one is married
or a widower; in any condition of life, one can accept
sannyāsa when intense vairāgya manifests in one's
character.”

A further explanation of sannyāsa is also clearly found
in Jāvālopaniṣad from the śukla section of Yājurveda:

(iv) atha parivrāḍ vivarṅavāsā muṅḍo'parigrahaḥ
śuciradrohī bhaikṣāno brahmabhūyāya bhavatīti/
yadyāturaḥ syānmanasā vācā vā sannyaset (15)

“Those who accept parivrajyā (sannyāsa) should wear
cloth which has been coloured saffron by geru (red
stone). They should have their hair shaved and
completely renounce the association of their wives, sons
and other relatives. Immediately after that they should
purify themselves externally and internally by fully
executing sādhana. Giving up all sense of hostility
towards others, they should perform the upāsana of
brahma in a pure and solitary place. Distressed persons
should accept sannyāsa only by words and mind.”

Now the question may arise, “Is the custom of sannyāsa
genuine or is it a concoction?” In answer to this it is
stated:

(v) eṣa panthā brahmanā hānuvitastenaivaiti sannyāsī
brahma vidityevamevaiṣa bhagavānniti vai yājṇavalkyaḥ
(16)


                           9
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

“The origin of the custom of sannyāsa is Lord Brahmā,
the grandfather of all the worlds. The sannyāsīs who
take shelter of this path of renunciation attain the
sac-cid-ānanda brahma and become competent to know
everything. Thus the path of sannyāsa is not imaginary;
it is real. Having heard this instruction from
Yājṇavalkya, Atri Ṛṣī accepted it by addressing him, ‘O
Bhagavān Yājṇavalkya!’”

vi) tridaṇḍam kamaṅḍalu ṣakyam jalapavitram patram śikhā
yajnopavītaṇca ityetat sarva bhusvāhetyapsu
parityajyātmānamanvicchet (18)

“After this, on attaining the stage of paramahaṁsa, the
signs of sannyāsa such as the tridaṇḍa, kamaṅḍalu,
śikhā, vasan, waterpot, kanthā, kaupīn, lower cloth and
uttarīya are also discarded.”

Now kindly examine the statements of smṛti:

(vii) viraktaḥ sarvakāmeṣu parivrājyam sabhāśrayet ekākī
vicarennityam tyaktvā sarvaparigraham (Viṣṅu Smṛti 4.2)

ekadaṅḍī bhavedvāpi tridaṇḍī vāpi vā bhavet (Viṣṅu Smṛti
4.10)

tridaṇḍam kuṅḍika caiva bhikṣādhāram tathaiva ca (Viṣṅu
Smṛti 4.12)

sūtram tathaiva gṛhṅīyānnityameva bahūdaka īṣatkṛt
kāṣāyasya liñgamāśritya tiṣṭhata (Viṣṅu Smṛti 4.18)

“One who is detached from all types of worldly desires
should accept sannyāsa. After accepting sannyāsa, he
should travel alone and he should maintain his life by
whatever is available in the way of alms without even
begging. He should carry ekadaṅḍa (single staff) or
tridaṇḍa (triple staff). The bahūdaka tridaṇḍī-sannyāsī
should carry a bowl for alms and a kamaṅḍalu. He should
wear a sacred thread and light-coloured saffron cloth.
Furthermore he should always meditate on Bhagavān within
his heart.”

It has also been stated in Hārītasmṛti:

(viii) tridaṇḍam vaiṣṇavam samyak santatam samaparvakam
veṣṭitam kṛṣṇagobālarajjumaccaturañgulam

saucārthamāsanārtham ca munibhiḥ samudāhṛtam
kaupīnācchādanam vāsaḥ kanthā śītanivāriṅīm

pāduke cāpi gṛhṅīyātkuryānnānthasya sañgraham etāni
tasya liñgāni yateḥ proktāni sarvadā (Hārītasmṛti
6.6,7,8)

“One should carry a tridaṇḍa made from bamboo rods which
all have the same number of knots. The rods should be
bound together by a strip of cloth measuring four
fingers in width and a rope of hairs from a black cow.
For the sake of purity and posture one should accept
kaupīn given by munis. To banish the effects of coldness
one should accept a ragged cloth and wooden sandals. One
should not collect any other items. These are said to be
the signs of a sannyāsī in all periods of time (four

                           10
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

yugas).”

It has been stated in the Mahānirvāṅa Tantra that even
in Kali-yuga the members of all four varṅas and also
common people outside the social castes have the right
to accept sannyāsa:

(ix) avadhūtāśramo devi kalau sannyāsa ucyate vidhinā
yena karttavyastam sarvam śṛṅu sāmpratam

brahmajṇāne samutpanne virate sarva karmaṅi
adhyātmavidyā nipuṅaḥ sannyāsāśramamāśrayet

brāhma kṣatriyo vaiśyaḥ śūdraḥ sāmānya eva ca
kulāvadhūta samskāre paṇcānāmadhikāritā
viprānamitareṣāṇca varṅānām prabale kalau ubhayatrāśrame
devi! sarveṣāmadhikāritā

(Mahānivārṅa Tantra 8th ullāsa)

“O Devi! In Kali-yuga the avadhūta-āśrama is called
sannyāsa. Now hear from me about the regulations
governing this āśrama. One who is expert in the
transcendental science of bhagavat-tattva, who is
detached from all kinds of fruitive activities and in
whom brahma-jṇāna has awakened, should accept the
renounced order of life, sannyāsa. Five categories of
people, namely brāhmaṅas, kṣatriyas, vaiśyas, sūdras and
common people from outside the social orders, can be
qualified in the matter of undergoing this sannyāsa-
saṁskara. Moreover, even when the influence of Kali is
powerful, vipras and also members of the other social
orders have the right to accept sannyāsa.”

In Manusmṛti it is stated:

(x) vāgdaṅḍo'tha manodaṅḍaḥ kāyadaṅḍastathaiva ca
yasyaite nihitā buddhau tridaṇḍīti sa ucyate (Manusmṛti
12.20)

“One who inflicts discipline (daṅḍa) on his words, body
and mind is called a tridaṇḍī-sannyāsī.”

In the immaculate purāṅa, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
tells Udḍhava about the origin of the four āśramas:

(xi) gṛhāśramo jaghanato brahmacarya hṛdo mama
vakṣaḥsthalādvane vāsaḥ sannyāsaḥ śirasi sthitaḥ

“The gṛhastha-āśrama has come from my thighs, the
brahmacarya-āśrama from my heart and the vānaprastha-
āśrama from my chest. However, sannyāsa is situated upon
my head.”(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.17.14)

Futhermore:

(xii) etām samāsthāya parātmāniṣṭhā madhyāsitām pūrva
tamairmaharṣibhiḥ aham tariṣyāmi durantapāram tamo
mukundāñghriniṣevayaiva

The Avantī Bhikṣu said, “Great ṛṣis and munis of yore
have taken shelter of this sannyāsa-āśrama in the form
of parātmā-niṣṭha (steadfast devotion to Bhagavān).
Having taken shelter of this same āśrama, I will also

                             11
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

easily cross over the insurmountable ocean of ignorance
by rendering service to the lotus feet of Śrī Mukunda.”

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.23.57)

In Skanda Purāṅa:

(xiii) śikhī yajṇopavītī syāt tridaṇḍī sakamaṅḍaluḥ sa
pavitraśca kāṣāyī gāyatrīṇca japet sadā

“A tridaṇḍī-sannyāsī should keep a śikhā, wear a sacred
thread and carry a kamaṅḍalu. He should dress in saffron
cloth and remaining ever pure, he should always chant
the gāyatrī-mantra.”

In Padma Purāṅa:

(xiv) ekavāsā dvivāsā vā śikhī yajṇopavītavān
kamaṅḍalukaro vidvānstridaṇḍo yāti tatparam

“A learned tridaṇḍī-sannyāsī should wear an outer cloth
and uttarīya, keep a śikhā, a sacred thread and
kamaṅḍalu. Having done so he should remain absorbed in
bhagavat-bhāva (transcendental emotion).” (Svargakhaṅḍa
Ādi. chapter 31)

(xv) In Samskāra Dīpikā, the supplement to Śrī Hari
Bhakti Vilāsa, written by Śrī Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, the
tridaṇḍa-sannyāsa saṁskāra and the regulations in regard
to wearing dor-kaupīn and saffron cloth are clearly
documented. An ancient manuscript of this text is
preserved in the royal library in Jaipur. This scripture
has been published by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura and it
is also mentioned in the Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Abhidhāna.

In ancient times, the custom of accepting tridaṇḍa-
sannyāsa was current among most vedic sannyāsīs. A rare
few also used to accept ekadaṅḍa. The rules governing
the acceptance of tridaṇḍa-sannyāsa are mentioned
everywhere throughout śruti, smṛti, purāṅa and āgama
śāstra, whereas the regulations in regard to ekadaṅḍa-
sannyāsa are few and far between. In the stage of
bahūdaka-sannyāsa, along with the three daṅḍas
signifying the discipline of speech, mind and body,
another prādeśamātra¹ daṅḍa representing jīva, the soul,
is attached in one place. Thus the tridaṇḍa is a
composite of four daṅḍas. The custom of tridaṇḍa-
sannyāsa is current in the sampradāyas of Śrī Rāmānuja
and Śrī Viṣṅusvāmī. The custom of ekadaṅḍa-sannyāsa
current in the sampradāya of Śrī Śañkarācārya is also
vedic sannyāsa. There is no system of accepting sannyāsa
among the Buddhists since they are opposed to the Vedas.
They become mendicants without any purificatory rites
such as receiving a daṅḍa and so on. Thus

(¹). prādeśamātra. A measurement equal to the distance
between the tip of the thumb and the tip of the index
finger. Hakīmjī's opinion that Śrīpād Śañkarācārya
imitated the sannyāsa of the Buddhists is completely
untrue and speculative. And straying even further from
the truth is the idea that the system of sannyāsa in the
sampradāyas of Ācārya Śrī Rāmānuja and Śrī Viṣṅusvāmī
came into use by copying the sannyāsa-rites of the Śrī
Śañkarācārya sampradāya.

                           12
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017


We have already shown that upon attaining the
qualification of intense detachment, the custom of
accepting sannyāsa from the position of any āśrama or
varṅa, at any time, regardless of one's age, is proper
in all respects according to the vedic scriptures. Thus
Ācārya Śañkara's acceptance of sannyāsa directly from
the brahmacarya-āśrama at the age of eight is fully
sanctioned by the vedas.

The vaiṣṇava-ācārya Śrī Madhva accepted ekadaṅḍa-
sannyāsa while maintaining his vaiṣṇava method of
worship and the same pure siddhānta (i.e. five types of
distinction; distinction between the jīva and īśvara
even in the state of liberation; the jīva is a servant
of Hari and so on.) This is not an imitation of
Śañkara's sannyāsa because Ācārya Śañkara is not the
original founder of the custom of ekadaṅḍa-sannyāsa. A
long time before Śañkara, in the vedic age, ekadaṅḍa and
tridaṇḍa were used. According to the Yājṇavalkyopaniṣad,
Śrī Brahmājī is the original founder of the sannyāsa-
āśrama and in ancient times great ṛṣis such as
Saṁvartaka, Āruṅi, Śvetaketu, Durvāsā, Ṛbhu, Nidāgha,
Dattātreya, Śuka, Vāmadeva and Hārīta achieved the
paramahaṁsa stage immediately after accepting sannyāsa.
In later times accounts can be found of 700 tridaṇḍi-
sannyāsīs in the Śrī Viṣṅusvāmī Sampradāya. They were
all pure vaiṣṇavas devoted to the service of Bhagavān.

According to the Sanskrit literature entitled Śrī
Vallabha-Digvijaya, Śrī Vallabhācārya became famous by
the name of Pūrṅānanda Yati after accepting tridaṇḍa-
sannyāsa in his old age from Śrī Mādhavendra Yati at
Hanumān Ghāṭ in Kāśī. It is a well-known fact that Śrī
Vallabhācārya performed worship in pure vātsalya-rasa.
According to Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta he accepted the
mantra for the worship of Yugala-kiśora from Śrī Gaura-
śakti Gadādhara Paṅḍita in Jagannātha Purī and from
vātsalya-rasa he was inspired to progress to the worship
of Kiśora-Gopāla.

vallabhatera-bhaṭṭa haya vātsalya-upāsana bāla-gopāla-
mantre tenho karena sevana

“Śrī Vallabha Bhaṭṭa was accustomed to worshipping Kṛṣṇa
as a child. Therefore he had been initiated into the
Bāla-Gopāla-mantra and was thus serving Him
accordingly.”

paṅḍitera sane tāra mana phiri gela kiśora-gopāla-
upāsanāya mana dila

“In the association of Gadādhara Paṅḍita his mind was
converted and he dedicated his heart to the worship of
Kiśora-Gopāla.” (Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta Antya
7.148,149)

Thus the accusation made by Śrī Hakīmjī that only
kevala-muktivādīs (impersonalists) accept sannyāsa and
that all the other ācāryas have imitated the sannyāsa of
the Śañkara sampradāya is also thoroughly groundless and
untrue. In regard to the sannyāsa of Śrī Viṣṅusvāmī and
Śrī Vallabhācārya we have shown that they were pure
vaiṣṇava sannyāsīs dedicated to bhakti. Now we shall

                           13
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

deliberate upon the sannyāsa of Śrī Rāmānuja and Śrī
Madhvācārya.

At first, Śrī Hakīmjī considered the sannyāsa of these
two ācāryas to be non-vedic. Then again, he was obliged
to concede that their sannyāsa was vedic. However, he
accepted that their sannyāsa was ordained by the
varṅāśrama-system by considering them to be muktivādīs.
Mukti is achieved by observing niṣkāma-varṅāśrama-
dharma, the execution of one's prescribed duties while
renouncing the fruits of action. Thus sannyāsa is
considered appropriate in the sādhana for achieving
mukti. However, objecting to sannyāsa in the Gauḍīya
Sampradāya, Śrī Hakīmjī professes that since the
objective of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Sampradāya is to
attain prema-sevā in Vraja there is no scope for the
custom of sannyāsa in the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Sampradāya.
This assertion of Śrī Hakīmjī is also offensive and born
of ignorance. Only those personalities who are
completely unaware of the authentic literatures of Śrī
Rāmānuja and Śrī Madhvācārya can utter such fictitious
statements. According to the authoritative texts of the
Śrī Sampradāya such as Śrī Bhāṣya, Vedārtha-sañgraha,
Prapannāmṛta and Gadyatraya, the jīva is
constitutionally the servant of Bhagavān. On the basis
of this established truth, the jīva can never attain
oneness with brahma. The highest mukti is servitude to
Bhagavān in Vaikuṅṭha. Śrī Madhvācārya is also of the
opinion that the jīva is the eternal attendant of Śrī
Hari and that mukti means to attain the service of the
lotus feet of Viṣṅu.²

(²) (a) śrīmadhvamate hariḥ paratamaḥ satam
jagattattvato bhado jīvagaṅā hareranucarā nīcoccabhāvam
gatāḥ (from the literature of Śrī Jayatīrtha and Śrī
Trivikramācārya), (b) 'mokṣam viṣṅavañghrilābham'
(Prameyaratnāvalī)]

Therefore mukti in the form of bhagavat-sevā as
propounded by these two sampradāyas is entirely
different from the nirviśeṣa-mukti of Śrī Śañkarācārya
which implies the oneness of the jīva with brahma. If
Hakīmjī were to see the verse of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
wherein it is stated, 'kaivalyaika prayojanam,' would he
also consider that the Śrīmad- Bhāgavatam is a text for
muktivādīs and that it is opposed to the Śrī Gauḍīya
conception? It is not proper to flare up immediately on
seeing the words ‘mukti’ and ‘kaivalya’. Rather, one
should understand the confidential meaning of these
words. Employing extensive scriptural evidence and
irrefutable arguments, commentators such as Śrīla Jīva
Gosvāmī have to interpreted the word ‘kevala’ to mean
‘viśuddha-prema’. In his Prīti Sandarbha, Śrīla Jīva
Gosvāmī has defined that the actual purport of the word
mukti is ‘prema-sevā’. Therefore the aforementioned two
sampradāyas are not philosophically opposed to the Śrī
Gauḍīya Sampradāya. All the vaiṣṇava sampradāyas agree
unanimously that viṣṅu-tattva is the object of our
worship, that the relationship between the jīva and
brahma is that of the servant and the served, that
bhakti is the sādhana and bhagavat-sevā (prema) is the
objective (prayojana). Svayam Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa and
Paravyomapati Śrīman Nārāyaṅa are not different from
each other in tattva (philosophical principles). The

                           14
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

distinction between the sampradāyas has arisen only due
to some specialities in regard to the relationship
between the worshiper and the object of worship. Thus
the same custom of sannyāsa which is practised in the
sampradāyas of Śrī Rāmānuja, Śrī Madhva and Śrī
Viṣṅusvāmī is in accordance with śāstra and also fit to
be accepted by the followers of Śrī Madhva who comprise
the Śrī Gauḍīya Sampradāya. The singular aim and
objective of sannyāsīs such as Śrī Mādhavendra Purī, Śrī
Viṣṅu Purī, Śrī Īśvara Purī, Śrī Rañga Purī and Śrī
Paramānanda Purī was only kṛṣṇa-prema. Śrī Hakīmjī or
anyone else cannot deny this fact. They had all entered
the path of bhakti first and then later accepted the
dress of niṣkiṇcana-sannyāsa because it was favourable
for aikāntika-bhakti, the cultivation of exclusive
devotion. Thus, following in the footsteps of these
prominent liberated personalities of the Śrī Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇava Sampradāya in accordance with the axiom
‘mahājano yena gataḥ sa panthā’, the custom of sannyāsa
is also thoroughly appropriate in this sampradāya.

Objection 2) In Kali-yuga sannyāsa is forbidden for all
sampradāyas: aśvamedham gavālambham sannyāsam
palapaitṛkam devareṅa sutotpattim kalau paṇca vivarjayet

“Five practices are forbidden in Kali-yuga: horse
sacrifices, cow sacrifices, accepting sannyāsa, offering
oblations of flesh to one’s forefathers and conceiving a
child in the womb of one's elder brother's wife.” (Śrī
Brahmavaivarta Purāṅa, Kṛṣṇajanmakhaṅḍa 185.180)

Refutation 2) Herein the point worthy of our
consideration is that the instructions of the vedas,
upaniṣads, purāṅas and smṛtis are applicable at all
times (sārvakālika). Sannyāsa is forbidden on the
strength of only one verse from Brahma Vaivarta Purāṅa,
whereas all the aforementioned authentic scriptures
unanimously endorse sannyāsa and saffron cloth for
qualified persons in every yuga. Thus it can be properly
understood that this prohibition is valid under some
special circumstances, not all circumstances, or that it
refers to a particular type of sannyāsa, because
elsewhere in that very same Brahma Vaivarta Purāṅa the
decree to accept sannyāsa and wear saffron cloth has
been given:

daṅḍam kamaṅḍalum raktavastram mātraṇca dhārayet nityam
pravāsī naikatra sa sannyāsīti kīrttitaḥ (Brahma
Vaivartta Purāṅa 2.36.9)

In Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu cited
as evidence the verse beginning with ‘aśvamedham’ from
Brahma Vaivarta Purāṅa to Caṅḍa Kāzī in opposition to
cow killing, not in connection with sannyāsa.

In Padma Purāṅa three types of sannyāsa have been
mentioned: jṇāna-sannyāsa, veda (vidvat or bhakti)-
sannyāsa and karma-sannyāsa.

jṇānasannyāsīnaḥ kecidvedasannyāsīno'pare
karmasannyāsinastvanye trividhāḥ parikīrttitaḥ (Padma
Purāṅa Ādi 31.)

Of these three, only karma-sannyāsa is forbidden in

                           15
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

Kali-yuga. Those who have no ātmā-jṇāna or whose goal is
not bhagavat-bhakti, yet they accept sannyāsa because
their senses have grown weak and they are incapable of
enjoying the happiness derived from the sense objects,
sound, touch, form, taste and smell, are called karma-
sannyāsīs. A devotee of Bhagavān is not a karmī, thus
the question of karma-sannyāsa does not arise. The
objective of jṇāna-sannyāsa is sāyujya-mukti. It is
stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.2.32):

āruhya kṛcchrena param padam tataḥ patantyadho'nādṛta
yuṣmadañghrayaḥ

“Those who rise up to the transcendental platform by the
execution of severe austerities fall down because they
have neglected to serve Your lotus feet.”

Thus devotees also do not accept jṇāna-sannyāsa for fear
of falling down. Bhagavat-bhaktas only accept veda-
sannyāsa which is also known as vidvat-sannyāsa. Even
their acceptance of vidvat-sannyāsa is only indicative
of parātmaniṣṭhā, dedication to the lotus feet of
Bhagavān. After accepting sannyāsa, Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, absorbed in ecstatic emotions, repeatedly
recited this verse from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam:

etām samāsthāya parātmaniṣṭhā madhyāsitām pūrva
tamairmaharṣibhiḥ aham tariṣyāmi durantapāram tamo
mukundāñghriniṣevanaiva (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.23.57)

Having recited this verse, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu said:

parātmaniṣṭhā-mātra veṣa dhāraṅa mukunda sevāya haya
saṁsāra tāraṅa

“The purpose of accepting sannyāsa is to dedicate
oneself to the service of Mukunda. By serving Mukunda
one can actually be liberated from the bondage of
material existence.”

sei veṣa kaila, ebe vṛndāvane giyā kṛṣṅāniṣevana kari
nibhṛte basiyā

“After accepting the sannyāsa order, Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu decided to go to Vṛndāvan and engage Himself
wholly and solely in the service of Mukunda in asolitary
place.”(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta Madhya 3.8, 9)

The regulations in regard to narottama-sannyāsa (vidvat-
sannyāsa) have also been given in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam:

ya svakātparato veha jātanirveda ātmavān hṛdi kṛtvā
hariṁ gehāt pravrajet sa narottamaḥ

“Those self-realised persons who, either by themselves
or by the instructions of others, become detached from
material existence, having understood that it is simply
full of suffering, and who accept sannyāsa, holding Śrī
Hari within their hearts, are called narottama.”(Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam 1.13.27)

Thus, after considering this matter and reconciling all
its aspects, one arrives at the conclusion that even in
Kali-yuga the acceptance of vidvat-sannyāsa or

                           16
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

narottama-sannyāsa (not karma-sannyāsa) is consistent
with śāstra in the case of one in whom detachment from
miserable worldly life has appeared and who has
completely renounced all material attachments for the
sake of unalloyed service to Bhagavān Śrī Mukunda. If it
is not despicable for a devotee to engage in bhajana
while remaining in the gṛhastha-āśrama, then how can it
be despicable for one to perform bhajana while remaining
in the superior āśrama of sannyāsa? Wherever one may be,
one must do bhajana. Thus it is incumbent upon the
individual to remain in whichever āśrama is favourable
for his bhajana. One should reject any unfavourable
elements and, giving up all attachment or identification
with one's external position within varṅāśrama, engage
in single-pointed hari-bhajana. This is the conclusion
of śāstra. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has said:

kibā vipra kibā nyāsī śūdra kene naya yei kṛṣṇa tattva
vettā sei guru haya

“Whether one is a brāhmaṅa, a sannyāsī or a śūdra,
regardless of one's position, one who knows kṛṣṇa-tattva
is a guru.” (Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta Madhya 8.128)

This statement of Śrīman Mahāprabhu supports the fact
that those in thesannyāsa-āśrama are also authorised
according to the Gauḍīya conception of bhajana and that
sannyāsa can be accepted in this age of Kali. A sannyāsī
who knows kṛṣṇa-tattva is honoured as an ācārya and
guru. Thus sannyāsa is neithercontemptible nor
forbidden.

Objection 3) “In the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Sampradāya founded
by Śrīman Mahāprabhu there is no custom of sannyāsa.”

Refutation 3) In this connection, those who know
sampradāya-tattva assert thatsvayam Bhagavān
Vrajendranandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa has appeared in Kali-yuga in
theform of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Just as āvatāras
such as Śrī Rāmacandra and also Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra Himself
have not inaugurated any sampradāya, similarly, to
consider Śrīman Mahāprabhu as the founder of a
sampradāya is incorrect and

opposed to śāstra. The activity of establishing a
sampradāya is not the duty of Bhagavān. He accomplishes
this task through His servants, namely Śrī Brahmājī, Śrī
Lakṣmījī, Śrī Rudra and Śrī Sanat Kumāra. If Śrīman
Mahāprabhu is accepted as the founder of a sampradāya
then a question mark will be applied to His scripturally
proven status as the origin of all incarnations
(bhagavad-āvatārī) because there is no available
evidence to prove that a sampradāya has ever been
inaugurated by any āvatāra of Bhagavān. Thus Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who is Svayaṁ Bhagavān, has not
formed or initiated a new sampradāya. Rather, acting in
compliance with His nara-līlā (human-like pastimes), He
protected the vaiṣṇava-guru-paramparā by accepting dīkṣā
into the Śrī Brahma-Madhva Sampradāya. In doing so He
also made this sampradāya the most excellent of all in
regard to its goal (sādhya) and method of attainment
(sādhana) by bestowing the supremely sweet and
incomparable system of worship of the topmost and
superlatively sweet feature of the worshipable principle

                           17
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

(upāsya-tattva).

At this point it will not be irrelevant to reveal the
fact that Śrīyukta Sundarānanda Vidyāvinoda, Śrī Rādhā-
govindanāth and Śrī Hakīmjī want to change the body of
the ancient sampradāya by establishing Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu as the founder of His sampradāya and in doing
so they have no fixed siddhānta.³ These personalities,
like the politicians of the modern era, are also expert
at changing their conclusions. Whatever siddhānta they
accept today, tomorrow they say the opposite. The
opinions of those who repeatedly change their viewpoints
are never reliable. Śrī Sundārananda Vidyāvinoda has
established his own fame by his fluctuating siddhānta
and by abandoning his gurudeva. Śrī Rādhāgovindanāth has
written in the first three editions of his publication
of Śrī Caitanya Caritāmṛta that the Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava
Sampradāya is in the line of the Śrī Madhva Sampradāya.
Then in the fourth edition, withdrawing his previous
conclusion, he has accepted groundless, speculative and
defective arguments to establish that the Śrī Gauḍīya
Sampradāya is an independent sampradāya. The honourable
Śrī Rādhāgovindanāth was not a pure vaiṣṇava initiated
into any vaiṣṇava sampradāya. How can those who are
bereft of a connection with a pure guru-paramparā come
to know the confidential and mysterious sāmpradāyika
siddhāntas? Imitating his sikṣā-gurus, Śrī Hakīmjī has
also defined one type of conclusion in regard to Śrīman
Mahāprabhu's sampradāya, sannyāsa veśa and so on in the
commentary of the first edition of his Śrī Caitanya
Caritāmṛta, then in the second edition he has defined
exactly the opposite conclusion. Wherever there is a
lack of bhajana-sādhana, wherever there is no factual
realization of tattva and wherever there is a lack of
firm faith in Śrī Guru and the guru-paramparā, in that
place there can never be steadiness in the unwavering
siddhānta.

(³) See the first edition of Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta
published by Śrī Hakīmjī. In his Caitanya Caraṅacumbinī
commentary, Madhya-līlā, Chapter 9, verse 249, Hakīmjī
has also written that Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is not a
sampradāyācārya – a conclusion to which he is now
opposed.

By accepting the opinions of such people, the only gain
will be anartha and vaiṣṇava-āparādha, not paramārtha
(prema). By analyzing the history of the sampradāyas it
can be clearly seen that until this very day the duty of
founding a sampradāya has been accomplished exclusively
by either the śakti or the servants of Viṣṅu. Although
Śrī Bhagavān has been called the original founder of
sanātana-dharma in the statements of śāstra such as:
dharman tu sākṣād bhagavat pranitaṁ (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
6.3.19) and dharmojagannāthāt sakṣānnārāyaṅāt
(Mahābhārata, śāntiparva 348,54), nevertheless, by
scriptural evidence such as: akartā caiva kartā ca
kāryaṁ kāraṅam eva ca (Mahābhārata, śāntiparva 348,60)
it is proven that sarva kāraṅa-kāraṅa Śrī Bhagavān, the
cause of all causes, does not directly intervene in the
task of establishing a sampradāya. He causes this to be
accomplished through the agency of personalities who are
invested with His potency. If it were not so then
instead of being called the Brahma-Sampradāya, Śrī-

                           18
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

Sampradāya, Catuḥsana-Sampradāya and Rudra-Sampradāya,
the sampradāyas would be celebrated by names such as the
Śrī Vāsudeva-Sampradāya, Nārāyaṅa-Sampradāya and
Sañkarṣana-Sampradāya. The manifestations of śrī viṣṅu-
tattva are the worshipful deities of the sat or
sāttvata-sampradāyas. From among Them, Śrī Kṛṣṇa or Śrī
Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu are the viṣṅu paratattva. By
accepting Śrī Kṛṣṇa or Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu as
only sampradāya-founding gurus, then it is inevitable
that They will be considered equal to or rivals with
Brahmā, Lakṣmījī, Catuḥsana, Śrī Rāmānuja, Śrī Madhva
and so on. To consider Them as such is contrary to
siddhānta. Therefore, in the literature of the Gosvāmīs
headed by Śrī Rupa and Sanātana, and in the literature
of the succeeding Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava ācāryas such as Śrī
Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhakura, Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṅa and Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, it is not written anywhere that
the Śrī Gauḍīya vaiṣṇavas are the “Caitanya Sampradāya”.
Thus Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu can never be called the
founder of a sampradāya.

Before accepting sannyāsa, Śrī Mādhavendra Purī had
accepted dīkṣā from Śrī Lakṣmīpati Tīrtha of the Madhva
Sampradāya. Later, upon the awakening of intense
vairāgya and an ardent longing to perform bhajana in
vraja-bhāva, he accepted sannyāsa from a sannyāsī
bearing the title “Purī”. Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu (who,
according to the opinion of some, is a disciple of Śrī
Lakṣmīpati Tīrtha), Śrī Īśvara Purī, Śrī Rañga Purī, Śrī
Paramānanda Purī, Śrī Brahmānanda Purī, Śrī Viṣṅu Purī,
Śrī Keśava Purī, Śrī Kṛṣṅānanda Purī and Śrī Sukhānanda
Purī were all sannyāsa disciples of Śrī Mādhavendra
Purī. He also had many disciples in the gṛhastha āśrama
such as Śrī Advaita Ācārya, Śrī Puṅḍarīka Vidyānidhi,
the Sānoḍiyā Vipra from Mathurā and Raghupati Upādhyāya
of Maithila. Śrī Keśava Bhāratī, the sannyāsa-veśa guru
of Śrīman Mahāprabhu, had also accepted dīkṣā from Śrī
Mādhavendra Purī during his household life. Later, to
engage exclusively in kṛṣṇa-bhajana, he accepted
niṣkiṇcana-sannyāsa veśa from a sannyāsī bearing the
title “Bhāratī”. Śrī Keśava Bhāratī has been described
as a disciple of Śrī Mādhavendra Purī in Prema Vilāsa,
vilāsa 23.

Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara was also a sannyāsī wearing saffron
cloth. Among all the premī-bhaktas, he was the highest
bhāgavata devotee from the very beginning of his life.
Later he accepted sannyāsa only for the sake of
perfection in unalloyed kṛṣṇa-bhajana. Out of all of
these examples, not even one of them had entered the
path of bhakti after accepting sannyāsa in the
advaitavādī line of Śāñkara. They were all already
situated in the bhakti-mārga. Śrī Hakīmjī and Śrī
Rādhāgovindanāth say that they had entered the path of
bhakti after accepting advaitavādī-sannyāsa and that
they did not give up their previous sannyāsa names and
sannyāsa cloth simply to show respect to their previous
ācāryas. However the actual facts and history are quite
the opposite. Is it that Śrī Īśvara Purī and these other
prominent personalities, prior to entering bhakti-mārga,
had taken advaita-sannyāsa from the advaitavādī
Mādhavendra Purī? And were they advaitavādīs? Have
Hakīmjī and those greatly realized persons who share his

                           19
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

opinion presented any sound evidence to prove this? Will
they be able to show some evidence in the future? Were
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu and Śrī
Svarūpa Dāmodara first advaitavādī sannyāsīs who later
entered bhakti-mārga? Never. Any discerning person can
never accept this.

After Śrīman Mahāprabhu, His līlā-parikaras (eternal
pastime associates) such as the six Gosvāmīs, Śrī
Lokanāth and Bhūgarbha, and later Śrī Kṛṣṇadāsa
Kavirāja, Śrī Narottama Ṭhākura and Śrī Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura were naturally niṣkiṇcana paramahaṁsa
vaiṣṇavas. There was no need for them to wear sannyāsa-
veśā or saffron cloth. Secondly, Śrīman Mahāprabhu had
performed the līlā of wearing sannyāsa-veśā and saffron
cloth. Thus considering themselves to be worthless,
lowly and unqualified, these mahātmās did not wear
sannyāsa-veśā and saffron cloth in order to show honour
and respect to the veśā of Śrīman Mahāprabhu and also to
maintain their own identities as servants under the
shelter of His lotus feet. On the other hand, in order
to express veneration for the niṣkiṇcana paramahaṁsa-
veśā of the associates of Śrīman Mahāprabhu and, under
their guidance, to preach His message throughout the
entire world, many akiṇcana vaiṣṇavas on the path of
rāgānuga-bhajana, holding the paramahaṁsa-veśā

upon their heads, have accepted a position below their
worshipable superiors by wearing the veśā and saffron
cloth of the sannyāsa āśrama which is includedwithin the
system of varṅāśrama dharma. These two customs, each
having their own place, are both exquisitely beautiful
and also completely in accordance with siddhānta. Today
śuddha hari-bhakti has been, is being and will continue
to be, preached and spread throughout the world by these
mahāpuruṣa, great perfected saints, who wear this second
type of niṣkiṇcana sannyāsa-veśā. The names of some of
these mahāpuruṣa sannyāsīs of the Gauḍīya Sampradāya are
as follows:

1) Śrī Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī: Śrī Prabodhānanda
Sarasvatī was the guru and paternal uncle of Śrī
GopālaBhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. He was a recipient of the mercy of
Śrīman Mahāprabhu. In addition to being a greatly
learned scholar and a natural poet, he was also fully
absorbed in bhajana.

2) Śrī Viśvarūpa Prabhu: Śrī Viśvarūpa was the elder
brother of Śrīman Mahāprabhu. After accepting sannyāsa
his name was Śrī Śañkarāraṅya. He never had any
connection with advaitavāda. He was a devotee from the
very beginning of his life.

3) Śrī Rādhikānāth Gosvāmī: Śrī Rādhikānāth Gosvāmī was
a greatly learned scholar and tattva-vid vaiṣṇava-ācārya
who appeared amongst the Gauḍīya vaiṣṇavas of the Śrī
Advaita-vaṁśa. He was a sannyāsī residing in Vrndāvana
and he used to wear saffron cloth and carry a tridaṇḍa.
He has quoted numerous statements of scriptural evidence
onthe subject of sannyāsa, eligibility for sannyāsa, its
necessity and regulations in his text entitled ‘Yati
Darpaṅa’.

4) Śrī Gauragovindānanda: Śrī Gauragovindānanda was a

                           20
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

disciple of Śrī Paramānanda Purī. His academicprowess
was unrivaled during his time. He was immersed in
single-pointed bhajana and his life's breath was Śrī
Gaurasundara. His sannyāsa name was Parivrājakācārya Śrī
Gaura-Govindānanda (Purī) Bhāgavata Svāmī. A vyavasthā-
patra (certified document) written by him in Sanskrit
verses to show that the Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Sampradāya
is in the line of Śrī Madhva is especially famous.

5) Śrī Gaura-gopāla Gosvāmī: Śrī Gaura-gopāla Gosvāmī
was a resident of Śrī Dhāma Navadvīpa and a celebrated
scholar of the Advaita-vaṁśa. He also accepted tridaṇḍa-
sannyāsa. Hissannyāsa name was “Śrī Guru-Gauravānanda
Mahārāja”.

6) Śrī Sārvabhauma Madhusūdana Gosvāmī: The renowned and
supremely erudite Śrī Sārvabhauma Madhūsudana Gosvāmī,
one of the famous Gosvāmīs of Śrī Rādhā-ramaṅa in Śrī
Vṛndāvana Dhāma, alsoaccepted sannyāsa and saffron
cloth.

7) Śrī Bālakṛṣṇa Gosvāmī: Śrī Bālakṛṣṇa Gosvāmī was one
of the Gosvāmīs of Śrī Rādhā-ramaṅa in Vṛndāvana. He
accepted tridaṇḍa and veśa from Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya
Gosvāmī.

9) Śrī Atula Kṛṣṇa Gosvāmī:Śrī Atula Kṛṣṇa Gosvāmī,
whose life and soul is Śrī Gaurasundara, is an eminent
scholar and exceedingly famous Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
commentator among the Gosvāmīs of Śrī Rādhā-ramaṅa in
Śrīdhāma Vṛndāvana. He has accepted sannyāsa-veśa from
Śrī Vidyāmānya Tīrtha, the leader of the vaiṣṇava
communityat the headquarters of the Śrī Madhvācārya
Sampradāya in Uḍupī. Nevertheless,he has maintained the
same tilaka, mantra, bhajana-pranālī and devotion to
Śrīman Mahāprabhu of his Gauḍīya parampara as he had
done prior to his accepting sannyāsa. His sannyāsa name
is “Śrī Caitanya Kṛṣṅāśraya Tīrtha Mahārāja”. He
iscurrently preaching the message of Śrī Gaurasundara
throughout India.

10) Jagadguru Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī: Śrī
Vimalā Prasāda Sarasvatī Ṭhākura preached throughout the
entire world thatharināma and śuddha-bhakti which
fulfills the innermost heart's desire of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu. He is also the founder of the Śrī Gauḍīya
Maṭhas in every state and country. After accepting
sannyāsa, he was celebrated by the name of Paramahaṁsa
Parivrājakācārya Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
“Prabhupāda”. Out of humility, he used to introduce
himself as “Śrī Vārṣabhānavī Dayita Dāsa”.

Hundreds of immensely talented and learned sannyāsa
disciples and grand-disciples of Śrīla Sarasvatī
Ṭhākura, being absorbed in bhajana and dedicated to the
service of Śrī Guru and Gaurāṅga, have preached and
spread the message ofŚrī Gaura throughout India and all
countries, large and small, throughout theentire world.
This powerful propagation is also going on today. Among
them, names such as Paramārādhya Parivrājakācārya Śrīmad
Bhakti Prajṇāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, Śrīmad Bhakti
Hṛdaya Vana Māhāraja, Śrīmad Bhakti Sārañga Gosvāmī
Mahārāja, Śrīmad Bhakti Dayita Mādhava Gosvāmī Mahārāja.
Śrīmad Bhakti Vilāsa Tīrtha Mahārāja, Śrīmad Bhakti

                           21
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

Bhūdeva Srautī Mahārāja,Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Swāmī
Mahārāja (the famous preacher of the message of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu throughout the Western countries) and
Parivrājakācārya Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Rakṣaka Śrīdhara
Gosvāmī Mahārāja are especially worthy of a mention. By
the great endeavours and service of these mahāpurusas,
many journals and authentic scriptures such as Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, Gītā and Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta are being
published in Indian languages such as Sanskrit, Hindi,
Bengali, Oṛiyā, Āsāmī, Gujarātī, Tamil and Telugu and
also in the languages of major nations such as English,
French, Spanish, Chinese, Russian and Japanese. This
invaluable literature is now available in about 40 or
50prominent languages of the world, including the
various languages of majorcontinents such as South
America and Africa. Vast temples of Śrī Śrī Gaura-
Nityānanda, Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Sītā-Rāma and Śrī
Jagannāthadeva have beenconstructed and are being
constructed everywhere. Abandoning all sectarianismin
regard to caste and creed, thousands of faithful ladies
and gentlemen withkaratāla and mṛdañga are loudly
chanting “Hari bol! Hari bol! “ and findingexhilaration
in sañkīrtana. Are Hakīmjī and his śikṣa-guruvarga not
committingmahā-vaiṣṇava aparādha by claiming that these
brilliant, supremely learned, parama niṣkiṇcana tridaṇḍi
sannyāsīs and brahmacāris attired in saffron cloth,
whose entire lives are dedicated to Śrī Gaurasundara,
are acting independently according to their own desire
and that they not following in the footsteps of the
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṅavācārya Gosvāmīs? Then why in his own
“smārikā”(commemorative publication) has he shown the
names and pictures of these very mahāvaiṣṇava ācāryas
and described them in writing as Śrī Brahma-Mādhva
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava ācāryas or Śrīman Mādhva-
Gauḍeśvarācāryas? Thus the validity of sannyāsa and
saffron cloth in the Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Sampradāya,
both before and after the time of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, has been established herein.

Objection 3b: Until the very end of their lives Śrī
Gauḍīya vaiṣṇavas such as Śrī Rūpa andSanātana kept the
same names by which they were known before renouncing
their homes.

Refutation 3b: As far as the matter of keeping their
previous names and veśa until the end of their lives is
concerned, this idea of Hakīmjī is also completely
misguided. Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu's previous name was
‘Kuvera’. ‘Nityānanda’ is his sannyāsa name. Śrī Advaita
Ācārya's previous name was Kamalākṣa or Kamalākānta.
ŚrīSanātana Gosvāmī's previous name was ‘Amara’. The
name given to him by Gauḍeśvara Hussein śhāh was ‘Sākara
Mallik’ and the name given by ŚrīmanMahāprabhu was ‘Śrī
Sanātana’. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī's previous name
was‘Santoṣa’. The name given to him by Hussein śhāh was
‘Dabīr Khāsa’ and thename given by Śrīman Mahāprabhu was
‘Śrī Rūpa’. When Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura
accepted veśa his name became 'Śrī Hari Vallabha Dāsa'.

According to 'Saṁskāra Dīpikā', written by Śrī Gopala
Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, the rule of accepting a name indicating
servitude to Bhagavān is included in the rites for
taking shelter of tridaṇḍa sannyāsa-veśa. Even the
custom of veśa employed at a later time is one type of

                           22
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

sannyāsa, because there is no need of vidhi
(regulations) to govern the behaviour of niṣkiṇcana
paramahaṁsas. There is no question of them being
controlled by the goad of scriptural injunctions. It is
also customary to accept a name indicating servitude to
Bhagavān at the time of taking shelter of this veśa. For
example, Śrī Kṛṣṇadāsa Bābājī Mahārāja (previously
Vaṭakṛṣṇa) and Śrīla Gaura Kiśora Dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja
(previously Vaṁśīdāsa) to name but a few. There is
evidence of thousands of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas changing
their previous names. Thus this opinion of Hakīmjī is
also simply childish ranting.

Refutation 3c) Among those who had taken shelter of the
lotus feet of Śrīman Mahāprabhu, not all were niṣkiṇcana
paramahaṁsa gosvāmīs and not all were indifferent to the
varṅāśrama system. There were mahāpuruṣas in all
categories; brahmacārīs such as Śrī Nakula Brahmacārī
and Śrī Pradyumna Brahmacārī, gṛhastha devotees such as
Śrī Advaita Ācārya, Śrīvāsa Paṅḍita, Śrī Śivānanda Sena
and Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya, sannyāsīs such as Śrī
Paramānanda Purī, Śrī Rañga Purī and Brahmānanda
Bhāratī, and prominent niṣkiṇcana mahābhāgavatas such as
Śrī Rūpa and Sanātana. However, there was not even a
trace of attachment or identification with varṅāśrama or
veśa in any of them. Their acceptance of varṅāśrama or
veśa was wholly and solely to provide a favourable
situation for their bhajana. Therefore the idea that
those who have accepted sannyāsa veśa have no
eligibility for Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava rāgānugā bhajana is
contrary to Gauḍīya siddhānta.

Objection 4) After delivering Śrī Sārvabhauma
Bhaṭṭācārya, Śrīman Mahāprabhu, alluding to Himself
through the words of Śrī Sārvabhauma, expounded the
conclusion that sannyāsa is unnecessary, detrimental and
above all opposed to bhakti-dharma. (Śrī Caitanya
Bhāgavata 3.3.30)

Refutation 4) In Śrī Caitanya-bhāgavata there is a
description of a conversation about sannyāsa between Śrī
Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya and Śrīman Mahāprabhu which
takes place prior to the deliverance of Śrī
Sārvabhaumajī. Śrī Hakīmjī has deliberately hidden this
incident from the readers. This incident is mentioned in
Śrī Caitanya Bhāgavata as follows:

nā jāniyā sārvabhauma īśvarera marma kahite lāgilā ye
jīvera yata dharma

param subuddhi tumī haiyā āpane tabe tumi sannyāsa
karilā ki kāraṅe

bujha dekhi vicāriyā ki āche sannyāse prathameī baddha
haya ahañkāra-pāśe

daṅḍa dhari mahājṇāna haya āpanāre kāhāreo bal joḍa ista
nāhi kare

yāra padadhūli laite vedera vihita hena jana namaskare,
tabu nahe bhīta (Śrī Caitanya Bhāgavata, Ādi 3/18-22)

Being quite ignorant of bhakti and bhakti-tattva, Śrī
Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya considered Śrīman Mahāprabhu,

                           23
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

who is directly Vrajendranandana Kṛṣṇa, adorned with the
sentiment and complexion of Śrī Rādhā, to be an ordinary
śāñkarite sannyāsī of tender years. With this idea in
mind, he began to behave as if he were imparting
instructions to an ignorant jīva. He said to Śrīman
Mahāprabhu, “You are the recipient of Kṛṣṇa's great
mercy. You also seem to be highly intelligent. So why
have you accepted sannyāsa? Just consider for a moment,
what is the value of sannyāsa? As soon as he carries a
daṅḍa, the jīva thinks of himself as a great jṇānī and
becomes bound up in the ropes of false ego. He can never
politely join his palms and speak to anyone with great
humility. The Vedas decree that one should accept the
foot dust of one's gurujana (superiors). Yet the
sannyāsī is not even afraid of committing aparādha on
seeing such gurujana offering their obeisances to him.
In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam we find the injunction to offer
praṅāma to all living entities:

visṛjya smayamānān svān dṛsaṁ vrīḍāṁ ca daihikīm
praṅamed daṅḍa-vad bhūmāv ā-śva-cāṅḍāla-go-kharam
(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.29.16)

manasaitāni bhūtāni praṅamed bahu-mānayan īśvaro jīva-
kalayā praviṣṭo bhagavān iti (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.29.34)

Śrī Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya continued:

“Bhagavān is also present within the hearts of the jīvas
in the form of the antaryāmī, paramātma. Understanding
this, one should offer sāṣṭāñga daṅḍavat praṅāma to all
jīvas, including dogs, dog-eaters, cows and asses.
However, a sannyāsī rejects his sacred thread and śikhā,
gives up bhagavat-bhajana, calls himself Nārāyaṅa and
accepts obeisances even from personalities who are
worthy of worship.”

Śrīman Mahāprabhu very humbly replied, “Do not consider
Me to be a sannyāsī. I have abandoned My home and given
up My śikhā and sacred thread only for the sake of
dedicating Myself exclusively to kṛṣṇa-bhajana.
Understanding Me to be afflicted by separation from
Kṛṣṇa, mercifully bless me so that I may meet My beloved
Kṛṣṇa.”

On another occasion Śrīman Mahāprabhuji spoke as
follows:

prabhu kahe, sādhu eī bhikṣura vacana mukunda-sevana
vrata kaila nirdhāraṅa

parātma-niṣṭhā-mātra veṣa-dhāraṅa mukunda-sevāya haya
saṁsāra-tāraṅa

seī veṣa kaila, ebe vṛndāvana giyā kṛṣṇa-niṣevana kari
nibhṛte vasiyā

“The statement of the tridaṇḍi bhikṣuka is true and
beneficial because he has made a determined vow to
engage in the service of the lotus feet of Śrī Mukunda.
The purport of sannyāsa-veśa is that by being fixed in
the service of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is the supreme soul and
the cause of all causes, one can give up all material
misidentification. When such niṣṭhā arises, one can

                           24
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

attain the service of Bhagavān Śrī Mukunda and very
easily cross over the ocean of birth and death. Having
accepted sannyāsa, now I will go to Vṛndāvana and, while
remaining in a solitary place, far from the tumult of
the mundane world, I will serve the lotus feet of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.” (Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta Madhya 3.7, 8, 9) After
accepting sannyāsa, although Śrīman Mahāprabhujī set off
for Vṛndāvana, He ended up in Śrī Jagannātha Purī. It
was there that He met with Śrī Sārvabhauma. At that time
Sārvabhaumajī gave Him the aforementioned instructions
defining the defects of sannyāsa. However, after hearing
Śrīman Mahāprabhu's explanation of the ‘ātmārāmaśca’
verse and after having darśana of His ṣaḍ-bhuja form,
Śrī Sārvabhauma 's illusion was dispelled. Then he began
to honour all of Śrīman Mahāprabhu's gṛhastha and
sannyāsī associates.

In all the scriptures such as Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta,
Śrī Caitanya Bhāgavata and Śrī Caitanya Candrāmṛta, one
will find a mood of veneration towards the sannyāsa
āśrama.

Śrī Sārvabhauma has stated:

sahajeī pūjya tumi are ta' sannyāsa ataeva haūṇ tomāra
āmi nija-dāsa

“You are naturally respectable and in addition to this
you are also a sannyāsī. Therefore I have become your
servant.”(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya 6.56)

As far as the matter of accepting praṅāmas and
considering oneself to be Nārāyaṅa is concerned, such
behaviour is totally opposed to vaiṣṇava-sannyāsa. In
Yājṇavalkyopaniṣad the injunction has been given that
all sannyāsīs should offer sāṣṭāñga praṅāma to all
living entities from outcaste dog-eaters to cows, asses,
birds and beasts

īśvaro jīva kalayā praviṣṭo bhagavāniti praṅamed
daṅḍavad bhamāvāśva cāṅḍāla gokharam
(Yājṇavalkyopaniṣad, mantra 4)

In ‘Saṁskara Dīpikā’, written by Śrī Gopāla Bhaṭṭa
Gosvāmī, it is clearly explained that the sannyāsa-
mantra is the mantra for attaining “gopī-bhāva”. In this
type of sannyāsa the śikhā and sacred thread are not
discarded. Sannyāsa-veśa is only accepted externally for
the purpose of engaging in one-pointed bhajana to the
lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā-Govinda. While internally
following the moods of the gopīs of Vraja, one
externally remains in the ānugatya (guidance) of the
associates of Śrī Gaurasundara. Therefore this sannyāsa
is never opposed to rāgānugā-bhajana. Another point
worthy of our consideration is that if we accept all the
bābājīs who have received veśa to be genuine parama-
bhāgavata vaiṣṇavas, completely devoid of false ego and
the propensity to criticize others, as suggested by
their dress, then it would never be possible for them to
have hatred and jealousy toward those who have accepted
sannyāsa and saffron cloth and who are engaged in the
bhajana of Śrī Guru-Gaurāṅga-Rādhā-Govinda exclusively
in the ānugatya of the Gauḍīya Gosvāmīs. If anyone
accepts veśa, yet,proudly thinking himself to be in the

                              25
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

paramahaṁsa stage, sees other practitioners of unalloyed
bhajana with contempt and considers them to be out of
line, then how can he be considered a paramahaṁsa or
rāgānuga-vaiṣṇava? Anarthas do not go away simply by
putting on bābājī-veśa. Alternatively, it is certainly
meritorious for unqualified sādhakas to remain in the
system of varṅāśrama and engage in bhajana, while
simultaneously giving up pride and attachment to both
varṅa and āśrama . When one is qualified, one will
automatically become indifferent to the regulations of
varṅāśrama and enter into rāgānuga-bhajana. Otherwise,
if unqualified persons imitate the fully impartial
paramahaṁsa vaiṣṇavas then the opposite result is
unavoidable.

Objection 5) Śrīman Mahāprabhujī never instructed anyone
to accept sannyāsa. Rather He has given the instruction
to renounce the system of varṅāśrama: eta saba chāḍi āra
varṅāśrama dharma, akiṇcana haṇā laya kṛṣṇaika śaraṅa:
“Without hesitation, one should take exclusive shelter
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa with full confidence,giving up all bad
association and even neglecting the regulative
principles of varṅāśrama-dharma.” (Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta 2.22.93)

Refutation 5) In this verse Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is
giving instructions on abhidheya-tattva, how to attain
the ultimate objective, kṛṣṇa-prema, which are meant for
a highly detached niṣkiṇcana vaiṣṇava like Śrī Sanātana
Gosvāmī. To illustrate and confirm this fact, Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu has then given the example of
Haridasa-Śreṣṭha Uddhavajī:

vijṇa janera haya yadi kṛṣṇa-guṅa-jṇāna anya tyaji
bhaje, tāte uddhava-pramāṅa

“Whenever an experienced person develops real knowledge
of Śri Kṛṣṇa and His transcendental qualities, he
naturally gives up all other engagements to perform
bhajana. Śri Uddhava is evidence of this.” (Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 22.97)

Thus such an instruction is not for ignorant or
unqualified persons who are seized by anarthas such as a
hankering for wealth, women and prestige. One should
understand that this instruction is for learned persons
who have realized the tattva of Śri Kṛṣṇa's name, form,
qualities and pastimes. This fact is clarified by the
use of the word “yadi” (if) in this verse (Madhya-līlā
22.97). Therefore it is not the duty of experienced
persons to catch one word and just stop there. Rather,
it is necessary first of all to consider when, to whom
and in what circumstance has a particular regulation or
prohibition been spoken. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has
given different types of instructions in various
circumstances as illustrated by the following examples:
a) Instructions to the young Raghunātha Dāsa (Gosvāmī):


sthira haiṇā ghare jāo nā hao bātūla krame-krame pāya
loka bhava-sindhu kūla

“Be patient and return to your home. Don't be a crazy
fellow. By and by you will be able to cross the ocean of

                           26
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

material existence.” (Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-
līlā 16.237)

markaṭa vairāgya nā kara loka dekhāṇā yathāyogya viṣaya
bhuṇja anāsakta haiṇā

“Do not be renounced like a monkey just to show off to
the common people. For the time being, enjoy the
material world in an appropriate way, but do not be
attached to it.” (Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā
16.238)

antare niṣṭhā kara bāhye loka vyavahāra acirāte kṛṣṇa
tomāya karibena uddhāra

“You should cultivate niṣṭhā, (resolute dedication to
Kṛṣṇa) within your heart, but externally you may behave
like an ordinary man. Thus Kṛṣṇa will soon become very
pleased and deliver you from the clutches of māyā.” (Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 16. 239)

(b) Instructions to Śrī Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa:

vṛddha mātā-pitāra jāī karaha sevana vaiṣṇava-pāsa
bhāgavat kara adhyayana

“When you return to your home, you should serve your
elderly father and mother, who are devotees.
Furthermore, you should study Śrīmad Bhāgavatam under
the guidance of a realized vaiṣṇava.” (Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta, Antya-līlā 13.113)

(c) Instructions to Śrī Śivānanda Sena:

gṛhaṣṭha hayena iñho cāhie saṇcaya saṇcaya nā kaile
kuṭumba bharaṅa nāhi haya

“Being a householder, Vāsudeva Datta needs to save
money. However, because he is not doing so, it is very
difficult for him to maintain his family.” (Śrī
Caitanya-caritamṛta, Madhya-līlā 15.95)

(d) After accepting sannyāsa, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
instructed the residents of Nadiyā in Śāntipura:

ghare jāiyā kara sadā kṛṣṇa sañkīrtana kṛṣṇa nāma, kṛṣṇa
kathā, kṛṣṇa ārādhana

“Return to your homes. Perform kṛṣṇa sañkīrtana, chant
the names of Kṛṣṇa, discuss Kṛṣṇa's pastimes and worship
Kṛṣṇa.” (Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 3.190)

ghare giyā kara sabe kṛṣṇa sañkīrtana punarapi āmā sañge
haibe milana

“ On returning to your homes, you should all perform
kṛṣṇa sañkīrtana. I assure you that we will meet again.”
(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 3.207)

(e) To Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda:

kibā vipra, kibā nyāsī, śudra kene naya jeī kṛṣṇa
tattva-vettā seī guru haya


                             27
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

“Whether one is a brāhmaṅa, a sannyāsi or a śudra, one
who knows kṛṣṇa-tattva is a guru.”(Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 8.128)

(g) Before appearing in this world, Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu made the following vow:

āpani karimu bhaktibhāva añgīkāre āpani ācari bhakti
śikhāimu sabāre

“ I shall accept the mood of a devotee and I shall teach
bhakti by practising it Myself.” (Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā 3.20)

āpane nā kaile dharma śikhāna na jāya ei ta siddhānta
gītā-bhāgavate gāya

“Unless one personally practises bhakti, he cannot teach
it to others. This conclusion is indeed confirmed
throughout the Gītā and Bhāgavatam.” (Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā 3.29)

Furthermore:

eī mata bhaktabhāva kari añgīkāra āpani ācari bhakti
karila pracāra

“In this way, assuming the sentiment of a devotee, He
preached bhakti while practising it Himself.” (Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā 4.41)

By analyzing these varied instructions of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, we can clearly see that brahmacārīs,
gṛhaṣṭha-bhaktas, those who have accepted veśa and
paramahaṁsas who are indifferent to varṅāśrama, are all
eligible to perform kṛṣṇa-bhajana. Those who are
absorbed in kṛṣṇa-bhajana are all worthy of the utmost
respect. If a gṛhaṣṭha-vaiṣṇava is worthy of veneration,
then how can a sannyāsi-vaiṣṇava, who has renounced
everything to be exclusively dedicated inaikantika-
bhajana, be considered despicable, unprincipled and fit
to be neglected?

If sādhakas in the gṛhasthāśrama, sannyāsāśrama or those
who have accepted veśa, are desirous of kṛṣṇa-prema,
they should engage in bhajana while remaining in
whichever āśrama they find to be favourable for the
practice of their sādhana to attain that prema. Whatever
is unfavourable should be rejected. Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu explained the reason for His accepting
sannyāsa to Śrī Advaita Ācārya Prabhu in the following
way:

binā sarva tyāgan bhajanam na hyasupate riti tyāgo
'smābhiḥ kṛta iha kimadvaitakathayā āyam daṅḍo bhūyān
prabalataraso mānasapaśo ritivāham
daṅḍagrahaṅamaviśeṣādakaravam (Caitanyacandrodaya Nāṭaka
5.22)

“Without renouncing everything it is not possible to
engage in the bhajana of the Lord of one's heart.
Therefore I have renounced everything. I am not a
renunciant like the advaitavādīs or nirviśeṣa-jṇānis who
hanker for liberation. I have adopted the practice of

                           28
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

carrying the sannyāsa-daṅḍa especially to give
punishment (daṅḍa) to the excessively restless animal of
my mind.” Can anyone find anything objectionable in such
sannyāsa?

Some say Śrīman Mahāprabhu's sannyāsa-līlā is only in
connection with His own transcendental form and is thus
applicable only to Him. However His sannyāsa-līlā is
also for the benefit and instruction of the jīvas:

āpanī ācari bhakti sikhāimu sabāre

“I will teach bhakti by practising it Myself.”(Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Antya-līlā 3.20)

In the verse “nāham vipro” (Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta,
Madhya-līlā 13.80) Śrīman Mahāprabhu has given
instructions regarding the pure svarūpa of the jīva. The
purport is that the bhakti-sādhaka should not keep
himself bound in any gross or subtle mundane
designations. Rather he should understand himself to be
a purely transcendental servant of Kṛṣṇa. Is it that the
self-conception of being a sannyāsī inevitably arises in
those who accept sannyāsa whereas there is no
possibility of mundane misidentification for gṛhastas
and those who have accepted veśa? This seems to be the
opinion of Hakīmjī. Actually sannyāsa is the arrangement
to give up all attachment and self-identification with
the system of varṅāśrama even while remaining within it.
Thus it is highly desirable to relinquish identification
with externals and engage in kṛṣṇa-bhajana with a fixed
determination to serve His lotus feet.

Objection 6) Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī has said that it is
forbidden for Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas to wear saffron cloth:

raktavastra vaiṣṅavera parite nā juyāya

“This red cloth is unfit for a vaiṣṇava to wear.” (Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Antya līlā 13.61)

Refutation 6) Now the actual context of this statement
is being presented before the readers so that the
subject may be clarified. Śrī Jagadānanda Paṅḍitajī, an
associate of Śrī Gaurasundara, was staying in the
bhajana-kutī of Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī with the intention
of having darśana of Gokula. One day Śrī Sanātana
Gosvāmī returned from performing madhukarī bhikṣā
(begging alms door to door) wearing a red cloth tied
around his head. When Paṅḍitajī saw this cloth, at first
he was very pleased, thinking that it was a remnant of
Śrīman Mahāprabhu. But later when he realized that this
cloth was from an advaitavādī sannyāsī, he became
furious. Nevertheless Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī very humbly
replied, “I was wearing this cloth only because I had
the desire to see your exclusive dedication to Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Your gaura-niṣṭhā is glorious. Now
I have no need of this. I will throw it away.”

raktavastra vaiṣṅavera parite nā yuyāya

“This red cloth is unfit for a vaiṣṇava to wear.”

Here Paṅḍitajī's anger was not caused by the sight of

                           29
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

saffron cloth. It was caused by Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī's
wearing the cloth of an advaitavādī sannyāsī as
evidenced by the following statement:

rātula vastra dekhi, paṅḍita premāviṣṭa hailā

“On seeing the red cloth, Jagadānanda Paṅḍita was
overwhelmed with ecstatic love.”(Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta, Antya 13.52)

If he was irritated only by reddish cloth then he would
also become angry on seeing the cloth of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu, Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara,
Śrī Paramānanda Purī and others. However, there is no
account of such a situation to be found anywhere else.
Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī had worn red cloth only to show the
proper etiquette in regard to Mahāprabhu's veśa and to
pacify Paṅḍitajī. Rakta (red) cloth is forbidden for
vaiṣṇavas. If it was the intention of Śrī Sanātana
Gosvāmī to exclusively prohibit the wearing of saffron
cloth, then he would have also forbidden sannyāsa in his
own commentary on Śrī Bṛhad Bhāgavatāmṛta. Śrī Sanātana
Gosvāmī has presented the point of view of Śrī Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavas on the subject of sannyāsa by citing and
explaining verse

3.5.39 of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam in his own commentary on
verse 2.7.14 of Śrī Bṛhad Bhāgavatāmṛta:

'ayamarthaḥ:-yatayo 'pi yasya padāravindasya mūlam talam
keta āśrayo yeṣām tathābhūtā eva santaḥ mahadapi saṁsāra
duḥkhamaṇjasā anāyāsenaiva bahirūtkṣipantīti

yadvā, ye śrībhagaccaraṅāravindāśrayāste yataya eva
nocyante, kintu paramabhaktā eva, sarvaparityāgena
taccaraṅāravindāśrayaṅāt, kevalam
gṛhādiparityāganiṣṭhārthameva sannyāsa-grahaṅāt,
veśamātreṅa yatisādṛśyam teṣām. ye tu ātmānameva
śrībhagavantam śrīnārāyaṅam manvānā ātmavytiriktadṛṣṭam
śrutam sarvameva manmayākalpitam mayyevādhyastamityādi
māyāvadānusāreṅādvaita bodhamātraparāsta
evādvaitaparavedānta-siddhāntamate yatayo 'bhidhīyate

ta eva hi sacchabdavācebhyo bhaktebhyo bhinnā akṣīṅapāpā
viṣayarāgavāsitāntaḥ karaṅā ajṇā api paṅḍitamānino
daityaprakṛtayaḥ tān pratyevemāni vacanāni śrūyante

“The demigods said, “O Lord! We pray to your lotus feet.
They are like an umbrella for repelling all the
sufferings of the jīvas who have surrendered unto them.
On taking shelter of these lotus feet the sannyāsīs
easily cast far away the endless miseries of material
existence. The conditioned souls of the world taste the
threefold miseries and they are incapable of acquiring
proper knowledge because they have not taken shelter of
Your lotus feet. Bhagavān! We will also take shelter in
the shade of those lotus feet and obtain knowledge.”

Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī comments further: “Sannyāsīs take
shelter of the lotus feet of Śrī Bhagavān and easily
cast off the unlimited miseries of this cycle of birth
and death. However those who have taken shelter of the
lotus feet of Bhagavān are never called sannyāsīs.
Although they externally wear sannyāsa-veśa they are

                           30
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

called bhaktas. So here the word 'yati' (sannyāsī) is
used to indicate those bhaktas because they have
renounced everything to take shelter at the lotus feet
of Śrī Bhagavān. In other words they accept sannyāsa by
giving up hearth, home and everything only for the
purpose of accomplishing steadfastness in their
dedication to the service of Bhagavān (parātmaniṣṭhā).

“They only appear to be sannyāsīs by their outward
dress, but actually they are bhaktas. However those who
consider themselves to be Śrī Bhagavān Nārāyaṅa are
absorbed in monistic conceptions in accordance with the
māyāvādī point of view. They entertain ideas such as,
‘All substances are situated within me. Although they
are seeing, hearing and moving, they have no soul
because they are simply imagined by my māyā.’ Those who
maintain such conceptions are called “yati” by the
adherents of advaitavāda vedānta-siddhānta. Furthermore,
they are different from those who are referred to by the
word “sat” in the aforementioned verse. They are also
possessed of a deep attachment for unabated, sinful
sense gratification, yet they consider themselves to be
greatly learned scholars. Therefore this statement is
referring to such yatis who are possessed of a demonic
nature.

This conclusion of Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī has also been
established in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta and Śrī Caitanya
Candrodaya. It is also Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s
internal mood. Thus Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī is not an
opponent but rather an advocate of saffron cloth. Śrī
Hakīmjī was unable to distinguish between gairika-vastra
(saffron cloth) and rakta-vastra (red cloth). Gairika-
vastra signifies anurāga for Kṛṣṇa whereas rakta-vastra
is a symbol of envy. This should not be worn by
vaiṣṇavas.

Objection 7) Sannyāsa is not mentioned anywhere among
the sixty-four limbs of sādhana-bhakti.

Refutation 7) This argument is extremely ridiculous.
Although sannyāsa is not mentionedanywhere among the
sixty-four limbs of sādhana-bhakti, neither is there the
slightest mention of entering the gṛhastha āśrama,
accepting veśa or wearing white cloth among the limbs of
sādhana-bhakti. So will Hakīmjī consider that these
activities are also forbidden for Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas?
What to speak of Śrī Hakīmjī’s own activities such as
running a printing press and a book shop. Since these
activities are also not mentioned within the sixty-four
limbs of sādhana-bhakti then Śrī Hakīmjī himself, by his
own definition, must also be unprincipled and outside of
the ānugatya of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas. What mountainous
intelligence! Gṛhastha, sannyāsa or even veśa are not
limbs of bhakti. They are the outer appearance of
sādhana-bhakti which can be accepted if they are
favourable or rejected if they are unfavourable. Thus,
although sannyāsa is not mentioned within the sixty-four
limbs of sādhana-bhakti, it cannot be considered
forbidden. ‘Rāgānugā’ is also not mentioned within the
limbs of vaidhi, so should it be forbidden? This
objection is simply irrelevant and dry logic.

Objection 8) At the beginning of the 18th chapter of the

                           31
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

eleventh canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura, in stating the essence of the
chapter, hasexplained that there is no necessity of any
āśrama for bhaktas by the phrase
‘bhaktasyānāśrayamitvaṇca’.

Refutation 8) Whatever has been elaborately described by
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura in his commentary on
the verse 11.18.28 of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is now being
presented before the readers.

jṇānaniṣṭho virakto vā madbhakto vānapekṣakaḥ
saliñgānāśramāṁstyaktvā caredavidhigocaraḥ

Commentary by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura:

paripakvajṇānino niṣkāmasvabhaktasya ca
varṅāśramaninayamamābhāvamāha,-jṇānaniṣṭhaḥ paripakva-
jṇānavān anapekṣakaḥ pratiṣṭhāparyantāpekṣārahitaḥ atra
sarvathā nairapekṣamajātapremno bhaktasya na sammavedata
utpannapremaiva bhaktaḥ saliñgānāśramāñstyajet
anutpannapremā tu nirliñgāśramadharmāñstyajedityartho
labhyate; svadharmatyāgastu “tāvat karmāṅi kurvīteti”
vākyāt bhaktānāmārambhata evāvagamyate tayoḥ
śuddhāntaḥkaraṅatvādeva pāpe pravṛttyabhāvāt
durācāratvaṁ nāśañkyam; tenāvidhigocaraḥ

“Bhaktas who are completely devoid of material desires
renounce āśrama dharma along with its concommitant
external signs and behave as paramahaṁsas who are not
subject to the regulations of the Vedas. Premī-bhaktas
are completely impartial and desireless in regard to the
material world. As long as prema has not awakened, one
cannot be completely impartial. Therefore, as long as
prema has not manifested in the heart of the sādhaka-
bhakta, he must engage in hari-bhajana without
renouncing the system of saliñga āśrama-dharma, that is
āśrama-dharma which is characterized by the appropriate
external paraphernalia. He should renounce nirliñga
āśrama-dharma or that āśrama-dharma which is not
characterized by the external symbols of recognition. In
other words, disregarding the nirliñga-āśrama-dharma
which is not characterized by the appropriate
paraphernalia such as the tridaṇḍa and saffron cloth,
one must engage in bhajana. Although the appropriate
activities of varṅāśrama are not necessary for the
impartial bhaktas, as long as devotees are not
completely indifferent to material life, i.e. as long as
they have not attained prema, they will remain absorbed
in bhajana-sādhana while wearing the symbols which are
appropriate for their aṣrama such as the tridaṇḍa and
saffron cloth.”

Premī bhaktas, who are completely free from all material
expectations, also dress appropriately according to the
aśrama system for the benefit of the common people.
Sādhaka-bhaktas will also continue to wear the
appropriate attire with a mood of detachment. Otherwise,
inauspiciousness will ensue due to transgressing the
orders of śāstra and the mahājanas.

By their critical analysis of the tridaṇḍa and saffron
cloth the sahajiyā group who are simply dependent on
material reasoning, reveal their own ignorance on the

                           32
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

subject of śāstra and invite vaiṣṇava aparādha for no
reason. If saffron cloth is so impure or forbidden for
vaiṣṇavas then why is it that since the time of the
Rāmāyaṅa and Mahābhārata, great, eminent ṛṣis and
maharṣis who have the power to see past, present and
future and also in Kali-yuga highly devoted
vaiṣṅavācāryas who were endowed with divine brilliance
and a far-reaching vision of all śāstra, such as Śrī
Rāmānujācārya and Śrī Madhvācārya, all wore saffron
cloth? In Śrī Gopāla campū (pūrvacampū 3.64) it is
stated that Śrī Paurṅamāsī devī also wears saffron
cloth. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has also written in his
Vidagdha Mādhava Nāṭaka that Śrī Paurṅamāsī devī wears
saffron (kāṣāya) cloth.

vahantī kāṣāyāmbaramurasi sāndīpanimuneḥ (Śrī Vidagdha
Mādhava 1.18)

And also,

paurṅamāsī bhagavatī sarvasiddhi vidhāyanī kāṣāyavasanā
gaurī kāśakeśīdarāyatā (Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa-gaṅoddeśadīpikā,
śloka 66)

Quoting a verse from Harivaṁśa, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has
written that all the princesses who were imprisoned by
Narakāsura had fasted and put on saffron cloth as part
of a vrata to attain the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

sarvāḥ kāṣāyavāsinyaḥ sarvāśca niyatendriyāḥ
vratopavāsatattvajṇāḥ kāñkṣantyaḥ kṛṣṇa-darśanam (Śrī
Gopāla Campu, Uttar Vibhāga 18.50 - quoted from
Harivaṁśa)

In Śrī Caitanya Bhāgavata there is a description of the
sannyāsa veśa of Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu and Nāmācārya
Haridāsa Ṭhākura -

ājṇā śire kari' nityānanda - haridāsa tatakṣaṅe calilena
pathe āsi hāsa

dohāna sannyāsiveśa - yāna yāra ghare āthevyathe āsi'
bhikṣā - nimantraṅa kare

“Taking the order of Śrīman Mahāprabhu upon their heads,
Śrīman Nityānanda Prabhu and Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura
immediately set out, laughing together in a joyful mood.
Wherever they went to beg alms in the form of the holy
names of Śri Kṛṣṇa, householders would extend
invitations to them because they were both wearing
sannyāsa-veśa.” (Śrī Caitanya Bhāgavata Madhya 13.15,
19)

In Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta Śrīman Mahāprabhu personally
explained the glories of sannyāsa while giving
consolation to His parents.

śuni; śacī-miśrera duḥkhī haila mana tabe prabhu mātā-
pitāra kaila āśvāsana

bhāla haila, - viśvarūpa sannyāsa karila pitṛ-kula,
matṛ-kula, - duī uddhārila

“When Śacīmātā and Jagannātha Miśra heard of the

                           33
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

departure of their elder son, Viśvarūpa, they were very
unhappy. To console them Mahāprabhu said, “My dear
mother and father, it is very good that Viśvarūpa has
accepted sannyāsa. By doing so he has delivered the
dynasties of both his father and mother.”(Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta, Ādi 15.13, 14)

In the 19th vilāsa of the scripture ‘Prema-vilāsa’,
there is a description of the sannyāsa of Śrī Mādhava
Ācārya, the author of the text entitled ‘Śrī Kṛṣṇa
Mañgala’:

sannyāsa kariyā tiṇha rahi vṛndāvana vrajera madhura
bhāve karaye bhajana

mādhava ācārya śrī mādhavī sakhī hana śrī rūpera kṛpāya
tāra haila uddīpana

“After accepting sannyāsa, Śrī Mādhava Ācārya lived in
Vṛndāvana and performed bhajana in the parakīya bhāva of
Vraja. Śrī Mādhava Ācārya was inspired by the mercy of
Śrī Rūpa. In Vraja-līla he is Śrī Mādhavī Sakhī.”
(Prema-Vilāsa, 19th vilāsa)From this incident described
in Prema-Vilāsa we can see that the gosvāmī-varga headed
by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī were not against sannyāsa in any
way. We also see from this that the custom of sannyāsa
is also practised among Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas.
Furthermore, it is also established by this example that
a sannyāsī is eligible to engage in bhajana following in
the wake of the vraja-gopis. Thus it is not forbidden
and it is not outside of the ānugatya of the Gauḍīya
Gosvāmīs for Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas, who are practising
devotees, dedicated to bhajana and who have renounced
their homes, to accept tridaṇḍa sannyāsa and saffron
cloth. However, it is illegal and contrary to śāstra for
unqualified persons to imitate the veśa of a niṣkiñcana-
paramahaṁsa.



In the middle Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāṇa Keśava Mahārāja, to
the left Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Muni Mahārāja (Śrī
Sanātana Prabhu), and to the right Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta
Svāmī Mahārāja (Śrī Abhaya Caraṇāravinda Prabhu)




Chapter Two

Pañcarātrika & Bhāgavata Guru-paramparā


The charm and superiority of the bhāgavata-paramparā

Nowadays, people are concocting newer and newer doubts
about Śrī guru-paramparā in the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṅava
Sampradāya. Some people believe that Śrī Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṅa was initiated in the Madhva Sampradāya and
that he was not actually a Gauḍīya Vaiṣṅava. They assert
that, although he had the association of Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṅavas, the influence of the Madhva Sampradāya was so
strong that in his own writings he stubbornly included

                           34
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and His Gauḍīya Vaiṣṅava
Sampradāya as part of the Madhva Sampradāya. They claim
that there is no reasonable justification for this, and
that Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṅa can therefore not be
accepted as an ācārya of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṅava
Sampradāya. Another group of ignorant people say that
Jagadguru Śrī Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupādajī
created a completely new concept which he called the
bhāgavata-paramparā. According to them, he has explained
in this supposedly new doctrine of bhāgavata-paramparā
that Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura is a disciple of
Vaiṣṅava Sarvabhauma Śrīla Jagannātha dasa Bābājī
Mahārāja, and that Śrī Gaura Kiśora Dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja
is a disciple of Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. Some
sahajiyā Vaiṣṅavas also present the doubt that Śrī
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī’s guru-paramparā cannot be
considered bona fide because he accepted the renounced
order (sannyāsa) from himself. Paramārādhya Śrīla
Gurudeva has shattered all these accusations with
powerful logic and solid scriptural evidence, and this
article presents his analysis of the subject. The
disciples and grand-disciples of Śrī Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Prabhupāda are currently preaching Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s suddha-kṛṣṅa-bhakti and śrī
harināma through-out the world. Because they have
preached extensively all over the world, the streets and
avenues in every prominent city—and even in every town
and village—are resounding with the sound of the holy
name, and young men and women are very enthusiastically
applying themselves to the cultivation of śuddha-bhakti.
They are meeting Vaiṣṅavas from India, and performing
harināma-sañkīrtana and preaching śuddha-bhakti together
with them. A few ignorant, so-called Vaiṣṅavas of the
sahajiyā community are agitated by this, and are trying
to mislead common people by presenting fraudulent
accusations against the Sārasvata Gauḍīya Vaiṣṅava
lineage. Śrīla Gurudeva has established the rational and
perfect conclusion on this matter in his own essay
entitled ‘Gauḍīya Vedantācārya Śrī Baladeva’. Here we
have presented some extracts from that essay.

The guru-paramparā of the commentator Śrī Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṅa

The historical truth regarding the guru-paramparā of the
commentator, Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṅa is as follows. He
first acquired specific expertise in the bhakti-śāstra
under the guidance of Virakta-Śiromani (the crest-jewel
of detached sādhus) Pitambara Dāsa. After that, he
accepted paṇcarātriki-dīkṣā from a Vaiṣṅava called Śrī
Rādhā-Dāmodara Dāsa, who had appeared in a dynasty of
brāhmaṅas in Kanyakubja. Rādhā-Dāmodara Dāsa, who was
the grand-son of Rasikānanda Murari, accepted dīkṣā from
another Kanya-kubjiya brāhmaṅa called Śrī
Nayanānandadeva Gosvāmī. Rasikānanda Prabhu, a disciple
of Śrī Śyāmānanda Prabhu, is the fourth guru before the
commentator Baladeva Vidyā-bhūṣana in the paṇcarātrika-
guru-paramparā, and his son was the aforementioned
Nayanānandadeva Gosvāmī. The guru of Śrī Śyāmānanda was
Śrī Hṛdaya Caitanya, whose guru was Gauridāsa Paṅḍita,
upon whom Śrīman Nityānanda Prabhu bestowed His mercy.
Even though Śyāmānanda Prabhu was a disciple of Ācārya
Hṛdaya Caitanya, he afterwards accepted discipleship
under Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī. Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī was a disciple

                           35
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, who was a disciple of Śrī Sanātana
Gosvāmī, and Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī was a follower and
associate of Śrīman Mahāprabhu.

The śiṣya-paramparā of Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṅa

We have given an account of the paṇcarātrika-paramparā
from Śrīman Mahāprabhu down to Śrī Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṅa. Now we will give an account of his śiṣya-
paramparā. Śrī Uddhara Dāsa, referred to in some places
as Uddhava Dāsa, was a disciple of the commentator. Some
think that these are two different people, but in any
case Uddhava Dāsa had a disciple named Śrī Madhusūdana
Dāsa. Jagannātha Dāsa Bābājī was a disciple of this very
Śrī Madhusūdana Dāsa. Previously, as Vaiṣṅava
Sarvabhauma or the prominent leader of the Vaiṣṅava
community in Mathurā-maṅḍala, Kṣetra-maṅḍala and Gauḍa-
maṅḍala, he became famous by the name of Siddha
Jagannātha Dāsa. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura accepted
this very Jagannātha Dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja as his
bhajana-śikṣā-guru by the system of bhāgavata-paramparā.
It was under the direction of Vaiṣṅava Sarvabhauma Śrīla
Jagannātha Dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja that Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura discovered the birthplace of Śrīman Mahāprabhu
at Śrīdhama Māyāpura. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura was the
śikṣā-guru or bhajana-guru of Śrīla Gaurakiśora Dāsa
Bābājī Mahārāja. Śrīla Gaurakiśora Dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja
accepted my Gurupādapadma Oṁ Viṣṅupāda Aṣṭottaraśata Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda as his own
disciple and gave him dīkṣā-mantras and so on. Whoever
is incompetent in accepting this paramparā is to be
counted amongst one of the thirteen types of
apasampradāyas mentioned in writing by Śrī Totarama
Bābājī Mahārāja. Alternatively, he may be regarded as
the creator of a fourteenth apasampradāya. From the
aforementioned guru-paramparā we can easily understand
that Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṅa is a follower of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu within the spiritual family lineage
(parivāra) of Śrī Śyāmānanda Prabhu. Ācārya Śrī
Śyāmānanda accepted the guidance of Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī,
and because Jīva Gosvāmī is exclusively rūpānuga (a
follower of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī), it therefore follows that
Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṅa is also a rūpānuga Vaiṣṅava.
There are those who acknowledge that Śrī Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṅa is in the line of Śrī Śyāmānanda, and yet
deny that he is a rūpānuga Vaiṣṅava or that he is
qualified for the topmost service mood of unnata-
ujjvala-rasa. Such people are certainly only deluded
offenders. Although Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṅa was
initiated in paṇcarātrika-dīkṣā by Śrī Rādhā Dāmodara
Dāsa, he also accepted śikṣā in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and
the literatures of the Gosvāmīs.

Paṇcarātrika-paramparā is included within the bhāgavata-
paramparā

The system of bhāgavata-paramparā is superior to that of
paṇcarātrika-paramparā, and is founded on the degree of
proficiency in bhajana (bhajana-niṣṭha). The charm and
superiority of bhāgavata-paramparā is that paṇcarātrika-
paramparā is included within it. In bhāgavata-paramparā
there is no obstruction in regard to time. From the
viewpoint of śuddha-bhakti, the doctrines of
paṇcarātrika and of bhāgavata both explain the same

                           36
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

teachings with the same objective. In Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta it is said, paṇcarātra bhāgavate ei lakṣana
kaya: “These symptoms are described in Vedic literatures
such as the paṇcarātras and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.”
(Caitanya-caritāmṛta Madhya 19.169). The prakrta-
sahajiyā sampradāya, while claiming to be followers of
Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, accumulate offences to the lotus feet
of Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī. Similarly, nowadays the jāti-
gosvāmīs and those who accept their remnants—such as
several members of the sahajiyā, kartābhajā,
kiśorībhajā, and bhajanākhājā sampradāyas—proudly
conceive of themselves as followers of Cakravartī
Ṭhākura, but cast calumnies against the commentator Śrī
Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṅa. In this way, they are growing
excessively hateful and progressing towards hell. Here
is a diagram of the paṇcarātrika-guru-paramparā and the
bhāgavata-paramparā. This will enable readers to
properly appreciate the speciality of śrī bhāgavata-
paramparā, and also understand how paṇcarātrika-guru-
paramparā is included within the bhāgavata-paramparā.
With the help of the diagram below and on the next page
we will give an account of the paṇcarātrika-guru-
paramparā and bhāgavata-paramparā of Śrī Śyāmānanda
Prabhu, Śrī Narottama Dāsa Ṭhākura, Śrī Raghunātha Dāsa
Gosvāmī, Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṅa, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura and
other Vaiṣṅava ācāryas. Śrī Śyāmānanda Prabhu: In
paṇcarātrika-guru-paramparā Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu’s
disciple is Gauridāsa Paṅḍita, and his disciple Hṛdaya
Caitanya is the dīkṣā-guru of Śrī Śyāmānanda Prabhu. In
bhāgavata-paramparā Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s disciple
is Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī, the disciple of Sanātana is Śrī
Rūpa Gosvāmī, and Rūpa’s disciple is Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī.
Śrī Śyāmānanda Prabhu is the śikṣā disciple of this same
Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī. It is no exaggeration to say that Śrī
Jīva Gosvāmī was superior to Śrī Hṛdaya Caitanya in
tattva, rasa, bhajana and indeed in all respects. For
this reason, Śrī Hṛdaya Caitanya personally sent Śrī
Śyāmānanda Prabhu to Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī for advanced
instruction in the practice of bhajana, and Śrī
Śyāmānanda Prabhu accepted the anugatya (guidance) of
Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī. Thus the serious question which
deserves our consideration here is this: Which is
superior, paṇcarātrika-guru-paramparā or bhāgavata-
paramparā? Śrī Narottama Ṭhākura: According to the
paṇcarātrika-guru-paramparā, Śrī Narottama Ṭhākura’s
guru is Śrī Lokanātha Dāsa Gosvāmī. However, there is no
record anywhere of Śrī Lokanātha Dāsa Gosvāmī’s
paṇcarātrika-dīkṣā-guru. Texts such as Śrī Gauḍīya
vaiṣṅava abhidhana have stated that Śrī Kṛṣṅa Caitanya
Mahāprabhu is Śrī Lokanātha Dāsa Gosvāmī’s guru, but it
is a well-known fact that Śrīman Mahāprabhu did not
accept anyone as His disciple according to the
paṇcarātrika-praṅālī (method). That means that, if
Śrīman Mahāprabhu is actually the guru of Śrī Lokanātha
Gosvāmī, it is only on the basis of bhāgavata-paramparā.
In any case, Śrī Narottama Ṭhākura, besides being the
paṇcarātrika disciple of Śrī Lokanātha Gosvāmī, is also
the disciple of Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī in bhāgavata-paramparā.
It was in the anugatya of Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī that Śrī
Narottama Ṭhākura became steeped in bhajana-śikṣā. Śrī
Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī: In paṇcarātrika-paramparā Śrī
Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī is a disciple of Śrī Yadunandana
Ācārya, who is situated in the paṇcarātrika-sākhā

                           37
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

(branch) of Śrī Advaita Ācārya. However, if we consider
Śrī Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī’s life history deeply from
another viewpoint, we find the very clear and indelible
influence of the bhajana-śikṣā of Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara
and Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, who are his gurus in bhāgavata-
paramparā. Here, too, if we compare paṇcarātrika-
paramparā with bhāgavata-paramparā, we find that the
superiority of bhāgavata-paramparā shines as radiantly
as the sun. Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṅa: According to
paṇcarātrika-guru-paramparā, Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṅa
is a paṇcarātrika disciple of Śrī Rādhā-Dāmodara in the
paramparā of Śrī Śyāmānanda Prabhu. At the same time, in
bhāgavata-paramparā he is a disciple of Śrī Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura with whom he studied Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam and all the various Gosvāmī literatures, and
from whom he received advanced instruction in bhajana.
The guidance of Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura in the
life of Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṅa is widely known. Only
under this guidance did he defeat the Śrī Vaiṣṅavas in
the royal court of Galtā and keep intact the service and
worship of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Govindajī. It was after
attaining the mercy of Śrī Govindadeva, Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī’s worshipful Deity, that Śrī Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṅa composed Śrī Govinda-bhāṣya. There is no
doubt about Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṅa being a rūpānuga
Vaiṣṅava, because he is under the guidance of Śrī
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, who is himself most
assuredly a rūpānuga Vaiṣṅava. Furthermore, it is a
well-known fact that Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṅa attained
the mercy of Śrī Govindadeva, the treasured life-breath
of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, and ensured His continuing service.
From this perspective, too, since he attained the mercy
of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and his ārādhyadeva Śrī Govindajī,
what doubt could possibly remain about his being a
rūpānuga Vaiṣṅava? Śrī Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura: According
to the paṇcarātrika-guru-paramparā, the dīkṣā-guru of
Śrī Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura is Śrī Vipina Bihārī Gosvāmī,
who is situated in the paṇcarātrika-paramparā of Śrī Śrī
Jāhnavā Ṭhākuranī. From our other viewpoint, no one can
deny that Śrī Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s life is imprinted
with the stamp of Śrīla Jagannātha Dāsa Bābājī
Mahārāja’s anugatya (guidance). Vaiṣṅava Sarvabhauma
Śrīla Jagannātha Mahārāja is a disciple of the famous
Madhu-sūdana Dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja in the paramparā of
Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṅa. It is not necessary to say
that Vaiṣṅava Sarvabhauma Śrīla Jagannātha Dāsa Bābājī
Mahārāja is superior to Śrī Vipina Bihārī Gosvāmī in
tattva-jṇāna, bhajana-śikṣā, etc. Śrī Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura: According to paṇcarātrika-guru-
paramparā Śrī Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura‘s dīkṣā-
guru is Śrī Gaura Kiśora Dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja who is a
descendant in the paṇcarātrika-guru-paramparā from Śrī
Jāhnavā Ṭhākurānī. Śrīla Bābājī Mahārāja accepted the
attire of a renunciate (veśa) from a disciple of Śrīla
Jagannātha Dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja named Śrī Bhāgavata Dāsa
Bābājī Mahārāja. Thus by bhāgavata-paramparā, Śrī
Gaurakiśora Dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja is in the branch of
Śrīla Jagannātha Dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja. According to this
analysis, by paṇcarātrika-paramparā Śrīla Sarasvatī
Ṭhākura is in the paramparā of Śrī Jāhnavā Ṭhākurānī,
and in bhāgavata-paramparā he has been connected with
Śrīla Jagannātha Dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja. It is clear from
Śrīla Sarasvatī Prabhupāda’s life history that Śrī
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s practices, precepts and bhajana-

                           38
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

praṅali were his very life and soul, and that he made
the fulfilment of the Ṭhākura’s aspirations the sole aim
and object of his life. Thus his guru in bhāgavata-
paramparā was Śrī Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, whose guru was
Śrīla Jagannātha Dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja. Therefore there
is not even the slightest justification for raising a
finger against the guru-paramparā of Śrīla Sarasvatī
Ṭhākura, the Founder-Acārya of the Śrī Gauḍīya Maṭha.
Several additional facts are worthy of our consideration
on the subject of paṇcarātrika-guru-paramparā and
bhāgavata-paramparā—

(1) The guru of lower rasa If a paṇcarātrika-dīkṣā-guru
in his siddha-svarūpa (constitutional spiritual form) is
situated in a rasa which lower than that of his
disciple, how can he give bhajana-śikṣā pertaining to
the more elevated rasa? In this situation, the disciple
must go elsewhere and take shelter of a Vaiṣṅava who is
qualified to give the appropriate superior guidance. For
example, Śrī Hṛdaya Caitanya is an associate in sakhya-
rasa in Kṛṣṅa lila, whereas his disciple Śrī Śyāmānanda
Prabhu (Duḥkhī Kṛṣṅa Dāsa) is an associate in madhura-
rasa. Therefore Śrī Hṛdaya Caitanya personally sent
Duḥkhī Kṛṣṅa Dāsa to Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī to receive
higher bhajana-śikṣā pertaining to madhura-rasa.

(2) The less qualified guru It may happen that guru and
disciple in paṇcarātrika-guru-paramparā are in the same
rasa, but that the guru is not so highly qualified as
the disciple. Under such circumstances, the disciple
must go and take shelter of an uttama Vaiṣṅava for
higher bhajana-śikṣā‚ and this Vaiṣṅava will be called
his guru in bhāgavata-paramparā. We can see from these
two considerations that the paṇcarātrika process has
some inherent defects, whereas the bhāgavata-paramparā
is completely free from these defects, and is flawless
in all respects.

(3) Śrīman Mahāprabhu is not paṇcarātrika-guru of anyone
All members of the Gauḍīya Sampradāya accept Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu as jagad guru, and consider
themselves to be His followers. However, on what basis
do they maintain this conviction? There is no recorded
account anywhere of Śrīman Mahāprabhu giving dīkṣā-
mantra to anyone. This means that Śrīman Mahāprabhu is
not the guru of anyone else in paṇcarātrika-paramparā,
although He Himself is a disciple of Śrī Īśvara Purī.
Therefore, if the Gaudīya Vaiṣṅava community accepts the
anugatya and discipleship of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, it
can only be on one basis, and that basis is bhāgavata-
paramparā.

(4) All Gauḍīya Vaiṣṅavas are rūpānuga on basis of
bhāgavata-paramparā only Each and every Gauḍīya Vaiṣṅava
is proud to call himself ‘rūpānuga’. But let us consider
this point: How many disciples did Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī
initiate by the paṇcarātrika method? The fact is that
Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī is his one and only dīkṣā disciple, and
he himself is not actually a dīkṣā disciple of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu. So on what basis do members of the
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṅava community accept Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī as
their guru? How is it possible to be a follower of Śrī
Rūpa Gosvāmī and at the same time be a follower of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu?

                           39
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017




Even Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī, who is the śikṣā-guru of Śrī
Rūpa Gosvāmī, has no second thoughts about calling
himself rūpānuga. The basis of all these examples is one
—bhāgavata-paramparā. It is only on the basis of
bhāgavata-paramparā that Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī is the
disciple of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and that the
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṅava community considers Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī to
be their guru.

Who is the paṇcarātrika-dīkṣā-guru of Śrīla Kṛṣṅadāsa
Kaviraja Gosvāmī? We cannot say, because he has not
mentioned the name of his paṇcarātrika-dīkṣā-guru in any
of his literatures, but he has named his śikṣā-gurus in
Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Adi 1.37:

ei chaya guru, śikṣā-guru ye āmāra

tāñ-sabāra pāda-padme koṭi namaskāra “These six gurus
(the Six Gosvāmīs of Vṛndāvana) are my śikṣā-gurus and I
offer countless obeisances at their lotus feet.”

At the end of each chapter of Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta he
has written:

śrī-rupa-raghunātha-pade yāra āśa




caitanya caritāmṛta kahe kṛṣṅa dāsa In these statements
he has accepted Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī and Śrī Raghunātha Dāsa
Gosvāmī as his main śikṣā-gurus. Thus he has also
accepted them as gurus on the basis of bhāgavata-
paramparā. From these facts it becomes thoroughly
obvious that bhāgavata-paramparā, which includes
paṇcarātrika-paramparā, always shines forth brilliantly.
What can we say, then, about those who ignore these
facts, about those who cast aspersions on the guru-
praṅālī of Śrī Baladeva Vidyabhūṣaṅa, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura and Śrī Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, and
about those who doubt that they are rūpānuga Vaiṣṅavas?
Such people are certainly staunch opponents of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu and secret agents of Kali. Thus,
whatever opinion my most worshipful Śrīla Gurudeva has
written on the subject of the guru-praṅālī of Śrī
Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṅa, and also in regard to
paṇcarātrika-guru-paramparā and bhāgavata-paramparā, is
both logical and fully in agreement with the established
conclusions of the scriptures (śāstra-siddhānta).




Chapter Three

The Gauḍīya Sampradāya is in the Line of Madhavācārya


The protection of his sampradāya

                           40
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017


The followers of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu accept the Śrī
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṅava Sampradāya as the Brahma-Madhva-Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṅava Sampradāya on the strength of the guru
paramparā. This is mentioned by the prominent Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṅava Ācāryas Śrīla Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, Śrī Kavi-
karṅapūra and Gauḍīya Vedānta Ācārya Śrīla Baladeva
Vidyabhūṣaṅa. Thus Gauḍīyas consider themselves to be a
branch of the Śrī Madhva Sampradāya. Vaiṣṅava Ācāryas
such as Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, Śrī Kṛṣṅadāsa Kavirāja
Gosvāmī, Śrīla Viṣvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura and Jagadguru Śrī Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī have also accepted this opinion. However these
days some people are trying to establish their own
concocted opinion that the Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṅava
Sampradāya is an independent sampradāya of which Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu is the original founder. Śrī
Sundarānanda Vidyāvinoda (who became opposed to his own
guru Śrī Ananta Vāsudeva) has tried, together with some
other personalities, to prove that the sampradāya of
Śrīman Mahāprabhu is not included in the Śrī Brahma-
Madhva Sampradāya. They state instead that it is
included in the impersonalist advaita-vādī sampradāya.
Originally, Śrī Sundarānanda Vidyāvinoda Mahodaya
accepted in his Ācārya Śrī Madhva that Mahāprabhu’s
sampradāya is included in the Śrī Madhva Sampradāya.
However, afterwards he considered that his own previous
evidence was not authentic. In his later book Acintya-
bhedābheda, he tried unsuccessfully to prove that the
Śrī Gauḍīya Sampradāya is an independent sampradāya. All
the arguments of the contending party are evident in his
book. Paramārādhya Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajṇāna Keśava
Gosvāmī Mahārājajī, who is like a lion for the elephant-
like heretics, wrote his own essay entitled Acintya-
bhedābheda, in which he uses scriptural evidence and
incontrovertible reasoning to refute all the arguments
in Sundarānanda Vidyāvinoda’s book. This essay has been
published in several issues of the Bengali Śrī Gauḍīya
Patrikā and the Hindi Śrī Bhagavata Patrikā. We shall
now briefly mention some of those arguments and
evidence.

The Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṅava sampradāya is in the line of
Śrī Madhva

First we shall mention two currently prominent arguments
which Śrī Sundarānanda Vidyāvinoda has put forward.

Objection 1: “According to Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta and
Śrī Caitanya-candroḍaya-nātaka, Śrī Caitanyadeva
accepted sannyāsa veśa from a kevalādvaita-vāda
sannyāsī, Śrī Keśava Bhārati, and He has referred to
himself as a māyāvāda sannyāsī. In addition to this,
Prakāśānanda Sarasvatī, who was the guru of the māyāvāda
sannyāsīs of Kāśī, also described him as a sannyāsī of
the māyāvādī sampradāya.

keśava bhāratīra śiṣya tahe tumi dhanya

sāmpradāyī sannyāsī tumi raha ei grāme

“Sarvabhauma Bhatta Ācārya has also accepted this:

bhāratī sampradāya ei hayena madhyama (Śrī Caitanya-

                           41
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

caritāmṛta, Madhya 6.72)”




Refutation: This argument of the opposing party is
totally unfounded, for the following reasons.

After a jīva has realised that material existence in the
chain of birth and death is useless and distressful, he
can recognise that the attainment of service to the
lotus feet of Bhagavān is the supreme auspiciousness.
Therefore one who is extremely fortunate accepts dīkṣā
and śikṣā from a person who is thoroughly versed in
śabda-brahma, who is adorned with realisation of
Bhagavān and who has no attachment for sense
gratification. That jīva then enters into paramārtha,
the acquisition of his highest spiritual objective. In
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s nara-līlā (human-like
pastimes), He went to Gayā Dhāma on the pretext of
making offerings (pitṛ-śrāddha) for the benefit of his
deceased father. There He offered Himself fully at the
lotus feet of Śrī Īśvara Purīpāda, who was the bud of
the desire-tree of prema. He was also a supremely rasika
and bhāvuka disciple of Śrī Mādhavendra Purī, the root
of that desire-tree of prema.

prabhu bale gayā yātrā saphala āmāra

yatra kṣane dekhilāñ caraṅa tomāra

(Śrī Caitanya Bhāgavata, Ādi 17.50)




saṁsāra-samudra haite uddhāraha more

eī āmi deha samarpilāñ tomāre

kṛṣṅa-pāda-padmera amṛta-rasa pāna

āmāre karāo tumi ei cāhi dāna

āra dine nibhṛte īśvara purī sthāne

mantra dīkṣā cāhilena madhura-vacane

(Śrī Caitanya Bhāgavata, Ādi 17.54)




tabe tāna sthāne śikṣā-guru nārāyaṅa




karilena daśākṣara mantrera grahaṅa


                            42
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017




(Śrī Caitanya Bhāgavata, Ādi 17.107)

According to this section of Śrī Caitanya-Bhāgavata, Śrī
Nimāī Paṅḍita performed the pastime of surrendering his
heart at the feet of Śrī Īśvara Purī. He prayed to him
for the dīkṣā-mantra in order to get release from
material existence and to attain Śrī Kṛṣṅa prema, and
Śrī Purīpāda very affectionately gave him dīkṣā by the
ten-syllable mantra. Sometime afterwards, Śrī Nimāī
Paṅḍita accepted sannyāsa veśa in Kaṭva from the
advaita-vāda sannyāsī Śrī Keśava Bhārati. After
accepting sannyāsa he set off for Vṛndāvana, saturated
in the madness of prema. When he arrived in Rāḍha-deśa,
absorbed in prema, he chanted a verse from Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam. etāṁ sa āsthāya parātmaniṣṭhām adhyāsitāṁ
pūrvatamair mahārṣibhiḥ ahaṁ tariṣyāmi durantapāraṁ tamo
mukundāñghri niṣevayaiva (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.23.57) “I
shall easily cross over the insurmountable ocean of
nescience by rendering service to the lotus feet of Śrī
Kṛṣṅa. This was approved by the great ṛṣis of ancient
times, who were fixed in firm devotion to Mukunda.”

prabhu kahe sādhu ei bhikṣuka-vacana

mukunda sevanavrata kaila nirdhāraṅa parātmāniṣṭhāmātra
veśa-dhāraṅa mukunda-sevāya haya saṁsāra-tāraṅa

seī veśa kaila ebe vṛndāvana giyā kṛṣṅa-niṣevana kari’
nibhṛte vasiyā

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya 3.7.9) After accepting
sannyāsa, Mahāprabhu said, “This promise of the
tridaṅḍi-bhikṣu is supremely true because the vow to
serve the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṅa is fixed by accepting
this veśa. Having renounced dedication to material sense
objects, the purpose of accepting this veśa is parātmā-
niṣṭha, single-pointed devotion to the lotus feet of Śrī
Kṛṣṅa. I have accepted this veśa, so now I will go to
Vrndavana and serve the lotus feet of Kṛṣṅa.”

In the above verse, the phrase ‘parātmaniṣṭhāmātra veśa-
dhāraṅa’ is particularly worthy of consideration. It
indicates that Mahāprabhu only accepted veśa from Śrī
Keśava Bhārati because it was favourable for the
cultivation of bhagavad-bhakti. He did not accept any
mantra or any doctrines of advaita-vāda. On the
contrary, throughout His life He refuted kevalādvaita-
vāda and the conclusions of māyāvāda. It is clear that
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu accepted only Śrī Īśvara
Purīpāda as his genuine guru, because it is Śrī Īśvara
Purīpāda’s śuddha-bhakti that He accepted, preached and
propagated throughout His life. Śrī Mādhavendra Purīpāda
and Śrī Īśvara Purīpāda are included within the Madhva
Sampradāya, so Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and his
followers, the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṅavas, are also included in
the Madhva Sampradāya. Moreover, Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s con-temporary pastime associates Śrī
Nityānanda Prabhu, Śrī Advaita Ācārya, Śrī Puṅḍarīka
Vidyānidhi, Brahmānanda Purī and others are also
followers of the Śrī Madhva Sampradāya because they are

                           43
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

all in the line of Śrī Mādhavendra Purī. Śrīman
Mahāprabhu always respected the disciples of Śrī
Mādhavendra Purī as his gurus, and He treated the
disciples of Śrī Īśvara Purī as Godbrothers. Guru ājṇā
haya avicāranīya: “One should not deliberate on the
validity of the order of the guru.” According to this
conclusion, he accepted Govinda as his servant. It is
proved by this that Īśvara Purī was actually his Guru.
Another point is as follows. Śrī Madhva Ācārya accepted
sannyāsa from Acyutaprekṣa, who was also a kevalādvaita-
vādī. Suppose we accept the opinion of the opposing
party, just for the sake of argument. In that case, if
Mahāprabhu is a kevalādvaita-vādī sannyāsī, then by the
same logic so is Madhva Ācārya as well. Where, then, is
the obstacle to Śrīman Mahāprabhujī’s being in the
Madhva Sampradāya, if both of them accepted the advaita-
vādī Śankara’s sampradāya? There is a second point here.
Śrī Madhva Ācārya accepted eka-daṅḍa (a single staff of
renunciation) according to the customs and regulations
of the Śankara sampradāya. It would be logically
consistent to say that Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu followed
his ideal example, and also accepted eka-daṅḍa sannyāsa
from a sannyāsī of the Śankara sampradāya, namely Śrī
Keśava Bhārati. From this it seems clear that Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṅavas are in the line of Śrī Madhva Ācārya.
Objection 2: “Gauḍīya Vaiṣṅava Ācārya Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī
has not mentioned any sort of relationship between the
Gauḍīya Sampradāya and the Madhva Sampradāya any-where
in his literatures such as Tattva-sandarbha or Sarva-
saṁvādinī. This idea has been introduced by Śrī Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṅa, who was initiated into the Madhva
Sampradāya in the early part of his life and only later
entered the Gauḍīya Sampradāya. For this reason he had a
natural inclination toward the Madhva Sampradāya.
Therefore Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṅa has forced the issue out
of prejudice, and has mentioned the Śrī Madhva
Sampradāya in his commentary on Tattva-sandarbha. In his
Prameya Ratnāvalī he delineated a guru-paramparā which
includes Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and His sampradāya
within the Śrī Madhva Sampradāya.” Refutation: These
accusations are completely groundless and imaginative
fabrications. Actually Jīva Gosvāmī acknowledged the
tattva-vāda of Śrī Madhava Ācārya, who is the guru of
tattva-vāda, and took support from it when he compiled
his Tattva-sandharbha, Bhagavata-sandarbha and so on.
Not only this, but he also cited in his literatures the
fundamental pramāṅa or substantiating verses of tattva-
vāda such as, ‘vādanti tat tattva-vidas tattvam’ (S.B.
1.2.11). Of the four vaiṣṅava sampradāya-ācāryas, only
Madhva Ācārya is celebrated by the name of tattva-vādī.
Since Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī has personally established
tattva-vāda, the Vaiṣṅavas of the Madhva-Gauḍīya
Sampradāya are therefore tattva-vādīs. In the third
śloka of the mañgalācaraṅa (auspicious invocation) of
Tattva-sandarbha, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī glorifies his guru
Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī and his paramguru Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī
as ‘tattvajṇāpakau’ (the ācāryas who proclaim tattva).
Similarly, the crown of the dynasty of vaiṣṅava ācāryas,
Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṅa Prabhu, has also designated
Śrī Rūpa and Śrī Sanātana as ‘tattvavid-uttamau’ (the
highest of all knowers of tattva) in his commentary on
this same śloka. It is clear from this that Śrī Jīva
Gosvāmī has offered respect to Śrī Madhva Ācārya, and
that Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṅa has followed Jīva Gosvāmī

                           44
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

in honouring Madhva Ācārya. Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṅa
Prabhu, has not shown any prejudice towards Madhva
Ācārya. On the contrary, if we compare Jīva Gosvāmī with
Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṅa, we find that Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṅa has glorified the two Gosvāmīs Śrī Rūpa and
Sanātana more than Jīva Gosvāmī has. There is no doubt
whatever that Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṅa is situated in
the āmnāya-dhārā (the transcendental current of
conclusive evidence) or the paramaparā of Śrī Gaura-
Nityānanda Prabhus and of Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmīpāda who
immediately follows them. Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṅa is
in the ninth generation from Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu
according to bhāgavat-paramparā, and in the eighth
generation according to paṇcarātrika-paramparā.
Historians have accepted his paṇcarātrika-paramparā as
follows: Śrī Nityānanda, Śrī Gaurīdāsa Paṅḍita, Hṛdaya
Caitanya, Syāmānanda Prabhu, Rasikānanda Prabhu,
Nayanānanda Prabhu and Śrī Rādhā-Dāmodara. Śrī Baladeva
Prabhu is the initiated disciple of this Śrī Rādhā-
Dāmodara and is also the most prominent śikṣā disciple
of Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartī. Historians have declared
that in no branch of the Madhva guru-paramparā were
there any brilliant scholars of such widespread fame as
Baladeva. In fact, at that time no one in any sampradāya
anywhere in India could equal Śrī Baladeva’s knowledge
in logic, in Vedānta and in śāstra such as the Purāṅas
and itihāsas. It is true that he stayed for some days in
the most prominent maṭha established by Śrī Madhva
Ācārya in Uḍūpī, and that he studied the Śrī Madhva
commentary on Vedānta; however, the Śrī Gauḍīya
Sampradāya was more of an influence upon him than was
the Śrī Madhva Sampradāya. It is natural for scholarly
personalities, who are worshipful throughout the worlds
and who are the preceptors of great precepts, to follow
in the lotus-footsteps of the vaiṣṅava ācāryas of the
very influential Madhva-Gauḍīya Sampradāya. Śrī Baladeva
thoroughly studied the commentary of Madhva, and also
made a meticulous study of the commentaries of Śañkara,
Rāmānuja, Bhāskara Ācārya, Nimbārka, Vallabha and
others. It is illogical to say that he is included in
each one of those sampradāyas because he had studied
those groups of philosophers. Śrī Baladeva Prabhu has
described historical events and quoted the conclusions
of the previous Gauḍīya Vaiṣṅava ācāryas in many
literatures, such as his Govinda-bhāṣya, Siddhānta-
ratnam, Prameya-ratnāvalī and his commentary on Tattva-
sandharba. He has enabled all the philosophers of the
world to understand that the Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṅava
Sampradāya is included within the Madhva Sampradāya. In
this regard all the scholars of the world, eastern and
western, ancient and modern, have bowed their heads in
reverence, and have unanimously accepted the siddhānta
and opinions of Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṅa Prabhu. Śrī
Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṅa was sent by Śrī Viśvanātha
Cakravartī to protect the honour of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṅava
sampradāya in the Galatā Gaddī in Jaipura. There he
defeated the objecting paṅḍitas of the Śrī sampradāya in
scriptural debate. There are no second opinions about
this. Does this not show that Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura personally inspired his śikṣā disciple Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṅa to prove that the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṅavas are in
the line of Madhva Ācārya? Śrīla Cakravartī Ṭhākura sent
his dīkṣā disciple Śrī Kṛṣṅadeva Sarvabhauma with Śrī
Baladeva to help him. If Śrī Cakravartī Ṭhākura had not

                           45
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

been so aged and weak at that time, he certainly would
have gone to Jaipur in person to take part in this
debate about the sampradāya. He would also have
established the very same conclusion as Śrī Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṅa. There is no sound evidence to prove that
Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṅa was first an ācārya or
disciple in the Madhva Sampradāya. There may be hearsay
and imaginative rumours, but no one has given any
substantial proof. The opposition party has alleged that
Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has not mentioned anywhere in his
literature that Gauḍīya Vaiṣṅavas are in the line of the
Madhva Sampradāya. This accusation is born of ignorance
and is absurd in the extreme. In numerous places in
Tattva-sandarbha, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī mentions his being
in the line of Madhva. Moreover, while composing Ṣaṭ-
sandarbha, he accepted the guidance of ācāryas in the
Śrī Madhva Sampradāya such as Vijayadhvaja, Śrī
Brahmaṅyatīrtha and Vyāsatīrtha, and collected many
scriptural proofs from their literatures. It is true
that he has also quoted the statements of Śrī Rāmānuja
Ācārya and Śrīdhara Svāmīpāda in many places, but he has
not considered these ācāryas to be previous ācāryas of
the Śrī Gauḍīya Sampradāya. Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī has even
accepted the statements of sages of different
philosophical schools such as Kapila and Pātaṇjalī when
they are favourable to bhakti. Nonetheless, that does
not mean that he is within those sampradāyas. One may
establish a specific point of siddhānta which supports
the views of an ācārya of a particular

sampradāya. That does not mean that one is then a member
of that sampradāya. Only when the siddhānta is
established by taking all the opinions of the
ācārya’sdisciple and grand-disciple is the person
establishing that conclusion considered to be in that
sampradāya, otherwise not. A part of the writings of
Sila Jīva Gosvāmī in regard to this topic is quoted
here:

atra ca sva-darśitārtha-viśeṣa-prāmāṅyāyaiva. na tu
śrīmad-bhāgavata-vākya-prāmāṅyāya pramāṅāni śrutī-
purāṅādi vacanāṁ yathā dṛṣṭam evodāharaṅī yāni. kvacit
svayamadrṣṭākarāṅi ca tattva-vāda-gurunāmādhunikānāṁ
śrīmac chañkarācārya śiṣyatāṁ labhvā’pi śrī
bhagavatapakṣapatena tato vicchidya, pracura-pracārita
vaiṣṅavatama- viśeṣāṅāṁ dakṣiṅādi-
deśavikhyāta-'śiṣyopaśiṣya-
bhūta'-’vijayadhvaja’-’jayatīrtha’-’brahmaṅyatīrtha’-
vyāsatīrthādi-veda-vedārtha vidvadvarānāṁ ‘śrī-
madhvācārya-caraṅāṁ’ bhāgavata tātparya-bhārata-
tātparya, brahma-sūtra-bhāṣyādibhyaḥ sañgṛhītāni.
taiścairamuktaṁ bhārata tātparye (2.1.8)

śāstrāntarāṅi saṇjānan vedāntasya prasādataḥ

deśe deśe tathā granthān dṛṣṭvā caiva pṛthag vidhān

yathā sa bhagavān vyāsaḥ sākṣān nārāyanaḥ prabhuḥ

jagāda bhāratādyeṣu tathā vakṣye tadīkṣayā iti

(Tattva-sandarbha 97-98) tatra taduddhatā śrutiś catur
veda śikhādyā, purānaṇ ca gāruḍādīnāṁ saṁprati sarvatrā-
pracaradrūpamaṁśādikaṁ; saṁhitā ca mahāsaṁ hitādikā;

                           46
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

tañtraṇca tañtra bhāgavataṁ brahma tarkadikamiti jṇeyam.

“I (Jīva Gosvāmī) have quoted various authentic
scriptural statements as evidence in the Ṣaṭ-sandharbha
literature. This is to establish the authenticity of my
own interpretation or opinion which I have expressed in
this literature; it is not to try to prove that the
statements or conclusions of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam are
authentic. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, like the Vedas, is self-
evident (svataḥ-pramāṅa) and therefore does not depend
upon any second evidence. In this literature I have
quoted various statements of evidence from the original
texts of śruti-smṛti, the Purāṅas and so on, exactly as
I have personally seen them in those literatures.
Besides that, my predecessor ācāryas from among the
guru-varga of tattva-vāda have cited evidence which I,
the author of Tattva-sandarbha (tattva-vādī), have also
quoted although there are several of the original texts
which I have not seen personally. These tattva-vādī
predecessor gurus, such as Śrī Mādhavendra Purī, have
accepted the śiṣyatva of Śrī Śañkara Ācārya by accepting
sannyāsa from ācāryas in the Śañkara sampradāya.
Nonetheless, because of their strong inclination to
Bhagavān, they remained completely aloof from the
doctrines of Śañkara. They broadly promulgated vaiṣṅava
doctrines of ācāryas which contain various specialities
from the conclusions of the ācāryas. The disciples and
grand-disciples of the renowned Ānanda-tīrtha,
Vijayadhvaja, Brahmaṅyatīrtha and Vyāsatīrtha have
collected evidence from literatures such as Bhāgavata-
tātparya, Bhārata-tātparya and Brahma-sūtra-bhāṣya
composed by Śrīman Madhva Ācārya, the best of those who
know the Vedas and their inner purport. “In his Bhārata-
tātparya, Śrīman Madhva Ācārya has also written, ‘By the
grace of Vedānta and the Upaniṣads, I will establish the
siddhānta, since I know the confidential mystery of
various other śāstras, I have investigated varieties of
literature from different countries and I have honour
for the conclusions expressed in texts such as the
Mahābhārata written by the direct manifestation of
Nārāyaṅa, Śrī Kṛṣṅa-dvaipāyana Vedavyāsa.’ “I (Jīva
Gosvāmī) am composing Tattva-sandarbha following the
above statements of Śrīman Madhva Ācārya. I am accepting
statements quoted by him and those in his line, without
having personally seen the originals of many of the
texts. This includes tantra such as saṁhitā and
mahāsaṁhitā, tantra-bhāgavata and brahmatarka.” This
evidence clearly proves that Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī has
accepted only Śrīman Madhva Ācārya as the predecessor
ācārya of the Śrī Gauḍīya Sampradāya. Nowhere does Śrī
Jīva Gosvāmī such a clear statement in regard to Śrī
Rāmānuja Ācārya or Śrīdhara Svāmīpāda. Specifically he
has not accepted all the conclusions of the disciples
and grand-disciples of any sampradāya ācārya other than
Madhva. Śrī Rāmānuja Ācārya had many disciples and
grand-disciples, and Śrīdhara Svami also had many
disciples, but Jīva Gosvāmī has not written down their
names anywhere. What to speak of mentioning Nimbārka
Ācārya’s name, we cannot find even a scent of his
existence anywhere in Jīva Gosvāmī’s literature.
Objection 3: “Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has described the
glories of Śrīman Mahāprabhu in a verse in the
mañgalācaraṅa of his Sarva-saṁvādinī. Praying to
Mahāprabhu, he has described Him as ‘sva-sampradāya-

                           47
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

sahasrādhidaiva' (the eternal presiding Deity of
thousands upon thousands of sampradāyas founded by Him).
How, then, can He be included within any other
sampradāya? He is personally the founder of the
independent Gauḍīya Sampradāya.” Refutation: This
objection is quite ridiculous. The complete verse from
the mañgalācaraṅa of Sarva-saṁvādinī reads as follows:

durlabha-prema-pīyūṣagañgā-pravāha-sahasraṁ sva-
sampradāya-sahasrādhidaivaṁ śrī

kṛṣṅa caitanyadeva nāmānaṁ śrī bhagavāntam Śrī
Sundarānanda Vidyāvinoda and other antagonists have
interpreted ‘sva-sampradāya-sahasrādhidaivam’ in this
verse to mean ‘the presiding Deity of thousands of
sampradāyas which Śrīman Mahāprabhu has personally
inaugurated.’ The salient point here is that Śrīman
Mahāprabhu has not founded thousands of sampradāyas; He
has established only one sampradāya, which is

called the Śrī Madhva-Gauḍīya Vaiṣṅava Sampradāya.
Therefore their interpretation is completely mistaken.
Śrī Rasikamohana Vidyābhūṣaṅa Mahodaya has interpreted
‘svasampradāya-sahasrādhidaiva’ in another way as ‘the
supreme presiding Deity of his own sampradāya.’ This
meaning is quite appropriate, and all Gauḍīya Vaiṣṅavas
have accepted it. One may say, “Śrīman Mahāprabhu is
Svayaṁ Bhagavān, and is directly Śrī Kṛṣṅacandra. Is it
necessary for Svayaṁ Bhagavān Gauracandra to consider
any other personality as His guru, and to accept dīkṣā
and śikṣā from him?” The answer is, “Yes, it is
necessary, when Śrī Bhagavān performs his nara-līlā
(human-like pastimes).” Śrī Rāmacandra has exhibited the
pastime of accepting dīkṣā and śikṣā from Vaśiṣṭha Muni,
Śrī Kṛṣṅa from Sāndīpani Muni, and Śrīman Mahāprabhu
from Īśvara Purīpāda. These activities do not effect
their bhagavattā (Godhood) even in the slightest way.
Svayaṁ Bhagavān performs such pastimes in order to give
instructions to the world. There is no question of
Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s tattva being lost if He is included
in any sampradāya. It is not the personal duty of
Bhagavān to found a sampradāya; His devotees do that.
History shows that in all cases only Viṣṅu śakti or the
servants of Viṣṅu have ever founded a sampradāya.
Granted, Śrī Bhagavān is the original, eternal
personality of sanātana-dharma which He Himself
establishes, as is evident in scriptural statements such
as 'dharman tu sākṣāt bhagavat pranītam' (Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam 6.3.19) and 'dharmo jagannāthaḥ sākṣāt
nārāyaṅāh' (Mahābhārata, Śānti-parva 348.54). Still the
statement 'akartā caiva kartā ca karyaṁ kāraṅam eva ca'
(Mahābhārata, Śānti-parva 348.7) shows that Bhagavān has
no direct agency in the business of establishing a
sampradāya. Rather, He accomplishes this task through
his empowered representatives. If it were not so, then
instead of the Brahma, Rudra, Sanaka and Śrī
Sampradāyas, there would be the Vāsudeva, Sañkarṣaṅa and
Nārāyaṅa Sampradāyas. Objection 4: “While touring in
South India, Śrīman Mahāprabhu went to Uḍūpī. There he
had a discussion with a tattva-vādī ācārya, who was in
Śrī Madhva Ācārya’s sampradāya. Mahāprabhu refuted the
views of the tattva-vādīs, so He can never be included
in that sampradāya.”


                           48
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

Refutation: Śrīman Mahāprabhujī did not directly refute
Madhva Ācārya’s ideas about śuddha-bhakti. Rather, He
refuted the distorted opinions of the tattva-vādīs which
had entered into the Madhva Sampradāya in the course of
time. Readers can understand this simply by looking in
this section of Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya 9.
276.277)

prabhu kahe — karmī, jṇānī, dui bhaktihīna

tomara sampradāye dekhi sei dui cihna

sabe eka guṅa dekhi tomāra sampradāye

satya-vigraha īśvare karaha niścaye

67

“Karmīs and jṇānīs are devoid of devotion, and it is
seen that both of these are respected in your
sampradāya. Still, in your sampradāya there is one very
great quality—the form of Bhagavān or śrī vigraha has
been accepted. Not only this, but śrī vigraha has also
been accepted as Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṅa Himself. He
is worshipped in your sampradāya in the form of Nṛtya-
Gopāla.”

This proves that Śrīman Mahāprabhu refuted distortions
which later entered the Madhva Sampradāya in the course
of time. He did not refute Madhva Ācārya’s opinions on
śuddha-bhakti or the fundamental conclusions that he
expressed in his commentaries. On the contrary, we have
already shown that literatures such as Tattva-sandarbha
and Sarva-saṁvādinī have been based on the conclusions
of Śrī Madhva and his disciples and grand-disciples. In
this connection we should point out that a difference of
sampradāya does not generally arise from some minor
difference of opinion. Rather, the difference between
sampradāya comes from the differences of theory about
the principal object of worship. Objection 5: “Madhva
Ācārya’s doctrine includes the following specific
points:

(a) liberation is only attained by brāhmaṅas who have
taken birth in a brāhmaṅa dynasty; (b) among devotees,
the devas are prominent; (c) only Brahma merges with
Viṣṅu; (d) Lakṣmījī is in the category of jīva; and (e)
the gopīs are in the category of the āpsarās of Svarga.
However, in the opinion of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and
the Vaiṣṅava ācāryas in his line these conceptions of
Madhva are contradictory to the conclusions of śuddha-
bhakti. Under such circumstances, why would Śrī
Caitanyadeva accept the Madhva Sampradāya? That being
the case, how can the ācāryas following in his Gauḍīya
Sampradāya be included within the Madhva Sampradāya?”
Refutation: When Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṅa was in Galtā
Gaddī in Jaipur, he used śastric evidence and
incontrovertible logic to break to pieces all these
arguments of the opposition party. He quoted the
conclusions of Madhva Ācārya as well as those of his
disciples and grand-disciples such as Vijayadhvaja,
Brahmaṅyatīrtha and Vyāsatīrtha. Śrī Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṅa has refuted all such accusations in his
literary compositions such as his commentary on Tattva-

                           49
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

sandarbha, his Govinda-bhāṣya, Siddhānta-ratnam and
Prameya-ratnāvalī, and he has proved that the Śrī
Gauḍīya Sampradāya is included within the Madhva
Sampradāya. In the Galtā Gaddī assembly, Baladeva proved
that Madhva considered Laksmījī to be the dear consort
of Viṣṅu. Madhva taught that her spiritual body is
composed of knowledge and pleasure and, like Viṣṅu, she
is also completely free from defects, such as the misery
of being confined in the womb prior to birth. She is
all-pervading, and she also enjoys in unlimited forms
along with the unlimited forms of Viṣṅu. When the
avatāra of Viṣṅu descends, Lakṣmījī also descends and
remains splendidly present in the form of that avatara’s
dear beloved consort. Like Viṣṅu, Lakṣmījī also has
various names and forms (Bṛhad-āranyaka Bhāṣya 3.5,
written by Śrī Madhva). Further-more, Lakṣmīdevī is
Viṣṅu’s subservient embodiment of all knowledge. She is
also superior to and more qualified than Caturmukha
Brahmā. She exists radiantly on the limbs of Bhagavān in
the form of various types of ornaments, and it is she
who manifests all facilities for the pleasure of Viṣṅu,
such as his bed, seat, throne, ornaments and so on.
(This is from Śrī Madhva Ācārya’s explanation of Brahma-
sūtra 4.2.1, supported by Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.9.13)
Nowhere has Śrī Madhva described Śrī Lakṣmījī to be in
the category of jīva. Similarly, the ideas that only
brāhmaṅas attain liberation, that the devas are the
prominent devotees, that only Brahmā merges with Viṣṅu
and so on, are all foreign to the Madhva Sampradāya. On
this subject Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has explained in
his The Teachings of Śrīman Mahāprabhu why Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu has accepted the Madhva Sampradāya. “Śrī Jīva
Gosvāmī, having determined the authenticity of one whose
speech is true, has also ascertained the authenticity of
the Purāṅas. Ultimately he has proved that Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam is the crest jewel of all evidence. He has
shown that the same characteristic qualities which
qualify Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam as the topmost evidence also
apply to the scriptures certified by Brahmā, Nārada,
Vyāsa, Sukadeva and after them in sequence Vijayadhvaja,
Brahmaṅyatīrtha, Vyāsatīrtha, and their tattva-guru
Śrīman Madhva Ācārya. These scriptures, then, are also
in the category of authentic literatures. “It is clearly
evident from this that the Brahma-Madhva Sampradāya is
the guru-praṅālī (system) of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṅavas who
have taken shelter of Śrīman Mahāprabhu. Kavi karṅapūra
confirmed this same idea in his delineation of the guru-
paramparā in his Gaura-ganoddeśa-dīpikā. The commentator
of Vedānta-sūtra Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṅa has also
accepted this same succession. There is no doubt at all
that those who do not accept this succession are
prominent enemies of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and of the
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṅavas who are following in His footsteps.
“The doctrine of bhedābheda or dvaitādvaita which
Nimbārka propounded is incomplete. It is in accepting
the teachings of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu that the
vaiṣṅava world has attained the complete perfection of
the doctrine of bhedābheda. The principal foundation-
stone of acintya-bhedābheda is sac-cid-ānanda vigraha,
and it is because Śrī Madhva Ācārya has accepted the
sac-cid-ānanda vigraha that Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has
accepted the Śrī Madhva Sampradāya. “There is a
technical difference between the philosophical ideas
which the previous Vaiṣṅava ācāryas have propagated

                           50
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

because there some slight incompleteness in those
philosophical ideas. The difference in sampradāya is due
to this technical difference. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu,
who is directly para-tattva, has shown compassion on the
world and given His own thoroughly pure and realised
doctrine of acintya-bhedābheda. By the power of His
omniscience, He has completed and made flawless all
those opinions which were suffering from some
deficiency, for example, Madhva’s sac-cid-ananda nitya-
vigraha, Rāmānuja Ācārya’s śakti-siddhānta, Viṣṅu-
svamī’s śuddhādvaita siddhānta and tadīya sarvasvatva
and Nimbarka’s nitya dvaitādvaita siddhānta.” (The
Teachings of Śrīman Mahāprabhu, p. 110). Another reason
for Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s acceptance of Madhva’s opinion
is that Madhva’s doctrine distinctly refutes māyāvāda or
kevalādvaita-vāda, which is opposed to bhakti-tattva in
all respects. A third point is that Śrī Madhva Ācārya
manifested and worshipped Nanda-nandana Nartaka-Gopāla
in Uḍūpī. When Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu had darśana of
the Deity, He became overwhelmed in ecstatic love and
began to dance. He had not seen such a Deity anywhere
else during his tour of South India. This is also
powerful evidence for His being in Madhva’s line. In his
Śrī Kṛṣṅa Vijaya, Śrī Guṅarāja Khān wrote the line,
Nanda-nandana kṛṣṅa— mora prāṅanātha: “Nanda-nandana
Kṛṣṅa is the Lord of my life” (quoted in Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta, Madhya 15.100), and for this utterance Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu sold Himself forever into the hands
of Śrī Guṅaraja Khān’s descendants. Why, then, would He
not sell Himself to the paramparā of those disciples and
grand-disciples for whom Nanda-nandana Nartaka-Gopāla is
their most worshipful Lord? This is also specific
evidence that the Gauḍīya Sampradāya is in the line of
Madhva. Although there is some slight difference of
opinion between Gauḍīya Vaiṣṅavas and Śrī Madhva in
regard to Brahman, jīva and jagat, this simple
difference of opinion is not the cause of a difference
of sampradāya. The difference between Vaiṣṅava
sampradāyas has been created on the basis of a
difference in upāsya-tattva (the object of worship) or
on the basis of gradations of excellence between aspects
of para-tattva. Even if there is some slight difference
in regard to sādhya, sādhana and sādhaka-tattva, this is
rarely considered to be the cause of a difference of
sampradāya. Actually, it is the difference in
realisation of para-tattva or upāsya-tattva (the
worshipful Supreme Truth) which is the main cause of
distinct sampradāyas. This was why Śrīman Mahāprabhu
overlooked the philosophical differences with the
tattva-vādīs and, focusing on the worship of para-tattva
Nartaka-Gopāla, accepted Śrī Madhva Ācārya as the
prominent sampradāya ācārya. Objection 6: Some persons
who are ignorant of sampradāya-tattva say, “Śrī
Mādhavendra Purī and Īśvara Purī cannot be sannyāsīs of
the Madhva Sampradāya because they have the designation
‘Purī’, whereas sannyāsīs in the Madhva Sampradāya are
called ‘Tīrtha.’ If Śrī Mādhavendra Purī is not included
within the Madhva Sampradāya, then there are no grounds
for claiming that Śrīman Mahāprabhu has accepted the
Madhva Sampradāya.” Refutation: Śrī Mādhavendra
Purīpāda’s title ‘Purī’ is his sannyāsa name. Actually,
he was the initiated disciple of Lakṣmīpati Tīrtha, who
was in the Śrī Madhva Sampradāya. Śrī Mādhavendra
Purīpāda later accepted sannyāsa from a sannyāsī bearing

                           51
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

the name ‘Purī,’ just as Śrīman Mahāprabhu first
accepted dīkṣā from Śrī Īśvara Purī and later manifested
the pastime of accepting sannyāsa from Śrī Keśava
Bhārati. There is no rule that the dīkṣā-guru and
sannyāsa-guru have to be the same person. In some cases
they may be, and in others not. Śrī Madhva Ācārya
himself was first initiated in a Vaiṣṅava sampradāya by
the Viṣṅu mantra and after that accepted sannyāsa-veśa
from an advaita-vādī, Acyutaprekṣa. After some days, Śrī
Madhva Ācārya influenced Acyutaprekṣa and brought him
into the Vaiṣṅava conception. Even after taking sannyāsa
from an advaita-vādī, Śrī Madhva Ācārya did not accept
advaita-vāda. On the contrary, he powerfully refuted all
the ideas of advaita-vāda and, having established
tattva-vāda, he preached and spread it everywhere. The
same is also seen in the life of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu. It is true that sannyāsīs in the Madhva
Sampradāya are called ‘Tīrtha’, but ‘Tīrtha’ is not the
title of gṛhastha-vaiṣṅavas or braḥmacārīs in that
sampradāya. Since Śrī Mādhavendra Purī did not have the
title ‘Tīrtha’ before taking sannyāsa, when he accepted
veśa from a sannyāsī in the advaita-sampradāya, his
title had to be ‘Purī.’ This is not illogical. Objection
7: Some say, “The sādhya (goal) and sādhana (practice)
of the Śrī Madhva Sampradāya differ from that of the Śrī
Gauḍīya Sampradāya. Therefore the Śrī Gauḍīya Sampradāya
cannot be considered to be within the Śrī Madhva
Sampradāya.” Refutation: This objection is thoroughly
false, and rooted in ignorance. Madhva’s doctrine
acknowledges bhagavat-bhakti as the sādhana in all
respects. As with Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṅavas, the initial
sādhana prescribed for kaniṣṭha-adhikārī sādhakas
(neophyte practitioners) is offering the results of
ones’ fruitive activities to Kṛṣṅa (kṛṣṅa-karmārpanam).
However, bhagavat-parama-prasāda sādhana (i.e. śuddha-
bhakti) has been established as the principal practice.
Śrī Madhva Ācārya has established bhakti as we see from
his Sūtra-bhāṣya (3.3.53): bhaktir evainaṁ nayati
bhaktir evainaṁ darśayati bhaktivaśaḥ puruṣo bhaktir eva
bhūyasi iti maṭharaśrutaḥ. In sūtra 3.3.45 he writes,
varāhe ca guru-prasādo balavānna tasmād valavattaram/
tathāpi śravanādiś ca karttavayo mokṣa-siddhaye: “The
mercy of Śrī Gurudeva is more powerful than anything
else for attaining the perfection of liberation in the
form of service to Viṣṅu’s lotus feet. Yet it is still
more necessary in engagement in the limbs of sādhana-
bhakti such as śravaṅa and kīrtana.” In his text
Mahābhārata-tātparya-nirṅaya (Defining the Purport of
Mahābhārata) the position of bhakti is seen throughout:
sneho bhaktir iti proktastayā muktir na cānyathā (1.105)
and bhaktyaiva tuṣyati hariḥ pravanatvam eva (2.59). We
have not given more evidence simply because of lack of
space. In the Madhva Sampradāya, love of Bhagavān is the
only sādhya. Although Śrīman Madhva Ācārya has accepted
mokṣa as the goal in some places, his definition of
mokṣa is, viṣṅav-āñghri lābhaḥ mukti: “Liberation is the
attainment of service to the lotus feet of Viṣṅu.” Thus,
the Śrī Madhva Sampradāya accepts the definition of
mukti spoken by Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, muktir hitvānyathā
rūpaṁ svarūpeṅa vyavasthitiḥ: “The jīva carries the
conception of ‘I’ and ‘mine’ arising from the gross and
subtle designations which are accomplished by the action
of māyā. Mukti means to be released from this false
identity and to be established in rendering loving

                           52
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

service to Bhagavān in one’s pure constitutional form.”
Madhva Ācārya’s mukti is not the sāyujya (merging with
Brahman) spoken of by Śañkara. Rather, it is based on
love of Bhagavān. Nowhere has he accepted sāyujya in the
form of the oneness of Brahman and jīva. On the
contrary, he has refuted it in every way. Madhva is well
known as a bheda-vādī because he accepts the jīva and
Brahman as being different both in the stage of bondage
and of liberation—abhedaḥ sarva-rūpeṣu jīvabhedaḥ
sadaiva hi.

Although Śrīman Madhva emphasises bheda (difference), he
does not at all disregard śrutis which indicate abheda
(non-difference); instead he has accepted their
compatibility. In other words, we find a hint of the
acceptance of acintya-bhedābheda, as Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī
has suggested in his Sandharbha literature. According to
Vedānta-sūtra, śakti śaktimator abhedaḥ: “The potency
and the potent are not different.” An indication of
acintya-bhedābheda is found in a statement of Brahma-
tarka which Śrī Madhva supported.

viśeṣasya viśiṣtasyāpy abhedas tadvad eva tu sarvam ca
cintya-śaktitvād yujyate parameśvare tac chaktyaiva tu
jīveṣu cid-rūpa-prakṛtāvāpi bhedābhedau tad-anyatra hy
ubhayor api darśanāt

(Brahma-tarka) Thus there is no particular difference
between Madhva Ācārya and Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
regarding sādhya and sādhana. Whatever slight difference
is evident is only mutual vaiśiṣtya (specific
distinction). There is a very specific similarity
between the Madhva and Gauḍīya Sampradāyas. The
sannyāsīs presiding over the eight maṭhas of the tattva-
vādīs in Uḍūpī perform bhajana in the mood of the gopīs
under the guidance of Śrī Kṛṣṅa’s eight beloved nāyikās
(heroines) in Vraja. On this subject, Śrī
Padmanābhacārī, the author of Śrī Madhva Ācārya’s
biography, has written, “The monks who take charge of
Śrī Kṛṣṅa in rotation are so many gopīs of Vṛndāvana who
moved with and loved Śrī Kṛṣṅa with an indescribable
intensity of feeling, and are taking rebirths now for
the privilege of worshipping Him” (Life and Teachings of
Śrī Madhva Ācārya by C.M. Padmanābhacārī, Chapter XII,
page 145).

Even today, the service of Yasodānandana Nṛtya-Gopāla is
seen in the prominent maṭha in Uḍūpī. Śrīla Madhva
Ācārya has praised his iṣṭadeva Nartaka Gopala Śrī Kṛṣṅa
in this way in the fifth verse, chapter six of his
Dvādasa stotram.

devakinandana nanda-kumāra




vṛndāvanāṇjana gokulacandra




                              53
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

kandaphalāśana sundara-rūpa




nanditagokula vanditapāda




Similarly, in the Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṅava Sampradāya,
service to Śrī Kṛṣṅa under the guidance of the gopis has
been ascertained as the sādhya in the writings of Śrīla
Rūpa, Sanātana, Raghunātha, Kṛṣṅadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī
and others. In this way, by evaluating the opinions of
the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṅava ācāryas from first to last, one can
conclude that the Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṅava Sampradāya is
included within the Śrī Madhva Sampradāya and that this
is consistent with reason in all respects. Objection 8:
“The Madhva Sampradāya is bheda-vādī, whereas the
Gauḍīya Sampradāya is acintya-bhedābheda-vādī. Therefore
there is a vast difference of opinion between them.”
Refutation: We have said previously that, although the
Madhva Sampradāya accepts five kinds of bheda between
Brahman, jīva and jagat, still there is a hint of
acintya-bhedābheda-vāda in their teachings. The Vedic
scriptures give evidence both for bheda and abheda in
relation to Brahman, jīva and jagat. However, although
there is both bheda and abheda, we only have experience
of bheda, not of abheda. In the field of bhakti, the
difference (bheda) between upāsya (the object of
worship) and upāsaka (the worshipper) is the back-bone
of worship, and this bheda is proved both in the stage
of sādhana and siddha. Otherwise, if there were no
difference between the worshipper and the object of
worship, then worship would not be possible. Thus,
although there may be some mutual difference between the
Śrī Gauḍīya and Madhva Sampradāyas, this cannot be the
cause of a difference in sampradāya. The object of
worship is Bhagavān, the method of worship is bhakti and
the objective is mokṣa in the form of bhagavat-sevā.
Vaiṣṅavas of the four Vaiṣṅava sampradāyas hold slightly
different opinions in regard to these tattvas, but we
cannot say that they are fundamentally different. They
are all adherents to the same religious principles. The
difference between Vaiṣṅava sampradāyas has been created
only on the basis of difference in upāsya-tattva
(worshipful Deity) or a difference of excellence in
regard to para-tattva. Though there may even exist a
difference in sādhya, sādhana and sādhaka-tattva, this
is rarely considered the cause of a difference between
sampradāyas. Actually the difference in realisation of
para-tattva and upāsya-tattva is the principal cause of
differences between sampradāyas. The upāsya-tattva has
been considered superior in proportion to the degree of
excellence exhibited. Śrī Murāri Gupta is one of
Mahāprabhu’s internal associates and he is described in
the Gauḍīya Sampradāya as an avatāra of Hanuman.
Although Śrīman Mahāprabhu informed him that Vrajendra-
nandana Śrī Kṛṣṅa has more mādhurya (sweetness) than
Bhagavān Śrī Ramacandra, Murāri Gupta was not attracted
to Kṛṣṅa bhajana. His worshipful Deity was Rāma, and he

                              54
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

went on worshipping Śrī Rāma until the very end. Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu was very pleased to see his
dedication to his worshipful Lord. Śrīvasa Paṅḍita is
also one of the principal associates of Mahāprabhu. His
worshipful Deity is Śrī Lakṣmī-Nārāyaṅa, and Śrī
Karṅapūra has considered him to be an avatāra of Śrī
Nārada. It is well known that he personally preferred
the worship of Lakṣmī-Nārāyaṅa to Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s
unnata-ujjvala rasa. Some ignorant and misguided persons
say that there is a difference of opinion between Śrī
Rūpa Gosvāmī and Jīva Gosvāmī because Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī
has rejected Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī’s explanation of the
parakīya-rasa of the Vraja gopīs, and has instead
supported svakīya-rasa. Actually this accusation is
completely unfounded and incorrect. The truth is that
Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī supported svakīya-vāda for the benefit
of some of his followers who had taste for svakīya-rasa.
His internal consideration was that unqualified persons
entering into the transcendentally wonderful parakīya
vraja-rasa should not fall into any adulterous
behaviour. It is offensive to consider him an opponent
of the transcendental vraja-rasa, and he is not
considered to be outside the Gauḍīya Sampradāya on
account of this simple divergence of views. We also see
differences of opinion among the ācāryas of the māyāvādī
or kevalādvaita-vādī sampradāya; the māyāvādīs
themselves accept this point. However, they are all
within the advaita-vādī Śankara Sampradāya. Some believe
in vivarta-vāda, some believe in bimba-pratibimba-vāda,
some have accepted avicchinna-vāda, some admit ābhāsa-
vāda, and they have refuted each others’ opinions. Even
so, they are included within the same sampradāya.
Similarly, although there are some slight mutual
differences of opinion between the Śrī Madhva and the
Śrī Gauḍīya Sampradāya, it is thoroughly appropriate to
accept that the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṅava Sampradāya follows
Madhva Ācārya.




Chapter Four

Bābājī Veśa and Siddha Pranālī


Bheka-praṅālī and siddha-praṅālī

In recent times in Bengal and in places such as Rādhā-
kuṅḍa and Vṛndāvana in Vraja the custom called bheka-
dhāraṅa and siddha-praṅālī has perverted the intrinsic
nature of the śuddha-bhakti established by Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu and the Six Gosvāmīs. Without consideration
of qualification or disqualification these people give
siddha-praṅālī and bābājī veśa to adulterous fellows,
debauchees and ordinary people who are ignorant of
śāstra and siddhānta. Having adopted this base practice,
those people fall to even greater depths of corruption
and depravity.

Bheka-dhāraṅa (the system of bābājī-veśa)

From when was the custom of bheka-dhāraṅa (the formal

                           55
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

acceptance of bābājī-veśa) in use? On making an
investigation we see that this custom was not current at
the time of the Six Gosvāmīs, Śrī Kṛṣṅadāsa Kavirāja
Gosvāmī, Śrī Narottama Dāsa Ṭhākura, Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī and so on because these personalities were
instinctively paramahaṁsas. Naturally Śrī Sanātāna
Gosvāmī, taking an old dhotī from Tapana Misra, tore it
up and wore it as bahir-vāsa and ḍor-kaupīna (loin cloth
worn by a paramahaṁsa). There is no mention at all of
giving siddha-praṅālī (the process in which the
spiritual master gives details of the spiritual form,
intrinsic mood etc.) in this connection. This dress of a
renunciate was adopted simply to indicate a firm
dedication to bhajana. Similarly, one should understand
the case to be the same in regard to the other Gosvāmīs.
In one way, this is included in category of the bhikṣuka
(mendicant) āśrama or sannyāsa because paramahaṁsa
mahātmās do not have any definite or fixed dress. They
are beyond rules, regulations and the distinguishing
marks of the āśramas such as sannyāsa. Since they are
always carried away in bhagavat-prema, the regulations
and prohibitions of scriptures such as the Vedas are no
impetus for such paramahaṁsas. However those people who
are not in the paramahaṁsa stage accept vaiṣṅava
sannyāsa according to sāttvata vaiṣṅava-smṛti such as
Satkriyāsāra-dīpika or according to the same regulations
they wear a white outer cloth and ḍor-kaupīna. This is
for firm dedication to sādhana-bhajana, and is called
bheka-dhāraṅa. The word ‘bheka’ is a corrupted form of
the Sanskrit word ‘bheṣa.’ Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
has written in his essay entitled ‘Bheka-Dhāraṅa
(reprinted in Gauḍīya Patrikā Year 6, No. 2): “The word
‘bheka’ is properly understood to mean the āśrama of
bhikṣuka (mendicants). The name of the sannyāsa āśrama
is bhikṣu-āśrama. Sannyāsīs can never associate with
women in this life. They will sustain their lives by the
occupation of begging. “Here a question arises. In which
āśrama are those Vaiṣṅavas who have accepted bheka
situated? Our studies of śāstra and the instructions of
Mahāprabhu establish that detached Vaiṣṅavas are
situated in the bhikṣu-āśrama. When the association of
women is completely forbidden for them then they are
situated in the sannyāsa āśrama. The sign of sannyāsa is
kaupīna (loin cloth). When they have accepted ḍor-
kaupīna or bahirvāsa (outer-garment) then they are
definitely included in the sannyāsa aśrama. “Sannyāsa is
of two kinds, ordinary sannyāsa and vaiṣṅava sannyāsa.
There is a vast difference between these two. In
ordinary sannyāsa there is peacefulness, self-control,
tolerance, renunciation, knowledge of the eternal and
the temporary and the ambition to attain Brahman. When
these dharmas have arisen in an individual, then
sannyāsa has been accepted. However, the presence of
these qualities does not by itself provide eligibility
for vaiṣṅava-sannyāsa. The process for developing rati
for Bhagavān begins first of all with faith in subjects
related to Bhagavān. After that one proceeds to sādhu-
sañga, bhajana-kriyā, anartha-nivṛtti and so on. At the
stage when rati for Bhagavān arises in the heart, a
dharma called virakti (detachment) takes shelter of the
Vaiṣṅava. At that stage the vaiṣṅava-sādhaka becomes
completely detached from the gṛhastha-āśrama. He then
wears kaupīna to minimize his personal necessities, and
maintains his life by begging. This is called vaiṣṅava-

                           56
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

bheka. Those who are simple and free from duplicity and
who accept bheka for the purpose of doing bhagavat-
bhajana are worthy to receive the prayers of the whole
world. This type of acceptance of bheka is of two kinds.
Some sādhakas, after achieving detachment born of bhāva,
accept bheka from a worthy guru; and some have put on
ḍor-kaupīna and bahirvāsa themselves. In the sampradāya
of Śrīman Mahāprabhu this custom of bheka is extremely
pure. Bowing my head with great faith, I repeatedly
offer my obeisances to such a tradition. “However, it is
very unfortunate that these days the bheka-āśrama is
becoming extremely corrupted. The consideration of
eligibility has completely disappeared. Some people, who
want to wear bheka although they are unqualified, have
their heads shaven, put on ḍor-kaupīna and accept bheka
whimsically. “In the present time some perversions have
come in the system of sannyāsa. What are they?

(1) Some householder Vaiṣṅavas become bābājīs, having
shaven their heads and put on a kaupīna. What can be
more injurious than this? Their action is opposed to
śāstra and to the interests of society. If they are
actually detached from material life then they may
accept bheka in genuine renunciation. Otherwise they
will disgrace vaiṣṅava-dharma and in the next life they
will also have to taste the fruit of doing so.

(2) There is a terrible and disastrous custom among
bābājīs of keeping maidservants in their āśramas. In
some āśramas a bābājī may even keep his own wife from
his previous āśrama in the form of a maidservant. These
people associate with women on the pretext of service to
God and service to sādhus.

(3) Bābājīs who are actually renounced completely reject
the greed for women, wealth, eatables and so on.
Nowadays, common people are losing faith in Vaiṣṅavism,
because they see that these defects are spreading among
supposedly renounced people. The essence of the matter
is that those who accept the symbols of renunciation
without having developed the genuine detachment which
arises from rati (love of Bhagavān) are a disturbance in
society and a disgrace to vaiṣṅava-dharma. Their own
downfall and the defamation of vaiṣṅava-dharma are both
guaranteed when they accept bheka before they are
qualified to do so.” After Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura and Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṅa, a dark age began in
Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s Gauḍīya Sampradāya, during which the
current of śrī rūpānugā-bhakti became somewhat impaired.
Various kinds of speculative malpractices and opinions
opposed to śuddha-bhakti became mixed in with the true
conception. At that time the situation was so dire that
the educated and cultured section of society began to
hate even the name of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṅavism, having
witnessed the misbehaviour of its followers. In this way
the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṅava Sampradāya became distanced from
the intelligentsia and respected society. At that time
the Seventh Gosvāmī Saccidānanda Bhakti-vinoda Ṭhākura
and Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī appeared. These two
personalities brought about a revolutionary
transformation in the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṅava Sampradāya and
restored its lost dignity. To these two mahā-puruṣas and
their followers goes the entire credit for whatever
diffusion of Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s nāma-sañkīrtana and

                           57
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

śuddha-bhakti has taken place among the learned and
respectable sector of society, not only in India but
also throughout the world. They have established the
Gauḍīya Maṭḥa preaching centres of śuddha-bhakti
everywhere; they have published the literatures of
śuddha-bhakti along with magazines and journals in all
of the major languages of the world; and thus in a very
short time they have revolutionized the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṅava
society. After the disappearance of Jagadguru Śrīla
Prabhupāda these improper practices began to appear
openly in all the prominent places of Śrī Vraja-maṅdala,
Gauḍa-maṅḍala and Kṣetra-maṅḍala. These groups of
bābājīs began to make allegations against Śrīla
Prabhupāda and the śuddha-vaiṣṅavas under his shelter.
They said that Vaiṣṅavas of the Gauḍiya Maṭha are simple
jṇānīs who are ignorant of rasa-tattva, and that their
acceptance of reddish cloth and sannyāsa is not properly
established procedure. Paramārādhyatama Śrīla Gurudeva
has refuted these accusations with scriptural evidence
and powerful arguments and has preached śuddha-bhakti
everywhere. For this purpose he had the essays
previously written by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura and
Jagadguru Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda
published again in his Śrī Gauḍiya-Patrikā and Bhāgavat-
Patrikā. He published a literature entitled ’Sahajiyā-
dalana’ (destroying the sahajiyā theory) and also argued
these points in huge assemblies in many places in Vraja-
maṅḍala, Gauḍa-maṅḍala and Kṣetra-maṅḍala. As a result
of this the opposition party made a case to prosecute
him for loss of reputation in a court of law. However in
the end they had to beg forgiveness in the same
courtroom.



Siddha-praṅālī

Siddha-praṅālī is very much misused nowadays in certain
places in Vraja-maṅḍala, Gauḍa-maṅḍala and Kṣetra-
maṅḍala. Some people are abused and even driven from
their homes when their wives pass away. Although they
are bereft of tattva-jṇāna and unaware of vaidhī-bhakti-
sādhana, they have their heads shaved in the middle of
the night, put on kaupīna and quickly take siddha-
praṅālī. These days siddha-praṅālī can be obtained very
easily by giving half a rupee. Just before giving mantra
a financial contract takes place. These people think,
“There can be no auspiciousness for sādhakas until they
acquire siddha-praṅālī. There is no necessity for
vaidhī-bhakti sādhana, tattva-jṇāna or anartha-nivṛtti.
The rāgānugā-bhakta should obtain siddha-praṅālī before
he goes through anartha-nivṛtti. In that way he can
avoid getting caught in the inconvenience of vaidhī-
bhakti.” These people’s conception is exactly like
thinking that a fruit will grow from a leaf before the
appearance of a flower. About fifty-five years ago, we
were performing Vraja-maṅḍala parikramā with
Paramārādhyatama Śrīla Gurudeva. Approximately four
hundred pilgrims attending the parikramā were staying in
a large dharma-śālā in Mathurā. Gurudeva had made a big
feast there, to which all the local sādhus, saints and
Vaiṣṅavas had been invited. Bābājīs who had accepted
bheka also assembled there in very large numbers. When
they came to meet with Śrīla Gurudeva, he became very

                           58
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

curious and asked them, “What is the aim and object of
your Kṛṣṅa bhajana?” They were taken aback when they
heard this question, but after thinking about it they
said, “By performing Kṛṣṅa bhajana we will attain mukti
and merge into Kṛṣṅa.” When Gurujī heard their answer,
he became very sad. On questioning them further, he
found that women were also staying in their āśramas as
maidservants. From that day on, he vowed to reform these
malpractices which had spread in the Gaudīya Vaiṣṅava
society. I have indicated this before. In spite of being
busy in preaching śuddha-bhakti throughout his life, he
never forgot this matter. A great deal of credit for the
improvement and reform of this situation goes to this
mahā-puruṣa. Here I am presenting whatever views I have
heard from him on this subject.

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has defined the following sequence
which we have to follow in order to enter into the realm
of bhakti.

ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-sañga ‘tha bhajana-kriyā

tato ‘nartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt tato niṣṭhā rucis tataḥ

athāsaktis tato bhāvas tataḥ premābhyudaṇcati

sadhakānām ayaṁ premnaḥ prādurbhāve bhavet kramaḥ Bhakti
flees very far away when the sādhaka transgresses this
sequence. Therefore it is extremely necessary to execute
the first añga of sādhana-bhakti, namely vaidhī-bhakti
or regulative devotional service, in order to enter the
realm of prema. Vaidhī-bhakti is not directly the cause
of the attainment of Kṛṣṅa prema. Still, it is necessary
to observe the appropriate limbs of vaidhī-bhakti in
order to enter into rāga-mārga. Vaidhī-bhakti is
established on the steadfast foundation of scriptural
evidence and it is endowed with powerful codes of
correct behaviour. Moreover, there is no particular
difference between the observance of the limbs of
rāgānugā sādhana-bhakti and vaidhī-bhakti. The
difference is only in devotion to the observance. Thus
the añgas of vaidhī-bhakti sādhana cannot be neglected
entirely. When Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu instructed Śrī
Sanātana Gosvāmī on the subject of the prayojana-tattva,
which is Kṛṣṅa prema, he said,

kona bhagye kona jīvera ‘sraddhā’ yadi haya

tabe sei jīva ‘sāadhu-sanga’ ye karaya

sadhu-sanga haite haya ‘sravana-kirtana’

sadhana-bhaktye haya ‘sarvānartha-nivartana’

anartha-nivṛtti haile bhaktye ‘niṣṭha’ haya

niṣṭha haite śravaṅādye ’ruci’ upajaya

ruci haite bhaktye haya ‘āsakti pracura

āsakti haite citte janme kṛṣṅe prity-añkura sei ’bhava’
gadha haile dhare ‘prema’-nāma sei prema— ’prayojana’
sarvānanda-dhāma (Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya
23.9-13) “If by good fortune a jīva develops sraddhā, he

                           59
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

begins to associate with sādhus, and in that company he
engages in hearing and chanting. By following sādhana-
bhakti he becomes free from all anarthas and advances
with firm faith (niṣṭhā) whereby ruci (taste) awakens
for sravaṅa, kīrtana and so on. After ruci, then āsakti
(deep attachment) arises, and from abundant āsakti the
seed of prīti (affection) is born in the heart. When
that emotion intensifies, it is called prema. This prema
is life’s ultimate goal and the abode of all joy.”

It is quite impossible for one who transgresses this
sequence to enter the realm of bhakti. Thus, those who
want to enter this domain while neglecting the limbs of
vaidhī sādhana-bhakti are in all respects unrestrained
and outside the conclusions of śāstra. They have no
relation at all with śuddha-bhakti.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has also expressed the same
opinion.

vidhi-mārga rata jane svādhīnatā ratna-dāne rāga-mārga
karāna praveśa

By considering the gradations of sādhya-vastu
(objectives) we find that the prema of Śrīmatī Rādhājī
for Kṛṣṅa is the crest-jewel. Furthermore, Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu has explained that the sādhya for the living
entities is Rādhā dāsya, service to Śrīmatī Rādhikā
imbued with pārakīya-bhāva. In order to obtain that
sādhya-vastu, sādhana is necessary.

sādhya-vastu sādhana vinā keha nāhi pāya kṛpā kari kaha
rāya pābāra upāya

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya 8.197) “The goal of
life (sādhya-vastu) cannot be achieved unless one
accepts the appropriate process (sādhana). Now, being
merciful upon Me, please explain that means by which
this goal can be attained.”

In reply to this Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda says,

rādhā-kṛṣṅera līlā ei ati gūḍhatara

dāsya-vātsalyādi-bhāve nā haya gocara

sabe eka sakhī-ganera ihāñ ādhikāra

sakhī haite haya ei līlāra vistāra

sakhī vinā ei līlā puṣṭa nāhi haya

sakhī līlā vistāriyā, sakhī āsvādaya

sakhī vinā ei līlāya anyera nāhi gati

sakhī-bhāve ye tāñre kare anugati

rādhā-kṛṣṅa kuṇja-sevā-sādhya sei pāya sei sādhya pāite
āra nāhika upāya

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya 8. 201-205)

“The pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṅa are very confidential

                           60
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

and cannot be understood through the mellows of
servitude, fraternity or paternal affection. Actually,
only the gopis have the right to appreciate these
transcendental pastimes, and only from them can these
pastimes be expanded. Without the gopis, these pastimes
between Rādhā and Kṛṣṅa cannot be nourished. Only by
their cooperation are such pastimes broadcast. It is
their business to taste the mellows. One cannot enter
into these pastimes without the help of the gopis.

Only one who does bhajana in the ecstasy of the gopis,
following in their footsteps, can engage in the service
of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṅa in the groves of Vṛndāvana. Only
then can one understand the conjugal love between Rādhā
and Kṛṣṅa. There is no other procedure for
understanding.”

ataeva gopī-bhāva kari angikara

ratri-dina cinte rādhā-kṛṣṅera vihara siddha-dehe cinti’
kare tahanni sevana sakhī-bhāve paya rādhā-kṛṣṅera
caraṅa

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya 8. 228-229)

“Therefore one should accept the mood of the gopīs in
their service. In such a transcendental mood, one should
always think of the pastimes of Sri Rādhā and Kṛṣṅa.
After meditating on Rādhā and Kṛṣṅa for a long time in
the internally conceived spiritual body, one attains the
opportunity to serve the lotus feet of Rādhā-Kṛṣṅa as
one of the Vraja devīs.” Essentially the gist of the
matter is that the love-laden līlā of Rādhā-Kṛṣṅa is so
confidential and so full of mysteries that it is
imperceptible, even for those in moods such as dāsya and
vātsalya. Only the sakhīs are eligible for this.
Therefore, no one can attain the service of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā or the kuṇja-sevā of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṅa Yugala by
sādhana without anugatya of the sakhīs, that is being
under their guidance. Thus the only means of attaining
this supreme sādhya is meditation on the līlās of Rādhā-
Kṛṣṅa throughout the day and night by the internally
conceived siddha-deha and in the mood of the sakhīs. For
this reason, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has given this
instruction in his Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu in the section
on the sādhana of śrī rāgānugā-bhakti: kṛṣṅaṁ smaran
janaṇ cāsya preṣṭhaṁ nija samīhitam tat-tat kathā rataś
cāsau kuryād vāsaṁ vraje sadā

sevā sādhaka-rūpeṅa siddha-rūpeṅa cātra hi

tad bhāva lipsunā kāryā vraja-lokānusārataḥ

śravaṅotkīrttanādīni vaidhī bhakty uditāni tu

yānyañgāni ca tānyatra vijṇeyāni manīṣibhiḥ Here Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī has mentioned two types of sādhana in
rāgānugā bhakti-sevā: sevā sādhaka-rūpeṅa siddha-rūpeṅa
cātra hi tad bhāva lipsunā kāryā vraja-lokānusārataḥ
When there is lobha, greed for rāgātmikā bhakti,
rāgānugā bhakti is executed in two ways: in the sādhaka-
rūpa, the external body in which one is presently
situated, and in the siddha-rūpa. Eagerly desiring to
attain rati for Kṛṣṅa or the

                           61
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017


bhāva (ecstatic sentiments) of one’s chosen associates
of Kṛṣṅa, one must follow the associates of Vrajaloka
such as Lalitā, Viśākhā, Rūpa Maṇjarī and their
followers such as Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī and Sanātana Gosvāmī.
One must render bodily service with the sādhaka-rūpa
following the great authorities residing in Vraja such
as Śrī Rūpa and Sanātana. And with the siddha-rūpa one
must render mānasī-sevā following the vrajavāsīs such as
Śrī Rūpa Maṇjarī and others. The meaning of the above
verse has been given in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta in this
way.

bāhya, antara — ihāra dui ta’ sādhana

‘bāhye’ sādhaka-dehe kare śravaṅa-kīrtana

‘mane’ nija-siddha-deha kariyā bhāvana

rātri-dine kare vraje kṛṣṅera sevana

(Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya, 22.156-157)

“This rāgānugā bhakti is performed in two ways:
externally and internally. Externally, in the sādhaka
body, the devotee engages in hearing and chanting. In
his mind, in his internally conceived, perfected‚
spiritual body he serves Kṛṣṅa in Vraja day and night.”

Thus rāgānugā-bhakti sādhakas should in all respects
practice bhāva-sambandhi sādhana such as śravaṅa,
kīrtana, service to tulasī, wearing tilaka, observing
vows beginning with Śrī Ekādaśī and Janmāṣṭamī and so
on, for all these activities nourish one’s own desired
bhāva. Simultaneously one must also render service to
Rādhā-Kṛṣṅa in Vraja, meditating on one’s siddha-deha in
the heart. The body of a gopī which is suitable for
rendering service to Rādhā-Govinda is called siddha-
deha. When the bhajana is complete, the jīva gives up
the inert material body, and attains the body of a gopī
corresponding to its eternal intrinsic form.

Śrīla Narottama Ṭhākura has said‚

sādhane bhābiba jāhā siddha-dehe pāba tāhā rāga pathera
ei se upāya

(Śrī Prema Bhakti-candrika 5.8)

“Whatever subject is constantly meditated upon at the
time of performing sādhana, that same subject is the
prominent meditation at the time of death and it
engrosses the citta (heart).” One’s destination at the
time of death will exactly correspond to the subject one
remembers at that time. Rājarṣi Bhārata attained the
body of a deer at the time of death, so what doubt is
there about attaining the body suitable for rendering to
the Divine Couple the service on which one constantly
reflected in one’s internally conceived siddha-deha?

In relation to the siddha-deha it has been said in the
Sanat-Kumāra Saṁhitā,ātmānaṁ cintayet tatra tāsāṁ madhye
manoramām rūpayauvanasampannāṁ kiśorīṁ
premodāakṛtimrādhikānuṇcarī nityaṁ tat sevana

                           62
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

parāyaṅāṁkṛṣṅād apy adhikaṁ prema rādhikāyāṁ
prakurvatīmSadāśiva is giving instruction to Nāradajī on
the subject of siddha-deha suitablefor rendering service
to the Divine Couple. “O Nārada! Meditate in this way
upon your own svarūpa among Śrī Kṛṣṅa's beloved
associates who take pride inbeing His paramours in the
aprākṛta Vṛndāvana Dhāma. ‘I am an extremelylovely and
supremely blissful kiśorī (adolescent girl), endowed
with youthfulbeauty. I am an eternal maidservant of
Śrīmati Rādhikā. Having arranged for ŚrīKṛṣṅa’s dearmost
mistress Śrīmatī Rādhikā to meet with Him, I will always
makethem both happy. Therefore I am the maidservant of
Rādhikā, the most beloved of Kṛṣṅa. Remaining always and
forever engaged in the service of the Divine

Couple‚ may I maintain more love for Śrīmatī than for
Kṛṣṅa.’” Now we should note that the descriptions of
siddha-deha that śāstra and the mahājanas have given are
for sādhakas of a particular level. Wherever siddha-deha
has been mentioned it has been shown in the context of
rāgānugā-bhakti. Specifically such instructions are
intended for those very fortunate sādhakas in whose
hearts lobha, a genuine greed to attain rāgātmikā-
bhakti, has already arisen due to saṁskāras
(impressions) from this life and previous lives. Here is
a further matter which is worthy of consideration. It is
one thing to understand the excellence of some
particular rasa by the discrimination given in śāstra.
It is another thing altogether to have lobha for that
rasa. When someone has lobha in a particular rasa, then
the symptoms of lobha will also be evident in that
sādhaka. When lobha arises, rāgānugā-bhakti sādhana
begins from the stage of ruci. It will be understood
from this that the nāmāparādha, sevāparādha and various
other anarthas of a sādhaka have, for the most part,
already gone far away. He has already controlled the six
urges mentioned by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī in Śrī Upadeśāmrta
(Verse 1); he is virtually free from the six faults
(Verse 2); he is endowed with the six qualities
beginning with utsāhān niścayāt (enthusiasm and
confidence) (Verse 3); having recognized the three types
of Vaiṣṅavas, he is expert in behaving appropriately
with them (Verse 5); and he has also become established
in the purport of the verse beginning tan nāma rūpa
caritādi (Verse 8). In other words he conducts himself
according to this verse. In this stage the sādhaka goes
on performing bhajana, and when he crosses the stage of
ruci and enters the stage of āsakti then a semblance of
the symptoms related by Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī in the verse
kṣāntir-avyartha-kālatvaṁ will be observed in him. In
the stage of āsakti, a semblance (ābhāsa) of the rati
which arises in the stage of bhāva will appear, and in
order to make that rati manifest fully, the sādhaka will
perform bhajana meditating on his siddha-deha. When this
ratyābhāsa transforms into rati by the practice of
bhajana, then the sādhaka attains factual experience of
his own svarūpa. This is called meditation on siddha-
deha, or the acceptance of vaiṣṅava-bheka. One who is
endowed with simplicity and who has lobha for this is
worshipful for the whole world. There are two types of
acceptance of bheka. A sādhaka may receive bheka from
some suitable guru; alternatively, when genuine vairāgya
arises as mentioned previously, he may accept bheka from
himself. Haridāsa Ṭhākura, the Six Gosvāmīs, Lokanātha

                           63
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

Gosvāmī and others are examples of the practice of
accepting bheka from oneself. This is also the way that
Śrīla Bhakti-siddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura accepted
sannyāsa veśa after the disappearance of Śrīla Gaura
Kiśora dāsa Bābājī from whom he had received dīkṣā-
mantra. We see from these examples that acceptance of
bheka in this way is fully in agreement with śāstra. Śrī
Rāmānuja Ācārya also accepted tridaṅḍi-sannyāsa from
himself after the disappearance of his guru Śrīla Yamuna
Ācārya. In any case, the meditation on one’s siddha-deha
depends on the mercy of one’s guru. The guru or śikṣā-
guru who is established in rasa-vicāra and who is a
svarūpa-siddha will indicate the details of the
sādhaka’s perfected form. Otherwise, if the sādhaka
changes the order of the sequence described above, he
cannot attain perfection. On the contrary, his bhakti
may become completely ruined and the conceptions of the
sampradāya will also become corrupted. We see this going
everywhere nowadays. Some ignorant people say that there
is no siddha-praṅālī in the Gaudīya Maṭha. This vicious
propaganda is erroneous in all respects. In the
authentic literature written by Śrīla Gopāla Bhaṭṭa
Gosvāmī entitled Sat-kriyā-sāra-dīpikā and Saṁskāra-
dīpikā, which is a supplement to Śrī Hari-bhakti-vilāsa,
there is an account of the tridaṅḍi-sannyāsa saṁskāra.
The original manuscript handwritten by Śrī Gopāla Bhaṭṭa
Gosvāmī is protected even today in the Royal Library of
Jaipur. An old copy of this same literature is also kept
to this day by the Gosvāmīs of Śrī Rādhā-Ramana.
Therefore this literature is authoritative evidence.
According to Saṁskāra-dīpikā, tridaṅḍi-sannyāsa veśa is
given among Gauḍīyas. In this sannyāsa saṁskāra, ḍor-
kaupīna, bahir-vāsa and the sannyāsa-mantra for taking
shelter of gopī-bhāva are also given. The eka-daśa-bhāva
(eleven aspects of gopī-bhāva), namely sambandha, vayaḥ,
nāma, rūpa, yūtha, veśa, ājṇā, vāsa, sevā, parākāṣṭā-
śvāsa and pālya-dāsī-bhāva, are contained within this
gopī-bhāva. The identity of the siddha-deha is
determined by the instructions of Śrī Guru in accordance
with the ruci of the sādhaka. One’s own nāma, rūpa,
vayasa, veśa, sambandha, yūtha, ājṇā, vāsa, parākāṣṭā-
śvāsa and pālya-dāsī bhāva given by guru is called
siddha-praṅālī. As the sādhaka goes on performing this
type of sādhana, the perfection of his svarūpa takes
place along with the attainment of śuddha-rati in his
heart.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has described his siddha-
svarūpa in this way.

varaṅe taḍit vāsa tārāvalī

kamala maṇjarī nāma

sāḍe bāra varṣa vayasa satata

svānanda sukhada dhāma

karpūra sevā lalitāra gaṅa

rādhā yūtheśvarī hana

mameśvarī-nātha śrī Nanda-nandana


                             64
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

āmāra parāṅa dhana

śrī rūpa maṇjarī prabhṛtira sama

yugala sevāya āśa

avaśya se-rūpa sevā pāba āmi

parākāṣṭhā suviśvāsa

kabe bā e dāsī saṁsiddhi labhibe

rādhā-kuṅḍe vāsa kari’ rādhā-kṛṣṅa sevā satata karibe
pūrva smṛti parihari’

“My complexion is like a flash of lightning and my dress
is bedecked with twinkling stars. My name is Kamala
Maṇjarī and I am eternally twelve-and-a-half years old.
My abode is Svānanda Sukhada Kuṇja. My service is to
supply camphor to Śrī Yugala. I serve in the gaṅa of
Lalitā and Śrī Rādhā is my yūtheśvarī. The Beloved of my
Svāminī, the son of Nanda Mahārāja, is the treasure of
my life. I aspire to serve Śrī Yugala like Rūpa Maṇjarī
and others, and I am confident that I will surely attain
this service. This is my highest aspiration. Oh, when
will this maidservant attain complete perfection and,
residing at Śrī Rādhā-kuṅḍa, serve Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṅa in
complete forgetfulness of my past?”

In conclusion, whatever custom of accepting bheka is
seen among bābājīs is not a fifth āśrama, rather it is a
second form of the fourth aśrama, namely the sannyāsa
āśrama.




Chapter Five

The Eligibility to Hear Rāsa-līlā Kathā




Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is a direct manifestation of the
Supreme Lord. It is an ambrosial, overflowing ocean of
nectarean love (prema-rasa) for Svayam Bhagavān
Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the personification of
divine rasa. Rasika and bhāvuka-bhaktas always drown in
this ocean. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the fully ripened,
nectarean fruit of the desire tree of Vedic literature
which comprises the entirety of Indian thought. Within
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, gopī-prema has been ascertained to be
the ultimate objective.

A few towering waves of gopī-prema can be seen from the
Veṇu-gīta portion of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Rasika-bhaktas
drown themselves in these waves and even lose all
consciousness of their own bodies. Greed to be immersed
in this nectarean ocean sprouts even in the hearts of
the faithful devotees who are situated on the shore of
this ocean.

                           65
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017


Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the combined form of Rasārāja
and Mahābhāva, resplendent with the sentiment and bodily
complexion of Śrī Rādhā, relished the nectar of Veṇu-
gīta with Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara and Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda in
Śrī Gambīra. Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī and Śrīla Jīva
Gosvāmī collected a few drops of this nectar in their
commentaries on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam entitled Bṛhat-
vaiṣṇava-toṣaṇī and Laghu-vaiṣṇava-toṣaṇī respectively.
Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, through his
commentary named Sārārtha-darśinī, has distributed to
the whole world the same nectar in the form of the
remnants of their mahāprasāda.

Some persons believe that unqualified sādhakas are
ineligible to hear, chant or remember the topics of Śrī
Veṇu-gīta, Śrī Rāsa Pañcādhyāya, Yugala-gīta, Bhramara-
gīta and so on, as described in the Tenth Canto of
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. This consideration is fully
legitimate. But according to their conception, only a
sādhaka who has conquered the six urges (kāma, krodha,
etc.), who is free from all anarthas and fully purified
from the heart disease of lust, is eligible to hear such
topics, while all others have no right. We will now
examine this topic in greater detail.

Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, who established and fulfilled the
inner heart's desire of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu,
composed Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, Śrī Ujjvala-
nīlamaṇi and other sacred texts. Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa
Kavirāja Gosvāmī composed Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta. While
writing, they were deeply concerned that these
confidential texts on rasa should not fall into the
hands of unqualified persons. If this should occur, it
may present a great disturbance to the world. A glimpse
of this topic is found in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-
līlā, 4.231-237), as stated by Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja
Gosvāmī:

e saba siddhānta gūḍha,––kahite nā yuyāya nā kahile,
keha ihāra anta nāhi pāya

ataeva kahi kichu kariñā nigūḍha bujhibe rasika bhakta,
nā bujhibe mūḍha

hṛdaye dharaye ye caitanya-nityānanda e saba siddhānte
sei pāibe ānanda

e saba siddhānta haya āmrera pallava bhakta-gaṇa-
kokilera sarvadā vallabha

abhakta-uṣṭrera ithe nā haya praveśatabe citte haya mora
ānanda-viśeṣa

ye lāgi kahite bhaya, se yadi nā jāneihā vai kibā sukha
āche tribhuvane

ataeva bhakta-gaṇe kari namaskāraniḥśaṅḍke kahiye, tāra
hauk camatkāra

“The esoteric and confidential conclusions regarding the
amorous pastimes of Rasarāja Śrī Kṛṣṇa together with the
gopīs, who are the embodiments of mahābhāva, are not fit
to be disclosed to the common ordinary man. But without

                           66
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

revealing them, no one can enter into this topic. I
shall, there fore, describe these topics in a concealed
manner so that only rasika-bhaktas will be able to
understand, whereas ineligible fools will not. “

“Anyone who has established Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and
Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu in their hearts will attain
transcendental bliss by hearing all these conclusions.
This entire doctrine is as sweet as newly grown mango
sprouts which can be relished only by the devotees who
are likened to cuckoo birds. For the camel-like
nondevotees, there is no possibility of admittance into
these topics. Therefore, there is special jubilation in
my heart. “ “If those whom I fear are themselves unable
to comprehend these topics, then what could be a greater
source of happiness in all the three worlds? Therefore,
after offering obeisances to the devotees, I am
revealing this subject without any hesitation.”

By reading and hearing these topics, everyone can attain
the highest benefit. Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī
has clarified this topic by quoting the following verse
from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.33.36):

anugrahāya bhaktānāṁ mānuṣaṁ deham āsthitaḥ

bhajate tādṛśīḥ krīḍā yāḥ śrutvā tat-paro bhavet

“In order to bestow mercy upon the devotees as well as
the conditioned souls, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa manifests His
humanlike form and performs such extraordinary pastimes
(rāsa-līlā) that anyone who hears them becomes
exclusively devoted unto Him.” (quoted in Cc, Ādi-
līlā4.34) Here Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja points out that the
verb bhavet in the above verse is in the imperative
mood. This means it is compulsory for the jīvas to hear
such pastimes, as explained in the following śloka from
Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 4.35):

‘bhavet kriyā vidhiliṅḍ, sei ihā kaya

kartavya avaśya ei, anyathā pratyavāya

“In the above verse, the verb bhavet is in the
imperative mood. Therefore, this certainly must be done.
To not do so would be a discrepancy.” For the
information of the reader, I am referring here to Śrīla
Jīva Gosvāmī's Vaiṣṇava-toṣaṇī commentary on the above
quoted Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam verse (10.33.36).

tatra loke dhiṣṭhātṛtvena kṛṣṇākhya narākāra
parabrahmaṇaḥ śrī gopair anubhūtatvāt evaṁ bhak
tānugrahārthaṁ tat krīḍety abhipretam. āptakāma tve pi
bhaktānugraho yujyate. viśuddha sattvasya tathā
svabhāvāt. yad bhāva bhāvite cānyatra dṛśyate sau. tathā
rahugaṇānugrāhake śrī jaḍa bharata charite, yathā vā
bhagavad anugrāhake mayīti ca. tatra bhakta śabdena
braja devyo braja janāś ca sarve kāla-traya sambandhino
nye ca vaiṣṇavā gṛhītāṁ––braja devīnāṁ pūrva-rāgādibhir
braja janānāṁ janmādibhir anyeṣāñ ca bhakta darśana
śravaṇādibhir apūrvatva sphuraṇāt. ataeva tādṛśa bhakta
prasaṅḍgena tādṛśīḥ sarva cittākarṣinīḥ krīḍā bhajate,
yāḥ sādhāraṇīr api śrutvā bhaktebho nyo


                           67
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

pi janas tatparo bhavet. kimuta rāsa līlā rūpām imāṁ
śrutvety arthaḥ. vakṣyate ca–– vikrīḍitaṁ vrajavadhūbhir
idañ ca viṣṇoḥ(S.B. 10.33.39) ityādi. yad vā, mānuṣaṁ
deham āśritaḥ sarvo pi jīvas tat paro bhavet, martya
loke śrī bhagavad avatārāt tathā bhajane mukhyatvāc ca
manuṣyānām eva sukhena tac chravaṇādi siddheḥ. bhūtānām
iti pāṭhe nijāvatāra kāraṇa bhakta sambandhena sarveṣām
eva janānāṁ viṣayināṁ mumukṣūṇāṁ muktānāñ cety arthaḥ.
iti parama kārūṇyam eva kāraṇam uktam. tathāpi bhajana
sambandhenaiva sarvānugraho jñeyaḥ. anyattaiḥ. tatra
bahirmukhānapīti tat paryantatvaṁ vivakṣitam, parama
prema parākāṣṭhā mayatayā śrī śukasyāpi tad
varṇanātiśaya pravṛtteḥ gopīnām ity asyārthāntare tv
evaṁ vyākhyeyam.

The words anugrahāya bhaktānāṁ mānuṣaṁ deham āsthitaḥ
indicate that the Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa appears in His
original humanlike form and performs various pastimes in
order to bestow favor upon His devotees. Therefore,
although Śrī Kṛṣṇa is satisfied in Himself (āptakāma),
His display of kindness toward the devotees is quite
appropriate. This is the distinctive characteristic of
viśuddha-sattva (pure goodness). The Lord is always
prepared to reward the devotees with a result consistent
with their performance of bhajana. The favor shown
toward King Rahugaṇa by Śrī Jaḍa Bharata and the Lord's
favor toward me (Śukadeva) illustrate this.

In the verse under discussion, it is said that the Lord
manifests His form and pastimes in order to bestow favor
upon His devotees. The word bhakta used here refers to
the vraja-devīs (the gopīs), the vraja-vāsīs (residents
of Vraja) and all other Vaiṣṇavas––past, present and
future. In order to bestow favor upon the vraja-devīs,
Svayam Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa lovingly executes such
pastimes as pūrva-rāga (the attachment in anticipation
of meeting Kṛṣṇa prior to their union). To bestow mercy
upon all the residents of Vraja, He enacts His birth and
other pastimes, and by all His activities, He bestows
favor upon past, present and future devotees through the
medium of hearing līlā-kathā.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa manifests all these pastimes to benefit the
devotees. By so doing, even ordinary persons (other than
the devotees) who hear even the more common of the
Lord's pastimes become fully intent upon the Lord.
Therefore, by hearing the supremely ambrosial rāsa-līlā,
ordinary per sons will certainly become exclusively
devoted to the Lord––of this there can be no doubt. This
fact will be elaborately discussed in subsequent verses
such as vikrīḍitaṁ vraja-vadhūbhir idaṁ ca viṣṇoḥ
(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, 10.33.39).

The words mānuṣaṁ deham āsthitaḥ may also indicate that
those jīvas who have attained the human form of life are
able to hear all these pastimes and thus they become
exclusively devoted to the Supreme Lord. This is so
because the Lord incarnates exclusively on the earthly
planets (martya loka), and it is here only that worship
of the Lord takes on its predominant form. Consequently,
the human beings residing on the earthly planets may
easily hear these narrations of the Lord's pastimes.

The word bhaktānāṁ appears in this verse. But in some

                           68
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

other editions, the word bhūtānāṁ is found in its place.
In that case, the purport would be as follows: the Lord
incarnates only for the sake of the devotees. As a
result, the devotees are the root cause of the Lord's
appearance. The Lord also appears in His original
humanlike form in order to bestow His favor upon the
liberated souls (muktas), the aspirants for liberation
(mumukṣus), sense enjoyers (viṣayīs) and all living
entities in accordance with their relationship with the
devotees. The Lord's compassion is therefore said to be
the cause of His appearance. Nevertheless, it must be
understood that the Lord's favor toward other living
entities is due only to their relationship with His
devotees. In other words, the Lord bestows favor upon
other jīvas only because of their connection with
devotees.

In his Bhāgavatam commentary known as Bhāvārtha-dīpikā,
Śrīla Śrīdhara Svāmī has written that what to speak of
the devotees, even materialistic persons are freed from
their material absorption by hearing the Lord's
pastimes, and thus they become exclusively fixed upon
Him. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura explains this
verse in his commentary known as Sārārtha darśinī:

bhaktānām anugrahāya tādṛśiḥ krīḍāḥ bhajate yāḥ śrutvā
mānuṣaṁ deham āśrīto jīvaḥ tatparas tad viṣayakaḥ
śraddhāvān bhaved iti krīḍāntar ato vailakṣaṇyena
madhura rasamayāḥ asyāḥ krīḍāyās tādṛśī maṇi-mantra-
mahauṣadhānām iva kācid atarkyā śaktir astīty
avagamyate.

“The Lord performs varieties of pastimes to show favor
to His devotees. Having adopted the human form of life,
living entities who hear these pastimes become
exclusively devoted unto the Lord. In other words, they
develop firm faith in hearing the narrations of the
Lord's activities. What more shall I say about the
importance of hearing līlā-kathā? And this rāsa-līlā,
being fully imbued with mādhurya rasa, is eminently
distinguished even from the Lord's other pastimes. Like
a jewel, a mantra or a powerful medicine, this rāsa-līlā
is endowed with such indisputable, astonishing potency
that by hearing it, all persons in the human form become
devoted to the Supreme Lord. Therefore, all varieties of
devotees who hear the descriptions of these pastimes
will become successful and obtain supreme pleasure. Can
there be any question of doubt in this regard?”

In this context, we may cite the following verse from
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.33.30):

naitat samācarej jātu manasāpi hy anīśvaraḥ vinaśyaty
ācaran mauḍhyād

yathārudro bdhi-jaṁ viṣam

“In other words, those who are not īśvara, the Supreme
Lord, who are powerless and subjected to karma, should
never imitate the Lord's pastimes even within their
minds. If anyone foolishly imitates Lord Śiva by
drinking the poison generated from the ocean, he will
certainly be destroyed.”


                            69
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

The gist of Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī's and Śrī Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura's commentaries on this verse is that
living entities who are subservient to the material body
and who are anīśvara––bereft of the controlling potency
of the Supreme Lord––should never behave in such a way
even within their minds. What to speak of actually
performing such activities, one should not even desire
to do so. In other words, such acts performed by God in
transgression of religious codes should not be
contemplated even within the mind.

The word samācaraṇa (behaviour), when divided into its
constituent parts (samyak and ācaraṇa), indicates
complete behaviour. Here it has been used to indicate
total prohibition of such activity. Therefore, the
purport is that such behaviour should not be adopted
even to the slightest extent. What to speak of
performing such activities through speech or the senses,
one should not even mentally conceive of such
activities.

The word hi indicates that this certainly must not be
done. If one were to behave in that way, he would be
completely destroyed. The significance of the word
mauḍhyād (stupidity) is that if any one, being ignorant
of the Lord's omnipotence and his own incompetence,
foolishly adopts such behaviour, he will be utterly
ruined, just as if anyone other than Lord Śiva were to
foolishly consume deadly poison, he would be instantly
destroyed. But Lord Śiva, in spite of drinking poison,
is not destroyed; to the contrary, he attains even
greater fame and splendour as Nīlakaṇṭha, he whose
throat turned blue from drinking poison.

Here in this verse, imitation of such behaviour has been
prohibited, yet in the verse to come (10.33.36)––yāḥ
śrutvā tatparo bhavet––it is evident that not only
devotees, but even others who faithfully hear these
pastimes will become fully devoted to the Supreme Lord.
This has been further explained in the following verse
from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.33.39):

vikrīḍitaṁ vraja vadhūbhir idañ ca viṣṇoḥ

śraddhānvito nuśṛṇuyād atha varṇayed yaḥ


bhaktiṁ parāṁ bhagavati pratilabhya kāmaṁ


hṛd-rogam āśv apahinoty acireṇa dhīraḥ

“A sober person who in the beginning faithfully and
continuously hears from his guru the narrations of Lord
Śrī Kṛṣṇa's unprecedented rāsa dance with the young
wives (gopīs) of Vraja, and later describes those
pastimes very soon attains parā-bhakti or prema-bhakti
towards the Supreme Lord, and thus becomes competent to
quickly dispel the heart disease of lust.”

Here Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī comments in Vaiṣṇava-toṣaṇī:
śraddhayā viśvāvasenānvita iti. tad viparītāvajñā-
rupāparādha-nivrīty arthañca nairantaryārthañca. tac ca
phala vaiśiṣṭyārtham, ataeva yo nu nirantaraṁ śṛṇuyāt,

                           70
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

athānantaraṁ svayaṁ varṇayec ca, upalakṣaṇañ caitat
smarec ca, bhaktiṁ prema-lakṣaṇāṁ parāṁ śrī gopikā
premānusāritvāt sarvot tama jātīyām; pratikṣaṇaṁ
nūtanatvena labdhā; hṛd-roga-rūpaṁ kāmam iti bhagavad
viṣayaḥ kāma viśeṣo vyavacchinnaḥ, tasya parama prema
rūpatvena tad vaiparītyāt. kāmam ity upalakṣaṇam anyeṣām
api hṛd-rogāṇām. anyatra śruyate(śrī
gītā,18.54)––“brahma bhūtaḥ prasannātmā na śocati na
kāṅḍkṣati, samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu mad bhaktiṁ labhate
parām.” iti atra tu hṛd-rogāpahānāt pūr vam eva parama
bhakti prāptiḥ tasmāt parama balavadevedaṁ sādhanam iti
bhāvaḥ.

Having concluded the narration of the rāsa-līlā,
Śukadeva Gosvāmī became deeply immersed in spiritual
ecstasy. In this verse, he describes the fruits of
hearing and chanting the rāsa-līlā and thus benedicts
all future listeners and recitors. Those who incessantly
and faithfully hear Śrī Kṛṣṇa's rāsa līlā with the young
wives of Vraja and later recite those pastimes, quickly
attain parā-bhakti toward Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa and thus
relinquish the heart disease of lust.

Śraddhānvita means to hear with firm faith. This word
has been used to prevent the offence which results from
mistrust (aviśvasa) or disregard (avajñā) of the
statements of śāstra in complete opposition to the
principle of hearing with faith. It has also been used
to promote constant hearing. By this word, the
importance of hearing has been pointed out. The words
atha varṇayed indicate that after continuously hearing
the rāsa-līlā along with other special pastimes, one
will personally describe those pastimes. By upalakṣaṇa,
or indirect implication, it is further indicated that
after hearing and reciting, one will also remember those
pastimes and take great delight in them. In other words,
hearing, chanting, remembering, experiencing delight,
and so on, are all implied by the words śraddhānvitaḥ
anuśṛṇuyāt atha varṇayed (to hear repeatedly with faith
and then describe).

Parā-bhakti means bhakti which follows in the wake of
the gopīs of Vraja. Therefore, the bhakti referred to
here is prema-bhakti of the highest category. The word
pratilabhya (repeatedly obtained), together with the
word parā-bhakti, indicates that first parā-bhakti
(possessing the distinctive characteristics of prema) is
obtained within the heart at every moment in ever new
varieties. Thereafter one quickly gives up the heart
disease of lust.

Here the difference between kāma (material lust) as a
disease of the heart and kāma (spiritual love) in
relationship to the Supreme Lord is pointed out. These
two are distinct from each other. The word kāma here
indirectly implies that all diseases of the heart will
quickly be dispelled.

In Bhagavad-gītā (18.54) it is said: “One who is
situated in the transcendental position beyond the
contamination of the three modes of nature (brahma-
bhūta), who is fully satisfied in the self, who neither
laments nor hankers for anything and who looks
impartially upon all living beings attains parā-bhakti

                           71
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

unto Me.”

In this Gītā verse it is said that one attains parā-
bhakti only after the disappearance of the diseases of
the heart, but in the above verse it is said that one
attains parā-bhakti even before their departure.
Consequently, it is understood that hearing and chanting
of rāsa-līlā is one of the most powerful forms of
sādhana.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura states as follows in
his Sārārtha-darśinī commentary on the same verse
(10.33.39):

anudinaṁ vā śṛṇuyāt. atha varṇayet kīrttayet.
svakavitayā kāvya-rūpatvena nibadhnīteti vā. parāṁ prema
lakṣaṇaṁ prāpyeti ktvā pratyayena hṛd-rogavaty apy
adhikāriṇi pratham ataeva premṇaḥ praveśas tatas tat
prabhāvenaivācirato hṛd roga nāśa iti premāyaṁ jñāna
yoga iva na durbalaḥ paratantraś ceti bhāvaḥ. hṛd-roga-
rūpaṁ kāmam iti bhagavad viṣayakaḥ kāma viśeṣo
vyavacchinnaḥ tasya premāmṛta rūpatvena tad vaiparityāt.
dhīraḥ paṇḍita iti hṛd roge satyapi katham premā bhaved
ity anāstikya lakṣaṇena mūrkhatvena rahita ity arthaḥ.
ataeva śraddhānvita iti śāstrāviśvāsināṁ nāmā parādhināṁ
premāpi nāṅḍgīkarotīti bhāvaḥ.

The prefix anu (repeatedly or methodically) when applied
to śṛṇuyāt (to hear) indicates constant hearing. By
continuously hearing from the lips of the śravaṇa-guru
and Vaiṣṇavas and thereafter reciting, narrating, or
describing (those pastimes) in poetry of one's own
composition, one attains parā-bhakti or in other words
bhakti which is of the nature of prema (prema-lakṣaṇa-
bhakti).

The suffix ktvā has been used in the formation of the
verb pratilabhya(obtained) as follows: prati + labh+
ktvā. According to the rules of Sanskrit grammar, when
the suffix ktvā is applied to a verbal root with a
prefix, it is replaced by yap. Then the letter 'p' is
dropped and thus the final form of the word
(pratilabhya) is obtained. The suffix ktvā is applied to
the first of two verbs performed by the same agent to
show successive action (i.e., having attained prema, he
relinquishes all lusty desires of the heart). In this
case, the first action is pratilabhya (the attainment of
prema) and the second action is apahinoti (renunciation
of the lusty desires of the heart).

Therefore, the suffix ktvā in the verb pratilabhya
indicates that although lust and other evils still
remain within the heart, prema-bhakti first enters the
heart and by its extraordinary influence destroys all
vices to the root. In other words, hearing and reciting
rāsa-līlā possess such astonishing power that the lust
in the heart of the faithful sādhaka is destroyed and he
attains prema. Though these two take place
simultaneously, the influence of prema manifests first
and through its effect, all lusty desires of the heart
are dissipated.

Thus as a result of hearing and chanting the narrations
of the Lord's pastimes, one first attains prema for the

                           72
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

Lord's lotus feet and thereafter one's heart is
liberated from lusty desires and all other
contamination. In other words, he becomes perfectly pure
because prema is not feeble like the processes of jñāna
and yoga. Bhakti is omnipotent and supremely
independent.

The words hṛd-roga kāma indicate the difference between
lusty desires of the heart and the kāma in relationship
to the Supreme Lord. Kāma which is in relationship to
the Supreme Lord is of the very nature of the nectar of
prema(premāmṛta svarūpa),whereas the lusty desires of
the heart are exactly the opposite. Therefore, these two
items are distinct from each other. This is
substantiated by use of the words hṛd-roga kāma.

The word dhīra means a paṇḍita, or one who is learned in
the śāstra. One who disbelieves the statement of this
verse and thinks, “As long as the disease of lust
remains in the heart, prema can not be obtained,” is
said to possess an atheistic temperament. One who is
free from such a foolish, atheistic demeanour is known
as a paṇḍita or sober person (dhīra). Consequently, only
those who have firm faith in the śāstra are known as
dhīra. Those who have no faith in the statements of the
śāstra are atheists and offenders to the holy name. Such
persons can never attain prema.

Consequently, in the heart of the sādhakas who firmly
believe in the statements of the śāstra, faith arises by
hearing rāsa-līlā and other narrations. Only in the
hearts of such faithful devotees does prema manifest its
influence as a result of hearing līlā-kathā. Thereafter,
lust and all evils present within the heart of the
devotee are destroyed to the root.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura's commentary on
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam

(10.47.59) is also relevant to this discussion. There it
is stated that bhakti is the only cause of superior
qualities being found in any individual. Austerities,
learning, knowledge, and so on, are not the cause of
superior qualities. Although bhakti is itself of the
highest excellence, it does not appear only in the most
exceptional individuals endowed with all good qualities.
On the contrary, it may manifest or remain even in the
most condemned and vile persons. Furthermore, it causes
thoroughly wretched and fallen persons to attain all
good qualities, to become worthy of the respect of all,
and to attain the highest and most rare association.

For this reason, the opinion that Bhakti-devī enters the
heart only after all anarthas, aparādhas, lust and other
diseases of the heart have been eradicated, is not
appropriate. On the contrary, by the mercy of the
Supreme Lord or the devotees, or by faithfully executing
sādhana and bhajana, this rare bhakti enters the heart
first and then all anarthas are automatically
dissipated––this conclusion is thoroughly agreeable.

Therefore, only faithful sādhakas with firm belief in
the statements of śāstra, guru and Vaiṣṇavas are
eligible to hear the līlā-kathā of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam

                           73
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

which are saturated with rasa. And conversely, those who
believe that only sādhakas who are completely free from
all anarthas are eligible to hear the above-mentioned
pastimes, will neither become free from anarthas nor
obtain eligibility to hear – even after millions of
births.

Another point to consider is that if this argument is
accepted, then we sādhakas who are still affected by
anarthas, although possessing faith, could never read
nor hear the sacred books of rasika Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava
ācāryas like Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī,
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura and Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. Under such a circumstance, we
would be for ever deprived of the extremely confidential
and elevated truths of bhakti expressed by these
ācāryas. There would be no possibility that the sprout
of greed for rāgānugā-bhakti would ever be awakened in
our hearts. Thus we would be forever cheated from that
which was not previously given, the prema-rasa of the
most munificent Śrī Śacī-nandana, the bestower of kṛṣṇa-
prema. What then would distinguish the Śrī Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavas who have taken shelter of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu from Vaiṣṇavas of other sampradāyas?

A third point to consider is this. In Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta(Madhya, 8.70) the following verse is quoted
from Padyāvalī:

kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasa-bhāvitā matiḥ krīyatāṁ yadi kuto pi
labhyate

tatra laulyam api mūlyam ekalaṁ


janma-koṭi-sukṛtair na labhyate

Here, the words laulyam api mūlyam ekalam (indeed the
only price is greed) indicate that this supremely rare
greed cannot be aroused even by pious activities
accumulated over millions and mil lions of births. Then
how can this greed be obtained? The words kṛṣṇa-bhakti-
rasa-bhāvitā matiḥ indicate one whose intelligence or
perception has been awakened toward kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasa.
Here, the implication is that by faithfully hearing the
narrations of Śrī Kṛṣṇa's pastimes saturated with rasa
from the lips of rasika Vaiṣṇavas in whom kṛṣṇa-bhakti-
rasa has arisen, or by faithfully and attentively
studying the literature related to the pastimes of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, composed by them, this greed may be obtained.
Besides this, there is no other means.

Another argument that at present there is no sādhaka who
is completely free from anarthas and, therefore, no one
is eligible, nor in the future will anyone be eligible,
is completely illogical. Freedom from lust and all other
anarthas in and of itself is not the qualification for
entrance into rāgānugā-bhakti. On the contrary, greed
awakened towards the Lord's mādhurya(sweetness) is the
sole qualification for entrance into rāgānugā-bhakti.
Nor is there any certainty that by routine observance of
the limbs of vaidhī-bhakti alone, greed toward rāgānugā-
bhakti will automatically awaken. There is no evidence
of this anywhere. Therefore, our highest obligation is

                           74
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

to follow the purport of the commentaries of the
previous ācāryas to the above-mentioned verses of
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

It is by the inspiration of His Divine Grace Śrīla guru-
pāda-padma nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa oṁ viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-
śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja
and the repeated solicitation of many bumblebee-like
devotees, I am presenting Śrī Veṇu-gīta to the readers
along with a purport to the commentaries of Śrīla
Cakravartī Ṭhākura and Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī named
Sārārtha-darśinī and Śrī Vaisnava-toṣaṇī respectively.
By reading this subject with full faith, the greed to
enter into rāgānugā-bhakti will certainly sprout in the
hearts of faithful devotees. This itself is the very
purpose of human life.




Addendum One

“The Appearance Day Of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Ṭhākura Prabhupada”


A lecture given in Germany: February 21, 2003 by
Tridandisvami Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedanta Nārāyaṅa Mahārāja


Today is a very auspicious day. It is the very holy
birthday of Srila Prabhupāda Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Gosvāmī Ṭhākura, and also the disappearance day of Śrīla
Gour Govinda Mahārāja. In the evening we will glorify
them, so all the devotees should be ready to be called
upon.

I want to speak something about the glories of Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda. If this mahā-
puruṣa, great, self-realized soul, had not descended in
this world, no one would have known the meaning of pure
bhakti. No one would have known the identity of Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, the book Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta,
or the books and glory of the Gosvāmīs.

Srila Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura gave us two jewels. One is
the holy birthplace of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He
manifested Gaura-dhama. Before him, no one knew where
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu had taken birth. No one knew
where Śrīdhama Māyāpura was actually located. Secondly,
he gave the jewel of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Thakura, who preached throughout the world and universe
the glory of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Śrī Nityānanda
Prabhu, the rūpānuga vicara-dhara (the conceptions of
the disciplic line of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvami), and the
glories of Śrī Sri Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Before the birth of
Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī and Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, and after the disappearance of
Śrīla Visvanatha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, Śrīla Narottama
Ṭhākura, Śrī Syamananda Prabhu, Srinivas Acārya, and
especially Śrīla Visvanatha Cakravartī Ṭhākura and Śrīla
Baladeva Vidyabhūṣaṅa, pure bhakti was covered. The
sahajiyā' ideas were spread throughout Śrī Vraja-dhama

                           75
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

and Śrī Navadvipa dhāma. Their influence prevailed and
there were hardly any real Vaiṣṇavas.

In the name of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, His philosophy
and His prema-dharma, the sahajiyā were degraded in
character and most sinful. To live with another man's
widow, to dance and sing with them, and to smoke
cigarettes and drink wine with them – this was their
idea of parakīya and vaiṣṇava-dharma. Because of their
influence, none of the learned and aristocratic persons
even wanted to hear the name "Gaudiya Vaiṣṇavas", what
to speak of follow them. They hated Gaudīya Vaiṣṇavas.
throughout the world and universe. There are eleven
sahajiyā groups, like gaura-nagari, sakhi-bekhi, Aul
Baul, and so on. In India, their main function was
widow-bhajana. They maintained their lives by doing
professional kirtanas during funeral processions. After
following a dead body and singing, they would receive a
donation from the deceased relatives. True vaiṣṇava-
dharma is completely pure, but all aristocratic persons
began to hate it and were thus in danger.

At that time, Śrīla Prabhupāda Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
appeared in Śrī Jagannātha-dhama as the son of Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. He was born with many symptoms of
a mahā-puruṣa, such as natural tilaka marks on his body
and the impressions of kanti-mala. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura told his wife Bhagavati-devi, "He is not an
ordinary boy. Any ordinary boy cannot have these natural
tilaka marks, kanti-mala and other signs. He has taken
birth in Jagannātha Purī, and also I have prayed to
Vimala devī, the consort of Lord Jagannātha. He has come
by Her mercy. The Ṭhākura thus gave his boy the name
Vimala Prasada. Prasada means mercy.

After six months, the baby became qualified to have his
anna-prasana mahotsava (grain ceremony in which a baby
is fed grains (sweet rice) for the first time). At the
same time the Jagannātha Chariot festival was taking
place. The three carts carrying Jagannātha, Baladeva and
Subhadra were in procession and had stopped in front of
Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura's house for three days. The
Ṭhākura was the manager of the entire festival.
Therefore, without any problem or obstacle, he took his
son upon the chariot and placed him in front of
Jagannātha-deva. He took some prasadam from there and
placed in the mouth of Vimala Prasada, and the flower
garland from the neck of Jagannātha dropped on the
baby's head. It is a very good sign when the deity's
falls in this way, for it means the recipient is being
blessed by the mercy of Lord Jagannātha, Śrī Govinda-
deva, Śrī Gopinatha, or any other deity. This also
happened to Śrī Caitanya Mahaprabhu Himself. Thus,
Vimala Prasada's anna-prasana mahotsava was observed.

Gradually he began to grow up. After some time, when he
became a boy of five years, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
himself gave him harinama and the arcana mantra for Lord
Kurmadeva. He began to learn many things. He was always
with Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, carrying his father's
Śrī Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, Śrī Ujjvala-nilamani, Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta and other books on his own head as
he accompanied him to various places for preaching or
giving classes. Thus, from the beginning of his life,

                           76
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

very good saṁskāras came to him. This, of course, was
his naravata-līlā (human-like pastimes), because he was
actually the eternal associate of Śrī Varsabhanavi-devi
dayitaya, near and dear to Varsabhanavi, Śrīmatī
Radhika. Kṛṣṇa-presthaya. Kṛṣṇa has so much love and
affection for the manjaris, the most beloved of Śrī
Varsabhanavi-devi.

Gaura-vani-pracarine. What is the meaning of gaura-vani?
This adjective has also been used in the praṇāma mantra
of Parama- pujyapada Śrīla Bhaktivedanta Swami Mahārāja,
but we do not go in deep to uncover its meaning. Gaura-
vani refers to that which Gaura (Sacinandana Gaurahari)
preached, and that which He inspired in the heart of
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī – the glorification of the mood of
the gopīs and Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Gauracandra said, "O
Nityānanda, O Haridasa Prabhu, you should go door to
door and preach 'Bolo Kṛṣṇa, bhaja Kṛṣṇa, karo Kṛṣṇa
(chant Śrī Kṛṣṇa's name, worship Him, and serve Him).
This is Gaura-vani. It is also what He discussed with
Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda and Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara in the
Gambira, especially His hidden revelation of the meaning
of ceto- darpana-marjanam, yugayitam nimesena caksusa
pravrsayitam, and aslisya vā pada-ratam. This is Gaura-
vani. It is also the love and affection explained by
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī in Śrī Bhakti-rasamrta-sindhu, Śrī
Ujjvala-nila-mani, Śrī Vidagda-madhava and Śrī Lalitā
Madhava. This is Gaura-vani.

Our entire paramparā descended to this world from Goloka
Vrndavana, and Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura
was one of the most prominent ācāryas. If he had not
come, everything would have been transferred into
sahajism – wherein all philosophy is asat-sampradaya.

If one is not serving his gurudeva, if he does not have
strong belief in his gurudeva, and if he is not
following his line of thought, such a person must be
sahajiya; and this is taking place nowadays. We are
preaching and therefore they are somewhat stopped, but I
do not know what will happen after I leave this world. A
very dangerous stage is coming.

Many ISKCON devotees left Śrīla Bhaktivedanta Swami
Mahārāja, their guru, Śrīla Prabhupāda, and they went to
Radha-kunda. Why? They wanted to remember asta-kaliya-
līlā as goopis - not gopīs, but goopis -and for this
offense they went to hell. They became "babajis".
Keeping two, three, or four widows with them, they began
to relish their "parakīya-bhajana." I know not only two,
or three, or four, but so many. They want to jump – not
to practice bhakti-yoga. They want to be gopīs by paying
two pennies to any bogus person who will "give" them
siddha-deha, the perfected personal identity, and tell
them, "You are a gopī."

They will give a name and all other information about
that "gopi." Then, after some time, such "disciples"
imagine themselves absorbed in Śrī Sri Radha and Kṛṣṇa's
most confidential pastimes in the kunjas. Please do not
try to be like that – do not go in that direction.

There are some ill-charactered persons who have been
rejected from the Gaudīya Maṭha, and they also went to

                           77
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

Radha-kunda to become babajis in that asat-sampradaya.
Such loose-charactered or unqualified persons imagine
themselves absorbed in the asta-kaliya-līlā of Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa in Their midnight and end of the night – nisanta-
līlā pastimes. At that time, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are meeting
in a kuṇja. If They are alone, half naked and kissing
each other, what will that "meditator" think? Material
ideas will come to him. He is bound to think in this
way, and this is wrong. Radha-Kṛṣṇa līlā is
transcendental. Only a saintly person like Śrī Śukadeva
Gosvami who was a brahmacari from his birth, or like
Nārada Gosvami who is a liberated soul, or like Lord
Śañkara who is an ideal personality, can properly think
of asta-kaliya-līlā.

You should offer praṇāma to such pastimes and try to
practice bhakti-yoga, as our predecessors ācāryas have
taught us. Gradually begin from the root of the tree,
then be qualified to climb, and then reach the top. Then
you can take the fruits. Otherwise, what will you have?
Nothing but these bogus ideas. Try to follow Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhanta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda, our Gurudeva Śrīla
Bhaktiprajnana Kesava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, and Śrīla
Bhaktivedanta Swami Mahārāja. Otherwise, you will also
be like those misdirected persons and you will also go
to hell.

Srila Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura sent his son to a Sanskrit
college and, at the age of twelve perhaps, he received
the degree in astrology and the title Siddhanta
Sarasvatī. At that time he had become the champion in
astrology throughout Bengal, and therefore all the
elevated paṅḍitas (those learned in scriptures) and
scholars there gave him that title. Sometimes Śrīla
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura would defeat the arguments of his
teachers, however, and he therefore left that college.
Our Gurudeva also left college. They both left because
they had nothing to learn from the teachers there.

During that time the governor of Bengal was Asutosa
Mukarji. At that time the Indian government was ruled by
the British, and the British made him Governor. He was
very qualified. He established the Calcutta University,
and there he kept a reserved seat for Srila
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura. He requested him,
"Oh, please come and be the head of the department.
Please oversee it. You are the most qualified for this."
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura replied: "I have not come to this
world to count the stars of the world. I have not come
to count the sands of the world. I cannot fulfill your
desire." As long as Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
remained in this world that post had been kept for him,
but he never accepted it.

Srila Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura then thought: "What should I
do for this boy?" He established a medical dispensary
and told his son, "Remain there, and somehow maintain it
so that there are no losses. Śrīla Prabhupāda Sarasvatī
Ṭhākura began to do so, but the dispensary failed, and
again the father wondered what to do.

There was a king in India at that time, who was the king
of Kashim Bazar, and he was a bosom friend of Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. He told the Ṭhākura, "I want a

                           78
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

tutor for my son He will be king after me, so I want a
tutor for him." Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura replied. "Let
us try; I will tell my son to teach him." At that time
the salary was very high. Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura went
to the king and began to teach his son - that the entire
world, along with all the sandhis and samas, movements
of the moon, is an emanation of Kṛṣṇa and non-different
from Him. He taught as Mahaprabhu taught when He was a
teacher in Navadvipa. After some time the boy became
very learned and a scholar in Vaiṣṇava philosophy, and
the result was that he became renounced. He was not like
you. Many of you have been hearing for sixteen or twenty
years, but you have not become detached. On the other
hand, being taught by Śrīla Saravati Ṭhākura, that
prince became detached from worldly enjoyment.

The boy's mother became very upset, and she told her
husband, the king: "You have only one son, and you want
to make him a sannyāsi? Your only son? I do not want
this. If you continue in this way I will take poison and
die." The king became upset and asked Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Thakura; "What should I do?" Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta
Thakura replied, "I will tell my boy to return home."
The King said, "I will continue to give you money, the
same salary that I have been giving, but he should
return."

At that time the king had a very big library, and Śrīla
Sarasvatī Thakura Prabhupāda studied the thousands of
books there – all the Gosvami's books, Śrīmad
Bhāgavatam, Brahma-sutra, books of the other
sampradāyas, and so on. Though he already knew their
contents, he studied those books just to set an example
for us. Quickly, in one or two years, he completed that
study.

After that he returned home, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
again considered what would be a good engagement for his
son. He purchased land in Māyāpura, beginning from
Jagannātha Bhavan, the house of Sacinandana, Yogapitha,
Candrasekara Bhavan and beyond. He gave the entire area
to Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Thakura, who then
began to do bhajana in Svarūpa Ganja. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura told him, "We have discovered the birthplace of
Mahāprabhu by the help and mercy of Śrīla Jagannātha
dāsa Babaji Mahārāja. Now you should glorify it."

Srila Sarasvatī Ṭhākura then made a hut where Śrī
Gauracandra, Srimati Visnupriya, Śrīmatī Laksmipriya and
Pancha-tattva were standing, and his father then ordered
him, "You should perform arcana in the deities' hut, and
you can maintain yourself by depending on Lord Kṛṣṇa
while performing His worship and service."

As you may know, in general, a father does not believe
that his boy is very intelligent and capable. Our Guru
Mahārāja considered us his babies and thought, "What
will they do?" He told us that he had made this Gaudīya
Math with bricks, and added, "After I leave this world,
if you cannot maintain yourself you should sell these
bricks and somehow maintain." Similarly, Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda used to think, "My baby is the same as he
was when he was young."


                           79
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

However, Śrīla Prabhupāda very quickly preached over the
entirety of Bengal. He began to establish the Navadvipa-
dhama parikramā and Kartika parikramā. Then, after some
time he gave sannyāsa to very qualified disciples - who
were practically only boys. At that time, Pujyapada Bon
Mahārāja, Pujyapada Śrīdhara Mahārāja, Pujyapada Vikanas
Mahārāja, Pujyapada Auduloumi Mahārāja and many others
were only about 25, 26, or 27, and they were the cream
of all Bengal or all India. They were the upper-class.
He brought them to him, gave them brahmacarya and
sannyāsa, and established Sri Caitanya Maṭha.

What is the meaning of the word "matha"? "Mathanti
vasanti satrah." It is a place in which students study
and learn under the guidance of their Gurudeva. It is
like the gurukulas of previous times, wherein boys would
study and become very qualified in all kinds of
siddhānta. Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura established this. He
also gave brahmacarya to many beautiful boys, and thus
very quickly preached all over India.

After some time he wished that this religion of Śrī
Caitanya Mahaprabhu would also go to the Western
countries, and he inspired Srila Bhaktivedanta Swami
Mahārāja - Śrī Abhaya Caranaravinda. By his mercy
Parama-pujyapada Śrīla Swami Mahārāja went abroad and
preached throughout the world in just a few years. He
established preaching centers and translated and
published many books which were in turn translated in
all the prominent languages of the world.

You have come by his mercy, and the root mercy is that
of Srila Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Ṭhākura.




Addendum Two

“Boycott The Sahajiyā Bābājīs”


A lecture given in Holland, June 10, 2001 by
Tridandisvami Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedanta Nārāyaṅa Mahārāja

I want to explain something so that you will be very
careful. I am receiving questions about the books
published by the bābājīs of Vraja. They accept Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu, and Śrī Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Conjugal. They have not written their own
books. They only take books like Stava-mala by Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī, Stavavali and Vilāpa Kusumāñjali by Śrīla
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, Rādhā-rāsa-sudhanidhi by Śrī
Prabhodananda Sarasvatī, and other Gosvami books. They
have taken our Gosvamis' explanations, which are in
Sanskrit, and they are simply translating them into
Bengali. Everything seems to be okay. However, you
should know what are the defects of these bābājīs, and
you should be very careful. You should carefully note
down their defects in your hearts and your notebooks.
First of all they don't accept that the Gaudīya Vaiṣṇava
Sampradāya is one of the sakhas, branches, of the
Brahma-Madhva Sampradāya, although this fact has been

                           80
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

clearly explained by Śrī Kavi Karnipura, Śrīla Jīva
Gosvāmī, and then by Śrī Baladeva Vidyabhusana Prabhu.
It has also been explained by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, by my
Gurudeva, that is, Śrīla Bhakti Prajṇāna Kesava Gosvāmī
Mahārāja, and also by Śrīla Bhaktivedanta Swami
Mahārāja.

Secondly, they think that Śrī Prabhodananda Sarasvatī
and Prakasananda Sarasvatī are the same person, although
there is so much difference between them. This cannot be
so. Will a person of the Rāmānuja Sampradāya go down to
become a Mayavadi like Prakasananda Sarasvatī, and then
again become Prabhodananda Sarasvati, who was so exalted
that he became the guru of Śrīla Gopala Bhaṭṭa Gosvami?
This idea is absurd. Prabhodananda Sarasvati and
Prakāśānanda Sarasvatī were contemporaries. Will the
same person go back and forth, being a Vaiṣṇava in South
India, then becoming a Mayavadi, again becoming a
Vaiṣṇava in Vṛndāvana, and again becoming a Mayavadi?
Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Thakura has vividly
written about this, and great historians and research
scholars have also rejected the idea that they are the
same person.

Thirdly, they don't give proper honor to Śrī Jīva
Gosvāmī, and this is a very big blunder. This is a vital
point. They say that Jiva Gosvāmī is of svakiya-bhava,
that he never supported parakīya- bhava, and that he is
against parakīya-bhava. They say that in his
explanations of Śrīmad Bhāgavatam and Brahma-samhita, in
his own books like Gopāla Campu, and especially in his
Śrī Ujjvala- nilamani tika, he has written against
parakīya-bhava. This is their greatest blunder. We don't
accept their statements at all.

Srila Jīva Gosvāmī was rūpānuga, a pure follower of
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvami and Śrī Rūpa Maṇjarī. However, for
some devotees who were not very qualified at that time,
who were beginners, and who did not know what is
parakīya-bhava – and even in Vraja there are so many
like this – he seemed to favor svakiya-bhava. For some
followers, so that they would be able to come at least
to vidhi- marga (worship according to the rules and
regulations of Narada- pancaratra), Jīva Gosvāmī wrote
as if he was a supporter of svakiya-rāsa. He wanted that
through this they should become qualified, and then they
should come to the mood of parakīya. For qualified
persons he has written that parakīya-bhava is in Vraja
and svakiya-bhava is in Dvaraka. He has vividly written
this, and he also accepted this. He can never be against
the teachings of Srila Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrīla Sanātana
Gosvāmī and Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu . He can never be
so. He was a follower of the same root idea of parakīya-
bhava as Rūpa Gosvāmī. For some unqualified persons he
has written in that other way, but the bābājīs of Vraja
cannot reconcile this. They are ignorant persons. They
became opposed to Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī and took the side
of Śrīla Visvanatha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, even though in
fact there is no dispute between Jīva Gosvāmī and
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura.

Whatever Jīva Gosvāmī wrote for the benefit of those
unqualified followers is in the line of tattva-siddhānta

                           81
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

, established philosophical truths. He wrote that, by
tattva, the gopīs are Kṛṣṇa-svakiya.

ananda-cinmaya-rāsa-pratibhavitabhis

tabhir ya eva nija-rupataya kalabhih


goloka eva nivasaty akhilatma-bhuto


govindam adi-purusam tam aham bhajami


(Brahma Samhita)

["I worship Govinda, the primeval Lord, who resides in
His own realm, Goloka, with Rādhā, who resembles His own
spiritual figure and who embodies the ecstatic potency
(Hladini). Their companions are Her confidantes, who
embody extensions of Her bodily form and who are imbued
and permeated with ever-blissful spiritual rāsa."]

Nija-rupataya kalabhih. The gopīs are Kṛṣṇa's power.
They cannot be parakīya in the eyes of tattva-siddhānta
. They are the same as Kṛṣṇa. They are the power of
Kṛṣṇa. They are also not the wives of any gopas, cowherd
men, of Vṛndāvana. They are all beloved of Kṛṣṇa, and
they are not different from Him. Thus, by tattva, they
are svakīya. (Sva means 'own' and kiya means sampatti,
wealth.) This means they are of Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa's own, and
they are His power. Visvanatha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has
written in the line of rāsa-siddhānta or rāsa-tattva. In
rāsa-tattva Yogamaya has arranged that both the gopīs
and Kṛṣṇa think that the gopīs are married to other
gopas, and therefore they have a paramour relationship.
If it were not like this, there would be no rāsa at all.
(Para means 'greatest', one's own greatest wealth, and
it also means 'another', another's wealth. Therefore the
meaning in both tattva-siddhānta and rāsa-siddhānta is
harmoniously reconciled.)

Srila Rūpa Gosvāmī has explained all these things,
especially in Ujjvala Nilamani, and also in his other
books. The gopīs are Kṛṣṇa's own, His power, but for
rāsa it is said that they are parakīya. What is
parakīya? There are two principles: atma-rāsa and para-
rāsa, or eka-rāsa and aneka-rāsa. Kṛṣṇa is eka-rāsa or
ātmā rāsa. He is one rāsa. In other words He is the
complete embodiment of rāsa. He is atmarama and
āptakāma. He is always full and satisfied in Himself. He
doesn't need anything from anyone in order to be happy.
The gopīs are His own power.

Sakti-saktimatayor-abheda. Sakti, the energy, and
saktiman, the possessor of that energy or power, are
both one. They are identical. However, although Kṛṣṇa
has this quality, He is also para-rāsa. Para-rāsa means
that the gopīs are vaishisteya; that is, they also have
a speciality that distinguishes them from Kṛṣṇa.
Although they are part of Kṛṣṇa, although they are one
with Him, their speciality is that they serve Him in the
mood of rāsa. Kṛṣṇa is the enjoyer and they are the
container or reservoir of love and affection. Kṛṣṇa also

                           82
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

wants to taste their mood. Aneka- rāsa or para-rāsa is
the gopis' rāsa, and Kṛṣṇa wants to taste that rāsa in
various ways. That rāsa is in the form of parakīya rāsa,
and this is the meaning of parakīya rāsa – nothing else.
These are a very high-class of philosophical
understandings, and Srila Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has
explained all these truths.

Therefore, Jīva Gosvāmī is not of a different opinion
than Rūpa Gosvami. They have the very same opinion.
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Thakura has proven that Jīva
Gosvāmī was in parakīya-bhava, and that he accepted
Śrīmad Bhāgavatam and Ujjvala-nilamani. [In his own
Ujjvala-nilamani tika, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has written,
"Svecchaya likitam kincit, atra kincid parecchaya. I
have written some things by my own desire and some
things by the desire of others. The portions which are
consistent, in which svakīya and parakīya are reconciled
and in the line of Rūpa Gosvāmī, is my desire, and the
portions that are not reconciled are written by the
desire of others." I have written about all these topics
in my book called Prabandha Paṇcakam, Five Essential
Essays. You should try to know these things fully. The
bābājīs say that we are not a branch of the line of
Madhvacarya. They say Madhvācārya is of a different
opinion than the Gaudīya Vaiṣṇavas. But this is quite
wrong. We have so many specialties that are there in the
line of Madhvācārya.

Also, they say that because Caitanya Mahāprabhu took
sannyāsa from Kesava Bhārati, a Mayavadi, He, Himself,
must be a Mayavadi. We don't accept this. Mahāprabhu's
actual guru was Isvara Purīpāda, He only took veśa, red
cloth, from Kesava Bhārati, and there is no harm in
this. Madhvācārya also did this, and Rāmānujācārya as
well. [Another point is as follows. Śrī Madhvācārya
accepted sannyāsa from Acyutapreksa, who was also a
kevalādvaita-vādī. Suppose we accept the opinion of the
opposing party, just for the sake of argument. In that
case, if Mahāprabhu is a kevaladvaita- vadi sannyāsa ,
then by the same logic so is Madhvācārya. Where, then,
is the obstacle to Śrīman Mahāprabhujī's being in the
Mādhva Sampradāya, if both of them accepted the advaita-
vādī Śankara's Sampradāya? There is a second point here.
Śrī Madhvācārya accepted eka-danda (a single staff of
renunciation) according to the customs and regulations
of the Śañkara Sampradāya. It would be logically
consistent to say that Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu followed
his ideal example, and also accepted eka danda-sannyāsa
from a sannyasi of the Śañkara Sampradāya, namely Śrī
Kesava Bhārati. From this it seems clear that Gaudīya
Vaiṣṇavas are in the line of Sri Madhvācārya.(from Five
Essential Essays)] Sannyāsa can be taken in this way.
[During the time of Lord Caitanya, the influence of
Śañkarācārya in society was very strong. People thought
that one could accept sannyāsa only in the disciplic
succession of Śañkarācārya. Lord Caitanya could have
performed His missionary activities as a householder,
but He found householder life an obstruction to His
mission. Therefore He decided to accept the renounced
order, sannyāsa . Since His acceptance of sannyāsa was
also designed to attract public attention, Lord
Caitanya, not wishing to disturb the social convention,
took the renounced order of life from a sannyāsī in the

                           83
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

disciplic succession of Sankaracarya, although sannyāsa
was also sanctioned in the Vaisnava sampradāya. (Cc.
Ādi-līlā 3.34 purp.)]

However, Mahāprabhu took gopal-mantra and other mantras
from Isvara Purīpāda. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī, and Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī have accepted this
– that Caitanya Mahāprabhu was not a Mayavadi.
Mādhavendra Purīpāda also took sannyāsa from a Mayavadi,
but he took dīkṣā initiation in the line of Mādhva, and
Lakṣmīpati Tīrtha was his guru.

We are thus in one line. There is some little difference
in upasana-marga, but by tattva we are both the same.
Śrī Baladeva Vidyabhusana Prabhu has written about this
very vividly, and the opinion of Kavi-karnapura is also
that we are in the Mādhva Sampradāya. He wrote a śloka
about this. Another point is that the bābājīs don't
accept that Śrīla Baladeva Vidyabhusana is in the
Gaudīya Vaiṣṇava line. They are vehemently opposed to
this understanding. However, if Baladeva Vidyabhūṣaṅa
Prabhu is out of our Gaudīya Sampradāya, then who is our
savior? He went to Galtā Gaddī in Jaipur and defeated
the Śrī Vaiṣṇavas. He told them that Śrīmatī Rādhikā
should be on the left of Kṛṣṇa. He wrote a commentary on
Vedānta Sutra called Govinda-bhasya, and that commentary
has been accepted as the Gaudiya-bhasya (commentary
representing the Gaudīya Sampradāya).

[As far as we in the Madhva-Gaudiya Sampradāya are
concerned, our acaryas accepted Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam as the
natural commentary on Brahma-sutra. The Gaudīya
Sampradāya did not make any commentary on the Brahma-
sutra because they accepted, and Caitanya Mahāprabhu
accepted, that Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the natural
commentary because it was also written by Vyasadeva, the
original author of Brahma- sutra. If the author has made
his own commentary, there was no need of another. This
is the Gaudiya-vaisnava-siddhānta . Sometime back,
however, in Jaipur, there was a challenge that the
Gaudīya Sampradāya has no commentary on the Vedanta-
sutra. Viśvanātha Cakravarti Ṭhākura was requested to go
there, because he was the most senior Vaiṣṇava scholar.
He was living in Vṛndāvana at that time, and because he
was very advanced in age at that time, he authorized
Baladeva Vidyabhūṣaṅa, "You do it. There is no need, but
people are demanding, 'Where is your commentary on the
Vedanta-sutra?'" Therefore, by the dictation of
Govindajī at Jaipur, Baladeva Vidyabhūṣaṅa, wrote the
commentary on Brahma-sutra called Govinda-bhasya. In
this way, the Brahma-Madhva- Gaudīya Sampradāya has also
got a commentary on Brahma-sutra, and that is required.
(from Śrīla Prabhupāda's lecture on Sept. 30, 1973)]

If Baladeva Vidyabhūṣaṅa Prabhu is not in our
sampradāya, then what sampradāya is He in? All his
commentaries are in the line of Srila Rūpa Gosvāmī and
our Gaudīya Vaiṣṇava ācāryas. If Baladeva Prabhu is out
of our sampradāya, everything will be finished. This is
a vital point. Also, these bābājīs say that if anyone
wears the saffron cloth of sannyāsa , he is not in the
Gaudīya Vaiṣṇava line. They have no correct idea. It is
stated in Caitanya Caritamrta:


                           84
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

kiba vipra, kiba nyasi, sudra kene naya yei Kṛṣṇa-
tattva-vetta, sei 'guru' haya

["It does not matter whether a person is a vipra
(learned scholar in Vedic wisdom) or is born in a lower
family, or is in the renounced order of life. If he is
master in the science of Kṛṣṇa, he is the perfect and
bona fide spiritual master." (Madhya-lila 8- 128)]

Kṛṣṇa dāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī has written 'kiba nyasi'.
Nyasi means sannyasi. Isvara Purīpāda, Mādhavendra
Purīpāda, and all renunciates in their line were
sannyāsīs in saffron cloth. There are so many associates
of Caitanya Mahāprabhu who wore saffron cloth. Svarūpa
Dāmodara also wore saffron cloth. What harm was there?
Saffron cloth is the sign of renunciation. It is the
color of anuraga, attachment for Kṛṣṇa. Because it is a
color, it is worn by sadhvis. Sadhvi means a married
lady, a lady who is not a widow. 'Married' means having
Kṛṣṇa as one's beloved. We are not widows, but those who
wear white cloths are widows.

From where has this word 'babaji' come in our line? From
whom has it come? Isvara Purīpāda, Mādhavendra Purīpāda,
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu , Nityānanda Prabhu, and after
Him, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, Sri Sanātana Gosvāmī, Śrīla
Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, Śrī Jīva Gosvami, Śrī Gopāla
Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, and Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvami. After
them, Kṛṣṇa dāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī and Vṛndāvana dasa
Ṭhākura, and then Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura, Śyāmānanda
dāsa, Srinivasa Acārya, and Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura. Where is the word babaji? Was anyone known as
Babaji? From where did this word babaji come? The
bābājīs have no reply. These Vaiṣṇavas were all
paramahaṁsa, not bābājī.

Sri Sanātana Gosvāmī did not wear saffron cloth because
he had great honor for Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu's saffron
or reddish cloth. He was thinking, "I cannot be like
Him, I am not so high." Therefore, out of honor and
reverence he wore white cloth, and he used to worship
this saffron cloth. In Vraja, the Vrajabasis all used to
call Sanātana Gosvāmī 'baba'. They called Sanātana
Gosvāmī bara-baba, elder sadhu, and Rūpa Gosvami chota-
baba, younger sadhu. After them, others in their line
took white cloth; but then, after the time of Viśvanātha
Cakravarti Ṭhākura, they deviated. Some, like Jagannātha
dāsa Babaji, Madhusūdana dāsa Babaji, and Gaura Kiśora
dāsa Babaji, took this bābājī name out of humility, and
everyone used to call them that. [Baba means sadhu or
father, and ji is a suffix meaning respectable. These
mukta-mahapurusas are paramahaṁsas, and they are also
the eternal associates of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. They are far
above the conception of bābājī or sannyāsa (which is
within the varnaśrama system). For them to accept the
nomenclature bābājī, therefore, is their humility.]
[After Śrīman Mahāprabhu, His lila-parikaras (eternal
pastime associates) such as the six Gosvāmīs, Sri
Lokanātha and Bhugarbha, and later Śrī Kṛṣṇadāsa
Kavirāja, Śrī Narottama Ṭhākura, and Śrī Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura were naturally niskincana paramahaṁsa
Vaiṣṇavas. There was no need for them to wear sannyāsa -
vesa, saffron cloth. Secondly, Śrīman Mahāprabhu had
performed the līlā of wearing sannyāsa-veśa and saffron

                           85
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

cloth. Thus considering themselves to be worthless,
lowly and unqualified, these mahātmās did not wear
sannyāsa-veśa and saffron cloth in order to show honor
and respect to the veśa of Sriman Mahāprabhu and also to
maintain their own identities as servants under the
shelter of His lotus feet. On the other hand, in order
to express veneration for the niskincana paramahaṁsa-
veśa of the associates of Śrīman Mahāprabhu, and, under
their guidance to preach His message throughout the
entire world, many akiṇcana Vaisnavas on the path of
raganuga-bhajana, holding the paramahaṁsa-veśa upon
their heads, have accepted a position below their
worshipable superiors by wearing the saffron cloth of
the sannyāsa aśrama which is included within the system
of varṅāśrama dharma. These two customs, each having
their own place, are both exquisitely beautiful and also
completely in accordance with siddhānta . Today suddha-
hari-bhakti has been, is being, and will continue to be,
preached and spread throughout the world by these
mahapurusas, great perfected saints, who wear this
second type of niskincana sannyasi-vesa. (from Five
Essential Essays)]

When Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura saw that
many bābājīs were now bogus, that they were with widow
matajis and producing sons, he became very furious and
said that we will again accept the same saffron cloth of
others like Rāmānujācārya, Madhvācārya, Mahāprabhu , and
Isvara Purīpāda. He then preached everywhere in the
world.

At that time, those family persons who were of loose
character and had no status in society honored these
bogus bābājīs. That is why Srila Prabhupāda
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura re-introduced the
reddish cloth and sannyāsa . Presently, those who are
bogus persons, but were previously in the Gaudīya Maṭha,
have become lusty and have thus been kicked out from the
Gaudīya Maṭha. Now they have become bābājīs.

The bābājīs especially criticize Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura, saying that he didn't have a guru. This is a
bogus idea. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura preached the name
and the glories of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and the
Gaudīya Vaiṣṇava Sampradāya to the whole world. He wrote
hundreds of books. Still, the bābājīs say he did not
have a proper guru, and that Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvati Prabhupāda also had no proper guru. [A sādhaka
may receive bheka (sannyāsa veśa) from some suitable
guru and alternatively, when genuine vairāgya (in bhava-
bhakti) arises, he may accept bheka from himself.
Haridāsa Ṭhākura, the Six Gosvāmīs, Lokanatha Gosvāmī,
and others are examples of the practice of accepting
bheka from oneself. This is also the way that Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura accepted sannyāsa veśa
after the disappearance of Śrīla Gaura Kiśora dāsa
Babaji, from whom he had received the dīkṣā mantra. We
see from these examples that acceptance of bheka in this
way is fully in agreement with śāstra. Sri Rāmānujācārya
also accepted tridandi-sannyāsa from himself after the
disappearance of his guru Śrīla Yamunacarya. (from Five
Essential Essays)] You should know that Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura was in the Bhagavata-parampara of
Śrīla Jagannātha dāsa Babaji Mahārāja. Śrīla Prabhupāda

                           86
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura was also in the line
as the same Jagannātha dāsa Babaji Mahārāja, Srila
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, and his guru, Śrīla Gaura Kiśora
Das Babaji Mahārāja. They were all in the same line.

Those in the bābājī line say that our Guru Mahārāja,
Śrīla Bhakti Prajnana Kesava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, and even
Śrīla Bhaktivedanta Swami Mahārāja, were not in the
proper disciplic line, and that they have no guru-
parampara. But it is actually the bābājīs who are not in
the guru-parampara.

I saw in France that so many devotees have given up
Śrīla Bhaktivedanta Swami Mahārāja, and they have become
bābājīs. They took babaji-vesa, dor-kaupin and so on.
Then, after two years, they fell down with mataji-
babajis. They accepted and lived with divorced ladies.
They are bound to do this. Thus, those who are not
accepting that Śrīla Bhaktivedanta Swami Mahārāja, our
Guru Mahārāja, Śrīla Bhakti Prajṇāna Kesava Gosvāmī
Mahārāja, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura
Prabhupāda, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Thakura, and all other
high-class Vaiṣṇavas are in the Gaudīya line, are
completely ignorant. If you read their books this poison
may come.

avaisnava-mukhodgirnam putam hari-kathamrtam

sravanam naiva kartavyam sarpocchistam yatha payah


(Padma Purana)

["One should not hear anything about Kṛṣṇa from a non-
Vaiṣṇava . Milk touched by the lips of a serpent has
poisonous effects. Similarly, talks about Kṛṣṇa given by
a non-Vaiṣṇava are also poisonous."]

Srila Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī's Vilāpa Kusumāñjali, and
other books like Kṛṣṇa Bhavanamrta, Rādhā-rāsa-
sudhanidhi, and Stava- vali are all good books. They are
amrta, nectar. However, you should not hear them from
non-Vaiṣṇavas; otherwise the bogus ideas of such non-
Vaisvnavas will come, and you will be deviated. Be very
careful about this.

Another point is regarding bhajana-praṅālī. Instead of
giving the proper process to the appropriate persons,
without giving proper training, without considering
whether a person is qualified or not, these bābājīs give
their own version of bhajana-praṅālī. Their so-called
disciples do not know who is Kṛṣṇa or what is bhajana.
They don't know any definition of bhakti, and they don't
even know how to clean themselves after passing stool.
They don't know anything. What will become of them?

naitat samacarej jatu

manasapi hy anisvaram


vinasyaty acaran mauḍhyād



                            87
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

yatharudro 'bdhi-jam visam

["One who is not a great controller should never imitate
the behavior of ruling personalities, even mentally. If
out of foolishness an ordinary person does imitate such
behavior, he will simply destroy himself, just as a
person who is not Rudra would destroy himself if he
tried to drink an ocean of poison." (SB. 10.33.31)]

If someone is not qualified, but he wants to drink
poison as Sankara did, he will die at once. First be
Śañkara, and then take poison. First be qualified.

First you should know Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī's Upadesamrta:
vaco vegam manasa krodha vegam. Also read Manaḥ Sikśa.
First learn tattva: maya-tattva, jiva-tattva, and Kṛṣṇa-
tattva. Afterwards, if you have actual greed, then you
can read those other books. Otherwise, if you don't
learn these principles first, you will be lusty, and you
will be bound to deviate and give up bhajana and
sādhana. We should read Jaiva Dharma. There, Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has explained all the ideas of
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. First learn trnad api sunicena taror
api sahisnuna / amanina manadena kirtaniyah sada hariḥ.
"One can chant the holy name of the Lord in a humble
state of mind, thinking himself lower than the straw in
the street. One should be more tolerant than the tree,
devoid of all sense of false prestige and ready to offer
all respects to others. ln such a state of mind one can
chant the holy name of the Lord constantly." This was
advised by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu :

ye-rupe la-ile nāma prema upajaya tahara lakṣaṇa suna,
svarupa-rama-raya

["O Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī and Rāmānanda Rāya, hear
from Me the symptoms of how one should chant the Hare
Kṛṣṇa maha-mantra to awaken very easily one's dormant
love for Kṛṣṇa." (Antya 20.21)]

Caitanya Mahāprabhu Himself gave us the instruction to
have these qualities. Try to develop these qualities,
and then you can read the other books. There are so many
devotees around the world, especially in France, who are
reading all these elevated books. However, they don't
know Kṛṣṇa-tattva or any other tattva, and they have no
niṣṭha, steady and strong faith, in their gurudeva.
Gradually they are giving up Śrīla Swami Mahārāja, Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, and the entire guru-
parampara. They criticize this line. Therefore, although
the books which have been translated by these bābājīs
are themselves bona fide, we should boycott them. Don't
read them. If you are qualified like a haṁsa, a swan, if
you can separate milk from water, then you may read
their translations – otherwise not.

About ten years ago I went on Vraja Maṇḍala Parikramā
with Pujyapāda Janardana Mahārāja. We went to Rādhā-
Kunda, and there we challenged the bābājīs. We had a
discussion for three hours, but no one came. I have also
challenged those bābājīs in my book, Five Essential
Essays, but no one responded. After reading that book
they wanted to take us to court, and I challenged them,
"Yes, we will see you in court." But they never came.

                             88
Five_Essential_Essays_-_Prabandha_Pancakam.txt   5/5/2017

Their lawyers had advised them not to go to court, as
they would have lost everything.

Don't be attracted to these sahajiyā bābājīs of Vraja.
You should be attracted to our guru-paramparā: Śrīla
Bhaktivedanta Swami Mahārāja, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvati Ṭhākura
Prabhupāda, Śrī Baladeva Vidyabhūṣaṅa, Śrīla Jiva
Gosvāmī, Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, and all
those in our Bhagavata-parampara.

I have come to tell you these things only to make you
all careful. Don't be bewildered. Try to be very strong,
knowing all these points.



Table of Contents

Chapter One The Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Sampradāya &
Sannyāsa

Chapter Two Pañcarātrika & Bhāgavata Guru-paramparā

Chapter Three The Gauḍīya Sampradāya is in the Line of
Madhavācārya

Chapter Four Bābājī Veśa and Siddha Pranālī

Chapter Five The Eligibility to Hear Rāsa-līlā Kathā

Preface to the Electronic Edition

Chapter One The Śrī Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava Sampradāya &
Sannyāsa

Chapter Three The Gauḍīya Sampradāya is in the Line of
Madhavācārya

Chapter Four Bābājī Veśa and Siddha Pranālī

Chapter Five The Eligibility to Hear Rāsa-līlā Kathā

Addendum One “The Appearance Day Of Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Prabhupada”

Addendum Two “Boycott The Sahajiyā Bābājīs”




                           89
