Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017

Gaura-vāṇī Pracāriṇe



Contents

Chapter 1 Over the Ocean

Chapter 2 The Meaning of His Praṇama-Mantra

Chapter 3 One Drop of Nectar

Chapter 4 His Master: Gaura-vāṇī Personified

Chapter 5 Śrī Gaura's Gift

Chapter 6 The School of Rūpa Gosvāmī

Chapter 7 Rūpānuga and Rāgānuga

Chapter 8 Truly Rūpānuga

Chapter 9 Cherished Service




A Note from the Publisher



In May of 2004, our most worshipful śikṣā Gurudeva, oṁ
viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja, requested that a special book be published.
This book would consist of his various discourses on the
deep meaning of the phrase ‘gaura-vāṇī pracāriṇe’ which
appears in the praṇāma-mantra of our most worshipful
dīkṣā Gurudeva, nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa oṁ viṣṇupāda Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Prabhupāda. These discourses
were spoken on various occasions in different countries,
over a period of ten years.

By the mercy of our śikṣā and dīkṣā gurus, we have
delighted in taking responsibility for its publication,
and we pray that you will be happy to read its contents.

For a greater appreciation and understanding of Śrīla
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja’s main points, we have included
excerpts from Śrīla Prabhupāda’s books and classes; the
design of the book was customized to highlight those
excerpts. We have included Śrīla Prabhupāda’s
translations wherever Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja quotes
Bengali and Sanskrit verses from Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta
and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. We have also presented various
quotes and songs by Śrīla Prabhupāda and other Gauḍīya
ācāryas in double-page spreads before each chapter.

Where pertinent, we have introduced Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja’s discourses with additional historical
information, and these appear in italics and/or
brackets. There are two special sections consisting of
excerpts from other discourses, illuminating their
respective chapters. At the back of the book, you will

                              1
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017

find an excerpt from one of the many letters Śrīla
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja received from Śrīla Prabhupāda.

In September of 1959, Śrīla Prabhupāda accepted the
sannyāsa order from Sri Gauḍīya Vedānta Samītī’s divine
spiritual preceptor, nitya-līlā praviṣṭa oṁ viṣṇupāda
Ācārya Keśarī Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Kesava Gosvāmī
Mahārāja, and received from him the sannyāsa name
“Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja.” Shortly after this, he
became founder-ācārya of the International Society for
Kṛṣṇa Consciousness, and became famous throughout the
world as Śrīla A.C. Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Prabhupāda or
Śrīla Prabhupāda.

In our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava tradition, all ācāryas and
sannyāsīs refer to one another by their given sannyāsa
names. Because Śrīla Prabhupāda’s sannyāsa name is
“Bhaktivedānta Swāmī,” Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja
respectfully refers to him as Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī
Mahārāja or Śrīla Swami Mahārāja.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja has used many Sanskrit terms in
his illuminations of Śrīla Prabhupāda’s praṇāma mantra;
these terms are all explained in English. Where you find
the explanation in the text insufficient, you are
invited to turn to the glossary.

We humbly beg you to forgive any mistakes made by us in
compiling Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja’s presentations.

This book is an offering by our humble self in the
service of Śrī Śrī Guru and Gauraṅga, offered to them on
Śrī Gauraṅga’s most auspicious appearance day — March
15, 2006.



Īśa Dāsa Adhikāri




Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja and I have so many
relationships with each other. First of all he is my
śikṣā-guru, my instructing spiritual master. He is also
the god-brother of my dīkṣā-guru, Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja. He took sannyāsa, the renounced
order, from my Gurudeva, as I did; so in this regard we
are god-brothers. We are also very intimate friends. I
have known him since 1946, and have served and obeyed
him since then.

He is Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja and I am
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja. I accepted sannyāsa in
1954, and he did so in 1959. Because I was already in
the sannyāsa order, I had the good fortune to perform
the procedures for his sannyāsa ceremony. By his mercy,
at that time he also allowed me to show him how to make
a daṇḍa (sannyāsa staff) and how to wear the sannyāsa
cloth. He was very pleased with me, and he shared with
me many truths about Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

He first met his Gurudeva, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta

                           2
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017

Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Prabhupāda, over eighty years ago, and
at that meeting, he received the order to go to Western
countries to preach in English. He was delayed, however,
and he came after about forty years. At that time he
wanted to take me with him, especially to New York where
he first began his preaching. He ordered me to send him
all the books required for his translation work, and I
did that. I also sent him Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa deities, musical
instruments like mṛdaṅgas (double-headed clay drums) and
karatālas (small brass hand cymbals), many kinds of
sweets and other paraphernalia. He wrote me over 400
letters, and in one letter he confided that we have a
transcendental relationship that can never be destroyed.

How did he travel to America? He traveled by Scindia
Steam Navigation Company’s freighter — by sea, not by
air. He only carried with him some books, like Bhagavad-
gītā and his translation of the First Canto of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam. At that time, he was penniless.

He first went to Boston and then to New York. In New
York, at Tompkins Square Park, he used to sing with his
eyes closed as he played his karatālas. Tears flowed
from his eyes and his heart melted as he sang:



śrī kṛṣṇa caitanya

prabhu nityānanda

śrī-advaita gadādhara

śrīvāsādi-gaura-bhakta-vṛnda



hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa

kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare

hare rāma hare rāma

rāma rāma hare hare



Tompkins Square Park was frequented by many hippies who
were drinking alcohol and engaging in other illicit
activities. They came and surrounded him. When he sang,
they danced and sang along, and sometimes they offered
him their bottles of wine. After some time, he turned
all those hippies into “happies” and their lives
changed.

Eventually, thousands of people began to follow him.
They began to worship and meditate on the Supreme Lord,
and thus they became very happy. He used to write me
from all the places of his preaching activities.

In just a few years he translated and wrote commentaries
on many Vedic scriptures, and his books have been
translated into all the prominent languages of the
world.

                           3
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017


Most of the major cities of this Earth were blessed by
his presence, where he established Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s mission. He preached in the mountains, on
islands like Hawaii, in forests like New Vṛndāvana, in
the desert and in so many other remote places throughout
the world. He established numerous temples, preaching
centers, schools and farms for cow protection. His voice
has extended to practically every part of the globe, and
his books have helped so many to realize the truths of
Kṛṣṇa consciousness.




No one called Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja to the
West; his Gurudeva sent him. He mercifully came to this
land, where only wine, wealth, and immoral association
with the opposite sex are prominent, where no one knows
his own identity, why he has come to this world, what is
his duty, and what is his aim of life. Everyone here was
sinking in darkness. Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja mercifully
came to this land, and in a very short time thousands
became his followers. Those who were hippies became
“happies” — all who were touched by his words became
happy.

Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja gave every-thing in his books, yet
he knew that a child (new devotee) of one year, two
years, or even five years could not comprehend all his
teachings. A father and mother save money for their
child, keeping it in a locked box. When the child is
mature, he will be qualified to properly utilize the
treasures inside. Before maturity, however, the child
would waste that treasure. Similarly, Śrīla Swāmī
Mahārāja kept all his treasures in his books. If you
want to open them, you must know that the key is in the
hands of the bhakta-bhāgavata.

There are two bhāgavatas: the grantha-bhāgavata (Vedic
scriptures) and the bhakta-bhāgavata (pure devotee). The
bhakta-bhāgavata is superior in the sense that the key
to the treasury of the Vedic scriptures is with that
bonafide self-realized devotee who has prema, pure love
for Śrī Kṛṣṇa. He can open the lock.

Within all of his books Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja has
preserved the treasure left by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. In
his purports we see all the teachings of Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī. In The Nectar of Instruction, for example, he
gives the process by which we can follow Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī and thus enter Vṛndāvana, the abode of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.

Some persons say, “We are not qualified, and we will
never be qualified to hear about Goloka.” I think this
is not correct, because Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja has written
about it all in his books. When we become mature and
qualified, we will be able to actually taste that
nectar. Then we can go to the place that Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī, Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, Śrīla
Vyāsadeva and Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja have
written about.

                           4
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                        5/5/2017




Chapter 1

Over the Ocean


Prayer to the Lotus Feet of Kṛṣṇa



[ an excerpt from the prayer written by Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Prabhupāda

on board the ship Jaladuta, September 13, 1965 ]



kṛṣṇa taba puṇya habe bhāi

e-puṇya koribe jabe rādhārāṇī khusī habe

dhruva ati boli tomā tāi



I emphatically say to you, O brothers, you will obtain
your good fortune from the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa only when
Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī becomes pleased with you. (refrain)



śrī-siddhānta saraswatī śacī-suta priya ati

kṛṣṇa-sebāya jāra tula nāi

sei se mohānta-guru jagater madhe uru

kṛṣṇa-bhakti dey ṭhāi ṭhāi



Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, who is
very dear to Lord Gaurāṅga, the son of mother Śacī, is
unparalleled in his service to the Supreme Lord Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. He is that great saintly spiritual master who
bestows intense devotion to Kṛṣṇa at different places
throughout the world. (verse 1)



tāra icchā balavān pāścātyete ṭhān ṭhān

hoy jāte gaurāṅger nām

pṛthivīte nagarādi āsamudra nada nadī

sakalei loy kṛṣṇa nām




                             5
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017

By his strong desire, the holy name of Lord Gaurāṅga
will spread throughout all the countries of the Western
world. In all the cities, towns and villages on the
Earth, from all the oceans, seas, rivers and streams,
everyone will chant the holy name of Kṛṣṇa. (verse 2)




Srīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja showed the world, by
his example, that even a street beggar who has strong
faith in the value of serving his spiritual master, Śrī
Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and Śrī
Nityānanda Prabhu, can go anywhere – Śrī Kṛṣṇa will make
all arrangements for him. The pure devotee can jump in
fire, and he can jump over the Alps, the Himalayas and
the ocean. He can go anywhere, for Kṛṣṇa will help him.

Although penniless, Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja jumped over the
ocean. Somehow he traveled by ship, and simply chanted
the holy names. As he chanted, he never took note of
whether or not anyone was watching him.

He used to say that if a blind person and a lame person
travel together, they can go anywhere they like. He
explained that the blind person will take the lame
person on his shoulders. The blind person will walk and
the lame person will direct. The lame person has eyes,
and he will say, “You should go this way and that way.”
The Western world is blind and India is lame. India has
no source of wealth to preach this mission throughout
the world; it has eyes but no legs. America and all
other Western countries are very wealthy, but they have
no eyes. If both combine and cooperate, we can preach
this mission to the entire world.

Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja preached throughout the world, and
in a few years he accomplished a miracle that has not
been seen anywhere else. He was a ‘long arm’ of Śrīla
Prabhupāda Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura and Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. In other words, they reached out
to the entire world through him, and they predicted his
coming. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has written, “I think
that within a very few years, thousands of Western
devotees, wearing śikhās and tulasī-mālās and chanting
Hare Kṛṣṇa, will join Indian devotees. They will all
chant and dance together.” Now we see this everywhere.

Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja used to say, “Bombay is my office,
Māyāpura is my place of sādhana-bhajana (spiritual
practice) and my home is Vṛndāvana.” That is why he came
to Vṛndāvana in his final days. He took samādhi there in
his home, Goloka Vṛndāvana.




Chapter 2

The Meaning of His Praṇama-Mantra



                           6
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017



What is the second verse in the praṇāma-mantra of Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja?

[Devotee:] Namas te sārasvate deve gaura-vāṇī-pracāriṇe,
nirviśeṣa-śūnyavādi-pāścātya-deśa-tāriṇe.

[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja:] This verse refers to gaura-
vāṇī. What is the meaning of that gaura-vāṇī he
preached?

[Devotee:] Lord Caitanya came to this world for four
reasons. One was to establish the yuga-dharma, the
principle religious duty of the present age, which is
the chanting of the holy name. Another was because
Advaita Ācārya had called Him to comeÖ

[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja:] I want to hear the
explanation of that gaura-vāṇī he preached throughout
the world.

[Devotee:] In simple words, it was to chant Hare Kṛṣṇa.

[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja:] Śrī Advaita Ācārya could have
given this. So many ācāryas have given this. Even Mahā-
Viṣṇu can give the chanting of the holy name, but he
cannot give that gaura-vāṇī.

Gaura-vāṇī is explained in the words of Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura:

ārādhyo bhagavān vrajeśa-tanayas

tad-dhāma vṛndāvanaṁ

ramyā kācid upāsanā

vraja-vadhū-vargeṇā yā kalpitā

śrīmad-bhāgavataṁ pramāṇam-amalaṁ

premā pumartho mahān

śrī-caitanya mahāprabhor-matam-idaṁ

tatrādaro naḥ paraḥ



Bhagavān Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His
transcendental abode Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma are my
worshipable objects. The most excellent method of
worshipping Kṛṣṇa is that adopted by the gopīs, the
young wives of Vraja. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is evidence of
this. It is the flawless and most authoritative
scripture, and kṛṣṇa-prema is the fifth and highest
achievement of human life — beyond mundane religiousity,
economic development, sense gratification and impersonal
liberation. This is the opinion of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu. We have supreme regard for this conclusion.
We have no inclination or respect for any other,
cheating opinions.


                           7
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017




This is the speciality of gaura-vāṇī: Śrī Kṛṣṇa is our
most worshipful deity. However, there are so many
manifestations of Kṛṣṇa. Dvārakādhīśa Kṛṣṇa is the son
of Vasudeva and Devakī. Is He our worshipable Deity? He
may be for so many others, and there is no harm in that.
We offer our obeisance to Him, but we worship Vrajendra-
nandana Kṛṣṇa, the son of Nanda Mahārāja, who took birth
from the womb of Mother Yaśodā.

At the time of His birth, Śrī Nanda-nandana Kṛṣṇa did
not have long hair, and He wore no decorations or
ornaments. He appeared as a simple baby, weeping, “Kyā,
kyā, kyā!” All the residents of Vṛndāvana understood
that He was born from the womb of Mother Yaśodā. We
worship that very Nanda-nandana.

He is nava-kiśora naṭavara, the eternally youthful
cowherd boy, the best of dancers. Mother Yaśodā thinks,
“Kṛṣṇa is my son.” We worship that Kṛṣṇa who was bound
by the ropes of His mother in Vṛndāvana. She out-ran
Him, caught hold of Him and bound Him, and for this
reason He is also known as Dāmodara-Kṛṣṇa [dāma means
ropes, and udara means the abdomen]. He killed the witch
Pūtanā, who tried to take His life by poisoning Him, and
He gave her a motherly position in Goloka. We worship
that Kṛṣṇa who was playing in the courtyard of Nanda
Bābā and Mother Yaśodā, and who was controlled by their
love and affection.

We worship that Kṛṣṇa who was always surrounded by
cowherd friends like Dāmā, Śrīdāmā, Sudāmā, Vasudāmā,
Stoka-kṛṣṇa, Lavaṅga, Arjuna, Ujjvala, Subala,
Madhumaṅgala and so on. They used to defeat Him in
various playful games, and He was very pleased to be
defeated. That Kṛṣṇa always performed pastimes with the
gopīs, the cowherd maidens of Vṛndāvana.

Ārādhyo bhagavān: Although He is the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, for the purpose of His pastimes His
bhagavatā (Godhood) is covered. All His opulences are
covered by Yogamāyā, His spiritual potency, and thus He
has no idea that He is God. That very Kṛṣṇa is our
ārādhya, the object of our worship.

Another manifestation of Kṛṣṇa is the husband of Rukmiṇī
and son of Vasudeva and Devakī. He is the worshipful
Deity of the residents of Mathurā and other places. They
may worship Him in that way, but as far as Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu is concerned: ārādhyo bhagavān vrajeśa-
tanayas tad-dhāma vṛndāvanam — Lord Kṛṣṇa, My worshipful
Deity, lives always in Vṛndāvana. He never gives up
Vṛndāvana; He never goes elsewhere. His manifestations
may go to Kurukṣetra, Dvārakā or Mathurā, but that Kṛṣṇa
whom I worship never leaves Vṛndāvana.

Ramyā kācid upāsanā vraja-vadhū: All the gopīs, and
especially Śrī Rādhā and Her group, have adopted the
highest process of serving Lord Kṛṣṇa for His pleasure.
In His service they can even place their lotus feet on
His head. To please Him they can chastise Him and order

                           8
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017

Him to do so many things. He will very happily carry out
their orders and think, “Oh, this is very good; very
good.” He does not take such pleasure in hearing the
prayers of even great demigods like Lord Brahmā and Lord
Śiva. He prefers to hear the gopīs chastise and call out
to Him, “Rascal! thief!” No one can serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa like
the gopīs.

Śrīmad-bhāgavataṁ pramāṇam amalam: We must look to
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, the highest evidence among all
scriptures, to understand this. Only in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam can we see these truths about the gopīs’ love
for Lord Kṛṣṇa. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu offers obeisance
to the Upaniṣads and all other scriptures because they
are the breath and words of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, but He
particularly glorifies Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Kṛṣṇa personally told the gopīs,
“Na pāraye ‘haṁ niravadya-saṁyujām — My dear gopīs, I
will not be able to repay you in thousands upon
thousands of births, so be pleased by your own devotion
to Me. Be merciful to Me.”

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam reveals this truth; but it can only be
understood by reading the commentaries of Śrīla Sanātana
Gosvāmī, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, and Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura, and by reading Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura’s collected verses of the Bhāgavatam called
Bhagavatārka-marīci-mālā.

Premā pumartho mahān: Pure love for Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa
(prema) is the ultimate goal, and the prema in the heart
of Śrīmatī Rādhikā is super-most. Hanumān has prema,
Dhruva Mahārāja has prema and Prahlāda Mahārāja also has
prema. The Pāṇḍavas and Uddhava have prema, and all the
queens of Dvārakā have so much prema. In Vṛndāvana, the
sakhās (cowherd friends), sakhīs (beloveds), Mother
Yaśodā and Nanda Mahārāja all have prema. But no one has
the prema of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Hers is the highest love
and affection towards Kṛṣṇa. Her love is in the heart of
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and He is telling us about it.
This is gaura-vāṇī. This is the vāṇī, or teaching, of
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

Before Mahāprabhu, no one ever preached this. In
previous Kali-yugas, only the performance of nāma-
saṅkīrtana (chanting the Lord’s holy names) was
preached.

Millions of years ago, in the Age called Satya-yuga, the
great sage Nārada Ṛṣi taught Vālmīki Ṛṣi to chant the
holy name. So the holy names have been given from
ancient times. Many ācāryas (spiritual preceptors) in
Kali-yuga have also told us to perform kīrtana, but no
one gave the love and affection that was given by Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Through nāma-saṅkīrtana, He
preached the love and affection of the gopīs.

This is Gaura-vāṇī



Gaura-vāṇī is contained within Mahāprabhu’s eight verses
of Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka:

                           9
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017




ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanaṁ

bhāva-mahā-dāvāgni-nirvāpaṇaṁ

śreyaḥ-kairava-candrikā-vitaraṇaṁ

vidyā-vadhū-jīvanam

ānandāmbudhi-vardhanaṁ

prati-padaṁ pūrṇāmṛtāsvādanaṁ

sarvātma-snapanaṁ

paraṁ vijayate śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtanam



Let there be supreme victory for the chanting of the
holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, which cleanses the mirror of the
heart and completely extinguishes the blazing forest
fire of material existence. Śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtana
diffuses the soothing moon rays of bhāva, which cause
the white lotus of good fortune to bloom for the living
entities. The holy name is the life and soul of
transcendental knowledge, since Vidya (spiritual
knowledge personified) is Śrī Nāma Prabhu’s consort. It
continuously increases the ocean of transcendental
bliss, enabling one to taste complete nectar at every
step. The holy name thoroughly bathes and cools the
body, mind and soul. (Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka, verse 1)



This is gaura-vāṇī.



nāmnām akāri bahudhā nija-sarva-śaktis

tatrārpitā niyamitaḥ smaraṇe na kālaḥ

etādṛśī tava kṛpā bhagavan mamāpi

durdaivam īdṛśam ihājani nānurāgaḥ



O Lord! Your holy name bestows all auspiciousness upon
the living entities. Therefore, for the benefit of the
jīvas, You eternally manifest Your innumerable names,
such as Rāma, Nārāyaṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Mukunda, Mādhava,
Govinda, Dāmodara, and so on. You have invested those
names with all the potencies of Your respective personal
forms. By Your causeless mercy, You have not even
imposed any restrictions on the chanting and remembrance
of such names as is the case with gāyatrī mantras, which
must be chanted only at specified times of the day. In
other words, the holy name can be chanted and remembered
at any time of the day or night. This is the provision
You have made. O Lord! This is Your causeless mercy upon

                           10
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017

the living entities. Nonetheless, I am so unfortunate
due to committing offenses that I have not awoken any
attachment for Your holy name, which is so easily
accessible and bestows all good fortune. (Śrī
Śikṣāṣṭaka, verse 2)

No one had ever explained this before. The holy names of
the Supreme Lord are invested with all the power of
their respective forms and pastimes. Through the
chanting of those holy names Mahāprabhu not only gave
love (general prema), but more than this. He gave all
the progressive stages of prema, namely sneha,11 māna,11
praṇaya,11 rāga,11 anurāga,11 bhāva and even mahābhāva.
In fact He gave even more than this; He gave
unnatojjvala-rasāṁsva-bhakti śriyam, the love of the
gopīs who are engaged in the direct service of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā. The highest love, mādanākhya-mahābhāva, is the
monopoly of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, but Mahāprabhu enabled the
fortunate jīvas (living entities) to have a slight touch
of that bhāva so that they may serve Her.

Mahāprabhu taught how to chant in such a way that the
powers of the holy names are experienced to the highest
extent. In the different Ages (Satya-yuga, Tretā-yuga
and Dvāpara-yuga) the holy names of the Lord were
chanted, but in those former Ages no one could attain
the highest prema.

No incarnation before Mahāprabhu could give such power
in the holy names. Neither Lord Rāmacandra nor Lord
Nṛsiṁhadeva could give it. Even Kṛṣṇa cannot give this
result in chanting, because He is the enjoyer of prema,
not its reservoir. He only knows what it is like to be
the object of love, not its container.This is gaura-
vāṇī.



tṛṇād api sunīcena taror api sahiṣṇunā

amāninā mānadena kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ

Thinking oneself to be even lower and more worthless
than the insignificant grass which is trampled beneath
the feet of all, being more tolerant than a tree,
accepting no honor but offering respect to all others
according to their respective positions, one should
continuously chant the holy name of Śrī Hari. (Śrī
Śikṣāṣṭaka, verse 3)



No one had ever explained this principle in such a way
before, in all its depth. Although humility is a
characteristic of all pure devotees, before Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s advent no one taught its profound limits.
Moreover, no one else could give the exalted result of
kīrtana: the manifestation of such humble devotional
sentiments.

Mahāprabhu told Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī and Rāmānanda
Rāya, “Hear from Me the process by which one can easily
attain kṛṣṇa-prema,” and then He uttered the verse
beginning tṛṇād api sunīcena.

                           11
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017


Mahāprabhu became very pleased when, by His order and
inspiration, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī explained the glory of the
name:



tuṇḍe tāṇḍavinī ratiṁ vitanute

tuṇḍāvalī-labdhaye

karṇa-kroḍa-kaḍambinī ghaṭayate

karṇārbudebhyaḥ spṛhām

cetaḥ-prāṅgaṇa-saṅginī vijayate

sarvendriyāṇāṁ kṛtiṁ

no jāne janitā kiyadbhir amṛtaiḥ

kṛṣṇeti varṇa-dvayī



I do not know how much nectar the two syllables ‘Kṛṣ-ṇa’
have produced. When the holy name of Kṛṣṇa is chanted,
it appears to dance within the mouth. We then desire
many, many mouths. When that name enters the holes of
the ears, we desire many millions of ears. And when the
holy name dances in the courtyard of the heart, it
conquers the activities of the mind, and therefore all
the senses become inert. (Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta,
Antya-līlā 1.99)



Hearing this verse from Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrīla
Haridāsa Ṭhākura began to jump, laugh and chant, “Hari
bol! Hari bol!” This is also gaura-vāṇī.



na dhanaṁ na janaṁ na sundarīṁ

kavitāṁ vā jagad-īśa kāmaye

mama janmani janmanīśvare

bhavatād bhaktir ahaitukī tvayi




O Jagadīśa, I do not desire wealth, followers such as
wife, sons, friends and relatives, nor mundane knowledge
expressed in poetic language. My only desire O Lord of
my life, is that birth after birth I may have
unmotivated devotional service unto Your lotus feet.
(Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka, verse 4)




                              12
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017

Give up all worldly sense gratifica-tion. Don’t pray for
a good wife, a good family, salvation or anything else;
only pray for causeless bhakti — service to the love
that is in the heart of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Such bhakti or
devotional service is established when the spiritual
potencies hlādinī (Kṛṣṇa’s pleasure potency) and saṁvit
(Kṛṣṇa’s knowledge potency), manifest in one’s heart on
the platform of sandhinī (Kṛṣṇa’s existence potency).

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu tells us who we are, in the next
Śikṣāṣṭaka verse:



ayi nanda-tanuja kiṅkaraṁ

patitaṁ māṁ viṣame bhavāmbudhau

kṛpayā tava pāda-paṅkaja-

sthita-dhūlī-sadṛśaṁ vicintaya



O Nanda-nandana, please be merciful upon me, Your
eternal servant, fallen in the turbulent ocean of
material existence as a result of my fruitive actions.
Please consider me as a particle of dust affixed to Your
lotus feet and accept me forever as Your bound servant.
(Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka, verse 5)



No one had ever used this language before. No one had
ever told us that we should desire to be a particle of
dust at the lotus feet of the son of Nanda Mahārāja.
[This fifth verse is elaborately explained in “Chapter 2
Special Section” on page 42—47.] In particular, no one
had ever told us:



nayanaṁ galad-aśru-dhārayā

vadanaṁ gadgada-ruddhayā girā

pulakair nicitaṁ vapuḥ kadā,

tava nāma-grahaṇe bhaviṣyati



O Lord! When will my eyes be filled with a stream of
tears? When will my voice choke up? And when will the
hairs of my body stand erect in ecstasy as I chant Your
holy name? (Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka, verse 6)




All varieties of aṣṭa-sāttvika-bhāva(eight ecstatic
symptoms) were present in Mahāprabhu’s body. With a
choked voice and bodily hairs standing on end, He

                             13
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017

prayed, “When will a day come that I can chant while
weeping, my bodily hairs standing on end and My heart
melting?”

No one had ever seen all these symptoms before Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu exhibited them. Vālmīki Ṛṣi, Dhruva
Mahārāja and Prahlāda Mahārāja experienced some ecstatic
symptoms, but not to this extent. Mahāprabhu taught this
wonderful phenomenon. He also taught us:



yugāyitaṁ nimeṣeṇa

cakṣuṣā prāvṛṣāyitam

śūnyāyitaṁ jagat sarvaṁ

govinda-viraheṇa me



O sakhī, in separation from Govinda, even a moment seems
like a millennium. Tears begin to shower from my eyes
like rain from the clouds, and this entire world seems
void. (Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka, verse 7)



There are hardly any qualified persons to realize all
the truths in this verse. That rare person who realizes
this verse will give up his body, because the material
body cannot tolerate the ecstatic emotions of pure
prema.

Śrīmān Mahāprabhu also taught:



āśliṣya vā pāda-ratāṁ pinaṣṭu mām

adarśanān marma-hatāṁ karotu vā

yathā tathā vā vidadhātu lampaṭo

mat-prāṇa-nāthas tu sa eva nāparaḥ



Let Kṛṣṇa tightly embrace this maidservant who is
attached to the service of His lotus feet, and thus make
me His very own. Or let Him break my heart by not being
present before Me. He is a debauchee and can do whatever
He likes. Even if He sports with other lovers directly
in front of Me, He is still my Prāṇanātha [the Lord of
my life]. There is no one other than Him. (Śrī
Śikṣāṣṭaka, verse 8)



The transcendental emotions revealed in this verse
cannot be found in this world; they are only found in
Goloka Vṛndāvana-dhāma. We should pray that a day will
come when we can become a maidservant of Śrīmatī Rādhikā

                           14
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017

under the guidance of the gopīs, especially Śrīmatī
Lalitā devī, Śrīmatī Viśākhā devī and Śrī Rūpa-mañjarī.
This is gaura-vāṇī.




Kept in His Books



This is the teaching of Parama-pūjyapada Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja, although, in the beginning
he had to cut so many jungles of māyāvāda
(impersonalism), nirviśeṣa (voidism) and sahajiyā
philosophies. He saw that it would take a long time to
make the land fertile for understanding, and he
therefore kept all these elevated truths in his
transcendental literatures. If any of his disciples
would become qualified to go deeply into those truths,
all this vāṇī would be found there. He wanted to more
openly preach gaura-vāṇī, but it was rare to find a
student who could go so deep. Most of his students could
not understand and properly follow him.

Gaura-vāṇī-pracāriṇe — Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa sent him for this.
You must know all this vāṇī, and be very strong in
preaching and glorifying him.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu inspired gaura-vāṇī in the
hearts of our Gosvāmīs, like Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrīla
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī and Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, who
instructed Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura and Śrīla
Śyāmānanda Prabhu. These teachings were then transmitted
to Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, Śrīla Baladeva
Vidyābhūṣaṇa, Śrīla Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja,
Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, Śrīla Prabhupāda
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, my Gurudeva Śrīla
Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, and so many
other associates of Śrīla Prabhupāda Sarasvatī Ṭhākura.
One of Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura’s hands was Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja, who travelled to Western
and Eastern countries and preached everywhere in just a
few years. We should try to know his glories.

Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura is described in
his praṇāma-mantra as gaura-vāṇīmūrti. Mūrti means
embodiment; he is the embodiment of gaura-vāṇī, and
Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja is in the same line. He is not
different from Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Thākura.
The term ‘Prabhupādanuga’ is a wrong idea. Śrīla
Prabhupāda Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja and Śrīla
Prabhupāda Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura are both
followers of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, and therefore they are
rūpānuga. Following them, we are all rūpānuga.



The Platform of Bhakti



Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has also collected gaura-vāṇī

                           15
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017

in his Daśa-mūla Śikṣā, and you should very carefully
note its meaning in your heart. He wrote that vāṇī in
Jaiva-dharma, his final and greatest book. Jaiva-dharma
is an authentic literature, and it is the essence of all
the Vedas, Upaniṣads, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta and all the books of our Gosvāmīs. Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura wrote there:



āmnāyaḥ prāha tattvaṁ harim iha

paramaṁ sarva-śaktiṁ rasābdhiṁ

tad-bhinnāṁsāṁś ca jīvān prakṛti-kavalitān

tad-vimuktāṁs ca bhāvād

bhedābheda-prakāśaṁ sakalam api hareḥ

sādhanaṁ śuddha-bhaktiṁ

sādhyaṁ tat-prītim evety upadiśati janān

gaura-candraḥ svayaṁ saḥ



1) Pramāṇa (evidence): The teachings of the Vedas
received through guru-paramparā (disciplic succession)
are known as āmnāya (meaning that which is committed to
memory). The infallible evidence of the Vedas, of the
smṛti-śāstras headed by the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, as well
as evidence such as direct sense perception that concurs
with the guidance of the Vedas, are all accepted as
pramāṇa. This pramāṇa establishes the following prameyas
(fundamental truths):

2) Parama-tattva: Śrī Hari (Śrī Nanda-nandana) alone is
the Supreme Absolute Truth.

3) Sarva-śaktimān: Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the possessor of
unlimited, multifarious potencies.

4) Akhila-rasāmṛta-sindhu: He is the ocean of nectarean
mellows.

5) Vibhinnāṁśa-tattva: Both the mukta (liberated) and
baddha (conditioned) jīvas are His eternally separated
parts and parcels.

6) Baddha-jīvas: Conditioned souls are covered by māyā.

7) Mukta-jīvas: Liberated souls are free from māyā.

8) Acintya-bhedābheda-tattva: The entire universe,
consisting of conscious, sentient jīvas and non-sentient
matter, is Śrī Hari’s acintya-bhedābheda-tattva. That is
to say, it is His manifestation which is inconceivably
both one with and different from Him.

9) Śuddha-bhakti: Pure devotional service is the only
practice (sādhana) to attain perfection.


                           16
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017

10) Kṛṣṇa-prīti: Transcendental love and affection for
Kṛṣṇa is the one and only final object of attainment
(sādhya-vastu).

The Supreme Personality of Godhead Śrī Gaurāṅgadeva has
herein instructed ten distinct tattvas (fundamental
truths) to the faithful jīvas. (Sri Dāsa Mūla Tattva,
Sloka 1)



One day you will have to know all these truths, and then
you will be able to enter the realm of bhakti, pure
devotional service. By the fruit of chanting the holy
name in elevated association, you must come to this
point. This is the platform of bhakti. If there is no
platform, there will be no bhakti. In that case, even if
you are chanting, after some time you will fall down —
even from sannyāsa.



Realizing the Mantra

[The following is an excerpt from a lecture in Badger,
California, on June 4, 2002. It contains an explanation
of the fifth verse of Śikṣāṣṭaka, as referenced in
chapter 2 page 35.]



I have explained about Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja’s glory in
other classes. What is gaura-vāṇī? It is the glories of
the gopīs.



***



I want to give the real objective of Śrīla Swāmī
Mahārāja’s preaching. Some persons without devotion are
preaching and dancing in nagar-saṅkīrtana and simul-
taneously making money and situating themselves in good
positions. A new boy, just coming to Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, can dance vigorously for twenty-four
hours, but this does not indicate spiritual advancement.
This is not such a high thing. It is the mood that is
important.

Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja was not dancing by his own will.
His dancing was fully controlled by the mood of the
gopīs, and he wanted to give that highest love and
affection. This is the main principle to understand.

This was his mission, and I also want to give this. Your
bhakti should be like a stream of the Ganges River,
always flowing. It should not stop at any place in this
world, otherwise it will become contaminated and
polluted.




                           17
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017

Oh Son of King Nanda



In the seventh stage of sadhana, called kṛṣṇa-āsakti,
the devotee’s heart melts and he weeps bitterly:



ayi nanda-tanuja kiṅkaraṁ

patitaṁ māṁ viṣame bhavāmbudhau

kṛpayā tava pāda-paṅkaja-

sthita-dhūlī-sadṛśaṁ vicintaya



O Nanda-nandana, please be merciful upon me, Your
eternal servant, fallen in the turbulent ocean of
material existence as a result of my fruitive actions.
Please consider me as a particle of dust affixed to Your
lotus feet and accept me forever as Your bound servant.
(Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka, verse 5)



Here Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is praying, “Oh Master of
My life! Oh son of Nanda! Oh son of Yaśodā-devi! Don’t
forget Me. Don’t take Me from Your lotus feet. I want to
remain there and serve You.”

The gopīs have prayed like this, for they also desire to
serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa:



tan naḥ prasīda vṛjinārdana te ‘nghri-mūlaṁ

prāptā visṛjya vasatīs tvad-upāsanāśāḥ

tvat-sundara-smita-nirīkṣaṇa-tīvra-kāma

taptātmanāṁ puruṣa-bhūṣaṇa dehi dāsyam



Therefore, O vanquisher of all distress, please show us
mercy. To approach Your lotus feet we abandoned our
families and homes, and we have no desire other than to
serve You. Our hearts are burning with intense desires
generated by Your beautiful smiling glances. O jewel
among men, please make us Your maidservants. (Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam 10.29.38)



Baladeva Prabhu also prays for service, and Nanda Bābā
prays for service when he is in a mood of separation.
Kṛṣṇa-dāsyaṁ, service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is very beautiful.

Service to Kṛṣṇa has two sides: the right side and the
left side. Kṛṣṇa’s service is on the right side, and

                            18
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017

service to Śrīmatī Rādhikā is on the left. The left side
gives a greater relish in transcendental mellows.

Ayinanda-tanuja kiṅkaraṁkṛpayā. In this stage of
sādhana, a semblance of siddha-deha sometimes manifests.
What is siddha-deha? Each jīva is part and parcel of the
Supreme Lord. Lord Kṛṣṇa’s body is beautiful, His
sidelong glances are beautiful, His relationships are
beautiful, and everything else about Him is complete and
beautiful. In the same way, even jīvas who are in a
conditioned state have very beautiful forms latent in
their constitutional positions; their spiritual bodies
are so beautiful that they can attract even Kṛṣṇa. Very
high-class moods are also present within each jīva, in a
latent, seed-like position, although they are now
covered by māyā.



Oh Daughter of King Vṛṣabhānu



Upon the manifestation of āsakti, the devotee thinks in
the ways expressed by Śrīla Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī
Ṭhākura, an intimate associate of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu. I will discuss one of Śrīla Prabodhānanda
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura’s verses, which has a very elevated
mood within it:

veṇuṁ karān nipatitaṁ skhalitaṁ śikhaṇḍaṁ

bhraśṭañca pīta-vasanaṁ vraja-rāja-sunoḥ

yasyāḥ kaṭākṣa-śara-ghāta-vimūrcchitasya

tāṁ rādhikāṁ paricarāmi kadā rasena



When will I delight in the service of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī?
When Kṛṣṇa is struck by the arrow of Her side-long
glance, He faints, His flute falls from His hands, the
peacock feathers on His head become loosened, and His
yellow scarf slips from His neck. (Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-
nidhi, verse 39)



Veṇuṁkarānnipatitaṁ: Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has
quoted this verse to explain the stage of prema called
anurāga. [See footnote 5.] Śrī Kṛṣṇa is ever fresh and
new (nitya-navīna), and in this stage He is experienced
as newer and newer at every moment. Once Śrīmatī Rādhikā
told Her sakhīs, “I’ve never seen this black person
before. Never in My whole life have I seen Him.”

Lalitā replied, “I saw you sitting in His lap just
today.”

Rādhikā then said, “Oh, I have never seen Him before.
That was another person. I’ve never seen this one.”



                           19
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017


Service to Śrī Rādhā



This is an example of the stage of love and affection
called anurāga. In Sanskrit there are many words for the
various stages of prema, whereas in English there are
only the words “love” and “affection”. The English
language uses the same words for both transcendental
prema and worldly prema. Sanskrit is not like this.
Worldly prema is actually lust, not love. Transcendental
prema begins with śraddhā, and gradually develops to
niṣṭhā, ruci and āsakti, and then to rati, prema, sneha,
māna, rāga, anurāga, bhāva, and mahābhāva. These are
different gradations of love, and they are distinct from
each other.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself desires the prema of Śrīmatī Rādhikā



aparikalita-pūrvaḥ kaś

camatkāra-kārī

sphurati mama garīyān

eṣa mādhurya-pūraḥ

ayam aham api hanta prekṣya

yaṁ lubdha-cetāḥ

sarabhasam upabhoktuṁ

kāmaye rādhikeva

Who manifests an abundance of sweetness greater than
Mine, which has never been experienced before and which
causes wonder to all? Alas, I Myself, My mind bewildered
upon seeing this beauty, impetuously desire to enjoy it
like Rādhikā. (Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta Ādi-līlā 4.146)



The verse of Śrīla Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī Ṭhākura,
beginning “veṇuṁkarānnipatitaṁ” explains Śrīmatī
Rādhikā’s mahābhāva. A devotee in the stage of āsakti
can think about this after he has heard about such
topics from great souls like Mādhavendra Purīpada,
Īśvara Purīpada, Svarūpa Dāmodara, Rāya Rāmānanda, Rūpa
Gosvāmī, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, Kṛṣṇadasa Kavirāja,
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura and also Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura, the seventh Gosvāmī. One who is in the
association of these exalted personalities can think
about this when he has attained āsakti. He cannot do so
before then.

Śrīla Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī Ṭhākura prays, “When will
the time come that I can continuously serve Śrīmatī
Kiśorīji (Rādhikā) with rasa, the natural emotion of my
spiritual form?” Here, Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī is
glorifying the highest, topmost love — the mādanākhya-

                              20
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017

bhāva of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Mādanākhya-bhāva is only in
Śrīmatī Rādhikā. It is not even in Lalitā or Viśākhā,
nor is it in Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa appeared in the form of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu to taste Rādhikā’s love — to realize
mādanākhya-bhāva.

Once Padma, the best sakhī of Candrāvalī, tried to
induce Kṛṣṇa to meet with Candrāvalī. She told Him,
“Candrāvalī is nearby. She will die if You do not meet
her. If You delay, she will surely die. Come with me at
once.” Speaking like this, she took Kṛṣṇa to
Candrāvalī’s secluded forest grove.

In the meantime, Rādhikā was waiting for Kṛṣṇa — and
waiting for death. Feeling she would very soon die
without Him, She was lamenting and crying grievously,
“Where is Kṛṣṇa? Where is Kṛṣṇa?”

Her highly intelligent and expert maidservant Rūpa-
mañjarī told Her, “Don’t lament. I will bring that
cheater immediately. He is a good person by nature, but
Padma is very tricky and crooked. She has somehow
allured Him, but I will bring Him very soon. Please
don’t lament.”

After some time, Rūpa-mañjarī arrived at Candrāvalī’s
kuñja and told Kṛṣṇa, “Oh, You are here with
Candrāvalī?! A huge demon named Keśī has come, preparing
to kill Your father and mother, all the Vrajavāsīs and
all the cows and calves — and You are here?!”

Kṛṣṇa exclaimed, “What shall I do? Oh Candrāvalī, Oh
Padma, please wait here. I will return very soon,
immediately after I have killed that demon. If I don’t
go, he will kill everyone. So wait a little; I will
return right away.” Thus, He left to meet Rādhikā.

Rādhikā had been piteously lament-ing, but somehow, by a
trick, Rūpa-mañjarī brought Śrī Kṛṣṇa to Her. She had
been lamenting until then, crying out, “When will Kṛṣṇa
come? When will Kṛṣṇa come?” As soon as He arrived,
however, She became contrary and demanded, “Where have
You been? I don’t want to talk to You!” and She turned
Her face away from Him.

This is the nature of the highest love and affection.
Rādhikā may be lamenting and weeping for Kṛṣṇa, but when
He approaches Her, She will be contrary. Then, when He
leaves, She will again lament and weep, crying out,
“Where has He gone?” This is the nature of prema.

Kṛṣṇa is also tricky. If Rādhikā and the gopīs pray to
Him in a submissive mood, He becomes contrary, and when
they are in a contrary mood He will become submissive.
This is a symptom of mahābhāva.

Kṛṣṇa is extremely beautiful, and charming, and He
stealthily engages his enchanting sidelong glances in
attracting the gopīs. He can attract all the gopīs, but
when Rādhikā looks towards Him with Her sidelong
glances, He Himself is attracted. He is struck by the
arrow of Her glance.

In this verse, Śrīla Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī Ṭhākura is

                           21
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017

expressing the supreme position of Śrīmatī Rādhikā.
Kṛṣṇa has been standing, but now He can no longer stand.
His flute falls from His hand, and His peacock feather
crown falls from His head and lands at Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s
lotus feet. His yellow cloth becomes loose and begins to
slip, and He faints.

That very Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Lord whose side-long
glances attract all the gopīs and force them to faint,
now drops His flute, His peacock feather and His chadar,
and He becomes unconscious. Śrīla Prabodhānanda
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura therefore prays, “When will I be
fortunate enough to serve Rādhikā’s lotus feet with
rasa?”

A sādhaka in the stage of āsakti can remember and
realize these pastimes to some extent, whereas even
those who are at the stage of ruci cannot do so. When
this stage of āsakti develops a little further, the
sādhaka attains the stage of rati (bhāva), and then his
full spiritual form manifests. At that stage the devotee
will always serve Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in Their aṣṭa-
kālīya-līlā (eight-fold daily pastimes), which appears
in his heart. After that he will go to Kṛṣṇa’s prakaṭa-
līlā (manifest pastimes) in Vraja, and he will very soon
become fully perfect.




Chapter 3

One Drop of Nectar


“lalita-lavaṅga-latā”

pada gāoyāñā

nṛtya kari’ bulena prabhu

nija-gaṇa lañā



prati-vṛkṣa-vallī aiche

bhramite bhramite

aśokera tale kṛṣṇe

dekhena ācambite



kṛṣṇa dekhi’ mahāprabhu

dhāñā calilā

āge dekhi’ hāsi’ kṛṣṇa

antardhāna ha-ilā


                            22
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017



āge pāilā kṛṣṇe,

tāṅre punaḥ hārāñā

bhūmete paḍilā prabhu

mūrcchita hañā




In this atmosphere, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu had His
associates sing a verse from the Gīta-govinda, beginning
with the words “Lalitā-lavaṅga-latā,” as He danced and
wandered about with them. As He thus wandered around
every tree and creeper, He came beneath an aśoka tree
and suddenly saw Lord Kṛṣṇa. He began running very
swiftly, but Kṛṣṇa smiled and disappeared. Having first
gotten Kṛṣṇa and then having lost Him again, He fell to
the ground unconscious.



-Caitanya-caritāmṛta,

Antya-līlā 19.84-87



lalita-lavaṅga-latā-pariśīlana

lalita-lavaṅga-latā-pariśīlana

komala-malaya-samīre

madhukara-nikara-karambita

kokila-kūjita-kuñja-kuṭīre

viharati harir iha sarasa-vasante

nṛtyati yuvati-janena samaṁ

sakhi virahi-janasya durante




My dear friend Rādhā, alas! Springtime is excruciating
for the forlorn and lonely-hearted. Look! The Malaya
breeze is enchanting as it arrives and impetuously
embraces the tender, charming creepers again and again.
The forest bower is permeated with the sweet kuhu sound
of the cuckoos and the drone of bees as they meander to
and fro. Moreover, Kṛṣṇa is dancing in this forest
bower. He is enjoying romantic pastimes with some
fortunate young lady while immersed in a festival of
love. (Gīta-govinda, Act 1 verse 28)



                              23
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017




ou just heard the kīrtana of Śrī Jayadeva Gosvāmī’s
Gīta-govinda, and now I will explain it.

Śrīmatī Rādhikā had determined, “I will have no further
relation with Kṛṣṇa. I will not go to meet Him.”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa was upset to hear about Her resolve, and He
therefore sent a gopī to change Her mind. That gopī told
Her: “New leaves have sprouted on all the trees. Cuckoos
are singing in the fifth note and peacocks are dancing
beautifully. All have become maddened and all are
attracted to come to Kṛṣṇa. Please come. Do you know
what will happen if You do not come at this time? So
many other gopīs want to meet with Him and please Him.
He may accept them and betray You, so don’t delay. Come,
follow me.”

Now Śrīmatī Rādhikā wondered, “What should I do? What
should I do?”

Lalitā came and instructed Her, “Don’t go. Don’t care
about Him.”

Śrīmatī Rādhikā said, “Oh Lalitā, I cannot obey you
because I am dying in separation. Whatever will happen
will happen, but I must go.”

Although She spoke like this, She did not go to meet
with Him, but continued to lament and weep. This is the
purport.

The aim of all our efforts in sādhana (devotional
practices) and bhajana (meditations) is absorbtion in
and service to this lamentation and weeping of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā. The goal of our lives is to attain the exalted
position as Her maidservant, but such attainment is very
rare in this world.

This is why I am teaching the very gradual progression
on the path of bhakti, beginning from śraddhā (initial
faith), and then coming to sādhu-saṅga (association with
pure devotees), bhajana-kriyā (engagement in devotional
practices), anartha-nivṛtti (freedom from obstacles),
niṣṭhā (steadiness), ruci (taste), āsakti (deep
attachment to Kṛṣṇa) and then bhāva (spiritual ecstasy).
In the stage of bhāva, the transcendental mood of bhakti
— the essence of saṁvit and hlādinī mixing on the
platform of sandhinī — will come into your heart. When
it comes, if you are not distracted by Candrāvalī or
others’ service, you may approach the lotus feet of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā and serve Her.

Those who have no taste in hearing topics of the sweet
pastimes of Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa are bound to
fall down. They will never be able to control their
senses. Śrīla Bhaktivedanta Swāmī Mahārāja wanted all
his disciples to develop a transcendental greed for
hearing these pastimes, otherwise they would be bound to
fall down. Since his departure, thousands have fallen.
So try to develop your Kṛṣṇa consciousness.


                           24
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017



His Real Mission



Perhaps you know the glories of Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja, my
śikṣā-guru.

Just like other ācāryas in our guru-paramparā, he was
ordered by his spiritual master to preach the mission of
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu in the line of Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī. That is why the words gaura-vāṇī-pracāriṇe are
in his praṇāma-mantra.

Nirviśeṣa-śūnyavādi also appears in it, because he cut
the jungles of Māyāvāda (impersonalism) and śūnyavāda
(Buddhism, voidism). Māyāvāda and Buddhist philosophies
are prevalent throughout the world, whereas true
devotees are very rare.

In the guise of devotees, the Māyāvādīs, śūnyavādīs and
sakhībhekī (materialistic devotees who think they can
enjoy spiritual conjugal love with this gross body) are
everywhere.

Gaura-vāṇī especially refers to that which Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu spoke with His lotus mouth. For example, He
taught all spiritual truths to Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī in
Prayāga. There he told him, “Bhakti-rasa, the
transcendental mellow of pure devotional service, is
endless and boundless; it is deeper than an ocean. I am
giving you only one drop, but this drop is so powerful
that it will drown the entire world.” Mahāprabhu taught
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī about the five primary relationships
(neutrality, servitude, friendship, parental affection
and conjugal love), as well as all other topics in
relation to bhakti-rasa.

He also inspired gaura-vāṇī in the heart of Śrī Rāya
Rāmānanda. He asked questions to Rāya Rāmānanda, and He
also inspired the answers in Rāya Rāmānanda’s heart.
Both these examples are gaura-vāṇī, the highest love and
affection of Vraja, Vṛndāvana, and ultimately Śrīmatī
Rādhikā’s love. This is the pinnacle of His teaching.

Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja came to preach this mission
everywhere, but it was rare to find a real follower. At
the end of his manifest stay in this world he told me,
“I have collected so many disciples. By the movement of
nāma-saṅkīrtana there was a revolution, but all in all
I’m not seeing the fruit of what?I wanted to give. Can
you help?”

I told him, “I don’t know all the truths of pure bhakti,
but if you, my Gurudeva, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī inspire those truths in me, then I
can preach as you desire.”

I have thus come here to remind you of his real mission.
As a bosom friend, I want to tell you that service to
Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the aim and object of our lives. Try
to understand this. If you have a very small particle of
eagerness for this ultimate devotion, you will never

                           25
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017

deviate and your life will be successful. Try to remove
all your unwanted desires, and understand gaura-vāṇī.




Chapter 4

His Master: Gaura-vāṇī Personified


“Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who is known as Gaurāṅga, is
the ocean of all conclusive knowledge in devotional
service. He empowered Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya, who may be
likened to a cloud of devotional service. This cloud was
filled with the water of all the conclusive purports of
devotional service and was empowered by the ocean to
spread this water over the ocean of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu Himself. Thus the ocean of Caitanya
Mahāprabhu became filled with the jewels of the
knowledge of pure devotional service.” (Śrī Caitanya
Caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 8.1)




“...Regarding your question about my Guru Maharaja, I
never told anyone that He was one of the eight sakhis. I
do not know how you got this news. According to Vaisnava
principles, nobody should think or imagine somebody as
Krishna, Radharani, or Their associates. Everyone should
aspire to follow the footprints of such associates. If
somebody thinks that somebody is Radha or Krishna, that
is not sanctioned by the Vaisnava philosophy. So far as
I know, my Guru Maharaja’s position was one of the
assistants of the manjaris...”




Srīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura gave us two jewels. First, he
identified the sacred birthplace of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu and thus manifested Gaura-dhāma. Before him,
no one knew where Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu had taken
birth, or where Śrīdhāma Māyāpura was actually located.
Second, he gave the jewel of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, who preached throughout the world the
glories of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Śrī Nityānanda
Prabhu, the rūpānuga disciplic line and Śrī Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa.

After the disappearance of Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa,
pure bhakti was somewhat covered until the appearance of
Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura and Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Gosvāmī. The sahajiyās’ ideas were spread
throughout Śrī Vraja-dhāma and Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma, and
because of their influence there were very few real
Vaiṣṇavas (devotees).

The sahajiyās were degraded in character, and they
committed the most sinful acts in the name of Śrī

                           26
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                         5/5/2017

Caitanya Mahāprabhu and His philosophy. Their conception
of parakīya (transcendental paramour love) and vaiṣṇava-
dharma (Vaiṣṇava religion) was living with another man’s
widow, singing, dancing, smoking cigarettes and drinking
wine. As a result of their influence, none of the
learned and aristocratic people wanted to hear the words
“Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas,” what to speak of follow them. They
hated Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas.

My Gurudeva counted eleven sahajiyā groups, like gaura-
nāgarī, sakhī-bekhī, aul and bāula. Their main function
was widow bhajana, and they maintained their lives by
performing professional kīrtanas during funeral
processions. After following a dead body and singing,
they would receive a donation from the relatives of the
deceased. True vaiṣṇava-dharma is completely pure, but
all aristocratic persons began to hate it because of the
behavior of the sahajiyās.

At that time, Śrīla Prabhupāda Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Ṭhākura appeared in Śrī Jagannātha Purī-dhāma as the son
of Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. He was born with many
symptoms of a great spiritual personality, such as
natural tilaka marks on his body and the impression on
his neck of kānti-mālā (neck beads made from the sacred
tulasī plant).

When he was five years old, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
personally gave him harināma initiation and the mantras
to worship Lord Kūrma-deva, and he began to learn many
things. He was always with Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura,
carrying his Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi,
Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta and other books on his head as
he accompanied him to various places to preach or give
class. From the beginning of his life, he had very good
saṁskāras (impressions on the heart).

These were his human-like pastimes, because actually he
is eternally situated in service to Śrīmatī Rādhikā and
is very near and dear to Her. In his praṇāma-mantra, he
is referred to as śrī vārṣabhānavī-devī dayitāya.
Vārṣabhānavī-devī is one of the names for Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, and dayitāya means near and dear. He is also
addressed as kṛṣṇa-preṣṭhāya. Kṛṣṇa has so much love and
affection for the mañjarīs, the maidservants of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, so Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Prabhupāda is also
near and dear to Him.

His praṇāma-mantra addresses him as gaura-vāṇī śrī-
mūrtaye, the embodiment or personification of gaura-
vāṇī, just as Śrīla Bhaktivedanta Swāmī Mahārāja is
gaura-vāṇī pracāriṇe. We must contemplate deeply to
uncover the inner meaning of this. Gaura-vāṇī refers to
that which Lord Gaura (Śacīnandana Gaurahari) preached,
and what He inspired in the heart of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī
— the glorification of the mood of the gopīs and Śrīmatī
Rādhikā.

Śrī Gauracandra told His   associates, “Oh Nityānanda, Oh
Haridāsa Prabhu! Go from   door to door and preach: bolo
kṛṣṇa, bhaja kṛṣṇa, karo   kṛṣṇa. Chant the names of
Kṛṣṇa, worship Kṛṣṇa and   serve Kṛṣṇa.” This is gaura-
vāṇī.


                             27
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017

Gaura-vāṇī is also what Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
discussed with Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda and Śrī Svarūpa
Dāmodara in the Gambhīrā, especially His hidden
revelation of the meaning of the first and last two
verses of Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka. Gaura-vāṇī is also the love
and affection explained by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī in Śrī
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, Śrī
Vidagdha-mādhava and Śrī Lalita-mādhava.

If He Had Not Come



Our entire disciplic succession descended to this world
from Goloka Vṛndāvana, and Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura is one of the most prominent ācāryas.
If he had not come, Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s mission would
have turned into sahajiyaism, wherein all philosophy is
asat-sampradāya (outside any bona fide disciplic
succession).

If one is not serving his Gurudeva, if he does not have
strong belief in him and is not following his line of
thought, such a person is a sahajiyā. This is taking
place nowadays. Because the actual message of our
paramparā is being preached, such persons are somewhat
stopped. But I do not know what will happen after I
leave this world. A very dangerous stage is coming.

Many devotees left their Guru, Śrīla Bhaktivedanta Swāmī
Mahārāja, and went to Rādhā-kuṇḍa. They wanted to
remember aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā, the pastimes which Lord Kṛṣṇa
performs with His associates in the eight periods of the
day and night — not as gopīs, but “goopis” — and for
this offense they have gone to hell. They became
“bābājīs,” keeping two, three or four widows, and they
began to relish their so-called “parakīya-bhajana.” They
wanted to jump over the authorized process; they did not
want to practice bhakti-yoga, the path of spiritual
realization through devotional service. They wanted to
be gopīs by paying two pennies to any bogus person who
would ‘give’ them siddha-deha (one’s perfected spiritual
identity) and tell them, “You are such and such gopī.”
Such cheaters give a name and other information about
that so-called gopī, and after some time their disciples
imagine themselves absorbed in Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s
most confidential pastimes in the kuñjas (secluded
forest groves). Do not go in that direction.

Some persons of ill-character, who were rejected from
the Gauḍīya Maṭha, also go to Rādhā-kuṇḍa to become
bābājīs in that asat-sampradāya. Such unqualified
persons of loose-character imagine them-selves absorbed
in meditating on the aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa
in Their midnight and end-of-the-night pastimes. At
those times Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa meet alone in a kuñja, half
naked and kissing each other. What will that ‘meditator’
think Material ideas will come to him. He is bound to
see such pastimes as material, and this is wrong. The
pastimes of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa are transcendental. Only
saintly persons like Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī who was a
brahmacārī (a celibate, unmarried student) from his
birth, Nārada Muni who is a liberated soul, or Lord
Śaṅkara who is an ideal personality, can properly think

                           28
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017

of aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā.

Offer obeisance to such pastimes and try to practice
bhakti-yoga as our predecessor ācāryas have taught us.
Begin from the root of the tree, become qualified to
climb, and then gradually reach the top. At that time
you can relish the fruits of the tree. Otherwise, you
will have nothing but false ideas. Try to follow Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, our Gurudeva Śrīla
Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, and Śrīla
Bhaktivedanta Swāmī Mahārāja.




A.C. Bhaktivedanta Swami



[Letter to Hamsaduta ,16 January, 1969]




“The Vidagdha-mādhava is a drama of Lord Kṛṣṇa’s
pastimes in Vṛndāvana. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī finished this
book in the year 1454 Śakābda (A.D. 1532).” (Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 1.41, purport)

“This work named Vidagdha-mādhava depicts the
characteristic pastimes of Lord Kṛṣṇa with decorations
of poetic ornaments. And the inner grounds of the forest
of Vṛndāvana provide a suitable platform for the dancing
of Kṛṣṇa with the gopīs.” (Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta,
Antya-līlā 1.138)




Chapter 5

Śrī Gaura's Gift




prema-rasa-niryāsa karite āsvādana

rāga-mārga bhakti loke karite pracāraṇa

rasika-śekhara kṛṣṇa parama-karuṇa

ei dui hetu haite icchāra udgama



The Lord’s desire to appear was born from two reasons:
He wanted to taste the sweet essence of the mellows of
love of God, and He wanted to propagate devotional
service in the world on the platform of spontaneous
attraction. Thus He is known as supremely jubilant and

                           29
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017

as the most merciful of all.



-Caitanya-caritāmṛta,

Ādi-līlā 4 15-16




anarpita-carīṁ cirāt

karuṇayāvatīrṇaḥ kalau

samarpayitum unnatojjvala-rasāṁ

sva-bhakti-śriyam

hariḥ puraṭa-sundara-dyuti

kadamba-sandīpitaḥ

sadā hṛdaya-kandare

sphuratu vaḥ śacī-nandanaḥ




May that Lord who is known as the son of Śrīmatī
Śacīdevī be transcendentally situated in the innermost
chambers of your heart. Resplendent with the radiance of
molten gold, He has appeared in the Age of Kali by His
causeless mercy to bestow what no incarnation ever
offered before: the most sublime and radiant spiritual
knowledge of the mellow taste of His service. (Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā 1.4)




rī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has come to give unnatojjvala-
rasāṁsva-bhakti-śriyam. There is a special emphasis on
the final words, sva-bhakti-śriyam. Sva means own. Whose
own? Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s own. Rādhikā is the
personification of bhakti.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa wanted to taste the essence of supreme
devotion to Himself, which is Rādhikā’s love. He also
wanted to distribute sva-bhakti-śriyam to the qualified
living entities. Bhakti refers to Rādhikā’s bhakti, and
śrīyam means beauty. As Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Kṛṣṇa
wanted to give to the fortunate living entities the
beauty of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s unnatojjvala-rasa. That
“beauty” is called mañjarī-bhāva, the mood of Her dear
maidservants.

Imagine a creeper surrounding a tree on which there are
delicious golden-reddish mangos, and cuckoos eating
these mangos and singing sweetly. On that creeper there

                             30
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017

are so many green leaves, flowers here and there, and
mañjarīs. If the air touches and plays with the creeper,
all the leaves become happy and begin to dance, and the
mañjarīs also dance with happiness.

This is the beauty of the creeper. If that creeper has
no leaves, no flowers and no mañjarīs, it has no beauty.
The air will not play with its branches, for it will
have no taste to play. The splendor of the creeper
manifests when it plays with the air, its leaves going
here and there and always dancing.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu wanted to give the beauty of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s unnatojjvala-rasa. The creeper
represents Śrīmatī Rādhikā and the beauty of Her love is
Her sakhīs. With the assistance of these sakhīs, She can
manifest more attractiveness and express more varieties
of bhāva.



The Beauty of Rādhā’s Love



In this connection there are four kinds of sakhīs:
svapakṣa, vipakṣa, taṭasthā and suhṛdā. The
svapakṣagopīs are those who are on the side of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, and they are Her intimate sakhīs. Candrāvalī
and all of her sakhīs are vipakṣa, opposed to Rādhikā.
Of course, the opposition in Vṛndāvana is not like that
of the material world. In Vṛndāvana the feelings of
opposition, as well as all other sentiments, are
varieties of transcendental love. Other sakhīs are in
the middle; they are neutral to Rādhikā and are thus
called taṭasthā.

Sakhīs who are friendly to Śrīmatī Rādhikā are called
suhṛdā. They are neither svapakṣa (on Śrī Rādhā’s side),
vipakṣa (opposed) nor taṭasthā (neutral). They are
friendly with Rādhikā and neutral towards Candrāvalī and
other vipakṣa-sakhīs. Conversely, the sakhīs who are
neutral to Śrīmatī Rādhikā are friendly to Candrāvalī.

Among the svapakṣa-sakhīs of Rādhikā there are five
divisions: sakhī, nitya-sakhī, prāṇa-sakhī, priya-sakhī
and priya-narmā-sakhī. The first division (the sakhīs)
although always serving both Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, have some
inclination towards Kṛṣṇa. Although this inclination is
present, they are not taṭasthā, suhṛdā nor vipakṣa. They
are svapakṣa, Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s intimate sakhīs.

Those svapakṣagopīs who are inclined towards Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, like Lalitā, Viśākhā and Citrā, are very near
and dear to Her. They are called priya-sakhīs and priya-
narmā-sakhīs (also called parama-preṣṭha-sakhīs).

The nitya-sakhīs and prāṇa-sakhīs are the mañjarīs. The
sole inclination of these sakhīs is towards Rādhikā.
Their conception is that without Rādhikā they cannot
live; Rādhikā is their life and soul. Among them the
prāṇa-sakhīs, like Rūpa-mañjarī and Rati-mañjari, are
prominent. The mañjarīs always serve Śrīmatī Rādhikā. If
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is defeated by Śrīmatī Rādhikā at various

                             31
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017

sports and games, they are very glad and begin clapping.
However, if Śrī Kṛṣṇa defeats Śrīmatī Rādhikā, they feel
defeated and make a sad face. Lalitā may laugh and
enjoy, but they will be sad.

These nitya- and prāṇa-sakhīs are always with Rādhikā.
Lalitā, Viśākhā and other similar sakhīs will not enter
the kuñja where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are performing certain
confidential pastimes, but the mañjarīs have the freedom
to enter at any time. They have a free pass to serve
there. Sakhīs such as Lalitā and Viśākhā will hesitate,
but those like Rūpa-mañjarī will not; they can render
any service at any time.

When Kṛṣṇa meets with Śrīmatī Rādhikā, the mañjarīs
taste whatever Rādhikā tastes, even if they are far
away. Thus, they have no need at all to meet Śrī Kṛṣṇa
separately. These mañjarīs are the beauty of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā’s love.



Power of Saṅkīrtana



Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu came especially to give the mood
of the mañjarīs, and living beings can never expect more
than this. They cannot be like Lalitā, Viśākhā and
others like them. But do not think this is a small
thing.

This is called unnatojjvala-rasa tat-tad-bhāvecchātmikā.
This means that such gopīs do not want to directly meet
or serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa; rather, they become happy seeing the
bliss of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

Through harināma-saṅkīrtana, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
personally tasted the unnatojjvala-rasa of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā and He distributed the mood of service to
Śrīmatī Rādhika. One who possesses the mood of a mañjarī
can taste the beauty and sweetness of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s flute
song and every one of His other features. If a person
does not have this kind of prema, he cannot do so.

Before Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu came to this world,
sakhya-rasa (the mood of friendship), dāsya-rasa (the
servitor mood) and vātsalya-rasa (the parental mood) had
been somewhat given by Madhvācārya, Rāmānuja and other
ācāryas. However, the śriyam (beauty) referred to in
unnatojjvala-rasāṁsva-bhakti-śriyam had not been given
for a long time — not since the previous day of Brahmā,
when Caitanya Mahāprabhu had previously come. This is
the highest benediction.

If anyone has some spiritual greed or even a little
taste for this, by reading ŚrīCaitanya-caritāmṛta and by
hearing these subjects from the pure devotee, he will
surrender everything at the lotus feet of his pure
dīkṣā-guru and śikṣā-guru and try to collect this
nectar.




                           32
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017

kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasa-bhāvitā matiḥ

krīyatāṁ yadi kuto ‘pi labhyate

tatra laulyam api mūlyam ekalaṁ

janma-koṭi-sukṛtair na labhyate



Pure devotional service in Kṛṣṇa conscious-ness cannot
be had even by pious activity in hundreds and thousands
of lives. It can be attained only by paying one price —
that is, intense greed to obtain it. If it is available
somewhere, one must purchase it without delay. (Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 8.70)




Chapter 6

The School of Rūpa Gosvāmī




“In another verse, Rūpa Gosvāmī says, kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasa-
bhāvitā matiḥ krīyatāṁ yadi kuto ‘pi labhyate. I have
translated the words Kṛṣṇa consciousness from kṛṣṇa-
bhakti-rasa-bhavita. So here Rūpa Gosvāmī advises, ‘If
Kṛṣṇa consciousness is available, please purchase it
immediately. Don’t delay.’ It is a very nice thing.”
(Journey of Self-Discovery, Chapter 2)



“Kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasa-bhāvitā matiḥ. Matiḥ means
intelligence or status of mind, that ‘I’ll serve Kṛṣṇa.’
“ (General lecture. Seattle, Washington, October 4,
1968)




rūpa-raghunātha-pade haibe ākuti

kabe hāma bujhaba se yugala-pirīti



‘When I am eager to understand the literature given by
the Gosvāmīs, then I shall be able to understand the
transcendental loving affairs of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.’ Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu appeared in order to bestow upon
human society the benediction of the science of Kṛṣṇa.
The most exalted of all the activities of Lord Kṛṣṇa are
His pastimes of conjugal love with the gopīs. Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu appeared in the mood of Śrīmatī
Rādhārāṇī, the best of the gopīs. Therefore, to
understand the mission of Lord Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
and follow in His footsteps, one must very seriously

                             33
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017

follow in the footsteps of the Six Gosvāmīs — Śrī Rūpa,
Sanātana, Bhaṭṭa Raghunātha, Śrī Jīva, Gopāla Bhaṭṭa and
Dāsa Raghunātha.”



óThe Nectar of Instruction, Preface




Caitanya Mahāprabhu is Lord Kṛṣṇa Himself. He can
therefore distribute vraja-prema (the love and affection
that lives in the hearts of the residents of Vraja) and
especially transcendental parakīya-rasa (paramour love).
As previously mentioned, the love He distributed is
called unnatojjvala-rasa. Unnata means highest, ujjvala
means brilliantly shining, and rasa means the mellow
taste of a specific relationship with Kṛṣṇa. Thus,
Mahāprabhu distributed service in the most sublime and
radiant mellow of conjugal love.

The brilliance of unnatojjvala-rasa is unparalleled, and
all of our ācāryas in the Gauḍīya samprādaya (the
disciplic succession that follows the teachings of Śrī
Caitanya

Mahāprabhu) have come to this world to teach it. They
did not come to taste the three things that Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu came to taste, but to distribute this same
rasa He came to distribute.

The distribution of unnatojjvala-rasa is one of the main
reasons for His advent, but not the foremost reason. The
first internal reason was to taste Śrī Rādhā’s mood, and
to distribute the mood of Śrī Rādhā’s maidservant was
the second. He wanted to distribute to the living beings
that prema which is rare even for even Lord Brahmā, Lord
Śaṅkara and Śrī Nārada Muni.

This mission could only be executed by the power of Lord
Kṛṣṇa in the form of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and all our
ācāryas have come to spread this mission. They have not
come only to preach the chanting of the holy name, for
this can also be done by the associates of Mahā-Viṣṇu.
Try to understand this point. The expansions or
manifestations of Mahā-Viṣṇu, such as Advaita Ācārya,
can preach and distribute the holy name, but they cannot
preach vraja-prema through nāma-saṅkīrtana without the
association of Caitanya Mahāprabhu. There is a vast
difference between the nāma-saṅkīrtana of this Kali-yuga
and that of other Kali-yugas. This is a speciality of
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, His followers and His
associates.

Incarnations of Mahā-Viṣṇu and His associates, such as
the four Kumāras, Viṣvaksena and others, can perform and
establish nāma-saṅkīrtana and yuga-dharma. But that
nāma-saṅkīrtana will not give vraja-prema. The nāma-
saṅkīrtana of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and His associates
has a special power to give this, and therefore the
expansions of Mahā-Viṣṇu descend with Mahāprabhu as His
associates.

                           34
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017




Tasting and Distributing



Unnatojjvala-rasa is of two kinds. The first is called
sambhogātmikā, which means direct enjoyment with Śrī
Kṛṣṇa in an amorous relationship. This is the love
Mahāprabhu tasted; it cannot be given. Sambhogātmikā is
the mood of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, Lalitā, Viśākhā, the other
principal gopīs and all gopīs like them. Tat-tad-
bhāvecchātmikā, enjoyment with Lord Kṛṣṇa that is
experienced vicariously by assisting Śrī Rādhā, is the
other kind. This is the love He distributed.

Śrīmatī Rādhikā has five kinds of sakhīs: sakhī, nitya-
sakhī, prāṇa-sakhī, priya-sakhī and priya-narmā-sakhī.
The first group is known simply as sakhīs. Gopīs in this
group love and serve Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa, but
they are slightly more inclined to please Kṛṣṇa.
Dhaniṣṭhā is an example of a sakhī.

The nitya-sakhīs and prāṇa-sakhīs are mañjarīs. Only
these two categories of sakhīs are tat-tad-
bhavecchātmikā. They serve both Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa,
but with a tendency to favor Śrīmatī Rādhikā and render
service to Her. They remain with Her, do everything to
please Her and obey only Her. If Śrī Kṛṣṇa calls them,
they will not obey. The prāṇa-sakhīs are the natural
leaders of the nitya-sakhīs, because they are more
intimately connected with Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Śrī Rūpa-
mañjarī and Śrī Rati-mañjarī are examples of prāṇa-
sakhīs.

Among the gopīs, the priya-sakhīs and the priya-narmā-
sakhīs are most dear to Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. Both types
serve Yugāla-kiśora, the divine youthful couple, but
with a slight tendency to favor Śrīmatī Rādhikā. They do
not lean solely towards Rādhikā as the mañjarīs do.
Lalitā and Viśākhā are examples of priya-narmā-sakhīs.
These sakhīs have so much power that they can sometimes
chastise Rādhikā and at other times Kṛṣṇa.

The difference between the nitya- and prāṇa-sakhīs
(mañjarīs) and the priya- and priya-narmā-sakhīs is that
the mañjarīs do everything for Śrīmatī Rādhikā and do
nothing for their personal relationship with Lord Kṛṣṇa.
They have no desire to taste any personal pleasure.

This is the type of unnatojjvala-rasa that Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu came to distribute. This is a very elevated
topic, and I am speaking about it for only a few rare
persons.



Goal and Practice



Why am I speaking about this subject and this verse? The
reason is that in order to perform sādhana, we must

                           35
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017

first be clear about our objective. For example, if you
want money, you may have to serve the government, get a
job or do business. If you don’t do business, you might
beg or steal; if you are not expert in stealing, you
might join a gang and forcefully attack with weapons.

An example of attacking by force in order to achieve
one’s desired object is found in the pastimes of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa Himself. He forcefully attacked Bhīṣmaka’s
kingdom, where hundreds of thousands of kings and their
soldiers waited to protect Princess Rukmiṇī from Him.
Like a lion entering a group of jackals, He took Rukmiṇī
on His chariot and swiftly rode to Dvārakā, where He
married her.

If someone has a goal, he will achieve it by hook or by
crook. We can take the example of a dog who stands
outside a sweet shop. He drools with greed as he watches
people eating sweets like rasagullā and rasamalai. He
knows his goal and is single-pointed in his efforts to
achieve that. He will not enter the shop, which the
owner guards with a stick, but he will run to lick the
leaf cups that have been thrown away. While he is
licking the cups, he will try to guard them from any
other dog.

Similarly, our objective in spiritual life should first
be fixed, and then we can decide how to achieve it. The
practice is called sādhana, and the goal is called
sādhya. Without the sādhya, one cannot determine the
sādhana. It is for this reason that Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa
Kavirāja presents the sādhya in the first verse after
the maṅgalācaraṇa (auspicious invocation) of
ŚrīCaitanya-caritāmṛta:



anarpita-carīṁ cirāt

karuṇayāvatīrṇaḥ kalau

samarpayitum unnatojjvala

rasāṁ sva-bhakti-śriyam

hariḥ puraṭa-sundara-dyuti

kadamba-sandīpitaḥ

sadā hṛdaya-kandare

sphuratu vaḥ śacī-nandanaḥ



May that Lord who is known as the son of Śrīmatī
Śacīdevī be transcendentally situated in the innermost
chambers of your heart. Resplendent with the radiance of
molten gold, He has appeared in the Age of Kali by His
causeless mercy to bestow what no incarnation ever
offered before: the most sublime and radiant spiritual
knowledge of the mellow taste of His service.
(ŚrīCaitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā 1.4)


                             36
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017



If your objective is to attain what Caitanya Mahāprabhu
came to give —

vraja-prema and unnatojjvala-bhāva — then come with me
to the school of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. Read all the
Gosvāmī’s literature and learn how to develop trans-
cendental greed for this. There are no rules and
regulations regarding the attainment of this spiritual
greed. It can come by associating with and hearing from
a bona fide Vaiṣṇava; it will not come by śāstric
(scriptural) arguments alone.

A very ugly, deformed, poor person may see a beautiful
princess. He may have some intense desire to make her
his wife, although this would be impossible. For that
greed or yearning, no wealth or other qualification is
required. It cannot be regulated.

Spiritual greed is acquired by hearing about the beauty
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the affection of the gopīs for Him, as
described by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
reveals how Śrī Kṛṣṇa is controlled by the gopīs.

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī describes how Kṛṣṇa places His head
at the lotus feet of Rādhikā and begs Her: “Please give
Me Your mercy.” By hearing from a pure devotee about the
topics contained in ŚrīCaitanya-caritāmṛta and the books
of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, spiritual greed may come —
whether one is qualified for it or not.

When that spiritual greed comes, one becomes qualified
to choose his means of achieving the goal, and that
means is called sādhana. He immediately achieves ruci
(the stage of relish) and gallops towards his goal.



The Way of Love



Those who practice sādhana-bhajana of Lord Kṛṣṇa out of
fear of going to hell are performing what is called
vaidhī-bhakti. Rāgānuga-bhakti is spontaneous loving
devotional service. Rāgānuga-bhakti-pravṛtti is the
stage of practicing sādhana-bhajana when the spiritual
greed to enter rāgānuga-bhakti has arisen in the heart.
Devotees in rāgānuga-pravṛtti have not reached the stage
of bhāva (the first sprout of pure love of God) but they
are developing some transcendental greed and will
eventually become qualified to practice rāgānuga-bhakti.
The word pravṛtti means “about to enter.” Such devotees
are not practicing rāgānuga yet, but they are
approaching it.

The practice of rāgānuga-bhakti enables one to become
one of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s rāgātmikā associates — Hi’s friends
and relatives in Goloka-Vṛndāvana.?Those who have rāga
(deep attachment for the object of one’s affection) are
rāgātmikā, associates of the Lord in His abode. Those
who are just reaching the stage of bhāva are rāgānuga.


                           37
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                         5/5/2017

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu especially came to give this
transcendental greed. For those who already have this
greed, He came to give bhāva; for those who have bhāva,
He came to give unnatojjvala prema — not in the category
of sambhogātmikā, Rādhā’s mood, but in the category of
tat-tad-bhāvecchātmikā, the mañjarīs’ mood. Try to
understand this topic. After ten or twenty years, or in
a future life, by being in the association of elevated
Vaiṣṇavas, you will realize something of this.

Those who have spiritual greed for rāgānuga-bhakti will
think like this: “I want the mood of rāgānuga. I am not
a rāgānuga-vaiṣṇava, but I pray that in some future
life, even in thousands of lives from now, I may receive
the mercy of a rāgānuga-vaiṣṇava. I pray that some day
this will come; I want nothing other than this. I don’t
mind dying. I’d rather die than drink water from any
ghāṭa (bathing place) other than Keśī-ghāṭa or Mānasi-
gaṅgā-ghāṭa. I will only go to a ghāṭa where the gopīs —
the tat-tad-bhāvecchātmikā-gopīs — are serving Śrī Śrī
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.”

The verse beginning “anarpita-carīṁcirāt” is from the
maṅgalācaraṇa of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s book, Vidagdha-
Mādhava. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu inspired Rūpa Gosvāmī
in Prayāga: “You should fulfill My wishes. You should
explain why I have come. Explain what I have come to
give and what I have come to practice Myself — the
unnatojjvala-parakīya-bhāva of the gopīs.”

You should know that this   mood is unparalleled even in
Goloka Vṛndāvana, what to   speak of this world. This
prema is the nitya-dharma   (eternal nature) of all living
entities — not just those   in human bodies.




Chapter 7

Rūpānuga and Rāgānuga




pālya-dāsī kori lalitā sundarī

āmāre loiyā kabe




śrī rādhikā-pade kāle milāibe

ajñā-sevā samarpibe (1)




When will beautiful Śrīmatī Lalitā-devī foster me as her
own novice maidservant? Hopefully, she will train and

                             38
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017

eventually offer me unto the lotus feet of Śrīmatī
Rādhārani, placing me entirely at Her disposal for
rendering various services according to Her own merciful
orders.



śrī rūpa manjarī saṅge jābo kabe

rasa-sevā-śikṣā-tare




tad-anugā ho’ye, rādhā-kuṇḍa taṭe

rohibo harṣitāntare (2)




When will Śrī Rūpa-mañjarī take me to the banks of Śrī
Rādhā-kuṇḍa, to give me lessons in the performance of
service to the transcendental mellows? She will take me
there and make me practice by following her instructions
and movements. Thus I will pass my time feeling the
greatest delight within my heart.



śrī viśākhā-pade, saṅgīta śikhibo,

kṛṣṇa-līlā rasamoy




śrī rati mañjarī, śrī rasa mañjarī,

hoibe sabe sadoy (3)




At the lotus feet of Śrī Viśākhā I will learn to play
music and sing songs which are full of the
transcendental mellows of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. All the
other sakhīs in our group, including Śrī Rati Mañjarī
and Śrī Rasa Mañjarī, will also welcome me into their
fold with the most kind and affectionate dealings.



parama ānande, sakale miliyā

rādhikā caraṇe rabo




                           39
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                         5/5/2017


ei parākāṣṭa, siddhi kabe habe,

pābo rādhā-padāsaba (4)




All of us will thus stay together, feeling the greatest
supreme bliss, and we will perpetually remain at the
lotus feet of Śrī Rādhikā. When, oh when will I achieve
this highest excellence of spiritual perfection, whereby
I will attain the intoxicating honey flowing from the
lotus feet of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī?



Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s Gīta-māla, Song 4




There is a difference between rūpānuga and rāgānuga.
Those who are eternally liberated associates serving
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana are called rāgātmikā. They
are described by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindhu and ŚrīUjjvala-nīlamaṇi. In this world, those who
want to serve like rāgātmikās are called rāgānuga,
because they are following the path of rāga, or loving
attachment. Rāgānuga devotees have transcendental greed
for vraja-bhakti and are truly following the process to
attain it.

Rūpānuga-bhaktas are only those who follow the same
manner and mood in which Śrī Rūpa-mañjarī serves Rādhā
and Kṛṣṇa. Although Śrī Rūpa-mañjarī serves both Rādhā
and Kṛṣṇa, she is more inclined towards Śrīmatī Rādhikā
— happy in the happiness of Śrīmatī Rādhikā and
suffering like Her when She suffers. Internally, in
their constitutional forms, the rūpānuga-bhaktas serve
in the same mood as Śrī Rūpa-mañjarī, and externally
they practice the same devotional activities as Rūpa
Gosvāmī.

Not all rāgānuga devotees are rūpānuga. Śrī Jayadeva
Gosvāmī is rāgānuga but not rūpānuga. Śrī Bilvamaṅgala
Ṭhākura is also truly rāgānuga, but not rūpānuga. Śrī
Svarūpa Dāmodara and Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda are not
rūpānuga. Although they are intimate associates of Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī, they are not his followers. In Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
pastimes they are Lalitā devī and Viśākhā devī
respectively. They are in a different category of Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa’s eternal associates. They are in a higher rank
than the mañjarīs, so they are not rūpānuga.

Lalitā, Viśākhā and Mother Yaśodā are neither rāgānuga
nor rūpānuga. They are not anugā at all. Anugā means
follower. In this connection, anugā refers to one who
practices bhakti by following in the footsteps of
Kṛṣṇa’s eternal associates. Lalitā, Viśākhā and Mother
Yaśodā are already eternal associates, and therefore
they are rāgātmikā.

                           40
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017


Those who want to serve like rāgātmikās are called
sādhakas (practitioners) of rāgānuga. If one follows
this path, inwardly meditating, “How can I serve Lord
Kṛṣṇa like Mother Yaśodā or Nanda Bābā?” he is rāgānuga,
not rūpānuga. Those who follow Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu under the guidance of the sakhās,
like Subala, Śrīdāmā and all others like them, desiring
to serve Lord Kṛṣṇa like them, will also not be called
rūpānuga. They will be called rāgānuga.

Parama-pūjyāpada Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja has
come especially to give this rūpānuga-bhakti, and what
to speak of vaidhī-bhakti. He did not come only to give
rāgānuga-bhakti. At that time, however, he could not
give this to his general disciples because most of them
were not at the stage to understand. Even now, although
I am endeavoring with great effort to make you
understand this subject matter, only a few are trying to
understand.

When Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja went to America approximately
twenty-five years ago, he could not openly preach this
topic because there was practically no one qualified to
understand it. The basic foundations of spiritual life
needed to be established, and therefore he was mostly
engaged in ‘cutting the jungles’ of philosophical
misconceptions. But he wanted to give this.

It cannot be true that he has only come to preach
vaidhī-bhakti, because the entire disciplic succession
of our Gauḍīya mission is rūpānuga. Śrīla Nimbāditya
Ācārya’s sampradāya is also rāgānuga, but of Dvārakā. It
is mixed with a conception of the Lord’s opulence,
following the moods of Satyabhāmā and Rukmiṇī, and
therefore it is not pure rāgānuga. Nimbāditya Ācārya’s
followers are not like those of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. Only
the ācāryas coming in the line of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu through Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī are rūpānuga.

So how is it possible that Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja could
have come only to give vaidhī-bhakti? I have known Śrīla
Swāmī Mahārāja since 1946, and I never saw him in that
way. I know personally that he has not come only to give
vaidhī-bhakti. He came to preach rūpānuga-bhakti.



The Simple Truth



One special quality I saw in him was that he was very
simple, and always smiling. Other preachers from India
had gone to Western countries before him. They were very
intelligent and knew all philosophical truths, but they
were not so simple that they could mingle with everyone,
including children. I saw how Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja used
to play with little children, and he was so jolly. He
had no false ego. He always used simple words, and his
method of giving Kṛṣṇa consciousness was like that of
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

When Mahāprabhu was traveling to Vṛndāvana He chanted,

                           41
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017

“Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa.” Or, He chanted:



kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa

kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa he!

kṛṣṇa keśava kṛṣṇa keśava

kṛṣṇa keśava pāhi mām!

rāma rāghava rāma rāghava

rāma rāghava rakṣa mām!



He continually wept, and it appeared as though the
Ganges and Yamunā Rivers were flowing from His eyes. He
was not thinking about where He was going. He was simply
weeping and calling out, “Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa.” By
His influence, all the elephants, tigers, lions and
bears of the forest also began to chant “Hare Kṛṣṇa.”
What philosophy did they know? They were without
philosophy.

Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja went to the West and began to
chant:



śrī kṛṣṇa caitanya

prabhu nityānanda

śrī-advaita gadādhara

śrīvāsādi-gaura-bhakta-vṛnda

hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa

kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare

hare rāma hare rāma

rāma rāma hare hare



At first he did not try to explain many deep
philosophical topics. He spoke very simply and told his
audiences, “Chant Kṛṣṇa’s name.” He began from there. He
loved everyone, whether they were qualified or not, and
those who met him became his.

This is one speciality of a qualified Guru: all his
disciples will think, “My Gurudeva loves me more than
anyone.” Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja was like this. I think
that all his disciples used to consider, “My Gurudeva
loves me most.” He would laugh and be jolly with anyone.
His disciples and even children automatically loved him.
In big assemblies and meetings he very simply taught the
truths of Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

                            42
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017


When I went to the Western countries I followed in his
footsteps. I did not discuss very complex Vedānta
philosophy. I only gave simple hari-kathā (narrations of
the holy names, forms, qualities and pastimes of the
Lord), and by his mercy and the mercy of my Gurudeva, so
many were charmed.

Previous to his coming to the West, big scholars of the
Gauḍīya Mission went to England and Europe, but
practically speaking they were not able to make any
disciples. On the other hand, we see that by Śrīla Swāmī
Mahārāja’s simplicity, by his very simple philosophical
presentations, by preaching the holy name and by loving
all, he was so successful. Of course, the deepest
philosophy was in that. Love is the deepest, most
supreme philosophy.



Naturally Awoken



Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja came to give what is already within
each soul:



nitya-siddha kṛṣṇa-prema

‘sādhya’ kabhu naya

śravaṇādi-śuddha-citte

karaye udaya



Pure love for Kṛṣṇa is eternally established in the
hearts of living entities. It is not something to be
gained from another source. When the heart is purified
by hearing and chanting, the living entity naturally
awakens. (Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛtaMadhya-līlā 22.107)



We are all eternal servants of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The soul is
perfect in itself. Its relation with Kṛṣṇa, its
particular name, qualities and specialities are already
present within it. This perfection is not brought from
outside; rather, it is within each soul in a dormant
state. Unfortunately māyā, the Lord’s deluding potency,
covers the soul. Śrī Guru removes that māyā, and the
soul’s perfect, true, constitutional form, qualities,
services and so on manifest automatically.

It is not that pure prema comes from outside and is
brought by our efforts or sādhana. What already exists
in the soul will come out — no new thing will come. No
type of association or sādhana can change what is
already there. What is in your soul will manifest by
hearing and chanting, and remembering Lord Kṛṣṇa.
Whatever rasa is in the soul will gradually emerge as

                           43
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017

our anarthas (the obstacles of unwanted desires,
activities and habits) disappear. If one has mādhurya-
rasa (conjugal love) in his soul, only that will come,
and this cannot be changed by any means. If one is in
dāsya-rasa, then dāsya-rasa will manifest. If someone is
in mādhurya-rasa, he will have only a little taste for
dāsya- or sakhya-rasa.

It is sometimes misunderstood that Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja
was only in sakhya-rasa and therefore could not give
mādhurya-rasa. This is not a fact. He came only to
spread the same mission in the world that was brought by
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. The fact that he taught the mission
of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī through his translations and
purports demonstrates that he understood it and could
give it.

He did not come only to give vaidhī-bhakti. We will have
to practice vaidhī-bhakti at first, and by this effort
Bhakti-devī will facilitate and manage our further
development. Bhakti is not an impersonal quality; she is
a person.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is controlled by prema-bhakti. In fact, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, Śrīmatī Rādhikā and all Their associates are
controlled by her. Bhakti can make Rādhā dance, Kṛṣṇa
dance, and the gopīs dance. She makes everyone in the
spiritual realm dance, and she herself dances.



His Sannyāsa Ceremony

[The following excerpt is from a discourse given at Śrī
Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha in Mathurā on September 27, 1996,
celebrating the anniversary

of Śrīla Prabhupāda’s taking sannyāsa.]



Sannyāsa is taken in order to attain the service of Śrī
Mukunda. It is not an ordinary thing. The sannyāsamantra
is the mantra of the very sacred gopī-bhāva. By uttering
this mantra we are able to give our entire body, mind,
soul and everything we possess to Lord Kṛṣṇa — to serve
Him. Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja dedicated himself to his
sannyāsa-guru, nitya-līlāpraviṣṭaoṁviṣṇupādaaṣṭottara-
śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja.
They were god-brothers and very bosom friends.

[This is an excerpt from a talk at the Bhaktivedānta
Manor in England on May 17, 1996.]



The day was Viśvarūpa-mahotsava [in September, 1959],
and many senior Vaiṣṇavas and disciples of Śrīla
Prabhupāda Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura were
present at Śrī Keśavaji Gauḍīya Maṭha. At that time my
Gurudeva gave Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja the sannyāsa-mantra.
Uttering this mantra is not merely a formality. It is
chanted to attain the service of the gopīs — to enter
into the mood of the gopīs. He was really a rūpānuga-

                           44
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017

vaiṣṇava.



His Rūpānuga Sannyāsa-guru

[ This is an excerpt from a discourse on Śrīla
Prabhupāda’s Nectar of Instruction (his translation and
commentary of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s Śrī Upadeśāmṛta) ]



Who is rūpānuga? Those who are actually following the
mood of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. All our ācāryas are
rūpānuga; they are not only rāgānuga. This is a very,
very important point.

Our Gurudeva, Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī
Mahārāja, has composed Sri Rādhā-Vindodāṣṭakam. The
first śloka is:



rādhā-cintā-niveśena

yasya kāntir vilopitā

śrī kṛṣṇa-caraṇaṁ vande

rādhāliṇgita-vigraham

I worship the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa when, due to being
thoroughly immersed in separation from Śrīmatī Rādhikā
(who is displaying māna, Her jealous anger), His own
dark complexion vanishes and He assumes Her bright,
golden luster. (Śrī Rādhā Vinoda-Bihārī Tattvāṣṭakam,
verse 1)



You should hear the meaning, other-wise you will miss
this rare opportunity.

Sometimes Śrīmatī Rādhikā becomes so absorbed in
feelings of separation, weeping so bitterly, that She
faints. Srila Rūpa Gosvāmī does not want this, and
neither do our Gurudeva nor any of our ācāryas. What
will they want? Rādhā-cintā-niveśenayasya
kāntirvilopitā. They consider, “Kṛṣṇa should weep in
separation from Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Kṛṣṇa should weep. Our
Śrīmatī Rādhikā is so soft, and Her feet are so soft.
She should not walk here and there to search for Kṛṣṇa.
Kṛṣṇa should search for Her, because He is a cowherd boy
and His feet are very hard. He should walk far and wide
in search for Her.”

When Srīmatī Rādhikā disappeared from the rāsa dance,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa searched throughout the forests for Her. He
could not find Her, so He was continuously searching and
weeping. At last He sat down at Imlī-tālā in Vṛndāvana,
near Yamunā and Seva-kuñja. He was bitterly weeping, and
absorbed in thinking, “Oh, where can I find Śrīmatī
Rādhikā? Where can I find Rādhikā? She has left Me here.
Where has She gone?” Drowned in these thoughts, Kṛṣṇa

                             45
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017

lost His black complexion and at once became golden. He
was still Kṛṣṇa, but He became golden like Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, and His mood was changed into Hers. At that
time He began to cry bitterly, “Oh Kṛṣṇa, where are You?
Oh Kṛṣṇa, where are You?”

Do you understand this? He was not calling “Oh Rādhika,
Oh Rādhika,” in Kṛṣṇa’s mood. Rather, Rādhika’s color
and mood came in Him and He began to call, “Kṛṣṇa,
Kṛṣṇa, where are You?”

In all our Gurudeva’s temples and preaching centers, he
established the Deities, Śrī Rādha Vinoda-bihārī — with
this mood: rādhā-cintā-niveśenayasya kāntirvilopitā.
Kṛṣṇa’s color and mood became covered with Rādhikā’s.
That is Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

Rādhāliṇgita-vigraham. I pray to that very form of
Kṛṣṇa, who has been embraced by Rādhikā with all Her
limbs. Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s body has been completely covered by
all the limbs and parts of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s body. In
this way, rādhāliṇgita-vigraha is Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu.

This is rūpānuga: “Kṛṣṇa should weep; Kṛṣṇa should
search for Rādhikā. Why should our sweet, innocent, very
simple Śrīmatī Rādhikā go here and there, in mountains,
across rivers and through thorny areas? Why should She
go? Kṛṣṇa should go everywhere in search of Her.”

All rūpānuga ācāryas think like this, and they have come
only to bestow their mercy upon us so that we may enter
their mood.

Śrīla Bhaktivedanta Swāmī Maharaja spent much time
cutting the jungles of atheism and impersonalism, but he
did not come only for this. We can see from his Nectar
of Instruction, his broadcasting of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s
teachings, that he is giving all these truths. Patiently
hear about this, and then you will be able to understand
the mood of this special rūpānuga-vaiṣṇava ācārya, Śrīla
Bhaktivedanta Swāmī Maharaja.




Chapter 8

Truly Rūpānuga




“Our only desire should be to take birth under the care
of a Vaiṣṇava. Fortunately we had the opportunity to be
born of a Vaiṣṇava father who took care of us very
nicely. He prayed to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī that in the
future we would become a servant of the eternal consort
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Thus, somehow or other we are now engaged
in that service.”




                           46
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017

- Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta,

Antya-līlā 1.24, purport



Strong faith in the self-realized Guru, and in the
entire guru-paramparā, is the backbone of bhakti. If you
do not have such strong faith, your life is
unsuccessful.

That strong faith brings you to akhaṇḍa-guru-tattva (the
embodiment of the complete principle of guru), Śrī
Baladeva Prabhu. You will ultimately see that Gurudeva
is the manifestation of Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu or Śrī
Baladeva Prabhu. If you pray for something from your
Guru, Nityānanda Prabhu and akhaṇḍa-guru-tattva Baladeva
Prabhu will at once arrange everything. This is because
Gurudeva is not separate from Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu.

You should not think that Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī
Prabhupāda has discovered something new, and that we are
‘Prabhupādānugas’. Some think, “Just as there are
rūpānuga-vaiṣṇavas, so we are Prabhupādānuga.” This
conception is completely ignorant. All our ācāryas have
told us to follow the rūpānuga-vaiṣṇavas.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu inspired within the heart of
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī the essence of all spiritual truths:
knowledge of the Vedas, Upaniṣads and all other
scriptures. Then, by the Lord’s mercy, Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī knew Mahāprabhu’s heart:



śrī-caitanya-mano-’bhīṣṭaṁ

sthāpitaṁ yena bhū-tale

svayaṁ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaṁ

dadāti sva-padāntikam



When will Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhupāda, who has
established within this material world the mission to
fulfill the desire of Lord Caitanya, give me shelter
under his lotus feet? (Śrī Prema-bhakti-candrikā 1.38)



By the mercy of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī manifested many books, such as ŚrīBhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu, ŚrīUjjvala-nīlamaṇi and ŚrīUpadeśāmṛta.
He explained everything about vraja-bhakti in ŚrīBhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu and ŚrīUjjvala-nīlamaṇi, and he wrote
the latter especially to give gopī-prema.

He explained in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu that bhakti can
be experienced in five moods and five kinds of services:
śānta, dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya and mādhurya. Among them,
three are prominent: sakhya, vātsalya and mādhurya. The
mood of the Vrajavāsīs, the residents of Vraja, is

                             47
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017

vraja-bhakti; the mood of the gopīs is mādhurya-rasa in
vraja-bhakti; and the mood of Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the
pinnacle of vraja-bhakti.

Those who follow the path of rāgānuga in any rasa other
than mañjarī-bhāva in mādhurya-rasa are not rūpānuga.
Those following the path of sakhya- and vātsalya-rasa
are rāgānuga, but they are not rūpānuga. Those who
follow in the personal mood of Śrī Rūpa-mañjarī and
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī are actually rūpānuga.

What is the mood of Rūpa-mañjarī? She is a dāsī,
maidservant, of Kṛṣṇa and Rādhikā, but with an
inclination towards Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Actually, she is a
dāsī of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and in this way she serves
Kṛṣṇa also. If Śrīmatī Rādhikā is happy, then Kṛṣṇa will
automatically be happy. If Kṛṣṇa has been neglecting
someone but that person has taken shelter of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, then Kṛṣṇa is bound to accept him.



yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādo

yasyāprasādān na gatiḥ kuto ‘pi

dhyāyaṁ stuvaṁs tasya yaśas tri-sandhyaṁ

vande guroḥ śrī-caraṇāravindam



Only by the mercy of Śrī Gurudeva can one receive the
mercy of Kṛṣṇa; without his grace the living entities
cannot make any advancement, nor can they be delivered.
Meditating three times a day on the glories of Śrī
Gurudeva and reciting stava-stuti, I offer prayers unto
his lotus feet. (Śrī Gurvaṣṭakam, verse 8)



Suppose you have made a mistake and committed an offense
at the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, or you have neglected
Him, but at the same time you have taken shelter at the
lotus feet of your qualified Guru. In that case Kṛṣṇa
may forgive you. Śrī Guru will tell Kṛṣṇa, “You must
forgive him. You are bound to forgive him, because I
have accepted him.”

On the other hand, if Kṛṣṇa is about to accept that
person, but Guru is neglecting him and is upset, then
Kṛṣṇa will also neglect him.

In the same way, even if Kṛṣṇa has neglected someone, if
that person takes shelter of the lotus feet of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, Kṛṣṇa is bound to give him special mercy.



rādhikā-dāsī yadi haya abhimāna

sigrai milai taba gokula-kāna



                           48
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017


If you develop pride in being Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s
exclusive maidservant, then very quickly you will meet
Gokula Kāna. (Śrī Rādhā Bhajana Mahimā 5)




Chapter 9

Cherished Service


pādābjayos tava vinā vara-dāsyam eva

nānyat kadāpi samaye kila devī yāce

sākhyāya te mama namo ‘stu namo ‘stu nityaṁ

dāsyāya te mama raso ‘stu raso ‘stu satyam




O most beautifully resplendant Goddess! I shall never
ask you for anything other than the service of your
lotus feet. Again and again I offer my obeisances, from
a distance, to the desire of becoming your sakhī. But
what I truly desire is to continuously relish the sweet
nectar of your service as a maidservant.




-Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī

(Vilāpa-kusumāñjali, verse 16)




At the time of his divine departure from this world,
Parama-pūjyāpada Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja
ordered me, “You should serve me by performing my
samādhi ceremony.” He knew the meaning and significance
of entering samādhi, as well as the proper procedures to
be performed at that time.

Samādhi is a Sanskrit word consisting of the two
syllables, samādhi. Sama means “the same” and dhi means
“intelligence.” When the pure devotee takes samādhi, it
means that upon departing from this world he enters the
same level, position and spiritual mood as the personal
associates of his worshipful Deity. He is serving in
that realm according to his own svarūpa (constitutional
form), with equal qualities, intelligence and beauty as
those associates. Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja’s worshipful
Deity is Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and he serves Her under the
guidance of Her personal associates, the mañjarīs.


                           49
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017

Your Śrīla Prabhupāda has preached about Lord
Jagannātha-deva, Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma and various
manifestations of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. But from his
writings, books and personal meetings and visits, I am
absolutely sure that his worshipful Deity is Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, and he sees Śrī Kṛṣṇa as Her Beloved.

The Complete Conception



At the time of Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja’s entering samādhi,
his desire was to assist Śrīmatī Rādhikā in that very
place where She renders Her services to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. He
was one with the mood of Her maidservants, and he
requested my service at that time.

The leader of the mañjarīs, Śrī Rūpa-mañjarī, serves
Śrīmatī Rādhikā when Rādhikā wants to meet with Kṛṣṇa.
In the dark of night she dresses Rādhikā in black
clothes, and ties Her ankle-bells in such a way that
they will not make any sound. At the time of dressing
Rādhikā, she may decorate Her with a necklace, with the
Syamantaka jewel as its centerpiece. At that time she
may say, “This jewel is the friend of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
Kaustubha jewel.” In this way, Rādhikā is reminded of
Her pastimes with Lord Kṛṣṇa and bestows all Her mercy
upon Śrī Rūpa-mañjarī, who always gives so much uddīpana
(inspiration) to Her bhāva.

If one has the mood to assist in his Guru’s service to
Śrī Rūpa-mañjarī or Śrīmatī Rādhikā, he renders the best
service. I do not know why Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja gave me
the mercy of giving him uddīpana as he entered samādhi.
I performed this service by decorating him with tilaka
and by writing certain sacred mantras with sandlewood
paste on his chest. These decorations indicated his
personal services to his worshipful Deity, Śrīmatī
Rādhikā.

Just before his departure from this world, he requested
me to sing Śrī Rūpa-mañjarī-pada:



śrī rūpa-mañjarī-pada, sei mora sampada,

sei mora bhajana-pūjana



The lotus feet of Śrī Rūpa-mañjarī are my dearmost
treasure. They are the topmost object of my worship and
inner devotional practices. (Śrī Rūpa-mañjarī-pada 1)



sei mora prāṇa-dhana, sei mora ābharaṇa,

sei mora jīvanera jīvana



Her lotus feet are my most cherished wealth, more dear

                           50
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017

than my own life. They are the exquisite ornament of my
life, and indeed, the very essence of my existence. (Śrī
Rūpa-mañjarī-pada 2)



This is the best saṅkīrtana of Śrī Rūpa-mañjarī, who can
lead us to Rādhikā’s service. While I sang this bhajana,
I saw that Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja’s face was sometimes
colored with one transcendental mood and sometimes with
another. I requested my brahmacārī, Śeṣaśāyī prabhu, to
sing with me as I personally performed this kīrtana for
him — just as I did for my Gurudeva at the time of his
entering samādhi. There were many similarities between
my dīkṣā-guru, Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī
Mahārāja, and Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja. I did
what Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja ordered me to do for him, and
I feel so fortunate that he gave me this service.?

Also just before his departure, he ordered me: “You
should advise and help my disciples, all GBC (Governing
Body Commision) devotees, and all devotees connected
with me.”

I did not think I could help them at that time, for I
considered them higher in rank than myself. I thought,
“They have so much guru-niṣṭhā, faith in the lotus feet
of their Gurudeva. They are far more advanced than I am.
They know the conclusive truths of the Kṛṣṇa
Consciousness philosophy better than I. How can I help
them?” But my śikṣā-guru gave some inspiration in my
heart.

By Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja’s inspiration I came to know
that many disciples were misunderstanding his real
identity. They were guessing that his constitutional
form is that of a cowherd friend of Kṛṣṇa. When I heard
this, I experienced so much pain in my heart for them —
they did not have accurate knowledge or feelings about
him. I realized that it is my duty to give them faith in
the complete conception of him, that he is in mādhurya-
rasa. Sakhya-rasa is included within mādhurya-rasa, so
sakhya-bhāva is also within him.



How Deep is the Mountain



There are two ways to see our Gurudeva, and in this
connection an analogy can be given of the Himalayan
Mountains. The height of the Himalayas is one thing and
its depth is another. We can somewhat see its height,
but we cannot see what is hidden deep within the ground.
We saw that Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja collected a large
number of disciples throughout the world in practically
no time; we saw all varieties of his height. He loved
everyone, and everyone felt, “He loves me so much.” We
also saw this in our Guru Mahārāja.

However, we cannot know how deep Śrī Guru is. Śrīla
Swāmī Mahārāja used to sing ŚrīGurvaṣṭakam with a
profound mood and tears in his eyes — in samādhi. He did

                           51
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017

not see who was looking at him and who was not, who was
taking part and who was not. He was simply absorbed in
singing and playing his karatālas.

The first four verses of ŚrīGurvaṣṭakam contain very
high subject matter that we can realize and see. But at
present we cannot realize the next two verses:



śrī-rādhikā-mādhavayor apāra-

mādhurya-līlā-guṇa-rūpa-nāmnām

prati-kṣaṇāsvādana-lolupasya

vande guroḥ śrī caraṇāravindam



At every moment Śrī Gurudeva is experiencing intense
greed in his heart to taste the unlimited sweetness of
the holy names, forms, qualities, and pastimes of Śrī
Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava in Vṛndāvana. I offer my prayers unto
the lotus feet of Śrī Gurudeva. (ŚrīGurvaṣṭakam, verse
5)



nikuñja-yūno rati-keli-siddhyai

yā yālibhir yuktir apekṣanīyā

tatrāti-dākṣyād ati-vallabhasya

vande guroḥ śrī caraṇāravindam



Śrī Gurudeva is always present with the sakhīs, planning
the arrangements for the perfection of Yugala-kiśora’s
amorous pastimes (rati-keli) within the kuñjas of
Vṛndāvana. Because he is so expert in making these
tasteful arrangements for Their pleasure, he is very
dear to Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. I offer my prayers unto the
lotus feet of Śrī Gurudeva. (ŚrīGurvaṣṭakam, verse 6)



Only one who is equal to his self-realized Guru can
understand his depth. A kaniṣṭha-adhikārī (novice
devotee) and a madhyama-adhikārī (intermediate devotee)
cannot guess how deep his feelings are. They cannot
begin to imagine the fathomless moods of kṛṣṇa-prema and
rādhā-prema in their Guru’s heart. Without being an
uttama-adhikārī, a topmost pure devotee, one cannot
understand.

Kaniṣṭha- and madhyama-adhikārī devotees can see his
height, his aiśvarya (opulence), the way in which he
collected disciples and very quickly preached all over
the world. But it is more valuable to see his depth. He
has not collected disciples just so we can experience
his height. He ultimately brought us to him with the

                           52
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017

sole aim of giving us his deep thoughts. Of course this
will take time; it could take many births to realize
this. When I look towards him and remember his orders, I
become moved, knowing that he is engaged in nikuñja-
yūnorati-keli-siddhyai. The main reason he came was to
give this very same service.He came to obey the orders
of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Nityānanda Prabhu and Śrī
Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, but he had to spend a great deal of
time laying the groundwork for this.

His Gurudeva was in a similar situation. Śrīla
Prabhupāda Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura has said,
“I came to give some valuable conceptions in rāgānuga-
bhāva, but I could not do so in the way I desired. Most
of my life was spent in sweeping and cutting jungles.”

This type of preaching is essential. Without preaching
vaidhī-bhakti the main thing cannot be given, because
vaidhī-bhakti is a prerequisite for further advancement.
Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura also used to say that when the
Māyāvāda philosophy is present, there can be no
preaching of bhakti. We will therefore have to cut the
jungles of atheism, Māyāvāda, sahajiyāism and other non-
Vedic philosophies. We will have to spend time defeating
their arguments.??

Now I think that by obeying Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja’s
orders, I have been fortunate to play a small role in
this deeper mission. If I can inspire rāgānuga-bhakti in
the hearts of devotees, I will see that I have fulfilled
the orders he gave me. This is the best service I can
render to his lotus feet.

When you are situated in rāgānuga-bhakti, you will be
able to factually see his relationship with Śrī Śrī
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in gopī-bhāva. Then you can deeply think
of his services to the Divine Couple in nikuñja-
yūnorati-keli-siddhyai.

He used to sing daily:



(jaya) rādhā-mādhava (jaya) kuñja-bihārī

gopī-jana-vallabha (jaya) giri-vara-dhārī

yaśodā-nandana, braja-jana-rañjana

yamunā-tīra-vanacārī (Jaya Rādhā-Mādhava)



All glories to Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava! All glories to Kuñja-
Bihārī, who is the gopīs’ dearmost beloved. He lifted
Govardhana Hill and is the darling son of Yaśodā Maiyā.
He wanders in the forests along the banks of the Yamunā,
where He enjoys with the many different gopīs in their
own groves.



Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja has so much transcendental greed to
serve Kuñja-Bihārī. A cowherd boy does not have these

                           53
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017

sentiments and exalted conceptions. The reference to
gopī-jana-vallabha in this song is also in our gopāla-
mantra, and it filled his heart. He desired to give the
service of gopī-jana-vallabha as performed by the gopīs.

He saw that there were only a few in this world who were
qualified for this; the number could be counted on one’s
fingers. Thus, in order to gradually bring his audiences
to a level of understanding, he preached about Lord
Jagannātha-deva and established Deities of Śrī Sītā-Rāma
and Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarāma. ?

The gopīs also spoke about Rāma-Kṛṣṇa in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, but they were not referring to Balarāma.
Balarāma is sometimes called Rāma, but the gopīs were
indicating Ramanīyā-Kṛṣṇa, that is, Śrī Kṛṣṇa the
enjoyer of Śrī Rādhā. The gopīs’ Rāma is Kṛṣṇa.
Qualified devotees, who have actually received the mercy
of their Gurudeva, will understand this.

The best service I can render to his lotus feet is to
give even an atom of the feelings of these exalted
conceptions to his disciples and followers.




“Without the help of the gopīs, one cannot enter into
these pastimes. Only one who worships the Lord in the
ecstasy of the gopīs, following in their footsteps, can
engage in the service of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in the
bushes of Vṛndāvana. Only then can one understand the
conjugal love between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. There is no other
procedure for understanding.” (Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta,
Madhya-līlā 8.204-205)



“The means for returning home, for going back to
Godhead, is devotional service, but everyone has a
different taste in the Lord’s service. One may be
inclined to serve the Lord in servitude (dāsya-rasa),
fraternity (sakhya-rasa) or parental love (vātsalya-
rasa), but none of these can enable one to enter into
the service of the Lord in conjugal love. To attain such
service, one has to follow in the footsteps of the gopīs
in the ecstasy of sakhī-bhāva. Then only can one
understand the transcendental mellow of conjugal love.”
(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 8.204-205,
purport)




Table of Contents

Chapter 1 Over the Ocean

Chapter 2 The Meaning of His Praṇama-Mantra

Chapter 3 One Drop of Nectar


                           54
Gaura-vani_Pracarine.txt                       5/5/2017

Chapter 4 His Master: Gaura-vāṇī Personified

Chapter 5 Śrī Gaura's Gift

Chapter 6 The School of Rūpa Gosvāmī

Chapter 7 Rūpānuga and Rāgānuga

Chapter 8 Truly Rūpānuga

Chapter 9 Cherished Service




                              55
