Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

Śrī Gīta-govinda



Jayadeva Gosvāmī

GVP (2011)



Rating:    ★★★★★




* * *




* * *




with commentary by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja




Śrī Gīta-govinda



Foreword

Introduction



Act One

Song 1

Song 2

Song 3

Song 4



Act Two

Song 5

Song 6



Act Three

                           1
Gita-govinda.txt       5/5/2017


Song 7



Act Four

Song 8

Song 9



Act Five

Song 10

Song 11



Act Six

Song 12



Act Seven

Song 13

Song 14

Song 15

Song 16



Act Eight

Song 17



Act Nine

Song 18



Act Ten

Song 19



Act Eleven

Song 20

Song 21

Song 22

                   2
Gita-govinda.txt                                   5/5/2017




Act Twelve

Song 23

Song 24




Foreword


A few words from Prabhupāda

Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura

On Śrī Gīta-govinda

The following discourse was delivered in 1932 on the eve
of the

446th commemoration of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s
appearance.



Śrī Jayadeva Gosvāmī, the court poet of the Sena
dynasty, has welcomed the appearance of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu in the auspicious invocation of Śrī Gīta-
govinda (1.1).

“O Rādhā, all directions are covered by dense and
ominous clouds. The forest floor has been cast into
darkness by the shadows of blackish tamāla trees. Kṛṣṇa
is naturally timid. He cannot be alone at night, so take
him home with you.” Śrī Rādhā turned her face towards
the bower of desire trees beside the forest path and,
bewildered by intense joy, she honoured the words of her
friend. When she arrived on the bank of the Yamunā
river, she initiated her love-play in a secret place.
May the sweetness of this confidential pastime of the
Divine Couple be victorious by manifesting in the hearts
of the devotees.



Śrī Pūjārī Gosvāmī’s commentary on the above verse does
not disclose the picture in its entirety. Here, Śrī
Jayadeva Gosvāmī has also revealed Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu to the hearts of highly advanced devotees.
The poet hints at the appearance of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in
one chamber of the great Yogapīṭha of Śrīdhāma Māyāpura;
and simultaneously, at the appearance of the combination
of their bodies as the independent form of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu.

The path to the spiritual sky had become thoroughly
obscured by the dense clouds of various dark ideologies.
Due to their obfuscation, the pleasant beauty of the
trees of Vṛndāvana appeared gloomy to the people of this

                              3
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

world.

When Kṛṣṇa appeared during the night (towards the end)
of Dvāpara-yuga, he said, mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja –
“Unconditionally surrender to me,” and ahaṁ hi sarva-
yajñānāṁ bhoktā ca prabhur eva ca – “I alone am the
enjoyer and master of all sacrifices.” Those of demonic
intelligence thought that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead Śrī Kṛṣṇa had spoken out of egoism and pride.
Thus the darkness and intoxication of atheism became
dominant, deviating the multitude of souls from the path
of spiritual welfare.

No one will care to listen to his words in the current
age if he appears again as Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Being.
Therefore, it is essential for him to appear combined in
one form with Śrī Rādhā in order to mitigate the
contempt of the public and overcome his own timidity.
Realizing this, Śrī Jayadeva Gosvāmī says, gṛhaṁ
prāpaya, “O Kṛṣṇa, combine with Rādhā and proceed to
nanda-gṛha, the home of Śrī Jagannātha Miśra at the
great Yogapīṭha in Śrīdhāma Māyāpura.”

Another name of Nanda is Vasudeva. In the Fourth Canto
of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is stated, sattvaṁ viśuddhaṁ
vasudeva-śabditam – “The pure consciousness in which
Kṛṣṇa is revealed is called vasudeva.” Although this is
a consideration from the perspective of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
divine majesty, still Śrī Kṛṣṇa only appears in pure
consciousness (viśuddha-sattva), even in his human-like
pastimes.

Let the celebrations on the eve of the appearance of the
combined form of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa be accomplished by
means of saṅkīrtana, the congregational chanting of the
holy names. Let all other conceptions be reduced to
ashes in the fire of saṅkīrtana. May the consciousness
of all living beings become fuel in the fire of love for
Kṛṣṇa, his holy names and his divine abode.

The Ganges has achieved oneness with the Yamunā river by
the influence of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s appearance
upon her banks. May the secret amorous pastimes of Rādhā
and Kṛṣṇa combined – the saṅkīrtana-rāsa – be
victorious!

On Eroticism — Sacred & Profane

Adapted from Śrī Caitanya’s Teachings, Chapter XIV

The sexual principle is a misunderstood symbol of
Reality. It can no more be banished from our
consciousness than consciousness itself. The male and
female forms are also not the sole and distinctive
possessions of this world. There is Reality behind them
as well. The soul has a body which is symbolized by the
female form and which is absolutely free from any
unwholesome material association.

The ascetic’s repugnance to the female form prevents an
unprejudiced examination of the female sex that is a
necessary factor of our conception of amorous love. This
amorous love is the highest subject of human poetry and
the most powerful factor in all human activities. Its

                           4
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

worthlessness is not established by refusing to
recognize it as a part of our nature. It would be much
more to the purpose to try to understand what it really
is. The Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the only book that answers
this all-important question.

The worship of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa is held by some modern
thinkers to be dangerous, and even immoral. They
apparently take exception to the erotic element, which
is the prominent aspect of the highest worship of Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu teaches us that it is obligatory
for everyone to pay homage to spiritual amour that
characterizes the highest service of the Divine Person.
This is the central topic of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, which
deals with the transcendental service of the Personal
Absolute.

Spiritual amour is the highest service to Divinity in
his most complete manifestation. The real Nature of
Divine Personality can never be fully understood by
those who are unable to appreciate the pre-eminent
excellence of his service by amorous love.

The conception of personality that is available to us in
this world necessarily refers to the gross human
physique combined with convention-ridden human
mentality. These two are the definite contents of the
conception. The functions of such personality can have
meaning only if they supply the needs of body and mind.

Man is connected with the entities of this world for the
satisfaction of the needs of his body and mind by five
varieties of relationship. These five modes exhaust all
possible forms of such relationship. A person may stand
in the relationship of impartiality to other human
beings; however, the emotional forms of relationship may
be said to begin with the relationship of the servant
towards his master. This is characterized by the
sentiment of distant respect for the master. The
relationship of friendship is closer than that of
servitude. Parenthood is still more intimate.
Consorthood, as of the wife or mistress to her husband
or lover, is the most intimate and comprehensive form of
relationship possible with another entity. The chain of
relationships is completed by the reciprocal
relationships of master to servant, friend to friend,
child to parents, husband or lover to wife or
sweetheart.

There is no reason not to believe that the five forms of
relationship are also inseparable concomitants of the
personality of the Absolute Being. However, they are
free from the fetters of the gross physical body and
materialistic mind.

Consorthood, as of the wife or mistress of this world,
is not eligible by itself to set the tune for other
relationships. Mundane consorthood is compelled to
shrink, at least outwardly, into the strictly private
and personal corner of the affairs of this world. It is
not welcomed for influencing other activities in an
explicit manner. It can act openly only within the

                           5
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

limits of extreme privacy.

Consorthood is nevertheless recognized as imparting its
deepest charm to life in a world in which it would not
be worth living devoid of this relationship. Everyone in
this world is however compelled to repress, more or
less, the working of this admittedly deepest principle
of his individual nature, on account of the opposition
of the uncongenial environment in the shape of the
defective organs, through which it has to be exercised.
But this cannot condemn the principle itself that is the
ruling force of life. It operates with no less
predominance, but with less weight of responsibility, by
being driven underground by the blind opposition of an
unsympathetic environment and gross sense organs.

Should we deliberately deny ourselves the benefit of the
guidance of well-considered opinion in this most vital
and important affair of life? All the great religions
scrupulously avoid and forbid any examination of this
all-important subject. The worship of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa is
the only exception to this rule.

The worship of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa has been subject to much
easily avoidable misunderstanding, bred by sheer
ignorance and easily welcomed prejudices. The
personality of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Eternal Divine Lover of
Śrī Rādhikā, is the premier spiritual male of the Realm
of Vraja, which is the Eternal Abode of the Divine Pair
as depicted in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. This is thought to be
an unworthy conception of the Absolute Personality, and
even as the survival and historical myth of a national
hero in the times of promiscuous sexuality and primitive
barbarism.

Hostility to the Divinity of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is entertained on
the ground that morality should constitute the kernel
and pervading principle of religion. We should not,
however, forget that this advertised morality is at best
only a regulative and restrictive principle. We are so
much wedded to the indispensable nature of this moral
regulation that it requires no small effort of the
imagination to admit that moral intervention would be
uncalled for and harmful but for the actually defective
nature of our present environment and sense organs. It
would be irrational to do away with moral regulation as
long as we are compelled to remain in our present
defective condition. But there must surely be a plane
that is free from all defects, being the natural and
eternal sphere of the activities of our unadulterated
spiritual nature. The plane of Divinity is superior to
that of our conditioned souls. There is no need for any
form of restrictive morality in the spiritual world,
where the soul is not subject to the limiting operation
of his present material and mental adjuncts.

The moral principle presupposes the existence of a
strong and spontaneous tendency for evil as being innate
to human nature. The good in this world is in a state of
perpetual conflict with dominating evil. Moral
regulation thus becomes the indispensable and permanent
outward expression of the suppressed good life.

On further analysis however, we discover that moral

                             6
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

judgement can take its stand only on an attenuated form
of the evil that it ostensibly seeks to eradicate. It
does not advocate acceptance of the substantive good.
What it chooses to call goodness is only relatively and
tentatively a lesser evil. The substantive good has
remained and will ever remain an open issue, if we are
content to be finally guided by a purely restrictive
moral code. The above difficulty and insufficiency of
the immoral code is most clearly realized in practice by
every sincere person. It can never be good in itself.
Empiric morality, as synthesis, is a counsel of
expediency for the establishment of a certain radically
defective kind of social living. Does not the existence
of positive regulation obstruct the practice of real
goodness? The goodness that is producible by the so-
called moral regulation is not substantively different
from wickedness.

It is necessary to fix our attention on this positive
issue. Is the act of procreation of offspring good or
evil? Is amour to be condemned or acclaimed? Can a
questionable principle of blind regulation supply the
answer to these real problems of life?

Amour is a hard fact of life. It is probably the
controlling fact. Why should it be capable of doing
harm? Or, should it be checked because of the
inopportune character of our present organs and
environment? Can a policy of repression of a really good
principle be healthy in the long run? Is it not
tantamount to refusal to think about the proper
solution? Would it be honest or helpful, for humouring
this criminal indolence, to gag those who put forward
sound proposals for the real solution?

True, the religions have systematically avoided thinking
positively on this fundamental issue. They have
prescribed only regulations of the present evil life
engendered by the uncongenial nature of the present
environment and the defective character of our mind and
body. This is not even negative help, if it is the only
provision. The disease is marked, but no effort is made
for its cure. But disease cannot be healed by a policy
that refuses in principle to contemplate the restoration
of healthy activity.

The question thus resolves itself into an enquiry, “How
can the fullest natural use of this amorous aptitude be
secured?” Aesthetics does not provide the answer.
Aesthetics cannot overlook or heal the really
unwholesome side of the mundane principle that is the
only subject matter of its examination. The ethical
answer, which is more to the point in one respect, has
been considered and rejected.

Medical science, biology and eugenics confine themselves
to the bodily consequence of the principle of amour and
the reaction of these on the mind. They also cover much
less ground than ethics.

The positive answer to the whole issue is given only by
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. This has been accepted and explained
by Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya. The answer elucidated by the
teachings of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya is prevented from being

                           7
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

misunderstood by his own illustrative career.

Any person who has taken the trouble to read the
accounts of the career of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya, penned by
his associates and their spiritual successors, must be
struck with the total absence of the erotic element in
his career. Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya never mixed with women on
the footing of sexual intimacy. His conduct is
disappointing to those who expect to find a rich harvest
of erotic activities because he was the supreme teacher
of the amorous service of Divinity.

In our present sinful state, sex suggests the idea of
sensuous impurity because our present self is sensuous.
The sense of impurity is really nothing but the
incongruity of any material, limited, unconscious
substance with the nature of the human soul. We are not
on the same plane with the object of our thoughts, but
are yoked to it in a most unnatural way. This longing is
the feeling of impurity or repugnance. So long as we
continue to look upon sex with an eye of longing we can
never think of it in any other way. But this longing is
also part of our present acquired nature and cannot
leave us until we can rid ourselves of this secondary
nature itself. With this reform of nature our relation
to the principle of sex also undergoes a complete
transformation that is, however, otherwise
incomprehensible to our present understanding. The
female form of the human soul and Śrī Kṛṣṇa is not the
relation between the material female form and its
corresponding male form. The amorous Pastimes of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa with the spiritual milkmaids of Vraja are not the
amorous pastimes between male and female of this world.
The amorous Pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa are not a concoction
of the dismissed brain of the sensualist. The amours of
this world could have no existence unless the
substantive principle exists in Śrī Kṛṣṇa. But no one
denies the existence and importance of the principle of
amour in the realm of the Absolute in its perfectly
wholesome form.

It is because we choose to regard as material the female
form of the soul that we are shocked at what we suppose
to be shameless sensuous proclivities of the
transcendentalists. This is inevitable so long as we
deliberately choose to nurse the error that the sex of
our experience is the real entity and not its perverted
reflection and imagine that we have been able to solve
the problem of sex by transferring our sensuous activity
from the body to the mind and by condemning as impure
the excesses of the external sexual act on no consistent
principle. Such bungling philosophy has not confined and
will never convince anybody of the real nature and
purpose of the sexual act. This is so because the sexual
act is the eternal concomitant in this sinful world of
the highest function of the spirit, which can never be
minimized or abolished by all our empiric endeavours.
The right understanding alone can save us from the
terrible consequences of our present suicidal sexual
follies.

The Personality of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is identical
with and yet distinct from Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The Activities of
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu are, therefore, also identical

                           8
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

with and yet distinct from the Amorous Pastimes of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. The Activities of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu appear
in the form capable of being received by the conditioned
soul without any chance of muddling by his conditioned
judgment.

The perfect chant of the Name of Kṛṣṇa is available to
all souls, and it is identical with the amorous service
of the spiritual milkmaids of Vraja. This is the sum and
substance of the teachings of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.
Conversely, those who do not perform the congregational
chant of the name of Kṛṣṇa in the manner that is free
from offence are not in a position to realize the nature
of Divine amour. Those who miss such realization remain
subject to the abject slavery of mundane lust.

Śrī Rādhikā is not specifically mentioned in the Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam. But in the description of the Circular
Amorous Dance, the rāsa pastimes, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
represented as leaving the circle of the dancing
milkmaids in the company of a female who is more
favoured than all the rest. The milkmaids who were thus
abruptly abandoned in the very midst of the dance
praised the genuine devotion of the unnamed female who
could induce Śrī Kṛṣṇa to prefer her sole company to the
combined attractions of all the others.

But although the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam mentions the above
incident, the subject is not further developed in that
work. This has been explained by the Gosvāmīs of
Vṛndāvana, the apostles of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, as
due to a deliberate resolve on the part of Śrī Śukadeva,
who is the narrator of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, to avoid
disclosing to his miscellaneous audience the ‘hidden
matters’ of the scriptures. The ‘hidden matters’ can
only be known by the special grace of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and not
otherwise. They are not to be divulged to all persons
indiscriminately.

This explanation offered by the Gosvāmīs is not opposed
to the open treatment of the same subject by Śrī
Jayadeva Gosvāmī and other writers. In spite of the Śrī
Gīta-govinda and its companion works, the subject of the
relationship of Śrī Rādhikā to Śrī Kṛṣṇa remains
shrouded in impenetrable mystery. No language can convey
to the lay reader anything but a misleading idea of the
nature of the subject on which Śrī Śukadeva maintained
such discreet silence. This result is hailed with
unmistakable joy by Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī,
author of Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta. Kavirāja Gosvāmī
pertinently observes that no joy can excel that of the
narrator of the hidden subject when he realizes that
unqualified persons are wholly and automatically barred
from all knowledge of the subject.

Śrī Śukadeva’s hesitation to divulge the secrets of the
Vedas is well founded. The conduct of Śrī Jayadeva
Gosvāmī in speaking without reserve is equally in order
if we remember that his book cannot be understood at all
by those who are lacking in the highest spiritual
culture.

Certain uncritical writers have even thrown mud at the
author of Śrī Gīta-govinda; but they are the exceptions.

                           9
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

Generally writers have thought it wise to avoid all
reference to the subject for the honest enough reason
that they have failed to understand how a book that has
a most obscene exterior could be cherished by all the
great devotees of the country whose conduct is
universally admitted to have been freed from any taint
of indecency. It is this paradox that has always
exercised a salutary restraining influence on the saner
sections of writers with regard to the treatment of this
unintelligible subject.

Śrī Rādhikā is realizable as the Counter-Whole of the
Personal Absolute. She is the Predominated Moiety of the
Absolute Whole. With regard to Śrī Rādhikā, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
the Predominating Moiety. The conception of male and
female refers to the principle of personality. As both
Personalities are fully divine, no grossness or
inadequacy of the corresponding mundane conception need
be imported into the subject. But it is imperative to
admit the absolute logical validity, under the
reservation of the inconceivability by our present
understanding, of the conception of the Divine Pair
possessing actual male and female spiritual forms.

The individual souls serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa as constituents of
Śrī Rādhikā. When they forget that they are constituents
of Śrī Rādhikā they forget the nature of their own
selves, and engage in the abnormal activities of the
mundane plane. The relation between one individual soul
and another is that of obeying each other as
constituents of Śrī Rādhikā in the performance of their
allotted service of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. To use a mundane analogy,
all individual souls are spiritual females in a
subordinate position to Śrī Rādhikā, whose service to
Śrī Kṛṣṇa they share by their nature as constituents.
The object of endeavour of the individual souls is to
learn to obey Śrī Rādhikā. Only by obeying Śrī Rādhikā
can they serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the only object of all worship. Śrī Kṛṣṇa
alone is the recipient of all service. No individual
soul can be the recipient of any service on his own
account or on account of any other individual soul. This
points to the true significance of the scriptural
injunction to abstain from sexual activity and avoid the
company of all sensual persons in order to qualify for
the service of Śrī Kṛṣṇa on the spiritual plane. No idea
of the positive nature of the function of the higher
plane corresponding to the sexual activity of this world
can be conveyed to those who are not completely free
from the disease of mundane sexual desire. It is for
this reason advisable to abstain from all empiric study
of the descriptions of the amorous activities of
divinity until one has actually been freed from every
worldly passion by the preparatory service of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
under the direction of a bona fide spiritual master.




Introduction



                           10
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017



To read a great literary work and understand it in terms
of etymology is one type of experience, but to
appreciate the profound sentiments by which one is truly
acquainted with the work is a different experience
entirely. Comprehension of the literal meaning of words
is generally a simple affair, whereas assimilation of
their underlying emotional significance is not so easy.
It is impossible for one who is not qualified to read a
particular text to accept its internal mood (bhāvārtha).
Therefore all ancient scriptures traditionally begin by
defining the specific parameters of eligibility for
their prospective readers.

Some deeply realized authors have strictly forbidden
unqualified persons to study their compositions and have
even pronounced curses upon those who might dare to
delve into subjects beyond their comprehension. What is
the need for such strict prohibitions? The necessity
arises because unqualified persons who read esoteric
texts inevitably misinterpret them. Thereby, potential
benefits are replaced by ill effects upon themselves and
others. The revered Jayadeva Gosvāmī has clarified the
subject of eligibility in his auspicious invocation:



yadi hari-smaraṇe sarasaṁ mano

yadi vilāsa-kalāsu kutūhalam

madhura-komala-kānta-padāvalīṁ

śṛṇu tadā jayadeva-sarasvatīm

If your heart yearns to delight in remembrance of Śrī
Hari; if you are hankering to contemplate upon him with
intense affection; if you are overwhelmed with curiosity
to know about his skill in amorous pastimes; then by all
means read this book. You will find my lovely poetry to
be extremely relishable. Although it is so emotive and
mellifluous, if you are not possessed of the
aforementioned qualifications then you must not read it.
This literature is not for you.

Although Śrī Jayadeva clearly addresses the issue of
eligibility, the unqualified sector of society fails to
understand him and goes on reading this poem with
enthusiasm for its charming linguistic embellishments.
However, impelled by their inability to grasp its real
significance, they finally resort to insulting the crest
jewel of poets, Śrī Jayadeva, as if his composition were
something crude. And so they must, for they do not
recognize the divinity of Śrī Hari. They are not even
inclined to approach the precincts of sweet
contemplation upon him. They remain confined to their
experience of misidentifying themselves with the
physical body and considering sensual gratification to
be the utmost limit of happiness. What can such slaves
to lust ever understand about the affairs of
transcendental love described by Śrī Jayadeva Gosvāmī?
The revered Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja has stated in Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 4.164–66):

                           11
Gita-govinda.txt                                  5/5/2017




kāma, prema—dõhākāra vibhinna lakṣaṇa lauha āra

hema yaiche svarūpe-vilakṣaṇa

ātmendriya-prīti-vāñchā—tāre bali ‘kāma’


kṛṣṇendriya-prīti-icchā dhare ‘prema’ nāma

kāmera tātparya—nija-sambhoga

kevala kṛṣṇa-sukha-tātparya—prema mahā-bala

The characteristics of worldly lust and transcendental
love are completely different. If mundane lust is
likened to iron then spiritual love can be likened to
gold. The desire to give satisfaction to one’s own
senses is called lust. However, the desire to satisfy
the senses of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is called pure love or prema.
The goal of lust is one’s own enjoyment, whereas the
purpose of love is to please Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Such prema is
immensely powerful.

How many people can understand the depth of Śrīla
Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja’s words? Those who are continuously
absorbed in gratifying their senses are especially
disqualified. For them, the supramundane loving pastimes
of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa are nothing but the play of lusty
desires. If they could love someone to the point of
completely abandoning all social customs, Vedic
religious injunctions and bodily connections, as Śrī
Rādhikā and her friends have done, then one day they
might also have some idea about the principles
underlying these pastimes. Only after making such a
sacrifice is it possible to understand that unselfish
prema can be expressed only by those who do not cherish
even the slightest ambition for their own happiness.

The Vaiṣṇava poets take up their pens simply for the
sake of instructing us about the glories of self-
effacing, transcendental love. The lion amongst poets,
Śrī Jayadeva, has also taken up his pen to show how the
Absolute Reality Śrī Kṛṣṇa is controlled by unmotivated
prema. He is always ready to fall at the feet of any
devotee in whom he detects even the fragrance of such
affection and humbly request, dehi pāda-pallavam udāram
– “Mercifully bestow upon me the soft petals of your
lotus feet.” (Śrī Gīta-govinda 10.8). On realizing this,
Śrī Jayadeva Gosvāmī was greatly perturbed. “How can I
make these words come from the mouth of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
supreme controller of unlimited millions of universes?”
Many times he asked himself, “Should I write such a
thing?” and many times he decided, “Yes, I should.” But
even though he wanted to do it, he could not bring
himself to write this line. He conceived of Śrī Kṛṣṇa as
the Supreme Personality of Godhead; therefore the
reverential mood checked his pen. However, the Supreme
Lord is always affectionate to his devotees. Assuming
the guise of Śrī Jayadeva, he completed the line by
writing dehi pāda-pallavam udāram in golden letters with
his own hand. Thus Śrī Kṛṣṇa made a resounding

                           12
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

announcement, as if by the ubiquitous beating of
kettledrums, to loudly proclaim his love for his
devotees.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is the incarnation of Bhagavān
who purifies the hearts of the living beings in the era
of Kali. In Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 2.77)
Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja writes:



caṇḍīdāsa, vidyāpati, rāyera nāṭaka-gīti,


karṇāmṛta, śrī-gīta-govinda

svarūpa-rāmānanda-sane, mahāprabhu rātri-dine gāya,

śune—parama ānanda

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu used to retire to the privacy of
Śrī Gambhīrā, a small room in Kāśī Miśra Bhavan, with
Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī and Rāmānanda Rāya and there he
would relish the transcendental mellows of several
literatures such as Rāmānanda Rāya’s Śrī Jagannātha-
vallabha-nāṭaka, Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura’s Śrī Kṛṣṇa-
karṇāmṛta, the poetry of Caṇḍīdāsa and Vidyāpati, and
Jayadeva Gosvāmī’s Śrī Gīta-govinda. Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu would become overwhelmed with joy as he sang
and heard them day and night.



Even amongst these great compositions, the excellence of
Jayadeva Gosvāmī’s Śrī Gīta-govinda is unsurpassed.

Herein lies a profound sentiment worthy of our special
attention. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu descended to this
world to teach devotional service by his own personal
example. Why did he study and taste the transcendental
mellows of all these literatures in a secluded place
with only one or two of his confidential associates? The
issue of eligibility is relevant even in this extreme
case. Furthermore, the environment in which to study
esoteric scriptures has also been revealed. The
glorification Śrīman Mahāprabhu performed in public
places amongst the common people of society was only
nāma-saṅkīrtana, the congregational chanting of the Holy
Name. His performance of rasa-saṅkīrtana took place in
his private dwelling, Śrī Gambhīrā, exclusively in the
company of Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara and Rāya Rāmānanda.
Similarly, saṅkīrtana was also performed behind closed
doors at night in the house of Śrīvāsa Ṭhākura in
Śrīdhāma Navadvīpa. This is the highest instruction of
Śrī Gaurāṅgadeva, the spiritual master of the entire
universe: “If you want to attain the highest
auspiciousness, first become qualified and then study
this literature secretly. Then you will be a candidate
for prema-bhakti. Otherwise you will commit offences to
Bhagavān and his devotees and you will fall down.”

Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa is śaktimān, the supreme potent
entity, and Śrīmatī Rādhikā is his supreme potency. As
stated by Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja:

                              13
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017




sac-cid-ānanda pūrṇa kṛṣṇera svarūpa


eka-i cic-chakti tāra dhare tina rūpa

ānandāṁśe hlādinī, sad-aṁśe sandhinī


cid-aṁśe saṁvit—yāre jñāna kari’ māni

hlādinīra sāra ‘prema’, prema-sāra ‘bhāva’


bhāvera parāma-kāṣṭhā—nāma ‘mahābhāva’

mahābhāva-svarūpā śrī-rādhā-ṭhākurāṇī


sarva-guṇa-khani kṛṣṇa-kāntā-śiromaṇi

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s body is the complete manifestation of
eternal existence, consciousness and pleasure. His one
spiritual potency manifests in three ways. Hlādinī is
his aspect of bliss; sandhinī, of eternal existence; and
saṁvit, of cognition, which is also considered to be
knowledge. The essence of hlādinī is prema,
unconditional love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The essence of prema
is bhāva, spiritual emotion, and the ultimate
development of bhāva is called mahābhāva. Śrī Rādhā is
the embodiment of mahābhāva. She is likened to a deep
mine of all precious qualities and she is the crest-
jewel amongst Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beloved gopīs. (Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā 4.61–62, 68–69)

The pastimes of Rādhikā and Kṛṣṇa are the transcendental
loving play of the Omnipotent Divinity and his potency
(śaktimān and śakti). They have the power to sanctify
the whole world because they are completely free from
even the slightest trace of lust. One should make a
diligent study of these pastimes, as such study
constitutes one of the limbs of bhakti-yoga. Although
many devotees are conversant with this conclusion, Śrī
Gīta-govinda remains inaccessible to them because they
are not sufficiently acquainted with the Sanskrit
language and its implications. This present edition will
provide them with sufficient help to understand the
meaning of the words and the emotions implied therein.

Nowadays Śrī Gīta-govinda is famous in the academic
community as a poem that exemplifies the amorous mellow,
śṛṅgāra-rasa. Śrī Jayadeva Gosvāmī is also widely
accepted as an exceptionally talented poet. However, Śrī
Gīta-govinda is not merely a world-famous composition,
full of emotive literary ornaments arranged according to
prosody. And Jayadeva Gosvāmī is not merely a poet adept
in tasteful expressions through the development of his
innate abilities. Śrī Gīta-govinda is the very essence
of all the Vedas and Śrī Jayadeva Gosvāmī is the
superlative devotional practitioner (sādhaka) and
perfected spiritualist (siddha), with complete mastery
of all Vedic wisdom. The readers of Śrī Gīta-govinda

                           14
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

will see that the author has remembered his worshipful
deity from the very beginning of his auspicious
invocation:

rādhā-mādhavayor jayanti yamunā-kūle rahaḥ-kelayaḥ

The inscrutable, secret pleasure pastimes of Śrī Rādhā-
Mādhava on the banks of Yamunā reign above all.

In the second verse he introduces his praiseworthy
subject matter:



śrī-vāsudeva-rati-keli-kathā-sametam

etaṁ karoti jayadeva-kaviḥ prabandham

The poet Jayadeva is writing this narration after taking
complete shelter of rati-keli, the supremely blissful
amorous sports of Śrī Vāsudeva, Śyāmasundara, the son of
the King of Vraja.



As mentioned previously in the third verse, Śrī Jayadeva
Gosvāmī has defined the qualifications required to read
this poem:



yadi hari-smaraṇe sarasaṁ mano

yadi vilāsa-kalāsu kutūhalam

madhura-komala-kānta-padāvalīṁ

śṛṇu tadā jayadeva-sarasvatīm

If you want your mind to be deeply attached to the
constant remembrance of Śrī Hari, or your heart is
already absorbed in contemplation upon him; and if you
are curious to taste the mellows of his pastimes – that
is, you hanker exclusively for this and for nothing else
– then by all means listen to these gentle, appealing
and honeyed verses of the transcendental poetry of
Jayadeva.

In this supramundane poem, Śrī Jayadeva Gosvāmī has
given a charming description of the intimate
transcendental love of Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava. The ultimate
excellence of the two aspects of śṛṅgāra-rasa, namely
separation and meeting, are both found in this lyrical
composition. The poet upholds the opinion that when the
union of lovers is first nourished by feelings of
separation, it bestows a greater joy upon the perfected
spiritualists and the devotional practitioners who are
expert in relishing the amorous mellow.

Svayaṁ Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa has instructed his intimate
devotee, Arjuna, about the eligibility and ineligibility
to hear and speak Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā in its eighteenth
chapter, verses 67 and 68.


                           15
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017



idaṁ te nātapaskāya

nābhaktāya kadācana

na cāśuśrūṣave vācyaṁ

na ca māṁ yo ’bhyasūyati

Do not speak about this confidential knowledge and
realization to those unqualified persons who have no
faith and who are not engaged in pure devotion to me.

ya idaṁ paramaṁ guhyaṁ

mad-bhakteṣv abhidhāsyati

bhaktiṁ mayi parāṁ kṛtvā

mām evaiṣyaty asaṁśayaḥ

One who explains the supreme mystery of my Gītā to the
faithful devotees is sure to attain pure devotion and in
the end he will come to me.

In these verses, Śrī Kṛṣṇa describes the characteristics
of the genuine candidates for transcendental realization
after first defining the disqualifications. Śrī Jīva
Gosvāmī has also presented a clear analysis of the
qualifications for hearing his Gopāla-campū. He has
pronounced a curse upon faithless non-devotees who still
insist upon reading it. Similarly, Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī
has strictly forbidden faithless persons to hear or read
his Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta. Other Gosvāmīs have also
pronounced curses to prohibit the unqualified from
delving into their literatures.

The substance of Śrī Gīta-govinda

Śrī Jayadeva Gosvāmī thoroughly understood the nature of
mankind in this present age of dissention (Kali-yuga).
He knew how easily they become bewildered by the sight
of superficial beauty. If they do not see an external
covering of beauty, they can overlook a potent medicinal
herb, thinking it to be of no value.

The poet Śrī Jayadeva was moved by the causeless
compassion Vaiṣṇavas feel towards all fallen souls.
Therefore, to make them relish eternal bliss, he wrapped
the incomparable shelter of his supremely sweet,
ecstatic transcendental emotions in the covering of the
worthless sweetness of the mundane erotic mood. By so
doing, Śrī Jayadeva has manifested the exclusive
antidote for the disease of material existence in the
form of this poem.

The respected readers can now readily understand that
Śrī Gīta-govinda is not about mundane sexuality. Rather,
it pertains to the very same sublime transcendental rasa
that has been defined in the Vedas as the cause of
lasting joy for every living being. Therefore, although
Śrī Gīta-govinda is a poetic composition, it is
simultaneously the embodiment of the essence of all the

                            16
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

Vedas. Śrī Jayadeva Gosvāmī is compared to the sacred
decorative marking (tilaka) upon the forehead of the
entire dynasty of poets who are conversant with the
principles of spiritual mellows. Sometimes he has
portrayed Śrī Rādhā as a jealous lover, proud of her
eminence. Sometimes he has made her weep incessantly in
the intolerable pain of separation from Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and
sometimes he has also put Śrī Bhagavān into the intense
anxiety of separation from her. Yet he did not stop
there. He has manifested the utmost extremity of love of
God and the pinnacle of Bhagavān’s affection for his
devotee by making Śrī Kṛṣṇa catch the lotus feet of Śrī
Rādhā and beg her, “Kindly accept me as your servant and
decorate my brow with the soft buds of your lotus feet.”
This love is the essence of all the Vedas.

The Upaniṣads proclaim that the indwelling Lord
(paramātmā) is only attained by whom he desires to be
attained.



nāyam ātmā pravacanena labhyo

na medhayā na bahunā śrutena

yam evaiṣa vṛṇute tena labhyas

tasyaiṣa ātmā vivṛṇute tanūṁ svām

(Kaṭha Upaniṣad 1.2.23)

Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the embodiment of eternal
concentrated bliss (ānanda). The conditioned living
entity, though searching exclusively for this happiness,
is always unsuccessful. However, his good fortune arises
when he witnesses the internal emotional ecstasies of
the pure devotees. On that day, bliss personified begins
to search for him.

Pure devotion (prema) is characterized by its power to
attract Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The practising devotee may be sitting
in his home, but once his heart is infused with
devotion, blissful Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is always greedy for
the taste of prema, becomes anxious for his association.
As if an offender, Kṛṣṇa will approach his devotee in a
humble mood and meekly supplicate him with the same
entreaty, “Kindly accept me as your servant and decorate
my brow with the soft buds of your lotus feet.” This is
the essential message of all the Vedic scriptures. “Just
as the Absolute Truth is far away, he is also very
near.”

A review of the literary principles of Śrī Gīta-govinda

The logical principle of “jewels and gold”, known as
maṇi-kāñcana-nyāya, dictates that priceless jewels
should be set in pure gold. In accordance with this
principle, the poet Śrī Jayadeva has presented a
narrative of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s priceless pastimes in the
purest example of literary composition. His poetry
includes many remarkable features: the sublime artistic
sensibilities of musical theory (gāndharva-vidyā); all
the confidential mysteries related to contemplation upon

                           17
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa; and an elaborate exposition of śṛṅgāra-rasa in
both meeting and separation. Furthermore, he has also
observed the ancient traditional methodology of literary
composition. In his own words – sānandāḥ pariśodhayantu
sudhiyaḥ śrī-gīta-govindataḥ... (Śrī Gīta-govinda 12.26–
27). The purport is that the absolute purity of all the
aforementioned attributes can only be found in the
poetry of Gīta-govinda. Therefore, it is essential for
learned persons to make a thorough examination of the
text in order to understand the validity of this
unprecedented claim. Śrī Jayadeva Gosvāmī is convinced
that the intoxicating effect of wine, the sweetness of
sugar, the flavour of ripe mangoes and the taste of a
beautiful woman’s lips, all pale into insignificance in
the presence of the sweetness of Śrī Gīta-govinda
because this romantic poem is saturated with the essence
of śṛṅgāra-rasa.

Śrī Jayadeva Gosvāmī has employed varieties of rhythm,
rasa and other poignant literary devices in this great
work. The mellifluous songs of Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava’s
amorous pastimes are the predominant subject of his
meditation. Through the medium of twenty-four songs, the
author has clearly revealed the immense depth of his
study of musical theory (saṅgīta-śāstra) and dramatic
science (rasa-śāstra). Every song is composed in a
different classical melodic mode (rāga) and rhythm
(tāla). A careful study of the text leads one to believe
that the poet must have directly experienced the meeting
and separation of Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava in his trance of
meditation.

Practical realization of Śrī Gīta-govinda

It is not by chance that Śrī Jayadeva Gosvāmī has
employed a female confidante (sakhī) in the role of a
mediator to arrange Kṛṣṇa’s meetings with Rādhā. The
purport is clear. Unless one is under the personal
guidance of such a sakhī and until one attains the help
of the sakhīs, one cannot attain Śrī Kṛṣṇa. All
devotional scriptures proclaim this conclusion. The help
of a sakhī and the help of guru are one and the same. To
be guru one must take shelter of the disposition of the
sakhīs, and to attain Śrī Kṛṣṇa one must accept the
shelter of a spiritual master who is perfectly situated
in the transcendental mood of a sakhī. Herein lies the
essential message of the Vedas:



tasmād guruṁ prapadyeta

jijñāsuḥ śreya uttamam

śābde pare ca niṣṇātaṁ

brahmaṇy upaśamāśrayam

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.3.21)

To know the Absolute Truth, one must take shelter of a
perfect guru who is fixed in devotion to the Absolute.
When Śrī Suta Gosvāmī began to narrate Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
in the sacred forest of Naimiṣāraṇya, he called it the

                              18
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

essence of the Vedas; and the essence of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam itself is the rāsa-līlā. Śrī Jayadeva Gosvāmī
has the ability to comprehend the essence of everything.
Therefore he condensed the rāsa-līlā even further, just
as one might perform the impossible feat of confining
the ocean within a jar. He was compelled by compassion
to manifest the nectar of immortality in the form of
this poem for the upliftment of all living beings in
this age of Kali. In answer to the inquiries of Parīkṣit
Mahārāja, Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī replied:



anugrahāya bhaktānāṁ

mānuṣaṁ deham āśritaḥ

bhajate tādṛśīḥ krīḍā

yāḥ śrutvā tat-paro bhavet

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.33.36)

Śrī Kṛṣṇa performs the rāsa-līlā to bestow mercy upon
his devotees. Yet the non-devotees are also naturally
fond of romance or śṛṅgāra-rasa. Therefore, when they
hear the rāsa-līlā they also gradually become absorbed
in thoughts of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Bhagavān performs apparently
erotic pastimes on the surface of the earth out of
compassion for everyone – the devotees and the non-
devotees. Mahārṣi Vedavyāsa was moved by compassion to
write it down for the benefit of all, and the topmost
devotee Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī was also moved by
compassion to preach it throughout the world. After
that, the best of poets, Śrī Jayadeva Gosvāmī, also
mercifully reproduced it in the form of an even sweeter
poetic composition. In answer to the questions raised by
Śrī Śacī-nandana Gaurahari, Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda has
explained:



prabhu kahe,—‘sādhya-vastura avadhi’ ei haya tomāra
prasāde ihā jānilÓ niścaya

‘sādhya-vastu’ ‘sādhana’ vinu keha nāhi pāya kṛpā kari
kaha, rāya, pābāra upāya

rāya kahe,—yeī kahāo, seī kahi vāṇī ki kahiye bhāla-
manda, kichui nā jāni

tribhuvana-madhye aiche haya kaun dhīra ye tomāra māyā-
nāṭe ha-ibeka sthira

mora mukhe vaktā tumi, tumi hao śrotā atyanta rahasya,
śuna, sādhanera kathā

rādhā-kṛṣṇera līlā ei ati gūḍhatara dāsya-vātsalyādi-
bhāve nā haya gocara

sabe eka sakhī-gaṇera ihÃ adhikāra sakhī haite haya ei
līlāra vistāra

sakhī vinā ei līlā puṣṭa nāhi haya sakhī līlā vistāriyā,

                             19
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

sakhī āsvādaya

sakhī vinā ei līlāya anyera nāhi gati sakhī-bhāve ye
tÃre kare anugati

rādhā-kṛṣṇa-kuñjasevā-sādhya sei pāya sei sādhya pāite
āra nāhika upāya

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 8.196–205)

After hearing about the goal of life from the lotus
mouth of Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
said, “This is the last word in regard to sādhya-vastu,
the object of attainment. By your mercy I have clearly
understood the whole subject. However, no one can attain
this extremely profound sādhya-vastu without adopting
the appropriate means (sādhana). Oh Rāya, be merciful to
me by kindly explaining the method for attaining this
goal.”

Rāya replied, “I only speak whatever you inspire within
my heart. I do not know whether what I say is good or
bad. Who is so sober that they can remain steady in the
midst of your dancing energy? You are speaking through
my mouth and at the same time you are also listening.
What a mysterious phenomenon.

“Now I will tell you about this confidential
methodology. The kuñja-līlā or rāsa-līlā of Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa is extremely deep. Devotees established in the
moods of servitude, friendship and parenthood cannot
even perceive it. None of them have eligibility to enter
into this pastime – only the sakhīs are qualified. This
pastime is expanded by the sakhīs. Without them it
cannot be nourished and only they can taste it.
Therefore, there is absolutely no opportunity to enter
kuñja-līlā without taking complete shelter of the sakhīs
and receiving their help. Only those whose devotional
service is to follow the transcendental emotions of the
sakhīs and remain under their shelter and guidance can
attain the kuñja-sevā of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. There is no
way to attain this objective except for absorption in
remembrance of the sakhīs while taking complete shelter
of their lotus feet.”

Life history of the poet Śrī Jayadeva

Śrī Jayadeva Gosvāmī was born in the village of
Kindubilva on the northern side of the Ajaya river,
almost twenty miles south of the Vīra-bhūmi district of
West Bengal. The village of Kindubilva is commonly known
as Kendulī. His father’s name was Bhojadeva and his
mother’s name was Vāmā-devī. Śrī Jayadeva has personally
revealed the place of his birth in the following verse:



varṇitaṁ jayadeva-kena harer idaṁ pravaṇena

kindubilva-samudra-sambhava-rohiṇī-ramaṇena

He who appeared in the village of Kindubilva, just as
the moon appears from the ocean, has collected Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s expressions of lamentation. That Jayadeva is

                           20
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

humbly narrating this song.

The King of Bengal, Mahārāja Lakṣmaṇa Sena, was as
learned in morality and appreciative of merit as the
famous Mahārāja Vikramāditya. As the royal council of
Mahārāja Vikramāditya was adorned with the splendour of
nine jewels in the form of his talented advisors such as
Kālīdāsa and Vararuci, the royal assembly of Mahārāja
Lakṣmaṇa Sena was adorned with five jewels, including
Govardhanācārya and Jayadeva. The following verse was
engraved upon a tablet of stone at the entrance to
Mahārāja Lakṣmaṇa Sena’s council chamber:



govardhanaś ca śaraṇo jayadeva umāpatiḥ

kavirājaś ca ratnāni samitau lakṣṇasya ca

Therefore it is evident that Govardhana, Śaraṇa,
Jayadeva, Umāpati and Dhoyī Kavirāja were the names of
the king’s royal advisors.



vācaḥ pallavayaty umāpatidharaḥ sandarbha-śuddhiṁ girāṁ

jānīte jayadeva eva śaraṇaṁ ślāghyo durūha-drute

śṛṅgārottara-sat-prameya-racanair ācārya-govardhana-

spardhī ko ’pi na viśrutaḥ śruti-dharo dhoyī kavi-
kṣmāpatiḥ



All the royal scholars’ names are included in this verse
found in the beginning of Śrī Gīta-govinda. The King
held them all in great reverence. He even selected
Umāpatidhara as his prime minister.

It is difficult to ascertain the exact date of Śrī
Jayadeva Gosvāmī’s birth. According to Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s main disciple, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī,
Jayadeva Gosvāmī was a contemporary of the Bengali king,
Mahārāja Lakṣmaṇa Sena. On the basis of authentic texts,
it is evident that Śrī Lakṣmaṇa Sena was reigning in
1030 Śakābda, corresponding to 1107ad. This date has
also been verified by Dr.Mitra on the basis of
supporting evidence gleaned from his extensive research.
Therefore it is certain that Śrī Jayadeva, being a
contemporary of Śrī Lakṣmaṇa Sena, was a personality of
the twelfth century. Cāṅda Kavi, a member of the royal
council of Mahārāja Pṛthvīrāja, has recounted the
glorious histories of the poets of former times in his
book entitled Cauhāna-rāṣṭra. Śrī Jayadeva and Gīta-
govinda are also mentioned therein. Pṛthvīrāja Mahārāja
was ruling from his capital, Delhi, in the final part of
the twelfth century. He was killed in a battle with
Mohammad Gaurī on the banks of the Dṛśadvati river in
1193ad. Thus it is clear that Gīta-govinda had already
been written prior to the period of Cāṅda Kavi,
otherwise he could not have mentioned it in Cauhāna-
rāṣṭra.

                              21
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017


Many wondrous and divine events from the life of Śrī
Jayadeva Gosvāmī have been described in Nābhājī Bhaṭṭa’s
text, Bhaktamāla. It is not necessary to make this book
excessively long by repeating all those details here.
The human side of Śrī Jayadeva Gosvāmī’s pastimes have
now become completely covered by the passing of many
centuries. Nevertheless, every year a huge gathering
still takes place in Kendulī-grām to commemorate his
disappearance from our mortal vision. The festival
begins on Makara-saṅkrānti in the month of Māgha
(January–February). Fifty to a hundred thousand pilgrims
congregate at the samādhi mandira of Śrī Jayadeva
Gosvāmī to honour him and to hear and recite his poetry.

Commentaries on Śrī Gīta-govinda

There are six famous commentaries on Śrī Gīta-govinda:



Rasa-mañjarī – by Mahā-mahopādhyāya Śaṅkara Miśra on the

inspiration of Śrī Śālīnātha.

Rasika-priyā – by Kumbha-nṛpati Kumbhakarṇa, the King of

Mewar. His reign spanned the first quarter of

the fourteenth century.

Sañjīvanī – by Vanamālī Bhaṭṭa.

Padadyotanikā – by Nārāyaṇa Bhaṭṭa.

Dīpikā – by Gopāla Ācārya.

Bālabodhinī – by Śrī Pūjārī Gosvāmī.



Bowing in deference to Śrī Pūjārī Gosvāmī’s Bālabodhinī-
ṭīkā, I humbly present Bālabodhinī-prakāśa. Though
drawing extensively from the exposition of Śrī Pūjārī
Gosvāmī, this new commentary includes additional
material from the other prominent commentators, along
with further elaborations in accordance with the
precepts of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī.

The original manuscript for the Hindi edition was
diligently compiled by Śrīmān Bhaktivedānta Tīrtha
Mahārāja. Then my daughter [disciple] Śrī Madhu
Khaṇḍelavāla MA, PhD. refined and embellished the
language as if infusing it with living force. She also
discovered and included the translation of Śrī Gīta-
govinda composed in rhyming verse (padyānuvāda) by a
resident of Delhi, Śrīmān Vinaya Mohana Saksenā. Śrīmān
Bhaktivedānta Mādhava Mahārāja and Śrīmān Omprakāśa
Vrajavāsī M.A., L.L.B., Sāhityaratna proofread the text.
Śrīmān Subāla-sakhā Brahmacārī and Śrīmān Purandara
Brahmacārī helped by typing. Śrīmān Puṇḍarīka Brahmacārī
and Saubhāgyavati Vṛndā-devī also worked tirelessly in
proofreading.


                             22
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

This edition of Śrī Gīta-govinda was rendered into the
English language by Śrīmān Bhaktivedānta Araṇya
Mahārāja. The manuscript was then edited by Śrīmān
Bhaktivedānta Bhaktisāra Mahārāja and proofread by
Śrīmān Prema-vilāsa dāsa Adhikārī. Śrīmān Amita-Kṛṣṇa
Brahmacārī proofread the Sanskrit manuscript, managed
the computer systems and contributed valuable research.
This transcendental treasure was further decorated by
Śrīmatī Śyāmarāṇī dāsī’s original devotional artwork,
which was created especially for this edition. Śrīmān
Kṛṣṇa-kāruṇya Brahmacārī rendered dedicated service in
the department of design and graphics, and Śrīmān
Premarasa dāsa Adhikārī oversaw all stages of the
production. Readers’ appreciation will also be enhanced
by hearing the complementary recording on CD. Śrīmān
Bhaktivedānta Muni Mahārāja arranged and sang all the
songs after years of carefully researching the authentic
musical tradition of Śrī Gīta-govinda.

I pray to Śrī Jayadeva Gosvāmī, his worshipful Śrī
Rādhikā and Vrajendra-nandana Śyāmasundara, “Kindly
bestow your causeless mercy upon all those who assisted
in the production of this book and make them genuinely
qualified to realize its transcendental significance.”

This edition was produced in a short time, so there are
bound to be a few minor errors. May the kind-hearted
readers accept the essential loving mood of the text and
be pleased to send me their corrections in writing so
that I can improve the next edition.



Fervently begging for a slight trace of the mercy of Śrī
Hari, Śrī Guru and the Vaiṣṇavas,

destitute and worthless,

Tridaṇḍibhikṣu Śrī Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa.



Śrī Jayadeva Gosvāmī’s disappearance day.

Mādhava-māsa,

Śrī Gaurābda 518

31st January, 2005




Act One




— sāmoda-dāmodaraḥ —



Verse 1

                           23
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017




meghair meduram ambaraṁ vana-bhuvaḥ śyāmās tamāla-
drumair

naktaṁ bhīrur ayaṁ tvam eva tad imaṁ rādhe gṛhaṁ prāpaya

itthaṁ nanda-nideśataś calitayoḥ praty-adhva-kuñja-
drumaṁ

rādhā-mādhavayor jayanti yamunā-kūle rahaḥ-kelayaḥ

Translation

Rādhā, all directions are covered by dense and ominous
clouds. The forest floor has been cast into darkness by
the shadows of blackish tamāla trees. Kṛṣṇa is naturally
timid. He cannot be alone at night, so take him home
with you.”

Śrī Rādhā turned her face towards the bower of desire
trees beside the forest path and, bewildered by intense
joy, she honoured the words of her friend. When she
arrived on the bank of the Kālindī river, she initiated
her love-play in a secret place. May the sweetness of
this confidential pastime of the Divine Couple be
victorious by manifesting in the hearts of the devotees.

Commentary

Śrī Jayadeva Gosvāmī paints a vivid picture of the
loving pastimes of Śrī Rādhā and Mādhava as they meet
alone in the forest groves. He has established their
excellence by describing their pastimes of
transcendental sensuality. The poet first depicts the
scene of Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava entering into a bower hidden
by the dense darkness of tamāla trees. His maṅgalācaraṇa
(auspicious invocation) is the love-play performed by
Kṛṣṇa’s most beloved, Śrī Rādhā, after honouring the
advice of her female friend (sakhī) by leading Kṛṣṇa to
a forest bower. This poem establishes the sweetness of
Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava’s pastimes, therefore it is auspicious
and beneficial for everyone.

Encouraging Rādhā, she continues, “Look! Dark clouds
holding the fair-complexioned moon in a loving embrace
are an excitant (uddīpana) for Kṛṣṇa’s mood. Seeing the
example of the clouds, the dark-complexioned Śyāma is
anxious to be united with the golden-limbed Rādhā.”

Śrī Rādhikā’s sakhī suggests, “At night the forest floor
is covered by the śyāma-coloured shade of tamāla trees.
Impenetrable darkness has spread everywhere, so who will
be able to see you? Now do not delay for another
second.”

In this opening verse, the great poet indicates that the
prominent rasa throughout the poem will be śṛṅgāra, the
monarch of all integrated ecstasies. The darkness of
night, the cloud-covered sky and the dense foliage of
the forest floor, beautified by tamāla trees, are all
uddīpana-vibhāva. ŚrīmatīRādhārāṇī is ālambana-vibhāva.
The sthāyibhāva is rati. The vyabhicārī-bhāvas include

                           24
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

harṣa, āvega and autsukya. The anubhāva is bhīrutva,
timidity. Śrī Rādhā has been described first because the
heroine is prominent in śṛṅgāra-rasa.

At this opportune moment in the pastime, Rādhā’s sakhī
will listen and look around to make sure that the coast
is clear. Then she will say, “Go into the dense forest
for as long as the moonshine is not visible.” In Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.30.42) Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī has said,
tamaḥ praviṣtam ālakṣya – “On seeing a dark place...”

According to literary tradition, there are two types of
poetic composition: sādhāraṇa-kāvya and mahā-kāvya, the
ordinary poem and the epic masterpiece. Three components
comprise the maṅgalācaraṇa verse of a mahā-kāvya:
blessings (āśīrvāda), obeisances (namaskāra) and a
definition of content (vastu-nirdeśa). In the present
verse, the word jayanti is understood in the sense of
namaskāra, respectful obeisances. This type of
interpretation is supported by the text of Kāvya-
prakāśa. The subject matter, namely Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava’s
amorous play, acts in the capacity of both vastu-nirdeśa
and āśīrvāda. Therefore this composition conforms to the
definition of a mahā-kāvya.

In Kāvyādarśa, a composition presented in sarga format
has been called mahā-kāvya. In the present verse, the
amorous play of Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava is the subject matter.
Thus the auspicious invocation is technically a
definition of content (vastu-nirdeśa). The dual compound
rādhā-mādhava has been employed to convey the
inseparable nature of their eternal relationship.



rādhā-kṛṣṇa aiche sadā eka-i svarūpa līlā-rasa āsvādite
dhare dui rūpa

Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are eternally one identity, yet they
have assumed two forms in order to relish the mellows of
loving pastimes.

This verse of Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 4.98)
demonstrates the unadulterated nature of the
relationship between Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. It is also
stated in the Ṛk-pariśiṣṭa: rādhayā mādhavo devo
mādhavenaiva rādhikā – “The handsomeness of Mādhava is
enhanced by Rādhā, and the exquisite loveliness of Rādhā
is heightened by Mādhava.” Similarly, Śrī Jayadeva
Gosvāmī points to the indivisible relationship between
the Divine Couple in his opening verse by employing the
dual compound rādhā-mādhava.

The first half of the verse is ornamented by samuccaya
alaṅkāra and the second half by āśīḥ alaṅkāra.
Consequently there is a combination of two distinct
figures of speech in one sentence. We also find examples
of vaidarbhī rīti, kaiśikī vṛtti, sambhāvitā gīti,
madhya laya and prasāda guṇa. The hero is anukūla nāyaka
and the heroine is svādhīna-bhartṛkā nāyikā. The first
half of the verse is an example of abhilāṣa-lakṣaṇa
vipralambha-śṛṅgāra, amorous feelings in separation,
characterized by intense hankering. The chanda (poetic
meter) is śārdūla-vikrīḍita.

                           25
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017




Verse 2

vāg-devatā-carita-citrita-citta-sadmā

padmāvatī-caraṇa-cāraṇa-cakravartī

śrī-vāsudeva-rati-keli-kathā-sametam

etaṁ karoti jayadeva-kaviḥ prabandham

Translation

The heart of the great poet Śrī Jayadeva Gosvāmī is like
a mansion, beautifully decorated with pictures of the
activities of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the predominating deity of
speech. He is incessantly immersed in greed to attain
the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā. By describing Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
amorous pastimes in the forest bowers, he has created a
tremendous upsurge of the brilliant romantic rasa within
those devotees who accept only pure sentiments of
ecstatic love.

Commentary

The heart of Śrī Jayadeva is now submerged in a vast
flood of bliss after attaining a momentary vision of the
pastimes of Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava, as indicated by the last
line of the previous verse. The compassionate emperor of
poets, Śrī Jayadeva, bestows favour upon all devotees by
directly expressing his own literary competence in this
verse beginning with the phrase vāg-devatā-carita.

Jayadevaḥ – jaya means “the utmost excellence”; deva
means dyotayati, prakāśayati or “he illuminates”. Śrī
Jayadeva is one who illuminates the utmost excellence of
the pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa by his devotion.

Prabandha – This literary composition (prabandha)
entitled Gīta-govinda attracts the hearts of its
audience in the most excellent way (pra). Alternatively,
it awakens Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes in the hearts of the
devotees in the most excellent way, thereby liberating
them from the bondage (bandha) of material existence.

Why is this poem so attractive? Śrī-vāsudeva-rati-keli-
kathā-sametam. Here the word śrī refers to Rādhā.
Vāsudeva refers to the master and indwelling soul of the
entire universe, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who incarnated as
the son of Vasudeva. He who brilliantly illuminates the
Vasu dynasty, the best of the Vasus, Śrī Nanda Mahārāja,
is called Vasudeva. Consequently the son of Nanda is
called Vāsudeva Kṛṣṇa. Śrī Jayadeva’s composition has
the power to attract the hearts of all because he has
elaborately described rati-keli, the love-play of Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. The etymology of this line is śrīś ca
vāsudevaś ca śrī-vāsudevau tayo rati-keli-kathaḥ tābhiḥ
sametam.

The next question is, “How did this narration come
about?” Śrī Jayadeva replies that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the
presiding deity of the art of speaking. He is the

                           26
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

orator, ever present within the innermost region of Śrī
Jayadeva’s heart, inspiring him to write. As the
presiding deity of the poet’s senses, Śrī Kṛṣṇa infuses
them with potency. Therefore Śrī Jayadeva describes his
worshipful deity as vāg-devatā, the presiding deity of
speech, to confirm that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is personally
composing this poem.

The pastimes of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa reside together like a
collection of paintings in the mansion of Śrī Jayadeva’s
heart. An artist first has an internal vision. After
transferring that vision to his canvas, it becomes a
painting. Similarly, this picture of loving pastimes has
been painted by the brush of Śrī Jayadeva. The
marvellous mansion of his heart is decorated with
paintings of Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava’s intimate encounters,
and its fabulous treasury is his fascinating poetry. The
poet has renounced all sense of responsibility for the
authorship of this narration because his speech and mind
are absorbed in Mādhava.

Whence came the power to depict such pastimes? In reply
Śrī Jayadeva admits that his sensory powers are all
inspired by Rādhā. And how is she present within those
powers? Śrī Rādhā is Padmāvatī. The etymology of the
word padmāvatī is padmaṁ kare asti yasyāḥ – “She who
holds a lotus flower in her hand,” namely Rādhā. This
reference to Padmāvatī implies that the poet is
predominantly absorbed in the service of Padmāvatī Rādhā
through the dramatic dancing art of his lyrical
expression. Padmāvatī is also the name of Śrī Jayadeva’s
wife. The great poet praises Rādhā and simultaneously
expresses feelings of gratitude towards his wife, Śrī
Padmāvatī, who was highly elevated in the loving service
of Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava.

The literary device of comparing the heart to a mansion
is an example of rūpaka and anujñā alaṅkāras. The chanda
is vasanta-tilakā. We also find examples of oja guṇa,
gauḍīyā rīti, bhāratī vṛtti and sambhāvitā gīti.

Verse 3



yadi hari-smaraṇe sarasaṁ mano

yadi vilāsa-kalāsu kutūhalam

madhura-komala-kānta-padāvalīṁ

śṛṇu tadā jayadeva-sarasvatīm

Translation

Dear audience! If your mind is permeated by mellows of
ever-fresh loving attachment while hearing the pastimes
of Śrī Hari, and if you are curious to know about his
ingenuity in the amorous arts, may you become immersed
in bliss by listening to the mellifluous, tender and
endearing verses of this collection of songs by the poet
Jayadeva.

Commentary

                           27
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017


The poet is not afraid or reluctant to admit his
eligibility to write this epic poem. Dull-witted persons
have no faith that this is a genuine account of the
divine play of Bhagavān. Therefore the qualifications
required to study this epic poem have been defined in
this verse.

“Dear devotees! If your heart is moved by constantly
remembering Śrī Kṛṣṇa and you are curious to know about
his delightful escapades such as rāsa-līlā, kuñja-
vilāsa1, his congress in the forest bowers, his
ingenuity in pastimes and the sweetness of his cunning
behaviour, then by all means hear these honeyed words of
Śrī Jayadeva, the bard of śṛṅgāra-rasa.”

Some devotees derive transcendental bliss from
remembering Śrī Hari in a general way, whereas others
experience spiritual happiness from a specific perusal
of his romantic affairs such as the rāsa-līlā. Now what
kind of poem is this? In response the poet says, “This
poem is predominated by śṛṅgāra-rasa and it is
exceptionally sweet. Its meaning is readily
comprehensible. Every verse is immensely endearing,
being imbued with kānti, Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s attribute of
beauty enhanced by love. As a lover is dear to her
beloved, this charming composition is extremely dear to
the pure devotees. Love naturally takes expression in
song, so Śrī Gīta-govinda has naturally assumed the
format of a musical. It should be sung in a melodious
voice.”

Ancient authorities on rhetoric have concluded that
mādhurya guṇa and komalatā, the qualities of sweetness
and tenderness, are of two types: śabdāśrita, related to
the individual words, and arthāśrita, related to the
wonderful emotional impact of those words. Both types
are evident in this composition.

In addition to offering obeisances, blessings and a
definition of content, an auspicious invocation
traditionally includes:

(1) Sambandha – the relationship between the subject
matter and the text.

(2) Abhidheya – the method of attainment.

(3) Prayojana – the ultimate objective.

(4) Adhikāra – the qualifications required to appreciate
the subject matter.

Remembrance of the amorous pastimes of Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava
is abhidheya. Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava are pratipādya, the
expounded subject, and the poem is pratipādaka, the
expounder. Therefore pratipādya and pratipādaka are in
smārya-smāraka sambandha, the relationship of the
memorable and the memorial. Only devotees who experience
ecstatic spiritual emotions when they hear and recite
the loving pastimes of Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava are qualified.

This third verse features dīpaka alaṅkāra, pāñcālī rīti,
kaiśikī vṛtti and drutavilambita chanda.

                           28
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017


Verse 4

vācaḥ pallavayaty umāpatidharaḥ sandarbha-śuddhiṁ girāṁ

jānīte jayadeva eva śaraṇaḥ ślāghyo durūha-drute

śṛṅgārottara-sat-prameya-racanair ācārya-govardhana-

spardhī ko ’pi na viśrutaḥ śruti-dharo dhoyī kavi-
kṣmāpatiḥ

Translation

The rhetoric of an illustrious poet named Umāpatidhara
is adorned with alliteration and other figures of
speech. The poet named Śaraṇa has received acclaim for
his cryptic verses. No one has ever heard of a poet who
can convey the flavour of worldly romance as skilfully
as Govardhana. Kavirāja Dhoyī can recite anything after
hearing it but once. When even these formidable poets
could not master every field of talent, how could the
poetry of Jayadeva abound with all attributes?

Commentary

Śrī Jayadeva has politely introduced himself as the
emperor of bards who glorify the lotus feet of Padmāvatī
ŚrīmatīRādhārāṇī. Continuing in the same self-
deprecating mood, he contrasts the deep significance and
maturity of his own composition with the worthless
mundane achievements of other poets.

There were six famous scholars in the royal assembly of
Mahārāja Lakṣmaṇa Sena:

(1) The poet Umāpatidhara was the counsellor of King
Lakṣmaṇa Sena. He only knew how to develop his message
by elaborating on details. Thus linguistic and semantic
sweetness were absent from his writing. Although his
compositions flourished into many branches and sub-
branches, he could not make them acceptable. Since his
poetry is not particularly heart-warming, it is confined
to the category of descriptive writing.

(2) The poet Śaraṇa was renowned for his ability to
quickly compose enigmatic verses. Although he was
popular, his writing contained defects such as
gūḍhārthatva, the employment of expressions that were
cryptic to the point of being unintelligible. Attributes
such as prasāda guṇa were also absent from his works.

(3) Govardhanācārya was the third pandit in the assembly
of Lakṣmaṇa Sena. His power of literary expression was
flawless. Śṛṅgāra is the ultimate stage in the
sequential development of rasa. No one could compete
with Ācārya Govardhana in his portrayal of the ordinary
hero and heroine who are the shelter of that rasa.
However, he could not describe the other rasas.

(4) The poet Śrutidhara was famous for his ability to
commit any composition to memory after hearing it but
once.


                           29
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

(5) Dhoyī Kavi was commonly known as Kavirāja, the king
of scholars. Although he was exceptionally well-versed
in literature, he could not compose original poetry of
his own.

(6) The sixth poet in the assembly of Lakṣmaṇa Sena was
Śrī Jayadeva. The perfection of language is achieved
only in descriptions of the name, form, qualities and
pastimes of Bhagavān, as confirmed by Śrī Nārada, tad
vāg-visargo janatāgha viplavo (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
1.5.11). This method of flawless composition was known
only to Śrī Jayadeva.

Therefore he expresses his humility as follows: “Does
Jayadeva know how to compose flawless poetry? Not at
all. Umāpati can write meticulously detailed
descriptions; Śaraṇa Kavi is famous for quickly
composing inscrutable verses; Ācārya Govardhana has no
equal; Dhoyī is the king of the literati; and Śrutidhara
has perfect aural retention; but Jayadeva does not know
anything.”

According to the author of Rasa-mañjarī, there were only
five poets in the assembly of Lakṣmaṇa Sena. He
considers the word śrutidharaḥ to be an adjective
qualifying Dhoyī Kavi, not the title of a specific poet.
In this case the meaning becomes, “Dhoyī Kavi can recite
any poem after hearing it but once.”

The presiding deity of speech, Sarasvatī, has proven the
aforementioned interpretation to be correct. Why is Śrī
Gīta-govinda superior to all other types of poetry? It
is naturally salient, emotive, revealing and sweet
because it describes the pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

The present verse features samuccaya alaṅkāra and
śārdūla-vikrīḍita chanda.



Scene One




Song 1


The musical mode is mālava-gauḍa rāga and the rhythm is
rūpaka tāla.



Verse 5

pralaya-payodhi-jale dhṛtavān asi vedam

vihita-vahitra-caritram akhedam

keva dhakeśava dhṛta-mīna-śarīra jaya jagadīśa hare (1)

Translation


                           30
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

O Jagadīśvara! O Hari! From your eternal spiritual
abode, you descend to this temporary world in the form
of a fish and save the Vedas from the ocean of universal
devastation, just as a ship effortlessly rescues a
drowning man. May you be victorious.

Commentary

The sole purpose of Śrī Jayadeva’s writing is to reveal
the supreme sweetness present in the pastimes of Śrī
Rādhā-Mādhava. The crest-jewel of heroes, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is
the original shelter of all existence. All the verses of
this song describe the avatāras of Śrī Kṛṣṇa beginning
with Matsya avatāra. The musical mode is mālava-gauḍa
rāga and the rhythm is rūpaka tāla.

Mālava-gauḍa rāga is characterized thus:



nitambinī-cumbita-vaktra-padmaḥ

śuka-dyutiḥ kuṇḍalavān pramattaḥ

saṅgīta-śālāṁ praviśan pradoṣe

mālā-dharo mālava-rāga-rājaḥ

Mālava, the king of rāgas, enters the music hall in a
state of intoxication, wearing earrings and a garland of
flowers. A shapely heroine is kissing his lotus face,
and his lustre is as emerald as a parrot.



The rhythm known as rūpaka tāla has been employed here.
Rūpaka tāla is recognized by the combination of virām
and druta at the end.

There are four titles for Bhagavān in this verse. The
first one is Keśava for several reasons. (1) The hair
that fell from Bhagavān during his Varāha incarnation
became kuśa grass, which is essential for the
performance of Vedic sacrifices. (2) According to Pāṇinī
– keśād vo ’nyatarasyāma – the word keśava is derived
from the word keśa, meaning “hair” in its widely known
sense, suffixed by the syllable va. (3) Amongst the
twelve vyūha expansions of Bhagavān, the keśava-vyūha
comes first. (4) The author of Bhagavad-guṇa-darpaṇa
states, praśasta-snigdha-nīla-kuṭila-kuntalaḥ – “The
name Keśava implies that Bhagavān is acclaimed for his
soft, black, curling locks of hair.” (5) Keśavaḥ: ko
brahmā īśaś ca tāvapi vayate praśastīti – “The
controller and instructing authority of both ka (Brahmā)
and īśa (Mahādeva Śiva) is called Keśava.” (6) Keśān
vayate – “The best of those who relish rasa, Kṛṣṇa, is
called Keśava because he decorates the hair of the
gopīs.” (7) The destroyer of the Keśī demon is called
Keśava.

The second title is Dhṛta-mīna-śarīra – “You who have
assumed the form of a fish.” Bhagavān descends in
various forms to deliver the devotees and destroy the
sinful. Amongst his innumerable incarnations, ten are

                           31
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

prominent, beginning with Matsya avatāra. In this
incarnation, Bhagavān killed the demon, Hayagrīva, who
had stolen the Vedas.

The third title, Jagadīśa, “Lord of the universe,”
signifies that he is the controller of the entire cosmos
and all the activities of nature (prakṛti). He regulates
the creation, maintenance and dissolution of the
universe and he governs its every detail from within in
the form of antaryāmī, the Supersoul. The name Jagadīśa
is also used to express the compassion of Bhagavān.

The purport of the fourth title, Hari, is harati
bhaktānām kleśam – “Bhagavān descends to relieve his
devotees from the endless distress of the material
world.” The poet has shown the highest regard for
Bhagavān by using these four titles.

Jaya means, “O master! You are expert in discovering
your own eminence. May you kindly manifest that
superiority.”

The line jaya jagadīśa hare is sung at the end of every
verse. Therefore it is called dhruva-pada, the refrain,
in accordance with the convention – dhruvatvāc ca dhruvo
jñeyaḥ.

Here the poet recounts the noble activities of Matsya
avatāra. During the universal dissolution, he
effortlessly rescued the Vedas, Manu, the Seven Sages
and all types of seeds, by pulling them through the vast
waters in a boat attached to his horn. In this
incarnation he also protected Satyavrata Muni.
Therefore, may Bhagavān Keśava be victorious.

This verse features ūrdhvamāgadhī rīti, upamā and
atiśayokti alaṅkāras and vīra-rasa. The sthāyibhāva is
called utsāha. Matsya avatāra is also recognized as the
predominating deity of vībhatsa-rasa (disgust).

Verse 6

kṣitir ati-vipula-tare tiṣṭhati tava pṛṣṭhe

dharaṇi-dharaṇa-kiṇa-cakra-gariṣṭhe

keśava dhṛta-kacchapa-rūpa jaya jagadīśa hare (2)

Translation

O Keśi-niṣūdana! O Jagadīśa! O Hari! Assuming your
tortoise form, you held the earth upon one part of your
expansive back. The fame of the impression made by the
earth on your back is ever-increasing. May you be
victorious!

Commentary

Bhagavān’s tortoise incarnation is being described. “Not
only did you draw this earth (Mandarācala) through the
waters of devastation, you also supported it upon your
back.” Bhagavān is present beneath the earth in his
tortoise incarnation. The earthly realm is situated like
a small toy ball upon his huge back, where it has made a

                           32
Gita-govinda.txt                                  5/5/2017

permanent impression.

“This scar is your ornament. May you be victorious.”

Jaya jagadīśa hare! The whole verse is likened to the
upper lid of the jewelled casket of this refrain.

Verse 7

vasati daśana-śikhare dharaṇī tava lagnā

śaśini kalaṅka-kaleva nimagnā

keśava dhṛta-śūkara-rūpa jaya jagadīśa hare (3)

Translation

O Jagadīśa! O Keśava! O Hari! O you who have assumed the
form of a boar! As the moon appears to contain a
blemish, similarly, the earth is situated upon your
tusks. May you be victorious!

Commentary

Not only does Bhagavān support the earth and all moving
and stationary living beings, he also runs with the
earth planet on his tusks. At the beginning of the
creation, Hiraṇyākṣa stole Bīja-bhūtā Pṛthvī, the earth
goddess, and went down to the Rasātala planetary system.
At that time Bhagavān assumed the form of a boar,
entered into the waters of devastation and rescued
Pṛthvī by lifting her up on the tip of his tusks. He
placed her on the surface of the water, where she
floated on the strength of his yogic power called satya-
saṅkalpa. When Bhagavān was carrying the earth upon his
radiant tusks, she appeared to be as beautiful as the
dark marks on the moon. The poet has compared Bhagavān’s
tusks with the new moon to illustrate the vast size of
his tusks in comparison to the earth. The earth is as
inconspicuous as marks on the moon. The word nimagna
points to Varāhadeva’s identity as the presiding deity
of bhayānaka-rasa (terror). This verse contains upamā
alaṅkāra.

“O you who appear in the form of a boar, may you be
victorious!”

Verse 8

tava kara-kamala-vare nakham adbhuta-śṛṅgam

dalita-hiraṇyakaśipu-tanu-bhṛṅgam

keśava dhṛta-narahari-rūpa jaya jagadīśa hare (4)

Translation

O Jagadīśvara! O Hari! O Keśava! You have assumed the
form of Nṛsiṁha, part man and part lion. With the
wonderful, sharp nails of your excellent lotus hands,
you tear apart the body of Hiraṇyakaśipu, just as a
bumblebee tears a flower. May you be victorious!

Commentary

                           33
Gita-govinda.txt                                  5/5/2017


Now Śrī Jayadeva praises Bhagavān in his Nṛsiṁha
avatāra. Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa is distressed by the sorrow
of others. He can accept any difficulty for himself, but
he cannot tolerate the suffering of others.
Hiraṇyakaśipu, the son of Diti, committed atrocities
against his own son, the great devotee Prahlāda
Mahārāja. So Bhagavān protected Prahlāda by tearing
apart the chest of that powerful demon with his nails.

“O Keśava! You have assumed a form which is part man and
part lion. One is struck with wonder because the sharp
nails of your excellent lotus hands appear to be the
pinnacles of a mountain range. They also resemble the
tips of the best lotus petals. Bumblebees tear apart the
tips of other lotus flowers, but the tips of your lotus
hands have torn apart the bee-like body of the demon
Hiraṇyakaśipu.” This is an example of virodhābhāsa
alaṅkāra, the reverse analogy. Rūpaka alaṅkāra has also
been employed by comparing the demon with a bumblebee to
convey his blackness. In the Viśvakośa Sanskrit
dictionary the word śṛṅga can refer to a musical horn,
excellence and the extreme tip. Śrī Nṛsiṁha is
considered to be the presiding deity of vātsalya-rasa
(parental affection).

Verse 9

chalayasi vikramaṇe balim adbhuta-vāmana

pada-nakha-nīra-janita-jana-pāvana

keśava dhṛta-vāmana-rūpa jaya jagadīśa hare (5)

Translation

O master of the entire universe! O Śrī Hari! O Keśava!
Assuming the form of a dwarf, you cheat King Bali on the
pretext of begging for three paces of land. The
population of the universe has become purified by the
water that touched your toenails (the Ganges). O
wonderful Vāmanadeva, may you be victorious!

Commentary

“You went to the sacrificial arena of Bali on the
pretext of begging alms. After requesting the donation
of three steps of land, you assumed your gigantic
Trivikrama form and spanned the upper and lower
planetary systems.”

The verb chalayasi is in the present tense to imply,
“After mercifully bestowing a benediction upon Bali, you
now reside with him in Pātāla.” Alternatively, “You have
been repeatedly cheating him in the form of a dwarf
since time without beginning.”

The phrase pada-nakha-nīra-janita-jana-pāvana says that
Bhagavān has purified the whole material world by
manifesting the Ganges from his toenails. As Bhagavān
spanned the earth, Brahmā saw his lotus feet in
Brahmāloka and offered arghya, the water offered in the
formal reception of a dignitary. That very water became
the Ganges. Therefore, “O Keśava, may you be

                           34
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

victorious!”

This verse is an example of the secondary mellow of
wonderment (adbhuta-rasa). Here Bhagavān appears as
Vāmanadeva, the presiding deity of sakhya-rasa
(friendship).

Verse 10

kṣatriya-rudhira-maye jagad-apagata-pāpam

snapayasi payasi śamita-bhava-tāpam

keśava dhṛta-bhṛgupati-rūpa jaya jagadīśa hare (6)

Translation

O Jagadīśa! O Hari! O Keśi-niṣūdana! You have assumed
the form of Bhṛgupati (Paraśurāma). You have dispelled
the anguish of the material world by destroying the
dynasty of the reigning military caste and purifying the
universe with the water of their blood. O you who have
appeared as Bhṛgupati, may you be victorious!

Commentary

The Paraśurāma incarnation is being glorified. “O Hari,
assuming the form of Bhṛgupati, you destroyed the
warrior caste who had become inimical to the brāhmaṇas;
not only once, but twenty-one times. You have made the
lake of their blood a place of pilgrimage at Kurukṣetra.
By bathing there, all the living entities of the
universe are delivered from the reactions of their sins
and they attain liberation from the suffering of
material existence. When spiritual knowledge awakens,
suffering is relieved and one is pacified.”

This verse features svābhāvikokti alaṅkāra and adbhuta-
rasa. The Paraśurāma avatāra is considered to be the
presiding deity of raudra-rasa (anger). The hero of the
first six verses of this song is dhīroddhata nāyaka.

Verse 11

vitarasi dikṣu raṇe dik-pati-kamanīyam

daśa-mukha-mauli-baliṁ ramaṇīyam

keśava dhṛta-raghupati-rūpa jaya jagadīśa hare (7)

Translation

O master of the universe, Śrī Hari! O killer of the Keśī
demon! Assuming the form of Śrī Rāma, you engage in
battle with the ten-headed demon king, Rāvaṇa, and
distribute his extremely attractive and coveted crowned
heads as sacrificial offerings to the presiding demigods
of the directions such as Indra. May you be victorious!

Commentary

The character of Śrī Rāma is being described in the
seventh verse of this song. “My Lord, you have appeared
as the tilaka of the Raghu dynasty, Śrī Rāma, to

                           35
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

tolerate sufferings such as separation from your
beloved.”

Śrī Bhagavān fought with Rāvaṇa, who had caused the
whole world to weep. In that terrific battle, Bhagavān
cut off Rāvaṇa’s ten heads and offered them as oblations
to the presiding deities of the ten directions. In this
way he brought peace to a world that had been
overwhelmed with catastrophes created by the evil
rākṣasa dynasty.

The sacrificial offering of Rāvaṇa’s heads was coveted
by the presiding deities of the directions. This
oblation signalled the death of Rāvaṇa and thus gave
great pleasure to all the people of the world. Śrī
Jayadeva has expressed this with the words “dikpati-
kamanīyam” and “ramaṇīyam”. There are ten dikpālas,
presiding deities of the ten directions, and the crowned
heads of Rāvaṇa were also ten in number. Therefore this
offering was kamanīya, immensely pleasing to the
dikpālas, who each received one crowned head.

Bhagavān has increased the bliss of the entire
population of the world by killing Rāvaṇa because Rāvaṇa
was habituated to inflicting pain upon others.

In this verse the hero is dhīrodātta nāyaka. Bhagavān’s
Rāma avatāra is the presiding deity of karuṇa-rasa
(compassion).

The etymology of the phrase daśa-mukha-mauli-balim is,
daśa-mukhasya ye maulaya tānyeva balim – “The crowned
heads of Rāvaṇa are the offering.” Although the word
mauli means both “head” and “crown”, the accepted
meaning is “crowned head” in accordance with the
impartial interpretation (taṭastha-lakṣaṇa).

Verse 12

vahasi vapuṣi viśade vasanaṁ jaladābham

hala-hati-bhīti-milita-yamunābham

keśava dhṛta-haladhara-rūpa jaya jagadīśa hare (8)

Translation

O Jagat-svāmi! O killer of the demon Keśī! O Hari! You
have assumed a brilliant white complexion in your form
as Baladeva Prabhu. You wear blue clothes that resemble
the beauty of newly formed, fresh rainclouds. It seems
that the River Yamunā has hidden in your cloth, fearing
the blow of your plough. O carrier of the plough, may
you be victorious!

Commentary

Bhagavān’s form as the carrier of the plough, Śrī
Balarāma, is being glorified in the eighth verse of this
song. The words vapuṣi viśade indicate that the fair
complexion of Śrī Balarāma is radiantly white. The word
jaladābha indicates that Balarāma Prabhu wears blue-
green-coloured clothes. Dark blue clouds that are dense
with water are called jalada. The word jaladābha is

                           36
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

derived thus jaladasya ābhā śyāmā yasya tam. As a fresh
raincloud is a source of joy for a farmer, Śrī
Balarāma’s cloth bestows bliss upon the devotees.

The etymology of the phrase hala-hati-bhīti-milita-
yamunābham is halena yā hatiḥ tad bhītyā militā yā
yamunā tasyā ābhā iva ābhā yasya tat. It is not that
Bhagavān only finds the distress of separation from his
beloved to be intolerable, as he did in the Śrī Rāma
incarnation. Here the poet says, “You have forcibly
dragged your dear devotee, Yamunā, just to relieve the
minor distress of your beloveds’ fatigue. The blue
clothes upon your radiant white limbs give the
impression that Yamunā has entered your charming blue
cloth, fearing the blow of your plough.”

The hero of this verse, Śrī Balarāma, is depicted as
dhīra-lalita nāyaka. He is considered to be the
presiding deity of hasya-rasa (divine comedy).

Verse 13

nindasi yajña-vidher ahaha śruti-jātam

sadaya-hṛdaya darśita-paśu-ghātam

keśava dhṛta-buddha-śarīra jaya jagadīśa hare (9)

Translation

O Jagadīśvara! O Hari! O Keśi-niṣūdana! You have assumed
the form of Buddha. Being compassionate and sensitive,
you decry the Vedas when you see the violence inflicted
upon animals in the course of sacrificial performances.
May you be victorious!

Commentary

Now Bhagavān’s Buddha avatāra is being eulogized. The
Vedas are the embodiment of the breath of Bhagavān,
tasya niḥśvasitaḥ vedāḥ. They are also considered to be
his personal orders. When conceptions opposed to the
Vedas began to flourish in the name of Vedic sacrifice,
Bhagavān descended in the form of Buddha.

One might ask, “If you have personally made the
regulations of sacrifice, then why did you speak out
against them? It is surprising that you are the original
propagator of the Vedas and now you are rebuking them.”

In response it is stated here sadaya-hṛdaya darśita-
paśu-ghātam – “Because you are kind to animals, you have
bewildered the demons by instructing them that non-
violence is the highest religion (ahīṁsā paramo
dharmaḥ). In the form of Mohinī-mūrti you bewildered the
demons and saved the ambrosia. Similarly, to bewilder
the demons and save the animals, in the form of Buddha
you later taught that sacrifices were improper.”

Bhagavān’s heart was moved with compassion on seeing the
violence committed against sacrificial animals. In this
avatāra, he was impelled by pity to decry the Vedic
scriptures advocating sacrifice.


                           37
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

In this verse the hero is dhīra-śānta nāyaka. Bhagavān
Buddha is considered to be the presiding deity of śānta-
rasa (tranquillity).

Verse 14

mleccha-nivaha-nidhane kalayasi karavālam

dhūmaketum iva kim api karālam

keśava dhṛta-kalki-śarīra jaya jagadīśa hare (10)

Translation

O Śrī Hari, controller of the universe! O Killer of
Keśī! Assuming the form of Kalki, you wield a fearsome
sword that resembles a foreboding star as you slaughter
the barbarians. May you be victorious!

Commentary

Now the poet recounts the glories of Bhagavān’s Kalki
avatāra. “Without making war at the end of Kali-yuga,
the savage population will not be destroyed. And without
such destruction, peace will not be established.
Therefore you assume the form of Kalki and exterminate
the barbarians. You wield a terrifying sword that
appears to be death personified as you annihilate the
degraded humans.”

The poet has used the words kim api to emphasize that
this sword is the embodiment of terror.

Dhūmaketum iva – Dhūmaketu is the name of a particular
dreaded star that signifies impending disaster.
Bhagavān’s sword is the Dhūmaketu that spells imminent
danger for the barbaric humans. The word dhūmaketu also
means “fire”, indicating that his sword is undesirable
for the uncivilized society.

The hero of the current verse is dhīroddhata nāyaka.
Kalki Bhagavān is considered to be the presiding deity
of vīra-rasa (chivalry).

Verse 15

śrī-jayadeva-kaver idam uditam udāram

śṛṇu sukha-daṁ śubha-daṁ bhava-sāram

keśava dhṛta-daśa-vidha-rūpa jaya jagadīśa hare (11)

Translation

O Jagadīśvara! O Śrī Hari! O Keśi-niṣūdana! O you who
appear in ten different forms! May you be pleased to
hear this magnanimous prayer of glorification by Śrī
Jayadeva, which bestows both happiness and
auspiciousness. It is the extracted essence of all
material existence.

Commentary

After singing, “Victory to the ten individual avatāras

                           38
Gita-govinda.txt                                  5/5/2017

who are the presiding deities of the various rasas,” now
the great poet Jayadeva makes his humble request to the
undisputed hero of all rasas. “O you who are the
embodiment of all ten forms, may you be victorious!”

Sukha-dam – This poetic eulogy bestows transcendental
happiness as soon as one hears it because it immediately
removes one’s absorption in anything else.

Śubha-dam – This prayer bestows auspiciousness upon the
world because it reveals the mysteries of your
appearance pastimes, and it destroys all impediments
obscuring the attainment of Paramātmā.

Bhava-sāram – This phrase is an example of a compound in
which the middle term has been elided (madhya-pada lopī
samāsa). The full phrase is bhava-cchedaka hetu madhye
sāram – “This prayer is theessence of all processes for
crossing over the ocean of material existence.”

Jaya – Use of the present tense indicates that all
Bhagavān’s incarnations are eternal and their pastimes
are also eternal. The poet has also testified that Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is the original cause of all incarnations. All
avatāras have manifested from him. He is the ultimate
reality appearing in different forms. Therefore, “O
complete origin of all avatāras, you endlessly revel in
your pastimes. You attract the hearts of everyone and
bestow sublime transcendental happiness upon them. May
you be eternally victorious! Your devotee, Śrī Jayadeva,
is offering this prayer unto you.”

In this verse we find śānta-rasa and paryāyokta
alaṅkāra.

Verse 16



vedān uddharate jaganti vahate bhū-golam udbibhrate

daityaṁ dārayate baliṁ chalayate kṣatra-kṣayaṁ kurvate

paulastyaṁ jayate halaṁ kalayate kāruṇyam ātanvate

mlecchān mūrcchayate daśākṛti-kṛte kṛṣṇāya tubhyaṁ namaḥ

Translation

Unto the deliverer of the Vedas, the upholder of the
world of moving and stationary living beings, the
saviour of Mother Earth, the slayer of Hiraṇyakaśipu,
the deceiver of Bali, the destroyer of the kṣatriyas,
the conqueror of Paulastya (Rāvaṇa), the wielder of the
plough called Āyudha, the advocate of compassion and the
slayer of the barbarians; unto you who assume these ten
spiritual forms, O Śrī Kṛṣṇa! I offer my obeisances unto
you.

Commentary

In the ten verses of the first song of Act One of Śrī
Gīta-govinda, Śrī Jayadeva has depicted the charming
pastimes of the avatāras of Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Śrī

                           39
Gita-govinda.txt                                 5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa manifests himself in the form of these ten
avatāras. He has delivered the Vedas in the form of
Matsya, he upheld the world in the form of Kūrma, he
saved Mother Earth in the form of Varāha, he killed
Hiraṇyakaśipu in the form of Nṛsiṁha, he cheated Bali
and made him his own in the form of Vāmana, he
annihilated the wicked kṣatriyas in the form of
Paraśurāma, he chastised the miscreants in the form of
Balabhadra, he advocated compassion in the form of
Buddha and he slew the barbarians in the form of Kalki.

“O Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa! O you who assume these ten
incarnations, obeisances unto you.”

The first song, entitled Daśāvatāra-stotra, is composed
in the chanda called kīrti-dhavala. Appropriate rāgas
include pārasvara and madhyama in ādi tāla. We also find
vilambita laya, mādhyamī rīti and śṛṅgāra-rasa.



Scene Two




Song 2


The musical mode is gurjarī rāga and the rhythm is
niḥsāra tāla.



Gurjarī rāga: The personification of this rāga resembles
the śyāmā heroine. Her body is warm in the cold season
and cool in the hot season. Her breasts are extremely
firm and her hair is captivating. Simply by the touch of
her feet, the aśoka tree blossoms out of season. She
arrives at a bed that is decorated with soft buds of the
best sandalwood trees. Being from the south, she assumes
semitones between the scale degrees.



The rhythm is niḥsāra tāla with two druta beats and two
laghu beats.



Verse 17

śrita-kamalā-kuca-maṇḍala dhṛta-kuṇḍala e

kalita-lalita-vanamāla jaya jaya deva hare (1)

Translation

O Deva! O Hari! O you who take shelter of the round
breasts of Śrī Rādhā! (O you who revel in pastimes with
the full bosom of Kamalā!) O you whose ears are
decorated with earrings and who wear an enchanting
garland of forest flowers! O Hari, may you be

                           40
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

triumphant!

Commentary

In the first song, Kṛṣṇa was described as the subject of
everyone’s worship. Now Śrī Jayadeva glorifies him as
the exclusive subject of contemplation and meditation.
These prayers reveal both Kṛṣṇa’s highest excellence as
the crest-jewel of all heroes and his various moods as
the chivalrous (dhīrodātta), the arrogant (dhīroddhata),
the sober (dhīra-śānta) and the romantic (dhīra-lalita)
hero.

Śrita-kamalā-kuca-maṇḍala e – the etymology of this
phrase is śrita-kamalāyāḥ kuca-maṇḍalaṁ yenā ’sau
tatsaṁvukṣai śrita-kamalā-kuca-maṇḍala, “Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
the servant of the round breasts of Rādhā.” He is the
beloved of Lakṣmī, his dearmost goddess of fortune. This
line infers Kṛṣṇa revels in amorous games; he is
carefree, cunning in the arts of love and expert in
joking.

Dhṛta-kuṇḍala e (dhṛte kuṇḍala yena sa tathā tasya
sambuddhiḥ) – “He who has put on earrings.” The beauty
of his lotus face is further enhanced by those makara-
shaped earrings.2 Kalita-lalita-vanamāla – “You have put
on an exceedingly attractive garland of forest flowers.”
The author of the Viśvakośa dictionary states:



āpāda-lambinī mālā

vanamāleti tāṁ viduḥ

patra-puṣpa-mayī mālā

vanamālā prakīrtitā

A garland that hangs all the way down to one’s feet is
called vanamālā. Such a garland is made from leaves and
flowers.

Thus Kṛṣṇa’s fresh youthfulness has been proclaimed by
these three adjectival phrases. His style of dressing
has also been revealed – gopa-veśa veṇu-kara, nava-
kiśora naṭa-vara. “Decorated like a dancer upon the
stage, the cowherd boy Kṛṣṇa is a fresh youth with a
flute in his hand.” (Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-
līlā 21.101)

Hare – O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, you attract the heart, mind and
prana (life-air) of everyone by displaying the splendour
of your marvellous pastimes amongst them.

The verses are connected by the refrain jaya jaya deva
hare.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is portrayed as dhīra-lalita nāyaka. This hero
is characterized by his skill in eros, his fresh
youthfulness, his expertise in humour, the absence of
anxiety, and submission to his beloveds.

The letter “e” is an embellishment (ālāpa) appropriately

                           41
Gita-govinda.txt                                  5/5/2017

placed to complete the rāga.

Verse 18

dina-maṇi-maṇḍala-maṇḍana bhava-khaṇḍana e

muni-jana-mānasa-haṁsa jaya jaya deva hare (2)

Translation

O Deva! O Hari! You are the ornament of the sun globe.
You sever the bondage of material existence. You are the
swan who sports in the Mānasa-sarovara Lake of the
sages’ hearts. May you be triumphant! May you be
triumphant!

Commentary

Dina-maṇi-maṇḍala-maṇḍana – “As the sun is worshipful
for everyone, you are worthy of contemplation and
worship.”

The Vedas enjoin, dheyaḥ sadā savitṛ-maṇḍala-madhya-
vartī, nārāyaṇaḥ sarasijāsana sanniviṣṭaḥ – “Śrī
Bhagavān resides within the sun planet in the form of
the Indwelling Witness (antaryāmī). This is to be
remembered during meditation.”

And, jyotir-abhyantare śyāmasundaram atulam – “The
incomparable Śyāmasundara resides within the light.”

Bhava-khaṇḍana e – The qualities of the soul have been
described in Chāndogya Upaniṣad (8.7.1):



eṣa ātmāpahata-pāpmā vijaro vimṛtyur viśoko

vijighatso ’pipāsaḥ satya-kāmaḥ satya-saṅkalpaḥ

By nature the soul is free from the bondage of actions;
free from old age, death, lamentation, bewilderment,
hunger and thirst. He has no sensual desires and all his
spiritual desires become realized.

These qualities are concealed as long as one is fallen
in material existence, yet they manifest when Bhagavān
bestows his mercy. Therefore Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa has been
addressed as bhava-khaṇḍana – “He who demolishes one’s
entanglement in material existence.”

Muni-jana-mānasa-haṁsa (muni-janānām mānasāni iva
mānasāni teṣu haṁsa iva haṁsa) – “As the king of swans
sports upon Lake Mānasa, you enact your pastimes upon
the minds of the thoughtful sages. An internal vision of
your loving play is continuously revealed to them.”

The poised visionaries are tolerant in the face of
adversity and decorated with all meritorious qualities
such as humility. Thus they are fully engaged in the
supramundane service of Kṛṣṇa (bhajana). By his mercy
they become completely detached from material existence.

Deva – Bhagavān is called Deva because he is replete

                           42
Gita-govinda.txt                                  5/5/2017

with divine attributes (divya-guṇa).

Jaya – This verb reveals the poet’s immense honour for
Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

The hero of this verse is the sober dhīra-śānta nāyaka.

Verse 19

kāliya-viṣa-dhara-gañjana jana-rañjana e

yadu-kula-nalina-dineśa jaya jaya deva hare (3)

Translation

O Deva! O Hari! You pulverize the pride of the venomous
snake, Kāliya. You fill the hearts of your dearest ones
with endless joy. You are the sun that makes the lotus
of the Yadu dynasty bloom. May you be triumphant! May
you be triumphant!

Commentary

After praying to Kṛṣṇa as the subject of his worship,
the poet now glorifies Kṛṣṇa as the subject of his
meditation. Here Śrī Kṛṣṇa is portrayed as the arrogant
hero, dhīroddhata nāyaka.

Kāliya-viṣa-dhara-gañjana – Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa crushed
the pride of the hundred-headed venomous serpent,
Kāliya, who lived in the River Yamunā at Kāliya-daha in
Vṛndāvana.

Jana-rañjana e – By subduing Kāliya, Bhagavān gave
pleasure to the folk of Vraja. Kṛṣṇa knows very well
that they do not desire anything but his welfare.
Moreover he thinks, “They cannot even stay alive without
me.” Their protection and their satisfaction also become
Kṛṣṇa’s responsibility. “O you who bring delight to your
devotees, may you be triumphant!”

Yadu-kula-nalina-dineśa – As a lotus blossoms when the
sun rises, the Yadu dynasty flourishes when Bhagavān
descends amongst them. The cowherd folk of Vraja are
also Yādavas. Therefore Kṛṣṇa is the only light of
Gokula.

This verse describes Bhagavān as a powerful individual
who enlivens his devotees and who belongs to a noble
family.

“O Deva, kindly crush the vanity of envious egotists
such as ourselves, thereby making us deeply happy.”

The arrogant hero, dhīroddhata nāyaka, is malicious,
proud, treacherous, angry, fickle and boastful.

Verse 20

madhu-mura-naraka-vināśana garuḍāsana e

sura-kula-keli-nidāna jaya jaya deva hare (4)

Translation

                           43
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017


O Deva! O Hari! O destroyer of the demons Madhu, Mura
and Naraka! O you who ride upon your transcendent eagle
Garuḍa! You inspire the demigods’ delightful play. May
you be triumphant! May you be triumphant!

Commentary

Madhu-mura-naraka-vināśana – Bhagavān destroys the
demons Madhu and Naraka during his residence in Dvārakā.
The reference to Mura alludes to his mystical powers of
deception.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa exhibits ninety-six heroic traits while
performing his eternal pleasure pastimes in three
spiritual realms: Gokula, Mathurā and Dvārakā. His role
as the arrogant hero (dhīroddhata) is indicated here.

Garuḍāsana e (garuḍa āsanaṁ yasya tat-sambuddhau) –
Bhagavān is Garuḍāsana, one who accepts the king of
birds, Garuḍa, as his throne.

Sura-kula-keli-nidāna – He increases the happiness of
the demigods by annihilating the demons and he
personally engages in blissful amusements along with his
pure devotees.

“O Hari, may you be triumphant!”

Verse 21

amala-kamala-dala-locana bhava-mocana e

tri-bhuvana-bhavana-nidhāna jaya jaya deva hare (5)

Translation

O Deva! O Hari! Your wide eyes resemble the petals of an
immaculate lotus flower. You bestow emancipation from
the sorrow of material existence. You are the foundation
of the three worlds. May you be triumphant! May you be
triumphant!

Commentary

This verse portrays Kṛṣṇa as the chivalrous hero
(dhīrodātta nāyaka).

Amala-kamala-dala-locana (amale ye kamala-dale te iva
locane yasyā ’sau tathā vidhaḥ tat sambuddhau) – “He
whose eyes are immaculate like the petals of a spotless
lotus flower.” His eyes allay the suffering and steal
away the heart, mind and prana of all, as stated in Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 21.105).



terache netrānta vāṇa, tāra dṛḍha sandhāna

vindhe rādhā-gopī-gaṇa-mana

The powerful arrow of his sidelong glance pierces the
hearts of Rādhā and the gopīs.


                              44
Gita-govinda.txt                                  5/5/2017

Bhava-mocana – Bhagavān compassionately delivers his
devotees from the endless chain of birth and death and
he protects all living entities.

Tribhuvana-bhavana-nidhāna – Śrī Hari pervades the three
planetary divisions of the universe (tribhuvana). He is
the storehouse of treasure (nidhi) in the palace
(bhavana) of the three worlds, the primal cause and the
original father.

All the qualities of the chivalrous hero – gravity,
courtesy, forgiveness, compassion, adherence to one’s
vows, modesty in speaking, honesty and the power to
thwart the pride of other heroes – exist in their
fullness only in the Supreme Personality, Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

“May you be triumphant!”

Verse 22

janaka-sutā-kṛta-bhūṣaṇa jita-dūṣaṇa e

samara-śamita-daśakaṇṭha jaya jaya deva hare (6)

Translation

O Deva! O Hari! You decorate Sītā-devī in your
incarnation as Śrī Rāma. You defeat the demon Dūṣaṇa and
you restore peace to the world by killing the ten-headed
Rāvaṇa in battle. May you be triumphant! May you be
triumphant!

Commentary

Janaka-sūtā-kṛta-bhūṣaṇa – “O Deva, as a chivalrous
hero, you decorate the daughter of Janaka Mahārāja with
your own hands. Your complexion is as dark as freshly
grown dūrvā grass. Therefore you are the ornament of
Sītā’s golden form. O you who are steadfast in your
vows, may you be triumphant!”

Jita-dūṣaṇa e (jita-dūṣaṇau yenā ’sau) – “During your
exile in the Daṇḍaka forest, you kill the cannibal
Dūṣaṇa.”

Samara-śamita-daśakaṇṭha – “The demon king Rāvaṇa was
steadfast in battle, belligerent and boastful. Yet you
made such a powerful warrior fall to the ground and
become silent. O master of all chivalrous heroes! O
Hari, may you who are adorned with the attributes of
profound dignity and forgiveness be triumphant!”

Verse 23

abhinava-jaladhara-sundara dhṛta-mandara e

śrī-mukha-candra-cakora jaya jaya deva hare (7)

Translation

O Śyāmasundara, your complexion is lustrous like a fresh
raincloud. O holder of the Mandara Mountain! As a cakora
bird pines for the moon, you are incessantly attached to
the moonlike face of the supreme goddess of fortune, Śrī

                           45
Gita-govinda.txt                                   5/5/2017

Rādhā. O Hari! O Deva! May you be triumphant! May you be
triumphant!

Commentary

In this verse the poet has presented the pastimes of
various incarnations of Bhagavān while establishing the
predominance of the romantic hero (dhīra-lalita nāyaka).

Dhṛta-mandara – “When Mandara Mountain would not remain
steady, you became a tortoise and held it firmly in
place. Simultaneously assuming another form, you then
assisted the demigods in churning the ocean of milk.”
Alternatively, dhṛta-mandara means “You who hold firm
the bosom of Śrī Rādhā.”

Śrī-mukha-candra-cakora – The lotus face of Rādhā is a
constant source of joy for Kṛṣṇa. As a cakora bird in a
state of distraction stares with unblinking eyes in the
direction of the moon, Bhagavān feels extreme jubilation
seeing Rādhā’s enchanting face. “O Deva! O Hari! May you
be triumphant!”

The phrase abhinava-jaladhara sundara sheds light upon
Bhagavān’s fresh youthfulness. The word cakora indicates
that he is subjugated by the affection of his lovers.
The phrase dhṛta-mandara, referring to Kṛṣṇa’s pastime
of holding the breasts of Rādhā, reveals his dexterity
in amorous play. These three qualities are prominent in
the romantic hero. “O master, may you be triumphant!”

Verse 24

tava caraṇe praṇatā vayam iti bhāvaya e

kuru kuśalaṁ praṇateṣu jaya jaya deva hare (8)

Translation

O Bhagavān, we have taken exclusive refuge at your lotus
feet. May you confer auspiciousness by blessing us with
the gift of transcendental love. O Deva! O Hari! May you
be triumphant! May you be triumphant!

Commentary

Śrī Jayadeva beseeches Śrī Kṛṣṇa to mercifully confer
auspiciousness upon the reciters and hearers of his
poem. “O ocean of auspicious qualities, we bow down and
surrender at your lotus feet. May you destroy all the
sins and suffering of your devotees. You and your
pastimes are the embodiment of the highest bliss. May
you kindly expand our joy by granting a vision of those
pastimes within our hearts.”

Verse 25

śrī-jayadeva-kaver idaṁ kurute mudam e

maṅgalam ujjvala-gītaṁ jaya jaya deva hare (9)

Translation

O Deva, may this charming, radiant and melodious

                           46
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

invocation of auspiciousness (maṅgalācaraṇa) composed by
Śrī Jayadeva increase your happiness. May it bestow
bliss upon your devotees who hear and recite your
glorious qualities. May you be triumphant! May you be
triumphant!

Commentary

On completing his eulogy of Bhagavān, Śrī Jayadeva
presents this humble supplication, “O Deva, by reciting
this auspicious invocation, I have taken a vow to sing
about the mellows of paramour love, ujjvala-rasa, and to
describe your amorous pastimes with Rādhā. Simply by
doing so, turbulent waves of euphoria have begun to rise
within my heart. If there is so much bliss in this
invocation, then I cannot estimate how much there will
be in the narration of your pastimes. May my auspicious
song be a source of joy for you both and may it also
confer spiritual success upon those who hear and recite
it.”

The metre of this song is maṅgala chanda.

Verse 26



padmā-payodhara-taṭī-parirambha-lagna-

kāśmīra-mudritam uro madhusūdanasya

vyaktānurāgam iva khelad-anaṅga-kheda-

svedāmbu-pūram anupūrayatu priyaṁ vaḥ

Translation

After embracing Rādhā, Kṛṣṇa’s chest bears the coloured
kuṅkuma imprint of her breasts, as if the deep love
within his heart is manifesting outwardly. His chest is
also covered with droplets of perspiration from the
exertion of passionate love-games (kandarpa-krīḍā). May
the chest of Madhusūdana, decorated thus during union
with his beloved, fulfil the hearts’ desires of you all.

Commentary

After offering obeisance to Śrī Kṛṣṇa in the previous
song, Śrī Jayadeva has recited the present verse to
benedict the audience.

Padmā-payodhara-taṭī – When Kṛṣṇa embraces his dearest
beloved, the vermillion cosmetic (kuṅkuma-keśara) that
was smeared down to her nipples melts and makes an
imprint of her breast upon Bhagavān’s chest. His heart
is always coloured by deep attachment (anurāga) to Rādhā
and his affection for her is incomparable. The words
payodhara-taṭī indicate that Rādhā’s full breasts are
highly raised and that her nipples resemble the peak of
a mountain surrounded by uneven terrain.

Parirambha-lagna-kāśmīra – The print of Rādhā’s breasts
on Kṛṣṇa’s chest indicates their immersion in a
prolonged embrace.

                           47
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017


Mudritam uro – The image of Rādhā’s bosom on Kṛṣṇa’s
chest has been printed like a seal of approval. The
beauty of his chest is enhanced immeasurably by this
display of love. Oh, how virtuous is their excessive
affection.

Vyaktānurāgam iva – The loving attachment (anurāga)
previously hidden within his heart has become clearly
manifest. It has manifested its colour outwardly so his
heart cannot be smeared by the love of anyone else.

Khelad-anaṅga-kheda-svedāmbu-puram – Droplets of
perspiration on Kṛṣṇa’s broad chest tell of his
exhaustion from prolonged engagement in the sports of
Cupid. Thus the love within his heart has become
visible, disguised as a mixture of her vermillion and
his perspiration.

Anupurayatu priyaṁ vaḥ – “May Kṛṣṇa’s vermillion-
coloured chest fulfil our most cherished desires by
increasing the divine love in our hearts.”

This verse has been sung in vasanta rāga, alluding to
the nature of Bhagavān in springtime. The heroine is
mugdhā nāyikā and the hero is kuśala nāyaka. Here we
find vasanta-tilakā chanda. The alaṅkāras include āśīḥ,
utprekṣā and anuprāsa. The rasa is śṛṅgāra.



Scene Three

Verse 27



vasante vāsantī-kusuma-sukumārair avayavair

bhramantīṁ kāntāre bahu-vihita-kṛṣṇānusaraṇām

amandaṁ kandarpa-jvara-janita-cintākulatayā

valad-bādhāṁ rādhāṁ sarasam idam ūce sahacarī

Translation

Once, in the splendid spring season, when Rādhikā was
pining for Kṛṣṇa, she began to search for him in one
forest grove after another. Her elegant, young limbs,
soft as mādhavī flowers, grew weary and Cupid made her
mind delirious with anxiety. At that time, her intimate
friend lovingly addressed her as follows.

Commentary

Śrī Jayadeva has depicted the pre-eminent virtues of Śrī
Rādhā-Mādhava by describing their auspicious and
endearing meeting. In that prologue, the lotus of the
poet’s heart began to bloom with joy. Therefore he was
moved to portray Kṛṣṇa as Rādhikā’s anukūla nāyaka,
adorned with the attributes of the dakṣiṇa, dhṛṣṭa and
śaṭha nāyaka. In accordance with sūcī-kaṭāha-nyāya, the
logic of accomplishing a relatively effortless task

                           48
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

prior to attempting a strenuous one, Śrī Śukadeva first
demonstrated the excellence of all the gopīs before
finally establishing the supremacy of Rādhā. Similarly,
Śrī Jayadeva will describe herein the symptoms of eight
types of nāyikā3 in Rādhā, ultimately to establish her
as the crest jewel of all heroines.

In the current verse Rādhikā is depicted as a heroine
who is anxious due to separation from her beloved
(utkaṇṭhitā nāyikā). Bharata Muni has explained the
symptoms of this heroine in Nāṭya-śāstra, his work on
dramatic theory. This heroine is wanton, afflicted with
sensual passion and a high fever. The limbs of her
lacklustre body tremble, her bodily hair stands on end
and she is repeatedly bewildered. She experiences bodily
tremors and intense horripilation. Her speech is
impelled by fervent impatience. In Śṛṅgāra-tilaka (1.78)
the symptoms of virahotkaṇṭhitā nāyikā have been
described as follows:



utkā bhavati sā yasyāḥ

saṅketaṁ nāgataḥ priyaḥ

tasyā ’nāgamane hetuṁ

cintayaty ākulā yathā

A heroine whose hero does not arrive punctually at the
appointed meeting place is called virahotkaṇṭhitā
nāyikā. She carefully ponders over the reasons for her
beloved’s absence and becomes fraught with anxiety.

The current verse is the foundation of vipralambha-
śṛṅgāra, a lover’s sentiments during separation. The
poet narrates an incident in which one sakhī of Rādhikā
says, “O Rādhā, your body is as soft as a mādhavī
flower, yet you are wandering in search of your lover
here in the undergrowth of the forest, which is full of
thorns and sharp grass. Despite searching extensively,
you have not found your dearest one. You are tormented
by Cupid’s arrows and burning in a fever of sensuous
desires as you pine for Kṛṣṇa’s association.”

The specific time or season, indicated by the word
vasanta, springtime, is the stimulant (uddīpana-vibhāva)
in this verse. The word calad (an alternative reading
for the word valad) is an adjective referring to Rādhā,
indicating that she has repeatedly searched for Kṛṣṇa in
the forest. Hoping against hope, she thinks, “Perhaps my
dearest is about to arrive. He may come at any moment
now.”

Vāsantī-kusuma-sukumārair avayavaiḥ – “The limbs of
Rādhā’s body resemble spring flowers.” The comparison
has been made to convey the tenderness of her youthful
beauty.

Vāsantī-kusuma – The mādhavī vine comes into full bloom
during the spring season. This phrase indicates that Śrī
Rādhā’s limbs are as enchanting and delicate as the
flowers of the mādhavī vine.

                           49
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017


“O Rādhā, it is certain that your beloved has abandoned
you, and now he must be enjoying loving pastimes with
someone else. On the night of the first autumnal rāsa-
līlā, Kṛṣṇa experienced your incomparable sweetness and
began to consider his celebrated loving attachment to
you to be successful. Therefore, sometimes he searches
around for a few days, as if mining for precious stones,
just to find out whether or not anyone in Vraja-maṇḍala
is equal to you. To satisfy his curiosity, Yogamāyā
inspired Kaṁsa to send Akrūra to Nanda Gaon. Then Kṛṣṇa
set off with Akrūra for Mathurā, which is densely
populated with an astronomical number of women.

“Kṛṣṇa discovered that no one in Mathurā-maṇḍala could
compare with the beauty and attractive qualities of the
damsels of Vraja. Then he set off for Dvārakā, as if
impelled by the desire to find your equal. In Dvārakā he
married the daughters of kings, but still his quest was
not complete. Then he married the sixteen thousand
princesses who had been kidnapped by Narakāsura. They
included celestial maidens, maidens amongst the
attendants of Kuvera, the daughters of serpents, and
human damsels. But still, O Rādhikā, he could not find
anyone like you, so he has returned again to Vraja after
killing Dantavakra.”

Kṛṣṇa’s return to Vraja, after his long-term domicile in
a distant land, is discussed in Padma Purāṇa:



kṛṣṇo ’pi taṁ dantavakraṁ hatvā yamunām uttīrya nanda-
vrajaṁ gatvā sotkaṇṭhau pitarau abhivādyāśvāsya tābhyāṁ
sāśru-kaṇṭham āliṅgitaḥ sakala gopa-vṛndān
praṇamyāśvāsya sarvān santarpayām āsa

After killing Dantavakra, Kṛṣṇa crossed the Yamunā and
arrived in Vraja. There he offered obeisances to Nanda
and Yaśodā and comforted them in various ways. They
bathed Kṛṣṇa in their tears and pacified their long-
lived anguish by embracing him to their hearts. Then he
met with all the other cowherders and relieved their
sorrows. Finally, he met with the gopīs and soothed
their pain of separation.



In the First Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, the residents
of Dvārakā say:



yarhy ambujākṣāpasasāra bho bhavān

kurūn madhūn vātha suhṛd-didṛkṣayā

tatrābda-koṭi-pratimaḥ kṣaṇo bhaved

raviṁ vinākṣṇor iva nas tavācyuta

O Lotus-eyed one, when you go away to Kurudeśa and
Madhupurī (Vraja-maṇḍala), one moment seems like ten
million aeons. As the eyes see only darkness in the

                           50
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

absence of the sun, in your absence all four directions
appear to be an empty, desolate void.



The gopīs’ happiness upon meeting with their beloved
during the spring season is heart-touching; and their
separation when distanced from him is heart-rending.
Rādhā’s sakhī is reminding her of both subjects.

This verse includes vaidarbhī rīti and upanāgarikā
vṛtti. The metre, śikhariṇī chanda, is defined thus:
rasaiḥ rudraiś chinnā ya-ma-na-sa-bha-lā-gaḥ śikhariṇī.




Song 3


The musical mode is vasanta rāga and the rhythm is yati
tāla.



śikhaṇḍa-barhoccaya-baddha-cūḍaḥ

puṣṇan pikaṁ cūta-navāṅkureṇa

bhraman mudā-rāmam anaṅga mūrtir

marto mātaṅgo hi vasanta-rāgaḥ



The vasanta rāga personified wears a peacock feather
upon his head. He nourishes a throng of the finest
cuckoos with freshly sprouted mango buds. His body
resembles Kāmadeva and he wanders joyfully like the
madly intoxicated king of elephants.



Verse 28

lalita-lavaṅga-latā-pariśīlana-komala-malaya-samīre

madhukara-nikara-karambita-kokila-kūjita-kuñja-kuṭīre

viharati harir iha sarasa-vasante viharati harir iha
sarasa-vasante

nṛtyati yuvati-janena samaṁ sakhi virahi-janasya durante

(refrain) (1)

Translation

“My dear friend Rādhā. Alas, springtime is excruciating
for the forlorn and lonely-hearted. Don’t look! The
Malaya breeze is so enchanting as he arrives and
impetuously embraces the tender, charming creepers again
and again. The forest bower is permeated with the sweet

                           51
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

kuhu sound of the cuckoos and the drone of bees as they
bumble to and fro. Moreover, Kṛṣṇa is also dancing in
this forest bower. He is enjoying romantic pastimes with
some fortunate young lady, while immersed in a festival
of love.”

Commentary

In springtime the trees are infused with new life by the
touch of the Malaya breeze. Bumblebees hum with
excitement on blossoms such as belī and camelī. The
cuckoos coo when they find fresh buds on the mango
trees. In that atmosphere, Kṛṣṇa appears like an
elephant maddened with lust. Wearing a peacock feather
in his turban, he mesmerizes all living entities.

Vasanta rāga is prominent in springtime. In yati tāla
there is tripuṭī of laghu and druta. The word sakhī
conveys the feeling of intimate friendship.

Sarasa-vasante – the adjective sarasa indicates that the
season of spring is relishable and full of astonishing
mellows.

Virahi-janasya durante – It is difficult for abandoned
lovers to pass the time in this provocative spring
season. Śrī Hari steals the mind, heart and prana of
everyone by his appealing pastimes, so separation from
him becomes all the more problematic and intolerable in
springtime.

Lalita-lavaṅga-latā-pariśīlana-komala-malaya-samīre –
This phrase describes the speciality of the location.
The Malaya breeze was already cool, gentle and fragrant,
but it has become even more so by the touch of the
elegant clove vines.

Madhukara-nikara-karambita-kokila-kūjita-kuñja-kuṭīre –
The etymology of this line is, madhukarāṇāṁ yo hi
nikaras tena karambitāḥ miśritāḥ ye kokilāstaiḥ kūjitaḥ
yaḥ kuñja kuṭīraḥ tatra – “The dancing place is a forest
bower resounding with the humming of bees and the cooing
of cuckoos.”

A female attendant is describing the beauty of
springtime in Vṛndāvana to the anxious, lonely heroine
(virahotkaṇṭhitā) Rādhā:

“The fragrance of the flowers, the touch of the Malaya
breeze, the coolness of Yamunā’s water, the handsome
trees tightly embraced by attractive clove creepers, the
burgeoning vines and the tender touch of one’s lover’s
limbs – however pleasant the spring season may be when
lovers meet, it is equally distressing during
separation.

“If an unconscious vine cannot bear to be without her
beloved in the excitement of the romantic season, then
how can a fully conscious vine-like woman? Now the drone
of the bees and the cooing of the cuckoos is ever more
heart-wrenching. When the minds of great sages are
attracted by the fragrance of mādhavī and belī flowers,
then what can be said of hopeful lovers?”


                           52
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

As Rādhā’s friend was speaking, she attained sphūrti, a
momentary inner vision of Mādhava. She continued, “When
a mango tree is embraced by a mādhavī vine, it sprouts
into new buds, just like a man whose hair stands on end
when he is embraced by a beautiful woman. In the same
way, enchanted by Vṛndāvana’s beautiful riverside
forest, today Śrī Hari revels in romantic sports, while
absorbed in the embrace of charming young ladies.”

This verse describes the excitants (uddīpana-vibhāva)
that nourish amorous love in separation (vipralambha-
śṛṅgāra-rasa).

Verse 29

unmada-madana-manoratha-pathika-vadhū-jana-janita-vilāpe

ali-kula-saṅkula-kusuma-samūha-nirākula-bakula-kalāpe

viharati harir iha sarasa-vasante... (2)

Translation

“My dear friend, when husbands travel away from home,
their lonely wives lament and weep incessantly. But
look! The mālatī trees are covered with flowers. There
is no vacant space left upon their branches. Innumerable
groups of bumblebees are humming upon clusters of bakula
flowers. And over there, Kṛṣṇa is dancing as he revels
in pastimes of love with other youthful mistresses.
Alas! How can I hold my patience?”

Commentary

Rādhārāṇī’s companion is painting a picture of the
vexatious, impassioning nature of spring, “This season
is immensely troublesome for lonely lovers because it
incites passion and lust. Heroines, whose dearest ones
have gone to distant lands, pine incessantly because
they cannot satisfy their inflamed desires. When flowers
such as bakula spread their fragrance in all directions,
swarms of jubilant bumblebees begin to hum as if in a
state of intense agitation.”

Verse 30

mṛgamada-saurabha-rabhasa-vaśaṁvada-nava-dala-māla-
tamāle

yuva-jana-hṛdaya-vidāraṇa-manasija-nakha-ruci-kiṁśuka-
jāle

viharati harir iha sarasa-vasante... (3)

Translation

“Adorned with new leaves, the tamāla trees delight in
diffusing their musk-like fragrance in all directions.
Sakhi, look! These lustrous palāśa flowers resemble the
fingernails of Kāmadeva. It seems that the King of
amorous love has torn at the bosom of youthful couples.”

Commentary


                           53
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

“All directions are now pervaded by the fragrance of
newly grown tamāla leaves, which resembles the scent of
kastūrī.”

The inner meaning is that all directions are infused
with Mādhava’s bodily fragrance, making separation from
him unbearable.

“The multitude of fully blossomed palāśa flowers appear
to be fingernails, Cupid’s special weapons for breaking
the hearts of separated young couples.”

By saying that young women’s hearts are rent asunder by
the sight of palāśa flowers, the sakhī implies that
separation is extremely harsh.

Verse 31

madana-mahīpati-kanaka-daṇḍa-ruci-keśara-kusuma-vikāse

milita-śilīmukha-pāṭali-paṭala-kṛta-smara-tūṇa-vilāse

viharati harir iha sarasa-vasante... (4)

Translation

“Blossoming nāga-kesara flowers appear to be the golden
rods of King Cupid4, and the clusters of pāṭali flowers
surrounded by bumblebees appear to be his quiver.”

Commentary

“Sakhi, the nāga-kesara flowers are blooming and they
resemble the lustre of His Majesty King Cupid’s golden
umbrella. When flowers are wounded by the arrows of the
bumblebees’ ‘teeth’, it breaks the hearts of lonely
lovers.”

Verse 32

vigalita-lajjita-jagad-avalokana-taruṇa-karuṇa-kṛta-hāse

virahi-nikṛntana-kunta-mukhākṛti-ketaki-danturitāśe

viharati harir iha sarasa-vasante... (5)

Translation

“It seems that the whole world has become shameless by
the formidable influence of spring. Seeing this, the
young, compassionate trees are laughing on the pretext
of bursting into flower. Look! Shaped like javelins for
piercing the hearts of lonely lovers, the screw-pine
flowers are blossoming brightly in all directions and
the directions are also overjoyed to unite with them.”

Commentary

Śrī Rādhā’s companion continues, “Dear sakhi, what more
can I say? In springtime, lonely ones abandon their
shyness and cry out loud in separation from their
beloveds. Springtime also vanquishes the bashfulness of
all creatures throughout the creation. Seeing the world
in this condition, the youthful and compassionate trees

                           54
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

blossom, dispersing the nectar of laughter on the
pretext of scattering their radiant flowers. It is as if
young men are revealing the nectar of their laughter,
understanding the lusty desires in the hearts of
sensuous women.”

How can compassion and laughter possibly occur
simultaneously? When intimate lovers are separated, they
are filled with compassion and pity because they feel so
wretched. Then they lose their equilibrium and begin to
laugh nervously. They feel that the tips of screw-pine
(ketakī) flowers are lances meant to spear their hearts.

Verse 33

mādhavikā-parimala-lalite nava-mālikayāti-sugandhau

muni-manasām api mohana-kāriṇi taruṇākāraṇa-bandhau

viharati harir iha sarasa-vasante... (6)

Translation

“The nectar of spring flowers and the aroma of jasmine
blossoms are enthralling. Even the minds of great sages
are agitated in springtime and they suddenly become
bewildered. Spring is the selfless friend of the young.”

Commentary

“The spring season is charming because the whole
atmosphere is fragrant with the delightful aroma of
jasmine (nava-mālikā) and the pollen of spring flowers
(mādhavī). If this stimulation arouses lust within the
minds of great sages, what can be said of its effect on
ordinary males? Even unconscious creepers cannot bear to
be without their lovers (the trees) during this
provocative season, so how can we conscious vine-like
young ladies tolerate loneliness? With the drone of the
bees and the cooing of the cuckoos, this spring season
is the selfless friend of young couples.”

Verse 34

sphurad-atimukta-latā-parirambhaṇa-pulakita-mukulita-
cūte

vṛndāvana-vipine parisara-parigata-yamunā-jala-pūte

viharati harir iha sarasa-vasante... (7)

Translation

“O my dear friend, the mango trees in the forest groves
of Vṛndāvana are covered with freshly sprouted buds
because they are thrilled by the embrace of the restless
mādhavī creepers. Śrī Hari is affectionately playing
with young women in the pure water of the Yamunā that
flows alongside those forest groves.”

Commentary

“In springtime, even inert substances become agitated by
lust. Impelled by the breeze, the spring-flower vine

                           55
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

caresses the mango tree, causing it to thrill with
horripilation in the form of new buds. The Yamunā flows
nearby, purifying the groves of Vṛndāvana where Śrī Hari
is enjoying amorous pastimes.”

Verse 35

śrī-jayadeva-bhaṇitam idam udayati hari-caraṇa-smṛti-
sāram

sarasa-vasanta-samaya-vana-varṇanam anugata-madana-
vikāram

viharati harir iha sarasa-vasante... (8)

Translation

This auspicious, rasa-laden song has perfectly
manifested through Śrī Jayadeva. The portrayal of the
forest in springtime is suffused with the erotic
aberrations of Rādhā when she is overwhelmed with
anxiety in separation from Kṛṣṇa. Woven together with
transformations of passion, the spring season awakens
remembrance of the lotus feet of Śrī Hari.

Commentary

To conclude, Śrī Jayadeva defines the specific
excellence of this song. Kṛṣṇa’s romantic amusements in
the forest during spring nourish śṛṅgāra-rasa. This
auspicious song embodies the very essence of
contemplation upon the lotus feet of Śrī Hari because it
is a concealed expression of those pastimes.

May this song be victorious. In other words, may those
who are disturbed by lust have the opportunity to hear
this song so that their lust may be eradicated forever.

This song features jāti alaṅkāra and laya chanda. Rādhā
is madhyā nāyikā and Kṛṣṇa is dakṣiṇa nāyaka. The rasa
is vipralambha-śṛṅgāra.

This third song is entitled Mādhavotsava-kamalākara.

Verse 36



dara-vidalita-mallī-valli-cañcat-parāga-

prakaṭita-paṭavāsair vāsayan kānanāni

iha hi dahati cetaḥ ketakī-gandha-bandhuḥ

prasarad-asamabāṇa-prāṇavad-gandhavāhaḥ

Translation

“O sakhi, look! The forest is covered with the fragrant
white powder of pollen from half-opened mallikā buds.
The Malaya breeze, a bosom friend of Kāmadeva, is
invigorated by the aroma of ketakī flowers. He acts like
Cupid’s arrow, burning the hearts of lonely lovers in
the forest.”

                           56
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017


Commentary

Alluding to the arousing effect of the Malaya breeze in
springtime, Rādhā’s companion says, “This gently moving
air sets fire to the hearts of lonely lovers.”

One may ask, “Why does the air burn their consciousness?
What offence have they committed?” The answer is given
here:

“He burns the hearts of lonely lovers just to obey the
order of his bosom friend.”

A bosom friend is as dear as one’s life-air (prana).
Therefore the gently moving air is likened to Kāmadeva’s
friend. Friends are also like-minded. This quality is
revealed by his concurrent behaviour.

When mallikā vines blossom slightly, a white layer of
radiant pollen spreads profusely like a white petticoat
(paṭavāsa).

This verse, composed in mālinī chanda, contains a
combination of samāsokti and varṇānuprāsa alaṅkāras.

Verse 37



adyotsaṅga-vasad-bhujaṅga-kavala-kleśād iveśācalaṁ

prāleya-plavanecchayānusarati śrīkhaṇḍa-śailānilaḥ

kiṁ ca snigdha-rasāla-mauli-mukulāny ālokya harṣodayād

unmīlanti kuhūḥ kuhūr iti kalottālāḥ pikānāṁ giraḥ

Translation

“O sakhi, I have heard that many snakes live in Malaya
Mountain. The wind from that direction must be
devastated by the burning poison of those snakes. Now it
seems to be moving in the direction of the Himālayas to
take bath in the icy water there.

“Sakhi, look! The cuckoos are loudly singing kuhu-kuhu
in mellifluous voices. They are jubilant on seeing the
tender and tasty mango buds.”

Commentary

In this verse Rādhā’s sakhī paints a picture of two
intensifiers (vibhāvas) of śṛṅgāra-rasa.

“During this particular month, the air of the Malaya
Mountain (Śrīkhaṇḍa-śaila) moves in the direction of the
snow-covered Himālayan region. Poisonous snakes reside
in the sandalwood trees of the Malaya Mountain, so the
wind sets out in the direction of the Himālayas to find
relief from the burning of snakebites. It seems that the
wind wants to feel the bliss enjoyed by the cool air of
the Himālayas.


                           57
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

“New buds appear on mango trees in spring. The cuckoos
are delighted to see the mango blossoms, so they loudly
sing out, ‘kuhu-kuhu’. O Rādhā, it is not proper for you
to be inhibited before Kṛṣṇa at such a provocative and
exciting time.”

This verse includes anuprāsa and upamā alaṅkāras,
vaidarbhī rīti and śārdūla-vikrīḍita chanda. The
sthāyibhāva is śṛṅgāra-rati in separation.

Verse 38



unmīlan-madhu-gandha-lubdha-madhupa-vyādhūta-cūtāṅkura-

krīḍat-kokila-kākalī-kalakalair udgīrṇa-karṇa-jvarāḥ

nīyante pathikaiḥ kathaṁ katham api dhyānāvadhāna-kṣaṇa-

prāpta-prāṇasamā-samāgama-rasollāsair amī vāsarāḥ

Translation

“O sakhi, look! The bumblebees are obsessed with the
aroma of mango blossoms. The call of cuckoos at play
upon the radiant buds mixes with the humming of the bees
to make a mellifluous sound. But this clamour is a fever
for the ears of separated lovers. They pass their days
anxiously remembering their lovers, who are as dear as
life itself. By meditating upon their faces in the
sorrow of separation, a moment of happiness comes when,
just for an instant, they feel the joy of being
together. Then they praise that distressful time.”

Commentary

Rādhā’s sakhī admits that separation is difficult to
tolerate. In the absence of Kṛṣṇa, the Malaya breeze
simply inflicts pain. Furthermore, the sweet murmuring
sound of cuckoos reverberates in all directions and
stirs feelings of deep regret in the hearts of the
lonely. It creates an outbreak of high fever in their
ears. The cuckoos’ voices remind them of their lovers
and for a moment they feel as if they have united with
them. This moment of distress is laudable.

The current verse contains kāvyaliṅga alaṅkāra, śārdūla-
vikrīḍita chanda, gauḍīyā rīti and vipralambha-śṛṅgāra-
rasa. Plural usage of the word vāsarāḥ is an example of
aucitya, appropriateness.



Scene Four

Verse 39



aneka-nārī-parirambha-sambhrama-

sphuran-manohāri-vilāsa-lālasam


                           58
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

murārim ārād upadarśayanty asau

sakhī samakṣaṁ punar āha rādhikām

Translation

Then Rādhikā’s sakhī expertly searched for Kṛṣṇa and saw
that he was nearby. He was immersed in joyful pastimes
with beautiful young gopīs, who were receiving him with
the utmost respect. An intense greed for delightful,
sensuous pastimes suddenly awakened in Kṛṣṇa’s mind when
the gopīs showed their eagerness to embrace him.
Pointing out this scene to Rādhā, the sakhī spoke to her
again in a hidden place.

Commentary

Thus far the poet has revealed Rādhā’s intensely
inflamed emotions (sudīpta-bhāva) through a vivid
description of the beauty of the forest. Now Rādhā’s
friend directly exposes Kṛṣṇa’s intentions by telling
her, “Sakhī, look! What is Murāri doing now?”

Although Kṛṣṇa was embraced by many young ladies, he was
not satisfied. Instead, he was overwhelmed with an
intense eagerness to meet with Rādhā and enjoy loving
pastimes with her.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes are eternal; therefore they are
also eternally perceptible. Three types of perception
occur in separation: remembrance (smaraṇa), an internal
vision (sphūrti) and direct appearance (āvirbhāva). This
particular pastime is appropriately accepted as a
sphūrti.

In this verse the chanda is vaṁśasthavila, the alaṅkāra
is anuprāsa and the hero is dakṣiṇa nāyaka.




Song 4


The musical mode is rāmakarī rāga and the rhythm is yati
tāla.



Verse 40

candana-carcita-nīla-kalevara-pīta-vasana-vanamālī

keli-calan-maṇi-kuṇḍala-maṇḍita-gaṇḍa-yuga-smita-śālī

harir iha mugdha-vadh-nikareharir iha mugdha-vadhū-
nikare

vilāsini vilasati keli-pare (refrain) (1)

Translation

“O playful Rādhā, look! Dressed in yellow cloth and a

                           59
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

garland of forest flowers, with sandalwood paste smeared
upon his dark limbs, Kṛṣṇa feels the utmost elation as
he enjoys pastimes with captivated young brides in this
Vṛndāvana forest. His earrings swing to and fro, the
beauty of his cheeks is astonishing and his face
displays a wondrous sweetness with the honey of his
playful laughter.”

Commentary

The rāga of this song is rāmakarī and the tāla is
jhampā. According to the author of Rasa-mañjarī, the
tāla is rūpaka.

A heroine dresses in blue cloth and adorns herself with
golden ornaments that resemble the dawn sky. Seeing her
impetuous indignation, the hero sits at her feet and
begins to placate her. The rāga employed to capture this
moment is called rāmakarī.

Kṛṣṇa was revelling in amorous amusements amidst an
assembly of playful heroines not far from where Rādhā is
observing everything along with her companion. On
beholding this scene, an intense yearning to enjoy
pastimes with Śrī Kṛṣṇa suddenly awakened in the mind of
Śrī Rādhā. Therefore, as Kṛṣṇa embraced one beautiful
gopī in a solitary grove, a vision of Rādhā began to
manifest in his heart.

The word mugdha can mean “inexperienced heroine” (mugdhā
nāyikā) and also “beautiful”. Both meanings are intended
in this context. The word vilāsa refers to an ecstatic
emotional ornament characterized by hāva and bhāva. As
stated by Bharata Muni in Nāṭya-śāstra:



sthāne yānāsane vāpi

netra vaktrādi karmaṇā

utpādyate viśeṣo yaḥ

sa-vilāsaḥ prakīrtitaḥ

Enchanting bodily postures and expressions of the eyes
and face while moving, sitting or walking are called
vilāsa.



The word smita indicates that Kṛṣṇa is smiling. Mild
laughter is called smita. In the words of Bharata Muni:



īṣad vikasitair gaṇḍaiḥ

kaṭākṣaiḥ sauṣṭhavānvitaiḥ

alakṣita dvijaṁ dhīram

uttamānāṁ smitaṁ bhavet


                             60
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

Smita occurs when a person who is smiling does not show
his teeth. His cheeks are sure to blossom slightly as he
casts a charming sidelong glance.

Verse 41

pīna-payodhara-bhāra-bhareṇa hariṁ parirabhya sa-rāgam

gopa-vadhūr anugāyati kācid udañcita-pañcama-rāgam

harir iha mugdha-vadhū-nikare... (2)

Translation

“Look, sakhi! One gopī is firmly embracing Kṛṣṇa with
intense attachment. Pressing the heavy burden of her
voluptuous breasts against Kṛṣṇa’s chest, she has begun
to sing with him in the fifth musical mode.”

Commentary

Rādhā’s friend is relaying the gopīs’ activities with
Śrī Kṛṣṇa as they are happening. “O Rādhā, your love-
play with Kṛṣṇa is unequalled and unsurpassed. Kṛṣṇa is
being passionately embraced by one proud, buxom gopī,
but this is just a dim reflection of his pastimes with
you. Indeed, how can this beautiful damsel possibly be
compared with you?

“Now Śrī Hari is singing in the fifth rāga and she
responds by singing along in the same way.”

By describing the gopī’s breasts as full and round, it
is implied that she is stunningly beautiful.

“Kṛṣṇa is showing a lack of dexterity here. Therefore
this gopī is embracing him without even trying to be
embraced by him. Although his secret amorous exchanges
are sweet, how can they really excel without you?
Śṛṅgāra-rasa matures when mutual embracing occurs and
that is only possible with you. Look at Śyāmasundara’s
endeavour to perform pastimes with others, even though
he is constantly remembering you.”

Pañcama rāga, the fifth musical mode, is usually sung to
accompany śṛṅgāra-rasa, as stated by Bharata Muni:



pañcamaṁ madhya bhūyiṣṭhaṁ

hāsya śṛṅgārayor bhavet

Pañcama rāga in madhya-tāla is predominant in hāsya and
śṛṅgāra-rasa.

Verse 42

kāpi vilāsa-vilola-vilocana-khelana-janita-manojam

dhyāyati mugdha-vadhūr adhikaṁ madhusūdana-vadana-
sarojam

harir iha mugdha-vadhū-nikare... (3)

                             61
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017


Translation

“Look, sakhi! This gopī is meditating on Kṛṣṇa. He
arouses lust in the hearts of sensuous young ladies with
the romantic sidelong glances of his restless eyes, and
she is greedy to drink the honey of his lotus face.”

Commentary

Describing an enchanted heroine (mugdhā nāyikā), Rādhā’s
sakhī says, “This gopī is meditating on Kṛṣṇa’s lotus
face. As Śyāmasundara revels in loving pastimes, his
restless eyes display suggestive expressions. He
intensifies the sensual appetite of the best of
attractive ladyloves by casting his playful glance upon
them and he feels immense bliss within the core of his
heart.”

The mugdhā nāyikā is very shy, therefore her amatory
endeavours are inhibited by behavioural conventions.

Verse 43

kāpi kapola-tale militā lapituṁ kim api śruti-mūle

cāru cucumba nitambavatī dayitaṁ pulakair anukūle

harir iha mugdha-vadhū-nikare... (4)

Translation

“Sakhi, look at that! One curvaceous milkmaid has leant
her face close to Kṛṣṇa’s cheek on the pretext of
whispering a secret in his ear. When Kṛṣṇa understood
her love-laden intention, his bodily hair stood on end.
Seeing his reaction, that expert heroine has seized this
favourable opportunity to fulfil her cherished desire.
With the utmost delight, she has begun to kiss his
cheek.”

Commentary

The word nitambavatī – “a woman whose hips are large and
shapely” – has been used to convey the exquisite
physical beauty of a mature heroine. It is improper to
kiss one’s beloved in the presence of one’s friends.
Therefore, on the pretext of informing Kṛṣṇa about
something else, she kissed the far side of his cheek.
This is indicative of the heroine’s expertise in loving
affairs (śṛṅgāra-vaidagdhya). Kṛṣṇa reciprocates as
anukūla nāyaka.

Verse 44

keli-kalā-kutukena ca kācid amuṁ yamunā-jala-kūle

mañjula-vañjula-kuñja-gataṁ vicakarṣa kareṇa dukūle

harir iha mugdha-vadhū-nikare... (5)

Translation

“Sakhi, look! One gopī discovered a secluded place in a

                           62
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

charming grove of cane on the bank of Yamunā. Impelled
by kāma-rasa and a joyful fascination for the amatory
arts, she caught hold of Kṛṣṇa’s yellow cloth with both
hands and dragged him away.”

Commentary

Śrī Rādhā’s friend is describing an unsteady heroine
(adhīrā nāyikā). “When Kṛṣṇa entered a flowering bower,
this temperamental heroine, consumed by a curiosity to
delight in the erotic arts, snatched Kṛṣṇa’s cloth and
brought him onto the bank of Yamunā.”

The word ca (and) implies that she began to joke with
Kṛṣṇa in various ways upon noticing a place that
afforded complete privacy.

The words yamunā-tīre – “on the bank of Yamunā” – have
not been used. Rather, the phrase yamunā-jala-tīre has
been employed to indicate that the river bank is cool
and pure like water (jala).

Pulling Kṛṣṇa away by his cloth when he shows signs of
being attached to another heroine is typical of the
temperamental lover (adhīrā nāyikā).

Verse 45

kara-tala-tāla-tarala-valayāvali-kalita-kalasvana-vaṁśe

rāsa-rase saha-nṛtya-parā hariṇā yuvatiḥ praśaśaṁse

harir iha mugdha-vadhū-nikare... (6)

Translation

“One young lady claps her hands while dancing,
enraptured in the ecstasy of the rāsa. Śrī Hari praises
her upon hearing the marvellous melody of his flute
combined with the sound of her trembling bangles.”

Commentary

The sakhī tells Rādhā that one young lady is clapping
her hands with the utmost dexterity of rhythm and tone
(tāna, māna, laya) while dancing with Kṛṣṇa in the rāsa-
līlā. Her bangles collide together to make a rhythmic
jingle that complements the sound of his flute. Hearing
this astonishingly sweet music, Kṛṣṇa repeatedly
applauds his attractive lover.

Verse 46

śliṣyati kām api cumbati kām api kām api ramayati rāmām

paśyati sa-smita-cārutarām aparām anugacchati vāmām

harir iha mugdha-vadhū-nikare... (7)

Translation

“Impelled by his craving for śṛṅgāra-rasa, Kṛṣṇa is
embracing one of his beloveds; he is kissing another and
somewhere else he enjoys passionate congress with

                           63
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

another. Elsewhere he gazes expectantly at the face of
another lover, while appreciating the nectar of her
sweet smile. Somewhere else he is following a woman who
has left him in a huff.”

Commentary

Śrī Kṛṣṇa has assumed many forms to enjoy varieties of
romantic activities simultaneously with all the heroines
who are intent on sporting with him. Impelled by a
craving for the happiness of sensual union, Kṛṣṇa
sometimes embraces one impassioned woman; sometimes he
kisses another. Somewhere he is strolling with one gopī
and elsewhere he is glancing with intense thirst for the
ravishing beauty of another. Sometimes he accidentally
addresses a fine young woman, “O Rādhā!” Consequently
she becomes indignant and leaves in a huff. Kṛṣṇa is so
anxious for her love that he follows behind and uses
various ploys to make her return. When that sulky gopī
refuses his amorous advances, he tries to soften her
anger with humble requests for conciliation.

This verse portrays Kṛṣṇa as the śaṭha, dhṛṣṭa, dakṣiṇa,
anukūla and dhūrta heroes. The heroines are all
abhisārikā nāyikās.

The symptoms of dhṛṣṭa nāyaka have been defined in
Śṛṅgāra-tilaka:



abhivyaktānya taruṇī




bhoga-lakṣmāpi nirbhayaḥ

mithyā-vacana dakṣaś ca




dhṛṣṭo ’yaṁ khalu kathyate

Although the signs of lovemaking with another young
woman are clearly visible on his person, the hero who
expertly and fearlessly concocts a fraudulent alibi is
called dhṛṣṭa nāyaka. (Śṛṅgāra-tilaka 1.17)



The symptoms of śaṭha nāyaka have been described thus:



priyaṁ vyakti puro ’nyatra

vipriyaṁ kurute bhṛśam

nigūḍham aparādhaṁ ca


                             64
Gita-govinda.txt                                   5/5/2017

śaṭho ’yaṁ kathito budhaiḥ

Learned authorities have stated that śaṭha nāyaka is a
hero who conceals his offences. He speaks sweet words in
front of his own heroine, while remaining covertly
attached to another. (Śṛṅgāra-tilaka 1.18)

Verse 47

śrī-jayadeva-bhaṇitam idam adbhuta-keśava-keli-rahasyam

vṛndāvana-vipine lalitaṁ vitanotu śubhāni yaśasyam

harir iha mugdha-vadhū-nikare... (8)

Translation

May this auspicious, delightful and astounding song of
Śrī Jayadeva increase the good fame of all. This song
bestows all virtues. It describes Rādhā’s gaze upon the
wondrous mystery of the sensual games performed by Kṛṣṇa
as she laments in separation from him in the bowers of
Vṛndāvana. It extends the excellence emanating from
those forest pastimes.

Commentary

To conclude, Śrī Jayadeva says, “Herein lies the mystery
of Keśava’s astonishing amorous affairs. The wonderful
secret is that one Kṛṣṇa expands himself into as many
forms as there are gopīs. Thereby he enjoys loving
pastimes with them all at the same time and personally
fulfils their cherished desires.

“This song is enchanting because it adheres exactly to
the rigours of rāga and tāla. Yet the greatest cause of
its appeal lies in the portrayal of Keśava’s secret arts
of love. May this sweet, melodious song confer
auspiciousness and increase the fame of those who recite
and hear it.”

Verse 48



viśveṣām anurañjanena janayann ānandam indīvara-

śreṇī-śyāmala-komalair upanayann aṅgair anaṅgotsavam

svacchandaṁ vraja-sundarībhir abhitaḥ praty-aṅgam
āliṅgitaḥ

śṛṅgāraḥ sakhi mūrtimān iva madhau mugdho hariḥ krīḍati

Translation

“O sakhi, Kṛṣṇa has become the eros personified as he
revels in loving pastimes, intoxicated by the rasa of
romantic springtime encounters. With his soft, dark
limbs that surpass the beauty of a blue lotus flower, he
is inaugurating Cupid’s great festival. With ever-
increasing attachment, he is satisfying the gopīs’
unbridled passion far in excess of their expectations.
Nevertheless, the beautiful gopīs of Vraja, helplessly

                             65
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

lost in the rapture of lovemaking, assume the dominant
male position and freely embrace each and every part of
his body.”

Commentary

Rādhā’s friend says, “Sakhi, look!” as she points out
the amorous activities of Śrī Rādhā’s dearest one with
the intention of stimulating her ecstatic emotions. “The
season is spring. What’s more, it is also the month of
Madhu, and Śrī Hari is lost in enjoying love-play with
all the gopīs as if he were śṛṅgāra-rasa personified.”

Śṛṅgāraḥ sakhīḥ mūrtimān iva – The sakhī reveals Kṛṣṇa’s
characteristics as he unites with his sensually aroused
lovers by portraying him as the embodiment of erotic
euphoria. Puruṣaḥ pramadā-yuktaḥ śṛṅgāra iti saṁjñitaḥ –
“A man who is united with a highly libidinous woman is
called śṛṅgāra.” Kṛṣṇa is satisfying the gopīs’ coveted
ambitions far beyond their expectations and intensifying
their happiness in a festival of Eros. Śrī Hari bestows
bliss upon all living entities by his ever-increasing
divine love.

The sakhī says that Kṛṣṇa’s elegant limbs are darker and
softer than a blue lotus. The word blue lotus (indīvara)
conveys the sense of darkness, softness and refreshing
coolness; the word śreṇī of freshness that appears newer
at every moment; and the word śyāmala of handsome tender
youthfulness. Kṛṣṇa is observing a festival of
transcendental lust with those tender limbs.

The attractive vraja-gopīs are embracing each and every
limb of Kṛṣṇa’s body spontaneously at their pleasure,
without the slightest hesitation.

Rasa emerges from the combination of two components: the
hero’s anurāga for the heroine and the heroine’s anurāga
for the hero. The hero may be attached to the heroine,
but unless the heroine is also attached to the hero,
rasa will not manifest.

One might ask, “Here we find only paraspara-anurañjana,
the act of pleasing each other; so where is rasa?” The
stage of rasa begins with the integration of vibhāva,
anubhāva, sāttvika-bhāva and sañcārī-bhāva. Then it
increases through the stages of sneha, praṇaya, māna,
rāga, anurāga, bhāva and mahābhāva. Consequently, rasa
flourishes with the maturity of prema. When prema-rasa
begins to manifest, the hero and heroine harbour no
reservations about their activities, the time or the
place. Yet union still does not reach its pinnacle,
despite the absence of inhibitions. The complete union
of every limb is perfectly accomplished only by
mahābhāva-rasa.

One might conjecture that Kṛṣṇa has only partial
experience of the cowherd damsels. Therefore it is
stated here, praty-aṅgam āliṅgita – Kṛṣṇa has satisfied
the gopīs by embracing each of their limbs, by kissing,
by touching and by other appropriate activities.
Furthermore, one might ask, “How could Kṛṣṇa have
embraced all of them?” The answer is that śṛṅgāra-rasa
is one, yet it pervades the entire creation. Similarly,

                           66
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa is one and also all-pervading. By virtue of this
attribute, he is competent to delight the whole
universe.

The current verse includes dīpaka alaṅkāra, vaidarbhī
rīti, śārdūla-vikrīḍita chanda, śṛṅgāra-rasa and
vākyaucitya. The heroine of the song, Rādhā, is
utkaṇṭhitā nāyikā. When the hero’s behaviour is
inconsistent, the heroine who becomes indifferent to the
world in the anxiety of separation is called utkaṇṭhitā
nāyikā.

Verse 49



rāsollāsa-bhareṇa vibhrama-bhṛtām ābhīra-vāma-bhruvām

abhyarṇaṁ parirabhya nirbharam uraḥ premāndhayā rādhayā

sādhu tvad-vadanaṁ sudhā-mayam iti vyāhṛtya gīta-stuti-

vyājād udbhaṭa-cumbitaḥ smita-manohārī hariḥ pātu vaḥ

Translation

Rādhā was blinded by love for Kṛṣṇa and enchanted to the
point of bewilderment. In this condition she became
utterly shameless. Directly before the attractive eyes
of the other radiant cowherd maidens, who were
overwhelmed with love in the rāsa-līlā, Rādhā tightly
embraced Kṛṣṇa’s chest. Singing his praises, “O my
sweetheart, how handsome is your lotus face. What an
incomparable mine of abundant nectar,” she engaged him
in a delightful kiss. On witnessing the intensity of her
love, Kṛṣṇa expressed the rhapsody within his heart with
a charming chuckle. O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, may you bestow
auspiciousness upon all.

Commentary

This is the final verse of Act One. The sakhī is
reminding Rādhā of her pastimes with Kṛṣṇa in the autumn
(śāradīyā-rāsa). Kṛṣṇa was immersed in a festival of
amorous desires. He stood splendidly amidst the cowherd
damsels, who were glancing at him from the corners of
their lotus eyes. At first Rādhā was anxious, but her
friend encouraged the sudden awakening of a tremendous
desire. Rādhā’s behaviour is generally inhibited by
shyness, yet she became shameless due to absorption in
prema. As if it were a part of the rāsa dance, she sang
Kṛṣṇa’s praises in ambrosial expressions, tightly
embraced his chest and began to kiss him directly in the
presence of all the other gopīs.

When Rādhā freely exhibited her ecstatic emotions before
all the elegant young ladies of Vraja, Kṛṣṇa’s face
expressed the utmost delight. “The well-mannered Rādhikā
is now blinded by love in the elation of the rāsa. How
expert she is.” May that captivated Śrī Kṛṣṇa bestow
auspiciousness upon all.

In this verse the nāyikā is pragalbhā and the nāyaka is
mugdha. The chanda is śārdūla-vikrīḍita. The alaṅkāras

                           67
Gita-govinda.txt                                  5/5/2017

include āśīḥ, aprastuta, praśaṁsā and vyājokti.



Thus ends the Bālabodhinī-prakāśa commentary on

Act One of Śrī Gīta-govinda, entitled Sāmoda-dāmodara.




Act Two




— akleśa-keśavaḥ —




Scene Five

Verse 1



viharati vane rādhā sādhāraṇa-praṇaye harau

vigalita-nijotkarṣād īrṣyā-vaśena gatānyataḥ

kvacid api latā-kuñje guñjan-madhu-vrata-maṇḍalī-

mukhara-śikhare līnā dīnāpy uvāca rahaḥ sakhīm

Translation

hen Rādhā saw Kṛṣṇa enjoying affectionate exchanges with
all the cowherd maidens in the groves of Vṛnḍāvana, she
became indignant because he had not acknowledged her
eminence. She immediately departed for another part of
the forest and hid herself inside a shady bower that
resounded with the drone of bumblebees. Feeling
wretched, she began to disclose secrets to her intimate
female companion.

Commentary

Act Two is entitled Akleśa-keśava. The purport is that
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Divinity and connoisseur
of rasa, is eternally free from distress. He never has
to undergo even the slightest pain. Bhagavān has two
uncommon characteristics:



(1) Akhila-heya-pratyanikatva – He has no connection
with material defects such as any type of painful
misfortune or calamity. He is pratyanīka, the formidable
nemesis of all defects. In this regard, the author of
Yoga-sūtra has stated:


                           68
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017



kleśa-karma-vipākāśayair aparāmṛṣṭaḥ puruṣa-viśeṣa
īśvaraḥ

“A person who has no relationship with defects such as
ignorance, false egotism, attachment, aversion, fear of
death, or reactive work and its consequences, is called
īśvara.” (Yoga-sūtra 1.24)

(2) Akhila-kalyāṇa-guṇākaratva – Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the
benefactor of the entire creation and a mine of
supernatural virtues. Therefore Act Two is entitled
Akleśa (stress-free) Keśava.

Śrī Rādhā is prone to temperamental behaviour. When the
sakhī informed her of Kṛṣṇa’s whereabouts, she entered
his great festival of Cupid. When she saw him expressing
equal affection to all the cowherd maidens, she proudly
thought, “I am his best lover. I am his constant
companion. But today he is not showing partiality to
me.” So she departed in a huff. Coming across a dense
grove, she went inside and sat down in hiding. Even
there she could not find peace because she was seething
with jealousy. A group of bumblebees were humming around
the flowers above this grove of blossoming vines. At
that time, when Rādhā felt the pain of her own jealous
anger, she began to share secrets with her companion
that should not be disclosed to anyone.

The chanda of this verse is hariṇī, which is defined as
rasa-yuga hayaiḥ n-sau m-rau s-lau go yadā hariṇī. The
heroine is prauḍhā nāyikā. The literary ornaments
include anuprāsa alaṅkāra. Rasavad alaṅkāra is present
due to excessive rati-bhāva. The word api strongly
emphasizes that Rādhā was in such a condition that she
was unable to speak. Furthermore, she never discloses
secrets. Thus the word api, meaning “nevertheless”,
conveys the sense of utter astonishment.

The present verse is the colophon (puṣpikā) of the fifth
song, which begins proper from the next verse.




Song 5


The musical mode is gurjarī rāga and the rhythm is yati
tāla.



Verse 2

sañcarad-adhara-sudhā-madhura-dhvani-mukharita-mohana-
vaṁśam

valita-dṛg-añcala-cañcala-mauli-kapola-vilola-vataṁsam




                           69
Gita-govinda.txt                                 5/5/2017

re harim iha vihita-vilarāse harim iha vihita-vilāsaṁ

smarati mano mama kṛta-parihāsam (refrain) (1)

Translation

“Sakhi, how amazing it is that in this festival of rāsa,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa has abandoned me and now, with cheerful
curiosity, he is relishing love in the company of other
amorous young women. Even so, I still continue to
remember him within the core of my heart. He fills the
flute in his lotus hands with a transformation of the
nectar of his lips by blowing and producing a sweet
expressive melody. Wishful glances from the corners of
his eyes make his jewelled head-dress quiver and his
earrings dangle near his cheeks. I repeatedly remember
his attractive dark complexion, his laughter and his
humorous behaviour.”

Commentary

Rādhā’s friend said, “Dear Rādhikā, Kṛṣṇa has neglected
you, so why do you love him so much that you are losing
your composure?”

Thus scolded by her friend, Rādhā spoke in a mood of
extreme self-abasement. “Sakhi, your words are true. Śrī
Kṛṣṇa has abandoned me. Infatuated by other attractive
lovers, he is merrily dallying with them, so my
expressions of love for him are certainly all in vain.
But what am I to do? His comical antics repeatedly
appear in my heart. Now I recall his playful seduction.

“O sakhi, this is the very pastime forest where we
previously experienced the joy of amorous love together.
I am so attached that I cannot forsake him. I always
remember his virtues. My heart cannot even imagine the
slightest fault in him. I am satisfied with whatever he
does.

“When Śyāmasundara laughs and jokes with the gopīs of
Vraja on the night of the rāsa-līlā, he fills the flute
in his lotus hands with a transformation of the nectar
of his lips...”Rādhikā begins her song of separation –
sañcarad-adhara-sudhā-madhura-dhvani-mukharita.

The etymology of this phrase is sañcarantyā adhara-
sudhayā madhuro dhvani yatra tad yathā syād tathā
mukharitā mohinī vaṁśī yena tam.

“The enchanting influence of his flute is famous.
Extracted from the nectar of his lips, the sweet sound
of his flute makes my mind unsteady and then suddenly
robs me of my patience. As soon as I remember the beauty
of his limbs, the restless ornament upon his crest, his
swinging earrings, and especially the way he embraces
and kisses the youthful gopīs, I immediately lose my
sense of propriety. O sakhi, what am I to do?”

Verse 3

candraka-cāru-mayūra-śikhaṇḍaka-maṇḍala-valayita-keśam

pracura-purandara-dhanur-anurañjita-medura-mudira-

                           70
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

suveśam

rāse harim iha vihita-vilāsaṁ... (2)

Translation

“Memories of Śrī Kṛṣṇa are coming to me most vividly.
His hair is adorned with a charming peacock feather,
which is beautified by its natural half-moon-shaped
design. His lustre resembles a mass of fresh rainclouds,
coloured by an abundance of brilliant rainbows.”

Commentary

The circular pattern on the end of a peacock feather is
called candraka. It also bestows joy like the moon
(candramā).

“Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s hair is encircled by such sweet peacock
feathers and his dark hue gives the impression of a
fresh cloud decorated by many rainbows. The memory of
his lovely, radiant figure comes to mind again and
again.”

Verse 4

gopa-kadamba-nitambavatī-mukha-cumbana-lambhita-lobham

bandhujīva-madhurādhara-pallavam ullasita-smita-śobham

rāse harim iha vihita-vilāsaṁ... (3)

Translation

“He lowers his face with the desire to kiss the faces of
the gopīs in the festival of Cupid. His tender lips are
an enchanting soft reddish colour like the bud of a
scarlet mallow flower. The unprecedented lustre of his
mild smile spreads across his handsome face. Memories of
that very Śrī Kṛṣṇa are coming to me most vividly.”

Commentary

“Memories of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is greedy to kiss the faces
of the newly married gopīs, are forcefully occupying my
mind. When he is immersed in secret love-play in the
forest bowers, his eagerness to kiss the faces of the
gopīs increases incessantly. The memory of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
red lips, the colour of scarlet mallow flowers
(bandhūka), is awakening spontaneously within my mind.
Sakhi, when he smiles, his handsomeness increases even
more.”

Verse 5

vipula-pulaka-bhuja-pallava-valayita-ballava-yuvati-
sahasram

kara-caraṇorasi maṇi-gaṇa-bhūṣaṇa-kiraṇa-vibhinna-
tamisram

rāse harim iha vihita-vilāsaṁ... (4)

Translation

                           71
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017


“I am helplessly remembering Śrī Kṛṣṇa, whose entire
body thrills with horripilation when he deeply embraces
thousands upon thousands of youthful gopīs with his arms
as tender as flower petals. He illuminates all
directions with sparkling beams emanating from the
jewelled ornaments on his hands, feet and chest.”

Commentary

“Now I am remembering those arms of Śyāmasundara, as
soft as newly sprouted leaves. They are covered with
severe horripilation as they encircle thousands of gopīs
and tightly embrace them. All darkness is dispelled by
the rays of beauty emanating from the ornaments on his
hands, feet and chest.”

Verse 6

jalada-paṭala-valad-indu-vinindaka-candana-tilaka-
lalāṭam

pīna-payodhara-parisara-mardana-nirdaya-hṛdaya-kavāṭam

rāse harim iha vihita-vilāsaṁ... (5)

Translation

“His forehead bears a captivating tilaka. Its
indescribable lustre defeats the immense beauty of a
restless moon amidst a multitude of fresh rainclouds. I
simply go on remembering how cruel-hearted Kṛṣṇa is
always fond of inflicting pain upon the invaluably
precious nipples of the most qualified young ladies’
large breasts with his own chest, which is as broad and
solid as a door.”

Commentary

“The beauty of the restless moon amidst fresh rainclouds
is a spectacle to behold. The dark screen of Kṛṣṇa’s
broad forehead is like a fresh raincloud and thereupon
his white sandalwood paste tilaka rebukes the pleasing
effect of the moon’s brilliant rays. I vividly remember
how Kṛṣṇa mercilessly grinds his broad chest against the
tender breasts of young ladies without respite at the
time of their amorous union.”

Verse 7

maṇimaya-makara-manohara-kuṇḍala-maṇḍita-gaṇḍam udāram

pīta-vasanam anugata-muni-manuja-surāsura-vara-parivāram

rāse harim iha vihita-vilāsaṁ... (6)

Translation

“The beauty of his cheeks is enhanced by his enchanting,
jewelled, makara-shaped earrings. He accepts the role of
a submissive hero (dakṣiṇa nāyaka) and generously
fulfils the hearts’ desires of his lovers. Attired in a
yellow garment, Kṛṣṇa has diffused his sweetness and
saturated the best of his followers, including demigods,

                           72
Gita-govinda.txt                                 5/5/2017

demons, sages and humans, in prema-rasa. Such memories
of Kṛṣṇa are forcefully coming to me of their own
accord.”

Commentary

“Kṛṣṇa’s ears are adorned with dangling earrings that
enhance the beauty of his cheeks. His earrings are
shaped like makara, a sea-creature who is considered to
be the emblem of Kāmadeva, the god of lust. He plays in
a submissive mood and he dresses in yellow. His best
followers include Nārada amongst the sages, Bhīṣma
amongst the humans, Prahlāda amongst the dynasty of
demons and Indra amongst the demigods. I cannot forget
him.”

Verse 8

viśada-kadamba-tale militaṁ kali-kaluṣa-bhayaṁ
śamayantam

mām api kim api taraṅgad-anaṅga-dṛśā manasā ramayantam

rāse harim iha vihita-vilāsaṁ... (7)

Translation

“My heart becomes increasingly agitated by remembering
Śrī Kṛṣṇa. After arriving beneath a broad kadamba tree
in full blossom, he waits for me while looking around in
anticipation. He completely dispels his own fear of
separation by consoling me with many clever and
flattering words of encouragement. His eyes restless
from the powerful waves of desire and his mind full of
longing, he revels in loving pastimes with me in my
heart of hearts.”

Commentary

Śrī Rādhā says, “O sakhi, he is still eagerly waiting
for me in the appointed meeting place beneath an
expansive kadamba tree. Afraid that I may leave him
during our lovers’ quarrel, he is still placating me
with ingenious words of flattery. He still delights me
with his rasa-laden glances and deeply attached heart.”

Mām api – “He still makes me happy.” The implication is,
“The activities of my beloved Kṛṣṇa are so enthralling
that even long after seeing them, I still feel the
utmost rapture.”

Verse 9

śrī-jayadeva-bhaṇitam ati-sundara-mohana-madhuripu-rūpam

hari-caraṇa-smaraṇaṁ prati samprati puṇyavatām anurūpam

rāse harim iha vihita-vilāsaṁ... (8)

Translation

Śrī Jayadeva has presented this poem for those fortunate
persons devoted to the service of Bhagavān. It describes
the spell-binding beauty of Kṛṣṇa’s form. It is the very

                           73
Gita-govinda.txt                                  5/5/2017

embodiment of remembrance of Śrī Hari’s lotus feet and
it should be relished after taking complete shelter of
the primary rasa.

Commentary

Concluding the fifth song, Śrī Jayadeva states that he
has composed it to awaken a particular type of
remembrance of Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet in the hearts of the
fortunate devotees who have attained transcendental
love. Here the word caraṇa refers to pastimes such as
the rāsa-līlā, the remembrance of which is beneficial
for devotees even today. The rāsa-līlā is exceptionally
endearing. Therefore this song comprises the method of
remembering Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet that Rādhā can never
forsake.

This fifth song, entitled Madhuripu-ratna-kaṇṭhikā, is
composed in laya chanda. Laya chanda is characterized
thus, munir yagaṇair layam āmananti.

Verse 10



gaṇayati guṇa-grāmaṁ bhrāmaṁ bhramād api nehate

vahati ca parītoṣaṁ doṣaṁ vimuñcati dūrataḥ

yuvatiṣu valat-tṛṣṇe kṛṣṇe vihāriṇi māṁ vinā

punar api mano vāmaṁ kāmaṁ karoti karomi kim

Translation

“Kṛṣṇa has neglected you. So why are you increasingly
vexed by attachment for him?” Rebuked in this way by her
intimate companion, Rādhā replied, “My dear friend,
Kṛṣṇa has abandoned me and now he is enjoying pastimes
of ever-fresh love with many other young ladies. I know
that it is futile to express my love for him. Still,
what am I to do? My attachment for him is so powerful
that it will not go away under any circumstances. I just
go on enumerating his wonderful qualities. When I
realize my eminence, I become maddened with ecstasy. I
cannot be angry with him, even by mistake; and I feel
satisfied when I overlook his faults. I ardently long
for him at every moment. Sakhi, I cannot forget him.
What am I to do?”

Commentary

Setting the scene for the sixth song, Rādhā begins an
account of her private affairs by saying, “Sakhi, my
heart is submissive to Kṛṣṇa, in spite of his
philandering with other women. Though he no longer wants
me, I continue to remember his manifold virtues and I
long for his association.”

Bhrāmaṁ bhramād api nehate – Here the word bhrāma means
anger. “My heart refuses to be angry with him, even
unintentionally. I have no desire to see faults in him,
such as his attachment for other heroines or his
indifference to me. I remain completely satisfied with

                           74
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

him. What am I to do?”

In this verse Śrī Rādhā is portrayed as the utkaṇṭhitā
nāyikā who is characterized thus:



utkā bhavati sā yasyā

vāsake nāgataḥ priyaḥ

tasyānāgamane hetuṁ

cintayantyākulā yathā

A heroine who anxiously frets over the reason why her
beloved has not come to her bedside is called
utkaṇṭhitā.



This verse includes hariṇī chanda, kriyaucitya, yamaka
śabda alaṅkāra and two artha alaṅkāras, namely saṁśaya
and dīpaka. The present verse is the puṣpikā of the
sixth song.



Scene Six




Song 6


The musical mode is mālava rāga. The rhythm moves
quickly in ekatālī tāla.



Verse 11

nibhṛta-nikuñja-gṛhaṁ gatayā niśi rahasi nilīya vasantam

cakita-vilokita-sakala-diśā rati-rabhasa-bhareṇa
hasantam



akhi he ke-mathanam udasakhi he keśi-mathanam udāraṁ

ramaya mayā saha madana-manoratha-

bhāvitayā sa-vikāram (refrain) (1)

Translation

“O sakhi, Keśi-mathana Kṛṣṇa is never lacking in
generosity when it comes to relieving the burning heat
of Kāmadeva. What’s more, his mind is also bewildered by
attachment for me. My anxiety is mounting incessantly;
how will my desire to unite with him be fulfilled?

                           75
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

Arrange for our meeting immediately.

“Once, he went to a secluded forest bower at night in
accordance with the plan we had discreetly arranged by
hints and signals. In a mischievous mood, he concealed
himself in the dense foliage of the forest just to
observe my eagerness to meet him and my agony in his
absence. I began to look around with tired, fearful
eyes, immersed in anxiety and thinking ‘Oh, when will he
come?’ Then he suddenly delighted me with the nectar of
his amorous laughter.

“Kṛṣṇa is munificent and he is the killer of the Keśī
demon. My yearning for passionate love-play has reached
the utmost limit and I am prepared to perform all the
activities of union. So my dear friend, arrange for Śrī
Kṛṣṇa to fulfil his ambitions with me at once.”

Commentary

Burning in a fever of transcendental lust, Rādhā reveals
her desire to meet Kṛṣṇa. She begins by disclosing the
details of how she had pleased him by her love-play on a
previous occasion. This pastime is full of the most
profound mysteries.

Sakhi! ramaya keśi-mathanam udāram mayā saha – “Sakhi,
arrange for me to delight in love with Keśi-niṣūdana.”
Here Rādhā expresses a desire for her own happiness. The
definition of pure devotion prohibits self-interest, so
why does she have such a desire? The cowherd maidens
have renounced everything to love Kṛṣṇa. They are devoid
of even the slightest trace of self-centred desire.
Nevertheless, if the intense hankering of the hero and
heroine is not mutual, prema will not fully manifest.
The heroine must show her anurāga to awaken the desire
for love in the heart of the hero. This is the nature of
prema.

The defect of incompatibility (rasābhāsa) arises if
prema is one-sided. It is stated:

anurāgo ’nuraktāyāṁ

rasāvaha iti sthitiḥ

abhāve tv anurāgasya

rasābhāsaṁ jagur budhāḥ

It is the opinion of learned authorities that rasa is
nourished by a woman’s eagerness for love, whereas
rasābhāsa occurs in the absence of such anurāga.



Therefore, Rādhā’s keen desire for Kṛṣṇa acts to
increase rasa.

“Sakhi, the very first time Kṛṣṇa enjoyed with me, he
realized the bliss of making love. Now that we are
apart, I constantly remember the happiness of our
amorous play. The erotic sentiment (madana-rasa) makes
me distraught with impatience. Separation from Kṛṣṇa has

                           76
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

become intolerable. Sakhi, arrange my union with him at
once!”

In this way the poet has portrayed Rādhā’s anurāga for
Kṛṣṇa and Kṛṣṇa’s anurāga for Rādhā. If an author
introduces the subject of union before depicting mutual
anurāga, the defect of rasābhāsa occurs.

Sa-vikāram – Śrī Rādhā says, “I have experienced the
transformations of kāma.” When a woman’s lust is
aroused, she devises an excuse to show her navel,
breasts and other parts of her body. As stated in the
commentary entitled Rasika-sarvasva:



nābhī mūla kucodara prakaṭanavyājena yad yoṣitāṁ

sākāṁ kṣaṁ muhur-īkṣaṇaṁ skhalitatā nīvīnibandhasya ca

keśa-bhraṁsana saṁyamau cakamitur mitrādi sandarśanaiḥ

saubhāgyādi guṇa praśasti kathanaiḥ tat sānurāgeṅgikatam

When a woman is aroused, her gestures are full of
anurāga. For example, she creates an opportunity to show
her navel, breasts and abdomen; she repeatedly glances
towards her beloved with desire in her eyes; her
undergarments begin to loosen; the arrangement of her
hair slips and she tries to fix it; she carefully
observes all the activities of her beloved’s friends and
she praises his good fortune and virtues along with
them.



“O sakhi, I am guilty of all these love-laden gestures.
Arrange my meeting with Śrī Kṛṣṇa at once.”

The phrase madana-manoratha-bhāvitayā means, “Desires
born from the kāma in the core of my heart are now fully
mature.”



ceṣṭā bhavati pūnnāryo

raty-utthānāti-saktayoḥ

sambhogo vipralambhaś ca

sa śṛṅgāro dvidhā mataḥ

When a man and a woman who are intensely attached to
each other perform romantic activities to stimulate each
other’s desires for union, the amorous mood is of two
types, namely meeting (sambhoga) and separation
(vipralambha).



“Just as I, the separated lover, long for Kṛṣṇa, he also
longs for me. O sakhi, take me to him at once!” In this
instance, śṛṅgāra-rasa is complete.

                           77
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017


Śrī Rādhā says, “When I arrived at the secluded kuñja in
the dead of night, not seeing Śyāmasundara, I began to
look around in great anxiety. At that time, he was
observing my eagerness from his hiding place in a dense
grove.

“When I began to search for him with fearful eyes, he
illuminated all directions with merriment by suddenly
appearing right in front of me and laughing heartily out
of enthusiasm for lovemaking. O sakhi, take me to him at
once!”

Verse 12

prathama-samāgama-lajjitayā paṭu-cāṭu-śatair anukūlam

mṛdu-madhura-smita-bhāṣitayā śithilī-kṛta-jaghana-
dukūlam

sakhi he keśī-mathanam udāraṁ... (2)

Translation

“Seeing me so naive and gullible due to the natural
embarrassment that occurs during one’s first amorous
encounter, he employed a succession of courteous words
and humble entreaties to abate my shyness. Enchanted by
his flattering words, I smiled softly and sweetly and
began to converse with him. Just then that cunning Kṛṣṇa
suddenly removed the cloth from my hips. O sakhi,
immediately arrange for me to meet with him!”

Commentary

Śrī Rādhā tells her friend, “This was not my first
intimate meeting with Kṛṣṇa. Nevertheless, I feigned the
shyness of a heroine on the occasion of her first union.
Noting my temperament, Kṛṣṇa spoke words of flattery
just to make me agreeable to his intentions. Delighted
by his sweet-talk, I smiled sweetly in return and
politely conversed with him. As soon as he saw that I
was favourably disposed to him, he suddenly opened my
lower cloth.

“I want to be united in amorous love with Kṛṣṇa. O
sakhi, arrange for me to meet with him at once!”

The phrase prathama-samāgama – first union – implies
that the sublime mellow of coition is always experienced
in newer and newer ways.

Verse 13

kisalaya-śayana-niveśitayā ciram urasi mamaiva śayānam

kṛta-parirambhaṇa-cumbanayā parirabhya kṛtādhara-pānam

sakhi he keśī-mathanam udāraṁ... (3)

Translation

“He made me lie down upon a charming bed of soft, fresh
flowers and then, with great pleasure, he laid so

                           78
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

radiantly upon my heart. I kissed him and embraced him
deeply. Moreover, he embraced me and repeatedly drank
the nectar of my lips under the powerful influence of
anaṅga-rasa. O sakhi, he is dearer to me than my very
life. Take me to meet with him at once.”

Commentary

“Sakhi, in the appointed place, Kṛṣṇa made me lie down
upon a bed made of soft flowers. After that he enjoyed
lovemaking upon my bosom for a long time. I would
embrace and kiss him and he would also embrace me and
drink the nectar of my lips at the same time. O sakhi,
arrange for me to meet with Śrī Kṛṣṇa at once.”

Kṛta-parirambhaṇa – The author of Rasa-mañjarī comments
that this position is called kṣīra-nīra āliṅgana on the
basis of evidence from Pañcasāyaka. The author of
Rasika-priyā considers this type of embrace to be tila-
taṇḍula āliṅgana and gives evidence from his Koka-
śāstra.

Verse 14

alasa-nimīlita-locanayā pulakāvali-lalita-kapolam

śrama-jala-sakala-kalevarayā vara-madana-madād ati-lolam

sakhi he keśī-mathanam udāraṁ... (4)

Translation

“From the sudden, unexpected surge of rapture within the
pleasure of passionate love with him, my eyes became
tired and closed. Kṛṣṇa’s cheeks assumed an
extraordinary charm and loveliness from the joy of this
love-play. Although he was already intoxicated by the
mellows of amorous union, seeing my attractive body
exhausted and dripping with perspiration, he became even
more agitated by the desire to taste anaṅga-rasa. O
sakhi, quickly arrange for me to meet with Śrī Kṛṣṇa!”

Commentary

“Sakhi, my body became tired and my eyes closed from the
exhaustion that follows in the wake of sexual pleasure.
My whole body was wet with drops of perspiration
indicative of my lusty thoughts. Seeing me in that
condition, the intense passion in Kṛṣṇa’s heart caused
his jubilation to escalate, which in turn creating an
enthralling lustre on his cheeks. He was immersed in the
immensely powerful bliss of erotic love. By beholding my
vine-like body, he suddenly became agitated. O sakhi,
arrange for me to meet with him!”

Profuse perspiration on Śrī Rādhā’s body from the
ecstasy of lovemaking reveals the climax of her
previously experienced delight.

Verse 15

kokila-kalarava-kūjitayā jita-manasija-tantra-vicāram

ślatha-kusumākula-kuntalayā nakha-likhita-ghana-stana-

                           79
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

bhāram

sakhi he keśī-mathanam udāraṁ... (5)

Translation

“Śrī Kṛṣṇa is thoroughly conversant with the
confidential theories found in authentic manuals on the
techniques of lovemaking (rati-śāstra) and he also
practises their rites. At the time of amorous union with
Kṛṣṇa, I cried out like a cuckoo. My braid opened and
the arrangement of flower blossoms slipped and fell from
my hair. I don’t know what he was writing on my large,
round breasts with the scratching of his fingernails. O
sakhi, arrange for me to meet with my dearmost Śrī Kṛṣṇa
at once!”

Commentary

Rādhā is describing her experience of union with Kṛṣṇa
according to the principles of tantra. At the time of
making love, she used to murmur like a cuckoo.

The author of Rasika-sarvasva has stated, kalarava
śabdaḥ pārāvata paryāyaḥ – “When a heroine is being
kissed and stimulated in various ways by her lover, her
breathing becomes erratic and she makes a sound similar
to the cooing of birds like the cuckoo or pigeon, thus
expressing the sudden thrill of pleasurable sensations.”

“Kṛṣṇa used to seize me by the hair, kiss me and drink
the nectar of my lips. At the height of our love-games,
he used to make nail-marks on my large, firm breasts.
Sakhi, arrange for me to meet with him at once!”

Verse 16

caraṇa-raṇita-maṇi-nūpurayā paripūrita-surata-vitānam

mukhara-viśṛṅkhala-mekhalayā sa-kaca-graha-cumbana-dānam

sakhi he keśī-mathanam udāraṁ... (6)

Translation

“As we enjoyed amorous play, the jewel-studded ankle-
bells on my feet rang out with the sound ‘runjhun’.
Although my waist-bells were very talkative, they
gradually came undone. Unite me at once with that Śrī
Kṛṣṇa who catches me by the hair, repeatedly kisses my
face and engages in sensual games to the fullest
extent.”

Commentary

“When Śrī Kṛṣṇa performed such endearing love-play, the
jewelled ankle-bells on my feet would jingle. At first
the sash of bells around my waist used to chime, but
later it would break and fall silent. He used to catch
my hair and kiss me. O sakhi, unite me with him at
once.”

Verse 17


                           80
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

rati-sukha-samaya-rasālasayā dara-mukulita-nayana-
sarojam

niḥsaha-nipatita-tanu-latayā madhusūdanam udita-manojam5

sakhi he keśī-mathanam udāraṁ... (7)

Translation

“While enjoying with him, I gradually became exhausted
from the experience of intense sexual pleasure. All my
limbs became languid and my vine-like body was
incapacitated by the vigorous exertion of making love. I
finally fell lifeless and inert. Kṛṣṇa’s slightly open
lotus eyes were soaked in the mellows of Cupid and
incomparable erotic transformations played incessantly
within his mind. O sakhi, unite me with my dearest Śrī
Kṛṣṇa at once.”

Commentary

After being submerged in the experience of amorous
pleasure, Rādhā became weary and Kṛṣṇa half-closed his
lotus eyes. A bumblebee generally sits on all the
flowers one by one and drinks their nectar, but when he
sees the excellence of the lotus flower, he becomes
deeply attached to it and cannot leave. He becomes madly
intoxicated by drinking its nectar and then takes rest
therein. Similarly, although Madhusūdana Śrī Kṛṣṇa
drinks the nectar of all the flower-like gopīs, impelled
by his deep attachment for the lotus-like Rādhā, he
abandons them all. She becomes his resting place because
he can experience the full ecstasy of all amorous
pleasures only with her. Moreover, when Rādhā
experiences Kṛṣṇa’s dexterity in passionate love, her
attachment for him also intensifies.

Today, Śrī Rādhā enjoyed loving pastimes with Śrī Hari
within her mind. By remembering her previous
experiences, she became overwhelmed with anxiety and
said to her friend, “O sakhi, arrange for me to meet
with Śrī Kṛṣṇa at once!”

Verse 18

śrī-jayadeva-bhaṇitam idam atiśaya-madhuripu-nidhuvana-
śīlam

sukham utkaṇṭhita-gopa-vadhū-kathitaṁ vitanotu sa-līlam

sakhi he keśī-mathanam udāraṁ... (8)

Translation

This erotic narration composed by Śrī Jayadeva portrays
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s excessive amorous passion as described by
the anxious and impatient heroine in the torment of her
separation. May it increase the auspiciousness of all
devotees who recite and hear it.

Commentary

In conclusion, Śrī Jayadeva says, “Although I have
presented this song, the details were revealed by Rādhā

                           81
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

to her intimate friend. Therefore the narrator of this
song is actually Śrī Rādhā. She has elaborately
described Kṛṣṇa’s prowess in love-play.”

When memories of her pastimes with Kṛṣṇa awakened,
Rādhā’s mind became unsteady. In this state, she
revealed the content of her heart to her companion for
the sake of meeting with Śyāmasundara.

Śrī Rādhā is referred to as nidhuvana-nāgarī because she
is also expert in sensuality. May this description of
her passionate games and loving thirst for Śrī Kṛṣṇa
bestow auspiciousness upon all.

This sixth song of Śrī Gīta-govinda is entitled Akleśa-
keśava-kuñjara-tilaka. The whole song is permeated with
vipralambha-śṛṅgāra-rasa. The metre is laya chanda.

Verse 19



hasta-srasta-vilāsa-vaṁśam anṛju-bhrū-vallimad-ballavī-

vṛndotsāri-dṛganta-vīkṣitam ati-svedārdra-gaṇḍa-sthalam

mām udvīkṣya vilajjita-smita-sudhā-mugdhānanaṁ kānane

govindaṁ vraja-sundarī-gaṇa-vṛtaṁ paśyāmi hṛṣyāmi ca

Translation

“O sakhi, Śrī Kṛṣṇa was romancing with the cowherd
girls, whose arched eyebrows resemble attractive
creepers, and casting his glance upon their charming
limbs. Though he was surrounded by a throng of beautiful
cowherd damsels, he made them retreat to a distant place
by a motion of his eyes. As soon as Kṛṣṇa saw me, he was
struck with wonder. His mind became obsessed with
amorous desires, causing his flute to fall from his
delicate hands and his forehead to become moist with
perspiration. His face blossomed with the nectar of a
bashful smile. I feel an indescribable bliss on seeing
his reaction.”

Commentary

There are three types of realization at the time of
separation: remembrance (smaraṇa), internal vision
(sphūrti) and direct audience (āvirbhāva). Śrī Rādhā
first experienced smaraṇa. When her mood intensified to
the state of sudīpta-mahābhāva, pastimes manifested
automatically within her heart. Now her realization is
sākṣāt anubhava, a direct experience.

She tells her friend, “Sakhi, look! I am laughing and I
feel overjoyed to see Govinda graciously present in this
forest of Vraja along with the beautiful gopīs.”

The sakhī asked, “Hey bewildered one! Why are you in
bliss when Kṛṣṇa has abandoned you to enjoy with other
gopīs?”

Rādhā replied, “He will become so embarrassed when he

                           82
Gita-govinda.txt                                 5/5/2017

notices that I am there. His own guilty conscience will
make him sweat profusely and his cheeks will become wet
with perspiration. When he sees my ecstatic symptoms
(sāttvika-bhāva), ecstatic symptoms will also erupt on
his limbs. His flute will slip from his hands in shame.
The cowherd girls of Vraja have attractive creeper-like
eyebrows. But he will repel them from his intimate
proximity with a gesture of his eyebrows. Then his face
will become utterly enchanting, enhanced by his mild
smile. When I behold my dearmost beloved in this way, I
will certainly feel the utmost bliss. Sakhi! When, oh
when will I meet my darling Śrī Kṛṣṇa in this way?”

This verse includes śārdūla-vikrīḍita chanda, dīpaka and
lāṭānuprāsa alaṅkāras, vipralambha-śṛṅgāra-rasa and
pāñcālī rīti. The hero is dakṣiṇa nāyaka.

Verse 20



durāloka-stoka-stabaka-navakāśoka-latikā-

vikāsaḥ kāsāropavana-pavano ’pi vyathayati

api bhrāmyad-bhṛṅgī-raṇita-ramaṇīyā na mukula-

prasūtiś cūtānāṁ sakhi śikhariṇīyaṁ sukhayati

Translation

“Sakhi, now there is no way that my mind can be
satisfied in separation from Kṛṣṇa. Look! The radiant
beauty of this slightly blossomed new aśoka vine is like
a spear piercing my eyes. The breeze wafting from the
groves on the shore of this lake also inflicts pain upon
every limb of my body. Even the beautiful drone of the
bumblebees as they wander in all directions is not
pleasing to me. The mango trees are all the more
captivating with their humming bumblebees, yet the fresh
blossoms sprouting from their branch-tips also do not
make me happy.”

Commentary

Describing excitants (vibhāvas) of love in separation,
Rādhā tells her intimate friend, “It has become
difficult to look at the aśoka trees during this spring
season. The new buds inflame the fire of separation. The
breeze moving through the lakeside groves causes aśoka-
latās to bloom in tiny clusters. This is also
torturous.”

The word durāloka is derived thus, duḥkhena āloka
avalokanam yasyā ’sau.

“Buds are sprouting on the branch-tips of the mango
trees and the humming bees are hovering around them.
These buds made me happy when I met with Śrī Kṛṣṇa, but
now they make me sad.”

The phrase bhrāmyad-bhṛṅgī, “wandering bees”, indicates
that Śrī Rādhā is pointing to the bumblebees, thereby
revealing that she has no desire for any male person

                           83
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

other than Kṛṣṇa. He is the only desirable male in her
eyes.

This verse includes samuccaya and anuprāsa alaṅkāras,
kriyaucitya and vipralambha-śṛṅgāra-rasa. The rīti is
māgadhī and gauḍīyā. Appropriately the metre is
śikhariṇī chanda.

Verse 21



sākūta-smitam ākulākula-galad-dhammillam ullāsita-

bhrū-vallīkam alīka-darśita-bhujā-mūlārddha-dṛṣṭa-stanam

gopīnāṁ nibhṛtaṁ nirīkṣya gamitākāṅkṣaś ciraṁ cintayan

antar mugdha-manoharaṁ haratu vaḥ kleśaṁ navaḥ keśavaḥ

Translation

The gopīs’ smiles conveyed their intentions so clearly
that even a naive person would be attracted. Their
braids loosened as the pores of their skin thrilled with
intense kāma. Kṛṣṇa gazed at their breasts as they
showed them off by raising their arms. Yet such gestures
were to no avail. Kṛṣṇa reflected deeply for a long
time, gradually destroying his last aspirations for the
company of the gopīs. Now he is exhilarated exclusively
by Rādhā’s emotions and his astonishment increases at
every new moment. May that youthful Keśava destroy the
sufferings of you all.

Commentary

The great poet, Śrī Jayadeva, bestows a benediction upon
all devotees in this, the final verse of Act Two. “Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is extremely discerning. He carefully deliberated
upon four gestures made by various gopīs. Even a half-
wit could decipher the common motive – seduction.”

(1) Sākūta-smitam – Although the gopīs’ smiling is
natural, it also conveys intentions. Their smiles were
obviously amorous desire in disguise. It is only natural
for an impassioned woman to extend seductive gestures
when she sees a young man.

(2) Ākulākula-galad-dhammilam – The gopīs’ braids were
loosened by bodily transformations such as horripilation
due to intense lust.

(3) Their eyes became restless with amorous desire on
seeing Kṛṣṇa.

(4) Although there was no reason to expose their armpits
or raise their hands, they would use excuses such as
artificially yawning as opportunities to show Kṛṣṇa
their uplifted breasts.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is highly discerning. He deliberated on these
activities within his heart and decided that they were
all in vain because no one can ever be compared with
Rādhā. May Śrī Keśava, who is praised in this way by his

                           84
Gita-govinda.txt                                  5/5/2017

devoted servants, dispel the sorrows of all his
devotees.

This verse includes samuccaya, āśīḥ and parikara
alaṅkāras. The chanda is śārdūla-vikrīḍita.



Thus ends the Bālabodhinī-prakāśa commentary on Act Two
of Śrī Gīta-govinda, entitled Akleśa-keśava.




Act Three




— mugdha-madhusūdanaḥ —




Scene Seven

Verse 1



kaṁsārir api saṁsāra-

vāsanā-bandha-śṛṅkhalām

rādhām ādhāya hṛdaye

tatyāja vraja-sundarīḥ

Translation

s Kṛṣṇa, the enemy of Kaṁsa, remembered the intimate
love expressed previously by Rādhā, he realized that it
was the very essence of the highest devotion. His heart
was bound by the chain of worldly desire, embodied in
the form of Rādhā. Therefore, considering the love of
the other voluptuous maidens of Vraja to be
insignificant, he abandoned them all.

Commentary

Acts One and Two describe the excellence of Rādhā and
Mādhava, concluding with a vivid portrayal of Rādhā’s
loving thirst and eagerness for Kṛṣṇa. Now, in the
beginning of Act Three, the author demonstrates Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s thirst and eagerness for Rādhā.

Memories of the autumnal dance (sāradīya-rāsa-līlā)
suddenly awakened in Kṛṣṇa’s heart. He remembered how he
had left the other gopīs in the arena of the rāsa dance
and had met alone with Śrī Rādhā. He remembered how he
had nourished her affection by arranging and decorating
her hair. Now in the absence of Rādhā, the anguish of

                           85
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

separation awakened in his heart. Therefore he abandoned
the company of the other attractive gopīs of Vraja.

Kaṁsāri – Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the enemy of the evil king,
Kaṁsa. Alternatively, kaṁ sukhaṁ sārayati vistārayati
kaṁsāriḥ – “He who expands one’s happiness, namely
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is called Kaṁsāri.”

Saṁsāra-vāsanā-bandha-śṛṅkhalām – When the word saṁsāra
is interpreted as a compound of samyak (complete) and
sāra (essence), then it refers to the delightful and
endearing madhura-rasa. Therefore, the tendency to
remain always preoccupied with madhura-rasa is called
saṁsāra-vāsanā. Rādhā is the binding fetter (śṛṅkhalā)
in the rāsa dance because she keeps Kṛṣṇa under her
control.

When a man of fine discrimination ascertains the
identity of the most essential substance by comparison
with the alternatives, he naturally abandons everything
else to zealously pursue his desired object. Then that
superlative object becomes his exclusive shelter.
Similarly, Śrī Kṛṣṇa has directly abandoned all the
other gopīs and accepted Rādhā as his exclusive shelter.

Vraja-sundarīḥ – The plural declension indicates that
Kṛṣṇa has forsaken many elegant young ladies in the
anguish of separation from Rādhā. This reveals his
excessive anurāga for her.

The metre of this verse is anuṣṭubh.

Verse 2



itas tatas tām anusṛtya rādhikām

anaṅga-bāṇa-vraṇa-khinna-mānasaḥ

kṛtānutāpaḥ sa kalinda-nandinī-

taṭānta-kuñje viṣasāda mādhavaḥ

Translation

As the arrows of Kāmadeva tore him apart, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
condemned himself, “Alas! Why did I neglect Śrī Rādhā?
How will I meet her again?” He searched extensively to
find her, but without success. Finally, in despair, he
entered a secluded grove on the Yamunā riverside and
began to repent.

Commentary

Kṛṣṇa’s realizations are being described. He feels the
same way that Rādhā was feeling in separation from him.
Although all the beautiful gopīs were willing, he was
indifferent to their service. The fact that his
sweetheart was actually present somewhere nearby made
him all the more despondent. He thought, “Today I could
not properly respect Śrī Rādhā, so she must have gone to
a bower on the Yamunā riverside.” He began to look in
one grove after another. After searching extensively,

                           86
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

hopelessness oppressed him to the point of giving up.
“If only I had consoled Rādhā with humble words, she
would not have left.”

In this way Kṛṣṇa sank to the depths of despair,
stricken by the arrows of Cupid and burning in the fire
of guilt.

Mādhavaḥ – mā (Lakṣmī) + dhava (pati) = Lakṣmīpati, the
husband of the goddess of fortune. This name of Kṛṣṇa
has a specific significance in this context: mā (Rādhā)
+ dhava (priyatama) = Mādhava, who is dearer to Rādhā
than her life’s breath, and whose anxiety in separation
from her is the emblem of her immense fortune.

The metre of this verse, vaṁśasthavila chanda, is
defined thus: vadanti vaṁśasthavilaṁ ja-tau ja-rau.




Song 7


The musical mode is gurjarī rāga; the rhythm, yati tāla.



Verse 3

mām iyaṁ calitā vilokya vṛtaṁ vadhū-nicayena

sāparādhatayā mayāpi na vāritāti-bhayena



hari! hari! hataratayhari! hari! hatādaratayā gatā sā
kupiteva (refrain) (1)

Translation

“When Rādhā saw me surrounded by cowherd damsels, she
became indignant and departed. I thought, ‘I have
committed an offence’, so I became fearful and could not
muster the courage to stop her from leaving. Alas! She
left in a huff because I had disrespected her.”

Commentary

Śrī Kṛṣṇa expresses his deep disappointment by the
exclamation hari! hari!

“Alas! What a terrible calamity. On seeing me surrounded
by a throng of elegant gopīs, Rādhā deserted me. She
feels neglected and disrespected. Although she always
reigns in my heart as my most beloved, and although she
abounds with all desirable virtues, and although her
love for me has never been surpassed, still I offended
her. Therefore I was nervous and hesitated to pacify
her. Feeling insulted, she became annoyed with me and
left, and now I am very sorry about what happened.”

Verse 4

                           87
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017


kiṁ kariṣyati kiṁ vadiṣyati sā ciraṁ viraheṇa

kiṁ dhanena janena kiṁ mama jīvitena gṛheṇa

hari! hari! hatādaratayā... (2)

Translation

“She has been suffering from the devastating heat of
separation for a long time, so I cannot predict her
behaviour. What will she do? What will she say? Alas! In
the absence of Rādhā, my wealth, my relatives, my life,
my home and everything seem worthless.”

Commentary

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is describing his own condition of separation.
“Whatever I am feeling in separation from Rādhā, she
must also be feeling. How much anxiety and distress she
must be going through. And my offence is the cause of
this pain. She is suffering so much because of me. I do
not know how she will express her anger, jealousy and
other feelings when I meet her again. What will she tell
her intimate friends? She must be making allegations
against me, saying, ‘He is so cruel and heartless’. On
the other hand, I will say, ‘O Rādhā, without you – my
prosperity, my associates, my herds of cows and my good
home – everything seems insignificant to me.’”

Verse 5

cintayāmi tad-ānanaṁ kuṭila-bhru kopa-bhareṇa

śoṇa-padmam ivopari bhramatākulaṁ bhramareṇa

hari! hari! hatādaratayā... (3)

Translation

“I feel as if Iam directly beholding the face of Śrī
Rādhā, with its arched creeper-like eyebrows. Her angry
face resembles a red lotus flower surrounded by hovering
bumblebees.”

Commentary

Kṛṣṇa says, “Now I am remembering Rādhā’s lotus face.
Her eyebrows must have become even more arched now that
she is annoyed. Her face is usually fair but now it must
be red with anger. That dejected face is enhanced by her
beautiful curved eyebrows that resemble a row of black
bumblebees hovering over a red lotus flower.”

This verse is an example of vākyārthopamā alaṅkāra.

Verse 6

tām ahaṁ hṛdi saṅgatām aniśaṁ bhṛśaṁ ramayāmi

kiṁ vane ’nusarāmi tām iha kiṁ vṛthā vilapāmi

hari! hari! hatādaratayā... (4)


                           88
Gita-govinda.txt                                   5/5/2017

Translation

“Alas! When I continuously realize the direct presence
of Rādhā and deeply embrace her in the temple of my
heart, why am I uselessly lamenting over her and why am
I repeatedly searching for her from forest to forest?”

Commentary

In separation, when Kṛṣṇa attains a vision (sphūrti) of
Rādhā in the core of his intensely anguished heart, he
says, “Śrī Rādhā is my most dearly beloved and she
resides in the temple of my mind all day and night. I
incessantly relish an abundance of amorous pastimes with
her in my heart. She is never separated from me. If she
is not to be found in the forest, then what profit lies
in searching for her there. And if I see her here in my
heart, then what is the point of lamenting.”

Verse 7

tanvi khinnam asūyayā hṛdayaṁ tavākalayāmi

tan na vedmi kuto gatāsi na tena te ’nunayāmi

hari! hari! hatādaratayā... (5)

Translation

“O delicate woman with a slender waist, it seems that
your heart is contaminated with jealousy. But what can I
do? You proudly left in a huff. What kind of humble
supplication should I offer to dispel your indignation?
I have no idea.”

Commentary

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is distraught in his condition of separation
from Rādhā. When a sphūrti of Rādhā suddenly became
visible, Kṛṣṇa began to speak as if she were directly
before him, addressing her, “O slender-waisted woman”
(tanvi).

“O Rādhā, I abandoned you to enjoy pastimes with other
vraja-gopīs. Your heart is now polluted by jealousy
towards them because you consider yourself superior.
Your heart is depressed because you are superimposing
faults upon me. You have left this place to go somewhere
else. What can I do about that? If I knew where you had
gone, I would touch your feet, pacify you and beg for
forgiveness.”

Verse 8

dṛśyase purato gatāgatam eva me vidadhāsi

kiṁ pureva sa-sambhramaṁ parirambhaṇaṁ na dadāsi

hari! hari! hatādaratayā... (6)

Translation

“Alas! It seems that you are repeatedly coming and
going. Why do you not impetuously embrace me as you did

                           89
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

before, being impelled by the exhilaration of love?”

Commentary

“O my darling Kṛśāṅgi, I am seeing you come and go
before my eyes; not more than that. You are just coming
and going. Why are you not binding me in the ropes of
your embrace today? Why have you become so cruel?”

It is true that when a lonely man’s despair reaches its
highest point, so does the intensity of his
contemplation. At that time it seems as if his lover is
actually present before him. Now Kṛṣṇa has become so
desperate in the absence of Rādhā that his meditation
has culminated in directly perceiving her before his
eyes. It appears to him that Rādhā and only Rādhā is
everywhere, in all directions. She is here; she is
there. Only Rādhā appears to him in every aspect of
existence.

Verse 9

kṣamyatām aparaṁ kadāpi tavedṛśaṁ na karomi

dehi sundari darśanaṁ mama manmathena dunomi

hari! hari! hatādaratayā... (7)

Translation

“O beautiful one, please forgive me. I will never offend
you again. Allow me to see you at once. I am reeling
from the pain inflicted by Kandarpa.”

Commentary

The poet is revealing the ultimate limit of Kṛṣṇa’s
despondency. A vision of Rādhā began to manifest in his
heart. In her presence, he is accepting her as his
object of worship by saying, “O Rādhā, please forgive my
offences. Whatever happened, kindly forget about it. I
will never commit such an offence in the future. Please
give me your darśana. I am your dearest one. Do not
leave my sight. In separation from you I am being
scorched by the heat of amorous desires.”

In this song Śrī Kṛṣṇa is dhīra-lalita nāyaka. The
prominent rasa is vipralambha-śṛṅgāra arising from
mutual anurāga.

Verse 10

varṇitaṁ jayadeva-kena harer idaṁ pravaṇena

kindubilva-samudra-sambhava-rohiṇī-ramaṇena

hari! hari! hatādaratayā... (8)

Translation

Śrī Jayadeva appeared in the village of Kindubilva just
as the moon appears from the ocean. He has humbly
collected Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s expressions of sorrow in the form
of this song.

                           90
Gita-govinda.txt                                 5/5/2017


Commentary

Śrī Jayadeva has described Kṛṣṇa’s lamentation in
separation from Rādhā with profound humility. Just as
the moon rises from the ocean, the poet Jayadeva has
appeared in the village of Kindubilva. Śrī Jayadeva is
known as Pīyūṣavarṣī, “one who showers nectar”. This is
also a name for Rohiṇī-ramaṇa, the moon. Just as
everyone is delighted by the moon, this song is bound to
delight everyone.

Verse 11



hṛdi bisa-latā-hāro nāyaṁ bhujaṅgama-nāyakaḥ

kuvalaya-dala-śreṇī kaṇṭhe na sā garala-dyutiḥ

malayaja-rajo nedaṁ bhasma priyā-rahite mayi

prahara na hara-bhrāntyānaṅga krudhā kim u dhāvasi

Translation

“Hey Anaṅga! Are you inflicting pain on me with such
fury because you think that I am Lord Śiva? Why have you
become so harsh? This is not the king of snakes, Vāsukī,
upon my chest. It is actually a necklace made of lotus
stems. The blueness of my throat is not the effect of
poison, but a garland of blue lotus flowers. This is not
ash from a funeral pyre smeared on my body. It is
sandalwood paste applied in the absence of my beloved.
So go away! You have caught me by mistake, so stop
unnecessarily raining your terrible arrows upon me. Why
are you running after me in such a rage? And look! Lord
Śiva lives happily with half of his body united with
Pārvatī, whereas I am far from united with Rādhikā – I
don’t even know where she is.”

Commentary

In separation from his dearest Śrī Rādhā, Kṛṣṇa’s heart
is devastated. He feels that Kāmadeva must have mistaken
him for Lord Śiva. Why else would he attack so
vehemently with his invincible arrows? Helplessly
overpowered, Kṛṣṇa calls out, “Hey Anaṅga, look! How
happily Lord Śiva lives, half his body united with his
beloved Pārvatī. However, what to speak of being united
with Rādhikā, who is dearer to me than my own breath, I
do not even know where she is.”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is experiencing a sphūrti of Rādhā in the
agony of the burning sensation caused by Cupid, the god
of amorous love. Therefore he directly says, “Hey
Anaṅga! Why are you furious with me for no reason and
running after me, just to beat me incessantly under the
misconception that I am Lord Śiva? This garland looks
like a snake but it is actually nothing but a necklace
of lotus fibres. You have mistaken the line of blue
lotuses on my neck for the blueness caused by poison on
the neck of Lord Śiva. This is not ash you see on my
body. It is Malaya sandalwood paste smeared upon my body

                           91
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

to relieve the heat of separation from my beloved. But
now it has dried up from the heat and turned to powder.
Without my lover, I am just like a lifeless body. So why
are you unnecessarily attacking me?”

This verse portrays vipralambha-śṛṅgāra and employs
apahnuti alaṅkāra. The metre is hariṇī chanda. The verse
also includes bhrāntimān alaṅkāra according to the
opinion of some learned authorities.

Verse 12



pāṇau mā kuru cūta-sāyakam amuṁ mā cāpam āropaya

krīḍā-nirjita-viśva mūrcchita-janāghātena kiṁ pauruṣam

tasyā eva mṛgī-dṛśo manasija preṅkhat-kaṭākṣāśuga-

śreṇī-jarjaritaṁ manāg api mano nādyāpi sandhukṣate

Translation

“Hey Cupid! You who conquer the entire universe by the
power of your bow on the pretext of playing a game, I am
suffering from the fever of amorous desires. In what way
will your remarkable prowess be established by
assaulting an insignificant and decrepit fellow like me.
Don’t take that mango-bud arrow in your hand. If you do,
at least do not place it on your bow. Just see! My heart
has been cut to pieces by the sidelong glances streaming
forth from that doe-eyed Śrī Rādhā and it has not yet
recovered. Therefore do not strike my heart, which has
already fainted from the convulsions of lust.”

Commentary

It is as if Kāmadeva said to Kṛṣṇa, “Although Śiva, who
incinerated my body, is certainly my enemy, you have
also transgressed my command. Therefore I will also aim
my arrows at you.”

Then Kṛṣṇa reproached Kāma, “O Manasija, don’t take that
arrow of mango buds in your hand.”

Kāmadeva’s flower arrows are of five types: (1) āmra
mukula (mango buds), (2) aśoka puṣpa, (3) mallikā puṣpa,
(4) mādhavī puṣpa, and (5) bakula puṣpa.

Mango buds have sprouted from the tips of their branches
because it is springtime. Kṛṣṇa thinks, “Kāmadeva has
made them into his arrows and he will shoot me while I
am in this condition of separation from Rādhā.”
Therefore he forbids him, “Don’t take that mango-bud
arrow in your hands.”

Mā cāpam āropaya – “If you do, then at least do not put
it on your bowstring.”

Krīḍā-nirjita-viśva – “O you for whom conquering the
universe is simply a matter of play! With joined palms I
beseech you. This arrow will surely deal me a mortal
blow. You are the conqueror of the universe and I am

                           92
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

like a dead person in separation from Śrī Rādhā. If a
hero like you were to beat a dying person, it would
simply result in your defamation. You would certainly
not be applauded for your heroic prowess.”

By the word manasija, Kṛṣṇa implies, “You have arisen
from my mind. It is not ethical to beating the one from
whom you have taken birth.”

“You want to shoot me with arrows on behalf of Rādhā.
But the arrow of her sidelong glance is even sharper
than your arrows and I have already been torn apart by
that. What is the necessity of shooting an arrow tipped
with incurable poison to add to the wounds I have
already sustained?”

This verse is an example of śārdūla-vikrīḍita chanda and
ākṣepa alaṅkāra.

Verse 13



bhrū-pallavo dhanur apāṅga-taraṅgitāni

bāṇā guṇaḥ śravaṇa-pālir iti smareṇa

tasyām anaṅga-jaya-jaṅgama-devatāyām

astrāṇi nirjita-jaganti kim arpitāni

Translation

“Aha! The bow of fresh petal-like eyebrows, the arrow-
like waves of angular glances from the corner of the
eye, the bowstring of long eyes that almost reach the
ears – these components comprise the totally infallible
military science employed by Kāmadeva. After conquering
everyone in the universe without exception, Kāmadeva has
again offered those weapons to their empress, the
animate deity of his own victory, Śrī Rādhā.”

Commentary

Attributing the entire arsenal of Cupid’s arrows to
Rādhā, Kṛṣṇa says, “Kāmadeva has deposited the weapons
that conquered the whole world in Śrī Rādhā.” Why? Here,
the word tat conveys the sense of pūrvānubhūti (previous
experience). By the word tasyām, Kṛṣṇa indicates that
“Kāmadeva has deposited the world-conquering weapons in
Rādhā, my cherished one, from whom I feel the anguish of
separation.”

To establish Rādhā’s second unique quality, Kṛṣṇa says
that she is the moving deity of Cupid’s victory.
Kāmadeva is the roving celestial who has conquered the
universe, but he did it only after acquiring weapons
from Rādhā. When his objective was accomplished, he
again offered those weapons back to their presiding
deity.

Kāmadeva’s world-conquering weapons are all found in Śrī
Rādhā.


                           93
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

Bhrū-pallava-dhanuḥ – The bow of petal-like eyebrows.
Rādhā’s eyebrows are compared to fresh petals because
they are dark and smooth, and to a bow because they are
curved.

Apāṅga-taraṅga – The waves of her sidelong glances are
Kāmadeva’s piercing arrows. Thus Kṛṣṇa implies, “Just as
an arrow pierces its target, Rādhā’s glance has pierced
my heart.”

Astra – The word astra refers to the instruments
employed in military science. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is comparing the
specific capabilities manifest in Rādhā’s limbs to
particular instruments employed by Kāmadeva in his
warfare.

This verse has been composed in vasanta-tilakā chanda
and embellished with utprekṣā and rūpaka alaṅkāras.

Verse 14



bhrū-cāpe nihitaḥ kaṭākṣa-viśikho nirmātu marma-vyathāṁ

śyāmātmā kuṭilaḥ karotu kabarī-bhāro ’pi mārodyamam

mohaṁ tāvad ayaṁ ca tanvi tanutāṁ bimbādharo rāgavān

sad-vṛttaṁ stana-maṇḍalaṁ tava kathaṁ prāṇair mama
krīḍati

Translation

“O slender Rādhā, the arrow of your sidelong glance,
shooting forth from the bow of your eyebrow, may tear my
heart to pieces. The rope of your dark curling locks may
bind me like a prisoner. Your lips, as soft and red as
bimba fruit, may bewilder me. But your perfectly round
and enchanting breasts are well-behaved. So why are they
playing with my life-airs on the pretext of a sport?”

Commentary

While meditating on Rādhā, Kṛṣṇa says, “The waves of
your sidelong glance are inflicting pain within the core
of my heart like arrows from the bow of your arched
eyebrows. This behaviour is quite befitting because it
is natural for a bow and arrows to give distress to
others. Wounding others is their occupation (dharma).

“Your curling black hair, which is naturally crooked,
launches an attack to kill me. This is also not
inappropriate because it is natural for those whose
hearts are crooked and corrupt to attempt murder.

“O slender-limbed Rādhā, your red (rāgī) lips make me
swoon and fall unconscious. This is also befitting. Is
there anything that those who are passionate and deeply
attached (rāgī) will not do to achieve their desires? It
is their very nature to engage in bewildering others.

“But why are your watermelon-like breasts trying to
steal my life-airs on the pretext of playing a game?

                           94
Gita-govinda.txt                                   5/5/2017

This seems to be thoroughly inappropriate. Such
behaviour is not natural for persons of integrity. Those
who are sad-vṛtta (perfectly behaved or perfectly round)
do not enjoy playing around with others’ life-airs.”

This verse features śārdūla-vikrīḍita chanda and virodha
alaṅkāra.

Verse 15



tāni sparśa-sukhāni te ca taralāḥ snigdhā dṛśor
vibhramās

tad vaktrāmbuja-saurabhaṁ sa ca sudhā-syandī girāṁ
vakrimā

sā bimbādhara-mādhurīti viṣayāsaṅge ’pi cen mānasaṁ

tasyāṁ lagna-samādhi hanta viraha-vyādhiḥ kathaṁ
vardhate

Translation

“While meditating on my beloved in a secluded place, my
skin thrills on experiencing the happiness of her pure
touch. The restlessness of her eyes, her affectionate
expressions, her erroneous behaviour due to the
bewilderment of love, and the way she casts her glance
are bringing me back to life. I am being inundated by
the fragrance of her lotus mouth. I can hear the
trickling ambrosia of her words as she speaks one
crooked statement after another. I am tasting the sweet
nectar of her enchanting bimba-fruit lips. My mind has
become deeply attached to these objects of perception in
this condition of trance. So why is my dire suffering
from the disease of separation increasing so rapidly at
every moment?”

Commentary

The malady of separation flows within Kṛṣṇa’s heart even
during a vivid vision (sphūrti) of romantic pastimes
with Rādhā in his meditation. Describing this
contradiction, Kṛṣṇa says, “My mind has become situated
in a trance on Rādhā. So why am I still being tortured
by feelings of separation? Separation (viraha) is a
condition of distress that occurs in the absence of
one’s beloved, but my mind adheres closely to Śrī Rādhā.

“The absence of internal meeting can be considered
separation. However, although I am experiencing internal
union, I still feel separation. This type of separation
must be caused by the absence of sensory union. That is
why it is also said that the experience of sensory
pleasure within the heart, despite the absence of the
sense objects, can also be referred to as union
(saṁyoga). But now this has also become a feeling of
viraha.”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is wondering, “What is real? The experience of
meeting also occurs in separation. I am feeling the
happiness of Rādhā’s touch on my skin. With my eyes I am

                           95
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

beholding her restless eyes, full of affectionate
mellows and overflowing with prema. With my nose I can
smell the fragrance of her lotus mouth, just as I have
experienced before. In this trance, my ears are tasting
the trickling nectar of Rādhā’s crooked words as if I
were directly perceiving them. Similarly, I am immersed
in the luscious nectar of her tender, red bimba-fruit
lower lip. In this way I am connected with all five
kinds of sense objects. So I cannot understand – why
does the torment of separation continue to increase?”

The present verse includes śārdūla-vikrīḍita chanda,
samuccaya alaṅkāra and vipralambha-śṛṅgāra.

Verse 16



tiryak-kaṇṭha-vilola-mauli-taralottaṁsasya vaṁśoccarad-

gīti-sthāna-kṛtāvadhāna-lalanā-lakṣair na saṁlakṣitāḥ

sammugdhe madhusūdanasya madhure rādhā-mukhendau sudhā-

sāre kandalitāś ciraṁ dadhatu vaḥ kṣemaṁ kaṭākṣormayaḥ

Translation

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is compelled by ecstatic emotions to adopt an
angular pose, crooked in three places. His crown and
earrings are swaying because of the way he tilts his
neck to one side. Being situated in the midst of
millions of attractive gopīs, he has inspired them to
meditate on the most provocative, swoon-inducing note of
his flute song, as he stares steadily upon the
enchanting and ambrosial lotus face of Śrī Rādhā, simply
to behold her excessive affection for him. May the
countless waves of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s sidelong glance bestow
auspiciousness upon all.

Commentary

In the last verse of Act Three, the poet has
substantiated the words of Rādhā. The emotions Kṛṣṇa
felt after seeing Rādhā when he was situated in the
midst of the gopīs are being presented herein. The poet
has blessed the reciters and hearers of this composition
by saying, “May that bewildered Madhusūdana bestow
auspiciousness upon you all.”

Here Kṛṣṇa is called Madhusūdana, meaning “bumblebee”,
or literally, “one who drinks honey”. Kṛṣṇa became
overjoyed upon beholding the slight restlessness and
striking beauty of Rādhā’s lotus face and he completely
abandoned all other desires to become exclusively
devoted to her. Because Rādhā’s sidelong glance emanated
waves of excessive affection, Madhusūdana became
transfixed on madhu, the intoxicating honey of her
enchanting moonlike face.

The abundant beauty of her face has been expressed by
the word sammugdha. The word madhura implies that
Rādhā’s face is sweeter than the nectar of immortality.
Kṛṣṇa beholds that face with great eagerness because of

                           96
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

its spellbinding sweetness. The word sudhā-sāra also
expresses that Rādhā’s face is the essence of ambrosia.
She has been likened to the moon because she makes Śrī
Kṛṣṇa joyful.

Although Kṛṣṇa was transfixed upon the face of Rādhā,
the other gopīs around him were completely unaware of
it. Kṛṣṇa was playing a melody upon his flute. The
melody ascended to a modulation around the most
provocative note, which immersed everyone’s attention in
the joy of listening. As he drew everyone’s
consciousness towards the sound of his flute, he also
mesmerized Rādhā with his flute melody in such a way
that the other gopīs could not understand what he was
doing. This is an illustration of Kṛṣṇa’s cunning
expertise.

Describing Kṛṣṇa’s posture the poet says, tiryak-kaṇṭha-
vilola-mauli-taralottaṁsasya – “He had adopted a crooked
pose by tilting his neck to one side. Thus his earrings
and the ornaments on his crown were oscillating.” The
word mauli can mean both “crown” and “head”. Moving the
head is a fault for a flute player, whereas not moving
the head is considered to be a mark of expertise. Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s skill is extraordinary, therefore his head was
not moving. Rather, only his earrings and the ornaments
on his crown were swaying.

This verse includes rūpaka alaṅkāra and śārdūla-
vikrīḍita chanda.



Thus ends the Bālabodhinī-prakāśa commentary on Act
Three of Śrī Gīta-govinda, entitled Mugdha-madhusūdana.




Act Four




— snigdha-madhusūdanaḥ —




Scene Eight

Verse 1



yamunā-tīra-vānīra-

nikuñje mandam āsthitam

prāha prema-bharodbhrāntaṁ

mādhavaṁ rādhikā-sakhī

                             97
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017


Translation

ewildered by love for Rādhā, Kṛṣṇa was sitting in a
dense grove on the Yamunā riverside feeling deeply
depressed. Rādhā’s dear friend began to speak to him as
follows.

Commentary

After depicting Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s love for each other,
now the poet will describe the methods employed by a
female envoy who desires to bring about their meeting.

Impelled by loneliness prior to meeting (pūrva-rāga),
Rādhā revealed her burning desire to meet with Kṛṣṇa to
her friend. After consoling Rādhā with reassuring words,
that sakhī set off to find Kṛṣṇa. She found him going
insane with anxiety in the absence of Rādhā as he sat in
a rattan-cane grove (vetasī-nikuñja) on the Yamunā
riverside. Then Rādhā’s intimate friend spoke to
Mādhava.




Song 8


The musical mode is karṇāṭa rāga, the rhythm, ekatālī
tāla.



Karṇāṭa rāga – Śikhikaṇṭha is walking, holding a huge
elephant tusk on his right shoulder with one hand and
wielding a sword in the other. Dancing angels and other
celestial beings glorify him with respectful prayers. On
such an occasion, it is appropriate to present karṇāṭa
rāga.




Verse 2

nindati candanam indu-kiraṇam anu vindati khedam adhīram

vyāla-nilaya-milanena garalam iva kalayati malaya-
samīram



sā virahe tava dīnā

mādhava manasija-viśikha-bhayād iva bhāvanayā tvayi līnā
(refrain) (1)

Translation

“O Mādhava! Rādhā is experiencing intense suffering in
separation from you. She is so afraid of the incessant

                           98
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

rain of Madana’s arrows that she has resorted to dhyāna-
yoga to find relief from this slow-burning fire of
distress. She has unconditionally surrendered to you and
now she is completely immersed in you by the practice of
meditation. In your absence, she criticizes sandalwood
paste. When she sees the rays of the moon, she feels as
if her body is burning and the Malaya breeze even
increases the heat. She also considers the breeze from
the Malaya Mountains to be like poison because it is
mixed with the hissing of venomous snakes who reside
around the sandalwood trees there.”

Commentary

The sakhī informs Kṛṣṇa about the agony Rādhā feels in
separation from him. She explains that Rādhā is in a
deep depression.

“Fearing Kāmadeva’s arrows, she began to meditate. Now
she has entered the state of samādhi, exclusive trance
upon you. Just as a person who is afraid of being shot
by arrows runs to take shelter of someone else to save
his life, similarly she has taken shelter of you because
you are the embodiment of amorous love. When you are
satisfied, there will be no need to fear anyone. O
Mādhava, in separation from you, Rādhā rebukes the
sandalwood paste smeared on her body because it is not a
source of happiness. Rather, it seems like a great
conflagration. Even the cooling rays of the moon seem to
set her heart ablaze because the moon ignites the fire
of her desires. She feels that the Malaya breeze must
have become poisonous from the hissing of the venomous
snakes who wind around the sandalwood trees of Malaya
Mountain.”

The phrase manasija-viśikha-bhayād iva is a charming
example of utprekṣā alaṅkāra. This verse is also
embellished by rūpaka and virodha alaṅkāras.

Verse 3

avirala-nipatita-madana-śarād iva bhavad-avanāya viśālam

sva-hṛdaya-marmaṇi varma karoti sajala-nalinī-dala-jālam

sā virahe tava dīnā... (2)

Translation

“The arrows of Kāmadeva are falling incessantly upon her
heart. Since you are also present there, she is making a
mystical shield (kavaca) to protect you by covering her
vulnerable heart with large lotus petals bearing
droplets of water.”

Commentary

By meditating continuously on Kṛṣṇa, Rādhā attained
oneness of heart with him. To inform him of this, the
sakhī says, “O Mādhava, you are always present in the
heart of Rādhā. She thought to herself, ‘Kāmadeva is
perpetually raining his arrows upon me but Śrī Kṛṣṇa
should not undergo the slightest difficulty.’ So she
covers her vulnerable heart with large lotus petals

                             99
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

bearing droplets of water (jāla). She is employing all
possible measures to protect you.”

The word jāla can also mean “net”. The sakhī implies,
“She has covered her heart with the net of lotus petals”
to express Rādhā’s sentiment, “May you never leave my
heart even for a moment.”

“The quiver of Kāmadeva is inexhaustible. He shoots his
arrows one after another. O Mādhava, although she is
helpless in separation from you, she still tries to
think of a remedy. But what can she think of? The lotus
petals she uses are themselves exactly like Kāmadeva’s
arrows. And from where will the droplets of water for
this shield come? How pitiful it is that even by making
a shield, she simply increases her own suffering.”

Verse 4

kusuma-viśikha-śara-talpam analpa-vilāsa-kalā-kamanīyam

vratam iva tava parirambha-sukhāya karoti kusuma-
śayanīyam

sā virahe tava dīnā... (3)

Translation

“Mādhava! Rādhā is making a delightful flower bed,
suitable for the enjoyment of many amorous pastimes. Yet
it seems to be a bed of Kāmadeva’s arrows. She is
performing severe austerities in the form of a vow to
recline on a bed of arrows in the hope of attaining your
deep embrace.”

Commentary

“Śrī Kṛṣṇa! Rādhā is burning in separation from you. She
is making a bed of flowers. Although it appears to be
the highest art of lovemaking personified, to her this
bed looks like a bed of Kāmadeva’s arrows.” The sakhī
implies, “Just as one might observe a dreadful vow to
attain some fabulous happiness, similarly Rādhā is
performing śaraśayyā-vrata, the severe austerity of
lying on a bed of arrows, for the sake of attaining the
uncommon happiness of your embrace.”

Verse 5

vahati ca valita-vilocana-jaladharam ānana-kamalam
udāram

vidhum iva vikaṭa-vidhuntuda-danta-dalana-galitāmṛta-
dhāram

sā virahe tava dīnā... (4)

Translation

“Just as a current of nectar began to flow from the moon
after it was bitten by the terrible gaping mouth of
Rāhu, similarly an incessant stream of tears is flowing
from the restless eyes of Śrī Rādhā’s exceptionally
attractive lotus face.”

                             100
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017


Commentary

The sakhī says, “O Mādhava, an unbroken stream of tears
flows from Rādhā’s restless and expansive eyes. It seems
as if the fearsome Rāhu has cut the moon with his teeth,
causing a stream of nectar to flow incessantly. Rādhā’s
face is not like a lotus, but like the moon, and the
teardrops flowing from her eyes are like nectar
(amṛta).”

This verse is an example of upamā alaṅkāra.

Verse 6

vilikhati rahasi kuraṅga-madena bhavantam asamaśara-
bhūtam

praṇamati makaram adho vinidhāya kare ca śaraṁ nava-
cūtam

sā virahe tava dīnā... (5)

Translation

“O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, in a secluded place, Rādhā is painting a
picture of your captivating form in musk, considering
you to be Kāmadeva himself. After depicting you with
mango-bud arrows in your hand and riding upon a makara,
she bows down to offer respectful obeisances to your
portrait.”

Commentary

“When Rādhā sits in a secluded place and paints your
portrait with liquid musk (kastūrī), she portrays you as
Kāmadeva – the god of sensual love – because, other than
you, who can drive her heart insane with desire? Only
you can fulfil her cherished ambitions. Then she paints
mango buds in your hand. They are the most powerful
amongst all the arrows of Kāmadeva. She depicts you
riding upon a makara, just like the predominating deity
of lust. Furthermore, to attain liberation from the
burning sensation of amorous desires, she respectfully
bows down before you and offers heartfelt prayers.”

This verse includes upamā alaṅkāra.

Verse 7

prati-padam idam api nigadati mādhava tava caraṇe
patitāham

tvayi vimukhe mayi sapadi sudhā-nidhir api tanute tanu-
dāham

sā virahe tava dīnā... (6)

Translation

“O Mādhava, after painting a picture of you in this
form, Rādhā pleads again and again, ‘Hey Śrī Kṛṣṇa! I am
falling at your feet. As soon as you become indifferent
to me, even the moon-god Candramā, with his chalice of

                             101
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

nectar, begins to shower fire upon my body.’”

Commentary

The sakhī says, “O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, wherever Rādhā goes, at
every step she utters, ‘I fall at your feet. Please do
not be indifferent to me. Whenever you are not satisfied
with me, even Candramā, the ocean of cooling nectar,
ignites a fire within my body.’”

The author of Rasa-mañjarī hints about the reason for
Rādhā’s use of the word mādhava. The syllable mā refers
to Lakṣmī, and dhava means pati, her Lord. When Kṛṣṇa
stays close to Rādhā, even Lakṣmī, who relates to Rādhā
as a rival, cannot harm her. But when Kṛṣṇa is
indifferent to Rādhā, Lakṣmī-devī’s brother, Candramā,
tortures her for being the rival of his sister.

This verse includes atiśayokti alaṅkāra. The description
of Candramā acting against his nature is an example of
virodha alaṅkāra.

Verse 8

dhyāna-layena puraḥ parikalpya bhavantam atīva durāpam

vilapati hasati viṣīdati roditi cañcati muñcati tāpam

sā virahe tava dīnā... (7)

Translation

“Śrī Rādhā is completely absorbed in meditation on you.
She imagines that you are directly before her. Sometimes
she laments in separation, sometimes she expresses
jubilation, sometimes she cries and sometimes she
abandons all suffering by being embraced in a momentary
vision.”

Commentary

The sakhī says, “O Kṛṣṇa, it is difficult for Rādhā to
find you by searching and other methods, so she is
absorbed in meditation instead and she imagines that you
are with her. When she feels that you are directly
before her, she paints your picture and when she looks
at your portrait, knowing you to be nearby, she begins
to laugh. Her mind becomes agitated with waves of joy,
but when you do not embrace her, her loud, insane
laughter transforms into a cry of lamentation. When your
imaginary form disappears, she begins to embrace it
again. She thinks, ‘If Śrī Kṛṣṇa sees me in this
condition, he will certainly come under my control.’
With this intention she abandons her anguish and desists
from floundering in the fire of separation.”

According to the commentary Rasika-priyā, the word
vilapati should read vilikhati. This verse features
dīpaka alaṅkāra. The heroine is expressing kilakiñcita-
bhāva.

Verse 9

śrī-jayadeva-bhaṇitam idam adhikaṁ yadi manasā naṭanīyam

                             102
Gita-govinda.txt                                  5/5/2017


hari-virahākula-ballava-yuvati-sakhī-vacanaṁ paṭhanīyam

sā virahe tava dīnā... (8)

Translation

This song composed by Śrī Jayadeva, based on the words
spoken by Rādhā’s dear friend, should be enacted within
the temple of the heart. The sakhī’s description of
Rādhā’s anguish in separation from Śrī Hari are worthy
of constant recitation.

Commentary

In this verse Śrī Jayadeva says that the tender and
youthful Rādhā is perturbed by separation from Kṛṣṇa.
The sakhī has revealed Rādhā’s confidential love to
Kṛṣṇa and her love-laden presentation is worthy of being
enacted within one’s heart. Acting is prominent in
dramatic theory (nāṭya). Therefore the word naṭanīyam
means “worthy of being enacted”; it can also mean
“relishable” and “to be tasted”. In his Nāṭya-śāstra,
Bharata Muni has stated naṭa śabdo rase mukhyaḥ – “The
primary meaning of the word naṭa is rasa.”

The purport of the phrase śrī-jayadeva-bhaṇitam idam
adhikam is that the entire essence of the sakhī’s words
is fully present in the poem of Śrī Jayadeva. Therefore
it is to be served and relished by pure devotees.




Scene Nine

Verse 10



āvāso vipināyate priya-sakhī-mālāpi jālāyate

tāpo ’pi śvasitena dāva-dahana-jvālā-kalāpāyate

sāpi tvad-viraheṇa hanta hariṇī-rūpāyate hā kathaṁ

kandarpo ’pi yamāyate viracayan śārdūla-vikrīḍitam

Translation

“O Śrī Kṛṣṇa, my sakhī Rādhā is behaving exactly like a
deer. She considers her residence to be the forest and
her friends to be like hunters with a net. The flames of
the blazing forest fire in her body are intensified by
her own sighs of pain. Alas, alas! Playing just like a
tiger, Kandarpa has become death personified as he
begins to maul her life airs.”

Commentary

A picture of Rādhā’s pitiful condition is being painted
by her intimate companion. Rādhā is exactly like a deer
when she is bereft of Kṛṣṇa’s association. This fair-

                             103
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

complexioned Rādhā resides in the forest, considering it
to be her home. Being scorched by separation from her
beloved, she wants to flee, but the net of the hunter-
like sakhīs is spread out before her. Her movements thus
restricted, she continuously feels frustrated. Even her
dearmost sakhīs seem to be fettering her like deer-
hunters equipped with a trap. As a deer becomes alarmed
and confused upon seeing a forest fire, similarly, she
does not know what to do when her long breaths mix with
the heat of her body and set her ablaze like a
firebrand.

Rādhā’s sorrowful sighs seem just like the flames of a
forest fire. Only the sound “Alas! Alas!” comes from her
mouth. Kāmadeva is always favourably disposed to Rādhā
when she is close to Kṛṣṇa. But now Kāmadeva is playing
like a tiger, as if he wants to kill her. That same god
of amorous love now appears to be death personified.

Amorous desire is like the play of a tiger who pounces
upon an innocent deer. The metre of this verse is also
called śārdūla-vikrīḍita (tiger’s play). The entire
metre is exactly like the play of Kāmadeva.

The comparison of Rādhā with a deer is also appropriate.
The sakhī implies, “A discerning woman will fall in love
with one who has affection for her, but Rādhā has fallen
in love with you. She is constantly immersed in the
ocean of affection. How can you be devoid of love for
her? Only a living entity born in the animal species can
have one-sided love.”

Furthermore, like a deer, her body is feeble and she is
perplexed about what to do. The helpless and innocent
Rādhā is tortured by the desire for Kṛṣṇa’s affection.
Over and above all, Cupid is also demonstrating his
prowess like a cruel tiger. However, in this case, it is
the highly discerning Rādhā who has fallen in love with
an unwilling candidate.

The chanda of this verse is śārdūla-vikrīḍita. The
alaṅkāras are luptopamā and virodhābhāsa.




Song 9


The musical mode is deśākha rāga, the rhythm, ekatālī
tāla.



The rays of the moon are illuminating all directions.
The hero is a wrestler. His bodily hair stands on end in
delight as he makes a sound by slapping his huge arms.
At such a time it is appropriate to sing deśākha rāga.



Verse 11


                          104
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

stana-vinihitam api hāram udāram

sā manute kṛśa-tanur iva bhāram

rādhikā virahe tava keśava (refrain) (1)

Translation

“O Keśava, Rādhā is so emaciated in separation from you
that the charming necklace upon her breasts has become a
burden.”

Commentary

In this song the sakhī describes Rādhā’s agony in a new
way. Rādhā’s limbs have become painfully thin in the
absence of Kṛṣṇa. Now she cannot even bear the weight of
the garland of lotus flowers upon her breasts.

The author of Gīta-govinda-dīpikā comments that kam is
another name for sukha (happiness). Kṛṣṇa is the
controller of kam, therefore he is called Keśava. The
word keśa means “to bestow happiness upon all”. The
syllable va in Keśava indicates the specific nectar
(amṛta) that is the life and soul of young women.
Consequently, Kṛṣṇa is called Keśava because he is the
life and soul of all the young women of Vraja. This
being the case, why is his lover, Rādhā, so unhappy?
Impelled by loneliness, she says the most wonderful
things without even speaking. Her ornaments are not a
burden; they are a curse. Therefore she wants to throw
them away.

Verse 12

sarasa-masṛṇam api malayaja-paṅkam

paśyati viṣam iva vapuṣi saśaṅkam

rādhikā virahe tava keśava... (2)

Translation

“O Keśava, in separation from you, Rādhā looks upon the
moist, smooth sandalwood paste smeared on her body as if
it were poison and she becomes afraid.”

Commentary

“Although Malaya sandalwood paste is smooth and
refreshing, she feels as if she were besmeared with
poison. In the agony of her loneliness, sandalwood
ointment is far from pleasing; it is positively
distressful.”

Verse 13

śvasita-pavanam anupama-pariṇāham

madana-dahanam iva vahati sa-dāham

rādhikā virahe tava keśava... (3)

Translation

                          105
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017


“Her body is being scorched by long sorrowful sighs,
heated by the flames of passion’s fire. Nevertheless,
she continues to hold on.”

Commentary

“The intense heat of separation within her heart is
intolerable. She lets out long sighs in an attempt to
cool off, but it has the opposite effect. Instead of
finding relief, she feels as if the fire is spreading
throughout her whole body. It is only passion that
blazes in this fire.”

Verse 14

diśi diśi kirati sajala-kaṇa-jālam

nayana-nalinam iva vigalita-nālam

rādhikā virahe tava keśava... (4)

Translation

“Her lotus eyes glance in all directions, scattering the
rain of her teardrops like water-speckled lotus flowers
detached from their stems.”

Commentary

“Her tearful eyes are as charming as blue lotuses
bearing droplets of water. All directions are bound by
the unbroken flow of her tears that spread out like a
net as she twirls around in anticipation of your return,
thinking that you could appear from any direction. As a
lotus flower has no fixed position once broken from its
stem, her eyes do not remain anywhere for more than a
moment. But for you, there is no support upon which they
might remain.”

This verse includes upamā and utprekṣā alaṅkāras.

Verse 15

tyajati na pāṇi-talena kapolam

bāla-śaśinam iva sāyam alolam

rādhikā virahe tava keśava... (5)

Translation

“Her cheek resembles the beauty of the newly risen moon
in the twilight sky when she sits alone in a secluded
place, holding it upon her reddish lotus hand.”

Commentary

“Rādhā was confused about what to do, so she became as
if inanimate. Now she holds the palm of her hand against
her cheek and remains perfectly still because she is
immersed in anxious thoughts, ‘Somehow or other, the day
passes by, but what will happen when night falls? It
will be like an aeon.’ Her face is thin and lacklustre

                          106
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

like the late evening moon. Half covered by her hand, it
resembles the moon on dvitīyā, the second day of the
waxing fortnight.”

As twilight detains the newly risen moon, the shield of
her hand seems to provide a shelter for her face. The
comparison with the crescent moon is appropriate because
her face is rendered half-visible by the covering of her
hand.

Verse 16

nayana-viṣayam api kisalaya-talpam

gaṇayati vihita-hutāśa-vikalpam

rādhikā virahe tava keśava... (6)

Translation

“Although she sees a bed of fresh petals directly before
her, in her bewilderment she perceives it to be a
blazing fire.”

Commentary

“Rādhā is traumatized by your absence. When she looks
upon a bed of fresh red petals, she sees a funeral pyre
set ablaze. She is experiencing illusory sensory
perceptions because her eyes are attached to you.”

Doubt about the identity of a substance arises from
similarity with another substance. Fire is red and
burning. Flower petals are also red and burning for
women afflicted by loneliness. Therefore Rādhā mistakes
the petals for fire.

Verse 17

harir iti harir iti japati sa-kāmam

viraha-vihita-maraṇeva nikāmam

rādhikā virahe tava keśava... (7)

Translation

“It seems that Rādhā has decided to give up her life. In
separation from you, she continuously chants japa of the
name, ‘Śrī Hari, Śrī Hari’, with the desire to attain
you.”

Commentary

“Because Rādhā is burning in the fire of separation, it
is as if she has decided that she will not maintain her
life any longer. Just as those who are without a hope in
the world and who wish to die chant japa of the name
‘Śrī Hari’ day and night, similarly Rādhā also
incessantly chants japa of the name ‘Śrī Hari’ with the
desire to attain you.”

Kṛṣṇa is called Hari because he destroys the suffering
of those who take shelter of him. Rādhā is chanting with

                          107
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

this ambition: “I may not attain him in this life, but
by chanting japa of ‘Hari Hari’, I will definitely
attain him as my most beloved in the next life.”

Verse 18

śrī-jayadeva-bhaṇitam iti gītam

sukhayatu keśava-padam upanītam

rādhikā virahe tava keśava... (8)

Translation

May this song of Śrī Jayadeva bestow happiness upon the
devotees who are unconditionally surrendered at the feet
of Kṛṣṇa.

Commentary

This song will certainly be a source of joy for the
unalloyed devotees because their meditation will easily
arrive at the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa (keśava-padam) simply
by remembering the field of Rādhā’s heart described
herein. Another meaning is, “The poet has recited this
song in the presence of the pure devotees (Vaiṣṇavas).”
The etymology of keśavaḥ padam is sthānaṁ yasyā ’sau taṁ
keśava-padam – “Those Vaiṣṇavas who have attained
Bhagavān are called keśava-pada.”

The song is embellished throughout by upamā alaṅkāra.
The metre is mālācatuṣpadī chanda.

Verse 19



sā romāñcati sīt-karoti vilapaty utkampate tāmyati

dhyāyaty udbhramati pramīlati pataty udyāti mūrcchaty
api

etāvaty atanu-jvare vara-tanur jīven na kiṁ te rasāt

svar-vaidya-pratima prasīdasi yadi tyakto ’nyathā
hastakaḥ

Translation

“O best of physicians! You are just like the celestial
physicians, the Aśvinī-kumāras. The exquisitely
beautiful Rādhā has become deranged by the anxiety of
separation. Sometimes her hair stands on end, sometimes
she begins to gasp and sometimes she becomes startled.
Sometimes she weeps out loud and at other times she
trembles. Sometimes she meditates on you with rapt
attention. She wanders throughout the places of your
loving pastimes. When she is overwhelmed with confusion,
she closes her eyes. Sometimes she falls to the ground.
Then she stands up and prepares to go, but she suddenly
faints and falls to the ground again. She is afflicted
with sannipāta-jvara, a dangerous fever resulting from
disorder of the bodily humours. If you are satisfied,
kindly administer the medicine of rasāmṛta to counteract

                          108
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

these violent transformations of passion. Then she may
attain the treasure of her prana. Otherwise her hands
will soon be motionless (she will die).”

Commentary

“Rādhā is afflicted with a virulent fever. The fever of
kāma has reached the critical stage of sannipāta. Rādhā
is not only thirsting for you by her external volition.
She also lives in you by involuntary bodily
transformations (sāttvika-bhāvas). This is the evidence
of her pure love.”

The sāttvika-bhāvas are as follows:



stambhaḥ svedo ’tha romāñcaḥ

svarabhaṅgo ’tha vepathuḥ

vaivaṇryam aśru pralayā-

vityaṣṭau sāttvikā matāḥ



Romāñcati – Its etymology is romāñca vidyate yasya sa
romāñcaḥ. romāñcita ity ārthaḥ. tadvad ācarati romāñcati
– “One who is thrilled with horripilation is called
romāñcita and the activity of a romāñcita is called
romāñcati.”

Vaivarṇya – “She gasps due to incessantly remembering
and worrying about you.”

Aśru – “She weeps when she remembers your virtues.”

Vepathu – “She thinks, ‘How will I be able to tolerate
the pain of separation from Śrī Kṛṣṇa?’ and trembles at
the thought.”

Sveda – “On becoming mentally and physically
debilitated, she perspires profusely.”

Stambha – “As she meditates upon you, she closes her
eyes as if all the activities of her senses were about
to cease.”

Vepathu – The second example of vepathu is indicated by
the word udbhramati. “She wanders throughout the places
of your playful pastimes in the hope of finding you.”

Svara-bhaṅga – Choking of the voice is indicated by the
word pramīlati. “She closes her eyes and remembers your
embrace and other activities. Thus she is unable to
speak.”

Stambha – The second example of becoming stunned is
intimated by the word patati, “She falls”. She falls to
the ground as she walks because her body is so weak and
emaciated.

Pralaya – The word udyati, “She gets up”, indicates that

                            109
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

after falling she stands up again. Then Rādhā’s friend
informs Kṛṣṇa about the sāttvika-bhāva called pralaya
(devastation) by saying murcchati, “She faints”.

Rādhā’s dear sakhī addressed Śrī Kṛṣṇa, “You are like
the Aśvinī-kumāras, the expert physicians of heaven. If
you are pleased with Rādhā, will the disease of sensual
desire not be cured? The use of a tonic is forbidden
when a raging fever is in the advanced stage. We try to
relieve her by putting cool lotus petals on her body and
fanning her with a palm-leaf, but nothing relieves the
disease of separation. Rather, it is gradually
increasing. She has become so weak that she can only
move her hands. If she were to know that you will not
agree to meet her, then her demise would be assured.

“She has given her heart exclusively to you, so if you
do not save her life by giving her your audience, then
you will surely incur the sin of abandoning a
dependant.”

This verse features śārdūla-vikrīḍita chanda, dīpaka
alaṅkāra and vipralambha-śṛṅgāra-rasa. The hero is
anukūla or dakṣiṇa nāyaka and the heroine is utkaṇṭhitā
nāyikā. A female attendant who assists the heroine is
called a sakhī.

Verse 20



smarāturāṁ daivata-vaidya-hṛdya

tvad-aṅga-saṅgāmṛta-mātra-sādhyām

vimukta-bādhāṁ kuruṣe na rādhām

upendra vajrād api dāruṇo ’si

Translation

“O Upendra! You are more expert in medical affairs than
the celestial physicians. Rādhā is suffering from the
heat of Cupid. She can only stay alive if she takes the
medicine of bodily union with you. Her disease, the
affliction of unfulfilled kāma, is very difficult to
cope with. Rādhā is about to die. If you do not relieve
her, then we will know that you are harder than a
thunderbolt.”

Commentary

The sakhī has decorated Kṛṣṇa with two specific titles:

Daivata-vaidyahṛdya – Kṛṣṇa is even more pleasant and
captivating than the celestial physicians, the Aśvinī-
kumāras.

Upendra – Kṛṣṇa previously appeared from the womb of
Mother Aditi in the form of Śrī Vāmanadeva to bestow
auspiciousness upon the aggrieved demigods. In that
incarnation his name was Upendra because he was the
younger brother of Indra. This address alludes to
Kṛṣṇa’s personal oath to always protect his dependants.

                          110
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017


The sakhī confides in Kṛṣṇa, “Rādhā has become a victim
of sensual love-sickness. The only medicine for this
incurable disease is to be united with you. The touch of
your limbs is like nectar for her. There is no need for
you to make even the slightest extraneous endeavour.
There will be no difficulty whatsoever on your part. So
if you do not bring her back to life, then you must be
even harder than a thunderbolt.”

Appropriately, the chanda of this verse is upendra-
vajrā.

Verse 21



kandarpa-jvara-saṁjvarātura-tanor āścaryam asyāś ciraṁ

cetaś candana-candramaḥ kamalinī-cintāsu santāmyati

kintu klānti-vaśena śītalataraṁ tvām ekam eva priyaṁ

dhyāyantī rahasi sthitā katham api kṣīṇā kṣaṇaṁ prāṇiti

Translation

“Rādhā is afflicted with the high fever of unrestrained
passion. How astonishing it is that she burns as soon as
she thinks of the remedies for a high temperature such
as sandalwood, moonshine and lotus flowers. Alas! Her
body has become feeble and cold from fatigue. As she
meditates exclusively on you in a secluded place, she
somehow stays alive for a few moments more.”

Commentary

“O Mādhava, she is staying alive only in the hope of
attaining union with you. Her fever has reached the
critical condition of sannipāta, wherein all methods of
mitigating the fever are useless. Sandalwood paste, the
cooling moonshine or lotus flowers simply do not work.
Her condition has reached its ultimate limit wherein her
temperature increases as soon as she even thinks of
these remedies. Sometimes, as the fever rises, she
becomes so weary that her temperature suddenly drops and
her body becomes cold from the evaporation of
perspiration. This lover is missing you so much. She
meditates exclusively upon you in her restless heart.
She has grown thin in your absence. Even in the midst of
such arduous adversity, she considers a moment’s
meditation on you to be a grand festival and thus she
holds on to her life-air.

“If you are wondering how she stays alive and how she
continues to breathe at this present moment, then the
answer is that you are her only beloved and there is
still a chance that she may attain the touch of your
cool body. She will live only for a few more seconds on
the strength of this hope. If you do not meet her
without delay, then it is possible that she will never
be restored to life.”

This verse includes śārdūla-vikrīḍita chanda, virodha

                          111
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

alaṅkāra and adbhuta-rasa.

Verse 22



kṣaṇam api virahaḥ purā na sehe

nayana-nimīlana-khinnayā yayā te

śvasiti katham asau rasāla-śākhāṁ

cira-viraheṇa vilokya puṣpitāgrām

Translation

“When gazing at you, Rādhā could not tolerate the
moment’s separation caused by the blinking of her eyes.
So I have no idea how she stays alive during this long
period of painful separation, especially when she sees a
delightful mango tree in full bloom (with fresh
flowering blossoms on its upper branches).”

Commentary

“O Kṛṣṇa, previously Rādhā would always stay close to
you because she could not tolerate your absence even for
a second. Even the momentary blinking of her eyes was a
source of great difficulty. She used to think, ‘Why did
Brahmā create eyelids that blink?’ She would undergo
immeasurable suffering when the slightest obstacle would
obstruct her vision of your face. So how can she
tolerate this prolonged separation, especially when she
sees blossoms on the tips of a mango tree? How does she
continue to breathe? Blossoms have sprouted on every
single branch. The tips of the branches have become
rasāla, the essence of all rasa. It is now Vasanta
season. In springtime, lonely heroines experience a pain
just like death. O Kṛṣṇa, kindly meet with Rādhā without
delay.”

Rādhā also thinks, “Just as I am afflicted with kāma
when I see blossoms on the tips of the mango tree, Kṛṣṇa
must also be afflicted with kāma for me. Therefore, he
will certainly come to meet me.”

Appropriately, this verse is composed in the chanda
called puṣpitāgrā (flowering tips).

Verse 23



vṛṣṭi-vyākula-gokulāvana-rasād uddhṛtya govardhanaṁ

bibhrad vallava-vallabhābhir adhikānandāc ciraṁ cumbitaḥ

darpeṇeva tad-arpitādhara-taṭī sindūra-mudrāṅkito

bāhur gopa-tanos tanotu bhavatāṁ śreyāṁsi kaṁsa-dviṣaḥ

Translation

The arms of Kṛṣṇa competed with Indra by lifting and

                             112
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

holding aloft Giri Govardhana to protect the anxious
residents of Gokula from heavy rainfall. His arms were
kissed for a long time by the beautiful young gopīs and
smeared with kuṅkuma from those newly married gopīs’
lips and the sindūra from their foreheads. May those
arms of the destroyer of Kaṁsa, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who appears
in the form of a cowherd boy, bestow auspiciousness upon
you all.

Commentary

Maṅgalāntāni ca śāstrāṇi prathante – “A scripture that
is auspicious in the beginning, the middle and the end,
is preached far and wide.” According to this injunction,
the poet Śrī Jayadeva has presented an invocation of
auspiciousness to conclude Act Four. This invocation
pronounces a blessing. “May the arms of Kṛṣṇa bestow
auspiciousness upon the reciters and hearers of this
Gīta-govinda.”

The unique features of Kṛṣṇa’s arms have been described
in the first line of this verse. In a rage, Indra had
incited the puṣkara and āvartaka clouds to release a
terrifying bombardment of rain to destroy Gokula. Seeing
the anxiety of the cowherd folk, Kṛṣṇa immediately
uprooted Govardhana Mountain and held it aloft upon his
hand to protect them. At that time, Kṛṣṇa’s arms
manifested the mellow of chivalry (vīra-rasa) in a way
that stimulated the romantic mood (śṛṅgāra-rasa).

While Kṛṣṇa was holding Govardhana, the gopīs, immersed
in ecstasy, began to kiss his arms. As they beheld his
dexterity, sweetness and beauty, they made red marks on
his arms with sindūra from their brows and the gloss
from their brilliant red lips.

May the arms of Kṛṣṇa, marked with the signs of his
intoxicating good fortune, bestow auspiciousness upon
all.

The title of this Act, Snigdha-madhusūdana, implies that
when Kṛṣṇa heard about Rādhā’s sorrowful condition, he
became completely inactive.



Thus ends the Bālabodhinī-prakāśa commentary on Act Four
of Śrī Gīta-govinda, entitled Snigdha-madhusūdana.




Act Five




— ākāṅkṣa-puṇḍarīkākṣaḥ —



Verse 1


                            113
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017



aham iha nivasāmi yāhi rādhām

anunaya mad-vacanena cānayethāḥ

iti madhuripuṇā sakhī niyuktā

svayam idam etya punar jagāda rādhām

Translation

hen Kṛṣṇa heard the moving account of Rādhā’s pitiful
condition from her intimate friend, he suggested, “I
will wait here. You should go to Śrī Rādhā, pacify her
with my humble appeal and then bring her here.” Engaged
thus by Madhuripu Kṛṣṇa, that sakhī approached Rādhā and
spoke the following words.

Commentary

Śrī Rādhā’s intense agony of separation has been
described in Act Four. When Kṛṣṇa heard from the sakhī
of Rādhā’s dire suffering, he considered himself to be
an offender. He felt both ashamed and also apprehensive.
Although he was eager to meet with his eternal beloved,
he did not go to her in person. He first expressed his
regret before her sakhī and then sent her to pacify
Rādhā’s pique with soothing words of conciliation. He
instructed the sakhī, “Humbly supplicate Śrī Rādhā on my
behalf. Devise a way to make her happy somehow or other
and then bring her here. I will wait right here on the
Yamunā riverside until she comes.” After being
instructed in this way, the sakhī went to inform Rādhā
of the news.

An ardent longing (ākāṅkṣa) to meet his eternal lover,
Śrī Rādhā, had awakened within Kṛṣṇa’s heart. Hence the
title of Act Five, Ākāṅkṣa-puṇḍarīkākṣa.

The name Puṇḍarīkākṣa, meaning “lotus-eyed one”,
attracts the readers’ attention to Kṛṣṇa’s supremely
enchanting eyes, which are also compared to red lotus
flowers in the Vedas, tasya yathā puṇḍarīkam evam
evākṣiṇī.

The chanda of this verse is puṣpitāgrā.



Scene Ten




Song 10


The musical mode is deśīvarāḍī rāga. The rhythm is
rūpaka tāla.




                          114
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

A heroine, with beautiful hair like an angel of heaven,
decorates her hands with bangles and her ears with
devapuṣpa flowers. When she fans her beloved with a yak-
tail whisk and enjoys delightful pastimes with him, at
that time it is appropriate to introduce deśīvarāḍī
rāga.



Verse 2

vahati malaya-samīre madanam upanidhāya

sphuṭati kusuma-nikare virahi-hṛdaya-dalanāya

sakhi! sati tava virahe vanamsakhi! sīdati tava virahe
vanamālī (refrain) (1)

Translation

“My dear friend Rādhā, the Malaya breeze drifts along
slowly, just to soak everyone in the mood for amour.
Varieties of flowers are opening and tearing open the
hearts of lonely lovers. At this provocative time of
spring, passionate Kṛṣṇa feels morose in separation from
you.”

Commentary

The sakhī informs Rādhā, “O friend, in this Vasanta
season the gentle motion of the Malaya breeze gives pain
to forlorn lovers. A multitude of flowers blossom to
break their hearts by arousing romantic sentiments.
Kṛṣṇa is utterly dejected without you, so why not go to
meet him?”

By referring to Kṛṣṇa as Vanamālī, “he who wears a
garland of forest flowers”, the sakhī intimates that,
“He is barely still alive. How does he live on? Only by
wearing a garland made by your hands.”

Verse 3

dahati śiśira-mayūkhe maraṇam anukaroti

patati madana-viśikhe vilapati vikalataro ’ti

sakhi! sīdati tava virahe... (2)

Translation

“The moonshine scorches him as he approaches the brink
of death. His heart is pierced by flowers that fall from
the trees like the arrows of Kāmadeva. He bitterly
laments his destitute condition.”

Commentary

“The moonlight cannot cool Vanamālī when he is afflicted
with longing for you. He feels that death personified is
directly present. Flames seem to be emanating from the
moon and setting him ablaze. Kṛṣṇa is behaving exactly
like a person who is about to die. When leaves and
flowers fall from the trees, he feels that Kāmadeva is

                          115
Gita-govinda.txt                                 5/5/2017

assaulting his heart with arrows. Kṛṣṇa is reclining on
a flower bed as if it were a bed of arrows, and he
weeps, overwhelmed with grief.”

Verse 4

dhvanati madhupa-samūhe śravaṇam apidadhāti

manasi valita-virahe niśi niśi rujam upayāti

sakhi! sīdati tava virahe... (3)

Translation

“He covers his ears with his hands when he hears the
humming of bumblebees. Every night he expects that he
will attain your company, but he is disappointed. His
infirmity increases as he goes on enduring the torture
of separation day after day.”

Commentary

“Although swarms of bumblebees are humming in all four
directions, this sound is not pleasant for Kṛṣṇa.
Rather, it grates harshly against his ears, so he tries
to block them with his hands. Every night he thinks that
you are by his side, but when he realizes that you are
not actually there, his sorrow intensifies. Consumed by
loneliness, he is simply floundering. He tosses and
turns incessantly when he lies down to rest.”

In this verse, the sakhī has described vipralambha-
uddīpana-vibhāva.

Verse 5

vasati vipina-vitāne tyajati lalita-dhāma

luṭhati dharaṇi-śayane bahu vilapati tava nāma

sakhi! sīdati tava virahe... (4)

Translation

“He has abandoned his own charming bed chamber to reside
in the forest. Instead of living comfortably at home, he
rolls about on the ground, repeatedly calling out your
name, ‘Rādhā! Rādhā!’”

Commentary

The sakhī says, “Rādhā, in separation from you, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa has given up residence in his own delightful
abode. He prefers to stay under the canopy of the
jungle. He no longer sleeps on a bed. He lies on the
ground where he spends the whole night rolling about and
calling your name, ‘Rādhā! Rādhā!’”

Verse 6

bhaṇati kavi-jayadeve viraha-vilasitena

manasi rabhasa-vibhave harir udayatu sukṛtena


                          116
Gita-govinda.txt                                   5/5/2017

sakhi! sīdati tava virahe... (5)

Translation

This song of Śrī Jayadeva is full of Kṛṣṇa’s anxiety of
separation. As a result of the piety infused by this
song, those who recite it attain an unsurpassed
immersion in the pastimes of separation. May Śrī Kṛṣṇa
manifest within their hearts.

Commentary

The poet Śrī Jayadeva says that the reciters and
audience of the tenth song, entitled Garuḍapada, will
accumulate immense piety (sukṛti). Consequently Śrī
Hari’s separation pastimes will enrich their hearts with
sustained enthusiasm. May Bhagavān appear in the hearts
of those who ardently long for rasa.

This poem may also be sung in kedāra rāga.

Kṛṣṇa is Rādhā’s prāṇanātha – she feels that his lotus
feet should be worshipped with the lamp of ten million
of her own pranas. Therefore, as soon as she heard about
his state of lamentation, she swooned and fell to the
ground unconscious. Then her sakhī became silent; she
could not speak another word. For this reason, this song
has been completed in only five verses.

Verse 7



pūrvaṁ yatra samaṁ tvayā rati-pater āsāditāḥ siddhayas

tasminn eva nikuñja-manmatha-mahā-tīrthe punar mādhavaḥ

dhyāyaṁs tvām aniśaṁ japann api tavaivālāpa-mantrāvalīṁ

bhūyas tvat-kuca-kumbha-nirbhara-parīrambhāmṛtaṁ
vāñchati

Translation

“In a great place of pilgrimage – a secluded forest
bower – Mādhava previously attained the perfections
(siddhis) of Kāmadeva, in order to fulfil your cherished
desires to embrace. He always meditates on you in that
sacred place to attain those siddhis. Constantly
uttering the mantra of his previous romantic
conversations with you, he makes a wish to attain the
nectar of liberation in the deep embrace of your
pitcher-like breasts.”

Commentary

Thereafter, the sakhī sprinkled the refreshing water of
Kṛṣṇa’s qualities upon Rādhā to bring her back to
consciousness. Then she began to describe Rādhā as a
heroine who embarks on a journey to meet with her lover
(abhisārikā nāyikā). She wants to please Rādhā by
convincing her that Mādhava’s heart seeks refuge in her
alone.


                          117
Gita-govinda.txt                                  5/5/2017

“O Rādhā, in Cupid’s sacred abode, a secluded grove,
Mādhava attained the great mystic powers of kāma, such
as the nectar of kissing and embracing you. He desires
to attain those same siddhis again today.

“The firm embrace of your pitcher-like breasts is nectar
and the water of that sacred pilgrimage place (mahā-
tīrtha) is also nectar. He is staying in Kāmadeva’s
mahā-tīrtha, meditating on your form and qualities.

“Day and night he utters the mantra of his bygone
romantic conversations with you. A mystic perfection is
only attained by chanting a mantra and meditating in a
secluded place before a deity. Kṛṣṇa wants to attain
kāma-siddhi in your presence in the form of your
satisfaction in the kāma-tīrtha of the secluded forest
groves. You are the deity of the pleasure grove. Your
amorous repartee has become the mantra to attain kāma-
siddhi. By this mantra, he wants to attain ambrosia in
the form of tightly embracing your highly protruding
pitcher-like breasts.”

This verse features śārdūla-vikrīḍita chanda and
kāvyaliṅga alaṅkāra.




Scene Eleven




Song 11


The musical mode is gurjarī rāga. The rhythm is ekatālī
tāla.



Verse 8

rati-sukha-sāre gatam abhisāre madana-manohara-veṣam

na kuru nitambini gamana-vilambanam anusara taṁ
hṛdayeśam



dhīra-samīre yamunā-tīre vasati vane vanamālī

pīna-payodhara-parisara-mardana-cañcala-kara-yuga-śālī

(refrain) (1)

Translation

“Vanamālī Kṛṣṇa is adorned with a garland of forest
flowers and his hands are always restless to inflict
pain upon the gopīs’ breasts. He is currently waiting in
a forest bower on the gentle Malaya-windswept shore of

                          118
Gita-govinda.txt                                 5/5/2017

the Yamunā. O young woman with voluptuous hips, Kṛṣṇa is
waiting in the appointed meeting place, which is a
perfect setting for lovemaking. He is dressed in the
most fascinating attire, exactly like the god of
sensuality. Go and meet with the darling of your heart
at once. You should not delay any longer.”

Commentary

Encouraging Rādhā to embark on her way to meet Kṛṣṇa,
the sakhī says, “O young woman with excellent broad
hips! Your pace is already slowed down by the weight of
your hips, so now there is no need to procrastinate any
further and be late for your tryst. Go swiftly so that
you will reach the appointed meeting place shortly after
Kṛṣṇa’s arrival. Therein you will find the essence of
sensual euphoria. The owner of your heart, Vanamālī
Kṛṣṇa, dressed like Madana, has already arrived and he
is anxiously looking out for your arrival.”

What is the speciality of that meeting place?

“There is a vetasī forest on the bank of Yamunā, where
the slowly drifting air has almost become stationary.
Though the forest is dense and isolated, this gentle
breeze is so pleasant at the time of lovemaking. Kṛṣṇa
is dressed for love and he has gone for abhisāra.”

To set out for a rendezvous on a moonlit night, after
decorating and dressing appropriately for the occasion,
is called abhisāra.

“Without the slightest delay, go at once and meet with
Vanamālī in that secluded forest bower.”

Verse 9

nāma-sametaṁ kṛta-saṅketaṁ vādayate mṛdu-veṇum

bahu manute nanu te tanu-saṅgata-pavana-calitam api
reṇum

dhīra-samīre yamunā-tīre... (2)

Translation

“O Rādhā, he is softly playing his flute,   as if calling
your name. He considers himself immensely   fortunate to
be touched by so many dust particles that   have first
touched your body. As they come to him on   the breeze, he
receives them with the utmost honour.”

Commentary

The sakhī is assuring Rādhā, “If you have no faith in my
words, then just listen to the sound of Kṛṣṇa’s flute
coming from that very place. The flute is singing your
name. It is the signal by which Kṛṣṇa is calling you to
meet him and also showing you the way to get there. If
you are doubtful and think, ‘I will definitely be
cheated when I arrive. He must have gone there to meet
another lover,’ then your doubt is unfounded because he
even considers the grains of sand raised by your feet to
be valuable jewels. He receives them with great respect

                          119
Gita-govinda.txt                                 5/5/2017

as they come to him on the breeze.”

Verse 10

patati patatre vicalati patre śaṅkita-bhavad-upayānam

racayati śayanaṁ sacakita-nayanaṁ paśyati tava panthānam

dhīra-samīre yamunā-tīre... (3)

Translation

“As Kṛṣṇa joyfully makes   the bed, he experiences many
internal visions. When a   bird landing on a tree rustles
the leaves and makes the   slightest sound, Kṛṣṇa glances
with startled eyes along   the path of your expected
arrival.”

Commentary

The sakhī informs Rādhā,“As soon as an insignificant
rustling sound comes from falling leaves, movements of
the air or birds coming and going in the trees, Kṛṣṇa is
filled with anticipation: ‘Perhaps Rādhā is coming.’
With joyful enthusiasm, he becomes busy in quickly
decorating the bed and he glances towards the path of
your expected arrival with startled eyes.”

Verse 11

mukharam adhīraṁ tyaja mañjīraṁ ripum iva keliṣu lolam

cala sakhi kuñjaṁ satimira-puñjaṁ śīlaya nīla-nicolam

dhīra-samīre yamunā-tīre... (4)

Translation

“Sakhi, go! Move in the direction of that kuñja. Take
off these dangerous enemies, your ankle-bells. They talk
loudly when you walk and they shake when you enjoy
union. Put on this dark blue garment.”

Commentary

The sakhī says, “O Rādhā, the appropriate time for
abhisāra has come because it is dark. Abhisārikā
heroines meet their lovers in the dark. So set off for
that secret forest grove in the darkness. My dear
friend, remove these ankle-bells. They are your enemies
because they are so restless. They inform others by
making a noise wherever you walk and they also become
talkative during your love-play. Like enemies, they open
their mouths without understanding the nature of the
occasion. These ankle-bells are unfavourable for the
attainment of your desired perfection. Now put on your
blue clothes. The veil of this blue garment will make
your fair complexion become one with the darkness (or
one with Śyāma) and conceal your journey.”

Verse 12

urasi murārer upahita-hāre ghana iva tarala-balāke


                            120
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

taḍid iva pīte rati-viparīte rājasi sukṛta-vipāke

dhīra-samīre yamunā-tīre... (5)

Translation

“O Rādhā, your complexion is yellow like a flash of
lightning. You will manifest the beauty of a restless
and crooked streak of lightning upon a dark cloud when
the result of your pious activities culminates in making
love upon Kṛṣṇa’s chest, which is decorated with a
necklace of jewels.”

Verse 13

vigalita-vasanaṁ parihṛta-rasanaṁ ghaṭaya jaghanam
apidhānam

kisalaya-śayane paṅkaja-nayane nidhim iva harṣa-nidhānam

dhīra-samīre yamunā-tīre... (6)

Translation

“O blue lotus-eyed Rādhā, be naked and without your
waist-chain. Establish the treasured jewel of your
thighs, the embodiment of your lover’s joyful
fulfilment, on a bed of freshly sprouted leaves.”

Commentary

In the previous verse, the sakhī awakened Rādhā’s
impatience for viparīta-rati, union in which the heroine
plays the dominant role and actively sports in the upper
position. Now, in this verse, the sakhī arouses Rādhā’s
eagerness to experience the love-play actively performed
by Kṛṣṇa. “O Rādhā, your eyes are as captivating as
lotus flowers. When you see how Kṛṣṇa is ten million
times more ravishing than the god of passionate love,
the cloth that covers your hips will slip off by itself.
The tiny bells attached to your waist-belt will be cast
aside. Then you should situate the receptacle of bliss,
the arrangement for Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s happiness, this
treasured jewel of your loins, on the flower bed made by
Kṛṣṇa.”

Verse 14

harir abhimānī rajanir idānīm iyam api yāti virāmam

kuru mama vacanaṁ satvara-racanaṁ pūraya madhuripu-kāmam

dhīra-samīre yamunā-tīre... (7)

Translation

“Now Śrī Kṛṣṇa is being stubborn. The last period of the
night is about to pass, so accept my advice. Go at once,
without further delay, and fulfil the desires of Kṛṣṇa,
the enemy of Madhu.”

Commentary

The sakhī says, “Kṛṣṇa has a mind of his own.” The

                          121
Gita-govinda.txt                                  5/5/2017

implied meaning is, “Kṛṣṇa’s heart and mind are at odds
with each other. He is trying very hard to appease you,
so do not be worried that he will meet with anyone else.
In regard to his being headstrong, it is remarkable
that, just to protect his own dignity, he could not come
to you, and on the other hand, he also cannot abandon
you. Whatever you have to do later, why not do it now?
The night is passing and the opportunity to meet will be
lost. So accept my advice – go to Kṛṣṇa immediately and
fulfil his desires.”

Verse 15

śrī-jayadeve kṛta-hari-seve bhaṇati parama-ramaṇīyam

pramudita-hṛdayaṁ harim ati-sadayaṁ namata sukṛta-
kamanīyam

dhīra-samīre yamunā-tīre... (8)

Translation

O saints! Kṛṣṇa is exuberant, causelessly merciful,
exceptionally sweet, virtuous and adorned with all
desirable qualities. Offer obeisances to him with a
joyful heart by reciting this song of Śrī Jayadeva, the
composer of the most enchanting poetry and the servant
of Śrī Hari.

Commentary

The poet Śrī Jayadeva concludes, “O devotees of
Bhagavān, a person who remains eternally absorbed in the
service of Kṛṣṇa has composed this endearing
conversation. Therefore Kṛṣṇa is eternally pleased with
it. May you all offer obeisances with joyful hearts to
the lovable Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is an ocean of mercy. He
becomes the object of everyone’s desires by granting
them their own individual sphūrti, or internal vision of
his delightful pastimes.”

Verse 16



vikirati muhuḥ śvāsān āśāḥ puro muhur īkṣate

praviśati muhuḥ kuñjaṁ guñjan muhur bahu tāmyati

racayati muhuḥ śayyāṁ paryākulaṁ muhur īkṣate

madana-kadana-klāntaḥ kānte priyas tava vartate

Translation

“O impassioned woman, your beloved Kṛṣṇa is waiting for
you in the hidden chamber of a kuñja and he is burning
with amorous desire. He draws long breaths and looks
around with startled eyes. Repeatedly lamenting in
indistinct words, he comes out of the bower of flowering
vines and then returns again feeling disappointed. Then
he continues to arrange and rearrange the flower bed and
glance towards the path of your expected arrival.”


                          122
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

Commentary

In different ways, Rādhā’s friend is urging her to meet
with Kṛṣṇa by informing her of his condition. “Kṛṣṇa is
unhappy without you because he feels the pain of
unfulfilled kāma. ‘You should have been here by now,’ he
thinks, and taking deep breaths, he lets out long sighs
of disappointment. Sometimes he steps outside the kuñja
and looks around expectantly in all directions hoping to
see the direction from which you might be coming. Then
he enters the kuñja again, thinking, ‘Have you already
come here and hidden yourself somewhere? Sometimes I go
outside, sometimes I go back inside. Why should I do
this again and again?’ He mutters different things to
himself as he ponders over the cause of your absence.
‘She has not come. Why not? Perhaps she has stopped on
the way for some reason or perhaps she is afraid.
Anyway, all this guesswork and speculation is useless.
She will definitely come.’ When this conviction arises,
he begins to prepare the bed.”

The word kadana implies that Kṛṣṇa thinks, “She will
definitely come because of her ever-fresh and increasing
love for me.” Therefore, he looks out for her arrival
with renewed optimism.

This verse includes dīpaka alaṅkāra. The chanda is
hariṇī.

Verse 17



tvad-vāmyena samaṁ samagram adhunā tigmāṁśur astaṁ gato

govindasya manorathena ca samaṁ prāptaṁ tamaḥ sāndratām

kokānāṁ karuṇa-svanena sadṛśī dīrghā mad-abhyarthanā

tan-mugdhe viphalaṁ vilambanam asau ramyo ’bhisāra-
kṣaṇaḥ

Translation

“Along with your contrary mood, the sun has also set.
Along with Kṛṣṇa’s desire, the darkness has also
intensified. Like the continuous crying of the lonely
cakravāka bird, who laments in pathetic tones during the
night, my request has also become futile. O bewildered
one, I have been pleading with you for a very long time.
Now it is useless to delay any longer. The delightful
time for abhisāra has arrived.”

Commentary

“O Rādhā, this is a suitable time for you to go to your
beloved. Helplessly impelled by your contrary nature,
you were indignant and refused to go anywhere. But now
your pique has gone down along with the sun, so there
are no obstacles to impede your tryst. As the density of
the night’s darkness grew, so did Govinda’s ardent
desire for your love. At night, the male and female
cakravāka birds are distanced from each other, so they
too let out long pitiful cries of agony due to excessive

                          123
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

feelings of separation. Like the sustained cries of the
cakravāka birds, my requests for you to meet with Kṛṣṇa
have gone in vain. O naive girl, do not miss this
opportunity. Now is the optimal time for abhisāra. The
darkness is impenetrable. Your dearmost one is eager for
you. Now do not delay on the pretext of dressing and
decorating yourself. Do it quickly.”

This verse features sahokti alaṅkāra and śārdūla-
vikrīḍita chanda.

Verse 18



āśleṣād anu cumbanād anu nakhollekhād anu svāntaja-

prodbodhād anu sambhramād anu ratārambhād anu prītayoḥ

anyārthaṁ gatayor bhramān militayoḥ sambhāṣaṇair jānator

dampatyor iha ko na ko na tamasi vrīḍā-vimiśro rasaḥ

Translation

“When a hero and heroine search for each other in the
dense darkness, the hero meets with another heroine and
his heroine meets with another hero by mistake. Only
when they begin to converse do they realize their error.
After recognizing each other, they embrace. At first
they kiss and then they begin to mark each other with
their fingernails. When they become completely
overwhelmed by erotic desires and absorbed in passion,
they lose their composure and excitedly begin their
love-play. After making love, both will feel an
astonishing type of affection. What sort of rasa, mixed
with feelings of shame, will not be attained in this
darkness? Therefore, O beautiful one, go! As quickly as
possible, go to your sylvan love chamber. Are such
excellent opportunities ever to be neglected?”

Commentary

The sakhī is tempting Rādhā. “O friend, Rādhikā, when
you arrive there and meet with Kṛṣṇa, you will discover
a variety of fascinating amorous games.” By these words,
she increases Rādhā’s eagerness and expresses the
cherished desire of both of them.

“When darkness falls, a hero and a heroine set off to
find their respective lovers but meet with each other
instead. At that time they realize the taste of erotic
ecstasies mixed with feelings of shame (vrīḍā-miśrita
śṛṅgāra-rasa). Then what rasa remains to be attained?
All types of rasa are incorporated in this vrīḍā-miśrita
rasa.”

The word bhramāt is interpreted thus, “They meet while
wandering in the direction of the kuñja and come to
recognize each other only after conversing together in
the dense darkness. Alternatively, they may have set out
with other purposes and then met by chance along the
way. They recognize each other in the course of
conversing by the broken articulation that ensues

                          124
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

sāttvika-bhāva. As soon as they understand the actual
situation, they suddenly embrace, but both still remain
afraid that someone might see them. Therefore bhayānaka-
rasa emerges, of which fear is the sthāyibhāva. Although
the hero is repeatedly forbidden to do so, he kisses and
bites his beloved by force. Furthermore, he laments,
‘Have I gone to so much trouble for nothing? Even if she
forbids me a hundred thousand times, I will not accept
no for an answer.’ Then his heart melts with compassion
and he attains karuṇa-rasa.

“When they begin to scratch each other with their nails
to stimulate their sensual appetite, the sthāyibhāva is
utsāha (resolve).

“Now they are on the verge of making love. In this love-
play, they experience the happiness of vismaya-pradhāna
adbhuta-rasa (astonishment). When kāma has arisen, they
indulge in varieties of sensual sports as they laugh and
speak joking words to each other. While engrossed in
rati-krīḍā, both feel hāsya-rasa (humour). Finally, when
their lovemaking is fully accomplished and they feel
mutual bliss, then they realize the sweetness of the
supreme emperor of all mellows, rasa-rāja śṛṅgāra-rasa.

“In this way, when a hero and heroine meet
unintentionally in the dark, at first they do not
recognize each other. When they do, both become ashamed,
but they do not blame each other or become angry because
both are at fault. Then, in the dense darkness, they
experience all rasas mixed with shame. Rādhā, you will
feel ashamed, ‘Oh, we have just met, so why have we
suddenly become immersed in such deep śṛṅgāra-rasa?’”

Cauryarata krama, the entire sequence of secret sexual
enjoyment, has been explained by Bharata Muni:



āśleṣa-cumbana-nakha-kṣata-kāma-bodha-

śīghratva-maithunam ananta-sukha-prabodham

prītis tato ’pi rasa-bhāvanam eva kāryam

evaṁ nitāntanaturāḥ suciraṁ ramante



The alaṅkāras called dīpaka, samuccaya and bhrāntimān
are notable in this verse. The chanda is śārdūla-
vikrīḍita.

Verse 19



sa-bhaya-cakitaṁ vinyasyantīṁ dṛśaṁ timire pathi

prati-taru muhuḥ sthitvā mandaṁ padāni vitanvatīm

katham api rahaḥ prāptām aṅgair anaṅga-taraṅgibhiḥ

sumukhi subhagaḥ paśyan sa tvām upaitu kṛtārthatām

                          125
Gita-govinda.txt                                   5/5/2017


Translation

“O beautiful young woman! Timidly looking around with
quickly moving glances, standing close to each tree,
then again gradually advancing step by step along the
dark path, you will somehow arrive at a secluded place.
When the greatly fortunate Kṛṣṇa sees you agitated by
the waves of kāma, his life will be successful.”

Commentary

“Attaining you means everything to Kṛṣṇa.” Alluding to
this, the sakhī tells Rādhā, “O stunningly beautiful
one, when you set out from here, you will proceed with
great caution as you walk upon that dark path through
the dense darkness. It is only natural to be afraid in
the dark. By chance, someone might see you, so it is
also natural to be alarmed. ‘I am actually going to the
trysting place to meet with Kṛṣṇa in complete darkness.’
This will be astonishing for you, and at the same time,
you will also doubt, ‘When I arrive there, will I meet
with Kṛṣṇa or not?’ Your body quickly tires from the
heavy burden of your breasts and hips. You become too
languid to walk quickly, so stop and wait beneath every
tree before going on. Kṛṣṇa will consider his life
successful when he sees you arrive at the appointed
meeting place in this enfeebled condition, with the
waves of Anaṅga playing on your body. Then he will begin
to plunge into the turbulent waves of excitement.”

This verse is embellished by the alaṅkāra called
atiśayokti. The chanda is hariṇī.

Verse 20



rādhā-mugdha-mukhāravinda-madhupas trailokya-mauli-
sthalī-

nepathyocita-nīla-ratnam avanī-bhārāvatārāntakaḥ

svacchandaṁ vraja-sundarī-jana-manas-toṣa-pradoṣodayaḥ

kaṁsa-dhvaṁsana-dhūmaketur avatu tvāṁ devakī-nandanaḥ

Translation

He is the bumblebee who drinks the honey of Rādhā’s
lotus face. He is the sapphire ornament of Vṛndāvana,
which is itself the crest-jewel of the three worlds.
Like nightfall, he is naturally competent to satisfy the
beautiful dairy maidens of Vraja. He annihilates the
aggressive empiricists who overburden the earth. He is
like the star Dhūmaketu, foreboding destruction for
Kaṁsa. May that Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the son of Devakī, protect
you all.

Commentary

After describing Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s emotions during
separation, the poet portrays the śṛṅgāra-rasa evoked by
their meeting. In this verse, Śrī Jayadeva bestows a

                          126
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

benediction upon the reciters and audience of this poem.

Mugdha-mukhāravinda-madhupaḥ – Rādhā’s face is like a
lotus flower. As a bumblebee frequents the lotus flower
to drink the nectar of its pollen, similarly Kṛṣṇa
tastes the sweetness of Rādhā’s lotus face. Therefore he
has been addressed as mugdha-madhupa, the bewildered
bumblebee. This part of the verse indicates their
pastimes of meeting.

Trailokya-mauli-sthalī-nepathyocita-nīla-ratnaḥ – He is
a sapphire upon the crown of the three worlds; that is,
he beautifies the best places in the entire creation.
The phrase nepathyocita means “a befitting ornament”.

Avanī-bhārāvantārāntakaḥ – When demons such as Śiśupāla,
Dantavakra and Kaṁsa took birth to increase the burden
of the earth, Kṛṣṇa appeared to bring about their
destruction. The word antaka means yama, or death
personified. Kṛṣṇa is just like death for those who are
a burden on the earth.

Svacchandaṁ vraja-sundarī-jana-manas-toṣodayaḥ – Kṛṣṇa
satisfies the hearts of the beautiful gopīs of Vraja
like twilight. As the moon rises at twilight and
satisfies women by providing them the opportunity to
meet with their lovers, similarly, without the slightest
restraint, Kṛṣṇa delights the hearts of the attractive
gopīs and fulfils their desires.

Kaṁsa-dhvaṁsana-dhūmaketuḥ – Kṛṣṇa, the destroyer of the
demon named Kaṁsa, is like the comet Dhūmaketu.
Dhūmaketu is one particular star. When this star
appears, the imminent destruction of the king is
considered inevitable. Similarly, the descent of Kṛṣṇa
forebodes the destruction of Kaṁsa.

Another meaning of dhūmaketu is “one who illuminates
like the sun”. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is also the Dhūmaketu that
spells the pacification of Śrī Rādhā’s kāma.

The etymology of the word pradoṣa is pragato doṣādayaḥ.

This verse includes the alaṅkāras called śleṣa,
luptopamā, parikara and varṇopamā. The chanda is
śārdūla-vikrīḍita and the rīti is pāñcālī.

Act Five has described abhisārikā, the condition of a
heroine who embarks for a secret tryst. The lotus-eyed
Kṛṣṇa is ready and waiting for the arrival of Rādhā.



Thus ends the Bālabodhinī-prakāśa commentary on Act Five
of Śrī Gīta-govinda, entitled Ākāṅkṣa-puṇḍarīkākṣa.




Act Six




                          127
Gita-govinda.txt                                 5/5/2017


— dhṛṣṭa-vaikuṇṭhaḥ —



Verse 1



atha tāṁ gantum aśaktāṁ ciram anuraktāṁ latā-gṛhe dṛṣṭvā

tac-caritaṁ govinde manasija-mande sakhī prāha

Translation

ādhā was sitting in a chamber of flowering vines. When
the sakhī saw Rādhā powerless to go to Kṛṣṇa despite her
being fervently desirous of his company, she described
Rādhā’s condition to Govinda, who was himself inflicted
physically and psychologically with transformations of
intense amorous desire.

Commentary

Although Rādhā was hankering for Kṛṣṇa, she could not go
to him because she was too debilitated from the trauma
of separation. Seeing this, the sakhī left Rādhikā there
in the chamber of flowering creepers and went to inform
Kṛṣṇa about Rādhā’s predicament.

Kṛṣṇa has sat down in a state of depression, suffering
from frustrated passion. Therefore his movements have
become slow. The purport of latā-gṛha is saṅketa-sthala,
the appointed meeting place.

The chanda of this verse is āryā.




Scene Twelve




Song 12


The musical mode is guṇakarī rāga and the rhythm is
rūpaka tāla.



Verse 2

paśyati diśi diśi rahasi bhavantam

tad-adhara-madhura-madhūni pibantam

nātha hare! sīdati rādhā vāsa-gṛhe (refrain) (1)

Translation

                          128
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017


“O Hari, you are her only refuge. Śrī Rādhā is sinking
to the depths of despair in the trysting place. She is
in agony. In all directions and in the core of her
heart, she sees you who are so skilful in drinking the
sweet nectar of her lips.”

Commentary

The sakhī says, “Rādhā has become listless. She is
sitting alone in the trysting place. By the intense
power of her meditation, she sees you everywhere. Her
subjective experience is that all directions are
kṛṣṇamayī, nothing but Kṛṣṇa.”

Another meaning is, “In that chamber of flowering vines,
she lovingly drinks through her ears endearing words
about your character and activities. It is the nature of
long-standing prema that the body and mind do not work
together in harmony. The mind wants to do something, but
the body will not assist. This is why she becomes
inert.”

Verse 3

tvad-abhisaraṇa-rabhasena valantī

patati padāni kiyanti calantī

nātha hare! sīdati... (2)

Translation

“As soon as Rādhā is enthused about embarking on a
lover’s journey and begins to make the appropriate
arrangements, she takes a few steps and falls down.”

Commentary

“Rādhā impetuously stands up to decorate and prepare
herself for abhisāra, but she is so enfeebled in the
wake of separation that after taking a few steps, she
falls helplessly to the ground unconscious.”

Verse 4

vihita-viśada-bisa-kisalaya-valayā

jīvati param iha tava rati-kalayā

nātha hare! sīdati... (3)

Translation

“She puts on bangles, a sash, rings, armlets, necklaces
and other ornaments made of spotless white lotus-fibres
and freshly sprouted leaves. She is living only in the
hope of enjoying union with you.”

Commentary

“Rādhā has surrounded herself with the fibres of lotus
stems and freshly spouted leaves to relieve the burning
sensation of kāma. Although she is feeble and emaciated,

                            129
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

she has held on to her life-airs until now only because
she feels happiness in the hope of enjoying amorous
pastimes with you. Even now, the ways of your love
reside in her life-airs and all the methods of your
prema are resonating upon her heart-strings. Her total
absorption in sensual union with you is the only cause
of her continued existence.”

Verse 5

muhur avalokita-maṇḍana-līlā

madhuripur aham iti bhāvana-śīlā

nātha hare! sīdati... (4)

Translation

“She thinks, ‘I am Madhuripu,’ and looks repeatedly at
your ornaments.”

Commentary

“O Kṛṣṇa, her prana has become one with yours. Imagining
that, ‘I am Madhusūdana. I am Rādhā’s prana, Śrī Kṛṣṇa,’
she identifies herself with you and becomes just like
you. She adorns herself while thinking, ‘These
ornaments, this crown, these earrings and this garland
of forest flowers are worthy of being worn when I enjoy
amorous union with Rādhā.’ Rādhā rejects all the
ornaments suitable for young women. In the agony of
separation from you, she passes her time dressing in
ornaments suitable for a male lover and looking just
like you. Then, after becoming Mādhava, she gazes with
wonderment upon Rādhā’s ornaments.”

Verse 6

tvaritam upaiti na katham abhisāram

harir iti vadati sakhīm anuvāram

nātha hare! sīdati... (5)

Translation

“She repeatedly inquires from her confidante, ‘Sakhi,
why is Śrī Kṛṣṇa not coming quickly for our
rendezvous?’”

Commentary

The sakhī informs Kṛṣṇa, “Sometimes she comes to me and
asks repeatedly, ‘Why doesn’t Śrī Hari hurry up and meet
me here in the appointed place?’”

Verse 7

śliṣyati cumbati jaladhara-kalpam

harir upagata iti timiram analpam

nātha hare! sīdati... (6)


                            130
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

Translation

“When she sees the dense darkness that resembles a
raincloud, she embraces and kisses it thinking, ‘Oh,
Hari has come.’”

Commentary

“When she sees the dense, blackish-blue darkness that
appears to be a cloud about to burst, she thinks,
‘Kṛṣṇa, you have come.’ Then she embraces that lovely
darkness to her breast and begins to kiss it.”

Verse 8

bhavati vilambini vigalita-lajjā

vilapati roditi vāsakasajjā

nātha hare! sīdati... (7)

Translation

“When Rādhā returns to external consciousness and
realizes that you have still not arrived, she loses all
bashfulness and begins to weep out loud.”

Commentary

Rādhā is portrayed here as vāsakasajjā nāyikā. When she
realizes, “I have not embraced Kṛṣṇa and I am not
kissing him. This is just the dense darkness,” she
becomes ashamed of her behaviour and begins to weep. Her
deranged condition is such that she mistakes the nearby
expanse of darkness to be her dearest beloved because of
its colour. Then she begins to lament, “Why has my most
beloved one not come by now?”

Vāsakasajjā – The vāsakasajjā nāyikā is a heroine who
arrives at the appointed grove and waits for her hero
with intense eagerness. She personally decorates the
grove, makes a flower bed and sends messengers to the
hero.

Verse 9

śrī-jayadeva-kaver idam uditam

rasika-janaṁ tanutām ati-muditam

nātha hare! sīdati... (8)

Translation

May this song of the poet Jayadeva awaken abundant
jubilation in the hearts of those who are expert in
relishing rasa.

Commentary

Śrī Jayadeva says, “A sakhī has sung the glories of
Rādhā’s love herein. May her words bestow bliss upon the
expert devotees whose hearts are infused with the
romantic mellow.”

                            131
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017


This twelfth song portrays the vipralambha-bhāva of
śṛṅgāra-rasa. The alaṅkāra is samuccaya, the hero is
śaṭha nāyaka and the heroine is a distraught vāsakasajjā
nāyikā.

Verse 10



vipula-pulaka-pāliḥ sphīta-sītkāram antar-

janita-jaḍima-kāku-vyākulaṁ vyāharantī

tava kitava vidhāyāmanda-kandarpa-cintāṁ

rasa-jaladhi-nimagnā dhyāna-lagnā mṛgākṣī

Translation

“O cheater! Covered with severe horripilation, stunned
from within and drawing her breath with pitiful groans,
the doe-eyed Rādhikā is absorbed in intense bodily
transformations arising from kāma for you. Somehow she
holds on to her life-air while being submerged in the
ocean of prema-rasa.”

Commentary

Painting a picture of Rādhā’s insane craving for union
(premonmāda), the sakhī says, “O cunning cheater! You
treacherous rogue! The doe-eyed Rādhikā is absorbed in a
state of meditation as she sinks into the love-ocean of
embracing and uniting with you. It seems to her that you
are holding her in an embrace. Therefore every pore of
her skin is thrilled with intense pleasure. She suddenly
draws her breath and murmurs indistinctly as she becomes
almost senseless. When the impetuous frenzy of her
internal kāma subsides, she sinks into the ocean of
bliss.”

This verse features mālinī chanda and rasavad alaṅkāra.

Verse 11



aṅgeṣv ābharaṇaṁ karoti bahuśaḥ patre ’pi sañcāriṇi

prāptaṁ tvāṁ pariśaṅkate vitanute śayyāṁ ciraṁ dhyāyati

ity ākalpa-vikalpa-talpa-racanā-saṅkalpa-līlā-śata-

vyāsaktāpi vinā tvayā vara-tanur naiṣā niśāṁ neṣyati

Translation

“The limbs of Śrī Rādhā’s body are incomparably
attractive. She decorates them with ornaments many
times. When leaves rustle, she is filled with
expectation, thinking, ‘Oh, you have come.’ She makes a
soft bed for you and when you are late she feels acute
pain. Thus, although she is occupied in various pastimes
such as decorating herself, feeling apprehension, making

                          132
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

the bed, speaking loving words and fixing her resolve,
she still cannot pass this night in separation from
you.”

Commentary

The sakhī tells Kṛṣṇa about the mental conditions,
dysfunctional behaviour and endeavours of the
vāsakasajjā. “Although Rādhā enjoys your amorous love
through meditation, she feels deficient without
attaining direct union with you. O Mādhava, my most
beautiful friend decorates her elegant limbs with
ornaments to attract you in expectation of your imminent
arrival. When the wind rustles the leaves on a tree, she
presumes that you are coming. When you do not appear,
she reassures herself, ‘He will definitely come’, and
prepares a bed of freshly sprouted leaves. She is lost
in thoughts of you. Sometimes she looks outside to see
if you are coming. When you are late, she becomes
utterly dejected. Thus although Rādhā remains occupied
in various activities such as adorning herself,
expecting your arrival and preparing a bed with the firm
resolve that you must be on the way, she still cannot
endure the night without you.”

This verse features śārdūla-vikrīḍita chanda and
samuccaya alaṅkāra.

Verse 12



kiṁ viśrāmyasi kṛṣṇa-bhogi-bhavane bhāṇḍīra-bhūmī-ruhe

bhrātar yāsi na dṛṣṭi-gocaram itaḥ sānanda-nandāspadam

rādhāyā vacanaṁ tad adhvaga-mukhān nandāntike gopato

govindasya jayanti sāyam atithi-prāśastya-garbhā giraḥ

Translation

“When I was a guest in Śrī Rādhā’s home, she said to me,
‘O brother, why are you resting at the foot of this
bhāṇḍīra tree? A poisonous black serpent lives here. Get
up and go to the delightful home of Nanda, which is
visible just before you. Why don’t you go there?’” On
hearing these words of Rādhā from the lips of a pilgrim,
Kṛṣṇa thanked “him” in such a way that Śrī Nanda
Mahārāja would not understand the inner mood of his
statements. May Govinda’s words of praise be victorious.

Commentary

To conclude Act Six, Śrī Jayadeva bestows a blessing
through the medium of this verse. The context is as
follows. When Rādhā saw that her sakhī was late, she
made an excuse to send another female envoy. That
messenger disguised herself as a male pilgrim and
approached Kṛṣṇa in the evening twilight. The “pilgrim”
gave Kṛṣṇa a message from Rādhā indirectly informing him
about a secret tryst. Śrī Jayadeva says, “May Govinda’s
words of praise to that pilgrim be victorious.”


                          133
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

What were Kṛṣṇa’s cryptic words concealing his
intentions from his father, Śrī Nanda Mahārāja? Kṛṣṇa
may have confirmed his approval by repeating the
pilgrim’s message. “O brother, why are you lamenting
here beneath this banyan tree that is the home of a
black snake? Go inside the delightful house of Nanda. It
is visible before you a little further ahead.”

Kṛṣṇa-bhogi – “black snake”; or alternatively “Kṛṣṇa,
who enjoys union (sambhoga) with his beloved.”

When Śrī Jayadeva says, “May Govinda’s words of praise
be victorious,” he implies, “May Rādhā’s wish be
fulfilled.” The word jaya also establishes Kṛṣṇa’s
unparalleled excellence.



Thus ends the Bālabodhinī-prakāśa commentary on Act Six
of Śrī Gīta-govinda, entitled Dhṛṣṭa-vaikuṇṭha,

describing the vāsakasajjā nāyikā.




Act Seven




— nāgara-nārāyaṇaḥ —



Verse 1



atrāntare ca kulaṭā-kula-vartma-pāta-

sañjāta-pātaka iva sphuṭa-lāñchana-śrīḥ

vṛndāvanāntaram adīpayad aṁśu-jālair

dik-sundarī-vadana-candana-bindur induḥ

Translation

ṛṣṇa was absorbed in thoughts of Rādhā. In the meantime,
the moon enhanced the beauty of Vṛndāvana with his
gentle rays. The moon appeared like a drop of sandalwood
paste on the lotus face of a beautiful newly married
woman in the form of the eastern direction. His limbs
bore a stain like the mark of tuberculosis on an
unchaste woman when she strays from the path of social
etiquette.

Commentary

Śrī Jayadeva is describing the full moonrise because it
demolishes the reluctance of contrary heroines. The poet
says, “When Rādhā was burning in separation from Kṛṣṇa,

                          134
Gita-govinda.txt                                 5/5/2017

the rays of the full moon illuminated the forest of
Vṛndāvana. The sinful reaction accrued by the moon for
obstructing the path of unchaste, impassioned women is
clearly evident from his deer-shaped mark.”

Alternatively, “The moon has decorated all directions
with his effulgence. He wears his own ill-fame like a
spot of sandalwood paste adorning the face of the
beautiful woman, Pūrva-diśā (the eastern direction
personified).”

Furthermore, “The moon has perfectly adorned the
beautiful eastern horizon, just as a spot of sandalwood
paste perfectly adorns the forehead of a beautiful
woman.”

Pātaka iva – A person who obstructs the path of others
is considered to be sinful. Unchaste ladies only have an
opportunity to meet with their lovers at night. The
moonlight creates an obstacle at that time by
jeopardizing the secrecy of their movements. The
reaction to this sin is evident from the moon’s deer-
shaped mark.

From one perspective, the moon is considered to be
stained by infamy, and from another, it is the ornament
of the open directions.

This verse includes rūpaka and utprekṣā alaṅkāras. The
chanda is vasanta-tilakā.

Verse 2



prasarati śaśadhara-bimbe vihita-vilambe ca mādhave
vidhurā

viracita-vividha-vilāpaṁ sā paritāpaṁ cakāroccaiḥ

Translation

The moon had already risen   to its zenith and Mādhava was
late. Therefore, afflicted   by separation and loudly
expressing her lamentation   in various ways, Rādhā began
to suffer the most intense   agony.

Commentary

When the moon rose to the highest point, Rādhā’s hopes
that Mādhava would surely come waned and the intense
pain of separation increased. Describing Rādhā’s
remorse, the sakhī says, “Rādhā began to weep out loud
in great distress, feeling completely helpless. The moon
had expanded fully and Mādhava had still not arrived. In
utter despair, Rādhā burst into tears.”

This verse is in āryā chanda.




Scene Thirteen

                             135
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017




Song 13


The musical mode is mālava rāga. The rhythm is yati
tāla.



Verse 3

kathita-samaye ’pi harir ahaha na yayau vanam

mama viphalam idam amalam api rūpa-yauvanam



yāmi he! kam iha śaraṇaṁ sakhī-jana-vacana-vañcitā
(refrain) (1)

Translation

“Alas, alas! My immaculate youth and beauty are all in
vain because Hari has not come to the forest at the
appointed time. I have been cheated by my friends, so to
whom may I turn for shelter now?”

Commentary

Rādhā laments, “Sakhi, you said, ‘I will go and bring
him at once. Just wait here.’ But even you have betrayed
me. You said that you would return to this grove before
moonrise, but now the moon has risen to its highest
point in the sky. I have been deceived by your false
words of reassurance. My impeccable youth and beauty are
all worthless because if they had any value, he would
definitely be here.”

The word ahaha (Alas! Alas!) indicates Rādhā’s profound
sorrow. The word he (Oh!) is used following a form of
address.

Verse 4

yad-anugamanāya niśi gahanam api śīlitam

tena mama hṛdayam idam asamaśara-kīlitam

yāmi he! kam iha... (2)

Translation

“Alas! That very person, in pursuance of whom I have
even entered this wild forest on such a dark night, is
piercing my heart with arrows of sensuality. To whom may
I turn for shelter?”

Commentary

Śrī Rādhā says,“He whom I came to meet in this lonely,

                          136
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

secluded jungle has driven the stake of lust into my
heart, or a seed incantation (bīja-mantra) of kāma has
bound me with such a mystical spell that I do not have a
position in any sphere.”

The word api (even) implies, “I had never done such a
thing before.”

Verse 5

mama maraṇam eva varam ati-vitatha-ketanā

kim iha viṣahāmi virahānalam acetanā

yāmi he! kam iha... (3)

Translation

“It is useless to maintain this body any longer. I
should die at once. I am becoming senseless. How can I
endure this intolerable fire of separation?”

Commentary

“I am ruined. How unsteady I am in separation from that
person for whose loving union I am sitting in this deep
forest in the dreadful darkness of night. I lost all
composure and sense. Where can I go? It is better to
die. How much separation can I tolerate? All signs of
hope have proven false. My body is worthless, otherwise
Hari would not neglect it in this way. I have acted
courageously by coming here on my sakhī’s words, but all
my endeavours are in vain. It is useless to go on
living.”

Verse 6

mām ahaha vidhurayati madhura-madhu-yāminī

kāpi harim anubhavati kṛta-sukṛta-kāminī

yāmi he! kam iha... (4)

Translation

“Oh, how unfortunate I am. This exceptionally sweet
spring night makes me unsteady with the pain of
loneliness. At a time like this it is certain that
elsewhere some impassioned young woman is experiencing
the highest happiness as she enjoys the fruit of her
pious activities in the form of making love with Kṛṣṇa.”

Commentary

Expressing the terrible pain in the core of her heart,
Rādhā says, “These rasa-laden nights of the spring
season embody the highest happiness, yet they are
torturing me. Conversely, some fortunate young woman is
tasting the rapture of playfully making love with Kṛṣṇa.
He did not come here as promised because that seductress
has bound him in the ropes of her love as he revels in
amorous pastimes. How I must be lacking in pious
activities. I am lamenting in the pain of separation and
in the meantime, some other woman is feeling the

                          137
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

happiness of passionate union with him.”

In the Viśvakośa dictionary vidhura is defined as
vikalatā, deficiency.

Verse 7

ahaha kalayāmi valayādi-maṇi-bhūṣaṇam

hari-viraha-dahana-vahanena bahu-dūṣaṇam

yāmi he! kam iha... (5)

Translation

“Alas, alas! All my jewel-encrusted bangles and other
ornaments are inflaming the fire of separation and
inflicting unlimited misery. Therefore they also seem to
be guilty.”

Commentary

“Oh, sakhi! You have played a big trick on me. I have
adorned my body with so many ornaments and decorated
myself with flowers, freshly sprouted leaves and jewels.
But they all seem to burn my body like flames in the
tortuous fire of unfulfilled sensual desires in the
absence of Hari. Now these ornaments are no longer
ornaments. They have become curses, because the beauty
and attire of a woman in love have but one fruit – her
lover’s glance. Alternatively, the value of ornaments is
only realized when someone looks at you with love.
Therefore these ornaments are not dear to me. Rather,
they seem to be conspiring against me.”

Verse 8

kusuma-sukumāra-tanum atanu-śara-līlayā

srag api hṛdi hanti mām ati-viṣama-śīlayā

yāmi he! kam iha... (6)

Translation

(To say nothing of my other ornaments) “Even this
garland of forest flowers on my chest is inflicting
terrible blows like the arrows of Cupid upon my body,
which is more delicate than the softest flower
blossoms.”

Commentary

“O my beloved! What can I say about my other ornaments?
The garland I wear upon my heart for your pleasure turns
into a weapon of Kāmadeva and steals my life-airs. It
pierces my heart like an arrow of kāma and its blow is
so damaging that my body, which is more delicate than a
flower, cannot endure its violence. When the body is
covered with the cuts and wounds of arrows one feels an
ordinary type of pain. But the pain of a heart broken by
these arrows of kāma is intolerable.”

Verse 9

                          138
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017


aham iha nivasi naaham iha nivasāmi na gaṇita-vana-
vetasā

smarati madhusūdano mām api na cetasā

yāmi he! kam iha... (7)

Translation

“I fearlessly sit waiting for Kṛṣṇa, even in the midst
of this formidable cane forest. But how astonishing it
is that Madhusūdana does not remember me even once.”

Commentary

Śrī Rādhā expresses her humility by saying, “I believed
in my sakhī’s words about meeting with Śrī Madhusūdana.
So I am sitting fearlessly in the depths of this spooky
forest, but he is not concerned about me. His friendship
is fickle. How amazing it is that the person for whom I
am waiting in this dense forest does not remember me
even once. Alas, this is simply my misfortune.”

Verse 10

hari-caraṇa-śaraṇa-jayadeva-kavi-bhāratī

vasatu hṛdi yuvatir iva komala-kalāvatī

yāmi he! kam iha... (8)

Translation

As the qualities of a young woman, who is expert in all
arts and whose body is soft and radiant, always shine
within the heart of a young man, similarly may this
delightful song of Śrī Jayadeva, who is unconditionally
surrendered at the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, always grace
the hearts of the devotees.

Commentary

Śrī Jayadeva says that his only protectors are the lotus
feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. He has no other guardian. His poem is
adorned with tender words and the arts of poetic
pertinence. A beautiful woman reigns with splendour
within the heart of her hero, especially if her body is
tender and she is talented in the six arts that increase
rasa, such as the use of ornaments and cosmetics. In the
same way, may this poem find a place within the hearts
of the devotees and bring them abundant joy. This is the
cherished desire of the poet.

Verse 11



tat kiṁ kām api kāminīm abhisṛtaḥ kiṁ vā kalā-kelibhir

baddho bandhubhir andhakāriṇi vanābhyarṇe kim
udbhrāmyati

kāntaḥ klānta-manā manāg api pathi prasthātum evākṣamaḥ

                          139
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017


saṅketī-kṛta-mañju-vañjula-latā-kuñje ’pi yan nāgataḥ

Translation

“Śrī Kṛṣṇa is more dear to me than my own life. Why has
he not come to the appointed chamber of blossoming
vines? What is the mystery behind it? Did he go for a
tryst with another passionate woman? Did he
inadvertently allow the appointed time to pass in the
joy of playing with his friends? Is he wandering around,
unable to find this place in the terrible darkness cast
by the shadow of this dense mass of trees? Is he so
debilitated by feelings of separation from me that he
cannot walk even a single step?”

Commentary

Beset with doubt, Rādhikā is pondering over possible
reasons why Śrī Kṛṣṇa has not come. “Oh, what could be
the cause of his absence?” Presenting her suspicions,
Rādhā says, “This charming chamber of vetasa creepers
was the appointed meeting place for us both, so what has
become of him? Why is he not here? Did he go to meet
with another heroine? How could his thirst for me be
less than for her? How could he abandon me in a place
like this to enjoy loving pastimes with someone else? It
is not possible. Did his sportive and artful friends
stop him from coming here by detaining him in the
playing field? This is also not feasible. How could he
forget the time for abhisāra? It seems that the crest-
jewel of cunning tricksters cannot find me in this dense
darkness, so he may still be searching for me. But how
many times has he come to this forest to meet me? The
path is well-known to him, so how could he forget the
way? It is impossible. Could he be languishing so much
in separation that he is unable to walk? Perhaps he is
worrying, ‘How will Rādhā feel after the moon has
risen?’”

This verse features śārdūla-vikrīḍita chanda and the
alaṅkāra called saṁśaya.

Verse 12



athāgatāṁ mādhavam antareṇa

sakhīm iyaṁ vīkṣya viṣāda-mūkām

viśaṅkamānā ramitaṁ kayāpi

janārdanaṁ dṛṣṭavad etad āha

Translation

When Rādhā saw her companion return without Mādhava, her
heart sank. Feeling apprehensive, Rādhā remained silent
and began to conjecture, “Is Janārdana enjoying love
with another passionate woman?”

Commentary


                             140
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

Rādhā was pondering over the many possible reasons for
Kṛṣṇa’s not coming to the trysting place. When she saw
her friend return without Kṛṣṇa, her emotions reached
the peak of sensitivity for a separated mistress
(vipralabdhā nāyikā). Rādhā was rendered speechless by
the intensity of her anguish and her friend also
remained silent in a state of despair. Rādhā presumed,
“She is silent and apathetic, because she has seen the
son of the King of Vraja enjoying amorous pastimes with
another woman. That’s why she is not saying anything.”

Rādhā burst into tears. “Isn’t that the meaning of
janārdana, ‘one who likes to give pain to others’?
Therefore he also gives pain to me.”

Vipralabdhā nāyikā – Impelled by ever-increasing
attachment, the lady-love arrives first at the
prearranged meeting place and sends a messenger to her
hero. However, by the will of providence the hero does
not show up and the time for meeting passes. At this
point, the heroine becomes a vipralabdhā nāyikā.

The chanda of this verse is upendra-vajrā.



Scene Fourteen




Song 14


The musical mode is vasanta rāga. The rhythm is yati
tāla.



Verse 13

smara-samarocita-viracita-veśā

dalita-kusuma-dara-vilulita-keśā



kāpi madhuripuṇā vilasati yuvatir adhika-guṇā (refrain)
(1)

Translation

“O sakhi, she is attired in clothes and ornaments
suitable for an amorous battle. When she is absorbed in
making love, her braid opens and the flowers fall from
her undulating tresses, only to be crushed by their
bodies. Some young woman, who is more qualified than I,
is blissfully engaged in revelry with Madhuripu.”

Commentary

With great apprehension, Rādhā says, “O sakhi, some
beautiful young lover, dressed for sexual combat (kāma-

                          141
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

saṅgrāma), is sporting with Madhuripu. While playing her
love games, her tightly bound braid came loose and is
now swinging to and fro. Thus the flowers that were
woven in her hair have cascaded down.”

Madhuripu – “Kṛṣṇa is the enemy of mādhurya. He does not
approve of sweetness. Therefore he has neglected me to
enjoy union with another young woman.”

Yuvatir adhika-guṇā – “This lovely vraja-gopī is more
qualified than I.” But that is impossible. The
vyaṅgārtha or suggested meaning is, “How amazing it is
that a less qualified young woman is making love to
him.” This description alludes to viparīta-rati, the
congress in which the heroine makes love in the dominant
role above her hero.

Smara-samara – Sexual love has been called an erotic
battle. In this amorous competition, intensely
passionate thrusting causes the heroine’s braid to open
and the flowers woven therein to cascade down and
scatter.

Verse 14

hari-parirambhaṇa-valita-vikārā

kuca-kalaśopari taralita-hārā

kāpi madhuripuṇā... (2)

Translation

“When Kṛṣṇa deeply embraces her, she becomes bewildered
by sensual agitation. She must be experiencing the
bodily transformations beginning with the thrill of
every pore of her skin and her necklace must be swinging
to and fro on her waterpot-like breasts.”

Commentary

Śrī Rādhā conjectures about the activities of her
attractive rival. Painting a vivid picture of her
behaviour, she says, “That young woman must have felt
the upsurge of various passionate bodily transformations
such as horripilation arising from the embrace of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. Her necklace must be swinging upon her raised
waterpot-like breasts.” A necklace will be restless when
a woman plays the active role in lovemaking. In other
words, it is only possible during viparīta-rati.

Verse 15

vicalad-alaka-lalitānana-candrā

tad-adhara-pāna-rabhasa-kṛta-tandrā

kāpi madhuripuṇā... (3)

Translation

“The beauty of her moonlike face must be enhanced by her
curling locks of hair and her eyes must be blissfully
closed out of an all-consuming greed to drink the nectar

                          142
Gita-govinda.txt                                 5/5/2017

of Kṛṣṇa’s lips.”

Commentary

“That charming lover’s moonlike face must look   even more
beautiful with her locks of hair moving to and   fro. She
must be drinking the nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s lips as   they make
love. Completely immersed in the joy of union,   she keeps
her eyes closed and plays kapaṭa-nidrā, acting   as if in
slumber.”

Verse 16

cañcala-kuṇḍala-lalita-kapolā

mukharita-rasana-jaghana-gati-lolā

kāpi madhuripuṇā... (4)

Translation

“Her cheeks must be even lovelier when her earrings are
swinging. The tiny bells on the jewelled sash elegantly
adorning her waist must be tinkling so sweetly as they
shake about on her hips.”

Commentary

“It is only natural for her earrings to sway when she is
competing in the game of love. Therefore the captivating
countenance of her cheeks must have increased. The bells
attached to the sash on her waist will be ringing
continuously. They must seem to be very restless because
her thighs are constantly in motion.”

Verse 17

dayita-vilokita-lajjita-hasitā

bahu-vidha-kūjita-rati-rasa-rasitā

kāpi madhuripuṇā... (5)

Translation

“When beloved Kṛṣṇa glances upon her, she becomes
embarrassed and laughs shyly. And when she tastes the
mellows of coition, she must be making an inarticulate
sound resembling the warbling of birds like the cuckoo
or kalahaṁsa, indicating that she is experiencing a
sudden surge of erotic euphoria.”

Commentary

“When Śrī Kṛṣṇa is satisfied, he will look towards her.
Then she will lower her face in shame and begin to
chuckle. As she gasps for breath in the throes of
excessive sensual ecstasy, she must be making many
different types of sweet inarticulate sounds like the
cuckoo or kalahaṁsa bird.”

Verse 18

vipula-pulaka-pṛthu-vepathu-bhaṅgā

                          143
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017


śvasita-nimīlita-vikasad-anaṅgā

kāpi madhuripuṇā... (6)

Translation

“When she is thrilled by the ecstasies of Cupid,
horripilation and bodily convulsions wash over her like
waves. Her complete absorption in sexual pleasure will
be revealed by the way she closes her eyes and lets out
a long sigh.”

Commentary

“At the time of making love, her kāma will gradually
intensify as the pores of her skin repeatedly become
erect. She trembles, her voice falters and she draws
long breaths. When she attains the climax of her
rapture, she will close her eyes.”

Vepathu-bhaṅgā – In this verse horripilation and
trembling have been compared to waves. “Just as waves
rise one after another in the ocean, similarly
horripilation and trembling must be arising in her body,
one after the other.”

Verse 19

śrama-jala-kaṇa-bhara-subhaga-śarīrā

paripatitorasi rati-raṇa-dhīrā

kāpi madhuripuṇā... (7)

Translation

“This passionate young woman, who is expert in tasting
the flavours of sensual love, must look even more
attractive when she is covered in droplets of
perspiration from the exertion of her love-sports. She
knows how to hold her patience during intercourse. How
beautiful she must be when, thoroughly exhausted from
the hard labour of making love, she finally collapses
upon Kṛṣṇa’s chest.”

Commentary

“She must have become completely exhausted from her
absorption in the energy of the god of lust. How her
lotus face must be glistening with drops of perspiration
from the hard exertion of making love. She is most
skilful in sexual warfare. How astonishingly beautiful
she must look now that she has fallen upon Kṛṣṇa’s
chest.”

Verse 20

śrī-jayadeva-bhaṇita-hari-ramitam

kali-kaluṣaṁ janayatu pariśamitam

kāpi madhuripuṇā... (8)


                          144
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

Translation

May Śrī Jayadeva’s description of Śrī Hari’s love-play
subdue the ill-effects of the age of Kali. (May it
pacify the lusty desires of everyone.)

Commentary

The fourteenth song of Śrī Gīta-govinda, entitled Hari-
ramita-campaka-śekhara, describes viparīta-rati.
Although the current era (Kali-yuga) is highly
contaminating, this description of sexual affairs is
pure. May it cleanse the lust from the hearts of all who
hear and recite it.

Verse 21



viraha-pāṇḍu-murāri-mukhāmbuja-

dyutir ayaṁ tirayann api vedanām

vidhur atīva tanoti mano-bhuvaḥ

suhṛd aye hṛdaye madana-vyathām

Translation

“My dear friend, the lustre of the moon has faded. It
resembles the lustre of Murārī’s lotus face that pales
in separation from me. After removing my anguish, the
moon became friends with Kāmadeva and now he is
increasing the agitation of amorous desires in my
heart.”

Commentary

Śrī Rādhā passed the entire night in lamentation. As she
watched the moon moving in the direction of Mount Asta
on the western horizon, she remembered Kṛṣṇa’s previous
affection for her. Confiding in her friend, Rādhā said,
“O sakhi, how painful it is. The moon increases the
distress of those who are suffering from loneliness.
Now, because the moon is setting, so is the burning of
my amorous desires. I remember the lotus face of Śrī
Hari when I see the pale complexion of the setting moon.
How languid he must have become in separation from me.”

Then, at the very next moment, she draws the opposite
conclusion. “Śrī Hari has abandoned me and he is
enjoying pastimes with another lover. Therefore his
lustre resembles the setting moon and the pain in my
heart has become even deeper.”




Scene Fifteen




                          145
Gita-govinda.txt                                  5/5/2017


Song 15


The musical mode is gurjarī rāga. The rhythm is ekatālī
tāla.



This song portrays the charming young woman, who is
fully preoccupied in loving dealings with Kṛṣṇa on the
Yamunā riverside, as the dominant heroine (svādhīna-
bhartṛkā).

Verse 22

samudita-madane ramaṇī-vadane cumbana-valitādhare

mṛgamada-tilakaṁ likhati sa-pulakaṁ mṛgam iva rajanī-
kare



ramate yamunā-pulina-vane vijayī murārir adhunā
(refrain) (1)

Translation

“Madhuripu is victorious in the love-battle. Now he is
enjoying romance with his beloved in a forest on the
bank of the Yamunā. This attractive mistress, every pore
of her skin erupting with joy, is the very embodiment of
everything that excites lust. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is decorating
her face with a design in musk that resembles the mark
of a deer upon the moon. His hair is also standing on
end and he is kissing her.”

Commentary

Śrī Rādhā speaks incoherent words of lamentation,
extending her imaginative projections about what Kṛṣṇa
must be doing now. She is actually remembering her own
previous pastimes with Kṛṣṇa and describing what she
sees through the eyes of her ecstatic loving mood
(bhāva-netra).

Rādhā sees a wonderful heroine who is thinking, “Now
Madhuripu has defeated me in this love-battle and he
will observe his victory festival (vijaya-utsava).”
Describing the characteristics of this imaginary
mistress, Rādhā says, “In a forest on the Yamunā
riverside, Kṛṣṇa is playing with that beautiful young
woman by artistically decorating her. He is applying a
tilaka of deer-musk upon the lotus face of that
attractive lover, causing her to thrill with
horripilation. On the pretext of decorating her, he has
drawn her face close to his with the intention of
kissing her. By doing this, his kāma has become fully
aroused and his hairs are also standing on end. He
cannot contain his feelings. With great difficulty, he
is painting a tilaka that ends up as a zigzag pattern.
Now her beauty is like that of the moon with its deer-
shaped mark. By kissing her upon the lips and face, the
colour of that tilaka has become smudged across Kṛṣṇa’s

                          146
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

lips.”

Verse 23

ghana-caya-rucire racayati cikure taralita-taruṇānane

kurubaka-kusumaṁ capalā-suṣamaṁ rati-pati-mṛga-kānane

ramate yamunā-pulina vane... (2)

Translation

“That young woman’s charming locks of hair resemble a
mass of dark rainclouds. They are a play-forest for the
deer called Madana. Her fresh, sympathetic face always
shines forth from amongst those locks, in which he is
now arranging rose laurel blossoms.”

Commentary

Commenting on Kṛṣṇa’s sport of decorating his beloved,
Śrī Rādhā tells her sakhī, “He has not only drawn tilaka
upon her forehead, he has also adorned her hair with
rose laurel flowers. Her hair is so black, soft, curly
and abundant that it resembles a multitude of
rainclouds. Or it seems to be a dense forest wherein the
deer called Kāmadeva can wander without fear. The hearts
of young men become restless simply by seeing these
locks of hair. The rose laurel flowers arranged in her
hair by Śrī Hari are shining brilliantly like lightning
in the dark clouds.”

Verse 24

ghaṭayati sughane kuca-yuga-gagane mṛgamada-ruci-rūṣite

maṇi-saram amalaṁ tāraka-paṭalaṁ nakha-pada-śaśi-bhūṣite

ramate yamunā-pulina vane... (3)

Translation

“This woman with beautiful hair has such large breasts
that they touch together in the middle. Smeared with
thick, black kastūrī powder, they resemble the night sky
embellished by the half moon-shaped impressions of his
fingernails. He is adorning her with an enchanting
necklace of pearls, as if placing a constellation of
immaculate stars, upon the firmament of the night sky.”

Commentary

Śrī Rādhā says, “Śrī Kṛṣṇa is placing a multitude of
stars in the form of the pearls of a necklace upon that
attractive woman’s breasts. Her breasts are decorated
with the half-moon-shaped marks of his fingernails.”

There is a charming and multifaceted similarity between
the sky and her breasts:

Kuca-yuga-gagane – “As the sky is expansive, so are her
breasts.” A clear conception of the immensity of her
breasts has been given by the image of the sky.


                          147
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

Sughane – “That heroine’s breasts, being extremely firm,
touch together in the middle, giving the appearance of
the sky when it is full of beautiful, dense clouds.”

Mṛgamada-ruci-rūṣite – “Droplets of perspiration are
trickling down her breasts from the hard exertion of
making love. So Kṛṣṇa smears her breasts with musk
powder (kastūrī) to make them dry. The night sky also
has a dark blue-black hue like kastūrī.”

Tāraka-paṭalaṁ nakha-pada-śaśi-bhūṣite – “Her pearl
necklace appears to be a multitude of stars and the
impressions left by the tips of Kṛṣṇa’s fingernails
appear to be radiant half-moons upon the night sky of
her round breasts.”

Taken together, these comparisons comprise a delightful
use of imagery. Her tilaka is a deer, her forehead is
the moon and her mass of hair is a safe and peaceful
forest. The rose laurel flowers are flashes of lightning
and her breasts have become the sky, enhanced by the
moon and stars in the form of nail-marks and tiny
pearls.

Verse 25

jita-bisa-śakale mṛdu-bhuja-yugale kara-tala-nalinī-dale

marakata-valayaṁ madhukara-nicayaṁ vitarati hima-śītale

ramate yamunā-pulina vane... (4)

Translation

“That charming mistress has elegant hair and large round
breasts. Not only that, her arms are cooler than lotus
stems and they are beautified by her soft lotus petal
hands. Now he is putting bumblebees upon them in the
form of emerald-encrusted bracelets.”

Commentary

Rādhā says, “That fortunate young woman’s arms defeat
the tenderness of a lotus stem. Her hands are fair like
snow and their cool palms are red as lotus flowers. As
black bumblebees upon the petals of a red lotus look so
pleasant, her lotus petal hands look delightful as Kṛṣṇa
adorns them with bangles encrusted with nīla jewels.
These bangles give the impression that bumblebees have
formed a line surrounding her hands.”

Hima-śītale – “His lover’s arms are as cool as snow
because the heat of her desires has been relieved by his
touch.” Alternatively, coolness indicates her lack of
kāma. The bracelets will generate a new heat in those
cool hands.

Verse 26

rati-gṛha-jaghane vipulāpaghane manasija-kanakāsane

maṇimaya-rasanaṁ toraṇa-hasanaṁ vikirati kṛta-vāsane

ramate yamunā-pulina vane... (5)

                          148
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017


Translation

“The hips of that attractive woman are as voluptuous,
fragrant and broad as the golden throne of the sex-god.
He is decorating her loins – the abode of amorous love –
with a jewelled girdle, as if he were emblazoning the
arched doorway of a palace with an auspicious festoon.”

Commentary

Śrī Rādhā says, “The hips of that mistress embody the
very shelter of amorous amusement. Her beautiful, broad
and fleshy thighs are the golden throne of the god of
lust. Simply by seeing them, the intense hankering for
the pleasure of union awakens in Kṛṣṇa’s heart.”

Kṛta-vāsanam – “Heroines perfume their limbs with a
special kind of fragrant smoke that brings their lovers
under their control. That attractive woman has perfumed
her loins with this scent and brought Kṛṣṇa under her
control.”

Kanakāsane – “The golden throne of Kāmadeva.” The word
kanaka, meaning “gold”, also refers to the poisonous
herb, dhattūra, which is very dear to Śaṅkara, Lord
Śiva. Śaṅkara had burnt Kāmadeva to ashes, therefore the
word kanaka has been used to indicate the incitement of
kāma.

Maṇimaya-rasanaṁ toraṇa-hasanam – Whenever a king
ascends to the throne, the principal arched gateway to
the palace is decorated with vandana-vāra, an auspicious
festoon of leaves and flowers. Here, Kṛṣṇa is decorating
his lover with vandana-vāra, in the form of a jewelled
girdle, in honour of King Kāmadeva’s ascension to the
golden throne of her fair thighs.

Vikirati – Kṛṣṇa began to tremble with erotic desire
upon touching her thighs. Thus he could not put her
jewelled girdle on properly. Nevertheless, the attempt
to put it on has been done – that attempt turned into
the recollection of one special pastime.

Verse 27

caraṇa-kisalaye kamalā-nilaye nakha-maṇi-gaṇa-pūjite

bahir-apavaraṇaṁ yāvaka-bharaṇaṁ janayati hṛdi yojite

ramate yamunā-pulina vane... (6)

Translation

“The fresh bud-like feet of that curvaceous woman are
resplendent with a fascinating reddish lustre and they
are adorned with the precious jewels of her toenails.
His chest, which is the abode of the goddess of fortune,
is now decorated with nail-marks and gemstones. He has
established her feet upon his chest and he is carefully
colouring them with red footlac.”

Commentary


                          149
Gita-govinda.txt                                  5/5/2017

Describing Kṛṣṇa’s new love-play, Rādhā says, “The lotus
feet of that greatly fortunate young woman are the very
shelter of Lakṣmī. They are reddish like soft, fresh
flower petals and her toenails shine like precious
jewels. He has sat down, embracing those two feet to his
heart. The goddess of fortune Lakṣmī eternally resides
upon his chest, which is now decorated with an array of
gems and the nail-marks made by that comely woman who is
so expert at making love. Kṛṣṇa is applying yāvaka
footlac with his own lotus hands to her naturally
reddish feet. He is adorning them with ornaments and
making a great endeavour to take care of them.”

The adjectival phrase nakha-maṇi-gaṇa-pūjita is
applicable both to Kṛṣṇa and his mistress.

Verse 28

ramayati subhṛśaṁ kām api sudṛśaṁ khala-haladhara-sodare

kim aphalam avasaṁ ciram iha virasaṁ vada sakhi
viṭapodare

ramate yamunā-pulina vane... (7)

Translation

“The brother of Haladhara – that indiscriminate, ill-
mannered uncouth rogue, Kṛṣṇa – is definitely tightly
embracing some woman with beautiful eyes and making love
to her. So sakhi, tell me – how long shall I sit waiting
in this bower of flowering vines in an unpleasant mood,
completely devoid of rasa?”

Commentary

After waiting for a long time, Rādhā became hopeless and
said to her friend, “Sakhi, say something. Give up your
silence. Now what is the benefit of uselessly loitering
in a dense thicket in the forest until the early hours?”

Khala-haladhara-sodare – “Haladhara is a name of
Balarāma. His younger brother, Kṛṣṇa, is extremely
mischievous. Haladhara means ‘ploughman’. Just like a
plough, Kṛṣṇa is base, rustic and unsophisticated. After
neglecting and cheating me, he is enjoying with that
woman with beautiful eyes. Oh, how could she have
beautiful eyes? He is just dallying with some uncouth
villager mistress who is just like he is. What
relationship do I have with him? I placed my trust in
him and what was the result? I have just spent the whole
night sitting in this wild jungle. How he has
disregarded me. Should I continue to be consumed by
remorse while waiting around in this kuñja? Should I
simply go on investigating his whereabouts? What
recourse do I have? But sakhi, how can I tolerate it? He
said that he would come here and instead he is engrossed
in pastimes with another beloved.”

The heroine of this fifteenth song is svādhīna-bhartṛkā
nāyikā. Kṛṣṇa cannot leave her because he is captivated
by her qualities. This is the root cause of his neglect
towards Rādhā.


                          150
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

Verse 29

ha rasa-bhaṇane kṛta-hari-guṇane madhuripu-pada-sevake

kali-yuga-caritaṁ na vasatu duritaṁ kavi-nṛpa-jayadevake

ramate yamunā-pulina vane... (8)

Translation

The king of poets, Jayadeva, glorifies the pastimes of
Śrī Hari, which are completely full of the romantic
flavour, śṛṅgāra-rasa. May the fault of wicked
behaviour, which is so prevalent in Kali-yuga, never
enter this servant of Śrī Madhusūdana.

Commentary

In the ecstasy of writing this song, Śrī Jayadeva
considers himself to be the best amongst all the
servants of Madhuripu and prays that the disgraceful
characteristics prevalent in this present age of quarrel
and hypocrisy may never enter those who hear this song.
The word rasa-bhaṇane means “one who speaks of
sensuality in a way that is full of rasa”. Hari-guṇane
refers to Śrī Jayadeva as “one who repeatedly recites
the glories of Śrī Hari”. All the statements of the poet
in this song are excitants of rasa (uddīpana). When this
rasa appears, the dark tendencies aroused by the
influence of Kali-yuga can no longer enter the heart.

Verse 30



nāyātaḥ sakhi nirdayo yadi śaṭhas tvaṁ dūti kiṁ dūyase

svacchandaṁ bahu-vallabhaḥ sa ramate kiṁ tatra te
dūṣaṇam

paśyādya priya-saṅgamāya dayitasyākṛṣyamāṇaṁ guṇair

utkaṇṭhārti-bharād iva sphuṭad idaṁ cetaḥ svayaṁ yāsyati

Translation

Sakhī – “O sakhi, Rādhā! He did not come.”

Rādhā – “If that merciless, cruel-hearted, two-faced
cheater does not come, why should you be upset?”

Sakhī – “He has many beloveds and he freely enjoys
amorous love with them without the slightest restraint.”

Rādhā – “What fault is that of yours? Look! Today my
heart has been broken by the burden of intense
eagerness. Being attracted by the qualities of my most
beloved Śrī Kṛṣṇa, my heart will go to meet with him by
itself.”

Commentary

Rādhā continued to express her anxious longing in the
great distress of separation. When Kṛṣṇa did not come,

                          151
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

she concluded that this despondent- faced messenger-girl
(dūtī) must be to blame. The sakhī told Rādhā, “My dear
friend, I called him many times, but he is so merciless
that he did not come.” Rādhā replied, “If that two-faced
cheater and rogue does not come then what fault is that
of yours? Why are you so upset? You have done your duty
as a messenger very well.” The messenger replied, “I am
upset because I could not bring him. He has numerous
beloveds and he is independent. He enjoys whenever and
wherever he wants.” Again Rādhā asked, “So what fault is
that of yours? Now look here. My heart is forcibly
attracted by his qualities. It is being torn apart by
the intolerable agony of his absence, so my devastated
prana will surely leave and reach him by itself.”

What is the nature of Rādhā’s heart? It is spontaneously
attracted by Kṛṣṇa’s qualities. The phrase utkaṇṭhārti-
bharād implies, “My heart is breaking under the burden
of the unfulfilled desire to unite with my beloved.
Although I try to check it, it will not stop. It will
certainly go to him.”

Alternatively, “Look, sakhi! It is not possible to
attain my beloved’s association at this time because
another charming mistress is meeting with him.
Nevertheless, my eagerness is increasing at every
moment.”

Again, the words of Rādhā may also be understood in the
following sense. “This heart has previously experienced
the delight of union with Śrī Hari, so it will
definitely go there. This is no fault of yours and no
fault of mine. That mistress is also not to be blamed.
Providence has surely become averse to me.”

A further sense is, “In this way my heart must go there
and, after attaining release, it will cease all
activity.”

As Rādhā was singing about Kṛṣṇa’s qualities in a state
of calm despondency (śānta-nirveda), she reached the
tenth and final condition of separation in which she
desires her own death.

Kṛṣṇa’s considerate nature is the guarantee of happiness
for his attractive lover. She does not have to
experience even the slightest difficulty. Conversely, in
the absence of Kṛṣṇa, Rādhā has attained a state of dire
despondency in which she feels that everything has gone
wrong.

The first half of this verse is a dialogue between Rādhā
and her companion. Now, Rādhā has become paranoid that
her messenger who went to bring Kṛṣṇa has returned after
making love with him herself. Therefore Rādhā calls
Kṛṣṇa a merciless, two-faced cheater and so on. “What an
uncouth rustic he is. He doesn’t even know the
difference between a heroine and a messenger girl!”

In this verse the chanda is śārdūla-vikrīḍita and the
alaṅkāra is kāvyaliṅga.




                          152
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017



Scene Sixteen




Song 16


The musical mode is deśavarāḍī rāga. The rhythm is
rūpaka tāla.



Verse 31

anila-tarala-kuvalaya-nayanena

tapati na sā kisalaya-śayanena



sakhi! yā ramitā vanamālinā (refrain) (1)

Translation

“Kṛṣṇa’s eyes are as restless as a lotus flower moving
in the wind. That fine young woman is delighted by
Vanamālī Kṛṣṇa. She must not have felt the slightest
difficulty when she lay down upon a bed of freshly
sprouted leaves.”

Commentary

Now Rādhā’s jealousy is inflamed more than ever.
Therefore, all the compliments spoken by Rādhā in this
song are simultaneously veiled criticisms. Each of the
following verses will be explained first as
complimentary (stuti-paraka-artha), and then as critical
(nindāparaka-artha).

Complimentary – Rādhā tells her friend, “O sakhi, Kṛṣṇa
is Vanamālī, garlanded with the flowers of the forest.
His eyes are as restless as a blue lotus moving in the
south wind. That young woman delights Kṛṣṇa and he
satisfies her amorous desires. How could she know how it
feels to be scorched as I am scorched, even when I lie
upon a bed of freshly sprouted leaves? How a heart can
be broken and torn to pieces is known only to me.”

Rādhā has praised Śrī Kṛṣṇa in this verse by describing
him as a courteous and considerate lover.

Critical – “Vanamālī Kṛṣṇa was so immersed in the
outstanding natural beauty of the forest that he must
have been disinterested in loving pastimes with that
gopī. His lotus eyes beheld her as she lay down on a bed
of soft leaves. Did that gopī feel distress when she
could not make the situation progress any further than
that? She certainly did.” In other words, “That gopī
must have felt distress because Kṛṣṇa was disinterested
in her. His eyes were moving like blue lotus flowers in

                          153
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

the wind as he looked around for another lover.”

Verse 32

vikasita-sarasija-lalita-mukhena

sphuṭati na sā manasija-viśikhena

sakhi! yā ramitā... (2)

Translation

“The terrible arrows of Kandarpa can never pierce that
beautiful woman who has been enjoyed by Vanamālī Kṛṣṇa.
His charming face resembles a fully blossomed lotus
flower.”

Alternatively, “That gopī cannot enjoy amorous pastimes
with Kṛṣṇa because he is in a joking mood, unconcerned
with the sensual arts. Is she not pierced by the
terrible arrows of kāma? She certainly is.”

Commentary

Complimentary – “Vanamālī Kṛṣṇa’s face shines with
romantic expressions like a lotus in full bloom as he
gives joy to his mistress. How could she know about the
pain inflicted by Cupid’s arrows? There is no question
of that lover feeling the distress of kāma’s arrows as I
am in separation. How my heart has been torn apart.”

Critical – “Kṛṣṇa is averse to love-play. He is
preoccupied with laughing and joking. This gopī cannot
enjoy amorous pastimes with him because his charming
face just goes on laughing and joking. Is she not
suffering from Cupid’s arrows? She certainly is.”

Verse 33

amṛta-madhura-mṛdutara-vacanena

jvalati na sā malayaja-pavanena

sakhi! yā ramitā... (3)

Translation

“Kṛṣṇa speaks sweet and tender words to delight that
young woman. She can never feel scorched by contact with
the Malaya breeze.”

Commentary

Complimentary – “Sakhi, he is charming that attractive
mistress with the nectar of his softly spoken, endearing
words. How could she know what kind of flames are
ignited by the cool south wind coming from Malaya
Mountain? Can she know about the pain that burns
heroines at the time of separation?”

Critical – “Kṛṣṇa has not enjoyed amorous love with that
gopī. Rather, he is just bewildering her with the nectar
of his sweet and gentle words. Will that young woman not
be burning in the Malaya breeze? She most certainly

                          154
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

will.”

Verse 34

sthala-jalaruha-ruci-kara-caraṇena

luṭhati na sā himakara-kiraṇena

sakhi! yā ramitā... (4)

Translation

“Vanamālī Kṛṣṇa’s hands and feet are as cool and
lustrous as hibiscus flowers. The charming woman who has
been enjoyed by them does not have to roll about on the
earth, burning in the rays of the moon.”

Commentary

Complimentary – “O sakhi, the palms of Kṛṣṇa’s hands and
the soles of his feet are as cool and lustrous as land
lotuses. Will the mistress who enjoys making love with
him know how the cool rays of the moon can burn? Why
would she change sides throughout the whole night, while
lying on her bed as she burns in the moonshine?”

Critical – “She must be continually changing sides all
night for want of attaining the embrace of Kṛṣṇa’s cool
lotus limbs.”

Verse 35

sajala-jalada-samudaya-rucireṇa

dahati na sā hṛdi viraha-davena

sakhi! yā ramitā... (5)

Translation

“Vanamālī Kṛṣṇa is even more enchanting, fresh and
effulgent than a bank of newly condensed rainclouds.
That perfectly curvaceous woman who has enjoyed union
with Kṛṣṇa will never be burnt by a large quantity of
poison in the form of prolonged separation.”

Commentary

Complimentary – “O sakhi, that beautiful young woman has
been enjoyed by Śrī Kṛṣṇa. His form is exceptionally
enchanting and fresh like a new raincloud. She is never
afraid of the venom of separation because he is
showering affection upon her like a raincloud. How could
she know that prolonged separation can tear one to
pieces?”

Critical – “That gopī could not have enjoyed union with
Kṛṣṇa, whose complexion resembles a new raincloud. Will
she not be suffering from the severe poison of prolonged
separation? She must be miserable.”

Verse 36

kanaka-nikaṣa-ruci-śuci-vasanena

                          155
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017


śvasiti na sā parijana-hasanena

sakhi! yā ramitā... (6)

Translation

“With his dark complexion dressed in pure yellow cloth,
Kṛṣṇa resembles a touchstone for testing gold. The
fortunate young woman who has been enjoyed by him never
has to draw deep breaths after becoming the cause of
laughter for those around her.”

Commentary

Complimentary – “Sakhi, Kṛṣṇa’s cloth is as pure, yellow
and radiant as golden lines rubbed upon the dark testing
stone of his body. That greatly fortunate mistress is
also his yellow garment when he binds her in the ropes
of his arms. So what will that noble young woman, who
has been delighted by him, know of the pain felt when
one’s own retinue begin to make jokes at one’s expense?
Will she know how one’s breathing becomes stifled or
what kind of dejection arises?”

Critical – “Śyāmasundara wears yellow garments and his
dark complexion is as lustrous as gold. To attain the
happiness of union with him, that gopī wears saffron
garments. Saffron is a colour suitable for ascetics,
therefore she is now an object of ridicule amongst her
own entourage. She must be depressed about that.”

Verse 37

sakala-bhuvana-jana-vara-taruṇena

vahati na sā rujam ati-karuṇena

sakhi! yā ramitā... (7)

Translation

“Kṛṣṇa is the best of all the young men in the entire
universe. His charming, youthful form is lustrous. The
heroine who is now enjoying love with him does not feel
the dreadful pain of separation in the core of her heart
because he is exceedingly compassionate.”

Commentary

Complimentary – “Amongst all the tender young men
throughout the various planetary systems, Kṛṣṇa most
abundantly exudes the joys of youth. He is the most
handsome and the best amongst fresh adolescent
performers of drama and dance. He is an ocean of mercy.
The beautiful young woman he satisfies will not descend
into a wretched condition and become utterly listless
like me.”

Critical – “That attractive young mistress enjoys love
with the best young men in the universe. She must feel
pain when she is separated from any one of them.”

Verse 38

                          156
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017


śrī-jayadeva-bhaṇita-vacanena

praviśatu harir api hṛdayam anena

sakhi! yā ramitā... (8)

Translation

May Śrī Hari enter the hearts of the devotees along with
Rādhā’s words of lamentation, rendered herein by Śrī
Jayadeva.

Commentary

This rendition of Rādhā’s words has been sung to glorify
Mādhava. May Kṛṣṇa be pleased by this song and enter the
heart. Whose heart should he enter? The heart of Śrī
Rādhā.

And may the supreme paramour, entering through the ears
of the reciters and audience of my song, take his place
on the heart-lotus of their ecstatic loving sentiments.

This sixteenth song of Śrī Gīta-govinda is entitled
Nārāyaṇa-madanāyāsa.

Verse 39



manobhavānandana candanānila

prasīda re dakṣiṇa muñca vāmatām

kṣaṇaṁ jagat-prāṇa vidhāya mādhavaṁ

puro mama prāṇa-haro bhaviṣyasi

Translation

“O breeze from the Malaya Mountain! O you who give joy
to Kāmadeva! Stay down in the South! Give up your
antagonism! O you who are like the prana of the
universe! Bring Mādhava before me and then take away my
prana.”

Commentary

Rādhā says, “The wind from Malaya Mountain makes the
arrows of kāma reach their target. Now he has turned
against me. He has delighted his friend Kāmadeva by
setting me on fire and burning me so severely in the
agonizing fire of sensual desires.”

Unable to tolerate the blows inflicted by Kāmadeva’s
arrows, Rādhā addresses the Malaya breeze. “You are
called the South wind and you give joy to the whole
world. So why are you not favourably disposed to me? Why
have you become antagonistic? I know that you are a
companion of Kāmadeva and it is certain that your nature
has been defiled by contact with the snake-infested
sandalwood trees on Malaya Mountain. How much suffering
will you inflict upon me? O life-air of the universe, be

                          157
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

pleased for just a moment and forgive me. Abandon your
animosity towards me. You can take my life-airs, but I
have one last request. First give me the opportunity to
see my beloved Mādhava, and then you can plunder my
prana.”

This verse features vaṁśasthavila chanda and atiśayokti
alaṅkāra.

Verse 40



ripur iva sakhī-saṁvāso ’yaṁ śikhīva himānilo

viṣam iva sudhā-raśmir yasmin dunoti manogate

hṛdayam adaye tasminn evaṁ punar valate balāt

kuvalaya-dṛśāṁ vāmaḥ kāmo nikāma-niraṅkuśaḥ

Translation

“O sakhi, my heart feels the pleasing company of my
friends to be like the association of enemies. The cool
and gentle breeze seems like a sacrificial fire and the
moonshine gives me pain as if it were poison.
Nevertheless, my heart is forcibly attached to him
against my will. It is true that kāma is always
completely unbridled in dealing with impassioned young
women who are as beautiful as the night-blooming water
lily.”

Commentary

Rādhā criticizes her own heart in the madness of
separation. She complains to her sakhī, “Alas! Whom can
I blame? Today my memories of Kṛṣṇa make the happy
company of those dear friends who forbade me to meet
with him seem like a hostile rain of enmity. The cool
breeze burns me like fire and the moon seems to be
deadly poison. O sakhi, despite all this adversity, my
heart still runs incessantly after that merciless, cruel
person, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Therefore the only cause of my
suffering is my own indiscriminate heart. For lotus-eyed
women who have no power to discriminate between the
beneficial and the detrimental, kāma is extremely
difficult to restrain and turns into the cause of
unlimited misery. Kāmadeva is uncontrollable. He is a
harsh antagonist to beautiful young women and his
behaviour is especially wanton towards heroines in
separation.”

This verse features hariṇī chanda and virodha alaṅkāra.

Verse 41



bādhāṁ vidhehi malayānila pañca-bāṇa

prāṇān gṛhāṇa na gṛhaṁ punar āśrayiṣye

kiṁ te kṛtānta-bhagini kṣamayā taraṅgair

                          158
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017


aṅgāni siñca mama śāmyatu deha-dāhaḥ

Translation

“O Malaya breeze, give me pain! O archer with five
arrows, you may steal my life-airs, but I will never go
home! O Yamunā, you are the sister of Yama, the lord of
death. So why should you forgive me? Sprinkle me with
your waves so that the burning distress of my body may
be extinguished forever.”

Commentary

Rādhā is now burning in the heat of separation. Taking a
vow to give up her life, she says, “O Malaya breeze! O
cooling wind, why are you waiting? Take a stand and give
me pain! O Pañcabāṇa, plunder my prana! That is why you
have five arrows – to steal my five life-airs. Stealing
prana is your ultimate objective.

“Although this is true, you first inflame those who are
suffering and turn them in the direction of household
life. However, I will die first. No matter how much you
control me, I will never go to my household. I will take
shelter of the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.”

Rādhā is devastated by kāma. After criticizing both
Kāmadeva and the Malaya breeze, Rādhā turns to the
Yamunā river, “O Yamunā, you are the sister of Yamarāja,
the lord of death! The Malaya breeze and Kāmadeva are
torturing me. Although Kāmadeva is the cause of lovers’
union, he has reversed his behaviour. The Malaya breeze,
which usually delights me, now makes me depressed. When
my pranas are accepted by both of them, then what answer
will you give to your brother Yama? So do not forgive
me. Soak my limbs in your waves. Take my corpse into
your waters so that the heat of my lifeless body may be
extinguished.”

In this way, Rādhā’s feelings of separation from Kṛṣṇa
reached the tenth and final condition – desiring one’s
own death.

This verse features vasanta-tilakā chanda and aprastuta-
praśaṁsā alaṅkāra.

Verse 42



prātar nīla-nicolam acyutam uraḥ saṁvīta-pītāṁśukaṁ

rādhāyāś cakitaṁ vilokya hasati svairaṁ sakhī-maṇḍale

vrīḍā-cañcalam añcalaṁ nayanayor ādhāya rādhānane

svādu-smera-mukho ’yam astu jagad-ānandāya nandātmajaḥ

Translation

One morning, in a state of utter bewilderment, Acyuta
Kṛṣṇa put on Rādhā’s blue upper garment and Rādhā
covered her breast with Kṛṣṇa’s yellow upper garment.

                          159
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

Seeing this, all the sakhīs burst into fits of
uncontrollable laughter. When Kṛṣṇa saw them all
laughing, he became shy and, with a mild smile, he cast
an expressive sidelong glance towards the lotus face of
Rādhā. May that son of Nanda give joy to the whole
universe.

Commentary

Śrī Jayadeva gives a blessing to the devotees in the
final verse of Act Seven. “May Kṛṣṇa, the son of Nanda
Mahārāja, bestow bliss upon the whole world.” Śrī
Jayadeva remembered a loving pastime of Śrī Rādhā-
Mādhava that had occurred previously in a nearby forest
and he has described the early morning scene there.

We can infer that Śrī Jayadeva could no longer describe
Rādhā in the pain of separation (khaṇḍitāvasthā).
Instead, he affords us a glimpse of her blissful state
of disarray (khaṇḍitāvasthā) after meeting with Kṛṣṇa on
a previous night. He employs the logic of a lion’s
glance (siṁhāvalokana-nyāya) to depict the general trend
of the night-time pastimes. This form of logic refers to
the casting of a retrospective glance while
simultaneously proceeding.

Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava passed the night together absorbed
in playing love games. When morning came, in a state of
bewilderment, they put on each other’s clothes. Acyuta
(infallible) Kṛṣṇa put on Rādhā’s blue bodice, and Rādhā
covered her breast with his yellow upper garment. The
sakhīs burst out laughing on witnessing this surprising
exchange and they were struck with wonder. Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
eyes became restless with embarrassment. His sidelong
glance fell upon the face of Rādhā and he blushed with a
gentle smile.

This verse has revealed Śrī Jayadeva’s desire for the
world’s auspiciousness. It includes hasya-rasa, śārdūla-
vikrīḍita chanda and svabhāvokti alaṅkāra. The hero is
śaṭha nāyaka and the heroine is abhisārikā nāyikā.



Thus ends the Bālabodhinī-prakāśa commentary on Act
Seven of Śrī Gīta-govinda, entitled Nāgara-nārāyaṇa.




Act Eight




— vilakṣya-lakṣmīpatiḥ —



Verse 1




                           160
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

atha katham api yāminīṁ vinīya

smara-śara-jarjaritāpi sā prabhāte

anunaya-vacanaṁ vadantam agre

praṇatam api priyam āha sābhyasūyam

Translation

hereafter, Rādhā somehow or other managed to pass the
night. When morning came, Kṛṣṇa fell at her feet and
tried to pacify her wrath with humble words. Although
Rādhā was severely injured by the arrows of Cupid, on
seeing her dear lover present before her in a submissive
mood and expressing his feelings of separation, she
began to speak to him in a jealous temper.

Commentary

Throughout the previous night, Rādhā continually wove a
network of presumptions about Kṛṣṇa entirely from the
figments of her imagination. She would look out for his
arrival with intense longing and, when he did not come,
she was torn apart by disappointment. She continually
sent messages and replies about the ill-effects of the
intoxicating springtime breeze. On that night of the
spring season, she was struck from ten directions at
once by the fragrance of varieties of flowers and by the
arrows of kāma. She lamented incessantly in the
appointed meeting place, while dreaming about meeting
with Kṛṣṇa and becoming completely lost in memories of
union with him. In this way, the night passed and
morning came. How ironic it is; the huff (māna) of
pouting heroines increases in the presence of their
beloveds. When Kṛṣṇa finally came before her, he bowed
down and spoke extremely humble words of conciliation.
In a submissive mood, he tried to comfort her and
dissipate her anger. However, simply by the devastating
influence of kāma, she saw signs of lovemaking on
Kṛṣṇa’s body and became even more impetuous and
unpredictable.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s bowing at the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā
represents the topmost excellence of prema. Rādhā’s
prana had risen up to her throat; that is, she was about
to expire. Her jealousy increased simply by seeing her
beloved Kṛṣṇa and she spoke as follows.




Scene Seventeen




Song 17


The musical mode is bhairavī rāga. The rhythm is yati
tāla.

                          161
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017




Verse 2

rajani-janita-guru-jāgara-rāga-kaṣāyitam alasa-nimeṣam

vahati nayanam anurāgam iva sphuṭam udita-rasābhiniveśam



hari! hari! yāhi mādhava yāhi keśava mā vada kaitava-
vādaṁ

tām anusara sarasīruha-locana yā tava harati viṣādam
(refrain) (1)

Translation

“Mādhava, go! Keśava, go away! Do not speak deceptive
words! Go to the woman who can take away your sorrow!
Your tired eyes are slowly closing because you were
fully alert throughout the night. They are reddish from
your absorption in the mellows of lovemaking and even
now they express a powerful and increasing attachment
for that beautiful vraja-gopī.”

Commentary

Hari! hari! – “Oh God, Lord have mercy!” These two non-
inflected interjections spoken by Rādhā are expressions
of her profound disappointment. They also serve to
complete the metre of the song.

Kṛṣṇa’s eyes are red because he was awake all night in
the anguish of separation. Kṛṣṇa is so weary that his
eyes repeatedly close. Noticing this, Rādhā addresses
him by three names that reveal her inner moods,
especially jealousy towards her rival.

Mādhava – In the mood of a jilted heroine (khaṇḍitā
nāyikā), Rādhā says to her beloved as he bows down
before her, “Lakṣmīpati, go! Go away! You are deeply
attached to someone else. Therefore you are bound to
offend others in one way or another. You are not (mā) my
husband (dhava). What to speak of being my husband, you
cheat me.”

Alternatively, mā implies, “Lakṣmī is fickle by nature,
therefore it is only logical to conclude that her
consort is also fickle. Since I am devoted to only one
consort, how could you have any real affection for me?
It is not possible, so go away!”

The prominent meaning of mā is Śrī Rādhā; and dhava
refers to prāṇa-priyatama, her most beloved Kṛṣṇa who is
dearer than her own life-air.

Keśava – Lodging further accusations and expressing her
dissatisfaction she said, “O Keśava, go away!” He who
wears excellent attire and ornaments and whose hair is
always unbound is called Keśava.

Alternatively, one who is attached to a person whose

                          162
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

hair is attractive is called Keśava. Here the word
keśava implies, “May you dedicate yourself to some other
ignoble woman whose hair is attractively adorned. O
beloved of many! What is the point of speaking deceptive
words to me when I am always devoted to only one person?
Do not tell lies. If you are wondering why am I angry
and upset, then listen – it is not so. Go and follow
that lotus-eyed woman who takes away all your cares and
woes. Your beloved must also have many lovers – like
loves like.”

Sarasīruha-locana – “O lotus-eyed one!” The word
sarasīruha can refer either to the day-blooming lotus
(kamala) or the night-blooming lotus (kumuda). It is
well known that Kṛṣṇa’s eyes resemble the kamala. But
here, Rādhā refers to the kumuda, which remains open
throughout the night and closes at the break of day.
Kṛṣṇa also appeared in the moon dynasty. Therefore,
Rādhā suspects that, like the moon, he has spent the
whole night awake with his lover.

“Even now, your thirst for her is visible in your eyes.
Your guilt, in the form of love’s redness, is still
there. The escalating absorption in śṛṅgāra-rasa that
arose in her association is evident in your eyes even
now. Cunning behaviour manifests according to the nature
of one’s heart.”

Alternatively, sarasīruha-locana means, “O you whose
eyes are half closed because you are always immersed in
bliss!” Rādhā admonished Kṛṣṇa, “Go to that woman who
has showered her mercy on you all night.”

Kṛṣṇa replied, “Rādhā, I am one in prana and one in body
with you. I am speaking the truth when I say that I have
not associated with any other woman. It is true that my
eyes are reddish – but not from staying awake with
another woman. My eyes are closing from tiredness.”

Verse 3

kajjala-malina-vilocana-cumbana-viracita-nīlima-rūpam

daśana-vasanam aruṇaṁ tava kṛṣṇa tanoti tanor anurūpam

hari! hari! yāhi mādhava... (2)

Translation

“Your beautiful red lips are the raiment of your rows of
teeth. They have become blackish like your body from
kissing her collyrium-smeared eyes.”

Commentary

Projecting the act of betrayal upon Mādhava within
herself, Rādhā begins to pierce him with heart-rending
insinuations. “Kṛṣṇa! There is no need for deceit. If
you say, ‘I have not spent the night with any other
lover,’ then why are your eyes so red? Your prema for
that passionate lover is still shining from your eyes
even now.”

Kṛṣṇa replied, “My dearest, I am telling you the truth.

                          163
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

I have not been awake the whole night with any other
mistress. My eyes are closing because I am tired.”

Rādhā said, “Then why have your red lips become black?
Her collyrium resembles the complexion of your body and
you have been kissing her collyrium-smeared eyes all
night. Go away! Go back to that woman who has coloured
your eyes, coloured your lips and showered her
compassion on you all night. Do not tell lies to me. Go!
Your eyes are red from absorption in the joy of
lovemaking. Being coloured by the redness of anurāga,
they clearly reveal your strong attachment for that
beautiful vraja-gopī.”

Verse 4

vapur anuharati tava smara-saṅgara-khara-nakhara-kṣata-
rekham

marakata-śakala-kalita-kala-dhauta-liper iva rati-jaya-
lekham

hari! hari! yāhi mādhava... (3)

Translation

“Your dark body is marked with scratches from the sharp
nails of that passionate woman. She is so expert at
erotic combat during your sensual love games. It appears
as if a certificate of victory in lovemaking has been
inscribed in golden letters upon an emerald wall.”

Commentary

Rādhā says, “O Kṛṣṇa, each of your limbs is telling me
the story of your loving pastimes. That charming woman
has made scratches upon your chest with her sharp nails.
It seems that your heart is a battlefield upon which a
dreadful war has taken place. There are sharp, red
scratch-marks upon your dark body. It appears as if a
certificate of victory in lovemaking has been written in
golden ink upon a dark emerald. This victory record
proclaims the news of your conquest. A passionate woman
has sent this amorous love-letter to her partner: ‘I
have completely conquered you in this erotic contest.’”

Rādhā is also condemning Kṛṣṇa for his lowliness. She
implies that he has been demoted from the position of a
hero (nāyaka) to the position of a messenger (dūta) by
delivering this letter on behalf of Rādhā’s rival.

Rādhā has used the word khara (sharp) with a special
intention. Primarily, it points to defeat in lovemaking.
Secondly, scratches made by the nails should not be
deep; they should be soft. Hard scratches are painful.
Therefore Rādhā implies, “It seems that this mistress
lacks proper knowledge of the techniques of lovemaking.
Now go away!”

Kṛṣṇa replied, “Rādhā, I was searching for you in the
thorny forests. My body was scratched by those thorns.
These are not the nail-marks of a young woman.”

Verse 5

                          164
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017


caraṇa-kamala-galad-alaktaka-siktam idaṁ tava hṛdayam
udāram

darśayatīva bahir madana-druma-nava-kisalaya-parivāram

hari! hari! yāhi mādhava... (4)

Translation

“Your celebrated chest is coloured with marks of red
footlac from the lotus feet of that attractive woman. It
seems as if the firmly-rooted tree of amorous desire
situated in the core of your heart is outwardly
manifesting its newly sprouted red leaves.”

Commentary

Rādhā’s words are full of veiled accusations. “Aha! Your
heart is so munificent. What an enchanting appearance it
has assumed! You have exhibited your generosity by
holding the lotus feet of that passionate woman upon
your heart in the joy of prema. The colour of the liquid
red lac flowing from her feet has coloured your chest.
The redness of her footlac on your dark complexion
enhances your handsomeness. It seems that the deep
attachment in your heart is manifesting outwardly in the
form of this colour, like new red leaves on the tree of
your amorous desire. The fresh leaves on that kāma tree
in your heart are coming outside. This forbidden love
affair has sprouted out onto your chest and now its new
red leaves are visible in the form of these footprints.
You cannot conceal your attachment for her. There is
nothing for you here, so go away!”

According to the opinion of some commentators, Rādhā
implies that Kṛṣṇa must have made love with this heroine
in a special position called krodha-bandha.

Presenting a case for his innocence, Kṛṣṇa said, “This
is just the remnant of a picture painted in minerals
such as gairika-dhātu. I have not held the lotus feet of
any beautiful young woman and this is certainly not
anyone’s footlac smeared on my heart.”

Verse 6

daśana-padaṁ bhavad-adhara-gataṁ mama janayati cetasi
khedam

kathayati katham adhunāpi mayā saha tava vapur etad
abhedam

hari! hari! yāhi mādhava... (5)

Translation

“Your lips are cut and wounded from the biting of that
sensual woman’s teeth. Seeing this, sorrow rises within
my heart, yet even now you say, ‘Your body is not
separate from mine. Our bodies are not different.’”

Commentary


                          165
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

“Kṛṣṇa! You can defend yourself against incriminating
evidence such as the redness of your eyes by making
fraudulent statements, but how will you explain away the
wounds on your soft petal-like lips? The cuts made by
the teeth of that sensual woman are as clearly visible
as the crescent moon. Your shameless smile inflames my
heart. The impression of that woman’s ‘bite’ on your
lips at the time of making love is arousing my sorrow. I
had reached the tenth and final condition in separation
from you. You repeatedly say, ‘We two are one’. How dare
you say that – with her bite-marks on your lips. Get out
of here.”

Śrī Kṛṣṇa defended his innocence. “O darling, my lips
were wounded by the bites of bumblebees greedy for their
fragrance. They have not been bitten by a woman.”

Verse 7

bahir iva malinataraṁ tava kṛṣṇa mano ’pi bhaviṣyati
nūnam

katham atha vañcayase janam anugatam asamaśara-jvara-
dūnam

hari! hari! yāhi mādhava... (6)

Translation

“Kṛṣṇa! Your heart must have become as dark as your
body. If it were not so, then you would not deceive your
own dependant in this way; especially at a time when she
is maimed by the arrows of Cupid.”

Commentary

Rādhā is disappointed. She says, “Kṛṣṇa! You are even
blacker on the inside than you are on the outside. How
could a naturally noble and clean heart become so
indifferent to me? Your black heart is so wicked, even
to those who are inclined to you and those who have
taken shelter of you. Only such a polluted heart could
be so deceptive as to neglect me to enjoy with another’s
lover. I am already traumatized by the arrows of kāma.
At least you should not betray me in this condition. Go,
cheater! Get out of here. A pure-hearted person could
never do such a thing.”

Kṛṣṇa said, “Rādhā! Do not doubt me unnecessarily. I
would never cheat you.”

Verse 8

bhramati bhavān abalā-kavalāya vaneṣu kim atra vicitram

prathayati pūtanikaiva vadhū-vadha-nirdaya-bāla-caritram

hari! hari! yāhi mādhava... (7)

Translation

“You are wandering from forest to forest simply for the
purpose of killing innocent women. What is astonishing
about this? By killing Pūtanā while still in your

                          166
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

infancy, you had already acquainted us with your cruel
and merciless nature. Killing women is just a part of
your habitual behaviour.”

Commentary

Rādhā continued, “It is your inherent nature to wander
about the forests ‘devouring’ and killing women. So if
you also kill me, then what is so surprising about that?

“Even in your infancy, you became renowned for killing
the belligerent Pūtanā, the sister of Kaṁsa. So how easy
it is for you to kill a woman like me. When such a
powerful woman immediately aged and died by your
influence, then what is so astonishing about killing a
woman like me? The Vedic scriptures state that it is
forbidden to kill a woman. Such an act is considered
most reprehensible. But this depravity of yours is
innate from birth. Kindly go away. Now you are a young
man, so you will not have to make the slightest
endeavour to kill a woman like me. O cruel one, leave me
alone!”

Verse 9

śrī-jayadeva-bhaṇita-rati-vañcita-khaṇḍita-yuvati-
vilāpam

śṛṇuta sudhā-madhuraṁ vibudhā vibudhālayato ’pi durāpam

hari! hari! yāhi mādhava... (8)

Translation

O learned ones, may you hear the bitter lamentation of a
betrayed and sensually deprived young woman, Rādhā,
which is even sweeter than nectar and rarely attained
even in the celestial realms.

Commentary

Here Śrī Jayadeva addresses the savants and the
celestial beings, “O learned ones, listen to the
lamentation of this jilted young woman who has been
deprived of the coveted pleasure of amorous union. This
lamentation is sweeter than nectar. It is never possible
to taste the nectar of her lamentation in the celestial
world. The sweetest substance available there is the
ambrosia of the demigods. This ambrosia is bitter in
comparison with the lamentation of Rādhā, although the
nectar of her lamentation is available to humans here on
earth. Therefore those eager to constantly remember
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa should definitely drink this incomparable
nectar.”

In this song Rādhā is khaṇḍitā nāyikā. The
characteristics of the khaṇḍitā heroine are:



nidrā-kaṣāya-mukulīkṛta-tāmra-netro

nārī-nakha-vraṇa-viśeṣa-vicitratāṅgaḥ


                          167
Gita-govinda.txt                                  5/5/2017

yasyāḥ kuto ’pi patireti gṛhaṁ prabhāte

sā khaṇḍeti kathitā kavibhiḥ purāṇaiḥ



“A beloved hero enters his heroine’s abode from
elsewhere in the morning time. He has been awake
throughout the entire night. His eyes are red and his
limbs are beautifully marked with scratches made by
another young woman. Learned poets have called the
heroine at that time khaṇḍitā nāyikā.”

This seventeenth song of Śrī Gīta-govinda, entitled
Lakṣmīpati-ratnāvalī, features megha rāga and the
vipralambha aspect of śṛṅgāra-rasa and karuṇa-rasa.

Verse 10



tavedaṁ paśyantyāḥ prasarad-anurāgaṁ bahir iva

priyā-pādālakta-cchuritam aruṇa-dyoti-hṛdayam

mamādya prakhyāta-praṇaya-bhara-bhaṅgena kitava

tvad-ālokaḥ śokād api kim api lajjāṁ janayati

Translation

“O two-faced cheater! Being coloured by footlac from the
feet of your dear vraja-gopī, today your radiant red
heart is outwardly revealing the powerful loving thirst
that lies within. On seeing this, my long-standing and
renowned love for you is being cut asunder. It is shame
alone that supersedes the sorrow I feel within my
heart.”

Commentary

Although Rādhā is now khaṇḍitā, she takes shelter of
arrogance. Accusing Kṛṣṇa, she says, “O charlatan! When
you did not arrive on time, I continued to wait for you.
Now my celebrated sympathy for you is being torn to
pieces. How can I express myself? The pain I feel in
separation from you is indescribable. I cannot decide
whether to live or die. How did such a calamity befall
me? I cannot live and I cannot die.

“O traitor! Seeing you in this condition, I do not feel
as much anguish as I feel shame. You have enjoyed union
with a lusty woman and, by holding her feet upon your
heart, your chest has become coloured red by her
footlac. When I see the red glow of dawn, it seems as if
today the anurāga you were carrying in your heart has
overflowed. When I see the signs of that lover’s
pleasure where you used to wear the Kaustubha jewel, I
become mortified with shame.

“I used to make you feel the boundless happiness of
pride in my exclusive confidential love for you. But now
you have broken that connecting thread of prema by this
contemptible behaviour. You have enjoyed loving her and

                          168
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

you do not even feel ashamed about it. May you be
blessed, Kṛṣṇa. Now go away, unfaithful one. Why did I
ever love you?”

The chanda of this verse is śikhariṇī.

?Kṛṣṇa considered, “Despite my determined endeavours,
Rādhā will not abandon her obstinacy. So now I will have
to take help from my envoy, the flute. It seems that I
have no other alternative. Rādhikā’s reluctance will
surely be dispelled by the sound of my flute.” Therefore
Śrī Jayadeva extends a benediction through the sound of
Kṛṣṇa’s flute in the following verse.

Verse 11



antar-mohana-mauli-ghūrṇana-calan-mandāra-visraṁsana-

stabdhākarṣaṇa-dṛṣṭi-harṣaṇa-mahā-mantraḥ kuraṅgī-dṛśām

dṛpyad-dānava-dūyamāna-diviṣad-durvāra-duḥkhā-padāṁ

bhraṁśaḥ kaṁsa-ripor vyapohayatu vaḥ śreyāṁsi vaṁśī-
ravaḥ

Translation

The sound of Kṛṣṇa’s flute bewilders the hearts of the
gopīs. It makes their jewelled tiaras whirl and their
elegant floral decorations fall. It drives away the
irrepressible suffering of the celestials who have been
sundered by the arrogant infernals. It makes doe-eyed
women become stunned. It attracts them and increases the
jubilation of their eyes. May that flute sound destroy
all impediments on the path of auspiciousness for
everyone.

Commentary

Śrī Jayadeva bestows a benediction upon the singers and
audience of Śrī Gīta-govinda through an auspicious
invocation in this, the final verse of the Act Eight.
“May the sound of Kaṁsāri Kṛṣṇa’s flute expand its
auspicious influence. This flute sound dispels the
intolerable suffering of the celestials (devatās) caused
by the arrogant infernals (dānavas). It enchants the
hearts of doe-eyed women to such an extent that,
immersed in bliss, their tiaras whirl and their heads
begin to spin as they continuously stare in a state of
bewilderment. The mandāra flower garlands of the
celestial nymphs in heaven break and begin to fall.”

The bewitching effect of Kṛṣṇa’s flute song is being
described. Vaśīkṛta-devatā, the presiding deity of the
art of subjugating others by magical spells, says
“Sādhu, sādhu! Bravo!” and shakes his head in
appreciation. The shaking of the head and the falling of
mandāra flowers indicates the māraṇa of the flute. When
a magical ceremony is performed for the destruction of
one’s enemy, that ritual is called māraṇa. The power of
Kṛṣṇa’s flute to stun and to attract is famous. On
hearing this flute sound, the female deer of Vraja

                          169
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

become attracted and remain motionless. Uccāṭana, the
magical power to make others abandon their occupational
duties, is clearly evident in the sound of Kṛṣṇa’s
flute. The power to create bewilderment in the core of
another’s heart is called mohanatva.

The sound of Kṛṣṇa’s flute is thus endowed with the
qualities of (1) mohanatva, (2) vaśīkaraṇatva, the
magical power to enslave others, (3) stambhatva, to stun
them, (4) ākarṣaṇatva, to attract them, (5) uccāṭanatva,
to make them abandon their occupations, and (6)
māraṇatva, to destroy all opposing elements. Therefore
Kṛṣṇa’s flute sound is the embodiment of the greatest
incantation, mahā-mantra-svarūpa. The spell-binding
magic of this mahā-mantra is especially related to the
gopīs.

In order to vanquish Rādhā’s profound contrariness,
Kṛṣṇa began to play upon his flute, the sound of which
is the greatest mystical incantation, endowed with the
six effective methods for accomplishing one’s objectives
(ṣaṭ-sādhana-sampanna mahā-mantra-svarūpa).



Thus ends the Bālabodhinī-prakāśa commentary on Act
Eight of Śrī Gīta-govinda, entitled Vilakṣya-lakṣmīpati,
on the subject of khaṇḍitā nāyikā.




Act Nine




— mugdha-mukundaḥ —



Verse 1



tām atha manmatha-khinnāṁ rati-rasa-bhinnāṁ viṣāda-
sampannām

anucintita-hari-caritāṁ kalahāntaritām uvāca rahaḥ sakhī

Translation

ādhā was severely oppressed by the arrows of Cupid and
sorely disappointed to be deprived of the rapture of
union with Kṛṣṇa. She was separated from Kṛṣṇa only as a
consequence of her quarrelsome nature (kalahāntaritā
nāyikā). As she anxiously remembered Śrī Hari’s romantic
activities, her companion spoke to her in a secluded
place.

Commentary

Now Śrī Jayadeva reveals Rādhā’s mood that prompts her

                          170
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

sakhī to encourage her to accept Kṛṣṇa and receive him
with honour.

Manmatha-khinnām – Rādhā feels acute distress from the
affliction of kāma.

Rati-rasa-bhinnām – She is thoroughly disappointed
because she is bereft of the rasa of amorous pastimes.

Viṣāda-sampannām – She has already reached the stage of
conflicting emotions (bhāva-śabalatā) because she is
deeply attached to union with Kṛṣṇa.

Anucintita-hari-caritām – Thoughts of Kṛṣṇa’s activities
flow in an unbroken stream within her heart.

Kalahāntaritām – Although she sees her beloved falling
at her feet in front of her friends, the heroine who
severely reprimands him and denies his requests is
called kalahāntaritā nāyikā. Such a heroine is called
kalahāntaritā because incoherent speech, anguish,
debility and other activities such as drawing long
breaths are evident in her behaviour.

There are five prominent characteristics of Rādhā’s
kalahāntaritā condition:

(1) Rādhā pours scorn on all the statements made by
Kṛṣṇa. She considers his reasonable explanations and
submissive mood to be nothing but cunning trickery.

(2) In her heart she makes a critical analysis of his
behaviour and lodges various allegations against him out
of loving anger.

(3) The more he prostrates himself before her, the more
her obstinacy increases.

(4) Her anguish increases as she remembers all the
misdemeanours committed by Kṛṣṇa in the realm of her
imagination.

(5) She anxiously thinks about Kṛṣṇa and nothing else.




Scene Eighteen




Song 18


The musical mode is gurjarī rāga. The rhythm is yati
tāla.




                          171
Gita-govinda.txt                                 5/5/2017

Verse 2

harir abhisarati vahati madhu-pavane

kim aparam adhika-sukhaṁ sakhi bhavane



mādhave mā kuru mānini mānam aye (refrain) (1)

Translation

“O sulky woman, look! The gentle spring breeze is
blowing and Kṛṣṇa has come to your trysting chamber. My
dear friend, what could be a greater source of happiness
than this?”

Commentary

“O sakhi, now you should not be uncooperative with
Lakṣmīpati Mādhava. He has appeared in the Madhu dynasty
and he is immensely affluent. Nevertheless, he is
continuously propitiating you. Give up your sulky mood.
The spring breeze is blowing, and Hari has personally
come to meet with you in your chamber. What could be a
greater source of happiness than this? His arrival is
the ultimate limit of happiness. O Rādhā, receive him
with honour.”

Verse 3

tāla-phalād api gurum ati-sarasam

kiṁ viphalī-kuruṣe kuca-kalaśam

mādhave... (2)

Translation

“Your waterpot-like breasts are heavier than perfectly
ripened palm fruits and they are also full of rasa. Why
are you making them useless?”

Commentary

The sakhī says, “O Rādhā, your pitcher-like breasts are
better than palm fruit (tāla). In the rasa-śāstra palm
fruit has been described as extremely heavy and juicy.
The heaviness and juiciness of palm fruit become
insignificant in the presence of your breasts. Therefore
their usefulness lies only in Hari and the touch of
Hari. The heaviness of those pitchers is just for him,
so you are ruining their purpose.”

Rādhā’s breasts have been compared to waterpots to
express their immensity. “Give up your contrary mood and
make Śrī Hari realize the flavour of amorous pastimes.”

Verse 4

kati na kathitam idam anupadam aciram

mā parihara harim atiśaya-ruciram


                          172
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

mādhave... (3)

Translation

“How many times do I have to tell you? Do not abandon
the exceptionally handsome and charming Śrī Hari.”

Commentary

The sakhī says, “Rādhā, I am trying again and again to
make you understand – do not be obstinate. The form and
lustre of Śrī Hari is most beautiful. Give up your sulky
mood and meet with him. Change your attitude. Śrī Hari
is extremely pleasing. He steals the heart of everyone.
It is never proper to abandon him.”

Verse 5

kim iti viṣīdasi rodiṣi vikalā

vihasati yuvati-sabhā tava sakalā

mādhave... (4)

Translation

“Why are you so overwhelmed with lamentation? Why are
you weeping? Your youthful rivals are delighted to see
your ‘alluring gestures’.”

Commentary

After hearing the advice of her companion, Rādhā is
still sobbing. The sakhī says, “Rādhā, why are you upset
now? Why are you crying? Seeing your method of
seduction, your rivals are mocking you. How foolish you
are. Śrī Hari is rolling on the ground at your feet and
you just go on crying.”

Verse 6

sajala-nalinī-dala-śīlita-śayane

harim avalokaya saphalaya nayane

mādhave... (5)

Translation

“Make your eyes successful by gazing lovingly at Śrī
Kṛṣṇa as he reclines upon a cool bed of moist lotus
petals.”

Commentary

The sakhī tells Rādhā, “Look, in this meeting place Śrī
Hari has laid down upon a bed of cool lotus petals that
is adorned with diamonds and pearls. Look at him. How
can you quarrel with the very person for want of whom
you are suffering? He is waiting for you, but you will
not abandon your wounded pride.”

Verse 7


                          173
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

janayasi manasi kim iti guru-khedam

śṛṇu mama vacanam anīhita-bhedam

mādhave... (6)

Translation

“Why are you so agitated in your heart of hearts? Listen
to me. I am speaking only for your benefit, without any
ulterior motive.”

Commentary

Even after hearing the suggestions of her friend, Rādhā
was still upset. The sakhī added, “O my dear friend, why
has your heart become so inimical? Why are you
unnecessarily suspicious? Why are you being so
problematic? I can see that you have become apathetic,
inactive and disinterested from the lacerating
experience of separation. Pay attention! Listen to me. I
only desire your welfare. Just understand this – there
is no difference between you and Śrī Kṛṣṇa.”

Verse 8

harir upayātu vadatu bahu-madhuram

kim iti karoṣi hṛdayam ati-vidhuram

mādhave... (7)

Translation

“Allow Śrī Hari to come close to you. Allow him to speak
some sweet words. Why are you inflicting even more pain
upon your own heart?”

Commentary

Rādhā’s sakhī says, “Dear Rādhā, let Hari come close to
you. Let him speak sweet words. It is not befitting for
you to remain apart from him. Make yourself happy by
listening to his words of flattery and thereby also make
him blissful. Your heart is anxious for him, so why are
you resisting? You are uselessly betraying your own
heart. It is improper to inflict suffering upon yourself
by sulking in this way. Give up your māna.”

Verse 9

śrī-jayadeva-bhaṇitam ati-lalitam

sukhayatu rasika-janaṁ hari-caritam

mādhave... (8)

Translation

May this exquisite description of Śrī Hari’s activities
composed by Śrī Jayadeva increase the happiness of the
devotees who are expert in relishing rasa.

Commentary

                          174
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017


This eighteenth song of Śrī Gīta-govinda is entitled
Amanda-mukunda. The only purpose and fruit of this song
is the pleasure of Śrī Hari and the devotees who are
expert in tasting the integration of transcendental
ecstasies. Śrī Jayadeva says, “I have described Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s beautiful activities. May they bring joy to the
hearts of the pure devotees.”

Verse 10



snigdhe yat paruṣāsi yat praṇamati stabdhāsi yad rāgiṇi

dveṣasthāsi yad unmukhe vimukhatāṁ yātāsi tasmin priye

tad yuktaṁ viparīta-kāriṇi tava śrīkhaṇḍa-carcā viṣaṁ

śītāṁśus tapano himaṁ hutavahaḥ krīḍā-mudo yātanāḥ

Translation

“O Rādhā, Śrī Kṛṣṇa has earnestly appealed to you with
humble words but in response you have simply become
harsh. He has bowed before you but you have turned your
face away and ignored him. How much deep love he has
shown you, yet you are hostile towards him. He is fully
attentive to you but you are completely averse to him.

“O you whose behaviour is totally perverse! Your
contrariness makes sandalwood paste seem like poison;
the gentle, refreshing moon seem as harsh as the sun;
cooling camphor seem like fire; and the happiness of
lovemaking seem like dreadful agony.”

Commentary

When Rādhā did not reply or even respond in any way, her
sakhī said, “Rādhā, what has happened to you this time?
You are completely obstinate. How inconsistent your
behaviour is. You were burning in anxiety for his love,
yet now that he has come to meet with you, your attitude
has surprisingly reversed and you are letting this
golden opportunity slip through your fingers.

“Kṛṣṇa has so much tender affection for you, but you are
harsh and cruel to him. He is bowing at your feet while
you arrogantly stand up and rebuke him with abrasive
words. He has all good qualities. Just see how much
attachment he has for you, but still you are hostile
towards him. How he looks upon your beautiful face with
whole-hearted attention, joy and eagerness. Yet you
remain unaffected and indifferent to him.

“Perhaps your intelligence has capsized. Your behaviour
is antithetical, so naturally on such a happy occasion
sandalwood paste burns you like venom, the cool rays of
the moon seem to be as oppressive as the scorching heat
of the sun, camphor burns you like fire and the joy of
lovemaking seems miserable. Your mind is pervaded by
pessimism. Abandon this contrary behaviour at once.”

Verse 11

                          175
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017




sāndrānanda-purandarādi-diviṣad-vṛndair amandādarād

ānamrair mukuṭendranīla-maṇibhiḥ sandarśitendindiram

svacchandaṁ makaranda-sundara-galan-mandākinī-meduraṁ

śrī-govinda-padāravindam aśubha-skandāya vandāmahe

Translation

When Śrī Kṛṣṇa deflated the pride of King Bali, the
celestials were immersed in bliss. As they bowed to him
with the utmost reverence, the reflected lustre of the
sapphires on their crowns made his feet seem to be blue
lotus flowers. The charming Ganges flows effortlessly
and spontaneously like honey from the lotus of those
feet. We pray to Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet, the vanquishers
of all inauspiciousness.

Commentary

A revelation of Rādhā’s greatness illuminated Śrī
Jayadeva’s heart when he remembered Kṛṣṇa’s flattering
words. Therefore he describes Kṛṣṇa’s opulence in this
verse to establish the extent of Rādhā’s good fortune.
He says, “Along with my disciples and their disciples, I
offer prayers to the lotus feet of Śrī Govinda because
those lotus feet subdue the inauspiciousness that
impedes the development of transcendental love.”

In this verse Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s feet have been
compared to attractive lotus flowers enhanced by
fragrant pollen in the form of the spontaneous flow of
the celestial Ganges. The celestials headed by Indra
blissfully offer prostrated obeisances at Kṛṣṇa’s lotus
feet like bumblebees adorning a pollen-covered lotus.
When they bow down, the aura of sapphires and other
jewels upon their crowns falls upon Kṛṣṇa’s feet, which
then appear to be blue lotuses. As humming bumblebees
hover around blue lotuses, the hearts of the devotees
eternally hover around the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa and
perpetually sing their glories. The yogīs continually
meditate upon his lotus feet for the annihilation of
their impediments.

What is the significance of describing the glories of
the lotus feet of Śrī Mukunda? How curious it is that
Mukunda is now perplexed about how to pacify Rādhā’s
pique. What can be said of Rādhā’s glories? Mukunda is
personally praying to hold her lotus feet upon his head.

Kṛṣṇa’s feet have been compared to lotuses, the Ganges
to fragrant pollen, and crest-jewels such as sapphires
to bumblebees. Therefore this verse features rūpaka
alaṅkāra. The chanda is śārdūla-vikrīḍita.



Thus ends the Bālabodhinī-prakāśa commentary on Act Nine
of Śrī Gīta-govinda entitled Mugdha-mukunda.


                          176
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017




Act Ten




— catura-caturbhujaḥ —



Verse 1



atrāntare masṛṇa-roṣa-vaśām asīma-

niḥśvāsa-niḥsaha-mukhīṁ sumukhīm upetya

savrīḍam īkṣita-sakhī-vadanāṁ pradoṣe

sānanda-gadgada-padaṁ harir ity uvāca

Translation

hen the day drew to a close, Śrī Hari could no longer
tolerate Rādhā’s long indignant sighs. She looked shyly
at the face of her intimate friend. Then Śrī Hari
approached the beautiful Rādhā and, blooming with joy,
he began to speak to her in a voice choked with emotion.

Commentary

Rādhā’s friend tried to make her understand the
situation so that she would lighten up, but Rādhā’s fury
did not wane. In the meantime, the day was drawing to a
close. Now Rādhā lets out long sighs in the pain of
separation. Her lotus face looks dejected. After trying
all possible methods to alleviate Rādhā’s obstinacy, her
friend has fallen silent. Rādhā feels the perplexity of
love. She has just neglected Kṛṣṇa, so how can she
suddenly about-face and desire his company? This is her
dilemma. Therefore she is looking shyly in the direction
of her sakhī. Depression has cast a shadow. Kṛṣṇa
thought that Śrī Rādhā must be feeling regretful by this
time in the evening. “Let me go to her at once. I will
accept all her accusations and, keeping them in mind, I
will beg for forgiveness.” Then he approached Rādhā and,
blooming with joy, he began to plead with her in a voice
choked with loving emotions.



Scene Nineteen




Song 19



                          177
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017



The musical mode is deśavarāḍī rāga. The rhythm is
aṣṭatālī tāla.



Verse 2

vadasi yadi kiñcid api danta-ruci-kaumudī harati dara-
timiram ati-ghoram

sphurad-adhara-sīdhave tava vadana-candramā rocayatu
locana-cakoram



priye! cāruśīle! muñca mayi mānam anidānaṁ

sapadi madanānalo dahati mama mānasaṁ

dehi mukha-kamala-madhu-pānam (refrain) (1)

Translation

“My beloved, O graceful one, give up this causeless
aversion. If you will speak to me, even a little, the
terrible darkness of my fear will be dispelled by the
effulgent rays of your teeth. Then your moonlike face
will make the cakora bird of my eyes anxious to drink
the nectar of your lips. The fire of amorous desire is
burning my heart. Allow me to drink the honey of your
lotus face.”

Commentary

Kṛṣṇa says to Rādhā, “My darling, although your
temperament is exceptionally virtuous, the contrary mood
you have adopted towards me with such a fixed resolve
and for no good reason is quite improper. While you have
been sulking, I have been burning in the fire of kāma.
And there is no reason for you to be in a huff. Your
suspicion that I have another lover is in vain.

“Amorous desire inflicts pain upon me only in the
absence of your shelter. Make me drink the honey of your
lotus face so that my internal fire may be extinguished.
I know this honey is extremely difficult to attain, so
if you will not do this, then just say something. You
may speak something complimentary or even something
derogatory, but at least say something.

“When you speak, your lotus face will bloom. The
moonbeams of your teeth will shine and thus the darkness
of fear within my heart will be dispelled. Rādhā, such
nectar is flowing from your moonlike face that the
cakora birds of my eyes want to drink this enlivening
juice. My beloved, you whose disposition is so pleasing!
You alone are the life and soul of my eyes.”

Verse 3

satyam evāsi yadi sudati mayi kopinī


                          178
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

dehi khara-nayana-śara-ghātam

ghaṭaya bhuja-bandhanaṁ janaya rada-khaṇḍanaṁ

yena vā bhavati sukha-jātam

priye! cāruśīle!... (2)

Translation

“O you whose teeth are radiant, if you are genuinely
angry with me, then strike me with the sharp arrows of
your glance. Bind me in the ropes of your arms. Cut my
lips with the biting of your teeth. Do whatever will
make you happy.”

Commentary

To pacify Rādhā, Kṛṣṇa says, “My dearest Rādhā, whose
teeth shine so brightly, do not be angry with me. If you
really want to express your anger against me, then
strike me with the sharp arrows of your eyes. And if
your anger is still not pacified, then punish me even
more. Bind me in the ropes of your arms and imprison me.
If you are still not satisfied, then injure my body by
biting me with your teeth. And if you are still not
satisfied, then just do whatever you feel is
appropriate. I am fit to be rebuked and worthy of
punishment. You may arrange any type of punishment for
me for the sake of your own happiness.”

Kṛṣṇa is ardently requesting Rādhā to scratch, embrace
and kiss him, on the pretext of punishing him by
striking, binding and biting.

Verse 4

tvam asi mama bhūṣaṇaṁ tvam asi mama jīvanaṁ

tvam asi mama bhava-jaladhi-ratnam

bhavatu bhavatīha mayi satatam anurodhinī

tatra mama hṛdayam ati-yatnam

priye! cāruśīle!... (3)

Translation

“You are my only ornament. You are my very life. You are
the jewel in the ocean of my existence. Always remain
favourably disposed to me – this is the exclusive object
of my endeavours.”

Commentary

Rādhā might say, “Kṛṣṇa, I cannot give you punishment.
You have other lovers who are dearer than I. Go and beg
from them.” With this apprehension, Kṛṣṇa says, “My
beloved, you are my perfect and complete adornment. I am
fortunate in all respects only when I am decorated by
you. To say nothing of external ornaments, you are the
very foundation of my life. You are my prana! Without
you I cannot even live. So where is the question of

                          179
Gita-govinda.txt                                   5/5/2017

other lovers?

“You are the incomparable treasure in the ocean of my
material existence. As one considers himself successful
upon attaining a wonderful jewel from the ocean, I feel
that my life is successful, having found the jewel of a
lover like you. Therefore, always remain favourably
disposed to me – my heart continually strives only for
this. All my endeavours are simply for the sake of
receiving your favour.”

Verse 5

nīla-nalinābham api tanvi tava locanaṁ dhārayati
kokanada-rūpam

kusumaśara-bāṇa-bhāvena yadi rañjayasi kṛṣṇam idam etad
anurūpam

priye! cāruśīle!... (4)

Translation

“O slender woman, your blue lotus-like eyes have now
become reddish. It would be befitting if you were to
colour this dark-complexioned body with your wanton
sidelong glance.”

Commentary

Kṛṣṇa says, “Rādhā, your eyes naturally resemble blue
lotus flowers. You are expert in colouring your eyes
with the redness of ever-fresh and increasing anurāga.
If you were to accept me on the strength of this
quality, then my life would be a grand success. But now
your eyes have abandoned their nature and assumed the
colour of a red lotus. This is your science of dyeing
(anurañjinī-vidyā). You are clearly proficient in making
dark coloured substances become red.

“Therefore, if you were to pierce me with arrows of
amorous desire in the form of your sidelong glance, I
would consider your knowledge befittingly employed.
Rādhā, give up your anger and make love to me. Just
become absorbed in the sport of sensuality (kāma-krīḍā).
This is natural for you.”

Verse 6

sphuratu kuca-kumbhayor upari maṇi-mañjarī rañjayatu
tava hṛdaya-deśam

rasatu raśanāpi tava ghana-jaghana-maṇḍale ghoṣayatu
manmatha-nideśam

priye! cāruśīle!... (5)

Translation

“May this necklace of jewels shine brilliantly upon your
pitcher-like breasts and enhance the beauty of your
heart. May this sash of bells splendidly adorning your
firm buttocks proclaim the order of Cupid.”


                          180
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

Commentary

Through indirect suggestions, Kṛṣṇa is praying to Rādhā
and begging her to unite with him in love-games. “May
our auspicious kāma-keli begin. Give up your shyness.
You are ready for the game of sensual love. Before
making love it is necessary to perform the ritual
establishment of full waterpots. May this jewelled
necklace enhance the beauty of your pitcher-shaped
breasts when it swings to and fro. May the sash of bells
encircling the broad centre of your voluptuous hips
announce the order of Kāmadeva’s rising ambitions by
resounding with a sweet kiṇa-kiṇa sound as we make love.
The order is, ‘May all men and women, who are intent
upon love-play during this intoxicating spring season,
be immersed in amorous activities. All contrary women –
give up your resistance and enthusiastically contest in
the erotic sports.’”

Verse 7

sthala-kamala-gañjanaṁ mama hṛdaya-rañjanaṁ

janita-rati-raṅga-para-bhāgam

bhaṇa masṛṇa-vāṇi karavāṇi caraṇa-dvayaṁ

sarasa-lasad-alaktaka-rāgam

priye! cāruśīle!... (6)

Translation

“O softly spoken one, your feet defeat the beauty of a
land lotus and increase the lustre of my heart. They
expand the abundance of kāma at the time of making love.
Just order me to colour those feet with footlac.”

Commentary

So far Rādhā has not replied to any of Kṛṣṇa’s
suggestions. Therefore, encouraging her to speak, he
says, “O softly spoken one, you speak such sweet words!
Release the arrow of your tender words. Order me with
your gentle whisper. These two feet eclipse the beauty
of the hibiscus flower. May I paint footlac upon these
feet that colour my heart, so that when we enjoy love-
play, their enhanced beauty will arouse excessive kāma?
When they are red, may they make my heart red (rāga).

“O you who speak so endearingly, these painted feet will
assume an indescribable splendour in the rasa of our
erotic amusement. They are the charming reservoir of
śṛṅgāra-rasa. They are the door to the arousal of sexual
passion. They initiate the upsurge of desire. O graceful
one, give up your contrary mood. On seeing the charming,
painted feet of a beautiful young woman, the minds of
young men become overwhelmed with sensual desires.”

Verse 8

smara-garala-khaṇḍanaṁ mama śirasi maṇḍanaṁ

dehi pada-pallavam udāram

                            181
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017


jvalati mayi dāruṇo madana-kadanānalo6

haratu tad-upāhita-vikāram

priye! cāruśīle!... (7)

Translation

“My beloved! Offer the fresh buds of your enchanting
feet as an ornament upon my head, so the devastating
effect of Cupid’s poison may be alleviated and the harsh
fire of amorous desires may also be relieved.”

Commentary

“Rādhā! My suffering will be vanquished only when you
accept me. I am overwhelmed by an epiphany (sphūrti) of
your all-conquering qualities, and I pray to you to
kindly place the freshly sprouted buds of your feet upon
my head. Your lotus feet are munificent. They fulfil the
innermost cherished desires of those who pray to them.
They are ornaments because they are red, soft and cool
like new petals. If you were to place them upon my head,
my head would be decorated and simultaneously the
poisonous effect of kāma would be counteracted.”

Kṛṣṇa has likened kāma to the venom of a snake. “The
touch of your feet will counteract the poison of kāma in
the same way that snake’s poison is rendered ineffectual
by the touch of Garuḍa’s feet. Even my defects, such as
the modifications of my mind arising from the heat of
kāma, will cease when you offer your feet to me. The
suffering created by kāma is dire. It burns my heart
exactly like fire. Every vital limb of my body is
turning into smouldering charcoal. The fever of kāma
that burns me within and without will be vanquished only
when you place the fresh buds of your feet upon my
head.”

Throughout this song the nāyikā, Rādhā, is prauḍhā and
mānavatī. Kṛṣṇa is anukūla nāyaka.

Verse 9

iti caṭula-cāṭu-paṭu-cāru mura-vairiṇo rādhikām adhi
vacana-jātam

jayati padmāvatī-ramaṇa-jayadeva-kavi-bhāratī-bhaṇitam
ati-śātam

priye! cāruśīle!... (8)

Translation

Śrī Jayadeva, the beloved of Padmāvatī, has related the
tender, flattering words spoken by the enemy of Mura to
Rādhā. May these sweet, enchanting words be triumphant.

Commentary

The statements of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, elicited by the
contrariness and contempt of his most beloved Rādhā, are
both delightful and pertinent because they brilliantly

                             182
Gita-govinda.txt                                  5/5/2017

illuminate his intense hankering. May they be triumphant
in every respect.

This charming poem contains ingenious flattery and
endearing sweet-talk. May it conquer the hearts of Śrī
Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa (padmāvatī-ramaṇa). Alternatively,
padmāvatī-ramaṇa refers to the talented poet Śrī
Jayadeva, the husband of Padmāvatī. Kṛṣṇa came
personally in the guise of Śrī Jayadeva and wrote the
line, dehi pada-pallavam udāram, which had been revealed
to Śrī Jayadeva in his trance of devotion.

This nineteenth song of Śrī Gīta-govinda is entitled
Catura-bhuja-rāgarāji-candrodyota.



Verse 10



parihara kṛtātaṅke śaṅkāṁ tvayā satataṁ ghana-

stana-jaghanayā-krānte svānte parān-avakāśini

viśati vitanor anyo dhanyo na ko ’pi mamāntaraṁ

praṇayini parīrambhārambhe vidhehi vidheyatām

Translation

“O my empathetic lover, be done with the useless
suspicion that I am attached to another heroine. O Rādhā
of firm breasts and buttocks! There is no room in my
heart for another heroine. With the exception of the
unembodied Cupid, no one else has the fortune to enter.
Now command me to embrace you.”

Commentary

Kṛṣṇa reasons with his beloved Rādhā, “Why has this
apprehension uselessly arisen within your heart? Do not
accuse me of associating with another young mistress. My
heart and mind are so overpowered by the weight of your
waterpot-like breasts and your heavy hips that I have no
opportunity even to remember anyone else. Your love has
invaded and completely pervaded my heart, so there is
not even the slightest room left for another mistress.
How can anyone else enter my mind? Because you reside
there, no one has the good fortune to enter except for
Cupid. My beloved Rādhā, now abandon your māna so that I
may embrace your round breasts. Make me your servant and
grant me the permission to do just that.”

This verse features the chanda called hariṇī and the
alaṅkāra called kāvyaliṅga. Rādhā is prauḍhā nāyikā and
Kṛṣṇa is pragalbhā nāyaka.

Verse 11



mugdhe vidhehi mayi nirdaya-danta-daṁśa-


                          183
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

dor-valli-bandha-niviḍa-stana-pīḍanāni

caṇḍi tvam eva mudam añca na pañca-bāṇa-

cāṇḍāla-kāṇḍa-dalanād asavaḥ prayāntu

Translation

“O bewildered one, if I am an offender, then why are you
hesitating to punish me? Punish me at once. Cruelly bite
me with your teeth and bind me tightly with your slender
creeper-like arms. Crush me with your hard breasts. O
angry woman, find happiness by punishing me in this way.
If my life-air departs as a result of such a severe
punishment, then good, let it go. But may my prana not
depart from the impact of the miscreant Kāmadeva’s
arrow.”

Commentary

Śrī Kṛṣṇa pleads, “O bewildered one, if you have no
faith in my words, then you can punish me. You are so
wrathful that you are not even trying to understand what
I have to say. So just punish me as you like. That rogue
Cupid is trying to kill me with his five arrows. Kindly
grant me the benediction that my prana will not depart.

“O you who are unaware of your own best interests – do
not be so hot-tempered. I am being pierced by the arrows
of Kāmadeva and now my prana is leaving only because of
you. Please save me. May you find satisfaction in
punishing me. Mercilessly bite me with your teeth. Crush
me with your firm breasts. Bind me tightly in your
creeper-like arms. Laugh at me and say, ‘Now you are my
prisoner and you will never escape!’”

Verse 12



śaśimukhi tava bhāti bhaṅgura-bhrūr

yuva-jana-moha-karāla-kāla-sarpī

tad-udita-bhaya-bhañjanāya yūnāṁ

tvad-adhara-sīdhu-sudhaiva siddha-mantraḥ

Translation

“O woman with a radiant moonlike face, the curving vine
of your eyebrow overwhelms the hearts of young men. It
resembles a female snake who even defeats the terrible
influence of time itself. The intoxicating nectar
flowing from your lips is the only siddha-mantra to
dispel the fear created by your eyebrow.”

Commentary

Kṛṣṇa is employing vātsyāyana-nyāya, the logic of
Vātsyāyana Ṛṣi, the author of Kāma-sūtra. “O Śaśimukhi,
although your face is as pleasant as the moon, your
curved eyebrows can bewilder young men, just like the
fearsome female serpent of time. Your eyebrows generate

                          184
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

intense fear, and oh, they look so malicious. But you
are Śaśimukhi (moon-face), so do not be angry with young
men. No young man can be saved once bitten by the female
snake of time. There is no medicine to relieve the
burning of this poison. Only a siddha-mantra, in the
form of the nectar of your lips, can counteract a
poisonous bite from the snake of your eyebrow.”

The chanda of this verse is puṣpitāgrā. The alaṅkāras
are kalpitopamā and rūpaka.

Verse 13



vyathayati vṛthā maunaṁ tanvi prapañcaya pañcamaṁ

taruṇi madhurālāpais tāpaṁ vinodaya dṛṣṭibhiḥ

sumukhi vimukhī-bhāvaṁ tāvad vimuñca na muñca māṁ

svayam atiśaya-snigdho mugdhe priyo ’yam upasthitaḥ

Translation

“O slender woman, your futile adherence to silence is
torturing me. O youthful one, sing out in the fifth
musical mode. Deliver me from this torment with your
sweet conversation and compassionate glance. O you whose
countenance is comely, do not abandon me – abandon your
indifference. O you who are bereft of proper
discrimination, your affectionate beloved is present
before you.”

Commentary

So far, Rādhā has not responded to any of Kṛṣṇa’s
suggestions. Now he appeals to her with courteous words.
“O slender woman, how emaciated you have become. Your
silence is gnawing away at you and giving so much pain
to me – all for no reason.

“Begin to sing in pañcama rāga. Be soft-hearted. In
spring, passionate women follow the example of their
dearmost beloveds. Your voice is sweeter than that of a
cuckoo. Converse sweetly. Make the rain of rasa fall
upon me by your glance. O young woman, vanquish all my
suffering with your merciful glance.

“O pretty one, it is not proper for you to disregard me.
Give up your indifference. Abandon your pride. Do not
abandon me. O bewildered one, O you who are bereft of
proper discrimination, I am your beloved. I am devoted
to you with tender affection. I am here without
invitation. Look – I am standing before you with tears
in my eyes. Bind me with your affectionate glance.”

This verse includes hariṇī chanda, yathāsaṁratna
alaṅkāra, prasāda guṇa, kaiśikī vṛtti, vaidarbhī rīti
and māgadhī gīti. The hero is anukūla nāyaka.

Verse 14



                          185
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017


bandhūka-dyuti-bāndhavo ’yam adharaḥ snigdho madhūka-
cchavir

gaṇḍaś caṇḍi cakāsti nīla-nalina-śrī-mocane locanam

nāsābhyeti tila-prasūna-padavīṁ kundābha-danti priye

prāyas tvan-mukha-sevayā vijayate viśvaṁ sa puṣpāyudhaḥ

Translation

“My beloved Caṇḍi, O hot-tempered woman, your enchanting
red lips are friends with the lustre of a bandhūka
flower. Your cool cheeks have assumed the splendour of a
madhūka flower. Your eyes eclipse the beauty of a blue
lotus flower. Your nose is like a sesame flower. Your
teeth are as radiant as jasmine blossoms. O beloved, the
flower archer Kāmadeva worshipped your face with his
five flower arrows and then conquered the entire
universe.”

Commentary

Kṛṣṇa addresses Rādhā as Caṇḍi (hot-tempered woman)
because she is still angry. “My dearest! Five weapons
shine upon your lotus face like the weapons of the
flower archer, Kāmadeva. O passionate woman, by
borrowing flower weapons from you, the highly acclaimed
conqueror of the universe, Kāmadeva, dominates the
entire creation. After conquering the universe, those
weapons repose radiantly upon your face.”

The special characteristics of Kāmadeva’s five arrows
are as follows:

(1) “Your lips are as red as a scarlet mallow flower.
They are Kāmadeva’s red enthralling arrow (ākarṣaṇa-
bāṇa).”

(2) “Your cool cheeks have the elegant golden-white
lustre of a madhūka flower, as if nectar is just about
to ooze from within. They are Kāmadeva’s honey-coloured
arrow of subjugation by enchantment (vaśīkaraṇa-bāṇa).”

(3) “Your blue eyes have eclipsed the beauty of blue
lotus flowers, after amalgamating within themselves the
essence of all beauty. They are Kāmadeva’s dark blue
intoxicating arrow (unmādana-bāṇa).”

(4) “Your nose resembles a sesame flower. This is his
melting arrow (drāvaṇa-bāṇa).”

(5) “Your teeth are like jasmine flowers. They are
Kāmadeva’s white draining arrow (śoṣaṇa-bāṇa).”

“In this way, Kāmadeva attained your mercy by serving
your face with all five weapons. On the strength of that
mercy he conquers the entire universe.”

This verse features śārdūla-vikrīḍita chanda and
utprekṣā alaṅkāra.

Verse 15

                          186
Gita-govinda.txt                                 5/5/2017




dṛśau tava madālase vadanam indu-sandīpanaṁ

gatir jana-manoramā vijita-rambham ūru-dvayam

ratis tava kalāvatī rucira-citra-lekhe bhruvāv

aho vibudha-yauvataṁ vahasi tanvi pṛthvī-gatā

Translation

“O slender woman, how astonishing it is! Although you
are present on the surface of this earth, you appear to
be one of the magical nymphs of heaven. The ocean of
your large blue eyes is indolent due to ardent passion
like Madālasā. Your face is as radiant as the moonlight
goddess, Indumatī. You walk like the heavenly goddess
Manoramā. Your two thighs have defeated the thighs of
the celestial beauty, Rambhā. You are accomplished in
the art of lovemaking like Kalāvatī; and your eyebrows
are as captivating as those of Citralekhā.”

Commentary

“O slender-waisted Rādhikā, although you are situated
upon this earth planet, it seems as if all the heavenly
goddesses are residing within you. The intoxicating
effect of pride in the good fortune of having your lover
at your feet has made your eyes become tired.

“Therefore, although you are my woman, your jubilant
pride suggests that you keep the celestial angel,
Madālasā, in your eyes. Your face is the abode of
Indumatī, the consort of Candramā, the moon deity; yet
it is even more essential for me than moonlight is for
the moon. Candramā’s heart fills with jealousy upon
seeing your face, because he has no power in comparison
with you. The way you walk gives joy to everyone.
Therefore the angel Manoramā resides in you. Your thighs
defame the trunk of a plantain tree, as if they were the
residence of Rambhā. Your movements are embellished with
all the seductive arts such as hāva, bhāva, vilāsa and
kilakiñcita. Therefore you are the abode of the
celestial named Kalāvatī. Your eyebrows are so perfect
and charming that they appear to have been painted by an
artist.

“Although you reside upon the surface of the earth
(pṛthvī), it seems that you have descended from above to
extend the youthful qualities of the celestial
goddesses. In other words, your youthfulness is divine.”

Therefore, this verse features pṛthvī chanda and
kalpitopamā alaṅkāra.

Verse 16



sa prītiṁ tanutāṁ hariḥ kuvalayāpīḍena sārdhaṁ raṇe

rādhā-pīna-payodhara-smaraṇa-kṛt-kumbhena sambhedavān

                          187
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017


yatra svidyati mīlati kṣaṇam api kṣipte dvipe tat-kṣaṇāt

kaṁsasyālam abhūt jitaṁ jitam iti vyāmoha-kolāhalaḥ

Translation

On seeing the highly protruding cranial globes of the
elephant Kuvalayāpīḍa, Bhagavān Śrī Hari remembered the
large, round breasts of Śrī Rādhā. He perspired
profusely during the fight when the elephant’s touch
awakened his absorption in anaṅga-rasa. The closing of
his eyes created a tremendous uproar from the crowd.
Sounds of joy and confusion abounded as the supporters
of Kaṁsa first cried out, “We have won! We have won!”
and then Kṛṣṇa’s supporters cried out, “We have won! We
have won!” when he killed the elephant. May that
Bhagavān Śrī Hari increase the bliss of the entire
universe.

Commentary

In this verse Śrī Jayadeva bestows a benediction upon
everyone. Kṛṣṇa is so absorbed in glorifying the
qualities of his beloved Rādhā that he remembers the
happiness of her touch even in an extremely perilous
situation. May that Śrī Hari increase your love. When
Kṛṣṇa fought with Kaṁsa’s elephant, Kuvalayāpīḍa, he saw
the elephant’s protruding cranial globes and was
reminded of Rādhā’s large, round breasts. Kṛṣṇa’s body
manifested transformations (sāttvika-bhāva) when touched
by the elephant, as if he had been touched by Rādhā.
Kṛṣṇa closed his eyes in bliss, overwhelmed by memories
of the joy of union with Rādhā. Then the courtiers of
Kaṁsa were delighted and exclaimed, “We have won. Kṛṣṇa
has closed his eyes in fear.” As soon as Kṛṣṇa heard the
tumultuous sound of confused statements, he suppressed
his feelings, beat the elephant to the ground and
quickly killed him. Suddenly, a great commotion arose
amongst the courtiers of the inimical party, “Kṛṣṇa has
won? He has won!” This uproar was delightful.

Act Ten has described Kṛṣṇa’s agitation on remembering
Rādhā. His loss of composure makes him look
extraordinarily charming.



Thus ends the Bālabodhinī-prakāśa commentary on Act Ten
of Śrī Gīta-govinda, entitled Catura-caturbhuja7.




Act Eleven




— sānanda-govindaḥ —




                          188
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

Verse 1



suciram anunayena prīṇayitvā mṛgākṣīṁ

gatavati kṛtaveśe keśave kuñja-śayyām

racita-rucira-bhūṣāṁ dṛṣṭi-moṣe pradoṣe

sphurati niravasādāṁ kāpi rādhāṁ jagāda

Translation

fter satisfying the doe-eyed Rādhā with humble
entreaties for a long time, Kṛṣṇa went away. He dressed
himself in enchanting attire and began to wait for her
on a bed in the chamber of a forest grove. In the
meantime, as visibility became obscured by the arrival
of twilight, a sakhī spoke to Rādhā, who was decorated
in a variety of bewitching ornaments.

Commentary

Kṛṣṇa continued to plead with Rādhā until late into the
day. Finally, Rādhā became pleased with him and he
confidently set off to prepare a play-bed in the chamber
of a nikuñja. The doe-eyed Rādhā was shining with joy.
When her dejection and despair disappeared without a
trace, jubilation pervaded the ecstatic emotions
overflowing in her doe-like eyes and her heart began to
swell with elation. She covered herself with a blue
garment to conceal her movements through the forest and
she decorated herself with fascinating ornaments that
would also pass unseen by others. To intensify Rādhā’s
eagerness to meet with Kṛṣṇa, her friend remarked
emphatically, “Rādhā! Now do you believe that
Madhusūdana adores you or not?”

The word pradoṣa indicates that night is falling. At
this time, nothing is clearly visible.

The chanda of the present verse is mālinī.



Scene Twenty




Song 20


The musical mode is vasanta rāga. The rhythm is yati
tāla.



Verse 2

viracita-cāṭu-vacana-racanaṁ caraṇe racita-praṇipātam


                          189
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

samprati mañjula-vañjula-sīmani keli-śayanam anuyātam



mugdhe! madhu-mathanam anugatammugdhe! madhu-mathanam
anugatam anusara rādhike! (refrain) (1)

Translation

“O guileless one, he who bows down at your feet and
humbly supplicates you with words of flattery, is
presently reposing upon a play-bed in a bower of
flowering vines in the delightful aśoka forest. Follow
in the footsteps of the destroyer of Madhu and meet with
him at once.”

Commentary

The sakhī said, “Rādhikā, the enemy of Madhu has become
completely submissive to you. Go to his side at once. Do
not delay. He has humbly appealed to you with endearing
words. He has wholeheartedly fallen at your feet. He has
prepared to welcome you and now he is sitting upon a bed
suitable for amorous love-games within an aśoka grove.
Follow his footsteps to that place. O bewildered one,
how naive you are. You do not even know when to go for a
rendezvous with your beloved. Go to him at once and
reciprocate with him in every way.”

Rādhike – The suffix ka sheds light upon Rādhā’s state
of guileless innocence.

The refrain is “Follow Madhusūdana. Do not delay.”
Characteristics of the grove, such as aśoka trees, have
been mentioned because they stimulate emotions.

Verse 3

ghana-jaghana-stana-bhāra-bhare dara-manthara-caraṇa-
vihāram

mukharita-maṇi-mañjīram upaihi vidhehi marāla-nikāram

mugdhe!... (2)

Translation

“O Rādhā, you who are burdened with heavy breasts and
hips. With your gait that defeats the elegant motion of
a royal swan, go to meet Kṛṣṇa. Make an enchanting sound
with your jewelled ankle-bells as you walk at a graceful
pace.”

Commentary

“O Rādhā, your cumbersome hips and large breasts cause
you to stoop. Go gently. Your slow, rhythmical motion
embarrasses the movement of swans. Be graciously present
in the love chamber of charming arbour. Take steps in
such a way that the musical sound of your jewelled
ankle-bells may arouse the passionate rasa.

“O guileless one, place your unsteady feet upon the
earth. Defeat the gait of a swan. Go now to the side of

                          190
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

Madhusūdana. Do not delay. Make these jewelled ankle-
bells resound.”

Verse 4

śṛṇu ramaṇīya-taraṁ taruṇī-jana-mohana-madhuripu-rāvam

kusuma-śarāsana-śāsana-vandini pika-nikare bhaja bhāvam

mugdhe!... (3)

Translation

“Listen to the delightful words of the bumblebees that
bewilder the hearts of young women. Realize your own
moods in the singing of the cuckoos, who propagate the
sweet orders of Kandarpa.”

Commentary

“Sakhi, set off at once. Many auspicious signs have
appeared for the sake of your tryst. In spring, the
sound of humming bumblebees resounds in all four
directions. They are anxious to sing in harmony with the
chime of your ankle-bells. Listen to the drone of the
bumblebees. This sound bewilders the hearts of
attractive young women. As bumblebees are dark, Kṛṣṇa is
also dark (śyāma). The humming of the bees signals the
time for trysting and fills the hearts of young women
with auspiciousness. Indeed, whose mind is not swayed by
their polite flattering appeals?

“Look! Listen! In this spring month of Madhu the cuckoos
call out with a shrill cry in pursuance of the order of
Kāmadeva. It is as if they are also the bards of
Kāmadeva and their fifth note is proclaiming his order.
Combine your moods with those of the cuckoos. Let the
order of Kāmadeva be manifest far and wide. With the
beating of drums, announce the order of the flower
archer. His order is, ‘May all sensual young men and
women engage in unrestrained enjoyment.’”

Madhuripu-rāvam – The word madhuripu, meaning
“bumblebee”, alludes to Kṛṣṇa.

The cuckoos’ stimulating effect (vibhāva) has been
expressed by the phrase kusuma-śarāsana-śāsana-vandini.

Verse 5

anila-tarala-kisalaya-nikareṇa kareṇa latā-nikurambam

preraṇam iva karabhoru karoti gatiṁ prati muñca vilambam

mugdhe!... (4)

Translation

“O you whose lovely thighs resemble the trunk of an
elephant! The vines move about restlessly in the breeze
as if inciting you to go by gesturing with their freshly
sprouted leaves. So don’t delay now.”

Commentary

                          191
Gita-govinda.txt                                  5/5/2017


The sakhī says, “O you whose excellent thighs taper like
the trunk of an elephant! As the creepers flutter in the
wind, they are beckoning you to go to Śrī Hari with the
hands of their leaves. Go at once. All nature is anxious
to take you to him. Now do not be late.

“The cool breeze moves so gently and the trembling
signals of the new leaves are encouraging you to go. The
insentient objects of nature are instructing you as if
they were sentient. Therefore the fulfilment of your
cherished desire is bound to take place. Your most
beloved Kṛṣṇa is deeply attached to you and he is
waiting for you on a play-bed in a chamber of vañjula
creepers. Go swiftly. Make haste. When you walk, the
attractive profile of your buttocks slopes like the back
of a cupped hand.”

Verse 6

sphuritam anaṅga-taraṅga-vaśād iva sūcita-hari-
parirambham

pṛccha manohara-hāra-vimala-jala- dhāram amuṁ kuca-
kumbham

mugdhe!... (5)

Translation

“Ask these quivering waterpot-like breasts of yours and
see. Helplessly trembling under the control of waves of
amorous desire, and beautified by immaculate streams in
the form of an enchanting necklace, your breasts inform
you of Śrī Hari’s imminent embrace.”

Commentary

The sakhī says, “Rādhā, what are you thinking about? Now
what more evidence do you need? If you do not believe
me, then ask your own breasts, which are just like
waterpots bearing the stream of your enchanting
necklace. Indeed, what is the cause of their quivering?
They are trembling under the control of the waves of
Kāmadeva to indicate the imminent embrace of your lover.
Śrī Hari will be carried along by the powerful current
of rasa from your breasts, only to be immersed in the
ocean of prema. They are full of intense hankering for
the touch of Śrī Hari’s lotus hands. The immaculate,
enchanting necklace upon the auspicious pitchers of your
breasts is like a stream of pure and sparkling water.
This stream is full of waves; an indication that you
will attain your beloved. Erotic desire makes your
breasts quiver and thus they have become an omen of
auspiciousness. Do not think this kāma is a curse and
delay even more. Go quickly.”

Verse 7

adhigatam akhila-sakhībhir idaṁ tava vapur api rati-
raṇa-sajjam

caṇḍi raṇita-rasanā-rava-ḍiṇḍimam abhisara sarasam
alajjam

                          192
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017


mugdhe!... (6)

Translation

“O you who are so skilled in the battle of lovemaking! O
passionate woman, your sakhīs know well that your body
is beautifully equipped for the purpose of a love-
battle. So abandon your shyness. With the utmost
enthusiasm, go for your rendezvous with the captivating
sound of your jewelled girdle resounding like the
beating of a war-drum.”

Commentary

The sakhī says to Rādhā, “Now why have you become proud?
Your desire has already transcended all limitations, so
why hesitate? Why be ashamed to go and meet with Kṛṣṇa?
We are all your intimate friends. Certainly no one else
is here but us. Why become angry for no reason? All your
sakhīs know well that your body is ready for a love-
battle. It is decorated with ornaments and every
substance required for engagement in sensual combat.
After becoming a beautiful female warrior, you are now
ready. As various instruments resound at the time of
marching out to war, the bells attached to your waist-
belt will chime when you set off for this love-battle.
Declare war! Abandon all shame and flow along in the
current of rasa as you journey with ever-increasing
attachment to meet Śrī Hari. Go, Caṇḍi! O passionate
woman, face the direction of the meeting place.”

Caṇḍī, or “belligerent woman”, is an appropriate address
for Rādhā when she is ready to fight.

Verse 8

smara-śara-subhaga-nakhena kareṇa sakhīm avalambya sa-
līlam

cala valaya-kvaṇitair avabodhaya harim api nija-gati-
śīlam

mugdhe!... (7)

Translation

“The attractive fingernails of your lotus hand are five
arrows of Kāmadeva, fit to be employed in the battle of
lovemaking. Use them to take support from your sakhī and
gracefully go. Śrī Hari’s character is highly acclaimed.
Make him aware of your arrival by the jingle of your
bracelets.”

Commentary

The sakhī says to Rādhā, “O fortunate one, the nails of
your soft, charming hands are Kāmadeva’s five flower
arrows. Catch the hand of your sakhī with these hands
and gracefully be on your way, ornamented with many
pronounced ecstatic emotions such as hāva-bhāva. Your
enchanting nails are as piercing as the arrows of
passionate desire. They are your weapons in this love-
battle. Kṛṣṇa is under the control of Kāmadeva and he is

                          193
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

waiting just for you. As a warrior first informs his
adversary that he is on the warpath, you should also
make Kṛṣṇa aware of your arrival by the tinkle of your
bangles. He is occupied in preparing himself. He wants
to fulfil the hankering of his heart. Inform him that
you are ready and determined for a love-battle.”

Verse 9

śrī-jayadeva-bhaṇitam adharīkṛta-hāram udāsita-rāmam

hari-vinihita-manasām adhitiṣṭhatu kaṇṭha-taṭīm avirāmam

mugdhe!... (8)

Translation

This song of Śrī Jayadeva eclipses the beauty of an
elegant necklace. It makes the most bewitchingly
attractive woman become apathetic. May it perpetually
grace the throats of those devotees who have completely
offered their hearts to Kṛṣṇa.

Commentary

This song of Śrī Jayadeva Gosvāmī defames necklaces
strung from pearls and other precious jewels and casts
them far away. It deflates the enthusiasm of beautiful
young women. May it always beautify the throats of the
devotees of Bhagavān. Vaiṣṇavas such as Parāśara, whose
hearts are attached to Bhagavān, will not wear necklaces
of jewels. Instead, they will wear this necklace
narrated by Jayadeva.

They will also embrace this song instead of embracing
beautiful women. Necklaces and beautiful women adorn the
bosom of those who are attached to the endless chain of
birth and death; and even then, not in all conditions;
only during the period of youthfulness. May this song
adorn the throats of the devotees of Bhagavān under all
circumstances because it is about Śrī Hari.

This twentieth song of Śrī Gīta-govinda is entitled Śrī
Hari-tālarāji-jaladhara-vilāsita. The rasa herein is
vipralambha-śṛṅgāra. The hero is uttama nāyaka.

Verse 10



sā māṁ drakṣyati vakṣyati smara-kathāṁ praty-aṅgam
āliṅganaiḥ

prītiṁ yāsyati raṁsyate sakhi samāgatyeti cintākulaḥ

sa tvāṁ paśyati vepate pulakayaty ānandati svidyati

praty-udgacchati mūrcchati sthira-tamaḥ-puñje nikuñje
priyaḥ

Translation

“Sakhi, your most beloved Kṛṣṇa is enveloped in the
dense darkness of a secluded bower, anxiously thinking,

                          194
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

‘When Rādhā comes, she will look upon me with
affectionate eyes. She will speak words full of rasa,
revealing her amorous desires. She will be delighted to
embrace each of my limbs and enjoy union with me.’ In
this way, he feels as if he is already seeing you
directly. His body is trembling from absorption in these
feelings. His hair stands on end, he perspires profusely
and he is blooming with unlimited joy. When he thinks
that you have come, he stands up to meet you and faints
in euphoria.”

Commentary

The sakhī says, “O Rādhā, Śrī Hari behaves strangely as
he sits in the dense darkness of the forest grove. His
peculiar activities are symptomatic of his escalating
thirst for you. When he anxiously remembers you, his
emotions overflow into sensual behaviour. He revels in
the thought that ‘Rādhā will see me. She will serve me
the sweet, intoxicating wine of her rasa-laden,
impassioned words. She will become overjoyed by
embracing every one of my limbs. Then she will be eager
for love-games with me.’

“In this way, Kṛṣṇa becomes exuberant as his heart
swells with many desires and expectations. When he sees
you in his meditation, he suddenly trembles and thrills
with horripilation. He begins to feel the rasa of union
with you in his imagination. As your amorous play
gradually progresses, he becomes drenched in
perspiration. He sees you in the dream of his ecstatic
mood and stands up. Then, when he realizes that he is
not actually seeing you, he becomes unconscious.”

This verse features śārdūla-vikrīḍita chanda and dīpaka
alaṅkāra. The eight sāttvika-bhāvas are divided as
follows:

(1) Becoming stunned (stambha) and fading complexion
(vaivarṇya) – After his anxiety and sensual behaviour,
he sees Rādhā coming from far away in the dense darkness
and his bodily complexion fades as he becomes stunned.

(2) Trembling (vepathu) and the standing of hairs
(romāñca) – When he dreams about Rādhā’s method of
intensifying kāma-keli through her erotic conversation,
he shudders and horripilates.

(3) Tears (aśrū) and perspiration (sveda) – In his
imagination, he feels the rapture of Rādhā embracing
every one of his limbs and, in the gradual progress of
their lovemaking, he becomes saturated with
perspiration.

(4) Faltering of the voice (svara-bhaṅga) and
devastation (pralaya) – He cannot call Rādhā’s name when
his voice falters in the joy of uniting with her, and he
is devastated when he realizes that he is bereft of her
association.

Verse 11




                          195
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

akṣṇor nikṣipad añjanaṁ śravaṇayos tāpiccha-gucchāvalīṁ

mūrdhni śyāma-saroja-dāma kucayoḥ kastūrikā-patrakam

dhūrtānām abhisāra-satvara-hṛdāṁ viṣvaṅ nikuñje sakhi

dhvāntaṁ nīla-nicola-cāru sudṛśāṁ praty-aṅgam āliṅgati

Translation

“Sakhi, look. The darkness surrounding the secluded
grove is the black cosmetic eye-liner of beautiful-eyed
passionate women who are eager to meet with their
deceitful lovers. It becomes the clusters of tamāla
leaves on their ears, the garlands of dark blue lotus
flowers on their heads and the pictures painted in musk
on their pitcher-like breasts. See how the darkness
embraces all their limbs and covers them even more
pleasantly than a dark blue garment.”

Commentary

The sakhī says, “O Rādhā, Śyāma is sitting in a dense
arbour where the darkness seems to be an amalgamation of
all the darkness in the universe. How eager and anxious
he is to meet you. Now do not delay. No one can
understand the movements of abhisārikā heroines in the
night because they wear the best deep blue garments. The
darkness of night is their dear friend because it is
also deep blue. It embraces them on all sides and
arouses their eagerness to make love with their
deceitful paramours in secluded forest bowers. Darkness
itself is their black cosmetic eye-liner and it also
plays the role of their dark blue peacock feather and
tamāla leaf ear-ornaments. Darkness is the garland of
blue lotus flowers on their hearts and the pictures
painted in liquid musk on their breasts.

“The deep blue darkness is also embracing every one of
your limbs and offering these ornaments and decorations
to you. Therefore, suitably attired for your tryst, set
off into the dense darkness and do not be late. In every
bower, the whole environment is favourable for the
secret rendezvous of shrewd lovers who are expert in
relishing rasa. This night is like a blue garment
covering every limb in its endless expansion.

“Go! Be on your way! You should arrive there before
another rival heroine does. At this time, there is no
need for you to put eye-liner on your eyes, earrings on
your ears, garlands on your neck, musk paintings on your
breasts or anything else. Just go at once.”

Verse 12



kāśmīra-gaura-vapuṣām abhisārikāṇām

ābaddha-rekham abhito ruci-mañjarībhiḥ

etat tamāla-dala-nīla-tamaṁ tamisraṁ

tat-prema-hema-nikaṣopalatāṁ tanoti

                          196
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017


Translation

“The shimmering lustre of trysting heroines with fair
saffron-complexioned bodies is the gold of love. That
gold marks the testing stone of impenetrable darkness,
which expands everywhere like the darkest leaves of the
tamāla tree.”

Commentary

The sakhī says, “My dear friend, for trysting heroines
whose bodies are as lustrous as saffron, this darkness,
deep blue as a tamāla leaf, is the testing stone for the
gold of love. The darkness is marked everywhere with the
lines of their shimmering golden lustre.

“The darkness is a testing stone who presents himself to
examine the gold of these young women’s love. The
quality of gold is tested on such a stone. The gold
leaves a mark on the stone but the colour of the stone
does not show up on the gold. However, when you enter
this dense darkness, golden-limbed Rādhā, the testing
stone will make a dark blue mark upon the strip of gold.
Now go to the meeting place as quickly as possible.”

This verse features upamā alaṅkāra and vasanta-tilakā
chanda.




Scene Twenty-one

Verse 13



hārāvalī-tarala-kāñcana-kāñci-dāma-

mañjīra-kaṅkaṇa-maṇi-dyuti-dīpitasya

dvāre nikuñja-nilayasya hariṁ vilokya

vrīḍāvatīm atha sakhīm iyam ity uvāca

Translation

The forest bower became illuminated by the lustre of her
golden waist-belt, earrings, the gems set in her
bracelets and the jewel situated splendidly in the
middle of her necklace. As Rādhā stood in the doorway of
the love chamber, she saw Śrī Hari and became shy. Then
a friend began to speak to her.

Commentary

After being encouraged by her sakhī, Rādhā arrives at
the forest pavilion. She is somewhat shy, but when she
sees Śrī Hari is already there, she becomes even more
bashful. The doorway of the nikuñja is lit up by the
radiance of her ornaments, her pearl necklace, gold
waist-belt, topaz and jewelled earrings. She can see

                          197
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa waiting for her by the light of these ornaments
and as soon as she sees him, she is overwhelmed with
embarrassment. It is appropriate for passionate young
women to employ shyness as a means of creating an
abundance of kāma on the occasion of their first union.
Now the sakhī is obliging Rādhā to step forward from the
doorway into the love chamber.

The chanda of this verse is vasanta-tilakā.




Song 21


The musical mode is varāḍī rāga. The rhythm is rūpaka
tāla.



Verse 14

mañjutara-kuñja-tala-keli-sadane

vilasa rati-rabhasa-hasita-vadane



pravi rhe! mhava-samam ihapraviśa rādhe! mādhava-samīpam
iha (refrain) (1)

Translation

“O Rādhā, your face is blooming with excessive rasa due
to your eagerness for lovemaking. Enter the pastime
chamber of this enchanting bower. Go to Mādhava and
enjoy with him.”

Commentary

The sakhī tells Rādhā, “Your face expresses delight due
to enthusiasm for love-play. Now you are smiling and
jubilant in the agitation of prema. A pastime chamber
has been made in the middle of this charming thicket.
Please go inside. Kindly approach Mādhava and make love
with him.”

Verse 15

nava-bhavad-aśoka-dala-śayana-sāre

vilasa kuca-kalaśa-tarala-hāre

praviśa rādhe!... (2)

Translation

“Your necklace trembles upon quivering pitcher-like
breasts, indicating an imminent sensual encounter with
your beloved. Enter and take your place upon the bed of
newly sprouted aśoka leaves. Approach Mādhava and enjoy
with him.”

                          198
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017


Commentary

“The restless necklace of pearls upon your bosom hints
that you are also restless for union. This bed of fresh
aśoka leaves has been made especially for you. Go! Revel
in the pleasure of union upon this elegantly decorated
bed.”

Verse 16

kusuma-caya-racita-śuci-vāsa-gehe

vilasa kusuma-sukumāra-dehe

praviśa rādhe!... (3)

Translation

“Your tender young body is even more captivating than a
flower. Enter the pure pastime chamber, which is adorned
with many flowers. Approach Mādhava and revel in
pleasure with him.”

Commentary

“Your body is even softer than flower blossoms and this
entire pastime pavilion is made from collected flowers
that sparkle brilliantly. Therefore enter this pure
chamber of flowers and experience rapture with Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. Go! Enter without fear because these are your own
quarters.”

Verse 17

cala-malaya-vana-pavana-surabhi-śīte

vilasa rati-valita-lalita-gīte

(mṛdu-cala-malaya-pavana-surabhi-śīte

vilasa madana-śara-nikara-bhīte)

praviśa rādhe!... (4)

Translation

“O Rādhā, you are afraid of the arrows of Cupid, and you
are singing a wanton song about the rasa of lovemaking.
Enter the pastime pavilion of flowering vines, which is
cool and fragrant with the gentle and restless movements
of the Malaya breeze. Approach Mādhava and delight in
amorous pleasure with him.”

Commentary

The sakhī encourages Rādhā, “You are intimidated by the
arrows of Kāmadeva, so take shelter in this love chamber
that is attended by the south wind from Malaya Mountain.
The soft touch of the breeze makes the grove of
blossoming creepers even more refreshing and aromatic.
Go into this temple of prema and enjoy pastimes with
Kṛṣṇa. The moment has come to express your inner ecstasy
with the voice of your prana. Sing! Sing out the madly

                          199
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

passionate song of love.”

Verse 18

vitata-bahu-valli-nava-pallava-ghane

vilasa ciram alasa-pīna-jaghane

praviśa rādhe!... (5)

Translation

“Your movements are slowed down by the heavy burden of
your buxom hips. Enter into this secluded pastime-bower,
which is densely covered with the new leaves of its
flourishing vines. Approach Mādhava and relish pastimes
with him.”

Commentary

“Your hips move slowly because they are so broad. And
this nikuñja has also expanded into a mass of
flourishing vines. Its density has increased with the
addition of newly sprouted leaves. Therefore, go inside
and revel in pleasure with your most beloved Śrī Kṛṣṇa
for a long time because no one will be able to see you.”

Verse 19

madhu-mudita-madhupa-kula-kalita-rāve

vilasa madana-rasa-sarasa-bhāve

praviśa rādhe!... (6)

Translation

“You feel an ever-increasing thirst for the erotic
mellow. Enter this flower chamber. It resounds with the
humming of bumblebees maddened from drinking honey.
Approach Mādhava and enjoy pastimes with him.”

Commentary

“You have been surcharged with sensuality by Kāmadeva.
Intoxicated bumblebees attain the greatest happiness
during the spring season. They hum in bliss as they
taste the rasa of the flowers in this grove. You should
also enter and taste prema-rasa. This is a place of
immense joy. It is the auspicious gate to intimate
loving union. Go inside. Rādhā, just enter the grove!”

Verse 20

madhuratara-pika-nikara-ninada-mukhare

vilasa daśana-ruci-rucira-śikhare

praviśa rādhe!... (7)

Translation

“O Rādhā, your teeth are like rubies or fully ripened
pomegranate seeds. Enter this pavilion of flowering

                            200
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

vines. It resounds with the sweet cooing of a flock of
cuckoos. Go close to Mādhava and enjoy with him.”

Commentary

The sakhī urges, “O Rādhā, your teeth sparkle with the
lustre of ruby-like jewels (śikhara). This nikuñja
already resounds with the sweet low tone of warbling
cuckoos. Accompany them as you revel to your heart’s
content with Śrī Kṛṣṇa. No one will hear you.”

Verse 21

vihita-padmāvatī-sukha-samāje

kuru murāre maṅgala-śatāni

bhaṇati jayadeva-kavirāja-rāje

praviśa rādhe!... (8)

Translation

The emperor of all poets, Śrī Jayadeva, has composed
this song to gladden Rādhā’s heart in a variety of ways.
O enemy of Mura, may you confer unlimited auspiciousness
upon the entire world.

Commentary

Offering his poem at the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, Śrī
Jayadeva says, “O Murāri, on hearing this song by the
emperor of poets, may you bestow auspiciousness upon
everyone in thousands of ways.”

Apart from being the name of Śrī Jayadeva’s wife,
Padmāvatī is also a name for the original goddess of
fortune, Śrī Rādhā. Jayadeva is the best amongst the
kings of poetry and he is a worshipper of Padmāvatī. He
humbly prays to Śrī Hari, “O Murāri, I have established
Padmāvatī within the inner palace. Therefore this poetry
is for your happiness. May you be delighted and confer
auspiciousness upon us hundreds of times over.”

Alternatively, Śrī Jayadeva personally appeals to Rādhā,
“O Padmāvatī, he who is the complete wealth of Lakṣmī is
joyfully present today within the pastime grove. May you
confer hundreds of types of auspiciousness upon that
Murāri. His only auspiciousness lies in making love with
you.”

Verse 22



tvāṁ cittena ciraṁ vahann ayam ati-śrānto bhṛśaṁ tāpitaḥ

kandarpeṇa ca pātum icchati sudhā-sambādha-bimbādharam

asyāṅkaṁ tad alaṅkuru kṣaṇam iha bhrū-kṣepa-lakṣmī-lava-

krīte dāsa ivopasevita-padāmbhoje kutaḥ sambhramaḥ

Translation

                             201
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017


“O ravishing beauty, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is present before you. He
is exhausted from holding you in the core of his heart
for a long time while burning in the heat of amorous
desire. He ardently longs to drink the sweet nectar of
your bimba-fruit lips. Go and adorn the chest of your
eager lover. He is ever grateful to receive the vast
opulence of your sidelong glance, even for a fraction of
a second. Like a purchased slave, he has become the
servant of your lotus feet merely for the price of your
sidelong glance. So why are you hesitating? Why are you
embarrassed?”

Commentary

The sakhī tells Rādhā, “Śrī Hari is depleted from
holding you in his heart for such a long time. He is
scorched from deep within. Kāmadeva has tormented him
severely. He aspires to drink the sweetness of your red
bimba-fruit lips, which are full of nectarean rasa.
Therefore, my dear one, become the lustre of your
hankering lover’s limbs! You have purchased him simply
by casting your glance upon him for just a second. Now
completely decorate the body of your foot-servant, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. Without inhibition, adorn his chest at once. Why
are you shy? Why deliberate any further? Why hesitate?”

This verse features rūpaka and utprekṣā alaṅkāras. The
chanda is śārdūla-vikrīḍita.

Verse 23



sā sa-sādhvasa-sānandaṁ govinde lola-locanā

siñjāna-mañju-mañjīraṁ praviveśa niveśanam

Translation

Śrī Rādhā’s heart was full of ambition as she glanced at
Govinda with her restless eyes. Her jewelled ankle-bells
tinkled alluringly as she began to enter the chamber of
the secluded forest bower.

Commentary

Rādhā was feeling nervous and elated at the same time.
She looked around and glanced towards the hopeful Kṛṣṇa.
Her ankle-bells tinkled as she entered the forest bower
on the advice of her friend. The bower was a perfect
place for amorous love-games. When she glanced at Kṛṣṇa,
she felt as if he were holding her in his every limb.



Scene Twenty-two




Song 22


                          202
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017


The musical mode is varāḍī rāga. The rhythm is yati
tāla.



There is a woman with attractive hair. She wears bangles
on her wrists and bunches of flowers upon her ears. When
she shyly takes up a yak-tail whisk and fans her beloved
as she delights in amusement with him, her song is
called varāḍī rāga.



Verse 24

rādhā-vadana-vilokana-vikasita-vividha-vikāra-vibhaṅgam

jala-nidhim iva vidhu-maṇḍala-darśana-taralita-tuṅga-
taraṅgam

harim eka-rasaṁ ciram abhilaṣita-vilāsaṁ

sā dadarśa guru-harṣa-vaśaṁvada-vadanam anaṅga-vikāsam

(refrain) (1)

Translation

Rādhā is the exclusive object of Kṛṣṇa’s ever-increasing
attachment. He has cherished the desire to enjoy amorous
pastimes with her for a long time. He blooms with
jubilation on beholding her face and he thrills with
various ecstatic transformations of passionate love.
Rādhā saw how Kṛṣṇa, the ocean of erotic mellows, was
manifesting amatory attachment through his suggestive
expressions and posture, just as the ocean becomes
turbulent with high waves upon seeing the orb of the
full moon.

Commentary

In the flower pavilion, Rādhā beheld Kṛṣṇa with
excessive affection. She saw his unique and manifold
virtues. All of Kṛṣṇa’s specialities are related to
Rādhā. Śrī Hari is referred to as eka-rasa. The purport
is that one rasa, the amorous mellow (śṛṅgāra), has made
itself prominent and that Kṛṣṇa is brimming with many
aspects of that one rasa.

Ever-fresh attachment for Rādhā is surging within him
because he has cherished the desire to enjoy intimate
pastimes with her for such a long time. Rādhā’s presence
in the pastime bower is the all in all of his life.
Kṛṣṇa was overwhelmed with happiness simply by seeing
her. He broke out into many sāttvika transformations
such as trembling and horripilation.

On seeing Rādhā’s face, which appeared to be the abode
of Kāmadeva, Kṛṣṇa’s face lit up with jubilation. He
wanted to fulfil his desire for union. Rādhā’s face is
the full moon, upon seeing which the Kṛṣṇa-ocean becomes
turbulent and heaves with towering waves. Rādhā noticed
that as soon as Kṛṣṇa saw her, he began to manifest many

                          203
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

kinds of amatory emotions.

Verse 25

hāram amalatara-tāram urasi dadhataṁ parilambya vidūram

sphuṭatara-phena-kadamba-karambitam iva yamunā-jala-
pūram

harim eka-rasaṁ... (2)

Translation

Śrī Hari has adorned his perfectly smooth chest with a
necklace of bright pearls that repeatedly embrace his
heart. It seems as if the water of the River Yamunā is
carrying clusters of conspicuous foam.

Commentary

In this verse Kṛṣṇa is compared to the broad current of
the River Yamunā. An auspicious necklace of pearls that
hangs down to his knees repeatedly embraces his dark
blue chest. It gives the impression that the dark blue
water of the Yamunā has mixed with white foam and is
directly manifesting there. It is also implied that the
sāttvika-bhāva of profuse perspiration is clearly
visible on Kṛṣṇa’s body.

Verse 26

śyāmala-mṛdula-kalevara-maṇḍalam adhigata-gaura-dukūlam

nīla-nalinam iva pīta-parāga-paṭala-bhara-valayita-mūlam

harim eka-rasaṁ... (3)

Translation

Śrī Hari has put a yellow garment on his soft and
lustrous dark body. It seems as if a blue lotus flower
has become drenched by its anther of golden pollen.

Commentary

Śrī Hari has draped a yellow shawl over his dark blue
transcendental body. Thus his body resembles a blue
lotus flower, ornately covered by its own yellow pollen.
This also indicates that Rādhā’s golden limbs will be
even more beautiful upon Kṛṣṇa’s dark blue chest. In
this way, Kṛṣṇa’s yellow shawl heralds the awaited
viparīta-rati.

Verse 27

tarala-dṛg-añcala-calana-manohara-vadana-janita-rati-
rāgam

sphuṭa-kamalodara-khelita-khañjana-yugam iva śaradi
taḍāgam

harim eka-rasaṁ... (4)

Translation

                             204
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017


Kṛṣṇa’s enchanting face is as beautiful as a fully
blossomed blue lotus flower in the pure water of a lake
during autumn. The expressive sidelong glances of his
restless eyes, which appear to be the sporting of a
wagtail bird upon a lotus, are inflaming Rādhā’s
obsession for sensuality.

Commentary

When Rādhā entered the chamber, Kṛṣṇa’s eyes became
restless. When she saw his charming face with its mild
smile, the desire to engage in amorous pastimes awakened
in her heart. Kṛṣṇa’s smiling face resembled a fully
blossomed autumnal lotus flower upon which sported the
two wagtail birds of his restless eyes. On beholding
Rādhā, Kṛṣṇa became motionless. Therefore he has been
compared to an autumnal lake.

In this verse the restlessness of his eyes reveals his
thirst for lovemaking. The casting of his sidelong
glance arouses Rādhā’s passion. The word kamalodara also
alludes to a specific coital position called padmāsana.
His enchanting face awakens the desire for such union in
young women.

Verse 28

vadana-kamala-pariśīlana-milita-mihira-sama-kuṇḍala-
śobham

smita-ruci-kusuma-samullasitādhara-pallava-kṛta-rati-
lobham

harim eka-rasaṁ... (5)

Translation

Red as the morning sun, the beauty of Kṛṣṇa’s jewelled
ear ornaments is rising to touch the beauty of his lotus
face. Shining with the lustre of his radiant smile, his
quivering flower-bud lips are arousing Rādhā’s greed for
amorous pastimes.

Commentary

The ornaments decorating Kṛṣṇa’s ears seem to be two
rising suns meeting on his cheeks to attain the touch of
his blooming lotus face. Sunlight is a reminder that the
time for loving pastimes must come to an end. Kṛṣṇa’s
gentle smile enhances the radiance of his face. His
flower-bud lips, eager to kiss the lips of Rādhā,
express his thirst for union. As Rādhā beholds Kṛṣṇa’s
lotus face, which is the ornament of the essence of
beauty, the desire for amorous love also rises in her
heart.

Verse 29

śaśi-kiraṇa-cchuritodara-jaladhara-sundara-sakusuma-
keśam

timirodita-vidhu-maṇḍala-nirmala-malayaja-tilaka-niveśam


                          205
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

harim eka-rasaṁ... (6)

Translation

Decorated with flowers and illuminated by the rays of
the moon, Kṛṣṇa’s locks of hair seem to be a row of
fresh rainclouds. The splendour of the sandalwood paste
tilaka on his forehead gives the impression that the
full moon has risen amidst the darkness of the
unblemished sky.

Commentary

Kṛṣṇa’s beautiful curling locks are adorned with
radiant, fully blossomed flowers. Their splendour gives
the impression that the moon is hidden amongstst a mass
of dark clouds. Alternatively, the rays of the moon are
pervading his dark tresses. Another interpretation
suggests that the moon is rising in the midst of the
clouds. Clusters of flowers are clearly visible where
the moon shines in between small clouds. And wherever
the moonshine is not visible, the clouds turn into
lampblack.

The tilaka of Malaya sandalwood paste on Kṛṣṇa’s dark
forehead looks like the full moon risen in the midst of
the dark sky. The presence of Rādhā makes Kṛṣṇa’s
clothing and ornaments become golden. Now Rādhā is
looking at that golden Śyāmasundara.

Verse 30

vipula-pulaka-bhara-danturitaṁ rati-keli-kalābhir
adhīram

maṇi-gaṇa-kiraṇa-samūha-samujjvala-bhūṣaṇa-subhaga-
śarīram

harim eka-rasaṁ... (7)

Translation

Rādhā’s glance makes Kṛṣṇa’s body thrill with severe
horripilation. His mind is unsteady as many subjects
concerning sensual love awaken therein. Illuminated by
the rays of his jewels, his splendid form has assumed an
exceedingly captivating aura.

Commentary

Rādhā notices that all the hairs on Kṛṣṇa’s body are
standing on end. She is astonished to see the wonderful
way his skin-pores become erect with pleasure. He is
extraordinarily agitated by the expectation of engaging
in love-games. On meeting Rādhā, Kṛṣṇa’s excitement
mounts, along with his absorption in thoughts of kissing
and other activities suitable in a performance of the
erotic arts. Rādhā is beholding the aura of Kṛṣṇa’s
wonderful body, enhanced by the lustre of his sparkling
jewellery.

Verse 31

śrī-jayadeva-bhaṇita-vibhava-dviguṇīkṛta-bhūṣaṇa-bhāram

                          206
Gita-govinda.txt                                 5/5/2017


praṇamata hṛdi vinidhāya hariṁ suciraṁ sukṛtodaya-sāram

harim eka-rasaṁ... (8)

Translation

The splendour of the multitude of Kṛṣṇa’s ornaments has
been doubled by the variety of ornamental expressions
composed by Śrī Jayadeva. O tasteful devotees! Kṛṣṇa is
the fruit of all your pious activities. With great care,
may you hold him within your heart and offer obeisances
to him.

Commentary

To conclude, Śrī Jayadeva says, “O you who are engaged
in devotional service, the poetry of the crest-jewel of
bards, Śrī Jayadeva, has doubled the beauty of Kṛṣṇa’s
ornaments.”

Alternatively, “This narration of Kṛṣṇa’s influence is
adorned with double alaṅkāras, or ambiguous literary
embellishments. Kṛṣṇa’s appearance is the embodiment of
all your pious activities accumulated over a vast period
of time. Hold him within your heart and offer obeisances
to him.”

Such a captivating appearance of Kṛṣṇa arises within
one’s heart as a result of immense piety. When Kṛṣṇa
unites with Rādhā, his attributes are doubled by the
doubled quantity of ornaments and also by the influence
of their meeting.

“May that very Kṛṣṇa, upon whom Śrī Rādhā stares
incessantly, be graciously present within your heart for
eternal time.”

This twenty-second song of Śrī Gīta-govinda is entitled
Sānanda-govinda-rāga śreṇi-kusumābharaṇa.

Verse 32



atikramyāpāṅgaṁ śravaṇa-patha-paryanta-gamana-

prayāsenevākṣṇos taralatara-tāraṁ patitayoḥ

tadānīṁ rādhāyāḥ priyatama-samāloka-samaye

papāta svedāmbu-prakara iva harṣāśru-nikaraḥ

Translation

Within moments of meeting her beloved, Rādhā’s
unsatiated eyes tried to pass beyond their corners and
reach around to her ears. Her inner jubilation became
restless and overflowed in the form of tears of joy, as
if it were perspiration arising from the exertion of her
eyes.

Commentary


                          207
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

After feeling the pain of separation for such a long
time, when Rādhā finally met with Kṛṣṇa, her jubilation
could not remain still, so it began to overflow from her
eyes. Her extraordinarily large eyes seemed to be
dripping with perspiration from relishing the taste of
love-play.

Alternatively, her eyes tried to surpass the position of
a sidelong glance and arrive at her ears. It was as if
the perspiration, arising from the hard endeavour of her
eyes, had begun to flow like a stream of water in the
form of tears of joy. Rādhā’s eyes were also excessively
restless due to her intense hankering to see Kṛṣṇa.

This verse, which reveals Rādhā’s sāttvika-bhāva,
features upamā alaṅkāra and śikhariṇī chanda.

Verse 33



bhajantyās talpāntaṁ kṛta-kapaṭa-kaṇḍūti-pihita-

smitaṁ yāte gehād bahir avahitālī-parijane

priyāsyaṁ paśyantyāḥ smara-śara-samāhūta-subhagaṁ

salajjā lajjāpi vyagamad iva dūraṁ mṛga-dṛśaḥ

Translation

Rādhā’s attendants were eager to make her happy. As soon
as they saw the doe-eyed Rādhā sitting on Keśava’s bed,
they tactfully concealed their smiles on the pretext of
scratching themselves and made their exit from the inner
chamber of the bower. Helplessly impelled by sensual
attraction, Rādhā cast a charming sidelong glance at the
face of her most beloved Kṛṣṇa. At that time, her
shyness also departed in shame and went far away.

Commentary

The moment Rādhā sat down on the bed, her considerate
sakhīs understood that it would not be proper for them
to stay there any longer. Their presence would impede
Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava’s sweet meeting. Smiling and making
various excuses to turn away, such as scratching their
ears, those cunning sakhīs made their exit from the
chamber of flowers.

When Rādhā sat elegantly upon the bed, she became
totally under the control of Kāmadeva’s arrows. She
began to look at Kṛṣṇa as if to pierce him with those
same arrows. Seeing Rādhā’s boldness (pragalbhatā), even
the goddess of shame personified became embarrassed. As
the sakhīs had done previously, she abandoned the doe-
eyed Rādhā and went far away. Now, how will inhibition
remain in this amorous affair? With an incessant,
unblinking gaze, Rādhā took complete possession of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.

This verse features rasavad alaṅkāra and śikhariṇī
chanda.


                          208
Gita-govinda.txt                                   5/5/2017

Verse 34



sānandaṁ nanda-sūnur diśatu mita-paraṁ sammadaṁ manda-
mandaṁ

rādhām ādhāya bāhvor vivaram anu dṛḍhaṁ pīḍayan prīti-
yogāt

tuṅgau tasyā urojāv atanu-vara-tanor nirgatau mā sma
bhūtāṁ

pṛṣṭhaṁ nirbhidya tasmād bahir iti valita-grīvam
ālokayan vaḥ

Translation

The son of Nanda, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, slowly and gently took
Rādhā in his arms, then he tightly embraced her with
affection. By embracing Rādhā, he felt as if her highly
protruding breasts might pierce through his back and
come out the other side. May that Śrī Kṛṣṇa confer bliss
upon all.

Commentary

Śrī Govinda, the son of Nanda, and Rādhā have met
together alone. Fully enraptured by this meeting, Kṛṣṇa
slowly and gently put his arms around Rādhā to embrace
her. Rādhā is more delicate than an acacia flower,
therefore Kṛṣṇa held her softly in his arms.

The phrase dṛḍhaṁ pīḍayan reveals Kṛṣṇa’s ever-
increasing thirst for her love. Impelled by affection,
Kṛṣṇa then embraced her tightly. This time Kṛṣṇa felt as
if Rādhā’s erect nipples were about to pierce through
his back and come out the other side. In this context,
the hard and penetrating nature of her nipples is being
revealed, indicating the extreme sensual appeal and
fresh feminine youthfulness of her natural beauty.
Otherwise she is softer than a flower.

This verse features śṛṅgāra-rasa, vaidarbhī rīti,
prasāda guṇa and sragdharā chanda.

Verse 35



jayaśrī-vinyastair mahita iva mandāra-kusumaiḥ

svayaṁ sindūreṇa dvipa-raṇa-mudā mudrita iva

bhujāpīḍa-krīḍā-hata-kuvalayāpīḍa-kariṇaḥ

prakīrṇāsṛg-bindur jayati bhuja-daṇḍo murajitaḥ

Translation

In the wrestling match, Kṛṣṇa’s arms are beautified by
drops of blood after killing the elephant Kuvalayāpīḍa.
From his exuberance in fighting with the elephant, it
seems as if his arms are smeared with vermilion and

                          209
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

decorated with mandāra flowers by the goddess of
victory. May those broad arms of Kṛṣṇa, the conqueror of
Mura, be ever-triumphant.

Commentary

Śrī Jayadeva says, “May Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s arms confer
auspiciousness upon you all. His excellent arms are
praiseworthy throughout the entire universe. He is known
as Murajita because his arms, like rods of chastisement,
brought an end to the Mura demon. His formidable arms
also sportively dispatched Kaṁsa’s elephant,
Kuvalayāpīḍa. When drops of the elephant’s blood
spattered onto his arms, it seemed as if the goddess of
victory was personally worshipping him with pārijāta
flowers. Kṛṣṇa’s delight in killing the elephant assumed
the form of vermilion.”

It is said that Kṛṣṇa remembered Rādhā when he saw the
elephant’s protruding cranial globes. Therefore,
although his arms were beautified by drops of blood,
they seemed to be decorated with the vermilion of bliss
or by mandāra flowers offered by Vijaya-Lakṣmī, the
goddess of victory.

“May those strong arms bestow auspiciousness upon you
all. O Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s arms! All glory to you! All victory
to you!”

This verse features śikhariṇī chanda, anuprāsa and
utprekṣā alaṅkāras, pāñcālī rīti, ārabhaṭī vṛtti and
vīra-rasa.

Verse 36



saundaryaika-nidher anaṅga-lalanā-lāvaṇya-līlā-juṣo

rādhāyā hṛdi palvale manasija-krīḍaika-raṅga-sthale

ramyoroja-saroja-khelana-rasitvād ātmanaḥ khyāpayan

dhyātur mānasa-rāja-haṁsa-nibhatāṁ deyān mukundo mudam

Translation

The ocean of beauty, Śrī Rādhā, is as lustrous as Rati-
devī, the consort of Cupid. Mukunda is single-mindedly
absorbed in play with her lotus breasts upon the
enchanting stage of the lake of her heart, just as the
regal swans of Lake Mānasa play among the lotus flowers.
Śrī Mukunda praises those who meditate upon him in this
way. May he bestow happiness upon all.

Commentary

Mukunda refers to he who releases everyone from distress
and bestows bliss. In this verse the crest-jewel of
poets, Śrī Jayadeva, gives a benediction to his readers
and audience by saying that Rādhā is the only ocean of
all beauty and her bosom is the playground of Kṛṣṇa.

The poet has compared Rādhā’s chest to a lake. As lotus

                          210
Gita-govinda.txt                                 5/5/2017

flowers grow upon a lake, the two enchanting lotus
flowers of Rādhā’s breasts are growing upon the lake of
her chest. The playful Kṛṣṇa is compared to the king of
swans who takes pleasure there.

That Kṛṣṇa-swan also sports on Mānasa-sarovara, the lake
of the hearts of those who meditate upon him. May he
thus confer auspiciousness upon all his devotees.

This verse features rūpaka and āśīḥ alaṅkāras. The
chanda is śārdūla-vikrīḍita.



Thus ends the Bālabodhinī-prakāśa commentary on Act
Eleven of Śrī Gīta-govinda, entitled Sānanda-govinda.




Act Twelve




— suprīta-pītāmbaraḥ —



Verse 1



gatavati sakhī-vṛnde ’manda-trapā-bhara-nirbhara-

smara-śara-vaśākūta-sphīta-smita-snapitādharām

sarasa-manasaṁ dṛṣṭvā rādhāṁ muhur nava-pallava-

prasara-śayane nikṣiptākṣīm uvāca hariḥ priyām

Translation

hen the female attendants made their exit from the
chamber of flowering vines, Śrī Rādhā, who is extremely
bashful, became possessed by Kāmadeva, the god of
amorous love. The beauty of her lips was enhanced by the
appearance of a smile and she glanced repeatedly at the
bed made from fresh leaves and flowers with an ever-
increasing passion for love-play. Seeing his beloved
glancing in this way, Kṛṣṇa began to speak.

Commentary

When Rādhā approached the bed for love-games in the
chamber of the grove, her sakhīs considered themselves
to be obstacles and made various excuses to leave. Kṛṣṇa
saw that Rādhā had become excruciatingly shy at heart.
By the influence of kāma, a gentle smile was playing on
her lips and she was looking in the direction of the bed
of new leaves. She was unable to say anything. Her mind
was full of unquenchable desire and the fresh flower bed
was the embodiment of her exclusive intention. Seeing

                          211
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

Rādhā’s disposition, Kṛṣṇa spoke to her with ever-
increasing affection.




Scene Twenty-three




Song 23


The musical mode is vibhāsa rāga. The rhythm is ekatālī
tāla.



Verse 2

kisalaya-śayana-tale kuru kāmini caraṇa-nalina-viniveśam

tava pada-pallava-vairi-parābhavam idam anubhavatu
suveśam



kṣaṇam adhunā nārāyaṇam anugatam anusara rādhike!
(refrain) (1)

Translation

“O passionate woman, place your flower-like feet upon
this bed of newly sprouted leaves. This bed is the enemy
of the soft leaves of your feet. Let it now feel the
humiliation of defeat. O Rādhikā, for a moment, may you
follow me, your subservient Nārāyaṇa.”

Commentary

Śrī Hari said to Rādhā, “O amorous woman, put your lotus
feet upon this bed of soft leaves. These leaves are
inimical to your petal-like feet. Attack them with your
feet so that they may realize their defeat. When an
enemy conquers his adversary, he crushes him with his
feet. O my beloved, I am delighted by the festival of
seeing you. Just for a moment, now allow me to be
delighted by the festival of union with you. Now the
moment has come to follow me. Enjoy loving pastimes with
your subservient Nārāyaṇa.”

As Nārāyaṇa is the creator, Kṛṣṇa said, “I am Nārāyaṇa”,
to introduce the creation of rasa. In this context,
Nārāyaṇa means, “He who resides (ayana) in the water
(nāra) and who is the shelter (ayana) of all living
entities (nāra).”

Kṛṣṇa implies, “A distressed person becomes joyful by
sporting in the water of the ocean. Similarly, you are
also suffering from the burning sensation of lust. So
just experience love-play, as if sporting in the ocean

                          212
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

of my prema. In this way, make yourself happy and also
refresh me.”

The word anugata (subordinate) implies, “Although I am
the beloved of many, my heart is exclusively yours.”

The phrase “place your feet” (upon the bed), reveals
that Kṛṣṇa has a specific activity in mind.

Verse 3

kara-kamalena karomi caraṇam aham āgamitāsi vidūram

kṣaṇam upakuru śayanopari mām iva nūpuram anugati-śūram

kṣaṇam adhunā... (2)

Translation

“My dear one, you have come here from far away. I will
massage your lotus feet with my lotus hands. Just for a
moment, upon this bed, show favour to a hero like me,
the follower of your ankle-bells.”

Commentary

Śrī Kṛṣṇa says, “O Rādhā, you have come here after
walking from very far away. Come, let me massage your
lotus feet with my hands. I worship these feet. I am
just like your ankle-bells. As they are always ready to
follow you wherever you go, so am I. Therefore I am also
eligible to receive your favour and become the
beneficiary of your kindness. You favour your ankle-
bells by wearing them, so show the same favour to me –
upon this bed.”

Verse 4

vadana-sudhā-nidhi-galitam amṛtam iva racaya vacanam
anukūlam

viraham ivāpanayāmi payodhara-rodhakam urasi dukūlam

kṣaṇam adhunā... (3)

Translation

“O Rādhā, please speak some pleasant words that trickle
like nectar from the moon of your face. I desire to
remove separation personified in the form of the garment
that covers your breasts and obstructs our
togetherness.”

Commentary

“O Rādhā, kindly utter pleasant and alluring words that
excite passion. Your face resembles the moon. As nectar
emanates from the moon, rain streams of nectar upon me
from your moonlike face by sweetly conversing about our
sexual games. I have been suffering in separation from
you.”

According to the principle of correlation between the
subject and object of a simile, it is equally valid to

                          213
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

say, “I remove the separation that is like a fine
cloth,” or, “I remove the fine cloth that is like
separation.”

“As separation obstructs our union, the fine cloth upon
your breasts also impedes our meeting. Therefore allow
me to remove this barrier. This fine cloth encloses your
breasts. The breasts of passionate women do not flourish
at the time of separation. Similarly, breasts do not
flourish when covered by a garment, so I will remove the
covering of separation that checks the radiance of your
bosom.”

Verse 5

priya-parirambhaṇa-rabhasa-valitam iva pulakitam ati-
duravāpam

mad-urasi kuca-kalaśaṁ viniveśaya śoṣaya manasija-tāpam

kṣaṇam adhunā... (4)

Translation

“My dearest, your rarely accessible pitcher-like breasts
thrill with horripilation. They are ready to be embraced
by your most beloved. Please place them upon my chest
and vanquish the heat of my unfulfilled amorous
desires.”

Commentary

“O Rādhā, hold your round waterpot-like breasts on my
chest as if you are placing pitchers upon a sacrificial
altar (maṅgala-vedī) and remove the heat of my passion.
Heat is vanquished by the proximity of a waterpot. Every
pore of the skin on your waterpot-like breasts is
thrilling with horripilation. Your breasts are extremely
difficult to attain without your favour. Now they are
ready and intent on the embrace of your sweetheart.
Therefore, place them on my heart and drive away the
burning of my kāma.”

Verse 6

adhara-sudhā-rasam upanaya bhāmini jīvaya mṛtam iva
dāsam

tvayi vinihita-manasaṁ virahānala-dagdha-vapuṣam
avilāsam

kṣaṇam adhunā... (5)

Translation

“O haughty woman, my mind is absorbed in you. I am
burning in the fire of separation. I am bereft of all
pleasure. Your servant is as if dead. Save my life by
making me drink the nectarean juice of your lips.”

Commentary

“My dear indignant one, this servant is nothing but the
personal attendant of your feet. Be merciful to him.

                          214
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

Abandon your contrary mood. Be done with your anger. I
am burning in the fire of separation as I constantly
remember you. This servant is like a person about to
die. Infuse new life into me with the nectar of your
lips. Make this inactive person active once again. A
dead person springs back to life upon drinking nectar.
Though bereft of all happiness, my heart is attached
exclusively to you. I am being scorched by the fire of
separation, so kindly sprinkle me with the nectar of
your lips.”

Verse 7

śaśimukhi mukharaya maṇi-raśanā-guṇam anuguṇa-kaṇṭha-
ninādam

śruti-puṭa-yugale pika-ruta-vikale śamaya cirād avasādam

kṣaṇam adhunā... (6)

Translation

“Your face is as beautiful as the moon. Make the jewels
on your girdle chime in resonance with the sound of your
voice, and thereby pacify my ears, which have been
frustrated for a long time by the cuckoo’s call.”

Commentary

“O woman with a radiant moonlike face, you are the moon
that drips with nectar. Make the jewelled bells on your
girdle sing out in harmony and unison with the tone of
your voice so that when you make love to me in the upper
position, those bells will begin to mark rhythm along
with your inarticulate exclamations of ecstasy. My ears
were distressed from hearing the cuckoos’ call because
it stimulates my memories of you. For lonely lovers, the
sound of cuckoos is simply painful. Now fill my ears
with music and allay this prolonged frustration of
separation.”

Verse 8

mām ati-viphala-ruṣā vikalī-kṛtam avalokitum adhunedam

mīlita-lajjitam iva nayanaṁ tava virama visṛja rati-
khedam

kṣaṇam adhunā... (7)

Translation

“O contrary woman, you have wounded me for no reason
with your pointless anger. Your eyes are half-closed, as
if ashamed, when you glance in my direction. Now abandon
your reluctance to unite with me.”

Commentary

“O Rādhā, you continually stared at me with wrathful
eyes to give me distress for no reason. Without
provocation, you made a show of anger to make me
depressed. In this way, you broke me into pieces. But
look, now your glance is raining prema. The furious

                          215
Gita-govinda.txt                                  5/5/2017

glance is ashamed, so your eyes have become half-closed.
Now your eyes should also give up this useless half-
closed expression. Be pleased with me and
enthusiastically cast aside your languor for union.”

Verse 9

śrī-jayadeva-bhaṇitam idam anupada-nigadita-madhuripu-
modam

janayatu rasika-janeṣu manorama-rati-rasa-bhāva-vinodam

kṣaṇam adhunā... (8)

Translation

Śrī Jayadeva describes the rapturous amusements of
Madhuripu Śrī Kṛṣṇa in every word. May his song awaken
the playful pastimes of the delightful amorous rasa in
the hearts of the devotees who are expert in tasting
pure transcendental mellows.

Commentary

Herein Śrī Jayadeva has investigated the ever-increasing
ecstasy of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. This song, entitled Madhuripu-
moda-vidyādhara-līlā, delights Śrī Kṛṣṇa because it
expands the mood of rati-rasa and exposes the eroticism
of union. The incomparable nature and pre-eminence of
śṛṅgāra-rasa is accepted unanimously amongst the expert
devotees.

“May this song awaken the fascinating joy of the erotic
mellow in the hearts of connoisseurs of spiritual love.”

Verse 10



pratyūhaḥ pulakāṅkureṇa niviḍāśleṣe nimeṣeṇa ca

krīḍākūta-vilokite ’dhara-sudhā-pāne kathā-kelibhiḥ

ānandādhigamena manmatha-kalā-yuddhe ’pi yasminn abhūd

udbhūtaḥ sa tayor babhūva suratārambhaḥ priyam bhāvukaḥ

Translation

Then they began the astonishing and supremely
pleasurable love-battle for which they had both been
hankering for a long time. In the heat of that sensual
competition, horripilation from the thrill of a deep
embrace seemed to be an impediment. The blinking of
their eyes seemed to obstruct their diligent observation
of each other’s intentions in the game. While drinking
the nectar of each other’s lips, their erotic sweet-talk
became troublesome. And even the attainment of rapture
seemed like an obstacle in the contest of amorous arts.

Commentary

In this verse Śrī Jayadeva explains that Rādhā and
Mādhava have now begun their long awaited and intensely

                          216
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

pleasurable sexual union.

In the beginning of their love-games, the erection of
their skin pores creates an obstacle. Naturally the
thrill of severe horripilation momentarily impedes their
entering the posture of union.

Furthermore, the blinking of their eyes obstructed their
careful observation of each other. Their eagerness to
see each other’s special intentions made blinking
intolerable. When drinking the nectar of each other’s
lips, their erotic repartee just seemed to get in the
way. When kissing, even sweet-talk is intolerable.
Tasting each other’s lips becomes much more pleasurable
than inciting each other with provocative words. Even
the attainment of rapture seems to be an impediment in
the contest of sensual arts.

This verse features śārdūla-vikrīḍita chanda,
yathāsaṅkhya alaṅkāra and the śṛṅgāra-rasa called
sambhoga. The present verse is an introduction to the
twenty-fourth song entitled Candrahāsa.

Verse 11



dorbhyāṁ saṁyamitaḥ payodhara-bhareṇāpīḍitaḥ pāṇijair

āviddho daśanaiḥ kṣatādhara-puṭaḥ śroṇī-taṭenāhataḥ

hastenānamitaḥ kace ’dhara-madhu-syandena sammohitaḥ

kāntaḥ kām api tṛptim āpa tad aho kāmasya vāmā gatiḥ

Translation

Rādhikā’s dear lover was bound by her arms, repeatedly
crushed by the weight of her breasts and pierced by her
fingernails. His lips were wounded by her teeth and he
was severely pounded by her hips. Catching his hair with
her hands, she held him down and bewildered him with the
stream of sweet honey from her lips. In this way Kṛṣṇa
attained an exhilaration that was out of this world.
Therefore it is said that the ways of Kāmadeva are
counterintuitive.

Commentary

The poet Śrī Jayadeva is describing viparīta-rati in
this verse. He states that Kṛṣṇa has attained an
indescribable state of satisfaction. Therefore it is
said that the ways of kāma are contradictory and beyond
ordinary experience.

This paradox arises from the appearance of another rasa.
As an offender takes shelter of chivalry (vīra-rasa) to
accept his punishment, Kṛṣṇa took shelter of vīra-rasa
and progressed through the stages of being arrested,
beaten, pierced, bound, wounded and made to submit.
Finally he arrived at the state of complete
bewilderment.

Although Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s enthusiasm is relentless,

                            217
Gita-govinda.txt                                  5/5/2017

neither side is prepared to withdraw from this love-
battle. Rādhā punished Kṛṣṇa in various ways through the
medium of viparīta-rati. She bound him in the prison of
her arms. She oppressed and pummelled him with the
combined weight of her breasts. She wounded him with her
nails and bit his lips with her teeth. She bashed him
with her broad hips. She grabbed his hair with her hands
as she drank the current of honey from his lips. Rādhā
brought her lover to the point of complete bewilderment.
Such love is a matter of great wonderment!

This verse features śārdūla-vikrīḍita chanda and rasavad
alaṅkāra. Some scholars also refer to this verse as a
specific sub-section entitled Kāminīhāsa.

Verse 12



mārāṅke rati-keli-saṅkula-raṇārambhe tayā sāhasa-

prāyaṁ kānta-jayāya kiñcid upari prārambhi yat-
sambhramāt

niṣpandā jaghana-sthalī śithilatā dor-vallir utkampitaṁ

vakṣo mīlitam akṣi pauruṣa-rasaḥ strīṇāṁ kutaḥ sidhyati

Translation

At the outset of the erotic war-game, absorption in kāma
made Śrī Rādhā intensely aggressive. She mounted her
lover’s chest and vigorously began to make love to him
with great zeal in a determined attempt to achieve
victory. By doing this, her loins eventually became
motionless, her arms became slack, her breasts began to
heave and her eyes closed. Indeed, how can a woman’s
desire to taste the aggressive male rasa ever be
successful?

Commentary

In continuation of the previous description, the author
presents a further development of śṛṅgāra-rasa
amalgamated with vīra-rasa. Therefore this verse should
be accepted in the context of the previous one.

From the perspective of philosophical principles, Rādhā
is present in the left side of Kṛṣṇa’s body. At the
beginning of their intense battle of lovemaking – when
Rādhā was absorbed in the fighting spirit – she
performed impetuous acts of aggression, such as binding,
beating and so on, in order to achieve victory over her
lover. However, she eventually became completely
exhausted. When her hips became motionless, she was
unable to move. She could not bind him because her arms
fell limp. Her breasts began to tremble violently and
her eyes closed. She could not even see anything.

Some sexologists are of the opinion that women are
weaker because they cannot maintain the dominant male
position (pauruṣatva). How can vīra-rasa possibly arise
in them?


                          218
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

Some scholars call this verse Pauruṣa-prema-vilāsa. It
features śārdūla-vikrīḍita chanda, viśeṣokti alaṅkāra
and sambhoga-śṛṅgāra-rasa.

Verse 13



tasyāḥ pāṭala-pāṇijāṅkitam uro nidrā-kaṣāye dṛśau

nirdhauto ’dhara-śoṇimā vilulitāḥ srasta-srajo mūrdhajāḥ

kāñcī-dāma dara-ślathāñcalam iti prātar nikhātair dṛśor

ebhiḥ kāma-śarais tad-adbhutam abhūt patyur manaḥ
kīlitam

Translation

Śrī Rādhā’s breasts had become pink with fingernail-
marks. Her eyes were red due to sleep deprivation. The
red cosmetic on her lips had been wiped away by
prolonged kissing. The garland of flowers that had been
woven into her hair had withered. The sash around her
waist had become loose and her underwear was open. When
these five arrows confronted Kṛṣṇa’s eyes in the early
morning, his mind was impaled by the five arrows of
Kāmadeva yet again. How astonishing it is!

Commentary

Here Śrī Jayadeva adds that Kṛṣṇa becomes pierced again
by Rādhā’s five lust-provoking arrows, even when their
lovemaking is over. How strikingly wonderful! In the
early morning, Kṛṣṇa’s sensual desires reawaken. In
which of Rādhā’s limbs did Kṛṣṇa see the arrows that
excited his kāma? In answer Śrī Jayadeva says:

(1) Palāśa puṣpa-bāṇa – Kṛṣṇa had marked Rādhā’s breasts
with his fingernails while they were making love.
Therefore her breasts are the pink pulas flower arrow.

(2) Kamala puṣpa-bāṇa – Her eyes had become red from her
being awake throughout the night. Therefore her eyes are
the lotus flower arrow.

(3) Bandhujīva puṣpa-bāṇa – When the red cosmetic on
Rādhā’s lips was washed away, their natural lustre was
revealed. Therefore her lips are the scarlet mallow
flower arrow.

(4) Mālatī puṣpa-bāṇa – The flower garland adorning
Rādhā’s hair had withered and fallen because the
arrangement of her hair was repeatedly crushed during
their love-games. Therefore this wilted garland is the
jasmine flower arrow.

(5) Kusumāstra-bāṇa – Rādhā’s sash and upper cloth had
become slack. They are Kāmadeva’s golden arrows such as
the bauhinia flower.



Kṛṣṇa’s mind was naturally pierced on beholding Rādhā.

                          219
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

Her limbs are the embodiment of the powerful arrows of
Cupid, which entered Kṛṣṇa’s heart through the pathway
of his eyes.

This verse is a specific sub-section entitled
Kāmādbhutābhinava-mṛgāṅka-lekha. The chanda is śārdūla-
vikrīḍita and the rasa is adbhuta-rasopabṛṁhita śṛṅgāra.

Verse 14



yālolaḥ keśa-pāśas taralitam alakaiḥ sveda-lolau kapolau

kliṣṭā dṛṣṭādhara-śrīḥ kuca-kalaśa-rucā hāritā hāra-
yaṣṭiḥ

kāñcī-kāñcid gatāśāṁ stana-jaghana-padaṁ pāṇinācchādya
sadyaḥ

paśyantī satrapaṁ māṁ tad api vilulita-srag-dhareyaṁ
dhinoti

Translation

In the early morning, Rādhā’s hair was dishevelled and
her curling locks had fallen loose. Her cheeks had
become wet with perspiration and the brightness of her
bitten lips had faded. Her pearl necklaces were defeated
by the beauty of her pitcher-like breasts, and the
lustre of the sash on her hips had become hopeless.
Rādhā was thoroughly exhausted. She immediately began to
cover her breasts and thighs with her hands. As she
looked shyly towards Kṛṣṇa, she acquainted him with the
cause of bliss by her captivating loveliness.

Commentary

Rādhā was overwhelmed with fatigue from the incessant
thrusts of lovemaking. As soon as morning came, she
quickly began to cover her limbs out of embarrassment.
As she was covering herself, she looked at Kṛṣṇa and
captivated his heart with her tender feminine beauty.
The braid of her hair was open and her curling locks
hung down on both sides. When the perspiration dried on
her cheeks, it left behind many stains. The lustre of
her bimba-fruit lips had become dim. The splendour of
her necklace had become hopeless before the radiance of
her round waterpot-breasts. In the absence of her
bodice, her necklace seemed pale and the lustre of the
sash about her hips also faded against the background of
her naked beauty.

Appropriately, the chanda of this verse is sragdharā.

Verse 15



īṣan-mīlita-dṛṣṭi mugdha-vilasat-sītkāra-dhārā-vaśād

avyaktākula-keli-kāku-vikasad-dantāṁśu-dhautādharam

śvāsonnaddha-payodharopari-pariṣvaṅgāt kuraṅgī-dṛśo

                          220
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017


harṣotkarṣa-vimukti-niḥsaha-tanor dhanyo dhayaty ānanam

Translation

Rādhā’s large doe-like eyes were almost closed from the
abundant rapture of lovemaking. Her body was incapable
of tolerating any sort of activity. Her lips were bathed
by the rays of her teeth, which were exposed each time
she expressed a sudden surge of sensual pleasure or when
she lovingly groaned in indistinct, pitiful murmuring
sounds. Her breasts trembled slightly from her tremulous
breathing as she felt Kṛṣṇa’s deep embrace. Only a
person with immense piety can see her face in this
condition.

Commentary

The poet says that Rādhā attained an extreme state of
euphoria during her amorous love-games. Therefore, on
being released from Kṛṣṇa’s embracing and kissing, she
drowned in a unique type of fathomless joy. Under the
influence of kāma, her body was unable to endure even
the slightest exertion. In the end, when her lover Śrī
Kṛṣṇa saw her face with half closed eyes, he wanted to
kiss her again and engage in further congress.

During lovemaking, Rādhā’s breasts, though not
horripilating, became hard and somewhat compressed in
Kṛṣṇa’s tight embrace. Rādhā was gasping over and over
again in spasms of intense ecstasy. As such charming,
indistinct and incoherent sounds came out from her
mouth, the space between her lips was washed in the rays
emanating from her sparkling teeth.

Only a person with a vast accumulation of pious
activities (sukṛti) can see Rādhā’s face at that time.
Such good fortune can be attained only by Śrī Kṛṣṇa or
the maidservants (mañjarīs) of Śrī Rādhā.

This verse features śārdūla-vikrīḍita chanda, jāti
alaṅkāra, pāñcālī rīti, māgadhī gīti, bhāratī vṛtti. The
gāna features sthita laya. Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s coital
position is called vṛkṣādhirūḍhakam āliṅgana, the tree-
mounting embrace.

Verse 16



Variation 1



atha sā nirgata-bādhā rādhā svādhīna-bhartṛkā

nijagāda rati-klāntaṁ kāntaṁ maṇḍana-vāñchayā



Variation 2




                          221
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

atha sahasā suprītaṁ suratānte sā nitānta-khinnāṅgī

rādhā jagāda sādaram idam ānandena govindam

Translation

Variation 1 – Rādhā’s affliction was pacified, and Kṛṣṇa
was exhausted from the vigorous exertion of loving
pastimes. Then, in the mood of a heroine who controls
her lover (svādhīna-bhartṛkā), Rādhā spoke to Kṛṣṇa,
expressing her desire to be decorated by him.



Variation 2 – When their lovemaking came to an end, the
blissfully exhausted Rādhā began to speak courteously to
Govinda.

Commentary

When one’s lover is completely absorbed in affection,
one’s request is sure to be fruitful – this is an
axiomatic truth. Therefore, Rādhā smiled. The words she
spoke to Kṛṣṇa will be described in the next song.




Song 24


The musical mode is rāmakarī rāga. The rhythm is yati
tāla.



Verse 17

kuru yadunandana candana-śiśiratareṇa kareṇa payodhare

mṛgamada-patrakam atra manobhava-maṅgala-kalaśa-sahodare

nijagāda sā yadunandane krīḍati hṛdayānandane (refrain)
(1)

Translation

As Śrī Rādhā was playing with Kṛṣṇa, the delight of her
heart, she said, “O Yadu-nandana, with your own hands
more cooling than sandalwood paste, please paint leaf
patterns in musk upon my breasts – the auspicious
pitchers of Kāmadeva.”

Commentary

The refrain of this song includes krīḍati hṛdayānandane
because Kṛṣṇa had awakened bliss (ānanda) in the heart
(hṛdaya) of Rādhā.

Yadu-nandana refers to the son of Nanda Mahārāja, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, who appeared in the Yadu dynasty. Seeing Kṛṣṇa
intent on playing, Rādhā said, “Decorate me with your
own hands in such a way that I become completely infused

                          222
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

with you. I am kṛṣṇamayī. First of all, paint a row of
leaves in musk upon my waterpot-breasts with your cool
hand. Your touch is more refreshing than sandalwood
paste. The auspicious pitchers established during
Kāmadeva’s procession around the universe are full,
heavy, and decorated with dark mango leaves.”

This verse also alludes to a specific type of nail-mark
called mayūra-padaka, which resembles the impression
left by a peacock’s foot. The artist who will paint the
leaves in musk is being supplicated with courtesy.

Verse 18

ali-kula-gañjana-sañjanakaṁ rati-nāyaka-sāyaka-mocane

tvad-adhara-cumbana-lambita-kajjalam ujjvalaya priya
locane

nijagāda sā yadunandane... (2)

Translation

“My darling one, my eyes release the arrows of Rati’s
hero. Their cosmetic has been smudged off by the kissing
of your lips. Please make my eyes shine with this
collyrium that eclipses the beauty of a swarm of
bumblebees.”

Commentary

Rādhā continued, “O my beloved, anoint my eyes with this
fresh eye-liner, which excels the splendour of a swarm
of bumblebees. Kāmadeva’s arrows fly from my sidelong
glance. The previous application of collyrium on my eyes
has been smudged off by the kissing of your lips.”

This verse reveals Kṛṣṇa’s pastime of kissing Rādhā’s
eyes. She implies, “O my sweetheart, you are the black
ointment upon my eyes!”

Verse 19

nayana-kuraṅga-taraṅga-vikāsa-nirāsa-kare śruti-maṇḍale

manasija-pāśa-vilāsa-dhare śubha-veśa niveśaya kuṇḍale

nijagāda sā yadunandane... (3)

Translation

“O you who dress most handsomely, my earrings repel the
leaping deer of my eyes. They are like the snares of
Kāmadeva that bind the hearts of young men. Please
decorate my ears with those earrings.”

Commentary

Rādhā tells Kṛṣṇa, “My darling who wears a yellow shawl,
decorate my ears with these ornaments, elegant as the
trap of Kāmadeva. My ears prevent the deer of my eyes
from bounding away. O delight of my heart, adorn my ears
with these ornaments that bewilder the hearts of young
men.”

                          223
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017


This verse describes how Rādhā’s eyes are so wide that
they reach around to her ears. The comparison with a
deer has been made to shed light on their restlessness
and their rapid angular movements.

Verse 20

bhramara-cayaṁ racayantam upari ruciraṁ suciraṁ mama
sammukhe

jita-kamale vimale parikarmaya narma-janakam alakaṁ
mukhe

nijagāda sā yadunandane... (4)

Translation

“My unblemished and pleasing face defeats the beauty of
an immaculate lotus flower. Braid my elegant tresses,
which manifest the splendour of bumblebees upon the
lotus of my face and give rise to laughter and joking.”

Commentary

Śrī Rādhā said, “O Yadu-nandana, my face has defeated
the lustre of a lotus flower. Please arrange the locks
of hair falling over my charming, unblemished and
perfect face. My disarrayed tresses may prompt others to
pass joking comments. Or one might mistake my curls for
a crowd of bumblebees who always land and rise upon a
lotus flower. O Kṛṣṇa, you are the curling black lock
upon the lotus of my face!”

The similarity of Rādhā’s tresses to a formation of
bumblebees supports the comparison of her face with a
lotus flower. This is an example of utprekṣā alaṅkāra.

Verse 21

mṛgamada-rasa-valitaṁ lalitaṁ kuru tilakam alika-rajanī-
kare

vihita-kalaṅka-kalaṁ kamalānana viśramita-śrama-śīkare

nijagāda sā yadunandane... (5)

Translation

“O lotus-faced one, the perspiration from our vigorous
lovemaking has now dried, staining my forehead like the
deer-shaped mark upon the moon. Please draw a beautiful
tilaka with this captivating musk upon the half-moon of
my forehead.”

Commentary

As with the previous verses, this verse also reveals a
specific excitant (uddīpana-vibhāva) of the permanent
ecstatic emotion. Rādhā’s inner feeling is, “O Kṛṣṇa,
you are the central point of my good fortune – you are
the tilaka on my forehead!”

Verse 22

                          224
Gita-govinda.txt                                 5/5/2017


mama rucire cikure kuru mānada mānasaja-dhvaja-cāmare

rati-galite lalite kusumāni śikhaṇḍi-śikhaṇḍaka-ḍāmare

nijagāda sā yadunandane... (6)

Translation

“O you who give respect to others, my hair, which fell
loose as we made love, is like the whisk of Kāmadeva’s
flag. It is more captivating than the tail-feathers of a
peacock. Please decorate my charming hair with flower
blossoms.”

Commentary

Śrī Rādhā addresses Kṛṣṇa as Mānada, one who gives
honour (māna) to his beloveds, or who breaks the
contrary mood of indignant lovers. “O Kṛṣṇa, you eclipse
the tail-feathers of a peacock with your own lustre. My
black locks of hair are as charming and attractive as
the whisk of Kāmadeva’s flag. They came undone as we
were making love. Please decorate them with flowers. May
you become my braid, woven with flowers, and diffuse
your fragrance.”

Verse 23

sarasa-ghane jaghane mama śambara-dāraṇa-vāraṇa-kandare

maṇi-raśanā-vasanābharaṇāni śubhāśaya vāsaya sundare

nijagāda sā yadunandane... (7)

Translation

“O pure-hearted one,   my loins are the cave of the madly
passionate elephant,   Kāmadeva. They are full of rasa,
beautiful, pleasing,   tender and broad. Please decorate
them with a jewelled   sash, cloth and ornaments.”

Commentary

Śrī Rādhā says, “O virtuous one, my heart’s delight!
Your lotus hands are the abode of all good fortune. Your
heart, being full of rasa, is the root of all
auspiciousness. Please decorate the slope of my hips
with a jewelled girdle, garment and ornaments. My loins
are full of rasa, soft and voluptuous. They are
exquisite and alluring like a cave because they are the
abode of the madly impassioned elephant, Kāmadeva.
Please dress them with garments and ornaments. Actually,
you are the ornament of my loins.”

In this song the hero is anukūla nāyaka, the heroine is
pragalbhā nāyikā and the rasa is sambhoga-śṛṅgāra.

Verse 24

śrī-jayadeva-vacasi jayade hṛdayaṁ sadayaṁ kuru maṇḍane

hari-caraṇa-smaraṇāmṛta-kṛta-kali-kaluṣa-bhava-jvara-
khaṇḍane

                            225
Gita-govinda.txt                                  5/5/2017


nijagāda sā yadunandane... (8)

Translation

Śrī Jayadeva’s words bestow auspiciousness and steal
away the heart. They are the ambrosial memories of Śrī
Hari’s lotus feet that vanquish the fever of impurities
prominent in the age of Kali. May you express the
sympathy in your heart by decorating the message of Śrī
Jayadeva.

Commentary

This song reveals the definite plan of Rādhā’s ecstatic
love. In the ultimate transformation of Rādhā’s prema,
she wants to immerse herself entirely in Kṛṣṇa. She
desires to become kṛṣṇamaya – made of Kṛṣṇa – by the
touch of his hands. Her heart is Kṛṣṇa’s and her clothes
and ornaments are all Kṛṣṇa.

Herein the depth of the realization of Rādhā’s prema
turns into rasa and pours down like rain. Rādhā says, “O
Yadu-nandana, be compassionate enough to decorate me. Be
absorbed in empathy and become my ornaments.”

From another perspective, the subject of this song is
the eloquent speech of Śrī Jayadeva. “As you will show
compassion by decorating Rādhā, please show compassion
by decorating my words.”

Therefore, each verse can be interpreted as a specific
reference to either Rādhā’s ornaments or Jayadeva’s
words.

This composition is the nectar of remembrance of Śrī
Hari’s lotus feet. Such nectar pacifies the furious
fever of immorality in the age of Kali and destroys all
sins. Simply remembering the nectar shower of Śrī
Jayadeva’s eloquent poetry bestows auspiciousness upon
all.

Verse 25



racaya kucayoḥ patraṁ citraṁ kuruṣva kapolayor

ghaṭaya jaghane kāñcīm añca srajā kabarī-bharam

kalaya valaya-śreṇīṁ pāṇau pade kuru nūpurāv

iti nigaditaḥ prītaḥ pītāmbaro ’pi tathākarot

Translation

“O you who are as dear as my very life, paint leaves
upon my breast. Draw pictures on my cheeks. Decorate my
hips with a jewelled sash. Make a charming braid in my
hair. Put bangles on my wrists and ankle-bells on my
feet.” Kṛṣṇa, attired in a yellow garment, was pleased
to do whatever Rādhā asked of him.

Commentary

                          226
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017


Śrī Jayadeva again cites the previous song in a
condensed form and adds that Kṛṣṇa gladly accomplished
whatever Rādhā told him to do. The word api indicates
that Kṛṣṇa attended to her decorations with immense
affection exactly as she desired.

Rādhā politely insisted, “O Yadu-nandana, please paint a
row of leaves upon my breasts. Draw makara and other
pictures on my cheeks. Put a sash around my hips. The
previous garland has fallen from my hair. Weave my braid
with another charming garland. Put bangles on my wrists
and jewelled ankle-bells on my feet.” In great delight,
Kṛṣṇa lovingly arranged all these decorations. How?
Kṛṣṇa personally became all of Rādhā’s ornaments.

This verse features hariṇī chanda and saṅkhya alaṅkāra.
The heroine is pragalbhā nāyikā and the hero is dakṣiṇa
nāyaka. The rasa is the saṁyoga aspect of śṛṅgāra-rasa.

Verse 26



yad-gāndharva-kalāsu kauśalam anudhyānaṁ ca yad-
vaiṣṇavaṁ

yac chṛṅgāra-viveka-tattvam api yat kāvyeṣu līlāyitam

tat sarvaṁ jayadeva-paṇḍita-kaveḥ kṛṣṇaika-tānātmanaḥ

sānandāḥ pariśodhayantu sudhiyaḥ śrī-gīta-govindataḥ

Translation

May the learned scholars, whose hearts are focused
exclusively on Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, joyfully test
whatever arts of the gandharvas, meditations on Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, deliberations on the true nature of śṛṅgāra-rasa,
and pastimes described in other poems, against the poem
entitled Gīta-govinda. That is, may they understand
Gīta-govinda and also teach it to others.

Commentary

On the pretext of praying to the learned scholars, Śrī
Jayadeva praises himself. “O men of wisdom! Gīta-govinda
is the all in all of the poet Jayadeva. May you
understand it and also teach it to others. May you also
test how Gīta-govinda is full of rasa.”

It is necessary to examine the authenticity of a
substance. Gāndharva-vidyā is a synonym for literature
on the musical arts (saṅgīta-śāstra). Thus the poet
implies that whatever genius and expertise is present in
gāndharva-vidyā is also written in this poem. Evidence
has been presented to show that rasa is the purest
transformation of the Vaiṣṇava devotional practices of
meditation and contemplation on Bhagavān. Whatever
deliberations have been made previously about śṛṅgāra-
rasa, in its forms of meeting and separation, have also
been described here in a superior way. Whatever pastimes
have been presented in the prominent poems about
śṛṅgāra-rasa are more brilliantly manifested here.

                          227
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017


The heart and intelligence of Śrī Jayadeva are
exclusively absorbed in Kṛṣṇa. The purpose of his
composition is to induce one-pointed meditation on
Kṛṣṇa. If devotees of Kṛṣṇa want to see or examine the
pure embodiment of artistry, finely discerning
authorship, meditation, contemplation, pastimes, pre-
eminence and sheer astonishment, then they may do so
through the medium of this epic poem, Śrī Gīta-govinda.

Verse 27



sādhvī mādhvīka cintā na bhavati bhavataḥ śarkare
karkarāsi

drākṣe drakṣyanti ke tvām amṛta mṛtam asi kṣīra nīraṁ
rasas te

mākanda kranda kāntādhara dharaṇi-talaṁ gaccha yacchanti
yāvad

bhāvaṁ śṛṅgāra-sārasvatam iha jayadevasya viṣvag-vacāṁsi

Translation

Hey powerful wine! Do not think you are so intoxicating.
Hey sugar! You are too harsh. Hey grapes! Who will look
at you? Hey nectar (amṛta)! You are like death (mṛta).
Hey milk! You taste like water. Hey ripe mango! Now go
and weep. Hey lips of a beautiful woman! Now you can go
to hell. As long as the complete essence of erotic love
exists in the form of the auspicious, artful composition
of Śrī Jayadeva, you have nothing to do.

Commentary

Śrī Jayadeva is describing the sweet artistry of Gīta-
govinda. This poem is an auspicious eulogy of the
essence of the most brilliant śṛṅgāra-rasa. Its
sweetness is so unparalleled that all other substances
in the world have become insipid in its presence. No
other sweet substance can administer sweetness to the
learned devotees.

Śrī Jayadeva’s clever words are auspiciousness
personified. The concentrated essence of everything is
the romantic sentiment (śṛṅgāra-rasa), and Gīta-govinda
is the essence of that. Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s auspicious
adventures are the exclusive embodiment of good fortune
and welfare. For the expert devotees of the Supreme
Lord, there is no astonishingly sweet taste available
anywhere like the rasa of Gīta-govinda. All the
sweetness in the entire world combined together in one
place has become tasteless in the presence of this
poetry.

The author says, “Hey wine! What will you think about
now? Your sweetness is in vain. What can your
intoxicating effect do for the righteous devotees? Hey
sugar! What happened to your sweetness? How harsh you
are. Are you worthy of investigation? You have no
substance. Hey grapes! Do not fear. Can any connoisseur

                          228
Gita-govinda.txt                               5/5/2017

of rasa ever even look in your direction? Hey nectar!
You should not be proud. You have died. Hey milk! Do not
proudly think ‘I am rasa’, because your rasa is just
water. Hey ripe mango! You have to cry. The devotees who
are expert at tasting juice (rasa) will not be concerned
about your growing old. Hey lips of passionate young
women! You also have no place. Go to Pātāla, the
residence of the infernals. Those who are expert in
relishing the rasa of this poetry do not experience any
sweetness in you.”

This literature is nothing but auspiciousness in the
beginning, the middle and the end. Therefore it is the
ingredient cause of the word śubha (auspiciousness).

The present verse features sragdharā chanda, āramayī
vṛtti, vaidarbhī rīti, tiraskṛtopadā alaṅkāra and the
nāṭya alaṅkāra called guṇa-kīrtana.

Verse 28



itthaṁ keli-tatīr vihṛtya yamunā-kūle samaṁ rādhayā

tad-romāvali-mauktikāvali-yuge veṇī-bhramaṁ bibhrati

tatrāhlādi-kuca-prayāga-phalayor lipsāvator hastayār

vyāpārāḥ puruṣottamasya dadatu sphītāṁ mudā sampadam

Translation

In this way, Kṛṣṇa enjoyed many love-games with Rādhā on
the Yamunā riverside. He mistook the row of hairs above
her navel and her pearl necklace to be the Prayāga
confluence. The fruits of that Prayāga are her
delightful breasts. Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the best of males,
desires to attain those breasts. May the affairs of his
two lotus hands bestow the wealth of happiness upon the
reciters and the audience of this poem.

Commentary

Śrī Jayadeva says, “May the activities of Kṛṣṇa’s hands
bestow immense happiness upon my reciters and my
audience.”

The speciality of his hands is that they perpetually
find joy in the Veṇī-saṅgama or Prayāga confluence.
Breasts are the fruit of this Prayāga. According to his
own desires, Kṛṣṇa plays many games with the dominant
heroine, Rādhā, on the banks of the Yamunā.

The meeting of Rādhā’s row of hairs (romāvalī) above her
navel with her necklace of pearls inspires remembrance
of the playful confluence of the rivers Ganges and
Yamunā. Her romāvalī has been compared with the Yamunā
because it is dark like Kṛṣṇa, and her pearls are bright
so they have been compared to the Ganges. Their meeting
place must surely be Prayāga. Śrī Rādhā is herself
Prayāga and the fruits of bathing in this Prayāga are
her breasts.


                          229
Gita-govinda.txt                                5/5/2017

“May whatever activities Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s hands perform,
impelled by the desire to attain the delightful fruit of
this Prayāga, confer ever-increasing bliss upon all
those who recite and hear this poem.”

This sub-section is entitled Suprīta-pītāmbara-
tālaśreṇī. It features sāṅga-rūpaka alaṅkāra, śārdūla-
vikrīḍita chanda, pāñcālī rīti and gīti and bhāratī
vṛtti. The heroine is svādhīna-bhartṛkā nāyikā and the
hero is uttama nāyaka with the attributes of dhīrodātta.

Verse 29



paryaṅkī-kṛta-nāga-nāyaka-phaṇā-śreṇī-maṇīnāṁ gaṇe

saṅkrānta-pratibimba-saṅkalanayā bibhrad vibhu-prakriyām

pādāmbhoruha-dhāri-vāridhi-sutām akṣṇāṁ didṛkṣuḥ śataiḥ

kāya-vyūham ivācarann upacitībhūto hariḥ pātu vaḥ

Translation

He who has kept Śeṣa-rāja, the chief of all serpents as
his bed; whose splendour is expanded as reflections in
the jewels upon Śeṣa-rāja’s innumerable hoods; whose
lotus feet are eternally massaged by the goddess of
fortune who desires to see him with thousands of eyes;
who is abounding simultaneously in many forms; may that
Śrī Hari protect you all.

Verse 30



tvām aprāpya mayi svayaṁvara-parāṁ kṣīroda-tīrodare

śaṅke sundari kālakūṭam apivat mūḍho mṛḍānī-patiḥ

itthaṁ pūrva-kathābhir anya-manaso vikṣipya vakṣo
’ñcalaṁ

padmāyāḥ stana-korakopari-milan-netro hariḥ pātu vaḥ

Translation

“O beautiful one! When the Lord of Pārvatī (Śiva) could
not attain you on the shore of the ocean of milk,
bewildered by your beauty, he swallowed the deadly
kālakūṭa poison. Then you selected me to be your
consort.”8

Remembering this previous conversation, Kṛṣṇa repeatedly
filled his eyes with the sight of the treasured
mahāpadma jewels of Śrī Rādhā’s breasts. May that Śrī
Hari protect you all.

Verse 31

śrī-bhojadeva-prabhavasya vāmā-

devī-suta śrī-jayadevakasya

                          230
Gita-govinda.txt                                  5/5/2017


parāśarādi-priya-bandhu-kaṇṭhe

śrī-gīta-govinda-kavitvam astu

Translation

May the poetry of Śrī Gīta-govinda by Śrī Jayadeva, the
son of Śrī Bhojadeva and Vāmā-devī, beautify the voices
of dear friends such as Parāśara.

Commentary

The sound of this poem should vastly expand and
continuously vibrate throughout the sky.

“May this unprecedented picture of pastimes continue to
be beautified eternally in the hearts of the devotees.
May Śrī Gīta-govinda become their beloved, more beloved
and most beloved all-inclusive life’s breath for
awakening their remembrance of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the embodiment
of rasa.”



Thus ends the Bālabodhinī-prakāśa commentary on Act
Twelve of Śrī Gīta-govinda, entitled Suprīta-pītāmbara.




The End




                          231
