Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                       5/5/2017

Going Beyond Vaikuṇṭha



Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

GVP (2011)



Tags: Going Beyond Vaikuṇṭha

Going Beyond Vaikuṇṭhattt



* * *




* * *




Going Beyond Vaikuṇṭha

Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja



Contents

Chapter One The Brāhmaṇa Meets Gopa-kumāra

Chapter Two Gopa-kumāra’s Remarkable Journey

Chapter Three The Superiority of Nāma-saṅkīrtana

Chapter Four The Moods of Intimacy and Sweetness

Chapter Five Bhagavān’s Incarnations are One

Chapter Six Kṛṣṇa’s Glories are Inconceivable

Chapter Seven Bhagavān’s Inconceivable Potency

Chapter Eight The Glories of Yogamāyā

Chapter Nine Kṛṣṇa Gives Prema Even to His Enemies

Chapter Ten The Gradations in Service

Chapter Eleven The Proper Mood for Arcana

Chapter Twelve Ultimately Prema Cannot Be Described




                             1
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

Introduction

This book is a collection of lectures which were spoken
originally in Hindi by one of the most renowned Vaiṣṇava
ācāryas of modern times, oṁ viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja. They comprise an
instalment of the immaculate commentary which he spoke
over a period of two years on Śrīla Sanātana
Gosvāmīpāda's Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta. Described herein
is how although having recently arrived in Śrī
Vaikuṇṭha-dhāma, the most desirable of places and whose
entrance is sought after by unlimited saintly persons,
Gopa-kumāra is feeling despondent and cannot even
ascertain the cause of his own dissatisfaction. At that
time he is approached by Śrī Nārada Ṛṣi, who becomes his
śikṣā-guru and enlightens him with the tattva necessary
to complete his spiritual journey and thereby attain the
fulfilment of all his long-cherished internal desires.
Therefore we are fully confident that eager sādhakas who
themselves sincerely yearn to one day go beyond
Vaikuṇṭha and enter Śrī Goloka-Vraja, the transcendental
land of spontaneous loving devotion to Śrī Śrī Rādhā-
Govinda, will find this publication very useful.

This material was recorded in January of 1991 at Śrīla
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja’s favoured place of residence, Śrī
Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha in Mathurā. I would like to
express my gratitude to Śrīmatī Āśā Nārāyaṇa (M.A. in
Sanskrit) for assisting with the translation, to Śrīmān
Ālwārnātha dāsa Vānacārī for his splendid editing of
this material, and to Śrīmatī Yaśodā-gopī-devī dāsī for
proofreading the book and for contributing the funds
which made its publication possible. Together we offer
it into the hands of Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, the crown-
jewel of rasika Vaiṣṇavas, praying that he will bless us
with the necessary qualification to continue serving him
in this capacity.



Vaiṣṇava dāsānudāsa, Prema-vilāsa dāsa


Completed on March 27, 1994, Śrī Gaura-pūrṇimā, the
anniversary of the appearance of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu.




Chapter One

The Brāhmaṇa Meets Gopa-kumāra




The Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta contains many fine topics
concerning bhakti. By hearing them with great attention
and interest, certainly a sublime type of greed will
arise, and that ‘greed will move us in the direction of
Vraja. For any sādhaka who desires rāgānugā-bhakti, the

                             2
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta is very useful. How we can enter
into bhagavad-bhakti and what is the nature of bhagavad-
bhakti-this book describes both of these topics
completely.

After the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam was spoken in seven days,
the mother of Parīkṣit Mahārāja, Uttarā, said to her
son, ´Because what Śukadeva Gosvāmī explained was so
philosophical and full of siddhānta, I was not able to
experience it in my heart due to being a woman.
Therefore you please explain the essence of it in a
simple fashion, in a few words only, so that I may
understand it well.”

Then Parīkṣit Mahārāja described how Nārada, from his
own experience, showed the glories of Bhagavān by
revealing the glories of His dhāma and the glories of
His eternal associates. Nārada, by going to different
holy places and different worlds, achieved bhagavat-
tattva (knowledge of Bhagavān), and he experienced how
Bhagavān is one yet expands into many. Similarly, the
dhāma is one, with Vṛndāvana as the original dhāma, and
it expands into many. And the original associates of
Bhagavān are those of Vṛndāvana, and they are likewise
expanded into many other worlds. This is the siddhānta:
the one is expanded into many. Bhagavān is not two,
three, ten, or twenty. Nārada is the crown-jewel of
those who know this tattva, and he is rasika (expert in
relishing rasa). So pretending that he didn’t know any
of this, Nārada began his journey.

First he met a brāhmaṇa worshipping his śālagrāma-śilā.
He said to the brāhmaṇa, ´In this world, you are surely
fortunate.” Beginning from there, he ultimately arrived
at Dvārakā, where he realised the gopīs to be the
topmost devotees. The gopīs of Vṛndāvana are
categorically higher than those great souls who are
situated in all the other rasas, and even higher than
the queens of Dvārakā. And amongst all the gopīs,
Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the best.


ārādhanānāṁ sarveṣāṁ

viṣṇor ārādhanaṁ param

tasmāt parataraṁ devi

tadīyānāṁ samarcanam


Padma Purāṇa


Mahādeva told Durgādevī, “Of all varieties of worship,
worship of Viṣṇu is the best. But even better than that
is the worship of those devotees related to Him.”

In this verse the word tadīyānāṁ means those who have a
relationship with Bhagavān. There are so many who are
related to Him, but amongst them, Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the
best. Hearing all of this, Nārada became overwhelmed
with prema. Especially in the pastime of constructing
Nava-vṛndāvana in Dvārakā, he was shown the glories of

                             3
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

the gopīs. Seeing how Kṛṣṇa was overwhelmed by
separation from the gopīs, Satyabhāmā, Rukmiṇī,
Jāmbavatī and all others became astonished. Nārada was
very pleased, but then he began to feel ashamed,
thinking, “By coming here today and making Kṛṣṇa
remember the gopīs, I have given Him some pain and made
Him fall unconscious.”

Kṛṣṇa said, “You may ask any boon from Me.”

Nārada replied, “Ask for a boon? I have committed a
great offence at Your feet! I have given You so much
trouble and made You fall unconscious.”

Kṛṣṇa said, “If you had not done this, then the glories
of My eternal associates in Vraja would never be
broadcast. Therefore you are worthy of taking a boon
from Me. Tell Me what you would like.”

So Nārada said, “Prabhu, I want to always remember Your
pastimes with the gopīs in Vṛndāvana. Wherever these
pastimes are being performed, I want to go to that place
and take the dust on my head. I want to always sing the
kīrtana of those pastimes, and if You would be so
merciful, please give me the prema of the gopīs.”

Kṛṣṇa said, “So it shall be. Going to the places of My
pastimes in Vraja-especially Nandagrāma, Varṣāṇā,
Govardhana, Yāvaṭa, Ter-kadamba, Uddhava-kyārī,
Vaṁśīvaṭa, and Rādhā-kuṇḍa-with great love you should
offer praṇāma and pray for their mercy. Then you will
easily obtain that rare prema which even Brahmā
desires.”

According to the gradation of His associates, there is
gradation in Bhagavān. There are so many different types
of devotees, different types of pastimes, and different
types of rasa. For the four Kumāras, Kṛṣṇa appears as
Brahmā, for Hanumān the same Kṛṣṇa appears as Rāmacandra
Prabhu, for Viśvakṣena and the devotees in Vaikuṇṭha He
is Nārāyaṇa, and for Satyabhāmā, Rukmiṇī, and Uddhava He
is Dvārakādīśa. To the gopas He is a friend, to those in
vātsalya-rasa He is a son, and to the gopīs He is the
dearest lover: all are one and the same Kṛṣṇa. How is it
possible to comprehend all of this? Only by the mercy of
Bhagavān and His devotees will we be able to fully
understand this; without their mercy it is not possible.

By relating the story of Gopa-kumāra, Parīkṣit Mahārāja
explained to his mother in a very simple and charming
way how we can attain prema. If anyone desires prema but
performs no śravaṇa and kīrtana, or thinks that he will
attain it merely by his own endeavour, he will never get
it. Without service to the guru and service to the
Vaiṣṇavas, then even after thousands of births or even
after reading thousands of scriptures, one will still
not be able to attain prema. Only by following the
prescribed sādhana is it possible. It has been said that
if we neglect the regulations of the śruti, smṛti, and
Nārada-paṣcarātra, we will not attain exclusive bhakti,
but only become confused. Therefore we must follow the
rules and regulations. What are they? We must accept
dīkṣā or initiation, offer intimate service to the guru,
and accept instruction from him. We must simply serve

                             4
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

the guru and Vaiṣṇavas, and keep arrogance far away by
cultivating humility and not thinking highly of
ourselves.

tṛṇād api sunīcena taror api sahiṣṇunā amāninā mānadena
kīrtanīyah sadā hariḥ



Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka 3


“One should take harināma in a humble state of mind,
thinking oneself to be more insignificant than a piece
of straw. One should be more tolerant than a tree, free
from false pride, and ready to offer all respect to
others.”

The more we can follow this, then by the mercy of
Bhagavān, and by the mercy of the Vaiṣṇavas-which is the
very essence of the mercy of Bhagavān-the sooner bhakti
will appear in our hearts.

If Bhagavān bestows His mercy on someone, then he will
attain bhakti. He has that power. But why does He give
His mercy to some persons and not to others? In this
world most people don’t engage in bhagavat-bhajana, and
to them He will not give His mercy. Then very few people
will get His mercy. Why is this so? Because He doesn’t
consider everyone to be equal. If mercy is shown to some
and not to others, it appears that the fault of
partiality is present. If a devotee makes distinctions
in regard to whom he is merciful, then it seems that the
fault of partiality has appeared in his devotion. To
give much love to one person, less to another; to give
much instruction to one and less to another; to tell
deep things to one and only superficial things to
another-in this behaviour it seems that there is the
fault of partiality.

But there are three types of Vaiṣṇavas: uttama,
madhyama, and kaniṣṭha. An uttama Vaiṣṇava has almost
all the good qualities of Bhagavān. They don’t
experience the sufferings of ordinary people. They are
ātmārāma (self-satisfied) and āptakāma (devoid of
mundane desires). Even if some allurement comes before
them, they are never disturbed and are always fixed in
internal worship. They will not show kindness to anyone
either, and even if someone dies they may remain
indifferent. They are transcendental to the body and
full of ātmā-jñāna.

The kaniṣṭha Vaiṣṇava does not have sufficient knowledge
of tattva, and is therefore unable to give mercy. And
there are four symptoms of a madhyama Vaiṣṇava:


īśvare tad-adhīneṣu bāliśeṣu dviṣatsu ca prema-maitrī-
kṛpopekṣā yaḥ karoti sa madhyamaḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāg. 11.2.46


                             5
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017


For Bhagavān he has prema, and towards Vaiṣṇavas he has
three types of friendly relations. Towards an uttama
Vaiṣṇava he has a service attitude, with those on an
equal footing to himself he will establish friendship,
and towards a kaniṣṭha Vaiṣṇava he is merciful. He is
completely indifferent to envious people, and to those
who are ignorant but have a little faith, in a general
way he is merciful.

In a madhyama-adhikārī there are these four types of
partiality, but in an uttama-adhikārī there is no such
partiality. He has the same outlook towards everyone. He
doesn’t see the difference between a conditioned soul
and a liberated soul; he sees that everyone is
liberated. Therefore he has no duty. But it is the duty
of the madhyama Vaiṣṇava to have this partiality.
Therefore, who will give the mercy by which bhakti will
arise? The madhyama Vaiṣṇava, and especially those that
are higher madhyama Vaiṣṇavas will give this mercy. One
who is entering the realm of an uttama Vaiṣṇava-who is
not there yet, but is qualified to cross the upper limit
of the madhyama stage- is especially kind and merciful.
He wants to distribute to others the wealth which he has
stored inside his own heart. When he distributes mercy,
the fault of partiality cannot be attributed to him,
because according to the Bhāgavatam, it is actually a
symptom of this stage to be partial. If we acquire the
association of such a Vaiṣṇava, then we should serve him
with our life and soul.


śuśrūṣayā bhajana-vijñam ananyam anya



nindādi-śūnya-hṛdam īpsita-saṅga-labdhyā



Upadeśāmṛta 5


“We should serve a Vaiṣṇava who is advanced in bhakti
and whose heart is free from the tendency to criticise
others.”

If we achieve the association of such a Vaiṣṇava, then
it is necessary for us to offer our head bowed to him in
surrender. If there is any cheating tendency in our
service, he will know of it. Just like Bhagavān, he can
see inside us and he knows well peoples cheating ways.
He may dispense punishment to us, but in that there will
also be mercy. Or upon perceiving our cheating he may be
indifferent towards us, so in a straightforward manner
we should serve him.

There are also two types of mercy from Vaiṣṇavas. One is
mercy acquired in previous lives, and the other is mercy
acquired in this life. The accumulated pious merit from
perhaps millions of lifetimes may result in one's
receiving mercy from Vaiṣṇavas who are rasika, merciful
by nature, and knowledgeable in tattva, thereby leading
one to take initiation from a genuine guru and make

                             6
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

progress on the path of bhajana. This is called
prāktana-saṁskāra: that which has been acquired in
previous births. Having such previous acquisition, in
some very rare cases there may even be no necessity of
formally accepting a guru. For instance, Haridāsa
Ṭhākura and so many of the associates of Caitanya
Mahāprabhu were already fully developed in bhakti and
for them there was no necessity of taking formal
initiation, but still they accepted it just to set an
example for common people.

There is also the case of Bharata Mahārāja. In his first
birth he had a guru, but in his second and third births
he did not formally accept a guru, yet still, without
effort he attained bhāva. He didn’t listen to his father
or anyone who tried to dissuade him from the path of
bhakti. This is prāktana-saṁskāra, having which one will
easily acquire a high guru, attain sādhu-saṅga, and very
quickly feel devotional sentiment arise within him.
Maybe only one verse of śāstra will be recited to him,
and from that only he will understand everything. Those
who have this previous merit will have some ruci or
taste for devotional life, and will knowingly accept
initiation from a rasika Vaiṣṇava. Then intense greed
for bhakti will arise in them, and they will make rapid
progress in bhajana.

As for those who don’t have this previous merit, by
hearing about the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa from the Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam and by associating with Vaiṣṇavas, greed for
bhakti will gradually arise in them. Then they will
accept a guru. But they may accept a guru whose thought
is not in the right line, and so they will have to leave
him and approach a genuinely spiritual guru whose
siddhānta is correct. Or they may accept a real guru in
the first place, and when that guru leaves this world,
what must they do? Accept a śikṣā-guru, a rasika
Vaiṣṇava who is full of spiritual greed. These are the
two types of mercy from Vaiṣṇavas.

In the Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta, Gopa-kumāra explains all
of these points to a brāhmaṇa from his own life’s
experience. This brāhmaṇa was a resident of
Prāgjyotiṣapura in Āssām. Just as we see these days in
Gujarāt there are scholars who wander here and there
speaking from the scriptures to make their living, so
this brāhmaṇa’s aim was like that. He was thinking that
there was a great deal of money in Āssām, and that
somehow or other he would be able to make a living
there. So he went there, and when he didn’t make any
money, he worshipped Kāmākhyā-devī (Pārvatī-devī). She
became very pleased with him, and understanding his
internal sentiment, thought, “It appears that he has
some sukṛti from previous lives. If I give him just a
little help, he will be able to go far. But first his
desire for money must be eliminated, and then he will be
able to go forward.” She appeared before the brāhmaṇa
and said, “You desire wealth? There is nothing greater
than the treasure that I will give you.”

What is the greatest wealth? Bhakti. If anyone
approaches a genuine guru-even if that person is just an
ignorant boy or girl and not able to understand much
siddhānta-still, such a guru will slowly give them

                             7
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

bhagavat-prema. But an impure guru will say, “Worship
Devī, worship Gaṇeśa, worship Śaṅkara, and being pleased
with you, they will give you whatever you desire.”

Kāmākhyā-devī, upon seeing a person’s nature, will act
accordingly. Seeing that this brāhmaṇa was a resident of
Govardhana, she decided that he should not be cheated in
any way. Understanding his simple nature, she gave him
the gopāla-mantra.

For entrance into mādhurya-rasa this mantra is
especially necessary. By the mercy of Sanātana Gosvāmī
and other exalted Vaiṣṇavas, the gopāla-mantra is now
prevalent in our sampradāya. Before the appearance of
Caitanya Mahāprabhu this mantra was not made available
to everyone. It was only given to those who were
understood to have the special qualification of
sufficient merit from previous lifetimes.

Devī gave this brāhmaṇa her darśana and bestowed this
mantra upon him. Chanting the mantra, his devotion
became firm. Chanting more and more, he eventually lost
his desire for wealth, and felt that he already
possessed the very root of all wealth. From Āssām he
went to the ocean at Gaṅgāsāgara and bathed, and
becoming indifferent to that place he went to Gayā.
Feeling indifferent there he went to Vārāṇasī, where he
became a little attracted to the conception of mukti or
liberation. There Pārvatī-devī again blessed him with
her darśana, yet this time she was accompanied by her
husband Śaṅkara, who said, “Beware! Don’t stay here! Go
away from here immediately!”

If they are especially merciful to someone, they will
instruct him in this way. Otherwise, one would remain
there, and shaving his head, would begin chanting “ahaṁ
brahmāsmi”, “tat-tvam asi” and “sarvam-khalvidam-
brahma”, aspiring for impersonal liberation. But being
merciful to this brāhmaṇa, Mahādeva and Pārvatī told
him, “Run away from here quickly; you mustn’t stay!
Mukti is like a tigress that will devour you, and you
will never re-emerge from its mouth! Run from here
quickly and don’t turn back! Go straight to Mathurā,
bathe at Viśrama-ghāṭa, and then proceed directly to
Vṛndāvana!”

On the way the brāhmaṇa spent some time in Prayāga where
he saw a crowd of thousands of people. Seated around a
fire performing a sacrifice were big, big renunciates
with their hair tied high on their heads and ashes
smeared on their bodies. Others were giving lectures and
readings and loudly chanting, “Jaya Śrī Rāma! Jaya Śrī
Rāma!” For the month of Māgha all types of sādhus go
there to bathe. The āśrama of Bharadvāja Ṛṣi where
Vālmīki spent some time is there, and there also
Rāmacandra crossed the Gaṅgā. It is a very pure place;
Caitanya Mahāprabhu instructed Rūpa Gosvāmī there as
well.

Seeing all of this, the brāhmaṇa thought, “If I could be
like this also, it would be very good.” The people were
giving great respect to all of the saints there. He took
darśana of the Bindhu-Mādhava Deity, attended the ārati,
and heard lectures. When some devotees started

                             8
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

performing a kīrtana, he said, “What are you shouting?
And what is all of this which you are speaking in your
discourses?”

They said to him, “Brother, don’t speak out so brashly
like this; it will be aparādha. The mahātmās are
describing the glories of Bhagavān Śrī Viṣṇu in their
discourses.”

Again the brāhmaṇa felt indifferent and left there.
Following the instructions of Śaṅkara he eventually
arrived at Mathurā and bathed at Viśrama-ghāṭa. In
Vārāṇasī Śaṅkara had told him, “If you continue chanting
your mantra-japa, your favourite Deity will give you
darśana.”

Who is the Deity of the gopāla-mantra? Gopāla Kṛṣṇa. And
which Gopāla Kṛṣṇa? It is according to the particular
sentiment of the devotee. To some it is the Gopāla that
takes the cows out for grazing, to some it is baby Kṛṣṇa
sitting in the lap of Yaśodā, and for those in mādhurya-
rasa it is Kiśora-Gopāla. For this brāhmaṇa, it was
Kṛṣṇa taking the cows out for grazing, playing the
flute, and wandering in the forests of Vṛndāvana in the
company of His cowherd friends.

If we do not receive the darśana of Kṛṣṇa in our
meditation while we are chanting our mantra-japa, in the
higher sense we can understand it all to be useless.
“When will it be? When will it be?”-we should have this
eagerness. We should chant with our hearts, and then we
will see that this mantra will bestow His direct
darśana. Otherwise birth after birth it will be
fruitless. If we are mindless while chanting, or
worried, or sometimes falling asleep, or sometimes
becoming discouraged, we will not receive the full
result of the mantra. When will we get the full result
of the mantra? When we chant in precisely the way which
Gurudeva has taught us, and as Pārvatī instructed this
brāhmaṇa: chanting with our concentration focused,
ridding our hearts of all desires for sense enjoyment,
with humility, and with tears coming to our eyes in
remembrance-this will bring Gopāla. We must chant with a
steady mind and exclusive sentiment, and eventually the
mantra will give us direct darśana of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself.



gurau goṣṭhe goṣṭhālayiṣu sujane bhūsura-gaṇe sva-mantre



Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā 1


We should chant with peace of mind, love, and firm
faith, and then the mantra will give us darśana of our
Deity, and also darśana of our guru.

After bathing at Viśrama-ghāṭa, the brāhmaṇa entered
Vṛndāvana. Eventually he arrived at the banks of the
Yamunā, and at that time there was no town or village
there. From a kuṣja he heard a voice lamenting, but it
was also very sweet. He could not discern if it was

                             9
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

someone crying, if it was a kīrtana, or even whether it
was a man or woman, but the sound was attracting him.
Slowly he began searching after this voice until he came
to a dense kuṣja amongst the gardens of the Yamunā near
Keśī-ghāṭa. Entering the kuṣja, he saw a very effulgent
and attractive brāhmaṇa. It was Gopa-kumāra, and he was
chanting this kīrtana in a very sweet melody:


śrī-kṛṣṇa gopāla hare mukunda



govinda he nanda-kiśora kṛṣṇa



hā śrī-yaśodā-tanaya prasīda



śrī-ballavī-jīvana rādhikeśa



Bṛhad-bhāg. 2.4.7


In his kīrtana he was emphasising the line “hā śrī-
yasodā-tanaya prasīda.” He was shedding tears and saliva
was falling from his mouth. Whether he was conscious or
unconscious, the brāhmaṇa couldn't tell. Bringing some
water from the Yamunā, the brāhmaṇa cleaned Gopa-
kumāra’s mouth, and fanning him, gradually brought him
to his external senses. After a little while Gopa-kumāra
arose and said, “You have come from Āssām, from
Prāgjyotiṣapura? There Devī gave you some mantra?” The
brāhmaṇa did not reply. “She gave you the gopāla-mantra?
From there, via Gaṅgāsāgara and Gayā, you went to
Vārāṇasī, and there Śaṅkara and Pārvatī gave you some
instruction? And via Prayāga you have come here?”

The more Gopa-kumāra said, the more the brāhmaṇa was
astonished, and deep faith arose in him towards Gopa-
kumāra. Thinking, “How did he know this?” the brāhmaṇa
could only stand motionlessly and listen, stunned. He
was deeply influenced. When we have this kind of
experience, the faith that it produces will stay with us
for our entire life. When we are fortunate enough to
meet such a guru, the effect will be lasting. But upon
meeting a bogus guru we will get a different feeling.
The so-called guru will say, “My friend, please take
harināma initiation from me.”

One may reply, “No, not now; perhaps I will take it
tomorrow or the next day.”

But if the so-called guru sees that, “This man is
wealthy and has a nice house and nice possessions;
through him we can get some work done. There is some
litigation against us, and since he has a post with the
government, he can clear it up for us,” then he will
say, “No, there is no need to wait. Take it now;
otherwise your mind will become distracted. Just bring a

                             10
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

flower garland.”

And even if one does not want to bring a garland, the
false guru will say, “Alright then; for you there will
be no restriction in regard to eating and drinking such
as being vegetarian and abstaining from wine. Whose
mantra do you want? Would you like the Gaṇeśa mantra?”

A pure guru will not do any of this funny business with
mantras. He will thoughtfully determine the sentiment of
a prospective disciple, and if the person has a genuine
desire for kṛṣṇa-bhakti, then he will give him the
mantra. Otherwise, on some pretext he will postpone it
and send the person away. Especially if a madhyama-
adhikārī guru is a little weak, he will keep the
prospective disciple in his company for some time, first
become convinced about his purity of purpose, and then
give him the mantra. The madhyama-adhikārī Vaiṣṇava
mostly acts as guru, not the uttama-adhikārī. An uttama-
adhikārī Vaiṣṇava must come down a little to the
madhyama-adhikārī stage in order to act as guru; but the
uttama-adhikārī generally does not initiate disciples.
Nārada became the guru of many persons, but he never
actually performed the rituals of a formal initiation
ceremony. He would simply inspire the flow of bhakti in
someone’s heart, give some instruction, and nothing
more.

Once there was a man named Kabīra who wanted to take
initiation from a Rāmānuja-Vaiṣṇava named Rāmānanda
Ācārya. Whenever he would come asking for initiation,
Rāmānanda would send him away. Rāmānanda considered this
Kabīra to be a first-class māyāvādī, a nirviśeṣa-vādī,
and therefore thought that he shouldn’t be given
initiation. So, one night, when it was extremely dark
and Rāmānanda was going to bathe, Kabīra, knowing that
he was coming, lay down on the path in front of him.
Because of the darkness, Rāmānanda did not see Kabīra
lying there and tripped over him. Thinking that he had
offended someone by touching them with his feet, he
said, “Say Rāma! Say Rāma!”

Then, standing up and clasping Rāmānanda’s feet, Kabīra
said, “This is my initiation, Gurujī. Now you are my
guru. Rāma, Rāma, Rāma...”

One can get initiated by this kind of trickery also, but
we cannot obtain devotion in this way. Kabīra simply
remained a first-class māyāvādī.

Gopa-kumāra was saying such things that it inspired full
faith in the brāhmaṇa. The brāhmaṇa said, “I have come
from afar, and in my heart there is a strong desire to
know one thing: what is sādhya, the final goal, and
sādhana, the method to attain it?”

If this question is not within a sādhaka or disciple,
then he will never reach the desired goal. When
Mahāprabhu was in East Bengal, Tapana Miśra asked Him,
“What is our sādhya and sādhana?” By asking this
question, a disciple will please his guru very much, and
the guru will reply, “Oh, what a beautiful question you
have asked!”


                             11
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

A disciple will be thinking, “Until now I have been
unable to ascertain what our sādhya is. Who should we
worship, and how should we perform that worship? What is
our necessity? To whom will we go, and how will we get
to Him?”

Therefore, from the very beginning of our spiritual
practice, we must know what is sādhana and what is
sādhya: “Which path should I take? And by travelling
along this path, what will I attain?” This knowledge is
given only in a real sampradāya; in some sampradāyas we
don’t even find this.

Gopa-kumāra said to the brāhmaṇa, “My dear friend, there
is little time. I will tell you some things regarding
this from my own experience. You already possess the
mantra, and you have already obtained the darśana of
Mahādeva and Pārvatī-devī. It is possible, in some
circumstances, that the mantra alone will give you
everything. But without remaining in the appropriate
Vaiṣṇava association, it is generally not possible to
learn the answer to your question. Therefore, in very
simple language I will help you to understand what is
sādhya and sādhana. I will tell you in sequence, one
stage after the other. If I immediately tell you about
vraja-prema, the prema of the gopīs, the prema of
Rādhikā, or if I immediately tell you how Śrī Kṛṣṇa-
Nanda-nandana, Naṭavara, Śyāma-sundara, Rādhā-kānta-is
alone our most worshipable Deity, you will not
understand. If I tell you first about the intimate
pastimes of Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, you will not
understand. So I will explain the gradation involved,
and according to your specific internal nature you will
catch a particular sentiment.”

Then Gopa-kumāra began his own life story: “I took birth
in the home of a milkman at Govardhana. When I was a
little grown up, my parents would send me to take the
cows for grazing. Taking the cows out to graze, drinking
milk, and playing with my friends: it was the carefree
life of a young cowherd boy. My friends and I were
fearless; we could even fight without fear of being
rebuked. The relationships between people there were
real and intimate, and this is how I grew up.

“One day I saw a brāhmaṇa, and he was very merciful to
me. He was always performing kīrtana of the name of
Bhagavān, and I saw that he was very renounced, never
caring for anything of this world. I began to develop
some faith in him. My mother would tell me to take him
some milk, and I would go and deliver it to him. I told
him that whenever he became hungry, he should tell us.
While taking the cows out every day, I would go to see
him, and slowly I came to love him. Eventually I loved
him with my whole heart and soul, so much so that I
forgot the affection of my mother and father and
everyone else.

“I saw him in many different states-sometimes laughing,
sometimes running, and sometimes rolling on the banks of
the Yamunā shouting, ‘Hā Kṛṣṇa! Hā Kṛṣṇa! Witnessing
this, great faith for him arose within me. My
relationship with the brāhmaṇa was very sweet. Like a
mother I would sometimes bring him roṭis and other

                             12
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

things, but mostly he would take milk. When I would come
and sit before him, he would put his hand on my head,
pat me on the back and show me great affection. As a
result of this, slowly I became indifferent to the
things of this world, and I desired to receive
initiation from him.

“Then one day I insisted that he initiate me. He told me
to first go and bathe in the Yamunā. I did so, and upon
returning, he spoke the mantra into my ear, the same
mantra that Pārvatī-devī has given you. Then my gurudeva
began to tell me the rules and regulations for chanting.
He said, ‘Who is the Deity of this mantra? And by
chanting it, what kind of sentiment will come into your
heart? Listen: with the flute in His hands and a peacock
feather on His head, the incomparably marvellous
Śyāmasundara... Then at that moment he became
overwhelmed with bhāva and fell to the ground
unconscious, without having said a word about the rules
and regulations or sādhya and sādhana. He had only told
me the mantra; he didn’t tell me its meaning, or how
many times to chant it, or even how to sit while
chanting. There was foam coming from his mouth, his
limbs were shivering, and the hairs of his body stood
erect. I ran to the Yamunā for water to revive him, but
when I returned he was no longer there. I searched
through all of the kuṣjas of the entire area of
Vṛndāvana. Searching and searching I became exhausted,
and not finding him anywhere, I became very upset.”

When I received initiation from my guru, Śrīla Bhakti
Prajñāna Keśava Mahārāja, I also asked him, “Please tell
me a little of the meaning of the gopāla-mantra and
kāma-gāyatrī.” He replied, “Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are the
gopāla-mantra and kāma-gāyatrī. By chanting them, Rādhā
and Kṛṣṇa will eventually reveal Themselves to you.
There is no necessity of knowing the full meaning now.
When the appropriate time comes, the mantras will flow
in your heart and reveal everything to you.” I have
always followed his instruction in this regard and there
has never been any necessity for me to ask anyone else.




Chapter Two

Gopa-kumāra’s Remarkable Journey




Gopa-kumāra’s guru had disappeared, but his niṣṭhā or
firm faith never left him. He never thought of going in
a different direction. Whatever the guru tells us is the
supreme truth of the Vedas, and we should always keep it
with us. A sādhaka may desire to understand everything
by relying solely upon his own experience and then
moving forward. Rather than accepting what anyone else
may tell him, he may feel that he must directly
experience everything himself. But the guru can see that
trying to understand everything step by step may take

                             13
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

millions of lives. What is heaven? What is Siddha-loka?
What are the Bhūr, Bhuvar, Svar, Mahar, Jana, and Tapo-
lokas? What kind of things can be seen there, and what
kinds of enjoyment are available? What happiness is
there within the eight material coverings? What is in
Śiva-loka? What is in Vaikuṇṭha-loka? What is in Rāma-
loka? We may desire to see and understand all of this by
our own endeavour and then consider and accept the
highest thing. But one does not progress this way.

For instance, there may be some worldly man who doesn’t
practice any sādhana. We will say to him, “My friend,
performing bhajana of Bhagavān is the most beneficial
thing for you. Leave everything else behind and simply
engage in bhajana.”

So the man may think, “But what about the love of my
parents? And I have not yet married-I want to have a
little experience of family life.”

If he has sufficient sukṛti or merit from previous
lifetimes, then he might leave his home; but for those
who don’t have this previous merit, it will be very
difficult. Therefore we can understand that those who
have left their families to engage in bhajana with great
determination have sukṛti from their previous births.
There is no necessity for them to become involved in
family life. Great devotees like Śukadeva Gosvāmī and
Nārada Ṛṣi had this previous merit. Generally, by
observing someone’s activities, we can discern whether
they have this sukṛti or not.

Many people want to experience all of the many worlds
themselves, but not everyone will have the previous
merit to do so. Therefore, being merciful, Sanātana
Gosvāmī has explained the happiness to be attained in
those worlds, the situation there, and the reason for
ultimately becoming indifferent to one world and going
to another. He revealed all of this through the medium
of the story of Gopa-kumāra, taking us through all of
those worlds until we finally arrive in Goloka-
Vṛndāvana.

But we mustn’t think that Sanātana Gosvāmī has merely
composed a fictitious novel describing Gopa-kumāra’s
extensive journey; this book contains a wide variety of
siddhānta with very deep meaning. For example, some
people think that the main reason Kṛṣṇa comes to this
world is to relieve the Earth’s burden. But really He
comes to give pleasure to His devotees, and especially
to broadcast to the world the prema of the gopīs and to
taste it Himself. Caitanya Mahāprabhu would accomplish
many purposes by one activity. He would perform one
activity, but from that, five people would be
instructed, and five separate objectives would be
achieved. In the same spirit Sanātana Gosvāmī has
presented the Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta.

Gopa-kumāra continued his story: “I was very upset at
the loss of my guru. By the influence of chanting my
mantra I felt deep spiritual longing and therefore left
my home and family. At Prayāga, I saw a brāhmaṇa engaged
in worshipping his śālagrāma-śilā on the banks of the
Gaṅgā. I thought that I would also like to do this, but

                             14
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

when I saw him place his śilā in a box, I thought, ‘If
Ṭhākurajī is placed in a box, He will have to go to
sleep hungry, and He won’t be able to move either! It
gave me some pain and unhappiness to see this.

“On the advice of that brāhmaṇa, I went to the king of
Kerala in South India, who was engaged there in
worshipping four-armed Padmanābha with great opulence.
He was also feeding, serving, and providing all
conveniences to the Vaiṣṇavas. Witnessing the opulence
of that worship, I stayed there for some time with great
love. I was thinking that I also would like to serve the
Deity as the king was doing. Then the king died with no
heir, and the court astrologers found the signs of a
king on my hand, so I was made the king and carried on
the worship. But whenever the Deity’s prasāda was
touched by a person from a lower caste, no one would eat
it. People would also accept or reject the prasāda on
the basis of whether it was cooked or uncooked, and I
was very unhappy to see all of this. The prasāda of the
Deity is spiritual, and there should be no such
considerations. Therefore I began to feel indifferent
towards that place.

“From some Vaiṣṇavas I heard the glories of Śrī
Jagannātha. They said, ‘In Nīlācala there are no such
considerations about prasāda. Even if the prasāda has
been touched by the mouth of a dog, it will still be
taken. Regardless of whether it is dry, stale, or
rotten, it is still considered to be non-different from
Bhagavān Himself.

“So I went there, and upon seeing this I was very
pleased. After taking darśana of Jagannātha for some
time, I began to desire to serve Him in the same manner
as the king there. I thought that I would like to become
the king myself so I could serve the Deity with my own
hands. Then the king died, and there was no qualified
person to succeed him. His oldest son had left home to
engage in bhajana, and the younger son didn’t possess
the necessary signs of a king. The people were in
anxiety about who would inherit the throne, so they
prayed to Jagannātha. He revealed to them in a dream,
‘The throne should be entrusted to whoever has the signs
of a king on his hands and feet. The proper signs must
be there, and they cannot be cut in any way. Someone may
have the proper signs, but they may be cut. He who has
the unbroken signs of a flower, waterpot, star, and
conchshell should be made the king.

“Seeing these signs on my hands alone, they installed me
on the throne. I carried on the Deity's service for some
time and was very happy. But ultimately I began to feel
detached from that place. I saw that the pujārīs were
always fighting amongst themselves, and sometimes I
could not see the Deity because the mandira was closed,
and this caused me to feel great separation. Also
Jagannāthajī never spoke to me. I was chanting my
gopāla-mantra, and I desired to have the darśana of that
Gopāla who plays freely and independently with the
gopas. I was unable to embrace Jagannātha and have such
free dealings with Him as I desired.

“Then one day I saw my gurudeva receiving darśana in the

                             15
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

mandira, but he was so overwhelmed with emotion that I
could not approach him. He was just gazing at
Jagannātha. Thinking that I would speak with him later,
I looked away, but when I looked again Gurujī had
vanished. I was again upset at losing him. The following
day, while wandering on the shores of the ocean, I saw
him seated there. There was foam on his mouth and tears
in his eyes as he was saying ‘Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa. After
bringing him to external consciousness, I fell at his
feet, and then he told me the purport of the mantra and
some regulations for chanting it. He said, ‘This mantra
will bestow whatever one desires. If you desire to see
Bhagavān Himself or anything else, this mantra will
fulfil your desire. After saying a little more he again
became absorbed in emotion, and where he went after
that, I don’t know.”

Which mantra is this? The gopāla-mantra. Although at
present our faith may not be fully developed, just see
how much power is contained within the gopāla-mantra!

Gopa-kumāra continued, “My faith increased by hearing
just these few words from him, and with great love I
chanted my mantra. At that time I was feeling
indifferent to Nīlācala, and then I heard from some
sages that in the heavenly planets Indra is serving
Bhagavān directly.”

Chanting his mantra-japa, intense hankering for going
there arose within him, and he immediately arrived in
Indra-loka. There Indra was directly serving Upendra
delectable foods and drinks like a loving brother. By
the influence of his mantra-japa, Gopa-kumāra desired to
attain the position of Indra. When Indra fled out of
fear of the demons, the sages and demigods appointed him
to the position of Indra. For some time he enjoyed the
facilities that came with that position and served
Upendra in different ways. But during the night he was
unable to have Upendra’s darśana, and for this reason he
began to feel indifferent towards that place as well.
Next Gopa-kumāra travelled throughout the Bhūr, Bhuvar,
and Svar planetary systems, having conversations with
Pippalāyana and other sages. After that he went to
Brahma-loka, where he gradually attained the position of
Brahmā.

There the personified Vedas, Upaniṣads, Purāṇas, and
other scriptures were debating amongst themselves. Some
were propounding merging into Brahman while others were
advocating bhagavad-bhakti. They were trying to decide
which of the two is superior and whom should be
worshipped. At first the Bhāgavatam remained neutral and
merely listened as they all debated. But in the end the
words of the Bhāgavatam were established as the best,
and the glories of Śrī Viṣṇu and Vaikuṇṭha were
delineated.

Again feeling indifferent to his surroundings, Gopa-
kumāra chanted his mantra-japa and returned to the
Vṛndāvana of this world, where he again met his guru,
Jayanta. Jayanta blessed him, saying, “What you have
seen until now is due to the influence of your mantra,
and by continuing your chanting you will also be able to
cross the eight material coverings. You will be able to

                             16
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

cross the Virajā river and go to Siddha-loka. I am
giving you my blessings that you will receive a body
that will be suitable for travelling to all of those
higher worlds, because no one can go there in a material
body. The desires of your heart will surely be
fulfilled, but in the course of your journey you mustn’t
ever stop. Ultimately you will reach your desired goal
by going in sequence, step by step.”

There is a related story about a sage of Daṇḍakāraṇya
who was performing austerities. He was chanting the
gopāla-mantra for thousands of years, yet he remained in
this world. Eventually Śrī Rāmacandra and Sītādevī
arrived in Daṇḍakāraṇya. Seeing the beauty of Rāma, the
sage’s mind became attracted. He prayed to Rāma, “I beg
that just as Sītā is serving You, I may serve You in
Your form as Gopāla. Please grant me this benediction.”

Rāma said, “Alright, so it shall be, but you cannot go
to Goloka directly. When the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa appear in
this universe, you will enter the womb of a gopī of
Vraja and develop your identity there. You will marry
and have a husband, mother-in-law, father-in-law, and
sister-in-law, but in a hidden way your first love will
always be for Gopāla. By the influence of the gopīs
association you will attain perfection, and any doubts
or ignorance that you may have will vanish. You will
appear in the womb of a gopī, you will develop an
identity within the līlā, your sentiment will become
perfected, and when Kṛṣṇa and His pastimes disappear
from this world, you will accompany them to Goloka-
Vṛndāvana and become an eternal companion of Kṛṣṇa. This
is the path.”

As long as our sentiment is not perfected, we will
remain in the Vraja of this world. After attaining
perfection we will leave this world; Bhagavān Himself
has said this thousands of times. Now we are proceeding
along the path step by step, and by the mercy of guru,
when the appropriate time comes we will obtain a body
suitable for travel to higher worlds; but the material
body is not able to go there.

Gopa-kumāra appeared the same as before, but at this
time he shed his material form and assumed a purely
spiritual form. Now like electricity he crossed in one
minute the eight material coverings which before had
taken him millions of years to cross step by step. The
denizens of the heavenly planets showered flowers on him
as he passed by at great speed, and Brahmā and others
offered praṇāma to him. Crossing those eight coverings
he saw whatever happiness was available inside them, and
then crossing the Virajā he arrived in Śiva-loka.

Brahma-loka consists of two sections: the upper part is
called Sadāśiva-loka, and the lower part is Siddha-loka,
which is the destination given to the demons who are
personally killed by Bhagavān. The nirviśeṣa-vādīs also
attain this destination after meditating on the formless
light for millions of years. That is called sāyujya-
mukti. This lower part is also called Mahā-kāla-puram or
Sāyujya-loka by the sages. This Mahā-kāla-puram is where
Kṛṣṇā took Arjuna to retrieve the son of the brāhmaṇa.


                             17
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

When Gopa-kumāra was at this Siddha-loka, he saw that it
was like a very deep river where one remains submerged
in nirviśeṣa-brahma for some time and then rises up
again. By chanting his gopāla-mantra he would come up,
but then by the influence of the lower world he would
again be submerged. Looking upon this formless void with
abhorrence, he proceeded up from Siddha-loka to
Sadāśiva-loka. There Śaṅkara and Pārvatī were performing
kīrtana and dancing with their associates. Pārvatī is
also known as Gaurī or she who possesses a bright bodily
complexion. Her limbs were shining like pure camphor and
making her appear very beautiful. She was playing some
musical instruments and Śaṅkarajī was dancing. Gaṇeśa
was singing, and Kārttikeya, Nandī, Bhringī, and all of
their associates were present there, glorifying Bhagavān
and dancing. At that time Gaṅeśa told Gopa-kumāra that
Śaṅkara and Bhagavān are one and the same, non-
different. After some time, Gopa-kumāra looked up into
the sky and saw four people there performing kīrtana.
They were eternal residents of Vaikuṇṭha. Seeing Śiva
and Pārvatī, they offered praṇāma and said, “O Mahādeva,
you and Hari are the same Soul.”

Hearing this, Śiva put his hands over his ears and said,
“What are you saying? You don’t know any tattva. Me-the
īśvara? No, I am not ?śvara, I am the servant of ?śvara,
the servant of Nārāyaṇa.”

After those four residents of Vaikuṇṭha elucidated some
tattva, Śiva began speaking to Gopa-kumāra: “Who can go
to Vaikuṇṭha? After one hundred births of giving
charity, performing pious activities, and following
varṇāśrama-dharma perfectly, one attains the position of
Brahmā. Then, by performing the function of Brahmā well
for one hundred births, one becomes Śiva. After assuming
the post of Śiva for thousands of years, one becomes a
Vaiṣṇava. I also desire to become a Vaiṣṇava. Then, by
practicing sādhana-bhakti as a Vaiṣṇava, one attains
Vaikuṇṭha. Therefore, attaining Vaikuṇṭha is not easy;
it is very rare. It appears that you are ready to enter
Vaikuṇṭha, but you cannot go straight there from here;
there is no direct path. From here go to Vraja, engage
in some bhajana and sādhana, and then you can go there.”

Chanting his gopāla-mantra, Gopa-kumāra saw that he had
arrived at Vṛndāvana in the very same kuṣja near Keśī-
Ghāṭa where he had previously met his guru. There he
immersed himself in sādhana-bhajana, and one day he was
reunited with his guru Jayanta. With great prema in his
heart Jayanta began to tell him some deep secrets, and
Gopa-kumāra was very pleased. What kind of secret
things? Related to progress in sādhana-bhajana: “Your
favourite Deity is Gopāla, and you are worshipping Him
in sakhya-bhāva. Until now you have been chanting the
gopāla-mantra, but in Vaikuṇṭha that mantra will no
longer be effective. There is no sādhana there; it is a
place of sādhya or final attainment. Therefore, all of
the branches of sādhana that you have practiced up until
now will not be effective there. Now your internal
svarūpa as a sakhā has arisen. You are related to Kṛṣṇa
as His beloved friend.”

The mantra had cleansed all kinds of anarthas and
aparādha from Gopa-kumāra’s heart and established his

                             18
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

eternal relationship with Bhagavān. This is such an
exalted achievement. The eternal relationship with Kṛṣṇa
that we achieve in our hearts will be in whichever rasa
we find tasteful. As long we do not possess pure
attachment to Kṛṣṇa, our bhajana will not be pure.
Especially for coming to the stage of rāgānugā-bhakti
this sentiment is so necessary: “Kṛṣṇa is mine, and I am
His.” At this stage none of the troubles of the material
world can disturb us. In the stage of bhāva these
troubles may come, but in the stage of prema we will not
be aware of these troubles and they cannot touch us,
just as in the cases of Śukadeva Gosvāmī, Nārada Ṛṣi,
and Prahlāda. But some difficulty came to Bharata
Mahārāja who was only in the stage of bhāva and he was
overwhelmed. So in the stage of bhāva some troubles may
still come, but after that, like the wind they will all
fly away and we will not even be aware of them. Then no
anartha, fruit of karma, or anything unpalatable will
come, and in our eternal form we will relish our eternal
relationship with Kṛṣṇa.

Then Jayanta secretly told Gopa-kumāra this mantra:

śrī-kṛṣṇa gopāla hare mukunda



govinda he nanda-kiśora kṛṣṇa



hā śrī-yaśodā-tanaya prasīda



śrī-ballavī-jīvana rādhikeśa



Bṛhad-bhāg. 2.4.7


In this mantra, for Gopa-kumāra the emphasis was on “hā
śrī-yaśodā-tanaya prasīda (O son of Yaśodā),” which for
him is the primary name of Kṛṣṇa, the others being
secondary. For his particular internal sentiment,
‘Yaśodā-tanaya is primary because He is Gopa-kumāra’s
dear friend, while the remaining names are descriptions:
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Gopāla, Hare, Mukunda, Govinda, Nanda-kiśora,
Śrī-ballavī-jīvana, and Rādhikeśa. If someone’s
sentiment is in mādhurya-rasa, then Rādhikeśa (the Lord
of Rādhā) may be the primary name, and the rest will be
secondary.

According to the sentiment in one’s heart, one of these
names will be selected as the primary name. Śrī-Yaśodā-
tanaya can be the primary name for both sakhya-rasa and
vātsalya-rasa. In mādhurya-rasa, two names are primary:
Śrī-ballavī-jīvana (He who is the very life of the
gopīs) and Rādhikeśa. Within the name Śrī-ballavī-jīvana
a bhāva is hidden-a very important, deep bhāva. To some
devotees, the name Rādhikeśa will not be given; to them
the name Śrī-ballavī-jīvana will be given. If a devotee
has no desire to become a sakhī, but wants instead to

                             19
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

become a dāsī and render service which assists the
amorous pastimes of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa from that position,
then the name Śrī-ballavī-jīvana is given to them. But
those who chant Rādhikeśa will become sakhīs. As we
progress in sādhana we will be able to better understand
these subtle points.

Jayanta didn’t tell these secret things to just anyone,
only to Gopa-kumāra. Then, while Gopa-kumāra was looking
the other way, Jayanta vanished again. With dazzling
effulgence and the speed of electricity he would appear,
tell Gopa-kumāra one or two things, and then disappear.
But we are so fortunate that we have been given the
opportunity to spend so much time in the personal
company of our guru. Every day we speak with him and he
gives us personal instruction and everything. Therefore
we are not really such qualified recipients. If we were,
then shining like electricity Gurudeva would appear and
give us one or two relevant thoughts which we would keep
with us for all time; then he would vanish. Like feeding
us milk-have you seen a dog with her puppies? She comes
and feeds them milk, and when she again leaves from
there, the puppies race after her. But she nudges them
away and proceeds, leaving them standing at a distance
just watching, and then finally they return home. Like
this, the guru will come, nurture the sentiment of a
disciple by giving some relevant instruction, and then
vanish.

After residing in Vṛndāvana and performing bhajana for
some time, Gopa-kumāra became absorbed in prema. Then
one day he beheld the most wondrous vision: wearing
yellow cloth, playing the flute, smiling, and speaking
to him with His eyes, Śrī Kṛṣṇa was suddenly present
before him. Gopa-kumāra cried out, “Oh! My very life!”
and raced after Him. Coming near to Kṛṣṇa he tried to
embrace Him, but just then Kṛṣṇa disappeared. Crying and
crying in deep separation, Gopa-kumāra fell to the
ground unconscious. While in his unconscious state, he
saw a beautiful golden airplane appear before him at the
speed of mind. Inside it were those same four residents
of Vaikuṇṭha whom he had met in Śiva-loka and who had
spoken some tattva to him. They said, “Please come; now
we are proceeding to Vaikuṇṭha.”

Mostly still in an unconscious state, Gopa-kumāra stood
up and sat inside the airplane. When he opened his eyes
he thought, “Where have I arrived at? Where am I?” At
once he found himself in a waiting room at the gates of
Vaikuṇṭha. His guardians told him, “You please wait
here. We are going inside to obtain the order from
Prabhu, and then we will take you inside.”

Saying this they went inside, and took quite some time
to return. Then Gopa-kumāra saw, one after another, many
eternal associates of Bhagavān entering through the
gates. They were carrying presents and paraphernalia for
the pūjā of Nārāyaṇa. Seeing their shining effulgence,
he mistook one of them to be Nārāyaṇa Himself, and
offering his praṇāma said, “Hey Nārāyaṇa! Hey Prabhu!
Please be merciful to me!”

That devotee replied, “Oh! Don’t call me Nārāyaṇa! I am
not Nārāyaṇa! I am only the servant of the servant of

                             20
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

Nārāyaṇa.” Everyone that came was greeted by Gopa-kumāra
in the same manner. He was wonderstruck at the opulence
of Vaikuṇṭha. He saw monkeys, bears, peacocks and other
kinds of birds arriving there, and they all appeared
divinely beautiful. Then the four Vaiṣṇavas who had
brought him returned and said, “Come! Prabhu has given
His order.”

Upon entering through the gates and seeing the opulence
of the doorman, Gopa-kumāra mistook him to be Nārāyaṇa
as well and began to offer him praṇāms and prayers. The
doorman put his hands over his ears and the party
proceeded further until they reached an interior
chamber. There, accompanied by Lakṣmīdevī herself and
with Nārada and other sages at His side was Śrī
Nārāyaṇa, reclining to one side on His elbow. He was
chewing betel nuts and appeared very splendid. Gopa-
kumāra offered praṇāma, and Nārāyaṇa raised His hand in
bestowal of blessings and said, “You have given Me so
much suffering. For millions of years I have been
waiting for you, thinking, ‘When will he come to Me?
Millions of years have passed, and until now I could not
find any pretext to bring you here to Vaikuṇṭha. I was
very upset about this, but I saw that you didn’t have
even a little desire to meet Me. If you had only chanted
even one of My names just once, taken sādhu-saṅga or
offered some service to a saint-but you did nothing at
all. Even if you had done parikramā of a mandira just
once! One particular pigeon did, and I awarded him
entrance into My abode. I could have done the same for
you. A hunter with a bow and arrow shot this pigeon who
was seated on the branch of a tree, and the bird fell to
the ground. In its wounded condition, unintentionally,
the pigeon did parikramā of the mandira one time before
dying. From that it attained enough merit to take a
human birth and begin voluntarily associating with
sādhus. Then in its next birth it came to Me.

“There was also one mouse who entered a mandira to drink
ghee. The ghee lamp was flickering, almost extinguished,
and just then this mouse began drinking some ghee from
it. By this movement the lamp became lit again, and the
mouse ran off, frightened. From this he attained the
result of offering a lamp to the Deity. In his next life
he took a human birth and then gradually by the mercy of
the Vaiṣṇavas he attained Vaikuṇṭha. But you didn’t even
do anything like this. All of the time you were opposed
to Me. You remained in bad company, always spoke about
mundane topics, and you were always absorbed in sense
enjoyment. You never did anything to bring yourself in
My direction. I thought, ‘By any means I must save him.
So I arranged for you to take birth at Govardhana and
then I Myself came as your guru: that was none other-
that was Me. I gave you the gopāla-mantra, and then I
kept coming in the midst of your progress to nourish
your mantra and strengthen your sādhana.

“One will not meet such a guru in one or two lives, but
only after thousands of births will one receive a guru
who can lead him to Me. I came to you in many forms and
gave you inspiration, instilled spiritual strength
within you, and told you all of the deep secrets of
bhajana. Now, it is very good that we have finally met,
and I am very happy! You will stay here now and not go

                             21
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

anywhere else.”

Gopa-kumāra began staying there. One day Lakṣmīdevī saw
that the evening was approaching and everyone had left
the presence of Nārāyaṇa except Gopa-kumāra. Since
Lakṣmīdevī alone serves Nārāyaṇa food and drink and
massages His feet, she told Viśvakṣena and others to
employ some cleverness to draw Gopa-kumāra away. They
said to him, “Come and take rest, it is late. Everyone
is going, and you also need rest; you appear very tired.
Therefore please come with us and take some rest.” They
tried this trickery to draw Gopa-kumāra away, but he
didn’t desire to go. Finally they affectionately took
his hand and led him away, but this made him very
unhappy.

Another day Nārāyaṇa called Gopa-kumāra and said, “Come
and do the service of fanning Me.” Gopa-kumāra became
very pleased upon obtaining this service, but what did
he really want? “I desire to play the flute with Him,
embrace Him, and take prasāda directly from His plate. I
want to take the cows out to graze with Him and
accompany Him to His house where His mother will feed us
and give us nice things to drink. I want this type of
free and independent relationship with Nārāyaṇa, but He
will not reciprocate with me in the same way. Instead,
here I am bound up: with my hands together I must offer
praṇāma.” Thinking like this, Gopa-kumāra became even
more unhappy.

One day Nārada approached Gopa-kumāra and said, “Your
face appears withered in unhappiness. I can see that you
are not satisfied.” Even before Gopa-kumāra could reply,
Nārada had understood everything. Beginning to speak,
Nārada felt a little shy because Lakṣmīdevī and others
were nearby and he could not speak openly before them.
So he took Gopa-kumāra to a solitary place, and said,
“Aho! Inside you there is some very deep desire? Here
you don’t have the relationship with Bhagavān that you
desire. You desire sakhya-bhāva. Here Bhagavān will not
kiss and embrace you; you cannot eat from the same plate
with Him and sleep on the same bed. All these loving
exchanges of sakhya-bhāva are what you really desire.
This has been your very, very strong desire for a very
long time.

“In this place your desire will not be fulfilled, but
don’t be discouraged because there is one thing you must
understand: Nārāyaṇa is your worshipable Lord. He and
the Gopāla that you desire in sakhya-bhāva are one and
the same, non-different. Silently you are desiring to
play with Him in sakhya-bhāva, but here your desire will
not be fulfilled. I will tell you how to proceed upwards
to your next destination.”




Chapter Three

The Superiority of Nāma-saṅkīrtana



                             22
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017



In telling Gopa-kumāra the sādhana for attaining
Vaikuṇṭha, the four-armed eternal associates of Nārāyaṇa
said:

manyāmahe kīrtanam eva sattamaṁ lokātmakaika-sva-hṛdi
smarat smṛteḥ vāci sva-yukte manasi śrutau tathā divyāt
parān apy apakurvad ātmya-vat



Bṛhad-bhāg. 2.3.148


“Because it engages the voice, ears, and mind, and
because it attracts others as it does oneself, we
consider that kīrtana is better than trying to remember
the Lord with the fickle mind.”

There are so many kinds of sādhana for attaining
Vaikuṇṭha, and this refers to the entire realm of
Vaikuṇṭha, up to Vṛndāvana. For everyone in a general
way, it is said that there are many sādhanas for
attaining Vaikuṇṭha such as ninefold bhakti, fivefold
bhakti, sixty-four kinds of bhakti, and so on. Amongst
all of these, three are primary: śravaṇa, kīrtana, and
smaraṇa. Of these three, kīrtana and smaraṇa are
primary. What is the meaning of smaraṇa? Rūpa Gosvāmī
says it means that while your tongue is chanting your
favourite name of Bhagavān, your mind is remembering
Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes.

In our sampradāya there are many who consider that
leaving aside all other methods, only dhyāna or
meditation should be done. Especially for developing
rāgānugā-bhakti, meditating on the topics of Kṛṣṇa's
pastimes and remembering His aṣṭakāla-līlā have been
recommended as the best type of smaraṇa. But here,
Sanātana Gosvāmī, through the medium of Gopa-kumāra and
the four-armed eternal associates of Nārāyaṇa, is saying
that saṅkīrtana is the best method of all. Why? Because
the mind is restless; it won’t remain steady. If anyone
can deeply meditate on the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa with a
steady mind, then that is alright. But in almost every
situation the mind is not peaceful; it remains restless.
Therefore there is only one plan:

evaṁ-vrataḥ sva-priya-nāma-kīrtyā jātānurāgo druta-citta
uccaiḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāg. 11.2.40

With a melted heart, loudly sing about the name, form,
qualities, and pastimes of Bhagavān. When one sincerely
chants his favourite name of Bhagavān, then from the
tongue that name will enter the mind and then the heart,
thereby quieting all of the senses. If by any separate
endeavour one tries to control the restless mind, he
will not be able to do so. For concentrating the mind,
kīrtana is necessary, and especially for Kali-yuga, Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu has given us nāma-saṅkīrtana as the

                             23
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

yuga-dharma.


harer nāma harer nāma harer nāmaiva kevalam kalau nāsty
eva nāsty eva nāsty eva gatir anyathā



Bṛhan-nāradīya Purāṇa 38.126




“In Kali-yuga, hari-kīrtana is the only means of
deliverance. There is no other way.”

Only nāma-saṅkīrtana will make the restless mind steady,
and is therefore the best method of all. If one performs
smaraṇa that is dependent on kīrtana, then that will be
effective. Arising on the tongue, nāma-saṅkīrtana will
control all of the remaining senses and the mind also.
Otherwise the mind is like a horse without a rider. If
there are no reins and no rider, what will the horse do?
Run here and there according to his own desire. But if
the rider of kīrtana climbs upon the horse of our mind
and takes the reins, then the horse of the mind will not
run aimlessly but will go wherever the rider directs
him. So what the four-armed eternal associates of
Nārāyaṇa were saying was conducive for the cultivation
of bhakti, and ultimately for gaining entrance into
Vraja. For this reason Jayanta gave Gopa-kumāra this
mantra to chant:


śrī-kṛṣṇa gopāla hare mukunda govinda he nanda-kiśora
kṛṣṇa hā śrī-yaśodā-tanaya prasīda śrī-ballavī-jīvana
rādhikeśa


We have heard that anyone who doesn’t perform kīrtana
which is full of the names of Bhagavān, but only chants
the gopāla-mantra will not be able to enter Goloka-
Vraja. But it has also been said that the sixty-thousand
maharṣis who witnessed the pastimes of Rāma in Satya-
yuga performed sādhana by chanting the gopāla-mantra,
and as a result they attained the forms of gopīs in
their next lives. And those who cite this reference say,
“So how can the gopāla-mantra be considered inferior?
The kāma-gāyatrī is inferior? They will not take one to
Goloka? The gopāla-mantra and the kāma-gāyatrī are
mantras of perfection! Anyone who performs sādhana by
chanting them will certainly attain Goloka!”

How can we harmonise this? Harmonising this seems to be
a very difficult task because it appears that there is a
contradiction in our siddhānta. Some say that only nāma-
saṅkīrtana will take us to Goloka, but others have
written that by chanting the gopāla-mantra so many
people went to Goloka-Vraja. So how can we harmonise
this?

Very easily: where is perfection attained? Where is
sādhana practiced? In this material world, and those

                             24
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

ṛṣis of Daṇḍakāraṇya were practicing sādhana by chanting
the gopāla-mantra. From the mantra, saṁbandha-jñāna
arose and ultimately transformed into sthāyī-bhāva or
permanent senti-ment, and according to their particular
internal natures, they attained perfection. They reached
the limit of this world and became qualified to go
beyond. Then by the influence of Yogamāyā, such
perfected souls take birth in the womb of gopīs when the
manifest pastimes of Kṛṣṇa appear in one of the material
universes. After taking birth in Vraja from the womb of
a gopī, they become either a sakhā, a motherly or
father-like guardian of Kṛṣṇa, or a gopī. But they must
first take birth in Gokula and develop an identity.

Then there is no necessity of chanting the mantra any
longer. Rather, by hearing and chanting about Kṛṣṇa’s
pastimes-and by the association of Gopāla Himself, the
gopīs and all of His other eternal playmates-one will
himself become part of Kṛṣṇa's eternal entourage and
then go to Goloka-Vṛndāvana. One will not go directly.
Therefore everything is harmonised like this: first
there is svarūpa-siddhi, and then after relinquishing
the material body comes vastu-siddhi. The mantra is only
useful in sādhana. There is no necessity of it in the
stage of perfection.

So, saying that the gopāla-mantra will take one to
Goloka-Vraja is correct: it will bring us to the
entrance, and then we will enter and the activities of
the mantra will cease. Both ideas in regard to the
mantra are correct. But without the gopāla-mantra and
the kāma-gāyatrī, will our sādhana be complete with only
the nāma-saṅkīrtana? No, because by nāma-saṅkīrtana
alone we will not be able to chant śuddha-nāma, the pure
name of Kṛṣṇa. First, from the influence of the mantra,
saṁbandha-jñāna will come, then we will feel a
particular devotional sentiment within us, and finally
our eternal svarūpa will arise. After this, by becoming
deeply absorbed in nāma-saṅkīrtana, everything will be
completed.

Suppose we are cutting grass, and someone says to us,
“Please use a golden blade to cut the grass.” Will we
use a golden blade to cut the grass? No, an iron blade
will be more effective. Similarly, because we are in
such a conditioned state, chanting the gopāla-mantra and
kāma-gāyatrī is also necessary. At different stages,
different things are necessary, but we shall understand
nāma-saṅkīrtana to be the best thing in sādhana, and in
perfection. The gopāla-mantra is effective only in
sādhana, but not in the stage of perfection. The
perfected soul will not chant it, because its work has
been completed. We must understand this point well:
nāma-saṅkīrtana is necessary in the conditioned state,
but along with it we must chant the gopāla-mantra, the
mantra of Mahāprabhu (gaura-gāyatrī), and all other
mantras that our guru has given to us. The efficacy of
these mantras is that they make saṁbandha-jñāna arise
and the attachment to sense enjoyment fade away. Anyone
who follows this method sincerely for one year, or even
six months, will certainly see what its result is. If
the desired result doesn’t come, then there must be some
problem. Perhaps the seed, the mantra, was not very
potent because the giver was not pure, or perhaps we are

                             25
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

not chanting from the heart or we are cheating in some
way. Rather, giving it our heart, with deep faith and
firm determination we should chant.

kṛṣṇasya nānā-vidha-kīrtaneṣu tan-nāma-saṅkīrtanam eva
mukhyam tat-prema-sampaj-janane svayaṁ drāk śaktaṁ tataḥ
śreṣṭhatamaṁ mataṁ tat



Bṛhad-bhāg. 2.3.158


“Of the many types of kṛṣṇa-kīrtana, the kīrtana of His
name is primary. Because it is capable of bestowing the
great wealth of pure love for Him very quickly, it is
considered the best.”

There are many types of kṛṣṇa-kīrtana-glorification of
His qualities, of His forms, of His pastimes-but the
glorification of His name is the foremost. If I call out
“Come over here,” who will come? Many people may come.
If I describe some qualities of the person I want, then
still many may come. But if I call out the name of the
specific person that I want, then at once only that
person will come. Similarly, there is glorification of
Bhagavān’s qualities, forms, and pastimes, but for
calling Bhagavān and for remembering Bhagavān, the nāma-
saṅkīrtana of Bhagavān is the best. Included within this
nāma-saṅkīrtana will be glorification of His qualities,
forms, and pastimes. In this way-”Hey Govinda, Hey
Gopīnātha, Hey Madana-mohana!”-our kīrtana should be
full of His names. And of these names, those which refer
to Kṛṣṇa’s relationship with the gopīs are the best of
all. If one desires to very quickly attain the lotus
feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and attain the prema of Vraja, then
nāma-saṅkīrtana is the best and most powerful method.
This is the conclusion of Sanātana Gosvāmī, because if
we chant nāma-saṅkīrtana with great sincerity, then very
quickly kṛṣṇa-prema will arise.

nāma-saṅkīrtanaṁ proktaṁ kṛṣṇasya prema-sampadi
baliṣṭhaṁ sādhanaṁ śreṣṭham paramākarṣa-mantra-vat



Bṛhad-bhāg. 2.3.164


“It is said that nāma-saṅkīrtana is the best and most
powerful method for attaining the treasure of kṛṣṇa-
prema because, like the most supremely magnetic mantra,
it pulls Śrī Kṛṣṇa towards a sādhaka.”

Therefore Gopa-kumāra was instructed to again return to
the material world where his guru instructed him on
kīrtana, and gave him this mantra to chant:


śrī-kṛṣṇa gopāla hare mukunda govinda he nanda-kiśora
kṛṣṇa hā śrī-yaśodā-tanaya prasīda śrī-ballavī-jīvana
rādhikeśa

22

                             26
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017


Here, one doubt may arise. Sanātana Gosvāmī and Caitanya
Mahāprabhu were contemporary, and at that time the
preaching of the mahā-mantra was going on. Mahāprabhu
had begun the specific propagation of the mahā-mantra in
Navadvīpa, and in Purī also it was going on. But in his
Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta, Sanātana Gosvāmī did not write
anything in relation to the mahā-mantra; instead he gave
the mantra containing the names śrī-kṛṣṇa gopāla hare
mukunda..., so should we think he didn’t know of the
mahā-mantra? What was the reason why he didn’t give the
mahā-mantra?

The mahā-mantra is especially meant for Kali-yuga,
whereas this mantra from Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta is for all
time, as are the gopāla-mantra and the gāyatrī-mantra.
But more importantly, Gopa-kumāra had the internal
sentiment of a cowherd boy, and therefore more explicit
names such as ‘Śrī-yaśodā-tanaya and ‘Nanda-kiśora Kṛṣṇa
were given to him. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and the
Gosvāmīs chanted the mahā-mantra knowing that ultimately
the only meaning of the mahā-mantra is Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
Themselves, but ordinarily one wouldn't see this meaning
there. They chanted it with intense feelings of
separation full of rasa and the sentiments of Vraja.
Anyone who comes to know this meaning will definitely
prefer chanting the mahā-mantra over the mantra śrī-
kṛṣṇa gopāla hare mukunda.... But because Gopa-kumāra
was merely a simple cowherd boy who had no knowledge of
tattva, he would have been unable to detect the
sentiment of Vraja within the mahā-mantra.

We can’t see a plant or a tree within a seed but they
are there, and an expert can examine a seed and
determine whether it will produce one thing or another.
Or if there are two pots of yoghurt, one may examine
them side by side and determine which one is naturally
sweet. The pot of yoghurt which has had sugar added will
have a slightly pinkish appearance, and should only cost
three rupees per kilo. Why? Because the cream has been
removed from this yoghurt, it has been skimmed, and a
little sugar has been added to give it some artificial
sweetness. But the other pot containing only simple and
pure yoghurt with its own natural white colour and
sweetness is worth ten rupees per kilo because it has
been made from whole milk and therefore there is ghee in
every particle of it.

Similarly, the Gosvāmīs have examined the sixteen names
in the mahā-mantra, extracted the meaning, and tasted
it. When chanting the mahā-mantra, the Deity whom we are
aspiring to serve is inherent within the names that we
are calling. For instance, in ‘Hare Rāma , to us ‘Rāma
means only Rādhā-ramaṇa Kṛṣṇa, and ‘Hare means Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, the one who steals Śrī Kṛṣṇa away to the kuṣja,
gives Him great pleasure, and serves Him with prema-
bhāva. When chanting ‘Hare , we are exclusively calling
Śrīmatī Rādhikā. If anyone receives this understanding
from a sat-guru or a rasika Vaiṣṇava, and chants the
mahā-mantra full of this sentiment, then their eternal
svarūpa will appear within them very soon. Otherwise, if
we have received the mantra in a crooked way, we will
think that its meaning is not Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
Themselves, but something else.

                             27
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017


So in the Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta, Sanātana Gosvāmī has
given the mantra ‘śrī-kṛṣṇa gopāla hare mukunda...
because for some this is necessary, but ordinarily for
the jīvas of Kali-yuga the mahā-mantra has been given,
and in accordance with the scriptures it should be
firmly adhered to and chanted always.




Chapter Four

The Moods of Intimacy and Sweetness




Although Gopa-kumāra had arrived in Vaikuṇṭha-dhāma, his
heart did not feel satisfaction there. I had a similar
experience recently in Bombay. We had been invited to
stay in the home of a wealthy gentleman there, and upon
entering his home, I could not find my way around that
place, really. They had a very beautiful floor which was
shining like a mirror, and I actually became confused,
just as Duryodhana became bewildered in the assembly
house of Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja. Mahāprabhu and His
devotees would not go to the house of any king because
the lust of worldly people can be very contaminating.
Seeing their opulence, we will begin thinking, “My home
should be like this,” “My āśrama should be like this.”
Then, not being able to acquire such things, this lust
will intensify within us. So instead we left and stayed
in the home of an ordinary family.

In Bombay, there are even people who are thousands of
lākhas of rupees more wealthy than that gentleman who
had invited us. Therefore, what can be said of the
enjoyment available in the heavenly planets? We cannot
comprehend such opulence. If we were to go there, we
would forget everything of this world. So if we were to
go to Vaikuṇṭha, what would we find? There the opulence
is even greater. There is such an abundance of happiness
there that anyone who enters Vaikuṇṭha will never have a
desire to leave. There is so much beauty, and no one
ever becomes old or diseased. There is no birth and no
death, whereas in heaven there is. Up to Mahar, Jana,
Tapo, and Satya-lokas there is birth and death, but
there is no trace of them in Vaikuṇṭha. There is always
new and fresh happiness, and opulence of the highest
standard. Even the soil there is cinmaya.

kalpa-taravo drumā bhūmiś cintāmaṇi-gaṇa-mayī toyam
amṛtam kathā gānaṁ naṭyaṁ gamanam api



Brahma-saṁhitā 5.56


The trees there are kalpataru, and the land is
cintāmaṇi-mayī. The water is nectar, the talking is
singing, and the walking is dancing-this is the nature

                             28
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

of Vaikuṇṭha. But Gopa-kumāra was feeling dissatisfied
there, and Nārada said to him, “This is a very grave
matter. Here I see that your face is withered in worry.
How is this possible? Coming here, no one can remain
unhappy, but I see that you are. What is it-is there
anything you are lacking, or is something else making
you unhappy? What is it?”

Such unhappiness will not be felt by everyone there, but
only by a special person. If for any reason someone is
unhappy there, they won’t be able to express it to
anyone. Such intense unhappiness cannot be expressed
even to your mother, father, brother, or sister, but
only to a bosom friend. By some means he will remove the
thorn, and he will understand your feelings. Nārada can
see inside all souls; he knows everything. With his eyes
closed in meditation, he ascertained the reason for
Gopa-kumāra’s unhappiness and became very pleased. Why
is it that seeing such unhappiness in another he became
pleased? There is one related story in this connection.

When Uddhava went to Vṛndāvana, he saw that Nanda
Mahārāja was wailing in lamentation, crying for Kṛṣṇa.
Kṛṣṇa was such a wonderful son, but now leaving Nanda
behind, He had gone away. Nanda was very unhappy, but
what was Uddhava thinking? “Today, we are supremely
fortunate to have received the darśana of such an
exalted personality who is actually crying for
Bhagavān.”

In the materially conditioned state of life, everyone is
crying for themselves. All for themselves. When a
brother dies, for whom is the family crying-for the
brother or for themselves? It seems that they are crying
for the brother, but really they are not. “If my brother
had lived, then he would have given me all sorts of
help. Now I am helpless”-this is what they are really
crying about. “Father has died; if he had lived, then
very easily all of our desires would have been
fulfilled.” “My wife has died; she was very beautiful
and a great servant. Seating us comfortably, she would
serve us food and water and everything. Now she is
gone,” and the husband is left crying, but is he really
crying for the wife? Really he is crying for himself.

So if in any situation a father is crying for a son, we
can understand that actually he is crying for himself.
But what Uddhava had witnessed was Nanda Bābā really
crying for Kṛṣṇa, not for himself-such deep kṛṣṇa-prema
was inside him. We should also aspire to be a little
like this. If even one time we shed a tear that is
actually for Bhagavān, then our lives will be
meaningful. But our hearts are not yet melted, and
therefore while chanting harināma our hair does not
stand on end. Mahāprabhu Himself said:

nayanaṁ galad-aśru-dhārayā

vadanaṁ gadgada-ruddhayā girā

pulakair nicitaṁ vapuḥ kadā

tava nāma-grahaṇe bhaviṣyati


                              29
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017



Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka 6


“Hey Prabhu! When, while chanting Your name, will tears
flow from my eyes like waves? When will my voice tremble
in ecstasy and the hairs of my body stand erect?”

What is the meaning of bhaviṣyati? When will that
opportunity come that one day, while chanting harināma,
tears will come from our eyes in a continuous flow that
will never stop? When will we be trembling and feeling
our heart melting, sometimes rolling on the ground,
sometimes laughing, sometimes crying, and sometimes
singing? Uddhava witnessed all of this and thought,
“Today I am so fortunate to have the darśana of such a
great personality. But what will I say: ‘You are the
most fortunate person ? I am unable to say that. Should
I tell him to go on crying, or should I try to console
him and tell him not to cry? In this world, if a man is
crying for Kṛṣṇa, that is actually desirable! I desire
to have sentiments like that also! If he is really
crying in kṛṣṇa-prema, he is the most fortunate person,
but how can I say anything? ‘Cry or ‘Don’t cry -I cannot
say either of those things. What can be done....”

So Uddhava could not speak even one word to Nanda Bābā.
Seeing the divine ecstasy of Nanda Bābā, Uddhava felt
that on that day his life had become successful. And a
similar sentiment came into the heart of Nārada upon
seeing the condition of Gopa-kumāra. “You are so very,
very fortunate. Even here in Vaikuṇṭḥa you are unhappy
because you want Nārāyaṇa to be Kṛṣṇa. You want to take
the cows out to graze with Him, and you want to live
with Him. You want to put your arms around Him and
embrace as friends. You want Kṛṣṇa to say, ‘Hey, Gopa-
kumāra! Bring the cows over this way! The cows are
thirsty, give them some water! , and with great love you
will follow the order of Kṛṣṇa. You want that sometimes
Kṛṣṇa will embrace you, and sometimes you will embrace
Him. That you will eat together, and even with unclean
hands you will place food into each others mouths. That
sometimes, when Kṛṣṇa is sleeping on the bed of Yaśodā,
you will arrive at His bedside with your body covered
with the dust of Vṛndāvana and say, ‘Hey! Don’t sleep
now! The cows have arrived at the door! Let’s go! You
want to do all of this, and it can be very easily
achieved as a sakhā.

“But what does Nārāyaṇa do? When you go before Him, He
lifts His right hand in bestowal of blessings: ‘May all
auspiciousness be upon you. Saying ‘Namo nārāyaṇa, namo
nārāyaṇa,' everyone is offering praṇāms to Him. He lifts
His hand and gives this blessing: ‘You will be fearless.
All good fortune shall attend you. You want to race to
embrace Him, and you want to play the flute with Him,
but you are not able to do any of this. You desire to
sleep on the same bed with Him at night, but by
cleverness and trickery or by some other means,
Lakṣmīdevī sends you away. And when you don’t leave
there, what does she do? She calls the doormen Jaya and
Vijaya and says, ‘He is not obeying me, and she has you
removed. And when you sing, ‘Śrī Kṛṣṇa! Gopāla! Hare!

                             30
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

Mukunda! Hey Govinda! Hey Nandakiśora! Hey Kṛṣṇa! Hey
Śrī Yaśodā-tanaya! Hey Śrī Ballavī-jīvana! Hey
Rādhikeśa! Be merciful to me! and play the flute and
express a desire to take the cows out to graze, all the
residents of Vaikuṇṭha abuse you and say, ‘Hey, what are
you saying? Nārāyaṇa, Prabhu, the Controller of the
controllers of all the worlds-you are calling Him Gopāl
and say you will take cows out to graze with Him? You
want to make Him the guardian of cows? You say He is a
milker of cows, that He is the lover of some cowherd
women, and that He is the son of a milkman? You say that
entering the home of a milkman together you and He will
steal yoghurt and sweets? You call Him a thief? You are
disreputing Him! You should be saying that He is Viṣṇu,
who possesses thousands of heads! You should be
glorifying Him in the form in which He gives blessings
and good fortune to all. How can you say that He is a
milkman, a thief, and a liar? You shouldn’t do this.
Saying this, they all make jokes and laugh at you.

“Some say, ‘My friend, it's true that Nārāyaṇa became
Kṛṣṇa and for His own pleasure and the amusement of His
devotees He performed some pastimes, but those pastimes
are not important. This is Vaikuṇṭha, not Vraja. You
shouldn’t speak of such things here. Hearing them speak
like this, you constantly feel ashamed.”

Suppose a cowherd boy such as Śrīdāmā or Subala were to
go to Dvārakā to see Kṛṣṇa. They would see that Kṛṣṇa is
seated there in the royal Sudharmā assembly house as
Dvārakādhīśa, the Mahārāja of Dvārakā. Ugrasena,
Vasudeva, and all the elders of the Yadu dynasty are
seated at His right side. Garga Ṛṣi and many other big,
big sages are seated in front of Him. His sons Sāmba,
Aniruddha, and Pradyumna are seated at His left side.
And behind a curtain are Rukmiṇī and Satyabhāmā, along
with Devakī and the other queens. Now if some gopa-
kiśora arrives in that assembly, how will he appear? In
cowherd dress, with a bent stick in one hand for guiding
the cows and a bamboo flute in the other. It will be
early evening, and having just returned from taking the
cows out for grazing, he will be very dusty and in need
of changing his clothes. If he arrives in that assembly,
he will want to embrace Kṛṣṇa, but Kṛṣṇa will only sit
quietly, glancing at the gopa only once and not again.

That poor fellow would have come with such high
expectations: the expectation that “Kṛṣṇa, by His
quality of bhakta-vātsalyatā or possessing special
affection for His devotees, will call me to come and sit
near Him.” But that would not happen there. Instead,
someone would say to him, “My friend, step this way.”
Then the cowherd boy would see all of the opulence there
and think, “Oh! Look at this umbrella, and look at this
cāmara! Look at all of these people!” Then he would look
at himself, feel ashamed, and go away from there. In
that place Rukmiṇī and Satyabhāmā and the other ladies
are decorated with ornaments as queens, so what would
happen if an ordinary lady with red guṣjā flowers in her
hair and wearing no costly jewelry went there? Therefore
the gopīs never go there because they would not be
respected.

Nārada was thinking, “This Gopa-kumāra has such a high

                             31
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

position that he considers Kṛṣṇa his dear friend, so he
will never be satisfied here in Vaikuṇṭha. His svarūpa
will not be recognised here; its full glory will not be
realised.” If any of us are ever fortunate enough to
attain the svarūpa of a gopa or a gopī, then if we were
to go to heaven or Vaikuṇṭha, we also would not like it
there. Perhaps Nārada would come to us, ascertain our
internal state, and think to himself, “She is special.
She is a servant of Rādhikā.” But he wouldn’t tell
anyone; he would just silently offer praṇāma. He would
understand that our svarūpa is not right for that place;
the guru can always understand.

Similarly, Nārada saw the internal sentiment of Gopa-
kumāra, understood the situation, and became very
pleased. Then, after thinking about what to say and what
not to say, he said, “Hmm...after taking your pulse, I'm
thinking that the disease which you have is not an
ordinary disease. The cure for it cannot be found in
this Vaikuṇṭha; there is no medicine for it here. And by
staying here, the disease will only increase. But I will
now tell you how your disease may be cured. You require
affection which is free of all reservations. This is
called viśrambha-bhāva, the mood of intimacy. In
Vaikuṇṭha, there is only sambhrama-bhāva.”


In the Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 4.17) it is said:


aiśvarya-jñānete saba jagat miśrita aiśvarya-śithila-
preme nāhi mora prīta


In Vaikuṇṭha there is prema, but it is weakened by
Bhagavān’s servants awareness of His majesty, aiśvarya.
They are serving Him with awareness of all of His
opulences, and therefore they are a little fearful. Śrī
Rāmacandra is seated on a bed, and Hanumān is seated
below. Crouching down, on cold days he will massage the
feet of Rāmacandrajī and cover the Lord with a quilt. He
is serving with prema and Bhagavān is pleased, but there
is a more intimate type of prema which is called
viśrambha. The prema of Jaya, Vijaya, and Lakṣmīdevī is
not viśrambha; it is sambhrama, which means that they
are aware of their own insignificance and therefore feel
a little fearful. Bhagavān is not fully satisfied by
this type of service, but if we try to serve Him with
the mood of viśrambha in our conditioned state, it will
be aparādha, although it is written in the scriptures
that viśrambhena gurau sevā-in the mood of intimacy we
should serve the guru. Here the purport of viśrambha is
that we should understand the guru to be a friend and
serve him as we would our mother, father, brother, or
friend.

When a friend of your family comes to your house, you
will not need to be told, “Your friend has come; offer
him a nice sitting place and bring him something to
drink.” Automatically you will do it. Therefore, a
servant who is uttama or topmost will understand his
guru’s desires and automatically act to fulfil them
without receiving any specific order. Serving without
having to be told-this is a symptom of the uttama

                             32
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                        5/5/2017

servant. One who serves his guru after being told is a
madhyama or intermediate servant. Then there is one
other type of servant to whom the guru will say, “Go
send for such-and-such Mahārāja.”

This servant will answer back, “But Gurujī, now it is
early evening and it is becoming dark.”

The guru knows it is becoming dark, but he has given his
order. “It doesn’t matter if it is dark; just go!”

Then this servant will say, “But Gurujī, on the road
there are many dogs.”

“Never mind that-take a stick with you and go!”

“But what if I go and Mahārāja is not there; then what
will I do?”

What can such a servant do? From the word ‘sevaka remove
the ‘se and that leaves ‘vaka . Vaka means a crane, a
hypocrite devotee. The crane stands in the water on one
leg as if he were a great renounced devotee in
meditation. But as soon as a fish swims by, he will
snatch it and eat it and then return to his pose.
Therefore the uttama servant is a real servant, and in a
general way we can also call the madhyama servant a real
servant, but one who is argumentative is not a servant
at all.

If we don’t understand the heart of the guru, then how
will we understand the heart of Kṛṣṇa? Therefore, those
people who desire to go beyond Vaikuṇṭha should serve
their guru with viśrambha love. If someone is hiding
something from his guru, and before his guru his heart
is not open, then how will he be able to go before
Bhagavān? This is the very foundation of śikṣā,
instruction: by honestly serving the guru we will learn.

Nārada observed that, “This Gopa-kumāra is a big
viśrambha-sevaka, and therefore Vaikuṇṭha is not
tasteful to him.” Therefore, Nārada will now start
explaining higher tattva to him. “Look, here in
Vaikuṇṭha everything is cinmaya, and here Bhagavān has
thousands of forms.”

What is the meaning? There are many forms of Varāha,
many forms of Mīna, many forms of Kūrma-deva,
Nṛsiṁhadeva, Vāmana, Paraśurāma, and all others. It is
generally understood that there are twenty-four types of
līlā-avatāras, but there are not merely twenty-four.
There are so many that They cannot possibly be counted.
But one incarnation is not different in quality from
another incarnation. They are residing in different
chambers of Vaikuṇṭha, and all of Them are eternal. Yes,
Bhagavān is one, but He appears according to the
gradation of the bhakti of His devotees. The same one
Bhagavān will be seen differently according to the
nature of one’s bhakti.

On the banks of the Yamunā at Kāliya-hrad in Vṛndāvana,
a sage named Saubhari Ṛṣi was performing austerities for
ten thousand years. But because Garuḍa was coming there
and eating fish, Saubhari Ṛṣi became angry and cursed

                             33
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

him. Due to this offence, material desire arose within
Saubhari Ṛṣi. Next, by his mystic power he assumed fifty
forms, married the fifty daughters of Māndhātā Muni, and
created fifty palaces with fifty gardens. He arranged
them in such a way that they would put Indra-purī to
shame with their extensive facility for enjoyment, and
he lived like that for the next ten thousand years. His
grandchildren and great-grandchildren had all grown up,
and one day Māndhātā Muni came there and said, “I have
lived without my daughters for so long that now they
don’t even remember me, and they have no desire
whatsoever to come to their father’s house. What has
happened?” Then he looked around and thought, “There is
such opulence here! This is why my daughters have no
desire to ever return to visit my home.”

These fifty forms which Saubhari Ṛṣi assumed were kāya-
vyūha forms. When he would lift his hand, all the forms
lifted their hand. In kāya-vyūha expansions, if the
original speaks, then all will speak. If he sleeps, then
all will sleep. If he moves, then all will move. One
form is real, and the rest are copies. But Bhagavān’s
incarnations are not like this. All of His forms are
independent.

There is one special point concerning the aiśvarya or
opulence of Dvārakā, and the mādhurya or sweetness of
Vṛndāvana. In Dvārakā, Kṛṣṇa marries sixteen thousand
queens. In one palace He is playing dice, somewhere else
He is giving cows in charity to a brāhmaṇa, somewhere
else He is performing a marriage ceremony, in another
palace He is performing a fire sacrifice, and in other
palaces He is engaged in other activities. All of His
forms appear the same as His original form and there is
no difference in quality between Them. Here, by aiśvarya
Kṛṣṇa has manifested into many, many different forms,
but all of Them are one in that all are all-powerful and
all are full in all opulences. Each queen is cooking and
offering Him preparations, and in one palace He is
eating dahl and purī, in another palace He is eating a
rice preparation, in another palace He is eating sabjī,
in another palace He is eating pakorās, and in another
palace He is eating sweet-rice. By aiśvarya, as the
possessor of all śakti, in Dvārakā Kṛṣṇa expands into
many, many forms, and all of the forms are real and
independent.

But what happens in Vṛndāvana? It is not a land of
aiśvarya, opulence. There, over and above opulence is
mādhurya, sweetness. How can we understand this clearly?
In Vraja there are not just sixteen thousand gopīs, but
millions; and between every two gopīs is one Kṛṣṇa, or
between every two Kṛṣṇas is one gopī. It appears like
this. Here we mustn’t even imagine that this is done by
aiśvarya; it is mādhurya. What is the meaning of
mādhurya? That which is suitable for His pastimes in
human form, nara-līlā. And that which is opposed to
nara-līlā is aiśvarya. For example, upon seeing the
Universal Form of Kṛṣṇa, Arjuna became astonished and
said, “By calling You ‘friend I have committed a great
offence. In the future I will never again call You
‘friend , and never again make You the driver of my
chariot. I have committed a great offence.” This was
aiśvarya-buddhi, awareness of Kṛṣṇa’s majesty, and was

                             34
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

not suitable for nara-līlā.

After witnessing Kṛṣṇa's killing of Kaṁsa, Vasudeva and
Devakī forgot about lovingly feeding Him milk. This is
another type of sentiment which is not suitable for
Kṛṣṇa’s nara-līlā, and therefore it is aiśvarya. But in
Vṛndāvana, when Kṛṣṇa lifted the massive Govardhana
Hill, Yaśodā felt proud and thought, “Today our son
lifted Govardhana!”, but the feeling that Kṛṣṇa was her
son did not leave her. Kṛṣṇa exhibited His opulence of
being all-powerful to lift Govardhana, but the sentiment
that Kṛṣṇa was her son never left her heart, and she
simply thought, “My son is so strong, there is no one in
the entire world stronger than Him!”

In the confusion of divine separation the gopīs were
speaking to a bee: “Hey messenger, we will never have an
intimate relationship with Kṛṣṇa. Never at any time,
because He is very crooked, a big liar, and very
deceptive. We will never trust Him, and we will never be
able to establish any friendship with Him. Why? He is
Bhagavān, isn’t He? Paurṇamāsī has told us that He is
Bhagavān, and we have faith in that. In His previous
birth He was Rāma. He has now appeared with a similar
beautiful, dark complexion; that hasn’t changed. He is
supposed to be a great renunciate and never be
controlled by a woman, yet overpowered by a woman He
went to the jungle with His wife. He had all the marks
of a sādhu and wore the dress of a sādhu, and yet went
to the jungle with His wife. His wife said, ‘Ārya-putra,
there is a deer as beautiful as gold; please catch it
for me, and then we will take it to Bharata. If You
cannot catch it alive, then after killing it with Your
arrow, from its skin we will make a beautiful seat
suitable for the king’s throne. Sitting upon it, Bharata
will be greatly pleased, and in the future You will also
sit there.

“Lakṣmaṇa at once said, ‘That deer form is the māyā of a
rākṣasa: please don’t go, but Rāma didn’t honour what
Lakṣmaṇa said. He said that He would never be
overpowered by a woman, yet whose words did He honour?
His wife s, and He came under her control. That’s the
kind of person He is. Then another woman came and He cut
off her nose and ears! She came begging for prema and
prepared to give Him everything-is there any fault in
that? Rāma appeared to possess all of the beauty of the
three worlds, so considering the general nature of the
female class, there was certainly no fault in her! But
what did He do? He cut off her nose and ears. And He
killed Vāli (the brother of Sugrīva) from a hidden
position instead of fighting directly in front of him.

“We have also heard about what He did to Bali Mahārāja.
As Vāmanadeva He asked for three steps of land, and Bali
was prepared to give it. Then He assumed a massive form
and snatched everything. The daughter of Bali said,
‘This is not the same form in which You had asked for
the three steps of land, so we shall not give it to You!
Then Bali said, ‘It’s alright, let it be, but his
daughter said to Bhagavān, ‘No! I will kill You! I will
give You poison and kill You! , and therefore she came
later as Pūtanā to do just that. At first, being
attracted by His beauty, she had desired to have Him as

                              35
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

her son; but upon seeing His cheating ways, she then
wanted to kill Him. Could she be blamed? Then Vāmanadeva
bound up her father, even after He snatched away
everything that came within the measurement of His three
steps, just as a crow snatches a fragment of food and
then kicks away the basket from which he got it! So we
certainly cannot see eye to eye with Kṛṣṇa.”

The purport of what they were saying is that they knew
that He was Bhagavān because they had faith in what
Paurṇamāsī had told them. But in spite of knowing that
He was Bhagavān, still His pastimes in human form were
the dearest to them, and they became immersed in that
loving sentiment. In the confusion of spontaneous love
they were saying that they would never be able to have
an intimate relationship with Him-this is an example of
mādhurya-bhāva.

In Vṛndāvana, it appeared that Kṛṣṇa expanded into
millions and millions of forms in the rāsa-līlā, but
actually He didn’t assume more forms. Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura has explained in his commentary on
the Bhāgavatam that there was only the one original form
of Kṛṣṇa, and He danced with such speed and dexterity in
the arena of rāsa that sometimes He would appear here,
sometimes He would appear there, and so each gopī
thought that “He is dancing with me only.” Appearing
like a stick which is burning on one end and being waved
in a circle, with inconceivable speed and dexterity He
was moving amongst them in the circular formation of the
rāsa-līlā.

We have seen dancing actors in our village near Vārāṇasī
who would perform for four or five thousand rupees. One
of these dancers would stack pot after pot with plates
between them on his head, and on top of everything would
be a plate with many candles on it. And dancing in such
a way that not even one item would fall, he would move
with so much speed it was incredible. So if an ordinary
man can dance like this, then how can Kṛṣṇa dance? One
and the same Kṛṣṇa was dancing amongst millions of gopīs
at the same time with inconceivable speed and dexterity.
This is mādhurya: what is suitable for nara-līlā, His
pastimes in human form. He assumes separate forms in
Dvārakā by aiśvarya, but in Vṛndāvana it was not kāya-
vyūha, incarnations, or expansions but the same one
Kṛṣṇa moving amongst the gopīs, causing each gopī to
think, “He is dancing with me only.”

This mādhurya is not present in Vaikuṇṭha, so Gopa-
kumāra was not satisfied there. After taking his pulse,
Nārada said, “It is a great thing that you desire;
therefore I must help you to understand the higher
points of tattva. For going to Goloka, it is necessary
to know all of this.”




Chapter Five

Bhagavān’s Incarnations are One


                             36
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017




Vaikuṇṭha is an expansive land. Included within
Vaikuṇṭha are Ayodhyā, Jagannātha Purī, Dvārakā,
Mathurā, Vṛndāvana, Govardhana, and Rādhā-kuṇḍa.
Residing there is not only Kṛṣṇa, but millions and
millions of incarnations of Bhagavān. In the four yugas,
in a manvantara, in the two fifty-year segments of
Brahmā’s life, Bhagavān descends in some form or other.
Upon His devotees' attainment of perfection, according
to their own specific sentiment they go to live with Him
in a particular section of Vaikuṇṭha, taking darśana of
their favourite Lord and serving Him there.

The sun is reflected in anything that acts as a mirror,
but the sun and the reflection are not one. Bimba means
the sun, and pratibimba means its reflection which
shines in another world. They are not one, but there is
some similarity between them. Unlike the sun, however,
there are so many incarnations of Bhagavān, and each and
every incarnation is directly Bhagavān Himself, and all
are fully saccidānanda. In Vaikuṇṭha, Bhagavān is not
situated in kāya-vyūha expansions; instead in
qualitative oneness He is situated in many different
forms for fulfilling the desires of His devotees. In the
Rāmāyaṇa and other scriptures it is said that Bhagavān
is one, and according to the form which the devotee is
praying for, He assumes an incarnation as either
Nṛsiṁha-avatāra, Kūrma-avatāra, Vāmana-avatāra,
Hayagrīva-avatāra-so many incarnations. Bhagavān can
come in many forms. Some say that originally Bhagavān
has no form, and that when anyone of this world calls
Him, then according to that person's particular
sentiment, He takes a corresponding form and appears in
this world. But this idea is incorrect. All of His forms
are real and eternal, and when devotees call Him by the
name of a specific form, then in that very form He
comes. All the scriptures declare this, and they are
fully authoritative due to being completely free of any
defect.

There are those who worship Lakṣmīpati Nārāyaṇa with
mantras such as oṁ nārāyaṇāya namaḥ and oṁ namo
bhagavate vāsudevāya. Dhruva attained perfection through
this process. Some chant oṁ varāhāya namaḥ to worship
Varāha in Navadvīpa-dhāma, some chant oṁ nṛsiṁhāya namaḥ
or other mantras of Nṛsiṁhadeva, and upon attaining
perfection those devotees will go to Vaikuṇṭha, but to a
special chamber in Vaikuṇṭha. How is Nārāyaṇa situated
there? In one place in His Nṛsiṁha form, and in another
place in His Varāha form. When there is a necessity in
this world for the presence of a particular form, then
He comes in that very form. For example, when Kṛṣṇa
comes, He comes holding the flute, as Nanda-nandana. He
never changes His form. He remains in one form, yet He
changes the secondary aspects of His pastimes in a
special way. His performing the rāsa-līlā with the gopīs
and playing as a child at the house of Nanda-these
pastimes are eternal, but He may change the killing of
Kaṁsa. Instead of Kaṁsa it may be Jarāsandha or some
other person. According to the necessity of the time the
secondary pastimes may be changed, but the eternal līlā
remains the same.

                             37
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017


Those who worship Nārāyaṇa will go to Vaikuṇṭha, but to
which chamber in Vaikuṇṭha? To the specific chamber
where Lakṣmī and Nārāyaṇa reside. One who chants japa of
the Nṛsiṁha mantra will also go to Vaikuṇṭha, but to a
special chamber where there is only bhajana of
Nṛsiṁhadeva. He will never see Rāma or Nārāyaṇa. There
are differences in the pastimes of Nṛsiṁha, Varāha, and
Kūrma, but in tattva, They are all non-different.

Before the advent of Vāmanadeva, the demigods worshipped
a special four-armed form of Viṣṇu which was established
in heaven for their pūjā. When a special circumstance
was created, then in a special form Vāmanadeva had to
come to snatch everything away from Bali Mahārāja. At
that time Aditi, the mother of the demigods, had
performed some tapasyā, and because of that He came.
Therefore, Vāmana performs pastimes which are different
from the four-armed Viṣṇu that is always present in
heaven, but in tattva They are one. Vāmana is a little
different from Viṣṇu in that in Vāmana’s pastimes there
is some deception, and the giving of some special good
fortune also. It seemed like robbery, but there was so
much kindness and bhakta-vātsalyatā (special affection
for His devotees) in it. He increased the glories of His
devotee. He put Bali Mahārāja into difficulty to make
his name immortal for all time. If Vāmana had not come,
who would know the name of Bali? For protecting His
devotees, He came in a very beautiful form. It seems
that He came for protecting the demigods and for
cheating the demons, but no; actually He benefited both.
In reality Bali Mahārāja received more benefit than the
demigods. The demigods got no special benefit, but Bali
Mahārāja did. Vāmana snatched the desire for material
enjoyment away from Bali and gave him bhakti, but He
didn’t snatch away the demigods facility for enjoyment;
rather He provided it by returning their kingdom to
them. So to whom was He more kind? But like Indra we
desire and pray, “O Prabhu, please don’t snatch our
material enjoyment away! Be merciful like this and make
our lives plentiful. My son, daughter, money, and wife-
please don’t take them! I will do bhajana, and they will
remain with me also.”

But some pray, “Prabhu, You please take all of this
away, and give me pure love at Your lotus feet.” Which
of these is correct? If in both hands there is a laḍḍu,
will you desire both, or only one? If Bhagavān says,
“Alright, you take the happiness of material enjoyment,
and together with that take pure love for Me also,” and
He puts both into our hands, certainly we will take the
material enjoyment and not the bhakti. But if we really
desire prema, then this enjoying spirit must be
eradicated. Otherwise there will be cheating and
deception in our bhakti. But ninety-nine per cent of the
people in this world desire it like this: “Our material
enjoyment must remain intact, our family must remain,
our money and palatable food must remain, our business
must go on nicely, and together with all of this we will
have bhakti.” So Prabhu says, “Alright.” But He gives
them only ordinary bhakti to accompany their material
enjoyment.

To the demigods Bhagavān gives the responsibility of

                             38
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

protecting the world, but the material world is
temporary. He says “Do this service for Me” and gives
them their posts, but then some of them think, “I have
become the master of the three worlds. Prabhu has given
me this position, and now I am the master of the entire
brahmāṇḍa.” They don’t understand that this is actually
an obstacle to bhakti. So He placed this very allurement
in the hands of Indra, and snatched that same allurement
away from Bali Mahārāja, giving him pure bhakti instead.
Many people do not understand that this is a special
activity of mercy He performed for Bali.

Assuming an incarnation in this world and performing
such beautiful pastimes is something which Nārāyaṇa will
not do. The four-armed form that is present there in
heaven will not do this. Nārāyaṇa will never cheat as
Vāmana did. He will also bestow prema, but He won’t
allow Himself to be viewed as a cheater. Vāmana cheated
in the vision of ordinary people. He begged for three
steps of land, then made His steps very, very large, and
stole everything. Vāmana will perform such variegated
pastimes and may even be seen as a cheater, but Nārāyaṇa
will never do this. So in this way, in the pastimes of
Rāma and other incarnations of Bhagavān there is
uniqueness. In tattva They are all one, but in His
pastimes, rasa and special affectionate dealings with
His devotees, there will be some differences.

In the scriptures it says that there is a final
dissolution when the two fifty-year segments of Brahmā’s
life have passed. Along with Brahmā, nature will merge
into Garbhodaśāyī Viṣṇu. Then He also will disappear and
all will merge into Kāraṇodaśāyī Viṣṇu. So many jīvas
will merge into the limbs of Viṣṇu at that time, and
those that are liberated will go to Vaikuṇṭha with
Brahmā. The others will again become embodied and return
to this cakra or cycle of māyā. At that time, Mahā-Mīna,
the fish incarnation, is to be seen.

After Mārkeṇḍeya Ṛṣi had been performing austerities for
a long time, one day he was bathing in the Gaṅga and a
small fish came into his kamaṇḍalu. He took it home, and
then the fish said, “O ṛṣi, I have come into your
kamaṇḍalu, but there is no space for Me here. Please
place Me in a larger body of water.”

Then Mārkeṇḍeya looked and saw that really the fish had
become larger. So he placed the fish in a small pond,
but after some time, the fish came to him in a dream and
said, “Ṛṣijī, now I am so big, I can no longer stay in
this pond.” So Mārkeṇḍeya lifted the fish out and placed
Him in the river, but the fish again enlarged in the
river and said, “Here also I cannot stay. Please place
Me in the ocean.”

By his yogic power Mārkeṇḍeya placed the fish in the
ocean. Then he saw in a dream that there was to be a
causal dissolution, like the one at the end of Brahmā’s
day. The final dissolution comes at the end of Brahmā’s
one hundred years, but this and the one that comes at
the end of his day can both be called nitya-pralaya.

The fish said, “The water will be rising and I will come
to you. You must collect seeds of all the things in the

                             39
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

world-vegetable seeds, a mango seed, a mustard seed,
everything. Then you must collect two of each species of
bird and animal and be ready to attach a strong boat to
Me in the morning when I arrive.”

During the night Mārkeṇḍeya made the arrangement. He
made a strong boat with a rope attached to it, and
placed the seeds of all species of life in it. When he
was ready, he saw that the entire universe was being
flooded with flowing water, and nothing could be seen.
The water was slowly rising, and gradually covered all
of the high places. The fish had assumed a massive form
with two horns, and He said, “Bind the boat to My
horns.” The ṛṣi did so, and Mahā-Mīna took everyone away
on the water. This dissolution lasts for one whole night
of Brahmā. The ṛṣi went without eating or drinking the
entire time, and he couldn’t find a place to take some
rest. Thinking “What kind of life is this?”, he was very
unhappy.

Eventually they arrived at Prayāga. There, Mārkeṇḍeya
could see only a banyan tree and nothing else. At the
top of the tree there was only one leaf where Vatśāyī
Viṣṇu was sleeping and performing the pastime of sucking
His toe. He looked towards the ṛṣi very mercifully and
consoled him, and transmitted śakti into him. He made an
arrangement for the ṛṣi’s sustenance and then said, “In
a few days this will all be over and you will again
become a prajāpati, and from Brahmā all creation will
again take place.”

This is one Mīna-avatāra. This Mīna-avatāra resides in
Vaikuṇṭha, and when the necessity arises He comes to
this world. His tattva is non-different from Nārāyaṇa.
His pastimes are variegated, but in tattva They are one.

Another Mīna incarnation protected the Vedas. The demons
had stolen the Vedas and thrown them into the water of
the dissolution and the Vedas had disappeared. The
tendency of demons is to be greatly destructive, and now
also we see that the Vedic śāstras are slowly
disappearing. If people don’t respect them, what will
happen? They will disappear, slowly. The Vedas will not
remain, you won’t be able to find the Bhāgavatam, and
such spiritual talks will disappear altogether. The mood
of Vṛndāvana and Mathurā will change, and after some
time men will also change. They won’t respect sādhus and
saints, and they won’t respect the Gītā and the
Bhāgavatam. Like this, the Vedas had disappeared, and to
protect them, another Mīna incarnation appeared.

This Mīna incarnation saved Satyavrata Muni, who had at
that time offered a prayer known as the Dāmodarāṣṭaka.
Taking so many things with him, he stayed in the ocean
for a long time, and the Vedas and scriptures were kept
in his heart. Again the dissolution was finished, and
again in the four directions creation took place. So
there is not just one Mīna incarnation, but many. In
Vaikuṇṭha also, there are different chambers suitable
for Their particular devotees, and Satyavrata Muni’s
worshipable Lord is this particular Mīna incarnation.

There is also the Kūrma-avatāra. At the time of churning
the ocean of milk, the demons and demigods came together

                             40
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

and agreed that everything produced from the churning
would be distributed. Viṣṇu, through the medium of
Brahmā, gave them some advice; otherwise nothing would
have been produced. They made the decision to churn the
ocean, and in the middle of it they placed the Mandara
Mountain. But there was no foundation for it, so the
mountain immediately sank. They thought, “This will be
very difficult. How will we remove it from the ocean?
How will we find a foundation upon which to churn?”

So they worshipped Viṣṇu, and He came in the form of a
tortoise, Kūrma. “For your good fortune, I will accept
the form of a tortoise. Place the mountain on Me, wind
the snake Vāsuki around it, and then churn.”

They placed the mountain on Viṣṇu who was below in the
form of a tortoise, and wrapped the king of snakes
Vāsuki around it. In one direction was the mouth of
Vāsuki and in the other direction was his tail. The
demigods said to the demons, “Since we are senior to
you, we will take the direction of the head. We are
worthy of more respect than you.”

The demons replied, “No! We will not give you this
respect! We will take the direction of the head. The
tail is lower; we will not take it!” So the demons
demanded the head side, not understanding the trickery
of the demigods. But the demigods insisted, “You are our
little brothers, the sons of Diti. Therefore, from
whatever is produced by the churning we will take first,
and you will take the remainder. And since we are senior
to you, we will take the direction of Vāsuki's head.”

But the demons were adamant. “No! It can never be like
that! We are superior! What is this, that we are
younger? We are superior, we will take the direction of
the head.”

The demigods actually wanted to take the tail end,
because they knew that in the midst of the churning,
during the hissing of the snake, deadly poison would be
emitted from his mouth. But the demons didn’t know this.
They quickly grabbed the mouth end, and while making a
great effort to churn, it became very hot, poison was
produced from the snake, and they were burnt. They
thought, “The demigods have tricked us! Alright; next
time we will understand everything. We will do exactly
the opposite of what they say.”

As they churned the ocean of milk, first poison was
produced, then Lakṣmīdevī came out, then nectar was
produced, Dhanvantari came out, the white elephant of
the demigods was produced, a horse was produced, and
many other wonderful things. When Lakṣmīdevī appeared,
she looked all around and wondered, “Who will I marry?”
She began considering, and felt that everyone she saw
was full of faults. She saw everyone-even Brahmā-and she
rejected them all. Finally Viṣṇu came there, and she put
the garland around His neck and married Him.

While the churning was going on, Kūrma had an itching
sensation on His back, and the churning movement of the
massive mountain scratched His itch. At that time, His
breathing in and out created the low and high tides of

                             41
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

the ocean. Some say the influence of the moon is the
cause of this, but the cause given in the scriptures is
correct.

Another Kūrma incarnation appeared in another yuga or
manvantara to support the Earth planet throughout its
entire duration. These are two separate Kūrma
incarnations.

Regarding Varāhadeva, before the creation there was only
water. Brahmā heard a sound indicating that he should
perform tapasyā, austerities. After this he met Nārāyaṇa
and heard the catuḥ-ślokī of the Bhāgavatam, and was
empowered to create. But for creation there must be a
foundation, and at that time there was no base because
the Earth was submerged in water. So Varāha, in the form
of a very, very small entity like a weevil, emerged from
Brahmā’s nose and immediately doubled in size. Then when
He was a little distance away, He assumed a form so
large that He filled the entire sky, and He jumped
straight into the ocean with both His snout and His feet
pointed downward. Such violent waves were produced that
they even reached up to heaven and Brahmaloka, and water
was spread in all directions. When Varāhadeva arrived at
Rasātala, He took the Earth on His snout and established
it above the water. This is one Varāha incarnation.

There is also another Varāha incarnation who found that
when He went to Rasātala, Hiraṇyākṣa was there waiting
for Him. Hiraṇyākṣa had been searching for his equal in
heroics, and he had asked Nārada where he could find
such a person. He was told to go to Varuṇadeva, who told
him, “Yes, you will find a suitable opponent, and He
will grind you to pieces.”

“Who is this person?”

“Viṣṇu.”

“Where can I find Him?”

“He is everywhere, but finding Him is very, very
difficult. When you meet Him, He will destroy your
pride.”

Hiraṇyākṣa was told that if he went to Rasātala at the
time of the final dissolution, he would meet Viṣṇu
there. He arrived there first, and he remained waiting
there for a very long time submerged in the water.
Finally Varāha arrived there and took the Earth on His
snout, just as a huge elephant holds a small flower or
as someone holds a mustard seed; it was so easy for Him.
He established the Earth above the water, and then
turned to fight with the demon. They fought for
thousands of years, and in the end Varāha killed
Hiraṇyākṣa with His club, thereby destroying his pride.
Then He disappeared. These are two separate Varāha
incarnations. One is white, the other is black.

Another incarnation is Yajña Varāha. In each of His
pores are millions of brahmāṇḍas, and He accepts the
results of sacrifice. By His mercy the Earth heard the
Purāṇas-the same ones written by Vyāsa-so from this we
can understand that the Purāṇas are eternal. Devotees

                             42
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

prayed to this Varāha because the Earth’s surface was
too rough and they were unable to do any farming. It
would not retain water, and the people could not live
without grains and water. So being merciful, Varāha
incarnated and with His teeth He uprooted big mountains
and made the Earth’s surface smooth. This is the nature
of a boar, that with his snout he digs. Afterwards the
Earth appeared as if it had been ploughed.

At that time, the Earth personified assumed the form of
a female boar. Her name was Dhartrī-devī, and she was
the śakti of Bhū-devī. Viṣṇu assumed the form of a boar,
so she became a female boar, and from them Narakāsura
was born. Originally his name was Dhartrī-nandana, not
Narakā-sura, but as a result of falling into bad
association he became a demon.

Association is what gives bhakti to any heart, and that
which can make it disappear. It is the cause of our
bondage or liberation. We will become just like those
with whom we keep company, so therefore bad association
is the most dangerous enemy of our hearts. By keeping
bad company even the son of Bhagavān and the Earth
personified became sinful. Whose company did he keep?
Duryodhana, Śakuni, Kaṁsa, Jarāsandha-so many people who
were opposed to Kṛṣṇa, and all were atheistic. He took
the association of all these people and then tried to
give Bhagavān trouble. Therefore he became known as
Narakāsura.

All together there are five Varāha incarnations
mentioned in the scriptures. They all reside in
Vaikuṇṭha, and when there is a necessity for one of Them
in this world, He comes and gives darśana to His
devotees in that very form. After those devotees attain
perfection, they go to Vaikuṇṭha to serve Him directly
there as well.

There are different incarnations of Nṛsiṁhadeva as well.
One incarnation killed Hiraṇyakaśipu and protected
Prahlāda. Another is mātṛcakra-pramatta. Matṛcakra means
those women who were detrimental to the welfare of the
world. When their power increased, Nṛsiṁha Bhagavān
appeared to subdue them. Another incarnation came in the
form of a cat and performed many different pastimes; He
also subdued demons and protected devotees.

In South India, there is one Deity called Jiyar Nṛsiṁha
and another called Pānā Nṛsiṁha. They are separate
incarnations. They appeared in different kalpas, and
there are differences in Their pastimes. There was once
a wild boar in a kingdom where in all directions there
were mountains and jungle. In that place was a farmer
who was a great devotee. He was growing corn, and every
day this boar came and ate it and destroyed his crop. He
was upset that his field was being destroyed, so he
constructed a platform in the middle of the field. He
thought that he would sit there during the night and
watch for that boar. That night the boar came and broke
everything again, so taking a stick, the farmer got down
from the platform and chased it. The boar ran with the
farmer following behind and after a little while,
laughing, the boar stopped and stood, displaying the
form of Nṛsiṁha. “For the purpose of mercifully giving

                             43
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

you My darśana, I have done this. Now you can offer corn
to Me. It is My favourite food, and I will fulfil all
the desires of your heart. Get money from the king and
establish Me on top of that mountain where only campā
flowers grow.”

He was Nṛsiṁha, but He assumed the form of a boar. On
the day of akṣaya-tṛtīyā the pujārīs apply candana to
that Deity and He reveals His form as a boar. That’s
all; only on one day of the year He gives that darśan.
This is Jiyar Nṛsiṁha, and He appeared in one particular
kalpa. Therefore in some places devotees worship a
combined form of Nṛsiṁha and Varāha.

In this way, Hayagrīva, Haṁsa-in the scriptures you will
find two, four, or five of each incarnation, but Their
tattva is one. According to the sentiments of Their
devotees, and for receiving different types of service
from them, They are all eternally residing in Vaikuṇṭha.

Speaking to Gopa-kumāra in Vaikuṇṭha, Nārada is saying,
“Here people are performing pūjā of Paraśurāma, of
Nṛsiṁha, of Vāmana, of many incarnations. If a devotee
comes here and performs pūjā to a particular Deity and
then after some time leaves that pūjā for the pūjā of
another Deity, there is no fault in it. In your lifetime
you have worshipped many incarnations of Bhagavān.
Therefore according to one’s own niṣṭhā he can go here
or there, because Bhagavān is one. I am telling you this
because I can see that you are not liking it here. Even
while in Vaikuṇṭha, if your internal svarūpa is that of
a gopa, then you will always desire to worship Gopāla.
Therefore you are not happy here, but there is no fault
in this. This is a very deep thing; it is not written
anywhere, but taking your pulse, I have ascertained the
reason for your dissatisfaction. Here, will Lakṣmīdevī
allow anyone else to massage the feet of her Prabhu?
Will she allow anyone to serve Him food? She won t. She
thinks, ‘It is my duty alone. You can only stand at a
distance and offer prayers to Him. If some devotee comes
here and tries to sit on the lap of Nārāyaṇa as Prahlāda
sits on the lap of Nṛsiṁha, she won’t allow it.

“From here you should continue your journey, and you
will experience more variegated pastimes and more
intimate rasa. I have explained all of this to you so
that first you will understand that all incarnations of
Bhagavān are one in tattva. Therefore there is no fault
in leaving one incarnation to go to another because They
are all one and the same. They only appear different to
accommodate the various sentiments of Their devotees.”




Chapter Six

Kṛṣṇa’s Glories are Inconceivable




                             44
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                       5/5/2017

All of the incarnations of Bhagavān   are the same in
quality, just as from one candle we   can light ten
candles and all will be the same in   quality. Which one
is the original and which ones were   lit from that, we
can’t tell.


etac ca vṛndā-vipine gha-hantur hṛtvārbha-vatsān
anubhūtam asti śrī-brahmaṇā dvāravatī-pure ca prāsāda-
vargeṣu mayā bhramitvā



Bṛhad-bhāg. 2.4.164


Nārada is saying, “When Brahmā stole the boys and calves
in Vṛndāvana, he experienced how Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the killer
of the Agha demon, is one and yet expands into many, and
I myself experienced it when I visited His palaces in
Dvārakā.”

In Vṛndāvana, the mothers and fathers of the gopīs and
gopas, upon seeing the beauty and sweetness of Kṛṣṇa-His
speech, His behaviour, all of His charming sweetness-the
desire comes in them that He be their son. At the time
when the cows are giving milk to their calves, they
think, “Sometimes Kṛṣṇa comes and drinks our milk with
His own mouth. We desire that He be our calf so we can
feed Him milk.” In Vraja-maṇḍala there are so many cows,
mothers, and mothers who already have sons, and they all
desire that Kṛṣṇa become their son so they can feed Him
milk and show Him motherly affection. Not so much when
Kṛṣṇa enters their houses, steals milk and drinks it,
but in the late afternoon when Kṛṣṇa returns from taking
the cows out to graze. At that time, Mother Yaśodā gives
Him motherly affection and wipes His face, and all the
mothers and cows desire very strongly in their hearts
that Kṛṣṇa be their son. Leaving their own children, all
the mothers come first to look after Kṛṣṇa. Then they
return to their own children, take them in their laps,
wipe their faces, and give them all affection.

Kṛṣṇa knows their desire. How does He know? It says in
one verse of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam that when Kṛṣṇa is
playing with the gopīs and is fully absorbed in līlā, He
forgets everything: “Where am I?” Any loss or gain in
this for Himself in this activity, any loss or gain for
the world-all of this is forgotten. At this time, if
some enemy attacks, what will happen? A rākṣasa like
Aghāsura or Bakāsura may come, but everything will be
forgotten. All household duties, eating, drinking,
bathing- all is forgotten. He is so absorbed in
relishing the prema of the gopīs that all is forgotten
and He is aware of nothing else. The affection of His
mothers, the affection of His friends-all is forgotten.

Regarding that time, Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura asks
a question. “You devotees are praying, ‘O Kṛṣṇacandra,
give me the darśana of Your lotus feet, and you are
crying and crying, but who will hear this prayer? Kṛṣṇa
has already forgotten everything! When Kṛṣṇa has
forgotten everything, then sarvajñatā or His quality of
knowing what is in everyone’s heart is diminished. That

                             45
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

is an aspect of aiśvarya, one of His opulences. At that
time when He is supremely absorbed-sometimes falling at
the feet of the gopīs, trying to appease them, serving
them, and receiving service from them-He is so absorbed
in this that He forgets all other things of the world.
All sarvajñatā has been abandoned, and all six kinds of
opulences have been forgotten. Then who will hear your
prayer?

“Knowing everything is a quality of aiśvarya, so if it
comes at this time, the mood of mādhurya will be
disturbed. So who will come to hear this prayer? This is
a big problem. We are praying, and that is meaningless?
If there is no listener, certainly it will be
meaningless. Paramātmā is Kṛṣṇa’s expansion; He exists
everywhere as the all-pervading witness. Will He know?
But if we are praying directly to Govinda and only
Paramātmā is aware of it, what does it matter? We are
praying to the king and the doorman is listening-what
will be the benefit in that? We won’t be satisfied with
that. So what then? Our prayer will not go directly to
Kṛṣṇa? If our prayer doesn’t reach Kṛṣṇa’s ears, then it
is as if we are crying and no one can hear. And if no
one hears, then who will do something to relieve that
crying? If a small baby is crying for milk and no one
hears him, what will he do? Therefore, our crying will
be like that. But don’t worry, don’t be disturbed; Kṛṣṇa
will hear.”

We may think, “But how? If He listens, it will be
aiśvarya.” To resolve this, Kṛṣṇa possesses two
qualities: He is simultaneously mugdha and sarvajña.
What is the meaning of mugdha? Becoming so spellbound in
love that it is just as if He doesn’t know anything.
Yaśodā grabs His ear and says, “You go to the corner and
continuously sit down and stand again! Don’t You steal
anymore!” And He will really do it! Taking a small stick
Yaśodā will say, “Today You will not get away without a
beating!” And Kṛṣṇa will say, “Mother! Don’t hit Me!”
with tears coming from His eyes. This is called
mugdhatā, being spellbound in emotion. Fear itself is
afraid of Him, yet He becomes frightened when Mother
Yaśodā approaches Him with a stick. She will not beat
Him; she just says that she will-but He cries and the
tears are flowing. Here, is Kṛṣṇa really crying, or is
He just making a show of it? Ordinary people will say,
“Bhagavān will cry? He won’t cry. What could He possibly
be afraid of?” But premī devotees will say that He is
really crying, and this is called mugdhatā.

If Jarāsandha, Pūtanā, Aghāsura, Bakāsura, Kaṁsa, or
Narakāsura come, then this young boy named Kṛṣṇa kills
them. This is His quality of sarva-śaktimattā, having
all power. He is as well-known for this as He is for
knowing everything, yet at the same time He becomes
spellbound in līlā. For example, once, Kṛṣṇa called for
Uddhava: “Uddhava, come over here. Today we have a
serious problem.”

“What is it?”

“Today, from Hastināpura, an invitation to the rājasūya-
yajña has come, and tomorrow it will commence there. In
the opposite direction, Jarāsandha is causing a great

                             46
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

disturbance and it is necessary to kill him. We should
do both things, but I can’t understand how. You are a
clever, intelligent man, My minister and friend; you
tell Me: what should I do? Should we go now to the
Pāṇḍavas rājasūya-yajña, or should we go and kill
Jarāsandha?”

Uddhava thought, “Look at this! Svayam Bhagavān, who
knows all and has all powers, is asking me? And it seems
that He is really asking, not that He is just giving Me
respect. It seems that He is not just playing the part
of a king, and that He is not just observing the
formality of taking advice from a minister. Is Kṛṣṇa
really just observing this formality, or is He sincerely
asking? It seems from looking at His face that He is
sincerely asking me!”

Then Uddhava replied, “Prabhu, according to my
consideration, it will be good if we go now to the
rājasūya-yajña in Hastināpura. We can accomplish both
objectives with one action. For completion of the
sacrifice, a horse will be sent off so that any king who
wants to present a challenge may do so, and You and
Arjuna can follow behind it. Please take Bhīma also.
Eventually that horse will arrive in the Māgadha
province of Jarāsandha and You can kill him there. Then
the rājasūya-yajña will be completed, and You can kill
Jarāsandha also.”

Kṛṣṇa patted Uddhava on the back. He was very, very
pleased. He could not make the decision Himself, and
when His prime minister gave such wise advice, He was
very pleased.

So Bhagavān is both mugdha and sarvajña at the same
time. This is not a fault, but rather by His
inconceivable potency it is one of His qualities. It is
stated in the Vedānta-sutra that all contradictory
qualities are completely harmonised in Kṛṣṇa: viruddha-
dharmam tasmin na citram. In Kṛṣṇa both mugdhatā and
sarvajñatā are going on together, and there is no fault
in this. This is not possible for anyone else. If any
human being says that they possess this quality, they
are only a fraud.

Kṛṣṇa is sarvajña like this: when the rāsa-līlā starts,
Kṛṣṇa sees so many gopīs, and they are all desiring that
“Kṛṣṇa will be with me only, He will appease me, and I
will be the most fortunate.” Kṛṣṇa knows this, and He
dances in such a way that it appears that between every
two gopīs is one Kṛṣṇa, and He fulfils their desires.
This is sarvajñatā. Such sarvajñatā is not seen even in
Rāma or Nārāyaṇa. Along with this, when Śrīmatī Rādhikā
disappears from the rāsa dance, Kṛṣṇa thinks, “Where has
She gone?” He doesn’t know. He is sarvajña, but still He
becomes upset and cries for Her. Just as Rāmacandra
really cries for Sītādevī, here Kṛṣṇa is really crying
for Rādhikā. And when They reunite? He becomes Hers
only. She says, “Today You decorate My hair,” and taking
a flower He follows behind Her. She says, “I am unable
to walk any further,” and He takes Her on His shoulders.
All of these things are mugdhatā. This is the very
pinnacle of both rāsa and bhagavattā or Bhagavān’s
nature as the Supreme.

                             47
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017


Regarding the older gopīs, they all desired that Kṛṣṇa
would become their son, and all of the cows desired that
Kṛṣṇa would become their calf. Kṛṣṇa saw that drinking
the milk of one mother would not fill His stomach. The
love of one mother would not be sufficient. Similarly,
the love of one gopī is not sufficient for Him. For Him,
millions of gopīs are necessary. He desires the
affection of millions of mothers, and that will fill His
‘stomach . Therefore, one day He thought, “Today in
Vraja, I will have millions of mothers, I will marry
millions of gopīs, and I will become the calf of
millions of cows. Let’s see, how will I do it? By
connection with the antaryāmī it could be done, but in
this humanlike form, in nara-līlā, it will be very
difficult.”

For this purpose He bewildered Brahmā. He sent
inspiration into the heart of Brahmā to come there to
Vraja. Then Brahmā saw the killing of Aghāsura and
thought, “This is a marvellous thing! How did this young
cowherd boy give liberation to that demon?”

To see more pastimes of Kṛṣṇa, Brahmā could have prayed
like this: “Prabhu, I want to see more of Your līlā.
Please be merciful to me and show me more pastimes.” It
is an ordinary prayer, and Kṛṣṇa would have fulfilled
it, but Brahmā didn’t do this. He thought, “Alright; I
will see more of His activities for myself.”

One way to find out what you want to know is to ask
someone. Another way is to just sit patiently and wait
for someone to automatically tell you. Leaving aside the
desire to know, one may think, “If I am qualified to
understand, then he will tell me.” But instead, in order
to find out something for himself, Brahmā thought, “I
will place an obstacle in His way.” How did this idea
come into his mind? In the form of caitya-guru Bhagavān
causes something to arise in someone’s heart. He Himself
inspired this idea within Brahmā so Brahmā would place
an obstacle in His līlā, and then Kṛṣṇa would be able to
fulfil all of His objectives yet still remain within
nara-līlā, His humanlike pastimes.

Therefore, in the afternoon of the same day He gave
mukti to Aghāsura, Kṛṣṇa was with the other cowherd
boys. They were very hungry, so they all sat down to
eat. With great eagerness and great love, while laughing
and playing and amusing one another, they were eating.
Brahmā observed this and thought, “This is the right
time.” The calves had continued moving on. By the
influence of Yogamāyā they had seen some especially
green grass for grazing, so they went further and
further ahead until they were very far away. Meanwhile,
the sakhās were still eating, and when the calves were
beyond the eyesight of everyone, Brahmā stole them. Some
say that he took them to his own Brahmaloka, and some
say that he hid them in the caves of Govardhana.
Govardhana is quite extensive and there are many caves
there.

When they didn’t see the calves, the boys said, “Where
have the calves gone?” Kṛṣṇa suggested, “I will go and
bring them back Myself. I will just play the flute and

                             48
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

they will return of their own accord. You all just
continue eating; I am going.”

Why did Kṛṣṇa do this? To play a trick on Brahmā, and so
He could become the boys and calves Himself. Therefore
He arranged precisely what Brahmā desired-that He would
somehow become separated from the other boys. Brahmā saw
this and thought, “The very thing I desired has now
happened! I wanted to kidnap the boys when Kṛṣṇa was not
watching, and now I have the perfect opportunity! Of His
own accord Kṛṣṇa has gone away.”

Kṛṣṇa went away, and how did He go? In the carefree
manner of a young cowherd, with a handful of yoghurt and
rice. But searching and searching, He thought, “Where
have the calves gone?” This is also mugdhatā.

After a little while, when He couldn’t find the calves,
He returned to the lunch area and saw that the boys had
also vanished. Brahmā had also taken them and confined
them within a cave. Kṛṣṇa actually didn’t know anything.
Searching and searching, He couldn’t see His friends,
and the calves were nowhere to be found. He still had
that uneaten rice in His hand, and His face became
withered from unhappiness. He became overwhelmed with
fear, thinking, “What will I say to all of their
mothers? All the calves have been lost, and now I do not
see the boys either. What will I tell all of the mothers
and vraja-vāsīs?” Kṛṣṇa was very worried. His limbs were
covered with dust, and His face was withered from
hunger, thirst, and unhappiness. Sarvajñatā was absent
here.

After a little while, Yogamāyā thought, “I should offer
some service.” She suddenly appeared there to render
service, and then Kṛṣṇa remembered, “Oh yes, through
Yogamāyā I engineered this entire situation to create
this pastime and to fulfil the desires of the vraja-
vāsīs.”

Then Kṛṣṇa expanded and assumed forms identical to those
of the boys and calves. He sat His friends back down and
fed them Himself, and everyone was very happy. Their
eating, drinking, and laughing went on as it had before,
and then in the late afternoon they all returned to
their homes. All the mothers thought, “Ahh, my son has
returned!” Previously they had gone first to Kṛṣṇa to
look after Him and give Him motherly affection, and then
attended to their own children. But that day they all
looked after their own children first, and forgot about
Kṛṣṇa. Only Yaśodā looked after Kṛṣṇa, and the rest of
the mothers looked after their own children. That day
the cows disregarded their younger calves, and showed
more attention to the older calves who had returned from
the forest with Kṛṣṇa, feeding them milk and licking
them. For one year the līlā went on like this.

Then Baladeva Prabhu thought, “What is this? The calves
have come running from Govardhana, and the cows are
showing affection first to the older ones, not caring
for the younger ones? Why is this? And the mothers who
used to attend to Kṛṣṇa first are now tending their own
children first. Why? What has happened? Why is it like
this?” Because Kṛṣṇa had become those children and

                             49
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

calves Himself, He received much more affection. All of
the mothers and cows had their desire to have Kṛṣṇa as
their son or calf fulfilled, and He received the
affection that He desired from millions of mothers. Also
in that very year He married millions of kiśorīs.
Through all those boys that He became, He married all
the young girls of Vṛndāvana, so all of His objectives
were accomplished.

Now that everything was completed, Kṛṣṇa sent some
internal inspiration to Baladeva to bring this pastime
to a close. Otherwise Baladeva wouldn’t have known
anything of it. Baladeva said, “My dear brother, I don’t
understand. Whose māyā is this? Is it the māyā of the
demigods, or Mahāmāyā, or whose māyā? This is not My
māyā, and if it were the māyā of the demigods or
Mahāmāyā, then I would understand.” Then He thought,
“Oh, Kṛṣṇa Himself has become all of these boys and
calves? Why has He done it?” He asked Kṛṣṇa, “My dear
brother, what is this? Until today I didn’t understand,
but today I see something unique. Why have You become so
many boys and calves also? What is this?” Kṛṣṇa smiled.
To fulfil the desires of so many people and to bewilder
Brahmā, through the medium of His own Yogamāyā potency
He engineered this pastime.

After a little while, Brahmā came from his own loka,
worried. He had found that there was no place for him in
his own loka. Kṛṣṇa had also assumed the form of
Hiraṇyagarbha Brahmā and had gone to Brahmaloka. There
He told the doorman, “If someone taking my form as
Brahmā comes here, don’t allow him to enter.”

When Brahmā returned to his abode after stealing the
boys and calves, six months passed. It was only one
minute for him, but his one minute is six months for us.
He arrived at his Brahmaloka and the doorman asked him,
“Who are you? Our grandfather Brahmā is here, and he has
said that if any other four-headed Brahmā comes here, he
is not allowed to enter. You cannot enter; stay outside!
You must be a creation of māyā.” Brahmā thought, “Oh!
Kṛṣṇa Himself has come here? I have committed an offence
at His feet; I must return to Earth immediately.” In
coming back to Vraja, another six months elapsed.
Altogether one Earth year had passed.

etac ca vṛndā-vipine gha-hantur hṛtvārbha-vatsān
anubhūtam asti śrī-brahmaṇā



Bṛhad-bhāg. 2.4.164


After stealing the cowherd boys and calves, Brahmājī
experienced how Kṛṣṇa is simultaneously one and
millions. Eko bahu syām: Kṛṣṇa is one and becomes many,
yet becoming many still remains one. First Brahmā saw,
“Here Kṛṣṇa is sitting with rice in His hand and eating,
just as He was that day one year ago, and with Him are
so many boys and calves. Are they the same ones that I
stole, or are they different ones? It is possible that
by His own māyā Kṛṣṇa has taken them from the caves. Who
are they? Which are the real ones?”

                             50
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017


To see about this, he went to Govardhana Hill. He saw
that the boys and calves were just as he had left them,
sleeping in yoga-nidrā. Then returning to Kṛṣṇa, he saw
that the boys and calves were there also. He thought,
“When I come here, Kṛṣṇa brings the boys and calves
here, and when I go to Govardhana, He places them back
there.”

Therefore, with two of his faces and four of his eyes,
he looked in the direction of the cave, and at the same
time with the other two faces and four eyes he looked
over to where Kṛṣṇa was. He saw that the boys and calves
were sleeping in the cave, and simultaneously they were
eating and drinking with Kṛṣṇa, performing pastimes.
Then suddenly he saw that the entire scene had
disappeared, and that all of the boys and calves with
Kṛṣṇa had assumed the forms of four-armed Nārāyaṇa. In
addition, he saw how the human beings, Brahmās,
Śaṅkaras, demigods, animals, plants, and so on of each
and every brahmāṇḍa were all offering prayers to these
four-armed Nārāyaṇas and performing kīrtana.

Brahmā saw that each of the four-armed forms had all of
the qualities of the original: all were saccidānanda,
all were full of the six opulences, all were sarva-
antaryāmī, and all had the sixty qualities of Bhagavān.
Only Kṛṣṇa Himself has four more. The boys had so many
blankets, sticks, flutes, horns, and other things, and
they also assumed four-armed forms. Witnessing this,
Brahmā became very astonished and began offering
prayers. “O Bhagavān! First You showed that You were
alone, then You showed that all of the boys and calves
are all Bhagavān, and finally You showed that everything
is Bhagavān. Without Bhagavān, nothing can have its
existence. No jīva can exist, and no material object can
exist, but at the same time everything is not directly
Bhagavān. But I have seen that all of the boys and
calves are You only. All have the qualities of Bhagavān;
it is not that some forms are inferior or superior.
After this I looked again, and all of these forms had
disappeared, and only You, Kṛṣṇa, remained.”

After witnessing this pastime, Brahmā said, “O Bhagavān!
Who can describe the glories of Your acintya-śakti?

jānanta eva jānantu

kiṁ bahūktyā na me prabho

manaso vapuṣo vāco

vaibhavaṁ tava go-caraḥ




Śrīmad-Bhāg. 10.14.38


“Those people who say that they know Bhagavān, that they
know the glories of Bhagavān-in reality they know
nothing. Until today I also thought like that, but

                             51
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                       5/5/2017

actually I am unable to describe His glories.”

What to speak of Brahmā, even Kṛṣṇa Himself cannot
describe His own glories. He cannot find the depth of
the glories of His own name, qualities, and form.
Assuming the complexion and sentiment of Śrīmatī Rādhikā
He became Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He descended in this
form to investigate His own glories, but He still
couldn’t find their depth. In this way Kṛṣṇa is
inconceivable. He is one, but becomes many. He is
mugdha, and simultaneously He is sarvajña. All
contradictory qualities are harmonised in Him. Don’t
attempt to understand this through debate! Only if one
is completely surrendered to Him can one know a little
of His glories. Think only of serving Him. Trying to
count or measure His glories will only be troublesome.
Therefore Brahmā said, “I cannot find the depth of Your
inconceivable glories.” The glories of Bhagavān are
limitless. Who can find the depth of them? Brahmā couldn
t, Baladeva Prabhu couldn t, even Kṛṣṇa Himself couldn
t. Therefore don’t try to fathom the glories of Bhagavān
through debate. By rendering service to Him we will
obtain some understanding of His glories. Therefore we
should make an effort only for bhakti.

Another reason that Kṛṣṇa showed this pastime was for
the bewilderment of Brahmā. In the midst of his life
Brahmā was sometimes in illusion. Thinking himself to be
the master of the entire universe, once Brahmā went to
Dvārakā-purī to meet with Kṛṣṇa. Arriving at the gates,
he said to the doorman, “I have come to see Kṛṣṇa.”

The doorman went to Kṛṣṇa and said, “Someone named
Brahmā has come to see You.”

Kṛṣṇa said, “Go and ask him ‘Which Brahmā? “

The doorman returned and asked, “Which Brahmā are you?”

He replied, “I am four-headed Brahmā, the grandfather of
all!”

The doorman went to Kṛṣṇa and repeated exactly what
Brahmā had said. Kṛṣṇa smiled and thought, “I have given
him this post, and just see how he has become proud.” So
Kṛṣṇa said, “Go and call him.”

Brahmā entered the Sudharmā assembly hall. In that place
even if millions and millions of people entered, there
would still be space for them. It could become very
extensive, and it could also become very small. On hot
days it would become cool, and on cold days it would be
warm. Just as one desired, it would become. When Brahmā
entered, he saw this vast royal assembly hall, and Kṛṣṇa
was seated in the middle. There were millions of other
Brahmās present there. The smallest of them, an eight-
headed Brahmā, was seated in the back. In the front
there were Brahmās with thousands of heads. Their crowns
were composed entirely of jewels, and when they were
getting up from offering praṇāmas, the sound of the
crowns clanging together resounded in the four
directions. He saw other Brahmās with sixteen heads,
others with sixty-four heads, and all of them were much,
much larger than himself. His pride now destroyed, he

                             52
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

went and offered his daṇḍavat-praṇāma to Kṛṣṇa. Getting
up, he saw that everything had disappeared and only
Kṛṣṇa was left, smiling. Such are His glories,
unlimited. And for one who has gone to Vaikuṇṭha as
Gopa-kumāra has, he will see that the glories of not
just one but of all the incarnations are like this.




Chapter Seven

Bhagavān’s Inconceivable Potency




When Brahmā stole the gopas and calves and Kṛṣṇa Himself
became all of them, He took on the same nature as all
the boys and calves. He also became the sticks,
blankets, everything-all were Kṛṣṇa Himself, and none
were different from Him. Brahmā personally experienced
this.


durvitarkyā hi sā śaktir adbhutā parameśvarī kintv
asyaikānta-bhakteṣu gūḍham kiṣcin na tiṣṭhati



Bṛhad-bhāg. 2.4.165


“Although Bhagavān’s potency is wonderful and
inconceivable, it is not a secret to His exclusive
devotees.”

But devotees do not keep the same feelings for all of
those mūrtis. If they do, then their sentiment will not
be perfected. If we see Them all as equal, then will we
treat those sticks which Kṛṣṇa became the same as the
original form of Kṛṣṇa Himself? Rāmacandra, Nārāyaṇa,
Nṛsiṁha, Vāmana-Kṛṣṇa is one with all of Them. So an
ordinary man, a neutral person, will consider Them all
equal, just as one may consider that all tulasī leaves
are equal: which one is smaller or bigger, which one has
holes in it, which are dry, wet, or immature doesn’t
matter; all are equal. Similarly, those who are neutral
say, “For us, all Vaiṣṇavas are equal. We don’t consider
who is an uttama-bhāgavat, madhyama-bhāgavat, or
kaniṣṭha. We see only that they are all Vaiṣṇavas. They
all wear saffron cloth, apply tilaka, and take harināma,
so for us they are all representatives of Bhagavān.”

Some people speak like this, but in bhagavad-bhakti,
such neutrality is not desirable. In bhakti there should
be exclusive feeling for one mūrti. Kṛṣṇa, Rāma,
Nṛsiṁha, Nārāyaṇa-They are all one, but for a devotee
one iṣṭadeva or favourite Deity must come. Then there
can be perfection in bhajana. Otherwise, the vision that
all are equal and that all are one from the viewpoint of
tattva is correct, but from the viewpoint of upāsanā or
worship, there are some shortcomings in it.

                             53
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017


For instance, Kṛṣṇa steals from houses and tells lies.
Yaśodā asks, “Hey! Have You been stealing from the
houses of others?”

Kṛṣṇa replies, “When could I have done it? Early in the
morning you sent Me to the forest to take the cows
grazing. All day they are grazing, and then I bring them
back in the early evening. Then I come to you. Tell Me,
when could I have stolen anything?”

And He had done it also! This is mugdhatā. This is a
positive quality of Bhagavān which is accepted by
devotees, but nirviśeṣa-vādīs consider this to be a
fault. They consider this to be a defect and will not
understand it. This is a quality of Bhagavān’s
variegatedness, but a neutral person will not be able to
understand it.

In the realm of bhakti, neutrality is the most
undesirable thing. Exclusive sentiment is the specific
quality of bhakti; therefore in relation to Kṛṣṇa there
will never be neutrality. There is neutrality in
Brahman, so this is a desirable quality for brahmavādīs.
If someone says that complete neutrality is a quality of
Kṛṣṇa, then he is certainly a neutral person. In the war
between the Pāṇḍavas and the Kauravas, by cleverness and
cheating Kṛṣṇa took the side of the Pāṇḍavas, His
devotees. One can also say that the sun is neutral. When
you are in front of it, it gives you light and heat, but
when you remain inside the house you don’t get its rays.
Then where is the sun’s neutrality? Bhagavān is just
like this.

Kṛṣṇa is just seated quietly, just like the master of a
house is seated. For everything He has appointed a
department head and has told everyone, “All of you do
your own work!” Then He just sits quietly and oversees
them all. Like this Kṛṣṇa possesses all śaktis, and lets
everyone automatically do their work. In the management
of the universe these śaktis see to it that there is
never any disturbance. There never has been, and never
will be; such is the efficacy of His śaktis.

Kṛṣṇa stole something, and when the news of His theft
reached Yaśodā, she became angry. Parabrahma had stolen
from houses and broken pots, so He will have to be
punished. But because His limbs are so soft, she will
not hit Him, but bind Him; then He will learn His
lesson. Taking a rope in her hands, she tried to bind
Kṛṣṇa, but the rope was short by a measurement of two
fingers length. She tried again with more rope, and
again the rope was two fingers length short. Trying and
trying, from early until ten o clock in the morning, the
rope was still two fingers length short. At that time,
Yaśodā was very astonished, and the gopīs were very
delighted. Originally they had angrily come to speak
against Kṛṣṇa so that He would be given punishment, and
now they were clapping their hands and laughing, saying
to Yaśodā, “Just see, you cannot control Him! How will
you possibly bind Him?” They brought all of the ropes of
Vraja and still couldn’t bind Him. It was always two
fingers length short. Yaśodā had applied such a long
rope, and neither His waist or waist ornaments had

                             54
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

increased in size, so how is this?

Bhagavān’s acintya-śakti remains in an inactive state,
not doing anything, but is always searching for an
opportunity for service. Just like the person who
doesn’t work all of the time but simply waits for the
order of his master, Bhagavān’s millions and millions of
śaktis are waiting for His order. But it is not like our
giving an order to someone. Bhagavān simply desires
something in His mind and simultaneously that task is
done. Here Kṛṣṇa thought, “Today Mother is binding Me,
but outside the cows are waiting for My darśana. Until I
come, they will not give milk. The calves are also
waiting for Me. Now the sakhās will come, and because I
won’t be able to go and play with them, they will be
very unhappy.”

The cowherd boys saw all of this and said, “Today Your
mother has taught You a good lesson!” They were very
unhappy that on that day they wouldn’t be able to play
with Kṛṣṇa, but at the same time they loved Kṛṣṇa so
much that just by seeing Him very briefly they felt
great happiness. Kṛṣṇa is very small in this pastime,
only three and one-half years old. So these other boys
are only three and even two years old, yet seeing Kṛṣṇa
in this condition they felt great happiness. But they
also lamented, “Oh, today Kṛṣṇa will not be able to play
with us because Mother has bound Him.”

This is mugdhatā, not sarvajñatā. This svarūpa-śakti is
also called Yogamāyā, the energy by which Kṛṣṇa performs
so many activities and pastimes. Yogamāyā saw that an
opportunity for service was available, and she responded
accordingly. “His waist will not be bound, and then He
will be able to go and play.” Regardless of how much
rope was applied, the rope remained two fingers length
short. This is impossible, but it becomes possible by
the arrangement of this svarūpa-śakti, the medium by
which Bhagavān performs His pastimes.

What determines whether Yogamāyā gives the darśana of
Bhagavān to someone or not? If Yogamāyā is pleased, then
someone can receive Kṛṣṇa’s darśana. If she is not
pleased, then they won’t get His darśana. This Yogamāyā
is the foundation for all of His pastimes, and this same
Yogamāyā in full form, expanded to the highest limit, is
Śrīmatī Rādhikā Herself. The same śakti is present in
Dvārakā in the forms of Satyabhāmā, Rukmiṇī, and others,
in Vaikuṇṭha in the forms of Lakṣmī, and in the heavenly
planets in the forms of the wives of the plenary
portions of Bhagavān there. In heaven there is the form
of caṣcala or restless Lakṣmī, and in Vaikuṇṭha there is
the form of acaṣcala or steady Lakṣmī. They are all
Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s reflected forms or expansions.

In the material world there is caṣcala Lakṣmī. Why is
she called that? Because today wealth is with some
person, and tomorrow it will be with another. She
doesn’t stick to one husband, and she is always
wandering in the four directions. Today here, tomorrow
there, and so on. Who is she? She is the shadow śakti of
the steady Lakṣmī: Bhū, Śrī, and Nīlā. Durgā is also a
shadow śakti- Vindyavāsinī, Kaṅkālī, Cāmuṇḍā and so on-
they are all shadow śaktis of the steady Lakṣmī. At the

                             55
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

time of Rāmacandra’s pastimes, within Laṅkā there was
Laṅkinī, and she was also a shadow śakti of the steady
Lakṣmī. The demons were worshipping her, but by nature
she was restless. When Hanumān came and attacked, she
became perturbed and ran away, thinking, “Very soon he
will destroy Rāvaṇa. This monkey has certainly come to
defeat us.”

In this world Lakṣmī is very restless, never remaining
in one place. Some people who have abundant wealth think
that they will turn it all over to their offspring, but
there is no guarantee that it will stay within their
family. But that Lakṣmī who in the form of Bhakti-devī
resides with Bhagavān is steady. Wherever this Lakṣmī
is, she is steady. If she is residing in a place where
someone offends her, then she may leave; otherwise she
will stay. But bhakti doesn’t come quickly-it is very
difficult to obtain. Therefore such para-śakti of
Bhagavān cannot be understood by argument, but by the
mood of service. If inside us is niṣṭhā, exclusive
feelings towards one particular form of Bhagavān, then
bhakti will come, but if there is not exclusive niṣṭhā
towards one form, then it will not come.

One may desire to perform bhajana for Rāma and Sītā,
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, Candrāvalī and Kṛṣṇa, and others. From
the perspective of tattva this is alright, and it is
possible that one may even attain Vaikuṇṭha. But if
there is not niṣṭhā for one particular Deity, then there
will be no rasa and no ānanda. This is being exclusive,
but it is not being biased; it is thoroughly correct.

In verse 2.4.165 of the Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta we find the
word parameśvarī. Parameśvarī is acintya-śakti, and to
know Her is not possible by argument. She is beyond
that. When will we be able to have Her darśana? When we
engage in exclusive bhajana it will become easy. The
sentiment of the gopīs rāgānugā-bhakti is very rare, and
very difficult to obtain. But although that sentiment is
very rare, it can be achieved. Sometimes even if that
thing which is considered the most degraded of all in
this world is dovetailed in the service of Bhagavān, it
can become the highest thing.


vikrīḍitaṁ vraja-vadhūbhir idaṁ ca viṣṇoḥ śraddhānvito
nuśṛṇuyād atha varṇayed yaḥ bhaktiṁ parāṁ bhagavati
pratilabhya kāmaṁ hṛd-rogam āśv apahinoty acireṇa dhīraḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāg. 10.33.39


“Anyone who faithfully hears or describes the divine
pastimes enjoyed by Śrī Kṛṣṇa with the gopīs of
Vṛndāvana will very quickly obtain pure bhakti, thereby
conquering the heart disease of lust.”

There is a very beautiful explanation of this verse in
the Bhāgavatam commentary of Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura. Some people think that they will first become
free from all offences and anarthas, become pure by
their own efforts, and then engage in bhajana, but that

                             56
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

is absurd. First concentrate the mind and make the heart
pure, then do bhajana, and then bhakti will come? It
will never be like this. You can try to concentrate the
mind for millions of lives, but there is no guarantee
that it will remain focused. Even the senses of big, big
sages like Viśvāmitra and Saubhari became disturbed, so
therefore in millions of lives it will not be possible
to control the mind by one’s own personal endeavour. You
will just be kept waiting for millions of lives. It is
like thinking that you will wait until the water of a
river dries up before you cross it. Whatever condition
you are now in-if you are a thief, a dacoit, a hooligan,
or if you are pure-start performing kṛṣṇa-bhajana and
chanting harināma, and automatically bhakti will take
care of the rest.

In this world, there is no greater misconduct than
adultery, but if it is in relation to Kṛṣṇa, then it is
not misconduct. Why? Because He is the husband of all.
From the perspective of bhakti the feelings that the
gopīs have for Kṛṣṇa are the highest of all sentiments,
both in this world and in the spiritual world. Some
people who hear the Tenth Canto of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
say, “Hey! This is mundane! They are loving Kṛṣṇa
through hiding and deception, and because of this they
have become so exalted?”

Yes: they have become so exalted that the most exemplary
personalities such as Nārada, Uddhava, and the Kumāras
meditate on the gopīs feet within their hearts. Those
devotees who have developed sentiments like those of the
gopīs-vikrīḍitam vraja-vadhūbhir-will gain entrance into
Kṛṣṇa’s playful pastimes.

If one listens with faith to narrations of Kṛṣṇa's
pastimes with the gopīs by anuśṛṇuyād-accepting a pure
guru, an ideal rasika Vaiṣṇava who knows bhagavat-tattva
and then constantly hearing from him-then exclusive
sentiment will come to him. This sentiment is our
everything, and it will arise in us and give us great
happiness. Anuvarṇayet means it is passed on from one to
another. What Vyāsadeva taught to Śukadeva Gosvāmī,
Śukadeva in turn taught that very same thing to Mahārāja
Parīkṣit. And what Śukadeva Gosvāmī taught, Sūta Gosvāmī
described that very same thing in the assembly of the
sages. If it is described like this and one listens with
faith, what will happen? Bhakti parāṁ bhagavatī: parāṁ
means Kṛṣṇa, the best of all tattva-one will obtain
bhakti for Him, and that bhakti will become so intense
that pratilabhya kāmaṁ hṛd-rogam āśu: one will obtain
the prema of the gopīs. And by obtaining that, what will
happen? The disease in the heart will be uprooted. What
is that disease? The lust that men and women have for
one another which clouds a person’s intelligence. If it
creates so much strife amongst lower species such as
animals and birds, then what to speak of the effect it
has on people?

This lust is so all-encompassing that when the desire
comes for anything, we think, “I am its enjoyer. I am
its master.” Even in regard to such basic things as food
and clothing-any desire for personal enjoyment
whatsoever-it is all lust. There are so many types of
lust from gross to subtle, but by hearing about the

                             57
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

gopīs transcendental desire for Kṛṣṇa, automatically the
heart disease of worldly desire which binds us birth
after birth can be uprooted. And then prema, that entity
which couldn’t be obtained by millions of lifetimes of
attempts at purification by our own efforts, will
gradually come. Just see how something which is degraded
in the worldly sense can at once be made pure when
performed for Bhagavān’s pleasure.

Therefore, Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says, “To
eradicate your bad qualities, to control your mind, and
to rid yourself of lust, all of your personal efforts
will prove to be futile! In millions and millions of
lives it will not happen! Just do one thing, and don’t
worry: practice bhagavad-bhakti by engaging in śravaṇam,
kīrtanam, and smaraṇam. There are so many kinds of
narrations about Kṛṣṇa, but the descriptions of the
rāsa-līlā wherein Kṛṣṇa is sporting with the gopīs are
the topmost. If someone becomes absorbed in them day and
night, then he will find no free time for anything else.
So how could he possibly become engaged in any sinful
activity? That person is really dhīraḥ-one whose buddhi,
intelligence, is fixed.”


teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam dadāmi
buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ yena mām upayānti te



Bhag.-gītā 10.10


“To those who are sincerely devoted to serving Me with
love, I give the understanding by which they can come to
Me.”

In this verse, the word ‘buddhi means the intelligence
which gives Bhagavān. It is full of mercy. In one place,
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura says, “O Kṛṣṇa, You are
very merciful. You said ‘dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ. Please
give me buddhi-yoga. And You may ask, ‘Which buddhi-yoga
do you want? The buddhi-yoga which I gave to Arjuna? But
I don’t desire that. For Arjuna it was alright. For
those people who desire that variety of buddhi-yoga, it
is alright. But to me please give that buddhi-yoga by
which even You become bewildered and forget Yourself, in
which You sport with the gopīs, and by serving which one
completely forgets himself. To become the servant of the
gopīs, to become lost in that service and forget
everything else-I want that buddhi. For those who are
serving You, having forgotten everything else and being
intoxicated in that service, You are doing everything in
the form of an ordinary human being. Be merciful and
please inspire that buddhi-yoga within me. Such dhīraḥ
or steadiness is what I desire. Give me that
intelligence by which I can come to You in this way.”
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has offered such a
beautiful prayer to Bhagavān, and no one can offer a
higher prayer than this.

Here Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura is saying, “My
friends, practice sādhana like this. Don’t pray in this
way all of the time: ‘O Kṛṣṇa, I am a big thief, a big

                             58
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

hooligan.... Just become deeply absorbed in His
pastimes. ‘I am qualified, I am not qualified -this is
the consideration of a neutral person.”

Let us say someone has become greedy for a rasagullā,
and there is no money in his pocket. Then by grabbing
it, stealing it, or by any means he will get it. Our
greed for bhakti must be like that, and we should pray
to Bhagavān that He will be merciful and give us this
greed. So the purport here is that the buddhi-yoga we
really want is the mercy of Yogamāyā.

This Yogamāyā śakti of Bhagavān is durvitarkyā-
inconceivable and beyond argument or debate. “Others
have received it, so I should certainly receive it. Why
was it given to them anyway? Bilvamaṅgala’s conduct was
very bad, so why did he get it? And on the contrary my
consciousness is pure; I have never stolen or told a
lie. Why shouldn’t I get bhakti?” We should not think
like this. “When will we get it? How will we get it?”-it
is durvitarkyā or inconceivable.

By the arrangement of this very Yogamāyā alone, Bhagavān
appears in unlimited varieties of forms. When Bhagavān
comes in the forms of Nara and Nārāyaṇa, He is always
absorbed in meditation. That is one bhāva or mood. In
the form of Rāma He has a particular mood, in all other
forms He possesses a specific mood, and all of this is
arranged by the influence of Yogamāyā, Parameśvarī. From
Parameśvara comes Parameśvarī. Kintv asyaikānta-
bhakteṣu, gūḍham kiṣcin na tiṣṭhati: even though it is
inconceivable, still, it is not a secret to His pure
devotees. By whose mercy will we obtain exclusive
bhakti? From Yogamāyā we will receive a proper
understanding of it; otherwise no one will ever be able
to understand it.

Nārada told Gopa-kumāra, “To enter Goloka you must
understand these points. Then you will be qualified to
render service there. Otherwise you will remain here in
Vaikuṇṭha and have dealings with Nārāyaṇa in a similar
way as the Kumāras, who came here, received a brief
darśana, and then merely returned to their own
residence.”

Now I will explain the next verse:

patnī-sahasrair yugapat praṇītaṁ

dravyaṁ sa bhuṅkte bhagavān yadaikaḥ

paśyanti tāny atra yathā pratisvam

ādau mamādattā tad eva me tti




Bṛhad-bhāg. 2.4.166


“Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa simultaneously ate all of the meals
offered by His queens in such a way that each queen

                             59
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

thought, ‘He has accepted His meal from me first. “

Here Nārada is saying that once he went to Dvārakā and
saw a very peculiar pastime of Kṛṣṇa. So many queens are
there, including principal queens such as Rukmiṇī; Kṛṣṇa
has thousands of wives there. They all prepared many
different kinds of preparations, and they wanted to see
whose offering Kṛṣṇa would consider the most beautiful
and the most delicious. They all invited Kṛṣṇa to their
respective palaces, and they were all watching to see
whose palace He would go to first. They had already
given invitations to Kṛṣṇa. It was understood that good
fortune of whoever could take Kṛṣṇa into their home on
this day and serve Him drinks and feed Him would be the
topmost. Seeing Kṛṣṇa emerge with Nārada from the
Sudharmā assembly hall, all the queens eagerly stepped
out of their palaces. Nārada was thinking, “Whose palace
will He go to first?”

Just then Kṛṣṇa assumed as many forms as there were
queens and entered the palace of each and every one of
them simultaneously. Nārada also expanded into as many
forms and followed behind Him. This is also possible for
great devotees; we shouldn’t think them incapable of
doing that. There is only one Rādhikā, but when Kṛṣṇa
becomes Nārāyaṇa, She becomes Lakṣmī. When He becomes
Vāmana, She becomes the Lakṣmī of Vāmana. And when He
becomes Mahāprabhu, She expands into Viṣṇupriya and
Lakṣmīpriya. In this way, wherever there will be
pastimes, She will be there. When Sadāśiva becomes
Śaṅkara, then She becomes Pārvatī.

It is the same for devotees who are rasika. Some
devotees are satisfied in only one līlā, while others go
to all līlās and assuming many different forms, taste
many different pastimes. Merely tasting one līlā will
not satisfy them. Nārada is like this. For those who are
rasika, it is difficult to say where they are. Nārada
visits Nārāyaṇa, and in the same form he also goes to
visit Rāma. But the Nārada that goes to Rāma is
different from the Nārada that goes to visit Kṛṣṇa. Not
different in tattva, but different in bhāva. Each of
these expansions of Nārada has his own sthāyī-bhāva,
permanent sentiment. Just as Kṛṣṇa says that He will
never leave Vṛndāvana, it is like this with devotees
also. The gopīs will never leave Vṛndāvana. If they do,
it will only be in another form as expansions, and it is
the same with the gopas also.

When Nārada enters Vraja, he is Madhumaṅgala. At
Govardhana at Nārada-kuṇḍa (near Kusuma-sarovara) he
performs austerities and worship for what purpose? His
desires have not been completely fulfilled. “O Kṛṣṇa, I
have seen what it is to be in sakhya-rasa, I have seen
what is in vātsalya, and I have also taken a look at
dāsya. Now, Prabhu, what is remaining?” He desires to
experience that also, and taking another form, it may be
possible.

So Nārada is saying that Kṛṣṇa came out of the Sudharmā-
sabhā in this way, and that he was following Him. So
many queens offered preparations, and Kṛṣṇa expanded
into thousands of forms and simultaneously went to the
palace of each and every queen. With the very same form

                             60
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

and mood, He simultaneously tasted all their offerings.
Some people say that there was only one form of Kṛṣṇa
going from palace to palace very, very fast, but Nārada
could not have done this as well. They say that with
such great speed Kṛṣṇa went to each queen in such a way
that all of the queens thought that He had come to her
first. They say that if one minute is divided into
millions of parts, that is the speed at which He was
going. But it is like this only in His mādhurya-līlā in
Vraja. In His aiśvarya-līlā in Dvārakā He expands into
many forms, but in Vraja He doesn’t expand into more
forms; He remains in one form only. When Nārada saw
Kṛṣṇa expand into all of these forms in His aiśvarya-
līlā, he was not at all astonished. When was he really
astonished? When he saw Kṛṣṇa in His mādhurya-līlā. With
great speed and dexterity the same one Kṛṣṇa was
appearing simultaneously between millions of gopīs, and
each and every gopī was thinking, “Oh! Kṛṣṇa is very
attracted to me! He loves me the most!”


Next Nārada speaks this verse (Bṛhad-bhāg. 2.4.167):


kvacit keṣv api jīveṣu

tat-tac-chakti-praveśataḥ

tasyāveśāvatārā ye

te pi tadvan matā budhaiḥ




“When Bhagavān’s potency enters into a jīva, he is known
by the wise to be a śaktyāveśa-avatāra, an empowered
incarnation.”

If any special śakti of Bhagavān enters into a jīva, he
is called a śaktyāveśa-avatāra. This is the meaning of
śaktyāveśa-avatāra: Bhagavān has transmitted His own
bhagavattā-śakti into that person. Bhagavān is the
possessor of all śakti, but bhagavattā is the
manifestation of śakti. Bhagavān has unlimited qualities
and this śakti manifests them all. Bhagavān is heroic,
merciful, knowledgable, and full in all six opulences,
and they all manifest by śakti. Who really lifted
Girirāja Govardhana? Śakti, without whom His each and
every activity would not take place. But we should not
think that śakti and śaktimān or the possessor of the
śakti are separate. They are one and the same.

We must respect those in whom śakti has entered just as
we would respect incarnations of Bhagavān Himself.
Nārada, Paraśurāma, Kapiladeva*-we should give respect
to them as empowered incarnations of Bhagavān because
there śakti has manifested. Who is the guru? There are
different gradations, but he is either Bhagavān’s jñāna-
avatāra, bhakti-avatāra, or prema-avatāra.

sākṣād-dharitvena samasta-śāstrair uktas tatha bhāvyata
eva sadbhiḥ kintu prabhor yaḥ priya eva tasya vande

                             61
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

guroḥ śrī-caraṇāravindam




Śrī Gurvaṣṭaka 7


“The guru is to be honoured as much as Bhagavān Himself
because he is the most confidential servant of the Lord.
This is acknowledged in all revealed scriptures and
followed by all authorities. I offer praṇāma to the
lotus feet of such a guru.”

If a Vaiṣṇava gives us bhakti, then what will we call
him? What sentiment will we have towards him? He is
giving us śikṣā, instruction, and although he may not
have spoken the mantra in our ear, he is giving us
bhakti. He is giving us something which is
indescribable. Yadunandana Ācārya originally gave
initiation to Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, but is what Rūpa
Gosvāmī gave him later to be considered less important
than that? We should always consider these things. The
śakti of Bhagavān is within the guru, so we should
respect him just as we respect Bhagavān. In reality even
more credit should be given to the guru, because by his
mercy we can understand Bhagavān. We have no direct
knowledge of Bhagavān. Mahāprabhu was very merciful, but
we can’t say that we actually know Him. Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura, Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, Rūpa Gosvāmī-we
have heard that they were all very merciful, and they
can give us mercy from their position, but it is our own
guru who can give us special things because of our
direct relationship with him. He attracts us to bhakti
and eradicates our desires for material enjoyment, so
therefore birth after birth we will remain indebted to
him.




Chapter Eight

The Glories of Yogamāyā


Nārada Ṛṣi has explained to Gopa-kumāra that just as
Bhagavān, being one, assumes different incarnations,
para-śakti is also one but comes in different forms.
According to her different activities, she is known by
different names. In different forms this same śakti is
present in Dvārakā-purī, in Vaikuṇṭha with the different
incarnations of Nārāyaṇa, and with the demigods.

It is written in some places that devotees don’t desire
the mercy of the Lakṣmī who is the goddess of aiśvarya,
opulence. We should understand that this does not refer
to the Mahā-Lakṣmī of Nārāyaṇa in the spiritual world.
That Lakṣmī is not caṣcala, restless, but she is steady
and permanent, and in that form she is perpetually
serving Nārāyaṇa.


                             62
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

Caṣcala Lakṣmī was born from the churning of the milk
ocean. This Lakṣmī is the goddess who embodies all money
and wealth, and devotees don’t desire her mercy. Even if
she wants to serve devotees and fulfil their desires,
they simply offer praṇāma to her and leave. What to
speak of older devotees, even new devotees are more dear
than her to Bhagavān. Kṛṣṇa said:



na tathā me priyatama


ātma-yonir na śaṅkaraḥ


na ca saṅkarṣaṇo na śrīr

naivātmā ca yathā bhavān



Śrīmad-Bhāg. 11.14.15


“My dear Uddhava, neither Brahmā, Śaṅkara, Saṅkarṣana,
the goddess of fortune Lakṣmī, nor even My own self are
as dear to Me as you are.”

He has spoken this verse in relation to caṣcala Lakṣmī.
If the Lakṣmī who is near Nārāyaṇa serving Him in
Vaikuṇṭha were to hear this verse, what would she do?
Therefore don’t take this verse to be in relation to
her. This can be said for the Lakṣmī who appeared as the
daughter of Bhṛgu. Only a Vaiṣṇava who has attentively
heard from the guru-paramparā will understand statements
like these from the scriptures. Others will certainly
misunderstand. Some may say that in this verse Lakṣmī is
another name of Rādhikā, but that would mean that
another devotee would be greater than Rādhikā-Uddhava
would be a greater devotee than Her. Uddhava desires to
take the dust of the gopīs feet on his head, so to think
that anyone is greater than sarva-lakṣmī-mayī Rādhikā
would certainly be erroneous. In order to understand
which Lakṣmī has been referred to in this verse requires
some careful consideration. We must try to properly
understand our siddhānta, and that can only be done by
remaining in the association of Vaiṣṇavas.

This verse refers to the Lakṣmī that bestows aṇimā-
siddhi, who gave opulence to Brahmā and the demigods,
and who appeared from the churning of the ocean. What to
speak of older devotees, even new devotees are superior
to her. Devotees, liberated souls, and those who desire
liberation: these three types of people don’t worship
that goddess of wealth, caṣcala Lakṣmī. This verse is
not referring to the Lakṣmī who is constantly situated
at Bhagavān’s chest, massaging His feet and serving Him.
That Mahā-Lakṣmī is steady, not restless, and is very
dear to Bhagavān. No devotee will ever be indifferent
towards her. But if anyone aspires for the affectionate
sidelong glance from the source of all incarnations, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, and His dearest Śrīmatī Rādhikā, then they will
simply respect this Mahā-Lakṣmī but not beg for her

                             63
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

mercy. They will beg for mercy directly from Śrīmatī
Rādhikā Herself.

This is not to be considered disrespect; there is no
place for disrespecting any Vaiṣṇavas. A Vaiṣṇava who is
rasika and tattvajña, conversant with tattva, should
always be respected. But that doesn’t mean that the
remainder of Vaiṣṇavas should be disrespected. That will
be aparādha. But we should be especially careful to
commit no offence at the feet of Kṛṣṇa’s exclusive
rasika, tattva-jña Vaiṣṇava, and with our hearts we will
always aspire to serve him.

Suppose there is a festival going on and hundreds of
devotees are there, including uttama-adhikārī Vaiṣṇavas,
madhyama-adhikārī Vaiṣṇavas, and kaniṣṭha-adhikārī
Vaiṣṇavas. If amongst them there is an exclusive
rāgānugā or even rūpānuga Vaiṣṇava, then we shall give
more respect to him, but we will have to give it with
cleverness. Otherwise ordinary people will think that
they can be indifferent to kaniṣṭha-adhikārī and
madhyama-adhikārī devotees. On three levels we shall
accordingly offer respect, but with some cleverness.
Appropriate respect must be shown to all, in gradation,
just as Rūpa Gosvāmī has written:

kṛṣṇeti yasya giri taṁ manasādriyeta dīkṣāsti cet
praṇatibhiś ca bhajantam īśam śuśrūṣayā bhajana-vijñam
ananyam anyanindādi-ṣūnya-hṛdam īpsita-saṅga-labdhyā



Upadeśāmṛta 5


The uttama Vaiṣṇava should be served with love. Being an
exclusive devotee, he never criticises anyone. Whether
he obtains happiness or unhappiness, he remains
satisfied. Exclusively by ujjvala-rasa he serves Kṛṣṇa,
so towards him we will have a special sentiment, but we
will not disrespect anyone. One devotee we will
criticise, another we will disobey, another we will
disrespect-saving ourselves from this mentality we
should give appropriate respect to all, and serve the
advanced rasika Vaiṣṇava with love.

Yogamāyā has so many forms, and we should never commit
any offence to any of them. We should give them
appropriate respect because they are the śakti of
Bhagavān, but we should not perform any give-and-take
transactions with them. This should be the only taking:
“Please give your mercy to us so our enjoying spirit
will go away.” Otherwise, this bartering mentality will
lead us into material enjoyment. That should be our only
prayer to them, and towards our most worshipable
goddesses, the gopīs, we should have a mood of following
and serving them.

In some places this śakti of Bhagavān is known as mahā-
vibhūti, in some places as Yogamāyā, and in some places
as ātmamāyā. In the Gītā 4.6 we find the words
sambhavāmy ātma-māyayā: “I incarnate by My internal
energy.” What is the meaning of ātmamāyā? That śakti of
Bhagavān in His natural form. Where does this ātmamāyā

                             64
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

come from? Who is its root? Śrīmatī Rādhikā. By the
medium of this potency, saccidānanda Bhagavān’s
enjoyment takes place. This Yogamāyā potency is nitya
(eternal), satya (factual), anādi (beginningless), and
ananta (unlimited). She took birth along with Kṛṣṇa, so
how can she be anādi, beginningless? Prior to her own
birth, she arranged for Baladeva Prabhu to appear as the
seventh child in the womb of Devakī and then she herself
took birth from the womb of Yaśodā later. So because she
performed some activity before taking birth, she is
nitya, and is therefore known as Sanātanī.

This Yogamāyā is the one who increases bhajanānanda, the
happiness experienced by Kṛṣṇa’s servants. This
Yogamāyā, taking the essence of the hlādinī and samvit
potencies together, takes a devotee progressively
through śraddhā, bhāva, prema, and all the way up to
mahābhāva. As if feeding the devotees milk she nurtures
them in so many ways, and she arranges for a soul who
has attained perfection in sādhana to appear in the womb
of a gopī. The personification of that Yogamāyā,
Paurṇamāsī, is the mother of Sāndīpani Muni and resides
in Nandagrāma. In many ways she increases rasa, either
by providing a stimulus, or by personally doing so as
Paurṇamāsī. She increases Yaśodā’s vātsalya-rasa, she
increases the cowherd boys sakhya-rasa, and she
increases the dāsya-bhāva of those in that rasa. She
enhances all of the rasas and nurtures all of the jīvas.
She is the mother of variegated bhajanānanda, and if one
doesn’t take shelter of her, his bhakti cannot increase.

This Yogamāyā is the foundation of the many kinds of
Bhagavān’s incarnations. She makes all the arrangements
in regard to Bhagavān’s dress, appearance, ornaments,
and pastimes. On one of the many occasions when Kṛṣṇa
played the flute, the gopīs went into a state of
bewilderment. Some were wearing ornaments in the wrong
places, and others placed make-up in places where it
should not have been applied. They were in all different
awkward conditions. Who arranged all of this? Yogamāyā.
The proper ornaments were placed on improper places on
their bodies, and the improper ornaments were placed on
the proper places, and this increased their beauty one
million times. Yogamāyā was the cause of this. Suppose
one gopī puts an ankle bracelet around her neck, and a
necklace around her ankle. When she goes before Kṛṣṇa,
He will see it and say, “Oh! You have arranged your
ornaments so beautifully!” So tell me then: how much
more valuable has it become? The cause is Yogamāyā.

This potency of Bhagavān is durvitarkyā: inconceivable.
Through Yogamāyā, Kṛṣṇa performs pastimes with His
devotees, there is His mugdhatā (being spellbound in
emotion), the mugdhatā of Yaśodā, and all varieties of
pastimes. From the very beginning it is done by her for
the pleasure of Bhagavān and His devotees. In another
form called Mahāmāyā, the activities of the asuras are
facilitated and the jīvas are bound within material
existence.

Vasudeva took Kṛṣṇa to Gokula and brought the girl
Yogamāyā back from the bed of Yaśodā. As long as she was
with Vasudeva, she remained as Yogamāyā; but when she
arrived in the jail of Kaṁsa, and Kaṁsa lifted her up to

                             65
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

kill her, then the activities of Mahā-māyā began, and
Yogamāyā, in an invisible form, began her own
activities. Exactly when she changed to her shadow form,
no one knew. Seeing this, it must appear to most persons
that they are one and the same potency, but they are not
one. When she was placed in the jail and Kaṁsa grabbed
her, she became eight-armed Durgā. He became astonished
and frightened, and said, “Oh! You are directly my
worshipable goddess!” But ultimately, when she left her
form as Yogamāyā, and how she did this and that-it is
all durvitarkyā, inconceivable.

The potency of Bhagavān is nitya, anādi, satya, ananta,
and indescribable. It cannot be fully described in words
and an ordinary man cannot portray its form. Only an
elevated, liberated, great soul can describe a little of
it. Otherwise it cannot be described at all.

We know that we are not the body. Hundreds of thousands
of times we have spoken this fact to others, but then we
perform some sensual activity and again we forget this.
If for one second we forget that we are not this body,
then all of our determination for spiritual advancement
may vanish. It happened to such a great liberated
personality as Nārada. In the Rāmāyaṇa it is said that
he was the cause of the appearance of Rāmacandra*.
Selfishness for one penny can drown us in mundane
consciousness. We must remain strong in bhajana, and
with great humility we should perform sādhana-bhajana.
Only by the influence of this Yogamāyā-when this potency
is transmitted into the heart of a jīva-will the
sentiment of bhakti arise, and we will be able to
properly engage in śravaṇa, kīrtana and so forth. How is
it done? By the essence of the hlādinī and samvit
potencies together this sentiment arises in the heart of
a jīva. This is called viśuddha-sattva, and this is the
activity of Yogamāyā. She performs unlimited types of
service in Vaikuṇṭha, Dvārakā, Mathurā, and finally in
Vṛndāvana.

There are differences in bhakti, and also differences in
rasa. What are the differences in bhakti? Sādhana-
bhakti, bhāva-bhakti, vaidhī-bhakti, rāgānugā-bhakti,
and within them also are niṣṭhā, ruci, āsakti, bhāva,
and next, in nitya-siddha devotees or in sādhana-siddha
devotees are sneha, māna, praṇaya, rāga, anurāga, bhāva
and mahābhāva. This variegatedness is all arranged by
Yogamāyā. Bhakti is one; bhakti is not two. It is one
sentiment, even though externally we see that there are
sixty-four kinds, or nine kinds, or five kinds, or three
kinds. Rasa is also one. Rasa is not many, but according
to the different fields of activity of sādhakas, it
appears to be in different forms. Śṛṅgāra is one
complete rasa, mādhurya-rasa. Manifest from that in
sequence are vātsalya, sakhya and dāsya, and it appears
in those forms. Bhagavān is one, not two, but according
to the gradation of one’s bhakti and the gradation of
one's jñāna, He appears as Brahman, Paramātmā, Bhagavān,
Kṛṣṇa and so many other forms. The same moon, according
to our angle of vision, appears to be in the forms of
dvitīya, trayodasī, paṣcamī and so on-the moon doesn’t
change. It is the same moon; only our vision of it
changes. Therefore sometimes it is amāvasya or new moon
night, sometimes it is pūrṇimā, and in precisely the

                             66
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

same way, the same Bhagavān appears differently
according to the gradation in a devotee’s sādhana.
Similarly, Bhagavān’s śakti is also seen according to
the gradation in a devotee’s sādhana. All of this
variegatedness is the arrangement of Yogamāyā, and
therefore for Yogamāyā there are so many mantras:

śrī paurṇamāsyaś caraṇāravindam

vande sadā bhakti-vitān-hetum

śrī kṛṣṇa-līlābdhi-taraṅga-magnam

yasya manaḥ sarva-niśevitayaḥ




“I offer praṇāma to the lotus feet of Śrī Paurṇamāsī-
devī, who is Bhagavān’s yogamāyā-śakti. She expands pure
prema-bhakti for the feet of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, and her
mind is always immersed in the ocean of Kṛṣṇa’s
pastimes.”


kātyāyani mahā-māye mahā-yoginy adhīśvari nanda-gopa-
sutaṁ devi patiṁ me kuru te namaḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāg. 10.22.4


The gopīs worshipped Yogamāyā with this mantra: “O
goddess Kātyāyanī! You are the great internal potency of
Bhagavān, the possessor of all mystic power and the
ultimate controller. Please make the son of Nanda our
husband. We offer praṇāma to you.”

All of the variegatedness in Bhagavān’s pastimes is
arranged by Yogamāyā. Although the influence of this
potency is indescribable, it is known to pure devotees,
and they can describe it. Just as the glories of
Bhagavān are indescribable, the glories of this potency
are also indescribable, but knowing something of it,
Bhagavān’s pure devotees have described it. Śukadeva
Gosvāmī, Vyāsa, Parāśara, Nārada, Rūpa and Sanātana
Gosvāmīs, Jīva Gosvāmī-many ācāryas have described it.



sā parāparayoḥ śaktyoḥ parā śaktir nigadyate prabhoḥ
svabhāvikī sā hi khyātā prakṛtir ity api



Bṛhad-bhāg. 2.4.178


“Bhagavān’s potencies are classified either as superior
or inferior. Yogamāyā is His superior, internal potency,
and because she is Bhagavān’s natural potency, in some
places she is known by the name Prakṛti.”

                             67
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017


This Yogamāyā and māyā-śakti are called the para and
apara potencies, respectively. They are perceived as two
forms. Actually they are one, but the original is para,
and its shadow is apara. What is the meaning of ‘shadow
? That which is non-different from the original but does
not perform the same functions, is called a shadow. But
not like the shadow of a tree which performs no
activity. Our shadow also performs no activity, but the
shadow of Bhagavān’s potency is not inactive.

In Goloka, Kṛṣṇa’s rāsa-līlā, Kṛṣṇa taking birth,
devotees serving Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa’s form, the gopīs forms,
the trees and plants there-everything is manifest by the
influence of Yogamāyā and is true and eternal. And what
are the activities of the apara-śakti? In different
places in nature, by the action of this potency, some
things are unreal, and some things are temporary. Some
things are satya, real, and some things are asatya,
false. All the relationships that we create in this
world are false, whereas all of the objects of this
world are true, but temporary.

Shells from the ocean are real, and silver is also real,
but the illusion of thinking the shells to be silver is
asatya, unreal. These shells glitter just like silver,
and both of these things are real. The seer is also
real. Three things are real, but considering these
shells to be silver is unreal. Or when there is a rope,
a snake, and a seer, these three things are also real,
but the illusion of considering the rope to be a snake
is unreal. At night, when we are walking along in the
dark, we may step on a rope. Because it is a little
stiff, it wraps around our foot and we cry out, “Snake!
Snake!” Then with a lamp we take a look, and our fear
disappears. We may have thought that a snake had bitten
us and that we were going to die, but after some light
comes, that illusion is dispelled.

All of us are undoubtedly real, but to take it that “I
am this body” is illusion. And to think that “all of
these objects belong to me” is also illusion. What is
‘mine ? “I belong to Kṛṣṇa, and I am His servant.” Up to
this point our conception is real. We should consider
all objects as instruments to be employed in the service
of Bhagavān, but instead we think, “I am their master.”
On account of this, so much quarrelling and fighting is
going on. Sādhus generally consider that nothing belongs
to them, but when necessity for a certain object arises,
even they claim ownership over it and fight amongst
themselves.

Therefore, this māyā-śakti is very peculiar. This
potency is one, but the external potency binds the jīva
in an illusory conception of himself and his
surroundings, whereas the internal potency, Yogamāyā,
illuminates within the jīva the knowledge of things
related to Bhagavān and bhakti. We may pray to Mahāmāyā,
“Please be merciful to us. Now we are a little entrapped
in your illusion, but we pray to you for bhakti to the
feet of Kṛṣṇa.” This Mahāmāyā, Kāmā-khyā-devī, honestly
and affectionately gave Gopa-kumāra the gopāla-mantra.
Although displaying the form of Mahāmāyā, she performed
the function of Yogamāyā. This potency in the form of

                             68
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

Yogamāyā acts to benefit devotees, but if someone
honestly desires it, then even in the form of Mahāmāyā
this potency will show mercy to devotees. Otherwise,
Mahāmāyā cheats the conditioned soul. At first, which
potency came to Haridāsa Ṭhākura in the form of a
prostitute? Mahāmāyā. Next, after she “became a
devotee”, her activities were those of Yogamāyā. In all
of these things we should see the difference and non-
difference according to the siddhānta given by Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, acintya-bhedābheda.


The jīva has also been called para-śakti. The Gītā (7.5)
says:


apareyam itas tv anyāṁ

prakṛtiṁ viddhi me parām

jīva-bhūtāṁ mahā-bāho

yayedaṁ dhāryate jagat



61

“Besides these, O mighty-armed Arjuna, there is another,
superior energy of Mine, which is the living entities
who are exploiting the resources of the material,
inferior nature.”

How many prakṛti or natures of Bhagavān are there? One.
Bhagavān’s natural potency-svabhā-vakī-means para-śakti.
But by saying ‘prakṛti , we understand it to refer to
the inferior nature which creates this temporary world
composed of eight elements. By saying ‘māyā we are
referring to ātmamāyā, the internal potency, but people
in general don’t know this, so the material world is
usually known as māyā. The activities of the shadow
potency Mahāmāyā are generally either false or
temporary, whereas all of the many activities of
Yogamāyā are eternal.

Where does Mahāmāyā, the goddess who embodies this
potency which makes the souls consider their bodies to
be their actual selves, herself reside? Within the
eighth material covering of the universe. Her complexion
is śyāma or very dark; there, all is śyāma. In a very
beautiful and attractive form she is situated there, and
previously in that very place she met Gopa-kumāra. With
some gifts to offer, she came before Gopa-kumāra and
said, “Tell me what you desire. Do you desire bhakti?
Then I will give you bhakti. Do you want facility to
enjoy material happiness? Then I will give you all
material happiness. I can give you everything, including
bhakti, because I am the sister of Bhagavān. I will give
you whatever you desire.”

By her mercy, Gopa-kumāra emerged from there and again
returned to the Earth planet. Otherwise it is not
possible to come out from there. By our own effort it is
not possible to overcome our illusion, and we just

                             69
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

simply become more entrapped. Therefore we should depend
fully on the grace of the Vaiṣṇavas, guru, and Bhagavān,
and we should not try on our own to escape this
entrapment.

Next, Nārada told Gopa-kumāra, “Here in Vaikuṇṭha, you
will see many different incarnations. One type is
vyaṣṭi, and one is samaṣṭi. Who is the samaṣṭi-avatāra?
Kṛṣṇa Himself. As we are vyaṣṭi-jīvas, and the samaṣṭi-
jīva is Hiraṇyagarbha Brahmā, there are so many expanded
incarnations such as Kūrma, Varāha, Nṛsiṁha, Paraśurāma,
and Vāmana, but don’t consider Kṛṣṇa to be like Them.
Kṛṣṇa is samaṣṭi-the seed, the root of all incarnations,
and from this original seed, different forms come. From
a mango seed, a nim tree will not come, nor will bananas
or guavas come from this mango seed. But Kṛṣṇa is such a
seed that He is the seed of everything; such a very
wonderful seed is Kṛṣṇa. Therefore He expands into all
of the incarnations by His acintya-śakti. This is
possible only for Kṛṣṇa and no one else. Nārāyaṇa may
also have incarnations; for some purpose an incarnation
may emerge from Him, but the special difference between
Him and Kṛṣṇa is that even if Nārāyaṇa does assume an
incarnation, He will not perform variegated pastimes.
Kṛṣṇa is avatārī, the source of all incarnations, and
when He personally descends, He performs unlimited
variegated pastimes. Plus Kṛṣṇa possesses four extra
special qualities of mādhurya which Nārāyaṇa does not.

Nārada is explaining all of this to Gopa-kumāra. “You
desire to witness all of these pastimes, but how will
you see them here?” Not aloud, but secretly Nārada is
telling him. “Kṛṣṇa can do the work of the Vāmana
incarnation. Alone, Kṛṣṇa can do the work of all the
Viṣṇu incarnations, the manvantara incarnations, the
śaktyāveśa-avatāras, the līlā-avatāras-anything that
Nārāyaṇa does, Kṛṣṇa can do also. No one else can do all
of this: it is a special quality of Kṛṣṇa.”

The word ‘bhagavān’ means what? ‘Bhaga’ means opulences-
six in all-and ‘vān means He who possesses them. Many
men of this world possess some opulence, but complete
opulence is found only in Nārāyaṇa or in His
incarnations. And where is opulence more complete? In
Kṛṣṇa of Dvārakā and Mathurā. And where is opulence the
most complete? In Vrajendra-nandana. There we find full
aiśvarya (wealth), vīrya (strength), yaśa (fame), śrī
(beauty), jñāna (knowledge), and vairāgya
(renunciation).

aiśvaryasya samagrasya vīryasya yaśasaḥ śrīyah jñāna-
vairāgyayoś cāpi ṣaṇṇāṁ bhaga itiṅganā



Viṣṇu Purāṇa 6.5.74


All of these qualities are found in Nārāyaṇa and the
incarnations also. Like aiśvarya-what is the aiśvarya of
Vāmanadeva? He appeared very small, but at the time of
measuring the Earth, He immediately became wonderfully
huge and in three steps covered the entire universe.
This is aiśvarya. Rāmacandra, taking all of the monkeys

                             70
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

and bears with Him, attacked Laṅkā and cut off Rāvaṇa’s
head, but a new head emerged. Each time He cut off
Rāvaṇa’s head, it would return. Finally He made a plan
whereby cutting off Rāvaṇa’s ten heads, they would not
return, and Rāvana was killed. This is aiśvarya.
Dvārakādhīśa Kṛṣṇa possesses so much aiśvarya, and all
of the other incarnations possess so much aiśvarya, but
Kṛṣṇa’s aiśvarya is especially marvellous. As a small
boy He was at the breast of Pūtanā, drinking and
drinking, and no one knew what He was actually doing. He
wouldn’t leave her breast, so they thought that maybe He
was only playing. Then He sucked out her life. He was
thinking, “I don’t like anyone to come to Vṛndāvana and
then leave again. She has entered within the boundaries
of Vraja, therefore I will not allow her to ever leave.”

This is aiśvarya, and it reaches its zenith in Kṛṣṇa.
There is some vairāgya in Rāma: He left the kingdom, but
He didn’t leave Sītā-He left the kingdom together with
her. Kṛṣṇa’s vairāgya is such that hundreds of thousands
of gopīs were collected together at a very pure place,
and a cool breeze was blowing; both kiśora and kiśorīs
were there, but at once He disappeared. Kṛṣṇa had such a
strong feeling of vairāgya that right before His eyes,
fifty-six million members of the Yadu dynasty took canes
and sticks and fought and killed one another-even His
own son was finished and fell to the ground, yet Kṛṣṇa,
neither smiling, nor worrying, nor saving anyone, just
sat quietly with His legs crossed. Why? His vision was
that all of this fighting and killing was just an indra-
jāla, a magical illusion. Therefore the pinnacle of all
six opulences is found only in Kṛṣṇa. The Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (1.3.28) says:

ete cāṁśa-kalāḥ puṁsaḥ kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam

63

“All of these incarnations are either plenary portions
or parts of plenary portions of the puruṣa-avatāras, but
Kṛṣṇa is Bhagavān Himself.”

Nārada told Gopa-kumāra, “Svayam-Bhagavān Kṛṣṇa’s
pastimes are variegated, His affection is variegated,
His prema is variegated, and His associates are
variegated. Anyone who has had even half of a taste of
this immense variegatedness by hearing about it simply
cannot remain here in Vaikuṇṭha.”

*Once Nārada desired to marry a princess, and in order
to be successful at her svayaṁvara, he prayed to Viṣṇu
for a face as beautiful as His. But to protect the
bhakti of His devotee, Viṣṇu instead gave Nārada the
face of a monkey. Not understanding why everyone was
ridiculing him at the svayaṁvara, Nārada was then told
to go and look at his reflection in a pond. Realising
that Viṣṇu had deceived him, he cursed Viṣṇu that in His
next life He would lose His wife, and that He would have
to take the help of monkeys to get her back. Therefore
Nārada is said to be the cause of the descent of Śrī
Rāmacandra.




                             71
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017



Chapter Nine

Kṛṣṇa Gives Prema Even to His Enemies


Gopa-kumāra was somewhat dissatisfied with Vaikuṇṭha-
that Vaikuṇṭha which is so desirable, where very, very
beautiful bhakti is going on, and which is so difficult
to attain. When Gopa-kumāra arrived there, Nārāyaṇa
engaged him in the service of fanning Him with a cāmara.
Sometimes He even displayed the form of Gopāla and the
līlā of taking the cows out to graze and other pastimes
also, but still Gopa-kumāra was not happy there.

I knew of one man who from childhood was hankering to go
to Vṛndāvana from his residence in Bihār. He was
thinking, “When will I be able to go to Vṛndāvana? There
I will bathe in the Yamunā, I will roll in the kuṣjas;
sometimes I will go to Rādhā-kuṇḍa, and sometimes I will
go to Śyāma-kuṇḍa.” After a very long time the
opportunity finally arrived, and leaving everything
behind, he went to Vṛndāvana and stayed for some time.
At first, with great emotion he roamed in the four
directions, smearing dust on himself and everything.
Then after some time, something astonishing happened:
gradually his ‘fever decreased. It is like a fever,
isn’t it? “I will go to Vṛndāvana, I will go to
Govardhana, I will go to Rādhā-kuṇḍa.” At first his
fever had increased, and so he left everything and came
to Vṛndāvana. He visited all the places of Kṛṣṇa’s
pastimes and daily he visited numerous mandiras and went
on parikramā. Sometimes he would even do parikramā two
or three times in the same day. He did whatever he was
physically capable of doing, but then after some time
the low tide of his fever came, and he didn’t perform
any parikramā or visit any mandiras.

Some come to Vṛndāvana and without understanding
anything they say, “This is the fruit of one or two
births sādhana, in Vṛndāvana?” But others come and see
that Vṛndāvana is full of rasa, and upon residing here
for a short time, they become overwhelmed with bhāva.
But for those who are newcomers and don’t have such
internal development, what will they see in the dust and
stone of Vṛndāvana? Everything they come across will
only disturb their minds, and this will be their darśana
of Vṛndāvana.

But Gopa-kumāra’s mind was disturbed in Vaikuṇṭha for a
different reason. In his heart there was some ardent
desire; intense spiritual greed produces this type of
ardent desire. And how did it come? For millions of
years he had been practicing sādhana: he had been to
Brahmaloka and many other worlds and back again, and
millions of years had elapsed. His ardent desire didn't
come after only one day; it came only after performing
bhajana by way of the gopāla-mantra, like the method of
Brahmā. In our sampradāya it is one of the main mantras,
yet still he was not feeling completely fulfilled.

Vaikuṇṭha is the pinnacle attained by vaidhī-bhakti and
is not minimised in our scriptures. Up to the Ninth

                             72
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam it is said to be the highest
destination. Where was Ajāmila taken? What was the
destination of Prahlāda? Vaikuṇṭha. And what was the
destination of Dhruva? Dhruvaloka, meaning one extended
part of Vaikuṇṭha. Therefore it has been stated that
there is no higher place to be attained by performing
bhakti. Although in one or two places in the scriptures
we find the glories of Goloka-Vraja described, they have
been described so briefly that an ordinary person will
not understand Goloka’s true value; only one who can
extract the essence will see, not everyone. Obtaining
residence there is extremely rare, and within Gopa-
kumāra’s heart is that rare desire for darśana of
Gopāla. Along with that he desires kṛṣṇa-prema which is
unrestricted like a horse with no reins.

What is unrestricted prema? The members of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā’s family bound Her inside the house, and the
other gopīs were also bound inside their homes. “If you
go to meet Kṛṣṇa we will punish you! Serve your husband
or we will beat you! And we will spread your bad name
everywhere!” Prema with fear of worldly reaction due to
having failed to uphold one’s dharma is restricted
prema; but the gopīs left their husbands regardless to
be with Kṛṣṇa. Their prema was not bound; rather it was
fully manifested, and it even increased further. Many
obstacles will come, yet prema will surely cross over
them and heighten one’s desire to meet Kṛṣṇa. Therefore
so many people were given obstacles, their desire for
meeting Kṛṣṇa increased, and they finally met Him. In
aiśvarya-bhāva there is no place for such prema. If
Bhagavān manifests His nature as the Supreme, He will
not freely converse with any ladies and He will not
approach any kiśorī or young, unmarried girl. Would
Rāmacandra even look upon the face of an unmarried girl?
Would Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu after He accepted
sannyāsa? What to speak of not noting what ornaments
they would be wearing around their necks or on their
wrists, Mahāprabhu would not even look at the nails of
their toes! Although They are Bhagavān, still They
possess such shyness and dharmajña or constant awareness
of upholding Their dharma.

Where there is such a sentiment, prema is restricted,
but this obstacle is due to the nature of one’s own
worshipable Lord. Obstacles imposed by others are not
enough to be a problem. All such obstacles were placed
before Gopa-kumāra. In Vaikuṇṭha, the residents teased
him: “You keep saying ‘Gopāla, Gopāla, Kṛṣṇa, and you
say that while holding a piece of bamboo stick Kṛṣṇa
will engage in rāsa with the gopīs? This is a very
shameful thing. Will Nārāyaṇa ever do this?” But this is
not the problem, the obstacle. Then why is Gopa-kumāra
dissatisfied? Nārada told him the reason. “In the form
of Nārāyaṇa, He will not manifest the type of prema that
you desire; He simply will not give it. You will not be
able to laugh with Him, converse freely with Him-that is
the big obstacle to prema here.”

Before, when Nārada told Gopa-kumāra to remain in
Vaikuṇṭha for some time, he wanted him to understand all
of this tattva. Nārāyaṇa has a total of sixty qualities,
five more than the demigods. Of these five, the first is
His being hatāri-gati-dāyaka: He gives a high

                             73
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

destination to those killed by His own hand. The second
is that He possesses the highest pinnacle of all
aiśvarya. The third is that He is the original seed of
all different incarnations. The fourth is that He is the
attractor of even the liberated souls, and the fifth is
that He is eternally present in millions of universes.
Therefore Nārāyaṇa is also Bhagavān and avatārī, the
seed of all incarnations. Kṛṣṇa is also avatārī, so what
is the difference between Them? When we say that
Nārāyaṇa doesn’t come as an avatāra, we mean that His
selfsame form which is present in Vaikuṇṭha will not
come to this world. Hayagrīva and other incarnations
come, but Nārāyaṇa Himself-with club, lotus flower,
disc, and conchshell in His four hands-comes in another
form as someone’s son, husband, brother, or friend, and
then performs all His pastimes from those positions. And
Kṛṣṇa? Bringing Vṛndāvana-dhāma with Him, He descends in
His original form, playing the flute and enjoying with
the gopīs. Bringing His dhāma and associates, He
descends in His selfsame form.

The Nārāyaṇa present at Badarī-Nārāyaṇa in the form of
Nara and Nārāyaṇa is different from vaikuṇṭha-ādipati
Nārāyaṇa, the master of Vaikuṇṭha. When Nārāyaṇa came
here as Vāmana, Lakṣmī also came here, but it was Vāmana
Nārāyaṇa that came here, and in Vaikuṇṭha there was
still vaikuṇṭha-ādipati Nārāyaṇa. Kāraṇodaśāyī Viṣṇu
lying on Śeṣa is also Nārāyaṇa, but His form and
activities are different. The form and activities of the
original Nārāyaṇa of Vaikuṇṭha are not brought to this
world. Therefore it is said that there is no actual
incarnation of Nārāyaṇa Himself. But in His original
form as a kiśora, Kṛṣṇa descends bringing His
associates, His līlā, and the entire sixty-four-square-
mile Vraja-maṇḍala which includes Rādhā-kuṇḍa, Śyāma-
kuṇḍa, Girirāja Govardhana, Nandagrāma, and Varṣāṇā.
This is His special characteristic; Nārāyaṇa doesn’t do
this. This is Kṛṣṇa’s unique characteristic as the
avatārī.

Bhagavān has so many forms, and all are hatāri-gati-
dāyaka. What does that mean? Those demons and enemies
who are personally killed by Him are given a high
destination. Rāmacandra, Nṛsiṁha, Varāha, Paraśurāma and
all other incarnations are hatāri-gati-dāyaka. The five
qualities that are found in Bhagavān and not found in
the demigods are found to the highest degree in Kṛṣṇa.
In Nārāyaṇa and the avatāras they are pūrṇa or complete,
but in Kṛṣṇa they are pūrṇatam or most complete. When
any avatāra from Nārāyaṇa up to Nṛsiṁha kills someone,
what destination do They give to those They have killed?
Sutala, Svarga, Brahmaloka, all kinds of destinations.
And They will also give liberation, mukti, to some
enemies killed by Them. According to how someone has
approached Them, They will give a particular destination
to that person.

For example, in rāma-līlā there was Śarbaṅga Ṛṣi, who
was worshipping brahma-tattva. He heard that Rāmacandra
was coming, and thinking that Rāma was the
personification of the impersonal Brahman, he waited for
Him. After the sage waited for some time, Rāmacandra
finally came and gave His darśana to him. Being very
pleased, the sage said, “Prabhu, give me my desired

                             74
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

destination.” Then from the ṛṣi’s body a light came out,
and that light entered into the body of Rāmacandra and
the ṛṣi attained liberation. He was such an unfortunate
man: he received the direct darśana of Rāmacandra and he
merely asked for liberation! Therefore Rāma will give
liberation. Many incarnations will give it, but to those
who approach Them as enemies, these incarnations will
not give prema.

What is real liberation? According to Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
it is svarūpena vyavasthitiḥ: that liberation which
bestows service to the feet of Bhagavān, which is the
highest destination. Those incarnations will not give
this type of mukti. Especially They will not give it to
those enemies whom They have killed. Nṛsiṁha killed
Hiraṇyakaśipu, and Varāha killed Hiraṇyākṣa, yet neither
of these demons obtained liberation in that birth. But
Kṛṣṇa killed numerous demons and not only gave them
liberation, to some He even gave prema! Like Pūtanā: she
approached Kṛṣṇa in the guise of a mother, so He gave
her a motherly position in Vraja. She didn’t directly
become Kṛṣṇa’s mother; she was given a position in
Goloka as an elderly dāsī, one who feeds Kṛṣṇa milk.
Otherwise there would be a problem-she would be equal to
Yaśodā, but that isn’t the case. She went to Goloka as a
dāsī. This type of liberation Kṛṣṇa can give, and no
other incarnation can give it.

Those that are killed by Bhagavān are generally given
ordinary destinations, but don’t think that He doesn’t
give liberation as well. He can give liberation, and to
devotees He gives prema. Citraketu Mahārāja didn’t
desire liberation, and so he prayed:

na nāka-pṛṣṭhaṁ na ca pārameṣṭhyaṁ na sārva-bhaumaṁ na
rasādhipatyam na yoga-siddhīr apunar-bhavaṁ vā samaṣjasa
tvā virahayya kāṅkṣe



Śrīmad-Bhāg. 6.11.25


“O Bhagavān! I do not desire to attain Dhruvaloka or
Brahmaloka, nor do I desire to rule over the middle or
lower planetary systems. I also do not desire the mystic
perfections of yoga, nor liberation from the cycle of
repeated birth and death if it means being separated
from You.”

Nṛsiṁhadeva offered liberation to Prahlāda Mahārāja, but
Prahlāda didn’t desire it. In this way devotees don’t
desire liberation, but if anyone wants it, Bhagavān can
give it. And He gives prema to those who worship Him
with a desire for it, like the rāja-kumārīs of
Janakapura. They wanted Rāma to marry them and become
their husband, so He showed them the path: “I can only
accept one wife; therefore all of you will take birth in
kṛṣṇa-līlā in the wombs of gopīs, and there your desires
will be fulfilled.” Those mahārṣis of Daṇḍakāraṇya also
first had to take birth as gopīs in Gokula; they were
not sent directly to Goloka. Their identities as gopīs
had not yet developed, so they had to first reside in
the Vraja of this world for some time.

                             75
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017


When a man takes a law course and passes the magistrate
exams, will he then immediately become a judge? He will
first have to undergo practical training by staying with
an established judge for some time, and then he can
become a judge himself. Similarly, going to the Vraja of
this world, one will have to first undergo an
apprenticeship, meaning that he must learn from someone,
personally. For example, if a newly-married girl goes to
the house of her mother-in-law and hasn’t yet learned
how to cook, clean pots, and serve food, then every day
she will have to take abuse. But the members of the
household will teach her everything. The mother-in-law
will say, “My daughter, today my health is not so good.
You do the cooking. Also, scrub the pots and sweep a
little. I must rest, so you make some roṭis like
this....” Through such cleverness they will give her all
practical instruction. In the same way, where will one
receive this practical instruction to serve as a gopī?
In the manifest pastimes of Bhagavān in Gokula-Vraja,
not at any other place. In a practical way, in the
company of the nitya-siddha devotees, for some time one
will undergo an apprenticeship and learn. If one were
sent directly to Goloka, then their identity would not
yet be fully developed. Therefore it is necessary to
first take birth in the manifest Vraja, and regardless
of whether one will be in dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya or
mādhurya, he must learn his duties there.

Next Nārada spoke this verse to Gopa-kumāra:



tāratamyaṁ tu kalpyeta


sva-sva-sevānusārataḥ


tad-tad-rasa-sajātīya


sukha-vaicitryāpekṣayā



Bṛhad-bhāg. 2.4.193


Kṛṣṇa has His uniqueness, and His associates, those who
serve Him, also have their special characteristics.
Kṛṣṇa is the crown jewel of those who are āptakāma and
ātmārāma. He is like a white conchshell. If you place a
pink flower in a white conchshell, its unique features
will stand out, as would the qualities of any coloured
flower placed in a white conchshell. The shelter of
Kṛṣṇa is then in relation to the particular nature of
the eternal associate. According to their uniqueness in
rasa, Kṛṣṇa manifests in that same way and accepts their
service.

For example, Varāha Bhagavān’s service is being
performed in Vaikuṇṭha, and there His desire is being
fulfilled. Varāhadeva also has another form within

                             76
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

prakṛti, in the eighth material covering. There He has
assumed a very beautiful form, and millions and millions
of souls are serving Him. And does Rāmacandra have only
one or two eternal associates? He has millions. A very
few of them are in sakhya-rasa, but mostly they serve
Him in dāsya-rasa. And Vāmanadeva has how many servants?
Millions and millions. So Kṛṣṇa is the root, these are
His incarnations, and jīvas are Their servants. But
there are those souls who are serving an incarnation,
and those souls who are serving Kṛṣṇa directly. Why is
Kṛṣṇa cheating like this? The mood of Vraja is so
beautiful, and the best of all rasa is mādhurya-rasa, so
why doesn’t He give mādhurya-rasa to everyone?

It is according to each soul’s particular ruci or taste.
To some jīva He may have only given liberation, and that
soul will think, “He has been so merciful to me; there
is nothing greater than this.” Will Hanumān agree to
become a father to Bhagavān and serve in that way?
Never. And those who are serving Varāha Bhagavān are
fully satisfied in that service. The servants of each
and every incarnation consider His merciful touch to be
the highest attainment. Gopa-kumāra saw that there were
so many devotees in Nārāyaṇa-loka, and they were all
happy there. In Ayodhyā, Rāma is very merciful and
affectionate to His devotees, but if Gopa-kumāra were to
go to Ayodhyā, would he be happy? Would he even find
cows in Ayodhyā? Yes, maybe in the home of a brāhmaṇa
for the purpose of worship there may be a cow, but there
will be no taking the cows out to graze as there is in
Vṛndāvana. There, in all directions sacrifices are being
performed with great pomp, and if a poor cowherd boy
were to go there, he would be disturbed by all of the
smoke! Therefore, he would not like it there under any
condition. Nārada silently understood all these feelings
within Gopa-kumāra’s heart.




Chapter Ten

The Gradations in Service


Sometimes it happens that a sādhaka cannot understand
his own heart. Just as a patient cannot identify his own
disease, a sādhaka, due to his own weaknesses and
shortcomings, cannot understand the nature of his own
devotional sentiment. But a qualified doctor, by taking
the pulse and seeing other symptoms, can understand
those things which the patient himself cannot know. He
will find the root cause of the disease. Where there is
a fever, the doctor will not give any medicine for the
fever itself, but instead he will give medicine for the
cause of the fever. An ordinary man cannot act as such a
doctor. Only someone with experience is the right
person. Similarly, in our bhajana we may be unhappy-such
misfortune may come to us. Those whose very life is
bhajana can reveal to us what are our weaknesses and
anarthas and from where they have arisen. They will give
us a plan for eliminating those problems at the very
root. They will say, “You must hear hari-kathā! And

                             77
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

before hearing hari-kathā, you must serve Gurudeva with
great faith.” And if we respond, “But in trying to
serve, my mind is very restless. How will I control
it?”, they will say, “Be confident-by Gurudeva’s grace
you will control it!”

Therefore, the clever, intelligent guru understands the
feelings in the heart of a disciple which even the
disciple himself doesn’t understand. Gopa-kumāra wants
to ask, “Why is it that my heart is not satisfied here,
even though I know that there is no greater place?” But
due to shyness, he cannot ask.

Nārada, the crown-jewel of spiritual doctors, recognised
the symptoms, identified the disease, and without even
inquiring anything from Gopa-kumāra will give the
answer. He will give different levels of answers,
understanding that what Gopa-kumāra is saying may be
irrelevant to the actual root cause of the disease
itself. So he will tell him some things that are
valuable for sādhana, and some things for siddha, the
level of perfection. If we don’t give the instructions
that we hear from an experienced soul a place in our
hearts and don’t follow them, then not only in one or
two births, but in countless millions of births we will
not attain hari-bhakti. Understanding the inner feelings
of Gopa-kumāra and knowing the reason for his
unhappiness, Nārada is telling us how we should engage
in bhajana. Therefore we must first prepare our minds to
accept his line of thought. The defects that Nārada will
point out to Gopa-kumāra are actually within us, and
when we make a sincere effort to eliminate these
defects, then we will really be engaging in bhajana. You
can take it that real bhajana will be coming soon.

vaikuṇṭha-vāsino hy ete kecid vai nitya-pārṣadāḥ pare
kṛṣṇasya kṛpayā sādhayitvemam āgatāḥa



Bṛhad-bhāg. 2.4.194


Some of the residents of Vaikuṇṭha are nitya-siddha, and
some are sādhana-siddha. The nitya-siddhas are the
eternal associates, and the sādhana-siddhas are those
who came later, who by the mercy of Bhagavān attained
perfection by the practice of sādhana. In the service of
all devotees there is gradation. Some remain near to
Bhagavān serving Him with the cāmara, while others are
far away carrying out orders. For instance, Vasiṣṭha Ṛṣi
is serving Rāmacandra in Ayodhyā, and his service is
saying “maṅgalaṁ bhavatu” and giving blessings. He gives
advice for different things such as how to perform
sacrifices and so on. Lakṣmaṇa also performs different
services for Rāma. Once, when Rāma was away, Lakṣmaṇa
sat with Niṣādrāja and sang the glories of Rāma for the
entire night. In great happiness Niṣādrāja experienced
ecstatic symptoms of love. Day and night Lakṣmaṇa serves
Rāma, and Hanuman also serves Him, but when Sītā serves
Him, then everyone else is sent outside, and they will
all follow her order. In such services there is always
gradation.


                             78
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

When trying to understand the reason for this gradation,
one should not pass judgement by thinking “This service
is the highest, this service is lower.” In Vaikuṇṭha all
of the servants have their uniqueness. For example,
cooking is being done there also. With great prema,
Rāma’s mother Kauśalyā, Lakṣmaṇa’s wife Urmilā, and
Sītādevī are all cooking for Rāma. Are they considered
mere cooks? No. Cooking is also arcana, so don’t
consider what is higher and lower in regard to sevā. To
think “I am important” and that someone else is “just a
cook” is aparādha. There is always gradation in service,
but in all of it there is prema. Maybe in one particular
form of bhajana there is more prema, and in another
there is less, but when you arrive in Vaikuṇṭha, you ll
find that everyone’s service is extraordinary, and their
prema is also extraordinary. We should understand this
point. Therefore, there is no inferiority there, only
gradation and speciality.

Hanumān, Jāmbavān, Sugrīva, Aṅgada, and all others came
together for the rāja-abhiṣeka of Rāmacandra. With great
prema Rāma had accepted all of their service and then
began bidding them farewell. He called Sugrīva and
placed a beautiful garland of jewels around his neck.
Rāma embraced him and said, “I am indebted to you. If
not for you, if you hadn’t gone searching for Sītā, then
we wouldn’t have ultimately been victorious. Therefore
remain in the kingdom and enjoy the fruits of your
service. Sometimes I will call for you to come and see
Me, or I will come to you Myself.”

While Rāma was bidding them farewell, there were tears
in the eyes of everyone. He called them one by one, and
meeting with them, He gave cloth to some, to others He
gave ornaments, and to others He gave something else.
But where had Aṅgada hidden? Why had he hidden? He was
thinking, “When He calls me, then I will have to go. But
I don’t want to leave Him!”

Rāma bid farewell to all, and Aṅgada remained hidden.
Then Rāma said, “Where has Aṅgada gone?” He was hiding
behind Hanumān, because he knew that Rāma wouldn’t call
Hanumān to bid him farewell. Rāma had called everyone
else; so why didn’t He call Hanumān? The reason was that
in the home of Sugrīva there was a wife and there were
children, so Rāma told Sugrīva, “Now you must return to
them.” Aṅgada had his mother, but Hanumān had left
everything. All others had their objects of love, and
together with that they had bhakti for Rāma also.
Everyone had other points of affection, but Hanumān had
no other point of affection. His only object of service
was the feet of Rāma. He didn’t even have his own hut!
All others had their family, or their kingdom, or their
building, or their position in society. Jāmbavān had his
cave in Vindhyācala mountain, so Rāma told him, “Go,
please...your wife is there.” But if He said to Hanumān,
“You go,” then Hanumān would say, “Prabhu, where will I
go? I have not made a hut anywhere. You are my mother
and my father also-You are my everything! Your feet are
my only residence. I have nothing else besides You.”

Rāmacandra saw that Hanumān was akiṣcana, whereas all
the others were not. So as long as there is another
point of affection besides Kṛṣṇa in our bhajana, then He

                             79
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                        5/5/2017

will say, “Alright, you go,” and send us back to the
place from which we have come. He sent back the wives of
the brāhmaṇas who had their homes, husbands and sons and
daughters. But although some of the gopīs had husbands
and even sons and daughters, upon meeting Kṛṣṇa their
attachment for them was washed away from their hearts
forever. As long as we remain akiṣcana, there will be no
attachment to a mother or anyone else, and we will not
be ordered to return.

bhajanānanda-sāmye pi bhedaḥ kaścit prakalpyate
bāhyāntariṇa-bhāvena dūra-pārśva-sthatādinā



Bṛhad-bhāg. 2.4.195


“The bhajanānanda, the happiness derived from serving
Bhagavān, is the same for all of His eternal associates,
but some consider that there is a difference between
serving Him from a position near to Him, and serving Him
from a distance.”

When a kaniṣṭha-adhikārī devotee engages in bhajana, he
thinks, “There is no one like me. I am getting so much
happiness from my bhajana. I am so impressive.” Another
man who is playing mṛdaṅga is thinking, “I am playing
the mṛdaṅga in so many ways and a very beautiful melody
is coming. I am playing so nicely.” The karatāla player
is also thinking in this way, and the man who is singing
is feeling that there is great happiness in all of this.
But when there will be some consideration of gradation,
then we will understand that simply playing the mṛdaṅga
and karatālas nicely does not constitute genuine
kīrtana. Why do we play the karatālas? Day and night a
party may be continuously playing golden, polished
karatālas and mṛdaṅgas very, very nicely, while in
another place there is one man alone, who without
mṛdaṅga or karatālas is sitting and chanting:

gurudeva! kṛpā-bindu diyā koro ei dāsetṛnāpekhā ati
hīnasakala sahane bala diyā koro nija-māne spṛha-
hīnasakale sammāna korite śakatideho nātha!
jathājathatabe to gāibo hari-nāma-sukheaparādha ha be
hata


Śaraṇāgati


“Gurudeva! Please give this servant of yours a drop of
your mercy which will make him realise that he is more
insignificant than a piece of straw. Give me the
strength to tolerate all difficulties, and please make
me devoid of all desires for personal prestige. Only
when you have given me the ability to properly respect
all living beings will all my offences cease, and I will
be able to sing harināma in great happiness.”

With great feeling he is singing it, and with his bodily
limbs shivering and tears flowing from his eyes. So
between the happiness of all those mṛdaṅga and karatāla
players and that of the one lone man performing kīrtana

                             80
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

with such feeling, will there be some distinction? Very
much so. The lone man’s chanting is really kīrtana. And
that ‘kīrtana that has very beautiful mṛdaṅga notes, a
beautiful melody, and has everyone involved in it, but
is devoid of even a little genuine devotion, is
something else entirely. Therefore in kīrtana, sincere
sentiment is necessary, and just as in bhajana there is
gradation, in arcana there is also gradation. One man is
offering arcana with a pure sentiment, one man is
offering arcana without any such sentiment, and another
man who blasphemes Vaiṣṇavas is also offering arcana to
the Deity. Will it all be equal? No.

In the spiritual realm also there is gradation in the
service of the eternal associates of Bhagavān. Just as
one servant brings flowers, another makes a garland,
another hands the garland to Lakṣmīdevī, another
prepares food, and another offers it. In this way there
is gradation. One is serving near to Him, and others are
serving from farther away. If the one who is serving
near to Him thinks that those who are serving from
farther away are inferior, he is mistaken. The bhāva or
sentiment is the important thing.

Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s servant Govinda dāsa may think
that Svarūpa Dāmodara and Rāya Rāmānanda are only
servants who remain at a distance from the Lord, and who
only come for a few minutes or an hour and make
Mahāprabhu cry. Govinda dāsa himself wipes away the
tears of Mahāprabhu, and then they come and make Him cry
again. So he may think, “Why do they have to come and
make Him cry again?”

Govinda dāsa is always saying to the Lord, “Prabhu,
please don’t cry.” Then Svarūpa Dāmodara will come and
make Him cry again, so what will Govinda dāsa think?
Therefore it is not that the servant who is nearer is
necessarily better. In this case the servants that
remained farther away from Mahāprabhu are higher. It is
not a question of the physical proximity or distance,
but of the heart’s nearness to or distance from Him.
That service to Hari, guru, and the Vaiṣṇavas in which
there is the most love is the best.

When the four Kumāras arrived at Vaikuṇṭha, the
gatekeepers there, Jaya and Vijaya, raised their sticks
and said, “You cannot enter!” Thinking that they were
the masters there, they prohibited the four Kumāras from
entering. Should those doormen have thought that since
the Kumāras had come from a long distance they couldn’t
have known that it was the time that Prabhu takes rest?
The Kumāras knew everything. They came in humility with
folded hands, but they knew everything. Jaya and Vijaya
didn’t understand the feelings and the prema that the
Kumāras have for Bhagavān. Is it like this only
sometimes? Most of the time it is like this! One who is
serving near to the Lord or near to Gurudeva cannot
understand the devotional sentiment of those who are
serving at a distance. Therefore we should be careful
not to think so highly of ourselves and we should always
remember the ‘misfortune that came upon Jaya and Vijaya.
We should understand how to behave properly and avoid
being arrogant. Generally these things are said for
those practicing sādhana, but even in the state of

                             81
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

perfection this can happen. This incident occurred in
Vaikuṇṭha, but it is for giving instruction to those of
us performing sādhana. In any situation we should never
have a mood of disrespect towards Vaiṣṇavas, nor should
we ever speak ill of Vaiṣṇavas.

Kṛṣṇa has so many eternal associates, and they all have
their uniqueness. There are so many incarnations and
sources of incarnations of Bhagavān, and They all have
Their associates, but Kṛṣṇa’s associates are more
special than them, more special than the devotees of
Nṛsiṁha and all other incarnations. The devotees of
other incarnations serve their Lord with humility and
folded hands, but Kṛṣṇa’s devotees sometimes fight and
quarrel with Him and display māna, jealous anger. Such a
bhāva is found in their service, and therefore they are
greater.

vadanti kecid bhagavān hi kṛṣṇaḥ

su-sac-cid-ānanda-ghanaika-mūrtiḥ

sa yat paraṁ brahma pare tu sarve

tat-pārṣadā brahmamayā vimuktāḥ



Bṛhad-bhāg. 2.4.200


Some say that Kṛṣṇa and His many incarnations are all
one in tattva, although there is some gradation and
speciality in rasa and manifestation of śakti. That is
alright. In Their associates there is the same
uniqueness, but will we take it that some of these
associates are inferior? Don’t think in this way.
Whether they are nitya-siddha or sādhana-siddha
devotees, it says here that they are all fully,
eternally liberated. Some say that Kṛṣṇa is parabrahma:

īśvaraḥ paramaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ anādir
ādir govindaḥ sarva-kāraṇa-kāraṇam



Brahma-saṁhitā 5.1


They say that He is parabrahma, and that all of His
eternal associates are brahma-svarūpa. In some places it
has been stated like this, and this is also not
incorrect. What is brahmānanda? The ānanda of the jīva
is called brahmānanda. The jīva has been called brahma,
but the jīva has not been referred to as parabrahma;
parabrahma is Kṛṣṇa. We don’t consider that brahma and
parabrahma are one and put them in the same class. We
consider the jīva to be the servant: dāso smi dāso ‘smi.
The scriptures say “brahma evaṁ bhavati”, in the Gītā
there is “viśate tad anantaram”, and there are also
similar verses in the Bhāgavatam. In Purī, Sārvabhauma
Bhaṭṭācārya came to have hatred for brahmavāda, but not
all liberation is worthy of hatred. Mukti can also mean
attaining service at the feet of Bhagavān. But

                             82
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

Sārvabhauma despised the word mukti, and he also
despised referring to the jīva as brahma.


Hearing this line of thought, Gopa-kumāra asked Nārada a
question:


pṛṣṭaṁ mayedaṁ bhagavan dharā-tale tiṣṭhanti yāḥ śrī-
pratimā mahā-prabhoḥ tāḥ sac-cid-ānanda-ghanās tayā matā
nīlādri-nāthaḥ puruṣottamo yathā


eko pi bhagavān sāndra-sac-cid-ānanda-vigrahaḥ kṛpayā
tatra tatrāste tat-tad-rūpeṇa līlayā



Bṛhad-bhāg. 2.4.202, 203


In this world, there are many vigrahas of Bhagavān. In
Purī there are Jagannātha, Baladeva, and Subhadrā, in
Śrī Raṅgam there is Raṅganātha, and in those places They
are being worshipped. There, whether the prasāda is
cooked or uncooked, its acceptability is not considered.
Those Deities are established there to mercifully give
darśana to the people of this world. Gopa-kumāra is
asking, “Prabhu, there are so many forms of Bhagavān in
this world, like Jagannātha and Raṅganātha, and many
other Deities. In what way should we respect Them? Are
They all solidified forms of saccidānanda? By offering
pūjā to any of Them, will it be considered offering pūjā
to Bhagavān?”

There are so many vigrahas in this world, and all are
saccidānanda. For showing mercy to the devotees, the one
Bhagavān is situated in many different forms as His
pastime. But we are not able to serve Him directly. If
we try to serve Him just as Lakṣmīdevī is serving
Nārāyaṇa, as the gopīs are serving Kṛṣṇa, and as
Prahlāda Mahārāja is serving Nṛsiṁhadeva, at some point
we will say, “Prabhu, the time to take rest has long
passed. Half the night I have remained without sleep. I
am feeling very sleepy.” So Bhagavān will say, “Then you
go and sleep,” and we will have to go and take rest. If
the Deity were to speak and express His desire-”Massage
My feet. This food has not been prepared properly; make
it like this”-we would become easily discouraged.

We want to serve according to our own desire. If we have
not even served according to the desire of our guru-if
we could not follow him properly-then how will we serve
Bhagavān directly? If we are placed directly in front of
Bhagavān and He says, “Do this service for Me!”, can we
do it? Could we do anything and everything He asked of
us at any time? We are not able to. Therefore the Deity
remains silent. However much service we offer, He just
remains silent. So Bhagavān has assumed all these forms
for giving mercy to the devotees. He understands that by
no other means will we be able to serve Him in our
conditioned state, so He becomes the vigraha, remains
silent, and in the end He just accepts our praṇāmas. For
this reason He has manifested these vigrahas.

                             83
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017


There are many different types of ruci in the jīvas, so
to accept service from them according to their ruci, He
has assumed different forms. Some will serve in dāsya-
rasa, some in sakhya, and some in vātsalya. Why has
Kṛṣṇa become Laḍḍu-Gopāla? Because then many people can
worship Him as their son. When women become old and
their offspring have all grown up, they still desire to
render the service of a parent. Women are so inclined
towards serving children that not only will they forget
about serving their husbands, they will even engage the
husband in the service of the children! The wife will
say to her husband, “Help me a little with the children.
Catch that child! Bring some milk for the children. The
children are sick, call the doctor for them! Take the
children to school!” The sentiment of serving children
is vātsalya-bhāva, so for them Kṛṣṇa has become Bāla-
Gopāla, for others He becomes something else, but all
these vigrahas are eternal. To accept service Kṛṣṇa has
become the Deity and assumed many forms; and He doesn’t
speak. If He spoke, then we couldn’t serve Him. At one,
two, or three o clock in the night He may feel cold and
require some service when His servant is in deep sleep.
So what would happen if He always expressed His desire?
Therefore He remains silent and accepts our service.

But if we suppose that He says nothing because He knows
nothing, that is an offence. He doesn’t speak or move,
but we should understand that He sees everything. He
knows the true scope of what we do, and we must accept
the reaction to whatever we do. Therefore in front of
Ṭhākurajī we shouldn’t spread our legs, talk too much,
become angry at anyone, or inordinately display
affection for anyone. Before Ṭhākurajī don’t offer
praṇāma to anyone, and don’t speak too loudly. All these
things should be given careful attention. If in the
Deity’s room there is fighting and arguing, and the
pujārī goes to do the pūjā with an agitated mind, that
will be an offence. With a disturbed mind we should not
do the Deity’s pūjā. But He remains silent anyway. We
take it that He sees nothing, but He is very merciful
and sometimes doesn’t even accept the offences of His
devotees.


Those who leave other types of sādhana to perform arcana
of the Deity will benefit. But Gopa-kumāra is saying to
Nārada, the very founder of pūjā, “Prabhu, in some
places in the scriptures itis written that there are
some who are offering arcana to the Deity, but are
disrespecting devotees.”


arcāyām eva haraye

pūjāṁ yaḥ śraddhayehate

na tad-bhakteṣu cānyeṣu

sa bhaktaḥ prākṛtaḥ smṛtaḥ




                             84
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017


Śrīmad-Bhāg. 11.2.47



“A devotee who worships the Deity in the temple with
faith but does not properly respect other devotees or
people in general is called a materialistic devotee, and
is included within the lowest class of devotees.”


yo māṁ sarveṣu bhūteṣu

santam ātmānam īśvaram

hitvārcam bhajate mauḍhyād

bhasmany eva juhoti saḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāg. 3.29.22


“One who worships the Deity in the temple but does not
know that Bhagavān in the form of Paramātmā is situated
in every living entity’s heart is in ignorance, and is
compared to one who offers oblations of ghee onto
ashes.”

Kṛṣṇa is situated within each and every jīva. There is
no soul where there is not Bhagavān. Yet in many
scriptures such as Nārada’s own bhakti-sūtra, the
Nārada-paṣcarātra, and others, it is stated that there
are people who worship the Deity in the temple, but
insult and disrespect other living entities and even
blaspheme Vaiṣṇavas as they are carrying on their pūjā.
Apparently they are very strict: if a mango has
mistakenly been put in an unclean place, or if someone
has seen it and desired to taste it, then they will
throw that mango away and it won’t be offered to the
Deity. At the time of cooking they cover their faces
with cloth, and at the time of kneading dough there will
be no speaking. They honour all of these principles, but
they disrespect devotees. They pass judgement on whether
devotees are higher or lower, and thus it is written
that the arcana that these people are offering to the
Deity is like the pouring of ghee onto ashes. And
furthermore:

aham uccāvacair dravyaiḥ kriyayotpannayānaghe naiva
tuṣye rcito rcāyāṁ bhūta-grāmāvamāninaḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāg. 3.29.24


Kapiladeva said, “O sinless mother, even if someone
worships the Deity with all the proper rituals and
various kinds of paraphernalia, I am never pleased by a
person who is ignorant of My presence in all living
entities.”


                             85
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

All souls are the residence of Bhagavān. Especially here
this instruction is being spoken for devotees. Those who
perform exclusive bhajana of Bhagavān must not insult
any living entity. We are insulting others, but so
nicely we are performing arcana. Even if we are giving
all respect to Vaiṣṇavas, still Bhagavān will not be
satisfied; there will still be offences because respect
is not being given to all souls. Pratimā-manda-
buddhinam: those of small intelligence are offering this
type of arcana-pūjā. In another place it is also said:

arcye viṣṇau śilā-dhīr guruṣu naramatir-vaiṣṇave jāti-
buddhiviṣṇorva vaiṣṇavānāṁ kalimalamathane pāda-tīrtha
ambu-buddhiḥ


There are those who consider that Bhagavān is in the
Deity. Yes, inside different things there is gradation
in the degree of Bhagavān’s presence, but they don’t
consider that the śilā is Bhagavān Himself. They also
think that the caraṇāmṛta of Bhagavān, which dispels the
influence of Kali-yuga, is ordinary water. And they
further consider that the object of arcana, the Deity,
is sometimes composed of ‘second-number marble, whereas
in another place there is a Deity composed of first-
class marble. They consider, “Oh, this Deity at
Govardhana is very beautiful, but the Deities we see in
the temples of Vṛndāvana are not this beautiful. Here,
Kṛṣṇa’s nose is a little straighter, His eyes are a
little longer, and this is very good.” Bhagavān does not
accept pūjā from such people who think like this.

They also consider the dust of the feet of Vaiṣṇavas to
be ordinary dust, and the foot-water of the Vaiṣṇavas to
be ordinary water. They have faith in the holy places
and the water there, but in the caraṇāmṛta of Vaiṣṇavas
they don’t have the same faith. They place their faith
in the skin and blood of the material body which is
destined to perish. The soul is inside every type of
body, but they don’t understand that the ātmā is a dear
part of Bhagavān. It doesn’t matter that the soul is
bound within a material body; its intrinsic form is as a
servant of Bhagavān. Therefore it should be respected.
Respect is given on different levels, so we should give
appropriate respect to all others. And what is the
position of he who doesn’t do this? Sa eva go-kharaḥ
(Śrīmad-Bhāg. 10.84.13). Go means animal, and kharaḥ
means donkey. Don’t take it that here go means a cow-a
cow is a very pure thing! It means such a person is no
better than an animal, and the most foolish of the
animals is the donkey.

Gopa-kumāra is asking Nārada, “Prabhu, why has this been
stated in the śāstras? Please explain this. Some of the
mūrti worshippers have been referred to like this, but
you said that those who perform arcana are the most
fortunate. How can this be harmonised?”

An ordinary person cannot harmonise it, and even a
lower-level madhyama-adhikārī devotee cannot harmonise
it. Only a middle or higher-level madhyama-adhikārī who
is conversant with the scriptures and who has attained
the mercy of gurudeva can grasp all of this. And because
Nārada is the original founder of the regulations of the

                             86
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

path of pūjā and also the foremost preacher of that
path, who could possibly know this tattva better than
him?




Chapter Eleven

The Proper Mood for Arcana


Upon hearing Gopa-kumāra’s question concerning arcana-
pūjā, Nārada was overwhelmed with supreme happiness and
immediately embraced him. Why did he embrace him?
Because in regard to this subject there is some doubt in
us. If someone asks us, “Okay, is this Deity made from
real marble, or false marble? Is it made from pure
metals, or alloys?” will we be pleased and embrace that
person? Rather we will be thinking, “Seeing this person
is sinful.” But in Vaikuṇṭha, it is not possible to have
such doubts. In Vaikuṇṭha this outlook cannot come, so
there is no personal necessity in Gopa-kumāra’s asking.
He is asking for the benefit of those of us on the path
of sādhana. He has no doubt himself, but doubt remains
in us. Therefore, for our welfare he has asked. Nārada
saw that he cares so much for others that he is asking
this question. Being very pleased, he embraced Gopa-
kumāra and slowly answered him.

Nārada said, “The Deity is directly Bhagavān Himself.
The Raṅganātha Deity, the Deity of Pandharpura (in
Mahārāṣṭra), the Veṅkateśvara Deity, Jagannātha in Purī,
the Deities of Māyāpura and the śrī vigrahas of
Vṛndāvana-Govinda, Gopīnātha and Madana-mohana-are all
directly Bhagavān. Sometimes the Deity says, ‘On the
side of My nose there is a small hole; place an ornament
there. And after feeding Me, take Me out. I never go
anywhere. And His devotee thinks, ‘He cannot speak or
move! Why is He speaking? And if He can speak, then
certainly He can move also, so I need not worry. Such
pastimes are performed by the Deity. Sometimes He asks
for an ornament, and sometimes during the night He comes
to a devotee in a dream and speaks with him. The
devotees in Purī perform kīrtana from the Gīta-govinda,
and when the Deity wants to join them, He races off the
altar, tearing His clothing and breaking His ornaments
on the way. Are such activities ordinary? Therefore one
must abandon any mundane conception of the Deity. He is
directly Bhagavān Himself.

“Besides this, what is the consideration that ‘this is
an old Deity, or ‘this is a new one, or ‘this is one we
made ourselves ? Girirāja is brought from Govardhana, or
a śālagrāma-śilā is brought from somewhere, and we
worship Him in that form. Or in our home with metal or
some other elements we have made a mūrti, and by
worshipping that mūrti we feel great happiness in our
hearts. If anyone abandons his varṇāśrama-dharma
responsibilities to perform pūjā of Bhagavān with great
faith, there is no fault in it. We must abandon the
mundane conception of the Deity, as He is the direct
form of Bhagavān.”

                             87
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017


No one made Baṅki-bihārī; He appeared by Himself. Others
were manifested by devotees: Madana-mohana was manifest
by Sanātana Gosvāmī, Govindajī and Dāmodara were
manifest by Rūpa Gosvāmī, and Gopīnātha was manifest by
Madhu Paṇḍita. All of these Deities appeared by
Themselves or were installed by great devotees, so
concerning Them there is no doubt. But by sincerely
serving other Deities which you have brought from
somewhere and have established yourself with mantra and
abhiṣeka you will also attain the topmost bhakti. In
this method there is no fault whatsoever.



na patityādi-doṣaḥ syād


guṇa eva mahān mataḥ


sevottamā matā bhaktiḥ

phalaṁ yā paramaṁ mahat



Bṛhad-bhāg. 2.4.209


There is a great quality in pūjā: from this service one
will obtain a great result, the topmost bhakti. If
anyone leaves his varṇāśrama-dharma responsibilities to
engage in pūjā with the aim of attaining bhagavad-
bhakti, and has genuinely entered into bhajana, but in
this birth he has not attained perfection because for
some reason in the midst of performing bhajana his
bhakti has stopped-for whatever reason-then what is the
loss? And if that person remains within varṇāśrama-
dharma for his entire life but doesn’t perform bhajana
or serve Bhagavān, then what will he have gained? All of
his life within varṇāśrama he served his parents, served
his family gurus, gave charity and dakṣiṇā, bathed at
holy places and everything, but he didn’t engage in
bhajana. So then what did he gain? Mahārāja Hariścandra
received the association of great personalities like
Viśvāmitra and became a great devotee; therefore he was
benefited. Otherwise there would have been no benefit
resulting from all of his dharma.

If someone in an immature stage left his vow of
brahmacarya and for some reason didn’t reach perfection,
then there is no loss for him. Why? Because in his next
birth he will begin again from the point of his
attainment and then go on to success. It is just as when
we study in a school, pass the courses, and then go to
another school and study further.

If anyone takes up bhajana, offering pūjā to Ṭhākurajī,
and chanting harināma, then all connections with the
world and varṇāśrama are broken. This is called
kriyālopa or absence of activity. Ordinarily, those who
have left their worldly duties would have to appoint
millions of mahārṣis to perform all the ceremonies

                             88
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

necessary for atonement in order to rectify their
mistake. But those who have entered into bhajana will
not have to undergo any atonement. Any man who leaves
his worldly duties for selfish motives has five debts
upon him: to the demigods, the sages, the forefathers,
the family members, and to all other living entities.

What is the duty of a son? How will he fulfil his debt
to his forefathers? Just as his father raised him and
made him qualified to live in the world, then he must
also marry, have offspring, and make them qualified to
live in the world. Then his debt to his forefathers is
completed. But without marrying it can’t be done. And
how will a girl fulfil her debt? By serving just as her
mother did. Her mother brought her up and looked after
her, and like that she will serve her husband, give
birth to sons and daughters, raise them to maturity, and
then she will be free of her debt. The debt to the
demigods is like this also, as are all other debts. As
long as one’s wife has not said, “Go then! Go and do
bhajana,” one cannot leave household life to take up
bhajana.

Yet in a very discreet way Mahāprabhu disregarded the
injunctions of the scriptures and left home. He left
behind His elderly mother, made no arrangements for her
needs, and giving up all responsibilities, He left. He
disregarded the injunctions of the scriptures, but for
what? For the service of Govinda. So when someone leaves
in this way, it is called kriyālopa.

According to the injunctions, first one should be a
brahmacārī, then a gṛhastha, then a vānaprastha, and
finally a sannyāsī. But some go straight from brahmacārī
to sannyāsa without following gṛhastha-dharma, so the
debt to their forefathers is upon them. However, there
will be no necessity of atonement for this if one has
left to take up the bhajana of Mukunda. But it is said
that those who have resorted to kriyālopa for some
purpose other than engaging in bhagavad-bhajana must
appoint three million brāhmaṇas to perform ceremonies
for their atonement-the kind of brāhmaṇas with long
beards and their hair tied high on their heads who live
only on milk. Day and night they will be chanting “oṁ
svāhā, oṁ svāhā”. Those who need atonement must appoint
them, and if they don’t follow this process of
atonement, Bhagavān will punish them. But for devotees
who have left their worldly responsibilities to take up
bhajana, this atonement is not necessary.

There are also sixty-four kinds of bhakti, and if
someone becomes absorbed in one kind and is unable to do
the rest, for this also there is no need of atonement.
But be especially careful of one thing: while absorbed
in the pūjā of Ṭhākurajī or while being absorbed in
taking harināma, do not offend any uttama Vaiṣṇava.
Always be careful of this. Other things Kṛṣṇa will
tolerate, but this He will not tolerate.


tāvat karmāṇi kurvīta


na nirvidyeta yāvatā

                             89
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017



mat-kathā-śravaṇādau vā

śraddhā yāvan na jāyate



Śrīmad-Bhāg. 11.20.9


One needs to follow the path of karma-kāṇḍa only as long
as he has no renunciation. At the time when renunciation
comes, and he understands that worldly attachments are a
source of misery, and that “I am ātma-tattva”, he will
no longer need to follow the path of karma. Then he can
go along the path of jñāna. Beyond this, if by śravaṇa,
kīrtana, smaraṇa, pāda-sevana, or any other way bhakti
comes, then also there is no need to follow the path of
karma.

For example, Rabindranātha Tagore never studied in
school, nor did he go to college. He was taught at home.
First his parents taught him, and after this a tutor
came and taught him. And the acquisition from his
previous lives was such that automatically he became
highly learned. For him studying in schools was not
necessary. Similarly, those who have given their hearts
to hearing and chanting about Kṛṣṇa have no need to
follow the path of karma. They may perform some karmic
activity, but it will only be for the benefit of others.
It will not be for themselves. But wherever there is
some faith in bhakti, no karma is necessary. For
performing karmic activities properly, there are many
books like Manusmṛti, Artha-saṁhitā, the writings of
Yājñavalkya, etc., and in society people have so many
conventions for that purpose. These things are not for
those who have entered into bhajana. If sādhakas do
them, it is alright, and if they don’t do them, there is
no harm.

Some people read the Gītā verse “Sarva-dharmān
parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja”, and they take it to
mean, “Leaving aside all material attachments, follow
the path of karma and come to My shelter.” But what did
our Gosvāmīs say? Leave both attachments and karma, just
as all of our previous ācāryas did, and as so many
devotees have done. Being a surrendered soul to
Bhagavān, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī left his home. Did he
engage in any karma? Not knowing bhakti-rasa, those of
meagre intelligence engage in karma, but for those who
understand the true nature of bhakti, there is no
arrangement for karma. They are above karma and
atonement. Bhagavān Himself sometimes performs certain
karma-kāṇḍa functions for the benefit of the world, and
saints and devotees also do it, but only for the welfare
of this world.

yad yad ācarati śreṣṭhas

tat tad evetaro janaḥ

sa yat pramāṇaṁ kurute


                             90
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

lokas tad anuvartate




Bhag.-gītā 3.21


“Common men imitate the actions of great men. Everyone
follows the standards which great personalities
establish.”

What is karma? When we do anything with a selfish aim
and taste the fruit of our own activities, it is karma
and we become implicated in its reaction. For instance,
“I am offering arcana to my Deity, and as a result
everyone will praise me, and I will make so much money.”
That pūjā will simply be karma. That which is done for
Bhagavān is bhakti, and that which is done for
liberation is jñāna. Bhagavān will accept pūjā offered
with the aim of pleasing Him.

If we are thinking, “Bhagavān will be pleased by my
service, and therefore He will give me a wife, give me a
husband, give us a son, daughter, or money,” then that
is karma. But from those who are offering pūjā solely
for the pleasure of Bhagavān-even though there may be
some mistakes in it-it will be accepted as genuine
bhakti.

Next Nārada spoke this verse:


siddhiḥ syād bhagavad-dṛṣṭyā

tṛṇa-sammānanād api

sakṛd-uccaranān nāmā

bhāsasya śravaṇāt tathā



Bṛhad-bhāg. 2.4.210


If with bhagavat-buddhi or awareness of Bhagavān’s
presence one offers praṇāma even to a piece of straw, or
offers something to that straw with great feeling and
shows it respect, then this action will be the fulfiller
of desires and the giver of perfection. And remembering
the name of his son, Ajāmila unknowingly achieved a
spiritual destination. Yes, unknowingly. If we have
given one of our family members the name of a rādhā-dāsī
or the name of a kṛṣṇa-dāsa, such as Madana-mohana, will
there be any result from that? Certainly there will be
benefit, even if we only call their names in abhāsa. In
this way Nārada has said that with bhagavat-buddhi
anyone can offer respect even to a piece of straw. Why?
Because in this world there is nothing that isn’t
related to Bhagavān. Is there anything? No, all objects
are the place of Bhagavān.


                             91
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

If we see that Bhagavān is even within a donkey, then
because of this vision will we have to take birth as a
donkey? No, it isn’t like that. It is written somewhere
that tilaka was applied to a donkey, and a tulasī-mālā
was placed around his neck. The people were saying that
if one didn’t offer praṇāma to the donkey, then that
person wouldn’t obtain bhakti. So someone was devoutly
offering praṇāma to the donkey. Yes, if one does this
with the vision that Bhagavān is in all things, there is
no harm, but thinking that this donkey is Bhagavān-that
is polluted intelligence. Prahlāda Mahārāja offered
praṇāma to everything-birds, animals, insects, straw-
why? Because he understood that without the presence of
Bhagavān, nothing can exist; not because “This is
Bhagavān Himself.”

If we were to see a peacock feather which has fallen in
the dust and been trod on by others, what would we do?
At once we would pick it up and clean it off, touch it
to our head, and keep it in some pure place. Why would
we keep it-because “this is Kṛṣṇa”? No, because this
thing is dear to Kṛṣṇa; Kṛṣṇa wears it. This is
bhagavat-buddhi. If with this outlook one offers respect
to a piece of straw, that will be greatly helpful in
attaining bhagavad-bhakti. So what to speak of our
progress if we offer respect directly to the Deity of
Bhagavān?

Non-moving living entities and all things are
manifestations of the śakti of Bhagavān, and there is no
harm in offering them praṇāma, just as Prahlāda Mahārāja
did. Everything is part of Bhagavān; we should
understand that. If we can attain perfection even by
seeing straw and other unimportant objects with the
vision of bhagavat-buddhi, then how much quicker will
the result come if we are directly remembering the śrī
vigraha? If we worship a Deity in the temple, or if we
establish a Deity in our home with a fire sacrifice,
abhiṣeka, and Vedic mantra, then how can there be any
fault in this? There is certainly no fault in it.
Therefore the mūrti-pūjā of Bhagavān has been written
about in all scriptures, and now Nārada will explain why
those other things have been written regarding certain
faults in pūjā.

kadāpi kṛṣṇa-pratimārcanavatāṁ

na sambhavet kṛṣṇa-pareṣv anādaraḥ

ghaṭeta cet karhy api tad-viṣaktito

gṛṇanti nāgas tad amī stavanty atha




Bṛhad-bhāg. 2.4.212



If anyone is really a devotee-even a kaniṣṭha-adhikārī
who may not even know tattva but is sincerely engaged in
pūjā of the Deity-then it will not be possible for him

                             92
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

to disrespect any Vaiṣṇava. A materialistic devotee is
still a devotee, isn’t he? But he will never be able to
show any disrespect. Upon seeing a Vaiṣṇava he will
offer praṇāma and say, “Please take darśana of our
Ṭhākurajī. Please take His prasāda,” and he will do
nothing more. If someone does disrespect a Vaiṣṇava,
then he has not yet even become a kaniṣṭha devotee.
Nārada is saying that if a devotee is really doing
arcana, then he will not be able to disrespect any
Vaiṣṇava. Not even a new devotee or a kaniṣṭha devotee
can do it.

One such opportunity came. A devotee was seated to begin
his arcana, and then an elder Vaiṣṇava came. The pujārī
was not immediately able to show that Vaiṣṇava respect.
In such a situation Vaiṣṇavas are very merciful. They
will say, “No, no-do your service, you should do your
pūjā.” The pujārī didn’t know that the Vaiṣṇava had come
because he was absorbed in his arcana. Then that
Vaiṣṇava was even more merciful towards him and didn't
consider that there was any fault. If that Vaiṣṇava who
came had considered this to be an aparādha on the part
of the pujārī, then he would not have been a Vaiṣṇava at
all. But at the same time, there can be the possibility
of aparādha here. Once Baladeva arrived in an assembly
and Romaharṣana knowingly did not get up and offer
praṇāma. He was not absorbed in anything at the time,
and he was thinking, “I am worshipable to everyone.” So
he didn’t show respect, and Baladeva finished him.

If a devotee is absorbed in pūjā or offering prayers and
a Vaiṣṇava comes, but the devotee does not see the
Vaiṣṇava due to being absorbed in his prayer, the
Vaiṣṇava will take their error as a great quality. They
won’t take it as an offence. But if one knows that a
Vaiṣṇava has come and intentionally neglects him,
thinking that the Vaiṣṇava is insignificant, that will
be an offence. Then the Deity will not accept that
person’s pūjā.

Suppose we are spending one lākha of rupees for a
festival for the Deity and we are busy making the
arrangements for one whole month. We are making
elaborate arrangements for the distribution of prasāda
to the thousands of people who come. We are putting up
electric decorations and making elaborate arrangements
for the pūjā, but if behind it is a desire for prestige,
that pūjā will be useless and the Deity will not accept
it. If we are doing this so that our prestige in the
world will increase and so that people will praise us,
then Thākurajī will not accept our pūjā.

If someone offers just a little simple pūjā which is
genuinely for the pleasure of Kṛṣṇa, then He accepts it;
but when there is impure motives in the pūjā, He will
not accept it. Therefore at the time of offering pūjā we
must have the proper sentiment in our hearts, and also
at the time of taking His name. Sometimes we may say to
someone, “Hey you! Come here!” If we call Kṛṣṇa in the
same way, will He listen? If we call Him and the correct
feelings are not there, He will not listen. We may say
to someone nicely and with some feeling, “Please come
and take prasāda.” If we approach Bhagavān in that mood,
He will come. Otherwise, if seeing that an offering is

                             93
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

late we rush through it by quickly chanting “oṁ kṛṣṇāya
namaḥ,” will He come? Only when there is sincere desire
from within will Bhagavān accept an offering. Otherwise,
He will not be hungry and will not accept it. We should
consider these things in whichever limb of bhakti we are
engaged in. If we are preparing food but we have no
genuine desire to please Him, we are not in the proper
mood, then Ṭhākurajī won’t accept any of it, because He
has no need. He is hungry only for prema. Taking all of
these things into consideration, we should engage in
kīrtana, śravana, smaraṇa, vandana, and everything with
prema. Then Bhagavān will certainly accept what has been
offered.

One may be singing kīrtana in a sweet melody, and some
great musicians are there. They know all the rhythms and
classical melodies and are playing them very sweetly,
and this attracts the minds of many people. But unless
it is exclusively for the pleasure of Bhagavān, then the
only result from this kīrtana is that those who are
listening are enjoying it. Those who are seated there
and playing the kīrtana will get no benefit if it is not
really for His satisfaction. This, then, is not an easy
thing; when all of one's activities are done solely for
Bhagavān's satisfaction, it is called śuddha-bhakti.

These days we can see how degraded things have become as
we enter further into the age of Kali. Some people take
the property of the Deity to be their own, and in their
pūjā they think, “I am important” and “I am the master.”
For this reason there is then sometimes a court case,
and such persons go on quarrelling and fighting,
sometimes even up to spilling blood and killing each
other rather than turning the service over to someone
who may be more qualified. Inside them is aggression
towards other living entities. They have more money,
more influence, more disciples, and by any means their
opulence has increased, but they continue to disrespect
other devotees. Such people will certainly be deprived
of what the scriptures declare to be the results of
pūjā: love for Bhagavān, darśana of Bhagavān, and
ultimately attaining Vaikuṇṭha.

Once, Nārada said to Bhagavān, “Prabhu, I see that many
people don’t respect devotees. Why is it like this? They
should respect devotees.”

Bhagavān replied, “What to speak of devotees, they don’t
even respect Me!” And desiring to prove the point, He
said, “I will show you something. Tomorrow there will be
a very big bhaṇḍāra (an arrangement for distributing
free prasāda to sādhus). I will go to that bhaṇḍāra
personally, and you will see how they respect Me there.”

Bhagavān went to the bhaṇḍāra. It was a very big
programme, and those who were invited had been sent
tickets. All of the important people with tickets had
entered, and then one old man with a black complexion
who was so thin that it appeared as if his back and
stomach were touching, came begging. “Please let me
enter. I haven’t eaten for four days,” he said. He tried
to enter a little inside, but was stopped by the guard.
“Do you have a ticket? No?”


                             94
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

In the end the old man pushed the guard aside and
entered. The guard became angry and notified the
supervisor, but the man didn’t care; pushing his way in,
he took a leaf for a plate and went and sat down at the
back. Then the supervisor approached him and said,
“Where is your ticket? You are not honouring this? Grab
this man and throw him out.”

When the beggar didn’t get up, four or five men
forcefully ejected him and slammed the door behind him.
Meanwhile, Nārada was watching. “Prabhu, I see now:
despite all Your efforts-pushing Your way in, taking a
leaf, and sitting in the back-after quarrelling with
You, they ejected You!”

So we shouldn’t show such disrespect to others. We
should all be careful. If someone comes to our home or
temple, we should certainly give him something-it might
be Him! And He may even come in the form of a māyāvādī.
We should give him something and show him some respect
also; otherwise it will be aggression towards others. If
a sādhu comes, then show him some respect. Knowing
Bhagavān to be inside everyone, give him respect and
speak to him with sweet words. Bhagavad-bhakti is
established on a foundation of very beautiful
philosophy, and if we don’t honour these things, fault
will come upon us. We should serve the Deity with the
correct vision and offer respect to all accordingly.
When Gopa-kumāra went to Prayāga, he saw different kinds
of sacrifices going on there, and everyone-even the
crows and monkeys and everyone-was given prasāda.

Nārada uses the word ‘aviduṣa . ‘Viduṣa means a scholar,
and aviduṣa means one who knows nothing, a fool. From a
foolish person Bhagavān doesn’t accept pūjā. But if
someone has no knowledge but is faithful, from that
person He will accept pūjā. Here, viduṣa and aviduṣa do
not refer to whether one has studied the Vedas or not.
Though having studied the Vedas and other scriptures one
can still be a fool. If after having read the Gītā,
Bhāgavatam, Rāmāyaṇa, and all the Purāṇas one still has
no faith in the Deity, he is simply a fool.

One day a devotee who came to our maṭha sat looking at
the Deities for half an hour. We were wondering if he
was experiencing some great sentiment or what he was
thinking. After gazing at the Deities for so long, he
called someone over and said, “From where has this mūrti
come? There is a defect in it.” This is aviduṣa, even
though this man had been a member of our order for at
least forty or fifty years.

Those that are aviduṣa don’t give proper respect to
anyone-not to Vaiṣṇavas, and not to others. Bhagavān
doesn’t accept pūjā from such people, but He will accept
pūjā from those who are ignorant but innocent, because
they are not offensive. In arcana, what comes first?
Offering bhoga. After that? The ghee lamp. Then?
Bathwater in a conchshell, followed by cloths, followed
by caraṇāmṛta, and after this the cāmara. So if someone
accidentally changes the sequence of these things and
offers the cāmara at the wrong time, will the Deity
reject his pūjā? This pūjā He will accept. But those who
do their pūjā with sixteen ingredients but no faith,

                             95
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

just so that people will come and give money-where the
pujārī is thinking that he made thirty rupees this week
and he will make another thirty rupees next week-are
committing aparādha. Bhagavān won’t accept pūjā from
those people. But from those who are ignorant yet
innocent He will always accept pūjā, even from a sakāma
person with some selfish desires. If a sakāma person is
faithful, then after a long time Bhagavān will still
give them bhakti because they have not committed any
offence, spoken any blasphemy, or engaged in any
violence towards other living entities. In this way
Bhagavān is supremely merciful. But if someone is
behaving unfavourably towards others, then in hundreds
of thousands of births he will not get bhakti.

Therefore according to one’s own natural proclivity he
should do everything for the service of Bhagavān. Then
He will be pleased, Gurudeva will be pleased, all
Vaiṣṇavas will be pleased, and then everything will be
correct. Remember that it is not for our own pleasure
that we are doing everything, but for the pleasure of
our gurudeva; only then is it fully correct.

This subject is very important, and especially for a
sādhaka it is necessary to hear. We may be eager to hear
talks about rasa and līlā, but this subject we may not
be so eager to hear about. These points are essential to
know because they are at the very root of sādhana-
bhajana. If disregarding them we commit aparādha, we
will leave the path of bhakti and our lives will be
useless. But instead we can prepare our hearts for
serving the Deity, the Vaiṣṇavas, and Gurudeva in the
correct way, and thereby achieve success in our sādhana.




Chapter Twelve

Ultimately Prema Cannot Be Described


Whenever we hear hari-kathā, we should listen with our
hearts, and be sure to keep it in our hearts. Otherwise,
the ear will hear, but the ear will not tell the heart,
and it shouldn’t be like that. What is told to our ears
should arrive in our hearts, and we should try to bring
that into practice. Then we will get the result of
hearing. If we are not able to hear hari-kathā properly
and not able to keep it in our hearts, then the
spiritual greed which should arise from hearing such
talks will not arise within us in this or any other
birth.

Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda said that
this world is deficient. This body is also deficient;
everything here is deficient. But whatever we are
undergoing in this world now, and whatever deficiencies
there are, our aim is not to make them go away. We
should not try for that in life. They will remain now,
and they will remain for millions of years. What is the
true purpose of human life-that should be ascertained in
this lifetime. What is the aim of life? What should we

                             96
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

do? This human birth is very valuable, because with it
we can meet Bhagavān. We should definitely try for this
in this very lifetime, and our goal should be
ascertained before we are forty years of age. Generally,
we see that after the age of forty one’s desire and
ability to take a new course in life is diminished. We
may try to apply our minds to something new and then
after some time our determination may fade and not
return. Although it is certainly possible to change
direction in life after the age of forty-and many have
done it-the risk is there that one will become “set in
their ways.” So whatever situation you are in now as
youths, at a tender age, you should put into practice
the ideals which will lead to the goal of human life.
Then the final result may come within a relatively short
time or a very long time; that is a separate
consideration. But your present age is very valuable.
Therefore certainly before the age of forty a person
should make the decision to fulfil the aim of human
life. Because after that the age of fifty comes, and
then there is an even greater chance that it will be too
late. At that time, we may hear everything, but still
never muster the firm determination to do what should be
done.

In the name Gopa-kumāra, what is the meaning of kumāra?
He is at a very tender age, and he met his guru at that
age. And even after millions of years when he finally
received such mercy that he met Bhagavān, he still
remained as a kumāra. From the day of meeting his guru,
he slowly came to understand siddhānta and became
determined. He never abandoned the chanting of his
gopāla-mantra. Wherever he went he kept the same
determination, and he never changed his aim. We should
follow that example. If our aim remains correct, then
Kṛṣṇa in the form of gurudeva, in the form of a
Vaiṣṇava, in the form of the śikṣā-guru, and in other
forms also, will give us help in the midst of our
progress and send others to help us as well. Who sent
Nārada to Gopa-kumāra? He met Nārada in Vaikuṇṭha, and
Bhagavān as the antaryāmī helps devotees in this way so
that they can attain the goal of life. One who instructs
us on how to attain Bhagavān is guru. For this purpose
Nārada is wandering throughout the world, and it is
through such a devotee that Bhagavān can help us.

Bhagavān is like a father and jagat-guru. The dīkṣā-guru
is also jagat-guru and like a father, but a father will
not instruct his daughter on how to serve her husband.
He will not tell her how she is to behave when alone
with her husband. Her mother will also not say. Who will
say? Her close friend will be able to tell her. The
example is also there that Kṛṣṇacandra is the beloved
son of Nanda Bābā, and Nanda Bābā’s younger brother is
Sunanda. Though living with both of them, Kṛṣṇa is more
affectionate with Sunanda. In the scriptures it has been
described that He associates more with Sunanda. Sunanda
is somewhat older than Kṛṣṇa, but he is Nanda’s youngest
brother. Therefore he is Kṛṣṇa’s dear friend and like
His father also. He can fight and quarrel with Kṛṣṇa
too, but when Kṛṣṇa wants His father to agree to
something, He approaches Sunanda, and Sunanda makes
Nanda Bābā agree to it. He is very intimate with Kṛṣṇa.


                             97
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                        5/5/2017

Similarly, like a father, Bhagavān Himself will give us
less instruction, but He will give it. In another form
He will give it in great detail by sending someone who
is dear to Him and that person will tell us everything.
In the form of śikṣā-guru, Bhagavān will tell one
everything. Nārada, as the śikṣā-guru of Gopa-kumāra,
will tell him things that Jayanta, Gopa-kumāra’s dīkṣā-
guru, would not tell him. Just as the greatness of the
dīkṣā-guru has been described, in the same way the
glories of the śikṣā-guru have also been described in
the Caitanya-caritāmṛta and other scriptures.

There is some separation, vipralambha-bhāva, in devotees
love. It is such a peculiar sentiment that only premī or
loving devotees can know it. Others cannot understand
it, and upon seeing it, they even become frightened. In
Purī, Mahāprabhu jumped into the ocean thinking that it
was the Yamunā. A fisherman, taking his net, climbed
into his boat and went out onto the ocean. Mahāprabhu’s
body appeared as if He had not eaten for a long time,
and in this weak and fragile condition He entered into
the fisherman’s net. When the fisherman was drawing in
his net, he felt the heavy weight and joyfully thought,
“Today I have caught a big fish.” Bringing the net into
the boat, he returned to the shore. There, when he
looked closer, he became frightened and thought, “What
is this? A corpse has come into my net!” Having touched
Mahāprabhu’s body, the fisherman felt that a ghost had
possessed him. Becoming overwhelmed with fear, he left
his net and everything there and ran away.

Nearby, Svarūpa Dāmodara, Rāya Rāmānanda, Nityānanda
Prabhu, Advaita Ācārya, and all the devotees were
searching for Mahāprabhu. Then they saw a madman on the
shore of the ocean who was laughing, crying, and calling
out, “Hari! Hari!”

Svarūpa Dāmodara said to him, “What happened?”

The fisherman said, “A ghost has possessed me!”

Recognising the man’s symptoms, Svarūpa Dāmodara said,
“I know how to rid you of this ghost; I know the
mantra.” He slapped the fisherman a few times, recited a
mantra, and then the fisherman came to his senses a bit.
Then he said, “My friend, can you show us where you have
seen this ghost?”

“From a distance I will show you, but I will not go near
there!”

“Alright.”

Going to the place, from a distance the fisherman showed
them. There, in the net was Mahāprabhu, His body rolled
into a ball in the posture of a child before birth. His
joints were all dislocated, and His whole body was slack
and elongated. Then Svarūpa Dāmodara told the fisherman,
“Okay... you can go now and this ‘ghost will no longer
disturb you.” Then the devotees took Mahāprabhu out of
the net, laid Him on the shore, and cleaned off His
body. Surrounding Him, they started performing kīrtana,
and after a little while Mahāprabhu came to His senses.


                             98
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

Seeing Mahāprabhu’s condition, that fisherman became
terrified. Like this, if any ordinary man sees such an
advanced state of bhakti, will he desire bhakti? But
loving devotees will understand. They will think, “When,
in my meditation, will I also be able to have such a
darśana of Kṛṣṇa as Mahāprabhu was experiencing? When
will I receive such an opportunity?”

A devotee has to go through this intense separation to
reach Kṛṣṇa. It is like the unhappiness of this world
multiplied millions of times, and a devotee will have to
feel that many times. Still, he will not be able to
express it in words. Bhagavān Himself is not able to
express it. Whoever is experiencing it will be unable to
express it in words. Nowhere in the scriptures are the
symptoms of premī devotees described completely. In
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, the symptoms of the gopīs state of
intoxication and mad, senseless talking have only been
described in brief; more than that has not been
described. It is not possible. But we should understand
the unhappiness of Śrīmatī Rādhikā and the gopīs in
separation from Kṛṣṇa to be the ultimate transformation
of happiness, the very culmination of happiness.

For example, when it is very hot and a few drops of rain
begin to fall, it is very pleasant. When the month of
Kārttika is starting and it begins to cool off, we like
that very much. So coolness is welcome, but too much
cold is unpleasant, such as when it freezes overnight
and ice is produced. But although cold and heat are
complete opposites, it is an astonishing thing that when
one takes a piece of ice in his hand, it feels as if it
is burning. This burning sensation is the ultimate
transformation of cold.

Similarly, in the realm of bhakti, when kṛṣṇa-prema
becomes intensified and one experiences vipralambha, it
seems that at that time he is very unhappy, but that is
not actually unhappiness. It is the pinnacle of
happiness. No one can describe the symptoms of that
condition. What were the sentiments of Śrīmatī Rādhikā
that Caitanya Mahāprabhu felt when He was locked in the
Gambhīrā and was rubbing His face against the wall? The
sentiments that were experienced by Rādhikā, the bhāva
experienced by Mahāprabhu-has all of this been
described? No. Therefore this is called sva-samvedhya-
daśā: it can only be understood by directly experiencing
it oneself. It is not possible for anyone to describe
it. We cannot tell anyone about what divine
blissfulness, what ānanda, has come within us as a
result of meeting Kṛṣṇa.

Therefore, Nārada tells Gopa-kumāra, “My dear friend,
this desire to meet Kṛṣṇa which has arisen inside you by
the influence of your mantra-this is sva-samvedhya-daśā.
With words I cannot make you understand completely this
matter that has disturbed you, but I will try to
describe it a little. The nature of prema is like that.
That desire for the prema of your internal svarūpa can
never be fulfilled here. That svarūpa is in sakhya-
bhāva, and beyond that, pure viśrambha or intimate
sakhyabhāva. This viśrambha sakhya-bhāva cannot be found
in any place from Siddha-loka to Sadāśivaloka to
Vaikuṇṭha, Ayodhyā, Mathurā, or Dvārakā. It is found

                             99
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

only in Vraja.”

Then Nārada took a look around. Lakṣmīdevī was nowhere
near, and no other eternal associates of Nārāyaṇa were
around, so no one was listening to this conversation. If
someone with a particular sentiment hears the words of
someone with a higher sentiment, they will say something
like, “Oh! He is blaspheming our Lord!” Therefore not
everyone should hear such talks. That is why Nārada
looked around to make sure that no servant of Lakṣmī, no
friend of Lakṣmī, Garuḍa, or anyone else was nearby.
Then, after looking, he began speaking again. “Inside
you there is so much bhakti. You can easily obtain
heavenly enjoyment, and you can also obtain liberation
easily. You can even have the prema of Vaikuṇṭha easily,
but the love for Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa which you are
seeking is so difficult to obtain, so rare. You can
easily attain residence in the heavenly planets,
liberation, or even Vaikuṇṭha by performing the
appropriate sacrifice. By following the path of jñāna
you can easily achieve liberation, and by way of karma-
yoga you can easily go to heaven. But the bhakti that
you desire cannot be easily obtained even by millions of
efforts. You will never obtain it by your own endeavour.
How will you receive it? If you unconditionally
surrender to Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and beg mercy from Them,
then it may be possible. Our effort is to pray for it.
Our only prayer is that we can somehow offer Them our
very soul. But trying to obtain this prema by our own
effort? It is not possible. What you desire is very
rare. It is obtainable-not that you can’t get it, you
can obtain it-but it is very difficult.”



kadācid eva kasmaicit


tad-ekārtha-spṛhāvate

taṁ dadyād bhagavān bhaktiṁ

loka-bāhyāya dhīmate



Bṛhad-bhāg. 2.4.233


If someone desires the prema of Vraja, then only if real
spiritual greed has somehow or other arisen within them
will they be able to obtain it. Without this greed it
will never be possible. When a person really wants
something, then by bribery, by thievery, by trickery, by
fighting-by any means they will try to get it, and this
greed is the root cause of prema-bhakti. Such
transcendental greed is possible only when Bhagavān and
His premī, rasika devotees are merciful to us. Kṛṣṇa
will give the highest treasure only to those who have
some special hankering for it and not to those who don’t
have this qualification.

What shape will this hankering take? “I want to serve
Kṛṣṇa just as Subala does, or just as Madhumaṅgala,

                             100
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

Śrīdāmā, and others do.” Is it possible that there is
any special difference between the service of Śrīdāmā
and the service of Subala? A very big difference is
possible. Śrīdāmā has great love for Kṛṣṇa; as much as
Subala or even more. But there is one hidden
consideration here: Śrīdāmā is the brother of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā. Therefore Kṛṣṇa is not always able to have free
dealings with Śrīdāmā, because through him Rādhikā may
come to know of something that Kṛṣṇa doesn’t want Her to
know about. But with Subala, Kṛṣṇa can speak openly and
freely and completely reveal His heart. Therefore there
is no distance between Kṛṣṇa and Subala. In this way
there are differences between sakhās, and Gopa-kumāra’s
hankering is like that of Subala. He desires to serve
Kṛṣṇa just as Subala does, remaining near to Him and
taking the cows out to graze.

Suppose Kṛṣṇa is distributing cintāmaṇi. Who is He
distributing it to? To those who are qualified to
receive it. And if someone else comes who is not
qualified to receive cintāmaṇi, what will Kṛṣṇa give to
him? He will give him some other stone which may shine
more than cintāmaṇi, but which is not cintāmaṇi. He will
give the greatest thing only to those who have some
special greed for it, and for this reason, He sent
Nārada to Gopa-kumāra, saying, “Increase his greed.” But
merely being greedy for a short time will not do. This
greed is like a creeper: you must water it and protect
it, and then it can grow all the way up to Vṛndāvana.

How does Kṛṣṇa increase someone’s greed? Once Nārada was
chanting his mantra. After chanting more and more, he
attained svarūpa-siddhi. A very beautiful form with four
arms appeared before him, and then at once disappeared.
Now how much had his greed increased? Nārada started
lamenting and crying until a voice from the sky said to
him, “While residing within a material body you will not
be able to have My direct company. For now you will
remain in svarūpa-siddhi and you will not change your
form. Then in your next birth, after giving up this
form, you will attain vastu-siddhi and reside with Me
eternally.”

Therefore in sequence-first as dīkṣā-guru, then as
śikṣā-guru, then Bhagavān Himself comes as guru to
increase our greed. So far the greed of Gopa-kumāra has
reached up to Vaikuṇṭha, but now Nārada has come to
increase his greed still further. Increasing more and
more, finally Kṛṣṇa will give him the highest treasure,
which is only given to someone who is fully greedy for
it.

Prema-bhakti becomes mature in a similar way as a mango
becomes ripe. There are many kinds of mangos. Some
mangos are so sweet, fragrant, and delicious that upon
tasting one of them, you won’t want to stop eating until
it is finished. Again and again you will keep putting
the mango to your mouth, and as long as there is a
little juice remaining in it, you will not discard it.
So where is prema found in its full maturity? In the
company of the vraja-vāsīs. In the company of the nitya-
siddha associates of Kṛṣṇa it will be fully mature, and
nowhere else. So at that time in Vaikuṇṭha, Gopa-
kumāra’s prema had not yet fully matured; it was still a

                             101
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

little unripe.

Nārada is saying that there is no one capable of
describing the tattva of fully matured prema. Why?
Because even Śrīmatī Rādhikā is not capable of it. In
fact, if there is any person who is the most incapable
of describing it, it is Rādhikā, because She Herself is
fully immersed in that rasa. She will not be able to
describe what She is experiencing, but those who remain
aloof will be able to describe a little something of it.
When a man has entered into rasa, what will he himself
speak about it? He will not say anything. In any
description of the state of Mahāprabhu’s prema, we don’t
find in any place that He Himself described it. In some
places Svarūpa Dāmodara has described it in poetry, Rūpa
Gosvāmī described a little something of it, and by
hearing from Rūpa and Raghunātha, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja
Gosvāmī described something of it, but he was unable to
describe it completely.

Nārada is saying, “In describing this prema, what will I
say? I am capable of saying something about the symptoms
of it, but most people will misunderstand and take
another meaning. I may say, ‘Oh! Rādhikā is dying in
separation and crying in pain, the poor girl has become
senseless! For a long time Rādhikā remained senseless.
The tears from Her eyes made Her clothing wet, and She
rubbed the dust of Kṛṣṇa’s feet on Her shawl and the
rest of Her clothes. With the tears related to Kṛṣṇa and
the dust related to Kṛṣṇa combined, Rādhikā’s clothes
became unclean, but She refused to change them. She was
firmly determined that She would wear no other clothes
except those that were saturated with Her tears for
Kṛṣṇa and His foot-dust. But upon hearing this, most
people will say, ‘Oh, such suffering! “

When Uddhava went to Vṛndāvana to deliver a message from
Kṛṣṇa and first saw the condition of the vraja-vāsīs, he
said, “I have heard that their love for Kṛṣṇa is very
deep, but for so long they are in so much agony! Mother
Yaśodā is dying!” But will Rādhikā, Nanda Bābā, or
Mother Yaśodā ever leave Vṛndāvana? Will any gopī ever
leave? Will even any of the young servants of the gopīs
leave? No. They are experiencing a kind of ecstasy that
even Uddhava could not fully understand. Therefore, even
the servants who sweep Rādhikā’s home are considered to
be on a higher level than Uddhava. Uddhava cannot attain
that high kind of sentiment. The gopīs are all crying,
and their servants are trying to console them, but still
none of them will ever leave there. In the end Uddhava
left Vṛndāvana unable to fully comprehend that high
sentiment.

The symptoms of prema in its mature state are not a
thing that can be spoken of, so how can it be written
about in the scriptures? And if they were written, then
what would be the result? In the Bhāgavatam only a
little has been described about the meeting of Śrī Rādhā
and Kṛṣṇa, and many people say that there is some
detestable, sinful activity described in the Bhāgavatam.
Many people have said this. How will all of these people
understand the Bhāgavatam? Only a little has been told,
and they say that it is filthy. So if even more of it
were described, then what would happen? Yet if the

                             102
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                     5/5/2017

Bhāgavatam were not there, the devotees would not be
able to maintain their lives because the Bhāgavatam is
most dear to them. If you give a piece of ginger to a
monkey, what will he do? He will look at it, and then
merely discard it. Monkeys do not know that ginger is
valuable for digestion and health. So these high
sentiments from the Bhāgavatam should not be described
to ignorant people. They are not spoken even to Rukmiṇī
or Satyabhāmā, so what to speak of others?

But there is one more point here: those who are rasika,
who are sva-samvedhya-daśā, who have experienced prema
themselves-they will not describe it, but they will
recognise it when they see it. Besides Svarūpa Dāmodara,
no one else could understand the bhāva of Caitanya
Mahāprabhu. He understood it, but never spoke of it.
There is a verse that Mahāprabhu was calling out with a
faltering voice before Jagannātha’s cart:



yaḥ kaumāra-haraḥ sa eva hi varas tā eva caitra-kṣapās
te conmīlita-mālatī-surabhayaḥ prauḍhāḥ kadambānilāḥ sā
caivāsmi tathāpi tatra surata-vyāpāra-līlā-vidhau revā-
rodhasi vetasī-taru-tale cetaḥ samutkaṇṭhate



Padyāvalī 382



“That same lover who stole away My heart during My youth
is now again My master. These are the same moonlit
nights in the month of Caitra, and the same breezes from
the kadamba forest are blowing the same fragrance from
the mālatī flowers. I am also the same lover as before,
but My heart is not satisfied here. I desire to return
with Him to the bank of the river Revā, under the vetasī
tree.”

When Mahāprabhu spoke that verse, only Svarūpa Dāmodara
understood, but then it became apparent that Rūpa
Gosvāmī also understood. Perceiving the sentiment within
Mahāprabhu’s heart, Rūpa Gosvāmī composed a parallel
verse. He wrote it on a palm leaf and placed it in the
thatched roof of his hut before going to bathe.



priyaḥ so yaṁ kṛṣṇaḥ sahacari kuru-kṣetra-militas
tathāhaṁ sā rādhā tad idam ubhayoḥ saṅgama-sukham
tathāpy antaḥ-khelan-madhura-muralī-paṣcama-juṣe mano me
kālindī-pulina-vipināya spṛhayati



Padyāvalī 383


“My dear friend, I have now again met My lover, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, here at Kurukṣetra. I am the same Rādhā, and We
are experiencing the happiness of meeting. Still, I
desire for Us to return to the bank of the Yamunā

                             103
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                       5/5/2017

beneath the trees of the forest there, where I can hear
Him playing the sweet melody of the fifth note on the
flute.”

Mahāprabhu and Svarūpa Dāmodara thought that only they
could understand this sentiment, but upon seeing this
poem of Rūpa Gosvāmī, they could see that Rūpa Gosvāmī
also understood. This is sva-samvedhya daśā.

Therefore Nārada told Gopa-kumāra, “You are an eternal
resident of Vraja, not of this Vaikuṇṭha. Now the mango
is ripening; a little fragrance is coming from it. In a
few days the mango will be fully mature, and its taster
will see that it has ripened, its fragrance has come,
and now juice will come out of it. So taking it, he will
relish it. Such a day is coming. Now the time is very
near when you will go to Vraja and all of your desires
will be fulfilled.”



Table of Contents

Chapter One The Brāhmaṇa Meets Gopa-kumāra

Chapter Two Gopa-kumāra’s Remarkable Journey

Chapter Three The Superiority of Nāma-saṅkīrtana

Chapter Four The Moods of Intimacy and Sweetness

Chapter Five Bhagavān’s Incarnations are One

Chapter Six Kṛṣṇa’s Glories are Inconceivable

Chapter Seven Bhagavān’s Inconceivable Potency

Chapter Eight The Glories of Yogamāyā

Chapter Nine Kṛṣṇa Gives Prema Even to His Enemies

Chapter Ten The Gradations in Service

Chapter Eleven The Proper Mood for Arcana

Chapter Twelve Ultimately Prema Cannot Be Described




Table of Contents

Chapter One The Brāhmaṇa Meets Gopa-kumāra

Chapter Two Gopa-kumāra’s Remarkable Journey

Chapter Three The Superiority of Nāma-saṅkīrtana

Chapter Four The Moods of Intimacy and Sweetness

Chapter Five Bhagavān’s Incarnations are One

Chapter Six Kṛṣṇa’s Glories are Inconceivable

                             104
Going_Beyond_Vaikuntha.txt                       5/5/2017


Chapter Seven Bhagavān’s Inconceivable Potency

Chapter Eight The Glories of Yogamāyā

Chapter Nine Kṛṣṇa Gives Prema Even to His Enemies

Chapter Ten The Gradations in Service

Chapter Eleven The Proper Mood for Arcana

Chapter Twelve Ultimately Prema Cannot Be Described




                             105
