Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

śrī śrī guru-gaurāṅgau jayataḥ



The Hidden Path of Devotion




Conversations on Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhāƙura’s

Rāga-vartma-candriƙā

(A Moonray of Illumination on the Path of Rāgānuga-
bhakti)



with Śrī Śrīmad Bhaƙtivedānta Narāyāṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja




gaudiya vedanta publications




Foreword



introduction

How to Enter Rāgānuga-bhaƙti



chapter two

Illuminating the Path to Rāgānuga-bhakti



chapter three

The Five Principles of Rāgānuga-bhaƙti



chapter four

Opulence, Or Sweetness?



epilogue

Praying for Service



                              1
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                      5/5/2017


About the author




© 2011 gaudiya Vedanta publications. some rights
reserved.

Except where otherwise noted, content in this book is
licensed under the creative commons attribution-no
derivatives works 3.0 unported license.

To view a copy of this license, visit
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/bynd/3.0/
Permissions beyond the scope of this license may be
available at www.purebhakti.com/pluslicense or write to:
gvp.contactus@gmail.com

Front cover painting: by Śyāmarāni dāsī © Bhaktivedanta
Book Trust Intl. Used with permission.

Painting of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura ©
Śyāmarāni dāsī. Used with permission.

Photo of Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja ©
Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Intl. Used with permission.
www.krishna.com

Paintings on pages 12 and 41 © Śyāmarāni dāsī. Used with
permission.

Line drawings on pages 19, 44, 74, and 114: by Mañjari
dāsī, Nāndī-mukhī dāsī, Śyāmarāni dāsī, and Viśvambhara
dāsa © Śyāmarāni dāsī. Used with permission.




The Hidden Path of Devotion

First Printing: Ƙartika, 2011 (5,000 copies)



ISBN: 978-1-935428-42-8

Library of Congress Control Number: 2011939290

British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data. A
catalogue record for this book is available from the
British Library



Cataloging in Publication Data--DK

Courtesy: D.K.   Agencies (P) Ltd.
<docinfo@dkagencies.com>




                              2
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa, 1921-

The hidden path of devotion : conversations on Śrīla
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura's Rāga-vartma-candrikā
(moonrays of illumination on the path of Rāgānuga-
bhakti) with Śrī Srīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja.

p. cm.

Includes verses in Sanskrit (roman). ISBN 9781935428428



1. Viśvanātha Cakravartin. Rāgavartmacandrikā. 2.
Bhakti.

3. Chaitanya (Sect)--Doctrines. I. Title. DDC 294.5436
23

Printed at   Spectrum Printing Press Pvt. Ltd., New
Delhi, (India)




Foreword


Painting the Bacƙground



It was the 1960’s – a time of search in a dark world.
Disillusioned by parents, teachers, religious figures,
and public leaders, disillusioned with government
policies on war, human rights, and goals of life, many
Western youth became attracted to leftwing political
ideologies.

Many searched for enlightenment,not quite knowing what
it would or wouldn’t be like. Though unaware of its
meaning and thinking that perhaps it included
promiscuous sensuous enjoyment in the mode of animals,
they searched for love, peace, and spiritual expression.
They created new heroes, looking for leadership in folk
singers who were ‘freedom fighters.’ Experimenting with
hallucinogenic and other mindaltering drugs, they only
knew that they were looking for ‘something else’ –
something exotic and nonWestern, something transcen
dental. During their attempt to uncover themselves and
their real selfinterest, they questioned: “Who am I? Why
am I here in this world? Why am I suffering? Why is the
rest of the world suffering? Is there really a God? If
so, is He the allpervading ‘It’ that is ultimately
‘Nothing’?   Am I that ‘It’?”




The lowrent East Village area, with its dilapidated
gothic landscape and history of beatnik intellectualism

                              3
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

and anti racism seemed to fit the bill, becoming the
destination of choice for those looking to escape
mainstream America. In the East Village, America’s
disillusioned youth flocked to watch psychedelic light
shows and hear folkrock. The hippieculture blossomed,
espousing libertarianism, nuclear fatalism, eastern
mysticism, and civil rights.

As the months rolled by, many of the youth realized that
something was amiss in this new alternative culture. The
leaders of the new culture told them that it was the
industrial military complex that was to blame for the
world’s problems, yet those leaders had no plausible
solutions to offer. The most lauded folksinger, Bob
Dylan, sang the obvious, “The Times, They are A’
Changin’, ” while assuring the 60’s generation that “The
Answers Are A’ Blowin’ in The Wind.” But neither he, nor
anyone else, could grab those answers from the wind and
show them to the generation looking for change.




Planting the Seed



It was within this countercultural setting that the
great, selfrealized spiritual master, Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja, arrived from India in
1965. He settled first in up town Manhattan, and later
moved to the East Village. There, at the age of seventy,
he chose to build his first temple of Ƙṛṣṇa
consciousness and begin his task of injecting the
timeless, spiritual wisdom of ancient Vedic India into
the searchers’ hearts. He told them, “We are not this
body. We are spirit souls, part and parcel of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, Ƙṛṣṇa. Our only duty,
and our only happiness, is to serve Him.”

Many people consider religion to be a part of general
history, and certainly religious movements have
influenced and shaped the course of events through the
ages. In the case of the Ƙṛṣṇa conscious movement,
Ƙṛṣṇa, the supreme founder of religion, used social,
economic, and political situations for an altogether
divine purpose. Vedic teachers say it was neither the
Vietnam War nor the civil rights movement that caused
the peoples’ search for transcendence. Rather, the time
was ripe.

We read in the ancient Vedas of India that the Supreme
Lord Ƙṛṣṇa, the source of time, appears whenever and
wherever there are discrepancies in the principles of
pure life and a predominance of irreligion and
materialistic activity. He appears whenever it becomes
necessary to relieve the Earth of the burden of
accumulated sinful activities, and to liberate the pious
from the cycle of birth, old age, disease, and death. He
comes when people are ready to receive Him. When He
appeared on Earth five thousand years ago, the world was
overburdened by the military arsenal of demons who were
posing as royal kings. Just before His advent, the world

                              4
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

was in a state of pandemonium.

That same Ƙṛṣṇa, in His form of time – now the 1960’s –

painted this social background of experimentalism and a
mood of strong antiestablishment. Such an atmosphere
provided the perfect setting for His divine messenger,
Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja, to paint the
foreground – a revolution in the impious life of a
misdirected civilization. Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī
Mahārāja, later to be renowned throughout the world as
Śrīla Prabhupāda, offered the disenfranchised and
discontented American youth, and later people all over
the world, everything they were yearning for, and more.
He inspired them towards the purpose of life, and showed
them the path to attain it.

After Śrīla Prabhupāda’s disappearance from the vision
of the mortal world, his intimate friend, seniormost
disciple, and great spiritual successor, Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja, gave scores of
discourses describing Prabhupāda’s glories and mission.
Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja, famous throughout the
world as Śrīla Gurudeva, gave renewed hope to thousands
of those aspirants who had been previously touched by
Śrīla Prabhupāda and had now felt themselves weakened




in spirit after his departure. He gave direction to
those who had never personally met Śrīla Prabhupāda but
had been inspired by his translations of the ancient
Vedic literatures, and he gave life to those souls who
hadn’t consciously known of Prabhupāda at all, but were
engaged in the illusory struggle with Ƙṛṣṇa’s powerful
material nature and would later learn of Prabhupāda’s
glory.

Herein are some excerpts of a few of Śrīla Gurudeva’s
discourses, in which he shares a glimpse into his
transcen dental relationship with Śrīla Prabhupāda. The
following excerpt is from his discourse on May 4, 2003:



He is my śikṣā-guru, and the godbrother of my spiritual
master. He accepted sannyāsa, the renounced order, from
my spiritual master, Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Ƙeśava
Gosvāmī Mahārāja, and I did too, so we are also
godbrothers. And we are very intimate friends. I have
known him since 1946, and have served and obeyed him
since then.



He desired to take me with him to the Western countries,
especially to New York where he first began his
preaching outside of India. He requested me to send him
all his books, and I did that. I also sent him
RādhāƘṛṣṇa Deities, mṛdaṅgas, karatālas, so many kinds
of sweets, and other paraphernalia. He wrote over four
hundred letters to me, and confided to me in one letter

                              5
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

that we have a transcendental relationship which cannot
be destroyed.



How did he go to America? By Scindia Shipping Lines; not
by airplane, but by boat, over the sea, with only some
books like Bhagavad-gita and his translation of the
Śrīmad- Bhāgavatam. Arriving penniless, he first came
to Boston and then went to New York. He used to sing in
a park with karatālas, chanting with his eyes closed,
“Śrī Ƙṛṣṇa Caitanya, Prabhu Nityānanda, Śrī Advaita,
Gadādhara, Śrīvāsādi Gaurabhaktavṛnda,” and “Hare Ƙṛṣṇa
Hare Ƙṛṣṇa, Ƙṛṣṇa Ƙṛṣṇa Hare Hare, Hare Rāma Hare Rāma,
Rāma Rāma Hare Hare.”



Tears flowed from his eyes as he sang, as his heart was
melted in love for Ƙṛṣṇa.

In that park there were many hippies, drinking alcohol,
smoking, and engaging in illicit activities. They came
and surrounded him; and when he sang, they would dance
and sometimes offer him their bottles of wine.   After
some time he turned all those hippies into ‘happies,’
and their lives were transformed. They began to meditate
and worship the Supreme Lord, and thus they became very
happy. He used to correspond with me from all the places
in which he was preaching.



In a mere couple of years he translated many Indian
scriptures and wrote many books, and those books were
translated into all the prominent languages of the
world. He preached in the mountains, on islands like
Hawaii, in forests like Śaraṇāgati in Canada, in the
desert, and in many countries around the world. His
voice has resounded far and wide, and his books have
helped countless souls to realize the truths of Ƙṛṣṇa
consciousness. He established numerous preaching
centers, farms for cow protection, and schools.



These excerpts are from Śrīla Gurudeva’s discourse of
November 10, 1991:



Now your Prabhupāda, my śikṣā-guru, is not within our
vision; but he is here. He is everywhere. Although we
do not have the eyes to see, he is everywhere. He is
akhaṇḍa-guru- tattva, a manifestation of Nityānanda
Prabhu, or Baladeva Prabhu.

By his disappearance, he has given an opportunity for us
to know who he really is and for what purpose he came
here. He wrote Bhagavad-gītā As It Is, Easy Journey to
Other Planets, a translation and commentary of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, and so many other authentic literatures. He
wanted to do something more, but he could not do so
because you did not have sufficient qualification to

                              6
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                      5/5/2017

receive everything he wanted to give you. Now, by his
grace, you are in a somewhat better position to
understand him.

Numerous teachers and preachers went to Western
countries, like the māyāvadī teacher Vivekānanda. Even
now, so many preachers are going to the Western
countries as well as to other parts of the world, but
they cannot give what your Prabhupāda has given. They
take old concocted theories and give that in new
bottles, but he has given what

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu Himself came to give this world.

He employed his magic wand and gave a shape to the
foretelling of Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, and therefore
we now see that Indians and Westerners around the world
are shaving their heads and dawning śikhā and mālā – and
that both lady and gentleman devotees are chanting “Hare
Ƙṛṣṇa Hare Ƙṛṣṇa Ƙṛṣṇa Ƙṛṣṇa Hare Hare, Hare Rāma / Hare
Rāma Rāma Rāma Hare Hare.”

His public preaching often consisted of general Ƙṛṣṇa
conscious topics, yet he discussed so many more profound
teachings in his books. Considering the eligibility of
his audience, he could not discourse on everything he
wanted to teach.

Your Śrīla Prabhupāda wanted to preach all the same
topics that I am sharing in Western countries –
everything that Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī gave in Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu, Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, and other books; all
that was given by Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī and
Śrīla Ƙṛṣṇadāsa Gosvāmī, and everything that was given
by other prominent ācāryas in our guru-paramparā. He
wanted to expand on all these topics in Western
countries, but it was not appropriate at that time. He
had only twelve years.



anarpita-carīṁ cirāt karuṇayāvatīrṇaḥ kalau

samarpayitum unnnotjjvala-rasāṁ sva bhakti-śriyam

hariḥ puraṭa-sundara-dyuti-kadamba-sandīpitaḥ

sadā hṛdaya-kandare sphuratu vaḥ śacī-nandanaḥ



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 1.4)



[May that Lord, who is known as the son of Śrīmatī
Śacīdevī, be transcendentally situated in the inner most
chambers of your heart. Resplendent with the radiance of
molten gold, He has appeared in the age of Ƙali by His
causeless mercy to bestow what has not been given in a
very long time – mañjarī-bhāva, the service of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā as Her confidential maidservant.]



                              7
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017


The meaning of this verse is profound. Your Prabhupāda
has come to give this very gift that Mahāprabhu came to
give, but he had to first prepare the soil of the land
in order to plant the seed. He gave the seed, but he had
to spend so much of his time making good soil. He taught
that if in this world there is Māyāvāda philosophy (the
conception that an impersonal God and the living
entities are the same in all respects), bhakti cannot
reside there. What was his ambition? He came only to
give Mahāprabhu’s mission as described in the above
verse.

What is the meaning of unnotjjvala-rasa as mentioned in
the verse? It is gopī-bhāva (the paramour love of the
vraja- gopīs), not the svakīyā-bhāva (wedded love) of
Dvārakā. Caitanya Mahāprabhu and Svāmījī have not come
to give this type of unnnotjjvala-rasa. Caitanya
Mahāprabhu has come to taste these things, not to give
them to others. They have both come to give unnotjjvala-
rasāṁ sva-bhakti śriyam; Sva means Rādhikā, bhakti here
refers to Rādhikā’sprema, and śriyam refers to Rādhikā’s
service.

Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja was really a sādhu.
He preached throughout the entire world and he also sent
me to do the same. At the time of his departure, he
requested that I come to his bedside in Vṛndāvana. When
I approached him there, he took my hands into his and
began to weep with love. He requested me to help his
devotees. He told me that he had collected so many
devotees, more than ten thousand, but he had no further
time to train them.



The following excerpt is from September 8, 2004:



It was by the grace of Śrī Śrī RādhāDāmodara, Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī, and his Gurudeva, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, that he went to the Western
countries, where in no time – in just a few years – he
established preach ing centers and beautiful temples
throughout the world. By his mercy Lord Jagannāthadeva
appeared, and Rathayātrā was established in most major
cities. Most importantly, he wrote and translated more
than one hundred books, which were translated in most
languages of the world and distributed profusely by his
beautiful young disciples. He accomplished a miracle in
his last years. In the midst of oceans, in forests and
cities, on the tops of mountains, and almost everywhere,
his glory is manifest. But his real glory is that he has
reestablished the same mission that Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī
had established, which had come from the very heart of
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Everything he said came from
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī; his mission would not have existed
had he left him out. He wanted to reveal all the
confidential topics given by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, and he
kept those truths in his books. He saw that at that time
there was a lack of qualification inhis disciples and
others; therefore, in general, he did not reveal those
truths openly. He kept that service for his disciples.

                              8
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017


Śrīla Prabhupāda especially kept that service for his
selfrealized disciples, whose hearts were immersed in
the sublime devotional truths which Śrīla Prabhupāda
desired to establish. Those disciples would, in turn,
teach these truths to Prabhupāda’s other disciples and
followers, as well as to the world at large.




Flowers in the Foreground



In the early 1990’s, Śrīla Gurudeva gave hundreds of
darśanas for several of Śrīla Prabhupāda’s senior
disciples.

During those few years they requested him to discuss
some of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava literatures, the essence of
all the ancient Vedic literatures, such as Jaiva-dharma
and Śrīmad- Bhāgavatam Tenth Canto, and in particular,
the chapters in

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam called Rāsa-līlā, Veṇu-gīta, Bhramāra-
gīta, and Gopī-gīta. They also desired to hear
discussions on the books Harināma-cintāmaṇi, Vilāpa-
kusumāñjali, and Rāga- vartma-candrikā.

In the year 1991, Śrīla Gurudeva led four discussions on
Rāga-vartma-candrikā by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura, who is considered to be the incarnation of
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and who came to further illuminate
Rūpa Gosvāmī’s mission.

Years later, Śrīla Gurudeva requested that all his
morning walks and darśanas be published in multivolumes,
and he directed that the 1990’s darśanas be published
along with those. We are thus pleased and honored by the
opportunity to share these Rāga-vartma-candrikā
conversations in the form of The Hidden Path of
Devotion. We pray that you will find its deep relevance
in your life, and that you will forgive us for any
possible mistakes in its presentation.

The soundfiles of all these darśanas are available for
downloading onwww.purebhakti.tv, where you can find a
link called ‘Raga-vartma-candrika’ under the header
‘Media Archive.’

In addition to these Rāga-vartma-candrikā conversations,
others have also been transcribed and published in the
form of books as well. These books, like Gopī-gīta and
Veṇu-gīta, are available for free downloading
atwww.purebhakti.com, and they can be ordered
fromwww.bhaktistore.com.




Aspiring for the service of Hari, Guru, and Vaiṣṇavas,

                              9
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017


The Editors Ƙārtika, 2011




introduction


Meeting the Supreme Lord Ƙṛṣṇa




[The following conversations with Śrīla Gurudeva, Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja, on Rāga-
vartma- candrikā are profoundly penetrating and
confidential. To prepare our respected readers for
entering this elevated arena, we are presenting herein
one of Śrīla Gurudeva’s discourses which carefully
introduces this sublime subject matter. The following
discourse was given in Hong Kong, on July 2, 2006.]



What is the true meaning of yoga? Yoga is a Sanskrit
word that means ‘connecting two things,’ or ‘adding two
things together.’ If you want to connect two bricks
together, then cement, water and other substances are
needed. Similarly, real yoga is the process of
connecting two persons; one being the Supreme Lord and
the other being each and every spirit souls.

Forgetting the Supreme Lord, we, the embodied souls,
suffer greatly. We have passed through all the various
species of life, as donkeys, asses, dogs, pigs, and
sometimes as demigods. By His causeless mercy, the
Supreme Lord Ƙṛṣṇa has now given us the opportunity of
this human life. But this form is very temporary; we do
not know when we will die. We grieve because we are
under the illusion that we are this body, which




is a bag of urine, stool, blood, and other unwanted
things. We believe we are this body, and we endeavor
only to please it. We do not try to satisfy our soul.

The easiest way to meet with Ƙṛṣṇa is through yoga. We
are His parts and parcels, His eternal servants. There
is no question of comparing Ƙṛṣṇa’s servants with
worldly servants. However, as service to Ƙṛṣṇa is very
loving and beautiful, like that of a friend, mother,
father, or son, or like the service of a lover towards
his most beloved, Ƙṛṣṇa’s eternal servants are all, by
nature, very loving.

What is taught as yoga nowadays is merely the exercise
of the body. By exercising throughout our life, or
throughout our thousands of future lives, still we will

                              10
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

not be happy. We will repeatedly grow old, and one day
we will have to give up this body.

Here, we are discussing true yoga, the ultimate
connection. By what process can we meet the Supreme Lord
Ƙṛṣṇa? It is through the process of love and affection
called bhakti-yoga. By giving our love to Ƙṛṣṇa, we can
attain that perfectional stage in which we will be happy
forever.

But what is that process? How can we attain the stage of
prema, or pure love of God?



anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ

jñāna-karmādy-anāvrtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-

śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā

Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.1.11)



Uttama-bhakti, or pure devotional service, is the
cultivation of activities that are meant exclusively for
the pleasure of Śrī Ƙṛṣṇa, or in other words the uninter
rupted flow of service to Śrī Ƙṛṣṇa, performed through
all endeavors of the body, mind, and speech, and through
the expression of various spiritual sentiments (bhāvas),
which is not covered by jñāna (knowledge aimed at
impersonal liberation) and karma (reward seeking
activity), and which is devoid of all desires other than
the aspiration to bring happiness to Śrī Ƙṛṣṇa.



This is the definition of uttama-bhakti, or pure
devotion. By this love and affection for the Supreme
Lord, we can meet with Him and serve Him. Scripture
states: “Parānuraktir īśvare – deep and strong affection
to Īśvara, the Supreme Controller Śrī Ƙṛṣṇa, is the only
transcendental religion of the soul.”



sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhokṣaje

ahaituky apratihatā yayātmā suprasīdati

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.6)



The supreme occupation (dharma) for all humanity is that
by which mankind can attain to loving devotional service
unto the transcendental Lord. Such devotional service
must be unmotivated and uninterrupted to completely
satisfy the self.



                              11
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                     5/5/2017


Spontaneous love and affection for Ƙṛṣṇa is the
transcendental and eternal religion of the soul, called
parama-dharma, meaning ‘the transcendental and eternal
religion of the soul.’ The teachings of presentday
religions are not truly dharma. If these religious
teachings would indicate devotion to Ƙṛṣṇa (kṛṣṇa-
bhakti) then they would be dharma, but most of the
adherents of religions such as Christianity, Islam, and
Buddhism don’t accept the transcendental form of the
Supreme Lord. They say that no qualities reside in Him.

What would be the use of accepting God if He has no
mercy or attributes; if He is like zero? We do not wish
to accept such fallacious ideas. Without selfish motive,
we desire




that whatever we do, we do to please Ƙṛṣṇa. We are
advised to consider, “What I am going to do — will it
please Ƙṛṣṇa or not? Will it please my Gurudeva?” In
bhakti-yoga, we consider, “Only if our endeavors please
them will we perform those acts, we will strongly
rejecting whatever is unfavorable for advancement in
bhakti.” This is bhakti-yoga, and it begins from its
smallest fraction, called śraddhā (faith).



ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu- saṅgo ’tha bhajana-kriyā

tato ’nartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt tato niṣṭhā rucis tataḥ

athāsaktis tato bhāvas tataḥ premābhyudañcati

sādhakanām ayaṁ premṇaḥ prādurbhāve bhavet kramaḥ

Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.4.15–16)



In the beginning one must have a preliminary desire for
selfrealization. This will bring one to the stage of
trying to associate with persons who are spiritually
elevated. In the next stage one becomes initiated by an
elevated spiritual master, and under his instruction the
neophyte devotee begins the process of devotional
service. By execution of devotional service under the
guidance of the spiritual master, one becomes free from
all material attachment, attains steadiness in
selfrealization, and acquires a taste for hearing about
the Supreme Personality of Godhead, Śrī Ƙṛṣṇa. This
taste leads one further forward to attachment forƘṛṣṇa
consciousness, which is matured in bhāva, or the
preliminary stage of transcendental love of God. Real
love for God is called prema, the highest perfectional
stage of life.



What is śraddhā? It is the strong faith that, “If I

                              12
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

perform kṛṣṇa-bhakti, then the fulfillment of all other
endeavors of my life will automatically be
accomplished.” Śraddhā is the tendency to serve Ƙṛṣṇa,
and its outer symptom is very strong faith in the words
of Ƙṛṣṇa, scriptures, and guru. How does śraddhā
manifest? It comes only by sādhu-saṅga, by being in the
association of a sādhu. But this refers to a real sādhu,
not an imitation.

Sādhu-saṅga first creates a platform of faith in the
words of Ƙṛṣṇa, guru, and Vaiṣṇavas. The sādhu will
direct the candidate for bhakti-yoga to accept harināma
and dīkṣā initiation. The student then selects a bona
fide guru, and learns the process of performing bhakti.

Bhakti is of two kinds: vaidhī-bhakti and rāgānuga-
bhakti. Vaidhī-bhakti-prema (the development of love of
God attained by worshiping Ƙṛṣṇa in awe and reverence)
yields Vaikuṇṭha dhāma (the abode of Śrī Ƙṛṣṇa in His
opulent feature as Lord Nārāyaṇa), and rāgānuga-
bhakti[1] takes the practitioner to Ƙṛṣṇadhāma. You are
most fortunate to be coming in the line of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu. Following in His line, one day you will be
able to achieve rāgānuga-bhakti, by reading Caitanya-
caritāmṛta, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and the books of the
Gosvāmīs.

Gurudeva teaches the sixtyfour processes of bhakti. Of
these, the first is to serve Gurudeva – to fulfill the
desire of Gurudeva– and thus be able to follow the
processes without deviation. Of the sixtyfour processes
of bhakti, nine are prominent:



śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ

smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam




arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ

sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.5.23)



Hearing and chanting about the transcendental holy name,
form, qualities, paraphernalia, and pastimes of Lord
Viṣṇu, or Ƙṛṣṇa, remembering them, serving the Lord’s
lotus feet, offering Him respectful worship with sixteen
types of paraphernalia, offering Him prayers, becoming
His servant, considering Him one’s best friend, and
surrendering everything unto Him (in other words,
serving Him with body, mind, and words). These nine
processes are accepted as pure devotional service.



Of these nine processes, five are most prominent:

                              13
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017




sādhu-saṅga, nāma-kīrtana, bhāgavata-śravana mathurā-
vāsa, śrī-mūrtira śraddhāya sevana

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 22.128)




One should associate with devotees, chant the holy name
of the Lord, hear Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, reside at
Mathurāmaṇḍala (which includes Vṛndāvana), and worship
the Deity with faith and veneration.



And of these five, three are most prominent: śravaṇam
(hearing), kīrtanam (chanting), and smaraṇam
(remembering). And of these three, one is most prominent
– kīrtana of Ƙṛṣṇa’s name. If you chant and remember Śrī
Ƙṛṣṇa’s name, you will automatically attain all
benedictions and success in life.



harer nāma harer nāma harer nāmaiva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva nāsty eva gatir anyathā

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 17.21)

In this age of quarrel and hypocrisy, the only means of
deliverance is chanting the holy name of the Lord. There
is no other way. There is no other way. There is no
other way.



If you follow these processes, then all anarthas (habits
and thoughts that are detrimental to bhakti) will
disappear. What are these anarthas? The first is nāma-
aparādha (offenses to the holy name), of which there are
ten kinds. Don’t criticize any Vaiṣṇava, and don’t be
envious of them. Don’t disobey your Gurudeva. Try to
totally follow and imbibe what he and other Vaiṣṇavas
are teaching.   At the time of chanting the holy name,
don’t be distracted by sleep or laziness. Chant “Hare
Ƙṛṣṇa Hare

Ƙṛṣṇa, Ƙṛṣṇa Ƙṛṣṇa Hare Hare, Hare Rāma Hare Rāma, Rāma
Rāma Hare Hare.” Chant your Gurudeva’s dīkṣā-mantras
daily, and understand their meanings.

Anarthas include nāma-aparādha, sevā-aparādha (offenses
in the execution of devotional practices) and so on. If
you follow this regulative process, anarthas will
diminish and gradually go away, and then niṣṭhā will
come. Niṣṭhā means steadiness of mind. The devotee fixed
in niṣṭhā will determine, “I can die, but I cannot give
up chanting the holy name.” Śrīla Haridāsa


                              14
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

Ṭhākura was beaten in twentytwo market places.   As they
beat him, the miscreant Muslim government followers
demanded, “You should chant Allah! Hoda! Don’t chant
Hare Ƙṛṣṇa!” But he continued to chant, “Hare Ƙṛṣṇa Hare
Ƙṛṣṇa, Ƙṛṣṇa Ƙṛṣṇa Hare Hare, Hare Rāma Hare Rāma, Rāma
Rāma Hare Hare.” At last he became almost like a
skeleton – bloody and only some skin remaining – and
finally they threw him in the Ganges.

Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura later came out of the Ganges as
if nothing had happened, and he was still chanting,
“Hare Ƙṛṣṇa, Hare Ƙṛṣṇa.” At that time his prosecutors
fearfully begged pardon at his lotus feet. Haridāsa
Ṭhākura personified niṣṭhā.

Do you know about Śrī Prahlāda Mahārāja? His father
tortured him in various ways and ordered, “Don’t speak
the name of Viṣṇu, my enemy!” But Prahlāda never
followed that order. He was always chanting, “Ƙṛṣṇa,
Ƙṛṣṇa, Ƙṛṣṇa.” Oh, be like that – very strong. Ƙṛṣṇa’s
mercy will then come to you.

After niṣṭhā, then ruci, or spiritual taste, will come;
taste

in chanting, taste in reading scriptures, in cooking for
Ƙṛṣṇa, and in all other devotional practices. There are
two kinds of ruci: vastu-vaisista-apeksani and vastu-
vaisista-anapeksani.

If kīrtana is melodious, with excellent instruments and

sweet voices, the devotee inspired in vastu-vaisista-
apeksani ruci will listen with relish, whereas even if a
singer has great love and affection but is not singing
in a melodious tune, that devotee will not appreciate
it. If the Deity is decorated with gold ornaments and
cloth, that devotee will offer obeisances, but if the
same Deity is devoid of decoration, he will not do so.

When there is no need of such external considerations,
when it does not make any difference whether or not the
singer has a sweet voice, and only Ƙṛṣṇa Himself is
important, that type of ruci is called vastu-vaisista-
anapeksani. Even if the singer’s voice is not tuneful
but the singer has śraddhā, niṣṭhā, and ruci, the
devotee so imbued will want to hear him. On the other
hand, where there is a sweet tune (rāga-ragina) but no
bhakti, he is without desire to hear.

The second type of ruci leads to the next stage of
bhakti,

called āsakti, which means ‘strong attachment to the
process of bhakti and to Śrī Ƙṛṣṇa. When one is situated
in āsakti, he thinks, “Without chanting the holy name, I
would not be able to remain alive for a moment.”
Attachment first comes for bhajana, and later manifests
for bhajanīya, meaning the object of bhajana, Ƙṛṣṇa and
His associates. When this āsakti becomes perfect, then
rati (a transcendental mood) appears. Rati is very
difficult for conditioned souls to comprehend.



                              15
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017


śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā

prema-sūryāṁśu-sāmya-bhāk

rucibhiś citta-masṛṇya-kṛd asau bhāva ucyate

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.3.1)



When devotional service is situated on the
transcendental platform of pure goodness, it is like a
ray of the sunlight of love for Ƙṛṣṇa. At such a time,
devotional service causes the heart to be softened by
various tastes, and it is called bhāva, or spiritual
emotion.



Rati, or bhāva, is situated on the platform of śuddha-
sattva, which is above the modes of material nature and
therefore also very difficult to understand. If one is
performing bhajana having renounced all attachments –
his wife, children, home, wealth, reputation, and all
other possessions – and yet rati (śuddha-sattva) has not
come, that person’s stage is very critical; there is
still a chance that he will fall down. I will explain,
in an easy way, the meaning of śuddha-sattva.

There are two kinds of associates of Śrī Ƙṛṣṇa:
rāgātmikā and rāgānuga. Mother Yaśodā, Nanda Bābā,
Subala, Śrīdāmā, and the gopīs are rāgātmikā, eternal
associates in Goloka Vṛndāvana dhāma, and those who
follow them are rāgānuga. When a rāgānuga-bhakta sādhaka
(a practitioner of rāgānuga-bhakti) is deeply absorbed
in the associates of Ƙṛṣṇa, like Mother Yaśodā, Nanda
Bābā, a cowherd friend (sakhā), or Ƙṛṣṇa’s most beloved
gopīs, that sādhaka’s mood is called rāgānuga and his
stage in bhakti is called śuddha-sattva. This is a very
high stage; pure bhakti is not ordinary.

After rati, prema appears in the heart. In that regard I
will tell a story, in brief.

Śrī Ƙṛṣṇa is the Supreme Lord. He is quite independent.
He is not dependent; He can do whatever He wants. Still,
Mother Yaśodā bound that powerful Ƙṛṣṇa with a rope and
He began to weep. Although He is the Supreme Lord, when




Mother Yaśodā told Him, “I will punish You,” He wept.
Was His weeping imitation? Not at all. He feels that if
Mother Yaśodā will not love and serve Him, He will not
be able to remain alive for a second. At first she
threatened to beat Him, but instead she somehow bound
Him and tied Him to a grinding mortar. Actually she
bound Him by her love and affection.

This is called prema, or pure love. If you want full
connection with Ƙṛṣṇa, then first develop spontaneous

                              16
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

love for Him.




chapter one




How to Enter Rāgānuga-bhaƙti




Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: You said that today you will
speak on Rāga-vartma-candrikā. You said you would give a
summary.




Ś




Śrīla Gurudeva: Before beginning this Śrī Rāga-vartma-
candrikā, I first pray to my Gurudeva, Śrī Śrīmad Bhaƙti
Prajñāna Ƙeśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, and to Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaƙtivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja; then to Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī
and Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, and then to the
author, Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura. We
earnestly beg their mercy, and especially the mercy of
Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura.

In this Rāga-vartma-candrikā, Śrīla Viśvanātha
Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura tells us what he has realized about
Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Ƙṛṣṇa’s anurāga, Their ever-fresh
sentiment of intense attachment. Anurāga is the stage of
prema which comes just before mahābhāva. Within prema
comes sneha, then māna, praṇaya, rāga, and then anurāga
[See Endnote 1].

After sharing with us that he has realized all this by
the grace of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī, he states, “I am writing something for those
persons – those very lucky persons – who have greed for
this rāga [See Endnote 2], but cannot find the path to
achieve it. This book will be their guide – a moonbeam
(candrikā) to illuminate the path (vartma) leading to
the loving devotion of the residents of Goloka Vṛndāvana
(rāga). This path is practically unknown in the world.”
During amāvasyā-rātri, the dark-moon night when the moon
is not visible, the night is so very dark. There is a
very narrow pathway, but it is unseen in the darkness.
If the moon were visible, it would distribute its rays
of light to reveal the path. This book is the candrikā,
or moonray, that casts its light on the path of rāga, or

                              17
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

spontaneous loving devotion. Therefore

it is called Rāga-vartma-candrikā.

We should know that this pathway is a very narrow one,
meant only for a few, rare, highly-qualified persons; it
is not for everyone.   Although Śrīla Viśvanātha
Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura advises that unqualified persons not
read this book, there is in fact no worldly
qualification required to read it and then enter this
path. The only qualification is lobha, or transcendental
greed.

It is stated in Bhagavad-gītā, “Api cet sudarācāro
bhajate māmananya-bhāk.” A person may be full of
anarthas, undesirable habits and thoughts, but if he
associates with a rāgānuga-bhakta and under that pure
devotee’s guidance reads the Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, he may become attracted and acquire a very
deep greed to have the same transcendental mood as the
Vrajavāsīs. He may be attracted to sakhya-rasa,
friendship with Ƙṛṣṇa; vātsalya-rasa, parental love for
Ƙṛṣṇa; or mādhurya-rasa, a relationship with Ƙṛṣṇa as a
beloved. Simply by faithfully hearing Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam’s descriptions of the moods of the gopīs, or
those of Ƙṛṣṇa’s father and mother, or of Ƙṛṣṇa’s
friends, he may begin to yearn to experience in his
heart such moods as theirs.

However, Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura does not
describe sakhya- and vātsalya-bhāva in Rāga-vartma-
candrikā; he presents only moods of the gopīs. In order
to attain the bhāva of the gopīs, one will especially
hear from a rāgānuga-bhakta the portions of the Tenth
Canto discussing their relationship with Ƙṛṣṇa, namely
Gopī-gīta, Yugala-gīta, Bhramara-gīta, Praṇaya-gīta, and
Veṇu-gīta.

One who has sufficient saṁskāras, impressions in the
heart from having taken proper association in previous
births, will be able to cultivate greed and achieve
gopī-bhāva by reading śāstra, but he will not have to
rely on sastric logic to convince himself. For such a
person, this treatise is like a moonbeam for discovering
the path of rāgānuga-bhakti.

The author first explains that there are two kinds of
śraddhā, or faith – vaidhī and rāgānuga – which result
in two kinds of bhakti, namely vaidhī-bhakti and
rāgānuga-bhakti respectively. Both types of śraddhā are
achieved through the association of qualified Vaiṣṇavas.

Vaidhī-bhakti is impelled by fear. It is induced by the
in- junctions of śāstra that instruct everyone to
perform bhakti to ṛṣṇa as the only means to protect one
from going to hell. One may engage in vaidhī-bhakti by
fear, or one may be convinced by the order of śāstra
which is based on yukti, reasoning. For example, śāstra
has ordered:



sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo yato bhaktir adhoksaje


                              18
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

ahaituky apratihatā yayātmā suprasīdati

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.6)



The highest pursuit for all humanity is pure bhakti –
bhakti performed to please the transcendental Lord
Adhokṣaja, Ƙṛṣṇa, by all one’s efforts of body, mind,
and soul. Such uttamā-bhakti (topmost devotion) is
continuously performed without any personal desire and
without any break. In this way one can fully satisfy
one’s soul.



By hearing such instructions, many people begin to
perform vaidhī-bhakti.

On the other hand, bhakti which is based only on the
genuine greed to follow in the footsteps of the gopīs is
called rāgānuga-bhakti.   Such greed is generated by
hearing the pas- times of Ƙṛṣṇa and the gopīs described
in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,




by reading the books of the Gosvāmīs, and especially by
being in the association of a rāgānuga-bhakta. Without
the association of rāgānuga-bhaktas, the pastimes of
Ƙṛṣṇa and the gopīs cannot be properly understood.

What is the nature of this greed? How can we know
whether or not our greed is genuine? When a sādhaka, or
spiritual practitioner, hears from rasika rāgānuga
Vaiṣṇavas about the sweet pastimes of Ƙṛṣṇa, especially
His pastimes with the gopīs– whether this be from
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Ƙṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta, Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi,
Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi, or any other related books – his
citta-vṛtti (heart) becomes very eager to aquire the
moods of Ƙṛṣṇa’s personal associates.   At that time he
becomes absorbed in Śrī Ƙṛṣṇa’s form, qualities, and
pastimes. Do you know the meaning of citta-vṛtti?



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Spiritual… inner… What’s the
word? Inner…



Śrīla Gurudeva: I want that word.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Consciousness? Inner
consciousness?



Śrīla Gurudeva: In this context citta-vṛtti refers to
the mind or heart. When our citta-vṛtti eagerly desires

                              19
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                      5/5/2017

to be like that of

Ƙṛṣṇa’s eternal associates, to have the same moods as
those eternal associates, that condition of the heart is
its real or natural state – as opposed to the imposed
worldly citta-vṛtti of material absorption.   At this
stage the devotee is not interested in examining sastric
orders. He will only want to achieve that mood which he
sees in his āśrayā-gopī, the gopī for whose mood he has
developed genuine greed. Do you understand? Can you
explain the meaning of lobha, or pure greed?



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: It is when a person hears the
descrip- tions of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam about Rādhā and
Ƙṛṣṇa, and then thinks of the feelings the gopīs have
for Ƙṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Gurudeva: Can you say what he wants?



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: He strongly wants to have the
same feeling that is within them.



Śrīla Gurudeva: Yes, but you have left out one thing.
Those with lobha are not regulated by sastric orders or
bindings. Such orders are left untouched.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Rules and regulations are not
there?



Śrīla Gurudeva: The rules and regulations of śāstra are
not needed at all.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Otherwise it is vaidhī?



Śrīla Gurudeva: For example, a person may see some rasa-
gullas or rābaḍī (Indian sweets). Whether or not he has
the money to purchase those sweets, he may at once
develop greed for them, thinking, “These are very
tasteful!” Similarly, in whatever stage a person may
find himself, if he sincerely deliberates, “Oh, the mood
of the gopīs is very tasteful and very good. I must
somehow obtain that,” such greed has no bindings or
consideration of sastric restrictions. If we judge that
we are not qualified and we think that what we want is
too high for us, this is a sign that we do not possess
greed. Do you understand?



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Please explain.

                              20
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                     5/5/2017




Śrīla Gurudeva: If I desire a rasagulla, but I think, “I
have no money in my pocket to purchase it, so I cannot
have it,” that means I have no real greed for it.   A
person with greed considers, “Somehow or other, by hook
or by crook…”



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Beg, borrow, or steal.



Śrīla Gurudeva: Such a person does not think about his
qualifi- cation or disqualification. He does not
consider whether or not he is able to have this bhakti.
He simply thinks, “I must have it!” This is real greed.
Do you understand? His desire must be overpowered by the
form, qualities, and pastimes of Ƙṛṣṇa. Then he is
considered to possess real greed.

A sādhaka possessing such greed may ponder, “I have
heard from the rasika Vaiṣṇavas how Lalitā, Viśākhā,
Citrā, Rūpa Mañjarī, and other associates serve Ƙṛṣṇa,
and I want to serve like them.” He does not stop to
judge whether he is qualified to achieve this
samajātīya-bhāva, or identical mood for which he
aspires, and he does not wait for any logical argument
to convince him.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Argument means ‘reasoning?’



Śrīla Gurudeva: Greed does not rely on reasoning. If
reasoning is required, there is no greed.

The next consideration is this: Once one develops greed,
how does one achieve his desired result? It comes by the
association of rasika rāgānuga Vaiṣṇavas. In that
association one reads books like Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi,
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, Vraja-rīti-cintāmaṇi, Ƙṛṣṇa-
karṇāmṛta, Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi,

Śrīla Jayadeva Gosvāmī’s Gīta-govinda, the books of Śrī
Ƙavi- karṇapūra and all our Gosvāmīs, and especially
Rāga-vartma- candrikā. One will read all of these books
and resolve: “How can I somehow easily achieve that
mood; by hook or by crook? What is the easiest method to
attain it?” This should be the question.

All of our ācāryas, including Śrīla Viśvanātha
Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura and Śrīla Bhaƙtivinoda Ṭhāƙura, have
recorded for us, in a practical way, how they themselves
achieved it and how the sādhana-siddha-gopīs achieved
it. Their writings are authentic śāstra. One will search
out their methods in such śāstras and adopt the process
discussed therein, because without following śāstra,
without following the guidelines of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī,
one will become a sahajiyā [See Endnote 3] or an

                              21
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                      5/5/2017

atheist.

A person with greed never judges his qualification; this
is the main point. And yet, he will eagerly take
assistance from these books. Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī
Ṭhāƙura is not personally present, but he is present
through his books.

It is important to understand that this greed will not
come by personal effort alone. It comes only by the
grace of Ƙṛṣṇa Himself, and by the grace of a rāgānuga-
bhakta. Without their mercy one cannot attain it.

Bhakta-kṛpā, or the mercy of Vaiṣṇavas, is of two kinds:
prāktana (from previous lives), and ādhunika (from this
life). Prāktana refers to mercy that comes from one’s
performance of bhakti in one’s past births as well as
the present birth. If a person has saṁskāras from his
previous births’ devotional activities and receives the
mercy of a Vaiṣṇava in this birth, he will very easily
and quickly advance in bhakti. Perhaps he will not even
have to accept dīkṣā again, as in the case of some of
our Gosvāmīs. Or, if he takes dīkṣā, he advances very
rapidly.

Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhāƙura, Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara, and Śrī
Rāya Rāmānanda did not tell us anything about their
guru-paramparā; they received the association of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu and thus achieved their desired
goal. This is an example of mercy due to pūrva-saṁskāra,
impressions accrued in previous births[2]. Do you
understand? I will test you.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja:   All right.



Śrīla Gurudeva: Do you know the meaning of saṁskāra?



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja:   Accrued pious assets,
purifications, and reformatory processes.



Śrīla Gurudeva: I will discuss the topic of saṁskāras,
so try to understand the meaning. If one has no previous
births’ saṁskāras but has somehow obtained greed by the
causeless mercy of a qualified guru or Vaiṣṇava, this is
called ādhunika-kṛpā. Such a person receives dīkṣā from
a rāgānuga Vaiṣṇava guru. Or, if he has received dīkṣā
before developing greed, then he accepts a rāgānuga
Vaiṣṇava as his śikṣā-guru. He may serve both his śikṣā-
and dīkṣā-guru with equal devotion. Or, in some cases he
may serve the śikṣā- guru more closely than his
anuṣṭhāna-dīkṣā-guru (the guru who gives the initiation
mantras according to pāñcarātrika- vidhi), as did Śrī
Śyāmānanda Prabhu, Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, and
Śrīla Ƙṛṣṇadāsa Ƙavirāja Gosvāmī.

Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī received dīkṣā from

                              22
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

Yadunandana Ācārya, and afterwards Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu placed him in the hands of Śrī Svarūpa
Dāmodara. Later, when Raghunātha dāsa went to
Vṛndāvana, he had the association of Śrīla Sanātana
Gosvāmī and especially of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī.
Ultimately, he prayed to Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī for the
fufillment of all his desires for his cherished service,
as described in his Vilāpa-kusumāñjali.

Ƙṛṣṇadāsa Ƙavirāja Gosvāmī did not disclose the name of
his dīkṣā-guru; perhaps because he did not obtain his
devotional thoughts from him. Rather he acknowledged
Rūpa and Raghunātha, because he received all his moods
from them.   At the end of each chapter of his Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta, he prayed:



śrī-rūpa-raghunātha-pade yāra āśa caitanya-caritāmṛta
kahe kṛṣṇadāsa



Praying at the lotus feet of Śrī Rūpa and Śrī
Raghunātha, always desiring their mercy, I, Ƙṛṣṇadāsa,
narrate Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, following in their
footsteps.



Why does Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī pray to Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī? Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara is Lalitā-devī, and
is therefore in a higher rank than Rūpa Gosvāmī, who is
Rūpa Mañjarī. Yet, Raghunātha dāsa prays only to Rūpa
Gosvāmī. Why? It is because he does not want to be a
nāyikā (beloved heroine) of Ƙṛṣṇa, like Lalitā and
Viśākhā.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: He wants to be in mañjarī-bhāva?



Śrīla Gurudeva: Only mañjarī-bhāva. What is a mañjarī?
We have heard about lotus mañjarīs and mango mañjarīs.
In fact, many creepers and good flowers have mañjarīs.
The mañjarī appears first and then the flower, and the
mañjarī is always located above the flower. When a bee
comes to sit on the flower and drink its honey, the
mañjarīs tremble, being overjoyed.

Similarly, the Ƙṛṣṇa-bee comes to Śrīmatī Rādhikā, She
glances at Him, and the two engage in loving pastimes
(prema- vilāsa). Although that ‘bee’ does not sit on
the mañjarī, the mañjarī trembles, feeling as if the bee
is sitting on her. What- ever the ‘flower’ experiences
in those pastimes manifests in the mañjarī, so there is
no need for the bee to go to her. She automatically
feels everything felt by the flower. If the bee kisses
the flower, then, seeing this, the mañjarī feels, “The
bee has kissed me.”

In fact, the mañjarī tastes something special that even

                              23
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                      5/5/2017

the flower does not taste, in the sense that the flower
does not tremble as the mañjarī does. Similarly the
maidservants of

Śrīmatī Rādhikā experience a pleasure in being Her maid-
servant, which She Herself does not experience, and that
pleasure is called bhāva-ullāsa rati [See Endnote 4].

Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī wanted to be a mañjarī,
not a ‘flower.’ In other words he did not want sakhī-
bhāva, the mood of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s friends like Lalitā
and Viśākhā, who have direct relationships with Śrī
Ƙṛṣṇa.

Herein lies the speciality of the mañjarīs. In our
sampra- dāya no one wants to be Śrī Rādhā’s sakhī; they
only want to be Her kiṅkarī. Are you totally
understanding my words? Do you know the meaning of the
word kiṅkarī?

Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Servant.



Śrīpād Mādhava Mahārāja: Maidservant.



Śrīla Gurudeva: There is no equivalent word in English
for kiṅkarī. It is such a beautiful Sanskrit word,
inferring something very soft, fragrant, and so sweet.

We cannot learn these topics simply by reading   books. No
book will clarify these truths for you as well   as our
discussion in this conversation. By discussing   with me
in this way, you can obtain more than what you   can ever
obtain by only reading books.



Śrīpād Mādhava Mahārāja: These truths are only revealed
through realization.



Śrīla Gurudeva: I do not say that I have any
realization, but I

have God’s mercy and my Gurudeva’s mercy.

In the first verse of Vilāpa-kusumāñjali, Śrīla
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī states that although Rūpa
Mañjarī’s husband is away from home, he sees a mark on
her lips. How has this come about? It is not that Ƙṛṣṇa
has kissed Rūpa Mañjarī. He has kissed Śrīmatī Rādhikā
and therefore Rādhikā has that mark on Her lips; but the
mark at once also manifests on the lips of Rūpa Mañjarī.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Gosvāmī: I was asking you about that in
Bombay.



                              24
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017


Śrīla Gurudeva: The marks on the face and body of
Śrīmatī Rādhārānī do not come to Lalitā and Viśākhā, but
they all come to the mañjarīs. We are followers of Rūpa
Gosvāmī, who is Rūpa Mañjarī.

I think that you will not forget these teachings for
your entire life.

A person may have taken only anuṣṭhaniki, formal dīkṣā,
thinking, “So many others have taken dīkṣā, so I should
also take it.” He has received a sacred thread, kānti-
mālā (neck beads), and so on during a fire sacrifice,
but he has not been given instructions on the internal
mood of dīkṣā. It is this internal mood of dīkṣā which
constitutes real dīkṣā.

Dīkṣā comes gradually, not in a moment. The process of
receiving dīkṣā takes place over a long period of time.
When one has the advantage of past births’ saṁskāras,
one easily accepts dīkṣā and the process is accomplished
quickly, but without previous saṁskāras the process is
slow.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Unless one gets the association
of rāgānuga Vaiṣṇavas.



Śrīla Gurudeva: That disciple must also be qualified. If
the disciple does not have sufficient saṁskāras and does
not yet possess greed, he will not be able to properly
receive these truths from his dīkṣā-guru, who may be
very qualified but may not have sufficient time to train
him on this topic. Later on, when greed is destined to
come soon, that disciple will not change his gurudeva,
but he will accept a śikṣā-guru. Sometimes the disciple
will give more preference to his śikṣā- guru, or equally
to both gurus, according to their qualification. He will
gradually hear all these topics.

If one’s dīkṣā-guru is present, the disciple will
receive all these things from him. Or, his gurudeva will
gladly order him to hear from another, more qualified,
person, as in the case of the disciples Śrī Śyāmānanda
Prabhu, Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhāƙura, and Śrī Śrīnivāsa
Ācārya.

As I mentioned earlier, if a person has greed by dint of
his previous birth’s or present birth’s saṁskāras, he
will begin to search through śāstra – by reading and
hearing – especially those śāstras or commentaries
written by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and his followers, the
rūpānuga Vaiṣṇavas.

What is the actual meaning of rūpānuga? In his books,
Rūpa Gosvāmī has described, in taṭastha-bhāva, the
various rasas. Do you know the meaning of taṭastha?

Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Marginal?



                              25
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017


Śrīpād Mādhava Mahārāja: Neutral.



Śrīla Gurudeva: He has written from a neutral position
about all the rasas – śānta, dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya,
and mādhurya. If one has greed for any of these moods,
that person will be a rāgānuga-bhakta but not
necessarily rūpānuga.

What is rūpānuga? Even if one follows Śrī Ujjvala-
nīlamaṇi, he may be rāgānuga but not rūpānuga. One will
be rūpānuga when he especially follows the way in which
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī serves Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Ƙṛṣṇa
internally, as Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī – deeply meditating on
the qualities and bhāva which Rūpa Mañjarī possesses in
serving Them.



Śrīpād Mādhava Mahārāja:   All rūpānuga-bhaktas are
rāgānuga, but not all rāgānugas are rūpānugas.



Śrīla Gurudeva: The sādhaka will search through śāstra
for the means to receive these moods. He will hear from
a rūpānuga Vaiṣṇava who will tell him to read Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, Ujjvala- nīlamaṇi, Ƙṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta, Rādhā-
rasa-sudhā-nidhi, Jayadeva Gosvāmī’s Gīta-govinda, and
the books of Caṇḍīdāsa, Vidyāpati, and others like them.

The rūpānuga Vaiṣṇava will also instruct him to seek
only that bhāva for which he has greed. He will know
about all the rasas, but he will serve only by one mood,
the mood of his sthāyi-bhāva (his permanent,
constitutional relationship with

Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Ƙṛṣṇa). One’s sthāyi-bhāva will manifest
only when prema is reached, but greed for that sthāyi-
bhāva awakens before that. Genuine greed, which does not
change in this or any future life, is called gāḍha-
saṁskāra [See Endnote 5]. If one has real greed, as
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has, one’s greed for a particular
sthāyi-bhāva will never change in any birth. Sanaka,
Sananda, Sanātana, and Sanat Ƙumāra have their sthāyi-
bhāva in śānta-rasa. Yet, they can narrate the entire
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: How is that? I remember asking
you that question before.



Śrīla Gurudeva: They can do so from a neutral position.
They know all about the various rasas, but they don’t
have direct experience of the higher rasas.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: What about Śukadeva Gosvāmī?



                              26
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017


Śrīla Gurudeva: Śukadeva Gosvāmī has some direct
experience, because he is the śuka, or parrot, of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā. He there- fore possesses a sthāyi-bhāva
of Vraja.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: You have said a very important
thing about Śukadeva Gosvāmī.



Śrīla Gurudeva: As Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s parrot, he sits on
the branches of tamāla or kadamba trees. He watches the
confiden- tial pastimes of Rādhikā and Ƙṛṣṇa, and
becomes very, very pleased. Yet, he cannot serve like
Rūpa Mañjarī.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Gosvāmī: He is watching everything. So what
kind of bhāva does he have?



Śrīla Gurudeva: It has been said in śāstra that he is
situated in śānta-bhāva.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Gosvāmī: Because he is neutral?



Śrīla Gurudeva: But he is in Vraja, and there is no
śānta-bhāva in Vraja. We will have to judge what rasa he
actually possesses. When Śrī Śrī Rādhikā and Ƙṛṣṇa are
sleeping in the morning,

Śuka [the name of Śukadeva Gosvāmī in the form of
Rādhikā’s parrot] says so many things to awaken Them.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: That does not sound like śānta-
bhāva.



Śrīla Gurudeva: Yes, it is not śānta-bhāva.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: He must have everything.



Śrīla Gurudeva: Yes. We will have to consider all these
truths.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Why is it said that he has śānta-

                              27
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                      5/5/2017

bhāva?



Śrīla Gurudeva: It is for the śānta-rasa bhaktas.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: So, you are saying that
externally it appears like that…



Śrīla Gurudeva: But…



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: But it is not actually.



Śrīla Gurudeva: The cows of Vraja have vātsalya-bhāva,
so surely Śuka cannot be of śānta-rasa.

To illustrate how to search out the process for
attainment of the fruit of one’s genuine greed, Śrīla
Viśvanātha Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura gives the example of a man
who is greedy to drink milk. Seeing some milk he wants
to taste it, so he undergoes a process to get it. He may
ask someone who drinks milk how that person acquired it.
After questioning him he will purchase a cow, making
sure that the cow has a calf because unless the cow has
a calf it cannot give milk. He will then take the cow
and calf to his home, where he will apply water or ghee
to the udder of the cow and bring the calf to drink.
After the calf has taken milk, the man will wash the
udder of the cow and then milk her. Next, he will put
the milk on the fire to boil. Then, if he wants that
boiled milk sweetened, he adds sugar, and for extra
flavor he adds rose water, kewra [3], camphor, and so
on.

Similarly, although a sādhaka with genuine greed does
not require the reasoning of śāstra to convince him to
perform bhakti, he carefully studies those śāstras that
will give him entrance into the process he requires for
achieving his goal.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura tells us that when a
person has actual greed, he also follows the procedures
of vaidhī-bhakti. However, his bhakti is not vaidhī-
bhakti; it is rāgānuga-bhakti. He engages in the nine
processes of bhakti, namely śravaṇam, kīrtanam, viṣṇoḥ
smaraṇam, pāda-sevanam, and so on.

From the very beginning he will carefully perform guru-
caranāśrayā, taking shelter of the lotus feet of śrī
guru, and faithfully serve him in viśrambha-bhāva.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: What is the meaning of viśrambha-
bhāva?


                              28
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                      5/5/2017



Śrīla Gurudeva: It implies giving up all fear. Fear
caused by the sense of awe and reverence is not present.
The disciple serves his guru as a bosom friend, not
thinking, “I am very low and he is very high.” Rather,
he feels that, “He is mine and I am his.” The analogy is
given of a young son who, seeing his father sitting
above him, does not care to sit on the ground. He at
once jumps up and sits on his father’s lap. He then pats
his father’s shoulder, strokes his father’s face, and
touches his father on his arm or holds his hand, serving
him with great love.

Moreover, a person qualified with genuine greed, with
even greater love than that young son, serves his
gurudeva from whom he has collected the truths he has
grasped and the moods he now possesses. This type of
intimate service is essential.

Guru-caranāśrayā means ‘taking shelter of a self-
realized guru,’ and it is the first of the sixty-four
items of devotional service. Then, following the
instruction of the second item, one accepts dīkṣā
initiation from him. Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta- sindhu lists
the sixty-four practices of devotional service, the
first five of which are in relationship to guru:



On the path of regulative devotional service, one must
observe the following five items: (1) accepting a bona
fide spiritual master; (2) accepting initiation from
him; (3) serving him; (4) receiving instructions from
him and making inquiries in order to learn devotional
service; and (5) following in the footsteps of the
previous ācāryas, and following the directions given by
the spiritual master.



The rāgānuga-bhakta follows the same procedures, but his
mood has changed from that which is found in vaidhī-
bhakti. The vaidhī-bhakti disciple will sit lower and
pray to his gurudeva with folded palms, “Gurudeva,
please give me an order. What service shall I do?” Then,
when the disciple receives an order, as a servant, he
will perform the service. On the other hand, a person
possessing genuine greed will serve in the mood I have
previously described; with no fear and no sense of
difference. He will resolve, “I am his and he is mine.”
All the limbs of vaidhī-bhakti are followed by the
rāgānuga Vaiṣṇava, but…



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: What is the difference?



Śrīla Gurudeva: Only the mood is different. If one
rejects the practices of vaidhī, he will be unable to
enter rāgānuga; his greed will be checked. So he must
follow.

                              29
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017


For a person who has actual greed and wants to follow
the process of rāgānuga-bhakti, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam says
that the Supreme Lord comes to him in the forms of both
caitya-guru and dīkṣā-guru. In this connection we should
know that guru is akhaṇḍa-tattva (the complete,
undivided principle of guru), a manifestation of
Nityānanda Prabhu, Baladeva Prabhu. Because gurudeva
gives everything that Nityānanda Prabhu and Baladeva
Prabhu have come to give, and because all his
instructions are Theirs, he is regarded as Their
manifestation.

In Bhagavad-gītā (10.10) it is stated:



teṣāṁ satata-yuktānāṁ

bhajatāṁ prīti-pūrvakam dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ taṁ

yena mām upayānti te




Upon those who lovingly perform bhajana and yearn for My
eternal association, I bestow that transcendental
knowledge by which they attain Me.



If a person surrenders to Ƙṛṣṇa and possesses true
greed, if he has a pure heart and sufficient saṁskāras,
the Lord reveals everything in his heart as caitya-guru.
Ƙṛṣṇa states in Bhagavad- gītā, “I give him the wisdom
to achieve My bhakti.” He does not give this openly; He
gives it in the heart. He benedicts His devotee with a
sphūrti (internal vision), inspiring him from within,
and personally manifests all siddhāntas in his heart. He
also gives instructions externally, in the form of the
dīkṣā- guru or śikṣā-guru.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: You say he dictates within the
heart?



Śrīla Gurudeva: Yes. He dictates in the heart.
Certainly.

People may see that this devotee has no guru and wonder,
“Does he know these truths?” Here is the answer. Ƙṛṣṇa
dictates everything – He manifests Himself – from
within, whether or not anyone else sees.

I have sometimes experienced this myself. I feel some-
thing within myself. I may not have read or seen or
heard a certain fact, yet sometimes very beautiful
things enter my heart. Perhaps you have also had this
experience? Certainly you will have had this experience,

                              30
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

because one who serves his gurudeva will surely receive
such realizations. Even if gurudeva is not present in
our sight, still, he will manifest all these truths.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura begins by telling us
the three key ślokas from Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu
(1.2.294–296), by realizing which one can enter the path
of rāgānuga-bhakti. The first is:



kṛṣṇaṁ smaran janaṁ cāsya, preṣṭhaṁ nija-samīhitam tat-
tat-kathā-rataś cāsau, kuryād vāsaṁ vraje sadā



While remembering Ƙṛṣṇa and His beloved associates whom
we desire to follow, being fully absorbed in dis-
cussions of their pastimes, one should always reside in
Vraja. If this is not possible, then one may reside
there by mind.



The second śloka is this:



sevā sādhaka-rūpeṇa, siddha-rūpeṇa cātra hi tad-bhāva-
lipsunā kāryā, vraja-lokānusārataḥ



On the path of rāgānuga, one should follow Ƙṛṣṇa’s
intimate beloved associates and their followers, always
remaining absorbed in their service. This should be done
by the sādhaka-rūpa (the external material body of one’s
present condition) and also in siddha-rūpa (by the
internal perfected spiritual body, which is suitable for
rendering the type of service to Śrī Ƙṛṣṇa for which
one’s heart is eager). One should eagerly desire the
bhāva, that is the special loving mood of those
associates of Ƙṛṣṇa in Vraja whom one aspires to follow.



And the third śloka is:



śravaṇot kīrtanādīni vaidha-bhakty-uditāni tu yāny
aṅgāni ca tāny atra vijñeyāni manīṣibhiḥ



In vaidhī-bhakti one practices the limbs of bhakti like
śravaṇa, kīrtana, and so on according to one’s qualifi-
cation. Similarly for rāgānuga-bhakti, it has been
advised by scholars who are well versed in the
principles of bhakti to follow these practices.



Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura then comments on

                              31
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

each śloka, one by one, and this subject is very deep.
Let us discuss the first śloka.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Where is this śloka? Which part
of Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu is it in?

Śrīla Gurudeva: You can find it at the end of the pūrva-
vibhāga (Eastern Division). Ƙṛṣṇaṁ smaran means
‘remembering Ƙṛṣṇa.’ Janaṁ cāsya preṣṭhaṁ nija-samīhitam
indicates remem- bering His preṣṭha, His dear
associates. These associates may also be of dāsya-rasa,
sakhya-rasa, or vātsalya-rasa, but Śrīla Viśvanātha
Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura especially discusses those in
mādhurya-rasa.

One who has developed greed to attain the mood of the
gopīs remembers Ƙṛṣṇa when He is in Sevā-kuñja or
Vaṁśīvaṭa. He has a lovely smile on His face, and He has
placed a very beautiful flute on His lips. His restless
eyes, like those of a deer, are searching here and
there. Seeing the gopīs coming He becomes overjoyed, and
at that moment He has no control over His body or mind.
He is God Himself, yet He forgets everything at that
time. Not knowing what He is doing or even what He looks
like, He stands in His tribhaṅga-lalita (threefold-
bending) pose, exquisitely beautiful.

Thousands upon thousands of gopīs are present there, but
from the corner of His eyes He is searching for one
particular gopī – and She is delaying. Then, from far
away He sees Her coming. Who is that gopī? She is Śrī
Rādhā. The rāgānuga- sādhaka meditates on Ƙṛṣṇa’s
appearance at that time.

This is smaraṇam, remembering Ƙṛṣṇa with all these
details and appreciating His many virtues. In Jaiva-
dharma we read about the qualities of Ƙiśora-kṛṣṇa, who
is Ƙṛṣṇa in His teenage form in śṛṅgāra-rasa (mādhurya-
rasa). The qualities of Ƙṛṣṇa in sakhya-rasa are not the
same as His qualities when He is with the gopīs, and His
qualities when He is with Nanda and Yaśodā are different
again. His qualities are different in every rasa.

Remember Ƙṛṣṇa possessing all the qualities with which
He is adorned in mādhurya-bhāva. Remember Him with the
gopīs as He tries to cheat them in gambling; and how
they in turn cheat Him and try to steal His flute.
Remember Ƙṛṣṇa and His priya-jana, His dearmost
associates.

What are the mannerisms, qualities, and nature of the
gopīs, and especially of those of Śrīmatī Rādhāraṇī?
What are the activities of that very gopī for whom we
have greed to follow? That gopī is not Rādhikā, Lalitā,
or Viśākhā; she is Rūpa Mañjarī. We have a very keen
interest to see what she is doing, because it is her
mood we wish to adopt. When Śrīmatī Rādhikā is pleased,
then Rūpa Mañjarī becomes so pleased.

Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī performs numerous services, like
bringing water in a golden pot or sometimes very slowly
and gently fanning with a cāmara...

                              32
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017




Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Massaging?



Śrīla Gurudeva: Yes, when she sees that Śrī Śrī Rādhā
and Ƙṛṣṇa are very tired, she serves Them accordingly.
We want to carefully watch that mañjarī, seeing what she
is doing and how she is performing her services.

The method to enter these pastimes and services is based
on unbroken remembrance. Janaṁ cāsya means remembering
all the gopīs, and especially that gopī whom I am
interested in following.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Meditating upon that?



Śrīla Gurudeva: This is the method of rāgānuga-sādhana-
bhajana. Tat-tat-kathā-rataś cāsau refers to the śikṣā-
guru, that premi-guru or rāgānuga-guru from whom we are
hearing. He will discuss with us the ways in which all
the sakhīs serve Ƙṛṣṇa, and especially the service of
Rūpa Mañjarī and our guru in the form of a sakhī. One
should talk about their pastimes with

Ƙṛṣṇa, as I sometimes discuss with you.

Such a devotee always resides in Vṛndāvana. If he has no
chance to be in Vṛndāvana by body, he will surely live
there by mind. Without living in Vṛndāvana, one cannot
attain that kind of love.

These three practices are essential: kṛṣṇa-smaraṇa,
remembering Ƙṛṣṇa with His dearmost associates; tat-tat-
kathā-rataś cāsau, continuously conversing about their
pastimes; and kuryād vāsaṁ vraje sadā, always residing
in Vṛndāvana (at least by mind) in such pastime places
as Sevā-kuñja, Saṅketa, and Yāvaṭa. And, if you have
the qualification, you may go to Rādhā-kuṇḍa at midday.
Spend all day with Rādhikā and that gopī whom you have
the conviction to follow.

This is all for today. Perhaps I will be able to
complete the next two ślokas in the next three days.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: You will speak for three more
days?



Śrīla Gurudeva: If I continue by pacing the explanations
over the next few days, you will be able to understand
something. If I do it in a hurry, these discussions will
not be as beneficial for you.



                              33
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017


[Question in Bengali]



Śrīla Gurudeva: Her question is this: If someone wants
to live in Vṛndāvana by mind, then won’t his body also
come? The answer is that his body will automatically
follow his mind and come to Vṛndāvana if that is his
sole desire.

Otherwise, if that type of person is not so qualified,
he will engage himself in other duties and think, “This
other duty should be done. This work should be done.
Moreover, the place in which I live has so many
facilities.” So, being far away, that type of a person
thinks about living in Vṛndāvana, but achieves only
little benefit.

Those who are like Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī think
in this way: “If I am not there at my house, let anyone
burn it down. And what will happen to my parents,
children, and wife if I go to Vṛndāvana? I don’t know
how they will live their lives; whether they will have
difficulties, or if they will be all right. It is no
longer my responsibility.”

On the other hand, a neophyte disciple may say, “Oh, my
Gurudeva told me to preach, so I must do this. This is
my duty, so no need to meditate on Vṛndāvana.” When our
greed comes to full bloom, we forget everything else. At
that stage no other obligation comes in our way.

Such a pure devotee will be seen by the entire world as
guru. For example, even now, we follow Rūpa Gosvāmī and
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī as our gurus. What are we
preaching? We are preaching only their words and our
Gurudeva’s words.

If others see that the words of Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja
and Girirāja Mahārāja are truly the words of Śrīla
Bhaƙtivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja – if they see that your
words are in accordance with guru and guru-paramparā –
they will be bound to accept all your instructions. At
that time there will be no harm in your preaching or
doing any other sevā; that will be real preaching.
However, I don’t know how many births it will take for
you to come to that stage.

One day you will have to leave your present preaching
and become qualified to go to Goloka Vṛndāvana, where
there is no preaching, only service. Then, from there,
as Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī came to this world with Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu, you can also return and preach with
your spiritual master.




[endnotes]




                              34
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017



1   (1) sneha – affection

(2) māna – the stage of prema in which sneha reaches
exul- tation, thus causing one to experience the
sweetness of the beloved in ever-new varieties, and when
the nāyikā (beloved heroine) assumes an outward conduct
which turns into tran- scendental anger and indignation
arising out of jealous love. (3) praṇaya – the
intensified stage of prema in which māna assumes a
feature of unrestrained intimacy known as viśrambha, or
confidence devoid of any restraint or formality. This
confidence causes one to consider one’s life, mind,
intelligence, body, and possessions to be one in all
respects with the life, mind, intelligence, and body of
the beloved.

(4) rāga – (a) an intensified stage of prema in which an
unquenchable loving thirst (premamayī-tṛṣṇa) for the
object of one’s affection, Ƙṛṣṇa, gives rise to
spontaneous and intense absorption in Him, so much so
that in the absence of the opportunity to please Him,
one is on the verge of giving up one’s life; (b) when
praṇaya is experienced in the heart as immense pleasure.
If by accepting some misery there is a chance to meet
with Ƙṛṣṇa, then that misery becomes a source of great
happiness. And, where happiness affords no opportunity
to meet with Him, it becomes the source of great
distress.

(5) anurāga – an intensified stage of prema as defined
in Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi (14.146): “Although one regularly
meets with and is well-acquainted with the beloved, the
ever-fresh senti- ment of intense attachment causes the
beloved to be newly experienced at every moment, as if
one has never before had any experience of such a
person.”

(6) bhāva – (a) loving emotions; a particular mood of
love in which the devotee serves Ƙṛṣṇa; (b) an
intensified stage of prema which in Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi has
equated with maha- bhāva, which occurs when anurāga
attains a certain stage of exhilaration and relish. This
can be experienced and relished only by anurāga itself
and by no other bhāva.

(7) mahābhāva – the most mature stage of prema.




2 [An excerpt from Rāga-vartma-candrikā, Verse 2,
purport by Śrīla Bhaƙtivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja:]



Here it is necessary to know the meanings of rāga,
rāgānuga, and rāgātmikā. Regarding this, Śrīla
Bhaƙtivinoda Ṭhāƙura says that the excessive attachment
for many forms of sense enjoyment, which the materialist
feels through natural contact with the sense objects, is

                              35
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

called rāga. Just as the eyes become agitated upon
seeing something beautiful, in the same way all the
senses are always eager to taste pleasure, and thus the
heart develops attachment (rāga) for the sense objects.

When Ƙṛṣṇa is the exclusive object of rāga, it is called
rāga-bhakti. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has defined this rāga
as, “iṣṭe svārasikī rāgaḥ paramāviṣṭatā – The strong,
natural, and complete absorption in the cherished object
of one’s devotion arising from an unquenchable love-
filled thirst is called rāga” (Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu
1.2.272). When one is engrossed in kṛṣṇa-bhakti at this
level, this is called rāgātmikā-bhakti. This bhakti is
especially found in the Vrajavāsīs, the eternal resi-
dents of Vraja. And, that bhakti which follows the
moods of the rāgātmikās is called rāgānuga. In other
words, when, by the mercy of Śrī Ƙṛṣṇa and His devotees
one cultivates bhakti impelled by the greed to obtain
the same mood as Ƙṛṣṇa’s beloved associates, such
devotion is called rāgānuga-bhakti.



3 [Sahajiyā – excerpt from Teachings of Lord Caitanya,
Chapter 13, by Śrīla Bhaƙtivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja:]



A class of so-called devotees (known as prākṛta-
sahajiyā) follow their own concocted ideas and,
representing themselves as Ƙṛṣṇa and Rādhā, indulge in
debauchery. Such devotional service and attachment are
false, and those so engaged are actually gliding down a
hellish path. This is not the standard of rāgātmikā, or
devotion. The prākṛta-sahajiyā community is actually
cheated and very unfortunate.



4 [Bhāva-ullāsa rati – an excerpt from Veṇu-gīta, Verse
7, purport by Śrīla Bhaƙtivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja:]



Generally, devotees of the same mood and who are en-
riched with similar desires naturally share suhṛd-bhāva,
inti- mate friendship, with each other. That is why the
love and affection that Lalitā and the other sakhīs have
for Śrīmatī Rādhikā is called suhṛd-rati. When their
suhṛd-rati is the same as or slightly less than their
kṛṣṇa-rati (affection towards Śrī Ƙṛṣṇa), this is called
sañcārī-bhāva, a temporary emotion that is compared to
the waves that rise and then fall in the ocean of their
permanent emotion of the mood of Ƙṛṣṇa’s beloveds. In
other words when this suhṛd-rati becomes equal to the
waves in the ocean of their prominent affection for
Ƙṛṣṇa, it is a sañcārī-bhāva.

However, in the case of the mañjarī-sakhīs, their suhṛd-
rati (for Śrī Rādhā and everything connected with Her),
which abundantly exceeds their kṛṣṇa-rati and which
constantly increases by the moment due to their full
absorption in it, is called bhāva-ullāsa-rati. This is a

                              36
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                     5/5/2017

special feature of madhura- rasa. Of the five types of
sakhīs, only the nitya-sakhīs and prāṇa- sakhīs, who are
known as mañjarīs, have this bhāva-ullāsa-rati as their
permanent emotion (sthāyi-rati). It is no longer just a
sañcārī-bhāva. These mañjarīs nurture an abundance of
sneha, tender affection, for Rādhājī.

It is seen that creepers are always endeavoring to
embrace trees, but the leaves, flowers, and buds
(mañjarīs) of the creepers do not even slightly try to
embrace the trees directly. When a creeper embraces a
tree, the joy of those flowers, leaves, and mañjarīs
automatically increases. In Śrī Vṛndāvana, Śrīmatī
Rādhikā stands supreme among all gopīs. She is famous as
the kalpa-latā (the creeper that fulfills every desire)
of love for Śrī Ƙṛṣṇa. Some of Her sakhīs have the
nature of leaves, some are like flowers, and some like
mañjarīs. That is why they are always eager for Śrīmatī
Rādhikā to meet with Ƙṛṣṇa, and are carried away by the
bliss of Their union.



5 [Excerpt from Jaiva-dharma, Chapter 28:]



Vrajanātha: Prabhu, what are the deep impressions
(gāḍha-

saṁskāra) you have spoken of in this context?



Gopāla-guru Gosvāmī: Bābā! You have been revolving in
the cycle of karma birth after birth, and thus, because
of attach- ment to worldly sense gratification, your
consciousness (citta) is made up of two types of
impressions (saṁskāra), namely, those acquired in
previous lives (prāktana), and those acquired in this
lifetime (ādhunika). During this time, the pure tendency
of the heart that was present in the pure existence of
your ātmā has become distorted. Now, by the influence of
spiritual merits (sukṛti) accumulated in many previous
lives, you have attained sat-saṅga in this life, and you
are creating saṁskāras by performing bhajana in this
association. When these saṁskāras dispel the distorted
saṁskāras, your original saṁskāras will arise. The
acintya-tattva will manifest within your heart to the
degree that these saṁskāras deepen. This is known as
gāḍha-saṁskāra.




chapter two


Illuminating the Path to Rāgātmiƙā-bhaƙti




                              37
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                     5/5/2017

Bhurijana dāsa: My understanding from your example is
that the heart of Rūpa Mañjarī is so dedicated to
Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī that she feels everything Śrīmatī
Rādhārāṇī feels. I also understand by your statement
that one must be dedicated to his guru in the same way.
With out surrender and without giving one’s heart to
guru, it doesn’t work, especially in rāgānuga-bhakti.



Śrīla Gurudeva: This surrender and the complete
dedication of the heart to śrī guru is called tādātmya
(oneness of heart) in Sanskrit. When an iron rod is
placed in fire, the qualities of the fire enter the
iron. When fire permeates that iron rod and makes it
redhot, it is the fire inside that burns other objects;
it is not that the iron rod burns them. The iron rod may
think, “I am fire” in the sense that it has become one
with the qualities of the fire and can now do the work
of fire.

Similarly, Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī and all the other mañjarīs
are tādātmika (one in heart) with Śrī Rādhā, and
therefore the actions of Rādhā become the actions of all
the mañjarīs. In other words, whatever She realizes is
also realized by every mañjarī. Nothing is hidden from
them. Some things may be hidden from Her sakhīs, but not
from Her mañjarīs.




Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Today you will carry on from
where you left off?



Śrīla Gurudeva: Do you want to hear the rest?



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Oh yes, very much. Just from what
you have been speaking, it is already so helpful.



Bhurijana dāsa: I would like to have the references for
the first two verses.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: The verses are from Bhakti-
rasāmṛta- sindhu.



Śrīla Gurudeva: I told them three ślokas, the first of
which is this:



kṛṣṇaṁ smaran janaṁ cāsya preṣṭhaṁ nija-samīhitam tat-
tat-kathā-rataś cāsau kuryād vāsaṁ vraje sadā

                              38
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017


Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.294)



While remembering Śrī Ƙṛṣṇa and His beloved asso ciates
whom one desires to follow, being fully absorbed in
discussions of their pastimes, one should always reside
in Vraja. If this is not possible, then one should
reside there by mind.



Have you heard the explanation of this śloka? It refers
to remembering Ƙṛṣṇa along with His dearmost associates.

This is the second śloka:



sevā sādhaka-rūpeṇa siddha-rūpeṇa cātra hi tad-bhāva-
lipsunā kāryā vraja-lokānusārataḥ

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.295)




On the path of rāgānuga, one should follow Ƙṛṣṇa’s
intimate beloved associates and their followers, always
remaining absorbed in their service. This should be done
by thesādhaka-rūpa (the external material body of one’s
present condition) and also in siddha-rūpa (by the
internal perfected spiritual body, which is suitable for
rendering the type of service to Śrī Ƙṛṣṇa for which
one’s heart is eager). One should eagerly desire the
bhāva, that is the special loving mood of those
associates of Ƙṛṣṇa in Vraja whom one aspires to follow.



Sevā means ‘service.’ Sādhaka-rūpeṇa refers to acting in
this world as a practitioner of rāgānuga-bhakti. Siddha-
rūpeṇa refers to serving in one’s perfected spiritual
body in Goloka Vraja, which is achieved by intense
greed. By the grace of guru and Ƙṛṣṇa, the devotee’s
spiritual form is revealed in his inner heart. In this
connection it is written in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta
(Madhya-līlā 22.157):



‘mane’ nija-siddha-deha kariyā bhāvana rātri-dine kare
vraje kṛṣṇera sevana




With one’s spiritual body, revealed by the mercy of śrī
guru, one serves Śrī RādhāƘṛṣṇa Yugala (the Divine
Couple) day and night in Vraja.


                              39
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017



Each and every jīva has an individual spiritual body
(siddha- deha).   As such we also have our own spiritual
body, but it has not yet manifested; it is in a seed
stage. Just as an entire tree is contained within its
seed, our transcendental body with all its
characteristics now exists in seedform. Because we have
turned away from Ƙṛṣṇa, that spiritual form is not seen.
When, by the grace of guru and Gaurāṅga our greed
sprouts and then fully blossoms, our śikṣā or dīkṣā-guru
may show us our spiritual body. He will first describe
our constitutional spiritual identity, as we see in
Jaiva-dharma that the guru of Vrajanātha and
Vijayakumāra told each of them the nature of their
individual spiritual forms.

Our spiritual form is presently in a latent condition.
Śrīla Bhaƙtivinoda Ṭhāƙura states that it can be
revealed in one




life, but I see that for us it is many births away. He
has simply shown the path.

As Śrīla Bhaƙtivinoda Ṭhāƙura explains in Jaiva-dharma,
when Vrajanātha and Vijayakumāra received dīkṣā, they
saw Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu with all His associates.
Although we were unable to see them at the time of our
dīkṣā, they are fully visible to a realized soul. This
is real dīkṣā.

We have entered into the class of dīkṣā, but our dīkṣā
is not complete. We are in class now, meaning that we
are in the training, or learning, process. May God and
guru shower their grace upon us so that we can receive
full dīkṣā – divya- jñāna (realized transcendental
knowledge) and divya-darśana (spiritual vision).

Divya-jñāna implies divya-darśana, as we see with Vijaya
kumāra and Vrajanātha. They saw the Lord at the time of
their dīkṣā initiation, and they at once fainted.
After that, they took all necessary instructions in
Navadvīpa from Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī. Then, on his
order they went to Purī, where they met Vakreśvara
Paṇḍita’s disciple Śrī Gopālaguru Gosvāmī for further
śikṣā.

Gopālaguru Gosvāmī is a rāgānuga Vaiṣṇava, and in his
spiritual form as a gopī he is one of the eight
principal sakhīs. Having realized that Vrajanātha was in
sakhya-bhāva and Vijaya kumāra was in gopī or mañjarī-
bhāva, he revealed to them their spiritual identities.
He was so merciful that he called them one at a time and
told them, “You are a cowherd friend of Ƙṛṣṇa,” and “You
are a maidservant of Śrīmatī Rādhikā.”

He gave both of them the āṣṭa-dasākṣara
(eighteensyllable) gopāla-mantra. Dāsya, sakhya,
vātsalya, and mādhurabhāvas are all found in this
gopāla-mantra, which nourishes and supports every rasa

                              40
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

of every jīva. Everything is there in the mantra, klīṁ
kṛṣṇāya govindāya gopījana-vallabhāya svāhā, but there
is one thing to consider. Ƙṛṣṇa is the Deity for one in
dāsya or sakhya-rasa. For that devotee, the name
Gopījanavallabha is the adjective describing Ƙṛṣṇa’s
qualities; it qualifies the first name.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: What about Ƙṛṣṇāya?



Śrīla Gurudeva: Ƙṛṣṇāya. Who is Ƙṛṣṇa?   A devotee in
dāsya- rasa considers, “He is my master and I am His
servant.” Such a devotee thinks that Ƙṛṣṇa is
Gopījanavallabha only in a general way.

Ƙṛṣṇa is the prominent name for those in sakhya-rasa as
well. In this mantra, such devotees stress on the names
Ƙṛṣṇa and Govinda. However, those who have mañjarī-bhāva
focus on Gopījanavallabha, which makes the other two
words, kṛṣṇāya and govindāya, adjectives for gopījana-
vallabhāya.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: What about those in vātsalya-
rasa?



Śrīla Gurudeva: Those in vātsalya-rasa follow the same
principle.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: They focus on Ƙṛṣṇa?



Śrīla Gurudeva: They focus on Ƙṛṣṇa as the Deity with
whom they are related. Everyone with vātsalya-bhāva
knows in an ordinary way that the gopīs love Ƙṛṣṇa, but
they have no…



Śrīpād Mādhava Mahārāja: No idea?



Śrīla Gurudeva: They have an idea of that love, but no
experience. Idea and experience are not the same.
Devotees with vātsalya-bhāva do not know that all the
young gopīs engage in intimate loving affairs with
Ƙṛṣṇa, and the sakhās also do not know the nature of
those exchanges.

For a person with greed to become a mañjarī, go in this
mantra refers to the gopīs. His meditation is “Govinda
gives great pleasure to the gopīs.” Such a devotee does
not contem plate other meanings. Rather, he thinks, “Śrī
Ƙṛṣṇa’s appearance with five flower arrows (His smiling,

                              41
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

His fluteplaying, His beautiful cheeks, His eyebrows,
and His sidelong glances) is immensely attractive.” In
this way, the two other names will support the name
Gopījanavallabha. Thus, the devotee with mādhurya-bhāva
will see the other names as adjectives of the names with
whom he is related.

Practically everyone in Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s sampradāya
emphasizes the name Gopījanavallabha. Those who come to
this sampradāya are mainly of gopī-bhāva; and some, like
Śrīvasa

Ṭhāƙura, Murāri Gupta,   Anupama, and others like them
are of other rasas. Thus, Vrajanātha and Vijayakumāra
received the same mantra although their spiritual forms
were in separate rasas. Vijayakumāra saw his Gurudeva as
a manifestation of Lalitā, and Vrajanātha saw him as a
manifestation of Baladeva Prabhu or Subala. It can
happen like this.

Śrī guru gives training for serving under the guidance
of Lalitā and Viśākhā in mādhurya-rasa. Rūpa Mañjarī,
the leader of Rādhikā’s prāṇa-sakhīs (Her most intimate
maidservants), also gives training in all the services
of Rādhikā’s maidservants. She does so not as a guru,
but as a very intimate bosom friend. In order to serve
as a mañjarī, everyone goes to Rūpa Mañjarī for
training. Therefore, we can see our guru as a
manifestation of Rūpa Mañjarī, but not as Rūpa Mañjarī
herself. Our vision of guru must not be Māyāvāda. Do you
understand?



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Can you please explain that
point?



Śrīla Gurudeva: We should see our Gurudeva as a
manifestation of Rūpa Mañjarī; that is quite proper.
This is what is meant by saying that Gopālaguru Gosvāmī
was seen as Lalitā and also as Subala. It means that he
was seen as their manifestation, just as one can see
Nārāyaṇa, Vāmana, and all other incarnations in

Ƙṛṣṇa. Anyone can see his guru in this way, as a
manifestation. Otherwise, seeing him directly as Rūpa
Mañjarī is Māyāvāda, and it is essential to always keep
Māyāvāda very far away.

Here in this verse, sevā sādhaka-rūpeṇa means that one
externally performs services as Rūpa Gosvāmī did. What
services did he perform?



saṅkhyā-pūrvaka-nāma-gāna-natibhiḥ kālāvasānī-kṛtau
nidrāhāra-vihārakādi-vijitau cātyanta-dīnau ca yau

rādhā-kṛṣṇa-guṇa-smṛter madhurimānandena sammohitau
vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau

Ṣaḍ-Gosvāmyaṣṭaka (6)

                              42
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017




I worship the Six Gosvāmīs, who passed all their time in
chanting the holy names, singing bhajanas, and also
offering daṇḍavat-prāṇama; humbly fulfilling their vow
to complete a fixed number of rounds daily. In this way
they utilized their valuable lives and conquered over
eating and sleeping.    Always very meek and humble,
they became enchanted in divine rapture by remembering



Śrī RādhāƘṛṣṇa’s sweet qualities.



Sometimes Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī would go to Rādhākuṇḍa,
sometimes to Govardhana, and sometimes to Nandagaon.
There in Nandagaon he would go to Ter Ƙadamba, or he
would spend one day at Uddhavakyārī, Nandabaiṭhaka,
Ƙokilāvana, or Jāvaṭa. He visited all these dearmost
places.

He liked to be in Yāvaṭa, because Śrīmatī Rādhikā, Rūpa
Mañjarī, and all Rādhikā’s friends used to live there.
At night, Rādhikā and Her friends would go from there to
meet with Ƙṛṣṇa in Saṅket, Sevākuñja, and many other
places, and at midday they would meet at Rādhākuṇḍa.
Rādhākuṇḍa holds some greater importance than all other
places, because the pastimes there take place in the
daytime, with only Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s gaṇa (group).



Śrīpād Mādhava Mahārāja: Her ‘gaṇa’ refers to Her
svapakṣa sakhīs (the gopīs of Her own party).



Śrīla Gurudeva: Only the svapakṣa gopīs can go there.
The vipakṣa gopīs (those in the rival party) and
taṭastha gopīs (those in the neutral party, who are
friendly toward the rival party) are not allowed at
Rādhākuṇḍa.




Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: What about Nanda and Yaśodā?



Śrīla Gurudeva: They never come there. In this way,
sādhaka-rūpeṇa refers to following the Six Gosvāmīs,
especially Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, and siddha-rūpeṇa refers
to following Rūpa Gosvāmī in his form as Śrī Rūpa
Mañjarī.   As a sādhaka, Rūpa Gosvāmī has a male form;
and internally, in his siddha-svarūpa, or spiritual form
as a gopī, he is Rūpa Mañjarī.




                              43
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

What services does Rūpa Mañjarī perform?



tāmbūlārpaṇa-pāda-mardana-payodānābhisārādibhir

vṛndāraṇya-maheśvarīṁ priyatayā yās toṣayanti priyāḥ

prāṇa-preṣṭha-sakhī-kulād api kilā saṅkocitā bhūmikāḥ

kelī-bhūmiṣu rūpa mañjarī-mukhās tā dāsikāh saṁśraye

Vraja-vilāsa-stava (38)



I take shelter of Rūpa Mañjarī and the other dear
maidservants of the great queen of Vṛndāvana, Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, who please Her by offering Her betel nut,
massaging Her lotus feet, offering Her water, and
arranging Her rendezvous with Ƙṛṣṇa. Because these
maidservants, without feeling shy, can enter the area
where the Divine Couple enjoy Their most confidential
pastimes, they are even more dear to Rādhikā than sakhīs
like Lalitā, who are themselves more dear to Her than
life itself.



Rūpa Mañjarī brings Rādhā and Ƙṛṣṇa tāmbūla (a betel nut
preparation) and water that has been very sweetly
flavored with milk and herbs (payo-dāna). She also
brings a beautiful golden pot when Rādhikā and Ƙṛṣṇa
want to spit the betel after chewing it.

She also serves Rādhikā at the time of Her abhisāra (the
amorous tryst, or lovers’ rendezvous). Do you understand
the meaning of abhisāra? This is when Śrīmatī Rādhikā
goes to meet Ƙṛṣṇa in Saṅketsthalī (a place of meeting).
When She goes to meet with Him on Pūrṇimā, the fullmoon
night, She dresses completely in white, and when She
goes to meet Him during śukla-paksa, the fifteen days of
the waxing moon, She dresses in whitish colors in
accordance with the gradual increase of the moon. Even
though Her complexion is fair and very golden, at that
time She has Her mañjarīs rub camphor mixed with many
other ingredients on Her body.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Why?



Śrīla Gurudeva: In order to make Her appear white.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Why?



Śrīla Gurudeva: In that way, if anyone looks in Her
direction they would think they are seeing only

                              44
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

moonrays.



Dhanurdhara Mahārāja: This is Her disguise?



Śrīla Gurudeva: This is Her disguise. Also, at that time
the mañjarīs bind Her ankle bells so that they will not
make any tinkling sound. No noise should be heard; and
because She must not be seen, Her sārī and veil should
both be white. Conversely, on the darkmoon night
(amāvasyā) a sakhī tells Her, “The night is dark, so You
must train how to go there.” Śrīmatī Rādhikā then
practices, at midnight. At that time She has Her sakhīs
take pots full of water and pour them in Her courtyard
in order to make it muddy and very slippery. Then, they
place thorns here and there on the muddy ground. They
create a setting as if Rādhikā is walking in a forest on
a stormy night; with rain falling very heavily, making
the earth extremely slippery, with many serpents and
thorns as well.

In this situation, on such a night, how can She go to
Ƙṛṣṇa? She practices during the night, by moving very
quietly and cautiously; like this [demonstrating someone
walking on tip toe]. Do you know the word for this type
of walking?




Dhanurdhara Mahārāja: Tiptoe. Very quietly. It is called
tiptoe.



Śrīla Gurudeva:   As Lalitādevī trains Śrīmatī Rādhikā
in this way, Rūpa Mañjarī watches, and our guru in this
world, as sakhī-mañjarī in that world, also watches.;
The mañjarīs know everything regarding the appropriate
times to go and the way in which to go, and they very
cleverly make all arrangements. This is abhisāra. The
night is dark, and it is raining. Śrī Ƙṛṣṇa is waiting
at Saṅketa. The mañjarīs go there first in order to find
Ƙṛṣṇa and tell Him that Śrīmatī Rādhikā will not come to
see Him that night. Actually, Rādhikā has already come
and is hiding, watching to see Ƙṛṣṇa’s reaction. In
order to further increase

Ƙṛṣṇa’s desire for Rādhikā’s association, the mañjarīs
lie to Him, saying, “She will not come tonight.” Ƙṛṣṇa
practically faints at this time, and anxiously suggests
a way for Rādhikā to meet with Him. If the mañjarīs see
that Ƙṛṣṇa is sincerely hankering to meet with Rādhikā,
they at once go and tell Her, and She then comes to Him.
Until then, She will not come.

Sometimes, when it is time for abhisāra, the mañjarīs’
fathersinlaw or mothersinlaw, or all of their
sistersinlaw, are present in their homes.   At that time
they must be so clever that they can find a way to cheat

                              45
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

their inlaws, telling them lies so that they can
cleverly go and devise a way for Rādhā and Ƙṛṣṇa to
meet. This is called abhisāra.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: What is the exact meaning of the
word abhisāra?



Śrīla Gurudeva: You should know the meaning of
abhisārikā. It is a Sanskrit word referring to the
heroine who leaves her home and travels to meet her
lover at the assigned rendezvous bower. There are eight
kinds of gopīs [This refers to the same gopī, such as
Rādhikā, at different times of the day or night]:

(1) Abhisārikā refers to the gopī who goes to the
meeting.

(2) Vāsaka-sajjā refers to the beloved gopī who
beautifies the bower with various types of decorations
with a mood of preparing the bedchamber for Her dearmost
lover. She is thinking, “Ƙṛṣṇa is coming just now, just
now, just now.”   As She makes the bed, She continually
listens for any noise. If She hears a rustling of
leaves, She again thinks, “Ƙṛṣṇa is coming.”

(3) Utkaṇṭhitā refers to that gopī who repeatedly
glances down the path in great eagerness, anxiously
anticipating the arrival of Her beloved Śrī Ƙṛṣṇa. She
is so eager for Ƙṛṣṇa to come, thinking, “Ƙṛṣṇa is just
now coming. When will He come? When will He come?” Then,
if He is late, She is called khaṇḍitā.

(4) Ƙhaṇḍitā: When Ƙṛṣṇa arrives late and His body
bears signs of having been with another lover, the
heroine becomes extremely jealous, either chastising Him
or pouting. On the occasion that the time for meeting
Ƙṛṣṇa is over and He has not yet come, She wonders, “Why
has He not come? There must be some reason. Perhaps He
has gone to another gopī, or He may have fallen into
danger. There are so many demons in Vṛndāvana. Perhaps
He had to fight with some demons, or something else may
have happened.”

Ƙṛṣṇa finally comes, well after the appointed time, when
it is almost morning. Seeing some signs on Ƙṛṣṇa’s body
indicating that He has just come from another beloved,
the heroine becomes furious. She then has a lovers’
quarrel with Him, and after that does not speak to Him.

(5) Ƙalahāntaritā: When, due to some quarrel with Ƙṛṣṇa
the heroine sends Him away, in Her anguish She becomes
even more bereaved due to dismissing Him.

(6) Svādhīna-bhartṛkā: On the occasion that Ƙṛṣṇa
apologizes, falls at the feet of Rādhikā, and finally
convinces Her to give up Her anger, She commands Him,
“Put on My anklebells. Braid My hair and decorate it,”
and Ƙṛṣṇa follows Her order. There is no English
equivalent for svādhīna-bhartṛkā, but the meaning is
that the lover is under Her control.

                              46
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017


(7) Vipralabdhā: The heroine who feels greatly
disappointed due to Her lover not showing up at all.

(8) Proṣita-bhartṛkā: A heroine whose lover is far away,
in a distant place.



In each situation the mañjarīs have some duty – to
rebuke Ƙṛṣṇa, to make Him understand, or to give
consolation to Rādhikā.   All the qualities required for
service at these times reside in the mañjarīs. They
prepare, give sympathy, decorate, and make innumerable
arrangements. As stated in Verse 6 of Śrī Gurvaṣṭakam:



nikuñja-yūno rati-keli-siddhyai yā yālibhir yuktir
apekṣaṇīyā



tatrāti-dākṣyād ati-vallabhasya vande guroḥ śrī-
caraṇāravindam




Śrī Gurudeva is always present with the sakhīs, planning
the arrangements for the perfection of the amorous
pastimes of the Divine Couple within the kuñjas of
Vṛndāvana. Because he is expert in making these tasteful
arrangements for Their pleasure, he is very dear to Śrī
Rādhā and Ƙṛṣṇa. I offer prayers unto the lotus feet of
Śrī Gurudeva.



Numerous arrangements are required to serve Rādhā and
Ƙṛṣṇa when They meet in the kuñja and engage in Their
pleasurable amorous pastimes (vilāsa). The sakhīs and
mañjarīs must cheat others, meet with Ƙṛṣṇa, rebuke Him,
and so on.

Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī is highly experienced and quite fit to
do all these services. We should always remember what
she does, and we should adopt her mood. However, until
we receive our sthāyi-bhāva (our constitutional mood),
which manifests after being empowered by hlādinī-śakti,
we can only pray for these services, as Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī prays in Vilāpa-kusumāñjali.

We cannot perform these services in our present stage,
and the guru warns his neophyte disciples not to try. We
can only pray, “When will my good fortune come so that I
will actually be able to render service like Rūpa
Mañjarī, Anaṅga Mañjarī, and our gurus in the
paramparā?”

The words tad-bhāva-lipsunā kāryā [in the verse on page
30] indicate that in his sādhaka-rūpa, the devotee with
genuine greed to obtain mañjarī-bhāva follows the mood

                              47
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

and activities of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrīla Raghunātha
dāsa Gosvāmī, and his own Gurudeva. And, in his siddha-
rūpa, he follows Rūpa Mañjarī, Rati Mañjarī, and Lavaṅgā
Mañjarī in their service to Śrī Śrī RādhāƘṛṣṇa.

Finally, vraja-lokānusārataḥ means ‘following in the
foot steps of a particular servant of Ƙṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana
(Vraja loka).’ Those who have genuine greed do just as
the Vrajavāsīs have done. Here, the word Vrajavāsīs
refers to Rūpa Mañjarī and other mañjarīs.

Ƙṛṣṇa performs two kinds of pastimes, namely aiśvarya-
līlā (pastimes of opulence) and mādhurya-līlā (pastimes
of sweetness). What is aiśvarya-līlā? Ƙṛṣṇa is always
full with six opulences, namely all beauty, strength,
wealth, fame, knowledge, and renunciation. He always
exhibits these, whether He is in His form as Nārāyaṇa or
in His original form as Ƙṛṣṇa.

We see that Ƙṛṣṇa is full with these six virtues even in
Vṛndāvana; He is never without them. When He killed
Pūtanā, He was a baby of only a few days. Pūtanā tried
to fly away when He took her breast in His mouth, but He
would not let her go. He told her in silence, “I will
take your milk, and your life. I will keep you with Me
always. I will never leave you.”

Pūtanā had the power of ten thousand elephants, yet she
could not break away from Ƙṛṣṇa. Baby Ƙṛṣṇa was doing
nothing, only gripping her breast in His mouth, yet He
took her life. This is truly aiśvarya-līlā, but Ƙṛṣṇa
did not change His form. He remained as a baby and
simply kept hold of Pūtanā’s breast.

All the residents of Vṛndāvana engage with Ƙṛṣṇa in
nara- līlā, His sweet humanlike pastimes. This pastime
of killing Pūtanā is in the category of nara-līlā, even
though Pūtanā was killed by Ƙṛṣṇa’s aiśvarya. There is
also aiśvarya in Vraja, but it is side by side with
mādhurya. Moreover, the gopīs and other Vrajavāsīs see
only mādhurya, not aiśvarya. Aiśvarya is present, but
it is covered by mādhurya.

It is not that in Vṛndāvana there is no aiśvarya-līlā.
In fact, the aiśvarya of Vraja is greater than that of
Dvārakā or even Vaikuṇṭha, but it is always covered by
mādhurya. Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has
written that if there was only nara-līlā and no aiśvarya
in Ƙṛṣṇa, He would simply be an ordinary human child
performing human activities. Without the quality of
aiśvarya He cannot be God, and He would not be worshiped
as the worshipful Deity of the various rasas. He would
not be the gopīs’ object of worship.

There is an interesting point to note here. We see that
Nanda Bābā, Yaśodā, and all the gopas and gopīs accept
Ƙṛṣṇa as Nanda Bābā's and Yaśodā’s son, or as their own
friend, and they behave accordingly. When everyone saw
sevenyearold Ƙṛṣṇa lifting Govardhana Hill upon His left
pinky finger, the cowherd men told Nanda Bābā, “This
child is not an ordinary boy. He is just like Nārāyaṇa,
and perhaps He is even Nārāyaṇa Himself.” Not believing
this, Nanda Bābā replied, “ At the time of Ƙṛṣṇa’s
namegiving ceremony, I heard this from Garga Ṛṣi. But

                              48
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                      5/5/2017

even if He is Nārāyaṇa, He is still my son.”

Garga Ṛṣi had told Nanda Bābā and the other Vrajavāsīs
that Ƙṛṣṇa is not less than Nārāyaṇa, and that He was
previously the son of Vasudeva. This is why all the
cowherd men were now saying, “Don’t treat Him as your
son, and don’t rebuke Him or tie Him up. Don’t abuse
Him. Don’t call Him ‘little thief’ or ‘cheater,’ or
‘rascal’ ” [See Endnote 1].



Nanda Bābā at once laughed, and said, “You are saying
that He is God and that He held up Govardhana upon His
finger. I see that you are over sixty. Your minds are
not working correctly. Ƙṛṣṇa comes and begs from His
mother, ‘Give me bread and butter.’ And He always
weeps. If He doesn’t get what He wants when He wants it,
He becomes furious with anger. And sometimes He steals.
These are not the symptoms of God. So, whether or not He
held up Govardhana, He is my son.

“Moreover, in my opinion He did not lift the hill; it
was actually lifted by Nārāyaṇa, the Deity of our home.
We prayed to Nārāyaṇa, and He answered our prayers. It
only appeared that Ƙṛṣṇa did it.

“Ƙṛṣṇa is my son. If for argument’s sake we say that He
is God, still He is my son. I will rebuke Him, I will
discipline Him, and I will do whatever else is needed to
make Him behave properly. I will keep Him by my side.”

Here, Nanda Mahārāja admits that Ƙṛṣṇa’s virtues make
Him appear like God. Still, although Ƙṛṣṇa had performed
an act of God, Nanda Mahārāja cannot give up his belief
that Ƙṛṣṇa is only his son.

Vasudeva and Devakī have a different conception,
however. After Ƙṛṣṇa and Balarāma killed Ƙaṁsa, They
came to them and untied their shackles and handcuffs.
The two boys wanted to offer obeisances to Vasudeva and
Devakī, Their mother and father, who were standing with
folded palms and praying, “Oh, You are God. We saw You…”



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: In the wrestling arena?



Śrīla Gurudeva: “We saw You when You originally appeared
to us in a fourhanded form, and now You have again come
before us.”

At that time Ƙṛṣṇa considered, “My pastimes will be
spoiled by their mood of aiśvarya.” He therefore called
for Yogamāyā to come. Yogamāyā came, and at the same
time Ƙṛṣṇa climbed onto Devakī’s lap and began to weep.
Then, by the effect of Yogamāyā, Devakī also began to
weep, and Baladeva fell at the feet of Vasudeva who
began to weep as well. But despite this, Vasudeva and
Devakī never saw Ƙṛṣṇa as their son; they considered Him
to be God.


                              49
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

Here we see the aiśvarya mood of Vasudeva and Devakī.
Their mood is accompanied by some mādhurya, but so
little that the mādhurya cannot cover the aiśvarya. In
Vraja, on the other hand, even if there is an abundance
of aiśvarya, Yaśodā and Nanda never forget that Ƙṛṣṇa is
only their son. For example, their breasts swell with
pride as they observe, “Oh,

Ƙṛṣṇa has lifted Govardhana Hill? My son has done this?
Oh, now all of Vraja can see how strong and powerful my
son is” [See Endnote 2].

Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura has given these good
examples, as he has also given examples for those in
mādhurya- rasa. Regarding the gopīs, he gives the
example of the occasion when Uddhava went to Vraja to
give them consolation. At that time Uddhava heard
Rādhikā telling the bumblebee, “O bee, go at once! Get
out of here. We will have no sandhi with Ƙṛṣṇa.” What is
the meaning of the word sandhi?



Bhurijana dāsa: Connection.



Śrīla Gurudeva: When two parties come to some agreement
in court, what is that called?



Dhanurdhara Mahārāja: Settlement.



Śrīla Gurudeva: Mutual settlement.



Girirāja Mahārāja: I looked it up in the Bhramara-gīta,
and it means ‘reconciliation.’



Śrīla Gurudeva: Yes. “We cannot make any reconciliation
with Him. We know who He is. We know who this person is
from His many previous births – not just from this
birth.”

This is the socalled aiśvarya mood of Rādhikā and the
gopīs. This is how they ‘realize’ Ƙṛṣṇa’s Godhood. They
say, “Paurṇamāsī told us about Ƙṛṣṇa, and we have faith
in her words. She told us that in His previous birth He
was Rāma, and He had the same blackish color as Ƙṛṣṇa
[deep green is also called śyāma]. He loved Sītā so much
that He became Her servant; when He went to the forest
He took Her with Him and acted as Her ordersupplier. He
could not live alone, just as Ƙṛṣṇa cannot live alone.
Ƙṛṣṇa always has to keep some lady with Him.

“Sītā once told Rāma, ‘Oh, look at that golden deer!
Please go and bring it to me, either dead or alive. If
You bring it alive, I will take it to Ayodhyā when our

                              50
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

time of exile is finished, and I will give it to Ƙaikeyī
Ma or Bharata. And, if You bring it dead, I will make a
very soft deerskin āsana. In either case, I want it.’

“Lakṣmaṇa warned Rāma, ‘I think this is the illusory
crea

tion of demons. You must not go.’

“But we know that even Lord Brahmā cannot change the
mind of a lady once she has determined something, so
what to speak of Rāma, who was a servant of that lady.
Therefore, despite Lakṣmaṇa’s warning, Rāma went to
capture the deer.

“At another time Śūrpaṇakhā (a maneating demoness) came
disguised to Rāma, saying, ‘I am so beautiful and You
are so handsome. I want to marry You. Your wife is not
as beautiful as I. I am available for You.’ Rāma
replied, ‘Better to go to Lakṣmaṇa. He is unmarried. My
wife is here, so I cannot accept you; but He is single.’
Śūrpaṇakhā then approached and told this to Lakṣmaṇa,
who asked her, ‘Do you want to be a maidservant or do
you want to be the queen?’ She answered,

‘I want to be the queen.’ Lakṣmaṇa replied, ‘I am the
servant of Rāma. If you wed Me, you will be a
maidservant. Rāma can have many marriages, and every
wife will be a queen; so return to Rāma.’ Again
Śūrpaṇakhā went to Rāmacandra, who directed her back to
Lakṣmaṇa. Finally she became furious and was ready to
eat Sītā.   At that time Rāma told Lakṣmaṇa, ‘Don’t joke
with her. Great harm will come of this.’ ”

Don’t ever joke with ladies. Don’t laugh with them or
make them laugh.

The gopīs continued, “Rāma was so cruel and lusty. Why
did He cut off Śūrpaṇakhā’s nose and ears? He purposely
marred her, just to make her so ugly that no one would
ever marry her and even her husband would not keep her.
In her next birth Śūrpaṇakhā came as Ƙubjā, who was
again so ugly that no one would marry her. So, see what
kind of person He is. See how cruel He is.

“Then, in Satyayuga, Ƙṛṣṇa came as Vāmana, and for no
good reason He cheated Bali Mahārāja by telling him, ‘I
will take only three steps of land.’ Bali Mahārāja
agreed, ‘Yes, I will give you this.’ But then,   when
Vāmana began to take His steps, He became so tall that
with two steps He covered all three planetary systems
and pierced the covering of the universe with the toes
of His left foot. He then needed somewhere to place His
foot for His third step, and Bali Mahārāja offered his
head, but still He was not satisfied. He tied Bali with
ropes and threw him down into hell.

“This is what we know about that person, so we will not
make any reconciliation with Him. Go away from here at
once.” This is what Śrīmatī Rādhikā was saying to the
bumblebee.

Here, Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī states that the gopīs
had heard from Paurṇamāsī that Ƙṛṣṇa is God, that He

                              51
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                      5/5/2017

came as Rāma, Vāmana, and all other incarnations, but
nonetheless they personally recognized Him only as their
lover.

In this way aiśvarya is present in Vraja, but it is
always covered with mādhurya. Moreover, this aiśvarya
mood comes only at the time of separation, not in
meeting. The Vrajavāsis’ aiśvarya mood is like a piece
of grass in three or four manas [1 mana = 40 kilograms]
of milk as the milk is being boiled over a very big
fire. When that milk gradually becomes so hot that it
begins to boil, the piece of grass comes up, but then at
once sinks down again.

So, only in the heat of separation is that grass of an
apparent aiśvarya mood seen in the gopīs. It is not
visible all the time. Moreover, even when a sense of
aiśvarya comes to their attention, the gopīs love Ƙṛṣṇa
only as their lover. They never personally think of Him
as God.

When aiśvarya nurtures nara-līlā, or in other words,
when Śrī Ƙṛṣṇa continues to act like an ordinary human
despite a display of opulence, then it is mādhurya.

Here is an example of the mādhurya-bhāva that is some
times present in the hearts of Devakī and Arjuna: When
Ƙṛṣṇa was sitting upon the chariot on the battlefield of
Ƙurukṣetra, Arjuna told Him, “O Ƙṛṣṇa, take my chariot
to the middle of the battlefield.” And Ƙṛṣṇa did that.
But then, when   Arjuna saw

Ƙṛṣṇa’s viśvarūpa, or universal form, he became very
nervous and said, “I will no longer address You as
Friend. You are God Himself.”



Bhurijana dāsa: Aiśvarya covered him.



Śrīla Gurudeva: Aiśvarya was more powerful. Arjuna was
over powered by aiśvarya and forgot that Ƙṛṣṇa was his
friend. Arjuna’s mood, as well as the mood of all
Ƙṛṣṇa’s other asso ciates in dvārakā-līlā, is full of
aiśvarya. Sometimes there is mādhurya, but it is always
defeated by aiśvarya.

The rāgānuga devotee considers Ƙṛṣṇa to be the lover of
the gopīs, and that He is especially Rādhākānta, the
lover of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. So, just as the gopīs serve
Rādhā and Ƙṛṣṇa in nara-līlā, we should also become
qualified to serve Them, as mañjarīs. This is the
meaning of vraja-lokānusārataḥ, or follow ing in the
footsteps of a particular associate of Ƙṛṣṇa.

Nanda Bābā, Yaśodā,   and the gopīs have relationships
with Ƙṛṣṇa as human   beings relate to each other, even
though they are not   humans. This is nara-līlā. (To
Bhurijana dāsa) You   can see the meaning in Śrī Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu.



                              52
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017


Bhurijana dāsa: Here is the whole verse (Bhakti-
rasāmṛta- sindhu 1.2.296):



sevā sādhaka-rūpeṇa siddha-rūpeṇa cātra hi tad-bhāva-
lipsunā kāryā vraja-lokānusārataḥ



In the transcendental realm of Vraja [Śrī Vrajadhāma]
one should serve the Supreme Lord, Śrī Ƙṛṣṇa, with a
feeling similar to that of His associates, and one
should place himself under the direct guidance of a
particular associate of Ƙṛṣṇa and should follow in his
footsteps. This method is applicable both in the stage
of sādhana (spiritual practices executed while still in
the stage of bondage), and in the stage of sādhya (God
realization), when one is a siddha-puraṣa, or a
spiritually perfect soul [See Endnote 3].




Śrīla Gurudeva: That was the second śloka quoted by
Śrīla

Viśvanātha Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura, and here is the third:



śravaṇotkīrtanādīni vaidha-bhakty-uditāni tu yāny aṅgāni
ca tānyatra vijñeyāni manīṣibhiḥ

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.296)




In vaidhī-bhakti one should practice the limbs of bhakti
such as śravaṇa, kīrtana, and so on according to one’s
qualification. Similarly, it has been advised by
scholars who are well versed in the principles of bhakti
to follow the same practices on the path of rāgānuga-
bhakti.



Śravaṇotkīrtanādīni: This refers to all the nine limbs
of bhakti, and especially the five main limbs, namely
sādhu-saṅga (association of pure devotees); nāma-kīrtana
(chanting the Lord’s holy names); bhāgavata-śravaṇa
(hearing narrations of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam from pure
devotees); mathurā-vāsa (living in the holy dhama, such
as Vraja, Navadvīpa, and Purī); and śrī-mūrtira
śraddhāya sevana (serving the Deity with faith).
Whatever limbs of bhakti are executed in vaidhī-bhakti
are adopted in rāgānuga-bhakti as well. Only the mood is
changed.

I will tell something more on another day.

                              53
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017




Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: When we are chanting our japa, we
are remembering the services described by Raghunātha
dāsa Gosvāmī in his Vilāpa-kusumāñjali – how he is
preparing the cottagehouse near Rādhākuṇḍa where Rādhā
and Ƙṛṣṇa will meet, how Rūpa Mañjarī is massaging
Ƙṛṣṇa’s feet and Rati Mañjarī is massaging Śrīmatī
Rādhikā’s feet [This conception is actually contrary to
the conclusions of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas – See Endnote
4].

If we remember this kind of activities while we chant,
is that alright? We are not thinking that we are doing
it; we are remem bering that they are doing it.



Śrīla Gurudeva: Yes. Remembering, and having some greed
to serve in that way. Moreover if you hear the very deep
meanings behind the pastimes, you will feel more joy and
you will be able to remember with more greed. For now do
as you are doing, and later, when Ƙṛṣṇa and your
Gurudeva reveal what they want you to do, then do that.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Can I ask some questions? When we
are meditating on the activities of Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī and
Śrī Rati Mañjarī, we know that our Gurudeva is also
assisting them. So I want to know: when you are
meditating on your Gurudeva, do you also meditate on
assisting him in his service to Rūpa Mañjarī?



Śrīla Gurudeva: We do so as assistants of Vinoda
Mañjarī.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: How does a disciple – just as you
are his disciple – how do you meditate on assisting
Vinoda Mañjarī?

Śrīla Gurudeva: I will tell you afterwards. You will
also know your Gurudeva by his grace, and you will
meditate accordingly.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: I am asking this because you say
that we should meditate on Rūpa Mañjarī or Rati Mañjarī.
So I am merely asking if we should meditate on our
Gurudeva as you meditate on serving Vinoda Mañjarī.



Śrīla Gurudeva:   As our ācāryas have done, we meditate
on our Gurudeva as a very near and dear sakhī of Rūpa
Mañjarī, who has qualities like those of Rūpa Mañjarī
but not exactly the same.


                              54
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                     5/5/2017



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja:   As we are assisting our
Gurudeva in our sādhaka form here, will we also be
assisting him there?



Śrīla Gurudeva: The form of your Gurudeva which you have
seen and served will surely come to you, so you can pray
to him that his form as a sakhī will manifest in your
heart. Then, when he gives you his darśana, meditation
will be very easy for you. It is certain that he will
somehow give an idea of his form, and after that you
will be able to realize and serve him there. For now you
can simply pray to him, “Please manifest yourself as you
serve in kṛṣṇa-līlā.”



Bhurijana dāsa: Tan no guruḥ pracodayāt.



Śrīla Gurudeva: Yes, that is the guru-mantra. We should
know that our guru is certainly a sakhī of Rūpa Mañjarī,
performing all varieties of services to Śrīmatī Rādhikā
under Rūpa Mañjarī’s guidance.

For now, you can realize what you have seen and whom you
served as you watched him engage in sādhana-bhajana.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: I can hold these questions until
next time, if you want, but I have a question to ask you
about caitanya- līlā.   Actually, I have a number of
questions on this subject. For example, what form does
our Gurudeva have in caitanya-līlā?

Śrīla Gurudeva:   As he is – as he is now.   You have
seen him.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: But we may have seen him over a
period of so many years. We see that his form has
somewhat changed.



Śrīla Gurudeva: You can remember whatever you have seen.

Śrī Advaita Ācārya was old, and Śrīnivāsa     Ācārya was
mature, as were so many others.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: I have some doubt on this point.
We understand that the siddha-deha, the spiritual body,
is eternally youthful, just as Ƙṛṣṇa is always very
youthful (nava-yauvana). But our Gurudeva’s body was
elderly. So do you mean to say that in Śvetadvīpa of
Golokadhāma he will have an elderly body?

                              55
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017




Śrīla Gurudeva: You will realize that form by his grace.
As far as his sādhaka form is concerned, you should only
remember what you have seen.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Does one also get a different
body in caitanya-līlā?



Śrīla Gurudeva: It is essential for you to know that
neither your Gurudeva nor our Gurudeva has a material
physical body. Their bodies are spiritual. Their bodies
are not at all like the body of a conditioned soul.
Their body, mind, and soul are sat-cit-ānanda.

We see his spiritual body as created by the illusory
māyā because we are under the illusory māyā. It may be
that we cannot see his form as it is actually, but we
will remember what we have seen as his sādhaka form. We
can remember this form; no kalpanā (imagination) is
needed. Then, after some time, your Gurudeva will see
the necessity to show you the form in which he serves
Caitanya Mahāprabhu there. He may reveal that form.




Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Just as your Gurudeva has shown
you his eternal identity as Vinoda Mañjarī, he may have
an eternal identity in caitanya-līlā.



Śrīla Gurudeva: I do not do any kalpanā…



Bhurijana dāsa: Imagination.



Śrīla Gurudeva: Imagination. I witnessed our Gurudeva
serving Caitanya Mahāprabhu in this body.    As I have
seen how he served, you have also seen your Gurudeva. We
should always remember him as we knew him. This is his
sādhaka form, and he has another, siddha-śarīra
(spiritual form as a gopī maidservant in Goloka
Vṛndāvana) to serve Rādhā and Ƙṛṣṇa.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: What about Caitanya Mahāprabhu? I
cannot grasp this point fully, because Rādhā and Ƙṛṣṇa
are in Goloka Vṛndāvana, and Vṛndāvana is manifest here.
So a certain portion of Goloka is Navadvīpa.




                              56
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

Śrīla Gurudeva: He can also go there in the form you
saw; I have belief in this.   And if anything is hidden,
he will reveal it when there is need. We have seen our
Gurudeva – always serving, always thinking of Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, and always preaching Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s
instructions and mission.

In gaura-līlā, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and Śrīla Sanātana
Gosvāmī served Him by rendering many services, among
which was writing literature; and your Gurudeva has also
done all these things. When he was in gaura-līlā at that
time, it is not sure that he would have performed that
same service. He has played this role now, but in
Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s pastimes he may not have done so.

He has preached throughout the entire world. Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī and Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī only served in
Navadvīpa, in Māyāpura, in Vṛndāvana, and in Purī; and
your Gurudeva served all over the world. We need not
imagine anything. We should understand that in the
sādhaka-śarīra that we have seen, he has served Caitanya
Mahāprabhu. Regarding his form as a parikara (associate)
at the time of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, he will reveal that
to you when he thinks it proper to do so.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: I have one last question,
regarding Śrīmatī Tulasīdevī. Is there a separate jīva
in each Tulasī plant?



Śrīla Gurudeva: Each plant is a manifestation of
Tulasīdevī. Tulasīdevī can manifest anywhere, just as
Ƙṛṣṇa and Rādhikā manifest everywhere. Śrī Ƙṛṣṇa and
Śrīmatī Rādhikā manifest in unlimited universes as well
as in mūrti forms. Similarly,

Śrīmatī Tulasīdevī manifests in unlimited universes, and
in unlimited places in the form of a plant.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: I mean to say that in a normal
tree there is a jīva soul. So, since there are so many
Tulasī plants, are there…



Śrīla Gurudeva: We can understand from the example of
the

śalagram-śila. There are so many śalagram-śilas, but
this does not mean that Nārāyaṇa is different in each
śila. He is not like the jīvas. In the same way, Tulasī
is one.    All the Tulasī plants are the same Tulasī;
they are not separate.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: They are not jīvas?



                              57
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017


Śrīla Gurudeva: No, certainly not.

There are so many pieces of Govardhana śilas – hundreds
of millions of śilas – and Govardhana is fully present
in each śila.   As the śilas are not different
Govardhanas, Tulasī is also one and the same.

In Śrī Ƙṛṣṇa’s Vṛndāvana pastimes we see that Vṛndādevī
is one personality and Tulasī Mañjarī is a another
personality. There is another Tulasī, who is a dūtī, or
messenger, of Vṛndā devī. Here in this world, Tulasī
(the plant) is a manifestation of Vṛndādevī.

Sometimes the name ‘Tulasī Mañjarī’ is used for ‘Rati
Mañjarī,’ that is, Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī in his
form as a mañjarī. Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī has two names
in his siddha form: Tulasī Mañjarī and Rati Mañjarī.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Is this the same person?



Śrīla Gurudeva: The same.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī is Tulasī
Mañjarī? She is under Vṛndādevī? She is a dūtī of Vrnda?



Śrīla Gurudeva: No, Tulasī is a separate personality.
Tulasī Mañjarī is one personality, and Tulasī is
another. Tulasī is a dūtī, not a mañjarī. Later on you
will know. By and by, you will learn everything.




[endnotes]




1 [An excerpt of a darśana with Śrīla Bhaƙtivedānta
Nārāyaṇa

Gosvāmī Mahārāja in Jagannātha Purī, on October 13,
2001:]



Śrīla Gurudeva: It is only in viraha (separation) that
the gopīs, and all the Vrajavāsīs, sometimes say, “He’s
God, the Supreme Lord.”    And in what context do they
say this? They say, “Garga

Ācārya has told us this,” or, “Paurṇamāsī has told us.”
Somehow they have heard this, but they themselves have

                              58
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

no realization that Ƙṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.



Prema-prayojana dāsa: Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī
Ṭhāƙura is always using the word jñāna. “They have the
jñāna that

Ƙṛṣṇa is Bhagavān; that He’s Parameśvara.”



Śrīla Gurudeva: They ‘knew;’ but ‘to know’ in this
connection means ‘knowing (hearing) from others.’ It
does not mean, “I know; I have realization.” It means
that they had merely heard that Ƙṛṣṇa is God.

2 [An excerpt of a darśana with Śrīla Bhaƙtivedānta
Nārāyaṇa

Gosvāmī Mahārāja in Holland, on June 28, 2002:]



Śyāmarāṇī dāsī: In the middle of your class you were
explain ing that none of the Vrajavāsīs know, or
believe, that Ƙṛṣṇa is the Supreme Lord.



Śrīla Gurudeva: Yes.



Śyāmarāṇī dāsī: Someone who doubted that principle once
asked you, “What about the pastime in which Ƙṛṣṇa became
Viṣṇu and Rādhikā became Lakṣmī?” You replied, “No.
There is a deep meaning there.”



Śrīla Gurudeva: This was Their play.



Śyāmarāṇī dāsī: Can you please explain further?



Śrīla Gurudeva: They were playing. No associates – not
even the grasses, creepers, parrots, or birds, what to
speak of any of the Vrajavāsīs like Nanda Bābā or Yaśodā
Mā – ever believe that Ƙṛṣṇa is the Supreme Lord. Ƙṛṣṇa
may be the Supreme Lord, the Lord of lords. He may be.
But to the Vrajavāsīs Ƙṛṣṇa is a friend, a son, or a
beloved; only this.



Śyāmarāṇī dāsī: So they were playing a game?




                              59
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

Śrīla Gurudeva: Yes, it was for the recreation and
entertain ment (mano-rañjana) of Rādhā and Ƙṛṣṇa and the
gopīs.   Actually the Vrajavāsīs do not know. They are
all greater than Brahmā,

Śaṅkara, and even Nārada. They can teach bhakti to
Nārada, but still they don’t know that Ƙṛṣṇa is the
Supreme Lord. If anyone would tell them that He is God,
the Vrajavāsīs would reply sarcastically, “Oh yes, you
are right. Be right. Very good. If He is the Supreme
Lord, then I want that everyone will attain bhakti to
His lotus feet.” Then, bas [a Hindi word meaning ‘that’s
the end of it’]; nothing is felt regarding Ƙṛṣṇa’s being
God, and nothing is said further.

3 [The translation of the verse found on page 50 of this
book is from Śrīla Prabhupāda Bhaktivedānta Svāmī
Mahārāja’s purport to Verse Eight of His Nectar of
Instruction. We substi tuted the translation read aloud
by Bhurijana dāsa with that one, because the available
English translation of Bhakti- rasāmṛta-sindhu from
which he was reading had many unclear IndianEnglish
phrases. We considered that the true meaning would have
been very difficult for the reader to comprehend in the
text of the book. For your reference, we have
transferred the reading of Bhurijana dāsa here:]



“In this Vraja, one engaged in spiritual practices
subser vient to the residents of Vraja with an eager
longing to follow in the mood of the bhāvas, feelings,
and senti ments of one’s desired dearest one of Śrī
Ƙṛṣṇa should serve them both, Śrī Ƙṛṣṇa and His dearest
Śrī Rādhā, or

Śrī NandaYaśodā as the case may be; both in the stage of
a sādhaka, in the stage of spiritual practices still in
bondage, and also in the stage of siddha, even when one
has attained the object of such spiritual practices.”



4 [An excerpt from Śrīla Bhaƙtivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja’s discussions on the subject of Vilāpa-
kusumāñjali, in Mathurā, India, in 1991:]



śrī rūpa-mañjarī-karārcita-pāda-padma goṣṭhendra-nandana
bhujārpita-mastakāyāḥ

Vilāpa-kusumāñjali (Verse 72)



There are two commentaries here. One is that Ƙṛṣṇa’s
feet are worshiped by Śrīmatī Rūpa Mañjarī, or in other
words, Rūpa Mañjarī is massaging Ƙṛṣṇa’s feet. Rādhā
and Ƙṛṣṇa are lying down on a bed, Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s
head is on the lap of Ƙṛṣṇa, and Ƙṛṣṇa is holding Her
head in His hand. Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī prays, “O
Svāminijī, O Śrīmatī Rādhikā, will You bless me that I
will serve Your feet at that time?”

                              60
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017


The commentary that is given by Rādhākuṇḍa bābājīs, is
not correct. We do not accept this; they do not consider
it a good thing. We follow ānugatya-dharma, the
principle of following in the footsteps of guru and
guru-paramparā. We follow under their guidance and take
their remnants. Bhakti is always rendered in ānugatya,
under superior guidance. If Ƙṛṣṇa’s feet are served by
Rūpa Mañjarī and Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s feet are served by
Rati Mañjarī, then Rati Mañjarī would not be in the
ānugatya of Rūpa Mañjarī.    A mañjarī wants to serve
Rādhikā more than Ƙṛṣṇa. So it is not possible that Rati
Mañjarī’s guru-sakhī, Rūpa Mañjarī, would be serving
Ƙṛṣṇa, and Rati Mañjarī, being subordinate, would take
the feet of Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

The idea of guru and Vaiṣṇavas is like this: Ƙṛṣṇa is
sitting. Śrīmatī Rādhikā is overjoyed and has become
svādhīna-bhartṛkā, meaning that Ƙṛṣṇa is subservient to
Her wishes. If She tells Him, “Stand up,” He will stand
up. Fully controlled by Her, He will reply, “Oh yes.” If
She tells Him, “Put on My earrings. Oh, comb and
decorate My hair,” Ƙṛṣṇa will do that.

Only Rūpa Mañjarī and Rati Mañjarī are present on this
occasion. Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s head is in the lap of Ƙṛṣṇa.
If both were lying down, as the bābājīs say, it would
not be possible for Her head to be on Ƙṛṣṇa’s lap.
Actually Ƙṛṣṇa is sitting, and Śrīmatī Rādhikā is lying
down with Her head on His lap. Ƙṛṣṇa has Her head in His
hand, and He is very softly caressing Her hair. If
anything is ‘wrong’ there, He is making it right and
smoothing it out, and Rādhikā is so pleased with this
service.

At that time Rūpa Mañjarī is serving Rādhikā’s feet and
Rati Mañjarī is praying to Rūpa Mañjarī, “I want to take
your prasādam remnants.” What is the meaning of
‘remnants’ in this connection? Rati Mañjarī prays, “You
are serving Rādhikā’s feet. Will you give me the order
that I also come and serve Her feet?” Rūpa Mañjarī then
places one of Rādhikā’s lotus feet on the lap of Rati
Mañjarī, and both massage Her feet. This is the mood of
ānugatya. This meaning is very pleasing and good, so we
accept this meaning and not the other one.

We shall always try to be in the ānugatya of our
gurudeva: gurudeva; parama-gurudeva, Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, who is Nayaṇa
Mañjarī; paratpara-gurudeva, ŚrīlaBhaktivinoda Ṭhākura,
who is Ƙamala Mañjarī; Narottama Ṭhākura, who is Vilāsa
Mañjarī; Rūpa Mañjarī, Anaṅga Mañjarī, Lavaṅga Mañjarī,
and so on. This is in the line of ānugatya- dharma,
which we never disobey.




chapter three


The Five Principles of Rāgānuga-bhaƙti


                              61
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017




Śrīla Gurudeva: We have completed in summary the
explanations of the first two ślokas that have been
quoted and discussed by Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī
Ṭhāƙura in his Rāga-vartma-candrikā.



The first śloka is this:



kṛṣṇaṁ smaran janaṁ cāsya preṣṭhaṁ nija-samīhitam

tat-tat-kathā-rataś cāsau kuryād vāsaṁ vraje sadā

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.294)



While remembering Śrī Ƙṛṣṇa and His beloved asso ciates
whom one desires to follow, being fully absorbed in
discussions of their pastimes, one should always reside
in Vraja. If this is not possible, then one should
reside there by mind.



We should remember Śrī Ƙṛṣṇa and those associates for
whose service mood we have greed. We should remember
them, hearing and repeating their pastimes with Śrī Śrī
Rādhā and Ƙṛṣṇa.    And we should live in Vṛndāvana, if
not by body then at least by mind.

The second śloka is:



sevā sādhaka-rūpeṇa siddha-rūpeṇa cātra hi tad-bhāva-
lipsunā kāryā vraja-lokānusārataḥ

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.295)



On the path of rāgānuga, one should follow Ƙṛṣṇa’s
intimate beloved associates and their followers, always
remaining absorbed in their service. This should be done
by thesādhaka-rūpa (the external material body of one’s
present condition) and also in siddha-rūpa (by the
internal perfected spiritual body, which is suitable for
rendering the type of service to Śrī Ƙṛṣṇa for which
one’s heart is eager). One should eagerly desire the
bhāva, that is the special loving mood of those
associates of Ƙṛṣṇa in Vraja whom one aspires to follow.



Sādhaka-rūpeṇa refers to Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and siddha-
rūpeṇa refers to Rūpa Mañjarī.


                              62
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                      5/5/2017

Vraja-lokānusārataḥ refers to Śrī Ƙṛṣṇa’s nara-līlā (His
humanlike pastimes) with Nanda Bābā, Yaśodā, and the
gopīs. They have humanlike relations with Ƙṛṣṇa, but
neither they nor Ƙṛṣṇa are humans.

And the third śloka is:



śravaṇotkīrtanādīni vaidha-bhakty-uditāni tu yāny aṅgāni
ca tānyatra vijñeyāni manīṣibhiḥ

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.296)



In vaidhī-bhakti one should practice the limbs of bhakti
like śravaṇa, kīrtana, and so on according to one’s
qualification. Similarly, for rāgānuga-bhakti also it
has been advised by scholars who are well versed in the
principles of bhakti to follow these practices.



If a person develops faith by reading or hearing the
order of śāstra and is consequently inspired to
cultivate bhakti, this is called vaidhī-bhakti. On the
other hand, if the devotee has genuine greed to attain
service like that of the gopīs, then even though he is
performing the limbs of vaidhī-bhakti, he has actually
developed mādhurya or rāgānuga-bhāva. The mood of his
vaidhī-bhakti performance will change; it will not be
the same as the mood of vaidhī-bhakti.     A rāgānuga-
bhakta may follow all sixtyfour limbs (aṅgas) of bhakti,
or nine, or five, or three (śravaṇa, kīrtana, and
smaraṇa), or only one (harināma- kīrtana) – but with the
mood of rāgānuga.

In his explanation of this śloka, Śrīla Viśvanātha
Caƙravartī

Ṭhāƙura says that a rāgānuga devotee need not follow
each and every one of the sixtyfour or nine limbs of
bhakti. He adopts only those practices which are
favorable for his development in rāgānuga-bhakti [See
Endnote 1]. He will not incur any offense if he neglects
any one of those limbs for his mūla, or root, bhāva
(constitutional mood). This is also called aṁśī-bhāva.
Aṁśī means…



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Essence.



Śrīla Gurudeva: What do you mean by ‘essence?’



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Essence means ‘the essential
thing.’



                              63
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017


Śrīla Gurudeva: What essential thing?



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: The essential thing is to get
greed.



Śrīla Gurudeva: That devotee already has greed.



Bhurijana dāsa: To cultivate or nourish.



Śrīla Gurudeva: To cultivate or nourish what?



Bhurijana dāsa: His affection, his love.



Śrīla Gurudeva: What affection?



Bhurijana dāsa: His affection for Ƙṛṣṇa in a particular
way or mood.




Śrīla Gurudeva: The root is gopī-bhāva, or more
specifically mañjarī-bhāva, the mood of personal service
to Śrīmatī Rādhikā like that of the mañjarīs. This is
the essence, the root mood (mūla-bhāva). In order to
obtain this, the devotee executes those activities which
are favorable and avoids those which are unfavorable.
For example, he avoids ahaṅgrahopāsanā.

Do you know the meaning of ahaṅgrahopāsanā?



Girirāja Mahārāja: To worship oneself as God.



Śrīla Gurudeva: This is not the meaning here. It means
to think that “I am Lalitā,” “I am Viśākhā,” “I am
Citra,” or “I am Rūpa Mañjarī.” Sahajiyā bābājīs
meditate that “I am Lalitāsakhī,” rather than thinking,
“I am Lalitā dāsī.” This ahaṅgrahopāsanā, considering
oneself to be nondifferent from the object of worship,
is very dangerous. Be careful to avoid this.

Another unfavorable practice is mudrās[4]. Do you know
the meaning of mudrā?


                              64
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: All the unimportant things in
relation to arcana and pūjā.



Śrīla Gurudeva: We do not hold kuśa grass in our hand
while taking saṅkalpa (a vow), nor do we adopt kara-
nyāsa. We do not meditate on dvārakā-līlā or worship the
queens of Dvārakā, even though these practices are
included within the sixty four limbs of bhakti.

Then, regarding the worship of Rāmacandra: Be careful;
this is for others, not for us. Even though Rāma is
Ƙṛṣṇa, we need to be very careful in this regard. We can
offer obeisances, saying, “O Ƙṛṣṇa! You have manifested
such a beautiful form as Rāma, by which You are
performing many wonderful pastimes.” We will not address
Him as Rāma, but as Ƙṛṣṇa, and



we will not worship that form of Rāma. [When such
devotees worship Rāma on His appearance day, they do so
with the mood that He is Ƙṛṣṇa in the form of Rāma.]
Worship of DvārakādhiśaƘṛṣṇa is better than worship of
Rāma, but that has also been warned against.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: What about Nṛsiṁhadeva?



Śrīla Gurudeva: We offer prāṇama to Nṛsiṁhadeva as the
protector of bhakti. Śāstra presents various rules and
regulations instructing that certain types of worship be
performed, but these are for ordinary persons, for the
general public, not for sādhakas who are specifically
going to serve Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Rāgānuga means to serve
Rādhikā with Ƙṛṣṇa, so we want to be singlepointed in
this. Our guru-paramparā has established so many Deities
for the general public that are not meant for those
engaged in onepointed worship.

Perform your worship very carefully, in such a way that
no one will think that you are against Rāma or
DvārakādhiśaƘṛṣṇa. Others should worship Them, and you
should execute all your bhakti activities with
singlepointed greed.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: There is that verse in the
Bhagavad- gītā which states, “Do not disrupt the minds…”



Śrīla Gurudeva:



na buddhi-bhedaṁ janayed ajñānāṁ karma-saṅginām

                              65
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                     5/5/2017


joṣayet sarva-karmāṇi vidvān yuktaḥ samācaran

Bhagavad-gītā (3.26)



So as not to disrupt the minds of ignorant men attached
to the fruitive results of prescribed duties, a learned
person should not induce them to stop work. Rather,

he engages them in all sorts of activities for the
gradual development of Ƙṛṣṇa consciousness by teaching
them to work in the spirit of devotion.



Even though it is written in the bhakti-śāstras that one
should execute these particular practices, a rāgānuga
devotee will not do so. Śāstra says that it is an
offense to neglect any of the limbs of bhakti. Śāstra
says that one should not do avajñā. What is the meaning
of avajñā?



Girirāja Mahārāja: Disobedience?



Śrīla Gurudeva:   Although it is improper to disobey any
limb of bhakti, there is something to understand in this
connection. Those practices which are not favorable in
rāgānuga are not to be done.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura says that there may
be a time when a person who is following this principle
of rāgānuga comes to a temple of Satyabhāmā, Rukmiṇī,
Rāmacandra, or some other Deity, and by chance he may be
obliged to worship Them. However, even if he does not do
so, he incurs no offense. For a general person it would
be an offense to avoid such worship, but in the case of
the rāgānuga devotee with genuine greed, the avoidance
of this worship is not done in a mood that would be
considered offensive.

Let us take the example of Hanumān. Garuḍa once told
Hanumān, “Your worshipful Deity is calling you. Your
worship ful Śrī Ƙṛṣṇa wants you to come and take His
darśana.”

Hanumān replied, “My health is so bad. I cannot go. I am
seriously ill.”

Garuḍa repeated, “Ƙṛṣṇa is calling you.”

Hanumān replied, “I know, but I am so tired that I
cannot do anything.”

Garuḍa tried to take him by force, but Hanumān flicked
Garuḍa with his tail, throwing him with such tremendous
force that he at once landed near the palace of Ƙṛṣṇa in
Dvārakā.


                              66
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                      5/5/2017

Ƙṛṣṇa told Garuḍa, “Go again, and this time tell him
that Rāma is calling him.”

Garuḍa returned to Hanumān and told him, “Your
worshipful Deity, Rāma, is calling you.”

Hanumān immediately became very joyful and said, “I will
just take my bath, and as soon as I put on tilaka I am
coming. Please go ahead and tell Rāma that I am coming
right away.” Garuḍa said, “I will go very quickly, at
the speed of mind.

Please come with me and ride on my back.”

Hanumān said, “No, there is no need. I am coming very
soon. You can go on ahead.”

As Garuḍa was flying with great speed and reached half
way to Rāma, he saw Hanumān coming back, jumping back,
from having just seen Rāma. Hanumān had already seen
Ƙṛṣṇa in the form of Rāma, spoken with Him, and paid his
respects. He was now returning, while Garuḍa was only
halfway there. He had been so eager to see his
worshipful Lord, who had now called him, that although
he had previously said he was ill – due to lack of
enthusiasm – he was now able to jump and fly faster than
Garuḍa; faster than the speed of mind.

Thus, even if the sādhaka with greed is not following
some of the various limbs of the ninefold practices of
bhakti, such as pāda-sevanam (parikramā of the Lord’s
pastime places) or arcanaṁ (temple worship), if he has
that root conception, this neglect is not an offense.
That root bhāva will fill up all the gaps in the form of
the missing practices.



śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi-pañcarātra-vidhiṁ vinā

aikāntikī harer bhaktir utpātāyaiva kalpate



Devotional service to Bhagavān that ignores the
authorized Vedic literatures such as the Upaniṣads,
Purāṇas, Nārada- pañcarātra, etc., is simply an
unnecessary disturbance in society.



Do you know this śloka? This is a very important śloka
from Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.101). The purport is
that if one I engaged in the exclusive worship of Ƙṛṣṇa
(aikāntiki harer-bhakti) but he is not following the
instructions of śāstras like the Śrutis, Smṛtis,
Pañcarātra, and Purāṇas, there will be some disturbance.

However, for a person truly established in this root
bhakti, a person with genuine greed to serve Rādhā and
Ƙṛṣṇa, that alone is sufficient. If that person does not
execute whatever limbs of bhakti are unfavorable for
advancement in rāgānuga, even though śāstra instructs
that all the limbs of bhakti should be observed, there

                              67
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

is no chance of committing an offense. It is a fact that
those who have actual greed and exclusively follow the
principles of rāgānuga-bhakti will attain the service of
Rādhā and Ƙṛṣṇa in gopī-bhāva.

There is an important thing to note in this connection.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura tells us: It is
sometimes said that if a sādhaka has an ambition to
serve Śrī Śrī Rādhā Kṛṣṇa with rāga and he is engaged
only in the hearing, chanting, and remembering of
vaidhī-bhakti, he will attain dvārakā-bhāva and become a
maidservant of Rukmiṇī and Satyabhāmā. He writes that it
is also sometimes said that if a sādhaka has greed and
performs vaidhī-bhakti plus rāgānuga- bhakti, he will
become a maidservant of the queens of Mathurā.

He writes that these conceptions are not correct. The
‘queen’ of Mathurā is Ƙubjā2, and the queens of Dvārakā
are Rukmiṇī, Satyabhāmā, and others like them. It is not
correct to say that a person performing vaidhī-bhakti
receives service to the queens of Dvārakā, or that a
person with greed who performs both vaidhī-bhakti and
rāgānuga-bhakti receives service to Ƙubjā.

Ƙubjā’s prema is not actually proper, and therefore it
is naturally less than that of the queens of Dvārakā.
The queens [5] of Dvārakā are so much superior to Ƙubjā.
Vaidhī performed along with rāgānuga is superior to the
performance of vaidhī alone. Do you understand? It is
against the principles of bhakti that a person
performing vaidhī-bhakti plus rāgānuga-bhakti would
receive the inferior position of service to Ƙubjā while
the performance of vaidhī-bhakti alone would yield a
superior position.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Maybe Candrāvalī’s service?



Śrīla Gurudeva: No.

It has been written in the Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad that
Rukmiṇī’s marriage was performed in Mathurā, and
therefore some persons say that Rukmiṇī is present there
as Ƙṛṣṇa’s queen. But this is against our Vaiṣṇava
principles. It is against our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava
philosophy to say that by following vaidhī-bhakti one
will receive the same reward as one who is engaged in
vaidhī mixed with rāgānuga. Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī
states that the idea of Rukmiṇī’s marriage in Mathurā is
against śāstra, and has been told only in Gopāla- tāpanī
Upaniṣad. Actually, when Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad says
Mathurā, it is referring to Dvārakā.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Is this because Mathurā and
Dvārakā are more or less the same?




                              68
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                      5/5/2017

Śrīla Gurudeva: In this regard the same. From our study
of

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and all other authentic bhakti
scriptures, we know that the idea of Rukmiṇī’s marriage
in Mathurā is not authentic. Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī
Ṭhāƙura will explain this later on, but he is mentioning
it now in order to make the point clear.

Which limbs are practiced in rāgānuga-bhakti? Which are
essential and which are disregarded? To answer this,
Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura has described five
categories of devotional practices for a person with
genuine greed:

(1) Abhīṣṭa-bhāva-mayī:   Absorption in one’s siddha-
bhāva; the mood of a mañjarī.

(2) Abhīṣṭa-bhāva-sambandhī: Those practices related to
one’s cherished mood. Such practices surely deliver the
desired goal.

(3) Abhīṣṭa-bhāva-anukūla: Those practices which are
favorable to one’s cherished mood.

(4) Abhīṣṭa-bhāva-aviruddha: Those practices which are
neutral; neither favorable nor opposed to one’s desired
mood.

(5) Abhīṣṭa-bhāva-viruddha: Those practices which are
detrimental to the attainment of one’s desired mood.



The first is abhīṣṭa-bhāva-mayī – always thinking about
one’s siddha-bhāva, the bhāva of a mañjarī. This will
never be changed.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: What is the meaning of abhīṣṭa?



Śrīpād Mādhava Mahārāja: The object of desire.



Śrīla Gurudeva: Abhīṣṭa refers to what we want. Iṣṭa
means ‘what we want,’ and abhi means ‘surely.’
Absorption in this mood will surely give us the
attainment of our cherished goal. Then comes abhīṣṭa-
bhāva-sambandhī, and after that, abhīṣṭa-bhāva-anukūla.
Do you know the meaning of anukūla?



Śrīpād Mādhava Mahārāja: Favorable.



Śrīla Gurudeva: Yes. Also, we may adopt whatever
practices are not unfavorable, but we avoid those
practices that are unfavorable (abhīṣṭa-bhāva-viruddha).

                              69
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                      5/5/2017

If a practice is favorable we accept it, and those
practices that are neither favorable nor unfavorable
(abhīṣṭa-aviruddha-bhāva) can be accepted or rejected
according to…



Bhurijana dāsa: Practicality.



Śrīla Gurudeva:   According to the atmosphere.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura further explains the
five aspects of rāgānuga-bhakti.

Abhīṣṭa-bhāva-mayī: Whatever practices we execute at the
time of our sādhana (the practices executed to attain
our goal) will be the same at the time of sādhya
(attainment of the goal of life; the stage of siddhi,
perfection). Rāgānuga- sādhakas remember Ƙṛṣṇa, Govinda,
at the time of sādhana, as they will also do in their
spiritual form as a mañjarī. Both remembrances are the
same, but one is unripe and the other ripe. The subject
of the mood will never change, just as kīrtana will
never be changed, whether performed in the stage of
sādhana or siddha.

The sādhakas’ absorption in their constitutional mood is
called abhīṣṭa-bhāva-mayī. Such sādhakas think of
themselves as kiśorī-gopīs (teenage gopīs) engaged in
Rādhikā’s service. In their meditation, they see
themselves as cowherd maidens making very beautiful
garlands and giving them to Rūpa Mañjarī. In turn, Rūpa
Mañjarī gives those garlands to Lalitā and Viśākhā, who
place them around the necks of Rādhā and Ƙṛṣṇa. This
type of meditation is called aṣṭa-kālīya-sevā, or aṣṭa-
yāmi-sevā.[6]

With such thoughts in mind, sādhakas utter such prayers
as Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa’s Vilāpa-kusumāñjali; and in
their siddha-sevā they actually engage in such service.
There is no change in the service. It is only a question
of being in the unripe or ripe stage.

Now let us consider the second principle, namely
abhīṣṭa- bhāva-sambandhī.

Everything has two causes, upādāna-kāraṇa and nimitta-
kāraṇa. Do you know the meaning of these two words?



Dhanurdhara Mahārāja: The material cause…



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja:   And the efficient cause. The
material and efficient causes.



Śrīla Gurudeva: What is the meaning of efficient?


                              70
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017



Dhanurdhara Mahārāja: The doer and the…?



Śrīla Gurudeva: Let us take the example of an earthen
pot. The earth, both raw and baked, is upādāna; and the
potter is nimitta. We can also take the example of
thread or other materials. They are upādāna-kāraṇa.

The creation of the material world has two causes –
nimitta and upādāna – and of these two, upādāna is more
important. The ingredient, or eminent, cause (upādāna)
is prakṛti, and the instrumental cause (nimitta) is
ƘāraṇodakaśāyīViṣṇu. In the matter of cosmic creation,
ƘāraṇodakaśāyīViṣṇu is nimitta- kāraṇa, and   Advaita
Ācārya is upādāna. Do you understand?



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: We were recently teaching this in
our Brahma-saṁhitā class.



Śrīla Gurudeva: Here in Rāga-vartma-candrikā, Śrīla
Viśvanātha Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura tells us about the
upādāna-kāraṇa (emi nent or prominent cause) of greed.
One eminent cause is

śravaṇam, hearing from our dīkṣā or śikṣā-gurudeva about

Ƙṛṣṇa – that Ƙṛṣṇa who is a beautiful teenage youth, who
looks extremely sweet as He holds His flute to His lips,
and who inspires gopī-prema. Guru will also tell us
about those particular gopīs, namely Rūpa Mañjarī and
all of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s other mañjarīs, who are the
abode of that gopī-prema for which we aspire.

If this is our ambition, we should remember them and
talk about their activities. We should also go to all
the places of their pastimes, such as Rādhākuṇḍa,
Śyāmakuṇḍa, Girirāja Govardhana, Vṛndāvana, and
Vaṁśīvaṭa. Such devotional services are upādāna-kāraṇa,
essential practices, which will hastily bring us to our
goal.

Some practices are nimitta-kāraṇa, such as putting on
tilaka, wearing kānti-mālā, and taking sannyāsa and
wearing saffron cloth. Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī
Ṭhāƙura is gradually clarifying the subject matter.

Some practices are known as upakaraka. Do you know the
meaning of upakaraka?



Bhurijana dāsa: Is ‘primary’ the proper translation for
this word? Primary means ‘completely necessary.’



Śrīla Gurudeva: Upakaraka means that if you engage in

                              71
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

this kind of practices your bhakti will progress, you
will gain; and if you don’t, you will be the loser. Such
practices include reading Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and similar
Vaiṣṇava literatures. Upakaraka means ‘beneficial,’ and
therefore it refers to both upādāna-kāraṇa and nimitta-
kāraṇa practices.

Gurupādāśraya (taking shelter of a bona fide guru),
mantra- japa (chanting mantras), dhyāna (meditation),
hearing, and remembering – these practices are all
bhāva-sambandhī, or upādāna-kāraṇa.

These practices are necessary, and in all such practices
it is essential to always keep in the center the root
bhāva for which we have greed – sakhya, vātsalya, or
mādhurya. Again, in sādhana that bhāva (abhīṣṭa-bhāva)
is unripe, and in the siddha stage it is ripe.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: The idea of upādāna and nimitta
is not clear yet.



Śrīla Gurudeva: First is bhāva-mayī, actual greed for
that parti cular mood: mañjarī-bhāva. Second is bhāva-
sambandhī, which is upādāna-kāraṇa – engaging in those
essential practices which quickly give that mood.
Without gurupādāśraya, one cannot attain this greed.
Hearing from śrī guru and servinghim are essential
practices, and are therefore called upādāna- kāraṇa
bhāva-sambandhī.

To remember the gopāla-mantra, kāma-gāyatrī, and Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s mantra are all bhāva-sambandhī.
When remembering klīṁ gaurāya svāhā will we utter words
only? It should come in our hearts that Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, or Śrī Gaurānga, is Ƙṛṣṇa Himself, and that
His kindness is causeless. Mahāprabhu is always in a
mood to give kṛṣṇa-prema through His mantra, klīṁ
gaurāya svāhā. In order to attain His service, we offer
ourselves to that Gaurāṅga by the word svāhā. We are
therefore advised to chant all these gāyatrī mantras
given to us by guru three times every day. This is also
upādāna-kāraṇa – it is a must.



nijābhīṣṭa kṛṣṇa-preṣṭha pācheta’ lāgiyā

nirantara sevā kare antarmanā hañā

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 22.159)



Actually, the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana are very dear to
Ƙṛṣṇa. If one wants to engage in spontaneous loving
service, he must follow the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana and
constantly engage in devotional service within his mind.




                              72
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

Following one of Ƙṛṣṇa’s beloved associates according to
his inner desire, the sādhaka always chants the mahā-
mantra; this is upādāna-kāraṇa. But he not only chants.
He remembers the predominating Deities of harināma and
he remembers Their qualities. He remembers the qualities
of Rāma in “Hare Rāma Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma Hare Hare” as
meaning Rādhā ramaṇa, and in Hare Ƙṛṣṇa, he remembers
that Hare is Śrīmatī Rādhikā. The phrase harati kunje
itik hare kṛṣṇam harati means that Ƙṛṣṇa is attractive
to all, but Śrīmatī Rādhikā attracts

Ƙṛṣṇa and enchants Him in the nikuñja. She is therefore
Madanamohanamohinī, the enchantress of the enchanter of
Cupid. Meditating in this way, we chant harināma. The
Hare Ƙṛṣṇa mahā-mantra is a siddha-mantra[7], so no
anuṣṭhāna (ceremony) of puraścaraṇa (preliminary
purifica tory procedures) need be performed along with
its utterance. Chanting the mantra in this way is a
practice of bhāva-sambandhī, and therefore such chanting
is upādāna-kāraṇa (essential practice). Nimitta-kāraṇa
practices are not bhāva-sambandhī.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura explains about the
aṣṭa-daśākṣya (eighteensyllable) mantra, as well as the
daśākṣya (tensyllable) mantra that Caitanya Mahāprabhu
received from His gurudeva. With the addition of klīṁ
kṛṣṇāya govindāya, the mantra is aṣṭa-daśākṣya, and with
only gopījana-vallabhāya svāhā it is a daśākṣya mantra.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: The last thing you just said, can
you clarify that further please? What does daśākṣya
mean?



Śrīla Gurudeva: Gopījana-vallabhāya svāhā is the
daśākṣya mantra.



Śrīpād Mādhava Mahārāja: The tensyllable mantra.



Śrīla Gurudeva: Without klīṁ.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: What is the mantra?



Śrīla Gurudeva: Your guru has given this to you, and I
have also given it: Gopījana-vallabhāya svāhā.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: But no klīṁ?



Śrīla Gurudeva: Ƙlīṁ is not counted within the ten

                              73
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017

syllables; it is separate. It is the bīja-mantra. The
bīja itself is a mantra, and it has combined with the
other syllables.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: What happened to kṛṣṇāya
govindāya?



Śrīla Gurudeva: With the addition of these two words and
klīṁ, the mantra becomes an eighteensyllable mantra.
Some persons say that there are twentyfour syllables in
the kāma-gāyatrī, and others say there are twentysix,
but when Rādhikā gave the correct information in the
dream of Viśvanātha Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura, then he knew…



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Twentyfour and a half syllables.
He knew what that half syllable is.



Śrīla Gurudeva: These mantras are also bhāva-sambandhī,
and hearing and telling about Ƙṛṣṇa and His dear ones
are also bhāva-sambandhī.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura says that in
rāgānuga there are two primary activities: smaraṇa
(remembering) and kīrtana (chanting). In this regard
which is superior, kīrtana or smaraṇa?



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Smaraṇa.



Śrīla Gurudeva: You say that smaraṇa is superior?



Bhurijana dāsa: Bṛhad-Bhāgavatāmṛta clearly says that
kīrtana is superior.



Śrīla Gurudeva: Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī explains that
smaraṇa seems to be superior, but for Ƙaliyuga it has
been declared (in Bṛhan-nāradīya Purāṇa), “Harer nāma
harer nāma harer nāmaiva kevalam.” Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu has come only for kīrtana, and those who
engage in the kīrtana-yajña (harināma saṅkīrtana) are
called sumedhasaḥ.



kṛṣṇa-varṇaṁ tviṣākṛṣṇaṁ

sāṅgopāṅgāstra-pārṣadam yajñaiḥ saṅkīrtana-prāyair

yajanti hi su-medhasaḥ

                              74
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                     5/5/2017


Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.5.32)




In the age of Ƙali, Ƙṛṣṇa appears with a golden
complexion (akṛṣṇa). He is constantly singing the two
syllables kṛ and ṣṇa, and He is accompanied by His
associates, servitors, weapons, and confidential
companions. Intelligent people worship Him by performing
saṅkīrtana-yajña.



Here, Śrīla Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura explains that what
Caitanya Mahāprabhu has decided is the decided fact.
Therefore smaraṇa is not superior. Rather, it follows
kīrtana.

Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī has explained in his Bṛhad-
Bhāgavatāmṛta why this is so, but sahajiyā bābājīs do
not understand his idea. He has especially written that
smaraṇa should be executed under the supervision of
saṅkīrtana. When a neophyte is engaged in remembering
the pastimes of Ƙṛṣṇa, if there is any noise, that
person’s concentration would be interrupted. Only if
that person were fully pure would loud singing or
conversation or noise not disturb his silent meditation.

On the other hand, even if a person’s mind is very
flicker ing, if he performs loud kīrtana, then all his
senses are bound to become silent. Therefore, chanting
and remembering to gether is bhāva-sambandhī.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura refers us to Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī’s book, Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, which
discusses the ṛṣis (sages) who performed tapasya. Do you
know the meaning of tapasya?



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja & Dhanurdhara Mahārāja:
Austerities.



Śrīla Gurudeva: We should not think that in this regard
auster ities means surrounding oneself by fire in the
summer, taking bath in very, very cold water in the
winter, not eating, taking a vow of silence, or
accepting any other bodily hardships. Here, austerities
refers to ārādhana, worship. Sixtythousand

ṛṣis performed ārādhana by mind, and by the grace of
Lord Rāmacandra, all of them became gopīs. These
practices are all bhāva-sambandhī.

Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: When you mentioned before that
kīrtana is superior to smaraṇa, does this kīrtana mean
japa (chanting softly on beads), or does it mean
congregational chanting with many people doing kīrtana
together?

                              75
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017




Śrīla Gurudeva: Chanting may be of two types: vyakti-
gata and amasti-gata, individual and congregational.
Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī was performing kīrtana
individually, meaning alone. But when he was chanting
with Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s kīrtana party, that chanting
was not individual. When Caitanya Mahāprabhu spoke with
Rāmānanda Rāya, their discussion was individual in the
sense that there was no third person nearby.

Whether the chanting is individual or congregational
does not bear relevance in relation to the superiority
of chanting. The important thing is having greed, being
under the guidance of a rasika Vaiṣṇava, remembering the
pastimes of Ƙṛṣṇa while chanting by tongue, and being in
Vṛndāvana by body or by mind. This type of kīrtana is
best.

When our guruji is performing kīrtana and we are partici
pating in that, our kīrtana is not the same as his,
because we are not equal to him. He is remembering the
pastimes of Ƙṛṣṇa and weeping, but we are not doing so.
We are only singing along with him; our chanting is not
the same.

Regarding nimitta-kāraṇa, nimitta-kāraṇa practices
include the observance of Ekādaśī and Janmāṣṭamī, as
well as performing any austerity for Ƙṛṣṇa – while
having that greed.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: But why the comparison with
upādāna andnimitta? Why has he chosen these two words –
upādāna and nimitta – to explain the difference between
the two groups of practices?



Śrīla Gurudeva: Upādāna-kāraṇa practices must certainly
be performed. If we do not perform nimitta-kāraṇa
practices at




any time, it is harmful, but not as harmful as the
neglect of upādāna-kāraṇa practices.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: You gave the example that upādāna
is the clay and nimitta is the potter.



Śrīla Gurudeva: Without the potter and without earth the
pot cannot be made. But the earth is especially crucial,
and therefore upādāna is superior. Hearing the pastimes
of Ƙṛṣṇa and serving gurudeva are upādāna-kāraṇa, and
the other practices are secondary in comparison.

                              76
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017


However, if one says that we should not observe Ekādaśī
– as Hithari Vaṁśa says[8] – this is not right. We must
observe Ekādaśī, Janmāṣṭamī, and other holy days even
though they are nimitta-kāraṇa and even though they are
not as important as the practices which quickly induce
internal absorption. Ekādaśī, Janmāṣṭamī, and similar
observances like placing tilaka marks on the body, are
beneficial for remembering the main objective. They
support the practices of bhāva-sambandhī, which in turn
leads to abhīṣṭa-bhāva-mayī.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Can you repeat that one more
time, please?



Śrīla Gurudeva: First is abhīṣṭa-bhāva-mayī, and then
bhāva- sambandhī. The practices of bhāva-sambandhī are
superior to those of nimitta-kāraṇa, which are bhāva-
anukūla. The bhāva-

sambandhī practices are the mūla-kāraṇa, the main cause,
in the development of abhīṣṭa-bhāva-mayī. Ekādaśī,
Janmāṣṭamī etc. are secondary.



Dhanurdhara Mahārāja: If the secondary practice is not
present, is the primary cause sufficient?



Śrīla Gurudeva: The injunction that Ekādaśī is secondary
is for a person who gives stress to Ekādaśī, Janmāṣṭamī,
and Rāmanavamī, but who is not hearing harikathā,
chanting, and remembering Ƙṛṣṇa.

What is the harm in neglecting Ekādaśī? For one who has
greed and is so engaged in bhāva-mayī or bhāva-sambandhī
that he is unaware of his external surroundings, there
is no harm. Vaṁśīdāsa Bābājī Mahārāja is an example of
this. He was observing Ekādaśī for three or four days,
on Aṣṭamī (the eighth lunar day) and Navamī (the ninth
lunar day). Then, on Ekādaśī, the eleventh lunar day, he
was completely unaware of the day due to being absorbed
in internal consciousness. Similarly, Śrīla Raghunātha
dāsa Gosvāmī would be internally absorbed in remembering
his services in the pastimes of Rādhā and Ƙṛṣṇa for many
days, and Ekādaśī would pass by at that time. Because
these two mahā-bhāgavatas (topmost self realized
devotees) were performing rāgānuga-bhajana, there was no
harm in their missing Ekādaśī. However, if one misses
Ekādaśī when one is externally conscious, this would be
very harmful for his bhakti.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: What is the difference
betweenbhāva-mayī and bhāva-sambandhī? What is the
distinction?


                              77
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017



Śrīla Gurudeva: I have told you all these things.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: I know, but I got confused when
you discussed the differences between upādāna and
nimitta, and how they refer to bhāva-sambandhī and
bhāva-anukūla.




Śrīla Gurudeva: First I explained abhīṣṭa-bhāva-mayī,
which may be in a ripe or unripe stage. In the stage of
sādhana it is the absorption in one’s internal identity
as a gopī while still having a material body, and in the
siddha stage one actually becomes a gopī. In both cases,
it is abhīṣṭa-bhāva-mayī.

Next is bhāva-sambandhī upādāna-kāraṇa. These are
activities that must be performed, like hearing and
remembering. These practices must not be neglected for
any reason. Regard ing nimitta-kāraṇa practices, if we
cannot follow them under certain circumstances, it is
not harmful. Therefore, they are considered secondary.

Observing the vow of Ƙārtika may fall in the category of
either upādāna-kāraṇa or nimitta-kāraṇa. When it is
followed simply in accordance with the rules of
renunciation such as avoiding certain foods and
activities, then it is in the category of nimitta-
kāraṇa. When it is followed in accordance with the
principles of hearing and chanting the names and glories
of Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Śrī Ƙṛṣṇa, then it is in the
category of upādāna-kāraṇa and is bhāva-sambandhī. If
austerities are observed during the month of Ƙārtika,
that is good, but śravaṇam and kīrtanam during Ƙārtika
must not be neglected.

Actually, every vrata (observance) is of two kinds:
upādāna- kāraṇa and nimitta-kāraṇa. When it is upādāna-
kāraṇa it cannot be missed, whereas if we fail to
practice this or other limbs of nimitta-kāraṇa under
certain circumstances, there is no harm.

For example, I once went to the temple of Śrī Govindajī
in Jaipur during Ƙārtika month. When the pūjārīs offered
me mahā-prasādam, I told them, “I am so lucky that you
are giving me this mahā-prasādam of Śrī Śrī
RādhāGovinda,” after which they brought me rice, laukī
(bottlegourd), and eggplant. We are not supposed to take
laukī or eggplant during Ƙārtika, but I accepted them as
mahā-prasādam, placing them upon my head with great
honor. At that time I was thinking, “Śrī Govindajī is
the worshipful Deity of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. Torespect
His mahā-prasādam is upādāna-kāraṇa,” so I respected it.
On the other hand, here in our temple we tell the
devotees not to prepare laukī, eggplant, and all the
other foodstuffs that are restricted during Ƙārtika.

Applying gopī-candana-tilaka and nāma-mudrā (stamping

                              78
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                      5/5/2017

the names of Ƙṛṣṇa on one’s body), which are nimitta-
kāraṇa, are in the category of bhāva-anukūla, which is
the third of the five limbs of rāgānuga-bhakti. First is
bhāva-mayī, second is bhāva-sambandhī, and third is
bhāva-anukūla.

Anukūla means ‘favorable.’ Practices in the category of
bhāva-anukūla begin with worship of Tulasīdevī[9] [See
Endnote 2] by offering her obeisances, watering her, and
doing parikramā (circumambulating her). These practices
are favorable, and should therefore be performed. Other
practices include the worship of cows, Dhātrī
(Myrobalan) trees,    Aśvattha (Banyan) trees, and
offering respect to brāhmaṇas[10].

Do you understand? These are among the sixtyfour
varieties of bhakti listed in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu and
are somewhat favorable and beneficial. We follow the
instructions of Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī in his Śrī
Manaḥ-śikṣā: “Sujane bhūsura-gaṇe – honoring even
brāhmaṇas who are not singlepointed in worship of Ƙṛṣṇa,
and who may be engaged in demigod worship.” At the same
time, if a rāgānuga Vaiṣṇava has no time for these
practices there is no harm, because they are nimitta-
kāraṇa.

So, all of these are bhāva-anukūla; they are favorable.
Do you understand?



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Favorable, but not essential.



Śrīla Gurudeva: Yes, not essential. Next is bhāva-
aviruddha – not unfavorable and not favorable.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Which things? Those you have
already mentioned?



Śrīla Gurudeva: I will mention them now.



Bhurijana dāsa: Now comes the fourth category.



Śrīla Gurudeva: Aviruddha means…



Bhurijana dāsa: Unfavorable.



Śrīla Gurudeva: Not unfavorable, yet not necessarily
favorable.


                              79
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura gives an example:
Ƙṛṣṇa wanted to drink milk from the breast of Yaśodā,
and at the same time the milk she had put on the fire
was going…



Dhanurdhara Mahārāja: Boiling over.



Śrīla Gurudeva: Yaśodā forcibly put Ƙṛṣṇa down in order
to attend the milk.   Although Ƙṛṣṇa was weeping and
very angry, she went to protect the milk on the stove.

This indicates that we should protect the things that
Ƙṛṣṇa likes even more than protecting Ƙṛṣṇa Himself. We
should favor these things more than Ƙṛṣṇa, because they
will be used in His service.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura has said that for
the rāgānuga-bhakta, although śravaṇam, kīrtanam, and
smaraṇam are superior, the management needed for
arranging the kīrtana is not less important.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Can you explain that again,
please?



Śrīla Gurudeva: For example, I may say to someone, “Oh,
come here and play the mṛdaṅga,” and to someone else I
may say, “Oh, please come and do kīrtana.” One person
may be making arrangements and managing in preparation
for the kīrtana performance, and another may be
preaching in order to enthuse others to attend. These
activities are not inferior to actual śravaṇam and
kīrtanam. Śravaṇam and kīrtanam are superior to
management, but ultimately management will be
transferred into śravaṇam and kīrtanam.



Bhurijana dāsa: You mentioned preaching. Does that
preaching refer to preaching about rāgānuga-bhakti, or
any level of bhakti? Does it refer even to vaidhī-bhakti
preaching?



Śrīla Gurudeva: That devotee should have rāgānuga-bhakti
in his heart, but he can do any kind of preaching in
support of saṅkīrtana, meaning śravaṇam, kīrtanam, and
smaraṇam.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Does management come in the
category of bhāva-aviruddha?




                              80
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                     5/5/2017

Śrīla Gurudeva: To understand, let us take this example.
You are preaching, managing, and holding meetings; you
are going here and there in order to promote nāma-
saṅkīrtana. There is no alternative – you must perform
these duties.   At the same time, it is essential to
internally maintain a certain mood while engaging in
these activities. When that mood is present, there is no
harm in executing these activities, as they are
favorable for rāgānuga-bhakti.

The fifth category for rāgānuga-sādhakas is bhāva-
viruddha. The activities to be rejected are:
Ahaṅgrahopāsanā (considering oneself to be nondifferent
from the object of worship); kara-nyāsa (assigning the
syllables of the mantra to the fingers); mudrās (various
procedures of intertwining the fingers during worship);
and dvārakā and mahiṣī-dhyāna (meditation on Ƙṛṣṇa’s
Dvārakā pastimes and worship of His queens). The
previously mentioned practices, those in the category of
bhāva-aviruddha, may be helpful, but these are directly
harmful and should be rejected.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: So, you are saying that the
arrange ment, management, and preaching for the purpose
of kīrtana are not less important?



Śrīla Gurudeva:    And also the preparing and sewing of
Ƙṛṣṇa’s clothes.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: These are not less than kīrtana
or smaraṇa?



Śrīla Gurudeva: Yes. This is because they will be
transformed into kīrtana and smaraṇa in the future, when
the beautifully dressed Deities inspire Their
glorification.

One should respect all the limbs of bhakti, beginning
with śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇu-smaraṇaṁ, but among all the
limbs, smaraṇam, meditation on Ƙṛṣṇa, is the goal.
Āsakti (attachment) is of two kinds: āsakti for the
limbs of sādhana (devotional practices leading to the
goal), and āsakti for Ƙṛṣṇa and His associates. Both are
good, but in later development, āsakti in śravaṇam,
kīrtanam, and all such practices of sādhana-bhakti will
transform into āsakti for remembering Ƙṛṣṇa and His
associates. In this way, āsakti begins as bhāva-anukūla
(activities that are favorable for rāgānuga-bhakti) and
later on becomes bhāva-mayī (complete absorption in
one’s cherished mood).



Bhurijana dāsa: What is the difference between practices
that are neutral (bhāva-aviruddha, meaning practices
that are neither favorable nor unfavorable for rāgānuga-

                              81
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

bhakti), and nimitta (practices that are supportive and
beneficial, but not essential)?



Śrīla Gurudeva: It is best that you read about this, and
then we will discuss.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Yes, we need to see this typed
out. If we read it again it will be very clear. We need
to see the categories.



Śrīla Gurudeva: Śrīla Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura has explained
what I have just shared with you, and when you attain
your siddha-śarīra you will realize all these truths. In
the preliminary stage you cannot have an exact idea.

Śrīla Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura concludes this first section by
saying, “I am explaining these truths to you, and if you
have not understood properly, it is my fault that I
could not make you understand. May God and the pure
devotees forgive me for this.”

We will complete Rāga-vartma-candrikā at the end of one
more day’s discussion.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: I have one or two practical
questions. Normally the small mūrti (Deity) in a temple
should be made from aṣṭa-dhātu (eight precious metals)
or some brass. But the Deity we installed is made of
marble. What if one of the Deities breaks?

I asked you this before and you said to replace it. Then
I told you that the other one has not broken. The small
marble Ƙṛṣṇa mūrti broke, but the Rādhāraṇī mūrti did
not. So, you said “Okay, you can just replace the Ƙṛṣṇa
mūrti.” Then I said, “What about Rādhāraṇī?” You said,
“She is not broken.”

But the problem is that because She is also made of
marble, we fear that fifty or a hundred years from now
this may happen again. We are thinking that both should
be replaced with brass mūrtis so that they will always
be safe.




Śrīla Gurudeva: But They have had prāṇa-pratiṣṭha (the
Vedic installation ceremony). It is better to have the
kṛṣṇa-mūrti replaced with marble stone and again perform
the installation, and then give Them to any disciple or
keep Them as a Deity in the temple.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: It is not so easy to worship

                              82
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

Rādhā and Ƙṛṣṇa at home; maybe no one will do that.



Śrīla Gurudeva: If our father is dead and our mother is
alive, should we also leave our mother? Should we tell
her, “You should go!”       ?



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: You gave the same answer before –
but I have a question about that. In the temple, bhoga
is offered five times every day, and so many other
things are offered. If we give the Deity to devotees to
worship in their home, must they continue the same
standard of worship?



Śrīla Gurudeva: Two times will do, or as the devotee can
do.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: So, for the temple, both Rādhā
and

Ƙṛṣṇa can be replaced with brass Deities, and the marble
ones can be given to someone who will worship Them at
home?



Śrīla Gurudeva: Yes, to someone at home, or to any
existing temple, or to a new temple.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Then the same problem may come
with breaking; better in the home, I think.

I have one other question: On a property that we have in

Vṛndāvana, there is an old drumstick tree.



Śrīla Gurudeva: A kadamba tree?



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: No, a vegetable tree. It is only
giving a few vegetables, and it is a very old tree. If
we want to construct any building, it is in the way. But
it is in Vṛndāvana, so can it be cut down or not?

Śrīla Gurudeva: Is it alive?



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: It is alive.




                              83
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

Śrīla Gurudeva: Is it old? If they take it from there
and replant it in another place, will it remain alive?



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: No. It has to be cut down.



Śrīla Gurudeva: You can act according to your idea.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: I cannot take the responsibility
for that decision, and that is why I am asking you. This
tree is right on the property, and it means that no
building can be constructed there. It is not a kadamba
tree. People say that the vegetable tree is not a very
useful tree.



Śrīla Gurudeva: On the other hand, we see that all
things of Vṛndāvana are cinmāyā (transcendental). They
want to do bhajana, and in fact they are doing bhajana.
They may be cut down only for building a temple.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: What if it is for somebody’s
residence?



Śrīla Gurudeva: Rather than asking me, you yourself can
think about it. I will not advise that you cut it or not
cut it.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: I will not take that
responsibility.



Śrīla Gurudeva: Yes, we should not take the
responsibility.

When Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī was constructing
Śyāmakuṇḍa next to Rādhākuṇḍa, he was planning to cut
down the trees that were standing on the bank of
Śyāmakuṇḍa as he was constructing its shape, but those
trees appeared to him in his dream and told him, “Please
don’t cut us down. We are doing bhajana here.” After
receiving that dream, he considered, “Ƙṛṣṇa is crooked.
He is tri-bhaṅga, bent in three places. He doesn’t want
to be straight.” Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī had
constructed Rādhākuṇḍa in a squareshape, but




he then decided to leave Śyāmakuṇḍa in a ‘crooked’ shape

                              84
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                     5/5/2017

by retaining the land around those sacred trees; he did
not cut them. Now, however, after fivehundred years, we
see that some of them are going away by themselves.



Dhanurdhara Mahārāja: I have one short question. Do the
husbands of the mañjarīs come from Yāvaṭa?



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: His question concerns Yāvaṭa, the
home of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s inlaws – Abhimanyu (Rādhikā’s
so called husband), Jaṭilā (Her motherinlaw), etc. When
we went there, you told us that the friends of Rādhikā
reside there with Her. So his question is this: does
this mean that their socalled husbands also live in
Yāvaṭa?



Śrīla Gurudeva: It may be, or may not be. For example,
Viśākhā comes from Ƙāmāi but she has relations in that
village.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: In Yāvaṭa?



Śrīla Gurudeva: In Yāvaṭa, and also in the house of
Jaṭilā. Viśākhā is related to Jaṭilā and Ƙuṭilā and so
many others. Yāvaṭa is a big village, and therefore so
many relatives of the gopīs live there. By making any
excuse, or by cheating, they tell their husbands, “I am
going to see my sister,” or “I am going to visit my (any
other) relative,” or, “I am going to such and such
place.” By telling such things, they come and serve

Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Somehow or other they serve Her.



Dhanurdhara Mahārāja: Somehow they are there.



Girirāja Mahārāja: You gave the example of the milk. You
said that if somebody wants milk, then he will learn
that he has to get a cow with a calf and do so many
things. But the real purpose is to get the milk. In that
regard, some years ago I made the resolution that I
would do whatever I have to do, whatever is necessary,
to get the association of Guru Mahārāja (Śrīla
Bhaƙtivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja) again. What category does
that come in?

In other words, for the last so many years I have been
doing so many services. But I am not doing those things
because of the injunctions of the scriptures which say
that if I don’t do them I will go to hell or something
like that. I was doing those things with the idea that
if I follow, I will get the association of Guru Mahārāja

                              85
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

again. Is this comparable to greed in rāgānuga-bhakti?



Śrīla Gurudeva: It is in the category of vaidhī-bhakti,
because he was expressing everything to you according to
the orders of śāstra. He was not instructing you in the
matter of developing greed, because he didn’t want to
tell those superlative subjects to ordinary persons. He
was preaching to you in order to create your faith in
the principles of vaidhī-bhakti. This is called pracāra
(widely preaching the general principles of kṛṣṇa-
bhakti). Rāgānuga-bhakti cannot be widely preached, be
cause it is vyakti-gata, meaning ‘individual.’



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: His question was a little
different.



Śrīla Gurudeva: “Is obeying for the purpose of attaining
the association of your Gurudeva rāgānuga or vaidhī?” Is
this your question?



Girirāja Mahārāja: Not exactly.



Śrīla Gurudeva: Then, what is it?



Girirāja Mahārāja: If someone follows the injunctions of
śāstra and is convinced on the basis of śāstra, that is
vaidhī- bhakti. But if somebody has greed to obtain some
object...



Śrīla Gurudeva: What object?



Girirāja Mahārāja: Well, that person wants to have love
for Ƙṛṣṇa in the mood of one of His associates.




Śrīla Gurudeva: There are only three kinds of moods for
which one may have greed in rāgānuga-bhakti – sakhya-
rasa, vātsalya-rasa, and mādhurya-rasa, and more
specifically for the service of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Any
other greed will not be accepted as rāgānuga.



Girirāja Mahārāja: I will give another example to
explain the question. In the beginning, one has āsakti

                              86
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

(attachment) for śravaṇam, kīrtanam, and smaraṇam. Then
later, that āsakti becomes transferred to Ƙṛṣṇa and His
eternal associates; but both are āsakti. So in the
beginning we desire the association of our Guru
Mahārāja, but we are thinking of him as we knew him here
in this world. Now it seems that the same desire can be
transformed when the idea of Guru Mahārāja’s identity
becomes more clear – his eternal identity in Ƙṛṣṇa’s
service.



Bhurijana dāsa: He is asking this: if we are thinking of
Guru Mahārāja as a mañjarī for instance, and we
desire...



Śrīla Gurudeva: How will he understand when he is not at
all engaged in rāgānuga-bhajana and he knows nothing
about the facts regarding the performance of rāgānuga-
bhakti? His idea does not represent rāgānuga-bhakti.



Dhanurdhara Mahārāja: What if one has greed to have
darśana of his guru again?



Śrīla Gurudeva: If one has received dīkṣā in the true
sense, if he has had sufficient connection with his
Gurudeva in his past lives and in this life, and he has
sufficient past impressions on his heart, it may then be
said that he has genuine greed. We must consider whether
or not that greed is genuine. If you are serving and
hearing from your Gurudeva and performing vaidhī-bhakti,
then, after some time, by the association of your
Gurudeva or any rasika Vaiṣṇava, you may gradually come
to rāgānuga-bhakti. At the same time, we may see that
someone has that greed without having taken any help and
without having taken proper dīkṣā.



Girirāja Mahārāja: Like Haridasa Ṭhākura?



Śrīla Gurudeva: More so, like Bilvamaṅgala Ṭhākura. Such
a devotee is rāgānuga. We can know whether or not a
person is a rāgānuga-bhakta by his actions and thinking.
One’s bhakti is vaidhī in the beginning stages of his
development, and after that, by hearing from Gurudeva or
a rasika Vaiṣṇava, true greed can come.



Dhanurdhara Mahārāja: But Girirāja Mahārāja’s greed is
not out of fear of the śāstras. He has so much love for
Prabhupāda that he will do anything to get his darśana
again. He will manage, he will go to any place in the
world, he will do śravaṇam and kīrtanam. So he is
asking, “What is that greed?”

                              87
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017




Śrīla Gurudeva: That sort of greed is vaidhī-bhakti.
And, by guru’s mercy, if guru creates genuine greed,
then it will become rāgānuga.



Dhanurdhara Mahārāja: But greed is out of love; He is
not doing bhakti out of fear of the sastric injunctions.
It is out of...



Śrīla Gurudeva: If you truly know that your Gurudeva is
Vinoda Mañjarī or any mañjarī, and if you have genuine
greed to serve him in that form, that is rāgānuga. On
the other hand, if you have greed to serve him with
knowledge only of the form you have seen, his sādhaka
form, it is not rāgānuga; it is vaidhī-sādhana. Is this
clear?



Dhanurdhara Mahārāja: It is very clear. Perfect.



Śrīla Gurudeva: You should know all these truths. But
you don’t have that book, Rāga-vartma-candrikā, so I am
explaining it to you in brief.

Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Your instruction to do japa while
meditating on Ƙṛṣṇa’s pastimes has been so effective.



Śrīla Gurudeva: You are so lucky that in a short time
you know the effect and have realized it.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: It is due to coming in your
association.



Śrīla Gurudeva: So, up until now we have discussed
abhīṣṭa- bhāva-mayī, abhīṣṭa-bhāva-sambandhī, abhīṣṭa-
bhāva-anukūla, abhīṣṭa-bhāva aviruddha, and abhīṣṭa-
bhāva-viruddha.

We have discussed all these topics. Do you remember
them?



Girirāja Mahārāja: I remember that we discussed them,
but it is hard for me to remember the content.




                              88
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017


[endnotes]




1 [Excerpts of a lecture by Śrīla Bhaƙtivedānta Nārāyaṇa
Gosvāmī Mahārāja in Germany, on July 8, 2007:]



Nowadays, especially in European countries and in
Russia, neophyte devotees consider themselves very
rasika. They want rasa (the taste of spiritual mellows).
They want to go up to the top of the tree of prema at
once. They want only mādanākhya- bhāva (the highest
ecstatic devotional love, situated only in Śrīmatī
Rādhikā). They do not like vaidhī-bhakti and do not want
to follow it.

Such ideas are very dangerous, so be very careful about
this. Those who maintain these ideas are nonsense
sahajiyā- vaiṣṇavas. We see some sahajiyās at Rādhākuṇḍa
and in Vṛndāvana. They give what they call ‘siddha-deha’
to anyone – even to those who don’t know how to clean
themselves after passing stool. Such sahajiyās, with no
knowledge at all, give their disciples socalled siddha-
deha and tell them, “Now you are a mañjarī of Vṛndāvana.
You are serving Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa there.” Unqualified
persons, those who accept this idea, keep with them very
beautiful young widowed ladies. They begin to taste
artificial parakīya-bhāva with those ladies, and then
beget many children.

Such misconceptions are very dangerous. I have warned
all my disciples – brahmacārīs, sannyāsīs, and all
others – to be very careful of this.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa has explained about the natural tendency in
all living beings of this world, even in snakes,
donkeys, and monkeys. He has especially explained to
Uddhava (in Śrīmad- Bhāgavatam, Canto 11) that the
donkey is kicked by the hind legs of the shedonkey as he
follows that shedonkey for sex life. The stooleating pig
is another example of uncontrolled sex indulgence, as is
the shegoat and hegoat. Even when the malegoat is on his
way to a slaughterhouse to be killed, if he sees any
shegoat he becomes shameless and wants to have sex with
her. This is quite amazing – he is having sex at the
time of death. We must be very careful of this – ladies
regarding males, and males regarding ladies.

If one claims to have greed for service to Śrīmatī
Rādhikā or service like the other Vrajavāsīs, there must
be some symptoms in them. If one actually sees or meets
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, that devotee cannot remain in this
world. Nārada (at the stage of bhāva-bhakti) saw only a
glimpse of his Lord Nārāyaṇa, and then the Lord
disappeared and told him, “I never give my audience to
those who are not pure.” So, how is it possible for a
conditioned soul to see Rādhikā? Unwilling to accept any
inconvenience in the execution of vaidhī-bhakti, those
who don’t follow its rules and regulations are

                              89
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

completely independent, whimsical, and opposed to
śāstra.

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has explained (from the Śrutis and
Smṛti śāstras) that there are sixtyfour limbs of bhakti,
and the first ten limbs are especially important. The
first limb is gurupadāśraya. One must first accept
harināma initiation, and then dīkṣā-mantra initiation.
One must learn how to do bhakti. He must learn what is
bhakti, what is not bhakti, what is sakāma-bhakti (the
performance of bhakti for the purpose of satisfying
material desires), niṣkāma-bhakti (the performance of
bhakti without desires for material results), nirguṇā-
bhaki (devotion that is unaffected by the qualities of
material nature), uttama-bhakti (pure devotional
service), āropa-siddha-bhakti (activities which are not
pure bhakti, but are designated as bhakti due to their
being offered to the Supreme Lord), sañga- siddha-bhakti
(endeavors that are associated with, or favorable to,
the development of bhakti, but are not of themselves
purely composed of bhakti), and svarūpa-siddha-bhakti
(endeavors that are purely constituted of bhakti).

It is essential for aspiring devotees to know all these
truths; otherwise they will perform bhakti which is
actually not bhakti.

It is impossible for those who do not want to serve
Śrīla Gurudeva to attain rāgānuga-bhakti. Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu followed all the limbs of vaidhī-bhakti that
are discussed in Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu. He also
told Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, “Be patient and
return home. Don’t be a crazy fellow. By and by you will
be able to cross the ocean of material existence” (Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 16.237).

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī is Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī (in his form as a
gopī), but outwardly he was following all the limbs of
vaidhī- bhakti. If, by the mercy of one’s qualified
guru, one has actual greed in his heart – if he is
internally serving Kṛṣṇa on the path of rāgānuga in his
siddha-deha (his original, selfrealized position) – he
must be at the stage of rati. Real greed will manifest
at that stage. Before this, a person has no real greed.
In the name of greed, males will be attracted to ladies
and the ladies will be attracted to men. This is very
dangerous, for they will all go to hell, not to the
transcendental world to be mañjarīs.

Without serving guru, we cannot enter into the realm of
bhakti. Do not be desperate (impatient to jump ahead)
like unqualified, bogus persons who say that they have
seen

Śrīmatī Rādhikā. If one actually sees the transcendental
form of Kṛṣṇa, he will leave his body at once and go to
Vṛndāvana, Vrajamaṇḍala, in his transcendental siddha-
deha (spiritually perfected) body and serve Kṛṣṇa there.

Always be careful in this regard. People who deny the
importance of observing the principles of vaidhī-bhakti
may not want to follow, but you must follow. Then, if
you read Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta under the guidance of a
rasika Vaiṣṇava, your vaidhī-bhakti will automatically

                              90
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

turn into rāgānuga- bhakti. This is the process.




2 [An excerpt from Śrīla Bhaƙtivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja's lecture in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, in
February, 1999:]



As for transcendental matters, Tulasīdevī gives so much
knowledge. She purifies our heart and words. If Tulasī
is present, she also imbues in one the tendency to chant
Kṛṣṇa’s names and remember His pastimes, along with the
tendency to serve Him. Why? Because Vṛndādevī
(Tulasidevī in the form of a gopī) is one of the dearest
sakhīs of Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana. She is so powerful that
she manages to keep Vṛndāvana very beautiful. Therefore,
the name of that forest where Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa play has
been named after her.

If one wants to serve Kṛṣṇa, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu,
and Nityānanda Prabhu, and wants to chant harināma, then
he should surely wear tulasī beads. Our neck beads
should be pure tulasī, not tulasī mixed with pearls in
between them. Sometimes I see devotees put Ganges water
and ghee on the tulasī beads; but tulasī is as sacred as
Ganges and Yamunā water. There is no need to further
purify the beads.




If one wants kṛṣṇa-bhakti, he will adopt the mood of
this verse: “tulasī dekhi, jurāya prāṇa, mādhava-toṣaṇī
jāni – The sight of the tulasī plant soothes my soul,
for I know she gives pleasure to Lord Kṛṣṇa.” Tulasī, or
Vṛndā, is always serving Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in Goloka
Vṛndāvana. All of Vṛndāvana was her property, and she
offered it to the lotus feet of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. So, if
anyone wants to have pure bhakti, they will certainly
keep tulasī plants, wear tulasī beads, chant on tulasī
japa beads, do parikramā of her at least four times
daily, and water her as needed.



[An excerpt from a lecture by Śrīla Bhaƙtivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, on
February 12, 2000:]



Kṛṣṇa always considers Himself indebted to Vṛndādevī.
She serves in such a way, with all paraphernalia, that
Kṛṣṇa thinks He cannot repay her. So, if anyone gives
tulasī leaves to Kṛṣṇa, He becomes shy and thinks, ‘This
devotee has purchased Me.’ You can make an experiment
and test whether this is true or false. Give water to
the tulasī plant and offer her leaves at the lotus feet
of Kṛṣṇa, and if you offer Him any foodstuffs, put

                              91
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

tulasī leaves on each preparation. Kṛṣṇa surely accepts
and is happy by this, and He will try to please you. He
will say, “What do you want? What do you want?”

So, worship Tulasī. Give her water and offer a ghee lamp
daily. Especially ladies should offer a lamp.
Circumambulate her four times daily and sing the tulasī-
ārati. If you want to love and attain the service of
RādhāKṛṣṇa conjugal, you must worship Tulasī. You will
very easily benefit.




chapter four


Opulence, Or Sweetness?




Śrīla Gurudeva: Now we begin the Second Illumination of
Rāga-vartma-candrikā, and herein Śrīla Viśvanātha
Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura is expressing a concern: One may
think, “Ƙṛṣṇa is always engaged in vilāsa (amorous
pastimes) with the gopīs, performing rāsa-līlā with them
and sporting with them. He has forgotten everything else
– His home and all His duties. He is unaware of whether
or not any danger or enemy is approaching. He knows no
fear and has no worries, and He does not know what is
victory or defeat. He is simply engaged in relishing His
loving pastimes in the association of the gopīs. He is
absorbed in trying to please the gopīs, and the gopīs
are always thinking, ‘How can we make Ƙṛṣṇa happy?’ ”

One may inquire, “When Ƙṛṣṇa has forgotten everything
other than His love for the gopīs, who will hear the
prayers of His rāgānuga-bhaktas? Who will give them
consolation and blessings? Who will fulfil their
objectives?”

Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura says that some
persons propose that the partial expansion of Ƙṛṣṇa,
Paramātmā, will hear the rāgānuga-bhakta’s prayers,
because in that form the Lord dwells as a witness in the
heart of every jīva soul. He says that no rāgānuga-
bhakta will be satisfied with Paramātmā, because
Paramātmā is unaware of the rāgānuga-bhaktas’ moods.
Paramātmā is not sufficient for them.

Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Why is Paramātmā not sufficient?



Śrīla Gurudeva: He is not rasika (skilled in relishing
transcen dental humors, or rasas). He is the witness of
the jīva’s activities and He gives the fruits of the
jīva’s karma. He is bound in His duty. The rāgānuga-
bhaktas are not satisfied even by Nārāyaṇa, what to
speak of Paramātmā. They will not be satisfied even by
Rāmacandra and Dvārakādhīśa, what to speak of Their

                              92
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

partial expansions.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura says that Śrī Ƙṛṣṇa
– Vrajendranandana Śyāmasundara, Gopīkānta – will hear.
But how? He is engaged in the enchantment of the gopīs’
love and has forgotten everything else, so how will He
hear? The answer lies in the fact that there are two
special qualities in Ƙṛṣṇa: sarvajñatā (omniscience) and
mugdhatā (incognizance, or bewilderment).

Mugdha means that by the power of Śrī Ƙṛṣṇa’s prema, He
is like an innocent and ignorant child. For instance,
when

Ƙṛṣṇa was in Dvārakā He called Uddhava and told him that
there were two very important works to be done. One
would be to kill Jarāsandha, and the other would be to
accept the Pāṇḍavas’ invitation to join the Rājasūya
sacrifice. He told Uddhava, “Both are equally important.
What should I do?”

Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura says that if Ƙṛṣṇa
was only sarvajña, omniscient, knowing everything past,
present, and future, then why did He seek Uddhava’s
advice? We can say that perhaps He was pretending to be
ignorant, but from the subject it is seen that He was
not pretending.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: The subject was so grave and
serious.



Śrīla Gurudeva: Uddhava replied, “You called for me and
just like an ordinary, simplehearted person You asked
me, ‘O Uddhava, what is My duty in this situation?’
Although You are full of unlimited, eternal knowledge
that is undivided and unimpeded by time and space, still
You questioned me, just as an innocent person approaches
someone wise for advice about some weighty matter.”

In order to render service, Uddhava continued, “My dear
Lord, I think it best for You to immediately go and help
Ƙing Yudhiṣṭhira in his great venture.   At the same
time, it is Your duty to give protection to the
surrendered souls. Both purposes can be served if we
understand the whole situation. Unless one is victorious
over all kings, one cannot perform the Rājasūya
sacrifice. In other words, Ƙing Yudhiṣṭhira cannot
perform this great sacrifice without gaining victory
over Ƙing Jarāsandha. We must first kill Jarāsandha, and
then all our purposes will automatically be served.”

Appreciating Uddhava’s solution, Ƙṛṣṇa replied,
“Uddhava, you are certainly very intelligent. I will do
as you advise.”

Another example: Ƙuntī prayed to Ƙṛṣṇa, “I remember the
pastime of Yaśodā binding Your waist. You were crying
bitterly, and that crying was not imitation. So I am
astonished. Fear personified fears You, yet You were
afraid of the stick in the hands of Yaśodā.”

                              93
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017


This is called mugdhatā, knowing nothing; just like a
very innocent child knows nothing. If a person is
overpowered by the illusory material māyā of Ƙṛṣṇa, that
person feels both happiness and suffering for many
births under that illusory energy. His happiness and
sufferings are all the work of māyā, meaning
‘forgetfulness of Ƙṛṣṇa.’   Are Ƙṛṣṇa’s mugdhatā and
sarvajñatā the fruits of this māyā? No. Ƙṛṣṇa is not
under the influence of brahma-māyā, or even Balarāma’s
māyā. Rather,

Ƙṛṣṇa’s illusion is the result of His prema, His bhakta-
vātsalya, His desire to please His devotees. He loves
His devotees so much that in their association He
becomes so enchanted that He forgets everything else.
His mugdhatā occurs by the influence of prema.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: It’s not by Yogamāyā? It’s by
prema?

Śrīla Gurudeva: Yes, prema; and that prema is Yogamāyā.
Yogamāyā is nothing other than the personification of

Ƙṛṣṇa’s prema. There are so many functions of prema,
such as Yogamāyā, ātmā-māyā (internal potency), Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, and hlādinī-śakti (pleasure potency). Due to
prema, Ƙṛṣṇa becomes sarvajña and mugdha at the same
time. While He is engaged with the gopīs in rāsa-līlā
and other loving pastimes, if any rāgānuga-bhakta in
this world worships and prays to Him and the gopīs, He
will fulfill that devotee’s desire. For that rāgānuga-
bhakta, He hears everything.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura tells us that we
need to know the meanings of aiśvarya and mādhurya. Now,
what is aiśvarya?



Girirāja Mahārāja: Aiśvarya means ‘opulence,’ or
‘majesty.’



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: It is the majestic feature of the
Lord in Dvārakā, Mathurā, and Nārāyaṇa’s Vaikuṇṭha; it
is worship with awe and reverence.



Śrīla Gurudeva:   And what is mādhurya?



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: The sweetness that overpowers His
opulence. It is the sweetness of the Lord’s pastimes.



Śrīla Gurudeva: This is not a sufficient answer.
Sweetness alone is not mādhurya. We taste sweet things,

                              94
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

but this is not regarded as mādhurya. We taste something
like this in our family relations, and a teenage boy
tastes what he calls mādhurya, but this is not mādhurya.
In the background there must be aiśvarya, or opulence.
Without aiśvarya there cannot be mādhurya.

Do you know the meaning of mahā-aiśvarya? Aiśvarya means
‘opulence,’ so mahā-aiśvarya means ‘great opulence.’
Whether or not there is an exhibition of great opulence,
if

Śrī Ƙṛṣṇa’s pastimes are experienced as nara-līlā, then
it is mādhurya. Do you know the meaning of nara-līlā?

Bhurijana dāsa:   As with humans.



Śrīla Gurudeva: Whether or not mahā-aiśvarya is present,
if Ƙṛṣṇa’s pastimes are experienced as nara-līlā, then
it is mādhurya. On the other hand, if by the presence of
mahā- aiśvarya Ƙṛṣṇa knows that He is God and His bhakta
also knows it, that is aiśvarya-līlā.[11]

For example, we have seen that when Ƙṛṣṇa and Arjuna
were about to fight in the Battle of Ƙurukṣetra, Arjuna
saw

Ƙṛṣṇa’s Universal Form and told Him (Bhagavad-gītā
11.41–42), “Thinking of You as my friend, I have rashly
addressed You

‘O Ƙṛṣṇa, O Yādava, O my friend,’ not knowing Your
glories. Please forgive whatever I may have done in
madness or in love. I have dishonored You many times,
jesting as we relaxed, lay on the same bed, or sat or
ate together, sometimes alone and sometimes in front of
many friends. O infallible one, please excuse me for all
those offenses.”

This is aiśvarya-līlā because Ƙṛṣṇa was in the mood that
“I am God,” and He showed   Arjuna His Universal Form.
When Arjuna saw that form, he abandoned his mood of
friendship.

Also, when Ƙṛṣṇa went with Baladeva to see Vasudeva and
Devakī after killing Ƙaṁsa, Vasudeva and Devakī began to
worship Ƙṛṣṇa with many prayers of glorification. In
this instance as well, Ƙṛṣṇa was in iśvarya-bhāva, the
conception that He is God. He considered Himself God,
and they also knew that He was God.

On the other hand the Vrajavāsīs never considered Him to
be God. He approached Govardhana, lifted it, and held it
with only the pinky finger of His left hand for seven
days. Indra then came and performed an opulent bathing
ceremony for Him, called abhiṣekha, employing several
sacred substances. After this, the gopa elders assembled
and decided, “Let us call Yaśodā and Nanda Mahārāja. Let
us tell them, ‘Do not imagine that Ƙṛṣṇa is your son. Do
not call Him thief, liar, or any other bad name; that
will be an offense.’ ” They advised Nanda Mahārāja and
Yaśodā Maiyā to understand that Ƙṛṣṇa was perhaps some
demigod, or perhaps Nārāyaṇa Himself, since this is what

                              95
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

they had heard from the sage Garga Ṛṣi.

Yaśodā never thought of Ƙṛṣṇa as God. Rather, extremely
pleased to hear that her son had lifted Govardhana for
seven days, she considered, “Everyone is offering praise
to my son,” and her chest swelled with great pride. If a
woman hears anything good about her children, she
becomes so pleased. Although Yaśodā knew that lifting
Govardhana was not the act of an ordinary person, she
still considered, “Ƙṛṣṇa is merely my child, my son.”
This is mādhurya.

Uddhava came to Vṛndāvana to console the gopīs in their
mood of separation from Ƙṛṣṇa after Ƙṛṣṇa went to
Mathurā. There, he overheard the gopīs complaining about
Ƙṛṣṇa, saying, “We have heard from Paurṇamāsī and Garga
Ṛṣi that Ƙṛṣṇa is īśvara, Bhagavān; not only in this
birth, but also in past births, and also when He was
Rāmacandra. But we know that even as Rāmacandra He acted
improperly and immorally, and He was controlled by
Sītādevī.”

In this way, eventhough it had come to their attention
through Paurṇamāsī and Garga Ṛṣi that Ƙṛṣṇa is God, they
personally never saw Him as such. This is the nature of
their ’īśvara-bhāva’. They would tell Him, “Oh, come
here. The red lac (decorative paint) on my feet is no
longer there. You should repaint it.” They would order
Him to perform so many services for them, and they would
also become angry with Him. If they were actually aware
of Ƙṛṣṇa’s Godhood, how could they have become angry
with Him?

Rather, the gopīs saw and behaved with Him only as their
lover. In their version of īśvara-bhāva, they know
nothing be yond the idea that He is their beloved. This
is mādhurya-bhāva.

Thus, when Ƙṛṣṇa knows that He is īśvara and His bhakta
also knows this, that pastime is in aiśvarya-bhāva. On
the other hand, when He and His associates both forget
this – and even when some idea comes to His associates
that He may be God, they only think of Him and behave
towards Him like a lover – that is mādhurya-bhāva.

In Vraja, Ƙṛṣṇa is always in vraja-bhāva. He is always
over powered by prema, meaning Yogamāyā, His internal
desire potency.   All actions in Vraja are performed by
this prema. It is not against siddhānta to say that
Ƙṛṣṇa is overpowered by prema, because prema and Ƙṛṣṇa
are the same Truth: sat-cit-ānanda- maya, consisting of
eternal existence, unlimited knowledge, and unfathomable
joy. This prema is the intrinsic nature ofƘṛṣṇa.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Can we say that prema is the
śakti (potency) of Ƙṛṣṇa, or not?



Śrīla Gurudeva: We may say so. Ƙṛṣṇa Himself is known as
raso vai saḥ (the reservoir of divine mellows). Rasa is
prema, prema is Ƙṛṣṇa, and Ƙṛṣṇa is prema. And, at the

                              96
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

same time, prema is the śakti of Ƙṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura explains that at the
time of rāsa-līlā, Śrī Ƙṛṣṇa was sarvajña, allknowing,
because He knew, “ All the gopīs love Me and want to
dance with Me.” He knew this, and He therefore expanded
into innumerable

Ƙṛṣṇas. On the other hand, when He did whatever the
gopīs desired and became controlled by them, He was
mugdha, unaware of His aiśvarya. Both qualities are
present in Him at the same time. Why? This is due to His
acintya-śakti, His power to make the impossible
possible. This is beyond all mundane logic.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura then says that when,
by vaidhī-bhakti, someone worships Nārāyaṇa, or Rāma, or
any other plenary expansion of Ƙṛṣṇa, that devotee goes
to Vaikuṇṭha after attaining perfection.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: What about RukmiṇīDvārakādhiśa?



Śrīla Gurudeva: I will explain this afterwards,
separately. When one performs vaidhī-bhakti and
discusses topics regarding Vaikuṇṭha, after achieving
perfection (vastu-siddhi) he attains Vaikuṇṭha.
Regarding those who have no greed but want to serve
Rādhā and Ƙṛṣṇa, and they are worshiping Rādhā and Ƙṛṣṇa
by the regulations of vaidhī-bhakti – where do they go
at the time of perfection?



Bhurijana dāsa: With no greed?



Śrīla Gurudeva: No greed. They are worshiping by vaidhī-
bhakti.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: To Dvārakā



Śrīla Gurudeva: Why Dvārakā? There is no relation with
Dvārakā in this case.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: They are worshiping Rādhā and
Ƙṛṣṇa?



Śrīla Gurudeva: They want Rādhā and Ƙṛṣṇa.




                              97
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                     5/5/2017

Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: But there is no greed?



Śrīla Gurudeva: No greed, and by vaidhī-bhakti. In that
case, they will attain Goloka. They know nothing about
parakīyā, Ƙṛṣṇa’s paramour love with Rādhikā and the
gopīs. They only know svakīyā, the idea of Śrī Śrī
RādhāƘṛṣṇa as a married couple. This svakīyā is in
Goloka.

The planet of Goloka is vast, with many prakoṣṭhas
(separate sections) situated there. So, if one is
worshiping RādhāƘṛṣṇa by vaidhī-bhakti and has no greed…

Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: He goes to Goloka.



Śrīla Gurudeva: In Goloka we find aiśvarya-jñāna,
knowledge of Ƙṛṣṇa’s Godhood, and svakīyā-bhāva, the
mood of RādhāƘṛṣṇa as a married couple. Their Lordships
there are Rādhā and Ƙṛṣṇa. Every kind of aiśvarya is
present there, almost like that of Nārāyaṇa, but Ƙṛṣṇa
is not manifest as Nārāyaṇa.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: I was reading Garga-Saṁhitā,
which describes this.



Śrīla Gurudeva: The twentyfour prominent forms of
Nārāyaṇa, as well as all His other forms, reside in
lower Vaikuṇṭha. Higher than that is Rāmaloka, and
higher than that is Ƙṛṣṇa loka. Ƙṛṣṇaloka begins from
Goloka, within which there are many divisions: Goloka,
Dvārakā, Mathurā, and then Vraja. In lower Goloka there
is only svakīyā-bhāva with aiśvarya-jñāna, with no greed
at all towards vraja-bhāva.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Ƙṛṣṇa showed the residents of
Vṛndāvana a vision of Goloka at   Akrūraghāṭa, the place
where Akrūra took bath when he was taking Ƙṛṣṇa and
Balarāma to Mathurā, .



Śrīla Gurudeva: Yes, but they only saw Goloka, not
Vraja, not Vṛndāvana.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: They saw this Goloka?



Śrīla Gurudeva: This Goloka.




                              98
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                      5/5/2017

Bhurijana dāsa: Ƙṛṣṇa showed Vaikuṇṭha to Akrūra.



Śrīla Gurudeva: In that connection, the word Vaikuṇṭha
refers to Goloka. He also showed this same Goloka to the
Vrajavāsīs – not Vraja, only Goloka. Ƙṛṣṇa and all His
associates including Rādhikā and Yaśodā were there in
Goloka in their own forms, but they were not in vraja-
bhāva.

Next, suppose someone worships Rādhā and Ƙṛṣṇa in
vaidhī-bhakti – not in rāga-marga and not under the
guidance of a rasika Vaiṣṇava – and at the same time he
has greed. That devotee will go to Dvārakā.[12] Why will
he go there? Because Rādhikā manifests as Satyabhāmā
there in Dvārakā, and Candrāvalī manifests as Rukmiṇī;
and because aiśvarya-jñāna, knowledge of Ƙṛṣṇa’s
Godhood, is present there. When Rādhā and Candrāvalī are
present as Satyabhāmā and Rukmiṇī, Ƙṛṣṇa is in His
feature as Dvārakādiśa and He is served by them in
Dvārakā.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: What is the difference between
someone who worships and goes to Goloka, and someone who
worships and goes to Dvārakā?



Śrīla Gurudeva: Those who worship without greed go to
Goloka.



Bhurijana dāsa: Only one has greed, but both are
worshiping in vaidhī-bhakti?



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Is there greed in Dvārakā?



Śrīla Gurudeva: Those bhaktas have greed, but they are
worshiping in vaidhī-bhakti. In that case Rādhikā
manifests as Satyabhāmā, Candrāvalī as Rukmiṇī, and
their associates as the other queens of Dvārakā. Ƙṛṣṇa
is in the same form there as He is in Vṛndāvana, but
there He is a Yādava.

Next, those who have greed for vraja-bhāva and worship
RādhāƘṛṣṇa by rāgānuga-bhakti under the guidance of a
rasika Vrajavāsī will achieve vraja-bhāva. Is this
clear?



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: This is very important.



Śrīla Gurudeva: This is a very important thing. Without

                              99
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

know ing these truths, we cannot have a proper idea of
Vraja and we may be deceived. If one has the svarūpa
(constitutional spiritual form) of a maidservant of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, that svarūpa will only manifest when
one is under the guidance of a rasika Vaiṣṇava.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: This gives us the conviction that
we must try for the thing you are teaching – rāgānuga-
bhakti.



Śrīla Gurudeva: Yes, rāgānuga-bhakti. But you will have
to give me dakṣiṇā (a donation) for this.



Girirāja Mahārāja: I’ll give anything.



Śrīla Gurudeva: I am very greedy. I want dakṣiṇā.



Girirāja Mahārāja: Tell me what to give.



Śrīla Gurudeva: I will have to tell you?



Girirāja Mahārāja: My heart.



Śrīla Gurudeva: Yes. These are such good topics, and we
are certainly lucky that we are discussing them. In the
practise of bhakti, hundreds of thousands of births may
go by and it is not certain that one will have the good
fortune to discuss such topics. It is only the mercy of
guru and Gaurāṅga that we are able to do so.

Making another very important point, Śrīla Viśvanātha
Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura says that we should not worship Śrī
Śrī RādhāƘṛṣṇa without pastimes. Do you understand? If
we chant “Hare Ƙṛṣṇa, Hare Ƙṛṣṇa” without remembering
Their pastimes, only a very simple thing can be
achieved. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has therefore said that
chanting Ƙṛṣṇa’s name and remembering His pastimes must
be amalgamated – then there will be rasa (the mellow
taste of a relationship with Rādhā and Ƙṛṣṇa). For
example, if sugar and water remain as they are,




without being mixed, there will be no rasa, no
nectartaste of a good drink. Both must mix together;
then it will be rasa.

                          100
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                     5/5/2017


What kind of pastimes do we want to remember? If we have
greed for that relationship, we want to remember Ƙṛṣṇa’s
pastimes with the gopīs. It is true that Ƙṛṣṇa is always
with His hlādinī-śakti, His pleasure potency. It is also
true that Rādhikā is the personification of His hlādinī-
śakti, also known as His svarūpa-śakti (His complete,
intrinsic potency). Still, we should not remember Rādhā
and Ƙṛṣṇa without Their pastimes. If we remember Them
without pastimes, hlādinī-śakti will not act upon us.

When we go to the temple, we see Rādhā and Ƙṛṣṇa simply
standing on the altar. If this is what we meditate upon
when we chant Hare Ƙṛṣṇa, we will have darśana of
Satyabhāmā and Rukmiṇī, or Lakṣmī. Thus, it is not
certain that we will attain vraja-bhāva simply by the
worship of Rādhā and Ƙṛṣṇa as They appear in the temple.

We should remember the pastimes of Rādhā and Ƙṛṣṇa as
they are served by the mañjarīs who are under the
guidance of Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī and Śrī Rati Mañjarī, and
we should meditate on our Gurudeva as one of the
mañjarīs. We should remember the pastimes as described
by our Gosvāmīs and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

When we perform the ārati of Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Ƙṛṣṇa, we
should again remember Their pastimes. Which pastimes? In
the morning, remember Their morning pastimes; and at
midday, remember Their midday pastimes. Consider that in
our svarūpa we are one of Their associates and, praying
for that attainment, meditate on our Gurudeva as one of
them. In this way our bhajana will be rāgānuga,
otherwise it will be simply performing vaidhī-bhakti.



Bhurijana dāsa: Did the gopīs or mañjarīs ever offer
ārati? Would they offer ārati to Rādhā and Ƙṛṣṇa?

Śrīla Gurudeva: Yes, but you’ll need to know what kind
of ārati they are doing. They have a pradīpa.



Śrīpād Mādhava Mahārāja: Lamp.



Bhurijana dāsa: Ghee (clarified butter) lamp.



Śrīla Gurudeva: But in this connection the ghee is their
heart’s prema, the pradīpa is their heart, and the
cotton…



Bhurijana dāsa: Wick.



Śrīla Gurudeva: The cotton is their bhāva, their mood of
service. What kind of bhāva?   A special bhāva. Every

                          101
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

bhakta has a special bhāva, and that bhāva comes out
through the eyes. The gopīs worship Ƙṛṣṇa by the corners
of their eyes, and Ƙṛṣṇa accepts their worship by His
eyes and takes it into His heart. The gopīs perform
arcana (worship) in this way; not in the way we do it.

When Ƙṛṣṇa comes home from cowgrazing, Yaśodā Mā takes a
ghee lamp and other paraphernalia and offers ārati to
Ƙṛṣṇa. The gopīs stand at the doorways so that they will
not be seen as they perform arcana with their
amourfilled eyes. Due to His glance being absorbed in
the arcana of the gopīs, Ƙṛṣṇa does not see His mother’s
ārati. The gopīs’ arcana is the best arcana and the best
ārati. We should see their ārati through our ārati.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura advises us to be
very careful. Some persons say that Rādhikā is svakīyā,
Ƙṛṣṇa’s wife, not parakīyā, His paramour. They say that
parakīyā is only present in Ƙṛṣṇa’s pastimes as they are
performed in this material world (prakaṭa-līlā), not in
His pastimes as manifest in Goloka Vṛndāvana (aprakaṭa-
līlā). Moreover, it appears that one of our ācāryas has
also written this [See Endnote 1].



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Jīva Gosvāmī.

Śrīla Gurudeva: Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, and the followers of
Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī.

Śrīla Visvanatha Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura says that none of
the books written by rasika Vaiṣṇava ācāryas, like
Nārada, Vyāsa, Śuka, Śaṅkara, and the father of
Vyāsadeva, namely Parāśara, state that Rādhā and Ƙṛṣṇa
are svakīyā, neither have any of the Purāṇas stated it.

It is essential to know that whether Rādhā and Ƙṛṣṇa’s
pastimes are manifest in prakaṭa-līlā (Their pastimes in
this material world) or aprakaṭa-līlā (Their unmanifest
pastimes, in Goloka Vṛndāvana), Rādhikā has parakīyā-
bhāva, the mood of a beloved in unwedded or paramour
love. Moreover, when it is said by any bona fide ācārya,
like Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, that She is svakīyā, then, in
that connection ‘svakīyā’ simply means that She belongs
to Ƙṛṣṇa because She is the embodiment of His hlādinī-
śakti, or pleasure potency. Regarding Her personal mood,
however, She is always immersed in the mood of parakīyā.

Thus, we should think of and worship Rādhikā in
parakīyā- bhāva, serving Her in this way and meditating
on this verse:



nikuñja-yūno rati-keli-siddhyai yā yālibhir yuktir
apekṣaṇīyā



tatrāti-dākṣyād ati-vallabhasya vande guroḥ śrī-
caraṇāravindam



                          102
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017


Śrī Gurvaṣṭakam (6)

The spiritual master is very dear, because he is expert
in assisting the gopīs, who at different times make
different tasteful arrangements for the perfection of
Rādhā and Ƙṛṣṇa’s conjugal loving affairs within the
groves of Vṛndāvana. I offer my most humble obeisances
unto the lotus feet of such a spiritual master.



Śrīmatī Rādhikā and the gopīs engage in cheating their
husbands, fathersinlaw, mothersinlaw, brothers, and all
other relatives in order to meet with Ƙṛṣṇa. If we have
greed for this service, we will want to know the sixteen
kinds of services performed by the gopīs in parakīyā-
bhāva.[13] If we do not become like these gopīs, we will
not be able to serve Śrīmatī Rādhikā.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Can I ask a question? I’ve heard
that Jīva Gosvāmī sometimes talked about svakīyā because
some of his disciples were not qualified to understand
parakīyā.



Śrīla Gurudeva: This is certainly true, and therefore we
can reconcile his statements in this way. He personally
accepted parakīyā-bhāva – and he explained for
qualified= devotees that Rādhikā’s relationship with Śrī
Ƙṛṣṇa is parakīyā. However, he told those who doubted
the supreme purity of Their relation ship to strictly
follow the understanding of svakīyā-bhāva.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: I have one more question. In
RādhāƘṛṣṇa’s līlā, we sometimes see that They are
married.

Śrīla Gurudeva:   We should always think of such
marriages as parakīyā, not svakīyā. For instance, a
marriage may take place when the gopīs want to joke with
Ƙṛṣṇa. Once, while Ƙṛṣṇa and the gopīs were engaged in
sitting and joking with each other, Lalitā stealthily
went behind Ƙṛṣṇa and Śrīmatī Rādhikā. She took the ends
of Their...



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Their sārī and dhotī cloth
[Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s veil and Ƙṛṣṇa’s chaddar].




Śrīla Gurudeva: ... and tied them together. Viśākhā then
began uttering mantras, and the gopīs began singing
marriage songs. The gopīs told Ƙṛṣṇa, “You should do
like this, and like that, and follow these procedures,”

                          103
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                      5/5/2017

and everyone present was very pleased. This is a joking
pastime in parakīyā-bhāva – a play marriage – and
Brahmā, as a priest, also once performed Their play
marriage.



Bhurijana dāsa: In Bhāṇḍīravana.



Śrīla Gurudeva: Such playmarriages have two purposes.
The inner purpose is the nourishment of parakīyā-rasa,
and the outer purpose is to close the mouths of
unqualified persons. For those who would criticize
parakīyā-rasa, thinking that the paramour love of Rādhā
and Ƙṛṣṇa is immoral, because of these playmarriages it
can be said, “Oh, They were married here.”

Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: They can be told, “It’s
legitimate.”



Śrīla Gurudeva: In this way both purposes are served.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: In this world we sometimes see
that children enact play marriages. It was something
like that?



Śrīla Gurudeva: It is for pleasure only. Now, Śrīla
Cakravartī Ṭhākura will explain something else, and
perhaps this will be his last topic.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: But there are so many more pages
to the book. What is this next thing?



Śrīla Gurudeva: I am about to tell you. Suppose a
sādhaka of rāgānuga-bhakti has crossed the stages of
śraddhā (faith), niṣṭhā (steadiness), ruci (taste),
āsakti (attachment), and bhāva (the stage of spiritual
emotions, just prior to pure love of God, or prema).
After bhāva there is nothing to do in this world;
sādhana-bhakti here has been completed, for the first
rays of prema have come.

Because the physical body cannot contain the ‘load’ of
prema, what happens? Does the devotee go directly to
Goloka Vṛndāvana? From that time, what does he do and
where does he live?

Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura quotes some persons
as saying that the devotee goes directly to Goloka
Vṛndāvana, but he says that this is not a fact. He
quotes Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi as saying that after this
stage they go to Vṛndāvana, but that it is not clear

                          104
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                      5/5/2017

there whether this refers to prakaṭa Vraja (Vraja as
manifest in Ƙṛṣṇa’s pastimes in this world), or aprakaṭa
Vraja (Goloka Vṛndāvana). If it is thought that they go
directly to Goloka Vṛndāvana, then some confusion will
arise. It is only after attaining the stages of prema,
sneha, māna, praṇaya, rāga, anurāga, bhāva (different
from the bhāva that comes before the attainment of
prema), and mahābhāva that one can meet Rādhā and Ƙṛṣṇa
in Vraja. Without mahābhāva, no one can meet Them. This
is the qualification of the gopīs who meet Them and
serve Rādhā. Under these circumstances, if the devotee
can go directly to aprakaṭa Goloka Vṛndāvana, from where
has he received the stages of sneha up to mahābhāva?

If he has not gone through these stages, he cannot
directly go there. Do you understand? In the body of the
sādhaka (the devotee practitioner in this world) even
sthāyī-bhāva cannot come; what to speak of sneha, māna,
praṇaya, and mahābhāva.



Bhurijana dāsa: Sthāyī-bhāva cannot come when?



Śrīla Gurudeva: It cannot appear in this physical body.
This body cannot tolerate prema; it can tolerate only up
to the stage of bhāva, and therefore it cannot appear in
this body. Sthāyī- bhāva appears at the stage of prema,
when all bhāvas – āśraya, ālambana, uddīpana,
vyabhicārī, and so forth gather together

[See Endnote 2].

Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura tells us that it is
not expressed in Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi whether the
devotee in the last stage of bhāva enters aprakaṭa Vraja
or prakaṭa Vraja, but our ācāryas have done some
investigation on this subject. He tells us that someone
may say that because that devotee has to take birth from
the womb of a gopī, he must go directly to aprakaṭa
Vraja.

He says, however, that there is no place of sādhana in
aprakaṭa Vraja, so it cannot be possible that the
devotee directly goes there. There is no opportunity for
training under the guidance of the nitya-siddha
(eternally perfect) associates of Rādhā and Ƙṛṣṇa in
aprakaṭa-līlā, which is siddha-bhūmi, the place of
perfection. Only after taking birth in the womb of a
gopī in prakaṭa Vraja, and receiving training there, can
one then go to aprakaṭa Vraja.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura says that by the
wish of Ƙṛṣṇa and Śrīmatī Rādhikā, Yogamāyā takes that
sādhaka who is situated in the advanced stage of bhāva-
bhakti to prakaṭa-līlā Vraja. Prakaṭa-līlā is present at
all times in some universe. By the wish of Ƙṛṣṇa and
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, Yogamāyā takes that lucky jīva to any
universe in which Their pastimes are going on, and gives
them birth from the womb of a gopī. Thus, that young
gopī has the association of nitya-siddha gopīs
(eternally perfect gopīs) from childhood. Sometimes she

                          105
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

sees Ƙṛṣṇa and thus has greed to meet Him; that stage is
called pūrva-rāga. She goes through so many stages from
prema to mahābhāva.

Even if she has been wedded and has associated with her
husband, still, she has prema for Ƙṛṣṇa. If she has a
child, Yogamāyā will not immediately approve her
association with Ƙṛṣṇa and the gopīs. In that case, she
will weep. Her heart will burn in feelings of separation
from Ƙṛṣṇa, and those feelings will wash away all
obstacles to meeting Him. She will know, “This is not my
child and this is not my husband,” and then she will
meet Ƙṛṣṇa.

Those gopīs who have the association of the nitya-siddha
gopīs reach up to mahābhāva and meet with Ƙṛṣṇa. Then,
when Ƙṛṣṇa’s prakaṭa-līlā is completed, when His
associates




in prakaṭa-līlā go to aprakaṭa-līlā, those gopīs will go
with them to serve there forever.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura declares, “O mahā-
anurāgi Vaiṣṇava, O rāgānuga Vaiṣṇava, don’t be worried.
Don’t be afraid. Go on with your practices of rāgānuga-
bhajana. After you leave your body, you will go to any
one of the universes in which Ƙṛṣṇa is performing His
pastimes. He will attract you. He will be waiting for
you there.”

Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura teaches us how to
pray: “O Gokulānanda, You are always sinking in the
ocean of the gopīs’ prema. You are a swan, swimming…”
Where?



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: In the ocean of Ƙṛṣṇa’s pastimes.



Bhurijana dāsa: Lake.



Śrīla Gurudeva: In the lake of gopī-prema. “You are the
swan in the lake of gopī-prema. You are the taster of
that gopī-prema. “Even though You are sarvajña
(allknowing), You are also mugdha (bewildered in prema).
You are mugdha, and at the same time, by Your acintya-
śakti, inconceivable potency, You are sarvajña. So
please hear my prayers. Please don’t be mugdha. If You
are mugdha, You are not able to hear me. I pray that You
will be both mugdha and sarvajña as well. In this way
You will know my heart and my prayer.”



līlā-vilāsine bhakti mañjarī lolupāline


                          106
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                      5/5/2017

maugdya sarvajñya nidhaye gokulānanda te namaḥ

Rāga-vartma-candrikā, Second Illumination



O Gokulānanda, O Enjoyer of amorous pastimes, You are
like a honeybee attracted by and always relishing the
beautiful, fragrant mañjarīs of bhakti, the budding
flowers of devotion, wherever they are found in any
devotee, and especially in Śrīmatī Rādhikā. I offer
praṇāma unto You.



Dadāmi buddhi-yogaṁ. Do you know what this phrase means?

Girirāja Mahārāja: I give the intelligence by which they
can come to Me.



Śrīla Gurudeva: Yes. Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura
is teaching us how to pray by his own example. He
writes, “I pray that You will give me intelligence so
that I may receive vraja-prema for both You and Rādhikā.
If You do not answer my prayer, I will declare that You
are not fulfilling Your promise; so You must keep Your
word.

“O Vrajendranandana, Your lotus feet are always taking
great pleasure in being decorated by the breasts of the
gopīs. How will I obtain the highest stage of service to
You? Please give me the kind of buddhi-yoga
(transcendental knowledge) by which I can receive this.”

Śrīla Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura is now ending his book. He
tells us, “Those who say that rāgānuga-bhakti is beyond
any sastric injunctions and those who say that one who
has left aside sastric injunctions can enter rāgānuga-
bhakti are wrong. Such persons don’t know anything.”

He says that without following śāstras such as Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, and the śāstras written by Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī,

Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, Śrīla Ƙṛṣṇadāsa Ƙavirāja
Gosvāmī, Śrī Nārada Ṛṣi, and all related śāstras, one
simply creates troubles for himself.



śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi- pañcarātra-vidhiṁ vinā




aikāntikī harer bhaktir utpātāyaiva kalpate




                          107
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.101)




Devotional service of the Lord that transgresses the
regulations of the authorized Vedic literatures, such as
the Upaniṣads, Purāṇas, and Nārada-pañcarātra, simply
causes unnecessary disturbance in society.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura has quoted this
śloka. We do not follow those persons who reject sastric
injunctions. It is most difficult even for the demigods
to achieve rāgānuga- bhakti, what to speak of general
persons.

He says, “I have written Rāga-vartma-candrikā (‘the
moonbeam illuminating the path of rāga’) for those who
are very qualified and who have received the grace of
guru and Gaurāṅga in order to discover the way and then
proceed along the path.” He tells us, “I have given some
light, and if others take advantage of that light I will
consider my endeavor successful.”

Today we have concluded the teachings of Rāga-vartma-
candrikā.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: May I ask a question?



Śrīla Gurudeva: Yes.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: You have told us that one in
gopī- bhāva should know one’s (gopī) name, age, parents,
place of birth, and so many things like this.   At what
stage in bhakti does this realization come? In the
progression there is bhāva, prema, sneha, and so on.
At what stage does that come?



Śrīla Gurudeva: As long as we have patience in the
matter of receiving this, we can know that our
qualification to receive it has not yet come. That
realization comes when all patience has been washed
away, when we are so totally impatient that we don’t
care whether or not we are qualified.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: You mentioned that this material
body cannot withstand the force of prema, so one must
first take birth in Ƙṛṣṇa’s prakaṭa-līlā, His pastimes
as they are manifest in some material universe. Before
that time, if one is meditating that, “My age as a gopī
is this, my name is this…”



                          108
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                     5/5/2017


Śrīla Gurudeva: There must be pure greed. When that pure
greed comes, God and guru will arrange that everything
is revealed. Somehow, by their arrangement, we will
surely have the required realizations.    At that time we
will be convinced that we will not be able to remain
alive if we do not know all these things.

Pure greed must come first.   At that time there will be
no consideration of whether or not we are qualified and
no con sideration of what stage we are in. Ƙṛṣṇa will
arrange every thing. But, we should not do any kalpanā.



Tamāla-kṛṣṇa Mahārāja: Imagination.



Śrīla Gurudeva: No imagination.

This is our Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava speciality. We should
continue practicing and trying to learn everything that
is needed in order to enter rāgānuga-bhakti.   We are
sure that Śrīmatī Rādhikā will arrange everything for
us. If She made all arrangements for Gopakumāra and the
Govardhana brāhmaṇa, why would She not arrange for us as
well? Surely, She will do so. She sent one of Her
associates to you, to bring you up to this stage. Why
would She not arrange further?

Whatever mercy has come to you already will surely con
tinue. If you have greed and a very strong desire, She
must certainly arrange for you to progress. If someone
is not available to come in person, Śrī Ƙṛṣṇa will
inspire you through the caitya- guru (Supersoul) in your
heart.

At this present time we can only pray, with a strong
desire. This is within our custody, and after that
whatever the Lord will do, He will do. In our present
stage we can have this desire; we are not qualified to
do more than this.

Next time we will discuss some ślokas of Vilāpa-
kusumāñjali. This will be very helpful in the matter of
entering rāgānuga- bhakti.




[endnotes]




1 [Excerpts from the commentary of Śrīla Bhaƙtivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja on Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī
Ṭhāƙura’s Rāga-vartma-candrikā:]




                          109
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

We are presenting herein the essence of Śrīla Jīva
Gosvāmī’s and Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura’s
views on svakīyā (marital love) and parakīyā
(extramarital love) that are imparted in both their
commentaries on Śloka 2.21 of Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi. Both
mahājanas have very skillfully given their respective
visions of the same ultimate   Absolute Truth, from the
point of view of tattva and līlā, based on logic and
proof from śāstra.



The Line of Thought of

Śrīla Viśvanātha Caƙravartī Ṭhāƙura



Śrīla Caƙravartīpāda maintains that Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī
is one of the prominent rūpānuga Vaiṣṇavas. It is not
possible for him to give an explanation in favor of
svakīyā, or marital love. Whatever he has explained
supporting svakīyā, he has done simply to satisfy
others. Therefore, concluding his explanation, he
himself has stated, “likhitaṁ kiñcid atra parecchayā – I
have written this to satisfy the desires of others.”

To allow unqualified persons of different inclinations
to understand that this inconceivable līlā is completely
immaculate, he has presented his commentary in support
of svakīya so that they too can come forward to meditate
on this līlā with unwavering faith. For the surrendered,
intimate devotees of Śrīman Mahāprabhu, however, this
explanation can never be acceptable, because it is not
fully consistent with some of the topics found elsewhere
throughout Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī’s commentary.

(1) Aupapatya, that is, upapati-bhāva (unwedded love),
is opposed to dharma and leads to hellish life. This
statement refers only to worldly nāyakas (lovers). But
how can there be even the slightest doubt regarding Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, the crown jewel ruler of dharma and adharma? The
meeting of mundane partners entails a touch of
immorality, but līlā-puruṣottama

Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who creates and destroys all the innumerable
universes simply by a movement of His eyebrows, and the
gopīs, who as the embodiments of hlādinī-śakti are the
most prominent among all His immeasurable potencies, can
never be touched by this fault.

Thus, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has written in Nāṭaka-candrikā:
“It should be understood that whatever scholars have
described as inferior about paroḍhā-aupapatya
(extramarital affairs between a married woman and her
paramour) applies only to mundane lovers, not to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs.” This is also the opinion of Śrī
Kavikarṇapūra in his Alaṅkāra-kaustubha. This upapati-
bhāva of the transcendentally perfect Śrī Kṛṣṇa and
parakīyā-bhāva of the gopīs are not defects (dūṣaṇa);
rather, they are ornaments (bhūṣaṇa).

(2) Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s prakaṭa-līlā is not illusory. In
reality, there is no distinction between prakaṭa and

                          110
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

aprakaṭa-līlā. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī’s thought in regard to
Śloka 43 of Brahma-saṁhitā is worth considering and
following. When Śrī Kṛṣṇa, to show mercy to the jīvas,
manifests the sweetness of His pastimes (līlā- mādhurya)
in the material world, it is called prakaṭa-līlā. When
this līlā disappears from the eyes of the living
entities in the material realm, it is called aprakaṭa-
līlā. In Laghu-bhāgavatāmṛta (1.244), Rūpa Gosvāmī
states: “Even though Kṛṣṇa is unborn, His birth and
other pastimes are supremely wonderful. For various
reasons He manifests such greatly astonishing,
transcendental līlās in the material world.”

(3) It is illogical to think that there is an eternal
husband wife relationship in aprakaṭa-līlā and an
illusory unwedded love in prakaṭa-līlā, because paramour
love is splendidly manifest throughout rāsa-līlā, the
crownjewel of all Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, from beginning to
end. It is totally inappropriate to consider this
pastime as māyika, or illusory. In each and every
chapter of Rāsa-pañcādhyāyī (the five chapters of
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam describing rāsa-līlā), there are many
proofs supporting extramarital love and paramourship.
Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī has clearly established paroḍhā
(each gopī’s marriage with another gopa) and upapati-
bhāva (the gopī’s paramour love for Kṛṣṇa) by quoting
the following verses spoken directly by Śrī Kṛṣṇa and by
the gopīs: tā vāryamāṇāḥ patibhiḥ (10.29.8), bhrātaraḥ
patayaś ca vaḥ (10.29.20), evam yat paty-apatya-suhṛdām
anuvṛttir aṅga (10.29.32), tad-guṇān eva gāyantyo nāt-
māgārāṇi sasmaruḥ (10.30.44), and so on. […]

(15) We see that the word pati (husband or protector) is
mentioned in a few places.   Actually, this does not
refer to a married man. Rather, it should be understood
as gati, mean ing, “You are my everything, You are my
ultimate shelter.” It is not correct to say that pati
refers only to a married man, the husband of a nāyikā
(female beloved). For example, in the chapter in
Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi describing various types of nāyikās,
the term svādhīna-bhartṛkā (a woman who controls her
pati) is used in relation to parakīyā. Furthermore, it
may be said that Kṛṣṇa has been described as the pati of
the nāyikās, but He has no marital relationship with
them. If Kṛṣṇa is the married husband of them all, then
the topic of para-dārābhimarśanam (to enjoy with
another’s wife) [Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.33.27] would not
arise. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam also mentions the vraja- devīs’
husbands. Moreover, it is stated [in Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi]
that the gopīs never had union with their husbands at
any time.

(16) In the statement sa vo hi svāmī bhavati from
Gopāla- tāpanī, the word svāmī indicates aiśvarya, not
marriage. This is authenticated in Pāṇini’s grammar
(5.2.126), which says svāmīnn-aiśvarya. Some texts cite
the following application: “In this world, svāmī is he
who maintains and supports others (like a king or any
magnanimous benefactor) and who is the enjoyer of all.”
Thus, the word svāmī does not always refer to a husband.

(17)   All relationships in Vraja are transcendental.
Wherever the word māyā is used, it should be understood
as Yogamāyā. Therefore, Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s acceptance of

                          111
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

Abhimanyu as Her husband should be seen as a
transcendental arrangement.   As one inseparable link in
the chain of Śrī Bhagavān’s pastimes, this relationship
is also not illusory. Yogamāyā is behind it.

(18) Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the hlādinī-śakti (pleasure
potency) of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Of this there is no doubt. The
object of our adoration is RādhāKṛṣṇa Yugala along with
Their special līlās. To worship RādhāKṛṣṇa devoid of
Their pastimes is outside our line of thought and
concept of bhajana.




Śrīla Bhaƙtivinoda Ṭhāƙura on Svakīyā and Parakīyā



Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has given a beautiful,
detailed elucidation of this subject matter in his
commentary on the śloka, ānanda-cin-maya-rasa-
pratibhāvitābhiḥ (Brahma-saṁhitā, Verse 37). We are
presenting an excerpt here for the benefit of the
sādhakas:



In his commentaries on this śloka and on Ujjvala-
nīlamaṇi, in Kṛṣṇa-sandarbha, and in his other works,
our worshipful ācārya Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī says that Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s prakaṭa-līlās are arranged by Yogamāyā. Because
of their connection with the illusory realm, they appear
to have assimilated some mundane features that cannot
exist in svarūpa-tattva, the intrinsic fundamental
reality. Examples of such pastimes include killing the
demons, attracting the wives of others, taking birth,
and so on. It is an established truth that the gopīs are
Kṛṣṇa’s svarūpa-śakti, extensions of His personal power;
hence, they are Kṛṣṇa’s svakīyā, unquestionably His own.
There is no possibility of their being anyone else’s
wives. We see that in prakaṭa-līlā, the gopīs do appear
to be the wives of others, but this is only an implicit
conviction created by Yogamāyā.

There is a secret meaning in the statement of Śrīla Jīva
Gosvāmī, which, if brought to light, will automatically
dispel all types of doubts. The revered Śrīla Jīva
Gosvāmī, the foremost follower of Śrīla Rūpa and
Sanātana Gosvāmīs, is the tattva-ācārya of the Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavas. Furthermore, in kṛṣṇa-līlā he is a mañjarī.
Therefore, there is no secret truth that is unknown to
him. Those who do not understand his esoteric intentions
raise arguments accepting and rejecting his ideas by
presenting their own concocted interpretations.

According to Śrī RūpaSanātana’s vision, there is no
difference between prakaṭa and aprakaṭa-līlā – they are
identical. The only distinction is that one
manifestation is beyond the material domain and the
other is within it.

A fine point to note here is that, just as Goloka is the

                          112
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

completely pure, divine truth beyond the illusory realm,
in the same way, even though BhaumaGokula is pure and
always uncontaminated, it appears in the material world
by Bhagavān’s cit-śakti, Yogamāyā.

In regard to prakaṭa and aprakaṭa, there is not even the
slightest touch of material defect, degradation, or
imperfection. Different visions are perceived depending
on the qualification of the person viewing the pastime.
Defect (contamination), foulness, designation, illusion,
ignorance, impurity, falsity, loathsomeness, and gross
ness are all perceived through the conditioned jīvas’
eyes, intelligence, and false ego dulled by the material
nature, but these shortcomings have no footing in the
spiritual realm. The more one is free from defects, the
more one is granted vision of the transcendental truth.
The truth is revealed in śāstra, but the purity of
realization for those who deliberate on these tattvas
will depend upon one’s qualification.

According to the views of Śrīla Rūpa and Śrī Sanātana,
whichever līlās manifest in BhaumaGokula are present in
Goloka in their pure form without a tinge of māyā. That
is why parakīyā-bhāva, in some form or another, is also
certainly present in Goloka in its inconceivably pure
state. All the manifestations created by Yogamāyā are
immaculate. Para-dārā (parakīyā) bhāva, the creation of
Yogamāyā, is therefore established on the pure absolute
reality. Jīva Gosvāmī has proved that there is no
difference between the līlās of Goloka and Gokula, so it
must be admitted that all pastimes have their origin in
Gokula.

One who takes the hand of a virgin girl according to the
sacred rites of marriage is called a husband (pati).
And he who, being overcome by passion, violates
conventional morality in order to win another’s wife is
called a paramour (upapati). In Goloka, the religious
obligation binding one within matrimonial regulation
does not exist. Thus, no husbandhood ascribed with those
characteristics is found there. In this connection, the
gopīs, who are Kṛṣṇa’s own potency, are not married
elsewhere. Thus, they are also not para-dārā, other
men’s wives.

Furthermore, it is not possible for parakīyā and
svakīyā- bhāva to be separate from each other. In the
manifest pas times within the illusory realm, the
strictures of marriage do exist, but Śrī Kṛṣṇa is beyond
their jurisdiction.

Parakīyā-rasa is the very essence of all rasas. To deny
its presence in Goloka minimizes that realm. It is not
possible that the highest delight in rasa is absent in
the topmost abode Goloka.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the source of all avatāras, relishes this
rasa in one way in Goloka and in another way in Gokula.
Thus, even though there appears to be a transgression of
dharma according to material vision, nevertheless, this
truth also exists in Goloka. “Ātmārāmo ’py arīramat –
Kṛṣṇa performed amorous pastimes although He is
ātmārāma, selfsatisfied” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.29.42).
“Ātmany avaruddha-saurataḥ – Satya-kāma Śrī Kṛṣṇa, whose

                          113
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

every desire comes to fruition, keeps in His heart the
hāva, bhāva and other anubhāvas (variagated
transcendental ecstasies) arising from His amorous
diversions” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.33.25). “Reme rameśo
vraja-sundarībhir yathārbhakaḥ sva-pratibimba- vibhramaḥ
– Just as an innocent child plays with his reflec tion
without undergoing any transformation, in the same
manner Ramāramaṇa (the enchanter of the Goddess of
Fortune) Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa enjoyed with the beautiful
Vraja maidens” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.33.16).

It is understood from these statements from śāstra that
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s intrinsic nature is to be selfsatisfied. Śrī
Kṛṣṇa manifests His own śakti (as Lakṣmī) in those
spiritual planets dominated by aiśvarya and consorts
with her in svakīyā- bhāva. There, with the sense of
svakīyā prevailing, rasa goes only up to the stage of
dāsya. But in Goloka, Kṛṣṇa manifests billions of gopīs
and, forgetting any sentiments of svakīyā, continuously
enjoys with them. In the svakīyā conception, as there
are no obstacles in meeting, the enjoyment of rasa is
not so exceptional. Therefore the gopīs, who are
naturally imbued with an innate paroḍhā sentiment,
eternally see themselves as other men’s wives. Kṛṣṇa,
reciprocating with their mood, intrinsically assumes the
identity of their para mour and, taking the help of His
intimate companion the flute, who is His priya-sakhī,
accomplishes rāsa and other līlās.

Goloka, which is eternally perfect and free from
illusion, is the rasa-pīṭha, the abode of divine
rapture. Thus, the flow of rasa in the conception of
paramourship finds its perfection there. Even vātsalya-
rasa is not found in Vaikuṇṭha because of aiśvarya.
However in Goloka, the fountainhead of ultimate
sweetness (situated in Vraja), there exists nothing
other than the original conception of rasa.

There, Nanda and Yaśodā are actually present but there
is no occurrence of birth. In the absence of birth,
parenthood does not actually exist. Nanda and Yaśodā
only have the mood (abhimāna) of being parents. This is
substantiated in the verse, jayati jana-nivāso devakī-
janmavādaḥ. This abhimāna (selfconception) is eternal
for the sake of perfect rasa.

Similarly, in śṛṅgāra-rasa also, since paroḍhā and
upapati- bhāvas are simply eternal selfconceptions,
there is no fault or transgression of śāstra. When the
eternal, transcendent reality of Goloka manifests in
prakaṭa Gokula, both of these conceptions are seen in
tangible form by worldly vision. This is the only
difference. In vātsalya-rasa, the mood of Nanda and
Yaśodā being parents becomes apparent in a concrete way
through birth and other līlās; and in śṛṅgāra- rasa, the
idea of the Vraja maidens being the wives of others
takes on a perceptible shape in the form of their
marriages with   Abhimanyu, Govardhanamalla, and others.
In reality, the gopīs have no separately existing
husbands, either in Gokula or in Goloka.

For that reason śāstra proclaims: “Na jātu vraja-devīnāṁ
patibhiḥ saha saṅgamaḥ – The vraja-devīs never had union
with their husbands.” Thus, rasa-tattvācārya Śrīla Rūpa

                          114
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

Gosvāmī, the master of the truths of rasa, has written:
“In ujjvala-rasa, the mellow of amorous love, there are
two types of nāyakas (heroes) – pati and upapati.” Śrīla
Jīva Gosvāmī, in his commentary on this śloka, has
written: “The nāyaka of Dvārakāpuri’s young women is
called pati, a wedded husband, and in Vraja, nāyaka Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is the upapati of the vraja-vanitās.” This passage
shows that Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has accepted Kṛṣṇa as the
pati in Vaikuṇṭha and Dvārakā and as the eternal upapati
in GolokaGokula. In the Lord of GolokaGokula, the
characteristics of a paramour are exhibited to their
full extent.

Therefore, in Goloka both svakīyā and parakīyā-rasa
exist. Their divergence and oneness are inconceivable by
material intelligence (acintya-bhedābheda). It can be
said that there is no difference between them, and it
can also be




said that there is difference. Why? The essence of
parakīyā is svakīyā-nivṛtti, or loving enjoyment outside
of the sanction of wedlock, and the essence of svakīyā
is parakīyā-nivṛtti, or the abstention from unlawful
connections. Kṛṣṇa has no unlawful connections with the
gopīs because they are His svarūpa-śakti, personal
potency. Thus parakīyā and svakīyā are one rasa, and
they also exist eternally as two varieties. Furthermore,
although the form of rasa in Gokula is the same, mundane
observers view it otherwise.

The supremely relishable and splendid form of that
bhagavad-rasa, tasted through four types of
transcendentally variegated ingredients – vibhāva,
anubhāva, sāttvikā, and vyabhicārī – is eternally
present in Goloka and Vaikuṇṭha. By the authority of
Yogamāyā, this very rasa of Goloka manifests in the form
of vraja-rasa in the material realm for the benefit of
the devotees. One should know that all the rasas seen in
this Gokula must surely be found also in Goloka in their
radiantly pure state. That is why the wonderful
varieties of nāgara and nāgarī (Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the
gopīs), the diversity of rasa in them, and all the
surroundings and paraphernalia of Gokula, including the
land (Vraja), rivers (Yamunā, Mānasī gaṅgā), mountain
(Girirāja), residences (Yāvaṭa, Nandagaon, etc.),
gateways, kuñjas, cows, and so on, collectively exist in
the same form in Goloka.

On the path of pure bhakti (bhakti-marga), it is crucial
to renounce any subject matter which, on acceptance,
would ultimately give rise to a nirviśeṣa (impersonal)
conception. Pure parakīya-rasa free from all mundane
conception, as described in goloka-līlā, is very rarely
attained. Rāgānuga devotees should adopt this concept
and perform sādhana. By doing so, they will achieve this
highly auspicious fun damental truth upon perfection.
When persons of gross worldly intellect endeavor for
parakīyā-bhakti, it generally culminates in immoral
activity in the material sphere. Our master of truth,
tattvācārya Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, took this into

                          115
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                     5/5/2017

consideration and presented his line of thought out of
great concern. The spirit of pure Vaiṣṇavism is to
accept the essence of his statements. It is an offense
to disregard the ācārya by attempting to establish
another theory.



2 [An excerpt from Ācārya Kesarī Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti
Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī – His Life and Teachings, Part
Five:]



Rati in the form of sthāyī-bhāva is the foundation of
rasa. Rasa comes from the union of its four constituent
ingredients, namely vibhāva, anubhāva, sāttvika, and
vyabhicārī. Vibhāva is of two types, namely ālambana and
uddīpana. Ālambana is also divided into two types:
āśraya and viṣaya. In pāramārthika-rasa Kṛṣṇa is the
only viṣaya (object) of rasa and the worshiper is the
āśraya (abode) of rasa. The qualities of the worshipful
object and objects in relation to Him are called
uddīpana.

Dancing, singing,yawning, hiccups, and so on are
expressions of the bhāva within the heart, and are
therefore called anubhāvas. The bodily transformations
such as becoming stunned, perspira tion, and
horripilation are called sāttvika-bhāvas because they
are manifested from sattva. There are thirtythree types
of vyabhicārī- bhāva such as selfdisparagement,
despondency, and humility. This collection of bhāvas
move in the direction of the ocean of the sthāyī-bhāva
and increases it. Therefore they are called vyabhicārī-
bhāva (vi means ‘intensification,’ abhi means ‘towards,’
cārī means ‘going’).

Rasa is of two types, namely mukhya (primary), and gauṇa
(secondary). The five mukhya-rasas are śānta (passive
adoration), dāsya (servitude), sakhya (friendship),
vātsalya (parental), and madhurya (conjugal). The seven
gauṇa-rasas are hasya (comedy), adbhuta (wonder), raudra
(anger), vīra (chivalry), karuṇa (pathos), bhayānaka
(horror), and vībhatsa (disgust).

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has given a brandnew and compre
hensive definition of bhakti.

anyābhilāṣitā śūnyaṁ jñāna-kārmādy anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (Pūrva-vibhāga 1.1.11)




The cultivation of activities which are meant exclu
sively for the pleasure of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, or in other words,
the uninterrupted flow of service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
performed through all endeavours of the body, mind and
speech, and through the expressions of various spiritual

                          116
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

sentiments (bhāvas), which is not covered by jñāna
(knowledge aimed at impersonal liberation) and karma
(rewardseeking activity), and which is devoid of all
desires other than the aspiration to bring happiness to
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is called uttamā-bhakti, pure devotional
service.



By performing sādhana of the abovementioned bhakti, rati
is awakened. When rati is more condensed it is called
prema.   As that prema becomes mature and more condensed
it is known as sneha, māna, praṇaya, rāga, anurāga,
bhāva, and mahābhāva. Kṛṣṇa-rati is also of five types
arising from five divisions of devotees: śānta, dāsya,
sakhya, vatsalya, and madhura rati. Among these,
madhura rati is the best. Kṛṣṇa- prema is also of two
types – aiśvarya-miśrita and kevala, or śuddha-prema.




epilogue


Praying for Service




Satsvarūpa Mahārāja: You were discussing in your Rāga-
vartma-candrikā conversations that we perform inner
arcana, thinking of the līlā of Rādhā and Ƙṛṣṇawhile we
perform our other devotional services such as japa and
other activities. I think I have a little bit of that
greed by your grace, but I feel I am not qualified to
perform this inner service. One reason is that I am
afraid. Is such meditation sahajiyā?[14]



Śrīla Gurudeva: I have said only to pray, “May I become
a dāsī ? May I serve Śrīmatī Rādhikā? May I serve Śrī
Rūpa Mañjarī?” Only pray. Do not imagine that you are
serving at present. Do not try to imitate those who are
already engaged in such service. Do you understand?



Satsvarūpa Mahārāja: Yes.



Śrīla Gurudeva: I pray to Ƙṛṣṇa and His subordinates, “I
want to serve You.” We are not qualified; yet, we want
to serve. We utter the prayers in Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī’s Vilāpa- kusumāñjali and Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s
Padyāvalī or Stava-mālā. Following in their footsteps,
we utter their prayers.




                            117
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

vṛndāvane viharator iha keli-kuñje

matta-dvipa-pravara-kautuka-vibhrameṇa sandarśayasva
yuvayor vadanāravinda

dvandvaṁ vidhehi mayi devi! kṛpām prasīda

Śrī Gāndharvā-samprārthanāṣṭakam (Verse 1)




O Devī Rādhikā! You and Śrī Ƙṛṣṇa are constantly
enjoying Your ambrosial amorous pastimes in the leafy
pleasure-groves of Vṛndāvana, like the intoxicated king
of elephants sporting with his queen elephant. There-
fore, O Gāndarvikā! Be pleased with me and mercifully
grant me darśana of Your and Your beloved Ƙṛṣṇa’s lotus-
like faces.



Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī is praying to Śrīmatī Rādhikā, “I
want to have darśana of You and Ƙṛṣṇa in real Vṛndāvana,
aprakaṭa Vṛndāvana (Goloka Vṛndāvana), as You roam there
in the kuñjas. Lalitā, Viśākhā and all other sakhīs are
serving You as You perform Your vihāra, or pleasure
sports, there.   May I have Your mercy, so that I will
be able to see You and Ƙṛṣṇa at that time?” This is one
prayer.

The next prārthanā (prayer) is this:



hā devi! kāku-bhara-gadgadayādya vācā

yāce nipatya bhuvi daṇḍavad udbhaṭārtiḥ

asya prasādam abhudhasya janasya kṛtvā

gāndharvike! nija-gaṇe ganaṇāṁ vidhehi

Śrī Gāndharvā-Samprārthanāṣṭakam (Verse 2)




O Devī Gāndharvikā, I am suffering greatly, and there-
fore today I throw myself on the ground like a stick and
humbly implore You with a choked voice to be merciful to
this fool and please count me as one of Your own.



Here, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī is praying, “O Śrīmatī Rādhikā,
You are my worshipful Deity. Be pleased with me. By Your
mercy, may I become capable to be among Your dāsīs? Hā
devi! kāku-bhara-gadgadayādya vācā – I am praying,
weeping, at Your lotus feet. I cannot speak, tears are
falling from my eyes, and I am in so much distress.
Please hear my prayer.

                          118
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017


“Udbhaṭārtiḥ – I am praying to You in great misery. I am
helpless. I have no knowledge at all. I have no shelter
other than Your lotus feet, and my only solace is
knowing that You are so kind and generous. I am falling
at Your feet, as You are my only hope.

“I am quite foolish. Yet, I have greed to serve You. I
am there- fore praying to Your lotus feet that You will
register my name in the list of Your dāsīs.”

No qualification is needed here. We are simply praying
for mercy. We need to do this type of prayer. Do you
understand?



Satsvarūpa Mahārāja: Yes, I understand.



Śrīla Gurudeva: There is nothing to fear in this. But
there must be greed; otherwise you will not be able to
have this mood of prayer.



Satsvarūpa Mahārāja:   Another difficulty is that this
requires control of the mind. It seems to be a kind of
meditation…



Śrīla Gurudeva: No, no. It requires only greed. If there
is greed, everything will be performed and accomplished.
If there is no greed, so many obstacles will arise;
whereas if greed is present, no obstruction can come in
the way.



Bhurijana dāsa: Nothing can stop it.



Satsvarūpa Mahārāja: May we begin with only a little
greed?



Śrīla Gurudeva: But it seems that there is no greed. If
there is no greed, then yukti, or logical argument, will
influence our consideration as to whether we should, or
should not, pray for this attainment. If there is greed,
no reasoning is needed. Our rāgānuga-sādhana will be
kept very sacred and secret, and we will desire to meet
with those persons who have a keen interest in such
sādhana. We will not discuss these topics with anyone
else.

At that time there will be no need for sastric yukti; no
need to become convinced by sastric reasoning or logic.
Suppose a man loves a lady, or a lady loves a man. There
is no reason why the lady loves that man; she simply saw

                          119
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

him and fell in love with him. Greed is like that.

We should try to perform vaidhī-bhakti always, thinking,
“I am performing vaidhī-bhakti by the grace of Ƙṛṣṇa,
who is so merciful.” Greed will come later on. The
practices of both are one; there is no difference. Some
difference is there, but no real difference.

If a blind man prays for something, there is no harm in
that. “I want to be in Vṛndāvana.” What harm is there in
such desire? “I want to serve my Gurudeva in
transcendental Goloka Vṛndāvana.” There is no harm in
this desire. We should avoid thinking, “I am a gopī, a
mañjarī. I am doing this and that service.” We are not
qualified to go there, so we pray for that qualification




About Śrīla Bhaƙtivedānta


Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja



On the sacred and auspicious day of     Maunī
Amāvasyā, 1921, Śrī Śrīmad Bhaƙtivedānta Nārāyaṇa
Gosvāmī Mahārāja took his divine birth in a devout
Vaiṣṇava family in Tivārīpura, in the state of Bihar,
India.

In February, 1946, he met his gurudeva, Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaƙti Prajñāna Ƙeśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, and his life of
complete and exemplary dedication to Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism,
or the path of kṛṣṇa-bhakti in the line of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, began to manifest.




He accompanied his gurudeva on his extensive preaching
tours throughout India, actively assisting him in
propagating the teachings of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu for
the eternal benefit of the living entities in this
world. This included regularly hosting the thousands of
pilgrims attending the yearly circumambulation of Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma, the appear- ance place of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, and Śrī Vṛndāvana- dhāma, the appearance
place of Śrī Ƙṛṣṇa.

His gurudeva had instructed him to translate the
writings of prominent Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas into Hindi, a
task he assiduously assumed throughout his entire life
and which resulted in the publication of nearly fifty
Hindi sacred texts. Later, most of these invaluable
masterpieces were translated into English and other
major languages of the world.

For many years, he traveled throughout India to spread
the message of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism, and it was for this
end, also, that in 1996, he journeyed abroad. During the

                            120
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                      5/5/2017

next fourteen years, he circled the globe more than
thirty times. Whether he was in India or abroad, his
preaching always bore the distinctive characteristic of
boldly unmasking any misconception obscuring the
specific purposes of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s advent,
in strict adherence to the desire of Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Prabhupāda and in
perfect congruence with the conceptions of Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s foremost follower.
Thus, in present times, in upholding the glorious tenets
of the Gauḍīya sampradāya, he performed the function of
a true ācārya.

At the age of ninety years, on December 29, 2010, he
concluded his pastimes in this world at Cakratīrtha, in
Śrī Jagannātha Purī-dhāma. The following day, in Śrī
Navadvīpa- dhāma, Śrī Gaurasundara’s fully empowered
emissary, the very embodiment of His unique compassion,
was given samādhi. He will never cease to reside in his
divine instructions and in the hearts of those who are
devoted to him.



English titles published by

Śrīla Bhaƙtivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja



Arcana-dīpikā Beyond Nīrvāṇa

Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā

Śrī Bhajana-rahasya

Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu Bhakti-rasāyana Bhakti-
tattva-viveka

Śrī Brahma-saṁhitā Essence of the Bhagavad-gītā Five
Essential Essays

Gaura-vāṇī Pracāriṇe Going Beyond Vaikunṭḥa Harmony

Impressions of Bhakti Jaiva-dharma Journey of the Soul

Letters From America

Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā My Śikṣā-guru and Priya-bandhu Our
Gurus: One in Siddhānta,

One at Heart

Pinnacle of Devotion

Śrī Prabandhāvalī

Secret Truths of the Bhāgavatam Secrets of the
Undiscovered Self

Śiva-tattva

Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta


                          121
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

Śrī Camatkāra-candrikā

Śrī Dāmodarāṣṭakam

Śrī Gauḍīya Gīti-guccha

Śrī Gīta-govinda

Śrī Gopī-gīta

Śrī Harināma Mahā-mantra

Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī – His Life and
Teachings

Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma-māhātmya

Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma Parikramā

Śrī Prema-sampuṭa

Śrī Rādhā-kṛṣṇa-gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā

Śrī Saṅkalpa-kalpadrumaḥ

Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka

Śrī Ślokāmṛtam

Śrī Upadeśāmṛta

Śrī Vraja-maṇḍala Parikramā

Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda Saṁvāda

The Distinctive Contribution of Śrīla

Rūpa Gosvāmī

The Essence of All Advice

The Hidden Path of Devotion

Their Lasting Relation

The Nectar of Govinda-līlā The Origin of Ratha-yātrā

The Speciality of The Gift of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu

The Way of Love

Utkalikā-vallarī

Vaiṣṇava-siddhānta-mālā Veṇu-gīta

Walking with a Saint (series)

Rays of the Harmonist (periodical)

Please contact us at the address stamped or written on
the first page of this book, or at the listings below:




                             122
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                       5/5/2017



WORLD WIDE

www.purebhakti.com/contact-us/centers-mainmenu-60.html



INDIA

• Mathura - Sri Kesavaji Gaudiya Matha

Jawahar Hata, U.P. 281001 (Opp. Dist. Hospital)

Tel: 0565 250-2334,Email: mathuramath@gmail.com

• New Delhi - Sri Ramana-vihari Gaudiya Matha

Block B-3, Janakpuri, New Delhi 110058

(Near musical fountain park) Tel: 011 25533568,
9810192540

• New Delhi - Karol Bagh Center - Rohini-nandana

9A/39 Channa Market, WEA, Karol Bagh

Tel.: 9810398406, 9810636370,Email:
purebhakti.kb@gmail.com

• Vrndavana - Sri Rupa-Sanatana Gaudiya Matha

Dan Gali, U.P. Tel: 0565 244-3270

• Vrndavana - Gopinath Bhavan

Ranapat Ghat (next to Imli-tala), Seva Kunja,

Vrindavan 281121, U.P.

Tel: 0565 244-3359, Email:vasantidasi@gmail.com

• Puri - Sri Damodar Gaudiya Math

Chakratirtha. Tel: 06752-229695

• Bangalore - Sri Madana Mohan Gaudiya Matha

245/1 29th Cross, Kaggadasa pura Balaji layout,
Bangalore-93

Tel: 089044277754,Email: giridharidas@gmail.com



UNITED KINGDOM & IRELAND

• Birmingham - International Distributor

Tel: (44) 153648-1769,Email: jivapavana@googlemail.com

• London - Ganga-mata Gaudiya Matha

Email: gangamatajis@yahoo.co.uk

                           123
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                         5/5/2017


• Galway - Family Center,

Tel: 353 85-1548200,Email: loveisgod108@hotmail.com



USA

• Gaudiya Vedanta Publications Offices

Tel: (800) 681-3040 ext. 108,Email:
orders@bhaktiprojects.org

• Houston - Preaching Center

Tel: (1) 713-984 8334,Email: byshouston@gmail.com

• Los      Angeles - Sri Sri Radha Govinda Temple

305 Rose      Avenue, Venice, California 90291




The Hidden Path of Devotion

contributors

There were many contributors to the completion of

The Hidden Path of Devotion, in the form of art, design,
diacritics, editing, advice, layout, proofreading,
śāstra research, typing, and typesetting, especially:
Śrīpād B. V. Mādhava Mahārāja, Śrīpād B. V. Tīrtha
Mahārāja, Ānitā dāsī, Bhadrā dāsī, Brajanāth dāsa,
Dāmodara dāsa, Haladara dāsa, Jāhnavā dāsī, Jānakī dāsī,
Jaya-gopāla dāsa, Jaya-govinda dāsa, Kṛṣṇa-kāminī dāsī,
Kumudinī dāsī, Mañjarī dāsī, Minu Gulati,

Prema-prayojana dāsa, Raghuvir dāsa, Sītā dāsī, Sudevī
dāsī, Sukhdeep Sran, Sulatā dāsī, Śyāmarāṇī dāsī,
Tamala-kṛṣṇa dāsa, Taruṇa-kṛṣṇa dāsa, Trilokanātha dasa,
Vaijayantī-māla dāsī, and Vasanti dāsī.

Cover and book design: Rāghava Paṇḍita dāsa

Special thanks to śa dāsa for archiving all sound files
on www.purebhakti.tv



Kind sponsors

Special thanks to Aaron Young, Jim Morash,

Kuldip Singh, Raghuvir dāsa, and Vrajeśa dāsa
(Vancouver) for the donations that printed this book.

www.mygvp.com




                             124
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                      5/5/2017

our websites

www.purebhaƙti.com • www.bacƙtobhaƙti.com www.purebha
ƙti.tv • www.hariƙatha.com www.bhaƙtistore.com •
www.gvpbooƙdistribution.com



The soundfiles of the conversations in this book are
available for downloading on www.purebhaƙti.tv, where
you can find a link called

‘Raga-vartma-candrika’ under the header ‘Media
Archive’.



for more information

If you are interested to know more about the books,
lectures, audios, videos, teachings, and international
society of

Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja,
please contact the secretary, Vasantī dāsī, at
connectwithussoon@gmail.com




* * *




[1] Rāgānuga-bhakti is bhakti that follows in the wake
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s eternal associates in Vraja, the
rāgātmikā associates, whose hearts are permeated with
rāga, the unquenchable loving thirst for Kṛṣṇa which
gives rise to spontaneous and intense absorption.




[2] These transcendental personalities are eternal
associates of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, not conditioned
souls, and therefore they do not depend upon past
saṁskāras. Yet, when they appear in this world, they set
an example for us by their behavior.




[3] Kewra is an extract distilled from the pandanus
flower, which is used to flavor drinks and desserts in
Indian cuisine.




                          125
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017


[4] Handmovements along with the recitation of mantras
as one touches the various parts of one’s own hand or
body, or the various parts of the body of the Deity.




[5] Kubjā was a hunchbacked maidservant of Kaṁsa who
developed conjugal attraction for Kṛṣṇa upon seeing Him.
But she desired Kṛṣṇa for her own happiness, and
therefore her love has been condemned. Her love cannot
be compared to that of the queens of Dvārakā or vraja-
gopīs.




[6] “Lord Kṛṣṇa’s eternal pastimes (nitya-līlā) in
Vṛndāvana are called aṣṭa- kālīya-līlā. The
twentyfourhour day of Śrī Śrī RādhāKṛṣṇa is divided into
eight parts, beginning with Their niśānta-līlā (predawn
pastimes), prātaḥ- līlā (morning pastimes), pūrvāhṇa-
līlā (forenoon pastimes), madhyāhna-līlā (midday
pastimes), aparāhna-līlā (afternoon pastimes), sāyama-
līlā (dusk pastimes), pradoṣa-līlā (evening pastimes),
and rātri-līlā (nighttime pastimes)” (Lecture by Śrīla
Bhaƙtivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmi Mahārāja in Navadvīpa, on
March 17, 2005).




[7] “The predominating Deity of the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-
mantra is Śrī Rādhā, and She personally gave it to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. Nāma-cintāmaṇi-kṛṣṇaś caitanya-rasa- vigrahaḥ,
pūrṇaḥ śuddho nitya-mukto ’bhinnatvān nāma-nāminoḥ (Śrī
Caitanya- caritāmrta, Madhya-līlā 17.133). Because these
holy names are nondifferent from the allperfect Divine
Couple, the mantra is also perfect. It is full with all
perfection, and it also gives full perfection to one who
sincerely chants it” (Explanation given by Śrīpād
Bhaƙtivedānta Tīrtha Mahārāja).




[8] “Hithari Vaṁśa was a disciple of Śrīla Gopāla Bhaṭṭa
Gosvāmī. Once, on the Ekādaśī day, he came before his
Gurudeva while eating pāna (an intoxicating spice
preparation made with betelnut, that is sometimes
offered to the Deity). His Gurudeva was angry and asked
why he was not following Ekādaśī. He replied, ‘How can I
ignore this prasādam?’ Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī then
rejected him. Many days passed and still Gosvāmī did not
accept him back, so he committed suicide by drowning
himself in the Yamunā. His present day followers do not
follow Ekādaśī. On the Ekādaśī day they hold a festival
and eat all kinds of grains. His followers call
themselves the RādhāVallabha sampradāya” (Explanation by

                          126
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

Śrīpād Bhaƙtivedānta Tīrtha Mahārāja).




[9] “There are different levels of anukūla-bhāva. It is
not that everything is on the same level, but at the
same time all these are bhāva-anukūla. Tulasī is more
important than the other respectable objects and
personalities, and therefore Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas worship
her especially – but all should be given respect”
(Explanation by Śrīpād Bhaktivedānta Tīrtha Mahārāja).




[10] Excerpt from Jaiva-dharma, Chapter 20:

Vijaya: How does one offer respects to trees such as the
aśvattha and āmalakī?

Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: “Aśvattha-tulasī-dhātrī-go-
bhūmi-sura-vaiṣṇavāḥ pūjitāḥ praṇatā-dhyātāḥ kṣapayanti
nṛnām agham – All of one’s sins are destroyed if one
remembers to perform pūjā and offers obeisances to the
āmalakī and pippala trees, Tulasī, the cows, brāhmaṇas
and Vaiṣṇavas” (Skanda Purāṇa).

One who is qualified for vaidhī-bhakti must maintain his
journey in life while staying in this world. To do this,
he is obliged to worship, meditate on, take care of, and
offer obeisances to useful and shadegiving trees such as
pippala, to fruitbearing trees such as the āmalakī, to
worshipable trees such as Tulasī, to cows and other
useful animals, to brāhmaṇas who protect society by
giving instructions on dharma, and to Vaiṣṇavas. The
vaidhī-bhaktas protect the world by performing these
activities.




[11] “Someone may propose: ‘One should understand that
sarvajñatā, omniscience, indicates an abundance of mahā-
aiśvarya, great opulence, devoid of mādhurya, sweetness,
while mādhurya is simply the mugdhatā, or bewilderment,
that results from completely setting aside aiśvarya and
imitating nara-līlā, human like behavior.’ Only
dullheaded people will speak like this. The conclusion
regarding mādhurya and related topics is that whether
mahā-aiśvarya is exhibited or not, if the mood of
humanlike pastimes is not transgressed even slightly,
then it will be called mādhurya” (Rāga-vartma-candrikā,
Second Illumination, Text 2).




[12] Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta states that Gopakumāra went to
many places before reaching Goloka Vṛndāvana – even to

                          127
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt                    5/5/2017

Dvārakā. He had greed, but because he did not have
sufficient rasika association, he could not easily
complete his journey to Goloka Vṛndāvana.




[13] “The sixteen activities of the sakhīs are: (1) to
glorify the prema and qualities of the Heroine to the
Hero and vice versa; (2) to create attachment between
the Heroine and Hero; (3) to arrange for Their
rendezvous; (4) to offer their sakhī to Śrī Ƙṛṣṇa; (5)
to joke; (6) to console; (7) to dress and decorate the
Heroine and Hero; (8) to skilfully hide the Heroine and
Hero’s innermost feelings; (9) to conceal the Heroine’s
faults; (10) to cheat their husbands and others; (11) to
give favourable instructions; (12) to arrange for the
Heroine and Hero to meet at the appropriate time; (13)
to fan and render other services; (14) to point out
faults in the Heroine and Hero and to instruct them;
(15) to deliver the Heroine and Hero’s messages to each
other; and (16) to endeavour to protect the Heroine’s
life” (Ujjvala-nīlamāṇi 8.88–91, quoted in Śrī Bhajana-
rahasya, Chapter 8, Text 19).




[14] “They foolishly think that Ƙṛṣṇa is like themselves
and that He embraces the gopīs just as an ordinary man
embraces a young girl. Some people thus become
interested in Ƙṛṣṇa because they think that His religion
allows indulgence in sex. This is not kṛṣṇa-bhakti, love
of Ƙṛṣṇa, but prākṛta- sahajiyā – materialistic lust”
(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Introduction by Śrīla
Bhaƙtivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja).

“The natural inclination to devotional service is also
based on scriptural injunction, and one who has
attachment for such devotional service is not required
to give it up simply on the strength of scriptural
argument. In this connection it should be noted that a
class of so-called devotees (known as prākṛta-sahajiyā)
follow their own concocted ideas, and representing
themselves as Ƙṛṣṇa and Rādhā, indulge in debauchery.
Such devotional service and attachment are false, and
those so engaged are actually gliding down a hellish
path. This is not the standard of rāgātmikā, or
devotion. The prākṛta-sahajiyā community is actually
cheated and very unfortunate” (Teachings of Lord
Caitanya, Chapter 13).



Table of Contents

chapter two

chapter three

chapter four


                          128
Hidden_Path_of_Devotion.txt              5/5/2017

epilogue

Foreword

introduction

How to Enter Rāgānuga-bhaƙti

Illuminating the Path to

chapter three

The Five Principles of Rāgānuga-bhaƙti

Opulence, Or Sweetness?

Praying for Service

About the author

[1]

[2]

[3]

[4]

[5]

[6]

[7]

[8]

[9]

[10]

[11]

[12]

[13]

[14]




                           129
