Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

Jaiva-Dharma 2nd edition



Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

GVP (2011)



Rating:   ★★★★★

Tags: Jaiva-Dharma (2nd ed 2002)

Jaiva-Dharma (2nd ed 2002)ttt



* * *




* * *




Jaiva-Dharma

(2nd ed 2002)



Table of Contents

Preface

Chapter 1: The Eternal & Temporary Dharmas of the Jīva

Chapter 2: The Nitya Dharma of the Jīva is Pure &
Eternal

Chapter 3: Naimittika-Dharma is to be Relinquished

Chapter 4: Vaiṣṇava-Dharma is Nitya-Dharma

Chapter 5: Vaidhī-Bhakti is Nitya not Naimittika Dharma

Chapter 6: Nitya-Dharma, Race & Caste

Chapter 7: Nitya-Dharma & Material Existence

Chapter 8: Nitya-Dharma & Vaiṣṇava Behavior

Chapter 9: Nitya-Dharma, Material Science & Civilization

Chapter 10: Nitya-Dharma & History

Chapter 11: Nitya-Dharma & Idolatry

Chapter 12: Nitya-Dharma, Sādhana & Sādhya

                           1
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017


Chapter 12: Nitya-Dharma, Sādhana & Sādhya

Chapter 13: Pramāṇa & The Commencement of Prameya

Chapter 14: Prameya: Śakti-Tattva

Chapter 15: Prameya: Jīva-Tattva

Chapter 16: Prameya: Jīvas Possessed by Māyā

Chapter 17: Prameya: The Jīvas Free from Māyā

Chapter 18: Prameya: Bhedābheda-Tattva

Chapter 19: Prameya: Abhidheya Tattva

Chapter 20: Prameya: Abhidheya -- Vaidhī-Sādhana-Bhakti

Chapter 21: Prameya: Abhidheya -- Rāgānugā-Sādhana-
Bhakti

Chapter 22: Prameya: Prayojana Tattva

Chapter 23: Prameya: Śrī-Nāma-Tattva

Chapter 24: Prameya: Nāma-Aparādha

Chapter 25: Prameya: Nāmābhāsa

Chapter 26: Introduction to Rasa-Tattva

Chapter 27: Rasa-Tattva: Sāttvika-Bhāva, Vyabhicārī-
Bhava & Raty-Ābhāsa

Chapter 28: Rasa-Tattva: Mukhya-Rati

Chapter 29: Rasa-Tattva: Anubhāvas in Śānta, Dāsya, &
Sakhya Rasas

Chapter 30: Rasa-Tattva: Anubhāvas of Vātsalya &
Madhurya Rasas

Chapter 31: Madhurya-Rasa: Kṛṣṇa’s Svarūpa, the Nāyaka,
& Svakīya-Nayīkas

Chapter 32: Madhurya-Rasa: Parakīya-Nayīkas

Chapter 33: Madhurya-Rasa: Śrī Rādhā’s Svarūpa, Five
Types of Sakhīs, & Messengers

Chapter 34: Madhurya-Rasa: Śrī Rādhā’s Svarūpa, Five
Types of Sakhīs, & Messengers

Chapter 35: Madhura-Rasa: Uddīpana

Chapter 36: Madhura-Rasa: Sthāyībhāva & Stages of Rati

Chapter 37: Śṛṅgāra-Rasa: Śṛṅgāra Svarūpa & Vipralambha

Chapter 38: Śṛṅgāra-Rasa: Mukhya-Sambhoga & Aṣṭa-Kālīya-
Līlā

Chapter 39: Entering Līlā

                            2
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017


Chapter 40: Attaining Prema, the Supreme Wealth

Phala Śruti (The fruits of hearing)




Preface

(written for the third Hindi edition)

by Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja

I am delighted that the Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti’s third
Hindi edition of Jaiva-Dharma is now being submitted
before the public. This publication has fulfilled my
long-standing desire, for I was deeply concerned that
this book was not available in Indiaís national
language, Hindi.

The original Jaiva-Dharma, written in Bengali, is a
priceless ornament for all Bengali-speaking Vaiṣṇavas.
The author, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, is a
confidential associate of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and
is famous as the Seventh Gosvāmī. In the modern Vaiṣṇava
community, he reinitiated a powerful flow of the sacred
Ganges of the unalloyed bhakti that Svayaṁ Bhagavān Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu revealed. Ṭhākura Bhaktivinoda wrote
well over a hundred books about bhakti in several
languages, and Jaiva-Dharma has ushered in a new era in
the world of philosophy and religion.

This Hindi edition was produced under the direction of
my most highly revered holy master, Śrī Gurupāda-padma
Oṁ Viṣṇupāda 108 Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava
Gosvāmī Mahārāja. He is a guardian of the Śrī Brahma-
Madhva-Gauḍīya Sampradāya and has fulfilled the inner
heartís desire of Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, Śrīla
Gaura-kiśora dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja, and Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura. He is an ācārya in
the line of disciplic succession coming from Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu and is the Founder-Ācārya of the Śrī
Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti and its branches, which are
spread throughout India. By his causeless, unlimited
mercy, inspiration and direct order, although I am unfit
and incompetent in all respects, I was able to translate
this book, which is full of exacting philosophy and
profound and confidential truths regarding the worship
of Bhagavān.

I have tried as far as possible in this translation to
preserve the lofty philosophy and highly intricate and
subtle moods concerning the analysis of rasa. I
endeavored to the best of my ability to express these
things in clear and easily understandable language. It
is for the readers to see how successful I have been in
this attempt. Whatever value there is in this effort is
exclusively due to the credit of the lotus feet of Śrī
Guru.

The Hindi translation of Jaiva-Dharma was first
published in the monthly magazine Śrī Bhāgavat-patrikā,

                           3
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

in a series of articles spanning six years. The faithful
readers greatly appreciated this and repeatedly begged
me to publish it as a separate book. Our second edition
of Jaiva-Dharma came out in book form for the benefit of
the faithful Hindi-speaking public and for the delight
of the pure devotees. This edition was very quickly
exhausted, so a third edition was presented to fulfill
the deep interest and demand of the readers.

My most revered holy master, Śrī Ācāryadeva, has given
an elaborate introduction in his editorial preface
detailing the unique characteristics of the book, its
author, and other important topics. However, I cannot
restrain my enthusiasm to add a few words of my own on
this subject. I beg the readers to study the
introduction with serious attention before reading this
book, and I have firm faith that by doing so, they will
obtain clear guidance as to how to enter into the truth
of the supreme reality.

The word jaiva-dharma refers to the dharma of the jīva,
or the constitutional function of the living being. From
external appearances, human beings seem to have
different religions according to classifications of
country, caste, race, and so on. The constitutional
natures of human beings, animals, birds, worms, insects,
and other living entities also seem to be of different
varieties. But in reality, all living beings throughout
the universe have only one eternal, immutable dharma.
Jaiva-Dharma gives a compelling and thorough description
of this dharma, which is eternal and which applies
everywhere, at all times, and to all living beings. This
book is filled with a highly concise form of the essence
of the exceedingly deep and confidential topics of the
Vedas, Vedānta, Upaniṣads, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Purāṇas,
Brahma-sūtra, Mahābhārata, Itihāsas, Pañcarātra, Ṣaṭ-
sandarbhas, Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindhu, Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, and other ideal śāstras.
Furthermore, it is written in the form of a tasteful,
entertaining, and easily-comprehensible novel.

Jaiva-Dharma gives an unprecedented and poignant
analysis of many vital topics, such as: bhagavata-tattva
(the truth regarding Śrī Bhagavān); jīva-tattva (the
truth regarding the jīvas); śakti-tattva (the truth
regarding Bhagavānís potencies); the conditioned and
liberated states of the jīvas; a comparative study of
the nature of karma, jñāna and bhakti; a conclusive and
meaningful discussion of the distinguishing
characteristics of regulated and spontaneous devotional
service (vaidhī and rāgānugā-bhakti); and the supreme
excellence of śrī-nāma-bhajana. All these topics are
discussed in terms of sambandha, abhidheya and
prayojana.

Prior to the Bengali edition of Jaiva-Dharma published
by the Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti, all editions of Jaiva-
Dharma published by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda and the subsequent
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava ācāryas in their line have included the
section on rasa-vicāra. However, for specific reasons,
our most revered holy master, Śrīla Gurupāda-padma,
published an edition containing only the first two
sections of the book, which deal respectively with

                           4
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

nitya-naimittika-dharma and sambandha, abhidheya and
prayojana. He did not publish the third part of the
book, which deals with rasa-vicāra (a detailed
consideration of the confidential, transcendental
mellows of bhakti).

Later, however, when Śrī Keśava Gauḍīya Maṭha was in the
process of publishing its Hindi edition from Mathurā,
Śrīla Gurupāda-padma personally reviewed the entire
book. In his introduction to this edition, he very
clearly instructed the readers to first examine their
eligibility or lack thereof, and then cautiously proceed
with their study of the third section dealing with rasa-
vicāra. Therefore, when all three parts of the book were
published together in the second edition, I did not feel
that it was necessary to give any further clarification.

At the time of writing Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, a doubt
arose in the heart of Śrī Kṛṣṇa dāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī
regarding whether he should present the discussion on
rasa-vicāra. He questioned whether or not to include
this topic in the book, lest ineligible people may read
it to their detriment. Finally he resolved to include
rasa-vicāra in the book, expressing this in his own
words in Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā (4.231-235):

e saba siddhānta gūḍha, kahite nā yuyāya

nā kahile, keha ihāra anta nāhi pāya

The esoteric and confidential conclusions regarding the
amorous pastimes of Rasarāja Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs,
who are the embodiments of mahābhāva, are not fit to be
disclosed to the common ordinary man.

ataeva kahi kichu kariñā nigūḍha

bujhibe rasika bhakta, nā bujhibe mūḍha

But if they are not revealed, no one can enter into this
topic. I shall therefore describe these topics in a
concealed manner, so that only rasika-bhaktas will be
able to understand them, whereas ineligible fools will
not.

hṛdaye dharaye ye caitanya-nityānanda

e saba siddhānte sei pāibe ānanda

Anyone who has established Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and
Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu in their hearts will attain
transcendental bliss by hearing these conclusions.

e saba siddhānta haya āmrera pallava

bhakta-gaṇa kokilera sarvadā vallabha

This entire doctrine is as sweet as newly grown mango
sprouts, which can only be relished by the devotees, who
are compared to cuckoos.

abhakta-uṣṭrera ithe nā haya praveśa

tabe citte haya more ānanda viśeṣa

                           5
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017


The camel-like non-devotees cannot possibly gain
admittance into these topics. Therefore, there is
special jubilation in my heart.

It is always inappropriate to reveal confidential vraja-
rasa topics before general people. However, there is
every possibility that this sacred mystery will
disappear if it is not thoroughly explained. Although
neem and mango trees may be present together in the same
garden, a crow will sit on a neem tree and taste its
bitter fruits, whereas the cuckoo, who has
discriminating taste, will sit on the mango tree and
savor its sweet sprouts and blossoms. Consequently, it
is proper to present rasa-vicāra.

Until now, the world of Hindi literature has lacked such
an exceptionally fine and comprehensive book, which
acquaints one through comparative analysis with the
highest philosophical conclusions and super-excellent
methods of worship of vaiṣṇava-dharma. Jaiva-Dharma has
fulfilled this need. It will usher in a new era in the
philosophical and religious worlds, and particularly in
the world of Vaiṣṇavism.



Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha

Mathurā, U.P., 1989



An aspirant for a particle of mercy

of Śrī-Śrī Guru and Vaiṣṇavas

Tridaṇḍi Bhikṣu Śrī Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa




Chapter 1

The Eternal & Temporary Dharmas of the Jīva



Within this world, the island of Jambūdvīpa is most
excellent. In Jambūdvīpa, the land of Bhārata-varṣa is
eminent and within Bhārata-varṣa, the topmost place is
Gauḍa-bhūmi. Within Gauḍa-bhūmi, the nine-island region
of Śrī Navadvīpa-maṇḍala is most distinguished, and in
one area of Śrī Navadvīpa-maṇḍala, on the eastern bank
of the Bhāgīrathī river, a beautiful settlement named
Śrī Godruma is eternally situated.

In ancient times, many stalwart practitioners of bhajana
lived in the various places of Śrī Godruma. It was here
that Śrī Surabhi, a cow of divine origin, previously
worshiped the Supreme Lord Bhagavān Śrī Gauracandra in
her own kuñja, a grove shaded with fragrant flowering
creepers. At a little distance from this kuñja is

                             6
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

Pradyumna-kuñja. Here, Śrī Premadāsa Paramahaṁsa Bābājī,
a śikṣā disciple of Pradyumna Brahmacārī, the best among
the associates of Śrī Gauracandra, now lived in a kuṭīra
(hut) covered with vines and dense foliage, and spent
his time constantly immersed in the divine rapture of
bhajana.

Śrī Premadāsa Bābājī was a refined scholar, and was
fully conversant with all the conclusions of the
śāstras. He had taken shelter of the forest of Śrī
Godruma with single-minded conviction, knowing it to be
non-different in essence from Śrī Nandagrāma. As a daily
routine, Bābājī Mahārāja chanted two hundred thousand
holy names and offered hundreds of obeisances to all the
Vaiṣṇavas. He maintained his existence by accepting alms
from the houses of the cowherd men. Whenever he found a
spare moment from these activities, he spent his time
not in idle gossip but in reading the book Prema-
vivarta, by Śrī Jagadānanda, a confidential associate of
Śrī Gaurasundara.

At such times, neighboring Vaiṣṇavas gathered and
listened with great devotion as Bābājī read with tear
filled eyes. And why would they not come to hear? This
divine treatise, Prema-vivarta, is filled with all the
conclusions of rasa, the condensed liquid essence of
integrated transcendental emotions. Moreover, the
Vaiṣṇavas were inundated by the waves of Bābājīís sweet,
resonant voice, which extinguished the venomous fire of
sensuality in their hearts like a shower of nectar.

One afternoon, having completed his chanting of śrī-
hari-nāma, Bābājī Mahāśaya sat reading Prema-vivarta in
his bower, shaded by vines of mādhavī and jasmine, and
became immersed in an ocean of transcendental emotions.
Just then, a mendicant in the renounced order of life
approached him, fell at his feet, and stayed prostrated
in obeisance for a considerable time. At first Bābājī
Mahāśaya remained absorbed in the bliss of
transcendental ecstasy, but after a while, when he
returned to external consciousness, he beheld the
sannyāsī mahātmā lying before him. Considering himself
more worthless and insignificant than a blade of grass,
Bābājī fell in front of the sannyāsī and began to weep,
exclaiming, “O Caitanya! O Nityānanda! Please be
merciful upon this fallen wretch.” The sannyāsī then
said, “Prabhu, I am extremely vile and destitute. Why do
you mock me like this?”

The sannyāsī proceeded to take the dust of Bābājī
Mahāśayaís feet upon his head, and then sat before him.
Bābājī Mahāśaya offered him a seat of banana tree bark,
and sitting beside him, spoke in a voice choked with
love, “Prabhu, what service may this worthless person
offer you?”

The sannyāsī set aside his begging bowl, and with folded
hands, began to speak. “O Master, I am most unfortunate.
I have spent my time in Kāśī and other holy places,
debating the analytical conclusions of the religious
texts ñ such as sāṅkhya, pātañjala, nyāya, vaiśeṣika,
pūrva-mīmāṁsā and uttara-mīmāṁsā ñ and exhaustively
studying the Upaniṣads and the other Vedānta-śāstras.
About twelve years ago, I accepted the renounced order

                           7
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

of life from Śrī Saccidānanda Sarasvatī. Having accepted
the staff of the renounced order, I traveled to all the
holy places, and wherever I went in India, I kept the
company of sannyāsīs who adhere to the doctrine of Śrī
Śaṅkara. In due course of time, I passed beyond the
first three stages of the renounced order ñ kuṭicaka,
bahūdaka, and haṁsa ñ and attained the highest status of
paramahaṁsa, in which I have remained for some time. In
Vārāṇasī, I adopted a vow of silence, and abided by
those statements that Śrī Śaṅkarācārya proclaimed to be
the mahā-vākya (chief axioms) of the Vedas, ahaṁ
brahmāsmi, prajñānaṁ brahma, and tat tvam asi. However,
the happiness and spiritual satisfaction that I was
supposed to find did not come to me.

“One day I saw a Vaiṣṇava sādhu loudly singing about the
pastimes of Śrī Hari. I opened my eyes and saw that he
was bathed in streams of tears, and in his ecstatic
rapture the hairs of his body were standing on end. He
was chanting the names “Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya, Prabhu
Nityānanda!” in a choked-up voice, and as he danced, his
feet slipped so that he fell on the ground again and
again. When I saw him and heard his song, my heart
filled with an indescribable ecstasy. Although that
mystical experience was so overwhelming, in order to
protect my status as a paramahaṁsa, I did not speak with
him at all. Alas! Fie on my rank and status! Cursed be
my destiny! I donít know why, but since that day my
heart has become attracted to Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanyaís lotus
feet.

“Shortly thereafter, I became obsessed with the desire
to find that Vaiṣṇava sādhu, but I could not see him
anywhere. Never before had I experienced anything like
the untainted bliss that I felt when I saw him and heard
the holy name emanating from his mouth. After
considerable thought, I concluded that the highest
benefit for me would be to take shelter at the lotus
feet of the Vaiṣṇavas.

“I left Kāśī and went to the beautiful holy land of Śrī
Vṛndāvana-dhāma. There I saw many Vaiṣṇavas, uttering
the names of Śrī Rūpa, Sanātana, and Jīva Gosvāmī in a
mood of great lamentation. They were absorbed in
meditation on the pastimes of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, and they
rolled on the ground, chanting the name of Śrī
Navadvīpa. When I saw and heard this, a greed arose
within me to behold the beautiful holy dhāma of
Navadvīpa. I circumambulated the one hundred sixty-eight
square miles of Śrī Vraja-dhāma, and came to Śrī
Māyāpura just a few days ago. I heard of your glories in
the town of Māyāpura, so I have come today to take
shelter of your lotus feet. Please fulfill my lifeís
aspiration by making this servant an object of your
mercy.”

Paramahaṁsa Bābājī Mahāśaya took a blade of grass
between his teeth. Weeping, he said, “O Sannyāsī
Ṭhākura, I am absolutely worthless. I have uselessly
spent my life filling my belly, sleeping, and engaging
in futile talks. It is true that I have taken up
residence in this sacred place where Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya
enacted His pastimes, but as the days fly by, I find
myself unable to taste this thing known as kṛṣṇa-prema.

                           8
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

You are so fortunate, for you have tasted that divine
love merely by seeing a Vaiṣṇava for just a moment. You
have received the mercy of Kṛṣṇa Caitanyadeva. I will be
very grateful if you will kindly remember this fallen
wretch for a moment when you are tasting that prema,
then my life will become successful.”

Saying this, Bābājī embraced the sannyāsī and bathed him
with his tears. When Sannyāsī Mahārāja thus touched the
limbs of the Vaiṣṇava, he experienced unprecedented
bliss within his heart. He began to dance as he wept,
and as he danced, he began to sing:

(jaya) śrī kṛṣṇa-caitanya śrī prabhu nityānanda

(jaya) premadāsa guru jaya bhajanānanda

All glories to Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya and Prabhu Nityānanda.
All glories to my divine master Premadāsa, and to the
bliss of bhajana.

Premadāsa Bābājī and Sannyāsī Mahārāja danced and
performed kīrtana for a long time. When they stopped,
they spoke together on many topics. Finally, Premadāsa
Bābājī said very humbly, “O Mahātmā, kindly stay here in
Pradyumna-kuñja for a few days just to purify me.”

The sannyāsī said, “I have offered my body at your lotus
feet. Why do you speak of a few days only? My anxious
prayer is that I may serve you until I give up this
body.”

Sannyāsī Ṭhākura was an erudite   scholar of all the
śāstras. He knew very well that   if one stays in the
residence of the guru, one will   naturally receive the
guruís instructions, so he took   up residence in that
grove with great delight.

After a few days Paramahaṁsa Bābājī said to the elevated
sannyāsī, “O Mahātmā, Śrī Pradyumna Brahmacārī has
mercifully given me shelter at his lotus feet. At
present he lives in the village of Śrī Devapallī on the
outskirts of Śrī Navadvīpa-maṇḍala, where he is absorbed
in the worship of Śrī Nṛsiṁhadeva. Today, after
collecting alms, let us go there and take darśana of his
lotus feet.”

Sannyāsī Ṭhākura replied, “I will follow whatever
instructions you give me.”

After two oíclock, they crossed the Alakānandā River,
and arrived in Śrī Devapallī. They then crossed the
Sūryaṭīlā River and took darśana of the lotus feet of
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhuís associate, Śrī Pradyumna
Brahmacārī, who was in the temple of Śrī Nṛsiṁhadeva.
From afar, Paramahaṁsa Bābājī fell to the ground and
offered prostrated obeisances to his guru. Pradyumna
Brahmacārī then came out of the temple, his heart
melting with affection for his disciple. Lifting
Paramahaṁsa Bābājī with both hands, and embracing him
very lovingly, he enquired about his welfare. After they
had discussed topics concerning bhajana for some time,
Paramahaṁsa Bābājī introduced Sannyāsī Ṭhākura to his
guru.

                           9
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017


Brahmacārī Ṭhākura said with great respect, “My dear
brother, you have obtained a most qualified guru. You
should study the book Prema-vivarta under Premadāsaís
direction.

kibā vipra kibā nyāsī śūdra kene naya

jei kṛṣṇa-tattva-vettā sei guru haya

Whether one is a brāhmaṇa, a sannyāsī, or a śūdra, if he
is fully conversant with all the truths regarding
transcendental knowledge of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, he can become a
guru. (Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya 8.128)

Sannyāsī Ṭhākura humbly offered obeisances at the lotus
feet of his parama-guru and said, “Prabhu, you are an
associate of Śrī Caitanyadeva and you can purify
hundreds of arrogant sannyāsīs like me just by your
merciful glance. Please bestow your mercy upon me.”

Sannyāsī Ṭhākura had no previous experience of the
reciprocal behavior between Vaiṣṇavas. However, he
accepted the mutual dealings that he observed between
his guru and parama-guru as the sad-ācāra (proper
etiquette) that he himself should follow, and from that
day on, he behaved accordingly toward his own guru
without a trace of duplicity. When the evening āratī was
over, the guru and śiṣya returned to Śrī Godruma.

A few days after residing in the kuñja, Sannyāsī Ṭhākura
became anxious to inquire about spiritual truths from
Paramahaṁsa Bābājī. By this time, the sannyāsī had
adopted all the ways of a Vaiṣṇava, except for his outer
dress. During his previous training, Sannyāsī Ṭhākura
had developed qualities such as full control over his
mind and senses, and had become firmly established in
the conception of the non-dual, all-pervading Absolute
(brahma-niṣṭhā). In addition, he had now acquired
staunch faith in the transcendental pastimes of
Parabrahma Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and had become deeply humble.

One morning, after performing ablutions at the break of
dawn, Paramahaṁsa Bābājī sat in the mādhavī grove
chanting hari-nāma on his tulasī-mālā. At that time, Śrī
Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa Yugalaís niśānta-līlā (Their
pastimes just prior to dawn) gradually manifested within
his heart. Because this was the time that Śrī Śrī Rādhā
and Kṛṣṇa part from each otherís company, leaving the
kuñja to return to Their respective homes, Paramahaṁsa
Bābājī felt great pangs of separation, and tears of love
streamed continuously from his eyes. While absorbed in
meditation on this pastime, he was internally engaged in
service appropriate for that period of the day in his
perfected spiritual form; thus, he had lost all
awareness of his physical body. Sannyāsī Ṭhākura was
captivated by Bābājīís state, and sat beside him,
observing his sāttvika-bhāvas, transcendental symptoms
of ecstasy.

Suddenly Paramahaṁsa Bābājī said to him, “O sakhī,
silence Kakkhaṭī (Śrīmatī Rādhikāís monkey) at once,
otherwise she will rouse Rādhā-Govinda from Their sleep
of divine pleasure; then Lalitā-sakhī will become

                           10
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

distressed, and will rebuke me. Look there! Anaṅga
Mañjarī is signaling for you to do this. You are Ramaṇa
Mañjarī and this is your designated service. Be
attentive in this regard.”

After uttering these words, Paramahaṁsa Bābājī fell
unconscious. From that moment, Sannyāsī Mahārāja, now
acquainted with his spiritual identity and service,
engaged himself accordingly. Thus, the day dawned and
the morning light spread its luster in the east. Birds
began chirping melodiously in every direction, and a
gentle breeze blew. The extraordinary beauty of the
mādhavī grove of Pradyumna-kuñja, illuminated by the
crimson rays of the rising sun, was beyond description.

Paramahaṁsa Bābājī was seated on a cushion of banana
bark. As he gradually regained external consciousness,
he began to chant śrī-nāma on his beads. Sannyāsī
Ṭhākura then offered prostrated obeisances at Bābājīís
feet, sat next to him, and with folded hands spoke with
great humility, “Prabhu, O Master, this destitute soul
wishes to submit a question before you. Kindly reply and
pacify my anguished heart. May you be pleased to infuse
vraja-rasa into my heart, which has been scorched by the
fire of brahma-jñāna (knowledge aimed at the impersonal
Absolute devoid of form, qualities and activities).”

Bābājī replied, “You are a fit candidate. Whatever
questions you ask, I will answer as far as I am able.”

Sannyāsī Ṭhākura said, “Prabhu! For a long time I have
heard of the pre-eminence of dharma. On numerous
occasions I have asked the question, ëWhat is dharma?í
to so many people. It is a cause of distress to me that
the answers those people have given contradict each
other. So please tell me, what is the true
constitutional dharma of the jīvas? And why do different
teachers explain the nature of dharma in such diverse
ways? If dharma is one, why donít all learned teachers
cultivate that one universal dharma which is without a
second?”

Paramahaṁsa Bābājī meditated upon the lotus feet of
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya, and began to speak: “O most
fortunate one, I shall describe to you the principles of
dharma as far as my knowledge allows. An object is
called a vastu, and its eternal nature is known as its
nitya-dharma. Nature arises from the elementary
structure of an object (ghaṭana). By Kṛṣṇaís desire,
when an object is formed, a particular nature is
inherent in that structure as an eternal concomitant
factor. This nature is the nitya-dharma of the object.

“The nature of a given object becomes altered or
distorted when a change takes place within it, either by
force of circumstance, or due to contact with other
objects. With the passage of time, this distorted nature
becomes fixed, and appears to be permanent, as if it
were the eternal nature of that object. This distorted
nature is not the svabhāva (true nature); it is called
nisarga, that nature which is acquired through long-term
association. This nisarga occupies the place of the
factual nature, and becomes identified as the svabhāva.


                           11
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

“For example, water is an object and its svabhāva is
liquidity. When water solidifies, due to certain
circumstances, and becomes ice, the acquired nature of
solidity takes the place of its inherent nature. In
reality, this acquired nature is not eternal; rather, it
is occasional or temporary. It arises because of some
cause, and when that cause is no longer effective, this
acquired nature vanishes automatically. However, the
svabhāva is eternal. It may become distorted, but it
still remains inseparably connected to its object, and
the original nature will certainly become evident again
when the proper time and circumstances arise.

“The svabhāva of an object is its nitya-dharma (eternal
function), while its acquired nature is its naimittika-
dharma (occasional function). Those who have true
knowledge of objects (vastu-jñāna) can know the
difference between eternal and occasional function,
whereas those who lack this knowledge consider acquired
nature to be true nature, and they consequently mistake
the temporary dharma for eternal dharma.”

“What is it that is called vastu, and what is the
meaning of svabhāva?” asked Sannyāsī Ṭhākura.

Paramahaṁsa Bābājī said, “The word vastu is derived from
the Sanskrit verbal root vas, which means ëto existí, or
ëto dwellí. The verbal root becomes a noun when the
suffix tu is added. Therefore, vastu means ëthat which
has existence or which is self-evidentí. There are two
types of vastu: vāstava and avāstava. The term ëtruly
abiding substanceí, vāstava-vastu, refers to that which
is grounded in transcendence. Temporary objects,
avāstava-vastu, are dravya (solid objects), guṇa
(qualities), and so on. Real objects have eternal
existence. Unreal objects only have a semblance of
existence, which is sometimes real and sometimes unreal.

“It is said in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.1.2)

vedyaṁ vāstavam atra vastu śivadaṁ

Only a truly abiding substance, which is related to the
Supreme Absolute Truth and which yields supreme
auspiciousness is worthy of being known.

“From this statement it is clearly understood that the
only real substance is that which is related to the
Supreme Transcendence. Śrī Bhagavān is the only real
Entity (vāstava-vastu). The living entity (jīva) is a
distinct or individual part of that Entity, while
māyāóthe potency that produces bewildermentóis the
energy of that Entity. Therefore, the word vastu refers
to three fundamental principles: Bhagavān, the jīva, and
māyā. Knowledge of the mutual relationship between these
three principles is known as pure knowledge (śuddha-
jñāna). There are innumerable apparent representations
of these three principles, and they are all regarded as
avāstava-vastu, unreal substances. The classification of
phenomena into various categories such as dravya
(objects) and guṇa (qualities), which is undertaken by
the Vaiśeṣika school of philosophy, is merely a
deliberation on the nature of avāstava-vastu, temporary
objects.

                           12
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017


“The special characteristic (viśeṣa-guṇa) of any truly
abiding substance is its factual nature. The jīva is a
real entity, and his eternal characteristic quality is
his true nature.”

Sannyāsī Mahārāja said, “Prabhu, I want to understand
this topic very clearly.”

Bābājī Mahāśaya replied, “Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja
Gosvāmī, who was an object of the mercy of Śrī
Nityānanda Prabhu, showed me a manuscript that he had
written with his own hand. Śrīman Mahāprabhu has
instructed us on this subject in the book named Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya 20.108) as follows:

jīvera svarūpa haya kṛṣṇera nitya-dāsa

kṛṣṇera taṭasthā-śakti bhedābheda-prakāśa

The constitutional   nature of the jīva is to be an
eternal servant of   Śrī Kṛṣṇa. He is the marginal potency
of Kṛṣṇa, and is a   manifestation simultaneously one with
Him, and different   from Him.

kṛṣṇa bhūli seī jīva anādi-bahirmukha

ataeva māyā tāre deya saṁsāra-duḥkha

Caitanya-caritāmṛta, (Madhya 20.117)

The jīva who has forgotten Kṛṣṇa has been preoccupied
with the external potency since time without beginning.
Consequently, Kṛṣṇaís illusory potency (māyā) gives him
misery in the form of material existence.

“Kṛṣṇa is the complete transcendental substance (cid-
vastu). He is often compared to the sun of the spiritual
realm, and the jīvas are compared to the sunís atomic
particles of light. Jīvas are innumerable. When it is
said that they are individual parts of Kṛṣṇa, it does
not mean that they are like the pieces of stone that
form a mountain. Although innumerable jīva portions
emanate from Śrī Kṛṣṇa, He is not diminished by this in
the slightest. For this reason, the Vedas have compared
the jīvas in one respect to sparks emanating from a
fire. In reality, no adequate comparison can be made. No
comparisonówhether to sparks of a blazing fire, atomic
particles within the rays of the sun, or gold produced
from powerful mystic jewelsóis completely appropriate.
The true nature of the jīva is easily revealed in the
heart, but only when the mundane conception of these
comparisons is given up.

“Kṛṣṇa is infinite spiritual substance (bṛhat-cid-
vastu), whereas the jīvas are infinitesimal spiritual
substance (aṇu-cid-vastu). The oneness of Kṛṣṇa and the
jīvas lies in their spiritual nature (cid-dharma), but
they are undoubtedly different as well, because their
natures are complete and incomplete respectively. Kṛṣṇa
is the eternal Lord of the jīvas, and the jīvas are
Kṛṣṇaís eternal servants. This interrelationship is
natural. Kṛṣṇa is the attractor, and the jīvas are
attracted. Kṛṣṇa is the supreme ruler, and the jīvas are

                             13
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

ruled. Kṛṣṇa is the observer, and the jīvas are
observed. Kṛṣṇa is the complete whole, and the jīvas are
poor and insignificant. Kṛṣṇa is the possessor of all
potency, and the jīvas are devoid of potency. Therefore,
the eternal svabhāva or dharma of the jīva is kṛṣṇa-
dāsya, eternal service and obedience to Kṛṣṇa.

“Kṛṣṇa is endowed with unlimited potencies. His complete
potency (pūrṇā-śakti) is perceived in the manifestation
of the spiri-tual world, cit-jagat. Similarly, His
taṭasthā-śakti, or marginal potency, is observed in the
manifestation of the jīvas. A special potency acts in
assembling the finite world (apūrṇa-jagat), and this
potency is known as taṭasthā-śakti. The action of the
marginal potency is to create an entity (vastu) which
exists between the animate objects (cid-vastu) and
inanimate objects (acid-vastu) and which can maintain a
relationship with both the spiritual and material
worlds. Purely transcendental entities are by nature
quite the opposite of inanimate objects, and therefore
have no connection whatsoever with them. Although the
jīva is an animate spiritual particle, he is capable of
a relationship with inanimate matter due to the
influence of aiśī-śakti, a divine potency, which is
known as the taṭasthā-śakti.

“The boundary region between land and the water of a
river is known as a taṭa or shore. This taṭa may be
considered to be both land and water; in other words, it
is situated in both. The divine aiśī-śakti, which is
situated in the border region, upholds the properties of
both land and water, as it were, in one existential
entity. The jīvaís nature is spiritual, but still, his
composition is such that he can become controlled by
jaḍa-dharma, the inert nature. Therefore the baddha-jīva
(conditioned soul) is not beyond all connection with
matter, unlike the jīvas in the spiritual domain.
Nonetheless, he is distinct from dull matter because of
his animate, spiritual nature. Since the jīva is by
nature different from both the purely spiritual entities
and dull matter, he is classified as a separate
principle. Therefore, the eternal distinction between
Bhagavān and the jīva must be accepted.

“Bhagavān is the supreme ruler of māyā (His external
potency which creates bewilderment), which is under His
full control. The jīva, on the other hand, may under
certain circumstances be controlled by māyā, for he is
subject to its influence. Hence, these three
principlesóBhagavān, the jīva, and māyāóare real
(paramārthika satya) and eternal. Of these three,
Bhagavān is the supreme eternal principle, and is the
foundation of the other principles. The following
statement of Śrī Kaṭha Upaniṣad (2.2.13) confirms this.

nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām

He is the supreme eternal amongst all eternals (and the
fundamental sentient being among all sentient beings).

“The jīva is by nature both an eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa,
and a representation of His marginal potency. This
demonstrates that the jīva is distinct from Bhagavān,
yet at the same time is not separate from Him. He is,

                           14
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

therefore, a manifestation that is both different and
non-different (bhedābheda-prakāśa). The jīva is subject
to domination by māyā, whereas Bhagavān is the
controller of māyā. Herein lies an eternal distinction
between the jīva and Bhagavān. On the other hand, the
jīva is by his constitutional nature a transcendental
entity, cid-vastu, and Bhagavān is also by nature cid-
vastu. Moreover, the jīva is a special potency of
Bhagavān. Herein lies the eternal non-distinction
between these two. Where eternal distinction and non-
distinction are found at one and the same time, eternal
distinction takes prominence.

“The nitya-dharma of the jīva is servitorship to Kṛṣṇa.
When he forgets this, he is subjected to the tyranny of
māyā, and from that very moment he becomes diverted from
Kṛṣṇa. The fall of the jīva does not take place within
the context of material time. Accordingly, the words
anādi-bahirmukha are used, meaning that the jīva has
been diverted since time without beginning. From the
moment of this diversion and the jīvaís entry into māyā,
his nitya-dharma becomes perverted. Therefore, by the
association of māyā, the jīva develops nisarga, an
acquired nature, which thus facilitates the display of
his temporary function and disposition known as
naimittika-dharma. The nitya-dharma (eternal function)
is one, indivisible, and faultless in all different
situations; but the naimittika-dharma (temporary
function) assumes many different forms when seen in
diverse circumstances, and when it is described in
various ways by men of divergent opinions.”

Having spoken thus, Paramahaṁsa Bābājī stopped and began
to chant śrī-hari-nāma-japa. Hearing this explanation of
spiritual truths, Sannyāsī Ṭhākura offered prostrated
obeisances and said, “Prabhu, I shall deliberate on all
these topics today. Tomorrow I shall submit at your
lotus feet any questions that may arise.”



Thus ends the First Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled

“The Eternal and Temporary Dharmas of the Jiva”




Chapter 2

The Nitya Dharma of the Jīva is Pure & Eternal



The next morning Sannyāsī Mahāśaya found no opportunity
to inquire from Premadāsa Bābājī, who was internally
immersed in vraja-bhāva, mellows of service in the mood
of the residents of Vraja. At midday, after accepting
alms from the houses of the villagers, they sat together
in the arbor known as śrī-mādhavī-mālatī maṇḍapa.
Paramahaṁsa Bābājī Mahāśaya then began to speak

                           15
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

compassionately: “O best of the bhaktas, what
conclusions have you reached after yesterdayís
discussion on the subject of dharma?”

Feeling supreme bliss (paramānanda), Sannyāsī Ṭhākura
asked, “Prabhu, if the jīva is infinitesimal, how can
his eternal dharma be full and pure? And if the natural
function of the jīva is formed at the time he is
constituted, how can that function be eternal?”

When Paramahaṁsa Bābājī heard these two questions, he
meditated on the lotus feet of Śrī Śacīnandana and then,
smiling, said, “Respected sir, although the jīva is
infinitesimal, his dharma is full and nitya (eternal).
Minuteness is only a trait by which he is identified.
Parabrahma Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra, is the one and only infinite
substance (bṛhad-vastu), and the jīvas are His
innumerable atomic particles. Like sparks emanating from
an undivided fire, the jīvas emanate from Kṛṣṇa, who is
the embodiment of immutable consciousness. Just as every
spark is endowed with the potency of the complete fire,
so each and every jīva is capable of displaying the full
function of consciousness. If a single spark has enough
fuel, it can kindle a blazing fire that will incinerate
the whole world. Similarly, even a single jīva can bring
about a great inundation of love by obtaining Śrī
Kṛṣṇacandra, who is the real object of love. As long as
he fails to contact the real object of his spiritual
function (dharma-viṣaya), the infinitesimal, conscious
jīva is incapable of exhibiting the natural development
of that function. In reality, it is only when the jīva
is in connection with his object that the identity of
its dharma becomes apparent.

“What is the nitya-dharma, or eternal, constitutional
function of the jīva? You must examine this question
carefully. Transcendental love for Kṛṣṇa (prema) is the
jīvaís nitya-dharma. The jīva is a substance
transcendental to mundane matter, and consciousness is
that which he is constituted. His eternal function is
divine love, and the nature of that pure prema is
service to Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, the constitutional function
of the jīva is service to Kṛṣṇa, which is the nature of
prema.

“Jīvas exist in two conditions: śuddha-avasthā, the pure
liberated state; or baddha-avasthā, the conditioned
state. In the liberated state, the jīva is completely
spiritual (cinmaya), and has no connection with mundane
matter. However, even in the liberated state, the jīva
is an infinitesimal entity.

“The jīva can undergo a change in condition because he
has the quality of minuteness. Kṛṣṇa, however, never
undergoes a change of condition, for by His very nature
He is the entity of infinite cognition. By His essential
constitution as a vastu (a factual existent entity), He
is supreme, completely pure, and eternal, whereas the
jīva, by his essential constitution as a vastu is
minute, a part, liable to contamination, and subject to
repeated change. Nevertheless, by virtue of the jīvaís
dharma, or unadulterated spiritual function, he is
great, undivided, pure, and everlasting. As long as the
jīva is pure, his dharma displays its spotless

                           16
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

character. However, when he is contaminated by
involvement with māyā, his true nature is perverted, and
he becomes impure, bereft of shelter, and oppressed by
mundane happiness and distress. The jīvaís course of
material existence comes into effect as soon as he
forgets his attitude of service to Kṛṣṇa.

“As long as the jīva remains pure, he maintains his
identity and self-conception in accordance with his
unadulterated spiritual function (sva-dharma). His
innate and original egoism is therefore rooted in the
conception that he is a servant of Kṛṣṇa. However, that
pure egoism recedes and assumes many different forms as
soon as he is contaminated by association with māyā. The
gross and subtle bodies then cover his pure
constitutional identity, and as a result, a different
egoism emerges in the subtle body (liṅga-śarīra). When
this combines with the soulís identification with the
gross body (sthūla-śarīra), a third form of egoism is
assumed. In his pure spiritual form, the jīva is
exclusively a servant of Kṛṣṇa. When the jīva identifies
with the subtle body, his original, pure egoism of being
a servant of Kṛṣṇa is covered, and he thinks that he can
enjoy the fruits of his actions. He then obtains a gross
body and thinks, ëI am a brāhmaṇa; I am a king; I am
poor; I am miserable; I am overwhelmed by disease and
lamentation; I am a woman; I am the master of this
person and that person.í Thus, he identifies himself
with many different types of gross bodily conceptions.†

“When the jīva associates with these different types of
false egoism, his constitutional function becomes
perverted. The intrinsic, constitutional function (sva-
dharma) of the jīva is unalloyed prema. This prema
manifests in a perverted way in the subtle body in the
form of happiness and distress, attachment and aversion,
and so on. This perversion is observed in a more
concentrated form in the gross body as the pleasures of
eating, drinking, and contact with sense objects. You
should understand clearly that the eternal function of
the jīva, known as nitya-dharma, is manifest only in his
pure state. The dharma that arises in the conditioned
state is known as naimittika, circumstantial. Nitya-
dharma is by nature complete, pure, and eternal. I will
explain naimittika-dharma at length another day.

“The unalloyed vaiṣṇava-dharma that has been depicted in
the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is eternal religion (nitya-
dharma). The various types of dharma that are propagated
in the world may be divided into three categories:
nitya-dharma, naimittika-dharma (circumstantial dharma),
and anitya-dharma (impermanent religion). Anitya-dharma
is religion that does not speak about the existence of
Īśvara and does not accept the eternality of the soul.
Naimittika-dharma acknowledges the existence of Īśvara
and the eternality of the soul but only endeavors to
obtain the mercy of Īśvara through provisional methods.
Nitya-dharma strives to obtain the service of Bhagavān
by means of unalloyed prema.

“Nitya-dharma may be known by different names according
to differences of country, race, and language. However,
it is one, and supremely beneficial. The ideal example
of nitya-dharma is vaiṣṇava-dharma, which is prevalent

                           17
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

in India. The pristine state of vaiṣṇava-dharma is that
dharma which Bhagavān Śacīnandana, the Lord of our
heart, has taught to the world. It is for this reason
that great personalities absorbed in the bliss of divine
love have accepted these teachings and taken help from
them.”

At this point Sannyāsī Ṭhākura with folded hands said,
“Prabhu, I am constantly witnessing the super-excellence
of the spotless vaiṣṇava-dharma which Śrī Śacīnandana
has revealed, and I have clearly realized the
contemptible nature of Śaṅkarācāryaís monistic doctrine.
Still, something has come to my mind, which I feel I
must submit to you; I donít want to hide it. I
understand that mahābhāva, which was displayed by Śrī
Caitanya, is the highest state of concentrated prema. Is
it different from the attainment of the perfection of
absolute oneness (advaita-siddhi)?”

When Paramahaṁsa Bābājī heard the name of Śrī
Śaṅkarācārya, he offered prostrated obeisances unto the
ācārya and said, “Respected sir, śaṅkaraḥ śaṅkaraḥ
sākṣāt: íŚaṅkarācārya is none other than Mahādeva-
Śaṅkara, or Śivajī.í You should always remember this.
Śaṅkara is guru for the Vaiṣṇavas, and for this reason
Mahāprabhu has referred to him as ācārya (spiritual
preceptor). For his own part, Śrī Śaṅkara was a perfect
Vaiṣṇava.

“At the time Śrī Śaṅkaraís appeared in India, there was
a great need for a guṇa-avatāra like him, an incarnation
who presides over the qualities of material nature.† The
study of the Vedic śāstras and the practice of
varṇāśrama-dharma had become practically extinct in
India due to the influence of śūnyavāda (voidism), the
nihilistic Buddhist philosophy. Śūnyavāda is vehemently
opposed to the personal conception of Bhagavān. Although
it partially accepts the principle of the living beingís
identity as a conscious, spiritual soul (jīvātmā), it is
an extreme example of anitya-dharma (impermanent
religion). The brāhmaṇas of that era had abandoned the
Vedic dharma and had in effect all become Buddhists. At
that point, Śaṅkarācārya appeared as an extremely
powerful incarnation of Mahādeva. He re-established the
credibility of the Vedic literatures and converted the
śūnyavāda doctrine of voidism into the brahmavāda
doctrine of nirviśeṣa (featureless) brahma. This was an
extraordinary feat, and India will remain ever indebted
to Śrī Śaṅkarācārya for this tremendous contribution.

“All activities in this world fall into one of two
categories: some are relative to a particular period of
time, and some are applicable for all time. The work of
Śaṅkarācārya was relative to a particular period and
bestowed tremendous benefit. Śaṅkarācārya laid the
foundation upon which great ācāryas such as Śrī
Rāmānujācārya erected the edifice of pure vaiṣṇava-
dharma. Consequently, Śaṅkarāvatāra was a great friend
and preceptor who pioneered vaiṣṇava-dharma.

“Vaiṣṇavas are now reaping the fruit of Śaṅkarācāryaís
philosophical precepts. For the jīvas who are bound by
matter, there is a great need for sambandha-jñāna,
knowledge of the soulís entanglement in material nature

                           18
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

and of his relationship with Bhagavān. Śaṅkarācārya and
the Vaiṣṇavas both accept that the sentient living
entities in this material world are completely distinct
and separate from their gross and subtle material
bodies, that the jīvas are spiritually existent, and
that liberation (mukti) entails giving up all connection
with this material world. Consequently, there is a great
deal of agreement between the doctrine of Śaṅkara and
that of the Vaiṣṇava ācāryas, up to the point of
liberation. Śaṅkara has even taught that the worship of
Śrī Hari is the method by which one can purify the heart
and attain liberation. He has only remained silent
regarding what extraordinary destination the jīva
attains after liberation.

“Śaṅkara knew perfectly well that if the jīvas could be
prompted to strive for liberation through the worship of
Hari, they would gradually become attached to the
pleasure of bhajana and thus become śuddha-bhaktas, pure
devotees. That is why he simply pointed out the path and
didnít reveal further confidential secrets of vaiṣṇava-
dharma. Those who have scrutinized the commentaries of
Śaṅkara can understand his inner intention, but those
who are only preoccupied with the external aspect of his
teachings remain far from the threshold of vaiṣṇava-
dharma.

“From one specific point of view, the perfected state of
absolute oneness (advaita-siddhi) seems identical to
prema. However, the narrow interpretation of absolute
oneness is certainly different from the meaning of
prema. What is prema? You should understand clearly that
prema is the unadulterated function by which two
transcendental entities are spontaneously attracted to
each other. Prema cannot occur without the separate
existence of two transcendental entities. Kṛṣṇa-prema is
the dharma by which all transcendental entities are
eternally attracted to the supreme transcendent Entity,
Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra. The ideology of prema rests on the
eternally established truths that Kṛṣṇacandra has His
own eternal, separate existence, and that the jīvas have
their own eternal, separate existence, following His
leadership (ānugatya); and that this prema-tattva is
also an eternally perfect truth (nitya-siddha-tattva).
The distinct presence of three seperate ingredients ñ
the relisher, the object of relish, and the act of
relishing ñ is a fact. If the relisher of prema and the
object of relish are one and the same, then prema cannot
be an eternal reality.

“We can say that absolute oneness or advaita-siddhi is
the same as prema if we define advaita-siddhi as the
pure state of a transcendental entity who has no
relationship with insentient matter. This conception of
advaita-siddhi implies oneness in the sense that
spiritual entities have become one in their spiritual
nature and function (cid-dharma). However, modern
scholars who have adopted the doctrine of Śaṅkara are
not satisfied with this idea, and they have tried to
establish that spiritual entities, cid-vastu have
themselves become indistinguishably one and the same
substance. In so doing, they have disregarded the true
Vedic conception of non-distinction and have propagated
a distorted version in its place. Vaiṣṇavas declare this

                           19
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

philosophy to be opposed to the Vedas because it denies
the eternality of prema.

“Śaṅkarācārya described the state of non-distinction
simply as the unadulterated condition of spiritual
substance. However, his modern-day followers could not
understand his inner intention, and consequently they
have marred their guruís reputation by teaching a
thoroughly debased doctrine known as Māyāvāda, which
describes the various states of prema as illusory
phenomena.

“Māyāvādīs deny from the very outset that anything
exists except the one spiritual substance (brahma), and
they also deny that the function of prema exists within
that spiritual substance. They claim that brahma is
beyond the influence of māyā as long as it remains in a
state of oneness, but that brahma becomes overwhelmed by
māyā when it becomes embodied and takes on various
shapes in the form of jīvas. Consequently, they believe
that the form of Bhagavān is an illusory manifestation.
In reality, though, His form is eternally pure and
constituted of concentrated consciousness. For this
reason, they have concluded that prema and its various
manifestations are illusory, and that the knowledge of
non-duality (advaita-jñāna) is beyond the influence of
māyā. Their mistaken conception of advaita-siddhi or
oneness can never be equated with prema.

“Śrī Caitanyadeva instructed the world to taste prema,
and He personally taught it by His transcendental
behavior and activities. This prema is completely beyond
the jurisdiction of māyā, and it is the highest
development of the unalloyed state of perfect oneness
(advaita-siddhi). The state known as mahābhāva is a
special transformation of this prema, in which
premānanda is extraordinarily powerful. Consequently,
both the separateness and intimate relationship of the
lover and the beloved are transported to an
unprecedented state. The inconsequential theory of
Māyāvāda is useless for understanding the subject matter
of prema in any of its stages.”

Sannyāsī Ṭhākura said with great reverence, “O Prabhu,
My heart is deeply pierced with the realization that the
Māyāvāda doctrine is most insignificant. Today, you have
mercifully dispelled whatever lingering doubts I had in
this regard. I feel a strong desire to give up wearing
this Māyāvāda sannyāsa garb.”

Bābājī Mahāśaya said, “O Mahātmā, I never give
instruction on external dress. When the dharma or
spiritual function of the heart becomes purified, the
external dress will be set right easily and naturally.
Where there is too much concern for external appearance,
there is inattention to the soulís inner function. When
your heart becomes pure, you will automatically develop
attachment for the external behavior of Vaiṣṇavas, and
there will be no fault if you change your external dress
then. Absorb your heart completely in trying to follow
the teachings of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya, and later you may
adopt the external items of vaiṣṇava-dharma to which you
are naturally inclined. You should always remember this
instruction of Śrīman Mahāprabhu:†

                           20
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017


markaṭa-vairāgya nā kara loka dekhāñā

yathāyogya viṣaya bhuñjaí anāsakta hañā

antare niṣṭhā kara, bāhye loka-vyavahāra

acirāt kṛṣṇa tomāya karibe uddhāra

Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya (16.238-239)

Do not adopt markaṭa-vairāgya (external, monkey
renunciation)† simply to impress the general populace.
You should accept without attachment whatever sense
objects are appropriate for maintaining your devotional
practices and give up all material desires within your
heart. Internally develop staunch faith in Śrī Kṛṣṇa and
externally carry out your worldly responsibilities in
such a way that no one can detect your inner mood. If
you act like this, Śrī Kṛṣṇa will very quickly deliver
you from material existence.

Sannyāsī Ṭhākura understood the deep significance of
this discussion, and made no further suggestion about
changing his outer dress. Folding his hands he said,
“Prabhu, since I am now your disciple, and I have taken
shelter at your lotus feet, I will bear upon my head
whatever instructions you give, without any argument. I
have understood from your instructions that
unadulterated kṛṣṇa-prema constitutes the only vaiṣṇava-
dharma. This love for Kṛṣṇa is the nitya-dharma of the
jīvas, and it is complete, pure, and natural. But what
of the various dharmas that are prevalent in different
countriesóhow should I regard these different
religions?”

Bābājī Mahāśaya said, “O Mahātmā, dharma is only one,
not two or many. The jīvas have only one dharma, and it
is known as vaiṣṇava-dharma. Differences of language,
country, or race cannot create differences in dharma.
Jaiva-dharma is the constitutional function of the jīva.
People may give it different names, but they cannot
create a different constitutional function. Jaiva-dharma
is the unadulterated spiritual love that the
infinitesimal entity has for the Infinite Entity. It
appears to become distorted into various mundane forms
because the jīvas possess different material natures.
That is why the name vaiṣṇava-dharma has been given to
identify the pure form of jaiva-dharma. The degree of
vaiṣṇava-dharma in any religion or dharma is a measure
of its purity.

“Some time ago, in Śrī Vraja-dhāma, I submitted a
question at the lotus feet of Śrīman Mahāprabhuís
confidential associate, Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī. I asked
him whether the word iśhqh in the Islamic religious
tradition means unadulterated love, or something else.
Sanātana Gosvāmī was a learned scholar of all the
śāstras, and his erudition in the Arabic and Farsi
languages in particular knew no bounds. Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī, and other exalted spiritual
preceptors were present in that assembly. Śrī Sanātana
Gosvāmī kindly answered my question as follows:


                           21
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

“ ëYes, the word iśhqh means love. Adherents of Islam do
use the word iśhqh in relation to the worship of Īśvara,
but the word generally means love in the ordinary
worldly sense. Islamic religious teachers have not been
able to understand the true conception of the pure
spiritual entity, or śuddha-cid-vastu. This is evident
from the poetical account of the devoted lovers Lailā
and Majnūn and from the literary descriptions of iśhqh
by the great poet Hāfiz. They have referred to iśhqh
either as physical love pertaining to the gross body, or
as emotional love in relation to the subtle body. Thus
they cannot have had any experience of unadulterated
divine love or prema towards Bhagavān. I have never seen
this type of prema described in any religious texts of
the Muslim teachers; I have only seen it in the Vaiṣṇava
śāstras. The same is true of the Muslim word rūh, which
means soul or spirit. It does not seem that Muslim
teachers have used the word rūh to mean the śuddha-jīva
(the liberated soul); rather, they have used the word
rūh in the sense of the baddha-jīva, the soul bound by
matter.

“ ëI have not seen unadulterated love for Kṛṣṇa taught
in any other religion, whereas descriptions of kṛṣṇa-
prema are common throughout the teachings of vaiṣṇava-
dharma. In the second śloka of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, kṛṣṇa-
prema has been lucidly described in the statement,
projjhita-kaitava-dharma: ëThis Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
propounds the highest truth from which all pretentious
religiosity has been rejected.í Nonetheless, I have full
faith that Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya was the first to give full
instructions on the religion of unalloyed kṛṣṇa-prema.
If you have faith in my words, you may accept this
conclusion.í Having heard these instructions, I offered
prostrated obeisances to Sanātana Gosvāmī again and
again.”

When Sannyāsī Ṭhākura heard this explanation from Bābājī
Mahārāja, he immediately offered daṇḍavat-praṇāma to
him. Paramahaṁsa Bābājī then said, “O best of the
bhaktas, I will now answer your second question. Please
listen attentively. The words ëcreationí and
ëformationí, when applied to the jīva, are used in a
material context. The speech of this world functions by
drawing from the experience of material phenomena. The
time that we experience is divided into the three phases
of past, present and future. This is material time
(jaḍīya-kāla), which is connected with the material
energy, māyā. In the spiritual domain, there is
spiritual time, cit-kāla, which eternally exists in the
present, with no divisions of past and future. The jīvas
and Kṛṣṇa exist in that spiritual time, so the jīva is
eternal and ever-existing.

“The functions of creation, formation and falling take
place under the influence of material time, and they are
used to describe the jīva after he is bound in this
material world. However, even though the jīva is
infinitesimal, he is an eternal, spiritual entity, and
his fundamental constitution existed before he entered
this material world. Since past and future do not exist
in the spiritual world, whatever occurs within that
spiritual time frame is eternally present. Therefore, in
reality, the jīva and his constitutional function are

                           22
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

both ever-present and eternal.

“I have explained all this to you in words, but you can
only understand their true meaning to the extent that
you have realized and experienced the unalloyed
spiritual realm. I have just given you a glimpse; you
should try to realize the meaning of what I have said
through cit-samādhi, spiritual meditation. You will not
be able to understand these topics through mundane logic
or by debate. The more you can free your faculty of
experience from material bondage, the more you will be
able to experience the spiritual domain.

“First you should cultivate the realization of your pure
spiritual identity and practice chanting śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma
purely, then your spiritual function known as jaiva-
dharma will be clearly revealed. Spiritual realization
and experience cannot be fully purified by the eightfold
yoga system known as aṣṭāṅga-yoga or brahma-jñāna by
cultivating knowledge of the all-pervading, featureless
brahma. The jīva can only manifest his nitya-siddha-
dharma or eternal spiritual function, by constantly
cultivating activities directly meant for Kṛṣṇaís
pleasure.

“You should constantly practice chanting hari-nāma with
great enthusiasm. Such practice is true spiritual
culture. By chanting hari-nāma regularly, you will
develop unprecedented attachment for śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma
within a short time, and you will directly experience
the spiritual realm. Chanting śrī-hari-nāma is the
foremost of all the different limbs of bhakti, and it
yields the quickest results. This is confirmed by Śrī
Mahāprabhuís instructions in Śrī Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirājaís
magnificent work, Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya
4.70-71):†

bhajanera madhye śreṣṭha nava-vidhā bhakti

ëkṛṣṇa-premaí, ëkṛṣṇaí dite dhare mahā-śakti

tāra madhye sarva-śreṣṭha nāma-saṅkīrtana

niraparādhe nāma laile pāya prema-dhana

Of all the different types of spiritual practice, the
nine forms of bhakti (śravaṇaṁ, kīrtanaṁ, etc.) are the
best because they have tremendous power to deliver Kṛṣṇa
and kṛṣṇa-prema. Of these nine practices, nāma-
saṅkīrtana is the best. By chanting śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma
without offense, one obtains the priceless treasure of
prema.

“Mahātmā, if you ask how to recognize a Vaiṣṇava, I will
tell you that a Vaiṣṇava is someone who has given up all
offenses, and who chants śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma with great
feeling. There are three categories of Vaiṣṇavas: the
kaniṣṭha (neophyte), the madhyama (intermediate), and
the uttama (most exalted). A kaniṣṭha Vaiṣṇava chants
the name of Kṛṣṇa occasionally, a madhyama Vaiṣṇava
chants the name of Kṛṣṇa constantly, and an uttama
Vaiṣṇava causes others to chant śrī-nāma by his very
presence. According to Mahāprabhuís instructions, we do
not need any other criteria to discern who is a

                           23
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

Vaiṣṇava.”

Sannyāsī Ṭhākura was deeply immersed in the nectar of
Bābājī Mahārājaís instructions, and he began to dance as
he chanted śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma: ëHare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa,
Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare / Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma
Rāma, Hare Hareí. On that day, he experienced ruci, a
natural taste, for hari-nāma. Offering prostrated
obeisances unto the lotus feet of his guru, he prayed,
“Prabhu! O friend of the destitute! Please bestow your
mercy upon this wretched soul.”



Thus ends the Second Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled

“The Nitya-Dharma of the Jīva is Pure and Eternal”




Chapter 3

Naimittika-Dharma is to be Relinquished



One night, just after ten oíclock, Sannyāsī Mahārāja sat
chanting hari-nāma on a raised mound in a secluded part
of his grove within Śrī Godruma. Gazing northward, he
saw the full moon had already risen, diffusing an
uncommon luster throughout Śrī Navadvīpa-maṇḍala.
Suddenly, a divine manifestation of nearby Śrī Māyāpura
became visible before his eyes.

Sannyāsī Mahārāja exclaimed, “Oh! What an extraordinary
vision! I am seeing a most astonishing and blissful holy
place! Towering jeweled palaces, temples and ornamented
archways are illuminating the bank of the Jāhnavī River
by their glittering splendor. The tumultuous sound of
hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana is rising from many places, as if
to pierce the sky. Hundreds of Vaiṣṇavas, like Nārada
playing upon his vīṇā, are chanting śrī-nāma and
dancing.

“On one side is fair-complexioned Mahādeva, with his
ḍamarū drum in his hand. He cries out, ëO Viśvambhara,
please bestow Your mercy upon me!í Saying this, he
dances tāṇḍava-nṛtya wildly, then falls to the ground,
unconscious. On another side, the four-headed Brahmā
sits in an assembly of ṛṣis who are well-versed in Vedic
lore. He recites the following Vedic mantra and lucidly
explains its meaning:†

mahān prabhur vai puruṣaḥ sattvasyaiṣaḥ pravartakaḥ

sunirmalām imāṁ prāptim īśāno jyotir avyayaḥ

Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (3.12)

“ëThat Personality is undoubtedly mahān, supreme, and He

                           24
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

is prabhu, master. He bestows the tendency for
intelligence, and by His mercy a person can attain
supremely pure and transcendental peace. That person
known as Mahāprabhu Śrī Caitanya is puruṣa, the Supreme
Person. He is īśāna, the Supreme Ruler. He is jyoti-
svarūpa, self-manifest and possessing a lustrous
effulgence due to the golden splendour of His limbs. He
is avyaya, the imperishable Lord.í

“Elsewhere, Indra and other devas are leaping in
ecstasy, crying, ëJaya Prabhu Gauracandra! Jaya
Nityānanda!í The birds sitting on the branches of the
trees are calling out, ëGaura! Nitāi!í Large black bees
are humming everywhere in the flower gardens,
intoxicated by drinking gaura-nāma-rasa, the liquid
essence of the holy name of Gaura. Prakṛti-devī (the
goddess of nature) is maddened with gaura-rasa and
diffusing her magnificent radiance everywhere. This is
wonderful! I have seen Śrī Māyāpura in broad daylight
many times, but I have never beheld anything like this
before. What am I seeing?”

Remembering his Gurudeva, Sannyāsī Mahārāja said, “O
Prabhu, now I can understand that you have bestowed your
mercy upon me today by granting me a vision of the
transcendental (aprākṛta) aspect of Māyāpura. From today
onwards, I shall call myself a follower of Śrī
Gauracandra. I see that everyone in this divine land of
Navadvīpa wears a necklace of tulasī beads, tilaka on
his forehead, and the letters of śrī-nāma stamped on his
body. I shall also do the same.”

Saying this, Sannyāsī Mahārāja fell into a state of
unconsciousness. He regained external consciousness
after a short while, and began to cry, “Indeed, I am
extremely fortunate, for by the mercy of my guru, I have
obtained a momentary vision of the sacred land of Śrī
Navadvīpa.”

The next morning, he threw his ekadaṇḍa staff into the
river. Then decorating his neck with a three stranded
necklace of tulasī beads and his forehead with the
ūrddhva-puṇḍra-tilaka mark, he chanted “Hari! Hari,” and
began to dance.

When the Vaiṣṇavas of Godruma saw Sannyāsī Mahārājaís
extraordinary mood and new appearance, they offered him
prostrated obeisance, saying, “You are blessed! You are
blessed!” He became somewhat embarrassed at this, and
said, “Oh, I have accepted this Vaiṣṇava dress to become
an object of the Vaiṣṇavasí mercy, but now I have met
with another obstacle. I have heard the following
statement many times from Gurudevaís mouth:

tṛṇād api sunīcena taror api sahiṣṇunā

amāninā mānadena kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ

Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka 3

Considering oneself to be more insignificant than a
blade of grass, being more tolerant than a tree, and
free from all desire for personal prestige, and offering
all respect to others, one should constantly be absorbed

                           25
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

in hari-kīrtana.

“The very same Vaiṣṇavas whom I consider to be my gurus
are now offering obeisances to me. What will become of
me?” Pondering thus, he approached Paramahaṁsa Bābājī,
offered him prostrated obeisance, and stood up with his
head bowed.

Bābājī Mahāśaya was seated in the mādhavī arbor chanting
hari-nāma. When he saw Sannyāsī Mahārājaís complete
change of dress and his awakening of bhāva for śrī-nāma,
he embraced him and bathed him with tears of love,
saying, “O Vaiṣṇava dāsa, today I have become successful
by touching your auspicious body.”

With that statement, Sannyāsī Mahārājaís previous name
was forsaken. He received a new life from that day and
was now known as Vaiṣṇava dāsa. Thus, he abandoned his
Māyāvāda sannyāsa dress, his prestigious sannyāsa name,
and the exalted conception he had of himself.

That afternoon, many Vaiṣṇavas came to Śrī Pradyumna-
kuñja from Śrī Godruma and Śrī Madhyadvīpa to see
Paramahaṁsa Bābājī. They all sat surrounding him,
chanting hari-nāma with tulasī-mālā in their hands. They
called out “Ha Gaurāṅga Nityānanda! Ha Sītānātha! Jaya
Śacīnandana!” and their eyes welled with tears. The
Vaiṣṇavas discussed among themselves topics related to
the confidential service of their iṣṭa-deva (worshipable
Deity), and then, after circumambulating Tulasī-devī,
they offered obeisances. At that time, Vaiṣṇava dāsa
also circumambulated Śrī Vṛndā-devī, and rolled in the
dust of the lotus feet of the Vaiṣṇavas.

Some of the Vaiṣṇavas whispered to one another, “Isnít
that Sannyāsī Mahārāja? What an extraordinary appearance
he has today!”

Rolling on the ground before the Vaiṣṇavas, Vaiṣṇava
dāsa said, “Today, my life has become successful, for I
have obtained the dust of the Vaiṣṇavasí lotus feet. By
Gurudevaís mercy, I have clearly understood that the
jīva has no destination unless he has the dust of the
Vaiṣṇavasí feet. The dust of the feet of the Vaiṣṇavas,
the water that washes their feet, and the nectar
emanating from their lips ñ these three items are the
medicine and the way of life for the patient who is
afflicted with the disease of material existence. They
are the cure for the entire material disease, and they
are also the source of transcendental enjoyment for the
healthy soul who has become free from this affliction.

“O Vaiṣṇavas, please do not think that I am trying to
show off my scholarship. My heart has now become free
from all such egotism. I took birth in a high brāhmaṇa
family, studied all the śāstras, and entered the
sannyāsa āśrama, which is the fourth stage of the social
order. As a result, my pride knew no bounds. But when I
became attracted to the Vaiṣṇava principles, a seed of
humility was sown in my heart. Gradually, through the
mercy of all you Vaiṣṇavas, I have been able to cast off
the vanity of my noble birth, the pride in my learning,
and the arrogance of my social status.


                           26
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

“Now I know that I am a destitute and insignificant
jīva. I was being ruined by my false ego of being a
brāhmaṇa, by my learning, and by my status as a
sannyāsī. I submit all this before your lotus feet with
full simplicity. You may deal with this servant of yours
however you deem fit.”

When the Vaiṣṇavas heard Vaiṣṇava dāsaís humble words,
many of them said, “O best of the bhāgavatas! We are
eager to obtain the dust of the feet of Vaiṣṇavas like
you. Please bless us with the dust of your lotus feet.
You are the object of Paramahaṁsa Bābājīís mercy. Please
purify us by making us your associates. The śāstra says
that bhakti is obtained through associating with bhaktas
like yourself:

bhaktis tu bhagavad-bhakta-saṅgena parijāyate

sat-saṅgaḥ prāpyate puṁbhiḥ sukṛtaiḥ pūrva-sañcitaiḥ

Bṛhan-Nāradīya-Purāṇa (4.33)

Bhakti is awakened when one associates with bhaktas of
Śrī Bhagavān. Association with śuddha-bhaktas is
attained only by the accumulation of transcendental
pious activities performed over many lifetimes.

“We had accumulated a sufficient stock of pious
activities which foster bhakti (bhakti-poṣaka-sukṛti),
and that is how we have obtained your association. Now,
by the strength of that association, we aspire for hari-
bhakti.”

When the Vaiṣṇavas had concluded their exchanges of
mutual respect and humility, Vaiṣṇava dāsa sat down on
one side of the assembly, thereby enhancing its dignity.
The hari-nāma-mālā looked brilliant in his hands.

That day, a fortunate gentleman was sitting with the
Vaiṣṇavas. He had taken birth in an aristocratic
brāhmaṇa family and was also a zamindar (wealthy
landlord). He had studied Arabic and Farsi from
childhood and had developed a significant reputation in
the country, for he had courted many of the Islamic
royalty and was also expert in group dynamics and
political strategy. Although he had enjoyed his position
and opulence for many years, it had brought him no
happiness. At last, he had taken up the practice of
hari-nāma saṅkīrtana.

In his childhood, the gentleman had been trained in
Indian classical music by some of the most prestigious
music masters of Delhi. Because of that training, he had
become strong enough to put himself forward as the lead
singer during performances of hari-nāma saṅkīrtana. The
Vaiṣṇavas did not like his polished, classical style of
singing; he would show off some of his musical artistry
during saṅkīrtana and then look expectantly at othersí
faces for recognition. He continued to lead kīrtanas for
many days, and gradually he began to experience some
pleasure in saṅkīrtana.

After some time, he came to Śrī Godruma in order to join
the kīrtana programs of the Navadvīpa Vaiṣṇavas, and he

                           27
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

took up residence in the āśrama of a Vaiṣṇava there. On
this particular day, accompanied by that Vaiṣṇava, he
had come to Pradyumna-kuñja, and was sitting in the
mālatī-mādhavī grove. When he saw the Vaiṣṇavasí humble
behavior towards each other, and heard Vaiṣṇava dāsaís
words, many doubts arose in his mind. Being a skilled
orator, he audaciously raised the following inquiry
before the assembly of Vaiṣṇavas: “The Manu-smṛti and
other dharma-śāstras state that the brāhmaṇa caste is
the highest caste. According to these śāstras, religious
rites such as sandhyā-vandanā (the chanting of Vedic
mantras such as brahma-gāyatrī at dawn, noon and sunset)
are considered to be nitya-karma (eternal duties) for
the brāhmaṇas. If these activities are obligatory, why
is Vaiṣṇava behavior opposed to them?”

Vaiṣṇavas have no taste for mundane argument and debate.
If the question had been put by an argumentative
brāhmaṇa, they would not have replied, for fear of
becoming embroiled in a battle of words. However, since
they saw that the present questioner regularly sang
hari-nāma, they all said, “We will be most happy if
Paramahaṁsa Bābājī Mahāśaya answers your question.”

On hearing the order of the Vaiṣṇavas, Paramahaṁsa
Bābājī Mahāśaya offered obeisances and said, “O great
souls, if you so desire, the respected bhakta, Śrī
Vaiṣṇava dāsa, will answer this question in full.” All
the Vaiṣṇavas consented to this proposal.

When Vaiṣṇava dāsa heard the words of his Gurudeva, he
considered himself most fortunate, and humbly said, “I
am wretched and insignificant. It is completely
inappropriate for me to say anything in such a learned
assembly. Nonetheless, I must always bear the order of
my Gurudeva upon my head. I have drunk the nectar of
spiritual instructions flowing from my guruís lotus
mouth. I shall remember that and speak as far as my
ability allows.” Having smeared his entire body with the
dust of the lotus feet of Paramahaṁsa Bābājī, he then
stood up and began to speak.

“Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya is the source of all different types
of expansions and avatāras. He is directly Bhagavān
Himself, full of transcendental bliss. The all-
pervading, featureless nirviśeṣa-brahma is the
effulgence of His limbs, and Paramātmā, who resides in
the hearts of all jīvas, is His partial expansion. May
He be pleased to enlighten us from within.

“Manu-saṁhitā and other dharma-śāstras are respected
throughout the world because they establish the codes
and prohibitions that follow the line of thought of the
Vedic śruti-śāstras. Human nature has two tendencies in
regard to religious pursuit; the first is called vaidhī,
the nature which impels one to follow the rules and
regulations of śāstra, and the second is rāgānugā, the
nature which impels one to follow the soulís spontaneous
attraction towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa. As long as the
intelligence is under the control of māyā, human nature
must be regulated by rules and prohibitions. Thus, in
this condition the vaidhī nature will certainly be in
effect. When the intelligence is liberated from the
bondage of māyā, however, human nature no longer needs

                           28
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

to be governed by rules and prohibitions; rather, it is
prompted by spontaneous love. In this condition, the
vaidhī tendency no longer remains, and the rāgānugā
tendency becomes manifest. This rāgānugā tendency is the
unadulterated nature of the jīva. It is the perfected
state of the self (svabhāva-siddha), transcendental
(cinmaya), and free from bondage to dull matter (jaḍa-
mukta).

“The pure spiritual jīvaís relationship with the
material world is completely terminated when Śrī Kṛṣṇa
wills. Until this time, the jīvaís relationship with the
material world can only tend toward its eventual
cessation (kṣayonmukha). In the kṣayonmukha stage, the
jīvaís intelligence attains freedom from matter to the
extent of svarūpataḥ jaḍa-mukti, but not to the extent
of vastutaḥ jaḍa-mukti.

“When one attains the stage of vastutaḥ jaḍa-mukti, the
rāgātmikā-vṛtti or mood of the rāgātmikās, is awakened
in the pure jīva both in terms of his internal spiritual
identity (svarūpa) and constitutional state (vastu).
This rāgātmikā-prakṛti is the nature of the eternal
residents of Vraja. The jīva who in the kṣayonmukha
stage follows in the wake of the rāgātmikā nature is
known as rāgānugā, one who follows the way of rāga. This
condition of rāgānugā should be ardently sought after by
the jīvas.

“As long as this condition is absent, human intelligence
remains spontaneously attached to mundane objects. Due
to oneís nisarga, the false acquired nature, the
bewildered jīva mistakenly considers attachment for
mundane objects to be his natural spiritual attachment
(svābhāvika-anurāga). At that time, oneís natural pure
attachment for spiritual objects is not present.

“The conceptions of ëIí and ëmineí are two types of
egoism whose influence is very prominent in the mundane
sphere, and which lead one to think, ëI am this bodyí,
and ëAll things relating to this body are mineí. Due to
these conceptions, one naturally feels attracted to
people and things that bring pleasure to the material
body, and one feels averse to people and things that
impede material pleasure. When the bewildered jīva falls
under the sway of such attachment and aversion, he
considers others to be friends or enemies, and displays
love or hatred for them in three ways: śārīrika, in
relation to the material body and its acquisitions;
sāmājika, in relation to society and social ideas;
naitika, and in relation to morality and ethics. Thus,
he engages in the struggle for material existence.

“The false attachment for kanaka, gold and the things
that money can buy, and kāminī, anyone who satisfies our
perverted lusty desires, brings one under the control of
temporary happiness and distress. This is known as
saṁsāra, a state in which in which one wanders
throughout the material universe gaining only birth,
death, the fruits of karma, and various conditions of
life ñ some high and some low.

“The jīvas who are bound in this way cannot easily
comprehend spiritual attachment (cid-anurāga), nor can

                           29
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

they have any realization or experience of such a thing.
In reality, this spiritual attachment is the jīvaís true
function (sva-dharma) and his eternal nature. However,
he forgets this and becomes engrossed in attachment to
matter, although he is actually a particle of
consciousness. Thus, he suffers degradation. This is a
miserable condition, although hardly any of the jīvas
who are thus entangled in saṁsāra think so.

“The jīvas bound by māyā are wholly unacquainted with
the rāgānugā nature, to say nothing of the rāgātmikā
nature. The rāgānugā nature may be awakened in the
hearts of the jīvas, but only occasionally by the mercy
of sādhus. Consequently, this rāgānugā nature is rare
and difficult to obtain, and those who are entangled in
saṁsāra are cheated of it by māyā.

“Bhagavān, however, is all-knowing and merciful. He saw
that the jīvas who are bound by māyā have been cheated
of their spiritual inclination. Now, how will they
attain good fortune? By what means can remembrance of
Kṛṣṇa be aroused in the hearts of the jīvas who are
enthralled by māyā? By the association of sādhus, the
jīvas will be able to understand that they are servants
of Kṛṣṇa. Yet, because there is no prescribed injunction
that one must associate with sādhus, where is there even
a hope that sādhu-saṅga, the association of saintly
devotees, may be possible or easily attainable for all?
Consequently, there can be no auspiciousness for people
in general without the path of rules and regulations
(vidhi-mārga).

“The śāstras were manifested from this merciful
consideration of Śrī Bhagavān. Issuing forth by His
mercy, the sun of the śāstra arose in the sky of the
hearts of the ancient Āryan ṛṣis, and illuminated all
the injunctions and rules to be followed by the
populace.

“In the beginning was the Veda-śāstra. One part of the
Veda śāstra teaches pious activities directed toward the
attainment of material fruits (karma); one part teaches
knowledge directed toward liberation (jñāna), and
another part teaches devotion with love and affection
for Bhagavān (bhakti). The jīvas who are infatuated with
māyā are found in many different conditions. Some are
completely stupefied, some have a little knowledge, and
some are knowledgeable in many subjects. The śāstra
provides different types of instructions that are
consistent with the different mentalities of the jīvas.
This differentiation is known as adhikāra, eligibility.

“There are countless individual jīvas, and they have
innumerable varieties of adhikāra, which have been
divided into three broad categories according to their
primary characteristics: karma-adhikāra, eligibility for
pious action leading to material gain, jñāna-adhikāra,
eligibility for knowledge leading to liberation, and
prema-adhikāra, eligibility for unalloyed loving service
to Bhagavān. The Veda-śāstra specifies these three types
of eligibility and establishes proper codes of behavior
for those in each of the three groups. The dharma that
the Vedas have thus prescribed is known as vaidha-
dharma.

                           30
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017


“The tendency by which a person is compelled to adopt
this vaidha-dharma is known as vaidhī-pravṛtti, the
proclivity to follow the religious codes of śāstra.
Those who are altogether lacking in the tendency to
follow the rules of śāstra are thoroughly avaidha,
opposed to the injunctions of śāstra. They are engaged
in sinful activities, and their lives are given over to
avaidha-karma, actions that defy the regulations of
śāstra. Such people are excluded from the jurisdiction
of the Vedas and are known as mlecchas, people belonging
to an uncivilized, non-Āryan race.

“The duties of those in the three eligibility groups
outlined in the Vedas have been described still more
elaborately in the saṁhitā-śāstras of the ṛṣis, who
composed numerous śāstras that follow the tenets of the
Vedas. The duties of those eligible for karma are
described in twenty dharma-śāstras compiled by Manu and
other paṇḍitas; Those conversant with the different
philosophical systems described the function of those
eligible for jñāna in the śāstras dealing with logic and
philosophy; and finally, the instructions and activities
for people eligible for bhakti have been determined by
those who are learned in the Purāṇas and pure tantras.
All these literatures are known as Vedic because they
are in keeping with the Veda.

“Modern-day pseudo-philosophers of these śāstras,
without a view to the underlying purport of all the
śāstras, have tried to establish the superiority of only
one of its limbs. This has cast innumerable people into
a pit of argument and doubt. Bhagavad-gītā, which is the
matchless deliberation on all these śāstras, clearly
establishes that karma not aiming at jñāna is atheistic,
and should be rejected. Karma-yoga and jñāna-yoga that
are not directed towards bhakti are also cheating
processes; in reality, karma-yoga, jñāna-yoga and
bhakti-yoga form a single yoga system. This is the Vedic
Vaiṣṇava siddhānta (conclusion).

“The jīva who is bewildered by māyā is first compelled
to adopt the path of karma; then he must adopt karma-
yoga, followed by jñāna-yoga, and finally bhakti-yoga.
However, if he is not shown that all these are but
different steps on the one staircase, the conditioned
jīva cannot ascend to the temple of bhakti.

“What does it mean to adopt the path of karma? Karma
consists of the activities that one performs with the
body or mind in the course of maintaining oneís life.
There are two types of karma: auspicious (śubha) and
inauspicious (aśubha). The results that the jīva obtains
by performing śubha-karma are auspicious, whereas those
that he obtains from aśubha-karma are inauspicious.
Aśubha-karma is also known as sin (pāpa), or prohibited
acts (vikarma). The non-performance of śubha-karma is
known as akarma. Both vikarma and akarma are bad,
whereas śubha-karma is good.

“There are three types of śubha-karma: obligatory daily
rites (nitya-karma), circumstantial duties (naimittika-
karma), and ceremonies performed out of a desire for
personal benefit (kāmya-karma). Kāmya-karma is

                           31
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

completely self-interested and should be rejected. The
śāstras direct us to adopt nitya-karma and naimittika-
karma. The śāstras have considered what is fit to be
taken up and what is fit to be abandoned, and they have
classified nitya-karma, naimittika-karma, and kāmya-
karma as karma, whereas akarma and kukarma (impious
activity) have not been included in this category.
Although kāmya-karma is counted as karma, it is
undesirable, and should be given up; so only nitya-karma
and naimittika-karma are truly accepted as karma.

“Nitya-karma is karma that produces auspiciousness for
the body, mind, and society, and which results in
promotion to other planets after death. Everyone is
obligated to perform nitya-karma, such as chanting the
brahma-gāyatrī-mantra at the three junctures of the day
(sandhyā-vandanā), offering prayers, using honest means
to maintain oneís body and society, behaving truthfully,
and caring for oneís family members and dependants.
Naimittika-karma is karma that one must carry out under
certain circumstances, or on certain occasions, for
example, performing rites for the departed souls of
oneís mother and father, atoning for sins and so on.

“The authors of the śāstras first examined the natures
of human beings and their natural eligibility traits,
and then established varṇāśrama-dharma, the duties for
the social castes and spiritual orders. Their intention
was to prescribe a system in which nitya-karma and
naimittika-karma could be carried out in an excellent
way in this world. The gist of this arrangement is that
there are four natural types of human beings, classified
according to the work that they are eligible to perform:
brāhmaṇas, teachers and priests; kṣatriyas,
administrators and warriors; vaiśyas, agriculturists and
businessmen; and śūdras, artisans and laborers. People
are also situated in four orders or stages of life,
which are known as āśramas: brahmacārī, unmarried
student life; gṛhastha, family life; vānaprastha,
retirement from family responsibilities; and sannyāsa,
the renounced ascetic life. Those who are fond of akarma
and vikarma are known as antyaja (outcaste) and are not
situated in any āśrama.

“The different varṇas are determined by nature, birth,
activities, and characteristics. When varṇa is
determined only on the basis of birth, the original
purpose of varṇāśrama is lost. Āśrama is determined by
the various stages of life, depending on whether one is
married or unmarried, or has renounced the association
of the opposite sex. Married life is known as the
gṛhastha āśrama and unmarried life is known as the
brahmacārī āśrama. Disassociation from spouse and family
is characteristic of the vānaprastha and sannyāsa
āśramas. Sannyāsa is the highest of all the āśramas, and
the brāhmaṇas are the highest of all the varṇas.

“This conclusion is established in the crest-jewel of
all the śāstras, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.17.15-21):

varṇānām āśramāṇāñ ca janma-bhūmy-anusāriṇīḥ

āsan prakṛtayo nṛṇāṁ nīcair nīcottamottamāḥ


                           32
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

The varṇas and āśramas of humanity have higher and lower
natures in accordance with the higher and lower places
on Śrī Bhagavānís universal body from which they
appeared.

śamo damas tapaḥ śaucaṁ santoṣaḥ kṣāntir ārjavaṁ

mad-bhaktiś ca dayā satyaṁ brahma-prakṛtayas tv imāḥ

The natural qualities of the brāhmaṇas are control of
the mind, control of the senses, austerity, cleanliness,
satisfaction, forbearance, simplicity, devotion unto Śrī
Bhagavān, compassion for the suffering of others, and
truthfulness.

tejo balaṁ dhṛtiḥ śauryaṁ titikṣaudāryam udyamaḥ

sthairyaṁ brahmaṇyam aiśvaryaṁ kṣatra-prakṛtayas tv imāḥ

The natural qualities of the kṣatriyas are prowess,
bodily strength, fortitude, heroism, tolerance,
generosity, great perseverance, steadiness, devotion to
the brāhmaṇas, and sovereignty.

āstikyaṁ dāna-niṣṭhā ca adambho brahma-sevanam

atuṣṭir arthopacayair vaiśya-prakṛtayas tv imāḥ

The natural qualities of the vaiśyas are theism,
dedication to charity, freedom from pride, service to
the brāhmaṇas, and an insatiable desire to accumulate
wealth.

śuśrūṣaṇaṁ dvija-gavāṁ devānāñ cāpy amāyayā

tatra labdhena santoṣaḥ śūdra-prakṛtayas tv imāḥ

The natural qualities of the śūdras are sincere service
to the devas, brāhmaṇas and cows, and being satisfied
with whatever wealth is obtained by such service.

aśaucam anṛtaṁ steyaṁ nāstikyaṁ śuṣka-vigrahaḥ

kāmaḥ krodhaś ca tarṣaś ca sa bhāvo ëntyāvasāyinām

The natural characteristics of those who are in the
lowest class, and who are estranged from the varṇāśrama
system are: uncleanness, dishonesty, thievery, lack of
faith in Vedic dharma and the existence of a next life,
futile quarrel, lust, anger, and greed for material
objects.

ahiṁsā satyam asteyam akāma-krodha-lobhatā

bhūta-priya-hitehā ca dharmo ëyaṁ sārva-varṇikaḥ

The duties for the members of all the varṇas are: non-
violence, truthfulness, abstention from theft, freedom
from lust, anger, and greed, and endeavoring for the
pleasure and welfare of all living beings.

“Everyone in this learned assembly knows the meaning of
the Sanskrit ślokas, so I am not translating them all. I
just want to say that the system of varṇa and āśrama is

                           33
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

the basis of vaidha-jīvana, life that is carried out in
accordance with religious rules and regulations. The
prominence of impiety in a country is measured by the
extent to which the varṇāśrama system is absent there.

“Now let us consider in what sense the words nitya
(eternal) and naimittika (circumstantial) have been used
in relation to the word karma. If we consider the
profound purport of the śāstras, we can see that these
two words have not been used to refer to karma in a
paramārthika sense, which relates to supreme spiritual
truth. Rather, they have been used in a routine
(vyavahārika), or figurative (aupacārika) sense.

“Properly speaking, words like nitya-dharma, nitya-
karma, and nitya-tattva can only be used to describe the
pure spiritual condition of the jīva. Therefore, in the
general use of the word nitya-karma, the word nitya is
applied to the word karma only in a figurative or
attributive sense, because karma in this world is a
means to an end, and only remotely indicates eternal
truth. Actually, karma is never eternal. Karma and jñāna
may only be thought of as nitya in an indirect sense
when karma is directed towards jñāna by means of karma-
yoga, and when jñāna is directed toward bhakti. The
brāhmaṇasí chanting of the brahma-gāyatrī-mantra, or
sandhyā-vandanā, is sometimes described as nitya-karma.
This is valid in the sense that practices that are
remotely directed toward bhakti through physical
activities may be termed nitya, but only because they
aim at nitya-dharma. In reality they are not nitya. This
usage is known as a figurative expression (upacāra).

“Actually, the only true nitya-karma for the jīvas is
kṛṣṇa-prema. In ontological terms, this true nitya-karma
is referred to as unalloyed spiritual cultivation
(viśuddha-cid-anuśīlana), or activities directed towards
reinstating oneís pure, transcendental consciousness.
The physical activities that one will naturally have to
adopt to attain this cid-anuśīlana are assistants to
nitya-karma, so there is no fault in referring to them
as nitya-karma. From the absolute perspective, though,
it would be better to refer to such activities as
naimittika, rather than nitya. The divisions of karma
into nitya and naimittika are only from a relative
viewpoint, and not from the absolute spiritual
perspective.

“From the point of view of the essential nature of
things, the nitya-dharma of the jīvas is unalloyed
spiritual practice, and all other types of dharma are
naimittika. This applies to varṇāśrama-dharma (duties
prescribed for the castes and orders of human
civilization), aṣṭāṅga-yoga (the eightfold yoga system),
sāṅkhya-jñāna (the path of knowledge involving
analytical research into the nature of spirit and
matter), and tapasyā (asceticism).

These are all naimittika-dharma because the jīva would
not need these dharmas if he were not bound. The
conditioned state of being bewildered by māyā is itself
a circumstantial cause, and the function or duty that is
prompted by a circumstantial cause (nimitta) is known as
naimittika-dharma. Therefore, from the absolute

                           34
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

spiritual perspective they are all naimittika-dharma.

“Naimittika-dharma includes the superiority of the
brāhmaṇas, their sandhyā-vandanā, and their acceptance
of sannyāsa after renunciation of all karma. All these
activities are highly recommended in the dharma-śāstras
and they are beneficial in consideration of appropriate
eligibility, but they still have no standing in relation
to nitya-karma.

viprād dvi-ṣaḍ-guṇa-yutād aravinda-nābha-

pādāravinda-vimukhāt śvapacaṁ variṣṭham

manye tad-arpita-mano-vacanehitārtha-

prāṇaṁ punāti sa kulaṁ na tu bhūrimānaḥ†

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.9.10)

In my estimation, a bhakta who has taken birth in a
family of dog-eaters, but who has dedicated his mind,
words, activities and wealth to the lotus feet of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, is superior to a brāhmaṇa endowed with all twelve
brahminical qualities, but who is diverted from the
lotus feet of Śrī Padmanābha. Such a bhakta, although of
lowly birth, can purify himself and his entire family,
whereas the brāhmaṇa who is filled with pride cannot
even purify himself.

“The twelve qualities of brāhmaṇas are: truthfulness,
control of the senses, austerity, freedom from malice,
modesty, tolerance, freedom from envy, sacrifice,
charity, fortitude, studying the Vedas, and accepting
vows. Brāhmaṇas endowed with these twelve qualities are
certainly worthy of honor in this world. However, if a
caṇḍāla is a bhakta, he is superior to brāhmaṇas who
possess these qualities but do not have kṛṣṇa-bhakti.
The purport is that a person who was born a caṇḍāla, but
who has been purified by the saṁskāra (impressions)
achieved through sādhu-saṅga, and who is now engaged in
the jīvaís nitya-dharma of pure spiritual cultivation,
is superior to a brāhmaṇa who is established in
naimittika-dharma, but who abstains from the nitya-
dharma of unalloyed spiritual practice.

“There are two kinds of human beings in this world:
those who are spiritually awake (udita-viveka) and those
who are spiritually unconscious (anudita-viveka). Most
people in this world are spiritually unconscious; those
who are spiritually awake are rare. Of all those who are
spiritually unconscious, the brāhmaṇas are the best, and
the brāhmaṇasínitya-karma, such as sandhyā-vandanā, is
the best of all the duties that are prescribed for the
different varṇas.

“Another name for those who are spiritually awake is
ëVaiṣṇavaí; their behavior will necessarily be different
from the behavior of those who are spiritually
unconscious. Even so, the behavior of the Vaiṣṇavas is
not opposed to the aim of the smṛti rules, which are
established in order to regulate people who are
spiritually unconscious. The ultimate aim of all the
śāstras is always one.

                             35
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017


“Those who are spiritually unconscious are obliged to
remain confined to a particular portion of the stark and
rudimentary injunctions of śāstra, whereas those who are
spiritually awake receive the underlying essence of
śāstra as an intimate friend. These two groups of people
perform different activities, but their aim is the same.
Ineligible people may think that the behavior of those
who are spiritually awake is opposed to the behavior of
people in general, but in reality, the fundamental aim
of these different patterns of behavior is the same.

“From the point of view of those who are spiritually
awake, people in general are eligible for instructions
regarding naimittika-dharma. However, naimittika-dharma
is in essence asampūrṇa (incomplete), miśra
(adulterated), acirasthāyī (impermanent) and heya (fit
to be rejected).

“Naimittika-dharma is not direct spiritual practice;
rather, it consists of temporary, material activities
that are taken up to attain pure spiritual practices.
Hence, it is merely the means to an end. The means is
never complete because its function ceases when it has
produced the end. Therefore, it is simply a phase in the
achievement of the final goal. Consequently, naimittika-
dharma is never complete (sampūrṇa).

“For example, a brāhmaṇaís chanting of sandhyā-vandanā,
like his various other duties, is temporary and subject
to specific rules. These activities do not stem from his
natural, spiritual proclivity. If after performing these
prescribed duties for a long time, one obtains the
association of śuddha-bhaktas (sādhu-saṅga), one
develops a taste for hari-nāma. At that time, sandhyā-
vandanā no longer remains a temporary prescribed duty
which is directed toward material rewards (karma). Hari-
nāma is complete spiritual practice, whereas sandhyā-
vandanā and other such practices are only the means to
obtain this principal goal and can never be the complete
reality.

“Naimittika-dharma is commendable because it aims at the
truth, but it is eventually meant to be abandoned (heya)
and it is mixed with undesirable results (miśra); only
spiritual reality is truly beneficial. Although the jīva
should relinquish matter and its association,
materialism is prominent in naimittika-dharma. Moreover,
naimittika-dharma produces such an abundance of
irrelevant results that the jīva cannot help but get
entangled in them.

“For instance, a brāhmaṇaís worship of Īśvara is
beneficial, but he is apt to think, ëI am a brāhmaṇa and
others are inferior to me.í The result of such false
egoism is that his worship yields detrimental results.
Another example is that an insignificant result of
practicing the eightfold yoga system is the attainment
of mystic powers, which are most inauspicious for the
jīvas. The two unavoidable companions of naimittika-
dharma are mukti (liberation) and bhukti (material
enjoyment), but the jīva must save himself from the
clutches of mukti and bhukti if he is to obtain his real
objective, which is the culture of pure spiritual

                           36
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

reality (cid-anuśīlana). Consequently, naimittika-dharma
entails much that is contemptible for the jīvas.

“Naimittika-dharma is impermanent (acirasthāyī), for it
does not apply at all times or in all conditions. For
instance, a brāhmaṇaís priestly duties, a kṣatriyaís
administrative or military duties, and other such
circumstantial occupations are brought about by a
particular cause, and they cease when the cause ceases.
If a brāhmaṇa takes birth as a caṇḍāla in his next life,
the brahminical occupational duties are no longer his
sva-dharma. I am using the word sva-dharma (own duty) in
a figurative sense here. The naimittika-sva-dharma of
the jīva changes in every birth, but his nitya-dharma
never changes. The jīvaís true sva-dharma is nitya-
dharma, whereas naimittika-dharma is impermanent.

“One may ask, What is vaiṣṇava-dharma? The answer is
that vaiṣṇava-dharma is the jīvaís nitya-dharma. When
the Vaiṣṇava ñ the jīva ñ is liberated from matter, he
nurtures kṛṣṇa-prema in his pure spiritual form. Before
that stage, when the Vaiṣṇava is still materially bound,
although spiritually awakened, he only accepts objects
and association that are favorable for his spiritual
practice, and he rejects all that is unfavorable. Thus,
he never adheres blindly to the rules and prohibitions
of the śāstras. He accepts the instructions and
prohibitions of the śāstras graciously, but only when
they are favorable to his practice of hari-bhajana. When
they are unfavorable, he immediately rejects them.

“A Vaiṣṇava is the worldís only true friend and he
renders auspiciousness for all jīvas of the world. Now I
have humbly submitted whatever I had to say today in
this assembly of Vaiṣṇavas. Kindly excuse my faults and
any offenses.”

Having spoken thus, Vaiṣṇava dāsa offered sāṣṭāṅga-
praṇāma to the assembled Vaiṣṇavas and sat off to one
side. By this time, the eyes of the Vaiṣṇavas had filled
with tears, and they all exclaimed in unison, “Well
done! Well done! Blessings upon you!” The groves of
Godruma echoed these words in response.

The brāhmaṇa singer who had asked the question could see
the profound truth of many of the topics presented in
the discussion. Some doubts had arisen on certain
points, but the seed of faith in vaiṣṇava-dharma had
been significantly nourished in his heart. He folded his
hands and said, “O great souls, I am not a Vaiṣṇava, but
I am becoming a Vaiṣṇava by continuously hearing hari-
nāma. If you will kindly instruct me, all my doubts may
be dispelled.”

Śrī Premadāsa Paramahaṁsa Bābājī Mahāśaya said kindly,
“From time to time you may associate with Śrīmān
Vaiṣṇava dāsa. He is a scholar who is learned in all the
śāstras. Previously, he lived in Vārāṇasī, where he
accepted sannyāsa after studying the vedānta-śāstras
deeply. Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya, who is the dearmost Lord of
our hearts, displayed unlimited mercy and attracted him
here to Śrī Navadvīpa. Now he is fully conversant with
all the truths of Vaiṣṇava philosophy, and he has also
developed profound love for hari-nāma.”

                           37
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017


The man who had asked the question was named Śrī
Kālīdāsa Lāhirī. On hearing Bābājī Mahāśayaís words, he
accepted Vaiṣṇava dāsa within his heart as his guru. He
thought, “Vaiṣṇava dāsa was born in a brāhmaṇa family,
and he accepted the sannyāsa-āśrama, so he is fit to
instruct a brāhmaṇa. Besides, I have witnessed his
extraordinary scholarship in the Vaiṣṇava truths. I can
learn much about vaiṣṇava-dharma from him.” Thinking in
this way, Lāhirī Mahāśaya offered daṇḍavat-praṇāma at
Vaiṣṇava dāsaís lotus feet, and said, “O great soul,
kindly bestow your mercy upon me.” Vaiṣṇava dāsa offered
daṇḍavat-praṇāma to him in return and responded, “If you
bestow your mercy upon me, I will be fully successful.”

As evening drew near, everyone returned to their
respective places.

Lāhirī Mahāśayaís house was in a grove in a secluded
area of the village. In the center of the kuñja was a
natural awning of mādhavī creepers and a raised platform
for Tulasī-devī. There were two rooms, one on either
side of the kuñja. The courtyard was enclosed with a
trellis of citā plants, and its beauty was enhanced by
many trees such as bael, nīma, and other trees bearing
fruits and flowers. The owner of that grove was Mādhava
dāsa Bābājī.

At first Mādhava dāsa Bābājī had been a man of spotless
virtue, but immoral association with a woman had
blemished his Vaiṣṇava character and was curtailing his
practice of bhajana. He was quite impoverished and was
meeting his expenses with difficulty by begging at
various places and by renting out his extra room, which
Lāhirī Mahāśaya was occupying.

That night, Lāhirī Mahāśayaís sleep was broken at
midnight. He had began to contemplate the essential
meaning of what Vaiṣṇava dāsa Bābājī had explained, when
he heard a sound outside. As he came out of his room, he
saw Mādhava dāsa Bābājī standing in the courtyard, and
speaking with a woman. The woman disappeared as soon as
she saw Lāhirī Mahāśaya, while Mādhava dāsa stood
motionless and embarrassed before him.

“Bābājī, what is the matter?” asked Lāhirī Mahāśaya.

“It is my ill fate,” replied Mādhava dāsa with tears in
his eyes. “What more can I say? Alas, to think of what I
was in the past, and what I have now become! Paramahaṁsa
Bābājī Mahāśaya had so much faith in me. Now I am
ashamed to go before him.”

“Please tell me clearly so that I can understand,”
Lāhirī Mahāśaya requested.

Mādhava dāsa replied, “The woman you just saw was my
wife when I was a householder. Shortly after I accepted
the renounced life of a bābājī, she went to Śrīpāṭ
Śāntipura, where she built a hut and began to reside on
the bank of the Gaṅgā. After many days had passed, I
happened to go to Śrīpāṭ Śāntipura, and saw her there. I
asked her, ëWhy did you leave your household?í and she
explained, ëFamily life no longer appeals to me, since I

                           38
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

am deprived of the service of your feet. I have taken up
residence in this tīrtha (holy place), and I can sustain
myself by begging alms.í

“I returned to Godruma without saying another word to
her. After some time, she also came to Godruma, and took
up residence in a cowherdís house. I used to see her
here and there every day, and the more I tried to avoid
her, the closer she drew to me. Now she lives in an
āśrama that she has built here, and she tries to ruin me
by coming here late at night. My bad reputation has
spread everywhere and my practice of bhajana has
deteriorated sorely through my association with her. I
am a disgrace to the family of the servants of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
Caitanya. I am the only person since the time of Choṭa
Haridāsaís chastisement† who deserves punishment.
Because of their compassion, the bābājīs of Śrī Godruma
have not yet chastised me, but they no longer have any
faith in me.”

When Lāhirī Mahāśaya heard these words, he said,
“Mādhava dāsa Bābājī, please be careful,” and returned
to his room. Bābājī went and sat down on his seat.

Lāhirī Mahāśaya could not sleep. Again and again he
thought, “Mādhava dāsa Bābājī has fallen down by
entering householder life again, after he has formally
renounced it. It is not appropriate for me to stay here
any longer. Even if it does not lead me into bad
association, it will certainly spoil my reputation, so
that the pure Vaiṣṇavas will no longer instruct me with
confidence.”

Early the next morning he went to Pradyumna-kuñja,
greeted Śrī Vaiṣṇava dāsa with due respect, and asked
for a place to stay in the kuñja. When Vaiṣṇava dāsa
informed Paramahaṁsa Bābājī Mahāśaya of this news,
Bābājī gave instructions that he should be given a place
to stay in a kuṭīra on one side of the kuñja. From then
on, Lāhirī Mahāśaya lived in that kuṭīra and arranged to
obtain prasāda at the house of a brāhmaṇa who lived
nearby.



Thus ends the Third Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled

“Naimittika-Dharma is to be Relinquished”




Chapter 4

Vaiṣṇava-Dharma is Nitya-Dharma



Lāhirī Mahāśayaís kuṭīra was adjacent to that of
Vaiṣṇava dāsa. A few mango and jackfruit trees stood
nearby, and the entire area was adorned with small betel

                           39
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

plants. In the courtyard there was a large circular
platform, which had been there for many years, since the
time of Pradyumna Brahmacārī. The Vaiṣṇavas had since
called it the Surabhi Terrace, and would circumambulate
it, offering daṇḍavat-praṇāma with faith.

The evening twilight had just yielded to dusk. Śrī
Vaiṣṇava dāsa was sitting in his cottage on a mat of
leaves, chanting hari-nāma. It was the dark fortnight of
the moon, and the night gradually settled into darkness.
A lamp was flickering in Lāhirī Mahāśayaís kuṭīra, and
by its light, he suddenly noticed what appeared to be a
snake by his doorway. He quickly adjusted the lamp and
took up a stick to kill the snake, but it had already
vanished.

“Be careful!” he told Vaiṣṇava dāsa. “A snake may have
just entered your kuṭīra.”

“Lāhirī Mahāśaya, why are you so disturbed about a
snake?” replied Vaiṣṇava dāsa. “Come and sit inside my
kuṭīra with me, and donít be afraid.”

Lāhirī Mahāśaya entered Vaiṣṇava dāsaís kuṭīra and sat
on a mat of leaves, but he still felt some mental
anxiety about the snake. “O great soul,” he said, “our
Śāntipura is good in this respect, for there is no fear
of snakes, scorpions and other such creatures there. In
Nadiyā, there is always danger from snakes. It is
especially difficult for a refined gentleman to live in
a forested area like Godruma.”

Śrī Vaiṣṇava dāsa Bābājī explained, “Lāhirī Mahāśaya, it
is senseless to agitate the mind over such matters. You
must have heard the story of Mahārāja Parīkṣit in the
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. He gave up all fear of his impending
death by snake-bite, and with an unflinching heart drank
the nectar of hari-kathā from Śrī Śukadevaís mouth. Thus
he tasted supreme transcendental bliss. A snake can
never bite the citta-deha; the only snake that can wound
the spiritual body is the snake of separation from
topics of Śrī Hari.

“The material body is not eternal, and one will
certainly have to give it up some day. As far as the
body is concerned, we should simply perform the karma
that is necessary to maintain it, and nothing more. When
the body collapses by the will of Kṛṣṇa, it cannot be
saved by any kind of effort, but until the designated
time for the demise of the body has arrived, a snake
cannot harm a person, even if he is sleeping right next
to it. Therefore, one may not introduce himself as a
Vaiṣṇava until he gets rid of his fear of snakes and all
such things. If the mind is agitated by such fears, how
will one be able to fix it upon the lotus feet of Śrī
Hari? So one should certainly stop being afraid of
snakes and trying to kill them out of fear.”

Lāhirī Mahāśaya said with some faith, “As a result of
hearing your words, which are just befitting a sādhu, my
heart has become free from all kinds of fear. Now I have
understood that one can obtain the highest benefit only
when the heart becomes elevated. Many great souls who
are engaged in the worship of Bhagavān live in mountain

                           40
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

caves, and they are never afraid of the wild animals
that live there. Rather, out of fear of materialistic
association, they have given up living with other human
beings, and they live among the wild animals instead.”

Bābājī Mahāśaya said, “When Bhakti-devī, the goddess of
devotion, makes her appearance in a personís heart, that
heart automatically becomes elevated. He then becomes
dear to all jīvas. Everyone, devotees and non-devotees
alike, feels affection for the Vaiṣṇavas, and that is
why every human being should become a Vaiṣṇava.”

As soon as Lāhirī Mahāśaya heard this he said, “You have
awakened my faith in nitya-dharma. It seems to me that
there is a close connection between nitya-dharma and
vaiṣṇava-dharma, but so far I have not been able to
understand how they are identical.”

Vaiṣṇava dāsa Bābājī replied, “In this world there are
two different dharmas that go by the name of vaiṣṇava-
dharma. The first is śuddha (pure) vaiṣṇava-dharma, and
the second is viddha (adulterated) vaiṣṇava-dharma.
Although śuddha-vaiṣṇava-dharma is one in principle, it
has four divisions according to rasa, or taste for
serving Bhagavān in a specific loving mood: dāsya
(servitude), sakhya (friendship), vātsalya (parental
affection), and mādhurya (conjugal love). In reality,
śuddha-vaiṣṇava-dharma is one without a second, and it
is known as nitya-dharma or para-dharma (the supreme
dharma).

“In the śruti-śāstra, Muṇḍaka Upaṇiṣad (1.1.3), we find
the following statement:

yad vijñāte sarvam idaṁ vijñātaṁ bhavati

Everything becomes known when one understands that
supreme truth clearly.

“This statement pertains to śuddha-vaiṣṇava-dharma. The
full import of this will gradually be revealed to you.

“There are two types of adulterated vaiṣṇava-dharma: one
is adulterated with karma (karma-viddha) and the other
with jñāna (jñāna-viddha). All the practices that the
orthodox brāhmaṇas (smārtas)† uphold as vaiṣṇava-dharma
are actually vaiṣṇava-dharma adulterated with karma.
This type of vaiṣṇava-dharma entails initiation into a
Vaiṣṇava mantra, but Viṣṇu, the all-pervading Lord of
the universe, is only treated as a constituent part of
the process of karma. Viṣṇu is actually the
superintendent of all the devatās, but in this system,
He is regarded as being only an aspect of karma, and
subject to its laws. In other words, the conception is
that karma is not subordinate to the will of Viṣṇu, but
that Viṣṇu is subordinate to the will of karma.

“According to this theory, all varieties of worship and
spiritual practice, such as upāsanā, bhajana, and
sādhana are merely parts of karma, because there is no
truth higher than karma. This type of vaiṣṇava-dharma
was professed by the ancient mīmāṁsaka philosophers and
has been prevalent for a very long time. Many people in
India who adhere to this doctrine pride themselves on

                           41
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

being Vaiṣṇavas but do not care to accept pure Vaiṣṇavas
as Vaiṣṇavas at all. This is their great misfortune.

“Vaiṣṇava-dharma adulterated with jñāna is also
widespread throughout India. According to this school of
thought, the supreme truth is the incomprehensible, all-
pervading brahma; and in order to attain this nirviśeṣa
(featureless) brahma, one should worship Sūrya, Gaṇeśa,
Śakti, Śiva, and Viṣṇu, who all possess forms. When
oneís knowledge becomes complete, one can give up the
worship of forms and ultimately attain the state of
nirviśeṣa-brahma. Many people accept this doctrine and
disrespect the pure Vaiṣṇavas. When followers of this
pañcopāsanā system worship Viṣṇu, they perform dīkṣā,
pūjā and all their activities for Viṣṇu, and they may
also worship Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. Still, it is not śuddha-
vaiṣṇava-dharma.

“The śuddha-vaiṣṇava-dharma that comes to light when one
eliminates the adulterated forms is the true vaiṣṇava-
dharma. Due to the influence of the age of Kali, most
people cannot understand what pure vaiṣṇava-dharma is,
and they therefore accept the various adulterated forms
as true vaiṣṇava-dharma.

“According to the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, human beings
display three different tendencies with regard to the
Absolute Truth: the tendency towards the all-pervading
brahma (brahma-pravṛtti); the tendency towards the
Supreme ātmā in the heart known as Paramātmā (paramātma-
pravṛtti); and the tendency towards the Supreme Person,
Bhagavān (bhāgavata-pravṛtti). By the brahma-pravṛtti
some people aquire a taste for the indefinite,
featureless nirviśeṣa-brahma as the ultimate principle.
The method they adopt in order to attain this
indeterminate state is known as pañcopāsanā.

“By the paramātma-pravṛtti, some people acquire a taste
for that yoga principle which establishes contact with
the subtle form of Paramātmā. The methods they adopt to
try to attain the trance of absorption in Paramātmā
(samādhi) are known as karma-yoga and aṣṭāṅga-yoga. This
doctrine holds that karma includes initiation into the
chanting of viṣṇu-mantras, worship of Śrī Viṣṇu,
meditation, and other such practices. Vaiṣṇava dharma
adulterated with karma is present in this system.

“By the bhāgavata-pravṛtti, fortunate jīvas acquire a
taste for the bhakti principle which seeks to obtain
service of the pure, personal form of Bhagavān,
saviśeṣa-bhagavat-svarūpa, who possesses all qualities
and attributes. Their activities, such as worshiping
Bhagavān, are not parts of karma or jñāna, but are
components of śuddha-bhakti (pure bhakti). The vaiṣṇava-
dharma that conforms to this doctrine is śuddha-
vaiṣṇava-dharma. It is said in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(1.2.11):

vadanti tat tattva-vidas tattvaṁ yaj-jñānam advayam

brahmeti paramātmeti bhagavān iti śabdyate

Those who know Absolute Reality describe that ultimate
non-dual substance as the Supreme Truth. Some know this

                           42
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

same advaya-jñāna-tattva by the name of brahma, some by
the name of Paramātmā and others by the name Bhagavān.

Bhagavat-tattva is the supreme tattva, and is the basis
of both brahma and Paramātmā. It is this personal
conception of the truth (bhagavat-tattva) that is the
pure conception of Śrī Viṣṇu. The jīvas who pursue this
principle are pure jīvas, and their inclination is
called bhakti. Devotion for Śrī Hari (hari-bhakti) is
celebrated by the names śuddha-vaiṣṇava-dharma, nitya-
dharma, jaiva-dharma (the constitutional function of the
jīvas), bhāgavata-dharma (the religion of worshiping the
Supreme Person), paramārtha-dharma (the religion that
strives for the ultimate benifit), and para-dharma (the
supreme function).

“All types of dharma that arise from the tendencies
toward brahma and Paramātmā are naimittika, and not
nitya. The cultivation of nirviśeṣa-brahma is motivated
by a material purpose (nimitta), and is therefore
naimittika, not nitya. When a jīva is anxious to gain
release from his bondage to matter, his state of
imprisonment becomes the nimitta (cause) that impels him
to adopt the naimittika-dharma of striving for the state
in which all material qualities are extinguished. This
striving is said to be naimittika because it is
motivated by a nimitta (material cause), namely the
state of material bondage. Therefore, the dharma of
striving to attain brahma is not eternal.

“The jīvas who adopt the dharma of seeking Paramātmā
with a desire for the happiness of samādhi take shelter
of naimittika-dharma motivated by the impetus for subtle
material pleasure. Therefore, Paramātmādharma is also
not eternal. Only unalloyed bhāgavata-dharma is
eternal.”

On hearing all this, Lāhirī Mahāśaya said, “O Mahāśaya,
kindly instruct me on śuddha-vaiṣṇava-dharma. I am
taking shelter at your lotus feet in my old age. Please
accept me. I have heard that if one has previously
accepted dīkṣā and śikṣā from an unqualified guru, he
should be initiated and receive instructions again when
he meets a genuine guru. I have been hearing your pure
instructions for several days, and my faith in vaiṣṇava-
dharma has been awakened. Please first instruct me about
vaiṣṇava-dharma and then sanctify me by giving me
initiation.”

Bābājī Mahāśaya became slightly ill at ease, and
replied, “O Mahāśaya, I will certainly instruct you as
far as I am able, but I am not fit to be a dīkṣā-guru.
Nonetheless, you may now take instructions on śuddha-
vaiṣṇava-dharma.

“Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the original guru of the
entire world, has explained that there are three
fundamental principles in vaiṣṇava-dharma: sambandha-
tattva, knowledge of oneís relationship with Bhagavān;
abhidheya-tattva, the means by which the ultimate goal
is achieved; and prayojana-tattva, the ultimate goal of
kṛṣṇa-prema. A śuddha-vaiṣṇava or śuddha-bhakta is one
who knows these three principles and acts in accordance
with them.

                           43
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017


“The first principle, sambandha-tattva, includes three
separate topics: The first topic is the material world
(jaḍa-jagat), or the fundamental truth regarding the
potency that creates bewilderment (māyika-tattva); the
second topic is the living beings (jīvas), or the
fundamental truth regarding the predominated entities
(adhīna-tattva); and the third topic is Bhagavān, or the
fundamental truth regarding the predominating entity
(prabhu-tattva).

“Bhagavān is one without a second and endowed with all
potencies. He is all-attractive, the exclusive abode of
opulence and sweetness, and is the sole shelter for all
jīvas. Athough He is the only shelter of māyā and all
the jīvas, still He is aloof and independent and exisits
in His own supreme, independent form which is uncommonly
beautiful. The effulgence of His limbs radiates to a
great distance, manifesting as the nirviśeṣa-brahma.
Through His divine potency known as aiśī-śakti He
manifests the jīvas and the material world, and then
enters into that world as Paramātmā, who is His partial
expansion. This is the fundamental truth concerning
Īśvara, the supreme controller, or Paramātmā, the
indwelling Supersoul.

“In the Vaikuṇṭha region of the spiritual sky, beyond
this material universe, He manifests as Nārāyaṇa, His
feature of supreme opulence and majesty. In Goloka
Vṛndāvana, which is beyond Vaikuṇṭha, He manifests as
Gopījana-vallabha Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra, His feature of
supreme sweetness. His various types of expansions, such
as identical manifestations (prakāśa) and pastime forms
(vilāsa), are eternal and unlimited. Nothing and no one
is equal to Him, what to speak of being superior to Him.

“His identical manifestations and pastime forms, prakāśa
and vilāsa, are manifested by His superior potency known
as parā-śakti. This parā-śakti displays its prowess
(vikrama) in many different features, out of which only
three are known to the jīvas. The first is the internal
potency, cid-vikrama, which arranges Śrī Hariís
transcendental pastimes and everything related to them.
The second is the marginal potency, jīva or taṭastha-
vikrama, which manifests and sustains innumerable jīvas.
The third is the potency that creates bewilderment,
māyā-vikrama, which creates material time, material
activities, and all the insubstantial objects of this
world.

“Sambandha-tattva comprises Īśvaraís relationship with
the jīvas, the relationship of the jīvas and of matter
with Īśvara, and the relationship of Īśvara and of the
jīvas with matter. One who understands this sambandha-
tattva completely is situated in sambandha-jñāna, and
one who does not have sambandha-jñāna cannot become a
pure Vaiṣṇava by any means.”

Lāhirī Mahāśaya said, “I have heard from some Vaiṣṇavas
that one is a real Vaiṣṇava only if he experiences the
path of devotion through bhāva (emotions), so there is
no need for knowledge. How much truth is there in this
statement? Up until now I have simply tried to evoke
emotions through the singing of hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana; I

                           44
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

have not made any attempt to understand sambandha-
jñāna.”

Bābājī said, “The highest fruit of attainment for the
Vaiṣṇavas is the development of bhāva, the first sprout
of prema, and the basis for all transcendental emotions.
However, that state of bhāva must be pure. Those who
think that the highest goal is to merge their identity
into the non-differentiated brahma practice inducing
emotions while engaged in spiritual discipline to attain
this goal. However, their emotions and their endeavors
are not śuddha-bhāva; they are merely an imitation. Even
a single drop of śuddha-bhāva can fulfill the highest
aspiration of the jīva, but the display of emotions by
those who are polluted with the jñāna that is aimed at
attaining nirviśeṣa-brahma is a great calamity for the
jīvas. The devotional sentiments of people who feel that
they are one with brahma are merely a cheating display.
Therefore, sambandha-jñāna is absolutely essential for
pure devotees.”

Lāhirī Mahāśaya then inquired with faith, “Is there any
truth higher than brahma? If Bhagavān is the origin of
brahma, why donít the jñānīs give up their pursuit of
brahma, and engage in the worship of Bhagavān?”

Bābājī Mahāśaya smiled mildly and said, “Brahmā, the
four Kumāras, Śuka, Nārada, and Mahādeva, the chief of
the celestials, have all ultimately taken shelter at the
lotus feet of Bhagavān.”

Lāhirī Mahāśaya then raised a doubt: “Bhagavān has a
form. Since form is limited by spatial considerations,
how can Bhagavān be the resting place of the limitless
and all-pervading brahma?”

Bābājī Mahārāja resolved his doubt, saying, “In the
material world, the entity known as the sky is also
limitless; why should brahma be considered to be more
important, merely because it is limitless? Bhagavān is
also limitless, by virtue of the potency manifested from
the effulgence of His limbs. At the same time, He
possesses His own transcendental form. Can any other
entity compare with this? It is because of this
unparalleled nature that Bhagavān is superior to the
principle of brahma.

“His transcendental form is supremely attractive, and
that self-same form is fully and completely all-
pervasive, omniscient, omnipotent, unlimitedly merciful
and supremely blissful. Which is superioróa form such as
this, which is endowed with all qualities, or an
obscure, all-pervading existence, which is devoid of
qualities and potencies? In reality, brahma is only a
partial, impersonal manifestation of Bhagavān. The
impersonal and personal features both exist
simultaneously and in perfect harmony in Bhagavān.

“Brahma is only one aspect of Bhagavān. Those whose
spiritual intelligence is limited are attracted to the
feature of the Supreme that is devoid of qualities, and
is formless, immutable, unknowable, and immeasurable.
But those who are all-seeing (sarva-darśī) have no
attraction for anything other than the complete Absolute

                           45
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

Truth. Vaiṣṇavas have no significant faith in Śrī Hariís
formless, impersonal feature, for it is opposed to their
eternal function and unalloyed prema. Bhagavān Śrī
Kṛṣṇacandra is the basis of both the personal and
impersonal features. He is an ocean of supreme
transcendental bliss and He attracts all pure jīvas.”

Lāhirī: How can Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s form be eternal, since He
takes birth, performs activities, and gives up His body?

Bābājī: Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s form is sac-cid-ānanda—ever-
existing, full of knowledge, and completely blissful.
His birth, activities, and leaving the body have no
connection with mundane matter.

Lāhirī: Then why have such descriptions been given in
Mahābhārata and other śāstras?

Bābājī: The eternal truth defies description, for it is
beyond words. The pure soul in his spiritual aspect sees
the transcendental form and pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, but
when he describes that supreme reality in words, it
appears just like worldly mundane history. Those who are
eligible to extract the essence from śāstras such as the
Mahābhārata experience Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes as they are.
However, when people of mundane intelligence hear these
descriptions, they interpret them in different ways.

Lāhirī: When one meditates on the form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
conception that arises in the heart is limited by time
and space. How can one transcend such limitations and
meditate on Kṛṣṇa’s actual form?

Bābājī: Meditation is an action of the mind, and as long
as the mind is not fully spiritualized, one’s meditation
cannot be spiritual (cinmaya). Bhakti purifies the mind
so that it gradually becomes spiritual, and when one
meditates with the mind that has become purified in that
way, such meditation certainly becomes cinmaya. When
bhajanānandī Vaiṣṇavas chant Kṛṣṇa’s name, the material
world cannot touch them, because they are cinmaya.
Internally, they are situated in the spiritual world as
they meditate on Kṛṣṇa’s daily pastimes and relish the
bliss of confidential service.

Lāhirī: Please be merciful and grant me such spiritual
realization (cid-anubhāva).

Bābājī: When you abandon all material doubts and mundane
logic, and constantly apply yourself to śrī-nāma,
spiritual realization will quickly arise within you of
its own accord. The more you resort to mundane logic,
the more you will subjugate your mind to material
bondage. The more you strive to initiate the flow of
nāma-rasa, the more your material shackles will become
loosened. The spiritual dimension will then manifest in
your heart.

Lāhirī: Please be merciful and explain what that
spiritual experience is.

Bābājī: The mind is brought to a standstill when it
tries to understand that truth through words. The truth
can be realized only through culture of spiritual bliss

                           46
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

(cid-ānanda). Give up all argumentation and simply chant
śrī-nāma for several days. Then the power of nāma will
automatically dispel all of your doubts and you will not
have to inquire further from anyone in this regard.

Lāhirī Mahāśaya: I have understood that one obtains
supreme spiritual benefit by drinking the liquid rasa of
śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma with great faith, so I will chant śrī-
nāma when I have understood sambandha-jñāna very
clearly.

Bābājī: That is the best way. You must have a sound
understanding of sambandha-jñāna.

Lāhirī:Bhagavat-tattva (the fundamental truth regarding
Bhagavān) has now become clear to me. Bhagavān is the
one Supreme Absolute Truth, and brahma and Paramātmā are
subordinate to Him. Although all-pervading, Śrī Bhagavān
resides in the spiritual world in His unique
transcendental form which possesses all potencies, and
is the supreme person of concentrated existence,
knowledge, and bliss. Although the master of all
potencies, He always remains completely entranced in
exuberant association with His pleasure-giving potency
(hlādinī-sakti). Now kindly instruct me about jīva-
tattva.

Bābājī: The taṭastha-śakti, or marginal potency, is one
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s innumerable potencies. Issuing forth from
this marginal potency are the entities who are situated
between the cit-jagat and jaḍa-jagat and which have the
potential to associate with either. These entities are
known as jīva-tattva. The jīvas are cit-paramāṇu by
composition, which means that they are atomic entities
of pure consciousness. These jīvas can be bound in the
material world because they are tiny, but since they are
constituted of pure consciousness, if they simply
acquire a little spiritual power, they can also become
eternal residents of the spiritual world and obtain
paramānanda (supreme transcendental pleasure).

There are two types of jīvas: mukta (liberated) and
baddha (bound). The jīvas who reside in the spiritual
world are mukta, whereas those who are shackled by māyā
and attached to this material world are baddha. There
are two types of baddha-jīvas: those who are spiritually
awake (udita-viveka); and those who are spiritually
unconscious (anudita-viveka). Birds, beasts and human
beings who do not seek their supreme spiritual benefit
are spiritually unconscious, whereas human beings who
have adopted the path of Vaiṣṇavism are spiritually
awake, for no one except the Vaiṣṇavas genuinely
endeavor to attain the supreme spiritual goal. That is
why the śāstras have declared that serving Vaiṣṇavas and
associating with them is the best of all activities.

Those who are spiritually awake develop taste for the
practice of kṛṣṇa-nāma on the strength of their faith in
śāstra, and from this they easily develop an attraction
for serving and associating with Vaiṣṇavas. However,
those who are spiritually unconscious cannot awaken
their faith in śāstra, and thus do not adopt the
practice of kṛṣṇa-nāma. They only worship the Deity of
Kṛṣṇa as a matter of social custom. Consequently, the

                           47
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

taste for associating with Vaiṣṇavas and serving them is
not awakened in their hearts.

Lāhirī: I have understood kṛṣṇa-tattva and jīva-tattva.
Now please explain māyā-tattva.

Bābājī:Māyā is the material function and is a potency of
Kṛṣṇa. This potency is known as the inferior potency
(aparā-śakti), or the external potency (bahirāṅgā-
śakti). Māyā remains far from Kṛṣṇa and kṛṣṇa-bhakti,
just as a shadow remains distant from light. Māyā
manifests the elements earth, water, fire, air, sky,
mind and intelligence; the fourteen divisions of
planetary systems; and the egoism by which one
identifies the material body as the self. Both the gross
and subtle bodies of the baddha-jīva are products of
māyā. When the jīva is liberated, his spiritual body is
untainted by matter. The more he is ensnared by māyā,
the more he is diverted from Kṛṣṇa; and the more he is
aloof from māyā, the more he is drawn towards Kṛṣṇa. The
material universe is created by the will of Kṛṣṇa, just
to facilitate the material enjoyment of the baddha-
jīvas; it is only a jail, and not the eternal residence
of the jīvas.

Lāhirī: Master, now please tell me about the eternal
relationship that exists between māyā, the jīvas, and
Kṛṣṇa.

Bābājī: The jīva is an atomic particle of consciousness
(aṇu-cit), and Kṛṣṇa is the complete consciousness
(pūrṇa-cit); therefore, the jīva is the eternal servant
of Kṛṣṇa. This material world is a prison house for the
jīvas. By the strength of association with saintly
people in this world, one repeatedly practices the
chanting of śrī-nāma. In due course of time one attains
Kṛṣṇa’s mercy, and when one is situated in one’s own
perfected spiritual form (cit-svarūpa) in the spiritual
world, one drinks the rasa (liquid mellow) of service to
Śrī Kṛṣṇa. This is the confidential relationship that
exists between these three fundamental realities
(tattvas). How can one perform bhajana without this
knowledge?

Lāhirī: If knowledge is obtained by academic study, must
one be a scholar to become a Vaiṣṇava?

Bābājī: There is no specific learning nor any particular
language which one must study in order to become a
Vaiṣṇava. In order to dispel the illusion of māyā, the
jīva should take shelter at the feet of a genuine guru
who is a true Vaiṣṇava. The Vaiṣṇava guru can impart
sambandha-jñāna by his words and behavior. This is known
as dīkṣā and śikṣā.

Lāhirī: What should one do after receiving dīkṣā and
śikṣā?

Bābājī: One should maintain virtuous conduct and peform
kṛṣṇa-bhajana. This is known as abhidheya-tattva, the
means to achieve the ultimate goal of kṛṣṇa-prema. This
tattva has been prominently described in the Vedas and
all the śāstras. Consequently, Śrīman Mahāprabhu has
referred to this fundamental truth as abhidheya-tattva.

                           48
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017


Lāhirī Mahāśayaís eyes filled with tears and he said, “O
divine Master, I take shelter at your lotus feet. Now
that I have heard your ambrosial words, I now understand
sambandha-jñāna and at the same time, to my utter
amazement, all the saṁskāras, or deep rooted mental
impressions related to my caste identification,
education, and training have been dissolved by your
mercy. Now please be merciful and instruct me about
abhidheya-tattva.

Bābājī: Now there is no worry. Your development of
humility is a sure sign that Śrī Caitanyadeva has
bestowed His mercy upon you. Sādhu-saṅga is the only
means of deliverance for the jīvas who are entangled in
this world. The sādhus and guru mercifully impart
instructions on how to perform bhajana, and on the
strength of that bhajana, one gradually obtains the
supreme goal (prayojana). Sādhana-bhakti (devotional
practice) is called abhidheya.

Lāhirī: Please tell me how to do bhagavad-bhajana.

Bābājī:Hari-bhajana means bhakti. There are three stages
of bhakti: the stage of practice (sādhana); the first
dawning of divine love (bhāva); and the mature state of
divine love (prema).

Lāhirī: Please instruct me. What are the different types
of sādhana, and how are they performed?

Bābājī Mahāśaya: Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī has described this
subject very elaborately in his book Śrī Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu. I will relate it to you in brief. There
are nine types of sādhana:

śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

The nine primary limbs of devotion are hearing,
chanting, and remembering; serving His lotus feet;
worshiping Him with various types of paraphernalia;
offering prayers; serving Him in the mood of an
exclusive servant; serving Him in the mood of an
intimate friend; and offering oneís very self unto Him.

These nine types of sādhana-bhakti are described in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.5.23). Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī has
analysed these nine in terms of their various parts and
subdivisions, and has given an elaborate description of
sixty-four types of sādhana-bhakti.

There is one special characteristicósādhana-bhakti is of
two types: vaidhī, sādhana impelled by the rules and
regulations of śāstra, and rāgānugā, sādhana impelled by
spontaneous love. These nine types of bhakti refer to
vaidhī-sādhana-bhakti. Rāgānugā-sādhana-bhakti consists
of internal service to Kṛṣṇa in the mood of the eternal
residents of Vraja, and adhering exclusively to their
guidance. The sādhaka should practice the type of
sādhana-bhakti for which he is eligible.

Lāhirī: How is adhikāra (eligibility) determined in

                           49
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

regard to sādhana-bhakti?

Bābājī: When the spiritual master considers that a
faithful sādhaka is fit to remain under the rules and
regulations of śāstra, he will first instruct him in
vaidhī-sādhana-bhakti. When he considers that a sādhaka
is eligible for rāgānugā-bhakti, he will instruct him
how to perform bhajana according to rāga-mārga.

Lāhirī: How is adhikāra recognized?

Bābājī: One is eligible for vaidhī-bhakti when one
desires to worship Bhagavān according to the rules and
regulations of the śāstra, and has not yet experienced
the principle of spontaneous attraction (rāga) in his
ātmā. One is eligible for rāgānugā-bhakti when a
spontaneous inclination for hari-bhajana has awakened in
his ātmā, and he does not wish to be subservient to the
rules of śāstra in his worship of Śrī Hari.

Lāhirī: Prabhu, please determine my adhikāra, so that I
may understand the principle of eligibility. I have not
yet been able to grasp your analysis of vaidhī and
rāgānugā-bhakti.

Bābājī: If you examine your heart, you will understand
your own eligibility. Do you think that bhajana is not
feasible without adhering to the tenets of śāstra?

Lāhirī: I think that it would be most beneficial to
engage in sādhana and bhajana according to the rules
outlined in the śāstra. Nowadays, however, it has
occurred to me that hari-bhajana is an ocean of rasa.
Gradually by the power of bhajana, I will be able to
taste that rasa.

Bābājī: You can now understand that the rules of śāstra
take precedence in your heart. Therefore, you should
adopt the practice of vaidhī-bhakti. In due course, the
principle of rāga will be awakened in your heart.

On hearing this, Lāhirī Mahāśaya touched Bābājī
Mahārājaís feet. With tears in his eyes he said, “Please
be merciful and instruct me in that for which I am
eligible. I donít want to discuss or contemplate
anything for which I am not qualified.”

Bābājī Mahāśaya embraced him and told him to sit down.

Lāhirī then humbly said, “Please instruct me clearly as
to which type of bhajana I should perform.”

“You should practice hari-nāma,” replied Bābājī Mahārāja
decisively. “Śrī-nāma-bhajana is more powerful than all
other forms of bhajana. There is no difference between
nāma, the holy name, and nāmī, Bhagavān, who possesses
the holy name. If you chant nāma without offense, you
will very quickly attain all perfection. All nine forms
of bhajana are automatically carried out when performing
nāma-bhajana. When one utters śrī-nāma, he is engaged in
both hearing and chanting. As one chants, one also
remembers the pastimes of Hari, and within the mind one
serves His lotus feet, worships Him, offers prayers to
Him, serves Him in the mood of a servant or friend, and

                            50
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

offers oneís very self to Him.”

Lāhirī: My heart has become intensely eager. O Master,
please don’t delay in bestowing your mercy upon me.

Bābājī told him, “You should always chant these names
without offense: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa,
Hare Hare/ Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.”
As he recited these names, Bābājī placed a tulasīmālā in
Lāhirī Mahāśayaís hands.

As he uttered the names and caressed the beads of the
mālā meditatively, Lāhirī Mahāśaya wept. “Prabhu,” he
said, “I cannot describe the happiness I have
experienced today.” Saying this, he fell unconscious at
Bābājī Mahāśayaís feet due to intense joy, but the
Bābājī caught him carefully. After a long period, Lāhirī
Mahāśaya regained consciousness and said, “Today I feel
myself blessed. I have never before experienced such
happiness.”

Bābājī Mahāśaya said, “O great soul, you are indeed
blessed, for you have faithfully accepted śrī-hari-nāma.
You have also rendered me fortunate.”

From then on, Lāhirī Mahāśaya was able to stay in his
kuṭīra without fear, and he began to chant śrī-nāma on
his mālā. A number of days passed in this way. He now
applied tilaka to the twelve parts of his upper body and
would eat nothing unoffered to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. He daily
chanted two lakhas (two hundred thousand) names on his
japa-mālā. Whenever he saw a pure Vaiṣṇava, he would at
once offer daṇḍavat-praṇāma. Every day, before attending
to other duties, he would offer daṇḍavat-praṇāma to
Paramahaṁsa Bābājī. He always served his Gurudeva, and
he no longer had any taste for mundane talks, or for
displaying his mastery in singing. He was not the same
Lāhirī Mahāśaya as before; he had become a Vaiṣṇava.

One day after offering daṇḍavat-praṇāma to Vaiṣṇava
dāsa, Bābājī Lāhirī inquired, “Prabhu, what is
prayojana-tattva?”

Bābājī answered, “The jīvaís ultimate goal, known as
prayojana-tattva, is kṛṣṇa-prema. When one practices
sādhana constantly, bhāva eventually manifests, and when
bhāva is fully developed and complete, it is called
prema. Prema is the eternal function of the jīva, his
eternal wealth, and his eternal goal. Only in the
absence of prema does the jīva undergo various
sufferings in material entanglement. There is nothing
greater than prema, for Kṛṣṇa is controlled only by
prema. Prema is the complete spiritual tattva. When
ānanda, spiritual ecstasy, becomes extremely thick and
condensed, it is known as prema.”

Lāhirī: (weeping) Can I become a fit candidate for
receiving prema?”

Bābājī embraced Lāhirī Mahāśaya and said, “In only a few
days you have converted your sādhana-bhakti into bhāva-
bhakti, and very soon Kṛṣṇa will certainly bestow His
mercy upon you.”


                           51
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

Hearing this, Lāhirī Mahāśaya became choked up with
bliss, and rolled on the ground at Bābājī Mahāśayaís
feet, exclaiming, “Ah! There is nothing except guru.
Alas! What was I doing all this time? Gurudeva! You have
mercifully rescued me from the dark well of sense
enjoyment.”



Thus ends the Fourth Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled

“Vaiṣṇava-Dharma is Nitya-Dharma”




Chapter 5

Vaidhī-Bhakti is Nitya not Naimittika Dharma



Lāhirī Mahāśaya had a residence in Śāntipura. His two
sons were both highly educated. The elder, Candranātha,
who was thirty-five years old, was a zamindar, and
managed all the household affairs. He was also a scholar
in medical science. Candranātha never underwent any
hardship for the sake of spiritual progress, but he
commanded tremendous respect in the brāhmaṇa community.
He employed servants, maids, doorkeepers, and other
workers, and he managed all the household affairs with
comfort and prestige.

From childhood, the younger son, Devīdāsa, had studied
the śāstras dealing with logic (nyāya-śāstra) and that
presents the codes of religious ritual (smṛti-śāstra).
Across the road from the family residence, he had opened
a pāṭha-śālā, a school dedicated to the study of the
four Vedas and four subjects: Sanskrit grammar,
rhetoric, logic, and philosophy. There he taught a group
of ten to fifteen students and had the title Vidyāratna
(jewel of learning).

One day a rumor circulated   in Śāntipura that Kālīdāsa
Lāhirī Mahāśaya had put on   the dress of an ascetic and
had become a Vaiṣṇava. The   news spread everywhere ñ at
the bathing ghāṭas, in the   market-place, and on the
streets.

Someone said, “The old man has become senile. He was a
man of ideal character for so long, but now he has gone
mad.”

Someone else said, “What kind of disease is this? All
kinds of happiness is there in his home; he is a
brāhmaṇa by birth, and his sons and family members are
all obedient to him. What suffering could drive such a
man to adopt the life of a mendicant?”

Another person said, “This is the ill fate of those who
wander here and there, shouting, “This is dharma! This

                             52
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

is dharma!”

A virtuous man said, “Kālīdāsa Lāhirī Mahāśaya is a very
pious soul. He is materially prosperous, and now in his
maturity he has developed love for hari-nāma.”

As different people gossiped and spread various rumours,
someone went to Devīdāsa Vidyāratna and reported what he
had heard.

Vidyāratna became quite anxious and went to his elder
brother. “Brother,” he said, “it looks as if we have to
face great difficulty because of Father. He is staying
at Godruma in Nadiyā on the plea of maintaining good
health, but he has fallen into bad company there. It is
impossible to ignore the outcry in the village about
this.”

Candranātha said, “Brother, I have also heard some
rumours. Our family is highly respected, but now we can
no longer show our faces because of our fatherís
activities. We have always belittled the descendants of
Advaita Prabhu, but now what has become of our own
house? Come, letís go inside. We shall discuss this
matter with Mother and decide what should be done.”

Soon afterwards, Candranātha and Devīdāsa were seated on
the second-floor veranda taking their meal, which was
served by a brāhmaṇī widow. Their mother sat with them.
Candranātha said, “Mother, have you heard any news of
Father?”

Mother said, “Why, heís well, isnít he? He is staying in
Śrī Navadvīpa, and he has become mad after hari-nāma.
Why donít you bring him here?”

Devīdāsa said, “Mother, Father is quite well, but
according to the reports we have been hearing, we can no
longer rely on him. On the contrary, if we brought him
here, we would become a social disgrace.”

Mother became somewhat perturbed and asked, “What has
happened to him? Just recently I went to the bank of the
Gaṅgā and had a long talk with the wife of one of the
leading Gosvāmīs. She told me, ëYour husband has met
with great auspiciousness. He has earned tremendous
respect among the Vaiṣṇavas.í “

Devīdāsa raised his voice slightly and said, “He has
certainly gained respect, but at the cost of our heads!
Would he have remained at home in his old age, and
accepted our service? No. But see now! Heís bent on
defaming our prestigious family by subsisting on the
remnants of ragged mendicants of different castes. Alas!
This is the tragic effect of the age of Kali. He was
such an experienced man, but what has become of his
intelligence?”

Mother said, “Bring him here now and keep him hidden
until you can persuade him to change his mind.”

Candranātha said, “What other alternative do we have?
Devī, go to Godruma secretly with two or three men and
bring Father here.”

                           53
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017


Devīdāsa said, “You both know very well that Father has
no regard for me because he considers me to be an
atheist. I am afraid that he may not even speak to me if
I go there.”

Devīdāsa had a maternal cousin called Śambhunātha, who
was very dear to Lāhirī Mahāśaya. He had stayed with him
for a long time, and had rendered much service to him.
It was decided that Devīdāsa and Śambhunātha would go
together to Godruma so a servant was sent that very day
to a brāhmaṇaís house in Godruma, to arrange for their
residential quarters.

The next day, when Devīdāsa and Śambhunātha had finished
their meal, they set out for Godruma. Having reached
their appointed lodging, they got down from their
palanquins and gave the bearers permission to depart. A
brāhmaṇa cook and two servants had arrived there in
advance.

At dusk, Devīdāsa and Śambhunātha made their way towards
Śrī Pradyumna-kuñja. On their arrival, they saw Lāhirī
Mahāśaya sitting on a mat of leaves on Surabhi Terrace
with his eyes closed. He was chanting hari-nāma on his
tulasī-mālā and his body was decorated in twelve places
with tilaka. Devīdāsa and Śambhunātha slowly climbed up
onto the terrace and offered praṇāma at his feet.

On hearing footsteps, Lāhirī Mahāśaya opened his eyes
and was astonished to see the two men. “Śambhu!” he
exclaimed, “What brings you here? How are you?”

“By your blessings we are quite well,” they replied
politely.

“Will you take your meal here?” asked Lāhirī Mahāśaya.

“We have already arranged for a place to stay,” they
replied. “You need not worry about us.”

At that moment, loud chanting of Śrī Hariís name was
heard from Śrī Premadāsa Bābājīís mādhavī-mālatī bower.
Vaiṣṇava dāsa Bābājī came out of his kuṭīra and asked
Lāhirī Mahāśaya, “Why was there such a loud sound of
hari-nāma from Paramahaṁsa Bābājīís grove?”

Lāhirī Mahāśaya and Vaiṣṇava dāsa Bābājī went ahead to
investigate, and found many Vaiṣṇavas circumambulating
Bābājī Mahāśāya and chanting Śrī Hariís name. The two of
them also joined in the assembly. Everyone offered
daṇḍavat-praṇāma to Paramahaṁsa Bābājī Mahārāja and sat
down on the terrace. Devīdāsa and Śambhunātha were also
seated on one side of the terrace, like crows in an
assembly of swans.

In the meantime, one of the Vaiṣṇavas said, “We have
come from Kaṇṭaka-nagara (Kattwa). Our main purpose is
to take darśana of Śrī Navadvīpa-Māyāpura and to obtain
the dust of the lotus feet of Paramahaṁsa Bābājī
Mahārāja.”

Paramahaṁsa Bābājī Mahārāja felt embarrassed and said,
“I am a great sinner. You have simply come to purify

                           54
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

me.”

After a short time it was discovered that these
Vaiṣṇavas were all expert in singing bhajanas
(devotional songs) glorifying Śrī Hari. Mṛdaṅga and
karatālas were brought at once, and a senior member of
the assembly began to sing a bhajana from Prārthanā.

“śrī kṛṣṇa caitanya prabhu nityānanda

gadāī advaita-candra gaura-bhakta-vṛnda

O Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanyacandra! O Prabhu Nityānanda! O
Gadādhara! O Advaitacandra! O Gauraís bhaktas.

apāra karuṇa-sindhu vaiṣṇava ṭhākura

mo hena pāmara dayā karaha pracura

O Vaiṣṇava Ṭhākura, you are a boundless ocean of mercy.
Please bestow your profuse mercy on a sinful creature
like me.

jāti-vidyā-dhana-jana-made matta jane

uddhāra kara he nātha, kṛpā-vitaraṇe

O master, please be merciful and deliver this person
intoxicated with the pride of high birth, education,
wealth and attachment to wife, children and family
members.

kanaka-kāminī-lobha, pratiṣṭhā-vāsanā

chāḍāiyā śodha more, e mora prārthanā

Please purify me of my lust for women and wealth and the
desire for prestige. This is my prayer.

nāme ruci, jīve dayā, vaiṣṇave ullāsa

dayā karií deha more, ohe kṛṣṇa-dāsa

O servant of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, please be merciful and give me a
taste for śrī-nāma and compassion for all jīvas ñ and
let me delight in the association of Vaiṣṇavas.

tomāra caraṇa-chāyā eka-mātra āśā

jīvane maraṇe mātra āmāra bharasā

The shade of your lotus feet is my only hope, my sole
refuge in life and in death.”

When this bhajana came to an end, the Vaiṣṇavas sang a
prayer composed by Kālīdāsa Lāhirī Mahāśaya, which was
charming and full of poetic sentiment.

miche māyā-vaśe, saṁsāra-sāgare, paḍiyā chilāma āmi

karuṇa kariyā, diyā pada-chāyā, āmāre tārila tumi

I fell into the ocean of saṁsāra and became enslaved in
futile activities by the influence of māyā. You were

                           55
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

merciful and delivered me by giving me the shade of your
lotus feet.

śuna śuna vaiṣṇava ṭhākura

tomāra caraṇe, sampiyāchi māthā, mora duḥkha kara dūra

O Vaiṣṇava Ṭhākura, please hear me. I have surrendered
my head at your feet. Please dispel my misery.

jātira gaurava, kevala raurava, vidyā se avidyā-kalā

śodhiyā āmāya, nitāi-caraṇe, sampahe ñ jāuka jvāla

Pride of caste is a terrible hell. Material learning is
but an aspect of ignorance. Please purify me and deliver
me to the feet of Nitāi. Please extinguish my blazing
agony.

tomāra kṛpāya, āmāra jihvāya, sphuruka yugala-nāma

kahe kālīdāsa, āmāra hṛdaye, jaguka śrī-rādha-śyāma

By your mercy, may the holy names of Śrī Yugala appear
on my tongue, and may Śrī Rādhā-Śyāma appear in my
heart. This is the prayer of Kālīdāsa.

Singing this bhajana together, all of them became
maddened with joy. At the end, they repeated the line,
jaguka śrī-rādhā-śyāma. “May Śrī Rādhā-Śyāma appear in
my heart,” again and again, and began to dance
exuberantly. As they continued to dance, a few bhāvuka
Vaiṣṇavas fell unconscious. An extraordinary atmosphere
developed, and as Devīdāsa witnessed all this, he began
to think that his father was deeply immersed in the
pursuit of spiritual truth, and that it would be
difficult to take him home.

It was about midnight when the meeting broke up.
Everyone exchanged daṇḍavat-praṇāma, and returned to
their respective places. Devīdāsa and Śambhunātha took
permission from their father and returned to their
lodgings.

The following day when they had finished their meal,
Devī and Śambhu went to the kuṭīra of Lāhirī Mahāśaya.
Devīdāsa Vidyāratna offered praṇāma to Lāhirī Mahāśaya
and said, “Dear Father, I have one request to make of
you. Please come and reside in our house at Śāntipura.
We will all be very happy to serve you at home. We can
also arrange for a solitary kuṭīra for you, if you give
your permission.”

Lāhirī Mahāśaya replied, “It is a good idea, but I would
not get the type of sādhu-saṅga in Śāntipura that I get
here. Devī, you know the people of Śāntipura; they are
so godless and so fond of slandering others that a man
can hardly be satisfied to live there. Granted, there
are many brāhmaṇas there, but their intelligence has
become crooked by their association with shallow-minded
materialists like the weavers. Fine garments, grandiose
words, and blasphemy of Vaiṣṇavas are the three
characteristics of the people of Śāntipura. The
descendants of Advaita Prabhu have undergone so much

                             56
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

trouble there that they have become almost inimical to
Mahāprabhu by such negative association. You should
therefore grant that I may stay here in Godruma. That is
my desire.”

Devīdāsa said, “Dear Father, what you say is true. But
why must you have anything to do with the people of
Śāntipura? Stay in a solitary place and spend your days
cultivating your religious practices, such as sandhyā-
vandanā. A brāhmaṇaís daily work is also his nitya-
dharma and it is the duty of a great soul like yourself
to be absorbed in that way.”

Becoming somewhat grave Lāhirī Mahāśaya said, “My dear
son, those days are no more. Now that I have lived for a
few months in the association of sādhus and have heard
Śrī Gurudevaís instructions, my understanding has
changed dramatically. I understand now that what you
refer to as nitya-dharma is really naimittika-dharma.
The only nitya-dharma is hari-bhakti. Sandhyā-vandanā
and other such practices are in reality naimittika-
dharma.”

Devīdāsa said, “Father, I have never seen or heard of
such an explanation in any śāstra. Is sandhyā-vandanā
not hari-bhajana? If it is hari-bhajana, then it is also
nitya-dharma. Is there any difference between sandhyā-
vandanā and the practices that constitute vaidhī-bhakti,
such as śravaṇa and kīrtana?”

Lāhirī Mahāśaya said, “The sandhyā-vandanā that is
included in karma-kāṇḍa is significantly different from
vaidhī-bhakti. Sandhyā-vandanā and other such activities
are performed in the karma-kāṇḍa system in order to
obtain liberation. However, activities of hari-bhajana,
such as śravaṇa and kīrtana, have no ulterior motive.
The śāstras describe the results of hearing, chanting,
and the other limbs of vaidhī-bhakti, but this is just
to interest people who would otherwise not be inclined
to perform those activities. The worship of Śrī Hari has
no fruit other than the service of Śrī Hari. The
principal fruit of the practice of vaidhī-bhakti is to
bring about the awakening of prema in hari-bhajana.”

Devīdāsa: Then you do admit that the divisions or aṅgas
of hari-bhajana have some secondary results.

Lāhirī: Yes, but the results depend on the different
types of practitioner (sādhaka). The Vaiṣṇavas perform
sādhana-bhakti for the sole purpose of coming to the
perfectional stage of devotion known as siddha-bhakti.
When non-Vaiṣṇavas perform the very same divisions or
aṅgas of bhakti, they have two principal motives: the
desire for material enjoyment (bhoga) and the desire for
liberation (mokṣa). Externally, there is no apparent
difference between the sādhana practices of the
Vaiṣṇavas and those of non-Vaiṣṇavas, but there is a
fundamental difference in niṣṭha.

When one worships Kṛṣṇa through the path of karma, the
mind is purified, and one may obtain material fruits,
freedom from disease, or liberation. But the same
worship of Kṛṣṇa through the path of bhakti produces
only prema for kṛṣṇa-nāma. When karmīs, those who follow

                           57
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

the path of karma, observe Ekādaśī, it eradicates their
sins; whereas when bhaktas observe Ekādaśī, it enhances
their hari-bhakti. Just see what a world of difference
there is!

The subtle difference between sādhana performed as an
aspect of karma, and sādhana performed as an aspect of
bhakti may be known only by the mercy of Bhagavān. The
bhaktas obtain the primary result, whereas the karmīs
are caught up in the secondary results, which may be
broadly divided into two categories, namely, bhukti
(material sense enjoyment) and mukti (liberation).

Devīdāsa: Then why do the śāstras extol the virtues of
the secondary results?

Lāhirī: There are two kinds of people in this world:
those who are spiritually awake and those who are
spiritually unconscious. The śāstras have praised
secondary results for the benefit of those who are
spiritually unconscious, and who do not perform any
pious activity unless they can visualize a forthcoming
result. However, the śāstras do not intend such people
to remain satisfied with secondary results; rather,
their attraction to secondary results should induce them
to perform virtuous acts, which will hasten their
contact with sādhus. Then, by the mercy of the sādhus,
they will come to know of the primary results of hari-
bhajana, and taste for those results will awaken within
them.

Devīdāsa: Then are we to understand that Raghunandana
and the other authors of the smṛti-śāstras are
spiritually unconscious?

Lāhirī: No, but the system that they have prescribed is
for the spiritual-ly unconscious. However, they
themselves seek the primary result.

Devīdāsa: Some śāstras only describe the secondary
results and do not mention the primary results at all.
Why is this?

Lāhirī: There are three types of śāstra, corresponding
to the varieties of adhikāra (eligibility) among human
beings: sāttvika, of the nature of goodness; rājasika,
of the nature of passion; and tāmasika, of the nature of
ignorance. The sāttvika-śāstras are for people who are
imbued with the nature of goodness (sattva-guṇa); the
rājasika-śāstras are for those enveloped by the nature
of passion (rajo-guṇa); and the tāmasika-śāstras are for
those engrossed in the nature of ignorance (tamo-guṇa).

Devīdāsa: If that is the case, how should one know which
directives of the śāstra to have faith in? And how may
those of lower adhikāra (eligibility) attain a higher
destination?

Lāhirī: Human beings have different natures and faiths
according to their different levels of adhikāra. People
who are impelled primarily by the mode of ignorance have
natural faith in the tāmasika-śāstras. Those affected
primarily by the mode of passion have natural faith in
the rājasika-śāstras, and those in the mode of goodness

                           58
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

naturally have faith in the sāttvika-śāstras. One’s
belief in a particular conclusion of the śāstra is
naturally in accordance with one’s faith.

As one faithfully carries out the duties for which one
has the adhikāra, he may come into contact with sādhus
and develop a higher adhikāra through their association.
As soon as a higher adhikāra is awakened, oneís nature
is elevated, and oneís faith in a more elevated śāstra
will follow accordingly. The authors of the śāstras were
infallible in their wisdom and composed the śāstras in
such a way that one will gradually develop higher
adhikāra by carrying out the duties for which one is
eligible and in which one naturally has faith. It is for
this reason that different directives have been given in
different śāstras. Faith in the śāstra is the root of
all auspiciousness.

Śrīmad Bhagavad-Gītā is the mīmāṁsā-śāstra of all the
śāstras. This siddhānta is clearly stated there.

Devīdāsa: I have studied many śāstras since my
childhood, but today, by your grace, I have understood
their purpose in an entirely new light.

Lāhirī: It is written in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.8.10):

aṇubhyaś ca mahadbhyaś ca śāstrebhyaḥ kuśalo naraḥ

sarvataḥ sāram ādadyāt puṣpebhya iva ṣaṭpadaḥ

An intelligent person will take the essence of all the
śāstras, whether they are great or small, just as a
bumblebee gathers honey from many different types of
flowers.

My dear son, I used to call you an atheist. Now I donít
criticize anyone, because faith depends on adhikāra.
There is no question of criticism in this regard.
Everyone is working according to their own adhikāra, and
they will advance gradually when the time is
appropriate. You are a scholar of the śāstras dealing
with logic and fruitive action, and since your
statements are in accordance with your adhikāra, there
is no fault in them.

Devīdāsa: Until now, I believed that there were no
scholars in the Vaiṣṇava sampradāya. I thought that the
Vaiṣṇavas were merely fanatics who concerned themselves
solely with one part of the śāstra, but what you have
explained today has completely dispelled my
misconceptions. Now I have faith that some of the
Vaiṣṇavas have truly understood the essence of the
śāstra. Are you studying the śāstras from any great soul
these days?

Lāhirī: My son, you may now call me a fanatical Vaiṣṇava
or whatever you like. My Gurudeva performs bhajana in
the kuṭīra next to mine. He has instructed me in the
essential conclusion of all the śāstras, and I have just
expressed the same thing to you. If you would like to
receive instruction at his lotus feet, you may inquire
from him in a devotional mood. Come, I will introduce
you to him.

                           59
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017


Lāhirī Mahāśaya took Devīdāsa Vidyāratna to the kuṭīra
of Śrī Vaiṣṇava dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja and introduced him
to his Gurudeva. He then left Devīdāsa with Bābājī
Mahārāja and returned to his kuṭīra to chant hari-nāma.

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: My dear son, what is the extent of your
education?

Devīdāsa: I have studied up to muktipāda and siddhānta-
kusumāñjali in the nyāya-śāstra, and all the books of
the smṛti-śāstra.

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: Then you have laboured diligently in your
study of the śāstra. Please give me a sample of what you
have learned.

Devīdāsa:

atyanta-duḥkha-nivṛttir eva muktiḥ

The cessation of all material miseries is known as
mukti.

One should always endeavor to obtain mukti, which is
defined in this statement from Sāṅkhya-darśana (1.1 and
6.5). I am seeking that liberation through faithful
adherence to my prescribed duties, known as sva-dharma.

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: Yes, I too, like yourself, once aspired
for mukti after having studied all those books.

Devīdāsa: Have you now given up the pursuit of mukti?

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: My dear son, tell me, what is the meaning
of mukti?

Devīdāsa: According to the nyāya-śāstra, the jīva and
brahma are eternally distinct from each other, so it is
not clear from the point of view of nyāya how the
cessation of all miseries can take place. According to
the Vedānta, however, mukti refers to the attainment of
non-differentiated brahma, or in other words, the jīva’s
attainment of the state of oneness with brahma. This is
clear from one point of view.

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: My dear son, I studied Śaṅkara’s Vedānta
commentary for fifteen years, and I also remained a
sannyāsī for several years. I endeavored strenuously to
attain mukti. I spent a long time deeply meditating upon
what Śaṅkara considered to be the four principal
statements of the śruti (mahā-vākyas). Finally, I
understood that the religious system that Śaṅkara
advocated was newly fashioned, so I gave it up.

Devīdāsa: Why did you consider it to be a recent and
antagonistic view?

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: An experienced man cannot easily convey
to others what he has realized through practical
examination. How will those who have not experienced it
be able to understand it?

Devīdāsa could see that Vaiṣṇava dāsa was a learned

                           60
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

scholar, and that he was straightforward and deeply
realized. Devīdāsa had not studied Vedānta, and he began
to think that he could do so if Vaiṣṇava dāsa were
merciful to him, so he inquired, “Am I fit to study
Vedānta?”

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: With the level of competence you have
achieved in the Sanskrit language, you can easily learn
Vedānta if you get a qualified instructor.”

Devīdāsa: If you will kindly teach me, I will study
under you.

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: The fact is that I am a servant of the
Vaiṣṇavas; there is nothing for me besides this.
Paramahaṁsa Bābājī Mahārāja has mercifully instructed me
to chant hari-nāma constantly, and I am doing just that.
I have so little time. Besides, jagad-guru Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī has specifically forbidden the Vaiṣṇavas to read
or hear Śaṅkara’s Śārīraka-bhāṣya commentary on Vedānta,
so I no longer read it myself or teach it to others.
However, Śrī Śacīnandana, who is the original preceptor
of the entire world, explained the true commentary on
Vedānta-sūtra to Śrī Sarvabhauma. Many Vaiṣṇavas still
have hand-written copies of that commentary. If you want
to study it, you can make a copy and I can help you
understand it. You may ask for a copy from the house of
Śrīmad Kavi Karṇapūra in the village of Kāñcana-pallī.

Devīdāsa: I will try. You are a great scholar of
Vedānta. Please tell me frankly, will I be able to
ascertain the true meaning of Vedānta by studying the
Vaiṣṇava commentary?

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: I have studied and taught the commentary
of Śaṅkara, and I have also studied Śrī Rāmānuja’s Śrī
Bhāṣya, and other commentaries as well. However, I have
not seen any explanation of the sūtras that is superior
to Mahāprabhu’s. This commentary was recorded by
Gopīnātha Ācārya and it is studied by the Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavas. There can be no doctrinal dispute in
Bhagavān’s own explanation of the sūtras, for His
commentary accurately represents the full import of the
Upaniṣads. If one presents this explanation of the
sūtras in proper sequence, it is certain that his
explanation will be respected in any assembly of learned
scholars.

Devīdāsa Vidyāratna became very pleased to hear this. He
faithfully offered daṇḍavat-praṇāma to Śrī Vaiṣṇava dāsa
Bābājī and returned to his fatherís kuṭīra, where he
related to his father what he had heard.

Lāhirī Mahāśaya was delighted and replied, “Devī, you
have acquired a great deal of education, but now you can
try to attain the highest destination, which is the
ultimate benefit for all living beings.”

Devīdāsa: Actually, my sole purpose in coming was to
take you home. Please return to our house just once and
everyone will become satisfied. Mother is particularly
anxious to have darśana of your feet once more.

Lāhirī: I have taken shelter of the lotus feet of the

                           61
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

Vaiṣṇavas, and I have pledged that I will never enter
any house that is opposed to bhakti. First you will have
to become Vaiṣṇavas, and then you can take me home.

Devīdāsa: Father!   How can you say that? We worship the
Lord every day at   home. We don’t disrespect the chanting
of hari-nāma, and   we receive guests and Vaiṣṇavas
cordially. Aren’t   we to be regarded as Vaiṣṇavas?

Lāhirī: Your activities are very similar to those of the
Vaiṣṇavas, but you are not actually Vaiṣṇavas.

Devīdāsa: Then how can one become a Vaiṣṇava?

Lāhirī: You can become a Vaiṣṇava by giving up your
temporary, naimittika duties, and adopting your eternal,
spiritual dharma.

Devīdāsa: I have one doubt that I would ask you to
resolve decisively. The activities of the Vaiṣṇavas
consist of śravaṇam, kīrtanam, smaraṇam, pāda-sevanam,
arcanam, vandanam, dāsyam, sakhyam, and ātma-nivedanam,
and they are significantly connected with matter, so why
aren’t they also referred to as temporary, naimittika? I
perceive some partiality in this. Activities such as the
service of the Deity, fasting, and worship with material
ingredients are all connected with gross matter, so how
can they be eternal?

Lāhirī: My son, I also needed a long time to understand
this point. Try to understand this very carefully. There
are two types of human beings: those whose interests are
connected with this material world (aihika); and those
who aspire for superior attainments in the future
(paramārthika). Those in the first category only strive
for material happiness, reputation and material
prosperity. Those in the second category are of three
types: those who are devoted to the Īśvara (īśānugata),
those who are fixed in the pursuit of monistic knowledge
aiming at liberation (jñāna-niṣṭha), and those who covet
mystic powers (siddhi-kāmī).

The siddhi-kāmīs are attached to the fruits of karma-
kāṇḍa, and they desire to obtain supernatural powers by
their performance of karma. The methods which they adopt
to obtain such unearthly powers are yāga (offering
oblations), yajña (performing sacrifices), and aṣṭāṅga-
yoga (the eightfold yoga system). They accept the
existence of Īśvara, but they believe that He is
subordinate to the laws of karma. This category includes
the material scientists.

The jñāna-niṣṭhas try to awaken their identity with
brahma by cultivating impersonal monistic knowledge.
They donít know or care whether Īśvara exists or not,
but they fabricate an imaginary form of Īśvara anyway
for the purpose of practicing sādhana. The fruit of
monistic knowledge is realizing oneís identity with
brahma, and the monists aspire to attain this eventually
by constantly engaging in the practices of bhakti
directed towards their imaginary form of Īśvara. When
they obtain the result of jñāna, they have no more use
for the Īśvara that they have merely imagined as a means
to achieve their end. When their bhakti towards Īśvara

                             62
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

bears its desired fruit, it is converted into jñāna.
According to this doctrine, neither Bhagavān nor bhakti
to Bhagavān is eternal.

The īśānugatas, those who are devoted to Īśvara, are the
third category of those who seek higher attainments in
the future (paramārthikas). Factually speaking, they are
the only ones who strive for paramārtha, the highest
goal of life. In their opinion, there is only one
Īśvara, who is without beginning or end, and who
manifests the jīvas and the material world by His own
potencies. The jīvas are His eternal servants, and
remain so, even after liberation. The eternal dharma of
the jīva is to remain eternally under the guidance of
Īśvara, for he can do nothing by his own strength. The
jīva cannot obtain any eternal benefit by the
performance of karma; however, when he submits himself
to Śrī Kṛṣṇaís shelter, he obtains all perfection by His
grace.

Those who covet mystic powers (siddhi-kāmīs) follow
karma-kāṇḍa, and those who cultivate monistic knowledge
(jñāna-niṣṭhas) follow jñāna-kāṇḍa. The īśānugatas are
the only devotees of Īśvara. The jñāna-kāṇḍīs and karma-
kāṇḍīs pride themselves on being interested in higher
attainment (pāramārthika), but in reality they are not
pursuing the highest goal but seeking temporary material
gain; and whatever they say about dharma is naimittika.

The present-day worshipers of Śiva, Durgā, Gaṇeśa, and
Sūrya are known respectively as Śaivas, Śāktas,
Gāṇapatyas, and Sauras, and they all follow jñāna-kāṇḍa.
They adopt the aṅgas of bhakti such as śravaṇa and
kīrtana only to attain mukti, and ultimately the
undifferentiated, impersonal nirviśeṣa-brahma. Those who
engage in śravaṇa and kīrtana without any desire for
bhukti or mukti are engaged in the service of Śrī Viṣṇu.
Among these five deities, the śrī-mūrti of Bhagavān Śrī
Viṣṇu is eternal, transcendental, and full of all
potencies. Those who do not accept Bhagavān as the
object of worship are merely worshiping temporary
objects.

My son, the service that all of you render at home to
the Deity of Bhagavān is not paramārthika because you do
not accept the eternality of Bhagavānís form. That is
why you cannot be counted among the īśānugatas. Now I
hope that you have understood the difference between
nitya and naimittika upāsanā (worship).

Devīdāsa: Yes. If one worships the śrī-vigraha (Deity)
of Bhagavān, but does not accept that vigraha as
eternal, then it is not worship of an eternal object.
However, can’t one adopt a temporary means of worship to
attain the eternal truth, which is ultimately distinct
from any such temporary forms?

Lāhirī: Even if that were the case, such temporary
worship cannot be called eternal dharma. The worship of
the eternal vigraha as performed in vaiṣṇava-dharma is
nitya-dharma.

Devīdāsa: But śrī-vigraha that is worshiped is fashioned
by a human being, so how can it be eternal?

                           63
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017


Lāhirī: The vigraha worshiped by the Vaiṣṇavas is not
like that. Bhagavān is not formless like brahma. On the
contrary, He is the all-powerful, concentrated
embodiment of eternity, knowledge, and bliss. It is that
sac-cid-ānanda-ghana-vigraha that is the worshipable
Deity of the Vaiṣṇavas. Bhagavān’s transcendental form
of eternity, bliss, and knowledge is first revealed in
the pure consciousness of the jīva, and then it is
reflected in the mind. The external form of the Deity is
fashioned according to this transcendental form revealed
in the mind, and by the power of bhakti-yoga, the sac-
cid-ānanda form of Bhagavān then manifests in the Deity.
When the devotee takes darśana of the Deity, that Deity
unites with the transcendental form of Bhagavān that the
devotee sees in his heart.

The Deity that the jñānīs worship, however, is not like
that. They think that the Deity is a statue made of
material elements, but that the state of brahma is
present in it while they are conducting their worship,
and that it becomes a mere material statue again after
they have finished their worship. Now you should
consider the difference between these two conceptions of
the Deity and their respective methods of worship. When
you obtain Vaiṣṇava dīkṣā by the mercy of a genuine
guru, you will be able to correctly understand this
difference by observing the results of both.

Devīdāsa: Yes, now this all makes more sense to me. Now
I see that the Vaiṣṇavas are not just fanatics driven by
blind faith; rather, they are endowed with subtle and
discriminating insight. There is a major difference
between the worship of the śrī-mūrti and the temporary
worship of an imaginary form of the Lord that has been
imposed on a material object. There is no difference in
the external procedures of worship, but there is a vast
difference in the faith of the two worshipers. I will
think about this for some days. Father, today my
greatest doubt has been dispelled. Now I can say
emphatically that the jñānīs’ worship is merely an
attempt to cheat Śrī Bhagavān. I will submit this topic
at your feet again at a later time.

After saying this, Devī Vidyāratna and Śambhu departed
for their residential quarters. They returned to Lāhirī
Mahāśayaís kuṭīra in the late afternoon, but there was
no opportunity to discuss these topics further, for at
that time everyone was immersed in hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana.

The following afternoon, everyone seated themselves in
Paramahaṁsa Bābājīís bower, Devī Vidyāratna and Śambhu
sat next to Lāhirī Mahāśaya. Just then, the Kāzī from
the village of Brāhmaṇa-Puṣkariṇī arrived. When the
Vaiṣṇavas saw him, they all stood up to offer him
respect, and the Kāzī also greeted the Vaiṣṇavas with
great pleasure and then sat in the assembly.

Paramahaṁsa Bābājī said, “You are blessed, for you are a
descendant of Chānd KāzīÇ who was an object of the mercy
of Śrī Mahāprabhu. Please kindly bestow your mercy upon
us.”

The Kāzī said, “By the mercy of Śrī Mahāprabhu, we have

                           64
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

become the objects of mercy of the Vaiṣṇavas. Gaurāṅga
is the Lord of our life. We do not do anything without
first offering our daṇḍavat-praṇāma to Him.”

Lāhirī Mahāśaya was a learned scholar of the Farsi
language, and he had studied the thirty sephārās of the
Quríān, and many books of the Sufis. He asked the Kāzī,
“According to your ideology, what is meant by mukti?”

The Kāzī replied, “What you refer to as the jīva,
individual soul, we call rūh. This rūh is found in two
conditions: rūh-mujarrad, the conscious or liberated
soul; and rūh-tarkībī, the conditioned soul. What you
refer to as spirit (cit) we call mujarrad, and what you
refer to as matter (acit) we call jism. Mujarrad is
beyond the limitations of time and space, whereas jism
is subordinate to time and space. The rūh-tarkībī, or
baddha-jīva, has a material mind and is full of
ignorance (malphuṭ) and desires. The rūh-mujarrad are
pure and aloof from all these contaminations, and they
reside in the spiritual abode, which is known as ālam
al-maśhāl.

“The rūh becomes pure through the gradual development of
iśhqh or prema. There is no influence of jism, or
matter, in that abode where Khodā (God) brought the
prophet Paigambar Sāhib. Yet even there, the rūh remains
as a servitor (bandā), and the Lord is the master.
Therefore the relationship between the bandā and Khodā
is eternal, and mukti is actually the attainment of this
relationship in its pure form. The Quríān and the
literature of the Sufis explain these conclusions, but
not everyone can understand them. Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu
mercifully taught Chānd Kāzī all these points, and since
that time we have become His unalloyed bhaktas.”

Lāhirī: What is the primary teaching of the Qur’ān?

Kāzī: According to the Qur’ān, the Lord’s personal
abode, which is the highest attainment in the spiritual
world, is known as behesht. It is a fact that there is
no formal worship there, yet life itself is worship
(ibāda). The residents of that abode are immersed in
transcendental bliss simply by seeing the Lord. This is
the very same teaching that has been presented by Śrī
Gaurāṅgadeva.

Lāhirī: Does the Qur’ān accept that the Lord has a
transcendental form?

Kāzī: The Qur’ān states that the Lord has no form. But
Śrī Gaurāṅgadeva told Chānd Kāzī that this teaching of
the Qur’ān means that the Lord cannot have a material
form. It does not preclude the existence of His pure
spiritual form. Paigambar Sāhib saw the divine loving
form of the Lord in accordance with his level of
eligibility. The transcendental moods and sentiments
that are characteristic of the other rasas remained
hidden from him.

Lāhirī: What is the opinion of the Sufis in this regard?

Kāzī: They adhere to the doctrine of anā al-ḥaqq, which
means “I am Khodā.” The Sufi (āswaph) doctrine of Islam

                           65
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

is exactly the same as the advaita-vāda doctrine.

Lāhirī: Are you a Sufi?

Kāzī: No, we are unadulterated devotees. Gaurāṅga is our
very life.

The discussion went on for a long time, and finally Kāzī
Sāhib offered his respects to the Vaiṣṇavas and
departed. Hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana followed, after which the
assembly dispersed.



Thus ends the Fifth Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled

“Vaidhī-bhakti is Nitya not Naimittika”




Chapter 6

Nitya-Dharma, Race & Caste



Devīdāsa Vidyāratna was a teacher, and for a long time
he had been firmly convinced that the brāhmaṇas were
foremost among all varṇas. He believed that no one
except brāhmaṇas are fit to obtain the highest goal of
life, and that unless he takes birth in a brāhmaṇa
family, the jīva cannot attain mukti. He also believed
that birth in such a family is the sole cause of
developing the characteristic nature of a brāhmaṇa. When
he heard the discussions between the Vaiṣṇavas and the
descendant of Chānd Kāzī, he became completely
dissatisfied. He could not penetrate the statements of
Kāzī Sāhib at all, for they were full of deep,
fundamental truths.

Perturbed at heart, Devīdāsa Vidyāratna began to think,
“Indeed the Muslim race is a strange phenomenon, and one
cannot make any sense of what they say. Of course,
father has studied Farsi and Arabic, and he has been
studying religion for a long time, but why does he give
so much respect to the Muslims? A Hindu is obliged to
take a bath in order to purify himself if he as much as
touches a Muslim, so what could Paramahaṁsa Bābājī
Mahārāja have been thinking when he invited such a
person to be seated in the assembly and offered him so
much respect?”

That very night Devīdāsa said, “Śambhu! I cannot remain
silent in this matter. I shall ignite a blazing fire of
logical debate and burn this heretical view to ashes. It
was here in Navadvīpa that stalwart scholars like
Sārvabhauma and Śiromaṇi discussed the nyāya-śāstra, and
Raghunandana churned the twenty-eight truths from the
smṛti-śāstra. How is it that the Hindus and Muslims are
now intermingling in this very same Navadvīpa? Perhaps

                             66
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

the teachers of Navadvīpa have not gotten wind of this
news yet.” Vidyāratna applied himself wholeheartedly to
his task for a couple of days.

At daybreak a light drizzle had fallen. By mid-morning,
oppressed by the clouds, the sun had not been able to
cast a single glance upon the earth. Devī and Śambhu
finished a meal of khichrī before ten oíclock and got
ready, sensing that the appropriate moment was upon
them. In Śrī Godruma, the Vaiṣṇavas had been delayed in
their mādhukarī. However, almost all of them had honored
prasāda, and were sitting in a large kuṭīra to one side
of the mādhavi-mālatī bower.

Paramahaṁsa Bābājī, Vaiṣṇava dāsa, Paṇḍita Ananta dāsa
from the village of Śrī Nṛsiṁha-pallī, Lāhirī Mahāśaya,
and Yādava dāsa from Kuliyā started chanting hari-nāma
on their tulasī-mālā, absorbed in paramānanda. At that
time, the famous paṇḍita, Kṛṣṇa Cūḍāmaṇi, arrived,
together with Vidyāratna Mahāśaya, Caturbhuja Padaratna
from Samudragarh, Cintāmaṇi Nyāyaratna from Kāśī, and
Kālīdāsa Vācaspati from Pūrva-sthālī. The Vaiṣṇavas
offered great respect to the learned brāhmaṇas and had
them seated.

Paramahaṁsa Bābājī said, “It is said that an overcast
day is inauspicious, but this day has become most
auspicious for us. Today the brāhmaṇa-paṇḍitas of the
dhāma have purified our kuṭīra with the dust of their
feet.”

Vaiṣṇavas naturally consider themselves more
insignificant than grass, so they all offered praṇāma
saying, vipra-caraṇebhyaḥ namaḥ: “Obeisances unto the
feet of the brāhmaṇas.” The brāhmaṇa-paṇḍitas, who
considered themselves to be respectable scholars,
responded by offering blessings to the Vaiṣṇavas, and
then sat down. The brāhmaṇas whom Vidyāratna had
prepared for a debate offered praṇāma to Lāhirī
Mahāśaya, because he was senior to all of them. Lāhirī
Mahāśaya, who was by now conversant with the
confidential truths of the śāstras, immediately returned
praṇāmas to the paṇḍitas.

Of all the paṇḍitas, Kṛṣṇa Cūḍāmaṇi was the most
eloquent. He had debated the meaning of the śāstra with
many other paṇḍitas in Kāśī, Mithilā and numerous other
places, and had defeated all of his opponents. He was
short, with a lustrous dark complexion and a grave
countenance, and his eyes shone like a pair of stars.
Now he began the discussion with the Vaiṣṇavas.

Cūḍāmaṇi said, “Today we have come to take darśana of
the Vaiṣṇavas. Although we do not support all your
conduct, we very much admire your exclusive devotion.
Śrī Bhagavān Himself states in Bhagavad-Gītā (9.30):

api cet su-durācāro bhajate mām ananya-bhāk

sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ samyag-vyavasito hi saḥ

Even if one is an abominable sinner, if he worships Me
with exclusive devotion, he is to be considered a sādhu,
for his intelligence is firmly situated in the proper

                           67
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

determination.

“This statement of the Bhagavad-Gītā is our evidence,
and it is because of this conclusion that we have come
to take darśana of the sādhus today. But we have one
complaint. Why do you associate with Muslims on the
pretext of bhakti? We wish to discuss this matter with
you. Whoever amongst you is most expert in debate should
step forward.”

The Vaiṣṇavas were distressed by Kṛṣṇa Cūḍāmaṇiís words,
and Paramahaṁsa Bābājī said very humbly, “We are fools.
What do we know of debate? We simply act in accordance
with the behavior shown by the previous mahājanas. You
are all scholars, so you may recite the instructions of
the śāstra, and we will listen in silence.”

Cūḍāmaṇi said, “How can you act according to such a
statement? You are under the auspices of Hindu society,
and if you perpetrate practices and teachings that are
opposed to the śāstra, the world will come to ruin. ëWe
will practice and preach against śāstra, and at the same
time claim that we are on the path of the mahājanas.í
What kind of talk is this? Who is a mahājana? One can be
truly known as a mahājana only if his behavior and
teachings are in accordance with śāstra. How can there
be any benefit for the world if we simply label anyone
we like a mahājana, and then quote the saying, mahājano
yena gataḥ sa panthāḥ: ëOne should follow the path of
the mahājanas.í?”

Cūḍāmaṇiís words became intolerable for the Vaiṣṇavas,
so they left and consulted with one another in a
separate kuṭīra. They concluded that, since the
mahājanas were being accused of being at fault, it was
imperative that they refute the charges as long as it
was in their power to do so. Paramahaṁsa Bābājī chose
not to participate in the debate. Paṇḍita Ananta dāsa
Bābājī was a scholar of the nyāya-śāstra, but everyone
requested Śrī Vaiṣṇava dāsa Bābājī to conduct the
debate. The Vaiṣṇavas could immediately understand that
Devīdāsa Vidyāratna had instigated this turmoil. Lāhirī
Mahāśaya was also present, and he added, “Devī is
extremely proud. His mind became disturbed on the day he
witnessed our behavior with Kāzī Sāhib, and that is why
he has now brought all these brāhmaṇa-paṇḍitas here.”

Vaiṣṇava dāsa took the dust of Paramahaṁsa Bābājīís feet
on his head and said, “I shall bear the order of the
Vaiṣṇavas upon my head. Today the knowledge that I have
imbibed must certainly bear fruit.”

By this time, the sky was clear. A broad sitting place
was spread out in the mālatī-mādhavī grove, and the
brāhmaṇa-paṇḍitas sat on one side and the Vaiṣṇavas on
the other. All the brāhmaṇas and paṇḍitas of Śrī Godruma
and Madhyadvīpa had been called there, and many
neighboring students and scholarly brāhmaṇas also joined
the assembly, so it was by no means a small gathering.
About a hundred brāhmaṇa-paṇḍitas were seated on one
side and about two hundred Vaiṣṇavas on the other.
Vaiṣṇava dāsa Bābājī, calm and composed, sat at the head
of the assembly by the request of the Vaiṣṇavas. Just
then, an astonishing incident occurredóa cluster of

                           68
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

mālatī flowers fell on Vaiṣṇava dāsaís head from the
vines above. This enlivened the Vaiṣṇavas, inspiring
them to utter the name of Hari loudly. “This is to be
understood as the mercy of Śrīman Mahāprabhu,” they
declared.

On the other side, Kṛṣṇa Cūḍāmaṇi grimaced and said,
“You may think that, but flowers will not do. The tree
shall be known by its fruit.”

Dismissing the matter, Vaiṣṇava dāsa began, “This
meeting that is taking place in Navadvīpa today
resembles the assemblies which take place in Vārāṇasī,
and this is a cause of great happiness for me. Although
I am a resident of Bengal, I spent many years studying
and lecturing in Vārāṇasī and other places, so I am not
so accustomed to speaking in Bengali. It is my request
that in todayís assembly the questions and answers be
made in Sanskrit.”

Cūḍāmaṇi had studied the śāstra very diligently, but he
could not speak Sanskrit fluently, apart from some
ślokas that he had committed to memory. He was somewhat
dismayed by Vaiṣṇava dāsaís proposal, and said, “Why? We
are meeting in Bengal, so it is best to speak in
Bengali. I cannot speak Sanskrit like the paṇḍitas of
the Western provinces.”

Everyone could understand by observing their respective
moods that Cūḍāmaṇi was becoming fearful of debating
with Vaiṣṇava dāsa. They all requested Vaiṣṇava dāsa to
speak in Bengali, and he agreed.

Cūḍāmaṇi raised the first objection by asking, “Is jāti,
or caste, nitya (invariable)? Are the Hindus and Muslims
not different castes? Do the Hindus not become fallen by
associating with Muslims?”

Vaiṣṇava dāsa Bābājī replied, “According to the nyāya-
śāstra, jāti (a term that refers to race, caste, or
species) is invariable. However, the term jāti-bheda
(caste distinction) mentioned there does not refer to
the difference of caste among human beings born in
different countries. This term refers to the difference
of species, such as that which is found between cows,
goats, and human beings.”

Cūḍāmaṇi said, “Yes, what you say is quite true. But
does that mean that there is no jāti-bheda (caste
distinction) between Hindus and Muslims?”

Vaiṣṇava dāsa said, “Yes, there is a distinction between
the castes, but that type of jāti is not eternal. Human
beings have only one jāti, which in this case means
“species”. Within the human species, many different
jāti, or castes, have been invented, based on the
differences of language, country, styles of dress, and
skin color.”

Cūḍāmaṇi: Is there no difference in terms of birth? Or
does the difference between Hindus and Muslims consist
of nothing more than the difference in clothing and
other such things?”


                           69
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

Vaiṣṇava dāsa:Jīvas are born into higher or lower
varṇas, castes, according to their previous karma; and
in congruity with their varṇas, they are eligible for
different types of work. Brāhmaṇas, kṣatriyas, vaiśyas,
and śūdras are the four varṇas. All others are antyaja,
which means that they are low-born and outside the caste
system.

Cūḍāmaṇi: Are the Muslims not outcaste?

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: Yes, according to the śāstra, they are
outside the jurisdiction of the four varṇas (antyaja).

Cūḍāmaṇi: Then how can Muslims be Vaiṣṇavas, and how can
respectable Vaiṣṇavas associate with them?

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: Vaiṣṇavas are those who have pure bhakti,
and all human beings are candidates for vaiṣṇava-dharma.
Muslims are not eligible to perform the duties
prescribed for the different varṇas in the varṇāśrama
system because their birth disqualifies them. However,
they have every right to participate in the practices of
bhakti. One can never say that he knows the actual
purport of the śāstras until he has minutely examined
the subtle differences between karma-kāṇḍa, jñāna-kāṇḍa,
and bhakti-kāṇḍa.

Cūḍāmaṇi: Very well, when one performs one’s prescribed
karma, the heart is gradually purified so that one
becomes eligible for jñāna. Amongst the jñānīs, some are
nirbheda-brahmavādīs, who advocate the undifferentiated
impersonal brahma, while others are Vaiṣṇavas, who
accept the personal form of Bhagavān possessing
transcendental attributes (saviśeṣa-vāda). According to
this progression, one cannot become a Vaiṣṇava without
first completing one’s eligibility for karma. Muslims
are not eligible even to perform the prescribed karma
within the varṇa system, because they are outcastes, so
how can they become eligible for bhakti?

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: Outcaste human beings have every right to
practice bhakti. All the śāstras accept this, and
Bhagavān Himself has stated it in Śrīmad Bhagavad-Gītā
(9.32):

māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya ye ëpi syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥ

striyo vaiśyās tathā śūdrās te ëpi yānti parāṁ gatim

O Pārtha, women, vaiśyas, śūdras, and low-born people
who have taken birth in sinful families can attain the
supreme destination by taking shelter of Me.

Here the word āśritya, taking shelter, refers to bhakti.
This is corroborated in the Skanda Purāṇa,Kāśī-khaṇḍa
(21.63):

brāhmaṇaḥ kṣatriyo vaiśyaḥ śūdro vā yadi vetaraḥ

viṣṇu-bhakti-samāyukto jñeyaḥ sarvottamaś ca saḥ

quoted in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (10.106)

Whether one is a brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, vaiśya, śūdra, or

                           70
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017

an outcaste, if he has taken shelter of viṣṇu-bhakti, he
is considered to be superior to all.

It is said in the Nāradīya Purāṇa.

śvapaco ëpi mahīpāla viṣṇu-bhakto dvijādhikaḥ

viṣṇu-bhakti-vihīno yo yatiś ca śvapacādhikaḥ

quoted in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (10.87)

Cūḍāmaṇi: You may give many quotations from śāstra as
evidence, but it is important to see what is the
underlying principle in this consideration. How can the
defect of degraded birth be removed? Can a defect
relating to one’s birth be removed without taking
another birth?

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: The defect of a degraded birth is the
result of prārabdha-karma, previous activities that have
begun to bear fruit in this life, and this prārabdha-
karma can be destroyed by uttering the name of Bhagavān.
The proof of this is stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(6.16.44):

yan-nāma sakṛc chravaṇāt pukkaśo ëpi vimucyate saṁsārāt

Even a low-born dog-eater can be delivered from material
existence simply by hearing Your holy name once.

It is also stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.2.46):

nātaḥ paraṁ karma-nibandha-kṛntanaṁ

mumukṣatāṁ tīrtha-padānukīrtanāt

na yat punaḥ karmasu sajjate mano

rajas-tamobhyām kalilaṁ tato ënyathā

Those who desire liberation from the bondage of material
existence have no means of rooting out sin except by the
chanting of the holy names of Bhagavān, who sanctifies
even the holy places by the mere touch of His lotus
feet. The reason is that when one performs nāma-
saṅkīrtana, the mind does not become attached to karma
again, whereas when one practices any other means of
atonement, the mind is again contaminated by the
material qualities of passion and ignorance, since the
tendencies to commit sin have not been destroyed at the
root.

Again in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.33.7) it is stated:

aho vata śvapaco ëto garīyān

yaj-jahvāgre vartate nāma tubhyam

tepus tapas te juhuvuḥ sasnur āryā

brahmānucūr nāma gṛṇanti ye te

Oh! What more can be said about the greatness of a
person who chants the holy name of Śrī Hari? A person

                           71
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

whose tongue utters Your holy names is superior to all,
even if he has taken birth in a family of dog-eaters.
His brahminical status has already been established in
his previous birth. Those fortunate jīvas who chant śrī-
hari-nāma have already undergone austerities, performed
fire sacrifices, bathed at the holy places, followed the
rules of proper conduct, and thoroughly studied the
Vedas.

Cūḍāmaṇi: Then why is it that a caṇḍāla who chants hari-
nāma is barred from performing yajñas and other
brahminical activities?

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: One must take birth in a brāhmaṇa family
to perform yajñas and other such activities, and even
one who is born in a brāhmaṇa family must be purified by
the ceremony of investiture with the sacred thread
before he is eligible to perform the duties of a
brāhmaṇa. Similarly, a caṇḍāla may have become purified
by taking up hari-nāma, but he is still not eligible to
perform yajñas until he acquires seminal birth in a
brāhmaṇa family. However, he can perform the aṅgas
(limbs) of bhakti, which are infinitely greater than
yajñas.

Cūḍāmaṇi: What kind of conclusion is that? How can a
person who is disqualified from an ordinary privilege be
qualified for something that is much higher? Is there
any conclusive evidence for this?

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: There are two types of human activity:
material activities that relate to practical existence
(vyāvahārika); and spiritual activities that relate to
the ultimate truth (paramārthika). A person may have
attained spiritual qualification, but that does not
necessarily qualify him for particular material
activities. For example, one who is a Muslim by birth
may have acquired the nature and all the qualities of a
brāhmaṇa, so that he is a brāhmaṇa from the spiritual
point of view, but he still remains ineligible for
certain material activities, such as marrying the
daughter of a brāhmaṇa.

Cūḍāmaṇi: Why is that? What is wrong if he does so?

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: If one violates social customs, one is
guilty of vyāvahārika-doṣa, secular impropriety, and
members of society who take pride in their social
respectability do not condone such activities. That is
why one should not perform them, even if he is
spiritually qualified.

Cūḍāmaṇi: Please tell me what is the cause of
eligibility for karma, and what is the cause of
eligibility for bhakti?

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: ‘Tat-tat-karma-yogya-svabhāva-janma’—
nature, birth, and other such vyāvahārika, or practical,
causes that make one suitable for a particular type of
work are the sources of eligibility for karma. The
source of eligibility for bhakti is tāttvika-śraddhā,
faith that is rooted in the Absolute Truth.

Cūḍāmaṇi: Don’t try to intimidate me with the language

                           72
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

of Vedānta. Explain clearly what you mean by ‘tat-tat-
karma-yogya-svabhāva’.

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: The qualities that are found in the
nature of a brāhmaṇa are: śama (control of the senses),
dama (control of the mind), tapaḥ (austerity), śauca
(purity), santoṣa (satisfaction), kṣamā (forgiveness),
saralatā (simplicity), īśa-bhakti (devotion to
Bhagavān), dayā (mercy), and satya (truthfulness). The
natural qualities of a kṣatriya are teja (prowess), bala
(physical strength), dhṛti (resoluteness), śaurya
(heroism), titikṣā (tolerance), udāratā (magnanimity),
udyama (perseverance), dhīratā (gravity), brahmaṇyatā
(devotion to the brāhmaṇas), and aiśvarya (opulence).
The qualities that characterize the vaiśyas are āstikya
(theism), dāna (charity), niṣṭhā (faith), adāmbhikatā
(absence of pride), and artha-tṛṣṇā (eagerness to
accumulate wealth). The natural qualities of a śūdra are
dvija-go-deva-sevā (service to the brāhmaṇas, cows, and
celestial deities), and yathā-lābha-santoṣa
(satisfaction with whatever is obtained). The qualities
in the nature of an antyaja (outcaste) are aśaucam
(uncleanliness), mithyā (dishonesty), caurya (thievery),
nāstikatā (atheism), vṛthā kalaha (futile quarrelling),
kāma (lust), krodha (anger), and indriya-tṛṣṇā
(hankering to satisfy one’s senses).

The śāstras prescribe that ones varṇa should be
determined according to these different natures. The
determination of varṇa on the basis of birth alone is a
recent practice. An individualís inclination for a
specific type of work and his expertise in it are both
related to these natures. A personís nature gives rise
to his inclination and taste for particular activities,
and it is this particular nature (svabhāva) that is
known as the nature according to specific types of work
(tat-tat-karma-yogya-svabhāva).

In some cases, birth is the prominent factor in
ascertaining a personís nature, and in other cases
association is the primary factor. Nature is formed by
association, which begins from birth, so birth is
certainly one cause that determines the development of
nature. Indeed, nature develops from the moment of birth
but that does not mean that birth is the only cause of
nature and eligibility for a particular type of work. It
is a great mistake to think like this, for there are
many other causes. Therefore, the śāstras prescribe that
one must study a personís nature when one assesses
eligibility for work.

Cūḍāmaṇi: What is meant by tāttvika-śraddhā, faith in
the Absolute Truth?

Vaiṣṇava dāsa:Tāttvika-śraddhā is pure-hearted faith in
Bhagavān, which gives rise to a spontaneous attempt to
attain Him. Atāttvika-śraddhā (unreal faith) is that
which is based on an erroneous conception of Bhagavān,
which arises in an impure heart on seeing worldly
activities, and which gives rise to self-interested
endeavors rooted in pride, prestige, and worldly
desires. Some mahājanas have described tāttvika-śraddhā
as śāstrīya-śraddhā, faith in the śāstras. It is this
tāttvika-śraddhā that is the cause of eligibility for

                           73
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

bhakti.

Cūḍāmaṇi: Let us admit that some people have developed
faith in the śāstras although their natures are not
elevated. Are such people also eligible for bhakti?

Vaiṣṇava dāsa:Śraddhā is the only cause of eligibility
for bhakti. Nature is the cause of eligibility for
karma, but not for bhakti. This is clearly stated in the
following ślokas from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.20.27-28):

jāta-śraddho mat-kathāsu nirviṇṇaḥ sarva-karmasu

veda duḥkhātmakān kāmān parityāge ëpy anīśvaraḥ

tato bhajeta māṁ prītaḥ śraddhālur dṛḍha-niścayaḥ

juṣamāṇaś ca tān kāmān duḥkhodarkāṁś ca garhayan

A sādhaka who has developed faith in narrations about
Me, and who is disgusted with all kinds of fruitive
activity, may still be unable to give up material
enjoyment and the desire for such enjoyment. Knowing
that such so-called pleasures are actually sources of
misery he should condemn himself while attempting to
enjoy them. Thereafter, in due course of time, he may be
able to worship Me with love, faith and fixed
determination.

proktena bhakti-yogena bhajato māsakṛn muneḥ

kāmā hṛdayyā naśyanti sarve mayi hṛdi sthite

bhidyate hṛdaya-granthiś chidyante sarva-saṁśayāḥ

kṣīyante cāsya karmāṇi mayi dṛṣṭe ëkhilātmani

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.20.29-30)

When the sādhaka constantly worships me by the method of
bhakti-yoga that I have described, I come and sit in his
heart. As soon as I am established there, all material
desires and saṁskāras, the impressions, on which the
material desires are based are destroyed. When the
sādhaka directly sees Me as Paramātmā situated in the
hearts of all living entities, the knot of the false ego
in his heart is pierced, all of his doubts are cut to
pieces, and his desires for fruitive activities are
completely eradicated.

yat karmabhir yat tapasā jñāna-vairāgyataś ca yat

yogena dāna-dharmeṇa śreyobhir itarair api

sarvaṁ mad-bhakti-yogena mad-bhakto labhate ëñjasā

svargāpavargaṁ mad-dhāma kathañcid yadi vāñchati

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11. 20. 32-33)

Whatever results are obtained with great difficulty
through fruitive activities, austerity, knowledge,
renunciation, practice of yoga, charity, religious
duties, and all other auspicious types of sādhana are

                           74
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

easily obtained by My bhaktas through the power of
bhakti-yoga. Although my bhaktas are free from all
ambition, they could easily obtain promotion to the
celestial planets, or attain liberation, or residence in
Vaikuṇṭha, if they at all desired such things.

This is the systematic development of bhakti-yoga that
arises from śraddhā.

Cūḍāmaṇi: What if I don’t accept the authority of
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam?

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: This is the conclusion of all the
śāstras. If you don’t accept the Bhāgavatam, you will be
troubled by other śāstras. There is no need for me to
quote many different śāstras. You may simply consider
what is said in Bhagavad-gītā, which is accepted by the
adherents of all philosophical systems. In fact, all
instructions are present in the Gītā śloka that you
uttered when you first arrived here (Gītā 9.30):

api cet su-durācāro bhajate mām ananya-bhāk

sādhur eva sa mantavyaḥ samyag vyavasito hi saḥ

When one has no object of devotion other than Me and his
faith is thus exclusively fixed in Me, he remains
absorbed in worshiping Me by hearing hari-kathā and
chanting hari-nāma. Such a person has adopted the path
of sādhus, and should therefore be considered a sādhu,
even if he behaves in opposition to the path of karma
due to an abominable and depraved nature.

The purport is that the system of varṇāśrama that
belongs to karma-kāṇḍa is one type of path; the process
of knowledge and renunciation that belongs to jñāna-
kāṇḍa is a second type of path; and faith in hari-kathā
and hari-nāma that develops in sat-saṅga is a third type
of path. Sometimes these three paths are taken together
as a single yoga system, identified either as karma-
yoga, jñāna-yoga, or bhakti-yoga, and sometimes they are
practiced as separate systems. The practitioners of
these different systems are known as karma-yogīs, jñāna-
yogīs, and bhakti-yogīs. Amongst all of these, the
bhakti-yogīs are the best, because bhakti-yoga is
endowed with unlimited auspiciousness and is
unparalleled in its supremacy. This conclusion is
supported in the statement of the Gītā (6.47):

yoginām api sarveṣāṁ mad-gatenāntarātmanā

śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ sa me yuktatamo mataḥ

O Arjuna, of all yogīs, I consider the topmost yogī to
be the one who constantly worships Me with great faith,
with his mind deeply absorbed in loving attachment to
Me.

The Gītā (9.31-32) further explains:

kṣipraṁ bhavati dharmātmā śaśvac-chāntiṁ nigacchati

kaunteya pratijānīhi na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati


                           75
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

māṁ hi pārtha vyapāśritya ye ëpi syuḥ pāpa-yonayaḥ

striyo vaiśyās tathā śūdrās te ëpi yānti parāṁ gatim

It is essential that you clearly understand the purport
of the śloka, kṣipraṁ bhavati dharmātmā. Faithful people
who have adopted the path of ananya-bhakti, exclusive
devotion, are quickly purified of all faults in their
nature and behavior. Dharma surely follows wherever
there is bhakti, because Bhagavān is the root of all
dharma, and He is easily conquered by bhakti. As soon as
Bhagavān is established in the heart, māyā, who binds
the jīvas in illusion, is immediately dissipated. There
is no need of any other method of sādhana. Dharma
appears as soon as one becomes a bhakta, and makes the
bhaktaís heart virtuous. The moment oneís desires for
mundane sense enjoyment have dissipated, peace pervades
the heart. That is why Śrī Kṛṣṇa promises, “My bhakta
will never perish.” The karmīs and jñānīs may fall prey
to bad association in the course of practicing their
sādhana, because they are independent, but the bhaktas
do not fall down, because the influence of Bhagavānís
presence saves them from bad association. The bhakta has
the supreme destination in his grasp, whether he takes
birth in a sinful family or in the home of a brāhmaṇa.

Cūḍāmaṇi: Look here, the provision found in our śāstras
for determining caste by birth seems to me to be
superior. One who has taken birth in a brāhmaṇa family
comes to the platform of knowledge by regular practice
of sandhyā-vandanā, and in the end he is destined to
obtain liberation. I cannot understand how śraddhā
develops. Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam explain
that bhakti arises from śraddhā, but I would like to
know clearly what the jīva should do to attain this
śraddhā.

Vaiṣṇava dāsa:Śraddhā is the jīva’s nitya-svabhāva
(eternal nature), but faith in the performance of
varṇāśrama duties does not arise from this eternal
nature; rather it arises from naimittika-svabhāva (the
circumstantial or temporary nature). It is said in the
Chāndogya Upaniṣad (7.19.1):

yadā vai śraddadhāty atha manute, nāśraddadhan manute,

śraddadhad eva manute, śraddhā tv eva vijijñāsitavyeti

śraddhāṁ bhagavo vijijñāsa iti

Sanat-kumāra said, “When a person develops śraddhā, he
can think about a subject and understand it, whereas one
cannot do so without śraddhā. Indeed only a person who
has śraddhā can reflect upon anything. Therefore you
must inquire very specifically about śraddhā.” Nārada
said, “O Master, I particularly wish to know about this
śraddhā.”

Some people who are learned in the conclusions of the
śāstras have explained that the word śraddhā means to
have faith in the Vedas and in the words of śrī-guru.
This meaning is not wrong, but it is not entirely clear.
In our sampradāya the meaning of the word śraddhā is
given as follows:

                           76
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017


śraddhā tv anyopāya-varjaṁ

bhakty-unmukhī citta-vṛtti-viśeṣaḥ

Śraddhā is the characteristic function of the heart that
strives toward bhakti alone, which is totally devoid of
karma and jñāna, and which desires nothing other than
the exclusive pleasure of Kṛṣṇa. (Āmnāya-sūtra 57)

When the sādhaka regularly hears the instructions of
sādhus in the association of śuddha-bhaktas, a
conviction arises in his heart that he cannot obtain his
eternal welfare by the methods of karma, jñāna, yoga,
and so on, and that he has no means of success unless he
takes exclusive shelter at the lotus feet of Śrī Hari.
When this conviction appears, it may be understood that
śraddhā has arisen in the sādhakaís heart. The nature of
śraddhā is described as follows:

sā ca śaraṇāpatti-lakṣaṇā

Śraddhā is characterized by its external symptom known
as śaraṇāgati, surrender to Śrī Hari. (Āmnāya-sūtra 58)

Śaraṇāgati is described in these words.

ānukūlyasya saṅkalpaḥ prātikūlyasya varjanaṁ

rakṣiṣyatīti viśvāso goptṛtve varaṇaṁ tathā

ātma-nikṣepa-kārpaṇye ṣaḍ-vidhā śaraṇāgatiḥ

(Hari-bhakti-vilāsa 11.47)

There are six symptoms of self-surrender. The first two
are ānukūlyasya saṅkalpa and prātikūlyasya varjanam: “I
will only do that which is favorable for unalloyed
bhakti, and I will reject all that is unfavorable.” This
is called saṅkalpa or pratijñā, a solemn vow. The third
symptom is rakṣiṣyatīti viśvāso, faith in Bhagavān as
oneís protector: “Bhagavān is my only protector. I can
derive absolutely no benefit from jñāna, yoga, and other
such practices.” This is an expression of trust
(viśvāsa). The fourth symptom is goptṛtvevaraṇam,
deliberate acceptance of Bhagavān as oneís maintainer:
“I cannot obtain anything, or even maintain myself, by
my own endeavor. I will serve Bhagavān as far as I am
able, and He will take care of me.” This is what is
meant by dependence (nirbharatā). The fifth symptom is
ātma-nikṣepa, surrender: “Who am I? I am His. My duty is
to fulfill His desire.” This is submission of the self
(ātma-nivedana). The sixth symptom is kārpaṇye,
meekness: “I am wretched, insignificant, and materially
destitute.” This is what is meant by humility (kārpanya
or dainya).

When these moods become established in the heart, a
disposition arises that is called śraddhā. A jīva who
has this śraddhā is eligible for bhakti, and this is the
first stage in the development of the svabhāva like that
of those pure jīvas who are eternally liberated.
Therefore this is the nitya-svabhāva of the jīvas, and
all other svabhāvas are naimittika.

                             77
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017


Cūḍāmaṇi: I understand. But you still have not explained
how śraddhā developes. If śraddhā develops from sat-
karma, virtuous deeds, then my argument is still
stronger, because śraddhā cannot arise without properly
performing the sat-karma and svadharma of varṇāśrama.
Muslims do not perform sat-karma, so how can they be
eligible for bhakti?

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: It is a fact that śraddhā arises from
sukṛti, pious deeds. It is stated in the Bṛhan-Nāradīya-
Purāṇa (4.33).

bhaktis tu bhagavad-bhakta-saṅgena parijāyate

sat-saṅgaḥ prāpyate puṁbhiḥ sukṛtaiḥ pūrva-sañcitaiḥ

The inclination for bhakti is awakened by association
with Bhagavānís bhaktas. The jīva obtains the
association of śuddha-bhaktas by the accumulated effect
of spiritually pious activities performed over many
lifetimes.

There are two types of sukṛti: nitya and naimittika. The
sukṛti by which one obtains sādhu-saṅga and bhakti is
nitya-sukṛti. The sukṛti by which one obtains material
enjoyment and impersonal liberation is naimittika-
sukṛti. Sukṛti which bears eternal fruit is nitya-
sukṛti. Sukṛti which bears temporary results which are
dependent upon some cause is naimittika or anitya-
sukṛti.

All types of material enjoyment are non-eternal because
they clearly depend on some cause. Many people think
that mukti is eternal, but this is only because they do
not know the actual nature of mukti. The individual ātmā
(soul) is śuddha (pure), nitya (eternal), and sanātana
(primeval). The cause (nimitta) of the jīvātmāís bondage
is association with māyā, and mukti is the complete
dissolution of this bondage. The act of deliverance or
release from bondage is accomplished in a single moment,
so the act of release is not in itself an eternal
action. All consideration of mukti ends as soon as
emancipation is attained, so mukti is nothing more than
the destruction of a material cause. Therefore, since
mukti is only the negation of a temporary material
cause, it is also naimittika, causal and temporary.

On the other hand, rati, or attachment, for the feet of
Śrī Hari never ends once it is established in the heart
of the jīva. Therefore, this rati or bhakti is nitya-
dharma, and if we analyse its practices (aṅgas)
correctly, none of them can be said to be naimittika.
The type of bhakti that terminates at the point that it
bestows mukti is only a type of naimittika-karma, while
bhakti that is present before, during and after mukti is
a distinct and eternal truth, and it is the nitya-dharma
of the jīvas. Mukti is but an irrelevant, secondary
result of bhakti. It is said in the Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad
(1.2.12):

parīkṣya lokān karma-citān brāhmaṇo

nirvedam āyān nāsty akṛtaḥ kṛtena

                           78
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017


tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet

samit-pāṇiḥ śrotriyaṁ brahma-niṣṭham

A brāhmaṇa who has exhaustively studied the śāstras will
become disinterested in the performance of karma by
carefully examining the temporary, impure and miserable
nature of Svarga-loka and the other celestial planets
which are attainable by performing material pious deeds.
This is so because the nitya-vastu, Bhagavān cannot be
obtained by worldy karma, for He is beyond the reach of
karma. To gain factual knowledge and realization of that
eternal supreme Person, one should find a qualified guru
who is learned in the Vedas, who is firmly established
in the service of Bhagavān, and who knows the Absolute
Truth. One should then approach that guru carrying wood
for kindling a sacrificial fire, and should surrender
body, mind, and words to him with faith and humility.

Karma, yoga, and jñāna all produce naimittika-
sukṛti.Bhakta-saṅga, the association of bhaktas, and
bhakti-kriyā-saṅga, contact with acts of devotion,
produce nitya-sukṛti. Only one who has accumulated
nitya-sukṛti over many lifetimes will develop śraddhā.
Naimittika-sukṛti produces many different results, but
it will not lead to the development of faith in
unalloyed bhakti.

Cūḍāmaṇi: Please explain clearly what you mean by
bhakta-saṅga and bhakti-kriyā-saṅga (contact with acts
of devotion). From what type of sukṛti do these arise?

Vaiṣṇava dāsa:Bhakta-saṅga means conversing with śuddha-
bhaktas, serving them, and hearing their discourses.
Śuddha-bhaktas perform the activities of bhakti such as
public congregational chanting of śrī-nāma.
Participation in these activities or performing them on
one’s own is called bhakti-kriyā-saṅga, contact with
acts of devotion.

In the śāstras, activities such as cleansing the temple
of Śrī Hari, offering a lamp to Tulasī, and observing
Hari-vāsara (Ekādaśī, Janmāṣṭamī, Rāma-navamī, and other
such days) are called bhakti-kriyā. Even if one performs
them accidentally or without pure śraddhā, they still
create bhakti-poṣaka sukṛti, virtue that nourishes
devotion. When this sukṛti acquires strength after many
lifetimes, śraddhā for sādhu-saṅga and ananya-bhakti
(exclusive devotion) develops.

It must be acknowledged that every vastu, substance, has
some particular potency which is known as vastu-śakti,
the inherent potency of that substance. The potency to
nourish bhakti is found only within the activities of
bhakti. These activities produce sukṛti even if they are
performed indifferently, what to speak when they are
being performed with faith. This is expressed in the
Prabhāsa-khaṇḍa quoted in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (11.451):

madhura-madhuram etan maṅgalaṁ maṅgalānāṁ

sakala-nigama-vallī-sat-phalaṁ cit-svarūpaṁ


                           79
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

sakṛd api parigītaṁ śraddhayā helayā vā

bhṛgu-vara nara-mātraṁ tārayet kṛṣṇa-nāma

Śrī-kṛṣṇa nāma is the sweetest among all things that are
sweet, and it stands supreme amongst all that is
auspicious. It is the eternal, fully ripened spiritual
fruit of the wish-fulfilling tree of the Vedas. O best
of the Bhṛgus, if anyone even once offenselessly chants
śrī-kṛṣṇa nāma, either with faith or indifference, śrī-
kṛṣṇa nāma immediately delivers that person from the
ocean of material existence.

Thus, all types of sukṛti that nourish bhakti are nitya-
sukṛti. When this sukṛti becomes strong, one gradually
develops śraddhā in ananya-bhakti (unalloyed bhakti),
and one attains sādhu-saṅga. Birth in a Muslim family is
the result of naimittika-duṣkṛti, or temporary impious
deeds, whereas faith in ananya-bhakti is the result of
nitya-sukṛti, eternal pious deeds. What is surprising
about this?

Cūḍāmaṇi: This is what I meant by my previous question.
If there is such a thing as bhakti-poṣaka-sukṛti (virtue
that nourishes devotion), it must arise from some other
type of sukṛti. But Muslims do not have any other type
of sukṛti, so it is not possible for them to have
bhakti-poṣaka-sukṛti either.

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: That is not a fact. Nitya-sukṛti and
naimittika-sukṛti are classified separately, so they do
not depend on one another. Once there was a sinful
hunter who was full of impious deeds, but who chanced to
stay up all night and fast on Śiva-rātrī. Because of the
nitya-sukṛti he accrued from this, he developed
eligibility for hari-bhakti. It is said in the Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (12.13.16): vaiṣṇavānāṁ yathā śambhuḥ: “Among
Vaiṣṇavas, Śivajī is the best.” From this statement it
is understood that Mahādeva is the most worshipful
Vaiṣṇava, and one obtains hari-bhakti by observing a vow
to please him.

Cūḍāmaṇi: So do you mean to say that nitya-sukṛti comes
about by chance?

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: Everything comes about by chance. This is
also the case on the path of karma. What is the
circumstance by which the jīva first entered the cycle
of karma? Can it be anything other than a chance
occurrence? The mimāṁsa philosophers have described
karma as anādi (being without beginning), but actually
karma does have a root. The chance occurrence that
brings one’s original karma into effect is indifference
to Bhagavān (bhagavad-vimukhatā).

Similarly, nitya-sukṛti also seems to be a chance
occurrence. It is said in the Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad
(4.7):

samāne vṛkṣe puruṣo nimagnoínīśayā śocati muhyamānaḥ

juṣṭaṁ yadā paśyaty anyam īśam asya mahimānam eti vīta-
śokaḥ


                           80
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

The jīva and the indwelling Paramātmā both reside in the
same tree, namely the material body. The jīva is
attached to material sense enjoyment, and is therefore
sunk in the bodily conception of life. Bewildered by
māyā, he cannot find any means of deliverance, and thus
he laments. However, by the influence of sukṛti acquired
over many lifetimes, he can obtain the mercy of Īśvara
or His śuddha-bhaktas. At that time, he will see in his
heart that there is a second individual within the tree
of his body. This is Īśvara, who is served eternally by
His unalloyed bhaktas. When the jīva witnesses the
uncommon glories of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, he becomes free from all
lamentation.

It is said in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.51.53):

bhavāpavargo bhramato yadā bhavej

janasya tarhy acyuta sat-samāgamaḥ

sat-saṅgamo yarhi tadaiva sad-gatau

parāvareśe tvayi jāyate ratiḥ

O Śrī Acyuta, You are eternally situated in Your
original, spiritual form. The jīva has been wandering in
the cycle of birth and death since time without
beginning. When the time for his release from this cycle
approaches, he obtains sat-saṅga, and through this, he
becomes firmly attached to You, who are the supreme goal
of attainment for the sādhus and the controller of both
spirit and matter.

And (3.25.25):

satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-samvido

bhavanti hṛt-karṇa-rasāyaṇāḥ kathāḥ

taj-joṣaṇād āśv apavarga-vartmani

śraddhā ratir bhaktir anukramiṣyati

In the association of śuddha-bhaktas, the recitation and
discussion of My glorious activities and pastimes are
pleasing to both the heart and the ears. By cultivating
knowledge in this way, one becomes established on the
path of liberation and progressively attains śraddhā,
then bhāva, and finally prema-bhakti.

Cūḍāmaṇi: In your opinion, is there no difference
between an Āryan and a Yavana?

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: There are two kinds of differences:
paramārthika, those that relate to absolute reality; and
vyāvahārika, those that relate to practical experience.
There is no paramārthika difference between Āryans and
Yavanas, yet a vyāvahārika difference does exist.

Cūḍāmaṇi: Why do you insist on repeatedly showing off
your verbosity in Vedanta? What do you mean by a
vyāvahārika difference between Āryans and Yavanas?

Ignoring Cūḍāmaṇiís impertinence,Vaiṣṇava dāsa answered,

                           81
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

“The term vyāvahārika refers to worldly customs. In
domestic life Yavanas are considered untouchable, so
their association is unsuitable from the vyāvahārika or
practical point of view. Āryans should not touch water
and food that has been touched by a Yavana. The body of
a Yavana is insignificant and untouchable because of his
unfortunate birth.”

Cūḍāmaṇi: Then how can there possibly be no difference
between Āryans and Yavanas from the absolute point of
view? Please explain this clearly.

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: The śāstras have affirmed this lucidly.
Bhṛgu-vara nara-mātraṁ tārayet kṛṣṇa-nāma: “O best of
the Bhṛgus, śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma delivers all men.” According
to this śloka, Yavanas and all other human beings have
an equal opportunity to attain the supreme goal of life.
Those who are devoid of nitya-sukṛti are known as dvi-
pada-paśu, two-legged animals, because they have no
faith in kṛṣṇa-nāma. Such people have no human
qualities, even though they have attained a human birth.
It is said in the Mahābhārata:

mahāprasāde govinde nāma-brahmaṇi vaiṣṇave

svalpa-puṇyavatāṁ rājan viśvāso naiva jāyate

O King, one whose past pious deeds are very meager
cannot have faith in mahāprasāda, in Śrī Govinda, in
śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma, or in the Vaiṣṇavas.

Nitya-sukṛti is great sukṛti that purifies the jīva.
Naimittika-sukṛti is insignificant sukṛti that does not
have the power to awaken śraddhā toward transcendental
objects. In this material world there are four
transcendental objects that awaken spiritual
consciousness; mahāprasāda, Kṛṣṇa, kṛṣṇa-nāma, and
Vaiṣṇavas.

Cūḍāmaṇi smiled slightly at this statement. He said,
“What kind of strange idea is this? This is simply the
fanaticism of the Vaiṣṇavas. How can rice, dahl, and
vegetables be cinmaya, spiritual? There is nothing that
you Vaiṣṇavas are incapable of.”

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: “Whatever you do, please do not criticize
the Vaiṣṇavas. This is my humble request. In a debate,
one should argue the points in question. What is the use
of deriding the Vaiṣṇavas? In this material world
mahāprasāda is the only food which is fit to be
accepted, because it provokes spiritual consciousness
and dissolves one’s materialistic nature. Therefore, Śrī
Īśopaniṣad (1) says:

īśāvāsyam idaṁ sarvaṁ yat kiñca jagatyāṁ jagat

tena tyaktena bhuñjīthā mā gṛdhaḥ kasyasvid dhanam

Everything animate and inanimate within the universe is
situated in Īśvara, and is also pervaded by Him.
Therefore, in a detached mood, one should accept only
what is necessary for oneís maintenance, considering all
things to be the remnants of Īśvara. One should not be
attached to anotherís wealth, considering himself to be

                           82
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

the enjoyer.

“Whatever exists within the universe is connected to
Bhagavānís potency. One will give up the worldly-minded
spirit of enjoyment if he considers everything to be
related to Bhagavānís cit-śakti, spiritual potency. An
introspective jīva will not be degraded if he accepts
only those worldly things that are necessary for the
maintenance of his body, considering them to be the
remnants of Bhagavān; on the contrary, his inclination
toward spiritual consciousness will be aroused. The
remnants of food and other articles offered to Bhagavān
are known as mahāprasāda. It is a great misfortune that
you have no faith in such extraordinary objects.”

Cūḍāmaṇi: Let us drop this subject and return to the
original point of our discussion. What is the proper
behavior between the Yavanas and you people?”

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: As long as someone remains a Yavana, we
remain indifferent to him. However, when someone who was
formerly a Yavana becomes a Vaiṣṇava by the influence of
nitya-sukṛti, we no longer consider him a Yavana. This
is very clear in the following statement from the Padma
Purāṇa:

śūdraṁ vā bhagavad-bhaktaṁ niṣādaṁ śvapacaṁ tathā

vīkṣate jāti-sāmānyāt sa yāti narakaṁ dhruvam

quoted in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (10.119)

If one considers a devotee of Bhagavān to be a member of
the lowest of the four castes (śūdra), a member of an
aboriginal tribe of hunters (niṣāda), or an outcaste
dog-eater (śvapaca), merely because the devotee has
taken birth in such families, one is assuredly destined
for hell.

The Itihāsa-samuccaya also says:

na me priyaś catur-vedi mad-bhaktaḥ śvapacaḥ priyaḥ

tasmai deyaṁ tato grāhyaṁ sa ca pūjyo yathā hy aham

quoted in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (10.127)

A brāhmaṇa who has studied the four Vedas, but has no
bhakti, is not dear to Me, whereas My bhakta is very
dear to Me, even if he has taken birth in a family of
dog-eaters. Such a bhakta is fit to receive charity, and
whatever he offers should be accepted. Indeed, he is as
worshipable as I am.

Cūḍāmaṇi: I understand. Then can a gṛhastha Vaiṣṇava
make a marriage relationship with a Yavana family?

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: From the general point of view, a Yavana
remains a Yavana in the eyes of the general populace
until he relinquishes his body. But from the absolute
point of view, he is no longer regarded as a Yavana once
he attains bhakti. Marriage is one of the ten kinds of
social rites (smārta-karma). If a gṛhastha Vaiṣṇava is
an Āryan, that is, if he is included within the four

                           83
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

varṇas, he should only marry within his own varṇa.

Even though the religious duties associated with the
four castes are naimittika in nature, they are still
recommended for the maintenance of domestic life. One
cannot become a Vaiṣṇava simply by giving up the social
customs of the four varṇas. Vaiṣṇavas should adopt
whatever is favorable for bhakti, and one can only give
up the duties of the varṇas when he has become qualified
to do so by genuine detachment. Then one can give up the
duties of the four varṇas, and everything associated
with them.

Varṇa-dharma can be given up easily when it becomes
unfavorable to bhajana. Similarly, a Yavana who has
awakened faith in bhakti has the right to give up the
association of ṭhe Yavana community if it becomes
unfavorable for bhajana. Suppose that one Vaiṣṇava is an
Āryan who is qualified to give up the four varṇas, and
another Vaiṣṇava is a Yavana who is qualified to give up
his community. Then what is the difference between them?
Both of them have given up vyāvahāra, that which relates
to ordinary life, and both have become brothers in
regard to paramārtha, spiritual reality.

However, this principle of rejecting varṇa-dharma does
not apply to a gṛhastha Vaiṣṇavas. A gṛhastha Vaiṣṇava
should not give up domestic society until he is fully
qualified to do so, even if it is unfavorable to
bhajana. However, he can easily give up worldly society
when firm attachment and affection for that which is
favorable to bhajana awakens in his heart. It is said in
the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.11.32):

ājñāyaivaṁ guṇān doṣān mayādiṣṭān api svakān

dharmān santyajya yaḥ sarvān māṁ bhajet sa tu sattamaḥ

Śrī Kṛṣṇa says, “In the Vedas I have given duties to
human beings, explaining what are positive attributes
and what are faults. One is considered the best of
sādhus if he knows all this but abandons his duties to
worship Me exclusively, with the firm conviction that
all perfection may be attained by bhakti alone.

This is corroborated by the ultimate conclusion of the
Bhagavad-gītā (18.66):

sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ

Abandon all varieties of naimittika-dharma, such as
karma and jñāna, and surrender only unto Me. Do not
lament, for I will deliver you from all sinful reactions
incurred by giving up your prescribed duties.

This is supported further in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(4.29.46):

yadā yasyānugṛhṇāti bhagavān ātma-bhāvitaḥ

sa jahāti matiṁ loke vede ca pariniṣṭhitām


                           84
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

Bhagavān bestows his mercy upon a jīva with whom He is
pleased because of his self-surrender, or serving Him
with complete absorption of his inner faculties. At that
time, the jīva gives up attachment for all social
customs and religious rituals prescribed by the Vedas.

Cūḍāmaṇi: Can you eat food, drink water, and conduct
other such activities with a Yavana who has truly become
a Vaiṣṇava?

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: A renounced Vaiṣṇava who is indifferent
to all social restrictions is known as nirapekṣa
(without any needs or requirements), and he can honor
mahāprasāda with such a Vaiṣṇava. A gṛhastha Vaiṣṇava
cannot sit and eat with him in the context of ordinary
social or family dealings, but there is no such
objection when it comes to honoring Viṣṇu or Vaiṣṇava
prasāda; in fact, it is his duty.

Cūḍāmaṇi: Then why is it that Yavana Vaiṣṇavas are not
permitted to worship and serve the Deities in the
Vaiṣṇava temples?

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: It is an offense to refer to a Vaiṣṇava
as a Yavana, simply because he has taken birth in such a
family. All Vaiṣṇavas have the right to serve Kṛṣṇa. If
a gṛhastha Vaiṣṇava serves the Deity in a way that
breaks the rules of varṇāśrama, it is considered to be a
fault from the worldly point of view. Nirapekṣa
Vaiṣṇavas are not required to worship the Deity, because
that would hinder their quality of being free from all
external requirements and dependencies (nirapekṣatā).
They remain engaged in serving Śrī Rādhā-Vallabha
through service carried out by the internally-conceived
spiritual form (mānasi-sevā).

Cūḍāmaṇi: I understand. Now please tell me what you
think about the brāhmaṇas.

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: There are two types of brāhmaṇas:
brāhmaṇas by nature (svabhāva-siddha) and brāhmaṇas by
birth alone (jāti-siddha). Those who are brāhmaṇas by
nature should be respected by adherents of all
philosophical systems because they are practically
Vaiṣṇavas. Those who are only brāhmaṇas by birth are
given conventional respect by everyone, and this is also
approved by the Vaiṣṇavas. The conclusion of the śāstra
on this topic is expressed in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(7.9.10):

viprād dvi-ṣaḍ-guṇa-yutād aravinda-nābha-

pādāravinda-vimukhāt śvapacaṁ variṣṭham

manye tad-arpita-mano-vacanehitārtha-

prāṇaṁ punāti sa kulaṁ na tu bhūrimānaḥ

A bhakta who is born in a family of dog-eaters, but who
has dedicated his mind, words, activities, and wealth at
the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa, is superior to a brāhmaṇa who
has all twelve brahmiṇical qualities, but who is averse
to the lotus feet of Bhagavān, whose navel is shaped
like a lotus. Such a bhakta can purify himself and his

                           85
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

whole family, whereas the brāhmaṇa who is puffed-up with
false prestige cannot even purify himself. That is my
opinion.

Cūḍāmaṇi:Śūdras are not eligible to study the Vedas, so
can a śūdra study the Vedas when he becomes a Vaiṣṇava?

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: From the absolute point of view, when one
becomes a pure Vaiṣṇava, he automatically attains the
status of a brāhmaṇa, whatever caste one may belong to.
The Vedas are divided into two sections: instructions
regarding karma, the performance of prescribed duties,
and instructions regarding tattva, the Absolute Truth.
Those who are qualified as brāhmaṇas in a worldly sense
are eligible to study the Vedas that promote karma, and
those who are brāhmaṇas by spiritual qualification are
qualified to study the Vedas that promote tattva. Pure
Vaiṣṇavas can study and teach the Vedas that promote
spiritual truth, no matter what caste they are born
into, and it is practically observed that they do so. It
is said in the Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad (4.4.21):

tam eva dhīro vijñāya prajñāṁ kurvīta brāhmaṇaḥ

A brāhmaṇa is a sober and spiritually enlightened person
who clearly knows para-brahma, and serves Him through
prema-bhakti which is a manifestation of the highest
knowledge.

It is also said in the Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad (3.8.10):

yo vā etad akṣaraṁ gārgy aviditvāsmāl lokāt praiti sa
kṛpanaḥ

atha ya etad akṣaraṁ gārgi viditvāsmāl lokāt praiti sa
brāhmaṇaḥ

O Gārgi, he who quits this world without knowing the
supreme imperishable being, Śrī Viṣṇu, is a wretched
miser, whereas he who quits this world knowing the
supreme being is recognized as a brāhmaṇa.

“Manu has said the following in regard to those who are
brāhmaṇas by vyāvahārika, or social considerations.”

yo ënadhītya dvijo vedam anyatra kurute śramam

sa jīvann eva śūdratvam āśu gacchati sānvayaḥ

Manu-smṛti (2.168)

A brāhmaṇa, kṣatriya, or vaiśya becomes twice-born by
investiture with the sacred thread, and this prepares
him for studying the Vedas. If a dvija fails to study
the Vedas after receiving the sacred thread, and instead
studies other subjects such as economics, science or
logic, he and his family members quickly become degraded
in this very life to the status of śūdras.

Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (6.23) explains the eligibility to
study the Vedas that promote spiritual truth:

yasya deve parā bhaktir yathā deve tathā gurau


                           86
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017

tasyaite kathitā hy arthāḥ prakāśante mahātmanaḥ

All the confidential truths described in this Upaṇiṣad
will be revealed to that great soul who has the same
exclusive, uninterrupted, transcendental devotion (parā-
bhakti) for his guru that he has for Śrī Bhagavān.

The word parā-bhakti in the above śloka means śuddha-
bhakti (pure bhakti). I donít want to elaborate any
further on this topic. You should try to understand it
yourself. In short, those who have faith in ananya-
bhakti are eligible to study the Vedas that promote
tattva, spiritual truth, and those who have already
attained ananya-bhakti are eligible to teach those
Vedas.

Cūḍāmaṇi: Then do you people conclude that the Vedas
that promote tattva teach only vaiṣṇava-dharma and no
other religion?

Vaiṣṇava dāsa:Dharma, is one, not two, and it is also
known as nitya-dharma or vaiṣṇava-dharma. All other
forms of naimittika-dharma taught in the Vedas are
simply steps leading to that eternal religion. Śrī
Bhagavān has said:

kālena naṣṭā pralaye vāṇīyaṁ veda-samjñitā

mayādau brahmaṇe proktā dharmo yasyāṁ mad-ātmakaḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.14.3)

Śrī Bhagavān said: “The Vedas contain instructions on
bhāgavata-dharma. At the time of annihilation, that
message was lost by the influence of time. Then, at the
beginning of the next creation known as Brāhma-kalpa, I
again spoke the same Vedic message to Brahmājī.”

The Kaṭha Upaniṣad (1.3.9) states:

sarve vedā yat padam āmananti

tat te padaṁ saṅgraheṇa bravīmi

tad viṣṇoḥ paramaṁ padaṁ sadā

I shall now describe to you in brief that ultimate truth
that all the Vedas have repeatedly described as the
supreme object of attainment. That abode of Viṣṇu (the
all-pervading Paramātmā, Vāsudeva) is the only supreme
destination.

By this point in the discussion, the faces of Devī
Vidyāratna and his associates looked pale and withered,
and the teachersí enthusiasm was shattered. It was
nearly five oíclock in the afternoon, so everyone agreed
to adjourn the dayís discussion, and the meeting ended.

The brāhmaṇa-paṇḍitas departed, enthusiastically
praising the scholarship of Vaiṣṇava dāsa, and the
Vaiṣṇavas left for their respective places, loudly
chanting the names of Hari.



                              87
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017


Thus ends the Sixth Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled

“Nitya-Dharma, Race & Caste”




Chapter 7

Nitya-Dharma & Material Existence



Over the ages, countless goldsmiths had lived in the
ancient mercantile town of Saptagrāma, on the bank of
the Sarasvatī River. By Śrī Nityānanda Prabhuís mercy,
since the time of Śrī Uddhāraṇa Datta, these merchants
had become addicted to hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana. One of
them, however, was a very miserly person named
Caṇḍīdāsa, who used to abstain from hari-kīrtana with
the townspeople because he was afraid of having to spend
money for sponsoring festivals. Caṇḍīdāsa had managed to
accumulate a good deal of wealth through stingy
dealings. His wife, Damayantī, had adopted the same mood
and did not extend even the least hospitality to
Vaiṣṇavas or other guests. This merchant couple in their
youth, had given birth to four sons and two daughters.
Their daughters had both married, and a vast inheritance
was reserved for their sons.

If saintly people never visit a house, the children in
it are less likely to become kind and compassionate. As
the sons grew up, they became increasingly selfish, and
began to wish that their parents would die so that they
could have their inheritance. The merchant couple became
extremely unhappy. One by one, the sons were married. As
their wives grew older, they imbibed their husbandsí
natures and also began to wish that their parents-in-law
would die. After some time, the sons became proficient
in business and began to oversee the buying and selling
very expertly. Dividing up most of their fatherís
wealth, they set up their own businesses.

One day, Caṇḍīdāsa called everyone to his side and said,
“Listen! I have lived a frugal existence since
childhood, and as a result, I have managed to set aside
a great fortune for all of you. I have never eaten fine
food or dressed in luxurious clothes, and your mother
has also lived in a similar manner. It is your duty to
care for us now that we are growing old, but we have
become increasingly distressed recently, because we have
begun to feel that you are neglecting us. I still have
some hidden wealth, and I will give it to whichever of
my sons will be good enough to take care of us.”

Caṇḍīdāsaís sons and daughters-in-law heard his words
silently, and then went off to a separate place to
conspire among themselves. They concluded, “It will be
best to send Mother and Father away, and then take
possession of their hidden wealth and divide it amongst

                           88
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

ourselves, for there is really no telling to whom the
old man will give it unjustly.” All of them were sure
that the wealth was buried in their fatherís bedroom.

One morning at dawn, Caṇḍidāsaës eldest son, Haricaraṇa,
went to his father, and with feigned humility said,
“Dear Father, you and Mother should go and take darśana
of Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma at least once, so that your human
life will become successful. I have heard that no other
holy place is as beneficial in this age of Kali as Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma. It will not be troublesome or expensive
for you to go there, and if you are unable to walk, we
can hire you a boat to take you upstream for a nominal
fee. There is also a Vaiṣṇavī who would be happy to
accompany you there.”

When Caṇḍīdāsa informed Damayantī about their sonís
proposal, she became very happy. Both of them concluded,
“Our children have become thoughtful and courteous since
our talk that day. We are strong enough to walk, so let
us make the pilgrimage to Śrīdhāma-Navadvīpa via Kālnā
and Śāntipura.”

Having selected an auspicious day, the couple set out on
their pilgrimage, taking the Vaiṣṇavī with them. The
next day, after walking a good distance, they arrived at
Ambikā-Kālnā. There they cooked for themselves in a
shop, and sat down to eat. While they were taking their
meal, a resident of Saptagrāma who knew them approached
and informed them, “Your sons have broken the lock to
your room and have taken all your possessions. They will
not allow you to re-enter the house. They have also
found your hidden wealth and have divided it among
themselves.”

When Caṇḍīdāsa and Damayantī received this news, they
were stricken with grief over the loss of their wealth.
They were unable to eat a single morsel, and spent the
entire day crying incessant tears. After some time, the
Vaiṣṇavī attendant tried to console them, saying, “Donít
be attached to your home. Come! You can take up the life
of Vaiṣṇava ascetics. Build a simple āśrama where
Vaiṣṇavas can gather and live. The children for whom you
have sacrificed everything have become your enemies, so
there is no need to return home. Let us go to Navadvīpa
and remain there. You can maintain yourselves by
accepting alms. That will be a much better life.”

When Damayantī and Caṇḍīdāsa thought of the behavior of
their sons and daughters-in-law, they said again and
again, “It would be better for us to die than to return
home.” In the end, they stayed for a few days at the
home of a Vaiṣṇava in the village of Ambikā, after which
they went to see Śāntipura, and finally arrived in Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma. They stayed in Śrī Māyāpura for a few
days with a merchant relative, and began to tour the
seven localities of Navadvīpa on the bank of the Gaṅgā,
as well as the seven localities of Kuliyā-grāma on the
other side of the river. After a few days, however,
their attachment for their sons and daughters-in-law
resurfaced.

Caṇḍīdāsa said to his wife, “Come, let us return home to
Saptagrāma. After all, they are our sons, arenít they?

                           89
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

Wonít they show us even a little affection?”

Their Vaiṣṇavī attendant said emphatically, “Have you no
dignity? This time, they will take your life!”

When the old couple heard this, they saw the truth in
her words, and became apprehensive. “O respected
Vaiṣṇavī,” they said, “you may return to your own place.
We have enough discrimination now. We will maintain our
existence by begging, approach a qualified person for
instruction, and engage in bhagavad-bhajana.”

The Vaiṣṇavī attendant left, and the merchant couple,
having now given up all hope of returning to their
former home in Saptagrāma, began to build a new home in
the area of Kuliyā-grāma, where Chakaurī Caṭṭopādhyāya
had lived. Taking contributions and instruction from
many gracious and well-mannered people, they built a
cottage and began to live there permanently. Kuliyā-
grāma is known as the holy place where offenses are
eradicated, and the longstanding belief was that all of
oneís previous offenses would be dispelled if one lived
there.

One day Caṇḍīdāsa said, “O mother of Hari, donít speak
about our children any more; donít even think of them.
We took birth in a merchant family because of many
previous offenses, and due to our defective birth we
became misers and never rendered any service to guests
or to Vaiṣṇavas. Now if we obtain any wealth here, we
will certainly use it to serve guests, so that we may
attain auspiciousness in our next life. I have been
thinking of opening a grocery shop. I will beg some
money from a few gentlemen and begin this work.”

Within a short time, Caṇḍīdāsa opened a small store and
managed to make some profit every day. The couple began
to serve one guest daily, in addition to feeding
themselves, and thus their life passed much more
pleasantly than before.

Caṇḍīdāsa had previously been educated, and now he sat
in his shop and read Guṇarāja Khānaís Śrī Kṛṣṇa Vijaya
whenever he found time. He ran his shop honestly and
served guests hospitably. Five or six months passed in
this manner, and when the people of Kuliyā came to know
of Caṇḍīdāsaís previous history, they began to develop
faith in him.

In this village lived a gṛhastha-brāhmaṇa named Yādava
dāsa, who lectured every day on Śrī Caitanya-maṅgala.
Caṇḍīdāsa occasionally went to hear those lectures, and
when he and Damayantī saw that Yādava dāsa and his wife
were always engaged in serving the Vaiṣṇavas, they also
became inspired to do the same.

One day, Caṇḍīdāsa inquired from Yādava dāsa, “What is
this material existence?”

Yādava dāsa said, “Many learned Vaiṣṇavas live on the
eastern bank of the Bhāgīrathī in Śrī Godrumadvīpa.
Come, let us go there and inquire from them. I also go
there from time to time and receive many instructions.
At present, the Vaiṣṇava scholars of Śrī Godruma are

                           90
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017

more expert than the brāhmaṇa scholars in the
conclusions of the śāstras. Some days ago, Śrī Vaiṣṇava
dāsa Bābājī defeated the brāhmaṇa-paṇḍitas of the area
in a debate. A deep question like yours can be resolved
most satisfactorily there.”

Yādava dāsa and Caṇḍīdāsa prepared to cross the Gaṅgā in
the afternoon. Damayantī now regularly served pure
Vaiṣṇavas, and the miserliness in her heart had become
negligible. “I will go with you to Śrī Godruma,” she
said.

“The Vaiṣṇavas there are not gṛhasthas,” said Yādava
dāsa. “They have adopted a life of strict renunciation
and are detached from all relations with women. I am
concerned that if you come along with us they will be
displeased.”

Damayantī replied, “I will offer daṇḍavat-praṇāma to
them from a distance, and I will not enter their grove.
I am an old lady. They will never become angry with me.”

Yādava dāsa agreed, but cautioned, “It is not the custom
for ladies to go there. Anyway, we can take you there to
sit in a nearby place, and we will bring you back with
us when we return.”

By late afternoon the three of them crossed the Gaṅgā
and reached Pradyumna-kuñja. Damayantī offered
prostrated daṇḍavat-praṇāma at the door of the kuñja,
and sat nearby under an old banyan tree. Yādava dāsa and
Caṇḍīdāsa entered the kuñja, and with great devotion
offered daṇḍavat-praṇāma to the assembly of Vaiṣṇavas
who were seated in the mālatī-mādhavī bower.

Paramahaṁsa Bābājī was seated in the midst of the
assembly, surrounded by Śrī Vaiṣṇava dāsa, Lāhirī
Mahāśaya, Ananta dāsa Bābājī and many others. Caṇḍīdāsa
sat close to Yādava dāsa.

Ananta dāsa Bābājī looked at Yādava dāsa and asked, “Who
is this new man?”

Yādava dāsa narrated the whole story of Caṇḍīdāsa.
Ananta dāsa Bābājī smiled and said, “Yes, this is what
is known as material existence. One who knows material
existence is actually wise, and those who fall into the
cycle of material existence are pitiable.”

Caṇḍīdāsaís mind was gradually becoming purified, for
when one performs nitya-sukṛti ñ such as hosting
Vaiṣṇavas, and reading and hearing Vaiṣṇava śāstras ñ he
certainly attains auspiciousness, and very easily
developes śraddhā in ananya-bhakti (exclusive devotion).
When he heard Śrī Ananta dāsa Bābājīís words, Caṇḍīdāsa
said with a softened heart, “My humble prayer is that
you will be merciful to me, and clearly explain what is
this material existence.”

Ananta dāsa Bābājī said, “Your question is very deep,
and I desire that Śrī Paramahaṁsa Bābājī Mahāśaya or Śrī
Vaiṣṇava dāsa Bābājī Mahāśaya should answer it.”

Paramahaṁsa Bābājī said, “Śrī Ananta dāsa Bābājī

                           91
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

Mahāśaya is suitably qualified to answer a question of
such gravity. Today we will all listen to his
instructions.”

Ananta dāsa: When I receive your order, I must certainly
say whatever I know. I shall begin by remembering the
lotus feet of my Gurudeva, Śrī Pradyumna Brahmacārī, a
confidential associate of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

The jīvas exist in two states: the liberated state
(mukta-daśā) and the state of material bondage (saṁsāra-
baddha-daśā). Those jīvas who are pure bhaktas of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and who have never been bound by māyā, or who were
liberated from material existence by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa,
are known as mukta-jīvas. The liberated state of
existence is known as mukta-daśā. The baddha-jīvas, on
the other hand, are those who are oblivious to Śrī Kṛṣṇa
and have fallen into the clutches of māyā since time
without beginning. Their conditioned state of existence
is known as saṁsāra-baddha-daśā. The jīvas who are
liberated from māyā are cinmaya, fully spiritual, and
their very life is service to Kṛṣṇa (kṛṣṇa-dāsya). They
do not reside in this material world, but in one of the
pure spiritual worlds such as Goloka, Vaikuṇṭha, or
Vṛndāvana. There are innumerable jīvas who are liberated
from māyā.

The jīvas who are bound by māyā are also innumerable.
Due to their kṛṣṇa-vimukhatā, defect of alienation from
Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇaís shadow potency, known as chāyā-śakti or
māyā, binds the jīva with her three-stranded ropes
consisting of the three qualities of material nature,
namely sattva-guṇa (goodness), rajo-guṇa (passion) and
tamo-guṇa (ignorance). The conditioned souls appear in a
variety of states of existence, according to the
influence of the various gradations of these guṇas. Just
consider the varieties in the jīvasí bodies, moods,
appearance, natures, living conditions, and movements.

When the jīva enters material existence, he takes on a
new type of egoism. In the pure state of existence, the
jīva has the egoism of being a servant of Kṛṣṇa, but in
the conditioned state, many different types of egoism
arise, making the living entity think, “I am a human
being,” “I am a devatā,” “I am an animal,” “I am a
king,” “I am a brāhmaṇa,” “I am an outcaste,” “I am
diseased,” “I am hungry,” “I am dishonored,” “I am
charitable,” “I am a husband,” “I am a wife,” “I am a
father,” “I am a son,” “I am an enemy,” “I am a friend,”
“I am a scholar,” “I am handsome,” “I am wealthy,” “I am
poor,” “I am happy,” “I am sad,” “I am strong,” and “I
am weak.” These attitudes are known as ahaṁtā, which
literally means the sense of ëI-nessí, or false egoism.

Besides this ahaṁtā, another function known as mamatā
(ëpossessivenessí or the sense of ëmy-nessí) enters the
nature of the jīva. This is exemplified in attitudes
such as: “This is my house,” “These are my possessions,”
“This is my wealth,” “This is my body,” “These are my
children,” “This is my wife,” “This is my husband,”
“This is my father,” “This is my mother,” “This is my
caste,” “This is my race,” “This is my strength,” “This
is my beauty,” “This is my quality,” “This is my
learning,” “This is my renunciation,” “This is my

                           92
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

knowledge,” “This is my wisdom,” “This is my work,”
“This is my property,” and “These are my servants and
dependants.” The colossal affair that brings the
conceptions of ëIí and ëmineí into play is known as
saṁsāra (material existence).

Yādava dāsa: The conceptions of ‘I’ and ‘mine’ are
active in the conditioned state, but do they also exist
in the liberated state?

Ananta dāsa: They do, but in the liberated state they
are spiritual and free from all defect. In the liberated
state in the spiritual world, the jīva becomes
acquainted with his pure nature, exactly as it was
created by Bhagavān. In that spiritual abode there are
many different types of real egoism, each with its own
characteristic sense of ‘I,’ so there are also many
types of cid-rasa, transcendental exchanges of
sentiments. All the different cinmaya-upakaraṇas,
spiritual paraphernalia, which form the constitutional
ingredients of rasa, come under the heading of ‘mine.’

Yādava dāsa: Then what is the defect in the different
conceptions of ‘I’ and ‘mine’ that exist in the
conditioned state?

Ananta dāsa: The defect is that in the pure state, the
conceptions of ‘I’ and ‘mine’ are real, whereas in
material existence they are all imaginary, or imposed
upon the living entity. That means that these
conceptions are not actually aspects of the jīva, but
are all false identities and relationships.
Consequently, all varieties of material identification
in mundane existence are impermanent and unreal, and
only cause momentary happiness and distress.

Yādava dāsa: Is this deceptive material existence false?

Ananta dāsa: No, this deceptive world is not false; it
is a reality, by Kṛṣṇa’s will. It is the jīva’s
conception of ‘I’ and ‘mine’ when he enters the material
world that is false. Those who believe that this world
is false are Māyāvādīs, advocates of the theory of
illusion. Such people are offenders.

Yādava dāsa: Why have we fallen into this illusory
relationship?

Ananta dāsa: Bhagavān is the complete spiritual entity
(pūrṇa-cid-vastu), and the jīvas are particles of spirit
(cit-kaṇa). The jīva‘s first location is on the boundary
line between the material and spiritual worlds. The
jīvas who do not forget their relationship with Kṛṣṇa
are empowered with cit-śakti, and are drawn from that
position into the spiritual realm, where they become His
eternal associates and begin to relish the bliss of His
service.

Those jīvas who turn away from Kṛṣṇa desire to enjoy
māyā, and māyā attracts them towards her by her potency.
From that moment, our material state of existence comes
into being and our true spiritual identity disappears.
We therefore think, “I am the enjoyer of māyā”. This
false egoism covers us with many varieties of false

                           93
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

identities.

Yādava dāsa: Why is it that our true identity does not
become manifest despite significant endeavor?

Ananta dāsa: There are two types of endeavor:
appropriate and inappropriate. Appropriate endeavors
will certainly dissipate false egoism, but how can
inappropriate endeavors do so?

Yādava dāsa: What are inappropriate endeavors?

Ananta dāsa: Some people think that their hearts will be
purified if they follow karma-kāṇḍa, and that they will
be liberated from māyā when they practice brahma-jñāna.
This type of endeavor is inappropriate. Others think
that by practicing aṣṭāṅga-yoga, they will enter a
trance of samādhi-yoga and attain perfection. This is
another inappropriate endeavor; there are many other
types as well.

Yādava dāsa: Why are these endeavors inappropriate?

Ananta dāsa: These methods are unsuitable because
practicing them creates many obstacles that impede the
attainment of one’s desired goal. In addition, there is
only a meager possibility of attaining that goal. The
point is that our material existence has come about
because of an offense, and unless we obtain the mercy of
the person whom we offended, we will not gain release
from our material condition and attain our pure,
spiritual condition.

Yādava dāsa: What are appropriate endeavors?

Ananta dāsa:Sādhu-saṅga (association of devotees) and
prapatti (surrender) are proper means. We find the
following statement about sādhu-saṅga in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (11.2.30):

ata ātyantikaṁ kṣemaṁ pṛcchāmo bhavato ënaghāḥ

saṁsāre ësmin kṣaṇārdho ëpi sat-saṅgaḥ śevadhir nṛṇām

O sinless one, we are inquiring from you about the
supreme benefit. In this material world, even half a
momentís association with a śuddha-bhakta is the
greatest wealth for human beings.

If one asks how jīvas who have fallen into this material
existence can attain their supreme benefit, I will reply
that it can be obtained by having sat-saṅga, even for
half a moment.

Prapatti is described in Gītā (7.14) as follows:

daivī hy eṣā guṇamayī mama māyā duratyayā

mām eva ye prapadyante māyām etāṁ taranti te

This divine potency of Mine, known as daivī-māyā,
consists of the three modes of nature ñ sattva, rajas
and tamas. Human beings cannot cross over this māyā by
their own efforts, and therefore it is very difficult to

                           94
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

overcome. Only those who surrender unto Me can cross
beyond this potency of Mine.

Caṇḍīdāsa: O great soul, I cannot understand your
explanation very well. I have understood that we were
pure entities, and that due to our forgetfulness of
Kṛṣṇa we have fallen into the hands of māyā, and are
bound in this world. If we obtain Kṛṣṇa’s mercy, we can
be delivered again; otherwise we will remain in the same
condition.

Ananta dāsa: Yes, for now it is sufficient for you to
believe this much. Yādava dāsa Mahāśaya clearly
understands all these truths. Gradually you will come to
understand these things from him. Śrī Jagadānanda, has
written a beautiful description of the variegated
conditions of the jīvas in his book Śrī Prema-vivarta
(6.1-13).

cit-kaṇa ñ jīva, kṛṣṇa ñ cinmaya bhāskara

nitya kṛṣṇe dekhi ñ kṛṣṇe karena ādara

kṛṣṇa-bahirmukha hañā bhoga-vāñchā kare

nikaṭa-stha māyā tāre jāpaṭiyā dhare

The jīva is an infinitesimal particle of spiritual
consciousness, like an atomic particle of light
emanating from the sun. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the complete
spiritual consciousness, the transcendental sun. As long
as jīvas focus their attention on Kṛṣṇa, they maintain
reverence for Him. However, when they turn their
attention away from Kṛṣṇa, they desire material
enjoyment. Kṛṣṇaís deluding potency, māyā, who is
standing near them, then binds them in her embrace.1

piśācī pāile jena mati-cchana haya

māyā-grasta jīvera haya se bhāva udaya

The dharma of the jīva who has turned away from Kṛṣṇa
becomes covered, just as a personís intelligence becomes
covered when he is haunted by a witch.

āmi siddha kṛṣṇa-dāsa, ei kathā bhūle

māyāra naphara hañā cira-dina bule

He forgets Bhagavānís identity, and his own identity as
a servant of Hari. Becoming a slave of māyā, he wanders
here and there for a long time in this bewildering
material existence.

kabhu rājā, kabhu prajā, kabhu vipra, śūdra

kabhu duḥkhī, kabhu sukhī, kabhu kīṭa kṣudra

Sometimes he is a king and sometimes a subject,
sometimes a brāhmaṇa and sometimes a śūdra. Sometimes he
is happy and sometimes distressed, and sometimes he is a
tiny insect.

kabhu svarge, kabhu martye, narake vā kabhu

                           95
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017


kabhu deva, kabhu daitya, kabhu dāsa, prabhu

Sometimes he is in heaven, sometimes on earth, and
sometimes in hell. Sometimes he is a deva and sometimes
a demon. Sometimes he is a servant and sometimes a
master.

ei-rūpe saṁsāra bhramite kona jana

sādhu-saṅge nija-tattva avagata hana

As he is wandering like this throughout material
existence, if by some great fortune he happens to obtain
the association of pure bhaktas, he comes to know of his
own identity, and his life thus becomes meaningful.

nija-tattva jāni āra saṁsāra na cāya

kena vā bhajinu māyā kare hāya hāya

By his association with those bhaktas, he understands
his true identity and becomes indifferent to material
enjoyment. Grieving bitterly for his predicament, he
laments, “Alas! Alas! Why did I serve māyā for so long?”

kaṅde bole, ohe kṛṣṇa! āmi tava dāsa

tomāra caraṇa chāḍií haila sarva-nāśa

He cries profusely, and prays at the lotus feet of
Bhagavān. “O Kṛṣṇa! I am Your eternal servant, but I
have been ruined because I disregarded the service of
Your feet. Who knows how long I have been wandering
aimlessly as the slave of māyā?

kākuti kariyā kṛṣṇe ḍāke eka-bāra

kṛpā kari kṛṣṇa tāre chāḍāna saṁsāra

“O Patita-pāvana! O Dīna-nātha! Please protect this
destitute soul. Deliver me from Your māyā and engage me
in Your service.” Śṛī Kṛṣṇa is an ocean of mercy, and
when He hears the jīva cry out in such desperation even
once, He quickly transports him across this
insurmountable material energy.

māyāke pichane rākhií kṛṣṇa-pāne cāya

bhajite bhajite kṛṣṇa-pāda-padma pāya

kṛṣṇa tāre dena nija-cic-chaktira bala

māyā ākarṣaṇa chāḍe haiyā durbala

Kṛṣṇa empowers the jīva with His cit-śakti, so that
māyāís power to attract the soul gradually wanes. The
jīva then turns his back on māyā and desires to attain
Kṛṣṇa. He worships Kṛṣṇa again and again, and finally
becomes competent to attain His lotus feet.

ësādhu-saṅge kṛṣṇa-nāmaíñei-mātra cāi

saṁsāra jinite āra kona vastu nāi

                           96
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017


Therefore, the only infallible method to cross this
insurmountable material existence is to chant kṛṣṇa-nāma
in the association of bhaktas.

Yādava dāsa: Bābājī Mahāśaya, the sādhus of whom you are
speaking are also present in this world, and they are
also oppressed by the miseries of material existence, so
how can they deliver other jīvas?

Ananta dāsa: It is a fact that sādhus also live in this
world, but there is a significant difference between the
earthly life of sādhus, and that of the jīvas who are
bewildered by māyā. Although the earthly lives of both
appear to be the same from the outside, internally there
is a vast difference. Moreover, the association of
sādhus is very rare, because even though sādhus are
always present, the common man cannot recognize them.

There are two categories of jīvas who have fallen into
the clutches of māyā. Some are completely absorbed in
insignificant worldly pleasures and have tremendous
regard for this material world; whereas others are
dissatisfied with the insignificant pleasures of māyā
and employ finer discrimination in the hope of attaining
a superior quality of happiness. Consequently, the
people of this world may be roughly divided into two
groups: those who lack the power to distinguish between
spirit and matter, and those who possess such spiritual
insight.

Some people refer to those who have no such insight as
material sense enjoyers, and to those who have insight
as mumukṣus, those who seek liberation. When I use the
word mumukṣu here, I am not referring to nirbheda-brahma
jñānīs, those who seek the nirviśeṣa-brahma through the
process of monistic knowledge. Those who are exasperated
with the miseries of material existence, and seek their
true spiritual identity are known as mumukṣus in the
Vedic śaṣtras. The word mumukṣā literally means ëthe
desire for mukti (liberation)í. When a mumukṣu gives up
this desire for liberation and engages in worshiping
Bhagavān, his bhajana is known as śuddha-bhakti. The
śāstras do not order one to give up mukti. Rather, when
a person who desires liberation gains knowledge of the
truth of Kṛṣṇa and the jīvas, he is liberated at once.
This is confirmed in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.14.3-5) as
follows:

rajobhiḥ sama-saṅkhyātāḥ pārthivair iha jantavaḥ

teṣāṁ ye kecanehante śreyo vai manujādayaḥ

The jīvas of this world are as innumerable as particles
of dust. Among all these living entities, very few
attain higher life forms, such as those of the human
beings, devas, and Gandharvas, and very few of those
adopt higher religious principles.

prāyo mumukṣavas teṣāṁ kecanaiva dvijottama

mumukṣūṇāṁ sahasreṣu kaścin mucyeta sidhyati

O best of the brāhmaṇas, amongst those who adopt higher

                           97
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

religious principles, very few strive for liberation,
and out of many thousands who strive for liberation, one
may actually attain the perfected or liberated state.

muktānām api siddhānāṁ nārāyaṇa-parāyaṇaḥ

su-durlabhaḥ praśāntātmā koṭiṣv api mahā-mune

O great sage, among many millions of such liberated and
perfected souls, a devotee who is fully peaceful and
exclusively devoted to Śrī Nārāyaṇa is extremely rare.

Bhaktas of Kṛṣṇa are even more rare than those of
Nārāyaṇa, for they have surpassed the desire for
liberation and are already situated in the liberated
state. They remain in this world as long as the body
endures, but their earthly existence is categorically
different from that of the materialists. The bhaktas of
Kṛṣṇa live in this world in two conditions (as
householders or as renunciants).

Yādava dāsa: The Bhāgavatam ślokas which you just quoted
refer to four categories of people who possess spiritual
insight. Out of these four, which type of association is
considered sādhu-saṅga?

Ananta dāsa: There are four categories of people who
possess spiritual insight: vivekī, those who are
conscientious; mumukṣu, those who desire liberation;
mukta, those who are liberated; and the bhakta. Amongst
these, the association of vivekīs and mumukṣus is
beneficial for viṣayīs, gross materialists. Muktas are
either liberated individuals with an insatiable thirst
for transcendental rasa, or impersonalists who pride
themselves on being liberated. Only association with the
first type of muktas is beneficial. Nirbheda Māyāvādīs
are offenders, and association with them is forbidden
for all. Such people have been condemned in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.2.32):

ye ënye ëravindākṣa vimukta-māninas

tvayy asta-bhāvād aviśuddha-buddhayaḥ

āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ

patanty adho ënādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ

O lotus-eyed Lord, those who do not take shelter of Your
lotus feet vainly consider themselves to be liberated.
Their intelligence is impure because they are devoid of
affection and devotion for You, and in reality they are
baddha-jīvas. Even though such people attain the
platform of liberation by undergoing severe austerities
and spiritual practices, they fall from that position
due to neglecting Your lotus feet.

The fourth category of discriminating souls, the
bhaktas, are attracted either to Bhagavānís opulent and
majestic feature (aiśvarya) or to His sweet and intimate
feature (mādhurya). The association of Bhagavānís
bhaktas is beneficial in all respects. Particularly if
one takes shelter of those bhaktas who are immersed in
His sweetness, viśuddha-bhakti-rasa, the transcendental

                           98
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017

mellows of bhakti, will manifest in oneís heart.

Yādava dāsa: You have explained that bhaktas live in two
conditions. Kindly explain this clearly so that people
like myself, who have limited intelligence, may
understand easily.

Ananta dāsa:Bhaktas are either gṛhastha-bhaktas,
householders, or tyāgī-bhaktas, those who have renounced
household life.

Yādava dāsa: Please describe the nature of the gṛhastha-
bhaktas’ relationship with this world.

Ananta dāsa: One does not become a gṛhastha simply by
building a house and living in it. The word gṛha in
gṛhastha refers to the household that one establishes by
accepting a suitable wife in marriage, according to
Vedic rules and regulations. A bhakta who resides in
such a condition and practices bhakti is known as a
gṛhastha-bhakta.

The jīva who is bound by māyā sees form and color
through the eyes; he hears sound through the ears; he
smells fragrance through the nose; he touches with the
skin; and he tastes with the tongue. The jīva enters the
material world through these five senses, and becomes
attached to it. The more attached he is to gross matter,
the more distant he is from his Prāṇanātha (the Lord of
his life) Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and his condition is called
bahirmukha-saṁsāra, consciousness directed outwards
towards mundane existence. Those who are intoxicated
with this mundane existence are known are viṣayīs, those
who are attached to worldly sense objects.

When bhaktas live as gṛhasthas, they are not like the
viṣayīs, who merely seek to gratify their senses. A
householderís dharma-patnī (wife, who is oneís partner
in realizing nitya-dharma) is a dāsī, or maidservant of
Kṛṣṇa, and so are his sons and daughters. The eyes of
all the family members are satisfied to behold the form
of the Deity and objects related to Kṛṣṇa; their ears
become fully satisfied to hear hari-kathā and narrations
of the lives of great sādhus; their noses experience
satisfaction by smelling the aroma of tulasī and the
other fragrant objects offered to the lotus feet of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa; their tongues taste the nectar of kṛṣṇa-nāma, and
the remnants of food offered to Kṛṣṇa; their skin feels
delight through touching the limbs of Śrī Hariís
bhaktas; their hopes, activities, desires, hospitality
to guests, and service to the Deity are all subordinate
to their service to Kṛṣṇa. Indeed, their entire life is
a great festival consisting of kṛṣṇa-nāma, mercy to
jīvas, and service to Vaiṣṇavas.

Only gṛhastha-bhaktas can possess material objects and
utilize them without becoming attached to them. It is
most appropriate for jīvas in the age of Kali to become
gṛhastha Vaiṣṇavas, for then there is no fear of falling
down.2

Bhakti can also be developed fully from this position.
Many gṛhastha Vaiṣṇavas are gurus who are well versed in
the fundamental truths of the śāstra. If the children of

                           99
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

such saintly Vaiṣṇavas are also pure Vaiṣṇavas
(Gosvāmīs), they too are counted as gṛhastha-bhaktas.
This is why the association of gṛhastha-bhaktas is
particularly beneficial for the jīvas.

Yādava dāsa:Gṛhastha Vaiṣṇavas are obliged to remain
under the jurisdiction of smārta-brāhmaṇas, otherwise
they will have to suffer much harassment in society.
Under such circumstances, how can they practice śuddha-
bhakti?

Ananta dāsa:Gṛhastha Vaiṣṇavas are certainly obliged to
carry out social conventions, such as getting their sons
and daughters married, performing ceremonial functions
for deceased forefathers, and other similar
responsibilities. However, they should not engage in
kāmya-karma, ritualistic activities meant only to
fulfill material ambitions.

When it comes to maintaining oneís livelihood, everyone
ñ even one who calls himself nirapekṣa (devoid of all
needs) ñ depends upon other people or things. All
embodied beings have needs; they depend on medicine when
they become ill, on foodstuffs when they are hungry, on
clothing to dispel the cold, and on a house for
protection from excessive heat or rain. Nirapekṣa really
means to reduce oneís necessities as far as possible,
for no one can be absolutely independent as long as he
has a material body. Still, it is best to be as free as
possible from material dependency, for that is more
conducive to advancement in bhakti.

All the activities that I mentioned before become free
from defect only when one links them with Kṛṣṇa. For
example, one should not enter marriage with a desire to
beget children, or to worship the forefathers and
Prajāpatis. It is favorable to bhakti to think, “I am
only accepting this maidservant of Kṛṣṇa so that we can
assist each other in Kṛṣṇaís service and establish
Kṛṣṇa-centered family life together.” Whatever oneís
materially attached relatives or family priest may say,
ultimately one reaps the fruit of oneís own
determination.

On the occasion of the śrāddha ceremony, one should
first offer the forefathers the remnants of food that
has been offered to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and then feed the
brāhmaṇas and Vaiṣṇavas. If gṛhastha Vaiṣṇavas observe
the śrāddha ceremony in this way, it is favorable for
their bhakti.

All the smārta rituals are karma, unless and until one
combines them with bhakti. If one carries out the karma
which one is enjoined to perform by the Vedas in
pursuance of śuddha-bhakti, that karma is not
unfavorable to bhakti. One should perform ordinary
activities in a renounced spirit and without attachment
for the result, and one should perform spiritual
activities in the association of bhaktas; then there
will be no fault.

Consider for a moment that most of Śrīman Mahāprabhuís
associates were gṛhastha-bhaktas, and so were many
rājarṣis (saintly kings) and devarṣis (great sages) from

                          100
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

ancient times. Dhruva, Prahlāda, and the Pāṇḍavas were
all gṛhastha-bhaktas. You should know that gṛhastha-
bhaktas are also highly respected in the world.

Yādava dāsa: If gṛhastha-bhaktas are so highly respected
and dear to everyone, why do some of them renounce
household life?

Ananta dāsa: Some gṛhastha-bhaktas are eligible to
renounce their household life, but such Vaiṣṇavas are
very few in this world, and their association is rare.

Yādava dāsa: Kindly explain how one becomes eligible to
renounce household life.

Ananta dāsa: Human beings have two tendencies:
bahirmukha-pravṛtti, the outward tendency; and
antarmukha-pavṛtti, the inward tendency. The Vedas refer
to these two tendencies as being focused outwards
towards the external world and focused inwards towards
the soul.

When the pure spiritual soul forgets his true identity,
he falsely identifies the mind as the self, although the
mind is really only a part of the subtle material body.
Having identified with the mind in this way, the soul
takes assistance from the doorways of the senses, and
becomes attracted to the external sense objects. This is
the outward tendency. The inward tendency is exhibited
when the stream of consciousness reverts from gross
matter back into the mind, and from there to the soul
proper.

One whose tendency is predominantly outward must conduct
all external tendencies offenselessly with Kṛṣṇa at the
center, through the strength of sādhu-saṅga. If one
takes shelter of kṛṣṇa-bhakti, these outward tendencies
are quickly curtailed and converted to the inward
tendency. When the direction of oneís tendency is
completely inward, the eligibility to renounce household
life is born, but if one gives up household life before
this stage is reached, there is a significant danger of
falling down again. The gṛhastha-āśrama is a special
school where the jīvas may receive instructions
regarding ātma-tattva, spiritual truth, and be given the
opportunity to develop their realization of such
matters. They may leave the school when their education
is complete.

Yādava dāsa: What are the symptoms of a bhakta who is
eligible to give up household life?

Ananta dāsa: He should be free from the desire to
associate with the opposite sex; he should have
unrestricted mercy toward all living entities; he should
be completely indifferent towards endeavors to
accumulate wealth, and he should strive only in times of
need to acquire food and clothing suitable for
maintaining himself. He should have unconditional love
for Śrī Kṛṣṇa; should shun the association of
materialists; and should be free from attachment and
aversion in life and death. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.45)
describes these symptoms as follows:


                          101
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017

sarva-bhūteṣu yaḥ paśyed bhagavad-bhāvam ātmanaḥ

bhūtāni bhagavaty ātmany eṣa bhāgavatottamaḥ

One who sees his own mood of attraction for Śrī Kṛṣṇa-
candra, the Soul of all souls, in all jīvas, and who
also sees all living entities residing within the
shelter of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is an uttama-bhāgavata.

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.25.22), Bhagavān Kapiladeva
describes the primary characteristics of sādhus:

mayy ananyena bhāvena bhaktiṁ kurvanti ye dṛḍhām

mat-kṛte tyakta-karmāṇas tyakta-svajana-bāndhavāḥ

Those who worship no one but Me, and who therefore
engage in firm and exclusive devotion unto Me, give up
everything for My sake, including all duties prescribed
in varṇāśrama-dharma and all relationships with their
wives, children, friends, and relatives.

It is also stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.55):

visṛjati hṛdayaṁ na yasya sākṣād-

dharir avaśābhihito ëpy aghaugha-nāśaḥ

praṇaya-rasanayā dhṛtāṅghri-padmaḥ

sa bhavati bhāgavata-pradhāna uktaḥ

If one utters, even without intent, śrī-hari-nāma in an
offenseless mood, at once heaps of sins accumulated
through many lifetimes, are destroyed. Such a person
thereby binds Śrī Hariís lotus feet within his heart
with ropes of love and is considered the best of
bhaktas.

When these symptoms are manifest in a gṛhastha-bhakta,
he is no longer suited for engagement in karma, and he
therefore renounces household life. Such nirapekṣa-
bhaktas (renunciants) are rare, and one should consider
himself extremely fortunate to attain their association.

Yādava dāsa: These days, young men often renounce
household life and adopt the dress of the renounced
order. They establish a place for sādhus to congregate,
and begin to worship the Deity of the Lord. After some
time, they fall into association with women again, but
do not give up chanting hari-nāma. They maintain their
hermitage by collecting alms from many places. Are such
men tyāgīs or gṛhastha-bhaktas?

Ananta dāsa: Your question raises several issues at
once, but I will answer them one by one. First of all,
eligibility to renounce household life has nothing to do
with youth or old age. Some gṛhastha-bhaktas are
qualified by the saṁskāras acquired in this life and
previous lives to give up household life even while they
are young. For example, Śukadeva’s previous saṁskāras
enabled him to renounce household life from the moment
of birth. One should only see that this eligibility is
not artificial. If real detachment awakens, then youth

                          102
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

is not an impediment.

Yādava dāsa: What is real renunciation and what is false
renunciation?

Ananta dāsa: Real renunciation is so firm that it can
never be broken at any time. False renunciation arises
from deception, dishonesty, and the desire for prestige.
Some people make a false show of renunciation to gain
the respect that is offered to nirapekṣa-bhaktas who
have given up household life, but such false detachment
is futile and completely inauspicious. As soon as such a
person leaves home, the symptoms of his eligibility for
detachment disappear, and depravity sets in.

Yādava dāsa: Does a bhakta who has given up household
life need to adopt the external dress of a renunciant?

Ananta dāsa:Nirapekṣa-akiñcana-bhaktas who have firmly
renounced the spirit of enjoyment purify the entire
world, whether they live in the forest or remain at
home. Some of them accept a loincloth and worn and torn
clothes as external signs to identify them as members of
the renounced order. At the time of accepting this
attire, they strengthen their resolve by taking a firm
vow in the presence of other Vaiṣṇavas who are in the
renounced order. This is called entrance into the
renounced order, or the acceptance of appropriate
garments for renunciation. If you refer to this as
bheka-grahaṇa or veśa-grahaṇa, the acceptance of the
dress of renunciation, then what is the harm?

Yādava dāsa: What is the purpose of being identified by
the signs of the renounced order?

Ananta dāsa: It is very helpful to be identified as a
member of the renounced order. A renunciant’s family
members will no longer maintain a relationship with him,
and will easily give him up. He will no longer desire to
enter his house, and a natural detachment will awaken in
his heart, with a consequent fear of materialistic
society. It is beneficial for some bhaktas to accept the
outward signs of renunciation, though this may not be
necessary if detachment from household life is fully
matured. It is said in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (4.29.46):
sa jahāti matiṁ loke vede ca pariniṣṭhitām, “A bhakta
who has received the mercy of Bhagavān gives up
attachment for all worldly activities, and for all
ritualistic duties prescribed in the Vedas.”

There is no injunction for such bhaktas to accept the
outward dress of renunciation. It is necessary only as
long as there is some dependence on public
consideration.

Yādava dāsa: From whom should one accept the renounced
order?

Ananta dāsa: One should accept the renounced order from
a Vaiṣṇava who is situated in the renounced order.
Gṛhastha-bhaktas have no experience of the behavior of
renounced bhaktas, so they should not initiate anyone
into the renounced order. The following statement of the
Brahma-vaivarta Purāṇa confirms this:

                          103
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017


aparīkṣyopadiṣṭaṁ yat loka-nāśāya tad bhavet

One brings ruination to the world if he instructs others
in religious principles that he himself does not follow.

Yādava dāsa: What criteria should a guru use to offer
initiation into the renounced order?

Ananta dāsa: The guru must first consider wether or not
the disciple is qualified. He should see if the
gṛhastha-bhakta, on the strength of kṛṣṇa-bhakti, has
acquired a spiritual temperament characterized by
qualities such as full control of the mind and senses.
Has the hankering for wealth and the satisfaction of the
tongue been uprooted or not? The guru should keep the
disciple with him for some time in order to examine him
thoroughly, and he may initiate him into the renounced
order when he finds that he is a suitable candidate.
Under no circumstances should he offer initiation prior
to this. If the guru offers initiation to a person who
is unqualified, he will certainly fall down himself.

Yādava dāsa: Now I see that it is no light matter to
accept the renounced order; it is a serious undertaking.
Unqualified gurus are turning this practice into a
common affair. It has only just begun, and there is no
telling where it will end.

Ananta dāsa: Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu severely punished
Choṭa Haridāsa for a completely insignificant fault,
just to protect the sanctity of the renounced order. The
followers of our Lord should always remember the
punishment of Choṭa Haridāsa.

Yādava dāsa: Is it proper to construct a monastery and
establish the worship of a Deity after one has entered
the renounced order?

Ananta dāsa: No. A qualified disciple who has entered
the renounced order should maintain his existence by
begging every day. He should not involve himself in
constructing a monastery or in other grand enterprises.
He can live anywhere, either in a secluded hut or in the
temple of a householder. He should remain aloof from all
affairs that require money, and he should constantly
chant śrī-hari-nāma without offense.

Yādava dāsa: What do you call renunciants who set up a
monastery and then live like householders?

Ananta dāsa: They may be called vāntāśī (those who eat
their own vomit).

Yādava dāsa: Then are they no longer to be considered
Vaiṣṇavas?

Ananta dāsa: What benefit is there in their association
when their behavior is contrary to śāstra and vaiṣṇava-
dharma? They have given up pure bhakti, and have adopted
a hypocritical lifestyle. What relationship could a
Vaiṣṇava have with such people?

Yādava dāsa: How can one say that they have given up

                          104
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

Vaiṣṇavism, as long as they don’t give up the chanting
of hari-nāma?

Ananta dāsa:Hari-nāma and nāma-aparādha are two
different things. Pure hari-nāma is quite distinct from
offensive chanting that only has the external appearance
of hari-nāma. It is an offense to commit sins on the
strength of chanting śrī-nāma. If one chants śrī-nāma
and at the same time commits sinful activities, thinking
that the power of śrī-nāma will exempt him from sinful
reactions, he is committing nāma-aparādha. This is not
śuddha-hari-nāma, and one should flee far away from such
offensive chanting.

Yādava dāsa: Then is the domestic life of such people
not to be considered Kṛṣṇa-centered?

“Never,” Ananta dāsa firmly said. “There is no room for
hypocrisy in a Kṛṣṇa-centered domestic life. There can
only be complete honesty and simplicity, with no trace
of offense.”

Yādava dāsa: Is such a person inferior to a gṛhastha-
bhakta?

Ananta dāsa: He is not even a devotee, so there is no
question of comparing him with any bhakta.

Yādava dāsa: How may he be rectified?

Ananta dāsa: He will be counted amongst the bhaktas
again when he gives up all these offenses, constantly
chants śrī-nāma, and sheds tears of repentance.

Yādava dāsa: Bābājī Mahāśaya, gṛhastha-bhaktas are
situated under the rules and regulations of varṇāśrama-
dharma. If a gṛhastha is excluded from varṇāśrama-
dharma, is he not barred from becoming a Vaiṣṇava?

Ananta dāsa: Ah! Vaiṣṇava-dharma is very liberal. All
jīvas have the right to vaiṣṇava-dharma; that is why it
is also known as jaiva-dharma. Even outcastes can take
up vaiṣṇava-dharma and live as gṛhasthas, although they
are not part of varṇāśrama. Moreover, people who have
accepted sannyāsa within varṇāśrama, and have then
fallen from their position, may later adopt pure bhakti
by the influence of sādhu-saṅga. Such people can become
gṛhastha-bhaktas, although they are also outside the
jurisdiction of varṇāśrama regulations.

There are others who abandon varṇāśrama-dharma due to
their misdeeds. If they and their children take shelter
of śuddha-bhakti by the influence of sādhu-saṅga, they
may become gṛhastha-bhaktas, although they are also
outside varṇāśrama. So we see that there are two kinds
of gṛhastha-bhaktas: one who is part of varṇāśrama and
one who is excluded from varṇāśrama.

Yādava dāsa: Which is superior of these two?

Ananta dāsa: Whoever has the most bhakti is superior. If
neither has any bhakti, then the person who is following
varṇāśrama is superior from the vyāvahārika, or
relative, point of view, because at least he has some

                          105
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

religious principles, whereas the other is an outcaste
with no religious principles. However, from the
paramārthika, or absolute, spiritual perspective, both
of them are fallen because they have no bhakti.

Yādava dāsa: Does a gṛhastha have the right to wear the
garments of a mendicant while he is still a householder?

Ananta dāsa: No. If he does, he is guilty on two counts:
he cheats himself and he cheats the world. If a gṛhastha
adopts the dress of a mendicant, he simply affronts and
ridicules genuine mendicants who wear the dress of the
renounced order.

Yādava dāsa: Bābājī Mahāśaya, do the śāstras describe
any system for accepting the renounced order?

Ananta dāsa: It is not clearly described. People of all
castes can become Vaiṣṇavas, but according to śāstra,
only those who are twice born can accept sannyāsa. In
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.11.35), Nārada describes the
separate characteristics of each of the different
varṇas, and then concludes with this statement:

yasya yal-lakṣaṇaṁ proktaṁ puṁso varṇābhivyañjakam

yad anyatrāpi dṛśyeta tat tenaiva vinirdiśet

A person should be considered to belong to the varṇa
whose characteristics he possesses, even if he has
appeared in a different caste.

The practice of offering sannyāsa to men who, although
born of other castes, possess the symptoms of brāhmaṇas,
is occurring on the basis of this verdict of the
śaṣtras. If a man born of a different caste truly
possesses the symptoms of a brāhmaṇa and is given
sannyāsa, then it must be avowed that this system is
approved by śaṣtra.

This verdict of the śāstras supports the practice of
offering sannyāsa to men who possess brahminical
symptoms, even though they are born of other castes, but
it only applies to paramārthika affairs, and not to
vyāvahārika affairs.

Yādava dāsa: Brother Caṇḍīdāsa, do you have the answer
to your question?

Caṇḍīdāsa: Today I have been blessed. Of all the
instructions that have flowed from the mouth of the most
revered Bābājī Mahāśaya, these are the points I have
been able to assimilate. The jīva is an eternal servant
of Kṛṣṇa, but he forgets this and takes on a material
body. Influenced by the qualities of material nature, he
derives happiness and distress from material objects.
For the privilege of enjoying the fruits of his material
activities, he must wear a garland of birth, old age,
and death.

The jīva sometimes takes birth in a high position and
sometimes in a low position, and he is led into
innumerable circumstances by his repeated change of
identity. Hunger and thirst spur him to action in a body

                          106
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

that may perish at any instant. He is bereft of the
necessities of this world, and is cast into unlimited
varieties of suffering. Many diseases and ailments
appear, which torment his body. In his home, he quarrels
with his wife and children, and sometimes he goes to the
extent of committing suicide. His greed to accumulate
wealth drives him to commit many sins. He is punished by
the government, insulted by others, and thus he suffers
untold bodily afflictions.

He is constantly aggrieved by separation from family
members, loss of wealth, theft by robbers, and countless
other causes of suffering. When a person becomes old,
his relatives do not take care of him, and this causes
him great distress. His withered body is ravaged by
mucus, rheumatism and a barrage of other pains, and is
simply a source of misery. After death, he enters
another womb and suffers intolerable pain. Yet despite
all this, as long as the body remains, his
discrimination is overpowered by lust, anger, greed,
illusion, pride, and envy. This is saṁsāra.

I now understand the meaning of the word saṁsāra. I
repeatedly offer daṇḍavat-praṇāma to Bābājī Mahāśaya.
The Vaiṣṇavas are gurus for the entire world. Today, by
the mercy of the Vaiṣṇavas, I have acquired real
knowledge of this material world.

When the Vaiṣṇavas present had heard Ananta dāsa Bābājī
Mahāśayaís profound instructions, they all loudly
exclaimed, “Sādhu! Sādhu!” By this time, many Vaiṣṇavas
had assembled there, and they began to sing a bhajana
that Lāhirī Mahāśaya had composed.

e ghora saṁsāre, paḍiyā mānava, na pāya duḥkhera śeṣa

sādhu-saṅga korií, hari bhaje yadi, tabe anta haya kleśa

The jīva who has fallen into this dreadful material
existence finds no end to his distress, but his troubles
come to an end when he is graced by the association of
sādhus and then takes to the worship of Śrī Hari.

viṣaya-anale, jvaliche hṛdaya, anale bāḍe anala

aparādha chaḍií laya kṛṣṇa-nāma, anale paḍaye jala

The raging fire of sensual desires scorches his heart,
and when he tries to satisfy those desires, the fire
simply flares up with greater intensity. However,
relinquishing offenses and chanting śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma acts
like a cooling shower of rain, which extinguishes this
blazing fire.

nitāi-caitanya-caraṇa-kamale, āśraya laila yei

kālidāsa bole, jīvane maraṇe, āmāra āśraya sei

Kālīdāsa says, “He who has taken shelter of the lotus
feet of Caitanya-Nitāi is my refuge in life and in
death.”

As the kīrtana was going on, Caṇḍīdāsa danced in great
ecstasy. He took the dust of the feet of the bābājīs

                          107
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

upon his head, and began to roll on the ground, weeping
in intense joy. Everyone declared, “Caṇḍīdāsa is
extremely fortunate!”

After some time, Yādava dāsa said, “Let us go,
Caṇḍīdāsa; we need to go to the other side of the
river.”

Caṇḍīdāsa replied, smiling, “If you take me across (the
river of material existance), I will go.”

The two of them offered daṇḍavat-praṇāma to Pradyumna-
kuñja and departed. As they came out of the kuñja, they
saw Damayantī offering repeated obeisances, and saying,
“Alas! Why did I take birth as a woman? If I had taken
birth as a man, I could easily have entered this kuñja,
taken darśana of the great souls, and become purified by
taking their foot dust on my head. May I simply become
the servitor of the Vaiṣṇavas of Śrī Navadvīpa birth
after birth, and spend my days in their service.”

Yādava dāsa said, “Ah! This Godruma-dhāma is a perfectly
sacred place. Simply by coming here, one obtains śuddha-
bhakti. Godruma is a cowherd village, the place where
Śacīnandana, the Lord of our life, enacts His divine
pastimes. In his heart Śrī Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī
realized this truth and prayed in the following words:

na loka-vedoddhṛta-mārga-bhedair

āviśya saṅkliśyate re vimūḍhāḥ

haṭheṇa sarvaṁ parihṛtya gauḍe

śrī-godrume parṇa-kuṭīṁ kurudhvam

Śrī Navadvīpa-śataka (36)

“O fools, although you have taken shelter of worldly
society and the Vedas, and adopted many social and
religious duties, you remain miserable. Now give up
these dubious paths, and quickly build yourself a leaf-
hut in Śrī Godruma.”

In this way, exchanging hari-kathā, the three crossed
the Gaṅgā and arrived in Kuliyā-grāma. Thence forward,
both Caṇḍīdāsa and his wife Damayantī displayed a
wonderful Vaiṣṇava demeanor. Untouched by the world of
māyā they became adorned with the qualities of vaiṣṇava-
sevā, constantly chanting kṛṣṇa-nāma, and showing mercy
to all jīvas. Blessed are the merchant couple! Blessed
is the mercy of the Vaiṣṇavas! Blessed is Śrī Navadvīpa-
bhūmi!



Thus ends the Seventh Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled

“Nitya-Dharma & Material Existence”




                            108
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017



Chapter 8

Nitya-Dharma & Vaiṣṇava Behavior



In a forest bordering the south-eastern bank of the
sacred pond known as Śrī Gorā-hrada, there were some
Vaiṣṇavas living in a secluded grove. One afternoon, the
Vaiṣṇavas of that place invited the Vaiṣṇavas of Godruma
to join them for afternoon prasāda. After honoring
prasāda, the Vaiṣṇavas sat together in the grove. At
that time, Lāhirī Mahāśaya sang a bhajana that awakened
ecstatic love of Vraja in everyoneís hearts.

(gaura!) kata līlā karile ekhāne

advaitādi bhakta-saṅge nācile e vane raṅge

kāliya-damana-saṅkīrtane

e hrada haite prabhu, nistārile nakra prabhu

kṛṣṇa yena kāliya-damane

Oh, think of the many pastimes Gaura performed here! He
danced and sported in this forest grove in the company
of Advaita and other Vaiṣṇavas. Just as Śrī Kṛṣṇa tamed
Kāliya-nāga, so our Prabhu delivered a crocodile from
this pond with His saṅkīrtana, which became known as
kāliya-damana-saṅkīrtana.

When the bhajana was over, the Vaiṣṇavas began to
discuss the unity of gaura-līlā and kṛṣṇa-līlā. While
they were doing so, a few Vaiṣṇavas from Baragāchī
arrived and offered daṇḍavat-praṇāma, first to Gorā-
hrada and then to the Vaiṣṇavas. The Vaiṣṇavas in the
grove offered suitable respects to the newcomers and
seated them.

In that secluded kuñja was an ancient banyan tree,
around whose base the Vaiṣṇavas had constructed a
circular, mortared terrace. Everyone honored the tree as
Nitāi-vaṭa (Nityānanda Prabhuís banyan tree), for He
would enjoy sitting beneath it. The Vaiṣṇavas now sat
beneath this Nitāi-vaṭa, and began discussing spiritual
matters. A young, inquisitive Vaiṣṇava in the group from
Baragāchī said very humbly, “I would like to ask a
question, and I will be most satisfied if one of you
will please answer it.”

Haridāsa Bābājī Mahāśaya, a resident of that secluded
kuñja, was a wise and deeply learned scholar. He was
almost a hundred years old. He had personally seen
Nityānanda Prabhu sitting beneath that banyan tree many
years before, and his heartís desire was to depart from
this world at this very spot. When he heard the youthís
words, he said, “My son, while Paramahaṁsa Bābājīís
entourage is sitting here, you need have no anxiety
about receiving a reply to your question.”

The young Vaiṣṇava from Baragāchī then enquired very

                           109
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

humbly, “I understand that vaiṣṇava-dharma is eternal
religion, and I would like to know in detail how one who
has taken shelter of vaiṣṇava-dharma should behave with
others.”

Having heard the newcomerís question, Haridāsa Bābājī
Mahāśaya glanced over at Śrī Vaiṣṇava dāsa Bābājī and
said, “Vaiṣṇava dāsa, there is no scholar in Bengal at
the present time who is equal to you, and you are also a
superlative Vaiṣṇava. You had the association of Śrīla
Prakāśānanda Sarasvatī Gosvāmī, and you have received
instruction from Paramahaṁsa Bābājī. You are a very
fortunate recipient of Śrīman Mahāprabhuís mercy, and
you are therefore most fit to answer this question.”

Vaiṣṇava dāsa Bābājī Mahāśaya said humbly, “O great
soul, you have seen Śrīman Nityānanda Prabhu, who is an
avatāra of Baladeva Himself, and your instructions have
enabled countless people to enter the spiritual path. I
would deem it a great mercy if you will instruct us
today.”

All the other Vaiṣṇavas agreed with Vaiṣṇava dāsa
Bābājī. Seeing no other recourse, Bābājī Mahāśaya
finally relented. He offered daṇḍavat-praṇāma to Śrī
Nityānanda Prabhu at the foot of the banyan tree and
began to speak.

Bābājī: I offer praṇāma to all the jīvas of this world,
considering them to be servants of Kṛṣṇa. “Everyone is a
servant of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, although some accept this, and
some do not.” Although everyone is by nature a servant
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, due to ignorance or illusion, some souls
do not accept this. They form one group. Another group
consists of those who do accept their natural identity
as servants of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Consequently, there are two
kinds of people in this world: kṛṣṇa-bahirmukha, those
who are diverted from Kṛṣṇa; and kṛṣṇa-unmukha, those
who are attentive to Kṛṣṇa.

Most people in this world are diverted from Kṛṣṇa and do
not accept dharma. There is nothing much to say about
the first group. They have no sense of what is to be
done and what is not to be done, and their entire
existence is based upon selfish happiness.

People who accept some moral principles have a sense of
duty. For them the great Vaiṣṇava, Manu, has written:

dhṛtiḥ kṣamā damo ësteyaṁ śaucam indriya-nigrahaḥ

dhīr vidyā satyam akrodho daśakaṁ dharma-lakṣaṇam

Śrī Manu-saṁhitā (6.92)

There are ten characteristics of religious life: dhṛti
(determination with patience); kṣamā (forgiveness),
which means not retaliating when wronged by others; dama
(control of the mind), which means equanimity even in
the face of unsettling circumstances; asteya (abstinence
from theft); śaucam (cleanliness); indriya-nigrahaḥ
(restraining the senses from their sense objects); dhī
(intelligence), which means knowledge of the śāstra;
vidyā (wisdom), which means realization of the soul;

                          110
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

satya (truthfulness); and akrodha (absence of anger), as
demonstrated by even-temperedness amidst irritating
circumstances.

Six of these characteristic ñ determination, control of
the mind, cleanliness, restraint of the senses,
knowledge of the śāstra, and wisdom ñ are duties to
oneís own self. The remaining four ñ forgiveness,
abstinence from stealing, truthfulness, and absence of
anger ñ are duties to others. These ten religious duties
have been prescribed for people in general, but none of
them clearly indicate hari-bhajana. Furthermore, one
will not necessarily attain complete success in life
simply by carrying out these duties faithfully. This is
confirmed in the Viṣṇu-dharmottara Purāṇa:

jīvitaṁ viṣṇu-bhaktasya varaṁ pañca-dināni ca

na tu kalpa-sahasrāṇi bhakti-hīnasya keśave

quoted in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (10.317)

It is most auspicious to live in this world, even for
five days, as a bhakta of Śrī Viṣṇu, whereas it is not
at all auspicious to live in this world for thousands of
kalpas without bhakti for Śrī Keśava.

A person bereft of kṛṣṇa-bhakti is not fit to be called
a human being, therefore śastra counts such people among
the two-legged animals. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.3.19)
states:

śva-viḍ-varāhoṣṭra-kharaiḥ saṁstutaḥ puruṣaḥ paśuḥ

na yat karṇa-pathopeto jātu nāma gadāgrajaḥ

Only men who are like dogs, hogs, camels and asses
praise those who never hear the holy name of Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
the elder brother of Gada.

If a person never allows śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma to enter his
ears, he is like an animal. In fact, he is more degraded
than hogs that eat stool and other rejected substances,
camels that wander in the desert of saṁsāra eating
cactus, and asses that carry heavy loads for others, and
are always harassed by the she-ass. However, the
question raised today was not about what such
unfortunate people should or should not do. It was only
about how those who have taken shelter of the path of
bhakti should behave with others.

Those who have adopted the path of bhakti may be divided
into three categories: kaniṣṭha (neophyte), madhyama
(intermediate), and uttama (topmost). Kaniṣṭhas are
those who have embarked upon the path of bhakti, but are
not yet true bhaktas. Their symptoms are described as
follows:

arcāyām eva haraye pūjāṁ yaḥ śraddhayehate

na tad-bhakteṣu cānyeṣu sa bhaktaḥ prākṛtaḥ smṛtaḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.47)


                          111
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

One who faithfully worships the Deity form of Śrī Hari,
but does not render service to His bhaktas or to other
living beings, is a prākṛta-bhakta, a materialistic
devotee.

Thus it is established that śraddhā is the bīja, or seed
of bhakti. Oneís bhakti is only effective when he
worships Bhagavān with śraddhā, and it is still not
śuddha-bhakti unless he worships the bhaktas as well.
Bhakti does not develop thoroughly as long as he fails
to do so. This type of bhakta has barely entered the
doorway of the practice of bhakti. It is said in the
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.84.13):

yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke

sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiṣu bhauma ijya-dhīḥ

yat tīrtha-buddhiḥ salile na karhicij

janeṣv abhijñeṣu sa eva go-kharaḥ

One who considers this corpse-like body, comprised of
the three elements vata, pita, and kapha, to be his real
self; who regards his wife, children, and others as his
very own; who considers mundane forms made of earth,
stone, or wood to be worshipable; and who regards mere
water to be a place of pilgrimage ñ but who does not
consider the bhagavad-bhaktas to be more dear than his
very self, to be his very own, to be worshipable, and to
be places of pilgrimage; such a person, though human, is
no better than an ass among animals.

The purport of these two ślokas is that one cannot even
approach the threshold of bhakti without worshiping
Bhagavān in the form of the Deity. If one rejects the
Deity form and resorts to logical debate alone to deduce
the truth, his heart becomes dry and he cannot ascertain
the true object of worship. Yet even when one accepts
the Deity, it is essential to serve Him in
transcendental consciousness (śuddha-cinmaya-buddhi). In
this world the jīvas are cinmaya vastu, conscious
entities, and among all the jīvas, the bhaktas of Kṛṣṇa
are śuddha-cinmaya, endowed with pure consciousness.
Kṛṣṇa and the bhaktas are both śuddha-cinmaya-vastu
(pure conscious entities), and in order to understand
them, it is essential to have sambandha-jñāna, which is
knowledge of the interrelationship between the material
world, the jīvas, and Kṛṣṇa. If one is to worship the
Deity with sambandha-jñāna, then one must worship Kṛṣṇa
and serve the bhaktas at the same time. This type of
adoration and respect for cinmaya-tattva, the
transcendental reality, which is endowed with śraddhā,
is known as śāstrīya śraddhā, faith based on śāstra.

Worship of the Deity that lacks this unequivocal
knowledge of the interrelationship between the different
aspects of the transcendental reality is simply founded
on laukika śraddhā, customary or traditional regard.
Such customary worship of the Deity is not śuddha-
bhakti, although it is the first step in approaching the
entrance to bhakti; this is the conclusion of śāstra.
Those who have reached this threshold of bhakti have
been described as follows:

                          112
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017


gṛhīta-viṣṇu-dīkṣāko viṣṇu-pūjā-paro naraḥ

vaiṣṇavo ëbhihito ëbhijñair itaro ësmād avaiṣṇavaḥ

Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (1.55)

Learned scholars have determined that a Vaiṣṇava is one
who is initiated into a Viṣṇu mantra in accordance with
the regulations of śāstra, and who is engaged in the
worship of Śrī Viṣṇu. All others are known as non-
Vaiṣṇavas.

Kaniṣṭha Vaiṣṇavas, or prākṛta-bhaktas, are those who
accept a family priest out of hereditary tradition, or
who are prompted by laukika śraddhā (wordly faith) to
imitate others by taking initiation into a Viṣṇu mantra
and worshiping the Deity of Śrī Viṣṇu. Such
materialistic devotees are not śuddha-bhaktas; rather, a
shadow-like semblance of bhakti called chāyā-bhakty-
ābhāsa is prominent in them. However, they do not have
pratibimba-bhakty-ābhāsa, which is a reflective
semblance of bhakti. This pratibimba-bhakty-ābhāsa is
offensive in nature and is devoid of Vaiṣṇavism. The
stage of chāyā-bhakty-ābhāsa is the result of great
fortune, because it is the preliminary stage of bhakti,
and people can gradually develop from it into madhyama
and uttama Vaiṣṇavas. Still, those at the stage of
chāyā-bhakty-ābhāsa cannot be called śuddha-bhaktas.
Such people worship the Deity with laukika śraddhā
(worldly faith). They can only behave towards others
according to the ten types of religious duties that I
have already described for people in general. The
behavior that the śāstras prescribe for bhaktas does not
apply to them, for they cannot even ascertain who is a
true bhakta and who is not. That power to discriminate
is a symptom of the madhyama Vaiṣṇava.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.46) describes the behavior of
the madhyama Vaiṣṇava as follows:

īśvare tad-adhīneṣu bāliśeṣu dviṣatsu ca

prema-maitrī-kṛpopekṣā yaḥ karoti sa madhyamaḥ

A madhyama-bhāgavata is one who loves Īśvara, is
friendly towards His bhaktas, shows mercy towards those
who are ignorant of bhakti, and neglects those who are
inimical to Īśvara or His bhaktas.

The behavior being described here is classified in the
realm of nitya-dharma. I am not referring here to
naimittika-dharma (temporary religious or worldly
duties). The behavior that I am describing is part of
nitya-dharma, and it is essential in the life of a
Vaiṣṇava. Other types of behavior that are not opposed
to this behavior may be accepted where necessary.

A Vaiṣṇavaís behavior is directed towards four
categories of individuals: īśvara, the Supreme Lord;
tad-adhīna, His bhaktas; bāliśa, materialistic people
who are ignorant of spiritual truth; and dveṣī, those
who are opposed to bhakti. A Vaiṣṇava shows love,
friendship, mercy, and neglect respectively to these

                            113
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

four kinds of individuals. In other words, he behaves
lovingly towards Īśvara, with friendship towards the
bhaktas, and mercifully towards the ignorant; he
neglects those who are inimical.

The first characteristic of a madhyama Vaiṣṇava is that
he has prema for Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is the Supreme Lord of
all. The word prema here refers to śuddha-bhakti, whose
symptoms have been described as follows in Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.1.11):

anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā

Uttamā-bhakti is the consummate endeavor to serve Śrī
Kṛṣṇa in a favorable mood. It is free from any other
desire, and it is not covered by knowledge of impersonal
brahma, by the daily and periodic duties outlined in the
smṛti-śāstras, or by renunciation, yoga, sāṅkhya, and
other types of dharma.

Bhakti that is imbued with such characteristics is first
found in the sādhana practices of a madhyama Vaiṣṇava,
and it extends up to the stages of bhāva and prema. The
only characteristic in the bhakti of the kaniṣṭha is
that of service to the Deity with faith. Such a person
does not have the characteristics of uttamā-bhakti,
namely: anyābhilāṣitā-śūnya, freedom from ulterior
desires; jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛta, freedom from the
coverings of impersonal knowledge and fruitive action;
and ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānuśīlana, consumate endeavours to
serve Kṛṣṇa in a favorable mood.

A kaniṣṭha is considered to have become a madhyama
Vaiṣṇava and a genuine bhakta when bhakti with these
symptoms manifests in his heart. Prior to this stage, he
is a prākṛta-bhakta, which means that he is only a
semblance of a bhakta (bhakta-ābhāsa), or a semblance of
a Vaiṣṇava (vaiṣṇava-ābhāsa). The word kṛṣṇānuśīlana
refers to prema, love for Kṛṣṇa, and it is qualified by
the word ānukūlyena. This refers to those things that
are favorable to kṛṣṇa-prema, namely, friendship with
the bhaktas, mercy towards the ignorant, and neglect of
those who are inimical. These three items are also
symptoms of a madhyama Vaiṣṇava.

The second characteristic of a madhyama Vaiṣṇava is his
friendship towards bhaktas, in whose hearts śuddha-
bhakti has appeared, and who are submissive to
Bhagavānís will. Kaniṣṭha bhaktas are not śuddha-bhaktas
fully submissive to Bhagavān, and they do not offer
respect or hospitality to śuddha-bhaktas. Therefore,
madhyama and uttama-bhaktas are the only suitable people
with whom to develop intimate friendships.

In three successive years the bhaktas of Kulīna-grāma
asked Śrīman Mahāprabhu, “What is a Vaiṣṇava and what
are the symptoms by which he can be recognized?” Śrī
Mahāprabhu replied by instructing them about uttama,
madhyama, and kaniṣṭha Vaiṣṇavas. Now, according to the
characteristics of His description, all three of those
classes ñ as He described them ñ meet the standards that
I have defined for madhyama and uttama Vaiṣṇavas. None

                          114
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

of them correspond to the kaniṣṭha bhaktas who are only
capable of worshiping the Deity form, because they do
not utter śuddha-kṛṣṇa-nāma. Their chanting is known as
chāyā-nāmābhāsa. Chāyā-nāmābhāsa refers to a semblance
of the pure name obscured by ignorance and anarthas,
like the sun covered by clouds, which does not manifest
its full brilliance.

Mahāprabhu instructed madhyama-adhikārī gṛhastha
Vaiṣṇavas to serve the three kinds of Vaiṣṇavas, which
He described as follows: one from whose mouth kṛṣṇa-nāma
is heard even once; one from whose mouth kṛṣṇa-nāma is
heard constantly; and one whose very sight spontaneously
evokes the chanting of śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma. All these three
types of Vaiṣṇavas are worthy of service, but this is
not true of one who only utters nāmābhāsa, and not
śuddha-kṛṣṇa-nāma. Only Vaiṣṇavas who utter śuddha-nāma
are worthy of service.

We are instructed to serve the Vaiṣṇavas in accordance
with their respective levels of advancement. The word
maitrī signifies association, conversation, and service.
As soon as one sees a pure Vaiṣṇava, one should receive
him, respectfully converse with him, and fulfill his
needs as far as one is able. One should serve him in all
these ways, and one should never envy him. One should
not criticize him, even by accident, or disrespect him,
even if his appearance is unattractive, or if he has
some disease.

The third characteristic of the madhyama Vaiṣṇava is
that he bestows mercy on the ignorant. The word bāliśa
refers to people who are ignorant of spiritual truth,
bewildered, or foolish. It means materialistic people
who have not received any genuine guidance in spiritual
matters, but have not been contaminated by unauthorized
doctrines such as Māyāvāda. They are not envious of
bhaktas and bhakti, but their mundane egoism and
attachment prevents them from developing faith in
Īśvara. Learned scholars also belong in this category if
they have not attained the highest fruit of study, which
is to develop faith in Īśvara.

The kaniṣṭha-adhikārī prākṛta-bhakta is standing at the
doorway to the temple of bhakti, but because of
ignorance in the principles of sambandha-jñāna, he has
not yet attained śuddha-bhakti. Such a person is also
regarded as bāliśa until he comes to the platform of
śuddha-bhakti. When he becomes acquainted with the truth
of sambandha-jñāna, and awakens taste for śuddha-hari-
nāma in the association of pure bhaktas, his ignorance
will be dissipated, and he will attain the status of a
madhyama Vaiṣṇava.

It is essential that a madhyama Vaiṣṇava should bestow
his mercy upon all the above-mentioned ignorant people.
He should treat them as guests and should satisfy their
needs as far as he is able, but that is not enough in
itself. He should also act in such a way as to awaken
their faith in ananya-bhakti and their taste for śuddha-
nāma. That is the real meaning of mercy. The ignorant
may be victimized by bad association and may fall down
at any time because they lack expertise in the śāstras.
The madhyama Vaiṣṇava should always protect such

                          115
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

susceptible people from bad association. He should
mercifully give them his association and gradually
instruct them in spiritual matters and in the glories of
śuddha-nāma.

A diseased person must be under the care of a physician
because he cannot cure himself. Just as one should
pardon the anger of a diseased person, so one should
also excuse the improper behavior of the ignorant. This
attitude is known as mercy. The ignorant have many
misconceptions, such as faith in karma-kāṇḍa, occasional
inclination towards jñāna, worshiping the Deity with
ulterior motives, faith in yoga, indifference towards
the association of pure Vaiṣṇavas, attachment to
varṇāśrama, and many other things. However, the
kaniṣṭha-adhikārī can quickly become a madhyama-adhikārī
when these misconceptions are dispelled by good
association, mercy, and good instructions.

When such people begin to worship the Deity of Bhagavān,
it may be understood that they have laid the foundation
of all auspiciousness. Of this there is no doubt. They
do not have the defect of adhering to false doctrines,
and for this reason they have a scent of true śraddhā.
Their Deity worship is not like that of the Māyāvādīs,
who do not have even a trace of śraddhā for the Deity,
and who are offenders at the lotus feet of Bhagavān.
That is why the words śraddhayā īhate, (he worships with
faith), have been used in the śloka (11.2.47) that
describes the kaniṣṭha-bhakta.

The philosophical outlook lodged in the heart of
Māyāvādīs and proponents of other similar doctrines is
that Bhagavān has no form and that the Deity which is
worshiped is simply an imaginary icon. Under such
circumstances, how can there be any faith in the Deity?
As a result there is a significant difference between
Deity worship of Māyāvādīs and that of even the most
neophyte Vaiṣṇavas.

Kaniṣṭha-adhikārī Vaiṣṇavas worship the Deity with
faith, knowing that Bhagavān possesses personal form and
attributes. Māyāvādīs, however, believe that Bhagavān
has no form or attributes, and that the Deity is
therefore imaginary and temporary. Neophytes are not
guilty of the offense of Māyāvāda, and that is why they
are accepted as prākṛta Vaiṣṇavas (materialistic
devotees), even though they do not possess any other
Vaiṣṇava characteristics. This is where their Vaiṣṇavism
is found. On the strength of this one quality, and by
the mercy of sādhus, they will certainly gradually be
elevated. Madhyama-adhikārī Vaiṣṇavas must be genuinely
merciful towards such people, and if they are, the
neophyte bhaktaís worship of the Deity and his chanting
of hari-nāma will quickly rise from the ābhāsa stage to
the purely transcendental stage.

The madhyama Vaiṣṇavaís fourth characteristic is neglect
towards those who are inimical. Here we must define
enmity and describe its different types. Dveṣa, enmity,
is a particular attitude which is also known as
matsaratā, envy, and which is exactly the opposite of
love. Īśvara is the only object of love, and dveṣa is
the attitude that is directly opposite to love for Him.

                          116
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

There are five different types of dveṣa: absence of
faith in Īśvara; the belief that Īśvara is nothing more
than a natural potency that brings about the results of
all action; the belief that Īśvara has no particular
form; the belief that the jīvas are not eternally
subordinate to Īśvara; and the absence of mercy.

Individuals whose hearts are contaminated by these
inimical attitudes are absolutely bereft of śuddha-
bhakti. They do not even have prākṛta-bhakti, the
rudimentary devotion that is the doorway to śuddha-
bhakti, and which is represented by the neophyte
bhaktaís worship of the Deity. The five types of enmity
are found to co-exist with attachment to material sense
enjoyment. Sometimes the third and fourth types of
enmity lead to such an extreme form of asceticism or
aversion towards the world that it culminates in self-
annihilation. This is seen in the lives of the Māyāvāda
sannyāsīs. How should śuddha-bhaktas behave towards such
inimical people? It is their duty to avoid them.

The word upekṣā, neglect, does not imply that one should
abandon all social dealings that are normal between
human beings. Nor does it mean that one should fail to
alleviate an inimical personís difficulty or deprivation
if he falls into distress. Gṛhastha Vaiṣṇavas remain
within society, so they have many types of
relationships, for instance, with relatives through
marriage, and with others through business dealings,
through the maintenance of property and bringing up of
animals, through endeavoring to mitigate the suffering
and ailments of others, and through their position as
citizens of the state. These different social relations
entail connection with inimical people, and avoidance
does not mean that one should at once give them up. One
is obliged to conduct routine affairs and interact with
people who are indifferent to Īśvara, but one should not
take their association when it comes to spiritual
matters.

Some members of oneís own family may acquire a malicious
nature as a result of their sinful activities from a
previous life. Should one abandon such people? Certainly
not. One should deal with them without attachment
insofar as ordinary affairs are concerned, but one
should not associate with them for spiritual matters.
Upekṣā should be applied in this regard. Spiritual
association means to meet together for the purpose of
spiritual advancement, to discuss topics of eternal
truth, and to render reciprocal service and welfare that
awakens oneís devotional sentiments. Upekṣā means
avoiding the association of people with whom such types
of exchange are not possible.

When an inimical person who has adopted discordant or
inconsistent opinions hears glorification of śuddha-
bhakti or virtuous instructions regarding bhakti, he
will immediately retort with some futile argument which
is not beneficial for you or for him. One should avoid
such fruitless arguments, and interact with such people
only as far as necessary in routine social dealings. One
may think that one should include inimical people among
the ignorant, and therefore bestow mercy upon them, but
if one does so, one will not help them and will only

                          117
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017

harm oneself. One should be benevolent, but with
caution.

Madhyama-adhikārī śuddha-bhaktas should certainly follow
these four instructions. If they neglect to do so in any
way, they become guilty of behaving improperly and thus
fail to do that for which they are qualified. This is
considered a serious defect, as explained in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (11.21.2):

sve sve ëdhikāre yā niṣṭhā sa guṇaḥ parikīrtitaḥ

viparyayas tu doṣaḥ syād ubhayor eṣa niścayaḥ

To be firmly established in the duties one is authorized
to perform is a good quality, whereas failure to do so
is a fault. Good qualities and faults are ascertained in
this way.

In other words, good qualities and faults are determined
according to oneís eligibility, and not by any other
criterion. According to the śāstras, the madhyama-
adhikārī śuddha-bhakta should develop prema for Kṛṣṇa
and friendship with His pure bhaktas. He should be
merciful to the ignorant and should neglect those who
are inimical. The degree of friendship that the
madhyama-bhakta establishes with other bhaktas should be
in keeping with the degree of their advancement in
bhakti; the degree of mercy that he bestows upon the
ignorant depends on their degree of sincerity or
foolishness; and the extent to which he neglects the
inimical depends on the degree of their enmity. The
madhyama-bhakta considers all these things as he
interacts with others in spiritual affairs. Worldly
affairs should be conducted in a straightforward manner,
but should always be performed with consideration of the
ultimate spiritual benifit.

Just then, a resident of Baragāchī named Nityānanda dāsa
interrupted by saying, “What is the behavior of uttama-
bhaktas?”

Slightly startled, Bābājī Mahāśaya said, “Brother! You
have asked a question that I am just in the process of
answering. Let me finish what I have to say. I am an old
man and my memory is fading. If the subject matter
changes too abruptly, I will forget what I was going to
say.”

Haridāsa was a strict Bābājī. Although he never found
fault with anyone, he was quick to respond when anyone
spoke inappropriately. Everyone was stunned to hear his
words. Again he offered praṇāma to Nityānanda Prabhu at
the foot of the banyan tree and resumed speaking.

Bābājī: When the bhakti of the madhyama Vaiṣṇava
progresses beyond the stages of sādhana and bhāva, and
comes to the level of prema, it becomes highly
condensed, and at that time, the Vaiṣṇava becomes an
uttama-bhakta. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.45) describes the
symptoms of an uttama Vaiṣṇava as follows:

sarva-bhūteṣu yaḥ paśyed bhagavad-bhāvam ātmanaḥ


                          118
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

bhūtāni bhagavaty ātmany eṣa bhāgavatottamaḥ

One who sees his own bhagavad-bhāva, ecstatic mood of
attraction towards Śrī Kṛṣṇacandra, in the hearts of all
jīvas (sarva-bhūteṣu) and sees all beings within Śrī
Kṛṣṇacandra is an uttama-bhāgavata.

An uttama Vaiṣṇava perceives that all living beings love
Bhagavān with the same particular feeling of
transcendental love that he himself cherishes towards
his iṣṭadeva. He also perceives that Bhagavān feels a
reciprocal attitude of love towards all living beings.
An uttama Vaiṣṇava has no disposition other than this
mood of transcendental love. Other moods arise from time
to time, according to different circumstances, but they
are all transformations of that prema.

For example, Śukadeva Gosvāmī was an uttama-bhāgavata,
but he described Kaṁsa in words such as bhoja-pāṁśula, a
disgrace to the Bhoja dynasty. Although it appears as if
these words were spoken out of enmity towards Kaṁsa,
they are actually a manifestation of prema towards
Kṛṣṇa. When śuddha-prema becomes the very life of a
bhakta, he is known as an uttama-bhāgavata. In this
condition there is no longer any distinction between
love, friendship, mercy, and neglect, as is the case
with the madhyama-adhikārī. All his behavior becomes a
manifestation of prema, and there is no difference in
his eyes between a kaniṣṭha, madhyama, or an uttama
Vaiṣṇava, nor is there any difference between a Vaiṣṇava
and a non-Vaiṣṇava. This advanced condition is extremely
rare.

Just consider now that a kaniṣṭha Vaiṣṇava does not
render service to Vaiṣṇavas, and an uttama Vaiṣṇava does
not make any distinction between Vaiṣṇavas and non-
Vaiṣṇavas, for he sees all jīvas as servants of Kṛṣṇa.
This means that only madhyama Vaiṣṇavas offer respect to
Vaiṣṇavas, and render service to them. A madhyama
Vaiṣṇava must serve the three kinds of Vaiṣṇavas ñ those
who chant kṛṣṇa-nāma even once, those who chant kṛṣṇa-
nāma constantly, and those whose mere sight
automatically causes kṛṣṇa-nāma to dance on oneís
tongue. A Vaiṣṇava may be considered a Vaiṣṇava, a
superior Vaiṣṇava, or a superlative Vaiṣṇava, according
to his degree of advancement. A madhyama-bhakta should
serve Vaiṣṇavas according to their status. Only an
uttama Vaiṣṇava will conclude that it is improper to
consider whether a Vaiṣṇava is kaniṣṭha, madhyama, or
uttama. If a madhyama-adhikārī Vaiṣṇava thinks in this
way, he will become an offender. Śrīman Mahāprabhu
indicated this to the residents of Kulīna-grāma, and His
instructions are to be revered even more than the Vedas
by all madhyama Vaiṣṇavas. And what are the Vedas, or
śruti? They are the orders of Parameśvara.

Having said this much, Haridāsa Bābājī became silent for
a moment. At this time, Nityānanda dāsa Bābājī of
Baragāchi folded his hands and said, “May I ask a
question now?”

Haridāsa Bābājī replied, “As it pleases you.”

“Bābājī Mahāśaya, to which category of Vaiṣṇavas do you

                          119
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

think I belong? Am I a kaniṣṭha or a madhyama Vaiṣṇava?
I am certainly not an uttama Vaiṣṇava.”

Haridāsa Bābājī Mahāśaya smiled a little and said,
“Brother, can one who has received the name Nityānanda
dāsa be anything other than an uttama Vaiṣṇava? My Nitāi
is very merciful. Even when He is beaten, He gives prema
in return. So if one takes His name and becomes His
dāsa, need anything more be said?”

Nityānanda dāsa: I sincerely want to know my actual
position.

Bābājī: Then tell me your whole story. If Nitāi empowers
me to speak, I shall say something.

Nityānanda dāsa: I took birth in a low-caste family in a
small village on the bank of the Padmāvatī River. I was
very simple and humble by nature from childhood, and I
always used to stay far away from bad company. I was
married at an early age, but after some days my parents
died, and my wife and I remained alone in the home. We
did not have so much wealth, so we worked every day to
maintain ourselves. Our days passed happily in this way,
but this happiness did not last for long, for after a
while, she also left her body. Because of my separation
from her, thoughts of detachment awakened in my mind.
Near my village were many Vaiṣṇavas who had renounced
household life, and I saw that the people of Baragāchī
offered them great respect. I hankered for that respect
very strongly, and because of the temporary feelings of
detachment brought on by the death of my wife, I went to
Baragāchī and accepted the dress of a Vaiṣṇava
mendicant. However, after a few days, my mind became
fickle; it was possessed by wicked thoughts, and it
became very difficult for me to control, but by great
fortune, I received the association of an excellent
Vaiṣṇava who is pure and simple. At present, he is
performing bhajana in Vraja. With deep affection, he
gave me profound advice, kept me in his association, and
purified my mind.

Now my mind is no longer disturbed by mischievous
thoughts. I have developed taste for chanting a hundred
thousand names of hari-nāma every day. I understand that
there is no difference between Śrī Hari and śrī-nāma,
and that both are fully spiritual. I observe the Ekādaśī
fast according to śāstra and offer water to Tulasī. When
the Vaiṣṇavas perform kīrtana, I also join with rapt
attention. I drink the water that washes the feet of
pure Vaiṣṇavas. I study the bhakti-śāstras every day. I
no longer desire to eat palatable food or dress nicely.
I have no taste to hear or participate in mundane talks.
When I see the Vaiṣṇavasí ecstatic moods, a desire comes
into my mind to roll on the ground at their feet, and
sometimes I do so, but it is out a desire for prestige.
Now please give your verdict: To which class of Vaiṣṇava
do I belong, and how should I behave?

Haridāsa Bābājī looked at Vaiṣṇava dāsa Bābājī with a
smile and said, “Tell us to which class of Vaiṣṇava does
Nityānanda dāsa belong?”

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: From what I have heard, he has surpassed

                          120
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

the kaniṣṭha stage and has entered the madhyama stage.

Bābājī: That is my feeling also.

Nityānanda dāsa: How wonderful! Today I have come to
know of my true position from the mouths of Vaiṣṇavas.
Please bestow your mercy upon me, so that I may
gradually come to the stage of an uttama Vaiṣṇava.

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: At the time that you accepted mendicancy,
there was a desire for honor and prestige in your heart,
so you were not actually qualified to enter the
renounced order, and therefore your acceptance of
mendicancy was tainted with flaw of unauthorized
consideration. In spite of this, you have attained
genuine auspiciousness by the mercy of the Vaiṣṇavas.

Nityānanda dāsa: Even now I have some desire for honor.
I think that I may attract others and win tremendous
respect if I am seen weeping profusely and displaying
ecstatic emotions.

Bābājī: You must endeavor to give this up, otherwise
there is a serious danger that your bhakti will be
eroded and you will have to descend to the kaniṣṭha
platform again. Although the six enemies of lust, anger,
greed, envy, pride and illusion may have departed, the
desire for honor remains. This desire for fame is the
most pernicious enemy of the Vaiṣṇavas, and it does not
easily agree to leave the sādhakas. Moreover, a single
drop of genuine spiritual emotion is far superior to an
imitative display of emotion (chāyā-bhāva-ābhāsa).

“Please give me your mercy,” said Nityānanda dāsa, and
reverentially placed the dust from Haridāsa Bābājīís
lotus feet on his own head. At this, Bābājī became
unsettled. He quickly got up, embraced Nityānanda dāsa,
seated him by his side, and patted him on the back. How
extraordinary is the effect of touching a Vaiṣṇava!
Tears immediately began to stream from Nityānanda dāsaís
eyes, and Haridāsa Bābājī could not check his own tears,
although he tried to do so. A wonderful atmosphere was
manifest, and tears came to the eyes of all the
assembled Vaiṣṇavas. At that moment, Nityānanda dāsa
accepted Śrī Haridāsa in his heart as his guru, and his
life became successful. Within a short time the emotion
subsided, and he inquired, “What are the primary and
secondary characteristics of a kaniṣṭha-bhakta in regard
to bhakti?”

Bābājī: The two primary characteristics of a kaniṣṭha
Vaiṣṇava are his faith in the eternal form of Bhagavān,
and his worship of the Deity. His secondary
characteristics are the devotional activities that he
performs, such as hearing, chanting, remembering, and
offering prayers.

Nityānanda dāsa: One cannot be a Vaiṣṇava unless he has
faith in the eternal form of Bhagavān and worships the
Deity according to the regulations of śāstra, so I can
well understand why these two are primary symptoms.
However, I cannot understand why hearing, chanting,
remembering, and other such activities are secondary.


                          121
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

Bābājī: The kaniṣṭha Vaiṣṇava is not acquainted with the
intrinsic nature of śuddha-bhakti, of which hearing,
chanting, and so on are aṅgas (limbs). Consequently, his
hearing and chanting do not assume their primary
identity, but are manifest in a gauṇa (secondary) form.
Furthermore, whatever arises from the three guṇas –
sattva (goodness), rajaḥ (passion), and tamaḥ
(ignorance) – is known as gauṇa. When these activities
become nirguṇa, free from the influence of the material
modes, they are aṅgas of śuddha-bhakti, and one has
attained the madhyama stage.

Nityānanda dāsa:   How can the kaniṣṭha Vaiṣṇava be called
a bhakta when he   is contaminated with the faults of
karma and jñāna,   and his heart is filled with desires
for things other   than bhakti?

Bābājī: One becomes eligible for bhakti once he has
attained śraddhā, which is the root of bhakti; there is
no doubt then that he is situated at the doorway to
bhakti. The word śraddhā means viśvāsa, belief. When the
kaniṣṭha-bhakta awakens belief in the divine Deity, he
becomes eligible for bhakti.

Nityānanda dāsa: When will he obtain bhakti?

Bābājī: The kaniṣṭha-bhakta becomes a śuddha-bhakta at
the madhyama level when his contamination of karma and
jñāna is dissipated, and he desires nothing other than
ananya-bhakti (exclusive bhakti). At that point, he
understands that there is a difference between service
to guests and service to bhaktas, and thus he awakens
taste for serving the bhaktas, which is favorable to
bhakti.

Nityānanda dāsa:Śuddha-bhakti appears along with
sambandha-jñāna. When is that knowledge awakened by
which one becomes eligible for śuddha-bhakti?

Bābājī: True sambandha-jñāna and śuddha-bhakti are
manifest simultaneously when knowledge contaminated by
Māyāvāda conceptions has been dispelled.

Nityānanda dāsa: How long does that take?

Bābājī: The stronger a person’s sukṛti from past
activities, the sooner he will attain it.

Nityānanda dāsa: What is the first result attained by
past sukṛti?

Bābājī: One attains sādhu-saṅga.

Nityānanda dāsa: And what is the progression that
evolves from sādhu-saṅga?

Bābājī: Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.25.25) describes the
systematic evolution of bhakti very succinctly:

satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-samvido

bhavanti hṛt-karṇa-rasāyaṇāḥ kathāḥ

taj-joṣaṇād āśv apavarga-vartmani

                            122
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017


śraddhā ratir bhaktir anukramiṣyati

In the association of śuddha-bhaktas, the recitation and
discussion of My glorious activities and pastimes are
pleasing to both the heart and the ears. By cultivating
knowledge in this way, one becomes established on the
path of liberation and progressively attains śraddhā,
then bhāva, and finally prema-bhakti.

Nityānanda dāsa: How does one attain sādhu-saṅga?

Bābājī: I have already said that sādhu-saṅga is attained
by sukṛti acquired in previous births. This is explained
in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.51.53):

bhavāpavargo bhramato yadā bhavej

janasya tarhy acyuta sat-samāgamaḥ

sat-saṅgamo yarhi tadaiva sad-gatau

parāvareśe tvayi jāyate ratiḥ

O Acyuta, the jīva has been wandering in the cycle of
birth and death since time without beginning. When the
time for his release from this cycle approaches, he
obtains sat-saṅga. From that moment, he becomes firmly
attached to You, who are the controller of both spirit
and matter, and the supreme goal of attainment for the
sādhus.

Nityānanda dāsa: It is only by sādhu-saṅga that a
kaniṣṭha-bhakta awakens an inclination for worshiping
the Deity, so how can it be said that he doesn’t render
any service to sādhus?

Bābājī: When one obtains sādhu-saṅga by good fortune,
viśvāsa, or belief in the divinity of the Deity awakens.
Nonetheless, worship of the Deity must be accompanied by
service to the sādhus themselves. Until this type of
faith develops, one’s śraddhā is incomplete, and one
remains ineligible for ananya-bhakti.

Nityānanda dāsa: What are the stages of progress for a
kaniṣṭha-bhakta?

Bābājī: Suppose that a kaniṣṭha-bhakta worships the
Deity form of Bhagavān every day with faith, but is not
yet free from the contaminations of karma, jñāna, and
extraneous desires. By chance, some guests come to him
who happen to be bhaktas, and he welcomes and serves
them, just as he would any other guests. The kaniṣṭha-
bhakta observes the activities and behavior of the
bhaktas and gets a chance to hear their discussions of
spiritual topics based on the śāstra. In this way, he
begins to develop great respect for the character of the
bhaktas.

At this point, he becomes aware of his own defects. He
begins to follow the behavior of the sādhus and to
rectify his own behavior. Gradually, his defects of
karma and jñāna begin to fade, and as his heart becomes
purified, he becomes increasingly free from extraneous

                          123
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

desires. He studies the śāstra by regularly hearing
narrations of Bhagavānís pastimes and the fundamental,
ontological truths about Bhagavān. His sambandha-jñāna
becomes progressively firmer as he accepts the
transcendental nature of Bhagavān, śrī-nāma, and the
aṅgas of bhakti such as hearing and chanting. When his
sambandha-jñāna becomes complete, he attains the stage
of a madhyama Vaiṣṇava. It is at this point that he
truly begins to associate with bhaktas. He can then
perceive that bhaktas are vastly superior to ordinary
guests, and he can begin to regard them on the level of
guru.

Nityānanda dāsa: Why is it that many kaniṣṭha-bhaktas do
not progress?

Bābājī: If the kaniṣṭha-bhakta associates mainly with
people who are inimical, his immature level of
eligibility for bhakti quickly fades, and his
eligibility for karma and jñāna becomes prominent. In
some cases, eligibility neither increases nor decreases,
but remains exactly the same.

Nityānanda dāsa: When does that happen?

Bābājī: When he associates equally with bhaktas and
inimical people.

Nityānanda dāsa: Under what circumstances can his
advancement be assured?

Bābājī: When his association with bhaktas becomes
prominent and his association with the inimical becomes
minimal, his advancement is rapid.

Nityānanda dāsa: What is the nature of the kaniṣṭha-
adhikārī’s inclination towards sinful and pious
activities?

Bābājī: In the preliminary stage, his inclination for
sinful and pious activities will be like that of the
karmīs and jñānīs, but as he progresses in bhakti, these
propensities will be dispelled, and his inclination to
please Bhagavān will become prominent.

Nityānanda dāsa: Dear master, I have understood the
situation of kaniṣṭha-adhikārīs. Now kindly describe the
primary symptoms of the madhyama-adhikārī bhaktas.

Bābājī: The madhyama-bhakta has ananya-bhakti towards
Kṛṣṇa. His friendship with the bhaktas consists of four
attitudes: he considers bhaktas to be more dear than his
very self (ātma-buddhi); he feels great possessiveness
towards them (mamatā-buddhi); he considers bhaktas as
worshipable (ijya-buddhi); and he considers them to be a
place of pilgrimage (tīrtha-buddhi). The madhyama-bhakta
also bestows mercy on those who are ignorant of
spiritual truth, and he neglects the inimical. These are
the primary characteristics of the madhyama-bhakta.

When one develops sambandha-jñāna and practices bhakti-
sādhana, which is the means (abhidheya), one attains the
goal of prema (prayojana). This is the methodology of
the madhyama-bhakta. It is generally observed that

                          124
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

madhyama-bhaktas perform hari-nāma, kīrtana, and other
such activities in the association of bhaktas, free from
any offense.

Nityānanda dāsa: What are the secondary symptoms of the
madhyama-bhakta?

Bābājī: The secondary symptom of the madhyama-bhakta is
the way in which he lives his life. His life is
completely surrendered to the will of Kṛṣṇa, and is
favorable to bhakti.

Nityānanda dāsa: Can he still commit sins or offenses?

Bābājī: Some tendency to commit sins or offenses may
remain in the beginning stage, but gradually these will
disappear. Whatever sins or offenses are still present
at the beginning of the madhyama stage are like chick-
peas that are just about to be ground to a pulp; they
are still seen as small lumps, but within a few moments
they will be crushed and will cease to exist. Yukta-
vairāgya (appropriate renunciation) is the life and soul
of the madhyama-bhakta.

Nityānanda dāsa: Does the madhyama-bhakta have any trace
of karma, jñāna or extraneous desires?

Bābājī: In the initial stages a faint trace of these
things may remain, but finally they are uprooted.
Whatever vestiges of karma and jñāna remain in the
beginning of the madhyama stage occasionally make
themselves visible, yet these gradually fade into
oblivion.

Nityānanda dāsa: Do such bhaktas even desire to live,
and if so, why?

Bābājī: Actually, they have no desire to live or die, or
to attain liberation. They desire to live only to attain
consummation of their bhajana.

Nityānanda dāsa: But why don’t they long for death? What
happiness can come from remaining in this gross material
body? When they die, will they not obtain their
spiritual forms and identities by Kṛṣṇa’s mercy?

Bābājī: They have no independent desires. All their
desires are solely dependent on Kṛṣṇa’s will, because
they are firmly convinced that everything is happening
by His will and that whatever happens is only because of
His desire. They have, therefore, no need to aspire for
anything independently.

Nityānanda dāsa: I have understood the symptoms of the
madhyama-adhikārī. Now, please tell me about the
secondary symptoms of the uttama-adhikārī.

Bābājī: Their secondary symptoms are their bodily
activities, but even these cannot actually be viewed
separately as secondary symptoms, because they are so
much under the control of prema, which is beyond all
influence of the material modes.

Nityānanda dāsa: Prabhu, there is no provision in śāstra

                          125
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

for the kaniṣṭha-adhikārīs to renounce household life,
and madhyama-adhikārīs may live either as householders
or renunciants. Is it possible that some uttama-
adhikārīs may live as householders?

Bābājī: One’s level of eligibility cannot be determined
by whether one is a householder or a renunciant; the
only criterion is one’s advancement in bhakti. There is
certainly no harm if an uttama-adhikārī bhakta remains a
householder. All the gṛhastha-bhaktas of Vraja were
uttama-adhikārīs. Many gṛhastha-bhaktas of our Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu were uttama-adhikārīs; Rāya
Rāmānanda is the foremost example of this.

Nityānanda dāsa: Prabhu, if an uttama-adhikārī bhakta is
a gṛhastha, and a madhyama-adhikārī bhakta is in the
renounced order, how should they behave towards each
other?

Bābājī: The person who is less qualified should offer
daṇḍavat-praṇāma to the person who is more qualified.
This stipulation is only for the benefit of the
madhyama-adhikārī, because the uttama-adhikārī bhakta
does not expect respect from anyone. In all living
beings he sees the presence of Bhagavān.

Nityānanda dāsa: Should one bring many Vaiṣṇavas
together and hold festivals for distributing bhagavat-
prasāda?

Bābājī: From the spiritual point of view, there is no
objection if many Vaiṣṇavas gather together for some
particular occasion and a madhyama-adhikārī gṛhastha-
bhakta wants to honor them by distributing the bhagavat-
prasāda. However, it is not good to make a pompous
display of serving the Vaiṣṇavas, for then this activity
will become adulterated with the mode of passion. One
should distribute prasāda to the assembled Vaiṣṇavas
with great care and attention. This is one’s duty. If
one wishes to serve the Vaiṣṇavas in this way, he should
only invite pure Vaiṣṇavas.

Nityānanda dāsa: A new caste has emerged in Baragāchī
consisting of people who refer to themselves as
descendants of Vaiṣṇavas. Kaniṣṭha-adhikārī householders
invite them and feed them in the name of Vaiṣṇava sevā.
How is this to be viewed?

Bābājī: Have these descendants of Vaiṣṇavas taken up
śuddha-bhakti?

Nityānanda dāsa: I don’t see śuddha-bhakti in any of
them. They only call themselves Vaiṣṇavas. Some of them
wear kaupīnas (loincloths).

Bābājī: I cannot say why is this type of practice is in
vogue. It should not be done. I can only surmise that it
is going on because kaniṣṭha Vaiṣṇavas have no ability
to recognize who is a true Vaiṣṇava.

Nityānanda dāsa: Do the descendants of Vaiṣṇavas deserve
any special regard?

Bābājī: Honor is due for those who are actually

                          126
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017

Vaiṣṇavas. If the descendants of Vaiṣṇavas are pure
Vaiṣṇavas, they should be honored in proportion to their
advancement in bhakti.

Nityānanda dāsa: What if the descendant of a Vaiṣṇava is
only a worldly man?

Bābājī: Then he should be considered as a worldly man
and not as a Vaiṣṇava; he should not be honored as a
Vaiṣṇava. One should always remember the instruction
given by Śrīman Mahāprabhu (Śikṣāṣṭaka 3):

tṛṇād api sunīcena taror api sahiṣṇunā

amāninā mānadena kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ

One can chant śrī-hari-nāma in a humble state of mind,
thinking himself more insignificant than the straw in
the street and more tolerant than the tree. One should
be devoid of all sense of false prestige, and ready to
offer all respects to others. In such a state of mind,
one can chant śrī-hari-nāma constantly.

One should be free from pride and should offer
appropriate respect to others. One should offer
Vaiṣṇavas the respect due to a Vaiṣṇava, and he should
offer those who are not Vaiṣṇavas the respect that
befits any human being. If one does not offer respect to
others, he does not acquire the necessary qualification
to chant śrī-nāma.

Nityānanda dāsa: How can one be free from pride?

Bābājī: One should not proudly think, ”I am a brāhmaṇa,”
”I am wealthy,” ”I am a learned scholar,” ”I am a
Vaiṣṇava,” or ”I have renounced family life.” People may
well offer respect because one has such qualities, but
one should not want to be honored by others out of such
egoistic pride. One should always think oneself to be
worthless, insignificant, destitute, and lower than a
blade of grass.

Nityānanda dāsa: It seems from this that one cannot be a
Vaiṣṇava without humility and compassion.

Bābājī: That is quite true.

Nityānanda dāsa: Then does Bhakti-devī depend on
humility and compassion?

Bābājī: No, bhakti is completely independent. Bhakti is
the personification of beauty and she is the supreme
ornament; she does not depend on any other good quality.
Humility and compassion are not separate qualities, but
are included within bhakti. “I am a servant of Kṛṣṇa,”
“I am destitute,” “I have nothing,” “Kṛṣṇa is my all-in-
all‚” – the bhakti that is expressed in these attitudes
is itself humility (dainya).

The tenderness of heart experienced towards Kṛṣṇa is
known as bhakti. All other jīvas are servants of Kṛṣṇa,
and tenderness of heart towards them is compassion
(dayā). Therefore, compassion is included within bhakti.


                          127
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

Kṣamā (forgiveness) is the bhāva situated between
humility and compassion. “When I am so wretched and
insignificant myself, how can I inflict punishment upon
others?” ñ when this attitude is combined with
compassion, forgiveness automatically appears.
Forgiveness is also included in bhakti.

Kṛṣṇa is satya, real. The fact that the jīvas are
servants of Kṛṣṇa is also real, as is the fact that the
material world is only a boarding house for the jīvas.
That means that bhakti is also real, because these
truths are based on the jīvasí relationship with Kṛṣṇa,
which is itself bhakti. Truth, humility, compassion, and
forgiveness are four special qualities that are included
in bhakti.

Nityānanda dāsa: How should a Vaiṣṇava behave towards
the followers of other religions?

Bābājī: The instruction of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.26)
is:

nārāyaṇa-kalāḥ śāntāḥ bhajanti hy anasūyavaḥ

Those who are free from the propensity to slander others
and who are fully peaceful worship Śrī Nārāyaṇa and His
plenary portions.

There is no dharma other than vaiṣṇava-dharma. All other
dharmas that are or ever will be propagated in the world
are either steps on the staircase of vaiṣṇava-dharma, or
else distortions of it. Those dharmas that are steps
leading to bhakti should be respected in proportion to
their degree of purity. One should not bear any malice
towards dharmas that are distortions of bhakti, but one
should focus exclusively on the cultivation of oneís own
devotional truths. One should not maintain any animosity
towards the followers of other religions. When the time
is ripe, the followers of various other dharmas will
become Vaiṣṇavas easily. Of this there is no doubt.

Nityānanda dāsa: Is it our duty to preach Vaiṣṇava
dharma or not?

Bābājī: Certainly it is. Our Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has
given everyone the responsibility of spreading this
dharma:

nāco, gāo, bhakta-saṅge kara saṅkīrtana

kṛṣṇa-nāma upadeśií tāraí sarva-jana

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā (7.92)

Dance, sing, and perform saṅkīrtana in the association
of bhaktas. You should deliver everyone by instructing
them to chant śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma.

ataeva āmi ājñā diluñ sabākāre

jāhāñ tāhāñ prema-phala dehaí yāre tāre

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā (9.36)


                          128
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

Therefore, I am ordering everyone to distribute the
fruits of prema wherever they go and to whomever they
meet.

However, one must remember not to give śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma to
unqualified people. Such people should first be given
the necessary qualification; only then can they be given
hari-nāma. Furthermore, these statements of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu do not apply when neglect (upekṣā) is
appropriate, for instance, when dealing with inimical
people. Trying to enlighten such people only presents
obstacles to oneís preaching.

When Nityānanda dāsa had heard Haridāsa Bābājī
Mahāśayaís ambrosial words, he rolled on the ground at
his feet in great love. The grove reverberated with the
Vaiṣṇavasí loud exclamations of śrī-hari-nāma, and
everyone offered daṇḍavat-praṇāma to Bābājī Mahāśaya.
The dayís meeting in that secluded grove came to an end,
and everyone returned to their respective places.



Thus ends the Eighth Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled

“Nitya-Dharma & Vaiṣṇava Behavior”




Chapter 9

Nitya-Dharma, Material Science & Civilization



Lāhirī Mahāśaya lived in the association of Vaiṣṇavas in
Śrī Godruma for three or four years, and thus his heart
became fully pure. At all times he chanted hari-nāma:
while eating, walking, and sitting; before sleeping; and
after rising. He wore simple clothes and did not even
use shoes or sandals. He had relinquished his pride in
his caste so completely that as soon as he saw a
Vaiṣṇava, he would offer him daṇḍavat-praṇāma, and
forcibly take the dust from his feet. He would seek out
pure Vaiṣṇavas in order to honor the remnants of their
meals. His sons came to him from time to time, but when
they understood his mood, they departed quickly, not
daring to propose that he should come home with them. To
look at Lāhirī Mahāśaya now, one would certainly take
him to be a Vaiṣṇava Bābājī.

From the philosophy of the Vaiṣṇavas of Śrī Godruma,
Lāhirī Mahāśaya had understood that the essential
principle is genuine detachment within the heart, and
not the adoption of the external dress of renunciation.
In order to minimize his needs, he followed the example
of Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī and tore one piece of cloth into
four to use as his garments. Nonetheless, he still wore
his sacred thread around his neck. Whenever his sons
wanted to give him some money, he would reply, “I will

                          129
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

not accept even a single kauḍī from materialists.”
Candraśekhara, his eldest son, once brought him a
hundred rupees for a festival to feed the Vaiṣṇavas, but
Lāhirī Mahāśaya remembered Śrī Dāsa Gosvāmīís example,
and did not accept the money.

One day Paramahaṁsa Bābājī said, “Lāhirī Mahāśaya, you
are now free from all traces of non-Vaiṣṇava behavior.
Even though we have accepted the vows of mendicancy, we
can still learn much from you about renunciation. You
need only accept a Vaisnava name for everything to be
complete.”

Lāhirī Mahāśaya replied, “You are my parama-guru. Please
do as you see fit.”

Bābājī Mahāśaya said, “Your residence is at Śrī
Śāntipura, so we will address you as Śrī Advaita dāsa.”

Lāhirī Mahāśaya fell in prostrated obeisance, and
accepted the mercy of his new name. From that day on,
everyone called him Śrī Advaita dāsa, and they referred
to the kuṭīra in which he resided and performed his
bhajana as Advaita-kuṭīra.

Advaita dāsa had a childhood friend named Digambara
Caṭṭopādhyāya, who had earned vast wealth and reputation
by performing important services in the Muslim royal
administration. When Digambara Caṭṭopādhyāya attained
seniority, he retired from his government post and
returned to his village of Ambikā. There he heard that
his childhood friend had renounced his home and was now
living in Godruma under the name, Śrī Advaita dāsa, and
was spending his time chanting hari-nāma.

Digambara Caṭṭopādhyāya was a dogmatic worshiper of the
Goddess Durgā, and he would block his ears with his
hands if he so much as heard the name of a Vaiṣṇava.
When he heard about the ëdownfallí of his beloved
friend, he said to his servant, “Vāmana dāsa, arrange
for a boat immediately, and I will go straight to
Godruma.”

The servant quickly hired a boat and reported back to
his master.

Digambara Caṭṭopādhyāya was very astute. He was a
scholar of the tantra-śāstras and was highly skilled in
the ways of Muslim civilization. His knowledge of Farsi
and Arabic forced even Muslim scholars and teachers to
admit defeat at his hands, and he would leave any
brāhmaṇa scholar dumbfounded by his expertise in arguing
the tantra-śāstra. He had acquired a significant
reputation in Delhi, Lucknow, and other cities, and in
his spare time, he had written a book called Tantra-
saṅgraha, A Compendium on the Tantra, in which he
displayed his extensive learning through his
commentaries on the ślokas.

Digambara took his Tantra-saṅgraha with him and climbed
into the boat in a fiery mood. Within six hours they
arrived at Śrī Godruma, where Digambara instructed an
intelligent man to go to Śrī Advaita dāsa, while he
himself remained in the boat. Digambaraís messenger

                          130
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

found Śrī Advaita dāsa sitting in his kuṭīra, chanting
hari-nāma, and he offered praṇāma to him.

“Who are you, and why have you come?” inquired Advaita
dāsa.

The man replied, “I have been sent by the venerable
Digambara Caṭṭopādhyāya. He asks whether Kālīdāsa still
remembers him, or whether he has forgotten him.”

Śrī Advaita dāsa asked rather eagerly, “Where is
Digambara? He is my childhood friend; how could I
possibly forget him? Has he now adopted vaiṣṇava-
dharma?”

The man said, “He is sitting in a boat at the riverside.
I cannot say whether he is a Vaiṣṇava or not.”

Advaita dāsa said, “Why is he at the riverside? Why
doesnít he come to my kuṭīra?”

When the messenger heard these inviting words, he left
to inform Digambara, who arrived at Advaita-kuṭīra
within an hour, accompanied by a few other gentlemen.
Digambara had always been a generous man at heart, and
now he became overwhelmed with joy when he saw his old
friend. He embraced Śrī Advaita dāsa and sang a song
that he had composed himself:

kālī! tomāra līlā-khelā ke jāne mā, tribhuvane?

kabhu puruṣa, kabhu nārī, kabhu matta hao go raṇe

brahmā haíye sṛṣṭi kare, sṛṣṭi nāśa haíye hara,

viṣṇu haíye viśva-vyāpī pāla go mā, sarva-jane

kṛṣṇa-rūpe vṛndāvane, vāṁśī bājāo vane vane,

(ābāra) gaura haíye navadvīpe, mātāo sabe saṅkīrtane

O Mother Kālī, who in the three worlds can fathom your
pastimes? Sometimes you take the shape of a man,
sometimes that of a woman, and sometimes you appear in
battle in a ferocious mood. As Lord Brahmā you create
the universe, as Lord Śiva you destroy it, and as Lord
Viṣṇu you pervade the universe and maintain all living
entities. As Śrī Kṛṣṇa you appear in Vṛndāvana and
wander from forest to forest playing the flute. Then
again, you appear in Navadvīpa as Śrī Gaura and
intoxicate everyone with the chanting śrī-hari-nāma.

Advaita dāsa offered Digambara Caṭṭopādhyāya a seat made
of leaves, saying, “Come in, my brother! Come in! It has
been such a long time since we last met.”

Digambara sat on the seat, expressing his affection with
tears as he said, “My brother Kālīdāsa, where shall I
go? Now you have become a renunciant, and you donít care
for the devas or for your religious duties. I came from
Punjab filled with so much hope, but our boyhood friends
have all gone. Peśā, Pāglā, Khendā, Girish, Iśe Pāglā,
Dhanuva, Kele the carpenter and Kānti Bhaṭṭacārya have
all passed away. Now only you and I remain. I thought I

                          131
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

could sometimes cross the Gaṅgā and meet you at
Śāntipura, and you could sometimes cross the Gaṅgā and
visit me in Ambikā. We could have spent whatever time
remains to us singing together and studying the tantra-
śāstra. Alas! Fate has dealt me a cruel blow. You have
become a worthless heap of cow-dung ñ of no use in this
life or the next. Tell me, how has this happened to
you?”

Advaita dāsa could see that his boyhood friend was most
undesirable company, and he began to devise a way of
escaping from his clutches. Thinking like this, he said,
“Brother Digambara, do you remember that day in Ambikā
when we were playing gullī-ḍaṇḍā, and we reached the old
tamarind tree?”

Digambara: Yes, yes, I remember very clearly. It was the
tamarind tree just next to Gaurīdāsa Paṇḍita’s house.
Gaura-Nitāi used to sit underneath that tree.

Advaita: Brother, as we were playing, you said, “Don’t
touch this tamarind tree. Aunt Śacī’s son used to sit
here, and if we touch this tree, we shall become
renunciants.”

Digambara: Yes, I remember it well. I noticed that you
had some leaning toward the Vaiṣṇavas, and I said, “You
will fall into Gaurāṅga’s trap.”

Advaita: Brother, that has been my nature. At that time,
I was only on the verge of falling into that trap, but
now I have actually fallen in.

Digambara: Take my hand and come out. It is not good to
remain in a trap.

Advaita: Brother, I am very happy in this trap. I pray
to remain here forever. Just touch this trap once and
see for yourself.

Digambara: I have seen everything. It seems like
happiness in the beginning, but in the end you will see
that it is just deception.

Advaita: And what about the trap that you are in? Do you
expect to obtain great happiness in the end? Don’t
delude yourself.

Digambara: Look, we are the attendants of the Goddess
Mahāvidyā (Durgā). We enjoy happiness now, and we will
also enjoy it in the hereafter. You think that you are
happy now, but I don’t see that you are happy at all.
Furthermore, there will be no limit to your suffering in
the end. I cannot understand why anyone becomes a
Vaiṣṇava. You see, we enjoy eating meat and fish, we are
well dressed, and we are more civilized than you
Vaiṣṇavas. We enjoy all the happiness that material
science affords, whereas you are deprived of all these
things, and ultimately you will not even gain
deliverance.

Advaita: Brother, why do you claim that there will be no
deliverance for me in the end?


                          132
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

Digambara: No one – even Lord Brahmā, Lord Viṣṇu, or
Lord Śiva – can ever obtain salvation if they are
indifferent to Mother Nistāriṇī. Mother Nistāriṇī, she
who grants deliverance, is the primordial power. She
manifests Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and Maheśa, and after that she
maintains them by her active potency (kārya-śakti). When
that Mother desires, everything re-enters her womb,
which is the vessel that contains the entire universe.
Have you ever worshiped the Mother to invoke her mercy?

Advaita: Is Mother Nistāriṇī a conscious entity or inert
matter?

Digambara: She is consciousness personified, and she
possesses independent will. It is by her desire alone
that spirit is created.

Advaita: What is puruṣa, and what is prakṛti?

Digambara: Vaiṣṇavas engage only in bhajana; they have
no knowledge of fundamental philosophical truths.
Although puruṣa and prakṛti manifest as two phenomena,
they are actually one, like the two halves of a chick-
pea. If you take the outer skin off the chick-pea, there
are two halves; but if the outer skin remains, there is
one chick-pea. Puruṣa is conscious and prakṛti is inert.
When the conscious and the inert merge into one
undifferentiated substance, it is known as brahma.

Advaita: Is your mother prakṛti, female, or puruṣa,
male?

Digambara: Sometimes she is female, and sometimes male.

Advaita: So, if puruṣa and prakṛti are like the two
halves of a chick-pea covered by a skin, which is the
mother and which is the father?

Digambara: Are you making philosophical enquiries?
Excellent! We are well acquainted with the truth. The
fact is that the mother is prakṛti, matter, and the
father is caitanya, consciousness.

Advaita: And who are you?

Digambara:Pāśa-baddho bhavej jīvaḥ pāśu-muktaḥ
sadāśivaḥ: “When one is bound by the ropes of māyā, one
is a jīva; and when one is released from those bonds,
one is Lord Sadāśiva.”

Advaita: So are you spirit or matter?

Digambara: I am spirit, and Mother is matter. When I am
bound, she is Mother; when I become liberated, she will
be my wife.

Advaita: Oh, splendid! Now the whole truth is exposed
without any doubt. The person who is your mother now
will become your wife later. Where did you get such a
philosophy?

Digambara: Brother, I am not like you, simply wandering
here and there saying, “Vaiṣṇava! Vaiṣṇava!” I have
acquired this knowledge by associating with innumerable

                            133
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

perfected and liberated sannyāsīs, brahmacārīs and
tāntrikas, and by studying the tantra-śāstras day and
night. If you wish, I can also make you fit for
understanding this knowledge.

Advaita dasa thought to himself, “What a ghastly
misfortune!” But aloud he said, “Very well. Please
explain one idea to me. What is civilization, and what
is material science (prākṛtika-vijñāna)?”

Digambara: Civilization means to speak courteously in a
cultured society, to dress oneself in a respectable and
pleasing manner, and to eat and to conduct oneself in a
way that is not repugnant to others. You do none of
these things.

Advaita: Why do you say that?

Digambara: You are distinctly unsociable, for you do not
mingle with others. The Vaiṣṇavas have never learned
what it means to please others with sweet words. As soon
as they lay eyes on anyone, they command him to chant
hari-nāma. Why, is there no other civilized discussion?
Anyone who sees your dress will not be inclined to let
you sit in an assembly. You wear a loincloth, a peculiar
tuft of hair on the top of your head, and a garland of
beads around your neck. What kind of an outfit is this?
And you eat only potatoes and roots. You are not at all
civilized.

Advaita dāsa determined that if   he were to start a
quarrel and Digambara went away   angered, it would be a
great relief. So he said, “Does   your type of civilized
living give you the opportunity   to attain a higher
destination in the next life?”

Digambara: Culture does not in itself grant one a higher
destination in the next life, but how can society be
elevated without culture? If society is elevated, then
one can endeavor for progress in other planets.

Advaita: Brother, I may say something, if you will not
become angry.

Digambara: You are my childhood friend; I would give up
my life for you. How can I not tolerate whatever you
have to say? I am fond of courtesy; even if I become
angry, my words remain sweet. The more a man can conceal
his inner feelings, the more cultured he is considered
to be.

Advaita: Human life is very short, and there are many
disturbances. In this brief span of life, the only duty
of humanity is to worship Śrī Hari with simplicity.
Studying the ways of material civilization and culture
is simply deceiving the soul. I have understood that the
word sabhyatā (civilization) is simply another name for
civil deception. A human being remains simple as long as
he adheres to the path of truth. When he adopts the path
of dishonesty, he desires to appear civilized and to
please others by sweet words, but internally he remains
addicted to deception and wicked deeds. What you
describe as civilization has no good qualities, because
truthfulness and simplicity are really the only good

                          134
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

qualities.

In modern times, civilization has come to mean keeping
oneís depravity concealed within. The word sabhyatā
literally means fitness to participate in a sabhā, or a
virtuous assembly. In reality, civilization that is free
from sin and deception is only found among Vaiṣṇavas.
Non-Vaiṣṇavas very much appreciate civilization that is
saturated with sin. The civilization that you speak of
is not related to the nitya-dharma of the jīva.

If civilization means to adorn oneself in stylish
clothes to appeal to others, then prostitutes are more
civilized than you are. The only requirement for
clothing is that it should cover the body and be clean
and free from unpleasant odor. Food is faultless when it
is pure and nutritious, but you only care whether it
tastes good; you donít even consider whether it is pure
or not. Wine and meat are naturally impure, and a
civilization based upon the consumption of such things
is simply a society dedicated to sin. What passes as
civilization at present is the culture of Kali-yuga.

Digambara: Have you forgotten the civilization of the
Muslim emperors? Just consider the manners with which
people sit in the court of a Muslim emperor, how
politely they speak, and with such proper etiquette.

Advaita: That is only worldly conduct. How deficient is
a man, really, if he does not abide by these external
formalities? Brother, you have served in the Muslim
government for so long that you have become partial to
that type of civilization. In reality, human life only
becomes civilized when it is sinless. The so-called
advancement of civilization in Kali-yuga simply means an
increase in sinful activity; this is nothing but
hypocrisy.

Digambara: Look, educated modern men have concluded that
civilization means humanism, and that those who are not
civilized are not human beings. To dress women
attractively and thereby conceal their faults is
considered to be a sign of sophistication.

Advaita: Just consider whether this idea is good or bad.
I perceive that those whom you call ‘educated’ are
merely rogues who have taken advantage of the times.
Such people favor this deceitful civilization partly
because of sinful impressions within their hearts, and
partly because they see it as an opportunity to conceal
their faults. Can a wise man find happiness in such a
civilization? Only vain arguments and physical
intimidation can maintain veneration for a civilization
of rogues.

Digambara: Some people say that society is advancing
with the increase of knowledge in the world, and
eventually it will be like heaven on earth.

Advaita: That is simply fantasy. It is quite
extraordinary that people have faith in this, and it is
even more bizarre that others have the audacity to
propagate such a view without actually believing it
themselves. There are two types of knowledge:

                          135
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

paramārthika knowledge relates to eternal truth, while
laukika knowledge relates to this transitory world.
Paramārthika knowledge does not seem to be increasing;
on the contrary, in most cases knowledge has been
corrupted and deviated from its original nature. Only
laukika knowledge seems to be on the increase. Does the
jīva have an eternal relationship with laukika
knowledge? When laukika-jñāna increases, people’s minds
become distracted by temporary material pursuits, and
they neglect the original spiritual truth. I firmly
believe that the more laukika-jñāna increases, the more
duplicitous a civilization becomes. This is a great
misfortune for the living beings.

Digambara: A misfortune? Why?

Advaita: As I said before, human life is very short. The
jīvas are like travelers at an inn, and they should use
this brief span of life to prepare themselves for their
ultimate destination. It would be sheer foolishness if
travelers staying in an inn were so caught up with
improving the conditions of their stay that they forgot
their destination. The more one’s involvement with
material knowledge increases, the more one’s time for
spiritual matters dwindles. I am convinced that material
knowledge should be used only as much as it is needed to
maintain one’s livelihood. There is no necessity for
excessive material knowledge and its companion, material
civilization. For how many days will this earthly
glitter remain?

Digambara: I see that I have fallen into the clutches of
an unyielding renunciant. Then does society serve no
function?

Advaita: That depends upon the composition of a
particular society. The function served by a society of
Vaiṣṇavas is highly beneficial for the jīvas, but a
society of non-Vaiṣṇavas, or a society that is merely
secular, serves no advantageous function for the jīvas.
But enough of this topic. Tell me, What do you mean by
material science?

Digambara: The tantra-śāstra has delineated many types
of material science (prākṛtika-vijñāna). Material
science includes whatever knowledge, skill and beauty
are to be found in the material world, as well as all
the various branches of knowledge, such as military
science, medical science, music, dance, and astronomy.
Prakṛti (material nature) is the primordial power, and
by her own potency she has manifested this material
universe and all the variety in it. Each and every form
is a by-product of this potency and is accompanied by
the knowledge or science corresponding to it. When one
acquires that knowledge, he is liberated from sins
committed to Mother Nistāriṇī. The Vaiṣṇavas do not seek
this knowledge, but we śāktas will obtain liberation on
the strength of it. Just consider how many books have
been written in pursuance of this knowledge by great men
such as Plato, Aristotle, Socrates, and the famous
Hākim.

Advaita: Digambara, you have said that the Vaiṣṇavas
have no interest in vijñāna (experiential, realized

                          136
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

knowledge), but that is not true. The pure knowledge of
the Vaiṣṇavas is endowed with vijñāna:

śrī bhagavān uvāca

jñānaṁ parama-guhyaṁ me yad-vijñāna-samanvitam

sa-rahasyaṁ tad-aṅgaṁ ca gṛhāṇa gaditaṁ mayā

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.9.31)

Śrī Bhagavān said, “O Brahmā, knowledge of Me is non-
dual, and yet it has four distinct divisions: jñāna,
vijñāna, rahasya and tad-aṅga. A jīva cannot understand
this by his own intelligence, but you can understand it
by My mercy. Jñāna is My svarūpa, and My relationship
with My potency is vijñāna. The jīva is My rahasya
(secret mystery), and pradhāna is My jñāna-aṅga.”

Before this creation, Bhagavān was pleased with Brahmāís
worship, and instructed him on the tenets of pure
vaiṣṇava-dharma. Bhagavān said, “O Brahmā, I am
explaining to you this most confidential jñāna of
Myself, the vijñāna with which it is endowed, its
rahasya, and all of its aṅgas (components). Accept all
of this from Me.”

Digambara, there are two types of knowledge: śuddha-
jñāna, pure knowledge, and viṣaya-jñāna, knowledge of
material objects. All human beings acquire viṣaya-jñāna
through the senses, but that knowledge is impure, so it
is useless for discerning transcendental objects. It is
only useful in relation to the jīvaís conditioned state
of material existence. Knowledge that pertains to
spiritual consciousness is known as śuddha-jñāna. That
is eternal, and it is the basis of the Vaiṣṇavasí
devotional service. Spiritual knowledge is the
antithesis of material knowledge, and is completely
distinct from it. You say that viṣaya-jñāna is vijñāna,
but it is not vijñāna in the true sense of the term. The
real reason that your Āyur-veda and other types of
material knowledge are called vijñāna is that they are
in contrast to pure spiritual knowledge. True vijñāna is
that pure knowledge that is distinct from material
knowledge. There is no difference between jñāna, which
is the knowledge of a truly abiding substance (cid-
vastu), and vijñāna, which is the knowledge of how such
an object is distinct from matter. Jñāna is direct
perception of a transcendental object, whereas vijñāna
is the establishment of pure knowledge in contrast to
material knowledge. Although these two are actually the
same thing, they are known either as jñāna or as vijñāna
according to the methods they employ.

You refer to material knowledge as vijñāna, but the
Vaiṣṇavas say that vijñāna is the true diagnosis of
material knowledge. They have examined the nature of
military science, medical science, astronomy, and
chemistry, and they have concluded that these are all
material knowledge, and that the jīva has no eternal
connection with them. Therefore, these different types
of material knowledge are of no consequence in relation
to the jīvaís nitya-dharma. The Vaiṣṇavas understand
that those who are expanding their mundane knowledge

                             137
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

according to their material propensities are immersed in
karma-kāṇḍa. However, Vaiṣṇavas do not condemn such
people. Indirectly, the endeavors for material
improvement help the Vaiṣṇavasí spiritual progress to
some extent. The material knowledge of those who pursue
material advancement is insignificant, and you may call
it prākṛtika-vijñāna, natural science. There is
certainly no objection to that. It is foolish to quarrel
over names.

Digambara: Well, if there were no advancement of
material knowledge, how could you Vaiṣṇavas conveniently
satisfy your material needs and be free to engage in
bhajana? You should also make some endeavor for material
advancement.

Advaita: People work in different ways, according to
their respective inclinations, but Īśvara is the supreme
controller of all, and He awards each person the
appropriate result of his action.

Digambara: Where does inclination come from?

Advaita: Inclination develops from deep-rooted
impressions in the heart, acquired through previous
activities. The more extensively one is involved with
matter, the more expert he will be in material knowledge
and the crafts originating from such knowledge. The
articles that such people manufacture may help the
Vaiṣṇavas to serve Kṛṣṇa, but there is no need for the
Vaiṣṇavas to labor for them separately. For example,
carpenters earn their livelihood by producing
siṁhāsanas, which gṛhastha Vaiṣṇavas use as platforms
where they place the Deity. Bees are inclined to gather
honey, which devotees accept for the service of the
Deity. It is not that all the jīvas of the world
endeavor for spiritual advancement. They are engaged in
different types of work, impelled by their respective
natures.

Human beings have different types of tendencies, some
high and some low. Those with lower natures are engaged
in varieties of work impelled by their lower tendencies.
The menial labor they perform assists other types of
work which are prompted by higher natures. The wheel of
this universe turns by the virtue of this division of
work. Everyone who is under the jurisdiction of matter
works according to his material propensity, and thereby
assists the Vaiṣṇavas in their spiritual development.
Such materialists are not aware that their activities
are helping the Vaiṣṇavas because they are bewildered by
the potency of Śrī Viṣṇuís māyā. Consequently, the
entire world serves the Vaiṣṇavas, but unknowingly.

Digambara: What is this viṣṇu-māyā?

Advaita: In the Caṇḍī-māhātmya of the Mārkaṇḍeya Purāṇa
(81.40), viṣṇu-māyā is described, mahamāyā hareḥ śaktir
yayā sammohitaṁ jagat: “The potency of Bhagavān by which
the entire world is bewildered is known as mahamāyā.”

Digambara: Then who is the goddess I know as Mother
Nistāriṇī?


                          138
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

Advaita: She is Śrī Hari’s external potency known as
viṣṇu-māyā.

Digambara opened his book on tantra and said, “Look, it
states in tantra-śāstra that my divine mother is
consciousness personified. She possesses full will and
she is beyond the three qualities of material nature,
yet she is the support of those three qualities. Your
viṣṇu-māyā is not free from the influence of the modes
of nature, so how can you equate your viṣṇu-māyā with my
mother? This type of fanaticism on the part of the
Vaiṣṇavas really irritates me. You Vaiṣṇavas have blind
faith.”

Advaita: My brother, Digambara, please don’t be angry.
You have come to see me after such a long time, and I
want to satisfy you. Is it a slight to speak of viṣṇu-
māyā? Bhagavān Viṣṇu is the embodiment of supreme
consciousness, and He is the one supreme controller of
all. Everything that exists is His potency. Potency is
not an independent object (vastu), but rather the
functional power inherent within an object (vastu-
dharma). To say that śakti (potency) is the root of
everything is thoroughly opposed to tattva, metaphysical
truth. Śakti cannot exist independent of the object from
which it originates. We must first accept the existence
of an object that possesses full spiritual
consciousness, otherwise accepting śakti by itself is
like dreaming of a flower in the sky.

The commentary on Vedānta states, śakti-śaktimator
abhedaḥ: “There is no difference between the potency and
the possessor of potency.” This means that śakti is not
a separate object. The Supreme Person who is the master
of all potencies is the one truly abiding substance.
Śakti is the quality, or inherent function, that is
subordinate to His will. You have said that śakti is the
embodiment of consciousness, that it possesses will, and
that it is beyond the influence of the three qualities
of material nature. This is correct, but only insofar as
śakti operates fully under the support of a pure
conscious entity, and is thus considered identical with
that powerful entity. Desire and consciousness depend on
the Supreme Being. Desire cannot exist in śakti; rather,
śakti acts in accordance with the desire of the Supreme
Being. You have the power to move, and when you desire
to move, that power will act. To say “the power is
moving” is merely a figure of speech; it actually means
that the person who possesses that power is moving.

Bhagavān has only one śakti, which is manifest in
different forms. When it functions in a spiritual
capacity, it is known as cit-śakti, and when it operates
in a material capacity, it is known as māyā, or jaḍa-
śakti. It is stated in the Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (6.8),
parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate, “The Vedas say that
Bhagavānís divine śakti is full of variety.”

The śakti that supports the three modes of material
nature ñ sattva, rajaḥ, and tamaḥ ñ is known as jaḍa-
śakti, and its functions are to create and destroy the
universe. The Purāṇas and the Tantra refer to it as
viṣṇu-māyā, mahāmāyā, māyā, and so on. There are many
allegorical descriptions of her activities. For example,

                          139
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

it is said that she is the mother of Brahmā, Viṣṇu, and
Śiva, and that she slew the demoniac brothers Śumbha and
Niśumbha. The living entity remains under the control of
this śakti as long as he is engrossed in material
enjoyment. When the jīva is endowed with pure knowledge,
he becomes aware of his own svarūpa, and this awareness
enables him to transcend māyā-śakti and attain the
liberated status. He then comes under the control of
cit-śakti and obtains spiritual happiness.

Digambara: Are you not under the control of some power?

Advaita: Yes, we are jīva-śakti. We have abandoned māyā-
śakti and come under the protection of cit-śakti.

Digambara: Then you are also a śākta.

Advaita: Yes, the Vaiṣṇavas are true śāktas. We are
under the control of Śrī Rādhikā, who is the embodiment
of cit-śakti. It is only under Her shelter that we
render service to Kṛṣṇa, so who is more of a śākta than
the Vaiṣṇavas? We do not see any difference between the
Vaiṣṇavas and the real śāktas. Those who are only
attached to māyā-śakti, without taking shelter of cit-
śakti, may be called śāktas, but they are not Vaiṣṇavas;
they are only materialists. In the Nārada-pañcarātra,
Śrī Durgā Devī explains:

tava vakṣasi rādhāhaṁ rāse vṛndāvane vane

In the forest known as Vṛndāvana, I am Your internal
śakti, Śrī Rādhikā, who adorns Your chest in the rāsa
dance.

From this statement of Durgā Devī, it is clear that
there is only one śakti, not two. That śakti is Rādhikā
when She manifests as the internal potency, and she is
Durgā when she is manifested as the external potency. In
the condition of freedom from contact with the material
modes of nature, viṣṇu-māyā is the cit-śakti. That same
viṣṇu-māyā is the jaḍa-śakti when it is endowed with the
modes of nature.

Digambara: You said that you are jīva-śakti. What is
that?

Advaita: Bhagavān has said in the Bhagavad-gītā (7.4-5):

bhūmir āpo ënalo vāyuḥ khaṁ mano buddhir eva ca

ahaṅkāra itīyaṁ me bhinnā prakṛtir aṣṭadhā

apareyam itas tv anyāṁ prakṛtiṁ viddhi me parām

jīva-bhūtāṁ mahā-bāho yayedaṁ dhāryate jagat

My inferior, or material prakṛti, is comprised of the
eight components: earth, water, fire, air, space, mind,
intelligence, and ego. These eight elements are under
the control of jaḍa-māyā. There is however another
prakṛti which is superior to this jaḍa-prakṛti and which
consists of the jīvas. By it this material world is
perceived or seen.


                          140
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

†Digambara, do you know the glory of Bhagavad-gītā? This
śāstra is the essence of the instructions of all the
śāstras, and it resolves all conflicts between the
various philosophical ideologies. It establishes that
the category of entities known as jīva-tattva is
fundamentally different from the material world and is
one of Īśvaraís potencies. Learned authorities refer to
this tattva as the taṭastha-śakti. This śakti is
superior to the external potency and inferior to the
internal potency. Therefore, the jīvas are a unique
śakti of Kṛṣṇa.

Digambara: Kālīdāsa, have you read the Bhagavad-gītā?

Advaita: Yes, I read it quite some time ago.

Digambara: What is the nature of its philosophical
teachings?

Advaita: My brother, Digambara, people praise molasses
only as long as they have not tasted sugar-candy.

Digambara: My brother, this is simply blind faith on
your part. Everyone has tremendous regard for the Devī-
Bhāgavata and the Devī-gītā. You Vaiṣṇavas are the only
people who cannot even bear to hear the names of these
two books.

Advaita: Have you read the Devī-gītā?

Digambara: No. Why should I lie? I was going to copy
these two books, but I still have not been able to do
so.

Advaita: How can you say whether a book is good or bad
when you have not even read it? Is it my faith or yours
that is blind?

Digambara: Brother, I have been somewhat afraid of you
ever since childhood. You were always very talkative,
but now that you have become a Vaiṣṇava, you are even
more assertive in expressing your views. Whatever I say,
you cut to pieces.

Advaita: I am certainly a worthless fool, but I can see
that there is no śuddha-dharma apart from vaiṣṇava-
dharma. You were always inimical to the Vaiṣṇavas, and
that is why you could not even recognize the path to
your own auspiciousness.

Digambara: (a little angry) Do you claim that I cannot
see the path to my own auspiciousness, when I have
performed so much sādhana and bhajana? Have I been
cutting grass all this time to feed my horse? Just look
at this Tantra-saṅgraha that I have written! Do you
think it was a joke to produce a book like this? You
arrogantly flaunt your Vaiṣṇavism, and ridicule modern
science and civilization. What am I to do about this?
Come, let us go to a civilized assembly and see who will
be judged right – you or me.

Advaita dāsa wanted to be free from Digambaraís
undesirable association as soon as possible, for he felt
that this meeting was completely non-productive. “Well

                          141
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

brother,” he said, “what use will your material science
and civilization be at the time of death?”

Digambara: Kālīdāsa, you are really a strange fellow.
Will anything remain after death? As long as you are
alive, you should try to acquire fame among civilized
men and enjoy the five pleasures: wine, meat, fish,
wealth, and women. At the time of death, Mother
Nistāriṇī will arrange for you to go wherever you are
meant to go. Death is certain, so why are you subjecting
yourself to so much tribulation at present? Where will
you be when the five elements of this body merge with
the five great elements of material nature?

This world is māyā, yogamāyā and mahāmāyā. It is she who
can award you happiness now and liberation after death.
Nothing exists except śakti; you have come from śakti,
and you will return to śakti in the end. Just serve
śakti and witness the power of śakti in science. Try to
increase your spiritual power through yoga discipline.
In the end, you will see that there is nothing other
than this imperceptible potency. Where did you get this
far-fetched tale about a conscious supreme God? Your
belief in such a story is making you suffer now, and I
canít fathom what destination you will attain in the
next life that will be superior to ours. What is the
need for a personal God? Just serve śakti, and when you
merge into that śakti, you will remain there eternally.

Advaita: My brother, you have become infatuated with
this material śakti. If there is an all-knowing
Bhagavān, then what will happen to you after death? What
is happiness? Happiness is peace of mind. I have given
up all material pleasure, and found happiness in inner
peace. If there is anything more to be achieved after
death, I will attain that as well. You are not
satisfied. The more you try to enjoy, the more your
thirst for material pleasure expands. You do not even
know what happiness is. You are simply drifting in the
current of sensuality and calling out, “Pleasure!
Pleasure!” but one day you will fall into an ocean of
sorrow.

Digambara: Whatever will be my fate will be. But why
have you abandoned the association of cultured men?

Advaita: I have not renounced the association of
cultured men; rather, that is precisely what I have
obtained. I am trying to give up the association of
degenerate men.

Digambara: How do you define degenerate association?

Advaita: Please hear without becoming angry, and I will
tell you. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam says (4.30.33):

yāvat te māyayā spṛṣṭā bhramāma iha karmabhiḥ

tāvad bhavat-prasaṅgānāṁ saṅgaḥ syān no bhave bhave

quoted in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (10.292)

O Bhagavān! We pray that as long as we are bewildered by
Your illusory potency and are wandering in material

                          142
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017

existence under the influence of our karmic activities,
we may have the association of Your premī bhaktas birth
after birth.

It is said in the Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (10.294):

asadbhiḥ saha saṅgas tu na kartavyaḥ kadācana

yasmāt sarvārtha-hāniḥ syād adhaḥ-pātaś ca jāyate

One should never associate with people who are immersed
in non-reality, for by such association one is deprived
of all worthwhile objects of attainment and falls down
to a degraded position.

The Katyāyana-saṁhitā states:

varaṁ hutavaha-jvālā pañjarāntar-vyavasthitiḥ

na śauri-cintā-vimukha-jana-samvāsa-vaiśasam

quoted in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (10.295)

Even if I should die in a blazing fire or be trapped for
all time in a cage, I still do not want the company of
persons averse to thinking of Kṛṣṇa.

It is said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.31.33-34):

satyaṁ śaucaṁ dayā maunaṁ buddhir hrīr śrīr yaśaḥ kṣamā

śamo damo bhagaś ceti yat-saṅgād yāti saṅkṣayam

teṣv aśānteṣu mūḍheṣu khaṇḍitātmasv asādhuṣu

saṅgaṁ na kuryāc chocyeṣu yoṣit-krīḍā-mṛgeṣu ca

quoted in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (10.297-298)

If one associates with those who are devoid of virtue,
oneís good qualities ñ such as truthfulness,
cleanliness, mercy, restraint of speech, intelligence,
shyness, wealth, fame, forgiveness, control of the
senses, control of the mind, and fortune ñ completely
fade away. Therefore, one should never associate with
disgraceful people who are agitated by desires for sense
enjoyment, who are foolish, who are engrossed in the
bodily conception of life, and who are playthings in the
hands of women.

It is said in the Garuḍa Purāṇa (231.17):

antargato ëpi vedānāṁ sarva-śāstrārtha-vedy api

yo na sarveśvare bhaktas taṁ vidyāt puruṣādhamam

quoted in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (10.303)

One may have studied all the Vedas and be acquainted
with the meaning of all the śāstras, but if he is not a
devotee of Śrī Hari, he should be understood as the
lowest of men.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.1.18) states:

                          143
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017


prāyaścittāni cīrṇāni nārāyaṇa-parāṅmukham

na niṣpunanti rājendra surā-kumbham ivāpagāḥ

quoted in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (10.305)

O King, just as the water of many rivers cannot purify a
wine pot, similarly, a person who is averse to Śrī
Nārāyaṇa cannot become purified by all the different
types of atonement, even if they are executed perfectly
again and again.

It is said in the Skanda Purāṇa:

hanti nindati vai dveṣṭi vaiṣṇavān nābhinandati

krudhyate yāti no harṣaṁ darśane patanāni ṣaṭ

quoted in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (10.312)

The six causes of downfall are to beat a Vaiṣṇava, to
slander him, to bear malice against him, to fail to
welcome or please him, to display anger towards him, and
to not feel pleasure upon seeing him.

Digambara, a person can never attain auspiciousness
through these types of immoral association. What
possible benefit can one gain by living in a society
composed of such men?

Digambara: Well now, what a distinguished gentleman I
have come to speak with! You should certainly stay
amidst the pure Vaiṣṇavas. I am going to my own house.

Advaita dāsa felt that his exchange with Digambara was
drawing to a close, and that it would be appropriate to
conclude on a pleasant note. In a courteous mood he
said, “You are my childhood friend. I know you must
return home, but I donít want you to go just yet. You
have come all this way, so please stay for a while. Take
some prasāda, and then you may go.”

Digambara: Kālīdāsa, you know very well that I follow a
strict diet. I only eat haviṣya, and I had a meal just
before coming here. However, it was a pleasure to see
you. I will come again if I find the time. I cannot stay
overnight because I have some duties to perform
according to the system given to me by my guru. Brother,
I must take my leave for today.

Advaita: I shall see you off to the boat. Let us go.

Digambara: No, no. Carry on with your own business. I
have some men with me.

Digambara then went away, singing a song about Goddess
Kālī, and Advaita dāsa was able to chant śrī-nāma in his
kuṭira without further obstruction.



Thus ends the Ninth Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,


                          144
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

entitled

“Nitya-Dharma, Material Science & Civilization”




Chapter 10

Nitya-Dharma & History



Śrī Harihara Bhaṭṭācārya was a professor residing in
Agradvīpa. He had accepted initiation into vaiṣṇava-
dharma, and was engaged in the worship of Bhagavān Śrī
Kṛṣṇa in his home. But a doubt arose in his mind about
Vaiṣṇavism which he could not dispel even after speaking
to many people about it. In fact, such talk only
agitated his mind further. One day, Harihara went to the
village of Arkaṭilā, and enquired from Śrī Caturbhuja
Nyāyaratna, “Bhaṭṭācārya Mahāśaya, can you tell me how
long ago vaiṣṇava-dharma appeared?”

For nearly twenty years Nyāyaratna Mahāśaya had
laboriously studied the nyāya-śāstra. Consequently, he
had become quite indifferent to religion, and did not
like to be bothered with religious discussions. He only
displayed any devotional tendency when he was performing
śakti-pūjā (worshiping Goddess Durgā).

When Nyāyaratna heard this question, he thought that
Harihara, being partial to the Vaiṣṇava religion,
intended to embroil him in a dispute, and that it would
be best to avoid such a conflict. Thinking like this,
Nyāyaratna Mahāśaya said, “Harihara, what kind of
question are you asking me today? You have studied the
nyāya-śāstra all the way up to the muktipada section.
Look, you know that there is no mention of vaiṣṇava-
dharma anywhere in the nyāya-śāstra, so why are you
burdening me with such a strange question?”

Harihara, now slightly aggravated, replied, “Bhaṭṭācārya
Mahāśaya, my forefathers have been Vaiṣṇavas for many
generations. I am also initiated with a Vaiṣṇava mantra,
and I have never had any doubt about vaiṣṇava-dharma.
However, you may have heard that Tarka-cūḍāmaṇi of
Vikramapura intends to uproot the Vaiṣṇava religion, and
as a result he is preaching against it at the moment,
both locally and abroad, and earning a good deal of
wealth by so doing. In a meeting that was attended
mostly by worshipers of Durgā, he proclaimed that the
Vaiṣṇava religion is very recent and has no
philosophical substance. He said that only low-class
people become Vaiṣṇavas; high-class people do not
respect vaiṣṇava-dharma.

“When I first heard such conclusions from a scholar of
his stature, it somewhat pained my heart, but when I
thought it over, it occurred to me that no vaiṣṇava-
dharma existed anywhere in Bengal prior to the
appearance of Śrī Caitanyadeva. Before that, everyone
worshiped Goddess Durgā and recited the śakti-mantras.

                          145
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

Granted, there were a few Vaiṣṇavas like ourselves, who
worshiped by reciting Vaiṣṇava mantras, but everyoneís
goal was ultimately to attain brahma and mukti, and to
this end they diligently applied themselves.

“In the type of vaiṣṇava-dharma into which we were
initiated, everyone approved of the pañcopāsana system,
but after Caitanya Mahāprabhuís time, vaiṣṇava-dharma
assumed a new outlook, and now Vaiṣṇavas cannot even
bear to hear the words mukti and brahma. I cannot even
say what they think bhakti is. Well, as they say, “A
one-eyed cow often strays from the herd.” That applies
perfectly to modern Vaiṣṇavas. So my question is, did
this type of vaiṣṇava-dharma exist previously, or has it
only appeared since the time of Caitanyadeva?”

Seeing that Harihara was not as orthodox a Vaiṣṇava as
he had feared, Nyāyaratna Mahāśayaís face blossomed with
happiness. “Harihara,” he said, “you are a true scholar
of the nyāya-śāstra. You have just expressed exactly
what I believe. These days there is a new upsurge of
vaiṣṇava-dharma, and I am afraid to say anything against
it. We must be a little cautious, because it is the age
of Kali. Many wealthy and respectable gentlemen have now
accepted Caitanyaís doctrine. They completely disregard
us, and even think that we are their enemies. I am
afraid that our profession will become obsolete within a
short time. Why, even the inferior castes of oil-
sellers, betel-leaf vendors and gold-traders have taken
to studying the śāstra, and that pains us.

“Look, for a long time the brāhmaṇas had arranged things
so that no other caste could study the śāstra, even the
kāyasthas, who are just below the brāhmaṇa caste.
Everyone was obliged to honor our words. Now people of
all castes have become Vaiṣṇavas and deliberate on
philosophical truths, and this has greatly damaged the
reputation of the brāhmaṇa caste. Nimāi Paṇḍita is
responsible for the destruction of brāhmaṇa-dharma.
Harihara, Tarka-cūḍāmaṇi has spoken correctly, whether
he has done so out of greed for wealth, or after careful
analysis of the situation.

“When I hear the words of the Vaiṣṇavas, my body burns
with anger. Now they go as far as to say that
Śaṅkarācārya established Māyāvāda śāstra on the order of
Bhagavān Himself, and that the Vaiṣṇava religion is
eternal. The religion that sprung up not even a hundred
years ago has now become beginningless! How amazing! It
is said, “The benefit which is meant for one man is
enjoyed by another.”

“Whatever glory Navadvīpa attained formerly has now been
laid to waste. In particular, there are some Vaiṣṇavas
who now live at Gādīgāchā in Navadvīpa, who look upon
the world as a shallow earthen plate. A few good
scholars among them have stirred up such a great
commotion that it has ruined the entire country. Now the
occupational duties of the four castes, the eternal
truth of the doctrine of Māyāvāda, and the worship of
the devatās and devīs are all fading into oblivion.
People seldom perform the śrāddha ceremony for the
benefit of their deceased relatives any more. How are we
teachers to survive?”

                          146
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017


Harihara said, “Mahātmā! Is there no remedy for this? In
Māyāpura there are still six or seven brāhmaṇa scholars
of great repute. Across the Gaṅgā in Kuliyā-grāma, there
are also numerous scholars who are well versed in the
smṛti and nyāya-śāstras. If they all combine together
and attack Gādīgāchā, will it not bear fruit?”

Nyāyaratna said, “Why not? Itís possible if the
brāhmaṇa-paṇḍitas can unite, but there are differences
among them these days. I heard that a few paṇḍitas
headed by Kṛṣṇa Cūḍāmaṇi went to Gādīgāchā and initiated
a debate, but they came back to their schools defeated,
after which they spoke no more about it than was
absolutely required.”

Harihara said, “Bhaṭṭācārya Mahāśaya, you are not only
our teacher, but the teacher of many teachers. Your
commentary on the nyāya-śāstra has taught many scholars
the art of reasoning by analyzing fallacious arguments.
If you so desire, you can defeat these Vaiṣṇava scholars
once and for all. Establish that the Vaiṣṇava religion
is a modern invention that the Vedas do not support.
This will be a great act of mercy on the brāhmaṇas, and
it will reinstate our long-established pañcopāsanā
worship, which is on the point of vanishing.”

Caturbhuja Nyāyaratna was inwardly afraid to debate with
the Vaiṣṇavas, thinking that they might defeat him as
they had Kṛṣṇa Cūḍāmaṇi and others. He said, “Harihara,
I will go in disguise. You should pose yourself as a
teacher and ignite the fire of debate in Gādīgāchā.
After that, I will take over and assume responsibility.”

Harihara said happily, “I will certainly carry out your
order. Next Monday we will cross the Gaṅgā and attack
them, invoking the name of Mahādeva for auspiciousness.”

Monday arrived while they were still pondering over this
matter. Three professors, Harihara, Kamalākānta and
Sadāśiva, met Śrī Caturbhuja Nyāyaratna at his home in
Arkaṭilā, and escorted him across the Gaṅgā to Godruma.
At four in the afternoon they arrived at the mādhavī
grove exclaiming “Haribol! Haribol!” having a mood like
Durvāsā Muni surrounded by his followers.

Advaita dāsa was at that time chanting hari-nāma in his
kuṭīra. Seeing them, he came out and affectionately
offered them each a seat. He then enquired, “How may I
be of service to you?”

Harihara said, “We have come to discuss some matters
with the Vaiṣṇavas.”

Advaita dāsa said, “The Vaiṣṇavas of this place do not
debate on any topic. However, it is all right if you
have come to enquire submissively about something. The
other day, a few professors initiated a full-scale
debate on the pretext of making some enquiries, and in
the end, they left greatly disturbed. I will ask
Paramahaṁsa Bābājī Mahāśaya and then give you an
answer.” Saying this, he entered Bābājī Mahāśayaís
kuṭīra.


                          147
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

A few moments later, Advaita dāsa returned and arranged
more mats for sitting. Then Paramahaṁsa Bābājī Mahāśaya
came into the grove and offered daṇḍavat-praṇāma to
Vṛndā-devī and then to the cultured brāhmaṇa visitors.
With folded hands, he enquired humbly, “O great souls,
please order us. What service can we do for you?”

Nyāyaratna said, “We have one or two questions to ask,
and we would like you to answer them.”

When Paramahaṁsa Bābājī Mahāśaya heard this request, he
summoned Śrī Vaiṣṇava dāsa Bābājī Mahāśaya to join them.
When Vaiṣṇava dāsa Bābājī arrived, he offered praṇāma to
Paramahaṁsa Bābājī and sat next to him. Within a short
while, a small group of Vaiṣṇavas had gathered.

Nyāyaratna Mahāśaya then asked his question: “Please
tell us whether the Vaiṣṇava religion is ancient or
modern.”

Paramahaṁsa Bābājī Mahāśaya requested Vaiṣṇava dāsa to
respond. In a peaceful, yet grave tone of voice,
Vaiṣṇava dāsa said, “The vaiṣṇava-dharma is sanātana,
everlasting, and nitya, eternal.”

Nyāyaratna: I see that there are two types of vaiṣṇava-
dharma. One maintains that the para-tattva known as
brahma is formless and devoid of qualities. However,
since there is no question of worshiping a formless
object, sādhakas first imagine brahma to have some form,
and then they worship that. This worship is only needed
to purify the heart, and when the heart is purified,
knowledge of the formless brahma arises. At that point,
there is no longer any need to continue the worship of
forms. The forms of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, Rāma, or Nṛsiṁha are
all imaginary, and are by-products of māyā. When one
worships these imaginary forms, knowledge of brahma
gradually awakens. Among worshipers of the five Deities
(pañcopāsakas), those who worship the Deity of Viṣṇu and
recite viṣṇu-mantras with this attitude consider
themselves Vaiṣṇavas.

In the second type of vaiṣṇava-dharma, Bhagavān Viṣṇu,
Rāma, or Kṛṣṇa are accepted as para-brahma, possessing
eternal forms. When the sādhaka worships one of these
particular forms with the corresponding mantras, he
obtains eternal knowledge of the specific Deity whom he
worships and receives the mercy of that Deity. According
to this view, the doctrine of impersonalism is Māyāvāda,
which is a misconception that Śaṅkara has propagated.
Now tell us, which of these two types of Vaiṣṇavism is
everlasting and eternal?

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: The second of these is the real vaiṣṇava-
dharma, and it is eternal. The other is vaiṣṇava-dharma
in name only. In reality, this pseudo vaiṣṇava-dharma is
opposed to real vaiṣṇava-dharma. It is temporary and has
originated from Māyāvāda doctrine.

Nyāyaratna: I understand that in your opinion, the only
true vaiṣṇava-dharma is the doctrine that you have
received from Caitanyadeva. You do not accept that the
worship of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, Rāma, or Nṛsiṁha constitutes
vaiṣṇava-dharma in and of itself. You only accept the

                          148
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

worship of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa or other Deities as vaiṣṇava-
dharma if it is conducted in accordance with the
ideology of Caitanya. Is this not so? It is a fine idea,
but how can you claim that this type of vaiṣṇava-dharma
is eternal?

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: This type of vaiṣṇava-dharma is taught
throughout the Vedic śāstras, and is instructed in all
the smṛti-śāstras. All the Vedic histories sing the
glories of this vaiṣṇava-dharma.

Nyāyaratna: It is obvious that Caitanyadeva is the
pioneer of this doctrine, but He appeared less than one
hundred and fifty years ago, so how can it be eternal?

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: This vaiṣṇava-dharma has been in
existence from the very moment of the jīvas’ appearance.
The jīvas are anādi because they have no beginning in
material time. Therefore, the constitutional function of
the jīvas, known as jaiva-dharma or vaiṣṇava-dharma, is
also anādi. Brahmā is the first jīva to take birth in
the universe. As soon as he appeared, the Vedic sound
vibration, which is the basis of vaiṣṇava-dharma, also
became manifest. This is recorded in the four essential
ślokas of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.9.33-36), known as the
catuḥ-ślokī. It is also mentioned in the Muṇḍaka
Upaniṣad (1.1.1):

brahmā devānāṁ prathamaḥ sambabhūva

viśvasya karttā bhuvanasya goptā

sa brahma-vidyāṁ sarva-vidyā-pratiṣṭhām

atharvāya jyeṣṭha-putrāya prāha

Brahmā, who is the first of all the devas, and who
appeared from the lotus that sprouted from the navel of
Bhagavān, is the creator of the universe and the
maintainer of all living entities. He imparted brahma-
vidyā, which is the basis for all other knowledge, unto
his eldest son, Atharva.

The Ṛg Veda-saṁhitā mentions the instructions of this
brahma-vidyā (1.22.20):

tad viṣṇoḥ paramaṁ padaṁ

sadā paśyanti sūrayaḥ

divīva cakṣur ātatam

The jñānī-janas (pure Vaiṣṇavas) always behold the
supreme abode of Bhagavān Śrī Viṣṇu, just as the
unobstructed eye sees the sun within the sky.

It is said in the Kaṭha Upaniṣad (1.3.9):

tad viṣṇoḥ paramaṁ padaṁ / viṣṇor yat paramaṁ padam

That supreme abode of Bhagavān Śrī Viṣṇu is the highest
attainment.

The Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (5.4) says:

                           149
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017


sarvā diśa ūrddhvam adhaś ca tiryak

prakāśayan bhrājate yad vanaḍvān

evaṁ sa devo bhagavān vareṇyo

yoni-svabhāvān adhitiṣṭhaty ekaḥ

Bhagavān is the Supreme Person and the original source
of all the devas. He is the supreme object of worship
and is one without a second. Just as the sun shines
radiantly, illuminating all directions, upwards,
downwards, and on all sides, so Bhagavān regulates
material nature, which is the origin of all different
species of life.

It is said in the Taittirīya Upaniṣad (2.1.2):

satyaṁ jñānam anantaṁ brahma

yo veda nihitaṁ guhāyāṁ parame vyoman

so ëśnute sarvān kāmān saha brahmaṇā vipaścitā

Para-tattva brahma is the embodiment of truth,
knowledge, and eternity. Although that para-brahma is
situated in the spiritual sky, He is hidden in the sky
of the hearts of all living entities. One who knows
Īśvara, who is situated within as the indwelling
Supersoul, attains the consummation of all his desires
in contact with that all-knowing Īśvara.

Nyāyaratna: The Ṛg Veda states, tad viṣṇoḥ paramaṁ
padaṁ: “They see the supreme abode of Viṣṇu.” How can
you say that this doesn’t refer to the vaiṣṇava-dharma
that is included in the Māyāvāda doctrine?

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: The vaiṣṇava-dharma that is included
within the scope of Māyāvāda rejects the conception of
eternal servitorship to Bhagavān. The Māyāvādīs believe
that when the sādhaka acquires knowledge, he attains the
status of brahma. However, where is the question of
service if one becomes brahma? It is said in the Kaṭha
Upaniṣad (1.2.23):

nāyam ātmā pravacanena labhyo / na medhayā na bahunā
śrutena

yam evaiṣa vṛṇute tena labhyas / tasyaiṣa ātmā vivṛṇute
tanuṁ svām

That Paramātmā Parabrahma cannot be attained by
delivering learned discourses, by applying oneís
intelligence, or even by hearing the Vedas extensively.
That Paramātmā is attainable only by one upon whom He
bestows His mercy. Since the Paramātma is very close by,
He reveals His own form.

The only true religion is the constitutional function of
service and surrender. There is no other means to attain
Bhagavānís mercy and thus see His eternal form.
Knowledge of brahma will not enable one to attain
darśana of Bhagavānís eternal form. We can understand

                          150
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

from this categorical Vedic statement that pure
vaiṣṇava-dharma is founded upon the Vedas. All the Vedas
sanction the vaiṣṇava-dharma that Śrīman Mahāprabhu
taught. There is no room for doubt in this regard.

Nyāyaratna: Is there any statement in the Vedas to the
effect that kṛṣṇa-bhajana, and not realization of
brahma-jñāna, is the highest attainment?

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: It is said in the Taittirīya Upaniṣad
(2.7.1), raso vai saḥ: “Kṛṣṇa is the embodiment of
rasa.” Besides, the Chāndogya Upaniṣad (8.13.1) states:

śyāmāc chabalaṁ prapadye śabalāc chyāmaṁ prapadye

By service to Kṛṣṇa, one attains the transcendental
abode of divine bliss, which is full of wonderful
pastimes, and by reaching that transcendental abode of
wonders, one attains Kṛṣṇa.

There are many similar statements in the Vedas which
declare that kṛṣṇa-bhajana is the highest attainment.

Nyāyaratna: Is the name Kṛṣṇa anywhere to be found in
the Vedas?

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: Does the word Śyāma not refer to Kṛṣṇa?
It is said in the Ṛg Veda (1.22.164.31):

apaśyaṁ gopām anipadyamā namā

I saw Śrī Kṛṣṇa who is born in a dynasty of gopas and
who is imperishable.

There are many statements in the Vedas that refer
specifically to Kṛṣṇa, who appeared as the son of a gopa
(cowherd).

Nyāyaratna: Kṛṣṇa’s name is not clearly mentioned in any
of these statements; this is simply your contrived
interpretation.

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: If you study the Vedas carefully, you
will see that they have used these types of indirect
statements in relation to every topic. The sages of old
have explained the meaning of all these statements, and
we should have the highest regard for their opinions.

Nyāyaratna: Please tell me the history of vaiṣṇava-
dharma.

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: I have already said that the appearance
of vaiṣṇava-dharma is concurrent with the origin of the
jīva. Brahmā was the first Vaiṣṇava. Śrīman Mahādeva is
also a Vaiṣṇava, as are all the progenitors of mankind.
Śrī Nārada Gosvāmī, who was born from the mind of
Brahmā, is a Vaiṣṇava. This clearly verifies that
vaiṣṇava-dharma is not a recent development, but has
been prevalent from the very beginning of creation.

Not all living entities are free from the influence of
the three modes of nature, and the superiority of a high
Vaiṣṇava will depend on the degree to which he is free
from the modes. The Mahābhārata, Rāmāyaṇa and the

                          151
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

Purāṇas are the histories of the Āryan race, and they
have all described the excellence of vaiṣṇava-dharma. We
have already seen that vaiṣṇava-dharma was present at
the beginning of creation. Prahlāda and Dhruva were both
pure Vaiṣṇavas. During their time, there were many
thousands of other Vaiṣṇavas whose names are not given
anywhere in history because only the most prominent have
been mentioned. Dhruva was the grandson of Manu, and
Prahlāda was the grandson of Prajāpati Kaśyapa, and they
both lived close to the beginning of creation; of this
there is no doubt. You can therefore observe that pure
vaiṣṇava-dharma was active from the beginning of
history.

Later, the kings of the solar and lunar dynasties, as
well as the great munis and ṛṣis, were all intently
devoted to Śrī Viṣṇu. There is extensive mention of
vaiṣṇava-dharma in the three previous ages, known as
Satya, Tretā, and Dvāpara. Even in the present age of
Kali, Śrī Rāmānuja, Śrī Madhvācārya and Śrī Viṣṇusvāmī
in Southern India, and Śrī Nimbāditya Svāmī in Western
India initiated many thousands of disciples into pure
vaiṣṇava-dharma. By their mercy, perhaps half the
population of India crossed the ocean of māyā and
attained shelter at the lotus feet of Bhagavān. Also,
just consider how many downtrodden and degraded people
Śrī Śacīnandana, who is the master of my heart and soul,
delivered in this land of Bengal. Can you still not
perceive the greatness of vaiṣṇava-dharma in spite of
witnessing all this?

Nyāyaratna: Yes, but on what basis do you call Prahlāda
and the others Vaiṣṇavas?

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: They can be known as Vaiṣṇavas on the
basis of śāstra. Prahlāda’s teachers, Ṣaṇḍa and Amarka,
wanted to instruct him in brahma-jñāna contaminated with
the doctrine of Māyāvāda, but he rejected their
teaching, realizing that hari-nāma is the essence of all
education, and he constantly chanted the name of
Bhagavān with great love and affection. Under such
circumstances, there can be no doubt that Prahlāda was a
pure Vaiṣṇava. The truth is that one cannot understand
the underlying essence of the śāstras without impartial
and minute investigation.

Nyāyaratna: If, as you say, vaiṣṇava-dharma has been in
perpetual existence, what new insight did Caitanya
Mahāprabhu reveal for which He should be given such
special regard?

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: Vaiṣṇava-dharma is like a lotus flower
which gradually comes into bloom when the time is ripe.
First it appears as a bud, and then it slowly begins to
blossom. In its maturity, it is fully blossomed and
attracts all jīvas by diffusing its sweet fragrance in
every direction. At the beginning of creation, four
aspects of knowledge were expressed to Brahmā through
the medium of the catuḥ-ślokī Bhāgavatam. These were
bhagavat-jñāna, transcendental knowledge of the Absolute
as Bhagavān; māyā-vijñāna, analytical knowledge of
Íśvara’s external potency; sādhana-bhakti, the means of
attaining the goal; and prema, which is the object of
attainment. These four elements were manifested in the

                          152
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

jīvas’ hearts as the sprout of the lotus flower of
vaiṣṇava-dharma.

At the time of Prahlāda, this sprout took shape as a
bud, which gradually began to blossom in the period of
Veda-vyāsa Muni, and developed into a flower at the time
of Rāmānuja, Madhva, and the other sampradāya-ācāryas.
Upon the appearance of Śrīman Mahāprabhu, vaiṣṇava-
dharma became the fully blossomed flower of prema and
began to attract the hearts of all jīvas by spreading
its enchantingly sweet fragrance.

The supremely confidential essence of vaiṣṇava-dharma is
the awakening of prema. Śrīman Mahāprabhu created the
good fortune for all jīvas by distributing this prema
through the chanting of śrī-hari-nāma. Śrī-nāma-
saṅkīrtana is a priceless possession, worthy of the
highest regard. Did anyone reveal this teaching prior to
Mahāprabhu? Although this truth existed in the śāstras,
there was no radiant example of it that could inspire
the ordinary jīvas to practice it in their own lives.
Indeed, before Śrīman Mahāprabhu, had anyone ever
plundered the storehouse of prema-rasa and distributed
it in this way, even to common men?

Nyāyaratna: All right, but if kīrtana is so beneficial,
why do learned paṇḍitas not hold it in high esteem?

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: The meaning of the word paṇḍita has
become perverted in the present age of Kali. Paṇḍā means
‘the intelligence of one who is enlightened by knowledge
of the śāstra’, and the word paṇḍita really refers to
one who has such intelligence. These days, however,
people are known as paṇḍitas if they can show off their
vain sophistry in the nyāya-śāstra, or explain the
meaning of the smṛti-śāstra in novel ways that appeal to
people in general. How can such paṇḍitas understand or
explain the meaning of dharma and the true purport of
the śāstras? That can only be realized by impartial
analysis of all the śāstras, so how can anyone obtain it
through the intellectual wrangling of nyāya?

The truth is that in Kali-yuga, those who are known as
paṇḍitas are expert at deceiving themselves and others
by arguing uselessly. Assemblies of such paṇḍitas engage
in heated debates over inconsequential matters, but they
never discuss knowledge of ultimate reality; knowledge
of the jīvasís relationship with the Absolute Truth, the
supreme goal for the jīvas; or the method for attaining
that goal. One can only understand the real nature of
prema and kīrtana when he discerns the truth of these
matters.

Nyāyaratna: All right, I admit that there are no
qualified paṇḍitas these days, but why don’t high-class
brāhmaṇas accept your vaiṣṇava-dharma? Brāhmaṇas are
situated in the mode of goodness, and they are naturally
inclined to the path of truthfulness and exalted
religious principles, so why is it that almost all
brāhmaṇas are opposed to vaiṣṇava-dharma?

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: You are asking the question, so I am
compelled to answer, although Vaiṣṇavas are naturally
opposed to criticizing others. I will try to answer your

                          153
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

last question if you will not feel pain and anger at
heart, and if you sincerely desire to know the truth.

Nyāyaratna: Come what may, our study of the śāstra has
imbued us with a fondness for tranquility, self-control
and tolerance. There is no question of not being able to
tolerate your words. Please speak openly and without
hesitation, and I will certainly respect whatever is
reasonable and good.

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: Please consider that Rāmānuja, Madhva,
Viṣṇusvāmī, and Nimbāditya were all brāhmaṇas, and that
they each had thousands of brāhmaṇa disciples. In
Bengal, our Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu was a Vedic
brāhmaṇa, our Nityānanda Prabhu was a Rāḍhīya brāhmaṇa,
and our Advaita Prabhu was a Vārendra brāhmaṇa. Our
gosvāmīs and mahājanas were almost all brāhmaṇas.
Thousands of brāhmaṇas who are the very pinnacle of the
brahminical lineage have taken refuge of vaiṣṇava-dharma
and are propagating this spotless religion in the world.
So how can you claim that high-class brāhmaṇas have no
regard for vaiṣṇava-dharma?

We know that those brāhmaṇas who honor vaiṣṇava-dharma
are all high-class brāhmaṇas. However, some people who
have taken birth in brāhmaṇa families have become
inimical toward vaiṣṇava-dharma because they are marred
by the faults of degraded family lineage, undesirable
association, and false education. Such behavior only
demonstrates their misfortune and fallen condition. This
is no evidence that they are actually brāhmaṇas. It is
to be especially noted that, according to śāstra, the
number of true brāhmaṇas in Kali-yuga is exceedingly
small, and these few are Vaiṣṇavas. When a brāhmaṇa
receives the vaiṣṇava-gāyatrī-mantra, which is the
mother of the Vedas, he becomes an initiated Vaiṣṇava.
However, due to the contamination of Kali-yuga, some of
these brāhmaṇas accept another non-Vedic initiation and
abandon their Vaiṣṇavism. Granted, the number of
Vaiṣṇava brāhmaṇas is very small, but that is still no
reason to manufacture a conclusion that is opposed to
the tenets of śāstra.

Nyāyaratna: Why is it that so many low-class people
accept vaiṣṇava-dharma?

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: This should not be a cause for doubt.
Most low-class people consider themselves quite wretched
and downtrodden, and thus they are eligible for the
mercy of the Vaiṣṇavas, without which one cannot become
a Vaiṣṇava. Humility cannot touch the heart of one who
is intoxicated with the pride of high birth and wealth,
and consequently it is very rare for such people to
obtain the mercy of the Vaiṣṇavas.

Nyāyaratna: I don’t care to discuss this subject any
further. I can see that you will inevitably quote the
harsh descriptions from śāstra of the brāhmaṇas of Kali-
yuga. I feel greatly pained when I hear particular
statements from the śāstra such as this one from the
Varāha Purāṇa:

rākṣasāḥ kalim āśrītya jāyante brahma-yoniṣu


                          154
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

Taking refuge of the age of Kali, demons are born in the
families of brāhmaṇas.

Let us not pursue this topic any further. Now, please
tell me why you donít respect Śrī Śaṅkarācārya, who is a
limitless ocean of knowledge.

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: Why do you say that? We consider Śrī
Śaṅkarācārya to be an incarnation of Śrī Mahādeva.
Śrīman Mahāprabhu instructed us to honor him by
addressing him as ācārya. We only reject his Māyāvāda
doctrine, because it is a covered form of Buddhism,
which the Vedas do not support. On Bhagavān’s order,
Śaṅkarācārya distorted the meaning of the Vedas,
Vedānta, and the Gītā, and he broadcast the false
doctrine of impersonal monism known as advaita-vāda to
convert those men who had a demonic nature. What fault
is there in this for which Śaṅkarācārya should be
condemned?

Buddhadeva is an avatāra of Bhagavān who also
established and preached a doctrine that is opposed to
the Vedas. But do descendants of the Āryans condemn him
for this? Someone may disagree with such activities of
Śrī Bhagavān and Mahādeva, and claim that they are
unjust, but we say that Bhagavān is the protector of the
universe, and Śrī Mahādeva is His representative, and
they are both all-knowing and all-auspicious. Bhagavān
and Mahādeva cannot possibly be guilty of injustice.
Those who blame them are ignorant and narrow-minded, and
cannot understand the deeper significance of their
activities.

Bhagavān and His activities are beyond human reasoning,
so intelligent people should never think, “Īśvara should
not have done that; it would have been better for Him to
do this.” Īśvara is the director of all jīvas, and only
He knows the necessity for binding men of ungodly nature
with the doctrine of illusion. We have no means of
understanding Īśvaraís purpose for manifesting the jīvas
at the time of creation, and then destroying their forms
at the time of the cosmic annihilation. This is all
Bhagavānís līlā. Those who are intently devoted to
Bhagavān experience great delight in hearing His
pastimes; they donít like to engage in intellectual
debates about these matters.

Nyāyaratna: That is all right, but why do you say that
the Māyāvāda doctrine is opposed to the Vedas, Vedānta,
and the Gītā?

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: If you have carefully examined the
Upaniṣads and the Vedānta-sūtra, kindly tell me which
mantras and sūtras support the doctrine of Māyāvāda? I
will then explain the true meaning of those statements,
and prove that they do not support Māyāvāda at all. Some
Vedic mantras may appear to contain a faint trace of
Māyāvāda philosophy, but if one examines the mantras
that come before and after, that interpretation will be
instantly dispelled.

Nyāyaratna: Brother, I have not studied the Upaniṣads
and the Vedānta-sūtra. When it comes to a discussion of
the nyāya-śāstra, I am ready to discourse on any topic.

                          155
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

Through logic I can turn a clay pot into a piece of
cloth, and a piece of cloth into a clay pot. I have read
a little of the Gītā, but I have not entered into it
deeply, so I cannot say any more on this point. Instead,
let me ask you one more question on another topic. You
are a learned scholar, so please properly explain to me
why Vaiṣṇavas don’t have faith in the remnants of food
offered to the devas and devīs, although they have great
faith in viṣṇu-prasāda.

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: I am not a scholar; I am a great fool.
You should know that whatever I am speaking is only by
the mercy of my Gurudeva, Paramahaṁsa Bābājī Mahārāja.
No one can know all the śāstras, for they are a
limitless ocean, but my Gurudeva has churned that ocean
and delivered the essence of the śāstras to me. I have
accepted that very essence as the conclusion that all
the śāstras have established.

The answer to your question is that Vaiṣṇavas do not
disrespect the prasāda of the devas and devīs. Śrī Kṛṣṇa
is the Supreme controller of all controllers; therefore,
He alone is known as Parameśvara. All the devas and
devīs are His devotees, and they are appointed to
positions in the administration of universal affairs.
Vaiṣṇavas can never disrespect the prasāda of bhaktas
because one obtains śuddha-bhakti by honoring their
remnants. The dust from bhaktasí feet, the nectar-like
water that has washed bhaktasí feet, and the nectar-like
food that has touched bhaktasí lips are three types of
prasāda that are supremely beneficial. They are the
medicine that destroys the disease of material
existence.

The fact is that when Māyāvādīs worship the devatās and
offer food to them, the devatās do not accept it because
the worshipers are contaminated with attachment to the
doctrine of illusion. There is ample evidence of this in
the śāstra, and if you ask me, I can supply the
quotations. The worshipers of the devas are mostly
Māyāvādīs, and it is detrimental to oneís bhakti and an
offense to Bhakti-devī to accept the prasāda of the
devas when such people have offered it. If a pure
Vaiṣṇava offers the prasāda of Kṛṣṇa to the devas and
devīs, they accept it with great love and begin to
dance, and if a Vaiṣṇava then takes that prasāda, he
experiences tremendous happiness.

Another point to consider is that the instruction of the
śāstra is all-powerful, and the yoga-śāstras direct
practitioners of the yoga system not to accept the
prasāda of any devatā. This does not mean that those who
practice yoga disrespect the prasāda of the devatās. It
simply means that giving up prasāda helps those who are
practicing yoga-sādhana to attain one-pointedness in
meditation. Similarly, in bhakti-sādhana, a bhakta
cannot attain exclusive devotion to Bhagavān, who is the
object of his worship, if he accepts the prasāda of any
other deva. It is therefore a mistake to think that
Vaiṣṇavas are averse to the prasāda of other devas and
devīs. The various practitioners only behave in that way
to try to attain perfection in their respective goals,
as the śāstras recommend.


                          156
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

Nyāyaratna: All right, that is clear, but why do you
oppose the killing of animals in sacrifice, when the
śāstras support it?

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: It is not the intention of śāstra that
animals should be killed. The Vedas declare, mā himsyāt
sarvāṇi bhūtāni: “One should not commit violence to any
living entity.” This statement forbids violence to
animals. As long as human nature is strongly influenced
by the modes of passion and ignorance, people will be
spontaneously driven to illicit connection with the
opposite sex, meat-eating, and intoxication. Such people
do not ask the Vedas to sanction their activities. The
purpose of the Vedas is not to promote such activities,
but rather to curb them. When human beings are situated
in the mode of goodness, they can naturally refrain from
animal slaughter, sexual indulgence, and intoxication.
Until that point, the Vedas prescribe various means to
control such tendencies. For this reason, they sanction
association with the opposite sex through marriage
(vivāha-yajña), the killing of animals in sacrifice, and
the drinking of wine in particular ceremonies. By
practicing in this way, these tendencies will gradually
wane in a person, and he will eventually be able to give
them up. This is the true purpose of the Vedas. They do
not recommend the killing of animals; their intention is
expressed in these words of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.5.11):

loke vyavāyāmiṣa-madya-sevā

nityās tu jantor na hi tatra codanā

vyavasthitis teṣu vivāha-yajña-

surā-grahair āśu nivṛttir iṣṭā

It is observed that people in this world have a natural
tendency toward intoxication, meat-eating, and sexual
enjoyment, but śāstra cannot sanction their engagement
in such activities. Therefore, special provisions have
been given whereby some association with the opposite
sex is permitted through marriage, some eating of flesh
is permitted through performance of sacrifice, and the
drinking of wine is permitted through the ritual known
as sautrāmaṇī-yajña. The purpose of such injunctions is
to restrain the licentious tendencies of the general
populace, and to establish them in moral conduct. The
intrinsic purpose of the Vedas in making such provisions
is to draw people away from such activities altogether.

The Vaiṣṇava conclusion in this regard is that there is
no objection if a person whose nature is ruled by
passion and ignorance kills animals. However, a person
who is situated in the mode of goodness should not do
so, because causing harm to other jīvas is an
animalistic propensity. Śrī Nārada has explained this in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.13.47):

ahastāni sa-hastānām apadāni catuṣ-padām

phalgūni tatra mahatāṁ jīvo jīvasya jīvanam

Living entities without hands are prey for those with
hands. Life-forms without legs are food for the four-

                          157
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

legged. Small creatures are subsistence for large ones.
In this way, one living entity is the means of existence
for another.

The verdict of Manu-smṛti (5.56) is also very clear:

na māṁsa-bhakṣaṇe doṣe na madye na ca maithune

pravṛttir eṣā bhūtānāṁ nivṛttis tu mahā-phalā

Abstinence from activities such as sexual indulgence,
meat-eating, and intoxication yields highly beneficial
results, although a human being is naturally inclined to
them.

Nyāyaratna: Yes, but why do the Vaiṣṇavas object to the
śrāddha ceremony and other activities that are meant to
repay one’s debt to the forefathers?

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: People who are intent on carrying out
prescribed pious duties perform the śrāddha ceremony in
accordance with the karma-kāṇḍa division of the Vedas.
Vaiṣṇavas have no objection to this, but śāstra
declares:

devarṣi-bhūtāpta-nṛṇāṁ pitṝṇāṁ

na kiṅkaro nāyam ṛṇī ca rājan

sarvātmanā yaḥ śaraṇaṁ śaraṇyaṁ

gato mukundaṁ parihṛtya kartam

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.5.41)

O King, when a human being gives up the ego of
independence from Bhagavān and takes full shelter of Śrī
Mukunda as the supreme refuge, he is released from his
debts to the devas, the sages, the general living
entities, family members, mankind, and to the
forefathers. Such a devotee no longer remains
subordinate to such personalities, nor is he bound to
their service.

Consequently, bhaktas who have taken shelter of Bhagavān
are not required to perform the śrāddha ceremony and
other karma-kāṇḍa activities meant for gaining release
from the debt to oneís forefathers. They are instructed
to worship Bhagavān, to offer bhagavat-prasāda to the
forefathers, and to honor bhagavat-prasāda with their
friends and relatives.

Nyāyaratna: At what point does one obtain the position
and eligibility to act in this way?

Vaiṣṇava dāsa: It is the prerogative of a Vaiṣṇava to
act in this way, and one becomes eligible from the time
that one awakens faith in hari-kathā and hari-nāma. It
is said in the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.20.9):

tāvat karmāṇi kurvīta na nirvidyeta yāvatā

mat-kathā-śravaṇādau vā śraddhā yāvan na jāyate


                          158
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

One is obliged to engage in karma and to follow the
rules and prohibitions associated with that path as long
as one has not awakened detachment from fruitive
activities and the results of such activities (such as
promotion to the celestial planets), or as long as one
has not awakened faith in hearing and chanting My līlā-
kathā.

Nyāyaratna: I am delighted to hear your explanations.
Seeing your scholarship and fine discrimination, my
faith has now been awakened in vaiṣṇava-dharma. My
brother, Harihara, there is no profit in debating any
further. These Vaiṣṇavas are great teachers among
paṇḍitas. They are exceedingly expert in extracting the
conclusions of all the śāstras. We may say whatever we
like to preserve our occupation, but it is highly
doubtful whether anyone has ever appeared in the land of
Bengal, or in all of India for that matter, who can
compare with such a renowned scholar and exalted
Vaiṣṇava as Nimāi Paṇḍita. Let us go. The day is waning
and it will be difficult to cross the Gaṅgā after dark.

Nyāyaratna and his group of teachers departed, calling
out, “Haribol! Haribol!” The Vaiṣṇavas then began to
dance and chant, “Jaya Śacīnandana!”



Thus ends the Tenth Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled

“Nitya-Dharma & History”




Chapter 11

Nitya-Dharma & Idolatry



On the western bank of the Bhāgīrathī, in the Koladvīpa
district of Navadvīpa, there is a famous village named
Kuliyā Pāhārpura. At the time of Śrīman Mahāprabhu, a
highly respected and influential Vaiṣṇava named Śrī
Mādhava dāsa Caṭṭopādhyāya (also known as Chakaurī
Caṭṭopādhyāya) lived in that village. Chakaurī
Caṭṭopādhyāya had a son named Śrīla Vaṁśī-vadanānanda
Ṭhākura. By the mercy of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Śrī
Vaṁśī-vadanānanda had tremendous power and authority.
Everyone addressed him as Vaṁśī-vadanānanda Prabhu,
because they regarded him as an incarnation of Kṛṣṇaís
flute. He was renowned as a special recipient of Śrī
Viṣṇupriyāís mercy.

After Śrī Priyājīís disappearance, Vaṁśī Prabhu
transferred the Deity whom she had worshiped from
Śrīdhāma-Māyāpura to Kuliyā Pāhārpura, and his
descendants carried out the service of this Deity for
some time after that. However, when his descendants
obtained the mercy of Śrī Jāhnavā Mātā, and moved from

                           159
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

Kuliyā Pāhārpura to Śrīpāṭ Bāghanāpārā, the worship of
the Deity was continued in Kuliyā-grāma by the sevaites
from Mālañcha.

Kuliyā-grāma is situated on the opposite side of the
Gaṅgā from Prācīna (old) Navadvīpa, and at that time
included many small settlements, among which Cināḍāṅgā
and a few others were quite famous. Once, a devotee
merchant in Cināḍāṅgā arranged a spiritual festival in
the temple of Kuliyā Pāhārpura and issued invitations to
many brāhmaṇa-paṇḍitas and all the Vaiṣṇavas within the
thirty-two square mile circumference of Navadvīpa. On
the day of the festival, the Vaiṣṇavas came from all
directions, each accompanied by their own entourage. Śrī
Ananta dāsa came from Śrī Nṛsiṁha-pallī; Gorācānda dāsa
Bābājī came from Śrī Māyāpura; Śrī Nārāyaṇa dāsa Bābājī
came from Śrī Bilva-puṣkariṇī; the renowned Narahari
dāsa came from Śrī Modadruma; Śrī Paramahaṁsa Bābājī and
Śrī Vaiṣṇava dāsa came from Śrī Godruma; and Śrī
Śacīnandana dāsa came from Śrī Samudragarh.

The Vaiṣṇavasí foreheads were decorated with vertical
tilaka markings (ūrddhva-puṇḍra), indicating that their
bodies were temples of Śrī Hari. On their necks they
wore tulasī-mālās, and their limbs looked splendid,
being stamped with the names of Śrī Gaura-Nityānanda.
Some held hari-nāma-mālās in their hands; and others
loudly performed saṅkīrtana of the mahā-mantra, Hare
Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma,
Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare, to the accompaniment of
mṛdaṅga and karatālas; and some danced continuously as
they moved along chanting, śrī-kṛṣṇa-caitanya prabhu
nityānanda śrī-advaita gadādhara śrīvāsādi-gaura-bhakta-
vṛnda.

In the bodies of many of the Vaiṣṇavas were seen the
external manifestations of ecstasy, such as torrents of
tears and hairs standing on end. While weeping some
called out fervently, “O Gaura-Kiśora! When will You
grant me a vision of Your eternal pastimes in
Navadvīpa?” There were many groups of Vaiṣṇavas who sang
śrī-nāma with the accompaniment of mṛdaṅga and other
instruments as they walked. The women of Kuliyā, who
were also bhaktas of Śrī Gaurāṅga, became astonished to
see these spiritual emotions, and praised the spiritual
good fortune of the Vaiṣṇavas.

Proceeding in this way, the Vaiṣṇavas arrived at the
nāṭya-mandīra (dancing mandīra) directly adjacent to the
Deitiesí altar. This was where Śrīman Mahāprabhu would
dance and perform saṅkīrtana. The merchant who was
sponsoring the festival greeted all of them. As a symbol
of submission, he wore cloth around his neck, and he
fell at the Vaiṣṇavas feet expressing sentiments of
great humility. When all the Vaiṣṇavas were seated in
the nāṭya-mandīra, the temple sevaites brought prasādam
flower garlands and placed them around their necks. The
poetic ślokas of Śrī Caitanya-maṅgala were then
melodiously chanted, and upon hearing the ambrosial līlā
of Śrī Caitanyadeva, these Vaiṣṇavas began to manifest
various types of sāttvika-bhāvas.

While they were thus absorbed in premānanda, the
doorkeeper entered and addressed the authorities of the

                          160
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

temple: “The chief Mullah of Sātsaikā Paraganā is
sitting outside the assembly hall with his associates
and followers. He requests to have a discussion with
some of the Vaiṣṇava paṇḍitas.” The temple authorities
in turn informed the exalted paṇḍita-bābājīs that the
Mullah had arrived, and desired to speak with them. As
soon as the Vaiṣṇavas received this news, due to a break
in the flow of transcendental rasa, the mood of their
assembly became overcast with dejection.

Kṛṣṇa dāsa Bābājī Mahāśaya of Śrī Madhyadvīpa inquired
from the temple authorities, “What is the Mullah Sāhibís
intention?” Knowing the Mullahís purpose, they replied,
“The Mullah Sāhib wants to discuss some spiritual
matters with the Vaiṣṇava paṇḍitas.” They added that the
Mullah was the foremost amongst Muslim scholars, and was
highly respected by the Emperor of Delhi. Although
always devoted to the promotion of his own religion, he
was not in the least inimical or belligerent toward
other religions. The Temple authorities humbly requested
that one or two Vaiṣṇava paṇḍitas should come forward
and discuss the śāstra with him to display the pre-
eminence of the sacred vaiṣṇava-dharma.

Some of the Vaiṣṇavas felt inspired to speak with the
Mullah Sāhib, seeing an opportunity to propound
vaiṣṇava-dharma. In the end, they decided amongst
themselves that Gorācānda dāsa Paṇḍita Bābājī of Śrī
Māyāpura, Vaiṣṇava dāsa Paṇḍita Bābājī of Śrī Godruma,
Premadāsa Bābājī of Jahnu-nagara, and Kali-pāvana dāsa
Bābājī of Campāhaṭṭa should discourse with the Mullah
Sāhib. All the other Vaiṣṇavas could also go to witness
their discussion when the recitation of Śrī Caitanya-
maṅgala was completed. Hearing this decision, the four
bābājīs loudly exclaimed, “Jaya Nityānanda!” and
followed the mahānta into the large courtyard outside
the temple.

The Mullah and his company were seated in the courtyard
under the pleasant and cooling shade of a large banyan
tree. When they saw the Vaiṣṇavas approaching, the
Mullah and his party stood up cordially to receive them.
Knowing all jīvas as servants of Kṛṣṇa, the Vaiṣṇavas in
turn offered daṇḍavat to Śrī Vāsudeva situated in the
heart of the Mullah and his associates, and then took
their respective seats. The setting was extraordinary to
behold. On one side sat fifty well-dressed Muslim
scholars with white beards, with their majestic,
decorated stallions tethered behind them. On the other
side, four Vaiṣṇavas of divine appearance sat in a
humble mood. With great anticipation, many Hindus, came
and sat behind them. Many others gathered there as well,
taking seats nearby.

Paṇḍita Gorācānda was the first to speak. He inquired,
“O great souls, why have you summoned such insignificant
people as ourselves?”

Mullah Badrud-Dīn Sāhib humbly replied, “Salām! We
desire to ask a few questions.”

Paṇḍita Gorācānda said, “What knowledge might we have
that can possibly answer your erudite questions?”


                          161
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

Badr ud-Dīn Sāhib came a little closer and said,
“Brothers, the devas and devīs have been worshiped in
Hindu society since ancient times. Now, we see in our
Quríān-sharīf that Allah is one, not two, and that He
has no form. It is an offense to make an image of Him
and worship it. I have a doubt about this issue, and I
have consulted many brāhmaṇa-paṇḍitas in the hope of
resolving it.

Those paṇḍitas replied that Allah is actually formless,
however, one cannot possibly conceive of that which has
no form. Therefore, one should first make an imaginary
form of Allah, and meditate upon Him by worshipping that
form.

“However, I am not satisfied with this answer because
creating an imaginary form of Allah is the work of
Satan. It is known as ëbutí, and it is completely
forbidden to worship it. Far from pleasing Allah, such
worship only makes one subject to His punishment. We
have heard that your original preceptor, Śrī
Caitanyadeva, corrected all the faults in Hindu dharma,
yet His sampradāya also makes provision for worshiping
material forms. We want to know why you Vaiṣṇavas have
not given up the worship of material forms, although you
are expert in the decisions of the śāstra.”

The Vaiṣṇava paṇḍitas were inwardly amused at the
Mullahís question. Outwardly, they declared, “Paṇḍita
Gorācānda Mahāśaya, kindly give a suitable reply to the
Mullahís question.”

Paṇḍita Gorācānda said graciously, “As you order,” and
proceeded to answer the question.

Gorācānda: He whom you refer to as Allah, we call
Bhagavān. The Supreme Lord is one, but He is known by
different names in the Qur’ān, the Purāṇas, and in
different countries and languages. The prime
consideration is that the name which expresses all of
the Supreme Lord’s characteristics should be given
prominence. For this reason we have greater esteem for
the name Bhagavān than the names Allah, brahma, and
Paramātmā. The word Allah refers to that Being who has
no superior, but we do not consider that greatness or
supremacy is the highest characteristic of the Lord.
Rather, the characteristic which evokes the highest
degree of wonder (camatkārita) and sweetness (mādhurī)
is worthy of the utmost regard.

Something that is exceedingly great inspires one type of
wonder, but minuteness is a counterpart to greatness,
and it inspires another type of wonder. Hence, the name
Allah does not express the highest limit of wonder
because it expresses greatness but not minuteness. On
the other hand, the word Bhagavān implies every type of
wonder imaginable.

The first characteristic of Bhagavān is complete
aiśvarya (opulence), which refers to the ultimate limit
of greatness and minuteness. The second characteristic
is that He is the most powerful, because He possesses
all śaktis (sarva-śaktimattā). That which is beyond the
reach of human intellect is governed by Īśvaraís

                          162
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

acintya-śakti (inconceivable potency), by which He
simultaneously possesses form, and is formless. If one
thinks that Īśvara cannot have a form, one rejects His
acintya-śakti, by which Bhagavān manifests His eternal
form and pastimes before His bhaktas. Allah, brahma, or
Paramātmā are nirākāra (formless), so they do not have
any special wonderful characteristics.

The third characteristic of Bhagavān is that He is
always maṅgalamaya, auspicious, and yaśa-pūrṇa, all-
famous. Therefore, His pastimes are full of nectar. His
fourth characteristic is that He possesses all beauty
(saundarya), and all living beings who are endowed with
transcendental vision see Him as the most beautiful
person. Bhagavānís fifth characteristic is that He has
limitless knowledge (aśeṣa-jñāna). This means He is
pure, complete, omniscient, and transcendental to
mundane matter. His form is the very embodiment of
consciousness and is beyond all material elements
(bhūta). His sixth characteristic is that, even though
He is the master and controller of all jīvas, He is
unattached (nirlepa) and independent (svatantra). These
are Bhagavānís six primary characteristics.

Bhagavān has two manifestations: His feature of aiśvarya
(majesty) and His feature of mādhurya (sweetness). His
mādhurya manifestation is the supreme friend for the
jīvas, and it is that personality, known as Kṛṣṇa or
Caitanya, who is the Lord of our hearts. You have said
that worshiping some imaginary form of the Lord is
worship of material forms, but-parast [Arabic] or bhūta-
pūjā [Sanskrit], and we also agree with that. The dharma
of the Vaiṣṇavas is to worship the fully conscious,
eternal Deity form of Bhagavān. Therefore, idolatry
(but-parast) is not part of the Vaiṣṇava doctrine.

One should clearly understand that the Vaiṣṇavasí
worship of the Deity is not idolatry. One cannot
prohibit Deity worship simply because some books forbid
idolatry; everything depends on the quality of faith in
the worshiperís heart. The more oneís heart can
transcend the influence of matter, the more competent
one will be to worship the pure form of the Deity. You
are the Mullah Sāhib, the chief of Muslim scholars, and
your heart may be free from the influence of matter, but
what about those of your disciples who are not so
learned? Are their hearts free from all thoughts of
matter?

The more one is absorbed in thoughts of matter, the more
he will be implicated in the worship of matter. Although
he may claim that the Lord is formless, his heart is
still filled with thoughts of matter. It is very
difficult for the general mass of people to worship the
pure form of the Deity, for such worship is strictly a
matter of personal qualification. In other words, only
one who has been elevated beyond the influence of matter
can transcend thoughts of material form. I sincerely
request you to consider this subject carefully.

Mullah: I have considered your statement carefully. You
say that Bhagavān refers to six astonishing attributes
of the Supreme, and I have concluded that the Qur’ān-
sharīf describes the same six qualities in relationship

                          163
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

to the word Allah. There is no point arguing over the
meaning of the word Allah; Allah is Bhagavān.

Gorācānda: Very good. If that is so, you must accept the
beauty and opulence of the Supreme Being. It is then
admitted that He possesses a splendid form in the
spiritual world, which is distinct from the world of
mundane matter. This is our divine Deity form.

Mullah: In our Qur’ān it is written that the Supreme
Entity has a divine all-conscious form, so we are
compelled to accept this fact. However, any image of
that spiritual form is material; that is what we call
but. The worship of but is not the worship of the
Supreme Being. Please tell me your viewpoint on this.

Gorācānda: In the Vaiṣṇava śāstras there is a provision
for worshiping the divine spiritual Deity form of
Bhagavān. For the elevated class of devotees no
prescription has been given to worship material objects
composed of earth, water, fire, or other elements. It is
said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.84.13):

yasyātma-buddhiḥ kuṇape tri-dhātuke

sva-dhīḥ kalatrādiṣu bhauma ijya-dhīḥ

yat tīrtha-buddhiḥ salile na karhicij

janeṣv abhijñeṣu sa eva go-kharaḥ

One who considers this corpse-like body, comprised of
the three elements vata, pita, and kapha, to be his real
self; who regards his wife, children, and others as his
very own; who considers mundane forms made of earth,
stone, or wood to be worshipable; and who regards mere
water to be a place of pilgrimage ñ but who does not
consider the bhagavad-bhaktas to be more dear than his
very self, to be his very own, to be worshipable, and to
be places of pilgrimage; such a person, though human, is
no better than an ass among animals.

It is said in the Gītā (9.25):

bhūtāni yānti bhūtejyā

Those who worship matter go to the realms of matter.

We see from these and many other conclusive statements
that there is no basis in śāstra for the worship of dead
matter. There is an important point to consider in this.
Human beings have different degrees of qualification
according to their knowledge and saṁskāra. Only those
who can understand pure spiritual existence are
competent to worship the pure spiritual form of the
Deity. Oneís understanding is proportionate to oneís
development in this regard.

Those whose spiritual qualification is extremely low
cannot understand the pure, spiritual state of
existence. Even when such people meditate on the Lord
within their minds, the form that they imagine is
material, and meditating on a material form within the
mind is the same as constructing a form of physical

                          164
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

elements, and regarding it as the Lordís form. That is
why it is beneficial for a person on this level of
eligibility to worship the Deity. Factually speaking, it
would be most inauspicious for the general class of
people if there were no worship of Deities. When
ordinary jīvas become inclined toward the service of the
Lord, they become despondent if they cannot see the
Deity form of the Lord before them. In religions where
there is no worship of the Deity, members who are on a
low level of spiritual qualification are highly
materialistic and oblivious to Īśvara, or in a state of
distraction. Therefore, worship of the Deity is the
foundation of religion for all humanity.

The form of Parameśvara is revealed to the mahājanas
through their trance of unalloyed jñāna-yoga, and they
meditate on that pure, transcendental form in their
hearts, which are purified by bhakti. When the bhaktaís
heart is revealed to the world after his continuous
meditation, the image of the Lordís transcendental form
is fashioned in this mundane world. The divine form of
the Lord, having been reflected in this way by the
mahājanas, has become the form of the Deity.

The Deity form is always cinmaya (spiritual and
conscious) for those who are on the highest platform of
eligibility. Those on the intermediate level see the
Deity as endowed with perception and awareness
(manomaya). This means that the intermediate devotee has
faith that the Deity is conscious of his thoughts and
prayers, and accepts his mood of worship. However, the
intermediate devotee, unlike the advanced devotee, does
not directly perceive the Deity as the spiritual all-
conscious form of Bhagavān. Those on the lowest level
initially see the Deity as material (jaḍamaya), but in
time, the Deity reveals His pure spiritual form to the
intelligence purified by spiritual love. Consequently,
the Deity form of Bhagavān is suitable to be worshipped
and served by all classes of devotees. It is unnecessary
to worship an imaginary form, but it is highly
beneficial to worship Bhagavānís eternal Deity form.

The Vaiṣṇava sampradāyas give this provision for people
on these three levels of eligibility to worship the
Deity. There is no fault in this, for it is the only
arrangement by which the jīvas can gradually attain
auspiciousness. This is confirmed in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(11.14.26):

yathā yathātmā parimṛjyate ësau

mat-puṇya-gāthā-śravaṇābhidhānaiḥ

tathā tathā paśyati vastu sūkṣmaṁ

cakṣur yathaivāñjana-samprayuktam

O Uddhava, as the eyes that are treated with therapeutic
ointment can see very minute objects, similarly, when
the heart is cleansed of material contamination by
hearing and reciting the narrations of My supremely pure
activities, it can see My subtle transcendental form,
which is beyond the purview of matter.


                          165
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

The jīvātmā is covered by the material mind, and in this
state he cannot know himself or render service to
Paramātmā. However, by performing sādhana-bhakti ñ which
consists of hearing, chanting, and other devotional
practices ñ the ātmā gradually develops spiritual power.
As that power increases, material bondage slackens, and
the more material bondage is relaxed, the more the
soulís own natural function comes into ascendancy. Thus,
one gradually attains direct perception of the self and
Īśvara and engages directly in spiritual activities.

Some people think one should endeavor to realize the
Absolute Truth by rejecting all that is not truth. This
is known as the cultivation of dry knowledge. What power
does a conditioned soul have to renounce objects that
are not inherently real? Can a prisoner who is confined
to a cell liberate himself simply by desiring to do so?
His objective should be to eradicate the offense that
has placed him in bondage. The jīvātmāís principal
defect is that he has forgotten that he is an eternal
servant of Bhagavān, and that is why he is bound by māyā
and forced to suffer material happiness, distress and
repeated birth and death in this world.

Although a person may initially be busy in sense
gratification, if for some reason or another his mind
becomes a little inclined towards Īśvara, and he
regularly takes darśana of the Deity and hears līlā-
kathā, his original nature of being the eternal servant
of Kṛṣṇa will be strengthened. The more strength this
inherent nature develops, the more competent he becomes
to perceive spirit directly. The only hope of spiritual
progress for those who are the least spiritually
qualified is to serve the Deity and to hear and chant
about the Lord. That is why the mahājanas have
established service to the Deity.

Mullah: Isn’t meditating on a form of the Lord within
one’s mind superior to imagining a form with the help of
the material elements?

Gorācānda: They are one and the same. The mind follows
matter, and whatever it thinks of is also material. We
may say that brahma is all-pervading, but how can our
minds actually conceive of this? We will be forced to
think of it in terms of the all-pervasiveness of the
sky. How can the mind go beyond this consideration? Our
conception of brahma is therefore constrained by the
limitation of material space.

If one says, “I am meditating on brahma,” the experience
of brahma will be limited by material time, for it fades
when oneís meditation is concluded. How can the mindís
meditation grasp an object that is above matter when it
is conditioned by time and space, which are material
phenomena? One may reject the idea that the form of the
Deity can consist of material elements such as earth and
water, and one can imagine that Īśvara is situated in
the directions or space, but still, this is all bhūta-
pūjā, the worship of matter.

No material object can support oneís attainment of the
transcendental goal. The only thing that facilitates
this is the awakening of the inclination towards Īśvara.

                          166
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

This inclination is inherent within the jīvātmā, and is
gradually strengthened and converted into bhakti when
one utters the name of God, recites His pastimes, and
receives inspiration from beholding the Deity (śrī
vigraha). The Lordís spiritual form can be experienced
only by pure bhakti, not by jñāna and karma.

Mullah: Matter is distinct from God. I think that it is
better not to worship material objects, because it is
said that Satan introduced the worship of matter to keep
the living entities bound in the material world.

Gorācānda: Īśvara is one without a second, and He has no
rival. Everything in this world is created by Him and is
under His control. Therefore, He can be satisfied with
any object when it is used in His worship. There is no
object in this world one can worship that can arouse His
malice, for He is all-auspicious. Even if a person such
as Satan exists, he is no more than a special jīva under
the control of God, and has no power to do anything that
is opposed to God’s will. However, in my opinion, it is
not possible for such a monstrous living entity to
exist. No activity can take place that is contrary to
the will of Īśvara, nor is any living entity independent
of the Lord.

You may ask, “What is the origin of sin?” My answer is
as follows. Vidyā (knowledge) is the understanding that
the jīvas are servants of Bhagavān, and avidyā
(ignorance) is forgetfulness of this. All jīvas who, for
whatever reason, take shelter of avidyā sow the seed of
all sins in their hearts. In the hearts of those jīvas
who are eternal associates of Bhagavān, there is no seed
of sin. One should understand this truth of avidyā
carefully, instead of imagining an extraordinary myth
about Satan. It means that it is not an offense to
worship the Lord in material elements. Worship of the
Deity is most essential for those of low spiritual
eligibility, and it is particularly auspicious for
people of high spiritual eligibility. In our opinion it
is mere dogma to think that the worship of the Deity is
not good. There is no logic or evidence from śāstra to
support this position.

Mullah: The inclination toward God cannot be stimulated
by worship of the Deity, because the mind of one who
performs such worship always remains confined to the
properties of matter.

Gorācānda: We can understand the defect in your theory
by studying the ancient historical accounts of those who
became great devotees. Many people began to worship the
Deity while they were neophytes, but as their devotional
mood developed through the association of pure devotees,
their realization of the transcendental and conscious
nature of the Deity also increased, and eventually they
became immersed in the ocean of prema.

The irrevocable conclusion is that sat-saṅga is the root
of all spiritual advancement. When one associates with
bhaktas of Bhagavān who are fully situated in divine
consciousness, one awakens transcendental affection
toward Bhagavān. The more this transcendental affection
increases, the more the material idea of the Deity

                          167
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

vanishes and through great good fortune this divine
consciousness gradually unfolds. In contrast, the
advocates of non-Āryan religions generally oppose Deity
worship, but just consider ñ how many of them have
attained spiritual realization (cinmaya-bhāva)? They
waste their time in useless arguments and malice. When
have they experienced true devotion to Bhagavān?

Mullah: There is no fault if one performs internal
bhajana of God in a mood of love, and externally engages
in the worship of the Deity. However, how can it be
worship of God to worship a dog, a cat, a serpent, or a
debauchee? Our revered prophet, Paigambara Sāhib, has
vehemently condemned such worship of material objects.

Gorācānda: All human beings are grateful to God. No
matter how many sins they commit, occasionally they
become aware that God is the supreme entity, and when
they are endowed with this belief, they bow down before
the extraordinary things of this world. When ignorant
people are inspired by their gratitude to God, they
naturally offer respect to the sun, a river, a mountain,
or to enormous animals. They express their hearts before
such things and display submission to them. Granted,
there is a vast difference between this type of worship
of material objects, and transcendental affection toward
the Lord (cinmaya bhagavad-bhakti). Still, when such
ignorant people adopt a mood of gratitude to God and
reverence toward material objects, it gradually produces
a positive effect. Therefore, if one examines the
situation logically, one cannot ascribe any fault to
them.

Meditation on the formless, all-pervading feature of the
Lord and offering namāz or other types of prayers to an
impersonal aspect of the Lord are also devoid of pure
transcendent love, so how are these methods any
different from the worship of a cat, for example? We
consider that it is essential to arouse bhāva towards
Bhagavān by any means possible. The door leading to
gradual elevation is firmly shut if people on any level
of worship are ridiculed or condemned. Those who fall
under the spell of dogmatism, and thereby become
sectarian, lack the qualities of generosity and
munificence. That is why they ridicule and condemn
others who do not worship in the same way as they do.
This is a great mistake on their part.

Mullah: Then must we conclude that everything is God,
and that to worship anything at all is worship of God?
That would mean that worship of sinful objects or the
sinful tendency is also worship of God. Do all these
different types of worship please God?

Gorācānda: We do not say that everything is God. On the
contrary, God is distinct from all these things. God
creates and controls everything, and everything has a
relationship with Him. The thread of that relationship
runs through everything, and that is why one may inquire
about the presence of God in all things. As one inquires
into the presence of God in all things, one can
gradually taste or experience the supreme transcendental
and conscious entity. This is expressed in the sūtra,
jijñāsā-āsvādanāvadhi: “Inquiry leads to experience.”

                          168
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017


You are all learned paṇḍitas. If you kindly consider
this matter in a generous mood, you will understand. We
Vaiṣṇavas are completely disinterested in material
things and we do not want to enter into long drawn-out
arguments. If you kindly permit us, we shall now go to
hear the sublime musical narration of Śrī Caitanya-
maṅgala.

It was not evident what conclusion the Mullah Sāhib
reached as a result of this discussion. After a short
silence he said, “I have been pleased to hear your point
of view. On another day I will return and inquire
further. Now it is late and I wish to return home.” He
and his party then mounted their horses, and departed
for Sātsāika Paraganā.

The bābājīs loudly uttered the name of Śrī Hari with
great delight and entered the temple to hear the
recitation of Śrī Caitanya-maṅgala.



Thus ends the Eleventh Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled

“Nitya-Dharma & Idolatry”




Chapter 12

Nitya-Dharma, Sādhana & Sādhya



Śrī Navadvīpa-maṇḍala is supreme among all holy places
of the world. Like Śrī Vṛndāvana, it covers an area of
thirty-two square miles, and is shaped like an eight-
petaled lotus flower. The center of that lotus is Śrī
Antardvīpa, the core of which is Śrī Māyāpura. To the
north of Śrī Māyāpura is Śrī Sīmantadvīpa, where a
temple of Śrī Sīmantinī Devī is situated. To the north
of this temple is the village of Bilva-puṣkariṇī, and to
the south lies Brāhmaṇa-puṣkariṇī. That area, which is
located in the northern section of Śrī Navadvīpa is
commonly referred to as Simuliyā.

At the time of Śrī Mahāprabhu, Simuliyā was the
residence of many learned paṇḍitas. The father of
Śacīdevī, Śrī Nīlāmbara Cakravartī Mahāśaya, had also
lived in this village. Now, not far from where Nīlāmbara
Cakravatīís house still stood, lived a Vedic brahmana
named Vrajanātha Bhaṭṭācārya. Vrajanātha had been
brilliant from his childhood. He had studied in a
Sanskrit school in Bilva-puṣkariṇī, and he had become
such a superior scholar of the science of logic (nyāya-
śāstra) that his ingenious and innovative arguments
embarrassed and intimidated all the renowned scholars of
Bilva-puṣkariṇī, Brāhmaṇa-puṣkariṇī, Māyāpura, Godruma,
Madhyadvīpa, Āmraghaṭṭa, Samudra-garh, Kuliyā,

                            169
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

Pūrvasthalī, and other places.

Wherever there was a gathering of paṇḍitas, Vrajanātha
Nyāya-pañcānana would set the assembly ablaze with a
barrage of unprecedented arguments. Among these paṇḍitas
was a cruel-hearted logician named Naiyāyika Cuḍāmaṇi,
who was deeply mortified by the wounds he had received
from the sharp blows of Vrajanāthaís logic. This
logician resolved to kill Nyāya-pañcānana using the
occult knowledge described in the tantra-śāstra, by
which one can invoke anotherís death through mystical
incantations. To this end, he moved into the cremation
ground in Rudradvīpa and began to utter death mantras
day and night.

It was amāvāsya, the night of the new moon, and dense
darkness pervaded all the four directions. At midnight,
Naiyāyika Cuḍāmaṇi sat in the middle of the cremation
ground and called out to his worshipable deity, “O
Mother, you are the only worshipable deity in this Kali-
yuga. I have heard that you become pleased simply by the
recitation of a few mantras, and that you easily bestow
benedictions upon your worshipers. O Goddess with a
terrifying face, this servant of yours has undergone
tremendous hardship in reciting your mantras for many
days. Please be merciful upon me just once. O Mother,
although I am plagued with many faults, you are still my
mother. Please excuse all my faults and appear before me
today.”

In this way, repeatedly calling out with cries of
distress, Nyāya Cūḍāmaṇi offered oblations in the fire
while uttering a mantra in the name of Vrajanātha Nyāya-
pañcānana. How astonishing was the power of that mantra!
The sky immediately became overcast with a mass of
dense, dark clouds. A fierce wind began to blow and
deafening peals of thunder roared. Hideous ghosts and
evil spirits could be seen in the intermittent flashes
of lightning. With the help of the sacrificial wine,
Cuḍāmaṇi summoned all his energy and called out, “O
Mother, please do not delay another moment.”

Just then an oracle from the heavens replied, “Do not
worry. Vrajanātha Nyāya-pañcānana will not discuss the
nyāya-śāstra for long. Within a few days, he will give
up debating and remain silent. He will no longer be your
rival. Be peaceful and return home.”

When the paṇḍita heard this oracle, he became satisfied.
He repeatedly offered praṇāma to Mahādeva, the chief of
the devas and author of the tantra, and then returned to
his own home.

Vrajanātha Nyāya-pañcānana had become a dig-vijayī
paṇḍita (one who has conquered the four directions
through scholarship) at the age of twenty-one. Day and
night he studied the books of the famous logician, Śrī
Gaṅgeśopādhyāya, who had initiated a new system of logic
known as navya-nyāya. Vrajanātha had found many faults
in Kāṇāībhaṭṭa Śiromaṇiís Dīdhiti, which was a
celebrated commentary on Gaṅgeśopādhyāyaís Tattva-
cintāmaṇi, and he had begun to write his own commentary.
Although he never thought of material enjoyment, the
word paramārtha (spiritual reality) never so much as

                          170
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

entered his ears. His single focus in life was to
initiate logical debates using the concepts and
terminology of nyāya, such as avaccheda (the property of
an object by which it is distinguished from everything
else), vyavaccheda (exclusion of one object from
another), ghaṭa (a clay pot), and paṭa (a piece of
cloth). While sleeping, dreaming, eating, or moving
about, his heart was filled with thoughts about the
nature of objects, the nature of time, and the
peculiarities of aqueous and terrestrial properties.

One evening, Vrajanātha was sitting on the bank of the
Gaṅgā, contemplating the sixteen categories propounded
by Gautama in his system of logic, when a new student of
the nyāya-śāstra approached him. “Nyāya-pañcānana
Mahāśaya,” said the student, “have you heard Nimāi
Paṇḍitaís logical refutation of the atomic theory of
creation?”

Nyāya-pañcānana roared like a lion, “Who is Nimāi
Paṇḍita? Are you speaking about the son of Jagannātha
Miśra? Tell me about his logical arguments.”

The student said, “A great person named Nimāi Paṇḍita
lived in Navadvīpa just a short time ago. He composed
many innovative logical arguments related to the nyāya-
śāstra and thus embarrassed Kāṇāībhaṭṭa Śiromaṇi. During
His time, there was no scholar equal to Him in mastery
of the nyāya-śāstra. Yet, even though He was so adept in
the nyāya-śāstra, He considered it quite insignificant.
Indeed, He regarded not only the nyāya-śāstra, but the
entire material world, as trifling. He therefore adopted
the life of a wandering mendicant in the renounced order
and traveled from place to place propagating the
chanting of hari-nāma. Present-day Vaiṣṇavas accept Him
as pūrṇa-brahma, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, and
they worship Him with the śrī-gaura-hari-mantra. Nyāya-
pañcānana Mahāśaya, you must look into His dialectical
arguments at least once.”

After hearing such praise of Nimāi Paṇḍitaís logical
reasoning, Vrajanātha Nyāya-pañcānana became quite
curious to hear His arguments. With difficulty, he was
able to collect a few of those arguments from various
sources. Human nature is such that when one develops
faith in a particular subject, he will naturally feel
regard for the teachers of that subject. Moreover, for
various reasons, common people do not easily develop
faith in exalted personalities who are still living,
whereas they tend to develop great faith in the
activities of mahājanas who have passed away. Nyāya-
pañcānana developed unshakable faith in Nimāi Paṇḍita by
studying his logical thesis.

Vrajanātha would say, “O Nimāi Paṇḍita, if I had been
born during Your time, there is no telling how much I
could have learned from You. O Nimāi Paṇḍita, kindly
enter my heart just once. You are truly pūrṇa-brahma,
for otherwise how could such extraordinary logical
arguments have come from Your mind? You are undoubtedly
Gaura-Hari, for You have destroyed the darkness of
ignorance by creating such remarkable arguments. The
darkness of ignorance is black, but You have removed it
by becoming Gaura (fair-complexioned). You are Hari

                          171
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

because You can steal the minds of the entire world. You
have stolen away my heart with the ingenuity of Your
logic.”

Repeatedly speaking in this way, Vrajanātha became
somewhat frantic. He called out loudly, “O Nimāi
Paṇḍita! O Gaura-Hari! Please be merciful to me. When
will I be able to create logical arguments like Yours?
If You are merciful unto me, there is no telling how
great a scholar of the nyāya-śāstra I may become.”

Vrajanātha thought to himself, “It seems to me that
those who worship Gaura-Hari must also be attracted to
Nimāi Paṇḍitaís scholarship in nyāya, just as I am. I
should go to them and see whether they have any books
that He has composed on nyāya.” Thinking like this,
Vrajanātha developed a desire to associate with the
devotees of Gaurāṅga. By constantly uttering the pure
names of Bhagavān such as Nimāi Paṇḍita and Gaura-Hari,
and by desiring to associate with the devotees of Gaura,
Vrajanātha earned tremendous sukṛti.

One day, while Vrajanātha was taking a meal with his
paternal grandmother, he asked, “Grandmother, did you
ever see Gaura-Hari?” Upon hearing the name of Śrī
Gaurāṅga, Vrajanāthaís grandmother nostalgically
remembered her childhood, and said, “Aha! What an
enchanting form He had! Alas! Will I ever behold His
beautiful, sweet form again? Can anyone who has seen
that captivating form ever engage her mind in domestic
affairs again? When He performed hari-nāma-kīrtana,
absorbed in ecstatic trance, the birds, beasts, trees,
and creepers of Navadvīpa would completely lose
consciousness of the external world due to intoxication
of prema. Even now, when I contemplate these thoughts,
an incessant flow of tears streams uncontrollably from
my eyes and soaks my breast.”

Vrajanātha inquired further, “Do you recall any pastimes
that He performed?”

Grandmother replied, “I certainly do, my son! When Śrī
Gaurāṅga would visit the house of His maternal uncle
with Mother Śacī, the elderly ladies of our house fed
Him śāka (spinach) and rice. He would praise the śāka
very highly and eat it with great prema.”

At that precise moment, Vrajanāthaís own mother placed
some śāka on his plate. Seeing it and appreciating the
serendipity of the moment, Vrajanātha became overjoyed.
“This is the beloved śāka of the logician Nimāi
Paṇḍita,” he said, and ate it with the utmost reverence.

Although Vrajanātha was completely lacking in
transcendental knowledge of absolute reality, he became
extremely attracted to Nimāi Paṇḍitaís brilliant
scholarship. Indeed, the intensity of his attraction
could not be estimated. Even the name of Nimāi was a
delight to his ears. When mendicants came to beg alms
uttering, “Jaya Śacīnandana,” he received them warmly
and fed them. He would sometimes go to Māyāpura, where
he would hear the bābājīs chanting the names of
Gaurāṅga, and he would ask them many questions about
Gaurāṅgaís triumphant activities in the field of

                          172
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

scholarship and learning.

After a few months of these activities, Vrajanātha was
no longer his former self. Previously, Nimāiís name had
pleased him only in connection with His scholarship in
nyāya, but now Nimāi pleased him in all respects.
Vrajanātha lost all interest in studying and teaching
nyāya, and no longer had any taste for dry arguments or
debate. Nimāi the logician no longer had any standing in
the kingdom of his heart, for Nimāi the devotee had
usurped all authority.

Vrajanāthaís heart would begin to dance when he heard
the sound of mṛdaṅga and karatālas, and he would offer
praṇāma within his mind whenever he saw pure devotees.
He displayed great devotion toward Śrī Navadvīpa,
respecting it as the birthplace of Śrī Gaurāṅgadeva.
When rival paṇḍitas saw that Nyāya-pañcānana had become
soft-hearted, they were very pleased at his condition.
Now they could openly step out of their houses without
fear. Naiyāyika Paṇḍita thought that his worshipable
Deity had rendered Vrajanātha inactive and there was no
longer any need to be afraid.

One day, while Vrajanātha was sitting in a secluded
place on the bank of the Bhāgīrathī, he thought to
himself, “If such a profound scholar of the nyāya-śāstra
as Nimāi could renounce logic, and adopt the path of
bhakti, what fault would there be if I should do the
same? While I was obsessed with nyāya, I could not apply
myself to the cultivation of bhakti, nor could I bear to
hear the name of Nimāi. In those days, I was so immersed
in the nyāya-śāstra that I could not even find time to
eat, drink, or sleep. Now I see things in quite the
opposite way. I no longer contemplate the topics of the
nyāya-śāstra; instead, I always remember the name of
Gaurāṅga. Still, even though the ecstatic devotional
dancing of the Vaiṣṇavas captivates my mind, I am the
son of a Vedic brāhmaṇa. I was born in a prestigious
family and I am highly respected in society. Although I
truly believe that the behavior and conduct of the
Vaiṣṇavas is excellent, it is inappropriate for me to
adopt their ways outwardly.

“There are many Vaiṣṇavas in Śrī Māyāpura at Khola-
bhāṅgā-ḍāṅgā, where Chānd Kāzī broke the mṛdaṅga to stop
the saṅkīrtana, and at Vairāgī-ḍāṅgā, the place of
Vaiṣṇava asceticism. I feel happy and purified at heart
when I see the radiance of their faces. But amongst all
those devotees, it is Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī
Mahāśaya who completely captivates my mind. When I see
him, my heart fills with śraddhā. I would like to be by
his side continuously and learn the bhakti-śāstras from
him. It is said in the Vedas:

ātmā vā are draṣṭavyaḥ śrotavyo mantavyo
nididhyāsitavyaḥ

Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad (4.5.6)

One should see, hear about, think of, and meditate on
the Supreme Absolute Truth.

In this mantra, the word mantavyaḥ means ëto be thought

                            173
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

of, to be considered or examined, to be admitted or
assumed, to be approved or sanctioned, or to be called
into question.í Although this word suggests that one
should acquire brahma-jñāna by studying the nyāya-
śāstra, the word śrotavya (to be heard or learned from a
teacher) implies the necessity for something greater. So
far, I have spent much of my life in useless arguments
and debate. Now, without wasting any more time, I long
to dedicate myself to the feet of Śrī Gaura-Hari. It
will therefore be most beneficial for me to go after
sunset and take darśana of Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī
Mahāśaya.”

Vrajanātha set out for Śrī Māyāpura at the close of day.
The sun was rapidly vanishing below the western horizon,
but its crimson rays were still dancing amidst the
treetops. A gentle breeze blew from the south and birds
flew in various directions, returning to their nests.
The first few stars were gradually appearing in the sky.
As Vrajanātha arrived in Śrīvāsāṅgana (the courtyard of
Śrīvāsa Ṭhākuraís house), the Vaiṣṇavas began sandhyā-
āratī in worship of Bhagavān, chanting and singing with
sweet voices. Vrajanātha took his seat on a platform
beneath a bakula tree. His heart melted as he heard the
āratī-kīrtana of Gaura-Hari, and when it ended, the
Vaiṣṇavas joined him on the platform.

At that time, the elderly Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī
Mahāśaya came and took a seat on the platform, chanting
“Jaya Śacīnandana, Jaya Nityānanda, Jaya Rūpa-Sanātana,
Jaya Dāsa Gosvāmī.” As he did so, everyone rose and
offered him daṇḍavat-praṇāma, and Vrajanātha also felt
compelled to do the same. When the aged Bābājī Mahāśaya
saw the extraordinary beauty of Vrajanāthaís face, he
embraced him and requested him to sit by his side. “Who
are you my son?” asked Bābājī.

Vrajanātha replied, “I am one who is thirsting for the
truth, and I long to receive some instruction from you.”

A Vaiṣṇava   seated nearby recognized Vrajanātha, and
said, “His   name is Vrajanātha Nyāya-pañcānana. There is
no scholar   of nyāya equal to him in all of Navadvīpa,
but now he   has developed some faith in Śacīnandana.”

Hearing of Vrajanāthaís vast erudition, the elderly
Bābājī said courteously, “My dear son, you are a great
scholar and I am a foolish and wretched soul. You are a
resident of the holy dhāma of our Śacīnandana, and we
are therefore objects of your mercy. How can we instruct
you? Kindly share with us some of the purifying
narrations of your Gaurāṅga and pacify our burning
hearts.”

As Bābājī Mahārāja and Vrajanātha conversed in this way,
the other Vaiṣṇavas gradually arose and dispersed to
resume their respective services.

Vrajanātha said, “Bābājī Mahāśaya, I was born in a
brāhmaṇa family, and as a result I am very proud of my
learning. Because of my egoism of high birth and
knowledge, I think this earth is within the grip of my
hand. I have no idea how to honor sādhus and great
persons. I cannot say by what good fortune I have

                            174
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

awakened faith in your character and behavior. I wish to
ask you a few questions; please answer them,
understanding that I have not come to you with any
ulterior motive.”

Vrajanātha then asked Bābājī Mahāśaya fervently, “Kindly
instruct me: What is the jīvaís ultimate goal of life
(sādhya), and what is the means (sādhana) to attain that
goal? While I was studying the nyāya-śāstra, I concluded
that the jīva is eternally separate from Īśvara, and
that the mercy of Õśvara is the only cause of the jīvaís
obtaining mukti. I have understood that the particular
method by which the mercy of Īśvara may be obtained is
called sādhana. The result that is achieved through
sādhana is known as sādhya. I have probed the nyāya-
śāstra many times with the inquiry as to what are sādhya
and sādhana? However, the nyāya-śāstra remains
completely silent on this point. It has not supplied me
with the answer. Please tell me your conclusions
regarding sādhya and sādhana.”

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī was a disciple of Śrī
Raghunātha Dāsa Gosvāmī, and he was not only an erudite
scholar, but also a self-realized saint. He had lived
for a long time at Rādhā-kuṇḍa under the shelter of Śrī
Dāsa Gosvāmīís lotus feet, and every afternoon he had
heard from him the pastimes of Śrī Caitanyadeva.
Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī would regularly discuss
philosophical truths with Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Mahāśaya,
and whenever some doubt arose, they resolved it by
inquiring from Śrī Dāsa Gosvāmī. After both Raghunātha
dāsa Gosvāmī and Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī left this
world, Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī came to Śrī Māyāpura
and became the principal paṇḍita-bābājī in Śrī Gauḍa-
maṇḍala. He and Premadāsa Paramahaṁsa Bābājī Mahāśaya of
Śrī Godruma often discussed topics of Śrī Hari, absorbed
in prema.

Bābājī: Nyāya-pañcānana Mahāśaya, anyone who studies the
nyāya-śāstra and then inquires about sādhya and sādhana
is certainly blessed in this world, because the chief
aim of the nyāya-śāstra is to compile axiomatic truths
through logical analysis. It is a waste of time to study
the nyāya-śāstra just to learn how to engage in dry
argument and debate. If one does so, his study of logic
has produced an illogical result; his labor is futile,
and he has spent his life in vain.

Sādhya means the truth (tattva) that is attained by
undertaking a specific practice. The practice is called
sādhana and it is the means that one adopts to obtain
that sādhya (goal). Those who are bound by māyā view
different objects as the ultimate goal of life according
to their individual tendencies and qualifications. In
reality, however, there is only one supreme goal.

There are three goals that one may try to attain, and
different individuals will choose one or the other
according to their tendency and adhikāra (eligibility).
These three goals are bhukti (material enjoyment), mukti
(liberation), and bhakti (devotional service). Those who
are ensnared in worldly activities, and who are
distracted by desires for material pleasure, take bhukti
as their goal. The śāstras are compared to a cow that

                          175
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

fulfills all desires (kāma-dhenu), for a human being can
obtain whatever object he desires from them. The śāstras
dealing with karma-kāṇḍa have explained that material
enjoyment is the sādhya (goal) for those who are
eligible to engage in fruitive action, and these śāstras
delineate all varieties of material pleasure that one
could possibly strive to attain in this world. Having
accepted material bodies in this world, the jīvas are
particularly fond of sensual enjoyment. The material
world is an abode to facilitate enjoyment through the
material senses. The pleasure one enjoys through the
senses from birth until death is known as enjoyment
pertaining to this life (aihika-sukha).

There are many different types of sensual pleasures that
one may enjoy in the state one attains after death, and
these are called āmutrika-sukha (enjoyment pertaining to
the next life). For example, the pleasures of the
celestial sphere include residing in Svarga (the higher
planets) or Indraloka (the planet of Indra) and
witnessing the dancing of the celestial society girls
known as apsarās; drinking the nectar of immortality;
smelling the fragrant flowers and seeing the beauty of
the nandana-kānana gardens; seeing the wonder of
Indrapurī; hearing the melodious songs of the
gandharvas; and associating with the celestial damsels
known as vidyādharīs.

Above Indraloka in succession are the planets of
Maharloka, Janaloka, Tapoloka, and finally Brahmaloka,
the highest planet in the material universe. The śāstras
give fewer descriptions of Maharloka and Janaloka than
of the celestial pleasures in Indraloka, and fewer
descriptions still of Tapoloka and Brahma-loka. In
contrast, the sensual pleasure of this earth planet,
Bhūrloka, is extremely gross. The rule is that the
higher the planetary system, the more subtle are the
senses and their objects. This is the only difference
between these realms; otherwise, the happiness available
on all these planets is merely the pleasure of the
senses, and there is no happiness other than this.
Spiritual happiness (cit-sukha) is absent on all these
planets, for the happiness found in such places is
related to the subtle body ñ which consists of the mind,
intelligence and ego ñ and is merely a semblance of pure
consciousness. The enjoyment of all these types of
pleasure is called bhukti, and the sādhana for the jīvas
trapped in the cycle of karma consists of the activities
they adopt to fulfill their aspirations for bhukti. It
is said in the Yajur-Veda (2.5.5):

svarga-kāmo ëśvamedhaṁ yajeta

Those who desire to attain the heavenly planets should
perform the aśvamedha-yajña.

The śāstras describe many different types of sādhana to
obtain bhukti, such as a particular type of fire
sacrifice called agniṣṭoma; oblations offered to a
certain class of devatās; digging wells, building
temples and performing similar beneficial works for
others; and ceremonies performed on the days of the new
and full moon. Bhukti is the object of attainment
(sādhya) for those who aspire for material enjoyment.

                          176
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017


Some of those who are oppressed by the miseries of
material existence consider the fourteen planetary
systems, which are the abodes of all material enjoyment,
worthless. These people therefore desire to become free
from the cycle of karma. They consider that mukti is the
only sādhya, and that bhukti is simply bondage. Such
people say, “Those whose inclination for material
enjoyment has not yet waned may realize their goal of
bhukti by following karma-kāṇḍa. However, Bhagavad-gītā
(9.21) states:

kṣīṇe puṇye martya-lokaṁ viśanti

When their pious credits have been exhausted, they again
enter the planets of mortality.

“This śloka establishes clearly and indisputably that
bhukti is perishable and not eternal. Whatever is
subject to decay is material, not spiritual. One should
undertake sādhana only to obtain an eternal objective.
Mukti is eternal, so it must certainly be the sādhya for
the jīvas. Mukti can be obtained by four types of
sādhana. These are: discriminating between eternal and
temporary objects; renouncing enjoyment of the fruits of
this world and the next; developing six qualities, such
as control of the mind and senses; and cultivating the
desire for liberation. These four activities are the
true sādhana.”

This is the viewpoint of those who regard mukti as the
object of attainment, and the śāstras propounding jñāna-
kāṇḍa present this analysis of sādhya and sādhana.

The śāstras are kāma-dhenu, and they arrange different
situations for the jīvas according to their adhikāra
(level of qualification). Mukti is generally understood
to be the cessation of the individual ego. However, if
the jīvas retain their individual existence and
identities when they attain it, mukti cannot be the
final attainment. This means that the jīvas can only
take mukti up to the limit of annihilation of the
individual self (nirvāṇa), but the jīvas are eternal, so
they cannot really be annihilated. This is confirmed in
the Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (6.13):

nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām

He is the supreme eternal being amongst all the eternal
living beings, and He is the supreme conscious entity
amongst all conscious entities.

This and other Vedic mantras establish that the jīva is
eternal, and that annihilation of his individual
existence (nirvāṇa) is therefore impossible. Those who
accept this conclusion understand that the jīva
continues to exist as an individual after he attains
mukti. Consequently, they do not accept bhukti or mukti
as the ultimate goal. Rather, they consider that bhukti
and mukti are actually extraneous goals which are
foreign to the nature of the jīva.

Every endeavor has a goal and some means to attain it.
The result that one strives to attain is known as

                          177
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

sādhya, and the practice one adopts to bring about that
result is known as sādhana. If you reflect deeply, you
will see that the goals of the living entities and the
means that they adopt to attain them are like successive
links in a chain. What is a sādhya (goal) now becomes
the sādhana, the means to obtain the next sādhya later
on. If one adopts this chain of cause and effect, one
eventually comes to the final link in the chain. The
effect, or sādhya, that is attained at that final stage
is the highest and ultimate sādhya, which does not
become a sādhana (means) for anything else because there
is no other sādhya beyond it. When one crosses all the
links in this chain of sādhya and sādhana, one
eventually reaches the final link, which is known as
bhakti. Bhakti is therefore the highest sādhya, because
it is the jīvasí eternal state of perfection (nitya-
siddha-bhāva).

Every action in human life is a link in the chain of
sādhana and sādhya, or cause and effect. The karma
section of this chain of cause and effect consists of
many links joined together. When one progresses beyond
this, a further series of links form another section
known as jñāna. Finally, the bhakti section begins where
the jñāna section ends. The final sādhya in the chain of
karma is bhukti, the final sādhya in the chain of jñāna
is mukti, and the final sādhya in the chain of bhakti is
prema-bhakti. If one reflects upon the nature of the
jīvasí perfected state, one must conclude that bhakti is
both sādhana and sādhya. Karma and jñāna are not the
final sādhya or sādhana, for they are only intermediate
stages.

Vrajanātha: There are many prominent statements in the
Upaniṣads that do not establish that bhakti is supreme,
or that it is the ultimate sādhya of attainment. It is
said in the Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad (4.5.15 and 2.4.24),
kena kaṁ paśyet: “Who should see? Whom will they see?
And by what means?” It is also stated in the Bṛhad-
āraṇyaka Upaniṣad (1.4.10), ahaṁ brahmāsmi: “I am
brahma.” It is said in the Aitareya Upaniṣad (1.5.3),
prajñānaṁ brahma: “Consciousness is brahma.” And in the
Chāndogya Upaniṣad (6.8.7) it is said, tat tvam asi
śvetaketo: “O Śvetaketu, you are that brahma.”
Considering all these statements, what is wrong in
regarding mukti as the supreme sādhya?

Bābājī: I have already explained that there are many
different types of sādhya according to different
tendencies. One cannot accept the validity of mukti as
long as one has any desire for bhukti, and many of the
statements in śāstra are written for people on that
level. For instance, the Āpastamba Śrauta-sūtra (2.1.1)
states, akṣayaṁ ha vai cāturmasya-yājinaḥ: “Those who
observe the vow of cāturmasya obtain perpetual residence
in heaven.” Does this mean that mukti is a worthless
goal? The karmīs desire only sense gratification. They
cannot discover the recommendations from śāstra for
mukti, but does that mean that mukti is not described
anywhere in the Vedas? A few of the ṛṣis who recommend
the path of karma maintain that renunciation is only
prescribed for those who are incompetent, and that those
who are competent should perform karma. This is not
actually true; these instructions are given for people

                          178
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

on lower levels of spiritual advancement in order to
promote their faith in their respective positions.

It is inauspicious for jīvas to neglect the duties for
which they are responsible. If one carries out oneís
duties in full faith that they are appropriate for oneís
present level, one easily gains access to the next level
of qualification. Consequently, prescriptions in the
Vedas promoting this type of faith have not been
condemned. On the contrary, if one condemns such
prescriptions one is liable to fall down. All jīvas who
have attained elevation in this world have done so by
strictly adhering to the duties for which they were
qualified.

Jñāna is actually superior to karma because it yields
mukti. Nonetheless, the śāstras that discuss competence
for karma praise karma most highly, and do not
substantiate the pre-eminence of jñāna. Similarly, where
the śāstras discuss competence for jñāna, we find all
the mantras that you have mentioned which praise mukti.
However, just as eligibility for jñāna is superior to
that for karma, the eligibility for bhakti is superior
to that for jñāna. Mantras such as tat tvam asi and ahaṁ
brahmāsmi praise impersonal liberation, and they
strengthen the faith of those who seek it to follow the
path for which they are qualified. For this reason, it
is not wrong to establish the eminence of jñāna.
However, jñāna is not the ultimate sādhana, and the
sādhya of jñāna, namely mukti, is not the ultimate
sādhya. The Vedic mantras establish the final conclusion
that bhakti is the sādhana, and prema-bhakti is the
sādhya.

Vrajanātha: The mantras that I quoted are principal
statements of the Vedas, known as mahā-vākyas. How can
the sādhya and sādhana that they put forward possibly be
extraneous?

Bābājī: The Vedic statements you quoted just a moment
ago are not described as mahā-vākyas anywhere in the
Vedas, nor have they been described as superior to other
statements. Teachers of jñāna have proclaimed that these
statements are mahā-vākyas in order to establish the
pre-eminence of their own doctrine, but in reality,
praṇava (oṁ) is the only mahā-vākya. All other Vedic
statements relate only to particular aspects of Vedic
knowledge.

It would not be incorrect to refer to all the statements
of the Vedas as mahā-vākyas. However, it is dogmatic to
single out one particular statement of the Vedas as the
mahā-vākya, and to label all others as ordinary. Those
who do so are committing an offense to the Vedas. The
Vedas describe many extraneous goals and the means to
attain them, so they sometimes praise karma-kāṇḍa, and
sometimes mukti, but in the ultimate analysis, the Vedas
conclude that bhakti alone is both sādhana and sādhya.

The Vedas are like a cow, and Śrī Nanda-nandana is the
milkman. In the Bhagavad-gītā (6.46-47), He has revealed
the purport of the Vedas regarding their ultimate aim:

tapasvibhyo ëdhiko yogī jñānibhyo ëpi mato ëdhikaḥ

                          179
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017


karmibhyaś cādhiko yogī tasmād yogī bhavārjuna

yoginām api sarveṣāṁ mad-gatenāntarātmanā

śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ sa me yuktatamo mataḥ

O Arjuna, a yogī is greater than all types of ascetics,
fruitive workers, and those who cultivate impersonal
knowledge aiming at liberation. Therefore, become a
yogī. And I consider that the greatest of all yogīs is
one who is attached to Me with firm faith, and who
constantly worships Me with full expression of the
heart.

It is said in the Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (6.23):

yasya deve parā bhaktir yathā deve tathā gurau

tasyaite kathitā hy arthāḥ prakāśante mahātmanaḥ

All the confidential purports of the Vedas are fully
revealed to that great soul who has the same parā-bhakti
for his Gurudeva as he has for Śrī Bhagavān.

It is said in the Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad, Pūrva-vibhāga
(2.2):

bhaktir asya bhajanaṁ tad ihāmutropādhi-

nairāsyenaivāmuṣmin manasaḥ kalpanam

etad eva ca naiṣkarmyam

Bhakti performed for the pleasure of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is known
as bhajana. This means to give up all desires for
enjoyment in this world and the next, to dedicate oneís
mind unto Kṛṣṇa, and to develop a feeling of complete
unity with Him because of an overwhelming sense of
prema. This bhajana also entails freedom from all
result-oriented activity.

It is said in the Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad (1.4.8):

ātmānam eva priyam upāsīta

One should worship the Supreme Soul, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, as the
dearest object of oneís affection.

In the Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad (4.5.6) it is also said:

ātmā vā are draṣṭavyaḥ śrotavyo

mantavyo nididhyāsitavyaḥ

O Maitreyī, one should see, hear about, think of and
meditate upon the Supreme Absolute Truth Paramātmā.

When one studies these Vedic statements carefully, it is
clear that bhakti is the best form of sādhana.

Vrajanātha: The karma-kāṇḍa section of the Vedas gives
instructions to perform bhakti to Īśvara, who bestows
the results of all action. In the jñāna-kāṇḍa section we

                             180
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

also find instructions to satisfy Hari by performing
bhakti through the medium of the four types of sādhana
known as sādhana-catuṣṭaya. So how can bhakti be the
sādhya if it is the means to obtain bhukti and mukti?
Since bhakti is the means, it ceases to exist when it
produces bhukti or mukti. This is the general principle.
Please educate me on this question.

Bābājī: It is true that performing the regulated
practices (sādhana) of bhakti in karma-kāṇḍa gives
material enjoyment, and bhakti-sādhana performed in
jñāna-kāṇḍa gives mukti. One cannot achieve any result
without satisfying Parameśvara, and He is only satisfied
by bhakti. He is the reservoir of all potencies, and
whatever potency is found within the jīvas, or within
inert matter, is only an infinitesimal display of His
potency. Karma and jñāna cannot satisfy Īśvara. Karma
and jñāna give a result only with the help of bhagavad-
bhakti. They are incapable of producing a result
independently. Therefore, it is seen that there is an
arrangement for some performance of a semblance of
bhakti in karma and jñāna. However, this is not śuddha-
bhakti. Rather, it is only bhakty-ābhāsa. Accordingly,
the bhakti seen in karma and jñāna is a mere semblance
of devotion, not śuddha-bhakti, and it is this bhakty-
ābhāsa that is instrumental in bringing forth the
results of those pursuits.

There are two types of bhakty-ābhāsa: śuddha bhakty-
ābhāsa (pure) and viddha bhakty-ābhāsa (adulterated). I
shall describe pure bhakty-ābhāsa later, but for the
present, you should know that there are three types of
adulterated bhakty-ābhāsa. These are bhakty-ābhāsa
adulterated with fruitive action, bhakty-ābhāsa
adulterated with monistic knowledge, and bhakty-ābhāsa
adulterated with both fruitive action and monistic
knowledge.

While a person is performing a yajña, he may say, “O
Indra, O Pūṣana (the devatā of the sun), please be
merciful and give us the results of this yajña.” All
activities exhibiting a semblance of bhakti adulterated
with this type of desire are known as a semblance of
bhakti adulterated with fruitive action. Some
magnanimous souls have referred to this type of
adulterated bhakti as devotion mixed with fruitive
action (karma-miśra-bhakti). Others have described it as
activities to which the symptoms of bhakti are
indirectly attributed (āropa-siddha-bhakti).

Another person may say, “O Yadunandana, I have come to
You out of fear of material existence. I chant Your
name, Hare Kṛṣṇa, day and night. Please grant me
liberation. O Supreme Lord, You are brahma. I have
fallen into the trap of māyā. Please deliver me from
this entanglement and let me merge in oneness with You.”
These sentiments are a semblance of bhakti adulterated
with monistic knowledge. Some magnanimous souls have
described this as devotion mixed with monistic knowledge
(jñāna-miśra-bhakti), and others as activities to which
the symptoms of bhakti are indirectly attributed (āropa-
siddha-bhakti). These adulterated forms of devotion are
different from śuddha-bhakti.


                          181
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

It is said in the Gītā (6.47), śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ
sa me yuktatamo mataḥ, “I consider that one who worships
Me with faith is the best of all yogīs.” The bhakti to
which Śrī Kṛṣṇa is referring in this statement is
śuddha-bhakti, and this is our sādhana. When it is
perfected, it is prema. Karma and jñāna are the means to
obtain bhukti and mukti respectively. They are not the
means by which the jīva can obtain his nitya-siddha-
bhāva, or eternal constitutional position of divine
love.

When Vrajanātha had heard all these conclusive truths,
he was unable to make further inquiries that day.
Instead, he reflected within himself, “The examination
and discussion of all these subtle philosophical truths
is superior to the dialectical analysis of the nyāya-
śāstra. Bābājī Mahāśaya is vastly learned in these
matters. I will gradually acquire knowledge by inquiring
from him about these topics. It is quite late, so I
should return home now.”

Thinking thus, he said, “Bābājī Mahāśaya, today by your
mercy, I have received essential superior knowledge. I
would like to come to you from time to time to receive
this type of instruction. You are a deeply realized
scholar and a great teacher; please be merciful to me.
Kindly permit me to ask you just one more question
today, since it is already late, and I will return home
when I have heard your answer. Did Śrī Śacīnandana
Gaurāṅga write any book in which all of His instructions
can be found? If He did, I am anxious to read it.”

Bābājī Mahāśaya replied, “Śrīman Mahāprabhu did not
write any book of His own, but His followers wrote many
books on His order. Mahāprabhu personally gave the jīvas
eight instructions in the form of aphorisms, named
Śikṣāṣṭaka. These are like a necklace of jewels for the
bhaktas. In these eight ślokas, He has imparted the
instructions of the Vedas, the Vedānta, the Upaniṣads,
and the Purāṇas in a concise and confidential manner, as
if keeping a vast ocean in a single pitcher. Based on
these confidential instructions, the bhaktas have
composed ten fundamental principles known as Daśa-mūla.
This Daśa-mūla succinctly describes both sādhya and
sādhana with reference to the topics of sambandha,
abhidheya, and prayojana. You should understand this
first.”

“Whatever you order, it is my duty to fulfill,” said
Vrajanātha. “You are my śikṣā-guru. I will come tomorrow
evening and take instruction from you on Daśa-mūla.”

Vrajanātha then offered daṇḍavat-praṇāma to Bābājī
Mahāśaya, who embraced him with great affection. “My
son,” said Bābājī, “you have purified the brāhmaṇa
lineage. It will give me great pleasure if you come
tomorrow evening.”



Thus ends the Twelfth Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled


                          182
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

“Nitya-Dharma, Sādhana & Sādhya”




Chapter 13

Pramāṇa & The Commencement of Prameya



Late the next afternoon, at the time of go-dhūli (when
the air is thick with dust-clouds raised by the cows
returning to the go-śālā), Vrajanātha arrived at
Śrīvāsāṅgana. He sat on the raised platform under the
dense foliage of the bakula tree, and waited for the
elderly Bābājī Mahārāja. Bābājī was waiting in his
bhajana-kuṭīra, and for some unknown reason, vātsalya-
bhāva had arisen in his heart towards Vrajanātha. As
soon as a slight sound outside indicated Vrajanāthaís
arrival, Bābājī came out and, lovingly embracing him,
took him into his kuṭīra, which was situated at one side
of the courtyard in an arbour of kuṇḍa flowers. There he
offered him a seat and sat beside him.

Vrajanātha took the dust of Bābājī Mahārājaís feet on
his head. Feeling blessed, he said humbly, “O great
soul, yesterday you told me that you would instruct me
on Daśa-mūla, the fundamental principles of Nimāi
Paṇḍitaís teachings. Kindly bestow this knowledge upon
me now.”

When Vrajanātha asked this wonderful question, Bābājī
Mahāśaya became very happy and said affectionately, “My
son, I shall first explain to you the sūtra śloka of
Daśa-mūla, wherein the ten ontological truths of Daśa-
mūla are set out in a condensed form. You are a scholar,
so by proper deliberation you will be able to comprehend
the true meanings of this śloka.

āmnāyaḥ prāha tattvaṁ harim iha paramaṁ sarva-śaktiṁ
rasābdhiṁ

tad-bhinnāṁśāṁś ca jīvān prakṛti-kavalitān tad-vimuktāṁś
ca bhāvād

bhedābheda-prakāśaṁ sakalam api hareḥ sādhanaṁ śuddha-
bhaktiṁ

sādhyaṁ tat-prītim evety upadiśati janān gauracandraḥ
svayaṁ saḥ

1. Pramāṇa: The teachings of the Vedas received through
guru-paramparā are known as āmnāya. The infallible
evidence of the Vedas, of the smṛti-śāstras headed by
the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, as well as evidence such as
direct sense perception (pratyakṣa), that concur with
the guidance of the Vedas, are all accepted as pramāṇa
(evidence). This pramāṇa establishes the following
prameyas (fundamental truths):

2. Parama-tattva: Śrī Hari alone is the Supreme Absolute
Truth.

                          183
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017


3. Sarva-śaktimān: Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the possessor of all
potency.

4. Akhila-rasāmṛta-sindhu: He is the ocean of nectarean
mellows.

5. Vibhinnāṁśa-tattva: Both the mukta (liberated) and
baddha (conditioned) jīvas are His eternally separated
parts and parcels.

6. Baddha-jīvas: Conditioned souls are subject to the
control and covering of māyā.

7. Mukta-jīvas: Liberated souls are free from māyā.

8. Acintya-bhedābheda-tattva: The entire universe,
consisting of the conscious (cit) and unconscious
(acit), is Śrī Hariís acintya-bhedābheda-prakāśa, that
is to say, it is His manifestation which is
inconceivably both different and non-different from Him.

9. Śuddha-bhakti: Pure devotional service is the only
practice (sādhana) to attain perfection.

10. Kṛṣṇa-prīti: Transcendental love and affection for
Kṛṣṇa is the one and only final object of attainment
(sādhya-vastu).

Svayaṁ Bhagavān Śrī Gaurāṅgadeva has herein instructed
ten distinct tattvas (fundamental truths) to the
faithful jīvas. The first of these is pramāṇa-tattva,
and the remaining nine are prameya-tattva. First you
should understand the meaning of pramāṇa. That subject
which is established by pramāṇa (evidence or proof) is
known as prameya (that which is proved); and that by
which prameya is proved is known as pramāṇa.

These ten fundamental tattvas (daśa-mūla-tattva) are set
out in the śloka that I have just recited. The next
śloka will be the first actual śloka of the Daśa-mūla,
and it elaborates on the first of the daśa-mūla-tattvas,
namely the authoritative Vedic literature (āmnāya or
pramāṇa-tattva). From the second to the eighth
ślokasambandha-tattva is described. The ninth śloka
describes abhidheya-tattva, which is the sādhana for
attaining the ultimate goal; and the tenth śloka
describes prayojana-tattva, which is the sādhya (goal)
itself.

When Vrajanātha had heard the meaning of the śloka, he
said, “Bābājī Mahārāja, I do not have anything to ask
now. If any question occurs to me after hearing the next
śloka, I will submit it at your lotus feet. Now kindly
explain the first śloka of the Daśa-mūla.”

Bābājī: Very good. Now listen attentively.

svataḥ-siddho vedo hari-dayita-vedhaḥ-prabhṛtitaḥ

pramāṇaṁ sat-prāptaṁ pramiti-viṣayān tān nava-vidhān

tathā pratyakṣādi-pramiti-sahitaṁ sādhayati naḥ


                          184
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017

na yuktis tarkākhyā praviśati tathā śakti-rahitā

Daśa-mūla (1)

The self-evident Vedas, which have been received in the
sampradāya through the guru-paramparā by recipients of
Śrī Hariís mercy such as Brahmājī and others, are known
as āmnāya-vākya. The nine prameya-tattvas are
established by these āmnāya-vākyas with the help of
other pramāṇas that follow the guidance of these
śāstras, such as evidence obtained by direct sense
perception (pratyakṣa). Reasoning that is only based on
logic is always lame in the matter of evaluating
inconceivable subject matters, since logic and argument
have no access in the realm of the inconceivable.

Vrajanātha: Is there any evidence within the Vedas to
show that Brahmājī gave instruction through disciplic
succession?

Bābājī: Yes, there is. In the Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad (1.1.1)
it is stated:

brahmā devānāṁ prathamaḥ sambabhūva

viśvasya karttā bhuvanasya goptā

sa brahma-vidyāṁ sarva-vidyā-pratiṣṭhām

atharvāya jyeṣṭha-putrāya prāha

Brahmājī, who is the creator of the entire universe, and
the protector of the worlds, was the first deva to
appear. He gave complete instructions on brahma-vidyā,
the basis of all knowledge, to his eldest son, Atharva.

It is also stated further on in MuṇḍakaUpaniṣad
(1.2.13),

yenākṣaraṁ purusaṁ veda satyaṁ

provāca tāṁ tattvato brahma-vidyām

Brahma-vidyā is knowledge that reveals the true svarūpa
of para-brahma, the indestructible Puruṣottama.

Vrajanātha: Do you have any evidence that the ṛṣis who
compiled the smṛti-śāstras have given the correct
explanation of the Vedas in them?

Bābājī: Evidence for this is given in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(11.14.3-4), the crest jewel of all śāstras.

kālena naṣṭā pralaye vāṇīyaṁ veda-saṁjnitā

mayādau brahmaṇe proktā dharmo yasyāṁ mad-ātmakaḥ

tena proktā sva-putrāya manave pūrva-jāya sā

tato bhṛgv-ādayo ígṛhṇan sapta brahma-maharṣayaḥ

Śrī Bhagavān said, “By the influence of time, the Vedas
containing My instructions on bhāgavata-dharma were lost
when the cosmic devastation occured. At the beginning of

                          185
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

the next brāhma-kalpa at the time of creation, I again
instructed Brahmā in that same Veda. Brahmā instructed
his son Manu in the Vedic knowledge, and Manu in turn
instructed the same science to the seven Brahmaṛṣis,
headed by Bhṛgu.”

Vrajanātha: What is the necessity for a sampradāya?

Bābājī: Most people in this world accept the shelter of
Māyāvāda philosophy, and follow that inauspicious path
which is devoid of bhakti. Consequently, if there were
no separate sampradāya for those who practice śuddha-
bhakti that is untainted by the faults of Māyāvāda, it
would be very difficult to attain genuine sat-saṅga.
Therefore, it is stated in the Padma Purāṇa,

sampradāya-vihinā ye mantrās te viphalā matāḥ

śrī-brahma-rudra-sanakā vaiṣṇavāḥ kṣiti-pāvanāḥ

Vaiṣṇava ācāryas in the four sampradāyasónamely
Rāmānujācārya in the Śrī-sampradāya, Madhvācārya in the
Brahma-sampradāya, Viṣṇusvāmī in the Rudra-sampradāya,
and Nimbāditya in the Catuḥsana-sampradāyaópurify the
whole universe. Dīkṣāmantras not received from the
ācāryas in one of these four sampradāyas will be
fruitless.

Of these four, the Brahma-sampradāya is the most ancient
and has continued through the disciplic succession until
the present day. These sampradāyas adhere to the system
of guru-paramparā and they have brought the Vedānta and
other supremely auspicious literatures unchanged from
the most ancient times, and by the potency of the system
of paramparā, there is not the slightest chance that
they have made any change or eliminated any portion.
There is, therefore, no reason to doubt the literature
that the sampradāya has authorized. Sampradāya is an
effective and indispensible arrangement, and for this
reason, the sat-sampradāya system is continuing amongst
saints and sādhus from the most ancient times.

Vrajanātha: Are the names of all the ācāryas in the
sampradāya available in order of succession?

Bābājī: Only the names of the most prominent ācāryas who
have appeared from time to time are mentioned.

Vrajanātha: I would like to hear the guru-paramparā of
the Brahma-sampradāya.

Bābājī: Listen.

para-vyomeśvarasyāsīc chiṣyo brahmā jagat-patiḥ

tasya śiṣyo nārado ëbhūd vyāsas tasyāpa śiṣyatām

Brahmā, the master of the universe, is the disciple of
Parameśvara Śrī Nārāyaṇa, and Nāradajī became the
disciple of Brahmā. Vyāsadeva became the disciple of
Nāradajī.

śuko vyāsasya śisyatvaṁ prāpto jñānāvarodhanāt


                          186
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017

vyāsāl labdho kṛṣṇa-dīkṣo madhvācāryo mahāyaśaḥ

Śrī Śukadevajī became the disciple of Śrī Vyāsadeva in
order to check the spread of impersonal jñāna. The
celebrated Madhvācārya also received kṛṣṇa-dīkṣā from
Śrī Vyāsadeva, Narahari became the twice-born śiṣya of
Madhvācārya.

tasya śiṣyo naraharis tac-chiṣyo mādhavo dvijaḥ

akṣobhyas tasya śiṣyo ëbhūt tac-chiṣyo jayatīrthakaḥ

Mādhva-dvija became the disciple of Narahari. Akṣobhya
was Mādhva-dvijaís disciple and accepted Jayatīrtha as
his disciple.

tasya śiṣyo jñānasindhus tasya śiṣyo mahānidhiḥ

vidyānidhis tasya śiṣyo rājendras tasya sevakaḥ

Jñānasindhu became the disciple of Jayatīrtha, Mahānidhi
became Jñānasindhuís disciple and accepted Vidyānidhi as
his disciple, and Rajendra became the disciple of
Vidyānidhi.

jayadharmo munis tasya śiṣyo yad-gaṇa-madhyataḥ

śrīmad-viṣṇupurī yas tu bhakti-ratnāvalī kṛtiḥ

Jayadharma Muni became the disciple of Rajendra, and one
of his followers named Śrī Viṣṇu Purī, who composed
Bhakti-ratnāvalī, was a prominent ācārya.

jayadharmasya śiṣyo ëbhūd brahmaṇyaḥ puruṣottamaḥ

vyāsa-tīrthas tasya śiṣyo yaś cakre viṣṇu-saṁhitām

Jayadharmaís disciple was Brahmaṇya Puruṣottama, who in
turn accepted Vyāsa-tīrtha, the author of Viṣṇu-saṁhitā,
as his disciple.

śrīmal-lakṣmīpatis tasya śiṣyo bhakti-rasāśrayaḥ

tasya śiṣyo mādhavendro yad-dharmo ëyaṁ pravartitaḥ

Śrī Lakṣmīpati became the disciple of Vyāsa-tīrtha, and
Mādhavendra Purī, who was the epitome of bhakti-rasa,
and who propagated bhakti-dharma, was the disciple of
Lakṣmīpati.

Vrajanātha: In the first śloka of Daśa-mūla, the Vedas
are accepted as the sole evidence (pramāṇa); whereas the
other pramāṇas, such as pratyakṣa (direct perception),
are accepted as evidence only when they follow the
Vedas. However, philosophies such as nyāya and sāṅkhya
have accepted further types of evidence. Well-versed
readers of the Purāṇas have accepted eight types of
pramāṇa: pratyakṣa (direct perception), anumāna
(inference based on generalized experience), upamāna
(analogy), śabda (revealed knowledge), aitihya
(traditional instruction), arthāpatti (inference from
circumstances), sambhava (speculation), and anupalabdhi
(understanding something by its non-perception). Why are
there so many opinions regarding pramāṇa? And if direct

                          187
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

perception and inference based on experience are not
counted among the perfect pramāṇas, how is it possible
to get real understanding? Kindly enlighten me.

Bābājī:Pratyakṣa and other types of evidence depend on
the senses, but since the senses of the conditioned jīva
are always subject to bhrama (illusion), pramāda
(error), vipralipsā (cheating), and karaṇāpāṭava
(imperfection of the senses), how can the knowledge
acquired through the senses be factual and faultless?
The fully independent possessor of all potencies, Śrī
Bhagavān Himself, personally manifested as perfect Vedic
knowledge within the pure hearts of great mahaṛṣis and
saintly ācāryas who were situated in full samādhi.
Therefore, the Vedas, which are the embodiment of
svataḥ-siddha-jñāna (self-manifest, pure knowledge) are
always faultless and fully dependable as evidence.

Vrajanātha: Please help me to understand clearly each of
the terms bhrama, pramāda, vipralipsā and karaṇāpāṭava.

Bābājī:Bhrama (illusion) is the baddha-jīva’s false
impression of reality resulting from faulty knowledge
gathered through imperfect senses. For example, in the
desert, the rays of the sun sometimes produce a mirage,
which creates the impression of water.

This fault of making errors and mistakes is called
pramāda. Since the material intelligence of the baddha
jīva is by nature limited, mistakes are inevitably
present in whatever siddhānta his limited intelligence
discerns in relation to the unlimited para-tattva.

Vipralipsā is the cheating propensity. This is manifest
when one, whose intelligence is limited by time and
space, is suspicious and reluctant to believe in the
activities and authority of Īśvara, who is far beyond
time and space.

Our senses are imperfect and ineffective, and this is
known as karaṇāpāṭava. Because of this, we cannot avoid
making mistakes in everyday circumstances. For example,
when we see an object suddenly, we may mistake it for
something else and draw faulty conclusions.

Vrajanātha: Do pratyakṣa and other pramāṇas have no
value at all as evidence?

Bābājī: What means do we have to gain knowledge of this
material sphere, except through direct perception and
other pramāṇas? Nonetheless, they can never give
knowledge about the spiritual world (cit-jagat), for
they cannot enter into it. That is why the Vedas are
certainly the one and only pramāṇa for gaining knowledge
about the cit-jagat. The evidence gained from pratyakṣa
and other pramāṇas is only worth considering when it
follows the guidelines of the self-evident Vedic
knowledge; otherwise its evidence can be discarded. That
is why the self-evident Vedas are the only evidence.
Pratyakṣa and other pramāṇas can also be accepted as
evidence, but only if they are in pursuance of the
Vedas.

Vrajanātha: Are literatures such as the Gītā and the

                          188
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

Bhāgavatam not counted as pramāṇa?

Bābājī: The Bhagavad-gītā is called an Upaniṣad (Gītā
Upaniṣad), because it is the vāṇī (instructions) of
Bhagavān; hence, the Gītā is Veda. Similarly, Daśa-mūla-
tattva is also bhagavat-vāṇī because it is Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s instructions, so it is also Veda. Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam is the crest-jewel of all the pramāṇas
because it is the compilation of the essence of the
meaning of the Vedas. The instructions of different
śāstras are authoritative evidence only as long as they
follow the Vedic knowledge. There are three types of
tantra-śāstras: sāttvika, rājasika and tāmasika. Of
these, the Pañcarātra and so on are in the sāttvika
group, and they are accepted as evidence because they
expand the confidential meaning of the Veda.

Vrajanātha: There are many books in the Vedic line.
Which of these may be accepted as evidence and which may
not?

Bābājī: In the course of time, unscrupulous and
untruthful personalities have interpolated many
chapters, maṇḍalas (sections and divisions) and mantras
into the Vedas, in order to fulfill various self-
interests. Those parts that were added at a later time
are called prakṣipta (interpolated) parts. It is not
that we should accept any and every Vedic text as
reliable evidence. Those Vedic granthas (sacred books)
that the ācāryas in the sat-sampradāyas have accepted as
evidence are definitely Veda and are authoritative
evidence, but we should reject literature or parts of
literature that they have not recognized.

Vrajanātha: Which Vedic granthas have the ācāryas of the
sat-sampradāyas accepted?

Bābājī: Iśa, Kena, Kaṭha, Praśna, Muṇḍaka, Māṇḍūkya,
Taittirīya, Aitareya, Chāndogya, Bṛhaḍ-āraṇyaka and
Śvetāśvatara—these eleven sāttvika Upaniṣads are
accepted, and so are Gopāla Upaniṣad, Nṛsiṁha-tāpanī and
some other tāpanīs that are helpful in worship. The
ācāryas have also accepted brāhmaṇas and maṇḍalas as
Vedic literature, as long as they expand the Vedas,
following the guidance of Ṛg, Sāma, Yajuḥ and Atharva.
We receive all the Vedic literatures from the ācāryas in
the sat-sampradāyas, so we can accept them as evidence
from a bona fide source.

Vrajanātha: Is there any evidence in the Veda to show
that logic cannot enter into transcendental subject
matter?

Bābājī: There are many famous statements in the Vedas,
such as, naiṣā tarkena matir āpaneyā, “O Naciketa!
Whatever intelligence you have gained regarding ātma-
tattva should not be destroyed by logic (tarka)” (Kaṭha
Upaniṣad 1.2.9); and the statements from Vedānta-sūtra,
such as, tarkāpratiṣṭhānāt, “Arguments based on logic
have no foundation and cannot be used to establish any
conclusions about the conscious reality, because a fact
that someone establishes by logic and argument today can
be refuted tomorrow by someone who is more intelligent
and qualified. Therefore, the process of argumentation

                          189
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

is said to be unfounded and baseless” (Brahma-sūtra
2.1.11).

Furthermore, it is stated:

acintyāḥ khalu ye bhāvā na tāṁs tarkeṇa yojayet

prakṛtibhyaḥ paraṁ yac ca tad acintyasya lakṣaṇam

Mahābhārata, Bhīṣma-parva (5.22)

All transcendental tattvas are beyond material nature,
and are therefore inconceivable. Dry arguments are
within the jurisdiction of material nature, so they can
only be applied in mundane subject matters. They cannot
even come close to transcendental tattvas, what to speak
of grasping them. As far as inconceivable conceptions
are concerned, the application of dry arguments is
undesirable and useless.

This śloka of the Mahābhārata establishes the limits of
logic, and Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, the ācārya of bhakti-
mārga, has therefore written in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu
(Eastern Division 1.1.32):

svalpāpi rucir eva syāt bhakti-tattvāvabodhikā

yuktis tu kevalā naiva yad asyā apratiṣṭhatā

One can comprehend bhakti-tattva when one has gained
even a little taste for śāstras that establish bhakti-
tattva, such as Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. However, one cannot
understand this bhakti-tattva by dry logic alone,
because logic has no basis, and there is no end to
arguments.

Nothing genuine can be ascertained by logic and
argument, as this ancient statement proves:

yatnenopādito ëpy arthaḥ kuśalair anumātṛbhiḥ

abhiyuktatarair anyair anyathaivopapādyate

Any logician can clearly establish any subject matter
using arguments, but someone who is more expert in
argument can easily refute him. You use logic to
establish one siddhānta today, but a more intelligent
and qualified logician will be able to refute it
tomorrow, so why should you rely on logic?

Vrajanātha: Bābājī, I have fully understood that the
Veda, which is to say, knowledge that is svataḥ-siddha
(self-evident), is pramāṇa. Some logicians argue against
the Vedas, but their efforts are fruitless. Now please
be merciful and explain the second śloka of Daśa-mūla-
tattva.

Bābājī:

haris tv ekaṁ tattvaṁ vidhi-śiva-sureśa-praṇamitaḥ

yad evedaṁ brahma prakṛti-rahitaṁ tat tv anumahaḥ

parātmā tasyāṁśo jagad-anugato viśva-janakaḥ

                             190
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017


sa vai rādhā-kānto nava-jalada-kāntiś cid-udayaḥ

Indeed Śrī Hari, to whom Brahmā, Śiva, Indra and other
devatās continuously offer praṇāma, is the only Supreme
Absolute Truth. Nirviśeṣa-brahma that is devoid of śakti
is Śrī Hariís bodily effulgence. Mahā-Viṣṇu, who has
created the universe and who has entered into it as the
indwelling Supersoul of all, is simply His partial
manifestation. It is that Śrī Hari alone, the very form
of transcendental reality (cit-svarūpa), whose
complexion is the color of a freshly formed thunder
cloud, who is Śrī Rādhā-vallabha, the beloved of Śrī
Rādhā.

Vrajanātha: The Upaniṣads describe   brahma, which is
transcendental to affiliation with   matter, to be the
supreme truth, so what argument or   evidence has Śrī
Gaurahari used to establish brahma   as Śrī Harī’s bodily
effulgence?

Bābājī: Śrī Hari is certainly Bhagavān, whose true
nature has been ascertained in the Viṣṇu Purāṇa
(6.5.74):

aiśvaryasya samagrasya vīryasya yaśasaḥ śriyaḥ

jñāna-vairāgyayoś caiva ṣaṇṇāṁ bhaga itīṅganā

Bhagavān is the Supreme Absolute Truth endowed with six
inconceivable qualities: complete opulence, strength,
fame, beauty, knowledge and renunciation.

Now, there is a mutual relationship amongst these
qualities of body (aṅgī) and limbs (aṅga). The question
may arise, which of these qualities is aṅgī, and which
are aṅgas? The aṅgī (body) is that within which the
aṅgas (limbs) are included. For example, a tree is aṅgī,
and the leaves and branches are the aṅgas; the body is
aṅgī, and the feet and hands are its aṅgas. Therefore,
the principal quality (aṅgī-guṇa) represents the body
and to that quality all the other qualities (aṅga-guṇas)
are arranged as its limbs.

The aṅgī-guṇa of Bhagavānís transcendental form is His
resplendent beauty (śrī); and the three qualities ñ
opulence (aiśvarya), strength (vīrya) and fame (yaśa) ñ
are His aṅgas (limbs). The remaining two qualities ñ
knowledge (jñāna) and renunciation (vairāgya) ñ are the
effulgence of the quality of fame, because jñāna and
vairāgya are only attributes of a quality, and not
original qualities in their own right. Thus, jñāna and
vairāgya are actually nirvikāra-jñāna, which is the
intrinsic, constitutional form of the nirviśeṣa-brahma,
and that brahma is the bodily effulgence of the
spiritual world. The changeless, inactive, nirviśeṣa-
brahma, which exists without body, limbs and so on, is
not in itself a complete tattva; rather, it depends on
the transcendental form of Bhagavān. Brahma is therefore
not a supreme vastu (entity) that exists in its own
right; it is a quality of the vastu. Bhagavān is indeed
that vastu, and brahma is His quality, just as the light
of a fire is not a complete and independent tattva, but
only a quality that depends on the fire.

                          191
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017


Vrajanātha: The impersonal, nirviśeṣa qualities of
brahma are described in many places in the Vedas, and at
the end of these descriptions, the mantra ‘oṁ śāntiḥ
śāntiḥ, hariḥ oṁ’ is always used to describe the supreme
truth, Śrī Hari. Who is this Śrī Hari?

Bābājī: That Śrī Hari is in fact cit-līlā-mithuna (the
combined form of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa), who performs divine
pastimes.

Vrajanātha: I will inquire into this subject later. Now
kindly tell me, how is Paramātmā, the creator of the
universe, a partial manifestation of Bhagavān?

Bābājī: Pervading everything by His qualities of
aiśvarya and vīrya (power), and creating all the
universes, Bhagavān enters every universe by His aṁśa
(partial manifestation), Viṣṇu. Every aṁśa of Bhagavān
always remains complete; none of them are ever
incomplete.

pūrṇam adaḥ pūrṇam idaṁ pūrṇāt pūrṇam udacyate

pūrṇasya pūrṇam ādāya pūrṇam evāvaśiṣyate

Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad (5.1) and Īśopaniṣad (inv.)

The avatārī-puruṣa (the origin of all avatāras) is
complete and perfect. Because He is completely perfect,
all avatāras emanating from Him are also complete. All
that emanates from the Supreme Complete is complete.
Even if the complete is subtracted from the complete, He
still remains complete. In no way does that Parameśvara
experience any diminution.

Therefore, that complete whole, Viṣṇu, who enters the
universe and controls it, is certainly the indwelling
Supersoul, Paramātmā. That Viṣṇu has three forms:
Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu and
Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, who is a
partial manifestation of Śrī Bhagavān, situates Himself
on the Causal Ocean, or the Virajā River, which extends
between the cit and māyika worlds. From there, He
glances over māyā, who is situated far away, and by this
glance the material world is created. Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa
has described the creation of the material world in
Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā (9.10):

mayādhyakṣeṇa prakṛtiḥ sūyate sa-carācaram

Under My superintendence, My illusory energy creates the
universe full of moving and non-moving beings.

Then it is said, sa aikṣata, “That Paramātmā glanced.”
(Aitareya Upaniṣad 1.1.1)

Sa imāl lokān asṛjat, “That Paramātmā created the
universe of moving and non-moving entities after
glancing over His māyā.” (Aitareya Upaniṣad 1.1.2)

Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇuís power of glancing, which enters
māyā, becomes Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, and the localized
atoms in the rays of the transcendental glance of that

                          192
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017

Mahā-Viṣṇu are the conditioned souls; and in the heart
of every jīva, Īśvara is situated as a thumb-sized
expansion of Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, also known as
Hiraṇyagarbha. Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (4.6) states, dvā
suparṇā sāyujā sakhāyā, “The jīva and Paramātmā are in
the heart of the jīva, like two birds on the branch of a
tree. One of these birds is Īśvara, who awards the
results of fruitive activity, and the other bird is the
jīva, who is tasting the fruits of his actions.” Śrī
Bhagavān has expressed this tattva as follows in the
Gītā Upaniṣad (10.41):

yad yad vibhūtimat sattvaṁ śrīmad ūrjitam eva vā

tat tad evāvagaccha tvaṁ mama tejoëṁśa-sambhavam

You should understand that all opulence, existence,
splendor and potency have come from a tiny part of My
opulence. Therefore, Arjuna, what is the necessity of
understanding all of My attributes separately? Simply
understand that by an expansion of Myself I have created
this entire creation, and I thereby pervade it fully.

Therefore, the attributes of God, such as being the
creator and maintainer of the universe, are manifested
in Paramātmā, the partial manifestation (aṁśa-svarūpa)
of parama-puruṣa Bhagavān.

Vrajanātha: I understand that brahma is Śrī Hari’s
bodily effulgence, and that Paramātmā is his part.
However, what evidence is there that Bhagavān Śrī Hari
is Kṛṣṇa Himself?

Bābājī: Śrī Kṛṣṇa Bhagavān is eternally manifest in two
features, one of aiśvarya (opulence and majesty) and the
other of mādhurya (sweetness). The feature of aiśvarya
is Nārāyaṇa, who is the master of the spiritual sky,
Vaikuṇṭha, and the origin of Mahā-Viṣṇu. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
the complete embodiment of the mādhurya feature. This
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the utmost limit of complete sweetness;
indeed, His sweetness is so great that its rays
completely cover His aiśvarya. From the perspective of
siddhānta or tattva there is no difference between
Nārāyaṇa and Kṛṣṇa. However, when we consider the degree
of rasa to be tasted in the spiritual world, Kṛṣṇa is
not only the foundation all rasa, but He Himself, being
the very form of rasa, is also parama upādeya-tattva,
the supremely pleasing Being. We find evidence in the
Vedas, Upaniṣads, and Purāṇas that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is Svayaṁ
Bhagavān Śrī Hari. For example, the Ṛg Veda
(1.12.164.31) states:

apaśyaṁ gopām aṇipadyamā namā

ca parā ca pathibhiś carantam sa-sadhrīcīḥ

sa viṣucīr vasāna āvarīvartti-bhuvaneṣv antaḥ

I saw a boy who appeared in the dynasty of cowherds. He
is infallible and is never annihilated. He wanders on
various paths, sometimes near and sometimes very far.
Sometimes He is beautifully adorned with varieties of
garments, and sometimes He wears cloth of only one
color. In this way, He repeatedly exhibits His manifest

                          193
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

and unmanifest pastimes.

In addition, in the Chāndogya Upaniṣad (8.13.1) it is
stated:

śyāmāc chabalaṁ prapadye śabalāc chyāmaṁ prapadye

By rendering sevā to Śyāma, one attains His
transcendental abode, which is full of spiritual bliss
and astonishing, variegated līlās; and within that cit-
jagat, one attains the eternal shelter of Śyāma.

Another understanding of this śloka is that the word
śyāma refers to Kṛṣṇa, and the word Śyāma or Kṛṣṇa,
meaning black, describes the nirguṇa-para-tattva, which
like black, is colorless, while the word śabala, meaning
gaura, refers to one who is endowed with variegated
colors. In other words, when para-tattva, is endowed
with all transcendental qualities, He is called gaura.
The secret meaning of this mantra is that one attains
Gaura by performing kṛṣṇa-bhajana, and one attains Kṛṣṇa
by performing gaura-bhajana. This and other mantras
describe the activities of the liberated and perfected
jīvas even after the stage of mukti.

We read in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.3.28):

ete cāṁśāḥ kalāḥ puṁsaḥ kṛṣṇas tu bhagavān svayam

Rāma, Nṛsiṁha, and the other avatāras are all portions
(aṁśas) or plenary portions (kalā) of the Supreme
Personality, Śrī Bhagavān, but Śrī Kṛṣṇa is that
original Bhagavān Himself.

In the Gītā Upaniṣad (7.7), Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself says,
mattaḥ parataraṁ nānyat kincid asti dhanañjaya: “O
Arjuna, there is nothing superior to Me,” and it is also
said in the Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad (Pūrva 2.8):

eko vaśī sarva-gaḥ kṛṣṇa īḍyaḥ

eko ípi san bahudhā yo ívabhāti

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the all-pervasive, non-dual para-brahma who
controls everything. He is the only worshipable object
for all the devatās, for mankind, and for all other
life-forms. Although He is one, through His acintya-
śakti He manifests many forms and performs many
varieties of līlās.

Vrajanātha: But how can Śrī Kṛṣṇa be all-pervading if He
has a medium-sized, human-like form? If we accept that
He has form, it means He can only stay in one place at a
time, and that gives rise to so many philosophical
discrepancies. The first is that He cannot be the all-
pervading tattva if He has a form and body. Secondly, if
He has a body, He will be limited by the material modes
of nature, so how can He be independent and have
limitless and absolute authority? How can this be
reconciled?

Bābājī: My dear son, you are now thinking like this
because you are bound by the qualities of māyā. As long
as the intelligence remains bound by material qualities,

                           194
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

it cannot touch śuddha-sattva. If such conditioned
intelligence attempts to exceed its own limitations
trying to understand śuddha-tattva, it superimposes
māyika forms and qualities on śuddha-tattva, and thus
conceives of a material form of Transcendence. After
some time, the intellect rejects this form as being
temporary, mutable, and subject to the material modes,
and then it imagines the nirviśeṣa-brahma. That is why
one cannot gain an understanding of the Supreme Absolute
Truth through the intelligence.

Whatever limitations you are inferring about the
transcendental, medium-sized form are completely
unfounded. Formlessness, immutability, and inactivity
simply comprise the material conception of what is
opposite to our conception of material qualities, so
they are themselves a type of material quality. However,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa also has qualities that are of an altogether
different nature: for example, His beautiful,
blossoming, smiling face; His lotus eyes; His beautiful
lotus feet, which bestow fearlessness and peace upon His
bhaktas; and His spiritual form, which is the pure
embodiment of transcendence, with limbs and body just
suitable for varieties of playful sports. The ëmedium
sizedí śrī-vigraha, that is the very basis of these two
types of qualities (form and all pervasiveness), is
supremely pleasing. The Nārada-pañcarātra describes His
extreme attractiveness to the mind, and this description
is replete with all siddhānta:

nirdoṣa-guṇa-vigraha ātma-tantro

niścetanātmaka-śarīra-guṇaiś ca hīnaḥ

ānanda-mātra-kara-pāda-mukhodarādiḥ

sarvatra ca svagata-bheda-vivarjitātmā

Śrī Kṛṣṇaís transcendental body is composed of eternity,
consciousness and bliss, without even a trace of
material qualities. He is not subject to material time
or space. On the contrary, He exists fully at all places
and in all times simultaneously. His form and existence
are the embodiment of absolute nonduality (advaya-jñāna-
svarūpa-vastu).

Direction (space) is an unlimited entity in the material
world. By material estimation, only a formless object
can be unlimited or all-pervading; an entity with a
medium-sized form cannot. However, this conception only
applies in the material world. In the spiritual world,
all objects and their intrinsic natures and attributes
are unlimited, so Śrī Kṛṣṇaís medium-sized form is also
all-pervading. Medium-sized objects in this material
world do not have this quality of all-pervasiveness, but
it is charmingly manifest in Śrī Kṛṣṇaís medium-sized
vigraha. That is the supra-mundane glory of His
transcendental vigraha. Can such glorious attributes be
found in the conception of the all-pervading brahma?
Material substances are always limited by time and
place. If an entity who is naturally beyond the effects
of time is compared to the all-pervading sky, which is
limited by time and space, then is not that entity,
beyond the influence of time, incomparably greater?

                          195
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017


Śrī Kṛṣṇaís vraja-dhāma is none other than the Brahma-
pura which is mentioned within the Chāndogya Upaniṣad.
This vraja-dhāma is a completely transcendental reality,
and is comprised of all types of transcendental variety.
Everything in that placeóthe earth, water, rivers,
mountains, trees, creepers, animals, birds, sky, sun,
moon and constellationsóis transcendental and is devoid
of material flaws or shortcomings. Conscious pleasure is
present always and everywhere, in its fullest form. My
dear son, this Māyāpura-Navadvīpa is that self-same
spiritual abode. You are unable to perceive it, however,
because you are bound in māyāís snare. But when, by the
mercy of saints and sādhus, spiritual consciousness
arises in your heart, you will then perceive this land
as the spiritual dhāma, and then only will you achieve
the perfection of vraja-vāsa (residence in Vraja).

Who has told you that there must be material merits and
faults wherever there is medium-sized form? You cannot
realize the actual glories of the transcendental medium-
sized form as long as your intelligence is bound up in
material impressions.

Vrajanātha: No intelligent person can have any doubts
about this point. However, I would like to know when,
where and how Kṛṣṇa’s spiritual vigraha, dhāma, and līlā
are manifested within material limitations, since Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s vigraha and bodily complexion, and Their
līlās, associates, houses, pastime-groves, forests,
secondary forests and all the objects in the spiritual
world are transcendental.

Bābājī: Śrī Kṛṣṇa possesses all potencies, so even that
which appears to be impossible is actually possible for
Him. What is astonishing in this? He is the all-potent
Personality (sarva-śaktimān puruṣa), the fully
independent supreme controller who is completely
autocratic and imbued with līlā. Simply by His desire,
He can appear in this material world in His self-same
spiritual form, along with His spiritual abode. How can
there be any doubt about this?

Vrajanātha: By His desire, He can do everything, and He
can manifest His purely spiritual form in this material
world—that much is clear. However, materialistic people
tend to think that Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s own transcendental abode
that is manifest here is simply a part of this material
universe, and they perceive His vraja-līlā to be just
like ordinary māyika activities. Why is this? Why can’t
worldly people see Kṛṣṇa’s self-manifest, spiritual form
as sac-cid-ānanda when He mercifully appears in this
world of birth and death?

Bābājī: One of Kṛṣṇa’s unlimited transcendental
qualities is His bhakta-vātsalya (affection for His
bhaktas). Because of this quality, His heart melts, and
through His hlādinī-śakti, He bestows upon His bhaktas a
type of spiritual potency that enables them to have
direct darśana of His self-manifest form and His
transcendental pastimes. However, the non-devotees’
eyes, ears, and other senses are made up of māyā, so
they can see no difference between Bhagavān’s spiritual
pastimes and the mundane events in human history.

                          196
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017


Vrajanātha: Then does this mean that Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa
did not descend to bestow mercy upon all jīvas?

Bābājī: Bhagavān certainly descends to benefit the whole
world. The bhaktas see His descent and līlā as
transcendental, whereas the non-devotees perceive them
as ordinary human affairs, which take place under the
influence of material principles. Even so, these līlās
have the power to bestow a type of spiritual merit
(sukṛti), and as this sukṛti gradually accumulates, one
is nourished so that one develops one-pointed śraddhā
towards kṛṣṇa-bhakti. That is why Bhagavān’s descent
certainly benefits all the jīvas in the universe,
because jīvas who possess such śraddhā and perform
ananya-bhakti-sādhana (unalloyed devotional service)
will one day be able to see Bhagavān’s transcendental
form and līlā.

Vrajanātha: Why is kṛṣṇa-līlā not distinctly described
throughout the Vedas?

Bābājī: The pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa are described here and
there in the Vedas, but in some places they are
described directly, and in other places indirectly.

Two types of expressions or tendencies determine the
meaning of words in a text: the direct, or literal sense
(abhidhā); and the indirect, or secondary sense
(lakṣaṇa). These are also called mukhya-vṛtti and gauṇa-
vṛtti, respectively. The literal sense (abhidhā-vṛtti)
of the mantra, śyāmāc chabalaṁ prapadye, in the last
section of the Chāndogya Upaniṣad, describes the
eternality of rasa and the service attitude of the
liberated jīvas towards Kṛṣṇa according to their
respective rasa. The indirect meaning of the words is
called gauṇa-vṛtti (secondary significance). In the
beginning of the conversation between Yājña-valkya,
Gārgī and Maitreyī, Kṛṣṇaís qualities are described by
means of indirect presentation (lakṣaṇa-vṛtti), and at
the end, the super-excellence of Kṛṣṇa is established by
means of direct presentation (mukhya-vṛtti). The eternal
pastimes (nitya-līlā) of Bhagavān are sometimes
indicated in the Vedas by the direct expression of the
words, and in many places, the indirect approach
describes the glories of brahma and Paramātmā. In fact,
it is the pledge of all the Vedas to describe Śrī
Kṛṣṇaís glories.

Vrajanātha: Bābājī Mahāśaya, there is no doubt that
Bhagavān Śrī Hari is para-tattva, but what is the
position of the devatās such as Brahmā, Śiva, Indra,
Sūrya, and Gaṇeśa? Please be merciful and explain this
to me. Many brāhmaṇas worship Mahādeva as the highest
brahma-tattva. I took birth in one such brāhmaṇa family,
so I have been hearing and saying this from my birth
until now. I want to know the actual truth.

Bābājī: I shall presently describe to you the respective
qualities of the ordinary living entities, the
worshipable devatās and devīs, and of Śrī Bhagavān.
Through the gradation of their respective qualities, you
can easily understand the truth regarding the supreme
object of worship.

                          197
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017


ayaṁ netā su-ramyāṅgaḥ sarva-sal-lakṣaṇānvitaḥ

ruciras tejasā yukto balīyān vayasānvitaḥ

These are the qualities of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the supreme hero.
He is: 1) endowed with delightfully charming bodily
limbs; 2) endowed with all auspicious characteristics;
3) beautiful; 4) radiant; 5) strong; and 6) eternally
youthful;

vividhādbhuta-bhāṣā-vit satya-vākyaḥ priyaṁ-vadaḥ

vāvadūkaḥ su-pāṇḍityo buddhimān pratibhānvitaḥ

7) conversant with many kinds of astonishing languages;
8) truthful; 9) a pleasing speaker; 10) eloquent; 11)
intelligent; 12) learned; 13) resourceful;

vidagdhaś caturo dakṣaḥ kṛta-jñaḥ su-dṛḍha-vrataḥ

deśa-kāla-supātra-jñaḥ śāstra-cakṣuḥ śucir vaśī

14) expert in relishing mellows; 15) clever; 16) expert;
17) grateful; 18) very firm in His vows; 19) an astute
judge of time, place and circumstance; 20) a seer
through the eyes of śāstras; 21) pure; 22) self-
controlled;

sthiro dāntaḥ kṣamā-śīlo gambhīro dhṛtimān samaḥ

vadānyo dhārmikaḥ śūraḥ karuṇo mānya-māna-kṛt

23) steadfast; 24) forebearing; 25) forgiving; 26)
inscrutable; 27) sober; 28) equipoised; 29) munificent;
30) virtuous; 31) chivalrous; 32) compassionate; 33)
respectful to others;

dakṣiṇo vinayī hrīmān śaraṇāgata-pālakaḥ

sukhī bhakta-suhṛt prema-vaśyaḥ sarva-śubhaṅ-karaḥ

34) amiable; (35) modest; 36) shy; 37) the protector of
surrendered souls; 38) happy; 39) the well-wisher of His
bhaktas; 40) controlled by prema; 41) the benefactor of
all;

pratāpī kīrtimān rakta-lokaḥ sādhu-samāśrayaḥ

nārī-gaṇa-manohārī sarvārādhyaḥ samṛddhimān

42) the tormentor of His enemies; 43) famous; 44)
beloved by all; 45) partial to the side of the sādhus;
46) the enchanter of womenís minds; 47) all-worshipable;
48) all-opulent;

varīyān īśvaraś ceti guṇās tasyānukīrtitāḥ

samudrā iva pañcāśad durvigāhā harer amī

49) superior to all; and 50) the controller. These fifty
qualities are present in Bhagavān Śrī Hari to an
unlimited degree like the unfathomable ocean.


                          198
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017

They are present to a minute degree in the jīvas,
whereas they are fully represented in Puruṣottama
Bhagavān. Another five of Kṛṣṇaís qualities are present
in Brahmā, Śiva and other devatās, but not in ordinary
jīvas:

sadā svarūpa-samprāptaḥ sarva-jño nitya-nūtanaḥ

sac-cid-ānanda-sāndrāṅgaḥ sarva-siddhi-niṣevitaḥ

51) He is always situated in His svarūpa; 52) He is
omniscient; 53) He is ever-fresh and new; 54) He is the
concentrated form of existence, knowledge and bliss; and
55) He is served by all mystic opulences.

These fifty-five qualities are partially present in the
devatās.

athocyante guṇāḥ pañca ye lakṣmīśādi-vartinaḥ

avicintya-mahā-śaktiḥ koṭi-brahmāṇḍa-vigrahaḥ

avatārāvalī-bījaṁ hatāri-gati-dāyakaḥ

ātmārāma-gaṇākarṣīty amī kṛṣṇe kilādbhutāḥ

Lakṣmīpati Nārāyaṇa has an additional five qualities:
56) He possesses inconceivable potencies; 57)
innumerable universes are situated within His body; 58)
He is the original cause or seed of all avatāras; 59) He
awards gati (a higher destination) to those whom He
kills; and 60) He can attract even those who are
ātmārāma (satisfied within the self).

These additional five qualities are not present in
Brahmā or Śiva, but they are wonderfully present in Śrī
Kṛṣṇa in their most complete form. Besides these sixty
qualities, Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself has four extra qualities,
namely:

sarvādbhuta-camatkāra-līlā-kallola-vāridhiḥ

atulya-mādhurya-prema-maṇḍita-priya-maṇḍalaḥ

tri-jagan-mānasākarṣī-muralī-kala-kūjitaḥ

asamānorddhva-rūpa-śrīḥ vismāpita-carācaraḥ

61) He is like a vast ocean teeming with waves of the
most astonishing and wonderful līlās; 62) He is adorned
with incomparable mādhurya-prema, and thus is
auspiciousness personified for His beloved bhaktas, who
also have unparalleled prema for Him; 63) He attracts
the three worlds with the marvelous vibration of His
muralī (flute); and 64) the resplendent rūpa (beauty) of
His transcendental form is unparalleled, charming and
astonishing to all moving and non-moving entities in the
three worlds.

līlā premṇā priyādhikyaṁ mādhurye veṇu-rūpayoḥ

ity asādhāraṇaṁ proktaṁ govindasya catuṣṭayam

Śrī Kṛṣṇaís sixty-four qualities and symptoms have been

                          199
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

described, including līlā-mādhurī, prema-mādhurī, veṇu-
mādhurī and rūpa-mādhurī. These are four extraordinary
qualities that He alone possesses.

These sixty-four qualities are fully and eternally
manifest in Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is the embodiment of sac-cid-
ānanda. The last four qualities are present only in Śrī
Kṛṣṇaís svarūpa, and not in any of His other pastime
forms. Apart from these four qualities, the remaining
sixty qualities are brilliantly situated in their
complete and fully conscious state in Śrī Nārāyaṇa, who
is the embodiment of Transcendence. Setting aside the
last five of these sixty qualities, the remaining fifty-
five are present to some extent in Śiva, Brahmā and
other devatās, and the first fifty qualities are present
to a very limited degree in all jīvas.

The devatās such as Śiva, Brahmā, Sūrya, Gaṇeśa and
Indra, are endowed with Bhagavānís partial qualities in
order to run the affairs of the material universe. They
have received a special measure of Bhagavānís opulences
to do this, so they are considered one type of special
incarnation. The inherent and constitutional nature of
all these devatās is that they are Bhagavānís servants,
and many jīvas have obtained bhagavad-bhakti through
their mercy. Since they are so much more qualified than
other jīvas, they are also considered to be among the
worshipable deities of the jīvas, depending on the
jīvasí qualification and level of consciousness.
Performing their pūjā is therefore considered a
secondary limb of the rules and regulations of bhagavad-
bhakti. They are always worshiped as the gurus of the
jīvas, for they mercifully bestow upon them one-pointed
kṛṣṇa-bhakti. Mahādeva, the Īśvara of all the devas, is
so complete in bhagavad-bhakti that he is perceived as
non-different from bhagavat-tattva. This is the reason
that the Māyāvādīs worship him as the supreme brahma-
tattva.



Thus ends the Thirteenth Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled

“Pramāṇa & The Commencement of Prameya”




Chapter 14

Prameya: Śakti-Tattva



The venerable Bābājīís teachings from the previous night
made a deep impression upon Vrajanātha, and as he
contemplated all those instructions he felt satisfied.

Sometimes he thought, “Oh! How extraordinary and
unparalleled are Śrī Gaurāṅgaís teachings; just hearing
them, I feel as if thrust within the waves of an ocean

                          200
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

of nectar, and the more I hear, the more thirsty and
eager I become to hear. It appears that the condensed
nectar of all tattvas streams from Bābājī Mahārājaís
lotus mouth, and my heart never becomes satiated by
hearing. All his teachings on siddhānta are perfectly
balanced, without a trace of inconsistency. It is as if
the ś·stras are all running after those conclusions to
verify every letter of them. I canít understand why the
brāhmaṇa society criticizes these teachings. I think
that their bias towards Māyāvāda has made them adopt a
false philosophy.”

Vrajanātha was thinking in this way as he reached
Raghunātha dāsa Bābājīís kuṭīra. First he offered
obeisances to the kuṭīra, and then seeing Bābājī
Mahāśaya, he offered obeisances to him. Bābājī Mahāśaya
lovingly embraced him and made him sit beside him.

Sitting down with great enthusiasm, Vrajanātha asked,
“Prabhu! You told me yesterday that you would explain
the third śloka of Daśa-mūla. I earnestly desire to hear
it. Kindly be merciful and explain it to me.”

Bābājī became very happy to hear this, and with his
hairs standing on end in rapture, began to speak:

parākhyāyāḥ śakter apṛthag api sa sve mahimani

sthito jīvākhyāṁ svām acid-abhihitāṁ tāṁ tri-padikām

sva-tantrecchaḥ śaktiṁ sakala-viṣaye preraṇa-paro

vikārādyaiḥ śūnyaḥ parama-puruṣo ëyaṁ vijayate

Daśa-mūla (3)

Athough Śrī Bhagavān is non-different from His
inconceivable transcendental potency (parā-śakti), He
has His own independent nature and desires. His parā-
śakti consists of three aspects ñ cit-śakti (spiritual
potency), jīva-śakti (marginal potency), and māyā-śakti
(external potency) ñ and He always inspires them to
engage in their respective functions. That para-tattva
(Supreme Absolute Truth), even while performing all
these activities, still remains immutable and is
eternally situated in the fully transcendental svarūpa
of His own glory.

Vrajanātha: The brāhmaṇas declare that the brahma form
of the para-tattva has no śakti, and they say that His
śakti is only manifest in His Īśvara form. I would like
to hear the conclusions of the Vedas about this.

Bābājī: The śakti of para-tattva manifests in all of His
forms. The Vedas say:

na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇaṁ ca vidyate

na tat-samaś cābhyadhikaś ca dṛśyate

parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate

svābhāvikī jñāna-bala-kriyā ca


                          201
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (6.7–8)

None of the activities of that para-brahma Paramātmā is
mundane, because none of His senses ñ such as His hands
and legs ñ is material. Thus through the medium of His
transcendental body, He performs His pastimes without
any material senses, and He is present everywhere at the
same time. Therefore, no one is even equal to Him, what
to speak of being greater than Him. The one divine
potency of Parameśvara has been described in śruti in
many ways, among which the description of His jñāna-
śakti (knowledge), His bala-śakti (power), and His
kriyā-śakti (potency for activity) are most important.
These are also called cit-śakti or saṁvit-śakti; sat-
śakti or sandhinī-śakti; and ānanda-śakti or hlādinī-
śakti respectively.

Regarding a discription of the cit-śakti, it is said:

te dhyāna-yogānugatā apaśyan

devātma-śaktiṁ sva-guṇair nigūḍhām

yaḥ kāraṇāni nikhilāni tāni

kālātma-yuktāny adhitiṣṭhaty ekaḥ

Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (1.3)

The tattva-jña ṛṣis established themselves in samādhi-
yoga, and being infused with the qualities of para-
brahma, through those qualities they have directly
percieved His most confidential, internal,
transcendental potencies. Thus, they have realized
Bhagavān, who is the basis and governor of all causes,
of the jīva, of prakṛti (material nature), of kāla
(time), and of karma.

Regarding jīva-śakti:

ajām ekāṁ lohita-śukla-kṛṣṇāṁ

bahvīḥ prajāḥ sṛjamānāṁ svarūpāḥ

ajo hy eko juṣamāṇo ënuśete

jahāty enāṁ bhukta-bhogāṁ ajo ënyaḥ

Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (4.5)

There are two types of unborn (aja) jīvas. Jīvas of the
first type are ajñānī, ignorant, and worship Bhagavānís
prakṛti. That prakṛti, whose modes are red, white, and
black, is also unborn like Bhagavān. However, the second
type of aja are jñānīs. They have overcome ignorance and
therefore completely renounce that prakṛti which the
others strive to enjoy.

Regarding māyā-śakti:

chandāṁsi yajñāḥ kratavo vratāni

bhūtaṁ bhavyaṁ yac ca vedā vadanti


                          202
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

asmān māyī sṛjate viśvam etat

tasmiṁś cānyo māyayā sanniruddhaḥ

Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (4.9)

Paramātmā, who is the master of māyā-prakṛti (the
deluding material nature), has created all the teachings
of the Vedas; special yajñas, such as jyotiṣṭoma, that
are performed with ghee; various types of vrata (fasts,
sacrifices, penances); and everything else in existence
in the past, present and the future ñ that is, the
entire world whose description is found in the Vedas.
The Īśvara of māyā has created all of this, and the aja
jīvas are bound by His māyā.

The Vedic mantra, parāsya-śaktiḥ (quoted previous page,
Śvet, Up. 6.7-8), explains that there is transcendental
śakti in even the highest stage of the para-tattva. The
personal appearance of that para-tattva is called
Bhagavān, and the nirviśeṣa manifestation is called
brahma. Nowhere in the Vedas is the para-tattva
described as being without śakti. What is called brahma
is a manifestation of para-tattva, and this nirviśeṣa-
brahma is also manifested by parā-śakti. Therefore,
there is transcendental potency in nirguṇa-nirviśeṣa-
brahma as well. In some places in the Vedas and the
Upaniṣads, this parā-śakti, is called svarūpa-śakti in
others cit-śakti, and elsewhere it has been called
antaraṅga-śakti. Actually, there is no such vastu as
brahma without śakti; it is simply an imagination of the
Māyāvādīs. In reality, the nirviśeṣa-brahma is beyond
the limited conception of Māyāvāda. The saviśeṣa-brahma
has been described as follows in the Vedas:

ya eko varṇo bahudhā śakti-yogād

varṇān anekān nihitārtho dadhāti

Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (4.1)

Although He has one color, He assumes several colors
(bhāvas) by dint of His personal śakti. Many colors ñ
that is, various types of potency ñ exist within Him.
Indeed, the whole world has its being in Him, for He is
its creator.

ya eko jālavān īśata īśanībhiḥ

sarvāl lokān īśata īśanībhiḥ

Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (3.1)

He who is the Īśvara of the whole world is one without a
second, and He is the Lord of māyā, which is like a net
in which the jīvas are ensnared. He regulates the entire
world by His aiśī śakti.

Now see how the śakti of para-tattva is never absent
from Him. Para-tattva is always self-illuminated and
self-manifesting. The Vedic mantras describe the three
types of śakti of that self-manifested tattva as
follows:


                          203
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

sa viśvakṛd viśvavidātma-yonirjñaḥ

kālakālo guṇī sarvavid yaḥ

pradhāna-kṣetrajña-patirguneśaḥ

saṁsāra-mokṣa-sthiti-bandhahetuḥ

Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (6.16)

That Paramātmā is omniscient and the creator of the
world. He is Self-born (ātmā-yoni), the controller of
kāla (time), the knower of all, the Īśvara of pradhāna
(māyā), and the Īśvara of all kṣetrajñas (jīvas). He is
full of all transcendental qualities and beyond all
material qualities, yet He is their master. He binds the
jīvas in saṁsāra, places them in their positions, and
liberates them from it.

This mantra describes the three states of parā-śakti.
The word pradhāna denotes māyā-śakti; the word kṣetrajña
denotes the jīva-śakti; and the cit-śakti has been
alluded to by the word kṣetrajña-pati. The Māyāvādīs
explain that brahma is the condition of para-tattva
without śakti, and that Īśvara is of this state with all
śakti, but this doctrine is simply imaginary. In
reality, Bhagavān always possesses all śakti. Śakti is
present in all of His aspects. He is eternally situated
in His svarūpa, and although He has all śakti in that
svarūpa, He Himself remains the Supreme Person, full of
His own independent will.

Vrajanātha: If He is fully associated with śakti, He
only works with the assistance of śakti. Then where is
His independent nature and desire?

Bābājī:Śakti-śaktimator abhedaḥ – according to this
statement in Vedānta, śakti (potency) and the śaktimān
puruṣa (the Supreme Person who possesses all śakti) are
non-different. Work shows the influence of śakti; that
is, all work is accomplished only by the means of śakti.
However, the desire to do work is an indication of
śaktimān. The mundane material world is the work of
māyā-śakti, all the jīvas are the work of jīva-śakti,
and the cid-jagat (spiritual world) is the work of cit-
śakti. Bhagavān inspires the cit-śakti, jīva-śakti and
māyā-śakti to be engaged in their respective activities,
but He Himself is still nirvikāra (unattached and
unaffected).

Vrajanātha: How can He remain nirvikāra when He works
according to His independent desire? Indeed, to be
possessed of independent desire (sva-icchāmaya) means
that He experiences vikāra (transformation).

Bābājī:Nirvikāra means to be free from any material
transformations (māyika-vikāra). Māyā is the shadow of
svarūpa-śakti. The work of māyā is reality, but it is
not an eternal reality. Thus the defect of māyā is not
present in the para-tattva. The vikāra that is present
in Śrī Hari in the form of His desire and pastimes is
nothing but the highest manifestation of prema. Such
wonderful manifestations of transcendental
variegatedness are present in advaya-jñāna Bhagavān. In

                             204
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

spite of creating the material world by His desire
through His māyā-śakti, this cit nature remains in
eternal, unbroken existence. Māyā has no connection with
the astonishing, variegated līlā of Bhagavān in the
spiritual world. However, jīvas whose intelligence has
been rendered dull by the influence of māyā think that
the wonderful variegatedness of the spiritual world is
just another affair of māyā.

One who suffers from jaundice sees everything as yellow,
and one whose eyes are covered by clouds perceives the
sun also to be covered by clouds. Similarly, those with
māyika intelligence imagine that transcendental names,
forms, qualities and pastimes are also māyika. The
purport is that māyā-śakti is a shadow of cit-śakti, so
the variegatedness found in spiritual activities is also
reflected in the workings of māyā. The variegatedness
seen in māyā-śakti is an inferior reflection, or shadow,
of the variegatedness found in cit-śakti, so although
these two types of variegatedness are apparently similar
to each other, they are actually completely opposite.
Superficially, a personís reflection in a mirror appears
the same as his body. However, with careful examination
they are seen to be exactly the opposite, for one is the
body and the other is its reflection. The bodyís various
parts appear opposite in their reflection: the left hand
appears on the right side and right hand on the left;
the left eye appears on the right side and the right eye
on the left. Similarly, the variegatedness of the
spiritual world and that of the material world appear
superficially the same. From a subtle point of view,
however, they are opposed to each other, for material
variegatedness is a distorted reflection of
transcendental variegatedness. Therefore, although there
is some apparent similarity, they are nonetheless
different in essence. That independent Supreme Person,
who works by His own sweet will, is the controller of
māyā. He is free from any māyika transformation, and
through māyā He fulfills His purposes.

Vrajanātha: Which of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s śaktis is Śrīmatī
Rādhikā?

Bābājī: As Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the complete śaktimān-tattva,
Śrīmatī Rādhikā is His complete śakti. She can be called
the complete svarūpa-śakti. So that They can enact and
relish Their līlā, Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Kṛṣṇa are
eternally separate, but They are also eternally
inseparable, just as musk and its scent are mutually
inseparable, and fire and its heat cannot be separate
from each other. That svarūpa-śakti, Śrīmatī Rādhikā,
has three kinds of potency of activity (kriyā-śakti).
They are known as: cit-śakti, jīva-śakti and māyā-śakti.
The cit-śakti is also called the internal potency
(antaraṅga-śakti); māyā-śakti is called the external
potency (bahiraṅga-śakti); and the jīva-śakti is called
the marginal potency (taṭastha-śakti). Although svarūpa-
śakti is one, She acts in these three ways. All the
eternal characteristics of svarūpa-śakti are completely
present in the cit-śakti, present to a minute degree in
the jīva-śakti, and present in a distorted way in the
māyā-śakti.

Apart from the three kinds of kriyā-śakti (potency of

                          205
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017

activity) that I have described, svarūpa-śakti also has
three other types of function, named hlādinī, sandhinī
and saṁvit. They are described as follows in the Daśa-
mūla (4):

sa vai hlādinyāś ca praṇaya-vikṛter hlādana-ratas

tathā samvic-chakti-prakaṭita-raho-bhāva-rasitaḥ

tathā śrī-sandhinyā kṛta-viśada-tad-dhāma-nicaye

rasāmbodhau magno vraja-rasa-vilāsī vijayate

There are three functions of svarūpa-śakti: hlādinī,
sandhinī and saṁvit. Kṛṣṇa remains perpetually immersed
in the praṇaya-vikāra of the hlādinī-śakti. Because of
the confidential bhāvas evoked by saṁvit-śakti, He is
ever-situated as rasika-śekhara in relishing newer and
newer rasa. That supremely independent pastime prince,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is ever-drowned within the ocean of vraja-
rasa in His transcendental bliss-filled abodes, headed
by Vṛndāvana, which are manifest through sandhinī-śakti.
All glories to Him!

The purport is that the three aspects of svarūpa-śakti ñ
namely, hlādinī, sandhinī, and saṁvit ñ completely
influence all the activities of the cit-śakti, jīva-
śakti, and māyā-śakti. The hlādinī-vṛtti of svarūpa-
śakti, as Śrīmatī Rādhikā, the daughter of Vṛṣabhānu
Mahārāja, gives full transcendental bliss and enjoyment
to Kṛṣṇa. Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the embodiment of
mahābhāva. She gives happiness to Kṛṣṇa in Her own
transcendental form, and She also eternally manifests
eight bhāvas as the eight principal sakhīs, who are
direct extensions (kāya-vyūha) of Her own svarūpa.
Besides that, She manifests Her four different types of
service moods as the four different types of sakhīs ñ
namely, priya-sakhīs, narma-sakhīs, prāṇa-sakhīs and
parama-preṣṭha-sakhīs. All these sakhīs are nitya-
siddha-sakhīs within the transcendental realm of Vraja.

The saṁvit-vṛtti of svarūpa-śakti manifests all the
various moods of the relationships (sambandha-bhāvas)
within Vraja. Sandhinī manifests everything in Vraja
that consists of water, earth and so on, such as the
villages, forests, gardens, and Giri-Govardhana, which
are places of Kṛṣṇaís pastimes. It also manifests all
the other transcendental objects used in Kṛṣṇaís
pastimes, as well as the transcendental bodies of Śrī
Rādhikā, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the sakhīs, sakhās, cows, dāsas and
dāsīs, and so on.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is always engrossed in supreme bliss in the
form of the praṇaya-vikāra of hlādinī, and being endowed
with the various bhāvas manifested by the saṁvit-vṛtti,
He relishes praṇaya-rasa. Through the saṁvit-vṛtti of
His parā-śakti, Kṛṣṇa performs activities such as
attracting the gopīs by playing upon His vaṁśī, taking
the cows out for grazing (go-cāraṇa), rāsa-līlā and
other pastimes. Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is Vraja-vilāsī (the
enjoyer of pastimes in Vraja), always remains immersed
in rasa in His transcendental dhāma, which is manifested
by the sandhinī potency. Amongst all the abodes of His
pastimes, the abode of His Vraja pastimes is the

                          206
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

sweetest.

Vrajanātha: You have just explained that sandhinī,
saṁvit, and hlādinī are all manifestations of svarūpa-
śakti. You have also said that jīva-śakti is an atomic
part of svarūpa-śakti, and that māyā-śakti is the
reflection of svarūpa-śakti. Now kindly explain how the
sandhinī, saṁvit, and hlādinī tendencies act upon the
jīva and on māyā.

Bābājī:Jīva-śakti is the atomic potency of svarūpa-
śakti, and all three aspects of svarūpa-śakti are
present in it to a minute degree. Thus, the hlādinī-
vṛtti is always present in the jīva in the form of
brahmānanda (spiritual bliss); saṁvit-vṛtti is present
in the form of brahma-jñāna (transcendental knowledge);
and sandhinī-vṛtti is present in the jīva’s minute form.
I will explain this subject matter more clearly when we
discuss jīva-tattva. In māyā-śakti, the hlādinī-vṛtti is
manifest in the form of mundane pleasure (jaḍānanda);
saṁvit-vṛtti is manifest in the form of material
knowledge (bhautika-jñāna); and the sandhinī-śakti is
manifest in the form of the entire material universe,
which consists of the fourteen planetary systems and the
material bodies of the jīvas.

Vrajanātha: Why is śakti called inconceivable, if all
its activities can be understood like this?

Bābājī: These topics can be understood in isolation from
each other, but their relationships are inconceivable.
In the material world, because opposite qualities have
the inherent tendency to annihilate each other,
principles that are mutually opposed cannot be present
together at the same place. However, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s śakti
has such inconceivable power that in the spiritual world
it manifests all the mutually opposing qualities
together at the same time and in a very wonderful and
beautiful manner. Even though Śrī Kṛṣṇa has the most
beautiful form (rūpa), He is formless (arūpa); He has a
transcendental mūrti (form), but He is present
everywhere; He is always active, and yet, being
unaffected, He performs no karma; He is the son of Nanda
Mahārāja, although He is unborn; He is simply a cowherd
boy, although He is worshiped by all others; and He has
a human-like form and bhāva, although He is omniscient.
Similarly, at one and the same time, He possesses all
qualities (saviśeṣa), and yet He has no qualities
(nirviśeṣa); He is acintya (inconceivable), and full of
rasa; He is both limited and limitless; He is very far
away, and very close by; He is unaffected (nirvikāra),
and yet He is afraid of the māna (sulking mood or
apparent anger) of the gopīs. How far can we enumerate
the infinite variety of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s qualities such as
these? They contradict each other, and yet they are
eternally and beautifully present without opposition or
conflict in His svarūpa (form), His abode, and in the
various paraphernalia related to Him. This is the
inconceivable nature of His śakti.

Vrajanātha: Do the Vedas accept this?

Bābājī: It has been accepted everywhere. It has been
said in the Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (3.19):

                          207
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017


apāṇi-pādo javano grahītā

paśyaty acakṣuḥ sa śṛṇoty akarṇaḥ

sa vetti vedyaṁ na ca tasyāsti vettā

tam āhur agryaṁ puruṣaṁ mahāntam

That Paramātmā has no material hands or legs, but He
accepts everything with His transcendental hands and
goes everywhere with His transcendental legs. He has no
material eyes or ears, yet He sees and hears everything
with His transcendental eyes and ears. He knows all that
is to be known and the activities of everything, but no
one can know Him unless He reveals Himself. The
transcendentalists who know brahma call Him the original
Personality, the great puruṣa who is the cause of all
causes.

In the Īśa Upaniṣad, we find the following statements:

tad ejati tan naijati tad dūre tad vantike

tad antar asya sarvasya tad usarvasyāsya bāhyataḥ

Īśa Upaniṣad (5)

That Parameśvara walks and yet He does not walk. He is
further than the furthest, yet He is also nearer than
the nearest. He is within everything, and at the same
time, outside of everything. This is how the qualities
in the spiritual world are perfectly resolved, although
they appear to contradict each other.

sa paryyagāc chukram akāyam avraṇam

asnāviraṁ śuddham apāpa-viddham

kavir manīṣī paribhūḥ svayambhūr

yāthātathyato írthān vyadadhāc chāśvatībhyaḥ samābhyaḥ

Īśa Upaniṣad (8)

That Paramātmā is omnipresent and pure. He has no
material form, but He has an eternal, transcendental
form full of knowledge and bliss. This body has no veins
or holes, and is beyond all designations. He is the
primeval sage and poet, He is omniscient, and He appears
by His own desire. He is situated on the highest
platform, and He controls everything. By His
inconceivable potency, He maintains everything
throughout eternity and engages all others in work
according to their qualities.

Vrajanātha: Is there any description in the Vedas of
Bhagavān, who is completely independent, appearing in
this material world of His own volition?

Bābājī: Yes, the Vedas mention it in several places. The
Talavakāra, or Kena Upaniṣad, relates a dialogue between
Umā and Mahendra (Śrī Śivajī) which describes how once a
fierce battle took place between the devatās and the

                            208
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

asuras. On this occasion, the asuras were heavily
defeated and fled from the battlefield. The devatās were
victorious, although the victory was actually Bhagavān’s
alone, and the devatās were only His instruments.
However, out of pride and arrogance, the devatās forgot
this and began to boast of their strength and valor. At
this point, para-brahma Bhagavān, who is the reservoir
of mercy, appeared there in a wonderful form, and
inquired as to the cause of their pride. He then
produced a straw and asked them to destroy it. The
devatās were amazed, for the deva of fire could not burn
it, nor could the deva of wind lift it, despite exerting
all their potency and prowess. The devas were astounded
to see Bhagavān’s extraordinarily beautiful form and
wonderful power.

tasmai tṛṇaṁ nidadhāveddaheti tadupapreyāya

sarvajavena tanna śaśāka dagdhuma. sa tat eva nivavṛte,

naitadaśakaṁ vijñātuṁ yadetad yakṣamiti

Kena Upaniṣad (3.6)

That Yakṣa (who was actually Bhagavān) put a straw in
front of Agnideva and said, “Let us see your strength.
Can you burn this dry straw?” Agnideva went close to
that straw and directed all his powers at it, but he
could not burn it. Ashamed, he returned and said to the
devatās, “I cannot understand who this Yakṣa is.”

The confidential purport of the Vedas is that Bhagavān
is an inconceivably beautiful Person. He appears by His
own sweet desire, and performs various pastimes with the
jīvas.

Vrajanātha: Bhagavān has been called an ocean of rasa.
Is this described anywhere in the Vedas?

Bābājī: It is clearly stated in the Taittirīya Upaniṣad
(2.7):

yad vai tat sukṛtaṁ raso vai saḥ

rasaṁ hy evāyaṁ labdhvānandī bhavati

ko hy evānyāt kaḥ prāṇyāt

yad eṣa ākāśa ānando na syāt

eṣa hy evānandayāti

Para-brahma Paramātmā is the sukṛta-brahma (the very
handsome supreme spirit). His svarūpa is unalloyed rasa,
and when the jīva realizes this rasa-svarūpa para-
brahma, he becomes full of ānanda. Who would endeavor to
live if that undivided Reality were not the embodiment
of ānanda in the form of rasa? Paramātmā alone gives
bliss to all.

Vrajanātha: If He is rasa-svarūpa, why can’t the
materialists see Him or comprehend Him?

Bābājī: There are two types of conditioned jīvas: those

                            209
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

who are turned away from Kṛṣṇa (parak), and those who
are facing Kṛṣṇa (pratyak). Jīvas in the parak state
cannot see Kṛṣṇa’s beauty because they are opposed to
Him; they only see and think about material things.
Jīvas in the pratyak state are opposed to māyā and
favorable to Kṛṣṇa, so they can see Kṛṣṇa’s rasa-
svarūpa. It is said in Kaṭha Upaniṣad:

parāñci khāni vyatṛṇat svayambhūs

tasmāt parāṅ paśyati nāntarātman

kaścid dhīraḥ pratyag ātmānam aikṣad

āvṛtta-cakṣur amṛtatvam icchan

The self-born Parameśvara has made all the senses so
that they tend towards external objects. That is why the
jīva normally perceives only external objects through
his senses and is unable to see Bhagavān situated within
his heart. Only a grave and resolute person (dhīra), who
desires liberation in the form of love of Kṛṣṇa, can
disengage his ears and other senses from external
objects and see the pratyag-ātmā Śrī Bhagavān.

Vrajanātha: Who is the one who has been called ‘the
embodiment of rasa’ in the śloka, raso vai saḥ?

Bābājī: It is said in Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad, Pūrva-
khaṇḍa (12-13):

gopa-veśam abhrābhaṁ taruṇaṁ kalpa-drumāśritam

sat-puṇḍarīka-nayanaṁ meghābhaṁ vaidyutāmbaram

dvi-bhujaṁ mauna-mudrāḍhyaṁ vana-mālinam īśvaram

His dress is like that of a cowherd boy. His eyes are
like a fully blossomed white lotus, the hue of His body
is blackish-blue like monsoon clouds, and He wears an
effulgent yellow cloth that is as brilliant as
lightning. His form is two-handed, and He is situated in
jñāna-mudrā (the pose indicating divine knowledge). His
neck is beautified with a garland of forest flowers that
reaches to His feet, and He is standing beneath a divine
kalpa-vṛkṣa. That Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the Lord of all.

Vrajanātha: Now I understand that Śrī Kṛṣṇa in His
nitya-siddha-svarūpa within the spiritual world is all-
powerful, the embodiment (svarūpa) of rasa, and the
abode (āṣraya-svarūpa) of all rasa. He cannot be
attained by brahma-jñāna. If one practices the eight-
fold system of yoga, one can only realize His partial
manifestation as Paramātmā. Nirviśeṣa-brahma is but the
bodily luster of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is full of eternal,
spiritual qualities, and is the worshipable Lord of all
worlds. However, we can find no means to attain Him
because He is beyond the juristiction of our thinking
power. Moreover, what means do human beings have, apart
from their faculty of contemplation? Whether one is a
brāhmaṇa or an untouchable, he does not have any means
other than his mind. Therefore, it is very difficult to
attain Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s mercy.


                          210
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

Bābājī: It is said in Kaṭha Upaniṣad (2.2.13):

tam ātma-sthaṁ ye ínupaśyanti dhīrās

teṣāṁ śāntiḥ śāśvatī netareṣām

Only the wise man who sees Paramātmā within himself can
achieve eternal peace; no one else can.

Vrajanātha: One may be able to attain eternal peace by
constantly seeing Him within oneself, but what is the
process by which one can see Him? It is difficult to
understand this.

Bābājī: It is said in Kaṭha Upaniṣad (1.2.23):

nāyam ātmā pravacanena labhyo

na medhayā na bahunā śrutena

yam evaiṣa vṛṇute tena labhyas

tasyaiṣa ātmā vivṛṇute tanuṁ svām

One cannot attain para-brahma Paramātmā by lecturing, by
intellect, or by the study of various śāstras. He only
reveals His transcendental form by His own mercy to one
whom He Himself accepts.

It is said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.29) :

athāpi te deva padāmbuja-dvaya-

prasāda-leśānugṛhīta eva hi

jānāti tattvaṁ bhagavan mahimno

na cānya eko ípi ciraṁ vicinvan

O Lord, one who attains even a little of the mercy of
Your two lotus feet can comprehend the essence of Your
transcendental glories. Others cannot realize the
essential truth of Your Self, even though they may keep
searching for You for many years through jñāna and
vairāgya.

My son, my Prabhu is very munificent. That Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
who is the Soul of all souls, cannot be attained by
reading or hearing various śāstras, or by arguments and
discussions. Nor can He be attained through sharp
intelligence, or by accepting several gurus. Only one
who accepts Him as ëMy Kṛṣṇaí can attain Him. He will
only manifest His transcendental sac-cid-ānanda form to
such a bhakta. When we analyze the abhidheya-tattva, you
will be able to understand these truths easily.

Vrajanātha: Are the names of Kṛṣṇa’s abodes written
anywhere in the Vedas?

Bābājī: Yes, names such as Paravyoma, Brahma-Gopāla-
purī, and Gokula are found in several places in the
Vedas. For example, the Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad says:

ṛco ëkṣare parame vyoman

                           211
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017


yasmin devā adhiviśve niṣeduḥ

yas tan na veda kim ṛcā kariṣyati

ya ittad vidus ta ime samāsate

One must know that infallible (akṣara) brahma who
resides in the abode called Paravyoma. He is the subject
matter of the mantras in the Ṛg Veda, and all the
devatās take shelter of Him. One who does not know that
parama-puruṣa cannot fulfill any purpose through the
Vedas. However, one becomes blessed who realizes that
Paramātmā in accordance with tattva.

It is said in Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad (2.2.7):

divye brahma-pure hy eṣa vyomny ātmā pratiṣṭhitaḥ

That Paramātmā eternally resides in the transcendental
Brahma-pura that is the form of Paravyoma.

It is said in Puruṣa-bodhinī-śruti:

gokulākhye māthura-maṇḍale dve parśve candrāvalī rādhikā
ca

In the area of Mathurā called Gokula, Śrīmatī Rādhikā is
situated on one side of Bhagavān, and Candrāvalī on the
other.

It is stated in Gopāla-tāpanī Upaniṣad:

tāsāṁ madhye sākṣād brahma-gopāla-purī hi

Brahma-Gopāla-purī is situated in the middle of the
group of transcendental abodes.

Vrajanātha: Why do the tāntrika-brāhmaṇas call Śiva’s
potency Durgā?

Bābājī: The deluding potency (māyā-śakti) is called
śiva-śakti. This māyā has three modes – namely, sattva,
rajaḥ and tamaḥ. Brāhmaṇas in the sāttvika mode worship
māyā in a pure way as the form that embodies sattva-
guṇa; brāhmaṇas in the rājasika mode worship māyā in the
form that embodies rajo-guṇa; and brāhmaṇas in the
tāmasika mode worship māyā as the presiding deity of
darkness, tamo-guṇa, taking ignorance to be knowledge.
In fact, māyā-śakti is only a name for the
transformation (vikāra) of Bhagavān’s parā-śakti, in the
form of its shadow (chāyā); it is not a separate,
independent śakti. Māyā is the sole cause of the jīva’s
bondage and liberation.

When the jīva becomes opposed to Kṛṣṇa, māyā punishes
him by throwing him into worldly bondage. However, when
the jīva becomes favorable to Kṛṣṇa, the same māyā
manifests the sāttvika quality and gives him knowledge
of Kṛṣṇa. She then liberates him from worldly bondage,
and makes him qualified to attain love of Kṛṣṇa.
Consequently, the jīvas bound by the modes of māyā
cannot see the pure form of māyā ñ that is, the svarūpa-
śakti of Bhagavān ñ and they worship māyā alone as the

                          212
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

primeval śakti. The jīva in the state of illusion can
only realize these advanced philosophical truths by good
fortune, and by the power of sukṛti. Otherwise, being
bewildered by māyā and entangled in false conclusions,
he remains bereft of real knowledge.

Vrajanātha: In Gokula-Upāsanā, Durgā-devī has been
counted among Śrī Hari’s associates. Who is this Durgā
of Gokula?

Bābājī: Durgā of Gokula is none other than yogamāyā. She
is situated as the seed of transformation of cit-śakti,
so when she is present in the spiritual world, she
considers herself to be non-different from the svarūpa-
śakti. The material māyā is only a transformation of
that yogamāyā. Durgā situated in the material world is
an attendant maidservant of that Durgā of the svarūpa-
śakti in the spiritual world. The Durgā of the svarūpa-
śakti is līlā-poṣaṇa-śakti, the potency that nourishes
Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. The gopīs who have taken complete
shelter of the parakīya-bhāva (paramour mood) bestowed
by yogamāyā, nourish Kṛṣṇa’s rasa-vilās in the spiritual
world. The purport of the statement yoga-māyām upāśritaḥ
(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.29.1) about the rāsa-līlā is that
there are many such activities in Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental
pastimes that appear like ignorance due to the svarūpa-
sāktī, but factually they are not. In order to nourish
mahā-rasa, yogamāyā stages activities that appear to be
performed in ignorance. We will analyze this subject in
detail later on, when we discuss rasa.

Vrajanātha: There is one thing that I wish to know
concerning dhāma-tattva. Kindly tell me, why do the
Vaiṣṇavas refer to Navadvīpa as Śrīdhāma?

Bābājī: Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma and Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma are
non-different from each other, and Māyāpura is the
highest truth within Navadvīpa-dhāma. The relationship
of Śrī Māyāpura to Navadvīpa is the same as the
relationship of Śrī Gokula to Vraja. Māyāpura is the
Mahā-Yogapīṭha (the great place of meeting) of
Navadvīpa. According to the śloka, channaḥ kalau, of
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.9.38), the plenary avatāra of
Bhagavān who appears in Kali-yuga (Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu) is covered, and similarly, His holy abodes
are also covered. In Kali-yuga, no other holy place is
equal to Śrī Navadvīpa. Only one who can realize the
transcendental nature of this dhāma is actually
qualified for vraja-rasa. From an external, material
point of view, both Vraja-dhāma and Navadvīpa-dhāma
appear to be mundane. Only those whose spiritual eyes
have by some good fortune been opened can see the dhāma
as it is.

Vrajanātha: I want to know the svarūpa of this
Navadvīpa-dhāma.

Bābājī: Goloka, Vṛndāvana and Śvetadvīpa are the inner
compartments of Paravyoma, the spiritual sky. Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s svakīya-līlā takes place in Goloka. His
parakīya-līlā takes place in Vṛndāvana, and its
pariśiṣṭa (supplementary) līlā takes place in
Śvetadvīpa. In tattva, there is no difference between
these three dhāmas. Navadvīpa is really Śvetadvīpa, so

                          213
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

it is non-different from Vṛndāvana. The residents of
Navadvīpa are very fortunate, for they are associates of
Śrī Gaurāṅgadeva. One can only attain residence of
Navadvīpa after performing many pious activities. Some
rasa is not manifested in Vṛndāvana, but that very rasa
is manifest in Navadvīpa as the supplement of Vṛndāvana
rasa. One experiences that rasa only when one becomes
competent to relish it.

Vrajanātha: How large is Navadvīpa-dhāma?

Bābājī: The area of Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma is sixteen
krośa, and is shaped like that of a lotus flower with
eight petals, which are the eight islands: Sīmantadvīpa,
Godrumadvīpa, Madhyadvīpa, Koladvīpa, Ṛtudvīpa,
Jahnudvīpa, Modruma-dvīpa, and Rudradvīpa. Antardvīpa,
which is situated in the center of these islands, is
like the whorl of the lotus flower, and Śrī Māyāpura is
situated at the very heart of this Antardvīpa. One can
quickly attain love of Kṛṣṇa by performing sādhana-
bhajana in Navadvīpa-dhāma, and especially in Māyāpura.
The Mahā-Yogapīṭha is the residence or mandira of Śrī
Jagannātha Miśra – is situated in the center of
Māyāpura, and in this very Yogapīṭha, the most fortunate
of all jīvas always take darśana of Śrī Gaurāṅgadeva’s
nitya-līlā.

Vrajanātha: Are the pastimes of Śrī Gaurāṅgadeva a work
of svarūpa-śakti?

Bābājī: Śrī Gaura’s pastimes are arranged by the same
śakti who arranges Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. There is no
difference between Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Gaurāṅgadeva. Śrī
Svarūpa Gosvāmī says:

rādhā-kṛṣṇa-praṇaya-vikṛtir hlādinī śaktir asmād

ekātmānāv api bhuvi purā deha-bhedaṁ gatau tau

caitanyākhyaṁ prakaṭam adhunā tad-dvayaṁ caikyam āptaṁ

rādhā-bhāva-dyuti-suvalitaṁ naumi kṛṣṇa-svarūpam

Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 1.5)

Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa are intrinsically one. However, They are
manifest eternally in two forms through the influence of
hlādinī-śakti in the form of Their pranaya-vikara,
because of the eternality of Their pastimes (vilāsa-
tattva). Now these two tattvas are manifested in one
svarūpa in the form of caitanya-tattva. Therefore, I bow
down to this svarūpa of Kṛṣṇa that is endowed with the
loving sentiments and luster of Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

Kṛṣṇa and Caitanya Mahāprabhu are both eternally
manifest. It cannot be determined which of Them came
earlier and who came later. “First Caitanya was there,
and then Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa manifested, and now They have
merged together again, and appeared in the form of
Caitanyadeva” ñ the understanding of this statement is
not that one of Them existed earlier, and the other
appeared later. Both manifestations are eternal; They
are present for all time, and will exist for all time.
All the pastimes of the Supreme Truth are eternal. Those

                          214
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

who think that one of these pastimes is principal and
the other is secondary are ignorant of the truth and
devoid of rasa.

Vrajanātha: If Śrī Gaurāṅgadeva is directly the complete
plenary truth, what then is the process for His worship?

Bābājī: Worshiping Gaura by chanting gaura-nāma-mantra
awards the same benefit as worshiping Kṛṣṇa by chanting
His holy names in kṛṣṇa-nāma-mantra. Worshiping Gaura
through the Kṛṣṇa mantra is the same as worshiping Kṛṣṇa
by the Gaura mantra. Those who believe that there is a
difference between Gaura and Kṛṣṇa are extremely
foolish; they are simply servants of Kali.

Vrajanātha: Where can one find the mantra of the hidden
avatāra Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu?

Bābājī: The tantras which contain the mantras of the
manifest avatāras also contain the mantra of the hidden
avatāra in a secret way. Those whose intelligence is not
crooked can understand it.

Vrajanātha: By what method is Gaurāṅga worshiped as
Yugala (in a dual form)?

Bābājī: Śrī Gaurāṅga’s Yugala is formed in one way in
the arcana process, and another way in the bhajana
process. Śrī Gaura-Viṣṇupriyā are worshiped in the
process of arcana, and in the process of bhajana, one
performs seva to Śrī Gaura-Gadādhara.

Vrajanātha: Which śakti of Śrī Gaurāṅga is Śrī
Viṣṇupriyā?

Bābājī: The bhaktas generally refer to her as bhū-śakti.
However, in reality she is the saṁvit potency combined
with the essence of hlādinī. In other words, she is the
personified form of bhakti, who has descended to assist
Gaura Avatāra in the work of spreading śrī-nāma. Just as
Navadvīpa-dhāma is the personified form (svarūpa) of the
nine-fold process of devotional service (navadhā-bhakti)
so Śrī Viṣṇupriyā is also the svarūpa of navadhā-bhakti.

Vrajanātha: So can Viṣṇupriyā-devī be called svarūpa-
śakti?

Bābājī: How can there be any doubt about this? Is the
combination of saṁvit-śakti and the essence of hlādinī-
śakti anything but svarūpa-śakti?

Vrajanātha: Prabhujī, I will soon learn to worship Śrī
Gaura. I have just remembered something else that I
would like you to please explain to me clearly. You have
explained that cit-śakti, jīva-śakti, and māyā-śakti are
three manifestations of svarūpa-śakti; that hlādinī,
saṁvit, and sandhinī are three functions (vṛttis) of
svarūpa-śakti; and that these three functions – namely,
hlādinī, saṁvit, and sandhinī – act on the three
manifestations, cit-śakti, jīva-śakti, and māyā-śakti.
All of this is simply the work of śakti. Apart from
this, the spiritual world, the spiritual body, and the
spiritual pastimes are also indications of śakti alone.
Then what is the indication of śaktimān Kṛṣṇa?

                          215
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017


Bābājī: This is a very difficult problem. Do you want to
kill this old man with the sharp arrows of your
arguments? My dear son, the answer is as simple as the
question, but it is difficult to find a person who is
qualified to understand it. Anyway, I shall explain it,
so please try to understand.

I agree that Kṛṣṇaís name, form, qualities, and pastimes
all indicate the function of śakti. However, freedom
(sva-tantratā) and free will (sva-icchāmayatā) are not
the work of śakti; they are both intrinsic activities of
the Supreme Person, and Kṛṣṇa is that Supreme Person who
has free will and is the abode of śakti. Śakti is the
enjoyed and Kṛṣṇa is the enjoyer; śakti is dependent but
Kṛṣṇa is independent; śakti surrounds that independent
Supreme Person on all sides, but He is always conscious
of śakti. The independent puruṣa is the master of śakti,
even though He is covered by śakti. Human beings can
only realize that Supreme Person (parama-puruṣa) by
taking shelter of that śakti. That is why the
conditioned jīva cannot realize the identity of śaktimān
independently from realizing the identity of śakti.
However, when the bhaktas develop love for śaktimān,
they are able to perceive Him, who is beyond śakti.
Bhakti is a form of śakti, and that is why she has a
female form. Being under the guidance of Kṛṣṇaís
internal potency (svarūpa-śakti), she experiences the
pastimes of the puruṣa. Those pastimes indicate that
Kṛṣṇa is possessed of both free will and the intrinsic
quality of being the predominating enjoyer.

Vrajanātha: If we accept a tattva beyond śakti that is
devoid of characteristics by which it can be identified,
that tattva would be the same as the brahma described in
the Upaniṣads.

Bābājī: The brahma of the Upaniṣads is devoid of
desires, but Kṛṣṇa, the parama-puruṣa who is described
in the Upaniṣads, is actually composed of free will
(sva-icchā-maya). There is a big difference between the
two. Brahma is nirviśeṣa, without any attributes.
Conversely, even though Kṛṣṇa is distinct from śakti, He
is saviśeṣa, possessed of form and attributes, because
He has the qualities of puruṣatva (manhood), bhoktṛtva
(being the enjoyer), adhikāra (authority), and
svatantratā (independence). In reality, Kṛṣṇa and His
śakti are non-different. The śakti that indicates
Kṛṣṇa’s presence is also Kṛṣṇa, because kṛṣṇa-kāminī
śakti in the form of Śrī Rādhā manifests Her identity in
a female form. Kṛṣṇa is the one who is served, and the
supreme śakti, Śrīmatīji, is His seva-dāsī. Their
individual abhimāna, self-conceptions, are the only
tattva that differentiates Them.

Vrajanātha: If Kṛṣṇa’s desire and capacity to enjoy
indicate the form of puruṣa, what is Śrīmatī Rādhikā‘s
desire?

Bābājī: Srīmatī Rādhikā’s desire is subordinate to
Kṛṣṇa’s; none of Her desires or efforts are independent
of His desire. Kṛṣṇa has desires, and Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s
desire is to serve Kṛṣṇa according to His desires.
Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the complete and original śakti, and

                          216
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa is puruṣa; that is, He controls and inspires
śakti.



After this discussion, Bābājī Mahārāja observed that it
was quite late at night and asked Vrajanātha to return
to his home. Vrajanātha offered daṇḍavat-praṇāma at
Bābājī Mahārājaís feet, and walked towards Bilva-
puṣkariṇī in a blissful mood.

Day by day, Vrajanāthaís moods were changing. This very
much alarmed his family members, and his paternal
grandmother decided to get him married as soon as
possible. She started looking for a suitable match but
Vrajanātha always stayed aloof from these matters and
did not heed the conversations regarding marriage.
Rather, he remained constantly absorbed in contemplating
the various tattvas that he heard from Bābājī Mahārāja.
He was naturally drawn to Bābājī Mahārāja in
Śrīvāsāṅgana, for he wanted to realize those tattvas he
had heard, and was greedy to hear ever-new nectarean
teachings.



Thus ends the Fourteenth Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled

“Prameya: Śakti-Tattva”




Chapter 15

Prameya: Jīva-Tattva



The next day, Vrajanātha reached Śrīvasāṅgana earlier
than on previous days. The Vaiṣṇavas from Godruma had
also come before evening to take darśana of sandhyā
āratī, and Śrī Premadāsa Paramahaṁsa Bābājī, Vaiṣṇava
dāsa, Advaita dāsa, and other Vaiṣṇavas were already
seated in the āratī-maṇḍapa. When Vrajanātha saw the
bhāvas of the Vaiṣṇavas from Godruma, he was struck with
wonder, and thought, “I will perfect my life by having
their association as soon as possible.” When those
Vaiṣṇavas saw his humble and devotional disposition, all
of them bestowed their blessings on Vrajanātha.

When āratī was over, Vrajanātha and the elderly Bābājī
began to walk southwards together in the direction of
Godruma. Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī saw an incessant stream
of tears flowing from Vrajanāthaís eyes and, feeling
very affectionate towards him, asked lovingly, “Bābā,
why are you weeping?”

Vrajanātha said, “Prabhu, when I remember your sweet
instructions, my heart becomes restless and the entire
world seems to be devoid of all substance. My heart is

                          217
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

becoming eager to take shelter at Śrī Gaurāṅgadevaís
lotus feet. Please be merciful to me and tell me who I
really am according to tattva, and why I have come to
this world.”

Bābājī: My dear son, you have blessed me by asking such
a question. The day that the jīva first asks this
question is the auspicious day on which his good fortune
arises. If you will kindly hear the fifth śloka of Daśa-
mūla, all your doubts will be dispelled.

sphuliṅgāḥ ṛddhāgner iva cid-aṇavo jīvā-nicayāḥ

hareḥ sūryasyaivāpṛthag api tu tad-bheda-viṣayāḥ

vaśe māyā yasya prakṛti-patir eveśvara iha

sa jīvo mukto ëpi prakṛti-vaśā-yogyaḥ sva-guṇataḥ

Just as many tiny sparks burst out from a blazing fire,
so the innumerable jīvas are like atomic, spiritual
particles in the rays of the spiritual sun, Śrī Hari.
Though these jīvas are non-different from Śrī Hari, they
are also eternally different from Him. The eternal
difference between the jīva and Īśvara is that Īśvara is
the Lord and master of māyā-śakti, whereas the jīva can
fall under the control of māyā, even in his liberated
stage, due to his constitutional nature.

Vrajanātha: This is an exceptional siddhānta, and I
would like to hear some Vedic evidence to support it.
Śrī Bhagavān’s statements are certainly Veda, but still,
people will be bound to accept the teachings of
Mahāprabhu if the Upaniṣads can substantiate this
principle.

Bābājī: This tattva is described in many places in the
Vedas. I will cite a few of them:

yathāgneḥ kṣudrā visphuliṅgā vyuccaranti

evam evāsmad ātmanaḥ sarvāṇi bhūtāni vyuccaranti

Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad (2.1.20)

Innumerable jīvas emanate from para-brahma, just like
tiny sparks from a fire.

tasya vā etasya puruṣasya dve eva sthāne

bhavata idañ ca paraloka-sthānañ ca

sandhyaṁ tṛtīyaṁ svapna-sthānaṁ

tasmin sandhye sthāne tiṣṭhann ete ubhe

sthāne paśyatīdañ ca paraloka-sthānañ ca

Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad (4.3.9)

There are two positions about which the jīva-puruṣa
should inquire ñ the inanimate material world, and the
spiritual world. The jīva is situated in a third
position, which is a dreamlike condition (svapna-

                          218
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

sthāna), and is the juncture (taṭastha) between the
other two. Being situated at the place where the two
worlds meet, he sees both the jaḍa-jagat (inert world)
and the cid-jagat (spiritual world).

This śloka describes the marginal nature of jīva-śakti.
Again, it is said in Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad (4.3.18):

tad yathā mahā-matsya ubhe kule ënusañcarati

pūrvañ cāparañ caivam evāyaṁ puruṣa etāv ubhāv antāv

anu sañcarati svapnāntañ ca buddhāṅtañ ca

Just as a large fish in a river sometimes goes to the
eastern bank and sometimes to the western bank, so the
jīva, being situated in kāraṇa-jala (the water of cause
that lies between the inert and conscious worlds), also
gradually wanders to both banks, the place of dreaming
and the place of wakefulness.

Vrajanātha: What is the Vedāntic meaning of the word
taṭastha?

Bābājī: The space between the ocean and the land is
called the taṭa (shore), but the place that touches the
ocean is actually nothing but land, so where is the
shore? The taṭa is the line of distinction separating
the ocean and the land, and it is so fine that it cannot
be seen with the gross eyes. If we compare the
transcendental realm to the ocean, and the material
world to the land, then taṭa is the subtle line that
divides the two, and the jīva-śakti is situated at the
place where the two meet. The jīvas are like the
countless atomic particles of light within the sunrays.
Being situated in the middle place, the jīvas see the
spiritual world on one side and the material universe
created by māyā on the other. Just as Bhagavān’s
spiritual śakti on one side is unlimited, māyā-śakti on
the other side is also very powerful. The innumerable
subtle (sūkṣma) jīvas are situated between these two.
The jīvas are marginal by nature because they have
manifested from Kṛṣṇa’s taṭastha-śakti (marginal
potency).

Vrajanātha: What is the taṭastha-svabhāva (marginal
nature)?

Bābājī: It is the nature that enables one to be situated
between both worlds, and to see both sides. Taṭastha-
svabhāva is the eligibility to come under the control of
either of the śaktis. Sometimes the shore is submerged
in the river because of erosion, and then again it
becomes one with the land because the river changes its
course. If the jīva looks in the direction of Kṛṣṇa –
that is, towards the spiritual world – he is influenced
by Kṛṣṇa śakti. He then enters the spiritual world, and
serves Bhagavān in his pure, conscious, spiritual form.
However, if he looks towards māyā, he becomes opposed to
Kṛṣṇa and is incarcerated by māyā. This dual-faceted
nature is called the taṭastha-svabhāva (marginal
nature).

Vrajanātha: Is there any material component in the

                          219
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

jīva’s original constitution?

Bābājī: No, the jīva is created solely from the cit-
śakti. He can be defeated – that is, covered by māyā –
because he is minute by nature and lacks spiritual
power, but there is not even a scent of māyā in the
jīva’s existence.

Vrajanātha: I have heard from my teacher that when a
fraction of the conscious brahma is covered by māyā, it
becomes the jīva. He explained the sky to be always the
indivisible mahā-ākāśa, but when a part of it is
enclosed in a pot, it becomes ghaṭa-ākāśa. Similarly,
the jīva is originally brahma, but when that brahma is
covered by māyā, the false ego of being a jīva develops.
Is this conception correct?

Bābājī: This doctrine is only Māyāvāda. How can māyā
touch brahma? The Māyāvādīs propose that brahma has no
śakti (lupta-śakti), so how can māyā – which is a śakti
– possibly approach brahma, if śakti is supposed to be
non-existent? The conclusion is that māyā cannot
possibly cover brahma and cause such a miserable
condition. Conversely, if we accept the transcendental
śakti (parā-śakti) of brahma, how can māyā, which is an
insignificant śakti, defeat the cit-śakti and create the
jīva from brahma? Besides, brahma is indivisible, so how
can such a brahma be divided? The idea that māyā can act
upon brahma is not acceptable. Māyā plays no role in the
creation of the jīvas. Admittedly, the jīva is only
atomic, but even so, it is still superior as a tattva to
māyā.

Vrajanātha: Once another teacher said that the jīva is
nothing but a reflection of brahma. The sun is reflected
in water, and similarly, brahma becomes jīva when it is
reflected in māyā. Is this conception correct?

Bābājī: Again this is simply another example of Māyāvāda
philosophy. Brahma has no limits, and a limitless entity
can never be reflected. The idea of limiting brahma is
opposed to the conclusions of the Vedas, so this theory
of reflection is to be rejected.

Vrajanātha: A dig-vijaya sannyāsī once   told me that in
reality there is no substance known as   jīva. One only
thinks of himself as a jīva because of   illusion, and
when the illusion is removed, there is   only one
indivisible brahma. Is this correct or   not?

Bābājī: This is also Māyāvāda doctrine which has no
foundation at all. According to śāstra, ekam
evādvitīyam: “There is nothing apart from brahma.” If
there is nothing except brahma, where has the illusion
come from, and who is supposed to be in illusion? If you
say that brahma is in illusion, you are saying that
brahma is not actually brahma; rather, it is
insignificant. And if you propose that illusion is a
separate and independent element, you negate the
undivided oneness (advaya-jñāna) of brahma.

Vrajanātha: Once an influential brāhmaṇa paṇḍita arrived
in Navadvīpa, and in a conference of intellectuals, he
established that only the jīva exists. His theory was

                          220
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

that this jīva creates everything in his dreams, and it
is because of this that he enjoys happiness and suffers
distress. Then, when the dream breaks, he sees that he
is nothing but brahma. To what extent is this idea
correct?

Bābājī: This is, again, Māyāvāda. If, as they say,
brahma is undifferentiated, how can it possibly produce
the jīva and his dreaming state? Māyāvādīs use examples,
such as, ‘the illusion of seeing mother-of-pearl in an
oyster shell as gold’ and ‘the illusion of taking a rope
to be a snake,’ but their philosophy cannot provide a
consistent basis for advaya-jñāna.

Vrajanātha: So māyā has nothing whatever to do with
creating the svarūpa of the jīvas – this has to be
accepted. At the same time, I have also clearly
understood that the jīva is by nature subject to the
influence of māyā. Now I want to know, did the cit-śakti
create the jīvas and give them their taṭastha-svabhāva
(marginal nature)?

Bābājī: No, the cit-śakti is paripūrṇa-śakti, the
complete potency of Kṛṣṇa, and its manifestations are
all eternally perfect substances. The jīva is not nitya-
siddha, although when he performs sādhana, he can become
sādhana-siddha and enjoy transcendental happiness like
the nitya-siddhas, eternally perfect beings. All the
four types of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s sakhīs are nitya-siddha,
and they are direct expansions (kāya-vyūha) of the cit-
śakti, Śrīmatī Rādhikā Herself. All the jīvas, on the
other hand, have manifested from Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s jīva-śakti.
The cit-śakti is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s complete śakti, whereas the
jīva-śakti is His incomplete śakti. Just as the complete
tattvas are all transformations of the complete potency,
similarly innumerable atomic, conscious jīvas are
transformations of the incomplete śakti.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa, being established in each of His śaktis,
manifests His svarūpa according to the nature of that
śakti. When He is situated in the cit-svarūpa, He
manifests His svarūpa as Śrī Kṛṣṇa and also as Nārāyaṇa,
the Lord of Paravyoma; when He is situated in the jīva-
śakti, He manifests His svarūpa as His vilāsa-mūrti of
Vraja, Baladeva; and being established in the māyā-
śakti, He manifests the three Viṣṇu forms:
Kāraṇodakaśāyī, Kṣīrodakaśāyī and Garbhodakaśāyī. In His
Kṛṣṇa form in Vraja, He manifests all the spiritual
affairs to the superlative degree. In His Baladeva
svarūpa as śeṣa-tattva, He manifests nitya-mukta-
pārṣada-jīvas, eternally liberated associates, who
render eight types of service to Kṛṣṇa śeṣī-tattva-
svarūpa, the origin of śeṣa-tattva. Again, as śeṣa-rūpa
Saṅkarṣaṇa in Paravyoma, He manifests eight types of
servants to render eight kinds of services as eternally
liberated associates of śeṣī-rūpa Nārāyaṇa. Mahā-Viṣṇu,
who is an avatāra of Saṅkarṣaṇa, situates Himself in the
jīva-śakti, and in His Paramātmāsvarūpa, He manifests
the jīvas who have the potential to be involved in the
material world. These jīvas are susceptible to the
influence of māyā, and unless they attain the shelter of
the hlādinī-śakti of the cit-śakti by Bhagavānís mercy,
the possibility of their being defeated by māyā remains.
The countless conditioned jīvas who have been conquered

                          221
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

by māyā are subordinate to the three modes of material
nature. Bearing all this in mind, the siddhānta is that
it is only the jīva-śakti, and not the cit-śakti, that
manifests the jīvas.

Vrajanātha: You said earlier that the cit world is
eternal, and so are the jīvas. If this is true, how can
an eternal entity possibly be created, manifested or
produced? If it is created at some point of time, it
must have been non-existent before that, so how can we
accept that it is eternal?

Bābājī: The time and space that you experience in this
material world are completely different from time and
space in the spiritual world. Material time is divided
into three aspects: past, present and future. However,
in the spiritual world there is only one undivided,
eternally present time. Every event of the spiritual
world is eternally present.

Whatever we say or describe in the material world is
under the jurisdiction of material time and space, so
when we say ñ “The jīvas were created,” “The spiritual
world was manifested,” or “There is no influence of māyā
in creating the form of the jīvas,” ñ material time is
bound to influence our language and our statements. This
is inevitable in our conditioned state, so we cannot
remove the influence of material time from our
descriptions of the atomic jīva and spiritual objects.
The conception of past, present and future always enters
them in some way or another. Still, those who can
discriminate properly can understand the application of
the eternal present when they comprehend the purport of
the descriptions of the spiritual world. Bābā, be very
careful in this matter. Give up the inevitable baseness,
or the aspect of the description that is fit to be
rejected, and have spiritual realization.

All Vaiṣṇavas say that the jīva is an eternal servant of
Kṛṣṇa, that his eternal nature is to serve Kṛṣṇa, and
that he is now bound by māyā, because he has forgotten
that eternal nature. However, everyone knows that the
jīva is an eternal entity, of which there are two types:
nitya-mukta and nitya-baddha. The subject has been
explained in this way only because the conditioned human
intellect being controlled by pramāda (inattentiveness),
is unable to comprehend a subject matter. Realized
sādhakas, though, experience transcendental truth
through their cit-samādhi. Our words always have some
material limitation, so whatever we say will have some
māyika defects. My dear son, you should always endeavor
to realize the pure truth. Logic and argument cannot
help at all in this regard, so it is futile to use them
to try to understand inconceivable subject matters.

I know that you will not be able to understand these
subjects in a moment, but as you cultivate these
transcendental moods within your heart, you will realize
cinmaya-bhāva more and more. In other words, all the
transcendental moods will manifest themselves in the
core of your purified heart. Your body is material, and
all the activities of your body are also material, but
the essence of your being is not material; you are an
atomic conscious entity. The more you know yourself, the

                          222
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

more you will be able to realize how your svarūpa is a
tattva superior to the world of māyā. Even if I tell
you, you will not realize it, or simply be hearing you
will not attain it. Cultivate the practice of chanting
hari-nāma as much as possible. As you go on chanting
hari-nāma, these transcendental bhāvas will begin to
manifest in your heart automatically, and to the degree
that they do so, you will be able to realize the
transcendental world. Mind and speech both have their
origin in matter, and they cannot touch the
transcendental truth, even with the greatest endeavor.
The Vedas say in Taittirīya Upaniṣad (2.9)

yato vāco nivartante aprāpya manasā saha

The speech and the mind return from brahma, being unable
to attain Him.

I advise you not to inquire about this matter from
anyone, but to realize it yourself. I have just given
you an indication (ābhāsa).

Vrajanātha: You have explained that the jīva is like a
spark of a burning fire, or an atomic particle in the
rays of the spiritual sun. What is the role of jīva-
śakti in this?

Bābājī: Kṛṣṇa, who in these examples is compared to the
blazing fire or the sun, is a self-manifest tattva.
Within the compass of that blazing fire or sun – in
other words, Kṛṣṇa – everything is a spiritual
manifestation, and the rays spread far and wide beyond
its sphere. These rays are the fractional function (aṇu-
kārya) of the svarūpa-śakti, and the rays within that
fractional function are paramāṇu (atomic particles) of
the spiritual sun. The jīvas are compared to this very
localized, atomic tattva. Svarūpa-śakti manifests the
world within the sphere of the spiritual sun, and the
function outside the sphere of the sun is carried out by
jīva-śakti, which is the direct partial representation
of cit-śakti. Therefore, the activities related to the
jīva are those of jīva-śakti. Parāsya śaktir vividhaiva
śrūyate (Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 6.8), “That acintya-śakti
is called parā-śakti. Although it is one, this innate
potency (sva-bhāvikī-śakti) has manifold varieties based
on jñāna (spiritual knowledge), bala (spiritual
strength), and kriyā (spiritual activities).” According
to this aphorism of śruti, the cit-śakti is a
manifestation of the parā-śakti. It emanates from its
own sphere – the spiritual realm – as the jīva-śakti,
and in the marginal region between the spiritual and the
material worlds, it manifests innumerable, eternal
jīvas, who are like atomic particles in the rays of the
spiritual sun.

Vrajanātha: A burning fire, the sun, sparks, and the
atomic particles of sunshine – these are all material
objects. Why has a comparison been made with these
material objects in the discussion of cit-tattva?

Bābājī: As I have already said, inevitably there are
material defects in any material statements we make
about cit-tattva, but what alternative do we have? We
are obliged to use these examples, because we are

                          223
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

helpless without them. Therefore, those who know tattva
try to explain cid-vastu by comparing it to fire or the
sun. In reality, Kṛṣṇa is far superior to the sun;
Kṛṣṇa’s effulgence is far superior to the radiance of
the sun; and Kṛṣṇa’s rays and the atoms in them – that
is the jīva-śakti and the jīvas – are far superior to
the rays of the sun and the atomic particles in the
rays. Still, these examples have been used because there
are many similarities within them.

Examples can explain some of the spiritual qualities,
but not all. The beauty of the sunís light and the
ability of its rays to illuminate other objects are both
qualities that compare with the cit-tattva, for it is
the quality of spirit to reveal its own beauty and to
illuminate other objects. However, the scorching heat in
the sunrays has no counterpart in the cid-vastu, nor
does the fact that the rays are material. Again, if we
say, “This milk is like water,” we are only considering
the liquid quality of water in the comparison;
otherwise, if all the qualities of water were present in
milk, why would the water not become milk? Examples can
explain certain specific qualities of an object, but not
all of its qualities and traits.

Vrajanātha: The spiritual rays of the transcendental
Kṛṣṇa-sun and the spiritual atoms within those rays are
non-different from the sun, yet at the same time they
are eternally different from it. How can both these
facts be true simultaneously?

Bābājī: In the material world, when one object is
produced from another, either the product is completely
different from its source, or else it remains a part of
it. This is the nature of material objects. For example,
an egg becomes separate from the mother bird once it is
laid, whereas a person’s nails and hair remain part of
the body until they are cut, even though they are
produced from his body. However, the nature of cid-vastu
is somewhat different. Whatever has manifested from the
spiritual sun is simultaneously one with it, and
different from it. The rays of the sun and the atomic
particles in the rays are not separate from the sun,
even after they have emanated from it. Similarly, the
rays of Kṛṣṇa’s svarūpa, and the atoms in those rays –
that is jīva-śakti and the jīvas – are not separate from
Him, even though they are produced from Him. At the same
time, although the jīvas are non–different from Kṛṣṇa,
they are also eternally different and separate from Him,
because they have their own minute particle of
independent desires. Therefore, the jīva’s difference
and non-difference from Kṛṣṇa is an eternal truth. This
is the special feature of the cit realm.

The sages give a partial example from our experience of
inert matter. Suppose you cut a small piece of gold from
a large piece, and use it to make a bangle. From the
perspective of the gold, the bangle is not different
from the original piece of gold; they are non-different.
However, from the perspective of the bangle, the two are
different from each other. This example is not a
completely correct representation of cit-tattva, but it
illustrates an important aspect: from the point of view
of cit-tattva, there is no difference between Īśvara and

                          224
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

the jīva, whereas from the perspective of state and
quantity, these two are eternally different. Īśvara is
complete cit, whereas the jīva is atomic cit. Īśvara is
great, whereas the jīva is insignificant. Some people
give the example of ghaṭa-ākāśa and mahā-ākāśa (the sky
in a pot, and the unlimited sky) in this regard, but
this example is completely inconsistent with regard to
cit-tattva.

Vrajanātha: If transcendental entities and material
objects belong to completely different categories, how
can material objects be used as appropriate examples for
understanding transcendental entities?

Bābājī: There are different categories of material
objects, and the paṇḍitas of the Nyāya school consider
them eternal. However, there is no such categorical
difference between the cit (transcendental) and jaḍa
(material). I have already said that cit is the only
reality, and jaḍa is simply its transformation (vikāra).
The vikāra is different from the original source, but it
is still similar to the pure, original object in many
respects. For example, ice is a transformation of water,
and it becomes different from water through this
transformation, but the two remain similar in many of
their qualities, such as coldness. Hot and cold water do
not both have the quality of coldness, but their quality
of fluidity is the same. Therefore, the transformed
object certainly retains some similarity to the pure
object. According to this principle, the transcendental
(cit) world can be understood to some extent with the
help of material examples. Again, by adopting the logic
of arundhatī-darśana1, one can use material examples to
understand something about the spiritual nature.

Kṛṣṇaís pastimes are completely spiritual, and there is
not even the slightest scent of a material mood in them.
The vraja-līlā described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is
transcendental, but when the descriptions are read in an
assembly, the fruits of hearing them are different
according to the respective qualifications of the
various listeners. Appreciating the ornamental figures
of speech from the mundane perspective, those who are
absorbed in material sense gratification hear it as a
story of an ordinary hero and heroine. The madhyama-
adhikārīs take shelter of arundhati-darśana-nyāya, and
experience the transcendental pastimes, which are
similar to mundane descriptions. And when the uttama-
adhikārībhaktas hear the descriptions of those pastimes,
they become absorbed in the rasa of pure transcendental
cid-vilāsa, which is above all mundane qualities. The
Absolute Truth is aprākṛta-tattva, so how can we educate
the jīvas about it without taking help of the principles
that I have just described? Can the conditioned jīva
understand a subject that renders the voice dumb and
stops the working of the mind? There doesnít appear to
be any method of explaining these subjects other than
the principle of similarity, and the logic of arundhatī-
darśana.

Material objects can be either different or non-
different from each other, so difference and non-
difference are not visible in them at one and the same
time, but this is not the case with parama-tattva. We

                          225
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

have to accept that Kṛṣṇa is simultaneously different
and non-different from His jīva-śakti and from the jīvas
in it. This bhedābheda-tattva (simultaneous difference
and oneness) is said to be acintya (inconceivable)
because it is beyond the limit of human intellect.

Vrajanātha: What is the difference between Īśvara and
the jīva?

Bābājī: First you should understand the non-difference
between Īśvara and the jīva, and after that, I will
explain their eternal difference. Īśvara is the
embodiment of knowledge (jñāna-svarūpa), the knower
(jñātā-svarūpa), one who considers or reflects (mantā-
svarūpa) and the enjoyer (bhoktṛ-svarūpa). He is self-
effulgent (sva-prakāśa) and He also illuminates others
(para-prakāśa). He has His own desires (icchā-maya), and
He is the knower of all (kṣetra-jña). The jīva, too, is
the form of knowledge, the knower, and the enjoyer; he
too, is self-effulgent, and he illuminates others; and
he too, has desires, and is the knower of his own field
(kṣetra-jña). From this perspective, there is no
difference between them.

However, Īśvara is omnipotent, and by dint of this
omnipotence, He is the basis of all these qualities,
which are present in Him in full. These qualities are
also present in the atomic jīva, but only to a minute
degree. Thus, the nature and form of Īśvara and the jīva
are eternally different from each other because one is
complete and the other is minute; and at the same time,
there is a lack of distinction between Īśvara and the
jīva because of the similarity between their qualities.

Īśvara is the Lord of svarūpa-śakti, jīva-śakti and
māyā-śakti because of the completeness of the internal
potency (ātma-śakti). Śakti is His maidservant, and He
is the Lord of śakti, who is activated by His desire;
this is the svarūpa of Īśvara. Though the qualities of
Īśvara are present in the jīva to a minute degree, the
jīva is nonetheless under the control of śakti.

The word māyā has been used in Daśa-mūla not only to
indicate material māyā, but also to indicate svarūpa-
śakti. Mīyate anayā iti māyā, “Māyā is that by which
things can be measured.” The word māyā refers to the
śakti that illuminates Kṛṣṇaís identity in all the three
worlds, namely, the cit-jagat, acit-jagat, and jīva-
jagat. Kṛṣṇa is the controller of māyā and the jīva is
under the control of māyā. Therefore, it is said in the
Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (4.9-10):

asmān māyī sṛjate viśvam etat

tasmiṁś cānyo māyayā sanniruddhaḥ

māyān tu prakṛtiṁ vidyān māyinan tu maheśvaram

tasyāvaya-bhūtais tu vyāptaṁ sarvam idaṁ jagat

Parameśvara is the Lord of māyā, He has created the
entire world wherein the jīvas are bound in the illusion
of material identification. It should be understood that
māyā is His prakṛti, and He is Maheśvara, the controller

                          226
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

of māyā. This entire world is pervaded by His limbs.

In this mantra, the word māyī is used to indicate Kṛṣṇa,
the controller of māyā, and prakṛti is used to indicate
the complete śakti. His great qualities and nature are
the special characteristics of Īśvara; they are not
present in the jīva, and he cannot attain them, even
after liberation. It is stated in Brahma-sūtra (4.4.17),
jagat-vyāpāra-varjjam prakaraṇāsannihitatvāt, “The
creation, maintenance and control of the entire
transcendental and inert world is the work of brahma
only, and no one else.” Except for this activity in
relation to the cit and acit worlds, all other
activities are possible for liberated jīvas. The śruti
states, yato vā imāni bhūtāni jāyante (Taittirīya
Upaniṣad 3.1): “He is that by which all the jīvas are
created and maintained, and into which they enter and
become unmanifest at the time of annihilation.” These
statements have only been made in relation to brahma,
and they cannot be applied to the jīva by any amount of
manipulation, because there is no reference to liberated
jīvas here. The śāstras state that it is only Bhagavān,
and not the liberated jīva, who performs activities of
creation, maintenance and annihilation. One may suppose
that the jīva can also perform these activities, but
this gives rise to the philosophy of many īśvaras (bahv-
īśvara-doṣa), which is defective. Therefore, the correct
siddhānta is that the jīva is not qualified for the
above-mentioned activities, even when liberated.

This establishes the eternal difference between the jīva
and Īśvara, and all learned people support this. This
difference is not imaginary, but eternal; it does not
disappear in any state of the jīva. Consequently, the
statement that the jīva is an eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa
should be accepted as a fundamental statement (mahā-
vākya).

Vrajanātha: If one can only prove the eternal difference
between Īśvara and the jīva, how can one accept the
oneness? Another point is that, if there is oneness, do
we have to accept a state of merging with Īśvara
(nirvāṇa)?

Bābājī: No, not at all. The jīva is not one with Kṛṣṇa
at any stage.

Vrajanātha: Then why have you spoken about acintya-
bhedābheda (inconceivable oneness and difference)?

Bābājī: From the qualitative perspective of cid-dharma,
there is oneness between Kṛṣṇa and the jīvas, but from
the quantitative perspective of their essential nature
and individual personalities (svarūpa), there is eternal
difference between them. Despite the eternal oneness, it
is the perception of difference that is eternally
prominent. Though the abheda-svarūpa is an accomplished
fact, there is no indication that any such state has
independent existence. Rather, it is the manifestation
of nitya-bheda (eternal difference) that is always
prominent. In other words, where eternal difference and
eternal oneness are present simultaneously, the
perception of bheda is stronger. For example, let us say
the owner of a house is called Devadatta, his house is

                          227
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

simultaneously a-devadatta (independent of Devadatta)
and sa-devadatta (identified with Devadatta). Even
though from some points of view it may be considered
independent of Devadatta, still its specific
characteristic of being identified with Devadatta
eternally exists. Similarly, in the case of Īśvara and
the jīvas, non-difference, or oneness, is not part of
the essential identity, even at the stage of svarūpa-
siddhi, just as the house can be called both a-devadatta
and sa-devadatta. From one perspective it may be viewed
as a-devadatta, but still, the real identity is sa-
devadatta.

Let me give you another example from the material world.
Sky is a material element, and there is also a basis for
its existence, but even though the basis is present,
only the sky is actually visible. Similarly, even within
the abheda existence, the distinctive nitya-bheda, which
is real, is found, and that is why nitya-bheda is the
only definitive characteristic of the essential reality
(vastu).

Vrajanātha: Please explain the eternal nature of the
jīva even more clearly.

Bābājī: The jīva is atomic consciousness and is endowed
with the quality of knowledge and is described by the
word aham (‘I’). He is the enjoyer, the thinker, and the
one who comprehends. The jīva has an eternal form which
is very subtle. Just as the different parts of the gross
body, the hands, legs, nose, eyes and so on combine to
manifest a beautiful form when established in their
respective places, similarly a very beautiful atomic
spiritual body is manifest, which is composed of
different spiritual parts. However, when the jīva is
entangled in māyā, that spiritual form is covered by two
material bodies. One of these is called the subtle body
(liṅga-śarīra) and the other is called the gross body
(sthūla-śarīra). The subtle body, which is the first to
cover the atomic spiritual body, is unavoidable
(aparihārya) from the beginning of the jīva’s
conditioned state until his liberation. When the jīva
transmigrates from one body to the next, the gross body
changes, but the subtle body does not. Rather, as the
jīva leaves the gross body, the subtle body carries all
its karmas and desires to the next body. The jīva’s
change of body and transmigration are carried out
through the science of pañcāgni (the five fires) which
is delineated in the Vedas. The system of pañcāgni, such
as the funeral fire, the fire of digestion and rain, has
been described in the Chāndogya Upaniṣad and Brahma-
sūtra. The jīva’s conditioned nature in the new body is
the result of the influences from his previous births,
and this nature determines the varṇa in which he takes
birth. After entering varṇāśrama, he begins to perform
karma again, and when he dies, he repeats the same
process. The first covering of the eternal spiritual
form is the subtle body, and the second is the gross
body.

Vrajanātha: What is the difference between the eternal
spiritual body and the subtle body?

Bābājī: The eternal body is the actual, original body,

                          228
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

and it is atomic, spiritual, and faultless. This is the
real object of the ego – the real ‘I’. The subtle body
arises from contact with matter, and it consists of
three vitiated transformations, namely, of the mind,
intelligence and ego.

Vrajanātha: Are mind, intelligence, and ego material
entities? If they are, how do they have the qualities of
knowledge and activity?

Bābājī:

bhūmir āpo ’nalo vāyuḥ khaṁ mano buddhir eva ca

ahaṅkāra itīyaṁ me bhinnā prakṛtir aṣṭadhā

apareyam itas tv anyāṁ prakṛtiṁ viddhi me parām

jīva-bhūtāṁ mahā-bāho yayedaṁ dhāryate jagat

etad-yonīni bhūtāni sarvāṇīty upadhāraya

ahaṁ kṛtsnasya jagataḥ prabhavaḥ pralayas tathā

Bhagavad-gītā (7.4-6)

My separated eight-fold aparā or māyā-prakṛti consists
of the five gross elements ñ earth, water, fire, air and
space ñ and the three subtle elements ñ mind,
intelligence and false ego. Besides this, O mighty-armed
Arjuna, I have a taṭastha-prakṛti, which can also be
called parā-prakṛti (superior nature). That prakṛti is
in the form of consciousness, and the jīvas. All the
jīvas who have manifested from this parā-prakṛti make
the inert world full of consciousness. The jīva-śakti is
called taṭastha because it is eligible for both worlds;
the spiritual world, which is manifest from My
antaraṅga-śakti; and the material world, which is
manifest from My bahriraṅga-śakti.

Since all created   entities are manifested from these two
types of prakṛti,   you should know that I, Bhagavān, am
the sole original   cause of creation and destruction of
all the worlds of   the moving and non-moving beings.

These ślokas of Gītā Upaniṣad describe the two types of
prakṛti of sarva-śaktimān Bhagavān. One is called parā-
prakṛti (the superior energy) and the other is called
aparā-prakṛti (the inferior energy). They are also known
as jīva-śakti and māyā-śakti respectively. The jīva-
śakti is called parā-śakti, or śreṣṭha-śakti (the
superior śakti), because it is full of spiritual atomic
particles. The māyā-śakti is called aparā (inferior)
because it is material and inert (jaḍa).

The jīva is a completely separate entity from the aparā-
śakti, which contains eight elements: the five gross
elements ñ earth, water, fire, air, and space ñ and the
three subtle elements mind, intelligence and ego. These
last three material elements are special. The aspect of
knowledge that is visible in them is material, and not
spiritual. The mind creates a false world by basing its
knowledge of sensual objects on the images and
influences that it absorbs from gross subjects in the

                            229
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

mundane realm. This process has its root in mundane
matter, not in spirit. The faculty that relies on that
knowledge to discriminate between real and unreal is
called buddhi, which also has its root in mundane
matter. The ego, or sense of ëI-nessí that is produced
by accepting the above knowledge is also material, and
not spiritual.

These three faculties together manifest the jīvaís
second form, which acts as the connection between the
jīva and matter, and is called ëthe subtle bodyí (liṅga-
śarīra). As the ego of the conditioned jīvaís subtle
body becomes stronger, it covers the ego of his eternal
form. The ego in the eternal nature in relationship to
the spiritual sun, Kṛṣṇa, is the eternal and pure ego,
and this same ego manifests again in the liberated
state. However, as long as the eternal body remains
covered by the subtle body, the material self-conception
(jaḍa-abhimāna) arising from the gross and subtle body
remains strong, and consequently the abhimāna of
relation with spirit is almost absent. The liṅga-śarīra
is very fine, so that the function of the gross body
covers it. Thus, identification with the caste and so on
of the gross body arises in the subtle body because it
is covered by the gross body. Although the three
elements ñ mind, intelligence and ego ñ are material,
the abhimāna of knowledge is inherent in them because
they are vitiated transformations of the function of the
soul (ātma-vṛtti).

Vrajanātha: I understand the eternal svarūpa of the jīva
to be spiritual and atomic in nature, and within that
svarūpa is a beautiful body composed of spiritual limbs.
In the conditioned state, that beautiful spiritual body
remains covered by the subtle body, and the material
covering of the jīva-svarūpa in the form of the jaḍa-
śarīra causes its material transformation (jaḍa-vikāra).
Now, I want to know whether the jīva is completely
faultless in the liberated state.

Bābājī: The atomic spiritual form is free from defect,
but because of its minute nature, it is inherently weak
and therefore incomplete. The only defect in that state
is that the jīva’s spiritual form may be covered through
association with the powerful māyā-śakti.

It is said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.2.32),

ye ínye íravindākṣa vimukta-māninas

tvayy asta-bhāvād aviśuddha-buddhayaḥ

āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ

patanty adho ínādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ

O lotus-eyed Lord, non-devotees, such as the jñānīs,
yogīs and renunciants, falsely consider themselves to be
liberated, but their intelligence is not really pure
because they lack devotion. They perform severe
austerities and penances, and achieve what they imagine
to be the liberated position, but they still fall from
there into a very low condition due to neglecting Your
lotus feet.

                          230
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017


This shows that the constitution of the jīva will always
remain incomplete, no matter how elevated a stage the
liberated jīva may achieve. That is the inherent nature
of jīva-tattva, and that is why it is said in the Vedas
that Īśvara is the controller of māyā, whereas the jīva
remains eligable to be controlled of māyā in all
circumstances.



Thus ends the Fifteenth Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled

“Prameya: Jīva-Tattva”




Chapter 16

Prameya: Jīvas Possessed by Māyā



Having heard the illuminating description of jīva-tattva
in Daśa-mūla, Vrajanātha returned home. Lying on his
bed, he was unable to sleep, and he began to reflect
deeply, “I have received an answer to the question, ëWho
am I?í Now I can understand myself to be simply an atom
of light in the effulgent rays of the spiritual sun, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. Although atomic by nature, I have my own inherent
value, purpose, knowledge, and a drop of spiritual bliss
(bindu-cidgata-ānanda). My svarūpa is a spiritual
particle (cit-kaṇa). Even though that form is atomic, it
is like Śrī Kṛṣṇaís human-like form. Now, I cannot see
this form; and this is my misfortune, only an extremely
fortunate soul can realize it. It is important that I
understand clearly why I suffer in this unfortunate
condition. Tomorrow I will inquire about this from Śrī
Gurudeva.”

Thinking thus, he finally fell asleep at around
midnight. Before dawn, he dreamt he had left his family
and accepted Vaiṣṇava dress. When he awoke, he joyfully
thought, “It appears that Kṛṣna will soon pull me out of
this saṁsāra.”

The next morning, while he was sitting on the porch some
students approached him. Offering their respects, they
said, “For a long time you have taught us very nicely,
and under your guidance we have learnt many profound
subject matters pertaining to nyāya. We hope that you
will now instruct us on nyāya-kusumāñjali.”

With great humility Vrajanātha replied, “My dear
brothers, I am unable to teach you any more, for I
cannot fix my mind on teaching at all. I have decided to
take another path. Under these circumstances, I suggest
that you study under the guidance of some other
teacher.” When they heard this the students became
unhappy, but since there was nothing that they could do,

                          231
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

gradually one by one they began to leave.

About that time, Śrī Caturbhuja Miśra Ghaṭaka came to
the house to present a proposal to Vrajanāthaís paternal
grandmother for his marriage. He said, “I am sure you
know Vijayanātha Bhaṭṭācārya. His family is good, and
quite well off; thus it will be a suitable match for
you. Most importantly, this girl is as qualified as she
is beautiful. On his side, Bhaṭṭācārya will make no
conditions regarding the marriage of his daughter with
Vrajanātha. He is ready to marry her in whichever way
you desire.”

Hearing this proposal, Vrajanāthaís grandmother became
exhilarated, but Vrajanātha felt dissatisfied within his
heart. “Alas!” he thought, “My grandmother is arranging
my marriage while I am planning to leave my family and
the world. How can I feel happy to discuss marriage at
this time?”

Later, there was an intense struggle of arguments and
counter arguments in their home regarding marriage.
Vrajanāthaís mother, grandmother and the other elderly
ladies were on one side, while on the other, completely
alone, was Vrajanātha. The ladies insisted in various
ways that Vrajanātha should get married, but he did not
agree. The discussion continued the entire day. Around
evening time, it began to rain heavily, and kept pouring
throughout the night, so that Vrajanātha could not go to
Māyāpura. The next day, because of the heated arguments
about marriage, he could not even eat his meals
properly. In the evening he went to Bābājīís cottage. He
paid obeisances and sat down close to Bābājī, who said,
“Yesterday night it was raining quite heavily. Thatís
probably why you couldnít come. Seeing you today gives
me much happiness.”

Vrajanātha said, “Prabhu, I am facing a problem which I
will tell you about later. First please explain to me,
if the jīva is a pure spiritual entity, how did he
become entangled in this miserable world?”

Bābājī smiled and said :

svarūpārthair hīnān nija-sukha-parān kṛṣṇa-vimukhān

harer māyā-dandyān guṇa-nigaḍa-jālaiḥ kalayati

tathā sthūlair lingai dvi-vidhāvaraṇaiḥ kleśa-nikarair

mahākarmālānair nayati patitān svarga-nirayau

Daśa-mūla, Śloka (6)

By his original nature the jīva is an eternal servant of
Kṛṣṇa. His svarūpa-dharma is service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Bhagavānís bewildering energy (māyā) punishes those
jīvas who are bereft of that svarūpa-dharma. These jīvas
are diverted from Kṛṣṇa, and are concerned with their
own happiness. She binds them in the ropes of the three
modes of material nature ñ sattva, rajaḥ and tamaḥ ñ
covers their svarūpa with gross and subtle bodies, thows
them into the miserable bondage of karma, thus
repeatedly causing them to experience happiness and

                           232
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

distress in heaven and hell.

“Innumerable jīvas appear from Śrī Baladeva Prabhu to
serve Vṛndāvana-vihārī Śrī Kṛṣṇa as His eternal
associates in Goloka Vṛndāvana, and others appear from
Śrī Saṅkarṣaṇa to serve the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha, Śrī
Nārāyaṇa, in the spiritual sky. Eternally relishing
rasa, engaged in the service of their worshipable Lord,
they always remain fixed in their constitutional
position. They always strive to please Bhagavān, and are
always attentive to Him. Having attained the strength of
cit-śakti, they are always strong. They have no
connection with the material energy. In fact, they do
not know if there is a bewildering energy called māyā or
not. Since they reside in the spiritual world, māyā is
very far away from them and does not affect them at all.
Always absorbed in the bliss of serving their
worshipable Lord, they are eternally liberated and are
free from material happiness and distress. Their life is
love alone, and they are not even conscious of misery,
death or fear.

“There are also innumerable, atomic, conscious jīvas who
emanate as rays in Kāraṇodakaśāyī Māhā-Viṣṇuís glance
upon His māyā-śakti. Since these jīvas are situated next
to māyā, they perceive her wonderful workings. Although
they have all the qualities of the jīvas that I have
already described, because of their minute and marginal
nature, they sometimes look to the spiritual world, and
sometimes to the material world. In this marginal
condition, the jīva is very weak because at that time he
has not attained spiritual strength from the mercy of
the object of his worship (sevā-vastu). Among these
unlimited jīvas, those who want to enjoy māyā become
engrossed in mundane sense gratification and enter the
state of nitya-baddha. On the other hand, the jīvas who
perform cid-anuśīlanam of Bhagavān receive spiritual
śakti (cid-bala) by His mercy, and enter the spiritual
world. Bābā! It is our great misfortune that we have
forgotten our service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and have become
bound in the shackles of māyā. Only because we have
forgotten our constitutional position, are we in this
deplorable condition.”

Vrajanātha: Prabhu, I understand that this marginal
position is situated in taṭasthā-svabhāva, or junction,
of the spiritual and material worlds. Why is it that
some jīvas go from there to the material world, while
others go to the spiritual world?

Bābājī: Kṛṣṇa’s qualities are also present in the jīvas,
but only in a minute quantity. Kṛṣṇa is supremely
independent, so the desire to be independent is
eternally present in the jīvas as well. When the jīva
uses his independence correctly, he remains disposed
towards Kṛṣṇa, but when he misuses it, he becomes
vimukha (indifferent) to Him. It is just this
indifference that gives rise to the desire in the jīva’s
heart to enjoy māyā. Because of the desire to enjoy
māyā, he develops the false ego that he can enjoy
material sense gratification, and then the five types of
ignorance – tamaḥ (not knowing anything about the spirit
soul), moha (the illusion of the bodily concept of
life), mahā-moha (madness for material enjoyment),

                          233
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

tāmisra (forgetfulness of one’s constitutional position
due to anger or envy) and andha-tāmisra (considering
death to be the ultimate end) – cover his pure, atomic
nature. Our liberation or subjugation simply depends on
whether we use our minute independence properly, or
misuse it.

Vrajanātha: Kṛṣṇa is karuṇamaya (full of mercy), so why
did He make the jīva so weak that he became entangled in
māyā?

Bābājī: It is true that Kṛṣṇa is karuṇamaya, overflowing
with mercy, however, He is also līlāmaya, overflowing
with desire to perform pastimes. Desiring various
pastimes to be enacted in different situations, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa made the jīva’s eligable for all conditions, from
the marginal state to the highest state of mahābhāva.
And to facilitate the jīva’s progressing practically and
steadfastly towards becoming qualified for Kṛṣṇa’s
service, He has also created the lower levels of
material existence, beginning from the lowest inert
matter up to ahaṅkāra, which are the cause of unlimited
obstruction in attaining paramānanda. Having fallen from
their constitutional position, the jīvas who are
entangled in māyā are indifferent to Kṛṣṇa and engrossed
in personal sense gratification. However, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
the reservoir of mercy. The more the jīva becomes
fallen, the more Kṛṣṇa provides him with opportunities
to attain the highest spiritual perfection. He brings
this about by appearing before him along with His
spiritual dhāma and His eternal associates. Those jīvas
who take advantage of this merciful opportunity and
sincerely endeavor to attain the higher position
gradually reach the spiritual world and attain a state
similar to that of Śrī Hari’s eternal associates.

Vrajanātha: Why must the jīvas suffer for the sake of
Bhagavān’s pastimes?

Bābājī: The jīvas possess some independence. This is
actually a sign of Bhagavān’s special mercy upon them.
Inert objects are very insignificant and worthless
because they have no such independent desire. The jīva
has attained sovereignty of the inert world only because
of his independent desire.

Misery and happiness are conditions of the mind. Thus
what we may consider misery is happiness for one
engrossed in it. Since all varieties of material sense
gratification finally result in nothing but misery, a
materialistic person only achieves suffering. When that
suffering becomes excessive, it gives rise to a search
for happiness. From that desire, discrimination arises,
and from discrimination, the tendency for inquiry is
born. As a result of this, one attains sat-saṅga (the
association of saintly people), whereupon śraddhā
develops. When śraddhā is born, the jīva ascends to a
higher stage, namely the path of bhakti.

Gold is purified by heating and hammering. Being
indifferent to Kṛṣṇa, the jīva has become impure through
engaging in mundane sense gratification. Therefore, he
must be purified by being beaten with the hammers of
misery on the anvil of this material world. By this

                          234
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

process, the misery of the jīvas averse to Kṛṣṇa finally
culminates in happiness. Suffering is therefore just a
sign of Bhagavānís mercy. That is why far sighted people
see the suffering of jīvas in Kṛṣṇaís pastimes as
auspicious, though the near sighted can only see it as
an inauspicious source of misery.

Vrajanātha: The jīva’s suffering in his conditioned
state is ultimately auspicious, but in the present state
it is very painful. Since Kṛṣṇa is omnipotent, couldn’t
He think of a less troublesome path?

Bābājī: Kṛṣṇa’s līlā is extremely wonderful and of many
varieties; this is also one of them. If Bhagavān is
independent and almighty, and performs all kinds of
pastimes, why should this be the only pastime that He
neglects? No pastime can be rejected if there is to be
full variety. Besides, the participants in other types
of pastimes also must accept some sort of suffering. Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is the enjoyer (puruṣa) and the active agent
(kartā). All ingredients and paraphernalia are
controlled by His desire and subject to His activities.
It is natural to experience some suffering when one is
controlled by the desire of the agent. However, if that
suffering brings pleasure in the end, it is not true
suffering. How can you call it suffering? The so-called
suffering that one undergoes in order to nourish and
support Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes is actually a source of
delight. The jīva’s independent desire has caused him to
abandon the pleasure of serving Kṛṣṇa, and instead
accept suffering in māyā. This is the jīva’s fault, not
Kṛṣṇa’s.

Vrajanātha: What harm would there have been if the jīva
had not been given independent desire? Kṛṣṇa is
omniscient, and He gave this independence to the jīvas,
even though He knew that they would suffer on account of
it, so isn’t He responsible for the jīva’s suffering?

Bābājī: Independence is a precious jewel, in the absence
of which inert objects are insignificant and worthless.
If the jīva had not received independence, he would also
have become as insignificant and worthless as the
material objects. The jīva is an atomic, spiritual
entity, so he must certainly have all the qualities of
spiritual objects. The only difference is that Bhagavān,
who is the complete spiritual object, possesses all
these qualities in full, whereas the jīva only has them
to a very minute degree. Independence is a distinctive
quality of the spiritual object, and an object’s
inherent quality cannot be separated from the object
itself. Consequently, the jīva also has this quality of
independence, but only to a very minute degree, because
he is atomic. It is only because of this independence
that the jīva is the supreme object in the material
world, and the lord of creation.

The independent jīva is a beloved servant of Kṛṣṇa, and
thus Kṛṣṇa is kind and compassionate towards him. Seeing
the misfortune of the jīva, as he misuses his
independence and becomes attached to māyā, He chases
after him, weeping and weeping, and appears in the
material world to deliver him. Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the ocean of
compassion, His heart melting with mercy for the jīvas,

                          235
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

manifests His acintya-līlā in the material world,
thinking that His appearance will enable the jīva to see
His nectarean pastimes. However, the jīva does not
understand the truth about Kṛṣṇaís pastimes, even after
being showered by so much mercy, so Kṛṣṇa then descends
in Śrī Navadvīpa in the form of guru. He personally
describes the supreme process of chanting His name,
form, qualities and pastimes, and personally instructs
and inspires the jīvas to take to this path by
practicing it Himself. Bābā, how can you accuse Kṛṣṇa of
being at fault in any way when He is so merciful? His
mercy is unlimited, but our misfortune is lamentable.

Vrajanātha: Is māyā-śakti the cause of our misfortune
then? Would the jīvas have had to suffer like this if
the omnipotent and omniscient Śrī Kṛṣṇa had kept māyā
away from them?

Bābājī:Māyā is a reflected transformation of Kṛṣṇa’s
internal potency, svarūpa-śakti, and it is like a fiery
furnace where the jīvas who are not qualified for
Kṛṣṇa’s sevā are chastized and made fit for the
spiritual world. Māyā is Kṛṣṇa’s maidservant. In order
to purify the jīvas who have turned against Kṛṣṇa, she
punishes them, gives appropriate therapy, and purifies
them. The infinitesimal jīva has forgotten that he is an
eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa, and for this offense, māyā,
taking the form of a witch (piśācī), punishes him. This
material world is like a jail, and māyā is the jailer
who imprisons the estranged jīvas and punishes them. A
king constructs a prison for the benefit of his
subjects, and in the same way, Bhagavān has shown His
immense mercy towards the jīvas by making this prison-
like material world and appointing māyā as its
custodian.

Vrajanātha: If this material world is a prison, it also
requires some suitable shackles. What are they?

Bābājī:Māyā incarcerates the offensive jīvas with three
types of shackles: those made of goodness (sattva-guṇa),
those made of passion (rajo-guṇa), and those made of
ignorance (tamo-guṇa). These fetters bind the jīva,
whether his inclination is tāmasika, rājasika, or even
sāttvika. Shackles may be made of different metals –
such as gold, silver or iron – but that makes no
difference to the pain of being bound by them.

Vrajanātha: How can the shackles of māyā bind the
atomic, conscious jīvas?

Bābājī: Objects of this material world cannot touch
spiritual objects. However, as soon as the jīva develops
the conception that he is an enjoyer of māyā, his
atomic, spiritual form is covered by the subtle body
made of false ego. That is how the shackles of māyā bind
his legs. The jīvas having a sāttvika ego reside in the
higher planets and are called devatās; their legs are
bound by sāttvika shackles made of gold. The rājasika-
jīvas have a mixture of the propensities of the devatās
and of the human beings, and they are confined in
rājasika shackles made of silver. And the tāmasika
jīvas, who are mad to taste jaḍānanda (bliss derived
from dull matter), are bound in tāmasika iron shackles.

                          236
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

Once the jīvas are bound in these shackles, they cannot
leave the prison. Even though they suffer various types
of miseries, they remain in captivity.

Vrajanātha: What sort of karma (activities) do the jīvas
perform while confined in māyā’s prison?

Bābājī: Initially, the jīva performs karma to provide
himself with his desired sense pleasure, in accordance
with his material propensities. Then, he performs karma
(activity) to try and dispell the miseries that result
from being bound by the shackles of māyā.

Vrajanātha: Please explain the first type of karma in
detail.

Bābājī: The covering of the gross material body has six
stages, namely, birth, existence, growth, creating by-
products, decline and death. These six transformations
are the inherent attributes of the gross body, and
hunger and thirst are it’s deficiencies. The pious jīva
who is situated in the material body is controlled by
eating, sleeping and sensual activities, as his material
sense desires dictate. In order to enjoy material
comforts, he engages in a variety of activities (karma)
that are born of his material desires. During the course
of his lifetime, he performs ten types of purificatory
ceremonies (puṇya saṁskāras), and eighteen other
sacrificial rites prescribed in the Vedas. His intention
is to accumulate pious credits through these karmas, so
that he can enjoy material pleasures by taking birth in
a brahminical or other high-class family in this world,
and thereafter, have godly pleasures in the higher
planets. Thus, he undertakes the path of karma.

In contrast, impious conditioned jīvas take shelter of
adharma, and enjoy sense gratification sacrilegiously by
performing various types of sinful activities. Jīvas in
the first category attain the higher planets and enjoy
celestial pleasures as a result of their pious
activities. When this period of enjoyment ends ñ as it
must ñ they take birth in the material world again as
human beings or in other life-forms. Jīvas in the second
category go to hell because of their sinful activities,
and after suffering a variety of miseries there, take
birth on earth again. Thus the jīva, bound in māyā and
entangled in the cycle of karma, wanders hither and
thither seeking to enjoy sense gratification.
Intermittently, he also enjoys some temporary pleasures
as a result of pious activities (puṇya-karma), and
suffers miseries because of his pāpa (sins).

Vrajanātha: Please describe the second type of karma as
well.

Bābājī: The jīva situated in the gross body undergoes
immense suffering due to the deficiencies of the gross
body, and he performs various types of karma in an
attempt to minimize these miseries. He collects various
foods and drinks to assuage his hunger and thirst, and
he toils arduously to earn money, so that he can buy
food easily. He collects warm clothes to protect himself
from the cold, marries to satisfy his desire for sensual
pleasures, and works hard to maintain his family and

                          237
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

children and fulfill their needs. He takes medicines to
cure diseases of the gross body, fights with others, and
goes to courts of law to protect his material assets. He
indulges in various sinful activities – such as
fighting, enviousness, stealing, and other misdemeanors
– because he is controlled by the six foes, namely, kāma
(lust), krodha (anger), mada (intoxication), moha
(illusion), mātsarya (envy) and bhaya (fear). All these
activities are to alleviate his sufferings. Thus the
entire life of the bewildered jīva is wasted in trying
to fulfill his desires and avoid suffering.

Vrajanātha: Wouldn’t māyā’s purpose have been served if
she had only covered the jīva with the subtle body?

Bābājī: The gross body is also necessary, because the
subtle body cannot perform work. Desires develop in the
subtle body because of the activities that the jīva
performs in his gross body, and the jīva receives
another gross body that is suitable to fulfill those
desires.

Vrajanātha: What is the connection between karma and its
fruits? According to the Mīmāṁsā school of thought,
Īśvara cannot award the fruits of karma because He is
only an imaginary object. The followers of this school
say that performing karma produces a tattva called
apūrva, and this apūrva gives the fruits of all the
karmas. Is this true?

Bābājī: The followers of the Mīmāṁsā school do not know
the actual meaning of the Vedas. They have a very basic
understanding that the Vedas generally prescribe various
types of sacrifices, and they have concocted a
philosophy based on this, but their doctrine is not
found anywhere in the Vedas. On the contrary, the Vedas
state very clearly that Īśvara awards all fruits of
karma. For example, Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (4.6), Mundaka
Upaniṣad (3.1.1) and the Ṛg Veda (1.164.21) state:

dvā suparṇā sayujā sakhāyā

samānaṁ vṛkṣaṁ pariṣasvajāte

tayor anyaḥ pippalaṁ svādv atty

anaśnann anyo íbhicākaśīt

Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu and the jīva are residing in this
temporary body, like two friendly birds in a pippala
tree. Of these two birds, one ñ the jīva ñ tastes the
fruits of the tree according to his karma, while the
other ñ Paramātmā ñ does not taste the fruits, but
simply observes as a witness.

The purport of this śloka is that this saṁsāra (material
world or material body) is like a pippala tree in which
two birds are perched. One of these is the conditioned
jīva, and the other is his friend, Īśvara (Paramātmā).
The first bird tastes the fruits of the tree, while the
other bird simply watches him. This means that the jīva
who is bound by māyā performs karma and enjoys the
fruits that Īśvara, the Lord of māyā, awards according
to the jīvaískarma. This pastime of Śrī Bhagavān

                             238
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

continues until the jīva turns towards Him. Now, where
is the apūrva of the followers of Mīmāṁsā philosophy
here? Think about this yourself. Godless doctrines can
never be complete and perfect in all respects.

Vrajanātha: Why have you said that karma is
beginningless?

Bābājī: The root of all karma is the desire to perform
karma, and the root cause of this desire is avidyā
(ignorance). Avidyā is forgetfulness of the truth: “I am
an eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa,” and it does not have its
origin in mundane time. Rather, it originates in the
taṭastha junction of the spiritual and material worlds.
That is why karma does not have its beginning in mundane
time, and is therefore called beginningless.

Vrajanātha: What is the difference between māyā and
avidyā?

Bābājī:Māyā is a śakti of Kṛṣṇa. Śrī Kṛṣṇa has created
the material universe through her, and has instigated
her to purify the jīvas who are averse to Him. Māyā has
two aspects: avidyā and pradhāna. Avidyā is related to
the jīvas, whereas pradhāna is related to inert matter.
The entire inert, mundane world has originated from
pradhāna, whereas the jīva’s desire to perform material
activity originates in avidyā. There are also two other
divisions of māyā, namely vidyā (knowledge) and avidyā
(forgetfulness), both of which are related to the jīva.
Avidyā binds the jīva, whereas vidyā liberates him. The
faculty of avidyā keeps working as long as the aparādhi-
jīva continues to forget Kṛṣṇa, but when he becomes
favorable to Kṛṣṇa, this is replaced by the faculty of
vidyā. Brahma-jñāna and so on are only particular
activities of the tendency for knowledge (vidyā-vṛtti).
When discrimination first develops, the jīva tries to
engage in auspicious activities, and when discrimination
has matured, spiritual knowledge manifests. Avidyā
covers the jīva, and vidyā removes that covering.

Vrajanātha: What is the function of the pradhāna?

Bābājī: When Īśvara’s endeavor, represented by Time
(kāla), stimulates māyā-prakṛti, it first creates the
unmanifest aggregate of the material elements (mahat-
tattva). Matter (dravya) is created by the stimulation
of the faculty of māyā called pradhāna. False ego
(ahaṅkāra) is born from a transformation of mahat-
tattva, and space (ākāśa) is created from a tāmasika
transformation of the false ego. Air is created from a
transformation of space, and fire is created from a
transformation of air. Water is then created by the
transformation of fire, and earth is created by the
transformation of water. This is how the material
elements are created. They are called the five gross
elements (pañca-mahā-bhūtas).

Now hear how the five sense objects (pañca-tanmātra) are
created. Kāla (time) stimulates the faculty of prakṛti
called avidyā and creates the tendencies within the
mahat-tattva for karma and jñāna. When the karma
propensity of mahat-tattva is transformed, it creates
knowledge (jñāna) and activities (kriyā) from sattva and

                          239
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

rajo-guṇas respectively. Mahat-tattva is also
transformed to become ahaṅkāra. Intelligence (buddhi) is
then created from a transformation of ahaṅkāra. Sound
(śabda) which is the property of space (ākāśa) is
created from the transformation of buddhi. The property
of touch (sparśa) is created from the transformation of
sound, and it includes both touch, quality of air, and
sound, quality of space. Prāṇa (life-air), oja (energy),
and bala (strength) are created from this quality of
touch. From a transformation of touch the property of
form and color in illuminating objects is generated.
Fire has three qualities, namely, form, touch and sound.
When this quality is transformed by time, it is
transformed into the four qualities, taste (rasa), form,
touch and sound in water. When they are further
transformed, the result is the five qualities in earth
which are smell (gandha), taste, form, touch and sound.
All the activities of transformation take place by the
appropriate aid of the puruṣa in His form of
consciousness (caitanya).

There are three kinds of ahaṅkāra: vaikārika (sāttvika),
taijasa (rājasika), and tamas. The material elements are
born from sāttvika-ahaṅkāra, and the ten senses are born
from rajasika- ahaṅkāra. There are two types of senses:
those for acquiring knowledge (jñāna-indriya) and the
working senses (karma-indriya). The eyes, ears, nose,
tongue and skin are the five senses for acquiring
knowledge; and speech, hands, feet, anus and genital are
the five working senses. Even if the five gross elements
(pañca-mahā-bhūta) combine with the subtle elements
(sūkṣma-bhūta), there is still no activity unless the
atomic, conscious jīva enters into them. As soon as the
aṇu-cit-jīva, who is a localized particle within the ray
of Bhagavānís glance, enters into the body made of mahā-
bhūta and sūkṣma-bhūta, all the activities are set in
motion. The sāttvika and rājasikaguṇas become fit to
function when they combine with tāmasika objects that
are a transformation of pradhāna. One should deliberate
on the functions of avidyā and pradhāna in this way.

There are twenty-four elements of māyā: the five gross
elements (mahā-bhūtas), namely, earth, water, fire, air
and space; the five sense-objects, namely smell, taste,
form, touch and sound; the five senses for acquiring
knowledge; the five working senses; mind; intelligence;
citta; and ahaṅkāra. These are the twenty-four elements
of material nature. The atomic conscious jīva who enters
into the body made of twenty-four elements is the
twenty-fifth element, and Paramātmā Īśvara is the
twenty-sixth.

Vrajanātha: Please tell me, how much of the human body,
whose size is three and a half cubits (seven spans) is
occupied by the subtle cover, and how much by the gross
cover; and in which part of the body does the conscious
jīva reside?

Bābājī: The five gross elements, the five sense-objects
(pañca-tanmātra), and the ten senses altogether comprise
the gross body. The four elements – mind, intelligence,
citta, and ahaṅkāra – form the subtle body, or liṅga-
śarīra. The conscious jīva is the one who falsely
relates to the body and objects related to the body as

                          240
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

‘I’ and ‘mine’, and due to that misidentification has
forgotten his true nature. He is extremely subtle and
beyond mundane space, time and qualities. In spite of
being very subtle, he pervades the entire body. Just as
the pleasurable effect of a minute drop of hari-candana
spreads all over the body when it is applied to one
part, so the atomic jīva, too, is the knower (kṣetra-
jña) of the whole body, and the experiencer of its pains
and pleasures.

Vrajanātha: If the jīva performs karma, and experiences
pains and pleasures, where is the question of Īśvara’s
active involvement?

Bābājī:Jīva is the instrumental cause, and when he
performs karma, Īśvara acts as the efficient cause and
arranges for the fruits of the karma that the jīva is
eligible to enjoy. Īśvara also arranges for the future
karma for which the jīva has become eligible. In short,
Īśvara awards fruits, while the jīva enjoys them.

Vrajanātha: How many types of baddha-jīvas are there?

Bābājī: There are five kinds, namely, those whose
consciousness is completely covered (ācchādita-cetana);
those whose consciousness is shrunken or contracted
(saṅkucita-cetana); those whose consciousness is budding
slightly (mukulita-cetana); those with developed
consciousness (vikasita-cetana); and those with fully
developed consciousness (pūrṇa-vikasita-cetana).

Vrajanātha: Which jīvas have completely covered
consciousness?

Bābājī: These are jīvas with the bodies of trees,
creepers, grass, stone and so on, who have forgotten
service to Kṛṣṇa, and are so engrossed in the material
qualities of māyā that they have no trace of their
sentient nature. There is only a slight indication of
their sentience through the six transformations. This is
the lowest stage of the jīva’s fall, and this fact is
corroborated by the epic stories of Ahalyā, Yamalarjuna,
and Sapta-tāla. One only reaches this stage because of
some grave offense, and one can only be delivered from
it by Kṛṣṇa’s mercy.

Vrajanātha: Which jīvas have contracted consciousness?

Bābājī: Beasts, birds, snakes, fish, aquatics,
mosquitoes, and various similar creatures have shrunken
or contracted consciousness. The consciousness of these
jīvas is apparent to some degree, unlike that of jīvas
in the previous group, whose consciousness is completely
covered. For example, these jīvas perform activities
such as eating, sleeping, free movement, and quarrelling
with others for things that they consider their
property. They also show fear, and they become angry
when they see injustice. However, they have no knowledge
of the spiritual world. Even monkeys have some
scientific understanding in their mischievous minds, for
they have some idea of what will or will not happen in
the future, and they also have the quality of being
grateful. Some animals have good knowledge about various
objects, too, but despite all these attributes, they do

                          241
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

not have a propensity for inquiring about Bhagavān, so
their consciousness is contracted. It is said in śāstra
that Mahārāja Bharata still had knowledge of the names
of Bhagavān, even while he was in the body of a deer,
but this is unusual; it only happens in special cases.
Bharata and King Nṛga had to take birth as animals
because of their offenses, and they were delivered when
their offense was nullified by Bhagavān’s mercy.

Vrajanātha: Which jīvas have slightly budding
consciousness (mukulita-cetana)?

Bābājī: Conditioned jīvas with human bodies fall into
three categories: those with slightly budding
consciousness (mukulita-cetana), those with developed
consciousness (vikasita-cetana), and those with fully
developed consciousness (pūrṇa-vikasita-cetana).
Generally, the human race can be divided into five
groups: 1) immoral atheists, 2) moral atheists, 3) moral
theists, who have both morals and faith in Īśvara, 4)
those who are engaged in sādhana-bhakti, and 5) those
who are engaged in bhāva-bhakti.

Those who are knowingly or unknowingly atheists are
either immoral or moral atheists. When a moral person
develops a little faith in Īśvara, he is called a moral
theist. Those who develop interest in sādhana-bhakti
according to the tenets of śāstra are called sādhana-
bhaktas, and those who have developed some unalloyed
love for Īśvara are called bhāva-bhaktas. Both immoral
and moral atheists have slightly budding consciousness;
moral theists and sādhana-bhaktas have developed
consciousness; and the bhāva-bhaktas have fully
developed consciousness.

Vrajanātha: How long do the bhāva-bhaktas stay bound in
māyā?

Bābājī: I will answer that question when I explain the
seventh śloka of Daśa-mūla. Now it’s quite late, so
kindly return to your home.

Vrajanātha returned home, contemplating all the tattvas
he had heard.



Thus ends the Sixteenth Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled

“Prameya: Jīvas possessed by Māyā”




Chapter 17

Prameya: The Jīvas Free from Māyā



Vrajanātha’s grandmother completed all the arrangements

                          242
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

for his marriage, and in the evening she explained
everything to him. Vrajanātha simply took his meal in
silence and made no reply that day. He lay awake on his
bed late that night, deep in thought about the state of
the pure spirit soul. Meanwhile, his elderly grandmother
was busy trying to find ways of convincing him to agree
to the marriage.

Just then, Vrajanātha’s maternal cousin, Veṇī-mādhava,
arrived. The girl that Vrajanātha was supposed to marry
was Veṇī-mādhavaís paternal cousin, and Vijaya-
Vidyāratna had sent him to finalize the arrangements.

Veṇī-mādhava inquired, “What’s the matter, Grandmother?
Why are you delaying in arranging brother Vrajaís
marriage?”

The grandmother replied in a rather anxious voice, “My
son, you are an intelligent boy. Perhaps he will change
his mind if you speak to him. All my efforts have been
in vain.”

Veṇī-mādhavaís character was clearly proclaimed by his
short stature, small neck, black complexion, and his
eyes, which blinked frequently. He liked to pry into
everything that was going on, rather than taking care of
his own business, but his involvement in othersí affairs
was never particularly useful. After listening to the
old lady, he frowned slightly, then boasted, “This is no
problem. I just need your permission. Veṇī-mādhava can
accomplish anything. You know me quite well. I can make
money just by counting the waves. Let me discuss this
with him just once. And if I succeed, then youíll treat
me to a nice feast with pūrīs and kacorīs?”

“Vrajanātha has taken his meal, and heís asleep now,”
said Grandmother.

“All right, Iíll come in the morning and put things in
order,” replied Veṇī-mādhava, and returned home.

The next day, he returned early in the morning carrying
a loṭā in his hand, and completed his morning ablutions.
When Vrajanātha saw him, he was a little surprised, and
said, “Brother! How have you come so early in the
morning?”

Veṇī-mādhava answered, “Dādā, you have been studying and
teaching nyāya-śāstra for a long time now. You are the
son of the Paṇḍita Harinātha Cūḍāmaṇi, and you have
become famous all over the country. You are the only
surviving male member of the house, and if you donít
have any heirs, who do you suppose will take care of
this big house of yours? Brother, we have a request.
Please get married.”

Vrajanātha replied, “Brother, donít give me unnecessary
trouble. Nowadays Iím accepting the shelter of Śrī
Gaura-sundaraís bhaktas, and I donít have any desire to
get involved in worldly affairs. I feel real peace in
the company of the Vaiṣṇavas in Māyāpura, and I donít
find any attraction for this world. I will either accept
sannyāsa, or spend my life in the shelter of the
Vaiṣṇavasí lotus feet. I have expressed my heart to you

                          243
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

because I know that you are my close friend, but donít
disclose this to anyone else.”

Veṇī-mādhava understood that nothing but trickery could
change Vrajanāthaís mind, so he cleverly curbed his
feelings, and in order to create a particular impression
he said, “I have always remained your assistant in
whatever you have done. I used to carry your books when
you were studying in the Sanskrit school, so I will
carry your staff and water-pot when you accept sannyāsa.
“ “

It is difficult to understand the minds of wicked
people; they have two tongues, and they say one thing
with one, and exactly the opposite with the other. They
are bandits in the garb of saints, carrying the name of
Śrī Rāma in the mouth, and a knife under the armpit.

Vrajanātha was a simple person. Warming to Veṇī-
mādhavaís sweet words, he said, “Brother, I have always
regarded you as my dear friend. Grandmother is just an
old woman, and she doesnít understand serious matters.
She is very enthusiastic to drown me in this ocean of
worldly affairs by getting me married to some girl. It
will be a relief if you can change her mind and somehow
dissuade her; I will always be indebted to you.”

Veṇī-mādhava replied, “No one will dare to oppose your
desire as long as Sharmarāma is living. Dādā, you will
see what I am capable of. But just let me know one
thing, why have you developed such hatred towards this
world? Who is advising you to cultivate such feelings of
renunciation?”

Vrajanātha explained about his renunciation,   and said,
“There is one elderly and experienced bābājī   called
Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī in Māyāpura. He is my   instructor,
and I go every day after dusk to the shelter   of his feet
to find relief from the burning fire of this   material
world. He is very merciful to me.”

The evil Veṇī-mādhava started thinking, “Now I
understand brother Vrajaís weakness. He has to be
brought back to the right track by deception, force or
skill.” Outwardly he said, “Brother, donít worry. I am
going home now, but I will gradually change
Grandmotherís mind.”

Veṇī-mādhava pretended to take the road that led to his
home, but instead he took another way, and reached
Śrīvāsāṅgana in Māyāpura. There he sat on the raised
platform under the bakula tree and began to admire the
opulences of the Vaiṣṇavas. “These Vaiṣṇavas are
actually enjoying the world. They have such beautiful
houses and lovely kuñjas. This is such a nice dias in a
wonderful courtyard.” In each of the kuṭīras, a Vaiṣṇava
sat chanting hari-nāma on his beads. They seemed quite
content, like the bulls of religion. The women of the
neighboring villages, who came to bathe in the Gaṅgā, of
their own accord supplied the Vaiṣṇavas with fruits,
vegetables, water and various eatables. Veṇī-mādhava
thought, “The brāhmaṇas have systematized karma-kāṇḍa to
receive these facilities, but instead these groups of
bābājīs are enjoying the cream. All glories to Kali-

                          244
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

yuga! These disciples of Kali are having a wonderful
time. Oh! My birth in a high brāhmaṇa family is useless!
No one even cares about us any more, what to speak of
offering us fruits and water. These Vaiṣṇavas even
condemn learned brāhmaṇas, and abuse and insult us by
calling us lowly and foolish. Brother Vraja fits this
description quite well though; although heís such a
well-educated man, he seems to have sold himself to
these sly loin-cloth people. I, Veṇī-mādhava, will
reform Vrajanātha and these bābājīs as well.”

Thinking like this, Veṇī-mādhava entered one of the
kuṭīras, which happened to be the one in which Śrī
Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī was sitting on a mat made of
banana leaves, chanting his hari-nāma.

A personís character is evident from his face, and the
ageing bābājī could understand that Kali personified had
entered in the form of this son of a brāhmaṇa. Vaiṣṇavas
consider themselves lower than a blade of grass. They
offer respect to those who insult them, and they pray
for the well being of an opponent, even if he tortures
them. Accordingly, Bābājī Mahārāja respectfully offered
Veṇī-mādhava a seat. Veṇī-mādhava had no Vaiṣṇava
qualities at all, so after sitting down, he offered his
blessings to Bābājī Mahārāja, considering himself above
all Vaiṣṇava etiquette.

“Bābā, what is your name? What brings you here?”
inquired Bābājī Mahāśaya informally. Veṇī-mādhava became
furious by being addressed informally, and he said
angrily, “O Bābājī, can you become equal to the
brāhmaṇas just by wearing a kaupīna (loincloth)? Never
mind! Just tell me, do you know Vrajanātha Nyāya-
pañcānana?

Bābājī: (understanding the reason for his annoyance)
Please excuse this old man; don’t become offended by my
words. Yes, Vrajanātha comes here sometimes, by his own
mercy.

Veṇī-mādhava: Don’t think that he’s a simpleton. He
comes here with ulterior motives. He is being polite at
first, to gain your confidence. The brāhmaṇas of
Belpukura are extremely annoyed at your behavior, and
they have consulted with each other and decided to send
Vrajanātha to you. You are an old man. Just be careful.
I will keep coming from time to time, to inform you how
their conspiracy progresses. Don’t tell him about me;
otherwise you will run into even deeper trouble. I will
take leave for today.

So saying, Veṇī-mādhava got up and returned to his home.
Later that afternoon, while Vrajanātha sat on the
verandah after his meal, Veṇī-mādhava suddenly appeared,
as if from nowhere, sat next to him, and struck up a
conversation. “Brother, I went to Māyāpura for some
business today,” he began. “There I saw an old man,
maybe Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī. We were talking about
things in general, and then the conversation turned to
you. The things he said about you! I have never heard
such repulsive things being spoken about any brāhmaṇa.
In the end he said, ëI will bring him down from his high
brahminical status by feeding him leftovers from many

                          245
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

low-caste people.í Fie on him! It is not proper for a
learned man like you to associate with such a person.
You will ruin the high prestige of the brāhmaṇas if you
act like this.”

Vrajanātha was astounded to hear Veṇī-mādhava say all
this. For some unknown reason, his faith and respect for
the Vaiṣṇavas and old Bābājī Mahārāja only doubled, and
he said gravely, “Brother, I am busy at present. You go
now; I will hear everything from you tomorrow, and make
a decision then.”

Veṇī-mādhava went away. Vrajanātha now became fully
aware of Veṇī-mādhavaís two-tongued nature. He was well
versed in the nyāya-śāstra, and although he had a
natural dislike for wickedness, the thought that Veṇī-
mādhava would help him on the path to sannyāsa had
induced Vrajanātha to be friendly towards him. Now,
however, he understood that all Veṇī-mādhavaís sweet
words had been for a particular motive. After further
thought, Vrajanātha realized that Veṇī-mādhava was
acting deceitfully because he was involved in the
marriage proposal. That must be why he had gone to
Māyāpura ñ to sow the seed of some secret plot. He
prayed in his mind, “O Bhagavān! Let my faith in the
lotus feet of my Gurudeva and the Vaiṣṇavas remain firm.
May it never be reduced by the disturbance of such
impure people.” He remained absorbed in these thoughts
until evening. Then he started out for Śrīvāsāṅgana,
arriving there deep in anxiety.

Back in Māyāpura, after Veṇī-mādhava had left, Bābājī
thought, “This man is certainly a brahma-rākṣasa.

rākṣasāḥ kalim āśritya jāyante brahma-yoniṣu

Taking shelter of Kali-yuga, rākṣasas take birth in
brāhmaṇa families.

“This statement of śāstra certainly holds true for that
person. His face clearly shows his pride in his high
caste, his false ego, his envy of Vaiṣṇavas, and his
religious hypocrisy. His short neck, his eyes, and his
deceptive way of talking actually represent his internal
state of mind. Ah, this man is a complete asura by
nature, whereas Vrajanātha is such a sweet-natured
person. O Kṛṣṇa! O Gaurāṅga! Never give me association
of such a person. I must warn Vrajanātha today.”

As soon as Vrajanātha reached the kuṭīra, Bābājī called
out to him affectionately, “Come, Bābā, come!” and
embraced him. Vrajanāthaís throat choked with emotion,
and tears started flowing from his eyes as he fell down
at Bābājīís feet. Bābājī picked him up very
affectionately and said gently, “A black-complexioned
brāhmaṇa came here this morning. He said some agitating
things and then went away again. Do you know him?”

Vrajanātha: Prabhu, your good self told me earlier that
there are different kinds of jīvas in this world. Some
of them are so envious that without any cause, they find
satisfaction in troubling other jīvas. Our brother,
Veṇī-mādhava, is one of the leaders in that category. I
will be glad if we don’t discuss him further. It is his

                          246
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

very nature to criticize you to me and me to you, and to
cause disputes between us by manufacturing false
accusations. I hope you didn’t pay any attention to what
he said.

Bābājī:Hā Kṛṣṇa! Hā Gaurāṅga! I have been serving the
Vaiṣṇavas for many days now, and by their mercy, I have
received the power to tell the difference between a
Vaiṣṇava and a non-Vaiṣṇava. You don’t need to say
anything to me about this.

Vrajanātha: Please forget all this and tell me how a
jīva can become free from the clutches of māyā.

Bābājī: You will get your answer in the seventh śloka of
Daśa-mūla:

yadā bhrāmaṁ bhrāmaṁ hari-rasa-galad-vaiṣṇava-janaṁ

kadācit saṁpaśyan tad-anugamane syād ruci-yutaḥ

tadā kṛṣṇāvṛttyā tyajati śanakair māyika-daśāṁ

svarūpaṁ vibhrāṇo vimala-rasa-bhogaṁ sa kurute

When, in the course of wandering amongst the higher and
lower species in the material world, a jīva is able to
behold a Vaiṣṇava absorbed in the flowing rasa of śrī-
hari-bhakti, taste arises in his heart for following the
Vaiṣṇava way of life. By chanting śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma, he
gradually becomes free from his conditioning. Step by
step, he then gains his intrinsic, cinmaya-svarūpa
(transcendental form), and becomes qualified to taste
the pure and spiritual rasa of direct service to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.

Vrajanātha: I would like to hear some evidence from the
Vedas to verify this.

Bābājī: It is said in the Upaniṣads,

samāne vṛkṣe puruṣo nimagno

ínīśayā śocati muhyamānaḥ

juṣṭaṁ yadā paśyaty anyam īśam

asya mahimānam eti vīta-śokaḥ

The jīva and the indwelling Paramātmā both reside in the
body, like two birds in the same tree. The jīva is sunk
in the bodily conception of life because of his
attachment to material sense enjoyment. Bewildered by
māyā, he cannot find any means of deliverance, and thus
he laments and falls down. When the jīva has darśana of
the other person within his heart ñ namely the Supreme
Lord, who is served eternally by His unalloyed bhaktas ñ
he witnesses Kṛṣṇaís uncommon glories. He then becomes
free from all lamentation, and attains his glorious
position as Kṛṣṇaís servant. (Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad 3.1.2 and
Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 4.7)

Vrajanātha: This śloka states that when the jīva sees
the worshipable Lord, he becomes free forever from all

                            247
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017

anxieties, and directly perceives His magnificence. Does
this imply liberation?

Bābājī: Liberation means to be released from the
clutches of māyā. Only those who have the association of
saintly people attain this liberation, but the real
subject of research is the glorious position that one
receives after attaining liberation.

muktir hitvānyathā-rūpaṁ svarūpeṇa vyavasthitiḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.10.6)

The jīva in his original, constitutional form is a pure
servant of Kṛṣṇa. When he falls down into the darkness
of nescience, he has to accept gross and subtle material
bodies. Liberation means to abandon these extraneous
forms completely and to be situated in oneís original,
spiritual svarūpa.

This half śloka explains that liberation means to
abandon these other forms and to be situated in oneís
svarūpa. Attaining oneís constitutional position is the
necessity for the jīva. The work of liberation is
complete the moment the jīva is released from the
clutches of māyā. Then, so many activities begin once he
attains his natural, constitutional position. This is
the fundermental necessity of attainment, mūla-prayojana
of the jīva. Freedom from intense misery can be called
liberation, but following liberation there is another
stage, in which a person achieves spiritual happiness
(cit-sukha). That state is described in the Chāndogya
Upaniṣad (8.12.3):

evam evaiṣa samprasādo ‘smāc charīrāt samutthaya

paraṁ jyoti-rūpa-sampadya svena rūpenābhiniṣpadyate

sa uttamaḥ puruṣaḥ sa tatra paryeti jakṣan krīḍan
ramamāṇaḥ

When the jīva achieves liberation, he transcends the
gross and subtle material bodies and is situated in his
own non-material, spiritual state, complete with his
spiritual effulgence. He then becomes transcendentally
situated. In that spiritual atmosphere, he becomes
absorbed in enjoyment (bhoga), activities (krīḍā) and
bliss (ānanda).

Vrajanātha: What are the symptoms of those who are
liberated from māyā?

Bābājī: They have eight symptoms, which Chāndogya
Upaniṣad (8.7.1) describes as follows:

ya ātmāpahata-pāpmā vijaro vimṛtyur viśoko ëvijighatso
ëpipāsaḥ satya-kāmaḥ satya-saṅkalpaḥ so ënveṣṭavyaḥ

The liberated soul has eight qualities: He is freed from
all sinful activity, as well as the addiction to sinful
activities that arises because of the nescience of māyā;
he is not subject to the miseries of old age; he always
remains young and fresh, and has no tendency to decay;
he never comes to an end, or dies; he is never morose;

                             248
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

he has no sensual desires; he has a natural inclination
towards serving Kṛṣṇa, with no other desires; and all of
his desires become realized. These eight qualities are
absent from the baddha-jīva.

Vrajanātha: It is said in the Daśa-mūla śloka, “The good
fortune of the jīva who is wandering aimlessly in the
material world arises when he meets a rasika Vaiṣṇava
who relishes the nectar of Hari.“ One might raise the
objection that one could eventually attain hari-bhakti
by performing pious activities, such as aṣṭāṅga-yoga and
cultivating brahma-jñāna.

Bābājī: These are Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s own words:

na rodhayati māṁ yogo na sāṅkhyaṁ dharma eva ca

na svādhyāyas tapas tyāgo neṣṭā-pūrttaṁ na dakṣiṇā

vratāni yajñāś chandāṁsi tīrthāni niyamā yamāḥ

yathāvarundhe sat-saṅgaḥ sarva-saṅgāpaho hi mām

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.12.1-2)

Śrī Bhagavān said, “I am not controlled by those who
perform yoga, study sāṅkhya philosophy, perform
religious duties and pious activities, study the Vedas,
perform penances and austerities, practice renunciation
or accept sannyāsa, perform sacrifice and welfare
activities, give donations in charity, practice fasting
and other vows, perform yajña, chant confidential
mantras, go on pilgrimage, and follow all the rules and
regulations for spiritual life. However, one who accepts
sat-saṅga, which destroys all material attachments, can
control Me. How much can I say? Aṣṭāṅga-yoga can
slightly satisfy Me indirectly, but sādhu-saṅga controls
Me completely.”

It is also stated in Hari-bhakti-sudhodhaya (8.51):

yasya yat-saṅgatiḥ puṁso maṇivat syāt sa tad-gunaḥ

sva-kularddhyaitato dhīmān sva-yūthāny eva saṁśrayet

Just as a jewel or crystal reflects the color of the
object with which it is in contact, so a person develops
qualities according to the company he keeps.

Therefore, by keeping association with pure sādhus, one
can become a pure sādhu. Thus the association of pure
sādhus is the root cause of all good fortune.

In the śāstras, the word niḥsaṅga means ëto live in
solitude.í This implies that we should only live in the
association of bhaktas. Niḥsaṅga means to leave all
other association and to take the association of
bhaktas. Even unintentional association with saintly
people brings good fortune for the jīva.

saṅgo yaḥ saṁsṛter hetur asatsu vihito ídhiyā

sa eva sādhuṣu kṛto niḥsaṅgatvāya kalpate


                          249
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.23.55)

The association of materialists is the cause of bondage
in the material world, even though one may not know that
this is so. Similarly, association with saintly people,
even if it happens by chance or unknowingly, is called
niḥsaṅga.

It is said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.5.32):

naiṣāṁ matis tāvad urukramāṅghriṁ

spṛśaty anarthāpagamo yad-arthaḥ

mahīyasāṁ pāda-rajo-íbhiṣekaṁ

niṣkiñcanānāṁ na vṛṇīta yāvat

The lotus feet of Urukrama, who is glorified for His
uncommon activities, destroy all anarthas in the heart.
However, those who are very materialistic cannot be
attached to His lotus feet until they smear their bodies
with the dust from the lotus feet of great souls who are
absorbed in bhagavat-prema and who are completely freed
from material attachments.

And Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.48.31) states:

na hy am-mayāni tīrthāni na devā mṛc-chilā-mayāḥ

te punanty uru-kālena darśanād eva sādhavaḥ

One is purified by the holy places where rivers such as
the Gaṅgā flow and by the stone and clay deities of
devatās only after rendering them reverential service
over a long period of time. However, when one has
darśana of a śuddha-bhakta, he is purified immediately.

That is why Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.51.53) also says:

bhavāpavargo bhramato yadā bhavej

janasya tarhy acyuta sat-samāgamaḥ

sat-saṅgamo yarhi tadaiva sad-gatau

parāvareśe tvayi jāyate matiḥ

O infallible Lord! The jīva has been wandering in this
world of birth and death since time without beginning.
When the time comes for him to leave this cycle of life
and death, he associates with Your śuddha-bhaktas. From
the moment that he achieves this association, his mind
becomes firmly fixed on You, who are the sole and
supreme shelter of the surrendered bhaktas, the
controller of all, and the cause of all causes.

Bābā, since time without beginning the jīva who is
eternally bound by māyā has been moving in the universe,
taking birth according to his karma, sometimes as a
deva, and sometimes in the various animal species. From
the time that he attains the association of saintly
people because of his past pious activities (sukṛti), he
fixes his mind very strongly on Kṛṣṇa, the controller of

                          250
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

all.

Vrajanātha: You have said that the association of
śuddha-bhaktas is achieved by sukṛti. What is sukṛti? Is
it karma or knowledge?

Bābājī: The śāstras say that there are two types of
auspicious karma (śubha-karma) that are in accordance
with Vedic injunctions. One causes the appearance of
bhakti, while the other gives irrelevant, inferior
results. Performance of pious activities such as nitya
and naimittika-karma, studying sāṅkhya, and cultivating
jñāna all give irrelevant results. The only auspicious
activities that give bhakti as an end result (bhakti-
prada-sukṛti) are associating with śuddha-bhaktas and
with places, times and things that bestow bhakti.

When enough bhakti-prada-sukṛti has been accumulated, it
gives rise to kṛṣṇa-bhakti. The other type of sukṛti,
however, is consumed after one enjoys its results, so it
does not accumulate to give any permanent result. All
the pious deeds in the world, such as charity, only
result in achieving the objects of sense gratification.
The sukṛti of impersonal speculation results in
impersonal liberation. Neither of these kinds of sukṛti
can give devotional service to Śrī Bhagavān.

Activities such as sādhu-saṅga and observing Ekādaśī,
Janmāṣṭamī, and Gaura-pūrṇimā all help to develop oneís
saintly qualities. Tulasī, mahā-prasāda, śrī mandira,
holy places, and articles used by sādhus (sādhu-vastu)
are all auspicious; touching them or obtaining their
darśana are pious deeds that give rise to bhakti.

Vrajanātha: Can a person obtain bhakti if he is
tormented by material problems and takes shelter of Śrī
Hari’s lotus feet in full knowledge to become relieved
of his problems?

Bābājī: The jīva, harassed by the afflictions of the
goddess of illusion, may somehow understand through
discriminating intelligence that worldly activities are
simply troublesome, and that his only solace is Kṛṣṇa’s
lotus feet and the feet of His śuddha-bhaktas. Knowing
this, he takes shelter of His lotus feet, and the first
step in this process of surrender is to accept the
shelter of śuddha-bhaktas. This is the principal,
bhakti-prada-sukṛti, through which he obtains the lotus
feet of Bhagavān. Whatever renunciation and wisdom he
had originally were just a secondary means of obtaining
bhakti. Thus, the association of bhaktas is the only way
to attain bhakti. There is no other recourse.

Vrajanātha: If karma, jñāna, renunciation and
discrimination are secondary ways of achieving bhakti,
what is the objection to calling them bhakti-prada-
sukṛti?

Bābājī: There is a strong objection: they bind one to
inferior, temporary results. The performance of karma
has no permanent result, but it binds the jīva to the
objects of sense gratification. Renunciation and
empirical knowledge can only lead the jīva as far as
knowledge of brahma, and this conception of an

                          251
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

impersonal supreme principle prevents him from attaining
Bhagavān’s lotus feet. Consequently, these cannot be
called bhakti-prada-sukṛti. It is true that they
sometimes take one to bhakti, but that is not the usual
course of events. Sādhu-saṅga, on the other hand,
definitely does not award any secondary benefit, but
forcibly brings the jīva towards prema. It is explained
in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.25.25):

satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-samvido

bhavanti hṛt-karṇa-rasāyanāḥ kathāḥ

taj-joṣaṇād āśv apavarga-vartmani

śraddhā ratir bhaktir anukramiṣyati

In the association of śuddha-bhaktas, the recitation and
discussion of My glorious activities and pastimes are
pleasing to both the heart and the ears. By cultivating
knowledge in this way, one becomes established on the
path of liberation and progressively attains śraddhā,
then bhāva, and finally prema-bhakti.

Vrajanātha: I understand that sādhu-saṅga is the only
sukṛti that gives rise to bhakti. One has to listen to
hari-kathā from the mouths of sādhus, and thereafter one
obtains bhakti. Is this the proper sequence to progress
in bhakti?

Bābājī: I will explain the proper way of progressing in
bhakti. Listen attentively. Only by good fortune does
the jīva who is wandering throughout the universe
achieve the sukṛti that gives rise to bhakti. One of the
many limbs of pure bhakti may touch a jīva’s life. For
example, he may fast on Ekādaśī, or touch or visit the
holy places of Bhagavān’s pastimes, or serve a guest who
happens to be a śuddha-bhakta, or have the chance to
hear hari-nāma or hari-kathā from the lotus mouth of an
akiñcana-bhakta. If someone desires material benefits or
impersonal liberation from such activities, the
resultant sukṛti does not lead to devotional service.
However, if an innocent person performs any of these
activities, either unknowingly or out of habit, without
desiring material sense gratification or impersonal
liberation, these activities lead to the accumulation of
bhakti-prada-sukṛti.

After accumulating such sukṛti for many births, it
becomes concentrated enough to give faith in pure
bhakti, and when faith in bhakti is undivided, one
develops a desire to associate with śuddha-bhaktas. By
association, one gradually becomes engaged in performing
sādhana and bhajana, and this leads to the removal of
anarthas, in proportion to the purity of chanting. When
anarthas are removed, the previous faith is purified
further to become niṣṭhā (firm faith). This firm faith
is also purified to become ruci (spiritual taste), and
by the saundarya (beauty) of bhakti, this ruci is
strengthened and takes the form of āsakti
(transcendental attachment). Transcendental attachment
matures into rati or bhāva. When rati combines with the
appropriate ingredients it becomes rasa. This is the
step-by-step progression in the development of kṛṣṇa-

                          252
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

prema.

The principal idea is that when people with sufficient
sukṛti have darśana of śuddha-bhaktas, they develop an
inclination to proceed on the path of bhakti. One
associates with a śuddha-bhakta by chance, and this
leads to initial śraddhā, whereupon he gets the
association of the bhaktas a second time. The result of
the first association is śraddhā, which can also be
termed surrender (śaraṇāgati). The initial sādhu-saṅga
is brought about by contact with holy places, auspicious
times and paraphernalia, and recipients of Śrī Hariís
grace, all of which are beloved by Him. These lead to
faith in His shelter. The symptoms of the development of
such faith are described in the Bhagavad-gītā (18.66):

sarva-dharmān parityajya

mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo

mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ

Here the words sarva-dharmān imply worldly duties
(smārta-dharma), aṣṭāṅga-yoga, sāṅkhya-yoga, jñāna and
renunciation. The jīva can never achieve his ultimate
spiritual goal by practicing all these dharmas, which is
why the instruction here is to give them up. Śrī Kṛṣṇa
says, “My form of pure and condensed sac-cid-ānanda
appearing as Vraja-vilāsī (the performer of wonderful
pastimes in Vraja) is the only shelter for the jīvas.
When one understands this, he gives up all desire for
bhukti (material sense enjoyment) and mukti (impersonal
liberation), and with undivided attention, takes shelter
of Me.” This is known as pravṛtti-rūpa-śraddhā (the
exclusive tendency to engage in Kṛṣṇaís service). When
such faith dawns in the jīvaís heart, with tears in his
eyes he resolves to become a follower of a Vaiṣṇava
sādhu. The Vaiṣṇava of whom he takes shelter at that
point is the guru.

Vrajanātha: How many types of anarthas does a jīva have?

Bābājī: There are four types of anarthas: 1) svarūpa-
bhrama (being in illusion about one’s spiritual
identity); 2) asat-tṛṣṇā (thirst for temporary material
enjoyment); 3) aparādha (offenses); and 4) hṛdaya-
daurbalya (weakness of the heart).

The jīvaís first anartha, namely svarūpa-bhrama occures
when he forgets the understanding that, “I ñ the pure,
spiritual spark ñ am Kṛṣṇaís servant,” and is carried
far away from his original, spiritual position. When the
jīva considers that he and his dead material possessions
are ëIí and ëmineí, he develops three types of asat-
tṛṣṇā. These are the desire for a son, for wealth, and
for celestial pleasures. There are ten types of
aparādha, which I will discuss later. The jīva is grief-
stricken because of hṛdaya-daurbalya. These four types
of anarthas are the naisargika-phala, the fruit of
nisarga, or the aquired nature of the jīva who has been
caught by ignorance, and they are removed gradually by
cultivating Kṛṣṇa consciousness in the association of

                           253
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

śuddha-bhaktas.

The four-fold path of yoga consists of withdrawal from
sense objects (pratyāhāra), self-control (yama),
following various rules and regulations (niyama)Ç and
renunciation (vairāgya). This process is not the proper
means to free oneself from material anxiety, for it is
difficult to attain perfection, and there is always a
strong risk of falling down. The only way to become free
from all anxiety is to cultivate pure Kṛṣṇa
consciousness in the association of śuddha-bhaktas. Thus
the jīva is freed from māyāís stranglehold and his
constitutional position is revealed to the extent that
anarthas have been removed from his heart.

Vrajanātha: Can people with no trace of anarthas be
termed liberated people?

Bābājī: Please consider the following śloka:

rajobhiḥ sama-saṅkhyātāḥ pārthivair iha jantavaḥ

teṣāṁ ye kecanehante śreyo vai manujādayaḥ

prāyo mumukṣavas teṣāṁ kecanaiva dvijottama

mumukṣūṇāṁ sahasreṣu kaścin mucyate sidhyati

muktānām api siddhānāṁ nārāyaṇa-parāyaṇaḥ

sudurlabhaḥ praśāntātmā koṭiṣv api mahā-mune

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.14.3-5)

He Bhagavān! There are as many jīvas in this material
world as there are grains of sand. Only a few of these
are human beings, amongst whom only a few direct their
efforts in search of a higher goal. Of those who are
endeavoring for a higher goal, only a few rare
individuals seek liberation from this world, and out of
thousands of such people, hardly one is actually able to
achieve siddhi (perfection) or mukti (liberation). Out
of millions of perfected liberated souls, it is
difficult to find a single peaceful, great soul who is
fully dedicated to sevā of Śrī Nārāyaṇa. Therefore,
Nārāyaṇaís bhaktas are very rare.

A person free from all anarthas is known as a śuddha-
bhakta. Such bhaktas are very rare; indeed, even among
millions of muktas, one can hardly find a single bhakta
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, no association in this world is
more rare than the association of Kṛṣṇaís bhaktas.

Vrajanātha: Does the word Vaiṣṇava imply a bhakta who
has renounced family life?

Bābājī: A śuddha-bhakta is a Vaiṣṇava, whether he is a
gṛhastha (householder) or sannyāsī (renunciant), a
brāhmaṇa or a caṇḍāla (dog-eater), rich or poor. A
devotee is a kṛṣṇa-bhakta to the degree that he has
śuddha-kṛṣṇa-bhakti (pure devotion for Kṛṣṇa).

Vrajanātha: You have already said that there are five
types of jīva in māyā’s stronghold, and you have also

                          254
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

said that bhaktas performing sādhana-bhakti and bhāva-
bhakti are under māyā’s control. At what stage are
bhaktas māyā-mukta (liberated from māyā)?

Bābājī: One is freed from the clutches of māyā from the
very beginning of his devotional service, but vastu-
gata-mukti, or complete liberation from the two material
bodies (gross and subtle), is only obtained when one
reaches the stage of full maturity in bhakti-sādhana.
Before this, a person is liberated to the extent that he
is svarūpa-gata, aware of his constitutional position.
The jīva achieves vastu-gata-māyā-mukti, complete
freedom from māyā, only when he is completely
disassociated from the gross and subtle bodies. The
stage of bhāva-bhakti dawns in the jīva’s heart as a
result of practicing sādhana-bhakti. When the jīva is
firmly established in bhāva-bhakti, he gives up his
gross body and after that he gives up the subtle body
and becomes established in his pure spiritual body (cit-
śarīra). Consequently, the jīva is not fully free from
māyā’s control even in the beginning stage of bhāva-
bhakti, because a trace of the conditioning of māyā
always remains as long as the jīva is performing
sādhana-bhakti. The authorities in our line have
carefully considered sādhana-bhakti and bhāva-bhakti,
and have included bhaktas practicing both these stages
amongst the five stages of conditioned souls. The
materialists and the impersonalists are definitely
included amongst the five categories of conditioned
souls.

The only path of deliverance from the clutches of māyā
is bhakti for Śrī Hari. The jīva has been put under
māyāís control because he is offensive, and the root of
all offense is forgetting that ëI am Kṛṣṇaís servant.í
The offenses can only be eradicated if one has Kṛṣṇaís
mercy; only then can one be freed from māyāís control.
The impersonalists believe that one can gain liberation
from māyā by cultivating knowledge, but this belief has
no basis; there is no possibility of becoming free from
māyā without His mercy. This is explained in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.2.32-33):

ye ínye íravindākṣa vimukta-māninas

tvayy asta-bhāvād aviśuddha-buddhayaḥ

āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ

patanty adho ínādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ

O lotus-eyed Lord! Those who proudly think that they are
liberated, but do not render devotional service unto
You, certainly have impure intelligence. Although they
perform severe austerities and penances, and rise up to
the spiritual position of impersonal realization of
brahma, they fall down again because they have no
respect for devotional service to Your lotus feet.

tathā na te mādhava tāvakāḥ kvacid

bhraśyanti mārgāt tvayi baddha-sauhṛdāḥ

tvayābhiguptā vicaranti nirbhayā

                          255
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017


vināyakānīkapa-mūrddhasu prabho

O Mādhava, Your dearmost bhaktas, who have true love for
Your lotus feet, are not like those proud jñānīs, for
they never fall down from the path of devotional
service. Since You protect them, they move about
fearlessly, stepping on the very heads of those who
obstruct their path, so that no obstacle can check their
progress.

Vrajanātha: How many different types of jīvas are
liberated from māyā?

Bābājī: Two kinds of jīvas are free from māyā’s control:
1) nitya-mukta (the jīvas who were never under māyā’s
control), and 2) baddha-mukta (those who were once under
māyā’s control, but are now free). The nitya-mukta-jīvas
are divided again into two categories: 1) aiśvarya-gata
(those who are attracted by Bhagavān’s feature of
opulence and majesty), and 2) mādhurya-gata (those who
are attracted by His feature of sweetness). Those jīvas
who are attracted by Kṛṣṇa’s aiśvarya are personal
associates of Śrī Nārāyaṇa, the Master of Vaikuṇṭha.
They are particles of spiritual effulgence emanating
from Śrī Mūla-Saṅkarṣana, who resides in Vaikuṇṭha.
Those who are attracted by Bhagavān’s mādhurya are
personal associates of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Master of Goloka
Vṛndāvana. They are particles of spiritual effulgence
manifesting from Śrī Baladeva, who resides in Goloka
Vṛndāvana.

There are three kinds of baddha-mukta-jīvas: 1)
aiśvarya-gata (those who are attracted to Bhagavānís
features of opulence and majesty), 2) mādhurya-gata
(those who are attracted to Bhagavānís feature of
sweetness) and 3) brahma-jyoti-gata (those who are
attracted to Bhagavānís impersonal effulgence). Those
who are attracted to His opulence during their period of
regulated service become eternal associates of Śrī
Nārāyaṇa, the master of the spiritual sky, and they
achieve sālokya-mukti (the opulence of residing on His
planet). Jīvas who are attracted to Śrī Kṛṣṇaís
sweetness during their period of sādhana attain direct
service to Him when they are liberated in the eternal
abodes of Vṛndāvana and other similar abodes. Jīvas who
attempt to merge into the impersonal effulgence during
their period of sādhana attain sāyujya-mukti when they
are liberated. They merge into His effulgence, and are
thus completely destroyed in the form of brahma-sāyujya.

Vrajanātha: What is the ultimate destination of the
unalloyed bhaktas of Śrī Gaura-Kiśora (Caitanya
Mahāprabhu)?

Bābājī: Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Gaura-Kiśora are non-different
in their tattva (absolute nature). They are both
shelters of mādhurya-rasa. However, there is a slight
difference between Them because mādhurya-rasa has two
prakoṣṭs (chambers). One is the mood of mādhurya
(sweetness), and the other is the mood of audārya
(magnanimity). Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s svārupa is manifest where
mādhurya is prominent, and Śrī Gaurāṅga’s form is
manifest where audārya is prominent. Similarly, the

                          256
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

transcendental Vṛndāvana also has two prakoṣṭs
(divisions): Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s abode and Śrī Gaura’s abode.

The nitya-siddha and nitya-mukta associates who reside
in Śrī Kṛṣṇaís abode are attracted first to mādhurya,
and then to audārya. The nitya-siddha and nitya-mukta
associates who reside in Śrī Gauraís abode are
blissfully absorbed in audārya, and then mādhurya. Some
of them reside in both abodes simultaneously by
expansions of the self (svarūpa-vyūha), while others
reside in one spiritual form in only one abode, and not
in the other.

Those who only worship Śrī Gaura during their period of
sādhana, only serve Śrī Gaura when they achieve
perfection, while those who only serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa during
their period of sādhana serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa on achieving
perfection. However, those who worship the forms of both
Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Gaura during their period of sādhana
manifest two forms when they attain perfection and
reside in both abodes simultaneously. The truth of the
simultaneous oneness and difference of Śrī Gaura and Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is a very confidential secret.

When Vrajanātha had heard all these teachings about the
state of the jīvas who are liberated from māyā, he could
no longer keep his composure. Brimming with emotion, he
fell down at the elderly Bābājīís lotus feet. Crying
profusely, Bābājī Mahāśaya picked him up and embraced
him. It was already quite late in the night. Vrajanātha
took leave of Bābājī Mahāśaya and went home, totally
engrossed in meditating on Bābājīís instructions.

When Vrajanātha reached home, he took his meal, and
while doing so, he warned his grandmother sternly,
“Grandmother, if you people want to see me here, stop
all this talk about my marriage and do not keep any sort
of contact with Veṇī-mādhava. He is my greatest enemy
and from tomorrow, I will never speak with him again.
You should also neglect him.”

Vrajanāthaís grandmother was very intelligent.
Understanding Vrajanāthaís mood, she decided to postpone
any question of marriage. “From the kind of sentiments
that he is displaying,” she thought, “if he is forced
too much, he might leave for Vṛndāvana or Vārāṇasī. Let
Bhagavān decide as He will.”



Thus ends the Seventeenth Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled

“Prameya:The Jīvas Free from Māyā”




Chapter 18

Prameya: Bhedābheda-Tattva


                             257
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017



Veṇī-mādhava had a wicked mind. Thus when Vrajanātha
scorned him, he decided to seek revenge by teaching
Vrajanātha and the Māyāpura Vaiṣṇavas a lesson. He made
a plan with some like-minded friends that when
Vrajanātha returned from Māyāpura, they would surround
him in a secluded place near Lakṣmaṇa Hill, and give him
a sound thrashing. Somehow or other, Vrajanātha got wind
of all this, and consulted with Bābājī. They agreed that
he would come to Māyāpura less frequently, and then only
during the day, and accompanied by a bodyguard.

Vrajanātha had some tenants in the village, amongst whom
Harīśa was expert at stick-fighting. One day Vrajanātha
called him and made a request. He said “Harīśa, I am
having a little difficulty these days, but if you help
me, I might have a way out”.

Harīśa said, “Ṭhākura, I can lay down my life for you. I
will kill your enemy today, if you tell me.”

Vrajanātha replied, “Veṇī-mādhava is a very wicked man,
and he means to cause me some trouble. He is creating so
much disturbance that I dare not go to visit the
Vaiṣṇavas in Śrīvāsāṅgana. He has arranged with some of
his devious friends to create trouble for me on my way
home.”

Harīśa became disturbed when he heard this, and he
replied, “Ṭhākura, as long as there is breath in my
body, you need have no fear. It looks as if this stick
of mine will soon come to good use against Veṇī-mādhava.
Just take me along with you whenever you go to Māyāpura
and I will handle a hundred opponents by myself.” After
Vrajanātha had made this arrangement with Harīśa, he
resumed his visits to Māyāpura every second or fourth
day, but he could not stay late. Yet he remained
dissatisfied within himself when he could not discuss
tattva.

After some ten or twenty days had passed in this way,
the wicked Veṇī-mādhava was bitten by a snake, and died.
When Vrajanātha heard the news, he wondered, “Did he
meet such a fate because of his envy of the Vaiṣṇavas?”
Then he concluded, “His allotted life-span had finished,
and so he died.

adya vābda-śatānte vā

mṛtyur vai prāṇiṇāṁ dhruvaḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.1.38)

One may die today, or after hundreds of years, but death
is sure for every living entity. This is an eternal
truth.

“Now my path to Śrīvāsāṅgana in Māyāpura is clear.”

That day, Vrajanātha reached Śrīvāsāṅgana a little after
dusk. He offered his obeisances to Raghunātha dāsa
Bābājī, and said, “From today I will be able to come to
serve your lotus feet every day, for the obstacle in the

                          258
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017

form of Veṇī-mādhava has left this world.” At first, the
soft-hearted Bābājī became a little disturbed on hearing
about the death of this spiritually unconscious person
(anudita-viveka-jīva). Then he calmed himself and said,
Sva-karma-phala-bhuk pumān. “Everyone enjoys or suffers
the result of his karma.” The jīva belongs to Kṛṣṇa, and
he will go wherever Kṛṣṇa sends him. Anyway, Bābā, I
hope you have no other anxiety.”

Vrajanātha: Only one: I have missed hearing your
nectarean talks all these days. Today I want to hear the
remaining instructions on Daśa-mūla.

Bābājī: I’m always available for you. Now, where did we
stop last time? Are there any questions in your heart
after our last conversation?

Vrajanātha: What is the name of Śrī Gaura Kiśora’s pure
and invaluable philosophical teachings? The previous
ācāryas have established the philosophies of advaita-
vāda (exclusive monism), dvaita-vāda (dualism),
śuddhādvaita-vāda (purefied non-dualism), viśiṣtādvaita-
vāda (specialized non-dualism), and dvaitādvaita-vāda
(dualism-with-monism). Has Śrī Gaurāṅgadeva accepted any
of these, or has He founded a different philosophical
school?

When you were instructing me about the system of
sampradāya, you said that Śrī Gaurāṅgadeva belongs to
the Brahma-sampradāya. In that case, should we consider
Him to be an ācārya of Madhvācāryaís dvaita-vāda?

Bābājī: Bābā, you should hear the eighth śloka of Daśa-
mūla:

hareḥ śakteḥ sarvaṁ cid-acid akhilaṁ syāt pariṇatiḥ

vivartaṁ no satyaṁ śrutim iti viruddhaṁ kali-malam

harer bhedābhedau śruti-vihita-tattvaṁ suvimalaṁ

tataḥ premnaḥ siddhir bhavati nitarāṁ nitya-viṣaye

The entire spiritual and material creation is a
transformation of Śrī Kṛṣṇaís śakti. The impersonal
philosophy of illusion (vivarta-vāda) is not true. It is
an impurity that has been produced by Kali-yuga, and is
contrary to the teachings of the Vedas. The Vedas
support acintya-bhedābheda-tattva (inconceivable oneness
and difference) as the pure and absolute doctrine, and
one can attain perfect love for the Eternal Absolute
when he accepts this principle.

The conclusive teachings of the Upaniṣads are known as
Vedānta, and in order to bring their precise meaning to
light, Vyāsadeva compiled a book of four chapters,
called Brahma-sūtra or Vedānta-sūtra. The Vedānta
commands great respect amongst the intellectual class.
In principle, Vedānta-sūtra is widely accepted as the
proper exposition of the truths taught in the Vedas.
From this Vedānta-sūtra, the different ācāryas extract
different conclusions, which are just suitable to
support their own philosophies.


                          259
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

Śrī Śaṅkarācārya has used Vedānta-sūtra to support his
impersonal theory of illusion, which is called vivarta-
vāda. He said that one compromises the very essence of
brahma if one accepts any transformation in brahma, that
the doctrine of transformation (pariṇāma-vāda) is
therefore completely faulty, and that vivarta-vāda is
the only reasonable philosophy. According to his own
needs, Śrī Śaṅkarācārya collected some Vedic mantras to
support His vivarta-vāda, which is also known as
Māyāvāda. We can understand from this that pariṇāma-vāda
has been popular from early times, and that Śrī Śaṅkara
checked its acceptance by establishing vivarta-vāda,
which is a sectarian doctrine.

Śrīman Madhvācārya was dissatisfied with vivarta-vāda,
so he propounded the doctrine of dualism (dvaita-vāda),
which he also supported with statements from the Vedas
to suit his own purpose. Similarly, Rāmanujācārya taught
specialized non-dualism (viśiṣtādvaita-vāda), Śrī
Nimbādityācārya taught dualism-with-monism
(dvaitādvaita-vāda) and Śrī Viṣṇusvāmī taught purefied
non-dualism (śuddhādvaita-vāda). Śrī Śaṅkarācāryaís
Māyāvāda philosophy is opposed to the basic principles
of bhakti. Each of the Vaiṣṇava ācāryas has claimed that
his principles are based on bhakti, although there are
differences between the various philosophies that they
taught. Śrīman Mahāprabhu accepted all the Vedic
conclusions with due respect, and gave their essence in
His own instructions. Mahāprabhu taught the doctrine of
acintya-bheda-abheda-tattva (inconceivable difference
and oneness). He remained within the sampradāya of
Śrīman Madhvācārya, but still Śrīman Mahāprabhu only
accepted the essence of Madhvācāryaís doctrine.

Vrajanātha: What is the doctrine of pariṇāma-vāda
(transformation)?

Bābājī: There are two kinds of pariṇāma-vāda: brahma-
pariṇāma-vāda (the doctrine of transformation of
brahma), and tat-śakti-pariṇāma-vāda (the teaching of
the transformation of energy). Those who believe in
brahma-pariṇāma-vāda (the transformation of brahma) say
that the acintya (inconceivable) and nirviśeṣa
(formless) brahma transforms itself into both living
beings and the inert material world. To support this
belief, they quote from the Chāndogya Upaniṣad (6.2.1),
ekam evādvitīyam, “Before the manifestation of this
universe there existed only the Absolute Truth, a non-
dual tattva that exists in truth.”

According to this Vedic mantra, brahma is the one and
only vastu which we should accept. This theory is also
known as non-dualism, or advaita-vāda. Look, in this
theory, the word pariṇāma (progressive transformation)
is used, but the actual process that it describes is in
fact vikāra (destruction or deformation).

Those who teach transformation of energy (śakti-
pariṇāma-vāda) do not accept any sort of transformation
in brahma. Rather, they say that the inconceivable
śakti, or potency of brahma, is transformed. The jīva-
śakti portion of the potency of brahma transforms into
the individual spirit jīvas, and the māyā-śakti portion
transforms into the material world. According to this

                          260
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

theory, there is pariṇāma (transformation), but not of
brahma.

sa-tattvato ënyathā-buddhir vikāra ity udāhṛtaḥ

Sadānanda’s Vedānta-sāra (59)

The word vikāra (modification) means that something
appears to be what it is factually not.

Brahma is accepted as a vastu (basic substance), from
which two separate products appear, namely the
individual souls and this material world. The appearance
of substances that are different in nature from the
original substance is known as vikāra, (modification).

What is a vikāra? It is just something appearing to be
what it is actually not. For example, milk is
transformed into yogurt. Although yogurt is milk, it is
called yogurt, and this yogurt is the vikāra or
modification of the original substance, in this case,
milk. According to brahma-pariṇāma-vāda, the material
world and the jīvas are the vikāra of brahma. Without
any doubt, this idea is absolutely impure for the
following reasons: Those who put forward this theory
accept the existence of only one substance, namely the
nirviśeṣa-brahma. But how can this brahma be modified
into a second substance, if nothing else exists apart
from it? The theory itself does not allow for
modification of brahma.

Accepting modification of brahma defies logic, which is
why brahma-pariṇāma-vāda is not reasonable under any
circumstances. However, there is no such fault in śakti-
pariṇāma-vāda, because according to this philosophy,
brahma remains unaltered at all times. Bhagavānís
inconceivable śakti that makes the impossible possible
(aghatana-ghatana-patīyasī-śakti) has an atomic
particle, which is transformed at some places as the
individual souls, and it also has a shadow portion,
which is transformed in other places into material
universes. When brahma desired, “Let there be living
entities,” the jīva-śakti part of the superior potency
(parā-śakti) immediately produced innumerable souls.
Similarly, when brahma desired the existence of the
material world, the māyā potency, the shadow form of
parā-śakti, at once manifested the unfathomable,
inanimate material world. Brahma accepts these changes
while remaining free from change itself.

One may argue: “Desiring is itself a transformation, so
how can this transformation occur in the desireless
brahma?” The answer to this is, “You are comparing the
desire of brahma to the desire of the jīva, and calling
it a vikāra (modification). Now, the jīva is an
insignificant śakti, and whenever he desires, that
desire comes from contact with another śakti. For this
reason, the desire of the jīva is called vikāra.
However, the desire of brahma is not in this category.
The independent desire of brahma is part of its
intrinsic nature. It is one with the śakti of brahma,
and at the same time different from it. Therefore, the
desire of brahma is the svarūpa of brahma, and there is
no place for vikāra. When brahma desires, śakti becomes

                          261
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

active, and only śakti is transformed. This subtle point
is beyond the discriminating power of the jīvasí minute
intelligence, and can only be understood through the
testimony of the Vedas.

Now we must consider the pariṇāma (transformation) of
śakti. The analogy of milk changing into yogurt may not
be the best example to explain śakti-pariṇāma-vāda.
Material examples do not give a complete understanding
of spiritual principles, but they can still enlighten us
regarding certain specific aspects. The cintāmaṇi gem is
a material object that can produce many varieties of
jewels, but it is not transformed or deformed itself in
any way. Śrī Bhagavānís creation of this material world
should be understood as being something similar to this.
As soon as Bhagavān desires, His acintya-śakti
(inconceivable potency) creates innumerable universes of
fourteen planetary systems and worlds where the jīvas
can live, but He Himself remains absolutely unchanged.

It should not be understood that this “untransformed”
Supreme is nirviśeṣa (formless) and impersonal. On the
contrary, this Supreme is the great and all-encompassing
substance, brahma (bṛhad-vastu-brahma). He is eternally
Bhagavān, the master of the six opulences. If one
accepts Him as merely nirviśeṣa, one cannot explain His
spiritual śakti. By His acintya-śakti, He exists
simultaneously in both personal and impersonal forms. To
suppose that He is only nirviśeṣa is to accept only half
the truth, without full understanding. His relationship
with the material world is described in the Vedas using
the instrumental (karaṇa) case to signify ëby which...í;
the ablative (apādāna) case to signify ëfrom which...í;
and the locative (adhikaraṇa) case to signify ëin
which...í. It is stated in the Taittirīya Upaniṣad
(3.1.1):

yato vā imāni bhūtāni jāyante

yena jātāni jīvanti

yat prayanty abhisaṁviśanti

tad vijijñāsasva tad brahma

One should know that brahma is He from whom all living
beings are born, by whose power they remain alive, and
into whom they enter at the end. He is the one about
whom you should inquire, He is brahma.1

In this śloka, ëyato vā imānií, the ablative (apādāna)
case for Īśvara is used when it is said that the living
beings are manifested from Him; ëyenaí, which is the
instrumental (karaṇa) case, is used when it is said that
all sentient creatures live by His power; and ëyatí,
which indicates the locative (adhikaraṇa) case, is used
when it is said that all living beings enter into Him in
the end. These three symptoms show that the Absolute
Truth is Supreme; this is His unique feature. That is
why Bhagavān is always saviśeṣa (possessing form,
qualities, and pastimes). Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī describes
the Supreme Person in these words:

ekam eva parama-tattvaṁ svābhāvikācintya-śaktyā

                          262
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017


sarvadaiva svarūpa-tad-rūpa-vaibhava-jīva-pradhāna-
rūpeṇa

caturdhāvatiṣṭhate sūryāntar-maṇḍala-stha-teja iva

maṇḍala tad-bahirgata-tad-raśmi-tat-praticchavi-rūpeṇa

The Absolute Truth is one. His unique characteristic is
that He is endowed with inconceivable potency, through
which He is always manifested in four ways: 1) svarūpa
(as His original form), 2) tad-rūpa-vaibhava (as His
personal splendor, including His abode, and His eternal
associates, expansions and avatāras), 3) jīvas (as the
individual spirit souls), and 4) pradhāna (as the
material energy). These four features are likened to the
interior of the sun planet, the surface of the sun, the
sun-rays emanating from this surface, and a remotely
situated reflection, respectively.

These examples only partially explain the Absolute
Truth. His original form is sat-cid-ānanda (full of
eternity, knowledge and bliss) and His spiritual name,
abode, associates and the entire paraphernalia in His
direct service are opulences that are non-different from
Himself (svarūpa-vaibhava). The countless nitya-mukta
and nitya-baddha jīvas are dependent, conscious atoms
(aṇu-cit). Pradhāna includes māyā-pradhāna, and its
products are the entire gross and subtle material
worlds. These four features exist eternally, and
similarly, the oneness of the Supreme Absolute is also
eternal. How can these two eternal contradictions exist
together? The answer is that it seems impossible to the
limited intelligence of the jīva, and it is only
possible through Bhagavānís inconceivable energy.

Vrajanātha: What is vivarta-vāda?

Bābājī: There is some reference to vivarta in the Vedas,
but that is not vivarta-vāda. Śrī Śaṅkarācārya has
interpreted the word vivarta in such a way that vivarta-
vāda has come to mean the same as Māyāvāda. The
scientific meaning of the word vivarta is:

atattvatoí nyathā buddhir vivarttam ity udāhṛtaḥ



Vivarta is the illusion of mistaking one thing for
another.

The jīva is an atomic, spiritual substance, but when he
is bewildered, he imagines that the subtle and gross
bodies in which he is encaged are his self. This
bewilderment is ignorance born of lack of knowledge, and
it is the only example of vivarta found in the Vedas.
Someone may think, “I am brahmaṇa Rāmanātha Pandey, the
son of the brahmaṇa Sanātana Pandey,” and another may
think, “I am the sweeper Madhuā, son of the sweeper
Harkhuā,” but really, such thoughts are completely
illusory. The jīva is an atomic spiritual spark and is
neither Rāmanātha Pandey nor the sweeper Madhuā; it only
seems to be so because he identifies with the body. The
illusions of mistaking a rope for a snake, and seeing

                          263
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

silver in the reflection on a conch shell are similar
examples.

The Vedas use various examples to try to convince the
jīvas to become free from this vivarta, the illusion of
identifying oneís self with this māyika body. Māyāvādīs
reject the true conclusions of the Vedas and establish a
rather comical theory of vivarta-vāda. They say that the
idea “I am brahma” is essential understanding, and the
idea “I am a jīva” is vivarta (erroneous understanding).
The Vedic examples of vivarta do not contradict śakti-
pariṇāma-vāda at all, but the theory of vivarta-vāda
that the Māyāvādīs put forward is simply foolish.

The Māyāvādīs propose various types of vivarta-vāda, of
which three are most common:

1. The soul is really brahma, but he became bewildered
into thinking himself to be an individual soul.

2. The jīvas are reflections of brahma.

3. The jīvas and the material world are just the dream
of brahma.

All these varieties of vivarta-vāda are false and
contrary to Vedic evidence.

Vrajanātha: What is this philosophy called Māyāvāda? I
am unable to understand it.

Bābājī: Listen carefully. Māyā-śakti is just a perverted
reflection of the spiritual kingdom, and it is also the
controller of the material world which the jīva enters
when he is overpowered by ignorance and illusion.
Spiritual things have an independent existence, and are
independently energetic, but Māyāvāda does not accept
this. Instead, the Māyāvāda theory declares that the
individual soul is itself brahma, and only appears to be
different from brahma because of the influence of māyā.
This theory states that the jīva only thinks himself to
be an individual entity, and that the moment the
influence of māyā is removed, he understands that he is
brahma. According to this conception, while under the
influence of māyā, the atomic spiritual spark has no
independent identity separate from māyā, and therefore
the way of liberation for the jīva is nirvāṇa, or
merging in brahma. Māyāvādīs do not accept the separate
existence of the pure individual soul. Furthermore, they
state that Bhagavān is subordinate to māyā, and has to
take shelter of māyā when He needs to come to this
material world. They say, “This is because brahma is
impersonal and does not have any form, which means that
He has to assume a material (māyika) form in order to
manifest Himself in this world. His Īśvara aspect has a
material body. The avatāras accept material bodies and
perform wonderful feats in this material world. In the
end, They leave Their material body in this world, and
return to Their abode.”

Māyāvādīs show a little kindness towards Bhagavān, for
they accept some differences between the jīva and the
avatāras of Īśvara. The distinction they make is that
the jīva has to accept a gross body because of his past

                          264
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

karma. This karma carries him away, even against his
wishes, and he is forced to accept birth, old age and
death. The Māyāvādīs say that Īśvaraís body,
designation, name and qualities are also material, but
that He accepts them of His own accord, and that
whenever He desires, He can reject everything and regain
His pure spirituality. He is not forced to accept the
reactions resulting from the activities that He
performs. These are all misconceptions of the Māyāvādīs.

Vrajanātha: Is this Māyāvāda philosophy found anywhere
in the Vedas?

Bābājī: No! Māyāvāda cannot be found anywhere in the
Vedas. Māyāvāda is Buddhism, We read in Padma Purāṇa:

māyāvādam asac-chāstraṁ

pracchannaṁ bauddham ucyate

mayaiva vihitaṁ devi

kalau brāhmaṇa-mūrtinā

Uttara-khaṇḍa (43.6)

In answer to a question by Umādevi (Parvatī), Mahādeva
explains “O Devī! Māyāvāda is an impure śāstra. Although
actually covered Buddhism, it has gained entry into the
religion of the Āryans, disguised as Vedic conclusions.
In Kali-yuga, I shall appear in the guise of a brāhmaṇa
and preach this Māyāvāda philosophy.”

Vrajanātha: Prabhu, why did Mahādeva perform such an
ugly task, when he is the leader of the devatās and the
foremost among Vaiṣṇavas?

Bābājī: Śrī Mahādeva is Bhagavān’s guṇa-avatāra. The
supremely merciful Lord saw the asuras taking to the
path of bhakti and worshiping Him to get fruitive
results and to fulfill their wicked desires. He then
thought, “The asuras are troubling the devotees by
polluting the path of devotional service, but the path
of bhakti should be freed from this pollution.” Thinking
thus, He called for Śivajī and said, “O Śambhu! It is
not auspicious for this material world if My pure bhakti
is taught amongst those who are in the mode of ignorance
and whose character is āsurika. You should preach from
śāstra and spread Māyāvāda philosophy in such a way that
the asuras become enamored and I remain concealed from
them. Those whose character is āsurika will leave the
path of devotional service and take shelter of Māyāvāda,
and this will give My gentle bhaktas the chance to taste
pure devotional service unhindered.”

Śrī Mahādeva, who is the supreme Vaiṣṇava, was at first
somewhat reluctant to accept such an arduous task with
which Bhagavān had entrusted him. However, considering
this to be His order, he therefore preached the Māyāvāda
philosophy. Where is the fault of Śrīman Mahādeva, the
supreme guru, in this? The entire universe functions
smoothly like a well-oiled machine under the guidance of
Bhagavān, who expertly wields in His hand the splendid
Sudarśana Cakra for the well-being of all creatures.

                          265
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

Only He knows what auspiciousness is hidden in His
order, and the duty of the humble servants is simply to
obey His order. Knowing this, the pure Vaiṣṇavas never
find any fault in Śaṅkarācārya, Sivaís incarnation who
preached Māyāvāda. Listen to the evidence from śāstra
for this:

tvam ārādhya tatha śambho grahiṣyāmi varaṁ sadā

dvāparādau yuge bhūtvā kalayā mānuṣādiṣu

svāgamaiḥ kalpitaistvañca janān madvimukhān kṛru

māñca gopaya yena syat sṛṣṭireśontarontarā

Padma Purāṇa, Uttara khaṇḍa (42.109-110)

and Nārada-pañcarātra (4.2.29-30):

Viṣṇu said, “O Śambhu, although I am Bhagavān, still I
have worshiped different devatās and devīs to bewilder
the asuras. In the same way, I shall worship you as
well, and receive a benediction. In Kali-yuga you should
incarnate amongst human beings through your partial
expansion. You should preach from śāstras like Āgama,
and fabricate a philosophy that will distract the
general mass of people away from Me, and keep Me
covered. In this way, more and more people will be
diverted away from Me, and My pastimes will become all
the more valuable.”

In Varāha Purāṇa, Bhagavān tells Śiva:

eṣa mohaṁ sṛjāmy āśu ye janān mohayiśyati

tvañca rudra mahāśāho mohaśāstrāṇi kāraya

atathyāni vitathyāni darśayasva mahābhuja

prakāśaṁ kuru cātmānamprakāśañca maṁ kuru

“I am creating the kind of illusion (moha) that will
delude the mass of people. O strong-armed Rudra, you
also create such a deluding śāstra. O mighty-armed one,
present fact as falsehood, and falsehood as fact. Give
prominence to your destructive Rudra form and conceal My
eternal original form as Bhagavān.”

Vrajanātha: Is there any Vedic evidence against the
Māyāvāda philosophy?

Bābājī: All the testimony of the Vedas refutes Māyāvāda
philosophy. The Māyāvādīs have searched all the Vedas
and isolated four sentences in their support. They call
these four sentences mahā-vākya, ‘the illustrious
statements.’ These four statements are:

1) sarvaṁ khalv idaṁ brahma, “All the universe is
brahma.”

Chāndogya Upaniṣad 3.14.1.

2) prajñānaṁ brahma, “The supreme knowledge is brahma.”


                             266
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

Aitareya Upaniṣad 1.5.3.

3) tat tvam asi śvetaketo, “O Śvetaketu, you are that”

Chāndogya Upaniṣad 6.8.7.

4) ahaṁ brahmāsmi, “I am brahma.”

Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad 1.4.10.

The first mahā-vākya teaches that the whole universe,
consisting of the living beings and non-living matter,
is brahma; nothing exists that is not brahma. The
identity of that brahma is explained elsewhere:

na tasya kāryaṁ karaṇaṁ ca vidyate

na tat-samaś cābhyadhikaś ca dṛśyate

parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate

svābhāvikī jñāna-bala-kriyā ca

Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (6.8)

None of the activities of that para-brahma Paramātmā is
mundane, because none of His senses ñ such as His hands
and legs ñ is material. Thus through the medium of His
transcendental body, He performs His pastimes without
any material senses, and He is present everywhere at the
same time. Therefore, no one is even equal to Him, what
to speak of being greater than Him. The one divine
potency of Parameśvara has been described in śruti in
many ways, among which the description of His jñāna-
śakti (knowledge), His bala-śakti (power), and His
kriyā-śakti (potency for activity) are most important.
These are also called cit-śakti or saṁvit-śakti; sat-
śakti or sandhinī-śakti; and ānanda-śakti or hlādinī-
śakti respectively.

Brahma and His śakti are accepted as non-different from
each other. In fact, this śakti is said to be an
inherent part of brahma, which is manifested in
different ways. From one point of view, it may be said
that nothing is different from brahma, for the potency
and the possessor of potency are non-different. However,
when we look at the material world, we can see that in
another sense brahma and His śakti are certainly
different.

nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām

eko bahūnāṁ yo vidadhāti kāmān

Kaṭha Upaniṣad (2.13) and

Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (6.10)

He is the one supreme eternal being among all eternal
beings, and the one supreme conscious being among all
conscious beings. He alone is fulfilling the desires of
everyone.

This statement from the Vedas accepts variegatedness

                            267
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

within the eternally existing substance (vastu), brahma.
It separates the śakti (potency) from śaktimān (the
possessor of the potency), and then it considers His
jñāna (knowledge), bala (power) and kriyā (activities).

Now let us consider the second mahā-vākya, prajñānaṁ
brahma, “The supreme knowledge is brahma” (Aitareya
Upaniṣad 1.5.3). Here it is said that brahma and
consciousness are identical. The word prajñānam, which
in this sentence is said to be one with brahma, is also
used in Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad (4.4.21), where it is
used to mean prema-bhakti:

tam eva dhiro vijñāya prajñāṁaṁ kurvīta brāhmaṇaḥ

When a steady and sober person attains knowledge of
brahma, he worships Him with genuine loving feelings
(jñāna-svarūpa-prema-bhakti).

The third mahā-vākya is tat tvam asi śvetaketo, “O
Śvetaketu, you are that,” (Chāndogya Upaniṣad 6.8.7).
This śloka gives instructions on oneness with brahma,
which is more elaborately described in Bṛhad-
āraṇyakaUpaniṣad (3.8.10) as follows:

yo vā etad akṣaraṁ gārgy aviditvāsmāl lokāt praiti sa
kṛpaṇaḥ

ya etad akṣaraṁ gārgi viditvāsmāl lokāt praiti sa
brāhmaṇaḥ

O Gargī! Those who leave this material world without
understanding the eternal Viṣṇu are kṛpaṇaḥ, extremely
miserly or degraded, whereas those who leave this
material world in knowledge of that Supreme Eternal are
actually brāhmaṇas, knowers of brahma.

The words tat tvam asi therefore mean, “He who gains
true knowledge eventually attains devotional service to
para-brahma, and he is to be known as a brāhmaṇa.”

The fourth mahā-vākya is ahaṁ brahmāsmi, “I am brahma”
(Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad 1.4.10). If the vidyā that is
established in this vākya does not become bhakti in the
end, then it is thoroughly condemned in Śrī Īśopaniṣad
(9), which says:

andhaṁ tamaḥ praviśanti ye ívidyāṁ upāsate

tato bhūya iva te tamo ya u vidyāyāṁ ratāḥ

Those who are situated in ignorance enter deep darkness,
and those who are in knowledge enter deeper darkness
still.

This mantra means that those who embrace ignorance, and
do not know the spiritual nature of the soul, enter the
darkest regions of ignorance. However, the destination
of those who reject ignorance, but who believe that the
jīva is brahma, and not a spiritual atom, is far worse.

Bābā! The Vedas have no shoreline and are unsurpassed.
Their precise meaning can only be understood by studying
each and every śloka of the Upaniṣads separately, and by

                          268
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

deriving the meaning from all of them combined. If one
singles out a particular sentence, he may always be
diverted by some misinterpretation. Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu therefore investigated all the Vedas
thoroughly, and then preached that the individual spirit
souls and the material world are simultaneously and
inconceivably one with Śrī Hari and different from Him.

Vrajanātha: I understand that the Vedas establish the
teaching of acintya-bhedābheda-tattva. Will you please
explain this more clearly with proofs from the Vedas
themselves?

Bābājī: Here are some of the many passages that describe
the oneness aspect (abheda-tattva) of bhedābheda-tattva:



sarvaṁ khalv idaṁ brahma, “Everything in this world is
certainly brahma.” (Chāndogya Upaniṣad 3.14.1)



ātmaivedaṁ sarvam iti, “Everything that is visible is
spirit (ātmā).” (Chāndogya Upaniṣad 7.52.2)



sad eva saumyedam agra āsid ekam evādvitīyam, “O gentle
one, this world initially existed in a non-dual,
spiritual form; and before the manifestation of this
universe, the Supreme Spirit was just a non-dual
substance.” (Chāndogya Upaniṣad 6.2.1)



evaṁ sa devo bhagavān vareṇyo yoni-svabhāvān
adhitiṣṭhaty ekaḥ, “Bhagavān Himself is the master of
all, even of the devatās, and He is the only one who is
worthy of worship. He is the cause of all causes, but He
Himself remains unaltered, just as the sun remains
stationary, while spreading its radiance in all
directions.” (Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 5.4)



Now listen to the mantras that support bheda
(difference):



oṁ brahma-vid āpnoti param, “One who understands brahma
attains the para-brahma.” (Taittirīya Upaniṣad 2.1)



mahāntaṁ vibhum ātmānaṁ matvā dhīro na śocati, “A sober,
intelligent person does not lament, even on seeing a
soul confined in a material body, because he knows that
the soul is great and present everywhere.” (Kaṭha
Upaniṣad 1.2.22)




                          269
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

satyaṁ jñānam anantaṁ brahma yo veda nihitam, “Brahma is
truth, knowledge and eternity personified. That brahma
is situated in the spiritual sky (Paravyoma), and is
also present in the depth of all living entitiesí
hearts. One who knows this attains siddhi through his
relationship with that indwelling Supersoul (antaryāmī),
the omniscient brahma.” (First Anuccheda of Taittirīya-
brahmānanda-vallī)



yasmāt paraṁ nā param asti kiñcit..., “There is no truth
superior to that Supreme Person. He is smaller than the
smallest, and greater than the greatest. He stands
alone, immovable like a tree in His self-effulgent
abode. This entire universe rests within that one
Supreme Person.” (Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 3.9)



pradhāna-kṣetra-jña-patir guṇeśaḥ, “The Parabrahma is
the Lord of the unmanifested material nature (pradhāna),
the Master of that Paramātmā who knows all the
individual living entities, and the Īśvara of the three
modes of material nature. He is Himself transcendental
to the modes of material nature.” (Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad
6.16)



tasyaiṣa ātmā vivṛṇute tanuṁ svām, “He reveals His body
only to those people in a very particular way.” (Kaṭha
Upaniṣad 2.23)



tam āhur agryaṁ puruṣaṁ mahāntam, “Those who know the
Absolute Truth chant His glories, knowing Him to be
Mahān Ādi-puruṣa, the Great Personality, and the Cause
of all causes.” (Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 3.19)



yāthātathyato ërthān vyadadhāt, “By His inconceivable
potency, He maintains the separate identities of all the
eternal elements, along with their particular
attributes.” (Īśopaniṣad, Mantra 8)



naitad aśakaṁ vijñātuṁ yad etad yakṣam iti, “Agnideva,
the devatā of fire said to the assembled devatās, ëI
cannot fully comprehend the identity of this yakṣa.í “
(Kena Upaniṣad 3.6)



asad vā idam agra   āsit..., “In the beginning, this
universe was just   an unmanifested form of brahma. This
unmanifest became   manifest in the form of brahma. That
brahma manifested   Himself in male form. For this reason
that male form is   known as the creator.” (Taittirīya
Upaniṣad 2.7.1)


                            270
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017



nityo nityānām, “Who is the supreme Eternal Being among
all the eternal beings?” (Kaṭha Upaniṣad 2.13 and
Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad 6.13)



sarvaṁ hy etad brahmāyam ātmā brahma soíyam ātmā
catuṣpāt, “All this is a manifestation of the inferior
potency of brahma. The spiritual form of Kṛṣṇa is none
other than the para-brahma. By His inconceivable
potency, He eternally manifests Himself in four
nectarean forms, even though He is one.” (Muṇḍaka
Upaniṣad, Mantra 2)



ayam ātmā sarvesāṁ bhūtānāṁ madhu, The Vedas speak about
Kṛṣṇa in an indirect way by describing His attributes,
and here they say that “Among all living beings, it is
only Kṛṣṇa Himself who is sweet like nectar.” (Bṛhad-
āraṇyaka Upaniṣad 2.5.14)



In these and countless other passages, the Vedas declare
that the individual souls are eternally different from
the Supreme. Every part of the Vedas is wonderful, and
no portion of them can be neglected. It is true that the
individual jīvas are eternally different from the
Supreme; and it is also true that they are eternally
non-different from the Supreme. We can find evidence in
the Vedas to support both bheda (difference) and abheda
(non-difference), because bheda and abheda exist
simultaneously as aspects of the Absolute Truth. This
relationship of the jīvas with the Supreme as
simultaneously one with Him and different from Him, is
inconceivable and beyond mundane intelligence. Logic and
arguments about the matter only lead to confusion.
Whatever has been said in the various parts of the Vedas
is all true, but we cannot understand the complete
meaning of those words because our intelligence is very
limited. That is why we should never disregard Vedic
teachings.

naiṣa tarkeṇa matir āpaneyā

Kaṭha Upaniṣad (2.2)

Naciketā! It is not proper to use argument to destroy
the wisdom of the Absolute Truth that you have received.

nāhaṁ manye su-vedeti no na vedeti veda ca

Kena Upaniṣad (2.2)

I do not think that I have thoroughly understood brahma.

These Vedic mantras give clear instructions that the
śakti of the Īśvara is inconceivable, and hence beyond
mundane reasoning.

Mahābhārata says:

                          271
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017


purāṇaṁ mānavo dharmaḥ sāṅga-vedañ cikitsitam

ājñā-siddhāni catvāri na hantavyāmi hetubhiḥ

The sāttvata Purāṇas, the dharma instructed by Manu, the
Ṣaḍ-aṅga-veda and Cikitsā-śāstra are the authentic
orders of the Supreme, and it is improper to try to
refute them by mundane arguments.

Thus it is quite clear that the Vedas support the
acintya-bhedābheda-tattva. Bearing in mind the ultimate
goal of the jīva, it seems that there is no siddhānta
that is higher than the principle of acintya-bhedābheda-
tattva; in fact, no other siddhānta even seems true.
Only when one accepts this philosophy of acintya-
bhedābheda can one realize the eternal individuality of
the jīva, and his eternal difference from Śrī Hari.
Without understanding this difference, the individual
soul cannot attain the true goal of life, which is prīti
(love for the Supreme).

Vrajanātha: What is the evidence that prīti is the
ultimate goal for the jīva?

Bābājī: It is said in the Vedas:

prāṇo hy eṣa yah sarva-bhūtair vibhāti

Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad (3.1.4)

The Supreme Person is the Life of all that lives, and He
shines within all beings. Those who know that Supreme
Personality by the science of bhakti do not look for
anything else.2 Such jīvan-muktas are endowed with
attachment for the Supreme (rati), and they participate
in His loving pastimes. Such bhaktas are the best of all
those who are in knowledge of brahma.

In other words, the most fortunate of those who know
brahma associate with Kṛṣṇa actively in His loving
pastimes. This sentiment of rati is a symptom of love
for Kṛṣṇa. It is explained further in Bṛhad-āraṇyaka
Upaniṣad (2.4.5 and 4.5.6):

na vā are sarvasya kāmāya sarvaṁ priyaṁ bhavaty

ātmanas tu kāmāya sarvaṁ priyaṁ bhavati

Yājña-valkya said, “O Maitreyī, everyone is not dear to
us because of their necessities; rather, they are dear
to us because of our own necessities.”

It is evident from this mantra that prīti (love for the
Supreme) is the only prayojana for the jīva. Bābā, there
are many examples of such statements in the Vedas,
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and Taittirīya Upaniṣad (2.7.1):

raso vai saḥ

ko hy evānyāt kaḥ prāṇyāt

yad eṣa ākāśa ānando na syāt


                            272
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

eṣa hy evānandayāti

The para-brahma, Paramātmā, is nectar personified. The
jīva finds pleasure in associating with that nectarean
Paramātmā, and who could live if He was not present in
the heart? It is Paramātmā alone who gives bliss to the
jīvas.

The word ānanda (bliss) is a synonym for prīti
(affection). All living beings are in search of pleasure
and bliss. A mumukṣu believes that liberation is the
ultimate pleasure, and that is why he is mad for
liberation. The sense enjoyers (bubhukṣus) believe that
the objects of sense gratification are the ultimate
pleasure, so they pursue the objects of sense
gratification until the end of their lives. It is the
hope of achieving pleasure that induces everyone to
perform all his activities. The bhaktas are also
endeavoring for Śrī Kṛṣṇaís devotional service. In fact,
everyone is looking for prīti ñ so much so that they are
even ready to sacrifice their lives for it. In
principle, everyoneís ultimate aim is prīti, and no one
can disagree with this. Everyone is exclusively
searching for pleasure, whether they are believers or
atheists, fruitive workers, karmīs, jñānīs, and whether
they have desires or are desireless. However, one cannot
achieve prīti simply by seeking it.

The fruitive workers believe that celestial pleasures
are the ultimate bliss, but it is explained in Bhagavad-
gītā (9.20):

ksīṇe puṇye martya-lokaṁ viśanti

After the residents of the gigantic celestial planets
have completed the results of their good karma, they
have to take birth again on the mortal earthly planets.
The karmīs who desire sense gratification constantly
transmigrate from one planet to another in this way.

According to this śloka of Gītā, everyone realizes their
mistake only when they fall from the celestial planets.
A person may begin to covet the pleasures of the
heavenly planets again when he fails to find pleasure in
the wealth, children, fame and power that is available
in the world of human beings. However, while he is
falling from the celestial worlds, he adopts a
respectful attitude towards an even greater happiness
than that of Svarga (the heavenly planets). He becomes
indifferent to the pleasures of the human worlds, the
celestial planets and even the higher planets up to
Brahmaloka when he understands that they are all
temporary, and that their happiness is also not fixed or
eternal. He then becomes renounced and starts to
investigate brahma-nirvāṇa and endeavor earnestly for
impersonal liberation. However, when he sees that
impersonal liberation also lacks bliss, he takes an
unbiased (taṭastha) position and searches for another
path that will enable him to achieve prīti, or pleasure.

How is it possible to experience prīti in impersonal
liberation? Who is the personality who is supposed to
experience such bliss? If I lose my identity, who will
exist to experience brahma? The very concept of the

                          273
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

bliss of brahma is meaningless because whether there is
pleasure in brahma or not, the theory of impersonal
liberation does not admit that anyone actually exists in
the liberated state to enjoy such pleasure. So what
conclusion can be drawn from such a doctrine? If I cease
to exist when I am liberated, then my individuality is
lost along with my existence. Nothing pertains to me any
more by which I can experience bliss or pleasure.
Nothing exists for me if I myself do not exist. Someone
may say, “I am brahma-rūpa.” However, this statement is
false, because the “I” who is brahma-rūpa is nitya
(eternal). In other words, if one says that he is
brahma, then he is also eternal. In that case,
everything is useless for him, including the process to
attain perfection (sādhana) and perfection itself
(siddhi). Therefore, prīti is not to be obtained in
brahma-nirvāṇa. Even if it is perfect, it is something
that is not experienced, like a flower growing in the
sky.

Bhakti is the only path by which the jīva can attain his
true goal. The final stage of bhakti is prema, which is
eternal. The pure jīva is eternal, pure Kṛṣṇa is
eternal, and pure love for Him is also eternal.
Consequently, one can only attain the perfection of true
love in eternity when he accepts the truth of acintya-
bhedābheda. Otherwise, the ultimate goal of the jīva,
which is love for the Supreme, becomes non-eternal, and
the existence of the jīva is also lost. Therefore, all
the śāstras accept and confirm the doctrine of acintya-
bhedābheda. All other doctrines are simply speculation.

Vrajanātha returned home in a blissful state of mind,
deeply absorbed in thoughts about pure spiritual love.



Thus ends the Eighteenth Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled

“Prameya: Bhedābheda-Tattva”




Chapter 19

Prameya: Abhidheya Tattva



After taking his meal, Vrajanātha retired to bed with
various conflicting views about acintya-bhedābheda (the
doctrine of inconceivable oneness and difference)
arising in his heart. Sometimes he thought that acintya-
bhedābheda-tattva was just another kind of Māyāvāda
philosophy, but when he reconsidered the teaching
seriously, he realized that there was no objection in
śāstra to it. On the contrary, it contained the essence
of all śāstras. “Śrīmad Gaura Kiśora is the complete
manifestation of Bhagavān Himself, and His profound
teachings cannot possibly be faulty in any way,” he said

                            274
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

to himself. “I will never give up the lotus feet of that
extremely kind and affectionate Gaura Kiśora. But alas!
What have I attained so far? I have come to understand
that acintya-bhedābheda-tattva is the ultimate truth,
but what have I gained through this knowledge? Śrī
Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī has said that prīti (love) is the
sādhya of life for all jīvas. Karmīs and jñānīs are also
searching for love, but they are ignorant about śuddha-
prīti. That is why I must reach the stage of
unadulterated love, but my only concern is, how may I
achieve it? I will inquire from Bābājī Mahāśaya about
this subject, and adopt his principles.” Thinking like
this, Vrajanātha fell asleep.

Since Vrajanātha went to sleep quite late, he also awoke
late the next morning. The sun had already risen when he
rose from his bed, and he had hardly finished his
morning ablutions when his maternal uncle Vijaya Kumāra
Bhaṭṭācārya Mahāśaya arrived from Śrī Modadruma.
Vrajanātha was very pleased to see his uncle after so
many days. He offered him daṇḍavat-praṇāma, and
respectfully offered him a seat.

Vijaya Kumāra was a great scholar and orator of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, and he would travel considerable distances
to give Bhāgavatam discourses. By the mercy of Śrī
Nārāyaṇa, he had developed staunch faith in his heart in
Śrī Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu. Some days previously, he had
the good fortune of obtaining darśana of Śrī Vṛndāvana
dāsa Ṭhākura in a village by the name of Denuḍa. Śrī
Vṛndāvana dāsa Ṭhākura had ordered him to visit the
inconceivable Yoga-pīṭha of Śrīdhāma Māyāpura, where Śrī
Śacīnandana Gaura Hariís acintya-līlā eternally takes
place. He also informed him that soon most of the holy
places of Śrīman Mahāprabhuís pastimes would soon
disappear, and would reappear after four hundred years.
He said that the places of Śrī Gauraís pastimes were
essentially non-different from Śrī Vṛndāvana, the holy
place of Kṛṣṇaís līlā; and that only those who can
perceive the transcendental nature of Śrī Māyāpura can
truly have darśana of Śrī Vṛndāvana. Hearing these words
of Śrī Vṛndāvana dāsa Ṭhākura, the incarnation of Śrī
Vyāsadeva, Vijaya Kumāra became very eager to take
darśana of Śrīdhāma Māyāpura, and decided to go there
after visiting his sister and nephew in Bilva-puṣkariṇī.

These days, the villages of Bilva-puṣkariṇī and Brahma-
puṣkariṇī are somewhat distant from each other, but in
those days, they were immediately adjacent, and the
boundary of Bilva-puṣkariṇī was within a mile of
Śrīdhāma Māyāpura Yoga-pīṭha. The old village of Bilva-
puṣkariṇī is abandoned these days, and is known by the
names Ṭoṭā and Tāraṇvāsa.

When uncle and nephew had exchanged pleasantries, Vijaya
Kumāra said, “Tell Grandmother that I am going to take
darśana of Śrīdhāma Māyāpura, and that I will be back
soon and take my afternoon meal here.”

“Uncle, why do you want to visit Māyāpura?” asked
Vrajanātha. Vijaya Kumāra was at that time unaware of
Vrajanāthaís present condition ñ he had only heard that
Vrajanātha had given up his study of nyāya-śāstra, and
was now studying Vedānta-sūtra ñ so he did not consider

                          275
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

it appropriate to describe his devotional sentiments to
him. Instead, he hid his real motive, and said, “I have
to meet someone in Māyāpura.”

Vrajanātha was aware that his uncle was not only a great
scholar of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, but also a devotee of Śrī
Gaura, so he guessed that he must have some spiritual
purpose in visiting Śrīdhāma Māyāpura. “Uncle,” he said,
“a very faithful and elevated Vaiṣṇava called Śrīla
Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī resides in Māyāpura. You must
have some discussion with him.”

Encouraged by Vrajanāthaís words Vijaya Kumāra said,
“Are you developing faith in the Vaiṣṇavas these days? I
heard that you have given up the study of nyāya-śāstra
and were studying Vedānta, but now I see that you are
entering into the path of bhakti, so I need not hide
anything from you. The fact is that Śrī Vṛndāvana dāsa
Ṭhākura Mahāśaya has ordered me to have darśana of Śrī
Yoga-pīṭha at Śrī Māyāpura, so I have decided to take
bath in the waters of Śrī Gaṅgā-devī, and then
circumambulate and take darśana of Śrī Yoga-pīṭha. Then
at Śrīvāsāṅgana, I shall roll to my heartís content in
the dust of the Vaiṣṇavasí lotus feet.”

Vrajanātha said,” Uncle! Please take me along with you.
Letís meet with mother, and then leave for Māyāpura.”

Deciding thus, they informed Vrajanāthaís mother, and
left for Māyāpura. First they took bath in the Gaṅgā,
and Vijaya Kumāra exclaimed, “Aha! Today my life has
become successful. At this ghāṭa Śrī Śacīnandana
Gaurahari bestowed unlimited mercy upon Jāhnavī-devī by
performing His water pastimes here for twenty-four
years. While bathing in these sacred waters today I am
feeling paramānanda.” When Vrajanātha heard Vijaya
Kumāra speak these words in an inspired mood, he spoke
with a melted heart: “Uncle, today I am also blessed by
your mercy.”

After Gaṅgāsnāna, they visited Mahāprabhuís birthplace
at the home of Jagannātha Miśra. There, by the mercy of
Śrī Dhāma, they became completely immersed in a mood of
deep spiritual love and their bodies became drenched
with tears. Vijaya Kumāra said, “If one takes birth in
this land of Gaura, but does not visit this Mahā Yoga-
pīṭha, oneís life is useless. Just see how this holy
place seems to material eyes to appear as any ordinary
piece of land, covered by straw huts, but by Gaurāṅgaís
mercy see what beauty and opulence is visible to us!
Look! How high and splendid are these bejeweled
mansions! How inviting are these lovely gardens! How
attractive to the eyes are these places of worship!
Look, here Śrī Gaurāṅga and Viṣṇu-priyā are standing
inside the house. O What an enchanting form! What an
enchanting form!”

As he said this, they both fell down and lost
consciousness. After quite some time, they recovered
with the help of some other devotees, and entered
Śrīvāsāṅgana. Tears flowed from their eyes, and they
rolled on the ground, exclaiming, “Ha Śrīvāsa! Ha
Advaita! Ha Nityānanda! Ha Gadādhara-Gaurāṅga! Please
give us Your mercy! Free us from false pride, and give

                          276
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

us the shelter of Your lotus feet!”

All the Vaiṣṇavas there became very joyful when they saw
such emotions in the two brāhmaṇas. They began to dance,
chanting loudly, “Māyāpura Candra ki jaya! Ajita
Gaurāṅga ki jaya! Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu ki jaya!”
Vrajanātha immediately offered his body at the lotus
feet of his worshipable spiritual master, Śrī Raghunātha
dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja. The elderly Bābājī picked him up
and embraced him, asking, “Bābā! What brings you here at
this time today? And who is this respectable mahājana
with you?”

Vrajanātha humbly told him everything, and the Vaiṣṇavas
seated them with utmost respect. Vijaya Kumāra then
inquired submissively from Śrīmad Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī
Mahārāja, “Prabhu, by what means can the ultimate aim
(prayojana) for all jīvas be achieved? Please be
merciful, and tell us how we can attain that prayojana.”

Bābājī: You are śuddha-bhaktas, and everything is within
your grasp. Still, since you have mercifully asked, I
will explain whatever little I know. Kṛṣṇa-bhakti which
is free from any trace of jñāna and karma is the
prayojana (ultimate aim) for all jīvas, and it is also
the means of attainment. During the stage of spiritual
practice (sādhana-avasthā) it is called sādhana-bhakti,
and in the liberated stage (siddha-avasthā), it is
called devotional service performed in prema-bhakti
(pure love).

Vijaya: What are the intrinsic characteristics (svarūpa-
lakṣaṇa) of bhakti?

Bābājī: By the order of Śrīman Mahāprabhu, Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī has described the intrinsic characteristics of
bhakti in Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.1.11) as
follows:

anyābhilāṣita-śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā

Uttamā-bhakti, pure devotional service, is the
cultivation of activities that are meant exclusively for
the benefit of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, in other words, the
uninterrupted flow of service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, performed
through all endeavors of body, mind, and speech, and
through expression of various spiritual sentiments
(bhāvas). It is not covered by jñāna (knowledge of
nirviśeṣa-brahma, aimed at impersonal liberation) and
karma (reward-seeking activity), yoga or austerities;
and it is completely free from all desires other than
the aspiration to bring happiness to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

This sūtra very clearly describes both the svarūpa-
lakṣaṇa (intrinsic characteristics) and the taṭastha-
lakṣaṇa (extrinsic symptoms) of bhakti. The word uttamā-
bhakti refers to pure devotional service. Devotional
service mixed with fruitive activity (karma-miśrā
bhakti) and devotional service mixed with speculative
knowledge (jñāna-miśrā bhakti) are not pure devotional
service. The aim of devotional service mixed with
fruitive activity (karma-miśrā bhakti) is sense

                          277
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

gratification, and the aim of devotional service mixed
with speculative knowledge (jñāna-miśrā bhakti) is
liberation. Only such devotional service free from any
trace of desire for fruitive results or liberation is
uttamā-bhakti (pure devotional service).

The fruit of bhakti is prema. The svarūpa-lakṣaṇa of
bhakti is endeavors favorable for Kṛṣṇa (kṛṣṇānuśīlanam)
performed with body, mind and speech, and loving
attitude of mind (prītimaya-mānasa). Such endeavors
(ceṣṭā) and spiritual sentiments (bhāvas) are both
favorable (ānukūlya) and constantly dynamic. By the
mercy of Kṛṣṇa and His bhaktas, when the special
function of the internal energy of Bhagavān manifests
upon the jīvaís own spiritual strength, then the true
form (svarūpa) of bhakti takes birth.

In the present state, the jīvaís body, mind and speech
are all materially afflicted. When the jīva directs them
by his own discrimination, the result is only dry
speculation and renunciation, and the true nature of
bhakti does not manifest through them. However, when
Kṛṣṇaís svarūpa-śakti becomes active in the jīvaís body,
mind and speech, the nature of pure bhakti immediately
becomes manifest. The ultimate aim of all spiritual
activities is Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and that is why real devotional
activity must be favorable towards Kṛṣṇa. Endeavors
performed for realization of brahma and Paramātmā are
not accepted as pure bhakti. Rather, they are aspects of
speculative knowledge (jñāna) and fruitive activities
(karma) respectively. There are two types of endeavors:
those that are favorable, and those that are
unfavorable. Only favorable activities are considered to
be devotional service.

The word ānukūlyena means the tendency to be favorably
disposed towards Kṛṣṇa. This tendency has some
connection with the material world during the period of
devotional practice (sādhana-kāla), but in the liberated
stage (siddha-kāla) it is utterly pure, free from any
connection with the material world. The characteristics
of bhakti are the same in both these stages. Therefore,
the intrinsic characteristics of bhakti are endeavors
for the cultivation of Kṛṣṇa consciousness performed
with favorable sentiments.

While we are discussing the intrinsic characteristics
(svarūpa-lakṣaṇa) of bhakti, it is also necessary to
describe its extrinsic characteristics (taṭastha-
lakṣaṇa). Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has explained that there
are two taṭastha-lakṣaṇa. The first is having no other
desires, and the second is freedom from the covering of
jñāna, karma and other such endeavors. Any ambition
other than the desire for progress in bhakti goes
against bhakti, and comes in the category of other
desires. Jñāna, karma, yoga and renunciation are said to
be antagonistic to bhakti when they are strong enough to
cover the heart. Therefore, pure bhakti may be described
as the cultivation of activities that are favorably
disposed to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, free from both the above
antagonistic characteristics.

Vijaya: What are the various distinctive characteristics
of bhakti?

                          278
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017


Bābājī: In Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.1.17), Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī has described the following six special
characteristics of bhakti:

kleśa-ghnī śubhadā mokṣa-laghutā-kṛt sudurlabhā

sāndrānanda-viśeṣātmā śrī-kṛṣṇākarṣiṇī ca sā

1. kleśa-ghnī ñ She destroys all kinds of distress.

2. śubhadā ñ She awards all kinds of good fortune.

3. mokṣa-laghutā-kṛt ñ She makes kṛt, the pleasure of
impersonal liberation appear laghutā ñ insignificant.

4. sudurlabhā ñ She is rarely achieved.

5. sāndrānanda-viśeṣātmā ñ Her nature is embued with the
most intense and superlative pleasure.

6. śrī-kṛṣṇa-ākarṣiṇī ñ She is the sole means to attract
Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Vijaya: How does bhakti destroy distress?

Bābājī: There are three kinds of kleśa (distress): sin
itself (pāpa), sin in its seed-form (pāpa-bīja), and
ignorance (avidyā). Sinful activity is classified as
pātaka (sinful), mahā-pātaka (very sinful) and atipātaka
(extremely sinful). All these are considered pāpa.
People in whose hearts śuddha-bhakti has manifested are
naturally not inclined to become involved in sinful
activities (pāpa). The desire to commit sins, which is
called pāpa-bīja, cannot remain in a heart filled with
bhakti. Avidyā means ignorance of one’s spiritual
identity. When śuddha-bhakti first dawns within the
heart, the jīva understands very clearly, “I am a
servant of Kṛṣṇa,” and ignorance disappears altogether.
This means that as Bhakti-devī, the goddess of bhakti,
spreads her effulgence, the darkness of pāpa, pāpa-bīja
and avidyā are expelled from one’s heart. On the
auspicious arrival of bhakti, all sorts of distress go
far away. That is why bhakti is kleśa-ghnī.

Vijaya: How is bhakti śubha dā?

Bābājī: In this world, all types of affection, all good
qualities, and all the different types of pleasures are
considered śubha (auspicious). One in whose heart pure
bhakti has manifested is endowed with four qualities;
humility, compassion, freedom from pride, and giving
honor to others. For this reason the whole world bestows
affection upon him. All kinds of sad-guṇas are
automatically manifested in śuddha-bhaktas. Bhakti is
capable of giving all kinds of pleasure. If one desires,
she can give material enjoyment, the happiness of
merging into the impersonal brahma (nirviśeṣa-brahma-
sukha), all kinds of mystical powers (siddhis), sense
gratification and liberation.

Vijaya: How does bhakti make even the pleasure of
impersonal liberation seem insignificant (mokṣa-laghutā-
kṛt)?

                          279
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017


Bābājī: If even a little love for the Supreme (bhagavad-
rati) has manifested in one’s heart, dharma (religion),
artha (economic development), kāma (sense gratification)
and mokṣa (liberation) naturally appear insignificant.

Vijaya: And why is it said that bhakti is rarely
achieved (sudurlabhā)?

Bābājī: This matter should be understood carefully.
Bhakti will remain elusive so long as one performs
devotional service improperly, even if one engages in
millions of different spiritual practices (sādhana).
Apart from that, Bhakti-devī satisfies the majority of
people with only impersonal liberation; she does not
give bhakti unless she sees that the practitioner is
highly qualified. It is for these two reasons that
bhakti is rarely achieved. The sādhana of cultivating
jñāna definitely leads one to liberation in the form of
merging into the non-dual brahma, which is the very form
of knowledge. It is also easy to get material sense
gratification by performing pious deeds like yajña and
other such activities. However, if one does not practice
bhakti-yoga, one cannot achieve bhakti to Śrī Hari, even
by performing millions of spiritual practices.

Vijaya: Why has bhakti been described as the superlative
form of bliss (sāndrānanda-viśeṣātmā)?

Bābājī:Bhakti is eternal spiritual happiness, and that
is why the performance of bhakti places one in an ocean
of bliss. If one combines all the different types of
worldly material pleasure, adds the pleasure of merging
into brahma (which is the negation of this material
world), and multiplies it all tens of millions of times,
the resultant pleasure still cannot compare to a single
drop of the ocean of the bliss of devotional service.
Material pleasures are utterly trivial, and the pleasure
that appears by negating material pleasure (mukti) is
very dry. Both these pleasures are different in nature
from the bliss of the spiritual world. One cannot
compare two things that are altogether different in
character. Therefore, those who have developed some
taste for the bliss of performing bhakti find the
pleasure of merging into nirviśeṣa-brahma to be as
insignificant as the water in a cow’s hoof-print. Only
those who have experienced this pleasure can understand
it; others cannot grasp or discuss it.

Vijaya: How does bhakti attract the all-attractive Śrī
Kṛṣṇa (śrī-kṛṣṇa-ākarṣiṇī)?

Bābājī: Śrī Kṛṣṇa, together with all His loved ones,
becomes forcibly attracted and controlled by a person
within whose heart Bhakti-devī has appeared. Kṛṣṇa
cannot be controlled or attracted by any other means.

Vijaya: If bhakti is so sublimely potent, why do those
who study many śāstras not try to achieve her?

Bābājī:Bhakti and Śrī Kṛṣṇa are beyond all material
boundaries, so human intelligence cannot reach Them,
because it is gross and limited. However, one can easily
understand the essence of devotional service (bhakti-

                          280
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

tattva) if he has developed even a slight taste by the
influence of pious deeds accumulated in the past. No one
but the most fortunate jīvas can understand bhakti-
tattva.

Vijaya: Why does material logic carry no weight?

Bābājī: Logic does not have the qualities necessary for
understanding spiritual pleasures. It is said,

naiṣā tarkeṇa matir āpaneyā / proktānyenaiva su-jñānāya
preṣṭha

Kaṭha Upaniṣad (1.2.9)

My dearest Naciketā, it is not proper to use argument to
destroy the wisdom of the Absolute Truth that you have
received.

Then it is also said, tarkāpratiṣṭhānāt (Vedānta-sūtra
2.1.11): “Logic is useless for establishing any vastu
(real substance), because what one person establishes by
logic and argument today, a more expert logician will
refute tomorrow.” That is why it is said that logic
carries no respect. All these statements of the Vedānta
establish that logic cannot explain spiritual matters.

Vrajanātha: Is there any stage of bhakti between
sādhana-bhakti and prema-bhakti?

Bābājī: Yes, certainly. There are three stages of
development of bhakti: sādhana-bhakti, bhāva-bhakti, and
prema-bhakti.

Vrajanātha: What are the characteristics of sādhana-
bhakti?

Bābājī:Bhakti is one; the differences are between the
different stages of development. As long as bhakti is
performed by the conditioned jīva by means of his
senses, it is called sādhana-bhakti.

Vrajanātha: You have explained that prema-bhakti is an
eternally perfect mood (nitya-siddha-bhāva), so why is
it necessary to practice in order to attain a sentiment
that is eternally perfect?

Bābājī:Nitya-siddha-bhāva is not actually something to
be gained from elsewhere (sādhya); that is, it cannot be
produced by sādhana. Sādhana is a name given to the
practice of manifesting bhāva in the heart.1 As long as
it is not manifested in the heart (due to being
covered), one will have to perform sādhana. In reality,
this bhāva is nitya-siddha (eternally present in the
heart).

Vrajanātha: Will you please explain this principle more
elaborately?

Bābājī:Certainly prema-bhakti is nitya-siddha (eternally
perfect), because it is a manifestation of Bhagavān’s
internal śakti, but it is not evident in the heart of
the conditioned jīva. Spiritual practice (sādhana)
consists of the efforts of body, mind, and speech to

                          281
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

make it appear in the heart. As long as bhāva is not
actually attained during the period of sādhana, it is
considered a sentiment that is achieved by practice, but
its eternal perfection becomes evident as soon as it
manifests itself in the heart.

Vrajanātha: What is the distinguishing characteristic
feature of sādhana?

Bābājī:Sādhana-bhakti is any method that trains the mind
to become Kṛṣṇa conscious.

Vrajanātha: How many kinds of sādhana-bhakti are there?

Bābājī: There are two kinds: vaidhī and rāgānugā.

Vrajanātha: What is vaidhī-bhakti?

Bābājī: The jīva’s spiritual propensity is manifest in
two ways. The regulations found in the codes of śāstra
are called vidhi, and the inclination that has its
origin in this vidhi is called vaidhi-pravṛtti (the
tendency to follow śāstra), and bhakti that is caused by
the discipline of śāstra is called vaidhī-bhakti,
because it has its origin in vaidhi-pravṛtti.

Vrajanātha: I will inquire about the characteristics of
spontaneous attraction (rāga) a little later. Now will
you kindly describe the characteristics of vidhi?

Bābājī: The śāstras have prescribed regulative duties
called vidhi, and have prohibited certain forbidden
activities (niṣedha). The prescribed duty (vaidha-
dharma) for the jīvas is to follow all the regulations
and to avoid all the prohibited activities.

Vrajanātha: From your explanation, it seems as if
vaidha-dharma consists of the rules and regulations of
all the śāstras, but the jīvas of Kali-yuga are weak and
short-lived, so they cannot study the prescriptions and
prohibitions of all the śāstras, and then ascertain
vaidha-dharma. Do the śāstras indicate how we can
determine vidhi-niṣedha briefly and practically?

Bābājī: It is written in Padma Purāṇa (42.103) and
Nārada-pañcarātra (4.2.23):

smarttavyaḥ satataṁ viṣṇur vismarttavyo na jātucit

sarve vidhi-niṣedhāḥ syur etayor eva kiṅkarāḥ

Always remember Viṣṇu, and never forget Him. All the
other prohibitions and recommendations are servitors of
these two instructions.

The purport is that the arrangement of all the various
kinds of vidhi and niṣedha within the śāstras are based
on these two basic sentences. Duty (vidhi) is
ascertained to be that which makes one constantly
remember Bhagavān, and forbidden activities (niṣedha)
are those that make one forget Him. “Remember Bhagavān
Śrī Viṣṇu constantly throughout your life,” this is the
basic prescription (vidhi), and the arrangements of
varṇāśrama and so on for the maintenance of the jīvas

                          282
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

are subject to it. “Never forget Kṛṣṇa,” this (niṣedha)
is the basic prohibition. Everything else ñ such as
abandoning sinful activities, avoiding the tendency to
divert oneís attention from Kṛṣṇa (kṛṣṇa-bahirmukhatā),
and atoning for sinful activities ñ are all subordinate
to this basic vidhi-niṣedha. Therefore, all the rules
and prohibitions described in the śāstras are eternal
servants of the rule to remember Kṛṣṇa constantly, and
the prohibition is to never forget Him. It follows that
the regulation to remember Kṛṣṇa is the fundamental
principle amongst all the regulations of varṇāśrama and
other such institutions.

śrī-camasa uvāca

mukha-bāhūru-pādebhyaḥ puruṣasyāśramaiḥ saha

catvāro jajñire varṇā guṇair viprādayaḥ pṛthak

ya eṣāṁ puruṣaṁ sākṣād ātma-prabhavam īśvaram

na bhajanty avajānanti sthānād bhraṣṭāḥ patanty adhaḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.5.2-3)

Śrī Camasa said, “The brāhmaṇas came into existence from
the mouth of the primordial Śrī Viṣṇu, the kṣatriyas
from His arms, the vaiśyas from His thighs, and the
śūdras from His feet. These four varṇas were born along
with their particular characteristics, as were the four
specific āśramas. A person living amongst these varṇas
and āśramas becomes intoxicated by his high social
position (varṇa) and spiritual position (āśrama), and
fails to worship his iṣṭadeva, Bhagavān Śrī Viṣṇu, or
even disrespects Him. Such a person falls down from his
position in the system of varṇa and āśrama, loses all
his prestige, and takes birth in the lower species.”

Vrajanātha: Why doesn’t everyone who follows the
regulations of varṇāśrama practice kṛṣṇa-bhakti?

Bābājī: Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī explains that amongst all
those who follow the regulations of śāstra, only those
who develop faith in bhakti are eligible to engage in
bhakti. They are not attracted towards the regulations
of material life, nor do they renounce material life.
Rather, they follow the ways of ordinary civilized life
to maintain their livelihood, and at the same time
practice the sādhana of śuddha-bhakti with faith. A
civilized jīva becomes qualified to engage in bhakti as
a result of sukṛti accumulated in the course of many
lives. There are three types of such faithful people:
the kaniṣṭha (neophyte), the madhyama (intermediate
bhakta), and the uttama (highly exalted bhakta).

Vrajanātha: It is said in Bhagavad-gītā that four kinds
of people perform bhakti: ārtta (those who are
distressed), jijñāsu (the inquisitive), arthārthī (those
who desire wealth), and jñānīs (those who are searching
for knowledge of the Absolute). What kind of bhakti are
they qualified for?

Bābājī: When they associate with saintly sādhus, their
distress, their inquisitiveness, their desire for

                          283
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

wealth, and their desire for knowledge are removed, and
they develop faith in unalloyed devotional service. Then
they immediately become qualified for engaging in
bhakti. The prominent examples of this are Gajendra,
Śaunaka and the other ṛṣis in Naimiṣāraṇya, Dhruva, and
the four Kumāras respectively.

Vrajanātha: Do devotees attain liberation at all?

Bābājī: There are five kinds of liberation: sālokya, to
live on the same planet as Bhagavān; sārṣṭi, to have the
same opulences as Bhagavān; sāmīpya, to have constant
association with Bhagavān; sārūpya, to obtain bodily
features similar to Bhagavān’s; and sāyujya, to become
one with Bhagavān. Bhaktas of Śrī Kṛṣṇa do not accept
sāyujya-mukti at any cost, because it is blatantly
opposed to the principles of bhakti. Sālokya, sārṣṭi,
sāmīpya and sārūpya are not fully opposed to bhakti, but
they still retain some adverse elements. The bhaktas of
Kṛṣṇa also completely reject these four kinds of
liberation that are manifested in Śrī Nārāyaṇa’s abode.

In some circumstances, these forms of liberation provide
comforts and opulences, whereas in their matured stages
they guide one towards prema-bhakti. If their ultimate
result is only comfort and opulence, bhaktas should
simply reject them. What to speak of liberation, even
Nārāyaṇaís prasāda does not appeal to the unalloyed
bhaktas of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Śrī Nārāyaṇa and Śrī Kṛṣṇa have
the same fundamental form and nature (svarūpa) from the
point of view of siddhānta, but from the viewpoint of
rasa, Śrī Kṛṣṇaís super-excellent glory is an eternal
fact.

Vrajanātha: Is it only those who are born in Āryan
families and who follow the regulations of varṇāśrama
who are eligible to engage in bhakti?

Bābājī: The entire human race is qualified to attain
eligibility for bhakti.

Vrajanātha: In that case, it seems that people who are
situated in varṇāśrama have to follow two sets of duties
– the regulations of varṇāśrama, and the rules of
śuddha-bhakti – whereas those situated outside
varṇāśrama have only one duty, which is to follow the
limbs (aṅgas) of bhakti. This means that people situated
in varṇāśrama have to endeavor more, because they have
to follow both the material regulations and the
spiritual regulations. Why is this?

Bābājī: A bhakta who is qualified for śuddha-bhakti may
be situated in varṇāśrama, but his only duty is to
follow the aṅga of bhakti, and then all his worldly
duties are fulfilled automatically. There is no fault in
neglecting worldly duties where they are independent of
bhakti, or opposed to it. A qualified bhakta is by his
very nature not inclined to neglect prescribed duties or
to perform forbidden activities. If in spite of this he
accidentally commits some sinful activity, he does not
have to perform the penances that are prescribed in the
rules governing karma. When bhakti resides in the heart,
sins that the bhakta commits by chance do not create a
lasting impression, and they are destroyed very easily

                          284
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

and quickly. That is why bhaktas do not need to perform
any separate penance.

Vrajanātha: How can a qualified bhakta repay his debts
to the devatās and others?

Bābājī: It is said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam that those who
are under the shelter of Bhagavān are not indebted to
anyone.

devarṣi-bhūtāpta-nṛṇāṁ pitṝṇāṁ

na kiṅkaro nāyam ṛṇī ca rājan

sarvātmanā yaḥ śaraṇaṁ śaraṇyaṁ

gato mukundaṁ parihṛtya karttam

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.5.41)

One who completely surrenders to Bhagavān Mukunda, the
affectionate protector of the surrendered souls, no
longer remains indebted to the devatās, forefathers,
other living beings, kinsmen, or guests. He is not
subordinate to anyone, and he is not obliged to serve
anyone.

The purport of the final instruction of Bhagavad-gītā
(18.66) is that Śrī Kṛṣṇa releases one from all sins if
he gives up all sorts of duties and comes to His
shelter. The essence of the Gītā is that when a person
becomes qualified for unalloyed bhakti, he is no longer
obliged to follow the regulations of jñāna-śāstra and
karma-śāstra. On the contrary, he attains all perfection
simply by following the path of bhakti. That is why Śrī
Kṛṣṇa declares, na me bhaktaḥ praṇaśyati: “My bhakta is
never vanquished.” Therefore, this promise of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
should be held above all.

When Vijaya Kumāra and Vrajanātha heard these words,
they said, “We have no further doubts in our hearts
concerning bhakti. We have understood that jñāna and
karma are of little consequence, and that without the
mercy of Bhakti-devī, there is no auspiciousness for the
jīva. Prabhu, now please be merciful, and make our lives
successful by telling us about the aṅgas of śuddha-
bhakti.”

Bābājī: Vrajanātha, you have heard Daśa-mūla as far as
the eighth śloka. You may relate them to your uncle
later. I feel very satisfied to see him. Now listen to
the ninth śloka:

śrutiḥ kṛṣṇākhyānaṁ smaraṇa-nati-pūjā-vidhi-gaṇāḥ

tathā dāsyaṁ sakhyaṁ paricaraṇam apy ātma-dadanam

navāṅgāny etānīha vidhi-gata-bhakter anudinaṁ

bhajan śraddhā-yuktaḥ suvimala-ratiṁ vai sa labhate

One should perform bhajana of the nine processes of
vaidhī-bhakti, namely, hearing, chanting, remembering,
offering prayers, worshiping, serving Kṛṣṇaís lotus

                          285
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

feet, acting as Kṛṣṇaís servant, becoming Kṛṣṇaís
friend, and surrendering oneself fully to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. One
who with faith daily practices bhajana in this way
certainly achieves pure kṛṣṇa-rati.

Śravaṇam, kīrtanam, smaraṇam, vandanam, pāda-sevanam,
arcanam, dāsyam, sakhyam and ātma-nivedanam: those who
daily practice these nine limbs of vaidhī-bhakti with
faith attain pure love of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Hearing (śravaṇa)
takes place when the descriptions of Kṛṣṇaís
transcendental holy name, form, qualities and pastimes
come in contact with the ears. There are two stages of
śravaṇa. The first stage is hearing descriptions of
Kṛṣṇaís qualities in the association of śuddha-bhaktas
before developing śraddhā. This type of śravaṇa creates
faith so that one develops a keen desire to hear śrī-
kṛṣṇa-nāma and His qualities. After one has developed
such faith, one hears Kṛṣṇaís transcendental names and
qualities with great eagerness from Śrī Guru and the
Vaiṣṇavas, and that is the second kind of śravaṇa.
Śravaṇa is one of the limbs of śuddha-bhakti, and
śravaṇa in the perfected stage is manifested as a result
of hearing from guru and Vaiṣṇavas in the stage of
spiritual practice. Śravaṇa is the first aṇga of bhakti.

Kīrtana takes place when śrī-hari-nāma and the
descriptions of His form, qualities and pastimes come in
contact with the tongue. There are many different
varieties of kīrtana, such as discussions of Śrī Kṛṣṇaís
pastimes, describing śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma, reading from śāstra
to others, attracting others to Kṛṣṇa by singing about
Him, uttering entreaties to invoke His mercy,
proclaiming His glories to others, chanting bhajanas in
praise of the Deity, offering prayers, and so on.
Kīrtana has been described as superior to all the other
nine aṅgas of bhakti, and this is especially true in
Kali-yuga, when kīrtana alone can bestow auspiciousness
upon everyone. This is stated in all śāstras:

dhyāyan kṛte yajan yajñais tretāyāṁ dvāpare írcayan

yad āpnoti tad āpnoti kalau saṅkīrtya keśavam

Padma Purāṇa, Uttara-khaṇḍa (72.25)

Whatever is achieved in Satya-yuga by meditation, in
Tretā-yuga by the performance of yajña, and in Dvāpara-
yuga by worshiping Kṛṣṇaís lotus feet is also obtained
in the age of Kali simply by chanting and glorifying Śrī
Keśava.

No other method purifies the heart as effectively as
hari-kīrtana. When many devotees perform kīrtana
together, it is called saṅkīrtana.

Remembering Kṛṣṇaís name, form, qualities and pastimes
is called smaraṇam, of which there are five kinds.
Smaraṇam means to contemplate some subject that has
previously been heard of, or experienced. Dhāraṇā means
to fix the mind on a particular subject, withdrawing it
from other objects. Dhyānam means to meditate on a
specific form. When dhyānam is unbroken like the
continuous flow of a stream of precious oil, it is
called dhruvānusmṛti, and samādhi is the state in which

                          286
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

one is oblivious to outside reality, and only aware of
the objects of meditation in oneís heart.

Śravaṇam, kīrtana and smaraṇam are the three primary
aṅgas of bhakti, for all the other aṅgas are included
within them, and of these three aṅgas, kīrtana is the
best and most important, because śravaṇam and smaraṇam
can be included within it.

According to Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.5.23):

śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

Hearing and chanting about Śrī Viṣṇuís transcendental
name, form, qualities and so on; remembering them;
serving His lotus feet; worshiping Him with sixteen
types of paraphernalia; offering prayers to Him;
becoming His servant; adopting a friendly mood towards
Him; and surrendering everything unto Him (in other
words, serving Him with the body, mind and words) ñ
these nine are accepted as śuddha-bhakti.

The fourth aṅga of bhakti is performing service (pāda-
sevā or paricaryā). Pāda-sevā must also be performed
together with śravaṇam, kīrtana and smaraṇam. One should
perform pāda-sevā with a humble attitude, understanding
that one is unqualified for the service. It is also
essential to realize the object of service as sac-cid-
ānanda, the embodiment of eternity, knowledge and bliss.
Pāda-sevā includes seeing the face of Śrī Kṛṣṇaís Deity
form, touching Him, circumambulating Him, following Him,
and visiting holy places such as Śrī Bhagavānís temple,
the Gaṅgā, Jagannātha Purī, Dvārakā, Mathurā, Navadvīpa
and so forth. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has presented these in
a very clear and vivid way in his description of the
sixty-four aṅgas of bhakti. Service to Śrī Tulasī and
śuddha-bhaktas is also included within this aṅga.

The fifth aṅga is worship (arcana). There are many
considerations regarding qualification and methods of
worship. If one is attracted to the path of arcana, even
after being engaged in śravaṇam, kīrtana and smaraṇam,
then one should perform arcana after properly accepting
dīkṣā-mantra from Śrī Gurudeva.

Vrajanātha: What is the difference between nāma and
mantra?

Bābājī: Śrī Hari’s name is the life and soul of mantra.
The ṛṣis have added words such as namaḥ (‘obeisances’)
to śrī-hari-nāma, and disclosed its specific power. Śrī-
hari-nāma by nature has nothing to do with this material
world, whereas the jīva, because of various bodily
designations provided by māyā, is entrapped by objects
consisting of dead matter. Consequently, in order to
detach the jīva’s mind from sense objects, different
principles of arcana have been established on the path
of regulated devotional service (maryādā-mārga). It is
essential for materialistic people to accept dīkṣā. When
one chants the Kṛṣṇa mantra, siddha-sādhya-susiddha-ari
are not considered.2


                          287
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

Initiation into the exclusive chanting of the Kṛṣṇa
mantra is extremely beneficial for the jīva, for of all
the different mantras in the world, the kṛṣṇa-mantra is
the most powerful. A bona fide disciple receives
strength from Kṛṣṇa immediately when a bona fide
spiritual master initiates him into this mantra. After
initiation, Gurudeva educates the inquiring disciple
concerning the performance of arcana. Briefly, arcana-
mārga includes the observance of Śrī Kṛṣṇaís Appearance
Day, fasting in Kārttika month, observing Ekādaśī,
taking bath in the month of Māgha, and other such
activities. One should also understand that one must
certainly worship Kṛṣṇaís bhaktas as well as Kṛṣṇa
Himself on the path of arcana.

The sixth aṅga of vaidhī-bhakti is offering prayers and
obeisances (vandanam). This is included as part of pāda-
sevā and kīrtana, but it is still considered a separate
aṅga of bhakti. Namaskara itself is also called
vandanam. Ekāṅga-namaskara and paying obeisances with
eight parts of the body touching the ground (aṣṭāṅga-
namaskara) are two types of namaskara. It is considered
offensive to offer obeisances with only one hand
touching the ground; to offer obeisances when the body
is covered with cloth, to offer obeisances behind the
Deity; to offer prostrated obeisances with the body
pointing directly towards the Deity, or with the right
side towards the Deity and to offer obeisances in the
garbha-mandira (Deity room).

Performing service (dāsyam) is the seventh aṅga of
bhakti. “I am Kṛṣṇaís servant” ñ this ego or conception
of the self is dāsyam, and bhajana performed with the
sentiment of a servant is the topmost bhajana. Dāsyam
includes offering obeisances, reciting prayers, offering
all of oneís activities, serving, keeping proper
conduct, remembering and obeying orders (kathā-
śravaṇam).

The eighth aṅga of bhakti is serving as a friend
(sakhyam), which includes the mood of kinship towards
Kṛṣṇa with the endeavors for His well being. There are
two kinds of sakhyam: friendship in vaidhī-bhakti and
friendship in rāgānugā-bhakti, but Śrī Prahlādaís śloka
refers to vaidhāṅga-sakhyam; for example, the feeling of
sakhyam while serving the Deity is vaidha-sakhyam.

The ninth aṅga is known as ātma-nivedanam, which means
offering the whole self ñ body, mind and pure ātmā ñ to
Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The characteristics of ātma-nivedanam are
exclusive endeavor for Kṛṣṇa, and lack of activity for
oneís own self-interest. It is also characteristic of
ātma-nivedanam that one lives to serve the desire of
Kṛṣṇa, and keeps oneís own desire subordinate to Kṛṣṇaís
desire, just as a cow that has been purchased does not
care for its own maintenance.

Ātma-nivedanam in vaidhī-bhakti is described in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (9.4.18ñ20):as follows:†

sa vai manaḥ kṛṣṇa-padāravindayor

vacāṁsi vaikuṇṭha-guṇānuvarṇane


                          288
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

karau harer mandira-mārjanādiṣu

śrutiṁ cakārācyuta-sat-kathodaye

Ambarīṣa Mahārāja engaged his mind in serving the lotus
feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, his words in describing the qualities
of Śrī Bhagavān, his hands in cleaning Śrī Hariís
temple, and his ears in hearing Acyutaís blissful
pastimes.

mukunda-liṅgālaya-darśane dṛśau

tad-bhṛtya-gātra-sparśe íṅga-saṅgamam

ghrāṇaṁ ca tat-pāda-saroja-saurabhe

śrīmat-tulasyāṁ rasanāṁ tad-arpite

He engaged his eyes in seeing the Deity of Mukunda,
different temples, and the holy places; all his bodily
limbs in touching the bodies of Kṛṣṇaís bhaktas; his
nostrils in smelling the divine smell of tulasī offered
to Kṛṣṇaís lotus feet; and his tongue in tasting the
prasāda offered to Bhagavān.

pādau hareḥ kṣetra-padānusarpaṇe

śiro hṛṣīkeśa-padābhivandane

kāmaṁ ca dāsye na tu kāma-kāmyayā

yathottama-śloka-janāśrayā ratiḥ

His feet were always engaged in walking to Bhagavānís
holy places, and he would pay obeisances to Śrī Kṛṣṇaís
lotus feet. Ambarīṣa Mahārāja would offer garlands,
sandal, bhoga and similar paraphernalia in Bhagavānís
service, not with the desire to enjoy himself, but to
receive the love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa that is present only in
His śuddha-bhaktas.

When Vijaya Kumāra and Vrajanātha heard Bābājī
Mahāśayaís very sweet and blissful instructions, they
were overwhelmed with joy, and offered obeisances to
him, saying, “Prabhu, you are directly Bhagavānís
personal associate. We are both blessed today by
receiving your nectarean instructions. We were wasting
our days in the useless pride of caste, family and high
education. By dint of the wealth of sukṛti accumulated
in many previous lifetimes we have obtained your mercy.”

Vijaya: O most eminent of the bhāgavatas, Śrī Vṛndāvana
dāsa Ṭhākura ordered me to visit the Yoga-pīṭha at Śrī
Māyāpura. By his mercy today I took darśana of that holy
place, and also of a personal associate of Śrī Bhagavān.
If you will be so kind, I will come again tomorrow
evening.

When the elderly Bābājī heard Śrī Vṛndāvana dāsa
Ṭhākuraís name, he immediately offered prostrated
daṇḍavats, and said, “I offer my respectful obeisances
again and again to the incarnation of Vyāsadeva in Śrī
Caitanyaís pastimes.”


                          289
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

Since it had become quite late in the morning,
Vrajanātha and Vijaya Kumāra then departed for
Vrajanāthaís home.



Thus ends The Ninteenth Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled

“Prameya:Abhidheya-Tattva”




Chapter 20

Prameya: Abhidheya -- Vaidhī-Sādhana-Bhakti



Vrajanātha and Vijaya Kumāra returned to Vrajanāthaís
home before noon. Vrajanāthaís mother was waiting for
them, and lovingly served them sumptuous prasādam. On
completion of the meal, uncle and nephew had
affectionate discussions, and Vrajanātha gradually
explained to his respected maternal uncle all the
instructions that he had previously heard from Bābājī
Mahārāja.

When Vijaya Kumāra heard these nectarean instructions,
he became blissful and said, “You are most fortunate.
Sat-saṅga is obtained only by great fortune. You have
obtained the very rare association of a great saint like
Bābājī Mahāśaya, and he has given you substantial
instructions about the highest goal of life
(paramārtaha). One who hears bhakti-kathā and hari-kathā
certainly attains good fortune and well-being, but if
these topics are heard from the mouth of a great
personality, then good fortune comes especially quickly.
You are learned in all the śāstras, and your scholarship
in nyāya-śāstra is especially unparalleled. You were
born in a Vedic brāhmaṇa family, and are not without
wealth. All these opulences now appear as your
ornaments. The reason for this is that you have taken
shelter of the lotus feet of Vaiṣṇavas, and acquired a
taste for Śrī Kṛṣṇaís līlā-kathā.”

As they discussed the supreme goal of life in this way,
Vrajanāthaís mother entered and said to Vijaya Kumāra,
“Brother, it is so long since you were here. Please
encourage Vrajanātha to become a gṛhastha (householder).
From his behaviour, I am afraid that he may become some
kind of sādhu. Several people have come with proposals
for marriage, but he has taken a vow not to get married.
My mother-in-law has also endeavored in this regard, but
he was not convinced.”

After listening to his sister Vijaya Kumāra replied, “I
will stay here for about fifteen days, and reflect
carefully on this matter, and then inform you of my
decision. Now please go inside the house.”


                             290
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

Vrajanāthaís mother left, and Vijaya Kumāra and
Vrajanātha again engaged in talks about the supreme goal
of life. The whole day passed like this. The following
day, when they had taken their meal, Vijaya Kumāra said,
“Vrajanātha, this evening let us both go to Śrīvāsāṅgana
and hear from Bābājī Mahārāja the explanation of the 64
aṅgas of bhakti given by Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī. He
Vrajanātha! May I achieve association like yours birth
after birth. Now, Bābājī Mahāśaya has described two
paths of sādhana-bhakti: vaidhī-mārga and rāga-mārga.
Frankly speaking, we are actually qualified for vaidhī-
dharma. Thus we should understand vaidhī-mārga
thoroughly and begin to practice sādhana before hearing
instructions on rāga-mārga. During his last talk Śrīla
Bābājī Mahārāja gave us instructions about the nine-fold
(navadhā) process of bhakti, however, I do not
understand how I should begin navadhā-bhakti. Today we
should understand this subject more deeply.”

As they continued on in this way, it became evening. The
sunís rays had left the earth, and were playing with the
high branches of the trees. Vijaya Kumāra and Vrajanātha
left home, and arrived at Śrīvāsāṅgana again. There they
offered their daṇḍavat-praṇāma to the assembled
Vaiṣṇavas and then entered the elderly Bābājīís kuṭīra.

Seeing how eager the bhaktas were to learn, Bābājī
became very pleased. With great love, he embraced them
and offered them each an āsana. They both offered their
daṇḍavat-praṇāma to Bābājī Mahāśayaís feet and sat down.

After they had chatted for a short time, Vijaya Kumāra
said, “Prabhu, we are certainly giving you much trouble,
however you mercifully accept it because of your
affection for the bhaktas. Today we would like to hear
from you about the 64 different aṅgas of bhakti that Śrī
Rūpa Gosvāmī has described. If you think that we are
qualified, kindly tell us, so that we can easily realize
śuddha-bhakti.”

Bābājī smiled and said, “First listen attentively. I
will recite the 64 aṅgas of bhakti, as described by Śrī
Rūpa Gosvāmī, the first ten of which are the basic,
preliminary aṅgas:

1. Taking shelter of the lotus feet of Śrī Guru (guru-
pādāśraya);

2. Taking initiation and instructions from Śrī Guru
(guru-dīkṣā and śikṣā);

3. Serving Śrī Guru with faith (viśvāsa-pūrvaka guru-
sevā);

4. Following the path outlined by sādhus;

5. Inquiring about sad-dharma or the procedures of
bhajana;

6. Renouncing all enjoyment of sense objects for Kṛṣṇa’s
sake;

7. Residing in dhāmas such as Dvārakā, and near to holy
rivers such as the Gaṅgā and Yamunā;

                          291
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017


8. Accepting only as much money and other facilities as
are required to sustain one’s life;

9. Respecting Ekādaśī, Janmāṣṭamī and other days related
to Hari;

10. Offering respects to the aśvattha, amalakī and other
sacred trees;

The next ten aṅgas take the form of prohibitions:

11. Abandoning all association of those who are averse
to Kṛṣṇa;

12. Not accepting unqualified people as disciples;

13. Renouncing pretentious endeavors, such as pompous
festivals, etc.;

14. Refraining from reading and reciting many books and
making novel interpretations of śāstra;

15. Avoiding miserly behavior in practical dealings;

16. Not being influenced by emotions such as
lamentation;

17. Not disrespecting or blaspheming the devatās;

18. Not harassing any jīva;

19. Abandoning fully offenses in sevā (sevā-aparādha)
and in the chanting of śrī-hari-nāma (nāma-aparādha);

20. Not tolerating blasphemy of Bhagavān and His
bhaktas.

You should understand these 20 aṅgas to be the entrance
to the temple of bhakti, and the first three ñ taking
shelter of the lotus feet of śrī-guru, taking dīkṣā and
śikṣā from guru, and serving him with faith ñ are the
main activities. After this are the following:

21. Adopting the outward signs (such as tilaka) of a
Vaiṣṇava;

22. Wearing the syllables of śrī-hari-nāma on one’s
body;

23. Accepting the remnants of garments, garlands and so
on that have been offered to the Deity;

24. Dancing in front of the Deity;

25. Offering daṇḍavat-praṇāma to Śrī Guru, Vaiṣṇava and
Bhagavān;

26. Respectfully rising from one’s seat on having
darśana of Hari, Guru and Vaiṣṇavas, and greeting them;

27. Following the Deity in procession;

28. Visiting the temples of Śrī Bhagavān;

                          292
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017


29. Circumambulation (parikramā) of the temple;

30. Performing Deity worship (pūjā and arcana);

31. Serving Śrī Kṛṣṇa like a king (paricarya);

32. Singing;

33. Performing congregational chanting of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
Nāma, nāma-saṅkīrtana;

34. Performing japa of the gāyatrī-mantras at the three
sandhyās, after first performing ācamana;

35. Offering submissive prayers or entreaties;

36. Reciting bhajanas or mantras in praise of Śrī Kṛṣṇa;

37. Relishing bhagavat-prasāda;

38. Drinking śrī-caraṇāmṛta (the nectar that has washed
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet);

39. Smelling the fragrance of incense, garlands and so
on that have been offered to Śrī Kṛṣṇa;

40. Touching the Deity;

41. Viewing (darśana) śrī mūrti with devotion;

42. Having darśana of āratī and festivals, etc.;

43. Hearing about the names, forms, qualities, pastimes,
etc., of Śrī Hari;

44. Always anticipating Kṛṣṇa’s mercy;

45. Contemplating (smaraṇam) Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s name, form,
qualities and pastimes;

46. Meditation;

47. Servitorship;

48. Friendship;

49. Self-surrender (ātma-samarpaṇa);

50. Offering one’s own very dear items to Kṛṣṇa;

51. Incessantly performing activities for Kṛṣṇa’s
pleasure;

52. Full self-surrender (śaraṇāgati) unto Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
lotus feet;

53. Serving Tulasī-devī;

54. Respecting Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and other bhakti-
śāstras;

55. Hearing and singing the glories of Śrī Hari’s dhāma
and His appearance places, such as Mathurā, and

                           293
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

circumambulating them;

56. Serving the Vaiṣṇavas;

57. Celebrating festivals related to Śrī Kṛṣṇa in
gatherings of sādhus, according to one’s means;

58. Observing the vow of cāturmāsya and especially
niyama-sevā in the month of Kārttika;

59. Celebrating the festival of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s Appearance
Day;

60. Śraddhayā śrī-mūrtir sevana – serving the Deity with
faith;

61. Bhagavat-śravaṇa – relishing the meaning of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam in association with rasika Vaiṣṇavas;

62. Sādhu-saṅga – associating with bhaktas who are of
the same mood, affectionate, and more advanced than
oneself (svajātiya-susnigdha-sadhu-saṅga);

63. Nāma-saṅkīrtanam – loud congregational chanting of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s Nāma;

64. Mathurā-vāsa – residing in dhāmas like Mathurā and
Vṛndāvana.

Although the last five aṅgas have been described at the
end, they are nonetheless the most important. They are
also referred to as pañcāṅga-bhakti (five-fold
devotional service). All these aṅgas are to be followed
with body, senses and the inner faculty (mind, heart and
soul) in the worship of Kṛṣṇa.

Vijaya: Prabhu, please give us some detailed
instructions regarding śrī-guru-pādāśraya. (#1)

Bābājī: When the disciple has become qualified for
undivided kṛṣṇa-bhakti, he should take shelter at the
feet of Śrī Guru, and by coming close to the qualified
guru, he will learn kṛṣṇa-tattva. The jīva becomes
qualified for kṛṣṇa-bhakti only when he is faithful. By
the influence of pious activities (sukṛti) performed in
previous births, he hears hari-kathā from the mouths of
sādhus, and a strong faith in Kṛṣṇa arises in him. This
is called śraddhā. Together with śraddhā, the mood of
taking shelter (śaraṇāgati) also appears to some extent.
Śraddhā and śaraṇāgati are almost the same tattva. The
disciple is qualified for undivided (ananya) bhakti if
he has developed the strong faith: “Kṛṣṇa-bhakti is
certainly the best and highest attainment in this world.
Thus I will accept kṛṣṇa-bhakti as my duty and to that
end I will do whatever is favorable for it, and reject
all activities that are unfavorable. Kṛṣṇa is my sole
protector, and I accept Him as my exclusive guardian. I
am very poor, wretched and destitute, and my independent
desire is not beneficial for me. Thus following Kṛṣṇa’s
desire exclusively is beneficial for me in all ways.”
When the jīva attains that qualification, he becomes
anxious to hear instructions on bhakti, and accepts
shelter at the lotus feet of the sad-guru. That is to
say, he becomes his disciple, and accepts instructions

                             294
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

(śikṣā) on bhakti.

tad-vijñānārthaṁ sa gurum evābhigacchet

samit-pāniḥ śrotriyaṁ brahma-niṣṭham

Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad (1.2.12)

In order to obtain knowledge of that bhagavad-vastu (the
absolute truth concerning Śrī Bhagavān), one should
approach sad-guru, carrying fire wood for sacrifice. The
qualification of sad-guru is that he is well versed in
the Vedas, absorbed in the Absolute Truth (brahma-jñāna)
and devoted to the service of Bhagavān.

ācāryavān puruṣo veda

Chāndogya Upaniṣad (6.14.2)

He who takes shelter of sad-guru comes to know that
para-brahma.

The qualities of a sad-guru (bona fide guru) and the
sat-śiṣya (bona fide disciple) are given in detail in
the Śrī Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (1.23.64). The essence is
that only a person with pure character and śraddhā is
qualified to become a śiṣya and only that person who is
endowed with śuddha-bhakti, who knows bhakti-tattva, and
is of spotless character, simple, without greed, free
from Māyāvāda philosophy, and expert in all devotional
activities is qualified as sad-guru.

A brāhmaṇa adorned with these qualities, and who is
honored by the whole society, can be guru of all the
other varṇas. If there is no brāhmaṇa, the disciple can
accept a guru who is situated in a higher varṇa than
himself. Apart from these considerations of varṇāśrama,
the principal consideration is that whoever knows kṛṣṇa-
tattva can be accepted as guru. If a person born in one
of the higher varṇas ñ brāhmaṇa, ksatriya and vaiśya ñ
finds the above-mentioned qualities present in a person
born of a brahmaṇa family and accepts him as guru, then
he can get some facilities and favors in a society that
respects the higher varṇa. Factually, though, only a
worthy bhakta can be guru. The rules for testing the
guru and disciple, as well as the determination of time,
are given in the śāstras. The purport is that the guru
will bestow his mercy upon the disciple when the guru
perceives the disciple to be qualified, and when the
disciple has faith in the guru, understanding him to be
a śuddha-bhakta.

There are two kinds of guru: dīkṣā-guru and śikṣā-guru.
One has to accept dīkṣā from the dīkṣā-guru; at the same
time, one also has to take śikṣā concerning arcana
(Deity worship). There is one dīkṣā-guru, but there can
be several śikṣā-gurus. The dīkṣā-guru is also competent
to act as śikṣā-guru.

Vijaya: Since the dīkṣā-guru is not to be given up, how
will Gurudeva give śikṣā if he is not competent of
giving sat-śikṣā?

Bābājī: Before accepting a guru, one should examine him

                            295
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

to see that he is expert in the tattva spoken in the
Vedas and has realized para-tattva. If he is, then he
will certainly be capable of giving all kinds of
instructions about the Absolute Truth. Normally, there
is no question of giving up the dīkṣā-guru. There are
two circumstances, however, in which he should be
abandoned. First, if the disciple accepted the guru
without examining the guru’s knowledge of the Absolute
Truth, his Vaiṣṇava qualities, and his other
qualifications, and second, if after initiation, the
guru does not perform any function, he should be given
up. Many passages in śāstras give evidence for this:



yo vyaktir nyāya-rahitam anyāyena śṛṇoti yaḥ

tāv ubhau narakaṁ ghoraṁ vrajataḥ kālam akṣayam

Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (1.62)

He who poses as an ācārya, but gives false instructions
that are opposed to the sattvata-śāstras, will reside in
a terrible hell for an unlimited period of time, and so
will the misguided disciple who mistakenly listens to
such a false guru.

guror apy avaliptasya kāryākāryam ajānataḥ

utpatha-pratipannasya parityāgo vidhīyate

Mahābhārata Udyoga-parva (179.25)

and Nārada-pañcarātra (1.10.20)

It is oneís duty to give up a guru who cannot teach the
disciple what he should do and what he should not do,
and who takes the wrong path, either because of bad
association or because he is opposed to Vaiṣṇavas.

avaiṣṇavopadiṣṭena mantreṇa nirayaṁ vrajet

punaś ca vidhinā samyag grāhayed vaiṣṇavād guroḥ

Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (4.144)

One goes to hell if he accepts mantras from an
avaiṣṇava-guru, that is, one who is associating with
women, and who is devoid of kṛṣṇa-bhakti. Therefore,
according to the rules of śāstra, one should take
mantras again from a Vaiṣṇava guru.

The second circumstance in which one may reject the guru
is if he was a Vaiṣṇava who knew the spiritual truth and
principles when the disciple accepted him, but who later
became a Māyāvādī or an enemy of the Vaiṣṇavas by the
influence of asat-saṅga. It is oneís duty to give up
such a guru. However, it is not proper to give up a guru
whose knowledge is meager, if he is not a Māyāvādī or an
enemy of the Vaiṣṇavas, and is not attached to sinful
activity. In that case, one should still respect him as
guru, and with his permission, one should go to another
Vaiṣṇava who is more knowledgeable, and serve that
Vaiṣṇava and take instructions from him.

                             296
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017


Vijaya: Please tell us about kṛṣṇa-dīkṣā and śikṣā. (#2)

Bābājī: One should accept śikṣā about the process of
arcana (Deity worship) and pure devotional service from
Śrī Gurudeva, and one should then perform kṛṣṇa-sevā and
kṛṣṇa-anuśīlanam with a simple mood. We will consider
the aṅgas of arcana in more detail later. It is
essential to take śikṣā from Śrī Gurudeva regarding
sambandha-jñāna (one’s relationship with Kṛṣṇa),
abhidheya-jñāna (the process of devotional service), and
prayojana-jñāna (the ultimate goal).

Vijaya: What does it mean to perform guru-sevā with
faith? (#3)

Bābājī: One should not consider Śrī Gurudeva to be a
mortal or an ordinary jīva. Rather, one should
understand him to be the representative of all the
devatās (sarva-devamaya). One should never disobey him,
and one should always know him to be vaikuṇṭha-tattva.

Vijaya: What does sādhu-mārgānugmanam (to follow the
path of saints) mean? (#4)

Bābājī:Sādhana-bhakti may be described as the means one
adopts to fix one’s mind on Kṛṣṇa’s feet, but it is
one’s duty to follow the path that the previous great
personalities (mahājanas) have followed, because this
path is always free from misery and hard labor, and is
the cause of all auspiciousness.

sa mṛgyaḥ śreyasāṁ hetuḥ panthaḥ santāpa-varjitaḥ

anavāpta-śramaṁ pūrve yena santaḥ pratasthire

Skanda Purāṇa

No one person can perfectly define the course or path of
devotion that one should follow, but the previous
mahājanas, following each other in succession, have made
this path of bhakti-yoga clear and simple, step by step.
They have made it easy, and have removed all the
obstacles, great and small, so we can follow it
fearlessly. Therefore, it is oneís duty to depend only
on that path. Even if one is performing single-pointed,
undivided bhakti of Śrī Hari, his bhakti can never bring
any good fortune if he is violating the rules of śruti,
smṛti, the Purāṇas and the Pañcarātras. One should
understand that such unauthorized bhakti will only be
the cause of confusion and disaster.

śruti-smṛti-purāṇādi-pañcarātra-vidhiṁ vinā

aikāntikī harer bhaktir utpātāyaiva kalpate

Brahma-yāmala, quoted in

Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu

Vijaya: Please tell us clearly how unauthorized hari-
bhakti can be the cause of disaster.

Bābājī: Single-pointed and undivided consciousness in

                             297
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

śuddha-bhakti is only obtained by depending on the path
given by the previous mahājanas. One cannot attain
single-pointed consciousness if one leaves the path of
the previous mahājanas and creates another path.
Consequently, Dattātreya, Buddha and other teachers who
were not able to understand śuddha-bhakti accepted a
shadow of this mood, and propagated the very
insignificant paths of māyāvāda-miśrā (bhakti mixed with
māyāvāda) and nāstikatā-miśra (bhakti mixed with
atheism). They designated these as single-pointed hari-
bhakti, but in reality, the paths that they put forward
are not hari-bhakti at all; they only create immense
confusion and spiritual disaster. Now, in the bhajana of
spontaneous devotion (rāga-mārga), there is no regard
for the rules of śruti, smṛti, purāṇa, pañcarātra and so
on. The only concern the followers of this path have is
to follow the inhabitants of Vraja, but sādhakas who are
qualified for vidhi-mārga must depend only on the path
of bhakti shown by Dhruva, Prahlāda, Nārada, Vyāsa, Śuka
and other mahājanas. That is why vaidhī-bhaktas have no
alternative but to follow the way of the sādhus.

Vijaya: What is the meaning of being inquisitive about
sad-dharma and the procedures of bhajana? (#5)

Bābājī:Sad-dharma means real dharma or the dharma of
real sādhus, and one should inquire enthusiastically to
understand it.

Vijaya: What does it mean to give up enjoyment for
Kṛṣṇa’s sake? (#6)

Bābājī: Material enjoyment (bhoga) means enjoying
happiness from the pleasure of eating and so on. That
bhoga is usually opposed to bhajana, so bhajana becomes
easy when one gives up such enjoyment for the purpose of
kṛṣṇa-bhajana. A person who is attached to material
enjoyment is just like a person who drinks alcohol, for
he’s so much attached to the objects of his senses that
he is unable to perform śuddha-bhakti. Therefore, we
should not enjoy material food; rather, we should only
honor and serve bhagavat-prasāda. One should protect the
body that we use in service, and also give up all kinds
of enjoyment on Ekādaśī, Janmāṣṭamī, Phālgunī Pūrṇimā,
Nṛsiṁha Caturdaśī, and similar days.

Vijaya: What does it mean to reside in dhāmas such as
Dvārakā, and places near the Gaṅgā and other holy
rivers? (#7)

Bābājī: Faith and steadiness in bhakti (bhakti-niṣṭhā)
arise in the places where Bhagavān’s blessed appearance
and other pastimes took place, and near pious rivers
such as the Gaṅgā and Yamunā.

Vijaya: Thus if one resides in Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma, one
becomes purified. Is the Gaṅgā the cause of this, or is
there another cause as well?

Bābājī:Aho! One receives all the benefits of residing in
Vṛndāvana if one resides anywhere within the 16 krośas
of Śrī Navadvīpa, and especially if one resides in Śrī
Māyāpura. Ayodhyā, Mathurā, Gāyā, Kāśī, Kāñcī, Avantikā
and Dvārakā are the seven holy places that give

                          298
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

liberation, but among them Śrī Māyāpura is the most
important dhāma. The reason is that Śrīman Mahāprabhu
has caused His eternal abode Śvetadvīpa to descend here.
Four centuries after Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s appearance,
this Śvetadvīpa will become the most important dhāma,
above all the other dhāmas on earth. By residing in this
dhāma, one becomes free from all kinds of offenses and
attains śuddha-bhakti. Śrī Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī has
accepted this dhāma as non-different from Śrī Vṛndāvana.
In fact, in some places he has shown that it is even
more glorious.

Vijaya: What does it mean to adopt appropriate means to
sustain one’s life for practicing bhakti? (#8)

Bābājī: It is said in the Nāradīya Purāṇa:

yāvatā syāt sva-nirvāhaḥ svīkuryāt tāvad artha-vit

ādhikye nyūnatāyāṁ ca cyavate paramārthataḥ

A wealthy person should accept as much wealth as he
requires to follow the rules and rituals that sustain
his bhakti. Accepting more or less than necessary is the
cause of falling down, even from the highest level.

One who is qualified for vaidhī-bhakti may earn his
livelihood by some proper means according to varṇāśrama-
dharma. It is beneficial to accept wealth according to
oneís necessity. Accepting more than necessary results
in attachment, which gradually destroys oneís bhajana.
It is not beneficial either to accept less than
necessary, because the resultant scarcity will also
weaken oneís bhajana. Therefore, as long as one is not
qualified for complete detachment (nirapekṣa), one
should accept wealth and so forth to maintain oneís life
and to follow śuddha-bhakti.

Vijaya: How does one observe hari-vāsara? (#9)

Bābājī: The term hari-vāsara refers to pure or unbroken
(śuddha) Ekādaśī. Mixed (viddha) Ekādaśī must be given
up. In cases where Dvādaśī is Mahā-dvādaśī, Dvādaśī
should be observed instead of Ekādaśī. One should
observe celibacy on the previous day, and then spend the
day of hari-vāsara fasting without taking water. One
should stay awake the whole night, incessantly engaged
in bhajana, and on the next day one should observe
celibacy and break the fast at the proper time. This is
proper observance of hari-vāsara. It is not possible to
observe nirjala fasting (i.e. fasting without drinking
water) without giving up mahā-prasāda. If one does not
have the ability or strength to observe hari-vāsara
properly, there is a provision for alternative
arrangements (aṇukalpa).. According to Hari-bhakti-
vilāsa, a representative may fast on one’s behalf.

upavāsetv aśaktasya āhitāgner athāpi vā

putrān vā kārayed anyān brāhmaṇān vāpi kārayet

Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (12.34)

If a sāgnika-brāhmaṇa is unable to fast, he may arrange

                             299
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

for brāhmaṇas or his sons to fast on his behalf.

The method of fasting through haviṣyānna and so on is
described as follows:

naktaṁ haviṣyānna-manodanam vā

phalaṁ tilāḥ kṣīram athāmbu cājyāṁ

yat pañca-gavyaṁ yadi vāpi vāyuḥ

praśastam atrottaram uttarañ ca

Vāyu Purāṇa, quoted in

Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (12.39)

In the evening, instead of grains, one should take other
foodstuffs (haviṣyānna), such as fruits, sesame, milk,
water, ghee, pañca-gavya and air. In this list, each
item is better than the one before. According to
Mahābhārata (Udyoga parva):

aṣṭaitānya-vratāghnāni āpo mūlaṁ phalaṁ payaḥ

havir brāhmaṇa-kāmya ca guror vacanam auṣadham

The following eight items do not destroy oneís vrata
(vow): water, roots, fruits, milk, ghee, the desire of a
brāhmaṇa, the words of the guru, and herbs and
medicines.

Vijaya: How does one offer respects to trees such as the
aśvattha and amalakī? (#10)

Bābājī: aśvattha-tulasī-dhātrī-go-bhūmi-sura-vaiṣṇavāḥ

pūjitāḥ praṇatā dhyātāḥ kṣapayanti nṛnām agham

Skanda Purāṇa

All of oneís sins are destroyed if one remembers to
perform pūjā and offers obeisances to the āmalakī and
pippala trees, Tulasī, the cows, brāhmaṇas and
Vaiṣṇavas.

One who is qualified for vaidhī-bhakti must maintain his
journey in life while staying in this world. To do this,
he is obliged to worship, meditate on, take care of, and
offer obeisances to useful and shade-giving trees such
as pippala, to fruit-bearing trees such as the āmalakī,
to worshipable trees such as Tulasī, to cows and other
useful animals, to brāhmaṇas who protect society by
giving instructions on dharma; and to Vaiṣṇavas. The
vaidhī-bhaktas protect the world by performing these
activities.

Vijaya: Please tell us in detail about giving up the
association of people who are averse to Kṛṣṇa. (#11)

Bābājī: When bhāva appears, bhakti becomes very strong
and deep, but so long as bhāva has not risen, it is
necessary to give up the association of people who are
opposed to bhakti. The word saṅga (association)

                             300
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

indicates attachment; saṅga does not just mean being
near other people and holding conversations with them.
Saṅga takes place when there is attachment in that
proximity and conversation. It is quite wrong to
associate with people who are averse to Bhagavān. After
bhāva has arisen, one never has any desire to associate
with such people. Consequently, those with the adhikāra
for vaidhī-bhakti should always stay away from such
association. The creeper of bhakti (bhakti-latā) becomes
dried up by aversion to Kṛṣṇa, just as polluted air and
too much heat destroy trees and plants.

Vijaya: Who are those people who are averse to Kṛṣṇa?

Bābājī: There are four kinds of people who are averse to
Kṛṣṇa: those who are devoid of kṛṣṇa-bhakti and are
attached to sense enjoyment (viṣayī); those who are
attached to associating with women (strī-saṅgī); those
whose hearts are polluted by Māyāvāda philosophy and
atheism; and those who are entangled in karma. One must
give up the association of these four kinds of people.

Vijaya: What should we know about not accepting
unqualified people as disciples? (#12)

Bābājī: It is a great fault to accept many disciples in
order to gain wealth. To make many disciples, one must
also accept those who do not have śraddhā, but it is an
offense to accept unfaithful people as disciples. Only
those who have śraddhā are qualified to be disciples;
others are not.

Vijaya: What is the significance of giving up
pretentious efforts in arranging festivals and so on?
(#13)

Bābājī: Briefly, one must perform bhagavad-bhajana, and
maintain one’s life at the same time. If one engages in
extensive material activities, he becomes so attached to
them that he cannot fix his mind in bhajana.

Vijaya: What about giving up studying, teaching and
interpreting various kinds of books? (#14)

Bābājī: The śāstras are just like the ocean. It is good
to study with discrimination books on the subject in
which we require to take instruction, but we will not
get full knowledge on any subject by reading fragments
of numerous books. Especially, intelligence related to
sambandha-tattva will not arise if one does not fix his
mind in studying attentively the bhakti-śāstras. Be
careful to take only the direct meaning of the śāstras,
for indirect interpretation (speculation) leads to the
opposite conclusion.

Vijaya: What does it mean to give up miserly behavior?
(#15)

Bābājī: We must collect suitable items for food and
shelter during our sojourn in this life. There is
difficulty if we fail to obtain these items, and also if
we obtain them, and then lose them again. Therefore, we
should not be perturbed when such miseries occur;
instead, we should keep remembrance of Bhagavān within

                          301
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

our minds.

Vijaya: How can one be saved from lamentation, anger,
etc.? (#16)

Bābājī: If one’s consciousness is full of sorrow, fear,
anger, greed and madness, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s sphūrti
(manifestation) will not appear. It is natural to feel
sorrow and illusion when one is separated from friends,
or when obstacles prevent us from fulfilling our
desires, but it is not proper to remain under the sway
of this sorrow and illusion. One will certainly feel
separation when separated from a son, but one must
remove this sorrow through remembrance of Śrī Hari. In
this way, one should practice fixing the mind on Śrī
Bhagavān’s lotus feet.

Vijaya: You have said that one should not disrespect the
devatās. Does that mean that we should perform their
pūjā? (#17)

Bābājī: We must have undeviated bhakti towards Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, who is the root devatā of all the devas. One
should not worship any other devatās, thinking them to
be independent of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. At the same time, one
should not be disrespectful to others who offer pūjā to
these devatās. One should respect the devatās,
understanding them to be all servants of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, but
one should always only remember Kṛṣṇa. Undeviating
bhakti will not rise in the jīva’s heart until it is
free from material qualities. One whose consciousness is
covered by the guṇas – sattva, rajaḥ and tamaḥ – will
perform pūjā of the devatā of the particular guṇa by
which he is influenced, and he will have a particular
faith (niṣṭhā) according to his qualification.
Therefore, one should be respectful towards the
worshipable devatās of different persons. By the mercy
of these devatās, the consciousness of these worshipers
will gradually become free from material qualities.

Vijaya: Please explain about not giving anxiety to other
living entities. (#18)

Bābājī: Śrī Kṛṣṇa is very quickly satisfied with one who
maintains a compassionate mood towards other jīvas, and
who does not give them any kind of anxiety through his
body, mind and words. Compassion is the main dharma of
the Vaiṣṇavas.

Vijaya: How does one abandon offenses in sevā (sevā-
aparādha) and in chanting śrī-hari-nāma (nāma-aparādha)?
(#19)

Bābājī: One must very carefully give up the sevā-
aparādhas in Deity worship (arcana) and nāma-aparādha in
general bhakti. There are thirty-two kinds of sevā-
aparādha, including entering the temple wearing shoes or
sitting in a palanquin; and there are ten kinds of nāma-
aparādha, including blaspheming saints and disrespecting
śrī-guru. One must certainly abandon these two
categories of aparādhas.

Vijaya: You have said that we should not tolerate
hearing blasphemy of Bhagavān and His bhaktas. Does that

                          302
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017

mean that we should fight with the blasphemer? (#20)

Bābājī: Those who blaspheme Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the Vaiṣṇavas
are opposed to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and their association should
be given up in any way possible.

Vijaya: You mentioned that these twenty aṅgas of bhakti
are especially significant. What is their connection
with the other aṅgas?

Bābājī: The remaining forty-four aṅgas are included
within the twenty aṅgas that I have just described. They
have been presented as different aṅgas in order to
explain them in detail. The thirty aṅgas from item 21
(accepting the symbols of a Vaiṣṇava) to item 50
(offering one’s dearest possessions to Kṛṣṇa) are
included in the path of Deity worship (arcana):

21. Accepting the symbols of a Vaiṣṇava means wearing a
necklace of tulasī beads around the neck, and applying
tilaka on twelve parts of the body.

22. Wearing the letters of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Nāma means writing
the names Hare Kṛṣṇa or the names of the Pañca-tattva on
the main parts of the body with sandalwood pulp
(candana).

23. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.6.46) recommends that we
accept the Deities’ remnants (nirmālya):

tvayopabhukta-srag-gandha-vāso-ílaṅkāra-carcitāḥ

ucchiṣṭa-bhojino dāsās tava māyāṁ jayema hi

Wearing the remnants of garlands, sandalwood paste
(candana), clothes and jewellery that You have worn, and
taking the remnants of Your food, we Your servants will
certainly be victorious over Your māyā.

24. Dancing before the Deity of Kṛṣṇa;

25. Offering prostrated obeisances (daṇḍavat-praṇāma);

26. Standing up when one sees śrī vigraha coming
(abhyutthāna).

27. Following behind the Deity in procession
(anuvrajyā).

28. Going into the temple of Kṛṣṇa;

29. Parikramā means to circumambulate the Deities at
least three times keeping Them on one’s right side.

30. Arcana means performing worship (pūjā) of the Deity
(śrī-mūrti) with different articles;.

31. Paricaryā means performing sevā for Śrī Kṛṣṇa just
as for a king.

paricaryā tu sevopakaraṇādi-pariṣkriyā

tathā prakīrṇaka-cchatra-vāditrādyair upāsanā


                          303
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.61)

This paricaryā is of two kinds one is to clean the
paraphernalia and to perform worship; and the other is
to perform sevā with a cāmara, to hold an umbrella, to
play musical instruments and so forth.

There is no need to explain the next few aṅgas
separately in any detail.

32. Singing;

33. Congregational chanting of śrī-hari-nāma;

34. Humbly expressing one’s mind in words (vijñapti);

35. Chanting japa and mantras with ācamana, three times
a day;

36. Reciting ślokas (stava-pāṭha) that glorify Śrī
Kṛṣṇa;

37. Accepting and respecting foodstuffs offered to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa (naivedya);

38. Tasting with devotion the water that has bathed Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet;

39. Relishing the fragrance of incense and garlands that
have been offered to Śrī Kṛṣṇa;

40. Taking darśana of śrī-mūrti;

41. Touching śrī-mūrti;

42. Seeing the performance of the āratī ceremony;

43. Hearing the glories of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s nāma, rūpa, guṇa,
līlā, and kathā;

44. Experiencing Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s mercy everywhere and in all
circumstances;

45. Contemplating Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s nāma, rūpa, guṇa and līlā,
within the mind;

46. Thoroughly meditating on Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s nāma, rūpa,
guṇa and līlā, and offering service in the mind (manasi-
sevā).

These few aṅgas are quite clear.

47. There are two kinds of servitorship (dāsyam):
offering the results of one’s activities, and being a
servant.

48. There are two kinds of sakhyam: that which is based
on faith (viśvāsa), and that which is based on an
attitude of friendship (maitrī).

49. The significance of the word ātma-nivedanam comes
from the word ātmā. From this come the two principles of
egoism of the embodied soul, namely, attachment to the
dehī (possessor of the body) in the form of ahaṁtā (I-

                          304
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

ness) and attachment to the deha (body) in the form of
mamatā (my-ness). Ātma-nivedanam means to offer these
two principles to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Vijaya: Will   you please explain these two terms more
clearly: the   egoism of the embodied jīva (dehī-niṣṭha
ahaṁtā), and   attachment to the body and to things
connected to   the body (deha-niṣṭha mamatā)?

Bābājī: The jīva within the body is called dehī
(embodied) or aham (self). Acting with the false
consciousness of “I” is called dehī-niṣṭha ahaṁtā (the
egoism of the embodied jīva); and the consciousness of
possessing the body or things that are related to the
body is called deha-niṣṭha mamatā (attachment to things
connected with the body). These two principles of ‘I’
and ‘mine’ are both to be offered to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Ātma-
nivedanam means to relinquish the consciousness of ‘I’
and ‘mine,’ and to take care of the body with the
consciousness, “I am Kṛṣṇa’s servant, I take Kṛṣṇa’s
prasāda, and I use this body in Kṛṣṇa’s service.”

Vijaya: How should we offer to Kṛṣṇa things that are
dear to us? (#50)

Bābājī: When we accept the things of this world that are
very pleasing to us, we should first offer them to
Kṛṣṇa. This is what Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī means by offering
the dearmost things to Kṛṣṇa.

Vijaya: How should we perform all endeavors for Kṛṣṇa’s
sake? (#51)

Bābājī: Performing all endeavors for Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s sake
means that one should perform all material activities
and all activities in regulated devotional service that
are favorable for service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa (hari-sevā).

Vijaya: How can one accept shelter in every way? (#52)

Bābājī: Taking full shelter (śaraṇāgati) means to
express the mood, “O Bhagavān, I am Yours!” (he bhagavān
tavaivāsmi!) and “O Bhagavān! I am taking shelter of
You!” (he radhe! he kṛṣṇa! tavaivāsmi) in the mind, and
out loud.

Vijaya: How does one perform service to Tulasī (tulasī-
sevā)? (#53)

Bābājī: There are nine ways of performing tulasī-sevā:
having darśana of Tulasī, touching Tulasī, remembering
Tulasī, performing kīrtana of Tulasī, offering
obeisances to Tulasī, hearing the glories and pastimes
of Tulasī, planting Tulasī, looking after Tulasī, and
perform regular daily worship (nitya-pūjā) of Tulasī.

Vijaya: How should one respect the śāstras? (#54)

Bābājī: The śāstras that establish bhagavad-bhakti are
the real śāstras. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the best of all
these śāstras, because it is the essence of all Vedānta.
Those who taste its nectarean mellows have no ruci for
any other śāstra.


                            305
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

Vijaya: What are the glories of Kṛṣṇa’s birthplace,
Mathurā? (#55)

Bābājī: All desires are fulfilled by performing the
following activities in relation to Mathurā: hearing,
chanting and remembering, desiring to go there, seeing
(darśana), touching, residing there, and serving. You
should know that Śrīdhāma Māyāpura is also of exactly
the same nature as Mathurā.

Vijaya: What is the purport of serving the Vaiṣṇavas
(vaiṣṇava-sevā)? (#56)

Bābājī: Vaiṣṇavas are very dear to Bhagavān, so when we
serve the Vaiṣṇavas, we obtain bhakti towards Bhagavān.
It is said in the śāstras that worshiping Śrī Viṣṇu is
greater than worshiping all the devatās, but greater
than the worship of Viṣṇu is worshiping the Vaiṣṇava,
who is His servant (sevaka).

Vijaya: What is the meaning of observing festivals
according to one’s means? (#57)

Bābājī: Mahotsava really means collecting articles
according to one’s means, and using them in Bhagavān’s
service and in His temple for the service of pure
Vaiṣṇavas. There is no greater festival than this in
this world.

Vijaya: How should we respect the month of Kārttika?
(#58)

Bābājī: The month of Kārttika is also called Ūrjjā.
Respecting Ūrjjā means performing sevā of Śrī Dāmodara
by following the aṅgas of bhakti, such as śravaṇa and
kīrtana, in a regulated way during this month.

Vijaya: How should one observe Kṛṣṇa’s Birth Day? (#59)

Bābājī: Śrī Janma-yātrā means observing the festivals of
Kṛṣṇa’s Appearance Day on Kṛṣṇa-āṣṭamī in the month of
Bhādrapada, and of Mahāprabhu’s Appearance Day on the
full moon day (Pūrṇimā) of the month of Phālguna.
Surrendered bhaktas must certainly observe these
festivals.

Vijaya: How should one faithfully serve and worship
(paricaryā) śrī-mūrti with opulence suitable for a king?
(#60)

Bābājī: Loving enthusiasm is very necessary in the
service and worship of śrī-mūrti. Kṛṣṇa gives not only
the insignificant fruit of mukti, but also the great
fruit of bhakti, to those who perform sevā-pūjā of śrī-
mūrti with great enthusiasm.

Vijaya: What does it mean to relish Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam in
the association of rasika-bhaktas? (#61)

Bābājī:Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the very sweet rasa of the
desire tree of the Vedas. By associating with people
averse to rasa one will be unable to taste the rasa of
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and the result will be aparādha. One
must taste the rasa of the ślokas of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam

                          306
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

in the association of those who are rasa-jña, who are
conversant with, and are drinking that rasa, and who are
qualified for śuddha-bhakti. Speaking or hearing Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam in general assemblies will not award pure
bhakti.

Vijaya: What is the association of bhaktas who are of
the same mood (svajātīya) and affectionate (snigdha)?
(#62)

Bābājī: Associating with abhaktas (non-devotees) in the
name of sat-saṅga will not bring elevation in bhakti.
The goal that bhaktas desire is to obtain service in
Kṛṣṇa’s aprākṛta (unmanifest) līlā, and one who has this
desire should be known as a bhakta. Elevation in bhakti
comes from associating with members of this group of
bhaktas who are superior to oneself. Without this saṅga,
the development of bhakti stops, and one acquires the
nature of the class of people with whom one has saṅga.
In relation to saṅga, Hari-bhakti-sudhodyaya (8.51)
says:

yasya yat-saṅgatiḥ puṁso maṇivat syāt sa tad-guṇaḥ

sva-kularddhye tato dhīmān sva-yuthāny eva saṁśrayet

Just as a jewel reflects the colors of objects around
it, similarly, a persons nature becomes like that of
those with whom he associates.

Therefore, one only becomes a pure sādhu by the
association of pure sādhus. Sādhu-saṅga (the association
of advanced bhaktas) is beneficial in every way. Where
śāstra gives advice that we should be free from mundane
companionship, the purport is that one should associate
with sādhus.

Vijaya: What is meant by nāma-saṅkīrtana? (#63)

Bābājī:Nāma is aprākṛta-caitanya-rasa (a transcendental
living mellow), and within nāma there is not any scent
of mundane consciousness. When the devoted jīva becomes
purified through bhakti and renders service to śrī-hari-
nāma, śrī-nāma personally manifests on his tongue. Nāma
cannot be accepted with material senses. This is how one
should incessantly perform nāma-saṅkīrtana, either alone
or with others.

Vijaya: By your mercy we have already understood
something about mathurā-vāsa (living in Kṛṣṇa’s
birthplace, Mathurā). Now please explain the essence of
these instructions. (#64)

Bābājī: Amongst the 64 aṅgas, these last five are the
most exalted. If one establishes even a slight
connection with them and keeps aloof from offenses, then
the state of bhāva will arise by their unlimited
wonderful influence.

Vijaya: Kindly tell us if there is something more that
we should know in relation to this process.

Bābājī: The śāstras sometimes describe some intermediate
fruits of these aṅgas of bhakti, in order to create ruci

                          307
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

for bhajana in those who are extroverted and impious.
However, the main fruit of all these aṅgas is to develop
attachment to Kṛṣṇa. All the activities of one who is
knowledgeable and expert in bhakti must be within the
aṅgas of bhakti, and not within the aṅgas of karma. The
practice of knowledge (jñāna) and renunciation
(vairāgya) may sometimes assist somebody to enter within
the temple of bhakti, but jñāna and vairāgya are not
aṅgas of bhakti, because they make the heart hard,
whereas bhakti is very soft and tender by nature.
Bhaktas accept the jñāna and vairāgya that manifest of
their own accord through the practice of bhakti, but
jñāna and vairāgya cannot be the cause of bhakti, and
bhakti easily awards results that knowledge and
renunciation cannot give.

Sādhana-bhakti gives rise to such ruci for hari-bhajana
that even very strong attachment to sense objects
decreases and vanishes. The sādhaka must always practice
yukta-vairāgya, and always stay away from the spirit of
deceitful renunciation (phalgu-vairāgya). Yukta-vairāgya
means to accept all paraphernalia, according to need and
in a detached mood, knowing it to be related to Kṛṣṇa.
If things are actually related to Śrī Hari, it is
artificial to renounce them as worldly because of greed
for mukti; this is called phalgu-vairāgya. Therefore,
adhyātmika-jñāna and phalgu-vairāgya should be given up.

Sometimes bhakti is displayed to acquire wealth,
disciples and so on, but this is far from pure bhakti.
In fact, such a show of bhakti is not actually an aṅga
of bhakti at all. Discrimination (viveka) and other
qualities are also not aṅgas of bhakti; they are
qualities of the practitioner of bhakti. Similarly yama,
niyama, good conduct, cleanliness, and so on are
naturally present in people who are favorable towards
Kṛṣṇa, so they are also not aṅgas of bhakti. Qualities
such as inward and outward purity, austerity and sense
control take shelter of Kṛṣṇaís bhaktas of their own
accord; the bhaktas do not have to endeavor for them
separately. Some of the aṅgas of bhakti that I have
mentioned are principal aṅgas, and one will attain
perfection by firmly performing sādhana of any of these
principal aṅgas, or of several of them. I have explained
everything about vaidhī-sādhana-bhakti in a very brief
way. Now you should understand this clearly, take it to
heart, and practice it with full force.

When Vrajanātha and Vijaya Kumāra heard these
instructions from Bābājī, they offered sāṣṭāṅga-
daṇḍavat-praṇāma and said, “Prabhu, please deliver us!
We are trapped in the deep trench of pride.”

Bābājī Mahāśaya replied, “Certainly Kṛṣṇa will bestow
His mercy upon you.”

That night uncle and nephew returned home very late.



Thus ends the Twentieth Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled


                          308
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

“Prameya: Abhidheya–Vaidhī-Sādhana-Bhakti”




Chapter 21

Prameya: Abhidheya -- Rāgānugā-Sādhana-Bhakti



Vijaya Kumāra and Vrajanātha were impressed when they
heard the deliberation concerning vaidhī-sādhana-bhakti.
They became firmly convinced that one must accept hari-
nāma and dīkṣā from a siddha-mahātmā (great perfected
soul) in order to enter the supreme abode. They
therefore decided to accept dīkṣā from Siddha Bābājī
Mahārāja the very next day, so as not to lose any time.

Vijaya Kumāra had already received dīkṣā-mantra from his
family guru in his boyhood. Vrajanātha, however, had not
received any dīkṣā-mantra other than the Gāyatrīmantra.
They had both clearly understood from the revered
Bābājīís instructions that the jīva goes to hell if he
chants mantras received from a guru who is not a
Vaiṣṇava; therefore, according to the regulations of
śāstra, when proper discrimination has awakened, he
should again take dīkṣā from a śuddha-vaiṣṇavaguru.
Particularly, one can achieve perfection in the chanting
of his mantra very quickly by accepting the mantra from
a siddha-bhakta. Thinking like this, they both decided
that they would go to Māyāpura the next morning, bathe
in the Gaṅgā, and then take dīkṣā from the most revered
Bābājī.

The next morning, they bathed in the Gaṅgā and applied
tilaka to the twelve places on their bodies. They then
arrived before Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī and offered
prostrated obeisances at his lotus feet. Bābājī
Mahārāja, being a siddha-vaiṣṇava, understood their
minds, but as a matter of etiquette he said, “Why have
you come here today so early in the morning? What is the
matter?”

Vijaya Kumāra and Vrajanātha humbly replied, “O Master,
you know that we are very lowly and destitute of
spiritual wealth, so kindly take pity on us.”

Bābājī Mahāśaya was very pleased to hear them speak in
this way. He called them into his kuṭīra separately, and
bestowed upon them the mantra consisting of eighteen
syllables. On receiving and chanting the mantra, they
both became intoxicated with mahā-prema, and started
dancing, crying out, “Jaya Gaurāṅga! Jaya Gaurāṅga!”
Around their necks they wore three strands of tulasī
beads, the beautiful sacred thread was draped about
their bodies, which were marked with tilaka in twelve
places; their faces were charming; they exhibited some
sāttvika-vikāra (transformations of ecstasy); and tears
flowed incessantly from their eyes. When Bābājī Mahāśaya
saw such beautiful forms, he embraced them, and said,
“Today, you have sanctified me.”


                          309
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

Again and again, they relished the dust from Bābājīís
lotus feet and rubbed it on their heads and on all their
limbs. At that time, in accordance with Vrajanāthaís
previous arrangement, their two servants arrived with a
large quantity of food offerings (bhoga) for Śrīman
Mahāprabhu. With folded hands Vijaya Kumāra and
Vrajanātha requested that the bhoga preparations should
be offered, and the venerable chief among the bhaktas of
Śrīvasa-aṅgana instructed the pūjārī to offer the bhoga
to the Deities of Śrī Śrī Pañca-tattva.

Conch-shells and bells sounded, and the Vaiṣṇavas took
up cymbals, karatālas and mṛdaṅgas and began to sing the
bhoga-āratī song before Śrīman Mahāprabhu. Many
Vaiṣṇavas gathered, and the bhoga offering was
accomplished with great ceremony. Arrangements were then
made for distributing prasādam in the nātya-mandira
(dancing hall). Hearing the loud sounds of hari-nāma,
all the Vaiṣṇavas assembled together, bringing their
loṭas with them. Then they loudly chanted the glories of
mahā-prasāda and began to honor prasāda. Vrajanātha and
Vijaya Kumāra did not want to sit down immediately,
because they were waiting for mahā-mahā-prasāda (the
remnants of the guru and the Vaiṣṇavas). However, the
foremost of the respected Bābājīs made them sit down,
saying, “You are gṛhastha Vaiṣṇavas. We will be blessed
by offering prostrated obeisances unto your lotus feet.”

Vijaya Kumāra and Vrajanātha said humbly with folded
hands, “You are great renounced Vaiṣṇavas. We will be
very fortunate if we can partake of your ambrosial
remnants, and it will be an offense if we sit with you.”

The Vaiṣṇavas replied, “So far as Vaiṣṇavism is
concerned, there is no difference between a householder
and a renunciant. Vaiṣṇavas are compared only according
to their devotion; the more advanced Vaiṣṇava is simply
the one who has the deeper devotion for Śrī Kṛṣṇa.”

They all sat together conversing in this way, and
honoring prasāda, but Vijaya Kumāra and Vrajanātha
waited quietly, faithfully keeping their prasāda in
front of them. Some of the Vaiṣṇavas who were respecting
prasāda noticed this and, understanding their motive,
said to Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī, “O chief of the
Vaiṣṇavas, please be kind to your faithful disciples,
otherwise they will not take prasāda.”

When the elderly Bābājī heard the Vaiṣṇavasí request, he
gave some of his prasāda to Vijaya and Vrajanātha. They
accepted his remnants with great faith, uttering śrī
gurave namaḥ, and began to honor prasāda. While the
bhaktas were taking prasāda, some would call out,
“Sādhus sāvahāna, be very careful not to overeat!” and
“All glories to the greatness of the prasādam!”

Oh! What unprecedented splendor arose in the nātya-
mandira of Śrivasa-aṅgana at that time! Everyone
perceived Śrī Śacī-devī, Sītā and Mālinī-devī bringing
prasāda, while Śrīman Mahāprabhu sat and lovingly took
that prasāda with His dear associates. Seeing this, the
Vaiṣṇavas forgot to take their own prasāda. They all
watched, motionless, while tears of great joy gently
trickled from their eyes, and their hands, which were in

                          310
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

the act of bringing prasāda to their mouths, remained
fixed for as long as this līlā was manifest. After a
short time, the līlā disappeared from their sight, and
they gazed at one another and wept. Then the sweet taste
of that prasāda defied description. As if with a single
voice all of the bhaktas said, “These two sons of
brāhmaṇas are recipients of Gaura Hariís mercy. For this
reason Śrīman Mahāprabhu has manifested His līlā in this
festival today.”

Vrajanātha and Vijaya Kumāra wept and said, “We are
worthless, wretched and destitute. We know nothing at
all. We could only see all these things today by the
causeless mercy of our guru and the Vaiṣṇavas. Today our
taking birth has become meaningful.”

When Vijaya Kumāra and Vrajanātha had honored prasāda,
they took permission of the Vaiṣṇavas and returned home.

From that day on, they bathed daily in the Gaṅgā, and
then offered daṇḍavat-praṇāma at the feet of their
preceptor. They would then take darśana of the Deity
forms of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in the mandira, and circumambulate
Tulasī. In this way, they accepted some kind of
instruction every day. After four or five days had
elapsed, they presented themselves one evening at
Śrivasa-aṅgana. Sandhyā-āratī and nāma-saṅkīrtana were
already over, and Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī sat in his
kuṭīra, softly chanting śrī-nāma in a sweet voice. They
both offered daṇḍavat-praṇāma at his lotus feet, and he
lovingly placed his lotus hand on their heads, seated
them, and inquired about their welfare.

Vrajanātha saw this as an opportunity and said, “Master,
by your mercy we have properly understood vaidhī-
sādhana-bhakti. Now we are very anxious to understand
rāgānugā-bhakti, so kindly instruct us about this.”

Bābājī was extremely pleased to hear this, and said,
“Śrī Gauracandra has taken both of you as His own, so
there is nothing that should not be given to you. Listen
very carefully as I explain rāgānugā-bhakti.

“First, I offer my daṇḍavat-praṇāma again and again at
the lotus feet of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, whom Śrīman
Mahāprabhu liberated from the association of the
Muslims, and to whom he instructed rasa-tattva at
Prayāga. I then take shelter of the lotus feet of Śrī
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, who is like a black bee,
tasting the nectar of that vraja-rasa. The supremely
merciful Śrī Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu liberated him from the
bottomless pit of gross materialism. Then, by entrusting
him within the hands of Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī, He
bestowed all perfection upon him.

“Now, before describing rāgānugā-bhakti, I should
explain the svarūpa of rāgātmikā-bhakti.

Vrajanātha: But I would first like to know what is rāga.

Bābājī: When materialistic people are in contact with
the objects of the senses, they naturally become deeply
attached to an endless variety of material sense
enjoyment. This intense attachment in the heart is

                          311
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017

called viṣaya-rāga. When they glance upon some beautiful
object, the eyes become restless, and in the heart,
there is an attraction (rañjakatā) towards the object of
beauty and attachment (rāga) to it.

Rāga-bhakti is the state in which Kṛṣṇa becomes the sole
object of rāga. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has defined the word
rāga in the following way:

iṣṭe svārasikī rāgaḥ paramāviṣṭatā bhavet

tan-mayī yā bhaved bhaktiḥ sātra rāgātmikoditā

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.272)

Rāga is the unquenchable loving thirst (prema-mayī
tṛṣṇā) for the object of oneís affection, which gives
rise to spontaneous and intense absorption (svārasikī
paramāviṣṭatā) in that object. Rāgamayī bhakti is the
performance of sevā, such as stringing garlands, with
such intense rāga.

Rāga is the absolute (parama) and undivided (svārasikī)
absorption (āviṣṭatā) in oneís own particular object of
worship. When devotion to Kṛṣṇa comes to the stage of
rāgamayī, it is called rāgātmikā-bhakti. In summary, it
can be said that intense hankering for Kṛṣṇa that is
saturated with prema (prema-mayī) is called rāgātmikā-
bhakti.

It is auspicious that a person in whose heart such rāga
has not arisen should strive to cultivate such bhakti by
behaving according to vidhi (the rules and regulations
of śāstra). The principles at work in vaidhī-bhakti are
fear, respect and reverence, whereas the only principle
at work in rāgātmikā-bhakti is lobha, or greed, in
relation to Śrī Kṛṣṇaís līlā.

Vrajanātha: Who has the adhikāra (qualification) for
rāgamayī bhakti?

Bābājī: Vaidhī-śraddhā bestows the adhikāra for vaidhī-
bhakti, and similarly, lobhamayī śraddhā (faith imbued
with greed for Kṛṣṇa’s vraja-līlā) bestows the adhikāra
for rāgamayī bhakti.

The bhāva of the vraja-vāsīs towards Kṛṣṇa is the
supreme example of rāgātmikā-bhakti. One who has the
great fortune to have greed (lobha) to obtain the same
bhāva (sentiment ) as the vraja-vāsīs have towards Kṛṣṇa
has the adhikāra for rāgānugā-bhakti.

Vrajanātha: What are the symptoms of such lobha?

Bābājī: When one hears about the intensely sweet bhāvas
of the vraja-vāsīs, one’s intelligence (buddhi-apekṣā)
begins to consider how one may enter into those
dealings. That desire (apekṣā) is the symptom that lobha
has awakened.

A person who has the adhikāra for vaidhī-bhakti tests
everything on the platform of intelligence, knowledge of
śāstra, and reasoning; and when he hears kṛṣṇa-kathā, he
only accepts it if these three support it. However,

                          312
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

there is no such consideration in rāga-mārga, for
intelligence, knowledge of śāstra, and reasoning are not
desired on this path. All that is needed is the greed
for the sentiments of the vraja-vāsīs: “What are the
sweet bhāvas of the vraja-vāsīs towards Kṛṣṇa? Is it
possible for me to obtain such bhāvas? How can this be
obtained?” This intense yearning is the symptom of
greed, and one who does not have it does not have the
adhikāra for rāgānugā-bhakti. This you should
understand.

Vrajanātha: What is the process of rāgānugā-bhakti?

Bābājī: The sādhaka who has developed greed towards the
beautiful service mood (sevā) of a particular vraja-vāsī
always remembers and meditates on his sevā to that
personality. He is absorbed in the mutual pastimes of
his beloved Śrī Kṛṣṇa with that vraja-vāsī, and he
constantly resides in Vraja, either physically or within
the mind, having a greed to obtain his or her bhāva. He
follows that vraja-vāsī’s example, and always renders
sevā in two ways: Externally, he serves as a practicing
sādhaka; and internally he renders sevā with the bhāvas
(bhāvana-pūrvaka) of his siddha-deha. This is the
process of rāgānugā-bhakti.

Vrajanātha: What is the relationship between rāgānugā-
bhakti and the aṅgas of vaidhī-bhakti?

Bābājī: The aṅgas of vaidhī-bhakti – śravaṇam, kīrtanam,
and so on – are also included in the rāgānugā-sādhaka’s
practice. The sādhaka follows the eternal residents of
Vraja, and consequently he tastes the eternal bliss of
service. At the same time, he observes the aṅgas of
vaidhī-bhakti with his external body.

Vrajanātha: Please explain the glories of rāgānugā-
bhakti.

Bābājī:Rāgānugā-bhakti very quickly bestows that fruit
which one cannot obtain even by observing the aṅgas of
vaidhī-bhakti with firm faith (niṣṭhā) for a long time.
Devotion on the vaidhī-mārga is weak, because it depends
on rules and regulations; whereas rāgānugā-bhakti is
naturally strong, because it is completely independent.
When one adopts the spiritual conception of following in
the footsteps of a loving resident of Vraja, rāga is
awakened which always involves following the process of
śravaṇam, kīrtanam, smaraṇam, pāda-sevanam, arcanam,
vandanam and ātma-nivedanam. Ruci for following in the
footsteps of the vraja-vāsīs is only awakened in those
whose hearts are nirguṇa (beyond material attributes).
This is why the greed for rāgānugā-bhakti is supremely
rare and the root of supreme auspiciousness. There are
as many types of rāgānugā-bhakti as there are of
rāgātmikā-bhakti.

Vrajanātha: How many kinds of rāgātmikā-bhakti are
there?

Bābājī: There are two kinds of rāgātmikā-bhakti: that
which is based on transcendental lust to satisfy Kṛṣṇa
(kāma-rūpā), and that which is based on relationship
(sambandha-rūpā).

                          313
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017


Vrajanātha: Please explain the difference between kāma-
rūpā and sambandha-rūpā.

Bābājī: It is said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.1.30-31):

kāmād dveṣād bhayāt snehād yathā bhaktyeśvare manaḥ

āveśya tad-aghaṁ hitvā bahavas tad-gatiṁ gatāḥ

gopyaḥ kāmād bhayāt kaṁso dveṣāc caidyādayo nṛpāḥ

sambandhād vṛṣṇayaḥ snehād yūyaṁ bhaktyā vayaṁ vibho

Many people have attained the Supreme by complete
absorption of the mind in devotion through lusty desires
(kāma), envy (dveṣa), fear (bhaya), or affection
(sneha), and by giving up the faulty aspects of those
sentiments. The gopīs have attained the Supreme by
fixing their minds on Kṛṣṇa through kāma; Kaṁsa by
bhaya; Śiṣupāla and other kings by dveṣa; the Yadus by
family relationships (sambandha); you (the Pāṇḍavas) by
affection (sneha); and we sages (Nārada and other ṛṣis)
by bhakti.

Six principles are mentioned here, namely, kāma (lust),
bhaya (fear), dveṣa (envy), sambandha (family
relationship), sneha (affection), and bhakti (devotion).
Two of these ñ bhaya (fear) and dveṣa (envy) ñ should
not be imitated because they are unfavorable sentiments.
Now, there are two kinds of sneha. The first is
associated with sakhya-bhāva and is included in vaidhī-
bhakti. The second kind is related to prema and has no
application in the field of sādhana. Therefore, sneha
has no place in the practice of rāgānugā-sādhana-bhakti.

The words bhaktyā vayam (in the śloka 7.1.31) mean that
ëweí ñ Nārada and other sages ñ have attained the
Supreme by bhakti. The word bhakti here should be
understood to mean vaidhī-bhakti, and may refer either
to the vaidhī-bhakti practices of the sages such as
Nārada, or to devotion mixed with jñāna.

The words tad-gatiṁ gatāḥ mean that many people have
attained the Supreme. It is important to have a clear
understanding of this sentence. A single ray of sunlight
(kiraṇa) and the sun itself are one and the same
substance (vastu). Similarly, brahma and Kṛṣṇa are also
one and the same substance; brahma is simply Kṛṣṇaís
bodily effulgence. The jñānī bhaktas merge into that
brahma existence, and so do Kṛṣṇaís enemies when He has
personally killed them. Some of them obtain sārūpyābhāsa
(a semblance of sārūpya, or having a form similar to
Bhagavānís) and remain immersed in the bliss of brahma.
According to the Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa, they stay in
Siddhaloka, the liberated world beyond the material
world.

Two kinds of jīvas reside in Siddhaloka: those who have
attained perfection through the cultivation of knowledge
(jñāna-siddha), and asuras who have been killed by Śrī
Bhagavān. Amongst these jñāna-siddhas, some who are
extremely fortunate become the āśraya of rāga (abode of
attachment for Kṛṣṇa), and they worship His lotus feet

                          314
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

and thus obtain the ultimate aim of kṛṣṇa-prema. In this
way, they gain entry into the group of Kṛṣṇaís dear
associates.

As the sunrays and the sun are considered one substance,
similarly there is no difference between Kṛṣṇaís bodily
effulgence known as brahma and Kṛṣṇa Himself. The words,
tad-gatim mean attaining tat, i.e., Kṛṣṇa (kṛṣṇa-gati).
The jñānīs and the asuras achieve sāyujya-mukti and both
attain brahma, which is the rays of Kṛṣṇaís effulgence
(kṛṣṇa-kiraṇa). The śuddha-bhaktas develop prema, and
attain service to Kṛṣṇa, who is the root of all
existence. Now, by removing bhaya, dveṣa, sneha, and
bhakti from the above-mentioned list of six
characteristics, we are left with kāma and sambandha.
Therefore, kāma and sambandha are the only bhāvas that
are applicable in rāga-mārga. Thus, there are two types
of rāgamayī bhakti: kāma-rūpā and sambandha-rūpā.

Vrajanātha: What is the svarūpa (intrinsic
characteristic) of kāma-rūpā bhakti?

Bābājī: The word kāma signifies sambhoga-tṛṣṇā (the
desire for sambhoga with Kṛṣṇa). This sambhoga-tṛṣṇā
changes into rāgātmikā-bhakti, and from this, causeless
loving behavior arises. In other words, prīti-sambhoga
is to satisfy Kṛṣṇa’s desires. All one’s endeavors are
made solely for Kṛṣṇa’s happiness and prosperity,
without any desire for one’s own happiness. Even if
there is an effort for one’s own pleasure, it is in
accordance with Kṛṣṇa’s happiness.

This unprecedented love is only found in the female
residents of Vraja. The gopīsíprema is endowed with a
particular wonderful sweetness (mādhurya), and gives
rise to many playful sports and pastimes. That is why
learned scholars refer to this unique condition of love
as kāma (lust), although in reality the gopīsíkāma is
aprākṛta (transcendental) and completely bereft of even
the slightest trace of fault. The kāma of the
conditioned souls is full of fault and contemptible,
whereas the love of the gopīs is so transcendentally
pure and attractive that even such dear bhaktas as
Uddhava also desire to attain it. Nothing can compare
with the gopīsí kāma; it can only be compared with
itself. Kāma-rūpā-rāgātmikā-bhakti is found only in
Vraja, and nowhere else. Kubjāís kāma in Mathura is not
really kāma, but merely rati. The kāma that I am
describing has no relation with that of Kubjā.

Vrajanātha: What is sambandha-rūpā-bhakti?

Bābājī: Sambandha-rūpā-bhakti is devotion to Kṛṣṇa in
which one assumes an abhimāna (conception and identity)
such as “I am Kṛṣṇa’s father” or “I am Kṛṣṇa’s mother.”
In Vraja, the devotion of Nanda Mahārāja and Mother
Yaśodā are examples of sambandha-rūpā bhakti.

One can attain oneís inherent svarūpa in unalloyed prema
by developing the bhāvas of either kāma-rūpā or
sambandha-rūpā. Therefore, both these bhāvas are the
shelter of nitya-siddha-bhaktas. These have only been
mentioned in the analysis of rāgānugā-bhakti. Now, you
can see that there are two types of rāgānugā-sādhana-

                          315
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

bhakti: kāmānugā and sambandhānugā.

Vrajanātha: Please explain the nature of kāmānugā in
rāgānugā-sādhana-bhakti.

Bābājī: Kāmānugā is the desire to follow kāma-rūpā-
bhakti, of which there are two types: sambhoga-icchāmayī
and tat-tad-bhāva-icchāmayī.

Vrajanātha: What is sambhoga-icchāmayī?

Bābājī: Sambhoga-icchāmayī means the desire to engage in
playful sportive pastimes (keli) with Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa’s
transcendental sportive pastimes with the gopīs are
called sambhoga.

Vrajanātha: What is tat-tad-bhāva-icchāmayī?

Bābājī: Tat-tad-bhāva-icchāmayī is the desire to
experience the sweet bhāvas that the gopīs of Vraja have
towards Kṛṣṇa.

Vrajanātha: How do these two kinds of rāgānugā-sādhana-
bhakti arise?

Bābājī: When a bhakta sees Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beautiful Deity
form and hears Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s madhura-līlā-kathā (sweet
pastimes), an intense hankering arises in his heart to
experience those bhāvas, and he then engages himself in
the sādhana of kāmānugā and sambandhānugā rāgānugā-
bhakti.

Vrajanātha: Śrī Kṛṣṇa is male (puruṣa) and the gopīs are
all female (prakṛti). As far as I understand, only
females can have the adhikāra for kāmānugā rāgānugā-
bhakti, so how can a male obtain this bhāva?

Bābājī: Jīvas in this world are the abodes of five
different types of relationships – śānta, dāsya, sakhya,
vātsalya and mādhurya – according to their own inherent
svabhāva. Of these five, dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya and
mādhurya are found in the residents of Vraja. Dāsya,
sakhya, and vātsalya with fatherly instincts are male
bhāvas, and those who are so inclined serve Kṛṣṇa in
male spiritual forms. The two rasas in which the female
bhāva is intrinsic are vātsalya with motherly instincts,
and śṛṅgāra-rasa or mādhurya-rasa (the mellow of amorous
love), and those who are of this nature engage in
Kṛṣṇa’s service as females. These two kinds of svabhāva
exist both in Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s eternal associates and in
sādhakas who are in their ānugatya (following).

Vrajanātha: How do those who have a male form practice
rāgānugā-sādhana with the bhāva of the vraja-gopīs?

Bābājī: Those who have developed ruci for śṛṅgāra-rasa
according to their adhikāra may be male outwardly, but
their spiritual body (siddha-śarīra) has a female form.
In that siddha-śarīra, they engage in Kṛṣṇa’s service,
following in the footsteps of a particular gopī
according to their ruci and inherent svabhāva. Padma
Purāṇa describes males who possessed this kind of bhāva.
When the sages of Daṇḍakāraṇya saw Śrī Rāmacandra’s
unparalleled beauty, they performed bhajana with a

                          316
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

desire to get Him as their husband. Later, they attained
gopī forms in Gokula līlā and engaged in Śrī Hari’s
service by kāma-rūpā-rāgamayī-bhakti.

Vrajanātha: We have heard that the women of Gokula are
nitya-siddhas, who appear in Vraja in order to give
nourishment to Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. If this is true, how is
it consistent with the description of the Padma Purāṇa?

Bābājī: Those who were nitya-siddhā gopīs easily
participated in the rāsa dance with Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Others
had taken birth as gopīs after attaining siddhi through
kāmarūpā-sādhana-bhakti. According to the śloka, tā
vāryamāṇāḥ patibhiḥ pitṛbhir bhrātṛ-bandhubhiḥ1 (Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam 10.29.8), they attained their aprākṛta-
svarūpa by rendering manasa-sevā to Kṛṣṇa. These were
mainly the maharṣis of Daṇḍakāraṇya.

Vrajanātha: Will you please explain who are the nitya-
siddhā gopīs and who are the sādhana-siddhā gopīs?

Bābājī: Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s svarūpa-śakti,
and the eight principal sakhīs are Her first kāya-vyūha
(bodily expansions). The other sakhīs follow behind as
Her further kāya-vyūha. All these sakhīs are nitya-
siddhā; they are svarūpa-śakti-tattva, not jīva-tattva.
The general sakhīs of Vraja – who attained perfection by
performing sādhana – follow Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s eternal
associates (parikara), and they are known as sādhana-
siddha jīvas. Having been imbued with the potency of
hlādinī-śakti, they attained sālokya (residence in
vraja-aprakṛta-līlā) with the nitya-siddhā sakhīs of
Vraja. Jīvas who attain perfection by the path of
rāgānugā-sādhana in śṛṅgāra-rasa are included amongst
the sādhana-siddhā sakhīs.

Those who only serve Kṛṣṇa according to the principles
of the vidhi-mārga, with the riraṁsā (desire) to enjoy
with Kṛṣṇa for their own pleasure, gain entry into the
group of Kṛṣṇaís queens in Dvārakā. One cannot become a
follower of the vraja-gopīs through the vidhi-mārga
alone. However, those who behave externally according to
the principles of vidhi-mārga, but who internally
practice the sādhana of rāga-mārga, also obtain vraja-
sevā.

Vrajanātha: How can one fulfill the desire for enjoyment
(ramaṇa) or riraṁsā?

Bābājī: Those who have the mood of Kṛṣṇa’s queens
(mahiṣī-bhāva) towards Him desire to give up the quality
of shamelessness (dhṛṣṭatā), and engage in Kṛṣṇa’s
service just as a housewife (gṛhinī). They do not want
to serve like the beautiful vraja-sundarīs.

Vrajanātha: Please explain this subject more clearly.

Bābājī: Mahiṣī-bhāva is the sādhana-sevā in which one
cherishes the spiritual self-conception that Kṛṣṇa is
one’s own husband. The relationship that is established
with Śrī Kṛṣṇa when one attains this mahiṣī-bhāva is
known as svakīya (marital love). Those who have mahiṣī-
bhāva in the stage of sādhana do not experience the
parakīya-rasa (paramour mellow) of the gopīs of Vraja,

                          317
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

and this is why they cannot follow the gopīs in
parakīya-bhāva. Therefore, the only way to attain vraja-
rasa is to practice rāgānugā-sādhana-bhakti in the
parakīya-bhāva.

Vrajanātha: By your mercy, I have understood up to this
point. Now, please explain the difference between kāma
and prema. If the two are non-different, then can’t
prema-rūpā be used instead of kāma-rūpā? The word kāma
sounds somewhat harsh.

Bābājī: There is some difference between kāma and prema.
Prema is the same as sambandha-rūpā rāgamayī-bhakti;
there is no difference between those two. In sambandha-
rūpā-bhakti, there is no kāma, in other words, no desire
for sambhoga; it is prema without playful sporting
pastimes (keli). Prema becomes kāma-rūpā-bhakti when it
is combined with the desire for sambhoga. Kāma-rūpā-
bhakti is not present in any other rasa; it is found
only in the śṛṅgāra-rasa of the vraja-devīs. Kāma in
this material world takes the form of sense
gratification, and it is quite different from aprākṛta-
kāma. The kāma of this material world is only a
perverted reflection or transformation of the faultless
aprākṛta-kāma. Even Kubjā’s bhāva cannot be called
direct kāma, although it is directed towards Kṛṣṇa.

Jaḍīya-kāma (lust in relation to inert, lifeless matter)
is based on sense gratification, and it is only a
transformation of misery. It is worthless and
contemptible. In contrast, kāma based on prema is full
of ānanda, and it is supremely valuable and always
joyful. Since prākṛta-kāma (worldly lust) is
insignificant and abominable, you should have no
hesitation in using the word aprākṛta-kāma
(transcendental lust).

Vrajanātha: Now please explain rāgānugā-bhakti that is
based on relationship (sambandha-rūpā).

Bābājī: Sambandhānugā bhakti has the mood of being
related to Kṛṣṇa, and this relationship may be one of
three types: in dāsya (servitude), in sakhya
(friendship), or in vātsalya (parental). ‘I am Kṛṣṇa’s
servant, and Kṛṣṇa is my master’; ‘I am Kṛṣṇa’s friend’;
‘I am Kṛṣṇa’s mother or father’ – all these moods are
called relationship. Sambandhānugā bhakti is pre-
eminently displayed only in the inhabitants of Vraja.

Vrajanātha: How does one cultivate rāgānugā-bhakti in
the mood of a servant, friend or parent?

Bābājī: One who has awakened ruci for dāsya-rasa follows
Kṛṣṇa’s eternal servants such as Raktaka and Patraka,
and serves Kṛṣṇa by following their particular mood of
service, imbued with madhura-bhāva. One whose ruci is
towards sakhya-rasa serves Kṛṣṇa by following the bhāva
(sentiment) and ceṣṭā (endeavors) of one of Kṛṣṇa’s
priya-sakhās such as Subala. One whose ruci is towards
vātsalya-rasa engages in Kṛṣṇa’s service by following
the bhāva and activities of bhaktas such as Nanda and
Yaśodā, who have a parental relationship with Him.

Vrajanātha: What does it mean to follow (anukaraṇa) the

                          318
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

ceṣṭā and bhāvas?

Bābājī: According to one’s eternal inherent nature
(siddha-bhāva) towards Kṛṣṇa, some specific bhāvas and
ceṣṭā (endeavors) arise, and vyavahāra (activities) are
also manifested along with them. A sādhaka performing
sambandhānugā bhakti engages himself in Kṛṣṇa’s service
by following these bhāvas, ceṣṭā and vyavahāra. For
instance, Nanda Mahārāja has the mood of paternal
affection towards Kṛṣṇa, so one should follow all the
endeavors that he makes to please Kṛṣṇa, guided by the
mood of paternal affection, but one should never
consider that he himself is Nanda, Yaśodā, Subala or
Raktaka. Rather, one should simply follow the bhāvas of
these great bhaktas according to one’s own ruci;
otherwise, it will be an offense.

Vrajanātha: Which type of rāgānugā-bhakti do we have the
adhikāra to adopt?

Bābājī: My son, you should scrutinize your own svabhāva,
and then you will see the corresponding type of devotion
for which you are qualified. A particular ruci will
awaken according to your inherent svabhāva, and you
should pursue the rasa that is indicated by that ruci.
In order to cultivate that rasa, you should follow one
of Kṛṣṇa’s eternal associates who is perfect in it. To
determine rasa, it is only necessary to examine your own
ruci. If your ruci is towards the path of rāga, then you
should act according to that ruci; and as long as
inclination has not awakened for the path of rāga, you
should simply execute the principles of vaidhī-bhakti
with firm faith.

Vijaya: Prabhu, I have been studying Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
for a long time, and I listen to kṛṣṇa-līlā whenever and
wherever I find the opportunity. Whenever I deliberate
on kṛṣṇa-līlā, a strong bhāva arises within my heart to
serve the Divine Couple as Lalitā-devī does.

Bābājī: You need not say any more. You are a mañjarī
(young maidservant) of Lalitā-devī. Which service do you
like?

Vijaya: I desire that Śrīmatī Lalitā-devī should grant
me permission to string garlands of flowers. I shall
string lovely garlands of beautiful delicate flowers,
and place them in Lalitā Sakhī’s lotus hands. She will
look upon me with an infinitely merciful, love-laden
glance, and then she will place the garlands around the
necks of Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

Bābājī: I give you my blessings that you may attain
perfection in the goal for which you are undertaking
your sādhana.

When Vijaya heard Bābājī Mahāśayaís affectionate
benediction, he fell at the lotus feet of his preceptor
and wept. Seeing his emotional state, Bābājī said, “Go
on continually practicing rāgānugā-sādhana-bhakti with
this same feeling, and externally follow the conduct
laid down according to the rules of vaidhī-sādhana-
bhakti, in a regular way.”


                          319
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

When Vrajanātha saw Vijaya Kumāraís spiritual wealth, he
folded his hands and humbly said, “My master, whenever I
meditate on Śrī Kṛṣṇaís pastimes, a desire arises in my
heart to serve Him by following in the footsteps of
Subala.”

Bābājī: Which service do you like?

Vrajanātha: When the calves wander far off to graze, I
would very much like to bring them back in the company
of Subala. When Kṛṣṇa sits in a place to play upon His
flute, I will take the permission of Subala to let the
cows drink water, and then I will bring them to Bhāi
(Brother) Kṛṣṇa. This is my heart’s desire.

Bābājī: I give you the benediction that you will attain
Kṛṣṇa’s service as a follower of Subala. You are
eligible to cultivate the sentiment of friendship
(sakhya-rasa).

It is wonderful that from that day on, within Vijaya
Kumāraís mind, the feeling began to sprout that he was a
maidservant (dāsī) of Śrīmatī Lalitā-devī, and he began
to look upon Śrīla Bābājī Mahārāja as the
personification of Śrī Lalitā-devī.

Vijaya: Oh master! What more remains to be known about
this subject. Please give your order.

Bābājī: Nothing more remains. You need only know the
name, form, dress and so on, of your siddha-śarīra. Come
to me alone at another time and I shall tell you all
these things.

Vijaya Kumāra offered daṇḍavat-praṇāma at the feet of
his preceptor and replied, “As my master pleases.”

From that day on, Vrajanātha began to look upon Bābājī
as the personification of Subala. Bābājī said to
Vrajanātha, “You also come to me alone at another time
and I will tell you the name, form, dress and ornaments
of your spiritual body.”

Vrajanātha offered daṇḍavat-praṇāma and said, “As my
master pleases.”

Vrajanātha and Vijaya Kumāra acknowledged their great
good fortune, and from that day on, they happily engaged
in their spiritual practice of rāgānugā-sādhana.
Externally, everything remained as before, but their
inner emotions had changed. Externally, Vijaya Kumāra
behaved only as a man, but internally he was imbued with
the female nature (strī-bhāva), while within Vrajanātha
appeared the inherent svabhāva of a cowherd boy.

The night was far advanced. Both of them returned home,
chanting on their japa-mālā the mahā-mantra that they
had received from their preceptor ñ Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare
Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma,
Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare. It was midnight, and the lovely
moonlight appeared like a shower of whitish silver upon
the earth. An intoxicating breeze blew from the Malayan
Mountain, creating a very pleasant sensation for the
mind. They sat down together beneath an āṁvalā tree in a

                          320
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

beautiful secluded place near Lakṣmana Ṭīlā, and began a
discussion.

Vijaya: Vrajanātha, our hearts’ desires have been
fulfilled. We shall certainly be blessed with Kṛṣṇa’s
mercy by the grace of the Vaiṣṇavas. Let us now decide
our future course of action. Tell me frankly what you
want to do. Do you want to marry, or do you want to
become a mendicant? I don’t want to put any pressure on
you; I just want you to let me know your real intention,
so that I can communicate it to your mother.

Vrajanātha: Uncle, I regard you very highly, and besides
that, you are an erudite scholar and a Vaiṣṇava. You
have been my guardian since my father passed away, and I
am prepared to act according to your order. I am nervous
about marriage because I don’t want to become entangled
in the material world and fall down from my realization
of the supreme spiritual reality. What is your opinion?

Vijaya: I don’t want to impose anything on you. You have
to decide for yourself.

Vrajanātha: It will be proper for me to receive
Gurudeva’s instruction, and act accordingly.

Vijaya: That’s a good idea. Tomorrow we shall take
Prabhupāda’s decision on this subject.

Vrajanātha: Uncle, what is your consideration? Will you
remain as a gṛhastha or become a mendicant?

Vijaya: My son, like you, I am also undecided. I
sometimes think of giving up gṛhastha-dharma and
becoming a mendicant; and sometimes I think that if I do
so, my heart may become dried up, so that I am deprived
of bhakti-rasa as well. I think it is appropriate to
take Śrī Gurudeva’s order in this regard, and act
accordingly. I shall do as he instructs me.

Realizing that the night was far advanced, uncle and
nephew returned home chanting hari-nāma, then after
honoring prasāda, they took rest.



Thus ends the Twenty-First Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled

“Prameya: Abhidheya–Rāgānugā-Sādhana-Bhakti”




Chapter 22

Prameya: Prayojana Tattva



It was Ekādaśī, and the Vaiṣṇavas were performing
kīrtana on the large raised platform beneath the Bakula

                            321
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

tree in Śrīvāsāṅgana. Some were sighing heavily, saying,
“Ha Gaurāṅga! Ha Nityānanda!” None of them could
understand in what kind of bhāva their revered, elderly
Bābājī was absorbed. Before their eyes, he became
stunned. Then after some time he burst into tears,
crying, “Woe is me! Alas! Where is my Rūpa? Where is my
Sanātana? Where is my Dāsa Gosvāmī? Where is my
Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja, the dearmost brother of my heart?
Where have they gone, abandoning me all alone? Fie on me
that I remain alive, simply tolerating the pain of their
separation! I am undone by their separation. Even the
remembrance of Rādhā-kuṇḍa is troublesome to me. My
life-force writhes in agony. Only the vision of Rūpa-
Sanātana will save my forlorn life. I have not given up
my life, even though separated from them! I am simply
condemned in every way!” Speaking in this way, he began
to roll in the dust of the courtyard.

All the Vaiṣṇavas there said, “Bābājī, be patient. Rūpa
and Raghunātha are in your heart. Look here, Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu and Nityānanda Prabhu are dancing
before you.”

“Oh! Oh, where?” Bābājī suddenly leapt to his feet, and
saw before him Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Śrī Nityānanda
Prabhu, Śrī Advaita Prabhu, Śrī Gadādhara, Śrīvāsa and
all the devotees performing kīrtana. They were all
dancing, completely absorbed in mahābhāva. Seeing this
scene, he said, “Blessed is Māyāpura! Only Śrī Māyāpura
can remove the grief of separation from Vraja.” When the
scene disappeared, he went on dancing for a long time.
Later, becoming peaceful, he sat in his cottage.

Just then, Vijaya Kumāra and Vrajanātha came and offered
obeisances at his lotus feet. Seeing them, Bābājī
Mahārāja was very pleased and said, “How is your
bhajana?”

Both of them humbly folded their hands and said, “We
need your mercy, for it is everything to us. It is only
because of so much sukṛti (pious activities) accumulated
over many births that we could so easily attain the
shelter of your lotus feet. Since it is Ekādaśī today,
with your permission we will observe nirjala fasting. We
have come to take your darśana.”

Bābājī: You two are blessed. Very soon you will attain
the state of bhāva.

Vijaya: Prabhu, what is the state of bhāva? So far, you
have not told us anything about this. Kindly bestow your
mercy upon us by speaking on this subject.

Bābājī: Up to this point, I have only given you
instructions concerning the practice of sādhana. By
continually practicing sādhana, one gradually comes to
the perfected stage. Bhāva is the preliminary condition
which heralds the stage of perfection (siddha-avasthā).
Śrī Daśa-mūla (10a) gives the following description of
this perfected state:

svarūpāvasthāne madhura-rasa-bhāvodaya iha

vraje rādhā-kṛṣṇa-svajana-jana bhāvaṁ hṛdi vahan

                          322
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017


parānande prītiṁ jagad-atula-sampat-sukham aho

vilāsākhye tattve parama-paricaryāṁ sa labhate

In the mature stage of sādhana-bhakti, when the jīva
becomes situated in his svarūpa, then by the influence
of the hlādinī potency, the state of bhāva in madhura-
rasa arises within him. In other words, the mood to
follow in the footsteps of the dearmost associates of
Śrī Śrī Rādhā Kṛṣṇa in Vraja arises in his heart.
Gradually he obtains happiness and prosperity that is
unsurpassed in this world, in the form of the supreme
service of paramānanda-tattva, which is known as vilāsa.
There is no greater gain than this for the jīva.

This śloka describes prayojana-tattva, the stage of
prema. The first stage of prema is bhāva.

prabhuḥ kaḥ ko jīvaḥ katham idam acid-viśvam iti vā

vicāryaitān ārthān hari-bhajana-kṛc chāstra-caturaḥ

abhedāśāṁ dharmān sakalam aparādhaṁ pariharan

harer nāmānandaṁ pibati hari-dāso hari janaiḥ

Daśa-mūla (10b)

Who is Kṛṣṇa? Who am I, the jīva? What is this temporary
material (acit) world, and the eternal spiritual (cit)
world? He, who is exclusively devoted to the bhajana of
Śrī Hari and has made an intelligent analysis of the
Vaiṣṇava śāstras under the guidance of śuddha-bhaktas,
who has abandoned all offenses and attachment to dharma
and adharma, and who can consider and dispose of all
questions, that servant of Śrī Hari drinks the sublime
beverage of śrī-hari-nāma in the company of other hari-
janas.

This Daśa-mūla is a compilation of unparalleled beauty,
in which all of Śrīman Mahāprabhuís instructions have
been expressed concisely.

Vijaya: I would like to hear the exalted position of
Daśa-mūla in brief.

Bābājī: Then listen.

saṁsevya daśa-mūlaṁ vai hitvā ëvidyām ayaṁ janaḥ

bhāva-puṣtiṁ tathā tuṣtiṁ labhate sādhu-saṅgataḥ

Daśa-mūla-mahātmya

When the jīva studies and carefully follows this Daśa-
mūla, he throws far away material disease in the form of
ignorance. Thereafter, through the association of
sādhus, he obtains the nourishment of bhāva, and becomes
fully satisfied.

Vijaya: Prabhu, may all of us wear the necklace of this
incomparable Daśa-mūla about our necks. We will recite
this Daśa-mūla every day, and offer respectful

                          323
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

obeisances unto Śrīman Mahāprabhu. Now kindly elaborate
on the subject of bhāva (bhāva-tattva).

Bābājī: The characteristic feature of bhāva is that it
is situated in unalloyed goodness (śuddha-sattva-viśeṣa-
rūpa-tattva). It can be compared to a tiny ray of the
prema sun.

The constitutional characteristic (svarūpa-lakṣaṇa) of
bhāva is that it is situated in unalloyed goodness
(viśuddha-sattva). Bhāva is also known by the name rati,
and is sometimes called a sprout of prema (premāṅkura).
The propensity for divine knowledge (saṁvit-vṛtti) is an
aspect of the all-enlightening internal potency
(svarūpa-śakti), and is the state of unalloyed goodness
(śuddha-sattva), having no connection with māyā. When
this saṁvit-vṛtti combines with the propensity for
unalloyed bliss (hlādinī-vṛtti), the essential aspect of
that combination is called bhāva.

One obtains knowledge of an object (vastu) by means of
the propensity for consciousness (saṁvit-vṛtti), and one
tastes that object through the propensity for unalloyed
bliss (hlādinī-vṛtti). Kṛṣṇa is the supreme object, and
His svarūpa can only be known through the all-
enlightening propensity of svarūpa-śakti, and not by the
mental faculty of the marginal jīvas. When the svarūpa-
śakti manifests herself within the heart of the jīva by
the mercy of Kṛṣṇa or of His bhakta, then the cognitive
faculty (saṁvit-vṛtti) of the svarūpa-śakti begins to
act within the heart. When that happens, knowledge of
the spiritual realm (cid-jagat) is revealed. The
spiritual world is constituted of śuddha-sattva, whereas
the material world is constituted of a combination of
the three material modes of sattva, rajaḥ and tamaḥ. The
essential combination of hlādinī with the knowledge of
the spiritual world enables one to taste the sweetness
of that spiritual realm, and when that taste attains
fullness, it is called prema.

If prema is compared to the sun, bhāva can be compared
to a ray (kiraṇa) of the sun. The constitutional nature
(svarūpa) of bhāva is that it is a ray of the sun of
prema, and its unique characteristic (viśeṣatā) is that
it purifies the heart of the jīva and thus causes the
heart to become softened or melted (masṛṇa). The word
ruci signifies three desires. These are 1) the desire to
attain the service of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa (prāpty-abhilāṣa),
2) the desire to do that which is favorable for Kṛṣṇaís
pleasure (anukūlya-abhilāṣa), and 3) the desire to serve
Kṛṣṇa with love and affection (sauhārda-abhilāṣa).

Bhāva can be described as the first glimpse of prema.
The word masṛṇa means ësoftness and melting of the
heart.í Bhāva has been described in the tantra as the
preliminary state of prema, and when it arises,
horripilation and other transformations of ecstasy
(sāttvika-vikāra) are manifested slightly. However, the
state of bhāva is self-established (svataḥ-siddha) in
the nitya-siddha-bhaktas, which means that śuddha-sattva
is eternally present in them, so there is no question of
it becoming manifest in them.

In the baddha-jīva, this state of bhāva first manifests

                          324
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

in the mental faculties (mano-vṛtti) and then becomes
identified (svarūpatā) with them. Therefore, although
bhāva is self-manifest (svayaṁ-prakāśa), it appears that
it did not exist previously, and that its manifestation
was brought about by something else (prakāśya). The
natural function of bhāva is to reveal the intrinsic
identity (svarūpa) of Kṛṣṇa and His sweet pastimes.
Bhāva manifests in the mental faculties (mano-vṛtti),
yet it appears to have been manifested by some other
faculty of knowledge. In reality, the nature (svarūpa)
of rati is self-tasting (svayam-āśvādana-svarūpa); in
other words, it is itself the object of taste and
enjoyment for the bhakta, and yet at the same time it
becomes the cause of the baddha-jīva relishing Kṛṣṇa and
His līlā.

Vrajanātha: How many types of bhāva are there?

Bābājī: There are two types of bhāva, arising from two
different causes. The first is bhāva that has arisen as
a result of ardent spiritual practice (sādhana-
abhiniveśa-ja-bhāva); and the second is bhāva that has
arisen due to Kṛṣṇa’s mercy or the mercy of Kṛṣṇa’s
bhakta (prasāda-ja-bhāva). Bhāva that arises from the
practice of sādhana is the most commonly observed; bhāva
arising from special mercy is very rare.

Vrajanātha: What is bhāva arising from practice
(sādhana-abhiniveśa-ja-bhāva)?

Bābājī: There are two kinds of bhāva arising from
practice, one on the vaidhī-mārga and the other on the
rāgānugā-mārga. Ruci appears first, before bhāva, and it
is followed by attachment (āsakti) to Kṛṣṇa, and finally
rati. I consider bhāva and rati to be the same because
this is the opinion of the Purāṇas and the śāstras
concerning the performance of the dramatic arts (nāṭya-
śāstras).

In the case of bhāva arising from vaidhī-sādhana,
śraddhā comes first, and then gives rise to niṣṭhā,
which in turn develops into ruci. However, in the case
of bhāva arising from rāgānugā-sādhana, ruci is produced
immediately.

Vrajanātha: What is bhāva arising from the mercy of
Kṛṣṇa or His bhakta (prasāda-ja-bhāva)?

Bābājī:Bhāva arising from the mercy of Kṛṣṇa or His
bhakta (prasāda-ja-bhāva) is bhāva that occurs
spontaneously, without the performance of any kind of
sādhana.

Vrajanātha: Please explain this further.

Bābājī: Kṛṣṇa’s mercy is bestowed in three ways: 1) by
words (vācika), 2) by granting vision (āloka-dāna), and
3) by grace manifest in the heart (hārda). Suppose that
Kṛṣṇa bestows His mercy upon some brāhmaṇa by saying, “O
best of the twice-born, may supremely auspicious,
blissful, and uninterrupted bhakti arise within you.”
Simply by such words, vācika-prasāda-ja-bhāva arises
within the heart.


                          325
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

The ṛṣis residing in the forest had never previously
seen Kṛṣṇa, but when they attained His darśana, bhāva
arose within their hearts. Such is the power of Kṛṣṇaís
mercy. This is an example of bhāva arising due to
Kṛṣṇaís granting His vision (āloka-dāna).

Bhāva that arises within the heart due to mercy is
called hārda-bhāva, and this is observed in the life
history of Śukadeva Gosvāmī and other bhaktas. When Śrī
Kṛṣṇa descended as Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, there were
many instances of these three kinds of bhāva arising
from His mercy. One cannot count the number of people
who were filled with bhāva when they saw Śrīman
Mahāprabhu. Jagāi and Mādhāi are examples of those who
obtained bhāva because of the Lordís words, and Jīva
Gosvāmī obtained bhāva from within his heart (hārda-
bhāva), by Śrī Gaurangaís mercy.

Vrajanātha: What is bhāva arising from the mercy of a
bhakta?

Bābājī: Dhruva and Prahlāda obtained bhāva for Bhagavān
by Nārada Muni’s mercy, and bhāva-bhakti arose in the
hearts of innumerable people by the mercy of Śrī Rūpa,
Sanātana and other associates (pārṣada) of Kṛṣṇa.

Vijaya: What are the symptoms of the appearance of
bhāva?

Bābājī: The following characteristics begin to manifest
in the sādhaka when bhāva appears:

1. kṣānti—tolerance,

2. avyārtha-kālatva—concern that time should not be
wasted,

3. virakti—detachment,

4. māna-śūnyatā—freedom from pride,

5. āśā-bandha—bound by hope,

6. utkaṇṭhā—deep longing,

7. nāma-gāne sadā-ruci—taste to always chant śrī-hari-
nāma,

8. āsaktis tad-guṇākhyāne—attraction for hearing about
Śrī Hari’s transcendental qualities, and

9. tad-vasati-sthale prīti—affection for the places of
Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes.

Vijaya: What is kṣānti (tolerance)?

Bābājī:Kṣānti means that one remains peaceful even when
there is cause for anger or mental agitation. Kṣānti may
also be called kṣamā.

Vijaya: What is avyārtha-kālatva (concern that time
should not be wasted)?

Bābājī:Avyārtha-kālatva means that one does not let a

                            326
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

moment pass in vain, and thus is incessantly engaged in
hari-bhajana.

Vijaya: Please explain the meaning of virakti
(detachment).

Bābājī: Virakti is disinterest in sense gratification.

Vijaya: Can those who have taken veśa (renounced order,
sannyāsa-veśa or bābājī-veśa) assert that they are
detached?

Bābājī:Veśa is a matter of social etiquette. When bhāva
appears within the heart, ruci for the spiritual world
becomes very strong, and taste for the material world
gradually diminishes. Finally, when bhāva fully
manifests, taste far the mundane world becomes
practically nil (śūnya-prāya). This is called detachment
(virakti). A detached Vaiṣṇava is one who has attained
virakti and then takes vaiṣṇava-veśa to diminish his
necessities. However, the śāstras do not sanction taking
veśa prior to the appearance of bhāva; that is not real
veśa at all. Śrīman Mahāprabhu taught this lesson to the
whole world when he punished Choṭa Haridāsa.

Vijaya: What is māna-śūnyatā (freedom from pride)?

Bābājī: Pride (abhimāna) arises when one identifies with
one’s wealth, strength, beauty, high position, high
caste, good family, lineage, etc. Māna-śūnyatā means
being free from pride in spite of possessing such
material qualification. Padma Purāṇa gives an excellent
example of māna-śūnyatā. There was a wise emperor, who
ruled all other prominent kings. However, when by good
fortune kṛṣṇa-bhakti arose within his heart, he gave up
his opulence and his pride in being the emperor, and
maintained his life by begging in the cities of his
enemies. He offered respects to all, regardless of
whether they were brāhmaṇas or enemies.

Vijaya: What is āśā-bandha (the bondage of hope)?

Bābājī:Āśā-bandha means to engage the mind in bhajana
bound by the unswerving faith that “Kṛṣṇa will certainly
bestow His mercy upon me.”

Vijaya: What is utkaṇṭhā (deep longing)?

Bābājī:Utkaṇṭhā is extreme greed to obtain one’s heart’s
desire.

Vijaya: What is nāma-kīrtana-ruci (taste for chanting
śrī-hari-nāma)?

Bābājī:Ruci in nāma-kīrtana means incessant engagement
in hari-nāma with the faith (viśvāsa) that śrī-nāma-
bhajana is the highest of all the many types of bhajana.
Ruci for nāma-kīrtana is the key to attaining supreme
auspiciousness. Another day I will explain the truth
regarding śrī-hari-nāma.

Vijaya: What is āsaktis tad-guṇākhyāne (attachment to
the descriptions of the transcendental qualities of
Kṛṣṇa)?

                          327
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017


Bābājī: It is said in Śrī Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta:

mādhuryād api madhuraṁ manmathatā tasya kim api kaiśoram

cāpalyād api capalaṁ, ceto bata harati hanta kiṁ kurmaḥ

Śrī Kṛṣṇa, as the transcendental Cupid (manmatha), is
sweeter than the most sweet, and His adolescence is more
restless than the most restless thing. The qualities of
that transcendental Cupid, which defy description, are
stealing my mind. Alas! What shall I do now?

No matter how much one hears about Śrī Kṛṣṇaís
qualities, one never becomes satiated. The attachment to
hearing goes on increasing incessantly, and one never
stops wishing to hear more and more.

Vijaya: What is tad-vasati-sthale prīti (affection for
the places of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes)?

Bābājī: When a bhakta performs parikramā of Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma, he inquires as follows: “O residents of
the dhāma, where is the birthplace of the dearmost
Master of our life? In which direction would
Mahāprabhu’s kīrtana party pass? Please tell me where
our Master used to perform his forenoon pastimes with
the gopas.” The residents of the dhāma reply, “This
place where we are standing is Śrī Māyāpura. The
elevated place that you see directly in front of us,
surrounded by the grove of tulasī plants, is the very
place where the most precious appearance of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu took place. Just see the villages of Gaṅgā-
nagara, Simuliyā, Gādigāchā, Majidā, and others. Śrīman
Mahāprabhu’s first saṅkīrtana party passed through these
very villages.” Hearing such sweet talks saturated with
prema from the mouths of the residents of Gauḍa, his
body thrills with horripilation, his heart becomes
overwhelmed with bliss, and tears trickle from his eyes.
In this way, he performs parikramā of all Mahāprabhu’s
pastime places. This is called affection for the places
where the Lord performed His pastimes (tad-vasati-sthale
prīti).

Vrajanātha: Should we understand that rati towards Kṛṣṇa
has arisen in every individual in whom we observe this
kind of emotion?

Bābājī: No. Rati is emotion (bhāva) that arises
spontaneously towards Kṛṣṇa. Similar emotion may be
observed in relation to other objects, but it cannot be
called rati.

Vrajanātha: Will you kindly give one or two examples to
make this subject clear?

Bābājī: Suppose a man desires liberation, but the dry
and difficult worship of the nirviśeṣa-brahma seems
troublesome to him. Then he hears from somewhere that
one can very easily attain mukti simply by uttering the
names of Bhagavān. For example, Ajāmila obtained mukti
easily by uttering the name of Nārāyaṇa. When the man
hears this, he becomes overjoyed. As he remembers the
power of śrī-nāma to give liberation, he becomes

                          328
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017

agitated with ecstasy, thinking that he will receive
liberation easily. He chants śrī-hari-nāma, weeps
continuously, and falls down unconscious. In this
instance, the name uttered by the sādhaka who desires
liberation is not śuddha-nāma, and the bhāva that he
displays is not kṛṣṇa-rati (śuddha-bhāva), because his
spontaneous feeling is not directed towards Kṛṣṇa. His
main objective is to obtain mukti, and not kṛṣṇa-prema.
The name that he utters is called nāma-ābhāsa, and his
emotional display (bhāva) is called bhāva-ābhāsa.

Another example is that of a person who worships Durgā-
devī in order to obtain material enjoyment. He prays,
“Please give me benedictions! Please give me wealth!”
Then, thinking that Durgā-devī will fulfill his heartís
desire as soon as she becomes pleased, he exclaims, “O
Durgā!” and rolls on the ground before her, crying. This
personís bhāva when he cries and falls on the ground is
not śuddha-bhāva. It is sometimes described as bhāva-
ābhāsa, and sometimes as false or impure emotion
(kubhāva). Bhāva cannot arise unless one performs
unadulterated worship of Kṛṣṇa (śuddha-kṛṣṇa-bhajana).
Bhāva is known as kubhāva or bhāva-ābhāsa if it arises
from a desire for material enjoyment (bhoga) or
liberation (mokṣa), even if it is related to Kṛṣṇa.

The word kubhāva refers to any sort of bhāva that may
arise in the heart of one who is contaminated with
Māyāvāda philosophy. Even if such a person lies
unconscious for seven praharas, this display cannot be
called bhāva. Aho! Even the most elevated liberated
souls, who are freed from all kinds of desires,
incessantly search out bhagavad-rati. It is the supreme
secret, and Kṛṣṇa does not easily bestow it, even on
completely sincere bhaktas whose practice of bhajana is
fully accomplished. How, then, can it arise in the
hearts of those who do not have śuddha-bhakti, and who
are contaminated with desires for material enjoyment and
liberation?

Vrajanātha: Prabhu, it is often observed that when those
who desire material enjoyment and liberation perform
hari-nāma-saṅkīrtana, they manifest the bodily symptoms
of bhāva that you have described. How is this to be
understood?

Bābājī: Only foolish people are astonished   to see the
external symptoms of bhāva in such people;   those who
understand bhāva-tattva properly call this   sort of bhāva
“the semblance of rati (raty-ābhāsa),” and   they remain
far away from it.

Vijaya: How many kinds of raty-ābhāsa are there?

Bābājī: There are two kinds of raty-ābhāsa: reflected
raty-ābhāsa (pratibimba raty-ābhāsa) and shadow raty-
ābhāsa (chāyā raty-ābhāsa).

Vijaya: What is pratibimba raty-ābhāsa?

Bābājī: People who desire liberation think that one can
only obtain mukti through brahma-jñāna, but the
spiritual discipline of brahma-jñāna is difficult and
troublesome. Some of them come to understand that mukti

                          329
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

may be achieved simply by performing hari-nāma, and that
one may obtain brahma-jñāna in this way very easily, and
without hard labor. When they think like this, they
become blissful, expecting to obtain mukti without
having to undergo great difficulty. Then this semblance
(ābhāsa) of the bodily transformations, such as tears,
horripilation, etc., appear in their bodies. Such
transformations are known as pratibimba-ābhāsa.

Vrajanātha: Why are they called ‘reflected
(pratibimba)’?

Bābājī: If those who desire liberation or material sense
enjoyment have the good fortune to associate with
advanced bhaktas, they also begin to adopt the processes
of hari-nāma-kīrtana and so on. At that time, some
reflection of the bhāva-moon in the sky of the śuddha-
bhakta’s heart also appears in the heart of those who
are thirsty for liberation. This reflection is called
pratibimba. Śuddha-bhāva never arises in the hearts of
those who desire material sense enjoyment or liberation,
but bhāva-ābhāsa arises in them when they see the bhāva
of śuddha-bhaktas. That bhāva-ābhāsa is known as
pratibimba-ābhāsa, and it does not generally produce any
enduring benefit. It only bestows material enjoyment and
liberation, and then it disappears. Such bhāva-ābhāsa
may also be understood to be a kind of nāma-aparādha.

Vrajanātha: Please explain the nature of chāyā-bhāva-
ābhāsa.

Bābājī: When a kaniṣṭha-bhakta who is unacquainted with
knowledge of the self (ātma-tattva) associates with
activities, time, places, and bhaktas that are dear to
Hari, a shadow (chāyā) of rati may appear. Compared to
rati itself, this shadow is insignificant by nature and
unsteady, but it creates curiosity (as to the rati the
śuddha-bhaktas experience), and it destroys sorrows.
This is called chāyā-raty-ābhāsa. The bhakti of these
bhaktas may be pure up to a certain limit, but it is not
resolute, and that is why it gives rise to raty-ābhāsa.
In any case, such chāyā-bhāva-ābhāsa only arises through
the influence of many pious activities. By the
association of Vaiṣṇavas (sat-saṅga), chāyā-bhāva-ābhāsa
becomes pure, and subsequently gives rise to śuddha-
bhāva. Nonetheless, one should bear in mind that, no
matter how developed this bhāva-ābhāsa may be, it
gradually wanes like the moon in the dark half of a
lunar month if one commits some offense towards a pure
Vaiṣṇava. What to speak of bhāva-ābhāsa, even śuddha-
bhāva will gradually vanish if one commits offenses
towards Kṛṣṇa’s bhaktas.

If one repeatedly associates with those who desire
liberation, his bhāva will also become bhāva-ābhāsa, or
he may fall victim to the pride of thinking himself to
be Īśvara. This is why it is sometimes seen that when
new bhaktas are dancing, they develop the desire for
liberation. These new bhaktas do not think carefully and
consider their situation, and so they associate with
those who seek liberation, which results in
disturbances. New bhaktas should, therefore, carefully
avoid the association of people who aspire for
liberation.

                          330
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017


Occasionally the state of bhāva is seen to arise in
someone suddenly, and without apparent cause. The
explanation for this is that he practiced sādhana
extensively in his previous birth, but that practice
could not bear fruit until now because of various kinds
of hindrances or impediments. However, śuddha-bhāva
suddenly arose in his heart when these obstacles were
removed. Sometimes, an excellent state of bhāva like
this may also arise suddenly because of Kṛṣṇaís
causeless mercy. This kind of bhāva is known as śrī-
kṛṣṇa-prasāda-ja-bhāva.

One should not criticize a person in whom true bhāva has
manifested, even though one may observe some slight
fault in his behavior, for once bhāva has arisen, the
sādhaka becomes completely successful in all his
endeavors. Under such circumstances, it is not possible
for him to behave sinfully, but if any sinful behavior
is sometimes observed, it should be understood in one of
two ways. The mahā-puruṣa-bhakta may have performed some
sinful activity by force of circumstances, but he cannot
possibly remain in that condition permanently.
Alternatively, some semblance of sin (pāpa-ābhāsa) from
his previous life has not been completely destroyed, and
is still present even after bhāva has arisen in him,
although it will be destroyed very soon. One should
think like this and not pay any attention to the
commonplace faults that may be seen in bhaktas, for it
is nāma-aparādha to do so. The Nṛsiṁha Purāṇa forbids us
to absorb our attention in such faults.

bhagavati ca harāv ananya-cetā

bhṛśa-malino’pi virājate manuṣyaḥ

na hi śaśa-kaluṣa-cchavīḥ kadācit

timira-paro bhavatām upaiti candraḥ

Just as the moon is never obscured by darkness, even
though covered with black spots, similarly, a person
exclusively devoted to Śrī Hari remains glorious, though
by appearance he may be wicked and depraved.

It should not be concluded from this instruction that a
bhakta repeatedly engages in sinful activities. Once a
bhakta has developed niṣṭhā in bhakti, he will have no
inclination to sin further. However, as long as the
material body exists, there is a chance that sinful
activity will occur unexpectedly. If a bhakta is
exclusively devoted, the influence of his bhajana
immediately burns to ashes all kinds of sins, just as a
blazing fire easily consumes a small heap of cotton, and
he becomes cautious not to become victimized by any
sinful activity again.

All kinds of sinful actions are dissipated at the stage
of steady, uninterrupted ananyā-bhakti, so it may be
clearly understood that those who repeatedly engage in
sinful activities have not yet developed this type of
bhakti. To engage repeatedly and knowingly in sinful
activity while practicing bhakti-yoga is nāma-aparādha,
which uproots bhakti completely and casts it aside.

                          331
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

Bhaktas therefore keep themselves distant from such
offenses.

Rati is by nature restless (aśānti), warm, vigorous, and
blissful, because it is perpetually full of increasing
spiritual longing (abhilāṣa). Although it produces
warmth in the form of sañcārī-bhāva, it is more cooling
than millions of moons, and it tastes as sweet as
nectar.

When Vrajanātha and Vijaya Kumāra heard this explanation
of bhāva-tattva, they were wonderstruck and sat silently
for a while, absorbed in thoughts of bhāva. After some
time, they said, “Prabhu, the powerful rain of your
nectarean instructions has created a flood of prema in
our scorched hearts. Now what should we do? Where should
we go? We cannot understand anything. It is very
difficult for us to attain bhāva because our hearts are
bereft of humility. We are full of pride because of our
brāhmaṇa birth, and the only thing that can save us is
your abundant love and mercy. If you bestow a drop of
prema on us we shall certainly achieve our objective.
Our only hope is that we have been able to establish a
spiritual relationship with you. We are extremely poor,
wretched, and destitute, and you are Kṛṣṇaís dear
associate, and supremely merciful. Please be merciful to
us and instruct us as to our duty.”

Vijaya Kumāra took advantage of the opportunity, and
said, “At this very moment Prabhu, the desire is arising
in me to renounce householder life and obtain residence
as a servant of your lotus feet. Vrajanātha is just a
boy, and his mother wants him to become a gṛhastha, but
he does not desire to do so. Please give your
instruction as to what he should do in this connection.”

Bābājī: You have both received Kṛṣṇa’s mercy. You should
serve Kṛṣṇa by transforming your household into Kṛṣṇa’s
household. Everyone should act according to the
instructions which Caitanya Mahāprabhu gave to the
world. He taught that there are two ways by which one
may worship Bhagavān while in this world: one may live
as a householder or in the renounced order. Until one is
qualified to take up the renounced order, he should
remain a householder and engage in Kṛṣṇa’s service.

In the first twenty-four years of His manifest pastimes,
Caitanya Mahāprabhu displayed the ideal for a gṛhastha
Vaiṣṇava, and during His last twenty-four years, He set
the ideal for a renounced Vaiṣṇava. Mahāprabhuís example
as a gṛhastha established the goal of householder life.
In my opinion, you should also do the same. You should
not think that one cannot obtain the goal of kṛṣṇa-prema
in householder life. Most of Mahāprabhuís favored
devotees were gṛhasthas, and even Vaiṣṇavas in the
renounced order of life pray for the dust from the lotus
feet of those gṛhastha-bhaktas.

The night was far advanced. Vijaya Kumāra and Vrajanātha
spent the whole night in Śrīvāsāṅgana, chanting the
glories of Śrī Hari in the company of the other
Vaiṣṇavas. At dawn the next morning, they finished their
ablutions, bathed in the Gaṅgā, and then offered
daṇḍavat-praṇāma at the feet of their Gurudeva and the

                          332
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

Vaiṣṇavas. Then they again performed saṅkīrtana, took
mahā-prasāda, and returned home before noon. Vijaya
Kumāra called his sister and said, “Now Vrajanātha will
marry, so you should make the necessary preparations. I
am going to Modadruma for a few days. You can send news
to me when you have fixed a date for the wedding. I
shall come with other family members to enhance the
auspicious marriage ceremony. I shall send my young
brother Harinātha here tomorrow. He will stay here and
arrange everything.”

Vrajanāthaís mother and paternal grandmother felt as if
they had obtained sovereignty over the earth. Completely
overjoyed, they presented Vijaya Kumāra with new clothes
and other gifts before they bade him farewell.



Thus ends the Twenty-second Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled

“Prameya:Prayojana-Tattva”




Chapter 23

Prameya: Śrī-Nāma-Tattva



Bilva-puṣkariṇī is a charming village where Bhagavatī
Bhāgīrathī flows in both the northern and western
directions. In one corner of the village, there is a
beautiful lake surrounded by bael trees. On the shore of
the lake is the Bilva-pakṣa Mahādeva Temple, and
Bhavatāraṇa is splendidly situated a little distant from
this temple. The village of Simuliyā is between Bilva-
puṣkariṇī and Brāhmaṇa-puṣkariṇī, and all three villages
are within the town of Navadvīpa. A wide road leads
through the center of Bilva-puṣkariṇī, and Vrajanāthaís
house is on this road towards the north.

Vijaya Kumāra had bidden his sister farewell and walked
for some distance, but on the way he began to think that
it would be fitting to learn śrī-nāma-tattva from Bābājī
before he went home. Thinking like this, he returned to
Bilva-puṣkariṇī, and said to his sister, “I will stay
here for one or two more days, and then I will return
home.”

Vrajanātha became very happy to see his maternal uncle
Vijaya Kumāra return. They sat together in the Caṇḍī-
maṇḍapa and began discussing the instructions of Daśa-
mūla. By now, Sūryadeva was preparing to set on the
western horizon, and the birds were quickly flying
towards their nests. Just at that time, two Vaiṣṇava
sādhus from the Śrī Rāmānuja-sampradāya arrived. They
put their āsana beneath a jackfruit tree in front of
Vrajanāthaís house, collected some sticks from here and
there, and lit a fire. Their foreheads were beautifully

                             333
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

adorned with the tilaka of the Śrī Sampradāya, and a
sublime peace emanated from their faces.

Vrajanāthaís mother was very hospitable towards guests.
Knowing that they must be hungry, she collected various
kinds of edible ingredients, and placed them before the
sādhus, requesting them to cook and eat. They were
satisfied, and began to prepare their roṭis. When
Vrajanātha and Vijaya Kumāra saw these Vaiṣṇavasí
peaceful faces, they came and sat with them. Both
Vaiṣṇavas were very pleased to see tulasī-mālās on the
necks of Vrajanātha and Vijaya Kumāra, and the twelve
marks of tilaka on their bodies. Spreading their blanket
out more, they very respectfully had them sit down.

In order to become acquainted with them Vrajanātha
asked, “Mahārāja, where are you coming from?”

One of the bābājīs answered, “We have come from Ayodhyā.
For many days, we have wanted to take darśana of Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma, the pastime place of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu. We are so fortunate that by Bhagavānís mercy
we have arrived in Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma today. We would
like to stay here for a few days and take darśana of the
pastime places of Śrīman Mahāprabhu.

“You have certainly arrived in Śrī Navadvīpa,” said
Vrajanātha. “You should rest here today, and take
darśana of Śrīman Mahāprabhuís birthplace, and of
Śrīvāsāṅgana.” When these two Vaiṣṇavas heard
Vrajanāthaís words, they became very blissful and
recited a śloka from the Gītā (15.6).

yad gatvā na nivartante tad dhāma paramaṁ mama

When one goes to My abode, he does not have to return to
this world.

“Today our lives have become blessed. We have become
blessed by taking darśana of Śrī Māyātīrtha, which is
the chief holy place of the seven Purīs.”

Thereafter, both Vaiṣṇavas reflected on artha-pañcaka,
and presented Śrī Rāmānujaís views on these five
subjects: sva-svarūpa, para-svarūpa, upāya-svarūpa,
puruṣārtha-svarūpa and virodhī-svarūpa. Upon hearing
these topics, Vijaya Kumāra in turn explained tattva-
traya, that is to say, he spoke on Īśvara, jīva, prakṛti
and their interrelationship. After some time, he said,
“What is the siddhānta in your sampradāya regarding śrī-
nāma-tattva?” However, Vrajanātha and Vijaya Kumāra were
not very impressed or appreciative of the reply that the
two Vaiṣṇavasí gave.

Thereafter, Vrajanātha said to Vijaya Kumāra, “Māmājī,
after much deliberation I have concluded that the jīva
can only find his welfare by accepting kṛṣṇa-nāma; there
is no other way. The Lord of our life, Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, has descended to this Māyātīrtha to teach
śuddha-kṛṣṇa-nāma in the world. When Śrī Gurudeva last
instructed us, he said that śrī-nāma is the foremost of
all of the aṅgas of bhakti and that we must make a
separate attempt to understand nāma-tattva. So let us go
this very day and try to understand śrī-nāma-tattva

                          334
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

conclusively.” Then, after taking care of the needs of
the guests, they departed.

The sandhyā had arrived, and darkness was spreading. In
Śrīvāsāṅgana, Śrī Bhagavānís sandhyā-āratī had begun,
and the Vaiṣṇavas were sitting on the platform of the
bakula tree. The elderly Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī was also
sitting there in their midst, chanting nāma on his
tulasī mālā and keeping count (saṅkhyā-pūrvaka).
Vrajanātha and Vijaya Kumāra offered sāṣṭāṅga-praṇāma at
his feet, and Bābājī Mahāśaya embraced them, saying, “Is
the bliss of your bhajana increasing?”

Vijaya Kumāra folded his hands and said, “Prabhu, by
your mercy, we are well in all respects. Now, kindly
bestow your mercy on us this evening and instruct us on
nāma-tattva.”

Being very pleased, Bābājī Mahārāja replied, “Śrī
Bhagavān has two kinds of names: His primary names
(mukhya-nāma) and His secondary names (gauṇa-nāma).
Names such as the Sṛṣṭi-kartā (Creator), Jagat-pātā
(Protector of the universe), Viśva-niyantā (Controller
of the universe), Viśva-pālaka (Maintainer of the
universe), and Paramātmā (Supersoul) are related to the
creation within the shelter of the material modes. These
are called gauṇa (secondary), because they are related
to the guṇas (modes of material nature). There are many
such gauṇa names, including names such as brahma.
Although their fruit is extremely great, they do not
easily yield a transcendental result (cit-phala).

The names that are always present both in the spiritual
and material worlds are spiritual and primary. For
example, names such as Nārāyaṇa, Vāsudeva, Janārdana,
Hṛṣīkeśa, Hari, Acyuta, Govinda, Gopāla, and Rāma are
all primary. These names are present in Bhagavānís abode
(bhagavad-dhāma), and are one with His form (bhagavat-
svarūpa). In the material world, these names only dance
on the tongues of very fortunate people to whose bhakti
they are attracted. Śrī-bhagavān-nāma has no connection
at all with the material world, and all the śaktis of
Bhagavānís form (bhagavat-svarūpa) are present in śrī-
nāma. Therefore, the names also possess all these
śaktis. They have descended into the material world and
are engaged in destroying māyā. The jīvas have no friend
in this material world except for hari-nāma. In the
Bṛhan-nāradīya Purāṇa, hari-nāma is said to be the only
way.

harer nāmaiva nāmaiva nāmaiva mama jīvanam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva nāsty eva gatir anyathā

Bṛhan-nāradīya Purāṇa (38.126)

Meditation is the predominant process for perfection in
Satya-yuga, yajña (sacrifice) in Tretā-yuga, and arcana
(Deity worship) in Dvāpara-yuga. But in Kali-yuga hari-
nāma is my only life, hari-nāma is my only life, hari-
nāma is my only life. In Kali-yuga, other than śrī-hari-
nāma, there is no other way, there is no other way,
there is no other way.


                          335
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

Hari-nāma has unlimited great and wonderful śakti which
can destroy all kinds of sins within a moment.

aveśenāpi yan-nāmni kīrttite sarva-pātakaiḥ

pumān vimucyate sadyaḥ siṁha-trastair mṛgair iva

Garuḍa Purāṇa (232.12)

A person who performs the kīrtana of Śrī Nārāyaṇa with
absorption becomes at once freed from all sins. They fly
away from him just like frightened deer who hear the
roar of a lion.

When one takes shelter of śrī-hari-nāma, all his
miseries and all kinds of diseases disappear.

ādhayo vyādhayo yasya smaraṇān nāma-kīrttanāt

tadaiva vilayaṁ yānti tam anantaṁ namāmy aham

Skanda-Purāṇa

I offer obeisances to the supreme Lord, who is known as
Anantadeva. Remembering Him and chanting His name
immediately dispels all kinds of diseases and miseries
completely.

One who performs hari-nāma purifies his family, his
society and the whole world.

mahāpātaka-yukto’pi kīrttayann aniśaṁ harim

śuddhāntaḥ karaṇo bhūtvā jāyate paṅkti-pāvanaḥ

Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa

Even if one is very sinful, if he constantly performs
hari-nāma, his heart becomes pure, he attains twice-born
status, and he purifies the whole world.

One who is dedicated to śrī-hari-nāma is relieved of all
unhappiness, all disturbances, and all kinds of disease.

sarva-rogopaśamaṁ sarvopadrava-nāśanam

śānti-daṁ sarva-riṣṭānāṁ harer nāmānukīrttanam

Bṛhad-viṣṇu Purāṇa

When one performs śrī-hari-nāma-kīrtana, all kinds of
diseases go away, all kinds of disturbances are
appeased, all kinds of obstacles are destroyed, and one
attains supreme peace.

The degrading qualities of Kali cannot affect one who
chants śrī-hari-nāma.

hare keśava govinda vāsudeva jaganmaya

itīrayanti ye nityaṁ na hi tān bādhate kaliḥ

Bṛhan-nāradīya Purāṇa


                          336
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

Kali cannot cause any impediment, even for a moment, to
those who perform constant kīrtana, chanting “O Hare! O
Govinda! O Keśava! O Vāsudeva! O Jaganmaya!”

One who hears śrī-hari-nāma becomes liberated from hell.

yathā yathā harer nāma kīrttayanti sma nārakāḥ

tathā tathā harau bhaktim udvahanto divaṁ yayuḥ

Nṛsiṁha-tāpanī

If even the residents of hell chant hari-nāma, they
achieve hari-bhakti, and enter within the divine abode.

Chanting hari-nāma destroys prārabdha-karma (the results
of past pious or impious activity which is now bearing
fruit).

yan nāmadheyaṁ mṛiyamāṇa āturaḥ

patan skhalan vā vivaśo gṛṇan pumān

vimukta-karmārgala uttamāṁ gatiṁ

prāpnoti yakṣyanti na taṁ kalau janāḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (12.3.44)

If a human being helplessly chants just one name of Śrī
Bhagavān at the time of death, in an afflicted
situation, or when falling down or slipping, all the
bondage of his karma is destroyed and he will obtain the
highest goal. But alas! Due to the influence of Kali-
yuga, people do not worship Him.

Hari-nāma-kīrtana is more glorious and beneficial than
studying the Vedas.

mā ṛco mā yajus tāta mā sāma paṭha kiñcana

govindeti harer nāma geyaṁ gāyasva nityaśaḥ

Skanda Purāṇa

There is no need to study and teach the Ṛg, Sāma and
Yajur Vedas, and so on. Simply perform constant
saṅkīrtana of Śrī Hariís name, Govinda.

Performing hari-nāma is better than visiting all tīrthas
(holy places).

tīrtha-koṭi-sahasrāṇi tīrtha-koṭi-śatāni ca

tāni sarvāṇy avāpnoti viṣṇor nāmāni kīrttanāt

Skanda Purāṇa

Kīrtana of Śrī Viṣṇuís names gives all the results
obtained by going to millions of tīrthas.

Even a dim glimmer of hari-nāma (hari-nāmābhāsa) gives
unlimitedly more results than all kinds of sat-karma
(pious fruitive activities).

                          337
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017


go-koṭi-dānaṁ grahaṇe khagasya

prayāga-gaṅgodaka kalpa-vāsaḥ

yajñāyutaṁ meru-suvarṇa-dānaṁ

govinda-kīrter na samaṁ śatāṁśaiḥ

One may give cows in charity on the day of a solar
eclipse; one may reside in Prayāga on the banks of the
Gaṅgā for a kalpa; or one may perform thousands of
yajñas, and give in charity a mountain of gold as high
as Mount Sumeru. Still, all these cannot even be
compared with a one-hundredth particle of śrī-govinda-
kīrtana.

Hari-nāma can yield all kinds of benefits (artha).

etat ṣaḍ-varga-haraṇaṁ ripu-nigrahaṇaṁ param

adhyātma-mūlam etad dhi viṣṇor nāmānukīrttanam

Skanda Purāṇa

Saṅkīrtana of Śrī Viṣṇuís names conquers the six senses
and the six enemies (beginning with kāma and krodha) and
is the root of knowledge of the Supreme Self.

Hari-nāma is invested with all śakti.

dāna-vrata-tapas-tīrtha-kṣetrādīnañ ca yāh sthitāḥ

śaktayo deva mahatāṁ sarva-pāpaharāḥ śubhāḥ

rājasūyāśvamedhānāñ jñana-sādhyātma-vastunaḥ

ākṛṣya hariṇā sarvāḥ sthāpitā sveṣu nāmasu

Skanda Purāṇa

There are so many auspicious qualities within charity
(dāna), vows (vrata), austerity (tapa), the holy places
(tīrtha-kṣetras), the devatās, within all kinds of sin-
removing righteous activities, in the aggregate of all
powers (śaktis), in the Rājasūya and Aśvamedha
sacrifices, and in the goal of knowledge of the identity
of the self (jñāna-sādhya of ātma-vastu). However, Śrī
Hari has assembled all of these potencies and invested
them within His own names.

Śrī-hari-nāma gives bliss to the whole world.

sthāne hṛṣīkeśa tava prakīrttyā / jagat prahṛṣyaty
anurajyate ca

Bhagavad-gītā (11.36)

O Hṛṣīkeśa, the world becomes delighted on hearing the
kīrtana of Your name and fame, and thus everyone becomes
attached to You.

One who chants śrī-hari-nāma is worshipable in the
world.

                          338
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017


nārāyaṇa jagannātha vāsudeva janārdana

itīrayanti ye nityaṁ te vai sarvatra vanditāḥ

Bṛhan-nāradīya Purāṇa

Those who always perform kīrtana, chanting “O Nārāyaṇa!
O Jagannātha! O Vāsudeva! O Janārdana!” are worshiped
everywhere in the world.

Śrī-hari-nāma is the only method for those who have no
way.

ananya-gatayo marttyā bhoginoí pi parantapāḥ

jñāna-vairāgya-rahitā brahmacaryādi-varjitāḥ

sarva-dharmojjhitāḥ viṣṇor nāma-mātraika-jalpakāḥ

sukhena yāṁ gatiṁ yānti na taṁ sarve’ pi dhārmikaḥ

Padma Purāṇa

Those who simply perform kīrtana of Śrī Viṣṇuís name may
do so because they have no other means of support, and
they may be absorbed in sense enjoyment. They may be
troublesome to others, bereft of celibacy and other
virtues, and outside all dharma. Still, the destination
that they achieve cannot be attained by all the combined
efforts of religious people.

Hari-nāma can be performed at all times and under all
circumstances.

na deśa-niyamas tasmin na kāla-niyamas tathā

nocchiṣṭādau niṣedho’sti śrī-harer nāmni lubdhaka

Viṣṇu-dharmottara

O you who are greedy for śrī-hari-nāma, there is no rule
of time and place for kīrtana of śrī-hari-nāma. One may
perform hari-nāma-kīrtana in any condition, whether one
is purified or contaminated, for example, if oneís mouth
is not clean after eating.

Hari-nāma certainly gives mukti very easily to one who
desires it.

nārāyaṇācyutānanta-vāsudeveti yo naraḥ

satataṁ kīrttayed bhuvi yāti mal-layatāṁ sa hi

Varāha Purāṇa

The person who wanders about the earth always chanting
the names Nārāyaṇa, Ananta, Acyuta and Vāsudeva will go
with Me to My planet.

kiṁ kariṣyati sāṅkhyena kiṁ yogair nara-nāyaka

muktim icchasi rājendra kuru govinda-kīrttanam


                          339
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017

Garuḍa Purāṇa

O best of men, what benefit can one derive from studying
sāṅkhya philosophy or practicing aṣṭāṅga-yoga? O King,
if you desire liberation, just perform Śrī Govindaís
kīrtana.

Hari-nāma enables the jīvas to attain Vaikuṇṭha.

sarvatra sarva-kāleṣu yeípi kurvanti pātakam

nāma-sankīrttanaṁ kṛtvā yānti viṣṇoḥ paraṁ padam

Nandī Purāṇa

Even one who has performed sinful activities always and
everywhere attains the supreme abode of Viṣṇu if he
performs nāma-saṅkīrtana.

Chanting hari-nāma is the topmost means of pleasing Śrī
Bhagavān.

nāma-saṅkīrttanaṁ viṣṇoḥ kṣut-tṛṭ-prapīḍitādiṣu

karoti satataṁ viprās tasya prīto hy adhokṣajaḥ

Bṛhan-nāradīya Purāṇa

O brāhmaṇas! Adhokṣaja Viṣṇu remains very satisfied with
those who incessantly perform saṅkīrtana of Viṣṇuís
name, even when troubled by hunger and thirst.

Hari-nāma has the śakti to control Śrī Bhagavān.

ṛṇam etat pravṛddhaṁ me hṛdayāṅ nāsarpati

yad-govindeti cukrośa kṛṣṇā māṁ dūra-vāsinam

Mahābhārata

When I was far away from Draupadī, she called out to Me,
“Hā Govinda!” I am very much indebted to her for her
distressed call, and I have not been able to remove that
debt from My heart even today.

Hari-nāma is the puruṣārtha (supreme goal of life) for
the jīvas.

idam eva hi māṅgalyam etad eva dhanārjanam

jīvitasya phalañ caitad yad dāmodara-kīrttanam

Skanda and Padma Purāṇas

Kīrtana of Dāmodara, is certainly the cause of all
auspiciousness, and the source of real wealth. The only
benifit of having life is to perform such kīrtana.

Hari-nāma-kīrtana is the best of all the different kinds
of bhakti-sādhana.

agha-cchit-smaraṇaṁ viṣṇor bahv-āyāsena sādhyate

oṣṭha-spandana-mātreṇa kīrttanaṁ tu tato varam

                           340
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017


Vaiṣṇava-cintāmaṇi

Śrī-viṣṇu-smaraṇam destroys all sins but is attained
only after much endevor. Viṣṇu-kīrtana, however, is
superior because the same benefit is attained simply by
vibrating śrī-nāma upon oneís lips.

yad-abhyarcya hariṁ bhaktyā kṛte kratu-śatair api

phalaṁ prāpnoty avikalaṁ kalau govinda-kīrttanam

The same entire benefit obtained by performing hundreds
of yajñas in Satya-yuga, can be achieved in Kali-yuga by
performing kīrtana of Śrī Govindaís names.

kṛte yad dhyāyato viṣṇuṁ tretāyāṁ yajato makhaiḥ

dvāpare paricaryāyāṁ kalau tad dhari-kīrttanāt

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (12.3.52)

Simply performing kīrtana of Śrī Hariís Nāma in Kali-
yuga gives the same results as those that are achieved
by meditating on Bhagavān in Satya-yuga, by worshiping
Him with great yajñas in Tretā-yuga, and by performing
formal Deity worship in Dvāpara-yuga.

Vijaya: Prabhu, I have full faith that hari-nāma is
completely spiritual, but still, in order to be free
from doubts with regard to nāma-tattva, it is necessary
to understand how śrī-hari-nāma can be spiritual, when
it is composed of syllables (which are apparently
material). Will you please clarify this point?

Bābājī: The svarūpa (nature and form) of śrī-nāma has
been explained in the Padma Purāṇa.

nāma cintāmaṇiḥ kṛṣṇaś caitanya-rasa-vigrahaḥ

pūrṇaḥ śuddho nitya-mukto íbhinnatvān nāma-nāminoḥ

Śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma is cintāmaṇi-svarūpa. This means that it
awards the supreme goal of life and all transcendental
good fortune. This is because śrī-hari-nāma is non-
different from Him who possesses śrī-nāma. For the same
reason śrī-divya-nāma is the very form of mellows
(caitanya-rasa-svarūpa), and is complete, pure, and
eternally liberated from contact with māyā.

Śrī-nāma and śrī-nāmī (He who possesses śrī-nāma) are
non-different in tattva. Therefore, śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma has
all the spiritual qualities present in Kṛṣṇa Himself,
the possessor of śrī-nāma. Śrī-nāma is always the
complete truth, and has no contact with dull matter. He
is eternally liberated, because He is never bound by
material modes. Śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma is Kṛṣṇa Himself, and
that is why He is the personified form of the aggregate
wealth of transcendental mellows. Śrī-hari-nāma is a
wish-fulfilling gem (cintāmaṇi), and thus can award all
that one desires from Him.

Vijaya: How can the syllables of śrī-hari-nāma be beyond
the realm of illusory, material words?

                          341
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017


Bābājī:Hari-nāma has not taken birth in the material
world. The conscious, spark-like jīva is qualified to
utter hari-nāma when he is situated in his pure,
spiritual form. However, he cannot perform pure hari-
nāma with his material senses which are bound by māyā.
When the jīva obtains the mercy of the hlādinī-śakti,
then the activity of realizing his svarūpa begins, and
śuddha-nāma arises at that time. When śuddha-nāma
appears, He mercifully descends on the mental faculty,
and dances on the tongue which has been purified through
the practice of bhakti. Śrī-hari-nāma is not a form of
letters, but when He dances on the material tongue, He
is manifest in the form of letters; that is the secret
of kṛṣṇa-nāma.

Vijaya: Which name is the sweetest of all the primary
holy names?

Bābājī: The Śata-nāma-stotra says,

viṣṇor ekaikaṁ nāmāpi sarva-vedādhikaṁ matam

tādṛk-nāma sahasreṇa rāma-nāma-samaṁ smṛtam

Chanting one name of Viṣṇu gives more benefit than
studying all the Vedas, and one name of Rāma is equal to
a thousand names (sahasra-nāma) of Viṣṇu.

Again, it is stated in the Brahmāṇḍa Purāṇa,

sahasra-nāmnāṁ puṇyānāṁ trir āvṛttyā tu yat phalam

ekāvṛttyā tu kṛṣṇasya nāmaikaṁ tat prayacchati

If one utters śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma once, one obtains the same
result that comes from chanting the pure viṣṇu-sahasra-
nāma three times.

The purport is that a thousand names of Viṣṇu equals one
name of Rāma, and three thousand names of Viṣṇu ñ that
is to say, three names of Rāma ñ equals one name of
Kṛṣṇa. Chanting Kṛṣṇaís name once gives the same result
as chanting Rāmaís name three times.

Śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma is certainly the supreme name. Therefore,
we should follow the instruction of the Lord of our
life, Śrī Gaurāṅga Sundara, and always take śrī-nāma as
He has given it: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa,
Hare, Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma, Rāma, Hare,
Hare.

Vijaya: What is the process of hari-nāma-sādhana?

Bābājī: One should constantly perform hari-nāma by
counting the names properly on a tulasī-mālā or in the
absence of that, counting on the fingers. One should
always stay far away from offenses. The fruit of śrī-
hari-nāma—kṛṣṇa-prema—is attained by chanting śuddha-
nāma. The purpose of keeping count is for the sādhaka to
understand whether his practice of śrī-hari-nāma is
increasing or diminishing. Tulasī-devī is very dear to
Hari, so touching her while taking hari-nāma means that
hari-nāma bestows more benefit. When one is practicing

                          342
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

nāma, one should understand that śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma is non-
different from His svarūpa (eternal, intrinsic form).

Vijaya: Prabhu, there are nine or sixty-four different
aṅgas of sādhana, but chanting śrī-hari-nāma is only one
form. If one is always practicing nāma, how can one have
time for the other forms of sādhana?

Bābājī: That is not difficult. The sixty-four different
aṅgas of bhakti are all contained within the nine-fold
process of bhakti. The nine aṅgas of bhakti, whether in
the worship (arcana) of śrī-mūrti (the Deity) or in
nirjana-sādhana,1 can be performed anywhere. Simply by
the pure hearing, chanting, and remembering of śrī-
kṛṣṇa-nāma in front of śrī-mūrti, one has accomplished
nāma-sādhana. Where there is no mūrti, simply remember
the mūrti, and perform sādhana to that mūrti with the
limbs of navadhā (nine-fold) bhakti, in the form of
hearing and chanting śrī-nāma, etc. One who is fortunate
enough to have special ruci for nāma always performs
nāma-kīrtana. Thus, he automatically follows all the
aṅgas of bhakti. Śrī-nāma-kīrtana is the most powerful
of all the nine processes of sādhana: śravaṇam kīrtanam
etc. During kīrtana, all the other aṅgas are present,
although they may not be evident.

Vijaya: How is it possible to perform continuous nāma-
saṅkīrtana?

Bābājī: Continuous nāma-kīrtana means performing kīrtana
of śrī-hari-nāma at all times, while sitting, getting
up, eating, or working, except when sleeping. In nāma-
sādhana there is no prohibition regarding time, place,
situation or cleanliness. That is, one may be in a pure
or impure condition.

Vijaya: Oh, the mercy of nāma-bhagavān is unlimited, but
we have no hope of becoming Vaiṣṇavas until you give us
your mercy and bestow upon us the power to perform nāma
constantly.

Bābājī: I have already explained that there are three
kinds of Vaiṣṇava: kaniṣṭha, madhyama, and uttama. Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu told Satyarāja Khān that anyone who
takes kṛṣṇa-nāma is a Vaiṣṇava. One who constantly takes
kṛṣṇa-nāma is a madhyama Vaiṣṇava, and the uttama
Vaiṣṇava is he whose very sight makes kṛṣṇa-nāma appear
spontaneously in one’s mouth. Since you sometimes take
kṛṣṇa-nāma with faith, you have already obtained the
position of a Vaiṣṇava.

Vijaya: Please tell us whatever else we should know
about śuddha-kṛṣṇa-nāma.

Bābājī:Śuddha-kṛṣṇa-nāma is kṛṣṇa-nāma that has arisen
through undivided bhakti resulting from full faith.
Other than that, the chanting of śrī-nāma will be
experienced as either nāmābhāsa or nāma-aparādha.

Vijaya: Prabhu, should we understand that hari-nāma is
sādhya (the aim and purpose) or sādhana (the means)?

Bābājī: When one takes hari-nāma in the course of
sādhana-bhakti, that nāma can be called sādhana.

                          343
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

However, when the bhakta takes hari-nāma in the course
of bhāva-bhakti or prema-bhakti, that manifestation of
śrī-hari-nāma is sādhya-vastu, or the aim and object of
practice. The sādhaka’s realization of the contraction
or expansion of śrī-hari-nāma will depend on his level
of bhakti.

Vijaya: Is there a difference in the experience of
kṛṣṇa-nāma and kṛṣṇa-svarūpa?

Bābājī: No, there is no difference in the experience,
but one should understand the confidential secret that
kṛṣṇa-nāma is more merciful than kṛṣṇa-svarūpa. Kṛṣṇa’s
svarūpa (form) does not forgive whatever offense is made
to Him, but kṛṣṇa-nāma forgives both offenses committed
to the svarūpa and offenses committed towards Himself.
When you take nāma, you should understand the nāma-
aparādhas very clearly and try to avoid them, because
you cannot chant śuddha-nāma until you stop committing
offenses. The next time you come, we will discuss nāma-
aparādha.

When Vrajanātha and Vijaya Kumāra had learned about the
glories of nāma and nāma-svarūpa-tattva, they took Śrī
Gurudevaís footdust, and slowly returned to Bilva-
puṣkariṇī.



Thus ends the Twenty-third Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled

“Prameya: Śrī-Nāma-Tattva”




Chapter 24

Prameya: Nāma-Aparādha



Vrajanātha and Vijaya Kumāra were extremely happy to
learn the glories of śrī-nāma and nāma-svarūpa-tattva.
When they arrived home, they chanted fifty thousand
names on their tulasī-mālā without offense, and by this
chanting of śuddha-nāma they received direct experience
of Kṛṣṇaís mercy. It was late at night when they finally
took rest.

When they rose the next morning, they discussed the
events of the previous night and became very blissful as
they expressed their own realizations. They passed the
day in bathing in the Gaṅgā, worshiping Kṛṣṇa, taking
hari-nāma, performing kīrtana, studying Daśa-mūla,
reviewing Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and performing vaiṣṇava-
sevā and bhagavat-prasāda-sevā. That evening, they
presented themselves at the venerable Bābājī Mahāśayaís
kuṭira at Śrīvāsāṅgana. After offering sāṣṭāṅga-praṇāma,
Vijaya Kumāra inquired about the topic of nāma-aparādha-
tattva that had been introduced the previous evening.

                             344
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017


On hearing Vijaya Kumāraís eagerness to know about this
tattva, Bābājī Mahārāja was pleased, and lovingly said,
“Just as nāma is the highest truth, so nāma-aparādha
(offense against śrī-nāma) is the most frightening of
all kinds of sins and offenses. All other kinds of sins
and offenses go away naturally and automatically as one
utters śrī-nāma, but nāma-aparādha does not go away so
easily. In the description of the glories of śrī-nāma in
the Padma Purāṇa, Svarga-khaṇḍa (48, 49) it is said:

nāma-aparādha-yuktānāṁ nāmāny eva haranty agham

aviśrānta-prayuktāni tāny evārtha-karāṇi ca

For those infected with nāma-aparādha, śrī-nāma will
certainly remove the sin, provided the sādhakas chant
tirelessly and unremittingly. Śrī-nāma Himself will
effect their deliverance.

Just see, it is so difficult to destroy nāma-aparādha.
Therefore, one must avoid nāma-aparādha when one chants
śrī-nāma. If one tries hard to stop committing nāma-
aparādha, śuddha-nāma will manifest very quickly.

One may take śrī-nāma and be chanting continually, with
the hairs on his body standing on end and streams of
tears flowing from his eyes; but it may still be that,
because of nāma-aparādha, he is not uttering śuddha-
nāma. Therefore, sādhakas must give very special
attention to this; otherwise, they will not be able to
chant śuddha-nāma.

Vijaya: Prabhu, what is śuddha-nāma (the pure holy
name)?

Bābājī:Śuddha-nāma is hari-nāma that is free from the
ten kinds of offenses. There is no consideration of
purity or impurity with regard to pronunciation of the
syllables of śrī-nāma.

nāmaikaṁ yasya vāci smaraṇa-patha-gataṁ śrotra-mūlaṁ
gataṁ vā

śuddhaṁ vāśuddha-varṇa-vyavahita-rahitaṁ tārayaty eva
satyam

tac ced deha-dravina-janatā lobha-pāṣāṇa-madhye

nikṣiptaṁ syānn aphala-janakaṁ śighram evātra vipra

Padma Purāṇa, Svarga-khaṇḍa (48. 60-61)

O best of brāhmaṇas, if only one holy name appears on
the tongue, or enters the ear, or arises on the path of
oneís remembrance, that nāma will certainly liberate
one. The purity or impurity of oneís pronunciation of
the syllables of śrī-nāma (nāma-akṣara) in accordance
with vidhi (regulation of śāstra) is not so important.
That is to say, śrī-nāma does not make such
considerations. What is considered is that the real
fruit of chanting will not come quickly if this all-
powerful name is chanted in the interests of the body,
house, wealth, material development, sons, and family,

                          345
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

or with greed for gold, women, and prestige.

There are two kinds of obstacles or offenses: ordinary
and great. Śrī-nāma that is chanted with ordinary
obstacles is nāma-ābhāsa, which awards its benefit some
time later. Nāma impeded with great obstacles is nāma-
aparādha. This aparādha does not go far away unless one
chants śrī-nāma constantly.

Vijaya: It seems to me that the sādhaka should know
about nāma-aparādha. Please be merciful and tell us in
detail about it.

Bābājī: There is a very deep and essential analysis of
the ten kinds of nāma-aparādha in the Padma Purāṇa:

satāṁ nindā nāmnaḥ param aparādhaṁ vitanute

yataḥ khyātiṁ yātaṁ katham u sahate tu tad-vigarhām

(1) Criticizing or blaspheming saints and great bhaktas
increases terrible offenses towards śrī-nāma. How can
Śrī Kṛṣṇa tolerate blasphemy of great souls who are
devoted to śrī-nāma, and who preach the glories of śrī-
kṛṣṇa-nāma in this world? Therefore, the first offense
is to blaspheme the bhaktas.

śivasya śrī-viṣṇor ya iha guṇa-nāmādi-sakalaṁ

dhiyā bhinnaṁ paśyet sa khalu hari-nāmāhita-karaḥ

(2) In this material world, Śrī Viṣṇuís name, form,
qualities, pastimes and so on are all-auspicious for all
beings. If one considers them to be material phenomena
and different from Śrī Viṣṇu Himself, this is
detrimental to oneís chanting of śrī-hari-nāma. It is
also nāma-aparādha to believe that Śiva and the other
devas are independent and equal with Śrī Viṣṇu.

The other offenses are:

(3) guror avajñā: to disrespect śrī-guru who knows nāma-
tattva by considering him an ordinary, mortal human
being, with a body made of the five material elements.

(4) śruti-śāstra-nindanam: to blaspheme the Vedas, the
Sātvatas, the Purāṇas, and other śāstras.

(5) artha-vādaḥ: to think that the glorification of śrī-
hari-nāma in śāstra is an exaggeration.

(6) hari-nāmni kalpanam: to interpret śrī-hari-nāma (in
a mundane way) or to think that nāma Himself is a
product of the imagination.

nāmno balād yasya hi pāpa-buddhir

na vidyate tasya yamair hi śuddhiḥ

(7) It is certain that one who is engaged in sinful
activi-ties on the strength of śrī-nāma cannot be
purified by artificial yoga practices such as yama,
niyama, dhyāna, and dhāraṇā.


                          346
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

dharma-vrata-tyāga-hutādi-sarva

śubha-kriyā-sāmyam api pramādaḥ

(8) It is an offense to think that rituals and pious
material activities such as dharma, vrata, tyāga, and
homa are equal, or even comparable to Bhagavānís śrī-
divya-nāma (transcendental name).

aśraddadhāne vimukheípy aśṛṇvati

yaś copadeśaḥ śiva-nāma-aparādhaḥ

(9) It is nāma-aparādha to give instructions on
auspicious śrī-nāma to those who are faithless or averse
to hearing śrī-nāma.

śrute ëpi nāma-māhātmye yaḥ prīti-rahito naraḥ

ahaṁ-mamādi-paramo nāmni soípy aparādha-kṛt

(10) One is a nāma-aparādhī if, even after hearing the
wonderful glories of śrī-nāma, he does not show love or
enthusiasm for chanting śrī-nāma and clings fast to the
material conception, of ëIí and ëmineí; that is to say,
“I am this body, composed of blood, flesh and skin, and
things relating to this body are mine.”

Vijaya: Please make us understand all these offenses by
explaining each śloka completely.

Bābājī: The first śloka describes two offenses. It is a
great offense to blaspheme, censure, or disrespect
bhaktas who have completely given up materially
motivated practices such as karma, dharma, jñāna, yoga
and tapasyā, and who with an exclusive mood of devotion,
have taken shelter of Bhagavān’s śrī-nāma. Śrī-Hari-Nāma
Prabhu cannot tolerate blasphemy of those who preach the
factual glories of śrī-nāma in this world. One should
not blaspheme those bhaktas who are one-pointedly
devoted to śrī-nāma. Instead, one should accept them as
the best of saintly persons. One should remain and
perform nāma-kīrtana in their association. One will
certainly attain the mercy of śrī-nāma quickly by doing
so.

Vijaya: Now we can understand the first offense clearly.
Kindly explain the second offense.

Bābājī: The second offense is mentioned in the second
part of the first śloka, and it has been explained in
two ways.

The first explanation is that it is an offense to śrī-
nāma to consider that Sadāśiva and other leaders of the
devas are independent of Śrī Viṣṇu. According to bahv-
īśvara-vāda (the doctrine of many controllers), Sadāśiva
is a perfectly powerful controller, who is independent
and separate from Bhagavān Śrī Viṣṇu. However, this
conception creates an obstacle to one-pointed hari-
bhakti. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is actually the controller of
everything and everyone, and Śiva and the other devas
only achieve their positions as controllers through His
power. These devas have no separate power of their own,

                          347
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

and it is nāma-aparādha to perform hari-nāma thinking
that they do.

The second explanation is that it is also an offense to
śrī-nāma to consider that the all-auspicious, intrinsic
svarūpa of Śrī Bhagavānís names, forms, qualities and
pastimes is different from Bhagavānís eternal, perfect
form (vigraha). Kṛṣṇaís intrinsic nature, Kṛṣṇaís name,
Kṛṣṇaís qualities and Kṛṣṇaís pastimes are all
transcendental and non-different from each other. One
should perform kṛṣṇa-nāma-saṅkīrtana with this knowledge
and realization, otherwise there will be an aparādha
(offense made to śrī-nāma). Thus, one should perform
kṛṣṇa-nāma after first comprehending sambandha-jñāna;
this is the process.

Vijaya: I can understand the first and second nāma-
aparādhas very well, because you have kindly explained
to me the relationship of simultaneous oneness and
difference between Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental spiritual
form and Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself, who possesses the form;
between His transcendental qualities and He who
possesses those qualities; between His names and He who
possesses those names; and between the parts and the
whole.

One who is taking shelter of śrī-nāma must also learn
from Gurudeva about the respective natures of the cit
(conscious) and acit (unconscious) tattvas, and about
the relationship between them. Now kindly explain the
third offense.

Bābājī: The śrī-nāma-guru is he who awards instructions
about the superiority of nāma-tattva, and one’s duty is
to maintain fixed and resolute bhakti towards him. It is
nāma-aparādha to minimize the position of nāma-guru,
thinking that he knows only about nāma-śāstra, whereas
the scholars of Vedānta philosophy and other śāstras
actually know the meaning of the śāstras. Actually, no
guru is superior to the nāma-tattva-vid guru, and it is
an offense to think that he is less important.

Vijaya: Prabhu, I am assured of well-being if I can
maintain pure bhakti towards you. Please explain the
fourth offense.

Bābājī: There is a special instruction in the śruti
regarding the ultimate goal. There, the glories of śrī-
nāma are declared to be the foremost of spiritual
processes.

oṁ āsya jānanto nāma-cid-viviktanas

mahas te viṣṇo sumatiṁ bhajāmahe

oṁ tat sat

O Śrī Viṣṇu, one who chants śrī-nāma thoughtfully and
properly will not be confused and disturbed in his
bhajana and other regulative practices. In other words,
when one accepts śrī-nāma, there is no question of the
place, time and person being favorable or unfavorable,
because śrī-nāma is the all-illuminating, personified
form of knowledge, and the supreme knowable object.

                          348
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

Therefore, we offer our prayers to śrī-nāma.

oṁ padaṁ devasya namasā vyantaḥ / śravasya vaśrava
ānnamṛktam

nāmāni cid dadhire yajñiyāni / bhadrāyante raṇayantaḥ
sandṛṣṭau

O most worshipable Lord, I am offering obeisances to
Your lotus feet again and again. Hearing the glories of
Your lotus feet may give bhaktas the adhikāra for fame
and liberation, but what is the value in that? Still
more glorious are those bhaktas who engage in
discussions and debates to establish Your lotus feet as
the ultimate abode, and together cultivate their service
relationship with You through the performance of
saṅkīrtana. When āsakti appears in their hearts, they
take sole shelter of Your caitanya-svarūpa-nāma (fully
conscious name) to achieve darśana of Your lotus feet.

oṁ tam u stotāraḥ pūrvaṁ yathāvida

ṛtasya garvabhaṁ januṣā piparttana

āsya jānanto nāma cid-viviktana

mahas te viṣṇo sumatiṁ bhajāmahe

Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (11.274-276), Ṛg Veda (1.156.3)

The letter ëuí indicates utter astonishment that we
cannot make our lives successful by performing kīrtana
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa as you do, glorifying that supremely
renowned primeval and complete tat and sat Reality
(padārtha). The reason is that we do not know how His
stava (prayers) and kīrtana should be performed.
Therefore our eternal duty is to fulfill the purpose of
our human life by engaging in incessant hari-nāma-
kīrtana.

All the Vedas and Upaniṣads proclaim the glories of śrī-
nāma, and it is nāma-aparādha to blaspheme the mantras
that reveal the glories of śrī-nāma. Some people
unfortunately neglect the śruti-mantras that give these
instructions, and give more respect to the other
instructions of the śruti. This is also nāma-aparādha,
and the result will be that the offender will not have
any taste for nāma. You should perform hari-nāma with
the understanding that these main śruti-mantras are the
life and soul of the śruti.

Vijaya: Prabhu, it seems as if nectar is pouring from
your mouth. Now, I am very eager to understand the fifth
offense.

Bābājī: The fifth offense is to give mundane
interpretations of śrī-nāma. The Jaiminī-saṁhitā
explains this offense as follows:

śruti-smṛti-purāṇesu nāma-māhātmya-vācisu

yeírthavāda iti brūyur na teṣāṁ niraya-kṣayaḥ

Those who consider that the mantras of the Vedas,

                          349
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

Purāṇas,Upaniṣads and other Vedic literatures have
exaggerated the glories of Bhagavānís nāma will go to
everlasting hell, and never return.

In the Brahma-saṁhitā, Śrī Bhagavān has said to Śrī
Brahmā:

yan-nāma-kīrtana-phalaṁ vividhaṁ niśamya

na śraddhadhāti manute yad utārthavādam

yo mānuṣas tam iha duḥkha-caye kṣipāmi

saṁsāra-ghora-vividhārtti-nipīḍitāṅgam

If a human being does not become faithful when he hears
the glories of hari-nāma, but believes them to be
exaggeration, I put him into the terrible cycle of birth
and death with all kinds of miseries.

In the śāstras it is said that Bhagavānís names contain
all His śaktis. Śrī-nāma is completely spiritual, and
therefore He is successful in destroying the illusion of
this material world.

kṛṣṇeti mangalaṁ nāma yasya vāci pravarttate

bhasmī-bhavanti rājendra mahāpātaka-koṭayaḥ

Viṣṇu-dharma Purāṇa

O King, millions of sins are burned to ashes if the
supremely auspicious form of Kṛṣṇaís nāma resides in
oneís mouth.

nānyat paśyāmi jantūnāṁ vihāya hari-kīrttanam

sarva-pāpa-praśamanaṁ prāyascittaṁ dvijottama

Bṛhan-nāradīya Purāṇa

O best among the brāhmaṇas, śrī-hari-nāma is the
atonement that destroys all forms of sins, and I
consider that one who gives up śrī-nāma to be no more
than an animal.

nāmno hi yāvatī śaktiḥ pāpa-nirharaṇe hareḥ

tāvat kartuṁ na śaknoti pātakaṁ pātakī naraḥ

Bṛhad-viṣṇu Purāṇa

The potency of śrī-hari-nāma can remove more sins than
the most sinful person can possibly commit.

All these glories of śrī-nāma are the supreme absolute
truth, but when people active in karma and jñāna hear
them, they concoct explanations to protect their own
activities. Their explanation is that the glories of
śrī-nāma mentioned in śāstras are not really the truth,
but are exaggerations intended to create a taste for
śrī-nāma.

Nāma-aparādha will prevent such offenders from getting a

                          350
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

taste for hari-nāma. You should perform hari-nāma with
full faith in the statements of the śāstras, and never
take the association of those who give mundane
explanations. Furthermore, if they unexpectedly appear
before your eyes, you should take bath with all your
clothes on. That is Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhuís
instruction.

Vijaya: Prabhu, it appears difficult for householders to
chant śuddha-hari-nāma because we are always surrounded
by offensive people who are not at all devotional. It is
very difficult for brāhmaṇa-paṇḍitas like ourselves to
have sat-saṅga. Prabhu, please give us the strength to
give up bad association. The more I hear from your
mouth, the more my thirst for hearing increases. Now
please explain the sixth offense to us.

Bābājī: The sixth offense is to consider śrī-bhagavān-
nāma to be imaginary. Māyāvādīs and fruitive
materialists think the changeless, nirviśeṣa-brahma to
be the Absolute Truth. Those who believe that the ṛṣis
have imagined śrī-bhagavān-nāma such as Rāma and Kṛṣṇa
as a method to attain perfection are nāma-aparādhīs.
Hari-nāma is not imaginary; He is an eternal, spiritual
vastu. Śrī-sad-guru and the Vedic śāstras instruct us
that when we engage in the process of bhakti, hari-nāma
manifests within our spiritual senses. Therefore, hari-
nāma must be accepted as the Absolute Truth, and if one
thinks that He is imaginary, one can never attain His
mercy.

Vijaya: Prabhu, before we took shelter of your fearless
lotus feet, due to bad association, we also thought in
that way. Now, by your mercy, this conception is
vanquished. Please explain the seventh offense to us.

Bābājī: One who is engaged in sinful activities on the
strength of śrī-nāma is a nāma-aparādhī. If one performs
sinful activities in the belief that śrī-nāma will
purify him, one cannot become free from those mountains
of sins by following the rules and regulations of
Vaiṣṇava conduct, because all these activities then
assume the form of further sins that are in the category
of nāma-aparādha, and only the process for nullifying
nāma-aparādhas can destroy them.

Vijaya: Prabhu, if hari-nāma can destroy all sins
without exception, then why does it not destroy the sins
of one who chants śrī-nāma, and why is he deemed an
offender?

Bābājī: On the day that the jīva accepts śuddha-nāma,
one name that he utters certainly destroys the sum total
of all his prārabdha and aprārabdha-karma, and through
the second name, prema will arise. Those who chant
śuddha-hari-nāma have no desire to perform even pious
activities, and what to speak of their maintaining pāpa-
buddhi, a mentality that “I shall commit sin and then
chant nāma to exonerate myself from that sin.” A person
who has taken shelter of śrī-nāma will never commit a
sin. However, it may be that a sādhaka only utters nāma-
ābhāsa, and not śuddha-nāma, because of some remaining
nāma-aparādha. The sins that he performed before
chanting nāma-ābhāsa are being destroyed, and there is

                          351
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

no taste for committing new sins. Nāma-ābhāsa also very
slowly destroys whatever sinful karma remains because of
previous practice. Sometimes he unexpectedly commits new
sins, but they also go away because of his nāma-ābhāsa.
However, it is nāma-aparādha to take shelter of śrī-nāma
and then engage in sinful activities, thinking, “Since
the influence of śrī-nāma destroys all my sins,
certainly it will also destroy the sins that I am
committing now.”

Vijaya: Now kindly tell us about the eighth offense.

Bābājī:Sat-karma refers to all kinds of dharma (in the
general sense), that is to say, varṇāśrama, performing
charity and other pious activities, observing vows
(vrata) and other kinds of auspicious activities,
renouncing the results of all activities (sannyāsa-
dharma), all kinds of yajñas, aṣṭāṅga-yoga, and whatever
else śāstra has defined as auspicious activity. These
are all counted as material dharma (jaḍa-dharma),
whereas Bhagavān’s śrī-nāma is transcendental to
material nature. All these sat-karma are only auxiliary
means to attain the transcendental, blissful goal; they
are not the goal themselves. However, hari-nāma is the
means at the time of sādhana, and is Himself sādhya, the
goal at the time of achieving the result. Therefore,
sat-karma cannot possibly be compared with hari-nāma,
and those who consider that sat-karma is equal to hari-
nāma are nāma-aparādhīs. One who prays to śrī-hari-nāma
for the insignificant results of performing sat-karma is
a nāma-aparādhī, because his activity exposes his
conception that the various forms of sat-karma are equal
to śrī-nāma. You should take refuge of hari-nāma with
spiritual intelligence, knowing that the result of sat-
karma is very insignificant. This is the understanding
of the process of sādhana (abhidheya-jñāna).

Vijaya: Prabhu, we have understood very well that there
is nothing equal to hari-nāma. Now mercifully enlighten
us about the ninth offense.

Bābājī: Of all the various instructions in the Vedas,
the instructions on hari-nāma are the most important,
and only those who have faith in exclusive bhakti are
qualified to hear śrī-nāma’s glories. It is an offense
to give instruction on hari-nāma to those who do not
have faith, who are averse to the transcendental service
of Hari, or who have no taste for hearing nāma. It is
beneficial to give instruction that hari-nāma is the
most exalted of all spiritual practices, and that all
who accept hari-nāma will become most fortunate, but one
should not give such instructions on hari-nāma to the
unqualified. When you become a parama-bhāgavata, then
you will also be able to transmit śakti. Such a great
Vaiṣṇava can first create faith in śrī-nāma by bestowing
spiritual śakti on the jīvas, and after that instruct
them about hari-nāma. However, as long as you remain a
madhyama Vaiṣṇava, you must neglect those who are
faithless, disinterested and envious.

Vijaya: Prabhu, how should we understand the behavior of
those who give hari-nāma to unqualified people out of
greed for wealth, name and fame?


                          352
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

Bābājī: They are nāma-aparādhī.

Vijaya: Please explain the tenth offense.

Bābājī: People in the material world think, “I am such-
and-such a person. This wealth, sons and relatives are
all mine.” They are madly engrossed in such material
consciousness. If by coincidence they hear the glories
of hari-nāma from learned people, a moment of
renunciation or knowledge may appear, but then if they
knowingly do not keep their attachment for śrī-nāma,
they are also nāma-aparādhīs. Therefore it is said in
the second śloka of Śikṣāṣṭaka:

nāmnām akāri bahudhā nija-sarva-śaktis

tatrārpitā niyamitaḥ smaraṇe na kālaḥ

etādṛśī tava kṛpā bhagavan mamāpi

durdaivam īdṛśam ihājani nānurāgaḥ

O Bhagavān, You have manifested Yourself in various
names, such as Kṛṣṇa, Govinda, Gopāla, Vanamālī, and so
on. You have invested all your śaktis in these names,
and there is no question of improper time or place for
remembering śrī-nāma. You are so causelessly merciful,
but unfortunately, because of my aparādhas, I have no
taste for śrī-hari-nāma, whom You have made so easily
available.

One should remain free from the ten kinds of nāma-
aparādha, and engage in hari-nāma. If one does so, śrī-
nāma will swiftly award you His mercy in the form of
prema, and transform you into a parama-bhāgavata.

Vijaya: Prabhu, I can now understand that Māyāvādīs,
karmīs and yogīs are all offenders to śrī-nāma. Since
this is the case, is it proper for pure Vaiṣṇavas to
participate when many people congregate to perform nāma-
kīrtana?

Bābājī: It is not proper for Vaiṣṇavas to participate in
saṅkīrtana groups in which nāma-aparādhīs are prominent
and the lead singer is a nāma-aparādhī. However, there
is no fault in participating in saṅkīrtana groups in
which pure Vaiṣṇavas or general bhaktas who are nāma-
ābhāsīs are prominent. On the contrary, in such saṅga
there will be gain in the form of ānanda in nāma-
saṅkīrtana.

Now it is late. Tomorrow I will speak to you on
nāmābhāsa.

Vijaya and Vrajanātha became ecstatic with nāma-prema.
After offering prayers to Bābājī Mahārāja, they took his
precious footdust on their foreheads and returned home,
singing kīrtana, hari haraye namaḥ kṛṣṇa yādavāya namaḥ!



Thus ends the Twenty-Fourth Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled

                          353
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017


“Prameya: Nāma-Aparādha”




Chapter 25

Prameya: Nāmābhāsa



The next day shortly after sandhyā, Vijaya and
Vrajanātha came before the respected Bābājī, and having
offered sāṣṭāṅga-daṇḍavat, they took their āsanas.
Vijaya took the opportunity to humbly ask, “Prabhu,
kindly have mercy upon us and tell us everything about
nāmābhāsa-tattva. We are very anxious to know the secret
of nāma-tattva.”

Bābājī answered, “You are very fortunate. If you want to
understand nāma-tattva, you must understand three
subject matters very well: nāma, nāmābhāsa and nāma-
aparādha. I have already explained so much about nāma
and nāma-aparādha, and now I will explain about
nāmābhāsa, which means the semblance of śrī-nāma.

Vijaya: What is nāmābhāsa, and how many kinds of ābhāsa
are there?

Bābājī: The word ābhāsa means luster, shadow or
reflection. As the radiance that emanates from a
naturally lustrous object has kānti (effulgence) or
chāyā (shadow), so the sun-like Name has two kinds of
ābhāsa: one is the shadow (nāma-chāyā), and the other is
the reflection (nāma-pratibimba). Learned people who are
conversant with bhakty-ābhāsa, bhāva-ābhāsa, nāmābhāsa,
and vaiṣṇava-ābhāsa say that all kinds of ābhāsa have
two divisions: pratibimba (reflection) and chāyā
(shadow).

Vijaya: What is the relation between bhakty-ābhāsa,
bhāva-ābhāsa, nāmābhāsa, and vaiṣṇava-ābhāsa?

Bābājī: Vaiṣṇavas practise hari-nāma, and when their
practice is on the level of bhakty-ābhāsa, then their
practice of nāma is called nāmābhāsa. They themselves
are also vaiṣṇava-ābhāsa, not pure bhaktas. Bhāva and
bhakti are one and the same thing; it is only because
they are on different levels that they are known by
different names.

Vijaya: On which platform is the jīva called vaiṣṇava-
ābhāsa?

Bābājī:Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.47) says:

arcāyām eva haraye pūjāṁ yaḥ śraddhayehate

na tad-bhakteṣu cānyeṣu sa bhaktaḥ prākṛtaḥ smṛtaḥ

One is a materialistic devotee (kaniṣṭha) if he accepts
the arcā-mūrti of Bhagavān as Śrī Hari and worships Him

                           354
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

with faith, but does not faithfully worship Kṛṣṇaís
bhakta or other jīvas.

In this śloka the word śraddhā is mentioned. However,
the intended meaning is śraddhābhāsa, not pure śraddhā,
because if one worships Kṛṣṇa but not His bhaktas, then
his śraddhā is either chāyā (shadow) or pratibimba
(reflection). That faith is worldly faith; it is not
spiritual faith (aprākṛta-śraddhā). Therefore we should
understand that anyone in whom we see that faith is a
materialistic devotee (prākṛta-bhakta), or a semblance
of a Vaiṣṇava (vaiṣṇava-ābhāsa). Śrīman Mahāprabhu has
said that Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmīís father and
uncle, Hiraṅya and Govardhana, were vaiṣṇava-prāya. This
means that they accepted Vaiṣṇava markings and dress,
and chanted nāmābhāsa, as if they were śuddha-bhaktas,
but actually they were not pure Vaiṣṇavas.

Vijaya: Can Māyāvādīs also be called vaiṣṇava-ābhāsa if
they accept the symbols of a Vaiṣṇava and chant śrī-
nāma?

Bābājī: No, they cannot even be called vaiṣṇava-ābhāsa.
They are simply offenders, so they are called vaiṣṇava-
āparādhī. In one sense, they might be called vaiṣṇava-
ābhāsa, because they have taken shelter of pratibimba-
nāmābhāsa and pratibimba-bhāva-ābhāsa, but they are such
great offenders that they are to be separated even from
the name Vaiṣṇava.

Vijaya: Prabhu, please explain the symptoms of śuddha-
nāma even more clearly, so that we may easily understand
it.

Bābājī: Śuddha-nāma means taking nāma with a favorable
attitude, while remaining free from all material desire
(anyābhilāṣa), and from coverings of jñāna, karma and so
on. To desire the supreme bliss that comes when the
transcendental nature of nāma manifests clearly is not
anyābhilāṣa. All kinds of desires apart from that – such
as the desire to be free from sins and to gain
liberation – are certainly anyābhilāṣa. There will be no
śuddha-nāma so long as anyābhilāṣa remains; one will not
receive śuddha-nāma as long as he still desires the
fruits of performing jñāna, karma, yoga and so on.

Śuddha-nāma comes from accepting nāma with only
favorable inclinations, and rejecting all unfavorable
emotions from the heart. If one keeps these
characteristics of bhakti in mind and deliberates
carefully, it becomes clear that śuddha-nāma is
certainly that nāma which is free from nāma-aparādha and
nāmābhāsa. Therefore Śrī Gauracandra, the merciful
avatāra for Kali-yuga, has said:

tṛṇād api sunīcena taror api sahiṣṇunā

amāninā mānadena kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ

Śikṣāṣṭaka (3)

One should think himself more insignificant and lower
than the straw in the street, and should be more
tolerant than a tree. He should give all respect to

                          355
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

others, without desiring any respect for himself. Then
he will be qualified to chant śrī-hari-nāma constantly.

Vijaya: Prabhu, what is the intrinsic difference between
nāmābhāsa and nāma-aparādha?

Bābājī: When there is no śuddha-nāma, śrī-nāma is called
nāmābhāsa. That nāmābhāsa is called nāmābhāsa at one
stage, and nāma-aparādha at another stage. It is called
nāmābhāsa when the name that is chanted is impure
because one is in ignorance, that is to say, one is
under the control of illusion and inattentiveness.
However, when the name is chanted impurely with a desire
for sense enjoyment (bhoga) or liberation (mokṣa), and
based on a Māyāvāda conception, that is known as nāma-
aparādha. If the other kinds of aparādhas that I told
you about before are present because of simple
ignorance, the aśuddha-nāma (impure name) taken in that
situation is not nāma-aparādha, but nāmābhāsa. You
should remember that, as long as one does not commit
nāma-aparādha when one is chanting nāmābhāsa, there is
hope that the nāmābhāsa will go away, and that śuddha-
nāma will arise. However, if there is nāma-aparādha, the
rising of nāma in the heart can only take place with
great difficulty. There is no means to obtain benefit
other than the method that I have already explained to
become free from the offenses against śrī-nāma.

Vijaya: If someone is performing nāmābhāsa, what must he
do so that his nāmābhāsa may become śuddha-nāma?

Bābājī: The suitable engagement is that he takes the
association of śuddha-bhaktas. If he stays in their
company and chants nāma according to their order and
guidance, he will then acquire a taste for śuddha-
bhakti. The name that appears on the tongue at that time
will be śuddha-nāma. At the same time, he should
diligently give up the company of nāma-aparādhīs,
because śuddha-nāma will not manifest if one remains in
their association. Sat-saṅga is the only cause of the
jīvas’ good fortune. That is why the Lord of our life,
Śrī Gaurāṅgadeva, instructed Sanātana Gosvāmī that sat-
saṅga is certainly the root of bhakti. One should always
renounce associating with women and non-devotees, and
practice kṛṣṇa-nāma in the association of bhaktas.

Vijaya: Prabhu, can the sādhaka not perform śuddha-nāma
without giving up his wife.

Bābājī: It is certainly imperative to give up the
association of women. A gṛhastha-vaiṣṇava who remains
with his married wife in a detached mood is acting
properly in the Vaiṣṇava world, and this is not called
“association with women.” The attachment of men for
women and women for men is called yoṣit saṅga. If a
householder takes kṛṣṇa-nāma and gives up his
attachments, then he will certainly attain the highest
goal of life.

Vijaya: How many kinds of nāmābhāsa are there?

Bābājī: Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (6.2.14) enumerates four kinds
of nāmābhāsa:


                          356
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

sāṅketyaṁ pārihāsyaṁ vā stobhaṁ helanam eva vā

vaikuṇṭha-nāma-grahaṇam aśeṣāgha-haraṁ viduḥ

One may utter śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma to indicate something else
(saṅketa), jokingly (parihāsa), antagonistically
(stobha), or even disrespectfully (helā). Learned people
know that these four types of shadow nāmābhāsa destroy
unlimited sins.

Those who are ignorant of nāma-tattva and sambandha-
tattva perform these four kinds of nāmābhāsa.

Vijaya: What is sāṅketya-nāmābhāsa?

Bābājī: Sāṅketya-nāmābhāsa is uttering Bhagavān’s name
when alluding to something else. For instance, Ajāmila
called his son Nārāyaṇa at the time of his death, but
Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s name is also Nārāyaṇa, so Ajāmila’s
uttering ‘Nārāyaṇa’ was an instance of sāṅketya-
nāmābhāsa. When Muslims see a pig, they show hatred and
exclaim, “Hārāma! Hārāma!” The exclamation ‘hārāma’
contains the two words ‘hā’ and ‘rāma’, so the person
uttering the word ‘hārāma’ also obtains deliverance from
the cycle of birth and death as a result of taking that
sāṅketya-nāma.

All the śāstras accept that nāmābhāsa gives mukti.
Through śrī-nāma, relationship is strongly established
with Mukunda, (the giver of liberation). Therefore, by
uttering śrī-nāma one is in touch with Bhagavān Mukunda
and by that contact, mukti (liberation) is easily
obtained. The same liberation that is obtained with
great difficulty through brahma-jñāna is easily
available to everybody without hard labor through
nāmābhāsa.

Vijaya: Prabhu, we have read in different places in the
śāstras that those who utter Kṛṣṇa’s names jokingly
obtain liberation. This includes those who desire
liberation (mumukṣu), those who are vainly proud of
their learning, mlecchas who are devoid of tattva-jñāna,
and those who are asurika and actually opposed to the
ultimate goal. Now please tell us about stobha-
nāmābhāsa.

Bābājī: Stobha means uttering śrī-nāma antagonistically
to hinder others in their chanting of Kṛṣṇa’s name. For
example, while a pure bhakta is chanting hari-nāma, an
offender may see him, and make faces, saying, “Your
‘Hari-Kesṭ’ will do everything!” This is an example of
stobha, and that stobha-nāma can award liberation even
to such a person as that hypocrite. The names have such
natural potency.

Vijaya: What is helā-nāmābhāsa?

Bābājī: Helā-nāmābhāsa means to utter śrī-nāma
disrespectfully. It is said in the Prābhāsa-khaṇḍa that
taking śrī-nāma neglectfully also results in liberation
from this material world.

madhura-madhuram etan maṅgalaṁ maṅgalānāṁ


                          357
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017

sakala-nigama-vallī sat-phalaṁ cit-svarūpam

sakṛd api parigītaṁ śraddhayā helayā vā

bhṛguvara nara-mātraṁ tārayet kṛṣṇa-nāma

O best of the Bhṛgus, this nāma-brahma is more sweet
than any sweet thing and the most auspicious of all that
is auspicious. He is the delectable pure fruit of the
flourishing śruti desire-creeper and appears as the
embodiment of knowledge, delivering any human being who
even once chants śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma either with respect or
disrespect.

In this śloka, the word śraddhayā means ëwith respectí
and helayā means ëwith disrespectí. The purport of the
statement nara-mātraṁ tārayet is that Kṛṣṇaís name even
gives liberation to the Muslims.

Vijaya: But isn’t it an offense to chant hari-nāma
antagonistically or disrespectfully?

Bābājī: It is an offense if one is disrespectful
knowingly and with bad intention, but if one is
disrespectful unknowingly, it is nāmābhāsa.

Vijaya: What is the result of nāmābhāsa, and what will
it not give?

Bābājī: Nāmābhāsa will give all kinds of enjoyment,
happiness, liberation and the eight kinds of perfections
(siddhis), but it will not give kṛṣṇa-prema, which is
the highest goal of human life. However, by giving up
bad association, and by associating constantly with
śuddha-bhaktas and following their instructions
regularly, one may quickly become a madhyama Vaiṣṇava.
Then even within a few days he can obtain śuddha-bhakti
and kṛṣṇa-prema.

Vijaya: Prabhu, many who are vaiṣṇava-ābhāsa bear the
outward signs of a Vaiṣṇava, and constantly perform
nāmābhāsa. Even so, despite engaging in this way for a
long time, they still do not receive prema. What is the
reason for this?

Bābājī: There is one secret here. The vaiṣṇava-ābhāsa-
sādhaka is qualified to receive pure devotion, but he
does not have pure, one-pointed bhakti. It may be that
he is associating with a person whom he thinks to be a
sādhu, but who is actually a Māyāvādī and not a śuddha-
bhakta. Due to this undesirable association, the sādhaka
will follow the Māyāvādī’s apasiddhāntika instructions,
and as a result, whatever bhakty-ābhāsa he had will
vanish, and he will gradually fall down into the
category of vaiṣṇava-aparādhī. In that condition, it is
quite difficult – indeed practically impossible – for
him to succeed in his practice. Yet, if his previous
sukṛti is strong, it will remove him from that bad
association and place him in the association of saintly
persons; and from that sat-saṅga he can obtain pure
Vaiṣṇavism again.

Vijaya: Prabhu, what is the result of nāma-aparādha?


                          358
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

Bābājī: The accumulation of sins from nāma-aparādha is
even more dreadful than the result of committing the
five mahā-pāpa millions of times: Thus we can easily
estimate the dire result of nāma-aparādha.

Vijaya: Prabhu, I understand that the result of nāma-
aparādha is very dangerous, but is there any good result
derived from the names that are uttered offensively?

Bābājī:Śrī-nāma will give whatever result the nāma-
aparādhī desires while he is chanting the names, but it
will not award kṛṣṇa-prema. At the same time, the
offender has to suffer the result of his offenses
against śrī-nāma. One who commits offenses to śrī-nāma,
and who takes the name with a wicked mentality will
receive the following results: In the beginning, the
nāma-aparādhī takes śrī-nāma with a wicked mentality,
but after sometime he occasionally chants nāma free from
wickedness. This chanting of the name without a crooked
mentality causes him to accumulate sukṛti. Slowly,
slowly, as that sukṛti increases, its influence enables
him to receive the association of saintly people who are
chanting śuddha-nāma. The influence of sat-saṅga induces
the nāma-aparādhī to chant śrī-nāma constantly, which
frees him from nāma-aparādhas. Even people who had a
great desire for liberation have gradually become hari-
bhaktas by taking shelter of this process.

Vijaya: If simply chanting one name can successfully
remove all sins, why is it necessary to chant śrī-nāma
constantly, like an unbroken stream of fragrant oil?

Bābājī: The inner self and dealings of the nāma-aparādhī
are always crooked in every way. He is opposed to Kṛṣṇa
(bahirmukha) by nature, and therefore has no taste for
saintly people or auspicious paraphernalia and times
related to Bhagavān. His natural inclination is towards
unworthy people, things, conclusions and activities.
However, if he always chants śrī-nāma, he will have no
time for unwanted association and activities, and
because he is not in bad association, his chanting of
śrī-nāma will gradually become pure and give him a taste
for auspicious objects.

Vijaya: Prabhu, a current of nectar of śrī-nāma-tattva
is flowing from your mouth and entering our hearts
through our ears, and we are becoming intoxicated by
śrī-nāma-prema-rasa. Today we have succeeded in
understanding these different topics of nāma, nāmābhāsa,
and nāma-aparādha. Now please give us whatever final
instruction is appropriate for us.

Bābājī: Paṇḍita Jagadānanda has given a very beautiful
instruction in his Prema-vivarta (Chapter 7). Listen
closely:

asādhu-saṅge bhāī, kṛṣṇa-nāma nāhi haya

nāmākṣara bahirāya baṭe, tabu nāma kabhu naya

Remember Bhai (my dear brother), kṛṣṇa-nāma cannot
awaken in the association of non-devotees. Only the
syllables of śrī-nāma will come out of the mouth, but
nāma Himself will remain far away.

                          359
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017


kabhu nāmābhāsa haya, sadā nāma-aparādha

e saba jānibe bhāī, kṛṣṇa-bhaktir bādha

Certainly there is only nāma-aparādha in their
association. Sometimes, by great fortune, there is
nāmābhāsa, but you should know that both nāmābhāsa and
nāma-aparādha are obstacles for kṛṣṇa-bhakti.

yadi karibe kṛṣṇa-nāma, sādhu-saṅga kara

bhukti-mukti-siddhi-vāñchā dūre pārihāra

If you want to chant pure kṛṣṇa-nāma, then take sādhu-
saṅga, and at the same time fully relinquish all desires
for enjoyment, liberation and mystic perfections.

daśa-aparādha tyaja māna apamāna

anāsaktye viṣaya bhuñja, āra laha kṛṣṇa-nāma

Remain free from the ten offenses to śrī-nāma, and from
false pride, contempt for others, and so forth. Accept
sense-objects only as far as necessary, in a spirit of
detachment, and incessantly take kṛṣṇa-nāma.

kṛṣṇa-bhaktir anukūla saba karaha svīkāra

kṛṣṇa-bhaktir pratikūla saba kara parihāra

Accept all that is favorable for kṛṣṇa-bhakti as your
very life, and wholly forsake all that may hinder your
practice of kṛṣṇa-bhakti.

jñāna-yoga-ceṣṭā chāḍa āra karma-saṅga

markaṭa-vairāgya tyaja yāte deha-raṅga

Abandon all endeavors for karma, jñāna and yoga, and
remain aloof from attachment to the external symptoms of
renunciation (markaṭa-vairāgya).

kṛṣṇa āmāya pāle, rakṣe ñ jāna sarva-kāla

ātma-nivedana-dainye ghucāo jañjāla

At all times have this full faith: “Kṛṣṇa will certainly
maintain and protect me.” Adopt the qualities of
śaraṇāgati headed by dainya (humility) and ātma-nivedana
(full surrender of oneself at Kṛṣṇaís lotus feet), for
practicing these six types of loving self-surrender
destroys the web of māyā.

sādhu pābā kaṣṭa baḍa jīvera jāniyā

sādhu-bhakta-rūpe kṛṣṇa āilā nadiyā

It is very rare that the jīva can receive sādhu-saṅga.
Knowing this, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself has descended
in the form of a sādhu and bhakta in Nadiyā (Navadvīpa)

gorā-pada āśraya karaha buddhimān


                          360
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

gorā bāī sādhu guru kebā āche ān

Therefore, O intelligent people, take shelter of Śrī
Gauraís feet. Who is a greater sādhu or guru than Him?
He is Kṛṣṇa Himself.

vairāgī bhāī grāmya-kāthā nā sunibe kāne

grāmya-vārttā nā kahibe, jabe milibe āna

My renounced brother, if you sometimes meet with others,
do not hear or discuss mundane topics.

svapne o nā kara bhāī strī-sambhāṣaṇa

gṛhe strī-chāḍiyā bhāī āsiyācha bana

O Bhai, do not talk with women, even in dreams. Remember
how you have left your wife at home and have come to the
forest (Śrī Vṛndāvana) to engage wholeheartedly in
bhajana,.

yadi cāha praṇaya rākhite gaurāṅgera sane

choṭa-haridāsera kathā thāke yena mane

If you desire to repose your love at Śrī Gauracandraís
lotus feet, always keep in mind Śrīman Mahāprabhuís
stern dealings with Choṭa Haridāsa in this connection.

bhāla nā khāibe, āra bhāla nā paribe

hṛdayete rādhā-kṛṣṇa sarvadā sevibe

Do not eat opulent food or wear fine clothes, but always
render sevā to Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa within your heart of
hearts.

baḍa-haridāsera nyāya kṛṣṇa-nāma balibe badane

aṣṭa-kāla rādhā-kṛṣṇa sevibe kuñja-bane

At all times, both by day and night, fill your mouth
with hari-nāma in the same way as Baḍa Haridāsa, and in
your heart perform sevā of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in the kuñjas of
Vṛndāvana during the eight periods of the day and night.

gṛhastha, vairāgī dūṅhe bale gorā-rāya

dekha bhāī nāma binā jena dina nāhi jāya

Look Bhai! Gaura-Rāya has given this instruction. It is
of no consequence whether one is in the gṛhastha-āśrama
or the vairāgī-āśrama. Both should not allow a day, an
hour or even a moment to pass by without taking nāma.

bahu aṅga sādhane bhāī nāhi prayojana

kṛṣṇa-nāmāśraye śuddha karaha jīvana

He Bhai! There is no need to practice many kinds of
sādhana. Just by taking shelter of kṛṣṇa-nāma, your life
will become purified and full of meaning.


                          361
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

baddha-jīve kṛpā kari kṛṣṇa haila nāma

kali-jīve dayā kari kṛṣṇa haila gauradhāma

Being merciful on the jīvas who are bound within this
age of quarrel, Śrī Kṛṣṇa has become nāma-rūpa; then
feeling still more compassion, He also became Gaura and
Śrī Gaura-dhāma (Navadvīpa).

ekānta-sarala-bhāve bhaja gaura-jana

tabe ta pāibe bhāī śrī-kṛṣṇa-caraṇa

So with single-minded determination and nonduplicitous
heart, just worship Śrī Gaura Candra. Bhai, through this
means, you will certainly attain the shelter of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa Candraís lotus feet.

gaura-jana-saṅga kara gaurāṅga baliyā

hare kṛṣṇa nāma bala nāciyā naciyā

Perform Hare Kṛṣṇa nāma-kīrtana in the association of
Gaura bhaktas and continuously dance and call out “Hā
Gaurāṅga! Hā Gaurāṅga!”

acire pāibe bhāī nāma-prema-dhana

yāhā vilāite prabhur ënadeí e āgamana

O Bhai! Being thus engaged, before long you will receive
the invaluable wealth of nāma-prema, the very jewel
which Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu descended to Nadiyā to
distribute.”

When Vijaya and Vrajanātha heard this passage of Śrī
Jagadānandaís Prema-vivarta from the mouth of Śrīla
Bābājī Mahārāja, their hearts became agitated, being
absorbed in the mood of mahā-prema expressed by Śrī
Jagadānanda Paṇḍita. Bābājī was almost unconscious for a
long time, and then he embraced them and crying, sang
the following kīrtana:

kṛṣṇa-nāma dhare kata bala

What power does the name of Kṛṣṇa possess? (refrain)

viṣaya-vāsanānale mora citta sadā jvale,

ravi-tapta maru-bhūmi sama

kaṛṇa-randhra-patha diyā, hṛdi mājhe praveśiya,

bariṣaya sudhā anupama

My heart was constantly burning in the fire of worldly
desires, just like a desert scorched by the rays of the
sun, but śrī-nāma, entering the core of my heart through
the holes of my ears, has showered unparalleled nectar
upon my soul.

hṛdaya haite bale, jihvāra agrete cale

śabda-rūpe nāce anukṣaṇa

                             362
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017


kaṅṭhe mora bhaṅge svara, aṅga kāṁpe thara thara,

sthira haite nā pāre caraṇa

Śrī-nāma speaks from within my heart, moves onto the tip
of my tongue, and constantly dances on it in the form of
transcendental sound. My throat becomes choked up, my
body shivers again and again, and my feet cannot remain
still.

cakṣe dhārā, dehe gharma, pulakita saba carma,

vivarṇa haila kalevara

mūrcchita haila mana, pralayera āgamana

bhāve sarva-deha jara-jara

Rivers of tears flow from my eyes, perspiration soaks my
body, all my skin thrills with rapture, my hairs stand
on end, and my complexion turns pale and discolored. My
mind grows faint, I begin to experience devastation, and
my whole body is shattered by a flood of ecstatic
emotions.

kari eta upadrava, citte varṣe śudhā-drava

more ḍāre premera sāgare

kichu nā bujhite dila, more ta bātula kaila,

mora citta-vitta saba hare

While causing such an ecstatic disturbance, śrī-nāma
showers liquid nectar on my heart, and drowns me in the
ocean of divine prema. He does not allow me to
understand anything, but makes me into a madman by
stealing away my mind and all my resources.

lainu āśraya jāṅíra hena vyavahāra tāṅíra

varṇite nā pāri e sakala

kṛṣṇa-nāma icchāmaya jāhe jāhe sukhī haya,

sei mora sukhera sambala

Such is the behavior of Him of whom I have taken
shelter. I am not capable of completely describing Him.
Śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāma is independent and acts as His sweet will
dictates. In whatever way He becomes happy, that is also
the main-stay of my happiness.

premera kalikā nāma, adbhuta-rasera dhāma

hena bala karaye prakāśa

īṣat vikaśií punaḥ, dekhāya nija-rūpa-guna

citta hari laya kṛṣṇa pāsa

Śrī-nāma is the bud of the lotus of prema, and the abode
of astonishing rasa. Such is the power that He manifests

                             363
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

that when He begins to blossom only a little further, He
reveals His own divine form and qualities. Thus, my
heart is abducted and taken into the presence of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.

pūrṇa-vikaśita hañā, braje more jāya lañā

dekhāya more svarūpa-vilāsa

more siddha-deha diyā, kṛṣṇa-pāse rākhe giyā

e dehera kare sarba-nāśa

Now blossoming fully, the prema flower of śrī-nāma takes
me to Vraja, and reveals to me the pastimes of His own
love-dalliance. Nāma gives me my own siddha-deha, keeps
me by the side of Kṛṣṇa, and then He completely destroys
everything related to this mortal frame of mine.

kṛṣṇa-nāma cintāmaṇi akhila-rasera khani

nitya-mukta śuddha-rasamaya

namera bālāī yata, saba laíye hai hata

tabe mora sukhera udaya

The name of Kṛṣṇa is a gem that fulfills all divine
aspirations (cintāmaṇi) and a mine of all bhakti-rasa.
He is eternally liberated, and He is the embodiment of
śuddha-rasa. When all impediments for the chanting of
śuddha-nāma are destroyed, then my happiness will know
its true awakening.

As they chanted this nāma-kīrtana again and again, half
the night passed. When the kīrtana finally ended, Vijaya
and Vrajanātha took permission from Gurudeva and
returned home, absorbed in nāma-rasa.



Thus ends the Twenty-Fifth Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled

“Prameya: Nāmābhāsa“




Chapter 26

Introduction to Rasa-Tattva



Vijaya Kumāra was absent for about a month. During this
time, Vrajanāthaís grandmother, who understood the
dispositions of both Vrajanātha and Vijaya Kumāra,
arranged for a suitable bride through a brāhmaṇa
mediator. When Vijaya Kumāra was informed, he sent his
younger brother to Bilva-puṣkarinī to organize the
wedding ceremony, which was duly performed at an

                           364
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

astrologically auspicious time on an auspicious day.

Vijaya Kumāra arrived some time later, when all the
marriage proceedings had been completed. He sat without
much interest in the situation around him, and did not
discuss worldly affairs such as health and prosperity,
for his heart was deeply absorbed in spiritual matters.
Vrajanātha detected his indifference, and said, “Uncle,
your heart appears to be uncertain these days. Why is
that? It is simply by your order that I am bound in the
shackles of worldly life. What have you decided to do
yourself?”

Vijaya Kumāra said, “I have decided to finally go to
Śrīdhāma Purī to have the darśana of Śrī Puruṣottama
(Śrī Jagannāthadeva). Some pilgrims are setting out for
Purī in a few days, and I will also go with them. I
shall go and take permission from Śrī Gurudeva.”

After taking lunch that afternoon, Vrajanātha and Vijaya
Kumāra went to Māyāpura, where they offered daṇḍavat-
praṇāma at Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājīís feet and begged
his permission to make a pilgrimage to Purī. Bābājī
Mahāśaya was delighted to hear their plea. His heart
melted with affection and he said, “It is very good that
you are going to Purī to take darśana of Śrī
Jagannāthadeva. Śrīman Mahāprabhuís sitting place is in
Kāśī Miśraís house in Purī, and Śrī Gopāla Guru Gosvāmī,
the disciple of Śrī Vakreśvara Paṇḍita, is present there
now in all his glory. Be sure to have his darśana and
accept his instructions with devotion. Nowadays, it is
only in that mahātmāís throat that the splendor of Śrī
Svarūpa Gosvāmīís teachings is fully manifest.”

Having received Śrī Gurudevaís permission, Vrajanātha
and Vijaya Kumāra joyfully returned home. On the way, at
Vrajanāthaís eager request, Vijaya Kumāra agreed to also
take him to Purī. When they arrived home, they disclosed
their plans for the pilgrimage to everyone. Vrajanāthaís
grandmother was also ready to go with them, so finally
it was decided that all three would go to Purī together.

The famous Ratha-yātrā of Śrī Jagannātha, Śrī Baladeva
and Śrī Subhadrā-devī is held in Purī in the month of
Āṣaṛha (June-July). At that time, those who are
dedicated to dharma flood in from all corners of India
and descend on Purī en masse. For this reason, pilgrims
from distant places set out from their homes many days
beforehand in order to arrive in good time. The month of
Jyeṣṭha (May-June) had scarcely begun when these three
also set out for Purī, along with the other pilgrims.
After walking for some days, they passed Dāntana and
arrived in Jaleśvara. Gradually moving on, they took
darśana of Kṣīracorā Gopīnātha, and came to Śrī Virajā-
kṣetra, where they performed nābhigayā-kriyā and took
bath in the Vaitaraṇī. Later, they had darśana of Śrī
Śākṣī Gopāla in Kaṭaka, and Śrī Liṅgarāja in Ekāmra-
kānana, and finally arrived in Śrī Kṣetra, Purī-dhāma.

All the pilgrims were accommodated in various places as
directed by their respective paṇḍās (guardian priests).
Vijaya Kumāra, Vrajanātha, and Vrajanāthaís grandmother
found lodgings at Haracaṇḍī Sāhī. In accordance with the
regulative principles, they took bath in the sea, and

                          365
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

then went for darśana of Śrī Jagannātha. They began to
take darśana, perform parikramā, and honor the prasāda
of the various tīrthas of that dhāma. After three or
four days, Vijaya Kumāra and Vrajanātha had darśana of
the śrī-vigraha of Śrīman Mahāprabhu as well as His
footprints, and also His fingerprints impressed on the
Garuḍa stambha (column of Garuḍa) in the temple of Śrī
Jagannāthadeva. When Śrīman Mahāprabhu took darśana of
Śrī Jagannāthadeva, He would become overwhelmed with
prema and streams of tears would flow from His eyes. At
such times, the stones beneath His feet melted from His
touch and were marked with His footprints. At the same
time, His prema also melted the Garuḍa stambha, which He
used to support Himself, and the marks of His fingers
became imprinted there. When Vijaya Kumāra and
Vrajanātha saw these impressions, they became
overwhelmed with prema.

That same day they went to Kāśī Miśra Bhavan. In that
great house constructed from stone is Śrī Gambhīrā, the
small room in which Śrīman Mahāprabhu would reside in
His state of prema. There, in order to console Him when
He was immersed in feelings of separation from Kṛṣṇa,
His dear associates, Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara and Rāya
Rāmānanda, would recite ślokas and sing bhajanas about
the pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Vijaya Kumāra and
Vrajanātha took darśana of that place, and of Śrīman
Mahāprabhuës paraphernalia, such as His wooden sandals,
that are gloriously present there. On one side, within,
is the mandira of Śrī Rādhā-Kānta, and on the other side
was the seat of Śrī Gopāla Guru Gosvāmī.

Vijaya and Vrajanātha fell at Śrī Gopāla Guru Gosvāmīís
feet. They were carried away in the happiness of prema
and began to shed tears. Śrī Guru Gosvāmī was very
pleased to see their ecstatic sentiments and embraced
them. He made them sit down close to him and immediately
asked, “I wish to know who you are.” When Vijaya and
Vrajanātha introduced themselves, Guru Gosvāmīís eyes
began to stream with tears of love. Hearing the name of
Śrī Navadvīpa, he said, “Today I have become blessed by
seeing the residents of Śrīdhāma Navadvīpa. Tell me, how
are the Vaiṣṇavas in Māyāpura, such as Śrī Raghunātha
dāsa and Gorācanda dāsa? Are they well? Aho! When I
remember Raghunātha dāsa, the memories of my śikṣā-guru
Śrī Dāsa Gosvāmī come to my mind.”

Guru Gosvāmī called his disciple, Śrī Dhyānacandra, and
said, “These two mahātmās will take prasāda here today.”
Śrī Dhyāna-candra took them both to his room and offered
them śrī-mahā-prasāda. Afterwards the three of them
discussed many subjects. Dhyānacandra Gosvāmī was
overjoyed when he saw Vijaya Kumāraís vast erudition in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and recognized Vrajanātha as a fine
scholar of all the śāstras. He related all their
discussions to Śrī Guru Gosvāmī, who was also delighted
to hear of their expertise in śāstra. Śrī Gopāla Guru
Gosvāmī called them near to him, and said, “You are both
very dear to me. Kindly allow me to see you every day,
as long as you stay in Śrī Puruṣottama Dhāma.”

Vijaya Kumāra humbly replied, “O Prabhu! Śrī Raghunātha
dāsa Bābājī of Śrī Māyāpura has bestowed great mercy
upon us. He has given us so much śikṣā, and he ordered

                          366
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

us to accept instructions at your divine feet.”

Guru Gosvāmī said, “Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī is a highly
learned scholar, and you should follow his instructions
thoroughly. If you want to know anything further, you
may come here tomorrow afternoon and present your
inquiries. You may honor mahā-prasāda here tomorrow.”
They conversed for some time, and then Vijaya and
Vrajanātha took permission from Śrī Guru Gosvāmī and
returned to Haracaṇḍī Sāhī.

The next day, Vijaya Kumāra and Vrajanātha returned to
Śrī Rādhā-Kānta Maṭha at the appointed time. They
honored prasāda, and then approached Śrī Gopāla Guru
Gosvāmī. When they had offered their respectful praṇāma
to him, they said, “Prabhu, we want to know about rasa-
tattva. Our lives will become successful when we hear
about kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasa from your lotus mouth. You are
the pre-eminent holy master of the Nimānanda-sampradāya
and you are reigning as jagad-guru on the seat of Śrīman
Mahāprabhuís successor, Śrī Svarūpa Gosvāmī. We desire
to hear rasa-tattva from your divine lips, so that our
scholarship may become fruitful.”

Śrī Gopāla Guru Gosvāmī was overjoyed, and taking these
worthy disciples, to a solitary place, he spoke to them.
“Śacī-nandana Nimāi Paṇḍita appeared in Śrī Navadvīpa-
Māyāpura, and He is the very life-breath of the bhaktas
of Śrī Gauḍa-maṇḍala, Śrī Kṣetra-maṇḍala and Śrī Vraja-
maṇḍala. May that Śacīnandana give us joy. May Śrī
Svarūpa Gosvāmī, whose madhura-rasa-sevā always fills
Śrī Mahāprabhu with elation, be manifest in the core of
our hearts. Śrī Vakreśvara Paṇḍita thoroughly captivated
Nimāi Paṇḍita with his dancing. He also showered his
mercy on Devānanda Paṇḍita by purifying him and making
him Kṛṣṇaís bhakta. May that Śrī Vakreśvara Paṇḍita
confer all auspiciousness upon you.

“Rasa is an unequalled tattva which can be compared to
the rising of the moon, whose radiance is the expanding
līlā of para-brahma Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Bhakti-rasa is the
function of kṛṣṇa-bhakti when it becomes absolutely
pure.”

Vrajanātha: Is rasa a principle that is predetermined?

Gosvāmī: I cannot answer that question in a single word,
“Yes” or “No.” I will explain the subject elaborately so
that you can understand it clearly. The kṛṣṇa-rati about
which you have heard from your Gurudeva is called
sthāyībhāva. When the other components (sāmagrī) of rasa
are combined with the sthāyībhāva, the resultant
manifestation is called kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasa.

Vrajanātha: Will you kindly explain in detail what is
sthāyībhāva, and what are the constituent ingredients
(sāmagrī) of rasa? We have heard from our Gurudeva about
bhāva, but we have not heard how bhāvas combine with
each other to form rasa.

Gosvāmī: Ordinarily, at the stage of bhāva, bhakti is
kṛṣṇa-rati. This rati arises in the heart of the bhakta
from the saṁskāras of past and present lives, and
develops further to the stage of rasa, when it becomes

                          367
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

the very embodiment of ānanda. It is made up of four
different ingredients: 1) vibhāva, 2) anubhāva, 3)
sāttvika and 4) vyabhicārī or sañcārī. I will first
explain these ingredients.

Vibhāva is the cause of tasting rati, and it has two
divisions: ālambana (the support) and uddīpana (the
awakening stimulus). Ālambana also has two divisions,
namely, the object (viṣaya) and the abode (āśraya). The
āśraya of rati is the person in whom rati exists, while
the viṣaya of rati is the person towards whom rati is
directed. Kṛṣṇaís bhaktas are the āśraya of rati because
they have rati in their hearts, whereas Kṛṣṇa is the
viṣaya of rati, because rati is directed towards Him.

Vrajanātha: So far we have understood that vibhāva is
divided into two parts: ālambana and uddīpana, and that
ālambana is also divided into two categories, namely,
āśraya and viṣaya. Kṛṣṇa is viṣaya, and the bhaktas are
āśraya. Now we are inquisitive to know whether Kṛṣṇa is
sometimes the āśraya of rati.

Gosvāmī: Yes, He is. When bhaktas have rati towards
Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa is viṣaya and the bhaktas are ālambana, and
when Kṛṣṇa has rati towards the bhaktas, then Kṛṣṇa is
āśraya and the bhaktas are viṣaya.

Vrajanātha: We have heard from our Gurudeva about Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s sixty-four qualities. If there is anything
further to be described in regard to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, please
tell us.

Gosvāmī: Although all the qualities exist fully in Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, His manifestation is complete in Dvārakā, more
complete in Mathurā, and most complete in Gokula. This
is because of the degree to which the qualities are
manifested in the respective dhāmas. Kṛṣṇa is one, but
He plays the parts of four types of heroes (nāyaka)
according to the differences in His līlā. They are 1)
dhīrodātta, 2) dhīra-lalita, 3) dhīra-śānta and 4)
dhīroddhata.

Vrajanātha: What type of nāyaka (hero) is dhīrodātta?

Gosvāmī: The symptoms of Kṛṣṇa as dhīrodātta-nāyaka are
gravity, courtesy, forgiveness, compassion, modesty, and
concealed pride.

Vrajanātha: What kind of nāyaka is called dhīra-lalita?

Gosvāmī: Kṛṣṇa falls under the control of His beloved
gopīs because He is expert in relishing loving mellows
(rasika); He is on the threshold of youth (nava-
yauvana); He is ingenious in joking (parihāsa-cāturī);
and He is free from anxiety (niścintatā). That is why He
is called dhīra-lalita-nāyaka.

Vrajanātha: And what are the symptoms of dhīra-śānta?

Gosvāmī: Kṛṣṇa is known as dhīra-śānta-nāyaka when He is
decorated with the qualities of being naturally sedate,
forbearing, judicious and humble.

Vrajanātha: What is dhīroddhata?

                          368
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017


Gosvāmī: Sometimes in His līlā, Kṛṣṇa is also seen to be
jealous, egotistical, deceitful, angry, fickle, and
boastful. At that time, He is known as dhīroddhata-
nāyaka.

Vrajanātha: The qualities that you have described are
mutually contradictory, so how can they possibly exist
at the same time in one Kṛṣṇa?

Gosvāmī: Kṛṣṇa is by nature fully independent,
autocratic, and supreme, and He has boundless opulence.
It is by the action of Kṛṣṇa’s acintya-śakti
(inconceivable potency) that these contradictory
qualities exist in Him at the same time. For example, we
read in the Kūrma Purāṇa:

asthūlaś cāṇuś caiva / sthūlo íṇuś caiva sarvataḥ

avarṇaḥ sarvataḥ proktaḥ / śyāmo raktāntalocanaḥ

aiśvarya-yogād bhagavān / viruddhārtho ëbhidhīyate

tathāpi doṣo parame/ naivāhāryā kathañcana

guṇāviruddhā apy ete / samāhāryāḥ samantataḥ

All contradictory qualities are splendidly and very
beautifully manifest in Bhagavān at the same time.
Although He is intangible and minute in every way, He is
tangible and all pervading in every way. He is devoid of
mundane color, but He has a transcendental śyāma hue,
and the corners of His eyes are reddish. This is how He
has been described in the śāstras. Bhagavān is said to
possess contradictory virtues on account of His mystic
opulence. Nevertheless, no fault can be attributed to
Parameśvara. Although the aggregate of His qualities
seems to be contradictory, these qualities are certainly
virtues in all respects.

In the Mahā-Varāha Purāṇa, it is stated:

sarve nityāḥ śaśvatāś ca / dehās tasya parātmaṇaḥ

hānopādāna-rahitā / naiva prakṛti-jaḥ kvacit

paramānanda-sandohā / jñāna-mātrāś ca sarvataḥ

sarve sarva-gunaiḥ pūrṇāḥ / sarva-doṣa-vivarjitāḥ

All the bodies of that Paramātmā are nitya and free from
the two types of activities known as ëgiving upí and
ëacceptingí. His bodies are not born from material
nature, but are composed of consciousness and are the
embodiment of paramānanda. Each and every limb of His
body is filled with all transcendental qualities and is
free from all defects.

The Vaiṣṇava-tantra states:

aṣṭādaśa-mahādoṣaiḥ / rahitā bhagavat-tanuḥ

sarvaiśvaryamayī satya-vijñānānanda-rūpiṇī


                          369
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

Bhagavān is endowed with all kinds of superhuman power,
perfect knowledge and joy, and His body is free from the
eighteen types of general faults.

These eighteen general faults are:

mohas tandrā bhramo rukṣa-rasatā kāma ulbaṇaḥ

lolatā mada-mātsaryau hiṁsā kheda-pariśramau

asatyaṁ krodha ākāṅkṣā āśaṅkā viśva-vibhramaḥ

viṣamatva parāpekṣā doṣā aṣṭādaśoditā

Viṣṇu-Yāmala

1) illusion, 2) lethargy, 3) bewilderment, 4) dullness,
5) intense lust, 6) fickleness, 7) pride, 8) envy, 9)
violence, 10) remorse, 11) desire for excessive peace
and comfort, 12) untruthfulness, 13) anger, 14)
hankering, 15) fear, 16) hallucination, 17)
contradiction, and 18) the tendency to depend on others.

All these transcendental qualities are present in the
forms of the avatāras, and they are expressed to the
utmost extent in Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is avatārī (the origin
of all avatāras). In addition to these, Kṛṣṇa possesses
a further eight qualities which indicate His manliness
(puruṣatva). These are: 1) śobhā (beauty), 2) vilāsa
(fascinating, transcendental pastimes), 3) mādhurya
(sweetness), 4) māṅgalya (auspiciousness), 5) sthiratā
(stability), 6) teja (brilliance), 7) lalita
(playfulness), and 8) audārya (munificence). His beauty
is particularly noticeable in kindness towards the
lowly, rivalry towards His peers, valor, enthusiasm,
dexterity and the revelation of truth. Vilāsa is
characterized in Him by His profound manner, calm glance
and humorous words. His mādhurya (sweetness) is
noticeable for pleasing loveliness is manifest in all
His activities. His auspiciousness is the abode of faith
of the entire world. His stability means that He is not
deviated in any activity. His brilliance means
attracting the attention of everyone towards Himself. He
exhibits an abundance of amorous sentiments and
endeavors and is thus called lalita (playful). His mood
of completely offering Himself is called audārya. Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is the crest-jewel of all heroes, and in His
human-like pastimes, sages such as Garga have been
described as His assistants in matters of dharma,
kṣatriyas such as Yuyudhāna in matters of war, and
ministers such as Uddhava in matters of counseling.

Vrajanātha: I have fully understood how Kṛṣṇa is the
heroic personification of mellows. Now please tell us
about Kṛṣṇa’s bhaktas who are fit to experience rasa,
and who are included in the category of vibhāva.

Gosvāmī: Only those whose hearts are overwhelmed by
loving sentiments for Kṛṣṇa can be bhaktas in rasa-
tattva. All of the twenty-nine qualities, from
truthfulness to bashfulness (being embarrassed by true
statements), which have been described in relation to
Kṛṣṇa, are also found in His bhaktas.


                          370
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017

Vrajanātha: How many types of kṛṣṇa-bhaktas are fit to
experience rasa?

Gosvāmī: There are two types: the sādhaka and the
siddha.

Vrajanātha: Who is a sādhaka?

Gosvāmī:Sādhakas are those in whom ruci for the topics
of Kṛṣṇa has arisen, and who have acquired the
qualification to have direct darśana of Kṛṣṇa, but who
have not yet completely surpassed all obstacles and
difficulties. Madhyama-bhaktas adorned with the symptoms
described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.46), īśvare tad-
adhīneṣu, are in the category of sādhaka.

Vrajanātha: Prabhu, are the bhaktas described in Śrīmad-
Bhāga-vatam (11. 2. 47), arcāyam eva haraye not eligible
to experience rasa?

Gosvāmī: They are not sādhakas until they become śuddha-
bhaktas by the mercy of other śuddha-bhaktas. Only
personalities like Bilvamaṅgala are genuine sādhakas.

Vrajanātha: Who are the siddha-bhaktas?

Gosvāmī:Siddha-bhaktas are those who do not experience
any suffering, whose activities are all performed under
the shelter of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and who always taste the
happiness of prema. There are two types of siddha-
bhaktas: those who have gained perfection (samprāpta-
siddha) and those who are eternally perfect (nitya-
siddha).

Vrajanātha: Who are the bhaktas who have gained
perfection (samprāpta-siddha)?

Gosvāmī: They are also of two types: those who attained
perfection through sādhana (sādhana-siddha), and those
who achieved perfection by mercy (kṛpā-siddha).

Vrajanātha: Who are the nitya-siddhas?

Gosvāmī: Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī has said:

ātma-koṭi-guṇaṁ kṛṣṇe / premānaṁ paramaṁ gatāḥ

nityānanda-guṇāḥ sarve / nitya-siddhā mukundavat

The nitya-siddhas are   those who, like Mukunda, are the
embodiment of ānanda,   and whose qualities are eternal.
Their main symptom is   that they are endowed with a prema
for Kṛṣṇa that is ten   million times more than they have
even for themselves.

It is said in the Uttara-Khaṇḍa of the Padma Purāṇa:

yathā saumitra-bharatau / yathā saṅkarṣaṇādayaḥ

tathā tenaiva jāyante / nija-lokād yadṛcchayā

punas tenaiva gacchanti / tat-padaṁ śāśvataṁ paraṁ

na karma-bandhanaṁ janma / vaiṣṇavānāñ ca vidyate

                            371
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017


Vaiṣṇavas are not bound by karma, nor do they take birth
like mundane human beings. Rather, they appear as
Lakṣmaṇa and Bharata, the sons of Sumitrā, appeared with
Śrī Rāmacandra; as Balarāma and others appear in this
material world with Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa by His will, and
then return again to the eternal transcendental abode
along with Him; or as the members of the Yadu dynasty
also appear in Bhagavānís manifest pastimes, and then
return with Him to the supreme abode (parama-dhāma) when
His pastimes become unmanifest.

Vrajanātha: Prabhu, I have understood the ālambana
aspect of vibhāva. Now kindly explain what is referred
to as uddīpana.

Gosvāmī:Uddīpana is that which causes bhāva to be
excited or stimulated. Kṛṣṇa’s qualities, His
activities, laughter, and the fragrance of His bodily
limbs, His flute, bugle-horn, ankle-bells, conch-shell
and footprints, the places of His pastimes, Tulasī, His
bhaktas, the auspicious times such as Ekādaśī (hari-
vāsara), and so on – these are all uddīpana. Kṛṣṇa’s
qualities (guṇa) are of three types, related to His
body, mind and speech, respectively (kāyika, mānasika
and vācika).

Age (vayasa) is prominent among the qualities relating
to His body. There are three divisions of Kṛṣṇaís age:
kaumāra, paugaṇḍa and kaiśora:

kaumāraṁ pañcamābdāntaṁ / paugaṇḍaṁ daśamāvadhi

āṣoḍaśāc ca kaiśoraṁ / yauvanaṁ syāt tataḥ param

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (2.1.306)

The kaumāra period lasts until the age of five. The
paugaṇḍa period lasts from this point until the age of
ten, and the kaiśora stage begins at the age of ten and
continues until the age of sixteen. The age after that
is called yauvana.

The kaiśora stage also has three divisions, which are
called the beginning, middle and end (ādya, madhya and
śeṣa). Among the bodily qualities, the consideration of
beauty is predominant. Beauty is present when the bodily
limbs are in proper proportion to each other. Clothing,
decoration and the arrangement of articles, including
the hair and so on, is called prasādhana.

Kṛṣṇa has three kinds of flute: vaṁśī, veṇu and muralī.
The veṇu is twelve fingers long and as thick as a thumb,
and it has six holes. The muralī is two hands in length
and has four finger-holes, besides the hole in the
mouthpiece. The vaṁśī is 17 fingers long. Of this, there
is a clear space of three finger-widths at the tail end.
At the head end of the flute is another space of four
finger-widths, which is also clear, except for the hole
for blowing, which is half a fingerís width from the
end. In the middle is a space containing eight finger-
holes separated from each other by a gap of half a
fingerís width. The vaṁśī therefore has a total of nine
holes.

                          372
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017


The conch-shell that turns to the right and rests
radiantly in Kṛṣṇaís hand is called Pāñcajanya.

Through these uddīpanas, the rati of the bhaktas
awakens, and when it is directed towards Kṛṣṇa, the
object of rati, it becomes the very embodiment of
ānanda. Rati is sthāyībhāva, and it alone transforms
into rasa.

Come here tomorrow at the same time; I will tell you
about rasa, and I will also explain anubhāva and so on.

Vijaya Kumāra and Vrajanātha offered daṇḍavat at Śrīla
Gopāla Guru Gosvāmīís lotus feet and took their leave.
Absorbed in contemplation on the subject of rasa, they
went to have darśana of Siddha-bakula. From there, they
went to take darśana of Śrī Jagannāthadeva and then
returned to their quarters.



Thus ends the Twenty-sixth Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled

“Introduction to Rasa-Tattva”




Chapter 27

Rasa-Tattva: Sāttvika-Bhāva, Vyabhicārī-Bhava & Raty-
Ābhāsa



The next day, when Vijaya Kumāra and Vrajanātha had
honored prasāda, they again went to Śrī Rādhā-Kānta
Maṭha, arriving just after midday. Śrī Gopāla Guru
Gosvāmī had also honored mahā-prasāda, and was waiting
for them. Śrī Dhyānacandra Gosvāmī was sitting by his
side writing Upāsanā-paddhati (The Procedures for
Worship). At that time, Śrī Guru Gosvāmīís appearance
was most remarkable. He was attired in the dress of a
sannyāsī, his forehead was marked with ūrddhva-puṇḍra
tilaka, the syllables of hari-nāma were written on each
of his limbs, and four thick strands of tulasī adorned
his neck. He held a japa-mālā in his hand, and at
intervals, streams of tears flowed onto his chest from
his eyes, which were half-closed in meditation. Weeping
and sighing, he sometimes called out loudly “Hā
Gaurāṅga! Hā Nityānanda!” His body was somewhat plump,
and his complexion was dark and effulgent. His coconut-
shell cup full of water was standing close to the seat
of banana-tree bark on which he was sitting, while his
two wooden sandals lay at a distance.

When Vijaya and Vrajanātha saw all this, unprecedented
śraddhā arose within their hearts. They both offered
their sāṣṭāṅga-praṇāma, and remained lying on the ground
for a long time. The residents of the Maṭha generally

                          373
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

respected Vijaya and Vrajanātha, having seen their
Vaiṣṇava qualities and their scholarship and profound
understanding of many śāstras, and also knowing them to
be residents of Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma. Today, however, all
were especially struck with wonder on seeing such ideal
Vaiṣṇava sentiments. When Guru Gosvāmī saw them lying
down and offering praṇāma in this way, he lifted them
up, embraced them lovingly, and made them sit down close
to him. Vrajanātha waited for an appropriate moment, and
then gradually and politely raised the subject of rasa.
Śrī Gosvāmī began to speak, his heart filled with prema,
“Today, I will make you understand the subject of
anubhāva and so on, and cause you to enter into rasa-
tattva.

“There are four ingredients of rasa: vibhāva, anubhāva,
sāttvika and vyabhicārī. Yesterday I explained vibhāva-
tattva, and today I shall first explain anubhāva. Listen
carefully.

“Vibhāva refers to the personalities who are the cause
of rati arising. Now, anubhāva refers to those visible
symptoms that cause rati to become evident, and by which
the bhāvas in the heart are realized. In other words,
anubhāva consists of activities such as sidelong glances
and hairs of the body standing on end, which are
manifest as external bodily transformations, but which
actually reveal the bhāvas of the heart. These internal
bhāvas are revealed by the following outward expressions
of agitation: dancing (nṛtya), rolling on the ground
(viluṇṭhana), singing (gīta), crying out loudly
(krośana), stretching the body and writhing (tanu-
moṭana), roaring (huṅkāra), yawning (jṛmbhana), sighing
and breathing deeply (dīrgha-śvāsa), indifference to
public opinion (lokānapekṣitā), salivating (lālāsrāva),
laughing loudly (aṭṭa-hāsa), dizziness (ghūrṇā), and
hiccupping (hikkā).”

Vrajanātha: How can these external transformations
nourish the tasting of the rasa of the internal
sthāyībhāva? I also have another question. At the time
of tasting rasa internally, these anubhāvas are
manifested externally in the body, so how can they be
separate and distinct ingredients of rasa?

Gosvāmī: Bābā, you are indeed a real paṇḍita of nyāya-
śāstra. To this very day, no one has posed such subtle
questions as you have. When I used to study rasa-śāstra
in the company of Śrī Paṇḍita Gosvāmī, exactly the same
arguments would arise in my mind. However, my doubts
were quickly dispelled by Śrī Gurudeva’s mercy. The
confidential significance is that in the pure
consciousness (śuddha-sattva) of the jīva, when vibhāva
stimulates the function of consciousness (citta) and
assists the function itself, at that time a natural
wonderment (vaicittya) arises, which makes the heart
blossom in various ways, and this in turn causes some
outward transformations to become evident in the body.
These external transformations, such as dancing, are
called udbhāsvara, and they are of many types. When the
heart dances, the body also begins to dance, and when
the heart sings, the tongue also sings. You should
understand the action of other transformations in the
same way. However, the action of udbhāsvara is not the

                          374
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

original action. Rather, the anubhāvas that arouse and
nourish the vibhāvas then spread throughout the body in
the form of udbhāsvara.

As soon as the sthāyībhāva in the heart is stimulated by
the vibhāva, anubhāva begins its function as another
action of the heart. Thus anubhāva is a separate
individual ingredient. When this is revealed through
activities such as singing, it is called “cooling”
(śīta); and when it is revealed through activities such
as dancing, it is called “throwing” (kṣepaṇa). There are
also many other symptoms of anubhāva ñ such as swelling
of the body, oozing of blood, and separation and
contraction of the bone-joints ñ which are very rarely
seen, so I will not elaborate upon them any further. The
extremely astonishing anubhāvas that were seen in the
body of my Prāṇeśvara Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, such as
becoming like a tortoise, are not possible in sādhaka-
bhaktas.

After Vijaya and Vrajanātha had heard these confidential
instructions of Guru Gosvāmī, they remained silent for
some time, and then asked, “Prabhu, what is sāttvika-
bhāva?”

Gosvāmī: The word sattva refers to the citta (pure heart
or consciousness) that is stimulated by any bhāva in
relation to Kṛṣṇa, either directly or with some
obstruction. The bhāvas that are born from this sattva
are called sāttvika-bhāvas. There are three types of
sāttvika-bhāvas: smooth (snigdha), smeared (digdha), and
rough (rukṣa).

Vrajanātha: What is snigdha (smooth) sāttvika-bhāva?

Gosvāmī:Snigdha sāttvika-bhāva has two divisions: mukhya
(primary) and gauṇa (secondary). Mukhya-snigdha
sāttvika-bhāva occurs when mukhya-rati that is directly
in relation to Kṛṣṇa overpowers the heart. Examples of
mukhya-snigdha sāttvika-bhāva are becoming stunned,
perspiring and so on. Gauṇa-snigdha sāttvika-bhāva
arises from an invasion of the heart by gauṇa-rati, when
Kṛṣṇa is at some distance, or there is some obstruction.
Two examples of gauṇa-sāttvika-bhāvas are: fading of the
bodily color (vaivarṇya) and faltering of the voice
(svara-bheda). Smeared (digdha) sāttvika-bhāva arises
when any bhāva other than the function of mukhya-rati
and gauṇa-rati overwhelms the heart. Trembling is an
example of the digdha (smeared) sāttvika-bhāvas that
follow on from rati.

Sometimes, when someone who only appears to be a bhakta
hears about the extremely wonderful and sweet bhāvas of
Kṛṣṇa, he becomes astonished and experiences elation,
although he actually has no rati. This is the third type
of sāttvika-bhāva, which is known as ëroughí (rukṣa). An
example of rukṣasāttvika-bhāva is seen when the hairs of
the body stand on end (romāñca).

Vrajanātha: How does sāttvika-bhāva arise?

Gosvāmī: When the heart (citta) of the sādhaka becomes
saturated with sattva-bhāva (pure emotion related to
Kṛṣṇa), it submits itself to the life air (prāṇa). Then,

                          375
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

when the prāṇa has been excited, it is transformed and
causes the appearance of profuse agitation in the body.
At that time, the bodily transformations such as stambha
(becoming stunned) occur.

Vrajanātha: How many types of sāttvika transformations
are there?

Gosvāmī: There are eight sāttvika transformations,
namely, becoming stunned (stambha); perspiration
(sveda); horripilation (romāñca); faltering of the voice
(svara-bheda); trembling (vepathu); transformations of
the bodily color (vaivarṇya), such as dirtiness and
thinness, which occur due to emotions such as despair,
fear and anger; shedding tears (aśru); and devastation
(pralaya).

Under some circumstances, the life-air (prāṇa) remains
as the fifth element (air) along with the other four
elements (earth, water, fire and sky). However,
sometimes when it predominates ñ that is, when it
situates itself in the air (vāyu) element ñ it travels
throughout the body of the jīva. When prāṇa comes in
contact with the earth element, inertness (stambha)
occurs; when it takes shelter of the water element,
tears (aśru) appear; when it is situated in the fire
element, change in bodily color (vaivarṇya) and
perspiring (sveda) are evident; when prāṇa takes shelter
of the sky element, loss of consciousness or devastation
(pralaya) occurs; and when prāṇa is self-dominating and
takes shelter of the air element, the transformed
conditions of horripilation (romāñca), trembling
(vepathu), and faltering of the voice (svara-bheda) are
manifested, depending on whether the degree of strength
of prāṇa is mild, moderate or intense, respectively.

Since these eight transformations are active both
internally and externally, they are sometimes called
bhāva and sometimes anubhāva. However, the anubhāvas ñ
such as dancing, rolling on the ground and singing ñ are
not considered the same as sāttvika-bhāvas because they
are only active in the outer body. The anubhāva
activities, such as dancing, are not the results of
bhāva arising from sattva (i.e., sāttvika-bhāva).
Rather, the activity is instigated by the application of
intelligence. However, in transformations such as
becoming stunned, sāttvika-bhāva acts directly, without
relying on the intelligence. For this reason, anubhāva
and sāttvika-bhāva are considered to be separate and
distinct ingredients.

Vrajanātha: I would like to know the cause of aṣṭa-
sāttvika transformations such as stambha (becoming
stunned).

Gosvāmī:Stambha is a state in which one becomes inert
without speaking or having any other activity, and it is
caused by jubilation, fear, astonishment, dejection,
regret, anger and weariness. Sveda (perspiration) is
moistness of the body caused by jubilation, fear, anger,
and so on. Romāñca (standing of the bodily hairs) arises
from astonishment, jubilation, enthusiasm and fear.
Svara-bheda (faltering of the voice) occurs due to
despair, wonder, anger, jubilation, and fear. Vepathu

                          376
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

(trembling ) is caused by fear, anger, jubilation, and
so on. Vaivarṇya (change in bodily color) is due to
emotions such as despair, anger, and fear. Aśru (tears)
come from the eyes through the influence of jubilation,
anger, despair and other emotions; tears of joy are
cool, whereas tears of anger are warm. In the state of
pralaya (devastation), one is bereft of activity and
knowledge, and he becomes senseless and falls on the
ground; this may be due to happiness or distress.

There are four types of sāttvika-bhāvas corresponding to
progressive gradations of sattva (purity). These are
called smoking (dhūmāyita), alight (jvalita), burning
(dīpta), and blazing (pradīpta). The rukṣa (rough)
sāttvika-bhāvas are generally dhūmāyita (smoking),
whereas the snigdha (smooth) sāttvika-bhāvas gradually
reach the higher stages. Rati is the cause of all
astonishing ānanda, and in its absence, there is no
wonderment in the rukṣasāttvika-bhāvas and other
emotions.

Vrajanātha: Prabhu, sāttvika-bhāvas arise by extreme
good fortune, but many people make a show of these
bhāvas when they are playing a role in a drama, or to
accomplish their own tasks in worldly life. What may be
said about the bhāvas of such people?

Gosvāmī:Sāttvika-bhāvas that manifest naturally as one
performs the sādhana of sincere and pure bhakti, are
Vaiṣṇava bhāvas. Apart from these, whatever emotional
symptoms appear can be divided into four categories: the
semblance of rati (raty-ābhāsa); the semblance of
sāttvika-bhāvas (sattvābhāsa); symptoms that do not
arise from sattva (niḥsattva); and adverse or contrary
symptoms (pratīpa).

Vrajanātha: What is raty-ābhāsa (the semblance of rati)?

Gosvāmī:Raty-ābhāsa occurs in those who desire
liberation; it arises in the impersonalist sannyāsīs of
the Śaṅkara sampradāya when they hear discussions about
the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa.

Vrajanātha: What is sattvābhāsa (the semblance of
sāttvika-bhāvas)?

Gosvāmī:Sattvābhāsa is the semblance of joy and
astonishment that arises in those whose hearts naturally
give rise to loose emotions – for example, the adherents
of jaran-mīmāṁsā, and ordinary women – when they hear
kṛṣṇa-kathā.

Vrajanātha: What is niḥsattva (the semblance of bhāva
that does not arise from sattva)?

Gosvāmī:Niḥsattva refers to symptoms such as
horripilation and tears that are exhibited by people
whose minds are naturally duplicit, and who practice
them for the sake of a dramatic performance, or in order
to accomplish a material objective. Some people are
actually hard-hearted, but they are so practiced that
they can begin to weep in an instant, as if they are
genuinely crying. However, their crying is completely
pretentious, and they are said to be slippery-minded.

                          377
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017


Vrajanātha: What are adverse or contrary symptoms
(pratīpa)?

Gosvāmī:Pratīpa-bhāva-ābhāsa is the semblance of bhāva
that occurs because of anger, fear and other emotions
resulting from activities that are unfavorable towards
Kṛṣṇa. Kamsa and Siśupāla are obvious examples.

Vrajanātha: Prabhu, we have understood vibhāva, anubhāva
and sāttvika-bhāvas, as well as the difference between
sāttvika-bhāva and anubhāva. Now please describe the
vyabhicārī-bhāvas.

Gosvāmī: There are thirty-three vyabhicārī-bhāvas. Vi
means ‘distinctly’, abhi means ‘towards’, and cārī means
‘moving’. These thirty-three bhāvas are called
vyabhicārī because they move distinctly towards the
sthāyībhāva. They are also called sañcārī-bhāvas,
because they are communicated through words, limbs and
sattva and thus travel (sañcārita) throughout the
system. They are like waves in the nectar ocean of the
sthāyībhāva, for they rise up, causing it to swell, and
then they merge back into the ocean again.

The thirty-three sañcārī-bhāvas are: 1) regret or
indifference (nirveda), 2) despair (viṣāda), 3) humility
(dainya), 4) physical and mental debility (glāni), 5)
fatigue (śrama), 6) intoxication (mada), 7) pride
(garva), 8) suspicion (śaṅkā), 9) fear (trāsa), 10)
agitation (āvega), 11) madness (unmāda), 12) confusion
or absence of mind (apasmṛti), 13) disease (vyādhi), 14)
fainting or delusion (moha), 15) death (mṛtyu), 16)
laziness (ālasya), 17) inertness (jāḍya), 18)
bashfulness (vrīḍā), 19) concealment of emotions
(avahitthā), 20) remembrance (smṛti), 21) deliberation
or reasoning (vitarka), 22) anxiety (cintā), 23) resolve
or wisdom (mati), 24) fortitude (dhṛti), 25) jubilation
(harṣa), 26) ardent desire (autsukatā), 27) ferocity
(augrya), 28) impatience and indignation (amarṣa), 29)
envy (asūyā), 30) restlessness (cāpalyam), 31) sleep
(nidrā), 32) deep sleep (supti), 33) awakening (bodha).

Some sañcārī-bhāvas are independent (svatantra), and
some are dependent (paratantra). There are two types of
dependent sañcārī-bhāvas: superior (vara) and inferior
(avara). The superior category is also divided into two
types, namely direct (sākṣāt) and separated, or
secondary (vyavahita). The independent sañcārī-bhāvas
are divided into three types: those that are devoid of
rati (rati-śūnya); subsequently contacting rati (rati-
anusparśana); and having a trace of rati (rati-gandha).

When these bhāvas appear in people who are averse to
Kṛṣṇa, or are perceived in inappropriate people or
things, they are divided into two types, namely,
unfavorable (prātikūlya) and improper (anaucitya). All
these bhāvas have four conditions: generation (utpatti),
union (sandhi), overcoming (śābalya), and pacification
(śānti).

Vrajanātha: Generation of bhāva (bhāva-utpatti) can be
easily understood, but what is union (bhāva-sandhi)?


                          378
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

Gosvāmī:Bhāva-sandhi occurs when two bhāvas – either of
the same type or of different types – meet together. For
example, when inertness caused by one’s loved one (iṣṭa)
and inertness caused by something else both arise at the
same time, this is an instance of the union of two
identical emotions (sarūpa-bhāva-sandhi). Conversely,
jubilation and apprehension arising simultaneously is an
example of the union of two different types of bhāva
(bhinna-bhāva-sandhi).

Vrajanātha: What is overcoming (bhāva-śābalya)?

Gosvāmī:Bhāva-śābalya is the clashing and jostling of
many bhāvas, in which one bhāva suppresses another and
becomes predominant. For instance, when Kaṁsa heard
about Kṛṣṇa, he became angry and fearful at the same
time; this is an example of bhāva-śābalya.

Vrajanātha: What is pacification (bhāva-śānti)?

Gosvāmī:Bhāva-śānti occurs when an extremely powerful
bhāva becomes pacified. When the vraja-vāsīs could not
see Kṛṣṇa nearby, they were very anxious, but their
apprehension was at once pacified – that is, it went far
away – when they heard the sound of His vaṁśī. This is
the pacified condition of despondency (viṣāda).

Vrajanātha: If we are qualified to know anything more
about this subject, then please tell us.

Gosvāmī: Altogether, there are forty-one bhāvas that
cause transformations of the body and senses. These are
the thirty-three vyabhicārī-bhāvas, one of the mukhya-
sthāyībhāvas, and also the seven gauṇa-sthāyībhāvas that
I shall describe later. These are all the propensities
of the heart (citta-vṛtti) that cause bhāva to arise.

Vrajanātha: Which types of bhāva do they arouse?

Gosvāmī: They produce the aṣṭa-sāttvika-bhāvas and the
anubhāvas that come in the category of vibhāvas.

Vrajanātha: Are all the bhāvas natural and inborn?

Gosvāmī: No, some of them are natural, while others are
transitory. The bhakta’s sthāyībhāva is his natural
bhāva, and the vyabhicārī-bhāvas are transitory.

Vrajanātha: Do all bhaktas have the same type of bhāva?

Gosvāmī: There are different types of bhaktas according
to the difference in the dispositions of their
respective minds (mano-bhāvas), so there is a gradation
of awakening of bhāvas, depending on the disposition of
the mind. This awakening is of three types: gariṣṭha
(heavy), laghiṣṭha (light), and gambhīra (grave).
However, the nature of nectar is that it is always
liquid, and the heart of the kṛṣṇa-bhakta is like nectar
by nature.

I shall stop here for today. Tomorrow I will explain
sthāyībhāva.

Vijaya and Vrajanātha offered sāṣṭāṅga-daṇḍavat to Śrī

                          379
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

Guru Gosvāmī. Taking his permission, they left for their
place of residence.



Thus ends the Twenty-Seventh Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled

“Rasa-Tattva:

Sāttvika-Bhāva, Vyabhicārī-Bhāva & Raty-Ābhāsa”




Chapter 28

Rasa-Tattva: Mukhya-Rati



The next day, Vijaya Kumāra and Vrajanātha came as usual
to the lotus feet of Śrī Gopāla Guru Gosvāmī, and after
offering their sāṣṭāṅga-daṇḍavat-praṇāma, they began to
ask questions in order to clarify the subjects that they
had discussed the previous day. Vrajanātha inquired,
“Prabhu, from everything you have explained about
vibhāva, anubhāva, sāttvika-bhāva and vyabhicārī-bhāva,
it seems that they are all bhāvas. Then, where is
sthāyībhāva amongst them?”

Gosvāmī: It is true that they are all bhāvas.
Sthāyībhāva is that bhāva which subjugates all the
compatible bhāvas such as hāsya, as well as the
incompatible bhāvas such as anger, and which
predominates and continues to reign as the emperor of
all the other bhāvas. Sthāyībhāva is the rati that the
bhakta has in his heart for Kṛṣṇa in identifying himself
as āśraya and Kṛṣṇa as viṣaya. In the description of the
ingredients of rasa, you see that āśraya has been
classified within vibhāva as ālambana (support). That
bhāva brings the other bhāvas under its control, and
accepts some of them as motivations for rasa, and some
as assistants to taste rasa. In this predominant
position, although it has the form of a relishable
bhāva, at the same time, it relishes the other bhāvas
itself. Study this very deeply, and reflect on how the
sthāyībhāva is different from the other bhāvas. Rati in
the form of sthāyībhāva can be either primary or
secondary, so there are two types of rati: mukhya-rati
and gauṇa-rati.

Vrajanātha: What is mukhya-rati?

Gosvāmī: In the context of bhāva-bhakti, mukhya-rati is
rati characterized as śuddha-sattva-viśeṣātmā svarūpa
(the ātmā’s unique svarūpa within the state of pure
goodness).

Vrajanātha: Hearing your pure deliberations today has
dispelled the misconception that I developed about rati
when I was studying mundane alaṅkāra-śāstra. Today, I

                           380
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

have properly understood that bhāgavata-rasa arises
within the pure svarūpa of the jīva as the innate
inclination of his ātmā. The rati to which worldly
authors refer is only experienced within the conditioned
jīva’s gross body, and the mind and citta (heart) of the
subtle body. Now I have also understood through your
explanation that rasa which is the exclusive wealth of
the pure jīva. By the mercy of the hlādinī śakti the
conditioned jīva can realize it to a very minute degree.
Please explain the different types of śuddha or mukhya-
rati to us.

When Guru Gosvāmī saw Vrajanāthaís comprehension of
tattva, tears of joy flowed from his eyes. Embracing
Vrajanātha, he said, “I have become blessed today by
having a disciple like you. Now listen. There are two
types of mukhya-rati: mukhya-rati that nourishes itself
(svārthāmukhya-rati) and mukhya-rati that nourishes
other ratis (parārthāmukhya-rati).”

Vrajanātha: What is svārthā mukhya-rati?

Gosvāmī:Svārthā rati supports and nourishes itself by
the compatible bhāvas, whereas the incompatible bhāvas
create regret or apathy in it.

Vrajanātha: What is parārthā mukhya-rati?

Gosvāmī:Parārthā mukhya-rati accommodates both the
compatible and the incompatible types of bhāva by
shrinking away (saṅkucita). There is also another way of
classifying mukhya-rati.

Vrajanātha: What is that?

Gosvāmī:Mukhya-rati is divided into five parts: śuddha,
dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya, and madhura. Just as the same
sun is seen in a variety of different ways when
reflected on different surfaces such as crystal,
similarly, specialities of sthāyībhāva arise from the
different receptacles of rati.

Vrajanātha: Please explain śuddha-rati.

Gosvāmī: There are three kinds of śuddha-rati: general
(sāmānya), clear (svaccha), and tranquil (śānta).
General or common (sāmānya) rati is the rati of ordinary
people and girls towards Kṛṣṇa. Svaccha (clear) rati
varies according to the relationships of the sādhaka
with different types of bhaktas, each of whom has his
own disposition and particular type of sādhana. Svaccha-
rati is like a completely clean and pure crystal, and
reflects the bhāva of whatever types of association
(bhakta-saṅga) the sādhaka has. That is why it is called
svaccha (clear) rati. Those who have this rati sometimes
call Kṛṣṇa ‘Prabhu,’ and offer prayers (stava),
sometimes they call Him ‘Mitra’ (friend) and cut jokes
with Him, sometimes they maintain and nourish Him,
considering Him as their son, sometimes they joyfully
address Him as ‘Kānta’ (beloved), and sometimes they
have the mood that He is Paramātmā.

Sama-svabhāva is the ānanda that arises in the mind of
one who, being endowed with the quality of equilibrium,

                            381
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

dispels all desires for sense gratification from the
mind. The rati that such naturally equipoised people
have for Kṛṣṇa arises from knowledge of Paramātmā, and
is called śānta-rati. This rati is called pure and
unmixed (śuddha) rati, because it has no connection with
the tastes present in dāsya-rati, sakhya-rati, vātsalya-
rati, and so on.

These three types of rati ñ dāsya, sakhya and vātsalya ñ
are also divided into two categories, namely exclusive
(kevalā) and congested (saṅkulā). In kevalārati, only
one type of rati is active, without even a scent of any
other type. In Vraja, kevalārati is exhibited by
servants such as Rasāla; friends such as Śrīdāmā; and
Kṛṣṇaís superiors such as Nanda Mahārāja. Congested
(saṅkulā) rati is rati in which two or more types of
rati are combined together. The rati of Uddhava, Bhīma,
and Vrajeśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhikāís nursemaid Mukharā is
called saṅkulā rati.

Vrajanātha: At first I had the conception that there was
no śānta-rati in the devotees of Vraja, but now I see
that it also exists in them to a limited extent. Mundane
poets think that there is no rati in śānta-dharma, but
it is certainly visible in rati for para-brahma. Now
please explain the symptoms of dāsya-rati.

Gosvāmī:Dāsya-rati or prīti is the rati composed of
sentiments of reverent service arising from the
conception, “Kṛṣṇa is the master, and I am the servant.”
Those who have attachment to such rati do not have prīti
for anything else.

Vrajanātha: What is the symptom of sakhya-rati?

Gosvāmī: In sakhya-rati, one has steadfast confidence in
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and thinks of Him as equal to himself.
Sakhya-rati is characterized by habitual laughter and
joking.

Vrajanātha: Please describe the symptoms of vātsalya-
rati.

Gosvāmī: The vātsalya-rati of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s superiors
(guru-jana), is composed of the desire to show favor and
kindness to Him. In this rati, there are activities such
as nourishing and protecting Kṛṣṇa, performing rituals
for auspiciousness in His life, offering blessings, and
touching His chin.

Vrajanātha: Now please be so kind as to describe
madhura-rati.

Gosvāmī:Madhura-rati is the rati between the doe-eyed
gopīs of Vraja and Śrī Kṛṣṇa, in which there are eight
types of meeting and enjoyment, beginning with
remembering, seeing and so on. It is expressed in
activities such as casting sidelong glances, expressions
and indications through the eye-brows, sweet words, and
laughter. Rati becomes increasingly more relishable and
rapturous as she progresses from śānta to madhura, and
she shines eternally within the varieties of bhāva-
bhaktas. So far I have briefly described the symptoms of
the five types of mukhya-rati.

                          382
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017


Vrajanātha: Now please explain gauṇa-rati in the context
of aprākṛta-rasa.

Gosvāmī:Gauṇa-rati is the special bhāva that arises from
vibhāva, specifically the excellence of ālambana, and
which is self-manifest through a contracted rati. The
seven gauṇa-bhāvas are hāsya (comedy), vismaya
(astonishment), utsāha (enthusiasm), śoka or karuṇa
(compassion), raudra (anger), bhayānaka (fear) and
jugupsā or bībhatsa (disgust). Kṛṣṇa-bhāva is possible
in the first six gauṇa-bhāvas. From the point of view of
rasa, the seventh rati is the disgust or reproach that
the bhaktas feel for the inert material body and its
activities when śuddha-rati awakens. The word rati has
still been used for bhāvas such as hāsya because of
their combination with parārthā mukhya-rati, even though
they are different from the distinct (svārthā) rati of
śuddha-sattva. That is why they are referred to as
hāsya-rati, vismaya-rati and so on. Sometimes gauṇa-rati
such as hāsya attain a permanent status in some bhaktas,
but this does not always occur. They are therefore
referred to as occasional, and ‘that which is not
manifested as a constant flowing current.’ In certain
circumstances, they become so powerful that they even
overpower the natural śuddha-rati and establish their
own supremacy.

Vrajanātha: Eight types of bhāva, such as śṛṅgāra, hāsya
and karuṇa, have been enumerated in poetic literature of
the material world (jaḍīya-alaṅkāra). Now I can
understand that the vibhāva of this sort of bhāva can
only seem beautiful in the insignificant rasa between a
mundane nāyaka and heroine (nāyikā). This has no place
in the cinmaya-rasa of Vraja, in which the pure ātmā
(spirit soul) alone is active; the activities of the
mind cannot reach into that sphere. Therefore, the
mahājanas have decided that rati is the sthāyībhāva and
have divided its mukhya-bhāvas into five types of
mukhya-rasa, and its gauṇa bhāvas into seven kinds of
gauṇa-rasa. This classification is appropriate. Now
kindly describe the symptoms of hāsya-rati (laughter).

Gosvāmī: The awakening of hāsya-rati is the blossoming
of the heart due to a comical misrepresentation of
words, appearance, or activities; its symptoms are a
widening of the eyes and a quivering of the nose, lips
and head. This laughter is only called hāsya-rati when
it has been nourished by saṅkucita-rati (contracted
rati), and arises from activities related to Kṛṣṇa.

Vrajanātha: Please tell me about the symptoms of
vismaya-rati (astonishment).

Gosvāmī: The transformation of the heart that occurs
when one witnesses something uncommon is called vismaya,
and this vismaya is called vismaya-rati when it is
related to Kṛṣṇa. In this vismaya-rati, anubhāvas are
manifest, such as looking with eyes wide open;
expressions such as “Wah! Wah!”(in astonishment), and
horripilation.

Vrajanātha: What are the symptoms of utsāha-rati
(enthusiasm)?

                          383
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017


Gosvamī:Utsāha is the steadfast attachment of the mind
to performing as soon as possible a great task whose
fruit is praised by sādhus. It is characterized by
urgency, abandoning patience, tremendous exertion, and
so on.

Vrajanātha: What are the symptoms of krodha-rati?

Gosvāmī:Krodha (anger) is the burning of the heart that
arises due to an incompatible bhāva. In krodha, one
experiences transformation such as harshness, frowning
and redness of the eyes.

Vrajanātha: What are the symptoms of bhaya-rati?

Gosvāmī:Bhaya (fear) is the excessive restlessness of
the heart that occurs when one witnesses a terrible
scene. The symptoms of hiding oneself, dryness of the
heart, and the endeavor to run away are characteristic
of bhaya.

Vrajanātha: Kindly tell me about the symptoms of
jugupsā-rati.

Gosvāmī:Jugupsā (disgust) is the contraction, or shying
away, that occurs on seeing, hearing, or remembering
detestable things. Its symptoms include spitting,
distorting one’s face, and vocally expressing disgust,
“Chih! Chih!” They are only accepted as rati when they
are favourable to Kṛsṇa; otherwise they are only mundane
human sentiments.

Vrajanātha: How many bhāvas are there altogether in
bhakti-rasa?

Gosvāmī: There are eight sthāyībhāvas, thirty-three
sañcārī-bhāvas and eight sāttvika-bhāvas, making a total
of forty-nine bhāvas. If these bhāvas are mundane
(prākṛta), they are full of the happiness and distress
that arises from the three material qualities; and if
they are manifest in relation to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, they are
transcendental (aprākṛta), and consist of full-blown
ānanda, beyond the three material qualities.

Even despondency (viṣāda) is composed of immense
happiness when it is related to Kṛṣṇa. Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī
has said that Kṛṣṇa and His bhaktas, headed by His
beloved consorts, are the cause of rati as ālambana. The
sāttvika-bhāvas, such as becoming stunned (stambha), are
the activities of rati, and the sañcārī-bhāvas,
beginning with self-disparagement (nirveda), are the
assistants of rati.

When rasa awakens, the transformations are not called
the cause, the effect, or the assistant; rather, they
are called vibhāva and so on. Paṇḍitas have given
vibhāva its name because it implants (vibhāva) in rati
the qualification to become specifically relishable.
Nṛtya (dancing) and so on are called anubhāvas because
they illuminate (anubhāva) the implanted (vibhāvita)
rati after they have expanded it. Sāttvika-bhāvas are so
called because they arouse sattva. Sañcārī-bhāvas are
those that make the implanted and illuminated (vibhāvita

                          384
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

and anubhāvita) rati charming in a variety of ways by
transmitting (sañcārita) the transitory bhāvas, such as
nirveda. According to the bhaktas who are well-versed in
poems and dramas related to Bhagavān, vibhāva and so on
are the fundamental cause of sevā (transcendental
service). In fact, these bhāvas, as part of rati, are by
their very nature the vilāsa of mahā-bhakti, and they
have the quality of distinct, inconceivable svarūpa
(acintya-svarūpa-viśiṣṭa). Śāstras such as Mahābhārata
describe them as beyond reasoning, and have also
established that it is improper to argue about the host
of bhāvas (bhāva-samūha) that are beyond rational
contemplation. The tattvas that are beyond prakṛti (the
modes of material nature) are acintya-tattvas.

Rati which is part of the inconceivable rasa-tattva is
enchanting to the mind. It actually implants (vibhāvita)
Kṛṣṇaís rūpa and so on within itself, and in this way
nourishes itself along with vibhāva and so on. Rati
illuminates Kṛṣṇaís qualities, such as His rūpa, which
are the abode of all types of mādhurya. Consequently,
when Kṛṣṇaís rūpa and other qualities are relished, they
expand the rati. Hence, vibhāva, anubhāva, sāttvika and
vyabhicārī-bhāvas assist rati, and rati also nourishes
these bhāvas.

Vrajanātha: What is the difference between viṣaya-rati
and kṛṣṇa-rati?

Gosvāmī:Viṣaya-rati is mundane, whereas kṛṣṇa-rati is
transcendental. In mundane rati, there is pleasure in
meeting and extreme distress in separation. However,
when bhaktas who love Bhagavān achieve kṛṣṇa-rati, it
turns into rasa and gives rise to the pleasure of union.
At the time of separation (vipralambha), that very rati
assumes the form of an extremely wonderful and
astonishing whirlpool of joy (ānanda-vivarta). In the
conversation between Śrīman Mahāprabhu and Rāya
Rāmānanda, Rāya Rāmānanda explains this astonishing
ānanda-vivarta of separation in his own śloka, pahilehi
rāga nayana-bhaṅge bhela (Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-
līlā 8.194). This śloka appears to describe intense
suffering, but in fact it is full of the highest type of
happiness.

Vrajanātha: Logicians say that the rasa that we see is
not fully manifest, but is only a part of the whole
rasa. How can we answer this contention?

Gosvāmī: Actually it is true that the rasa aroused by
interactions in the material world (jaḍa-rasa) is only a
part of the whole rasa, because rasa is only manifested
when sthāyībhāva combines with the ingredients (sāmagrī)
of rasa. Prior to that it remains unmanifest. But this
is not the case with the transcendental rasa (aprākṛta-
cinmaya-rasa). In the stage of perfection (siddha), it
is eternal, undivided and self-manifest. During the
stage of sādhana, one can realize this same rasa in the
manifest form in the mundane world. Mundane rasa does
not endure in separation, whereas trans-cendental rasa
becomes even more beautiful in the condition of
separation.

This aprākṛta-cinmaya-rasa, as the playful pastime

                          385
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

manifestation (vilāsa-rūpa) of the hlādinīmahā-śakti,
has attained tadātmya (oneness) with the supreme bliss
(paramānanda). In other words, paramānanda is itself
rasa. This is beyond the realm of logic and argument
because it is acintya.

Vrajanātha: How many types of rasa are there in
aprākṛta-tattva?

Gosvāmī: There is one mukhya form of rati, and seven
gauṇa forms, so there are eight types of rati
altogether. Similarly, mukhya-rasa is also one of the
five types, and there are seven types of gauṇa-rasa, so
there are also eight types of rasa.

Vrajanātha: Kindly tell me the names of all eight. The
more I hear, the more my desire to hear increases.

Gosvāmī: Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī has stated in Śrī Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu (Southern Division 5.115):

mukhyas tu pañcadhā śantaḥ prītaḥ preyāṁś ca vatsalaḥ

madhuraś cety amī jñeyā yathā pūrvvam anuttamāḥ

hasyo ídbhutas tathā vīraḥ karuṇo raudra ity api

bhayānakaḥ sa vibhatsa iti gauṇaś ca saptadhā

There are five types of mukhya-bhakti-rasa: śānta,
prīta, preya, vātsalya and madhura. It is to be
understood that the first of these five is lower than
the second, the second lower than the third, and so on
in sequence. Besides these, there are seven types of
gauṇa-bhakti-rasa: hāsya, adbhuta, vīra, karuṇa, raudra,
bhayānaka, and bībhatsa.

Vrajanātha: What is the meaning of the word bhāva in the
context of cinmaya-rasa?

Gosvāmī: In rasa-tantra, the word bhāva indicates the
sentiment that is awakened by deep spiritual impressions
(gāḍha-saṁskāras) of the subject of meditation in the
heart of the learned, whose intelligence is exclusively
applied to spiritual subject matter. I have mentioned
earlier that there are two types of bhāva: cintya
(conceivable) and acintya (inconceivable). One can apply
logic to the subject of cintya-bhāvas, because all such
bhāvas that arise in the conditioned mind of the baddha-
jīva are born of the inert material nature. This means
that one can think about their subject matter.
Similarly, any mundane thoughts about Īśvara are also
cintya-bhāva.

Actually, bhāvas related to Īśvara are not cintya
because īśvara-tattva is beyond the mundane substance.
However, it is a mistake to think, “Īśvara-tattva is
beyond the inert material energy, and consequently there
is no conceivable bhāva in Him. Therefore, there is no
bhāva at all in īśvara-tattva.” Actually, all the bhāvas
exist in relation to Īśvara, but they are acintya
because they are beyond the thinking capacity of the
material mind. Bring those inconceivable bhāvas into the
heart and go on cultivating them with undivided

                          386
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

attention. You should know that one of those bhāvas is
permanent (sthāyī), and you should accept the other
acintya-bhāvas as the ingredients (sāmagrī) of rasa.
When you do so, the eternally perfect (nitya-siddha)
rasa, which is full and uninterrupted (akhaṇḍa), will
arise within you.

Vrajanātha: Prabhu, what are the deep impressions
(gāḍha-saṁskāras) you have spoken of in this context?

Gosvāmī: Bābā! You have been revolving in the cycle of
karma birth after birth, and thus, because of attachment
to worldly sense gratification, your consciousness
(citta) is made up of two types of impressions
(saṁskāra), namely, those acquired in previous lives
(prāktana), and those acquired in this lifetime
(ādhunika). During this time, the pure tendency of the
heart that was present in the pure existence of your
ātmā has become distorted. Now, by the influence of
spiritual merits (sukṛti) accumulated in many previous
lives, you have attained sat-saṅga in this life, and you
are creating saṁskāras by performing bhajana in this
association. When these saṁskāras dispel the distorted
saṁskāras, your original saṁskāras will arise. The
acintya-tattva will manifest within your heart to the
degree that these saṁskāras deepen. This is known as
gāḍha-saṁskāra.

Vrajanātha: I am curious to know who has the adhikāra
(eligibility) to enter into rasa-tattva?

Gosvāmī: The only candidates for rasa-tattva are
sādhakas who can bring into their hearts the acintya-
bhāvas arising from the gāḍha-saṁskāras, according to
the sequence that I have described. Others are not
qualified. Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī has said:

vyatītya bhāvanā-vartma / yaś camatkāra-bhāra-bhūḥ

hṛdi sattvojjvale bāḍhaṁ / svadate sa raso mataḥ

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (Southern Division 5.79)

Rasa is the miraculous sthāyībhāva, which is the
veritable repository of wonder, and which is experienced
after the sādhaka crosses beyond the path of
contemplation. It is relished in the heart that has
become radiant from being thoroughly and completely
refined by śuddha-sattva.

Vrajanātha: Who is unqualified (anadhikārī) for this
rasa? It is offensive to explain rasa to someone who is
not qualified, just as it is an offense to give hari-
nāma to an unqualified person. Prabhu, we are low and
destitute wretches, so please give us your mercy, and
make us cautious in this regard.

Gosvāmī: Renunciation that is indifferent towards
śuddha-bhakti can be called pretentious renunciation
(phalgu-vairāgya), and knowledge that is indifferent
towards śuddha-bhakti can be called dry speculation
(śuṣka-jñāna). Those who are not favorable to śuddha-
bhakti are all unqualified for the subject of rasa, for
example, false renunciants, dry speculators, those who

                          387
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

are dedicated to mundane logic, those who follow karma-
mīmāṁsā and who praise the dry knowledge (śuṣka-jñāna)
section of the uttara-mīmāṁsā, those who are averse to
relishing bhakti, and those who follow the mundane
philosophical system of kevala-advaita-vāda. Rasika-
bhaktas will protect kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasa from these
unqualified people just as one protects a valuable
treasure from thieves.

Vrajanātha: Today we have been blessed. We will obey the
instructions that we have received from your divine lips
in all respects.

Vijaya: Prabhu, I support myself with whatever wealth I
acquire from reciting Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam in an open
assembly of general people, but Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is
rasa-grantha. Is there any aparādha in collecting money
by reciting it to common people?

Gosvāmī:Aho! Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the crest-jewel of all
śāstra, and it is the embodiment of the fruit of all the
Vedic śāstras. One should simply follow the instructions
in the First Canto (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.1.3):

muhur aho rasikā bhuvi bhāvukāḥ

O rasika-bhaktas who are expert in relishing the rasa of
bhagavat-prīti, even in your liberated stage you should
keep on repeatedly drinking the rasa of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, which is the ripened fruit of the wish-
fulfilling tree of the Vedas.

According to this śloka, only bhāvuka or rasika-bhaktas
are considered qualified to drink the rasa of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam. Bābā, you should give up this occupation
immediately. You eagerly desire rasa, so donít make any
more aparādha to rasa. Raso vai saḥóin this statement of
the Vedas, it has been said that rasa is the very
svarūpa of Kṛṣṇa. There are many other occupations by
which you can maintain your life, and you should support
yourself by one of them. From now on, donít collect
wealth by reciting Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam to general people.
Yes, if you meet any rasika listener, you can recite
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam to him with great pleasure, but donít
take any remuneration or donation.

Vijaya: Prabhu, today you have saved me from committing
a serious aparādha. From now on, I will not do this any
more, but what will be the effect of the aparādha that I
have already committed?

Gosvāmī: Those offenses will be vanquished. When you
surrender to rasa with a simple heart, rasa will
certainly forgive you. Don’t be anxious about this.

Vijaya: Prabhu, I will maintain my life by some menial
occupation, but I will not describe rasa to unqualified
people even if they offer me money.

Gosvāmī: Bābā! You are fortunate! Kṛṣṇa has certainly
accepted you as His very own, otherwise, it would not be
possible for you to have such firm conviction in the
subject of bhakti. Both of you are residents of Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma. Śrī Gaurahari has invested you with His

                          388
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

potency.



Thus ends the Twenty-Eighth Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled

“Rasa-Tattva: Mukhya-Rati”




Chapter 29

Rasa-Tattva: Anubhāvas in Śānta, Dāsya, & Sakhya Rasas



Vrajanātha and Vijaya Kumāra considered their situation
carefully and decided that they would spend Cāturmāsya
in Purī and hear about all the aspects of rasa-tattva
from Śrī Gopāla Guru. When Vrajanātha’s grandmother
heard the glories of residing in Purī during Cāturmāsya,
she also agreed with their suggestion. From then on,
they regularly went to receive darśana of Śrī
Jagannātha-deva, morning and evening, took bath in
Narendra Sarovara, and visited the important holy places
in and around Purī. In addition to this, they had
darśana of Śrī Jagannāthadeva with great devotion
whenever a special service, ceremony or dressing took
place. In this way, they passed their time in a very
regulated and sublime manner. They expressed their
innermost feelings before Śrī Gopāla Guru.

When they expressed their intentions to Śrī Guru
Gosvāmī, he was delighted and said, “I have already
developed such thick parental affection for you both
within my heart that I think I will feel great distress
when you leave. The longer you stay here, the more
pleased I will be. One can easily attain a sad-guru, but
it is not easy to find a sat-śiṣya.”

Vrajanātha very humbly requested, “Please be so kind as
to explain rasa-tattva in such a way that we can easily
understand the vibhāvas and other features of the
various rasas.”

Gosvāmī: It is an exceedingly beautiful subject. Listen
carefully and I will happily speak whatever Śrī
Gaurasundara inspires me to speak. First comes śānta-
rasa, in which the sthāyībhāva is śānti-rati.

The ānanda in brahmānanda of the nirviśeṣa-vādīs is
extremely limited and feeble, and so is the ātmānanda of
the yogīs. The ānanda of realizing Īśa (īśvara) is
somewhat superior to these, and realization of the
svarūpa of īśvara is the cause of much satisfaction and
bliss. The support (ālambana) of śānta-rasa is the four-
armed form of Nārāyaṇa, who has qualities such as
supremacy and opulence. Śānta-rati has its abode in
peaceful personalities (śānta-puruṣa), namely, those who
are ātmārāma, and ascetics who have faith in Bhagavān.

                             389
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017


The four Kumāras ñ Sanaka, Sanātana, Sanat-kumāra and
Sanandana ñ who wander in the forms of bāla-sannyāsīs,
are prominent among those who are ātmārāma. At first,
they were inclined towards nirviśeṣa-brahma, but later
they became attracted to the sweetness of Bhagavānís
form, and they engaged in the worship of that mūrti
which is the condensed embodiment of cit
(transcendence). Ascetics who enter into śānta-rasa have
performed appropriate renunciation (yukta-vairāgya), by
which they have already vanquished all obstacles and
dispelled all attachment to the objects of the senses.
However, they still have desire for liberation.

The uddīpana (stimuli) of śānta-rasa are as follows:
hearing all the prominent Upaniṣads; residing in a
solitary place; discussing and deliberating on tattva;
establishing the predominance of the knowledge potency
(vidyā-śakti); honoring the universal form (viśva-rūpa);
associating with those devoted to Śrī Hari, and who also
cultivate empirical knowledge and philosophical
speculation (jñāna-miśra-bhaktas); and reflecting upon
the tattva of the Upaniṣads in the company of equally
learned persons. Further uddīpanas are the fragrance of
tulasī offered to Bhagavānís lotus feet; the sound of
the conch-shell; sacred mountains and forests; siddha-
kṣetra; the Gaṅgā; the inclination to diminish contact
with the objects of sense gratification (that is, the
desire to vanquish all sinful reactions); and
contemplating the conception of the all-devouring
influence of time. These are the vibhāvas (impetuses for
tasting) of śānta-rasa.

Vrajanātha: What are the visible symptoms (anubhāvas) of
this rasa?

Gosvāmī: Some of the anubhāvas of śānta-rasa, which are
specific (asādhāraṇa) to those who have śānti-rati, are
staring at the tip of the nose; behaving as an ascetic
beyond all codes of social conduct (avadhūta); walking
with the vision extended not more than four cubits
ahead; exhibiting the jñāna-mudrā; holding no malice
towards those who are inimical to Bhagavān; the absence
of excessive affection toward the premī-bhaktas of
Bhagavān; a mood of honor and reverence towards
liberation and the disintegration of material existence;
indifference; freedom from feelings of proprietorship
and false ego (mamatā); and observing silence. Yawning,
contorting the limbs, instructions on bhakti, offering
praṇāma and stava-stuti to Hari are some of the common
emotions of śānta-rasa.

Vrajanātha: What are the sāttvika transformations in
śānta-rasa?

Gosvāmī: Almost all the sāttvika-vikāras – such as the
standing of romāñca (the bodily hairs), sveda
(perspiration), and stambha (becoming stunned) – are
visible in this rasa. The only exception is pralaya
(fainting and falling unconscious on the ground).
However, these sāttvika transformations do not extend to
the stage of dīpta (burning).

Vrajanātha: Which of the sañcārī-bhāvas are evident in

                          390
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

this rasa?

Gosvāmī: The sañcārī-bhāvas that are commonly seen in
śānta-rasa are: remorse and nirveda (self-
disparagement), patience, jubilation, conviction or
understanding, remembrance, despondency, ardent desire,
absorption and excitement, and argument.

Vrajanātha: How many types of śānti-rati are there?

Gosvāmī:Śānti-rati is the sthāyībhāva in śānta-rasa, and
it is divided into two types: equal (samā) and condensed
(sāndrā). Samā śānti-rati occurs in asamprajñāta-samādhi
(the stage where the practitioner has achieved trance,
but the ātma has not yet reached the platform of
perceiving his own svarūpa), wherein jubilation,
trembling, and horripilation are manifest in the body
due to experiencing a sphūrti of Bhagavān.

Sāndrā-śānti-rati is the rati in which sāndrānanda is
manifest. This occurs in nirvikalpa-samādhi, the trance
in which all the functions of the mind are arrested
because of complete annihilation of avidyā, wherein one
directly sees Bhagavān before him. The extreme condensed
bliss that arises then is called sāndrānanda.

Śānta-rasa is also divided into pārokṣa (indirect) and
sākṣātkāra (direct). Śukadeva and Bilvamaṅgala rejected
the brahmānanda derived from jñāna and plunged
themselves into the ocean of bhakti-rasānanda. The same
is true of the renowned scholar, Śrī Sārvabhauma
Bhaṭṭācārya.

Vrajanātha: Why has śānta-rasa not been accepted in the
mundane literary tradition (alaṅkāra)?

Gosvāmī: The reason that mundane authors have not
accepted śānti-rati is that in worldly affairs, variety
and diversity disappear as soon as śānti (peacefulness)
appears. However, in transcendental dealings, the
aprākṛta-rasa increases progressively from the
appearance of śānta-rasa. Bhagavān has stated that the
quality of having one’s intelligence firmly fixed in Him
is called śama. Since it is impossible to fix the
intelligence firmly in Bhagavān unless one has śānti-
rati, śānta-rasa must necessarily be accepted in cit-
tattva.

Vrajanātha: I have thoroughly understood śānta-rasa. Now
kindly explain dāsya-rasa along with its vibhāva and so
on.

Gosvāmī: Learned scholars call dāsya-rasa ‘prīta-rasa’.
There are two types of prīta-rasa: sambhrama and
gaurava. Servants in sambhrama-prīta-rasa have the mood
that they are fit to receive the kindness of their
master, and those in gaurava-prīta-rasa have the
attitude of being maintained or reared by Kṛṣṇa.

Vrajanātha: What is sambhrama-prīta-rasa?

Gosvāmī:Sambhrama-prīti towards Vrajendranandana Kṛṣṇa
arises in those who have the self-conception, “I am
Kṛṣṇa’s servant.” When that prīti is gradually nourished

                          391
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017

more and more, it is called sambhrama-prīta-rasa. Kṛṣṇa
and His servants are the ālambana in this rasa.

Vrajanātha: What is Kṛṣṇa’s svarūpa in this rasa?

Gosvāmī: In Gokula, the ālambana for sambhrama-prīta-
rasa is Kṛṣṇa’s two-armed form. In other places, He is
sometimes ālambana in His two-armed form, and sometimes
in His four-armed form. In Gokula, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is ālambana
in the form of that Prabhu who is dressed as a cowherd
boy, whose complexion is as radiant as a fresh monsoon
cloud, who holds a muralī flute in his hand, whose
midriff is adorned with a yellow cloth that defeats the
beauty of gold, and who wears a crown of peacock
feathers on His head.

In other places, He is present in a two-handed form, but
He is ālambana in His opulent form, carrying śaṅkha and
cakra and so forth in His hands, and wearing pearls and
jeweled ornaments on all His limbs. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī
has written in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (Western Division
2.3.5):

brahmāṇḍa-koṭi-dhāmaika-roma-kūpaḥ kṛpāmbudhiḥ

avicintya-mahāśaktiḥ sarvva-siddhi-niṣevitaḥ

avatārāvalī-bījaṁ sadātmārāma-hṛd-guṇaḥ

īśvaraḥ paramārādhyaḥ sarvva-jñaḥ sudṛḍha-vrataḥ

samṛddhimān kṣamā-śīlaḥ śaraṇāgata-pālakāḥ

dakṣiṇaḥ satya-vacano dakṣaḥ sarvva-śubhaṅkaraḥ

pratāpī dhārmikaḥ śāstra-cakṣur bhakta-suhṛttamaḥ

vadānyas tejasā yuktaḥ kṛta-jñah kīrtti-saṁśrayaḥ

varīyān balavān prema-vaśya ity ādibhir guṇaiḥ

yutaś catur vidheṣv eṣa dāseṣv ālambhano hariḥ

That Śrī Hari Kṛṣṇa, who is the embodiment of ālambana
for the four kinds of dāsya-bhaktas, possesses the
following qualities: millions of universes are situated
in each and every pore of His transcendental body (koṭi-
brahmāṇḍa-vigraha); He is the ocean of compassion
(kṛpāmbudhi); He is endowed with inconceivable potency
which is beyond the understanding of the jīvaís
insignificant intelligence (acintya-mahā-śakti); He is
served by all types of mystic perfections (sarva-siddhi-
niṣevita); He is the origin of all avatāras such as the
guṇa-avatāras, līlā-avatāras, and śaktyāveśa-avatāras
(avatārāvalī-bīja): He steals the hearts of self-
satisfied yogīs, such as Śukadeva (ātmārāma-gaṇākarṣī);
He regulates everything (īśvara); He is supremely
worshipable for all jīvas and devatās (paramārādhya); He
is omniscient (sarva-jña); He is firmly fixed in His vow
(sudṛḍha-vrata); He is opulent (samṛddhimān); He is
forgiving (kṣamā-śīla); He is the protector of the
surrendered souls (śaraṇāgata-pālaka); He is supremely
liberal (dakṣiṇa); His words never prove false (satya-
vacana); He can perform difficult tasks with ease

                          392
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

(dakṣa); He acts for the welfare of everyone (sarva-
śubhaṅkara); He is valorous (pratāpī); He is religious
(dhārmika); He sees and acts in accordance with śāstra
(śāstra-cakṣu); He is the best well-wisher of His
bhaktas (bhakta-suhṛt); He is magnanimous (vadānya); His
body is radiant, extremely powerful, and influential
(tejasvī); He is grateful (kṛtajña); He is famous
(kīrtimān); He is the most excellent (varīyān); He is
strong (balavān); and He is controlled by the love of
His bhaktas (prema-vaśya).

Vrajanātha: Who are the four types of dāsa?

Gosvāmī: There are four types of dāsa who are ālambana
as the āśraya of dāsya-rati. They are: 1) those who have
taken His full shelter, and who always keep their eyes
down; 2) those who carry out the orders of Bhagavān; 3)
those who are trustworthy; and 4) those who consider
Kṛṣṇa to be Prabhu, and are thus endowed with a humble
disposition. Their tāttvika names are 1) adhikṛta-dāsa,
2) āśrita-dāsa, 3) pāriṣada-dāsa and 4) anugata-dāsa.

Vrajanātha: Who are examples of adhikṛta-dāsa?

Gosvāmī: The devas and devīs headed by Brahmā, Śiva and
Indra are adhikṛta-dāsas and dāsīs. They engage in
Bhagavān’s service when they have attained the
qualification to perform tasks related to the material
universe.

Vrajanātha: Who are āśrita-dāsa?

Gosvāmī: There are three types of āśrita-dāsa: those who
have taken refuge (śaraṇāgata); those who are jñānīs
attached to the path of jñāna; and those who are fixed
in the service of Bhagavān (sevā-niṣṭha). Kāliya-nāga
and the kings who had been imprisoned by Jarāsandha are
in the category of śaraṇāgata-dāsa. The ṛṣis headed by
Śaunaka are called jñāna-niṣṭha dāsa, because they gave
up the desire for mukti and took shelter of Śrī Hari.
The sevā-niṣṭhā dāsa are bhaktas like Candradhvāja,
Harihara, Bahulāśva, Ikṣvāku and Puṇḍarīka, who were
attached to bhagavad-bhajana from the very beginning.

Vrajanātha: Who are pāriṣada-dāsa?

Gosvāmī: Uddhava, Dāruka, Sātyaki, Śrutadeva, Śatrujit,
Nanda, Upananda, and Bhadra are in the category of
pāriṣada-dāsa. Although they are engaged in activities
such as giving advice, they also engage in appropriate
services according to time and circumstance. Bhīṣma,
Parīkṣit, and Vidura are also pāriṣada-bhaktas, and
premī-dāsa Uddhava is the best among them all.

Vrajanātha: Who are anugata-dāsa?

Gosvāmī: Those servants whose hearts are always attached
to performing sevā are called anugata-dāsa. They are of
two types: those who reside in Vraja and those who
reside in Dvārakā Purī. Anugata-dāsas in Dvārakā Purī
include Sucandra, Maṇḍala, Stambha and Sutamba. Those in
Vraja include Raktaka, Patraka, Patrī, Madhukaṇṭha,
Madhuvrata, Rasāla, Suvilāsa, Premakandha, Makarandaka,
Ānanda, Candrahāsa, Pāyoda, Vakula, Rasada and Śārada.

                          393
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

Raktaka is prominent among all these anugata-dāsas of
Vraja.

Pāriṣada and anugata-dāsas are further divided into
three categories, namely dhūrya, dhīra, and vīra. The
dhūrya-pāriṣadas are those who display due affection
towards Kṛṣṇa, His beloved gopīs and His servants.
Dhīra-pāriṣadas are those who are not specifically
engaged in Kṛṣṇaís service, but who take shelter of
Kṛṣṇaís beloveds, such as Satyabhāmā. Vīra-pāriṣadas are
those bhaktas who have taken exclusive shelter of
Kṛṣṇaís mercy, and are therefore not concerned about
others. These three types of kṛṣṇa-dāsañ āśrita,
pāriṣada and anugata ñ are divided into three types
again on the basis of nitya-siddha, siddha, and sādhaka.

Vrajanātha: Will you kindly explain the various types of
uddīpana in dāsya-rasa?

Gosvāmī: The uddīpanas in dāsya-rasa are the sound of
the muralī and śṛṅga (buffalo horn); Kṛṣṇa’s smiling
glance; hearing His qualities; a lotus flower; Kṛṣṇa’s
footprints; a fresh monsoon cloud; and the fragrance of
Kṛṣṇa’s limbs.

Vrajanātha: What are the anubhāvas in this rasa?

Gosvāmī: The anubhāvas that are specific (asādhāraṇa) to
dāsya-rasa include being fully engaged in one’s
prescribed duties, obeying the orders of Bhagavān,
remaining free from envy and malice in the service of
Bhagavān, friendship with Kṛṣṇa’s servants, and firm
faith in Kṛṣṇa. The expressions (udbhāsvaras) that are
common (sādhāraṇa-anubhāvas) to other rasas include
dancing, showing respect toward Kṛṣṇa’s near and dear
ones, and detachment from all else.

Vrajanātha: What types of sāttvika-vikāra are present in
prīta-rasa?

Gosvāmī: All the sāttvika-bhāvas such as stambha
manifest in this rasa.

Vrajanātha: What types of vyabhicārī-bhāvas occur in
this rasa?

Gosvāmī: Twenty-four vyabhicārī-bhāvas are present in
this rasa. They are jubilation, pride, fortitude, self-
disparagement, depression, humility, anxiety,
remembrance, apprehension, resolve, ardent desire,
argumentation, deliberation, agitation, bashfulness,
inertness, bewilderment, madness, concealing emotions,
awakening, dreaming, fatigue, disease and yearning for
death. There is no distinct appearance of intoxication,
exhaustion, fear, fainting and falling on the ground,
laziness, fury, intolerance, envy and sleep. The bhāvas
of jubilation, pride and fortitude are exhibited in
meeting (milana), and the bhāvas of debility, disease
and death are exhibited in separation. The other
eighteen bhāvas, such as self-disparagement, are visible
both in meeting and separation.

Vrajanātha: I would like to know about the sthāyībhāva
of prīta-rasa.

                          394
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017


Gosvāmī: The sthāyībhāva of this rasa is the prīti that
results from combining an attitude of respect towards
Kṛṣṇa with a trembling of the heart evoked by awe, and
the conception that He is one’s master.

In śānta-rasa, the sthāyībhāva is rati alone, whereas in
this rasa, sthāyībhāva occurs when rati has the mood of
mamatā (possessiveness) and becomes prīti. As this
sambhrama-prīti gradually increases, it extends through
the stages of prema and sneha up to the stage of rāga.
When sambhrama-prīti is free from apprehension and fear,
it assumes the form of prema. When a condensed form of
prema gives rise to a melting of the heart, then it is
known by the name of sneha, the stage in which the
bhakta cannot tolerate even a momentís separation. Sneha
becomes rāga when it has developed to the point where
even distress seems to be happiness. In such a
condition, there is a desire to give up oneís life at
the time of separation from Kṛṣṇa. Those who are in the
categories of adhikṛta and āśrita-dāsa can reach the
stage of prema, but not further than that. Pāriṣadas can
reach the level of sneha. Sthāyībhāva develops up to the
limit of rāga in Parīkṣit, Dāruka, Uddhava and the
anugata-dāsas of Vraja. When rāga arises, there is a
partial appearance of sakhya-bhāva. Paṇḍitas call
meeting with Kṛṣṇa in this rasa “yoga”, and separation
from Kṛṣṇa “ayoga.” There are two types of ayoga ñ
anxious longing (utkaṇṭhita) and separation (viyoga) and
three types of yoga ñ siddhi (perfection), tuṣṭi
(satisfaction), and sthiti (residence). Siddhi is seeing
Kṛṣṇa after being in the condition of anxious longing,
and tuṣṭi means meeting with Kṛṣṇa after separation
(viyoga). Sthiti means to live with Kṛṣṇa.

Vrajanātha: I have understood sambhrama-prīti. Now
please explain gaurava-prīti.

Gosvāmī:Gaurava-mayī-prīti is the mood of those who have
the abhimāna, “Kṛṣṇa should take care of me – nourishing
and maintaining me.” When this prīti is nourished by the
corresponding vibhāvas, anubhāvas and so on, it is
called gaurava-prīta-rasa. Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, His wards
and dependent servants are the ālambana of this rasa.
The viṣaya-ālambana in gaurava-prīti is Kṛṣṇa in the
form of the great guru; the possessor of immense fame,
intelligence and strength; the protector; and the
maintainer. Kṛṣṇa’s wards (lālya-bhaktas) are divided
into two categories: juniors and sons. Sāraṇa, Gada and
Subhadra consider themselves juniors, while
personalities such as Pradyumna, Cārudeṣṇa and Sāmba
have the abhimāna of being sons. The uddīpana of this
rasa are Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s parental affection and gentle
smiling. Examples of anubhāvas are sitting on a lower
seat in Kṛṣṇa’s presence, following the directives of
one’s worshipful superiors, and giving up independent
activities. You should know that the sañcārī or
vyabhicārī-bhāvas are the same as I have mentioned
before in regard to sambhrama-prīta-rasa.

Vrajanātha: What does the word gaurava mean?

Gosvāmī:Gaurava refers to the relationship with Kṛṣṇa
based on the conception, “Kṛṣṇa is my father by bodily

                          395
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

relationship,” or “Kṛṣṇa is my guru.” Gaurava-prīti is
affection with full absorption towards Kṛṣṇa with the
sentiment that He is nourishing and maintaining one.
This is the sthāyībhāva of this rasa.

Vrajanātha: Prabhu, I have understood prīta-rasa. Now
please describe preyo-bhakti-rasa (sakhya-rasa).

Gosvāmī: In this rasa, the ālambana is Kṛṣṇa and His
friends; the two-handed form of Vrajendranandana Śrī
Kṛṣṇa holding a muralī is viṣaya-ālambana, and His
friends are āśraya-ālambana.

Vrajanātha: I would like to know the characteristics and
divisions of Kṛṣṇa’s sakhās.

Gosvāmī: Kṛṣṇa’s friends have forms, qualities and
attire exactly like those of the dāsya-bhaktas, but they
do not have sambhrama-bhāva as the servants do; rather,
they are imbued with viśrambha-bhāva. Kṛṣṇa’s friends
are divided into two categories: those who reside in the
city (pura), and those in Vraja. Arjuna, Bhīma, Draupadī
and Śrīdāma brāhmaṇa (Sudāma vipra) are sakhās of the
city, amongst whom Arjuna is the best.

The sakhās who reside in Vraja always want to be with
Kṛṣṇa, and they always have an intense hankering to see
Him, for He is their life and soul. For that reason,
they are the principal sakhās. There are four types of
sakhās in Vraja: 1) suhṛt, 2) sakhā, 3) priya-sakhā, and
4) priya-narma-sakhā. The suhṛt-sakhās are somewhat
older than Kṛṣṇa, and they have some vātsalya-bhāva
mixed in their moods towards Him. They carry weapons,
and always protect Kṛṣṇa from miscreants. They include
Subhadra, Maṇḍalībhadra, Bhadravardhana, Gobhaṭa, Yakṣa,
Indrabhaṭa, Bhadrāṅga, Vīrabhadra, Mahāguṇa, Vijaya and
Balabhadra. Maṇḍalībhadra and Balabhadra are the most
prominent among them.

The sakhās are somewhat younger than Kṛṣṇa, and their
mood of friendship is alloyed with a touch of dāsya-
bhāva. They include Viśāla, Vṛṣabha, Ojasvī,
Devaprastha, Varūthapa, Maranda, Kusumāpīḍa, Maṇibaddha
and Karandhama. Devaprastha is the best of these.

The priya-sakhās are friends of the same age as Kṛṣṇa
with unalloyed sakhya-bhāva. These include Śrīdāma,
Sudāma, Dāma, Vasudāma, Kiṅkiṇī, Stoka-Kṛṣṇa, Aṁśu,
Bhadrasena, Vilāsī, Puṇḍarīka, Vitaṅka and Kalaviṅka.

Kṛṣṇaís priya-narma-sakhās are superior to the three
other groups of sakhās ñ namely the suhṛt-sakhās, the
sakhās and the priya-sakhās ñ and they are expert at
performing extremely confidential activities. They
include Subala, Arjuna, Gandharva, Vasanta and Ujjvala,
who always speaks joking words. Among the sakhās, some
are nitya-priya (nitya-siddhas); some were previously
devatās who attained the position of Kṛṣṇaís friends by
sādhana; and some are sādhakas. They delight Kṛṣṇa and
create varieties of amusement by a variety of
distinctive moods and gestures in friendly service.

Vrajanātha: What is the uddīpana in this rasa?


                          396
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

Gosvāmī:Uddīpana in sakhya-rasa includes Kṛṣṇa’s age;
His beautiful form; His horn, veṇu and conch-shell; His
joking and laughter; His valiant deeds; and His
performance of pastimes. In the pasturing grounds
(goṣṭha), His kumāra age is uddīpana, and in Gokula, His
kaiśora age is uddīpana.

Vrajanātha: I would like to know about the anubhāvas
that are common (sādhāraṇa) to all the groups of sakhās.

Gosvāmī: Some of the sādhāraṇa-anubhāvas of the sakhās
are wrestling; ball games; riding on each other’s
shoulders; stick-fighting; reclining or sitting together
with Kṛṣṇa on a bed, a sitting place, or a swing;
sitting down and joking; water sports; playing with
monkeys; trying to please Kṛṣṇa; dancing; and singing.
In addition to these general activities, the suhṛt-
sakhās typically give good advice and take the lead in
all activities. The special activities of the sakhās are
offering tāmbūla, drawing tilaka markings, anointing
Kṛṣṇa with sandalwood paste and so on. The special
activities of the priya-sakhās are defeating Kṛṣṇa in
fighting, pulling Kṛṣṇa by His cloth, and being
decorated by Kṛṣṇa. The special prerogative of the
priya-narma-sakhās is to assist in Kṛṣṇa’s madhura-līlā.
Like dāsas, they decorate Kṛṣṇa with forest flowers and
render service such as fanning Him.

Vrajanātha: What are the sāttvika and sañcārī-bhāvas in
sakhya-rasa?

Gosvāmī: They are similar to those of dāsya-rasa, but
somewhat more intense.

Vrajanātha: What is the nature of the sthāyībhāva of
this rasa?

Gosvāmī: Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has written in Śrī Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu (Western Division 9.3.45):

vimukta-sambhramā yā syād viśrambhātmā ratir dvayoḥ

prāyaḥ samānayor atra sā sakhyaṁ sthāyī-śabda-bhāk

Sakhya-sthāyībhāva is rati that is full of intimacy and
free from feelings of reverence between two
personalities who are ordinarily equal.

Vrajanātha: What is viśrambha?

Gosvāmī: viśrambho gāḍha-viśvāsa-viśeṣo yantraṇojjhitaḥ

Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu

(Western Division 3.46)

Viśrambha is the deep confidence which is devoid of
restraint, which causes one to think that there is no
difference at all between oneself and Kṛṣṇa.

Vrajanātha: Please be so kind as to tell me about the
gradual development of this viśrambha.

Gosvāmī: This sakhya-rasa arrives at the stage of

                             397
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

praṇaya, after incorporating prema, sneha, and rāga.

Vrajanātha: What are the symptoms of praṇaya?

Gosvāmī:Praṇaya is rati that is completely free from the
slightest scent of reverence, even in circumstances that
would ordinarily invoke such feelings.

The greatness of sakhya-rasa is unprecedented. In prīta-
rasa and vātsalya-rasa, Kṛṣṇaís bhāva and the bhāva of
His bhakta are different from each other. Amongst all
the rasas, prema-rasa ñ that is sakhya-rasa ñ is
certainly dear (priya), because in this rasa both Kṛṣṇa
and His bhaktas have the same sweet bhāva.



Thus ends the Twenty-Ninth Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled

“Rasa-Tattva: Anubhāvas in Śānta, Dāsya & Sakhya Rasas”




Chapter 30

Rasa-Tattva: Anubhāvas of Vātsalya & Madhurya Rasas



One day, Vijaya and Vrajanātha, after honoring bhagavat-
prasāda went to take darśana of Śrī Haridāsa Ṭhākuraís
samādhi and Śrī Gopīnātha at Śrī Gopīnātha-ṭoṭā. They
then proceeded to the Śrī Rādhā-Kānta Maṭha. After
offering their praṇāma at Śrī Guru Gosvāmīís lotus feet,
they sat down and began to discuss a variety of subjects
with Śrī Dhyānacandra Gosvāmī. In the meantime, Śrī Guru
Gosvāmī after honoring mahāprasāda, gracefully came out
and sat on his āsana. Vrajanātha then humbly inquired
about vātsalya-bhakti-rasa, and Śrī Guru Gosvāmī
replied, “In vātsalya-rasa, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is viṣaya-ālambana
and His elders (guru-jana) are āśraya-ālambana. Kṛṣṇa is
beautiful with His dark-complexioned limbs. He is
endowed with all auspicious symptoms, His behavior is
mild, His speech is sweet, and He is simple and bashful.
He is modest, He is respectful towards His elders, and
He is charitable. Among His elders, Vrajeśvarī Yaśodā
and Vrajeśvara Nanda Mahārāja are the most prominent.
Others are Rohiṇī and the other elderly gopīs who are
Kṛṣṇaís worshipable superiors, also Devakī, Kuntī,
Vasudeva, Sāndīpanī and so on. In this rasa, the
uddīpanas are Kṛṣṇaís ages, such as kaumāra, His beauty,
His dress, His childhood, His restlessness, His sweet
words and laughter, and His pastimes.

Vrajanātha: Please tell me about the anubhāvas of this
rasa.

Gosvāmī: The anubhāvas are smelling Kṛṣṇa’s head,
cleansing His limbs with the hands, offering blessings,
giving Him orders, nurturing Him and caring for Him, and

                          398
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

giving beneficial instructions. The general (sādhāraṇa)
anubhāvas of this rasa are kissing Kṛṣṇa, embracing Him,
calling Him loudly by name, and restraining and scolding
Him at the appropriate times.

Vrajanātha: Which sāttvika transformations arise in this
rasa?

Gosvāmī: There are the eight symptoms, such as shedding
tears, trembling, perspiration and becoming stunned.
There is also the unique symptom of milk flowing from
the breast, so altogether there are nine sāttvika-
vikāras in this rasa.

Vrajanātha: Kindly also tell me about the vyabhicārī-
bhāvas.

Gosvāmī: In vātsalya-rasa, the vyabhicārī-bhāvas are the
same as those I explained previously in connection with
prīta-rasa (dāsya-rasa). In addition to all the others,
there is apasmāra (fainting).

Vrajanātha: What is the sthāyībhāva of this rasa?

Gosvāmī: The sthāyībhāva is the rati of the benevolent
superior for the object of his kindness, which is
utterly devoid of reverence. The vātsalya-rati of elders
like Yaśodā is naturally mature. The sthāyībhāva of this
rasa progresses through prema and sneha to rāga.
Baladeva Prabhu’s bhāva is a mixture of prīta (dāsya)
and vātsalya; Yudhiṣṭhira’s bhāva is combined with
vātsalya, prīta (dāsya) and sakhya; Ugrasena’s prīti-
dāsya-rasa is a combination of vātsalya, and sakhya-
rasa; while Nakula, Sahadeva, and Nārada have a mixture
of sakhya and dāsya-rasa, as is the bhāva of Rudra,
Garuḍa, and Uddhava.

Vrajanātha: Prabhu, I have understood vātsalya-rasa. Now
kindly explain the ultimate mellow, madhura-rasa, for we
shall become blessed simply by hearing about it.

Gosvāmī:Madhura-bhakti-rasa has been called mukhya-
bhakti-rasa. The conditioned jīva has taken shelter of
mundane rasa, but when his intelligence becomes
dedicated to Īśvara, he naturally attains the path of
detachment. Even then, he cannot be inclined for
madhura-rasa until he becomes eligible for cid-rasa.
Such people have no qualification for this rasa. The
very nature of madhura-rasa makes it difficult to
understand, and candidates for madhura-rasa are rarely
found. This is the reason why this rasa is extremely
secret. Madhura-rasa is naturally an extensive subject,
but I will only give a brief summary now.

Vrajanātha: Prabhu, I am a follower of Subala. I know
that you will consider my eligibility to hear about
madhura-rasa and instruct me appropriately.

Gosvāmī: The priya-narma-sakhās are eligible for
śṛṅgāra-rasa to some extent. I will keep your
qualification in mind and speak whatever is appropriate
for you, and I will say nothing unsuitable.

Vrajanātha: Who are the ālambana of this rasa?

                          399
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017


Gosvāmī: Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the viṣaya-ālambana of this rasa.
As a gallant lover, He is the supreme abode of expertise
in relishing pastimes of unequalled and unsurpassed
beauty. The āśraya-ālambana of this rasa are the gopīs
of Vraja, and Śrīmatī Rādhājī is the best of all Kṛṣṇa’s
beloved consorts. The sound of Kṛṣṇa’s muralī is the
uddīpana of this rasa, and the anubhāvas are casting
sidelong glances and smiling. All the sāttvika-bhāvas
manifest completely in madhura-rasa, and so do all the
vyabhicārī-bhāvas, with the exceptions of laziness and
fierceness.

Vrajanātha: What is the nature of the sthāyībhāva of
this rasa?

Gosvāmī:Madhura-rati becomes madhura-bhakti-rasa when it
has been nourished by the appropriate vibhāvas and so on
of one’s ātmā. Such rati for Rādhā-Mādhava is not
subject to any type of obstruction (viccheda) through
the influence of compatible (svajātīya) or incompatible
(vijātīya) bhāvas.

Vrajanātha: How many types of madhura-rasa are there?

Gosvāmī: There are two divisions of madhura-rasa:
vipralambha (separation) and sambhoga (meeting).

Vrajanātha: What is vipralambha?

Gosvāmī: There are many types of vipralambha, such as
pūrva-rāga, māna, and pravāsa.

Vrajanātha: What is pūrva-rāga?

Gosvāmī:Pūrva-rāga is the bhāva that exists before
meeting one’s beloved.

Vrajanātha: What are māna and pravāsa?

Gosvāmī: I don’t need to explain māna, because everyone
understands it. Pravāsa means being away from each
other, or separation (viraha).

Vrajanātha: What is sambhoga?

Gosvāmī:Sambhoga is the bhoga (ānanda) that occurs when
lovers meet. I will say no more about madhura-rasa.
Those sādhakas qualified for madhura-rasa should learn
its confidential mysteries by studying Śrī Ujjvala-
nīlamaṇi.

Vrajanātha: Kindly tell me something about the position
of the gauṇa-bhakti-rasas.

Gosvāmī: There are seven gauṇa-rasas: hāsya (comedy),
adbhuta (wonder), vīra (chivalry), karuṇa (compassion),
raudra (anger), bhayānaka (fear) and bībhatsa (disgust).
When they become powerful and take the place of the
mukhya-rasa, they appear as separate, individual rasas.
When they act as independent rasas in this way, they
become the sthāyībhāva, and when they are nourished by
appropriate vibhāvas and so on, they become rasa.
Actually, only the five mukhya-rasas – śānta, dāsya,

                          400
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

sakhya, vātsalya, and madhurya – are rasa; the seven
gauṇa-rasas beginning with hāsya are generally included
within the category of vyabhicārī-bhāvas.

Vrajanātha: I am fully acquainted with hāsya and so on
from my studies of rasa-vicāra in alaṅkāra-śāstra, so
please tell me about their relationship with the mukhya-
rasas.

Gosvāmī: Now I will explain how the various rasas, such
as śānta, are mutually compatible or incompatible.

Dāsya, bībhatsa, dharma-vīra (chivalry in performing
religious rites) and adbhuta are all compatible with
śānta.

Adbhuta is also compatible with dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya
and madhura.

Śānta is incompatible with madhura, yuddha-vīra, raudra
and bhayānaka.

Dāsya is compatible with bībhatsa, śānta, dharma-vīra
and dāna-vīra, and incompatible with madhura, yuddha-
vīra and raudra.

Sakhya is compatible with madhura, hāsya and yuddha-
vīra, and incompatible with vātsalya, bībhatsa, raudra,
and bhayānaka.

Vātsalya is compatible with hāsya, karuṇa and bhayānaka
and incompatible with madhura, yuddha-vīra, dāsya and
raudra.

Madhura is compatible with hāsya and sakhya, and
incompatible with vātsalya, bībhatsa, śānta, raudra and
bhayānaka.

Hāsya is compatible with bībhatsa, madhura and vātsalya,
and incompatible with karuṇa and bhayānaka.

Adbhuta is compatible with vīra, śānta, dāsya, sakhya,
vātsalya and madhura, and incompatible with hāsya,
sakhya, dāsya, raudra and bībhatsa.

Vīra-rasa is compatible with adbhuta-rasa and
incompatible with bhayānaka. According to some opinions,
vīra is also incompatible with śānta.

Karuṇa is compatible with raudra and vātsalya and
incompatible with vīra, hāsya, the sambhoga aspect of
śṛṅgāra, and adbhuta.

Raudra is compatible with karuṇa and vīra, and
incompatible with hāsya, śṛṅgāra and bhayānaka.

Bhayānaka is compatible with bībhatsa and karuṇa, and
incompatible with vīra, śṛṅgāra, hāsya and raudra.

Bībhatsa is compatible with śānta, hāsya, and dāsya, and
incompatible with śṛṅgāra and sakhya.

The remaining combinations are all mutually neutral
(taṭastha).

                          401
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017


Vrajanātha: Please describe the result of the
combinations.

Gosvāmī: The tasting of rasa is increased by the
combination of compatible rasas. The combination of aṅga
(supplementary) with aṅgī (principal) rasas is good.
Whether the compatible rasa is mukhya or gauṇa, it is
appropriate to make it the complement (mitra) of aṅgī-
rasa.

Vrajanātha: Please tell me about the difference between
aṅga and aṅgī.

Gosvāmī: When any rasa, either mukhya or gauṇa,
dominates the other rasas and becomes prominent, it is
called aṅgī, and the rasa that nourishes the aṅgī-rasa
plays the role of a sañcārī-bhāva as an aṅga. As stated
in Viṣṇu-dharmottara:

rasānāṁ samavetānāṁ yasya rūpaṁ bhaved bahu

sa mantavyo rasaḥ sthāyī śeṣāḥ sañcāriṇo matāḥ

When rasas combine, one should understand that the rasa
whose nature is particularly prominent is the sthāyī-
rasa, and the other rasas are sañcārī-bhāvas.

Vrajanātha: How can gauṇa-rasa be aṅgī?

Gosvāmī: Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī has said:

prodyan vibhāvanotkarṣāt puṣṭiṁ mukhyena lambhitaḥ

kuñcatā nija-nāthena gauṇo ë py aṅgitvam aśnute

mukhyas tv aṅgatvam āsādya puṣṇann indram upendravat

gaunam evāṅginaṁ kṛtvā nigūḍha-ṅija-vaibhavaḥ

anādi-vāsanodbhāsa vāsite bhakta-cetasi

bhāty eva na tu līnaḥ syād eva sañcāri-gauṇavat

aṅgī-mukhyaḥ svam atrāṅgair bhāvais tair abhivarddhayan

svajātīyair vijātīyaiḥ svatantraḥ sann virājate

yasya mukhyasya yo bhakto bhaven nitya-nijāśrayaḥ

aṅgī sa eva tatra syān mukhyo py anyo ṅgatāṁ vrajet



Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu

(Northern Division, 8th Wave, 46-50)

Sometimes even a gauṇa-rasa achieves the position of
aṅgī when it is inspired by an abundance of vibhāva, and
has also been nourished by the mukhya-rasa that usually
predominates it but has now developed a contracted
condition (gauṇa-bhāva). At that time, the former
mukhya-rasa becomes aṅga, hides its own splendor, and

                          402
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

nourishes the gauṇa-rasa that has become aṅgī, just as
Upendra Bhagavān, Vāmanadeva, maintained Devarāja Indra.
Unlike the gauṇa-sañcārī-bhāvas, this mukhya-rasa does
not merge into the land of the bhaktaís heart, which is
endowed with sublime fragrance in the form of the
beginningless tendency for transcendental service. In
other words, the mukhya-rasa does not disappear, as the
gauṇa-rasas do when they become vyabhicārī and disappear
into the mukhya-rasas. Rather the mukhya-rasa remains
independently manifest, nourishing itself by the
aggregate of the compatible bhāvas, which take the
position of aṅgas.

Those who relish a particular rasa are eternally
sheltered in that one specific rasa, which for them
remains radiant as aṅgī-rasa. Other rasas, even though
they may be mukhya, function in the capacity of aṅgas of
this prevailing aṅgī-rasa.

You should also note that aṅga-rasa is only accepted
when it combines with aṅgī-rasa to increase the relish
of rasa; otherwise, its combination with another aṅga-
rasa will be fruitless.

Vrajanātha: What happens when incompatible rasas are
combined?

Gosvāmī: If you mix a sweet juice with sour, salty, or
pungent substances, the taste becomes distasteful;
similarly, when one rasa is combined with another that
is incompatible, the result is without rasa or tasteless
(virasatā). This defective combination of opposite rasas
can be called rasābhāsa.

Vrajanātha: Is the combination of incompatible rasas
invariably bad?

Gosvāmī: In Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī
has said:

dvayor ekatarasyeha bādhyatvenopavarṇane

smaryyamāṇatayāpy uktau sāmyena vacane ‘pi ca

rasāntareṇa vyavadhau taṭasthena priyeṇa vā

viṣayāśraya-bhede ca gauṇena dviṣatā saha

ity ādiṣu na vairasyaṁ vairiṇo janayed yutiḥ

(Northern Division 8th Wave 63-64)

The combination of two incompatible rasas does not
result in virasatā under the following circumstances:
when one establishes the excellence of one rasa by
making logical statements, and by describing the
obstructions or inferiority of another rasa that is
incompatible with the first; when one describes the
remembrance of an incompatible rasa; when one
establishes a similarity; when there is the intervention
of a neutral or compatible rasa; or when there is a
difference between the viṣaya or aśraya of a gauṇa-rasa
and mukhya-rasa that are incompatible with each other.


                          403
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

Furthermore, consider this point. In bhaktas such as
Yudhiṣṭhira, dāsya and vātsalya are manifest separately
at different times. Mutually incompatible rasas do not
arise together at the same time. However, in the stage
of adhirūḍha-mahābhāva, if all the incompatible bhāvas
arise together simultaneously, they will not generate
rasābhāsa.

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has said (Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu
80.57):

kvāpy acintya-mahāśaktau mahāpuruṣa-śekhare

rasāvali-samāveśaḥ svādāyaivopajāyate

When many contradictory rasas combine at once in a
personality who is the crest-jewel of the mahā-puruṣas
and who is imbued with inconceivable mahā-śakti, this
only enhances the wondrous nature of the taste.

Vrajanātha: I have heard from learned and rasika
Vaiṣṇavas that Śrīman Mahāprabhu had a low opinion of
rasābhāsa, and that He would never hear bhajanas,
kīrtanas or poetry that contained it. Now kindly tell me
how many types of rasābhāsa there are?

Gosvāmī:Rasa, when it is devoid of an aṅgī, is called
rasābhāsa. There are three gradations of rasābhāsa:
major (uttama), intermediate (madhyama) and minor
(kaniṣṭha). They are called uparasa, anurasa and aparasa
respectively.

Vrajanātha: What is uparasa?

Gosvāmī: If any of the twelve rasas, beginning with
śānta, has an ingredient such as the sthāyībhāva,
vibhāva, or anubhāva that has become disfigured
(virūpitā), they can be called uparasa. Uparasa is
caused by the disfigurement of the sthāyībhāva, vibhāva,
or anubhāva.

Vrajanātha: What is anurasa?

Gosvāmī: The secondary rasas, beginning with hāsya, if
not related to Kṛṣṇa‚ are called anurasa. If vīra-rasa
and so on are manifest in neutrally disposed
personalities, this is also anurasa.

Vrajanātha: But if they arise in the heart of someone
who has no relation to Kṛṣṇa, they are not rasa at all.
In that case, they will be mere mundane rasa. Why then
have such symptoms of anurasa been described?

Gosvāmī:Rasa is anurasa only when it has no direct
relationship with Kṛṣṇa. For example, the gopīs laughed
when they saw the nose of Śrīmatī Rādhā’s pet female
monkey, Kakkhaṭī. Another example is Devarṣi Nārada
seeing some parrots sitting on the branch of a tree in
Bhāṇḍīravana, discussing Vedānta. When he saw this,
great astonishment (adbhuta-rasa) arose in his heart.
The gopīs’ laughter, and the adbhuta-rasa arising in
Nārada’s heart have no direct relationship with Kṛṣṇa,
but there is still some distant relationship with Him.
Consequently, both are examples of anurasa.

                          404
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017


Vrajanātha: What is aparasa?

Gosvāmī: When Kṛṣṇa’s opponents are the āśraya of any of
the gauṇa-rasas beginning with hāsya-rasa, and the
viṣaya is Kṛṣṇa Himself, the result is aparasa. For
instance, Jarāsandha’s repeated laughter when he saw
Kṛṣṇa running away on the battlefield is an example of
aparasa. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has written in Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu (9.21):

bhāvā sarve tad-ābhāsā rasābhāsāś ca kecana

amī proktā rasābhijñaiḥ sarveípi rasanād rasāḥ

Some persons refer to bhāva in terms of tad-ābhāsa (a
dim reflection of the Supreme Absolute Truth) and others
rasābhāsa. However, learned scholars who have realized
rasa only use the word bhāva to denote rasa that is
derived from relishing transcendental ānanda.

When Vijaya Kumāra and Vrajanātha heard this rasika,
charming and poignant appraisal of rasa-tattva, they
fell at Śrī Guru Gosvāmīís lotus feet weeping profusely,
and spoke in voices choked with emotion:

ajñāna-timirāndhasya jñanāñjana-śalākayā

cakṣur unmīlitaṁ yena tasmai śrī-guruve namaḥ

I offer my respectful obeisances to Śrī Gurudeva, who
has applied the ointment of divya-jñāna, and has thus
dispelled the dense darkness of the desires for dharma,
artha, kāma and mokṣa, which arise from the five types
of ignorance.1 In this way, he has opened my
transcendental eyes, which have become inclined to the
service of Hari.

Lovingly lifting them up, Śrī Guru Gosvāmī embraced
them. He blessed them, saying, “May this rasa-tattva
manifest within your hearts.”

Every day Vijaya and Vrajanātha would discuss spiritual
topics with Śrī Dhyānacandra Gosvāmī, and accept
caraṇāmṛta and Śrī Guru Gosvāmīís prasāda remnants. At
various times they observed that many śuddha Vaiṣṇavas
were engaged in bhajana ñ sometimes in their bhajana-
kuṭīra, sometimes at the samādhi of Śrī Haridāsa
Ṭhākura, sometimes at the temple of Śrī Gopīnātha, and
sometimes at Siddha-Bakula. Thus, through the example of
the Vaiṣṇavas they also became immersed in bhāvas
favorable for their bhajana. They also had darśana of
the places mentioned in Stavāvalī and Stavamālā, where
Śrīman Mahāprabhu experienced complete absorption in
bhāva. Wherever śuddha Vaiṣṇavas performed nāma-kīrtana,
they would join them. In this way, they both
increasingly matured in their bhajana.

Vijaya pondered deeply, “Śrī Guru Gosvāmī has given us
śikṣā about madhura-rasa, but it was just a very brief
summary. Let Vrajanātha remain submerged in sakhya-rasa.
At an appropriate time I will come alone to Śrī Guru
Gosvāmī and hear his elaborate appreciation of madhura-
rasa.” Thinking in this way, through Dhyānacandra

                          405
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

Gosvāmīís mercy, he acquired a copy of Śrī Ujjvala-
nīlamaṇi, and began to study it. Any doubts that arose
in his mind, Śrī Guru Gosvāmī would mercifully
reconcile.

OnceÇ at dusk, while Vijaya and Vrajanātha were
strolling, they arrived at the shore of the ocean.
Sitting on the beach they gazed at the waves. There was
no end to the incessant waves. Observing this, they
considered, “This life is also full of an incessant and
unending flow of waves. Thus no one can know what will
happen next, or when it will happen. Therefore, we
should immediately learn the method of rāga-mārga
bhajana.”

Vrajanātha said, “I have seen the bhajana-paddhati
composed by Śrī Dhyānacandra Gosvāmī. It seems to me
that if one studied it under the guidance of Gurudeva,
one could attain a beautiful result. I will make a
copy!”

Having made this resolution, he requested Śrī
Dhyānacandra Gosvāmīís permission to copy his sacred
manual, but Śrī Dhyānacandra refused to give it unless
Guru Gosvāmī gave his permission to do so. Accordingly,
they approached Śrī Guru Gosvāmī, begging him to allow
Dhyānacandra Gosvāmī to give the paddhati. Śrī Guru
Gosvāmī gave his consent, and when Vijaya and Vrajanātha
obtained it, they made separate copies. They considered
that they should wait for an opportune moment to
approach Śrī Guru Gosvāmī in order to understand this
paddhati thoroughly.

Śrī Dhyānacandra Gosvāmī was a learned scholar with a
broad and comprehensive vision of all śāstra. Especially
in regard to the procedures for hari-bhajana (hari-
bhajana-tantra), no other scholar could match the depth
of his experience, and he was the most prominent among
all of Śrī Gopāla Guruís disciples. Understanding that
Vijaya and Vrajanātha were qualified for bhajana, he
instructed them both thoroughly. Occasionally, they
approached Śrī Guru Gosvāmīís lotus feet to clear all
types of doubts about their practice of bhajana.
Gradually through their studies, they came to comprehend
the daily pastimes of Śrīman Mahāprabhu and Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Thus becoming engaged in aṣṭa-kālīyabhajana, they
rendered service within their hearts throughout the
eight time-divisions of the day.



Thus ends the Thirtieth Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled

“Rasa-Tattva: Anubhāvas of Vātsalya & Madhura Rasas”




Chapter 31

Madhurya-Rasa: Kṛṣṇa’s Svarūpa, the Nāyaka, & Svakīya-

                          406
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

Nayīkas



It was a very pleasant time in the autumn season. One
night, at about ten oíclock, the earth had put on a sari
of cool and gentle moonlight, and her beauty had become
intensely attractive. Vijaya Kumāra was reading Ujjvala-
nīlamaṇi and pondering deeply on the subject matter when
his gaze suddenly fell upon the auspicious radiance of
the moonlight. His heart became filled with an
indescribable rapture, and he thought, “This is a very
beautiful time. Why not go immediately and have darśana
of Sundarācala? I have heard that whenever Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu had darśana of Sundarācala, He saw a sphūrti
of vraja-dhāma.” Thinking like this, he set off alone in
the direction of Sundarācala. By this time, Vijaya
Kumāra was taking instructions in the practice of
bhajana in pure madhura-rasa. His thoughts only flowed
towards hearing about Kṛṣṇaís vraja-līlā and
specifically, Śrī Kṛṣṇaís pastimes with the gopīs; any
other topics had become tasteless to him.

He passed Balagaṇḍī and made his way towards
Śraddhābāli. As he saw the small forests on either side,
a sphūrti of Vṛndāvana manifested before his eyes. He
became overwhelmed with prema, and said, “Aho! I am so
very fortunate! I am having darśana of that vraja-bhūmi,
which is extremely difficult to attain, even for the
devatās such as Brahmā. How beautiful these forest
bowers are! Look at this kuñja-vana! Oh! What am I
seeing? Within this maṇḍapa of mādhavī-mālatī creepers,
the master of my life, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is sitting with the
gopīs and laughing and joking with them!” Vijaya Kumāra
became very restless. Abandoning fear and consideration
of formalities, he ran at full speed in that direction,
not even aware of his body and mind. However, after
going just a short distance, he fainted and fell to the
ground unconscious. A gentle breeze began to serve him,
and after a short time he regained his external senses.
He looked in all directions, but the vision was nowhere
to be seen. After some time, he returned to his
dwelling, grief-stricken, and lay down on his bed
without saying anything to anyone.

Vijaya was exceedingly delighted by the sphūrti of
vraja-līlā. In his heart, he thought, “Tomorrow, at the
lotus feet of Śrī Gurudeva, I will submit a description
of the confidential mystery that I have seen tonight.”
However, the next moment he recalled that one should not
tell others, if by great fortune one happens to see the
confidential aprākṛta-līlā. Reflecting like this, he
gradually fell asleep.

The next day, after honoring prasāda, he went to the
house of Kāśī Miśra, offered his sāṣṭāṅgapraṇāma to his
Gurudeva, and sat before him. Śrī Gurudeva embraced him
affectionately and inquired about his well-being.

Vijaya Kumāra was very happy to see his Gurudeva.
Composing himself, he said, “Prabhu, by your unlimited
grace my human life has become successful. Now, I long
to know some confidential tattvas in regard to śrī-
ujjvala-rasa. I have been reading Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, and

                          407
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

there are certain parts whose purport I cannot
comprehend. May I ask you some questions about it?

Gosvāmī: Vijaya, you are my beloved disciple. You are
quite welcome to ask whatever questions you wish to, and
I will try to answer them as far as I can.

Vijaya: Prabhu, of the mukhya rasas, madhura-rasa has
been called the rasa that gives rise to an abundance of
mysteries. And why not? Since the qualities of the other
four rasas – śānta, dāsya, sakhya, and vātsalya – are
eternally present in madhura-rasa, whatever astonishing
and wonderful qualities they lack are perfectly and
beautifully established in madhura-rasa. Consequently,
madhura-rasa is without any doubt superior to all
others. Madhura-rasa is quite inappropriate for those
who take shelter of the path of impersonal renunciation,
because their hearts are dry. At the same time, those
who are attracted to mundane sense gratification also
find madhura-rasa difficult to understand, because it is
exactly the opposite of mundane nature. The madhura-rasa
of Vraja is not easy to attain because it is completely
different from śṛṅgāra-rasa within the material world.
So why does the aprākṛta-madhura-rasa appear just like
the despicable mundane rasa between men and women in
material existence?

Gosvāmī: Vijaya, you know well that all the varieties in
the mundane sphere are a reflection of the varieties in
the transcendental sphere, and the material world itself
is also the reflection of the spiritual world. There is
a profound secret in this, namely, that the nature of
the reflected experience is naturally reversed. Whatever
is most exalted in the original existence or form
becomes most abominable in the reflection, and whatever
is lowest in the original form is seen as highest in its
reflected existence. Every part and limb of a body
appears in a reversed form in its reflection in a
mirror; similarly, the parama-vastu (supreme
transcendental Reality) is reflected by the influence of
His own inconceivable śakti. The shadow of that śakti
has expanded itself in full detail in the form of
mundane existence. Consequently, all the characteristics
of the parama-vastu appear in their reversed form in
material existence.

Transcendental rasa, which is the very nature of parama-
vastu, is reflected in this insentient material world as
the abominable, mundane rasa. The astonishing,
matchless, variegated happiness in the parama-vastu is
its own innate rasa, but when it is reflected in the
inert plane, the conditioned jīva imagines that this
principle has material designations and attributes. He
then decides that the spiritual substance is only
formless and featureless (nirviśeṣa), and imagines that,
since variety is absent in the nirviśeṣa-tattva, all
kinds of variety must be essentially mundane.
Consequently, he cannot comprehend the eternal nature of
transcendental existence, which is free from all
material attributes because it is totally beyond them.
This is the inevitable result of using logic to try to
understand the truth.

Actually, the parama-vastu is full of astonishing

                          408
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

varieties because it is the embodiment of all rasa.
Since spiritual varieties are reflected in mundane rasa,
one can take help from the varieties of mundane rasa to
infer the existence and qualities of the spiritual rasa
that is beyond oneís sense perception. The varieties of
rasa in the parama-vastu are as follows: In the
spiritual world, the śānta-dharma that embodies śānta-
rasa is in the lowest position; above this is dāsya-
rasa, and above that sakhya-rasa; above sakhya-rasa is
vātsalya-rasa; and madhura-rasa reigns splendidly above
all. In the material world, everything is in the
reversed order, so madhura-rasa is on the lowest level,
vātsalya is above it, sakhya is above vātsalya, and
śānta-rasa is the highest of all.

The position and activities of the reflection of
madhura-rasa in the mundane world are extremely petty
and shameful. Consequently, people who deliberate on
rasa-tattva from the mundane perspective conclude that
madhura-rasa is wretched and contemptible. Actually, in
the spiritual world, it is completely pure, immaculate
and full of astonishing sweetness. There the meeting of
Kṛṣṇa with His various types of śakti as puruṣa-prakṛti
is completely pure and the origin of all truth.

In the material world, the mundane behavior between men
and women is indeed shameful. However, there is no
transgression of dharma in the spiritual world because
Kṛṣṇa is the only puruṣa and all the cit-tattvas in this
rasa are prakṛti. In the material world, one jīva
becomes the enjoyer and another jīva becomes the
enjoyed, and they want to relate with each other in that
way. This affair becomes abhorrent and shameful because
it is completely opposed to fundamental tattva. In
tattva, one jīva is not the enjoyer of another jīva. On
the contrary, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the only enjoyer and all
jīvas are to be enjoyed by Him. The situation in which
the jīva becomes the enjoyer is against his eternal
dharma. Actually, there is no doubt that this state of
affairs is utterly shameful and despicable. From the
perspective of reality and its reflection, it is
inevitable that the behavior of mundane men and women
will appear to be identical to Kṛṣṇaís immaculate
pastimes, even though one is thoroughly base and the
other is supremely valuable and meaningful.

Vijaya: Prabhu, now that I have heard this unprecedented
siddhānta and conception, my purpose has been
accomplished. My self-evident conviction has now become
firm and all my doubts are dispelled. I have now
understood the position of madhura-rasa within the
spiritual world. Aho! Just as the very word madhura-rasa
means sweet, its transcendental bhāva also gives rise to
such supreme bliss (paramānanda). Who is so unfortunate
as one who finds satisfaction in śānta-rasa when there
is a rasa such as madhura-rasa? Prabhu, I wish to hear
the elaborate and full explanation of the philosophy and
principles of the confidential madhura-rasa.

Gosvāmī: Listen, Bābā! Kṛṣṇa is the viṣaya of madhura-
rasa, His dearly beloved gopīs are the āśraya, and both
together are the ālambana of this rasa.

Vijaya: What is the beautiful form of Kṛṣṇa as the

                          409
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

viṣaya of this rasa?

Gosvāmī:Aho, what a sweet question! Kṛṣṇa’s complexion
is the hue of a monsoon cloud. He is charming and sweet,
and He has all auspicious bodily characteristics. He is
a strong, budding youth, and an eloquent and endearing
speaker. He is intelligent, splendid, sober, skillful,
clever, happy, grateful, sincere, and He is controlled
by love. He is profound, super-excellent, and famous. He
steals the hearts of young damsels, and He is ever-
fresh. He enjoys incomparable pastimes, He is
exquisitely beautiful, and He is the most dearly beloved
who plays upon His vaṁśī. Kṛṣṇa is the only person who
has these qualities. The beauty of His two lotus feet
has crushed to dust Kandarpa’s pride. His sidelong
glance enchants the hearts of all, and He is a treasury
of playful pastimes.

Vijaya: I have fully realized that Śrī Kṛṣṇa with His
aprākṛta form and qualities is the only nāyaka of the
supremely wonderful, transcendental madhura-rasa.
Previously, I studied various śāstras, and I used logic
and reasoning to meditate on the form of Kṛṣṇa, but my
faith in His form did not become firmly established.
However, through your mercy, bhakti based on ruci has
arisen within my heart. Since my heart has been purified
by devotion, I am continuously experiencing the sphūrti
of Kṛṣṇa there, day and night. Even though I leave
Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa does not leave my heart. Aho! How merciful
He is! Now I really understand:

sarvathaiva durūho ëyam abhaktair bhagavad-rasaḥ

tat-pādāmbuja-sarvasvair bhaktair evānurasyate

vyatītya bhāvanā-vartma yaś camatkāra-bhāra-bhuḥ

hṛdi sattvojjvale bāḍhaṁ svadate sa raso mataḥ

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu,

(Southern Division 5.78-79)

Only the śuddha-bhaktas who accept Śrī Kṛṣṇaís lotus
feet as their all-in-all can experience this bhagavad-
rasa. One can never experience this rasa or realize it
if his heart does not have the slightest scent of
bhakti, if he is full of mundane sentiments, or if his
saṁskāras have molded his nature so that he is addicted
to logic.

Prabhu, I have realized that rasa is the supremely pure
and wondrous bhāva that arises in the heart when it is
illuminated by śuddha-sattva, and that it transcends the
limit of a human beingís power of contemplation. Rasa is
the entity of the spiritual world, and it is absent in
the mundane world. It manifests upon the pure existence
(sattā) of the jīva who is by nature an atomic particle
of consciousness (cit-kaṇa). This rasa is experienced in
the state of bhakti-samādhi. One who has Śrī Gurudevaís
mercy and can discriminate between śuddha-sattva (pure
goodness) and miśra-sattva (mixed goodness) will have no
doubt about this at all.


                          410
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

Gosvāmī: What you have said is absolutely true. Now, I
will ask you a question to dispel many of your doubts.
Simply by answering it, you will realize a
transcendental tattva. Tell me, what is the difference
between śuddha-sattva and miśra-sattva?

Vijaya Kumāra offered sāṣṭāṅga-daṇḍavat-praṇāma at Śrī
Gurudevaís feet, and said humbly, “Prabhu, by your
mercy, I will explain it to the best of my ability.
Please correct me if I make any mistake. That which has
existence is called sattā, and a substance that has an
actual position, form, quality and activity can be
called sattva. Śuddha-sattva is sattva that has no
beginning or end, and whose form is eternally new. It is
not contaminated by the divisions of past and future
time, and it always remains thoroughly astonishing.
Śuddha-sattva includes all aspects of existence that are
the products of the pure spiritual energy (śuddha-cit-
śakti).

“In māyā, which is the shadow of the cit-śakti, there is
transformation of time as past and future. All aspects
of existence in this māyā contain the rajo-dharma
(function of the mode of passion) of māyā, for they have
a beginning. They also contain the tamo-dharma (function
of the mode of ignorance) for they have an end. Miśra-
sattva refers to aspects of māyika-sattva that have a
beginning and an end.

“Now, the pure jīva is śuddha-sattva, and his form,
qualities, and activities are also composed of śuddha-
sattva. However, since the śuddha-jīva was conditioned,
the two qualities of māyāñ rajo-guṇa and tamo-guṇa ñ
have become mixed with his pure sattva. Therefore the
conditioned jīva is called miśra-sattva (mixed existence
or mixed goodness).

Gosvāmī: Bābā, you have presented an extremely subtle
siddhānta. Now tell me, how is the heart of the jīva
illuminated by śuddha-sattva?

Vijaya: The śuddha-sattva (pure existence) of the jīva
does not manifest clearly as long as he remains
conditioned in the material world. He realizes his
svarūpa to the extent that this śuddha-sattva arises,
but he cannot attain this result by any sādhana of karma
or jñāna. The reason is as follows. No bodily impurity
can be eradicated by another substance that is itself
impure. Mundane karma is impure by nature, so how can it
remove the contamination of māyika impurity on the jīva?
As for jñāna, it is like fire, for it burns the impurity
and at the same time it obliterates the fundamental
sattva (existence) along with it. How can this give rise
to the happiness that comes from having cleansed the
impurity? Thus, śuddha-sattva can only appear through
bhakti, which arises by the mercy of Kṛṣṇa and the
Vaiṣṇavas. When bhakti appears, śuddha-sattva
illuminates the heart.

Gosvāmī: It is a pleasure to give instructions to a
person as qualified as you. Now, what else do you wish
to inquire about?

Vijaya: You have already explained that there are four

                          411
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

types of nāyaka: dhīrodātta, dhīra-lalita, dhīra-śānta,
and dhīroddhata. Which one of these is Kṛṣṇa?

Gosvāmī: All of these four types of heroic
characteristics are present in Kṛṣṇa. The mutually
contradictory bhāvas that are seen in these four types
of nāyaka are all present in nāyaka Kṛṣṇa, through His
acintya-śakti, and He has the śakti to maintain all the
rasas at once. These bhāvas act according to Kṛṣṇa’s
desire. Kṛṣṇa, who is endowed with the characteristics
of all four types of nāyaka, also has another
fascinating and secret peculiarity, which only
extraordinarily qualified persons are eligible to know.

Vijaya: Since you have already bestowed your great mercy
upon me, kindly tell me this tattva also.

Vijaya Kumāraís eyes filled with tears as he said this,
and he fell at Gosvāmījīís feet. Gosvāmījī lifted him up
and embraced him. His own eyes also filled with tears,
as he said in a voice choked with emotion, “Bābā, the
confidential mystery is that in madhura-rasa Kṛṣṇa is
two distinct types of nāyaka: He is husband (pati) and
paramour (upapati) as well.”

Vijaya: Prabhu! Kṛṣṇa is our eternal pati. He should
only be called pati, so why is there the relationship of
upapati?

Gosvāmī: This is a profound mystery. Spiritual affairs
are like mysterious jewels, but among them parakīya-
madhura-rasa is like the Kaustubha-maṇi.

Vijaya: Bhaktas who have taken shelter of madhura-rasa
engage in bhajana with the bhāva that Kṛṣṇa is their
pati. What is the deep import of considering Kṛṣṇa one’s
upapati?

Gosvāmī: No rasa whatsoever appears if one conceives of
para-tattva as impersonal and worships it in an
impersonal mood (nirviśeṣa-bhāva). This process denies
the validity of Vedic statements such as raso vai saḥ:
“That supreme Absolute Truth is the personification of
all rasa”(Chāndogya Upaniṣad 8.13.1). Nirviśeṣa-bhāva is
useless because of its severe lack of happiness.
However, from another angle of vision the experience of
rasa can develop progressively in accordance with the
variety of saviśeṣa-bhāva. You should understand that
rasa is the primary tattva of the para-tattva. The
saviśeṣa-bhāva called īśvara-bhāva, in which one relates
to the Supreme as Controller, is somewhat superior to
nirviśeṣa-bhāva, and the prabhu-bhāva of dāsya-rasa is
higher than the īśvara-bhāva of śānta-rasa. Sakhya-bhāva
is more elevated than dāsya-bhāva, vātsalya-bhāva is
still more superior, and madhura-rasa is the topmost of
all. Just as there is a sequence among these bhāvas,
each being better than the previous one, similarly
parakīya-madhura-rasa is superior to svakīya.

There are two tattvas: ātmā (oneís own) and para (others
as āśraya). The natural tendency to be fixed in the self
(ātma-niṣṭha dharma) is called ātmārāmatā (the
satisfaction from being situated in the self), and in
this ātmārāmatā, rasa has no assistance from any

                          412
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

separate entity. Kṛṣṇa has this quality of being
eternally self-satisfied. However, at the same time, the
quality of enjoying with the assistance of others
(parārāmatā-dharma) also exists in Him eternally. The
aggregate of contradictory characteristics is present
together simultaneously in parama-puruṣa, Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
This is the intrinsic and constitutional nature of the
Supreme Absolute Truth (para-tattva). In one aspect of
kṛṣṇa-līlā there is ātmārāmatā, while in its
counterpart, the quintessence of parārāmatā reigns
splendidly to its fullest extent. The summit of this
parārāmatā is parakīya-bhāva. Parakīya-rasa is the
astonishing rasa that appears when the nāyaka and nāyikā
are united by rāga (attraction), even though the
relationship between them is para-bhāva (bhāva of
accepting para ñ anotherís consort).

From ātmārāmatā to parakīya-madhura-rasa is the full
spectrum of rasa. As rasa is drawn in the direction of
ātmārāmatā, it gradually becomes dry, whereas to the
extent that it is drawn towards parakīya, it attains its
fully blossomed state. When Kṛṣṇa is the nāyaka,
parakīya-rasa can never be disgraceful, whereas if any
ordinary jīva becomes the nāyaka, the consideration of
dharma and adharma arises, and parakīya-bhāva then
becomes extremely base. Thus, poets have determined that
the meeting between a male paramour and a married woman
is utterly contemptible. However, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī has
said that, although alaṅkāra-śāstra has described the
upapati as detestable and contemptible, this only
applies to a mundane (prākṛta) nāyaka. No such
conclusion can apply to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is directly the
transcendental source of all avatāras.

Vijaya: Kindly tell me about the distinct characteristic
of pati.

Gosvāmī: A pati is one who has accepted the hand of a
bride in marriage.

Vijaya: Please explain the characteristics of upapati
and parakīya.

Gosvāmī: The upapati is a man who is driven by intense
attachment to transgress dharma and accept a parakīyā as
his most dearly beloved. A parakīyā is a woman who
neglects the dharma of this world and the next,
transgresses the regulations of marriage, and completely
offers herself to a man other than her husband. There
are two types of parakīyā, namely unmarried (kanyā) and
married (paroḍhā).

Vijaya: What are the symptoms of svakīyā?

Gosvāmī: A chaste woman who has been married according
to the regulative principles, and who is always absorbed
in following the orders of her husband, is called
svakīyā.

Vijaya: Who are svakīyā and who are parakīyā for Śrī
Kṛṣṇa?

Gosvāmī: The married ladies of Dvārakā Purī are svakīyā,
and the young gopīs of Vraja are mainly parakīyā.

                          413
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017


Vijaya: Where are these two types of consort situated in
the aprakaṭa-līlā?

Gosvāmī: This is a very confidential matter. You know
that the domain of the para-tattva comprises four
quarters. Three quarters of His opulences (vibhūti) are
manifest in the spiritual realm, and one quarter is in
the mundane realm. Thus, the entire realm of māyā,
consisting of fourteen planetary systems, is situated in
one quarter of His vibhūti. The River Virajā lies
between the material and spiritual worlds, the world of
māyā being situated on this side of it, and the
spiritual world on the other side. Brahma-dhāma, which
is composed of effulgence, surrounds the spiritual world
(cit-jagat) on all sides. Apart from that, when one
penetrates beyond the Virajā, the spiritual sky
(paravyoma) is seen as saṁvyoma-rūpa Vaikuṇṭha. There,
aiśvarya is prominent and Nārāyaṇa reigns as the Lord of
lords, attended by unlimited transcendental majestic
śaktis. In Vaikuṇṭha, Bhagavān has svakīya-rasa, and the
śrī, bhū, and nīlā-śaktis serve Him as svakīyā consorts.
Above Vaikuṇṭha lies Goloka. In Vaikuṇṭha, the svakīyā
consorts of the city (pura) remain absorbed in their
respective appropriate services. In Goloka, the young
ladies of Vraja serve Kṛṣṇa in their particular rasa.

Vijaya: If Goloka is Kṛṣṇa’s highest dhāma, then why
have the wonderful glories of Vraja been extolled?

Gosvāmī: Places such as Vraja, Gokula and Vṛndāvana are
within Śrī Mathurā-maṇḍala. Mathurā-maṇḍala and Goloka
are non-different from each other (abheda-tattva). When
this one phenomenon is situated in the highest region of
the cit-jagat, it is known as Goloka, and when it is
manifested within this material universe, it is known as
Mathurā-maṇḍala. Thus, it is celebrated simultaneously
in these two svarūpas.

Vijaya: How is that possible? I don’t understand.

Gosvāmī: Such phenomena are possible only by Kṛṣṇa’s
acintya-śakti. All the activities within the
jurisdiction of acintya-śakti are beyond comprehension
and argument. That eternal abode of Goloka is called
Mathurā-dhāma in the prakaṭa-līlā within the world of
gross elements (prapañca), and this very same place is
called Goloka in aprakaṭa-līlā. Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental
pastimes are eternal, and Goloka is eternally manifest
in the nitya-jagat. Those who have become eligible to
have darśana of the pure spiritual substance see Goloka.
Not only that, but they can have darśana of Goloka in
Gokula itself. However, the jīva whose intelligence is
material cannot attain the darśana of Goloka. Even
though Gokula is Goloka, jīvas with mundane intelligence
see Gokula as an ordinary place of this material world
consisting of five gross elements.

Vijaya: What is the qualification to have the darśana of
Goloka?

Gosvāmī: Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī has said:

iti sañcintya bhagavān mahākāruṇiko vibhuḥ

                          414
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017


darśayāmāsa svaṁ lokaṁ gopānāṁ tamasaḥ param

satyaṁ jñānam anantaṁ yad brahma-jyotiḥ sanātanam

yad dhi paśyanti munayo guṇāpāye samāhitāḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.28.14-15)

Although the gopas are eternally perfect, they
nonetheless descend to this world as assistants in
Kṛṣṇaís pastimes. The sādhana-siddha-gopas were the
followers of those nitya-siddha-gopas. These sādhana-
siddha-gopas thought, “Due to ignorance, the jīvas in
this world identify themselves with their material
bodies. Thus they are hankering with many types of
desires, and they engage in various types of work in
order to fulfill them. As a result, they wander
aimlessly accepting repeated birth in higher and lower
species. We are also engaged in the same activity”.

Considering this, the greatly compassionate Bhagavān Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, who has inconceivable majestic opulence, granted
to those gopas darśana of His parama-dhāma, Goloka,
which is beyond the dense darkness of māyā. The variety
in that dhāma is eternal, absolute reality, full of
unlimited spiritual pastimes. That dhāma is eternally
self-illuminated with the effulgence of brahma, and it
is perceived by the hosts of sages and sādhakas through
trance in the stage beyond the influence of the three
guṇas.

Bābā, one cannot have darśana of Goloka without Kṛṣṇaís
mercy. Kṛṣṇa bestowed mercy on the vraja-vāsīs and
granted them darśana of Goloka. This Goloka is the
excellent transcendental abode beyond material nature,
and its variegatedness is the embodiment of eternal
truth and endless spiritual pastimes. The spiritual
effulgence of the brahmajyoti exists there eternally as
the brilliant radiance (prabhā) of His limbs. When the
sādhaka is free from all mundane connections with
matter, he can have darśana of that special tattva.

Vijaya: Can all liberated personalities have darśana of
Goloka?

Gosvāmī: Even among millions of liberated souls, a
bhakta of Bhagavān is very rare. In brahma-dhāma the
jīvas who become liberated by the practice of aṣṭāṅga-
yoga and brahma-jñāna, enjoy forgetfulness of the self.
Just as a man in a state of deep sleep (suṣupti) remains
completely inactive, being bereft of power to perceive,
to understand, to desire and so forth, similarly, the
jīvas who attain brahma-dhāma are oblivious to their own
ātmā, so they remain like inanimate lumps. What to speak
of them, even bhaktas absorbed in aiśvarya cannot see
Goloka. Bhaktas with a mood of aiśvarya render service
to an opulent form of the Lord in Vaikuṇṭha according to
their respective bhāvas. Even one who engages in kṛṣṇa-
bhajana in vraja-rasa can only have darśana of Goloka if
he is so fortunate that Kṛṣṇa bestows mercy upon him and
releases him from the māyā’s endless bondage.

Vijaya: Well, if only this type of liberated bhakta can

                          415
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

see Goloka, why has Goloka been described in śāstras
such as Śrī Brahma-saṁhitā, Hari-vaṁśa and the Padma
Purāṇa? If Kṛṣṇa’s mercy is only available through
vraja-bhajana, what was the point of mentioning Goloka?

Gosvāmī: Those vraja-rasika-bhaktas whom Kṛṣṇa elevates
to Goloka from this world of five gross elements
(prapañca) can see Goloka completely. Furthermore,
śuddha-bhaktas in vraja-bhāva can also see Goloka to a
certain extent. There are two types of bhaktas: sādhaka
and siddha. Sādhakas are not qualified to see Goloka.
Again, there are two types of siddha-bhaktas, namely
vastu-siddha-bhaktas and svarūpa-siddha-bhaktas. Vastu-
siddha-bhaktas are brought directly to Goloka by Kṛṣṇa’s
mercy, whereas svarūpa-siddha-bhaktas see the svarūpa of
Goloka, but they are still situated in the prapañca
(material existence), and not directly in Goloka. By
Kṛṣṇa’s mercy, their eyes of bhakti are in the process
of gradually opening, thus there are many grades of
eligibility in this group. Some see a little, some see
something more, and others see more still. To the extent
that Kṛṣṇa is merciful to them, they will see Goloka. As
long as they are in the sādhana stage of bhakti,
whatever darśana they attain of Gokula is tinged with
some māyika-bhāva. After crossing the stage of sādhana
and reaching the level of bhāva, their darśana is
somewhat pure, and when they arrive at the stage of
prema, they begin to have darśana to the full extent.

Vijaya: Prabhu, in what respects are Goloka and Vraja
different from each other?

Gosvāmī: Everything that one sees in Vraja is present in
Goloka, but the various aspects appear somewhat
different because of differences in the niṣṭhā of the
observer. In fact, there is no difference between Goloka
and Vṛndāvana; they appear differently to different
observers, depending on their different vision.
Extremely ignorant people see everything in Vraja as
material. The vision of a person in rajo-guṇa is
somewhat more auspicious compared to this, and those who
are situated in sattva-guṇa have darśana of śuddha-
sattva according to their ability to see. Everyone’s
vision is different according to their adhikāra.

Vijaya: Prabhu, I have some realization, but will you
kindly give an example to clarify the subject further? A
material object cannot serve as a complete example to
illustrate spiritual subjects, but still, even a partial
indication can give rise to a full realization.

Gosvāmī: This is a very difficult problem. We are
forbidden to reveal our own confidential realization to
others. When you also have some confidential realization
by Kṛṣṇa’s mercy, you should always keep it hidden. I
will explain this subject to you only as far as our
previous ācāryas have revealed it, and by Kṛṣṇa’s mercy,
you will be able to see the rest yourself. Perception in
Goloka is purely spiritual, and there is not the
slightest tinge of material perception. To nourish rasa
there, the cit-śakti has manifested varieties of bhāva
in many places, and amongst them there is one spiritual
conception known as abhimāna. For instance, Kṛṣṇa has no
beginning and no birth in Goloka, but to assist the

                          416
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

līlā, vātsalya-rasa is personified there by the
conception (abhimāna) in the spiritual existence of
fatherhood and motherhood in the forms of Nanda and
Yaśodā. Again, wonderful varieties of śṛṅgāra-rasa, such
as separation (vipralambha) and meeting (sambhoga),
exist in this conception (abhimāna) form. Although the
actual situation in parakīya-bhāva is śuddha-svakīya,
the self-conceptions (abhimāna) of paramour beloved
(parakīyā) and paramour lover (upapati) are eternally
present in it.

Just see! All these abhimāna are completely convincing
in Vraja, for they are exhibited in a gross outward form
by the potency of yogamāyā. For example, in Vraja,
Yaśodā labors to give birth to Kṛṣṇa in her maternity
room, and the nitya-siddha-gopīs have a parakīya-
abhimāna that arises from their marriages to husbands
such as Abhimanyu and Govardhana-gopa. In other words,
the abhimāna of Goloka are all visible in Vraja in very
tangible forms, which are managed by yogamāyā from the
exceedingly subtle, original reality. There is not even
the slightest trace of falsity in Vraja, and it
resembles Goloka in all respects. Differences in vision
arise only according to the degree of material
obstruction of the observer.

Vijaya: Then should one meditate on the appropriate
aspects of aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā by proper deliberation?

Gosvāmī: No, it is not like that. One who has darśana of
vraja-līlā should remember aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā according to
his realization. By Kṛṣṇa’s mercy, the līlā manifests
itself in the sādhaka’s heart through the power of his
bhajana. It is not necessary to try and improve the
bhāvas of the līlā by one’s own endeavors.

Vijaya: Yadṛśī bhāvanā yasya siddhir bhavati tādṛśī.
According to this logic, the perfection that one attains
corresponds exactly to the type of meditation performed
at the time of sādhana, so it seems that one must
perform purified, immaculate meditation on Goloka.

Gosvāmī: What you are saying is correct. All the
perceptions in Vraja are pure reality, and not even a
single one is contrary to this; otherwise, there would
be a fault. Perfection occurs when sādhana becomes pure,
and the purer one’s meditation is at the time of
sādhana, the faster one attains siddhi. You should
endeavor in such a way that your sādhana may be
accomplished beautifully, but still, it is beyond your
power to purify your sādhana. Only Kṛṣṇa, through His
acintya-śakti, can do this. If you try to do it
yourself, you will become entangled in the thorny
thickets of jñāna, but if Kṛṣṇa bestows His mercy, there
will be no such injurious result.

Vijaya: Today I have become fortunate. I want to ask one
further question. Is the abode of the Dvārakā consorts
only in Vaikuṇṭha, or in Goloka as well?

Gosvāmī: The endless ānanda of the cit-jagat is attained
in Vaikuṇṭha; there is no attainment higher than
Vaikuṇṭha. Cities such as Dvārakā are there and the
young ladies of those cities reside in their own

                          417
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

palaces’, rendering service to Kṛṣṇa. The only ones who
are situated in the madhura-rasa of Goloka are the
vraja-ramaṇīs. All the pastimes that are in Vraja are in
Goloka. However, it is mentioned in Gopāla-tāpanī
Upaniṣad that Rukmiṇījī is situated in svakīya-rasa in
Mathurā Purī, which is in Goloka.

Vijaya: Prabhu, do all the activities in Goloka occur in
the same sequence as I see them in Vraja?

Gosvāmī: Yes, they all exist there in the same order,
but without the divisions based on māyika conceptions.
However, all such māyika conceptions have their own
supremely pure spiritual origins, which I cannot
explain. This you can understand only by the power of
your bhajana.

Vijaya: The whole of mundane existence (prapañca)
becomes completely dissolved at the time of the
universal dissolution (mahā-pralaya), so in what sense
is vraja-līlā eternally present?

Gosvāmī:Vraja-līlā is eternal from both the prakaṭa and
aprakaṭa perspective. The present perception (sāmprata-
pratīti) of vraja-līlā is eternally existing in one of
the unlimited universes, which revolve in cyclic order
like a wheel. A particular līlā now present in one
brahmāṇḍa appears the next moment in another brahmāṇḍa.
Thus, that particular līlā is aprakaṭa-līlā in the first
brahmāṇḍa, but it is present in the next brahmāṇḍa as
prakaṭa-līlā. In this way, all types of prakaṭa-līlā are
eternal. Even in the aprakaṭa state, all the līlās are
eternally present.

Vijaya: If prakaṭa-līlā occurs in all the brahmāṇḍas,
does vraja-dhāma exist in each brahmāṇḍa?

Gosvāmī: Yes, it does. Goloka is a self-manifesting
phenomenon which is present in every universe as the
abode of kṛṣṇa- līlā. Goloka also manifests itself in
the heart of all śuddha-bhaktas.

Vijaya: Why does Mathurā-maṇḍala remain manifest in a
universe where the līlā is non-manifest (aprakaṭa)?

Gosvāmī: The aprakaṭa-līlā is eternally present in the
dhāma, which remains to bestow mercy upon the bhaktas
who reside there.

That dayís discussion drew to a close. While returning
to his residence, Vijaya Kumāra repeatedly meditated
upon his sevā in aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā.



Thus ends the Thirty-First Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled

“Madhura-Rasa: Kṛṣṇa’s Svarūpa, the Nāyaka, & Svakīya-
Nāyikās”




                          418
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017



Chapter 32

Madhurya-Rasa: Parakīya-Nayīkas



It was night. Vrajanātha had completed his bhajana for
that day. Putting his hari-nāma-mālā aside, he fell
asleep. Vijaya Kumāra had honored prasāda, and lay on
his bed, but sleep would not come, for he was absorbed
in thought. At first he had the idea that Goloka and
Gokula were different places. Now, however, he concluded
that Goloka and Gokula are non-different. The root of
parakīya-rasa is in Goloka. But how can Kṛṣṇa be upapati
(paramour) there? He could not comprehend this point.

“If Kṛṣṇa is the supreme substance,” he thought, “and
śakti and śaktimān are non-different, even if śakti
becomes separated from śaktimān, how can śakti be called
paroḍhā (married to a gopa other than Kṛṣṇa), and Kṛṣṇa
be called upapati (paramour)?”

At first he thought, “Tomorrow I will ask Śrī Gurudeva
the question and have my doubt removed,” but then he
thought, “It would be improper to ask Gurudeva anything
further about Goloka. Still, it must be cleared.”

Pondering in this way, he finally fell asleep. While
asleep, he dreamt that he was in the presence of his
Gurudeva, and in order to vanquish his doubt, he was
asking the very question that had preoccupied him just
before he fell asleep. Gurudeva replied, “Bābā Vijaya,
Kṛṣṇa is fully independent in all activities, and His
unimpeded desires are not dependent on the desires of
others. His eternal desire is that His aiśvarya should
be concealed and His mādhurya should be manifested.
Accordingly, He assigns to His śakti an existence
separate from Himself. Consequently, His parā-śakti
assumes the form of millions of attractive young gopīs,
all endeavoring to render Him various services. Still
Kṛṣṇa is not fully satisfied by His śaktiís service
while it is influenced by knowledge of His opulence.
Therefore by the wonderful influence of His yogamāyā-
śakti, He provides those beautiful gopīs with the
abhimāna (self-conception) that they belong to separate
households. That is to say, through the influence of
that śakti (yogamāyā), they consider themselves the
wives of others, and simultaneously, Kṛṣṇa also assumes
the relationship as their upapati (paramour).

“Out of lobha (greed) for parakīya-rasa, Kṛṣṇa
transcends His ātmārāma-dharma (self-satisfied nature)
and performs varieties of wonderful līlas, such as rāsa-
līlā, with those young gopīs, who implicitly believe
that they are married to others. Vaṁśī is His priya-
sakhī (dear friend) in accomplishing this activity. In
order that Kṛṣna taste these special features the
eternal parakīya-bhāva is established in Goloka. For
this reason, all the pastime-forests of Goloka and the
sites of Kṛṣṇaís loving play, such as Vṛndāvana, remain
eternally present. All the līlā-sthānas (places of
pastimes) in Vraja ñ such as the arena of the rāsa,

                          419
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

Yamunā and Giri-Govardhana ñ are in Goloka, and in this
way, the moods of being married (dāmpatya-bhāva), and of
being faithful to oneís husband (svakīyatva-bhāva) are
present there. Śuddha-svakīyatva, the pure conjugal mood
reigns splendidly in Vaikuṇṭha. The qualities of svakīya
and parakīya are thus considered to be inconceivably
different and non-different.

“Just see, this subject is so astounding. In Goloka,
parakīya-bhāva is present only as abhimāna (a
conception). In Vraja, it appears to be like an affair
with anotherís wife, but there is actually no adultery
because the young gopīs are Kṛṣṇaís own śakti. Kṛṣṇa is
united with them from the beginning of time; therefore,
their fundamental quality is actually perfect
faithfulness to oneís husband (svakīyatva) and the
quality of being married (dāmpatya). The gopas such as
Abhimanyu are special avatāras of their respective
conceptions in Goloka. They become husbands to nourish
Kṛṣṇaís līlā and to make Him the leader of vilāsa
(pastimes) on the stage of Vraja in the mood of an
upapati. In Goloka, which is far beyond the material
world, rasa is nourished only by this conception. Within
the material universe in Gokula, all the conceptions
manifest their individual existences and assume bodies
by yogamāyāís influence in order to create the
experience of being married, and then to transgress the
codes of marital conduct. All this is accomplished by
the actions of yogamāyā.”

When Vijaya Kumāra had thus heard svakīya and parakīya-
tattva explained by Gurudeva in his dream, his doubts
were dispelled. Goloka, beyond the mundane world, is
factually the selfsame bhauma (earthly) Gokula ñ his
conviction in this fact became steadfast, and the
supremely blissful identity of vraja-rasa arose in his
heart. At the same time, he felt an awakening of
implicit faith in the nitya-aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā of Vraja.
Rising early the next morning, he thought, “Śrī Gurudeva
has shown me unlimitedly mercy. Now I will hear from him
about the components of rasa and then attain niṣṭhā in
bhajana.”

Vijaya Kumāra honored prasāda and came before his
Gurudeva at the prearranged time. Shedding tears of
prema, he offered his praṇāma. Gurudeva lovingly
embraced him and said, “Bābā, Kṛṣṇa has favored you with
His genuine mercy. Thus I have become fortunate simply
by seeing you.” As he said this, the powerful influence
of prema made his mind unsteady.

After a short time, when Gosvāmījī regained external
perception, Vijaya Kumāra offered his sāṣṭāṅga-praṇāma,
and said, “Prabhu, I do not know Kṛṣṇaís mercy; I only
know your mercy. Now I have given up trying to realize
Goloka. I am fully satisfied in the endeavor to attain
realization of Vraja. I want to thoroughly understand
the fascinating varieties of vraja-rasa. Kindly tell me,
can the unmarried gopīs who maintained the mood that
Kṛṣṇa was their husband be called svakīya or not?”

Gosvāmī: Those unmarried gopīs of Gokula were svakīya at
that time because of their niṣṭhā in the mood of
approaching Kṛṣṇa as their husband, but their intrinsic

                          420
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

mood is parakīya. Although their svakīya mood is not
natural, their svakīya relationship is perfected in that
particular condition in Gokula līlā because Kṛṣṇa
accepted them as His wives by the gandharva-vivāha-rīti
(the custom of marriage by the exchange of garlands).

Vijaya: Prabhu, in due course, I will ask many
questions, one after the other. I want to understand all
the topics of Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi in the sequence in
which they have been presented. First, I wish to learn
all about nāyaka (heroes). There are four types of
nāyaka, namely, anukūla, dakṣiṇa, śaṭha and dhṛṣṭa.
Please describe the anukūla (favorable) nāyaka.

Gosvāmī: The anukūla-nāyaka is He who gives up the
desire for other attractive maidens because of extreme
attachment to only one nāyikā (heroine). The bhāva of
Śrī Rāmacandrajī towards Śrī Sītā-devī and of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
towards Śrīmatī Rādhikājī is that of the anukūla-nāyaka.

Vijaya: I want to know the identity of the various
bhāvas – such as anukūla – of the four types of nāyaka,
such as dhīrodātta. Kindly describe the symptoms of the
dhīrodātta-anukūla-nāyaka.

Gosvāmī: The dhīrodātta-anukūla-nāyaka is grave, humble,
forgiving, compassionate, resolute, steadfast in his
vows, free from vanity, modest and extremely munificent.
Still, He renounces all those qualities for the sake of
His nāyikā, and goes to meet with her in secret.

Vijaya: Please tell me the symptoms of dhīra-lalita-
anukūla-nāyaka.

Gosvāmī: The dhīra-lalita-nāyaka is by nature a
connoisseur of rasa, ever-youthful, expert in joking,
and free from anxiety. The dhīra-lalita-anukūla-nāyaka
has all these, combined with the symptom of enjoying
uninterrupted pleasure.

Vijaya: What is dhīra-śānta-anukūla-nāyaka?

Gosvāmī: The dhīra-śānta-anukūla-nāyaka is naturally
serene and tolerant, wise, and considerate.

Vijaya: Kindly explain the symptoms of the dhīroddhata-
anukūla-nāyaka.

Gosvāmī: When the nāyaka who is envious, proud,
deceitful, easily angered, and boastful is favorable, He
is called dhīroddhata-anukūla-nāyaka.

Vijaya: What is a dakṣiṇa-nāyaka?

Gosvāmī: The word dakṣiṇa means “simple and honest.” A
dakṣiṇa-nāyaka is He who does not give up respect, awe,
and submissive love for His previous beloved, even when
He gives His heart to another nāyikā. One who is equally
disposed towards many heroines is also called a dakṣiṇa-
nāyaka.

Vijaya: What are the symptoms of a śaṭha-nāyaka?

Gosvāmī: A śaṭha-nāyaka is endearing in the presence of

                          421
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

His beloved, but He secretly commits grave offenses by
acting in an unloving manner behind her back.

Vijaya: What are the characteristics of a dhṛṣṭa-nāyaka?

Gosvāmī: A dhṛṣṭa-nāyaka is completely fearless and
expert at lying, even though everyone can clearly see
the signs of His having enjoyed the company of another
beloved.

Vijaya: Prabhu, how many different types of nāyaka are
there altogether?

Gosvāmī: As far as we are concerned, Kṛṣṇa is the only
nāyaka. There is no one besides Him. That one Kṛṣṇa is
pūrṇa (perfect) in Dvārakā, pūrṇatara (more perfect) in
Mathurā, and pūrṇatama (most perfect) in Vraja. He is
both pati (husband) and upapati (paramour) in all three
of these places. Thus He is (2x3)= 6 types of nāyaka.
Furthermore, because of the four categories beginning
with dhīrodātta, He embodies (6x4) = 24 types. Then
again, these types are divided into anukūla, dakṣiṇa,
śaṭha and dhṛṣṭa, so there are (24x4)= 96 types of
nāyaka. Now you should know that there are 24 types of
nāyaka in svakīya-rasa, and 24 types of nāyaka again in
parakīya-rasa. In vraja-līlā, svakīya-rasa is a
contracted bhāva, and parakīya-rasa predominates. Thus,
the 24 types of nāyaka in parakīya-rasa are eternally
and splendidly manifest in Śrī Kṛṣṇa in Vraja. He is
perceived as whatever type of nāyaka is necessary to
perform any particular part in any aspect of a līlā.

Vijaya: Prabhu, I have realized the various qualities of
nāyaka and nāyikā. Now I want to know how many types of
assistants (sahāyaka) the nāyaka has.

Gosvāmī: The nāyaka has five types of assistants, namely
ceṭa, viṭa, vidūṣaka, pīṭha-mardda, and priya-narma-
sakhā. They are all expert in using joking words; they
are always intensely devoted to Kṛṣṇa with anurāga (deep
love); they know how to behave according to the occasion
and circumstance; they are expert; and they are adept in
the art of pleasing the gopīs when they become angry, as
well as giving confidential advice. All five types of
assistants have these qualities.

Vijaya: What are the attributes of the ceṭa assistants?

Gosvāmī: They are expert in discovering anything, they
perform secret tasks, and their disposition is somewhat
bold and arrogant. In Gokula, sakhās such as Bhaṅgura
and Bhṛṅgara perform the activities of Kṛṣṇa’s ceṭa.

Vijaya: Who are called viṭa?

Gosvāmī: Kṛṣṇa’s viṭa, such as Kaḍāra and Bhāratī
Bandha, are extremely talented in activities such as
dressing and decorating Kṛṣṇa. They are cunning, skilled
in conversation and expert in manipulating others.

Vijaya: Who are the vidūṣakas?

Gosvāmī: The vidūṣakas are fond of eating and
quarreling. They are expert at making others laugh with

                          422
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

their comical gestures, words and dress. Madhumaṅgala
and gopas such as Vasanta are prominent among Kṛṣṇa’s
vidūṣakas.

Vijaya: Who is in the category of pīṭha-mardda?

Gosvāmī: Śrīdāmā is Kṛṣṇa’s pīṭha-mardda. Though his
qualities are just like those of a nāyaka, he conducts
all his activities according to the order of the nāyaka.

Vijaya: What are the symptoms of the priya-narma-sakhās?

Gosvāmī: They are privy to extremely confidential
secrets and have taken shelter of the bhāvas of the
sakhīs. Subala and Arjuna are prominent among Kṛṣṇa’s
priya-narma-sakhās. Thus they are the best of all
Kṛṣṇa’s friends. Among these five – ceṭa, viṭa,
vidūṣaka, pīṭha-mardda and priya-narma-sakhā – the ceṭas
are in dāsya-rasa, the pīṭha-marddas are in vīra-rasa,
and the rest are in sakhya-rasa. The ceṭas are servants
(kiṅkara) and the other four are sakhās.

Vijaya: Are there no female assistants (sahāyakās)?

Gosvāmī: Yes, there are, and they are called dūtīs
(messengers).

Vijaya: How many types of dūtī are there?

Gosvāmī: There are two kinds: svayaṁ-dūtī and āpta-dūtī.
Katākṣa (the sidelong glance) and vaṁśī-dhvani (the
sound of Kṛṣṇa’s flute) are svayaṁ-dūtīs.

Vijaya: Ahā! Who are the āpta-dūtīs?

Gosvāmī: Vīrā is proficient in speaking bold words, and
Vṛndā is expert in persuasive flattery. They are both
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s āpta-dūtīs. The svayaṁ-dūtīs and āpta-dūtīs
are extraordinary dūtīs. Apart from them, there are
ordinary messengers such as liṅginī, daiva-jñā and
śilpa-kāriṇī. I will describe them elaborately later in
the context of nāyikās and dūtīs.

Vijaya: I have understood the mood and attributes of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa as nāyaka, and I have also heard that Śrī Kṛṣṇa
performs nitya-līlā in both pati and upapati bhāva. He
performs pastimes in Dvārakā in pati-bhāva, and in
vraja-purī in upapati-bhāva. Our Kṛṣṇa is upapati, so it
is essential for us to know about the vraja-ramaṇīs, the
charming young gopīs.

Gosvāmī: Most of the damsels of Vraja with whom
Vrajendra-nandana Śyāmasundara performs pastimes are in
parakīya-bhāva, because madhura-rasa does not fully
develop without parakīya. The rasa of the charming
ladies of Dvārakā-purī remains limited by their marital
relationship, whereas the rasa of the female residents
of Vraja, who possess that śuddha-kāma from which Kṛṣṇa
derives the utmost happiness, is unrestricted (akuṇṭha).

Vijaya: What is the purport of this?

Gosvāmī: Śrī Rudra, who is highly knowledgeable in the
subject of śṛṅgāra-rasa, states that the supreme weapons

                          423
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

of Kandarpa (Cupid) are obstacles such as the contrary
moods of women (vāmatā), and the extreme difficulty in
meeting with women (durlabhatā) because of the
prohibitions that society imposes. Cāṇakya Paṇḍita has
stated that the nāyaka’s heart becomes more deeply
attached when He is forbidden to meet His beloved and
when the doe-eyed beloved is difficult to attain. Look!
Although Kṛṣṇa is ātmārāma, at the time of rāsa-līlā, He
manifested Himself in as many svarūpas as there were
gopīs, and then performed līlā with them. Every sādhaka
should follow rāsa-līlā. Here the special instruction is
that, if the sādhakas desire auspiciousness, they should
enter this rāsa-līlā as a bhakta, but they should never
imitate Kṛṣṇa. In other words, they should enter this
līlā only by becoming a follower of a gopī, by adopting
the mood of gopī-bhāva.

Vijaya: Can you kindly explain more elaborately the
subject of gopī-bhāva?

Gosvāmī: Nandanandana Kṛṣṇa, the son of Nanda Mahārāja,
is a gopa, and He does not perform amorous pastimes with
anyone except with the gopīs. The sādhaka who is
eligible for śṛṅgāra-rasa should engage in kṛṣṇa-bhajana
with the same bhāva with which the gopīs render loving
service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. In the course of his bhajana, the
sādhaka should meditate on himself as a vraja-gopī. The
sādhaka should consider himself the maidservant of some
extremely fortunate vraja-vāsinī (female resident of
Vraja), and under her guidance, should render services
to Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. One cannot possibly awaken rasa unless
one considers oneself paroḍhā, that is, married to a
gopa other than Kṛṣṇa. It is this paroḍhā-abhimāna, the
self-conception of being married to a gopa other than
Kṛṣṇa, that is the specific dharma of the vraja-gopīs.
Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī has written:

māyā-kalita-tādṛk-strī-śīlanenānusūyibhiḥ

na jātu vrajadevīnāṁ patibhiḥ saha saṅgamaḥ

Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi,

Kṛṣṇa vallabhā prakaraṇa (19)

The vraja-devīs who, through the influence of yogamāyā,
consider themselves married to gopas other than Kṛṣṇa,
never come in physical contact with their dharmika
wedded husbands. At the time of the gopīsí abhisāra
(rendezvous with Kṛṣṇa) and so on, the gopas in their
houses see forms of the gopīs that exactly resemble
their own wives. These forms are fabricated by yogamāyā
so that the gopas will think to themselves, “Our wives
are right here at home,” and they never have any
opportunity to be jealous or to feel enmity towards
Kṛṣṇa.

The vraja-devīs never had physical contact with their
lawfully-wedded husbands, who were all contrived by
yogamāyā. Each of the vraja-gopīsí husbands is only the
manifestation from their respective bhāvas in the Goloka
līlā. Their marriages are also nothing but an implicit
conviction created by yogamāyā. The gopīs are not
actually married to other gopas, but the abhimāna, or

                          424
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

self-conception, of being married to other gopas is
eternally present. If it were not so, it would naturally
be impossible for the unprecedented parakīya-rasa to
manifest because of contrariness (vāmatā),
inaccessibility (durlabhatā), obstructions, social
prohibitions, fear and so on. The nāyikā-bhāva of vraja-
rasa cannot be attained without such a conception.
Lakṣmījī of Vaikuṇṭha is an example of this.

Vijaya: What is the bhāva of knowing oneself as paroḍhā?

Gosvāmī: A gopī thinks, “I am a girl who was born in the
house of a vraja-gopa, and when I grew up to be a young
adolescent, I was given in marriage to a youthful gopa.”
Only through this type of conviction does the intense
yearning to meet intimately with Kṛṣṇa become powerful.
Gopī-bhāva means to attribute (āropa) to oneself the
mood of being a gopa’s wife who has not yet given birth
to a child.

Vijaya: If the sādhaka is male, how can he attribute
gopī-bhāva to himself?

Gosvāmī: People only consider themselves male because
they are under the influence of the illusory nature
imposed by māyā. Except for Kṛṣṇa’s eternal male
associates, the pure, inherent spiritual nature of all
others is female. Really, there are no male and female
characteristics in the spiritual structure, but the
sādhaka can attain eligibility to be a vraja-vāsinī when
he is impelled by svabhāva and a steadfast abhimāna.
Only those who have ruci for madhura-rasa are eligible
to become vraja-vāsinīs. If one performs sādhana
according to one’s ruci, one will attain a perfected
state that corresponds exactly to the nature of that
sādhana.

Vijaya: What are the glories of being a gopī married to
a gopa other than Kṛṣṇa?

Gosvāmī: The vraja-gopīs who are married to others
naturally become mines of superabundant beauty and
extraordinarily powerful transcendental virtues when the
intense hankering to meet intimately with Kṛṣṇa arises
in their hearts. They also become decorated with the
exquisite loveliness of prema. The sweetness of their
rasa exceeds that of all the śaktis of Bhagavān, headed
by the goddess of fortune Lakṣmī.

Vijaya: How many kinds of vraja-sundarī (beautiful
damsels) are there?

Gosvāmī: There are three types: sādhana-parā, devī, and
nitya-priyā.

Vijaya: Are there also different types of sādhana-parā-
sundarī?

Gosvāmī: Yes, there are two types of sādhana-parā-
sundarī: yauthikī and ayauthikī.

Vijaya: Who are the yauthikī?

Gosvāmī: The yauthikī sundarīs have taken birth in Vraja

                          425
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

together in a group, after being absorbed in the sādhana
for vraja-rasa. In other words, they are members of a
particular group. There are two kinds of yauthikī: muni-
gaṇa and upaniṣad-gaṇa.

Vijaya: Which munis have taken birth in Vraja as gopīs?

Gosvāmī: Some munis offered worship to Gopāla, but were
unable to attain siddhi (perfection). After having
darśana of Śrī Rāmacandra’s beauty, they further
endeavored in sādhana in accordance with their cherished
desire. Thus, they accepted gopī-bhāva and took birth as
gopīs. Padma Purāṇa refers to them in this way, and
Bṛhad-Vāmana Purāṇa states that some of them attained
perfection at the beginning of the rāsa-līlā.

Vijaya: How did the Upaniṣads take birth as gopīs in
Vraja?

Gosvāmī: The Mahā-Upaniṣads personified, who were gifted
with extremely fine discrimination, became thoroughly
astonished when they saw the gopīs’ good fortune, and
after performing severe austerities with śraddhā, they
attained birth in Vraja as gopīs.

Vijaya: Who are ayauthikī?

Gosvāmī: There are two types of sundarīs celebrated by
the name ayauthikī: long-standing (prācīnā) and new
(navīnā). They are exceptionally attached to gopī-bhāva,
and perform sādhana with intense eagerness and natural
anurāga. Some take birth alone, and others in groups of
two, three, or even more at the same time. The prācīnā
ayauthikī-gopīs attained sālokya (living on the same
planet) together with the nitya-priyā gopīs a long time
ago. The navīnā-ayauthikī gopīs come to Vraja by taking
birth in the species of devas, humans, and other beings.
They gradually become prācīnā, and attain sālokya in the
way I have already mentioned.

Vijaya: I have understood the subject of sādhana-parā.
Now please be so kind as to explain to me about the
devīs.

Gosvāmī: When Kṛṣṇa descends among the devas in Svarga
by His aṁśa, aṁśas of His nitya-kāntās also manifest as
devīs in order to satisfy Him. Those very devīs take
birth in kṛṣṇa-līlā as the daughters of gopas and become
the prāṇa-sakhīs of the nitya-priyā-gopīs of whom they
are aṁśas – in other words, of their own aṁśanīs.

Vijaya: Prabhu, when does Kṛṣṇa take birth by His aṁśa
in the species of devas?

Gosvāmī: Kṛṣṇa takes birth from Aditi’s womb by His
svāṁśa form as Vāmana, and by His vibhinnāṁśas
(separated expansions), He becomes the devatas. Śiva and
Brahmā are not born from the womb of a mother, and
although they are not in the category of ordinary jīvas
who have fifty qualities to a minute degree, they are
still only vibhinnāṁśa. Those fifty qualities are
certainly present in Brahmā and Śiva to a somewhat
greater extent, and in addition they have five more
qualities that are not found in the ordinary jīvas.

                             426
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

Therefore, these two are called the chief devatās.
Gaṇeśa and Sūrya are also situated in the same category
as Brahmā for the same reason, but all the other devas
are classified as jīvas . All the devatās are Kṛṣṇa’s
vibhinnāṁśas, and their wives (devīs) are the
vibhinnāṁśas of cit-śakti. Just before Kṛṣṇa’s
appearance, Brahmā ordered them to take birth to satisfy
Kṛṣṇa, and following his order some of them took birth
in Vraja and others in Dvārakā, according to their
different tastes and sādhana. The devīs who take birth
in Vraja because of intense eagerness to attain Kṛṣṇa
are the prāṇa-sakhīs of the nitya-priyā-gopīs.

Vijaya: Prabhu, the Upaniṣads attained birth as gopīs,
but kindly tell me, do any other presiding devīs of the
Vedas also accept birth in Vraja?

Gosvāmī: It is written in the sṛṣṭi-khaṇḍa of Padma
Purāṇa that Gāyatrī, who is Veda-mātā, the mother of the
Vedas, also took birth as a gopī and attained Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s association. From that time, she assumed the
form of kāma-gāyatrī.

Vijaya: But isn’t kāma-gāyatrī without any beginning
(anādi)?

Gosvāmī:Kāma-gāyatrī is certainly anādi, and this anādi-
gāyatrī first manifested in the form of Veda-mātā.
Later, by the influence of sādhana, and seeing the good
fortune of many Upaniṣads, she took birth in Vraja along
with the Gopāla Upaniṣad. Although the form of kāma-
gāyatrī is eternal, she exists splendidly in an eternal
and separate form as Veda-mātā Gāyatrī.

Vijaya: All those, such as the Upaniṣads, who took birth
in Vraja had the abhimāna of being the daughters of
gopas, and they accepted Kṛṣṇa as their own husband with
the conception that He was a gopa-nāyaka. Kṛṣṇa became
their husband at that time by the custom of gandharva-
vivāha. I have understood this much. However, Kṛṣṇa’s
eternal beloved consorts are His associates from time
without beginning, so is Kṛṣṇa’s relationship of upapati
with them only a contrivance of māyā?

Gosvāmī: It is certainly one type of creation of māyā,
but not of jaḍa-māyā, the illusory energy exhibited in
the material world. Jaḍa-māyā can never touch kṛṣṇa-
līlā. Although vraja-līlā is within the material world,
it is completely beyond the jurisdiction of jaḍa-māyā.
Another name for cit-śakti is yogamāyā, and in kṛṣṇa-
līlā this very yogamāyā acts in such a way that one who
is influenced by jaḍa-māyā sees that kṛṣṇa-līlā in an
external form. Yogamāyā brings to Vraja the paroḍhā-
abhimāna of Goloka with each of the nitya-priyās, and
gives that abhimāna form a separate individual
existence. Then, by arranging for the marriages between
the nitya-priyā-gopīs and those separate existences,1
she makes Kṛṣṇa upapati.

The omniscient puruṣa and the all-knowing śaktis who are
absorbed in their respective rasa accept these bhāvas.
This indicates the superiority of rasa and the super-
excellence of the fully independent icchā-śakti. There
is no such eminence in Vaikuṇṭha and Dvārakā. When the

                          427
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

prāṇa-sakhīs attain sālokya along with the nitya-priyā
gopīs, their restricted pati-bhāva broadens and becomes
upapati-bhāva. This is their ultimate achievement.

Vijaya: This siddhānta is quite extraordinary. My heart
has become refreshed. Now kindly explain to me about the
nitya–priyā gopīs.

Gosvāmī: Śrī Gauracandra could not have revealed such
esoteric principles through my mouth if there were no
qualified listener present such as your good self. Look
here, in various places, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī, who is all-
knowing (sarva-jña), has deliberated on this subject in
a very confidential manner, which one can understand by
reading his commentaries and literatures such as Kṛṣṇa-
sandarbha. Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī was always afraid that if
unqualified persons came to know about these very
esoteric principles, they might later take shelter of a
corrupted form of dharma. At that time, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī
felt anxious about all the faults, such as rasābhāsa and
the distortion of rasa, that are seen in so-called
Vaiṣṇavas today. He could not prevent this misfortune,
although he was so careful. You should not speak this
siddhānta in the presence of others, except for those
who are qualified to receive it. Now I will describe the
nitya-priyā gopīs.

Vijaya: Who are the nitya-priyā gopīs? Although in the
past I have studied many śāstras, now my sole desire is
to drink this nectar from the lotus mouth of Śrī
Gurudeva.

Gosvāmī: Like Kṛṣṇa, the nitya-priyā gopīs in Vraja are
the abodes of all qualities, such as beauty and
cleverness. Rādhā and Candrāvalī are most prominent
among them. They have been referred to in the Brahma-
saṁhitā (5.37).

ānanda-cinmaya-rasa-pratibhāvitābhis

tābhir ya eva nija-rūpatayā kalābhiḥ

goloka eva nivasaty akhilātma-bhūto

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

When the ānanda-aṁśa of the sac-cid-ānanda-para-tattva
agitates the cid-aṁśa, and is then enthused by the
separately manifest hlādinī pratibhā (splendor), then
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, along with Her sakhīs who are all
extensions of Her spiritual form, become manifest. I
perform bhajana of that Govinda, who is the supreme,
original Soul of all souls. He eternally resides in
Goloka-dhāma with those damsels, who are all endowed
with the sixty-four arts.

The nitya-priyā gopīs have been mentioned in this
statement of Brahmā, which is the essence of all the
Vedas. They are nitya, which means that they are a
manifestation of cit-śakti and are thus beyond time and
space ñ this is truth. There, nitya-līlā is an
expression of the sixty-four arts: kalābhiḥ svāṁśa-
rūpābhiḥ śaktibhiḥ. Although there are different
meanings given by the ācāryas in other commentaries on

                          428
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

Brahma Saṁhitā, I have explained Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara
Gosvāmīís extremely confidential commentary. This secret
treasure is hidden in the vault of the hearts of Śrī
Rūpa-Sanātana and Śrī Jīva Gosvāmīs.

Vijaya: I am intensely eager to hear the various names
of the nitya-priyā gopīs.

Gosvāmī:Śāstras such as the Skanda Purāṇa and Prahlāda-
saṁhitā, have mentioned names such as Rādhā, Candrāvalī,
Viśākhā, Lalitā, Śyāmā, Padmā, Śaibyā, Bhadrikā, Tārā,
Vicitrā, Gopālī, Dhaniṣṭhā, and Pālī. Another name of
Candrāvalī is Somātā, and Śrīmatī Rādhikā is also called
Gāndharvā. Vraja-gopīs such as Khañjanākṣī, Manoramā,
Maṅgalā, Vimalā, Līlā, Kṛṣṇā, Śārī, Viśāradā, Tārāvalī,
Cakorākṣī, Śaṅkarī and Kuṁkumā are also famous in this
world.

Vijaya: What is their relationship with each other?

Gosvāmī: These gopīs are yūtheśvarīs (group leaders).
There are not one or two groups, but hundreds, and in
each of them, there are hundreds of thousands of
beautiful, individual gopīs. All of the above mentioned
gopīs, from Śrīmatī Rādhikā to Kuṁkumā, are yūtheśvarīs.
Viśākhā, Lalitā, Padmā and Śaibyā have been described in
the śāstras more elaborately than the others. Among
these yūtheśvarīs, the eight gopīs beginning with Rādhā
have been called pradhānā, because they are most
fortunate.

Vijaya: Viśākhā, Lalitā, Padmā, and Śaibyā are pradhānā
gopīs, and they are especially expert in nourishing
Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. Why have they not been accepted as
distinct yūtheśvarīs?

Gosvāmī: They are so qualified that although it would be
proper to call them yūtheśvarīs, Lalitā and Viśākhā
remain so enchanted by Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s supremely
blissful bhāva that they do not want to call themselves
independent yūtheśvarīs. Among them, some are followers
of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and others are followers of
Candrāvalī.

Vijaya: I have heard that Lalitā has a gaṇa (sub-group).
What type of group is it?

Gosvāmī: Śrīmatī Rādhājī is prominent amongst all the
yūtheśvarīs. Some of the gopīs in Her dependent yūthas
are attracted to Śrī Lalitājī’s special bhāva, and call
themselves Lalitā gaṇa. Other gopīs refer to themselves
as Viśākhā gaṇa, and so on. The aṣṭa-sakhīs headed by
Lalitā and Viśākhā are the heroines of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s
various gaṇas. If one is very fortunate, one can acquire
the qualification to enter Śrīmatī Lalitā’s gaṇa.

Vijaya: In which śāstra can the names of these gopīs be
found?

Gosvāmī: Their names are found in śāstras such as Padma
Purāṇa, Skanda Purāṇa and the Uttara khaṇḍa of Bhaviṣya
Purāṇa. Many names are also mentioned in Sātvata-tantra.

Vijaya:Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is the crest-jewel of all

                          429
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

śāstras in the entire universe, so it would have been a
matter of great joy if these names were mentioned there.

Gosvāmī:Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is a tattva-śāstra, but it is
also an ocean of rasa. From the point of view of the
rasika-bhaktas, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is filled with the
complete deliberation on rasa-tattva, as if an ocean
were contained in a single jar. Śrī Rādhā’s name and the
bhāvas and identities of all the gopīs have been
described there in a highly confidential way. If you
reflect thoroughly upon the ślokas of the Tenth Canto,
you can find everything. Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī has
described this subject in a confidential way to keep
unqualified people at a distance. Vijaya, what will be
the result of giving chanting beads and full and
explicit descriptions to one and all? The reader can
understand the confidential topics only as far as his
conceptions are advanced. Therefore, one quality of a
genuine paṇḍita is that he can reveal in a hidden way
subjects that are not fit to be revealed in the presence
of everyone. Qualified people understand them only as
far as their adhikāra allows. There is no knowledge of
the factual vastu without śrī-guru-paramparā. One may
acquire knowledge in other ways, but it will have no
effect. You can only attain the complete rasa of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam after thoroughly understanding Ujjvala-
nīlamaṇi.

In this way, after a long period of questions and
answers, that dayís iṣṭagoṣṭhi was completed. Vijaya
returned to his residence, meditating incessantly on the
subjects that he had heard. As all the vicāra
(considerations) in relation to nāyaka and nāyikā
awakened in the field of his heart, he became absorbed
in paramānanda, and as he remembered the discussion
about vaṁśī and svayaṁ-dūtī, a stream of tears flowed
from his eyes. At that time, the pastime that he had
seen in the grove on his way to Sundarācala the previous
night appeared vividly upon the screen of his heart.



Thus ends the Thirty-second Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled

“Madhura-rasa: Parakīya-nāyikās”




Chapter 33

Madhurya-Rasa: Śrī Rādhā’s Svarūpa, Five Types of
Sakhīs, & Messengers



One day, Vijaya Kumāra and Vrajanātha took bath in
Indradyumna Sarovara, and upon returning to their
residence, they honored prasāda together. Vrajanātha
then set off to have darśana of Śrī Haridāsa Ṭhākuraís
samādhi, while Vijaya Kumāra came before the lotus feet

                          430
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

of his Gurudeva at Śrī Rādhā-Kānta Maṭha. When he saw
that the time was appropriate, he posed some questions
about Śrīmatī Rādhikā: “Prabhu, Śrī Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī is
our be-all and end-all and our very lifeís breath. I
cannot express it. I do not know why my heart melts when
I just hear the name of Śrī Rādhikā. Although Śrī Kṛṣṇa
is our only refuge, still I only like to taste the
playful pastimes that He performs with Śrī Rādhikā. My
mind does not want to hear any kṛṣṇa-kathā that does not
mention Śrīmatī Rādhikāís name or discuss Her pastimes.
What can I say? Now I am not at all pleased to introduce
myself as Vijaya Kumāra Bhaṭṭācārya. I am overjoyed to
call myself Śrī Rādhikāís pālya-dāsī. Another surprising
thing is that I have no desire to speak vraja-līlā-kathā
to those who are kṛṣṇa-bahirmukha (reluctant to serve
Kṛṣṇa). I want to get up and flee from any assembly
where those who are not rasika describe the glories of
Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.”

Gosvāmī: You are fortunate! As long as one does not have
complete conviction in being a vraja-ramaṇī, he is not
qualified to enter into the descriptions of Śrī Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s līlā-vilāsa. What to speak of those in
male forms, even a devī has no eligibility for Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa kathā.

I have already discussed Kṛṣṇaís beloved consorts with
you. Rādhā and Candrāvalī are the foremost amongst them,
and they both have millions of yūthas of fresh
adolescent gopīs. At the time of the mahā-rāsa hundreds
of millions of charming young gopīs took part in the
rāsa-maṇḍala and expanded its beauty.

Vijaya: Prabhu, let Candrāvalī have her millions of
yūthas, but please show mercy to me and tell me about
Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s glories, so that my contaminated ears
may be purified and filled with rasa. I have taken full
shelter of you.

Gosvāmī: Ahā Vijaya, of Rādhā and Candrāvalī, Śrī
Rādhājī is mahābhāva-svarūpā (the complete embodiment of
the highest love), and She therefore excels Candrāvalī
in all qualities, and in all matters. Look, in the
Tāpanī śruti, She has been called Gāndharvā. In the Ṛk-
pariśiṣṭa (supplement to the Ṛg Veda), there is a
description of the immense brilliance of Mādhava when He
is with Rādhā. In the Padma Purāṇa, Nāradajī has also
said, “Just as Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the most beloved of
Kṛṣṇa, similarly Her kuṇḍa is also equally dear to Him.
Of all the gopīs, Śrī Rādhārāṇī is the most dear to
Kṛṣṇa.” What an unprecedented and astonishing tattva
this rādhā-tattva is! Among all the various śaktis of
Bhagavān, the supermost mahā-śakti is called hlādinī.
Rādhikā is mahābhāva-svarūpā, the embodiment of the
condensed essence of that hlādinī.

Vijaya: What an exceptional tattva! Now please describe
Śrī Rādhā’s svarūpa.

Gosvāmī: In all respects Śrīmatī Rādhā is the most
beautiful of all Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beloved consorts (suṣṭhu-
kāntā-svarūpa), and She is adorned with sixteen śṛṅgāra
(decorations) and twelve ābharaṇa (ornaments).


                          431
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

Vijaya: What is the meaning of suṣṭhu-kāntā-svarūpa?

Gosvāmī: Śrī Rādhā’s svarūpa is so beautiful that there
is no necessity of decorative embellishments. Her
unparalleled loveliness is expanded by Her hair, which
is a mass of elegant curls, by Her lotus face, by Her
large, restless eyes, and by Her beautiful breasts. The
extraordinary beauty of Her svarūpa is increased many
times over by Her slender waist, by Her two exquisite
shoulders that are slightly lowered, and by Her flower-
bud hands, which are embellished by the jewels of Her
finger nails. There is no comparison to Her beauty in
all the three worlds.

Vijaya: What are the sixteen śrṅgāras?

Gosvāmī: Her sixteen śṛṅgāras are Her bath, the radiance
of the jewel decorating the tip of Her nose, Her blue
garments, the belt about Her waist, Her braid, Her
earrings, the sandalwood paste smeared on Her limbs, the
arrangement of flowers in Her hair, Her garland, the
līlā-kamala (play-lotus) in Her hand, the tāmbūla in Her
mouth, the dot of kasturī on Her chin, the kājala around
Her eyes, the pictures drawn in mṛgamada (musk) on Her
rosy cheeks, the red lac on Her feet, and the tilaka on
Her forehead. Śrīmatī Rādhikā is always beautified by
these types of decoration.

Vijaya: What are the twelve ābharaṇas?

Gosvāmī: The twelve ābharaṇas that decorate Śrī Rādhā’s
limbs are the exceptionally brilliant jewelled tiara
upon Her head, Her golden earrings, the golden belt upon
Her hips, the golden necklace, the vallī and golden
śalākā on Her ears, the bracelets on Her wrists, the
ornament on Her neck, the rings on Her fingers, Her
pearl necklace, Her armlets, the jewelled ankle bells on
Her feet, and the rings on Her toes.

Vijaya: Please show compassion to me by describing Śrī
Rādhā’s prominent qualities.

Gosvāmī: Like Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Śrīmatī Rādhā also has
innumerable qualities, among which twenty-five are
prominent.

1. She is sweet (madhura), that is, She is incomparably
beautiful in appearance.

2. She is an ever-fresh youth.

3. Her eyes are restless and inclined to give sidelong
glances.

4. She has a radiant, gentle and sweet smile.

5. She has beautiful lines, indicating auspiciousness.

6. She maddens Kṛṣṇa with the fragrance of Her bodily
limbs.

7. She is expert in the musical arts.

8. She speaks sweetly.

                          432
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017


9. She is expert in making jokes.

10. She is very polite and modest.

11. She is merciful

12. She is cunning.

13. She is expert in all duties.

14. She is shy.

15. She is always steadfast on the path of righteous
conduct.

16. She is patient.

17. She is grave, so that it is very difficult to
understand the import of Her mind.

18. She is fond of enjoying pastimes.

19. She is acutely eager to manifest the supermost
excellence of mahābhāva.

20. When the residents of Gokula see Her, their hearts
immediately overflow with prema.

21. Her fame pervades the entire universe.

22. She is the object of affection for Her superiors
(guru-jana).

23. She is controlled by the intense love (praṇaya) of
Her sakhīs.

24. She is prominent among all Kṛṣṇa’s sakhīs.

25. Keśava always remains submissive to Her orders.



Vijaya: I want to know in detail about the elegant lines
that indicate Her immense good fortune.

Gosvāmī: According to the Varāha-saṁhitā, Jyotiṣa-
śāstra, Kāśī-khaṇḍa, and the Purāṇas such as the Matsya
Purāṇa and Garuḍa Purāṇa, these are the auspicious signs
on Her left foot: 1) There is a barleycorn at the base
of Her big toe, 2) below that is a cakra. 3) Below the
middle toe is a lotus flower, and 4) below the lotus is
a banner, and 5) a flag. 6) There is a line curving up
from the middle of the sole to the right side of the
middle toe. 7) Below Her little toe is an elephant-goad.

The signs on Her right foot are as follows. 1) At the
root of Her big toe is a conch-shell, 2) on Her heel is
a fish, and 3) below Her little toe is an altar. Above
the fish are 4) a chariot, 5) a mountain, 6) an earring,
7) a club, and 8) the mark of a śakti.

On Her left hand, 1) a long-life line extends from the
point where the index finger and the middle finger meet,

                          433
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

to below the little finger. 2) Another line begins from
below the long life-line, and extends to the place
between the index-finger and the thumb. 3) Below the
thumb, a curved line extends from the wrist to the space
between the thumb and index-finger to meet with the
middle line. 4-8) On the tip of Her thumb and each of
Her fingers is a cakra. The three lines plus the five
cakras makes eight signs all together. 9) Then, below
the ring-finger is an elephant, 10) below the life-line
is a horse, 11) below the middle line is a bull, and
below the little finger are 12) an elephant goad, 13) a
fan, 14) a Śrī tree, 15) a victory-column, 16) an arrow,
17) a javelin, and 18) a garland.

On the right hand, just as on the left, there are three
lines beginning with the life-line. In addition, there
is a conch-shell on the tip of Her thumb and each of Her
fingers. That makes eight signs altogether. 9) Below the
index finger is a camara, and 10) below the little
finger are an elephant goad, 11) a palace, 12) a
dundubhi drum, 13) a lightning bolt, 14) two carts, 15)
an archerís bow, 16) a sword, and 17) a waterpot.

Since there are seven signs on the left foot, eight on
the right, eighteen on the left hand and seventeen on
the right, altogether there are fifty auspicious signs
indicating supreme fortune.

Vijaya: Are these symptoms not possible in others?

Gosvāmī: These qualities are present in the jīvas to a
very slight degree, and somewhat more in the devīs, but
they are all fully manifest in Śrī Rādhikā. All of Śrī
Rādhikā’s qualities are aprākṛta (transcendental),
because these qualities are not present purely and
completely in anybody in the mundane world, even in
goddesses such as Gaurī.

Vijaya: Ahā! Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s virtues are
inconceivable. One can realize them only by Her mercy.

Gosvāmī: How can I express Her glories? What is there to
compare with the beauty and qualities that perpetually
bewilder even Kṛṣṇa Himself?

Vijaya: Prabhu, please describe Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s
sakhīs.

Gosvāmī: Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s yūtha is the best of all.
Every young gopī in that group is adorned with all
transcendental virtues. They directly attract even Kṛṣṇa
with their qualities, playful glances and gestures.

Vijaya: How many types of sakhīs does Śrīmatī Rādhikā
have?

Gosvāmī: There are five types: 1) sakhī, 2) nitya-sakhī,
3) prāṇa-sakhī, 4) priya-sakhī, and 5) parama-preṣṭha-
sakhī.

Vijaya: Who are the sakhīs?

Gosvāmī: The sakhīs include Kusumikā, Vṛndā and
Dhaniṣṭhā.

                          434
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017


Vijaya: Who are the nitya-sakhīs?

Gosvāmī: Kastūrī, Maṇi-mañjarī and others are nitya-
sakhīs.

Vijaya: Who are the prāṇa-sakhīs?

Gosvāmī: The prāṇa-sakhīs include Śaśimukhī, Vāsantī,
and Lāsikā. They have attained forms and qualities
similar to those of Vṛndāvaneśvarī, Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

Vijaya: Who are the priya-sakhīs?

Gosvāmī: Kurāṅgākṣī, Sumadhyā, Madanālasā, Kamalā,
Mādhurī, Mañjukeśī, Kandarpa-sundarī, Mādhavī, Mālatī,
Kāma-latā, Śaśi-kalā, and many others are priya-sakhīs.

Vijaya: Who are the parama-preṣṭha-sakhīs?

Gosvāmī: Lalitā, Viśākhā, Citrā, Campaka-latā, Tuṅga-
vidyā, Indu-lekhā, Raṅgadevī, Sudevī – these eight are
pradhānā and parama-preṣṭha-sakhīs. Their prema for
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa is developed to the highest degree. They
please Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa by sometimes showing more love
for Kṛṣṇa, and sometimes showing more for Rādhā.

Vijaya: I have understood the meaning of yūtha. Now
please tell me about gaṇa.

Gosvāmī: In every yūtha, there are several further
divisions, which are called gaṇa. For example in the
yūtha of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, the sakhīs who follow Lalitā
are known as Lalitā gaṇa.

Vijaya: The paroḍhā-bhāva (paramour mood) of the gopīs
of Vraja is a very important characteristic. But in what
circumstances does paroḍhā-bhāva not indicate a
desirable state?

Gosvāmī: In this mundane world, all femininity and
masculinity is only a designation. According to the
result of peoples’ karma (activities) under the
influence of illusion, one is now a woman and another a
man. People in māyā have many petty and adharmika
desires, so the ṛṣis have forbidden a man to associate
with any woman except the one to whom he is married
according to the injunctions of śāstra. Poets and
authors of mundane alaṅkāra have also rejected the
paramour mood, in order to make others understand that
this instruction of the ṛṣis is compatible with dharma.
The rasa of the transcendental pastimes is nitya-rasa,
whereas the śṛṅgāra-rasa of males and females who are
products of the material energy is merely its perverted
reflection. The mundane display of śṛṅgāra-rasa is
extremely limited and subject to regulative principles,
and that is why the paroḍhā-bhāva of the insignificant
mundane nāyikās has been rejected. However, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
sac-cid-ānanda, so when He is the only puruṣa or nāyaka,
whatever meeting takes place with a paramour in order to
nourish rasa is not subject to criticism. In this
tattva, there is no place for conventional marriage,
which is an extremely insignificant, illusory
designation. The criticism of paramours is proper in

                          435
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

worldly literature, but it cannot be applied to the
young maidens of Gokula when Goloka-bihārī manifests
both His supreme parakīya-rasa and Goloka in this world.

Vijaya: Please tell me what are the excellent
characteristics that are exhibited by the young gopīs of
Gokula due to their kṛṣṇa-prema?

Gosvāmī: The cowherd damsels of Gokula accept Kṛṣṇa only
to be Nanda Mahārāja’s son, since He appears to be that
and nothing more. The bhāvas and characteristics that
arise from this conviction are not a subject matter for
abhaktas (non-devotees), who are addicted to logic, and
they are rarely understood even by bhaktas. Śrī
Nandanandana is not lacking in aiśvarya-bhāva, but it
remains practically hidden, because mādhurya is always
in the ascendant. For example, when the gopīs were
afflicted with feelings of separation from Kṛṣṇa, He
played a joke by hiding His two-armed form from them and
manifesting a four-armed form, but they did not pay
attention to it. Then, as soon as He came before Śrī
Rādhikājī, the four-armed form disappeared and His two-
armed form became manifest again. This is the result of
Śrī Rādhā’s extremely confidential parakīya-bhāva.

Vijaya: I have become so fortunate by hearing this.
Prabhu, now please describe the different types of
nāyikā.

Gosvāmī: There are three types of nāyikās, namely
svakīyā, parakīyā and sāmānyā. I have already described
the transcendental rasa of the svakīyā and parakīyā-
nāyikās, and now I will explain about the sāmānyā-
nāyikā. Paṇḍitas of mundane alaṅkāra (rhetoric) have
ascertained that sāmānyā-nāyikās are prostitutes. They
are simply avaricious. They do not hate the nāyaka who
has no good qualities, and they do not really love the
virtuous nāyaka. They only love money. Consequently,
their śṛṅgāra-rasa is not actually śṛṅgāra-rasa, but
only a semblance. Nonetheless, the maidservant Kubjā of
Mathurā is included in the category of parakīya as a
sāmānyā-nāyikā because of some qualification in her
bhāva, even though her relationship with Kṛṣṇa lacks
śṛṅgāra rasa.

Vijaya: What is her qualification in bhāva?

Gosvāmī: Kubjā never had rati for anyone as long as she
was deformed, but when she saw Kṛṣṇa’s beauty, the
desire arose in her heart to anoint Kṛṣṇa’s limbs with
sandal-paste in the mood of a beloved. For this reason
she can be called parakīyā. However, her rati is
inferior to that of the mahiṣīs because, unlike the
queens of Dvārakā, she showed little desire to make
Kṛṣṇa happy. She tugged at Kṛṣṇa’s upper garment and
fervently beseeched Him to enjoy with her, but because
of self-interest or because the desire for her own
pleasure was mixed with the bhāva of a beloved, her rati
is considered sādhāraṇī (ordinary).

Vijaya: In cid-rasa there is a distinction between
svakīyā and parakīyā-nāyikās. If there are any more
distinct categories within these two, then please be
merciful and describe them.

                          436
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017


Gosvāmī: In the spiritual rasa, both kinds of nāyikā –
namely svakīyā and parakīyā – have three divisions:
mugdhā, madhyā and pragalbhā.

Vijaya: Prabhu, just now by your mercy, cid-rasa entered
for a moment within my heart, and you appeared to me as
a vraja-gopī. I have no idea what became of my illusory
puruṣa-bhāva (male mood). Now I am becoming increasingly
eager to know about the various bhāvas of the nāyikās.
Although I have attained ramaṇī-bhāva, I do not know the
appropriate activities of the ramaṇīs. Thus remembering
your transcendental form, I am inquiring at your lotus
feet about the process of rendering kṛṣṇa-sevā. Now
please tell me, who is the mugdhā nāyikā (innocent
heroine)?

Gosvāmī: These are the symptoms of the bewildered and
innocent nāyikā, who has newly discovered her
youthfulness (nava-yauvanā): She desires union with
Kṛṣṇa (kāminī), but in loving affairs she acts in a
contrary way. Her friends control her. Although she is
extremely shy in the intimate activities of sensual
love, still she tries her best to arrange for sambhoga
with her lover in a covered way, hiding from the view of
others. When the nāyaka commits an offense, she gazes at
Him with tearful eyes, and neither responds with
endearing words, nor rebukes Him; she does not even show
jealous anger.

Vijaya: What are the characteristics of the madhyā
nāyikā?

Gosvāmī: These are the symptoms of the madhyā: Her
impulse for passionate love is very strong, but she is
also shy. She is a fresh budding youth (nava-yauvanā),
and in her speech there is a touch of arrogance. She
experiences erotic union with Kṛṣṇa until she becomes
bewildered and faints. When she is in māna, she is
sometimes soft and sometimes harsh. There are three
categories of madhyā nāyikā, according to their behavior
when māna arises: dhīrā, adhīrā and dhīrādhīrā. The
nāyikā who jokingly speaks crooked words with her
beloved after He has offended her is called dhīrā
madhyā; the nāyikā who furiously rebukes her priya-
vallabha with harsh words is called adhīrā madhyā; and
the nāyikā who tearfully uses crooked words against her
priya-vallabha is called dhīrādhīrā madhyā. The supreme
excellence of all rasa is evident only in the madhyā
nāyikā, because of the mixture of mugdhā and pragalbhā
in her nature.

Vijaya: Kindly describe the symptoms and nature of the
pragalbhā (impudent) nāyikā.

Gosvāmī: The pragalbhā nāyikā is in full-blown youth
(pūrna-yauvanā). She is blinded by pride and extremely
eager for sensual love. She is expert in fully
expressing a variety of bhāvas, and she is qualified to
overwhelm her lover with prema-rasa. Her words and deeds
are extremely profound (gambhīra) and mature, and when
her māna is aroused, her behavior is very harsh.
Pragalbhā nāyikās display three types of behavior at the
time of māna: dhīrā, adhīrā and dhīrādhīrā. The dhīrā

                          437
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

pragalbhā either becomes apathetic in amorous pastimes,
or else she treats her beloved with extreme respect
outwardly, while hiding her real bhāvas. The adhīrā
pragalbhā becomes harsh, threatens and scolds her lover,
and punishes Him with loud abuse. The dhīrādhīrā
pragalbhā has virtues like those of the dhīrādhīrā
madhyā nāyikā.

Madhyā and pragalbhā nāyikās are both divided into two
further categories, namely jyeṣṭha (senior) and kaniṣṭha
(junior). Thus, there are jyeṣṭhañmadhyā and kaniṣṭha-
madhyā, jyeṣṭha-pragalbhā and kaniṣṭha-pragalbhā. The
distinction between jyeṣṭha and kaniṣṭha depends
entirely on the degree of the nāyikāíspraṇaya for her
lover.

Vijaya: Prabhu, how many types of nāyikā are there
altogether?

Gosvāmī: There are fifteen types of nāyikā. There is
only one type of kanyā (unmarried nāyikā), because they
are only mugdhā. The other nāyikās are classified as
mugdhā, madhyā and pragalbhā; and of these, the madhyā
and pragalbhā are both sub-divided into three further
categories: dhīrā, adhīrā and dhīrādhīrā. This means
that there are seven types of svakīyā nāyikā, and also
seven types of parakīyā-nāyikā, so altogether there are
(7+ 7+1) = 15 types of nāyikā.

Vijaya: How many avasthās (conditions or situations) do
the nāyikās have?

Gosvāmī: There are eight avasthās: abhisārikā
(trysting), vāsaka-sajjā (prepared and perfumed),
utkaṇṭhitā (impatiently hankering), khaṇḍitā (jealous),
vipralabdhā (disappointed), kalahāntaritā (anguished due
to separation by quarrel), proṣita-bhartṛkā (separation
from the beloved) and svādhīna-bhartṛkā (contols her
lover). These eight conditions occur in the fifteen
types of nāyikā that I have already mentioned.

Vijaya: Who is the abhisārikā?

Gosvāmī: The abhisārikā arranges a tryst (abhisāra) with
her lover at an appointed place, and goes there to
rendezvous with Him. The jyotsna-abhisārikā goes for
abhisāra dressed in white garments during the bright
fortnight of the moon (śukla-pakṣa), and the tamo
‘bhisārikā dresses herself in black clothes during
kṛṣṇa-pakṣa (the dark fortnight). At the time of going
for abhisāra, she is absolutely silent and gorgeously
decorated from head to toe, as if out of shyness. She
contracts Her bodily limbs, and she is accompanied by
one affectionate sakhī.

Vijaya: Please tell me about the vāsaka-sajjā nāyikā.

Gosvāmī: The vāsaka-sajjā nāyikā ornaments and perfumes
her body and prepares and decorates the place of meeting
in eager anticipation of her lover’s arrival, determined
to engage in smara-krīḍā (the games of Kāmadeva). Hoping
that her lover will come when He gets the opportunity,
she gazes down the path along which her lover will
approach, glorifies her lover, and hears His līlā-kathā

                          438
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

in the company of her sakhīs, and at every moment
eagerly waits for a messenger to bring news of her lover
– all these are the activities of the vāsaka-sajjā.

Vijaya: Please describe the utkaṇṭhitā.

Gosvāmī: When the nāyaka is late for the rendezvous
through no fault of His own, the restless nāyikā who
becomes excessively impatient and eager to meet her
lover is called utkaṇṭhitā. Her heart burns in agony,
her body trembles, she speculates as to why her lover
has not come, she loses all desire to do anything, and
she describes her own sorry plight, shedding tears of
lamentation – these are the activities of the utkaṇṭhitā
nāyikā.

The condition of vāsaka-sajjā also ultimately transforms
into that of utkaṇṭhitā. When the vāsaka-sajjā has been
waiting since the arranged time of her kāntaís arrival,
and sees that He has not come, she changes her mind and
thinks, “Perhaps He could not come because of the
influence of another nāyikā.” Bereft of the company of
her most beloved kānta, she grows excessively eager and
restless. She is then called utkaṇṭhitā nāyikā.

Vijaya: Who is the khaṇḍitā nāyikā?

Gosvāmī: The khaṇḍitā nāyikā is one whose nāyaka finally
appears long after the appointed time for meeting,
during the last prahara (3 hours) of the night, bearing
the signs of amorous pastimes with another nāyikā. At
that time, the khaṇḍitā nāyikā takes very long, drawn-
out breaths due to anger, and does not speak a word to
her beloved.

Vijaya: Who is called vipralabdhā?

Gosvāmī: Sometimes, by the will of providence, the
nāyaka is unable to come for one reason or another, even
after fixing the time and place of the tryst by a signal
or hint. The nāyikā who is severely afflicted by pangs
of separation from her beloved at that time is called
vipralabdhā. She shows many different types of behavior,
such as decrying her own worthlessness, becoming
anxious, lamenting, weeping bitterly, sighing deeply,
and fainting.

Vijaya: What are the symptoms of a kalahāntaritā?

Gosvāmī: The kalahāntaritā nāyikā severely reprimands
her prāṇa-vallabha, and then spurns Him, even after He
falls at her feet before all of her friends. She is
called kalahāntaritā because of her activities and
emotions, such as delirious, incoherent speech; anguish;
debility of body and mind; and taking long, drawn-out
breaths.

Vijaya: Who is called proṣita-bhartṛkā?

Gosvāmī: The proṣita-bhartṛkā nāyikā’s lover has gone to
a distant land. She has many activities including
melancholy, inertia, anxiety, and not sleeping, dressing
or bathing herself.


                          439
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

Vijaya: Who is svādhīna-bhartṛkā?

Gosvāmī: The nāyikā whose priyatama is submissive to her
and who always stays with her is called svādhīna-
bhartṛkā. She has many activities, such as enjoying
pastimes with Him in the forest, playing in the water
with Him, and picking flowers.

Vijaya: So the condition of svādhīna-bhartṛkā must be
the source of immense joy.

Gosvāmī: The svādhīna-bhartṛkā nāyikā whose beloved
cannot leave her for even a moment because of being
controlled by her prema is called mādhavī. Among the
eight types of nāyikā, three – the svādhīna-bhartṛkā,
vāsaka-sajjā and abhisārikā – are cheerful at heart, and
adorned with ornaments and other decorations. The
remaining five nāyikās – namely khaṇḍitā, vipralabdhā,
utkaṇṭhitā, proṣita-bhartṛkā and kalahāntaritā – do not
have any ornaments and finery. Their hearts are
afflicted with anxiety, and they lament bitterly,
resting their left cheek on their left hand.

Vijaya: How can such suffering exist in kṛṣṇa-prema?
What is the meaning of this affliction?

Gosvāmī: Since kṛṣṇa-prema is cinmaya (transcendental),
this apparent suffering is also only another astonishing
variety of paramānanda. The affliction experienced in
the material world is actually a source of acute
distress, whereas in the cit-jagat it is simply a
transformation of ecstatic ānanda. When one tastes this
suffering, it gives rise to the immense happiness of
cinmaya-rasa. However, this cannot be expressed by
words.

Vijaya: What are the degrees of prema that these nāyikās
possess?

Gosvāmī: The nāyikās have been divided into three
categories – uttamā, madhyamā, and kaniṣṭhā – according
to their degree of prema for Vrajendranandana. Kṛṣṇa
feels bhāva for any particular nāyikā to the degree that
that nāyikā feels bhāva for Him.

Vijaya: What are the symptoms of uttamā?

Gosvāmī: The uttamā nāyikā can abandon all her dharmas
as if they were an insignificant piece of straw for the
sake of giving her beloved just a moment’s happiness.
Even if the nāyaka makes this type of nāyikā unhappy,
she does not become jealous; and her heart is torn
asunder if anyone tells her that her beloved is unhappy,
even if it is not true.

Vijaya: Please describe the symptoms of the madhyamā.

Gosvāmī: Her heart simply becomes dejected when she
hears about the unhappiness of her beloved.

Vijaya: What are the symptoms of the kaniṣṭhā?

Gosvāmī: The kaniṣṭhā nāyikā is fearful of obstacles –
such as the shame arising from public opinion – that

                          440
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

might prevent her from meeting Kṛṣṇa.

Vijaya: How many types of nāyikā are there altogether?

Gosvāmī: Altogether, there are 360 types of nāyikā.
First, there are the fifteen types that I mentioned
before, and these fifteen types have been further
divided into eight types each. (15 x 8) = 120 types, and
each of these is again classified as kaniṣṭhā, madhyamā,
and uttamā. (120 x 3) = 360 types of nāyikā.

Vijaya: Now that I have heard an account of the nāyikās,
I have become eager to know about the mutual
distinctions between the yūtheśvarīs. Please be
causelessly merciful and explain this to me.

Gosvāmī:Yūtheśvarīs are divided into svapakṣā, vipakṣā
and taṭasthā. After that, there are three more
divisions, according to the degree of saubhāgya (good
fortune): adhikā (great), samā (moderate) and laghvī
(light). These are again divided into three further
categories: prakharā (harsh), madhyā (moderate) and
mṛdvī (soft). The nāyikā who boldly expresses her sorrow
and anger in words is called prakharā. The mṛdvī nāyikā
speaks sweetly, and the nature of the madhyā nāyikā is
situated between these two.

The adhikā nāyikās are divided into two sections, namely
ātyantikī (extreme) and āpekṣikī (comparative). One who
has no superior and no equal is called ātyantika-adhikā.
This applies only to Śrīmatī Rādhā. She is madhyā and
She has no equal in Vraja.

Vijaya: Who are the āpekṣika-adhikās?

Gosvāmī:Āpekṣika-adhikā nāyikās are yūtheśvarīs who are
superior to one or several other yūtheśvarīs.

Vijaya: Who are ātyantikī laghu?

Gosvāmī:Ātyantikī laghu is the nāyikā to whom all other
nāyikās are superior. All nāyikās are laghu compared to
ātyantikī adhikā. Except for the ātyantikī laghu, all
yūtheśvarīs are adhikā. Thus, there is no question of
the ātyantikī-adhikā-yūtheśvarī being equal or inferior
to anyone else, and similarly, there is no question of
the ātyantikī-laghu being superior to anyone else. There
is only one type of samā-laghu. The madhyā yūthesvarī is
of nine types arising from the categories of adhikā,
prakharā and so on.

Therefore, there are twelve divisions among the
yūtheśvarīs:

1) ātyantikī-adhikā, 2) samā-laghu, 3) adhika-madhyā, 4)
samā-madhyā, 5) laghu-madhyā, 6) adhika-prakharā, 7)
sama-prakharā, 8) laghu-prakharā, 9) adhika-mṛdvī, 10)
samā-mṛdvī, 11) laghu-mṛdvī, and 12) ātyantikī-laghu.

Vijaya: Now I would like to know about the different
types of dūtīs (messengers).

Gosvāmī: The nāyikās who are afflicted with an intense
hankering to meet with Kṛṣṇa require the help of

                          441
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

messengers (dūtīs), who are of two kinds: svayaṁ-dūtī
and āpta-dūtī.

Vijaya: What is the nature of the svayaṁ-dūtī?

Gosvāmī: When the nāyikā is bewildered by anurāga (deep
attachment), her excessive eagerness sometimes
vanquishes her shyness, so that she becomes shameless,
and personally expresses her bhāva to her nāyaka. This
is called svayaṁ-dūtī. The expression can be of three
kinds – with the body (kāyika-abhiyoga), in words
(vācika-abhiyoga), and with the eyes (cakṣuṣa-abhiyoga).

Vijaya: What is a vācika-abhiyoga?

Gosvāmī:Vācika-abhiyoga is only a hint or suggestion
(vyaṅga). There are two types of suggestion: the
suggestion through intonation (śabda-vyaṅga), and the
suggestion in the meaning (artha-vyaṅga). Sometimes the
suggestion is made by referring to Kṛṣṇa, and sometimes
by referring to something nearby.

Vijaya: What are the suggestions of which Kṛṣṇa is the
subject?

Gosvāmī: There are two types of suggestions of which
Kṛṣṇa is the subject: sākṣāt (direct) and vyapadeśa (by
deceit).

Vijaya: What is the direct suggestion?

Gosvāmī: Direct suggestions are categorized as garva
(proud statement), ākṣepa (accusation) and yāñcā
(directly begging). There are many kinds.

Vijaya: What is a suggestion expressed through an
accusation (ākṣepa)?

Gosvāmī: One type of suggestion expressed through an
accusation is based on the sound of the words, and
another on the meaning. There is no necessity of giving
examples to illustrate this, because you are conversant
with alaṅkāra (rhetoric).

Vijaya: Very well. What is a suggestion expressed by
begging (yāñcā)?

Gosvāmī: The suggestions expressed as begging are
divided into two types: svārtha and parārtha. Svārtha-
yāñcā means to express only one’s own request, and
parārtha-yāñcā means that one’s request is expressed by
someone else. Within these two categories, there are
distinct suggestions either through intonation (śabda-
vyaṅga) or through meaning (artha-vyaṅga). When the
bhāva is mixed in with the words, it is known as an
indication (saṅketika-yāñcā).

Vijaya: I have understood the sākṣāt-vyaṅga. In those
direct abhiyoga statements in the speech of the nāyikās
to Kṛṣṇa, there are suggestions in intonation (śabda-
vyaṅga) and suggestions in meaning (artha-vyaṅga). Their
use is seen in drama and other theatrical performances,
and poets have manifested them through their oratory
genius. Now kindly explain the meaning of vyapadeśa.

                          442
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017


Gosvāmī: The word vyapadeśa is a technical term derived
from the word apadeśa in alaṅkāra-śāstra. Vyapadeśa
means ‘by deceit’, that is, one expresses a confidential
meaning on the pretext of saying something else. The
purport is that one speaks to Kṛṣṇa in such a way that
the obvious meaning conveys one idea, but there is a
hidden entreaty to render some service. This method of
communication is called vyapadeśa, and it performs the
work of a dūtī.

Vijaya: So, vyapadeśa is a kind of deceptive statement,
whose secret meaning expresses the sense of begging for
loving service. Now kindly continue.

Gosvāmī: There is a type of expression called puruṣa–
viṣaya-gata-viyoga. This occurs when one thinks, “Kṛṣṇa
is present, and although He is hearing, He is not really
hearing,” and begins to converse with a nearby animal or
bird. This is also divided into two types: the
suggestion arising from the sound of the words, and the
suggestion arising from the meaning of the words.

Vijaya: I have understood this by your mercy. Now,
please tell me what the bodily suggestions are.

Gosvāmī: Bodily abhiyoga is performing activities in
Kṛṣṇa’s presence, such as snapping one’s fingers,
standing up suddenly on some pretext, covering one’s
limbs out of fear and shyness, writing on the ground
with one’s toe, scratching one’s ear, applying tilaka,
dressing oneself, gesturing with one’s eyebrows,
embracing one’s sakhī, scolding one’s gopī friend,
biting one’s lips, stringing a necklace, making a sound
with one’s ornaments, exposing one’s armpit, writing
Kṛṣṇa’s name, and twining creepers around a tree.

Vijaya: Please tell me about suggestions with the eyes
(cakṣuṣa-abhiyoga).

Gosvāmī: Laughing with the eyes, half-closing the eyes,
making dancing movements with the eyes, ogling,
squinting, looking with the left eye, and sidelong
glancing – these are all suggestions with the eyes.

Vijaya: I have understood svayaṁ-dūtī. You have just
given a hint to convey some idea about these messengers,
and I have understood that they are of innumerable
varieties. Now, please tell me about āpta-dūtī.

Gosvāmī: These dūtīs never commit a breach of
confidence, or disclose the secrets to which they are
privy, even if their life-airs are about to depart. They
are affectionate and extremely cunning in the art of
conversation. Only those youthful gopīs who are endowed
with all virtues are the dūtīs of the vraja-sundarīs.

Vijaya: How many types of āpta-dūtī are there?

Gosvāmī: There are three types: amitārthā, nisṛṣṭārthā
and patra-hārī. Amitārthā is a dūtī who understands
certain hints or signals, and then arranges for the
nāyaka and nāyikā to meet. Nisṛṣṭārthā is a sakhī who
causes the meeting of the lover and beloved by employing

                          443
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

persuasive arguments and reasoning, and the patra-hārī
is one who only delivers a message.

Vijaya: Are there any other kinds of āpta-dūtī?

Gosvāmī: Śilpa-kāriṇī (artists), daiva-jñā
(astrologers), liṅgiṇī (ascetics), paricārikā (maid
servants), dhātreyī (nurses), vana-devī (goddesses of
the forest) and sakhīs are also included in the category
of dūtīs. Śilpa-kāriṇī use their artistic paintings to
induce the lovers to meet. The daiva-jñā dūtīs arrange
meetings by explaining their astrological predictions.
Lingiṇī dūtīs, for example Paurṇamāsī, wear the garments
of tapasviṇīs (female ascetics). Several sakhīs,
including Lavaṅga-mañjarī and Bhānumati, are paricārikā
dūtīs. Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s nursemaids are dhātreyī dūtīs.
The vana-devīs are presiding deities of the forest of
Vṛndāvana (adhiṣṭhātrī-devīs). The sakhīs mentioned
previously are also dūtīs, and they perform their
function by expressing their messages openly, or by
indirect hints and suggestions. To do this, they employ
all kinds of devices such as vyapadeśa (deceit), śabda-
mūla (tone of words), artha-mūla (direct word meaning),
praśaṁsa (praise), and ākṣepa (allegations).

When Vijaya Kumāra had heard this explanation, he
offered his daṇḍavat-praṇāma to the lotus feet of Śrī
Gopala Guru Gosvāmī. Taking his leave, he returned to
his residence, reflecting along the way upon all that he
had heard.



Thus ends the Thirty-third Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled

“Madhura-Rasa: Śrī Rādhā’s Svarūpa, Five types of
Sakhīs,

& Messengers”




Chapter 34

Madhurya-Rasa: Śrī Rādhā’s Svarūpa, Five Types of
Sakhīs, & Messengers



The next day, Vijaya Kumāra honored prasāda somewhat
earlier than usual, and then set out along the seashore
towards Kāśī Miśra Bhavan. When he saw the ocean waves,
the sentiments of the ocean of rasa began to surge
within his heart. Overwhelmed with bhāva, he thought to
himself, “Ahā! The ocean is inspiring bhāva to swell
within me. Although it is a material substance, it is
evoking my deeply concealed transcendental sentiments.
It is just like the ocean of rasa that my Prabhu has
described to me.


                          444
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017

“When I leave my gross and subtle bodies far behind, I
find myself sitting upon the shore of the ocean of rasa,
relishing rasa in my mañjarī-svarūpa. Kṛṣṇa, who is
imbued with the luster of a fresh monsoon rain cloud, is
the exclusive Lord of my lifeís breath. Śrīmatī Rādhikā,
the daughter of Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja, who keeps Her
gorgeous presence at Kṛṣṇaís side, is the be-all and
end-all of my very existence. This ocean is the
transformation of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇaís intimate love
(praṇaya). The rows of waves are the different types of
bhāva that combine to comprise rasa itself. I am a sakhī
on the shore, and the manifold waves rising up in this
ocean are bhāvas which drown me in prema-rasa. Kṛṣṇa is
the ocean of rasa, and that is why the color of the
ocean is exactly like His. The waves of love in that
ocean are Śrīmatī Rādhājī, and that is why the ocean
waves are white. The high towering waves are the sakhīs
and the small waves are their maidservants (paricārikā).
Among them, I am a follower of a paricārikā, like a
particle of spray on a distant shore.”

Vijaya Kumāra derived great delight from these beautiful
meditations. After a short while, his external
consciousness returned and continuing slowly on his way,
he gradually arrived at the residence of Śrī Guru
Gosvāmī. He offered his sāṣṭāṅga-praṇāma, and sat down
near his Gurudeva, feeling very insignificant.

Śrī Guru Gosvāmī then inquired with affectionate
concern, “Vijaya, is everything all right?”

Vijaya: Prabhu, your mercy alone is the very root of
auspiciousness for me. I want to thoroughly understand
the different categories of sakhīs so that I may become
their follower.

Gosvāmī: Vijaya, it is beyond the capability of any jīva
to describe the glories of the sakhīs, but still, I have
realized it practically because I have been under the
ānugatya (guidance) of Śrī Rūpa. The beautiful sakhīs of
Vraja cause the complete and perfect unfolding of prema-
līlā. They are the storehouse of trust in vraja-yugala,
the divine couple of Vraja. Only one who is very
fortunate has the desire to know clearly about the
elaborate considerations concerning the sakhīs. The
divisions I have already mentioned – namely adhikā, samā
and laghu; and prakharā, madhyā and mṛdvī – also exist
among the sakhīs who are affiliated with a yūtha. I
described all these divisions to you yesterday. In this
connection, it is always befitting to remember the
authoritative statements of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī:

prema-saubhāgya-sād-guṇyādy- adhikyād adhikā sakhī

samā tat-sāmyato jñeyā tal-laghutvāt tathā laghuḥ

Some of the sakhīs are called adhikā (greater), due to
the abundance of their transcendental qualities and
their great fortune in the matter of prema. Some sakhīs
are celebrated by the name samā because they are equal
in qualities, while others, who are less endowed with
those qualities, are called laghu.

durllaṅghya-vākya-prakharā prakhyātā gauravocitā

                          445
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017


tad-ūnatve bhaven-mṛdvī madhyā tat-sāmyam āgatā

A sakhī whose words are not easily transgressed
(durlaṅghya) is renowned as prakharā, and she has
imposing gravity. A sakhī who lacks gravity is called
mṛdvī, and one who has an average amount of gravity is
called madhyā.

ātyantikādhikatvādi-bhedaḥ pūrvavad atra saḥ

sva-yūthe yūtha-nāthaiva syād atrātyantikādhikā

sā kvāpi prakharā yūthe kvāpi madhyā mṛduḥ kvacit

Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, Sakhī-prakaraṇa (3-5)

One should also understand divisions such as ātyantika-
ādhikā among those sakhīs. The yūtheśvarī is ātyantika-
adhikā in her own group, although she may also be known
as prakharā or mṛdū in some other yūthas.

Vijaya: The ātyantika-adhikā yūtheśvarīs are the most
prominent sakhīs in their own groups. They are of three
types according to their respective natures, ātyantika-
adhikā prakharā, ātyantika-adhikā madhyā and ātyantika-
adhikā mṛdvī. You have already described them. Now, by
your causeless grace, please explain this subject
elaborately.

Gosvāmī: Only the yūtheśvarīs are called ātyantika-
adhikā (unlimitedly great). The other group members are
classified as āpekṣika-adhikā (relatively great),
āpekṣika-samā (relatively equal) and āpekṣika-laghu
(relatively unimportant), and there are also three kinds
in each of these three groups, so there are nine types
altogether: (1) āpekṣika-adhikā prakharā, (2) āpekṣika-
adhikā madhyā, (3) āpekṣika-adhikā mṛdvī, (4) āpekṣika-
samā prakharā, (5) āpekṣika-samā madhyā, (6) āpekṣika-
samā mṛdvī, (7) āpekṣika-laghu prakharā, (8) āpekṣika-
laghu madhyā, (9) āpekṣika-laghu mṛdvī.

There are also two types of ātyantika-laghu ñ ātyantika-
laghu and samā-laghu ñ which, added to the other nine
makes eleven, so when we include the yūtheśvarī, there
are twelve types of nāyikās in every yūtha.

Vijaya: Prabhu, please be so merciful as to tell me
about the groups of the most famous sakhīs.

Gosvāmī: The sakhīs headed by Lalitā in Śrī Rādhā’s
yūtha are in the category of āpekṣika-adhikā prakharā.
The sakhīs headed by Viśākhā in the same group are in
the āpekṣika-adhikā madhyā, and sakhīs such as Citrā and
Mādhurī are āpekṣika-adhikā mṛdvī. In comparison with
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, the aṣṭa-sakhīs headed by Śrī Lalitā
are āpekṣika-laghu (relatively unimportant).

Vijaya: How many types of āpekṣika-laghu prakharā sakhīs
are there?

Gosvāmī: There are two sorts of laghu-prakharā sakhī:
left-wing (vāmā) and right-wing (dakṣiṇā).


                          446
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

Vijaya: What are the symptoms of vāmā?

Gosvāmī: They are always eager to accept honor, and they
become angry when there is any laxity in offering them
respect; and they are not at all easily controlled by
their nāyaka. Such nāyikās are called vāmā. In Rādhikā’s
yūtha, sakhīs such as Lalitā are called vāmā-prakharā.

Vijaya: Please describe the symptoms of dakṣiṇā.

Gosvāmī: The nāyikā who does not have māna, who is frank
and expresses herself openly, and who becomes submissive
to the sweet words of the nāyaka is called dakṣiṇā. In
Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s yūtha, sakhīs such as Tuṅgavidyā are
called dakṣiṇā prakharā.

Vijaya: Who are ātyantika-laghu?

Gosvāmī:Sakhīs such as Kusumikā can be called ātyantika-
laghus, because they are gentle in all respects and they
are insignificant in comparison with the other sakhīs.

Vijaya: What are the sakhīs’ activities when they act as
messengers (dūtīs)?

Gosvāmī: When the sakhīs act as dūtīs, it is their duty
to arrange a meeting (abhisāra) in order to unite the
nāyaka and nāyikā who are staying at a distance from one
another.

Vijaya: Can the sakhīs (girlfriends) be nāyikās?

Gosvāmī: The yūtheśvarīs are eternally nāyikās. The
āpekṣika-adhikā prakharā, āpekṣika-adhikā madhyā and
āpekṣika-adhikā mṛdvī sakhīs have the intrinsic natures
of both nāyikā and sakhī. They are nāyikās in relation
to those who are laghu in comparison, and sakhīs in
relation to those who are adhika in comparison, so they
can be called “almost heroines” (nāyikā-prāya).
Āpekṣika-samā prakharā, madhyā and mṛdvī are known as
dvi-samā – that is, they are sakhīs to those who are
adhikā, and nāyikā to those who are laghu. Those who are
in the category of āpekṣikī laghu, prakharā, madhyā and
mṛdvī are mainly sakhīs. Ātyantikī laghu gopīs are
yūtheśvarīs and according to the calculation of the
three types of sakhīs that I mentioned before, they are
in the fifth category. They are nitya-sakhīs. In
relation to the yūtheśvarī, āpekṣikī sakhīs are sakhīs
and dūtīs, not nāyikās. For the ātyāntikī laghu (nitya-
sakhī), all are nāyikās, not dūtīs.

Vijaya: Who are dūtīs among the sakhīs?

Gosvāmī:Yūtheśvarīs are eternally nāyikās. They do not
act primarily as dūtīs because they are the object of
respect of all the others. The yūtheśvarī engages the
sakhī who is dearest to her in her group as a dūtī.
Sometimes the yūtheśvarī also performs the activity of a
dūtī in a secondary capacity for her sakhī because of
that sakhī’s intimate love (praṇaya) for her. All the
activities of a dūtī, except for coming and going to
distant places, are secondary. They are divided into
activities performed right before Kṛṣṇa’s eyes, and
activities performed in His absence.

                          447
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017


Vijaya: How many types of messages are sent in Kṛṣṇa’s
presence?

Gosvāmī: These messages are of two kinds: messages in
the form of hints or signals (saṅketika) and verbal
messages (vācika).

Vijaya: What are saṅketika?

Gosvāmī: Sending a sakhī to Kṛṣṇa by a sidelong glance,
a wink, a movement of the eyebrows or other gestures is
called a saṅketika communication, in the form of a hint
or signal.

Vijaya: What type of message is called vācika?

Gosvāmī:Vācika messages are those that are communicated
by the sakhīs conversing amongst themselves in front of
Kṛṣṇa or behind Him.

Vijaya: What are the messages carried in Kṛṣṇa’s absence
(parokṣa)?

Gosvāmī:Parokṣa means that one sakhī is offered or sent
to Kṛṣṇa by another.

Vijaya: What are the communications that the nāyikā-
prāya perform?

Gosvāmī: When three types of sakhīs āpekṣika-adhikā
prakharā, madhyā and mṛdvī perform the activities of a
dūtī for sakhīs who are laghu in comparison with
themselves, those communications are called the
activities of nāyikā-prāya. Among these, the samā and
madhyā sakhīs have an especially sweet and intimate
companionship, in which they feel no mutual differences.
Only specialists in prema can understand this.

Vijaya: What do the sakhī-prāya do when they carry
messages?

Gosvāmī:Laghu-prakharā, laghu-madhyā and laghu-mṛdvī
mainly perform the activities of dūtīs. Therefore, their
communication of messages is called the activity of
sakhī-prāya.

Vijaya: Then what is a nitya-sakhī?

Gosvāmī:Nitya-sakhīs are those who only want to be
sakhīs, and not nāyikās. There are two types of nitya-
sakhīs: ātyantikī laghu (least significant) and āpekṣikī
laghu (relatively unimportant).

Vijaya: If a sakhī has a particular svabhāva, such as
prakharā, is that her permanent mode of behavior?

Gosvāmī: It may be a sakhī’s natural disposition, but
she may also exhibit other types of behavior according
to time and circumstance. Lalitā’s diligent efforts to
break Rādhikā’s māna are an example of this.

Vijaya: It seems that the sakhīs always meet with Kṛṣṇa
through Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s careful arrangement.

                          448
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017


Gosvāmī: There is an esoteric mystery in this. When a
sakhī meets with Kṛṣṇa in a solitary place while she is
acting as a dūtī, even if Kṛṣṇa fervently requests her
to enjoy with Him, she will not agree to His
proposition. If she were to agree, then her priya-
sakhī’s confidence in her as a dūtī would be lost.

Vijaya: What are the activities of the sakhīs?

Gosvāmī: The sakhīs perform sixteen types of activities:

1. describing the virtues of the nāyikā to the nāyaka,
and vice versa;

2. increasing Their mutual attachment;

3. arranging Their rendezvous;

4. bringing one’s sakhī and offering her to Kṛṣṇa;

5. making jokes;

6. giving consolation;

7. dressing and decorating;

8. expertly expressing the heartfelt sentiments of the
nāyaka before the nāyikā, and vice versa;

9. expertly hiding Their faults and blunders;

10. giving instructions on how to cheat the husband or
other relatives;

11. arranging for the nāyaka and nāyikā to meet at the
appropriate time;

12. rendering the service of fanning with a cāmara;

13. reproaching and disregarding the nāyaka and nāyikā
under special circumstances;

14. sending messages;

15. protecting the prāṇa of the nāyikā;

16. exercising extreme care and diligence in all
matters.

There are astounding examples of all these activities.

Vijaya: Prabhu, I have understood the idea, and I    will
look at the examples in Śrī-Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi. Now    I have
understood a great deal, and I want to know about    the
resolute prema that the sakhīs have for Kṛṣṇa and    for
each other.

Gosvāmī: There are two kinds of svapakṣa-sakhīs. Those
whose affection for Kṛṣṇa is the same as their affection
for their yūtheśvarī are sama-snehā, and those whose
affection for Kṛṣṇa and their yūtheśvarī is not equal
are asama-snehā.


                          449
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017

Vijaya: Who are the sakhīs who have asama-snehā?

Gosvāmī: There are two types of asama-snehā sakhīs. Some
have more affection for their yūtheśvarī than for Kṛṣṇa,
while other sakhīs think, “I am the maidservant of
Hari.” They do not mix with other groups, and they have
complete affection for their yūtheśvarī, but they have
still more affection for Kṛṣṇa. Alternatively, those
sakhīs who think, “I am the maidservant of my sakhī,”
and who have more affection for their sakhī than for
Kṛṣṇa are called sakhī snehā-adhika.

Vijaya: Who are they?

Gosvāmī: Among five types of sakhīs, those who have more
affection for Kṛṣṇa (kṛṣṇa-sneha-adhikā) are simply
called sakhī. The prāṇa-sakhīs and nitya-sakhīs are both
sakhī-snehā-adhikā, for they have more affection for
their sakhī.

Vijaya: Who are the sama-snehā sakhīs?

Gosvāmī: Those who have equal affection for both Kṛṣṇa
and their yūtheśvarī are sama-snehā.

Vijaya: Who are the best among all the sakhīs?

Gosvāmī: The best of all are those who consider
themselves Śrī Rādhā’s nearest and dearest (nija-jana),
although they love both Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Kṛṣṇa
equally. They are called priya-sakhīs and parama-
preṣṭha-sakhīs.

Vijaya: Prabhu, please explain the divisions between
svapakṣa and pratipakṣa.

Gosvāmī: All the vraja-sundarīs are divided into four
categories: svapakṣā, suḥrt-pakṣā, taṭasthā and
pratipakṣā. The suḥrt-pakṣa and taṭastha are incidental;
it is the distinction between the svapakṣa and
pratipakṣa that gives rise to rasa.

Vijaya: Please describe the svapakṣā and pratipakṣā in
detail.

Gosvāmī: I have already explained almost everything in
relation to svapakṣa. Now I will explain the different
groups, such as suḥrt-pakṣā. The suhṛt-pakṣā are divided
into two categories, namely iṣṭa-sādhikā and aniṣṭa-
sādhikā (those who accomplish the desirable and
undesirable, respectively). Those who are friendly
towards a rival party are called taṭasthā.

Vijaya: Now please tell me about vipakṣa.

Gosvāmī: The vipakṣa (rival party) are those who are
inimical, and who perform antagonistic activities, such
as destroying what is desirable and promoting what is
undesirable. These vipakṣa-sakhīs exhibit a host of
moods, including trickery, spite, restlessness,
jealousy, hostility, grief and pride.

Vijaya: How do they manifest pride?


                          450
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

Gosvāmī: Pride is expressed in six ways: egotism
(ahaṅkāra), abhimāna (ostentatiousness), darpa
(smugness), uddhasita (arrogance), mada (conceit), and
auddhatya (haughtiness).

Vijaya: What does ahaṅkāra (egotism) mean in this
context?

Gosvāmī:Ahaṅkāra involves criticizing another group
(pakṣa) while glorifying the virtues of one’s own group.

Vijaya: What is the purport of abhimāna here?

Gosvāmī: Using expressive moods and postures to show the
superiority of one’s own party’s prema is called
abhimāna (ostentatiousness).

Vijaya: What is darpa?

Gosvāmī:Darpa (smugness) is the pride that indicates the
superiority of one’s enjoyment of pastimes.

Vijaya: What is uddhasita (arrogance)?

Gosvāmī:Uddhasita is directly laughing at the rival
party.

Vijaya: What is mada?

Gosvāmī: In this context, mada (conceit) is the pride
that enhances the excellence of sevā and so on.

Vijaya: What is auddhatya?

Gosvāmī:Auddhatya (haughtiness) is openly declaring
one’s own superiority. The sakhīs’ double-edged taunting
and depreciation of others are examples of this kind of
garva.

Vijaya: Do the yūtheśvarīs also directly exhibit
jealousy?

Gosvāmī: No. The yūtheśvarīs are very grave, and they do
not directly manifest spite towards the rival party.
Besides, even a sakhī who is prakharā will not speak
about trivial things in the presence of vipakṣa-
yūtheśvarīs.

Vijaya: Prabhu, the yūtheśvarīs in vraja-līlā are
eternally perfect śaktīs of Bhagavān. What is the
significance of the existence of bhāvas such as their
mutual enmity? When the worldly logicians and
empiricists who are averse to Kṛṣṇa see all this, they
disrespect the transcendental principle of vraja-līlā
and ridicule it. They say that if there is malice and so
on in the parama-tattva, then why condemn enmity in the
activities of this material world? What is the point of
celebrating such activities? We reside in Śrīdhāma
Navadvīpa where, by Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanyadeva’s will, one
can find all kinds of materialistic people. Some are
staunch followers of karma-kāṇḍa, and most of them are
offenders who find faults in Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. They
disregard this unique, transcendental līlā, thinking
that it is a product of māyā. Kindly be merciful to me

                             451
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

and clarify this subject so that my heart can be
steadfast in the face of such remarks.

Gosvāmī: Only those who are completely bereft of rasa
say that it is improper for the dear bhaktas of Hari to
express sentiments such as hostility. If we reflect
deeply on this matter, we find that Kṛṣṇa destroys sins
and also enchants millions of Kāmadevas. His priya-
narma-sakhā, śṛṅgāra-rasa himself, reigns splendidly,
fully manifest in Vraja. It is this rasa alone, who, in
order to satisfy Kṛṣṇa, incites jealousy and all its
related sentiments among the rival groups’ egotism.
However, in reality there is no jealousy between them.
Their apparently inimical moods are nothing but a
transformation of affection.

Vijaya: Prabhu, I am an insignificant creature, and such
esoteric subjects do not arise within my heart easily.
Please bestow your grace upon me by explaining this
matter so explicitly that I may easily understand it and
become blessed.

Gosvāmī:Prema-rasa is like the ocean of milk, which
becomes unpalatable when it is mixed with the cow urine
of logic and arguments. It is not appropriate to apply
philosophical considerations of tattva in the context of
prema-rasa. On the one hand, Bhakti-devī bestows the
illumination of cit and hlādinī in the hearts of the
sādhakas who have accumulated a vast amount of sukṛti,
so that they realize the essence of all siddhānta
without the assistance of any logic at all. On the other
hand, these inconceivable conclusions do not awaken at
all in the hearts of those who want to comprehend
siddhānta through mundane logic, argument and worldly
scholarship. The application of false and misguided
logic (kutarka) only gives rise to more kutarka.
However, you are an extremely fortunate jīva. By Bhakti-
devī’s mercy, you have already understood everything,
but you are still inquiring from me for the sake of
fortifying your understanding of siddhānta. I will
certainly inform you of these principles. You are not a
logician or a follower of karma-kāṇḍa or jñāna-kāṇḍa,
and neither are you excessively devoted to vaidhī-
bhakti, or self-restraint through rules and regulations.
There is no objection to my telling you about any
siddhānta.

There are two types of inquisitive people. One makes
inquiries after having taken shelter of dry logic,
whereas the other, who has confidence in the existence
of bhakti, can be satisfied by its svataḥ-siddha (self-
evident) ideals. You should never reply to the questions
of dry logicians, because they will never have faith in
genuine explanations of the truth. Their power of reason
is confined to the realm of māyā, so they are lame in
relation to the acintya-bhāvas. Their intelligence
cannot even begin to enter the acintya subject matter,
no matter how strenuously they agitate their minds.
Ultimately, mental speculation only diminishes whatever
feeble trace of conviction one has in Īśvara. Those who
accept the party of bhakti-pakṣa (the devotional
viewpoint) are divided into many types according to
their eligibility. Even amongst those who have attained
a sad-guru, only those who have achieved the adhikāra

                          452
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

for śṛṅgāra-rasa can understand this confidential
tattva.

Vijaya! What an unprecedented rasa this vraja-līlā is!
It appears to be the same principle as the mundane
śṛṅgāra-rasa of this world, but actually it is
completely the opposite. It has been stated in the rāsa-
pañcādhyāyī (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 10.33.40) that the heart
disease of those who study this līlā is vanquished. What
is the heart disease of the conditional soul? Material
lust. This lust naturally arises in those who identify
themselves with a male or female body composed of seven
dhātus, such as flesh and blood, and who take shelter of
the subtle body by accepting an identity consisting of
desires pertaining to the mind, intelligence and false
ego. Nothing has the power to remove this lust easily;
it can only be dispelled by the continuous cultivation
of endeavors and moods in pursuit of vraja-līlā. In this
siddhānta you will see the miraculous feature of the
śṛṅgāra-rasa of Vṛndāvana līlā. You will also realize
that, although nirviśeṣa-brahma is characterized by
self-satisfaction (ātmārāma), this aprākṛta-śṛṅgāra-rasa
considers it quite insignificant and throws it very far
away, reigning splendidly for all time. Moreover, this
śṛṅgāra-rasa externally exists with a brilliance that
fully and perfectly diminishes the value of the opulence
of the transcendental Vaikuṇṭha world in the spiritual
sky.

The glories of śṛṅgāra-rasa are unsurpassed. There is
sāndrānanda (highly condensed bliss) in this rasa, but
there is no dry pleasure (śuṣkānanda), no happiness
derived from inert matter (jaḍānanda) and not even
limited happiness (saṅkucitānanda). It is the embodiment
of complete ānanda, and in order to achieve the
completion of rasa in this pūrṇānanda, in many instances
the unlimited varieties of bhāva are afflicted with
mutually opposite bhāvas. In some circumstances, these
opposing bhāvas are affectionate and in other
circumstances, they consist of emotions such as enmity.
However, the bhāvas of the aprākṛta-rasa are not base
and full of defects like mundane emotions such as
enmity. They are simply varieties of the fascinating
transformations of paramānanda. They surge up like
waves, which excite the ocean of rasa.

Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmīís conclusion is that bhāva is possessed
of wonderful variegatedness. The various bhāvas that are
completely compatible with each other are in relation to
svapakṣa. Bhāvas that are mostly compatible, and only
slightly incompatible, are in relation to suhṛt-pakṣa.
When the incompatible bhāvas predominate, and there are
very few compatible bhāvas, those bhāvas are called
taṭastha, and when all the bhāvas are completely
incompatible, those groups of bhāvas are in relation to
vipakṣa. Another point is that when these bhāvas are
incompatible, they are not mutually pleasing, which is
why they give rise to enmity and similar sentiments in
this paramānanda-rasa.

Vijaya: What is the necessity for pakṣa and vipakṣa
bhāvas?

Gosvāmī: When the bhāvas of two nāyikās are equal, the

                          453
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

bhāva of rivalry occurs, and consequently the moods of
friendship and hostility perform their activities as
transformations of rasa. You should understand that this
is also only to enrich the supreme sweetness of the
akhaṇḍa-śṛṅgāra-rasa.

Vijaya: Are the two śaktis, Śrīmatī Rādhā and
Candrāvalī, equal from the point of view of tattva?

Gosvāmī: No, no. Only Śrīmatī Rādhikā, who is composed
entirely of mahābhāva, is the essence of hlādinī.
Candrāvalī is Her kāya-vyūha (bodily expansion), and is
unlimitedly less qualified than Śrīmatī Rādhikā.
Nevertheless, in śṛṅgāra-rasa Candrāvalī has a mood of
equality with Rādhā, so that a rivalry emerges to
nourish the prema-rasa. Again, consider this. The bhāva
of these two yūtheśvarīs cannot be completely
compatible. If somehow or other it seems to be so, that
is simply a coincidence, just as the shape eaten by a
book worm out of the pages of a book might accidentally
resemble a letter of the alphabet. Actually, the
svapakṣa and vipakṣa bhāvas of rasa occur naturally.

Vijaya: Prabhu, you have dispelled whatever small doubts
I had. Your sweet instructions have entered my heart
through the path of my ears, and they are destroying all
my bitterness. I have fully understood ālambana (the
object and the abode of rasa) in regard to the vibhava
of madhura-rasa. Sac-cid-ānanda Kṛṣṇa is the one and
only nāyaka, and I am meditating upon His qualities,
form and activities. He has the temperaments of
dhīrodātta, dhīra-lalita, dhīra-śānta and dhīroddhata,
and He eternally performs His līlā as a nāyaka in the
roles of pati and upapati. As a lover, He is anukūla
(faithful), dakṣiṇa (sincere), śaṭha (cheating), and
dhṛṣṭa (reckless and bold). He is always served by
friends who arrange His meetings (ceṭaka), dress Him
(viṭa), and make jokes (vidūṣaka); and by His masseurs
(pīṭha-marddaka) and His most intimate friends (priya-
narma-sakhās). He is fond of playing on the vaṁśī.
Today, Kṛṣṇa has appeared in my heart as the viṣaya of
rasa.

At the same time, I have also understood how the
beautiful young women of Vraja are the āśraya of
madhura-rasa. These gopīs are nāyikās. Nāyikās are
divided into two types: svakīyā and parakīyā. In Vraja,
the parakīyā-nāyikās are the āśraya of śṛṅgāra-rasa, and
they are of three types: sādhana-parā, devī and nitya-
priyā. The attractive damsels of Vraja divide into
groups in which they serve Kṛṣṇa, and millions of lovely
vraja-gopīs are subordinate to one of the many
yūtheśvarīs. Among all the yūtheśvarīs, Śrī Rādhā and
Śrī Candrāvalī are prominent. In Śrī Rādhāís yūtha there
are five kinds of sakhī, namely sakhī, nitya-sakhī,
prāṇa-sakhī, priya-sakhī and parama-śreṣṭha-sakhī.
Although the parama-śreṣṭha-sakhīs, who are also known
as aṣṭa-sakhīs, are qualified to be yūtheśvarīs, they do
not create separate yūthas because they desire to remain
the followers of Śrī Rādhā. The sakhīs under their
guidance are collectively called their gaṇa, for
instance Lalitāgaṇa, Viśākhāgaṇa and so on.

Nāyikās are divided into three types ñ mugdhā, madhyā

                          454
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

and pragalbhā ñ and of these, the madhyā and pragalbhā
are each divided into three further categories: dhīrā,
adhīrā and dhīrādhīrā. These six categories plus mugdhā
make seven categories in all, which are divided into two
types ñ svakīyā and parakīyā ñ to make fourteen types in
all. The category of unmarried nāyikā (kanyā) is added
to these fourteen to make a total of fifteen categories
of nāyikā. These fifteen types of nāyikā have the eight
avasthā (conditions or situations), beginning with
abhisārikā and so on, and all these categories are
divided again into uttamā, madhyamā and kaniṣṭhā to make
the sum total of (15 x 8 x 3) = 360 types of nāyikā. The
distinct types of behavior (vyavahāra) of the
yūtheśvarīs, such as suhṛt, as well as their purposes
(tātparya), have awakened within my heart. I have also
understood the duties of the sakhīs and the messengers
(dūtīs). Now that I have learned all of these topics, I
have an understanding of the āśraya-tattva of rasa, and
by combining this with the details of the viṣaya-tattva
of rasa, I have also understood ālambana-tattva, which
is included within the subject of vibhāva. And tomorrow
I will learn about uddīpana! Kṛṣṇa has shown me
unlimited kindness by giving me the association of a
sad-guru like yourself. I am taking my nourishment by
drinking the liquid nectar flowing from your lotus
mouth.

Śrī Gopāla Guru Gosvāmī embraced Vijaya and said, “My
dear son, I have also become successful by attaining a
disciple like you. As you make more inquiries, Śrī
Nityānanda Prabhu is personally replying to those
questions through my mouth.” Tears of prema began to
cascade from the eyes of both guru and śisya. When the
mahātmās such as Śrī Dhyānacandra witnessed Vijayaís
immense fortune, they became immersed in paramānanda.
Just then, some śuddha Vaiṣṇavas arrived outside Rādhā-
Kānta Maṭha and began to sing some ślokas composed by
Caṇḍīdāsa:

sai (sakhī), kebā sunāila śyāma-nāma (refrain)

kānera bhītāra diyā, marame paśila go,

ākula karila mora prāṇa

Oh, my dear sakhī, who is that person who first made Me
hear this name “Śyāma”? When it enters My heart through
My ears, I become overwhelmed with impatience.

na jāni kateka madhu, śyāma-nāme āche go,

vadana chāḍite nāhi pāre

I donít know how much sweetness fills this name; it is
so sweet that My tongue will not leave it for a moment.

japite japite nāma, avaśa karila go

kemone pāibo sai, tāre

As I go on repeating this name, I become completely
absorbed. Oh, sakhī, how will I ever be able to meet
Him?


                           455
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

nāma-paratape jāra, aichana karila go

aṅgera paraśe kibā haya

If that personís name alone has the power to put Me in
such a condition, I cannot even imagine what My
condition would be if I were to touch His body.

yekhāne vasati tāra, sekhāne thākhiya go,

yuvatī dharama kaiche raya

Wherever He stays, how can the young women maintain
their religious principles?

pāśarite kari mane, pāśarā na jāya go,

ki karibe ki habe upāya

In My heart I want to forget Him, but I cannot. Now I
cannot understand what is the remedy, what to do.

kahe dvija-caṇḍīdāsa, kulavatī kula-nāśe

apanāra yauvana jācāya

Dvija Caṇḍīdāsa says, “That Śyāmānanda has destroyed the
dynasty of chaste ladies by showing His youthful
beauty.”

They continued to chant this kīrtana with mṛdaṅga and
karatālas for an hour and a half, and all became
immersed in prema. When their absorption subsided
somewhat, Vijaya Kumāra offered his respects to the
Vaiṣṇavas according to their eligibility. He then
offered his sāṣṭāṅga-praṇāma to Śrī Guru Gosvāmī and set
off for his residence in Haracaṇḍī Sāhī.



Thus ends the Thirty-fourth Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled

“Madhura-Rasa: Different Categories of Sakhīs”




Chapter 35

Madhura-Rasa: Uddīpana



The next day, Vijaya Kumāra, having honored prasāda,
came to Śrī Guru Gosvāmīís lotus feet at the appointed
time. As he offered his sāṣṭāṅga-daṇḍavat-praṇāma, he
became overwhelmed with excitement. Gosvāmījī lifted him
up, embraced him, and very affectionately made him sit
beside him. Vijaya Kumāra seized the opportunity and
said, “Prabhu, I want to know about the uddīpana of
madhura-rasa. Will you be so kind as to explain this to

                             456
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

me?”

Śrī Guru Gosvāmī replied, “The uddīpana-vibhāvas in
madhura-rasa are the following: the guṇa (qualities) of
Kṛṣṇa and His beloved gopīs, their names (nāma),
activities and character (carita), ornaments (maṇḍana),
things related to the object of love (sambandhī), and
things that are not directly related to the object of
love (taṭastha).”

Vijaya: Please describe the guṇa first.

Gosvāmī: There are three types of guṇa: relating to the
mind (mānasika), speech (vācika) and the body (kāyika).

Vijaya: What are the various types of qualities that
relate to the mind (mānasa-guṇa) in this rasa?

Gosvāmī: There are many kinds of mānasa-guṇa, such as
gratefulness, forgiveness and compassion.

Vijaya: What are the different types of vācika-guṇa?

Gosvāmī: All spoken words that give joy to the ears
constitute vācika-guṇa.

Vijaya: What are the different types of bodily qualities
(kāyika-guṇa)?

Gosvāmī: The kāyika guṇas are vayasa (age), rūpa (form),
lāvaṇya (luster), saundarya (beauty), abhirūpatā
(influence), mādhurya (sweetness), mārddva (softness),
and so on. The four divisions of age that have taken
shelter of madhura-rasa are vayaḥ-sandhi, navya-vayasa,
vyakta-vayasa and pūrṇa-vayasa.

Vijaya: What is vayaḥ-sandhi?

Gosvāmī:Vayaḥ-sandhi is the juncture between the stage
of childhood (bālya) and youth (yauvana), and this
particular stage is called prathama-kaiśora. The stage
of full youth (sampūrṇa-kiśora) is included within
vayaḥ-sandhi. Paugaṇḍa (childhood up to ten years old)
can be called bālya. The sweetness of the vayaḥ-sandhi
of Kṛṣṇa and His beloveds is uddīpana.

Vijaya: What is navya-vayasa (sprouting)?

Gosvāmī: The symptoms of navya-vayasa include the
arrival of fresh youthfulness (nava-yauvana), slight
appearance of the breasts, restlessness of the eyes,
gentle smiles, and somewhat agitated hearts.

Vijaya: What is vyakta-vayasa (revealed)?

As Vijaya Kumāra was asking this question, a Vaiṣṇava
from the Rāmānuja-sampradāya and a paṇḍita-sannyāsī from
the Śaṅkara Maṭha arrived there to take darśana of the
Deity. The Vaiṣṇava had the conception of being a male
servant of Bhagavān, and the Śaṅkara sannyāsī was
absorbed in dry meditation on the impersonal nirviśeṣa-
brahma, so neither of them could identify themselves as
being a vraja-gopī. Since it is forbidden to discuss
rasa-kathā in the presence of people who consider

                          457
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017

themselves male, Gosvāmī and Vijaya both became silent,
and then began to engage in ordinary small talk about
various things with the Vaiṣṇava newcomer and the
ekadaṇḍī sannyāsī. After a short time, the two visitors
set off in the direction of Siddha-bakula, and Vijaya
repeated his question, smiling slightly.

Gosvāmī: In the stage known as vyakta-vayasa, the gopīs’
breasts become quite prominent, their bellies have three
folds, and all their limbs begin to shimmer with an
effulgent luster.

Vijaya: What is pūrṇa-vayasa (full)?

Gosvāmī:Pūrṇa-vayasa is the stage at which the buttocks
become highly developed, the waist becomes thin, all the
limbs become lustrous, the breasts become heavy, and the
thighs resemble the trunks of banana trees. A few
particular vraja-sundarīs also exhibit the features of
pūrṇa-yauvana in their earlier youth.

Vijaya: I have understood the subject of vayasa. Now
please tell me about rūpa.

Gosvāmī:Rūpa is such extraordinary beauty that a woman
appears to be decorated, even though she is not wearing
any ornaments. Exquisite rūpa occurs when all the limbs
are in perfect proportion.

Vijaya: What is lāvaṇya?

Gosvāmī:Lāvaṇya is a pearl-like luster that emanates
from the bodily limbs.

Vijaya: What is saundarya?

Gosvāmī: Saundarya is the bodily perfection in which
each and every one of the bodily limbs is appropriately
shaped and in ideal proportion to the others.

Vijaya: What is abhirūpatā?

Gosvāmī: One is said to have abhirūpatā when one’s
astonishing qualities cause nearby objects to attain the
same beauty as one’s own.

Vijaya: What is mādhurya?

Gosvāmī:Mādhurya is bodily beauty that is simply
indescribable.

Vijaya: What is mārddva?

Gosvāmī:Mārddva is softness which is unable to tolerate
even the touch of soft things. There are three types of
mārddva: uttama, madhyama and kaniṣṭha.

Vijaya: Prabhu, I have understood guṇa. Now please tell
me about nāma.

Gosvāmī: Names such as Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, which are full of
supremely mysterious and confidential rasa, are called
nāma.


                             458
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

Vijaya: Now kindly tell me about carita (behavior).

Gosvāmī: There are two types of carita: anubhāva and
līlā. I will tell you about anubhāva when I have
completed the subject of vibhāva.

Vijaya: Then please describe līlā.

Gosvāmī: The term līlā refers to sundara-krīḍā
(beautiful games) and activities, tāṇḍava (dancing),
veṇu-vādana (playing the flute), go-dohana (milking the
cows), and calling them down from the hill and counting
them.

Vijaya: What are sundara-krīḍā?

Gosvāmī: There are unlimited sportive pastimes, such as
rāsa-līlā, ball games, and speaking in the languages of
the birds and animals.

Vijaya: How many types of maṇḍana (decorations) are
there?

Gosvāmī: There are four types of maṇḍana: clothes,
ornaments, garlands, and anulepana (pastes and perfumes
that are smeared on the body).

Vijaya: What is sambandhī?

Gosvāmī:Sambandhī has been divided into two types:
things that are connected (lagna) and things that are
nearby (sannihita).

Vijaya: What does lagna (auspicious occurences) mean?

Gosvāmī:Lagna-sambandhī includes the sounds of the flute
and the bugle, singing, fragrances, the tinkling of
ornaments, footprints, the sound of the vīṇā, and
artistic skill.

Vijaya: What is the nature of the flute’s melody?

Gosvāmī: The stream of nectar that comes out from
Kṛṣṇa’s lips through the muralī is prominent among all
types of uddīpana.

Vijaya: Now please describe things that are nearby
(sannihita-sambandhī).

Gosvāmī:Sannihita-sambandhī include remnant garlands,
peacock feathers, gairika (red stone) and other colored
minerals from the hills, the cows, the stick, the bugle,
the sight of Kṛṣṇa’s dear associates, the dust raised by
the hooves of the cows, Vṛndāvana, entities and objects
in the shelter of Vṛndāvana (vṛndāvanāśrita-vastu),
Govardhana, Yamunā, and the rāsa-sthālī.

Vijaya: What is meant by vṛndāvanāśrita (in the shelter
of Vṛndāvana)?

Gosvāmī: Animals such as deer, birds such as the
peacock, bumble-bees, groves of flowering vines, tulasī,
flowers, and kadamba trees are all vṛndāvanāśrita.


                             459
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

Vijaya: What is meant by taṭastha (marginal)?

Gosvāmī: Moonbeams, clouds, lightning, the spring
season, autumn, the full moon, the breezes, and birds
such as the peacock are all taṭastha.

After hearing attentively about the uddīpana-bhāvas,
Vijaya Kumāra was silent for a while. The meeting of
ālambana with uddīpana-bhāvas aroused an exalted
sentiment within his heart, and at once anubhāvas began
to manifest in his body. In a voice choked with emotion
he said, “Prabhu, now kindly describe the anubhāvas in
detail. You have explained one part of kṛṣṇa-carita
(Kṛṣṇaís activities and qualities), namely līlā. When I
learn about anubhāva, I will be able to know about
kṛṣṇa-carita completely.

Gosvāmī: There are three types of anubhāvas: alaṅkāra
(ornaments), udbhāsvara (symptoms), and vācika (verbal).

Vijaya: What is alaṅkāra (ornament)?

Gosvāmī: The twenty types of alaṅkāras of the attractive
gopīs of Vraja in their youth (yauvana) have been called
sattva-ja (arising from śuddha-sattva). These manifest
wonderfully because of intense absorption in their
beloved Kṛṣṇa. These twenty types of alaṅkāra have been
divided into three categories:

1. those arising from the limbs (aṅga-ja),

2. those that arise spontaneously (ayatna-ja), and

3. those that arise from oneís own nature (svabhāva-ja).

The alaṅkāras arising from the limbs (aṅga-ja) are: 1)
seed attachment (bhāva), 2) gestures (hāva) and 3)
amorous dalliance (helā). Ayatna-ja includes 4) beauty
(śobhā), 5) luster (kānti), 6) brilliance (dīpti), 7)
sweetness (mādhurya), 8) boldness (pragalbhatā), 9)
magnanimity (audārya), and 10) patience (dhairya).
Svabhāva-ja includes 11) imitating līlā, 12) enjoyment
(vilāsa), 13) a particular mood of dressing (vicchitti),
14) bewilderment (vibhrama), 15) a particular mixture of
bhāvas (kila-kiñcita), 16) awakening of longing
(moṭṭāyita), 17) apparent opposition (kuṭṭamita), 18)
disrespect (vivvoka), 19) tenderness (lalita), and 20)
bhāvas expressed through activity (vikṛta).

Vijaya: What is the meaning of bhāva in this context?

Gosvāmī: In ujjvala-rasa, when rati, which is like a
seed, appears upon the unagitated citta, its first
transformation is called bhāva. The untransformed stage
of citta is called sattva. When the cause of
transformation is present, the original transformation,
which is like the first sprouting of a seed, is called
bhāva.

Vijaya: What is hāva (gestures)?

Gosvāmī:Hāva is a condition in which rati is more
clearly evident than in bhāva, with a tilting of the
neck, gestures of the eyebrows and eyes, and other

                          460
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

symptoms.

Vijaya: What is helā?

Gosvāmī:Hāva is called helā when it clearly indicates
sensual passion.

Vijaya: What is śobhā (beauty)?

Gosvāmī:Śobhā is the beautification of the bodily limbs
that arises due to youthfulness and rūpa-sambhoga.

Vijaya: What is kānti (luster)?

Gosvāmī:Kānti is the radiant splendor that emanates in
the act of satisfaction of this supernatural kāma.

Vijaya: What is dīpti?

Gosvāmī:Kānti is called dīpti when it is intensified and
becomes highly inflamed with passion through the
influence of factors such as age, enjoyment, place,
time, qualities, rūpa and attire.

Vijaya: What is mādhurya (sweetness)?

Gosvāmī:Mādhurya is the stage in which every endeavor is
exquisitely elegant under all circumstances.

Vijaya: What is pragalbhatā (boldness)?

Gosvāmī:Pragalbhatā is a complete lack of inhibition or
fear at the time of prayoga, when one’s own bodily limbs
are on top of the limbs of one’s lover.

Vijaya: What is audārya (magnanimity)?

Gosvāmī:Audārya is the quality of being self-controlled
and courteous in all situations.

Vijaya: What is dhairya (steadiness)?

Gosvāmī: The tendency of the heart is called dhairya
when it is steady and unwavering.

Vijaya: What is the meaning of līlā in this context?

Gosvāmī:Līlā is imitating the charming attire and
activities of one’s beloved.

Vijaya: What is vilāsa (enjoyment)?

Gosvāmī: The particular suggestive expressions of the
face and eyes that one makes while moving, standing
still or sitting, to bring about union with one’s
beloved are called vilāsa.

Vijaya: What is vicchitti?

Gosvāmī:Vicchitti is a way of dressing that enhances
one’s splendor, although employing very little in the
way of decorations and ornaments. According to the
opinion of some experts in rasa, sometimes, when a
nāyikā’s lover approaches her after He has committed an

                             461
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

offense against her, the bhāva arises in her heart that
her ornaments are simply a burden and she has only
dressed and decorated herself on the insistence of her
sakhīs. This sort of jealous and neglectful mood is also
called vicchitti.

Vijaya: What is vibhrama (bewilderment)?

Gosvāmī:Vibhrama is a state of bewilderment that is
caused by the powerful urges of madana when the nāyikā
meets with her beloved. In this state, she intends to
put on her necklace, garland and other ornaments in
particular places, but actually puts them on in
different places.

Vijaya: What is kila-kiñcita?

Gosvāmī:Kila-kiñcita is the condition in which pride,
hankering, weeping, laughing, hostility, fear and anger
arise at the same time because of feelings of
jubilation.

Vijaya: What is moṭṭāyita?

Gosvāmī:Moṭṭāyita is the intense longing that arises in
the nāyikā’s heart when she receives news about her
lover and remembers Him.

Vijaya: What is kuṭṭamita?

Gosvāmī:Kuṭṭamita is the anger that the nāyikā feigns
externally due to dignity, shyness and so on – although
she is delighted within her heart – when her lover
touches her breast or lips.

Vijaya: What is vivvoka?

Gosvāmī:Vivvoka is disrespect shown towards one’s lover
out of pride and māna.

Vijaya: What is lalita?

Gosvāmī:Lalita is the tenderness that is expressed by
movements of the eyebrows and gestures of all the bodily
limbs.

Vijaya: What is vikṛta?

Gosvāmī:Vikṛta is the expression by activities – rather
than in words – of moods such as shyness, jealousy or
māna that arise within the heart.

These are the twenty bodily and psychological alaṅkāras.
Rasika-bhaktas have also accepted two more alaṅkāras in
addition to the ornaments that I have already mentioned.
These are feigned ignorance (maugdhya) and feigned fear
(cakita).

Vijaya: What is maugdhya?

Gosvāmī: A nāyikā exhibits maugdhya when she pretends to
be unaware of something that she actually knows
perfectly well, and inquires from her lover as if in
ignorance.

                             462
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017


Vijaya: Now please tell me about cakita.

Gosvāmī:Cakita is making a show of being very afraid in
the lover’s presence, although one is actually not
afraid at all.

Vijaya: Prabhu, I have understood the alaṅkāras. Now,
please instruct me about udbhāsvara.

Gosvāmī: When the bhāva of the heart is manifest in the
body, the manifestation is called udbhāsvara. In
madhura-rasa, the udbhāsvaras include a slackening or
slipping of the drawstrings of one’s skirt, loosening of
the blouse, disarray of the braids and so on, an
affliction in the body, yawning, a flaring of the
nostrils, sighing deeply, restlessness, singing, and
condemning oneself.

Vijaya: Couldn’t all the udbhāsvaras you have just
described be considered within the categories of
moṭṭāyita and vilāsa?

Gosvāmī: They have been described separately because
they enhance a special type of beauty (śobhā).

Vijaya: Prabhu, now please kindly explain the vācika-
anubhāvas.

Gosvāmī: There are twelve types of vācika-anubhāvas:
ālāpa, vilāpa, saṁlāpa, pralāpa, anulāpa, apalāpa,
sandeśa, atideśa, apadeśa, upadeśa, nirdeśa and
vyapadeśa.

Vijaya: What is ālāpa?

Gosvāmī:Ālāpa is pleasing words of flattery.

Vijaya: What is vilāpa?

Gosvāmī:Vilāpa is words uttered out of sorrow.

Vijaya: What is saṁlāpa?

Gosvāmī:Saṁlāpa is conversation.

Vijaya: What is pralāpa?

Gosvāmī:Pralāpa is meaningless talk.

Vijaya: What is anulāpa?

Gosvāmī:Anulāpa means to utter the same words
repeatedly.

Vijaya: What is apalāpa?

Gosvāmī:Apalāpa means giving another meaning to words
that have already been spoken.

Vijaya: What is sandeśa?

Gosvāmī:Sandeśa is sending a message to one’s lover when
He has gone to another land.

                           463
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017


Vijaya: What is atideśa?

Gosvāmī:Atideśa is saying, “His words are my words.”

Vijaya: What is apadeśa?

Gosvāmī:Apadeśa is expressing the subject in question
through other words, and not speaking about it directly.

Vijaya: What is upadeśa?

Gosvāmī: The term upadeśa refers to words full of
instruction.

Vijaya: What is nirdeśa?

Gosvāmī:Nirdeśa is confessing, “I am that very person.”

Vijaya: What is vyapadeśa?

Gosvāmī:Vyapadeśa is revealing the desire of one’s heart
on the pretext of saying something else.

All these anubhāvas are present in all the rasas, but
they have been described in this context because the
sweetness of ujjvala-rasa is more greatly enhanced by
these anubhāvas.

Vijaya: Prabhu, why is it necessary to describe the
anubhāvas separately in the subject of rasa?

Gosvāmī: The bhāvas in the heart that have arisen from
the combination of ālambana and uddīpana are called
anubhāvas when they manifest on the bodily limbs. This
subject cannot be understood clearly without explaining
them separately.

Vijaya: Please be merciful and describe the sāttvika-
bhāvas in mādhurya-rasa.

Gosvāmī: I mentioned the eight sāttvika-bhāvas, such as
stambha, sveda and so on, while I was talking about
ordinary rasa-tattva. They are also the sāttvika-bhāvas
of this rasa, but the examples of these bhāvas are quite
different in this rasa.

Vijaya: How are they different?

Gosvāmī: You will see that in vraja-līlā, becoming
stunned (stambha-bhāva) arises out of jubilation
(harṣa), fear (bhaya), wonder (āścarya), despondency
(viṣāda), and indignation (amarṣa). Perspiration (sveda)
arises from jubilation, fear and anger (krodha).
Horripilation (romāñca) comes from wonder, jubilation
and fear. Faltering of the voice occurs due to
despondency, astonishment (vismaya), indignation, and
fear. Fear, jubilation, and indignation cause trembling.
Changing colour (vaivarṇya) arises from despondency,
anger, and fear. Shedding of tears (aśru) may occur due
to jubilation, anger, or despondency. Loss of
consciousness (pralaya) may occur due to happiness or
distress.


                             464
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

Vijaya: Are there any manifestations of sāttvika-vikāra
in this rasa that are different from those in the other
rasas?

Gosvāmī: Yes. I have explained the sāttvika-bhāvas known
as dhūmāyita, jvalita, dīpta and uddīpta in the context
of general (sādhāraṇa) rasa-vicāra. In this madhura-
rasa, there is one division of uddīpta called sūddīpta-
bhāva.

Vijaya: Prabhu, you have been unlimitedly merciful to
me. Now please tell me how the vyabhicārī bhāvas are
manifested in this rasa.

Gosvāmī: Almost all of the thirty-three sañcārī or
vyabhicārī-bhāvas that I have already explained to you,
beginning with self-disparagement (nirveda), occur in
madhura-rasa. Ferociousness (augrya) and laziness
(ālasya) are the two exceptions. The sañcārī-bhāvas of
madhura-rasa have several wonderful features.

Vijaya: What are they?

Gosvāmī: The most fascinating feature is that whatever
type of kṛṣṇa-prema is present in the friends and elders
(guru-jana) in the other rasas is also attained as a
sañcārī-bhāva in madhura-rasa. In other words, the
sthāyībhāvas of those other rasas act as sañcārī or
vyabhicārī-bhāvas in this rasa.

Vijaya: What are the other surprising aspects?

Gosvāmī: Another wonderful point is that the vyabhicārī-
bhāvas in this rasa – even those such as maraṇa (death)
– are not considered direct aṅgas of rasa. Quite
logically, in this rasa they have been counted among the
attributes (guṇas) of the rasa. The conclusion is that
rasa itself is the guṇī (that which possesses the
attributes), and the vyabhicārī-bhāvas are the
attributes (guṇa) that it possesses.

Vijaya: How do the sañcārī-bhāvas arise?

Gosvāmī: Self-disparagement (nirveda) arises from
distress, aversion, jealousy, despondency, calamity, and
offense.

Vijaya: What is the cause of humility (dainya)?

Gosvāmī:Dainya comes from sorrow, fear, and offense.

Vijaya: How does debility (glāni) arise?

Gosvāmī:Glāni is the result of exertion, anxiety, and
amorous endeavors.

Vijaya: How does exhaustion (śrama) arise?

Gosvāmī:Śrama is the result of so much wandering,
dancing, and amorous exertion.

Vijaya: What is the cause of intoxication (mada)?

Gosvāmī: Mada is induced by drinking honey-wine.

                          465
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017


Vijaya: How does pride (garva) appear?

Gosvāmī:Garva comes from good fortune, beauty, personal
attributes, obtaining shelter of the most excellent
person, and the attainment of the object of one’s
desire.

Vijaya: What causes apprehension (śaṅkā)?

Gosvāmī: The causes of śaṅkā are theft, offense,
cruelty, lightning, ferocious animals, and fearsome
sounds.

Vijaya: How does agitation and uncertainty (āvega)
arise?

Gosvāmī:Āvega is an acute uncertainty about what to do,
which arises from seeing or hearing the object of one’s
affection or of one’s aversion.

Vijaya: What is the cause of madness (unmāda)?

Gosvāmī: Unmāda can be caused by excessive ecstasy
(mahānanda) or by feelings of separation.

Vijaya: Why does confusion or absence of mind (apasmṛti)
occur?

Gosvāmī:Apasmṛti is the confusion or absence of mind
that arises from utter distress.1

Vijaya: What is disease (vyādhi)?

Gosvāmī:Vyādhi is bodily transformation, such as fever,
that arises due to apprehension and anxiety.

Vijaya: What is bewilderment (moha)?

Gosvāmī:Moha is the bewilderment that occurs when the
heart is stupefied due to jubilation, separation and
sorrow.

Vijaya: What is death (mṛtyu)?

Gosvāmī: There is no mṛtyu in this rasa – only the
attempt to die.

Vijaya: What is laziness (ālasya)?

Gosvāmī: There is also no ālasya in this rasa. Ālasya is
pretending to be powerless, although one has energy;
however, there is not even the slightest room for ālasya
in Kṛṣṇa’s service. It may be observed in a secondary
sense, though, among the opposing elements.

Vijaya: What is the cause of inertia (jāḍya)?

Gosvāmī: Jāḍya may come about on seeing the object of
one’s love, on hearing about Him, or on seeing something
that is most undesirable. Jāḍya may also arise from
feelings of separation.

Vijaya: Why does bashfulness (vrīḍā) occur?

                          466
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017


Gosvāmī:Vrīḍā occurs due to meeting for the first time,
behaving inappropriately, or because of words of praise
or contempt.

Vijaya: What is the cause of avahitthā (concealing one’s
nature)?

Gosvāmī: Avahitthā is caused by treachery, shyness,
duplicity, fear, and dignity.

Vijaya: What is the cause of remembrance (smṛti)?

Gosvāmī:Smṛti is the result of seeing something similar,
or due to a fixed habit.

Vijaya: How does pondering logical possibilities
(vitarka) arise?

Gosvāmī:Vitarka is the result of investigation and
doubt.

Vijaya: What is anxiety (cintā)?

Gosvāmī:Cintā arises from not attaining what one
desires, and from fear of the undesirable.

Vijaya: What is thoughtfulness (mati)?

Gosvāmī:Mati is reflection or deliberation on something.

Vijaya: What is fortitude (dhṛti)?

Gosvāmī:Dhṛti is the steadfastness of the heart that
comes from fulfilling one’s aspirations and being free
from sorrow.

Vijaya: What is jubilation (harṣa)?

Gosvāmī:Harṣa is the joyfulness that arises on seeing or
attaining the object of one’s cherished desires.

Vijaya: What is eagerness (autsukya)?

Gosvāmī:Autsukya is the ardent desire to see one’s
beloved, and the intense hankering or impatience to
attain Him.

Vijaya: What is ferociousness (augrya)?

Gosvāmī: Violence is called augrya, and it has no place
in madhura-rasa.

Vijaya: What is indignation (amarṣa)?

Gosvāmī:Amarṣa is the intolerance that is expressed
because of being disrespected or insulted.

Vijaya: What is enmity (asūyā)?

Gosvāmī:Asūyā is resentment of others’ good fortune, and
it arises due to good fortune and virtues.

Vijaya: What is the cause of unsteadiness (cāpala)?

                          467
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017


Gosvāmī:Cāpala is fickleness or lightness of mind, and
it is caused by attachment and aversion.

Vijaya: What is the cause of sleep (nidrā)?

Gosvāmī:Nidrā is induced by fatigue.

Vijaya: What is supti?

Gosvāmī:Supti means dreaming.

Vijaya: What is wakefulness (bodha)?

Gosvāmī:Bodha is being far from sleep.

Bābā Vijaya, in addition to these vyabhicārī-bhāvas,
there are four stages, namely bhāvotpatti, bhāva-sandhi,
bhāva-śābālya and bhāva-śānti. Bhāvotpatti is the
appearance of a bhāva, and bhāva-sandhi is the joining
together of two bhāvas. Sa-rūpa-sandhi is the
amalgamation of two bhāvas that have the same cause, and
bhinna-sandhi is the mixing of bhāvas that have arisen
from separate causes. The mixing of many bhāvas at once
is called bhāva-śābālya, and the destruction or
pacification of bhāvas is called bhāva-śānti.

Vijaya now had a complete understanding of the
components of madhura-rasa, for he had heard the
explanations of its vibhāvas, sāttvika-bhāvas, and
vyabhicārī-bhāvas. His heart became overwhelmed with
prema, which was, however, somewhat indistinct. Having
thoroughly understood this, he fell at the feet of his
Gurudeva. Weeping and weeping, he said, “Prabhu, please
bestow your mercy on me, and tell me why prema has still
not blossomed in my heart.”

Guru Gosvāmījī embraced Vijaya and said, “You will be
able to understand prema-tattva tomorrow. You have
understood the components of prema, but it still has not
yet arisen distinctly in your heart. Prema is the
sthāyībhāva. You have already heard about sthāyībhāva in
a general way, but you will attain all perfection when
you hear specifically about the sthāyībhāva in ujjvala-
rasa. Now it has become very late. I will explain
further tomorrow.”

Tears began to fall from Vijayaís eyes again. He offered
his daṇḍavat-praṇāma and then returned to his residence,
deeply pondering all that he had heard.



Thus ends the Thirty-fifth Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled

“Madhura-Rasa: Uddīpana”




Chapter 36

                           468
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017


Madhura-Rasa: Sthāyībhāva & Stages of Rati



The next day, Vijaya Kumāra arrived punctually at the
lotus feet of his Gurudeva, offered sāṣṭāṅga-daṇḍavat,
and sat in his place. Śrī Gopāla Guru Gosvāmī observed
Vijayaís eagerness to know about sthāyībhāva and said,
“Madhura-rati is the sthāyībhāva of madhura-rasa.”

Vijaya: What causes the appearance of rati?

Gosvāmī:Rati arises from abhiyoga, viṣaya, sambandha,
abhimāna, tadīya-viśeṣa, upamā and svabhāva. Each of
these causes is progressively superior to the previous
one, so the rati that arises from svabhāva is the best
of all.

Vijaya: What is abhiyoga?

Gosvāmī:Abhiyoga is expressing one’s bhāva. There are
two types of abhiyoga: that which one reveals
personally, and that which someone else reveals.

Vijaya: What is viṣaya?

Gosvāmī: There are five types of viṣaya, namely, sound
(śabda), touch (sparśa), beauty (rūpa), taste (rasa) and
fragrance (gandha).

Vijaya: What is sambandha?

Gosvāmī:Sambandha refers to the glories of four aspects:
lineage, beauty, qualities and pastimes.

Vijaya: What is abhimāna?

Gosvāmī:Abhimāna is the definite decision to accept only
one particular object although many other beautiful
objects are present. For example, when Kṛṣṇa went to
Mathurā, a certain vraja-gopī had awakened her rati for
Kṛṣṇa. However, she had not been able to have His
association because she had not yet attained full youth.
One of her friends saw the exquisite beauty of her age,
and spoke to her in a solitary place to test her: “O
sakhī, Kṛṣṇa has left Vraja and gone away, and now your
new youthfulness and other qualities are developing.
There are so many youths in Vraja who are handsome and
qualified. If you want to marry any of them, whisper to
me, and I will speak with your mother and make all the
necessary arrangements.”

When that vraja-gopī heard her friendís words, she
replied, “O sakhī, this whole world may have so many
expert young men, who are like waves of beauty and
sweetness, each sweeter and more beautiful than the one
before. Let them be. Highly qualified young ladies may
accept them. As far as I am concerned, if someone does
not wear a crown of peacock feathers upon His head, if
there is no muralī splendidly adorning His lips, and if
His body is not beautified by tilaka and other
decorations made with minerals such as gairika-dhātu,
then I will consider him to be as insignificant as a

                             469
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

piece of straw, and I will not have the slightest
inclination towards him.”

This is an example of abhimāna.

Vijaya: I have understood abhimāna. What is tadīya-
viśeṣa?

Gosvāmī: Kṛṣṇa’s footprints, the pasturing grounds of
Vṛndāvana, and Kṛṣṇa’s priya-jana are called tadīya-
viśeṣa. Kṛṣṇa’s priya-jana are those who have rāga,
anurāga and mahābhāva for Him.

Vijaya: What is upamā?

Gosvāmī:Upamā is a resemblance between one object and
another. In this context, it refers to some resemblance
to Kṛṣṇa.

Vijaya: What is svabhāva?

Gosvāmī:Svabhāva is the nature that is self-manifest and
does not depend on any other cause. There are two kinds
of svabhāva: nisarga and svarūpa.

Vijaya: What is nisarga?

Gosvāmī:Nisarga is the desire or saṁskāra arising from
firmly established habits or practices. Hearing about
Kṛṣṇa’s guṇa, rūpa and so on is only a partial cause of
the awakening of rati. Nisarga consists of the
impressions caused by steadfast raty-ābhāsa developed in
many lives of the jīva. It is awakened suddenly and
unexpectedly when one hears the descriptions of Kṛṣṇa’s
guṇa, rūpa and so on. This means that hearing about
Kṛṣṇa’s qualities and beauty is not the only cause of
rati.

Vijaya: Please explain svarūpa.

Gosvāmī:Svarūpa is the bhāva that has no birth and no
origin, and which manifests its own perfection
independently. There are three types of svarūpa: kṛṣṇa-
niṣṭha, lalanā-niṣṭha and ubhaya-niṣṭha. Those who have
a demonic nature cannot attain kṛṣṇa-niṣṭha-svarūpa, but
it is easily attainable for those who have a godly
nature. Lalanā-niṣṭha-svarūpa is self-manifest rati that
is expressed as an involuntary impulse towards Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, even when one has not seen Him or heard about His
beauty and qualities. The svabhāva in which both kṛṣṇa-
niṣṭha and lalanā-niṣṭha are manifest is called ubhaya-
niṣṭha-svarūpa.

Vijaya: That means that there are seven causes all
together: abhiyoga, viṣaya, sambandha, abhimāna, tadīya-
viśeṣa, upamā and svabhāva. Do all types of madhura-rati
arise from these seven causes?

Gosvāmī: The kṛṣṇa-rati of the gopīs of Gokula occurs
naturally and of its own accord. It is self-manifest,
and is not aroused by abhiyoga and so on. However, these
causes also play a role in many pastimes. The rati of
the sādhana-siddhas and nisarga-siddhas is awakened by
these seven causes, beginning with abhiyoga.

                            470
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017


Vijaya: I have not been able to comprehend this subject
thoroughly. Please give one or two examples to help me
to understand.

Gosvāmī: The rati that I am talking about arises only
from rāgānugā-bhakti, but this type of rati is very far
away as long as vaidhī-bhakti does not become bhāvamayī.
A sādhaka who develops a greed for those moods on seeing
the vraja-gopīs’ ecstatic emotional performance of
kṛṣṇa-sevā gradually attains rati arising from the six
causes other than svabhāva, and especially from priya-
jana. When he becomes sādhana-siddha, he experiences a
sphūrti, a momentary, internal manifestation of lalanā-
niṣṭha-svarūpa.

Vijaya: How many kinds of rati are there?

Gosvāmī: There are three kinds of rati: sādhāraṇī
(general), samañjasā (proper), and samarthā (competent).
The rati of Kubjā is an example of sādhāraṇī rati. It
has been condemned because its fundamental basis is the
desire to enjoy union. The rati of the mahiṣīs of
Dvārakā is called samañjasā (proper), because it
satisfies worldly standards of righteous conduct, and it
is awakened by the regulative principles of marriage. “I
am His wife, He is my husband,” this rati is limited by
such sentiments. The rati of the residents of Gokula is
samarthā because such rati magnificently goes beyond
even the boundaries of social restrictions and religious
principles. Samarthā rati is not actually improper.
Indeed, from the perspective of the ultimate
transcendental objective (parama-paramārtha), only
samarthā rati is correct in the highest sense. Sādhāraṇī
rati is like a jewel; samañjasā rati is like cintāmaṇi;
and samarthā rati is supremely rare, like the Kaustubha-
maṇi.

Vijayaís eyes filled with tears and, weeping
continuously, he said, “Today, I am extremely fortunate
to hear such an unprecedented and exalted subject.
Prabhu, by your causeless mercy, please describe the
characteristics of sādhāraṇī rati.”

Gosvāmī:Sādhāraṇī rati appears from the desire for
sambhoga. It is stimulated by utter infatuation when one
sees Kṛṣṇa face-to-face, but it is not so deep and
neither is it thick nor permanent. When the desire for
sambhoga subsides, this rati also subsides, which is why
it is categorized as inferior.

Vijaya: What is the nature of samañjasā rati?

Gosvāmī:Samañjasā rati is the full and concentrated rati
that is aroused by hearing about Kṛṣṇa’s beauty and
qualities, and which arises from the conception, “I am
His wife, and He is my husband.” Sometimes the desire
for sambhoga also occurs in this rati. When the desire
for sambhoga is separate from samañjasā rati, it is not
possible to control Śrī Kṛṣṇa by expressing one’s mood,
or by the hāva, bhāva, helā and so on arising from the
desire for sambhoga.

Vijaya: What is the nature of samarthā rati?

                          471
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017


Gosvāmī: The desire for sambhoga with Kṛṣṇa is present
in every type of rati. In sādhāraṇī and samañjasā rati,
the desire for sambhoga is for one’s own personal
satisfaction. Samarthā is the special bhāva that is
completely selfless and free from the self-interested
desire for union, and which attains the state of tad-
ātmya or oneness with the desire for union.

Vijaya: What is the nature of that special bhāva? Kindly
clarify this point a little more.

Gosvāmī: There are two types of desire for sambhoga. The
first is the desire for sambhoga in which one desires
that one’s own senses are satisfied by the beloved for
one’s own happiness. The second is the desire for
sambhoga that consists entirely of the conception that
one should satisfy the senses of the beloved for His
happiness. The first type of desire can be called kāma,
because the desire for one’s own happiness is inherent
in it. The second type of desire has been called prema,
because it consists exclusively of the desire for the
happiness of one’s beloved. The first type of desire,
kāma, is powerful and it is prominent in sādhāraṇī rati,
but it does not predominate in samañjasā. The latter
characteristic, namely prema, or the exclusive desire
for the happiness of one’s beloved, is the inherent
distinctive function (viśeṣa-dharma) of the desire for
sambhoga in samarthā rati.

Vijaya: One must feel happiness from the touch of one’s
beloved in sambhoga. Is there no desire for this
happiness in samarthā rati?

Gosvāmī: It is certainly extremely difficult to be
completely free from such a desire. Nevertheless,
although such a desire is present in the heart of one
who has samarthā rati, it is extremely faint. This
samarthā rati becomes powerful with the support of its
viśeṣa-dharma (specific characteristic) when it embraces
and becomes one with the desire for sambhoga. This type
of rati is celebrated by the name samarthā (capable)
because it is endowed with great capability (to control
Kṛṣṇa).

Vijaya: What is the special glory of samarthā rati?

Gosvāmī: As soon as this samarthā rati appears, one
becomes oblivious to all types of obstacles, such as
family, religious principles, patience and shyness. This
is so, whether it was aroused by sambandha, tadīya,
svabhāvika-svarūpa, or any of the other causes beginning
with abhiyoga that I mentioned previously. This type of
rati is extremely deep.

Vijaya: How does the desire for sambhoga attain oneness
when it mixes with śuddhā rati?

Gosvāmī: The samarthā rati of the vraja-gopīs is only
for the sake of Kṛṣṇa’s happiness, and whatever
happiness they experience in their sambhoga is also to
please Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, the desire for sambhoga
combines with rati, which is exclusively the desire for
Kṛṣṇa’s happiness, and assumes the most astounding

                          472
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

splendor with waves of vilāsa. This rati does not allow
the desire for sambhoga to exist separately from itself.
Sometimes this rati can terminate itself in samañjasā.

Vijaya:Aho! How extraordinary this rati is! I want to
hear about its ultimate glory.

Gosvāmī: When this rati is mature, it attains the
condition of mahābhāva. All liberated personalities are
searching for this rati, and five kinds of bhaktas
attain it to the degree that they are capable of doing
so.

Vijaya: Prabhu, I wish to know about the sequence in
which rati evolves.

Gosvāmī: syād dṛḍhe ‘yaṁ ratiḥ premā prodyan snehaḥ
kramād ayam

syān mānaḥ praṇayo rāgo’nurāgo bhāva ity api

(Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, Sthāyībhāva-prakaraṇa 53)

The meaning is that this madhura-rati is made unshakable
by the presence of antagonistic elements. Then it is
called prema. This prema gradually manifests its own
sweetness as it develops into sneha, māna, praṇaya,
rāga, anurāga and bhāva.

Vijaya: Prabhu, please give an example to help me
understand this point.

Gosvāmī: Just as the seed of sugar cane grows and
progressively develops into cane juice, guḍa, khaṇḍa,
śarkarā, sitā and sitotpala, similarly rati, prema,
sneha, māna, praṇaya, rāga, anurāga and bhāva are all
one substance in progressive stages of development. In
this context, the word bhāva refers to mahābhāva.

Vijaya: Why have you referred to all these bhāvas as
prema when they all have different names?

Gosvāmī:Paṇḍitas have used the word prema to denote all
the stages beginning with sneha because they are six
progressive stages in the development of the unmitigated
pleasure sports (vilāsa) of prema itself. As prema for
Śrī Kṛṣṇa appears in His bhaktas, the corresponding type
of prema also arises in Kṛṣṇa for His bhaktas.

Vijaya: What is the primary characteristic of prema?

Gosvāmī: In madhura-rasa, the bond of emotion between
the youthful couple never breaks despite there being
cause for the destruction of the relationship. That
indestructible emotional bond is called prema.

Vijaya: How many kinds of prema are there?

Gosvāmī: There are three kinds: prauḍha, madhya and
manda.

Vijaya: What is the nature of prauḍha-prema?

Gosvāmī: In prauḍha-prema, the heart of the beloved

                          473
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

flounders in anxiety over the pain that her lover must
be feeling when she is late for the meeting.

Vijaya: What is madhya-prema?

Gosvāmī:Madhya-prema is that in which the beloved can
tolerate the distress of the lover.

Vijaya: What is manda-prema?

Gosvāmī:Manda-prema is prema in which forgetfulness may
occur under some particular circumstances of time and
place, or in which there is no sacrifice or respect, as
the lovers are always extremely familiar which each
other, due to being very intimate and remaining
together. Although this prema is mild (manda), there is
no disrespect or neglect in it.

Vijaya: If there are any more important points on this
subject, please explain them.

Gosvāmī:Prauḍha, madhya and manda-prema can also be
easily understood by one other type of characteristic.
The prema in which separation is intolerable is prauḍha-
prema; the prema in which the pain inflicted by
separation is tolerable is madhya-prema; and the prema
in which forgetfulness may occur in certain special
circumstances is called manda-prema.

Vijaya: I have understood prema. Now please describe
sneha.

Gosvāmī: When prema attains its ultimate limit and
illuminates the lamp of the citta (mind) and melts the
heart, it is called sneha. Here the word citta denotes
the attainment of the object (viṣaya) of prema. The
marginal characteristic of sneha is that one is never
satiated, despite repeatedly looking at the object of
one’s affection.

Vijaya: Are there any superior and inferior divisions
within sneha?

Gosvāmī: Yes. There are also three divisions in
accordance with the gradations of the development of
sneha. These are uttama, madhya and kaniṣṭha. In
kaniṣṭha-sneha, the heart melts on touching the limbs of
one’s beloved; in madhya-sneha, the heart melts simply
upon seeing one’s beloved; and in uttama-sneha, the
heart melts merely by hearing anything in connection
with one’s dearest beloved.

Vijaya: How many types of sneha are there?

Gosvāmī: The natural characteristic of sneha is that it
can manifest in two ways: ghṛta-sneha and madhu-sneha.

Vijaya: What is ghṛta-sneha?

Gosvāmī:Ghṛta-sneha is deep with a great deal of
respectful affection. Ghṛta (ghee) is not independently
sweet like honey; it is only delicious when it is mixed
with sugar and other ingredients. Similarly, ghṛta-sneha
is not independently sweet like madhu-sneha, and it only

                          474
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

becomes highly palatable when mixed with other bhāvas
such as garva (pride) and asūyā (jealousy). Ghṛta-sneha
is cool in its natural state, so it becomes thick with
mutual honor and deep respect. In other words, ghṛta-
sneha solidifies in contact with the mutual respect
(ādara) of the nāyaka and nāyikā, just as ghee naturally
solidifies in contact with a cool substance. This sneha
is called ghṛta-sneha because it has the characteristics
of ghee.

Vijaya: You have mentioned ādara (honor). What is its
nature?

Gosvāmī:Ādara is born from gaurava (awe and veneration),
so ādara and gaurava are mutually interdependent. This
honor (ādara) becomes clearly manifest in sneha,
although it is present in rati.

Vijaya: What is gaurava?

Gosvāmī:Gaurava is the conception, “He is my guru-jana
(respectable superior),” and the bhāva that is aroused
by this conception is called sambhrama. Ādara and
gaurava are mutually interdependent. Maintaining a
respectful attitude is a sign that gaurava (awe and
veneration) is naturally present.

Vijaya: What is the nature of madhu-sneha?

Gosvāmī:Madhu-sneha is the affection that is imbued with
excessive possessiveness (madīyatva), which makes the
lover think, “He is mine.” This affection manifests its
own sweetness without depending on any other bhāvas. It
is independently full of sweetness, and a variety of
rasas are combined within it. It also creates heat
because of its natural tendency towards mad passion. It
has been called madhu-sneha because it has these
characteristics of honey.

Vijaya: What is possessiveness (madīyatva)?

Gosvāmī: Two conceptions are active in rati. One type of
rati is imbued with the idea, “I am His,” and the other
type of rati is imbued with the conviction, “He is
mine.” The predominant mood in ghṛta-sneha is “I am
His,” whereas the predominant mood in madhu-sneha is “He
is mine.” Ghṛta-sneha is Candrāvalī’s characteristic
mood, while madhu-sneha is Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s. Both these
bhāvas are madīyatva.

When Vijaya heard about these two types of bhāva, his
hair began to stand on end. Choked with emotion, he
offered his daṇḍavat-praṇāma to Śrī Guru Gosvāmī and
said, “Today I have become fortunate, and my human birth
has become successful. Although drinking the nectar of
your instructions, my thirst to hear is still not
satiated. Now please be causelessly merciful to me by
explaining about māna.”

Gosvāmī:Māna is sneha that has attained the pinnacle of
its excellence and has externally assumed a guileful or
crooked mood to cause the nāyaka and nāyikā to realize a
new sweetness.


                           475
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

Vijaya: How many types of māna are there?

Gosvāmī: There are two types of māna: udātta and lalitā.

Vijaya: What is udātta-māna?

Gosvāmī: There are also two types of udātta-māna. One
type takes on a submissive mood (dākṣiṇya-bhāva)
externally, and a contrary mood (vāmya-bhāva)
internally. The other is expressed through extremely
cryptic behavior; it hides the bhāvas of the mind and is
characterized by profound gravity, laced with a slight
scent of vāmya. Udātta-māna occurs only in ghṛta-sneha.

Vijaya: What is lalita-māna? I cannot say why, but for
some reason I have more interest in it.

Gosvāmī: When madhu-sneha becomes turbulent due to its
tendency to boil over, conveying unrestrained and
extremely sweet crookedness and humor, it is called
lalita-māna. There are also two types of lalita-māna,
namely kauṭilya-lalita-māna and narma-lalita-māna. When
the heart independently assumes a crooked nature, it is
called kauṭilya-lalita-māna, and māna that is infused
with humor is called narma-lalita-māna. Both types of
lalita-māna arise from madhu-sneha.

Vijaya: What is praṇaya?

Gosvāmī: When māna is imbued with viśrambha so that one
considers oneself non-different from one’s beloved, it
is called praṇaya.

Vijaya: What is the meaning of viśrambha in this
context?

Gosvāmī:Viśrambha is intimate confidence, and it is the
intrinsic nature of praṇaya. Viśrambha is not the
instrumental cause (nimitta-kāraṇa) of praṇaya; rather,
it is the ingredient cause (upādāna-kāraṇa). There are
two kinds of viśrambha: maitra and sakhya.

Vijaya: What is maitra-viśrambha?

Gosvāmī:Maitra-viśrambha is the implicit trust that is
imbued with courtesy and humility.

Vijaya: What is sakhya-viśrambha?

Gosvāmī: Implicit trust is called sakhya-viśrambha when
it is free from all types of fear and is imbued with the
full confidence that one’s beloved is controlled by
one’s love.

Vijaya: Please clearly explain the inter-relationship
between praṇaya, sneha and māna.

Gosvāmī: In some circumstances, praṇaya arises from
sneha, and then develops the characteristic behavior of
māna. In other cases, māna arises from sneha, and then
becomes praṇaya. Therefore, māna and praṇaya are
interchangeably related as cause and effect. That is why
viśrambha has been described separately. The appearance
of maitra and sakhya is caused by the differences

                           476
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017

between udātta and lalita. Moreover, there is also the
further consideration of sumaitra and susakhya in
praṇaya (i.e., the prefix su indicates special or good).

Vijaya: Now please describe the symptoms of rāga.

Gosvāmī:Praṇaya is called rāga in its highest condition,
when even extreme distress seems like happiness.

Vijaya: How many types of rāga are there?

Gosvāmī: There are two types of rāga: nīlimā-rāga and
raktimā-rāga.

Vijaya: How many types of nīlimā-rāga are there?

Gosvāmī: There are also two types of nīlimā-rāga, namely
nīlī-rāga and śyāmā-rāga.

Vijaya: What is nīlī-rāga?

Gosvāmī:Nīlī-rāga is rāga that has no possibility of
becoming weakened and when it is visible externally, it
conceals the other bhāvas with which it is combined.
This rāga can be seen in Candrāvalī and Kṛṣṇa.

Vijaya: What is śyāmā-rāga?

Gosvāmī:Śyāmā-rāga is the rāga that is displayed through
timidity, auṣadhaseka and so on. It is manifest somewhat
more than nīlī-rāga, and is attained after a long time.

Vijaya: How many types of raktimā-rāga are there?

Gosvāmī: There are two types: kusumbha-rāga and
mañjiṣṭhā sambhava-rāga.

Vijaya: What is kusumbha-rāga?

Gosvāmī:Kusumbha-rāga is the rāga that is infused at
once within the heart, and that manifests its own beauty
according to necessity, although it illuminates the
splendor of other rāgas at the same time. Kusumbha-rāga
is stable in the heart that has a special capacity to
contain it, although it sometimes diminishes when it is
mixed with mañjiṣṭhā in Kṛṣṇa’s beloveds.

Vijaya: What is mañjiṣṭhā-rāga?

Gosvāmī:Mañjiṣṭhā-rāga is the rāga that is self-
manifest; that is, it is not dependent on others; it is
never destroyed; it is always steadfast; and it is never
dulled, unlike kusumbha. Such rāga is found in Śrīmatī
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.

The conclusion is that the bhāvas that I have already
described ñ such as ghṛta-sneha, udātta, maitra,
sumaitra, and nīlimā ñ are found in Candrāvalī and the
mahiṣīs such as Rukmiṇī. All of the progressively
superior bhāvas ñ such as madhu-sneha, lalitā, sakhya,
susakhya and raktimā ñ are found fully in Śrī Rādhikā.
They are sometimes manifested in Satyabhāmā, and under
special circumstances in Lakṣmaṇā as well.


                             477
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

When I discussed ālambana-vibhāva earlier, I analyzed
the divisions, such as svapakṣa, between the various
devīs of Gokula, which arise from these different types
of bhāva.

Scholarly personalities take support of transcendental
intelligence (the power of prajñā) to comprehend the
various separate divisions that can occur by the mutual
combination of the forty-one other mukhya-bhāvas
mentioned in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu. I am not giving a
separate explanation here.

Vijaya: Which bhāvas do you mean when you use the term
“other bhāvas” (bhāvāntara)?

Gosvāmī: This means the sthāyī-madhura-bhāva, thirty-
three vyabhicārī-bhāvas, and seven gauṇa bhāvas
beginning with hāsya. The term ‘other bhāvas’
(bhāvāntara) refers to this total of forty-one bhāvas
taken together.

Vijaya: I have understood the subject of rāga. Now
please explain anurāga.

Gosvāmī:Anurāga is eternally newer and newer and causes
one’s beloved to be always experienced as new at every
moment.

Vijaya: Does this anurāga manifest any other fascinating
features?

Gosvāmī:Anurāga is manifest in forms such as the
sentiment in which the lovers feel that each has
subjugated the other by their love, by prema-vaicittya
and by the desire to take birth among lifeless objects.
Anurāga also causes the sphūrti of Kṛṣṇa to appear at
the time of separation.

Vijaya: I can easily understand the sense of mutual
subjugation, and the desire to take birth as an inert
object such as a tree. But please, mercifully instruct
me about prema-vaicittya.

Gosvāmī:Prema-vaicittya is included in vipralambha; I
will tell you about this later.

Vijaya: That is fine. Then kindly tell me about
mahābhāva.

Gosvāmī: My dear child, my acquaintance with vraja-rasa
is utterly insignificant. Where am I, and where is the
description of the supremely elevated mahābhāva?
Nevertheless, I am speaking on the strength of the
merciful śikṣā I have received from Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī and
Paṇḍita Gosvāmī. You should realize that by their mercy
alone I can say something in accordance with Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī’s specifications. When anurāga in the form of
yāvad-āśraya-vṛtti attains the condition of svayaṁvedya-
daśā and becomes manifest (prakāśita), it is called
bhāva or mahābhāva.

Vijaya: Prabhu, I am thoroughly worthless and destitute.
I am inquiring foolishly. Please be compassionate and
explain the symptoms of mahābhāva in simple language

                          478
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

that is suitable for my understanding.

Gosvāmī: Śrī Rādhikājī is the āśraya of anurāga, and
Kṛṣṇa is the viṣaya of anurāga. Śrī Nandanandana in His
śṛṅgāra form is the ultimate limit of viṣaya-tattva, and
Śrī Rādhājī is the ultimate limit of āśraya-tattva. This
means that Śrī Kṛṣṇa alone is the supermost viṣaya of
anurāga, and Śrī Rādhājī is its supermost āśraya. Their
anurāga is the sthāyībhāva. When that anurāga reaches
its ultimate limit, it is called yāvad-āśraya-vṛtti. In
that condition, it attains the svayaṁvedya-daśā, the
condition that is only completely realized by that
special beloved. At that time, anurāga is illuminated by
the bhāvas such as sūddīpta.

Vijaya:Aho! Mahābhāva! What is the meaning of mahābhāva
– today I have understood something. Mahābhāva is the
ultimate limit of all bhāvas. I have become intensely
eager to hear an example of this mahābhāva. Please be
merciful and describe something to satisfy my ears.

Gosvāmī: This śloka is an example of mahābhāva.

rādhāyā bhavataś ca citta-jatunī svedair vilāpya kramād

yuñjann adri-nikuñja-kuñjara-pate nirdhūta-bheda-bhramam

citrāya svayam anvarañjayad iha brahmāṇḍa-harmyodare

bhūyobhir nava-rāga-hiṅgula-bharaiḥ śṛṅgāra-kāruḥ kṛtī

(Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, Sthāyībhāva prakaraṇa 155)

Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa continuously enjoy Their loving play in
the nikuñjas. Vṛṇdā-devī, having realized the excellence
of their anurāga, says to Kṛṣṇa, “O King of mad
elephants, who sports in the groves on Govardhana Hill,
there is an accomplished artist of the name Śṛṅgāra rasa
and upon the fire generated from the heat of Your two
bhāvas, he has slowly melted Your shellac-like hearts
and made them one. Then mixing that with profuse
quantities of the kuṅkuma of Your everfresh rāga, he is
painting an astonishing picture upon the inner walls of
the grand temple of the universe.”

Here, ënirdhūta-bheda-bhramamí means Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa
have become free from Their duality and become one, thus
culminating in the stage of svayaṁvedya daśā. The grand
temple of the universe should be understood to refer to
yāvad-āśraya-vṛtti and the term “he is painting”
indicates the condition of prakāśita.

Vijaya: Where is this mahābhāva to be found?

Gosvāmī:Mahābhāva is extremely rare, even in the mahiṣīs
headed by Rukmiṇī. It is only experienced by the vraja-
devīs headed by Śrī Rādhā.

Vijaya: What is the purport of this?

Gosvāmī:Svakīya-bhāva is present wherever the nāyikā is
bound to the nāyaka by the regulations of marriage. In
svakīya-bhāva, rati is samañjasā, so it is not competent
to attain the most elevated conditions such as

                          479
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

mahābhāva. Svakīya-bhāva is also present in some gopīs
in Vraja, but parakīya-bhāva is predominant. In Vraja,
rati is samarthā, so it develops fully, and reaches up
to the condition of mahābhāva.

Vijaya: How many types of mahābhāva are there?

Gosvāmī:Mahābhāva, which is the embodiment of the
highest nectar, attracts the heart and causes it to
attain its own intrinsic nature. There are two types of
mahābhāva: rūḍha and adhirūḍha.

Vijaya: What is rūḍha-mahābhāva?

Gosvāmī:Rūḍha-mahābhāva is the stage in which all the
sāttvika-bhāvas are manifest in the uddīpta condition.

Vijaya: Be merciful and explain the anubhāvas of rūḍha-
mahābhāva.

Gosvāmī: In rūḍha-mahābhāva, even the passing of a
moment is unbearable; this rūḍha-mahābhāva churns the
hearts of those present; a kalpa seems to pass like a
moment (kalpa-kṣaṇatva); one feels dejected because of
the apprehension that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is undergoing some
inconvenience, although He is actually happy; one
becomes forgetful of everything, even oneself, although
one is not bewildered; and one moment seems to pass like
a kalpa (kṣaṇa-kalpatā). Some of these anubhāvas are
experienced during meeting, and some during separation.

Vijaya: “Even the passing of a moment is unbearable” –
please give an example of this to help me understand.

Gosvāmī: This bhāva is vaicittya-vipralambha (a
particular manifestation of separation). Even in
meeting, there is the feeling of being separated, and
even a moment’s separation is intolerable. That is why,
when the gopīs looked upon Śrī Kṛṣṇa for the first time
after so long at Kurukṣetra, they cursed Brahmājī, the
creator of their eyelids, because the blinking of their
eyelids was obstructing their vision of Kṛṣṇa. Even the
time that elapsed during the blinking of their eyes
became unbearable.

Vijaya: “This rūḍha-bhāva churns the hearts of those who
are present” – what does that mean?

Gosvāmī: For example, at Kurukṣetra, when the mahiṣīs
such as Rukmiṇī and the kings such as Yudhiṣṭhira saw
the uncommon anurāga of the gopīs who had come to see
Kṛṣṇa, their hearts were churned. That is what this
statement refers to.

Vijaya: What is kalpa-kṣaṇatva?

Gosvāmī: Although the night of the rāsa-līlā was as long
as a night of Brahmā, it still seemed to be less than a
second to the gopīs. Such a mood is called kalpa-
kṣaṇatva.

Vijaya: Please help me to understand the bhāva of
feeling dejected for fear that Śrī Kṛṣṇa may undergo
some inconvenience, although actually He is happy.

                          480
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017


Gosvāmī: An example is found in the śloka:

yat te sujāta-caraṇāmburuhaṁ staneṣu

bhītāḥ śanaiḥ priya dadhīmahi karkaśeṣu

tenāṭavīm aṭasi tad vyathate na kiṁ svit

kūrpādibhir bhramati dhīr bhavad-āyuṣāṁ naḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.31.19)

Even when the gopīs hold the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
upon their breasts, they think, “It is lamentable that
our breasts are so hard. Kṛṣṇaís soft lotus feet must be
feeling pain when we keep them on our breasts.” Such
regret is called dejection due to the fear of difficulty
for Kṛṣṇa at the time of His happiness.

Vijaya: What is the phenomenon of forgetting everything
even in the absence of bewilderment?

Gosvāmī: All types of bewilderment (moha) are vanquished
by the sphūrti of Kṛṣṇa within the heart; that is, there
is the complete absence of moha. But when the sphūrti of
Kṛṣṇa occurs, one loses awareness of everything else in
the entire world, including one’s own body.

Vijaya: What is kṣaṇa-kalpatā?

Gosvāmī: Kṛṣṇa describes the state of the gopīs’
separation to Uddhava, “Uddhava, when I was with the
vraja-vāsīs in Vṛndāvana, their nights with Me seemed to
pass like a moment, but in separation from Me, those
same nights appeared to never end and they felt those
nights to be longer than a kalpa.” In this way, they
would experience the passing of one moment to be like
being lost in a vast ocean of time.

Vijaya: I have understood rūḍha-mahābhāva. Now please
explain adhirūḍha-mahābhāva.

Gosvāmī:Adhirūḍha-mahābhāva is the mood in which all the
anubhāvas that are manifested in resolute mahābhāva
attain special characteristics that are even more
astonishing than those anubhāvas in their normal forms.

Vijaya: How many types of adhirūḍha are there?

Gosvāmī: There are two types, modana and mādana.

Vijaya: What is modana?

Gosvāmī: The adhirūḍha-mahābhāva in which all the
sāttvika-bhāvas of the nāyaka and nāyikā are aroused to
a much greater extent than in the uddīpta condition is
called modana. In this modana-bhāva, Kṛṣṇa and Rādhā
feel some anguish and fear.

Vijaya: Please describe the position of modana.

Gosvāmī:Modana does not occur anywhere other than in the
yūtha of Śrī Rādhikā. Modana is the dearest and most

                          481
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017

delightful pleasure sport of the hlādinī-śakti. In some
special conditions of separation, modana becomes mohana,
and as an effect of this helpless condition of
separation, all the sāttvika-bhāvas manifest in the
sūddīpta condition.

Vijaya: Please describe the anubhāvas in the stage of
mohana.

Gosvāmī: Kṛṣṇa faints while being embraced by another
lover;1 one desires Kṛṣṇa’s happiness while personally
accepting unbearable distress; the bhāva called
brahmāṇḍa-kṣobha-kāritā causes the whole universe to
feel anguish, and even birds and beasts begin to cry;
the powerful longing that, in the event of death, the
five elements of the body may associate with Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Divya-unmāda (divine madness) and other anubhāvas also
occur in the stage of mohana. The miraculous
characteristics of mahābhāva are manifest to the fullest
extent in Śrī Rādhikā’s mohana-bhāva, even more than in
moha, which is included among the sañcārī-bhāvas.

Vijaya: Prabhu, if you consider it to be appropriate,
kindly describe two symptoms of divya-unmāda.

Gosvāmī: When mohana-bhāva attains a unique,
indescribable mode of behavior, developing into a
wondrous condition that resembles a state of utter
confusion, then it is divya-unmāda. It has many
different features such as udghūrṇā and citra-jalpa.

Vijaya: What is udghūrṇā?

Gosvāmī: The state of divya-unmāda in which many
varieties of astounding and uncontrollable endeavors are
manifest is called udghūrṇā.

Rādhikā experienced udghūrṇā when Kṛṣṇa departed for
Mathurā. At that time, as if in complete forgetfulness
due to feelings of separation from Kṛṣṇa, Rādhikā
thought, “Kṛṣṇa is coming; He will be here in just a
moment.” Thinking in that way, She made the bed in Her
kuñja. Sometimes She rebuked the dark clouds like a
nāyikā who expresses anger towards her unfaithful lover
(khaṇḍitā), and sometimes She wandered around hurriedly
in the dense darkness of the night, like a nāyikā who
makes a secret journey to meet with her lover
(abhisāriṇī).

Vijaya: What is citra-jalpa?

Gosvāmī:Citra-jalpa consists of the discourses that
occur when one meets a friend of one’s beloved. They are
full of intense longing, and they arise from bhāvas such
as jealousy, envy, restlessness, pride, and eagerness.

Vijaya: How many aṅgas of citra-jalpa are there?

Gosvāmī: There are ten limbs of citra-jalpa, namely,
prajalpa, parijalpa, vijalpa, ujjalpa, sañjalpa,
avajalpa, abhijalpa, ājalpa, pratijalpa and sujalpa. You
can find a description of them in Bhramara-gītā in the
Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.2


                            482
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

Vijaya: What is prajalpa?

Gosvāmī:Prajalpa means to reveal the tactlessness of
one’s lover, using various neglectful mannerisms that
are imbued with malice, jealousy, and pride.

Vijaya: What is parijalpa?

Gosvāmī:Parijalpa is showing one’s own expertise through
expressions that establish faults in one’s prāṇa-dhana,
such as His cruelty, treachery and fickleness.

Vijaya: What is vijalpa?

Gosvāmī:Vijalpa refers to speech in which one outwardly
makes malicious allegations against Kṛṣṇa, while the
aspect of māna is hidden in the heart.

Vijaya: What is ujjalpa?

Gosvāmī:Ujjalpa means speaking of Kṛṣṇa’s treachery,
hypocrisy and so on out of jealousy arising from one’s
pride, and always making hostile allegations against
Him.

Vijaya: What is sañjalpa?

Gosvāmī:Sañjalpa is establishing Kṛṣṇa’s ungratefulness,
harshness, deceitfulness and so on through cryptic
joking accusations or mannerisms.

Vijaya: What is avajalpa?

Gosvāmī:Avajalpa is expressing one’s involuntary or
helpless attachment to Kṛṣṇa with fear imbued with
jealousy, while finding in Him faults such as hard-
heartedness, lustiness and villainy.

Vijaya: What is abhijalpa?

Gosvāmī:Abhijalpa means to lament with indirect
expressions such as, “Kṛṣṇa even gives the distress of
separation to His birds such as His parrot and the
peacocks, so attachment to Him is useless.”

Vijaya: What is ājalpa?

Gosvāmī:Ājalpa means to expose Kṛṣṇa’s duplicity and
persecution due to self-disparagement, and to say that
only subjects other than Kṛṣṇa’s līlā-kathā give
happiness.

Vijaya: What is pratijalpa?

Gosvāmī:Pratijalpa means showing respect towards a
messenger sent by Kṛṣṇa, and saying, “Kṛṣṇa is a knave
and a dacoit when He is seeking amorous love, so it is
inappropriate to meet with Him, because He is with other
charming ladies at the moment.”

Vijaya: What is sujalpa?

Gosvāmī:Sujalpa is inquiring about Kṛṣṇa out of
simplicity, with a mood of gravity, humility,

                             483
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

restlessness and eagerness.

Vijaya: Prabhu, am I qualified to know about the
symptoms of mādana?

Gosvāmī: When prema, which is the embodiment of the
essence of hlādinī, increases even further than the
mahābhāva that I have described so far, it attains an
extremely advanced condition. The paramount emotion in
which it becomes jubilant (ullāsa) due to the
simultaneous manifestation of all types of bhāvas is
called mādana. This mādana is eternally and splendidly
manifest only in Śrī Rādhā. It does not arise in other
gopīs, even in those such as Lalitā.

Vijaya: Is there jealousy in mādana-bhāva?

Gosvāmī: Jealousy is very prominent in mādana-bhāva; it
is even seen to be directed towards unworthy or
inanimate objects. Mādana is also famous for causing Śrī
Rādhā to praise anything that has even the faintest
scent of a relation with Kṛṣṇa, although She is
constantly in intimate union with Him. For example,
Śrīmatī Rādhā becomes envious of Kṛṣṇa’s vana-mālā
(garland of forest flowers) and Kṛṣṇa’s sweethearts from
the mountainous regions, the girls of the Pulinda tribe.

Vijaya: When does mādana arise?

Gosvāmī: This fascinating mādana-bhāva only occurs at
the time of meeting. The eternal sporting pastimes of
mādana reign splendidly in innumerable forms.

Vijaya: Prabhu, can we find a description of this type
of mādana in the statements of any sages?

Gosvāmī:Mādana-rasa is unlimited, so it is difficult for
even the transcendental Cupid, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, to understand
the full extent of its activities. That is why even Śrī
Śuka Muni was not able to describe it fully, and what to
speak of the philosophers of rasa, such as Bharata Muni.

Vijaya: Your statements are astounding. How is it
possible that even Kṛṣṇa Himself, who is the embodiment
of rasa and the constitutional enjoyer of rasa, does not
fully understand the behavior of mādana?

Gosvāmī: Kṛṣṇa is rasa Himself, and He is unlimited,
omniscient and omnipotent. Nothing is hidden from Him,
and nothing is inaccessible or impossible for Him. He is
eternally eka-rasa, and at the same time, He is also
aneka-rasa, due to His acintya-bhedābheda-dharma. As
eka-rasa (encompassing everything within Himself), He is
ātmārāma, and in this condition, no rasa exists
separately from Him. However, He is simultaneously
aneka-rasa. Thus, besides ātma-gata-rasa (rasa
experienced by oneself), there is also para-gata-rasa
(rasa experienced by others) and the varieties of mixed
ātma-para-vicitra-rasa. The happiness of His līlā lies
in the latter two types of rasa. When para-gata expands
to the ultimate degree, it is called parakīya-rasa, and
this highest development manifests abundantly in
Vṛndāvana. Thus for the ātma-gata-rasa, the unknown,
exalted and unique happiness of parakīya-rasa is the

                          484
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

last limit of mādana. This is present during the purely
unmanifest līlā in Goloka, and also to a slight extent
in Vraja.

Vijaya: Prabhu, you have shown unlimited mercy to me.
Now please explain the essence of all types of madhura-
rasa in brief, so that I may easily understand.

Gosvāmī: All the bhāvas that arise in the vraja-devīs
are divine in all respects, and beyond the jurisdiction
of logic. Therefore, it is not only difficult, but
impossible to describe those bhāvas thoroughly. It has
been stated in śāstra that Śrī Rādhikā’s rāga manifested
from pūrva-rāga. Under special conditions, that very
rāga becomes anurāga, and from anurāga comes sneha. Then
it is further manifest in the form of māna and praṇaya.
All these points are not fixed, but the condition of
dhūmāyita is certainly the last limit of sādhāraṇī rati.
Samañjasā rati develops as far as sneha, māna, praṇaya,
rāga and anurāga, in which dīpta-rati is manifest in the
jvalita form. In rūḍha-mahābhāva there is uddīpta, and
from modana onwards there is sūddīpta-rati. You should
understand that madhura-rasa is sometimes like this
because the order of the stages may also be rearranged
according to differences in time, place and
circumstance. Sādhāraṇī rati develops as far as prema,
samañjasā rati as far as anurāga, and samarthā rati as
far as mahābhāva.

Vijaya: How far does rati develop in sakhya-rasa?

Gosvāmī: The rati of the narma-vayasa associates reaches
up to anurāga, but the rati of Subala and others reaches
up to mahābhāva.

Vijaya: I see that the characteristics of sthāyībhāva
that you described earlier reach up to the limit of
mahābhāva. If sthāyībhāva is only one tattva from top to
bottom, why do we see a difference between the rasas?

Gosvāmī: This difference between the rasas arises from
the different kinds of sthāyībhāva. The mysterious
activities of sthāyībhāva are not evident. The different
categories only become visible when the ingredients are
combined with the sthāyībhāva. The sthāyībhāva attains
the state of rasa by a combination of the appropriate
components of rasa, according to its particular, hidden
identity.

Vijaya: Is the distinction between svakīyā and parakīyā
eternal in madhurā rati?

Gosvāmī: Yes, the distinction between svakīya and
parakīya is eternal; it is not an arbitrary designation.
If this difference were to be considered an arbitrary
designation, then all the rasas headed by madhura-rasa
would also have to be considered arbitrary designations.
One’s eternal and natural rasa is indeed his very own
distinctive category of eternal rasa. He has a
corresponding ruci, and performs bhajana accordingly,
and this leads to a corresponding type of attainment.

There is also svakīya-rasa in Vraja. Those who maintain
the mood, “Kṛṣṇa is my husband,” have a corresponding

                          485
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

type of ruci, sādhana-bhajana, and ultimate attainment.
The quality of svakīya in Dvārakā is a Vaikuṇṭha tattva,
whereas the quality of svakīya in Vraja is a Goloka
tattva. There is a difference between them. Vāsudeva
Kṛṣṇa, the son of Vasudeva, is situated within
Vrajanātha Kṛṣṇa, and one should understand that the
highest condition of this svakīya-tattva in relation to
Vāsudeva Kṛṣṇa extends only as far as Vaikuṇṭha.

After hearing this, Vijaya offered praṇāma to Śrī
Gurudeva and returned to his residence, absorbed in
great love.



Thus ends the Thirty-sixth Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled

“Madhura-Rasa: Sthāyībhāva & Stages of Rati”




Chapter 37

Śṛṅgāra-Rasa: Śṛṅgāra Svarūpa & Vipralambha



Vijaya Kumāra relished the aspects of mādhurya-bhāva
that he had heard the previous day, and he was still in
this mood when he again presented himself before Śrī
Gurudeva. He offered praṇāma, and inquired from him
submissively, “Prabhu, I have understood about vibhāva,
anubhāva, sāttvika-bhāva and vyabhicārī-bhāva, and also
the svarūpa of sthāyībhāva. However, although I have
combined these four kinds of ingredients with
sthāyībhāva, I still cannot awaken rasa. Why is this?”

Gosvāmī: Dear Vijaya, you will not be able to awaken
rasa in sthāyībhāva until you have become conversant
with the svarūpa (intrinsic nature) of śṛṅgāra-rasa.

Vijaya: What is śṛṅgāra-rasa?

Gosvāmī: Śṛṅgāra is the super-excellent and profuse
transcendental charm of madhura-rasa. There are two
kinds of śṛṅgāra: vipralambha (love in separation) and
sambhoga (meeting and performing joyful transcendental
pastimes together).

Vijaya: I would like to know the characteristics of
vipralambha.

Gosvāmī: Vipralambha is the delightful emotion that
manifests when the nāyaka and the nāyikās cannot fulfill
their cherished and delightful longing for pastimes such
as embracing and kissing each other. Vipralambha can
occur in any state, either during meeting (milana) or
separation (viyoga), and it especially nourishes the
mood of sambhoga. Vipralambha is also called viraha or
viyoga.

                          486
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017


Vijaya: How does vipralambha nourish the mood of
sambhoga?

Gosvāmī: Dipping a colored cloth repeatedly in the same
dye increasingly enhances the brilliance of the color.
Similarly, vipralambha enhances the super-excellent
brilliance of sambhoga-rasa. Sambhoga cannot develop
fully without vipralambha.

Vijaya: How many different types of vipralambha are
there?

Gosvāmī: There are four types: pūrva-rāga, māna, prema-
vaicittya and pravāsa.

Vijaya: What is pūrva-rāga?

Gosvāmī:Pūrva-rāga is the fascination and enchantment
that arises when the nāyaka and nāyikā see each other
and hear about each other before they actually meet.

Vijaya: What are the different ways of seeing each
other?

Gosvāmī: The nāyikā may see Kṛṣṇa directly in person,
see His form in a picture, or see Him in dreams.

Vijaya: And what are the different ways of hearing about
each other?

Gosvāmī: One may hear someone reciting the nāyaka’s
stutis and glorification, hear about Him from the lips
of sakhīs and messengers (dūtīs), and listen to songs
praising Him.

Vijaya: What causes the appearance of this rati?

Gosvāmī: When I explained sthāyībhāva   before, I
mentioned that the appearance of rati   is caused by
abhiyoga, viṣaya, sambandha, abhimāna   and so on. These
are also the causes of rati appearing   in pūrva-rāga.

Vijaya: Does this pūrva-rāga manifest first in the
vraja-nāyaka, or in the vraja-nāyikās?

Gosvāmī: There are many considerations here. In mundane
affairs, the man generally initiates the longing for
mutual attraction, because women are usually more shy
than men. However, since women also have more prema,
pūrva-rāga manifests first in the doe-eyed gopīs. The
bhakti-śāstras state that pūrva-rāga manifests first in
the bhakta, and Śrī Kṛṣṇa reciprocates accordingly. The
vraja-devīs are the topmost of all bhaktas, so pūrva-
rāga manifests perfectly in them first.

There is an ancient adage in regard to this trait of
human nature ñ “The woman feels attraction first, and
the man responds to her gesture.” However, there is no
fault in reversing the above order, if the intensity of
prema is the same in both of them.

Vijaya: Please explain the sañcārī-bhāvas of pūrva-rāga.


                          487
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

Gosvāmī: Disease, doubt, jealousy, exertion, fatigue,
depression, eagerness, humility, anxiety, sleep,
awakening, dejection, inertia, madness, bewilderment and
longing for death are all sañcārī- or vyabhicārī-bhāvas.

Vijaya: How many different types of pūrva-rāga are
there?

Gosvāmī: There are three types: prauḍha (fully matured),
samañjasa (intermediate), and sādhāraṇa (general).

Vijaya: What is prauḍha (fully matured) pūrva-rāga?

Gosvāmī: Pūrva-rāga is prauḍha when it occurs in those
possessed of samarthā rati. On this level of pūrva-rāga,
the ten daśās (states) beginning from intense longing
(lālasā) up to the desire for death (maraṇa) can
manifest. Since this pūrva-rāga is prauḍha (fully
matured), the states that manifest in it are also
prauḍha.

Vijaya: What are the ten daśās (states)?

Gosvāmī: They are as follows:

lālasodvega-jāgaryās tānavam jaḍimātra tu

vaiyagryaṁ vyādhir unmādo moho mṛtyur daśā daśa

(Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, pūrva-rāga division, 9)

The ten states are intense longing (lālasa), anxiety
(udvega), sleeplessness (jāgaraṇa), emaciation (tānava),
inertia (jaḍatā), impatience (vyagratā), illness
(vyādhi), madness (unmāda), delusion (moha), and longing
for death (mṛtyu).

Vijaya: What is lālasā?

Gosvāmī: Lālasā is the intense longing to attain one’s
heartfelt desire (abhīṣṭa), and its symptoms are
eagerness, fickleness, reeling, and heavy breathing.

Vijaya: What is udvega?

Gosvāmī: Udvega is perturbation of the mind, and it
manifests itself through symptoms such as deep, heavy
breathing; fickleness; motionlessness; thoughtfulness;
tears; change of bodily color; and perspiration.

Vijaya: What is jāgaraṇa?

Gosvāmī: Jāgaraṇa is sleeplessness, and it gives rise to
motionlessness, and dryness of the senses.

Vijaya: What is tānava?

Gosvāmī: Tānava is leanness of the body, and it is
accompanied by symptoms such as bodily weakness and
reeling of the mind. Some people read vilāpa
(lamentation) in place of tānava.

Vijaya: What is jaḍatā (inertia)?


                            488
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

Gosvāmī: Jaḍatā is shown by the absence of
discrimination, by not responding even when asked
something, and by the loss of ability to see and hear.
It is also known as jaḍimā.

Vijaya: What is vyagratā (impatience)?

Gosvāmī: The condition in which the transformations
resulting from bhāva do not manifest externally is
called “gravity.” Vyagratā is the state in which this
gravity is agitated and becomes intolerable. The
symptoms of vyagratā are discrimination, despondency,
regret, and jealousy.

Vijaya: What is vyādhi?

Gosvāmī: When one becomes acutely disappointed because
one has not attained one’s cherished goal (abhīṣṭa) –
namely one’s beloved – the resultant state has symptoms
such as becoming pale, and developing a high fever. This
is called vyādhi, and it gives rise to anubhāvas such as
cold and shivering; desire; delusion; deep, long
breathing; and falling unconscious on the ground.

Vijaya: What is unmāda (madness)?

Gosvāmī: Unmāda is the condition in which the nāyikā
always mistakenly perceives her beloved in different
objects everywhere – for example, taking a tamāla tree
to be Kṛṣṇa, and embracing it. It is the result of
intense absorption of the mind in constant thoughts of
one’s beloved, and of being overwhelmed by bhāvas such
as despondency, dejection, and humility. Its anubhāvas
are aversion, making jealous remarks to one’s beloved,
long breathing, not blinking the eyes, and feeling
extreme pangs of separation.

Vijaya: What is moha?

Gosvāmī: Moha means to become unconscious, and its
anubhāvas are becoming motionless, falling unconscious
and so on.

Vijaya: What is mṛtyu (longing for death)?

Gosvāmī: When the nāyikā is unable to meet with her
kānta (beloved), even though she employs all means, such
as sending love-letters and messages through sakhīs,
Cupid’s arrows cause such unbearably intense pangs of
separation that she strives for death. In this state,
she gives away her cherished belongings to her sakhīs.
Uddīpana-vibhāvas, such as bees, a mild breeze,
moonlight, kadamba trees, clouds, lightning, and
peacocks stimulate the development of this state of
mṛtyu.

Vijaya: What is samañjasa-pūrva-rāga? Kindly explain.

Gosvāmī: Samañjasa-pūrva-rāga is the pūrva-rāga that
appears prior to meeting, and it is the specific
characteristic of samañjasā rati. In this condition, the
nāyikā can gradually manifest the ten conditions,
namely, longing (abhilāṣa), contemplation (cintā),
remembrance (smṛti), glorifying the qualities of the

                          489
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

lover (guṇa-kīrtana), agitation and anxiety (udvega),
lamentation (vilāpa), madness (unmāda), illness
(vyādhi), inertia (jaḍatā), and longing for death
(mṛtyu).

Vijaya: What is the meaning of abhilāṣa in this context?

Gosvāmī:Abhilāṣa refers to the endeavors made to meet
one’s beloved, and its anubhāvas are decorating one’s
body, approaching the beloved on the pretext of doing
something else, and displaying one’s attraction
(anurāga) towards Him.

Vijaya: What is the nature of cintā here?

Gosvāmī: Cintā is meditation on how to achieve
association with one’s lover, such as informing him of
one’s condition through a brāhmaṇa, or sending a letter.
Its symptoms are tossing and turning in bed; long, deep
breathing; and gazing.

Vijaya: What is meant by smṛti here?

Gosvāmī: Smṛti is deep absorption in thoughts of the
beloved whose association has been experienced by seeing
Him and hearing about Him and His beauty, His ornaments,
His pastimes and various blissful dealings, and
everything related to Him. Its anubhāvas are trembling,
fatigue, change in bodily color, tears, detachment and
renunciation, and deep breathing.

Vijaya: What is guṇa-kīrtana?

Gosvāmī: Guṇa-kīrtana is the glorification of the
nāyaka’s qualities, such as His form and beauty, and its
anubhāvas include trembling, horripilation, and choking
of the voice. Anxiety, lamentation accompanied by
madness, illness, inertia, and longing for death – these
six symptoms are manifest in samañjasa-pūrva-rāga to the
same extent as they are in samañjasā rati.

Vijaya: Now, please explain the symptoms of sādhāraṇa-
pūrva-rāga.

Gosvāmī: Sādhāraṇa-pūrva-rāga is exactly like sādhāraṇī
rati. In this condition, the first six stages (daśās) –
up to lamentation (vilāpa) – appear in a mild way. I do
not feel the need to give examples here, because they
are very simple. In this type of pūrva-rāga, the lover
and beloved exchange love-letters (kāma-lekha-patra),
garlands, and so on through confidential companions.

Vijaya: What are kāma-lekha-patra (love-letters)?

Gosvāmī: Love-letters are expressions of mutual loving
sentiments in writing. There are two kinds: sākṣara,
those written with letters or inscriptions of the
alphabet, and nirakṣara, those written without using
letters.

Vijaya: What are nirakṣara-kāma-lekha?

Gosvāmī: An example of a symbolic love-letter is a half-
moon shaped impression made with a nail on a red-colored

                          490
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017

leaf, without any other mark or letter on it.

Vijaya: What are sākṣara-kāma-lekha (written love-
letters)?

Gosvāmī: Written love-letters are letters exchanged
between the nāyaka and nāyikā that they have written in
their own handwriting, expressing their heartfelt
emotional state in natural language. These love-letters
are written with colored inks which are obtained either
from minerals from the mountains, by squeezing red
flowers, or from kuṅkuma powder. Large flower-petals are
used instead of paper for writing on, and the letters
are tied with fibers from the stalks of lotuses.

Vijaya: What is the gradual development of pūrva-rāga?

Gosvāmī: Some say that affection is aroused at first
simply by seeing one’s beloved. This is followed by
contemplation, attachment, making a vow, desire for
meeting, sleeplessness, emaciation, distaste for
everything else, loss of shyness, madness, falling
unconscious, and longing for death – in that order. Such
is the extension of the intensity of kāma (prema).
Pūrva-rāga manifests both in the nāyaka and in the
nāyikās, but it appears in the nāyikās first, and then
in the nāyaka.

Vijaya: What is māna?

Gosvāmī: Māna is the bhāva that prevents the nāyaka and
nāyikā from engaging in their cherished activities of
embracing, looking at each other, kissing, talking in a
pleasing way, and so forth, even though they are both in
the same place and they share a deep attachment for each
other. Māna causes the appearance of sañcārī-bhāvas such
as despondency, doubt, anger, restlessness, pride,
jealousy, concealing the sentiments, guilt, and serious
thoughtfulness.

Vijaya: What is the underlying principle of māna?

Gosvāmī: The basis of māna is praṇaya; māna does not
normally arise prior to the stage of praṇaya, and even
if it does, it is only in a contracted or unripe state.
There are two types of māna: māna with a cause (sahetu)
and māna without a cause (nirhetu).

Vijaya: What is māna with a cause (sahetu-māna)?

Gosvāmī: Īrṣyā (jealous feelings) rise in the heart of
the nāyikā when she sees or hears about the nāyaka
behaving with special affection for a nāyikā from the
rival (vipakṣa) or marginal (taṭastha) groups. When this
īrṣyā (jealousy) becomes overwhelmed by praṇaya, it
develops into sahetu-māna. It has long been held that,
just as there is no bhaya (fear) without sneha,
similarly, there can be no īrṣyā without praṇaya. In
this way, all these various expressions of māna only
illuminate the intensity of the prema between the
nāyikās and the nāyaka.

The nāyikāís heart is imbued with bhāvas such as intense
loving possessiveness for her beloved (susakhya). When

                          491
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

she sees the nāyaka, who is exceedingly attached to her,
favoring a rival nāyikā and sporting with her, she
becomes restless and impatient. Once, in Dvārakā, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa presented a pārijāta flower to Śrī Rukmiṇī.
However although all the queens heard about this
incident, only Satyabhāmāís heart was overpowered by
māna. Satyabhāmāís māna was aroused when she understood
the unique position afforded to her rival.

Vijaya: How many ways are there of discovering the
special position of rivals (vipakṣa-vaiśiṣṭya)?

Gosvāmī: There are three ways: hearing (śruta),
inference (anumati), and seeing (dṛṣṭa).

Vijaya: What is hearing (śruta)?

Gosvāmī: Śruta-vipakṣa-vaiśiṣṭya comes about when the
nāyikā hears from a priya-sakhī or from a parrot about
the pastimes of her beloved with a nāyikā from the
opposing party.

Vijaya: What is anumati-vipakṣa-vaiśiṣṭya?

Gosvāmī: Anumati-vipakṣa-vaiśiṣṭya occurs when the
nāyikā sees that the body of her lover bears evidence of
amorous pastimes with another nāyikā, or when she hears
her lover inadvertently say the name of a rival nāyikā,
or when she sees her rival nāyikā in a dream. The marks
of union seen on the bodies of the nāyaka and a rival
nāyikā are called bhogāṅka, and speaking the name of a
rival nāyikā is called gotra-skhalana. When this occurs,
the nāyikā feels that it is more painful than death.

Vijaya: I would like to hear an example of gotra-
skhalana.

Gosvāmī: Once, when Kṛṣṇa was returning to His home
after spending time with Śrīmatī Rādhā, He suddenly met
with Candrāvalī. Śrī Kṛṣṇa inquired from her, “O Rādhe,
is everything fine with you?” When Candrāvalī heard
Kṛṣṇa speaking like this, she replied rather angrily, “O
Kaṁsa, are You well?” Kṛṣṇa was surprised, and asked
her, “O beautiful one, why are you so bewildered?”
Candrāvalī became flushed with anger, and promptly
replied, “Where have You seen Rādhā around here?” Then
Kṛṣṇa understood the situation, and thought to Himself,
“Oh, I have addressed Candrāvalī as Rādhā by mistake.”
Understanding His own mistake, He felt ashamed and
lowered His face. He was also smiling mildly to see
Candrāvalī’s spontaneous and cunning eloquence, which
resulted from her īrṣyā (jealousy). May this Hari, who
dispels all miseries, protect us all.

Vijaya: What is understanding the particular position of
a rival through a dream (svapna-dṛṣṭa-vipakṣa-
vaiśiṣṭya)?

Gosvāmī: The activities of Kṛṣṇa and His viduṣaka
friends while dreaming are examples of this. For example
on one occasion, Kṛṣṇa and Candrāvalī were sleeping on
the same bed after amorous pastimes in the krīḍā-kuñja.
While dreaming, Kṛṣṇa said, “O Rādhe! I promise You that
You alone are My most beloved; only You are inside and

                          492
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017

outside My heart; only You are in front of Me, and
behind Me, and everywhere. What more can I say? Only You
are present in My house, in Govardhana, and in its
forested valleys.” When Candrāvalī heard Śrī Kṛṣṇa
speaking like this in His dream, she got up from the bed
due to māna arising in her heart, and walked away.

Now here is one of Madhumaṅgalaís dreams. Once he was
sleeping on a raised platform outside a kuñja in which
Kṛṣṇa and Candrāvalī were engaged in happy pastimes, and
in his dream he said, “O Mādhavī, Kṛṣṇa is talking very
expertly and flattering Padmāís sakhī Candrāvalī just to
deceive her. Try to bring Rādhā here quickly, so that
She can meet with Kṛṣṇa. Donít worry.” When Candrāvalī
heard Madhumaṅgala speaking like this in his dream, she
became distressed. At that time, Padmā was sitting in a
nearby kuñja, and when she saw Candrāvalīís condition,
she said to Śaibyā, “Oh sakhī, just see how miserable
Candrāvalīís face has become since she heard
Madhumaṅgala talking in his dream! She has lowered her
head and she is burning with grief.”

Vijaya: What is directly seeing (darśana)?

Gosvāmī: This means that the nāyikā directly sees her
nāyaka engaged in pastimes with another nāyikā.

Vijaya: What is causeless māna (nirhetuka-māna)?

Gosvāmī: Causeless māna develops between the nāyaka and
nāyikā when praṇaya is enhanced by an apparent cause for
māna, although there is no cause for māna in reality.
Paṇḍitas have concluded that māna is the effect of
praṇaya, and that causeless māna is nothing but an
extension of praṇaya arising from its vilāsa (joyful
pastimes). They call this causeless māna ‘praṇaya-māna’.
The previous authorities (paṇḍitas) also maintain that
the movements and dealings of prema are crooked, like
the movement of a snake. Therefore, two kinds of māna
are evident in the dealings between the nāyaka and the
nāyikā: māna without a cause (nirhetu) and māna with a
cause (sahetu). The vyabhicārī-bhāva in this rasa is
concealing one’s emotions and feelings (avahitthā).

Vijaya: How is causeless māna pacified?

Gosvāmī: This māna is pacified by itself; it does not
need any remedial measures. When laughter occurs, then
the māna disappears automatically. However, to pacify
sahetu-māna, the nāyaka has to adopt many appropriate
means, such as sāma (consoling words), bheda (diplomatic
remarks), kriyā (taking an oath), dāna (presentations),
nati (bowing down), upekṣā (neglect and apparent
indifference), and rasāntara (a sudden change of mood).
The sign that the nāyikā’s māna has been pacified is
that the nāyaka wipes away her tears, and there is
laughter and so on.

Vijaya: What is sāma (consolation with words)?

Gosvāmī: Sāma is the use of sweet, pleasing words and
promises to pacify priyā (the beloved).

Vijaya: What is bheda (diplomatic remarks)?

                          493
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017


Gosvāmī: There are two types of bheda: one is expressing
one’s greatness by various gestures and insinuations,
and the other is rebuking the nāyikā indirectly through
sakhīs.

Vijaya: What is meant by dāna (presentation)?

Gosvāmī: Dāna is the deceitful presentation of ornaments
and other gifts.

Vijaya: What is nati (humble submission)?

Gosvāmī: Nati means to fall at the nāyikā’s feet with
all possible humility.

Vijaya: What is upekṣā (neglect)?

Gosvāmī: Upekṣā (neglect or indifference) is the mood of
apparently abandoning the nāyikā when all other means of
pacifying her māna have proved fruitless. Others say
that upekṣā refers to using remarks with double meaning
to please the nāyikā.

Vijaya: What does your expression rasāntara (change of
thoughts) mean?

Gosvāmī: Rasāntara is the sudden creation of fear in the
nāyikā’s mind by words, or by some natural occurrence.
There are two types of rasāntara: that which occurs by
itself, and that which is created by the sharp
intelligence of the nāyaka.

Here is an example of a change of mind that takes place
spontaneously: Once, Kṛṣṇa was unable to pacify Bhadrāís
māna, despite various endeavors. Suddenly there was a
tremendous sound of thunder, which frightened Bhadrā so
much that she at once embraced Kṛṣṇa who was sitting in
front of her.

Here is an example of pacifying māna by an intelligent
plan: Once, Rādhikā was deeply absorbed in māna. Kṛṣṇa,
who is supremely playful by nature, saw that He could
not pacify Her by any means, so He played a charming
trick. He personally made a very beautiful flower
garland, and placed it around the neck of Śrīmatījī. She
angrily took the garland off Her neck and threw it away,
and by the will of providence it fell on Kṛṣṇa. He
immediately screwed up His eyes, made a face as if He
had been badly injured, and sat in one corner looking
very depressed. Seeing this, Rādhājī became restless and
anxious, and She held Kṛṣṇaís shoulders with Her two
hands. Then Kṛṣṇa laughed and enfolded Her in His strong
embrace.

Vijaya: Are there any other means to pacify māna?

Gosvāmī: Apart from these methods, the māna of the
vraja-gopīs can be pacified in special times and places,
and with the sound of the muralī, even without using
sāma and so on. Mild māna can be pacified without much
effort, whereas pacifying moderate māna requires careful
efforts. The most deeply rooted māna (durjaya-māna) is
extremely difficult to pacify.

                          494
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017


The gopīs use various remarks to chastise Kṛṣṇa when
they are in māna, for example, Vāma (ungrateful one, who
acts unfavorably), Durlīla-śiromaṇi (crest-jewel of the
mischief-makers), Kitava-rāja (King of cheaters), Khala-
śreṣṭha (supremely wicked), Mahā-dhūrta (extremely
crooked ruffian), Kaṭhora (cruel and hard-hearted),
Nirlajja (shameless), Atidurlalita (extremely hard to
please), Gopī-kāmuka (one who lusts after the gopīs),
Ramaṇī-cora (one who steals the chastity of the gopīs),
Gopī-dharma-nāśaka (one who spoils the religious
principles and chastity of the gopīs), Gopa-sādhvi-
viḍambaka (one who mocks the chastity of the gopīs),
Kāmukeśvara (Lord of lust), Gāḍh-timira (one who puts
others in the darkness of delusion), Śyāma (one who has
a very dark complexion, which puts others in the
darkness of illusion), Vastra-cora (one who steals the
clothes of the gopīs), Govardhana-upatyakā-taskara (one
who steals the chastity of gopīs in the hills of
Govardhana).

Vijaya: What is prema-vaicittya?

Gosvāmī: Prema-vaicittya refers to heartfelt pangs of
separation that the nāyikā feels, even when she is very
close to the nāyaka, and it is the intrinsic nature of
prema in its highest state. This super-excellent feature
results in a type of helplessness or agitation of mind
that creates an illusion of being separate from Kṛṣṇa,
and this unnatural state is called vaicittya.

Vijaya: What is pravāsa?

Gosvāmī: Pravāsa is the obstruction or hindrance between
the nāyaka and nāyikā when they have been together and
are now separated, either because they live in different
countries or different villages, or because of a
difference in mood (rasāntara), or because they are in
different places. In pravāsa, one experiences all the
vyabhicārī-bhāvas of śṛṅgāra-rasa except jubilation,
pride, madness, and shyness. There are two types of
pravāsa: that which is intentional, and that which is
not pre-planned, or which takes place by force of
circumstance.

Vijaya: What is intentional pravāsa?

Gosvāmī: Intentional pravāsa takes place when the nāyaka
goes away because of some obligation or responsibility.
By His very nature, Kṛṣṇa is obliged to His bhaktas –
for example, the moving and non-moving jīvas of
Vṛndāvana, the Pāṇḍavas, and Śrutadeva in Mithila – to
give them full happiness and good instructions, and to
fulfill their desires. Pravāsa has two further
divisions: one is just going out of sight, and the other
is going to some distant place (sudūra). There are three
types of sudūra-pravāsa, corresponding to the three
phases of time: past, present and future. During sudūra-
pravāsa, the nāyaka and nāyikā exchange messages.

Vijaya: What is unintentional pravāsa?

Gosvāmī: Unintentional pravāsa is the sudūra-pravāsa
caused by subordination to others, or by circumstances

                           495
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

that are beyond one’s control. There are various types
of subordination, classified as divya, adivya and
divyādviya. The ten states that occur in this pravāsa
are: thoughtfulness, sleeplessness, anxiety, becoming
thinner, darkening of the limbs and face, incoherent
talk, illness, madness, bewilderment, and longing for
death. In vipralambha caused by pravāsa, these ten
states manifest even in Kṛṣṇa.

My dear Vijaya, although various states appear as
anubhāvas in the different distinct types of prema, I
have not mentioned them all. Generally, all of these
states appear as the effect of the gradations of prema,
beginning from sneha and developing through māna,
praṇaya, rāga, anurāga, and bhāva up to mahābhāva.
However, the stage of mohana, an unparalleled state
which I have already explained, manifests in Śrīmatī
Rādhikā. Some of the authors of rasa-śāstra have
accepted vipralambha related to compassion (karuṇā) as a
separate division, but I have not explained this rasa
separately because it is another type of pravāsa.

As Vijaya was contemplating Śrī Guru Gosvāmīís
instructions on vipralambha, he said to himself,
“Vipralambha-rasa is not an independent phenomenon or a
self-perfected rasa; it simply promotes and nourishes
the mood of sambhoga. For a jīva bound to worldliness,
such pangs of separation (vipralambha-rasa) manifest in
a special manner, and this is ultimately favorable for
his pleasure in meeting (sambhoga-rasa). However, in the
eternal transcendental rasa, the bhāva of vipralambha
exists eternally, to some extent. In fact, the
variegatedness of spiritual pastimes cannot be invoked
to its fullest possible degree without vipralambha.”



Thus ends the Thirty-Seventh Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled

“Śṛṅgāra-Rasa: Śṛṅgāra Svarūpa &Vipralambha”




Chapter 38

Śṛṅgāra-Rasa: Mukhya-Sambhoga & Aṣṭa-Kālīya-Līlā



Vijaya Kumāra, with folded hands, inquired from his
Gurudeva about sambhoga-rasa. He replied affectionately.

Gosvāmī: There are two types of kṛṣṇa-līlā: prakaṭa
(manifest) and aprakaṭa (unmanifest). The states of
separation (viraha) in vipralambha-rasa that I have
already described correspond to prakaṭa-līlā. However,
in aprakaṭa Vṛndāvana, there is no separation of the
vraja-devīs from Śrī Hari, who is eternally engaged in
His variegated, blissful līlā such as the rāsa-līlā. It
is written in the Mathurā-mahātmya: “Kṛṣṇa plays

                          496
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

eternally with the gopas and gopīs there.” Since the
verb ‘plays’ (krīḍ) is in the present tense, it is to be
understood that Kṛṣṇa’s līlās are eternal. Therefore, in
the aprakaṭa-līlā of Goloka or Vṛndāvana, there is no
separation caused by Kṛṣṇa’s making His residence in a
distant place (dūra-pravāsa). Love in union (sambhoga)
exists eternally there.

The nāyaka and nāyikās are respectively the viṣaya
(object) and āśraya (abode) of love, and the term
sambhoga refers to the wonderful bhāva that arises from
the rapture of their loving dealings ñ such as seeing
each other, talking together, and touching each other ñ
the object of which is solely to give pleasure to each
other. There are two types of sambhoga: mukhya and gauṇa

Vijaya: What is mukhya-sambhoga?

Gosvāmī:Mukhya (principal) sambhoga is the sambhoga that
takes place in the awakened state. There are four kinds
of mukhya-sambhoga: 1) saṅkṣipta-sambhoga (brief
sambhoga), which takes place after pūrva-rāga; 2)
saṅkīrṇa-sambhoga (restricted sambhoga), which takes
place after māna is pacified; 3) sampanna-sambhoga
(enriched sambhoga), which takes place after the nāyaka
and nāyikā have been somewhat distant from each other
for some time; and 4) samṛddhimān sambhoga (flourishing
sambhoga), which takes place after being separated by a
long distance.

Vijaya: Please describe saṅkṣipta-sambhoga in more
detail.

Gosvāmī:Saṅkṣipta-sambhoga is characterized by reverence
and shyness between nāyaka and nāyikā. As a result, the
expressions of their mutual love – such as kissing and
embracing – are brief and hasty.

Vijaya: Please explain saṅkīrṇa-sambhoga.

Gosvāmī: In saṅkīrṇa-sambhoga, the nāyikā’s endeavors
for amorous pastimes are expressed with simultaneous
feelings of pain and pleasure. This is compared to the
relish of chewing hot sugar cane; although it is sweet,
it also burns. This state results from her remembering
that the nāyaka deceived her, or from seeing marks of
amorous enjoyment on the nāyaka’s body, or from hearing
from others about His amorous activities with other
women.

Vijaya: What is sampanna-sambhoga?

Gosvāmī:Sampanna-sambhoga takes place when the nāyaka
returns to be with the nāyikā after being a short
distance away. There are two types: āgati and
prādurbhāva. Āgati is the appearance of the nāyaka
before the nāyikā during the routine of general,
everyday life; for example, the gopīs have darśana of
Kṛṣṇa regularly in the evening when He returns from
grazing the cows. Prādurbhāva refers to Kṛṣṇa’s sudden
appearance before the gopīs when they are extremely
overwhelmed by prema. An example is Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s sudden
appearance before the gopīs when they were lamenting in
separation because He had disappeared from the rāsa-

                          497
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

līlā. In prādurbhāva there is a festival of happiness
arising from the fulfillment of all one’s cherished
desires.

Vijaya: What is samṛddhimān sambhoga?

Gosvāmī: It is not possible for the nāyaka and nāyikās
to see each other and meet together all the time,
because they are subordinate to others and are bound by
social etiquette. The profuse bliss that They experience
when They meet suddenly, after being released from the
influence of external pressures, is called samṛddhimān
sambhoga. There are two types of sambhoga-rasa, namely
concealed (channa), and manifest (prakāśa), but there is
no need to explain them at present.

Vijaya: What is gauṇa-sambhoga?

Gosvāmī:Gauṇa-sambhoga refers to the particular pastimes
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa that are experienced during dreams. There
are two kinds of dreams: general and special. I have
already described general dreams in the context of
vyabhicārī-bhāva. The sambhoga in special dreams is
experienced as real and supremely amazing, and it is
endowed with sthāyībhāvas and sañcārī-bhāvas like those
of the waking state; in other words, it is exactly like
sambhoga while one is awake. Gauṇa-sambhoga has the same
four divisions as mukhya-sambhoga: 1) saṅkṣipta-sambhoga
(brief sambhoga), 2) saṅkīrṇa-sambhoga (restricted
sambhoga), 3) sampanna-sambhoga (enriched sambhoga), and
4) samṛddhimān sambhoga (flourishing sambhoga).

Vijaya: No factual events occur when one is dreaming, so
how is samṛddhimān sambhoga at all possible in dreams?

Gosvāmī: The svarūpa (essential nature) of a dream is
the same as that of the waking state. This is
demonstrated by the example of Ūṣā and Aniruddha. While
Ūṣā was asleep in King Bāṇa’s inner royal chambers at
Śoṇitapura, she was practically experiencing the
pleasure of union with Aniruddha in her dream. At the
very same time, Aniruddha was dreaming in his sleeping
chamber in Dvārakā-purī, and was also enjoying the
pleasure of vilāsa with Ūṣā. Ordinary people of the
mundane realm do not have such experiences.

We can substantiate this fact still further by the
evidence of direct perception, for there are examples of
siddha-bhaktas having supremely wonderful dreams in
which they receive articles such as ornaments which are
still with them when they wake up; this is because such
dreams are themselves a reality. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa and
His kāntās also have unimpeded dreams in which sambhoga
actually takes place. These dreams are of two types: 1)
the dream that occurs while one is awake (jāgarāyamāna-
svapna), and 2) the condition of wakefulness that occurs
while one is dreaming (svapnāyamāna-jāgara). The dreams
of gopīs who have transcended the fourth state, namely
samādhi, and attained the fifth state, namely prema, are
not false like the dreams that are caused by the mode of
passion. Rather, the dreams of the gopīs are aprākṛta,
nirguṇa, and absolutely real. Consequently, it is
perfectly possible for samṛddhimān sambhoga to take
place in the highly astonishing, aprākṛta dream pastimes

                          498
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

of Kṛṣṇa and His beloved gopīs.

Vijaya: Please describe the anubhāvas of sambhoga.

Gosvāmī: The anubhāvas of sambhoga are: seeing each
other (sandarśana), talking (jalpana), touching
(sparśana), blocking each others’ way in a solitary
place (raha-vartma-rodhana), rāsa-līlā, pleasure
pastimes in Vṛndāvana (vṛndāvana-krīḍa), playing in the
Yamunā (yamunā-jale keli), boat pastimes (nauka-vilāsa),
pastimes of stealing flowers (puṣpa-caurya-līlā),
pastimes of demanding taxes (dāna-līlā), hide-and-seek
in the kuñjas (kuñje lukocuri-khelā), drinking honey
wine (madhu-pāna), Kṛṣṇa dressing in female attire
(strī-veśa-dhāraṇa), pretending to sleep (kapaṭa-nidrā),
gambling (dyūta-krīḍā), pulling off each others’
garments (vastra-ākarṣaṇa), kissing (cumbana), embracing
(ālingana), making nail-marks (nakha-arpaṇa), drinking
the nectar of the lips that are like bimba fruit (bimba-
adhara-sudhā-pāna), and enjoying amorous union (nidhu-
vane ramaṇa-samprayoga).

Vijaya: Prabhu, līlā-vilāsa is distinct from amorous
union (samprayoga). Which of these two gives more bliss?

Gosvāmī: There is more bliss in līlā-vilāsa than in
samprayoga.

Vijaya: How do Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s beloved gopīs address Him in
a loving mood (praṇaya)?

Gosvāmī: The sakhīs address Śrī Kṛṣṇa with great
affection as, “He Gokulānanda, He Govinda, He
Goṣṭhendra-Kula-candra (the moon of the family of the
King of cowherd men), He Prāṇeśvara (the Lord of my
life), He Sundarottaṁsa (whose chest and shoulders are
very beautiful), He Nāgara Śiromaṇi (O crest jewel of
lovers), He Vṛndāvana-candra, He Gokula-rāja, and He
Manohara (O thief of my mind).”

Vijaya: Prabhu, I understand that there are two types of
kṛṣṇa-līlā, namely prakaṭa (manifest) and aprakaṭa
(unmanifest), but that they are still one and the same
tattva. Now, please explain to me the types of prakaṭa-
vraja-līlā.

Gosvāmī: There are two types of prakaṭa-vraja-līlā:
nitya (eternal) and naimittika (occasional). The Vraja
pastimes that take place during the eight periods of the
day and night (aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā) are actually nitya-
līlā, whereas Kṛṣṇa’s killing Pūtanā, and His long
sojourn away from Vraja in Mathurā and Dvārakā, are
naimittika-līlās.

Vijaya: Prabhu, please instruct me about the nitya-līlā.

Gosvāmī: We find two types of descriptions: one by the
ṛṣis and the other by the Gosvāmīs of Vṛndāvana. Which
of these would you like to hear?

Vijaya: I would like to hear the description in the
ślokas that the ṛṣis have composed.

Gosvāmī:

                          499
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017


niśāntah prātah pūrvāhno madhyāhaś cāparāhnakaḥ

sāyaṁ pradoṣo-ratriś ca kālāṣṭau ca yathā-kṛamam

madhyāhno yāminī cobhau yan muhūrttam ito smṛtau

tri-muhūrttam itā jñeyā niśānta-pramukhāḥ pare

The aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā of Vraja takes place during eight
periods of the day and night. These are 1) niśānta (the
end of the night just before dawn), 2) prātaḥ (morning),
3) pūrvāhna (forenoon), 4) madhyāhna (noon), 5) aparāhna
(afternoon), 6) sāyam (late afternoon and dusk), 7)
pradoṣa (evening), and 8) rātri (night). The rātri-līlā
and madhyāhna-līlās both last for six muhūrtas, while
the other six periods each last for three muhūrtas.

Śrī Sadāśiva has explained this aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā in
Sanat-kumāra-saṁhitā. He has specified which services
are to be rendered at particular times of the day, in
accordance with the aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā. Thus, one should
remember the appropriate līlā at the appropriate time.

Vijaya: Prabhu, may I please hear the statements of
Jagad-guru Sadāśiva?

Gosvāmī: Listen carefully:

sadā-śiva uvāca

parakīyābhimāninyas / tathāsya ca priyāḥ janāḥ

pracureṇaiva bhāvena / ramayanti nija-priyam

Sadāśīva said, “Śrī Hariís beloved damsels in Vraja, who
have the sentiments of parakīya-bhāva towards Him,
please the darling of their hearts with profuse moods of
divya-prema.

ātmānaṁ cintayet tatra / tāsāṁ madhye manoramām

rūpa-yauvana-sampannāṁ / kiśorīṁ pramadākṛtim

He Nārada! You should contemplate your ātma-svarūpa in
the following manner. You are a kiśorī (pre-adolescent)
gopī and you reside in the very heart of transcendental
Vṛndāvana, amidst the beloved damsels of Kṛṣṇa, who are
endowed with paramour sentiment for Him. You have a
charming youthful form, and enchanting, intoxicating
beauty.

nānā-śilpa-kalābhijñāṁ / kṛṣṇa-bhogānurūpiṇīm

prārthitām api kṛṣṇena / tato bhoga-parāṅ-mukhīm

You are accomplished in many fine arts for Śrī Kṛṣṇaís
pleasure. Yet even if Kṛṣṇa earnestly requests to meet
with you, you are ever averse to pleasure unrelated to
the pleasure of your Svāminī.

rādhikānucarīṁ nityam / tat-sevana-parāyaṇām

kṛṣṇād íapy adhikaṁ prema / rādhikāyāṁ prakūrvatiṁ

                             500
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017


You are the maidservant of Śrī Kṛṣṇaís most beloved
consort Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and are wholly and exclusively
dedicated to Her sevā. You always have more prema for
Śrī Rādhikā than for Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

prītyānudivasaṁ yatnāt / tayoh saṅgama-kāriṇīm

tat-sevana-sukhāhlāda-bhāvenātisunirvṛtām

Everyday with much endeavor you arrange for the youthful
coupleís meeting, and remain forever content with the
ecstatic bliss of Their service.

ity ātmānaṁ vicintyaiva / tatra sevāṁ samācaret

brāhma-mūhūrttaṁ ārabhya / yāvat tu ṣyān mahāniśi

Thus, while conceiving of your ātma-svarūpa in this
particular way, you should painstakingly render mānasi
sevā in transcendental Vṛndāvana from brāhma-muhūrta to
the end of niśānta-līlā (pastimes at nightís end).”

Vijaya: What are the activities of niśānta-līlā?

Gosvāmī:

śrī vṛndā uvāca

madhye vṛndāvane ramye / pañcāśat-kuñja-maṇḍite

kalpa-vṛkṣa-nikuñjesu / divya-ratnamaye gṛhe

Śrī Vṛndā-devī said, “In the midst of enchanting
Vṛndāvana, surrounded by fifty kuñjas of desire trees,
lies a bower-cottage of cintāmaṇi gems.

nidritau tiṣṭhitas talpe / niviḍāliṅgitau mithaḥ

mad-ājñā-kāribhih paścāt / pakṣibhir bodhitāv api

There on a bed of fragrant flowers, yugala-kiśora
Vṛṣabhānu-dulālī Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and Vrajendra-nandana
Śyāmasundara Śrī Kṛṣṇa lie asleep in a firm embrace.
Then according to my instructions, the birds attempt to
awaken Them by a rousing chorus of melodious warbling
songs.

gāḍhāliṅgana-nirbhedam / āptau tad-bhaṅga-kātarau

no matiṁ kurvatas talpāt / samutthātuṁ manāg api

However, the two lovers have become so intrinsically,
unbreakably one through Their deep embrace that even the
thought of breaking up evokes alarm. Indeed, They are
unable in the slightest to fix their minds on rising.

tataś ca śārikā-śabdaih / śuka-śabdaiś ca tau muhuḥ

bodhitau vividhair vākyaiḥ / sva-talpād udatiṣṭhatām

However, by the repeated and ingenious urgings of the
śuka and śārīkā (male and female parrots), They at last
awaken and rise from Their bed.

                          501
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017


upaviṣṭau tato dṛṣtvā / sakhyas talpe mudāṇvitau

praviśya kurvanti sevāṁ / tat-kālasyocitām tayoḥ

Seeing Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa sitting blissfully on the bed, the
sakhīs happily approach Them and render the various
services required at that time.

punaś ca śārikā-vākyair / utthāya tau sva-talpataḥ

āgatau sva-sva-bhavanaṁ / bhīty-utkaṇṭhākulau mithaḥ

But just thereafter, through further prompting from the
śārikā, the Divine Couple inevitably arise from that bed
and rush to Their respective homes, full of anxiety
provoked by the transcendental rasas of fear and
restlessness.”

Vijaya: What are the prātaḥ kālīya-līlā (morning
pastimes)?

Gosvāmī:

prātaś ca bodhito mātrā/ talpād utthāya sa-tvaraḥ

kṛtvā kṛṣṇo danta-kāṣṭhaṁ / baladeva-samanvitaḥ

In the morning, Yaśodā Māiyā calls Kṛṣṇa, who then gets
up from His bed and brushes His teeth with a twig in the
company of Śrī Baladeva.

mātrānumodito yāti / gośālāṁ dohanotsukaḥ

rādhā ëpi bodhitā vipra / vayasyābhih sva-talpataḥ

Then with her permission, They go to the cowshed, eager
to milk Their cows. O sage, Śrī Rādhā also leaves Her
bed in the morning, awakened by Her sakhīs.

utthāya danta-kāṣṭhādi / kṛtvā ëbhyaṅgaṁ samācaret

snāna-vedīṁ tato gatvā / snāpitā lalitādibhiḥ

After She has brushed Her pearl-like teeth with an
astringent twig, Her sakhīs massage Her body with
aromatic oils. After that, She enters the bathing
chamber and sits upon an elevated āsana while Lalitā and
the other principal sakhīs perform abhiṣeka of Her
Divine Form.

bhūṣā-gṛhaṁ vrajet tatra / vayasyā bhūṣayanty api

bhūṣaṇair vividhair divyair / gandha-mālyānulepanaiḥ

Next, She enters the ornament palace. There, Her sakhīs
apply divine creams and scents, decorate Her with
various divine garments and ornaments, adorn Her with
pleasing, fragrant garlands and cool Her brow with the
pulp of sandal.

tataś ca sva-janais tasyāh / śuśrūṣāṁ prāpya yatnataḥ

paktum ahūyate sv-annaṁ / sa-sakhī sā yaṣodayā

                          502
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017


When Śrīmatī Rādhikā has thus received complete and
attentive service from Her sakhīs, by Yaśodā Maiyāís
request She departs for Nanda-bhavan to cook delicious
food for Śrī Kṛṣṇa”

Hearing this, Nārada asked:

katham ahūyate devi / pākārthaṁ sā yaṣodayā

satīṣu pākatṛīṣu ca / rohiṇī-pramukhāsv api

“He Devī. There are many expert cooks headed by Rohinī
Māiyā; why then does Mother Yaśodā invite Rādhārāṇī to
cook in Nanda-bhavan?”

durvāsasā svayaṁ datto / varas tasyai mudā mune

iti kātyāyanī-vaktrāt / śrutam āsīn mayā purā

Śrī Vṛndā-devī said, “O Nārada, I formerly heard from
Bhagavatī Kātyāyanī that Durvāsā Muni bestowed the
following boon upon Śrīmatī Rādhikā:

tvayā yat pacyate devi / tad-annaṁ mad-anugrahāt

miṣṭaṁ svādv-amṛta-sparddhiṁ bhoktṛr āyuṣkaraṁ tathā

ëHe Devi! By my mercy, whatever food You cook will rival
the nectar of the gods. Furthermore it will bless the
eater with great longevity.í

ity āhvayati tāṁ nityaṁ / yaśodā putra-vatsalā

āyuṣmān me bhavet putraḥ / svādu-lobhāt tathā sati

Thus putra-vatsalā Yaśodā, praying, ëLet my son be long-
lived!í daily invites Śrīmatī Rādhikā to Nanda-bhavan to
cook. She also has an intense greed to taste that
delectable food.

śvaśrānumoditā sāpi / hṛṣtā nandālayaṁ vrajet

sva-sakhī-prakarā tatra / gatvā pākaṁ karoti ca

Taking permission from Her mother-in-law, Śrīmatī
Rādhikā blissfully comes to the home of Nanda
accompanied by Her sakhīs to prepare the kitchen.

kṛṣṇoípi dugdhvā gāḥ kāścit / dohayitvā janaiḥ paraiḥ

āgacchati pitur vākyāt / sva-gṛhaṁ sakhibhir vṛtaḥ

“Meanwhile, Śrī Kṛṣṇa milks a few cows Himself and then,
on His fatherís order, He engages others to milk the
remaining cows and returns home with His friends.

abhyaṅga-mardanaṁ kṛtvā / dāsaiḥ saṁsnāpito mudā

dhauta-vastra-dharaḥ sragvī / candanākta-kalevaraḥ

Arriving home, His servants gleefully massage His divine
body with oil and bathe Him. Then they dress Him with
fresh clothes, smear His body beautifully with sandal

                          503
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

paste, and decorate Him with fragrant garlands.

dvi-vastra-baddha-keśaś ca / gṛīvābhālo-parisphuran

candrākāra-sphurad-bhālas / tilakāloka-rañjitaḥ

Kṛṣṇa wears two garments. One covers His lower body and
one His chest. Cascading around His graceful neck and
forehead, His charming, curly hair brilliantly expands
His unprecedented, sweet beauty. On His effulgent
forehead, which resembles the half-moon, His servants
draw a charming tilaka sign which delights the eyes of
all.

kaṅkanāṅgada-keyūra / ratna-mudrā-lasat-karaḥ

muktāhāra-sphurad-vakṣo / makarākṛti-kuṇḍalaḥ

On His wrists, Śrī Kṛṣṇa wears bejeweled bracelets, and
on His arms, precious jeweled bangles. On His hands,
signet rings shine. On His chest, a pearl necklace
glistens, and dazzling makara-shaped sapphire earrings
swing from His ears.

muhur ākārito mātrā / praviśed bhojanālayam

avalambya karaṁ sakhyur / baladevam anuvrataḥ

After this, Śrī Kṛṣṇa hears Yaśomatī repeatedly calling
Him. So, surrounded by His sakhās and holding one of
them by the hand, He follows His elder brother Baladeva
to the bhojanālaya (dining hall).

bhunkte ípi vividhānnāni / mātrā ca sakhibhir vṛtaḥ

hāsayan vividhair hāsyaiḥ / sakhiṁs tair hasati svayam

There, in His sakhāsí company, He relishes all the
prepara-tions prepared by Rādhikā and Her sakhīs. Making
many jokes, He makes His friends laugh, and He also
laughs with them.

itthaṁ bhuktvā tathācamya / divya-khaṭṭopari kṣaṇam

viśramet sevakair dattaṁ / tāmbūlam vibhajann adan

When He has finished His meal, He takes ācamana
(mouthwash) and His servants offer Him tāmbūla, which He
distributes among His sakhās. Thereafter, He rests on a
transcendental bed for some time and chews the tāmbūla.”

Vijaya: Please describe the pūrvāhna-līlā (forenoon
pastimes).

Gosvāmī:

gopa-veśa-dharaḥ kṛṣṇo / dhenu-vṛnda-puraḥsaraḥ

vrajavāsi-janaiḥ prītyā / sarvair anugataḥ pathi

“Śrī Kṛṣṇa, attired in gopa-veśa, then leaves the
village with the cows for cow-grazing. At that time, all
the vraja-vāsīs follow Him some distance from the
village, drawn by their intense love and affection for

                          504
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

Him.

pitaraṁ mātaraṁ natvā / netrāntena priyā-gaṇam

yathā-yogyaṁ tathā cānyān / sa nivarttya vanaṁ vrajet

Speaking respectfully, Śrī Kṛṣṇa offers praṇāma to His
father and mother. At the same time, through the corner
of His eyes He glances meaningfully at His beloved gopīs
and thrills their hearts. Then after paying due respect
to those who have followed Him, Vaṁśīdhārī Śyāma
proceeds with His sakhās towards the pastures.

vanaṁ praviśya sakhibhiḥ / kṛīḍayitvā kṣaṇaṁ tataḥ

vihārair vividhais tatra / vane vikṛīḍato mudā

Having entered the forest, for some time He creates many
kinds of games and gleefully sports with His sakhās.

vañcayitvā ca tān sarvān / dvitraiḥ priya-sakhair vṛtaḥ

sāṅketakaṁ vrajed dharṣāt / priyā-sandarśanotsakaḥ

Then, cleverly engaging them in activities such as
pasturing the cows, He tricks them and leaves them all
aside. He then proceeds jubilantly with two or three
priya-sakhās towards the rendezvous (saṅketa) with His
beloved gopīs eager to see His priyā.”

Vijaya: Please describe the madhyāhna-līlā (mid-day
pastimes).

Gosvāmī: sāpi kṛṣṇe vanaṁ yāntaṁ / dṛṣṭvā sva-gṛham
āgatā

sūryādi-pūjā-vyājena / kusumādyāhṛti-cchalāt

“After watching Śrī Kṛṣṇa leave for the forest, His most
beloved consort Śrīmatī Rādhikā returns to Her home.
Then, on the pretext of performing Sūrya-pūjā or
collecting flowers,Ö

vañcayitvā gurūn yāti / priya-saṅgecchayā vanam

itthaṁ tau bahu-yatnena / militvā sva-gaṇais tataḥ

ÖShe tricks Her elders in order to have saṅga with Her
priyatama Śyāma. Accompanied by Her sakhīs, She goes to
the same forest to meet Him. Thus after much endeavor,
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa meet againÖ

vihārair vividhais tatra / vane vikṛīḍito mudā

hindolikā samārūḍhau / sakhībhir dolitau kvacit

Öand blissfully enact various sportive paramānanda-līlā
together in the forest. At times, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa sit on
a swing and are swung by Their sakhīs.

kvaciḍ veṇuṁ kara-srastaṁ / priyayāpahṛtaṁ hariḥ

anveṣayann upālabdho / vipralabdho priyā-gaṇaiḥ


                          505
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

Sometimes (while feeling slightly drowsy) Śrī Hariís
veṇu slips from His fingers and is stolen by His priyā
Śrī Rādhā. Despite restlessly searching on all sides for
it, He finally becomes disappointed and gives up hope.
At that point the beloved gopīs offer the veṇu into His
lotus hands,

hāsito bahudhā tābhir / hāsitas tatra tiṣṭhati

vasanta-ṛtunā juṣtaṁ / vanaṁ khaṇdaṁ kvacin mudā

laughing and making witty remarks. At that time Kṛṣṇa
looks splendid as He delights the gopīs by teasing them,
joking and countering their impudent remarks. Sometimes,
Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Śrī Kṛṣṇa enter a particular section
of the forest that is attended by the spring season
personified.

praviśya candanāmbhobhiḥ / kuṅkumādi-jalair api

niṣiñcato yantra-muktais / tat-paṅkair limpato mithaḥ

There, They use silver syringes filled with colored
water mixed with fragrant substances, such as kuṅkuma
and candana, to drench each other; and at other times,
They smear the paste of candana, kuṅkuma and so on over
each otherís limbs.

sakhyoípy evaṁ viṣiñcanti / tāś ca tau siñcataḥ punaḥ

vasanta-vāyu-juṣṭeṣu / vana-khaṇḍeṣu sarvataḥ

In the beauty and splendor of that forest, which is
served on all sides by soothing spring breezes, the
sakhīs also join in Their transcendental sports by
assisting Them to bathe one another with that fragrant
water...

tat-tat-kālocitair nānā-vihāraiḥ sa-gaṇair dvija

śrāntau kvacid vṛkṣa-mūlam / āsādya muni-sattama

O best of the munis, Śrīmatī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and their
confidential sakhās and sakhīs perform various blissful
sports appropriate for that time. Feeling fatigued from
performing Their pastimes in this lively way, They sit
beneath a treeÖ

upaviśyāsane divye / madhu-pānaṁ pracakratuḥ

tato madhu-madonmattau / nidrayā militekṣaṇau

Öon a divine throne and enjoy drinking nectarean honey-
wine (madhu). Becoming intoxicated by that madhu, They
close Their eyes in sleep for some time.

mithaḥ pāṇi-samālambya / kāma-bāṇa-prasaṅgatau

riraṁsur viśataḥ kuñje / skhalat-pādābjakau pathi

Holding each otherís hands Rādhā-Śyāma become pierced by
the arrows of Kāmadeva, and desiring to enjoy with one
another, Their lotus feet stumble from the path and They
enter the kuñja.

                          506
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017


kṛīḍataś ca tatas tatra / kariṇī-yūthapau yathā

sakhyoípi madhubhir mattā / nidrayā pīḍitekṣaṇau

Thereafter, Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Śyāmasundara freely
consort with each other in the kuñja, like the king of
elephants and his mate. The sakhīs, who are also
intoxicated with madhu, proceed drowsilyÖ

abhito mañju-kuñjeṣu / sarvā evāpi śiṣyire

pṛthag ekena vapuṣā / kṛṣṇoípi yugapad vibhuḥ

Öto various charming kuñjas nearby. By the influence of
His inconceivable potency, Śrī Kṛṣṇa manifests Himself
in many forms, and simultaneously meets individually
with each sakhī.

sarvāsāṁ sannidhiṁ gacchet / priyayā prerito muhuḥ

ramayitvā ca taḥ sarvāḥ / kariṇīr gaja-rāḍ iva

Just as an elephant infatuated by lust does not feel
tired when he unites with a number of she-elephants, at
the same time that He is giving further and futher
inspiration to Śrī Rādhā, Śrī Kṛṣṇa consorts with many
beloved sakhīs.

priyayā ca tathā tābhiḥ / kṛīḍārthañ ca saro vrajet

After such amorous sports with Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Her
confidential sakhīs, They enter a lake for water
sports.”

vṛnde śrī-nanda putrasya / mādhurya-kṛīḍane katham

aiśvaryasya prakāśoíbhūt / iti me chindi saṁśayam

Śrī Nārada said, “O Vṛndā, how is it possible for the
aiśvarya feature to manifest in the mādhurya of Śrī
Nandanandanaís pastimes? Please dispel this doubt.”

mune mādhuryam apy asti / līlā-śaktiḥ hares tu sā

tayā pṛthak kṛīḍaṁ gopa-gopikābhih samaṁ hariḥ

Śrī Vṛndā-devī said, “O Muni, Śrī Hariís mādhurya is
actually His līlā-śakti. With this śakti He performs His
most attractive and sweet pastimes. It is only through
this mādhurya-līlā-śakti that He sports at the same time
with each gopa and gopī,...

rādhayā saha rūpeṇa / nijena ramate svayam

iti mādhurya-līlāyāh / śaktir na tv īśatā hareḥ

but in His own original form He sports with Śrī Rādhā.
This is Śrī Kṛṣṇaís mādhurya-śakti, not His aiśvarya-
śakti.

jala-sekair mithas tatra / kṛīḍitvā sva-gaṇais tataḥ

vāsaḥ srak-candanair divyair / bhūṣaṇair api bhūṣitau

                          507
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017


“After entering within the lake, Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and Their
sakhīs begin Their play by splashing water at each
other, and then bathing each other. After that, They are
decorated with beautiful garments, fragrant garlands,
candana and divine ornaments.

tatraiva sarasas tīre / divya-maṇimaye gṛhe

aśnataḥ phala-mūlāni / kalpitāni mayaiva hi

Then, within a divine bower of jewels situated on the
shore of that lake, I offer them a repast of fruits and
herbal drinks that I have prepared myself.

haris tu prathamaṁ bhuktvā / kāntayā parisevitah

dvitrābhiḥ sevito gacchec / chayyāṁ puṣpa-vinirmitām

Śrīmatī Rādhikā personally serves Śrī Kṛṣṇa as He honors
the festive foods first. He then rests on a bed of
flowers. At that time, two or three sakhīs attend HimÖ

tāmbūlair vyajanais tatra / pāda-samvāhanādibhih

sevyamāno hasaṁs tābhir / modate preyasīṁ smaran

Öby supplying Him with betel nuts (tāmbūla), fanning
Him, massaging His feet, and so on. As the sakhīs serve
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, He falls asleep smiling, absorbed in thoughts
of His beloved Rādhikā.

śrī-rādhāpi harau supte / sa-sakhī moditāntarā

kānta-dattaṁ prīta-manā / ucchiṣṭaṁ bubhuje tataḥ

While Śrī Kṛṣṇa rests, Rādhikā and Her sakhīs with great
love and delight relish the remnants of food and drink
left by Her lover.

kiñcid eva tato bhuktvā / vrajet śayyā-niketanam

draṣṭuṁ kānta-mukhāmbhojaṁ / cakorīva niṣā-karam

“After Śrī Rādhikā has accepted a little of Kṛṣṇaís
remnants, She goes to the bedroom and gazes upon the
lotus face of Her Prāṇa-vallabha, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, just like
the cakorī bird looks at the moon.

tāmbūla-carvitaṁ tasya / tatratyābhir niveditam

tāmbūlāny api cāśnāti / vibhajantī priyāliṣu

The sakhīs there offer Her the tāmbūla chewed by Śrī
Śyāmasundara. She also chews the remnants, after
dividing it among Her sakhīs.

kṛṣṇoípi tāsāṁ śuśrūṣuḥ / svacchanda-bhāṣitaṁ mithaḥ

prāpta-nidra ivābhāti / vinidroípi paṭāvṛtaḥ

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is eager to hear the sweet, uninhibited talks
between Śrī Rādhikā and Her sakhīs, so He has covered
His whole body with cloth and pretends to be deeply

                          508
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017

asleep, although He is fully awake.

tāś ca kelī-kṣaṇaṁ kṛtvā / mithaḥ kānta-kathāśrayāḥ

vyāja-nidraṁ harer jñātvā / kutaścid anumānataḥ

The sakhīs think that Kṛṣṇa is asleep and freely make
witty remarks, laughing and cutting jokes with each
other. Soon afterwards, however, they guess that He was
only pretending to be asleep, and that He has cleverly
heard everything that they said.

vyudasya rasanāṁ dadbhiḥ / paśyantyoínyonya-mānanam

līnā iva lajjayā syuḥ / kṣaṇam ucur na kiñcana

Feeling ashamed, they press their tongues between their
teeth, and immersed in shyness, they look at each
otherís faces in awe, unable to speak.

kṣaṇād eva tato vastraṁ / durīkṛtya tad-aṅgataḥ

sādhu-nidrāṁ gatoísīti / hāsayantī hasanti tāḥ

However, they very soon recover their natural state;
throwing the cloth from Kṛṣṇaís body, they say, ëWhat a
sound sleep You are having!í This amuses Kṛṣṇa, and they
all laugh together.

evam tau vividhair hāsyai / ramamānau gaṇaiḥ saha

anubhūyaḥ kṣaṇaṁ nidrāṁ / sukhañ ca muni-sattama

“O best of the munis, in this way Rādhā, Kṛṣṇa and the
sakhīs perform a variety of playful pastimes which are
full of witty jokes and laughter, and then They enjoy
blissful sleep for sometime.

upaviśyāsane divye / sa-gaṇau vistṛte mudā

paṇīkṛtya mitho hāraṁ / cumbāśleṣa-paricchadān

Thereafter, in great delight, they all sit on a divine,
capacious raised seat. Then, wagering necklaces,
garments, kisses or embraces,Ö

akṣair vikṛīḍataḥ premnā / narmālāpa-puraḥsaram

parājitoípi priyayā / jitam ity vadan mṛṣā

Öwith bhāvas of prema they jestingly gamble with dice.
Even though Kṛṣṇa is defeated, He falsely claims that He
has won.

hārādi-gṛahaṇe tasyāḥ / pravṛttas tāḍyate tayā

tathaivaṁ tāḍitaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ/ karotpala-sarorūhaiḥ

Thus He approaches to take away Rādhikāís necklace, but
She slaps Him. Being thus slapped by Her lotus hands,...

viṣaṇṇa-mānaso bhūtva / gantuṁ ca kurute matim

jitoísmi cet tvayā devi / gṛhyatām mat-paṇīkṛtam

                          509
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017


Kṛṣṇa becomes morose. Pretending that He is about to
leave the place, He says ëO Devī, I have been defeated
by You. Here, take my wager.

cumbanādi mayā dattam / ity uktvā ca tathācaret

kauṭilyam tad-bhruvor draṣṭuṁ / śrotuṁ tad-bhartsanaṁ
vacaḥ

These are the kisses and other things that I staked
before.í So saying, Śrī Kṛṣṇa awards Śrīmatī Rādhikā Her
kisses and so on. Being eager to witness Śrī Rādhāís
crooked eyebrows and hear Her words of chastisement to
Śrī ŚyāmaÖ

tataḥ śārī-śukānāñ ca / śrutvā bāgāharaṁ mithaḥ

nirgacchatas tataḥ sthānād / gantu-kāmau gṛhaṁ prati

Öthe śuka and śārī birds come and begin a dispute about
the respective virtues of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. After hearing
that dispute between the śuka and śārī, Śrī Śrī Rādhā
and Kṛṣṇa depart for Their respective destinations.

kṛṣṇaḥ kāntām anujñāpya / gavām abhimukhaṁ vrajet

sā tu sūrya-gṛhaṁ gacchet / sakhī-maṇḍala-samvṛtā

Śrī Kṛṣṇa takes leave of His Prāṇa-vallabhā Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, and goes to rejoin the cows, while Śrīmatī
Rādhikā goes with Her sakhīs to Sūrya Mandira to perform
Sūrya-pūjā.

kiyad dūraṁ tato gatvā / parāvṛtya hariḥ punaḥ

vipra-veśaṁ samāsthāya / yāti sūrya-gṛhaṁ prati

Meanwhile, after Śrī Kṛṣṇa has gone a short distance, He
disguises Himself as a brāhmaṇa priest, and also sets
off for Sūrya Mandira.

sūryañ ca pūjayet tatra / prārthitas tat-sakhī-janaiḥ

tadaiva kalpitair vedaiḥ / parihāsa-viśāradaiḥ

Śrīmatī Rādhikāís sakhīs think that He is a pūjārī who
will help them to conduct their worship, and they
request Him to perform Sūrya-pūjā on their behalf.
Thereupon, Śrī Kṛṣṇa begins to perform Sūrya-pūjā with
funny, concocted Vedic mantras.

tatas tā vyathitaṁ kāntaṁ / parijñāya vicakṣaṇāḥ

ānanda-sāgare līnā / na viduḥ svaṁ na cāparam

When the intelligent sakhīs hear these made-up Vedic
mantras, they immediately understand that this priest is
none other than their lover Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself, who is
distressed in separation from Śrī Rādhikā. Knowing this,
drowning in the ocean of the bliss of prema, they forget
their own identity and that of others.

vihārair vividhair evaṁ / sārddhayām advayaṁ mune

                          510
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017


nītvā gṛhaṁ vrajeyus tāḥ / sa ca kṛṣṇo gavāṁ vrajet

(O Muni), when They have spent two and a half praharas
performing a variety of pastimes like this, Śrīmatī
Rādhikā and Her sakhīs return to their respective homes,
while Kṛṣṇa proceeds to His cows.”

Vijaya: What are the aparāhna-līlā (afternoon pastimes)?

Gosvāmī:

saṅgamya sva-sakhīn kṛṣṇo / gṛhītvā gāḥ samantataḥ

āgacchati vrajaṁ karṣan / tatratyān muralī-ravaiḥ

Śrī Vṛndā-devī continues, “O Nārada, Kṛṣṇa rejoins His
sakhās and returns to Vraja. By the sweet sound of His
muralī, He assembles all the cows from every direction
and steals away the hearts of the vraja-vāsīs.

tato nandādayaḥ sarve / śrutvā veṇu-ravaṁ hareḥ

go-dhūli-paṭala-vyāptaṁ / dṛṣṭvā vāpi nabha-sthalam

kṛṣṇasyābhimukhaṁ yānti / tad-darśana-samutsukāḥ

When Nanda and the other vraja-vāsīs hear the sweet
sound of Śrī Hariís veṇu and see the sky being covered
with the dust raised by the cowsí hooves, they become
very eager to see Him and immediately proceed in that
direction.

rādhikāpi samāgatya / gṛhe snātvā vibhūṣitā

sampādya kānta-bhogārthaṁ / bhakṣyāṇi vividhāni ca

sakhī-saṅgha-yutā yāti / kāntaṁ draṣṭuṁ samutsukāḥ

After returning to Her home, and being bathed, dressed
and ornamented by Her sakhīs, Śrīmatī Rādhikā prepares
various types of foods for Her Prāṇa-vallabha Śrī Kṛṣṇa
and anxiously leaves with Her sakhīs to take His
darśana.

rāja-mārge vraja-dvāri / yatra sarva-vrajaukasaḥ

kṛṣṇoípi tān samāgamya / yathāvad anupūrvaśaḥ

When Kṛṣṇa returns to the outskirts of Vraja on the way
from go-cāraṇa, all of the vraja-vāsīs gather on both
sides of the royal path. Śrī Kṛṣṇa greets everyone, and
offers respect according to age, qualities and so forth.

darśanaiḥ sparśanair vācā / smita-pūrvāvalokanaiḥ

gopa-vṛddhān namaskāraiḥ / kāyikair vācikair api

Some He favors by looking on them, some by embracing,
some by sweet words, and some by jubilant, sweet,
smiling glances overflowing with prema.

sāṣṭāṅga-pātaiḥ pitarau / rohiṇīm api nārada


                          511
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017

netrānta-sūcitenaiva / vinayena priyāṁ tathā

He Nārada! Śrī Kṛṣṇa offers respectful namaskara both by
bodily gestures and by respectful words to all the
elderly gopas. Falling down, He offers sāṣṭāṅga-daṇḍavat
to the feet of Mahārāja Nanda, Yaśodā Māiyā, and Rohiṇī
Māiyā, and gives special delight to His beloved gopīs
with His kṛpā-kaṭākṣa (merciful sweet sidelong glances).

evaṁ taiś ca yathā-yogyaṁ / vrajaukobhiḥ prapūjitaḥ

gavālayaṁ tathā gāś ca / sampraviśya samantataḥ

In return, the various vraja-vāsīs offer Him blessings,
exchange sweet words, worship Him and so on. He then
carefully herds the cows into the go-śālā.

pitṛbhyām arthito yāti / bhrātrā saha nijālayam

snātvā bhuktvā kiñcid atra / pitrā mātrānumoditaḥ

gavālayaṁ punar yāti / dogdhu-kāmo gavāṁ payaḥ

Afterwards at the request of Their parents, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
and Daujī go to Their rooms and bathe and take a little
prasāda. Then after requesting their parentsí blessings,
the two divine brothers again proceed eagerly towards
the go-śālā to milk the cows.”

Vijaya: What are the śāyaṁ-līlā (pastimes during dusk
and early evening)?

Gosvāmī:

tāś ca dugdhvā punaḥ kṛṣṇaḥ / dohayitvā ca kāścana

pitrā sārddhaṁ gṛhaṁ yāti / payo-bhāra-śatānugaḥ

“Then Śrī Kṛṣṇa milks some of the cows Himself and
engages others in milking the rest. When this is done,
He returns to His house with His father, followed by
hundreds of servants carrying pots of milk.

tatrāpi māṭr-vṛndaiś ca / tat-putraiś ca balena ca

sambhukte vividhānnāni / carvya-coṣyādikāni ca

Arriving home, He sits beside Nanda Mahārāja, His
uncles, His cousins, Balarāma and the sakhās while
Yaśodā, Rohiṇī, and other elderly gopīs serve Them, and
He relishes varieties of food preparations that are
chewed, sucked, licked and drunk.”

Vijaya: Please tell me about the pradoṣa-līlā (pastimes
of the first part of the night).

Gosvāmī:

tan-mātuh prārthanāt pūrvaṁ / rādhāyāpi tadaiva hi

prasthāpyante sakhī-dvārā / pakvānnānī tadālayam

“In great excitement, Śrīmatī Rādhikā cooks varieties of
food preparations and sends them by Her sakhīs to Kṛṣṇa

                          512
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017

in Nanda-bhavan, even before Her mother-in-law orders
Her to do so.

ślāghayaṁś ca haris tāni / bhuktvā piṭrādibhiḥ saha

sabhā-gṛhaṁ vrajet taiś ca / juṣṭaṁ bandhu-janādibhiḥ

pakvānnāni gṛhītvā tāḥ / sakhyas tatra samāgatāḥ

bahūny eva punas tāni / pradattāni yaśodayā

Along with His father and the sakhās, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
repeatedly relishes and praises the varieties of
preparations sent by Śrī Rādhā, as well as many others
given by Yaśodā Māiyā. Then Kṛṣṇa goes with His father,
friends and relatives to the assembly hall where singers
and dancers entertain them with sweet songs and dances.

sakhyā tatra tayā dattaṁ / kṛṣṇocchiṣṭaṁ tathā rahaḥ

sarvaṁ tābhiḥ samānīya / rādhikāyai nivedyate

Meanwhile, the sakhīs take Kṛṣṇaís remnants and offer
them to Rādhikā in a secret place. Śrīmatī Rādhikā
distributes them amongst the sakhīs in order of
seniority (and deeply absorbed in thoughts of Him She
honors them with great delight).

sāpi bhuktvā sakhī-vargā yutā tad-anupūrvaśaḥ

sakhībhir maṇḍitā tiṣṭhet / abhisarttuṁ samudyatā

After enjoying those remnants, Her sakhīs decorate Her
very charmingly, and She is then ready to go on abhisāra
(meeting with Her priyatama Śyāma!).”

Vijaya: Prabhu, I am becoming very eager to hear about
rātri-līlā (the night pastimes).

Gosvāmī: prasthāpyate mayā kācid / ata eva tataḥ sakhī

tathābhisāritābhiś ca / yamunāyāḥ samīpataḥ

kalpa-vṛkṣe nikuñjeísmin / divya-ratnamaye gṛhe

sita-kṛṣṇa-niśāyogyā / veśayitvā sakhī-yutā

Śrī Vṛndā-devī said, “I send a certain sakhī from here
to Śrīmatī Rādhikā, who accompanied by Her sakhīs then
comes to a divine, bejeweled bower inside the nikuñja.
It is situated on the banks of Yamunā, densely covered
by kalpa-vṛkṣa trees. According to the messenger sakhīís
indication, Śrīmatī Rādhikā dresses in clothes that suit
the brightness of the moon. During the dark fortnight
(kṛṣṇa-pakṣa), She dresses in dark clothes, while in the
bright fortnight (śukla-pakṣa), She wears light or white
clothes.

kṛṣṇoípi vividhas tatra / dṛṣṭvā kautūhalaṁ tataḥ

kātyāyanyā manojñāni / śrutvāpi gītakāny api

Meanwhile, Kṛṣṇa sits in His fatherís assembly hall,
watching various types of wonderful shows and listening

                          513
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

to kātyāyanī-saṅgīta songs that captivate the mind.

dhana-dhānyādibhis tāṁś ca / prīṇayitvā vidhānataḥ

janair ārādhito mātrā / yāti śayyā-niketanam

After that, He suitably rewards and satisfies the
performers with wealth or grains, accepts worship from
Nanda Mahārājaís subjects, and proceeds with His mother
towards His bedroom.

mātari prasthitāyān tu / bahir gatvā tato gṛhāt

sāṅketitaṁ kāntayātra / samāgacched alakṣitaḥ

After Yaśodā Māiyā has put Kṛṣṇa to sleep, she leaves
His room and goes to rest in her own room. Thereupon,
Kṛṣṇa, who was only pretending to be asleep, silently
leaves His room, taking care not to be noticed by
anyone,

militvā tāv ubhāv atra / kṛīdato vana-rājiṣu

vihārair vividhai rāsa-lāsya-gīta-puraḥsaraiḥ

He goes to join His consort at the assigned meeting
(saṅketa) place. There, They perform various pastimes
headed by singing and rāsa dancing together in the
forest with Their sakhīs.

sārddhaṁ yāma-dvayaṁ nītvā / rātrāv eva vidhānataḥ

viśve suṣupatuḥ kuñje / pakṣibhis tāv alakṣitau

“After spending almost two and a half praharas of the
night and performing various other pastimes of the rāsa-
līlā, (such as bathing in Yamunā), the two Moieties
enter Their kuñja unnoticed by the sleeping birds.

ekānte kusumaiḥ klipte / keli-talpe manohare

suptāvatiṣṭhatāṁ tatra / sevyamānau nijālibhiḥ

In that solitary kuñja, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa lie down on a
sublime bed of flowers, just suitable for Their mind-
captivating, amorous pastimes. Then they rest while
Their most confidential sakhīs render appropriate
services.”

Vijaya, this is the most celebrated Śrī Kṛṣṇaís aṣṭa-
kālīya-līlā, in which the ingredients of all types of
rasa are present. The various types of rasas that I have
discussed with you previously are all present in this
līlā. You should keep rendering your service at your
assigned place, at the appointed time, in your appointed
group, and with your specific relationship.

When Vijaya Kumāra had heard all these descriptions from
Śrī Guru Gosvāmīís lotus mouth, he became overwhelmed
with bhāva. Tears of prema rolled down his cheeks, and
the hairs on his body stood on end. He spoke a few words
in a faltering voice, and then fell unconscious at Śrī
Gopāla Guru Gosvāmīís lotus feet. Sometime later, when
he regained consciousness, Śrī Gopāla Guru Gosvāmī

                          514
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

embraced him with great affection, and stroked his head.
Streams of tears also fell from Śrī Guru Gosvāmīís eyes.

Eventually, realizing that it was very late at night,
Vijaya Kumāra offered daṇḍavat-praṇāma at Śrī Guru
Gosvāmīís lotus feet, composed himself, and walked
slowly to his place. Now rasa-kathā began to appear in
his heart day and night.



Thus ends the Thirty-eighth Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled

“Śṛṅgāra-Rasa: Mukhya-Sambhoga & Aṣṭa-Kālīya-Līlā”




Chapter 39

Entering Līlā



Now an intense longing possessed Vijaya Kumāra. Nothing
seemed to please him, and he could no longer steady his
heart, even after having darśana of Jagannāthadeva in
the temple. He had long ago understood the fundamentals
of rasa-tattva, but it was only now, in Śrī Gopāl Guru
Gosvāmīís association, that he came to understand
madhura-rasa with its sthāyībhāva, vibhāvas, anubhāvas,
sattvika-bhāvas and vyabhicārī-bhāvas. Different bhāvas
manifested in his heart at different times. For a while,
one bhāva would arise and immerse him in bliss, and then
a new bhāva would invade his heart. He passed his days
in this way, completely helpless to check the awakening
and movement of any bhāva in his heart, or its
transformation into another bhāva. Consequently, one day
he approached the lotus feet of Śrī Guru Gosvāmī with
tearful eyes and submitted the following request,
“Prabhu, by your unlimited compassion, I have learnt
everything, but I cannot control my real self, so I
cannot firmly establish myself in kṛṣṇa-līlā. Kindly
bestow upon me whatever instructions you may think
suitable for me in my present condition.”

Śrī Guru Gosvāmī became overjoyed to see Vijaya Kumāraís
bhāvas, and thought to himself, “Aho! How glorious and
wonderful the nature of kṛṣṇa-prema is! It makes
happiness seem like distress, and distress like
happiness!” Then he said to Vijaya Kumāra, “My dear son,
now you should adopt the means by which you can enter
into kṛṣṇa-līlā.”

Vijaya: What is the method for doing that?

Gosvāmī: Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī has prescribed
the method to enter kṛṣṇa-līlā in the following śloka:

na dharmaṁ nādharmaṁ śruti-gaṇa-niruktaṁ kila kuru


                          515
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

vraje rādhā-kṛṣṇa-pracura-paricaryām iha tanu

śaci-sūnuṁ nandīśvara-pati-sutatve guru-varaṁ

mukunda-preṣṭhatve smara param ajasraṁ nanu manaḥ

Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā (2)

O my dear mind! Please do not perform either dharma or
adharma mentioned in the śrutis. Rather, you should
render profuse loving service to Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
Yugala here in Vraja, for the śrutis have ascertained
that They are the highest principle of supreme worship
and the Supreme Absolute Truth. Always meditate on Śacī-
nandana Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who is richly endowed
with the complexion and sentiments of Śrīmatī Rādhikā,
as non-different from Śrī Nanda-nandana; and always
remember Śrī Gurudeva as most dear to Śrī Mukunda.

Donít waste time vainly deliberating on the righteous
and unrighteous activities (dharma and adharma)
mentioned in śāstra. In other words, you should
completely abandon śāstric reasoning and logic, and
engage in the sādhana of rāgānugā-bhakti according to
the greed developed in your heart. Render profuse loving
service to Śrī Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in Vraja. That is,
engage in the bhajana of vraja-rasa. If you ask who will
teach the aim and object of vraja-rasa bhajana, then
please listen.

After vraja-līlā, our Prāṇanātha Śrī Nimānanda has
appeared from the womb of Śrī Śacī-devī in pracchanna
(concealed) Vṛndāvana, Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma. Śacīnandana
Gaurahari is none other than Kṛṣṇa Himself, the son of
the Lord of Nandīśvara, Śrī Nanda Mahārāja. Never
consider Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu to be inferior to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa in any aspect of tattva. He has appeared in
Navadvīpa, and has displayed a distinct bhajana-līlā, so
you should never give up vraja-bhajana, thinking that He
is Navadvīpa-nāgara (the lover who enjoys His consorts
in Navadvīpa). He is Kṛṣṇa Himself, but you should not
disturb those on the path of arcana, who meditate upon
Him separately from Kṛṣṇa and perform His worship with
separate mantras. On the rasa-mārga, He is the exclusive
object of bhajana as Śrī Rādhā-vallabha, and He has
appeared as Śacī-nandana, the sole guru of vraja-rasa.
Therefore, perform bhajana of that Śacī-nandana as
kṛṣṇa-preṣṭha, that is considering Him to be guru who is
very dear to Kṛṣṇa. Before performing rādhā-kṛṣṇa-
smaraṇa, always remember gaura-līlā, because it will
stimulate and awaken your bhāvas of aṣṭa-kālīya-kṛṣṇa-
līlā. Always realize bhajana-gurudeva as none other than
a vraja-yūtheśvarī or sakhī. Enter into vraja-līlā by
performing bhajana in this way.

Vijaya: Prabhu, now I will put aside all the logical
arguments of the śāstras and all the other paths, for I
am becoming very eager to render appropriate services in
aṣṭa-kālīya-kṛṣṇa-līlā, as taught and demonstrated by
Śrī Gaurāṅgadeva, under the guidance of my guru-rūpā
sakhī. Please instruct me how can I make my mind
steadfast in this attitude, so that I can achieve my
goal.


                          516
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

Gosvāmī: Two subjects are to be clearly understood in
this connection: upāsya-pariṣkṛti and upāsaka-pariṣkṛti.
Upāsya-pariṣkṛti means to refine the conception and
realize the true nature of the upāsya, or the object of
one’s sevā. You have already accomplished upāsya-
pariṣkṛti, for you have understood rasa-tattva. There
are eleven bhāvas (ekādaśa-bhāvas) with respect to
upāsaka-pariṣkṛti; you have gained almost all of them,
but you need to be somewhat more firmly established in
them.

Vijaya: Kindly explain these ekādaśa-bhāvas to me
thoroughly once again.

Gosvāmī: The ekādaśa-bhāvas are: 1) sambandha
(relationship), 2) vayasa (age), 3) nāma (name), 4) rūpa
(personal form and beauty), 5) yūtha (group), 6) veśa
(dress), 7) ājñā (specific instruction), 8) vāsa
(residence), 9) sevā (exclusive service); 10)
parākāṣṭhā-śvāsa (the highest summit of emotion, which
is the aspirant’s very life breath), and 11) pālya-dāsī-
bhāva (the sentiment of a maidservant under the
protection of Śrī Rādhā).

Vijaya: What is sambandha (relationship)?

Gosvāmī: The sentiment of sambandha is the very
foundation of this subject. The sentiments with which
one relates to Kṛṣṇa when one establishes sambandha
determine one’s corresponding state of perfection
(siddhi). One who accepts Kṛṣṇa as master when he
establishes his relationship with Him becomes dāsa. One
who accepts Kṛṣṇa as his sakhā or son when he
establishes his relationship becomes sakhā or parent,
respectively. One who accepts Him as husband in the
marital (svakīya) relationship becomes a beautiful young
lady in Dvārakā. Śānta-rasa is absent in Vraja, and even
dāsya-rasa is very inhibited. In any case, this
relationship is established according to the worshiper’s
ruci.

Your nature is feminine, and your inclination is in
parakīya-rasa, so you are a subordinate attendant of
Vraja-vaneśvarī. The sambandha that you have to
cultivate and realize fully is: “I am a maidservant of
Śrīmatī Rādhikāís most confidential attendant maid.
Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the mistress of my very life, and
Kṛṣṇa is Her life; therefore Śrī Rādhā-vallabha Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is certainly the Lord of my life.”

Vijaya: I have heard that our ācārya, Śrīla Jīva
Gosvāmī, was in favor of sambandha in svakīya-bhāva (the
marital relationship). Is this true?

Gosvāmī: None of the followers of Śrīman Mahāprabhu were
outside the pure, transcendental parakīya-bhāva. Śrī
Svarūpa Gosvāmī is the sole guru of this transcendental
parakīya-rasa. He has given instruction on the purest
transcendental parakīya-bhāva, and Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī –
as well as Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī
– followed in his footsteps and maintained the same
opinion. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has never cherished any
independent sentiments of svakīya-bhajana. However, he
observed the scent of svakīya-bhāva in some of the

                          517
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

upāsakas (worshipers) of Vraja. The svakīya-bhāva of
Vraja is found only where the samarthā rati has a scent
of samañjasā rati in it. Those who maintain a slight
sense of svakīya-bhāva when they establish their
relationship with Kṛṣṇa are actually svakīya-upāsakas.
Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī had both types of disciples: those
with śuddha parakīya-bhāva, and those whose worship was
mixed with a sense of svakīya-bhāva. Consequently, he
left separate instructions according to his disciples’
different inclinations. This fact is clearly established
by the śloka: svecchayā likhitaṁ kiñcit in his Locana-
rocanī ṭīkā on Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi.

Vijaya: Very well. I have understood that only the
unadulterated parakīya-bhajana is accepted in the
viśuddha (pure) Gauḍīya conception. Now that I have
understood sambandha, please tell me about vayasa (age).

Gosvāmī: The sambandha that you have established with
Kṛṣṇa has resulted in your unprecedented and
unparalleled intrinsic svarūpa (vraja-lalanā-svarūpa) of
a vraja-gopī. Now, to render service in that svarūpa,
you need to have a suitable age (vayasa). The
appropriate age is kaiśora (the age from ten to
sixteen), also known as vayaḥ-sandhi. In your svarūpa,
you will begin from the age of ten, and grow up to
sixteen years. Vraja-lalanā’s do not have the three ages
of bālya (infancy, ages 0 – 5), paugaṇḍa (childhood,
ages 5 – 10), and vṛddha (adulthood), so you should
always foster the spiritual identification of being a
kiśorī.

Vijaya: Please explain to me about nāma (name). I have
already received the name of my svarūpa, but still,
please give me firm instructions in this regard.

Gosvāmī: After hearing about the services of various
damsels of Vraja, your own service tendency has
awakened. According to that natural tendency for
service, you are a maidservant of Rādhikā- sakhī. The
name of that maidservant is your name. Your Gurudeva has
given you your name after examining your inclination or
ruci. That name is to be considered your nitya-nāma. You
will be delighted (manoramā) by this name among the
vraja-gopīs.

Vijaya: Prabhu, now please tell me about rūpa (eternal
form).

Gosvāmī: Your intrinsic, transcendental identity is that
of a beautiful, youthful kiśorī, which means that your
Śrī Gurudeva has defined your siddha-rūpa according to
your inclination and ruci. How can one be the
maidservant of Śrīmatī Rādhikā without having been
endowed with an inconceivably divine form and personal
beauty?

Vijaya: Please consolidate my faith regarding yūtha
(group).

Gosvāmī: Śrīmatī Rādhikā Herself is the yūtheśvarī
(leader of the yūtha), and you have to live as an
attendant in the group of one of Her eight principal
sakhīs. Your Gurudeva has put you under the guidance of

                          518
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017

Śrīmatī Lalitā, so now you should render loving service
to Yūtheśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Līlāmaya Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
under Śrī Lalitā’s order.

Vijaya: Prabhu, what sort of sādhakas become followers
in the groups of yūtheśvarīs such as Śrī Candrāvalī?

Gosvāmī: The intense desire to be the attendant of a
yūtheśvarī awakens in one’s heart only after
accumulating fortune (sukṛti) for many births, so only
the most fortunate sādhakas have access to Śrīmatī
Rādhikā’s yūtha. The efforts of Śrī Candrāvalī and other
yūtheśvarīs are simply to enhance the līlā, and it is
only to nourish Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava’s transcendental
rasa that the other yūtheśvarīs have accepted the mood
of an opponent. In fact, Śrīmatī Rādhikā alone is
yūtheśvarī.

Śrī Kṛṣṇaís variegated pastimes are full of abhimāna
(spiritual self-conception). Those who have a particular
service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa in His pastimes identify themselves
as being perfectly fitted for just that service.

Vijaya: Now I wish to become resolute with regard to
guṇa (qualities).

Gosvāmī: You are expert in the various types of fine
skills required for your assigned service. You need
suitable qualities and dress in order to render your
service perfectly, and your Gurudeva has already
ascertained these for you.

Vijaya: Now, please tell me about ājñā (specific
orders).

Gosvāmī: There are two types of ājñā: nitya and
naimittika. Your nitya-ājñā is whatever ājñā your
compassionate sakhī has bestowed upon you regarding your
sevā during the aṣṭa-kālīya līlā, and you must continue
to render it regularly at that particular time, without
any negligence. Apart from that, from time to time, she
may give you ājñā about other services when the
necessity arises, and this is called naimittika-ājñā
(occasional orders). You should also attend to these
services with the utmost diligence.

Vijaya: What is vāsa (residence)?

Gosvāmī: To reside in Vraja eternally – this is vāsa.
You should realize your identity as a gopī who is born
in the house of some gopa in one of the villages of
Vraja, and you have been married to a gopa of some other
village of Vraja. However, the sweet sound of Kṛṣṇa’s
muralī has captivated you. Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s
confidential sakhī has taken you under her guidance and
has appointed a place of residence for you in a
beautiful kuṭīra in a grove on the bank of Rādhā-kuṇḍa.
The residence that you have realized internally, by your
intrinsic spiritual identity, is your true vāsa. Your
parakīya-bhāva is actually your nitya-siddha-bhāva.

Vijaya: Kindly give more specific details about my sevā
(service).


                          519
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

Gosvāmī: You are a maidservant of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and
your eternal service is to render loving service unto
Her. Sometimes, out of necessity, She may send you to be
alone with Śrī Kṛṣṇa in a solitary place, and at that
time, Kṛṣṇa may express His desire to enjoy with you.
However, you should never agree to His proposals. You
are a dāsī of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and you never
independently serve Kṛṣṇa for His pleasure without Her
permission. You have equal loving attachment for Rādhā
and Kṛṣṇa, but still you should maintain greater
earnestness for Her loving service (dāsya-prema) than
for Kṛṣṇa’s. This is the meaning of sevā. Your sevā is
to care for Śrī Rādhikā’s comfort and pleasure in all
the eight-fold pastimes of the aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā. Śrīla
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī has presented the outline of
your service in Śrī Vilāpa-kusumāñjalī, based on Śrī
Svarūpa Dāmodara’s treatise.

Vijaya: How can the parākāṣṭhā-śvāsa (the utmost summit
of sentiments, and the very breath of the aspirant) be
ascertained?

Gosvāmī: Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī has explained
parākāṣṭhā in the following two ślokas: (Vilāpa-
kusumāñjali 102-103)

āśā-bharair amṛta-śindhumayaih kathañcit

kālo mayātigamitaḥ kila sāmprataṁ hi

tvañ cet kṛpāṁ mayi vidhāsyasi naiva kiṁ me

prāṇair vrajena ca varoru vakāriṇāpi

Hā Varoru Rādhe, I am spending my days in great
distress, maintaining the highest expectation of
attaining the ocean of nectar. Now please bestow Your
kindness upon me, for if You do not do so, what is the
use of my life, my residence in Vraja, or even my
servitude to Kṛṣṇa? All will be completely in vain.

hā nātha gokula-sudhā-kara suprasanna-

vaktrāravinda madhura-smita he kṛpārdra

yatra tvayā viharate praṇayaiḥ prayārāt

tatraiva mām api naya priya-sevanāya

Hā! Gokulacandra! Hā! Kṛṣṇa, with a smiling, blissful,
lotus face! Hā! You whose heart is soft and melting,
wanting to bestow mercy on all! Kindly take me where You
lovingly take Śrīmatī Rādhikā and sport with Her
eternally, and allow me to render confidential, loving
service to You both.

Vijaya: Please explain pālya-dāsī-svabhāva (the
disposition of the maids who have accepted the
protection of Śrī Rādhā).

Gosvāmī: Śrīla Dāsa Gosvāmī has explained the
disposition of the pālya-dāsīs in his Vraja-vilāsa-stava
as follows:


                          520
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

sāndra-prema-rasaiḥ plutā priyatayā prāgalbhyam āptā
tayoḥ

prāṇa-preṣṭha-vayasyayor anudinaṁ līlābhisāraṁ kramaiḥ

vaidagdhyena tathā sakhīṁ prati sadā mānasya śikṣāṁ
rasair

yeyaṁ kārayatīha hanta lalitā gṛhṇātu sā māṁ gaṇaiḥ

Vraja-vilāsa-stava (29)

Śrī Lalitā-devī is drowning in the utterly unfathomable
prema-rasa. Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa are her prāṇa-preṣṭha
(her dearest beloved, the life of her life), and every
day, with the pragalbhatā (boldness) born of her love
for Them both, she arranges for Their loving meetings.
With great expertise she instructs her sakhī Śrīmatī
Rādhikā. May she accept me as pālya-dāsī, one of the
attendant maids in her personal group.

Vijaya: What sort of attitude should a pālya-dāsī have
towards Śrī Lalitā-devī’s other attendant maids, and how
should she deal with them?

Gosvāmī: All of Śrīla Dāsa Gosvāmī’s writings are
enriched with transcendental rasa, which are but
illustrations of Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī’s
instructions. In this respect, he has written:

tāmbūlārpaṇa-pāda-mardana-payodānābhisārādibhir

vṛndāraṇya-maheśvarīṁ priyatayā yās toṣayanti priyāḥ

prāṇa-preṣṭha-sakhī-kulād api kilāsaṅkocitā bhūmikāḥ

kelī-bhūmiṣu rūpa-mañjarī-mukhās tā dāsikāh saṁśraye

Vraja-vilāsa-stava (38)

I take shelter of Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī and the other
maidservants of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, the great Queen of
Vṛndāvana. Those maidservants perpetually satisfy Her by
their loving services, such as offering tāmbūla,
massaging Her feet, bringing water, and arranging for
Her trysts with Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The prāṇa-preṣṭha-sakhīs are
dearer to Śrīmatī Rādhikā than Her very life, but these
maidservants are still more dear, because without
feeling shy they can enter the area where the Divine
Couple enjoy Their most confidential pastimes.

Vijaya: What type of attitude and dealings should be
maintained towards the other principal sakhīs?

Gosvāmī: Śrīla Dāsa Gosvāmī has indicated this in the
following śloka:

praṇaya-lalita-narma-sphāra-bhūmis tayor yā

vraja-pura-nava-yūnor yā ca kaṇṭhān pikānām

nayati param adhastād divya-gānena tuṣṭyā

prathayatu mama dīkṣāṁ hanta seyaṁ viśākhā

                          521
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017


Vraja-vilāsa-stava (30)

Śrī Viśākhā-devī is favored by the youthful couple on
account of her qualities of intimate love, playful
humor, and daring, amorous curiosity. Her charming,
celestial singing mocks the sweetness of the cuckoo. May
that Viśākhā mercifully train me in the art of music.

Gopāl Guru Gosvāmī added. “You must also maintain a
similar submissive attitude towards the other sakhīs.

Vijaya: But what type of mood should be maintained
towards the sakhīs of the rival group (vipakṣa)?

Gosvāmī: In this regard, Śrīla Dāsa Gosvāmī states:

sāpatnyoccaya-rajyad-ujjvala-rasasyoccaih samudvṛddhaye

saubhāgyodbhaṭa-garva-vibhrama-bhṛtaḥ śrī-rādhikāyāḥ
sphuṭam

govindaḥ smara-phulla-vallava-vadhū-vargeṇa yena kṣaṇaṁ

kṛīḍaty eṣa tam atra vistṛta-mahā-puṇyañ ca vandāmahe

Vraja-vilāsa-stava (41)

I repeatedly offer my prayers to the vraja-gopīs, headed
by the highly fortunate Candrāvalī, who have the mood of
rivals towards Śrīmatī Rādhikā. They are endowed with
attributes such as the feelings of great fortune, pride
in their excellence, and amorous delusion (vibhrama).
Śrī Kṛṣṇa consorts with them for only a few moments,
just to enhance the mood of Śrī Rādhikāís śṛṅgāra-rasa.

One has to maintain this type of feeling within the
heart towards the sakhīs belonging to the opposing
group, and at the time of rendering service, you can
deal with each individual appropriately with loving
remarks and jokes.

In summary, you should render your sevā according to the
methods and bhāvas illustrated in Śrī Vilāpa-
kusumāñjalī, and maintain mutual relationship and
dealings with sakhīs and other vraja-vāsīs as explained
in Śrī Vraja-vilāsa-stava. Contemplate all the
variegated līlās included within the aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā as
they are explained in Viśākhānandādi-stotram. Absorb
your mind in kṛṣṇa-līlā according to the approach
specified in Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā, and maintain resolute
determination for the rules and regulations of bhakti
according to the bhāvas presented in Sva-niyama-daśakam.

In his writings, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has illustrated
rasa-tattva extensively. Since Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
entrusted him with this particular responsibility, he
has not explained how rasa acts while one renders sevā.
Śrīla Dāsa Gosvāmī accomplished this task in his
writings, which are based on the kaḍaca (notes) of Śrīla
Svarūpa Dāmodara. Śrīman Mahāprabhu authorized and
empowered His different associates respectively with
different missionary responsibilities, and following His
instructions, they discharged their services flawlessly.

                          522
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017


Vijaya: Please tell me what those various
responsibilities were, and to whom Śrīman Mahāprabhu
entrusted them.

Gosvāmī: Śrīman Mahāprabhu entrusted Śrī Svarūpa
Dāmodara with the responsibility of teaching the process
of sevā endowed with transcendental rasa (rasamayī
upāsanā). To fulfill Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s order, Śrī
Svarūpa Dāmodara presented his treatise in two parts.
One part is called the internal path (antaḥ-panthā) of
rasamayī upāsanā, while the second part is called the
external path (bahih-panthā) of rasamayī upāsanā. Śrī
Svarūpa Dāmodara offered this antaḥ-panthā around the
neck of Śrīla Dāsa Gosvāmī, and it is illustrated and
well-preserved in Dāsa Gosvāmī’s writings. He taught the
bahih-panthā to Śrī Vakreśvara Gosvāmī, and this is the
distinguished treasure of our line right up to the
present day. I gave this treasured process to Śrīman
Dhyānacandra, and he has written a paddhati (a
systematic, step-by-step method of practice) based upon
it, which you have already obtained.

Śrīman Mahāprabhu empowered Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu and
Śrī Advaita Prabhu and entrusted them with the
responsibility of preaching the glories of śrī-nāma. He
ordered and empowered Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī to manifest
rasa-tattva, and He gave Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī the
responsibility of elaborately illustrating the
relationship between vaidhī-bhakti and rāga-bhakti. He
also instructed Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī to explain the
esoteric relationship between prakaṭa and aprakaṭa
Gokula. Through Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu and Śrīla Sanātana
Gosvāmī, Mahāprabhu empowered Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī to
establish the tattva of sambandha, abhidheya and
prayojana. In this way, each of them carried out just
those specific responsibilities that Mahāprabhu had
entrusted to them.

Vijaya: Prabhu, what responsibility did Mahāprabhu
entrust to Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda?

Gosvāmī: Śrīman Mahāprabhu entrusted Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda
with the responsibility of elaborately illustrating
rasa-tattva, and through Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, he
accomplished this to the fullest extent.

Vijaya: Prabhu, what was the responsibility entrusted to
Śrī Sārvabhauma?

Gosvāmī: He was entrusted with the responsibility of
teaching the philosophical truths about the Absolute
Reality (tattva). He in turn gave that responsibility to
Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, through the medium of one of his own
disciples.

Vijaya: What was Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s instruction to His
prominent followers in Bengal?

Gosvāmī: The responsibility of the Gauḍīya mahāntas was
to illuminate śrī gaura-tattva and to awaken in the
jīvas’ hearts transcendental śraddhā for the kṛṣṇa-
bhakti-rasa that Śrī Gaura had initiated. Again,
Mahāprabhu entrusted some great souls among them with

                          523
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

the responsibility of composing and propagating a
special mode of rasa-kīrtana.

Vijaya: What was the responsibility entrusted to Śrīla
Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa?

Gosvāmī: He was entrusted to teach the glories of
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

Vijaya: And to Śrīla Gopāla Bhaṭṭa?

Gosvāmī: Śrīman Mahāprabhu entrusted him with the
responsibility of properly protecting and preserving the
supremely pure and transcendental śṛṅgāra-rasa from any
distortions, and of checking any unreasonable negligence
towards vaidhī-bhakti.

Vijaya: What responsibility was given to Śrī
Prabhodhānanda Gosvāmī, the guru and uncle of Śrī Gopāla
Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī?

Gosvāmī: He was entrusted with the responsibility of
informing the world that the highest achievement is to
cultivate spontaneous loving attachment for vraja-rasa.

When Vijaya Kumāra heard all these topics, he was
delighted, and considered himself to be supremely
blessed.



Thus ends the Thirty-nineth Chapter of Jaiva-dharma,

entitled

“Entering Līlā”




Chapter 40

Attaining Prema, the Supreme Wealth



Vijaya pondered deeply, “Hearing about vraja-līlā, a
greed has now awakened in my heart for that līlā, and
thus I will gradually attain the stage of complete
success (sampatti-daśā).” He therefore concluded that he
must know about the nature of this gradual development.
Thinking thus, he approached Śrī Guru Gosvāmī and humbly
inquired, “Prabhu, I need to know the various stages
that a bhakta undergoes, beginning from the stage of
hearing to the stage of sampatti-daśā (complete
success).”

Gosvāmī: Altogether there are five stages: (1) śravaṇa-
daśā (the stage of hearing), (2) varaṇa-daśā (the stage
of acceptance), (3) smaraṇa-daśā (the stage of
remembrance), (4) bhāvāpana-daśā (the stage of spiritual
ecstasy), and (5) prema-sampatti-daśā (the state of
attaining the highest success of prema).

                          524
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017


Vijaya: Kindly explain śravaṇa-daśā.

Gosvāmī: When the jīva develops ruci for hearing kṛṣṇa-
līlā-kathā, it should be understood that his state of
aversion has been removed. At that time, an intense
hankering to hear kṛṣṇa-kathā awakens in him, and he has
to hear transcendental kṛṣṇa-kathā from the lips of a
bhakta who is much more advanced than he is.

It is said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (4.29.40):

tasmin mahan-mukharitā madhu-bhic-caritra-

pīyūṣa-śeṣa-saritaḥ paritaḥ sravanti

tā ye pibanty avitṛṣo nṛpa gāḍha-karṇais

tān na spṛśanty aśana-tṛḍ-bhaya-śoka-mohāḥ

In assemblies of saintly people, unlimited rivers of
pure nectar emanate from the mouths of great souls in
the form of descriptions of the transcendental
character, pastimes and qualities of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Those
who are never satiated when they drink these nectarean
glories through their ears with rapt attention can never
be subjected to hunger, thirst, fear, grief, delusion
and other anarthas.

Vijaya: Those who are averse (bahirmukha-daśā) also
occasionally hear kṛṣṇa-kathā. What kind of śravaṇa is
that?

Gosvāmī: There is a vast difference between the śravaṇa
of kṛṣṇa-kathā in the state of aversion (bahirmukha-
daśā) and śravaṇa in the state of being favorably
disposed (antarmukha-daśā). The śravaṇa of those who are
bahirmukha takes place by chance, and not because of
their śraddhā. Such śravaṇa gives rise to spiritual
fortune that leads towards bhakti (bhakty-unmukhī
sukṛti), and when this has accumulated over many
lifetimes, it gives rise to transcendental śraddhā. At
the stage that this transcendental śraddhā is awakened
in the heart, śravaṇa of kṛṣṇa-kathā from the lips of
saintly personalities is called śravaṇa-daśā. There are
two types of śravaṇa-daśā. The first is unmethodical or
irregular hearing (krama-hīna-śravaṇa-daśā), and the
second is hearing methodically in a regular order
(krama-śuddha-śravaṇa-daśā).

Vijaya: What is krama-hīna-śravaṇa-daśā (irregular
hearing)?

Gosvāmī:Krama-hīna-śravaṇa-daśā is hearing about kṛṣṇa-
līlā in an irregular and unmethodical manner. Hearing
kṛṣṇa-līlā with irresolute intelligence results in this
sort of unmethodical śravaṇa, because such hearing does
not enable one to realize the relationship between the
various līlās, and thus rasa does not awaken in his
heart.

Vijaya: Please explain about krama-śuddha-śravaṇa-daśā
(systematic hearing).


                          525
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

Gosvāmī:Rasa only awakens in one’s heart when kṛṣṇa-līlā
is heard methodically or in a regular order with
resolute intelligence. When one hears the aṣṭa-kālīya-
nitya-līlā (eternal eightfold pastimes) separately from
the naimittika-līlās (occasional līlās such as Kṛṣṇa’s
divine birth and so on), then his śravaṇa is krama-
śuddha. Only this krama-śuddha śravaṇa is desirable on
the path of bhajana. If one hears kṛṣṇa-līlā in the
krama-śuddha manner, the sweetness and charm of the līlā
is gradually conceived, and the inclination to perform
rāgānugā-bhajana appears in the heart of the listener.
At that time he thinks within himself, “Aho! Subala has
such a wonderful sakhya-bhāva for Kṛṣṇa. I will also
render loving sevā to Kṛṣṇa like him in sakhya-rasa.”
This type of strong affinity is called lobha (greed).
The performance of kṛṣṇa-bhajana with such lobha,
following the sweet bhāvas of the vraja-vāsīs, is called
rāgānugā-bhakti. I have given the example of sakhya-
rasa, but this type of rāgānugā-bhakti is also performed
in all the four rasas, beginning with dāsya. By the
grace of my Prāṇeśvara Śrī Nimānanda, you have a natural
disposition for śṛṅgāra-rasa. Because you have heard
about the vraja-gopīs exceptional bhāvas and sevā
attitude towards Kṛṣṇa, the greed to render premamayi-
sevā to Kṛṣṇa like them has appeared in your heart, and
that very greed has bestowed upon you the path to obtain
such aprākṛṭa-sevā.

In reality, the only śravaṇa-daśā of this process is the
confidential conversation between guru and disciple.

Vijaya: When is one’s śravaṇa-daśā considered completed?

Gosvāmī: One’s śravaṇa-daśā is completed when one
realizes the eternality of kṛṣṇa-līlā. Since kṛṣṇa-līlā
is supremely pure and transcendental, it completely
captivates the mind and heart. One is then afflicted
with acute impatience to enter into it and participate
in it. Śrī Gurudeva describes to the śiṣya the ekādaśa-
bhāvas that I mentioned previously. Śravaṇa-daśā should
only be considered completed or perfected when the
disciple’s disposition of mind is imbued with the
loveliness of the līlā. At that time, the disciple is
afflicted with intense eagerness and attains varaṇa-daśā
(the stage of acceptance).

Vijaya: Prabhu, please tell me about varaṇa-daśā.

Gosvāmī: When the spontaneous attachment of the heart is
bound in the līlā by the shackles of the ekādaśa-bhāvas
that I mentioned previously, the disciple becomes
overwhelmed and falls at Gurudeva’s lotus feet weeping
constantly. At that time, Gurudeva becomes manifest in
the form of a sakhī, and the disciple as her attendant.
The essential characteristic of the vraja-gopīs is that
they are extremely eager to render loving service to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. Gurudeva is a vraja-lalanā who has reached the
perfectional stage of this sevā. At that time, the
disciple humbly prays to Śrī Gurudeva with the following
heartfelt sentiments:

tvāṁ natvā yācate dhṛtvā tṛṇaṁ dantair ayaṁ janaḥ

sva-dāsyāmṛta-sekena jīvayāmuṁ su-duḥkhitam

                          526
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017


na muñcec charaṇāyātam api duṣṭaṁ dayāmayaḥ

ato rādhālike hā hā muñcainaṁ naiva tādṛśam

Premāmbhoja-marandākhya-stavarāja (11-12)

O Rādhālike, I am very degraded. Holding a blade of
grass between my teeth, and falling at Your lotus feet
with all possible humility, I pray that You will kindly
shower Your grace upon this destitute soul and enliven
me by bestowing the nectar of service under Your
direction and guidance. Those who are celebrated as kind
and merciful do not reject even wicked people who accept
their shelter, and surrender unto them; this is their
very nature. Therefore, please be kind to this wicked
person who has surrendered unto You. Please do not
deprive me of Your causeless grace. I am longing so
intensely for the loving service of the Divine Couple of
Vraja under the shelter of Your lotus feet.

This is the typical bhāva of varaṇa-daśā. In this stage,
the guru-rūpā sakhī gives the sādhaka the order (ājñā)
to engage in aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā-smaraṇam by taking
complete shelter of kṛṣṇa-nāma while residing in Vraja,
and assures him that his heartfelt, cherished longing
will be fulfilled very soon.

Vijaya: Please tell me about smaraṇa-daśā.

Gosvāmī: Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has said:

kṛṣṇaṁ smaran janañ cāsya presṭhaṁ nija-śamīhitaṁ

tat-tat-kathā-rataś cāsau kuryād vāsaṁ vraje sadā

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, Eastern Division (2.294-296)

The sādhaka should constantly remember Śrī Kṛṣṇa along
with His beloved eternal associates. He should absorb
himself in chanting and hearing Their glorious pastimes,
and he should always reside in Vraja.

sevā sādhaka-rūpeṇa siddha-rūpeṇa cātra hi

tad-bhāva-lipsunā kāryā vraja-lokānusārataḥ

Those who have developed greed for rāgātmikā-bhakti will
render service following the residents of Vraja
internally by siddha-rūpa and externally in their
sādhaka-rūpa.

śravaṇotkīrtanādīni vaidha-bhakty-uditāni tu

yāny aṅgāni ca tāny atra vijñeyāni manīṣibhiḥ

Those who are well-versed in transcendental knowledge
(tattva-vit) know full well that all the various limbs
of bhakti, such as śravaṇa and loud kīrtana, should also
be practiced in rāgānugā-bhakti.

Even before Vijaya Kumāra had heard the in-depth
explanation of these three ślokas, he asked, “What is
the meaning of kuryād vāsaṁ vraje sadā?”

                          527
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017


Gosvāmī: According to Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, it means that
the sādhaka should reside physically in vraja-maṇḍala,
in other words, in the pastime places of Śrī Śrī Rādhā
and Kṛṣṇa (līlā-maṇḍala). If he cannot stay in Vraja
physically, then he should do so mentally, because the
result of residing in Vraja mentally is the same as
residing there physically. The sādhaka should follow in
the footsteps of the particular sakhī whose loving
bhāvas (premika-rāga) has attracted him. He should
reside in Vraja with the abhimāna of being a kuñja-
sevikā (a maid attendant in the kuñja) of that
particular sakhī. He should constantly remember Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and the bhāva of that sakhī.

With this gross body the sādhaka should perform the
aṅgas of vaidhī-bhakti such as śravaṇa and kīrtana. With
his subtle body he should constantly remember the aṣṭa-
kālīya-līlā, and render his assigned sevā as a siddha-
vraja-gopī according to the eleven bhāvas that he has
attained.

Outwardly, the sādhaka must maintain his life following
the prescribed rules and regulations, and internally he
should cultivate the bhāvas that nourish his spiritual
form (siddha-deha). One who follows this procedure
correctly will naturally develop detachment from
anything other than Vraja.

Vijaya: Please illustrate this sevā more clearly.

Gosvāmī: The real meaning of vraja-vāsa is to stay in a
solitary place with aprākṛta-bhāva. The sādhaka should
render sevā according to the aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā while
regularly chanting a fixed number of hari-nāma. He
should regulate all the activities for bodily
maintenance so that they do not become unfavorable to
his bhajana. In other words, life should be molded in
such a way that activities of bodily maintenance become
favorable to one’s bhajana.

Vijaya Kumāra contemplated this deeply, and said,
“Prabhu, I have understood this fully, but how can the
mind be composed?

Gosvāmī: The mind automatically becomes composed as soon
as one attains rāgānugā-bhakti. This is because the
hankering of the mind for worldly enjoyment
automatically ceases when it is enlivened with the
inherent loving attachment of the self, and it runs
towards Vraja. In other words, the mind chases after
mundane enjoyment only because of its affinity for it,
but when this affinity is directed towards Vraja, the
mind becomes composed because of the absence of such
attachment for worldliness. Still, if any apprehension
of obstacles remains, it is beneficial to adopt the
gradual (krama) course that I mentioned previously.
Then, when the mind becomes fully composed, the
distractions of worldliness cannot cause any harm.

Vijaya: What is the meaning of krama (gradual)
cultivation?

Gosvāmī: One should maintain a fixed count of hari-nāma,

                          528
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                   5/5/2017

and one should devoutly chant śrī-hari-nāma for a fixed
period every day in solitude, absorbed in his particular
bhāva, and keep his mind free from mundane thought.
Slowly and gradually one should increase the time for
this sādhana, and eventually the stage will come when
the mind will always be saturated with alaukika-cinmaya-
bhāvas, so that no mundane thoughts can prevail over it.

Vijaya: For how long must one follow this practice?

Gosvāmī: One should continue to follow this practice
until he has reached a state of mind that is beyond any
disturbance.

Vijaya: How can one perform nāma-smaraṇa with bhāva?
Please elaborate on this point.

Gosvāmī: First you should chant nāma in ullāsa (a mood
of rejoicing). Then combine that joy with possessiveness
(mamatā). After that, you should compound that mamatā
with viśrambha (intimacy). When you do this, śuddha-
bhāva will gradually arise. Then, bhāvāpana-daśā will
appear. Initially, during the time of smaraṇa, the
sādhaka simply imposes bhāva on his practice. However,
in the stage of bhāvāpana, śuddha-bhāva manifests in the
heart, and this is called prema. This indeed is the
sequence for gradual development of nisthā within the
heart of the upāsaka (transcendental servant), and this
practice also includes the development of nisthā in the
conception of the object of upāsya (the object of one’s
sevā).

Vijaya: What is the sequence of upāsya-niṣṭha?

Gosvāmī: If you want to attain the fully-blossomed stage
of prema, then you should accept the following
instruction of Śrī Dāsa Gosvāmī.

yadīccher āvāsaṁ vraja-bhuvi sa-rāgaṁ prati-janur

yuva-dvandvaṁ tac cet paricaritum ārād abhilaṣeḥ

svarūpaṁ śrī-rūpaṁ sa-gaṇam iha tasyāgrajam api

sphuṭaṁ premṇā nityaṁ smara nama tadā tvaṁ śṛṇu manaḥ

Manaḥ-śikṣā (3)

O mind! If you cherish an ardent desire to live in Vraja
with rāga, and if you long to render direct loving sevā
life after life to Vraja-Yugala in Their parakīya
affairs, which are free from any bondage to the rules of
wedlock, then you must distinctly and constantly
remember with love Śrī Svarūpa Gosvāmī and Śrī Rūpa and
Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmīs, along with their associates. You
should accept them as your guru-rūpā-sakhīs, and offer
them praṇāma.

The idea is that if one performs sādhana in the bhāva of
svakīya-rasa, the result is samañjasa-rasa, in which the
sevā-bhāva to the Divine Couple is inhibited and not in
a fully blossomed state. Therefore, you should perform
bhajana maintaining the spiritual ego (abhimāna) of pure
parakīya-rasa according to the conceptions of Śrī

                          529
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017

Svarūpa, Śrī Rūpa and Śrī Sanātana. Even during the
sādhana stage, when the bhāvas are simply imposed, one
should only adopt the pure parakīya-bhāva. If the
sādhaka imposes the parakīyabhāvas, parakīya-rati will
manifest, and parakīya-rasa will eventually manifest
from this parakīya-rati. This indeed is the nitya-rasa
of Vraja aprakaṭa-līlā.

Vijaya: What is the process of hearing (krama-śuddha) in
sequence in aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā?

Gosvāmī: After explaining all the fascinating varieties
of rasa in aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī has said:

atalatvād apāratvād āptoí sau durvigāhatām

spṛṣṭaiḥ paraṁ taṭasthena rasābdhir madhuro yathā

Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, Gauṇa-sambhoga division (23)

Kṛṣṇa-līlā is completely transcendental from all
aspects. It is a sweet ocean of rasa. However, this
ocean is unfathomable and has no shore. Kṛṣṇa-līlā is
incomprehensible for the beings of this mundane world
because it is extremely difficult for them to penetrate
the mortal realm and have access to śuddha-aprākṛta-
tattva (pure transcendental reality). The aprākṛta-rasa
is so astonishing, variegated, and all-pervading that it
cannot be surpassed.

Moreover, even if one who has been enlivened with
aprākṛta-bhāva and who lives within that pure tattva
explains the esoteric kṛṣṇa-līlā, his description cannot
be flawless or complete because description depends on
words, and words are incapable of fully expressing that
transcendental reality. What to speak of such a person,
when Bhagavān Himself describes aprākṛta-rasa, listeners
and readers who are themselves overwhelmed by mundane
faults and limitations perceive even His own description
as faulty. Consequently, it is certainly very difficult
to dive deep into the ocean of rasa. However, when one
is situated on the shore of this ocean in a neutral
state, one can describe just a drop of it.

Vijaya: Then how is it possible to attain aprākṛta-rasa?

Gosvāmī:Madhura-rasa is unfathomable, matchless, and
difficult to understand. This is the very nature of
kṛṣṇa-līlā. However, our beloved Kṛṣṇa is unlimitedly
endowed with two special qualities, which are the real
basis of our hopes: He is sarva-śaktimān (possessed of
all potencies) and icchā maya (possessed of His own
unimpeded and independent will). Therefore, by His sweet
will He can easily make His esoteric līlās manifest in
this mundane world, although they are unlimited,
unfathomable, and difficult to understand. This mundane
realm is extremely insignificant and petty, but still,
as the supreme autocrat, He desires to bring the topmost
transcendental aspects of kṛṣṇa-līlā to this world. It
is only by His causeless mercy that His transcendental,
eternal, sweet līlās, which are saturated with rasa
(aprākṛta-nitya-madhura-rasamaya-līlā) have manifested
in this mundane world.


                          530
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

How is it possible for Śrī Mathurā-dhāma, which is
aprākṛta (transcendental to this mundane world), to
manifest in this world, and how does it exist here? No
argument can be applied in this matter because it is
never possible for the limited intelligence of humans or
devatās to understand the activities of Bhagavānís
acintya-śakti. Vraja-līlā in this world is the prakaṭa-
bhāva (manifest experience) of the topmost kṛṣṇa-līlā,
which is transcendental to this mundane realm. We have
realized and attained it, so there is no cause of
anxiety for us.

Vijaya: If prakaṭa-līlā and aprakaṭa-līlā are both the
same tattva, how is it possible for the one to be
superior to another?

Gosvāmī: Undoubtedly both are the same. The līlā that is
manifest here indeed exists in its entirety in the
transcendental realm. However, from the point of view of
the conditioned souls in the initial stages of sādhana,
it appears one way, and as they gradually advance it
appears in progressively elevated forms. In the stage of
bhāvāpana, realization of this līlā is completely pure.

Vijaya, you are eligible to hear this subject, so I have
no hesitation in speaking with you. One attains the
stage of bhāvāpana in his smaraṇa-daśā, as a result of
performing the appropriate sādhana for a long time.
During the stage of smaraṇa, when one becomes completely
free from all the polluted moods of his mundane
experience, the stage of āpana (realization of oneís
svarūpa) appears. Śuddha-bhakti mercifully appears in
the sādhakaís heart according to the degree of
appropriate practice in smaraṇa-daśā. Bhakti alone is
kṛṣṇa-ākarṣiṇī (attractive to Kṛṣṇa), so by Kṛṣṇaís
grace, all the dirt in the form of misconceptions is
gradually removed in smaraṇa-daśā

It is said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.14.26):

yathā yathātmā parimṛjyate ësau

mat-puṇya-gāthā-śravaṇābhidhānaiḥ

tathā tathā paśyati vastu sūkṣmaṁ

cakṣur yathaivāñjana-samprayuktam

Just as anointing the eyes with salve gives them the
power to see even subtle objects, similarly, when the
jīvaís heart is cleansed by the śravaṇa and kīrtana of
My supremely purifying līlā-kathā, he gains the ability
to realize extremely subtle tattva, namely, the truth
about My svarūpa and My līlās.

When the eyes are treated with ointment, they can see
much more clearly. In just the same way, a jīva can
realize the aprākṛta-svarūpa (transcendental nature) of
the manifest kṛṣṇa-līlā to the extent that he is
purified by contact with the aprākṛta-vastu
(transcendental reality) through śravaṇa, kīrtana and
smaraṇa of kṛṣṇa-līlā-kathā.

It is said in Brahma-saṁhitā (5.38):

                          531
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                 5/5/2017


premāñjana-cchurita-bhakti-vilocanena

santaḥ sadaiva hṛdayeṣu vilokayanti

yaṁ śyāmasundaram acintya-guṇa-svarūpaṁ

govindam ādi-puruṣaṁ tam ahaṁ bhajāmi

I perform bhajana of the primeval puruṣa, Śrī Govinda,
who is Śyāmasundara Kṛṣṇa. His form has inconceivably
unique qualities, and His śuddha-bhaktas perpetually see
Him in their hearts with the eye of devotion anointed
with the salve of love.

At the stage of bhāvāpana (svarūpa-siddhi), the faculty
of transcendental vision appears, and at that time, the
sādhaka can have darśana of his sakhī, and also
yūtheśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Even after having darśana of
Golokanātha Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the sādhakaís realization is not
steady at all times until he achieves the stage of
sampatti-daśā (vastu-siddhi), in which his gross and
subtle bodies are destroyed. In bhāvāpana-daśā, the pure
jīva has full command over the inert gross and subtle
bodies. However, the secondary result of sampatti-daśā,
the stage in which Kṛṣṇaís mercy is fully manifested, is
that the connection of the jīva with this mundane world
is completely cut off. Bhāvāpana-daśā is called svarūpa-
siddhi, and in sampatti-daśā one attains vastu-siddhi.

Vijaya: How does one experience Kṛṣṇa’s nāma, guṇa,
rūpa, līlā and dhāma at the time of vastu-siddhi?

Gosvāmī: I cannot answer this question. I will only be
able to see them and speak about them when I attain
vastu-siddhi, and you will only be able to understand
and realize these things when you attain sampatti-daśā.
At that time, there will be no further need to make you
understand the various aspects of kṛṣṇa-līlā; you will
perceive it directly, so you will have no more need for
further inquiry. Besides, it is useless for the bhakta
to express what he sees in his svarūpa-siddhi – that is,
in the bhāvāpana-daśā – because none of his hearers will
be able to realize what he is saying. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī
has described the symptoms of the svarūpa-siddha-
mahāpuruṣas as follows:

jane cej jātabhāveípi vaiguṇyam iva dṛśyate

kāryā tathāpi nāsūyā kṛtārthaḥ sarvathaiva saḥ

dhanyasyāyaṁ navaḥ premā yasyonmīlati cetasi

antarvaṇi bhir apy asya mudrā suṣṭhu sudurgamā

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, Eastern Wave (3.29 and 4.12)

One may see some apparent imperfection or misconduct in
the external behavior of bhaktas who have attained the
stage of bhāva. Even so, it is essential not to be
envious of them by attributing faults to them, because
they have become completely detached from everything
other than Kṛṣṇa, and therefore they are fully
successful in every respect.

                          532
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017


This prema only appears in the hearts of those who are
very fortunate. Even those who are learned in śāstra
find it very difficult to comprehend the activities and
movements of those in whom the new sprout of prema has
appeared.

Vijaya: If that is so, why are there attempts in Śrī
Brahma-saṁhitā and other such śāstras to give a
description of Goloka?

Gosvāmī: When great sādhus are situated in their
svarūpa-siddhi, and when Brahmā and other devatās have
been mercifully granted a vision of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
transcendental pastimes, they have tried to glorify such
pastimes through their stavas and stutis, according to
their respective visions. However, such descriptions are
only limited because this mundane realm has no proper
words to express the aprākṛta-bhāvas. Besides, bhaktas
who are not sufficiently advanced cannot fully
comprehend such descriptions.

The bhaktas, however, have no need for all these
descriptions. It is recommended that they should perform
bhajana by taking support of the prakaṭa-līlā that Śrī
Kṛṣṇa has very kindly manifested in this world, and they
will accomplish all perfection by this alone. Those who
perform such bhajana in Gokula with niṣṭhā will very
soon receive a sphūrti of Goloka in their hearts. All
the divya-līlā of Gokula are also eternally existent in
Goloka, for in tattva there is no distinction between
them. Those with material vision perceive phenomena and
activities in Gokula as mundane or illusory, but such
perception ceases to exist at the time of svarūpa-
siddhi. One should continue to perform bhajana and be
satisfied with whatever realization of the
transcendental reality is bestowed upon him according to
his adhikāra ñ this is really Śrī Kṛṣṇaís instruction.
If we sincerely adhere to His instructions, in due
course of time He will surely bestow on us His causeless
mercy, through which we can have the full vision of His
divya-līlā.

Now Vijaya Kumāra became completely free from doubt in
every respect. He fully awoke to his innate disposition
and skillfully dovetailed all the ekādaśa-bhāvas in
kṛṣṇa-līlā. He seated himself in his bhajana-kuṭīra on
the seashore, became completely composed, and spent his
entire time relishing prema-sevā. During this time,
Vrajanāthaís mother left this world, and Vrajanātha left
for his native place along with his grandmother. Sakhya-
prema had arisen in his unalloyed heart, and thus he
resided in Navadvīpa-dhāma in the association of sincere
Vaiṣṇavas and performed his bhajana blissfully on the
bank of Bhagavatī Gaṅgā.

Vijaya Kumāra, however, gave up his householderís dress
and accepted the kaupīna and bahir-vāsa of the
renunciant. He maintained his life by madhukarī, begging
śrī-mahāprasāda, while remaining constantly absorbed in
bhajana. Throughout all the eight praharas of the day
and night, he only took a little rest during the time of
Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇaís transcendental sleep. After They
ate, He would honor prasāda, and when They were awake he

                          533
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

would render appropriate sevā. His hari-nāma-mālā was in
his hands at all times. Sometimes he would dance and
sometimes he wept loudly. At other times, while gazing
at the waves of the sea, he would laugh. Who but Vijaya
himself could understand the movements of his bhajana
and the transcendental bhāva of his heart?

Outwardly, his name became Nimāi dāsa Bābājī. He never
indulged in speaking or hearing worldly talk. He was the
very embodiment of humility, his character was spotless,
and his determination in bhajana was unwavering. If
anybody offered him mahā-prasāda or kaupīna-bahir-vāsa,
he accepted only the very least that he needed, and not
more. While he was chanting hari-nāma, tears constantly
rolled down his cheeks, his throat became choked, and
the hairs of his body stood erect. Within a short span
of time, he attained perfection in his bhajana and Śrī
Kṛṣṇa most graciously bestowed upon him the adhikāra to
render sevā in His aprakaṭa-līlā. Like Brahmā Haridāsa
Ṭhākura, his bhajana-deha (the body with which he
performed bhajana) was buried under the sands of the
beach at Purī.

gaura-premānande hari hari bol!

Bolo Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa Candra ki jaya!



Thus ends the Fortieth Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled

“Attaining Prema, The Supreme Wealth”




guru-kṛṣṇa-vaiṣṇavera kṛpā-bala dhari

bhaktivinoda dīna bahu yatna kari

After striving many days and carrying upon his head the
kṛpā-śakti of Śrī Guru, Kṛṣṇa and the Vaiṣṇavas, this
lowly Bhaktivinoda…

viracila jaiva-dharma gauḍīya-bhāṣāya

sampūrṇa haila grantha māghī-pūrṇimāya

…has composed Jaiva-dharma according to the pure
conceptions of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava philosophy. This book
was fully complete on Māghī-pūrṇimā (the full moon day
of the month of Māgha)…

caitanyābda cāri-śata-daśe navadvīpe

godruma-surabhi-kuñje jāhnavī-samīpe

in the year 410 of the Caitanya Era (1896) at Surabhī-
kuñja in Godrumadvīpa, near the sacred river Jāhnavī in
Navadvīpa-maṇḍala.


                          534
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017

śrī-kali-pāvana-gorā-pade yāṅra āśa

e grantha paḍūn tini kariyā viśvāsa

Those who desire the shelter of the lotus feet of Śrī
Gaurāṅga, the purifier of the age of Kali, should read
this book with faith.

gaurāṅge jāṅhāra nā janmila śraddhā-leśa

e grantha paḍite tāṅre śapatha viśeṣa

However I take an oath that someone who has not
developed even a trace of śraddhā for Śrī Gaurāṅgadeva
should not read this book…

śuṣka-muktivāde kṛṣṇa kabhu nāhi pāya

śraddhāvāne vraja-līlā śuddha-rūpe bhāya

…for the dry mukti-vādīs can never attain the shelter of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, but one endowed with spiritual śraddhā will
gradually realize the full esoteric aspects of vraja-
līlā.




Phala Śruti

(The fruits of hearing)

pṛthivīte yata kathā dharma-nāme cale

bhāgavata kahe saba paripūrṇa chale

As indicated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.1.2), all the
philosophies on earth that are celebrated as dharma are
utterly deceptive.

chala-dharma chāḍií kara satya-dharme mati

catur-varga tyajií dhara nitya-prema-gati

One should completely abandon such deceptive dharmas and
absorb his mind in true dharma. In other words, one
should give up the fourfold goals of material life --
dharma, artha, kāma, mokṣa -- and aspire solely for the
ultimate destination of nitya-prema.

āmitva-mīmāṁsā-bhrame nije jaḍa-buddhi

nirviśeṣa-brahma-jñāne nahe citta-śuddhi

Those who are deluded identify themselves with matter.
That is their error, however one cannot be purified of
such delusion by endeavors for nirviśeṣa-brahma-jñāna.

vicitratā hīna hale nirviśesa haya

kāla sīmātulya seha āprakṛta naya

The māyāvādī thinks Śrī Kṛṣṇa to be subject to the

                          535
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                               5/5/2017

limitations of time such as birth and death and
considers that He is not transcendental. Thus he rejects
Śrī Bhagavānís vicitratā (astonishing characteristics,
paraphernalia, qualities and līlā). Through this vicious
attempt he is left with the philosophy of nirviśeṣa-
brahma.

khaṇḍa-jñāne heya-dharma āche suniścaya

prākṛta haile, kabhu aprākṛta naya

Such base and contemptible jñāna which arises out of an
attempt to dismember the divine form of Bhagavān is only
fit to be rejected. It is prākṛta (materialistic) and
should never be given credence as aprākṛta-dharma.

jaḍe dvaita-jñāna heya, cite upādeya

kṛṣṇa-bhakti cira-dina upāya-upāye

Such knowledge which is solely related to the duality of
this dull material world is fit to be rejected, whereas
transcendental knowledge of the divine duality within
the spiritual world (cit-jagat) should be accepted
forever within oneís heart both as the upāya (means of
attainment) and the upāye (goal worthy of attainment).

jīva kabhu jaḍa naya, hari kabhu naya

hari saha jīvācintya-bhedābhedamaya

The jīva is not a product of dull matter, nor is he
kevalādvaita, absolutely one in all ways with Śrī Hari.
The jīva is inconceivably different and non different
from Hari.

deha kabhu jīva naya, dharā-bhogya naya

dāsa-bhogya jīva, kṛṣṇa prabhu bhoktā haya

The material body should never be considered to be the
jīva, and this earth is not for the jīva to exploit and
enjoy. The jīvaíssvarūpa is kṛṣṇa-dāsa and thus he is
meant for Kṛṣṇaís enjoyment, whereas Śrī Kṛṣṇaís svarūpa
is prabhu (master) and bhoktā (enjoyer).

jaiva-dharme nāhi āche deha-dharma-kathā

nāhi āche jīva-jñāne māyāvāda-prathā

This book, entitled Jaiva-dharma, neither discusses
matters related to the dead material body, nor does it
propound the Māyāvāda doctrine of the jīvaís oneness
with brahma.

jīva-nitya-dharma bhakti ñ tāhe jaḍa nāī

śuddha-jīva ëpremaí sevā-phale pāya tāī

The jīvaís nitya-dharma is bhakti devoid of material
motivation. The jīva, purified by sevā, attains the
fruit of that sevā in the form of prema.

jaiva-dharmaí pāṭhe sei śuddha-bhakti haya

                          536
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                5/5/2017


jaiva-dharmaí nā paḍile kabhu bhakti naya

One who reads Jaiva-dharma with faithful deliberation
will surely attain śuddha-bhakti, but one who does not
read Jaiva-dharma can never attain bhakti.

rūpānuga-abhimāna pāṭhe dṛḍha haya

jaiva-dharma vimukhake dharma-hīna kaya

Faithfully reading Jaiva-dharma will surely strengthen
oneís abhimāna as a rūpānuga (follower of Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī). One who is averse to reading Jaiva-dharma is
certainly devoid of religious principles.

yāvat jīvana jei paḍe jaiva-dharma

bhaktimān sei jāne vṛthā jñāna-karma

One who faithfully reads Jaiva-dharma throughout his
entire life will be endowed with bhakti, and will surely
realize the futility of jñāna and karma.

kṛṣṇera amala-sevā labhií seī nara

sevā-sukhe magna rahe sadā kṛṣṇa-para

Such a man, being fully devoted to Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
Yugala-Kiśora and having attained Their amala-prema-
sevā, remains forever merged in the bliss of such
immaculate loving service.



Table of Contents

Preface

Chapter 1: The Eternal & Temporary Dharmas of the Jīva

Chapter 2: The Nitya Dharma of the Jīva is Pure &
Eternal

Chapter 3: Naimittika-Dharma is to be Relinquished

Chapter 4: Vaiṣṇava-Dharma is Nitya-Dharma

Chapter 5: Vaidhī-Bhakti is Nitya not Naimittika Dharma

Chapter 6: Nitya-Dharma, Race & Caste

Chapter 7: Nitya-Dharma & Material Existence

Chapter 8: Nitya-Dharma & Vaiṣṇava Behavior

Chapter 9: Nitya-Dharma, Material Science & Civilization

Chapter 10: Nitya-Dharma & History

Chapter 11: Nitya-Dharma & Idolatry

Chapter 12: Nitya-Dharma, Sādhana & Sādhya


                          537
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                                  5/5/2017

Chapter 13: Pramāṇa & The Commencement of Prameya

Chapter 14: Prameya: Śakti-Tattva

Chapter 15: Prameya: Jīva-Tattva

Chapter 16: Prameya: Jīvas Possessed by Māyā

Chapter 17: Prameya: The Jīvas Free from Māyā

Chapter 18: Prameya: Bhedābheda-Tattva

Chapter 19: Prameya: Abhidheya Tattva

Chapter 20: Prameya: Abhidheya -- Vaidhī-Sādhana-Bhakti

Chapter 21: Prameya: Abhidheya -- Rāgānugā-Sādhana-
Bhakti

Chapter 22: Prameya: Prayojana Tattva

Chapter 23: Prameya: Śrī-Nāma-Tattva

Chapter 24: Prameya: Nāma-Aparādha

Chapter 25: Prameya: Nāmābhāsa

Chapter 26: Introduction to Rasa-Tattva

Chapter 27: Rasa-Tattva: Sāttvika-Bhāva, Vyabhicārī-
Bhava & Raty-Ābhāsa

Chapter 28: Rasa-Tattva: Mukhya-Rati

Chapter 29: Rasa-Tattva: Anubhāvas in Śānta, Dāsya, &
Sakhya Rasas

Chapter 30: Rasa-Tattva: Anubhāvas of Vātsalya &
Madhurya Rasas

Chapter 31: Madhurya-Rasa: Kṛṣṇa’s Svarūpa, the Nāyaka,
& Svakīya-Nayīkas

Chapter 32: Madhurya-Rasa: Parakīya-Nayīkas

Chapter 33: Madhurya-Rasa: Śrī Rādhā’s Svarūpa, Five
Types of Sakhīs, & Messengers

Chapter 34: Madhurya-Rasa: Śrī Rādhā’s Svarūpa, Five
Types of Sakhīs, & Messengers

Chapter 35: Madhura-Rasa: Uddīpana

Chapter 36: Madhura-Rasa: Sthāyībhāva & Stages of Rati

Chapter 37: Śṛṅgāra-Rasa: Śṛṅgāra Svarūpa & Vipralambha

Chapter 38: Śṛṅgāra-Rasa: Mukhya-Sambhoga & Aṣṭa-Kālīya-
Līlā

Chapter 39: Entering Līlā

Chapter 40: Attaining Prema, the Supreme Wealth


                            538
Jaiva-Dharma.txt                      5/5/2017

Phala Śruti (The fruits of hearing)




                          539
