Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                         5/5/2017

Journey of the Soul



Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

GVP (2011)



Rating:   ★★★★★

Tags: Journey of the Soul

Journey of the Soulttt



* * *




* * *




Journey of the Soul



Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

GVP (2011)



Rating:   ★★★★★

Tags: Journey of the Soul

Journey of the Soulttt



* * *




* * *




Journey of the Soul




                            1
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                           5/5/2017

Contents

Introduction - Whom Can You Trust?

Chapter One The Truth of the Soul

Chapter Two - A Map of the Worlds

Chapter Three - The Origin of the Living Entity

Chapter Four - No One Falls from the Eternal Abode

Chapter Five - Moon on the Branch

Chapter Six - Both, Choice and Chance

Chapter Seven Inconceivable Jīva-tattva

Introduction to Jaiva-Dharma

Chapter Fifteen - Jīva Tattva

Chapter Sixteen - Jīvas and Māyā

Chapter Seventeen - Liberation of the Jīva from Māyā

From the Junction

The Same Message

Śrila Bhaktivinode Ṭhākura

Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja




Foreword

A Note from the Editors

“Who am I?”

“Where have I come from?”

“How can I be free from the suffering and limitations
imposed upon me by this world?”

“Is there a way for me to attain knowledge of my hidden
spiritual self that is beyond the chains of matter?”

“What is my ultimate destination and how do I reach it?”

These questions have been asked by sincere seekers of
truth for millennia. According to India’s ancient Vedic
wisdom, the answers to these timeless questions live in
the hearts of great, self-realized spiritual masters.
The sages of India have realized these answers through a
perfect deductive process, by the transcendental
unbroken chain of disciplic succession.

In this connection, consider the analogy of a mango
tree. On the top of the mango tree there is a very ripe

                             2
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

and delicious fruit. If someone were to drop a fruit
from the top of the tree, it would be destroyed.
Therefore it is passed from one person on the tree to
another, and in this way the mango comes down intact.

The ripe and delicious fruit at the top of the tree is
analogous to the Vedic process of divine knowledge,
which is descending through transcendental authority,
person to person, so that each soul can receive this
knowledge gently and with its most powerful effect.
Journey of the Soul has come in the disciplic line of an
ancient succession of spiritual teachers, a spiritual
succession whose goal is to assist the soul in his
journey to the supreme destination.

About the Author

Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja is
recognized by prominent spiritual leaders and hundreds
of thousands of spiritual seekers as a realized soul in
this unbroken succession of pure spiritual preceptors.
He is the foremost disciple of his spiritual master,
Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, and has
also received profound instruction from the world-famous
preacher of Kṛṣṇa-consciousness and bhakti-yoga, Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja.

Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja is the
author’s full, respected name, and his honorific title
is even longer: Tridaṇḍisvāmī Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja. Because we have written his
name so many times throughout this book, for ease and
accessibility to our readers, we will generally refer to
him as Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja.

A scholar of resilient erudition in the field of Vedic
wisdom, Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja has been
inspiring seekers of spiritual and philosophical truth
for over sixty years. He has published dozens of
devotional literatures on the timeless science of
bhakti-yoga, in both Hindi and English, which in turn
have been translated into most of the major world
languages. At present ninety years old, he continues to
lecture around the globe, giving spiritual shelter and
guidance to sincere souls. To date he has completed his
thirtieth world-preaching tour.

In response to the yearning questions of numerous
spiritual aspirants, Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja
requested some of his editors to compile a book of his
lectures and informal talks on the subject of the
eternal soul (jīva-tattva) and the individual soul’s
relationship with the Supreme Soul. In his compassion,
he desired that all people become eligible to enter the
Lord’s kingdom of eternal life in unending bliss and
unfathomable knowledge. He wanted to inspire in people’s
hearts a strong faith in that spiritual kingdom and
devotional greed to enter it.

Like other pure masters in his transcendental lineage,
Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja wanted to share with his
spiritual daughters and sons this understanding: we are
not these mortal bodies and this world is not our real
home. As eternal parts and parcels of the Lord, who is

                           3
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

known throughout the Vedic literature as Śrī Kṛṣṇa, we
have manifested from a region between the pure spiritual
world and this material netherworld. By proper education
we can enter the Lord’s abode, our real home, which we
have not yet experienced and which is beyond the limit
of our imagination.

The Divisions of this Book

Journey of the Soul is divided into three parts. Part
One, the main body of the book, consists of selected
lectures, interviews, and informal meetings with Śrīla
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja on the topic of jīva-tattva,
which were given by him over a span of about twelve
years.

As editors, we had two choices in regard to the
presentation of the subject matter. We could keep the
lectures and discussions intact, as Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Gosvāmī Mahārāja spoke them, or we could write an
adaptation in our own words. Keeping his discussions in
tact, as he spoke them, would mean much repetition of
ideas. This is because each lecture presented an entire
idea, not as a development from a previous lecture or
interview on the same subject. Also, his words were
spoken to live audiences or to individuals, and
therefore his language was conversational rather than
literary.

If we had chosen the adaptation, we would have made a
fully step-by-step development of ideas throughout the
book, without repetition of ideas. But then it would be
a book written by conditioned souls; it would not have
the full potency that this important literature needs in
order to inspire and imbue the reader with true
spiritual understanding.

We therefore opted to keep Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja’s discussions intact, for in that way the
potency of the pure devotee is present on each page. We
have not presented these lectures and interviews
chronologically, but in a manner that best develops the
book’s theme. With Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s
authorization and guidance we have edited his spoken
words for grammatical precision, as English is not his
mother tongue. We have also edited them for flow of
language, because of the fact that the lectures and
interviews were spoken for audiences, not written for
pages. Even though you will find repetition of the same
theme, we pray that this repetition will serve to
clarify the profound message and help you to more easily
imbibe the sacred truths herein.

Part Two is an excerpt of three chapters from Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s book, Jaiva-dharma, which
elaborates on the subject of jīva-tattva, a Sanskrit
term that literally means ‘the fundamental truth of the
eternal spirit soul.’ In his own discourses Śrīla
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja glorifies Jaiva-dharma. During
one such discourse he said, “If you want to advance in
Kṛṣṇa consciousness, try to read this book again and
again with very strong faith. In this book you can very
easily experience the essence of all Vedic literature;
that is, the Vedas, the Upanisads, the Śrīmad-

                             4
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

Bhāgavatam, and the Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta. Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has written Jaiva-dharma in the
form of a dialogue, with questions and profound answers.
If you go deep in your reading, so many new spiritual
understandings and realizations will come to you. I have
personally read Jaiva-dharma no less than 108 times.”

Part Three of Journey of the Soul consists of quotes
from the books, lectures, and letters of another divine
representative in the Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s personal
succession of realized masters, Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Svāmī Mahārāja, who is renowned throughout the world as
Śrīla Prabhupāda. Śrīla Prabhupāda’s inspired and
authoritative statements illuminate the conclusive
truths on the origin, nature, and fully excellent
destination of the spirit soul. Although acclaimed
internationally for his establishment of a worldwide
confederation of almost one hundred āśramas, schools,
temples, institutes, and farm communities, he always
considered his treasure of devotional literature to be
his most significant contribution to the world. In fact,
the Bhaktivedānta Book Trust, established in 1972 to
exclusively publish his works, is known as the world’s
largest publisher of books in the field of Indian
religion and philosophy. All of the quotes that cite his
books, lectures, discussions, and letters in Part Three,
as well as all the quotes in Part One, are sourced from
his Vedabase folio, the digital compilation of all of
his original written and spoken words.

In Part One, Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja draws
extensively from the ancient Vedic texts, and he often
refers to Śrīla Prabhupāda’s translations and
commentaries. We have also cited Śrīla Prabhupāda’s
quotes in the form of footnotes, and unless otherwise
mentioned, all the pull-quotes in the colored pull-quote
boxes placed throughout the text were taken from his
Vedabase-folio. The pull-quote boxes that have
statements from Bhakti-rasāyana, Going Beyond Vaikuṇṭha,
Veṇu-gīta and Jaiva-dharma are from the lectures and
translations of Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja.

We have attempted to keep the language of the book very
straightforward and easy to understand. Nevertheless,
Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja uses many Sanskrit terms
in his discourses, and we have kept them the text in
order to preserve the mood and precision of the meaning.
For the benefit of the readers, these terms are always
explained in English, either in the text itself or in
the footnotes. When you find the explanation in the text
or footnote insufficient, you are invited to turn to the
glossary at the back of the book.

Following the tradition of our spiritual preceptors, we
use standard diacritical markings to indicate the
pronunciation of the Sanskrit words. Pronounce ā like a
in father, ī like ea in neat, ū like oo in root, ṛ like
ri in rip, ṁ and ṅ like ng in hung, ś and ṣ like sh in
shy, and c like ch in chap.

We pray that you, our respected readers, receive new
light regarding this most profound journey of the spirit
soul, whose pure being is more brilliant than millions
of suns, and who has the potency to become a personal

                           5
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

associate of God Himself.

Welcome to Journey of the Soul, the window to your own
journey. Please excuse any errors on our part in
presenting this compilation.




The Editorial Team




Gaura-Purnima: February, 2010




Part One - Discourses




Introduction - Whom Can You Trust?

We trust various persons of authority to infrom us about
material subject matters, but whom shall we trust in
regard to transcendental subject matters and the
transcendental world? We cannot experience transcendence
with any of our material senses. How then, can we have
an idea of that pure reality? We can see the body, but
not the soul. How can we verify that there is a soul
beyond matter?

Though God is everywhere, we don’t see Him. How then,
can we determine who is God? Although it is evident that
we cannot control the world, how can we trust that there
is a God from whom this creation has come, and how can
we be confident that it is He who controls it? Millions
of people are born daily, and millions also die. Who
controls this overwhelming tide of birth and death? Sea
waves come on schedule, the sun appears on schedule, and
new days come with continuous regularity. We do not
control those rhythms, yet somehow, everything is
maintained.

Our senses are imperfect, and therefore it may not be
possible to trust the information given by them. Our
eyes cannot even see the underside of the eyelids, the
closest thing to them, what to speak of seeing inside
our body, and more significantly, the soul within the
body. Our material senses of seeing, hearing, and
touching have some abilities, but they are extremely
limited. Therefore, especially regarding transcendental
subject matters, we can trust neither the imperfect
senses nor the authorities who rely on those senses to
formulate their conclusions.

Pragmatists say that we can trust only what we can see,

                            6
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                          5/5/2017

but factually there are many instances wherein we trust
as reality that which is beyond our own vision. For
example, once I was on a train with my Gurudeva, and a
railway officer approached him.

“Do you believe in God?” he asked.

Gurudeva replied, “Yes.”

The officer said, “I don’t believe in God, because I
can’t see Him. I only trust what my eyes can see.”

Gurudeva replied, “This is not true. You believe many
things you have not seen. Can you say who your father
is?”

The officer said, “Yes,” and told him the name of his
father.

Gurudeva asked, “How do you know he is your father? Do
you have any proof?”

Realizing that he had no proof, the officer   felt
uncomfortable and became somewhat restless.   His mother
had told him, “Here is your father,” and on   this
‘evidence’ he would say, “He is my father.”   If our
mother is lying, we have no other recourse;   we trust
that our mother will not deceive us.

The officer then asked him, “Who is God?”

Gurudeva replied, “Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.”

The officer asked, “Why do you say that? In what way is
He God?”

Gurudeva replied, “Some persons say that God has no
form, attributes, or qualities, but the Vedic scriptures
tell us that He has a form and many qualities. If He has
no form, then from where did this world manifest? The
world is replete with an endless diversity of forms.
‘Something’ cannot come from ‘nothing.’ Therefore, God
must have a form, and His form must be the most
beautiful. There is no one as beautiful or full of
worthy qualities as He. For example, He can generate,
regulate, and destroy the entire material world in a
moment. He can create millions of worlds, suns, and
moons within a second, and it is thus certain that He is
all-powerful; we cannot do as He does. Moreover, He is
extremely merciful. Otherwise, how can He know our
difficulties, sorrows, and sufferings, and how can He
help us? He is the embodiment of love and affection. If
He were not so, if He were not able to love us and help
us in our miseries, what would be the need of that God?”

Perfect Words

According to the great sages and saints of India, only
transcendental words can be trusted. Such words can
reveal the real path; what they describe is immaculate.
Transcendental matters are discussed in the Vedas, the
Upaniṣads, and especially the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, the
most ancient of all revealed scriptures.

                           7
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017


*Info Box Start*

Ancient Vedic Wisdom

“The Vedas are not compilations of human knowledge.
Vedic knowledge comes from the spiritual world, from
Lord Kṛṣṇa--The Vedas are considered to be the mother,
and Brahmā (the creator of this Universe) is called the
grandfather, the forefather, because he was the first to
be instructed in the Vedic knowledge. In the beginning
(of creation), the first living creature was Brahmā. He
received this Vedic knowledge and imparted it to Nārada
and other disciples and sons, and they also distributed
it to their disciples.

“In this way, the Vedic knowledge comes down by
disciplic succession. It is also confirmed in the
Bhagavad-gītā that Vedic knowledge is understood in this
way. If you make experimental endeavor, you come to the
same conclusion, but just to save time you should
accept--The Vedas instruct that in order to understand
transcendental knowledge, we have to hear from the
authority. Transcendental knowledge is knowledge from
beyond this universe.”

(Lecture by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja. London,
October 6, 1969)

*Info Box End*



We sometimes speculate about what we see. For example,
from a distance we might see someone coming towards us
and think that person to be our father. Then, as that
person comes closer, we recognize that he is not
actually our father but a person resembling him. Whereas
the eyes do not gather conclusive evidence on their own,
if they accept the vision of the authoritative Vedic
literatures such as Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, the Vedas, and
the Upaniṣads, they can surely be trusted.

The Soul Within

According to the sages who have realized the divine
knowledge of the Vedas, we are not these material
bodies; we are spirit souls. The soul is presently
captured in the jail of this body, as a beautiful bird
is captured in a cage. Although we do not want our body
to become old and die, it is bound to age; that is, if
it does not die in youth. The hair on this present body
will become white, the eyesight will weaken, and the day
will come when the body will not be able to walk without
the help of a stick. Then, one day, the soul will give
it up altogether.



* Info Box Start*

Soul and Supersoul

The individual soul and the Supreme Soul live together

                           8
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

within the body. This is confirmed in the Upaniṣads by
the analogy that two friendly birds live in one tree ñ
one bird eating the fruit of the tree and the other
simply witnessing and directing. Although the individual
living being, who is compared to the bird that is
eating, is sitting with his friend the Supreme Soul, the
individual living being cannot see Him.

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 6.4.24, Purport by Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja)

*Info Box End*



Within this material body there is another
transcendental person. However, although that other
person is within the body, He is not encaged. He is
never born, and never becomes old or subject to death.
Unlike us, He does not become a material child, youth,
or aged person. He is the controller of the entire
creation and all souls. He is God, and His position as
God never changes. He is almighty. He knows past,
present and future. He is omniscient and all-powerful.

All potencies are eternally invested in that
transcendental personality, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. It is because His internal power always lives
within Him that He can create millions of universes, He
can sport anywhere, and He can perform any herculean
task. By the arrangement of this same intrinsic power,
which is known in the Vedas as svarūpa-śakti, He
manifests as His plenary and partial incarnations, such
as Rāma, Balarāma, and Nṛsiṁhadeva.

The Lord also manifests His marginal energy, called
taṭasthā-śakti, which is situated between the spiritual
and material world, and which is comprised of spirit
souls. Although we souls are His parts and parcels, we
have now chosen to forget Him. For this reason another
of His potencies, His power of delusion called māyā, has
thrown us in this world and covered us. We are thus
bewildered regarding who is God, and we are trapped in
an endless cycle of birth, death, and sorrow.

A careful scrutiny of this world reveals that even high-
posted personalities such as emperors, chief ministers,
and presidents are suffering; everyone is suffering and
no one knows why. Even if people experience some
happiness in youth, they face many problems, and one day
they will have to give up this body. Even if they are
unable to determine whether or not God exists, they can
very easily say that death exists. Even people who do
not believe in God are bound to admit, “Death is sure.”
Eating, sleeping, mating, and defending or quarreling,
they consider that they will be happy by material
endeavors.

Among all species in this world, the human being
possesses the most developed consciousness. Humans can
perceive the future, whereas less-developed animal forms
of life lack this capacity. Animals like monkeys,
donkeys, and cows can anticipate the very near future,
but not more than that. Let us suppose that there are

                           9
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

many cows or goats being taken to a slaughter house.
Even as they are approaching the moment of death, if
they are given some morsels of grass to eat, they will
quarrel over it, saying, “I will take it!” “No, I will
take it!” In general, they cannot understand that they
are about to die.

But as humans, we can contemplate matters of life and
death; we can anticipate a future situation. Still, we
are not happy. We will become happy by realizing our
identity as spirit souls and that there is a realm free
from the jurisdiction of birth, old age, disease, and
death. Why does one person take birth as a daughter or
son of a prime minister and another take birth in a very
poor family?

Why is one person born beautiful and healthy, and
another born lame? Why will a particular poor man later
become a prime minister or president, whereas another
poor man, despite great endeavor for such a position,
remains impoverished? In this human body one must
contemplate topics such as: “Why am I suffering?” “Why
am I moving toward death?” “Who am I?” and “Who is God?”
Such contemplation is the difference between an animal
birth and a human birth.

All species of life, such as humans, trees, creepers,
and lower animals have some sense of gratification, and
they all experience some degree of love and affection.
Suppose we sweetly call a dog and show him affection; he
will respond, wagging his tail in happiness. If one
feels and shows that love, then even a tiger or lion
will not be ferocious towards him.

Everywhere there is love and affection ñ even in trees.
If you caress a tree’s leaf, the tree will be very
happy. On the other hand, if you take a knife to cut its
branches, the tree will tremble in fear. Little creepers
show their love for trees by embracing them.

True religion is pure, divine love and affection, and
the embodiment of true religion is God, known in the
Vedic literature as Kṛṣṇa. God is very merciful and
unlimitedly powerful, and we are His parts and parcels.
If we realize this fact, we will definately escape the
chain of sorrow and suffering. This understanding, as
well as the process to attain it, is called bhakti-yoga.

Linking Two Souls

Yoga is a Sanskrit word which means ‘linking’ or
‘combining.’ There must be two objects to form a link,
and there must be a process to link those two objects.
For example, if you want to join two bricks, then cement
and water are needed. Similarly, yoga means linking or
connecting two persons, the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa and each
soul, by the process of bhakti, or pure devotion. In
other words yoga is that process by which a soul can
associate with Kṛṣṇa through devotion.

The soul is the Lord’s part and parcel, His eternal
servant. Servants of Kṛṣṇa are not like worldly
servants. Service rendered to Kṛṣṇa is loving and
beautiful, like the service of a friend, or of a mother

                           10
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

and father to a son, or of one beloved to another.
Bhakti means loving devotion, and Kṛṣṇa’s servants are
all very loving in their devotional service.

Having attained this human form of life, we must try to
know who we really are. There are exalted personalities
in this world who have realized the soul and God, and
who have a transcendental link with Him. By their own
practices they can show us the path to attain Him, and
by our practice we can also have realization of this.
Such a teacher is called ācārya, guru, holy master, or
spiritual master. Such a guru is not subject to the
delusion of this world, and therefore it is essential to
attain his association.

The renowned, self-realized spiritual master, Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī, has explained the path to perfection: “In the
beginning one must have a preliminary desire for self-
realization. This will bring one to the stage of trying
to associate with persons who are spiritually elevated.
In the next stage one becomes initiated by an elevated
spiritual master and under his instruction the neophyte
devotee begins the process of devotional service. By
executing devotional service under the guidance of the
spiritual master, one becomes free from all material
attachment, attains steadiness in self-realization, and
acquires a taste for hearing about the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. This taste gradually
bestows attachment for Kṛṣṇa consciousness, which is
matured in bhāva, or the preliminary stage of
transcendental love of God. Real love for God is called
prema, the highest perfectional stage of life” (Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu 1.4.15-16).

It is the inherent nature of the individual soul to
serve God, the Supreme Soul, and the desire or tendency
to serve Him manifests by the association of His pure
devotee. If we desire to serve the Supreme Godhead but
after some time we fail to associate with those who are
serving Him, that desire dries up. It is likened to a
tree which, after developing some leaves, dies for want
of water. Good association is the water of our spiritual
life.

Without good association, and without this higher
realization of the goal of life, human existence becomes
like that of lower animals. In fact, we see that the
world’s leaders quarrel with each other like animals,
and are even crueler than animals. Fighting with nails
and teeth, animals are forced by their nature to kill a
few other animals, but these humans create atom bombs
and destroy the lives of millions of people and animals.
Devoid of spiritual guidance, looking for love and
happiness through sense gratification, and unable to
control their senses, such persons want to control the
world.

The Three Realms

The great saint Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī has explained that
there are three types of creation ñ the transcendental
realm, the innumerable souls, and the millions of
material worlds.


                           11
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

The transcendental world is beyond the world of matter;
repeated birth, death, and sorrow do not exist there.

Regarding the infinite souls, they are of two
categories. One category pertains to those who are
liberated and are immersed in the happiness of loving
service to God in the transcendental world of Vaikuṇṭha
(the spiritual planetary system). The other category
pertains to those souls who are in this world, who have
forgotten God, and who are called conditioned souls.

In this world the soul is covered by a body composed of
the five inert elements ñ earth, water, fire, air, and
ether. When the body dies and is then burned or buried,
the five elements return to their original source ñ
earth returns to earth, fire to fire, and so on ñ but
the soul never dies or takes birth.

Individual spirit souls are in some ways the same as God
and in some ways different. As God has a beautiful body,
multifarious powers, and fathomless good qualities, the
living entities are also graced with these attributes.
The difference is that God is infinite whereas souls are
infinitesimal. The tiny souls cannot create worlds and
cannot control them, whereas God orchestrates everything
and is the master of the deluding energy of this world.
The Supreme Lord and His numerous incarnations are
beyond transformation. His incarnations are not under
the control of the deluding energy and They are never
subject to misery.

Conditioned souls, those who have misused their
independence and have forgotten the Supreme Lord,
undergo various material changes and influences. Thrown
into this world by the Lord’s potency of illusion, they
think, “I am this body, I am the doer, I am the
controller, and I am the enjoyer of this world.” This
mentality is the symptom of conditioned souls. Actually,
all souls have emanated from the Supreme Godhead, Kṛṣṇa,
and all the universes have also emanated from His power.

This world has emanated from His deluding māyā potency,
and therefore it is also different and non-different
from Him. The ancient Vedic scriptures state: “śakti-
śaktimator abhedaḥ ñ there is no difference between the
potent (God) and the potency (His power).” The Vedic
philosophy is called acintya-bhedābheda-tattva, or
inconceivable, simultaneous difference and non-
difference.

We cannot understand these truths by merely reading
books. It is essential for us to hear such truths from
devotees who have realized this knowledge. We cannot
realize the Supreme Personality of Godhead or the
position of our own soul by worldly knowledge,
practicing aṣṭāṅga-yoga, performing austerities, or
giving donations in charity. Transcendental realization
is possible only by the practice of pure bhakti-yoga,
engagement in transcendental loving service.

We can understand these truths by first recognizing the
nature of God. If God were to have no individual form,
this world and all souls could have no individual
existence. If God were to have no shape or form, how

                           12
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

could He create human bodies? The fact of His supreme
personality is not only stated in the Vedic scriptures
and the Bible, but also in the Koran of the Muslims:
“Inallah kalaka mein suratihi ñ Khoda (or Allah) has
created human bodies similar to His own form.” God is a
Person, He has a form, and He is very merciful. With
this conviction, we can trust Him.

We can become attached to God through bhakti-yoga,
whereas we cannot do so by mere theoretical knowledge.
For example, someone may say, “By drinking water, we can
quench our thirst.” However, if we do not actually drink
water our thirst will not dissipate. We must drink a
glass of water, and then our thirst will be quenched.
Suppose you are hungry; you need food. I may tell you
that by eating chapatis, rice, bread, butter, and some
sweets, your hunger will go away, but merely knowing
this will not give you the foodstuffs or satisfy your
hunger. Similarly, intellectual knowledge is not enough
to practically progress in life. Bhakti-yoga is
practical activity, and by practicing it we will realize
all knowledge.

The Only Object of Love

As explained above, we all possess love and affection to
some degree. A beautiful young girl and boy see each
other, then they are attracted to each other, and after
that they are bound by marriage. Then, if they quarrel,
they may divorce and try to fulfill their desires by
taking another wife or husband. Then, if they are still
not happy in their householder life, they get a dog and
say, “We can trust dogs. Wives and husbands may divorce
us, but dogs do not do so.” Then, after some time they
see that the dog dies. In this way, we cannot become
truly or perpetually happy by the loving exchanges in
this world. The only true object of love is God. The
nature of our soul is that we are reservoirs of divine
love, but at present our love is impure and selfish. A
man may love his very beautiful wife, but only if she
serves and obeys him. If she is quarrelsome, or if she
is in love with another man, that love will be
disrupted.

Thus, in our present state of bodily consciousness, our
love and affection is not pure; it is mixed with
selfishness. On the other hand, if we perform bhakti-
yoga by chanting the names of God and regularly hearing
about Him, His beloved devotees will guide us to develop
unalloyed love for Him. Such devotees alone are truly
happy. They understand the dynamic of this world and
thus they have no attachment to the body. Somehow
maintaining their life, they always chant, remember, and
meditate on the Supreme Lord. If we associate with them,
they will guide us in spiritual advancement.

The beginning stage of bhakti-yoga is called sādhana-
bhakti, the stage of spiritual practice. Then, by such
practice, with the development of a semblance of love
and affection and with the mind and intelligence in the
mode of pure goodness, the practitioner of bhakti
reaches the stage called bhāva-bhakti. In bhāva-bhakti,
a soul can somewhat realize love for Kṛṣṇa, as well as
the way in which he can serve Him. Then, after some

                           13
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

time, divine absorption in Him and love for Him
manifests, and this final stage is called prema.

Prema is one principle, but it is divided into five
moods of service: śānta-rasa (neutral love), dāsya-rasa
(servitorship), sakhya-rasa (friendship), vātsalya-rasa
(parental love), and mādhurya-rasa (amorous love). Śānta
means love and affection toward God without any
speciality of service. In śānta-rasa one thinks, “God is
great and we are His tiny parts and parcels. We should
offer obeisances to Him. He is so merciful.” One in
śānta-rasa has no worldly attachment. The devotee does
not pray, “O God, give me bread and butter, give me
bliss, give me liberation.” Śānta-rasa manifests after
liberation, as was the case with the four Kumāra
brothers: Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanātana and Sanat Kumāra.
They had no worldly attachment, but they also relished
no specific mellow of love and affection for God.

In the mood of dāsya-rasa, one serves God as one’s
master. A devotee in dāsya-rasa thinks about Kṛṣṇa thus:
“You are my master. You are the root of the entire
universe, its creation and destruction.” Moreover, in
dāsya-rasa there is active service, as in the case of
Hanumān, who faithfully served Lord Rāma.

Next is the mood of sakhya-rasa, service to Kṛṣṇa as a
friend. A devotee in sakhya-rasa thinks, “Kṛṣṇa is my
friend.” There are two kinds of friends: friends in
Ayodhyā and Dvārakā (the abode of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s expansion,
Lord Rāma and Dvārakādīśa), and friends in Vraja (the
abode of Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself). The Lord’s friends in
Ayodhyā and Dvārakā experience some awe and reverence
along with their mood of friendship, but Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
friends in Vraja are bosom friends. Kṛṣṇa and His
intimate friends always show affection for each other on
an equal level. Kṛṣṇa’s friends can sleep on the same
bed as Him. They can eat and then share their food with
Him, and He also eats and then shares His remnants with
them. They do not consider that He is God.

One can also think, “Kṛṣṇa is my son.” This
relationship, called vātsalya-rasa, is more exalted than
the previous relationships. If we want to serve God in a
parental mood, we can serve Him as His own parents. The
father will take his son on his lap, embrace Him, and
give Him sweets to eat. Even if the father has become
old, still he wants to serve his son. The idea of the
Supreme Personality of Godhead as our father opposes our
desire for loving service, because if God is the father,
He would have to serve us. We tell our father, “Oh
father, please supply this, please supply that. Give me
water, give me bread.” On the other hand, if we think of
God as our son, then we wish to serve Him.

Superior to parental love is amorous or conjugal love,
which is called mādhurya-rasa. Mādhurya-rasa is divided
into two separate moods: married or wedded love, and
unwedded love. Those who are married to Kṛṣṇa by Vedic
mantra and by law are exemplified by Kṛṣṇa’s queens,
headed by Rukmiṇī and Satyabhāmā. The other mood is
unwedded love, and the young women in this category have
no cause for their loving relation with Kṛṣṇa other than
love and affection itself. This supreme stage of

                           14
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

ecstatic love, called paramour love (upapati-bhāva), is
exemplified by the gopīs of Vraja.

Bhakti-yoga is very easy to practice. You can chant the
name of God in the day or in the night, whether you are
Hindu, Muslim, Christian, or any other religious
denomination. Even animals can hear when you chant
loudly, and they are also spiritually benefited. You can
chant the names of God ñ “Hare Kṛṣṇa” ñ if you are poor,
and you can chant if you are wealthy. You can chant
after bathing or without having bathed at all; before,
after, or during meals; sitting or standing, or in any
other condition. There is no dependence on wealth or
situation. The essence of all Vedic scriptures is the
Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra: “Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa,
Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.”

We have invented divisions, thinking, “This is India,
this is America, this is Australia,” and thus we create
passports and visas. But God is one without a second. We
can chant to Him and pray to Him to be merciful to us.
This chanting of the holy name is the supreme process
for perfection of life.



[This lecture was given on December 27, 1998, in Perth,
Australia, on the disappearance day of the great saint
Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī.]




Chapter One

The Truth of the Soul


The subject matter regarding the established
philosophical truths of the living entity (jīva-tattva)
is very advanced. Still it is essential to know,
especially for those who actively share spiritual topics
with others. Lucid knowledge of philosophical truths is
the foundation of a strong spiritual life.

siddhānta baliyā citte nā kara alasa

ihā ha-ite kṛṣṇe lāge sudṛḍha mānasa

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā 2.117)

A sincere student should not neglect the discussion of
such conclusions, considering them controversial, for
such discussions strengthen the mind. Thus, one’s mind
becomes attached to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Although this subject is elevated and profound, it
gradually becomes easier to understand, and over time,
to read or discuss it becomes relishable. Do not be
disheartened and think, “Oh, it is such a lofty topic.
My mind is not able to even touch it.”

We Stood on the Shoreline

                            15
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017


In all Vaiṣṇava or devotional literature, we find
someone who asks questions and someone who answers those
questions. This recurring theme points to the foundation
of spiritual life: humble inquiry to know the truth. God
Himself set this example, as seen in the conversations
between the Supreme Lord Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu[i]1 and
His associates Śrīla Rāya Rāmānanda and Śrīla Sanātana
Gosvāmī.

In this mood, the great king Parīkṣit Mahārāja inquires
from the sage, Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī: “The living
entity’s transcendental constitution is spiritual and
conscious, whereas the Lord’s deluding material potency,
māyā, is inert and mundane. How is it, then, that the
living entity became entangled in māyā? This is very
amazing.”

Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī replies:

bhayaṁ dvitīyābhiniveśataḥ syād



īśād apetasya viparyayo ‘smṛtiḥ




tan-māyayāto budha ābhajet taṁ



bhaktyaikayeśaṁ guru-devatātmā




(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.2.37)

Fear arises when a living entity misidentifies himself
as the material body because of absorption in the
external, illusory energy of the Lord. When he thus
turns away from the Supreme Lord, he also forgets his
own constitutional position as a servant of the Lord.
This bewildering, fearful condition is the effect of the
potency of illusion, called māyā. Therefore, an
intelligent person should engage unflinchingly in the
unalloyed devotional service of the Lord under the
guidance of a bona fide spiritual master, whom he should
accept as his worshipful deity and as his very life and
soul.

This verse indicates that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the root of all
existence. He is the Absolute Truth, ‘one without a
second.’ He is the ultimate person; He is the first,
with no second. He is the personification of complete
and total existence. He manifests various potencies,
unlimited living entities (jīvas), and innumerable
worlds; and even His father Nanda Mahārāja, His Mother
Yaśodā, and all of His associates are His
manifestations. He is thus the worshipful Deity of all.

                              16
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                         5/5/2017


By the living entity’s constitution, he is an eternal
servant of that Supreme worshipful Lord, Śrī Kṛṣṇa. As
stated in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 20.108):

jīvera ‘svarūpa’ haya ñ kṛṣṇera ‘nitya-dāsa’



kṛṣṇera ‘taṭasthā-śakti’ ‘bhedābheda-prakāśa’



It is the living entity’s constitutional position to be
an eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa, because he is the marginal
energy of Kṛṣṇa and a manifestation simultaneously one
with and different from Him.

As an eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa, the jīva soul is
blissful by nature. However, in one crucial moment he
looked towards the Lord’s external potency, thinking
that something exists besides the Lord.

Being part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, the jīva’s intrinsic
nature is to look towards Kṛṣṇa; so why did he look
towards māyā? The answer is that Kṛṣṇa has given the
jīva independence. If the jīva misuses that
independence, he is entrusted to the jurisdiction of
māyā and punished. Grabbed by māyā he becomes materially
absorbed, and in this predicament no other materially
absorbed person can save him.

In the above-mentioned verse by Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī
(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.2.37), the words īśād apetasya
viparyayo ‘smṛtiḥ confirm that the jīva was standing at
the line running between the transcendental world and
the inert, material world. By his choice he looked to
this ‘lovely’ māyā, who showed him the ways in which he
could enjoy on his own, apart from Kṛṣṇa. Spellbound by
māyā, the jīva thought, “It is my right to enjoy.” Māyā
immediately supplied him a subtle body (made of material
mind, intelligence, and false ego) and gross body (made
of bones, blood, skin, urine, stool, and so forth), and
he began to think, “I am this body and everything in
relation to this body is mine.”

Thus, when the jīva turns away from Kṛṣṇa by his free
will and independence, he becomes enveloped by the
misconception of this bodily concept of life and becomes
enamored by the beautiful forms manufactured by māyā.
Having entered this realm of existence, he cannot find
the way out by himself. The only escape is the shelter
of those who know the way out. After a long time of
being bound in this world of birth and death, the
fortunate jīvas may be approached by a pure devotee
saying, “What are you doing, my brothers, my sisters?
You are misguided. You have derailed from the path of
love of God. Come with me; I will guide you on the path
to true happiness.”

Only by proper association can one develop spiritual
consciousness and consider the truth: “I am an eternal
servant of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and I can serve Him with love and
affection like those in the spiritual realms of Vraja

                           17
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

and Vaikuṇṭha. This world is only a shadow of that
sublime spiritual consciousness of love and service.”

In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam verse above, Śrīla Śukadeva
Gosvāmī explains to Parīkṣit Mahārāja the importance of
associating with saintly, exalted devotees of the Lord.
A saintly devotee can change the heart of the misery-
stricken conditioned soul in one moment.

‘sādhu-saṅga’, ‘sādhu-saṅga’ ñ sarva-śāstre kaya

lava-mātra sādhu-saṅge sarva-siddhi haya

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 22.54)

The verdict of all revealed scriptures is that by even a
moment’s association with a pure devotee, one can attain
all success.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam declares that anyone who is sincerely
chanting and remembering Kṛṣṇa under the guidance of a
sādhu is destined to become happy. If even a neophyte
devotee (kaniṣṭha-adhikārī) is chanting and sincerely
weeping for Kṛṣṇa, lamenting his fallen state, he is
destined to become happy through the shelter of saintly
association. One may be entangled in numerous unwanted
mentalities and habits, but if one chants sincerely, he
becomes happy.

That happy devotee will show a person the spiritual path
and advise him, “I know a bona fide, self-realized guru,
and by his help I have become so joyous. Come with me; I
will introduce him to you.” This person is called
vartma-pradarśaka guru, the guru who shows the path.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is very merciful; He is the guru in the heart
(caitya-guru). Together with the vartma-pradarśaka guru,
He guides a person to the bona fide, self-realized guru.
Accepting the bona fide guru, that person begins to
perform devotional activities (bhajana) in the service
of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and gradually all his unwanted habits and
mentalities disappear.

In the Eleventh Canto of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa tells Uddhava, His foremost associate:

ekasyaiva mamāṁśasya




jīvasyaiva mahā-mate




bandho ‘syāvidyayānādir




                           18
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

vidyayā ca tathetaraḥ




(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.11.4)

O most intelligent Uddhava, the living entity, called
jīva, is My part and parcel, but due to ignorance he has
been suffering in material bondage since time
immemorial. By knowledge, however, he can be liberated.

In this verse, Śrī Kṛṣṇa praises Uddhava for his
intelligence. A sincere devotee of Kṛṣṇa is intelligent
because he has chosen the path of bhakti, pure devotion.
There are many so-called intelligent persons in the
world, like scientists and politicians, but according to
the standard of supreme intelligence ñ the choice to
love and serve God ñ such persons’ intelligence is lost.

According to this verse, Kṛṣṇa is telling Uddhava,
“Uddhava, you should know that on this Earth, and in all
material worlds, the spirit soul is My part and parcel.
Wandering throughout these worlds since time immemorial,
his ignorance has no calculable beginning and therefore
the duration of his conditioning cannot be measured.
However, by the influence of the spiritual energy known
as yogamāyā, who is the embodiment of timeless
transcendental knowledge, the conditioned soul can be
liberated.” What is that transcendental knowledge which
liberates the soul? It is knowledge of the Supreme
Lord’s greatness, and the soul’s eternal relationship
with Him.

If someone tears a flower, the flower is no longer
whole; if he tears it further, it shreds and is
destroyed. The entire material world is like this ñ if
anything in this world is divided and further divided,
the whole is lost. But this principle does not apply to
the spiritual realm. Kṛṣṇa remains complete even though
unlimited parts and parcels emanate from Him. This
reality is stated in many places in the Vedic
scriptures, and one such statement is found in Bhagavad-
gītā:

mamaivāṁśo jīva-loke




jīva-bhūtaḥ sanātanaḥ




manaḥ-ṣaṣṭhānīndriyāṇi




                              19
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

prakṛti-sthāni karṣati




(Bhagavad-gītā 15.7)

The living entities, in this conditioned world are My
eternal fragmental parts. Due to conditioned life, they
are struggling very hard with the six senses, which
include the mind.

It is essential to understand in which way the jīva is
part of the Supreme Whole, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, since the Lord can
never be divided into parts. There is no limit to His
length or width; He has no end ñ no top and no bottom.
The entire world is within Him, yet He Himself is not
divided.

For example, we can cut a pebble from a boulder, but we
cannot cut anything from Kṛṣṇa. The jīva is not a part
of Kṛṣṇa in the same way that a small piece of stone is
part of a larger stone. Because Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the
Complete Whole, the complete Absolute Truth, the
personification of complete existence, even though so
many manifestations and expansions emanate from Him, He
remains the complete balance.

The Supreme Personality of Godhead Kṛṣṇa has two types
of expansions. His viṣṇu-tattva expansions, known as
svāṁśa, are His plenary (direct and full) incarnations.
The living entities, known as vibhinnāṁśa, are not full
or direct expansions. They are His infinitesimal,
separated parts and parcels.

The following analogy helps us understand the Supreme
Lord in relation to His plenary incarnations. The Lord
can be compared to a ghee-lamp[ii]2 that lights other
ghee-lamps. Some lamps almost equal the light of the
original and some lamps have only tiny flames; it
depends on the size of the lamp. Moreover, if the flame
of one ghee-lamp is used to light another, the first
flame will remain the same as it was. It will not become
smaller or lose potency. Similarly, although innumerable
plenary incarnations have emanated from Kṛṣṇa, the
original source of all incarnations, the source has not
diminished in power.

oṁ pūrṇam adaḥ pūrṇam idaṁ pūrṇāt pūrṇam udacyate

pūrṇasya pūrṇam ādāya pūrṇam evāvaśiṣyate

(Śrī Īśopaniṣad, Invocation)

The Personality of Godhead is perfect and complete, and
because He is completely perfect, all emanations from
Him, such as this phenomenal world, are perfectly
equipped as complete wholes. Whatever is produced of the
Complete Whole is also complete in itself. Because He is
the Complete Whole, even though so many complete units
emanate from Him, He remains the complete balance.

From the point of view of philosophical truth (tattva),

                           20
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s plenary incarnations like Rāma and
Nṛsiṁhadeva are one with Him. At the same time, from the
point of view of the mellow of transcendental
relationships (rasa), these incarnations are different.
Kṛṣṇa is the origin of all incarnations, such as the
līlā-avatāras (pastime incarnations) and the three
puruṣa-avatāras, namely Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu,
Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, and Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, who
control the three various aspects of material existence:
creation, maintenance, and destruction, respectively.
[Please see chart at the end of this chapter.]

The analogy of the ghee-lamp contributes to our
understanding of Kṛṣṇa and His plenary expansions
(svāṁśa incarnations). Now, to clarify our understanding
of the Lord’s expansion as the infinitesimal living
entities, we may take the analogy of the cintāmaṇi
stone[iii]3.

The word cintā means ‘thought’ or ‘desire,’ and maṇi
means ‘jewel.’ The cintāmaṇi stone manifests as much
gold as a person desires, but that gold is not directly
cintāmaṇi. Similarly, every one of us emanates from Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, but we are not Kṛṣṇa Himself.

Cintāmaṇi can manifest unlimited opulence to fulfill
anyone’s desires; yet no matter how much gold emanates
from it, that jewel remains as it was, without any
transformation or diminution. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa always
remains full and complete even though unlimited
infinitesimal parts and parcels (vibhinnāṁśa jīvas) have
emanated

from Him.

When gold is within the cintāmaṇi stone it is in its
original state or position, but when it manifests
outside that cintāmaṇi it is transformed. Similarly,
when the living being is within the ‘cintāmaṇi’ of full
Kṛṣṇa consciousness, he has spiritual qualities like
those of Kṛṣṇa; but when he is outside pure Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, in other words when he is entangled in
māyā, those qualities appear to be lost or perverted. At
that time, when he is absorbed in māyā, only material
qualities abound.

We Are Infinitesimal, He Is Infinite

ekaḥ śuddhaḥ svayaṁ-jyotir




nirguṇo ‘sau guṇāśrayaḥ




sarva-go ‘nāvṛtaḥ sākṣī




                             21
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017



nirātmātmātmanaḥ paraḥ




(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 4.20.7)

The Supreme Soul is one. He is pure, non-material, and
self-effulgent. He is the reservoir of all good
qualities and He is all-pervading. He is without
material covering and He is the witness of all
activities. He is completely distinguished from other
living entities and He is transcendental to all embodied
souls.

This verse describes the qualities of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, thus highlighting several
distinctions between Him and the individual soul. Some
say that all living entities are God, and the proponents
of this belief misinterpret such Vedic aphorisms as tat
tvam asi [meaning ‘the living entity is a spiritual
particle of the supreme spirit’] to mean ‘you are that
impersonal God;’ sarvaṁ khalv idaṁ brahma [meaning
‘there is no existence beyond brahma, the Absolute
Truth’] to mean ‘everything is God;’ prajñānaṁ brahma
[meaning ‘pure knowledge is transcendental and is of the
same spiritual substance as brahma’] to mean ‘brahma is
impersonal consciousness;’ and ahaṁ brahmāsmi [meaning
‘I am not this body; I am spirit soul’] to mean ‘I am
that spirit whole. I am brahma.’

The leader of such proponents, Śaṅkarācārya, is an
incarnation of Śankara, Lord Siva. He was very clever;
although he appeared to be the leader of the impersonal
path, his actual purpose was to fulfill the desire of
Lord Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa had instructed Śankara, “Go to the
material world and hide Me from all those who are
opposed to My pure devotion, those who serve and worship
Me with the desire to become very powerful like the
demons Hiraṇyakaśipu and Rāvaṇa. Such false devotees
will create great disturbances, so keep them far away
from Me. Go and delude them by misinterpreting the
Vedas. Tell them this: ‘Why are you worshiping Kṛṣṇa?
You yourself are God in every respect. We are all one
with that impersonal God.’”

Thus, impersonalism is not an idea of the Vedas
themselves. In truth, we are not God, nor is God
impersonal. He is a person, and we are His parts and
parcels, His eternal servitors. The Supreme Personality
of Godhead is one without a second, whereas the jīvas
are unlimited in number

What does it mean that the jīvas are unlimited in
number? Suppose that all persons in this universe become
liberated, and the material universe then becomes vacant
of humans. Still, there are so many jīvas in the blood
of even one human being that if each of those jīvas were
to take a human body, hundreds of thousands of universes
would overflow with human population. This localized
example gives a hint of the unlimited number of living

                             22
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

entities within the universe, and there are also
unlimited jīvas in the spiritual worlds of Vaikuṇṭha and
Goloka Vṛndāvana. This multiplicity is one of the prime
distinctions between the jīva and God.

Consider this distinction as well: the individual soul
is not present in an object such as a microphone, but
the Paramātmā, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s form as the Supersoul, is
present there. Nothing in this world exists without the
presence of Paramātmā.

There are two souls present within each body ñ the
infinitesimal jīva and the Lord’s manifestation as
Paramātmā. The jīva is entangled in fruitive activities
(karma), trying to relish the fruits of his labor. The
Supreme Lord is not a conditioned soul, and He is not
enamored by the material energy. He is simply the
witness within the jīva’s heart.

The Supreme Lord is eternally pure, and māyā, or
delusion, is far away from Him and His abode. Māyā
cannot attract the Lord, but the jīva, being minute, can
be attracted by māyā at any time. Śrī Kṛṣṇa is always
pure and self-illuminating, whereas the jīva is prone to
be influenced by the darkness of illusion and can thus
be covered by the mistaken identity of bodily
identification.

Kṛṣṇa appears personally in His beautiful form of
Vrajendra-nandana, the son of Nanda Mahārāja, to those
who perform bhajana, devotional meditation and service
to Him. To those who serve the Lord in His opulent,
four-handed form as Vaikuṇṭha Nārāyaṇa, He appears as
Lord Nārāyaṇa. Here in this world, He resides as the
witness in the heart of every individual living being,
and He is also situated in each and every atom as
Paramātmā. The Lord manifests in an astounding array of
forms and energies, while the jīva is very limited; he
is localized and minute.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the eternal Absolute Truth. Kaṭha Upaniṣad
(2.2.13) says, “nityo nityānāṁ cetanaś cetanānām ñ of
living beings He is the Supreme Living Being, and among
all eternals He is the Prime Eternal.” Although the jīva
is known to be His separated part and parcel, he is not
actually separate. The jīva has no separate existence
from Kṛṣṇa

and he will always be subordinate to Him, in this world
and in the spiritual world.

Kṛṣṇa is free from material qualities and at the   same
time possesses all transcendental qualities. The   jīvas
can reach the stage of having qualities like the   Lord’s
when, by the grace of God and guru, they realize   their
eternal nature of subordination to Him.

Our Choice to Dream

Once, the great saint Vidura went to Badrikāśrama in the
Himalaya Mountains to see Maitreya Ṛṣi, a learned sage
and a recipient of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s mercy. Vidura approached
Maitreya Ṛṣi and inquired, “It is very amazing: although
the jīva is a conscious being and is always connected

                           23
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                           5/5/2017

with the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa’s form as the Supersoul, he
becomes entangled in māyā. How is this possible?”

Maitreya Ṛṣi replied, “I will tell you, in brief, the
only reason. Kṛṣṇa possesses an inconceivable power
known as aghaṭana-ghaṭana-paṭīyasī-śakti, the power
which makes the impossible possible. It is this power
that hides the Lord’s mercy from the jīva who chooses to
turn away from Him, thus compelling that jīva to become
a conditioned soul.”

Consider that māyā is also one of Kṛṣṇa’s potencies and
thus cannot do anything against His will. Ultimately,
therefore, Kṛṣṇa is the cause of māyā’s workings. Why,
then, has Kṛṣṇa created such an environment that causes
so many jīvas to suffer? The answer is that creating the
material world is one of His unlimited pastimes. There
is no lack in the variety of His innumerable pastimes,
and this is one of them. The Lord is fully independent
to do as He chooses. We cannot challenge Him, and as
stated in the Vedic scriptures, we cannot understand Him
by argument or logic.

acintyāḥ khalu ye bhāvā na tāṁs tarkeṇa yojayet

(Mahābhārata, Bhīṣma-parva 5.22)

We should not try to understand things beyond our
material conception by argument and counter-argument.

It is not possible to understand transcendental matters
with the limited, mundane mind, and therefore we rely on
the descriptions of that realm from the Vedas. We rely
on the essence of the Vedas, which is the Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, and on the great saints known as the Six
Gosvāmīs, who have given us the essence of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam in their own writings.

As mentioned above, only by the influence of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
inconceivable energy that makes the impossible possible
does the jīva become bewildered by māyā, under the sway
of the conceptions ‘I,’ ‘me,’ and ‘mine,’ which are
based on the illusion of bodily identification. In his
natural state, in his constitutional form, the jīva is
pure. Although he is minute, he is an atomic portion of
cit-śakti, Lord Kṛṣṇa’s own transcendental potency.[iv]4
He is now conditioned by a material body, but there is
nothing material ñ no māyā ñ in his natural, spiritual
constitution.

Material conditioning is called ‘bondage,’ but this
bondage is not real. It is not reality because it does
not touch the transcendental soul. When a man sleeps at
night, he may dream that his head is being cut off, but
when he wakes up he sees that nothing has happened.
Similarly, by the mercy of guru and Kṛṣṇa, when we
awaken to Kṛṣṇa consciousness we think, “What was I
seeing all that time? It was just like a dream.” If
suffering comes to you, you need not be upset or
nervous. Just remember that this apparent suffering is
due to being under illusion, like living in a dream.

Maitreya Ṛṣi continued to explain to Vidura that where
there is no sun there is darkness; but in truth,

                           24
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

darkness does not exist, for it is simply the absence of
light. Similarly, where there is no service to Kṛṣṇa,
who is like the sun, there is māyā, or darkness.

Maitreya gave the following analogy: On a moonlit night,
the moon in the sky and a tree standing on the bank of a
pond are both reflected in the water. When the wind
blows and there are ripples upon the surface of the
water, it seems as though the moon and the tree are
swaying back and forth. In truth, however, both are
solid and still; they are not trembling at all.
Similarly, in this world we accept reflection as
reality. We appear to be suffering in various material
conditions, but actually we are transcendental to
matter.

Although it is not possible to understand with material
senses or mind, the jīva is an eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa
even if in his conditioned state it appears that he is
not. Here is yet another analogy: If one places a cloth
over a watch, one cannot see any movement of the hands
of the watch ñ but there is movement. Similarly, we see
only our bodily and mental activities. We cannot
understand that there is an eternal soul inside the
body, without whom the body would not be able to
function. We are conscious, infinitesimal parts and
parcels of the Lord, somehow serving the Lord even in
this stage of bondage although we do not realize it.

For example, the demon Kaṁsa was serving Kṛṣṇa in an
indirect way. Kaṁsa’s atrocities were an integral cause
for Kṛṣṇa’s appearance in this world; if there were no
Kaṁsa, there would be no sweet pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in
Vṛndāvana. Similarly, Rāvaṇa’s atrocities were an
integral cause for the appearance of Lord Rāma; if there
were no Rāvaṇa, the enemy of Lord Rāma, there would be
no sweet pastimes of Lord Rāma in this world.

Similarly, the conditioned jīva is serving the Lord, but
indirectly. At present he is serving the Lord’s deluding
māyā potency. He is now in a dream, dreaming that he is
his various material bodies.

Our Awakening

Hidden in the heart of the material body, every jīva
possesses a beautiful, marvellous form. It is with this
transcendental form (called siddha-deha) that the jīva
can serve Kṛṣṇa directly. Although this spiritual form
is now covered, by the mercy of guru and Kṛṣṇa all
unwanted habits and mentalities gradually disappear and
it is gradually revealed. When one reaches the stage of
bhāva, spiritual emotion (also known as svarūpa-
siddhi[v]5), devotion that is transcendental to the
modes of material nature manifests in the heart and one
can awaken to the realization of his or her own divine
form. Then, receiving the mercy of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, one
becomes totally freed from this gross material body,
mind, intelligence, false ego, and contaminated
consciousness.

Regarding Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself, He never has a material
body. He did not leave a material body behind when He
left this planet and disappeared from the world’s

                           25
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

vision. Not only is Kṛṣṇa’s form transcendental to any
kind of material body, it is the very cause of all
spiritual and material worlds.

In order to understand these deep subject matters and
realize our original, internal self, let us aspire to
attain the mercy of the bona fide spiritual master, and
through him, aspire to perform bhajana.

evaṁ-vrataḥ sva-priya-nāma-kīrtyā



jātānurāgo druta-citta uccaiḥ




hasaty atho roditi rauti gāyaty



unmāda-van nṛtyati loka-bāhyaḥ




(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.2.4)

By chanting the holy name of the Supreme Lord, one comes
to the stage of love of Godhead. Then the devotee is
fixed in his vow as an eternal servant of the Lord, and
he gradually becomes very much attached to a particular
name and form of the Lord. As his heart melts with
ecstatic love, he laughs very loudly or cries or shouts.
Sometimes he sings and dances like a madman, for he is
indifferent to public opinion.

Such a pure devotee has no shyness in regards to
expressing his devotion. He chants loudly, unaware of
his environment and unaware of whether or not he is
dressed. Constantly remembering the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa,
sometimes he weeps, “Kṛṣṇa, where are You?” and
sometimes he rolls on the ground, laughing. Ordinary
people consider him mad, but he is simply experiencing
love of God. This spiritual realization is our true
position and it is the aim and object of our life. Let
us endeavor to engage our mind in hearing (śravaṇaṁ),
worshiping (arcanaṁ), and especially in chanting the
holy names of the Lord (nāma-saṅkīrtanaṁ).



Question: Is the jīva conscious of what he is doing when
he chooses to turn away from Kṛṣṇa and become enamored
by māyā?



Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja: No, he is unaware of
the implications of his choice. He thinks, “I am doing
the best thing for myself. I will enjoy.” He is like a

                             26
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

baby trying to capture fire with his bare little hands.
He believes that the fire is something he can eat,
whereas that fire will devour him. Similarly, the jīva
looks towards this world for enjoyment, but is devoured
by the cycle of repeated births and deaths, sorrows, and
suffering.

If you are always engaged in the practices of bhakti,
then māyā ñ forgetfulness of your relationship with the
Lord ñ will not be able to attract you.

[This discourse, given on June 15, 2005 in Badger,
California, is based on Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s
book, Śrī Śrīmad Bhāgavata Arka Marīcimāla, which means
“A Garland of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Verses.”]




Chapter Two - A Map of the Worlds


How and why did this world come into existence? We must
know the answer to this question. The answer is given in
the first verse of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and it is the
central theme of this discussion:

janmādy asya yato ‘nvayād itarataś

cārtheṣv abhijñaḥ svarāṭ



tene brahma hṛdā ya ādi-kavaye

muhyanti yat sūrayaḥ



tejo-vāri-mṛdāṁ yathā vinimayo

yatra tri-sargo ‘mṛṣā



dhāmnā svena sadā nirasta-kuhakaṁ

satyaṁ paraṁ dhīmahi



O my Lord, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, son of Vasudeva, O all-pervading
Personality of Godhead, I offer my respectful obeisances
unto You. I meditate upon Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa because He is
theis the Absolute Truth and the primeval cause of all
causes of the creation, sustenance, and destruction of
the manifested universes. He is directly and indirectly
conscious of all manifestations, and He is independent
because there is no other cause beyond Him. It is He
only who first imparted the Vedic knowledge unto the
heart of Brahmāji, the original living being. By Him,
even the great sages and demigods are placed into
illusion, as one is bewildered by the illusory

                           27
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

representations of water seen in fire or land seen on
water. Only because of Him do the material universes,
temporarily manifested by the reactions of the three
modes of nature, appear factual although they are
unreal. I therefore meditate upon Him, Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
who is eternally existent in the transcendental abode,
which is forever free from the illusory representations
of the material world. I meditate upon Him, for He is
the Absolute Truth.

Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara expounded upon this important verse
to Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, who in turn expanded that
explanation in his book, Śrī Bhāgavata Arka Marīcimāla.
I am further delineating the teachings of this
significant verse according to the teachings of these
two previous ācāryas. Although this is a very deep
subject, we should acquaint ourselves with its important
philosophy.

One Without a Second

In this world there are unlimited living entities in the
8,400,000 species of life, and it is impossible to
fathom the extent of the varieties of their natures and
qualities. All these conditioned living entities are
expansions of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s energy.

At the same time, Kṛṣṇa has innumerable associates in
the transcendental world ñ His parents Nanda Bābā and
Mother Yaśodā, His many cowherd friends such as Dāmā,
Śrīdama, Subala, and Madhumaṅgala, and His millions of
gopī beloveds ñ with their innumerable natures and
qualities.

Krsna has numberless expansions in both the spiritual
and material worlds. Yet, the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam states
that the Absolute Truth, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is one-without-a-
second (advaya-jñāna). This means He is devoid of
duality, He is the sum-total of all existence and there
is no one besides Him. In light of the previous
statements, which mention the extent and variety of
conditioned living entities and transcendental
associates, why has the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam stated that
Kṛṣṇa is one without a second?



[Editorial note: As mentioned in ‘A Note from the
Editors’ at the beginning of this book, Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Gosvāmī Mahārāja uses several Sanskrit terms from the
Vedic literatures. There are no exact English
equivalents for these spiritually scientific terms.
Therefore, for precision of the original depth of
meaning, in addition to the English translation we have
kept the original Sanskrit terms. As these terms are
used throughout this book in different contexts, you
will soon be able to understand and relish them. If you
are new to this subject and feel it is too cumbersome to
read all the Sanskrit terms, feel free to skip over them
until you feel more comfortable with them. We are
especially mentioning this here, because many Sanskrit
terms come up in the next few paragraphs.]



                           28
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017


Kṛṣṇa is one without a second because nothing, and no
one, has any independent existence from Him; everything
and everyone depends upon Him for existence. In the
transcendental world, He expands as His own personal
power (cit-śakti, or svarūpa-śakti), which is also known
as His internal power (antaraṅga-śakti).[vi]1 The living
entities are manifestations of His marginal energy
(jīva-śakti, or taṭasthā-śakti), which is situated
between the transcendental and material worlds. Finally,
in this material world, His illusory power called māyā-
śakti manifests the innumerable varieties of inert
matter visible to us. None of these powers, or
potencies, has any independent existence from Him.

In this verse, not only is Śrī Kṛṣṇa described as one-
without-a- second, but His power (śakti) is one-without-
a-second as well. At the same time, His power is known
by various names, such as the internal potency
(antaraṅga-śakti), the pleasure potency (hlādinī-śakti)
and the transcendental or spiritual potency (cit-śakti,
or svarūpa-śakti). There are different names for the one
śakti.[vii]2

The living entities (jīva-śakti, or taṭasthā-śakti) and
this inert world (māyā-śakti) are not different from the
non-dual spiritual potency (cit-śakti or svarūpa-śakti),
in the sense that they have no independent existence
from it. When that internal, transcendental potency
manifests the millions of infinitesimal jīvas, then,
according to its activity, it is called taṭasthā-śakti.
When the shadow of that same internal potency manifests
this material world and its varieties of inert matter,
then, according to its activity, it is called bahiraṅgā-
śakti (the external energy), or māyā-śakti (the deluding
material energy), or simply māyā. But ultimately, that
internal, spiritual potency is one.

When the marginal energy (the living entities) comes in
contact with māyā-śakti (the external energy), it
manifests as the world of the living entities. Māyā-
śakti has manifested this inert, temporary world, with
its varieties of bodies, minds, natures, and so on.

In this world we are under the illusion of māyā, and
there is a prominence of māyā, so we consider that this
phantasmagoric world is full of māyā. Ultimately,
though, as mentioned above, māyā is a shadow
manifestation of Kṛṣṇa’s intrinsic internal potency, His
svarūpa-śakti or antaraṅga-śakti, whose embodiment is
Śrīmatī Rādhikā.[viii]3 This is because māyā is a power,
or śakti, and all śaktis are transformations of svarūpa-
śakti.

However, if we say that māyā-śakti refers directly to
Śrīmatī Rādhikā Herself, this would be a
misunderstanding. If we say that the form of māyā is
Rādhikā Herself, this is incorrect, but if we say that
māyā (personified as Durgā-devī) is a shadow expansion
of Rādhikā and therefore has no independent existence
from Her, this is correct.[ix]4

In this way, it is not that there are many śaktis; there
is only one śakti, but it has different names according

                           29
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

to various functions. Moreover, there is no duality in
śakti (the power) and śaktimān (the possessor of the
power). “Śakti-śaktimatayor abheda ñ Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His
power are non-different or non-dual.” They are one.
[Pease see chart of Kṛṣṇa’s energies on pages 48 and
49.]



*Info Box Start*

The Sacred Supreme Power

Śrī Kṛṣṇa is pūrṇa-śaktimān, the supreme energetic in
His highest original form, and Śrīmatī Rādhikā is pūrṇa-
śakti, His supreme energy in Her highest, original form.
Also, Śrīmatī Rādhikā may be known as pūrṇa-svarūpa-
śakti, the absolute embodiment of the original divine
energy of the Lord and identical with Him. For example,
musk is recognizable by and inseparable from its
inherent fragrance. Similarly, fire is known by and is
inseparable from its heat. Similarly, Śrīmatī Rādhikā
and Śrī Kṛṣṇa, relishing Their transcendental pastimes,
are eternally distinct personalities, but simultaneously
non-different and inseparable. The three active
potencies ñ cit-śakti, jīva-śakti, and māyā-śakti ñ
emanate from the svarūpa-śakti. Another name of the cit-
śakti is antaraṅgā-śakti, the internal spiritual
potency, and another term for the jīva-śakti is the
taṭasthā-śakti, the marginal energy. The synonym for the
māyā-śakti is bahiraṅgā-śakti, the external energy.
Although the svarūpa-śakti is one, She executes
activities through these Her three extensions. All the
eternal, inherent qualities of the svarūpa-śakti are
fully manifest in the cit-śakti; they are minutely
present in the jīva-śakti; and are perversely reflected
in the māyā-śakti.(Jaiva-dharma, Chapter 14)

*Info Box End*



A Fact of Wonder

The word anvayād in the above-mentioned first verse of
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam means ‘direct.’ This indicates that
all potencies manifest directly from Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The word
itarataś, meaning ‘indirect,’ indicates the existence of
something very strange ñ a fact of wonder. Although the
jīva is part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa and is therefore
spiritual and conscious, he is now bound by māyā and is
influenced by inert material energy. Although the soul
is not his body, he thinks, “I am this body.” How is
this possible, since consciousness is superior to dull
matter? Although it is not possible for the jīva to be
bound by the inferior material energy, nevertheless it
takes place. This is a fact of wonder.

When Śrī Kṛṣṇa created the jīvas, He gave them a very
valuable gift called independence. We chose to misuse
our independence, and now we are being rectified in the
prison of this material world by its prison-warden,
Māyā-devī.


                           30
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

There are twenty-eight principles[x]5 (tattvas) in the
manifestation of this world, and none of them have any
separate existence from the Supreme Lord. Although the
jīva does not know how this world was created or how he
was covered by māyā, Kṛṣṇa knows everything. By the
influence of Kṛṣṇa’s māyā, even great demigods like
Brahmā and Śaṅkara (Śiva) may become bewildered, for
even they are unable to measure the depth of power in
His energy.

Because Kṛṣṇa is served by His svarūpa-śakti, His
complete power personified as Śrīmatī Rādhikā, He is
complete. It is stated in Śrī Īśopaniṣad:

oṁ pūrṇam adaḥ pūrṇam idaṁ pūrṇāt pūrṇam udacyate

pūrṇasya pūrṇam ādāya pūrṇam evāvaśiṣyate

The Personality of Godhead is perfect and complete, and
because He is completely perfect, all emanations from
Him, such as this phenomenal world, are perfectly
equipped as complete wholes. Whatever is produced from
the Complete Whole is also complete in itself; and
because He is the Complete Whole, even though so many
complete units emanate from Him, He remains the complete
balance.

The Supreme Lord is always complete, infinite, and
independent; no one can control Him. He mercifully
inspired Lord Brahmā, the original Vedic scholar (ādi-
kavi), in the four ‘nutshell’ verses of the Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam called catuḥ-ślokī. Thus, Brahmā realized the
Lord’s glories by the Lord’s mercy, and then manifested
the Vedas with their unlimited knowledge. Even the
world’s greatly learned scholars become bewildered
regarding the expanse of this Vedic knowledge. They
cannot understand how Kṛṣṇa is controlling all of His
energies and how these energies are working under His
direction.

Three Worlds

The word tri-sargaḥ in the above-mentioned Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam verse (1.1.1) refers to the three kinds of
creation: the transcendental realm (cit-sarga), the
realm of the living entities (jīva-sarga), and the
material realm, or the realm of inert matter (jaḍa-
sarga). Cit-sarga, the transcendental world, begins from
the Vaikuṇṭha planets and goes up to the highest of the
Lord’s abodes, Goloka Vṛndāvana. In Vṛndāvana, Nanda
Bābā, Mother Yaśodā, the cowherd boys, the gopīs, the
trees, creepers, rivers, and mountains are all
transcendental. Everything and everyone there is full of
eternal life, unending bliss, and unfathomable knowledge
(sat-cit-ānanda).



*Info Box Start*

Love in Friendship

Because they would massage Kṛṣṇa’s legs with great love,
the sakhās, Kṛṣṇa’s cowherd friends, are referred to as

                           31
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

mahātmās, great souls. There are millions of sakhās and
all are exalted. Some would fan Him, but not with a
cāmara; with a fan made of leaves and peacock feathers
they would fan Him with great love. They serve Kṛṣṇa by
providing their own laps as pillows for His head ñ can
such good fortune be seen anywhere else? Their affection
for Kṛṣṇa is supremely natural, in the mood of nara-
līlā, which means they consider Him to be an ordinary
child. Seeing how Kṛṣṇa has exerted Himself in wrestling
with them and in taking the cows out to graze, the
sakhās serve Him with tender feelings in order to remove
His exhaustion--To remove even one drop of perspiration
from Kṛṣṇa’s brow they are prepared to give up their
very lives.

(Bhakti-rasāyana, Chapter 10)

*Info Box End*



Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī prays:

yat kiñcit tṛṇa-gulma-kīkaṭa-mukhaṁ goṣṭhe samastaṁ hi
tat

sarvānandamayaṁ mukunda-dayitaṁ līlānukūlaṁ param

śāstrair eva muhur muhuḥ sphuṭam idam niṣṭaṅkitaṁ yācñyā

brahmāder api saspṛheṇa tad idaṁ sarvaṁ mayā vandyate

(Stavāvalī, Vraja- vilāsa-stava 102)

With great longing I worship all the living entities of
Vraja, including the grass, bushes, flies, and birds,
which are filled with transcendental bliss. Their
fortune is so great that it is aspired for by
personalities like Śrī Brahmā and Uddhava. Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam and other śāstras have repeatedly and clearly
propounded their glories. They are very dear to Śrī
Mukunda and assist in His pastimes.

*Info Box Start*

Forever in Love

In this way the cows and calves, due to excessive joy,
forget themselves and get lost in gazing at the one who
adorns His moon-like face with the veṇu. As soon as they
see Vrajendra-nandana, His sweet and incomparable
beautiful form manifests in their hearts, and their eyes
fill with tears of joy. Thus, they cannot even see Him
although He is standing right in front of them. They can
only hear and relish the veṇu’s wonderful rasa-filled
sound through their ears. They remain absolutely still,
being intoxicated from tasting the nectar of their
internal vision of that most attractive form. It seems
that these cows, who are the embodiment of the nectar of
vātsalya-prema (motherly love), make their lives
successful by taking Vrajendra-nandana in the laps of
their hearts, being unable to do so outwardly. As a
result, they drown in ecstatic bliss.


                           32
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

(Veṇu-gīta, Chapter 13)

*Info Box End*



In this world there is no example of cit-sarga (the
spiritual realm) and there is no perfect analogy to
explain it. Still, commenting upon this verse from the
Bhāgavatam, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura cites the analogy
of fire in order to help us gradually understand.

What is fire? Fire is a śakti, or potency. Although we
cannot see fire despite the fact that it is everywhere
(in its invisible feature as a potency), by the striking
of matches or the rubbing together of two stones or
pieces of wood, flames become visible. In other words,
fire manifests when there is an appropriate cause for it
to do so.

In a similar way, the Lord’s spiritual potency is
transcendental and cannot be seen or experienced by
material senses. His spiritual abode, Goloka Vṛndāvana,
is ever present in the transcendental realm, far beyond
the purview of our sense perception. As fire sometimes
manifests, so Kṛṣṇa and His incarnations like Lord
Rāmacandra and Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva appear in this world
from time to time. Kṛṣṇa comes especially to show favor
to His devotees, and at that time He performs an
unlimited variety of activities to please them.

The analogy of the fire has been given in relation to
the spiritual realm. Regarding the realm of the living
entities, this crucial Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam verse gives the
analogy of water. In a very cold environment water
becomes ice, and if that ice is thrown at someone, it
may injure that person or even fracture his bones. On
the other hand, in water’s natural state, if a man is
very thirsty he can drink it and find it sweet.

Similarly, as water’s natural state is liquidity, the
jīva’s natural state is to be an eternal servant of
Kṛṣṇa. By constitution, the jīva serves Kṛṣṇa and is
joyous in that service. When he misuses the independence
given by Kṛṣṇa, māyā throws him very far away from Kṛṣṇa
and gives him gross and subtle bodies whereby he becomes
like ice. He is frozen, out of his own nature, at which
time he thinks, “I am this body, and the happiness and
suffering of this body is mine.”

When the conditioned jīva becomes advanced in spiritual
life, he sees that there is in fact no bondage and no
liberation from that bondage. In reality he is always
liberated, but at present he is in the illusion that he
is bound. It is only by the mercy of guru, and then the
mercy of Kṛṣṇa, that he is able to emerge from this
bodily conception of bondage.

The analogy of fire elucidates the nature of the
transcendental realm (cit-sarga), and the second
analogy, of water, illustrates the nature of the living
entities (jīva-sarga). Now, consider the analogy of
earth in order to understand the creation of this world
of inert matter (jaḍa-sarga).

                           33
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017


In this material world, more than fire or water, earth
is the prominent element; almost everything is made of
earth. For example, an earthen pot is made of earth. It
can carry water if it has been first baked in a kiln,
but still it is earth. In fact, gold, copper, coal, and
diamonds are also manifestations of the element earth.
[xi]6 One can manufacture a variety of products with
various functions, all seemingly different, but these
products are all basically earth.

This analogy is given to express the principle of māyā-
śakti, the māyā creation. Just as the pot, gold, copper,
etc. appear to be separate elements whereas they are
nothing but earth, similarly, everything in the material
world is composed of māyā. Although this world is made
of māyā-śakti and is thus perishable and illusory, by
the influence of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s acintya-śakti (His
inconceivable power) it appears to be a permanent truth.

Faith in the Spiritual Realm

The above-mentioned Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam verse states:
dhāmnā svena sadā nirasta-kuhakaṁ. This phrase means
that the abode of Lord Kṛṣṇa is completely free from
māyā. That realm is animated only by Yogamāyā, who is
the manifestation of the Lord’s superior spiritual
energy (parā-śakti) and who enlivens all the residents
with pure love.



*Info Box Start*

Land of Transcendental Potency

This yogamāyā and mahāmāyā are called the superior and
inferior potencies, respectively. They are perceived as
two forms. Actually they are one, but the original is
superior and its shadow is inferior. -- In Goloka,
Kṛṣṇa’s rāsa-līlā, Kṛṣṇa’s taking birth, devotees
serving Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa’s form, the gopīs’ forms, the trees
and plants there ñ everything is manifest by the
influence of yogamāyā and is true and eternal.”

(Going Beyond Vaikuṇṭha, Chapter 8)

*Info Box End*



Only the spiritual pleasure potency (hlādinī-śakti), the
eternal existence potency (sandhinī-śakti), and the
transcendental knowledge potency (saṁvit-śakti), which
are the three aspects of svarūpa-śakti, are present
there. The illusion (māyā) which creates this material
world is not present in the spiritual realm.

Thus, those who reside there never fall to this material
world. It is not that the jīvas of this world have
forgotten that spiritual abode and come here. Rather,
they have forgotten that they are originally manifest
from the borderline region called taṭasthā, which lies
between the material and spiritual worlds.

                           34
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                           5/5/2017


The phrase satyaṁ paraṁ means that Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Vrajendra-
nandana Syamasundara, the youthful son of the king of
Vraja, who possesses a dazzling cloudlike complexion, is
paraṁ-satya, the Supreme Truth. The word dhīmahi,
meaning ‘I meditate,’ indicates, “I meditate on that
Supreme Truth. May He be merciful and kindly manifest in
my heart.” Or, “I meditate upon the Supreme Absolute
Truth Śrī Kṛṣṇa, along with the embodiment of His
svarūpa-śakti, Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and Her bodily
expansions, the gopīs.” “Dhāmnā svena sadā ñ That
Absolute Truth is eternally present in Goloka Vṛndāvana,
and sometimes He manifests in the material world with
His associates.”

In the Bhagavad-gītā (15.6) Śrī Kṛṣṇa states: “Yad gatvā
na nivartante tad dhāma paramaṁ mama ñ those who reach
that supreme abode of Mine never return to this material
world.” As mentioned above, the Lord’s associates come
here now and then, but only to fulfill His mission. By
practicing great austerities for millions of births, one
may go to Goloka Vṛndāvana. Since there is no māyā in
Vṛndāvana, how can one be interested in anything but
Kṛṣṇa? How can anyone fall from there? Rather, Yogamāyā
assists all the residents of that abode to lovingly
serve Him forever.

By Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s unlimited power He manifests the
transcendental world, the world of jīvas and the myriad
material universes, and simultaneously He maintains His
own separate and independent existence. Śrīla Vyāsadeva,
the author of this foundational Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam verse,
is offering obeisances to that Absolute Truth, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.

In conclusion, consider the analogy that when a person
takes a bath, most of the water disappears from his body
and goes down the drain. Yet, some water remains on the
body, and that is enough to cleanse it. Similarly,
although this subject is profound and difficult to grasp
at first, please endeavor to understand. Allow to remain
with you whatever knowledge you can grasp.



[This discourse was given on June 14, 2005, in Badger,
California, on the subject of Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura’s book, Bhāgavata Arka Marīcimāla. The sub-
section, Faith In That Realm, is an excerpt from Śrīla
Narayana Gosvami Mahārāja’s book, Secret Truths of the
Bhāgavatam.]




Chapter Three - The Origin of the Living Entity


In this discourse, Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja discusses a conversation that took place
between Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and Śrīla Sanātana
Gosvāmī as described in the Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta.
Herein, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī is playing the role of a

                           35
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                         5/5/2017

conditioned soul who is seeking divine self-awareness
and freedom from material miseries. He has inquired from
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu about his own true identity,
which is beyond the body.

The Crest-jewel of Inquiry

Srīla Sanātana Gosvāmī inquired from Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, “I have come to this

world, but I do not know who I am. Who am I?”

In order to understand this subject, we will turn to the
translations of Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja. In
Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 20.102-103 his
translation states:

Who am I? Why do the threefold miseries always give me
trouble? If I do not know this, how can I be benefited?
Actually, I do not know how to inquire about the goal of
life and the process for obtaining it. Being merciful
upon me, please explain all these truths.

None of us know who we are by spiritual constitution.
Someone may consider, “I am Īśa Prabhu,” another may
think, “I am Keśava Prabhu,” and others may conjecture
that they are this or that person. Therefore, in order
to indicate our true identity, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī
humbly questioned Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

Mahāprabhu replied, “You know everything, but you are
inquiring about your true identity so as to uplift
others. Although a saintly person knows everything, he
remains very humble and tries to confirm his statements
by asking the higher authorities.”

kṛṣṇa-sakti dhara tumi, jana tattva-bhava



jani’ dardhya lagi’ puche,-sadhura svabhava



(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 20.105)

Since you possess Lord Kṛṣṇa’s potency, you certainly
know these things. However, it is the nature of a sādhu
to inquire. Although he knows these things, the sādhu
inquires for the sake of strictness.

Mahāprabhu continued, “You are not really Sanātana, in
the sense that you are not this physical body.”

jīvera ‘svarūpa’ hayaóókṛṣṇera ‘nitya-dāsa’



kṛṣṇera ‘taṭasthā-śakti’ ‘bhedābheda-prakāśa’



sūryāṁśa-kiraṇa, yaiche agni-jvālā-caya


                             36
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                         5/5/2017



svābhāvika kṛṣṇera tina-prakāra ‘śakti’ haya



(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 20.108ñ109)

It is the living entity’s constitutional position to be
an eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa, because he is the marginal
energy of Kṛṣṇa ñ a manifestation simultaneously one
with and different from the Lord, like a molecular
particle of sunshine or spark of fire. Kṛṣṇa has three
varieties of energy.[xii]1

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu explained that by spiritual
constitution, all those who have life ñ such as human
beings, birds, animals, trees and creepers, and even
worms and insects ñ are all eternal servants of Lord
Kṛṣṇa. All souls are transformations of the Lord’s
marginal potency (taṭasthā-śakti parināma). They are not
direct transformations of svarūpa-śakti.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu continued:

kṛṣṇa bhuli’ sei jīva anādi-bahirmukha



ataeva māyā tāre deya saṁsāra-duḥkha



(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 20.117)

Forgetting Kṛṣṇa, the living entity has been attracted
by the

external feature from time immemorial. Therefore, the
illusory energy māyā gives him all kinds of misery in
this material existence.

Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja is quoting the version of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu. The jīva, the eternal servant of
Kṛṣṇa, is Kṛṣṇa’s mar-ginal potency (taṭasthā-śakti).
Essential to understand and remember is that he is not
pure svarūpa-śakti, or internal potency. Taṭasthā-śakti
is one of the energies of svarūpa-śakti, but it is not
full.

Svarūpa-śakti has three functions (vṛttis), namely
transcendental happiness (hlādinī), divine knowledge
(saṁvit), and spiritual existence (sandhinī). It is from
svarūpa-śakti that Lord Nṛsiṁha, Lord Rāma, and other
direct incarnations of Kṛṣṇa manifest, and these
incarnations are called svāṁśa, Kṛṣṇa’s personal
expansions. [Sva means ‘own’ or ‘plenary’ or ‘direct,’
and aṁśa means ‘part’ or ‘expansion.’] This is not true
for the vibhinnāṁśa-tattva jīvas [vibhinna means
‘separated’ and aṁśa means ‘portion.’]

svāṁśa-vibhinnāṁśa-rūpe hañā vistāra



                           37
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017


ananta vaikuṇṭha-brahmāṇḍe karena vihāra



(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 22.9)

Kṛṣṇa expands Himself in many forms. Some of them are
personal expansions and some are separate expansions.
Thus He performs pastimes in both the spiritual and
material worlds. The spiritual worlds are the Vaikuṇṭha
planets, and the material universes are brahmāṇḍas,
gigantic globes governed by Lord Brahmā.

A question arises: if all souls are eternal servants of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, how could they have become averse to Him? Why
did they turn away from Him? The answer is that the
jīvas who became averse had not yet realized their
constitutional position of eternal service.

Two Kinds of Souls

There are two categories of jīvas, as stated in Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 22.10ñ13:

sei vibhinnāṁśa jīva ñ dui ta’ prakāra



eka ñ ‘nitya-mukta’, eka ñ ‘nitya-saṁsāra’



(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 22.10)

The living entities, the jīvas, are divided into two
categories. Some are nitya-mukta, eternally liberated,
never having been conditioned, and others are
perpetually conditioned (nitya-saṁsāra, or nitya-
baddha).

The meaning of nitya-saṁsāra in this verse does not mean
‘forever conditioned.’ It means that the time we have
been conditioned is so vast that it cannot be
calculated.



*Info Box Start*

Only Two Kinds of Souls

There are two categories of vibhinnāṁśa jīvas, not
three. The jīvas who manifest in the spiritual world are
eternally liberated (nitya-mukta) vibhinnāṁśa jīvas; and
the jīvas who manifest in the taṭasthā region and who
look from there towards the spiritual world are also
eternally liberated (nitya-mukta) vibhinnāṁśa jīvas. The
jīvas who look towards the material world from the
taṭasthā region are called conditioned souls, or nitya-
baddha (or nitya-saṁsāra) vibhinnāṁśa jīvas.”

(Continued in Part Four, Overview)


                           38
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

*Info Box End*

‘nitya-mukta’ ñ nitya kṛṣṇa-carane unmukha



‘kṛṣṇa-parisada’ nama, bhunje seva-sukha



(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 22.11)

Those who are eternally liberated are always awake to
Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and they render transcendental
loving service at the feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa. They are to be
considered eternal associates of Kṛṣṇa, and they are
eternally enjoying the transcendental bliss of serving
Him.”

This is a prominent point to understand. The liberated
jīvas are eternal associates of Śrī Kṛṣṇa in His abode,
always engaged in serving Him and relishing the
sweetness of their service to Him. In the Lord’s abode,
the potency that bewilders the conditioned soul and
encourages him to identify with his body is not present.



*Info Box Start*

Never to the River

“There are many living entities who are eternally
liberated. They never come to this world. It is just
like the ocean and the rivers. In the river you will
find fishes and in the ocean you will find fishes.
Sometimes it may be that the fishes of the river may go
to the ocean, but the fishes of the ocean never come to
the river ñ they never come to the river. There is no
place for them there.”

(Lecture by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja. New
York, January 8, 1967)

*Info Box End



Only Yogamāyā, the spiritual potency that nourishes the
service mood of liberated souls, is present there. There
is nothing in the spiritual world to make one forget
Kṛṣṇa, and therefore the Lord’s associates are never
liable to forget Him or become averse to Him. The love
and affection of these associates is always fresh and
ever-new; it is ever-unfolding. Even if the ‘newness’ of
the love and affection reaches its limit and there is no
room for further newness, still, it becomes ever-
increasingly new and fresh.

In regards to the second category of jīva:

nitya-baddha’ ñ kṛṣṇa haite nitya-bahirmukha

‘nitya-saṁsāra’, bhuñje narakādi duḥkha

                           39
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017


(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 22.12)

Apart from the ever-liberated devotees, there are the
conditioned souls, who always turn away from the service
of the Lord. They are perpetually conditioned in this
material world and are thus subjected to the material
tribulations brought about by different bodily forms in
hellish conditions.

sei doṣe māyā-piśācī daṇḍa kare tāre



ādhyātmikādi tāpa-traya tāre jāri’ māre



(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 22.13)

Due to his being opposed to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, the
conditioned soul is punished by the witch of the
external energy, māyā. He is thus ready to suffer the
threefold miseries brought about by the body and mind,
the inimical behavior of other living entities, and
natural disturbances caused by the demigods.

The souls in the second category ñ the conditioned souls
ñ have never directly associated with Kṛṣṇa. They have
never relished His service, and that is why they are
called nitya-bahirmukha, or conditioned from
beginningless time.

The above-mentioned verse states that the souls in the
second category are being punished by māyā. Why are they
being punished? What have they done wrong? Their defect
is that they have chosen to turn away from Kṛṣṇa. They
preferred to look towards the material world for
pleasure; in this way it is considered that they are
opposed to Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Still, although they have never relished the sweetness
of serving Kṛṣṇa nor do they possess knowledge about
such service, they are Kṛṣṇa’s taṭasthā-śakti, His
marginal energy. They are His eternal servants by their
constitutional position.

A certain type of jīva manifests in the spiritual world
ñ from Kṛṣṇa’s first expansion, Śrī Baladeva. The jīvas
who manifest from Baladeva are called nitya-unmukha,
meaning that they are always serving Kṛṣṇa. Although all
taṭasthā-śakti jīvas are servants by constitution, the
second kind of jīva has not come from Goloka Vṛndāvana.
The conditioned souls of this world have never been in
Goloka Vṛndāvana. They are coming from Kāraṇodakaśāyī
Viṣṇu[xiii]2, in the realm between the spiritual and
material world.

Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī clarifies our understanding of the
two kinds of jīvas. He states in his Paramātma-
sandharbha:

tad evam anantā eva jīvākhyās taṭasthāḥ śaktayaḥ / tatra
tāsāṁ varga-dvayam / eko vargo’ nādita eva bhagavad-

                           40
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

unmukhaḥ / anyas tv anādita eva bhagavat-parāṅmukhaḥ /
svabhāvatas tadīya-jñāna-bhāvāt tadīya-jñānābhāvāt ca

(Paramātma-sandarbha, Anuccheda 47, Text 1)

Thus the Lord’s marginal potency is comprised of
individual spirit souls. Although these individual
spirit souls are limitless in number, they may be
divided into two groups: (1) the souls who from time
immemorial are favorable to the Supreme Lord; and (2)
the rebellious souls who from time immemorial are averse
to the Supreme Lord. One group is aware of the Lord’s
glories and the other group is not aware of them.

Here, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī explains that there are
unlimited jīvas emanating from taṭasthā-śakti, and from
there some have turned away from Kṛṣṇa. They turned away
from Kṛṣṇa and chose to enter the material world, which
is a ‘dream-place’ (svapna-sthāna). In the material
world it appears that one person is aware of the world
around him, another is dreaming, and another is fast
asleep without dreaming at all. Actually, everyone here
is dreaming, because this entire place is a dream-place.
The jīvas’ sleep in this dream-place is not so deep that
they are fully unconscious, because they are part of the
spiritual conscious substance (cit-vastu) even when they
are not liberated. Rather, they are experiencing a dream
of material designations.

Regarding the souls coming from the divine light-filled
glance of Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu: Within that light, Kṛṣṇa
in His form as Viṣṇu gives them the intelligence and
freedom to consider, “What should I do?” There is a very
fine, imaginary line between the transcendental and
material worlds. Kṛṣṇa gives the jīvas some freedom,
saying in effect, “From here you can look towards this
world of māyā and you can also look towards the
spiritual world. What you choose depends upon you. I
will give you a moment to decide.”

Certain jīvas looked from the taṭasthā region towards
the spiritual world and were attracted there. Yogamāyā
at once gave them the power of bhakti to go there, to
serve Kṛṣṇa for eternity. Others looked toward the
material world, they were attracted, they decided to
relish it, and thus they were granted their desire.

The jīvas in this region were within the body of
Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, in seed form, and when they came
out through His glance, some fell in māyā. This truth
has been substantiated in Śrī Brahma-saṁhitā:

The Lord of the mundane world, Mahā-Viṣṇu
(Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu), possesses thousands upon
thousands of heads, eyes, and hands. He is the source of
thousands upon thousands of incarnations in His
thousands upon thousands of subjective portions. He
generates thousands upon thousands of individual souls.

(Śrī Brahma-Samhita, Text 11)

An unlimited number of atomic conscious particles emerge
from the spiritual rays of Paramātmā as the aggregate of
the living entities. These innumerable jīvas have no

                           41
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

relation with the mundane world when they come to know
themselves to be the eternal servants of the Supreme
Lord. At that time, they are incorporated into the realm
of Vaikuṇṭha.

(Śrī Brahma Samhita, Text 16, purport)

The svarūpa-śakti, or internal potency of Kṛṣṇa, which
is spiritual, functioning as His own personal power, has
manifested His pastimes of Goloka. By Her grace,
individual souls who are constituents of the marginal
potency can have admission into even those pastimes.

(Śrī Brahma-Samhita, Text 6, purport)

Everything Is Present in the Divine Seed

Spiritual identity is already present within the soul,
in seed-form. Consider the analogy of a mango seed. If
you plant a mango seed in fertile ground and give it
water, gradually a sprout will emerge. After a few days,
some leaves will unfurl and later some branches will
begin to grow. After a few years, the plant will become
quite large, with an abundance of leaves, branches, and
flowers. One day, mangos will begin to swell on its
branches, and then they will ripen and become sweet and
juicy.

Everything needed to produce a mango tree is present
within the mango seed. The potency of the leaves,
branches, and fruits is dormant within the seed, as well
as the number of leaves and the sweetness of the fruit.

Similarly, the personal form of the soul is now present
in a latent state. Everything about the soul’s spiritual
form, dress, nature, dwelling place, and service is
present within the soul, even though the pure
transcendental form has not developed and was never
previously developed.



*Info Box Start*

Potency of Divine Seed

In further reference to your question about the form of
the spirit soul of the conditioned living entity, there
is a spiritual form always, but it develops fully only
when the living entity goes back to Vaikuṇṭha. This form
develops according to the desire of the living entity.
Until this perfectional stage is reached, the form is
lying dormant, as the form of the tree is lying dormant
in the seed.(Letter from Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī
Mahārāja. Los Angeles, August 8, 1969.)

*Info Box End*



*Info Box Start*

In God’s Abode


                           42
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

The conclusion is that no one falls from the spiritual
world, or Vaikuṇṭha-planet, for it is the eternal abode.

(Śrīmad-Bhagavatam 3.16.26, Purport by Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja)

*Info Box End*



Śrī Kṛṣṇa states in the Bhagavad-gītā (15.6): Yad gatvā
na nivartante tad dhāma paramaṁ mama. This means that by
practicing bhakti-yoga for thousands upon thousands of
lifetimes, one’s spiritual form is developed.Thus, one
is liberated and granted the benediction of entrance
into the spiritual world, from which he will never
return to this world. Those from this world who are
liberated by practicing bhakti-yoga are serving Kṛṣṇa in
Vaikuṇṭha in His forms as Rāma, Nṛsiṁha, Kalki, or
Vāmana, or in Goloka as Mathureśa or Kṛṣṇa. They are all
liberated. They will never return to the world of
repeated birth and death. Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī
Mahārāja writes in his translation of the above
mentioned verse:

That supreme abode of Mine is not illumined by the sun
or moon, nor by fire or electricity. Those who reach it
never return to this material world.

(Bhagavad-gītā 15.6, purport)

Question: Someone may say, “Yes, we accept what Kṛṣṇa
spoke in the Bhagavad-gītā ñ that once going to
Vaikuṇṭha from this world, we don’t return to this
world. But we did fall from there before we first came
to this world.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja: If this were true, the
principle stated in the Bhagavad-gītā and other
scriptures would still be a fallacy. Our scriptures
propound only reality. For those souls who are already
serving in that realm, there is no māyā at all. There is
no chance of becoming averse to Kṛṣṇa. For one who is
eternally in that realm and for one who has attained
that realm from this material world ñ both kinds of
souls never fall, for there is no māyā in God’s abode.

In this connection we should try to follow the teachings
of Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, our tattva-ācārya, as well as the
teachings of our disciplic line of spiritual masters
such as Śrīla Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa, Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura, and especially Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura[xiv]3. If there is any confusion when reading
the words of a particular bona fide guru, we can
reconcile and clarify our understanding by taking help
of the words of the other bona fide gurus in our
disciplic line.

Jīva Gosvāmī is a very bona fide guru. He has explained
this subject and all other spiritual subjects in his
Sandarbhas, leaving no scope for doubt. We will have to
read his words in order to reconcile, and in this way we
will be able to see the compatibility, consistency, and
harmony in the teaching of all our ācāryas.

                           43
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017


It is also essential to read the books of the Seventh
Gosvāmī, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, who is also a bona
fide guru like Jīva Gosvāmī and Rupa Gosvāmī. He clearly
elucidates these truths of the soul in his book, Jaiva-
dharma. There, he writes that innumerable eternal souls
have emanated from Baladeva Prabhu in Goloka Vṛndāvana,
like the sakhas, Nanda Bābā, and other associates.
Regarding the gopīs there, unlimited gopīs are bodily
manifestations (nitya-siddha kāyavyūha-rūpa) of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā. Those gopīs who are not Her bodily
manifestations are coming from Baladeva; they are also
eternally liberated and eternally serving Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura explains that this principle
is also applicable in Dvārakā and Vaikuṇṭha. In Dvārakā,
the jīvas are coming from Baladeva Prabhu’s expansion,
Mūla-Saṇkarṣaṇa, and in Vaikuṇṭha they are coming from
His expansion known as Mahā-Saṅkarṣaṇa.

All these eternal souls are serving in one of two ways:
in Kṛṣṇa’s sweet, human-like pastimes (mādhurya-lila);
or in His opulent pas-times (aiśvarya-lila) as
Dvārakādīśa, the prince of Dvārakā, and Nārāyaṇa, the
Lord of Vaikuṇṭha. Regarding those jīvas manifested from
Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu in the taṭasthā region or marginal
line, they are two kinds: some liberated (those who
turned towards the spiritual world) and some conditioned
(those who turned towards the material world).

Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmi Mahārāja has accepted this
line of guru-paramparā, more than us. He is a realized
soul. He never says anything different from the words of
our previous ācāryas. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has
accepted all the previous acaryas in the line of Śrīla
Rupa Gosvāmī, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvati Gosvāmī
Thākura has accepted Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, and
Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmi Mahārāja has accepted his
Gurudeva, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvati Gosvāmī
Thākura. With this understanding, we can reconcile.



[This discourse was given on June 2, 2000 in Badger,
California.]




Chapter Four - No One Falls from the Eternal Abode


Let us turn to an excerpt from Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura’s book, Śrī Jaiva-dharma. The scene in the
following excerpt takes place on the island of Godruma
in Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma, where Sannyāsī Ṭhākura asked a
question to his guru, Paramahaṁsa Bābāji Mahārāja.

Sannyāsī Ṭhākura said, “For a long time I have heard of
the pre-eminence of dharma, or the eternal nature,
religion, character, and function of the living being.
On numerous occasions I have asked the question to many
people, ‘What is dharma?’ It is a cause of distress to

                           44
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                         5/5/2017

me that those peoples’ answers contradict each other.

“So please tell me, what is the true constitutional
dharma of the jīvas, and why do different teachers
explain the nature of dharma in such diverse ways? If
dharma is one, why don’t all learned teachers cultivate
that universal dharma which is one without a second?”

(Jaiva-dharma, Chapter 1)

Paramahaṁsa Bābāji Mahārāja replied to his disciple that
dharma is one. The only real dharma is love and
affection for the Supreme Lord, which is also known in
the ancient Vedas as vaiṣṇava-dharma (devotion to the
Supreme Lord), sanātana-dharma (the eternal function of
the soul), and bhagavad-dharma (the principles of dharma
as enunciated by the Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself).

This love sometimes transforms, as water sometimes
transforms into ice, fog, or steam. When water is in the
form of ice it may cause injury if thrown at someone,
whereas water in its natural state will not do so.
Similarly love for Kṛṣṇa, which is the intrinsic nature
and mood of the jīva, has now become transformed. Now we
love each other, or we love our dogs, cats, our own
bodies, or the bodies of our boyfriends or girlfriends.

This so-called love is false dharma, meaning that it has
nothing to do with the natural function of the soul.
Love originates in the Lord’s abode, Goloka Vṛndāvana;
its root is there. That pure love is in the heart of
every living being, but it has been transformed, as
water is transformed into ice under certain conditions.
Although we are under the notion that we love each
other, the love experienced in this world is but a
perverted reflection of real love and is actually lust
for sense gratification. Love in its pure state is love
and affection for Kṛṣṇa, and it originates in the hearts
of the gopīs and other residents of Vṛndāvana.

We ‘Forgot’ the Lord

In response to the question of his disciple in relation
to dharma, Paramahaṁsa Bābāji Mahārāja quoted verses
from Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī’s book, Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta:

jīvera ‘svarūpa’ hayaóókṛṣṇera ‘nitya-dāsa’

kṛṣṇera ‘taṭasthā-śakti’ ‘bhedābheda-prakāśa’



sūryāṁśa-kiraṇa, yaiche agni-jvālā-caya

svābhāvika kṛṣṇera tina-prakāra ‘śakti’ haya



(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 20.108ñ109)

It is the living entity’s constitutional position to be
an eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa, because he is the marginal
energy of Kṛṣṇa and a manifestation simultaneously one

                            45
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                         5/5/2017

with and different from the Lord, like a molecular
particle of sunshine or fire. Kṛṣṇa has three varieties
of energy.

kṛṣṇa bhuli’ sei jīva anādi-bahirmukha



ataeva māyā tāre deya saṁsāra-duḥkha



(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 20.117)

Forgetting Kṛṣṇa, the living entity has been attracted
by the external feature from time immemorial. Therefore,
the illusory energy māyā gives him all kinds of misery
in his material existence.



The words kṛṣṇa bhuli in the above-mentioned verse
apparently mean ‘forgetting Kṛṣṇa,’ but what is the
deeper understanding? Does it mean that the jīva was
once engaged in Kṛṣṇa’s service in His spiritual abode,
and has now forgotten that service?

The intended meaning is very different. All mundane
languages have defects, and therefore they cannot purely
express the nature of our constitutional form (svarūpa).
To clarify the meaning, Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī
writes kṛṣṇera ‘taṭasthā-śakti’ ‘bhedābheda-prakāśa,
meaning that the jīva is a manifestation of Kṛṣṇa’s
marginal energy.

Different Sources, Different Destinations

Please note this down carefully in your notebooks and in
your hearts. Jaiva-dharma, Chapter Sixteen, states:

Innumerable jīvas appear from Śrī Baladeva Prabhu to
serve Vṛndāvana-vihārī Śrī Kṛṣṇa as His eternal
associates in Goloka Vṛndāvana; and others appear from
Śrī Saṅkarṣaṇa to serve the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha, Śrī
Nārāyaṇa, in the spiritual sky. Eternally relishing
rasa, engaged in the service of their worshipful Lord,
these jīvas always remain fixed in their constitutional
position. They always strive to please the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and are always favorable to Him.
By virtue of the spiritual potency, they have the
strength to stay fixed in their devotion and they have
no connection with the material energy. In fact, they
are unaware that there is a deluding energy called māyā.
Inasmuch as they reside in the spiritual world, māyā
stays far from them and does not affect them at all.

Always absorbed in the bliss of serving their worshipful
Lord, they are eternally liberated and completely
unaware of material happiness and distress. Their life
is love alone, and they are not even conscious of
misery, death, or fear.

The residents of the spiritual world are liberated,
which means that they have no awareness of māyā and this

                           46
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                         5/5/2017

material world. Who is aware? We jīvas in this material
world are aware.

We have come from the taṭasthā-region, from a
manifestation of Baladeva Prabhu called Kāraṇodakaśāyī
Viṣṇu, the incarnation of the Lord who is situated on
the marginal line between the spiritual and material
worlds, in the Causal Ocean.

Lord Kṛṣṇa has created the jīva as an independent being,
whose independence is a special jewel. If the jīva uses
his independence well, he quickly progresses towards
Vaikuṇṭha, and if he misuses it, he suffers.

Consider this analogy. If tiny, round mustard seeds are
dropped upon the sharp edge of the blade of a sword,
some seeds will fall to one side and some will fall to
the other. Like those mustard seeds that fall to one
side or the other, from the taṭasthā-śakti region the
jīvas are either elevated to the spiritual world or
degraded to this material world. After emanating from
the glance of Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, if they look towards
Goloka Vṛndāvana, yogamāyā at once helps them to go
there. On the other hand, those who look towards the
material world are attracted by mahāmāyā, whereupon
mahāmāyā drags them to this inert netherworld. Kṛṣṇa is
not at fault for this; it is their free will to look
here or there.

Of course, no analogy can give a perfect understanding
of spiritual truth, but there are some similarities to
help us understand. The sharp edge of the knife
represents the taṭasthā region and the mustard seeds
represent the innumerable jīvas. Like the edge of the
knife, the taṭasthā region is not a place of rest. The
jīva cannot stay there; he has to quickly decide his
destination. What is not similar in this analogy is
that, unlike the jīvas, the mustard seeds are not
conscious and therefore they have no ability to choose.

Kṛṣṇa did not create this world with a desire that the
jīvas should suffer. Rather, the material creation is
one of the very valuable, pleasant, and sweet pastimes
of Kṛṣṇa, which the jīva can understand and appreciate
only when he transcends his materially conditioned
consciousness and attains an advanced stage of Kṛṣṇa
consciousness.[xv]1

Kṛṣṇa personally states in the Bhagavad-gītā:

na tad bhāsayate sūryo




na śaśāṅko na pāvakaḥ




yad gatvā na nivartante


                           47
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017




tad dhāma paramaṁ mama




(Bhagavad-gītā 15.6)

That supreme abode of Mine is not illumined by the sun
or moon, nor by fire or electricity. Those who reach it
never return to this material world.

A person who seriously chants, remembers, and follows
the process of devotional service passes through the
stages of initial faith (śraddhā), steadiness (niṣṭhā),
taste (ruci), attachment to the process of devotion and
to Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself (āsakti), spiritual emotions
(bhāva), and pure love (prema). When he attains prema,
he is then qualified to enter Goloka Vṛndāvana and to
serve Lord Kṛṣṇa there. Once he attains this position,
he is free from the possibility of falling back down to
this world.

Truly Liberated Souls Remain Liberated

It is quite absurd to think that liberated souls in
Goloka Vṛndāvana could ever be covered by māyā. In this
regard, Canto Six of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam describes the
history of the Lord’s associate, Citraketu Mahārāja. A
casual reading of this history may give the impression
that Citraketu Mahārāja fell down from the spiritual
world (Vaikuṇṭha), and one may take that impression as
proof that the jīva falls from there. However, Citraketu
Mahārāja never fell from his position as the Lord’s
associate.

Citraketu Mahārāja went to see his friend and god-
brother Lord Śiva, who was sitting with his wife, the
very beautiful Pārvatī. Lord Śiva, who is also an
eternally liberated soul, was naked, Pārvatī was sitting
on his lap, and the two of them were surrounded by an
assembly of Siddhas, Cāraṇas, and great sages.

Citraketu began to joke with his friend: “What are you
doing? You are completely naked and this beautiful young
lady is sitting on your lap. What will everyone think?”
He was laughing and Śiva was smiling, but Pārvatī could
not tolerate his teasing. She immediately cursed him,
declaring, “You will become a demon.”

Hearing this undeserved curse from Pārvatī, Śiva told
her, “He is a liberated soul. Whether he is in this
world or in the spiritual world, he will always be a
pure devotee; he cannot be transformed into anything
else. He has the power to resist your curse, and had he
so wished, he could have also cursed you. Just see how
humble he is. Because he is a Vaiṣṇava he is beyond
hankering and lamentation, and therefore he has
tolerated your words and accepted your curse.”


                           48
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                           5/5/2017

Citraketu Mahārāja intentionally and willingly agreed to
accept the body of a demon in order to establish this
truth: Whether a devotee is in this world or in hell, he
will glorify his Lord and give instructions to everyone
to serve Him. It was for this reason that he took his
next birth as the ‘demon’ Vṛtrāsura and spent a short
time in that body.

While in the body of that demon, he was engaged in a
fight with his enemy, the demigod Indra. During the
battle he told Indra, “Kill me. I cannot serve my Lord
in this body.” After having attempted to kill Vṛtrāsura
and failing, Indra thought in great wonder, “How will I
be able to kill him? He is telling me to do so, but I
cannot.” Even Indra’s thunderbolt was powerless.

Vṛtrāsura prayed to the Lord (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
6.11.26):

O lotus-eyed Lord, as baby birds that have not yet
developed their wings always look for their mother to
return and feed them; as small calves tied with ropes
await anxiously the time of milking, when they will be
allowed to drink the milk of their mothers; or as a
morose wife whose husband is away from home always longs
for him to return so that she can satisfy him in all
respects ñ I always yearn for the opportunity to render
direct service unto You.

In this highly elevated verse, Vṛtrāsura reveals that
his mood in service to Kṛṣṇa was like that of the gopīs.
In fact, by this prayer of Vṛtrāsura, Śrīla Vyāsadeva
and Śukadeva Gosvāmī have glorified the love and
affection of the gopīs. Citraketu Mahārāja did not fall
from Vaikuṇṭha. He purposefully came to this material
world to establish certain truths.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam also relates the history of the saint
Bharata Mahārāja.[xvi]2 It is sometimes assumed that
Bharata Mahārāja had fallen from his exalted devotional
platform of bhāva-bhakti, the preliminary stage of love
of God, and therefore he took his next birth as a deer.
Actually, Bharata Mahārāja performed this pastime only
to give particular lessons to conditioned souls like us.
He wanted to demonstrate that no matter how elevated one
might consider himself to be, one must be very cautious
in the matter of cultivating pure bhakti; otherwise one
falls down.

Another example of a vastly misunderstood ‘fall’ is Jaya
and Vijaya, the doorkeepers of Vaikuṇṭha.[xvii]3 They
desired to satisfy Lord Nārāyaṇa’s wish to taste the
mood of combat. The Lord then attracted the four Kumāras
to visit Him in Vaikuṇṭha specifically to curse Jaya and
Vijaya to descend to this world so that He would have
the opportunity to fight with them.

Neither anger, nor lust, nor any debased qualities are
present in Vaikuṇṭha. In the instance of the so-called
cursing of Jaya and Vijaya, Lord Nārāyaṇa had personally
inspired His transcendental potency yogamāyā to make the
four Kumāras angry, which caused them to curse Jaya and
Vijaya. After having cursed them, the four Kumāras
immediately lamented, but Lord Nārāyaṇa assured them,

                           49
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

“Do not worry. I personally wanted this to happen. Jaya
and Vijaya will manifest as demons in the material world
for three lifetimes, and I will perform pastimes with
them in the spirit of chivalry. In the meantime, they
will simultaneously remain in their original forms in
the spiritual world.” Thus, Jaya and Vijaya continued to
reside in Vaikuṇṭha in their original forms, and their
manifestations came to this phenomenal world to act as
demons.

Being pure devotees, Jaya and Vijaya are able to
manifest manifold forms, just as Kṛṣṇa’s mother, Yaśodā,
has unlimited forms. Nārada Ṛṣi also has millions of
forms, in Vaikuṇṭha, in Dvārakā, and throughout the
infinite universes. Lord Brahmā has said that a person
may be able to count the stars in the sky and the sands
on the Earth, but he will not be able to fully glorify
the sweet pastimes of Kṛṣṇa and His associates. We
cannot imagine such things.[xviii]4

While no souls fall from Goloka Vṛndāvana or Vaikuṇṭha
at any time or in any circumstance, they may come to
this world with Kṛṣṇa to assist in His pastimes, as did
His cowherd friends Śrīdāmā and Subala. Or, Kṛṣṇa may
send a liberated soul, His associate, to this world,
telling him, “Go there and help the conditioned souls.”
A liberated soul in this world has a greater
understanding of the overwhelming anxiety and suffering
of the conditioned living entities than those liberated
souls who are in Goloka, because he realizes the reality
of the spiritual world and simultaneously sees this
world.

No one is happy in this world. Even those in the prime
of youth are unsatisfied, and they will never become
satisfied. They will have to grow old and die, and when
they die they will not be able to take with them
anything they have collected during their lifetime. So
try to remember Kṛṣṇa and follow this tenet: God is one,
religion is one, and that one religion is love and
affection for the Supreme Godhead, Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Question: You mentioned that Kṛṣṇa’s associates go with
Him to the innumerable universes and they also have
expansions. Is this also possible for the living entity
who was once conditioned but becomes a perfected soul by
the practice of devotional service? If we become
perfect, do we also accompany Kṛṣṇa to all those
universes?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja: Yes. If you become
perfect like Kṛṣṇa’s associates, you can do so.[xix]5
Perfect devotees, those who constantly meditate upon the
daily twenty-four-hour transcendental loving pastimes of
Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa (aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā), will attain
Goloka Vṛndāvana.

Those who worship Gaura-Nityānanda Prabhu and constantly
meditate upon Their pastimes will go to Śvetadvīpa,
which is Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s abode of Navadvīpa as it
is manifest in Goloka. [This Śvetadvīpa is different
from the island which lies in the Ocean of Milk.]

Those who remember both Gauranga and Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, and

                           50
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

want to serve both, have two constitutional forms and go
to both abodes.[xx]6 Beyond the infinite material
universes, Śvetadvīpa and Goloka Vṛndāvana are
gloriously manifest, and such perfect, liberated souls
reside in both these abodes.

[This discourse was given on February 16, 2002, in
Murwillumbah, Australia, as part of a series of classes
on Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s Jaiva-dharma.]




Chapter Five - Moon on the Branch


In the Sanskrit language, the logic used to explain that
which is beyond our understanding is called, śākhā-
candra-nyāya, or ‘moon-on-the-branch logic.’

One may ask, “Where is the moon?” And someone may reply,
“Look over there, the moon is sitting on the branch of
that tree.” In truth, the moon is millions of miles away
from the Earth, and its position in the sky is indicated
by pointing to it as it apparently sits on the branch.

Similarly, regarding eternal, spiritual existence,
mundane language can only give a scant indication of the
truth. No example or analogy can fully explain it. By
way of illustration, one may say, “Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
beautiful; His complexion is black like that of a fresh
rain-cloud or tamāla tree.” However, is He actually
black like a cloud or a tamāla tree? Can any comparison
be completely accurate? His beauty is unparalleled.



*Info Box Start*

Beyond Material Words

Whatever we say or describe in the material world is
under the jurisdiction of material time and space. When
we say, “The jīvas were created,” “The spiritual world
was manifested,” or “There is no influence of māyā in
creating the form of the jīvas,” material time is bound
to influence our language and statements. This influence
of material time is inevitable in our conditioned state,
so we cannot remove it from our descriptions of the
atomic jīva and spiritual objects. The conception of
past, present, and future always enters our descriptions
in some way or another.

Still, those who can discriminate properly can
understand the application of the eternal present when
they comprehend the purport of the descriptions of the
spiritual world. Be very careful in this matter. Give up
the inevitable baseness, the aspect of the description
that is fit to be rejected, and have spiritual
realization.

(Jaiva-dharma, Chapter 15)


                             51
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                           5/5/2017

*Info Box End*



In the same way, mundane language cannot fully explain
jīva-tattva, the truth of the eternal living entity. By
the regular performance of bhajana, by daily chanting
the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra, and by hearing hari-kathā
(narrations about Kṛṣṇa and His associates) with a
strong belief in the goal of life, we will advance in
devotion. Then, according to our level of advancement,
we will be able to realize all established philosophical
truths.

Arguments based on mundane logic will not satisfy us,
for one logical argument may defeat other arguments, and
yet another logical argument will defeat all of the
previous ones. Mundane logic and argument have no
entrance into the spiritual atmosphere. As stated by
Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura:

tathā pratyakṣādi-pramiti-sahitaṁ sādhayati naḥ

na yuktis tarkākhyā praviśati tathā śakti-rahitā

(Daśa-mūla 1)

Reasoning that is based only on logic is always crippled
when evaluating inconceivable subject matters, since
logic and argument have no access in the realm of the
inconceivable.

In Jaiva-dharma, Sannyāsī Ṭhākura humbly asks his
spiritual master, Paramahaṁsa Bābājī Mahārāja, “Prabhu,
I want to know about the eternal soul. I want to realize
the truth; I am not satisfied by only having
intellectual knowledge. I want to be truly satisfied.”
Paramahaṁsa Bābājī Mahārāja replied, “Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa
Kavirāja Gosvāmī, who was an object of Śrī Nityānanda
Prabhu’s mercy, showed me a manuscript he had written in
his own handwriting. In that divine compilation, Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu instructed
us on this subject:

jīvera svarūpa haya kṛṣṇera nitya-dāsa,



kṛṣṇera taṭasthā-śakti bhedābheda prakāśa



(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 20.108)

The constitutional nature of the jīva is to be an
eternal servant of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. He is the marginal potency
of Kṛṣṇa, and is a manifestation simultaneously one with
Him and different from Him.

kṛṣṇa bhuli’ sei jīva anādi-bahirmukha



ataeva māyā tāre deya saṁsāra-duḥkha

                           52
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                          5/5/2017




(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 20.117)

The jīva who has forgotten Kṛṣṇa has been preoccupied
with the external potency since a time without
beginning. Consequently, Kṛṣṇa’s illusory potency, māyā,
gives him misery in the form of material existence.

What is the harm in believing that this verse confirms
the jīva’s previous residence in Goloka and his falldown
from there to the material world? The harm is this: If
it is possible to fall from the spiritual world, if one
were vulnerable there, then what use would it be to
engage in spiritual practices (sādhana) and devotional
absorption (bhajana) for attainment of that abode? If,
by the performance of bhajana one attains the spiritual
world and later falls back to the material world, what
would be the use of endeavoring with great determination
to reach there? There would be no use; it would be
better to stay here in the material world. Moreover, the
idea of the jīvas’ fall-down from Goloka Vṛndāvana
suggests that the deluding material potency also exists
there.



*Info Box Start*

Causal Ocean

The Virajā, or Causal Ocean, is the border between the
spiritual world and material world. The material energy
is situated on one shore of that ocean and cannot enter
onto the other shore, which is the spiritual sky.

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 20.269)

*Info Box End*



The idea that māyā is present in Goloka implies that
even Kṛṣṇa’s cowherd friends like Sudāmā, Śrīdāmā, and
Madhumaṅgala, His parents Mother Yaśodā and Nanda Bābā,
and all the gopīs including Śrīmatī Rādhikā may also
forget Kṛṣṇa and fall down from there. But it is not
possible for them to forget Kṛṣṇa.

Here, by the influence of the material energy, we have a
certain vocabulary and we use certain words ñ like kṛṣṇa
bhuli, meaning ‘forgetting Kṛṣṇa.’ We can purify our
understanding of those words by performing sādhana-
bhajana. We cannot understand spiritual topics through
words alone because, as mentioned above, mundane
language does not extend beyond matter. Nevertheless
language is our tool for expression, and therefore we
require the help of pure devotees to assist us in
comprehending it.

Nārada Muni Did Not Fall

The verses of Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Śrīmad-

                           53
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

Bhāgavatam, and other Vedic scriptures are full of
profound purports and require careful explanation. For
example, it is sometimes thought that the great sage
Nārada Muni, although a liberated soul, occasionally
falls into māyā. In reality, his apparent fall-downs are
his pastimes of role-playing, performed for the purpose
of serving the Lord in His various incarnations. All of
his pastimes are performed to please the Lord, and also
to teach lessons to all of us.

In the following pastime, Nārada Muni conquered Kāmadeva
(Cupid) and then proudly thought, “Oh, even my own guru,
Śaṅkara (Lord Śiva), ran after māyā. When Kṛṣṇa assumed
His female form as the goddess Mohinī-mūrti, Śiva became
enraptured and ran after Her, oblivious to Her real
identity.”[xxi]1 Śrī Nārada Muni gloated, “On the other
hand, when Kāmadeva came to me, he could not attract me
at all.”

Nārada approached Lord Śiva and boasted, “I have
conquered Kāmadeva.” Lord Śiva laughed and said, “Don’t
tell Lord Brahmā and Lord Nārāyaṇa.” Not listening, he
then went to Lord Brahmā, bragging in the same way. Lord
Brahmā thought, “A thorn of false ego has entered him.
It must be removed.” Brahmā replied, “Very good, but
don’t tell Lord Nārāyaṇa.” Not listening, Nārada finally
approached Lord Nārāyaṇa.

Listening to Nārada’s self-praise, Lord Nārāyaṇa
considered, “False ego, like a disease, has now infected
his heart. His disease is like piles, and he will not be
cured without an operation. I must remove this
condition; I must operate.” Hiding His real feelings, He
replied to Nārada, “You are My best devotee. I am very
proud of you.”

While Nārada was returning to this universe after his
visit with the Lord, he saw a magnificent kingdom in
which there lived a king and his beautiful daughter.
Delighted, Śrī Nārada thought, “I have never before seen
such stunning beauty!” Approaching the king, he said, “I
know astrology. I want to see the hand of your daughter
so that I can tell you her future.” He then read on the
princess’s palm that the man she marries would possess
all the qualities of greatness, in full. Wondering, “How
can I marry this girl?” he left and began to meditate on
his worshipful Lord Nārāyaṇa.

Nārāyaṇa at once appeared in his meditation and
inquired, “What benediction do you wish?” Nārada prayed,
“Please help me. I want to marry the king’s daughter.
Please give me a face as beautiful as Yours.” Lord
Nārāyaṇa replied, “All auspiciousness to you. All
blessings unto you. I will do what is best for you.”

Now, convinced and satisfied that Lord Nārāyaṇa had
fulfilled his desire, Nārada returned to the king’s
palace. It so happened that the king was then in the
midst of performing his daughter’s svayaṁvara, the
ceremony in which a princess chooses her husband. The
king’s daughter was holding a garland, preparing to
place it on the neck of the man who would most attract
her, whom she would choose to marry.


                           54
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

Nārada followed the princess as she perused the various
contestants, showing his face in hope that she would
offer him the garland. However, whenever he came into
her view, she looked at him in disgust and walked on.
Still, trying to attract her attention, he continued to
pursue her.

The associates of Lord Śiva were present on that
occasion and, seeing Nārada’s repeated attempts, told
him, “Oh, you are so beautiful!” Nārada believed that he
was being praised, but he was actually being ridiculed.

In the meantime, Lord Nārāyaṇa arrived at the palace on
His bird carrier, Garuḍa, and as soon as the princess
saw Him she adorned His neck with her garland. Then,
without a moment’s delay, Lord Nārāyaṇa placed her on
His lap and they quickly flew away on Garuḍa.

Nārada deliberated, “What a wicked person! I have served
Him selflessly throughout my life. Only one time did I
request from Him a favor ñ I wished to marry this girl
and I asked Him for a countenance as attractive as His
own. I will now see what type of face He has given me!”
Then, looking in a mirror, he saw that he had the face
of a baboon.

Angry and upset, Nārada immediately flew to Vaikuṇṭha,
where he saw that very princess on Lakṣmī-devī’s seat.
“You have cheated me!” He rebuked, “I curse You that You
will weep just as I am weeping over this lady. Your wife
will be taken away from You, and to retrieve her You
will have to take the help of monkeys!”

At the next moment Lord Nārāyaṇa removed the illusion
created by His yogamāyā potency, and Nārada saw that the
girl who had enchanted him was actually Lakṣmī-devī
herself.

“I performed this operation only to remove your false
ego and pride,” Lord Nārāyaṇa explained kindly. Nārada
at once fell to the Lord’s lotus feet and apologized
profusely.

This transcendental pastime became the cause of Lord Śrī
Rāmacandra’s appearance. It manisfested to teach
conditioned souls what to do and what not to do. We
should not think that Nārada was previously in Goloka
Vṛndāvana or Vaikuṇṭha and was later covered by māyā. By
the wish of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, devotees can do anything to
fulfill His desires.

Liberation in an Instant

Question: Why does the living entity have minute
independence?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja: This is because he is a
conscious being; he is not unconscious. Independence is
the symptom of the conscious entity, who always has
independence whether he is here in bondage or liberated
in the spiritual world.

Question: Using his independence, the living entity has
a choice to go

                           55
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                         5/5/2017


from the taṭasthā region to Goloka, or from the taṭasthā
region to the material world.

Generally, one learns to differentiate between māyā and
Kṛṣṇa by associating with pure devotees. Since the jīva
does not have the association of pure devotees in the
taṭasthā region, how could he know what is māyā and what
is Kṛṣṇa? How could he know how to make the proper
choice?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja: Kṛṣṇa wants everyone to
come to Him and serve Him in the spiritual world. He
never wants anyone to be separated from Him and thus be
unhappy. He arranges whatever is favorable for the jīvas
to easily attain Him. Knowing everything and being all-
powerful, if He sees that a soul has some small but
sincere desire to serve Him, He arranges everything in
such a way that that soul can go to the spiritual world
and associate with Him there. Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī’s
book, Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta, describes how the Lord makes
elaborate arrangements for the living entity to come to
the spiritual world.

‘Revival’ of Our Relationship with Kṛṣṇa

Question: If we spirit souls have not fallen from
Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes in Goloka Vṛndāvana, why do the
scriptures say that we ‘revive’ our relationship with
Kṛṣṇa, or that we have ‘forgotten’ that relationship? If
we have never experienced it, where is the question of
‘reviving’ or ‘forgetting’ it?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja: We can understand this
by the following verse:

kṛṣṇa bhuli’ sei jīva anādi-bahirmukha



ataeva māyā tāre deya saṁsāra-duḥkha



(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 20.117)

Forgetting Kṛṣṇa, the living entity has been attracted
by the external feature from time immemorial. Therefore,
the illusory energy, māyā, gives him all kinds of misery
in his material existence.

The answer to your question has been given by the word
anādi. Anādi means ‘no ādi,’ or ‘no beginning.’ This
means that the conditioned jīva has never met Kṛṣṇa.

Question: Why is the word ‘forgotten’ used so often?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja: This word and other
words like it have been used for beginners, for those
who have no true understanding of spiritual
consciousness. Moreover, there is no other word.




                           56
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

*Info Box Start*

That You Can Remember

Devotee: --if we’ve never been with Kṛṣṇa, if we’ve
never been in Kṛṣṇa-loka, then how is it that we start
‘remembering’ His pastimes and His form?

Prabhupāda: You remember Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes by hearing
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. You can hear Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. That
you can remember.

Devotee: But how can we remember if we’ve never known
them before?

Prabhupāda: How you can remember?

Devotee: If we haven’t known it.

Prabhupāda: You can know it by hearing from Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam. Why we are citing so many scriptures, like
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and Bhagavad-gītā? Just to remember.

(Room Conversation with Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī
Mahārāja. Boston, April 27, 1969)

*Info Box End*



Someone may say, “The sun is sitting on the branches of
that tree.” This is said just to give an indication
regarding the direction in which the sun can be
perceived. If the sun were actually sitting on the
branches, the tree would turn to ashes in less than a
moment.

Similarly, verses that contain words like ‘forget’ and
‘revive’ give us a mere indication of spiritual truth.
It is certain that if one is able to see Kṛṣṇa, he will
never be prone to fall in the trap of māyā. This would
not be possible. If a true sādhaka (advanced spiritual
practitioner) does not fall in the trap of māyā, then
what to speak of a siddha, a perfect, liberated soul,
who is always immersed in tasting the nectar of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s personal service?

If a jīva is present in Goloka Vṛndāvana, how is it
possible for him to forget Kṛṣṇa? The following
Bhagavad-gītā verse describes the devotee situated in
prema-bhakti, who, in his siddha-form, is an associate
of Kṛṣṇa in the spiritual realm:

viṣayā vinivartante nirāhārasya dehinaḥ

rasa-varjaṁ raso ‘py asya paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate

(Bhagavad-gītā 2.59)

The embodied soul may be artificially restricted from
sense enjoyment by withdrawing the senses from their
objects, but his taste for sense objects remains.
However, one who experiences a higher taste is fixed in
consciousness. A devotee of the Lord automatically

                           57
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

refrains because of a superior taste.

If one sees a beautiful object but then beholds
something he considers to be more beautiful, he will be
attracted to the latter. If a person has a taste to
enjoy certain objects, but then gets a higher taste for
a superior object, his lower taste will automatically
disappear.

It is because of their higher taste that pure Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavas, who follow in the footsteps of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, do not re-quire to labor even slightly to
control their mind. Rather, they easily control it by
always engaging it in hearing hari-kathā, chanting, and
remembering Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Rasa-varjaṁ raso ‘py asya paraṁ dṛṣṭvā nivartate.
Spiritual rasa (the mellow flavor experienced in one’s
relationship with Kṛṣṇa) is more tasteful than this
worldly rasa (the taste in a mundane relationship). The
mind is made of matter and therefore always engages in
worldly rasa. However, if it experiences a more
beautiful taste, loving service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, it has no
incentive to think about this world.



*Info Box Start*

A Higher Taste

Possessing the highest divine love, mahābhāva, the
gopīs’ minds and hearts became so absorbed in Kṛṣṇa that
they could no longer be considered their own. As a piece
of cotton placed on a few drops of water immediately
absorbs the water into it, the ‘water of the gopīs’
hearts’ was immediately absorbed into the ‘Kṛṣṇa-cotton’
in such a way that it was as if their individual
existences were lost-- Singing about His virtues more
and more, the gopīs at once became tadātmika, or one in
heart, with Kṛṣṇa. They completely forgot their own
bodies, bodily rela-ions, homes, and everything else.
They were unremittingly searching for Kṛṣṇa, asking the
vines, trees, tulasī, and deer if they had seen Him--
Taking on Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s identity, they began imitating His
activities and saying to one another, ‘How beautiful is
my gait! How beautifully do I play the flute!” Fully
absorbed in Kṛṣṇa their natures had changed, just as
iron put into a fire develops the qualities of the
fire.’

(Bhakti-rasāyana, Chapter 15)

*Info Box End*



In this way, even without the pure devotee’s conscious
desire to control his mind, it is automatically
controlled by his giving it more compelling topics of
thought. The material world is somewhat beautiful, but
Śrī Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs and Goloka Vṛndāvana are far
more beautiful.


                           58
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

In this world there are so many rasas, but they are
actually like poison. While first tasting them they seem
sweet, but in time the taste becomes insipid. For
example, when a man and woman try to enjoy an intimate
relationship, their relationship seems sweet at the
beginning but invariably turns sour. A mango is very
delicious, but if one eats more mangos than he can
digest, that mango will act like poison. One may like
ghee (clarified butter), but if he takes more ghee than
he can digest, it acts like poison. We encounter this
phenomenon whenever we try to enjoy in this world. If
one can engage his mind always, in all ways, in Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, his mind will automatically be controlled and he
will never be deluded by māyā.



[“Moon on the Branch” was spoken on December 15, 2001,
in Paderborn, Germany. The subsection “‘Revival’ of our
Relationship with Kṛṣṇa” is a transcription of a darśana
given in June, 1992, in Vṛndāvana, India.]




Chapter Six - Both, Choice and Chance


The following chapter is an excerpt from two morning
walk conversations. In all the other chapters, the
indented quotes are part of the discourses and
discussions. However, the nature of morning walks is
that the topics are diverse and quickly travel from one
theme to another. We have therefore added relevant
indented quotes in order to assist with the flow and
clarity of the presentation.

A Chance to Choose

Question: When the jīvas first come into this world from
Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu’s glance, they receive either a
human body or a non-human body. In the human species,
the jīva performs materialistic activities and
consequently suffers or enjoys the fruits of his work.

Humans perform karmic (fruitive) activities, but other
species do not. Other species only suffer the results of
the karmic actions which they performed when they were
previously humans.

Does this mean that all jīvas first come into this world
from the taṭasthā region as human beings, and then, due
to their karma, they enter into other species?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja: No, this is not the
process. The species in which the jīva takes birth
depends on Kṛṣṇa. The jīva gets a body according to the
degree of his desire to enjoy this world. If he has a
strong desire to enjoy independently from Kṛṣṇa, he
takes birth in the animal species. If his desire to be
independent is moderate, he takes a human birth. So, the
jīva’s appearance in different species depends on the
will of Kṛṣṇa, and also according to the degree of his

                           59
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

desire to enjoy separately from Kṛṣṇa.

Question: The jīva has no karma when he first decides to
come to this world?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja: He has no karma at that
time, but he has independence in the sense of free will.

Kṛṣṇa’s qualities are also present in the jīvas, but
only in a minute quantity. Kṛṣṇa is supremely
independent, so the desire to be independent is
eternally present in the jīvas as well. When the jīva
uses his independence correctly, he remains disposed
towards Kṛṣṇa, but when he misuses it, he becomes
indifferent to Him. It is just this indifference that
gives rise to the desire in the jīva’s heart to enjoy
māyā.

(Jaiva-dharma, Chapter 15)

It is not that all independence is the same; there is
gradation. Some jīvas desire a little independence, or a
small sense of autonomy, while others desire total
independence.

Question: In your class yesterday, you described how the
living entities in the taṭasthā-śakti region fall to
this material world. You gave the analogy of mustard
seeds landing on the sharp blade of a knife and then
falling on one side of the knife or the other. You said
that, like those mustard seeds, the jīva can go either
to the material world or the spiritual world. I am
trying to understand if this happens because of our
minute independence, or by chance, that we come here.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja: Independence was first,
and chance is second. Without independence, how can the
jīva look toward either yogamāyā or mahāmāyā?

Question: So it is a choice, Gurudeva? The jīva is
responsible?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja: Yes; the jīva has
independence, and Kṛṣṇa never interferes with that. Here
is an analogy to help explain this principle. In the
government, there is a magistrate for each district. If
a person does something for the benefit of the public he
will be rewarded by that magistrate, and if he commits a
crime he will be punished.

There are some people who know that if they commit a
crime they will be punished or even put to death; yet
they commit the crime. There are numerous culprits who
go to jail, and when they are released they commit the
crime again because they like to be in jail. Some jīvas
are like that; even though they suffer repeatedly in
this material world, they are ignorantly attached to
remaining here.

Question: In Jaiva-dharma it is said that when Kṛṣṇa
situates Himself in the taṭasthā-śakti, He manifests the
jīva. What does this mean?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja: At this time, Kṛṣṇa is

                             60
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

only with His taṭasthā-śakti. He has somehow hidden His
cit-śakti (transcendental potency), hlādinī-śakti
(spiritual pleasure potency), and all other potencies.
When all other potencies are hidden, then the jīva
manifests.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa establishes Himself in each of His śaktis, and
manifests His svarūpa according to the nature of that
śakti. When He is situated in the cit-svarūpa, He
manifests His essential svarūpa, both as Śrī Kṛṣṇa
Himself, and also as Nārāyaṇa, the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha.
When He is situated in the jīva-śakti, He manifests His
svarūpa as His vilāsa-mūrti (pastime expansion) of
Vraja, Baladeva. When He situates Himself in the māyā-
śakti, He manifests the three Viṣṇu forms:
Kāraṇodakaśāyī, Garbhodakaśāyī and Kṣīrodakaśāyī.

In His Kṛṣṇa form, He manifests all the spiritual
affairs to the superlative degree. In His Baladeva
svarūpa as śeṣa-tattva, He manifests nitya-mukta-
pārṣada-jīvas (eternally liberated associates) who
render eight types of service to Kṛṣṇa Himself, the
origin of śeṣa-tattva. Again, as śeṣa-rūpa Saṅkarṣaṇa in
Vaikuṇṭha, He manifests eight types of servants to
render eight kinds of services as eternally liberated
associates of Nārāyaṇa. Mahā-Viṣṇu, who is an expansion
of Saṅkarṣaṇa, situates Himself in the heart of the
jīva-śakti, and as Paramātmā, manifests the jīvas in the
material world.

These jīvas are susceptible to the influence of māyā,
and unless they attain the shelter of the hlādinī-śakti
by Bhagavān’s mercy, it is possible that they will be
defeated by māyā. The countless conditioned jīvas who
have been illusioned by māyā are under the control of
the three modes of material nature. Bearing all this in
mind, the siddhānta is that it is only the jīva-śakti,
and not the cit-śakti, that manifests the jīvas.

(Jaiva-dharma, Chapter 15)

The head of taṭasthā-śakti is Baladeva Prabhu.
Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, who manifests the innumerable
jīvas in the region between the material and spiritual
worlds, is an expansion of Mahā-Saṅkarṣaṇa in Vaikuṇṭha,
and Mahā-Saṅkarṣaṇa is an expansion of Baladeva.

So, your question was, “What is the meaning of the
statement, ‘When Kṛṣṇa situates Himself in the taṭasthā-
śakti, He manifests the jīva?’ The answer is that Kṛṣṇa
manifests His form as Baladeva, and Baladeva manifests
the jīva.

Question: Are the jīvas who manifest from Kāraṇodakaśāyī
Viṣṇu significantly different from those who directly
manifest from Mahā-Saṅkarṣaṇa in Vaikuṇṭha or Baladeva
in Vraja?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja: Their qualities are the
same, except that those who emanate from Baladeva and
Mahā-Saṅkarṣaṇa in the spiritual world have the eternal
shelter of cit-śakti.

There are also innumerable atomic conscious jīvas who

                             61
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

emanate as rays in Kāraṇodakaśāyī Māhā-Viṣṇu’s glance
upon His māyā-śakti. Since these jīvas are situated next
to māyā, they perceive her wonderful workings. Although
they have all the qualities of the jīvas I have already
described, because of their minute and marginal nature,
they sometimes look to the spiritual world and sometimes
to the material world.

(Jaiva-dharma, Chapter 16)

A Chance at the Imaginary Line

Question: If the jīva is conscious and transcendental
(cit), how is it that he manifests via the taṭasthā-
śakti and not the cit-śakti, since the taṭasthā-śakti is
inferior to the cit-śakti?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja: The jīva is actually
cit-śakti. The philosophy of taṭasthā-śakti has been
given only as an indication. In actuality there is no
specific geographic area between the spiritual and
material worlds called taṭasthā. Taṭasthā as a line
between the two worlds is imaginary. There is certainly
jīva-śakti and taṭasthā-śakti, but the concept of
taṭasthā as a geographical place is provisional.
Taṭasthā-śakti is ultimately also cit-śakti, in the
sense that the jīva is conscious (cit), not inert
(acit).

The taṭa-rekha, the marginal line lying between the
water of a river and its bank, is both water and land,
being situated where the two meet. Since the divine
taṭasthā-śakti is situated at the margin of matter and
spirit, it displays the characteristics of both matter
and spirit. It is one principle, yet it displays two
natures.

The jīva is a spiritual spark, a product of the higher
spiritual nature, yet being the divine taṭasthā-śakti,
he has a nature that enables him to relate to the
mundane material energy and be always prone to coming
under her influence. Thus, on one hand, the jīva cannot
be wholly likened to the pure spiritual nature, which is
transcendental to and entirely beyond the influence of
the material nature. Nevertheless, he cannot be
categorized as material since, by his intrinsic
constitution, he is spiritual.

(Jaiva-dharma, Chapter 1)

The Right Choice Was Enough

Question: In regards to those jīvas who look towards
Kṛṣṇa and the spiritual world from the taṭasthā-śakti,
from where does their eligibility come to make such a
choice? One’s choices in one’s present life are
generally made according to one’s sukṛti (past and
present spiritual pious activities) and saṁskāras
(impressions on the heart, coming from past pious or
impious acts.)

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja: At that time there are
neither sukṛtis nor saṁskāras (impressions on the heart,
or reformatory procedures).

                              62
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017


Question: Nothing?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja: Nothing, nothing. The
very act of their looking toward the Vaikuṇṭha planets
is their sādhana (spiritual practices), sukṛti, and
saṁskāra. There is no other sukṛti or saṁskāra required.
Those jīvas used their independence properly, and that
is sufficient.

Whatever we say or describe in the material world is
under the jurisdiction of material time and space. When
we say, “The jīvas were created,” or “The spiritual
world was manifested,” or “There is no influence of māyā
in creating the form of the jīvas,” material time is
bound to influence our language and statements. This is
inevitable in our conditioned state, so we cannot remove
the influence of material time from our descriptions of
the atomic jīva and spiritual objects. The conception of
past, present, and future always enters them in some way
or another.

Still, those who can discriminate properly can
understand the application of the eternal present when
they comprehend the purport of the descriptions of the
spiritual world. Be very careful in this matter. Give up
the inevitable baseness, the aspect of the description
that is fit to be rejected, and attain spiritual
realization.

I advise you not to inquire about this philosophical
subject from anyone, but to realize it yourself. I have
just given you an indication or semblance.

(Jaiva-dharma, Chapter 15)

The Potency of the Lord’s Potency

Question: Śrīla Gurudeva, in your class yesterday you
said that our sampradāya (line of disciplic succession),
the disciplic line of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, has a
speciality that is not present in the other Vaiṣṇava
sampradāyas.

The teaching in the other Vaiṣṇava sampradāyas is that
the jīva is actually part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa’s body.
But in our sampradāya, the teaching is that the jīva is
coming from Kṛṣṇa’s spiritual potency (śakti), not
directly from Kṛṣṇa’s body. I thought that all four
Vaiṣṇava sampradāyas accepted the fact that the Supreme
Lord has potencies, and that the jīva is one of His
potencies.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja: Proponents of the other
sampradāyas know that the jīva is one of the Lord’s
potencies, and they have written this; but their
understanding is that the marginal potency, the living
entity, is directly coming from Kṛṣṇa’s body. They do
not accept that the jīva is a manifestation of Kṛṣṇa’s
potency called jīva-śakti, which in turn is a partial
manifestation of the spiritual potency called cit-śakti.

They have not accepted the philosophy of śakti-pariṇāma-
vāda, which is the understanding that all manifestations

                             63
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

are transformations of the Supreme Lord’s potencies.
Only Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and His sampradāya have
accepted this philosophy.

Śrīla Madhvācārya accepted the theory of vastu-pariṇāma-
vāda. He wrote that the jīva and this material world are
compared to two separate adjectives qualifying a noun,
the noun in this analogy being brahma (meaning, the
Absolute Truth). He wrote that the material world is the
external body of brahma and the jīva is brahma’s subtle
body, as the mind, intelligence, and false ego comprise
our subtle body. Madhvācārya gave this analogy to create
the understanding that Reality is one, but with
specialities. It is clear that although he accepts the
philosophy that Kṛṣṇa and Viṣṇu have śakti, he has not
accepted śakti-pariṇāma-vāda. In other words, he
accepted the false idea that Kṛṣṇa Himself is
transformed, whereas it is actually His divine potency
that is transformed.

The philosophies of Śrī Viṣṇusvāmī, Śrī Nimbāditya
(Nimbārka), and Rāmānujācārya are similar to that of Śrī
Madhvācārya, in the sense that they have also accepted
the philosophy of vastu-pariṇāma-vāda. According to
their philosophy, Kṛṣṇa’s own form is transformed. Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu did not approve of this philosophy.
He preached śakti-pariṇāma-vāda.

A Chance for the Lord’s Sweet Pastimes

Question: In Jaiva-dharma, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
says that the jīva’s going through material existence is
Kṛṣṇa’s pastime. I don’t understand this. Even though
suffering takes place in the mind, nevertheless, the
jīva is suffering. It seems that this is very cruel of
Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja: If you read Jaiva-
dharma thoroughly, you will see that this is one of
Kṛṣṇa’s sweet pastimes.

Question: But the jīva does not think, “This is a sweet
pastime.” He thinks, “This is suffering.” Moreover, this
suffering is not by his choice. You said yesterday that
the jīva’s misuse of independence is compared to mustard
seeds falling on the blade of a knife and then falling
on one side of the blade or the other. It seems like
chance, not choice, that the jīva is suffering here in
this material world. How can we reconcile this? How is
‘chance’ Kṛṣṇa’s pastime?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja: Kṛṣṇa has given
independence to all jīvas, and He does not want to take
that away. The jīva looks here and there; because he has
eyes, he must look somewhere. If it happens that he
looks towards the transcendental world he is attracted
to yogamāyā, and if he looks toward mahāmāyā he is
attracted to this world.

Question: This cannot be the jīva’s conscious choice,
because he does not have experience of Kṛṣṇa and the
spiritual world.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja: He has no experience,

                           64
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

but Kṛṣṇa has given him independence, and by that
independence he looks where he wants to go.

Vrajanātha: Lord Kṛṣṇa is overflowing with mercy, so why
did He make the jīva so weak that he became entangled in
māyā?”

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābāji: It is true that He is
overflowing with mercy, but He is also overflowing with
desire to perform pastimes. Desiring various pastimes to
be enacted in different situations, Śrī Kṛṣṇa made the
jīvas eligible for all conditions, from the marginal
state to the highest state of the gopīs’ love for Kṛṣṇa
called mahābhāva. To facilitate the jīvas’ progress
practically and steadfastly towards becoming qualified
for His service, He has also created the lower levels of
material existence ñ beginning from the lowest inert
matter up to false ego ñ which is the cause of unlimited
obstruction in attaining supreme bliss.

Having fallen from their constitutional position, the
jīvas who are entangled in māyā are indifferent to Kṛṣṇa
and engrossed in personal sense gratification. However,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the reservoir of mercy. The more the jīva
becomes fallen, the more Kṛṣṇa provides him with
opportunities to attain the highest spiritual
perfection. He brings this about by appearing before him
along with His spiritual abode and eternal associates.
Those jīvas who take advantage of this merciful
opportunity and sincerely endeavor to attain the higher
position gradually reach the spiritual world and attain
a state similar to that of Śrī Hari’s eternal
associates.”

Vrajanātha: Why must the jīvas suffer for the sake of
the Lord’s pastimes?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābāji: The jīvas possess some
independence. This is actually a sign of God’s special
mercy upon them. Inert objects are very insignificant
and worthless because they have no such independent
desire. The jīva has attained sovereignty of the inert
world only because of this independent desire.

Misery and happiness are conditions of the mind. Thus,
what we may consider misery is happiness for one
engrossed in it. Since all varieties of material sense
gratification finally result in nothing but misery, a
materialistic person only achieves suffering. When that
suffering becomes excessive, it gives rise to a search
for happiness. From that desire discrimination arises,
and from discrimination, the tendency for inquiry is
born. As a result of this, one attains the association
of saintly devotees, whereupon śraddhā (faith in serving
Kṛṣṇa) develops. When śraddhā is born, the jīva ascends
to a higher stage, namely the path of devotional service
to the Lord.

Gold is purified by heating and hammering. Being
indifferent to Kṛṣṇa, the jīva has become impure through
engaging in mundane sense gratification. Therefore, he
must be purified by being beaten with the hammers of
misery on the anvil of this material world. By this
process, the misery of the jīvas averse to Kṛṣṇa finally

                           65
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

culminates in happiness. Suffering is therefore just a
sign of God’s mercy. That is why far-sighted people see
the suffering of jīvas in Lord Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes as
auspicious, though the near-sighted can only see it as
an inauspicious source of misery.

(Jaiva Dharma, Chapter 16)

Try to read Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s Jaiva-dharma
thoroughly, and strive to follow its teachings. You must
know that you cannot reconcile these philosophical
principles by material intelligence. Perform bhajana and
aspire to increase your advancement in devotional
service. Then, when you become advanced, all your doubts
and questions will automatically be answered.

No Control over Freedom

Question: When we go on our morning walk, we see
billions of blades of grass. What kind of karma makes
one fall from a human birth all the way down to the
birth of a blade of grass?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja: It happens by free
will. I have already given the analogy of a very small
mustard seed. If that seed is thrown on the edge of a
sword’s blade, it will immediately fall on one side or
the other. It will not remain on the blade’s edge. Even
without suffering or enjoying the fruit of karma, it
will go to one side or the other.

Similarly, even if the soul is not subjected to the pain
or pleasure resulting from one’s past activities,
because his nature is to be taṭasthā (marginal), he must
always choose one path or the other. He cannot remain in
the taṭasthā realm.

Question: But where is the free will? It seems like
there is no free will. The jīvas are falling here or
there without choice.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja: Kṛṣṇa has given them
independence, free will, both in the realm of taṭasthā-
śakti and as conditioned souls. That independence must
always be with them. Even when they become liberated,
that taṭasthā-bhāva, the mood of free will to choose,
will be present within them.

Question: But when he hits that demarcation ñ that sharp
edge of the blade ñ going this way or that way--

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja: As I mentioned earlier,
material analogies are not perfect in all respects. The
mustard seed is not conscious, whereas in all situations
the jīva has his natural, intrinsic marginal nature.
Kṛṣṇa never interferes with his freedom. Wherever he
wants to go, he can go.

Question: The human form is a platform on which one
performs karma. How does one fall from human life all
the way down to being a blade of grass?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja: Freedom has so many
possibilities. Someone may think, “I want to be a blade

                             66
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                          5/5/2017

of grass.”   You cannot control a person’s freedom. One
may think,   “I will be a mountain,” or “I will be river,”
or “I will   be a human,” or “I will be a tiger.” There is
no control   over the freedom of another living being.

Question: Who would want to be a blade of grass?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja: Uddhava wanted to be a
blade of grass in Vṛndāvana. Why would he not want to be
a blade of grass? In that way Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs would
walk by him and he would be bathed by the dust of their
lotus feet.

Question: At the time of the jīva’s choosing which way
to turn, he may look left and right. What does he see
exactly?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja: He sees that in this
world all are enjoying sense gratification. Moreover,
since the jīva is independent in all stages of his
existence, he may enthusiastically take to the process
of Kṛṣṇa consciousness and then later on change his
mind. Later on he may think, “Oh, sense gratification is
very, very good. It is more rewarding than Kṛṣṇa’s
service. There is nothing of value in Kṛṣṇa’s service.”

Question: Sometimes it is said that the jīva falls to
this world by chance, and sometimes it is said that his
fall is his own fault. Which is correct?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvami Mahārāja: Try to understand that
both are the same.

[Except for the section called “No Control Over
Freedom,” this chapter is a collection of excerpts from
a conversation with Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja
during his morning walk in Badger, California, on June
14, 2008. “No Control Over Freedom” was spoken on a
morning walk in Venice, Italy, on June 9, 2009.]




Chapter Seven

Inconceivable Jīva-tattva




Question: There is a verse in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta
which says that the jīva in this world is eternally
conditioned. The words nitya-saṁsāra means ‘eternally
conditioned.’

‘nitya-baddha’ ñ kṛṣṇa haite nitya-bahirmukha

‘nitya-saṁsāra’, bhuñje narakādi duḥkha

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā, 22.13)

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja: The jīva is not
eternally conditioned. In this particular verse, nitya

                             67
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

does not mean ‘eternal.’ Nitya also means ‘perpetually,’
‘constantly’ or ‘regularly.’[xxii]1 In this connection
it means anādi, or ‘beginningless,’ meaning that the
jīva has been conditioned since time immemorial.[xxiii]2
If it meant ‘eternal’ in the true sense, we would have
no scope to get out of māyā. A careful translation of
the verse reveals this truth.

Question: The anādi-baddha-jīva, the living entity who
has been conditioned since time immemorial, never had
any direct relationship with Kṛṣṇa?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja: Everything about the
jīva’s relationship with Kṛṣṇa is present in his
svarūpa, but he has never experienced that relationship.
It cannot be said that in a seed there is no tree, no
fruit, no branches, and no leaves. Everything is latent
within a seed, but we cannot see it. This is also true
of the jīva.

The mukta-mahāpuruṣa, or liberated, self-realized soul,
sees that every soul in this world is serving Kṛṣṇa. But
we see that we are con-ditioned souls; our vision does
not encompass spiritual reality.

No mundane words can describe the form of the soul,
because it is beyond our comprehension. Māyā is not
present in the ātmā, and to help us understand this I
will give the analogy of the sun and the clouds. The sun
is compared here with the spirit soul, and māyā is
compared with the clouds. Although there are clouds
outside the sun, there are no clouds in the sun itself.
Those on the ground see the clouds, but those who are
above the clouds always see the sun; they do not see
clouds. Similarly, although we conditioned souls cannot
see the soul serving Kṛṣṇa, self-realized souls like Śrī
Nārada Ṛṣi can see that we are always serving even
though we are conditioned.

What I am explaining to you now is only for you at this
stage of your spiritual life. Strive to perform
harināma, the chanting of the pure holy names of Kṛṣṇa,
and beg for mercy so that you will come out of māyā and
realize all these truths. Without the chanting of the
holy names, the experience of transcendence is not
possible.

A devotee who has come to the stage of nirdhūta-kaṣāya
(the advanced stage of bhāva-bhakti, in which all
impurities are gone from one’s heart but one still has a
material body) or bhagavat-pārṣada-deha-prāpta (the
stage in which one has the spiritual body of an eternal
associate of the Lord)[xxiv]3 realizes that there is
actually no māyā. On the other hand, for a conditioned
soul there is no realization of liberation. Kṛṣṇa’s
associates can realize the transcendental reality,
whereas conditioned souls can only imagine it.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura writes in Jaiva-dharma that
devotees who perform harināma and beg mercy from Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu may realize
transcendence (cit-vastu). Kṛṣṇa is the complete cit-
vastu, or Complete Transcendental Entity, whereas the
jīva is the infinitesimal cit-vastu, or minute spirit

                           68
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

spark.

In śāstra, numerous siddhāntas, philosophical
conclusions, have been explained for certain devotees at
certain stages of their spiritual life. It is not that
all siddhānta is for all persons at all stages of their
development in devotion. There is siddhānta for kaniṣṭha
Vaiṣṇavas (neophytes in bhakti), madhyama Vaiṣṇavas
(those devotees in the intermediate stage), and uttama
Vaiṣṇavas (those devotees who have crossed over māyā).
In the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, many categories of siddhānta
are given for various classes of persons.

Chant, “Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare,
Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.” Try to do
bhajana and realize all these transcendental truths.
Mundane logic and reasoning will never truly answer the
questions about the individual soul and his relationship
with the Supreme Soul.

Question: Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī says that one acquires
bhakti by association or by mercy. Can you explain this
further?

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja: The attainment of
bhakti is dependent on whom we associate with. It
depends on whether we associate with a kaniṣṭha
Vaiṣṇava, a madhyama Vaiṣṇava, or an uttama Vaiṣṇava .

A madhyama Vaiṣṇava can only give siddhānta. He cannot
speak from an experience of spiritual realization. If we
want realization, it is necessary to hear and associate
with realized souls, namely the three kinds of uttama
Vaiṣṇavas. The association of a madhyama Vaiṣṇava can
take us to the entrance of regulated devotional practice
(sādhana-bhakti), and by his mercy he can lead us to a
realized soul, an uttama Vaiṣṇava.



[“Inconceivable Jīva-tattva” is an excerpt of a
conversation between Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja and
a group of ISKCON GBC sannyāsīs and other senior ISKCON
members. This conversation took place on March 29,
1993.]

Part Two - Jaiva-Dharma



Introduction to Jaiva-Dharma

I am very happy and satisfied that Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura's Jaiva-dharma has been published and printed in
English. It is a very authentic book for understanding
fundamental philosophical truths, the process to attain
the perfection of kṛṣṇa-prema, and finally the
attainment of kṛṣṇa-prema itself.

When I first published it in Hindi, I thought that it
must also be translated into English for the benefit of
the entire world, for it would bring about a spiritual
revolution. Now that it is published and will be
distributed throughout the world, that revolution of new

                           69
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

thought will surely manifest and the erroneous
impressions about jīva-tattva, bhakti-tattva, and all
other important philosophical truths will be clarified.
Those who read this book under the guidance of a
qualified Vaiṣṇava will capture its glories.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura adopted the same process in
his Jaiva-dharma that had been adopted by Śrīla
Vyāsadeva in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam; that is, he presented
tattva in such an interesting and enlivening way that
the book appears like a novel.

But it is not a novel; it is factual history. Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura saw the series of historic divine
events in his samādhi (mystic trance), and then he
systematically wrote it down. He was able to do this
because, besides realizing these events, he also
realized all of the written docu-ments of Śrīla Rupa
Gosvami, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī, Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvami, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, Śrīla Visvanatha Cakravarti
Ṭhākura, the teachings of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and the
teachings of all the ācāryas in His line.

If one wants to enter the spiritual realm, he must read
Jaiva-dharma thoroughly, under the guidance of an
exalted realized Vaiṣṇava, not only one time but one
hundred times.

[A glorification of Jaiva-dharma by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja, spoken in September, 2001, in
Mathura, India.]




Chapter Fifteen - Jīva Tattva


The following three chapters from Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura’s Jaiva-Dharma contain all the beautiful
conclusive truths about the soul ñ the transcendental
particle of spirit, who is simultaneously within the
body and beyond it. Herein you will be fortunate to meet
the ideal guru, Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī, and his
ideal disciple, Vrajanātha, in the ideal and divine
setting of Śrī Dhāma Māyāpura.



The next day, Vrajanātha reached the courtyard of
Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita’s house earlier than on previous days.
The Vaiṣṇavas from Godruma had also come before evening
to see the Deities’ sandhyā-āratī ceremony. Śrī
Premadāsa Paramahaṁsa Bābājī, Vaiṣṇava dāsa, Advaita
dāsa, and other Vaiṣṇavas were already seated on the
small platform in front of the Deities, where the
devotees observe the ceremony.

When Vrajanātha saw the transcendental moods of the
Vaiṣṇavas from Godruma, he was struck with wonder and
thought, “I will perfect my life by having their
association as soon as possible.” At the same time, when
those Vaiṣṇavas saw Vrajanātha’s humble and devotional

                           70
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                           5/5/2017

disposition, all of them bestowed their blessings on
him.

When the āratī ceremony was over, Vrajanātha and the
elderly Bābājī began to walk southwards together, in the
direction of Godruma. Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī saw that
tears were continuously falling from Vrajanātha’s eyes
and, feeling very affectionate towards him, asked
lovingly, “Why are you weeping?”

Vrajanātha said, “Master, when I remember your sweet
instructions, my heart becomes restless and the whole
world seems to be empty. My heart is eager to take
shelter at Śrī Gaurāṅgadeva’s [Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s] lotus feet. Being merciful, please tell me
of my true identity and why I have come to this world.”

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: My dear son, you have
blessed me by asking such a question. On the auspicious
day that the jīva asks this question, certainly good
fortune arises in his life. Kindly hear the fifth verse
of Daśa-mūla, and all your doubts will vanish.

sphuliṅgāḥ ṛddhāgner iva cid-aṇavo jīvā-nicayāḥ

hareḥ sūryasyaivāpṛthag api tu tad-bheda-viṣayāḥ

vaśe māyā yasya prakṛti-patir eveśvara iha

sa jīvo mukto ‘pi prakṛti-vaśā-yogyaḥ sva-guṇataḥ

Just as sparks burst out from a blazing fire, so the
innumerable jīvas are like spiritual particles in the
rays of the spiritual sun, Śrī Hari. Though non-
different from Him, they are simultaneously eternally
different. The eternal difference between the jīva and
God is that God is the lord and master of His illusory
potency, whereas the jīva has the potential to fall
under her control, even in his liberated stage, due to
his constitutional nature.

Vrajanātha: This philosophical conclusion which you have
presented is certainly unique and unparalleled, yet I
would like to hear some Vedic evidence in relation to
it. Lord Caitanya’s statements are certainly Veda (Vedic
knowledge); still, people will be bound to accept His
teachings if the Upaniṣads can substantiate them.

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: This truth is described in
many places in the Vedas. I will cite a few references:

yathāgneḥ kṣudrā visphuliṅgā vyuccaranti

evam evāsmad ātmanaḥ sarvāṇi bhūtāni vyuccaranti

Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad (2.1.20)

Innumerable jīvas emanate from the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, just like tiny sparks from a fire.

tasya vā etasya puruṣasya dve eva sthāne / bhavata idañ
ca paraloka-sthānañ ca / sandhyaṁ tṛtīyaṁ svapna-sthānaṁ
/ tasmin sandhye sthāne tiṣṭhann ete ubhe / sthāne
paśyatīdañ ca paraloka-sthānañ ca

                           71
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017


Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad (4.3.9)

The jīva has the possibility of two residences ñ the
material realm and the spiritual realm ñ both of which
he may seek. He is situated in a third position, which
is a dreamlike condition (svapna-sthāna) and is the
juncture (taṭasthā) between the other two. From that
middle position he is able to see both the material and
the spiritual worlds.

This verse describes the marginal nature of jīva-śakti.
Again, it is said in Bṛhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad (4.3.18):

tad yathā mahā-matsya ubhe kule ‘nusañcarati / pūrvañ
cāparañ caivam evāyaṁ puruṣa etāv ubhāv antāv / anu
sañcarati svapnāntañ ca buddhāṅtañ ca

The symptoms of the marginal existence are like those of
a huge aquatic who is capable of living on both the
eastern and western sides of the river at his own will.
The jīva soul, situated within the waters of the Causal
Ocean, which lies between the material and spiritual
worlds, is able to reside in both the dream world of
matter and the spiritual world of divine wakefulness.

Vrajanātha: What is the Vedic understanding of the word
taṭasthā?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: The borderline between the
ocean and the land is called the shore (taṭa); but the
place that touches the ocean is actually nothing but
land, so where is the shore? The taṭa is the line of
demarcation separating the ocean and the land, and it is
so fine that it cannot be seen with the gross eyes. If
we compare the transcendental realm to the ocean and the
material world to the land, then taṭa is the subtle line
that divides the two. The jīva-śakti is situated at that
place.

The countless atomic particles that float in the rays of
the sun give an inkling of the real position of the
jīva. Situated in the middle place, they see the
spiritual world on one side and the material universe
created by māyā (the Lord’s deluding material potency)
on the other. The Lord’s spiritual potency on one side
is unlimited, and the material potency on the other side
is enormous. In between them are situated the
innumerable extremely minute jīvas. The jīvas arise from
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s marginal potency; hence their nature is also
marginal.

Vrajanātha: What is the marginal nature?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: It is the nature that
enables the jīva to be situated between both worlds, and
to see both. It is the jīva’s tendency to become
subordinate to the control of either of the potencies.
Sometimes the shore is submerged in the river because of
erosion, and then again it becomes one with the land
because the river changes its course. In a similar way,
if the jīva looks towards Kṛṣṇa ñ that is, towards the
spiritual world ñ he is influenced by Kṛṣṇa’s internal
energy. He then enters the spiritual world and serves

                           72
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

Śrī Kṛṣṇa in his pure, fully conscious spiritual form.
However, if he looks towards māyā, he becomes opposed to
Kṛṣṇa and is bound by the net of māyā. This dual-faceted
nature is called the marginal nature.

Vrajanātha: Is there any illusory material component
(māyā-śakti) in the jīva’s original constitution?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: No, the jīva is created
solely from the cit-śakti (transcendental or spiritual
potency). He can be defeated, or covered, by māyā,
because he is minute by nature and lacks spiritual
power. However, there is not even a scent of māyā in his
existence.

Vrajanātha: I have heard from my teacher that when a
fraction of brahma, the all-pervasive spiritual Absolute
Truth, is covered by māyā, it becomes the jīva. He
explained the sky to be always indivisible, but when a
part of it is enclosed in a pot, it becomes like a pot
of sky. Similarly, the jīva is constitutionally nothing
but brahma, but when that brahma is covered by māyā, the
false ego of being a jīva develops. Is this conception
correct?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: This doctrine is simply
Māyāvāda. How can māyā touch transcendental brahma? The
Māyāvādīs propose that brahma has no potency. If potency
is supposed to be non-existent, how can māyā ñ which is
potency ñ possibly approach brahma?

Conversely, if we accept the transcendental potency
(cit-śakti) of brahma, how can the material potency,
māyā-śakti, who is insignificant, defeat that
transcendental potency and create the jīva from brahma?
Moreover, how can māyā be assertive when she has no
independent potency and will? Brahma can never be
deluded by māyā’s shroud of illusion. Furthermore,
brahma is indivisible, so how can such a brahma be
fragmented? The idea that māyā can act upon brahma is
not acceptable.

Māyā plays no role in the creation of the jīvas.
Admittedly the jīva is atomic, but even so, the jīva is
still a reality superior to māyā.

Vrajanātha: Once, another teacher said that the jīva is
nothing but a reflection of brahma. The sun is reflected
in water, and similarly, brahma is seen as jīva when it
is reflected in māyā. What do you think of this
conception?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: Again, this is simply an
example of Māyāvāda philosophy. Brahma has no limit, and
a limitless entity can never be reflected. The idea of
limiting brahma is opposed to the conclusions of the
Vedas, so this illogical theory of reflection should be
utterly rejected.

Vrajanātha: A scholar of debate once told me that in
reality there is no substance known as jīva. One only
thinks himself a jīva because of illusion, and when the
illusion is removed, there is only one indivisible
brahma. Is there any truth to this concept?

                           73
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017


Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: This is also a Māyāvāda
doctrine, which has no foundation at all. According to
scripture, “ekam evādvitīyam ñ there is nothing apart
from brahma.” If this is so, whence has illusion come,
and who is supposed to be in illusion? If you say that
brahma is under illusion, in effect you are saying
brahma is not actually brahma, which means great, but
rather is insignificant. Furthermore, if you propose
that illusion is a separate and independent entity, you
negate the non-dual nature of brahma.

Vrajanātha: Once an influential scholar arrived in
Navadvīpa, and in a conference of scholars he tried to
establish that only the jīva exists. His theory was that
the jīva creates everything in his dreams, and it is
because of this that he enjoys happiness and suffers
distress. Then, when the dream breaks, he sees that he
is nothing but brahma. To what extent is this idea
correct?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: This is, again, Māyāvāda.
If, as they say, brahma is undifferentiated, how can it
possibly produce the jīva and his dreaming state?
Māyāvādīs use examples such as the illusion of seeing
mother-of-pearl (the shining inner surface of a pearl
oyster shell) as gold, and the illusion of taking a rope
to be a snake. Through such arguments, their philosophy
cannot provide a consistent basis for non-dual oneness.
All these arguments are traps of illusion.

Vrajanātha: So māyā has nothing whatsoever to do with
creating the constitutional form of the jīvas ñ this has
to be accepted. At the same time, I have also clearly
understood that the jīva is by nature subject to the
influence of māyā. Now I would like to know, did the
cit-śakti directly create the jīvas with their marginal
nature?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: No, the cit-śakti is the
complete potency of Kṛṣṇa, and its manifestations are
all eternally perfect beings (nitya-siddha). The jīva
coming from the the taṭasthā region is not nitya-siddha,
although when he performs regulated devotional services
(sādhana), he can become perfect by the performance of
such services (sādhana-siddha) and enjoy transcendental
happiness like the nitya-siddhas. Śrīmatī Rādhikā has
four types of sakhīs who are nitya-siddha, and they are
direct expansions (kāya-vyūha) of the personified cit-
śakti, Śrīmatī Rādhikā Herself.

All jīvas have manifested from Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s jīva-śakti.
The cit-śakti is His complete potency, whereas the jīva-
śakti is His incomplete potency. The complete entities
are all transformations of the complete potency, and the
innumerable atomic, conscious jīvas are transformations
of the incomplete potency.

Kṛṣṇa establishes Himself in each of His śaktis, and
manifests His svarūpa according to the nature of that
śakti. When He is situated in the cit-svarūpa, He
manifests His essential svarūpa, both as Śrī Kṛṣṇa
Himself, and also as Nārāyaṇa, the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha;
when He is situated in the jīva-śakti, He manifests His

                           74
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

svarūpa as His vilāsa-mūrti (pastime expansion) of
Vraja, Baladeva; and when He situates Himself in the
māyā-śakti, He manifests the three Viṣṇu forms:
Kāraṇodakaśāyī, Garbhodakaśāyī and Kṣīrodakaśāyī.

In His Kṛṣṇa form, He manifests all the spiritual
affairs to the superlative degree. In His Baladeva
svarūpa as śeṣa-tattva, He manifests nitya-mukta-
pārṣada-jīvas (eternally liberated associates) who
render eight types of service to Kṛṣṇa Himself, the
origin of śeṣa-tattva. Again, as Saṅkarṣaṇa in
Vaikuṇṭha, He manifests eight types of servants to
render eight kinds of services as eternally liberated
associates of Nārāyaṇa. Mahā-Viṣṇu, who is an expansion
of Saṅkarṣaṇa, situates Himself in the heart of the
jīva-śakti, and as Paramātmā, manifests the jīvas in the
material world.

These jīvas are susceptible to the influence of māyā,
and unless they attain the shelter of the hlādinī-śakti
by Bhagavān’s mercy, it is possible that they will be
defeated by māyā. The countless conditioned jīvas who
have been illusioned by māyā are under the control of
the three modes of material nature.

Vrajanātha: You said earlier that the spiritual world is
eternal, and so are the jīvas. If this is true, how can
eternal entities possibly be created, manifested, or
produced? If they are created at some point in time,
they must have been non-existent before that; so how can
we accept their eternality?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: The time and space
experienced in this material world are completely
different from that of the spiritual world. Material
time is divided into three aspects, namely past, present
and future, whereas in the spiritual world there is only
one undivided, eternally present time. Every event of
the spiritual world is eternally present.

Whatever we say or describe in the material world is
under the jurisdiction of material time and space. When
we say, “The jīvas were created,” “The spiritual world
was manifested,” or “There is no influence of māyā in
creating the form of the jīvas,” material time is bound
to influence our language and statements. This is
inevitable in our conditioned state, and therefore we
cannot remove the influence of material time from our
conceptions and descriptions of the atomic jīva and
spiritual objects. We inevitably think and speak in
terms of past, present, and future.

On the other hand, those who are dedicated to
understanding the pure transcendental viewpoint can
comprehend the application of the eternal present when
they hear the descriptions of the spiritual world. Be
very careful in this matter. Reject the unavoidable
mundane aspect of the description, and perceive the
spiritual reality.

The jīva is an eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa, his eternal
nature is to serve Kṛṣṇa, and having forgotten that
eternal nature, he has become bound by māyā. This
understanding is shared by all types of Vaiṣṇavas, and

                           75
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

all of them consider that there are two types of jīva:
nitya-mukta and nitya-baddha. However, although all
varieties of Vaiṣṇavas speak in this way, there are
different types of understanding. The human intellect
becomes overwhelmed by intoxication due to gross bodily
identification, and therefore it cannot comprehend
transcendental matters, whereas realized souls perceive
the non-material truth through spiritual trance.

Our words always have some material limitation, so
whatever we say will have material defects. My dear son,
you should always endeavor to realize the pure truth.
Logic and argument cannot help at all in this regard. It
is futile to use them to try to understand inconceivable
subject matters.

I am aware of the fact that you cannot immediately
comprehend the depths of this line of spiritual thought.
However, as your devotional practice and spiritual
attachment increase, your power to discriminate between
matter and spirit will be sharpened. In other words, the
host of spiritual moods will spontaneously arise in your
pure heart.

Your body is material and all the activities of your
body are also material, but in reality you are non-
material. You are an infinitesimal conscious entity. The
more you know yourself, the more you will be able to
realize how your real form is a truth superior to the
world of māyā.

However, by my mere telling you this, you will not
realize it; by hearing alone you will not attain it.
Cultivate the practice of chanting hari-nāma as much as
possible. As you go on chanting, the multitude of
transcendental moods will naturally begin to manifest in
your heart. To the degree that they do, you will be able
to realize the transcendental world.

Both mind and speech have their origin in matter. They
cannot touch the transcendental truth, even with the
greatest endeavor. The Vedas say (Taittirīya Upaniṣad
2.9):

yato vāco nivartante aprāpya manasā saha

Speech and mind return from their search for brahma,
being unable to attain Him.

I advise you not to inquire about this philosophical
subject from anyone else, but to realize it yourself. I
have just given you an indication.

Vrajanātha: You have explained that the jīva is like a
spark of a burning fire, or like an atomic particle in
the rays of the spiritual Sun. What is the role of jīva-
śakti in this?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: Lord Kṛṣṇa, who in these
analogies is compared to the blazing fire or the Sun, is
the self-manifesting Absolute Truth. Thus, everything
within the burning flames of that Sun is fully
spiritual. The rays emanating from their source, the
spiritual Sun, constitute the jīva-śakti or taṭasthā-

                           76
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

śakti, the subservient expansion of the svarūpa-śakti,
and the atomic particles situated in the rays of this
spiritual Sun are the jīvas.

The svarūpa-śakti has manifested the Sun planet, and the
activities that take place outside the Sun globe are the
activities of the jīva-śakti, the partial expansion of
the svarūpa-śakti. Therefore, any activities pertaining
to the jīvas are the action of jīva-śakti alone.

“Parāsya śaktir vividhaiva śrūyate ñ that inconceivable
potency is called parā-śakti. Although it is one, this
innate potency has manifold varieties” (Śvetāśvatara
Upaniṣad 6.8). According to this scriptural aphorism,
the cit-śakti is a manifestation of the parā-śakti, and
it emanates from its own sphere, the spiritual realm.
The jīva-śakti, in the marginal region between the
spiritual and the material worlds, manifests
innumerable, eternal jīvas, who are like atomic
particles in the rays of the spiritual Sun.

Vrajanātha: The fire, the Sun, the burning sparks, and
the atomic particles of sunshine ñ these are all
material objects. Why has a comparison been made with
these material objects in the discussion of spiritual
truth?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: As I have already said,
inevitably there are material defects in any material
statements we make about spiritual truth, but what
alternative do we have? We are obliged to use these
examples as guidelines because we are helpless without
them. Therefore, those who know established truth try to
explain spiritual substance (cit-vastu) by comparing it
to fire or the Sun. In reality, the Sun of Lord Kṛṣṇa is
far superior to the material Sun. His effulgence is far
superior to the radiance of the Sun and His rays and the
atoms in them ñ that is, the jīva-śakti and the jīvas ñ
are far superior to the rays of the Sun and the atomic
particles of the rays. Still, these examples have been
used because there are similarities within them.

Examples can explain some spiritual qualities, but not
all. The beauty of the Sun’s light and the ability of
its rays to illuminate other objects are both qualities
that compare with spiritual reality, for it is the
quality of spirit to reveal its own beauty and to
illuminate other objects. However, the scorching heat in
the sunrays have no counterpart in spiritual substance,
nor does the fact that the rays are material. If we say,
“This milk is like water,” we are only considering the
liquid quality of water in the comparison; otherwise, if
all the qualities of water were present in milk, why
would the milk not become water? Thus, examples can
explain certain specific qualities and traits of an
object, but not all.

Vrajanātha: The spiritual rays of the transcendental
kṛṣṇa-sun and the spiritual atoms within those rays are
non-different from the Sun; yet, at the same time they
are eternally different from it. How can both these
facts be true simultaneously?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: In the material world, when

                           77
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

one object is produced from another, the product is
either completely different from its source, or else it
remains a part of it. This is the nature of material
objects. For example, an egg becomes separate from the
mother bird once it is laid, whereas a person’s nails
and hair remain part of the body until they are cut,
even though they are produced from his body.

The nature of spiritual reality is somewhat different.
Whatever has manifested from the spiritual Sun, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, is simultaneously one with Him and different from
Him. The rays of the Sun and the atomic particles in the
rays are not separate from the Sun, even after they have
emanated from it. Similarly, the rays of Kṛṣṇa’s form
and the atoms in those rays ñ jīva-śakti and the jīvas ñ
are not separate from Him, even though they are produced
from Him.

At the same time, although the jīvas are non-different
from Him, they are also eternally different and separate
from Him since they have their own minute particle of
independent desires. Therefore, the jīva’s difference
and non-difference from Him is an eternal truth. This is
the special feature of the transcendental realm.

The sages give a provincial analogy [an analogy that is
not fully accurate but is like a place-holder until
realization comes] from our experience of inert matter.
Suppose you cut a small piece of gold from a large piece
and use it to make a bangle. From the perspective of
gold, the bangle is not different from the original
piece of gold. However, from the perspective of the
bangle, the two are different from each other. This
example does not present a complete representation of
transcendental truth, but it illustrates an important
aspect.

From the point of view of qualitative spiritual reality,
there is no difference between the Supreme Controller
and the jīva, whereas from the perspective of status and
quantity, these two are eternally different. God is
complete spirit, whereas the jīva is atomic spirit. God
is great, whereas the jīva is insignificant. Some people
give the analogy of the sky in a pot and the unlimited
sky in this regard, but this example is completely
inconsistent with regard to the spiritual realm.

Vrajanātha: If transcendental entities and material
objects belong to completely different categories, how
can material objects be used as appropriate examples for
understanding transcendental entities?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: There are different
categories of material objects, and the scholars of the
school of mundane logic consider them eternal. However,
there is no such categorical difference between the
transcendental and material. I have already said that
transcendence is the only reality and matter is simply
its vitiated transformation. The transformation is
different from the original source, but it is still
similar to the pure, original object in many respects.

For example, ice is a transformation of water, and it
becomes different from water through this

                           78
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

transformation; but the two remain similar in many of
their qualities, such as coldness. Hot and cold water do
not both have the quality of coldness, but their quality
of fluidity is the same. Therefore, the transformed
object certainly retains some similarity to the pure,
original object. According to this principle, the
transcendental world can be understood to some extent
with the help of material examples.

By adopting the logic of arundhatī-darśana, one can use
material examples to understand something about the
spiritual nature. By comparing the gross characteristics
of matter with its opposite nature, spirit, we can
surmise the esoteric truths of the spiritual nature, as
certain characteristics inherent in the material nature
are close to the spiritual truths.

Lord Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes are completely spiritual, and
there is not even the slightest scent of a material mood
in them. The pastimes of Vraja described in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam are transcendental, but when the descriptions
are read in an assembly, the fruits of hearing them
differ according to the respective qualifications of the
listeners. Appreciating the ornamental figures of speech
from the mundane perspective, those who are absorbed in
material sense gratification hear these narrations as
stories of an ordinary hero and heroine.

The intermediate devotees (madhyama-adhikārīs) take
shelter of the logic of arundhatī-darśana and perceive
the spiritual truth underlying the descriptions, and
they experience sublime happiness because of their
devotional mood. Finally, when the topmost devotees
(uttama-adhikārīs) hear the descriptions of those
pastimes, they become immersed in their pure
transcendental relationship with the Lord, devoid of all
mundane qualities, and thus relish spiritual rasa.

The Absolute Truth is beyond matter, so how can we
educate the jīvas without taking help of the principles
I have just described? Can the conditioned jīva
understand a subject that renders the voice dumb and
stops the working of the mind? There doesn’t appear to
be any method of explaining these subjects other than
the principle of similarity ñ the logic of arundhatī-
darśana.

Material objects can be either different or non-
different from each other, so difference and non-
difference are not visible in them at one and the same
time; but this is not the case with transcendental
truth. We have to accept that Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
simultaneously different and non-different from His
jīva-śakti and the jīvas in it. This simultaneous
difference and oneness is said to be inconceivable,
because it is beyond the limit of human intellect.

Vrajanātha: What is the difference between the Supreme
Lord and the jīva?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: First understand the non-
difference, and then I will explain their eternal
difference. The Supreme Lord is the embodiment of
knowledge, the self-manifest supreme divinity, the

                           79
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                          5/5/2017

illuminator of others, the knower of the fields of
action (kṣetrajña), the self-determined, and the
enjoyer.

The jīva, too, is an embodiment of knowledge, a knower,
a thinker, and an enjoyer. He, too, is by nature self-
effulgent and he illuminates others. He is the knower of
the field of his own body and also acts as he desires.
From this perspective, there is no difference between
them.

However, God is omnipotent, and by dint of this
omnipotence He is the basis of all these qualities,
which are present in Him in full. These qualities are
also present in the atomic jīva, but only to a minute
degree. Thus, the nature and form of God and the jīva
are eternally distinct from each other because one is
full and all-encompassing and the other is extremely
minute. Simultaneously, there is a lack of distinction
between them, because their qualities are similar.

Through the absolute influence of His svarūpa-śakti, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead is the Lord of cit-śakti,
jīva-śakti, and māyā-śakti. These varieties of śakti are
His maidservants, ready to execute His bidding alone,
without individual prerogatives. He is the Lord of
śakti, who acts in accord with His desire; this is the
nature of the Lord. Though the qualities of the Supreme
Lord are present in the jīva to a minute degree, the
jīva is nonetheless under the control of śakti.

The word māyā has been used in Daśa-mūla, not only to
indicate material māyā, but also to indicate svarūpa-
śakti, which is also known as yogamāyā. “Mīyate anayā
iti māyā ñ māyā is that by which things can be
measured.” The word māyā refers to the potency that
illuminates Lord Kṛṣṇa’s identity in all the three
worlds, namely, the spiritual world, the material world,
and the world of the marginal living entities. Kṛṣṇa is
the controller of māyā and the jīva is under the control
of māyā, as is said in the Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad
(4.9-10):

yasmān māyī sṛjate viśvam etat

tasmiṁś cānyo māyayā sanniruddhaḥ

māyāṁ tu prakṛtiṁ vidyān māyinaṁ tu maheśvaram

tasyāvayava-bhūtais tu vyāptaṁ sarvam idaṁ jagat

God is the Lord of māyā, and He has thoroughly bound up
the host of jīvas within this world made of the five
gross elements. It should be understood that māyā is His
energy, and He is Maheśvara, the controller of māyā.
This entire world is pervaded by the limbs of His
Universal Form.

In this verse, the word māyī is used to indicate Kṛṣṇa,
the controller of māyā, and prakṛti (energy) is used to
indicate His complete potency or power. His great
qualities and nature are His special characteristics.
These are not present in the jīva, and the jīva cannot
attain them even after liberation.

                           80
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017


It is stated in the Brahma-sūtra (4.4.17): “Jagat-
vyāpāra-varjjam prakaraṇā sannihitatvāt ñ the creation,
maintenance, and control of the entire transcendental
and inert world is the work of the Lord alone; no one
else.” Except for this activity in relation to the
spiritual and material worlds, all other activities are
possible for liberated jīvas. The Vedic scripture
states: “Yato vā imāni bhūtāni jāyante ñ the Supreme
Absolute Truth is the primal source of all the living
entities, the sustainer of everything, and at the same
time the destination into whom the total dissolution
enters” (Taittirīya Upaniṣad 3.1).

These statements have only been made in relation to the
Lord. They cannot be applied to the jīva by any amount
of manipulation, because there is no reference to
liberated jīvas here. Scripture states that it is only
the Supreme Godhead, and not the liberated jīva, who
performs activities of creation, maintenance, and
annihilation.

One may suppose that the jīva can also perform these
activities, but this gives rise to the philosophy of
many Gods, which is defective. Therefore, the correct
philosophical conclusion is that the jīva is not
qualified for the above-mentioned activities, even when
liberated. This establishes the eternal difference
between the jīva and the Lord, and all learned persons
support this.

This difference is not imaginary, but eternal; it does
not disappear in any state of the jīva’s existence.
Consequently, the statement “jīvera ‘svarūpa’ haya
kṛṣṇera nitya-dāsa ñ the jīva is an eternal servant of
Kṛṣṇa” should be accepted as a mahā-vākya, a dictum
whose import is all-encompassing and fundamental to a
correct understanding of spiritual truth.

Vrajanātha: If the eternal difference between the
Supreme Lord and the jīva is established, then how is
nondifference accepted? Another point is that if there
is undifferentiated oneness, does such a state as
nirvāṇa actually exist? Does this have to be accepted?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: No, not at all. The jīva is
not one in all respects with Kṛṣṇa at any stage.

Vrajanātha: Then why do you speak of inconceivable
oneness and difference?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: From the point of view of
spiritual quality there is no difference between the
Supreme Lord and the jīva, but from the point of view of
their constitutional nature (svarūpa), there is an
eternal difference between them. Their oneness is
eternal and their distinction is also eternal, but the
aspect of eternal distinction between them is pre-
eminent and conspicuous.

For example, let us say that the owner of a house is
called Devadatta. His house is simultaneously separate
from him, yet one with him because it is identified with
him. Though from one point of view it is considered

                           81
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

independent from him, still, people always know it as
his.

Another example from the material world is the visible
sky. It is inert matter and has a source, but in spite
of its having oneness with its source ñ the general
outer space ñ the visible sky is self-evident by its
distinction from its source. In fact, its identity is
discerned by this distinction from its source.

Thus, the eternal difference of the jīva from the
Supreme Lord, in spite of His simultaneous eternal
oneness with the Lord, actually bestows upon the jīva
his eternal identity and is thus the most important
aspect of their eternal relationship.

Vrajanātha: Kindly explain the eternal nature of the
jīva more clearly.

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: The jīva is atomic
consciousness, he is endowed with the quality of
knowledge, and he is described by the word ‘I.’ He is
the enjoyer, the thinker, and the knower. He has an
eternal form which is very esoteric and subtle.

Just as the different parts of the gross body, namely
the hands, legs, nose, eyes, and so on, combine to
manifest a beautiful form when established in their
respective places, the jīva has a very beautiful atomic
spiritual body that is composed of different spiritual
parts. This spiritual body is the eternal constitutional
form of the jīva, but when the jīva is entangled in
māyā, he is covered by two material designations or
false identities. One designation is called the subtle
body and the other is called the gross body.

Although the subtle body is an artificial imposition
upon the atomic spiritual body, from the beginning of
the jīva’s conditioned state until his liberation it
cannot be relinquished. When the jīva transmigrates from
one body to the next, the gross body changes but the
subtle body does not.

Rather, as the soul leaves the gross body, the subtle
body carries all his fruitive activities and desires to
the next body. His change of body and transmigration are
carried out through the science of pañcāgni (the five
fires), which is delineated in the Vedas. The system of
pañcāgni, such as the funeral fire, the fire of
digestion, the fire which invokes rainfall, and so on
has been described in the Chāndogya Upaniṣad and Brahma-
sūtra.

The jīva’s conditioned nature in a new body is the
result of the impressions (saṁskāras) made upon his
subtle body from his previous births, and in accordance
with this nature he takes birth within a particular
status and caste (varṇa). After entering varṇāśrama, he
becomes attached to fruitive activity again, and when he
dies he repeats the same process. Thus, the first
covering of the eternal spiritual form is the subtle
body and the second is the gross body.

Vrajanātha: What is the difference between the eternal

                           82
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                           5/5/2017

spiritual body and the subtle body?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: The eternal body is the
actual, original body, and it is atomic, spiritual, and
faultless. It is the true entity, which should be spoken
of as ‘I,’ the real ego. The subtle body arises from
contact with matter, and it consists of three vitiated
transformations, namely the mind, intelligence, and
false ego.

Vrajanātha: Are mind, intelligence, and false ego
material entities? If they are, how do they have the
qualities of consciousness, knowledge, and activity?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī:

bhūmir āpo ‘nalo vāyuḥ khaṁ mano buddhir eva ca

ahaṅkāra itīyaṁ me bhinnā prakṛtir aṣṭadhā

apareyam itas tv anyāṁ prakṛtiṁ viddhi me parām

jīva-bhūtāṁ mahā-bāho yayedaṁ dhāryate jagat

etadyonīni bhūtāni sarvāṇīty upadhāraya

ahaṁ kṛtsnasya jagataḥ prabhavaḥ pralayas tathā

Bhagavad-gītā (7.4ñ6)

My separated, eight-fold inferior energy consists of the
five gross elements, namely earth, water, fire, air, and
space; and the three subtle elements, namely mind,
intelligence, and false ego.

Besides this, O mighty-armed Arjuna, I have a superior
energy, which is in the form of conscious jīvas. All
jīvas, who have manifested from this superior energy,
make the inert world full of consciousness. The jīva is
called taṭasthā because it is eligible for both worlds;
the spiritual world, which is manifest from My internal
energy; and the material world, which is manifest from
My external energy.

Since the entire spiritual and material worlds are
manifest from these two energies of Mine, you should
know that I, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, am the
sole original cause of creation and destruction of all
the worlds of the moving and non-moving beings.

These verses of Gītopaniṣad describe the two types of
energy of the all-powerful Lord. One is called parā-
prakṛti (the superior energy) and the other is called
aparā-prakṛti (the inferior energy). They are also known
as jīva-śakti and māyā-śakti respectively. The jīva-
śakti is the superior energy because it is full of
spiritual atomic particles. Māyā-śakti is inferior
because it is inert.

The jīva is completely distinct from the inferior
energy, which contains eight elements: the five gross
elements, namely earth, water, fire, air, and space; and
the three subtle elements, namely mind, intelligence and
false ego.

                              83
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017


Regarding these last three material elements, the aspect
of knowledge visible in them is material, not spiritual.
The mind creates a false world by basing its knowledge
of objects on the influences that it absorbs from the
mundane realm. Although these three exhibit some form of
consciousness and knowledge because of the presence of
the jīva within them, it is not transcendental
consciousness but mundane vitiated consciousness by the
effect of the attachment of the jīva to the inferior
māyā-śakti.

This array of knowledge has its root in dull matter, not
in spirit. The faculty that relies on that knowledge to
discriminate between the real and unreal is called
intelligence, which also has its root in matter. The
ego, or sense of ‘I-ness,’ that is produced by accepting
the above knowledge is also material.

Together, these three faculties manifest the jīva’s
second form, which acts as the connection between the
jīva and matter and is called the subtle body. As the
false ego of the conditioned jīva’s subtle body becomes
stronger, it further covers the true ego of his eternal
form.

The ego in the jīva’s constitutional nature in
relationship to the Spiritual Sun, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is eternal
and pure, and manifests in the liberated state. However,
as long as the eternal body remains covered by the
subtle body, the material conception arising from the
gross and subtle body remains strong. Consequently, the
self-conception of a relation with spirit is almost
absent. The subtle body is very fine; thus the gross
body covers it and through it performs its own
functions.

In this way, identification with the caste and so on of
the gross body arises in the subtle body. Although the
three elements ñ mind, intelligence, and false ego ñ are
material, the ego of having knowledge is inherent in
them because they are vitiated or perverted
transformations of the function of the soul.

Vrajanātha: I understand the eternal constitution of the
jīva to be spiritual and atomic in nature, and that he
has a beautiful and sublime body composed of spiritual
limbs. In the conditioned state, that beautiful
spiritual body remains covered by the subtle body and
gross body. Being thus overshadowed, a corruption or
distortion takes place regarding the constitutional
nature of the jīva.

Now I desire to know if the jīva is completely flawless
in his emancipated state.

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: The atomic spiritual form is
free from defect, but because of its minute nature, it
is inherently weak and vulnerable, and therefore called
incomplete. The only defect in this state is that the
jīva’s spiritual form may be covered through association
with the powerful material energy.

It is said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.2.32):

                           84
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017


ye ‘nye ‘ravindākṣa vimukta-māninas

tvayy asta-bhāvād aviśuddha-buddhayaḥ

āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ

patanty adho ‘nādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ

O lotus-eyed Lord, apart from Your devotees, all others,
such as impersonalists, yogīs, and renunciants falsely
consider themselves fully liberated. However, because
they lack devotion, their intelligence is not fully
pure. They perform severe austerities and penances and
achieve what they imagine to be the fully liberated
position, but still they fall from there into a very low
condition due to neglecting Your lotus feet.

Therefore, however elevated a position a liberated soul
may attain, the incomplete nature of his constitution
will always remain with him. That is the inherent nature
of jīva-tattva. Thus it is said in the Vedas that the
Supreme Lord is the controller of māyā, whereas the jīva
remains potentially liable to her control in all
circumstances.



Thus ends the Fifteenth Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled Jīva-tattva.




Chapter Sixteen - Jīvas and Māyā


Having heard the illuminating description of jīva-tattva
in Daśa-mūla, Vrajanātha returned home. Lying on his bed
he was unable to sleep, and he began to reflect deeply,
“I have received an answer to the question, ‘Who am I?’
Now I can understand myself to be an atom of light in
the effulgent rays of the spiritual Sun, Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Although atomic by nature, I have my own inherent
qualities, purpose of life, divine knowledge, and
spiritual bliss.

“Even though my form is atomic, it is like Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
human-like form. Presently I cannot see this form, and
this is my misfortune. Only an extremely fortunate soul
can realize it. It is important that I understand
clearly why I am suffering in this unfortunate
condition. Tomorrow I will inquire about this from Śrī
Gurudeva.”

Thinking thus, Vrajanatha finally fell asleep at around
midnight. Before dawn, he dreamt he had left his family
and accepted the dress of a Vaiṣṇava. When he awoke, he
joyfully thought, “It appears that Lord Kṛṣṇa will soon
pull me out of this material entanglement.”

Later that morning, while he was sitting on the porch,

                           85
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

some of his students approached him. Offering their
respects, they said, “For a long time you have taught us
very nicely, and under your guidance we have learned
many profound subject matters pertaining to nyāya
(logic). We hope that you will now instruct us on the
famous book of logic, Nyāya Kusumāñjali (An Offering of
the Flowers of Logic).

With great humility, Vrajanātha replied, “My dear
brothers, I am unable to teach you anymore, for I cannot
fix my mind on teaching at all. I have decided to take
another path. Under these circumstances, I suggest that
you study under the guidance of some other teacher.” The
students became unhappy to hear this, but since there
was nothing they could do, gradually, one by one, they
began to leave.

About that time, Śrī Caturbhuja Miśra Ghaṭaka came to
Vrajanātha’s house to present a proposal to his paternal
grandmother for his marriage. He said, “I am sure you
know Vijayanātha Bhaṭṭācārya. His family is good, and
quite well off; it will be a suitable match for you.
Most importantly, this girl is as qualified as she is
beautiful. On his part, Bhaṭṭācārya will make no
conditions regarding the marriage of his daughter with
Vrajanātha. He is ready to marry her in whichever way
you desire.”

Hearing this proposal Vrajanātha’s grandmother became
exhilarated, but Vrajanātha felt dissatisfied within his
heart. “Alas!” he thought, “My grandmother is arranging
my marriage while I am planning to leave my family and
the world. How can I feel happy to discuss marriage at
this time?”

Later, there was an intense struggle of arguments and
counter-arguments in their home regarding marriage.
Vrajanātha’s mother, grandmother, and the other elderly
ladies were on one side, while on the other, completely
alone, was Vrajanātha. The ladies insisted in various
ways that Vrajanātha should get married, but he did not
agree.

The discussion continued for the entire day. Around
evening time it began to rain heavily. It continued
pouring throughout the night, and therefore Vrajanātha
could not go to Māyāpura. Then, on the next day, because
of the heated arguments about marriage, he could not
even eat his meals properly.

In the evening he went to Bābājī’s cottage. He paid
obeisances and sat down close to Śrī Raghunātha dāsa
Bābājī, who told him, “Yesterday night it was raining
quite heavily. That’s probably why you couldn’t come.
Seeing you today gives me much happiness.”

Vrajanātha said, “Master, I am facing a problem which I
will tell you about later. First, please explain to me,
if the jīva is a pure spiritual entity, how did he
become entangled in this miserable world?”

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī smiled and said:

svarūpārthair hīnān nija-sukha-parān kṛṣṇa-vimukhān

                           86
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                          5/5/2017


harer māyā-dandyān guṇa-nigaḍa-jālaiḥ kalayati



tathā sthūlair lingair dvi-vidhāvaraṇaiḥ kleśa-nikarair

mahākarmālānair nayati patitān svarga-nirayau



(Daśa-mūla, Verse 6)

By their original nature, the jīvas are eternal servants
of Kṛṣṇa; it is their constitutional nature to render
Him service. The Lord’s illusory potency, māyā, punishes
those jīvas who have abandoned their eternal
occupational duty, who are averse to Kṛṣṇa, and who are
absorbed with their own happiness. Māyā binds them with
the shackles of the three modes of material nature ñ
goodness, passion and ignorance ñ covers their
constitional forms with gross and subtle bodies, and
throws them into the miserable bondage of fruitive
action and reaction. She thus repeatedly causes them to
experience happiness and distress in heaven and hell.

Innumerable nitya-parsada jīvas (eternally liberated
associates) manifest from Śrī Baladeva Prabhu to serve
Vṛndāvana-vihārī Śrī Kṛṣṇa as His eternal associates in
Goloka Vṛndāvana, and others manifest from Śrī
Saṅkarṣaṇa to serve the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha, Śrī Nārāyaṇa,
in the spiritual world. Forever relishing rasa, engaged
in the service of their worshipable Lord, they always
remain fixed in their constitutional position. They
always strive to please the Lord and are always
attentive to Him.

Having the shelter of cit-śakti, they are always strong.
They have no connection with the material energy. In
fact, they do not know whether there is a bewildering
energy called māyā or not. Since they reside in the
spiritual world, māyā is very far away from them and
does not affect them at all. Always absorbed in the
bliss of serving their worshipable Lord, they are
eternally liberated and are free from material happiness
and distress. Their life is love alone, and they are not
at all conscious of misery, death, or fear.

There are also innumerable atomic conscious jīvas who
emanate from Kāraṇodakaśāyī Māhā-Viṣṇu’s glance upon His
māyā-śakti. Since these jīvas are situated next to māyā,
they perceive her wonderful workings. Although they have
all the qualities of the jīvas I have already described,
because of their minute and marginal nature, they
sometimes look to the spiritual world, and sometimes to
the material world.

In this marginal condition, the jīva is very weak
because up to this point in time he has not attained
spiritual strength by the mercy of his worshipful Lord.
Among these unlimited jīvas, those who want to enjoy
māyā become engrossed in mundane sense gratification and
enter a state of perpetual slavery to her.


                           87
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

On the other hand, the jīvas who endeavor to serve the
Lord receive spiritual power by His mercy and enter the
spiritual world. It is our great misfortune that we have
forgotten our service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa and have become bound
in the shackles of māyā. Being thus bereft of the true
purpose for our very existence, we are now in this
deplorable condition.

Vrajanātha: Master, I understand that this marginal
position is situated at the junction of the spiritual
and material worlds. Why is it that some jīvas go from
there to the material world, while others go to the
spiritual world?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: Kṛṣṇa’s qualities are also
present in the jīvas, but only in a minute quantity.
Kṛṣṇa is supremely independent, so the desire to be
independent is eternally present in the jīvas as well.
When the jīva uses his independence correctly, he
remains properly inclined to the service of Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
but when he misuses it, he becomes indifferent to Him.
It is just this indifference that gives rise to the
desire in the jīva’s heart to enjoy māyā.

Because of the desire to enjoy māyā, the jīva develops
the contemptible false ego that he can enjoy material
sense gratification. At that time, the five types of
ignorance ñ tamaḥ (not knowing anything about the spirit
soul), moha (the illusion of the bodily concept of
life), mahā-moha (madness for material enjoyment),
tāmisra (forgetfulness of one’s constitutional position
due to anger or envy) and andha-tāmisra (considering
death to be the ultimate end) ñ cover his pure, atomic
nature. Our liberation or subjugation simply depends on
whether or not we use our minute independence properly.

Vrajanātha: Lord Kṛṣṇa is overflowing with mercy, so why
did He make the jīva so weak that he became entangled in
māyā?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: It is true that He is
overflowing with mercy, but He is also overflowing with
desire to perform pastimes. With the view that the jīva
could become an active partner for His various spiritual
pastimes, the Supreme Lord has made him versatile and
capable of rising from his humble position as a marginal
being to the stage of the gopis’ love for Kṛṣṇa, called
mahā-bhāva, the highest spiritual consciousness, which
is unlimited and transcendental. To facilitate the
jīva’s progressing practically and steadfastly towards
becoming qualified for His service, He has also created
the lower levels of material existence, beginning from
the lowest inert matter up to false ego.

Should the jīva choose the path of material progress,
the inert matter presents practically insurmountable
obstacles in his search for supreme happiness. Divorced
from his constitutional position, the jīva who is
entangled in māyā is inimical to Kṛṣṇa and engrossed in
personal sense gratification. However, because Śrī Kṛṣṇa
is the reservoir of mercy, the more the jīva becomes
depraved, the more Kṛṣṇa provides him with opportunities
to attain the highest spiritual perfection. He brings
this about by appearing before him along with His

                           88
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

spiritual abode and eternal associates. Those jīvas who
take advantage of this merciful opportunity and
sincerely endeavor to attain the higher position
gradually reach the spiritual world and attain a state
similar to that of the Lord’s eternal associates.

Vrajanātha: Why must some jīvas suffer for the sake of
the Lord’s pastimes?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: The jīvas possess some
independence, and this is actually a sign of the Lord’s
special mercy upon them. Inert objects are very
insignificant and worthless because they have no such
independent desire. The jīva has attained sovereignty
over the inert world only because of this independent
desire.

Misery and happiness are conditions of the mind. Thus,
what we may consider misery is happiness for one
engrossed in it. Since all varieties of material sense
gratification finally result in nothing but misery, a
materialistic person only achieves suffering. When that
suffering becomes excessive, it gives rise to a search
for unalloyed and endless happiness. From that desire
discrimination arises, and from discrimination, the
tendency for inquiry about the ultimate reality is born.
As a result of this, one attains the association of
saintly devotees, whereupon śraddhā (faith in serving
Kṛṣṇa) develops. When śraddhā is born, the jīva
gradually ascends upon the lofty path leading to
devotional service to the Lord.

Gold is purified in a fire by heating and hammering.
Being indifferent to Kṛṣṇa, the jīva has become impure
through illusory sense gratification and aversion
towards Him. Therefore, he must be purified by being
beaten with the hammers of misery on the anvil of this
material world. By this process, the misery of the jīvas
averse to Kṛṣṇa finally culminates in happiness.
Suffering is therefore just a sign of God’s mercy. That
is why persons endowed with divine vision perceive the
suffering of jīvas in Lord Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes within His
material creation as auspicious, though those who lack
such vision abhor it as only suffering.

Vrajanātha: The jīva’s suffering in his conditioned
state is ultimately auspicious, but at the same time it
is very painful. Since Kṛṣṇa is omnipotent, could He not
think of a less troublesome path?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: Lord Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes are
extremely astonishing and of many varieties; and this is
also one of them. If the independent Lord performs all
kinds of pastimes, why should this be the only pastime
that He neglects? No pastime can be rejected if there is
to be full variety. Whatever the pastime, the
participants assisting the Lord may have to accept many
hardships and pain.

Srī Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Enjoyer as well as Creator. All
the participants and paraphernalia are fully under His
control and they are His working tools. In fully
surrendering oneself to the sweet will of the Supreme
Lord, it is only natural that one may have to accept

                           89
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

adversities. If finally this material adversity turns
into an auspicious state that is far from miserable,
then why, ultimately, should one call it adversity?

On the transcendental platform, the tribulations of the
jīva trying to satisfy the Lord in His pastimes are by
all means pleasurable. The so-called suffering he
undergoes in order to nourish and support Kṛṣṇa’s
pastimes is actually the source of supreme delight.

The jīva’s independent desire has caused him to abandon
the pleasure of serving Kṛṣṇa. Denying himself the
exultation one experiences while directly assisting Śrī
Kṛṣṇa in His transcendental pastimes, intead he embraces
māyā, who gives him only harassment. This is the jīva’s
fault, not Kṛṣṇa’s.

Vrajanātha: What harm would there have been if the jīva
had not been given independent desire? Kṛṣṇa is
omniscient, and He gave this independence to the jīvas
even though He knew that they would suffer on account of
it. So isn’t He responsible for the jīva’s suffering?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: Independence is a precious
jewel, in the absence of which inert objects are
insignificant and worthless. If the jīva had not
received independence, he would also have become as
insignificant and worthless as the material objects.

The jīva is an atomic spiritual entity, so he must
certainly have all the qualities of spiritual entities.
He is part and parcel of the Complete Spiritual Entity
(cit-vastu); hence he possesses the same qualities as
the Absolute Whole, but in minute measure. The only
difference between him and the ultimate spiritual
substance, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is that the complete spiritual
entity possesses all these qualities in full, whereas
the jīva only possesses them to a very minute degree.

Independence is a distinctive quality of the spiritual
entity, and an entity’s inherent quality cannot be
separated from him. Consequently, the jīva also has this
quality of independence, but only to a very minute
degree because he is atomic. It is only because of this
independence that the jīva is the most exalted of all
entities within the material world, and is its lord and
master in the material sense.

Endowed with minute independence, the jīva is a beloved
servant of Kṛṣṇa. Seeing the jīva’s misfortune as he
misuses his independence and becomes attached to māyā,
Kṛṣṇa chases after him, weeping, and He appears in the
material world to deliver him. Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the ocean of
compassion, His heart melting with mercy for the jīva,
manifests His inconceivable pastimes in the material
world, considering that His appearance will enable the
jīva to see those nectarean pastimes.

However, even after being showered by so much mercy, the
jīva does not understand the truth of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes.
Lord Kṛṣṇa then descends in Śrī Navadvīpa in the form of
guru. He personally describes the supreme process of
chanting His name and glorifying His form, qualities,
and pastimes. He personally instructs and inspires the

                           90
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

jīva to take to this path by practicing it Himself. How
can you accuse Kṛṣṇa of being at fault in any way, when
He is so merciful? His mercy is unlimited, but our
misfortune is lamentable.

Vrajanātha: Is māyā-śakti the cause of our misfortune
then? Would the jīvas have had to suffer like this if
the omnipotent and omniscient Śrī Kṛṣṇa had kept māyā
away from them?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: Māyā is a shadow and
vitiated transformation of Kṛṣṇa’s internal potency,
svarūpa-śakti, and she is like a fiery furnace where the
jīvas who are not qualified for Kṛṣṇa’s service are
chastized and then made fit for the spiritual world.
Māyā is Kṛṣṇa’s maidservant. In order to purify the
jīvas who have turned against Him, she punishes them and
gives them appropriate therapy to purify them.

The infinitesimal jīva has forgotten that he is an
eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa. For this offense, māyā, taking
the form of a witch, punishes him. This material world
is like a prison, and māyā is the jailer who imprisons
the estranged jīvas and punishes them. A king constructs
a prison for the benefit of his subjects, and in the
same way, God has shown His immense mercy towards the
jīvas by making this prison-like material world and
appointing māyā as its custodian.

Vrajanātha: If this material world is a prison, it also
requires some suitable shackles. What are they?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: Māyā incarcerates the
offensive jīvas with three types of shackles: those made
of mundane goodness, those made of passion, and those
made of ignorance. These fetters bind the jīva, whether
his inclination is in the mode of ignorance, passion, or
even goodness. Shackles may be made of different metals
ñ such as gold, silver, or iron ñ but that makes no
difference to the pain of being bound by them.

Vrajanātha: If we accept that the jīva is spiritual, how
can the chains of māyā hold him in bondage?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: Objects of this material
world cannot touch spiritual objects. However, as soon
as the jīva develops the conception that he is an
enjoyer of māyā, his atomic, spiritual form is covered
by the subtle body made of false ego. That is how the
shackles of māyā bind his legs.

The jīvas with a false ego in the mode of material
goodness reside in the higher planets and are called
demigods. Their legs are bound by shackles in that mode,
which are made of gold. Jīvas under the mode of passion
have a mixture of the propensities of the demigods and
of the human beings, and they are confined by the
shackles in that mode, which are made of silver. The
jīvas under the mode of ignorance, who are mad to taste
bliss derived from dull matter, are bound in iron
shackles of ignorance. Once the jīvas are bound in these
shackles, they cannot leave the prison. Suffering
various types of miseries, they remain in captivity.


                           91
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

Vrajanātha: What sort of activities do the jīvas perform
while confined in māyā’s prison?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: Initially, the jīva performs
activities to provide himself with his desired sense
pleasure in accordance with his material propensities.
After that, he performs activities to try and dispel the
miseries that result from being bound by the shackles of
māyā.

Vrajanātha: Please explain the first type of fruitive
activity in detail.

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: The covering of the gross
material body has six stages, namely birth, existence,
growth, creation of by-products, decline, and death.
These six transformations are the inherent attributes of
the gross body. Additionally, the body undergoes hunger,
thirst, and other discomforting needs. The jīva who is
situated in the material body is controlled by eating,
sleeping, and sensual activities, as his material sense
desires dictate. In order to enjoy material comforts, he
engages in a variety of activities that are born of his
material desires.

To acquire such desired objectives, he may take the
option of material piety. Thus, from his birth to his
last breath he may perform the ten Vedic ritualistic
pious activities (saṁskāras) to maintain himself and
acquire his material goals. His intention is to
accumulate pious credits through these activities so
that he can enjoy material pleasures by taking birth in
a brahminical or other high-class family in this world,
and thereafter have godly pleasures in the higher
planets. Thus, he undertakes the path of fruitive
activity.

In contrast, impious conditioned jīvas take shelter of
irreligiosity, and they enjoy sensual pleasures
sacrilegiously by performing many types of sinful
activities.

Jīvas in the first category attain the higher planets
and enjoy celestial pleasures as a result of their pious
activities. When this period of enjoyment ends, as it
must, they again take birth on the eartly planets as
human beings or in other life-forms. Jīvas in the second
category go to hell because of their sinful activities,
and after suffering a variety of miseries there, they
take birth on Earth again.

Thus the jīva, bound in māyā and entangled in the cycle
of fruitive activity and its fruits, wanders here and
there, seeking to enjoy sense gratification.
Intermittently, he enjoys some temporary pleasures as a
result of pious activities and suffers miseries because
of his sins.

Vrajanātha: Please clearly describe the second type of
fruitive action as well.

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: The jīva situated in the
gross body undergoes immense suffering due to being
caught within the entangling web of its deficiencies,

                           92
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

and he performs various types of activity in an attempt
to minimize these miseries. He collects various foods
and drinks to assuage his hunger and thirst, and he
toils arduously to earn money so that he can buy food
easily. He collects warm clothes to protect himself from
the cold, marries to satisfy his desire for sensual
pleasures, and works hard to maintain and nurture his
family and children and to fulfill their needs. He takes
medicines to cure diseases of the gross body, fights
with others, and goes to courts of law to protect his
material assets.

Because he is controlled by the six foes, namely lust,
anger, intoxication, illusion, envy, and fear, he also
indulges in various sinful activities such as fighting,
enviousness, stealing, and other misdemeanors. All these
activities of the bewildered jīva are performed to
alleviate his sufferings, and thus his entire life is
wasted in trying to fulfill his desires and avoid
suffering.

Vrajanātha: Wouldn’t māyā’s purpose have been served if
she had covered the jīva with only the subtle body?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: The gross body is also
necessary, because the subtle body cannot perform work.
Desires develop in the subtle body because of the
activities the jīva performs in his gross body, and he
receives another gross body that is suitable to fulfil
those desires.

Vrajanātha: What is the connection between karma
(fruitive or reward-seeking activity) and its fruits?
According to the Mīmāṁsā school of thought, there is no
Supreme Controller, or God, who awards the fruits of
activity. God is only an imaginary entity. The followers
of this school say that there is an unprecedented and
ever-changing principle, known as karma, which is
generated from previously performed activity, and this
principle awards the result of all activity. Is this
true?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: The followers of the Mīmāṁsā
school are not acquainted with the actual principles
taught in the Vedas. Seeing that there is a general
recommendation within the Vedas for various kinds of
karma, headed by the practice of yajña, they have with
much difficulty fabricated a philosophy based on this.
But their doctrine is not found anywhere in the Vedas.
On the contrary, the Vedas state very clearly that the
Lord awards all the fruits of material activity. For
example, Śvetāśvatara Upaniṣad (4.6) and Mundaka
Upaniṣad (3.1.1) state:

dvā suparṇā sayujā sakhāyā



samānaṁ vṛkṣaṁ pariṣaṣvajāte




                             93
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

tayor anyaḥ pippalaṁ svādv atty



anaśnann anyo ‘bhicākaśīti




Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu and the jīva reside in this
temporary body, like two friendly birds in a pippala
tree. Of these two birds, one ñ

the jīva ñ tastes the fruits of the tree according to
the results of his past karma. The other ñ Paramātmā ñ
does not taste the fruits, but simply observes as a
witness.

The meaning of the above-mentioned verse is that this
transitory material body is like a pippala tree in which
two birds are perched. One of these is the conditioned
jīva, and the other is his friend, the Supreme Lord in
His form as Paramātmā, the Supersoul. The first bird
tastes the fruits of the tree, while the other bird does
not enjoy those fruits but simply watches the first
bird. This means that the jīva who is bound by māyā
performs karma and enjoys the fruits. God, the Lord of
māyā, awards the results of those actions.

This pastime of the Supreme Lord continues until the
jīva turns towards Him. In other words, as long as the
jīva is unable to attain a direct audience with the
Lord, the Lord continues to perform pastimes with the
jīva appropriate to his situation. Now, where is the
relevance of the Mīmāṁsā followers’ ‘destiny caused by
the resultant actions of remote karma’? Think about this
yourself. Godless doctrines can never be complete and
perfect in all respects.

Vrajanātha: Why have you said that karma is
beginningless?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: The root of all material
activity is the desire to perform it, and the root cause
of this desire is avidyā, ignorance. Avidyā is
forgetfulness of the truth: “I am an eternal servant of
Kṛṣṇa,” and it does not have its origin in mundane time.
Rather, it originates in the taṭastha region, at the
junction of the spiritual and material worlds. That is
why karma does not have its beginning in mundane time
and is therefore called beginningless.

Vrajanātha: What is the difference between māyā and
avidyā?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: Māyā is a potency of Kṛṣṇa.
Śrī Kṛṣṇa has created the material universe through her,
and has instigated her to purify the jīvas who are
averse to Him. Māyā has two functions: avidyā,
ignorance, and pradhāna, the condition of material
nature immediately prior to its manifestation. Avidyā is
related to the jīvas whereas pradhāna is related to
inert matter. The entire inert, mundane world has

                             94
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

originated from pradhāna, whereas the jīva’s desire to
perform material activity originates in avidyā.

There are also two other divisions of māyā, namely vidyā
(knowledge) and avidyā (ignorance), both of which are
related to the conditioned jīva. Avidyā binds the jīva
whereas vidyā liberates him.The function of avidyā keeps
working as long as the imprisoned jīva continues to
forget Kṛṣṇa, but when he becomes favorable to Kṛṣṇa,
avidyā is replaced by the function of vidyā. Brahma-
jñāna (knowledge concerning the Supreme Spirit, the
minute spirit souls, and their inter-relationship) is
the specific function of vidyā.

Manifesting within the spiritually awakening
consciousness of the jīva, vidyā has two phases. In her
first phase, vidyā prompts pious deeds and a positive
spiritual endeavour, and in her second, mature phase
bestows realization of the Supreme Truth. When
discrimination first develops, the jīva tries to engage
in auspicious activities, and when discrimination has
matured, spiritual knowledge manifests. Avidyā covers
the jīva, and vidyā removes that covering.

Vrajanātha: What is the function of the pradhāna?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: The condition of material
nature immediately previous to its manifestation is
called pradhāna. When the Supreme Lord engages the Time
factor to stimulate His potency of māyā, māyā first
creates the aggregate of the material elements (mahat-
tattva), which is itself produced from the unmanifest
pradhāna. Thus, when the pradhāna is stirred into motion
by Time, matter comes into existence.

False ego is born from a transformation of the mahat-
tattva, and space (ether) is created from a
transformation of the false ego in the mode of
ignorance. Air is created from a transformation of
space, and fire is created from a transformation of air.
Water is then created by the transformation of fire, and
earth is created by the transformation of water. This is
how the material elements are created. They are called
the five gross elements.

Now hear how the five sense objects are created. Time
stimulates the faculty of material energy called
ignorance (avidyā) and creates the tendencies within the
mahat-tattva for fruitive activity (karma) and material
knowledge (jñāna). When the propensity or tendency of
the mahat-tattva is transformed, it creates knowledge
and activities from the modes of goodness and passion
respectively. Mahat-tattva is also transformed to become
false ego, and intelligence is then created from a
transformation of ego. Sound, which is the property of
space, is created from the transformation of
intelligence. The property of touch is created from the
transformation of sound, and it includes both touch, the
quality of air, and sound, the quality of space. Life-
air, energy, and strength are created from this quality
of touch. From a transformation of touch, form and color
in illuminating objects is generated, which is the
property of fire. Fire has three qualities, namely,
form, touch and sound. When this quality is transformed

                           95
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

by Time, it becomes water, which has four qualities,
namely taste, form, touch, and sound. When these are
further transformed, the result is the five qualities in
earth, which are smell, taste, form, touch and sound.
All the activities of transformation take place by the
assistance and support of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead.

There are three kinds of false ego, namely goodness,
passion, and ignorance. The material elements are born
from false ego in the mode of ignorance, and the ten
senses are born from false ego in passion. There are two
types of senses: knowledge-acquiring senses and working
senses. The eyes, ears, nose, tongue and skin are the
five senses for acquiring knowledge; and voice, hands,
feet, anus, and genitals are the five working senses.

Even if the five gross elements combine with the subtle
elements, there is still no activity unless the atomic
conscious jīva enters into them. As soon as the jīva,
who is a localized particle within the ray of the Lord’s
glance, enters into the body made of gross and subtle
matter, all the activities are set in motion. In this
way, the senses manifested by the modes of material
goodness and passion encounter the sense-objects that
the pradhāna has manifested through the mode of
ignorance. All these elements amalgamate and interact to
form a suitable field for the material action of the
jīva. Avidyā and pradhāna work in this way.

Thus there are twenty-four elements within this world of
māyā: the five gross elements, namely, earth, water,
fire, air, and space; the five sense-objects, namely
smell, taste, form, touch, and sound; the five senses
for acquiring knowledge; the five working senses; mind;
intelligence; contaminated consciousness; and false ego.
These are the twenty-four elements of material nature.
The atomic conscious jīva who enters into the body made
of twenty-four elements is the twenty-fifth principle,
and Paramātmā, is the twenty-sixth.

Vrajanātha: Please tell me, how much of the entire human
body, which is three and a half spans of a person’s
combined arm and hand, is occupied by the subtle body,
and how much by the gross body; and in which part of the
body does the conscious jīva reside?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: The five gross elements, the
five sense-objects, and the ten senses altogether
comprise the gross body. The four subtle elements,
namely intelligence, contaminated consciousness, mind,
and false ego, form the subtle body. One who falsely
identifies with the body and makes claims in
relationship to the body, thus living under the false
concepts of ‘I’ and ‘mine,’ is the jīva who is thus
deprived of his true intrinsic nature.

The jīva is extremely subtle, beyond mundane space,
time, and qualities, but in spite of being very minute,
he pervades the entire body. Just as the pleasurable
effect of a minute drop of sandalwood paste spreads all
over the body when it is applied to one part, so the
atomic jīva is the knower of the entire body and the
experiencer of its pains and pleasures.

                           96
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                           5/5/2017


Vrajanātha: If it is the jīva who performs karma and
experiences the consequent pains and pleasures, where is
the question of the Supreme Lord’s active involvement?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: Jīva is the initiator, and
when he performs material activity, the Lord arranges
for the fruits which the jīva is eligible to enjoy. The
Lord also arranges for the future activity for which the
jīva has become eligible. In short, the Supreme Lord
awards the fruits, while the jīva ‘enjoys’ them.

Vrajanātha: How many types of conditioned souls are
there?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: There are five kinds,
namely, those whose consciousness is completely covered;
those whose consciousness is stunted or contracted;
those whose consciousness is budding slightly; those
with developed consciousness; and those with fully
developed consciousness.

Vrajanātha: Which jīvas have completely covered
consciousness?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: These are jīvas with the
bodies of trees, creepers, grass, stone, and so on, who
have totally forgotten their service to Kṛṣṇa and are so
engrossed in the material qualities of māyā that they
have no trace of their sentient nature. There is only a
slight indication of their sentience through the six
transformations.

This is the lowest stage of the jīva’s fall, and this
fact is corroborated by the epic stories of Ahalyā,
Yamalārjuna, and Sapta-tāla. One only reaches this stage
because of some grave offense, and one can only be
delivered from it by Kṛṣṇa’s mercy.

Vrajanātha: Which jīvas have stunted consciousness?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: Beasts, birds, snakes, fish,
aquatics, mosquitoes, and various similar creatures have
stunted or contracted consciousness. The consciousness
of these jīvas is apparent to some degree, unlike that
of jīvas in the previous group, whose consciousness is
completely covered. For example, these jīvas perform
activities such as eating, sleeping, coming and going at
will, and quarrelling with others for things that they
consider their property. They also show fear, and they
become angry when they see injustice. However, they have
no knowledge of the spiritual world.

Even monkeys have some scientific understanding in their
mischievous minds, for they have some idea of what will
or will not happen in the future, and they also have the
quality of being grateful. Some animals have good
knowledge about various objects, too. However, despite
all these attributes, they do not have a propensity for
inquiring about God. Thus, their consciousness is
contracted.

It is said in scripture that Mahārāja Bharata had
knowledge of the names of the Lord even while he was in

                           97
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                         5/5/2017

the body of a deer, but this is unusual; this only
happens in special cases. Bharata and King Nṛga had to
take birth as animals because of their offenses, and
they were delivered when their offenses were nullified
by the Lord’s mercy.

Vrajanātha: Which jīvas have slightly budding
consciousness?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: Conditioned jīvas with human
bodies fall into three categories: those with slightly
budding consciousness, those with developed
consciousness, and those with fully developed
consciousness. Generally, the human race can be divided
into five groups: (1) immoral atheists, (2) moral
atheists, (3) moral theists, who have both morals and
faith in God, (4) those who are engaged in sādhana-
bhakti, devotional service performed with the aim of
attaining bhāva, or spiritual emotions for Kṛṣṇa, and
(5) those who are engaged in bhāva-bhakti, devotion
performed by those who have attained spiritual emotions;
pure devotees, whose devotion to the Lord is
spontaneous.

Those who are knowingly or unknowingly atheists are
either immoral or moral atheists. When a moral person
develops a little faith in God, he is called a moral
theist. Those who develop interest in sādhana-bhakti
according to the tenets of scripture are called sādhana-
bhaktas, and those who have developed some unalloyed
love for God are called bhāva-bhaktas. Both immoral and
moral atheists have slightly budding consciousness;
moral theists and sādhana-bhaktas have developed
consciousness; and the bhāva-bhaktas have fully
developed consciousness.

Vrajanātha: How long do the bhāva-bhaktas stay bound in
māyā?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: I will answer that question
when I explain the seventh verse of Daśa-mūla. Now it’s
quite late, so it’s best that you return home.

Vrajanātha then returned home, contemplating all the
truths he had heard.




Thus ends the Sixteenth Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled “Jīvas Possessed by Māyā”




Chapter Seventeen - Liberation of the Jīva from Māyā


Vrajanātha’s grandmother completed all the arrangements
for his marriage, and in the evening she explained to
him the details. Vrajanātha simply took his meal, in

                           98
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

silence, and made no reply that day. He lay awake on his
bed late that night, deep in thought about the state of
the pure spirit soul. Meanwhile, his elderly grandmother
was busy trying to find ways of convincing him to agree
to the marriage.

At that time, Vrajanātha’s maternal cousin, Veṇī-
mādhava, arrived. The girl Vrajanātha was supposed to
marry was Veṇī-mādhava’s paternal cousin, and Vijaya-
vidyāratna had sent him to finalize the arrangements.

Veṇī-mādhava inquired, “What’s the matter, Grandmother?
Why are you delaying in arranging brother Vraja’s
marriage?”

Vrajanātha’s grandmother replied in a rather anxious
voice, “My son, you are an intelligent boy. Perhaps he
will change his mind if you

speak to him. All my efforts have been in vain.”

Veṇī-mādhava’s character was clearly pro-claimed by his
short stature, small neck, black complexion, and his
eyes which blinked frequently. He liked to pry into
everything that was going on rather than taking care of
his own business, and his involvement in others’ affairs
was never particularly useful. After listening to the
old lady, he frowned slightly and then boasted, “This is
no problem. I just need your permission. Veṇī-mādhava
can accomplish anything. You know me quite well; I can
make money just by counting the waves. Let me discuss
this with him just once. And if I succeed, you’ll treat
me to a nice feast with pūrīs and kacorīs?”

“Vrajanātha has taken his meal, and he’s asleep now,”
said Grandmother.

“All right, I’ll come in the morning and put things in
order,” replied Veṇī-mādhava, and then he returned home.

The next day he returned early in the morning, carrying
a waterpot in his hand, and completed his morning
ablutions. Somewhat surprised to see him, Vrajanātha
said, “Brother why have you come so early in the
morning?”

Veṇī-mādhava answered, “Elder brother, you have been
studying and teaching nyāya-śāstra for a long time now.
You are the son of the Paṇḍita Harinātha Cūḍāmaṇi, and
you have become famous all over the country. You are the
only surviving male member of the house, and if you
don’t have any heirs, who do you suppose will take care
of this big house of yours? We have a request. Please
get married.”

Vrajanātha replied, “Brother, don’t give me unnecessary
trouble. Nowadays I’m accepting the shelter of Śrī
Gaurasundara’s devotees, and I don’t have any desire to
get involved in worldly affairs. I feel real peace in
the company of the Vaiṣṇavas in Māyāpura, and I don’t
find any attraction for this world. I will either accept
sannyāsa or spend my life in the shelter of the
Vaiṣṇavas’ lotus feet. I have expressed my heart to you
because I know that you are my close friend, but don’t

                           99
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

disclose this to anyone else.”

Veṇī-mādhava understood that nothing but trickery could
change Vrajanātha’s mind, so he cleverly curbed his
feelings. In order to create a particular impression, he
said, “I have always remained your assistant in whatever
you have done. I used to carry your books when you were
studying in the Sanskrit school, so I will carry your
staff and waterpot when you accept sannyāsa.”

It is difficult to understand the minds of wicked
people. They have two tongues, saying one thing with
one, and exactly the opposite with the other. They are
bandits in the garb of saints, carrying the name of Śrī
Rāma in the mouth and a dagger under the armpit.

Warming to Veṇī-mādhava’s sweet words, Vrajanātha said,
“Brother, I have always regarded you as my dear friend.
Being an old woman, Grandmother doesn’t understand
serious matters. She is very enthusiastic to drown me in
this ocean of worldly affairs by getting me married to
some girl. It will be a relief if you can change her
mind and somehow dissuade her. I will always be indebted
to you.”

Veṇī-mādhava replied, “No one will dare to oppose your
desire as long as Sharmarāma is living. Elder brother,
you will see what I am capable of. But just let me know
one thing; why have you developed such an aversion
towards this world? Who is advising you to embrace such
feelings of renunciation?”

Vrajanātha described all the events which had led up to
his feelings of detachment. He said, “There is an
elderly and experienced bābājī in Māyāpura named Śrī
Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī. He is my spiritual preceptor. I
go every day after dusk to the shelter of his feet,
where I find relief from the burning fire of this
material world. He is very merciful to me.”

The evil Veṇī-mādhava began conspiring within himself,
“Now I understand brother Vraja’s weakness. He has to be
brought back to the right track by deception and skill.”
Outwardly he said, “Brother, don’t worry. I am going
home now, but I will gradually change Grandmother’s
mind.”

Veṇī-mādhava pretended to take the road that led to his
home, but instead he took another way and reached
Śrīvāsāṅgana in Māyāpura. There he sat on the raised
platform under the bakula tree and began to admire the
opulences of the Vaiṣṇavas. “These Vaiṣṇavas are the
actual enjoyers of this world,” He said to himself.
“What beautiful cottages and lovely groves! What a nice
dias in a wonderful

courtyard!

“In each of the cottages, a Vaiṣṇava sits chanting hari-
nāma on his beads, and each one seems quite content,
like the bulls of religion. Of their own accord, the
women of the neighboring villages who come to bathe in
the Gaṅgā supply these Vaiṣṇavas with fruits, roots,
water, ghee, spices, and other tasty ingredients.

                          100
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017


“The brāhmaṇas practice karma-kāṇḍa activities (fruitive
activites as described in the Vedas for elevation to the
heavenly planets and resultant high birth and material
enjoyment) just to receive these facilities, but these
groups of bābājīs are enjoying the cream instead!

“All glories to Kali-yuga, the age of quarrel and
hypocracy! These disciples of Kali are blessed with good
fortune, and my birth in a high brāhmaṇa family is
useless! Alas! Nowadays no one even inquires about
anything from us, what to speak of offering us fruits
and water! The Vaiṣṇavas condemn the scholarly brāhmaṇa
logicians, accusing us of using word jugglery simply for
the discussion of material objects, and calling us
fools. Moreover, even after having studied this science
of logic thoroughly and becoming a well-educated man, my
elder brother Vrajanātha has begun to accept the words
of these sly loin-cloth people. I, Veṇī-mādhava, will
reform Vrajanātha and give a sound beating to these
bābājīs as well!”

Thinking like this, Veṇī-mādhava entered one of the
cottages, which happened to be the one in which Śrī
Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī was sitting on a mat made of
banana leaves, chanting hari-nāma.

A person’s character is evident from his face, and the
elderly Bābājī could understand that Kali personified
had entered in the form of this son of a brāhmaṇa.
Vaiṣṇavas consider themselves lower than a blade of
grass. They offer respect to those who insult them, and
they pray for the well-being of an opponent, even if he
tortures them. Without any desire for personal honor,
they give honor to all others. Accordingly, Bābājī
Mahārāja respectfully offered Veṇī-mādhava a seat. Veṇī-
mādhava had no Vaiṣṇava qualities at all, so after
sitting down, he offered his blessings to Bābājī
Mahārāja, considering himself to be above all Vaiṣṇava
etiquette.

“Bābā, what is your name? What brings you here?”
inquired Śrī Bābājī Mahāśaya informally. Veṇī-mādhava
became furious by being addressed with the informal
usage of the word ‘you’ instead of the formal one. Thus,
with a face twisted by contempt he said, “O Bābājī, can
you become equal to the brāhmaṇas just by wearing a
loincloth? Never mind! Just tell me, do you know
Vrajanātha Nyāya-pañcānana?”

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: (understanding the reason
for his annoyance) Please excuse this old man; don’t
become offended by my words. Yes, Vrajanātha comes here
sometimes, by his mercy.

Veṇī-mādhava: Don’t think that he’s a simpleton. He
comes here with ulterior motives. He is being polite at
first, to gain your confidence. The brāhmaṇas of
Belpukura are extremely annoyed at your behavior, and
they have consulted with each other and decided to send
Vrajanātha to you. You are an old man. Just be careful.
I will keep coming from time to time, to inform you how
their conspiracy progresses. Don’t tell him about me;
otherwise you will run into even deeper trouble. I will

                          101
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

take leave for today.

So saying, Veṇī-mādhava got up and returned to his home;
and later, just after completing his midday meal, he
visited Vrajanātha. While Vrajanātha was sitting on his
verandah, Veṇī-mādhava suddenly appeared as if from
nowhere, sat next to him, and struck up a conversation.

“Brother, I went to Māyāpura for some business today,”
he began. “There I saw an old man, maybe the same
Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī with whom you spoke. We were
talking about things in general, and then the
conversation turned to you. The things he said about
you! I have never heard such repulsive things being
spoken about any brāhmaṇa. In the end he said, ‘I will
bring him down from his high brahminical status by
feeding him leftovers from many low-caste people.’ Fie
on him! It is not proper for a learned man like you to
associate with such a person. You will ruin the high
prestige of the brāhmaṇas if you act like this.”

Vrajanātha was astounded to hear Veṇī-mādhava say all
this. For some unknown reason, his faith and respect for
the Vaiṣṇavas and Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja
only doubled, and he said gravely, “Brother, I am busy
at present. You go now; I will hear everything from you
tomorrow, and then I will make a decision.”

Veṇī-mādhava went away, and Vrajanātha was now fully
aware of Veṇī-mādhava’s two-tongued nature. Although He
was well versed in the nyāya-śāstra and had a natural
dislike for wickedness, the thought that Veṇī-mādhava
would help him on the path to sannyāsa had induced him
to be friendly.

Now, however, Vrajanatha understood that all Veṇī-
mādhava’s sweet words had been for a particular motive.
After further thought, he realized that Veṇī-mādhava was
acting deceitfully because he was involved in the
marriage proposal. He realized that that must have been
why Veṇī-mādhava had gone to Māyāpura ñ to sow the seed
of some secret plot. He prayed in his mind, “O Lord! Let
my faith in the lotus feet of my Gurudeva and the
Vaiṣṇavas remain firm. May it never be reduced by the
disturbance of such impure people.” He remained absorbed
in these thoughts until evening. He then started for
Śrīvāsāṅgana, the courtyard of Śrīvasa Ṭhākura’s house,
and arrived there deep in anxiety.

Back in Māyāpura, after Veṇī-mādhava had left, Bābājī
thought, “This man is certainly a brahma-rākṣasa.
‘Rākṣasāḥ kalim āśritya jāyante brahma-yoniṣu ñ taking
shelter of Kali-yuga, rākṣasas (demons) take birth in
brāhmaṇa families.’ This statement of scripture
certainly holds true for that person. His face clearly
shows his pride in his high caste, his false ego, his
envy of Vaiṣṇavas, and his religious hypocrisy. His
short neck, his eyes, and his deceptive way of talking
actually represent his internal state of mind. Ah, this
man is a complete atheistic demon by nature, whereas
Vrajanātha is such a sweet-natured person. O Kṛṣṇa! O
Gaurāṅga! Never give me association of such a person. I
must warn Vrajanātha today.”


                          102
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                           5/5/2017

As soon as Vrajanātha reached the cottage, Bābājī called
out to him affectionately, “Come, come!” and embraced
him. Vrajanātha’s throat choked with emotion, and tears
began flowing from his eyes as he fell down at Śrī
Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī’s feet. Śrī Bābājī Mahārāja
picked him up very affectionately and said gently, “A
black-complexioned brāhmaṇa came here this morning. He
said some agitating things and then went away again. Do
you know him?”

Vrajanātha: Prabhu, your good self told me earlier that
there are different kinds of jīvas in this world. Some
of them are so envious that without any cause they find
satisfaction in troubling others. Our brother, Veṇī-
mādhava, is one of the leaders in that category. I will
be glad if we don’t discuss him further. It is his very
nature to criticize you to me and me to you, and to
cause disputes between us by manufacturing false
accusations. I hope you didn’t pay any attention to what
he said.

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: O Kṛṣṇa! O Gaurāṅga! I have
been serving the Vaiṣṇavas for many days now, and by
their mercy, I have received the power to tell the
difference between a Vaiṣṇava and a non-Vaiṣṇava. So, I
am aware of everything in this regard. You don’t need to
say anything to me about this.

Vrajanātha: Yes, let us forget all this. Please tell me
how the conditioned soul can become free from māyā’s
clutches .

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: You will get your answer in
the seventh verse of Daśa-mūla:

yadā bhrāmaṁ bhrāmaṁ hari-rasa-galad-vaiṣṇava-janaṁ

kadācit saṁpaśyan tad-anugamane syād ruci-yutaḥ

tadā kṛṣṇāvṛttyā tyajati śanakair māyika-daśāṁ

svarūpaṁ bibhrāṇo vimala-rasa-bhogaṁ sa kurute



When, in the course of wandering among higher and lower
species in the cycle of repeated birth and death, a jīva
bound by māyā-śakti beholds a Vaiṣṇava intoxicated by
the mellows of devotion to Śrī Hari, and a taste arises
in his heart for following the Vaiṣṇava path. By
regularly chanting Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s names, he gradually
becomes fully aloof from all effects of his illusory
conditioning. Step by step, he then realises his
constitutional spiritual form and becomes qualified to
relish the unalloyed mellows of direct service to Śrī
Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.

Vrajanātha: I would like to hear some evidence from the
Vedas to

verify this.

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: Both the Muṇḍaka Upaniṣad
(3.1.2) and Svetāśvatara Upaniṣad (4.7) repeat the same

                          103
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                           5/5/2017

śloka:

samāne vṛkṣe puruṣo nimagno



‘nīśayā śocati muhyamānaḥ




juṣṭaṁ yadā paśyaty anyam īśam



asya mahimānam eti vīta-śokaḥ




The jīva is situated in the material body like a bird is
situated on a tree. Being illusioned by the Lord’s
deluding potency, he falls into bodily identification
and tries to enjoy eating the fruits of that tree. Thus
he laments repeatedly, feeling himself bereft of
shelter. However, when he perceives within the tree of
his body another bird, the Supreme Lord, who is the
proper object of his service, he then becomes free of
all lamentation and attains his own glory in the form of
service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.”

Vrajanātha: This verse states that when the jīva sees
the worshipable Lord, he becomes free forever from all
anxieties and directly perceives His Lord’s
magnificence. Does this imply liberation?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: The termination of the
jīva’s captivity within māyā is called mukti, which is
attainable by the person who associates with pure
devotees. Most importantly, one should consider the
details of the status which the jīva attains after
mukti. The Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.10.6) declares:

muktir hitvānyathā-rūpaṁ svarūpeṇa vyavasthitiḥ

Mukti is the permanent situation of the living entity in
his constitutional transcendental form, having been
attained after giving up the changeable gross and subtle
material bodies.

This verse explains that liberation means to abandon
these other forms and to be situated in one’s original
spiritual form. Attaining one’s constitutional position
is the fundamental necessity for the jīva. The work of
liberation is complete the moment the jīva is released
from the clutches of māyā. Then, so many activities
begin once he attains his natural, constitutional
position. Mukti can also be defined as atyanta-duḥkha-
nivrtti, which means ‘release from endless suffering.’
However, after attaining this liberation, there is the
stage of positive spiritual happiness. That state is
described in the Chāndogya Upaniṣad (8.12.3):

                            104
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                           5/5/2017


evam evaiṣa samprasādo ‘smāc charīrāt samutthaya

paraṁ jyoti-rūpa-sampadya svena rūpenābhiniṣpadyate

sa uttama-puruṣaḥ sa tatra paryeti jakṣan krīḍan
ramamāṇaḥ

The liberated jīva transcends the confines of his gross
and subtle material bodies and acquires a spiritual form
luminescent with transcendental lustre. This is his
intrinsic, supramundane identity. He is a perfect being
and resides in the spiritual world, relishing sublime
activities and divine bliss at every moment.

Vrajanātha: What are the symptoms of those who are
liberated from māyā?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: They have eight symptoms,
which the Chāndogya Upaniṣad (8.7.1) describes as
follows:

ya ātmāpahata-pāpmā vijaro vimṛtyur viśoko ‘vijighatso
‘pipāsaḥ satya-kāmaḥ satya-saṅkalpaḥ so ‘nveṣṭavyaḥ

One should earnestly seek the association of a liberated
soul, who possesses the following eight qualities: (1)
apahata-pāpmā ñ he is freed from all sin, that is to say
he is free from any connection with addiction to sinful
activities that arises from the nescience of māyā; (2)
vijara ñ he is not subject to the miseries of old age;
that is, since he has no tendency to decay, he always
remains young and fresh; (3) vimṛtyu ñ he does not die;
he never falls under the influence of death; (4) viśoka
ñ he is never morose; (5) vijighatsa ñ he has no desire
for personal enjoyment; (6) apipāsa ñ he has a natural
inclination towards serving his most beloved Kṛṣṇa, with
no other desires; (7) satya-kāma ñ his desires are just
suitable for the service of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and conversely,
his desires are free from fault (since they are only for
the pleasure of the Supreme Absolute Truth); and (8)
satya-saṅkalpaḥ ñ all of his desires become fulfilled.
These eight qualities are absent in the jīvas bound by
māyā.

Vrajanātha: It is said in the Daśa-mūla verse, “The good
fortune of the jīva who is wandering aimlessly in the
material world arises when he meets a rasika Vaiṣṇava,
that pure devotee who relishes the nectar of Hari.” One
might raise the objection that one could eventually
attain devotion to Lord Kṛṣṇa by performing pious
activities, such as aṣṭāṅga-yoga (the eight-fold yoga
system) and the cultivation of knowledge of the
impersonal feature of the Lord.

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: These are Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s own
words:

na rodhayati māṁ yogo na sāṅkhyaṁ dharma eva ca

na svādhyāyas tapas tyāgo neṣṭā-pūrttaṁ na dakṣiṇā

vratāni yajñāś chandāṁsi tīrthāni niyamā yamāḥ


                          105
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                           5/5/2017

yathāvarundhe sat-saṅgaḥ sarva-saṅgāpaho hi mām

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 11.12.1ñ2)

The Supreme Personality of Godhead said, “My dear
Uddhava, by associating with My pure devotees one can
destroy one’s attachment for all objects of material
sense gratification. The devotion developed in such
purifying association brings Me under the control of My
devotee. One may perform the aṣṭāṅga-yoga system, engage
in philosophical analysis of the elements of material
nature, practice non-violence and other ordinary
principles of piety, chant the Vedas, perform penances,
take to the renounced order of life, execute sacrificial
performances and dig wells, plant trees and perform
other public welfare activities, give in charity, carry
out severe vows, worship the devas, chant confidential
mantras, visit holy places or accept major and minor
disciplinary injunctions, but even by performing all
such activities one does not bring Me under his
control.”

It is also stated in Hari-bhakti-sudhodhaya (8.51):

yasya yat-saṅgatiḥ puṁso maṇi-vat syāt sa tad-gunaḥ

sva-kularddhyaitato dhīmān sva-yūthāny eva saṁśrayet

Just as a jewel or crystal reflects the color of the
object with which it is in contact, so a person develops
qualities according to the company he keeps. Therefore,
by keeping association with pure unalloyed devotees, one
can also become a pure devotee. Thus, the association of
such devotees is the root cause of all good fortune.

In the scriptures, the word niḥsaṅga means ‘to live in
solitude.’ This implies that we should only live in the
association of devotees. Niḥsaṅga means to leave all
other association and take the association of a pure
devotee. Even unintentional association with saintly
people brings good fortune for the jīva.

saṅgo yaḥ saṁsṛter hetur asatsu vihito ‘dhiyā

sa eva sādhuṣu kṛto niḥsaṅgatvāya kalpate

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.23.55)

The association of materialists causes bondage in the
material world, even though one may not know that this
is so. Similarly, association with saintly people, even
if it happens by chance or unknowingly, is called
niḥsaṅga.

It is said in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.5.32):

naiṣāṁ matis tāvad urukramāṅghriṁ



spṛśaty anarthāpagamo yad-arthaḥ




                          106
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017



mahīyasāṁ pāda-rajo-’bhiṣekaṁ



niṣkiñcanānāṁ na vṛṇīta yāvat




The lotus feet of the Lord, who is glorified for His
uncommon activities, destroy all anarthas in the heart.
However, those who are very materialistic cannot be
attached to His lotus feet until they smear their bodies
with the dust from the lotus feet of great souls who are
absorbed in His loving service and who are completely
freed from material attachments.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.48.31) states:

na hy am-mayāni tīrthāni na devā mṛc-chilā-mayāḥ

te punanty uru-kālena darśanād eva sādhavaḥ

Only after a long period of worshiping Gaṅgā-devī, the
holy places of pilgrimage, and the earthen and marble
deity forms of the demigods, is the soul of such a
worshiper sanctified, whereas an unalloyed devotee of
the Lord purifies any person simply by giving a moment’s
association through his mere presence.’

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.51.53) states further:

bhavāpavargo bhramato yadā bhavej



janasya tarhy acyuta sat-samāgamaḥ




sat-saṅgamo yarhi tadaiva sad-gatau



parāvareśe tvayi jāyate matiḥ




O infallible Lord! The jīva has been wandering in this
world of birth and death since time without beginning.
When the time comes for him to leave this cycle of birth
and death, he receives association with Your self-
realized pure devotees. From the moment he achieves this
association, his mind becomes firmly fixed on You who
are the sole and supreme shelter of the surrendered
devotees, the controller of all, and the cause of all
causes.

                          107
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017


Since time without beginning, the jīva who is eternally
bound by māyā has been moving throughout the universe,
taking birth according to his past fruitive actions;
sometimes as a demigod and sometimes in the various
animal species. From the time he attains the association
of saintly people by dint of of his past pious
activities (sukṛti), he fixes his mind very firmly on
Kṛṣṇa, the controller of all.

Vrajanātha: You have said that sādhu-saṅga is achieved
by sukṛti. What is sukṛti? Is it part of fruitive
activity or the cultivation of knowledge?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: The scriptures assign the
term sukṛti to auspicious activity. There are two kinds
of sukṛti. One (bhakti-sukṛti) causes the appearance of
bhakti, and the other (sādhāraṇa-sukṛti) produces
various inferior transitory results. Another meaning of
karma is ‘prescribed duties.’ Such duties are of two
types: Those compulsory every day (nitya), and those
that are compulsory for particular occasions
(naimittika), like piṇḍa. Performance of pious
activities (those prescribes for daily execution and
those prescribed for particular occasions) and the
cultivation of knowledge leading to impersonal
liberation give inferior results. The auspicious
activities that generate devotion to Lord Kṛṣṇa as an
end result are the association of pure devotees, and
contact with sanctified places, auspicious times, and
sanctified items.

When enough of such sukṛti has been accumulated, it
gives rise to kṛṣṇa-bhakti. The other type of sukṛti,
however, is consumed after one enjoys its results, so it
does not accumulate to give any permanent result.
Charity and all other pious deeds in the world result
only in achieving the objects of sense gratification.
The sukṛti of impersonal speculation results in
impersonal liberation. Neither of these kinds of sukṛti
can give devotional service to the Supreme Lord.

Activities such as sādhu-saṅga and observing holy days
like Ekādaśī, Janmāṣṭamī, and Gaura-pūrṇimā all help to
develop one’s saintly qualities. Tulasī, the remnants of
the Lord’s foodstuffs called mahā-prasādam, the Lord’s
temples, holy places, and articles used by sādhus are
all auspicious and give rise to bhakti.

Vrajanātha: Can a person obtain bhakti if he is
tormented by material problems and intelligently takes
shelter of Śrī Hari’s lotus feet to become relieved of
his problems?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: The jīva who is harassed by
the afflictions of the goddess of illusion may somehow
understand through discriminating intelligence that
worldly activities are simply troublesome, and that his
only solace is the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa and His pure
devotees. Knowing this, he runs to take shelter of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet, the first step in this process being
the acceptance of the shelter of bhagavad-bhaktas. Such
acceptance is the principal bhakti-bestowing sukṛti,
through which he obtains the lotus feet of the Supreme

                          108
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

Lord.

The jīva’s initial mood of renunciation and state of
awakening consciousness play an indirect, secondary role
as stepping stones towards his ultimate devotional goal.
However, sādhu-saṅga, an indispensable need, is the
principal means to attain śuddha-bhakti at the lotus
feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

Vrajanātha: If karma, jñāna, renunciation, and
discrimination are indirect ways of achieving bhakti,
what is the objection to refer to them as bhakti-
bestowing sukṛti?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: There is a strong objection:
they bind one to inferior, temporary results. The
performance of fruitive activity has no permanent
result; rather it binds the jīva to the objects of sense
gratification and thus renders him complacent.
Renunciation and empirical knowledge immerse the jīva in
knowledge of the impersonal Supreme and cause him to
become indifferent to the Lord. This principle prevents
him from attaining the Supreme Lord’s lotus feet.

It is true that these processes very rarely take one to
bhakti, but that is the exception, not the rule. On the
other hand, association of pure devotees does not award
any inferior benefit, but surely brings the jīva towards
prema. It is explained in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.25.25):

satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-samvido



bhavanti hṛt-karṇa-rasāyanāḥ kathāḥ



taj-joṣaṇād āśv apavarga-vartmani



śraddhā ratir bhaktir anukramiṣyati



In the association of pure devotees, the recitation and
discussion of My glorious activities and pastimes are
pleasing to both the heart and the ears. By engaging in
devotional service in this way, one becomes established
on that path whereby all ignorance is nullified, and one
progressively attains śraddhā, then bhāva, and finally
prema-bhakti.

Vrajanātha: I understand that sādhu-saṅga is the only
sukṛti that causes devotional service to expand and
develop. One has to listen to the hari-kathā flowing
from the mouths of sādhus, and thereafter one obtains
bhakti. Is this the proper sequence to progress in
bhakti?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: I will explain the proper
way of progressing in devotion; please listen with deep
contemplation. Only by good fortune does the jīva who is

                          109
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

wandering throughout the universe achieve the sukṛti
that gives rise to bhakti.

Any one of the many limbs of pure bhakti may touch a
jīva’s life. For example, he may fast on Ekādaśī, or see
or touch the holy places of the Lord’s pastimes, or
serve a guest there who happens to be a pure devotee, or
have the chance to hear hari-nāma or hari-kathā flowing
from the lotus mouth of a devotee who has no other
possession than Kṛṣṇa.

If someone desires material benefits or impersonal
liberation from such activities, the result does not
lead to devotional service. In contrast, if these
activities are performed even by a person who has no
knowledge of the scientific spiritual truths of bhakti
but has no objective to attain impersonal liberation or
sense gratification, and they are performed either
because of accidental association with sādhus or for
some mundane reason such as to please one’s relatives
etc. these activities lead to the accumulation of sukṛti
that gives rise to bhakti.

After accumulating such sukṛti for many births, it
becomes concentrated enough to give faith in unalloyed
bhakti, and when faith in such bhakti develops further,
one develops greed to associate with pure devotees. By
association with sādhus one gradually becomes engaged in
performing sādhana (devotional activities that regulate
and purify the tendency for sense gratification) and
bhajana (chanting, hearing and remembering Lord Kṛṣṇa).
This leads to the removal of anarthas (unwanted habits
and activities which distract one from pure devotion) in
proportion to the purity of the devotee’s chanting.

When anarthas are removed, the previous faith is
purified still further from contaminants and transforms
into niṣṭhā (firm faith). This niṣṭhā is also gradually
purified and transforms into ruci (spiritual taste), and
by the influence of the enchanting beauty of bhakti,
this ruci is strengthened and becomes transformed into
āśakti (transcendental attachment). Aśakti then
gradually matures into the great gift of the fully
perfected state of rati or bhāva (spiritual emotions).
Then, when rati combines with the appropriate
ingredients, it becomes rasa (a transcendental
relationship in pure divine love for Kṛṣṇa). This is the
step-by-step progression in the development of kṛṣṇa-
prema.

The principal idea is that when people with sufficient
sukṛti encounter pure sādhus, an inclination is born in
their hearts to proceed on the path of bhakti. First of
all one associates with a pure devotee by chance, and
this leads to initial śraddhā, whereupon one gets the
association of such devotees a second time. The result
of the first association is śraddhā, which can also be
termed ‘acceptance of the path of surrender.’ The
initial sādhu-saṅga is brought about by contact with
holy places, auspicious times and paraphernalia, and
recipients of Śrī Hari’s grace, all of which are beloved
by Him. These lead to faith in His shelter. The symptoms
of the development of such faith are described in the
Bhagavad-gītā (18.66):

                          110
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                           5/5/2017


sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ

Here the words sarva-dharmān imply worldly religious
duties, aṣṭāṅga-yoga, sāṅkhya-yoga, jñāna[xxv]1, and
renunciation. The jīva can never achieve his ultimate
spiritual goal by practicing all these worldly
religions, which is why the instruction here is to give
them up. Śrī Kṛṣṇa says, “My form of condensed eternity,
knowledge and bliss, appearing as the performer of
wonderful pastimes in Vraja, is the only shelter for the
jīvas. When one understands this, he gives up all desire
for material sense enjoyment and impersonal liberation,
and takes shelter of Me with undivided attention.” Such
śraddhā is the sole means whereby the process of bhakti
can dynamically advance. When such faith dawns in the
jīva’s heart, with tears in his eyes he resolves to
become a follower of a Vaiṣṇava sādhu. The Vaiṣṇava of
whom he takes shelter is known as śrī-guru.

Vrajanātha: How many different kinds of anarthas
(unwanted habits and mantalities) are there?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: There are four types of
anarthas: (1) svarūpa aprāpti, inability to realize
one’s constitutional form; (2) asat-tṛṣṇā, hankering for
the impermanent; (3) aparādha, offenses; and (4) hṛdaya-
daurbalya, weakness of heart.

When the jīva forgets that he is a minute particle of
spirit and a servant of Kṛṣṇa, he is carried very far
from his original, spiritual position as Kṛṣṇa’s servant
and begins superimposing his conception of ‘I’ and
‘mine’ upon inert matter. Asat-tṛṣṇā arises in the form
of three desires to enjoy transitory sensual pleasure;
the desire for offspring, wealth, and the pleasures of
heaven. There are ten types of aparadha, offenses, which
I will discuss later. Then on account of hṛdaya-
daurbalya, weakness of heart, lamentation arises. These
four types of anarthas develop due to the material
conditioned nature of the jīvas bound by ignorance, and
they are removed gradually by cultivating pure Kṛṣṇa
consciousness in the association of pure devotees.

The path of yoga consists of the four parts: (1)
pratyāhāra, withdrawal from sense-objects; (2) yama,
fundamental principles such as abstinence from
licencious sexlife, consumption of meat, fish etc,
intoxication, gambling, and other frivolous activities;
(3) niyama, secondary regulations such as rising early,
bathing etc; and (4) vairāgya, renunciation. This path
is not a means to free oneself from material anxiety,
for it cannot award ultimate perfection and is filled
with problems and the danger of falldown and failure.
Ultimately, purification by this path [without being in
conjunction with bhakti] is only a most distant
possibility.

The only one process which is   free from disturbance is
the cultivation of pure Kṛṣṇa   consciousness in the
association of pure devotees.   The jīva is thus freed
from māyā’s stranglehold, and   his constitutional

                          111
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                           5/5/2017

position is revealed to the extent that anarthas are
removed from his heart.

Vrajanātha: Can people with no trace of anarthas be
termed liberated people?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: Please consider the
following śloka:

rajobhiḥ sama-saṅkhyātāḥ pārthivair iha jantavaḥ

teṣāṁ ye kecanehante śreyo vai manujādayaḥ



prāyo mumukṣavas teṣāṁ kecanaiva dvijottama

mumukṣūṇāṁ sahasreṣu kaścin mucyate sidhyati



muktānām api siddhānāṁ nārāyaṇa-parāyaṇaḥ

sudurlabhaḥ praśāntātmā koṭiṣv api mahā-mune



(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 6.14.3ñ5)

O Lord! There are as many jīvas in this material world
as there are grains of sand. Only a few of these are
human beings, among whom only a few strive for any form
of spiritual auspiciousness. (Most of the jīvas are
sense gratifiers who are intoxicated by insignificant
sense enjoyment). One may actually achieve liberation,
in the sense of giving up material attachment to
society, friendship, love, country, home, wife and
children; but among many thousands of such liberated
persons, one who can understand the true meaning of
liberation is very rare. Among hundreds of millions of
such liberated or perfected beings, it is very rare to
find a great soul whose mind is fully peaceful and is a
devotee of Lord Nārāyaṇa. Therefore a devotee of
Nārāyaṇa is very rare.

A person free from all anarthas is known as a pure
devotee. Such devotees are very rare; indeed, even among
millions of liberated persons, one can hardly find a
single devotee of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, no association
in this world is rarer than the association of Kṛṣṇa’s
devotees.

Vrajanātha: Does the word Vaiṣṇava imply a bhakta who
has renounced family life?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: A pure devotee of Kṛṣṇa is a
Vaiṣṇava whether he is a householder or sannyāsī
(renunciant), a brāhmaṇa or a caṇḍāla (dog-eater), rich
or poor. To the degree that he has pure devotion for
Kṛṣṇa, he should be known as a kṛṣṇa-bhakta.

Vrajanātha: You have already said that there are five
types of jīvas who are bound by māyā. You have also
included devotees performing sādhana-bhakti and bhāva-

                          112
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

bhakti in that category. At what stage are devotees
liberated from māyā?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: One is freed from the
clutches of māyā from the very beginning of his
devotional service, but complete liberation from the two
material bodies (gross and subtle), is only obtained
when one reaches the stage of full maturity in bhakti-
sādhana. Before this, a person is liberated to the
extent that he is aware of his constitutional position.
The jīva achieves complete freedom from māyā only when
he is completely disassociated from the gross and subtle
bodies.

The stage of bhāva-bhakti dawns in the jīva’s heart as a
result of practicing sādhana-bhakti. When the jīva is
firmly established in bhāva-bhakti, he gives up his
gross body and after that his subtle body and becomes
established in his pure spiritual body. Consequently, he
is not fully free from māyā’s control even in the
beginning stage of bhāva-bhakti, because a trace of the
conditioning of māyā always remains as long as he is
performing sādhana-bhakti.

The authorities in our line have carefully considered
sādhana-bhakti and bhāva-bhakti, and have included
devotees practicing both these stages amongst the five
stages of conditioned souls. The materialists and
impersonalists are definitely included amongst the five
categories of conditioned souls.

The only path of deliverance from the clutches of māyā
is pure devotion for Śrī Hari. The imprisonment of the
jīva began when he forgot his position as the eternal
servant of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. This forgetfulness is his original
offence and root of all his subsequent offences. Only
the mercy of Śrī Kṛṣṇa can forgive all these offences
and nothing else. Therefore, the mercy of Śrī Kṛṣṇa is
alone the indispensable instrument that can fully
release the jīva from the captivity of māyā.

The impersonalists believe that only by cultivating
impersonal knowledge can one gain liberation from māyā,
but this belief has no basis. There is no possibility of
becoming free from māyā without Kṛṣṇa’s mercy. This is
explained in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.2.32ñ33):

ye ‘nye ‘ravindākṣa vimukta-māninas



tvayy asta-bhāvād aviśuddha-buddhayaḥ



āruhya kṛcchreṇa paraṁ padaṁ tataḥ



patanty adho ‘nādṛta-yuṣmad-aṅghrayaḥ



O lotus-eyed Lord! Those who proudly think that they are

                          113
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

liberated but do not render devotional service unto You,
certainly have impure intelligence. Although they
perform severe austerities and penances and rise up to
the spiritual position of impersonal realization of
brahma, they fall down again because they have no
respect for devotional service to Your lotus feet.

tathā na te mādhava tāvakāḥ kvacid



bhraśyanti mārgāt tvayi baddha-sauhṛdāḥ



tvayābhiguptā vicaranti nirbhayā



vināyakānīkapa-mūrddhasu prabho



O Mādhava, Your dearmost bhaktas, who have true love for
Your lotus feet, are not like those proud jñānīs, for
they never fall down from the path of devotional
service. Since You protect them, they move about
fearlessly, stepping on the very heads of those who
obstruct their path so that no obstacle can check their
progress.

Vrajanātha: How many different types of jīvas are
liberated from māyā?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: Two kinds of jīvas are free
from māyā’s control: (1) nitya-mukta, the jīvas who were
never under māyā’s control; and (2) baddha-mukta, those
who were once under māyā’s control but are now free.

The nitya-mukta-jīvas are divided again into two
categories: (1) those who are attracted by the Supreme
Lord’s feature of opulence and majesty (aiśvarya-gata);
and (2) those who are attracted by His feature of
sweetness (mādhurya-gata).

Those jīvas who are attracted by Kṛṣṇa’s opulence and
majesty are personal associates of Śrī Nārāyaṇa, the
Master of Vaikuṇṭha. They are particles of spiritual
effulgence emanating from Śrī Mūla-Saṅkarṣana who
resides in Vaikuṇṭha. Those jīvas who are attracted by
the Lord’s sweet, human-like pastimes are personal
associates of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Master of Goloka Vṛndāvana.
They are particles of spiritual effulgence manifesting
from Śrī Baladeva, who resides in Goloka Vṛndāvana.

There are three kinds of baddha-mukta-jīvas: (1)
aiśvarya-gata, those who are attracted to the Lord’s
features of opulence and majesty; (2) mādhurya-gata,
those who are attracted to His feature of sweetness; and
(3) brahma-jyoti-gata, those who are attracted to His
impersonal effulgence.

Those who are attracted to His opulence during their
period of spiritual practice become eternal associates

                          114
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

of Śrī Nārāyaṇa, the master of the spiritual sky, and
they achieve sālokya-mukti (the opulence of residing on
His planet). Jīvas who are attracted to Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
sweetness during their period of devotional practice
attain direct service to Him when they are liberated in
the eternal abodes of Vṛndāvana and other similar
abodes. Jīvas who attempt to merge into the impersonal
effulgence during their period of practice attain
sāyujya-mukti when they are liberated. They merge into
His effulgence and are thus completely destroyed.

Vrajanātha: What is the ultimate destination of the
unalloyed devotees of Śrī Gaura-Kiśora (Caitanya
Mahāprabhu)?

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Bābājī: Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Gaura-
Kiśora are not a separate reality. They are both the
abodes of madhura-rasa (the mood of sweetness) However,
there is a slight difference between Them because
madhura-rasa has two chambers. One is the mood of
mādhurya (sweetness), and the other is the mood of
audārya (magnanimity). Wherever the mood of mādhurya-
rasa is prominent Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s form becomes gracefully
manifest, and Śrī Gaurāṅga’s form is radiantly manifest
where audārya is prominent. Similarly, the original
Vṛndāvana also has two divisions: Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s abode and
Śrī Gaura’s abode.

In Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s abode, His nitya-siddha and nitya-mukta
associates have a mood of audārya, but there is a
predominance of mādhurya-rasa, whereas in Śrī Gaura’s
abode His associates have sweetness, yet that mādhurya-
rasa is predominated and covered over by an overwhelming
mood of munificence. Some associates reside in both
abodes simultaneously by expansions of the self
(svarūpa-vyūha), while others reside in one spiritual
form in only one abode, and not in the other.

Those who only worship Śrī Gaura during their period of
sādhana only serve in the abode of Śrī Gaura when they
achieve perfection, while those who only serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa
during their period of sādhana serve in Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
abode on achieving perfection. However, those who
worship the forms of both Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Gaura
during.their period of sādhana manifest two forms when
they attain perfection, and reside in both abodes
simultaneously. This truth of the simultaneous oneness
and difference of Śrī Gaura and Śrī Kṛṣṇa is a supremely
confidential secret.

When Vrajanātha heard all these teachings about the
state of the jīvas who are liberated from māyā, he could
no longer keep his composure. Brimming with emotion, he
fell down at the elderly Vaiṣṇava’s lotus feet, and
Bābājī Mahāśaya, crying profusely, lifted him up and
embraced him.

It was already quite late in the night. Vrajanātha took
leave of Śrī Bābājī Mahāśaya and went home, totally
engrossed in meditating on his instructions.

When Vrajanātha reached home he took his meal, and while
doing so he warned his grandmother sternly,
“Grandmother, if you people want to see me here, stop

                          115
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

all this talk about my marriage and do not keep any sort
of contact with Veṇī-mādhava. He is my greatest enemy,
and from tomorrow I will never speak with him again. You
should also neglect him.”

Vrajanātha’s grandmother was very intelligent. Thus,
understanding Vrajanātha’s mood, she decided to postpone
any question of marriage. “From the kind of sentiments
he’s displaying,” she thought, “It seems that if he is
forced too much, he might leave for Vṛndāvana or
Vārāṇasī. Let God decide as He wills.”



Thus ends the Seventeenth Chapter of Jaiva-Dharma,

entitled “Prameya: The Jīvas Free from Māyā”



Part Three - Srila Prabhupāda's Legacy



From the Junction

In order to help his audiences understand the essential
and complex subject of jīva-tattva, and especially to
increase their faith in Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s abode as the jīva’s
eternal shelter, Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja often
requests them to seek guidance from his śikṣā-guru Śrīla
Prabhupāda Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja.

On Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s request, in this
chapter the editors introduce and quote from Śrīla
Prabhupāda’s translations, purports, lectures, and
letters. Unless otherwise mentioned, the indented quotes
in Part Three, as well as in Part One, are cited
directly from his Bhaktivedanta Book Trust Vedabase
folio, the comprehensive database of all of his spoken
and written words.

From the Borderline

The following quotes confirm that the jīvas in this
world emanate from the region called taṭasthā-śakti,
which is located on the borderline between the spiritual
and material worlds.

The Supreme Personality of Godhead has three primary
energies, or potencies. The first is called antaraṅga-
śakti, or the internal potency. The second is called
taṭasthā-śakti, or the marginal potency. The third is
called bahiraṅga-śakti, or the external potency. The
living entities constitute the marginal potency, and
they are situated between the internal and external
potencies.

(Nectar of Instruction, Verse 2, purport)

According to Viṣṇu Purāṇa, Bhagavad-gītā, and all other
Vedic literatures, the living entities are generated
from the taṭasthā energy of the Lord, and thus they are
always the energy of the Lord and are not the energetic.

                          116
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017


(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.7.9, purport)

The jiva has access to two places, both of which he may
seek, this material world and the spiritual realm. He is
situated in svapna-sthanam, the dream-like third state,
on the margin of these two worlds. From that junction he
is able to see both the material and the spiritual
worlds.

(Brhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad 4.3.9)

The symptoms of the marginal existence are like those of
a huge aquatic who is capable of living on both the
eastern and western sides of the river at his own will.
Similarly, the jiva soul, situated within the waters of
the Causal Ocean, which lies between the material and
spiritual worlds, is able to reside in both the dream-
world of matter and the spiritual world of divine
wakefulness.

(Brhad-āraṇyaka Upaniṣad 4.3.18)

The borderline between water and land is called taṭa.
Yet, the water is contiguous to the land; where then is
the taṭa, the margin? The taṭa is merely the demarcation
that separates the water from land. This taṭa is a very
subtle state; it cannot be perceived through mundane
vision. From this allegory, we take the water as the
spiritual world and the land as the material world.
Thus, the fine line that divides the two worlds is the
taṭa, the subtle demarcation exactly whereupon the jīva
soul is located.

(Jaiva-dharma, Chapter 15)

Our First Time in Kṛṣṇa’s Abode

The following quotes explain that we, the conditioned
souls, have not yet been to our eternal home, the Lord’s
spiritual abode.

The mature devotees, who have completely executed Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, are immediately transferred to the
universe where Kṛṣṇa is appearing. In that universe the
devotees get their first opportunity to associate with
Kṛṣṇa personally and directly.

(Kṛṣṇa, The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Chapter 28)

In further reference to your question about the form of
the spirit soul of the conditioned living entity: there
is a spiritual form always, but it develops fully only
when the living entity goes to Vaikuṇṭha. This form
develops according to the desire of the living entity.
Until this perfectional stage is reached, the form is
lying dormant as the form of the tree is lying dormant
in the seed.

(Letter to Rūpānuga. Los Angeles, August 8, 1969)

The sole potency of Kṛṣṇa, which is spiritual,
functioning as Kṛṣṇa’s own proper power, has manifested
His pastimes of Goloka or Gokula. By Her grace [the

                             117
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

grace of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, who is the personification of
Kṛṣṇa’s sole potency], individual souls, who are
constituents of the marginal potency, can have admission
into even those pastimes.

(Brahma-saṁhitā, Verse 6, purport)

An unlimited number of atomic conscious particles emerge
from the spiritual rays of Paramātmā as the aggregate of
the living entities. These innumerable jīvas have no
relation with the mundane world when they come to know
themselves to be the eternal servants of the Supreme
Lord. At that time, they are incorporated into the realm
of Vaikuṇṭha.

(Brahma-saṁhitā, Verse 16, purport)

No Māyā in the Spiritual World

In the following quotes, Śrīla Prabhupāda confirms that
residents of the spiritual world never fall into the
material world.

The eternally liberated living beings are in the
Vaikuṇṭha-jagat, the spiritual world, and they never
fall into the material world.

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 5.11.12, purport)

From authoritative sources it can be discerned that
associates of Lord Viṣṇu who descend from Vaikuṇṭha do
not actually fall. They come with the purpose of
fulfilling the desire of the Lord, and their descent to
this material world is comparable to that of the Lord.
The Lord comes to this material world through the agency
of His internal potency, and similarly, when a devotee
or associate of the Lord descends to this material
world, he does so through the action of the spiritual
energy. Any pastime conducted by the Supreme Personality
of Godhead is an arrangement by yogamāyā, not mahāmāyā.
Therefore it is to be understood that when Jaya and
Vijaya descended to this material world, they came
because there was something to be done for the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Otherwise it is a fact that no
one falls from Vaikuṇṭha--From authoritative sources it
is learned that Jaya and Vijaya were sent to this
material world to fulfill the Lord’s desire to fight--
Otherwise, as Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira says, aśraddheya
ivābhāti: the statement that a servant of the Lord could
fall from Vaikuṇṭha seems unbelievable.

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 7.1.35, purport)

Sometimes it is asked how the living entity falls down
from the spiritual world to the material world. Here is
the answer. Unless one is elevated to the Vaikuṇṭha
planets, directly in touch with the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, he is prone to fall down, either from the
impersonal Brahman realization or from an ecstatic
trance of meditation.

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.25.29, purport)

The conclusion is that no one falls from the spiritual

                          118
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

world, or Vaikuṇṭha planet, for it is the eternal abode.

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.16.26, purport)

The Lord is the soul of all living beings, and He
desires always to have all the living beings in their
svarūpa, in their constitutional position, to
participate in transcendental life in His association.
His attractive features and sweet smiles go deep into
the heart of everyone, and once it is so done the living
being is admitted into the kingdom of God, from which no
one returns. This is confirmed in the Bhagavad-gītā.

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.10.27, purport)

The spiritual relation with the Lord is so enlivening
and resourceful that no one can leave the company of the
Lord, once having taken shelter of Him.

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.11.33 purport)

The Perfect Abode, Vaikuṇṭha

The following statements confirm that because in
Vaikuṇṭha there is no māyā ñ no ignorance, passion, or
even materially contaminated goodness ñ no one ever
makes the wrong decision to leave.

Kāraṇābdhi-pāre. Just on the other side of the Causal
Ocean, this material energy is situated. Virajāra pāre
paravyome nāhi gati. And this material energy has no
entrance in the spiritual kingdom.

(Lecture on Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta,

Madhya-līlā 20.255ñ281. New York, 1966)

At that time, Śrī Bhagavān, being pleased with Brahmā’s
penance, showed him His abode. Vaikuṇṭha is devoid of
all distress (kleśa) and free from illusion or fear
generated by that distress. No place is superior to that
abode, and pious, self-realized souls always desire to
go there. It is devoid of material passion and
ignorance, and even of material goodness, which is mixed
with passion and ignorance. Only pure goodness is
present and there is no effect of the force of time.
What to speak of anger, envy, and so forth, even māyā,
the illusory potency, the root cause of material
happiness and sorrow, does not exist there. It is the
permanent residence of Bhagavān’s eternal associates,
who are worshiped both by demigods and demons.

(Śrīmad Bhāgavatam 2.9.9ñ10)

The Lord has His internal energy also, which has another
creation known to be the Vaikuṇṭha lokas, where there is
no ignorance, no passion, no illusion, and no past and
present.

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.9.10, purport)

The inhabitants of those planets are liberated from
birth, death, old age, and diseases, and have full
knowledge of everything; they are all godly and free

                          119
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                          5/5/2017

from all sorts of material hankerings. They have nothing
to do there except to render transcendental loving
service to the Supreme Lord Nārāyaṇa, who is the
predominating Deity of such Vaikuṇṭha planets.

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.6.18)

All the residents of Vaikuṇṭha-loka know perfectly well
that their master is Nārāyaṇa, or Kṛṣṇa, and that they
are all His servants. They are all self-realized souls
who are nitya-mukta, everlastingly liberated. Although
they could conceivably declare themselves Nārāyaṇa or
Viṣṇu, they never do so; they always remain Kṛṣṇa
conscious and serve the Lord faithfully. Such is the
atmosphere of Vaikuṇṭha-loka.

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 6.1.34ñ6, purport)

In the following conversation, Śrīla Prabhupāda reveals
that the emotions and feelings of this world are
reflections of the spiritual world, but they are full of
imperfections and inebriety. In contrast, all the
emotions and feelings of the residents of the Lord’s
spiritual abode, the real world, are perfect and
beautiful.

Question: Svāmīji,   if all things here are a reflection
of what is perfect   in the spiritual world, then
shouldn’t hate and   frustration and despair and prejudice
also appear in the   spiritual world?

Prabhupāda: Yes.

Question: Does it?

Prabhupāda: Yes.

Question: Then isn’t that... aren’t they bad?

Prabhupāda: But that frustration has no disappointment.
That is the beauty. Just like Lord Caitanya is
manifesting that spiritual frustration: “Oh Kṛṣṇa, I
could not see You.” He’s jumping in the sea in
frustration, but that frustration is the highest
perfection of love. Yes, everything is there, but
without inebriety. There is frustration, but not this
material frustration. That spiritual frustration
enriches one’s eagerness of love for Kṛṣṇa.

Now, see Viṣṇu. Of course, in Vaikuṇṭha-jagat there is
no violence. But Viṣṇu is taking the symbol of violence.
Otherwise what is the meaning of this disc and club? So
when He wants to be violent, He comes here as Nṛsiṁha-
mūrti. And, He sends some of His devotees to play
violence. That is Hiraṇyakaśipu.

There, the devotees are so much in accord with Kṛṣṇa and
Viṣṇu that there is no question of disagreement. But
violence is when there is disagreement, by the atheist.
Therefore, sometimes a devotee is deputed in this world
to play as atheist, and Kṛṣṇa comes to kill him ñ to
teach these people that, “If you become atheist, here is
My disc and club for you.” But this is not possible to
be displayed in Vaikuṇṭha. Just like there is sometimes

                             120
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                         5/5/2017

mock fight. A father is fighting in mock with a small
child, and he has become defeated; but there is
pleasure.

(Room Conversation. New York, April 11, 1969)

Therefore, the conclusion is that the inhabitants of the
Vaikuṇṭha planets are all brahma-bhūta (self-realized)
living entities, as distinguished from the mundane
creatures, who are all compact in hankering and
lamentation. When one is not in the modes of ignorance
and passion, one is supposed to be situated in the mode
of goodness in the material world. Goodness in the
material world also at times becomes contaminated by
touches of the modes of passion and ignorance. In the
Vaikuṇṭha-loka, it is unalloyed goodness only. The whole
situation there is one of freedom from the illusory
manifestation of the external energy.

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 2.9.10, purport)

The Most Perfect Abode, Vṛṇdāvana

In the following passages, Śrīla Prabhupāda glorifies
Vṛndāvana, which is higher than the Vaikuṇṭha planets,
as the highest destination. Vṛndāvana is nondifferent
from Kṛṣṇa, and thus it is as worshipable as He is. As
there is no māyā in Him, there is none in His abode. We
can have faith in that abode.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura said that the
mission of Lord Caitanya is ārādhyo bhagavān vrajeśa-
tanaya: “Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme Personality of Godhead, is
ārādhya.” Ārādhya means ‘He is worshipable.’ He’s the
only worshipable personality. Ārādhyo bhagavān vrajeśa-
tanaya tad-dhāmaṁ vṛndāvanam: “And, as Lord Kṛṣṇa is
worshipable, similarly His place of pastimes, Vṛndāvana-
dhāma, is also worshipable.”

(Lecture on Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā

20.124ñ125. New York, November 26, 1966)

The holy place known as Mathurā is spiritually superior
to Vaikuṇṭha, the transcendental world, because the Lord
appeared there. Superior to Mathurā-Purī is the
transcendental forest of Vṛndāvana because of Kṛṣṇa’s
rāsa-līlā pastimes. And superior to the forest of
Vṛndāvana is Govardhana Hill, for it was raised by the
divine hand of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and was the site of His various
loving pastimes. And, above all, the superexcellent Śrī
Rādhā-kuṇḍa stands supreme, for it is overflooded with
the ambrosial nectarean prema of the Lord of Gokula, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. Where, then, is that intelligent person who is
unwilling to serve this divine Rādhā-kuṇḍa, which is
situated at the foot of Govardhana Hill?

(Nectar of Instruction, Verse 9)

I worship that transcendental seat, known as Śvetadvīpa
where, as loving consorts, the Lakṣmīs in their
unalloyed spiritual essence practice the amorous service
of the Supreme Lord Kṛṣṇa as their only lover; where
every tree is a transcendental purpose tree; where the

                          121
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

soil is the purpose gem, all water is nectar, every word
is a song, every gait is a dance, the flute is the
favorite attendant, effulgence is full of transcendental
bliss and the supreme spiritual entities are all
enjoyable and tasty, where numberless milk cows always
emit transcendental oceans of milk; where there is
eternal existence of transcendental time, which is ever
present and without past or future and hence is not
subject to the quality of passing away even for the
space of half a moment. That realm is known as Goloka
only to a very few self-realized souls in this world.

(Brahma-saṁhitā 5.56)

God’s Mercy - The Soul’s Free Will

These conversations clarify why the Supreme Lord has
endowed the jīva with free will.

Prabhupāda: That potentiality is eternal. God is
eternal. We are eternal. Our relationship is eternal.
Everything is eternal. But because we are small, minute
fragments, sometimes we fall down.

Question: They say, “God should have created us so that
we...”

Prabhupāda: Why should you dictate to God? God has
created perfectly. He has given you independence. You
fall down; it is your fault. If you misuse your
independence, you fall down. Just like the government
gives everyone an opportunity. Why do you become
criminal and go to the jail? That is your fault.

Question: They say that God should have created us so
that we...

Prabhupāda: Why ‘should have created’? He has already
created perfectly. Because you are perfect, therefore
you have got the independence to misuse. You are not a
dead stone. That is perfection.

Ye yathā māṁ prapadyante (Bhagavad-gītā 4.11). You can
go anywhere ñ Svarga. You can go to the Vaikuṇṭha. Yānti
deva-vratā devān (Bhagavad-gītā 9.25). You can go to the
higher planets. You can go to hell. When you go to hell,
it is your choice. God has given you all perfection.
Pūrṇam idaṁ, pūrṇam adaḥ, pūrṇāt pūrṇam udacyate (Śrī
Īśopaniṣad, Invocation). Everything is complete,
perfect, and because you are perfect, you have got
independence. But, misusing that independence, you are
imperfect. Again, reviving your proper use of
independence, you can become perfect although you are
imperfect now. That is the Kṛṣṇa consciousness
movement--

Because they have become imperfect, therefore they are
blaming God. “God is good” ñ they forget this. That is
their imperfection. On one side they say, “God is good.”
Still, they’re blaming God. What is this nonsense? If
He’s God and God is good, how can you blame Him? God is
good; in all circumstances He’s good. That is the
meaning of good. Good does not mean that one time you
are good and next time you are bad--

                          122
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                         5/5/2017


God has made everything. Just like here [pointing to a
material object]. It is made not to move. Stay. But we
are better than this. Is it not? It cannot move. So God
has made this also. But because we can move, we are
better than this. And they say, “Why has God made me to
commit mistake?” This rascal does not understand that
that is freedom. Why don’t you take the right path? God
says, “This is right.” Sarva-dharmān parityajya mām ekaṁ
śaraṇaṁ vraja (Bhagavad-gītā 18.66). Why don’t you take
it? How can you say God is bad? What is the argument?

Question: Well, the argument is that if God is so all-
powerful, why does He even let me fall?-- Why doesn’t He
save me from my own foolishness? Why doesn’t He...?

Prabhupāda: Yes, He’s saving you, but you don’t carry
out His order-- Just like I say, “Chant sixteen rounds.”
If you do not do it, what can I do? That is your fault.

Question: If God were to force us, there’d be no love.

Prabhupāda: No, no. Force is not good. Force is there.
Force is there. The māyā is another force.

(Morning Walk. Los Angeles, December 6, 1973)

The references above mercifully share with us that,
under the guidance of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s pure
devotees, we spirit souls can learn to properly use our
jewel-like independence. With full faith in the Lord’s
perfect spiritual realm, we can gradually become
qualified to enter and perpetually enjoy our loving
services to the Lord.




The Same Message

We present this chapter to further the understanding
that Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s abode, as well as its residents, are
eternally perfect.

Another aim of this chapter is to further establish that
the teachings of Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Prabhupāda,
Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja, and all
of our predecessor ācāryas are one; their message is the
same. By this understanding, we may be blessed with
their combined mercy.

Introduction: No Contradiction

In these quotes, Śrīla Prabhupāda explains that the same
message is given in all scriptures and by all pure
devotees, gurus, and ācāryas.

Vedic literature means there is no contradiction. Either
you read this Veda or that Veda. People who are foolish,
who cannot understand, sometimes see contradiction. No.
There is no contradiction. Same one law.

(Lecture on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 7.9.30.

                          123
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                         5/5/2017


Māyāpur, 1976)

So there is a link between one Vedic literature to
another. There is no contradiction. But different things
are there for different classes of men.

(Lecture on Bhagavad-gītā 4.1. Montreal, August 24,
1968)

What five thousand years ago Vyāsadeva instructed or
Kṛṣṇa instructed, the same thing we are also
instructing. Therefore there is no difference between
instructions. Therefore guru is one. Although hundreds
and thousands of ācāryas have come and gone, but the
message is one. Therefore guru cannot be two. Real guru
will not talk differently.

Guru must come from the paramparā system by disciplic
succession. Five thousand years or five millions of
years, what was spoken by the supreme God or guru, the
present guru also will say the same thing. That is guru.
That is bona fide guru. Otherwise, he’s not guru. Simple
definition. Guru cannot change any word of the
predecessor.

(Lecture: What is a Guru? London, August 22, 1973)

The above statements affirm that Śrīla Prabhupāda’s
teaching regarding the origination of the soul is
without contradiction. That teaching may be expressed in
different ways according to the capacity of a particular
audience to understand, but the essence is the

same.

We now offer to our respected reader some passages from
Śrīla Prabhupāda’s books, letters, and other writings
that are sometimes misunderstood to mean that the souls
of this world fell here from Goloka Vṛndāvana or
Vaikuṇṭha. As Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja explains
in his lectures in Part One of Journey of the Soul,
misconstruing such passages weakens the spiritual
seeker’s faith in Kṛṣṇa’s abode and invariably weakens
his desire and enthusiasm to attain it.

Therefore, in this Part Three of Journey of the Soul, we
will explain those same passages in the light of
clarifying quotes from Śrīla Prabhupāda, in the light of
Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī’s discourses in Part One, and
also in the light of the three chapters of Jaiva-dharma
found in Part Two.

Please forgive us for any shortcomings in our
presentation.

The Editors.

We Have Not Seen Kṛṣṇa Yet

As a pure follower of the disciplic succession of self-
realized gurus, Śrīla Prabhupāda teaches that when the
conditioned soul becomes self-realized, he will see God
for the first time. The souls of this world have never

                             124
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

directly seen Him before.

Regarding your second question, have the conditioned
souls ever seen Kṛṣṇa? Were they with the Lord before
being conditioned by the desire to lord it over material
nature? Yes, the conditioned souls are parts and parcels
of the Lord and thus they were with Kṛṣṇa before being
conditioned.

Just as the child must have seen his father because the
father places the child in the womb of the mother,
similarly each soul has seen Kṛṣṇa or the Supreme
Father. But at that time, the conditioned souls are
resting in the condition called suṣupti, which is
exactly deep sleep without dream, or anesthetized state.
Therefore they do not remember being with Kṛṣṇa when
they wake up in the material world and become engaged in
material affairs.

(Letter to Jagadīśa. Los Angeles, March 25, 1970)

Initially, the above letter may seem to state that
conditioned souls were previously with Śrī Kṛṣṇa in His
transcendental abode, Goloka Vṛndāvana. But careful
study reveals a different history.

Śrīla Prabhupāda states that Kṛṣṇa is like a father who
injects the child into the womb of the mother. Although
the child is part and parcel of the father and was
within the body of the father before entering the womb
of the mother, he was in seed-form at that time. He had
never associated with his father.

Similarly, in the Lord’s form as Mahā-Viṣṇu, He is the
seed-giving father who injects the seeds of the living
entities into the womb of material nature. The living
entity in this world has yet to personally associate
with Kṛṣṇa in His abode.

How Were We in Kṛṣṇa’s Līlā?

In 1972, in response to a letter from his Australian
disciples, Śrīla Prabhupāda dictated a brief essay
entitled “Crow and Tala-fruit Logic.” The following
statement is an excerpt from that essay.

We never had any occasion when we were separated from
Kṛṣṇa.

Śrīla Prabhupāda will reveal later that we were never
separated from Kṛṣṇa because we have always been with
His energies, which are non-different from Him. In fact,
we are one of His energies; as stated in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (3.5.6): “He expands Himself into many living
entities, which are manifested as different species of
life.” In addition, His expansion as the Supersoul in
the hearts of all beings has been with us since the
beginning of time. In these ways we have never been
separated from Him.

The essay continues:

Just like one man is dreaming and he forgets himself. In
dream he creates himself in different forms: “Now I am

                            125
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

the King,” discussing like that. This creation of
himself is as seer and the subject matter as seen, two
things. But as soon as the dream is over, the ‘seen’
disappears, but the seer remains. Now he is in his
original position.

Our separation from Kṛṣṇa is like that. We dream of this
body and of so many relationships with other things.
First the attachment comes to enjoy sense gratification.
Even with Kṛṣṇa, desire for sense gratification is
there.

Here, Śrīla Prabhupāda teaches that Kṛṣṇa is everywhere
because Kṛṣṇa’s various energies are everywhere. His
statement, “even with Kṛṣṇa, desire for sense-
gratification is there” means that even though Kṛṣṇa is
in our hearts as Supersoul, and even though we are with
Him now in the sense that this world has no separate
existence from Him, still we turn away from Him and
desire to enjoy separate from Him. The meaning of
‘original position’ will be discussed soon.

His essay continues:

There is a dormant attitude for forgetting Kṛṣṇa and
creating an atmosphere for enjoying independently. Just
like at the edge of the beach, sometimes the water
covers, sometimes there is dry sand, coming and going.
Our position is like that, sometimes covered, sometimes
free, just like at the edge of the tide. As soon as we
forget, immediately the illusion is there. Just like as
soon as we sleep, dream is there. We cannot say,
therefore, that we are not with Kṛṣṇa.

When Śrīla Prabhupāda says, “We cannot say, therefore,
that we are not with Kṛṣṇa,” he is confirming that his
previous statement, “Even with Kṛṣṇa, desire for sense
gratification is there” does not necessarily mean we
were in His abode. Kṛṣṇa is everywhere. He is therefore
also present in this taṭasthā region, where spirit souls
are connected with Him as His parts and parcels. He also
resides with the souls in the material world, where He
is situated within the hearts of the conditioned souls
as Supersoul. Also, in this material world, the material
elements themselves are emanations of His energy. In
this way Śrīla Prabhupāda writes, “We cannot say,
therefore, that we are not with Kṛṣṇa.”

He writes about the analogy of the edge of the beach. He
discusses the imaginary line between the open land and
the water called taṭa. The jīva originates in this area
between the spiritual and material worlds, known in
spiritual philosophy as taṭasthā.

The essay continues:

As soon as we try to become the Lord, immediately we are
covered by māyā. Formerly we were with Kṛṣṇa in His līlā
[pastimes] or sport. But this covering of māyā may be of
very, very, very, very long duration; therefore many
creations are coming and going.

In the material world, since time immemorial, we have
been serving in Kṛṣṇa’s līlā (pastimes). The creation,

                          126
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

maintenance, and destruction of this material world are
also the Lord’s pastimes. This cycle is referred to in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.4.12) as sad-udbhava-sthāna-
nirodha-līlayā and in Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Adi-līlā 5.9)
as srsti-līlā. We have been, and still are, serving in
Kṛṣṇa’s līlā here in the material world. Directly or
indirectly, all living entities are serving the Lord. It
is for this reason that Śrīla Prabhupāda states, “We
cannot say, therefore, that we are not with Kṛṣṇa.”

The essay continues:

Due to this long period of time it is sometimes said
that we are ever-conditioned. But this long duration of
time becomes very insignificant when one actually comes
to Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Just like in a dream we are
thinking very long time, but as soon as we awaken we
look at our watch and see it has been a moment

only.

The real position is servant of Kṛṣṇa, and servant of
Kṛṣṇa means in kṛṣṇa-līlā. Directly or indirectly,
always we are serving Kṛṣṇa’s līlā. Even in dream. Just
like we cannot go out of the sun when it is daytime, so
where is the chance of going out of kṛṣṇa-līlā?

Śrīla Prabhupāda confirms here that even now we are in
Kṛṣṇa’s līlā. The creation of both taṭasthā-śakti and
the material world is also a feature of His pastimes.

The essay continues:

The cloud may be there, it may become very gray and dim,
but still the sunlight is there, everywhere, during the
daytime. Because I am part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa, I am
always connected. My finger, even though it may be
diseased, remains part and parcel of my body. Therefore,
we try to treat it, cure it, because it is part and
parcel. So Kṛṣṇa comes Himself when we forget Him, or He
sends His representative.

A disciple once asked Śrīla Prabhupāda, “If we’ve never
been with Kṛṣṇa, if we’ve never been in Kṛṣṇa-loka, then
how is it that we start ‘remembering’ His pastimes and
His form?” Śrīla Prabhupāda replied, “You remember
Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes by hearing Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

You can hear Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. That you can remember.”
The disciple then asked, “But how can we ‘remember’ if
we’ve never known them before?” Prabhupāda replied, “You
can know by hearing from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Why are we
citing so many scriptures like Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and
Bhagavad-gītā? Just to remember” (Room Conversation.
Boston, April 27, 1969). In this 1969 conversation,
Prabhupāda confirmed that words like ‘remember’ and
‘forget’ are mere indications.

The essay continues:

Awakening or dreaming, I am the same man. As soon as I
awaken and see myself, I see Kṛṣṇa. Cause and effect are
both Kṛṣṇa. Just like cotton becomes thread and thread
becomes cloth, still, the original cause is cotton.

                          127
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                         5/5/2017

Therefore, everything is Kṛṣṇa in the ultimate sense.
When we cannot contact Kṛṣṇa personally, we contact His
energies. So there is no chance to be outside Kṛṣṇa’s
līlā.

Here, Śrīla Prabhupāda verifies that his previous
referral to the conditioned souls having formally been
in Kṛṣṇa’s līlā refers to His līlā of material creation.
As stated in Jaiva-dharma Chapter Sixteen, some souls
are in His līlā in the spiritual world and some are in
His līlā in the material world.

In the following conversation, Śrīla Prabhupāda further
establishes that in this world we are always with Kṛṣṇa
and have always been with Him. In this way we can
further reconcile his statement: “Formerly we were with
Kṛṣṇa in His līlā.” In other words we were in His līlā,
and we are in His līlā, while in the taṭasthā region and
while in the material world.

Yaśomatīnandana: Is [the jīva] allowed to associate with
Kṛṣṇa in the beginning?

Prabhupāda: He’s always with Kṛṣṇa. Simply he has
forgotten. Have you not been with Kṛṣṇa? We are standing
on this sand. The sand is Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa’s energy. We are
standing by the water. This is Kṛṣṇa’s energy. Bhūmir
āpo ‘nalo vāyuḥ (Bhagavad-gītā 7.4). Don’t you read
that? So is it different from Kṛṣṇa?

Yaśomatīnandana: No, but it is...

Prabhupāda: My body is also Kṛṣṇa’s energy. I am also
Kṛṣṇa’s energy. I am always with Kṛṣṇa. Simply I have
forgotten it.

Yaśomatīnandana: But this is Kṛṣṇa’s inferior energy,
right?

Prabhupāda: That may be. That is a comparative study,
inferior or superior. But it is energy.

Yaśomatīnandana: Yes.

Prabhupāda: As energy, it is not different from Kṛṣṇa.

Yaśomatīnandana: Vāsudevaḥ sarvam iti (Bhagavad-gītā
7.19).

Prabhupāda: Yes. As energy, how can you differentiate
from Kṛṣṇa?

(Morning walk. Los Angeles, December 5, 1973)

We Are With Kṛṣṇa as Supersoul

Prabhupāda explains below that the activities of
Paramātmā, the Supersoul in the hearts of all created
beings, are also considered to be Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. The
conditioned soul has formerly associated with Kṛṣṇa in
the form of the Supersoul, and is also associating with
Him now.

So we are also associated with Kṛṣṇa, as Paramātmā

                          128
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

within the heart--

(Lecture on Bhagavad-gītā 4.5. Bombay, March 25, 1975)

We Have Not Been Home Yet

In the verses below, Paramātmā, in the form of a
brāhmaṇa, appears to His devotee and converses with her.
These verses are sometimes mistaken to mean that the
spirit soul has left his original home, Goloka
Vṛndāvana.

The brāhmaṇa inquired as follows: Who are you? Whose
wife or daughter are you? Who is the man lying here? It
appears you are lamenting for this dead body. Don’t you
recognize Me? I am your eternal friend. You may remember
that many times in the past you have consulted Me.

The brāhmaṇa continued: My dear friend, even though you
cannot immediately recognize Me, can’t you remember that
in the past you had a very intimate friend?
Unfortunately, you gave up My company and accepted a
position as enjoyer of this material world.

My dear gentle friend, both you and I are exactly like
two swans. We live together in the same heart, which is
just like the Mānasa Lake. Although we have been living
together for many thousands of years, we are still far
away from our original home.

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 4.28.52ñ54)

Paramātmā has been traveling with us since time
immemorial, from one body to another. However, as Śrīla
Prabhupāda explains in the following purport, Paramātmā
is not Śrī Kṛṣṇa of Goloka Vṛndāvana:

In His Paramātmā feature, Kṛṣṇa is the old friend of
everyone. The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Paramātmā,
appeared before the Queen as a brāhmaṇa, but why didn’t
He appear in His original form as Śrī Kṛṣṇa? Śrīla
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura remarks that unless one is
very highly elevated in loving the Supreme Personality
of Godhead, one cannot see Him as He is.

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 4.28.51, purport)

Paramātmā is neither Śrī Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana nor Lord
Nārāyaṇa in Vaikuṇṭha. Paramātmā has never resided in
Vṛndāvana or Vaikuṇṭha, the original home of all
existence, nor will He ever reside there. This is
explained in the following purport excerpt:

The Paramātmā manifestation is also a temporary, all-
pervasive aspect of the Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu. The
Paramātmā manifestation is not eternal in the spiritual
world. Therefore the factual Absolute Truth is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead Kṛṣṇa. He is the complete
energetic person, and He possesses different separated
and internal energies.

(Bhagavad-gītā 7.4, purport)

Although Lord Paramātmā utters the words ‘our original

                            129
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

home,’ He has never been there, nor have the conditioned
souls of this world been there. The discernment that the
souls of this world have not fallen from the spiritual
world is explained in the next section.

No Going Back and Forth

The original home of the living entity and the Supreme
Personality of Godhead is the spiritual world. In the
spiritual world both the Lord and the living entities
live together very peacefully. Since the living entity
remains engaged in the service of the Lord, they both
share a blissful life in the spiritual world. However,
when the living entity wants to enjoy himself, he falls
down into the material world. Even while in that
position, the Lord remains with him as the Supersoul,
his intimate friend.

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 4.28.54, purport)

It is certainly true that the constitutional home of the
living entity is in the spiritual world, but it is not
that the same living entity goes back and forth between
the spiritual and material worlds. In his translations,
purports, and lecture below, Śrīla Prabhupāda states
that there are two categories of living entities:

The living entities, the jīvas, are divided into two
categories. Some are nitya-mukta, eternally liberated,
and others are eternally conditioned.

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 22.10)

The first category is that of the eternally liberated
living entities, those who are in the spiritual world,
and they are never overwhelmed by māyā. They never
desire to gratify their own senses; they only desire
Kṛṣṇa’s happiness.

Those who are eternally liberated are always awake to
Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and they render transcendental
loving service at the feet of Lord Kṛṣṇa. They are to be
considered eternal associates of Kṛṣṇa, and they are
eternally enjoying the transcendental bliss of serving
Kṛṣṇa.

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 22.11)

The second category is that of the perpetually
conditioned souls of this world, who have yet to become
pure devotees and join the eternally liberated souls in
the kingdom of God.

Apart from the ever-liberated devotees, there are the
conditioned souls, who always turn away from the service
of the Lord. They are perpetually conditioned in this
material world and are subjected to the material
tribulations brought about by different bodily forms in
hellish conditions.

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 22.12)

The nitya-baddhas are always conditioned by the external
energy, and the nitya-muktas never come in contact with

                          130
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

the external energy. Sometimes, an ever-liberated
personal associate of the Supreme Personality of Godhead
descends into this universe just as the Lord descends.
Although working for the liberation of conditioned
souls, the messenger of the Supreme Lord remains
untouched by the material energy. Generally, ever-
liberated personalities live in the spiritual world as
associates of Lord Kṛṣṇa, and they are known as kṛṣṇa-
pāriṣada, associates of the Lord. Their only business is
enjoying Lord Kṛṣṇa’s company, and even though such
eternally liberated persons come within this material
world to serve the Lord’s purpose, they enjoy Lord
Kṛṣṇa’s company without stoppage. The ever-liberated
person, who works on Kṛṣṇa’s behalf, enjoys Lord Kṛṣṇa’s
company through his engagement.

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 22.14ñ15, purport)

svāṁśa-vibhinnāṁśa-rūpe hañā vistāra



ananta vaikuṇṭha-brahmāṇḍe karena vihāra



So Kṛṣṇa is both in the spiritual world and the material
world. Because we represent Kṛṣṇa, we are in this
brahmāṇḍa ñ conditioned. But there are many living
entities who are eternally liberated. They never come to
this [world]. Just like the ocean and the rivers. In the
river you will find fishes and in the ocean you will
find fishes. Sometimes it may be that the fishes of the
river may go to the ocean, but the fishes of the ocean
never come to the river ñ never come to the river. There
is no place for them.

sei vibhinnāṁśa jīva-dui ta’ prakāra



eka-’nitya-mukta’, eka-’nitya saṁsāra’



Now, this energy manifested as the living entities; they
are also two kinds. What are they? Eka-nitya-mukta. One
class of living entities, they are eternally liberated.
Just like the fishes in the ocean. Take the ocean as the
place of liberation. That individuality is there. And
that individuality is reciprocated between Kṛṣṇa and the
individual souls. They are called nitya-mukta, eternally
liberated. And the other class, who are just like in the
river fishes, they are called nitya-baddha. Their, I
mean to say, limited sphere is in the river or in the
pond or in the well.

(Lecture on Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 22.6.

New York, January 8, 1967)

In this way, Śrīla Prabhupāda clarifies that eternally
liberated souls never become conditioned, and the souls
in this world were never previously residents of the

                             131
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

spiritual world. It is by great fortune that by the
process of bhakti-yoga under proper guidance,
conditioned souls also can join the Supreme Lord.

We’ve Not Yet Spoken with Our Supreme Father

It may appear from the statement below that the
conditioned souls have previously conversed with Kṛṣṇa
directly:

We are very proud of our senses. But these senses are
given just like a boy is given some plaything by the
father; similarly, we wanted to enjoy this material
world. Therefore our material senses are awarded: “All
right, you enjoy. You just have experience of this
material world, and when you get experience that ‘I am
not happy,’ then you shall come back again to Me.”

(Lecture on Bhagavad-gītā 2.55ñ58. New York, April 15,
1966)

Directly hearing from the Lord or directly discussing
with the Lord is only possible for the great devotees ñ
those who are free from the propensity to enjoy the
material senses. Why, then, does Prabhupāda seem to say
that Kṛṣṇa is speaking directly to a conditioned soul
who has turned away from Him?

This is another example of śākhā-candra-nyāya, the logic
of the moon on the branch. Śrīla Prabhupāda writes in
one of his purports from the Caitanya-caritāmṛta: “First
a child is shown the branches of a tree, and then he is
shown the moon through the branches. This is called
śākhā-candra-nyāya. The idea is that first one must be
given a simpler example. Then the more difficult
background is explained” (Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta,
Madhya-līlā 21.31, purport).

Because Jīva-tattva cannot be truly understood by one
who thinks, “I am a lady” or “I am a lad,” therefore,
having mercifully descended to this world of
materialistic persons who were fully absorbed in the
concepts of “I am this body and everything in relation
to this body is mine,” Prabhupāda is giving an
indication here ñ God is our father, He loves us, and He
wants us to seek His shelter and become happy.

Factually, when we conditioned souls reach perfection in
our devotional life, we will meet Śrī Kṛṣṇa in His abode
for the first time. This is explained below, in
Prabhupāda’s Kṛṣṇa, The Supreme Personality of Godhead:

The mature devotees, who have completely executed Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, are immediately transferred to the
universe where Kṛṣṇa is appearing. In that universe the
devotees get their first opportunity to associate with
Kṛṣṇa personally and directly.

(Kṛṣṇa, The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Chapter 28)

This conclusive quote confirms that when the conditioned
soul becomes free from māyā’s clutches, he will attain
the spiritual abode of the Lord and associate with Him
for the first time.

                          132
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017


Back Home, Back to Godhead

The material creation by the Lord of creatures (Viṣṇu)
is a chance offered to the conditioned souls to come
back home, back to Godhead.

(Bhagavad-gītā 3.10, purport)

Śrīla Prabhupāda has made the phrase “Back Home, Back to
Godhead” quite well-known throughout the world. This
phrase may seem to mean that the souls of this world
were previously in Goloka Vṛndāvana, they left there,
and now they must return there. We hope that the
discussion below helps to clarify the meaning of
‘returning home, Back to Godhead’:

In Vṛndāvana, in 1993, a senior disciple of Śrīla
Prabhupāda asked Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmi Maharaj·, “What
did Śrīla Prabhupāda mean when he said, ‘Back to home,
back to Godhead?’”

Using that disciple’s own life as an analogy, Śrīla
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmi Mahārāja explained that although her
son was born and raised in Vṛndāvana, India, he
considers himself American ñ because his mother is
American. When the school holidays begin, he tells his
friends and classmates at the Vṛndāvana Gurukula, “I am
going home.”

Similarly, Śrīla Prabhupāda’s famous phrase “Back Home,
Back to Godhead” helps the conditioned souls to think of
the Supreme Lord as their father, and wherever their
father resides is home. This phrase helps us to
understand that Kṛṣṇa is not impersonal, and that His
home is our rightful home. This is explained in the
excerpt below:

Back to Godhead means God is a person, a person like you
and me. Just like your father is a person. That is
practical knowledge. Your father’s father is also a
person. His father is also a person. His father is also
a person. Immediately you can understand. Therefore the
supreme father must be a person.

(Lecture on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 6.1.11.

New York, July 25, 1971)

The Lord does not want His sons, the living beings, to
suffer the threefold miseries of life. He desires that
all of them come to Him and live with Him, but going
back to Godhead means that one must purify himself from
material infections.

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.5.35, purport)

Back to Godhead means one must be completely pure. A
slight impurity will not be allowed.

(Lecture on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 6.1.34ñ39.

Surat, December 19, 1970)


                             133
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

In two of the three quotes above, the concept of purity
is mentioned along with going back home. This means that
in the Lord’s abode there is no impurity, no impure
desire to enjoy separately from Kṛṣṇa. Māyā cannot enter
the spiritual world.

For Newcomers

The following quote from Śrīla Prabhupāda’s lecture may
seem controversial in its contrast to the previous
statements regarding the origin of the living entities,
and may even seem to contradict the previous ācāryas,
but in fact it does not.

--because we have also come down from Vaikuṇṭha some
millions and millions of years ago. Anādi karama-phale.
Anādi means ‘before the creation.’ We living entities,
we are eternal. Even the creation is annihilated after
millions and trillions of years, the living entities,
are not annihilated.

(Lecture on Bhagavad-gītā 2.6. London, August 6, 1973)

There is no contradiction between Śrīla Prabhupāda and
his guru or parama-guru. Being a pure follower of his
parama-guru, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, he is a pure
follower of his statement in Jaiva-dharma: “Inasmuch as
they reside in the spiritual world, māyā stays far from
them and does not affect them at all.” And of course he
himself has written, “There are Vaikuṇṭha planets in the
spiritual world, and the devotees there are all
liberated. These devotees are akṣara, which means they
do not fall down into the material world. They remain in
the spiritual world of the Vaikuṇṭhas” (Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam 7.1.35, purport).

So why, on rare occasions does Prabhupāda speak in such
a way in the above-mentioned London lecture? He answers
this himself in his 1968 lecture that is quoted at the
beginning of this article: “There is no contradiction,
but different things are there for different classes of
men.” As explained above, he sometimes simplified the
concepts of eternality and “Back Home, Back to Godhead”
for a particular audience, for those new to the Kṛṣṇa
conscious path. In this way, we could gradually come to
understand the inconceivable jīva-tattva.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmi Mahārāja has explained that our
ācāryas sometimes give ‘baby-food to babies.’ In other
words, they give explanation that are easy for aspiring
devotees to accsept and understand according to those
devotees’ level of advancement. We have seen that on
very rare occasions Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmi Mahārāja
personally gives this ‘baby-food’ to his new audiences.
For example, at a darsana in Miami, in 2008, he told a
first-time guest, “By chance you have been thrown to
this world from Goloka Vrndavana. The guard of that
Goloka planet, Yogamaya devi, threw us into this world.
You are actually a male or female servant of Sri Sri
Radha-Krsna, but you wanted to enjoy sense gratification
and have forgotten your true heritage.”

Vaikuṇṭha Residents Do Not Take the Chance


                          134
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

It is true that jīvas always have independence, even in
Vaikuṇṭha--

Constitutionally, every living entity, even if he is in
the Vaikuṇṭha-loka, has the chance of falling down.

(Letter to Upendra. Tittenhurst,

October 27, 1969)

But those in Vaikuṇṭha never choose to misuse that
independence and forget Kṛṣṇa. Śrīla Prabhupāda’s
consistency of philosophical thought is confirmed below:

Question: When the souls that were never conditioned at
all..., do they also have the independence?

Prabhupāda: Yes, but they have not misused. They know
that “I am meant for Kṛṣṇa’s service,” and they are
happy in Kṛṣṇa’s service.

Question: Could they ever misuse it?

Prabhupāda: Yes, they can misuse it also. That power is
there. Yes?

Question: Well, I believe you once said that once a
conditioned soul becomes perfected and gets out of the
material world and he goes to Kṛṣṇa-loka, there’s no
possibility of falling back.

Prabhupāda: No, there is possibility, but he does not
come. Just like after putting your hand in the fire, you
never put it again if you are really intelligent. So
those who are going back to Godhead, they become
intelligent.

(Lecture on Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta,

Ādi-līlā 7.108. Francisco, 1967)

There are Vaikuṇṭha planets in the spiritual world, and
the devotees there are all liberated. These devotees are
akṣara, which means they do not fall down into the
material world. They remain in the spiritual world of
the Vaikuṇṭhas. They are also persons like us, but they
are eternal persons, complete with full knowledge and
bliss. That is the difference between them and us. That
is tattva-jñāna. In other words, these associates of the
Lord, Jaya and Vijaya, descended to the material world
to serve the Lord by fulfilling His desire to fight.
Otherwise, as Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira says, aśraddheya
ivābhāti: the statement that a servant of the Lord could
fall from Vaikuṇṭha seems unbelievable.

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 7.1.35, purport)

No Wrong in Vaikuṇṭha Devotees

The previous purport tells us that Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja
said, “The statement that a servant of the Lord could
fall from Vaikuṇṭha seems unbelievable.” The purport
states that all the residents of Vaikuṇṭha are eternal,
and full of bliss and knowledge. Although the following

                          135
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                         5/5/2017

purport is not contradictory, it may initially appear to
contradict Yudisthira’s words.

In the Bhakti-sandarbha by Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, there is
a quotation from the Skanda Purāṇa admonishing that a
person who eats grains on Ekādaśī becomes a murderer of
his mother, father, brother, and spiritual master, and
even if he is elevated to a Vaikuṇṭha planet, he falls
down.

(Caitanya Caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā 15.9, purport)

In effect, Prabhupāda is saying, “Even if one thinks
himself a perfect transcendentalist, qualified to be a
resident of Vaikuṇṭha, he should not neglect Ekādaśī.”
Prabhupāda implies that no one should be so proud as to
think that one need not follow Ekādaśī, which is Kṛṣṇa
Himself, manifest in the form of a time period. Śrīla
Prabhupāda wrote this statement as a warning to aspiring
devotees about the gravity of following the Ekādaśī fast
ñ not that pure devotees, once having attained
Vaikuṇṭha, fall down.

Even in This World, True Devotees Do Not Fall

True devotees remain in their sublime position, even in
this world, what to speak of the spiritual world. In a
cursory first reading of the following passages from the
Caitanya-caritāmṛta, the contrary seems to be presented,
but we will soon see that there is no contradiction.

There, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s associate Svarūpa
Dāmodara Gosvāmī, a pure devotee, seems to imply that
even he may fall from his position by hearing
impersonalist (Māyāvāda) philosophy. Bhagavān Ācārya had
requested Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī to hear a commentary
upon Vedānta from his Māyāvādī brother, Gopāla. Somewhat
angry, Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī replied as follows.
“When a Vaiṣṇava listens to the Śārīraka-bhāṣya, the
Māyāvāda commentary upon Vedānta-sūtra, he gives up the
Kṛṣṇa conscious attitude that the Lord is the master and
the living entity is His servant. Instead, he considers
himself the Supreme Lord.

maha-bhagavata yei, kṛṣṇa prana-dhana yara

māyāvāda-sravane citta avasya phire tanra.

The Māyāvāda philosophy presents such a jugglery of
words that even a highly elevated devotee who has
accepted Kṛṣṇa as his life and soul changes his decision
when he reads the Māyāvāda commentary on Vedānta-sūtra.

Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī is the most beloved follower of
Mahāprabhu, and in kṛṣṇa-līlā he is none other than
Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s dearmost sakhī, Lalitā-devī. When
such an exalted Vaiṣṇava refers to the possibility that
even he may fall down, he does so out of humility, or
joke, or warning to others. Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī is
cautioning the neophyte Vaiṣṇava, who may artificially
believe himself to be advanced and invulnerable. If that
neophyte hears Māyāvāda philosophy, he may lose his
tenuous faith in Kṛṣṇa as the Supreme Person.


                          136
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                         5/5/2017

Further on, Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī reveals his true,
underlying reason for not wanting to listen to Māyāvāda
philosophy: his heart breaks when he hears any offense
to his beloved Lord Kṛṣṇa.

The conversation continues in the following passage:

In spite of Svarūpa Dāmodara’s protest, Bhagavān Ācārya
continued, “We are all fixed at the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa
with our hearts and souls. Therefore the Śārīraka-bhāṣya
cannot change our minds.”

Svarūpa Dāmodara replied, “Nevertheless, when we hear
the Māyāvāda philosophy, we hear that Brahman is
knowledge and that the universe of māyā is false, but we
gain no spiritual understanding. The Māyāvādī
philosopher tries to establish that the living entity is
only imaginary and that the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is under the influence of māyā. Hearing this
kind of commentary breaks the heart and life of a
devotee.”

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Antya-līlā 2.96ñ99)

Brahmā and Sīva Also Do Not Fall

These are examples. Brahmā became attracted with his
daughter. Lord Śiva became attracted with the beauty of
Mohinī-mūrti, even in the presence of his wife. So this
sex life can be controlled only by becoming Kṛṣṇa
conscious.

(Room Conversation. Bombay, January 7, 1977)

The above passage may seem to imply that even Lord
Brahmā and Lord Śiva, who are both pure devotees, can
become bewildered by māyā. However, the pastimes of
Brahmā and Śiva wherein they appear to be attracted by
māyā are only meant to instruct conditioned souls.

Brahmā and Śiva occupy the highest posts in the universe
ñ as the creator and the destroyer respectively ñ and
conditioned souls sometimes desire such high posts. In
the following conversation, Śrīla Prabhupāda cautions
his audience about desiring any exalted position in this
world, for all material situations are fraught with the
miseries offered by māyā. Śrīla Prabhupāda encourages
his audience to desire only pure devotion to Lord Kṛṣṇa.

Devotee: It says here that a pure devotee like Haridāsa
Ṭhākura would not fall victim to Māyādevī’s temptations,
but even Lord Brahmā, Lord Śiva, might fall victim. I
always thought that they were pure devotees of the Lord.

Prabhupāda: No. They are pure devotees, but they are
guṇāvatāra (presiding deities of the modes of nature).
Just like Lord Brahmā is the supreme personality within
this material universe. He’s the father of all living
entities. So they are pure devotees. Of course, if we
very scrutinizingly study, Haridāsa Ṭhākura is, in
devotional service, in a greater position than Brahmā,
although he is considered the incarnation of Brahmā ñ
Brahmā Haridāsa.


                          137
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

So we should not be disturbed when we see Lord Brahmā
and Lord Śiva are captivated in that way. We should take
this instruction, that is, “Lord Brahmā or Lord Śiva
become victim of māyā sometimes, what to speak of us?
Therefore we shall be very, very careful. There is
chance of fall-down even in the status of Brahmā and
Śiva, what to speak of ordinary persons. Therefore we
should be very strongly inclined to Kṛṣṇa consciousness
like Haridāsa Ṭhākura. Then we shall be able very easily
to overcome the allurement of māyā.” That is to be
understood. Not that “Brahmā showed weakness. He is weak
or he is less.” No. That is for our instruction.

(Lecture on Bhagavad-gītā 2.62ñ72.

Los Angeles, December 16, 1968)

These quotes show that Brahmā and Śiva, as pure devotees
of Kṛṣṇa, assist the Lord in giving His instructions to
the souls of this universe.

The sages like Marīci were not in the wrong in
submitting their protests against the acts of their
great father [Brahmā]. They knew very well that even
though their father committed a mistake, there must have
been some great purpose behind the show; otherwise such
a great personality could not have committed such a
mistake. It might be that Brahmā wanted to warn his
subordinates about human frailties in their dealings
with women.

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 3.12.29)

The illusory, material energy is represented by
Durgādevī, who is the wife of Girīśa, or Lord Śiva.
Durgādevī could not captivate Lord Śiva’s mind, but now
that Lord Śiva wanted to see Lord Viṣṇu’s feminine form,
Lord Viṣṇu, by His mystic power, would assume a form
that would captivate even Lord Śiva. Therefore Lord
Viṣṇu was grave and at the same time was smiling.

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 8.12.14)

The Supreme Personality of Godhead knew that because
Lord Śiva is not an ordinary person, he cannot be
bewildered even by the most beautiful woman. Cupid
himself tried to invoke Lord Śiva’s lusty desires in the
presence of Pārvatī, but Lord Śiva was never agitated.
Rather, the blazing fire from Lord Śiva’s eyes turned
Cupid to ashes. Therefore, Lord Viṣṇu had to think twice
about what kind of beautiful form would bewilder even
Lord Śiva.

(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 8.12.15)

Brahmā and Śiva are not ordinary souls and are not
subjected to temptation. They remain free from the lure
of māyā; rather they are under the influence of yogamāyā
ñ so what to speak of the residents of the spiritual
abodes of the Lord. In fact, Brahmā and Śiva worship the
residents of the Lord’s abodes, especially the residents
of Vṛndāvana.

Other Examples

                          138
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017


There are innumerable other examples of personalities in
scriptural history whom conditioned souls like us cannot
understand without the help of pure devotees like Śrīla
Prabhupāda and his disciplic succession. For example,
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam relates the history of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
associates and personal family members who, just before
the Lord’s disappearance, fought with and killed
eachother after having become intoxicated by drinking
rice-wine. In this regard Śrīla Visvanātha Cakravārti
Thākura, whose commentaries are often quoted by Śrīla
Prabhupāda, states that this was just like a magic show
performed by the greatest magician, Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself,
in order to return them to their abodes.

Another example is the history of the ‘demon’ Śiśupāla,
Kṛṣṇa’s cousin, who tried to kill Kṛṣṇa and who was
finally beheaded by him. How is it possible that Kṛṣṇa’s
cousin could become a demon? In this regard,
Prabhupāda’s Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam translations and purports
reveal that by entering Kṛṣṇa’s body after being
‘killed’ by Him, Śiśupāla ‘re-entered’ Vaikuṇṭha as one
of the Lord’s two associates, Jaya and Vijaya. Moreover,
Jaya and Vijaya had never left Vaikuṇṭha. According to
our ācāryas, their original forms remained in Vaikuṇṭha
and, in order to fulfill the Lord’s desire for
chivalrous fighting, their expansions played the role of
demons in this world.

Another example is the history of Choṭa Haridāsa, which
is mercifully translated by Prabhupāda in his Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmrta. In that history Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu chastised and rejected His associate, Choṭa
Haridāsa, who was in the renounced order and at the same
time looked lustfully at a lady. How is it possible that
Mahāprabhu’s dear associate could fall into lust? Śrīla
Prabhupāda quotes the version of his Guru Mahārāja,
Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, who said that
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the ocean of mercy, chastised
Choṭa Haridāsa, although Choṭa Haridāsa was His dear
devotee, in order to establish that one in the
devotional line should not be a hypocrite. Choṭa
Haridāsa did not actually fall.

Another example is the history of Kālā Kṛṣṇadāsa, who
was assigned by Mahāprabhu’s devotees to carry His
waterpot and other belongings while He travelled through
South India. During these travels Kālā Kṛṣṇadāsa was
influenced and allured by gypsies who enticed him with
women. Mahāprabhu’ saved Kālā Kṛṣṇadāsa from this plight
but later, despite Kālā Kṛṣṇadāsa’s tears, He rejected
him from His company. However, even though the Lord
rejected him, His confidential devotees mercifully gave
him another chance. They considered, “We want a person
to go to Bengal just to inform Śacīmātā about Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s arrival at Jagannātha Purī.” Thus
they engaged him as an instrument in pleasing the Lord’s
pure devotees.

Did Kālā Kṛṣṇadāsa fall from the spiritual world and was
then re-instated? In the spiritual world are no gypsies
to allure the eternal, liberated associates of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. Prabhupāda writes in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta,
Madhya-līlā 7.39:

                          139
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017


This Kṛṣṇadāsa, known as Kālā Kṛṣṇadāsa, is not the Kālā
Kṛṣṇadāsa mentioned in the Eleventh Chapter, verse 37,
of the Ādi-līlā. The Kālā Kṛṣṇadāsa mentioned in the
Eleventh Chapter is one of the twelve gopālas (cowherd
boys) who appeared to substantiate the pastimes of Lord
Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He is known as a great devotee of
Lord Nityānanda Prabhu. The brāhmaṇa named Kālā
Kṛṣṇadāsa who went with Śrī Caitanya to South India and
later to Bengal is mentioned in the Madhya-līlā, Tenth
Chapter, verses 62ñ79. One should not take these two to
be the same person.

In this world there are many fortunate souls who come in
contact with Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu during His manifest
pastimes here, and they all benefit tremendously. They
get further purified by contact with the Lord and His
associates, and then attain perfection. Still, they are
in this world because they originally desired to enjoy
sense gratification. That is the teaching in this
pastime.

One may inquire why his name is mentioned in Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā 10.145 as being a branch
of prema-kalpataru, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. The answer
is given by Śrīla Prabhupāda’s guru, Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, in his lecture
delivered in 1933 and which is published in Gauḍīya,
Eleventh Year, Issue Forty-one, pages 646-648. This was
a very important discussion about Choṭa Haridāsa, and
Jagāi and Mādhāi, wherein he also shed light on the
topic of Kālā Kṛṣṇadāsa.

He states that Śrīman Mahāprabhu had rejected Kālā
Kṛṣṇadāsa at first, but by the mercy of Śrīman
Nityānanda Prabhu and his own genuine repentence he was
again reinstated as servant of Mahāprabhu. It was due to
Nityānanda prabhu’s mercy alone that he was later added
as a branch of Mahāprabhu’s prema-kalpataru. It is not
that he was previously an eternal associate.

By this pastime Mahāprabhu taught that one has to be
extremely careful while practicing devotional process
because until we have reached perfection we may become
allured by Mahāprabhu’s illusory māyā. In Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 17.14 Mahāprabhu told His
associates:

“Such a person must be a new man, and he must have a
peaceful mind. If I can obtain such a man, I shall agree
to take him with Me.”

Śrīla Prabhupāda writes in his purport:

Formerly, when Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu went to South
India, a brāhmaṇa named Kālā Kṛṣṇadāsa went with Him.
Kālā Kṛṣṇadāsa fell victim to a woman, and Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu had to take the trouble to free him from the
clutches of the gypsies. Therefore the Lord here says
that He wants a new man who is peaceful in mind. One
whose mind is not peaceful is agitated by certain
drives, especially sex desire, even though he be in the
company of Caitanya Mahāprabhu-- Māyā is so strong that
unless one is determined not to fall victim, even the

                          140
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

Supreme Personality of Godhead cannot give protection.

The Supreme Lord and His representative always want to
give protection, but a person must take advantage of
their personal contact. If one thinks that the Supreme
Personality of Godhead or His representative is an
ordinary man, he will certainly fall down. Thus Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu did not want a person like Kālā
Kṛṣṇadāsa to accompany Him. He wanted someone who was
determined, who had a peaceful mind, and who was not
agitated by ulterior motives.

In his lecture of May 3, 2001, Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja supports the version of Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa
Kavirāja and Śrīla Prabhupāda thus:

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s personal servant, Kālā
Kṛṣṇadāsa, went with Him to South India for about four
months. He did not have a taste for chanting,
remembering, or hearing hari-katha, but he was helping
Mahāprabhu. He was very lucky to serve, but he had no
taste. Mahāprabhu was chanting, “Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa”
in all the temples and making everyone Vaiṣṇavas, but
what became of His servant?

This fellow had no taste. He had never said to
Mahāprabhu, “O, I want to hear hari-katha.” He never
questioned Him and he never heard His teachings. What
became of him? He was attracted by the Bhaṭṭathāris,
gypsy girls, who were so beautiful that in a moment he
gave up Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the Supreme Personality of
Godhead Kṛṣṇa Himself.

And in addition, on November 20, 2001 he said in a
discourse:

It was amazing, however, that although Kālā Kṛṣṇadāsa
was traveling with the Lord, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu,
Mahāprabhu was not able to help him. This is because
Kālā Kṛṣṇadāsa was only engaged in Mahāprabhu’s external
service. He did not inquire from Him about bhakti,
neither did he have taste for His hari-katha, neither
did he have a taste for chanting. In other words, he
could not adopt Mahāprabhu’s inner mood.

The Perfect Remain Perfect

The following quotes show the infallible position of
self-realized devotees who are here in this world. The
pure devotees in this world don’t fall from their
position despite the all-pervading lure of māyā here.
What to speak, then, of those devotees in their forms as
residents of the spiritual world. We can have faith in
them, and faith in the world from which they come.

Pure devotional service is so spiritually relishable
that a devotee becomes automatically uninterested in
material enjoyment. That is the sign of perfection in
progressive devotional service. A pure devotee
continuously remembers the lotus feet of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa
and does not forget Him even for a moment, not even in
exchange for all the opulence of the three worlds.

(Srīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.5.19, purport)

                             141
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017


When Uddhava was fully absorbed in the transcendental
ecstasy of love of God, he actually forgot all about the
external world. The pure devotee lives constantly in the
abode of the Supreme Lord, even in the present body,
which apparently belongs to this world. The pure devotee
is not exactly on the bodily plane, since he is absorbed
in the transcendental thought of the Supreme.

(Srīmad-Bhāgavatam .3.2.6 purport)

Question: Prabhupāda, a devotee, very often, after
chanting, they develop very, very high. I see a lot of
devotees; they fall down back to the māyā. What is the
reason?

Prabhupāda: He is not a devotee. He is pretending to be
a devotee. One who is a devotee never falls down. There
are so many false devotees. He falls down.

(Morning Walk. Toronto, June 21, 1971)

Question: Often the devotee thinks that he’s more
unhappy than the karmīs, because he knows he’s unhappy.

Prabhupāda: Then that means he is not a devotee.

Question: He’s not a devotee.

Prabhupāda: Yes. He’s not a devotee. Devotee means, the
first sign will be that he is happy. Brahma-bhūtaḥ
prasannātmā (Bhagavad-gītā 18.54). If he’s not
prasannātmā, he’s a rascal. He has not even entered
devotional life. He’s outside. That is the test. Just
like Dhruva Mahārāja. When he saw Viṣṇu, he said,
“Everything is all right. I don’t want anything. Svāmin
kṛtārtho ‘smi.” That is Vaiṣṇava. And if he is still in
want or unhappiness, that means he has no spiritual life
at all. He is simply making a show.

(Morning Walk. Melbourne, April 24, 1976)

The link connecting these four quotes is this concept of
‘higher taste’. Śrīla Prabhupāda explains that perfect
devotees experience the higher taste of service to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, and therefore the allure of māyā simply does not
attract them. Those who have not actually reached that
relishable higher taste will still have a taste for
material enjoyment. Māyā still has the power to attract
the aspiring devotee away from the path of devotion.

The third-class person in Kṛṣṇa consciousness may fall
down, but when one is in the second class he does not
fall down, and for the first-class person in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness there is no chance of falling down.

Bhagavad-gītā 9.3, purport)

There is no possibility that a first-class devotee will
fall down, even though he may mix with non-devotees to
preach.

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 22.71, purport)


                          142
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

A false guru will fall prey to māyā, whereas a bona fide
guru, the true devotee, never forgets Kṛṣṇa for even a
moment. Such a guru can bring his disciples, followers,
and audiences to his own level of perfection.

Śrīla Prabhupāda has written in the conclusion of his
purport to Nectar of Instruction, Verse Five: “One
should not become a spiritual master unless he has
attained the platform of uttama-adhikārī [first-class
devotee]. A neophyte Vaiṣṇava or a Vaiṣṇava situated on
the intermediate platform can also accept disciples, but
such disciples must be on the same platform, and it
should be understood that they cannot advance very well
toward the ultimate goal of life under his insufficient
guidance. Therefore a disciple should be careful to
accept an uttama-adhikārī as a spiritual master.”

“Devarsi Narada is an example of the topmost uttama-
bhāgavata. Sukadeva Gosvāmī belongs to the intermediate
stage of uttama-bhāgavatas (nirdhuta-kasaya). Śrī Narada
in his previous birth as the son of a maidservant is an
example of the preliminary stage of uttama-bhāgavatas
(mūrcchita-kāśayā). The association and mercy of these
three kinds of maha-bhāgavatas is the cause of the
manifestation of śraddhā” (Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-
bindu, Verse 3, Śrī Bindu-vikāśinī-vṛtti, comment).

Our Original Position

To illustrate the conditioned souls’ turning away from
their inherent love and service to Kṛṣṇa, Śrīla
Prabhupāda gives the analogy of sparks falling out of a
fire. This analogy refers to the jīvas in the taṭasthā
region who turn away from their inherent nature.

It is stated in several places that the living entities
are like sparks of a fire, and the Supreme Personality
of Godhead is like the fire itself. If the sparks
somehow or other fall out of the fire, they lose their
natural illumination; thus it is ascertained that the
living entities come into this material world exactly as
sparks fall from a great fire. The living entity wants
to imitate Kṛṣṇa and tries to lord it over material
nature in order to enjoy sense gratification; thus he
forgets his original position, and his illuminating
power, his spiritual identity, is extinguished.

(Kṛṣṇa, The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Chapter 87)

The Supreme Lord is infinitely greater than fire, and
therefore the above-mentioned analogy is not fully
accurate; still, mundane analogies give us at least an
initial glimmer of understanding. In this connection,
the phrases ‘fall out of the fire,’ ‘lose their natural
illumination,’ ‘forgets his original position,’ and ‘his
spiritual identity is extinguished’ do not mean to say
that the soul fell to this world from Vaikuṇṭha or
Goloka Vṛndāvana. Rather, the phrases are further
examples of the moon-on-the-branch logic.

In the Kṛṣṇa book quote above, the words ‘forgets his
original position’ imply that love of Kṛṣṇa, pure Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, is inherent, or latent, in our soul, just
as the almond oil is inherent in the almond, the ghee is

                          143
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                           5/5/2017

inherent in the milk, and the tree is inherent in its
seed. Śrīla Prabhupāda confirms this conclusion in the
following letter:

Regarding your question ñ “What does it mean: ‘We are
all originally Kṛṣṇa conscious entities?’ We are always
with Kṛṣṇa. Where is Kṛṣṇa not present? So how can you
say that we were not before? You are always with Kṛṣṇa,
and when we forget this fact we are far, far away from
Him. In the Īśopaniṣad it is clearly stated, tad dure
tad vantike ñ He is very far away, but He is very near
as well.

(Letter to Upendra. Los Angeles, July 15, 1970)

So this forgetfulness is our fall-down. It can take
place at any moment, and we can counteract this
forgetfulness immediately by rising to the platform of
Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

(Letter to Upendra. Los Angeles, July 15, 1970)

The following excerpt also includes the words ‘forget’
and ‘original,’ and it further establishes their meaning
in the context of jīva-tattva, the truth of the soul:

You are Christian; you can change your faith tomorrow.
The Sanskrit word religion does not mean faith. Religion
means the original characteristic. That is called
religion. So the original characteristic means that it
cannot be changed. That quality, that characteristic, is
always with us. The Vedic version is that the living
entity is an eternal servant of God. When he forgets
this relationship, that he is the eternal servant of
God, this means that his material existence begins.

(Lecture at St. Pascal’s Franciscan Seminary.

Melbourne, June 28, 1974)

As Prabhupāda explains above, in discussing jīva-tattva
the word ‘original’ means ‘unchangeable’ or ‘that which
is inherent or dormant in us.’ This is further confirmed
in the following statement:

Since Kṛṣṇa consciousness is inherent in every living
entity, everyone should be given a chance to hear about
Kṛṣṇa. Simply by hearing and chanting ñ śravaṇaṁ
kīrtanam ñ one’s heart is directly purified, and one’s
original Kṛṣṇa consciousness is immediately awakened.

(Nectar of Devotion, Verse 4, purport)

Our Natural Position

In the quotes below, Śrīla Prabhupāda uses the phrase
‘natural position’ to explain the soul’s inherent nature
to be Kṛṣṇa conscious, just as ghee is inherent in milk
or almond oil is inherent in the almond.

Eternally conditioned means... We cannot be eternally
conditioned, because we are part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa.
Our natural position is ever liberated, eternally
liberated. But because we wanted to imitate Kṛṣṇa, we

                            144
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                         5/5/2017

wanted to become Kṛṣṇa as the Māyāvādīs want to do,
therefore [we are conditioned.] In the spiritual world,
Kṛṣṇa is the only enjoyer.

(Lecture on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 1.10.5.

Māyāpur, June 20, 1973)

The word ‘regaining’ below has the same meaning as
‘reviving.’ In connection with jīva-tattva, ‘to revive’
means to awaken what is inherent, as the tree is
inherent within the seed.

Below, Śrīla Prabhupāda explains how the soul’s natural
position, his inherent and dormant potency for Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, is eternally present within.

There are certain prescribed methods for employing our
senses and mind in such a way that our dormant
consciousness for loving Kṛṣṇa will be invoked, as much
as the child, with a little practice, can begin to walk.
One who has no basic walking capacity cannot walk by
practice. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa consciousness cannot be
aroused simply by practice. Actually there is no such
practice. When we wish to develop our innate capacity
for devotional service, there are certain processes
which, by our accepting and executing them, will cause
that dormant capacity to be invoked. Such practice is
called sādhana-bhakti.

(Nectar of Devotion, Chapter 2)

Here is another analogy showing how ‘natural’ means that
something is present in a latent stage, but has not yet
developed. Prabhupāda explains this as follows:

Prema is not something you have to get outside. It is
already there. Just like a young boy, young girl. As
soon as they meet, there is natural attraction. That is
already there. It is not that he has brought this
attraction, purchased it from some shopkeeper. No. It is
already there. Simply by combination it becomes aroused.
That’s all. Similarly, kṛṣṇa-prema is there.

(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 22.107)

This final quote below concludes the theme of Part Three
of Journey of the Soul: the spirit souls in this world
have yet to manifest their spiritual forms, which are
now lying in seed.

In further reference to your question about the form of
the spirit soul of the conditioned living entity, there
is a spiritual form always, but it develops fully only
when the living entity goes back to Vaikuṇṭha. This form
develops according to the desire of the living entity.
Until this perfectional stage is reached, the form is
lying dormant like the form of the tree is lying dormant
in the seed.

(Letter to Rūpānuga. Los Angeles, August 8, 1969)

The above-mentioned quotes establish that once we become
pure devotees by taking shelter of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s

                          145
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

associate, the bona fide self-realized spiritual master,
and by following the process of bhakti-yoga, we develop
our spiritual forms. Then we, like all the other
residents of Vaikuṇṭha and Goloka Vṛndāvana, reside
there for eternity in unlimited happiness.

We can have faith in that realm, as stated by Śrīla
Prabhupāda’s paratpara-guru, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura,
in his Jaiva-dharma (Chapter Sixteen): “Inasmuch as they
reside in the spiritual world, māyā stays far from them
and does not affect them at all. Always absorbed in the
bliss of serving their worshipable Lord, they are
eternally liberated and completely unaware of material
happiness and distress. Their life is love alone, and
they are not even conscious of misery, death or fear.”




Part Four - Overview

An End Note From the Editors

There are two categories of vibhinnāṁśa jīvas, not
three. The jīvas who are manifest in the spiritual world
are eternally liberated (nitya-mukta) vibhinnāṁśa jīvas;
and the jīvas who manifest in the taṭasthā region and
who look from there towards the spiritual world are also
eternally liberated (nitya-mukta) vibhinnāṁśa jīvas. The
jīvas who look towards the material world from the
taṭasthā region are called conditioned souls, nitya-
baddha (or nitya-saṁsāra) vibhinnāṁśa jīvas.

Although the jīvas manifested by Baladeva and His
expansions in the spiritual worlds are eternal
associates (nitya-pāṛsadas), they are technically
vibhinnāṁśa-tattva, or vibhinnāṁśa jīvas. Jaiva-dharma
states, “When He (Kṛṣṇa) is situated in the jīva-śakti,
He manifests His svarūpa as Baladeva.” It also states,
“Innumerable nitya-pāṛsada jīvas manifest from Śrī
Baladeva Prabhu to serve Vṛndāvana-vihārī Śrī Kṛṣṇa as
His eternal associates in Goloka Vṛndāvana, and others
manifest from Śrī Saṅkarṣaṇa to serve the Lord of
Vaikuṇṭha, Śrī Nārāyaṇa, in the spiritual world.”

Evidence that there are two kinds of jīva is given in
the discourse entitled “Origin of the Living Entity” as
follows:



sei vibhinnāṁśa jīva ñ dui ta’ prakāra



eka ñ ‘nitya-mukta’, eka ñ ‘nitya-saṁsāra’



‘nitya-mukta’ nitya kṛṣṇa-carane unmukha




                          146
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                           5/5/2017

‘kṛṣṇa-pāriṣada’ nāma, bhuñje sevā-sukha



(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 22.10ñ11)

The living entities [jīvas] are divided into two
categories. Some are eternally liberated and others are
eternally conditioned. Those who are eternally liberated
are always awake to Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and they render
transcendental loving service at the feet of Kṛṣṇa. They
are eternal associates of Kṛṣṇa, and eternally enjoy the
transcendental bliss of serving Him.

“Origin of the Living Entity” also quotes Śrīla Jīva
Gosvāmī:

tad evam anantā eva jīvākhyās taṭasthāḥ śaktayaḥ

tatra tāsāṁ varga-dvayam eko vargo’ nādita eva bhagavad-

unmukhaḥ anyas tv anādita eva bhagavat-parāṅmukhaḥ

svabhāvatas tadīya-jñāna-bhāvāt tadīya-jñānābhāvāt ca

(Paramātma-sandarbha, Anuccheda 47, Text 1)

Thus the Lord’s marginal potency is comprised of
individual spirit souls. Although these individual
spirit souls are limitless in number, they may be
divided into two groups: (1) the souls who from time
immemorial are favorable to the Supreme Lord; and (2)
the rebellious souls who from time immemorial are averse
to the Supreme Lord. One group is aware of the Lord’s
glories and the other group is not aware of them.

Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī continues:

tatra prathamo ‘ntaraṇgā-śakti-vilāsānugṛhīto / nitya-
bhagavat-parikara-rūpo garuḍādikaḥ / thoktaṁ pādmottara-
khaṇḍe tri-pad-vibhūter / lokas tu ity adau bhagavat-
sandarbhodāhṛte

asya ca taṭasthatvaṁ jīvatva-prasiddher īśvaratva-koṭāv
apraveśāt

(Paramātma-sandarbha, Anuccheda 47, Text 2)

The first group consists of Garuḍa and the other eternal
associates of the Lord. These devotees take shelter of
the Lord’s internal potency and enjoy pastimes with Him.
They reside in the spiritual world, which will be
described in the Bhagavat-sandarbha (Anuccheda 78). They
are termed as ‘taṭasthā’ because they are famous as
jīvas and they do not enter the category of Īśvara
(God).

When the word ‘taṭasthā’ is used to refer to the eternal
associates, as mentioned in the verse above, it does not
mean that such souls have a tendency to look towards
either the spiritual world or the material world. They
are too far away from māyā to see it. In this connection
it means that they are very close to being God in the
sense that they have qualities like God’s ñ but they are

                          147
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

not God. They are qualitatively one with Him as
confirmed in all the Vedic scriptures (sākṣād-dharitvena
samasta-śāstraih), and at the same time they are His
most confidential servants (kintu prabhor yaḥ priya eva
tasya).

They are close to being God in quality, but they are not
God because (1) He is vibhu (unlimited) and they are aṇu
(infinitesimal), and (2) He is the energetic source of
all energies and they are always His energy. They are
not God and they are not made of māyā-śakti; they are
pure, transcendental, and free from material qualities.
Thus they are called taṭasthā, or situated in the
marginal category.

A problem in harmonizing the various references of the
word taṭasthā in its different contexts arises from
daily usage and emotional connotations associated with
it. Many of us may not be familiar with taṭasthā in
reference to Kṛṣṇa’s eternal associates, and therefore
we see the word as minimizing their greatness and making
them somewhat equal to us nitya-baddhas. We tend to
think like this when we read Śrīla Bhakivinoda Ṭhākura’s
beautiful explanation in Jaiva-dharma, Chapter Sixteen,
stating that the jīvas manifest by Baladeva in the
spiritual world and the jīvas manifest by Mahā-Viṣṇu in
the taṭasthā region are essentially the same in quality.
Chapter Sixteen states:

These nitya-pārṣadās are eternally engaged in serving
their object of worship, the Supreme Godhead, who is
absorbed in rasa -- They are forever extremely
spiritually potent, being imbued with the cit-śakti of
the Lord. They have no connection with māyā ñ they are
even unmindful of her existence -- Prema being their
life and soul, they do not even know that lamentation,
death, or fear actually exist.

Also, countless, infinitesimal jīvas emanate from
Kāraṇodakaśāyī Mahā-Viṣṇu, lying within the Causal
Ocean, whose glance impregnates the māyā-śakti. As these
jīvas are the neighbours of māyā, they witness her
variegatedness. The symptoms of the jīvas as discussed
earlier are also present in these jīvas. However,
because they are minuscule in size and situated at the
margin, their constitutional nature is to look at both
the material world and the spiritual sky. Their marginal
condition makes them vulnerable because ñ up to this
point of time ñ they have not been reinforced with cit-
bala, the strength of spiritual potency, by the mercy of
the Supreme Lord, their worshipable object.

A necessity therefore arises to consider the alternative
interpretation of taṭasthā mentioned by Śrīla Jīva
Gosvāmī, which glorifies the qualitative oneness of the
nitya-pāṛsada jīvas with God, and their intimate,
confidential relationship with Him. We need not be
limited to the understanding of taṭasthā which refers to
a provisional concept of the geographical location of
origin. The Sanskrit language is extremely deep and no
one word has only one meaning. The understanding
associated with taṭasthā as a ‘place’ does not preclude
the way in which it has been used by Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī
and Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī.

                          148
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                          5/5/2017


When we hear or read, “Garuḍa, the great bird-carrier of
Lord Viṣṇu, the nitya-siddha pāṛsada of the Lord, is a
taṭasthā-śakti jīva,” we may say, “That is absurd
apasiddhānta.” This may be because we feel we are being
told to believe that Garuḍa emanated from Mahā-Viṣṇu in
the region between the spiritual and material worlds. On
the basis of that interpretation of the word, it is of
course absurd apasiddhānta.

As mentioned above, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura explains
in Jaiva-dharma that the nitya-pāṛsada jīvas manifested
from Baladeva and the jīvas manifest in the taṭasthā
region from Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu are essentially the
same in quality: “Although they have all the qualities
of the [nitya-pāṛsada] jīvas I have already described,
because of their minute and marginal nature, they
sometimes look to the spiritual world, and sometimes to
the material world.”

Of course, to respect the eternal associates as being
far superior to us in every respect is healthy,
advantageous, and positive. Still, on a theoretical
level, to say the associates of the Lord are not
technically vibhinnāṁśa jīvas creates the necessity of
making another special category for them in addition to
the standard two types of expansions, namely svaṁśa and
vibhinnāṁśa. With the exception of kāyavyūha-rūpa
(direct expansions of Śrī Rādhā), there is no extra
category mentioned in the writings of our Gosvāmīs.

Thus, the vibhinnāṁśa categorization here applies to
those who are nitya-mukta (i.e. never conditioned
[baddha] at any time) and nitya-baddha (having never
been in the spiritual world at any time). The nitya-
mukta category will therefore include nitya-pāṛsada
jīvas (eternal associates), who come from Baladeva, and
also the jīvas who came from Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, who
fortunately looked toward yogamāyā rather than mahāmāyā,
and then became associates. According to their sphere of
action they are differently termed as ‘nitya-siddha’
[‘nitya-mukta’] and ‘sādhana-siddha’ when they are
situated in the spiritual realm, and ‘sādhaka’ and
‘nitya-baddha’ when situated in the material realm.

It is stated in Jaiva-dharma, Chapter Fifteen:

Kṛṣṇa establishes Himself in each of His śaktis, and
manifests His svarūpa according to the nature of that
śakti. When He is situated in the cit-svarūpa, He
manifests His essential svarūpa, both as Śrī Kṛṣṇa
Himself, and also as Nārāyaṇa, the Lord of Vaikuṇṭha;
when He is situated in the jīva-śakti, He manifests His
svarūpa as His vilāsa-mūrti of Vraja, Baladeva; and when
He situates Himself in the māyā-śakti, He manifests the
three Viṣṇu forms: Kāraṇodakaśāyī, Garbhodakaśāyī, and
Kṣīrodakaśāyī.

In His Kṛṣṇa form He manifests all the spiritual affairs
to the superlative degree. In His Baladeva svarūpa as
śeṣa-tattva[xxvi]1, He manifests nitya-mukta-pārṣada-
jīvas who render eight types of service to Kṛṣṇa
Himself, the origin of śeṣa-tattva. Again, as śeṣa-rūpa
Saṅkarṣaṇa in Vaikuṇṭha, He manifests eight types of

                          149
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

servants to render eight kinds of services as eternally
liberated associates of śeṣī-rūpa Nārāyaṇa.

Mahā-Viṣṇu, who is an expansion of Saṅkarṣaṇa, situates
Himself in the heart of the jīva-śakti, and as Paramātmā
manifests the jīvas in the material world. These jīvas
are susceptible to the influence of māyā, and unless
they attain the shelter of the hlādinī-śakti by
Bhagavān’s mercy, it is possible that they will be
defeated by māyā. The countless conditioned jīvas who
have been illusioned by māyā are under the control of
the three modes of material nature.

As stated above, Baladeva is the predominating Deity of
jīva-śakti. He is also the predominating Deity of
sandhinī-śakti, which maintains and manifests all the
variegatedness of the spiritual world. He is both. As
stated in Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s Śrī
Prabandhāvalī, Chapter Eight:

Kṛṣṇa’s first extension is Baladeva. Kṛṣṇa’s stick, the
peacock feather in Kṛṣṇa’s crown, all of Kṛṣṇa’s
paraphernalia, the gopīs’ paraphernalia, Vṛndāvana-dhāma
ñ all of these are manifest by sandhinī-śakti, and the
embodiment of that potency is Baladeva Prabhu. The
embodiment of hlādinī-śakti is Rādhikā, and Kṛṣṇa is the
possessor of cit-śakti. These three together are sac-
cid-ānanda, the complete form of Kṛṣṇa (eternity,
knowledge, and bliss). Neither Rādhikā nor Baladeva are
separate from Him; together They are one. From Baladeva
Prabhu alone, all the eternally perfected devotees of
Kṛṣṇa are manifest.

While the jīva is a manifestation of jīva-tattva, the
sandhinī-vṛtti [vṛtti means ‘function’ or ‘activity’] of
svarūpa-śakti is present in him. Like Kṛṣṇa Himself, the
pure form of the jīva is by constitution sac-cid-ānanda
[Bhagavad-gītā 15.7]. It is stated in Jaiva-dharma,
Chapter Fourteen:

Bābājī: Jīva-śakti is the atomic (anu) potency of
svarūpa-śakti, and all three aspects of svarūpa-śakti
are present in it to a minute (anu) degree. Thus, the
hlādinī-vṛtti is always present in the jīva in the form
of spiritual bliss; saṁvit-vṛtti is present in the form
of transcendental knowledge; and sandhinī-vṛtti is
always present in the jīva’s minute form (as anu-
caitanya).

In addition to being the predominating Deity of jīva-
śakti and sandhinī-śakti, Baladeva Prabhu is also the
akhaṇḍa-guru-tattva, meaning the undivided, original
principle of guru. Many merciful ācāryas in guru-
paramparā come to this world and teach us the truths of
the inconceivable jīva.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s writes in his Veṇu-
gīta, Ānanda-varddhinī commentary:

These gopīs are of three types: Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s kāya-
vyūha, the nitya-siddha, and the sādhana-siddha gopīs.
Those who directly appear from Śrīmatī Rādhikā are
called kāya-vyūha. Śrīmatī Rādhikā expands Herself in
many forms to enrich the flavors of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes.

                          150
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                           5/5/2017

Nitya-siddha (eternally perfect) gopīs are jīva-tattva
appearing from Baladeva Prabhu. They are never bound by
māyā.

Regarding the gopīs and other consorts who are not
jīvas, as mentioned in the reference above they are
plenary expansions of svarūpa-śakti Śrīmatī Rādhikā. We
find the following in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā
4.76ñ81:

Just as the fountainhead, Lord Kṛṣṇa, is the cause of
all incarnations [svaṁśa], so Śrī Rādhā is the cause of
all these consorts. The goddesses of fortune are partial
manifestations of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and the queens are
reflections of Her image. The goddesses of fortune are
Her plenary portions, and they display the forms of
vaibhava-vilāsa. The queens are of the nature of Her
vaibhava-prakāśa. The vraja-devīs have diverse bodily
features. They are Her expansions [kāya-vyūha rūpa] and
are the instruments for expanding rasa. Without many
consorts, there is not such exultation in rasa.
Therefore there are many manifestations of Śrīmatī
Rādhārāṇī to assist in the Lord’s pastimes. Among them
are various groups of consorts in Vraja who have
varieties of sentiments and mellows. They help Lord
Kṛṣṇa taste all the sweetness of the rāsa dance and
other pastimes.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja has elaborately
explained in his Pinnacle of Devotion, in the chapter
entitled “Supreme Chastity,” that we conditioned jīvas
of this world can attain the position of sādhana-siddha
as one of the five kinds of sakhīs of Śrīmatī Rādhikā,
namely Her maidservant (nitya-sakhī), under the guidance
of Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī and her followers.



References:

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi līlā 4.76ñ81, Ādi-līlā
5.8ñ11,

Ādi-līlā 5.123ñ124, Madhya-līlā 8.164, Madhya-līlā
22.9ñ13

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu kī Śikṣā (Hindi), 6th Paricched

(Jīva-tattva), p 77ñ78

Paramātma-sandarbha, Anuccheda 47, 1ñ2

Veṇu-gīta, Verses 3ñ4, Ananda-varddhinī Vyākhyā

Pinnacle of Devotion, Supreme Chastity

Jaiva-dharma, Chapter 14ñ17

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 3.2.56 (Dāsya-parikāras)

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu 3.3.53 (Sakhya-parikāras)

Part Five


                          151
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

About the Authors




Śrila Bhaktivinode Ṭhākura

The following is an excerpt from Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja’s introduction to Jaiva-dharma.



Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has broadcast the
transcendental instructions of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
in many different languages. He has written
approximately one hundred books in Sanskrit, Bengali,
Oriya, Hindi, Urdu, and English. When one sees the list
of his books, one can easily infer that the author was a
vastly learned scholar of many different languages.

I think it necessary at this point to shed some light on
a special feature of the author’s life. Although he was
a pre-eminent scholar of Western thought, he was
completely free from Western influences. Western
educators say, “Don’t follow me; follow my words.” In
other words, “Don’t do as I do; do as I say.” The life
of Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura refutes this principle,
for he personally applied and demonstrated all the
instructions of his books in his own life. Therefore,
his instructions and manner of bhajana are known as
bhaktivinoda-dhārā (the line of Bhaktivinoda).

There is not a single instruction in his books that he
did not personally follow. There is no disparity between
his writings and his life, between his actions and his
words. They are one in all respects.

It is natural for readers to be curious to learn about a
great personality who possesses such extraordinary
character. Modern readers in particular, who seek to
know about any subject, cannot have faith in an author’s
writings without being acquainted with the author
himself. Therefore, I am submitting a few words about
Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura.

When it comes to discussing the life of great, self-
realized personalities who are transcendental to mortal
existence, it would be a mistake to consider their
birth, life span, and departure from the vision of this
world to be similar to that of mere mortals. They are
beyond birth and death, they are situated in eternal
existence, and their coming and going from this world is
strictly a matter of their own appearance and
disappearance.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura appeared on September 2,
1838, and thus illuminated the sky of Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavism. He took birth in a high-class family in a
village named Vīra-nagara, which is located within the
Nadiyā district of West Bengal, not far from Śrīdhāma-
Māyāpura, the appearance place of Śrī Gaurāṅga. He
disappeared from this world on June 23, 1914, in the
city of Calcutta, at which time he entered the midday

                             152
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

pastimes of Śrī Śrī Gāndharvikā-Giridhārī (Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa),
who are the supreme objects of worship for the Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavas.

In his brief lifespan of seventy-six years, he
instructed the world by personally carrying out the
duties of the four stages of spiritual life: brahmacārya
(celibate student-life), gṛhastha (religious
householder-life), vānapraṣtha (withdrawal from worldly
duties), and sannyāsa (formal renunciation). He first
underwent brahmacārya and obtained various elevated
instructions. After that, he entered gṛhastha life and
set an ideal example of how to maintain family members
through honest and noble means. All householders should
follow this example.

During his householder life, he travelled all over India
as a highly placed officer in the administration and
justice department of the British government of India.
By his exacting discrimination and expert administrative
skills, this great personality managed to regulate and
bring to order even those places that were infamous as
lawless states. In the midst of family duties, he
astonished all his contemporaries by the religious ideal
he displayed. Although engaged in pressing
responsibilities, he wrote many books in different
languages. If the reader studies the list of his books,
he can clearly deduce Bhaktivinoda’s incredible creative
power.

After retiring from his government responsibilities,
Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura adopted the stage of
vānaprastha and intensified his spiritual practice. At
that time, he established an āśrama at Surabhi-kuñja in
Godrumadvīpa, one of the nine districts of Navadvīpa. He
remained there and performed bhajana for a considerable
time.

Later he accepted the life of an ascetic and resided at
Svānanda-sukhada-kuñja, which was nearby. While residing
there, he established the appearance place of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu and many other places of gaura-līlā.
In this, he followed the example of Mahāprabhu and His
followers, the Six Gosvāmīs, who had discovered the
birthplace and other pastime places of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

If Śrīla Ṭhākura Bhaktivinoda had not appeared in this
world, the pastime places and instructions of Śrī
Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu would have disappeared from the
world. The entire world of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas will
therefore remain indebted to him forever. It is for this
reason that he has been awarded the highest honor in the
Vaiṣṇava community by being addressed as the Seventh
Gosvāmī.




Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja



Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja is

                          153
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

the disciple of oṁ viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, who is one of the foremost
leading disciples of oṁ viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda.

On February 16, 1921, Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja
took his divine birth in the village of Tewaripur,
located near the bank of the sacred Ganges River in
Bihar, India. It was here that Lord Rāmacandra killed
the Taraka demon.

Śrīla Mahārāja appeared in this world on the amāvasyā
(new moon) day. His birth name was Śrīman Nārāyaṇa
Tiwari. He was born in a very religious Trivedi brāhmaṇa
family, and throughout his childhood he had many
opportunities to regularly accompany his father to
kīrtanas and lecture assemblies.

In February of 1946, he had his first meeting with his
Gurudeva, in Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma, West Bengal. He had
traveled there from his village after meeting a disciple
of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Thakura named Śrīla
Narottamānanda Brahmacārī, who had been touring in his
area, preaching the message of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.
After some discussions with him, Śrīla Mahārāja had
become convinced of the paramount position of the
philosophy disseminated by the ācāryas in the line of
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. Within days, he had left home to
join the mission of his spiritual master and surrender
his life to him.

Arriving in Śrī Navadvīpa Dhāma, Śrīla Mahārāja
enthusiastically joined the annual parikramā. At the end
of the parikramā, on Gaura-pūrṇimā, he was given both
harināma and dīkṣā mantras by Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, receiving the name Śrī Gaura
Nārāyaṇa Brahmacārī. Soon afterward, his Gurudeva also
awarded him the title ‘Bhakta-bāndhava,’ which means
‘friend of the devotees,’ as he was always serving the
Vaiṣṇavas in a very pleasing manner.

Over the next seven years he traveled extensively with
his Gurudeva on preaching tours throughout India. In
1952, again on Gaura-pūrṇimā, his beloved Gurudeva
awarded him initiation into the sacred order of
sannyāsa. In 1954, his Gurudeva gave him charge of the
newly opened temple in Mathurā, Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya
Maṭha. Śrīla Mahārāja then began to spend part of the
year in Mathurā and the other part in Bengal, serving
extensively in both areas. This continued for the next
fourteen years.

His responsibility further increased when Śrīla Bhakti
Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja appointed him vice-
president of his institution, the Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta
Samiti, as well as editor-in-chief of its Hindi
publications and monthly magazine, Śrī Bhāgavat Patrikā.
In 1968, his Gurudeva departed from this world and Śrīla
Mahārāja personally performed all the necessary
ceremonial rituals for his samādhi. During this time
period, as a humble servitor of the Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta
Samiti, he began to organize the annual Kārtika Vraja-
maṇḍala parikramā, which he continues to carry on up to
this present day.

                          154
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017


Śrīla Mahārāja was requested by his Gurudeva to
translate the books of Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Thakura from
Bengali into his native language, Hindi. He has carried
out this request by translating some of the Ṭhākura’s
most prominent books, such as Jaiva-dharma, Caitanya-
śikṣāmṛta, Bhakti-tattva-viveka, Vaiṣṇava-siddhānta-
mālā, to name only a few. All these books, as well as
his translations and commentaries of other prominent
ācāryas of the guru-paramparā, are presently being
translated into English and other languages by his
followers. To date, he has translated and published over
eighty books in Hindi, and over fifty books in English.
In addition, many of his English books have now been
translated into other languages, including Spanish,
French, German, Italian, Russian, Portuguese, Chinese,
and several Indian languages.

He continues to lecture in Hindi, Bengali, and English
throughout India and internationally, and all of his
discourses are recorded. Several Hindi lectures have
been transcribed, as well as translated into English and
other languages for publication. Additionally, thousands
of his English lectures have been recorded and filmed,
and, they are also being sent as transcriptions, audios,
and videos over the internet to reach hundreds of
thousands of fortunate souls.

A significant relationship in the life of Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Gosvāmī Mahārāja is his association with Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja, known throughout the world
as Śrīla Prabhupāda, the famous preacher of Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavism and Founder-Ācārya of ISKCON, the
International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness. They
first met in Calcutta, in 1946, on the occasion of the
inauguration of a new branch of the Gauḍīya Vedānta
Samiti when they had both come to render their services.
Śrīla Prabhupāda Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja is one of
its founding members.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja accompanied his Gurudeva
to Jhansi, where Śrīla Prabhupāda, or Abhaya
Caraṇāravinda Prabhu, as he was formerly known, had been
trying to start a Vaiṣṇava society named The League of
Devotees. A few years later, in the early fifties, he
came to reside in Mathurā at Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha,
on the invitation of his godbrother, Śrīla Bhakti
Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, and he remained there
for some months. Sharing regular devotional exchanges
and deep discussions of Vaiṣṇava siddhānta with him,
Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja developed a still
further intimate relationship with him during this time
period, regarding him both as his śikṣā-guru and bosom
friend.

In 1959 Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja
initiated Abhaya Caraṇāravinda Prabhu into the sacred
sannyāsa order, giving him the sannyāsī name and title
Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja, and the
ceremony of Vedic fire yajña and all the rituals were
personally performed by Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja.
Śrīla Prabhupāda Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja was
already residing in Vṛndāvana during this period, first
at the Vaṁśī Gopāla Mandira and a few years later at the

                          155
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Dāmodara Mandira, and Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Gosvāmī Mahārāja would often go there to visit him. He
would cook for him and honor the prasāda with him, and
they would exchange intimate discussions on Vaiṣṇava
philosophy.

When Śrīla Prabhupāda went to preach in the West and
succeeded in starting the first Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa temple in
America, Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja sent him the
first mṛdaṅga drums and karatālas that he would be using
for saṅkīrtana. Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja
maintained regular correspondence every month or two
with Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja and
Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja up until 1968, when
Śrīla Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja entered nitya-līlā. After
that, he continued to write Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja, until his own divine departure in 1977.

Toward the end of his manifest stay in this world, he
requested Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja several times
to kindly give his association to his western disciples
and help them to understand the deep truths of the
Vaiṣṇava philosophy in the line of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī.
Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja humbly agreed to honor
his request, considering him to be one of his
worshipable śikṣā-gurus. Śrīla Prabhupāda also requested
Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja to take complete charge
of performing all the rituals for his samādhi after his
departure. Both of these requests clearly demonstrated
his firm and utter confidence in Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja.

For three decades since Śrīla Prabhupāda’s departure
from the vision of this world in November 1977, Śrīla
Mahārāja has been unwaveringly carrying out this final
request, by providing insightful guidance and loving
shelter to all who come to him seeking it. Through the
medium of his English books and extensive world touring,
he is now giving his association and divine realizations
to Śrīla Prabhupāda’s followers and all other sincere
searchers of truth throughout the globe. Although he is
over 88 years of age, he regularly travels throughout
India and abroad, preaching the glories of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu and Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, and the true glory
of ISKCON’s Founder-ācārya Śrīla Prabhupāda and his
entire guru-paramparā.

In 2009, the year of the publication of his Gopī-gīta
discourses, Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja completed
his thirtieth world preaching tour. In many countries,
he is invited to prominent Hindu temples to give
lectures on India’s Vedic sanātana-dharma. When he is in
India, he is regularly invited by dignitaries to speak
at their spiritual programs. A prominent member of the
Brahma-Madhva-Gauḍīya disciplic succession, he is highly
acclaimed throughout India as a spiritual scholar and
teacher, and as a pure devotee of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa in the
line of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He is recognized as a
strict follower of Vedic culture, Hindu sanātana-dharma,
Vaiṣṇava etiquette, daivī-varṇāśrama, and bhāgavat-
bhajana. Most of the notable spiritual scholars of
Mathurā and Vṛndāvana invite him to speak at their
assemblies, and he also invites them to attend programs
at his Maṭha.

                          156
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017


Many Indian government officials, like the DCP (Deputy
Commissioner of Police) and also many court judges, in
Delhi, Bombay, Calcutta, Mathurā, and elsewhere are his
disciples. Many renowned industrialists and businessmen
regularly come to him to inquire about spiritual life
and receive his blessings. Many head pūjārīs throughout
Vraja-maṇḍala visit him. The head pūjārī of the well-
known Rādhā-Govinda Mandira in Jaipur regularly arranges
to bring garlands and mahā-prasāda from the Deities,
especially on the occasions of Śrīla Mahārāja’s
commencement of another world tour. This is also true of
the pūjārī of Śrī Jagannātha Mandira in Purī. The leader
of all Lord Jagannātha’s servants, the Dayitā-pati of
Purī, also attends Śrīla Mahārāja’s classes when he is
in Purī.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja has been conducting
Vraja-maṇḍala parikramā for over fifty years, and,
during that time, the heads of all the villages come to
him and pay their respects. He has also been engaged for
several years in organizing the renovation of many holy
places in Vṛndāvana, such as Bhāṇḍīravaṭa in
Bhāṇḍīravana, Kadamba-kyārī near Nandagrāma, Brahma-
kuṇḍa and Surabhi-kuṇḍa in Govardhana, and Kāliya-ghāṭa
in Vṛndāvana. His work in this regard is recognized by
the public, the government and the press. For this and
his other spiritual achievements, he was awarded the
title Yuga-Ācārya by the heads of the various villages
throughout Vraja-maṇḍala.

He also leads a Navadvīpa-dhāma parikramā every year at
the time of Gaura-pūrṇimā. At that time he and his
sannyāsīs are followed by over 20,000 pilgrims from
Bengal, and over 2,000 other Indian and Western
pilgrims. Most of the devotees from Bengal are poor
village people, and they are given free facilities and
prasādam throughout the week-long festival.

Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja has
demonstrated and exemplified the unadulterated life of
utter dedication and pure loving service to his
Gurudeva, his guru-paramparā, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu,
and the Divine Couple, Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. As Their
intimate servitor, he continues to illuminate the path
for those who wish to discover and dive deeply into the
ecstatic ocean of rādhā-dāsyam, service to the radiantly
beautiful lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s dearly beloved,
Śrīmatī Rādhikā.




* * *



[i] “Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the incarnation who
delivers the fallen conditioned souls in the age of
Kali, is directly the Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself.
Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa, overwhelmed with an intense
desire to relish a particular sentiment, assumed the
heartfelt ecstatic mood and bodily complexion of Śrīmatī

                          157
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

Rādhikā, the embodiment of His own pleasure potency
(hlādinī-śakti), and bestowed upon the entire world the
gifts of His holy name and divine love for Him” (Śrī
Śikṣāṣṭaka, Introduction).



[ii] A ghee-lamp is a wick dipped in clarified butter,
which is used for worship of the Deity.



[iii] There are many references to the cintāmaṇi stone
in the Vedic scriptures. For example, in Brahma-saṁhitā
(5.29, 56) Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His abode are described thus:
“I worship that supreme abode of Śvetadvīpa, where the
beloved heroines are a host of transcendental goddesses
of fortune, and the Supreme Personality Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the
only lover; where all the trees are spiritual desire-
trees, and the earth is made of transcendental wish-
fulfilling cintāmaṇi jewels.”



[iv] Please see the chart on Lord Kṛṣṇa’s potencies
(śaktis) in Chapter Two.



[v] Svarūpa-siddhi is the stage in which a devotee’s
svarūpa, or internal spiritual form and identity,
becomes manifest in his heart. This comes at the stage
of bhāva-bhakti.



[vi] “The cit-śakti, which is also called svarūpa-śakti
or antaraṅga-śakti, displays many varied manifestations.
It sustains the kingdom of God and its paraphernalia”
(Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā 2.101).



[vii] See the chart on Lord Kṛṣṇa’s potencies (śaktis)
on pages 48 and 49.



[viii] “The śaktis (potencies) of God exists in two
ways. When the potencies of the Lord are situated within
His form and are one with it, they are manifest as
potency alone without shape. When they are manifest in
the form of the presiding deity of the śakti, they
appear as the associates of the Lord and render all of
their varieties of service; then they are called
personified” (Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī ñ His Life
and Precepts, Part Five).



[ix] The following statement by Śrī Durgā can be found
in the Sammohana-tantra: “The name Durgā, by which I am
known, is Her name. The qualities for which I am famous
are Her qualities. The majesty with which I am

                          158
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

resplendent is Her majesty. That Mahā-Lakṣmī, Śrī Rādhā,
is non-different from Śrī Kṛṣṇa. She is His dearmost
sweetheart and the crest-jewel of His beloveds.”



[x] The twenty-eight principles are: (1) the unmanifest
material nature (prakṛti), (2)Mahā-Viṣṇu (or
Kāraṇodakaśāyī Viṣṇu), (3) the unmanifest material world
in the form of the aggregate of material ingredients
(mahat-tattva), (4) the Supersoul (Paramātmā, or
Kṣīrodakaśāyī Viṣṇu), (5) the living entity (jīva), (6)
false ego, (7) intelligence, (8) mind, (9-13) the five
gross elements (ether, air, fire, water, earth), (14-18)
the five sense objects (sound, touch, form, taste,
smell), (19-23) the five organs of sense perception
(ear, skin, eyes, tongue, nose), and (24-28) the five
working sense organs (hands, feet, mouth, anus,
genitals).



[xi] Bhagavad-gītā states that there are five gross
material elements: earth, water, fire, air, and ether.
Diamonds, copper, and gold are not mentioned as being
separate elements.



[xii] “Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura explains these verses
as follows: Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī asked Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, ‘Who am I?’ In answer, the Lord replied,
‘You are a pure living entity. You are neither the gross
material body nor the subtle body composed of mind and
intelligence. Actually you are a spirit soul, eternally
part and parcel of the Supreme Soul, Kṛṣṇa. Therefore
you are His eternal servant. You belong to Kṛṣṇa’s
marginal potency.

“There are two worlds – the spiritual world and the
material world – and you are situated between the
material and spiritual potencies. You have a
relationship with both the material and the spiritual
world; therefore you are called the marginal potency.
You are related with Kṛṣṇa as simultaneously one and
different from Him. Because you are spirit soul, you are
one in quality with the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
but because you are a very minute particle of spirit
soul, you are different from the Supreme Soul’ ” (Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā 20.108–109, purport).



[xiii] Please see the chart of the three puruṣa-avatāras
in Chapter One.



[xiv] Please see Part Five, About the Authors, for a
brief sketch of the life and glory of Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura.




                          159
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                        5/5/2017

[xv] Please see Part Two, Jaiva-dharma, Chapter Sixteen,
for a more elaborate explanation of this.



[xvi] See glossary for a brief history of Bharata
Mahārāja.



[xvii] See glossary for a brief history of Jaya and
Vijaya.



[xviii] “There are Vaikuṇṭha planets in the spiritual
world, and the devotees there are all liberated. These
devotees are akṣara, which means they do not fall down
into the material world. They remain in the spiritual
world of the Vaikuṇṭhas. They are also persons like us,
but they are eternal persons, complete with full
knowledge and bliss. That is the difference between them
and us. That is tattva-jñāna. In other words, these
associates of the Lord, Jaya and Vijaya, descended to
the material world to serve the Lord by fulfilling His
desire to fight. Otherwise, as Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira
says, aśraddheya ivābhāti: the statement that a servant
of the Lord could fall from Vaikuṇṭha seems
unbelievable” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 7.1.35, purport).



[xix] The associates of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and
Mahāprabhu in the spiritual world also assist Them in
Their divine pastimes that are performed throughout the
myriad material universes.



[xx] For more information on this topic, please read
Part Two, Jaiva-dharma, Chapter Seventeen).



[xxi] “In Bhagavad-gītā (7.14) it is said: ‘daivī hy eṣā
guṇa-mayī mama māyā duratyayā ñ The external potency of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead is extremely strong.’
Indeed, everyone is fully captivated by her activities.
Lord Śambhu (Śiva) was not to be captivated by the
external potency, but because Lord Viṣṇu wanted to
captivate Him also, He exhibited His internal potency to
act the way that His external potency acts to captivate
ordinary living entities. Lord Viṣṇu can captivate
anyone, even such a strong personality as Lord Śambhu”
(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam 8.12.21, purport).



[xxii] “We are therefore stressing, ‘Always hear, always
read, always hear.’ Nityaṁ bhāgavata-sevayā (Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam 1.2.18). Nitya. If you can constantly,
twenty-four hours, hear and chant--’Hear’ means somebody
chants, or you chant yourself, or hear, or some of your
colleagues may chant, you hear” (Lecture on Śrīmad-

                          160
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                           5/5/2017

Bhāgavatam 5.5.6. Vṛndāvana, October 28, 1976).



[xxiii] ìThe nitya-dharma of the jīva is servitorship to
Kṛṣṇa. When he forgets this, he is subjected to the
tyranny of māyā, and from that very moment he becomes
diverted from Kṛṣṇa. The fall of the jīva does not take
place within the context of material time. Accordingly,
the words anādi-bahirmukha are used, meaning that the
jīva has been diverted since time without beginning”
(Jaiva-dharma, Chapter 1).



[xxiv] Siddha-mahāpuruṣas are of three types: (1)
bhagavat-pārṣada-deha-prāpta (those who have obtained
perfected spiritual bodies as eternal associates of the
Lord), (2) nirdhūta-kaṣāya (those who have thrown off
all material impurities), and (3) mūrcchita-kaṣāya
(those in whom a trace of material contamination still
lies dormant).

(1) Bhagavat-pārṣada-deha-prāpta:

After giving up the gross material body, those who have
perfected themselves through the practice of bhakti
obtain sat-cit-ānanda spiritual forms, which are just
suitable for the service of the Lord as associates
(pārṣadas). Such persons are the best of all uttama-
bhāgavatas.

(2) Nirdhūta-kaṣāya:

Those who, although still residing within the gross
material body made of five elements, have no trace of
material desire nor any material impressions (saṁskāras)
within their hearts are called nirdhūta-kaṣāya (those
who have thrown off all material impurities). They
belong to the intermediate class of uttama-bhāgavatas.

(3) Mūrcchita-kaṣāya:

Those siddha-mahāpuruṣas pursuing the path of bhakti in
whose hearts there remains a trace of desire and
impressions based on the material mode of goodness are
known as mūrcchita-kaṣāya. Due to the influence of their
bhakti-yoga, these desires and impressions remain in a
dormant or unconscious state. As soon as there is a
favorable opportunity, their worshipful object, Śrī
Bhagavān, somehow causes their desire to be consumed and
attracts them to His lotus feet. Such elevated souls
belong to the preliminary stage (kaniṣṭha) of uttama-
bhāgavatas. Devarṣi Nārada is an example of the topmost
uttama-bhāgavata. Śukadeva Gosvāmī belongs to the
intermediate stage of uttama-bhāgavatas (nirdhūta-
kaṣāya). Śrī Nārada in his previous birth as the son of
a maidservant is an example of the preliminary stage of
uttama-bhāgavatas (mūrcchita-kaṣāya).

The association and mercy of these three kinds of maha-
bhāgavatas is the cause of the manifestation of śraddhā.

(Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu, Verse 3, Śrī Bindu-

                          161
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                           5/5/2017

vikāśinī-vṛtti, comment)



[xxv] See glossary for the definitions of aṣṭāṅga-yoga,
sāṅkhya-yoga and jñāna.



[xxvi] Baladeva is śeṣa-tattva. This means that He
assumes varieties of forms to serve Kṛṣṇa, and also He
manifests as Lord Śeṣa, who also manifests in various
forms for service. For more information, kindly refer to
Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā 5.8ñ11 and 5.123ñ124.




Table of Contents

Chapter One The Truth of the Soul

Chapter Two - A Map of the Worlds

Chapter Three - The Origin of the Living Entity

Chapter Four - No One Falls from the Eternal Abode

Chapter Five - Moon on the Branch

Chapter Six - Both, Choice and Chance

Chapter Seven Inconceivable Jīva-tattva

Chapter Fifteen - Jīva Tattva

Chapter Sixteen - Jīvas and Māyā

Chapter Seventeen - Liberation of the Jīva from Māyā



Table of Contents

Chapter One The Truth of the Soul

Chapter Two - A Map of the Worlds

Chapter Three - The Origin of the Living Entity

Chapter Four - No One Falls from the Eternal Abode

Chapter Five - Moon on the Branch

Chapter Six - Both, Choice and Chance

Chapter Seven Inconceivable Jīva-tattva

Chapter Fifteen - Jīva Tattva

Chapter Sixteen - Jīvas and Māyā

Chapter Seventeen - Liberation of the Jīva from Māyā

                           162
Journey_of_the_Soul.txt                           5/5/2017




Table of Contents

Chapter One The Truth of the Soul

Chapter Two - A Map of the Worlds

Chapter Three - The Origin of the Living Entity

Chapter Four - No One Falls from the Eternal Abode

Chapter Five - Moon on the Branch

Chapter Six - Both, Choice and Chance

Chapter Seven Inconceivable Jīva-tattva

Chapter Fifteen - Jīva Tattva

Chapter Sixteen - Jīvas and Māyā

Chapter Seventeen - Liberation of the Jīva from Māyā




                          163
