Manah-siksa.txt                                 5/5/2017

Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā

Spiritual instruction given to one’s own mind



with the

Śrī Bhajana-darpaṇa-digdarśinī-vṛtti

commentary of

Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja



a translation with expanded purport of the

Bhajana-darpaṇa

commentary of

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Thākura




Contents



Preface

Introduction

Verse One

Verse Two

Verse Three

Verse Four

Verse Five

Verse Six

Verse Seven

Verse Eight

Verse Nine

Verse Ten

Verse Eleven

Verse Twelve




                             1
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017

Preface




[translated from the Hindi edition]

Today by the causeless mercy of the lotus feet of my
most worshipful spiritual master, nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa oṁ
viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, this edition of Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā
composed by Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, the pre-eminent
follower of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, is happily presented
before the faithful readers. The commentary found in
this edition is called Śrī Bhajana-darpaṇa-digdarśinī-
vṛtti, the purport that examines every point of the
commentary known as Bhajana-darpaṇa. It is a translation
along with expanded notes of the Bhajana-darpaṇa
commentary written by Śrīla Saccidānanda Bhaktivinoda
Thākura, who in this modern age reinitiated the flow of
the Ganges-like river of bhakti, which had become
practically invisible.

Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā – written by Śrī Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī, the eternal associate of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu – is a collection of eleven verses that offer
spiritual instruction to the mind. These verses are an
excerpt from the book known as Śrī Stavāvalī, a
compilation of all of the author’s prayers and deep
spiritual yearnings. In a very concise manner, Śrī Dāsa
Gosvāmī has surcharged these eleven verses of Manaḥ-
śikṣā with the essence of the teachings of Śrī
Gaurasundara, the prema-intoxicated embodiment of the
combined forms of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, as well as those
of His intimate associate Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara and the
ācārya of the profound science of devotional mellows,
Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī.

In the Gauḍīya devotional literatures such as Śrī Bṛhad-
bhāgavatāmṛta, Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, the six
Sandarbhas and Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, devotion has
been classified in three divisions: sādhana-bhakti,
bhāva-bhakti and prema-bhakti. Sādhana-bhakti, devotion
in the practice stage, is further divided into two
stages: vaidhī (devotion based upon scriptural
injunction) and rāgānuga (spontaneous devotion). Bhāva-
bhakti that arises from vaidhī-sādhana-bhakti and prema-
bhakti that arises from bhāva-bhakti of that nature are
predominated by aiśvarya-jñāna, knowledge of the Lord’s
opulence and majesty. But bhāva originating from
rāgānuga-sādhana-bhakti and prema originating from that
standard of bhāva is predominated by mādhurya,
sweetness, without the slightest trace of aiśvarya.

Only by love that is predominated by such sweetness
devoid of any scent of formality or reverence can one
obtain the loving service of the lotus feet of the
eternally youthful Divine Couple, Vrajendra-nandana Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Love that
is predominated by awe and veneration causes one to
attain to Vaikuṇṭha. Therefore there is a very subtle
yet significant difference between the quality of bhāva
and prema arising from vaidhī-sādhana-bhakti and
rāgānuga-sādhana-bhakti. This fundamental difference is

                           2
Manah-siksa.txt                                 5/5/2017

the distinctive trait of the line of thought of the Śrī
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava ācāryas, as expressed in this statement
from Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 3.15–17):

sakala jagate more kare vidhi-bhakti

vidhi-bhaktye vraja-bhāva pāite nāhi śakti

aiśvarya-jñānete saba jagata miśrita

aiśvarya-śithila-preme nāhi more prīta

aiśvarya jñāne vidhi bhajana kariyā

vaikuṇṭhake jāya catur-vidha mukti pāñā



[Śrī Kṛṣṇa said:] Everywhere in the world people worship
Me according to scriptural injunctions, but simply by
following such regulative principles one cannot attain
the loving sentiments of My exalted devotees in Vraja.
Aware of My supreme majesty, the entire world worships
Me in a mood of awe and veneration. Love that is
weakened by such reverence gives Me no pleasure. Those
who worship Me according to scriptural injunctions in a
mood predominated by awe and veneration go to Vaikuṇṭha
and obtain the four kinds of liberation: sārṣṭhi
(opulence like that of the Lord), sārūpya (bodily
features like those of the Lord), sāmīpya (nearness to
the Lord) and sālokya (residence in the Lord’s realm).

A deep attachment that is permeated by spontaneous and
intense absorption in the object of one’s affection is
called rāga. Devotion unto Śrī Kṛṣṇa that is saturated
with this deep attachment is known as rāgātmikā-bhakti.
Devotion that follows in the wake of rāgātmikā-bhakti is
called rāgānuga-bhakti. Greed to obtain the mood of the
Lord’s rāgātmika devotees is the sole qualification for
rāgānuga-bhakti. Practitioners of such rāgānuga-bhakti
should always reside in Vraja. By means of both the
physical body and the internally contemplated spiritual
body that is suitable to carry out the service to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa for which one anxiously aspires, one should always
remember Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His beloved gopīs of Vraja and
constantly serve Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.

While continuously residing in Vraja under the guidance
of rasika devotees who are deeply immersed in the mood
of Vraja, one should hear, chant and remember the names,
form, qualities and pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. This is the
method of bhajana for devotees who are traversing the
path of rāgānuga-bhakti. Out of all the limbs of
devotion such as hearing and chanting that have been
described in relation to vaidhī-bhakti, those which are
favourable to the development of one’s particular
disposition may also be accepted on the path of
rāgānuga-sādhana.

It is essential to know that by following the
instructions that Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu gave to the
jīvas of this world, a strong yearning to pursue the
path of rāgānuga will suddenly awaken in the sādhaka’s
heart. Śrī Caitanyadeva personally practised, propagated

                           3
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017

and tasted only that bhajana which is undertaken via the
path of spontaneous devotion (rāga-mārga). If by great
fortune the jīvas obtain the association of the beloved
associates of Śrī Gaurāṅgadeva, then they will certainly
develop greed for the mood of the eternal residents of
Vraja. Until one receives such association, most
sādhakas adopt the process of vaidhī-bhakti, which
certainly must be done.

By taking shelter of the lotus feet of Śrī Caitanyadeva,
one will inevitably enter into rāga-mārga. Sādhakas who
are eagerly desirous of entering rāga-mārga must first
practise the sādhana of rāgānuga-bhakti. The
qualification that is required for rāgānuga-bhakti is
extremely high. When greed actually develops towards the
mood of the eternal residents of Vraja, one loses his
taste for the things of this world and obtains release
from pious and sinful activities, fruitive action
(karma), inaction (akarma), prohibited action (vikarma),
non-devotional renunciation (vairāgya), the cultivation
of knowledge aimed at impersonal liberation (jñāna), and
the attraction for the practice of mystic yoga.

In vaidhī-mārga one first develops faith (śraddhā). Then
one acquires the association of devotees (sādhu-saṅga).
Thereafter, by practice of bhajana one is released from
the impediments to spiritual advancement (anarthas).
Gradually one then develops resolute steadiness
(niṣṭhā), strong taste (ruci), firm attachment (āsakti)
and ecstatic emotion (bhāva). By this system bhāva is
obtained after a very long time. But when greed
develops, all anarthas are very easily destroyed because
of the absence of hankering for material sense
enjoyment. Bhāva also arises concomitantly with this
greed. In rāga-mārga, however, it is essential to cast
off all falsity, deceit and desire for prestige. If one
does not do so, anarthas will increase and one will be
dangerously deviated. In this event, debased attachment,
rāga, will be mistaken for viśuddha-rāga, pure
attachment. Gradually the sādhaka’s material association
will increase, and he will fall down.

Here the meaning of rāgānuga-bhakti is rūpānuga-bhakti.
Without becoming rūpānuga, a follower of Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī, it is impossible to enter the path of
rāgātmikā-bhakti. If by some great fortune a person
develops an intense desire to enter the path of
rāgānuga-bhakti, then one should certainly study and
follow this Manaḥ-śikṣā of Śrī Dāsa Gosvāmī, the
principal follower of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī.

A brief history of the life of Śrī Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī appeared in a respected and
fabulously wealthy family of kāyastha landholders in a
village called Kṛṣṇapura (Saptagrāma) within the Hugalī
district of West Bengal around the year 1494. His
father’s name was Śrī Govardhana Majumadāra. Śrī
Govardhana’s older brother was named Hiraṇya Majumadāra.
Although both brothers were opulent landowners, they
were devoutly religious and maintained tremendous
respect for and faith in the Vaiṣṇava sādhus. The
renowned devotee of Lord Gaura and the ācārya of the

                           4
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017

holy name, Śrī Haridāsa Thākura, used to visit their
royal court. Their spiritual master and royal priest,
Śrī Yadunandana Ācārya, was an intimate disciple of Śrī
Advaita Ācārya and a close friend of Haridāsa Thākura.
It was Yadunandana Ācārya who was the initiating
spiritual master of Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa.

In his childhood Raghunātha dāsa received the
association of pure devotees such as Śrī Haridāsa
Thākura and Śrī Yadunandana Ācārya, and in his early
youth he met with Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu and his
associates. This influence left a very deep impression
on him in regard to unalloyed devotion. He very quickly
renounced wealth comparable to that of Indra, the king
of the heavenly realms, and a wife who was as beautiful
as a heavenly goddess. He went to Purī-dhāma and
submitted himself at the feet of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, who entrusted him into the hands of His
second self, Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara. Since that time he
became known as “Svarūpera Raghu”, or the Raghu of
Svarūpa, and by his mercy he acquired eligibility to
render intimate service to Śrī Gaurasundara. Being very
pleased with his unflinching dedication to bhajana and
exemplary renunciation, Śrī Gaurasundara endowed him
with the eligibility to serve Śrī Giridhārī in the form
of a govardhana-śilā and Śrī Rādhikā in the form of a
guñja-mālā.

After Śrī Gaurasundara withdrew His pastimes from the
view of this world, Śrī Raghunātha dāsa became
overwhelmed with the agony of intolerable separation. He
left Purī-dhāma and went to Vṛndāvana with the intention
of giving up his life by throwing himself off the peak
of Śrī Govardhana Hill. There, however, Śrī Rūpa and
Sanātana Gosvāmīs convinced him to give up this idea by
showering him with the nectar of their mercy and sweet
kṛṣṇa-kathā. From that time he became their third
brother and took up permanent residence on the bank of
Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa.

At Rādhā-kuṇḍa he remained deeply immersed in
worshipping Śrī Rādhā-Govinda in the mood of separation
with severe, unearthly renunciation. At the advanced age
of approximately one hundred years, while performing
this standard of bhajana, he entered into the unmanifest
pastimes of the Divine Couple by entering into Śrī
Rādhā-kuṇḍa. He is understood to be Rati Mañjarī in
vraja-līlā. In Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 10.98–
102), Śrī Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī has described Śrī
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī’s method of bhajana in the
following words:

anna-jala tyāga kaila anya-kathana

pala dui-tina māṭhā karena bhakṣaṇa

sahasra daṇḍavat kare, laya lakṣa nāma

dui sahasra vaiṣṇavere nitya paraṇāma

rātri-dine rādhā-kṛṣṇera mānasa sevana

prahareka mahāprabhura caritra-kathana


                           5
Manah-siksa.txt                                 5/5/2017

tina sandhyā rādhā-kuṇḍe apatita snāna

vraja-vāsī vaiṣṇave kare āliṅgana māna

sārdha sapta-prahara kare bhaktira sādhane

cāri daṇḍa nidrā, seha nahe kona-dine



When Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī came to Vraja, he took
up residence at Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa on the order of Śrī Rūpa
and Sanātana Gosvāmīs and became immersed in bhajana in
the mood of anguished separation. He practically gave up
all food and drink. Every day he accepted only a few
ounces of buttermilk in order to sustain his life. He
never spoke or listened to mundane talks that had no
connection to kṛṣṇa-kathā. Every day as a matter of
regulation he offered one thousand prostrated obeisances
unto Śrī Nanda-nandana, Śrīmatī Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī, Their
eternal pastime associates, and to the places of Their
divine pastimes. He also offered two thousand obeisances
unto different Vaiṣṇavas and chanted one hundred
thousand holy names. Day and night he served Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa within his mind. He discussed the pastimes of
Śrīman Mahāprabhu for three hours, bathed in Śrī Rādhā-
kuṇḍa three times daily, and would regularly embrace the
Vrajavāsī Vaiṣṇavas. In this way he used to perform
bhakti for twenty-two-and-a-half hours a day out of
twenty-four. Thus he would sleep for only one-and-a-half
hours, and some days he would not sleep at all.

He has written three books that are very famous: (1) Śrī
Stavāvalī, (2) Śrī Dāna-carita (Dāna-keli-cintāmaṇi) and
(3) Śrī Muktā-carita. This book, Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā, is
included within Śrī Stavāvalī, a compilation of prayers
and glorifications composed by him.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Thākura

author of the commentary known as Śrī Bhajana-darpaṇa



Śrī Saccidānanda Bhaktivinoda Thākura, the eternal
associate of Śrī Gaurasundara, reinitiated the current
of pure devotion in this modern age, wherein almost
everyone is addicted to material enjoyment steeped in
the glitter of mundane knowledge. He has written a
commentary on the verses of Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā that is
rooted in deep philosophical conclusions and full of
rasa, the liquid mellows of devotion. In this commentary
he has very carefully analysed every verse in relation
to rāgānuga-bhakti or rūpānuga-bhakti. Supported by
quotations from Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, Ujjvala-
nīlamaṇī, Stava-mālā, Stavāvalī and other Gosvāmī
literature, he has indicated the essential method of
bhajana for the benefit of rāgānuga-sādhakas. All
rāgānuga-sādhakas will remain forever indebted to him
for this extraordinary gift.

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Thākura is an intimate associate of
Śacīnandana Śrī Gaurasundara, who is adorned with the
complexion and bhāva of Śrī Rādhā and who delivers the

                             6
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017

fallen souls in the age of Kali. Śrī Bhaktivinoda
appeared in this world in order to spread śrī harināma-
saṅkīrtana and to propagate pure bhakti and in
particular rūpānuga- (rāgānuga-) bhakti, thus fulfilling
the inner longing of Śrīman Mahāprabhu. He appeared on
2nd September, 1838 in a highly educated and respected
family in a village named Vīranagara near Śrī Māyāpura
within the district of Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma, West Bengal.
He disappeared from this world on 23rd June, 1914 in the
city of Calcutta. He wrote approximately one hundred
books on bhakti in Sanskrit, Bengali, Hindi, English,
Oriya and other languages. For this reason enlightened
persons have called him the “Seventh Gosvāmī” and the
Bhāgīratha1 who initiated the mighty flowing river of
bhakti in the modern age.

He revealed the place of Śrī Gaurāṅga’s appearance at
the yoga-pīṭha in Śrī Māyāpura and also begot Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī. Furthermore, by his
influential and impeccable discourses, articles and
books about pure bhakti, and by his establishing śrī
nāma-hāṭta, or the marketplace of the holy name, in
every town and village, he laid the foundation for
widespread distribution of rūpānuga-bhakti throughout
the world. Today the outcome of this is directly visible
everywhere. The sound vibration of congregational
chanting of the holy names of Gaura and Kṛṣṇa resounds
in every corner of the world, and even in far off
Western and Eastern countries enormous, opulent temples
have been built.

My most worshipful spiritual master, Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti
Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, is a guardian of the
Śrī Gauḍīya sampradāya and the founder-ācārya of the Śrī
Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti as well as the Gauḍīya temples
that operate under the jurisdiction of that society. In
addition to the books that he personally wrote, he
republished the books of Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Thākura and
other previous ācāryas in the Bengali language. Now by
his heartfelt desire, inspiration and causeless mercy,
Jaiva-dharma, Śrī Caitanya-śikṣāmṛta, Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhura-śikṣā, Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka and other books have
been published in India’s national language of Hindi,
while others are still being published.

The present director and ācārya of the Śrī Gauḍīya
Vedānta Samiti, my most worshipful godbrother Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktivedānta Vāmana Mahārāja, is deeply immersed in
transcendental knowledge and is an intimate servant of
the lotus feet of our spiritual master. I humbly pray at
his lotus feet that he may kindly offer this precious
book, Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā, into the lotus hands of our
beloved gurudeva, thus fulfilling the inner longing of
his heart.

I am fully confident that devotees who have a deep
yearning for bhakti and particularly practitioners of
rāgānuga-bhakti who covet the dust of Vṛndāvana will
have tremendous appreciation for this book. Faithful
persons who study this book will obtain qualification to
enter into the prema-dharma of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.
In conclusion, may our most worshipful spiritual master,
who is the concentrated manifestation of the Lord’s
compassion, pour down a profuse shower of mercy upon us,

                           7
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017

thus enabling us to attain greater and greater
eligibility in fulfilling the inner longing of his
heart. This is our anxious, heartfelt prayer at his
lotus feet, which bestow kṛṣṇa-prema.



An aspirant for a particle of mercy

of Śrī Hari, Guru and Vaiṣṇavas,

humble and insignificant,



Tridaṇḍi-bhikṣu Śrī Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa



Śrī Guru-pūrṇimā

13th July, 1984

Mathurā, Uttar Pradesh, India




Introduction




It is with utmost pleasure that we present this second
English edition of Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā before our faithful
Vaiṣṇava readers. This new edition has been made
possible by the inspiration and causeless mercy of our
most worshipful Śrīla Gurudeva, oṁ viṣṇupāda paramahaṁsa
parivrājakācārya aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja. Śrīla Gurudeva considers this book to
be of great relevance to those aspiring for eternal
servitude unto the eternally youthful Divine Couple of
Vraja, Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Govinda. He lectures often on it
both in Hindi and in English and he encourages devotees
to study it carefully as part of their spiritual
practice.

Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā consists of twelve verses composed by
Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī. These verses instruct the
mind how to make progress on the path of bhajana. Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Thākura has written a commentary on these
verses known as Bhajana-darpaṇa, or the mirror that
reveals the nature of bhajana. In this commentary he has
very carefully analysed every word of the verses written
by Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja has produced a Hindi edition of
this book with the original verses and the commentary of
Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Thākura. His translation is not only
an exact rendering of the Thākura’s Bhajana-darpaṇa
commentary, but it also includes elaboration of his own
on select points to make the subject matter all the more
accessible to practising devotees aspiring to take up

                            8
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017

the path of bhajana. Therefore his translation of the
commentary is known asŚrī Bhajana-darpaṇa-digdarśinī-
vṛtti, or the purport that reveals every point of the
commentary known as Bhajana-darpaṇa.

This English edition is a translation of Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja’s Hindi work. In addition to the material that
is found in the Hindi edition, this book includes
purports that were compiled from lectures spoken in
Hindi by Śrīla Gurudeva on the first four verses. These
are identified in this book as “Anuvṛtti”, or a
commentary that follows the line of thought previously
given.

In providing word-for-word synonyms for the verses of
Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā, we have not followed the sequential
order of the words as they appear in the verses but,
rather, the natural order of the words as they appear in
a sentence. This system is called anvaya in Sanskrit.
Anvaya literally means the natural order or connection
of words in a sentence. The order of words in a Sanskrit
verse is not generally the natural order of words in a
sentence in Sanskrit prose. Therefore translators
commonly use the system of anvaya to transpose the words
of verses into Sanskrit, Bengali or Hindi prose.
Although this system may seem awkward at first in
locating the words from the verse, it greatly
facilitates being able to see how the words fit together
to form the translation of the verse. The meaning of the
verse becomes self-evident by the anvaya system. We hope
that the readers will appreciate the advantage of this
system, as it helps one to delve deeper into the meaning
of the verses. To bring this to the readers’ attention
in the book, we have identified the word-for-word
synonyms simply as “Anvaya”.

In his ongoing endeavour to publish Vaiṣṇava literature
in the English language, Śrīla Gurudeva is always quick
to mention that he is simply accepting the remnants and
following in the footsteps of his dear friend and
instructing spiritual master, nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa oṁ
viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad A.C. Bhaktivedānta
Swami Prabhupāda. By publishing immaculate English
editions of such important literatures as Bhagavad-gītā,
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Śrīla
Prabhupāda inundated the English-speaking world with the
priceless nectar of devotion unto Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
and Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Single-handedly and in a
relatively short period of time, he made “Hare Kṛṣṇa” a
household word and forever changed the lives of
countless people. The immensity of his unique
contribution to Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavism can hardly be
estimated, and the living entities of this world will
remain forever indebted to him.

For this improved second edition of Śrī Manah-śikṣā,
grateful acknowledgement is extended to Lavaṅga-latā
dāsī for copy-editing the material, to Śānti dāsī and
Giridhārī dāsa for proofreading the final manuscript, to
Atula-kṛṣṇa dāsa and Ananta-kṛṣṇa dāsa for checking the
Sanskrit, to Kṛṣṇa-prema dāsa for designing the new
cover and to Subala-sakhā dāsa for providing the new
photograph of Śrīla Gurudeva. On behalf of the many
devotees serving in Gauḍīya Vedānta Publications, we

                           9
Manah-siksa.txt                                  5/5/2017

humbly offer this current edition into the hands of
Śrīla Gurudeva, praying that he will bless us with the
capacity to continue rendering service to his innermost
desire.



An aspirant for the service of the

lotus feet of śrī guru and the Vaiṣṇavas,



Prema-vilāsa dāsa



Annadā-ekādaśī

23rd August, 2003

Gopīnātha-bhavana, Śrī Vṛndāvana



śrī śrī gāndharvā-giridharābhyāṁ namaḥ




Verse One




gurau goṣṭhe goṣṭhālayiṣu sujane bhūsura-gaṇe

sva-mantre śrī-nāmni vraja-nava-yuva-dvandva-śaraṇe

sadā dambhaṁ hitvā kuru ratim apūrvām atitarām

aye svāntar bhrātaś caṭubhir abhiyāce dhṛta-padaḥ



Anvaya

ayebhrātaḥ – O brother; svāntaḥ – mind; dhṛta-padaḥ –
holding your feet; abhiyāce – I am praying; caṭubhiḥ –
with sweet words; sadā – always; hitvā – giving up;
dambham – pride; atitarām – exceedingly; kuru – adopt;
apūrvām – unprecedented; ratim – spiritual attachment;
gurau – in the spiritual master; goṣṭhe – in Vraja-
dhāma; goṣṭālayiṣu – in the Vrajavāsīs; sujane – in the
Vaiṣṇavas; bhūsura-gaṇe – in the brāhmaṇas; sva-mantre –
in one’s own dīkṣā-mantras; śrī-nāmni – in the holy
names of the Lord; vraja-nava-yuva-dvandva-śaraṇe –
(and) in the shelter of the ever-fresh, youthful couple
of Vraja.




                           10
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017

Translation

O my dear brother, my foolish mind, taking hold of your
feet, I humbly pray to you with sweet words. Please give
up all pride and quickly develop deep, loving attachment
for the spiritual master, Śrī Vraja-dhāma, the residents
of Vraja, the Vaiṣṇavas, the brāhmaṇas, your dīkṣā-
mantras, the holy names of the Supreme Lord, and the
shelter of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, the eternally youthful
Divine Couple of Vraja.




Śrī Bhajana-darpaṇa-digdarśinī-vṛtti



Maṅgalācaraṇa

First of all I pray at the lotus feet of my most
worshipful spiritual master, nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa oṁ
viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja. Although I am unqualified in
all respects, by a drop of his causeless mercy, I am
undertaking the translation of Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā and this
Digdarśinī-vṛtti, a translation (with expanded purport)
of the combined Sanskrit and Bengali commentary of Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Thākura named Bhajana-darpaṇa. Falling down
at the lotus feet of the annotator, Śrī Bhaktivinoda
Thākura, and the composer of Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā, Śrī
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, who is the chief follower of
Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī and eminent amongst the Six Gosvāmīs, I
pray for their mercy.

śrī śrī guru-caraṇebhyoḥ namaḥ



śrī śrī caitanya-candrāya namaḥ



śrī śrī rādhā-kṛṣṇābhyāṁ namaḥ



Offering prostrated obeisances at the lotus feet of Śrī
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, I begin the commentary on his
Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā named Bhajana-darpaṇa. Śrī Dāsa Gosvāmī
is revered throughout the world, for he severed all
worldly connections and took complete shelter at the
lotus feet of Śrī Śacīnandana Gaurahari, the munificent
incarnation of Kali-yuga. He received the deep and
confidential conclusions of bhakti from Śrī Svarūpa
Dāmodara Gosvāmī on the order of Śrīman Mahāprabhu. The
twelve verses of Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā are the life and soul
of all Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas. By targeting his own mind, Śrī
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī has instructed all Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavas.

By great fortune, as a result of pious merit (sukṛti)
accumulated over many lifetimes, faith (śraddhā) in the

                           11
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017

Supreme Lord is awakened in the heart of the jīva. This
small book comprises those instructions that constitute
the prime duty of the living entity at that time. The
deep and confidential meaning of each word of the first
verse will now be given.

(1) Śrī Guru

The topmost devotee of the Supreme Lord who completely
destroys all impediments to spiritual advancement
(anarthas) and who bestows transcendental knowledge of
one’s relationship with Śrī Kṛṣṇa (sambandha-jñāna) is
known as dīkṣā-guru, the initiating spiritual master.
The topmost devotee who gives instructions about how to
perform bhajana of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa is known as
śikṣā-guru, the instructing spiritual master. Knowing
both to be non-different from Śrī Kṛṣṇa and very dear to
Him, one should serve them lovingly in accordance with
the inner desire of their hearts. In all the revealed
scriptures the spiritual master is considered to be the
sum total of all the demigods and the eternal
manifestation of the Supreme Lord. They should be
worshipped and revered in the highest manner and should
never be considered as ordinary human beings.

(2) Goṣṭha: Śrī Vraja-dhāma

The word goṣṭha here refers to Śrī Vraja-dhāma or, in
other words, all the places within Vraja-maṇḍala wherein
the eternal pastimes of the Divine Couple are enacted.
These include Śrī Gokula, Śrī Vṛndāvana, Śrī Nandagrāma,
Śrī Varṣāṇā, Śrī Yāvaṭa, Śrī Govardhana, Śrī Śyāma-
kuṇḍa, Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa and other such places. What is
the deep meaning behind having love for residence in
Vraja-dhāma? The following doubt may be raised. The
conclusion of the scriptures is that one should engage
in bhajana unto the Supreme Lord. Since this may be
performed anywhere, what need is there to live only in
Vraja? One should give up such doubts and antagonistic
views and maintain special attachment for Vraja. If one
cannot live in Vraja physically, then one should live
there mentally and perform bhajana with great love.

(3) Goṣṭhālayin: The residents of Vraja

Only pure devotees who live in Vraja with the motive to
serve the Divine Couple are true residents of Vraja.
They do not aspire even for eternal residence in
Vaikuṇṭha, what to speak of impersonal liberation or
sense enjoyment. They reside in Vraja both in body and
in mind and render loving service to Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
Yugala. They are considered to be devotees of the
highest level (uttama-bhāgavatas). Without their mercy
one cannot enter rāgānuga-bhakti. One should give up the
pride by which one thinks, “I am a virtuous devotee of
the Lord, fully conversant with all the devotional
truths and not inferior to the residents of Vraja in any
respect.” Rather, one should have great love for them.

(4) Sujana: The Vaiṣṇavas

Sujanas are devotees who belong to the four Vaiṣṇava
sampradāyas or their corollary branches but do not live
in Vraja in the true sense. This means that although

                              12
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017

they may physically take up residence in Vraja, they do
not serve Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala with spontaneous
attachment in the mood characteristic of Vraja. One
should not look down upon them, but have a respectful
attitude towards them. They are intermediate devotees
(madhyama-bhāgavatas).

(5) Bhūsura-gaṇa: The brāhmaṇas

Brāhmaṇas who follow daiva-varṇāśrama, the Vedic system
of social duty related to advancement in devotional
life, and who are teachers of the Vaiṣṇava way of life,
are known as bhūsuras, lords of the Earth. They are
inferior devotees (kaniṣṭha-bhāgavatas). One should show
affection to them also. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.64.41),
within the context of the narration of King Nṛga, the
Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa informs the residents of Dvārakā:

vipraṁ kṛtāgasam api

naiva druhyata māmakāḥ

ghnantaṁ bahu śapantaṁ

vā namas-kuruta nityaśaḥ

My dear relatives, do not bear malice even towards
brāhmaṇas who are sinners and offenders. Even if they
beat you or curse you, you should always offer
obeisances unto them. Therefore do not maintain an
attitude of contempt or disrespect towards them.

(6) Sva-mantra: One’s dīkṣā-mantras

One’s personal mantra or the mantra received from the
spiritual master is known as sva-mantra. One should
chant this mantra regularly with special love, in
accordance with the method instructed by the guru.

(7) Śrī Harināma

Śrī Hari, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Govinda, Gopīnātha, Rādhā-kānta and
so on are the principal names of the Supreme Lord.
Patita-pāvana, Paramātmā, Brahma and so on are His
secondary names. Only the principal names should be
chanted, especially the mahā-mantra:

hare kṛṣṇa hare kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa hare hare

hare rāma hare rāma rāma rāma hare hare

This mantra consisting of sixteen names is called the
mahā-mantra for deliverance in Kali-yuga. Therefore one
should perform japa and kīrtana of this mantra with
love.

(8) Vraja-nava-yuva-dvandva-śaraṇa: Surrender to the
youthful Divine Couple of Vraja

Surrender means to take complete and exclusive shelter
at the lotus feet of the eternally youthful Divine
Couple (yugala-kiśora), Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. In his song
entitled Śrī Rādhā-niṣṭhā from Gītāvalī, Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Thākura has stated:

                           13
Manah-siksa.txt                                 5/5/2017


rādhikāra dāsī yadi hoya abhimāna



śīghrai milai taba gokula-kāna



If one prides himself as a maidservant of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, then very quickly he will attain Vrajendra-
nandana of Gokula.

(9) Dambhaṁ hitvā: Give up pride

Illusion (māyā), deceit (chala), hypocrisy (kapaṭatā),
ignorance (avidyā), dishonesty (kuṭilatā) and depravity
(śaṭhatā) are different aspects of pride. In the
cultivation of bhakti, all desires and aspirations in
the mind other than those which increase one’s pure love
for one’s most worshipful deity (iṣṭadeva) are known as
kapaṭatā, hypocrisy. The influence of avidyā increases
when there is a predominance of fruitive activity,
impersonal knowledge or mystic yoga practice in the
performance of sādhana-bhakti. When there is any type of
unfavourable attitude in the cultivation of kṛṣṇa-
bhakti, it is the covering of māyā. All these should be
abandoned very diligently. All kinds of false pride
arising out of strictly adhering to the occupational
duties corresponding to one’s caste and stage of life
(varṇāśrama-dharma), from material aspirations, and from
misconceptions about one’s true identity are removed by
taking shelter of unalloyed devotion (śuddha-bhakti).

(10) Apūrva-rati

Ātma-rati is the pure spiritual attachment intrinsic to
the soul. The jīva is by nature a servant of Kṛṣṇa. Pure
attachment for Kṛṣṇa is present in his pure spiritual
form. But when the living entity is diverted from Kṛṣṇa
and bound by māyā, his attachment is directed towards
perishable material objects. This perverted attachment
that is connected with māyā is incidental and
distressful. It is only in pure kṛṣṇa-bhakti that rati
of the soul finds its place. In other words, pure love
for Kṛṣṇa is itself ātma-rati, because Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the
Supersoul of all souls. In its mature state, the more
this pure ātma-rati evolves, the more it is known as
apūrva-rati, or unprecedented spiritual attachment.

(11) Atitarāṁ kuru: Make intensive endeavours

One should endeavour with great eagerness to obtain
ātma-rati. One should not remain complacent, thinking
that bhakti will arise of its own accord by some good
fortune. The more one’s spiritual strength increases,
the more the effects of one’s fruitive activities will
diminish, and without doubt one will obtain the mercy of
pure devotees and the Supreme Lord.

The purport of this instruction is that as long as the
desire for reward-seeking activity is not diminished by
the association of devotees, deep faith (śraddhā) will
not arise. As long as this faith does not arise, one is

                           14
Manah-siksa.txt                                 5/5/2017

unfit to hear and assimilate hari-kathā and spiritual
instructions. When, by good fortune, transcendental
śraddhā arises, one should take shelter of an initiating
spiritual master and receive the śrī yugala-mantra.
Having obtained this mantra, one should worship the
initiating and instructing spiritual masters with
intense attachment, or ātma-rati.

One should not be satisfied simply to offer respect to
the guru, considering him to be a mere sage. Rather, one
should serve him with love and devotion, accepting him
as one’s dearest friend and well-wisher. The three kinds
of Vaiṣṇava devotees – neophyte (kaniṣṭha), intermediate
(madhyama) and topmost (uttama) – should be offered
respects suitably and received with affection. One
should cultivate true attachment to the holy name and
the mantra given by one’s dīkṣā-guru. Considering Śrī
Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala to be one’s life and soul, one
should take shelter at Their lotus feet.



Anuvṛtti



Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī is giving instructions to
the unrestrained and unsteady mind. Through the mind
only, a conditioned living entity becomes favourable or
unfavourable to bhajana. One gets worldly faith through
the mind and the mind pervades a person’s life.
Spontaneous bhajana is performed only when the mind is
under control. Therefore Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī
composed these verses of Manaḥ-śikṣā for the benefit of
the sādhakas. He developed intense greed for the service
of Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava after hearing hari-kathā from Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Svarūpa Dāmodara, Rūpa Gosvāmī and
Sanātana Gosvāmī. Although he is an eternally perfected
soul, he presented himself as a sādhaka.

“O mind, please give up all pride and deceit, and
develop apūrva-rati for the lotus feet of the spiritual
master, Śrī Vraja-dhāma, the residents of Vraja, the
Vaiṣṇavas, the brāhmaṇas, your dikṣā-mantras, the holy
name and the shelter of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala.”

The word goṣṭhālayin refers to the topmost devotees of
the Lord who live in Vraja in their eternal identity
(svarūpa) all the time. The word sujana refers to the
Vaiṣṇavas of other sampradāyas who live and perform
bhajana in Vraja but not in their svarūpa. The word
bhūsuras means the brāhmaṇas who follow smārta customs
but have devotion for Kṛṣṇa. One should develop love for
all of them. Rati, affection, is of two types: one is
general and the other is apūrva, unprecedented. One
should have apūrva-rati for the spiritual master and
perform service that is imbued with a deep sense of
faith and intimacy (viśrambha-guru-sevā). Service to the
guru and resolute faith in the guru are the foundation
of bhajana because the spiritual master is the guide of
one’s devotional life.

There are four kinds of guru: one who provides original
guidance along the path (vartma-pradarśaka-guru), the

                           15
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017

initiating spiritual master (dīkṣā-guru), the
instructing spiritual master (śikṣā-guru) and the Lord
Himself as Supersoul (caitya-guru). One should have
faith in and deep attachment for all of them. The
initiating and instructing spiritual masters are equal
in all respects and are of the same status. The
initiating spiritual master is bhagavad-rūpa, the
embodiment of the Lord’s form, and the instructing
spiritual master is bhagavad-svarūpa, the embodiment of
the Lord’s personality.

Sometimes one spiritual master acts as both dīkṣā- and
śikṣā-guru. I received both initiation and instruction
from my gurudeva. If there are two spiritual masters,
then both should be given the same respect. The guru
should be a mahā-bhāgavata, otherwise the disciple will
lose faith. True faith comes from the heart; it is not a
thing of the imagination. A mahā-bhāgavata initiating
spiritual master comes down to the intermediate level
(madhyama) and gives instructions. He nourishes the
disciples’ sambandha-jñāna and removes their impediments
to advancement (anarthas). One who gives instructions
for bhajana and upgrades and nourishes it is an
instructing spiritual master. One’s dīkṣā-guru can act
as a śikṣā-guru for others, and somebody else’s dīkṣā-
guru can act as one’s śikṣā-guru. There can be some
differences of a small degree in both, but one is not
less than the other. Therefore the word guru is used for
both, and both should be given equal respect.

There are two kinds of service rendered to the guru. One
kind is ordinary and arises out of the consciousness of
duty. The other kind is performed by the loving
affection of the heart (anurāga), and this service is
extraordinary. This is viśrambha-guru-sevā. In this
verse the service of anurāga has been described.

One simple sādhaka leaves home, comes in contact with a
spiritual master, takes initiation and gradually takes
instruction also. He makes progress in bhajana. He
offers obeisances to his guru every morning, touches his
feet and performs ninefold devotion: hearing (śravaṇam),
chanting (kīrtanam), remembering the glories of the Lord
(viṣṇu-smaraṇam), serving His lotus feet (pāda-sevanam),
worshipping Him (arcanam), praying to Him (vandanam),
carrying out His orders (dāsyam), making friends with
Him (sakhyam) and offering one’s very self to Him (ātma-
nivedanam). These are the nine limbs of bhakti mentioned
in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.5.23).

There are also five limbs of bhakti mentioned in Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 22.128):

sādhu-saṅga, nāma-kīrtana, bhāgavata-śravaṇa

mathurā-vāsa, śrī-mūrtira śraddhāya sevana

One should associate with devotees, chant the holy name
of the Lord, hear Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, reside in Mathurā-
maṇḍala and serve the deity with great faith.

Of all the methods prescribed for performing bhajana, to
always chant the holy name of the Lord is topmost. This
is expressed in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya-līlā

                           16
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017

4.70, 71):

bhajanera madhye śreṣṭha nava-vidhā bhakti

tāra madhye sarva śreṣṭha nāma-saṅkīrtana

Of all the limbs of bhajana, the nine types of devotion
are the best, and amongst these nāma-saṅkīrtana is best
of all.

So one type of disciple places more emphasis on
executing the activities of sādhana and on hearing,
chanting and remembering. This is ordinary service to
the spiritual master. The second service, which is
performed with spontaneous feelings of love, is when the
disciple serves the spiritual master first and then
chants the holy name and performs other types of sādhana
if he finds time after serving his guru. He gives
preference to serving the spiritual master rather than
to sādhana. This is special and extraordinary service.

Yasya deve parā bhaktir, yathā deve tathā gurau: One
should have equal devotion for one’s guru as he does for
Kṛṣṇa Himself; this is an eternal truth. In the early
stages of sādhana one should have more devotion for the
guru than for Bhagavān, because hearing, chanting and so
on have sambandha – a relationship with the worshipful
object – but in the beginning we really don’t have much
of a relationship with Kṛṣṇa or render service directly
unto Him. On the other hand, service to the spiritual
master bestows all kinds of perfection.

One noteworthy example of service to the guru is found
among the disciples of Śrī Śaṅkarācārya. This particular
disciple, named Giri (later Toṭakācārya), was
illiterate. He used to wash his spiritual master’s
clothes, cook for him and perform other menial services.
Even while Śaṅkarācārya was giving a lecture, Giri would
be engaged in the service of his guru, but he tried to
hear also. Other disciples considered him to be a fool.
One day he went across the river to wash clothes and got
delayed. Meanwhile his spiritual master was scheduled to
speak, but did not start the lecture. The other
disciples, numbering six thousand, asked their gurudeva
to start the class. They said, “Except for that one
ignorant disciple, all others are present. And he does
not understand anything anyway, so please start the
class.” But Śaṅkarācārya kept waiting for Giri. After
finishing his service, Giri came running and sat for
class, and began reciting Sanskrit verses that were full
of beautiful poetry and metaphors. The others were
astonished at his knowledge. Śrī Śaṅkarācārya explained
that this was the result of viśrambha-sevā, service
rendered unto the spiritual master with intimacy and
great love.

There are several such examples of guru-sevā. Govinda
dāsa used to serve Śrīman Mahāprabhu with great love and
intimacy. He used to tell Svarūpa Dāmodara, “Why do you
come and make Mahāprabhu cry?” It is not so that he did
not understand the dealings of Mahāprabhu; he was not a
fool. He understood the deep spiritual emotions (bhāvas)
of Mahāprabhu. He could write Sanskrit verses, and he
recorded the pastimes of Mahāprabhu in his notebooks,

                           17
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017

which are known as the kaḍacā, or notes, of Govinda
dāsa. These writings were used by Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja
Gosvāmī in composing his Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta.

A competent spiritual master, who has controlled Kṛṣṇa
and has a fully mature relationship with Him, is an
uttama-bhāgavata, a topmost devotee of the Lord. He can
instill his bhakti in the heart of his disciples.
Service to the spiritual master can bestow everything
and, in particular, all perfection in bhakti.

We have so many anarthas, impediments: lust, greed,
anger, pride, envy, illusion, offences committed to the
holy name, offences committed to the deity, and so on.
Each anartha is removed by a separate method. To remove
anger, one should not have any desire; because when a
desire is unfulfilled, it leads to anger. A topmost
devotee has no desire except the desires to please the
spiritual master and Bhagavān and to attain prema-
bhakti. The heart of such a devotee is the abode of the
Lord. Lust can be removed by associating with saintly
persons and by abandoning all objects of attachment.
There is no guarantee that these impediments will not
return, but service rendered to the spiritual master can
vanquish all anarthas without the possibility of their
return. The guru gives the disciple saintly association,
speaks hari-kathā to him, and engages him in Kṛṣṇa’s
service; thus gradually all of the disciple’s
impediments are eradicated.

Goṣṭha, or Vraja-dhāma, and goṣṭhālayin, the residents
of Vraja, are also served in the same two ways, i.e.
ordinary and extraordinary. Rāga-bhakti cannot be
attained without residence in Vraja. If one cannot
reside there physically, then one should do so mentally.
Śrīman Mahāprabhu said: “jekhāne sādhugaṇa sekhāne
vṛndāvana – that place where sādhus reside is known as
Vṛndāvana.” This is all right, but Mahāprabhu very
keenly desired to go to Vṛndāvana. Wherever He stayed,
He remained absorbed in the meditation of Vṛndāvana.
While in Purī, He considered the sand dune of Caṭaka-
parvata to be Govardhana Hill, and the ocean as the
Yamunā. When Mahāprabhu visited Vṛndāvana, He became
overwhelmed in ecstatic love of Kṛṣṇa. Seeing Rādhā-
kuṇḍa, Govardhana, the Yamunā and other places of
pastimes, His condition became uncontrollable in the
madness of ecstasy in love of Kṛṣṇa. In this ecstasy He
was embracing Govardhana, jumping into the Yamunā,
weeping and rolling on the ground. Mahāprabhu’s servant
Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya became afraid that the Lord might
encounter some serious accident in this madness, and
therefore brought Him back to Puri after eight or ten
days.

Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī has written in his Upadeśāmṛta (8):

tan-nāma-rūpa-caritādi-sukīrtanānu-

smṛtyoḥ krameṇa rasanā manasī niyojya

tiṣṭhan vraje tad-anurāgi-janānugāmī

kālaṁ nayed akhilam ity upadeśa-sāram


                           18
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017

Devotees should gradually withdraw the tongue and mind
from all other objects and engage them exclusively in
chanting and remembering the glories of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
names, form, qualities and pastimes. They should spend
all of their time in this way, living in Śrī Vraja-
maṇḍala under the guidance of a spiritual master and
Vaiṣṇavas who are deeply attached to Śrī Kṛṣṇa. This is
the essence of all advice.

How does Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī serve? While one
servant massages the legs of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrī
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, internally absorbed in the
perception of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s and his own eternal
forms as maidservant assistants to Śrīmatī Rādhikā,
smiles and recites the following verse (Vilāpa-
kusumāñjali (1)):

tvaṁ rūpa-mañjari sakhi prathitā pure ’smin

puṁsaḥ parasya vadanaṁ nahi paśyasīti

bimbādhare kṣatam anāgata-bhartṛkāyā

yat te vyadhāyi kim u tac-chuka-puṅgavena

O dear friend Rūpa Mañjarī, you are famous in Vraja as a
very chaste girl. You never so much as look at the face
of any other man. Your husband has been away at another
village for the past few days, and yet your lips are
freshly cut. Can it be that some excellent parrot has
bitten them, having mistaken them for a bimba fruit?

Hearing this, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī smiled.

Further absorbed in this internal mood, Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī expresses the service for which he anxiously
longs (Vilāpa-kusumāñjali (72)):

śrī-rūpa-mañjari-karārcita-pāda-padma

goṣṭhendra-nandana-bhujārpita-mastakāyāḥ

hā modataḥ kanaka-gauri padāravinda-

samvāhanāni śanakais tava kiṁ kariṣye?

Śrīmatī Rādhikā is fatigued from the labour of amorous
pastimes and is resting with Her head in the lap of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. He is gently stroking Her hair, and Rūpa Mañjarī
is gently massaging Her legs and fanning Her. Rati
Mañjarī (Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī) is watching this with
greedy eyes and praying to obtain the remnants of Rūpa
Mañjarī’s service.

Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī understood the inner desire (mano
’bhīṣṭa) of Śrīman Mahāprabhu, and therefore he was very
dear to Him. We should also understand the inner desire
of our spiritual master (śrī guru), the holy dhāma
(goṣṭha) and the residents of the dhāma (goṣṭhālayin),
and we should serve them according to our ability and
eligibility with deep faith and firm conviction, even if
we have to lose our life in their service. Do not
consider the practice of sādhana to be higher than their
association. Yasya prasādād bhagavat prasādaḥ: one gets

                           19
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017

the mercy of Kṛṣṇa only by the mercy of the spiritual
master. If the spiritual master is not pleased, then
even pleasing the whole world will not help. We are
under his shelter and have surrendered to him. One’s own
independent endeavours to serve will turn into fruitive
activity (karma). One should come so close to the
spiritual master that he becomes worried even for our
eating and other bodily necessities.

Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa is the best place in all of Vraja-dhāma,
and Govardhana is better than Nandagrāma, Gokula and
Varṣāṇā. In regard to ordinary and extraordinary service
towards the residents of Vraja, ordinary service is
dṛśyamāna-prakāśa. This means whatever we can see with
our material vision. One who sees in this way
understands that although this is the holy dhāma,
everything here is not eternal. There are all kinds of
people in the dhāma, even thieves and rogues who are
trying to cheat the pilgrims. When an ordinary person
sees this, he becomes somewhat disillusioned and starts
disliking Vraja. But how does Śrī Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī see Vraja? His vision is expressed in the
following verse:

yat kiñcit tṛṇa-gulma-kīkaṭa-mukhaṁ goṣṭhe samastaṁ hi
tat

sarvānandamayaṁ mukunda-dayitaṁ līlānukūlaṁ param

śāstrair eva muhur muhuḥ sphuṭam idam niṣṭaṅkitaṁ yācñyā

brahmāder api saspṛheṇa tad idaṁ sarvaṁ mayā vandyate

Stavāvalī (Vraja-vilāsa-stava (102))



With great longing I worship all the living entities of
Vraja including the grass, bushes, flies and birds,
which are filled with transcendental bliss. Their
fortune is so great that it is aspired for even by
exalted personalities like Śrī Brahmā and Uddhava.
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and other scriptures have repeatedly
and clearly propounded their glories. They are very dear
to Śrī Mukunda and assist in His pastimes.



Śrī Dāsa Gosvāmī finds that the trees, creepers, grass,
animals, birds, tigers, bears, flies, rats and even
mosquitoes are fully spiritual and favourable to Kṛṣṇa’s
pastimes. Can we think like this? Our firmness in
devotion is not so steady as this. Suppose a bull is
rushing towards us. If we don’t save ourselves from him,
the bull will hit us with his horns. So at our stage of
eligibility, our ordinary vision (dṛśyamāna-prakāśa) is
all right.

The word goṣṭhālayin refers to the residents of Vraja.
Those residents of Vraja who have inner sentiments like
the eternal rāgātmika Vrajavāsīs, even though they may
not have taken birth in Vraja, are the real Vrajavāsīs;
especially if they have the topmost mādhurya-bhāva of
the gopīs and are performing bhajana in this mood. We

                           20
Manah-siksa.txt                                 5/5/2017

should understand these to be the true residents of
Vraja and serve them. How should they be served? We
should hear the hari-kathā emanating from their mouths
and serve the dust of their feet. What is the meaning of
“the dust of their feet”? It means to develop excellent
loving attachment (rati) for them through service; this
in turn will improve one’s bhajana. Always remember that
everything in Vraja – even the trees, creepers, birds
and animals – are all transcendental (cinmaya) and
favourable to Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. Whatever Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī says is the eternal truth. We have to reach up
to that stage where we can also have the same vision as
he has.

Do not have any relationship with those who have taken
birth in Vraja but are antagonistic to bhakti. Associate
with those residents of Vraja who have a similar mood to
ours. We are engaging in kṛṣṇa-bhajana. An impersonalist
(māyāvādī) considers Kṛṣṇa to be illusory and accepts
impersonal liberation to be superior to eternally
serving the Lord. He may be pious, renowned and virtuous
in all his dealings, but he believes in the famous
impersonalist aphorism “sarvaṁ khalv idaṁ brahma – all
this is indeed Brahman.” Another person is serving Kṛṣṇa
but is not yet on the liberated platform; he simply has
attraction for the path of bhakti. So who is worthy of
respect? Of course, those who are serving Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.
The association of māyāvādīs will ruin one’s devotion
completely.

Sujane bhusura gaṇe – This refers to the Vaiṣṇavas of
other sampradāyas and the brāhmaṇas. One should respect
them also. Do not disrespect brāhmaṇas. Don’t disrespect
anyone, but associate only with those who help increase
our bhakti.

Sva mantre – One’s dikṣā-mantras are chanted three times
a day. Such daily performance of religious rites at
scheduled periods of the day is called āhnika. Some
persons chant all three in the morning and not during
the rest of the day. Some chant only the Hare Kṛṣṇa
mahā-mantra given by their spiritual master. The mantras
given by the guru are the brahma-gāyatrī (for men only),
the guru-mantra, guru-gāyatrī, gaura-mantra, gaura-
gāyatrī, gopāla-mantra, kāma-gāyatrī, pañca-tattva-
mantra and the Hare Kṛṣṇa mahā-mantra. These should be
chanted with deep faith. Consider these mantras to be
the form of Bhagavān and chant them with love and
affection. The spiritual master gives these mantras
after some consideration. But service to the spiritual
master should be done first, and mantras can be chanted
afterwards.

Don’t think that these mantras are ordinary. In the
story of Gopa-kumāra in Śrī Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta, the
importance and power of mantra is illustrated very
nicely. Due to some good influence from his previous
birth, Gopa-kumāra took birth in a cowherd family of
Vraja. He used to take the cows out for grazing. Once,
he saw a saintly personality crying out and singing and
shedding profuse tears. He could not understand the
reason behind this behaviour, but he became attracted to
that saint and started visiting and serving him. He used
to bring him milk, butter and other milk products. One

                           21
Manah-siksa.txt                                 5/5/2017

day the saint asked Gopa-kumāra to bathe in the Yamunā
and afterwards gave him the gopāla-mantra. But he could
recite only half the mantra to Gopa-kumāra before tears
started falling from his eyes. Eventually he fell
unconscious after somehow completing the recitation of
the mantra to Gopa-kumāra. The saint had no chance to
even mention the method and rules of chanting the
mantra. Gopa-kumāra went to search for some water, but
when he returned, his guru had disappeared. Gopa-kumāra
had faith in the mantra, and therefore started chanting
it. All his material desires gradually vanished. Slowly
he travelled from the Earth planet to Brahmaloka to
Śivaloka, and crossed Vaikuṇṭha, Ayodhyā, Dvārakā,
Mathurā and finally in Vṛndāvana he met Kṛṣṇa. He
achieved this by chanting the gopāla-mantra.

Mantra nourishes sambandha, one’s relationship with
Kṛṣṇa. Mantra means that which controls the mind and
removes anarthas. Therefore never neglect your mantras
and chant with concentration. In Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta
(Ādi-līlā 7.77, 78) Mahāprabhu has said:

nāma laite laite mora bhrānta haila mana

dhairya dharite nāri hailāma unmatta

By chanting the holy name again and again my mind has
become bewildered. I can no longer maintain my composure
and have become mad.



Śrīman Mahāprabhu saw a beautiful dark-complexioned boy
standing in a threefold-bending posture (tribhaṅga-
lalita) and playing the flute. He was very attractive.
Mahāprabhu ran after Him to catch Him but He
disappeared. Mahāprabhu started weeping and became mad
for Him.

All sinful reactions are burnt forever by chanting the
mantra. By the chanting of impersonalists, the
unmanifest reactions to one’s activities (aprārabdha-
karma) will be removed, but one has to undergo the
effects that have matured (prārabdha-karma). This means
that due to sins committed in previous lives, one gets
this body and its concomitant afflictions, which are to
be tolerated. But Vaiṣṇavas do not undergo these
sufferings because they take shelter of the holy name.
One should chant the holy name by following the
spiritual master and the Vaiṣṇavas.

Mahotsavāyate means “to enjoy bliss”. How? Kṛṣṇa is
running forward. His earrings are swinging on His
cheeks. He is wearing pītāmbara, a yellow cloth. Mother
Yaśodā has decorated her small child very beautifully.
Kṛṣṇa looks backwards, and seeing Yaśodā coming to catch
Him, runs again. Yaśodā is very full-bodied, and as she
is running, her body is trembling. This is the
mahotsava, blissful festival, of Gokula. Whosoever sees
this becomes enchanted. Such mahotsavas are manifested
to a devotee’s perception by the holy name. The holy
name reveals the blissful pastimes of Rādhā-kuṇḍa and
Vṛndāvana – but according to one’s qualification to see
them. To attain the eligibility to see them, we should

                           22
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017

perform bhajana like the rāgānuga Vaiṣṇavas – with firm,
resolute determination.

Ideally one should not chant less than one lākha, or one
hundred thousand names, per day, and this chanting
should be done with a steady and stable mind. This is
bhajana. The aim of bhajana is to attain bhāva-bhakti.
Those who aim at bhāva-bhakti and perform uninterrupted
bhajana receive all opportunities and facilities from
the Lord Himself. Śrīla Haridāsa Thākura received such
facilities from birth in the form of

association with Śrī Advaita Ācārya and Śrīman
Mahāprabhu. This was due to the chanting of the holy
name.

“Unless I complete the chanting of fifty thousand names,
I shall not eat or drink. And I shall not sleep until I
complete the full number of rounds” – this should be the
firm resolve of a sādhaka. Haridāsa Ṭhākura’s body
became very weak in his final days. When Mahāprabhu
asked him about his disease, he replied that his disease
was that he could not finish his regular number of
rounds. Do we have such attachment for chanting the holy
name? We should perform exclusive, resolute bhakti
towards the spiritual master, the Vaiṣṇavas, the holy
name and the holy land of Vraja.

Dambhaṁ hitvā – As you perform your sādhana and bhajana,
give up all kinds of cunning and deceit and aim only at
the attainment of prema. “O mind, give up illusion and
ignorance and perform bhajana.” Within the mind there
should always be our worshipful deity Kṛṣṇa and His
associates – the spiritual master and the Vaiṣṇavas. Our
only concern should be how to increase our love for the
spiritual master, the Vaiṣṇavas and Kṛṣṇa. One should
have firm faith that Kṛṣṇa will take care of us and our
daily needs. He is fully capable. This firm faith is the
doorway to surrender.

One should perform the practices of bhakti with great
eagerness. One should not be complacent and think, “Oh,
if bhakti is in my astrological chart, I will get it.”
Do not simply depend on “luck”; make some endeavour to
obtain bhakti, strive day and night and do not waste
even a moment, for one may die at any moment. One’s body
becomes spiritual by the chanting of the holy name.
Gradually by the unfolding of spiritual power the body
becomes cinmaya, transcendental.

The essence of these instructions is that the desire for
worldly activities is not vanquished unless one gets the
association of devotees. One attains pure chanting in
the association of saints, and thus his bhakti grows and
flourishes.




Verse Two




                           23
Manah-siksa.txt                                 5/5/2017



na dharmaṁ nādharmaṁ śruti-gaṇa-niruktaṁ kila kuru

vraje rādhā-kṛṣṇa-pracura-paricaryām iha tanu

śacī-sūnuṁ nandīśvara-pati-sutatve guru-varaṁ

mukunda-preṣṭhatve smara param ajasraṁ nanu manaḥ




Anvaya

manaḥ – O mind; kila – indeed; na kuru – do not perform;
dharmam – routine religious activities resulting in
piety; adharmaṁ na – nor irreligious activities
resulting in sin; niruktam – mentioned; śruti-gaṇa – in
the Vedas; param – rather; tanu – perform; pracura –
profuse; paricaryām – service; rādhā-kṛṣṇa – for Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa; iha – here; vraje – in Vraja-dhāma; nanu –
(and) certainly; ajasram – always; smara – remember and
meditate upon; śacī-sūnum – the son of Śacī; nandīśvara-
pati-sutatve – as the son of the master of Nandagrāma;
guru-varam – (and) the spiritual master; mukunda-
preṣṭhatve – as most dear to Śrī Mukunda.



Translation

O my dear mind, please do not perform either the routine
religious activities resulting in piety (dharma) or the
irreligious activities resulting in sin (adharma) as
mentioned in the Śrutis or Vedas. Rather, you should
render profuse loving service to Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
Yugala here in Vraja, for the Śrutis have ascertained
Them to be the highest principle of supreme worship and
the Supreme Absolute Truth. Always meditate on
Śacīnandana Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who is richly
endowed with the complexion and sentiments of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, as non-different from Śrī Nanda-nandana. And
always remember the spiritual master as most dear to Śrī
Mukunda.



Śrī Bhajana-darpaṇa-digdarśinī-vṛtti



Pūrva-pakṣa: The first objection to an assertion in any
discussion

The advice given in the first verse to give up all pride
and serve the eternally youthful Divine Couple with
single-minded devotion raises some doubts. The first
doubt is that if one completely gives up all pride and
takes exclusive shelter of devotion unto Śrī Kṛṣṇa, how
will one maintain and support oneself? Life cannot be
maintained without performing nitya- and naimittika-
karma (daily and occasional prescribed duties), which

                           24
Manah-siksa.txt                                 5/5/2017

consist of pious and impious result-oriented activities.
The second doubt is that if one adopts single-minded
worship of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala, then how is Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu to be regarded? If one performs
bhajana of Śrīman Mahāprabhu considering Him also as
one’s object of worship, then, there being two objects
of worship, the devotion is not single-minded (ananya).
The third uncertainty is in what devotional mood should
one meditate upon the spiritual master? These three
doubts are reconciled in the explanation that follows.

(1) Na dharmaṁ nādharmaṁ śruti-gaṇa-niruktaṁ kila kuru:

Do not perform the religious and irreligious activities
mentioned in the Śrutis

Dharma and adharma are described in the Śrutis – the
original four Vedas and the Upaniṣads – and the Smṛtis
such as the Purāṇas and Itihāsas, which follow the
precepts of the Śrutis. Whatever activities are
performed by humankind come under these two categories
of dharma and adharma. If they are completely
prohibited, then it is not possible to live even for a
moment. Therefore Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī has not
prohibited all activities of the sense organs. There are
two kinds of persons in the world – the learned (vijña)
and the ignorant (ajña). The ignorant do not work unless
disciplined, and if they do act independently, it only
results in inauspiciousness. Therefore all activities
described in the Śrutis and their attendant literature,
the Smṛtis, have been divided into dharma and adharma
for the welfare of such persons so that they may easily
abstain from inauspicious activities and engage in
auspicious ones.

Those who are learned are conscious of their spiritual
identity. The disciplinary injunctions of the scriptures
are not meant for them. They have been ordained to act
on the platform of the pure spiritual attachment
intrinsic to the soul (ātma- or kṛṣṇa-rati), or in other
words to render unalloyed service to the Divine Couple.
Those who are faithful are included in the category of
learned persons. The instruction of Śrīla Raghunātha
dāsa Gosvāmī to abandon all dharma and adharma mentioned
in the Vedas and remain engaged exclusively in the
loving service of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala is for such
learned self-realised souls. Whatever activities must be
carried out in the life of a sādhaka should be done in
the mood of service to the Supreme Lord.

Even the activities prescribed in the Vedas for those
who are firmly established in the varṇāśrama stage of
life should be performed in this mood. Householder
devotees should worship deities at home, and all
activities like earning money, maintaining family
members, protecting assets, building a house, and so on
should be done as an offering to the deities. One should
consider oneself simply as a servant of the Lord. Under
no circumstance should one think oneself to be an
enjoyer and thus exploit the fruits of activity for
one’s own selfish enjoyment. Religious rituals such as
the offering of foodstuff to the forefathers (śrāddha)
prescribed in the book Śrī Hari-bhakti-vilāsa should
also be done in the mood of service to the Lord. Upon

                           25
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017

attaining eligibility, one transcends his attachment to
and dependence upon the principles of varṇāśrama. At
such a time factual residence in Vraja and unalloyed
service to the Divine Couple becomes natural and easy.
Those who cannot physically live in Vraja should do so
mentally.

(2) Śacī-sūnuṁ nandīśvara-pati-sutatve (smara): Meditate
on Śrī Śacīnandana as non-different from Śrī Nanda-
nandana

In order to distribute the holy name and the most
radiant divine love that was never previously given
(anarpita-unnatojjvala-prema) to the living entities
diverted from Kṛṣṇa and entangled in worldly affairs,
Śrī Nanda-nandana appeared in the form of Śrī
Śacīnandana Gaurahari. In particular, He assumed the
complexion and sentiments of Śrīmatī Rādhikā in order to
taste the unparalleled sweetness of Her loving
sentiments.

There are two questions that may arise in this
connection. Since Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is the
combined embodiment of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, why not
worship only Him, by which the worship of the Divine
Couple will automatically be accomplished? Or should one
worship Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
separately? Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the spiritual
master of the entire universe, has settled these
questions by personally appearing in the mood of a
devotee. He demonstrated by His own example how to
perform devotion unto Lord Kṛṣṇa and advised the jīvas
to do the same. Following His instructions, we should
worship Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala. But before rendering
service unto the Divine Couple, one should first of all
meditate upon the spiritual master and upon Śrī
Gaurāṅgadeva, otherwise one will not be able to attain
the supreme spiritual perfection (paramārtha-siddhi).

In answer to the second question it may be noted that by
worshipping Śrī Śacīnandana Gaurahari separately, one is
unable to understand how He is non-different from Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. When one is established in the consciousness of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa being non-different from Śrī Gaurahari, one is
then able to remember Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu even while
worshipping Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

(3) Guru-varaṁ mukunda-preṣṭhatve (smara): Meditate on
the spiritual master as very dear to Śrī Mukunda

The spiritual master is known as mukunda-preṣṭha, or one
who is very dear to Śrī Mukunda, who bestows liberation
(mukti) from material bondage. Devotees should think,
“Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is an ocean of mercy, has sent His very
dear associate as my spiritual master in order to
deliver me.” It is, therefore, fully appropriate to
consider the spiritual master as an intimate servant of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā. According to the statement of the
scriptures (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.17.27)) ācārya māṁ
vijānīyāt, the spiritual master is known as the
embodiment (svarūpa) of Bhagavān. In Hari-bhakti-vilāsa
and elsewhere this has been explained to mean that the
guru is very dear to Bhagavān or that he is equally
worshipful as the Lord. But to reject Bhagavān and

                           26
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017

worship only the spiritual master, thinking him to be
God, is an offence.

prathamaṁ tu guruṁ pūjya

tataś caiva mamārcanam

kurvan siddhim avāpnoti

hy anyathā niṣphalaṁ bhavet

Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (4.344)

[Śrī Kṛṣṇa said:] A devotee who worships the spiritual
master first and then worships Me attains perfection. It
is fruitless to worship Me alone.

In direct opposition to this, if an evil-minded,
arrogant and wretched man disregards the spiritual
master and worships only Bhagavān, he becomes a target
for the Lord’s wrath. When a lotus flower is situated in
water, the rays of the sun cause it to blossom. The same
sun, however, will wither a lotus that is not situated
in water. In this example the spiritual master is
compared to water and the Supreme Lord is compared with
the sun. This is the purport of the following verse
(from Jayadākhyāna-saṁhitā).

nārāyaṇo ’pi vikṛtiṁ yāti

guroḥ pracyutasya durbuddheḥ

kamalaṁ jalādapetaṁ

śoṣayati ravir na poṣayati



Anuvṛtti



This Verse Two explains the method of bhajana. According
to the instructions of Verse One, one should perform
bhajana after giving up all kinds of pride. In such a
condition, worldly life cannot be maintained. Śrī
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī advises that dharma and adharma
both be given up if one has the desire to perform
bhajana. In order to perform exclusive bhajana of Śrī
Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, one should abandon all kinds of dharma
and adharma enjoined in the Vedas, Śrutīs and other
similar literatures. But by giving up one’s daily and
occasional duties (nitya- and naimittika-karma), life
would become difficult and there would be several
defects. Then what should we do? The activities that
help us in the course of our life that are beneficial
for this world as well as the next world are called
dharma. To not follow this is adharma, and to do what is
contrary to this is called vidharma. We may not perform
adharma, vidharma or kukarma (unbeneficial activity),
but we have to follow dharma. In the Śrutis religious
duties are divided according to karma (fruitive
activity), jñāna (the cultivation of knowledge aimed at
impersonal liberation) and bhakti (devotion unto the

                              27
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017

Supreme Lord).

tāvat karmāṇi kurvīta

na nirvidyeta yāvatā

mat-kathā-śravaṇādau vā

śraddhā yāvan na jāyate

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.20.9)



Until one awakens detachment from the results of
fruitive activity or until one develops faith in hearing
discourses related to Me, one must carry out his daily
and occasional obligatory activities.



The Vedas say: “ahiṁsā paramo dharmaḥ – non-violence is
the highest religious principle”; “pitṛ-devo bhava mātṛ-
devo bhava – respect your elders and parents”; “atithi-
devo bhava – respect those who are uninvited guests at
your home”; and “ācārya-devo bhava – respect your
teachers and preceptors”. In ordinary day-to-day life
these cannot be abandoned, and this is how one gets
entangled in karma. When one realises that fruitive
activity and its fruits result only in suffering, then
one wishes to become free: na nirvidyeta yāvatā. No good
karma results in eternal happiness, and the ultimate
outcome will be suffering. One gets married for
happiness but it turns out to be painful. Accumulation
of wealth also results in suffering. When one comes to
this realisation he awakens detachment from material
activities: “karma cetanī nirveda ...kṛtaḥ – detachment
is accomplished by awareness of the misery of material
activity.”

Draupadī and the Pāṇḍavas were fully surrendered to
Kṛṣṇa, yet even they underwent great suffering. King
Hariścandra1 followed the path of dharma, yet he had to
suffer. If one comes to this understanding that karma
and the fruits of karma result in suffering only, then
he becomes eligible for jñāna. But even the elaborate
commentaries on jñāna given in the scriptures do not
contain real happiness because there is no acceptance of
Bhagavān. They propound that Bhagavān is formless and
devoid of qualities and designations. This kind of void
perspective cannot contain happiness. If one listens to
the glorification of the Lord, then by hearing such
topics one develops the desire to perform bhajana, and
he gives up fruitive activity and impersonal knowledge
immediately. This is expressed in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(11.11.32) as follows:

ājñāyaivaṁ guṇān doṣān

mayādiṣṭān api svakān

dharmān santyajya yaḥ sarvān

māṁ bhajeta sa tu sattamaḥ

                              28
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017


[Śrī Kṛṣṇa said:] I have given duties to human beings in
the Vedas and the Upaniṣads and explained what is dharma
and what is adharma, what are attributes and what are
faults. To carry out one’s religious duties is a
positive attribute because it purifies the heart of the
performer. To neglect such duty is a fault. One who
knows all this and yet abandons his prescribed duty,
considering it to be a distraction to bhajana, and who
worships Me exclusively with the firm conviction that
all perfection may be attained by bhakti alone, is the
best amongst all humankind.

This is further explained in Bhagavad-gītā (18.66) in
the verse sarva-dharmān parityajya, mām ekam śaraṇaṁ
vraja. Therefore Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī advises
that one abandon all dharma and adharma given in the
Vedas. “Those things will not be beneficial to your
eternal identity, so give them up and perform profuse
service to Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa day and night.” Dāsa
Gosvāmī instructs his mind, which does not have ruci but
has developed greed to attain the mercy of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu and perform bhajana to Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.
From the very beginning he does not aim at vaidhī-
bhakti, devotion based on scriptural regulation, but at
rāgānuga-bhakti, devotion steeped in spontaneous love.

If one does not develop greed after hearing the pastimes
of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, one is the most unfortunate
among all unfortunate persons. But Dāsa Gosvāmī says
that all living entities are eligible for this rāgānuga-
bhajana because everyone is a servant of Kṛṣṇa: jīvera
svarūpa haya kṛṣṇera nitya-dāsa.

Some persons say, “Do not read the Tenth Canto of
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam” – but who should not read it? Only
those who lead an animalistic life. Śrī Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī says: “rādhā-kṛṣṇa-pracura-paricaryām iha tanuḥ
– perform profuse service to Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa here in
Vraja.” What is pracura-sevā? It means to serve day and
night. In Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.295) Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī has said:

sevā sādhaka-rūpeṇa

siddha-rūpeṇa cātra hi

tad-bhāva-lipsunā kāryā

vraja-lokānusārataḥ

A sādhaka who has greed for rāgānuga-bhakti should serve
Śrī Kṛṣṇa both in the sādhaka-rūpa and the siddha-rūpa
in accordance with the bhāva of the eternal residents of
Vraja who possess the same mood for which he aspires.
The sādhaka-rūpa refers to the physical body in which
one is presently situated, and the siddha-rūpa refers to
the internally contemplated spiritual form that is
suitable to serve Kṛṣṇa according to one’s cherished
desire. In the siddha-deha, the perfected internal
spiritual body, one should offer mental services to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa under the guidance of Śrī Rādhā, Lalitā, Viśākhā,
Rūpa Mañjarī, Rati Mañjarī and others. In the sādhaka-
rūpa, one’s physical body, one should render physical

                           29
Manah-siksa.txt                                 5/5/2017

service under the guidance of Śrī Rūpa, Śrī Sanātana and
others.



Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī has determined the nature of uttama-
bhakti in the very beginning of Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu
(1.1.11):

anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ

jñāna-karmādy anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-

śīlanāṁ bhaktir uttamā

The cultivation of activities that are meant exclusively
for the pleasure of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, or in other words the
uninterrupted flow of service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, performed
through all endeavours of the body, mind and speech, and
through the expression of various spiritual sentiments
(bhāvas), which is not covered by jñāna (knowledge aimed
at impersonal liberation) and karma (reward-seeking
activity), and which is devoid of all desires other than
the aspiration to bring happiness to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is
called uttama-bhakti, pure devotional service.

“Give up spurious desire, fruitive activity and the
cultivation of impersonal knowledge, and serve Kṛṣṇa
favourably.” How is this favourable pracura-sevā
performed? Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī prayed at the
feet of Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī:

vairāgya-yug-bhakti-rasaṁ prayatnair

apāyayan mām anabhīpsum andham

kṛpāmbudhir yaḥ paraduḥkha duḥkhī

sanātanaṁ taṁ prabhum āśrayāmi

Vilāpa-kusumāñjali (6)

Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī is an ocean of mercy who grieves
for the distress of others. Although I was blinded by
ignorance and unwilling to do so, he induced me with
great diligence to drink the nectarean liquid mellows of
devotion, which are endowed with renunciation. I take
shelter of that Sanātana Gosvāmī Prabhu as my
instructing spiritual master.

Sanātana Gosvāmī instructed him to serve Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa, and the aim of our bhajana should also be to
serve Them. Sanātana Gosvāmī is very merciful. What
Sanātana Gosvāmī has given in Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta is the
desire to follow Gopa-kumāra and Nārada. Vaidhī-bhakti
starts from śraddhā, faith, and progresses slowly up to
ruci, taste. Śraddhā in rāgānuga-bhakti is different. It
generally starts from the stage of āsakti, deep
attachment, and due to the presence of greed it
progresses very quickly.

If we are to accept the statement that one should not

                           30
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017

read the Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, then we
should not study Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, the books of
our Gosvāmīs, Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta and so on, because
they are imbued with the same topics. We should not hear
the dialogue between Rāya Rāmānanda and Mahāprabhu. Even
the very first verse of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam – satyaṁ paraṁ
dhīmahi – is full of rādhā-prema, so we should not read
this either. In the third verse Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is
described as nigama-kalpa-taror-galitaṁ phalaṁ – the
mature fruit of the desire tree of Vedic literature.
What is in this verse? The entire Tenth Canto and other
pastimes exist within this verse in coded form.
Therefore we should also be restricted from studying
this. Then what is left?

When Mahārāja Parīkṣit asked Śukadeva Gosvāmī, “Kṛṣṇa is
Bhagavān Himself; why did He break the religious
principles and perform the rāsa dance with the wives of
others? This is not proper,” Śukadeva Gosvāmī replied,
“If one can obtain Bhagavān by means of anger, lust and
envy, then why can’t one approach Him by prema, divine
love, and kāma, spiritual desire?” Śukadeva Gosvāmī
wanted to describe the beautiful holī-līlā (colour-
throwing festival) and jhulana-līlā (swing festival)
along with the rāsa-līlā, but he did not describe those
pastimes because he considered the audience ineligible
to hear them. Therefore our ācāryas described all these
in Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta [by Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Thākura] and Govinda-līlāmṛta [by Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa
Kavirāja Gosvāmī], thinking that unauthorised persons
would not read them, but if one has a little taste he
will surely read them.

The pastimes of Kṛṣṇa are described in the dialogue
between Uddhava and Maitreya in the Third Canto. The
pastimes of the gopīs are referred to in the Eleventh
Canto. In every verse of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, in some form
or other, there is mention of the Tenth Canto. Therefore
those who advise not to read the Tenth Canto are not
authorised to read any part of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. They
should not even touch Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta. For whom
did Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī write pracura-sevā,
tāmbulādi-arpaṇam (offering of betal and so on) and
pāda-mardanam (massaging the lotus feet)? For whom did
he advise all this? For the devotees only. How can one
learn these services if one does not read Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam? Yes, one does have to develop eligibility;
one does have to have śraddhā, niṣṭhā and so on; but if
this is not our aim, then even after several lifetimes
one shall not obtain the qualification to hear this.

Caitanya Mahāprabhu says there are two types of
services: external and internal. Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī
says that externally we should follow hearing, chanting
and so on – the five limbs of bhakti – and those who
have greed will follow tan-nāma-rūpa-caritādi-
sukīrtanānu smṛtyoḥ – recitation of and meditation upon
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s names, form, qualities and pastimes as
quoted previously (Upadeśāmṛta (8)). If we are living in
Vṛndāvana, then why should we not read the Tenth Canto?
If we go to Sevā-kuñja for offering obeisances, with
what understanding will we go? Shall we offer obeisances
only to the trees and bushes, or to the confidential
pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa that are not described even

                           31
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017

in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam? What is the point in going to
Nidhuvana2 and Cīra-ghāṭa if all those pastimes do not
overwhelm the heart? For what purpose shall we go to
Girirāja-Govardhana, Candra-sarovara, Paiṭhagrāma and
Rādhā-kuṇḍa? At present we may not have the
qualification to perceive the pastimes that take place
there, but this chapter cannot be forever closed to us,
never to be read.

There are two kinds of bhajana: one is for sādhakas,
practitioners, and the other is for siddhas, perfected
souls. In this verse, Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī is
instructing the sādhakas how to perform bhajana that
will gradually lead to the perfectional stage. If you
want to do this kind of bhajana, then consider
Śacīnandana as Yaśodā-nandana; consider the son of
Jagannātha Miśra to be the son of Nanda Bābā. The son of
Mother Śacī is very merciful. He has come from Vṛndāvana
to bestow mercy upon the living entities. Anarpita-carīṁ
cirāt karuṇayāvatīrṇaḥ kalau – He has appeared in the
age of Kali out of His causeless mercy to bestow the
most priceless gift that was not previously given. He
has come to do a favour and to give this confidential
prema. He has come to relish rādhā-bhāvā Himself. He is
so kind that He gives prema to everyone, even to the
birds and beasts, as He did in the Jhārikhaṇḍa forest.

Kṛṣṇa gave prema occasionally, but Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu gave it freely. Those entangled in the
material world have no other way to receive it except by
chanting the holy name and associating with devotees.
Caitanya Mahāprabhu and all His associates came to give
this. Śrī Rādhā became Gadādhara Paṇḍita, Viśākhā and
Lalitā appeared as Rāmānanda Rāya and Svarūpa Dāmodara;
Kṛṣṇa brought all eight principal sakhīs and their
maidservants. Lord Brahmā and Prahlāda Mahārāja together
became Haridāsa Thākura. Nityānanda Prabhu preached the
teachings of Caitanya Mahāprabhu and nāma-kīrtana.
Caitanya Mahāprabhu went to Jagannātha Purī to relish
unnata-ujjvala-prema, the highest mādhurya-prema of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and to inundate the world with the
nectar of confidential service to Her. He came in the
form of Mahāprabhu to taste the unparalleled sweetness
of rādhā-bhāva and to preach mañjarī-bhāva.

Without performing bhajana to Caitanya Mahāprabhu, one
cannot perform bhajana of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. But the
scriptures say to perform ananya-bhajana, to worship
only one deity. So what should we do? Should we worship
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, or Gauracandra? Some say that worshipping
Caitanya Mahāprabhu is worshipping Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Thākura has answered this question in his
Jaiva-dharma and in Navadvīpa-dhāma-māhātmya. Before
Bhaktivinoda Thākura appeared in this world, this
mockery was going on: “Mahāprabhu is my nāgara (hero),
and I am His nāgarī (heroine). If I am Kṛṣṇa’s sakhī –
Rādhā’s sakhī – and if They perform the rāsa dance, then
Mahāprabhu should also perform the rāsa dance, and we
should take part in it as His sakhīs.” This is called
gaurāṅga-nāgarī-vāda. Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī and all other
ācāryas have rejected this theory, for it is not
accepted by Mahāprabhu. Therefore Bhaktivinoda Thākura
refuted it, and Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Prabhupāda refuted
it.

                           32
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017


So should we worship Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and Mahāprabhu
separately? The sahajiyās say, “Do not worship Gaura-
Nityānanda; accept only Mahāprabhu and not Nityānanda
Prabhu.” But they don’t know the intricacies of rasa. In
our temples Mahāprabhu-Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa are there, and Gaura-
Nityānanda are also there. They are non-different.
Caitanya Mahāprabhu said to serve Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa and
chant the name of Kṛṣṇa. But He did not mention His own
name, so should we neglect Him? Śrī Bhaktivinoda Thākura
says that before worshipping the Divine Couple Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa, we should remember Mahāprabhu. He is Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.
We should pray as follows, “Out of Your causeless mercy
You have come with rādhā-bhāva to instruct the method of
bhakti, and therefore I remember You.” Meditate like
this and serve Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.

All the scriptures declare the spiritual master to be
the direct representative of Kṛṣṇa: sākṣād-dharitvena-
samasta-śāstrair. Kṛṣṇa says that one should know the
spiritual master to be His very self – ācāryaṁ māṁ
vijānīyāt (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.17.27)). Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta also says to serve both the initiating and
instructing spiritual masters, considering them to be
Kṛṣṇa’s outward form (rūpa) and inward form (svarūpa),
respectively. But without serving the spiritual master
one cannot serve Kṛṣṇa. We should serve the guru, and by
his mercy we can serve Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. We should not
differentiate; rather, we should have more devotion for
the spiritual master than for Kṛṣṇa. This is how you can
serve Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa; otherwise not.

Therefore in order to worship Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, meditate on
Mahāprabhu and pray, “You are none other than Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa.” One has to serve Mahāprabhu with a mood of
dāsya, servitude. When this sentiment is fully mature,
then Mahāprabhu will grant His darśana in the form of
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. At that time one’s devotion progresses in
one of the moods of sakhya (friendship), vātsalya
(parenthood) or mādhurya (amorous love). But without
meditating on Mahāprabhu one cannot perform bhajana.

The spiritual master is very dear to Mukunda, as stated
in Hari-bhakti-vilāsa (4.344):

prathamaṁ tu guruṁ pūjya

tataś caiva mamārcanam

kurvan siddhim avāpnoti

hy anyathā niṣphalaṁ bhavet

By worshipping the spiritual master first and then
Myself one will attain perfection; otherwise one’s
worship will be fruitless.

One should worship the spiritual master first in his
form as a sādhaka and render intimate service
(viśrambha-guru-sevā) unto him. Consider the guru to be
your ever well-wisher. There should be internal and deep
love for the spiritual master. One should aspire to
inherit and receive the love for Kṛṣṇa that is present
in his heart. Serve the form (vapu) of the spiritual

                              33
Manah-siksa.txt                                    5/5/2017

master by the medium of his words (vāṇī); otherwise that
service will become material. The spiritual master is
āsraya-bhagavān, the supreme receptacle of love for the
Lord, and Kṛṣṇa is viṣaya-bhagavān, the supreme object
of love.




Verse Three




yadīccher āvāsaṁ vraja-bhuvi sa-rāgaṁ prati-janur

yuva-dvandvaṁ tac cet paricaritum ārād abhilaṣeḥ

svarūpaṁ śrī rūpaṁ sa-gaṇam iha tasyāgrajam api

sphuṭaṁ premṇā nityaṁ smara nama tadā tvaṁ śṛṇu manaḥ




Anvaya

manaḥ – O mind; yadi – if; iccheḥ – (you) desire; āvāsam
– to live; vraja-bhuvi – in the land of Vraja; sa-rāgam
– with rāgātmikā-bhakti; cet – (and) if; abhilaṣeḥ –
(you) desire; paricaritum – to serve; tat yuva-dvandvam
– that youthful Divine Couple, Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava; ārāt –
directly; tadā – then; tvam – you; śṛṇu – hear (me); iha
– here; prati-januḥ – in birth after birth; nityam –
always; sphuṭam – distinctly; smara – remember; nama –
(and) bow down; premṇā – with love; svarūpam – to Śrī
Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī; śrī rūpam – to Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī; tasya agrajam – (and) to his elder brother Śrī
Sanātana Gosvāmī; api – also; sa-gaṇam – with their
associates.



Translation

My dear mind, please hear me. If you are eager to gain
residence in Vraja on the platform of rāgātmikā-bhakti,
and if you desire to obtain the direct service of the
eternally youthful Divine Couple, Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, then
birth after birth always distinctly remember and bow
down with great love to Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī,
Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī and his elder brother Śrī Sanātana
Gosvāmī, and all other associates of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, who are the recipients of His mercy.



Śrī Bhajana-darpaṇa-digdarśinī-vṛtti




                           34
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017

Pūrva-pakṣa: Objection

The question may be raised here whether it is possible
to attain rāgātmikā-bhakti and residence in Vraja by
accepting initiation and instruction from a Vaiṣṇava of
any other sampradāya. This question is answered in this
third verse.

The most munificent Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu bestows
rāgātmikā-bhakti and vraja-prema for Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
Yugala. He reveals the supremely confidential mysteries
of that vraja-prema and the method to obtain it. His
most intimate associates Śrī Svarūpa, Śrī Rūpa, Śrī
Sanātana and other gosvāmīs are the principal
storekeepers and guardians of this most rare vraja-
prema. Through the medium of their disciplic succession
and the authentic literatures composed by them, they
have given the whole world the most valuable gift of the
procedures of vraja-rasa, the manner of residence in
Vraja, and the most confidential method of obtaining
love for the Divine Couple. Without taking shelter of
their lotus feet and following their instructions, it is
not possible to obtain residence in Vraja on the
platform of rāgātmikā-bhakti and the service of the
Divine Couple, saturated with anurāga.

(1) Rāgātmikā-bhakti

The word sa-rāgam means “with rāgātmikā-bhakti”.
Generally the practice (sādhana) and perfection (siddhi)
of bhakti are divided into three categories: sādhana-
bhakti, bhāva-bhakti and prema-bhakti. When sādhana-
bhakti matures, one is endowed with bhāva-bhakti, and
fully matured bhāva-bhakti is known as prema-bhakti. Śrī
Rūpa Gosvāmī, who is fully acquainted with the inner
truths of bhakti, has employed very fine discrimination
in describing the gradual development of prema in his
book Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.4.15–16) as follows:

ādau śraddhā tataḥ sādhu-

saṅgo ’tha bhajana-kriyā

tato ’nartha-nivṛttiḥ syāt

tato niṣṭhā rucis tataḥ

athāsaktis tato bhāvas

tataḥ premābhyudañcati

sādhakānām ayaṁ premṇaḥ

prādurbhāve bhavet kramaḥ

In the beginning śraddhā develops by hearing the
scriptures in the association of devotees. Śraddhā means
to have firm faith in the words of the scriptures and
the spiritual master. This leads to sādhu-saṅga, or
associating with devotees, in order to learn from them
the method of bhajana. Thereafter one takes up bhajana-
kriyā, the practice of bhajana, which results in
anartha-nivṛtti, destruction of the reactions of
prārabdha3 and aprārabdha sins. After this, niṣṭhā or

                             35
Manah-siksa.txt                                 5/5/2017

steadiness develops, which means to have continuity in
bhajana without any disruption. This leads to the
development of ruci, a conscious desire and taste for
bhajana. Then one develops āsakti, in which one
experiences spontaneous attraction both for the
performance of bhajana itself and for the object of
bhajana, Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. Thereafter bhāva manifests
and finally prema arises. This is the general order of
the development of prema in sādhakas.

Sādhana-bhakti, which is performed during the devotee’s
stage of practice, has two divisions: vaidhī and
rāgānuga. At the stage of the fruition of bhakti also, a
corresponding subtle difference remains. In other words
there is a subtle difference between prema arising from
vaidhī-sādhana-bhakti and prema arising from rāgānuga-
sādhana-bhakti. The philosophical conclusion of Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī concerning vaidhī-bhakti is expressed in Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.6, 269) as follows:

yatra rāgānavāptatvāt

pravṛttir upajāyate

śāsane naiva śāstrasya

sā vaidhī bhaktir ucyate

śāstroktayā prabalayā

tat tan maryādayānvitā

vaidhī bhaktir ayaṁ kaiścin

maryādā mārga ucyate

Engagement in sādhana-bhakti is sometimes inspired by
intense greed (lobha) and sometimes by the disciplinary
statements of the scriptures. When engagement in
sādhana-bhakti is not inspired by spontaneous love but
by the governing directions of the scriptures, it is
called vaidhī-bhakti. This vaidhī-bhakti, which consists
of strict constraints outlined in the scriptures, is
called maryādā-mārga also by some learned scholars
(namely those coming in the disciplic succession of Śrī
Vallabhācārya).

In Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.270–3), Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī
describes rāgānuga-bhakti as follows:

virājantīm abhivyaktaṁ

vrajavāsi-janādiṣu

rāgātmikām anusṛtā yā

sā rāgānugocyate

rāgānuga vivekārtham

ādau rāgātmikocyate

iṣṭe svārasikī rāgaḥ


                              36
Manah-siksa.txt                                 5/5/2017

paramāviṣṭatā bhavet

tanmayī yā bhaved bhaktiḥ

sātra rāgātmikoditā

sā kāmarūpā sambandha-rūpā

ceti bhaved dvidhā

That bhakti which is distinctly present in the eternal
inhabitants of Vraja – including the cows, deer, parrots
and other birds and animals – is called rāgātmikā-
bhakti. Bhakti that follows in accordance with that
rāgātmikā-bhakti is called rāgānuga-bhakti. In order to
thoroughly understand rāgānuga-bhakti, rāgātmikā-bhakti
is being described first. An unquenchable loving thirst
for the object of one’s affection (Śrī Kṛṣṇa) that gives
rise to spontaneous and intense absorption in that
object is called rāga. Such rāgamaya-bhakti, or the
performance of services such as stringing garlands with
intense rāga, is called rāgātmikā-bhakti. This
rāgātmikā-bhakti is of two kinds: (1) kāma-rūpa (that
which is based on amorous attraction) and (2) sambandha-
rūpa (that which is based on parental and other
relationships).

Who is eligible for rāgānuga-bhakti? Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī’s
conclusions regarding this topic are expressed in
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.291–3) as follows:

rāgātmikaika-niṣṭhā ye

vrajavāsi-janādayaḥ

teṣāṁ bhāvāptaye lubdho

bhaved atrādhikāravān

tat tad bhāvādi mādhurye

śrute dhīryad apekṣate

nātra śāstraṁ na yuktiñ ca

tal lobhotpati lakṣaṇam

vaidha bhakty adhikārī tu

bhāvāvirbhāvanāvadhi

atra śāstraṁ tathā tarkam

anukūlam apekṣate

Those who have intense greed to obtain that bhāva which
is exactly in accordance with the mood and sentiments of
the residents of Vraja who are exclusively established
in rāgātmikā-bhakti are alone eligible for the path of
rāgānuga-bhakti. The symptom of the awakening of such
greed is that upon hearing the incomparably sweet
pastime-narrations from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and other
books composed by rasika devotees concerning the
sentiments, form, qualities and so on of Śrī Nanda, Śrī

                             37
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017

Yaśodā and other Vrajavāsīs, which are supremely
attractive to Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa and satisfy all His senses,
one automatically engages in bhakti with an intense
desire to obtain those same sentiments. At that time
one’s intelligence is not even the least bit dependent
on scriptural injunctions or logical reasoning. Those
who are eligible only for vaidhī-bhakti remain dependent
on scriptural injunctions and favourable reasoning until
deep love for the Supreme Lord (bhagavad-rati) manifests
in their hearts. After the appearance of rati, however,
they are no longer dependent upon such things. But those
who are eligible for rāgānuga-bhakti are from the very
beginning engaged in bhakti with greed to obtain the
divine sentiments predominant in Vraja, and are never
dependent on reasoning and scriptural injunctions. This
is the supreme excellence of rāgānuga-bhakti.
Nonetheless, when greed awakens it is essential to
investigate the scriptures and to meticulously carry out
the sādhana mentioned therein by which one’s objective
may be achieved.

Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī’s conclusions regarding the method for
performing rāgānuga-bhajana are stated in Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.294–5) as follows:

kṛṣṇaṁ smaran janaṁ cāsya

preṣṭhaṁ nija samīhitam

tat tat kathā rataś cāsau

kuryād vāsaṁ vraje sadā

One should constantly remember one’s dearest, eternally
fresh youth, Śrī Nanda-nandana, and the beloved
associates of Kṛṣṇa who are possessed of the identical
mood for which one aspires. One should always reside in
Śrī Vraja-dhāma with great attachment for hearing topics
regarding Kṛṣṇa and His devotees. If one is physically
unable to live in Vraja, one should do so mentally. This
is the method of rāgānuga-bhakti-sādhana.

sevā sādhaka-rūpeṇa

siddha-rūpeṇa cātra hi

tad-bhāva lipsunā kāryā

vraja-lokānusārataḥ

A sādhaka who has greed for rāgānuga-bhakti should serve
Śrī Kṛṣṇa both in the sādhaka-rūpa and the siddha-rūpa
in accordance with the profound sentiments of the
eternal residents of Vraja who possess the same mood for
which he aspires.

The sādhaka-rūpa refers to the physical body in which
one is presently situated, and the siddha-rūpa refers to
the internally contemplated spiritual form that is
suitable to serve Kṛṣṇa according to one’s cherished
desire. One should serve Śrī Kṛṣṇa in these two forms by
following (not imitating) under the guidance of Kṛṣṇa’s
beloved Śrī Rādhikā, Candrāvalī, Lalitā, Viśākhā, Rūpa
Mañjarī and others, as well as their followers such as

                            38
Manah-siksa.txt                                   5/5/2017

Śrī Rūpa, Śrī Sanātana and Śrī Raghunātha dāsa.

Asādhaka of the sentiment of servitude should serve in
accordance with the mood of Kṛṣṇa’s associates in dāsya-
bhāva such as Raktaka and Patraka. A sādhaka of sakhya-
bhāva should follow Śrīdāma, Subala and others. A
sādhaka of vātsalya-bhāva should serve according to the
mood of Śrī Nanda and Yaśodā. In the siddha-deha, the
perfected internal spiritual body, one should offer
mental services to Śrī Kṛṣṇa under the guidance of Śrī
Rādhā, Lalitā, Viśākhā, Rūpa Mañjarī, Rati Mañjarī and
others. In the sādhaka-rūpa, one’s physical body, one
should render physical service under the guidance of Śrī
Rūpa, Śrī Sanātana and others.

śravaṇotkīrtanādīni

vaidha-bhakty uditāni tu

yāny aṅgāni ca tānyatra

vijñeyāni manīṣibhiḥ

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.296)

The limbs of bhakti such as hearing, chanting and taking
shelter of a bona fide spiritual master, which have
already been described in regard to vaidhī-bhakti, are
also useful and necessary in rāgānuga-bhakti. But
judicious sādhakas will adopt only those limbs that
nourish their specific bhāva, avoiding those that hamper
it. A sādhaka who aspires for vraja-bhāva should not
undertake those limbs that are opposed to that mood.
These include the following: (1) ahaṅgrahopāsanā – to
consider oneself as non-different from the object of
worship; (2) mudrās – different procedures of
intertwining the fingers during worship; (3) nyāsa – the
breathing procedures known as prāṇāyāma; and (4)
meditation on Dvārakā and worship of Śrī Rukmiṇī and
other queens of Dvārakā.

After surpassing the stage of sādhana, one enters the
stage of bhāva, which is also known as rati. In his book
Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi (Sthāyibhāva, texts 57, 59–62),
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī describes rati as follows:

iyam eva ratiḥ prauḍhā

mahābhāva daśāṁ vrajet

yā mṛgyā syād vimuktānāṁ

bhaktānāṁ ca varīyasām

syād dṛḍheyaṁ ratiḥ premā

prodyan snehaḥ kramādayam

syān-mānaḥ praṇayo rāgo

’nurāgo bhāva ity api

bījam ikṣuḥ sa ca rasaḥ


                            39
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017

sa guḍaḥ khaṇḍa eva saḥ

sa śarkarā sitā sā ca

sā yathā syāt sitopalā

ataḥ prema-vilāsāḥ syur

bhāvāḥ snehādayas tu ṣaṭ

prāyo vyavahriyante ’mī

prema-śabdena sūribhiḥ

yasyā yādṛśa-jātīyaḥ

kṛṣṇe premābhyudañcati

tasyāṁ tādṛśa-jātīyaḥ

sa kṛṣṇasyāpy udīyate

Samartha-rati gradually matures and becomes transformed
into mahābhāva. Therefore liberated souls and the
topmost devotees strive to attain this rati. Rati
gradually intensifies into prema, which is known by
different names in accordance with the distinctive
character of each successive stage. It is thus
identified as prema, sneha, māna, praṇaya, rāga, anurāga
and bhāva. This development is compared to the
transformation of sugarcane seeds into sugarcane plants,
sugarcane juice, molasses, crude sugar, refined sugar,
sugar candy and rock candy. In this analogy rati is
compared to sugarcane seeds because it is the seed of
prema. Prema is compared to the sugarcane plant. Just as
all six stages from sugarcane juice to rock candy are
transformations of sugarcane only, all six stages from
sneha to bhāva are the distinctive transformations of
prema. Therefore learned authorities in the scriptures
use the word prema in a general sense to refer to all
six stages. It should be noted here that the particular
type of prema that Kṛṣṇa has for the heroines (nāyikās)
who are possessed of samartha-rati is exactly in
accordance with the type of prema that arises in their
hearts.

If one reflects in an unbiased and thoughtful manner,
then it must be concluded that the prema related to the
śṛṅgāra-rasa of Vraja is not found in other sampradāyas.
If at all it exists, it is only to a very limited
extent. Therefore Śrī Dāsa Gosvāmī has instructed the
sādhakas desirous of attaining vraja-bhāva to accept Śrī
Svarūpa Dāmodara, Śrī Rūpa, Śrī Sanātana and other
gosvāmīs, who are recipients of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s mercy, as instructing spiritual masters.

(2) Pratijanuḥ: Life after life

Rāgātmikā-bhakti, which possesses the characteristics of
prema, is perfected only after many lifetimes. If,
however, one receives the mercy of Bhagavān or His
devotees, it may be perfected quickly.



                           40
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017


Anuvṛtti



Those who want to perform bhajana, especially under the
guidance of our gosvāmīs, are instructed in Verse One to
develop unprecedented spiritual attachment (apūrva-rati)
for the spiritual master, the holy land of Vraja, the
residents of Vraja, the Vaiṣṇavas, the brāhmaṇas, one’s
mantras given at initiation and the holy name. This is
lobhamayī-bhakti, devotion full of greed. Apūrva-rati
begins from the initial stage of faith and goes up to
the elevated stage of bhāva. This is not ordinary
bhakti. In Verse Two the instruction is to live in Vraja
and perform pracura-sevā (abundant service) to the
Vrajavāsīs. “Abandon adharma and even dharma as enjoined
in the scriptures; now you should perform bhajana by
living in Vraja.”

In this verse it is said yadīccher āvāsam: if you have
the desire to perform bhajana life after life with
intense anurāga for the lotus feet of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa, then the most effective method is svarūpaṁ śrī
rūpaṁ sagaṇam iha tasyāgrajam api – you should weep and
call out to Svarūpa Dāmodara, Rāmānanda Rāya, Rūpa
Gosvāmī and Sanātana Gosvāmī, along with their
associates. They are eternal associates of the treasurer
of prema, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. You must always offer
obeisances to them every day. “O mind, I hold your feet
and pray to you to do the same.”

The word pratijanuḥ means “life after life”. This brings
up the following question, “By worshipping the Supreme
Lord, doesn’t the cycle of birth and death cease? Don’t
the devotees of Bhagavān try to stop this
transmigration?” Most people say that by performing
bhajana we shall be liberated from birth and death.
Bhakti is of three kinds: sādhana-bhakti, bhāva-bhakti
and prema-bhakti. Bhakti is full of nectar even from the
beginning of one’s bhajana; therefore the devotees do
not want to stop the cycle of birth and death until
their bhakti reaches its final perfection of full
maturity. Until then, they are prepared to take
thousands of births, live in Vraja, and try to perform
bhajana with love and devotion.

The devotee neither wants to merge in Brahman nor to
accept any other type of liberation. He wants to take
birth in Vraja and to attain the association of rasika
Vaiṣṇavas. Thus his faith reaches the stage of bhāva,
and that bhāva matures into prema. So until a devotee
attains the paragon of perfection in his bhakti, he does
not mind taking birth again and again. The bud of a rose
or lotus will not bloom into a flower if it is plucked
as a bud. The bud does not have fragrance, beauty and
nectar. All these characteristics come only when the bud
blooms into a flower. At that time the bumblebee starts
to visit the flower; similarly, a devotee does not mind
taking several births to perfect his bhakti until he
attains that prema which can control Kṛṣṇa and which
provides the eligibility to receive the direct darśana
of Kṛṣṇa. This bhakti is full of nectar, and a devotee
derives tremendous bliss by absorbing his mind in

                           41
Manah-siksa.txt                                 5/5/2017

bhakti-rasa. It gives pleasure to Kṛṣṇa, and
subsequently a devotee also feels that pleasure. The
paths of fruitive activity (karma), impersonal knowledge
(jñāna) and mystic yoga are very difficult, but bhajana
is full of bliss. Therefore the devotees of the Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇava sampradāya do not want to stop the cycle of
birth and death until they attain perfection.

Another question is raised, “Can one attain rāgānuga-
bhakti or residence in Vraja in rāgātmikā-bhakti by
taking initiation and instruction in any other
sampradāya? If someone has received the mantra of the
Rāmānuja, Madhva or any other sampradāya, will he get
vraja-bhāva after the maturity of his bhajana, or not?”
Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī says and Śrī Bhaktivinoda
Thākura explains that only the intimate associates of
the greatly munificent Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu are the
original treasurers and patrons of this topmost prema.
The most intimate, confidential and highly esoteric
mysteries of the method of rāgātmikā-bhakti to Śrī Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala were bestowed upon Svarūpa Dāmodara
and other intimate associates of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu; therefore only they can give this rare and
invaluable treasure of vraja-prema.

The word sarāgam means “to live in Vraja with rāga”.
What is rāga? The natural affection that the rāgātmikā
devotees have for Kṛṣṇa is known as rāga, and their
service is known as rāgātmikā-bhakti. Those who follow
these rāgātmikās are known as rāgānugas. This starts
from the initial stage of faith and goes even beyond
prema. For those who do not have such natural affection
yet want to perform bhakti, there is vaidhī-bhakti.
Their desire to perform bhakti is due to the regulation
of the scriptures.

Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda and my
spiritual master, Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī
Mahārāja, were not ordered by anyone to perform service
or bhajana. Their bhajana was natural and spontaneous.
One who is serving the spiritual master and the
Vaiṣṇavas, performing deity service, and engaging in
hearing, chanting and remembering the Lord without being
ordered to do so, has natural, spontaneous love and
affection (anurāga). One does not obtain this anurāga in
one lifetime. It is attained over the course of several
lifetimes. Pratijanu means “several lifetimes”. Vaidhī-
bhakti can be achieved quickly, but rāga-bhakti is
perfected after several lifetimes. For one small mistake
Bhārata Mahārāja4 had to take three lives. We are
committing many mistakes, not only with our bodies but
with our minds also, so we cannot help feeling that our
perfection will come after several lifetimes.




Verse Four




                           42
Manah-siksa.txt                                   5/5/2017

asad-vārtā-veśyā visṛja mati-sarvasva-haraṇīḥ

kathā mukti-vyāghryā na śṛṇu kila sarvātma-gilanīḥ

api tyaktvā lakṣmī-pati-ratim ito vyoma-nayanīm

vraje rādhā-kṛṣṇau sva-rati-maṇi-dau tvaṁ bhaja manaḥ



Anvaya

manaḥ – O mind; visṛja – abandon; asad-vārtā-veśyā – the
prostitute of contemptible mundane talk; haraṇīḥ –
plundering; sarvasva – all one’s wealth; mati – of pure
intelligence; kila – (and) unequivocally; na śṛṇu – do
not hear; kathāḥ – talk; mukti-vyāghryāḥ – of the
tigress of impersonal liberation; sarvātmā-gilanīḥ –
devouring the existence of the soul; tyaktvā – reject;
api – even; ratim – attachment; lakṣmī-pati – for Śrī
Nārāyaṇa, the husband of Lakṣmī; vyoma-nayanīm – leading
to Vaikuṇṭha in the paravyoma; itaḥ vraje – in this
Vraja-dhāma; tvam – you; bhaja – worship; rādhā-kṛṣṇau –
Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa; dau – bestowing; maṇi – the jewel; sva-
rati – of love for Them.



Translation

O my dear brother mind, please abandon altogether the
prostitute of contemptible mundane talk, which plunders
the entire treasure of pure wisdom. You must
unequivocally give up hearing all talk of impersonal
liberation which, like a tigress, devours your very
soul. Furthermore, please abandon even

the attachment to Lakṣmīpati Śrī Nārāyaṇa, which leads
to Vaikuṇṭha. You should live in Vraja and worship Śrī
Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, who bestow upon devotees the precious
jewel of love for Them.



Śrī Bhajana-darpaṇa-digdarśinī-vṛtti



This fourth verse describes various elements that
obstruct the attainment of prema.

(1) Mati-sarvasva-haraṇī asad-vārtā-veśyā: The
prostitute of mundane talk plunders the wealth of wisdom

Just as a prostitute deprives a debauchee of his riches,
mundane talks rob the living entity of his wealth of
good intelligence. Intelligence that is directed towards
spiritual attainment is the only treasure of the living
entity who has adopted the path of bhajana. Mundane
talks ruin such wisdom and turn it towards sense
enjoyment and liberation. Discussions of fleeting sense
enjoyment and any kind of connection with such topics
are asat, useless.


                           43
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017

Study of scriptures that bestow only temporary,
insignificant benefits, greed for wealth, and intimate
association with women or with men attached to women are
all asat. Householder Vaiṣṇavas who are selfishly
attached to their wives, and householders or renunciants
who associate with women on the pretext of sharing hari-
kathā, but with a lusty motive, are also included in the
category of asat. To pursue such useless objects with
great attachment is called asad-vārtā. Śrī Rāya
Rāmānanda, the chief associate of Śrīman Mahāprabhu, has
said the following about good intelligence (Padyāvalī
(14)):

kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasa-bhāvitā matiḥ

krīyatāṁ yadi kuto ’pi labhyate

tatra laulyam api mūlyam ekalaṁ

janma-koṭi-sukṛtair na labhyate

O men of virtue, if intelligence that is infused with
the mellows of devotion unto Lord Kṛṣṇa is available
anywhere, then buy it at once, without delay. The only
price to get it is an intense desire to obtain vraja-
rasa. Without this greed, it cannot be obtained even by
accumulating pious activities for millions of births.

(2) Sarvātma-gilanī mukti-vyāghryā kathā: Talk of
liberation is a tigress that devours the soul

The word mukti here refers to brahma-nirvāṇa, which is
also known as sāyujya-mukti, or merging into the Lord’s
bodily effulgence. Sāyujya-mukti very easily and
thoroughly consumes the individual spiritual existence
of the soul, or ātma-sattā. Although spiritual existence
is admitted in the conception of mukti, the idea that
the individual ātmā becomes the all-encompassing supreme
Brahman is misleading and phantasmagoric like a flower
in the sky. In reality it is the possessor of all
potencies, Śrī Bhagavān, who is the one and only Supreme
Absolute Truth.

The Supreme Lord has one eternal and supreme divine
potency, or para-śakti. This para-śakti serves the Lord
in various capacities. As the internal potency,
Yogamāyā, she manifests the transcendental pastimes of
Bhagavān. As the external potency, Mahāmāyā, she
produces both the unlimited material universes and the
gross and subtle material bodies of the conditioned
living entities. As the marginal potency, she manifests
the innumerable, infinitesimal living entities.

Those who are antagonistic to the eternal names, forms,
qualities and pastimes of Bhagavān imagine a state of
emancipation from the reactions of their fruitive
activities known as brahma-laya, or dissolution into
Brahman, which brings about annihilation of the
individual self. They derive some sort of pleasure by
discussing such so-called liberation. But the pleasure
of that liberation is exactly like that of a prisoner
who commits suicide in order to obtain everlasting
relief from material suffering. One should carefully
abandon all discussion of the methods of worship and

                           44
Manah-siksa.txt                                 5/5/2017

procedures for the attainment of such liberation, as
well as the association of persons who are intent upon
it. Just as a man-eating tigress consumes a man’s body,
the tigress of liberation devours the individual
existence of the soul. Therefore devotees of the Lord
consider impersonal liberation as equivalent to self-
annihilation.

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s conclusions on this subject are
stated in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.22, 25) as
follows:

bhukti-mukti-spṛhā

yāvat piśācī hṛdi vartate

tāvad bhakti-sukhasyātra

katham abhyudayo bhavet

śrī-kṛṣṇa-caraṇāmbhoja-

sevā-nirvṛta-cetasām

eṣāṁ mokṣāya bhaktānāṁ

na kadācit spṛhā bhavet

As long as the two witches of the desires for material
enjoy-ment and impersonal liberation remain within the
heart of the sādhaka, how can the happiness of unalloyed
devotion be awakened there? In other words, pure bhakti
can never arise in such an impure heart. Devotees whose
minds are immersed in the happiness of service to the
lotus feet of Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa do not have
even a scent of desire for liberation.

(3) Vyoma-nayanī lakṣmīpati-rati: Love for Lakṣmīpati
Nārāyaṇa leads to Vaikuṇṭha

The word vyoma or paravyoma here refers to Vaikuṇṭha-
dhāma. It is the abode of Lakṣmīpati Śrī Nārāyaṇa, who
is characterised by supreme opulence and majesty. By
attaining perfection in sādhana-bhakti directed towards
Śrīman Nārāyaṇa, one can get four kinds of liberation in
Vaikuṇṭha-dhāma: sārūpya (obtaining the same features
and form as the Lord), sāmīpya (living in the Lord’s
association), sālokya (living on the same planet as the
Lord) and sārṣṭi (having the same opulences as the
Lord). Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī’s conclusions on this subject
are stated in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.55–9) as
follows:

atra tyājyatayaivoktā

muktiḥ pañca-vidhāpi cet

sālokyādis tathāpy atra

bhaktyā nāti-virudhyate

sukhaiśvaryottarā seyaṁ

prema-sevottarety api

                            45
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017


sālokyādir-dvidhā tatra

nādyā sevājuṣāṁ matā

kintu premaika-mādhurya-

juṣa ekāntino harau

naivāṅgīkurvate jātu

muktiṁ pañca-vidhām api

tatrāpy ekāntināṁ śreṣṭhā

govinda-hṛta-mānasāḥ

yeṣāṁ śrīśa-prasādo ’pi

mano hartuṁ na śaknuyāt

siddhāntatas tv abhede ’pi

śrīśa-kṛṣṇa-svarūpayoḥ

rasenotkṛṣyate kṛṣṇa-

rūpam eṣā rasa-sthitiḥ

Though all five forms of liberation listed here are to
be disregarded by a pure devotee, the first four –
sārūpya, sāmīpya, sālokya and sārṣṭi – are not
altogether incompatible with bhakti. These four forms of
liberation are of two kinds: (1) sukhaiśvaryottarā –
liberation in which the individual desires his personal
pleasure from the grandeur and wealth of Vaikuṇṭha; and
(2) prema-sevottarā – liberation in which the dominant
desire is to serve the Lord for His pleasure. The first
of these, sukhaiśvaryottara-mukti, is not accepted by
devotees who are attached to the loving service of the
Lord, because it is tainted with the desire for self-
pleasure and enjoyment of the Lord’s opulence. The
second, prema-sevottara-mukti, is accepted by some
devotees, but even in this there remains a trace of
indirect desire for personal enjoyment. Consequently,
devotees who are fervently attached to the service of
the Lord consider even prema-sevottara-mukti to be
opposed to bhakti (which is characterised by unalloyed
loving service). Therefore exclusive devotees, who drink
deeply the mellow sweetness of prema-bhakti for Lord
Hari and whose only interest is to give pleasure to the
Lord, certainly do not accept any of the five forms of
liberation, even though they may be offered by the Lord
Himself.

Of all the exclusive devotees of the different
incarnations of the Supreme Lord, the parama-premātura-
bhaktas, those desirous of the highest prema, whose
hearts have been stolen by Śrī Nanda-nandana, are the
topmost. Even the grace of Lakṣmīpati Nārāyaṇa, the Lord
of the paravyoma, cannot attract their minds. Although
there is no difference between Śrī Nārāyaṇa and Śrī
Kṛṣṇa in terms of existential truth, Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s form is
superior due to the superexcellence of prema-rasa. The

                             46
Manah-siksa.txt                                   5/5/2017

very nature of rasa itself reveals the supreme
excellence of the form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The ultimate climax
of prema-rasa is found only in the condition of
mahābhāva. The only object for this kind of rasa is
Vrajendra-nandana – not Mahā-Nārāyaṇa or other
incarnations. Therefore even Lakṣmī, who is always
situated at the chest of Mahā-Nārāyaṇa, underwent severe
austerities in order to obtain this extraordinary
quality of rasa.

Śrī Haridāsa has expressed the following sentiment in
this regard (Padyāvalī (102)):

alaṁ tri-diva-vārtayā kim iti sārvabhauma-śriyā

vidūratara-vartinī bhavatu mokṣa-lakṣmīr api

kalinda-giri-nandinī-taṭa-nikuñja-puñjodare

mano harati kevalaṁ nava-tamāla-nīlaṁ mahaḥ

I have no use for talk about attaining the heavenly
planets, what to speak of acquiring sovereignty over the
entire Earth. Even the names Mokṣa (liberation) and
Lakṣmī (attainment of the opulent realm of Vaikuṇṭha)
afford me no pleasure. My mind is captivated only by
that cluster of bluish brilliance whose colour resembles
a young tamāla tree and who graces the groves situated
on the banks of the Yamunā.

(4) Sva-rati-maṇi-da: Bestowing the jewel of love for
Them

The Soul of all souls, Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, are the
bestowers of the jewel of ātma-rati. The infinitesimal
living entity is an eternal servant of Kṛṣṇa. The
spontaneous attraction for Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa that the jīva
experiences in his constitutional state is called ātma-
rati. Although this ātma-rati is eternally present in
the original identity (svarūpa) of the living entity, in
the conditioned state it remains covered by material
desires born of ignorance.

Śrī Ṝśvara Purī’s transcendental attraction is exemplary
in this regard (Padyāvalī (75)):

dhanyānāṁ hṛdi bhāsatāṁ girivara-pratyagra-kuñjaukasāṁ

satyānanda-rasaṁ vikāra-vibhava-vyāvṛttam antar-mahaḥ

asmākaṁ kila vallavī-rati-raso vṛndāṭavī-lālaso

gopaḥ ko ’pi mahendranīla-ruciraś citte muhuḥ krīḍatu

Those fortunate pure souls, the non-dualistic brahma-
jñānīs, dwelling in the secluded forests of the
Himalayas, may experience indescribable transcendental
bliss within their hearts as a festival of perfect
mental equilibrium and freedom from all anxiety. Let
them do so; I have no use for that. Indeed, always
sporting within my heart is an eternally youthful
cowherd boy whose complexion is more enticing than a
blue sapphire, who is the embodiment of rasa imbued with
love for the gopīs, and who exhibits playful sportive

                           47
Manah-siksa.txt                                 5/5/2017

pastimes in Vṛndāvana.

Śrī Mādhavendra Purī’s firm attachment is also very
beautifully expressed (Padyāvalī (76)):

rasaṁ praśaṁsantu kavitva-niṣṭhā

brahmāmṛtaṁ veda-śiro-niviṣṭāḥ

vayaṁ tu guñjā-kalitāvataṁsaṁ

gṛhīta-vaṁśaṁ kam api śrayāmaḥ

Let the poets extol the sweet taste of poetry. Let the
Vedic scholars extensively eulogise the nectar of
Brahman realisation. I myself will take shelter of a
youthful cowherd boy who is decorated with a garland of
guñjā berries and other ornaments and who holds a flute
to His blossoming lips.

Śrī Kaviratna also states (Padyāvalī (78)):

jātu prārthayate na pārthiva-padaṁ naindre pade modate

sandhate na ca yoga-siddhiṣu dhiyaṁ mokṣaṁ ca nākāṅkṣati

kālindī-vana-sīmani sthira-taḍin-megha-dyutau kevalaṁ

śuddhe brahmaṇi vallavī-bhuja-latā-baddhe mano dhāvati

My mind never hankers to become emperor, nor can it
derive any pleasure from the post of Indra. It is unable
to enlist the intelligence in seeking the mystic
perfections, nor aspire for liberation. My mind runs
only in pursuit of that indescribable, pure Brahman who
is embraced by the creeper-like arms of the gopīs, and
who thus resembles a lustrous fresh raincloud interlaced
with steady streaks of lightning in the Vṛndāvana forest
on the banks of the Yamunā.

Śrī Mādhavendra Purī expresses a similar glorious
sentiment (Padyāvalī (96)):

anaṅga-rasa-cāturī-capala-cāru-netrāñcalaś

calan-makara-kuṇḍala-sphurita-kānti-gaṇḍa-sthalaḥ

vrajollasita-nāgarī-nikara-rāsa-lāsyotsukaḥ

sa me sapadi mānase sphuratu ko ’pi gopālakaḥ

Alas! May that extraordinary cowherd boy soon appear
within the temple of my heart, who is cunning in the art
of amorous affairs, who casts sidelong glances from the
corners of His charming, restless eyes, whose cheeks
reflect the glittering radiance of His trembling makara-
shaped5 earrings, and who is extremely anxious to enjoy
the rāsa dance with the blissful gopīs of Vraja.

Only by the worship of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala in Vraja
is this jewel of rati, ecstatic love for Them, awakened
within one’s heart. Upon receiving further nourishment,
it is promoted to the stage of mahābhāva.


                           48
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017



Anuvṛtti



There are two types of instruction regarding the
performance of bhajana: one is prescription (vidhi) and
the other is prohibition (niṣedha). Both are necessary.
“Always remember Kṛṣṇa and never forget Him.” This is
the primary injunction of all the Vedas, and all other
injunctions are subordinate to this. Always remember
Kṛṣṇa is vidhi, and never forget Kṛṣṇa is niṣedha. Also,
“Accept whatever is favourable for bhakti, and reject
that which is unfavourable.” Actually, we do not have
the qualification to know what is really favourable and
what is not; but we can find out from elevated devotees
and the scriptures. Mundane talk is niṣedha. We have
been warned not to engage in worldly talks. Grāmya-kathā
nā śunibe, grāmya-vārtā nā kahibe (Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta (Antya-līlā 6.236)): Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
instructed Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī to avoid grāmya-
kathā, which literally means “village talk”. Grāmya
means dharma (mundane religiosity), artha (economic
development), kāma (sense gratification) and mokṣa
(liberation). The spiritual master and the Vaiṣṇavas,
being very merciful, bestow upon us this power of
discernment.

Asad-vārtā-veśyā – “The worst impediment in the realm of
bhakti is mundane talk; therefore never gossip –
instead, always speak about bhakti.” This instruction
was given to Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī by Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, and the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam also decries
mundane conversation and advises one to keep away from
it. A mind that is polluted is a great impediment in
bhakti, and so Caitanya Mahāprabhu has said ceto-
darpaṇa-mārjanam – one should cleanse the mirror of the
mind through the chanting of the holy name.

The mind itself is a storehouse of pollution. It is
formed by the activities performed in previous
lifetimes. It carries the impressions of all the good
and bad actions performed by a person through countless
lifetimes. These impressions are to be cleansed away by
the chanting of the holy name as advised by Mahāprabhu.
One cannot perform bhajana with a mind that is under the
grip of the qualities of material nature. One must get
rid of the qualities of passion and ignorance. The
quality of goodness has some virtues in it, like good
behaviour, respect of elders, and so on, but there is no
bhajana. A little bit of goodness has to be accepted for
normal daily life, but later on it should also be given
up because it comes under the jurisdiction of material
nature. All three qualities are contaminated and provoke
one to sense enjoyment. Bhakti cannot flourish in such a
mind.

The effect of bad association pollutes the mind and
ruins bhakti. The association of materialistic people,
of those who associate with women and of impersonalists
is harmful for an aspirant of pure bhakti. When one’s
mind is attracted to speaking about useless topics, one
becomes implicated in the blasphemy of the spiritual

                           49
Manah-siksa.txt                                 5/5/2017

master and the Vaiṣṇavas and finally Kṛṣṇa, and he thus
falls down from the path of bhakti. Do not indulge in
idle talk even for a minute. This will displace bhakti
from the heart and destroy the seed of rati, ecstatic
love.

One gets this rare seed of ecstatic love by associating
with advanced devotees, and such association is received
by the accumulation of pious merit (sukṛti) over
millions of lifetimes. A person who smokes or drinks
liquor can be delivered in some lifetime, but one who
indulges in idle talk cannot be saved in any life. One
person smokes tobacco and takes intoxicants, and another
person embezzles the money of Vaiṣṇavas and the deities
– whose sins are more serious? A smoker will give up
smoking in some lifetime, but all future lives of the
second person are ruined.

In Jaiva-dharma Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Thākura mentions an
incident wherein Paramahaṁsa Bābājī forbids Sannyāsī
Thākura to change his dress and says, “Learn some
Vaiṣṇava philosophy, imbibe the qualities of a Vaiṣṇava,
and change your mind. Dress is external and can be
changed at any time in a minute.”

The wicked and evil nature of the mind is very
detrimental to bhakti. Asad-vārtā is the mother of all
nonsense talk, and therefore one should give it up with
sincere efforts. Any speech that derides the service of
the spiritual master, the Vaiṣṇavas and Kṛṣṇa is asad-
vārtā or grāmya-vārtā, which destroys the inclination
and resolve for bhakti. This resolve is known as mati.
Which mati? Kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasa-bhāvitā matiḥ – that
resolve which is enthused by the taste of the liquid
mellows of devotion unto Lord Kṛṣṇa. This resolve seems
very small, but it is the seed of the creeper of
devotion, which develops through the stages of niṣṭhā,
ruci, āsakti, bhāva, prema, and further up to mahābhāva.
Protect this creeper very carefully and do not let it
wither. This resolve that “I will perform bhajana” comes
by the association of Vaiṣṇavas. This resolve is very
rare and precious like a cintāmaṇi gem. Its creeper
grows up to Goloka Vṛndāvana and produces the fruit of
prema, so prevent it from being destroyed at any cost.

The desire to lead an easy and comfortable life is the
real impediment. We want all the activities of our daily
life like eating, sleeping, travelling and so on to be
comfortable not only today, but every day and even in
the future. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu advised Raghunātha
dāsa Gosvāmī to give up such comforts (Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta (Antya-līlā 6.236)): “bhāla nā khāibe āra
bhāla nā paribe – do not eat palatable food or dress
very nicely.” We remain in anxiety to fulfil these asat
desires. Give up all this. If we are cooking for the
deity but with a desire to enjoy the result later on,
this also comes under the classification of asad-vārtā.
The mind is a cheater; it cheats in many ways. Always
remain very alert to save yourself from all kinds of
asad-vārtā.

Mukti, liberation, is like a tigress. Even the talk of
liberation is very dangerous. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Thākura
says that the word mukti means brahma-nirvāṇa or

                           50
Manah-siksa.txt                                 5/5/2017

sāyujya-mukti, which can devour the very existence of
the soul. In this definition, the word ātmā refers not
only to the soul but to the body, mind and intelligence
to perform devotion unto the Supreme Lord. If there is
no soul, there cannot be bhajana. “We want escape from
miseries and relief from birth and death. This can be
attained by sāyujya-mukti.” We do not want the
sufferings and miseries of life, and therefore all
ācāryas have thought about liberation. Relief from
material existence is the greatest liberation, and a
Vaiṣṇava attains this very easily by bhakti. If we
obtain bhakti, then liberation is attained
automatically. We need not endeavour for liberation
separately, while others strive very hard to obtain
liberation.

It is believed that mukti bestows brahma-sattā, or that
one merges into Brahman. This is absurd. It is like
being possessed by a ghost, a bhūta,6 and therefore they
say brahma-“bhūtaḥ” prasannātmā. In reality Kṛṣṇa is
all-powerful; He is the Supreme Absolute Truth. He has
one para-śakti or svarūpa-śakti. This potency manifests
all the dhāmas of Vaikuṇṭha. The mundane jaḍa-śakti,
which is the shadow of para-śakti, manifests the
material world, and the taṭastha-śakti manifests the
living entities. Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the original potency
and the source of all other potencies.

The desire to please Bhagavān and His associates, the
spiritual master and the Vaiṣṇavas comes in bhakti.
Besides this, any other desire for self-enjoyment or the
desire to go to Vaikuṇṭha and enjoy the opulence there
does not come under the heading of bhakti. One has to
undertake all kinds of efforts for Kṛṣṇa: akhila-ceṣṭā-
parāyaṇa – one should be intent to carry out all one’s
endeavours for the sake of Kṛṣṇa. Do not delay; start
this right now.




Verse Five




asac-ceṣṭā-kaṣṭa-prada-vikaṭa-pāśālibhir iha

prakāmaṁ kāmādi-prakaṭa-pathapāti-vyatikaraiḥ

gale baddhvā hanye ’ham iti bakabhid vartmapa-gaṇe

kuru tvaṁ phutkārān avati sa yathā tvāṁ mana itaḥ



Anvaya

manaḥ – O mind; iha – in this material existence;
prakaṭa-pathapāti-vyatikaraiḥ – the assembled aggressors
on the open road; kāmādi – of lust, anger and so on;
gale baddhvā – binding the neck; prakāmam –

                           51
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017

licentiously; kaṣṭa-prada-vikaṭa-pāśālibhiḥ – with the
torturous, dreadful ropes; asac-ceṣṭā – of wicked deeds;
hanye – are killing; aham – me; iti – (speaking) thus;
tvam – you; kuru – loudly; phutkārān – call out;
vartmapa-gaṇe – to the Vaiṣṇavas, the protectors of the
path; bakabhid – of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the killer of Baka; yathā
– as a result of which; saḥ – those devotees; avati –
(will) protect; tvām – you; itaḥ – from their hands.



Translation

“Lust, anger and so on are a band of dacoits who assail
one suddenly on the open road of material life. They
have bound my neck licentiously with the torturous,
dreadful ropes of wicked deeds and are thus killing me.”
O mind, speaking in this way, you must grievously cry
out to the powerful and merciful devotees who are the
protectors of the path of devotion leading to Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
the killer of Bakāsura. Hearing your piteous cry, they
will surely protect you from such a condition.



Śrī Bhajana-darpaṇa-digdarśinī-vṛtti



(1) Kāmādi-prakaṭa-pathapāti-vyatikara: Lust etc. – the
assembled aggressors on the open road

Lust, anger, greed, illusion, pride and envy are six
dacoits on the open road of material life. The word
vyatikara means “meeting together”. Having assembled
together, these six dacoits assail their victims on the
path of material life. In Bhagavad-gītā (2.62–3) we find
the following statement regarding lust, anger and so on:

dhyāyato viṣayān puṁsaḥ

saṅgas teṣūpajāyate

saṅgāt sañjāyate kāmaḥ

kāmāt krodho ’bhijāyate

krodhād bhavati sammohaḥ

sammohāt smṛti-vibhramaḥ

smṛti-bhraṁśād buddhi-nāśo

buddhi-nāśāt praṇaśyati

While contemplating the objects of the senses, a person
develops attachment for them; from such attachment, lust
to enjoy those objects is aroused. From lust that is
impeded, anger arises. From anger, delusion arises; and
from delusion, bewilderment of memory. From bewilderment
of memory, intelligence – or in other words jñāna-śakti,
the faculty of wisdom – is vanquished. When intelligence
is vanquished, one becomes immersed in material
enjoyment once again. In this way one becomes entrapped

                             52
Manah-siksa.txt                                 5/5/2017

in the cycle of material existence and suffers the
results of one’s worldly activities.

Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhuṣaṇa has explained the meaning of
these verses in his commentary known as Gītā-bhūṣaṇa-
bhāṣya as follows:

vijitendriyasyāpi mayyaniveśita-manasaḥ punar anartho
durbāra ityāha – dhyāyata iti dvyābhyām. viṣayān
śabdādīn sukha-hetutva buddhyā dhyāyataḥ punaḥ punaś
cintayato yoginas teṣu saṅga āsaktir bhavati; saṅgād
dhetos teṣu kāma-tṛṣṇā jāyate; kāmāc ca kenacit
pratihatāt krodhaḥ citta-jvālas tat pratighātako
bhavati. (62) krodhāt sammohaḥ kāryākārya-viveka-
vijñāna-vilopaḥ; sammohāt smṛter indriya-vijayādi-
prayatnānusandher vibhramo vibhraṁśa; smṛti-bhraṁśād
buddher ātma-jñānārthakasyādhya-vasāyasya nāśaḥ; buddhi-
nāśāt praṇaśyati punar viṣaya-bhoga-nimagno bhavati
saṁsaratītyarthaḥ – mad anāśra-yaṇād durbalaṁ manas tāni
sva-viṣayair yojayantīti bhāvaḥ. tathā ca mano-
vijigīṣuṇā mad upāsanaḥ vidheyam. (63)

It is absolutely impossible to become free from the
anarthas of lust, anger and so on solely by restraining
the mind through the cultivation of impersonal
knowledge, practice of mystic yoga and performance of
austerities, without fixing the mind on the lotus feet
of Bhagavān. When one considers the objects of the
senses – namely form, taste, smell, touch and sound – to
be sources of happiness, one constantly meditates upon
them within the mind. By so doing, even great yogīs
develop attachment to them. Attachment leads to the
desire for enjoyment. When enjoyment is obstructed, then
anger arises.

From anger, delusion arises, which here refers to the
loss of intelligence or wisdom by which one
discriminates between what is to be done and what is not
to be done. From this delusion, memory is bewildered,
which means that one is deviated from the attempt to
conquer the senses. When memory is bewildered,
intelligence is vanquished. This means that the
cultivation of knowledge of self-realisation (ātma-
jñāna) is destroyed. Finally, when intelligence is
destroyed, there is total extinction, or praṇaśyati. The
word praṇaśyati used here means that one becomes
immersed once again in sensual enjoyment.

The conclusion is that it is impossible to conquer the
irrepressible mind without taking shelter of Śrī
Bhagavān. The uncontrolled mind is the root cause of all
severe anarthas. Therefore those who are desirous of
controlling the mind must certainly worship the Supreme
Lord. This is the principal and exclusive duty of all
living entities.

(2) Asac-ceṣṭā-kaṣṭa-prada-vikaṭa-pāśa: The torturous,
dreadful ropes of wicked deeds

The living entity is bound by the neck with the painful,
fearful ropes of wicked deeds enacted by the above-
mentioned six enemies of lust, anger and so on.

(3) Bakabhid-vartmapa-gaṇa: The protectors of the path

                           53
Manah-siksa.txt                                   5/5/2017

leading to the killer of Bakāsura

The word bakabhid refers to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is the killer
of the demon Baka, the personification of duplicity. The
word vartma means “a path”, or in other words the path
of the cultivation of love for Kṛṣṇa. The suffix pa
means “a guardian or protector”, which here refers to
the Vaiṣṇavas. The purport is that to save oneself from
the aforementioned impediments, one should cry piteously
and call upon the Vaiṣṇavas, because they are the
guardians and protectors on the path of cultivating
kṛṣṇa-prema. These powerful, most merciful Vaiṣṇavas
will certainly protect you upon hearing your piteous
cry.

Śrī Rāmānujācārya prays as follows (Padyāvalī (52)):

prahlāda-nārada-parāśara-puṇḍarīka-

vyāsāmbarīṣa-śuka-śaunaka-bhīṣma-dālbhyān

rukmāṅgadoddhava-vibhīṣaṇa-phālgunādīn

puṇyān imān parama-bhāgavatān namāmi

I offer my respectful obeisances to the great saintly
devotees of the Lord headed by Prahlāda, Nārada,
Parāśara, Puṇḍarīka, Vyāsa, Ambarīṣa, Śuka, Śaunaka,
Bhīṣma, Dālbhya, Rukmāṅgada, Uddhava, Vibhīṣaṇa and
Arjuna.

The devotee poet Śrī Sarvajña, who is full of faith in
the devotees, describes their condition as follows
(Padyāvalī (56)):

tvad-bhaktaḥ saritām patiṁ culukavat khadyotavad
bhāskaraṁ

meruṁ paśyati loṣṭravat kim aparaṁ bhūmeḥ patiṁ
bhṛtyavat

cintāratna-cayaṁ śilā-śakalavat kalpa-drumaṁ kāṣṭhavat

saṁsāraṁ tṛṇa-rāśivat kim aparaṁ dehaṁ nijaṁ bhāravat

O Bhagavān, Your devotees consider the ocean to be a
mere puddle, the sun a firefly, Mount Meru a clump of
earth, a powerful emperor of the world an insignificant
servant, a pile of cintāmaṇi jewels mere fragments of
stone, a wish-fulfilling kalpadruma tree an ordinary
stick, and the entire world a bunch of straw. What more
can be said? In separation from You, they consider their
own bodies to be heavy burdens.

Śrī Mādhava Sarasvatī explains further (Padyāvalī (57)):

mīmāṁsā-rajasā malīmasa-dṛśāṁ tāvan na dhīr īśvare

garvodarka-kutarka-karkaśa-dhiyāṁ dūre ’pi vārtā hareḥ

jānanto ’pi na jānate śruti-sukhaṁ śrī-raṅgi-saṅgād ṛte

su-svāduṁ pariveśayanty api rasaṁ gurvī na darvī spṛśet


                           54
Manah-siksa.txt                                 5/5/2017

Those whose eyes of wisdom have been sullied by the dust
of mīmāṁsā philosophy, which promotes only karma-kāṇḍa,
cannot fix their intelligence on Bhagavān. Those whose
intelligence has become stiffened by fallacious
arguments, whose ultimate end is but pride, have no
interest in hearing narrations of Your pastimes. Even
learned scholars of the Vedas who are devoid of
attachment to Śrī Kṛṣṇa are unable to know the actual
conclusion of the Vedas. They are exactly like long-
handled ladles that serve out delicious food but remain
bereft of the sweet taste.

The glories of associating with devotees are described
in Śrī Hari-bhakti-sudhodaya (quoted in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindhu (1.2.229)):

yasya yat saṅgatiḥ puṁso

maṇivat syāt sa tad-guṇaḥ

sva-kūlarddhyai tato dhīmān

sva-yūthyān eva saṁśrayet

The influence of like-minded association is demonstrated
in the following example: as a crystal reflects the
colour of nearby objects, so also does a person imbibe
the qualities of those with whom he associates.
Therefore intelligent persons should associate with
like-minded, respectable individuals in order to
increase the prestige of their families.

The purport of this verse is that the contamination of
the heart cannot be eradicated by dry renunciation, the
cultivation of impersonal knowledge, the practise of
mystic yoga or the performance of austerities. It is
only by the influence of association with Vaiṣṇavas who
are free from all pride and upon the attainment of their
mercy that the heart very easily becomes cleansed of all
misgivings.




Verse Six




are cetaḥ prodyat-kapaṭa-kuṭināṭī-bhara-khara

kṣaran-mūtre snātvā dahasi katham ātmānam api mām

sadā tvaṁ gāndharvā-giridhara-pada-prema-vilasat

sudhāmbhodhau snātvā svam api nitarāṁ māṁ ca sukhaya



Anvaya

are – O; cetaḥ – mind; snātvā – bathing; kṣaran-mūtre –

                              55
Manah-siksa.txt                                 5/5/2017

in the trickling urine; bhara-khara – of the great
donkey; prodyat – of fully developed; kapaṭa – deceit;
kuṭināṭī – (and) hypocrisy; katham – why; dahasi – are
you burning; ātmānam – yourself; mām api – and me also;
tvam – you; sadā – always; snātvā – bathing; sudhā-
ambhodhau – in the ocean of nectar; vilasat – arising;
pada-prema – from love born of the feet; gāndharvā-
giridhara – of Śrī Rādhā-Giridhārī; sukhaya – delight;
svam – yourself; ca – and; mām api – me also; nitarām –
thoroughly.



Translation

[In spite of having subdued the enemies of lust and
anger, one may not have conquered the great enemy of
deceit. This verse instructs us how to gain victory over
this powerful enemy.] O wicked mind, although you adopt
the path of sādhana, you imagine yourself purified by
bathing in the trickling urine of the great donkey of
full-blown deceit and hypocrisy. By doing so, you are
simultaneously burning yourself and scorching me, a tiny
jīva. Stop this! Delight yourself and me by eternally
bathing in the nectarean ocean of pure love for the
lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala.



Śrī Bhajana-darpaṇa-digdarśinī-vṛtti



(1) Prodyat-kapaṭa-kuṭināṭī-bhara-khara-kṣaran-mūtre
snātvā: Bathing in the trickling urine of the great
donkey of full-blown deceit and hypocrisy

The overt deceit and hypocrisy that are present in a
devotee even after adopting the path of sādhana are
compared to the urine of a donkey. Considering oneself
to be intently engaged in bhajana while remaining
devious and hypocritical at heart is like considering
oneself pure by bathing in the filthy, burning urine of
a donkey. A sādhaka should carefully abandon this
pitfall.

There are three kinds of bhakti-sādhaka: (1)
pariniṣṭhita, (2) svaniṣṭha and (3) nirapekṣa. The
pariniṣṭhita-sādhaka completely discards the rules and
prohibitions prescribed within varṇāśrama and endeavours
incessantly simply to please Bhagavān Śrī Hari. The
svaniṣṭha-sādhaka performs all his activities in
accordance with the rules and prohibitions laid down for
the service and attendance of Bhagavān. Both these types
of sādhakas are householders (gṛhasthas). The nirapekṣa-
sādhaka is a renunciant. All three are benefited only
when

they become thoroughly honest. Otherwise, by resorting
to deceitfulness, they are surely vanquished. The
hypocrisy demonstrated by these three is described
below.

(1) Deceit of the pariniṣṭhita-sādhaka: (a) indulging in

                           56
Manah-siksa.txt                                 5/5/2017

sense enjoyment on the pretext of sādhana-bhakti, (b)
serving wealthy and influential materialists instead of
unpretentious devotees, (c) accumulating wealth beyond
one’s needs, (d) having great enthusiasm for futile,
temporary enterprises, (e) indulging in illogical
arguments on the pretext of cultivating knowledge and
(f) adopting the dress of a renunciant to get material
prestige.

(2) Deceit of the svaniṣṭha-sādhaka: (a) making an
external show of strict adherence to rules and
regulations but remaining inwardly attached to material
subjects and (b) preferring the association of
philanthropists, mundane scholars, yogīs and
materialistic people to that of resolute, loving
devotees.

(3) Deceit of the nirapekṣa-sādhaka: (a) maintaining
pride by thinking oneself to be an elevated Vaiṣṇava,
(b) adopting the dress of a renunciant and, due to false
ego, regarding other sādhakas as inferior, (c)
accumulating wealth and materials beyond the basic
necessities of life, (d) associating with women on the
pretext of sādhana, (e) keeping close contact with
materialistic people with the intention of collecting
funds and donations instead of going to the temple, (f)
worrying about collecting funds on the pretext of
performing bhajana and (g) enfeebling one’s attachment
for Kṛṣṇa by attributing importance and respect merely
to the external dress and symbols of the renounced order
and by being overly attached to the rules and
regulations of renunciation.

Therefore the defects of mundane arguments (kutarka),
false philosophical conclusions (kusiddhānta) and
impediments to advancement (anarthas), all arising from
deceit in the domain of bhajana, have been compared to
the urine of a donkey. Many sādhakas consider themselves
purified by bathing in this unholy urine of the donkey
of deceit, but in reality it only consumes their soul.

(2) Gāndharvā-giridhara-pada-prema-vilasat-sudhāmbhodhau
snātvā: Bathing in the nectarean ocean of love for the
lotus feet of Śrī Gāndharvā-Giridhārī

Gāndharvā refers to Śrīmatī Rādhikā, who is the internal
potency (svarūpa-śakti) of Bhagavān. Giridhara refers to
the Supreme Person, Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is
the possessor of all potency (sarva-śaktimān). One is
here advised to bathe in the ocean of nectar that
consists of viśuddha-cid-vilāsa, or divine spiritual
transformations born of love for the lotus feet of the
eternally youthful Divine Couple.

Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī himself prays in this regard in Śrī
Prārthanā-paddhati (Stava-mālā):

śuddha-gāṅgeya-gaurāṅgīṁ

kuraṅgī-laṅgimekṣaṇām

jita-koṭīndu-bimbāsyām

ambudāmbara-samvṛtām(1)

                           57
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017


O Vṛndāvaneśvarī, Śrī Rādhikā, the complexion of Your
limbs is like molten gold. Your eyes are as charming as
the restless, elongated eyes of a doe. Your face defeats
the brilliance of millions of moons. You are gracefully
dressed in a blue sārī the colour of a fresh cloud.

navīna-ballavī-vṛnda-

dhammillottphulla-mallikām

divya-ratnādy-alaṅkāra-

sevyamāna-tanu-śriyam(2)

You are the crowning garland of jasmine flowers on the
decorated braided hair of the young gopīs of Vraja. Your
limbs are splendidly adorned with divine jewels and
other ornaments.

vidagdha-maṇḍala-guruṁ

guṇa-gaurava-maṇḍitām

ati-preṣṭha-vayasyābhir

aṣṭābhir abhiveṣṭitām (3)

You are the best amongst all the elegant and dexterous
gopīs. You are ornamented with unlimited transcendental
virtues and eminence. You are surrounded by the eight
principal sakhīs, who are most dear to You.

cañcalāpāṅga-bhaṅgena

vyākulī-kṛta-keśavām

goṣṭhendra-suta-jīvātu-

ramya-bimbādharāmṛtām(4)

You agitate Kṛṣṇa by Your compelling sidelong glances.
The nectar of Your beautiful bimba-fruit lips is the
life-giving elixir for Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

tvām asau yācate natvā

viluṭhan yamunā-taṭe

kākubhir-vyākula-svānto

jano vṛndāvaneśvari (5)

O Śrīmatī Rādhikā, rolling on the ground by the bank of
the Yamunā with an agitated heart, I humbly appeal to
You out of despair.

kṛtāgaske ’py ayogye ’pi

jane ’smin kumatāv api

dāsya-dāna-pradānasya

lavam apy upapādaya (6)

                             58
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017


Even though I am an offender, unqualified in all
respects, and have crooked intelligence, I beg You to
make me fortunate by bestowing upon me even the smallest
service at Your lotus feet.

yuktas tvayā jano naiva

duḥkhito ’yam upekṣitum

kṛpā-dyota-drava-citta-

navanītāsi yat sadā (7)

O most merciful one, it is not fitting for You to
neglect this anguished person, for Your butter-like
tender heart is always melting with compassion.

In his Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Mādhavayor nāma-yugāṣṭakam (Stava-
mālā), Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī has written:

rādhā-mādhavayor etad

vakṣye nāma-yugāṣṭakam

rādhā-dāmodarau pūrvaṁ

rādhikā-mādhavau tataḥ (1)

Now I will sing this prayer that consists of eight
verses glorifying the names of the Divine Couple, Śrī
Rādhā-Mādhava. First I will sing the praise of Śrī
Rādhā-Dāmodara and then of Śrī Rādhikā-Mādhava.

vṛṣabhānu-kumārī ca

tathā gopendra-nandanaḥ

govindasya priya-sakhī

gāndharvā-bāndhavas tathā (2)

Śrīmatī Rādhikā is Vṛṣabhānu-kumārī, the young daughter
of King Vṛṣabhānu, and Śrī Kṛṣṇa is Gopendra-nandana,
the son of the king of the cowherds. She is the dearmost
friend of Govinda, and He is the dearest friend of
Gāndharvā, Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

nikuñja-nāgarau goṣṭa-

kiśora-jana-śekharau

vṛndāvanādhipau kṛṣṇa-

vallabhā-rādhikā-priyau(3)

She is Nikuñja-nāgarī, the heroine of the groves of
Vraja, and He is Nikuñja-nāgara, the hero. She is
mukuṭa-maṇi, the crown jewel of all the graceful maidens
of Vraja, and He is śirobhūṣaṇa, the head-ornament of
all handsome youths. She is adhiṣṭhātrī, the presiding
goddess of Vṛndāvana, and He is adhīśvara, the presiding
chief. She is Kṛṣṇa-vallabhā, the lover of Kṛṣṇa, and He
is Rādhā-vallabha, the lover of Rādhā.

                             59
Manah-siksa.txt                                   5/5/2017


I will live in Vraja with great love, glorifying the
names of my beloved Divine Couple and remembering Their
eternal eightfold daily pastimes (aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā)
within my heart. By doing so, O mind, when will I be
submerged and cause you to become submerged in the
nectarean ocean of the variegated manifestations of love
for the lotus feet of Śrī Gāndharvā-Giridhara?




Verse Seven




pratiṣṭhāśā dhṛṣṭā śvapaca-ramaṇī me hṛdi naṭet

kathaṁ sādhu-premā spṛśati śucir etan nanu manaḥ

sadā tvaṁ sevasva prabhu-dayita-sāmantam atulaṁ

yathā tāṁ niṣkāśya tvaritam iha taṁ veśayati saḥ



Anvaya

manaḥ – O mind; āśā – the desire; pratiṣṭhā – for
prestige; dhṛṣṭā – an audacious; śvapaca-ramaṇī –
outcaste woman from the tribe of dog-eaters; naṭet – if
she dances; me hṛdi – in my heart; katham – (then) how;
nanu – indeed; śuciḥ – pure; sādhu-premā – divine love;
spṛśati – can touch; etat – that heart; tvam –
(therefore) you; sadā – always; sevasva – serve; atulam
– the incomparable; dayita – beloved; sāmantam –
commanders (of the army); prabhu – of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa;
yathā – so that; saḥ – they; tvaritam – quickly;
niṣkāsya – expelling; tām – that (outcaste dog-eater);
veśayati – cause to enter; tam – that (divine love); iha
– in this heart.



Translation

[Why is it that deceit still lingers in the heart
despite one’s having given up all material sense
enjoyment? This verse has been composed in order to
answer this question.] O mind, how can pure divine love
appear in my heart as long as the shameless dog-eating,
outcaste woman of the desire for prestige is audaciously
dancing there? Therefore always remember and serve the
immeasurably powerful commanders of the army of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, the beloved devotees of the Lord. They will at
once banish this outcaste woman and initiate the flow of
immaculate vraja-prema in your heart.



Śrī Bhajana-darpaṇa-digdarśinī-vṛtti

                           60
Manah-siksa.txt                                   5/5/2017




(1) Dhṛṣṭā śvapaca-ramaṇī pratiṣṭhāśā: The desire for
prestige is an audacious, dog-eating, outcaste woman

The desire for honour and distinction is called
pratiṣṭhāśā. Although all other anarthas may be
dispelled, the desire for prestige is not easily
removed. From this, all kinds of deceit and hypocrisy
arise and are gradually nourished. The desire for
prestige is called shameless, for although it is the
root of all anarthas, it fails to acknowledge its own
fault. It is also called cāṇḍālinī, a female dog-eater,
for it is engaged in eating the dogmeat of fame.

The svaniṣṭha-sādhaka mentioned in the previous verse
yearns to be recognised as virtuous, benevolent and free
from all sin. The pariniṣṭhita-sādhaka thinks, “I am a
devotee of Bhagavān, I understand things clearly, and
I’m uninterested in material enjoyment.” In this way he
nourishes the desire to expand his fame. The nirapekṣa-
sādhaka thinks, “I am a strict renunciant, I have
perfectly understood the conclusions of the scriptures,
and my bhakti has come to the perfectional stage.” In
this way he maintains the desire for prestige.

As long as the desire for honour and distinction has not
been driven from the heart, deceit will remain; and
until one becomes free from deceit, he cannot obtain
pure, unalloyed divine love.

(2) Nirmala-sādhu-prema: Immaculate divine love

In this regard, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī has expressed the
following conclusion in Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.4.1):

samyaṅ masṛṇita-svānto

mamatvātiśayāṅkitaḥ

bhāvaḥ sa eva sāndrātmā

budhaiḥ premā nigadyate

When bhāva-bhakti deepens and matures, the sādhaka’s
heart becomes completely soft and melted. At that time
the devotee experiences the supreme exultation of
transcendental bliss and awakens an overwhelming sense
of possessiveness (mamatā) towards Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Learned
authorities describe this condition as prema.

(3) Prabhu-dayita-atula-sāmanta: The incomparable army
commanders of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa

The words prabhu-dayita mean those who are extremely
dear to Lord Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The word atula
means “that which has no comparison”. The word sāmanta
means “a general or commander of an army”. Always serve
the powerful generals of the army of Kṛṣṇa’s devotees.
Their mercy is unparalleled and they are very dear
servitors of Śrī Nanda-nandana. The divine rays of
hlādinī-śakti are reflected in the hearts of pure
Vaiṣṇavas. From their hearts, these rays of hlādinī-

                           61
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017

śakti are transmitted into the hearts of other faithful
sādhakas, thus dispelling the anarthas of wickedness,
deceit and hypocrisy and manifesting vraja-prema. The
embrace of pure Vaiṣṇavas, the dust from their lotus
feet, the nectar from their lips (that is, the remnants
of their prasāda), the water that washes their feet, and
their instructions are all fully competent to transmit
hlādinī-śakti into the heart. Therefore in the Padma
Purāṇa worship of the Vaiṣṇavas is declared to be even
higher than the worship of Bhagavān.

ārādhanānāṁ sarveṣāṁ

viṣṇor ārādhanaṁ param

tasmāt parataraṁ devi

tadīyānāṁ samarcanam

[Śrī Mahādeva said:] O Pārvatī, the worship of Śrī Viṣṇu
is the highest of all different types of worship. But
even superior to that is the worship of His devotees.

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.7.19–20) it is further stated:

yat sevāya bhagavataḥ kuṭa-

sthasya madhu-dviṣaḥ

rati-rāso bhavet tīvraḥ

pādayor vyasanārdanaḥ

durāpā hy alpa-tapasaḥ

sevā vaikuṇṭha-vartmasu

[Vidura said:] By serving the lotus feet of the devotees
of Bhagavān, highly concentrated divine love, existent
in all three phases of time, develops for the lotus feet
of Śrī Madhusūdana; and as a concomitant result, one
obtains everlasting deliverance from the bondage of
material existence. For those whose austerity and pious
credits are very meagre, it is extremely difficult to
obtain the service of such devotees who are very dear to
the Lord.

In Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya-līlā 16.60–1) it is
said:

bhakta-pada-dhūli āra bhakta-pada-jala

bhakta-bhukta-avaśeṣa, – tīna mahābala

ei tina-sevā haite kṛṣṇa-premā haya

punaḥ punaḥ sarva-śāstre phukāriyā kaya

The dust of the lotus feet of devotees, the water that
washes their feet and the remnants of their prasāda –
these three are very powerful. By honouring these three,
one attains love for the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. This
has been proclaimed in all the scriptures again and
again.

                              62
Manah-siksa.txt                                 5/5/2017


In this regard, Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī says (Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindhu (1.2.219)):

yāvanti bhagavad-bhakter

aṅgāni kathitānīha

prāyas tāvanti tad-bhakta-

bhakter api budhā viduḥ

Most of the limbs of bhakti described thus far [in
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu] in relationship to the Supreme
Lord may also be practised in regard to His devotees.
This is the opinion of learned scholars who know the
esoteric truths of bhakti.

In describing the five most potent limbs of bhakti, Śrī
Rūpa Gosvāmī has said that they possess such
inconceivable, extraordinary power that even slight
performance of any one of them can cause bhāva-bhakti to
arise in persons who are free from offence, even though
they may be lacking faith. He cites the following
example to show how bhāva-bhakti arises by association
with devotees who have bhāva (Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu
(1.2.241)):

dṛgambhobhir dhautaḥ pulaka-paṭalī maṇḍita-tanuḥ

skhalann-antaḥphullo dadhad ati-pṛthuṁ vepathum api

dṛśoḥ kakṣāṁ yāvan mama sa puruṣaḥ ko ’py upayayau

na jāne kiṁ tāvan matir iha gṛhe nābhiramate

I don’t know why my mind no longer remains attached to
household affairs since that extraordinary person
appeared on the pathway of my eyes, whose body is
drenched in showers of tears, whose bodily hairs stand
on end in ecstasy, who falters at every step, who is
submerged in transcendental bliss within his heart, and
who trembles feverishly, being overcome by spiritual
emotion.

Śrī Mukunda dāsa Gosvāmī has commented on this verse as
follows: The words dṛśoḥ kakṣāṁ yāvat – since he has
appeared on the pathway of my eyes – indicate very
slight contact with a devotee. Although seeing the
extraordinary devotee is undoubtedly the cause of the
man’s detachment, he says that he does not know the
cause. This is indicative of a lack of faith. Lastly,
the words iha gṛhe nābhiramata – unattached to this
household – are indicative of the appearance of bhāva-
bhakti.

It is concluded from the above verses that the beloved
devotees of Bhagavān are the incomparably powerful
generals of the Lord’s army. Serving them eradicates all
anarthas very easily and generates the very rare divine
love for Śrī Kṛṣṇa.




                             63
Manah-siksa.txt                                 5/5/2017



Verse Eight




yathā duṣṭatvaṁ me davayati śaṭhasyāpi kṛpayā

yathā mahyaṁ premāmṛtam api dadāty ujjvalam asau

yathā śrī gāndharvā-bhajana-vidhaye prerayati māṁ

tathā goṣṭhe kākvā giridharam iha tvaṁ bhaja manaḥ



Anvaya

manaḥ – O mind; iha goṣṭhe – in this Vraja; tvam – you;
bhaja – worship; giridharam – Śrī Giridhārī; tathā – in
such a manner; kākvā – with humble words; yathā – so
that; śaṭhasya api – although (I am) corrupt; asau – He;
kṛpayā – mercifully; davayati – drives away; me – my;
duṣṭatvam – wickedness; yathā – so that; dadāti – He
gives; ujjvalam – the radiant; amṛtam – nectar; prema –
of divine love; api – also; mahyam – to me; yathā –
(and) so that; prerayati – He impels; mām – me; śrī
gāndharvā-bhajana-vidhaye – in the service of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā.



Translation

[By the association of advanced devotees, hlādinī-śakti,
which dispels all corruption and brings about the
highest perfection, is transmitted into the sādhaka’s
heart. But that type of association is not easily
obtained.] Therefore, O mind, with utter humility and
grief-stricken words, just worship Śrī Giridhārī-Kṛṣṇa
in Vraja in such a way that He will become pleased with
me. By His causeless mercy He will remove my wickedness,
bestow the nectar of His supremely radiant love, and
confer upon me the inspiration to worship Śrīmatī
Rādhikā.



Śrī Bhajana-darpaṇa-digdarśinī-vṛtti



(1) Dainya-kākuti: Humble, grief-stricken expression

“I am completely helpless and destitute.” A humble and
sincere prayer with this mood is called dainya-kākuti.
In his Śrī Gāndharvā-samprārthanāṣṭakam (Stava-mālā),
Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī has prayed in such a humble and
guileless manner:

vṛndāvane viharator iha keli-kuñje

matta-dvipa-pravara-kautuka-vibhrameṇa

                           64
Manah-siksa.txt                                 5/5/2017


sandarśayasva yuvayor vadanāravinda-

dvandvaṁ vidhehi mayi devi! kṛpāṁ prasīda (1)

O Devī Rādhikā, being enthralled like two intoxicated
elephants, You and Śrī Kṛṣṇa constantly delight in
amorous pastimes in the pleasure-groves of Śrī
Vṛndāvana. Therefore, O Gāndharvikā, please be kind and
mercifully grant me the darśana of Your two lotus-like
faces.

hā devi kāku-bhara-gadgadayādya vācā

yāce nipatya bhuvi daṇḍavad udbhaṭārtiḥ

asya prasādam abudhasya janasya kṛtvā

gāndharvike! nija-gaṇe gaṇanāṁ vidhehi (2)

O Devī Gāndharvikā, I am greatly distressed. Therefore,
falling to the ground like a rod, I submit the following
prayer to Your lotus feet in a choked-up voice full of
despair. Please be merciful upon this ignorant person
and consider me as one of Your maidservants.

śyāme ramā-ramaṇa-sundaratā-variṣṭha-

saundarya-mohita-samasta-jagaj-janasya

śyāmasya vāma-bhuja-baddha-tanuṁ kadāhaṁ

tvām indirā-virala-rūpa-bharāṁ bhajāmi? (3)

O Śrīmatī Śyāmā (Rādhikā), You are far more beautiful
than Lakṣmī-devī. When shall I worship You who are
embraced by the left arm of Your beloved Śrī
Śyāmasundara, whose beauty eclipses that of Śrīman
Nārāyaṇa and captivates the entire creation?

tvāṁ pracchadena mudira-cchavinā pidhāya

mañjīra-mukta-caraṇāṁ ca vidhāya devi

kuñje vrajendra-tanayena virājamāne

naktaṁ kadā pramuditām abhisārayiṣye (4)

O Devī Rādhikā, when will I become Your handmaiden and
dress You appropriately for Your lover’s rendezvous by
removing the ankle bells from Your lotus feet and
covering Your graceful limbs in a blue sārī the colour
of a fresh cloud? When will I lead You to the bower at
night, Your heart filled with rapture and anticipation
to meet with Your lover, Śrī Nanda-nandana?

kuñje prasūna-kula-kalpita-keli-talpe

saṁviṣṭayor madhura-narma-vilāsa-bhājoḥ

loka-trayābharaṇayoś caraṇāmbujāni

saṁvāhayiṣyati kadā yuvayor jano ’yam? (5)


                           65
Manah-siksa.txt                                 5/5/2017

O Devī, You and Śrī Kṛṣṇa are the ornament of the three
worlds. In the forest grove when both of You recline on
a soft bed of a beautiful variety of flowers and partake
in amorous pastimes abounding with merriment, will I be
blessed to serve You and Your beloved’s lotus feet?

tvat-kuṇḍa-rodhasi vilāsa-pariśrameṇa

svedāmbu-cumbi-vadanāmburuha-śriyau vām

vṛndāvaneśvari kadā taru-mūla-bhājau

saṁvījayāmi camarī-caya-cāmareṇa (6)

O Vṛndāvaneśvarī, when the lotus faces of You and Your
beloved are decorated with drops of perspiration due to
the labour of love-sports, You sit in the shade of a
beautiful kadamba tree on the bank of Rādhā-kuṇḍa in
order to rest. At that time will I, as Your maidservant,
fan Your bodies with a jewelled cāmara?

līnāṁ nikuñja-kuhare bhavatīṁ mukunde

citraiva sūcitavatī rucirākṣi nāham

bhugnāṁ bhruvaṁ na racayeti mṛṣāruṣāṁ tvām

agre vrajendra-tanasya kadā nu neṣye (7)

O charming-eyed Śrī Rādhikā, when You playfully hide in
a secret place within the forest grove, Śrī Kṛṣṇa will
come to know of Your whereabouts and appear before You.
You will then question me reproachfully, “O Rūpa
Mañjarī, did you disclose My hiding place to Him?” Then
I will answer, “No, no, I said nothing. It was Citrā
Sakhī who told Him, so please don’t frown upon me.” When
will I be blessed to see You feigning such anger towards
me, and when will I get the opportunity to appease You
with sweet words in the presence of Śrī Kṛṣṇa?

vāg-yuddha-keli-kutuke vraja-rāja sūnuṁ

jitvonmadām adhika-darpa vikāsi-jalpām

phullābhir ālibhir analpam udīryamāṇa-

stotrāṁ kadā nu bhavatīm avalokayiṣye (8)

When, in a prankish mood, You defeat Śrī Kṛṣṇa in a
battle of words, You become exceedingly jubilant and
exult in the pride of Your oratory prowess. The sakhīs,
being overjoyed with the victory of their svāminī,
praise You, cheering, “Jaya Rādhā, jaya Rādhā!” When
will I behold You in such a state?

yaḥ ko ’pi suṣṭhu vṛṣabhānu-kumāri-kāyāḥ

samprārthanāṣṭakam idaṁ paṭhati prapannaḥ

sā preyasā saha sametya dhṛta-pramodā

tatra prasāda-laharīm urarī-karoti (9)

Anyone who takes shelter of Śrī Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī, Śrī

                           66
Manah-siksa.txt                                 5/5/2017

Rādhikā, by regularly reciting this entreaty with great
faith and an attitude of pure devotion, will surely
please Her along with Her beloved Śrī Kṛṣṇa, thus
becoming the recipient of Their profuse mercy.

(2) Śaṭhatā me duṣṭatvam: Pretention is my wickedness

Pretention is the vice of the conditioned living
entities. In their pure state the jīvas are by nature
simple and honest. When the living entities take shelter
of ignorance (avidyā), they at once become deceitful,
proud, obsessed with honour and prestige, hypocritical
and immoral, and thus they stray far from the truth of
their spiritual identity in relationship with the Lord.
By the power of devotee association, when they consider
themselves to be far more insignificant than a blade of
grass and offer respect to others as befits their
respective positions, they take shelter of the holy
name. Then Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His beloved devotees will
bestow mercy upon them, and they will obtain the rare
commodity of kṛṣṇa-prema.

(3) Ujjvala-premāmṛta: The nectar of amorous love

The word ujjvala refers to śṛṇgāra-rasa, which is also
known as mādhurya-rasa. In Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi (1.2–3),
in the chapter known as Nāyaka-bheda-prakaraṇa
(Varieties of Heroes), Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī describes
mādhurya-rasa as follows:

mukhya-raseṣu purā yaḥ

saṅkṣepeṇodito ’ti rahasyatvāt

pṛthag eva bhakti rasarāṭ sa

vistāreṇocyate madhuraḥ

vakṣyamāṇair vibhāvādyaiḥ

svādyatāṁ madhurā ratiḥ

nītā bhakti rasaḥ prokto

madhurākhyo manīṣibhiḥ

In Bhakti-rasāṁṛta-sindhu it is described that the
cultivation of bhakti may be undertaken in five
different rasas: śānta, dāsya, sakhya, vātsalya and
mādhurya. These are known as mukhya or primary rasas.
Mādhurya-rasa is chief amongst all varieties of bhakti-
rasa. Although it is foremost of all, the first four
rasas have been described very elaborately, whereas
mādhurya-rasa is described only in brief. This is
because mādhurya-rasa is very confidential. There are
three reasons for its confidentiality. (1) Because it is
meant only for those devotees who have taken exclusive
shelter of mādhurya-rasa, it is unsuitable for devotees
of the other four rasas (śānta, dāsya and so on). (2)
Although there are many devotees who have taken shelter
of mādhurya-rasa, they are inept in tasting it because
they are devoid of the appropriate impressions in the
heart (saṁskāras) for this rasa. For such persons
mādhurya-rasa is difficult to comprehend. (3) Mādhurya-

                            67
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017

rasa deals principally with the path of spontaneous love
(rāga-mārga), and as such it discusses many different
confidential moods. Because sādhakas whose hearts are
bound by many desires are unacquainted with the
confidential mysteries of rāga-mārga, their minds are
obsessed with vaidhī-mārga. Therefore this mādhurya-rasa
is not fit to be broadcast before them.

For all these reasons mādhurya-rasa is very
confidential, and it is inappropriate to describe it in
conjunction with the other rasas. Consequently, in Śrī
Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, mādhurya-rasa has been described very
elaborately in order to make only those devotees who are
pursuing rāga-mārga with exclusive recourse to mādhurya-
rasa eligible to taste this rasa. When madhura-rati is
instigated by the elements of vibhāva, anubhāva,
sāttvika-bhāva and vyābhicārī-bhāva and becomes
extremely relishable, learned scholars of the profound
science of devotional mellows call it mādhurya-rasa.

When that rati which is the sthāyibhāva of śānta, dāsya,
sakhya or vātsalya combines with the four elements of
vibhāva, anubhāva, sāttvika-bhāva and vyābhicāri-bhāva,
it attains to the status of rasa. The same is to be
understood in regard to mādhurya-rasa. In mādhurya-rasa
Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the object of love (viṣayālambana), and the
gopīs are the receptacles of love (āśrayālambana). Their
qualities are stimulants (uddīpanas) to mādhurya-rasa.
While enacting their amorous pastimes, the beloveds of
Śrī Kṛṣṇa and even Kṛṣṇa Himself sometimes display the
eight sāttvika-bhāvas and thirty-three vyabhicāri-
bhāvas, which rise up like waves causing the ocean of
bhakti-rasa to swell. When sādhana-bhakti is transformed
into bhāva-bhakti, the sthāyibhāva becomes manifest.
When the sthāyibhāva combines with vibhāva, anubhāva and
so on, and attains to the state of rasa, it signifies
the appearance of prema and is known as bhakti-rasa.

Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s Vṛndāvana pastimes and all the pastimes He
enacted with His beloved gopīs throughout Vraja-maṇḍala
are examples of this rasa. Those who, by great fortune,
awaken greed to obtain this mādhurya-rasa must follow in
the wake of the gopīs, praying repeatedly with intense
longing and anguish in a voice choked with emotion (as
described previously). When Śrīmatī Rādhikā bestows Her
mercy upon such persons, the rays of hlādinī-śakti enter
their hearts and thus manifest this rasa. There is no
other way to obtain this mādhurya-rasa.

(4) Śrī-gāndharvā-bhajana

Sometimes the infinitesimal living entity pursues the
cultivation of impersonal knowledge with the intention
of becoming liberated, and thus becomes absorbed in the
experience of brahmānanda, the bliss derived from
realisation of impersonal Brahman. But that experience
is thoroughly insignificant in comparison to paramānanda
or prema-sevānanda, the transcendental ecstasy of
service to the Lord in unalloyed love. It thus pales
like the light of a firefly before the sun. As long as
the infinitesimal living entity remains unacquainted
with the bliss derived from pure divine love
(premānanda) , he considers the negligible pleasure of
Brahman realisation to be all-in-all. Without gaining

                            68
Manah-siksa.txt                                 5/5/2017

the mercy of the hlādinī-śakti, one is ineligible to
obtain the topmosy spiritual ecstasy. The means to
receive this mercy is as follows.

Upon hearing of the bhāva of the eternal residents of
Vraja who are situated in rāgātmikā-bhakti, greed may
awaken in the heart to obtain this bhāva. When this
occurs one should take shelter of the lotus feet of one
of the sakhīs or mañjarīs of Śrīmatī Rādhikā and serve
her with great humility. By thus rendering continuous
service, one’s eligibility for increased service is
augmented directly in proportion to the advancement of
one’s capability. Only by the mercy of the sakhīs can
one receive the mercy of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. The more one
obtains this mercy, the more hlādinī-śakti will be
transmitted into one’s heart. Thus gradually one will
obtain the eternal loving service of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
in accordance with one’s eligibility.

Those who do not accept the existence of eternal divine
pastimes within the realm of transcendence are guilty of
denying the completeness of the absolute truth who is
the supreme potent (sarva-śaktimāna) and the embodiment
of rasa. Such persons are cut off from the path of mercy
and are thus cheated from loving service.

A further consideration is that as long as a sādhaka
maintains the conception within himself of being a
mundane, material male, he is ineligible for this
service imbued with the ecstatic moods found in Vraja.
Service of this type has no relationship whatsoever with
the mundane female or male bodies. The female mood
(strī-bhāva) that arises in the constitutional form of
the pure, infinitesimal jīva is the only identity that
is suitable for such service. Sādhakas who at the time
of performing sādhana superimpose upon the mind the
mundane conceptions of male or female that are born of
contact with the material body are deviated from the
path of sādhana. To isolate oneself from such persons
and perform bhajana under the guidance of a rāgānuga,
rasika-bhakta who has taken exclusive shelter of the
lotus feet of Śrīmatī Rādhikā is known as śrī-gāndharvā-
bhajana.




Verse Nine




madīśā-nāthatve vraja-vipina-candraṁ vraja-vane-

śvarīṁ tāṁ-nāthatve tad-atula-sakhītve tu lalitām

viśākhāṁ śikṣālī-vitaraṇa-gurutve priya-saro-

girīndrau tat-prekṣā-lalita-rati-datve smara manaḥ




                           69
Manah-siksa.txt                                 5/5/2017

Anvaya

manaḥ – O mind; smara – remember; vraja-vipina-candram –
Śrī Vṛndāvanacandra, the moon of the forest of Vraja;
madīśā-nāthatve – as the Lord of the life of my
mistress; tām – that; vrajavaneśvarīm – Śrī
Vṛndāvaneśvarī, the queen of the forest of Vraja;
nāthatve – as my mistress; lalitām – Śrī Lalitā; tu –
indeed; tad-atula-sakhītve – as the peerless friend of
Śrī Rādhā; viśākhām – Śrī Viśākhā; śikṣālī-vitaraṇa-
gurutve – as the spiritual master who imparts all
instructions; priya-saro-girīndrau – the precious pond
Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Girirāja-Govardhana; tat-prekṣā-
lalita-rati-datve – as bestowing darśana of Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa and ecstatic love for Them.



Translation

[This verse is instructing us as to what the mutual
relation-ship should be between rāgānuga-bhajana and
mādhurya-rasa.] O mind, always remember Vṛndāvanacandra
Śrī Kṛṣṇa as the Lord of my svāminī Śrī Rādhikā’s life,
Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhikā as my mistress, Śrī
Lalitā as the peerless friend of my svāminī, Śrī Viśākhā
as the instructing spiritual master in the arrangements
of service rendered unto the Divine Couple, and Śrī
Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Girirāja-Govardhana as those who grant
darśana of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and bestow ecstatic love for
Their lotus feet.



Śrī Bhajana-darpaṇa-digdarśinī-vṛtti



(1) Vraja-vipina-candraṁ smara: Remember Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
moon of the forest of Vraja

In this regard two verses are quoted from Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī’s Mukunda-muktāvalī-stava, taken from Stava-
mālā.

nava-jaladhara-varṇaṁ campakodbhāsi-karṇaṁ

vikasita-nalināsyaṁ visphuran-manda-hāsyam

kanaka-ruci-dukūlaṁ cāru-barhāva-cūlaṁ

kamapi nikhila-sāraṁ naumi gopī-kumāram (1)

I worship a gopī’s darling son whose complexion is like
that of a fresh raincloud, whose attractive ears are
decorated with campaka flowers, upon whose charming face
a mild smile blossoms like a blooming lotus flower, who
wears a yellow garment that resembles the lustre of
molten gold, whose head is adorned with a beautiful
peacock feather, and who is the quintessence of the
three worlds.

mukha-jita-śarad-induḥ keli-lāvaṇya-sindhuḥ


                           70
Manah-siksa.txt                                  5/5/2017

kara-vinihita-kandur-ballavī-prāṇabandhuḥ

vapu-rūpa-sṛta-reṇuḥ kakṣa-nikṣipta-veṇur

vacana-vaśaga-dhenuḥ pātu māṁ nanda-sūnuḥ (2)

May I be protected by that Śrī Nanda-nandana whose face
is far more attractive than the autumn moon, who is an
ocean of elegance suitable for the enactment of amorous
pastimes, whose hands are equipped with a ball for
playing games, who is the dearmost friend of the young
maidens of Vraja, whose body is beautified by the dust
raised from the hooves of the cows, whose flute is kept
prominently on His left side, and who subdues the cows
by His melodious voice.

The next two verses are supplementary verses to the Tri-
bhaṅgī-pañcakam, also taken from Stava-mālā.

viracaya mayi daṇḍaṁ dīna-bandho dayāṁ vā

gatir iha na bhavattaḥ kācid anyā mamāsti

nipatatu śata-koṭir nirbharaṁ vā navāmbhas

tad api kila payodaḥ stūyate cātakena (1)

O friend of the fallen, whether the clouds pour down a
shower of water upon the thirsting cātaka birds or hurl
a lightning bolt at them, the cātaka birds never tire of
propitiating the clouds, for they have no other
recourse. Similarly, whether You are merciful to me or
punish me, I have no support in this world other than
You. You may do as You like.

prācīnānāṁ bhajanam atulaṁ duṣkaraṁ śṛṇvato me

nairāśyena jvalati hṛdayaṁ bhakti-leśālasasya

viśvadrīcīm agha-hara tavākarṇya kāruṇya-vīcīm

āśā-bindū kṣitam idam upaity-antare hanta śaityam (2)

O slayer of Aghāsura (or the destroyer of sins), when I
hear of the extremely rigorous sādhana and bhajana
undertaken by great souls like Śrī Śuka and Mahārāja
Ambarīṣa in former times, my heart, which is devoid of
any trace of bhakti, becomes stricken with remorse and
hopelessness because such difficult bhajana and sādhana
will never be possible for me. Thus I feel that I will
never be able to obtain Your lotus feet. But when I see
the waves of mercy You have diffused everywhere from
Lord Brahmā down to the most heinous sinners, my heart
becomes pacified again and instilled with a ray of hope.

(2) Tāṁ vrajavaneśvarīṁ nāthatve (smara): Remember
Śrīmatī Rādhikā as one’s svāminī

In his Vilāpa-kusumāñjali (7–8), quoted below,
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī has acknowledged Śrīmatī Rādhikā
as his svāminī. With great fervour and perturbation he
has prayed in a mood of single-minded devotion in order
to obtain service unto Her.


                           71
Manah-siksa.txt                                 5/5/2017

aty utkaṭena nitarāṁ virahānalena

dandahyamāna hṛdayā kila kāpi dāsī

hā svāmini kṣanam iha praṇayena gāḍham

ākrandanena vidhurā vilapāmi padyaiḥ

O Svāminī Śrī Rādhikā, I am Your maidservant, but my
heart is burning due to the virulent fire of separation
from You. I cry repeatedly and thus I have become
thoroughly aggrieved. Seeing no other means of
reprieval, I reside at Śrī Govardhana by the bank of Śrī
Rādhā-kuṇḍa and lovingly supplicate Your lotus feet with
these few lines of lamentation.

devi duḥkha-kula-sāgarodare

dūyamānam ati durgataṁ janam

tvaṁ kṛpā-prabala-naukayādbhutaṁ

prāpaya sva-pada-paṅkajālayam

May You be pleased. O Vraja-vilāsinī Śrī Rādhikā, having
fallen into the unfathomable ocean of intense grief, I
am severely tormented and seized by calamity. O
supremely compassionate one, kindly place me upon the
indestructible boat of Your mercy and grant me the
direct service of Your lotus feet.

(3) Lalitāṁ tad-atula-sakhītve (smara): Remember Śrī
Lalitā as the peerless friend of Śrīmatī Rādhikā

This mood is clearly expressed by Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī in
his Śrī Lalitāṣṭaka, taken from Stava-mālā.

rādhā-mukunda-pada-sambhava-gharma-bindu

nirmañchanopakaraṇī-kṛta-deha-lakṣām

uttuṅga-sauhṛda-viśeṣa-vaśāt pragalbhāṁ

devīṁ guṇaiḥ sulalitāṁ lalitāṁ namāmi (1)

I offer obeisances unto the haughty Śrī Lalitā-devī, who
is the charming repository of qualities such as beauty,
sweetness and gravity, who is engaged in wiping away the
glittering drops of perspiration from the lotus feet of
Śrī Rādhā-Mādhava, and who is perpetually immersed in
the most elevated mellows of sauhārda-rasa, undivided
absorption in fulfilling the heart’s desire of her
intimate friend Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

rākā-sudhā-kiraṇa-maṇḍala-kānti-daṇḍi-

vaktra-śriyaṁ cakita-cāru-camūru-netrām

rādhā-prasādhana-vidhāna-kalā-prasiddhāṁ

devīṁ guṇaiḥ sulalitāṁ lalitāṁ namāmi (2)

I offer obeisances unto Śrī Lalitā-devī, whose beautiful
face mocks the brilliance of the full moon, whose eyes

                              72
Manah-siksa.txt                                 5/5/2017

are ever restless like those of a startled doe, who is
famous for her extraordinary expertise in the art of
dressing Śrīmatī Rādhikā and who is the repository of
unlimited feminine qualities.

lāsyollasad-bhujaga-śatru-patatra-citra-

paṭṭāṁśukābharaṇa-kañculikāñcitāṅgīm

gorocanā-ruci-vigarhaṇa-gaurimāṇaṁ

devīṁ guṇaiḥ sulalitāṁ lalitāṁ namāmi (3)

I offer obeisances unto Śrī Lalitā-devī, whose body is
adorned with a splendorous silk dress as brilliantly
multicoloured as the tail-feathers of an ecstatically
dancing peacock, whose upper body is covered with an
immensely attractive bodice, whose hair partition is
decorated with shimmering red vermillion and who wears
various necklaces and other jewelled ornaments. Her
golden complexion defeats even the lustre of gorocanā (a
bright yellow pigment used in painting, dyeing and
tilaka) and she possesses innumerable good qualities.

dhūrte vrajendra-tanaye tanu suṣṭhu-vāmyaṁ

mā dakṣiṇā bhava kalaṅkini lāghavāya

rādhe giraṁ śṛṇu hitām iti śikṣayantīṁ

devīṁ guṇaiḥ sulatitāṁ lalitāṁ namāmi (4)

I offer obeisances unto Śrī Lalitā-devī, the charming
treasure-house of all good qualities, who instructs
Śrīmatī Rādhikā in this way: “O Kalaṅkinī (unchaste
one), Rādhikā, listen to my beneficial words! Vrajendra-
nandana is very guileful. Don’t display Your mood of
gentle submission to Him (dākṣinya-bhāva); instead,
always be contrary (vāmya-bhāva) in all circumstances.”

rādhāmabhi-vrajapateḥ kṛtamātmajena

kūṭaṁ manāg api vilokya vilohitākṣīm

vāg-bhaṅgibhis tam-acireṇa vilajjayantīṁ

devīṁ guṇaiḥ sulalitāṁ lalitāṁ namāmi (5)

I offer obeisances unto the abode of all good qualities,
the supremely charming Śrī Lalitā-devī, who upon hearing
Śrī Kṛṣṇa speak even a few crafty words to Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, immediately becomes furious and embarrasses
Kṛṣṇa by speaking sarcastic words such as, “You are so
truthful and simple-hearted, and such a chaste lover!”

vātsalya-vṛnda-vasatiṁ paśupāla-rājñyāḥ

sakhyānuśikṣaṇa-kalāsu guruṁ sakhīnām

rādhā-balāvaraja-jīvita-nirviśeṣāṁ

devīṁ guṇaiḥ sulalitāṁ lalitāṁ namāmi (6)

I offer obeisances unto the supremely charming Śrī

                           73
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017

Lalitā-devī, who possesses the aggregate of all divine
qualities. She is the recipient of the parental
affection of Śrīmatī Yaśodā-devī, the queen of Goparāja
Śrī Nanda Mahārāja. She is the spiritual master of all
the sakhīs who instructs them in the matter of
friendship, and she is the very life of both Śrīmatī
Rādhikā and the younger brother of Baladeva.

yāṁ kām api vraja-kule vṛṣabhānujāyāḥ

prekṣya svapakṣa-padavīm anuruddhyamānām

sadyas-tad-iṣṭa-ghaṭanena kṛtārthayantīṁ

devīṁ guṇaiḥ sulalitāṁ lalitāṁ namāmi (7)

I offer obeisances unto the supremely charming Śrī
Lālitā-devī, the treasure-house of all good qualities.
Upon seeing any young maiden anywhere in Vraja and
discerning that she is inclined towards her dearmost
friend Śrīmatī Rādhikā, Lalitā immediately fulfils all
of that maiden’s internal desires and makes her
successful in all respects.

rādhā-vrajendra-suta-saṅgama-raṅga-caryāṁ

varyāṁ viniścitavatīm akhilotsavebhyaḥ

tāṁ gokula-priya-sakhī-nikuramba-mukhyāṁ

devīṁ guṇaiḥ sulalitāṁ lalitāṁ namāmi (8)

I offer obeisances unto Śrī Lalitā-devī, the embodiment
of all divine virtues and the foremost of the priya-
sakhīs of Gokula. Her most deeply cherished task is
providing enjoyment for Śrī Rādhā-Govinda by arranging
for Them to meet. She has far greater longing to perform
this exquisite task than to enjoy the entirety of other
types of festivals.

nandann-amūni lalitā-guṇa-lālitāni

padyāni yaḥ paṭhati nirmala-dṛṣṭir aṣṭau

prītyā vikarṣati janaṁ nija-vṛnda-madhye

taṁ kīrtidā-pati-kulojjvala-kalpa-vallī (9)

If a person with a cheerful and pure heart recites this
composition in praise of Lalitā-devī, who is superbly
ornamented with the qualities of beauty, grace and
charm, Śrīmatī Rādhikā, the effulgent wish-fulfilling
creeper in the family of Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja,
affectionately draws that person towards Her and adopts
her amongst Her group of sakhīs.

(4) Viśākhāṁ śikṣālī-vitaraṇa-gurutve (smara): Remember
Śrī Viśākhā as one’s instructing spiritual master

The Yamunā river is considered non-different from Śrī
Viśākhā. Śrī Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa has cited the
following verse in confirmation of this:

viśākhorasi yā viṣṇor

                           74
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017


yasyāṁ viṣṇur jalātmani

nityaṁ nimajjati prītyā tāṁ

saurīṁ yamunāṁ stumaḥ

Lord Viṣṇu daily immerses Himself and plays with great
pleasure and affection in the water of the Yamunā, the
liquid form of Viśākhā-devī. I offer prayers to Yamunā-
devī, the daughter of the sun-god Sūrya.

Śrī Vidyābhūṣaṇapāda comments on this verse as follows:

viśākhā yamunā-vapur iti vicāreṇa

yamunā-stutyā tat-stutir, iti vidyābhūṣaṇaḥ

Śrī Viśākhā is considered as the embodiment of Yamunā.
Therefore by offering prayers to the Yamunā one
automatically offers prayers to Viśākhā.

Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī has composed the following prayer in
glorification of the Yamunā known as Śrī Yamunāṣṭaka,
taken from Stava-mālā.

bhrātur antakasya pattane ’bhipatti-hāriṇī

prekṣayāti-pāpino ’pi pāpa-sindhu-tāriṇī

nīra-mādhurībhir apy-aśeṣa-citta-bandhinī

māṁ punātu sarvadāravinda-bandhu-nandinī (1)

May Yamunā-devī, the daughter of Sūryadeva, who delights
the friend of the lotus (Sūrya), always purify me. She
saves those who touch her from going to the realm of her
brother Yamarāja, and merely seeing her enables wicked
sinners to cross the ocean of sin. She binds the hearts
of everyone by the uninterrupted sweetness of her
waters.

hāri-vāri-dhārayābhimaṇḍitoru-khāṇḍavā

puṇḍarīka-maṇḍalodyad-aṇḍajāli-tāṇḍavā

snāna-kāma-pāmarogra-pāpa-sampad-andhinī

māṁ punātu sarvadāravinda-bandhu-nandinī (2)

Yamunā-devī adorns Indra’s immense Khāṇḍava forest with
her enchanting current, and upon her blooming white
lotuses, birds such as wagtails always dance with great
jubilation. To say nothing of those who bathe in her
waters, even vile sinners are absolved from dreadful
sins simply by desiring to bathe in the Yamunā. May
Yamunā-devī, the daughter of Sūryadeva, who delights the
friend of the lotus, always purify me.

śīkarābhimṛṣṭa-jantu-durvipāka-mardinī

nanda-nandanāntaraṅga-bhakti-pūra-vardhinī

tīra-saṅgamābhilāṣi-maṅgalānubandhinī

                              75
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017


māṁ punātu sarvadāravinda-bandhu-nandinī (3)

Yamunā-devī destroys the reactions to the atrocious sins
committed by those who merely touch a drop of her water.
She increases the flow of rāgānuga-bhakti for Nanda-
nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa within one’s heart and benedicts
anyone who simply desires to reside on her banks. May
Yamunā-devī, the daughter of the sun-god, who delights
the friend of the lotus, always purify me.

dvīpa-cakravāla-juṣṭa-sapta-sindhu-bhedinī

śrī-mukunda-nirmitoru-divya-keli-vedinī

kānti-kandalībhir indranīla-vṛnda-nindinī

māṁ punātu sarvadāravinda-bandhu-nandinī (4)

Yamunā-devī is so inconceivably powerful that although
she flows through the seven oceans which surround the
seven giant islands of Bhū-maṇḍala, she never merges
into them as

ordinary rivers do. Being an intimate witness to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s wonderful, transcendental pastimes, she causes
those pastimes to arise in the hearts of those who take
shelter of her. Her dark, shimmering beauty defeats that
of even a precious blue sapphire. May the daughter of
the sun-god, Yamunā-devī, who delights the friend of the
lotus, always purify me.

māthureṇa maṇḍalena cāruṇābhimaṇḍitā

prema-naddha-vaiṣṇavādhva-vardhanāya paṇḍitā

ūrmi-dor-vilāsa-padmanābha-pāda-vandinī

māṁ punātu sarvadāravinda-bandhu-nandinī (5)

Ornamented by the supremely enchanting land of Mathurā-
maṇḍala, Yamunā-devī is adept in propelling advancement
upon the path of Vaiṣṇavism for those devotees who are
bound by prema. In other words, she directly manifests
rāgānuga-bhakti in the hearts of those devotees who
bathe in her waters. With her waves, which are like
playful arms, she worships Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet. May
the daughter of the sun-god, Yamunā-devī, who delights
the friend of the lotus, always purify me.

ramya-tīra-rambhamāṇa-go-kadamba-bhūṣitā

divya-gandha-bhāk-kadamba-puṣpa-rāji-rūṣitā

nanda-sūnu-bhakta-saṅgha-saṅgamābhinandinī

māṁ punātu sarvadāravinda-bandhu-nandinī (6)

Yamunā-devī is further beautified by the presence of the
cows mooing in deep subdued tones on both sides of her
supremely attractive banks. She is scented by the
celestial fragrance emanating from the flowers of the
kadamba trees that line her shores. She is always
overjoyed by the gathering of the dear devotees of Śrī

                           76
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017

Nanda-nandana. May Yamunā-devī, the daughter of
Sūryadeva, who delights the friend of the lotus, always
purify me.

phulla-pakṣa-mallikākṣa-haṁsa-lakṣa-kūjitā

bhakti-viddha-deva-siddha-kinnarāli-pūjitā

tīra-gandhavāha-gandha-janma-bandha-randhinī

māṁ punātu sarvadāravinda-bandhu-nandinī (7)

Yamunā-devī reverberates with the captivating sound of
hundreds of thousands of elated white swans who glide
upon her waters. She is always worshipped by the devas,
siddhas, kinnaras and human beings whose hearts are
dedicated to the service of Śrī Hari. By the slightest
touch of the breezes that gently blow upon her banks,
the living entities’ bondage to repeated birth and death
is cut to pieces. May the daughter of the sun-god,
Yamunā-devī, who delights the friend of the lotus,
always purify me.

cid-vilāsa-vāri-pūra-bhūr-bhuvaḥ-svarāpinī

kīrtitāpi durmadoru-pāpa-marma-tāpinī

ballavendra-nandanāṅgarāga-bhaṅga-gandhinī

māṁ punātu sarvadāravinda-bandhu-nandinī (8)

Yamunā-devī pervades the entire three worlds known as
Bhū, Bhuva and Sva by the flow of her water, which
carries in it the direct revelation of the uncommon
transcendental pastimes of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala.
Thus she causes those pastimes to be broadcast
throughout the three worlds. By singing her glories the
deeply-rooted core of insurmountable, abysmal sins are
completely burnt to ashes. She has become supremely
fragrant due to the sandalwood paste and kuṅkuma that
anoints the body of Vrajarāja-kumāra Śrī Kṛṣṇa and that
melts in her water as He enjoys His water-sports. May
Yamunā-devī, who is the daughter of the sun-god and who
delights the friend of the lotus, always purify me.

tuṣṭa-buddhir aṣṭakena nirmalormi-ceṣṭitāṁ

tvām-anena bhānu-putri sarva-deva-veṣṭitām

yaḥ stavīti vardhayasva sarva-pāpa-mocane

bhakti-pūram asya devi puṇḍarīka-locane (9)

O daughter of Sūryadeva, O divine goddess, Śrī Yamunā, I
submit this prayer at your feet, that you may benedict
those intelligent and contented persons who recite this
composition in glorification of you who are surrounded
by all the demigods and who are possessed of immaculate
activities in the form of your transparent waves. May
you expand the current of their bhakti for the lotus-
eyed Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who liberates people from all sins
including ignorance.

(5) Priyasaraḥ (Rādhā-kuṇḍa) tat-prekṣā-lalita-rati-

                           77
Manah-siksa.txt                                  5/5/2017

datve (smara): Remember Rādhā-kuṇḍa as granting darśana
of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and bestowing ecstatic love for Them

One should remember that Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa bestows
ecstatic love for the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
Yugala. Such a prayer has been expressed by Śrī
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī in his Vilāpa-kusumāñjali (98):

he śrī-sarovara sadā tvayi sā madīśā

preṣṭhena sārdham iha khelati kāmaraṅgaiḥ

tvaṁ cet priyāt priyam atīva tayor itīmāṁ

hā darśayādya kṛpayā mama jīvitaṁ tām

O Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa, my svāminī Śrī Rādhikā always enjoys
amorous sportive pastimes with Her beloved Śrī Kṛṣṇa
along your banks. You are more precious to Them than
life itself. Therefore kindly grant me darśana this very
day of Śrī Rādhikā, who is the life of my life.

(6) Praying to Śrī Viśākhā (as bestowing darśana of and
ecstatic love for Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa)

In Vilāpa-kusumāñjali (99) Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī prays
to Śrī Viśākhā in a similar manner.

kṣaṇam api tava saṅgaṁ na tyajed eva devi

tvam asi sama-vayas tvān-narmabhūmir yad asyāḥ

iti sumukhi viśākhe darśayitvā mad-īśāṁ

mama viraha-hatāyāḥ prāṇa-rakṣāṁ kuruṣva

O Sumukhī (beautiful-faced girl), O Viśākhā, because you
are precisely the same age as my mistress, Śrī Rādhikā,
you are the abode of Her playful pastimes. Consequently,
She cannot give up your association even for a moment. I
have become extremely agitated and distressed due to
separation from Her. Kindly grant me darśana of Her
lotus feet and thus preserve my life.

(7) Girīndrau lalita-rati-datve (smara): Remember
Girirāja-Govardhana as bestowing ecstatic love

In his Śrī Govardhana-vāsa-prārthanā-daśakam (8), taken
from Śrī Stavāvalī, Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī prays
for residence at Śrī Govardhana.

giri-nṛpa hari-dāsa-śreṇi-varyeti nāmā-

mṛtam idam uditaṁ śrī rādhikā-vaktra-candrāt

vraja-nava-tilakatve klṛpta vedaiḥ sphuṭaṁ me

nija-nikaṭa-nivāsaṁ dehi govardhana tvam

O Girirāja-Govardhana, the nectar of your name as
Haridāsa-varya (best of the servants of Śrī Kṛṣṇa) has
been manifest directly from the lotus mouth of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā when She uttered the words (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(10.21.18)): “hantāyam adrir abalā haridāsa-varyaḥ – O

                           78
Manah-siksa.txt                                   5/5/2017

sakhīs, this Girirāja-Govardhana is the best of all the
devotees of Śrī Hari.” Thus all the Vedas have
established you as the fresh tilaka mark adorning the
forehead of Vraja. Therefore O Govardhana, kindly grant
me residence by your side.

The purport of this statement is that by being granted
residence at the feet of Girirāja-Govardhana, Raghunātha
dāsa Gosvāmī prays that Govardhana will cause ecstatic
love for the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala to
awaken in his heart.

By seeing, remembering and reciting the glories of Śrī
Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Girirāja-Govardhana, one obtains prema-
bhakti that is steeped in the mood of rāgānuga. All the
places wherein Śrī Kṛṣṇa enacted His transcendental
pastimes bestow firm attachment for the lotus feet of
Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala. Therefore one should always
remember them with great love.




Verse Ten




ratiṁ gaurī-līle api tapati saundarya-kiraṇaiḥ

śacī-lakṣmī-satyāḥ paribhavati saubhāgya-valanaiḥ

vaśī-kāraiś candrāvali-mukha-navīna-vraja-satīḥ

kṣipaty ārād yā tāṁ hari-dayita-rādhāṁ bhaja manaḥ



Anvaya

manaḥ – O mind; bhaja – worship; tām – that; rādhām –
Śrī Rādhā; hari-dayita – the beloved of Śrī Kṛṣṇa; yā –
who; tapati – burns or afflicts; rati – Rati-devī, the
wife of Kāmadeva; gaurī – Gaurī-devī, the wife of Lord
Śiva; api – and; līlā – Līlā-devī, the personal energy
of Lord Nārāyaṇa; saundarya-kiraṇaiḥ – by the rays of
Her beauty; paribhavati – (who) defeats; śacī – Śacī-
devī, the wife of Indra; lakṣmī – Lakṣmī-devī, the
eternal consort of Lord Nārāyaṇa; satyāḥ – (and)
Satyabhāmā-devī, one of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s principal queens at
Dvārakā; saubhāgya-valanaiḥ – by the superabundance of
Her good fortune; kṣipati – (and who) casts; ārāt – to a
distant place; navīna-vraja-satīḥ – the chaste young
girls of Vraja;

candrāvalī-mukha – headed by Candrāvalī; vaśī-karaiḥ –
by Her quality of being able to bring Śrī Kṛṣṇa under
Her control.



Translation

                           79
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017


[Without taking shelter of the Lord’s internal potency
(svarūpa-śakti), one can never obtain the fullest aspect
of the absolute truth, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is the possessor
of that potency. Therefore the following statement is
expressed.] O mind, give up attachment for all others
and just worship the most beloved of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, who inflames Rati, Gaurī and Līlā by the
effulgent rays of Her beauty; who vanquishes Śrī Śacī,
Śrī Lakṣmī and Śrī Satyabhāmā by the profusion of Her
good fortune; and who dissipates the pride of the chaste
young girls of Vraja headed by Śrī Candrāvalī by Her
ability to bring Śrī Kṛṣṇa under Her control. This
Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the most beloved of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.



Śrī Bhajana-darpaṇa-digdarśinī-vṛtti



(1) The extraordinary qualities of Śrīmatī Rādhikā

In his Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, in the chapter entitled Śrī
Rādhā-prakaraṇa (4.11–15), Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī has
described the twenty-five principal qualities of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā.

atha vṛndāvaneśvaryāḥ

kīrtyante pravarā guṇāḥ

madhureyaṁ nava-vayāś-

calāpāṅgojjvala-smitā

cāru-saubhāgya-rekhāḍhyā

gandhonmādita-mādhavā

saṅgīta-prasarābhijñā

ramya-vāk narma-paṇḍitā

vinītā karuṇā-pūrṇā

vidagdhā pāṭavānvitā

lajjāśīlā sumaryādā

dhairyā gāmbhīrya-śālinī

suvilāsā mahābhāva-

paramotkarṣa-tarṣiṇī

gokula-prema-vasatir

jagac-chreṇī-lasad-yaśāḥ

gurvarpita-guru-snehā

sakhī-praṇayitā-vaśā


                           80
Manah-siksa.txt                                 5/5/2017

kṛṣṇa-priyāvalī-mukhyā

santatāśrava-keśavā

bahunā kiṁ guṇās-tasyāḥ

saṅkhyātītā harer iva

I shall now describe the principal qualities of
Vṛndāvaneśvarī, Śrīmatī Rādhikā: (1) madhurā – She is
charming; (2) nava-vayāḥ – She is eternally situated in
the middle of blooming youth; (3) calāpāṅgā – She casts
sidelong glances from Her restless eyes; (4) ujjvala-
smitā – She smiles radiantly and sweetly; (5) cāru-
saubhāgya-rekhāḍhyā – Her feet and other parts of Her
body are marked with beautiful, auspicious lines; (6)
gandhonmādita-mādhavā – the fragrance of Her body drives
Śrī Kṛṣṇa mad; (7) saṅgīta-prasarābhijñā – She is expert
in the art of singing and music; (8) ramya-vāk – Her
speech is charming; (9) narma-paṇḍitā – She is quick-
witted and accomplished in the use of joking words; (10)
vinītā – She is modest; (11) karuṇā-pūrṇā – She is
merciful; (12) vidagdhā – She is highly skilled in the
sixty-four arts and in all varieties of amorous sports;
(13) pāṭavānvitā – She is dexterous; (14) lajjāśīlā –
She is shy; (15) sumaryādā – She never deviates from the
path of righteousness; (16) dhairyā-śālinī – She is
forbearing and tolerant in the face of distress; (17)
gāmbhīrya-śālinī – She is grave; (18) suvilāsā – She is
always decorated with various types of ornamental
gestures of the body such as hāva, bhāva and helā
(various feminine gestures that entice the beloved) as
well as smiling, horripilation, and variations of the
voice, which are indicative of Her ecstatic moods in
relation to Śrī Kṛṣṇa; (19) mahābhāva-paramotkarṣa-
tarṣiṇī – She is extremely eager to display the highest
manifestation of mahābhāva; (20) gokula-prema-vasati –
She is the object of love for all the residents of
Gokula; (21) jagat-śreṇī-lasad-yaśā – Her fame is spread
throughout the entire universe; (22) gurvarpita-guru-
snehā – She is the recipient of great affection from Her
elders; (23) sakhī-praṇayitā-vaśā – She is controlled by
the love of Her sakhīs; (24) kṛṣṇa-priyāvalī-mukhyā –
She is foremost of all Kṛṣṇa’s lovers; and (25)
santatāśravā-keśava – She always keeps Śrī Keśava under
Her control. What more need be said? Like Śrī Kṛṣṇa, She
is fully endowed with unlimited transcendental
qualities.

The glories of Śrīmatī Rādhikā are further described by
Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī in Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi (4.3–6):

tayor apy ubhayor madhye

rādhikā sarvathādhikā

mahābhāva-svarūpeyaṁ

guṇair ativarīyasī

Between Śrī Rādhā and Śrī Candrāvalī, Śrī Rādhā is
superior in all respects. She is the embodiment of
mahābhāva. No one can compare with Her in the possession
of transcendental qualities.

                           81
Manah-siksa.txt                                  5/5/2017


gopālottara-tāpinyāṁ

yad gāndharveti viśrutā

rādhety ṛk pariśiṣṭe ca

mādhavena sahoditā

atas tadīya-māhātmyaṁ

pādme devarṣinoditam

In the Gopālottara-tāpani She is, therefore, celebrated
by the name Gāndharvā. In the supplement to the g Veda,
Her name has been mentioned together with Śrī Mādhava.
This is expressed in the following words: “rādhayā
mādhavo devo mādhavenaiva rādhikā – Mādhava is always
with Śrīmatī Rādhikā and She is always with Him. They
always remain together and are never separated from one
another.” Therefore Śrī Devarṣi Nārada has described Her
glories in the Padma Purāṇa.

yathā rādhā priyā viṣṇos

tasyāḥ kuṇḍaṁ priyaṁ tathā

sarva-gopīṣu saivaikā

viṣṇor atyanta-vallabhā

Just as Śrīmatī Rādhikā is most dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, Her
pond Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa is equally dear to Him. Amongst all
the beloved gopīs, none are as dear as Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

hlādinī yā mahā-śaktiḥ

sarva-śakti-varīyasī

tat-sāra-bhāva-rūpeyam

iti tantre pratiṣṭhitā

The supreme potency known as hlādinī is superior to all
the other potencies of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. The concentrated form
of this hlādinī-śakti, which finds its ultimate
expression in the stage of mādanākhyā-mahābhāva, is none
other than Śrīmatī Rādhikā. This conclusion has been
established in the Tantras.

In his Cāṭu-puṣpāñjali from Stava-mālā, Rūpa Gosvāmī has
glorified Śrīmatī Rādhikā as follows:

nava-gorocanā-gaurīṁ pravarendīvarāmbarām

maṇi-stavaka-vidyoti-veṇī-vyālāṅganā-phaṇām(1)

O Vṛndāvaneśvarī, I offer prayers unto You. Your golden
complexion is like fresh gorocana. Your sārī is the
colour of a beautiful blue lotus, and the upper part of
Your long, braided hair is studded with jewels, making
it appear like the hood of a black serpent.

upamāna-ghaṭā-māna-prahāri-mukha-maṇḍalāṁ

                             82
Manah-siksa.txt                                    5/5/2017


navendu-nindi-bhālodyat-kastūrī-tilaka-śriyam(2)

Your exquisite face shames the brilliance of the full
moon, a fully-blossomed lotus flower, or any other
possible object of comparison. Your forehead, which
resembles a newly-risen crescent moon, is splendorously
adorned with musk tilaka.

bhrū-jitānaṅga-kodaṇḍāṁ lola-nīlālakāvalim

kajjalojjvalatā-rājac-cakorī-cāru-locanām(3)

Your curved eyebrows put Cupid’s bow to shame. Your
swaying tresses of black, curling hair are splendid, and
Your eyes, which are wonderfully decorated with kājala,
look like a pair of youthful cakorī birds (which are
said to be enamoured by the moon and are therefore a
symbol of amorous desire).

tila-puṣpābha-nāsāgra-virājad-vara-mauktikām

adharoddhūta-bandhūkāṁ kundālī-bandhura-dvijām (4)

A splendid pearl adorns the sesame-flower tip of Your
nose, Your lips are like deep red bandhūka flowers, and
Your rows of teeth glitter like sparkling white jasmine
buds.

sa-ratna-svarṇa-rājīva-karṇikākṛta-karṇikām

kastūrī-bindu-cibukāṁ ratna-graiveyakojjvalām (5)

Jewel-studded stamens of golden lotus flowers decorate
Your ears, Your chin is decorated with a dot of musk,
and You wear a necklace bedecked with jewels.

divyāṅgada-pariṣvaṅga-lasad-bhuja-mṛṇālikām

valāri-ratna-valaya-kalālambi-kalāvikām(6)

Your beautiful arms, which are like lotus-stems, are
adorned with armlets, and on Your wrists are bracelets
composed of blue sapphires that jingle sweetly as You
move.

ratnāṅgurīyakollāsi-varāṅguli-karāmbujām

manohara-mahā-hāra-vihāri-kuca-kuṭmalām(7)

The fingers of Your lotus hands are decorated with rings
mounted with jewels, and Your breasts are adorned with
an enchanting, precious necklace.

romāli-bhujagī-mūrdha-ratnābha-taralāñcitām

vali-trayī-latā-baddha-kṣīṇa-bhaṅgura-madhyamām(8)

Sitting atop the line of hairs that cross Your navel,
the central jewel of that necklace appears like the
jewel on the head of a female snake. Your fine, slender
waist, bent slightly by the weight of Your breasts, is
marked by three lines that appear like entwining
creepers.

                           83
Manah-siksa.txt                                   5/5/2017


maṇi-sārasanādhāra-visphāra-śroṇi-rodhasam

hema-rambhā-madārambha-stambhanoru-yugākṛtim(9)

Around Your broad hips is a splendid, tinkling, jewel-
studded waist-band, and Your shapely thighs crush the
pride of the golden trunk of the plantain tree.

jānu-dyuti-jita-kṣulla-pīta-ratna-samudgakām

śaran-nīraja-nīrājya-mañjīra-viraṇat-padām(10)

The splendour of Your beautiful knees puts to shame the
radiance of round, yellow sapphire jewellery cases, and
Your beautiful feet, which are adorned by tinkling
anklets, gleam with red lotuses that blossom in autumn.

rākendu-koṭi-saundarya-jaitra-pāda-nakha-dyutim

aṣṭābhiḥ sāttvikair bhāvair ākulī-kṛta-vigrahām (11)

The resplendence of the nails of Your lotus feet defeats
the beauty of millions of full moons, and Your entire
form is pervaded by the eight sāttvika-bhāvas, such as
perspiration and becoming stunned.

mukundāṅga-kṛtāpāṅgām anaṅgormi-taraṅgitām

tvām ārabdha-śriyānandāṁ vande vṛndāvaneśvari (12)

As you flash sidelong glances at Śrī Kṛṣṇa, You swell
with waves of amorous desire, and then You meet with Him
and experience infinite bliss. O Vṛndāvaneśvarī, I
worship You, the reservoir of divine qualities.

ayi prodyan-mahā-bhāva-mādhurī vihvalāntare

aśeṣa-nāyikāvasthā-prākaṭyādbhuta-ceṣṭite(13)

O Śrīmatī, Your heart is inundated by the combined
sweetness of all the symptoms of mahābhāva arising
simultaneously in You. Because You possess all the
attributes of the unlimited varieties of heroines,
everyone is astonished upon witnessing Your varied moods
and gestures.

sarva-mādhurya-viñcholī-nirmañchita-padāmbuje

indirā-mṛgya-saundarya-sphurad-aṅghri-nakhāñcale(14)

All the attributes of a heroine such as sweetness attend
Your lotus feet, and that beauty which even Lakṣmī-devī
prays for shines forth from the nails of those feet.

gokulendu-mukhī-vṛnda-sīmantottaṁsa-mañjari

lalitādi-sakhī-yūtha-jīvātu-smita-korake(15)

You are the crest jewel and flower-bud of all the women
of Gokula, and Your sweet, gentle smile is life-giving
tonic for all the sakhīs headed by Lalitā.

caṭulāpāṅga-mādhurya-bindūnmādita-mādhave

                           84
Manah-siksa.txt                                  5/5/2017


tāta-pāda-yaśaḥ stoma-kairavānanda-candrike (16)

The sidelong glances from Your restless eyes act as
drops of ambrosia that madden Mādhava, and You are the
moon that expands the flower of Your father’s fame.

apāra-karuṇā-pūra-pūritāntar-mano-hrade

prasīdāsmin jane devi nija-dāsya-spṛhā-juṣi (17)

Your heart is like a fathomless reservoir that is
overflowing with compassion. Therefore, O Goddess, be
pleased with this humble soul who longs to become Your
maidservant.

kaccit tvaṁ cāṭu-paṭunā tena goṣṭhendra-sūnunā

prārthyamāna-calāpāṅga-prasādā drakṣyase mayā? (18)

After Your mood of jealous anger has broken, the cunning
Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa entreats You to meet with
Him with words of flattery. At that time You become
ecstatic and shower Him with sidelong glances. When will
I be able to witness such emotions?

tvāṁ sādhu mādhavī-puṣpair mādhavena kalā-vidā

prasādhyamānāṁ svidyantīṁ vījayiṣyāmy ahaṁ kadā? (19)

As the skilful and artistic Śrī Kṛṣṇa decorates You with
mādhavī flowers, the touch of His lotus hands causes the
symptoms of ecstasy to break out over Your entire form,
thereby drenching You in perspiration. Oh, when at this
time will I be able to gently fan You with a palm-leaf?

keli-vistraṁsino vakra-keśa-vṛndasya sundari

saṁskārāya kadā devi janam etaṁ nidekṣyasi? (20)

O Devī, O Sundarī, after Your loveplay with Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
Your hair is left dishevelled and in need of being
arranged again. When will You order this surrendered
soul to perform this service?

kadā bimbhoṣṭhi tāmbūlaṁ mayā tava mukhāmbuje

arpyamāṇaṁ vrajādhīśa-sūnur ācchidya bhokṣyate? (21)

O Bimboṣṭhī (one whose lips are   like bimba fruits),
after You accept my offering of   tāmbula, Śrī Kṛṣṇa will
remove it from Your lotus mouth   and place it in His own
mouth. When will I witness such   loving pastimes?

vraja-rāja-kumāra-vallabhā-kula-sīmanta-maṇi prasida me

parivāra-gaṇasya te yathā padavī me na davīyasī bhavet
(22)

O Śrīmatī, since You are the crown jewel of Vrajendra-
nandana’s beloved gopīs, be pleased with me and ever-so-
quickly consider me a member of Your family. Please show
me this kindness.


                           85
Manah-siksa.txt                                  5/5/2017

karuṇāṁ muhur arthaye paraṁ tava vṛndāvana cakravartini

api keśi-riporyayā bhavet sa caṭu-prārthana-bhājanaṁ
janaḥ (23)

O Queen of Vṛndāvana, I beseech You at Your lotus feet
time and again. Please be compassionate and make me Your
maidservant (pālyadāsī). After You have become indignant
due to a lover’s quarrel, in order to meet with You
again Śrī Kṛṣṇa will speak many flattering words to me,
knowing me to be Your dear attendant. At that time I
will take His hand and lead Him to You. O Svāminī, when
will You grant me this mercy?

imaṁ vṛndāvaneśvaryā jano yaḥ paṭhati stavaṁ

cāṭu-puṣpāñjaliṁ nāma sa syād asyāḥ kṛpāspadam (24)

A fortunate soul who faithfully recites this Cāṭu-
puṣpāñjali in glorification of Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī
Rādhikā will very quickly become the recipient of Her
mercy.

One should worship Śrīmatī Rādhikā by reciting prayers
like this and by rendering all types of service. Śrī
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī has expressed this mood in his
Vilāpa-kusumāñjali (101–2).

lakṣmīr yad aṅghri-kamalasya nakhāñcalasya

saundarya-bindum api nārhati labdhum-īśe

sā tvaṁ vidhāsyasi na cen mama netradānaṁ

kiṁ jīvitena mama duḥkha-dāvāgni-dena?

O Prāṇeśvarī Śrī Rādhikā, Śrī Lakṣmī-devī is unable to
obtain even a drop of the beauty that radiates from the
tips of the toenails of Your lotus feet. If You do not
grant me the eyes to behold Your splendorous form,
qualities and pastimes, then of what use to me is this
miserable life, which blazes in a raging conflagration
of anguish?

āśābharair amṛta-sindhumayaiḥ kathañcit

kālo mayāti-gamitaḥ kila sāmprataṁ hi

tvaṁ cet kṛpāṁ mayi vidhāsyasi naiva kiṁ me

prāṇair vrajena ca varoru bakāriṇāpi?

O Varoru (girl with beautiful thighs), it is decidedly
only with the hope of obtaining the nectarean ocean of
service unto You and the vision of Your transcendental
pastimes that I have been able to maintain my life thus
far with severe difficulty. But if You are not merciful
unto me even now, then of what use to me is this life,
residence in Vraja-dhāma or even Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself?

If a person is greatly   fortunate, ecstatic love that is
steeped in the mood of   Vraja may be awakened in him by
the causeless mercy of   Bhagavān or His devotee. At that
time one comes to know   of his eternal constitutional

                             86
Manah-siksa.txt                                  5/5/2017

identity from a rāgānuga-guru. Equipped with this
understanding and being desirous of taking up
appropriate services and sādhana, the spiritual aspirant
should first take shelter of the lotus feet of such a
spiritual master, perceiving him in his eternal
spiritual form as a mañjarī. He should then engage in
bhajana and sādhana with heart and soul. By continuous
practice of sādhana and bhajana, he will obtain the
service of one of the sakhīs of Śrīmatī Rādhikā by the
mercy of his mañjarī-guru. By continued service unto
that sakhī and by receiving her mercy, one will obtain
the direct darśana of Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhikā.
Finally, by Her mercy, one will be able to serve the
Divine Couple in Their transcendental pastimes. All this
can be accomplished only by unpretentious humility,
intense hankering and one-pointed focus on the goal.




Verse Eleven




samaṁ śrī-rūpeṇa smara-vivaśa-rādhā-giribhṛtor

vraje sākṣāt-sevā-labhana-vidhaye tad-gaṇa-yujoḥ

tad-ijyākhyā-dhyāna-śravaṇa-nati-pañcāmṛtam idaṁ

dhayan nītyā govardhanam anudinaṁ tvaṁ bhaja manaḥ



Anvaya

manaḥ – O mind; vidhaye – for the method; labhana – of
obtaining; sākṣāt-sevā – the direct service; rādhā-
giribhṛtoḥ – of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Giridhārī; smara-vivaśa –
who are entranced with amorous desire; tad-gaṇa-yujoḥ –
along with Their associates; vraje – in Vraja; tvam –
you; dhayan – drink; śrī-rūpeṇa-samam – in accordance
with Śrī Rūpa; idam – this; pañcāmṛta – nectar
consisting of five ingredients; tad-ijyā – (in the form
of) Their worship (arcana); ākhyā – descriptions of
Their names, forms, qualities and pastimes (saṅkīrtana);
dhyāna – meditation; śravaṇa – hearing of Their names,
forms, qualities and pastimes; nati – bowing down to
Them; bhaja – (and) worship; govardhanam – Śrī
Govardhana; anudinam – every day; nītyā – with the
precepts of devotion.



Translation

[Now the method of performing very deep and confidential
bhajana is being explained.] O my dear mind, in order to
obtain the direct service of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Giridhārī,
who are always entranced by amorous desire, and the
service of Their eternal associates in Vraja, one should

                           87
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017

drink the pañcāmṛta of service to Them in accordance
with the method prescribed by Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī. This
pañcāmṛta is ambrosial nectar comprised of the following
five ingredients: worship of the Divine Couple (arcana),
chanting the glories of Their transcendental names,
forms, qualities and pastimes (saṅkīrtana), meditating
upon Them (dhyāna), hearing the glories of Their names,
forms, qualities and pastimes (śravaṇa), and offering
obeisances unto Them. In addition one should worship Śrī
Govardhana daily in accordance with the precepts of
devotion.



Śrī Bhajana-darpaṇa-digdarśinī-vṛtti



(1) Tad-gaṇa-yujoḥ: With Their associates

This refers to Śrī Kṛṣṇa surrounded by His friends such
as Śrīdāma and Subala, and Śrīmatī Rādhikā surrounded by
Her girlfriends such as Śrī Lalitā and Viśākhā.



(2) Smara-vilāsa-vivaśa: Absorbed in amorous pastimes

Śrī Rādhā-Giridhārī are deeply immersed in śṛṅgāra-rasa,
considering it to be more attractive than dāsya-,
sakhya- or vātsalya-rasa.



(3) Vraje sākṣāt-sevā-labhana: Obtaining direct service
in Vraja

The service that one performs in the stage of sādhana is
a simulation of direct service. In the stage of
perfection one first obtains remote service. By serving
regularly from a distant place under the guidance of a
mañjarī, one gradually obtains the service of the
sakhīs. Thereafter, she obtains the direct service of
Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Govinda. There are unlimited varieties of
services such as cleansing the kuñja where Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa enact Their pastimes, arranging Their bed,
bringing water, stringing garlands, preparing tāmbula
and offering camphor. Innumerable maidservants are each
engaged in their respective services.

The direct service of Śrī Rādhā-Govinda is possible only
when the jīva obtains his eternal, perfected spiritual
form (nitya-siddha deha). The conditioned living entity
cannot perform direct service with his material gross or
subtle body. In direct service one experiences unbounded
bliss and perpetually innovative rasa at every instant
owing to the profound emotions originating from
mādhurya-rasa. At this stage the happiness one derives
from direct service is so great that one has not even
the slightest trace of desire for personal enjoyment.
Situated on this platform, a devotee’s heart is never
touched by any kind of misery. The distress that is
exhibited in mādhurya-rasa in the mood of separation
(vipralambha) is but a transformation of divine ecstasy.

                           88
Manah-siksa.txt                                5/5/2017

This experience has no connection whatsoever with the
grief associated with the material body.

(4) Śrī Rūpeṇa-samam: In accordance with Śrī Rūpa

Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, the ācārya of mādhurya-rasa, has set
forth the procedures for rāgānuga-sādhakas pursuing
mādhurya-rasa in his books named Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindhu and Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi. One should adopt these
methods and drink the pañcāmṛta mentioned in this Verse
Eleven. These methods are described in Śrī Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.90–3) as follows.

śraddhā viśeṣataḥ prītiḥ

śrī-mūrter-aṅghri-sevane

śrīmad-bhāgavatārthānām

āsvādo rasikaiḥ saha

sajātīyāśaye snigdhe

sādhau saṅgaḥ svato vare

nāma-saṅkīrtanaṁ śrīman-

mathurā-maṇḍale sthitiḥ

aṅgānāṁ pañcakasyāsya

pūrvaṁ vilikhitasya ca

nikhila śraiṣṭhya bodhāya

punar apy atra kīrtanam

(1) One should serve the lotus feet of the deity with
faith and especially with love; (2) one should taste the
meaning of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam in the company of rasika
Vaiṣṇavas; (3) one should associate with devotees who
are situated in the same mood, who are soft-hearted and
affectionately disposed, and who are more advanced than
oneself; (4) one should perform śrī-nāma-saṅkīrtana; and
(5) one should reside in Mathurā-maṇḍala, or in other
words Vraja-maṇḍala. Although these five limbs of bhakti
have already been mentioned, they are repeated again in
order to establish their superiority to the other limbs.

(5) Ijyā: Worship of the deity

The limbs of bhakti that are incorporated under this
heading include service to the lotus feet of the deity
(arcana), observing Ekādaśī and certain Dvādaśīs,
wearing tulasī neck beads and tilaka, honouring
caraṇāmṛta and mahā-prasāda, undertaking vows like
kārttika-vrata, and serving the tulasī plant.

(6) Ākhyā: Glorification

Study of the devotional scriptures, hearing and reciting
hari-kathā in the association of devotees, and chanting
the glories of the holy names, form, qualities and
pastimes of the Lord are known as ākhyā, glorification.

                            89
Manah-siksa.txt                                  5/5/2017


(7) Dhyāna: Meditation

Dhyāna refers to a specific practice that is included
within the broader discipline of smaraṇa, remembrance.
But in this verse the entire practice of smaraṇa has
been referred to simply as dhyāna. Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī has
elaborated on this subject in his Bhakti-sandarbha
(Anuccheda 278):

smaraṇaṁ manasānusandhānam. atha pūrvavat krama-sopāna-
rītyā sukha-labhyaṁ guṇa-parikara-sevā-līlā smaraṇaṁ
cānusandheyam. tad idam smaraṇaṁ pañca-vidham – yat
kiñcid anusandhānaṁ smaraṇam. sarvataś-cittam ākṛṣya
sāmānyākāreṇa manodhāraṇaṁ dhāraṇā. viśeṣato rūpādi
cintanaṁ dhyānam. amṛta-dhārāvadanavacchinnaṁ tad
dhruvānusmṛtiḥ. dhyeyamātra-sphūraṇaṁ samādhir iti.

Close inspection with the mind is called smaraṇa,
remembrance. Thereafter, one should practise remembrance
according to the step-by-step method described
previously. In other words, one should first remember
the names, then the form, then the qualities of the
Lord, and in accordance with this progression one should
practise the easy method of remembering the qualities,
associates, services and pastimes of Śrī Hari. This
remembrance is of five types: (1) A little investigation
or examination of Śrī Hari’s names, form and so on is
called smaraṇa. (2) To withdraw the mind from all
external objects and fix it in a general way upon the
names, form, etc. of Śrī Hari is called dhārana. (3) To
contemplate the Lord’s names, form, etc. in a
distinctive manner is called dhyāna. (4) When that
remembrance proceeds in an uninterrupted manner like a
continuous flow of nectar, it is called dhruvānusmṛti.
(5) That meditation in which the object of one’s
contemplation is the only thing manifest in the heart is
called samādhi.

(8) Śravaṇa: Hearing

To hear about the names, form, qualities and pastimes of
Śrī Bhagavān from the mouths of pure devotees is called
śravaṇa. Hearing Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and other devotional
scriptures every evening in the association of pure
devotees and other similar arrangements for hearing are
also included within this item.

(9) Nati: Offering obeisances

To offer prostrated obeisances before the deity at the
time of taking darśana, or to bow down at the places
where the Lord enacted His pastimes or at places that
stimulate one’s remembrance of the Lord, is called nati.

(10) Govardhanaṁ bhaja: Worship Śrī Govardhana

Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī has targeted this
instruction towards himself as well as towards everyone
else. Svayam Bhagavān Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu personally
gave His govardhana-śilā to Śrī Dāsa Gosvāmī, who
describes this himself in his Śrī Gaurāṅga-stava-
kalpataru (11), taken from Stavāvalī.


                           90
Manah-siksa.txt                                 5/5/2017

mahā-sampad-dārād api patitam uddhṛtya kṛpayā

svarūpe yaḥ svīye kujanam api māṁ nyasya muditaḥ

uro-guñjāhāraṁ priyam api ca govardhana-śilāṁ

dadau me gaurāṅgo hṛdaya udayan māṁ madayati

Although I am atrociously fallen and despicable, Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu out of His causeless mercy delivered
me from great material opulence, wife and so on. He
handed me over in great pleasure to Śrī Svarūpa
Dāmodara, His confidential associate. Considering me to
be very dear, He gave me the guñjā-mālā that adorned His
own neck and His govardhana-śilā. May that Śrī
Gaurāṅgadeva appear in my heart and intoxicate me with
divine ecstasy.

“Śrī-govardhana-śilā is a direct manifestation of the
Supreme Lord. Śrī Dāsa Gosvāmī used to reside by Śrī
Govardhana at Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa and never went anywhere
else. Following his example, I will never give up
residence at Govardhana.” To have this kind of firm
determination is another means of worshipping Śrī
Govardhana.

Śrī Govardhana worship has two meanings for the ordinary
sādhakas. The first is that one should consider
govardhana-śilā as a venerable deity and therefore
worship Him in accordance with the rules previously
mentioned [under heading (5) Ijyā on pp. 125–6]. The
second is that one should reside at Śrī Govardhana, a
place wherein the Lord enacted His pastimes, and worship
Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala. By indirect implication
(upalakṣaṇa), this signifies residence anywhere in
Vraja-maṇḍala. Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī has said that to live in
Mathurā-maṇḍala is one of the principal limbs of bhakti;
therefore, here the same thing is being expressed in
different words.

(11) Nītyā: In accordance with the rules (of devotion)

One should not think that the word nīti used here refers
only to vaidhī-mārga. Those who are eligible for vaidhī-
bhakti will worship according to the rules set forth by
Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī for vaidhī-mārga, and those who are
eligible for rāgānuga-bhakti will worship by adopting
the procedures of rāga-mārga enunciated by him.




Verse Twelve




manaḥ-śikṣā-daikādaśaka-varam etan madhurayā

girā gāyaty uccaiḥ samadhigata-sarvārtha-tati yaḥ

sa-yūthaḥ śrī-rūpānuga iha bhavan gokulavane

                           91
Manah-siksa.txt                                  5/5/2017


jano rādhā-kṛṣṇātula-bhajana-ratnaṁ sa labhate



Anvaya

yaḥ janaḥ – anyone who; śrī-rūpānugaḥ bhavan – becomes a
follower of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī; sa-yūthaḥ – with his
group; iha gokulavane – in this forest of Gokula (in Śrī
Vraja-maṇḍala near Śrī Govardhana); uccaiḥ – (and)
loudly; gāyati – sings; etat – these; varam – excellent;
ekādaśaka – eleven verses; manaḥ-śikṣā-da – which give
instruction to the mind; madhurayā girā – with a sweet
voice; samadhigata – having thoroughly understood; sarva
– all; artha-tati – the many meanings; saḥ – he; labhate
– obtains; atula – the incomparable; bhajana-ratnam –
jewel of worship; rādhā-kṛṣṇa – unto Śrī Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa.



Translation

[While instructing his own mind, Śrī Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī offers the following benediction in order to
inspire other devotees to study and recite this
composition known as Manaḥ-śikṣā.] Anyone who, adopting
the line of Śrī Rūpa and his followers, takes up
residence in Gokulavana and loudly sings these eleven
excellent instructions to the mind in a melodious voice
with full understanding of their meaning, will certainly
obtain the matchless gem of worshipping Śrī Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa.



Śrī Bhajana-darpaṇa-digdarśinī-vṛtti



(1) Sa-yūtha: With his group

The word sa-yūtha – with his group or followers – refers
to rūpānuga Vaiṣṇavas who are possessed of the same
inclination, who are soft-hearted and affectionate, and
who are more advanced than oneself. One should remain
under the guidance of such persons. Although Lalitā-devī
and other sakhīs are independent nāyikās (heroines) and
yūtheśvarīs (group leaders), they remain under the
guidance of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Similarly, although uttama-
bhāgavata Vaiṣṇavas may be spiritual masters for many
disciples, they are followers of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī. In
this connection we find the following statement from Śrī
Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi (Hari-priyā-prakaraṇa 3.61):

yūthādhipātve ’py aucityaṁ

dadhānā lalitādayaḥ

sveṣṭa-rādhādibhāvasya

lobhāt sakhya-ruciṁ dadhuḥ


                             92
Manah-siksa.txt                                 5/5/2017

Although Lalitā and the other principal sakhīs are fully
competent as group leaders (yūtheśvarīs), they are
extremely eager to please their dearmost Śrīmatī Rādhikā
and therefore they prefer to adopt the mood of attendant
sakhīs. They do not care to assume the mood of
independent yūtheśvarī-nāyikās.

(2) Rūpānuga

Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī enunciated the principles of rasa on
the order of Śrīman Mahāprabhu. He performed his own
bhajana in accordance with those principles and thereby
established the ideal standard of vraja-bhajana for the
whole world. Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī, Śrī Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī and other rasika-ācāryas followed this system.
To follow this method of bhajana is known as śrī-
rūpānuga-bhajana.

(3) Gokulavane: In the forest of Gokula

This refers to any charming place in Śrī Mathurā or
Vraja-maṇḍala wherein the Lord enacted His pastimes. Śrī
Rūpa Gosvāmī describes the glories of Śrī Mathurā-
maṇḍala in his Stava-mālā (Śrī Mathurā-stava).

mukter govinda-bhakter vitaraṇa-caturaṁ sac-cid-ānanda-
rūpaṁ

yasyāṁ vidyoti vidyā-yugalam-udayate tārakaṁ pārakaṁ ca

kṛṣṇasyotpatti-līlā-khanir akhila-jagan-mauli-ratnasya
sā te

vaikuṇṭhād yā pratiṣṭhā prathayatu mathurā maṅgalānāṁ
kalāpam (1)

Śrī Mathurā-purī is thoroughly adept at conferring
liberation in the form of bhakti for the lotus feet of
Śrī Govinda. She enables the living entities to cross
over the ocean of material existence and bestows love
for Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and is thus fully endowed with two types
of knowledge known as tāraka (taking across) and pāraka
(causing to reach the ultimate end). She is the crest
jewel of all places in the entire creation, being the
abode where Śrī Kṛṣṇa enacted His childhood pastimes and
other līlās. May that Śrī Mathurā-purī, who is
worshipful even for Vaikuṇṭha, bestow all auspiciousness
upon you.

koṭīndu-spaṣṭa-kāntī rabhasa-yuta-bhava-kleśa-yodhair
ayodhyā

māyā-vitrāsivāsā muni-hṛdayam uṣo divya-līlāḥ sravantī

sāśīḥ kāśīśamukhyāmarapatibhir alaṁ prārthita-dvārakāryā

vaikuṇṭhodgīta-kīrtir diśatu madhupurī prema-bhakti-
śriyaṁ vaḥ (2)

The radiance of Śrī Mathurā-purī is superior to many
millions of moons. The five types of misery beginning
with ignorance, which are like powerful warriors
perpetuating this raging material existence, are unable
to conquer her. By residing there, one is easily freed

                           93
Manah-siksa.txt                                   5/5/2017

from the sufferings of material existence. The mystical
demigods, being aware of the greatness of residing in
Mathurā-purī, are also fearful of doing anything to her
inhabitants. The pastimes of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, which steal the
hearts of great sages like Śrī Śuka and Śaunaka, are
eternally enacted there. She fulfils all the desires of
her worshippers. Even Lord Śiva and the demigods hanker
to carry out the duty of being her watchman. Śrī
Varāhadeva has sung her glories. May that Śrī Mathurā-
purī bestow prema-bhakti upon you.

bījaṁ mukti-taror anartha-paṭalī-nistārakaṁ tārakaṁ

dhāma-prema-rasasya vāñchita-dhurāsaṁpārakaṁ pārakam

etad yatra nivāsinām udayate cic-chakti-vṛtti-dvayaṁ

mathmātu vyasanāni māthurapurī sā vaḥ śriyaṁ ca kriyāt
(3)

Śrī Mathurā-purī is the seed of the tree of liberation
and she delivers one from all anarthas. She protects one
from all inauspiciousness and is the foundation of
prema-rasa. She fulfils all desires, thus enabling one
to attain complete submission unto Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Śrī
Kṛṣṇa’s cit-śakti, which has the functions of giving
Kṛṣṇa pleasure and nourishing His pastimes, and which is
eternally existent, composed of spiritual consciousness
and full of transcendental bliss (sac-cid-ānanda), is
eternally manifest there. May that Śrī Mathurā-purī
eradicate all your sins even to the extent of the subtle
body, and endow you with prema-bhakti.

adyāvanti patad-grahaṁ kuru kare māye śanair-vījaya

cchatraṁ kañci gṛhāṇa kāśi purataḥ pādū-yugaṁ dhāraya

nāyodhye bhaja sambhramaṁ stuti-kathāṁ nodgāraya dvārake

devīyaṁ bhavatīṣu hanta mathurā dṛṣṭi-prasādaṁ dadhe (4)

O Avantī (Ujjain), today please pick up the receptacle
for chewed betel nut. O Māyāpurī (Haridvāra), you should
fan with a cāmara. O Kāñcī, you hold up the umbrella. O
Kāśī, stay in front with the wooden sandals ready in
your hands. O Ayodhyā, don’t feel apprehensive that your
service may be rejected. O Dvārakā, don’t offer prayers
now, for today Mahārāja Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s queen, Śrī Mathurā-
devī, is pleased with all of you who are her
maidservants.7

In Stava-mālā (Śrī Vṛndāvanāṣṭaka), Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī has
described the glories of Vṛndāvana.

mukunda-muralī-rava-śravaṇa-phulla-hṛd-ballavī-

kadambaka-karambita-prati-kadamba-kuñjāntarā

kalinda-giri-nandinī-kamala-kandalāndolinā

sugandhir anilena me śaraṇam astu vṛndāṭavī (1)

Śrī Vṛndāvana’s luxuriant groves of kadamba trees abound
with gopīs whose hearts are greatly delighted upon

                           94
Manah-siksa.txt                                    5/5/2017

hearing the melody of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s flute, and those
groves are made even more fragrant due to a gentle
breeze carrying the scent of lotus flowers blossoming
upon the waters of Śrī Yamunā, the daughter of Mount
Kalinda. May that Śrī Vṛndāvana be my shelter.

vikuṇṭha-pura-saṁśrayād vipinato ’pi niḥśreyasāt

sahasra-guṇitāṁ śriyaṁ praduhatī rasa-śreyasīm

catur-mukha-mukhair api spṛhita-tārṇa-dehodbhavā

jagad-gurubhir-agrimaiḥ śaraṇam astu vṛndāṭavī (2)

Residence in Śrī Vṛndāvana is far superior to the
position of liberation in Vaikuṇṭha, and therefore
thousands of times more beneficial. In other words, Śrī
Vṛndāvana bestows the priceless treasures of dāsya-,
sakhya-, vātsalya- and mādhurya-rasas. Even four-headed
Lord Brahmā, the spiritual master of the entire
universe, prays to obtain birth there even as an
insignificant blade of grass or a bush. May that Śrī
Vṛndāvana be my shelter.

anārata-vikasvara-vratati-puñja-puṣpāvalī-

visāri-vara-saurabhodgama-ramā-camatkāriṇī

amanda-makaranda-bhṛd-viṭapi-vṛnda-vandī-kṛta-

dvirepha-kula-vanditā śaraṇam astu vṛndāṭavī (3)

The multitudes of blooming creepers in Vṛndāvana always
exude a sweet aroma that extends a great distance and
astonishes even Śrī Lakṣmī-devī. Vṛndāvana is eulogised
by swarms of buzzing bumblebees hovering about the
trees, which emit an abundant shower of nectar from
their blossoming flowers. May that Śrī Vṛndāvana be my
shelter.

kṣaṇadyuti-ghana-śriyor vraja-navīna-yūnoḥ padaiḥ

suvalghubhir alaṅkṛtā lalita-lakṣma-lakṣmī-bharaiḥ

tayor nakhara-maṇḍalī-śikhara-keli-caryocitair

vṛtā-kiśalayāṅkuraiḥ śaraṇam astu vṛndāṭavī (4)

The entire area of Vraja is marked with charming and
artistic symbols, such as the lightning bolt and goad,
that have been made by the lotus feet of the eternally
youthful lovers, Śrī Rādhā-Govinda Yugala, whose bodily
complexions when They meet together resemble a flash of
lightning intermingled with a fresh monsoon cloud. That
land is always laden with fresh buds and shoots that
emulate the beauty of the nails on the lotus feet of Śrī
Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. May that Śrī Vṛndāvana be my shelter.

vrajendra-sakha-nandinī śubhatarādhikāra-kriyā-

prabhāvaja-sukhotsava-sphurita-jaṅgama-sthāvarā

pralamba-damanānuja-dhvanita-vaṁśīkā-kākalī-


                           95
Manah-siksa.txt                                   5/5/2017

rasajña-mṛga-maṇḍalā śaraṇaṁ astu vṛndāṭavī (5)

In the land of Vṛndāvana, on the order of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā – the daughter of Nanda Mahārāja’s intimate
friend Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja – Vṛndā Sakhī delights and
invigorates both moving and non-moving living entities
in order to increase the festival of divine bliss for
Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. In that land herds of deer wander
about, expert at relishing the sweet, melodious sound of
the flute of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the younger brother of Baladeva
– the slayer of the Pralamba demon. May that Śrī
Vṛndāvana be my shelter.

amanda-mudirārbudābhyadhika-mādhurī-medura-

vrajendra-suta-vīkṣaṇonnaṭita-nīla-kaṇṭhotkarā

dineśa-suhṛd-ātmajā-kṛta-nijābhimānollasal-

latā-khaga-mṛgāṅganā śaraṇam astu vṛndāṭavī (6)

In Vṛndāvana the peacocks dance in jubilation, being
intoxicated by seeing Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s dark bodily
complexion, which resembles a fresh raincloud. Out of
deep loving attachment for this land, Śrī Rādhikā, the
daughter of the sun-god’s friend Śrī Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja,
proclaims, “This Vṛndāvana is mine,” thereby greatly
delighting the creepers, doe, peahens, female cuckoos
and the females of all the species of birds found there
(due to the pre-eminence of femininity established by
Śrī Vṛndāvaneśvarī Śrīmatī Rādhikā). May that Śrī
Vṛndāvana be my shelter.

agaṇya-guṇa-nāgarī-gaṇa-gariṣṭha-gāndharvikā

manoja-raṇa-cāturī-piśuna-kuñja-puñjojjvalā

jagat-traya-kalā-guror lalita-lāsya-valgat-pada-

prayoga-vidhi-sākṣiṇī śaraṇam astu vṛndāṭavī (7)

The divinely beautiful, splendorous kuñjas of Vṛndāvana
testify to the cleverness in lovers’ quarrels of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, who possesses countless virtues. That land is
witness to the captivating dance steps of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who
is supremely expert in all the arts. May that Śrī
Vṛndāvana be my shelter.

variṣṭha-hari-dāsatā-pada-samṛddha-govardhanā

madhūdvaha-vadhū-camatkṛti-nivāsa rāsa-sthalā

agūḍha-gahana-śriyo madhurima-vrajenojjvalā

vrajasya sahajena me śaraṇam astu vṛndāṭavī (8)

In Vṛndāvana-dhāma, Śrī Girirāja-Govardhana – having
been awarded the extremely rare title of being the
topmost servant of Hari by the gopīs – is gloriously
manifest. In that land is situated the arena of the rāsa
dance, which thoroughly astonishes the gopīs or the
queens of Dvārakā like Śrī Rukmiṇī and Satyabhāmā. Being
surrounded by forests of trees full of fragrant flowers,
foliage and blossoms, Śrī Vṛndāvana radiates a lustrous

                           96
Manah-siksa.txt                                  5/5/2017

splendour glowing with sweetness. May that Śrī Vṛndāvana
naturally become my sole shelter.

idaṁ nikhila niṣkuṭāvali-variṣṭha-vṛndāṭavī-

guṇa-smaraṇa-kāri yaḥ paṭhati suṣṭhu padyāṣṭakam

vasan vyasana-mukta-dhīr aniśam atra sad-vāsanaḥ

sa pīta-vasane vaśī ratim avāpya vikrīḍati (9)

If a sinless person who has conquered his senses is
intently engaged in the cultivation of unalloyed
devotion, and if while residing in Vṛndāvana he lovingly
recites this composition that stimulates remembrance of
the qualities of Śrī Vṛndāvana, the best of all forests,
he will obtain ecstatic love for the lotus feet of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, who wears a yellow garment and is accompanied by
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and he will become happily immersed in
Their pastimes.

(4) Manaḥ-śikṣā-da: Instructing the mind

This composition known as Manaḥ-śikṣā offers
instructions to the minds of persons who are anxiously
desiring to pursue the path of bhajana.

(5) Varam: Most excellent

These verses are filled with the most elevated and
confidential instructions that were revealed by Śrī
Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī and Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī via the
mercy of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

(6) Madhurayā-girā-uccaiḥ: Loudly singing in a melodious
voice

One should sing these verses with the proper metre and
melody, either alone or accompanied by other faithful
sādhakas, in a loud voice overflowing with love and
intense feeling.

(7) Samadhigata: Thoroughly understood

One should recite these eleven verses with a thorough
understanding of their deep and confidential meanings.

yeṣāṁ sarāga-bhajane vraja-rāja-sūnoḥ

śrī-rūpa śikṣita matānugamanānurāgaḥ

yatnena te bhajana-darpaṇa nāma bhāṣyaṁ

śikṣāda-śloka sahitaṁ prapaṭhantu bhaktyā

Those who have an intense desire to worship Śrī Śrī
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala with deep attachment by adopting the
methods of vraja-bhajana in full accordance with the
instructions of rasa-ācārya Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī should
study Manaḥ-śikṣā with great love and serious attention
to this commentary known as Bhajana-darpaṇa.

Thus ends this Digdarśinī-vṛtti, the translation and
purport of the combined Sanskrit and Bengali commentary

                            97
Manah-siksa.txt                                 5/5/2017

known as Bhajana-darpaṇa composed by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Thākura.




Table of Contents

Preface

Introduction

Verse One

Verse Two

Verse Three

Verse Four

Verse Five

Verse Six

Verse Seven

Verse Eight

Verse Nine

Verse Ten

Verse Eleven

Verse Twelve




                           98
