Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                   5/5/2017

Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma



and the Prominent Holy Places of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas
in Śrī Gauḍa-maṇḍala



by Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja




Contents

Introduction

Preface to the English Edition

The Magnificence of Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma

The Appearance and Size of the Dhāma



Śrī Antardvīpa

Ātopura-grāma

Śacī-devī’s delivery room

Kṣetrapāla Śiva, or Gopīśvara Mahādeva

Śrī Nṛsiṁhadeva Temple

Śrī Gaura-kuṇḍa

Vṛddha-Śiva, or Śiva-ḍovā

Mahāprabhu-ghāṭa

Jagāī-Mādhāī-ghāṭa, or Mādhāī-ghāṭa

Bārakonā-ghāṭa

Nāgariyā-ghāṭa

Gaṅgā-nagara

Śrīvāsa-aṅgana, or Khola-bhāṅgāra-ḍāṅgā

Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita

Śrī Advaita-bhavana

Śrī Gadādhara-aṅgana

Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara

Śrī Jagadānanda Paṇḍita

Śrī Candraśekhara-bhavana

                            1
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017


Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura’s samādhi-
mandira

Śrīla Gaura-kīśora dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja’s samādhi

Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śrī Śyāma-kuṇḍa

Pṛthu-kuṇḍa, or Ballāla-dīghī

Śrī Murārī Gupta’s Residence

Śrī Īśodyāna



The Gauḍīya-maṭhas

Śrī Yogapīṭha-Māyāpura

Śrī Gaura-Gadādhara Āśrama

Śrī Gauḍīya Āśrama

Śrī Caitanya-Candrodaya Mandira

Śrī Caitanya Gauḍīya Maṭha

Śrī Caitanya-Bhāgavat Maṭha

Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Caitanya Maṭha

Śrī Gopīnātha Gauḍīya Maṭha

Śrī Gaurāṅga Gauḍīya Maṭha

Śrī Paramahaṁsa Gauḍīya Maṭha

The Geographical Location of Old Navadvīpa

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura and Antardvīpa Māyāpura



Śrī Simantadvīpa

Chand Kazi’s Samādhi

Śrīdhara-aṅgana



Śrī Godrumadvīpa

Svānanda-sukhada-kuñja

Suvarṇa-vihāra

Harihara-kṣetra

Devapallī (Nṛsiṁhapallī)




                              2
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt          5/5/2017

Śrī Madhyadvīpa

Saptarṣi-bhajana-sthala

Naimiṣāraṇya

Brāhmaṇa-puṣkara (Puṣkara-tīrtha)

Uccahaṭṭa

Pañcaveṇī



Śrī Koladvīpa

Prauḍhāmāyā

Kuliyā-dharmaśālā

Śrīla Vaṁśī dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja

Śrī Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha

Śrī Caitanya Sārasvata Gauḍīya Maṭha

Samudragaḍha

Campaka-haṭṭa



Śrī Ṛtudvīpa

Vidyānagara



Śrī Jahnudvīpa

Bhīṣma-ṭilā



Śrī Modadrumadvīpa

Śrī Vṛndāvana dāsa Ṭhākura’s

Śrī Mālinī-devī’s father’s house

Śrī Sāraṅgadeva Murārī’s residence

Vaikuṇṭhapura

Mahatpura



Śrī Rudradvīpa

Bilvapakṣa

Bharadvāja-ṭīlā, or Bhāruī-ḍāṅgā


                              3
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt           5/5/2017

Nidayā-ghāṭa



Śrī Gauḍa-maṇḍala

Ambikā-kālanā

Śrī Gaurīdāsa Paṇḍita

Bālasāgrāma (Rādhānagara)

Śrī Mīnaketana Rāmadāsa

Benāpola

Śrī Haridāsa Ṭhākura

Buḍhana

Budhuī-pāḍā

Budhurī

Cākadaha

Cākundī

Śrīnivāsa Ācārya

Cāṅdapāḍā

Cāndapura

Cāṭigrāma

Śrī Puṇḍarīka Vidyānidhi

Śrī Mukunda Datta

Chatrabhoga

Chuṅchurā

Dāṅīhāṭa, or Dāīhāṭa

Śrī Vaṁśī-vadanānanda

Denuḍa

Devagrāma

Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura

Ḍhākā (Śrī Ḍhākeśvarī Pīṭha)

Ḍhākā-dakṣiṇa

Dhārendā Bahādura

Śrī Śyāmānanda Prabhu

Ekacakrā (Vīracandra-pura Garbhavāsa)


                            4
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt   5/5/2017

Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu

Gopīvallabhapura

Śrī Rasikānanda Prabhu

Guptipāḍa

Jhāmaṭapura

Kāgaja Pukuriyā

Kājalīgrāma

Kālikāpura

Kāñcaḍāpāḍā, or Kāñcanapallī

Kāñcana-gaḍiyā

Kāñcanā-grāma

Kāṅkuṭiyā

Kāśima-bāzāra

Kaṭavā

Kendubilva

Keśīyāḍī

Khaḍadaha

Khānākula-kṛṣṇa-nagara

Kheturī

Kogrāma

Kolkata Bāgabāzāra

Kṛṣṇapura

Kulāī, or Kānuī-grāma

Kulīna-grāma

Śrī Rāmānanda Vasu

Kumārahaṭṭa

Śrī Īśvara Purīpāda

Mādhāī-talā

Maheśa

Mekhalā

Navagrāma

Navahaṭṭa, or Naihāṭī


                           5
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt        5/5/2017

Nityānandapura

Pañcakuṭī

Pānīhāṭī

Śrī Rāghava Paṇḍita

Paścimapāḍā

Phuliyā

Pichaladā

Pūrvasthalī

Puṭiyā

Śrī Gaṅgāmātā Gosvāminī

Rāmakeli

Śrī Rūpa and Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmīs

Śrī Anupama

Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī

Saidābāda

Śaṅkhanagara

Śāntipura

Śrī Advaita Ācārya

Saptagrāma

Śītala-grāma

Śrīkhaṇḍa

Śrī Narahari Sarakāra Ṭhākura

Śrī Mukunda Sarakāra Ṭhākura

Śrī Cirañjīva Sena

Śrī Dāmodara Kavirāja

Śrī Rāmacandra Kavirāja

Śrī Govinda Kavirāja

Śrī Sulocana

Śrī Balarāma dāsa

Śrī Ratikānta Ṭhākura

Śrī Rāma-gopāla dāsa

Śrī Rāmapura-cātarā


                           6
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

Tālakharī

Tamaluka, or Tāmralipti

Triveṇī

Uddhāraṇa-pura

Vāghnāpāḍā

Vākalācandradvīpa

Śrī Candraśekhara Ācārya

Vakreśvara

Vallabhapura

Vanaviṣṇupura

Varāhanagara

Vrajarājapura

Śrī Gadādhara dāsa

Yājīgrāma

Śrīnivāsa Ācārya Prabhu

Yaśaḍā



Prayers to Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma

Śrī Navadvīpāṣṭakam

The Glories of Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma




Introduction




translated from the Hindi Edition




Śyāmasundara Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the son of the king of Vraja, is
the ultimate limit of the Absolute Truth. He is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, the cause of all causes
and the origin of everything, though He Himself is
without origin. He is the personification of eternity,
knowledge and bliss. He possesses all potencies and is
the most merciful. He fully embodies and relishes all
transcendental mellows. This same Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who
performs pastimes filled with sweetness, displays the

                           7
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

highest degree of magnanimity as Śrī Gaurasundara, He
who freely bestows transcendental love. Thus Śrī Kṛṣṇa
and Śrī Gaurasundara comprise an identical spiritual
principle (tattva). Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s abode, Śrī Vṛndāvana-
dhāma, is similarly identical in all respects to Śrī
Gaurasundara’s abode, Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma. The perimeter
of both is approximately thirty-two miles (16 kosas).1
The Vedic scriptures reveal that Śrī Gaurasundara’s
pastimes are the sequel to Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes.



In Vraja, Śrī Kṛṣṇa relishes the mellows of
transcendental love, and in Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma He
distributes them. That devotee who performs his
devotional practices aspiring for the transcendental
mellows of Vraja can easily attain this vraja-prema by
taking exclusive shelter of Śrī Gaurasundara and His
dear associates in Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma, where offences
are not considered. Hence, the glories of both
Navadvīpa-dhāma and Vṛndāvana-dhāma defy description.
Devarṣi Nārada, Śrī Uddhava and other exalted saints
possess a high calibre of prema; but still they aspire
to acquire this rarely attained vraja-prema. Śrī
Gaurasundara’s abode easily bestows this prema to
sādhakas who take its shelter. In conclusion, Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma is as supremely magnanimous as Śrī
Gaurasundara Himself.



Navadvīpa-dhāma consists of nine islands [nava means
“nine” and dvīpa means “island”], namely, Antardvīpa,
Sīmantadvīpa, Godrumadvīpa, Madhyadvīpa, Koladvīpa,
Ṛtudvīpa, Jahnudvīpa, Modadrumadvīpa and Rudradvīpa.
Furthermore, Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma is the abode of the
nine types of devotional service as follows: Antardvīpa
— self-surrender, Sīmantadvīpa — hearing, Godrumadvīpa —
chanting, Madhyadvīpa — remembering, Koladvīpa — serving
the Lord’s lotus feet, Ṛtudvīpa — worshipping,
Jahnudvīpa — offering prayers, Modadrumadvīpa — engaging
as a servant, and Rudradvīpa — serving as a friend.



Śrī Gaurasundara and His intimate associates enacted
their pastimes throughout Navadvīpa-dhāma. Gaurasundara
also performed pastimes in Śrī Gauḍa-maṇḍala, the area
surrounding Navadvīpa-dhāma, where many of His
associates appeared, performed their pastimes and
practised their bhajana. To this day the places
mentioned in this book serve to generate memories of the
Lord’s pastimes. These pastimes are eternal, as
confirmed in Bhakti-ratnākara (1.57):



adyāpiha sei līlā kare gaurarāya



kona-kona bhāgyavān dekhibāre pāya



                           8
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017


Even today Śrī Gaurasundara performs pastimes here with
His associates, but only an exceedingly fortunate living
entity can behold them.



The jīva’s life becomes successful by circumambulating
Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma, where the Lord’s most munificent
pastimes are enacted. Moreover, if he does so while
chanting the holy name and hearing hari-kathā, he
receives unlimited benefit.



Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī was still a youth when Mahāprabhu
(Śrī Gaurasundara) entered His unmanifest pastimes. Soon
after, he renounced material life and came to Śrīdhāma
Māyāpura. In the house of Mahāprabhu, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī
received the priceless mercy of Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu,
who later guided him on Navadvīpa-dhāma’s thirty-two
mile parikramā, elaborating on Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s
pastimes in each and every place. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura’s deeply moving descriptions of this parikramā
are recorded in Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma-māhātmya (see
Parikramā-khaṇḍa).



Years later, Śrī Īśāna Ṭhākura, an associate of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu, took Śrīnivāsa Ācārya, Śrī Narottama Ṭhākura
and Śrī Rāmacandra Kavirāja on parikramā of Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma. Śrīla Narahari Cakravartī Ṭhākura gives
a captivating description of this parikramā in his
Bhakti-ratnākara, and a concise yet heart-rending
description is found in Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s Śrī
Navadvīpa-bhāva-taraṅga.



In recent times our grand-spiritual master, oṁ viṣṇupāda
aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Gosvāmī Ṭhākura Prabhupāda, inaugurated Śrī Navadvīpa-
dhāma parikramā and executed it according to the section
on parikramā in Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s book Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma-māhātmya. He performed the parikramā
with thousands of pilgrims to bestow this auspicious
opportunity upon the wider community. Following in his
footsteps, our spiritual master, jagad-guru nitya-līlā
praviṣṭa oṁ viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti
Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, performed this
parikramā annually, as do those devotees who have taken
shelter of him.



Annually, for the last forty-five years, this worthless
and insignificant servant has also had the opportunity
to participate in Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma parikramā. For
many years I performed it with my spiritual master, and
in this way received several opportunities to hear
narrations of pastimes and philosophical conclusions
from his lotus mouth. Later, when he had entered his
unmanifest pastimes, I performed parikramā under the

                           9
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

guidance of his Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti. This book is
based on those narrations, on information taken from
Bhakti-ratnākara, and in particular on Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma-māhātmya and
his Śrī Navadvīpa-bhāva-taraṅga.



Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s prema-dharma, eternal religion
of pure, transcendental loving service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is
being extensively propagated all over the world.
Consequently, countless pilgrims from India and abroad
come to take darśana of Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s appearance-
place, Śrīdhāma Māyāpura, His various pastime-places in
Navadvīpa-dhāma, and the appearance- and pastime-places
of His associates. I hope this book will assist all
inquisitive devotees.



My most worshipful Gurudeva, the crest-jewel of topmost,
swan-like Vaiṣṇavas, oṁ viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-śata Śrī
Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī, is the guardian
of the Śrī Gauḍiya sampradāya, and the founder-ācārya of
the Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti and the gauḍīya-maṭhas
throughout India under its jurisdiction. He established
Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha in Mathurā-dhāma to preach
Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s prema-dharma amongst the Hindi-
speaking population. His causeless mercy and inspiration
has led to much devotional literature being translated
from Bengali into Hindi, and this translating work
continues to this day. It is a great pleasure to present
this book to the reader today, on behalf of my Gurudeva.



Finally, I must mention that this book was produced very
quickly through the enthusiasm, generosity and
affectionate support of the present chairman and ācārya
of Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti, my god-brother
parivrājakācārya Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Vāmana
Mahārāja. I am indebted to him. May he offer this book
into the lotus hands of our most beloved Gurudeva and
thus bestow his affection upon me. This is our prayer at
his lotus feet.



The service of the devotees who made this book ready for
publication is laudable. Worthy of mention are Śrī Oṁ
Prakāśa Vrajavāsī (M.A.) Sāhityaratna, Dr. Kedāra Datta
Tatrāḍī (P.H.D.), Śrīman Navīna-kṛṣṇa Brahmacārī, Śrīman
Anaṅga-mohana Brahmacārī and others. Śrīman Jagannātha
dāsa Ādhikārī and others financed its publication. I am
praying to the lotus feet of Their Lordships Śrī Guru-
Gaurāṅga and Śrī Gāndhārvikā-Giridhārī that They shower
Their abundant mercy and blessings upon them.



This book was published immediately after its basic
completion, and may therefore contain some errors. May
intelligent readers delight us by correcting these
errors in the course of their reading.

                           10
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017




Praying for a particle of the mercy of

Śrī Hari, Śrī Guru and the Vaiṣṇavas,



(Śrī Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa)Śrī Gaura-pūrṇimā, 1992Śrī
Keśavajī Gauḍīya MaṭhaMathurā (U.P.)




Preface to the English Edition




In this book our eternally merciful Gurudeva, Śrī Śrīman
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, describes the numerous
sacred places of Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma and introduces many
of the holy places in the surrounding area of Śrī Gauḍa-
maṇḍala (which includes Bangladesh).



The enclosed map of Śrī Gauḍa-maṇḍala offers another
dimension of involvement to the reader of this and other
books about Śrīman Mahāprabhu and His followers. The
locations of many places were verifiable, but over time,
some places have been forgotten or obscured by changes
in landscape, and therefore are not easily located or
available for darśana.



Śrīpad Bodhayan Mahārāja kindly connected us with Śrīman
Mukunda Prabhu (Mr. Mukulpada Mitra) from Ḍhāka, who
ensured a successful pilgrimage to Bangladesh to take
photos. Both ISKCON temples and Gauḍīya-maṭhas showed
their non-sectarian spirit by giving assistance in this
regard.



We are ever indebted to Śrīla A.C. Bhaktivedānta Svāmī
Prabhupāda, who revealed to the Western world the
glories, pastimes and abodes of Śrī Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu
and His associates. We pray to one day genuinely desire
the mercy of our Gurudeva and the followers of
Mahāprabhu, by which we will all find ourselves
submerged in the same ocean of love for Śrī Gaurāṅga in
which they are blissfully immersed.




Śānti dāsī / Vaijayantī-mālā dāsī

                           11
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017




Nityānanda-trayodaśī



21st February, 2005



Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha,



Mathurā




The Magnificence of Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma




I offer my obeisances to Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma, a
transcen-dental land that is so enchanting that it
steals the heart. This abode is referred to as
“Brahmapura” in the Chāndogya Upaniṣad, “Śvetadvīpa” in
the Smṛtis and “Vraja” by rare devotees who are
conversant with transcendental mellows.



Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma is the pastime-place of Śrī
Śacīnandana Gaurahari, who is characterised by the
sentiments and bodily lustre of Śrī Rādhā. Śrī Gaurahari
is the combined form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is the king of
all pleasure (rasa-rāja), and of Śrī Rādhā, who is the
personification of ecstatic love of Godhead (mahābhāva).
“Antaḥ kṛṣṇaṁ bahir-gauram — inwardly He is Kṛṣṇa
Himself, and outwardly He is of fair complexion
(gaura).”



The glory of this dhāma is without limit or comparison.
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s dhāma, which is eternal, is as
profound and esoteric as He is. However, the conditioned
living entities are unable to properly behold the dhāma,
because they have turned their backs on the Lord. As a
result, they are enveloped by His illusory energy
(Mahāmāyā). By the mercy of Yogamāyā-devī, Mahāmāyā
removes her illusory covering of material existence,
enabling the living entities to take complete darśana of
the Lord’s holy abode. This is explained by Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura in his Śrī Navadvīpa-bhāva-taraṅga
(verse 11):



māyā-jālāvṛta cakṣu dekhe kṣudrāgāra


                              12
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017



jaḍa-māyā bhūmi jala dravya jata āra



māyā kṛpā kari jāla uṭhāya jakhana



āṅkhi dekhe suviśāla cinmaya bhavana



One whose eyes are covered by the illusory energy looks
upon the dhāma and merely sees an ordinary place and
material elements, such as earth and water. If, however,
the illusory energy mercifully lifts her covering, then
one beholds a grand transcendental dwelling.



Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes (kṛṣṇa-līlā) and Śrīman
Mahāprabhu’s pastimes (gaura-līlā) are non-different,
just as Vṛndāvana-dhāma and Navadvīpa-dhāma are non-
different. Gaura-līlā is the sequel to kṛṣṇa-līlā. At
the end of Dvāpara-yuga the most merciful Vrajendra-
nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the foremost enjoyer of all
transcendental mellows, descended to this material world
along with the entire land of Vraja and His Vraja
companions. He appeared for the purpose of bestowing His
transcendental love upon the living entities by
performing His various pastimes.



Even though Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s holy name and abode are
unlimitedly magnanimous, the living entities (jīvas)
cannot easily attain kṛṣṇa-prema from them. The
principal reason for this is the jīvas’ vast
accumulation of offences. It is impossible to attain
prema as long as one’s chanting is offensive to the holy
name. Amazingly, offences are not considered significant
when one chants the holy name of Śrī Gaurasundara,
visits His holy abode and practises devotion to Him.
This kṛṣṇa-prema is rarely attained, but if a person
utters the names of Śrī Gaura and Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu
in Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma, kṛṣṇa-prema easily manifests in
his heart, even if he is offensive. Jagāī and Mādhāī are
striking evidence of this.



Navadvīpa-dhāma has yet another unique magnificence. If
a sādhaka worships Śrī Gaurasundara in the mood of
neutrality (śānta-rasa) or servitude (dāsya-rasa), he
easily attains the mood of either fraternal (sakhya-
rasa), parental (vātsalya-rasa) or amorous love
(mādhura-rasa) for Kṛṣṇa. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
explains that worship to Śrīman Mahāprabhu should be
performed in the mood of servitude. When this mood of
servitude matures, the most elevated mellow of amorous
love for Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa manifests in the heart of the
practitioner. The object of one’s bhajana, Śrīman

                           13
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

Mahāprabhu, is then seen as Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.



The boundless and infinite glory of Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma
cannot be completely described, even by the father of
mankind, Brahmā; by the lord of lords, Mahādeva; or by
Anantadeva with his thousands of mouths. For countless
millennia demigods and goddesses, as well as Rudras and
Siddhas, worship Śrī Gauracandra in various parts of
Navadvīpa-dhāma just to receive His mercy and the mercy
of the dhāma. The Śrutis, Smṛtis, Tantras, Purāṇas and
other scriptures obscure their descriptions of Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma’s true splendour, which can only be
understood by the mercy of Bhagavān and His devotees.



It was the desire of the Lord that in Satya-yuga, Tretā-
yuga and Dvāpara-yuga, the glory of Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma
remain concealed. In Kali-yuga, however, the glory of
this dhāma resplendently manifests and the influence of
the other holy places diminishes.



The Supreme Personality of Godhead, Vrajendra-nandana
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, descends as Śrī Gaurasundara to benefit the
living entities by propagating the chanting of the holy
name and by distributing prema. Beyond even that, He
descends to personally relish the sentiments of Śrī
Rādhā. At that time, His most cherished abode, Śrī
Vṛndāvana, which until that time was covered, manifests
as Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma, and powerfully bestows prema-
bhakti. If a person takes shelter of Śrī Gaurasundara in
His abode, he will easily attain this prema-bhakti that
dear devotees like Śrī Nārada and others rarely achieve.
Śrī Gaura and Śrī Nityānanda do not seriously consider
the living entities’ offences; neither does Their abode.
Prema-bhakti in the unnatojjvala-rasa of Vraja is
attained simply by residing in the land of Navadvīpa or
circumabulating it with faith.




The Appearance and Size of the Dhāma




Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma’s nine islands are situated within
Śrī Gauḍa-maṇḍala on both banks of the Bhagavatī-
Bhāgīrathī (Gaṅgā). Here the Bhagavatī-Gaṅgā flows a
twisting, zigzag course as if reluctant to continue on
her way, preferring instead to forever enfold this
playground of Śrīman Mahāprabhu in her embrace.



Śrī Gauḍa-maṇḍala extends over twenty-one yojanas, with
Śrī Gaṅgā-devī flowing through its centre. Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma is located in the heart of Śrī Gauḍa-

                           14
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

maṇḍala, the centre of which is the Yogapīṭha-Māyāpura,
where Śrīman Mahāprabhu appeared. Gauḍa-maṇḍala is a
wish-fulfilling gem, because all that is here — the
water, land and trees — is spiritual. All sacred places,
such as the seven holy cities, as well as the Gaṅgā,
Yamunā and Sarasvatī, are included within it. The living
entities’ darśana of this extraordinary dhāma is solely
dependent on the mercy of Śrīman Nityānanda Prabhu.



Śrī Navadvīpa is shaped like an extensive eight-petalled
lotus flower, the centre of which is Antardvīpa
Māyāpura. Sīmantadvīpa, Godrumadvīpa, Madhyadvīpa,
Koladvīpa, Rudradvīpa, Jahnudvīpa, Modadrumadvīpa and
Ṛtudvīpa constitute the lotus’ eight petals. The centre
of Śrī Gauḍa-maṇḍala, Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma, has a
circumference of sixteen kosas (approximately thirty-two
miles), and is also like the pericarp of a lotus flower.
According to the scriptures, Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s
appearance-place, Antardvīpa Māyāpura, is situated on
the Gaṅgā’s eastern bank along with Sīmantadvīpa,
Godrumadvīpa and Madhydvīpa. Five islands — Koladvīpa,
Ṛtudvīpa, Rudradvīpa, Jahnudvīpa and Modadrumadvīpa —
lie on the western bank. By examining five hundred year
old government maps and by studying the authoritative
literatures of that time it is clearly evident that
Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s appearance-place was situated on the
Gaṅgā’s eastern bank. Śrī Caitanya-bhāgavata, Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta and other old authoritative
scriptures give clear descriptions of how Śrīdhāma
Māyāpura, Chand Kazi’s samādhi, Ballāla Sena’s fort,
Ballāla-dīghī, Śrīdhara-āṅgana and other such places
were situated in close proximity on the Gaṅgā’s eastern
bank. It is in present times only that the town of
Navadvīpa is situated on the Gaṅgā’s western bank, which
is actually the location of the original Koladvīpa. When
the Gaṅgā flooded the original Navadvīpa, its residents
moved to settle on the higher ground on the western
bank. Changes like this have taken place frequently.
Today, once again, there are many beautiful, tall
temples decorating the Gaṅgā’s eastern bank.



The circumambulation of Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma begins from
Antardvīpa Māyāpura. From there one progresses in
sequence to Sīmantadvīpa, Godrumadvīpa and Madhyadvīpa.
After crossing the Gaṅgā, one then continues to
Koladvīpa, Ṛtudvīpa, Jahnudvīpa, Modadrumadvīpa and
Rudradvīpa, returning to Antardvīpa to complete the
parikramā. Previously Rudradvīpa was located on the
Gaṅgā’s western bank, but now it is on the eastern bank.
The auspicious day to commence the yearly parikramā is
on the eighth or ninth day of the bright fortnight in
the month of Phālguna (February—March), and it is
auspicious to finish it on Pūrṇimā in that same month.
In this way one can take darśana of one or two different
islands each day, and on Pūrṇimā, the appearance day of
Śrī Gaurasundara, one may take darśana of Śrīdhāma
Māyāpura.




                           15
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

In his Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma-māhātmya, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura beautifully describes the parikramā of Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma in Bengali poetry. He also describes it
briefly in his Śrī Navadvīpa-bhāva-taraṅga, as does
Śrīla Narahari Cakravartī Ṭhākura in his Bhakti-
ratnākara.



First Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu guided Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī on
this parikramā, and thereafter, Mahāprabhu’s servant Śrī
Īśāna Ṭhākura, a resident of Māyāpura, took Śrīnivāsa
Ācārya, Śrī Narottama Ṭhākura and Śrī Rāmacandra
Kavirāja around the dhāma. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
himself later performed this same parikramā and
described the places of darśana in all nine islands in
Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma-māhātmya. Next Śrīla Sarasvatī
Ṭhākura performed the parikramā yearly and his principal
disciples have continued this practice to this present
day. Jagad-guru Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī
Mahārāja and his followers are prominent among those
disciples performing this parikramā.



Each of Navadvīpa’s nine islands represent one of the
nine kinds of devotion described in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam as
follows: Godrumadvīpa — chanting (kīrtanam), Madhyadvīpa
— remembering (smaraṇam), Koladvīpa — serving the Lord’s
lotus feet (pāda-sevanam), Ṛtudvīpa — worshipping
(arcanam), Jahnudvīpa — offering prayers (vandanam),
Modadrumadvīpa — engaging as a servant (dāsyam),
Rudradvīpa — serving as a friend (sakhyam), Sīmantadvīpa
— hearing (śravaṇam), and Antardvīpa — fully
surrendering one’s very self to the Lord (ātma-
nivedanam).



The twelve forests of Vraja are concealed within the
nine islands of Navadvīpa, but in Navadvīpa these
forests are situated in a different order. Antardvīpa is
Gokula-Mahāvana. North of Pṛthu-kuṇḍa (or Ballāla-dīghī)
are Madhuvana and the city of Mathurā. In the middle of
Madhuvana, near Śrīdhara’s hut, is Viśrāma-ghāṭa, where
Śrīman Mahāprabhu rested after reforming the Kazī.



Godrumadvīpa is Nandagrāma, where countless cowherd boys
reside. At this place Śrīman Mahāprabhu and Śrī
Nityānanda Prabhu would become absorbed in ecstasy upon
remembering their cowherding pastimes with the cowherd
boys. Madhyadvīpa is a part of Kāmyavana, and both
Puṣkara and Naimiṣāraṇya are also present there.
Koladvīpa is Bahulāvana and Campaka-haṭṭa is
Khadiravana. Ṛtudvīpa is Rādhā-kuṇḍa, which is a part of
Vṛndāvana. Nearby, in Koladvīpa’s Kuliyā-pahāḍa is
Govardhana. Jahnudvīpa is Bhadravana, and Modadrumadvīpa
is Bhāṇḍīravana. Mahatpura in Modadrumadvīpa is
Kāmyavana. Rudradvīpa is Baelvana and Sīmantadvīpa,
situated near Rudradvīpa, is also a part of Baelvana. In
this way, the twelve forests of Śrīdhāma Vṛndāvana are
concealed within the islands of Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma.

                           16
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017




The Nine Islands




Śrī Antardvīpa




Ātopura-grāma




Four-headed Brahmā performed austerities at Ātopura-
grāma to become free from the offence he committed
during Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes of stealing the cowherd boys and
calves. Feeling deeply remorseful and having
contemplated Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s coming pastimes and His
munificence, he worshipped the Lord at this place.



Mahāprabhu’s pastimes are eternal, yet sometimes they
manifest in this world, and other times they do not.
Consequently, it is not against established
philosophical conclusions to worship Śrīman Mahāprabhu
even before He performs His pastimes in this world.
Satisfied with Lord Brahmā’s worship, Śrīman Mahāprabhu
appeared before him. Brahmājī begged forgiveness for his
offences, and asked for a boon: “When You exhibit Your
pastimes in this world, please arrange for me to take
birth in a low-class family and, thus in a mood of
humility and wretchedness, fulfil Your innermost desire
with my service.”



Śrīman Mahāprabhu then granted Lord Brahmā his boon,
saying, “You will take birth in a Muslim family and
serve Me by preaching and loudly chanting the holy names
of Hari. I will appear in this form of Gaurāṅga, having
accepted the senti-ment and bodily lustre of My beloved
Rādhā for the purpose of fulfilling My three special
internal desires. I will madden all the living entities
in the universe by making them dance in harināma-
saṅkīrtana and by bestowing upon them the most elevated
and resplendent prema, which is rarely attained even by
the demigods. You will assist Me in fulfilling My
heart’s desires to accomplish this.”



This island (dvīpa) became known as Antardvīpa, because
it was here that the Lord revealed His internal (antara)
sentiments to Brahmā. In Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s pastimes

                           17
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

this same Brahmā appeared as nāma-ācārya Śrīla Haridāsa
Ṭhākura, the authority in the chanting of the holy name.
Antardvīpa is also known as Ātopura.



Antardvīpa’s central point, the Mahā-yogapīṭha, is the
appearance-place of the Lord, and is also known as
Māyāpura. This Antardvīpa consists of Ballāla-dīghī
(Pṛthu-kuṇḍa), a portion of Vāmana-pukura, Śrīnāthapura,
Gaṅgā-nagara and other places. Śrī Jagannātha Miśra’s
house was within the present Vāmana-pukura. Although
Śrīman Mahāprabhu eternally performs pastimes here, only
fortunate souls can witness them.



When the foundation to the present grand Yogapīṭha
Temple in Māyāpura was being dug, a small four-armed
deity was found. This deity had been worshipped by Śrī
Jagannātha Miśra, whose temple was located in that spot.
And just nearby, under a large neem tree, Nimāī took
birth from Śrī Śacī-devī’s womb. Śacī-devī’s father, Śrī
Nīlāmbara Cakravartī, was a renowned scholar of
astrology and logic. Śacī-devī was highly chaste, devout
and the embodiment of mercy. Her eight daughters died at
birth, one after the other. She then gave birth to an
extraordinary son named Śrī Viśvarūpa. He was learned in
the scriptures, peaceful in nature and benevolent. He
was omniscient and his intellect was unparalleled.
Although he was incomparably beautiful, he was
completely detached from sense enjoyment. Nimāī took
birth after Viśvarūpa.



Nimāī was none other than Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa
Himself who had accepted the mood and lustre of Śrī
Rādhā. He chose to appear in this world for several
reasons among which four are prominent:



(1) To propagate the yuga-dharma, or the religious
practice for the age. This is the congregational
chanting of the holy names (śrī-nāma-saṅkīrtana).



(2) To distribute what had never been given before —
unnatojjvala-prema, transcendental love in the elevated
amorous mellow.



(3) To respond to the entreaty of Śrī Advaita Ācārya,
who was perturbed by the extremely irreligious state of
the world at that time. Śrī Advaita Ācārya had wor-
shipped Śrī Krṣṇa with Gaṅgā water and tulasī leaves,
and thus induced the Lord to appear.



(4) To fulfil His three confidential desires. Kṛṣṇa, who

                           18
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

is supremely merciful and the enjoyer of all
transcenden-tal mellows, accepted the mood and lustre of
Śrī Rādhā and appeared as Śrī Gaurāṅga:



(a) to taste the greatness of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s prema,



(b) to personally taste, as Śrīmatī Rādhikā does, all
the sweetness of His form, and



(c) to taste Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s happiness when She
relishes His sweetness.



Śrī Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu took birth on 23rd Phālguna in
the Śakābda Era 1407, that is [according to the
Christian Era] 28th February, 1486. It was a full-moon
day, and He appeared at twilight. There was a lunar
eclipse that evening, and everywhere hundreds of
thousands of people were singing the glories of Hari. In
such a glorious atmosphere, which was surcharged with
the chanting of the holy name, He appeared from the womb
of Śrī Śacī-devī. Because He took birth under a neem
tree He was named Nimāī, and because His complexion was
golden in lustre, He became known as Gaurāṅga (golden-
limbed). The ladies exclaimed, “Hari Bol, Hari Bol!” and
that abode resounded continuously with the vibration of
the holy names.



Nimāī’s childhood nature was extremely restless, just
like Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s. Once, in the house of Jagannātha
Miśra, He caught a snake and proceeded to play with it.
Another time He climbed upon the shoulders of a thief
and rode on them throughout the town. On an Ekādaśī day
He begged for the food that was being offered to the
deity in the house of a devotee. He cried often, and
only stopped when someone chanted the holy names, at
which He broke out into loud peals of laughter.
Sometimes, on His way home from school He would play
games in the Gaṅgā with the other children. When His
elder brother Viśvarūpa accepted the renounced order,
however, Nimāī’s behaviour became more subdued and He
studied at Śrī Gaṅgādāsa’s school, which He attended
with Gadādhara, Dāmodara, Jagadānanda, Mukunda and other
boys. Later He established a Sanskrit school in His own
home where He taught grammar.



At one of the Gaṅgā’s ghāṭas in Antardvīpa, He crushed
the pride of a champion of erudition named Keśava
Kāśmīrī and instructed him in bhajana. In Antardvīpa He
was married twice; first to Śrī Lakṣmīpriyā-devī, and
after she left this world, to Śrī Viṣṇupriyā-devī. It
was from here that He travelled to Gayā, where Śrī
Īśvara Purī initiated Him into the chanting of Śrī

                           19
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa’s names. When He returned He had become
transformed into an exalted devotee who constantly
tasted transcendental sentiments. Finally, in a mood of
detachment, He left His aged mother and His wife
Viṣṇupriyā and crossed the Gaṅgā to accept the renounced
order in Kaṭavā.



Later, in Śāntipura, His mother requested Him to take up
His residence in Purī-dhāma instead of Vṛndāvana, and He
agreed to do this. He later left Purī to travel
throughout South India where He discussed bhakti-tattva
with Śrī Rāmānanda Rāya on the bank of the river
Godāvarī. In all, He remained based in Purī-dhāma for
twenty-four years, the first six of which were spent
travelling to Vṛndāvana, South India and other places.
During the remaining eighteen years He experienced an
unceasing restlessness caused by feelings of separation
from Kṛṣṇa. Svarūpa Dāmodara and Rāya Rāmānanda were
able to pacify Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s specific moods by
reciting appropriate verses from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, or
by singing songs by Caṇḍīdāsa, Vidyāpati, or from
Jayadeva Gosvāmī’s Gīta-Govinda. He had conducted His
married life as an ideal house-holder, and when He
renounced it, He lived a life of complete detachment. In
this way He set the example how to engage in the ideal,
renounced life of bhajana.



When Śrīman Mahāprabhu accepted sannyāsa, the lives of
Mother Śacī and Viṣṇupriyā-devī became filled with
intolerable separation from Him. At that time, they were
cared for by Īśāna Ṭhākura and Śrī Vaṁśī-vadanānanda. In
separation from Mahāprabhu, Viṣṇupriyā-devī forgot to
eat, drink or tend to other bodily needs. Indeed, she
forgot everything, and became extremely weak and frail.
She simply chanted the mahā-mantra from morning to noon,
and for each mantra she chanted, she put aside one grain
of rice. At noon she prepared that rice and offered it
to Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and her deity of Mahāprabhu. She then
offered the prasāda to Śacī-devī, who would accept some
and leave the rest, which amounted to a mere handful,
for Viṣṇupriyā-devī. With a restless heart she
remembered Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu day and night, and as
she chanted the holy name, she wept. Faithful devotees
received darśana of her lotus feet only after repeated
requests.



Unable to tolerate separation from Śrīman Mahāprabhu,
Vaiṣṇavas like Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu, Śrī Advaita Ācārya
and Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita gradually moved away from Navadvīpa
to reside elsewhere. Later, when the Gaṅgā flooded a
large part of Navadvīpa, the inhabitants of Navadvīpa
moved to the western bank, called Kuliyā-Pahāḍapura.




Śacī-devī’s delivery room

                            20
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017




(where Nimāī’s umbilical cord was cut)



Here under a neem tree, baby Nimāī took birth from the
womb of Mother Śacī. The original tree has since
departed from this world, and a new tree has grown in
the same place.




Kṣetrapāla Śiva, or Gopīśvara Mahādeva




In the Yogapīṭha, Kṣetrapāla Śiva, the protector of the
dhāma, is eternally worshipped. He is also known as Śrī
Gopīśvara, and he bestows service to the dhāma. Pure
devotees who perform their worship in accordance with
the followers of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī (the śrī-rūpānugas)
honour Kṣetrapāla Śiva as Gopīśvara Śiva, and pray to
him for eternal service to Śrī Gaurasundara that is
devoid of material attributes. Śrī Gaura is the
embodiment of rasarāja-mahābhāva, the combined form of
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Gopīśvara Śiva’s praṇāma-mantra (from
Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s Śrī Saṅkalpa-
kalpa-druma, text 103) is:



vṛdāvanāvani-pate! jaya soma! soma-maule!



sanaka-sanandana-sanātana-nāradeḍya



gopīśvara! vraja-vilāsi-yugāṅghri-padme



prema prayaccha nirūpādhi namo namas te



O gatekeeper of Vṛndāvana! O Soma, all glories to you! O
you whose forehead is decorated with the moon, and who
is worshipful for the sages headed by Sanaka, Sanandana,
Sanātana and Nārada! O Gopīśvara! Desiring that you
bestow upon me prema for the lotus feet of Śrī Rādhā-
Mādhava, who perform joyous pastimes in Vraja-dhāma, I
offer obeisances unto you time and again.




                           21
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017


Śrī Nṛsiṁhadeva Temple




Close to Kṣetrapāla Śiva is a temple of Śrī Nṛsiṁhadeva,
who destroys obstacles on the path of devotion, and
nearby are the deities of Śrī Gaura-Gadādhara.




Śrī Gaura-kuṇḍa




In Vṛndāvana, Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śrī Śyāma-kuṇḍa are
supremely glorious. Similarly, in Navadvīpa, which is
non-different from Vṛndāvana, Śrī Gaura-kuṇḍa in
Māyāpura is matchlessly glorious. The devotees of Śrī
Gaurasundara bathe and perform ācamana in this pond, and
thus they taste the sweetness of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s
mercy. Many exalted personalities, expert in bhajana,
perform their worship here.




Vṛddha-Śiva, or Śiva-ḍovā




Vṛddha-Śiva is located on the bank of the Gaṅgā south of
the Yogapīṭha. In Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s time there was a
temple of Vṛddha-Śiva here, but the temple has since
disappeared in the Gaṅgā’s flow. At that place, which is
now known as Śiva-ḍovā, Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu gave Śrī
Jiva Gosvāmī darśana of Vṛddha-Śiva.




Mahāprabhu-ghāṭa




Mahāprabhu-ghāṭa was situated near the Yogapīṭha, six
yards north of Vṛddha-Śiva. These ghāṭas no longer exist
having been submerged by the Gaṅgā. Here Nimāī, as a
young boy and as a scholar, used to bathe in the Gaṅgā
and perform water-sports. Just as the Yamunā witnessed
Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, the Gaṅgā received the good fortune to
delight in Nimāī’s pastimes.




                            22
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017


Jagāī-Mādhāī-ghāṭa, or Mādhāī-ghāṭa




Jagāī-Mādhāī-ghāṭa was near Jagannātha Miśra’s house in
Māyāpura, on the bank of the Gaṅgā. By the mercy of
Śrīman Mahāprabhu, Śrī Mādhāī used to clean this ghāṭa
with his own hands.



Jagāī and Mādhāī, previously Jagadānanda and
Mādhavānanda Bandhopādhyāya, were born into a
prestigious brāhmaṇa family of Navadvīpa, but bad
association corrupted their characters and they became
great rogues, drunkards and sinners. In fear of their
oppressive and tyrannical behaviour, no virtuous persons
— especially the elderly, children or women — would come
to bathe at this ghāṭa.



Śrīman Mahāprabhu had appointed the exalted Nityānanda
Prabhu and Haridāsa Ṭhākura to go throughout the town to
propagate nāma-prema, transcendental love for Kṛṣṇa
through chanting the holy name. They both considered
Jagāī and Mādhāī to be the most suitable candidates for
receiving nāma-prema, and they asked them to chant the
holy name. But the brothers were completely intoxicated
on wine. Mādhāī took a piece of a broken, earthen wine
pot and threw it at Nityānanda Prabhu’s head, making it
bleed. Haridāsa Ṭhākura reported this unfortunate
incident to Śrīman Mahāprabhu, who, enraged, went there
with all of His associates. Raising His hand above His
head, He summoned His disc weapon, crying, “Cakra,
cakra!” The sight of the transcendental disc weapon in
the hand of Mahāprabhu made Jagāī and Mādhāī tremble in
fear. This melted the heart of the most compassionate
Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu, who grasped Mahāprabhu’s hand and
said, “The purpose of Your appearance in this
incarnation is to distribute love of God. It is
therefore not fitting for You to kill someone. Instead
it is appropriate for You to purify a person’s heart by
giving him prema. Jagāī prevented Mādhāī from striking
Me a second time, so please be merciful to him.”



Mahāprabhu embraced Jagāī, who fainted in ecstasy, then
He placed His feet on Jagāī’s chest. Jagāī began to weep
and chant, “Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa!” Seeing this, Mādhāī fell at
the feet of Nityānanda Prabhu begging for forgiveness
and Mahāprabhu bestowed prema upon him also. Mādhāī
asked Nityānanda Prabhu how he could become free from
his former sins of killing various living entities, and
Nityānanda Prabhu instructed him to tend to the
maintenance of this ghāṭa. He told him that rendering
service to the Gaṅgā would remove his offences. On the
order of Nityānanda Prabhu, Mādhāī performed this
service for the rest of his life, and in this way took
the dust of the Vaiṣṇavas’ feet. He built steps at this
ghāṭa with his own hands and also cleaned them daily.

                           23
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

People therefore called this ghāṭa Jagāī-Mādhāī-ghāṭa,
or just Mādhāī-ghāṭa. It was situated thirty yards north
of Mahāprabhu-ghāṭa.




Bārakonā-ghāṭa




In His youth Nimāī Paṇḍīta used to teach Sanskrit
grammar to students in His own school. After class, He
would discuss the scriptures with His students at
Bārakonā-ghāṭa. Once, the eminent Keśava Kāśmīrī, a
digvijayī-paṇḍita from Kāśmīra, arrived there with
hundreds of his disciples. Keśava Kāśmīrī was famous for
having defeated brilliant scholars all over India. In
East India, Navadvīpa was known as an important centre
of learning where the Vedas, Upaniṣads, Smṛtis, Purāṇas
and the six systems of Indian philosophy, especially
navyanyāya (a new kind of logic) were taught. People
came from great distances to study here.



Keśava Kāśmīrī had received the blessings of Sarasvatī,
the goddess of learning. He was especially gifted in
composing highly ornamented poetry, and in a moment
hundreds of original Sanskrit verses would issue forth
from his mouth in an unbroken stream. He could defeat
the most prominent scholars with his brilliant speech,
which revealed his great expertise in logic and other
talents. When, therefore, he arrived in the town of
Navadvīpa he very proudly declared that any scholar
there should come forward to debate with him; otherwise,
they should write a letter declaring his victory over
them. But no scholar came forward. These scholars were
all envious of Nimāī Paṇḍita and with great cunning they
told Keśava Kāśmīrī, “The boy Nimāī Paṇḍita is
Navadvīpa’s most insignificant scholar. First debate
with Him, and then you can debate with us.”



It was dusk, and as the sun set into the Gaṅgā, its red
rays playfully danced on her waves. The brilliant Nimāī
Paṇḍita sat on the bank of the Gaṅgā amongst a group of
students, teaching them grammar. The sky was reddish as
if filled with anurāga and the atmosphere was serene.
Seeing the students, Keśava Kāśmīrī, intoxicated with
pride, came over to them. Nimāī’s sweet voice was
speaking excellent and logical statements on grammar and
navyanyāya, thus revealing His extraordinary brilliance.
This attracted Keśava Kāśmīrī, who sat down amongst
them, thus making some of the boys quite nervous. Keśava
Kāśmīrī asked one boy, “What is this student’s name?”



The boy replied, “He is our Nimāī Paṇḍita.” Merely
hearing this name filled Keśava Kāśmīrī with fear. One

                           24
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

of the boys whispered into Nimāī’s ear, “This is Keśava
Kāśmīrī.” Nimāī Paṇḍita turned to Keśava Kāśmīrī and
spoke respectfully. “It is our good fortune that today
you have come into our midst. We have heard of your
glories. Please recite something for us.”



Keśava Kāśmīrī asked, “What subject matter would you
like to hear about?”



Nimāī replied, “We would like to hear Śrī Bhagavatī-
Bhāgīrathī’s glories from your lips.” Immediately Keśava
Kāśmīrī began reciting a shower of freshly composed
verses adorned with alliteration and other literary
ornaments. The students were stunned. Nimāī Paṇḍita then
asked him to select just one of the verses he had
recited and describe its virtues and faults.



Keśava Kāśmīrī asked, “Which verse would you like me to
describe?” Nimāī Paṇḍita immediately chose a verse from
the middle of the poem. Seeing Nimāī’s capacity to hear
something and at once commit it to memory, Keśava
Kāśmīrī was struck with wonder and trembled within.
Nonetheless, out of pride he answered, “In Keśava
Kāśmīrī’s compositions there is never any fault.” He
pointed out the verse’s five virtues in regard to
alliteration and he also pointed out other literary
ornaments. Nimāī Paṇḍita, with humility and gravity,
then pointed out five more virtues. When He further
pointed out five faults, everyone was astounded.



His pride crushed and unable to respond, the defeated
Keśava Kāśmīrī returned to his quarters. That night
Mother Sarasvatī consoled him saying, “The person who
defeated you is my Master, the Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa
Himself. You are highly fortunate to have received His
darśana. Fall at His feet and beg forgiveness.”



Early the next morning, Keśava Kāśmīrī met Nimāī Paṇḍita
and fell at His feet begging forgiveness. Nimāī Paṇḍita
instructed him, “The purpose of scholarship is not to
defeat others; its only purpose is to worship Kṛṣṇa. Go
to Vraja and worship Him with a simple heart.” Keśava
Kāśmīrī offered his obeisances to Nimāī Paṇḍita and
left.




Nāgariyā-ghāṭa




                           25
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

Ten yards north of Bārakonā-ghāṭa at nearby Gaṅgā-nagara
was Śrī Gaṅgādāsa Paṇḍita’s Sanskrit school in which
Nimāī studied with the other boys. On the way home from
school Nimāī would stop by Nāgariyā-ghāṭa and tell the
young girls to worship Him. He blessed the girls who
worshipped His feet that their future husbands would be
handsome, pleasant, wealthy and respected. And He
threatened the others with husbands that would be
crippled and poor. Sometimes, while taking bath in the
Gaṅgā, He would splash water on the brāhmaṇas who were
chanting mantras and offering water to the sun, and when
they angrily rebuked Him, He took water in His mouth and
sprayed them with it. Angered upon hearing the
complaints of the brāhmaṇas and the young girls,
Jagannātha Miśra went to the ghāṭa with stick in hand.
But he was unable to find Nimāī because He had taken
another path home, having told the boys to inform His
father that He had gone straight home from school. Nimāī
smeared dust on His body and sprinkled it with drops of
ink, just to hide any indication that He might have
bathed. When Jagannātha Mīśra arrived at the house, he
saw the dust and ink on Nimāī’s body and an expression
of pure innocence on His face, and he did not say a
word.



It was at Nāgariyā-ghāṭa that Śrī Śacī-devī first saw
Śrī Lakṣmīpriyā and selected her to be Nimāī’s bride.



On the day the Kazi was subdued Śrīman Mahāprabhu came
here with a huge saṅkīrtana party and chanted for some
time. Then, carrying burning torches and performing
kīrtana with mṛdaṅgas and karatālas, they went to Chand
Kazi’s residence in Simuliyā-grāma.




Gaṅgā-nagara




Today Gaṅgā-nagara is covered by the Gaṅgā. Here,
Navadvīpa’s famous scholar Śrī Gaṅgādāsa Paṇḍita had his
school where Nimāī as a boy completed His studies in
grammar. Nimāī then opened a school in His own home.
Gaṅgādāsa, who was Sāndīpanī Muni in Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes,
greatly honoured Nimāī.



Upon returning from Gayā, Nimāī was absorbed in krṣṇa-
prema. “Nimāī the teacher” had become “Nimāī the
devotee”, and He gave up teaching. When Nimāī’s students
complained to Paṇḍita Gaṅgādāsa about this, he showed
them mercy by presenting to bhāvuka Nimāī many logical
arguments why He should resume His teaching. Nimāī
Paṇḍita complied to his instruction, but now He revealed
every syllable and aphorism as a manifestation of Śrī

                           26
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

Śyāmasundara Kṛṣṇa, who attracts the entire universe.
Before His students’ very eyes, He would glorify Kṛṣṇa’s
pastimes and become immersed in ecstasy, and upon coming
to external consciousness tears would flow from His eyes
and His voice would choke up. All He could say was, “I
can no longer teach grammar that is devoid of devotion
to Kṛṣṇa.” He then absorbed Himself in kīrtana
accompanied by His students, who abandoned their studies
to join Him.




Śrīvāsa-aṅgana, or Khola-bhāṅgāra-ḍāṅgā




This place is situated about two hundred yards north of
the Yogapīṭha. Here in the extensive courtyard of
Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita’s house, Mahāprabhu used to perform
harināma-saṅkīrtana together with His associates. All
night long Śrīvāsa and his four brothers would perform
kīrtana with mṛdaṅgas and karatālas. The atheistic
Hindus in the neighbourhood complained to Navadvīpa’s
ruler, Maulānā Sirājuddīna Chand Kazi, who decreed that
no Hindu should loudly utter the holy name or loudly
perform kīrtana. Anyone who did so would be duly
punished and lose his caste. In spite of this decree,
the kīrtanas at Śrīvāsa-aṅgana continued. Finally the
Kazi himself came here and smashed a mṛdaṅga. Śrīvāsa-
aṅgana is therefore also known as Khola-bhāṅgāra-dāṅgā,
“the place where the mṛdaṅga was broken”. It is also
Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s place of saṅkīrtana-rāsa.




Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita




The eminent Śrīvāsa Paṇḍīta was the principal supporter
of Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s gṛhastha-līlā, or pastimes
performed as a householder. The following significant
pastimes took place at his house:



(1) When He returned from Gayā, Śrīman Mahāprabhu sat
upon Śrī Viṣṇu’s throne and in full splendour displayed
His opulence as the Supreme Lord.



(2) The devotees performed the abhiṣeka, or sacred
bathing, of Śrīman Mahāprabhu.



(3) Śrīman Mahāprabhu bestowed love of God upon all His

                           27
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

devotees. Mother Śacī-devī also received prema after
begging Śrī Advaita Ācārya’s forgiveness for her offence
to him.



(4) Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu’s vyāsa-pūjā took place here.



(5) Śrīman Mahāprabhu showed Nityānanda Prabhu His six-
armed form, holding a bow and arrow, flute, staff and
water pot in His hands.



(6) Śrīman Mahāprabhu manifested sāta-prahariyā-bhāva,
“the ecstasy of twenty-one hours”.



(7) For one year kīrtana was secretly performed the
entire night long.



(8) Śrīman Mahāprabhu showed Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita His form of
Lord Nṛsiṁhadeva.



(9) When Śrīvāsa’s son left his body, Mahāprabhu stopped
the kīrtana and called the dead boy’s soul to re-enter
his body. Mahāprabhu asked him, “Having left Śrīvāsa
Paṇḍita, where are you going?”



The boy answered, “No one is anybody’s son, brother,
friend or parent. These relationships are all false, and
cause pain and sorrow. The Supreme Lord is the one
supreme father of all living entities. By the influence
of Mahāmāyā the living entities wander throughout the
8,400,000 species of life, both high and low, while
suffering the results of their activities. Only by
worshipping the Supreme Lord and receiving His mercy and
the mercy of His devotees, can one become free from
illusion and attain transcendental service to Him.
According to my previous deeds I took birth in this
house, and now, the time I was destined to live here has
come to an end.” Śrīman Mahāprabhu then gave the boy
permission to leave his body. When the residents of
Śrīvāsa’s house saw and heard this they became
enlightened by transcendental knowledge and devoted
themselves fully to bhagavad-bhajana.



(10) Śrī Mahāprabhu gave His remnants to Nārāyaṇī,
Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita’s young niece. The son of Nārāyaṇī is
Śrī Vṛndāvana dāsa Ṭhākura, the Vedavyāsa of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu’s pastimes and the author of Śrī Caitanya-
bhāgavata.


                           28
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017



Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita, who is an incarnation of Śrī Nārada, is
a branch of the Śrī Caitanya tree and is one of the
Pañca-tattva. He took birth in the district of Śrīhaṭṭa
and later came to live near Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s house in
Navadvīpa. When Mahāprabhu left for Purī after accepting
sannyāsa, Śrīvāsa felt Navadvīpa to be desolate and
moved to Kumārahaṭṭa. Śrīman Mahāprabhu and His
associates used to perform kīrtana-pastimes in Śrīvāsa’s
courtyard. Once an envious brāhmaṇa, Gopāla Cāpāla, who
was displeased with Śrīvāsa, placed impure objects at
the door of his house. As a result of this offence
Gopāla Cāpāla contracted leprosy. Later, when he
approached Śrīvāsa crying and begging for forgiveness,
Śrīvāsa forgave him.



Once, Śrīvāsa’s mother-in-law hid herself in Śrīvāsa-
aṅgana to listen to the kīrtana, but Śrīvāsa sensed her
presence and knowing her to be unqualified to
participate, made her leave.



Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita was both a singer and dancer in Śrīman
Mahāprabhu’s kīrtana. During the Ratha-yātrā festival he
used to stay with Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu in Jagannātha
Purī.




Śrī Advaita-bhavana




the house of Śrī Advaita Ācārya



Śrī Advaita-bhavana is situated twenty yards north of
Śrīvāsa-aṅgana. Śrī Advaita Ācārya’s birthplace is
Navagrāma in the district of Śrīhaṭṭa, but he later
moved to Śāntipura. He also resided here in Navadvīpa.
He taught his many students the explanations of bhakti
as given in the Gītā and Bhāgavatam. Nimāī’s elder
brother, Śrī Viśvarūpa, was one of his many students. On
the order of His mother, the boy Nimāī used to fetch
Viśvarūpa from school and bring him home. Though
normally grave, Advaita Ācārya was enchanted by Nimāī’s
behaviour and broken speech. Smiling, Nimāī looked at
him as if to say, “Although you called for Me to come to
this world, you cannot recognise Me. The time will come
though, when you certainly will.” This amazing child
made a deep impression on Śrī Advaita Ācārya.



It was at this very same place that Śrī Advaita Ācārya
used to worship Kṛṣṇa with tulasī leaves and Gaṅgā water

                           29
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

according to the rules of the pāñcarātrika system, or
the regulative prin-ciples enjoined in the Nārada-
pañcarātra. To remove the sorrows of the living
entities, he loudly called out to the Lord. Hearing this
call Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself appeared as Śrī Gaurāṅga.



Here at Advaita-bhavana, Viśvarūpa, Haridāsa Ṭhākura,
Śrīvāsa, Gaṅgādāsa, Śuklāmbara, Candraśekhara, Murārī
Gupta and other Vaiṣṇavas used to assemble and become
absorbed in the sweet mellows of kṛṣṇa-kathā. After
Śrīman Mahāprabhu took sannyāsa, Advaita Ācārya moved to
Śāntipura. He then met with Śrīman Mahāprabhu every year
at the time of the Ratha-yātrā in Jagannātha Purī.




Śrī Gadādhara-aṅgana




Ten yards east of Advaita-bhavana is Gadādhara-aṅgana.
This was the residence of Śrī Gadādhara Paṇḍita, whose
father was Śrī Mādhava Miśra. Gadādhara Paṇḍita was
Mahāprabhu’s fellow student and dear friend, and in
their childhood, Mahāprabhu used to bother him by
debating with him about logic (nyāya). After Mahāprabu
took sannyāsa, Gadādhara went with Him to Śrī Jagannātha
Purī and stayed with Him there. It was with the sole
intention of remaining with Mahāprabhu in Purī that he
accepted kṣetra-sannyāsa, or a vow to remain in a holy
place of pilgrimage and never leave.



Śrī Gadādhara was a great scholar, and a rasika, melodic
speaker of the Bhāgavatam. Upon hearing the narrations
of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam from the lips of Gadādhara, Śrīman
Mahāprabhu would become overwhelmed with transcendental
emotions. In Jagannātha Purī he lived at Śrī Gopīnātha
Ṭoṭā where he served Śrī Gopīnātha, and Mahāprabhu would
come there to hear him narrating the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.
At the close of His manifest pastimes, Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu entered the temple of Śrī Gopīnātha and
merged into the deity. Sometime later Gadādhara Paṇḍita
also entered his unmanifest pastimes.



It is said that when Śrī Gopīnātha saw how difficult it
was for Gadādhara Paṇḍita to decorate Him with garlands
and ornaments, He assumed a sitting position that He has
remained in since. All other deities of Śrī Kṛṣṇa are
standing; it is only here that He is sitting.




Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara

                           30
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017




In Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara was Lalitā
Sakhī. His previous name was Śrī Puruṣottama Ācārya. His
father’s name was Śrī Padmagarbha Ācārya, whose original
residence was in Bhiṭādiyā, and his maternal grandfather
was Śrī Jayarāja Cakravartī, who was a resident of
Navadvīpa. Jayarāja Cakravartī married his daughter to
Śrī Padmagarbha Ācārya. They also settled in Śrī
Navadvīpa where Puruṣottama took birth. Some time later
Śrī Padmagarbha Ācārya went to Mithilā and Kāśī to study
Vedānta, leaving his wife and sons in Navadvīpa. In Kāśī
he received Vaiṣṇava initiation from Śrī Mādhavendra
Purī’s spiritual master Śrī Lakṣmīpati and then returned
to Bhiṭādiyā, where he again married.



Puruṣottama was raised in the house of his maternal
grand-father in Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma and was Śrīman
Mahāprabu’s fellow student. After Mahāprabhu’s sannyāsa
he went to Kāśī where he accepted the renounced order,
and was thereafter known as Svarūpa Dāmodara. Although
he remained in Kāśī studying the Vedas, Vedānta and
other scriptures, he never acquired a taste for the
monistic commentary of the Vedānta propagated by Śrī
Śaṅkarācārya. As soon as he was able, he left Kāśī and
arrived at Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s lotus feet in Śrī
Purī-dhāma.



Svarūpa Dāmodara is the principal member of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu’s three-and-a-half intimate associates
(Svarūpa Dāmodara, Rāmānanda Rāya, Śikhi Māhiti and
Mādhavī-devī). Not only was he an excellent poet, but he
was learned in the scriptures and established
philosophical conclusions (siddhānta). He sang with
great feeling, and was a rasika and bhāvuka speaker of
the Bhāgavatam. He was a member of Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s
kīrtana party, and was Puṇḍarīka Vidyānidhi’s foremost
friend and companion. He strung a garland of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu’s pastimes into his diary (known as a kaḍacā)
that Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī later spoke to Śrīla
Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī and upon which Śrīla Kavirāja
Gosvāmī based his Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta. If Śrīman
Mahāprabhu heard an expression of any sentiment opposed
to the established philosophical conclusions of
devotion, opposed to rasa or in which there was an
overlapping of rasas, He experienced distress.
Therefore, before a verse or composition was presented
to Mahāprabhu, it was shown to Svarūpa Dāmodara.



In accordance with Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s inner mood,
Svarūpa Dāmodara used to recite the sweet verses and
songs of Vidyāpati, Caṇḍīdāsa and Jayadeva Gosvāmī’s
Gīta-govinda. He sang like a Gandharva and was like
Bṛhaspati in his knowledge of the scriptures. He was
very dear to Nityānanda Prabhu and Advaita Ācārya, and
he was the life of Śrīvāsa and the other devotees.

                           31
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

Śrīman Mahāprabhu entrusted Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī to
his care.




Śrī Jagadānanda Paṇḍita




Śrī Jagadānanda Paṇḍita was Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s intimate
devotee and a singer in His kīrtana. He knew no one
other than Śrīman Mahāprabhu. In Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes he was
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s principal queen, Satyabhāmā-devī.1 He used
to serve Śrīman Mahāprabhu in Purī-dhāma.



Once Paṇḍitajī went to Bengal and collected from
Śivānanda Sena a cooling oil made from fragrant
sandalwood paste and other ingredients. He filled a pot
with the oil, brought it to Purī-dhāma and gave it to
Mahāprabhu’s servant, Govinda, saying, “Apply a little
of this oil to the Lord’s head to minimise the excess of
bile and air in His body.” Śrīman Mahāprabhu, however,
forbade anyone to use the oil on Him. He told Govinda,
“With great effort Jagadānanda has brought this oil from
Bengal. Give it to the Jagannātha Temple for the Lord’s
servants to use in the oil-lamps. I’m a sannyāsī and
cannot accept it.” When Govinda again told Mahāprabhu
that Jagadānanda had requested Him to use the oil,
Mahāprabhu became angry. He retorted, “Why only oil? Why
not also arrange for a masseur to massage Me daily with
that oil! Did I accept the renounced order for these
pleasures? You have nothing to lose if I use that oil,
but I will be ruined and all would laugh. I will be
labelled a dārī-sannyāsī, a tantric renunciant who keeps
women.”



Jagadānanda was most upset, and the next day he went to
see Śrīman Mahāprabhu. He took the pot of oil and
smashed it to the ground before the Lord. Oil spread
everywhere. Then he returned to his residence, bolted
the door and refused to eat or drink for three days. All
he did was weep.



Although Mahāprabhu was by nature extremely grave, He
was unable to remain calm upon seeing Jagadānanda’s
reaction. On the morning of the fourth day He went to
Jagadānanda’s residence and said, “I’m now on My way to
take bath in the ocean, but I’m very hungry. Cook
something quickly and I will come back soon.” Forgetting
all pride, Śrī Jagadānanda took bath and absorbed
himself in cooking. He finished in no time and when
Mahāprabhu returned Jagadānanda offered Him a beautiful
sitting place and mahā-prasāda. Mahāprabhu said, “Today
we shall honour mahā-prasāda together,” and silently
took His seat. But Jagadānanda turned his face away from

                           32
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Mahāprabhu. “First You should take prasāda,” he said,
“and then I will take.” “Alright,” the Lord said, “but
you must prove true to your word.”



“My word will   never be proven untrue,” Jagadānanda
responded. “I   could never transgress Your order.” The
Lord honoured   prasāda to His complete satisfaction and
told Govinda,   “Inform Me when Jagadānanda has honoured
prasāda.”



Jagadānanda never approved of the Lord’s austere
renunciation. When Mahāprabhu took rest He would lie on
the ground on His outer garment. One day Jagadānanda
brought a saffron-coloured cloth, filled it with soft
cotton and laid it where Mahāprabhu usually took rest.
“Who has made this bedding?” the Lord asked.



When Govinda told Him it was Jagadānanda the Lord said
nothing further, but threw the bedding outside, saying,
“Bring a comfortable bed as well. You all want to engage
Me in sense gratification, but as a sannyāsī, it is
proper for Me to stay far away from sense enjoyment.”



But Svarūpa Dāmodara supported Jagadānanda and devised
another plan to give the Lord some bedding. He tore some
bark of a plantain tree into fine fibers and filled an
old outer cloth with it. After much coaxing by the
devotees Mahāprabhu accepted the bedding.



Everyone was satisfied that the Lord had accepted it —
all except Jagadānanda, who was angry inwardly, but
appeared happy. Previously Mahāprabhu had rejected
Jagadānanda’s request to go to Vṛndāvana. Now,
concealing his anger and unhappiness, Jagadānanda again
asked for permission to go.



The Lord answered, “You’re going to Vṛndāvana because
you’re angry with Me; therefore, you will merely become
a beggar and see faults in Me.” Jagadānanda repeatedly
insisted on receiving Mahāprabhu’s permission and
finally He gave it.



In Vṛndāvana Jagadānanda stayed with Śrī Sanātana
Gosvāmī. One day while Jagadānanda was cooking kichri,
Sanātana Gosvāmī entered the room wearing a red cloth
tied around his head. Jagadānanda Paṇḍita thought that
this cloth must have been Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s remnants,
so he asked Sanātana Gosvāmī, “From where did you get
this cloth? Did the Lord give it to you?” Sanātana
Gosvāmī answered, “Mukunda Sarasvatī gave it to me.”

                             33
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

Upon hearing that the cloth had come from an advaitavādī
sannyāsī Jagadānanda burned with anger and losing all
control, he raised a cooking pot to beat Sanātana
Gosvāmī. Sanātana Gosvāmī became somewhat ashamed so
Jagadānanda put down the pot and said, “You are one of
Mahāprabhu’s chief associates and very dear to Him, yet
you wear the cloth of another sannyāsī, a renunciant of
the impersonalistic school, on your head! I cannot
tolerate this.” When the exalted Vaiṣṇava, Sanātana
Gosvāmī, who was both wise and tolerant, witnessed
Jagadānanda’s firm faith in Mahāprabhu, he became
extremely pleased and told him, “Your fortune is
unlimited.”



Once, at the time of Ratha-yātrā, Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī
journeyed to Jagannātha Purī to take darśana of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu. As he travelled through the deep Jhārikhaṇḍa
forest, mosquitoes bit him and he drank water from
rivers and canals. Consequently pussy boils developed
all over his body. Despite this, Mahāprabhu still
lovingly embraced him. This saddened Sanātana Gosvāmī,
who forbade Mahāprabhu to embrace him as long as his
body was in such a condition. Mahāprabhu, however, did
not obey him. Distressed, Sanātana Gosvāmī asked Śrī
Jagadānanda what he should do.



Paṇḍitajī replied, “It appears that it is not proper for
you to stay here. It would be auspicious for you to
return to Vṛndāvana after the Ratha-yātrā.” Somehow or
other Mahāprabhu found out about this conversation.
Displeased, He told Sanātana, “Jagā is a new student,
but he has become so proud that he has even begun to
instruct you, who are My instructor and like My
spiritual master.”



Sanātana responded, “Today I can understand how dear
Jagadānanda is to You. You make him drink the nectar of
Your loving quarrels with him, whereas on the pretext of
giving me honour You make me drink bitter neem juice.
This is my misfortune.”



Śrīman Mahāprabhu became somewhat embarrassed, and to
satisfy Sanātana Gosvāmī He said, “Don’t think
Jagadānanda is more dear to Me than you are, but I’m
unable to tolerate the transgression of rules and
regulations of etiquette. You are an authority on the
scriptures and Jagā is a young boy. The bodies of
Vaiṣṇavas are never material. To test Me, Śrī Kṛṣṇa has
made your body erupt with these sores. If I didn’t
embrace your body, I would be committing an offence to a
Vaiṣṇava. To Me your body is more fragrant than
sandalwood paste from the Malayana mountains.”



There is no reference to the exact location of the

                           34
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

residences of Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara and Jagadānanda, but
it is known that they were close to the residence of
Śrīman Mahāprabhu.




Śrī Candraśekhara-bhavana




Śrī Candraśekhara Ācārya was very close to Śrīman
Mahāprabhu. He was also known as Ācāryaratna, which
means “jewel amongst learned personalities”. His place
of residence is known as Vraja-pattana. At
Candraśekhara-bhavana, in the first dramatic stage
performance in the history of Bengal, Śrīman Mahāprabhu
danced in the mood of Rukmiṇī.



In 1918 jagad-guru Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Ṭhākura established Śrī Caitanya Maṭha at this very
location. From this Caitanya Maṭha, branches and sub-
branches of gauḍīya-maṭhas have been established all
over the world, and today it

remains the main source of international preaching and
propagation of the holy names of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Due to the endeavours of Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura and Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura the
ideology of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas is today spreading
throughout the whole world. The following words of
Śrīman Mahāprabhu (Śrī Caitanya-bhāgavata, Antya-khaṇḍa
4.126) have become meaningful in all respects:



pṛthivīte-paryānta yata āche deśa-grāma



sarvatra sañcāra haibeka mora nāma



My holy name will be broadcast in every town and village
of this Earth planet.




Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura’s samādhi-
mandira




Here is the samādhi of the world-famous jagad-guru Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura. This exalted, saintly
personality (mahāpuruṣa) appeared in Purī-dhāma in 1874

                            35
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

on the fifth day of the dark lunar fortnight in the
month of Māgha (6th February) and was named Vimala
Prasāda. His father was Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura and
his mother, Śrī Bhagavatī-devī. From childhood it was
evident that he was a mahāpuruṣa, as he exhibited all
such symptoms. When Vimala Prasāda was a small child,
Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura initiated him into the
chanting of the holy name and the Nṛsiṁha mantra. When
he was eight or nine years old, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura gave him the mantra to worship Śrī Kūrmadeva,
who had manifested Himself in a wall of their house, and
instructed Vimala Prasāda in worship of Him.



Upon seeing Vimala Prasāda’s scholastic brilliance, the
aca-demic assembly awarded him the title “Śrī Siddhānta
Sarasvatī”. In 1900 at Svānanda-sukhada-kuñja in Śrī
Godrumadvīpa, he received initiation from Śrīla Gaura-
kiśora dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja, who was a stalwart
renunciant devoted to chanting the holy name. In 1918 he
accepted tridaṇḍa-sannyāsa, and at Śrī Gaura-pūrṇimā
established Śrī Caitanya Maṭha and installed the deities
of Śrī Guru-Gaurānga and Śrī Gāndharvikā-Giridhārī. From
this place he inaugurated the preaching of śrī kṛṣṇa-
nāma and kṛṣṇa-prema, as practised and propagated by Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu, in India and other places around
the world.



He re-instituted Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma parikramā; bestowed
the renounced order upon qualified disciples; published
monthly, weekly and daily journals, which propagated
Gauḍīya philosophy in various languages such as Bengali,
Hindi, Sanskrit, Telegu, Tamil, Asamiya and English;
published other devotional literatures; and sent out
qualified preachers to various places. Thus, in a short
time he preached pure devotion in a way that no one had
done before. He also established gauḍīya-maṭhas in
prominent places. At Śrī Gaura’s birthplace, the
Yogapīṭha, he constructed a grand temple. Then, on 1st
January, 1937, he entered Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s niśānta-līlā
and his own unmanifest pastimes.




Śrīla Gaura-kīśora dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja’s samādhi




Śrīla Gaura-kiśora dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja was the
initiating spiritual master of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura. He used to reside in Vraja at the
various places of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, such as
Vṛndāvana, Govardhana, Rādhā-kuṇḍa, Śyāma-kuṇḍa, Sūrya-
kuṇḍa and Nandagrāma, and he did his bhajana there while
practising severe renunciation. He then went to Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma where he performed bhajana in a mood of
great separation from Śrī Kṛṣṇa. To escape the asso-
ciation of materialistic sense enjoyers, he hid in an

                           36
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

abandoned latrine built by the municipality of
Navadvīpa. He did not open the door for anyone, not even
for the District Judge and Police Superintendent who
came to see him. But he did open it for our most
worshipful spiritual master Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava
Gosvāmī Mahārāja (at that time Śrī Vinoda-bihārī
Brahmacārī). Recognising him as a recipient of the mercy
of Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, he opened the door with
great affection, gave his darśana and instructed him to
perform pure bhajana. Bābājī Mahārāja was a siddha-
mahāpuruṣa, a perfected, self-realised personality. Due
to strong renunciation he became fully blind —
externally.2 Nonetheless, he daily crossed the Gaṅgā,
while loudly chanting the holy name, to go to Svānanda-
sukhada-kuñja in Godruma to hear hari-kathā from Śrī
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. He left this world on Utthāna-
ekādaśī, 17th November, 1915. With his own hands Śrīla
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura placed his spiritual master in samādhi
in Nūtana-caḍā in the ancient Kuliyā (present Navadvīpa
Town) in accordance with the prescribed rules in the
Samskāra-dīpikā. After some time the Gaṅgā flooded and
fearing that she would wash away the samādhi of his
spiritual master, Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura moved it, re-
establishing it on the bank of Rādhā-kuṇḍa at Śrī
Caitanya Maṭha.




Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śrī Śyāma-kuṇḍa




Śrīla Prabhupāda manifested Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śrī
Śyāma-kuṇḍa next to Candraśekhara-bhavana on the banks
of the ancient Śrī Pṛthu-kuṇḍa, or Ballāla-dīghī. There,
in a mood of deep separation, he used to perform bhajana
of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and Śrī Gaurasundara. The mere sight
of these two ponds causes memories of Rādhā-kuṇḍa and
Śyāma-kuṇḍa in Vraja to arise in the heart. Nearby is a
dense jackfruit tree under which Śrī Vinoda-bihārī
Brahmacārī would sit while supervising Śrīla Sarasvatī
Prabhupāda’s estate and managing Śrī Caitanya Maṭha.




Pṛthu-kuṇḍa, or Ballāla-dīghī




East of Gaṅgā-nagara was a beautiful pond that people
called Ballāla-dīghī. In Satya-yuga there lived a very
glorious emperor named Pṛthu. Pṛthu Mahārāja was an
empowered incarnation of the Supreme Lord, a śaktyāveśa-
avatāra. He levelled hilly parts of the Earth to make it
suitable for the people to live on and support
themselves by agricultural activities. He arrived at
this place intending to level it, when he saw a powerful
effulgent light emanating in all directions. To

                           37
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

understand this mysterious light, he entered meditation.



In his meditation he saw that this was Śrīdhāma
Navadvīpa, which is non-different from Vṛndāvana. In the
coming Kali-yuga the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
Vrajendra-nandana Śyāmasundara, Himself would appear at
this very place as Śrī Śacīnandana Gaurahari. To
accomplish His own purposes He would accept the lustre
and inner sentiments of His beloved Śrīmatī Rādhikā, the
embodiment of mahābhāva. He would perform various kinds
of loving pastimes with His associates and disseminate
the chanting of Kṛṣṇa’s holy name throughout the world,
bestowing kṛṣṇa-prema upon all. Pṛthu Mahārāja also
received Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s darśana, and Mahāprabhu
ordered him to keep the glories of this place hidden for
now. He also told him to construct a beautiful pond
here, which later became known as Pṛthu-kuṇḍa, renown
for the purity and sweetness of its waters.



Later Śrī Lakṣmaṇa Sena became the king of this place.
He enlarged and deepened the pond, and named it Ballāla-
dīghī after his father Ballāla Sena. The ruins of
Mahārāja Lakṣmaṇa Sena’s palace (and Ballāla Sena’s) are
still seen today in the neighbourhood behind Chand
Kazi’s samādhi.




Śrī Murārī Gupta’s Residence




Murārī Gupta’s Śrī Rāma-Sītā temple and residence are
situated east of the Yogapīṭha Temple on what was
previously the bank of Ballāla-dīghī. He was Śrīman
Mahāprabhu’s associate and fellow student. Accomplished
in all arts, he was an expert dancer, a sweet singer and
the author of Śrī Caitanya-caritra.



Murārī Gupta took birth in a famous family of ayurvedic
doctors in the district of Śrīhaṭṭa. Later he went to
live in Śrīdhāma Navadvīpa. Although he was a few years
older than Mahāprabhu, and studied in a higher grade,
and although he was a sharp, intelligent student, Nimāī
would sometimes defeat him in their debates on nyāya-
śāstra, the scriptures of logic. When Murārī Gupta
established an axiom, Nimāī refuted it. And when Nimāī
established one, Murārī refuted it. Although Nimāī was
defeated, He praised Murārī for his astute intelligence
and scriptural knowledge.



When Śrīman Mahāprabhu returned from Gayā, Murārī Gupta
joined His saṅkīrtana party and danced as he performed

                           38
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

kīrtana in the houses of Śrīvāsa and in the houses of
other devotees. When Murārī’s sweet voice would chant
Bhāgavatam verses, Śrīman Mahāprabhu became immersed in
ecstasy and both He and Murārī Gupta would weep. Once in
Murārī’s house Śrīman Mahāprabhu revealed His Śrī Varāha
form to him.



In Śrī Rāma’s pastimes Murārī Gupta was Hanumān, the
Lord’s unparalleled servant, and had exclusive faith in
Śrī Rāma. Once, to test Murārī’s one-pointed devotion to
Rāma, Śrīman Mahāprabhu explained the ultimate truth
that Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the Lord of all
lords. He described Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s unequalled virtues and
His four unique qualities that are not found in any of
His other incarnations. Thus inspired, Murārī became
enthused to worship Kṛṣṇa and returned to his home. The
next morning, however, he approached Śrīman Mahāprabhu
with an agitated heart and fell at His feet, weeping. “I
see no alternative but to take my life,” he said.
“Yesterday I embraced Your instruction to worship Śrī
Kṛṣṇa because my ultimate duty is to follow Your order,
but at the same time I have dedicated my life to the
lotus feet Śrī Rāmacandra. Just trying to imagine giving
up my service to Śrī Rāmacandra tears my heart to
pieces. Last night my mind gave me no peace, for on one
hand I cannot leave Śrī Rāmacandra and on the other hand
I cannot transgress Your order. Under these
circumstances it is only befitting for me to die.”
Śrīman Mahāprabhu became completely satisfied upon
seeing Murārī Gupta’s one-pointed devotion to Śrī Rāma
and ordered him to continue his worship of Him.



Once, Śrīman Mahāprabhu and Nityānanda Prabhu were
sitting together in Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita’s house. Murārī
Gupta first paid his obeisances to Gauracandra and then
to Nityānanda Prabhu. This did not please Śrīman
Mahāprabhu who told him, “You have transgressed Vaiṣṇava
etiquette.” That night Mahāprabhu entered Murārī’s dream
and spoke to him of the glories of Nityānanda Prabhu.
“Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu is akhaṇḍa guru-tattva, the
original undivided truth of the spiritual master. First,
the devotee worships the spiritual master and then he
worships the Supreme Lord. If a devotee transgresses
this order the Supreme Lord does not accept his worship
of Him.” The next morning Murārī first offered his
obeisances to Nityānanda Prabhu and then to Mahāprabhu.
This greatly satisfied Mahāprabhu.



Śrī Murārī Gupta was a very famous ayurvedic doctor, and
people from afar used to come to him for treatment. In
reality, however, he was a doctor who cured the disease
of material existence.



Sometimes, while absorbed in ecstasy, Śrīman Mahāprabhu
assumed the mood of four-armed Lord Nārāyaṇa. Murārī
Gupta then assumed the mood of Garuḍa, and Mahāprabhu

                           39
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

climbed on to his shoulders.



When Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu left for Purī after taking
sannyāsa, Murārī Gupta would travel there yearly for the
Ratha-yātrā festival.




Śrī Īśodyāna




or Śrī Nandana Ācārya’s residence



Iśodyāna is on the southern boundary of Antardvīpa at
the confluence of the rivers Gaṅgā and Sarasvatī
(Khaḍiyā River), and is situated between them. There was
a beautiful garden here in which deer, blue cows and
other smaller forest animals used to roam.



Śrī Nandana Ācārya lived and performed his bhajana here.
Once, Nityānanda Prabhu came to this house and hid. He
thought, “If My younger brother Kanhaiyā has really
appeared as Gaurāṅga, He will personally come here to
meet Me.” Understanding Nityānanda Prabhu’s desire,
Śrīman Mahāprabhu came to this place with some of His
associates. At Their first meeting the two brothers were
overjoyed and became surcharged with spiritual
happiness. Later, Mahāprabhu brought Nityānanda to
Śrīvāsa-aṅgana, and from that time on Nityānanda
remained with the Lord. Both are “the Lord (īśa) of
lords”, and therefore Their meeting place is known as
Īśodyāna, “the garden of the two Lords”.




The Gauḍīya-maṭhas




at Īśodyāna in Māyāpura and Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Prabhupāda



Today, on the eastern side of the Gaṅgā, there is a
beautiful “mountain range” of gauḍīya-maṭhas beginning
from Śrī Yogapīṭha-Māyāpura and ending in the south at
the confluence of the Gaṅgā and Jālaṅgī (Khaḍīyā River).




                           40
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

Jagad-guru nitya-līlā praviṣṭa oṁ viṣṇupāda aṣṭottara-
śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda was
an illustrious ācārya and scholar in the Brahma-Mādhva-
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava line. He knew several languages, was a
natural poet, a distinguished writer and was fully
conversant with bhakti-tattva and other philosophical
principles. He was a fearless, expert speaker of the
impartial truth, and could sharply refute the sahajiyās
(who are opposed to bhakti) and the impersonalists. His
explanations of the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam were both
relishable and filled with philosophical conclusions. He
was an unequalled preacher and ācārya of the chanting of
the holy name and distributing love of Godhead as
preached and practised by Śrīman Mahāprabhu.



Through the mercy of this great personality it has
become possible to preach Mahāprabhu’s message
throughout the world, and centres, temples, maṭhas and
āśramas, which disseminate pure devotional service, have
been established everywhere. Many devotional
literatures, such as Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Śrīmad Bhagavad-
Gītā, Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindhu, Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi and Jaiva-dharma, have been
published in the world’s major languages. He empowered
his many qualified disciples with the transcendental
potency to deliver the people of this material world.
Within a short period of time they preached pure
devotional service throughout the world, thus fulfilling
the desire of their worshipful spiritual master.



The following sannyāsīs and ācāryas are some of the
well-known disciples of Śrīla Prabhupāda: Śrīmad Bhakti
Prajñāna Keśava Mahārāja, Śrīmad Bhakti Pradīpa Tīrtha
Mahārāja, Śrīmad Bhakti Vilāsa Tīrtha Mahārāja, Śrīmad
Bhakti Rakṣaka Śrīdhara Mahārāja, Śrīmad Bhakti Sāraṅga
Gosvāmī Mahārāja, Śrīmad Bhakti Hṛdaya Vana Mahārāja,
Śrīmad Bhakti Vicāra Yāyāvara Mahārāja, Śrīmad
Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja, Śrīmad Bhakti Gaurava
Vaikhānas Mahārāja, Śrīmad Bhakti Kevala Auḍulomī
Mahārāja, Śrīmad Bhakti Prakāśa Araṇya Mahārāja, Śrīmad
Bhakti Vijñāna Āśrama Mahārāja, Śrīmad Bhakti Sarvasva
Giri Mahārāja, Śrīmad Bhakti Sudhīra Yācaka Mahārāja,
Śrīmad Bhakti Vilāsa Gabhastanemi Mahārāja, Śrīmad
Bhakti Viveka Bhāratī Mahārāja, Śrīmad Bhakti Svarūpa
Parvata Mahārāja, Śrīmad Bhakti Śrīrūpa Siddhāntī
Mahārāja, Śrīmad Bhakti Dayita Mādhava Mahārāja, Śrīmad
Bhakti Kusuma Śravaṇa Mahārāja, Śrīmad Bhakti
Bhaktyāloka Paramahaṁsa Mahārāja, Śrīmad Bhakti Saurabha
Sāra Mahārāja, Śrīmad Bhakti Pramoda Purī Mahārāja and
Śrīmad Bhakti Kamala Madhusūdana Mahārāja. After Śrīla
Prabhupāda’s disappearance they opened their own
gauḍīya-maṭhas to preach pure devotional service
throughout the world. In this way they fulfilled Śrīla
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Prabhupāda’s innermost desire.



Our most worshipful Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava
Mahārāja established the grand Śrī Devānanda Gauḍīya
Maṭha, Śrīla Bhakti Rakṣaka Śrīdhara Mahārāja

                           41
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

established Śrī Caitanya Sārasvata Gauḍīya Maṭha, and
Śrīla Bhakti Viveka Bhāratī Mahārāja and Śrīla Bhakti
Śrīrūpa Siddhāntī Mahārāja established Śrī Gauḍīya Āsana
and Mission. These maṭhas are all in Koladvīpa (the
present town of Navadvīpa). Śrīmad Bhakti Kevala
Auḍulomi Mahārāja established Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Gauḍīya Maṭha in Godruma. On the Gaṅgā’s
eastern bank, beginning from Yogapīṭha-Māyāpura up to
the confluence of the Gaṅgā and Khaḍiyā River, there is
a beautiful chain of temples. The prominent among them
are listed below.




Śrī Yogapīṭha-Māyāpura




After the disappearance of jagad-guru Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, Śrī Yogapīṭha-
Māyāpura, Śrīvāsa-aṅgana, Śrī Advaita-bhavana, Śrī
Caitanya Maṭha (Candraśekhara-bhavana) and other places
came under the care of Śrīmad Bhakti Vilāsa Tīrtha
Mahārāja. Numerous gauḍīya-maṭhas were also managed
under his guidance.



Śrīmad Bhakti Vilāsa Tīrtha Mahārāja had received
initiation from Śrīla Prabhupāda in his youth and
tolerated much hardship to render him extensive service.
After Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Mahārāja entered his
unmanifest pastimes, Śrīmad Tīrtha Mahārāja accepted the
renounced order from tridaṇḍi-svāmī Bhakti Vijñāna
Āśrama Mahārāja. In Śrīla Prabhupāda’s time, Bhakti
Vilāsa Tīrtha Mahārāja was the secretary of all the
maṭhas, and after Śrīla Prabhupāda’s disappearance he
became the ācārya of Śrī Caitanya Maṭha.




Śrī Gaura-Gadādhara Āśrama




This āśrama was established by Śrī Rasānanda Vana
Mahārāja, a disciple of tridaṇḍi-svāmī Śrīmad Bhakti
Hṛdaya Vana Mahārāja, who was a prominent disciple of
Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Prabhupāda. Śrīmad
Bhakti Hṛdaya Vana Mahārāja established “Bhajana-kuṭī”
in Śrī Vṛndāvana, and founded the College of Oriental
Studies at Ramaṇa-retī, Vṛndāvana. Śrīla Sarasvatī
Ṭhākura Prabhupāda sent him to preach pure devotion to
the Western world, in countries like England, France,
Germany and Spain.




                             42
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017



Śrī Gauḍīya Āśrama




This āśrama was established by a disciple of tridaṇḍi-
svāmī Śrīmad Bhakti Svarūpa Parvata Mahārāja (a disciple
of Śrīla Prabhupāda). Śrīmad Parvata Mahārāja preached
in Udālā, Orissa, where he established Udālā Gauḍīya
Maṭha.




Śrī Caitanya-Candrodaya Mandira




Nitya-līlā praviṣṭa oṁ viṣṇupāda Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta
Svāmī Mahārāja established this extensive temple in
Īśodyāna, Śrīdhāma Māyāpura. He was initiated by jagad-
guru Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura in 1933 and
in 1966 founded the world-famous International Society
for Kṛṣṇa Conscious-ness (ISKCON), which has many
hundreds of temples all over the world.



Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Svāmī Mahārāja, who was born in
1896 in the city of Kolkata, was highly religious from
childhood. On the order of his spiritual master he wrote
essays in English and sent them to his magazine for
publication. After giving up his home, wife, children
and all else, he accepted the renounced order in 1959 at
Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha in Mathurā from nitya-līlā
praviṣṭa oṁ viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava
Gosvāmī Mahārāja. He translated Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and
the Gītā into English, and to fulfil his spiritual
master’s innermost desire he went to the United States
of America in 1965 to preach pure devotion. There he
composed authoritative translations and explanations of
devotional literature and wrote several other books. He
left this world on 14th November, 1977. At present
thousands of his disciples and grand-disciples are
preaching the holy name of Kṛṣṇa and pure devotion all
over the world.



There is a plan to build a great Vedic temple here so
devotees from all over the world can continue to study
Vedic culture.




Śrī Gaura-Nityānanda Mandira



                           43
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017




(Śrī Nandana Ācārya-bhavana)



This temple was established by Śrīmad Bhakti Sāraṅga
Gosvāmī Mahārāja, a prominent disciple of jagad-guru
Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Prabhupāda. He was exclusively
devoted to Prabhupāda’s service. He was a powerful
speaker and an excellent writer, and had countless other
good qualities. He was the editor and managing director
of the weekly Gauḍīya, which was established by Śrīla
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura. Śrīla Prabhupāda sent him to the
Western countries to preach the message of Mahāprabhu
and pure devotional service. After Śrīla Prabhupāda’s
disappearance he established preaching-centres in
Śrīdhāma Vṛndāvana, Delhi, Jagannātha Purī, Māyāpura and
other places.



During the time of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu there was a
very beautiful garden here where Śrī Nandana Ācārya
built his home and performed bhajana. After Śrī
Nityānanda Prabbhu had visited the holy places of India
he came to Nandana Ācārya’s house and hid. His motive
for hiding was, “If Nimāī Paṇḍita really is Śrī Nanda-
nandana, He is omniscient and will certainly know that I
have arrived. Then He will personally come here to meet
Me.” And so it happened. That evening Nimāī Paṇḍita,
along with some of His prominent associates, came here
to meet Nityānanda Prabhu for the first time in
caitanya-līlā. They became so deeply absorbed in the
moods of Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma that They lost
consciousness. Thereafter Śrī Nimāī Paṇḍita took
Nityānanda Prabhu to Śrīvāsa-aṅgana where all the
devotees were delighted to meet Him. Śrīmatī Mālinī-
devī, Śrīvāsa’s wife, cared for Nityānanda as her own
son in every respect, and thus raised Him.




Śrī Caitanya Gauḍīya Maṭha




Tridaṇḍi-svāmī Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Dayita Mādhava
Mahārāja, one of Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura’s prominent
disciples and an influential ācārya, is the founder of
this maṭha. His brahmacārī name was Śrī Hayagrīva
Brahmacārī. After Śrīla Prabhupāda’s disappearance he
accepted the renounced order from parivrājakācārya Śrī
Śrīmad Bhakti Gaurava Vaikhānasa Mahārāja. He
established preaching-centres in Bengal, Assam, Andhra
Pradesh, Punjab, Uttar Pradesh and other places in
India, from which to spread the message of Lord
Caitanya. He also established centres of bhakti in Śrī
Vṛndāvana-dhāma, Śrī Purī-dhāma and Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma.
He published a monthly Bengali magazine called Caitanya-

                             44
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

vāṇī, and many authoritative and ancient religious
scriptures. His samādhi is here.




Śrī Caitanya-Bhāgavat Maṭha




This maṭha was established by parivrājakācārya Śrī
Śrīmad Bhakti Vicāra Yāyāvara Mahārāja, Śrīla Sarasvatī
Ṭhākura’s last sannyāsī disciple. By nature he was a
very simple-hearted Vaiṣṇava and an exceptionally sweet
singer. People were deeply moved by his beautiful
saṅkīrtana. He established preaching-centres in
Medinīpura, Kāṅthi, Candrakonā Town and Māyāpura. His
place of bhajana and his samādhi are here.




Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Caitanya Maṭha




The founder of this maṭha is parivrājakācārya Śrīmad
Bhakti Kamala Madhusūdana Mahārāja, a disciple of Śrīla
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura. He took birth in 1899 in East Bengal
(Bangladesh) in Vājitapura village of the Magārīpura
subdivision of the Harīpura district. His father’s name
was Śrī Pārvatīnātha Sanyāla and his mother’s name was
Svarṇamayī-devī. He received his primary education in
Vājitapura and his higher education in Kolkata. While
engaged in his former occupation as co-editor of the
famous daily Amṛta-bazara of Kolkata he would frequently
attend the lectures of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
in the city’s Śrī Bāgabāzāra Gauḍīya Maṭha. He was so
influenced by Śrīla Prabhupāda’s hari-kathā that he gave
up his home, family, work and everything else to take
full shelter of Prabhupāda’s lotus feet. In Śrīla
Prabhupāda’s time he bore the responsibility of managing
several maṭhas. After Śrīla Prabhupāda’s disap-pearance
he resided with our spiritual master, Śrīla Bhakti
Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, in Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta
Samiti. He was the editor of the Samiti’s main journal,
the Gauḍīya Patrikā, and he also preached in various
parts of India. He later established preaching-centres
in the town of Vardhamāna and Īśodyāna in Māyāpura. He
was an influential speaker and commentator of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam. He entered aprakaṭa-līlā in 1991 on Gaura-
daśamī. His samādhi is situated here.




Śrī Gopīnātha Gauḍīya Maṭha



                              45
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017



This maṭha was established by parivrājakācārya tridaṇḍi-
svāmī Śrīmad Bhakti Pramoda Purī Mahārāja. In Śrīla
Prabhupāda’s time he wrote articles for the daily
Nadiyā-prakāśa and other weekly and monthly religious
magazines. Śrī Purī Mahārāja was also a great preacher
of bhakti-dharma and an influential speaker of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam. Before accepting the renounced order his
name was Śrī Praṇavānanda Brahmacārī. After Śrīla
Prabhupāda’s disappearance he spent a long time with our
spiritual master, Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī
Mahārāja, in Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti. He later
founded Śrī Vāsudeva Gauḍīya Maṭha in Ambikā-kālanā,
from where he preached pure bhakti throughout India. He
frequently stayed with the ācārya of Śrī Caitanya
Gauḍīya Maṭha, Śrīmad Bhakti Dayita Mādhava Mahārāja,
and was the President of the Editorial Board of their
journal, Caitanya-vāṇī. He entered aprakaṭa-līlā on 22nd
November, 1999, in Jagannātha Purī. His samādhi is here.




Śrī Gaurāṅga Gauḍīya Maṭha




This maṭha was established by Śrīla Bhakti Saurabha Sāra
Mahārāja, a disciple of Śrīla Prabhupāda. After
Prabhupāda’s disappearance, Śrīla Sāra Mahārāja accepted
sannyāsa from Śrīmad Bhakti Sāraṅga Gosvāmī Mahārāja,
the founder of Śrī Gauḍīya Saṅgha. After Śrīmad Gosvāmī
Mahārāja’s disappearance he served as the ācārya of Śrī
Gauḍīya Saṅgha for some time. He was very humble,
learned in the philosophical conclusions of bhakti, and
greatly adept in writing and speaking.




Śrī Paramahaṁsa Gauḍīya Maṭha




This maṭha was established by disciples of
parivrājakācārya Bhaktyaloka Paramahaṁsa Mahārāja, a
disciple of Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura. He was a very
simple-hearted Vaiṣṇava and would always chant the holy
name. During Prabhupāda’s time he was the manager of the
Gauḍīya Printing Press in Kṛṣṇa-nagara, which produced
the Nadiyā-prakāśa and other publications. For some time
he also looked after the estate in Śrī Māyāpura. After
Śrīla Prabhupāda’s disappearance he stayed with our
spiritual master, Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī
Mahārāja, in Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti. He later
established a maṭha in Kolkata, where he took up his
residence. This maṭha (Śrī Paramahaṁsa Gauḍīya Maṭha)
has been named after him.


                             46
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017



Many other maṭhas besides those mentioned here have been
established or are being established in this area.




The Geographical Location of Old Navadvīpa




[There has been a centuries old controversy regarding
the location of Old Navadvīpa, Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s
birthplace. The information in this section comes from
the book Citre-navadvīpa by Śrī Śaradindu Nārāyaṇa Rāya
(published by Śrī Caitanya Maṭha, Māyāpura). This
information gives conclusive proof that Old Navadvīpa
was situated on the eastern bank of the Gaṅgā. The
English excerpts from the above-mentioned book have been
quoted directly. — ed.]




By studying scriptures such as Urddhāmnāya Mahā-tantra,
Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta and Bhakti-ratnākara it is clear
that Old Navadvīpa was situated on the Gaṅgā’s
(Bhagavatī-Bhāgīrathī’s) eastern bank. The Urddhāmnāya
Mahā-tantra states:



vartateha navadvīpe nityadhāmni maheśvari



bhāgīrathī taṭepūrve māyāpurantu gokulam



O Maheśvari, Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma is eternal, and
Māyāpura, which is situated on the Bhāgīrathī’s eastern
bank, is the same as Gokula.



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 1.86) states: “...
gauḍadeśe pūrva-śaile karilā udaya — ... they arose on
the eastern horizon in the land of Gauḍa.” And Ādi-līlā
13.97 states: “nadīyā-udayagiri, pūrṇacandra gaurahari,
kṛpā kari’ ha-ila udaya — thus by His causeless mercy
the full moon, Gaurahari, rose in the district of
Nadīyā, which is compared to Udayagiri, where the sun
first becomes visible.”



Śrī Navadvīpa-parikramā by Śrīla Narahari Cakravartī
states:


                           47
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017



śrī-suradhunīra pūrva-tīre



antardvīpādika catuṣṭaya śobhākare



jāhnavīra paścikulete



koladvīpādika pañca vikhyāta jagate



Antardvīpa and three other islands are situated in full
splendour on the eastern bank of the Suradhunī (Gaṅgā),
and Koladvīpa and four other famous islands are on the
Jāhnavī’s (Gaṅgā’s) western bank.



In the 16th century, during the British Empire’s
occupation of India, Sir William Hunter produced an
authoritative historical and geographical record of
India, focusing on many well known places in Bengal. In
this record (Hunter’s Statistical Account, pg 142) he
described the geographical position of Navadvīpa Town:



“It was on the east of the Bhagirathi and on the west of
the Jalangi.”



In other words, Navadvīpa Town was situated on
Bhāgīrathī’s eastern bank and Jālangī’s western bank.



From the explanations in the Nadiya Gazetteer one can
understand that Navadvīpa was the capital of the kings
of the Sena dynasty:



“Nabadwip is a very ancient city and is reported to have
been founded in A.D. 1063 by one of the Sen kings of
Bengal. In the Aini Akbari it is noted that in the time
of Lakhana Sen, Nadia was the Capital of Bengal.”



In other words, Navadvīpa is an ancient city, said to be
founded in 1063 by a king of the Sena dynasty. Āini
Akbarī also mentions that Navadvīpa was the capital of
Bengal during the reign of Mahārāja Śrī Lakṣmaṇa Sena.




                             48
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

In his Statistical Account (pg. 142) Sir William Hunter
also has mentioned that Mahārāja Lakṣmaṇa Sena founded
Nadīyā in A.D. 1063.



The following statement appeared in the Calcutta Review
(pg. 398, 1946):



“The earliest that we know of Nadia is that in 1203 it
was the Capital of Bengal.”



In other words, our first information about Nadīyā Town
is that it was the capital of Bengal in 1203. In this
way much proof supports the fact that old Nadīyā, or old
Navadvīpa, was the capital of the kings of the Sena
dynasty and was situated on the Gaṅgā’s eastern bank.



The Nadiya District Gazetteer provides further evidence:



“The nature of Mahammadi Baktier’s conquest (A.D. 1203)
appears to have been exaggerated. The expedition to
Nadia was only on in-road, a dash for securing booty.
The troopers looted the city with the palace and went
away. They did not take possession of the part. It seems
probable that the hold of Mohammedans upon the part of
Bengal in which Nadia district lies was very slight for
the two centuries which succeeded the sack of Navadwip
by Baktier Khan. It appears, however, that by the middle
of the fifteenth century the independent Mahammedan
Kings of Bengal had established their authority.”



It seems that the description of the conquest of
Navadvīpa by Baktiyāra Khān (1203) was exaggerated. The
sole reason Baktiyāra Khān invaded Nadīyā was to loot
its riches. It was a sudden attack in which the cavalry
plundered the royal palace and Navadvīpa Town, and then
left. They never established any authority over the
town, although it is possible that after their attack on
Navadvīpa, Baktiyāra Khān was its authority in name
only. If so, this authority lasted for the duration of
two centuries. In the middle of the 15th century the
independent Muslim emperors established their authority
over Bengal.



Nadiya Gazetteer and Hunter’s Statistical Account (pg.
142) clearly prove that the highland adjacent to present
Māyāpura is actually the ruins of King Ballāla Sena’s
palace and that Nadīyā Town was his capital. Ballāla-
dīghī (Pṛthu-kuṇḍa) was situated nearby.



                           49
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017


Over time, the course of the Gaṅgā’s flow occasionally
changed and gradually it washed away the old Navadvīpa
Town, which was later founded again on the western bank.
Old Navadvīpa, or Nadīyā Town, is now known by various
names, such as Brāhmaṇa-pukura, Bel-pukura, Śrī
Māyāpura, Ballāla-dīghī and Śrīnāthapura. The present
Śrīdhāma Māyāpura is where Śrī Jagannātha Miśra’s house,
Śrīvāsa-aṅgana, Advaita-bhavana, Murārī Gupta-bhavana
and other places were situated. The place known as
Kuliyā-grāma (or Pahāḍa-pura) during Mahāprabhu’s time,
is where the present Navadvīpa Town and Municipality are
situated. Old maps give evidence of this.



Bhakti-ratnākara is an old and authoritative scripture
which was composed by the well-known Śrīla Narahari
Cakravartī Ṭhākura. In its description of Navadvīpa-
dhāma parikramā, Bhakti-ratnākara gives clear evidence
to support that Antardvīpa Māyāpura, which was situated
on the Gaṅgā’s eastern bank, was the old Nadīyā, or
Navadvīpa Town. Even today Chand Kazi’s samādhi,
Śrīdhara-aṅgana and other places are situated on the
eastern bank. When Śrīnivāsa Ācārya and Śrī Narottama
Ṭhākura performed parikramā with Īśāna Ṭhākura, they
visited Jagannātha-bhavana and the nearby Bārakonā-
ghāṭa, Gaṅgā-nagara and so forth, and without crossing
the Gaṅgā, they went to Chand Kazi’s samādhi, Śrīdhara-
aṅgana, Simuliyā and other places.



In 1684 William Hayes, an agent of the East India
Company, wrote in his diary about Richard Temple’s old
map, which also shows that Navadvīpa Town was situated
on Bhāgīrathī’s eastern bank.



In 1572, Kavi-karṇapūra wrote his famous play Śrī
Caitanya-candrodaya. From the geographical description
given there it is clear that the old Navadvīpa, or
Nadīyā Town, was situated on the Gaṅgā’s eastern bank
and that Kuliyā-grāma was situated on the western bank.



Śrī Vṛndāvana dāsa Ṭhākura compiled Śrī Caitanya-
bhāgavata just a few years after the disappearance of
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. From the descriptions in this
book one can get to know the geographical location of
Navadvīpa and nearby places. Everyone accepts that the
samādhi of Chand Kazi, who was a contemporary of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu, is situated in Vāmana-pukura (also
known as Brāhmaṇa-pukura and Brāhmaṇa-puṣkariṇī).
According to Śrī Caitanya-bhāgavata’s narration of Chand
Kazi’s defeat, Śrīman Mahāprabhu took a large saṅkīrtana
party to Chand Kazi’s residence, but there is no mention
that they crossed the Gaṅgā.



From the above-mentioned proofs it is clear that the

                           50
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

place indicated by Śrīla Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja
and Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura in Śrī Māyāpura-dhāma is
the actual place of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s
appearance.



Some people say that Rāmacandrapura, or Kekaḍā Māṅṭha,
situated on the Gaṅgā’s western bank, is the actual site
of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s appearance and is therefore
the ancient Māyāpura. This assumption, however, is
completely baseless and opposed to the above proofs.
Some reasons for this, in brief, are:



(1) If Rāmacandrapura were Mahāprabhu’s appreance-place
and Chand Kazi’s house was on the other side of the
Gaṅgā, Śrīman Mahāprabhu and His kīrtana party would
have had to cross the Gaṅgā to go from Rāmacandrapura to
the Kazi’s house on the day of the Kazi’s defeat. But
Śrī Caitanya-bhāgavata does not mention that Śrīman
Mahāprabhu crossed the Gaṅgā.



(2) To go from Rāmacandrapura to the Kazi’s house in
Vāmana-pukura via Gaṅgā-nagara, one has to go through
Rudra-pāḍā. There is no alternate route. Śrīman
Mahāprabhu led the saṅkīrtana party through many ghāṭas
on the banks of the Gaṅgā. Then, finally arriving at
Gaṅgā-nagara, He came to the Kazi’s house. If the
saṅkīrtana party had started at Rāmacandrapura, the
distance travelled would have been 6—8 miles.



(3) In the narration of Śrīnivāsa Ācārya’s parikramā it
is mentioned that he went to Simuliyā (Sīmantadvīpa)
from Antardvīpa. Even today, the Kazi’s house and
samādhi are on the path from present Māyāpura
(Antardvīpa) to Simuliyā. If we take Rāmacandrapura to
be Antardvīpa Māyāpura, however, then to reach Simuliyā
from there one must surely cross Rudra-pāḍā, or
Rudradvīpa. Śrīnivāsa Ācārya finally arrived in
Rudradvīpa after going to Jānnagara (Jahnudvīpa), then
to Māmagāchi (Modadrumdvīpa) and Mahatpura (Mātāpura),
etc. If Śrīnivāsa Ācārya had begun his Navadvīpa-dhāma
parikramā from Rāmacandrapura, how would he have reached
Simuliyā first, and then Gādīgāchā (Godrumadvīpa) and
Majīdā (Madhyadvīpa), and after crossing the Gaṅgā,
Kuliyā (Koladvīpa), Rātudvīpa-Rātupura (Ṛtudvīpa),
Jānnagara (Jahnudvīpa), Māmagāchi (Modadrumadvīpa) and
finally Rudra-pāḍā (Rudradvīpa)? Consequently, it must
be concluded that he started his parikramā from the
present Antardvīpa Māyāpura situated on the Gaṅgā’s
eastern bank. This conclusion is in accordance with the
description given in Bhakti-ratnākara and with old maps.



(4) It is mentioned in Bhakti-ratnākara that one can see
Suvarṇa-vihāra from Antardvīpa. Even today one can see
Suvarṇa-vihāra from the present Māyāpura. But if

                           51
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

Rāmacandrapura is considered to be Antardvīpa it is
impossible to see Suvarṇa-vihāra, which is situated
about 5—6 miles away.



(5) If Rāmacandrapura is the place of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu’s appearance, and if Gaṅgā-Govinda Singh
considered that place to be Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s birth-
place and built a temple there, why are the deities of
Śrī Rāma-Sītā established in this temple? Why didn’t he
establish a deity of Śrīman Mahāprabhu, and why didn’t
he call this place Māyāpura? And why is this place known
as Rāmacandrapura on the old government maps?



(6) It is well-known that there is a huge Śrī Rāma-Sītā
festival celebrated with great pomp in Rāmacandrapura.
This Rāmacandrapura is situated within Modadrumadvīpa,
Śrī Rāmacandra and Sītājī’s pastime-place. Hence, this
place cannot also be assumed to be Antardvīpa Māyāpura.



These and other facts (unstated to avoid increasing the
size of this book) give clear proof that Rāmacandrapura,
or Kekaḍā Māṅṭha, is definitely not Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s
appearance-place.




Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura and Antardvīpa Māyāpura




Śrī Saccidānanda Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s eternal intimate associate, is revered as
the Seventh Gosvāmī who again inaugurated the flow of
the Bhāgīrathī of bhakti. He appeared in this world to
manifest Mahāprabhu’s holy name (gaura-nāma), His
innermost desire (gaura-kāma) and His holy abode (gaura-
dhāma). Like Śrī Rūpa and Śrī Sanātana, he wanted to
reside in Vraja and perform bhajana there. On his way to
Vraja-maṇḍala he came to a deity of Lord Śiva, Mahādeva
Śrī Tāḍakeśvara, a short distance from Kolkata. That
night Śrī Mahādeva appeared to him in a dream and
requested him to reveal Śrī Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu’s
appearance-place. He also told him to remain in Gauḍa-
maṇḍala and perform bhajana. Śrī Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura
placed Śrī Tāḍakeśvara’s instruction upon his head and
returned to Śrīdhāma Navadvīpa. There, in Godrumadvīpa,
he constructed a small hut and began performing bhajana,
eager to find Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s appearance-place. He
wrote in his autobiography:



“I was very anxious to find Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s
appearance-place. I went to Navadvīpa (the present
Navadvīpa Town) and with much endeavour made some

                           52
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

investigation, but was unable to find any trace of it.
Thus I became very unhappy. Nowadays the people of
Navadvīpa are only busy filling their bellies. They know
nothing about Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s pastime-places, nor do
they endeavour to learn about them. One day after
twilight, at ten o’clock, Kamala and I, together with
one clerk, were standing on the roof of the Rani
Dharmaśālā looking about. It was very dark and the sky
was filled with clouds. Then, across the Gaṅgā towards
the north I saw an effulgent mansion. I asked Kamala,
‘Did you see something?’ He answered, ‘I became
awestruck to see an effulgent mansion on the other side
of the Gaṅgā towards the north.’ In the morning I again
went to the roof of the Rani Dharmaśālā and attentively
looked towards that place. I was unable to see the
effulgent mansion, but I could see a palm tree there.
When I inquired from others about that place, they said
it was called Ballāla-dīghī and that one can still see
many traces of King Lakṣmaṇa Sena’s old fort there. The
coming Monday I went to Kṛṣṇa-nagara and the following
Saturday I went straight from there to Ballāla-dīghī.
That night I beheld a wondrous sight. Śrīman Mahāprabhu,
Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu, Śrī Advaita Ācārya, Śrī Gadādhara
and the other devotees were completely absorbed in
chanting and dancing ecstatically. Everyone’s eyes were
filled with tears. The tumultuous sound of “Hari Bol!”
and the sound of mṛdaṅgas and kartālas maddened the
devotees. After sometime that sight disappeared from my
eyes.



“The next day I walked to those places to take darśana
of them and asked the elderly locals about them. They
told me that this was Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s birthplace. I
visited all the small villages mentioned in Bhakti-
ratnākara as well as those mentioned in Śrīla Vṛndāvana
dāsa Ṭhākura’s Śrī Caitanya-bhāgavata. Thereafter I sat
in Kṛṣṇa-nagara and compiled the book Śrī Navadvīpa-
dhāma-māhātmya and sent it to be printed in Kolkata. I
told Śrī Dvārikā Bābū, an engineer from Kṛṣṇa-nagara,
about my findings. He could understand everything I said
and on the strength of his intelligence he produced a
map of Śrī Navadvīpa-maṇḍala. I wandered throughout
Navadvīpa-dhāma and wrote the Dhāma-mahātmya, because at
that time I could do nothing else.”



In Godruma, 1893, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura performed a
great harināma-saṅkīrtana festival under the auspices of
Śrīla Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja. At that time Śrī
Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja went with many Vaiṣṇavas
to take darśana of Śrī Māyāpura. Overwhelmed by ecstatic
sentiments, he himself pointed out Mahāprabhu’s
birthplace, the lost Yogapīṭha-Māyāpura. The 144-year-
old Bābājī Mahārāja became overwhelmed with ecstasy and
jumped into the air, crying out, “This is the birthplace
of Gauracandra, our very life and soul!” Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, many famous writers of Bengal,
many high-posted government officers, editors of famous
magazines and others witnessed the event. Amongst them
was Śrī Śyāmalāla Gosvāmī, the great and erudite
Vaiṣṇava. Also present were Śrī Śaśībhūṣaṇa Gosvāmī, Śrī

                           53
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

Rādhikānātha Gosvāmī, Śrī Vipina Bihārī Gosvāmī, Śrī
Rāya Vanamālī, Śrī Rāya Bahādura, Śrī Śiśīra Kumāra
Ghoṣa, Śrī Dvārikānātha Sarakāra and Śrī Naphara Kumāra.
Some huts were eventually made here and the temple
construction began. Gradually, faithful devotees from
the various states of India came here to take darśana
and now, crowds of people come from all over the world
to this holy place.




Śrī Simantadvīpa




This island is also called Simuliyā. It consists of
Śyenaḍāṅgā, a part of Vāmana-pukura (Brāhmaṇa-
puṣkariṇī), Rājapūta, Mullāpāḍā, Viṣṇu-nagara, Saraḍāṅgā
and other places. There is an ancient temple of Śrī
Jagannātha in old Saraḍāṅgā, which is also called
Śavara-kṣetra. It is said that a Muslim king named
Kālāpahāḍa became antagonistic towards the Hindus when
his mother, a Hindu lady, was forcibly captured by
Muslims and her Hindu parents abandoned her. She was
left with no choice but to live with the Muslims. When
he grew up Kālāpahāḍa came to know of this. He
demolished thousands of temples and forcibly converted
thousands of Hindus into Muslims. When he attacked
Jagannātha Purī the deities of Jagannātha, Baladeva and
Śubhadrā were brought to this place and worshipped by a
devotee here.



According to the Purāṇas, once, in the course of
Śaṅkarajī’s (Śiva’s) narration of the Supreme Lord’s
pastimes to Pārvatī, he began to describe Śrī Gaurāṅga,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s coming incarnation in Kali-yuga. Śrī
Gaurāṅga is none other than Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself
resplendent with the sentiment and lustre of Śrī Rādhā,
performing the pastime of distributing prema to ordinary
people. Such prema is rarely attained even by the
demigods. Inspired by this description, Pārvatī-devī
proceeded to perform severe austerities in this dense
forest of Navadvīpa. Mahāprabhu became pleased by her
austerities and appeared before her. Enchanted by His
form, she expressed her desire to behold His pastimes
when they would manifest in this world. Śrīman
Mahāprabhu said, “Since you are My inseparable energy,
you are always an associate in My pastimes. As My
internal energy you are My dear Rādhikā, and as the
external energy you are a manifestation of Rādhikā known
as Durgā, or Pārvatī. As Yogamāyā you manifest My
pastimes, and as Paurṇamāsī in Vraja you nourish them.
Now in Navadvīpa you eternally reside as Prauḍhāmāyā
along with Kṣetrapāla Śiva. You bewilder those who are
indifferent to Me, and you help those who turn toward Me
to become attracted to serving Me.”




                           54
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

Hearing this, Pārvatī became overwhelmed with ecstatic
love. She took Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s foot-dust in her
hands and placed it where her hair parts in the middle.
Mahāprabhu then disappeared. The parting in the hair is
called sīmanta, and because she placed Mahāprabhu’s
foot-dust there she is worshipped as Sīmantanī-devī. The
place where this pastime occurred became known as
Sīmantadvīpa.




Chand Kazi’s Samādhi




This place is situated in Sīmantadvīpa on the boundary
of Antardvīpa. Nearby was Maulānā Sirajuddīna Chand
Kazi’s palace. Śacī-devī’s father, Nīlāmbara Cakravartī,
used to reside in this village. Chand Kazi was a high
official in the kingdom of Emperor Hussein Shah,
Bengal’s chief ruler. At that time Chand Kazi was the
administrator of Navadvīpa as well as its magistrate.
Some considered him to be the spiritual master of the
Emperor. He used to be a great opponent of Hindu
religion and after breaking a mṛdaṅga during the
devotee’s kīrtana in Śrīvāsa-aṅgana he passed a law
against the performance of saṅkīrtana. That same
evening, in defiance of that law, Śrīman Mahāprabhu
gathered hundreds of thousands of people, almost all
carrying burning torches. Performing kīrtana with
mṛdaṅgas and karatālas they went to Chand Kazi’s
residence. The terrified Chand Kazi hid, but somehow
Mahāprabhu enticed him out, assuring him he had no need
to fear. “According to village relationships you are My
maternal uncle and I want your affection. Why are you
hiding?”



Chand Kazi replied, “After breaking the mṛdaṅga, I
returned home. That night while I slept, the form of
Nṛsiṁha suddenly mounted my chest and scratched it with
His nails. Trembling in rage He said, ‘Today I’m letting
you go, but if in the future you ever again obstruct the
saṅkīrtana movement, I will kill you. Always remember
this.’ I started from my sleep in horror. Look, even now
You can see His nailmarks on my chest. I promise that
from this day forth, I will never obstruct the
saṅkīrtana movement; nor will anyone in my dynasty
obstruct it. I will disown anyone who does so.”



Śrīman Mahāprabhu then inquired from the Kazi, “Please
explain why are you engaged in cow killing. The cow, who
gives milk to both Hindus and Muslims, is the mother of
everyone.” The Kazi replied, “In our noble Koran there
is no injunction to kill the cow. Those who do so are
acting in opposition to the Koran.” After this incident,
Chand Kazi became a devotee, and when he disappeared
from this world, his samādhi was built at this place.

                           55
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

Even today Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s Vaiṣṇava devotees
reverentially circumambulate Chand Kazi’s samādhi.



At his samādhi a 500-year-old goloka-campaka tree stands
as witness to this incident. The tree continues to
blossom even though the upper part of the tree is
hollow.




Śrīdhara-aṅgana




Śrīdhara-aṅgana is situated in the north-east corner of
Antardvīpa at the border of Simantadvīpa near Chand
Kazi’s samādhi in the south-eastern direction. Here, in
the middle of a banana grove was the dilapidated house
of the niṣkiñcana Śrīdhara, the best of devotees and
most dear to Śrī Gaura and Nityānanda Prabhu. In Kṛṣṇa’s
pastimes Śrīdhara was the cowherd boy Kusumāsava Sakhā.



Nimāī Paṇḍita used to meet him daily on the bank of the
Gaṅgā. On the footpath that ran alongside the Gaṅgā,
Śrīdhara would sit selling banana-leaves, banana-
flowers, soft banana-stalks, ripe bananas, green
bananas, and various vegetables such as bottle-gourd
(laukī) and eggplant, all of which he had grown in his
garden. With half of the money he obtained from his
sales, he would buy flowers and other articles to
worship the Gaṅgā, and the other half he used for his
maintenance. He thus performed bhajana day and night.



Nimāī particularly liked Śrīdhara’s vegetables. Every
day He ‘took’ a vegetable from him without paying —
sometimes a laukī, sometimes a banana-flower and
sometimes a ripe banana — and then a scuffle would take
place between them. Śrīdhara would become angry, catch
Nimāī’s hand and say, “I’m a poor brāhmaṇa. What can I
give in charity? Furthermore I’m worshipping the Gaṅgā.”
Mahāprabhu would answer, “And I’m Gaṅgā’s husband. By
serving Me, Gaṅgā will be satisfied.” Śrīdhara replied,
“You commit an offence by saying You are the husband of
the Gaṅgā. You don’t even fear Bhagavān Himself.”
Mahāprabhu laughed and said, “One day you will have to
accept My words.” Both the old man and the young boy
derived immense delight from such quarrelling.



When, in Śrīvāsa-aṅgana, Śrīman Mahāprabhu manifested
His sāta-prahariyā-bhāva (“the ecstasy of twenty-one
hours”) Śrīdhara was called for and given kṛṣṇa-prema.
Thus absorbed he cried, “Oh Kṛṣṇa, oh Kṛṣṇa!” and
fainted.

                           56
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017




After defeating the Kazi, Śrīman Mahāprabhu came to
Śrīdhara’s house with a huge saṅkīrtana party.
Mahāprabhu drank water to His satisfaction from
Śrīdhara’s broken iron pot, and greatly glorified him.



On the day that Mahāprabhu renounced His home He met
Śrīdhara in the evening and received a laukī from him as
a gift. He gave it to His mother and asked her to make
laklakī [laukī cooked in milk with sugar]. When it was
prepared and offered to their deity, Śrīman Mahāprabhu
honoured that mahā-prasāda with great relish.




Śrī Godrumadvīpa




This island comprises the ancient places of Gādīgāchā,
Bālīcara, Maheśagañja, Tiyorakhālī, Āmaghāṭā, Śyāma-
nagara, Virijā, Devapallī, Harīśapura and Suvarṇa-
vihāra. It extends from the eastern bank of the Gaṅgā
and the southern bank of the Sarasvatī (Khaḍiyā River)
to Devapallī. In the course of time local language usage
has changed the name Godruma to Gādīgāchā.



Previously a massive banyan tree stood on a high part of
the Bhagavatī-Bhāgīrathī’s bank, where the Surabhī cow
and the King of the demigods, Indra, worshipped Śrī
Gaura. During Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes Indra wanted to destroy
Gokula because the residents of Vraja had stopped
worshipping him. For seven days he sent torrents of rain
upon Vraja, but Kṛṣṇa protected Gokula by lifting Śrī
Govardhana. The pride of Indra was crushed and fear
arose within him because of his offence. When he learnt
from Grandfather Brahmā that Śrī Gauracandra would
appear in the future, he took Mother Surabhī with him
and performed austerities under a banyan tree at this
lonely place in Navadvīpa, hoping to evoke His mercy.



A long time passed. Finally Śrī Gauracandra appeared
before him saying, “I understand your heart. After some
time I will appear in Śrī Navadvīpa and distribute the
chanting of My holy name along with pure love for Śrī
Kṛṣṇa to the general people. At that time you will
assist Me in My pastimes.” When the Lord disappeared,
Mother Surabhī made a hut under this banyan tree and
became absorbed in worship of Śrī Gauracandra here.
Since then this place has become known as Godruma. Go
means “cow” (Surabhī) and druma means “tree”.



                           57
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017


Once during the time of cosmic devastation, Mṛkaṇḍa
Ṛṣi’s son, Mārkaṇḍeya Ṛṣi, rested at this place. He had
attained the age of seven kalpas (7 x 4,320,000,000
earth years). During the annihilation at the end of the
seventh kalpa, the Earth was submerged in water, leaving
not one place visible. Mārkaṇḍeya Ṛṣi floated in the
water and finally, by immense good fortune, he came to
this place in Navadvīpa.



Seeing the exhausted sage unconscious from the effect of

the dashing waves, merciful Mother Surabhī lifted him
from the water of devastation and brought him to her
hut. When he regained consciousness, he was amazed to
see that Navadvīpa-dhāma was not under water. The sight
of the beautiful forests and sub-forests filled with
trees, plants, birds and animals of the thirty-two mile
large dhāma greatly pleased him. Mother Surabhī gave him
her nectarean milk to drink, which fully rejuvenated
him. She then instructed him to remain at Godruma and
worship Śrī Gauracandra.



“This dhāma is transcendental and beyond material
nature,” she said. “It cannot be seen with material
eyes. Eight of the islands of Navadvīpa are like the
petals of a lotus, and Śrīdhāma Māyāpura is like the
pericarp of that lotus. Here, in a concealed form, all
the holy places and demigods worship Śrī Gaurāṅga
Mahāprabhu. By worshipping Him one will attain service
to Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in Vraja with the sentiment of
amorous love (madhura-bhāva). Although all perfections,
the eight kinds of opulence and all kinds of liberation
stand at the gate of this sacred place praying for
service, the devotees of Śrī Gaura reject them from
afar. By worshipping Śrī Gauracandra one becomes forever
free from sins and miseries, as well as from all kinds
of fructified and unfructified fruitive activities,
desires for sense enjoyment, and from ignorance.”
Mārkaṇḍeya therefore remained here to perform bhajana.




Svānanda-sukhada-kuñja




Towards the eastern side of Godruma, on the bank of the
Sarasvatī, lies Svānanda-sukhada-kuñja, where Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura built a hut and performed his
bhajana. In a corner of this grove is the bhajana-kuṭī
of Śrīla Gaura-kiśora dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja, the crest-
jewel among avadhūtas and Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s
intimate friend. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura was later
placed in samādhi here.



                           58
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017


In present times, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura is the main
personality who re-inaugurated the propagation of pure
devotion. He compiled approximately one hundred books on
bhakti in various languages and established the
transcendental glories of Śrī Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu. In
the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava community he is therefore known as
the Seventh Gosvāmī. It is by the persistent endeavours
of this great personality that the Śrī Viśva-vaiṣṇava-
rāja-sabhā (the Universal Assembly of Vaiṣṇavas) was
established in Kolkata in the year 398 of the Caitanya
era (A.D. 1884). He preached the message of Mahāprabhu
(gaura-vāṇī), the name of Mahāprabhu (gaura-nāma) and
pure devotional service (śuddha-bhakti) very vigorously
through the medium of a magazine called Sajjana-toṣaṇī.
He also published many old, authoritative Vaiṣṇava
literatures. Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī was his
dear son and it was through him that Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura preached pure devotion all over the world.



Once, in the middle of the night, while he was
performing his bhajana in Godruma, he saw a
transcendental light shining some distance from the
other side of the river towards the north. The next day
he saw the same light and he also saw Śrī Gaura-
Nityānanda performing mahā-saṅkīrtana with Their
associates at that same place. In order to understand
this mystery, he crossed the Sarasvatī River and came to
Śrīdhāma Māyāpura where he saw tulasī plants growing
near a palm tree. Upon further inquiry from the local
people, he learned that no crop grew there except tulasī
— who grew of her own accord. In an attempt to verify
that place as the birthplace of Śrī Gaurasundara, Śrī
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura studied old government maps and
reports, as well as historic literature, specifically
Śrī Caitanya-bhāgavata, Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta and
Bhakti-ratnākara. He also heard from elderly, eminent,
saintly personalities about it.



Finally, he went there in the company of nitya-siddha
vaiṣṇava-sārvabhauma Śrīla Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī
Mahārāja and other famous personalities of Bengal. When
Śrīla Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja’s arrived at that
place, he danced with joy, thus indicating it to be the
Yogapīṭha, the place of Śrī Gaura’s appearance. Śrī
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura established the deities of Śrī
Gaura-Viṣṇupriyā-Lakṣmīpriyā, the Pañca-tattva and so
forth there, and entrusted the management of the entire
place to his son Śrī Vimalā Prasāda Sarasvatī. Later
this Vimalā Prasāda became famous as Śrī Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī.



Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura established nāma-haṭṭa and
thus preached the chanting of the holy name and pure
devotion in the villages. In Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes in Vraja
he was Śrī Kamalā Mañjarī. He was also an eternal
associate of Śrī Gaurasundara.


                           59
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017




Suvarṇa-vihāra




Suvarṇa-vihāra is situated near the Āmaghāṭā station on
the Navadvīpa-ghāṭa railway line, which goes to Kṛṣṇa-
nagara. In Satya-yuga King Suvarṇa Sena lived and ruled
here for many years. His attachment to sense
gratification and to his kingdom did not diminish, but
lasted to his old age. Once, to his great fortune, the
great sage Nārada appeared at his palace. Nārada saw
that the king was completely absorbed in sense
gratification, and this evoked his mercy. In a solitary
place the sage proceeded to give the king instructions
for his welfare: “My dear King, you are passing your
life fruitlessly. You perceive what is useless to be
valuable and what is of true value to be useless. Please
consider the situation properly: it is material objects
that have no value and no use. They entangle the living
entity in the cycle of birth and death and repeatedly
hurl him into it.



“Please deliberate on what I say. After death, what will
become of your relationships with your father, son,
wife, brothers, friends and subjects? These
relationships will cease and your body will be burned.
To remain attached to this material body is not very
intelligent. If according to the result of one’s
fruitive actions, one goes to the heavenly planets and
enjoys the happiness there, one must again return to
this world, as such an attainment is not permanent.



“Impersonal liberation completely destroys the living
entity, so no material or transcendental happiness can
be found there either. In such liberation the jīva’s
existence vanishes. Therefore fortunate living entities
do not desire it.



“The jīva is Kṛṣṇa’s eternal servant, but having
forgotten the Supreme Lord, he wanders throughout
various species of life always troubled by the three
types of miseries. If by good fortune while wandering in
this material world, he attains the association of pure
devotees, then transcendental faith (pāramārthika-
śraddhā) arises in his heart. When he takes shelter of a
bona fide spiritual master, he starts his practice of
kṛṣṇa-bhajana. By taking unalloyed shelter of a
spiritual master and performing bhajana in the
association of devotees, his faith (śraddhā) gradually
matures into niṣṭhā, ruci, āsakti, bhāva and finally
kṛṣṇa-prema. The only correct process to attain pure
devotion is to perform the nine types of devotional
service, such as hearing, chanting, remembering and

                           60
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

praying. Only by this sādhana-bhakti can one attain
kṛṣṇa-prema.



“O King, you are born in Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma and thus
you are very fortunate. In the forthcoming Kali-yuga,
the source of all incarnations, Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself, will
appear as Śrī Gaurāṅga accepting the sentiment and
complexion of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. He will distribute the
holy name and love of God to the common man. Those
people who live in Kṛṣṇa’s abode and perform their
sādhana-bhajana there while tolerating many
difficulties, attain perfection after a long time. But
for those who live in the land of Gaura and take shelter
of Gaura’s name, offences are easily removed. They
quickly attain kṛṣṇa-prema.” Speaking thus, Nārada Muni
chanted “Gaurahari!” and danced in ecstatic love.



That night, after Nārada Ṛṣi left, the king dreamt of
Śrī Gaurahari and His associates dancing and singing.
When his sleep broke, the aggrieved king began to cry.
Then a voice from the sky said, “O King, do not be
distraught. In My manifest pastimes you will become My
associate, Buddhimanta Khān, and you will render Me many
kinds of service.” Śrī Buddhimanta Khān assisted Śrīman
Mahāprabhu in various ways, such as assisting Him in His
journey to Purī-dhāma.



At the present time, Śrī Suvarṇa-vihāra Gauḍīya Maṭha,
established by Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura,
is situated in a mango grove on the ruins of Suvarṇa
Sena’s palace.




Harihara-kṣetra




Harihara-kṣetra is also called Mahā-Vārāṇasī. It is
situated on the bank of the Gaṇḍakī River on the eastern
side of the river Alakānandā. Here in an ancient temple,
Śrī Hari and Śrī Hara (Viṣṇu and Śiva) are manifest in
one and the same deity. The best of the Vaiṣṇavas, Śrī
Śambhu (Śiva), and vaiṣṇavī-śakti Śrī Gauri eternally
reside here chanting the name of Gaura. Residence in
this place is superior to residence in Kāśī and Kailāśa.
When a living entity dies here Śambhu chants Śrī Gaura’s
name in his ear and thus delivers him from this material
world.



Śrī Mahādeva, or Śrī Śambhu, is actually Sadā-Śiva. This
means he is viṣṇu-tattva, a primary expansion of the
Supreme Lord. There is no difference between Sadā-Śiva

                           61
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

and Viṣṇu. Accepting a portion of the mode of ignorance,
Sadā-Śiva destroys this material world and fulfils the
desires of the jīvas. He bewilders those who are
unfavourable to Kṛṣṇa, and he grants devotion to Kṛṣṇa
and protects those who are favourable. He worships Kṛṣṇa
in his abode of Kāśī or Kailāśa. As the foremost of
Vaiṣṇavas he is very dear to Śrī Hari and is non-
different from Him.



Persons like Rāvaṇa, Kumbhakarṇa, Meghanāda, Kaṁsa,
Jarāsandha and Bhaumāsura, are envious of Śrī Hari and
only worship Śaṅkara. They are called demons and Śrī
Hari kills them. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam describes how
Puṇḍarīka Vāsudeva and his friend, the king of Kāśī,
opposed Śrī Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa killed the coward Puṇḍarīka
Vāsudeva and chopped off the king’s head, throwing it at
the gate of Kāśī. At this, his son prepared to attack
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, but before he could do so Kṛṣṇa burned the
entire city of Kāśī to ashes with the heat coming from
His Sudarśana cakra. Śaṅkara left Kāśī with his
associates and took shelter of Harihara-kṣetra.



The real nature of Lord Śiva is very mysterious. When
Śrī Rāmacandra established Rāmeśvara, a deity of Śiva,
everyone present acknowledged Rāmeśvara to mean rāmasya
īśvaraḥ, or “Śīva is the lord (īśvara) of Rāma.” The
demigods opposed this and through the compound rāmaśca
asau īśvaraḥ they derived another meaning: “Rāma and
Śaṅkara are both the Lord (īśvara).” These explanations
distressed Śaṅkara, who personally spoke from the śiva-
liṅga: “Neither explanation is correct. Through the
grammatical compound rāmaḥ yasya īśvaraḥ sa rāmeśvaraḥ
the meaning of Rāmeśvara becomes: ‘Rāmeśvara is he whose
Lord is Rāma.’” Thus, Śrī Kṛṣṇa is established as the
sole Lord of all lords, and Śaṅkara as His precious
servant.1



In the narration of Ūṣā’s marriage in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
a fight is described between Bāṇāsura and Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Śaṅkara sided with Bāṇāsura, who was defeated by Kṛṣṇa.
Śaṅkara prayed to Kṛṣṇa to spare Bāṇāsura’s life, and as
a result Kṛṣṇa cut off all but four of Bāṇāsura’s
thousand arms, and made him an associate of Śaṅkara.



Vaiṣṇavas acknowledge Lord Śaṅkara as dear to the
Supreme Lord and the spiritual master of the Vaiṣṇavas,
and therefore they respect and honour him. Śaṅkara is
kṣetrapāla, the protector of all of Bhagavān’s holy
abodes. In Vṛndāvana, where he accepts the mood of a
gopī, he is famous as Śrī Gopīśvara. He bestows kṛṣṇa-
prema upon qualified living entities, and thus gives
them entrance into Vṛndāvana. Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam also
accepts Śaṅkara as the best of Vaiṣṇavas, vaiṣṇavānāṁ
yathā śambhuḥ. Even if the Lord gives him unpleasant
instructions, Śaṅkara is forever attentive to carry them
out. When the ocean of milk had been churned, Śaṅkara,

                           62
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

understanding Viṣṇu’s desire, drank the poison the
churning had produced and thus protected the universe.
Śaṅkara also understood the desire of his Lord and
Master, Śrī Kṛṣṇa, that he come as Śrī Śaṅkarācārya to
propagate impersonalism, which is opposed to the
principles of the Vedas. By doing this he obscured pure
devotion and knowledge of the essential reality of the
Supreme Personality, subdued the atheistic Buddhists,
and destroyed the impersonal karma-kāṇḍa [the division
of the Vedas that deals with fruitive activities]. By
always observing Bhagavān’s desire, Śaṅkara serves the
Lord’s innermost desire.




Devapallī (Nṛsiṁhapallī)




Devapallī, situated in the south-eastern part of Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma, has been famous since Satya-yuga. Lord
Nṛsiṁhadeva rested here after killing Hiraṇyakaśipu, who
had been tyrannising the devotee Prahlāda. This place is
situated on the ancient riverbed of Mandākinī, on whose
bank various demigods such as Brahmā, Indradeva,
Sūryadeva, Gaṇeśa and Viśvakarmā built their residences
on different hillocks. Here they stay worshipping Śrī
Nṛsiṁhadeva. In course of time, the flow of Mandākinī
changed; the demigods’ dwellings also turned into
hillocks and the temple vanished.



While performing saṅkīrtana Śrīman Mahāprabhu and His
associates came to this place, which is considered to be
the border of Navadvīpa-dhāma. In the evening they
returned to Śrīdhāma Māyāpura, passing through Harihara-
kṣetra, Brāhmaṇa-puṣkariṇī, Suvarṇa-vihāra and other
places. The forests and gardens here were replete with
rivers, streams, mango groves, small villages, and
various birds and animals like deer, blue-cows and
cuckoos. Absorbed in ecstasy Śrī Gaura and Nityānanda
Prabhu sang and danced as They returned to Māyāpura with
Advaita Ācārya, Gadādhara, Mukunda, Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita and
other associates. People from every village received
them as they passed by and participated in their
chanting and dancing.



Śrīman Mahāprabhu would remember the pastimes of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa returning to the village from the forest where He
was grazing the cows — the flute in full splendour
seated on His lips; a yellow cloth decorating His
bluish-black limbs like a permanent lightning flash
shimmering against a new monsoon cloud; and a
vaijayantī-mālā, a garland of five kinds of flowers,
extending down to His feet. The cowherd boys sang
Kanhaiyā’s glories, while millions of mooing cows
surrounded Him. Taking Kṛṣṇa to be a bluish-black cloud
and the sound of His flute to be thunder, the peacocks

                           63
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

became intoxicated. They spread their tail-feathers and
began to dance.



The cuckoos’ singing of “kuhu-kuhu” sounded as if they
were welcoming Kṛṣṇa. The gopīs — hiding in the groves
on both sides of the path, on the roofs of high
buildings and behind the latticed windows of the
residential quarters — worshipped Śyāmasundara through
their crooked side-long glances.



Suddenly an old lady said to her newly married daughter-
in-law, “Stay in the house. If you go out, this black
(kṛṣṇa) snake will bite you. You will not get free from
the poison it injects for the rest of your life.” The
simple-hearted gopī responded, “Why don’t you forbid
your own daughter to go? And why are you yourself going?
I shall certainly go.”



Śrīman Mahāprabhu was thus absorbed in the mood of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā taking direct darśana of Śyāmasundara
Kṛṣṇa. With great difficulty, Mahāprabhu’s associates
tried to bring Him back to consciousness, and when they
eventually did, He burst into tears. At that time
Gadādhara Paṇḍita sang this verse from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(10.21.5) in a sweet, melodic voice.



barhāpīḍaṁ naṭa-vara-vapuḥ karṇayoḥ karṇikāraṁ



bibhrad vāsaḥ kanaka-kapiśaṁ vaijayantīṁ ca mālām



randhrān veṇor adhara-sudhayāpūrayan gopa-vṛndair



vṛndāraṇyaṁ sva-pada-ramaṇaṁ prāviśad gīta-kīrtiḥ



Śyāmasundara is entering the forest of Vṛndāvana
accompanied by His cowherd boyfriends. In His turban
there is a peacock feather; over His ears, a karṇikāra
flower; on His body, a yellow cloth glitters like gold;
and around His neck, extending down to His knees, is a
heart-stealing garland strung with five kinds of
fragrant forest flowers. He is dressed like an expert
dancer on a stage, and the nectar of His lips flows
through the holes of His flute. Singing His glories, the
cowherd boys follow behind Him. Already more charming
than Vaikuṇṭha, Vṛndāvana-dhāma, marked with the
impressions of Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet which are
decorated with the conch, disc and other symbols, has
become even more beautiful.

                           64
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017




And Mukunda Ghoṣa recited this verse (Padyāvali 46):



phullendīvara-kāntim indu-vadanaṁ barhāvataṁsa-priyaṁ



śrī-vatsāṇkam udāra-kaustubha-dharaṁ pītāmbaraṁ sundaram



gopīnāṁ nayanotpalārcita-tanuṁ go-gopa-saṅghāvṛtaṁ



govindaṁ kala-veṇu-vādana-paraṁ divyāṅga-bhūṣaṁ bhaje



I worship Govinda, whose complexion is the colour of a
blossoming blue lotus flower. His face is like the moon,
and He is fond of wearing a peacock feather in His
crown. His chest bears the mark of Śrīvatsa and is
adorned with the Kaustubha gem. He wears beautiful
yellow garments, and His handsome form is worshipped by
the gopīs’ sidelong glances. His companions are
multitudes of cows and cowherd boys. He plays sweet
melodies on the flute, and His body is decorated with
glittering ornaments.



Hearing these verses everyone became immersed in
ecstasy.



Nityānanda Prabhu and His sakhās blissfully accompanied
Śrīman Mahāprabhu who then entered the mood of Kanhaiyā.
They all arrived at the house of Śacī-mātā, who then
performed āratī to the devotees. Taking Gaura and
Nityānanda on her lap, she wiped the dust from Their
bodies with the end of her sari.



Śrī Nṛsiṁha rested at this place after killing
Hiraṇyakaśipu, the father of His great devotee Prahlāda.
Hiraṇyakaśipu was opposed to the Supreme Lord and His
devotees. He forbade his son Prahlāda to chant the name
of the Lord, but Prahlāda Mahārāja never complied.
Hiraṇyakaśipu devised many means to kill his son. He
threw him into fire, hurled him into the ocean, gave him
poison and threw him into a pit of snakes. When not one
of these plans was successful, he again sent Prahlāda to
study with Ṣaṇḍa and Amarka, the sons of Hiraṇyakaśipu’s
spiritual master, Śukrācārya.




                           65
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

One day, while his teachers were absent from the
classroom, Prahlāda began to instruct his schoolmates,
all of whom were the children of demons. “We do not know
when death will come,” he told them. “According to their
karma, some people die in childhood, some in youth, some
in adulthood and some in old age. Therefore, it is
necessary to worship the Supreme Lord from childhood.
Just as one suffers misery, despite making no endeavour
to attain it, one will also experience happiness, which
also comes of its own accord as a result of one’s
previous actions. Therefore, the sole and most
beneficial duty of one who has acquired a human birth is
to worship the Supreme Lord.



“He who spends this precious human life gathering
enjoyment for the senses is just like an animal. He must
leave behind whatever he has collected as a result of
his activities, including his body. Such things cannot
give happiness and peace to the living entity, who is
the eternal servant of the Lord. We have fallen into
this miserable condition because we have turned away
from the Lord. Only by worshipping Bhagavān can the jīva
remain eternally happy. The highest duties of the living
entities are chanting the holy name, hearing narrations
about the Lord and remembering these narrations.” The
words of Prahlāda Mahārāja had a powerful effect on the
boys and they loudly chanted the name of Hari.



Hiraṇyakaśipu came to know that Prahlāda was spoiling
the other children, inciting them to join him in
chanting the holy name, and he called him to his palace.
His eyes and face red with anger he leaped at Prahlāda
with club in hand shouting, “Now let’s see who will
protect you! Where is He?” Fearlessly, Prahlāda
answered, “He is not only my protector, He is also
yours; He is the protector of the entire universe. He is
omnipresent; there is no place where He cannot be found.
I see Him everywhere.” Hiraṇyakaśipu bellowed, “Oh, you
liar! Is He also in this pillar?” And he smashed it with
his bare fist. A dreadful roar and loud peals of
laughter resounded from the pillar and Hiraṇyakaśipu
shuddered as the fearsome Nṛsiṁha Bhagavān, with the
body of a human and the head of a lion emerged. He
prepared himself to fight with Śrī Nṛsiṁha, but the Lord
placed him across His thighs and slayed him. He did not
kill him during the day or during the night, but at
twilight; it was neither inside the house nor outside
it, but in the doorway; it was not in any standard
month, but in Puruṣottama, the leap month; it was not
with any weapons or arms that He tore open his stomach,
but with His nails.2



The demigods began offering glorifications to the Lord,
who repeatedly requested Prahlāda to ask for a boon.
Prahlāda, however, would not accept one. Finally, he
said, “Let me suffer the miseries of all the living
entities of the universe. Then, when they are free from
all of their sins, please allow them to be engaged in

                           66
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

Your service.” The Supreme Lord became extremely pleased
by this prayer of Prahlāda Mahārāja, who is the ideal
devotee. Mere remembrance of him removes all worldly
miseries and one attains devotion to the Lord.



Śrī Nṛsiṁhadeva is greatly honoured at Nṛsiṁhapallī. In
Vraja people show honour to Girirāja-Govardhana with the
hope that he will fulfil any desire or remove any
misery, and in Gauḍa-maṇḍala they respect Lord
Nṛsiṁhadeva for the same purpose. People come from afar
to take His darśana.




Śrī Madhyadvīpa




Madhyadvīpa is situated south-west of Godruma, and it
encompasses Majīdāgrāma, Vāmana-pāḍā, Simūlagāchi,
Brahma-nagara and other villages. With the gradual
degeneration of the language, the name Madhyadvīpa
became Majīdāgrāma. Places to visit here are Saptarṣi-
bhajana-sthala (Saptarṣi-ṭila), Naimiṣāraṇya, Puṣkara-
tīrtha, Uccahaṭṭa, Pañcaveṇī and Haṁsavāhana Śīva.




Saptarṣi-bhajana-sthala



(the place of worship of the seven sages)



In Satya-yuga, the seven great sages (saptarṣis) —
namely Marīci, Atri, Aṅgīrā, Pulaha, Kratu, Pulastha and
Vaśiṣṭha — approached Grandsire Brahmā and talked with
him about Śrī Gaurahari, who would appear in the coming
Kali-yuga. They discussed His method of bhajana, and how
He would distribute to everyone, even the dog-eaters,
the prema that even the demigods rarely attain. When
they requested Brahmā to tell them something about the
nature of this prema, Brahmā became pleased and
instructed the sages to go to Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma. There
they should chant Śrī Gaurahari’s names and remember His
pastimes. He said that by this process, the dhāma itself
would awaken gaura-prema in their hearts. Those who have
love and affection for Navadvīpa-dhāma, where offences
are not considered, easily attain residence in Vraja.



When they heard the glory of Śrī Navadvīpa these sages
built their bhajana-kuṭīs at this place in Madhyadvīpa.

                           67
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

Praying for Gaurasundara’s mercy, they remained here,
loudly chanting and glorifying Śrī Gaurasundara’s name,
form, qualities and pastimes. They relinquished eating,
drinking, sleeping and other types of sense enjoyment.
One day, at noon, while chanting the name of Gaura, the
extraordinarily attractive Śrī Gaurasundara appeared to
them together with His associates. The sages glorified
and completely surrendered to Him, who was resplendent
with the sentiments and lustre of Śrī Rādhā. Śrī
Gaurasundara ordered the sages to give up all desires
fulfilled through jñāna, karma, tapasyā and yoga, and
only desire to serve Kṛṣṇa, devoting themselves
exclusively to chanting Kṛṣṇa’s name. “After some time,”
He said, “I, along with all My associates, will manifest
My pastimes in Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma, and you will be able
to witness them.”



After Śrī Gaurasundara disappeared from their vision,
the seven sages remained here at Saptarṣi-bhajana-sthala
and eagerly engaged in worshipping Śrī Gaura. During
Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s manifest pastimes, He and His
associates would come here performing kīrtana.




Naimiṣāraṇya



The supremely sacred Gomatī River flows south of
Saptarṣi-ṭilā. The groves bordering the Gomatī are
called Naimiṣāraṇya. Here 88,000 sages heard narrations
about Śrī Gaurasundara from the mouth of Śrī Sūta
Gosvāmī. At that time, Pañcānana Mahādeva (Śiva) gave up
his bull carrier (vāhana) and rode on a swan (haṁsa) to
hear Śrī Gaura’s pastimes accompanied by his associates.




Brāhmaṇa-puṣkara (Puṣkara-tīrtha)



The present name of Brāhmaṇa-puṣkara is Vāmana-pokharā
or Vāmana-purā. In Satya-yuga, a brāhmaṇa named Jīvana
dāsa came here while visiting all the holy places and
took up residence here. His ardent desire to take bath
in Puṣkara-tīrtha made him extremely restless. As he
slept that night he heard a divine voice in his dream:
“Remain here for some time chanting the holy name of the
Lord and your desire will be fulfilled.” He made a hut
and performed bhajana here until the end of his life. In
his very old age, Tīrtharāja Puṣkara mercifully appeared
to him in the form of a beautiful pond and told him to
take bath. Upon doing so the brāhmaṇa was blessed with a
divine vision in which he directly saw the
personification of Tīrtharāja Puṣkara. Puṣkara-rāja
mercifully instructed him, “O brāhmaṇa, whatever benefit

                           68
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

a person attains by taking one hundred baths in all the
other holy places, he attains by residing in Navadvīpa-
dhāma for just one night. Therefore I will also reside
here eternally along with all the holy places of the
Earth. In the upcoming Kali-yuga, Śrī Gaurahari will
manifest in Navadvīpa-dhāma and distribute kṛṣṇa-prema
through the chanting of Kṛṣṇa’s holy names. You will
take birth at that time and have the good fortune of
seeing His pastimes.”




Uccahaṭṭa



Uccahaṭṭa, which is also called Hāṭa-ḍāṅgā-grāma, is
Kurukṣetra within Brahmāvarta [a tract of land between
the rivers Yamunā and Gaṅgā]. On one side flows the
Sarasvatī River and on the other side, the Dṛṣadvatī.
Taking all His associates with Him, Śrīman Mahāprabhu
passed through Brāhmaṇa-puṣkara and came here while
performing kīrtana with up to fourteen mṛdaṅgas. All the
demigods would come and loudly chant Gaura’s name in
unison and narrate His pastimes. Therefore this place is
called Uccahaṭṭa. Ucca means “in a loud voice” and haṭṭa
means “gathering”. It is also known as Hāṭa-ḍāṅgā, which
means “the place where the demigods assemble”. If one
always resides in Navadvīpa at Uccahaṭṭa, which is non-
different from Kurukṣetra, and performs bhajana here,
one will quickly attain Śrī Gaurasundara’s mercy.




Pañcaveṇī



Pañcaveṇī is situated near Uccahaṭṭa. It is the
confluence of the Bhagavatī-Gaṅgā as well as the
Mandākinī, Alakānandā and Sarasvatī (which is hidden).
On the western side, the Gaṅgā meets with Bhogavatī and
Mānasa-gaṅgā. This place is the glorious Mahā-Prayāga.
Grandsire Brahmā performed millions of sacrifices on the
Gaṅgā’s two banks. If a living entity dies here — in the
water, on the land or in the sky — he effortlessly
attains Śrī Goloka-dhāma.



All rivers converge here to perform service to Śrī
Gaura. This is the conclusion of Śrī Vedavyāsa and other
omniscient sages. There is no other holy place in the
fourteen planetary systems equal to this Pañcaveṇī.
Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s sacred pastimes easily manifest in
the hearts of those who reverentially remember Him while
taking bath or performing ācamana here. Loving devotion
for Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet then manifests in their
hearts.


                           69
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017




Śrī Koladvīpa




Koladvīpa includes such places as Gaṅgā-prasāda,
Samudragaḍha, Campaka-haṭṭa, Gadakhalīkācara, Kolāmāda,
Pāramedīyā, Gādakhalīra, Tegharīpāḍā and Tegharīkola. It
also includes the present city of Navadvīpa, which is
called Aparādha-bhañjana-pāṭa, or Kuliyā. Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura writes in his informative article
on Kuliyā-dhāma, published in the magazine Sajjana-
toṣaṇī, that on this Earth, Śrī Kuliyā-pahāḍa within
Navadvīpa is unparalleled.



On the western bank of the Gaṅgā, near the confluence of
the Pañcaveṇī (which is situated on both the eastern and
western banks) is the raised land called Śrī Kuliyā-
pahāḍa. Śrī Koladeva, which is a name for Varāhadeva
(the boar incarnation), appeared in Koladvīpa.



Once, in Satya-yuga, a brāhmaṇa named Vāsudeva lived in
Koladvīpa where he worshipped Varāhadeva. Lord Varāha
was so pleased with the brāhmaṇa’s worship that He
appeared before him, first as Varāhadeva (Koladeva) and
then in His form of Nṛsiṁha. Upon seeing this form of
Nṛsiṁha, who protected the devotee Prahlāda by killing
Hiraṇyakaśipu, the fortunate brāhmaṇa became restless
with love and began to glorify the Lord. Pleased, the
Lord again assumed His mountain-like form as Koladeva
and spoke the following words. “This Navadvīpa-dhāma,
which is Gupta Vṛndāvana, or the hidden Vṛndāvana, is
very dear to Me. No other dhāma in the three worlds can
compare to it and all other dhāmas on the Earth are
eternally situated in their full splendour within it.
Residence here easily grants the result of residing in
all other holy places. In Kali-yuga Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
having accepted Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s mood and complexion,
will appear as Śrī Gaurāṅga in Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma.
While performing various pastimes with His associates,
He will propagate the chanting of the holy name and in
this way distribute love of God to the common people.
You will take birth at that time and receive the fortune
of beholding those pastimes. For now, however, keep this
secret.” With these words, Śrī Koladeva disappeared and
Śrī Vāsudeva Vipra continued his worship of the Lord.



Koladvīpa is non-different from Śrī Govardhana.
Bahulāvana is in Koladvīpa’s northern part and the place
of rāsa-līlā of Śrīdhāma Vṛndāvana is in the southern
part.



                           70
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017


Koladvīpa is also called Aparādha-bhañjana Kuliyā, or
“Kuliyā, the place where offences are destroyed”. After
taking sannyāsa, Śrīman Mahāprabhu went to Śrī Purī-
dhāma. He travelled for some time in South India and
then returned to Purī. Later He travelled again, this
time to take darśana of Śrīdhāma Vṛndāvana. Thousands of
people accompanied Him as He passed through places such
as Pānīhāṭī, Kumārahaṭṭa and Kāñcanapallī, until He
finally arrived at Vidyā-vācaspati’s house in
Vidyānagara. The crowds were so great that for seven
days Mahāprabhu stayed in Mādhava dāsa’s house in
Kuliyā. While He was here, He delivered Gopāla Cāpāla, a
resident of Kuliyā, who was an offender to both the
Vaiṣṇavas and the holy name, and Devānanda Paṇḍita, who
also offended the Vaiṣṇavas.



Gopāla Cakravartī was a government tax collector who
worked under Śrī Hiraṇya and Govardhana Majūmdāra, the
well-known residents of Saptagrāma. He was highly
scholarly and very beautiful. One day the royal priest,
Balarāma Paṇḍita, went with Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura to
the royal court of Śrī Hiraṇya and Govardhana. Śrīla
Haridāsa Ṭhākura proceeded to glorify the holy name
saying, “What to speak of uttering one pure name, the
utterance of a mere semblance of the holy name — spoken
to indicate something else (saṅketa), jokingly
(parihāsa), disrespectfully (avahelā), derisively
(stobha-avajñā) or inattentively (upekṣā) — can easily
bestow liberation. Pure chanting of the holy name awards
kṛṣṇa-prema by which one attains Vaikuṇṭha or above
that, Śrī Goloka-dhāma.” Haridāsa Ṭhākura’s statements
greatly angered Gopāla, who contemptuously insulted him:
“Liberation is attained only by jñāna; it can never be
attained by harināma. If one can attain liberation by
chanting the holy name, then let my nose rot and fall
off, otherwise, if Haridāsa’s statement is wrong, let
his nose rot and fall off.” A tumult broke out in the
assembly. Balarāma Paṇḍita said, “You have offended the
exalted Vaiṣṇava Haridāsa Ṭhākura. There will never be
any auspiciousness for you. You have guaranteed your own
destruction due to your terrible offence to a Vaiṣṇava.”



After this incident Govardhana dāsa dismissed Gopāla
Cakravartī from his service. And although the mahā-
bhāgavata Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura, the personification of
forgiveness and tolerance, did not accept Gopāla’s
offence, Gopāla became afflicted by leprosy three days
after the incident. His beautiful campaka-flower-like
nose, his fingers and his toes rotted away. After many
days Śrīman Mahāprabhu came to Kuliyā-grāma and Gopāla
Cakravartī went to see Him. Weeping, he surrendered to
the supremely merciful Mahāprabhu and begged forgiveness
for his vaiṣṇava-aparādha. Caitanya Mahāprabhu forgave
this nāma-aparādhī brāhmaṇa and instructed him to
continuously chant the holy name. Gopāla Cakravartī did
so and his leprosy soon disappeared leaving him
beautiful as before. Now, he was Bhagavān’s devotee,
highly dedicated to the holy name, and a servant of the
Vaiṣṇavas.

                           71
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017




Another resident of Navadvīpa named Gopāla Cāpāla was a
depraved brāhmaṇa. He became so envious of Śrīvāsa
Paṇḍita that he could not tolerate the saṅkīrtana at
Śrīvāsa’s house and tried to disturb him in different
ways. At night he placed at Śrīvāsa’s door many items
used in the worship of the goddess Durgā, such as a wine
pot and vermilion, to show that Śrīvāsa was only
externally posing as a Vaiṣṇava. Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita had
them removed and purified the place by smearing it with
cow dung. Due to this great offence Gopāla Cāpāla soon
became afflicted with leprosy. When, after accepting
sannyāsa, Śrīman Mahāprabhu came to Kuliyā, Gopāla
Cāpāla came to Him and falling at His feet, began to
weep. Mahāprabhu told him to beg forgiveness from
Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita. He fell weeping at Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita’s
feet and by the mercy of Mahāprabhu, his health
returned.



At that time in Navadvīpa, Devānanda Paṇḍita was
considered a great teacher of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and he
instructed many students in his home in Kuliyā-nagara on
the Gaṅgā’s western bank. Once, the mahā-bhāgavata
Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita passed by Devānanda Paṇḍita’s house and
heard Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam being recited. He went in and
sat down to listen. As Devānanda Paṇḍita described
Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita was unable to remain
calm. He wept loudly and rolled on the ground. Devānanda
Paṇḍita’s students, who were devoid of bhāva-bhakti,
could not understand Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita’s aṣṭa-sāttvika
bhāvas. Considering him a disturbance to their studies,
they threw him out of the house. Devānanda Paṇḍita
remained silent, doing nothing to stop them. When news
of this incident came to Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu He
angrily said, “Devānanda does not understand a single
letter of the Bhāgavatam, which is Śrī Kṛṣṇa personified
and completely transcendental, so what can he teach!
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam can not even remain near him. He is an
offender of both Vaiṣṇavas and the Bhāgavatam. I will
tear up his false Bhāgavatam and throw it away.”



Some time later, Devānanda Paṇḍita met Śrī Puṇḍarīka
Vidyānidhi, one of Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s associates.
Vidyānidhi mercifully gave him lucid instructions on
philosophical knowledge about the devotees, Bhāgavatam
and the Supreme Lord. He revealed to Devānanda Paṇḍita
many confidential truths about Śrīman Mahāprabhu and
Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita. Remembering his previous behaviour
Devānanda Paṇḍita became filled with remorse. When Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu came to Kuliyā after accepting
sannyāsa, Devānanda Paṇḍita came before Him and in great
humility, repeatedly begged forgiveness for his offence.
Śrīman Mahāprabhu told him to beg pardon from Śrīvāsa
Paṇḍita directly. Devānanda approached Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita,
an incarnation of Nāradajī, the personification of
mercy. Śrīvāsa forgave all his offences and requested
Mahāprabhu to show Devānanda Paṇḍita mercy. This He did,
and thus made him qualified to attain love of God.

                           72
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017




When the teacher Nimāī Paṇḍita was living in Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma, the prominent professors and students
there opposed Him and ridiculed His devotional mood. For
the welfare of these ignorant people bereft of bhakti,
Nimāī Paṇḍita left Navadvīpa and took sannyāsa. Now,
having understood His glory, the teachers and students
repented. When Nimāī Paṇḍita returned as Śrī Kṛṣṇa
Caitanya Mahāprabhu to Kuliyā-nagara (after accepting
sannyāsa), they all came to Mādhava dāsa’s house to see
him. Weeping they begged forgiveness at His feet, and
the supremely merciful Mahāprabhu pardoned them. From
that time, they all became devotees.



Because these pastimes took place here, Kuliyā-grāma is
known as Aparādha-bhañjana-pāṭa, “the place where
offences are destroyed”.




Prauḍhāmāyā



Antardvīpa, south of Māyāpura, is the place of Vṛddha-
Śiva and Prauḍhāmāyā, the protectors of the dhāma. They
reside here eternally, bewildering those opposed to the
Lord and engaging those who are favourably disposed
towards Him in Śrī Gaura’s service. Although they reside
in Antardvīpa eternally, when the larger part of
Māyāpura was lost in the Gaṅgā’s flow, Prauḍhāmāyā was
worshipped by the devotees in Kuliyā-pahāḍapura. Today
people call this place “Pauḍhā Mā Talā”.



When Śrī Kṛṣṇa took birth from Mother Yaśodā’s womb,
this same Yogamāyā also appeared. Yogamāyā is one of the
Supreme Lord’s parā-śaktis, or superior internal
potencies, and she serves Him in various forms. In
Nanda-bhavana or in Vraja she, as Yogamāyā, bewilders
Mother Yaśodā into feeling that Kṛṣṇa is her son.
Overpowered by a parental mood, Yaśodā binds Kṛṣṇa to
the mortar, chastises Him and nurtures Him. All of
Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes are accomplished by Yogamāyā. And to
bewilder and punish Kaṁsa and other demons, she
manifests as Mahāmāyā in Mathurā.



The various forms of Mahāmāyā, such as Durgā, Kālī,
Bhadrā, Vindhyavāsinī, Kāmākhyā and Caṇḍī, bewilder
materialistic people by bestowing upon them wealth,
opulence, sons, family and so forth. And as Yogamāyā
Paurṇamāsī, she bestows transcendental power (cit-śakti)
upon the living entities and grants them the eligibility
to serve the youthful Divine Couple, Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.


                           73
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017



Yogamāyā places a covering over the Lord’s abodes so
that those opposed to Him cannot enter. And with the net
of her Mahāmāyā she keeps fruitive workers, dry mental
speculators and others away, depriving them of darśana
of the dhāma.



Śrī Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja’s bhajana-kuṭī and
samādhi



Śrī Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja used to reside at
Sūrya-kuṇḍa in Vraja-maṇḍala where he performed his
bhajana, but at the end of his life he moved to Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma. It was his habit to loudly chant the
mahā-mantra. He was recognised as the most prominent
scholar of his time. He was also acknowledged as being
most expert in relishing transcendental mellows (rasika)
and the most perfected Vaiṣṇava in Gauḍa-maṇḍala, Vraja-
maṇḍala and Kṣetra-maṇḍala. He is therefore known as
vaiṣṇava-sārvabhauma, the topmost Vaiṣṇava. At Śrī
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura’s request this great personality
determined Śrīdhāma Māyāpura to be the birthplace of Śrī
Gaura. On his order a grand temple was constructed in
Māyāpura at the birthplace of Śrī Gaura, where the
deities of Śrī Gaura-Viṣṇupriyā-Lakṣmīpriyā and Pañca-
tattva are presently worshipped.



In the Bengali year 1302 (A.D. 1895), two years after
Māyāpura-dhāma was located, Śrī Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī
Mahārāja entered his unmanifest pastimes. He had
appeared in a village in the Ṭaṅgāila portion of the
Mayamana-siṅha district in East Bengal (Bangladesh) and
remained in this material world for approximately 144
years. It is said that in an act of great mercy he
infused his entire strength in bhajana and his knowledge
of the scriptures, culminating in prema-bhakti, into the
heart of Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura.



Once the disciples of Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja
complained to Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura: “We gave up
our home to learn about bhajana from Bābājī Mahārāja,
but instead he is instructing us to serve Bhagavān by
growing flowers and vegetables. He is not educating us
in meditation on Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s daily eight-fold pastimes.
Please request him to train us in bhajana.”



Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura responded, “Growing tulasī,
flowers, fruits and vegetables for the service of the
deity will purify the living entities who are afflicted
by offences and desires in the heart opposed to bhakti
(anarthas); otherwise it is not possible for them to
chant the pure, transcendental name. If unqualified
persons meditate on these confidential pastimes their

                           74
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                   5/5/2017

anarthas will substantially increase, and gradually they
will be unable to perform bhajana. We will benefit by
performing our sādhana according to Śrīla Bābājī
Mahārāja’s instructions.”



Śrīla Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja used to save
whatever donations people gave him. One day he ordered
his disciples to buy rasagullas and other sweets, offer
them to the deity and give the prasāda to the cows and
dogs of the dhāma. His disciples, however, wanted to use
the money to invite the bābājīs of that place for a
grand festival. Bābājī Mahārāja forbade them. “It is
more beneficial to feed the cows and dogs of the dhāma
than to feed so-called Vaiṣṇavas who outwardly dress as
saintly personalities wearing tilaka and beads, but who
secretly engage in illicit activities. By feeding the
animals of the dhāma one will enter pure bhakti.” All
the rasagullas were then given to the cows and dogs.



In his extreme old age Bābājī Mahārāja’s eyelids drooped
so low that they obstructed his vision. There was a dog
where he lived that had six or seven puppies. When his
disciples brought him mahā-prasāda he would wait for the
puppies to come to him and count them with his fingers.
Then he let them eat from his plate. Only after they had
eaten would he himself honour prasāda. If his disciples
hid the puppies from him he, displeased, would not
honour prasāda. He would indignantly say, “You people do
not understand that these are the puppies of the dhāma;
they are not ordinary. I will not take anything until
they come here and honour prasāda with me.” Such was
Bābājī Mahārāja’s firm faith in the dhāma.



His disciples used to carry him in a basket on their
heads — sometimes to Māyāpura, sometimes to Godruma-
kuñja and some-times to other places. Upon arriving at
Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s birthplace in Śrīdhāma Māyāpura, he
sang and danced, jumping high into the air.




Kuliyā-dharmaśālā



(and Śrīla Gaura-kiśora dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja)



Śrīla Gaura-kiśora dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja, the crest-jewel
of avadhūtas and paramahaṁsas, performed bhajana from
time to time here. He would also perform his bhajana at
Kṛṣṇa’s various pastime-places in Vraja, such as
Vṛndāvana, Govardhana, Rādhā-kuṇḍa, Sūrya-kuṇḍa,
Nandagrāma and Varsānā. His bhajana was characterised by
severe renunciation, so extreme, in fact, that when he

                           75
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

felt hungry he sometimes ate the mud from Rādhā-kuṇḍa or
the Yamunā. In a mood of separation from the Divine
Couple, he would cry out, “O Rādhā! O Kṛṣṇa!” and wander
from forest to forest loudly singing songs such as
“kothāya go premamayī rādhe rādhe, kothāya go vraja-
vilāsinī rādhe rādhe.” In his later life he came to Śrī
Navadvīpa to get the mercy of this dhāma.



Śrīla Gaura-kiśora dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja had taken a vow
not to accept any disciples, but Śrī Vimalā Prasāda
Sarasvatī vowed to fast until he received initiation
from him. This, combined with the request of Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, resulted in Śrīla Gaura-kiśora
dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja giving initiation into Vaiṣṇavism
to the boy Sarasvatī, who became famous in the Vaiṣṇava
world as oṁ viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Prabhupāda.



Bābājī Mahārāja regarded honour and prestige harmful to
bhajana. He therefore carefully avoided it, considering
it to be like the stool of a pig. People would disturb
him to receive blessings for their material desires,
such as wealth, followers, sons and family. Once, to
avoid such materialistic people, Bābājī Mahārāja went to
live in the abandoned latrine in a government dharmaśālā
in Kuliyā. When the District Magistrate came to know of
this he went to meet him with the Police Superintendent.
Bābājī had locked the latrine door from inside, and even
though they waited for a long time, repeatedly
requesting him to open the door, he would not come out
to meet with them. They offered to construct a hut for
him in a good location, but Bābājī Mahārāja did not
consent to the idea. According to Bābājī Mahārāja, the
association of materialistic people is more disgusting
than the stench of excrement, and is an obstacle for
bhakti. He later entered his unmanifest pastimes in this
same dharmaśālā.



Our worshipful spiritual master, Śrī Śrīla Bhakti
Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja (at that time known as
Śrī Vinoda-bihārī Brahmacārī) came to Śrīdhāma Māyāpura
to take darśana of Bābājī Mahārāja. Initially, Bābājī
spoke faintly from inside the latrine: “I’m very sick
and cannot open the door.” When, however, Vinoda-bihārī
Brahmacārī said, “I’m a servant who has taken shelter of
Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura,” Bābājī immediately opened the
door. He affectionately put his hand on Vinoda-bihārī’s
head and said, “Perform your sādhana-bhajana fearlessly.
I personally accept all your hardships.” Whenever our
spiritual master remembered the mercy Śrī Bābājī
Mahārāja bestowed upon him, he became overwhelmed with
ecstatic emotion.



Once a man approached Śrīla Bābājī Mahārāja and
repeatedly requested him to bestow his mercy upon him.
Bābājī Mahārāja immediately took off his ḍora and

                           76
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

kaupīna [the undergarments of a renunciant], and told
him, “Here, take my mercy.” Fearing that he would have
to give up material life the man quickly fled.



Another incident involved a young man who referred to
himself as Bābājī’s disciple and who lived near his
āśrama. After some days he returned to his home, married
and came back to Bābājī Mahārāja with his wife. He
offered obeisances to Bābājī and begged for his
auspicious blessings, saying, “Bābājī Mahārāja, I have
collected a maidservant (kṛṣṇa-dāsī) for Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
service. Please give us your blessings.”



Bābājī gravely said, “It is a matter of great pleasure
that you have established a new house for Kṛṣṇa and
collected a kṛṣṇa-dāsī. But, be cautious! Never
entertain the thought of personally enjoying her. Never
accept any service from her, always think of her as
worshipful and always serve her. A kṛṣṇa-dāsī is most
respectable and worshipful for the entire universe.”
When that young man heard this, he quickly left with his
wife.



Once, with great happiness, a so-called bābājī gave the
following auspicious news to Bābājī Mahārāja: “I have
purchased a beautiful place in Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma. I
will build a hut there and perform bhajana.” Hearing
this Bābājī Mahārāja answered, “It is very amazing that
you have purchased land in Navadvīpa-dhāma where every
particle of dust is transcendental and millions of times
more valuable than a cintāmaṇi, a wish-fulfilling gem.
The entire wealth of the universe cannot compare with
the value of just one dust particle of this abode, and
you have bought a piece of this land? This is beyond my
comprehension.” Ashamed, the man fell at Bābājī’s feet.



Previously the samādhi of this great personality was
situated in Kuliyā-grāma (Navadvīpa Town) on the Gaṅgā’s
western bank, but when the river flooded, Śrīla
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura re-established it next to Rādhā-kuṇḍa
close to Śrī Candraśekhara-bhavana.



Although, from a worldly point of view, Bābājī Mahārāja
was blind and uneducated, prominent speakers of the
Bhāgavatam who were his contemporaries would come to
hear his confidential and ambrosial explanations of
verses from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.




Śrīla Vaṁśī dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja


                           77
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017



The highly exalted Śrīla Vaṁśī dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja, a
contemporary of Śrīla Gaura-kiśora dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja,
was completely dedicated to bhajana. On the bank of the
Gaṅgā in Kuliyā’s Nūtana-caḍhā, he built a hut where he
performed his bhajana. He worshipped his Śrī Gaura-
Nityānanda deities with bhāva-sevā, serving Them with
great love and affection — sometimes reproaching Them,
sometimes fighting and quarrelling with Them, and
sometimes crying in separation from Them. Even great
philosophers were confounded by his fathomless
attachment to his deities, and the sentiments hidden
within his heart. Once, when he was picking flowers from
a kanera tree next to his bhajana-kuṭī, a young boy
forbade him to do so, and an argument ensued. The boy
pushed Bābājī Mahārāja, who fell and hurt his feet.
Bābājī returned to his hut, threatening Śrī Gaura-
Nityānanda saying, “Why did You send me to pick flowers?
And why did this boy push me? I will not serve You.” He
became sulky, but Bābājī was unable to stay in this mood
for long and soon he again became absorbed in his
service. He used to become so blissfully absorbed in
nāma-bhajana that he would forget to follow Ekādaśī, and
on other occasions he would observe Ekādaśī for three or
four days, even fasting from water. Sometimes he greatly
glorified Nityānanda Prabhu and would call Mahāprabhu
mischievous. Sometimes to avoid materialistic people and
materialistic so-called Vaiṣṇavas, he would throw impure
items, like fish bones and fins, around his hut so that
ordinary men would think him low-class and stay away
from him.



Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī acknowledged him as a
siddha-mahāpuruṣa and greatly honoured him, and Śrīla
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura’s disciples would visit him. It was
very difficult to understand Śrīla Bābājī Mahārāja’s
manner of speaking and his moods, because he was always
roaming in the internal kingdom of bhakti.




Śrī Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha



The northern part of Śrī Koladvīpa is both Śrī
Govardhana and Bahulāvana; and in the southern part,
where the Yamunā flows on the western side, is Śrī
Vṛndāvana’s place of the rāsa-līlā. Vaṁśī-vaṭa and the
place of the rāsa are in the midst of the forests and
gardens on Yamunā’s bank.



Śrī Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha is situated in the middle of
Koladvīpa. In 1940, after jagad-guru Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Prabhupada entered
aprakaṭa-līlā, one of his intimate associates, Śrīla
Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, established Śrī

                              78
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti in a rented building. He did this
to fulfil his spiritual master’s innermost desire. He
later purchased an extensive piece of land on which he
established a maṭha with a beautiful temple. The
following deities preside in the three chambers of the
temple: (1) Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura
Prabhupāda, (2) Śrī Gaurāṅga and Śrī Rādhā-Vinoda-
bihārī, and (3) Śrī Koladeva, or Varāhadeva, the
presiding deity of Śrī Koladvīpa.



The temple’s nine towers each represent one limb of
navadhā-bhakti, the nine types of devotional service:
hearing, chanting, remembering, serving the Lord’s lotus
feet, worshipping, offering prayers, engaging as a
servant, serving as a friend and completely surrendering
oneself.



The maṭha is divided into the following nine parts
(khaṇḍas):



(1) Paramārtha-khaṇḍa — the printing press where
devotional literature and magazines are produced.



(2) Kīrtana-khaṇḍa — the place where saṅkīrtana and
lectures on Bhāgavatam and other scriptures take place.



(3) Upāsya-khaṇḍa — the temple where the deities of
Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Prabhupāda, Śrī Gaurāṅga, Śrī
Rādhā-Vinoda-bihārī and Śrī Koladeva are worshipped.



(4) Sevaka-khaṇḍa — the place where the residents of the
maṭha live.



(5) Bhoga-khaṇḍa — the storehouse and kitchen.



(6) Govardhana-khaṇḍa — the cow shed.



(7) Vaiṣṇava-granthāgāra-khaṇḍa — the library.



(8) Udyāna-khaṇḍa — the garden.



(9) Jñāna-khaṇḍa — the bathrooms and latrines.

                           79
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017




These sections are divided on the basis of activities
favourable to bhakti, which are to be accepted and those
unfavourable, which are to be avoided. Jñāna and karma
which are devoid of bhakti are always to be rejected
just as one rejects stool. For this reason the bathrooms
and latrines of the maṭha are called Jñāna-khaṇḍa.



It was Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī’s long-
held desire that a deity of Śrī Koladeva be established
on the Gaṅgā’s western bank in the old Kuliyā-nagara. To
fulfill this desire, Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava
Gosvāmī Mahārāja has manifested the service of Śrī
Koladeva at this place.



Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, appeared
in East Bengal (present day Bangladesh) in the village
of Vānārīpāḍā in the Variśāla district. He took birth in
the well-established Guhaṭhākurtā dynasty. He was the
second son of the great devotee Śrī Śaradacandra Guha
and the highly devotional Bhuvana-mohinī-devī. He had a
very beautiful golden complexion, therefore he was
called Janārdana, which comes from the word jyotsanā
(moonlight) or jonā (which is derived from jyotsanā).
His actual name was Śrī Vinoda-bihārī. When Vinoda was
eight years old his father died. Śrī Bhuvana-mohinī-devī
was a very skilled and learned woman from a family of
landowners, and she brought up her children to be the
same. From childhood Vinoda-bihārī was fearless,
intelligent, virtuous, benevolent, strong, wise and,
above all, deeply religious. Seeing his managerial
competence and desire to render service to society and
humanity at large, everyone honoured him. At age twelve,
when Vinoda was in eighth grade, he began to take
responsibility for management of the family land,
showing competence and knowledge of law that is rarely
seen in one so young. He passed the entrance examination
and received admission to Uttarapāḍā College. One year
later he commenced his studies at Daulatapura College.
The teachers there lauded his recitation of Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā and other
religious scriptures.



In 1915 he went with his paternal aunt, Śrīmatī
Sarojavāsinī-devī to meet Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Prabhupāda, and received harināma
initiation from him. Then in 1919 on Phālgunī-pūrṇimā
[Gaura-pūrṇimā, the appearance of Śrīman Mahāprabhu] he
received Vaiṣṇava initiation from Śrīla Prabhupāda. From
that time on he was manager of the press in Kṛṣṇa-
nagara, which printed the daily magazine Nadīyā, and he
also contributed many articles to this magazine. In 1929
Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura was so pleased with one of his
philosophical lectures that Prabhupāda presented him
with his complete collection of philosophical
scriptures.

                           80
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017




On 21st March, 1932, on the occasion of Gaura-pūrṇimā,
Śrīla Prabhupāda gave him the title “Kṛtiratna” — “he
who performs the crest-jewel of all activities” — being
pleased with the responsibility with which he rendered
service. Thereafter, Vinoda-bihārī preached pure
devotion in Jagannātha Purī, Kaṭaka, Bāleśvara,
Allahabad, Kānpura, Assam and other places. One of his
works, Māyāvāda kī Jīvanī (Vaiṣṇava-vijaya), had a
powerful effect on the Vaiṣṇava community. During his
manifest pastimes, Śrīla Prabhupāda often tried to award
Śrī Vinoda-bihārī sannyāsa, but for different reasons,
was never able to do so. After his disappearance, Śrīla
Prabhupāda appeared to him in three separate dreams and
ordered him to enter the renounced order. Therefore in
1941 in Kaṭavā, where Śrīman Mahāprabhu took sannyāsa,
Śrī Vinoda-bihārī accepted the renounced order from
Śrīmad Bhakti Rakṣaka Śrīdhara Mahārāja, a disciple of
Śrīla Prabhupāda, and received the sannyāsa name Śrīmad
Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja. He preached
pure bhakti in Rāma-ghāṭa, Naihāṭī, Kāṅcaḍāpāḍā,
Chuṅchurā, Candana-nagara, Vaidyavāṭī, Śrī Rāmapura,
Kolkata and other places on both sides of the Gaṅgā.
Prominent scholars were impressed by his discourses on
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. He established Śrī Uddhāraṇa Gauḍīya
Maṭha in Chuṅchurā upon the request of the local
residents.



In 1940, on Akṣaya-tṛtīyā in the month of Vaiśākha
(April—May), he founded Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti in a
rented house on Bospāḍā Lane in Kolkata. He established
the Samiti’s headquarters, Śrī Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha,
in the present city of Kuliyā in Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma.
From here he re-inaugurated the performance of Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma parikramā and the celebration of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu’s appearance. He published the monthly
magazines Gauḍīya Patrikā in Bengali and Bhāgavata
Patrikā in Hindi, and simultaneously he preached in
villages in the districts of Medinīpura, Caubīsa-
paraganā, Huglī and Vardhamāna. He established Śrī
Gauḍīya Vedānta Catuṣpāṭhī. On 13th September, 1954, he
founded Śrī Keśavajī Gauḍīya Maṭha in Mathurā, and on
Annakūṭa Mahotsava 1956, he installed the deities in
this maṭha. In the same way he also established Śrī
Goloka-gañja Gauḍīya Matḥa in Assam and Vāsudeva Gauḍīya
Maṭha in Vāsugāon. He established a maṭha in Pichaladā,
where Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s footprints are, and a
preaching-centre in Rāṇḍīyā-hāṭa (Koraṇṭa) near Bhadraka
in Orissa.



Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja was a
highly influential ācārya, with exemplary faith in his
spiritual master (guru-niṣṭhā). He was an exceptionally
gifted writer, a forceful speaker and was conversant
with law. He was also an expert manager, wise and a
fearless preacher of the truth. According to Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s innermost desire he preached the
message of pure bhakti all over India within a very

                           81
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

short time. On the night of Śarada-pūrṇimā in October
1968, he manifested his aprakaṭa-līlā and entered into
mahā-rāsa. His samādhi also lies here.




Śrī Caitanya Sārasvata Gauḍīya Maṭha



Tridaṇḍi-svāmī Śrīmad Bhakti Rakṣaka Śrīdhara Mahārāja,
one of jagad-guru Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura’s most
prominent disciples, performed his bhajana and founded
this maṭha here. As the best of scholars, he was expert
in the philosophical conclusions of bhakti, and his
discourses reflected this. This brilliant ācārya was
also an extraordinary poet who composed several
unparalleled hymns and prayers about Hari, Guru and
Vaiṣṇavas, and the dhāma. Our spiritual master received
sannyāsa from him. His samādhi is located here.




Śrī Sārasvata Gauḍīya Āsana and Mission



This maṭha was established by parivrājakācārya Śrīmad
Bhakti Viveka Bhāratī Mahārāja and Śrīmad Bhakti Śrīrūpa
Siddhāntī Mahārāja, two of Śrīla Prabhupāda’s disciples.
Both were erudite, notable authors and influential
speakers. They re-published Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā,
Brahma-sūtra, Sindhu-Bindu-Kiraṇa and some of the
Upaniṣads, and established preaching-centres in Kolkata
and Purī-dhāma.




Samudragaḍha



This place is situated in the south-western part of
Koladvīpa, and is understood to be within Bahulāvana in
Vraja. It is also considered non-different from
Dvārikāpurī and Gaṅgā-sāgara.



In Dvāpara-yuga King Samudra Sena, a devotee of Kṛṣṇa,
ruled this area. At the time of the Rājasūya sacrifice,
the powerful Pāṇḍava, Bhīmasena, who had defeated the
kings of east India, came here with his army to conquer
Bengal. Mahārāja Samudra Sena had an ardent desire to
take Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s darśana, and he knew that this is
possible only by the mercy of His devotees. He thought,
“If in battle I can somehow defeat Bhīmasena, he will
have no other solution than to call out to Kṛṣṇa to

                           82
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

protect him. In this way my worshipful Lord Kṛṣṇa will
appear and I will be able to take darśana of Him.” With
high spirited zeal and full force he met Bhīma in
battle, and by the Lord’s desire, Bhīma actually faced
defeat. When, in great distress Bhīma cried out to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa, the protector of the Pāṇḍavas, Kṛṣṇa immediately
appeared on the battlefield, but only King Samudra Sena
was able to have His darśana. The Supreme Lord remained
unseen to Bhīmasena and to both armies. Śrī Kṛṣṇa told
Samudra Sena about His coming advent as Śrī Gaurāṅga and
instructed him to worship Śrī Gaura through harināma-
saṅkīrtana. On Samudra Sena’s request, Śrī Kṛṣṇa
manifested His form of Gaurāṅga, resplendent with the
lustre and sentiments of Śrī Rādhā. Upon receiving this
darśana, the King became deeply content. He offered
abundant gifts to Bhīma and established an alliance with
him. Bhīmasena, also satisfied, departed with the
happiness of victory.



This place is also non-different from Kumudavana in
Vraja. During the late afternoon, Śrī Kṛṣṇa roams here
performing playful pastimes with the cowherd girls. King
Samudra Sena also had darśana of these pastimes.



Famous Samudragaḍha is situated south of Navadvīpa on
the western border. The ocean is not very far from here.
Being eager to see the Lord’s pastimes, Mahāprabhu’s
devotee, the ocean, came here along the Gaṅgā. Now the
ocean eternally resides here taking darśana of
Navadvīpa-dhāma and Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s pastimes.
It requested Mahāprabhu: “Please reside for some time on
my shores, and bestow upon me the fortune of having
darśana of Your wonderful pastimes there.” To fulfill
this desire Śrī Mahāprabhu, after taking sannyāsa,
manifested His astonishing pastimes in Śrī Purī-dhāma on
the ocean’s shore.




Campaka-haṭṭa



Śrī Koladvīpa’s south-western part, Campaka-haṭṭa, was
named after the large garden of campaka flowers that
used to be here. Its present name is Cāṁpā-hāṭī and it
is situated in the Vardhamāna district. In Satya-yuga an
elderly brāhmaṇa resided here and worshipped Śrī Rādhā-
Govinda with these campaka flowers. Pleased with his
service, Śrī Śyāmasundara Kṛṣṇa appeared before him as
the beautiful Śrī Gaura, whose complexion is resplendent
like a campaka flower, and said, “In Kali-yuga I will
manifest the form you now see and distribute the
chanting of the holy name and love of Kṛṣṇa to the
living entities. At that time you will also take birth
and witness My most munificent pastimes.” In
Mahāprabhu’s pastimes that brāhmaṇa was Dvija Vāṇīnātha,
the younger brother of Śrī Gadādhara, who is the

                           83
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

personified potency of Śrī Gaura. In Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes
Vāṇīnātha was Kāmalekhā Sakhī. The deities of Śrī Gaura-
Gadādhara that Vāṇīnātha worshipped are now being served
here in Śrī Gaura-Gadādhara Gauḍīya Maṭha, which was
established by jagad-guru Śrīla Prabhupāda.



This is Śrī Jayadeva Gosvāmī’s residence and place of
bhajana. Jayadeva Gosvāmī was a contemporary of King
Ballāla Sena, who greatly honoured him. Jayadeva’s
bhajana-kuṭī was on the Gaṅgā’s eastern bank some
distance from Ballāla Sena’s royal palace, but when an
obstacle arose in his bhajana, he left there with his
wife Padmāvatī and came to this solitary and charming
garden. Once, as he was composing the verses of Gīta-
govinda, a pastime in which Śrīmatī Rādhikā entered Her
sulky mood (māna) appeared in his heart. Kṛṣṇa’s
repeated attempts to remove Her māna all failed. Then
the mood entered Śrī Jayadeva’s heart in which he
understood that to pacify Śrīmatī Rādhikā, Śrī Kṛṣṇa put
His head at Her lotus feet. This filled Śrī Jayadeva
with fear and he could not bring himself to write it. He
thought, “Śrī Kṛṣṇa is everyone’s worshipful Supreme
Lord and He possesses all potencies. Śrīmatī Rādhikā is
His potency and maidservant. How is it possible for Śrī
Kṛṣṇa to put His head at Rādhikā’s lotus feet? That
would transgress the principles of religion.” His hand
trembled and lost grip of his pen. He could write no
more, so he went to take bath in the Gaṅgā. Meanwhile,
Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the topmost relisher of transcendental
mellows, assumed the form of Śrī Jayadeva and went to
his house. He asked Padmāvatī to bring Him the
manuscript and personally completed the verse smara-
garala-khaṇḍanaṁ (“the deadly poison of amorous love”)
that Jayadeva had begun to write, by adding mama śirasi
maṇḍanaṁ dehi pada-pallavam udāram (“is counteracted by
decorating My head with Your flower-like feet”).



smara-garala-khaṇḍanaṁ



mama śirasi maṇḍanam



dehi pada-pallavam udāram



The beautiful flower blossoms of Your feet counteract
the deadly poison of amorous love, and they extinguish
the terrifying fire of the pain of that love, which
rages within My heart. Therefore, please be kind and
allow Your feet to decorate My head.



Śrī Kṛṣṇa left the house and a short time later,
Jayadeva returned. Surprised, his wife asked, “How were
you able to come back so quickly? Just a short while ago

                            84
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

you returned, wrote something in your book, and again
went out to take bath.” Jayadeva Gosvāmī asked for his
manuscript and upon opening it saw that his unfinished
verse was now complete. Filled with wonder and weeping,
he told his wife, “O Devī, you are blessed. You had
darśana of Śyāmasundara Kṛṣṇa, who personally came here
and completed the verse I feared to write. Kṛṣṇa is
brought under control by prema, not by devotion based on
rules and regulations.”



After some time, Jayadeva Gosvāmī and his wife moved to
Jagannātha Purī. Gīta-govinda is so beautifully sweet
that even Jagannāthadeva Himself is eager to hear it.
Once in a garden, a deva-dāsī [a dancing girl in the
Jagannātha Temple] was singing the verses of Gīta-
govinda, and Jagannāthajī came out of the temple and
swiftly ran towards that garden. As He ran, thorny
bushes tore His cloth and scratched His body. When he
had heard all the verses He returned to the temple and
took His place on the altar. When the pujārī opened the
door he was astonished to see Śrī Jagannātha’s
condition. The head pujārī and the king were informed
and everyone was filled with concern. The next night Śrī
Jagannātha appeared to the head pujārī in a dream and
revealed to him the secret that He heard verses being
sung from Gīta-govinda, and in His haste to go to the
source of the sound, His cloth was torn. When Śrī
Svarūpa Dāmodara recited Gīta-govinda verses to Śrīman
Mahāprabhu, He became immersed in ecstasy.



Śrī Jayadeva received darśana of his beloved Lord in His
form as Śrī Gaurāṅga Mahāprabhu.




Śrī Ṛtudvīpa




Charming Ṛtudvīpa is situated north of Campaka-haṭṭa and
south of Śrī Jahnudvīpa. The present name of Ṛtudvīpa
(the hidden Rādhā-kuṇḍa) is Rātupura.



All six seasons are present in Ṛtudvīpa, which is full
of flower gardens and lush, leafy bowers. On the banks
of Rādhā-kuṇḍa in particular are dense mango groves
inhabited by singing cuckoos.



When Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu came here with Jīva Gosvāmī,
He became absorbed in the mood of Baladeva Prabhu in His
Vraja pastimes. He loudly cried, “Quickly bring Me My
bugle! The calves have strayed ahead! Bhaiyā Kanhaiyā is

                           85
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

still at home sleeping and is not here yet. O Subala!
Śrīdāma! Where are you? How can I take care of the
calves Myself? Brother Kanhaiyā, where are You?”



The devotees present caught Nityānanda and tried to calm
Him. “Prabhu, Your brother Kanhaiyā came as Gauracandra.
After taking sannyāsa He went to Jagannātha Purī where
He now lives. His absence from Navadvīpa has left the
entire town empty and desolate, but He is unmoved by our
affection and love, and has reduced us to paupers.”



Hearing this, Nityānanda Prabhu loudly wept and fell to
the ground in a faint. He revived after some time, and
said, “Bhaiyā Kanhaiyā, why did You become a sannyāsī
and leave us all? Unable to live without You, I will
jump into the Yamunā and give up My life!” And again He
fell unconscious. The devotees loudly chanted Gaura’s
name, and after almost one and a half hours when He
regained consciousness, He addressed the devotees
saying, “This place is the hidden Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-
kuṇḍa. Surrounding the kuṇḍas, where Kṛṣṇa’s midday
pastimes (madhyāhna-līlā) take place, are the enchanting
groves of the sakhīs.” In the afternoon Śrīman
Mahāprabhu and His associates would come here performing
saṅkīrtana and distributing kṛṣṇa-prema to everyone.



In the kingdom of bhajana Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa is supreme.
Above Devī-dhāma [this material universe], across the
Virajā and above both Brahmaloka and Śivaloka is Śrī
Vaikuṇṭha-dhāma. In Vaikuṇṭha, above Sāketa and other
dhāmas, is Śrī Kṛṣṇaloka, and in Śrī Kṛṣṇaloka, above
Dvārakā, is Śrī Mathurā-dhāma. Within Mathurā, Śrī
Gokula-Vṛndāvana is topmost, and in Vṛndāvana,
Govardhana is the most superior place. In this
Govardhana, Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śrī Śyāma-kuṇḍa are
supreme and the most confidential places of Śrī Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa’s līlā-vilāsa (particularly Their midday
pastimes).




Vidyānagara



Vidyānagara is situated within Ṛtudvīpa on Navadvīpa’s
western border. It is here that the Vedas, Upaniṣads,
Purāṇas, Smṛtis and the sixty-four kinds of knowledge
originated, and it is the main centre of their study and
instruction. Lord Brahmā, the grandfather of the
universe, taught the sages and the demigods at this
place. These sages, who had realised the intrinsic
nature of mantras, manifested the various Upaniṣads.
Manu, Vaśiṣṭha, Parāśara, Yājñavalkya and others
manifested the Smṛtis and taught them to the sages.
Vālmīki Ṛṣi, by Śrī Nārada’s mercy, compiled the

                           86
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

original Rāmāyaṇa here and taught it to Bharadvāja and
other disciples. At this place Dhanvantari received
education in Ayurveda, Viśvāmitra in Dhanurveda, and
Śaunaka and other sages in the Vedas and Purāṇas. Kapila
Ṛṣi manifested sāṅkhya philosophy here; Gautama — nyāya,
Kaṇabhūka — vaiśeṣika, and Pātañjali — yoga. Jaiminī
manifested mīmāṁsā here; Vedavyāsa — vedānta-darśana,
Mahābhārata, the Purāṇas and so forth; and Devarṣi
Nārada manifested Pañcarātra-darśana. Each instructed
their specific areas of knowledge to their respective
followers. In particular Śrī Vedavyāsa manifested the
spotless Purāṇa, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, which represents the
essence of all knowledge, the meaning of gāyatrī, the
essence of Mahābhārata and the truth established in the
Upaniṣads. For the Vaiṣṇavas, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is as
dear as life.



The omniscient Bṛhaspati, the guru of the demigods, came
to know from Grandfather Brahmā that Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself
would appear as Śrī Gaurāṅga in the coming Kali-yuga and
that through saṅkīrtana He would distribute kṛṣṇa-prema
to the common person. Before Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s
manifest pastimes, Bṛhaspati took birth in Vidyānagara
as Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya. His father’s name was Śrī
Maheśa Viśārada and his younger brother was Śrī Vidyā-
vācaspati.



Then, just before the appearance of Śrīman Mahāprabhu,
Śrī Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya went to Śrī Jagannātha Purī,
where he became the royal scholar of Mahārāja
Pratāparudra’s court. Amongst contemporary advaitavādī
scholars he was considered the most knowledgeable.
Eminent, learned renunciants from the advaitavādī school
came to study Śaṅkara-bhāṣya, a commentary on Vedānta-
sūtra (or Brahma-sūtra), from him.



After accepting sannyāsa Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu went to
Śrī Purī-dhāma where, upon taking darśana of Śrī
Jagannātha, He became so overwhelmed with ecstasy that
He fell to the ground unconscious. Sārvabhauma
Bhaṭṭācārya, who was present there, was astonished to
see the eight symptoms of transcendental ecstasy (aṣṭa-
sāttvika bhāvas) on Mahāprabhu’s body. Understanding Him
to be an extraordinarily great personality, he brought
Him to his residence. Soon after, Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu
and the other devotees went to his house, and from them
Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya became very pleased to learn
Mahāprabhu’s identity as the son of Śrī Jagannātha
Miśra, his father’s dear friend. He affectionately
insisted on teaching Him the Śaṅkara-bhāṣya,
Śaṅkarācārya’s commentary on the Vedānta, for seven
days. The young sannyāsī, Śrīman Mahāprabhu, however,
refuted all the logic Sārvabhauma presented in an
attempt to establish that the true purport of the
Vedānta is that the Absolute Truth is devoid of
attributes (nirviśeṣa-brahma). Instead, Mahāprabhu
established the Absolute Truth as being endowed with all
transcendental attributes (saviśeṣa-brahma). He then

                           87
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

mercifully showed Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya His six-armed
form. Sārvabhauma’s pride was shattered and he attained
transcendental knowledge. He became a devotee of the
Lord and one of Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s associates.



Vidyānagara is the place of Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s
scholastic pastimes. As Nimāī Paṇḍita He used to come
here and playfully defeat Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya’s
disciples with His sharp logic. Even eminent teachers
feared debating with Him.



Vidyānagara is the abode of the nine kinds of devotional
service. Prauḍhāmāyā resides here eternally and renders
service to Śrī Gaurasundara by keeping non-devotees away
from bhakti. She does this by bewildering them with
ignorance. Kṛṣṇa-bhakti is the only real knowledge
(vidyā), and its shadow is ignorance (avidyā). Both
vidyā and avidyā reside in Śrī Gaura-dhāma and, directly
and indirectly, render eternal service to the Lord.




Śrī Jahnudvīpa




Jahnudvīpa extends throughout the present Jānnagara, and
is non-different from Bhadravana in Vraja. Previously,
the river Jāhnavī (Gaṅgā) flowed nearby. Śrīman
Mahāprabhu used to pass through here while performing
saṅkīrtana with His associates, so it is a place of
Mahāprabhu’s kīrtana and other pastimes. Jānnagara, the
local name of Jahnudvīpa, is Jahnu Muni’s place of
worship. He so pleased Śrī Gaurahari with his worship
that the Lord appeared before him, golden and effulgent.
Jahnu Muni became immersed in infinite spiritual joy and
requested Mahāprabhu to be able to reside in Navadvīpa
birth after birth. Śrīman Mahāprabhu blessed him,
saying, “When in the future, My pastimes manifest, you
will be able to witness them.”



Jahnu Muni performed his worship in this small forest in
Navadvīpa, and one day, while meditating upon the Lord’s
pastimes, he entered samādhi. Elsewhere, King
Bhagīratha, having pleased Brahmā and Śiva, was bringing
the Gaṅgā from Gaṅgotrī to the great ocean via
Haridvāra, Prayāga, Kāśī and other places, with the
purpose of delivering his 60,000 ancestors, the sons of
King Sagara, who had been burned to ashes near Śrī
Kapila Muni’s hermitage.



Mahārāja Bhagīratha’s chariot raced ahead of Bhagavatī-

                           88
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

Gaṅgā, who made rippling sounds as she flowed along.
When he came to Jahnu Muni’s āśrama Bhagīratha paid his
obeisances to the sage and continued, with the Surasari-
Gaṅgā flowing closely behind him. The Gaṅgā’s dancing
waves revealed her extreme delight to have entered Śrī
Gaura-dhāma. She was not conscious of her body, and as
she passed by Jahnu Muni’s hut, she swept away a part of
it, as well as his water pot and some other belongings.
The Gaṅgā’s rippling sound, sprinkles of her water and a
cool breeze broke the sage’s meditation. Initially he
was angry, but in a moment he realised that this stream
of water was not ordinary. In fact, it had come from the
Causal Ocean, and Lord Brahmā had used it to wash Śrī
Vāmanadeva’s feet. That same water was now flowing as
the very pure water of patita-pāvanī Bhagavatī-Gaṅgā,
who is rarely attained by the demigods. With great faith
Jahnu Muni bowed his head, promptly scooped all the
Gaṅgā’s water into his hollowed palm and drank it. This
left the Gaṅgā, who was flowing from above, unable to
proceed. Bhagīratha was most perturbed, but somehow he
pleased the sage, who scratched his thigh. With a
rippling sound, the Gaṅgā emerged from it and encircled
the entire area of Śrī Navadvīpa, flowing in such a way
as to divide the land into nine parts. Since then, it
has been called Navadvīpa, or “nine islands”. Because
she had entered the sage’s stomach and manifested again
from his thigh, Śrī Gaṅgā became known as Śrī Jahnu
Muni’s dear daughter Jāhnavī, and this place became
known as Jahnudvīpa.



The Purāṇas give another narration about Śrī Gaṅgā. In
Goloka, Gaṅgā is Kṛṣṇa’s beloved sakhī. Once in a
secluded part of Goloka she was deeply absorbed in
charming ambrosial talks with Kṛṣṇa, when suddenly she
noticed Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Her sakhīs approaching.
Gaṅgā became embarrassed and in her embarrassment she
turned into water. Smiling, Rādhikā asked Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
“Where did that sakhī of Yours go?” Kṛṣṇa made the
gestures of one trying to excuse himself and said,
“Apart from You there is no other sakhī here.” Śrīmatī
Rādhikā understood Kṛṣṇa’s words and accepted Gaṅgā as
Her sakhī. The Gaṅgā, as water, is eternally situated in
Goloka, as is the Yamunā. A portion of the Gaṅgā is
manifest as the Causal Ocean, with which Lord Brahmā
washed Śrī Vāmanadeva’s lotus feet.



Once, in Emperor Akbara’s court in Agra a question arose
as to which of the two rivers — the Gaṅgā or the Yamunā
— was superior. A discussion ensued. Kings, feudal
princes and royal scholars who resided on the banks of
the Gaṅgā stated she was superior. And those living on
the banks of Śrī Yamunā asserted that she was superior.
The controversy could not be resolved. At that time, Śrī
Jīva Gosvāmī was performing bhajana in Vṛndāvana, having
accepted a vow to remain in a holy place of pilgrimage
(kṣetra-sannyāsa). In his time, he was celebrated as the
world’s most learned saintly personality. With much
honour and faith, Akbara summoned Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī to
Agra in the hope that he could resolve this issue, but
Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī was not prepared to leave Vraja, even

                           89
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

for one day. Upon the Emperor’s strong insistence Jīva
Gosvāmī finally agreed to go on the condition that he
could return to Vraja the same day. The Emperor made all
travel arrangements, and Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī thus attended
the royal court.



After hearing the arguments on both sides Jīva Gosvāmī
gave his conclusion, “According to the scriptures, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Lord. Śrī Vāmanadeva is a part of a
part of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself, and Śrī Gaṅgā is the
water that washed His lotus feet. On the other hand, Śrī
Yamunā, or Kālindī, is one of the queens of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
As His dearmost beloved she is non-different from Him.
Now, you can decide who is superior. The benefit one
gets from taking bath in the Gaṅgā is attained simply by
thinking of the Yamunā. By bathing in the Gaṅgā sins are
removed, but by bathing in the Yamunā one will attain
kṛṣṇa-prema and vraja-prema. Kṛṣṇa enjoys performing
pastimes with His sakhās and sakhīs on Yamunā’s bank and
in her waters.



“But a special consideration is to be made in this
connection. Śrī Gaṅgā joins with Śrī Yamunā at Prayāga,
and together they proceed to Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma, the
place of Mahāprabhu’s pastimes. The Gaṅgā flows on the
eastern side and the Yamunā flows on the western side.
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu performs His various pastimes in
the combination of these two waters. Such great fortune
places the Bhagavatī-Bhāgīrathī Gaṅgā on an equal status
to Śrī Yamunā. The Gaṅgā is capable of giving gaura-
prema, which is non-different from kṛṣṇa-prema.”



All members of the assembly appreciated Śrī Jīva
Gosvāmī’s conclusion, and Emperor Akbara had also
received the great fortune of having his darśana.




Bhīṣma-ṭilā



Bhīṣma-ṭilā is situated near Jānnagara. Bhīṣmadeva came
here to meet with his maternal grandfather, Śrī Jahnu
Muni, and stayed with him for some time. Daily, Bhīṣma
heard narrations about the Lord and received various
instructions from Jahnu Muni about Śrī Gaurāṅgadeva and
His appearance in Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma. He explained that
after some time, at the beginning of Kali-yuga, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa would appear as Śrī Gaurāṅga and give kṛṣṇa-nāma
and kṛṣṇa-prema to both qualified and unqualified living
entities all over the world. He would even drive the
trees, creepers, birds and animals mad with kṛṣṇa-prema.




                           90
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

He further educated Bhīṣmadeva in politics, laws of
religion, laws of society and in the subtle rules of
dharma, and he imparted knowledge about the soul and
matter (ātmā-anātmā), matter and consciousness (jaḍa-
cetana), the reality of the

living entity (jīva-tattva), the reality of the illusory
energy (māyā-tattva), the reality of the Supreme
Personality (bhagavat-tattva), the reality of the nature
of devotional service (bhakti-tattva) and so on. The
jīva is an eternal servant of the Supreme Lord, but
because he is opposed to this service, he has fallen
into the cycle of birth and death in the illusory
material world, and is scorched by the three-fold
miseries. By the mercy of a bona fide spiritual master
the jīva can hear narrations about the Supreme Lord and
chant His name in the association of Vaiṣṇavas. In this
way, he can attain his svarūpa, or original
constitutional form. This is the essential teaching of
all religions. When, at the time of his death,
Grandfather Bhīṣma was lying on his bed of arrows, he
imparted the instructions he heard from Śrī Jahnu Muni
to the distressed Mahārāja Yudhiṣṭhira and the other
Pāṇḍavas. The place where Bhīṣmadeva resided is known as
Bhīṣma-ṭilā.




Śrī Modadrumadvīpa




Modadrumadvīpa, also known as Māmagāchī, is Bhāṇḍīravana
in Vraja. In a previous kalpa, Śrī Rāmacandra, together
with His younger brother Lakṣmaṇa and His wife Sītājī,
were banished to the forest on the order of His father
and stayed for some time at Modadrumadvīpa. In this
beautiful forest was a banyan tree, and on its branches,
which extended far and wide, sat many kinds of birds
sweetly chirping their unending song. The beauty of
Modadrumadvīpa captivated their hearts, and Śrī
Rāmacandra asked Lakṣmaṇa to construct a hut made from
leaves under this tree. Here they stayed for some time.



Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura relates the following pastime
in his Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma-māhātmya: Once as Lord
Rāmacandra was observing the extraordinary beauty of
this forest, He began to smile. Sītā asked Him why He
was smiling, and Śrī Rāma replied, “In this forthcoming
Kali-yuga, I will take birth from the womb of Mother
Śacī in Śrī Jagannātha Miśra’s house in this same
Navadvīpa-dhāma. People will know Me as Gaurāṅga, and I
will charm everyone by performing a variety of
enchanting pastimes. I will manifest the glory of the
holy name and thus madden the common people with the
chanting of these names. I will change the hearts of
even the sinners and give them love of God, which even
the demigods rarely attain. In My youth I will accept

                           91
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

sannyāsa, after which I will reside in Śrī Jagannātha
Purī. At that time My mother Śacī-devī, who is none
other than Kauśalyā, will weep holding her daughter-in-
law Viṣṇupriyā in her arms. You will be that Viṣṇupriyā.
I will thereafter remain in Purī and will also weep for
you day and night.”



Sītājī inquired, “Why will You perform such pastimes?”



Śrī Rāma answered, “I will appear in this world as
Gaurāṅga just to teach the living entities prema-bhakti.



“Prema-bhakti is tasted in two ways: meeting (sambhoga)
and separation (vipralambha). In sambhoga-rasa the
pleasure one receives in meeting is prominent. In
vipralambha-rasa, in the distress of separation, one
attains the happiness of constant internal meeting in
which everything external is forgotten. Only in
separation do one-pointed rasika devotees attain the
unlimited bliss of service. Without vipralambha,
sambhoga-rasa is not nourished and instead tastes like
vipralambha. Therefore in vipralambha, rasa is a million
times more relishable than in sambhoga.



“When I appear as Gaurāṅga, Mother Kauśalyā, together
with Aditi-devī, will appear as Śacī-devī, and you will
be My wife Viṣṇupriyā. Later, in this incarnation as
Rāma, I will find an excuse to abandon you, and send you
to the hermitage of Vālmīki. Then in separation from
you, I will make a golden Sītā and worship you. In the
same way, in My incarnation as Gaura, you will manifest
a deity of Me as Gaurāṅga after I renounce My home, and
you will worship Me in Navadvīpa. Through the pastimes
of Gaurāṅga, I will teach the world the excellence of
vipralambha-rasa.



“Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma is dear to Me, even more so than
Ayodhyā. This banyan tree will become famous as Rāma-
vaṭa, but it will disappear at the beginning of Kali-
yuga.”



After staying here for some time, Śrī Rāmacandra,
together with Sītā and Lakṣmaṇa, departed for
Daṇḍakāraṇya.



By the desire of Śrī Rāmacandra, His dear friend Guhaka,
the King of Niṣāda, took birth here in the house of a
brāhmaṇa as Sadānanda Bhaṭṭācārya. Sadānanda Bhaṭṭācārya
had one-pointed firm faith in Rāmacandra and was present
in Śrī Jagannātha Miśra’s house at the time of Śrīman

                           92
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

Mahāprabhu’s appearance. When he took darśana of baby
Nimāī he saw Him as Śrī Rāmacandra. He later had darśana
of Śrī Rāma, Sītā and Lakṣmaṇa, with Śrī Hanumān folding
his hands at their feet. Sadānanda Bhaṭṭācārya often
used to come to the house of Jagannātha Miśra to take
darśana of the child Nimāī. When, after some time,
Śrīman Mahāprabhu inaugurated His harināma-saṅkīrtana,
Sadānanda performed kīrtana in Mahāprabhu’s group and
was overwhelmed with transcendental bliss.




Śrī Vṛndāvana dāsa Ṭhākura’s



place of residence



Modadrumadvīpa is the appearance-place of Śrī Vṛndāvana
dāsa Ṭhākura, the author of Śrī Caitanya-bhāgavata. He
is non-different from Śrī Kṛṣṇa-dvaipāyana Vedavyāsa.
His mother was Śrī Nārāyaṇī-devī, the niece of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu’s associate Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita. When she was
young, this devout child lovingly accepted mahā-prasāda
remnants from Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who had much
affection for her. In due course of time, Nārāyaṇī-devī
married into a brāhmaṇa family from this place.



Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura established Śrī
Modadruma Gauḍīya Maṭha here. Śrī Gaura-Nityānanda and
Śrī Jagannātha, the deities served by Śrī Vṛndāvana dāsa
Ṭhākura, are still worshipped here.




Śrī Mālinī-devī’s father’s house



and Śrī Vāsudeva Datta’s residence



The house of the father of Śrī Mālinī-devī, Śrīvāsa
Paṇḍita’s wife, was here, near the house of Śrīla
Vṛndāvana dāsa Ṭhākura. The residence of Śrī Sāraṅga and
Murārī, both of whom are asso-ciates of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu, is close by. After Mahāprabhu took sannyāsa
and left Navadvīpa, they were unable to remain in
Navadvīpa due to separation from Him, so they moved here
and performed their bhajana. Śrī Madana-Gopāla, the
deity established by Śrī Vāsudeva Datta Ṭhākura, the
younger brother of Śrī Mukunda Datta Ṭhākura from
Caṭṭagrāma, is worshipped here to this day.



                           93
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                     5/5/2017


Śrī Vāsudeva Datta Ṭhākura was an associate of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu, who generously spent all he had in the
service of the Supreme Lord, keeping nothing for the
future. He was a topmost devotee. Śrīman Mahāprabhu
praised him saying, “This body of Mine is the property
of Vāsudeva only. Wherever he sells Me, I will be sold.
This fact I state three times.” Śrī Yadunandana Ācārya,
the initiating spiritual master of Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī, was a disciple of Śrī Vāsudeva Datta Ṭhākura.



Once, Śrī Vāsudeva Datta requested Śrīman Mahāprabhu,
“Let me accept on my head the sins of all the living
entities in the world. I will suffer for their sins
birth after birth. You can then remove their material
bondage and liberate them.”



Śrī Vāsudeva Datta rendered service to Viṣṇu and the
Vaiṣṇavas with such magnanimity that Śrīman Mahāprabhu
appointed Śrī Śivānanda Sena as Vāsudeva Datta’s
sarakhela, or accountant, to look after his assets and
oversee his expenses.




Śrī Sāraṅgadeva Murārī’s residence



Śrī Sāraṅgadeva, an associate of Śrī Gaura, resided here
in Māmagachī. Once, as Śrī Gaurasundara was returning
home with Śrīvāsa and Śrī Sāraṅgadeva, having
reprimanded Devānanda Paṇḍita, He turned to Sāraṅgadeva
and asked, “Sāraṅgadeva, why don’t you accept a
disciple? It must be an endeavour for you to do all the
work in the āśrama, to serve the deities and then join
Me in saṅkīrtana.



Sāraṅgadeva replied, “I cannot find a qualified
disciple, therefore I accept no one.”



Mahāprabhu said, “Whomever you accept as a disciple will
become qualified.”



Sāraṅgadeva then agreed. “I will accept as a disciple
the first person I meet tomorrow.” He then paid his
obeisances to the Lord and returned to his āśrama. The
next morning Sāraṅgadeva got up and went to take bath in
the Gaṅgā. There he saw the dead body of a boy floating
in the water. Remembering Mahāprabhu’s order,
Sāraṅgadeva brought that dead boy to the riverbank and
recited the dīkṣā-mantra into his ear. Astonishingly,

                           94
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

when the mantra entered the boy’s ear he returned to
life. Paying his prostrated obeisances at Śrī
Sāraṅgadeva’s feet he said, “Yesterday, on the occasion
of my sacred thread ceremony, I was bitten by a
poisonous black snake. I don’t know what happened after
that.”



When the boy’s parents, relatives and friends heard that
he was alive again they came to the place of Śrī
Sāraṅgadeva. They embraced the boy and said, “When you
were bitten by that snake no remedy could save you.
Since the body of a person who has died of a snake bite
cannot be burned, we placed you in the Gaṅgā, and by the
mercy of Śrī Sāraṅgadeva you have returned to life.”
They wanted the boy, Murārī, to go home with them, but
he would not go. This boy, who later became known as Śrī
Murārī Ṭhākura, firmly vowed to spend his entire life in
the service of Śrī Sāraṅgadeva.



At Sāraṅgadeva’s residence there was a huge bakula tree.
Even today this ancient tree, which is completely hollow
inside, stands as witness to this event.




Vaikuṇṭhapura



This village, situated on the north-western border of
Modadrumadvīpa, is where Śrī Nārāyaṇa is eternally wor-
shipped in Navadvīpa-dhāma, together with His three
potencies — Śrī, Bhū and Līlā. The reflected rays
emanating from this transcendental land are called
Brahman. Only one who has transcendental vision can have
darśana of this abode.



Once when Nārada Ṛṣi went to Śrī Vaikuṇṭha, he could not
find Śrī Lakṣmī-Nārāyaṇa there. He inquired from their
associates as to their where-abouts. They answered that
Śrī Lakṣmī-Nārāyaṇa had gone to Navadvīpa-dhāma on the
Earth planet, so Nārada Ṛṣi came to this place where he
was able to have their darśana. Pleased with him, Śrī
Nārāyaṇa revealed to him His form as Śrī Gaurāṅga. The
place where Nārada had this darśana became known as
Vaikuṇṭhapura.



There is another more confidential story about this
place. For some time Śrī Rāmānuja Ācārya stayed in
Śrīkṣetra Jagannātha Purī and rendered service to Śrī
Jagannāthadeva. Once Śrī Jagannātha mercifully ordered
him: “Journey to Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma and take darśana of
that place. After some time, I will appear there as Śrī
Gaurāṅga and distribute kṛṣṇa-prema to the common people

                           95
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

everywhere through kṛṣṇa-nāma-saṅkīrtana. Leave your
disciples here in Puri and go alone to Navadvīpa, which
is a million times superior to Śrī Raṅgam. When you have
taken darśana of Navadvīpa you should return to your
place at Kūrmācala.” Śrī Rāmānuja thus came here on the
order of Śrī Jagannāthadeva. When he took darśana of
Lord Vaiṅkaṭeśvara he saw Him as Śrī Gaurāṅga. This
darśana of Śrī Gauracandra made Rāmānuja Ācārya so
restless that he declared, “I will never leave
Navadvīpa-dhāma and go elsewhere. I will remain here to
witness Your coming pastimes in this place.” Śrī
Gaurasundara told him, “Your desire will be fulfilled.
You will take birth here when My pastimes manifest,” and
then He disappeared.



By the desire of the Lord, Śrī Rāmānuja Ācārya returned
to South India where he began to preach dāsya-bhakti,
devotion in the mellow of servitude. With his
philosophy, called viśiṣṭādvaitavāda, he defeated the
impersonal advaitavāda of Śrī Śaṅkarācārya using
scriptural evidence and sharp logic. He is acknowledged
as the founder of the Śrī sampradāya, which is one of
the four Vaiṣṇava sampradāyas in Kali-yuga. The
literatures he wrote, such as a commentary on the
Vedānta-sūtra known as Śrī-bhāṣya, are famous.



During the advent of Śrīman Mahāprabhu, Śrī Rāmānuja
took birth in a brāhmaṇa family. His name was Śrī Ananta
and he participated in the marriage ceremony of Śrī
Nimāī Paṇḍita and Śrī Lakṣmīpriyā.




Mahatpura



Mahatpura is Kāmyavana in Vraja-maṇḍala. During their
forest exile, Draupadī, Yudhiṣṭhira and the other
Pāṇḍavas came to the village of Ekacakrā. Mahārāja
Yudhiṣṭhira was gladdened by its beauty. One night in a
dream he received darśana of Śrī Baladeva Prabhu, who
showed him His form of Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu. Nityānanda
Prabhu told him about Śrī Gaurāṅga’s coming incarnation
and instructed him to take darśana of the nearby Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma. Consequently, the Pāṇḍavas came to this
place near Māyāpura on the Gaṅgā’s bank where they
worshipped Śrī Gaurasundara. Being pleased with their
worship, Śrī Gaurasundara appeared before them and
described the glories of the Lord’s holy name and His
own future pastimes. Śrī Yudhiṣṭhira Mahārāja, his
brothers and wife became joyfully intoxicated in gaura-
prema and started to dance. The place where they
received darśana of Śrī Mahāprabhu has become famous as
Mahatpura. Five banyan trees once stood here as well as
a hillock named Yudhiṣṭhira-vedī, but now they have all
have disappeared.


                           96
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017



Śrī Madhvācārya and his disciples stayed here for some
time and thus attained the mercy of Śrīman Mahāprabhu.
In Kali-yuga Śrī Madhvācārya is acknowledged as the main
ācārya in the Śrī Brahma sampradāya, one of the four
Vaiṣṇava sampradāyas. This sampradāya descends from
Brahmā to Nārada and then to Vyāsa, who is Nārada’s
disciple and the spiritual master of Śrī Madhvācārya.
The Madhva sampradāya is named after him.



Śrī Madhvācārya is the propounder of dvaitavāda.
According to this philosophy five types of differences
(bheda) are eternal: (1) the difference between Brahman
and the living entity (jīva), (2) the difference between
jīva and jīva, (3) the difference between jīva and jaḍa
(inert matter), (4) the difference between jaḍa and
jaḍa, and (5) the difference between Brahman and jaḍa.
Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Brahman, and He is all powerful
(sarva-śaktimān). The jīvas are His parts and parcels,
and are of two types: conditioned and liberated.
Bhagavad-bhakti, devotion to the Lord, is the main
sādhana. Moreover, Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Person, and the
jīva is His eternal servant. Because of these
philosophical points, Śrī Mādhavendra Purīpāda, the seed
of the desire tree of prema, and his disciples Īśvara
Purīpāda, Advaita Ācārya, Puṇḍarīka Vidyānidhi,
Paramānanda Purī and other prominent associates of
Śrīman Mahāprabhu, have appeared in this disciplic
lineage. Śrīman Mahāprabhu accepted Vaiṣṇava initiation
from Śrī Īśvara Purīpāda and therefore, this disciplic
lineage is named Śrī Brahma-Madhva-Gauḍīya-Vaiṣṇava
sampradāya.



Śrī Madhvācārya worshipped Śrī Gaurasundara for some
time here. This is where he had darśana of the
resplendent golden form of Śrī Śacīnandana Gaurahari,
who instructed Madhvācārya saying, “You are My eternal
servant. Very soon I will appear in Navadvīpa-dhāma. I
will accept initiation into your disciplic lineage and
distribute pure, unalloyed prema-bhakti and the holy
name throughout the world. Now you should travel all
over India and with scriptural evidence and sharp logic
refute the non-vedic hidden Buddhism preached by Śrī
Śaṅkarācārya. The body of Bhagavān eternally exists and
is composed of eternity, knowledge and bliss. This
Supreme Brahman is the fountainhead of all
transcendental qualities. The living entity can never
become the Supreme Brahman; the relationship between
them is that of master and servant. Preach this truth
everywhere, but do not reveal the secret of My coming
pastimes for now.”



Saying this, Śrī Gaurahari disappeared. Thereafter, on
His instruction, Śrī Madhvācārya travelled widely
eliminating impersonalism (māyāvāda) and disseminating
bhakti.


                           97
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017




Śrī Rudradvīpa




Rudradvīpa extends to villages such as Rādupura,
Śaṅkarapura, Rudrapāḍā, Nidayā-ghāṭa and Ṭoṭā. Jagad-
guru Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura established
Śrī Rudradvīpa Gauḍīya Maṭha here.



Śrī Rudradeva (Lord Śiva) knew that golden-complexioned
Gaurahari would appear in Nadīyā and distribute the holy
name and love of God everywhere so he came here with his
associates before Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s appearance. He
began to chant the name of Gaura and dance, and the
demigods showered him with flowers. When Śrī
Gaurasundara saw Rudradeva’s absorption in kīrtana, He
appeared before him and told him about His descent in
the coming Kali-yuga. He then disappeared.



Learned persons say that Nīla-lohita and the other ten
Rudras worship Gauracandra at this place, and therefore
it is called Rudradvīpa. Kailāsa-dhāma (Lord Śiva’s
abode) is merely the radiance of this Rudradvīpa.
Abandoning the path of impersonalism, which is opposed
to devotional service, Aṣṭāvakra, Dattātreya and other
sages worship Bhagavān here and to attain bhakti.



Śrī Śaṅkarācārya also came here, but Rudradeva forbade
him to preach impersonalism in Śrī Navadvīpa-maṇḍala, so
he went elsewhere. The ācārya of śuddhādvaita, Śrī
Viṣṇusvāmī, acquired Rudradeva’s mercy and manifested
the Śrī Rudra Vaiṣṇava sampradāya in Kali-yuga. At this
place Śrīman Mahāprabhu gave His mercy to Śrīla Śrīdhara
Svāmī, whose commentary on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, known as
Bhāvārtha-dīpīka, was greatly revered by Mahāprabhu.



For some time Rudradvīpa was situated on the Gaṅgā’s
western bank. When Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī performed his dhāma-
parikramā, this island was situated on both the eastern
and western banks of the Gaṅgā, and in Śrīnivāsa
Ācārya’s time it was situated on the eastern bank.
Nowadays part of Rudradvīpa is also situated on the
western bank again.




Bilvapakṣa


                           98
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017



The vernacular form of the name Bilvapakṣa is Bela
Pokhariyā. This is Baelvana in Vraja. Respectable
brāhmaṇas used to worship Mahādeva with bilva (bael)
leaves here; therefore it became known as Bilvapakṣa or
Bela Pokhariyā.



Śrī Nimbāditya Ācārya was one of those brāhmaṇas. He was
the highly learned founder-ācārya of the Śrī Catuḥsana
sampradāya, one of the Vaiṣṇava sampradāyas in Kali-
yuga. His philosophical doctrine is known as
dvaitādvaita. According to his line of thought the
living entity and inert matter are simultaneously one
with and different from Brahman. From the perspective of
the transcendental substance (vastu), there is no
difference between the living entity and Brahman, but
the living entity is minute, ignorant and subject to
illusion, and his intrinsic nature is that of a servant.
Brahman is complete eternity, knowl-edge and bliss. He
possesses all potencies in full and is the master of the
living entity and inert matter. Since the material world
is also produced by Bhagavān’s potency, it is both
different and non-different from Brahman.



Sanaka and the three other Kumāras worshipped Śrī Gaura
at this place. Infused with their potency, Śrī
Nimbāditya Ācārya preached pure devotion (bhedābheda-
tattva). There are four main Vaiṣṇava sampradāyas. Each
sampradāya has its own founder — Śrī (Lakṣmī), Brahmā,
Rudra and Sanat Kumāra. In Kali-yuga Śrī accepted
Rāmānuja as the founder-ācārya, Brahmā accepted
Madhvācārya, Rudra accepted Viṣṇusvāmī and Sanat Kumāra
accepted Nimbāditya. All four refuted Śrī Śaṅkara’s
impersonalism and propagated bhakti.



Śrī Nimbāditya Ācārya worshipped Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa
here and received Their darśana in Their form as Śrī
Gaurasundara. He took birth around the time of
Mahāprabhu’s manifest pastimes as Digvijayī Keśava
Kāśmīrī. Śrīman Mahāprabhu defeated him and instructed
him to perform bhajana of Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa.




Bharadvāja-ṭīlā, or Bhāruī-ḍāṅgā



Bharadvāja-ṭīlā is situated north-west of Gaṅgā-nagara.
When Śrīnivāsa Ācārya performed parikramā of Navadvīpa-
dhāma, Bharadvāja-ṭilā was a prosperous town situated on
a hill (ṭilā). The corrupted form of the name
Bharadvāja-ṭilā is Bhāruī-ḍāṅgā. While visiting
different holy places, Bharadvāja Ṛṣi came here from
Prayāga and worshipped Śrī Gaurahari at Cakrahṛda or

                           99
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

Cākadaha, on the Gaṅgā’s bank.



Bharadvāja Ṛṣi was a disciple of the original poet
Vālmīki and he was very powerful. During His exile to
the forest, Śrī Rāmacandra came to his āśrama together
with Sītājī and Lakṣmaṇa. Bharadvāja Ṛṣi was omniscient,
and knew where the coming incarnation of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu would perform His pastimes; therefore he came
to Navadvīpa-dhāma.




Nidayā-ghāṭa



This ghāṭa is situated on the Gaṅgā’s eastern bank. Śrī
Gaura only informed certain devotees, such as Gadādhara
Paṇḍita and Candraśekhara Ācārya, about His intention to
take sannyāsa. One evening as Śrī Gaurasundara roamed
throughout all quarters of Navadvīpa and lovingly met
with the devotees and citizens there, Śrīdhara gave Him
a laukī (bottle-gourd). The cowherd men gave Him milk,
someone gave Him sandalwood pulp, and someone else a
flower garland, and in this way they honoured Him.
Gaurasundara returned home with the milk and the laukī,
gave it to Mother Śacī and asked her to prepare lakalakī
(laukī cooked in milk with sugar) from it. The
preparation was then offered to Śrī Śālagrāma Bhagavān
and distributed to everyone. Mahāprabhu Himself also
lovingly relished this preparation.



That night, Gaurasundara spent some time with Viṣṇupriyā
for the first time in a long while. He affectionately
laughed and spoke sweetly to her, and also decorated
her. Viṣṇupriyā became apprehensive; His behaviour had
changed so much. On the previous day during her bath in
the Gaṅgā she had lost the nose-ring received at her
wedding. She knew this loss was most inauspicious and
now, as she remembered the incident, she trembled and
her fear increased. With the help of Yogamāyā Śrīman
Mahāprabhu quickly lulled Viṣṇupriyā into a deep sleep.
Then detached, hard-hearted and merciless, He took one
last tear-filled look at Viṣṇupriyā. Śrī Śacī-devī stood
at the door like a wooden statue, almost inert in
separation from Him. She did not even have the strength
to weep. Śrī Gaurasundara offered obeisances to His
mother, who gazed in silence unable to speak, and left
His home. On that wintry night He jumped into the
turbulent waters of the Gaṅgā at this ghāṭa, crossed the
river and went to Kaṇṭaka-nagarī (Kaṭavā) where He
accepted the renounced order from Śrī Keśava Bhāratī.
Then, via Śāntipura, He went to Śrī Jagannātha Purī.
Being very cruel-hearted (nirdaya) He left His widowed
mother and His wife, and crossed the Gaṅgā at this
ghāṭa. From that time on this ghāṭa became known as
Nidayā-ghāṭa.


                          100
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017




Śrī Gauḍa-maṇḍala




Prominent Holy Place of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇavas in Śrī
Gauḍa-maṇḍala



The Supreme Lord Himself, Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
appeared about five hundred years ago as Śrī Śacīnandana
Gaurahari in Śrī Māyāpura-dhāma in the ancient land of
Gauḍa (Bengal). He came to fulfil His own three desires
and to distribute kṛṣṇa-prema throughout the world
through harināma-saṅkīrtana. Kṛṣṇa’s associates of Vraja
also made their appearances in various places throughout
Gauḍa-maṇḍala. Bhagavān’s appearance-place is
worshipful. Similarly, the appearance-places of His
associates, as well as their places of residence and
bhajana, are also supremely pure and worshipful, and
bestow auspiciousness upon the devotees. Vaiṣṇavas
enthusiastically visit and circumambulate these places,
also called śrīpāṭas. Some of the śrīpāṭas in Śrī Gauḍa-
maṇḍala will now be described.




Ambikā-kālanā



Ambikā-kālanā lies on the bank of the Gaṅgā near Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma. Śāntipura, where Śrī Advaita Ācārya
resided, is across the Gaṅgā from Ambikā-kālanā. Many
devotees lived here, including Śrī Gaurīdāsa Paṇḍita,
his elder brother Sūryadāsa Sarakhela, Śrī Hṛdaya-
caitanya (Śrī Śyāmānanda Prabhu’s guru), Paramānanda and
Kṛṣṇadāsa Sarakhela.




Śrī Gaurīdāsa Paṇḍita



Paṇḍita Gaurīdāsa was one of the twelve cowherd boys in
the Nityānanda branch of the Caitanya tree. [A beautiful
description of the Caitanya tree and its branches is
found in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Ādi-līlā, Chapters 9—
10.] In Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes he was Subala Sakhā. He
initially lived in Śāligrāma, and later moved to Ambikā-
kālanā.



                          101
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017


Śrī Gaurīdāsa Paṇḍita’s father was Śrī Kaṁsāri Miśra and
his mother was Kamalā-devī. His elder brother was Śrī
Sūryadāsa Sarakhela, whose two daughters, Śrī Vasudhā
and Śrī Jāhnavā-devī, were married to Śrī Nityānanda
Prabhu. His disciple was Śrī Hṛdaya-caitanya, spiritual
master of the famous Śrī Śyāmānanda Prabhu.



Once Śrīman Mahāprabhu and Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu took a
boat and rowed along the river from the village of
Harinadī to Ambikā-kālanā. They arrived at the bhajana-
kuṭī of Gaurīdāsa, who was sitting beneath a nearby
tamarind tree. Seeing the two Lords after a long time,
Śrī Gaurīdāsa Paṇḍita repeatedly requested Them to
always remain in his home. Śrīman Mahāprabhu created
forms of Himself and Nityānanda Prabhu from neem tree
wood and gave Them to Gaurīdāsa. He used to talk to
these deities, and lovingly feed and serve Them. These
same deities are present here to this day.




Bālasāgrāma (Rādhānagara)



This is Śrī Mīnaketana Rāmadāsa’s residence and is
situated ten miles east of Rāmapura Hāṭa.




Śrī Mīnaketana Rāmadāsa



Śrī Mīnaketana Rāmadāsa was a self-realized premī-
bhakta. He is in the Nityānanda branch of the Caitanya
tree. He was invited to attend a twenty-four hour long
nāma-saṅkīrtana at the house of Śrī Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja.
Upon his arrival, all the Vaiṣṇavas present honoured
him, but the pujārī, Guṇārṇava Miśra, neither greeted
him nor talked with him. Displeased, Mīnaketana Rāmadāsa
said, “Here is a second Romaharśaṇa Sūta.” (When
Romaharśaṇa Sūta did not greet Baladeva Prabhu, Baladeva
cut off his head.)




Benāpola



Benāpola is in the Yaśohara district in Bangladesh, near
the Indian border. Here Śrī Haridāsa Ṭhākura used to
chant 300,000 holy names daily.


                            102
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017




Śrī Haridāsa Ṭhākura



Rāmacandra Khān, a wicked and envious landowner, sent
the prostitute Lakṣahīrā to Haridāsa Ṭhākura in an
attempt to make him deviate from his bhajana. Lakṣahirā
heard Haridāsa Ṭhākura’s pure chanting of the holy name
for three successive nights, and her heart became
purified. She fell at his feet, weepingly begging
forgiveness. Haridāsa Ṭhākura pardoned her. She then
gave in charity all she possessed — her house and her
entire wealth. Now humble and destitute, she expressed a
resolute desire to worship the Supreme Lord, and
Haridāsa Ṭhākura initiated her into the Vaiṣṇava-dharma.
He instructed her to perform bhajana in his āśrama on
the bank of the Gaṅgā, then he himself left that place.
Within a short time she became a greatly renounced
ascetic, fully absorbed in bhajana. Virtuous people and
great saintly persons would come from far away to pay
their respects to her.



When Śrī Haridāsa Ṭhākura lived in Phuliyā, Muslims, who
opposed his chanting of the holy name, tried to kill him
by whipping him in twenty-two market places. Thinking
him dead, they threw him into the Gaṅgā. The mere touch
of the Gaṅgā’s water, however, returned his body to its
original condition and he went back to his āśrama, still
chanting the holy name. This so astonished the Muslim
rulers that they considered him to be a pīra, a living
Muslim saint, and granted him permission to chant the
holy name.



Śrī Haridāsa Ṭhākura used to visit Hiraṇya and
Govardhana Majūmdāra’s royal court, and felt much
affection for Govardhana’s son, Śrī Raghunātha dāsa. His
association had a great impact on the boy. One day in
the court, an intense debate ensued between two parties
regarding the glory of Bhagavān’s holy name. One party
stated that the holy name can give liberation, and the
other declared this to be impossible. When Haridāsa
Ṭhākura arrived at the assembly hall, everybody wanted
to know his opinion. His answer was simple and
straightforward: “A mere semblance of the holy name,
nāmaābhāsa, can grant liberation, even if one does not
desire it. Furthermore, kṛṣṇa-prema can be obtained by
purely chanting the name of Kṛṣṇa.” These words angered
one of the brāhmaṇas present who said to Haridāsa
Ṭhākura, “If a person cannot attain liberation by
chanting harināma, let your nose fall off! And if it is
indeed possible to attain liberation by chanting the
holy name, then may my own nose fall off.” A tumult
ensued as everyone present rose to their feet. Śrī
Haridāsa Ṭhākura unhappily left the assembly. The
offensive brāhmaṇa was expelled from the royal assembly,
and astonishingly, in just a few days, he contracted

                          103
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

leprosy and his nose did indeed fall off.



Śrī Haridāsa Ṭhākura’s life is filled with many other
wonderful pastimes. He is considered to be a combined
incarnation of Lord Brahmā and Prahlāda Mahārāja. At the
end of his life he came to Purī to be near Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, who made him a hut at Siddha-bakula where he
could perform bhajana. Śrī Rūpa and Sanātana Gosvāmīs
lived with him in Jagannātha Purī. When Śrī Haridāsa
Ṭhākura was leaving his body, Śrīman Mahāprabhu and His
associates came to him. With His own hands Mahāprabhu
placed him in samādhi, and then celebrated his
disappearance festival with the devotees.




Buḍhana



Buḍhana, Śrī Haridāsa Ṭhākura’s birthplace, is situated
in the Sātkhīrā subdivision of the Khulnā district in
Bangladesh. Haridāsa Ṭhākura later moved to Phuliyā near
Śāntipura and performed bhajana there. He would visit
Śrī Advaita Ācārya who resided at Śāntipura.




Budhuī-pāḍā



Hemalatā-devī, the eldest daughter of Śrīnivāsa Ācārya,
was married to Śrī Gopījana-vallabha, the son of Śrī
Rāmakiśana Caṭṭarāja, of this village. Yadunandana dāsa,
a disciple of Hemalatā-devī, also lived here.
Yadunandana translated many Vaiṣṇava literatures.
Budhuī-pāḍā is now submerged in the Gaṅgā’s waters, and
its inhabitants have moved to Naiyālisa-pāḍā.




Budhurī



This place is also called Teliyā-budhurī, and is the
śrīpāṭa of Śrī Rāmacandra Kavirāja and Govinda Kavirāja.




Cākadaha



                          104
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017


Situated in the Nadīyā district, Cākadaha is the
residence of Śrī Maheśa Paṇḍita, who was one of the
twelve cowherd boys in the Nityānanda branch of the
Caitanya tree. In Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes in Vraja he was the
cowherd boy Udāra Gopāla. Śrī Pradyumna killed
Śambarāsura here, and thus this place is also called
Pradyumna-nagara.




Cākundī



Cākundī is three miles north of Agradvīpa in the
district of Nadīyā. This is Śrīnivāsa Ācārya’s
birthplace. His samādhi is also located here.




Śrīnivāsa Ācārya



Śrīnivāsa Ācārya was born in 1441 of the Śaka Era on
Vaiśākhī-pūrṇimā (the full-moon day in April—May in A.D.
1519). His father was a Rāḍhīya brāhmaṇa named Śrī
Caitanya dāsa. Śrīnivāsa Ācārya was the best of
illustrious spiritual preceptors and propagated
Vaiṣṇava-vedānta and Vaiṣṇava literature. He also
composed a collection of songs about great Vaiṣṇavas.
Śrī Ācārya Prabhu contributed significantly to the
preaching of the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava-dharma, and is
considered to be a second manifestation of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu. His spiritual master is the celebrated Śrī
Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, and he studied Vaiṣṇava
philosophy and devotional literature under Śrīla Jīva
Gosvāmī. Śrī Ācārya Prabhu is considered to be the
founder of the kīrtana style called manoharaśāhī-svara.
[Also see “Yājīgrāma”.]




Cāṅdapāḍā



Cāṅdapāḍā, situated eight miles northeast of the
Murśidābād station, is where Śrī Subuddhi Rāya took
birth. Once, the Mohammedan governor of Bengal was urged
by his wife to throw water from his water pot on Śrī
Subuddhi Rāya’s face. Consequently Subuddhi Rāya lost
his caste. The brāhmaṇas advised him to purify himself
by drinking boiling ghee and thus give up his life.
Subuddhi Rāya, however, had surrendered to Śrīman
Mahāprabhu, who instructed him to chant the holy name
and go to Mathurā-Vṛndāvana. Subuddhi Rāya remained in

                          105
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

Mathurā-Vṛndāvana where he chanted harināma and became a
highly elevated saint.




Cāndapura



Cāndapura, a village of Saptagrāma, is the residence of
Śrī Yadunandana Ācārya, the spiritual master of Śrīla
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī and dear friend of Śrīla
Haridāsa Ṭhākura. As a result of his association,
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī attained the lotus feet of
Nityānanda Prabhu and Śrī Gauracandra.




Cāṭigrāma



This village is situated in the Caṭṭagrāma district and
is the birthplace of some of Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s
associates, such as Śrī Puṇḍarīka Vidyānidhi, Śrī
Caitanya Vallabha, Śrī Vāsudeva Datta and Śrī Mukunda
Datta.




Śrī Puṇḍarīka Vidyānidhi



Puṇḍarīka Vidyānidhi, who was Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja in
vraja-līlā, was born in a brāhmaṇa family. His father’s
was Śrī Rāṇeśvara Brahmacārī and his mother was Śrī
Gaṅgā-devī. He was the zamindar of Candraśālā, and also
had a residence and property in Navadvīpa. Puṇḍarīka
Vidyānidhi was a disciple of the illustrious Śrī
Mādhavendra Purī. He had a friendship with Śrī Mādhava
Miśra, the father of Śrī Gadādhara Paṇḍita, and with Śrī
Svarūpa Dāmodara. Śrī Puṇḍarīka was like a royal sage
(rājarṣi) and although he engaged in the tasks of a
zamindar and possessed vast wealth, he was a highly
elevated devotee of the Lord. Śrīman Mahāprabhu would
refer to him as bāpa, or father, and also as
“Premanidhi” (“the ocean of prema”).



Once, Mahāprabhu sent Gadādhara Paṇḍita to visit
Puṇḍarīka Vidyānidhi, but upon seeing his affluent
lifestyle, which seemed to bespeak of sense
gratification, Gadādhara Paṇḍita returned to Mahāprabhu.
Mahāprabhu sent him again to Puṇḍarīka Vidyānidhi, this
time with Śrī Mukunda. When Puṇḍarīka Vidyānidhi heard
Mukunda recite the verse aho bakī yaṁ... from the

                           106
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, he was immediately carried away in
ecstasy. He rolled on the ground, tearing his royal
clothes, and became covered in dust. He was completely
unaware of his body and finally he fell unconscious.
This incident made a deep impression on Gadādhara
Paṇḍita and he later accepted Vaiṣṇava initiation from
him.



One day in Purī, when Puṇḍarīka Vidyānidhi went for
darśana of Lord Jagannātha, he noticed that the Lord was
wearing new cloth. These new clothes were full of starch
so Puṇḍarīka Vidyānidhi considered them impure and his
mind became critical of Lord Jagannātha’s priest. That
night both Śrī Jagannātha and Śrī Baladeva came to him
in a dream. They caught hold of him and laughed as They
slapped his cheeks. The next morning, Puṇḍarīka
Vidyānidhi saw his swollen cheeks. Understanding that he
had received the great mercy of Lord Jagannātha, he wept
tears of transcendental jubilation. “Aho! Lord
Jagannātha and Baladeva are very merciful. Upon seeing
Their dear friend commit a mistake, They corrected him
as a good friend would.” [Also see “Mekhalā”.]




Śrī Mukunda Datta



Mukunda Datta, the younger brother of Vāsudeva Datta,
was Mahāprabhu’s fellow-student whose singing voice was
exceptionally melodic. In vraja-līlā he was Madhukaṇṭha
Sakhā. He initially lived in Caṭṭaśālā in the Caṭṭagrāma
district, but later took up residence in Navadvīpa.
After Śrīman Mahāprabhu accepted sannyāsa Mukunda Datta
moved to Kāṅcaḍāpāḍā.



Once Śrīman Mahāprabhu admonished him, calling him khaḍa
jāṭhiyā beṭā1, and He refused to give him prema. Sending
a message through Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita, Mukunda asked
Mahāprabhu when he might receive His darśana again, and
Mahāprabhu replied that he would receive it after ten
million births. When Mukunda heard this, he began to
dance and cried, “Now, it is certain that I will attain
the Lord after ten million births!” Śrīman Mahāprabhu
received news of Mukunda’s reaction, which revealed deep
loving sentiments, and His heart melted. He called for
Mukunda and bestowed His mercy upon him immediately.
Mukunda Datta remained with Mahāprabhu during His
kīrtanas in Śrīvāsa-aṅgana, during His sannyāsa
initiation and during His stay in Nīlācala (Purī-dhāma).




Chatrabhoga


                          107
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017



Chatrabhoga is situated four miles south of the
Jayanagara-Majilapura railway station in Thānā
Mathurāpura, Caubīsa-paraganā. During the time of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu, the Gaṅgā divided into hundreds of branches
and merged into the ocean at Chatrabhoga. Mahāprabhu
passed through here on His way to Purī. Jagad-guru Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura established Śrīman
Mahāprabhu’s foot-prints (pāda-pīṭha) here. Nearby is
Cakra-tīrtha, and also the famous tīrtha called
Ambūliṅga.




Chuṅchurā



In Pañcānana-talā, in the Kāmārapāḍā market of
Chuṅchurā, is the deity of Śrī Śyāmasundara that used to
be the family deity of Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī. When
Muslims were causing a disturbance in Saptagrāma,
Raghunātha dāsa’s father Śrī Govardhana Majūmadāra hid
Śrī Śyāmasundara here. The deity has resided here since
that time.



Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja
established Śrī Uddhāraṇa Gauḍīya Maṭha in an ancient
ṭhākura-bāḍī2 in Chuṅchurā’s Caumāthā. The deities of
Śrī Gaura-Nityānanda that were previously worshipped by
Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita in Kumārahaṭṭa (Hālīśahara) were later
brought to this maṭha in Chuṅchurā and are still being
worshipped here.




Dāṅīhāṭa, or Dāīhāṭa



The village of Dāṅīhāṭa is situated two miles from
Dāīhāṭa station on the Baiṇḍila-Baḍaharavā railway line.
The śrīpāṭa of Śrī Mukunda Ghoṣa, Śrī Vāsudeva Ghoṣa’s
brother, is situated here. The deity worshipped by him,
Śrī Rasika-rāya, is still present here. This is also the
place of Śrī Vaṁśī-vadanāndana’s śrīpāṭa.




Śrī Vaṁśī-vadanānanda



In kṛṣṇa-līlā Śrī Vaṁśī-vadanānanda was the cherished
flute (vaṁśī) of Śrī Kṛṣṇa. His residence is also in

                          108
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

Kuliyā-pahāḍapura in Śrīdhāma Navadvīpa. After Śrīman
Mahāprabhu accepted the renounced order and left for
Purī, Vaṁśī-vadanānanda was appointed guardian of Mother
Śacī and Śrī Viṣṇupriyā-devī in Śrīdhāma Navadvīpa. He
established a deity of Śrī Gaurāṅga on the approval of
Śrī Viṣṇupriyā-devī.




Denuḍa



Denuḍa is the birthplace of Śrī Keśava Bhāratī,
Mahāprabhu’s sannyāsa-guru. After Śrī Keśava Bhāratī
accepted the renounced order he established āśramas,
first in Khāṭundi and later in Kaṭavā, to perform his
bhajana. His samādhi is also in Kaṭavā.



Śrī Vṛndāvana dāsa Ṭhākura composed Śrī Caitanya-
bhāgavata here and established deities of Śrī Nitāī-
Gaura. Denuḍa was the home of his maternal uncle. Śrī
Gadādhara Paṇḍita’s handwritten Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, in
which Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu Himself wrote the meanings
of certain words, is safely preserved here to this day.




Devagrāma



Devagrāma lies in the Murśidābāda district in Thānā
Sāgaradīghi and is the birthplace of Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura.




Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura



Śrī Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura was born in Devagrāma
in 1576 of the Śaka Era (A.D. 1654). His father’s name
was Śrī Rāma-nārāyaṇa Cakravartī. Śrī Viśvanātha
Cakravartī received his primary education in Devagrāma
and studied devotional scriptures in Saidābāda. His
initiating spiritual master was Śrī Rādhā-ramaṇa
Cakravartī, and his grand-spiritual master (parama-guru)
was Śrī Kṛṣṇa-caraṇa Cakravartī, Śrī Rādhā-ramaṇa
Cakravartī’s father. Śrī Kṛṣṇa-caraṇa was the son of Śrī
Rāma-kṛṣṇa Ācārya of Saidābāda, and the adopted son of
Gaṅgā-nārāyaṇa of Bālūcara. Śrī Kṛṣṇa-caraṇa resided in
Saidābāda, where he studied the bhakti-śāstras and later
taught them to Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura.
During this period Cakravartī Ṭhākura composed three

                          109
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

small books — Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu, Ujjvala-
nīlamaṇi-kiraṇa and Bhāgavatāmṛta-kaṇā. Although
Cakravartī Ṭhākura married, he had no attachment to
household life. Renouncing his home he went to reside in
Vṛndāvana to do bhajana. On the order of his spiritual
master he returned to his virtuous wife, but spent only
one night with her in which he spoke the nectarean words
of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. The next morning he returned to
Vṛndāvana.



In his time Cakravartī Ṭhākura was known in the assembly
of scholars as mahā-mahopādhyāya, the most illustrious
of great teachers, and the helmsman and crest-jewel of
the assembly of the Vaiṣṇavas. He was a profound
scholar, a great philosopher, a superlative poet and an
eminent devotee, expert in relishing rasa. He is called
Viśvanātha because he shows the path of bhakti to the
living entities of the universe (viśva), and he is
called Cakravartī because he resides in the circle
(cakra) of bhakti. It is said that rain would never fall
where he sat to write his commentaries on Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam. The deity established by him, Śrī
Gokulānanda, is still present in Vṛndāvana. Śrī
Viśvanātha Cakravartī left this world on the banks of
Rādhā-kuṇḍa on Māghī-śukla-pañcamī, the fifth day of the
bright fortnight in the month of Māgha (January—
February). His samādhi is near the Śrī Gokulānanda
Temple in Vṛndāvana.



Some of his most prominent commentaries and books are:
Sārārtha-darśanī commentary on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,
Sārārtha-varṣiṇī commentary on the Gītā, Ānanda-candrika
commentary on Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, Bhaktisāra-pradarśinī
commentary on Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, Bhakti-harṣinī
commentary on Gopāla-tāpanī, commentary on Brahma-
saṁhitā, Mahatī commentary on Dāna-keli-kaumudī,
Sukhavartanī commentary on Ānanda-vṛndāvana-campu,
Subodhinī commentary on Alaṅkāra-kaustubha, commentary
on Haṁsadūta, a Sanskrit commentary on Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta, a commentary on Prema-bhakti-candrikā, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa-bhāvanāmṛta, Śrī Gaurāṅga-līlāmṛta, Aiśvarya-
kādambinī, Mādhurya-kādambinī, Stavāmṛta-laharī, Śrī
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu, Śrī Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi-
kiraṇa, Bhāgavatāmṛta-kaṇā, Rāga-vartma-candrikā,
Camatkāra-candrikā and Kṣaṇadā-gīta-cintāmaṇī.




Ḍhākā (Śrī Ḍhākeśvarī Pīṭha)



Ḍhākā is where Śrī Vīracandra Prabhu met with the Nāvāb
(the Muslim governor), and asked him for the beautifully
carved stone piece situated on the top of the tower of
his royal residence. The Nāvāb complied. From that stone
he manifested a beautiful deity of Śrī Śyāmasundara.
Vīracandra Prabhu preached bhagavad-bhakti in this

                          110
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

region.




Ḍhākā-dakṣiṇa



Śrī Jagannātha Miśra, the father of Śrīman Mahāprabhu,
and his father, Śrī Upendra Miśra, were born here.
Śrīman Mahāprabhu came here to meet with His paternal
grandmother. This place is also known as Gupta, or
hidden, Vṛndāvana.




Dhārendā Bahādura



Dhārendā Bahādura is Śrī Śyāmānanda Prabhu’s śrīpāṭa,
and is situated in the Medinīpura district near the
Khaḍagapura railway station. Śrī Śyāmānanda Prabhu took
birth here in 1455 Śakābda (A.D. 1533).




Śrī Śyāmānanda Prabhu



Śrī Śyāmānanda Prabhu was born in the Sadagopa dynasty.
His father’s name was Śrī Kṛṣṇa Maṇḍala and his mother’s
name was Śrīmatī Durikā-devī. Many of his elder brothers
and sisters died before he took birth. In an attempt to
prevent him from also dying, his parents named him
Duḥkhī (which means “sad” or “distressed”). Later his
name became Kṛṣṇa dāsa, hence his childhood name was
Duḥkhī Kṛṣṇa dāsa. When he was young, on the instruction
of his father, he took Vaiṣṇava initiation from Śrī
Hṛdaya Caitanya, a disciple of Gaurīdāsa Paṇḍita from
Ambikā-Kālanā. Śyāmānanda Prabhu first took darśana of
Gauḍa-maṇḍala after which he travelled to all the holy
places of India. He then studied the devotional
scriptures under Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī in Vṛndāvana, where
he lived at Jhāḍū-maṇḍala and performed his sādhana-
bhajana. One morning while sweeping the nearby Rāsa-
maṇḍala, he found one of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s anklets. He
presented it to Jīva Gosvāmī, who forbade him to give it
to anyone but Rādhikā Herself. Śrī Lalitā and Śrī
Viśākhā came to Śyāmānanda Prabhu looking for the
anklet, but he told them, “I will only return the anklet
to its owner. If She comes here, I will place it around
Her ankle with my own hands.”



Lalitā answered, “Have you no shame? You are a bābājī,

                          111
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                     5/5/2017

but you are prepared to place this anklet on the foot of
a young, married lady!” Śyāmānanda Prabhu remained
resolute. Finally it was decided that he could place the
anklet on the foot of the owner if his eyes were
blindfolded. This done, Śrīmatī Rādhikā appeared before
him with Her sakhīs, and the life of Śyāmānanda Prabhu
became successful. Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī was very pleased
with him, and gave him the name “Śyāmānanda dāsa”, which
means “a servant of Śyāmasundara, who gives pleasure to
Śyāmā (Rādhikā)”. The anklet was touched to his
forehead, leaving a tilaka mark in the shape of the
anklet.



Śyāmānanda Prabhu travelled with Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura
and Śrīnivāsa Ācārya to Bengal, taking with them many
volumes of Vaiṣṇava literature, which King Vīrahamvīra
stole. [This pastime is related under “Vanaviṣṇupura”
and “Yājīgrāma”.]



In his final days Śyāmānanda Prabhu lived in Nṛsiṁhapura
in Orissa and extensively preached Vaiṣṇava-dharma.
Rasikānanda is prominent amongst his countless
disciples.




Ekacakrā (Vīracandra-pura Garbhavāsa)



Ekacakrā is situated eight miles east of the Mallāpura
railway station and eleven miles from the Rāmapura Hāṭa
railway station.



One can take darśana of the following places in
Ekacakrā:



(1) Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu’s place of birth, called the
“Garbhavāsa”.



(2) The place where Nityānanda’s mother, Padmāvatī,
performed ṣaṣṭhī-pūjā [the ceremony performed six days
after the birth of a son]. This is near the Garbhavāsa.



(3) Padmāvatī-puṣkariṇī, a pond that was constructed in
memory of Mother Padmāvatī.



(4) Mālātalā, the gigantic pīpala tree on the branch of

                          112
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

which Śrīman Mahāprabhu hung His garland (mālā).



(5) Siddha-bakula, a huge bakula tree under which Śrī
Nityānanda Prabhu played in His childhood.



(6) Vīracandra-pura, which is named after Śrī Nityānanda
Prabhu’s son, Śrī Vīracandra (also known as Śrī
Vīrabhadra). Śrī Bāṅkā Rāya (or Śrī Baṅkima Rāya) with
Śrī Jāhnavā-devī on His right and Śrīmatī Rādhikā on His
left are worshipped in the temple here. Śrī Nityānanda
Prabhu found this deity of Śrī Bāṅkā Rāya at Kadamba-
khaṇḍī-ghāṭa at the small river Yamunā, which flows
nearby. The deity of Śrīmatī Rādhikā was found beneath
the roots of a neem tree in Bhaḍḍāpura.




Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu



Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu appeared in the village of
Ekacakrā on Māghī-śukla-trayodaśī, in the year 1395 of
the Śaka Era (A.D. 1473). His father was Śrī Haḍhāī
Paṇḍita and His mother was Padmāvatī-devī.



In their childhood Śrī Nityānanda (Nitāī) and the other
boys performed dramas based on the Supreme Lord’s
pastimes, such as rāma-līlā and kṛṣṇa-līlā. In the
dramas depicting Rāma’s pastimes Nitāī took the role of
Lakṣmaṇa, and in the dramas of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes He would
take the role of Balarāma. He completely absorbed
Himself in His role. Once, He became so absorbed in the
mood of Lakṣmaṇa fighting in Laṅkā that He actually
became unconscious by the power of Meghanātha’s blow to
His chest. He remained in that condition for so long
that the other boys tearfully went to inform His
parents. When they saw their child unconscious they also
started to cry. Then one boy said, “Nityānanda told me
that when He faints, Hanumān should bring the saṅjīvanī
medicinal plant from the Gandhamādana Mountain. When
Nityānanda smells it He will regain consciousness.” The
boy playing the role of Hanumān enacted obtaining the
saṅjīvanī plant and bringing it to Nitāī who, to
everyone’s amazement, quickly regained consciousness.



Once, when Nitāī was a child, a Vaiṣṇava came to
Ekacakrā and asked Nitāī’s father to allow him to take
Nitāī with him on a pilgrimage to India’s holy places.
Later, Nityānanda Prabhu came to Vṛndāvana and from
there went to Śrīdhāma Navadvīpa where He met Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He was Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s “right
hand” in propagating the holy name and distributing love
of God. In kṛṣṇa-līlā Nityānanda was Śrī Baladeva and

                          113
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

before that, in Rāma’s pastimes in Tretā-yuga, He was
Lakṣmaṇa, Śrī Rāma’s younger brother. Nityānanda Prabhu
played a prominent role in the deliverance of Jagāī and
Mādhāī. On Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s order, He went daily
throughout the town of Navadvīpa begging people to chant
the holy name. He would become deeply absorbed in
dancing and chanting with the devotees in Śrīvāsa-
aṅgana, the place of saṅkīrtana-rāsa.



Nityānanda Prabhu was not conscious of His body to the
extent that He sometimes wore cloth meant for the lower
part of His body around His head, and quite naked became
absorbed in cowgrazing and other pastimes related to
sakhya-bhāva, or the mellow of friendship. Nityānanda
Prabhu is one of the two main branches of the desire
tree of bhakti [the Caitanya tree].



When Śrīman Mahāprabhu became a renunciant and went to
Purī, Nityānanda Prabhu and some other devotees went
with Him. On the bank of a river in Orissa, Nityānanda
Prabhu broke Mahāprabhu’s sannyāsa staff (daṇḍa) into
three pieces and threw them into the river. This river
therefore became known as Daṇḍa-bhāṅgā, or “the place
where the daṇḍa was broken”. Mahāprabhu asked, “Why did
You break My daṇḍa, My life-companion?” Nityānanda
Prabhu answered, “I cannot tolerate seeing You carry
this daṇḍa made of dry bamboo for the rest of Your
life.” The hidden meaning behind these words is that the
ekadaṇḍa (single staff) indicates impersonalism in which
one thinks, “I am Brahman.” Nityānanda Prabhu turned
Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s ekadaṇḍa into the tridaṇḍa carried
by Vaiṣṇavas.



Prior to Jagannātha Ratha-yātrā, Nityānanda Prabhu was
Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s most prominent assistant. Mahāprabhu
eventually ordered Him to propagate devotional service
to the Supreme Lord, especially harināma-saṅkīrtana, all
over Bengal. Nityānanda Prabhu therefore returned to
live in Navadvīpa and after some time married the two
daughters of Sūryadāsa Sarakhela, Śrī Vasudhā and Śrī
Jāhnavā. After His marriage He lived in Khaḍadaha, where
His son, Śrī Vīracandra, took birth.



Nityānanda Prabhu is Mula-saṅkarṣaṇa. He manifests in
five forms: Mahā-saṅkarṣaṇa, Kāraṇābdhiśāyī Viṣṇu,
Garbhodaśāyī Viṣṇu, Kṣīrodaśāyī Viṣṇu and Śeṣa. He is
the presiding deity (adhiṣṭhātrī-deva) of the sandhinī-
śakti, the potency of eternal existence. He serves the
Youthful Couple as the sakhī Anaṅga Mañjarī.



After Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu entered His unmanifest
pastimes, Jāhnavā-devī and Vīracandra Prabhu came to
Ekacakrā. Memories of Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu awakened
within them and they wept tears of bliss. In the course

                          114
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

of time, the village of Ekacakrā became deserted, but
now the population is growing again.




Gopīvallabhapura



Gopīvallabhapura is situated in the Medinīpura district
on the bank of the Suvarṇa-rekhā River.



Śrī Rasikānanda Prabhu, a disciple of Śrī Śyāmananda
Prabhu, received a deity from the King of Mayura-
bhañjana. Śrī Śyāmananda Prabhu named the deity Śrī
Gopīnātha, and the place where he established this deity
became known as Gopīvallabhpura. Many articles have been
preserved in the house of the late mahanta, Śrī
Nandanandānanda-deva Gosvāmī, including stamped royal
agreements and Śrī Rasikānanda Prabhu’s neck beads, his
patchwork garment, his Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, clay pots,
tilaka, three or four of his flutes and many of his
handwritten books.




Śrī Rasikānanda Prabhu



Śrī Rasikānanda Prabhu is also called Rasika Murārī, and
was Śyāmānanda Prabhu’s most prominent disciple. He
appeared in 1512 in the Śaka Era (A.D. 1590) in the
village of Rohiṇī, or Rayaṇī, which is situated on the
bank of the Suvarṇa-rekhā River. His father’s name was
Śrī Acyutānanda and his mother’s name was Śrī Bhavānī-
devī. Śrī Rasikānanda was erudite, rasika and a
perfected great soul (siddha-mahātmā). Śrī Śyāmananda
Prabhu was captivated by Rasikānanda Prabhu’s qualities,
and entrusted him with the service of Śrī Govinda, a
deity established by Śrī Śyāmananda.



Śrī Rasikānanda Prabhu was a powerful personality. Once
a despotic Muslim ruler released some wild elephants to
cause him trouble. Chanting the Lord’s name he took some
water in his palms and threw it upon the elephants. The
mere touch of this water made the elephants turn their
heads, lift their trunks and loudly chant Kṛṣṇa’s holy
names. At that moment the elephants became Vaiṣṇavas,
adopting humble and mild behaviour. The heart of the
despotic ruler changed, and after surrendering to Śrī
Rasikānanda he became a devotee of Kṛṣṇa.



Rulers of contemporary kingdoms, such as Mayūra-

                          115
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

bhañjana, Paṭāśapura and Mayanā, became disciples of Śrī
Rasikānanda Prabhu due to his transcendental potency. In
his final days he performed kīrtana with his disciples
as they walked from Vāṅśadaha village to Remunā. When
they arrived in the courtyard of the Khīracorā-Gopīnātha
Temple, Śrī Rasikānanda went into the inner chamber of
the temple and entered Śrī Gopīnātha’s body. All his
associates present also gave up their bodies, right
there in the courtyard. Śrī Rasikānanda’s puṣpa-samādhi
and the samādhis of the other devotees are near the
temple of Śrī Khīracorā-Gopīnātha.




Guptipāḍa



Śrī Vakreśvara Paṇḍita’s residence is in Guptipāḍa. Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu entrusted Śrī Vakreśvara with the
responsibility of serving in the Śrī Rādhā-kānta Maṭha
and the Gambhīrā, which is situated in Śrī Kāśī Miśra-
bhavana in Purī-dhāma.




Jhāmaṭapura



Jhāmaṭapura is situated in the Vardhamāna district, near
the Sālāra station (on the Eastern Railway line). Within
it are the residences of Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja
Gosvāmī, who used to live here with his elder brother,
and Śrī Mīnaketana Rāmadāsa, a great devotee of Lord
Nityānanda.



Once, while they were glorifying Śrīman Mahāprabhu in
kīrtana, Śrī Mīnaketana Rāmadāsa came to their house.
When Mīnaketana Rāmadāsa began glorifying Śrī Nityānanda
Prabhu, Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī’s elder brother
interjected with some disrespectful comments about Him.
Angered, Śrī Mīnaketana Rāmadāsa left that place. Śrī
Kavirāja Gosvāmī became so enraged with his brother that
he set out for Vṛndāvana, and thus abandoned his brother
forever. Upon seeing Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja’s firm faith in
Him, Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu showed unfathomable mercy by
giving him direct darśana of Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, Śrī
Rādhā-Govinda, Śrī Rādhā-Gopīnātha and Śrī Rādhā-Mohana.
This pastime took place here in Jhāmaṭapura. Nityānanda
Prabhu also bestowed prema-bhakti upon Kṛṣṇadāsa
Kavirāja and empowered him to compose literature on
devotional service.




                          116
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

Kāgaja Pukuriyā



Kāgaja Pukuriyā is situated in the Yaśohara district,
east of Benāpola. The immoral and vicious Rāmacandra
Khān, who maintained connections with prostitutes, used
to live here. He once engaged a young, charming
prostitute named Lakṣahīrā to disturb Śrī Haridāsa
Ṭhākura’s sādhana, but upon hearing Śrī Haridāsa
Ṭhākura’s pure chanting she gave up her former ways and
became a great Vaiṣṇavī. Even several exalted male
saints and sādhus would come to take her darśana.



Later, when Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu came to this village,
Rāmacandra Khān showed him disrespect. Nityānanda Prabhu
immediately left. Due to this offence, Muslims attacked
the village the next day, killing Rāmacandra Khān and
his family, and desecrating the place.




Kājalīgrāma



Kājalīgrāma is situated in the Vardhamāna district and
is the birthplace of Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu’s mother,
Śrīmatī Padmāvatī. She was a highly learned and deeply
pious woman. Her father’s name was Śrī Maheśvara Śarmā.




Kālikāpura



Kālikāpura is situated in the Vardhamāna district near
Kācoyāra. At Kālikāpura the deities of Śrī Rādhā-
Mādhava, who were established by Śrī Gaṅgāmātā
Gosvāminī’s descendants, are worshipped.




Kāñcaḍāpāḍā, or Kāñcanapallī



Kāñcanapallī, the residence of Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s
associate Śrī Vāsudeva Datta, is situated on the bank of
the Gaṅgā in the Caubīsa-paraganā district. Like his
brother Śrī Mukunda Datta, Śrī Vāsudeva Datta was an
expert singer in Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s congregational
chanting party. He once asked the following boon from
Śrīman Mahāprabhu: “I will accept the sins of all the
living entities in the universe if You kindly remove

                          117
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

their attachment to material life and engage them in
worshipping You.” He later left Kāñcaḍāpāḍā and became a
resident of Nīlācala. In Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes he was
Madhuvrata Sakhā.



Śivānanda Sena was born in Kulīna-grāma and his father-
in-law’s house was in Kāñcaḍāpāḍā.



Śrī Kṛṣṇa-rāya, a deity established by Śrī Kavi-
karṇapūra, is worshipped in the Kṛṣṇapura section of
Kāñcaḍāpāḍā.




Kāñcana-gaḍiyā



Kāñcana-gaḍiyā is situated about five miles from
Bājārasāhu station, in the Kāṅdi subdivision of the
Murśidābād district. One can take darśana of the
following places in Kāñcana-gaḍiyā:



(1) the residence of Śrī Haridāsa Ācārya (also known as
Dvija Haridāsa), an associate of Śrīman Mahāprabhu.
Haridāsa Ācārya resided and performed bhajana in
Vṛndāvana according to Mahāprabhu’s instructions. He had
two sons, Śrīdāsa and Gokuladāsa. When Haridāsa Ācārya
went to Vṛndāvana, they remained in Kāñcana-gaḍiyā.
Haridāsa Ācārya requested Śrīnivāsa Ācārya to give them
Vaiṣṇava initiation which he did when he returned from
Vṛndāvana. Haridāsa Ācārya departed from this world in
Vṛndāvana, and his sons brought his body to Kāñcana-
gaḍiyā where they placed him in samādhi.



(2) the residence of Śrī Rādhā-vallabha dāsa Maṇḍala,
who translated Vilāpa-kusumāñjali.



(3) the residence of Śrīnivāsa Ācārya’s disciple, Śrī
Vṛndāvana Caṭṭarāja.



(4) the residence of Śrīnivāsa Ācārya’s disciple,
Nṛsiṁha Kavirāja, one of the eight poets (aṣṭa-
kavirājas).



(5) the residence of Śrīnivāsa Ācārya’s disciple Śrī
Raghunātha Kara, also one of the eight poets.


                          118
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017




Kāñcanā-grāma



Kāñcanā-grāma in Caṭṭagrāma is the birthplace of the
brothers Śrī Vāsudeva and Mukunda Datta, as well as
other associates of Śrīman Mahāprabhu. Mahāprabhu asked
Śrī Śivānanda Sena to look after Śrī Vāsudeva Datta’s
property. Śrī Vāsudeva Datta, who was Madhuvrata Sakhā
in Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, was a sweet and skillful singer.




Kāṅkuṭiyā



In Kāṅkuṭiyā, which is situated near Deulira village in
the Vīrabhūma district, is the house of Śrī Locana dāsa
Ṭhākura’s father-in-law. The deities established by him,
Śrī Gopīnātha and Śrī Gaura-Nitāī, are still worshipped
here.




Kāśima-bāzāra



In Kāśima-bāzāra is the royal palace of Mahārāja Śrī
Manīndracandra Nandī, who offered his life, treasury and
everything in his possession to the progress of the
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava-dharma. To his great credit he financed
printing of a Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam that had several
commentaries. In many ways, he helped Śrī Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura and Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura Prabhupāda preach
Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava-dharma both in India and abroad.




Kaṭavā



Kaṭavā is situated in the Vardhamāna district, and is
also called Kaṇṭaka-nagarī. At the age of twenty-four,
Śrī Nimāī Paṇḍita left His wife Viṣṇupriyā and His
mother Śacī-devī, crossed the Gaṅgā at Nidayā-ghāṭa and
came to this place, where He accepted sannyāsa from Śrī
Keśava Bhāratī. From here He went to Purī via Śāntīpura.
A temple of Śrīman Mahāprabhu still stands here.




                          119
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

The place where Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s head was shaved for
his sannyāsa ceremony, a samādhi of His hair, Śrī
Gadādhara dāsa’s samādhi and residence, the residence of
Śrī Keśava Bhāratī, and the samādhi of Śrī Madhu, the
barber who shaved Mahāprabhu, are also here.



Our spiritual master, nitya-līlā praviṣṭa oṁ viṣṇupāda
Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, also
accepted the renounced order here.




Kendubilva



Kendubilva is situated in the Vīrabhūma district on
River Ajaya’s bank, twenty miles south of Siuḍī. The
illustrious poet and the author of Gīta-govinda, Śrī
Jayadeva Gosvāmī, took birth here. For sometime he was
the royal paṇḍita of Mahārāja Lakṣmaṇa Sena.




Keśīyāḍī



Keśīyāḍī, situated in the Medinīpura district, has been
purified by the touch of Śrī Śyāmānanda Prabhu’s and Śrī
Rasikānanda Prabhu’s lotus feet. There is also a
gauḍīya-maṭha here.




Khaḍadaha



Khaḍadaha village is situated on the Gaṅgā’s bank, two
miles west of Khaḍadaha railway station on the Eastern
Railway line in the Caubīsa-paraganā district. When
Śrīman Mahāprabhu went to Purī, Nityānanda Prabhu
returned to Bengal to preach Vaiṣṇava-dharma in various
places on Mahāprabhu’s order. After some time, He
married Śrī Jāhnavā-devī and Śrī Vasudhā-devī and came
to live in Khaḍadaha. His son, Śrī Vīrabhadra
(Vīracandra), and his daughter, Gaṅgāmātā-devī, took
birth here. Śrīnivāsa Ācārya and Narottama Ṭhākura also
visited this place. A deity of Śrī Śyāmasundara Rāyā
presides in the local temple. The ghāṭa at the Gaṅgā is
known as Śyāmasundara-ghāṭa.




                          120
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017


Khānākula-kṛṣṇa-nagara



Khānākula is situated on the bank of the river
Dvārakeśvara in the Huglī district, and is the residence
of Śrī Abhirāma Gosvāmī. He was prominent among the
twelve gopālas, or cowherd boyfriends, in the branch of
Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu. In kṛṣṇa-līlā he was Śrīdāma
Sakhā and in rāma-līlā he was Bharata. His wife’s name
was Mālinī-devī. In the mood of Śrīdāma he once lifted
with one hand a mighty wooden log that sixteen people
together had been unable to lift. Abhirāma Gosvāmī held
it up like a flute. He was so powerful that when he
offered his obeisances to any deity other than a Viṣṇu
deity, or to an ordinary stone, it would crack.
Furthermore, when he paid obeisances to seven of
Nityānanda Prabhu’s sons they all died, but when He paid
obeisances to Śrī Vīracandra Prabhu, the eighth son, he
remained alive. Abhirāma Gosvāmī considered Vīracandra
Prabhu to be Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s second body.



Abhirāma Gosvāmī carried a whip called “Jaya-maṅgala”.
Any fortunate person who was touched by this whip
received love of God. Śrī Abhirāma Gosvāmī struck
Śrīnivāsa Ācārya with this whip and gave him kṛṣṇa-
prema.




Kheturī



Kheturī, the birthplace of Śrī Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura,
is situated in the Rājaśāhī district (Bangladesh) near
Rājabari Hāṭa.



The places of darśana in Kheturī-dhāma are:



(1) Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura’s sitting-place (the āsana-
bāḍī),



(2) Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa established by Narottama
dāsa Ṭhākura,



(3) Āmlītalā (or Imlītalā), where Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura
put his tooth stick in the earth and a massive tamarind
(imlī) tree grew,



                          121
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017


(4) Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura’s place of bhajana,



(5) Prematalī. Before Śrī Narottama’s birth, Śrīman
Mahāprabhu came here and deposited prema for him in the
Padma River. This place, on the bank of the Padma,
therefore became known as Prematalī. It is two miles
from Kheturī.



At the famous Kheturī-mahotsava, Śrī Narottama dāsa
Ṭhākura established six deities: (1) Śrī Gaurāṅga, (2)
Śrī Vallabhī-kānta, (3) Śrī Vraja-mohana, (4) Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
(5) Śrī Rādhā-kānta and (6) Śrī Rādhā-mohana. These
deities are no longer present here. Śrī Gaurāṅga is
presently worshipped in Jiagañja (in the Murśidābada
district) in West Bengal. Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu’s
consort, Śrī Jāhnavā-devī, participated in this grand
festival along with uncountable Vaiṣṇavas from all over
Bengal.




Kogrāma



Kogrāma, situated in the Vardhāmana district, south of
Śrīkhaṇḍa. It is the residence of Śrī Locana dāsa
Ṭhākura, the author of Śrī Caitanya-maṅgala, and his
samādhi is also here. His mother’s name was Sadānandī
and his father was Kamalākara. He was a disciple of the
celebrated Śrī Narahari Sarkāra Ṭhākura of Śrīkhaṇḍa.
Locana dāsa Ṭhākura composed a collection of songs and
translated the verses of Rāsa-pañcādhyāyī, the five
chapters in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam describing Śrī Kṛṣṇa’s
rāsa-līlā.




Kolkata Bāgabāzāra



The King of Viṣṇupura, Vīrahamvīra, used to serve Śrī
Madana-mohana. This deity was originally served by the
descendants of Śrī Kāśīśvara Paṇḍita, and King
Vīrahamvīra received the deity from them. One of
Vīrahamvīra’s descendants mortgaged Śrī Madana-mohana
for 100,000 rupees with Śrī Gokulacandra Mitra, a rich
landowner residing in Bāgabāzāra. For this they even had
a courtcase. To this day, Śrī Madana-mohana is present
in Bāgabāzāra in Gokulacandra Mitra-bhavana.




                          122
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017


Kṛṣṇapura



Kṛṣṇapura (one of the villages of Saptagrāma) is the
appearance-place of Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī. The
palace of his father, Śrī Govardhana dāsa, and uncle,
Śrī Hiraṇya dāsa, was here. Kṛṣṇapura is situated in the
Huglī district, a short distance south of Saptagrāma
village on the eastern bank of the Sarasvatī River,
which is now almost dry. In the temple here is a pair of
wooden shoes worn by Raghunātha dāsa and a stone slab he
used as a seat.




Kulāī, or Kānuī-grāma



The village of Kulāī is situated in the Vardhamāna
district on the bank of the River Ajaya, ten miles
north-west of Kaṭavā. It is the birthplace of three of
Śrī Mahāprabhu’s associates — Śrī Govinda, Śrī Mādhava
and Śrī Vāsudeva. Śrīman Mahāprabhu rested on the bank
of this river.




Kulīna-grāma



Kulīna-grāma is situated in the Vardhamāna district,
three miles east of Jaugrāma railway station on the
Eastern Railway’s Newcord line. This was the residential
place of many of Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s associates, such as
Śrī Satyarāja Khān, Śrī Rāmānanda Vasu, Śaṅkara,
Vidyānanda and Vāṇīnātha Vasu. Among the places of
darśana here are the Śrī Jagannātha Temple, Śrī Madana-
gopāla Temple, a temple of Gopīśvara Śiva (worshipped by
Satyarāja Khān), Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura’s place of
bhajana and a memorial stambha dedicated to Satyarāja
Khān and the other famous residents of Kulīna-grāma.




Śrī Rāmānanda Vasu



Śrī Rāmānanda Vasu was extremely dear to Śrīman
Mahāprabhu. His father’s real name was Śrī Lakṣmīnātha
Vasu, but his title was Śrī Satyarāja Khān. The name of
Śrī Satyarāja Khān’s father was Śrī Mālādhara Vasu and
his title was Śrī Guṇarāja Khān, a renowned poet. Śrīman
Mahāprabhu recited a line from his famous book, Śrī

                          123
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa-vijaya: “nanda-nandana kṛṣṇa mora prāṇa-nātha —
Nanda-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the Lord of my life.”
Mahāprabhu then said, “By this statement of Guṇarāja I’m
sold into the hands of his dynasty.”



Śrī Rāmānanda Vasu and his father, Śrī Satyarāja Khān,
both met Śrīman Mahāprabhu at the time of Ratha-yātrā.
Their meeting is described in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta.
Every year on the order of Śrīman Mahāprabhu, they used
to bring silk ropes that they had made themselves. This
rope was used to move Śrī Jagannātha on to His chariot
at the time of the Ratha-yātrā. In answering a series of
questions put to Him by Śrī Rāmānanda Vasu and Śrī
Satyarāja Khān, Mahāprabhu said, “One whose mouth has
once uttered the holy name of Kṛṣṇa is a third-class
Vaiṣṇava and is worshipful. He whose mouth constantly
utters kṛṣṇa-nāma is a higher Vaiṣṇava, a second-class
Vaiṣṇava. And he whose darśana causes one automatically
chant kṛṣṇa-nāma is a first-class Vaiṣṇava.”




Kumārahaṭṭa



Kumārahaṭṭa is situated in the Caubīsa-paraganā
district. Śrī Īśvara Purī, Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita and Khañja
Bhagavānācārya used to reside here. Its present name is
Hālīśahara. Previously Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita lived in
Navadvīpa, but after Śrīman Mahāprabhu entered aprakaṭa-
līlā, he was unable to tolerate separation from Him and
moved here.




Śrī Īśvara Purīpāda



Śrī Īśvara Purīpāda, the most prominent disciple of Śrī
Mādhavendra Purī, had firm faith in his guru. He spent
most of his time residing at his guru’s āśrama in Gayā.
Caitanya Mahāprabhu met him in the Viṣṇu Temple in Gayā,
and accepted Vaiṣṇava initiation from him. He was a
bhāvuka bhakta and an extraordinary poet, authoring the
famous Kṛṣṇa-līlāmṛta. While Īśvara Purī was in
Navadvīpa-dhāma, he asked Nimāī Paṇḍita to correct this
book. This event took place before Nimāī’s dīkṣā.



After accepting the renounced order of life, Śrīman
Mahāprabhu came to Kumārahaṭṭa, the birthplace of his
guru, where He reverentially took some dust and placed
it on His head. As Śrī Īśvara Purī was leaving this
world, he ordered Govinda and Kāśīśvara to go to Purī
and serve Mahāprabhu there.

                          124
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017




Mādhāī-talā



Mādhāī-talā is situated one mile from Mahāprabhu’s
temple in Kaṭavā. The samādhi of Śrī Mādhāī, of the
famous brothers Jagāī and Mādhāī, is here.




Maheśa



Maheśa is also called Śrī Rāmapura-Maheśa. It is the
residence of two of Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s associates, Śrī
Kamalākara Pillāī and Dhruvānanda Brahmacārī. Kamalākara
Pillāī’s daughter, Śrī Nārāyaṇī-devī, was married to Śrī
Vīracandra Prabhu. The Ratha-yātrā festival that takes
place here is renowned.




Mekhalā



Mekhalā is the place of residence of Śrī Puṇḍarīka
Vidyānidhi, an associate of Śrīman Mahāprabhu. It is
situated twelve miles north of Caṭṭagrāma village. Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu considered Puṇḍarīka Vidyānidhi to
be Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja and used to address him as
“Father”. Although he lived like a king, upon hearing a
verse from Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam he fell from his bed and
began to cry, calling out, “O Kṛṣṇa! O Kṛṣṇa!” On Śrīman
Mahāprabhu’s recommendation, Śrī Gadādhara Paṇḍita took
initiation from him.



Śrī Puṇḍarīka Vidyānidhi was a disciple of Śrī
Mādhavendra Purī. He would never go to the Gaṅgā to take
bath during the day because at that time people would
wash the dirt from their bodies in her waters, as well
as wash their clothes, rinse their mouths and so forth.
This made him greatly unhappy. For this reason, he would
go to the bank of the Gaṅgā at night, pay his obeisances
and perform ācamana. He never placed his feet in the
Gaṅgā. [Also see “Cāṭigrāma”.]




Navagrāma

                          125
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017




Lāuḍa Navagrāma in the Śrīhaṭṭa district is Śrī Advaita
Ācārya’s birthplace. [See “Śāntipura”.]




Navahaṭṭa, or Naihāṭī



Navahaṭṭa village is situated three miles north of
Kaṭavā, and is the home of Śrī Sarvānanda Vācaspati,
whose knowledge of the Purāṇas was unequalled. Śrī
Sarvānanda Vācaspati was Sanātana Gosvāmī’s teacher in
Sanskrit. Śrī Rūpa and Śrī Sanātana’s ancestor, Śrī
Padmanābha, lived in Navahaṭṭa and worshipped Śrī
Jagannātha by performing Ratha-yātrā and other services.
Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī’s father, Śrī Kumāradeva, left this
place due to family troubles and went to
Vāklācandradvīpa.




Nityānandapura



This place lies within Saptagrāma in the Huglī district.
After Nityānanda Prabhu’s marriage with Śrī Vasudhā and
Śrī Jāhnavā-devī they resided here for some time.




Pañcakuṭī



This village, which is situated within the Bāṅkuḍā
district, is near Vanaviṣṇupura where dacoits stole the
bullock cart filled with scriptures from Śrīnivāsa
Ācārya.




Pānīhāṭī



Pānīhāṭī is situated on Gaṅgā’s bank in the Caubīsa-
paraganā district and is where Śrī Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī, on the order of Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu, observed
the ciḍā-dahī-daṇḍa-mahotsava, a festival in which the
Vaiṣṇavas were served delicious chipped rice
preparations.

                          126
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017




Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu used to sit under a banyan tree on
the bank of the Gaṅgā, and the same tree is still here
today. Nearby, under a bower of mālatī and mādhavī
creepers, is the residence of Śrī Rāghava Paṇḍita. Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta gives a beautiful description of
Rāghava’s bags filled with foodstuffs that his sister
Damayantī had cooked for Śrīman Mahāprabhu. It also
describes Damayantī’s inclination to serve.




Śrī Rāghava Paṇḍita



Śrī Rāghava Paṇḍita is one of Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s main
associates. In vraja-līlā he was Dhaniṣṭhā. Kadamba
flowers used to bloom on the jambīra-nībū tree next to
his house and from them he would make garlands for his
deity. His sister, Damayantī, used to spend many days
painstakingly preparing a variety of tasty dried
foodstuffs for him to take to Śrīman Mahāprabhu in Śrī
Purī-dhāma at the time of Ratha-yātrā. Throughout the
year, Govinda would daily offer these preparations to
Mahāprabhu in small quantities. From time to time,
Rāghava Paṇḍita himself, who was very dear to all of
Mahāprabhu’s devotees, cooked for Śrīman Mahāprabhu.




Paścimapāḍā



The village of Paścimapāḍā is situated west of Telīyā
Budhurī, and is the residential place of Śrī Govinda
Kavirāja, who is in the Nityānanda branch of the
Caitanya tree. He was Śrīnivāsa Ācārya’s disciple and
Śrī Rāmacandra Kavirāja’s younger brother. His father
was Śrī Cirañjīva Sena and his wife was Mahāmāyā-devī.
Govinda Kavirāja was a Śākta, a worshipper of Durgā-
devī, but by the mercy of his brother and mother, he
later took initiation into Vaiṣṇava-dharma. Once, when
he was ill, he went with his brother to Śrīnivāsa Ācārya
and accepted initiation from him. After his initiation
he became free from that disease and composed his first
song, bhajahuṅ re mana śrī-nanda-nandana abhaya-
caraṇāravinda re. He not only became free from his
bodily disease, but from material conditioning as well.
Thereafter he composed many devotional songs that later
became famous. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī was so impressed by
his extraordinary poetic talent that he gave him the
title “Kavirāja”, “he who is pre-eminent among poets”.
Śrī Vīracandra Gosvāmī also praised his poetry.




                          127
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

The following lines of Bengali poetry, full of beautiful
alliteration, are an example of his work. They
wonderfully describe the blackish añjana on Kṛṣṇa’s
eyes, His śyāma-complexioned hue that resembles a cloud,
His hair decorated with mallī flowers, His sweetness
sweeter than honey and His garland of mālati flowers. It
also describes Kṛṣṇa to be as cool as the moon and His
body as fragrant as a flower.



añjana gañjana jagajana rañjana, jalada puñja jini
varaṇā



mukalita mallī, madhura madhu-mādhurī mālati mañjulamāla



kuvalaya kandala kusumākalevara kālima-kānti kalola




Phuliyā



Phuliyā is one of the places where Śrī Haridāsa Ṭhākura
resided. It is situated near the Gaṅgā in the Nadīyā
district, just south of Śāntipura. Inside a cave here,
Śrī Haridāsa Ṭhākura used to chant the holy name 300,000
times each day. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu also came here
after taking sannyāsa.




Pichaladā



In the Medinīpura district, fourteen miles from the city
of Tamaluka, there is a place called Naraghāṭa. Crossing
the River Haldī at Naraghāṭa, one will find the small
village of Pichaladā nearby. When Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu first journeyed from Jagannātha Purī to
Vṛndāvana by the ocean route, He came to this place.
From here He travelled by boat to Pānīhāṭī. Nowadays
there is a maṭha here, “Pādapīṭha” Pichaladā Gauḍīya
Maṭha, established by Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti.




Pūrvasthalī



Pūrvasthalī is situated in the western part of Śrī

                          128
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

Navadvīpa-dhāma. Its old name was Śaṅkarapura.




Puṭiyā



The king of Puṭiyā, Śrī Vīrendra Nārāyaṇa, was initiated
into Vaiṣṇava-dharma by the mercy of Vaiṣṇavas who had
been inspired by the descendants of Śrīnivāsa Ācārya
Prabhu.




Śrī Gaṅgāmātā Gosvāminī



Śrī Śacī-devī, a daughter of one of Puṭiyā’s kings,
accepted initiation from Śrī Haridāsa Gosvāmī, who was a
great Vaiṣṇava and pujārī of Śrī Govindadeva in
Vṛndāvana. Śrī Śacī-devī lived in Vṛndāvana on the order
of her spiritual master and performed strict sādhana-
bhajana at Rādhā-kuṇḍa for some years. She later
performed bhajana in a hut at the ruins of Śrī
Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya’s house in Jagannātha Purī. To
fulfil the order of her spiritual master she desired to
construct a beautiful temple there in memory of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu and Śrī Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya.



Once, on Gaṅgā-daśharā (the day Gaṅgā appeared in this
world), Śacī-devī desired to take bath in the Gaṅgā.
That night the Gaṅgā flowed from Śrī Jagannāthadeva’s
lotus feet to her āśrama. Upon entering the waters of
the Gaṅgā to take bath, the current carried her to Śrī
Jagannātha’s feet in the temple. In the morning when the
pujārīs opened the temple doors they saw Śrī Śacī-devī,
and taking her to be a thief, put her in jail.
Jagannātha came to the king and the head pujārī in a
dream and ordered them: “Show Śacī-devī great respect
and honour. Take her back to her own place and accept
initiation from her. Build a beautiful temple there
according to her desire, and then make all arrangements
for worship in that temple.” This miracle astonished
everyone and they became her disciples. From then on she
became known as Śrī Gaṅgāmātā Gosvāminī.



The deity of Śrī Śyāma-rāya of Jaipur ordered His
brāhmaṇa pujārī to personally carry Him to Śrī Gaṅgāmātā
Gosvāminī in Śrī Purī-dhāma. In Purī, Śrī Śyāma-rāya
accepted personal service from her. On her order, the
Mahārāja of Purī renovated the house of Śrī Sārvabhauma
Bhaṭṭācārya in such a way that it was again a
magnificent royal palace just as people remembered it to
be. To this day Śrī Śyāma-rāya is being worshipped

                          129
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

there.




Rāmakeli



Rāmakeli is situated in the Māladaha district and used
to be the capital of the land of Gauḍa. Here Śrī Rūpa
and Śrī Sanātana held the posts of Emperor Hussein
Shah’s ministers. It is also the birthplace of Śrī Jīva
Gosvāmī. In the northern part of Rāmakeli is Sanātana-
dīghi, and on the western bank of Sanātana-dīghi was
their place of residence. There is a large pond named
Rūpa-sāgara here, which was constructed by Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī, whose residence was on the eastern side. Even
today a tamāla and keli-kadamba tree grow where Śrīman
Mahāprabhu sat as He was about to leave for Vṛndāvana.
The magnificent temple of Śrī Madana-mohana, established
by Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī, is still a place of darśana. In
memory of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, Śrī Rūpa and Śrī Sanātana
Gosvāmīs manifested Śyāma-kuṇḍa and Rādhā-kuṇḍa, which
are nearby. They also manifested Lalitā-, Viśākhā-,
Indulekhā-, Sudevī- and Raṅgadevī-kuṇḍa.



When Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, followed by a huge crowd,
came here on His way to Śrī Vṛndāvana, Śrīla Sanātana
Gosvāmī told Him that it is inappropriate to go to
Vṛndāvana surrounded by so many people, as one’s heart’s
sentiments would diminish. Hearing this, Mahāprabhu
returned to Jagannātha Purī. A year later He again
journeyed to Vṛndāvana by the Jhārikhaṇḍa path with just
Śrī Balabhadra Bhaṭṭācārya and one brāhmaṇa servant.




Śrī Rūpa and Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmīs



The brothers, Śrī Rūpa and Śrī Sanātana, are intimate
associates of Śrīman Mahāprabhu. In Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes Śrī
Sanātana Gosvāmī was Lavaṅga Mañjarī and Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī was Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī. The four Kumāras are also
present in Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī.



Śrī Rūpa, Śrī Sanātana and their youngest brother
Anupama, were Yajurvedīya Bhāradvāja Gotrīya brāhmaṇas,
whose forefathers hailed from Karnāṭaka, South India.
Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī’s previous name was Amara and Śrī
Rūpa Gosvāmī’s name was Santoṣa. From childhood they
demonstrated sharp intellect and studied all the śāstras
from the crown jewel of Śrī Navadvīpa’s teachers, Śrī
Vidyā-vācaspati. Their special interest was Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam.

                          130
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017




In their youth, the three brothers became royal
ministers in the kingdom of Hussain Shah, the emperor of
Gauḍa. He had appointed Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī as his
Prime Minister and Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī as his Private
Secretary, giving them the titles “Sākara Mallika” and
“Dabhira Khāsa”. They oversaw all the royal affairs with
such expertise that the Emperor became completely
dependent on them.



When Śrīman Mahāprabhu came to Rāmakeli on the pretext
of going to Vṛndāvana, both Rūpa and Sanātana took off
their royal attire. Accepting very humble dress they
came to take darśana of Mahāprabhu’s lotus feet; thus
their lives attained complete success. Just by seeing
Mahāprabhu, their already perfected renunciation and
attachment to Bhagavān spontaneously overflowed. Now
their minds and hearts were completely detached from
royal duties, and they passed their time studying
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and worshipping the Supreme Lord.



Later, on another pilgrimage, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
went to Vṛndāvana. When Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī received news
of this he retired from his royal duties and proceeded
to go there, along with his younger brother Anupama. By
the time they arrived Śrīman Mahāprabhu had left
Vṛndāvana to return to Purī. On His way He arrived in
Prayāga and it was there that He again met Śrī Rūpa
Gosvāmī and Anupama. Mahāprabhu stayed with Rūpa Gosvāmī
in Prayāga for ten days, instructing him on the
conclusive truths of bhakti-rasa and prema. He also
empowered Rūpa Gosvāmī to manifest the lost holy places
of Vṛndāvana and to compose devotional literature.



Mahāprabhu then proceeded to Kāśī. Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī,
who was now indifferent towards his royal duties,
desired to abandon such materialistic life. However the
Emperor objected to his proposal and imprisoned him.
Sanātana Gosvāmī then received a mysterious message from
Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, and as a result of understanding that
message, he successfully escaped. He went to Kāśī, where
he met with Śrīman Mahāprabhu. Mahāprabhu stayed with
Sanātana Gosvāmī in Kāśī for some time, giving him lucid
instructions on jīva-tattva, bhagavad-tattva, māyā-
tattva and sambandha-tattva. He explained that the
performance of devotional service (bhakti) is abhidheya-
tattva and that pure love of God (kṛṣṇa-prema) is
prayojana-tattva. Empowering him thus, Mahāprabhu
ordered him to go to Vṛndāvana and manifest the lost
holy places there, compose devotional literature and
establish the worship of the ancient deities of
Vṛndāvana. Thus empowered, Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī
fulfilled Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s inner desire by
manifesting lost holy places of Vṛndāvana, establishing
the service of Śrī Madana-mohana, and compiling Hari-
bhakti-vilāsa, Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛtam and a commentary on

                          131
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam’s Tenth Canto.



Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī fulfilled Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s inner
desire in the following ways. He manifested the service
of Śrī Rādhā-Govindadeva and re-discovered other lost
holy places of Vṛndāvana. In particular he compiled
priceless devotional literature such as Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindhu, Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, Lalita-mādhava, Vidagdha-
mādhava, Laghu-bhāgavatāmṛtam, Stava-mālā, Uddhava-
sandeśa, Haṁsa-dūta, Dāna-keli-kaumudī and Rādhā-kṛṣṇa-
gaṇoddeśa-dīpikā. The Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sampradāya is
eternally indebted to these two great personalities.




Śrī Anupama



Śrī Anupama was Śrī Rūpa and Sanātana’s younger brother,
and like them, was a high-ranking government official in
the government of Emperor Hussein Shah. Together with
Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī he fully renounced material life and
went to Śrī Vṛndāvana.



Anupama was a devotee of Śrī Rāmacandra. Once, Rūpa
Gosvāmī told him about the sweetness of Śrī Kṛṣṇa and
instructed him to make Him his worshipful Lord instead.
Anupama humbly accepted this instruction, but wept all
night, tormented by an incessant restlessness. Early the
next morning he came to Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī and said,
“Without worshipping Śrī Rāmacandra I cannot remain
alive. On the other hand I cannot disobey your order.
Under these circumstances the only auspicious action for
me to take is to die.” Pleased, Rūpa Gosvāmī advised him
to continue his determined and faithful worship of Lord
Rāma. He travelled to Purī with Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī to take
darśana of Śrīman Mahāprabhu, but on the way there, he
left this world. His son was the famous Śrī Jīva
Gosvāmī.




Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī



Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī was the son of Śrī Anupama (Vallabha).
As a young boy he took darśana of Mahāprabhu when He
came to the village of Rāmakeli. Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī placed
Jīva at the feet of Mahāprabhu, who placed His lotus
hands on Jīva’s head.



Jīva studied grammar and the scriptures when he was

                          132
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

quite young, after which he went to Navadvīpa where Śrī
Nityānanda Prabhu took him on Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma
parikramā. Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu also took him for
darśana of Śrī Viṣṇuprīyā. He then sent Jīva to Rūpa and
Sanātana in Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma. On the way Jīva stopped
in Kāsī for some time and studied Vedānta under Śrī
Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya’s disciple, Śrī Madhusūdana
Vācaspati. In particular he studied the Vedānta, as
Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya had heard it from Śrīman
Mahāprabhu. When he arrived in Vṛndāvana he took shelter
at Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī’s lotus feet, and Śrī Rūpa and
Sanātana Gosvāmīs instructed him on all bhakti
literature. Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī gave him dīkṣā and taught
him the content of the books he had written.



In his time, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī was renowned as the
world’s greatest scholar. Vaiṣṇavas of the three dhāmas
— Vraja-maṇḍala, Gauḍa-maṇḍala and Kṣetra-maṇḍala — used
to take instruction from him. He instructed Śrī
Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura, Śrīnivāsa Ācārya and Śrī
Śyāmānanda Prabhu in the entirety of bhakti literature.
Among his major works are the Ṣaṭ-sandarbhas,
Sarvasamvādinī, Harināmāmṛta-vyākaraṇa, Gopala-campū,
Mādhava-mahotsava, Krama-sandarbha, and commentaries on
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu, Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi and Brahma-
samhitā.




Saidābāda



Saidābāda is situated on the Gaṅgā’s bank one mile west
of Kāsima-bāzāra in the Murśidābāda district, and is the
residence of Śrī Harirāma Ācārya Prabhu, a disciple of
Śrī Rāmacandra Kavirāja. This is also where Śrī
Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura studied the scriptures on
bhakti.




Śaṅkhanagara



Śaṅkhanagara is one of the seven villages comprising
Saptagrāma. It is situated on River Sarasvatī’s bank,
near the village called Magarāra, and is the śrīpāṭa of
Kālidāsa, Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa’s paternal uncle.
Kālidāsa would search out well-known Vaiṣṇavas, even if
they resided far away, offer them items such as fruits
and sweets, and listen to them speak hari-kathā. The
Vaiṣṇavas would offer to their deity whatever he gave
them. After honouring the prasāda, they would throw away
the peels, stones, leaves, leafcups and so forth, and
Kālidāsa, who would be hiding nearby, ate or licked
whatever remnants they discarded. He would then dance in

                          133
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

euphoric bliss.



Once Kālidāsa went to a remote village where the great
devotee Jhaḍū Ṭhākura resided. Jhaḍū Ṭhākura was born
into a śūdra family. That evening Kālidāsa came to his
house, offered him some sweet, ripe mangoes and listened
to him speak hari-kathā. At nightfall Kālidāsa took his
leave and hid nearby. Jhaḍū Ṭhākura’s wife washed and
offered some of the mangoes and then gave them to her
husband. Then she took his remnants and threw what was
left on to the scrap pile outside their house. This was
just the opportunity Kālidāsa had been waiting for. He
quickly retrieved the peels and stones from the pile and
proceeded to suck them.



Kālidāsa had firm faith in the potency of the Vaiṣṇavas’
remnants. This made Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu so satisfied
with him that He never objected to Kālidāsa daily
drinking the water that had washed His feet at
Jagannātha Temple’s lion gate. He did not allow anyone
else to drink this water, but was so pleased with
Kālidāsa’s service to the Vaiṣṇavas that he bestowed
such great fortune upon him.




Śāntipura



Śāntipura is situated on the bank of the Gaṅgā, and is
the śrīpāṭa of Śrī Advaita Ācārya, Śrī Harṣa and Śrī
Gopāla Ācāryas. Today Śrī Advaita Ācārya’s Nṛsiṁha śilā
and the deity of Śrī Madana-gopāla accept worship here.
Śrī Gaura and Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu used to come here to
meet with Śrī Advaita Ācārya.




Śrī Advaita Ācārya



Śrī Advaita Ācārya is one of the Pañca-tattva, and a
disciple of Śrī Mādhavendra Purī. In his previous
pastimes he was Devādideva Mahādeva (Lord Śiva). He
appeared in a Vārendra brāhmaṇa family in Lāuḍa
Navagrāma on Śuklā-saptamī in the month of Māgha, 1355
of the Śaka Era (A.D.1434) and lived for 125 years. His
father’s name was Kuvera Paṇḍita and his mother was
Nābhā-devī. His previous name was Kamalākṣa Veda
Pañcānana. His two wives were Śrī Sītā-devī and Śrī
Devī. Sītā-devī gave birth to Acyutānanda and five other
sons, and Śrī Devī gave birth to Śyāmadāsa. Śrī
Viśvarūpa, Nimāī’s elder brother, studied under Advaita
Ācārya.

                          134
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017




Śrī Advaita Ācārya is an incarnation of Mahā Viṣṇu.
Previously He worshipped a śāligrāma-śilā with tulasī
leaves and Gaṅgā water, thus causing Vrajendra-nandana
Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself to appear as Śrī Gaurāṅga, resplendent
with the sentiments and bodily complexion of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā. Śrī Advaita Ācārya participated in all the
important pastimes of Śrīman Mahāprabhu, and to attain
the Lord’s darśana, Śrī Advaita would yearly travel to
Jagannātha Purī at the time of the Ratha-yātrā festival.
He disowned those of his sons who were devoid of
devotion to the Lord, accepting his youngest son,
Acyuta, an unalloyed devotee of Śrī Gaura, as his only
real son. The glorious Advaita Ācārya shared a deep
friendship with Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu, and was well
versed in all scriptures. He would honour every Vaiṣṇava
regardless of that Vaiṣṇava’s caste or family.



He wanted to reveal to the world that Mahāprabhu is Śrī
Kṛṣṇa Himself and worshipped Him for this reason. Śrīman
Mahāprabhu, however, respected Advaita Ācārya as His
spiritual master and would not accept his worship. This
disturbed Advaita Ācārya who returned to Śāntipura,
where he began to explain the Gītā according to
impersonal philosophy. When Śrīman Mahāprabhu heard him
speak like this, He threw the elderly Advaita Ācārya to
the ground before the entire assembly and repeatedly
punched him. Sītā-devī tried to restrain the Lord, but
He did not acknowledge her entreaty and threatened
Advaita with proud words that actually revealed His own
opulences. Advaita Ācārya became jubilant and jumped up
in bliss. Turning to Mahāprabhu he said, “Now that You
have caught a thief, the relationship between the Lord
and His servant has been strengthened.” Understanding
Advaita Ācārya’s real purpose for having preached
impersonalism, Mahāprabhu became ashamed to have beaten
him.



Because Advaita Ācārya is non-different from Śrī Hari,
he is called “Advaita” (meaning “non-dual”), and because
he is an authority in and teacher of the philosophical
principles of bhakti, he is called “Ācārya”.



Once Śacī-mātā referred to Advaita Ācārya as “Dvaita
Ācārya” because he separated a son (Viśvarūpa) from his
mother (herself) by making him a sannyāsī and sending
him away. Displeased with His mother’s words Mahāprabhu
did not bestow kṛṣṇa-prema upon her. The devotees asked
why, since He had bestowed it upon all His other
devotees. Mahāprabhu angrily said, “She is an offender
at the feet of Advaita Ācārya.” Śrī Śacī-devī then went
to Śāntipura and beseeched Advaita Ācārya to forgive
her. Śrīman Mahāprabhu gave kṛṣṇa-prema to His mother on
Advaita Ācārya’s request.



                          135
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017


His pilgrimage to India’s holy places brought him to
Śrīdhāma Vṛndāvana and he visited all twelve forests
there. From Vṛndāvana he went to Mithilā, where he was
astonished to see that a divine-looking, elderly
brāhmaṇa had placed his head at the root of a tree and
was weeping as he sang the following verses:



tātala saikate, vāri-bindu-sama,



suta-mita-ramaṇī-samāje



tohe visari mana, tāhe samarpinu,



O my Lord, completely forgetting You, I offered my mind
unto the society of women, children and friends; but
this experience has been just like offering a drop of
water to a beach’s burning sands. How can I possibly be
relieved of this great misery?



ādha janama hāma, ninde goṅāyanu,



jarā śiśu koto-dina gelā



nidhuvane ramaṇī, rasa-raṅge mātanu,



Wandering about in a half-alive condition, I have spent
my life ab majhu habo kon kāje



tohe bhajabo kon belā



sāgara-laharī samānā



in utter disgrace. I passed uncountable days as a
frivolous child and now as a useless old man, and I have
been intoxicated by the pleasure of sharing romantic
adventures with beautiful young women. When will I ever
get a chance to worship You?



koto caturānana, mari mari jāota,

                           136
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017




na tuyā ādi avasānā



tohe janami puna, tohe samāota,



Numberless Brahmās die one after another, whereas You
are without beginning or end. All such Brahmās take
birth from You and are again absorbed into You, just
like waves in the ocean.



Hearing these verses Advaita Ācārya inquired about the
brāhmaṇa’s identity. When he found out he was none other
than Śrī Vidyāpati they affectionately embraced. It is
said that Advaita Ācārya also met Śrī Caṇḍīdāsa, the
renowned Bengali Vaiṣṇava poet.




Saptagrāma



The residences of Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī and Śrī
Uddhāraṇa Datta Ṭhākura are situated here. Saptagrāma,
meaning “seven villages”, comprised Saptagrāma,
Veśavāṭī, Śivapura, Vāsudevapura, Kṛṣṇapura (or
Cāṅdapura), Nityānandapura and Śaṅkhanagara (the present
Triveṇī-grāma). At that time Saptagrāma was quite
prosperous. Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī was a resident
of Kṛṣṇapura, Śrī Kālīdāsa Lāhiḍī — of Śaṅkhanagar, and
Śrī Balarāma Ācārya — of Cāṅdapura. The family guru of
Raghunātha dāsa, Śrī Yadunandana Ācārya, was also a
resident of Cāṅdapura. Nityānanda Prabhu would visit
Saptagrāma.



The actual name of Uddhāraṇa Datta Ṭhākura was Divākara.
His wife died when he was twenty-six. He then left home
and travelled with Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu and preached
bhakti-dharma.



The two brothers Hiraṇya dāsa and Govardhana dāsa lived
in Saptagrāma, and were extremely wealthy landowners.
Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī was the son of Govardhana
dāsa. Śrīmatī Viṣṇupriyā-devī’s father, Śrī Sanātana
Miśra, was the spiritual master of Hiraṇya dāsa and
Govardhana dāsa.




                          137
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017


Śītala-grāma



This village, previously called Siddhala-grāma, lies on
the Vardhamāna-Kaṭavā railway line, one mile northeast
of Kaicara station. The residence of Śrī Dhanañjaya
Paṇḍita, one of the twelve gopālas, is here. In kṛṣṇa-
līlā Dhanañjaya Paṇḍita was Vasudāma. He was born in
Pāḍagrāma in the Caṭṭagrāma district. His father was
Śrīpati Bandhopādhyāya, his mother was Kālindī-devī, and
his wife was Hari-priyā. He gave everything he owned to
Śrīman Mahāprabhu and kept only one empty pot. To preach
Vaiṣṇava-dharma he travelled to many places, finally
arriving at Śītala-grāma, where he established the
deities of Śrī Gaura-Nitāī and Śrī Gopīnātha.




Śrīkhaṇḍa



Śrīkhaṇḍa village is situated one mile from Śrīpāṭa
Śrīkhaṇḍa railway station on the line between Vardhamāna
and Kaṭavā, and is the residence of Śrī Narahari
Sarakāra Ṭhākura. Numerous eminent and celebrated
Vaiṣṇavas resided here, such as Mukunda Ṭhākura, Śrī
Raghunandana, Śrī Cirañjīva, Sulocana, Dāmodara
Kavirāja, Rāmacandra Kavirāja, Govinda Kavirāja,
Balarāma dāsa, Ratikānta Ṭhākura, Rāma-gopāla dāsa,
Pītāmbara dāsa, Śacīnandana dāsa and Jagadānanda. Among
the places of darśana here are Śrī Narahari Sarakāra’s
house and place of bhajana, Madhu-puṣkariṇī, Baḍaḍāṅgā
bhajana-sthalī, the deities of Śrī Gopīnātha and Śrī
Gaurāṅga, as well as the deities established by
Raghunandana’s son Kanhāī Ṭhākura — Viṣṇupriyā, Śyāma-
rāya and Madana-gopāla.




Śrī Narahari Sarakāra Ṭhākura



In Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes Narahari Sarakāra Ṭhākura was the
prāṇa-sakhī Madhumati. He appeared in 1405 of the Śaka
Era (A.D. 1483). His father’s name was Nārāyaṇadeva and
mother was Guī-devī. His elder brother was Mukunda
Ṭhākura, whose son was the well-known Raghunandana
Ṭhākura. Narahari Ṭhākura was a noted scholar, poet and
a rasika Vaiṣṇava. Even before meeting Śrīman Mahāprabhu
he composed poetry in both Sanskrit and Bengali about
Śrī Rādhā-Govinda’s pastimes. He and Gadādhara Paṇḍita
later lived with and served Śrīman Mahāprabhu. His own
specific service to Mahāprabhu was fanning Him with a
cāmara. He composed Bhakti-candrikakā Paṭala, Śrī Kṛṣṇa-
bhajanāmṛtam, Śrī Caitanya-sahasra-nāma, Śrī
Śacīnandanāṣṭaka and Śrī Rādhāṣṭaka. He also composed

                          138
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

much sweet, nectar-like poetry. His deity of Śrī
Gaurāṅga is still being worshipped here. Śrī
Raghunandana, the son of his elder brother Mukunda
Ṭhākura, continued his family line.



Once, Śrī Gauracandra and Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu came to
Śrīkhaṇḍa and asked Śrī Narahari Ṭhākura for some honey
to drink. With his powers Śrī Narahari Ṭhākura
transformed the water of a nearby pond into honey, and
in this way they were satisfied. That pond is still
called Madhu-puṣkariṇī, the pond of honey.




Śrī Mukunda Sarakāra Ṭhākura



Mukunda Ṭhākura is the elder brother of Narahari
Sarakāra Ṭhākura, who is in a branch of the Caitanya
tree. His son was Raghunandana. Mukunda Ṭhākura married
on the order of Mahāprabhu and was the royal physician
of Hussein Shah, the emperor of Bengal. One day, while
sitting on an elevated platform beside the king, Mukunda
observed the royal servant fanning the king with a fan
of peacock feathers. Seeing the peacock feathers, he
became overwhelmed in ecstatic rapture and fell to the
ground in a faint. When he regained consciousness he
excused his behaviour by telling the inquisitive king
that he suffered from epilepsy. The king, however, could
understand that Mukunda’s fainting had been caused by
his internal sentiments, and the king’s respect for him
increased. Mukunda later left the post of royal
physician to study devotional literature in Navadvīpa
with Mahāprabhu.



One day in Jagannātha Purī, Śrīman Mahāprabhu asked
Mukunda, “Is Raghunandana your son or are you his son?”



With great humility Mukunda answered, “Raghunandana is
my father.”



“Why?” Mahāprabhu asked.



“Because through him I have attained bhagavad-bhakti and
affection for You.”



These words greatly pleased Mahāprabhu and His devotees.



                           139
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017


Narahari Sarakāra helped raise Raghunandana, the son of
Mukunda Ṭhākura. In his early childhood, Raghunandana’s
love-filled devotion induced Gopīnātha, the family
deity, to eat a sweet ball made of rice. And, by the
influence of Raghunandana a kadamba tree on Madhu-
puṣkariṇī’s bank would give just two kadamba flowers
daily, which he used in the worship of Śrī Gopīnātha.



Once Śrī Abhirāma Gosvāmī came to Śrīkhaṇḍa. Whomever
Abhirāma Gosvāmī paid his obeisances to would die. But
when, he offered his obeisances to Raghunandana Ṭhākura,
he accepted them and embraced Abhirāma. Raghunandana
then took him to the kīrtana at the bhajana-sthalī in
Baḍaḍāṅgā.



Śrī Narahari Sarakāra once became so absorbed in dancing
in the kīrtana at Baḍaḍāṅga that his anklebell (nūpura)
broke off and landed in the home of his disciple,
Kṛṣṇadāsa, who lived in Ākāīhāṭa some distance away.
Even today there is a pond in Ākāīhāṭa known as Nūpura-
kuṇḍa.



Śrīman Mahāprabhu, who inaugurated saṅkīrtana,
considered Raghunandana His son. On the adhivāsa [the
day before a function begins], of Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s
saṅkīrtana-yajña, Mahāprabhu gave Raghunandana the
privilege of offering garlands, sandalwood pulp and
other articles to the devotees present, and on the day
of the festival’s completion He had him perform the
ritual of breaking the pot filled with yogurt and
turmeric.




Śrī Cirañjīva Sena



Cirañjīva Sena moved his residence from Kumāra-nagara to
Śrīkhaṇḍa. He was a disciple of Narahari Sarakāra, and
his two sons, Rāmacandra Kavirāja and Govinda Kavirāja,
were well-known poets. In kṛṣṇa-līlā he was Candrikā or
Rūpakaṇṭhī Sakhī.




Śrī Dāmodara Kavirāja



Dāmodara Kavirāja is also known as Dāmodara Sena and was
a distinguished poet and scholar. His daughter, Śrī
Sunandā, was married to Cirañjīva Sena.

                          140
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017




Śrī Rāmacandra Kavirāja



Rāmacandra Kavirāja was a disciple of Śrīnivāsa Ācārya,
and was the son of Cirañjīva Sena and Sunandā-devī. In
kṛṣṇa-līlā he was Karuṇā Mañjarī. His maternal
grandfather, Śrī Dāmodara Kavirāja, was Śrī Narahari
Sarakāra’s disciple. When his father left this world, he
moved to Kumāra-nagara where his maternal grandfather
resided. He later lived in the village of Teliyā-budhurī
in the Murśidābāda district. At the time of Rāmacandra
Kavirāja’s wedding, Śrīnivāsa Prabhu saw him in his
wedding attire and said, “With his own money a man buys
illusion, then he ties a noose around his neck and
considers himself successful.” The next day Rāmacandra
renounced his home and became a disciple of Śrīnivāsa
Prabhu.



Rāmacandra Kavirāja was the the instructing spiritual
master of King Vīrahamvīra of Viṣṇupura. His devotion to
his spiritual master was unparalleled. Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī
was so impressed by his poetry that he gave him the
title “Kavirāja”. Rāmacandra is one of the aṣṭa-kavis,
or eight poets. His most prominent books are Smaraṇa-
camatkāra, Smaraṇa-darpaṇa, Siddhānta-candrikā and the
biography of Śrīnivāsa Ācārya.



Although Rāmacandra Kavirāja was married, he was
completely detached and never became entangled in
worldly life. His wife’s name was Ratnamālā. The
descendants of his brother, Govinda Kavirāja, are still
present.




Śrī Govinda Kavirāja



Śrī Govinda Kavirāja was a disciple of Śrīnivāsa Ācārya.
His mother was Sunandā-devī, his father Śrī Cirañjīva
Sena and his elder brother, Śrī Rāmacandra Kavirāja. He
was born in Teliyā-budhurī. His wife’s name was
Mahāmāyā-devī and his son was Divya Siṁha. When his
father left this world Govinda went with his mother and
elder brother to the house of his maternal grandfather,
Śrī Dāmodara Kavirāja, in Kumāra-nagara.



Govinda Kavirāja heard Śrīnivāsa Ācārya’s mercy-filled
words to Rāmacandra Kavirāja at the time of Rāmacandra’s

                          141
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

wedding, and from then on remained in the shelter of
Śrīnivāsa Ācārya. He had previously been a Śākta,
worshipper of Śakti (Durgā) and although he was
advancing in bhajana, could not give up his worship of
Śakti. Once, by great fortune, he became severely ill.
Understanding that his death was imminent he petitioned
his brother, Rāmacandra Kavirāja, and begged to receive
darśana of Śrīnivāsa Ācārya Prabhu’s lotus feet.
Śrīnivāsa Ācārya then came to the village of Budhurī and
placed his feet on Govinda Kavirāja’s head. That moment
changed his life and he gained fresh enthusiasm for
bhajana. The first song he wrote after this event was
the very beautiful: “bhajahuṅ re mana śrī nanda-nandana
abhaya-caraṇāravinda re — O mind, serve the lotus feet
of Nanda-nandana, which grant fearlessness.”



His mind became fixed in composing poetry solely about
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Some of his best-known compositions are
Śrī Rāma-caritra-gītā, Saṅgīta-mādhava Nāṭaka and Aṣṭa-
kālīya Ekānana Pada. Impressed by his extraordinary
poetic talent, Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī and other leading
Vaiṣṇavas used to correspond with him. The Gosvāmīs of
Vṛndāvana honoured him with the titles “Kavirāja” and
“Kavīndra”. He is one of the eight poets, forever
remembered, respected and worshipped by the Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavas.




Śrī Sulocana



Śrī Sulocana was one of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s
associates and in kṛṣṇa-līlā he was Candraśekharā Gopī.




Śrī Balarāma dāsa



Śrī Balarāma dāsa was Jāhnavā-devī’s disciple and he
also received instruction on bhajana from Narahari
Sarakāra. He participated in the historic festival at
Kheturī.




Śrī Ratikānta Ṭhākura



Śrī Ratikānta Ṭhākura was the grandson of Madana Ṭhākura
of Śrīkhaṇḍa and a digvijayī-paṇḍita. He composed Śrī
Gaura-śataka and established the famous deity of Śrī

                          142
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

Madana-gopāla in Śrīkhaṇḍa. Śrī Gopāla dāsa, who
composed Śrī Rasa-kalpavallī, was his disciple.




Śrī Rāma-gopāla dāsa



Śrī Rāma-gopāla dāsa was a resident of Śrīkhaṇḍa and a
disciple of Ratikānta Ṭhākura, who was in the lineage of
Śrī Raghunandana. He compiled the poem Rasa-kalpavallī,
which has twelve divisions.




Śrī Rāmapura-cātarā



Śrī Rāmapura-cātarā is the residential place of Śrī
Kāśīśvara Paṇḍita, an associate of Śrīman Mahāprabhu in
the branch of Śrī Śaṅkarāraṇya. In kṛṣṇa-līlā he was
Keli Mañjarī. He was born in 1420 in the Śaka Era (A.D.
1498) in Brāhmaṇa-ḍāṅgā village in the Yaśohara
district. His father’s name was Śrī Vāsudeva Ācārya and
his mother was Śrī Jāhnavā-devī. From his childhood he
was a brahmacārī attracted to Śrī Gaurāṅgadeva. He left
home in his youth and went to Śrīdhāma Purī. On his
mother’s request he established Śrī Gaura-Nitāī deities
in Cātarā and began to worship Them.




Tālakharī



Tālakharī is situated midway between the towns of Magura
and Yaśohara in Bangladesh. It is the appearance-place
of Śrī Lokanātha Gosvāmī who later found and established
the worship of the deity of Śrī Rādhā-Vinoda in Kiśorī-
kuṇḍa (a pond situated in Umrāo Village in Chattravana,
Śrīdhāma Vṛndāvana). Fearing name and fame, Lokanātha
Gosvāmī forbade Śrī Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja to mention him in
Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta. His disciple, Śrī Narottama
Ṭhākura, preached Vaiṣṇava-dharma throughout eastern
India.




Tamaluka, or Tāmralipti



Tamaluka, an ancient city in the Medinīpura district, is

                          143
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

situated on the bank of the River Rūpa-nārāyaṇa. In
ancient times it was a renowned port and the capital of
famous kings. During the time of the Mahābhārata War,
when King Mayūradhvaja fought the Pāṇḍavas here, he
recognised Arjuna and Kṛṣṇa. He requested Śrī Kṛṣṇa to
continually give him His darśana, and since then Śrī
Kṛṣṇa is present here as Jiṣṇu-hari, a deity of Arjuna
and Kṛṣṇa.



The twenty-third chief of the Jains, Pārśvanātha, came
to this place and preached against the karma-kāṇḍa
section of the Vedas. The Buddhists had one of their
main monasteries here.



Emperor Aśoka of the Maurya Empire annexed Tāmralipti
and established an Aśoka pillar here.



After Śrīman Mahāprabhu accepted the renounced order,
Vāsudeva Ghoṣa could not remain in Nadīyā without
Mahāprabhu. Thus he moved to Tamaluka, where he
established a deity of Śrīman Mahāprabhu whom he
worshipped.




Triveṇī



When Nityānanda Prabhu resided in Saptagrāma, He used to
take bath at Triveṇī-ghāṭa, which is at the confluence
of the Gaṅgā, Yamunā and Sarasvatī.




Uddhāraṇa-pura



Uddhāraṇa-pura is situated in the Vardhamāna district on
Bhagavatī-Bhāgīrathī’s bank, two miles north of Kaṭavā.
This was the residential place of Śrī Uddhāraṇa Datta
Ṭhākura, a dear associate of Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu. His
samādhi is here. It is said that Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu
used to sit beneath an old neem tree nearby.



Śrī Uddhāraṇa Datta Ṭhākura is foremost among the twelve
cowherd boys (dvādaśa-gopālas) in the Śrī Nityānanda
Prabhu branch of the Caitanya tree. In kṛṣṇa-līlā he was
Śrī Subāhu Sakhā. He took birth in Kṛṣṇapura of
Saptagrāma in a prosperous family belonging to the
suvarṇa-vaṇik community. His father’s name was Śrīkara

                          144
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

Datta and his mother’s name was Bhadrāvatī. Upon
completing his education he entered household life and
was appointed the manager of King Nairājā’s estate in
Navahaṭṭa (Naihāṭī) near Kaṭavā. At that time Śrī
Uddhāraṇa Datta Ṭhākura lived in the nearby village
named Uddhāraṇa-pura after him. By the influence of Śrī
Nityānanda Prabhu’s association, he later left
everything — his vast wealth, home and so forth — and
served Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu. He roamed about with
Nityānanda Prabhu propagating the glories of the Lord’s
holy name and devotion to Him. In the year 1436 in the
Śaka Era (A.D. 1514) on Agrahāyaṇī-kṛṣṇa-trayodaśī, at
the age of sixty, he entered his unmanifest pastimes.




Vāghnāpāḍā



Vāghnāpāḍā is the first train station on the line from
Ambikā-kālanā to Navadvīpa. It is the residential place
of Śrī Vaṁśī-vadanānanda and his son Rāmāī Ṭhākura (or
Śrī Rāmacandra Gosvāmī). [See “Dāīhāṭa”.]




Vākalācandradvīpa



Śrī Kumāradeva, Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī’s father, lived at
Vākalā after leaving Naihāṭī. Śrī Sanātana (Amara), Śrī
Rūpa (Santoṣa) and Śrī Vallabha (Anupama) took birth
here. Śrī Candraśekhara Ācārya also resided here for
some time.




Śrī Candraśekhara Ācārya



Śrī Candraśekhara Ācārya, also known as Ācāryaratna, was
Mahāprabhu’s maternal uncle. He was born in the Śrīhaṭṭa
district, but later lived in Navadvīpa-dhāma. Śrīman
Mahāprabhu danced in the mood of the supreme goddess of
fortune in his house. He used to participate in Śrīman
Mahāprabhu’s saṅkīrtana, and was present when He
accepted the renounced order in Kaṭavā. It was
Candraśekhara Ācārya who gave the news of Mahāprabhu’s
sannyāsa to the residents of Śāntipura and Navadvīpa.




Vakreśvara

                           145
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017




This village, also called Gupta Kāśī, is situated
thirteen miles southwest of Siuḍī in the Vīrabhūma
district. The sage Aṣṭāvakra performed austerities here.
In the north of Vakreśvara are the rivers Vakreśvara and
Pāpaharā. In a temple courtyard is Śveta-gaṅgā and a
śiva-liṅga called Vakreśvara. Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu
visited this place.




Vallabhapura



Śrī Kāśīśvara Paṇḍita and Śrī Rudra Paṇḍita, two of
Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s associates, resided here. Their
deity, Śrī Rādhā-Vallabha, is still worshipped in
Vallabhapura. On Mahāprabhu’s order Śrī Kāśīśvara
Paṇḍita established and served the Gaura-Govinda deity
here. In Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes he was Keli Mañjarī.



Kāśīśvara Paṇḍita had deep affection for Śrī Rūpa and
Sanātana Gosvāmīs. He used to live in Purī-dhāma near
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and although he had no desire
to leave that place, Mahāprabhu gave him a deity of
Himself and ordered him to go to Vṛndāvana. He complied
with the Lord’s instruction. Śrī Rudra Paṇḍita was
Varuthaka, a cowherd boy, in Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes.




Vanaviṣṇupura



Vanaviṣṇupura is situated in the Bāṅkuḍā district and
was the capital of King Vīrahamvīra. One night, as
Śrīnivāsa Ācārya, Śrī Narottama Ṭhākura and Śrī
Śyāmānanda Prabhu were bringing Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava
literature in a bullock cart from Vṛndāvana, the king
stole the cart, thinking it to be filled with jewels.
Later, in his royal court, when the king heard Śrīnivāsa
Ācārya’s supremely beautiful recitation of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, he returned the books. He accepted
initiation and became a great Vaiṣṇava. Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī
named him Caitanya dāsa. At the time of King
Vīrahamvīra, Vanaviṣṇupura was prosperous in all
respects.



The temple of Śrī Madana-mohana is the most famous
temple in Vanaviṣṇupura. The temples of Śrī Śyāma-rāya,
Kālācandra-muralī-manohara and Madana-gopāla are also
here. Once, when enemies attacked this place, Śrī

                          146
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

Madana-mohana ignited the weapon named Dalamādala, which
was like a machine-gun, and the attackers fled.



At present Śrī Madana-mohana graces the residence of the
late Śrī Gokulacandra Mitra of Kolkata. It is said that
once, due to lack of funds, the descendants King
Vīrahamvīra pawned Śrī Madana-mohana. Since then the
deity presides in Bāgabāzāra, Kolkata.




Varāhanagara



Varāhanagara is the place of Śrī Bhāgavata Ācārya’s
residence. His samādhi is also here. When Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu came here He became very delighted to hear
Śrī Bhāgavata Ācārya’s Śrī Kṛṣṇa-prema-taraṅginī, a
poetic translation of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam that is filled
with exalted philosophical conclusions.




Vrajarājapura



Vrajarājapura, situated in the Bāṅkuḍā district, is a
pastime-place of Śrī Gadādhara dāsa, an associate of Śrī
Nityānanda Prabhu.




Śrī Gadādhara dāsa



Śrī Gadādhara dāsa used to live in Eṅḍiyādaha on the
bank of the Gaṅgā. He also lived in Purī-dhāma near
Śrīman Mahāprabhu. When Mahāprabhu ordered Nityānanda
Prabhu to distribute love of God in Bengal, He sent
Gadādhara dāsa with Him. Dāsa Gadādhara was very
powerful and out-spoken. One day he advised the Muslim
Kazi in his village to chant the holy name, and by his
mercy the Kazi became a Vaiṣṇava. While residing in
Navadvīpa he looked after Śacī-mātā and Viṣṇupriyā-devī.
His temple, house and samādhi are still present in
Eṅḍiyādaha.




Yājīgrāma


                          147
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017



Yājīgrāma is situated in the Vardhamāna district, a
short distance south of Kaṭavā, and is Śrīnivāsa
Ācārya’s śrīpāṭa.




Śrīnivāsa Ācārya Prabhu



Śrīnivāsa Ācārya appeared in a brāhmaṇa family in the
village of Cākundī on the bank of the Gaṅgā. His
father’s name was Śrī Caitanya dāsa. In his childhood he
studied grammar and other subjects, and at that time he
heard about the glory of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. In
Śrīkhaṇḍa, Śrīnivāsa Ācārya had darśana of Śrī
Raghunandana and other devotees of Śrīman Mahāprabhu.
This made him yearn to go to Śrī Kṣetra (Purī) to take
darśana of the Lord and His associates.



After he began his journey he heard that Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu had left this world and entered His
unmanifest pastimes. Overwhelmed with grief he fell
unconscious. Finally, upon arriving in Purī he met Śrī
Gadādhara Paṇḍita, who taught him some verses from the
Bhāgavatam and instructed him to go to Gauḍa-deśa. He
later heard that Śrī Gadādhara Paṇḍita had also entered
aprakaṭa-līlā, and he fainted. While returning to Bengal
he received the news that Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu had
entered aprakaṭa-līlā. Somehow or other he again
returned to Navadvīpa, and from there went to Śrīkhaṇḍa
and then Vṛndāvana, where he received Vaiṣṇava
initiation from Śrī Gopala Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī. Under Śrī
Jīva Gosvāmī he studied with Śrī Narottama and Śrī
Śyāmānanda Prabhu all bhakti literature, such as Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, as well as the Gosvāmīs’ Ṣaṭ-sandarbha and
Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu.



Then, on the order of Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī, he took all the
books composed by the Gosvāmīs and continued on to
Bengal with Śrī Narottama and Śrī Śyāmānanda Prabhu to
preach. They carried the books in large boxes loaded on
bullock carts. At the Bengali border near Vanaviṣṇupura,
King Vīrahamvīra, the leader of the local dacoits,
thinking the cart to be filled with jewels, stole the
books. Later, upon being highly impressed by Śrīnivāsa
Ācārya’s devotional brilliance, the King returned the
books and accepted Vaiṣṇava initiation from him.
Śrīnivāsa Ācārya then continued to Bengal with the
books.



In Śrīkhaṇḍa, Narahari Sarakāra Ṭhākura arranged for
Śrīnivāsa’s marriage. Then Śrīnivāsa again went to
Vṛndāvana, and after taking darśana, he returned to

                          148
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

Bengal, where he began to propagate pure devotion. [Also
see “Cākundī”.]




Yaśaḍā



Yaśaḍā is situated near Cākadaha on the bank of the
Gaṅgā in the district of Nadīyā. It is the śrīpāṭa of
Śrī Jagadīśa, one of Śrīman Mahāprabhu’s associates. Śrī
Jagadīśa Paṇḍita personally carried a deity of Śrī
Jagannātha on his shoulders from Purī-dhāma to this
place. At that time he took rest under a banyan tree
here, which is still alive today.




Prayers to Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma




Śrī Navadvīpāṣṭakam and The Glories of Śrī Navadvīpa-
dhāma




Śrī Navadvīpāṣṭakam



(Eight verses in glorification of Śrī Navadvīpa)



by Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī




śrī-gauḍa-deśe sura-dīrghikāyās



tīre ‘ti-ramye pura-puṇya-mayyāḥ



lasantam ānanda-bhareṇa nityaṁ,



taṁ śrī-navadvīpam ahaṁ smarāmi (1)


                          149
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017



I perpetually meditate upon Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma, which
is eternally filled with supreme bliss and is splendidly
situated on the sacred Bhagavatī-Bhāgīrathī’s naturally
beautiful bank in the land of Gauḍa.



yasmai paravyoma vadanti kecit



kecic ca goloka itīrayanti



vadanti vṛndāvanam eva taj-jñās



taṁ śrī-navadvīpam ahaṁ smarāmi (2)



I perpetually meditate upon Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma, which
some refer to as Paravyoma-Vaikuṇṭha, and some as
Goloka. Those who have realised the truth, however, know
it as Śrī Vṛndāvana.



yaḥ sarva-dikṣu sphuritaiḥ suśītair



nānā-drumaiḥ sūpavanaiḥ parītaḥ



śrī-gaura-madhyāhna-vihāra-pātrais



taṁ śrī-navadvīpam ahaṁ smarāmi (3)



I perpetually meditate upon Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma, where a
radiant, cool, gentle and fragrant breeze flows in all
directions. This dhāma is beautifully decorated with
varieties of green and blossoming trees, thus creating
an auspicious atmosphere for Śrī Gaurasundara’s midday
pastimes.



śrī-svar-ṇadī yatra vihāra-bhūmiḥ



suvarṇa-sopāna-nibaddha-tīrā



                             150
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017


vyāptormibhir gaura-vagāha-rūpais



taṁ śrī-navadvīpam ahaṁ smarāmi (4)



I perpetually meditate upon that Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma
where, with the strong current of her waves, Śrī
Bhagavatī-Bhāgīrathī dances to and fro, delighted in
supreme bliss. Her banks are decorated with golden
stairs.



mahānty anantāni gṛhāṇi yatra



sphuranti haimāni manoharāṇi



pratyālayaṁ yaṁ śrayate sadā śrīs



taṁ śrī-navadvīpam ahaṁ smarāmi (5)



I perpetually meditate upon Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma, where
there are countless, beautifully effulgent golden
palatial buildings, in which Śrī Lakṣmī-devī is
personally present.



vidyā-dayā kṣānti-mukhaiḥ samstaiḥ



sadbhir guṇair yatra janāḥ prapannāḥ



samstūyamānā ṛṣi-deva-siddhais



taṁ śrī-navadvīpam ahaṁ smarāmi (6)



I perpetually meditate upon Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma, where
each resident is ornamented by excellent qualities, such
as knowledge, compassion, forgiveness and sacrifice.
Even great sages, demigods and perfected beings glorify
these residents.




                          151
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

yasyāntare miśra-purandarasya



sānanda-sāmyaika padaṁ nivāsaḥ



śrī-gaura-janmādika-līlayāḍhyas



taṁ śrī-navadvīpam ahaṁ smarāmi (7)



I perpetually meditate upon Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma, in the
centre of which Śrī Gaurasundara’s birth pastime is
performed, and where Śrī Jagannātha Miśra’s house, the
only abode of transcendental happiness, is situated.



gauro bhraman yatra hariḥ sva-bhaktaiḥ



saṅkīrtana-prema-bhareṇa sarvam



nimajjayaty ullasad-unmadābdhau



taṁ śrī-navadvīpam ahaṁ smarāmi (8)



I perpetually meditate upon Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma, where
Śrī Gaurahari loudly and lovingly performs saṅkīrtana
with the devotees, thus submerging everyone in an ocean
of the elevated ujjvala-bhāva.



etan navadvīpa-vicintanāḍhyaṁ



padyāṣṭakaṁ prīta-manāḥ paṭhed yaḥ



śrīmac-chacī-nandana-pāḍapadme



sudurlabhaṁ prema samāpnuyāt saḥ (9)



Those who affectionately recite this pure padyāṣṭaka to
Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma will achieve the rarely attained

                          152
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                     5/5/2017

jewel of prema for Śrī Śacīnandana’s lotus feet.




The Glories of Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma



(taken from Śrī Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī’s Śrī Navadvīpa-
śatakam,



the hundred verses glorifying the land of Navadvīpa)




śrutiś chāndogyākhyā vadati paramaṁ brahma-purakaṁ



smṛtir vaikuṇṭhākhyaṁ vadati kila yad viṣṇu-sadanam



sita-dvīpañcānye virala-rasiko ‘yaṁ vrajavanaṁ



navadvīpaṁ vande parama-sukhadaṁ taṁ cid-uditam



I offer my respects to the supremely blissful Śrī
Navadvīpa-dhāma, which is manifested by the cit-śakti,
the transcendental potency. The Chāndogya Upaniṣad names
it Parabrahmapura; the Smṛtis call it Vaikuṇṭha, the
abode of Viṣṇu; other great personalities describe it as
Śvetadvīpa; and the rare rasika bhaktas know it to be
Śrī Vṛndāvana.



kadā navadvīpa-vanāntareṣv ahaṁ



paribhraman gaura-kiśoram adbhutam



mudā naṭantaṁ nitarāṁ sa-pārṣadaṁ



parisphuran vīkṣya patāmi mūrchhitaḥ



Oh, when, as I wander through Antardvīpa, the inner part

                          153
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                    5/5/2017

of Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma, will such good fortune arise
that I swoon in ecstasy upon seeing that most wonderful
Śrī Gaurakiśora jubilantly dancing with His associates?



yat-sīmānam api spṛśen na nigamo dūrāt paraṁ lakṣyate



kiñcid gūḍhatayā yad eva paramānandotsavaikāvadhiḥ



yan mādhuryakalāpy avedi na śiva-svāyambhūvādyair ahaṁ



tac chīman-nava-khaṇḍa-dhāma-rasadaṁ vindāmi rādhā-pateḥ



When will I attain Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma, which easily
bestows prema to Śrī Rādhikā-ramaṇa? Not even the Vedas
can touch the boundary of this dhāma; they can only look
in that direction from afar. There, a great festival of
inexplicable supreme bliss in its highest form secretely
takes place eternally. Śiva, Svayambhū and other
demigods are not acquainted with even a particle of its
great sweetness.



svayaṁ patita-patrakāṇy amṛtavat kṣudhā bhakṣayan



tṛṣā tridivavandinī śuci-payo ‘ñjalībhiḥ pivan



kadā madhura-rādhikā-ramaṇa-rāsa-keli-sthalīṁ



vilokya rasa-magna-dhīr adhivasāmi gaurāṭīm



Oh, when will I achieve such good fortune upon residing
in Śrī Gaura’s forest, Śrī Navadvīpa-kānana, that my
hunger becomes allayed by the nectarean-like leaves that
fall naturally, my thirst becomes quenched by drinking
the tasty, cool water of the sacred Suradhunī (Gaṅgā),
and I become submerged in prema-rasa upon beholding the
place of Śrī Rādhikā-ramaṇa’s sweet amorous pastimes?



sarva-sādhana-hīno ‘pi



navadvīpaika-saṁśrayaḥ

                          154
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017




yaḥ ko ‘pi prāpruyād eva



rādhā-priya-rasotsavam



Although a person may be devoid of all kinds of
spiritual practices, if he has not committed offences to
the dhāma and takes unalloyed shelter of Śrīdhāma
Navadvīpa, he will certainly enter the wonderful
festival of rāsa of Śrī Vārṣabhānavī Rāsa-rāseśvarī
Śrīmatī Rādhikā.



sā me na mātā sa ca me pitā na



sa me na bandhuḥ sa ca me sakhā na



sa me na mitraṁ sa ca me gurur na



yo me na rādhāvana-vāsam icchet



A father is not my father, a mother is not my mother, a
relative is not my relative, a friend is not my friend,
a well-wisher is not my well-wisher, and a guru is not
my guru if they are opposed to my residing in our
precious Rādhāvana (Śrī Navadvīpa).



ārādhitaṁ nava-vanaṁ vraja-kānanaṁ te



nārādhitaṁ nava-vanaṁ vraja eva dūre



ārādhito dvija-suto vraja-nāgaras te



nārādhito dvija-suto na taveha kṛṣṇaḥ



If you have worshipped Śrī Navavana (Śrī Navadvīpa) you
have worshipped Vraja-kānana (Śrī Vṛndāvana). If you
have not worshipped Navadvīpa, however, Śrī Vraja-dhāma
is far away from you. If you have worshipped Śrī

                           155
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                   5/5/2017

Gaurasundara, the son of Śrī Jagannātha, you have
worshipped Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the gallant of Vraja. But if you
have not worshipped the son of Miśra, then, in this
world, you have not worshipped Gopendra-nandana.



sakala-vibhava-sāraṁ sarva-dharmaika-sāraṁ



sakala-bhajana-sāraṁ sakala-siddhayaika-sāram



sakala-mahima-sāraṁ vastu khaṇḍe navākhye



sakala-madhurimāmbho-rāśi-sāraṁ vihāraḥ



To wander through the nine islands of Śrī Navadvīpa-
dhāma is the essence of all opulences, the essence of
all religious principles, the essence of all bhajana,
the essence of all perfections, the essence of all
glories and the essence of all kinds of oceans of
sweetness.



saṁsāra-sindhu-taraṇe hṛdayaṁ yadi syāt



saṁkīrttanāmṛta-rase ramate manaś cet



premāmbudhau viharaṇe yadi citta-vṛttir



māyāpurākhya-nagare vasatiṁ kurusva



If you cherish the desire in your heart to cross the
ocean of material existence, if you have the desire to
taste the sweet nectar of the holy name, if you have an
intent eagerness to play in the ocean of prema, you must
certainly reside in the city of Śrī Māyāpura.



kadā navadvīpa-vanāntareśv ahaṁ



paribhraman saikata-pūrṇa-catvare




                          156
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

harīti rāmeti harīti kīrtayan



vilokya gauraṁ prapātāmi vihvalaḥ



Oh, when will I achieve such great fortune that, while
wandering the paths filled with shining white sand in
the beautiful forests of Śrī Navadvīpa reciting “Hari,
Kṛṣṇa, Rāma” in a sweet voice, I will behold Śrī
Gauracandra and fall to the ground overwhelmed by prema?




Table of Contents

Introduction

Preface to the English Edition

The Magnificence of Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma

The Appearance and Size of the Dhāma

Śrī Antardvīpa

Ātopura-grāma

Śacī-devī’s delivery room

Kṣetrapāla Śiva, or Gopīśvara Mahādeva

Śrī Nṛsiṁhadeva Temple

Śrī Gaura-kuṇḍa

Vṛddha-Śiva, or Śiva-ḍovā

Mahāprabhu-ghāṭa

Jagāī-Mādhāī-ghāṭa, or Mādhāī-ghāṭa

Bārakonā-ghāṭa

Nāgariyā-ghāṭa

Gaṅgā-nagara

Śrīvāsa-aṅgana, or Khola-bhāṅgāra-ḍāṅgā

Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita

Śrī Advaita-bhavana

Śrī Gadādhara-aṅgana

Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara

Śrī Jagadānanda Paṇḍita


                            157
Navadvipa-dhama_Parikrama.txt                  5/5/2017

Śrī Candraśekhara-bhavana

Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura’s samādhi-
mandira

Śrīla Gaura-kīśora dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja’s samādhi

Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śrī Śyāma-kuṇḍa

Pṛthu-kuṇḍa, or Ballāla-dīghī

Śrī Murārī Gupta’s Residence

Śrī Īśodyāna

The Gauḍīya-maṭhas

Śrī Yogapīṭha-Māyāpura

Śrī Gaura-Gadādhara Āśrama

Śrī Gauḍīya Āśrama

Śrī Caitanya-Candrodaya Mandira

Śrī Caitanya Gauḍīya Maṭha

Śrī Caitanya-Bhāgavat Maṭha

Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Caitanya Maṭha

Śrī Gopīnātha Gauḍīya Maṭha

Śrī Gaurāṅga Gauḍīya Maṭha

Śrī Paramahaṁsa Gauḍīya Maṭha

The Geographical Location of Old Navadvīpa

Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura and Antardvīpa Māyāpura

Śrī Simantadvīpa

Chand Kazi’s Samādhi

Śrīdhara-aṅgana

Śrī Godrumadvīpa

Svānanda-sukhada-kuñja

Suvarṇa-vihāra

Harihara-kṣetra

Devapallī (Nṛsiṁhapallī)




                             158
