Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

The Nectar of Govinda-lila



Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja

GVP (2011)



Tags: REL032030, REL022000, REL032040

REL032030ttt REL022000ttt REL032040ttt



* * *




* * *




This compilation of discourses by Srila Bhaktivedanta
Narayana Maharaja beautifully describe the deep inner
meanings of the famous Srimad Bhagavad-Gita sloka 18.65:
manmana bhava mad-bhakto/mad-yaji mam namsakuru/
mamevaisyasi satyam te/pratijane priyo' si me - "Offer
your mind to Me; become My bhakta by hearing and
chanting, etc. about My names, forms, qualities and
pastimes; worship Me and offer obeisances to Me. In this
way, you will certainly come to me. I promise you this
because you are very dear to Me." Also included are
three discourses on Basanta Pancami, Nisanta-bhajana,
Sriya Suka.



Contents

Introduction

Maṅgalācaraṇa

1. Always Think of Me (man-manā bhava)

2. Become My Devotee (mad bhakto)

3. Worship Me and Offer Obeisances to Me (mad yājī māṁ
namaskuru)

4. Vasanta-pañcamī

5. Niśānta-bhajana

6. Śriyā śuka

Verse Index


                             1
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                      5/5/2017

Contact Information

Other titles by Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja



śrī śrī guru-gaurāṅgau jayataḥ




The Nectar of Govinda-līlā




Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja




First Kindle Edition

May 2011



To report errors in this Kindle version of The Nectar of
Govinda-līlā or for information on how to obtain other
Kindle books in the series please write to
jayradhe@gmail.com



ISBN 81-86737-03-0



* * *




www.purebhakti.com


for news, updates, and free downloads of books and
lectures


www.purebhakti.tv


to watch and hear classes online, or get links and
schedule updates for live webcasts


www.backtobhakti.com


for the latest, up-to-date news on IPBYS, the
International Pure Bhakti Yoga Society

                             2
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                       5/5/2017




* * *



© 2011 Gaudiya Vedanta Publications. Some Rights
Reserved.



To view a copy of this license, visit
http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nd/3.0/



Permissions beyond the scope of this license may be
available at www.purebhakti.com/pluslicense or write to:
gvp.contactus@gmail.com




Introduction


It is with great happiness that we now present this
third English edition of The Nectar of Govinda-līlā
before our faithful readers. This material was spoken
originally in Hindi in 1990-91 by one of the most
prominent Vaiṣṇava teachers of the modern era, our
beloved gurudeva, oṁ viṣṇupāda paramahaṁsa
parivrājakācārya aṣṭottara-śata Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja.

A stalwart spiritual master in a disciplic succession
emanating directly from the Supreme Lord Himself, Śrīla
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja has been preaching the ancient science
of Kṛṣṇa consciousness for over fifty years. Since 1996
he has travelled extensively outside India, enlightening
unlimited spiritual seekers and granting them renewed
inspiration. He has published numerous literatures in
both Hindi and English, but it is the quality of his
spoken word that especially distinguishes him. Śrīla
Gurudeva possesses a unique ability to explain the finer
points of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava philosophy and a simply
extraordinary ability to describe the pastimes of the
Divine Couple, Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. The lectures that
comprise this book are a perfect illustration of these
talents, and it is therefore our firm conviction that
this publication will prove to be very beneficial for
those sincerely desiring to make progress in their
spiritual lives.

A strong determination to broadcast the ancient
teachings of spiritual India in the modern world is
something Śrīla Gurudeva shares in common with his dear
friend and instructing spiritual master, nitya-līlā-
praviṣṭa oṁ viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad A.C. Bhaktivedānta
Swami Prabhupāda. Śrīla Prabhupāda singlehandedly and in
a relatively short period of time - from his initial
arrival in the West in 1966 until his departure from

                             3
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                       5/5/2017

this realm in 1977 - spread the teachings of Kṛṣṇa
consciousness around the entire world. His translations
and writings set the standard for the literary
presentation of Vaiṣṇava theology, and we sincerely pray
that this volume pleases him.

Grateful acknowledgement is extended to Lavaṅga-latā
dāsī for copy-editing this new edition, to Śānti dāsī
and Giridhārī dāsa for proofreading the final
manuscript, to Atula-kṛṣṇa dāsa and Ananta-kṛṣṇa dāsa
for checking the Sanskrit, to Kṛṣṇa-prema dāsa for
designing the new cover and to Subala-sakhā dāsa for
providing the new photograph of Śrīla Gurudeva. On
behalf of the many devotees serving in Gauḍīya Vedānta
Publications, we off this publication to Śrīla Gurudeva,
praying that he be pleased with our efforts.

An aspiring servant of the Vaiṣṇavas,

Prema-vilāsa dāsa

Pāpāṅkuśa-ekādaśī

5th October, 2003

Gopīnātha-bhavana, Śrī Vṛndāvana




Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja




Śrī Śrīmad A.C. Bhaktivedānta Swami Prabhupāda




Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī




Maṅgalācaraṇa


oṁ ajñāna-timirāndhasya

jñānāñjana-śalākayā

cakṣur unmīlitaṁ yena

tasmai śri-gurave namaḥ

I offer my most humble prostrated obeisances unto the
spiritual master, who has opened my eyes, which were
blinded by the darkness of ignorance, with the
torchlight of knowledge.

                             4
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017


vāñchā-kalpa-tarubhyaś ca

kṛpā-sindhubhya eva ca

patitānāṁ pāvenebhyo

vaiṣṇavebhyo namo namaḥ

I offer obeisances to the Vaiṣṇavas, who just like
desire trees can fulfil the desires of everyone and who
are full of compassion for the conditioned souls.

namo mahā-vadānyāya

kṛṣṇa-prema-pradāya te

kṛṣṇāya kṛṣṇa-caitanya

nāmne gaura-tviṣe namaḥ

I offer obeisances to Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who is
Kṛṣṇa Himself. He has assumed the golden hue of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā and is munificently distributing kṛṣṇa-prema.

he kṛṣṇa karuṇā-sindho

dīna-bandho jagat-pate

gopeśa gopikā-kānta

rādhā-kānta namo 'stu te

I offer obeisances to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, who is an ocean of
mercy, the friend of the distressed and the source of
all creation. He is the master of the gopas and the
lover of the gopīs headed by Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

tapta-kāñcana-gaurāṅgi

rādhe vṛndāvaneśvari

vṛṣabhānu-sute devi

praṇamāmi hari-priye

I offer obeisances to Śrīmatī Rādhikā, whose complexion
is like molten gold and who is the queen of Vṛndāvana.
She is the daughter of Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja and is very
dear to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

hā devi kāku-bhara-gadgadayādya vācā

yāce nipatya bhuvi daṇḍavad udbhaṭārtiḥ

asya prasādam abudhasya janasya kṛtvā

gāndharvike nija gane gaṇanāṁ vidhehi

O Devī Gāndharvikā, in utter desperation I throw myself
on the ground like a stick and with a choked voice
humbly implore You to please be merciful to this fool
and count me as one of Your own.


                             5
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

aṅga-śyāmalima-cchaṭābhir abhito mandīkṛtendīvaraṁ

jāḍyaṁ jāguḍa-rociṣāṁ vidadhataṁ pa?āmbarasya śriyā

vṛndāraṇya-nivāsinaṁ hṛdi lasad-dāmābhir āmodaraṁ

rādhā-skandha-niveśitojjvala-bhujaṁ dhyāyema dāmodaram

Whose dark bodily lustre is millions of times more
beautiful than the blue lotus flower, whose refulgent
yellow garments rebuke the radiance of golden kuṅkuma,
whose residence is Śrī Vṛndāvana-dhāma, whose chest is
beautified by a swinging vaijayantī garland and whose
splendorous left hand rests upon the right shoulder of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā - I meditate upon that Śrī Dāmodara.

bhaktyā vihīnā aparādha-lakṣyaiḥ

kṣiptāś ca kāmādi-taraṅga-madhye

kṛpā-mayi tvāṁ śaraṇaṁ prapannā

vṛnde numaste caraṇāravindam

Devoid of devotion and guilty of committing unlimited
offences, I am being tossed about in the ocean of
material existence by the turbulent waves of lust,
anger, greed and so forth. Therefore, O merciful Vṛndā-
devī, I take shelter of you and offer obeisances unto
your lotus feet.

gurave gauracandrāya

rādhikāyai tad-ālaye

kṛṣṇāya kṛṣṇa-bhaktāya

tad-bhaktāya namo namaḥ

I offer obeisances to the spiritual master, to Śrī
Gauracandra, to Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Her associates, to
Śrī Kṛṣṇa and His devotees, and to all Vaiṣṇavas.

vairāgya-yug-bhakti-rasaṁ prayatnair

apāyayan mām anabhīpsum andham kṛpāmbhudhir yaḥ para-
duḥkha-duḥkhī

sanātanaṁ taṁ prabhum āśrayāmi

I was unwilling to drink the nectar of bhakti possessed
of renunciation, but Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī, being an
ocean of mercy who cannot tolerate the sufferings of
others, made me drink it. Therefore I take shelter of
him as my master.

śrī-caitanya-mano-'bhīṣṭṁ

sthāpitaṁ yena bhūtale

svayaṁ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaṁ

dadāti sva-padāntikam


                             6
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

When will Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, who has established the
mission in this world that fulfils the internal desire
of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, give me shelter at his lotus
feet?

yaṁ pravrajantam anupetam apeta-kṛtyaṁ

dvaipāyano viraha-kātara ājuhāva

putreti tan-mayatayā taravo 'bhinedus

taṁ sarva-bhūta-hṛdayaṁ munim ānato 'smi

I offer obeisances to Śrī śukadeva Gosvāmī, who can
enter the hearts of all living entities. When he left
home without undergoing the purificatory processes such
as accepting the sacred thread, his father Vyāsa cried
out, "Oh my son!" As if they were absorbed in that same
feeling of separation, only the trees echoed in response
to his call.

tavaivāsmi tavaivāsmi

na jīvāmi tvayā vinā

iti vijñāya devi tvaṁ

naya māṁ caraṇāntikam

I am Yours! I am Yours! I cannot live without You! O
Devī (Rādhā), please understand this and bring me to
Your feet.




Chapter One


man-manā bhava

Always Think of Me

Recently, by the desire of Bhagavān, we had to leave the
holy land of Vṛndāvana for some time, but wherever we
go, we always remember Vṛndāvana. The scriptures
describe many spiritual places, but in the entire
universe there is no place like Vṛndāvana. He who knows
the glories of Vṛndāvana will understand this, and
especially one who has received the mercy of Vṛndāvana
will understand this. In his Śrī Vṛndāvana-mahimāmṛta,
Śrīla Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī has written that Vṛndāvana
is our everything, and not just the village of
Vṛndāvana, but the entire Vraja-maṇḍala. Especially
Nandagrāma, Varṣāṇā, Rādhā-kuṇḍa, Śyāma-kuṇḍa, Girirāja-
Govardhana: they are all included within Vṛndāvana. Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and His eternal associates have performed pastimes
there that are thoroughly unique.

For understanding these things, the instructions of
Bhagavadgītā serve as a foundation. Constructed upon
this foundation is the palace of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam with
its twelve floors. There are nine storeys or cantos

                             7
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

lower, two storeys or cantos above, and in the middle is
the tenth storey, or the Tenth Canto. Inside this there
are ninety different kuñjas, which are the chapters of
the Tenth Canto. And in the centre of this are five
special chambers, which are the five chapters describing
the rāsa dance, where Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa are enjoying
amorous pastimes. It appears that Rādhikā is serving
Kṛṣṇa, but really Kṛṣṇa is serving Her. As long as the
foundation of the instructions of Bhagavad-gītā is not
there, we will take a mundane understanding of these
topics and every thing will be ruined.

In the Gītā (18.65) we find this verse:

man-manā bhava mad-bhakto

mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru

mām evaiṣyasi satyaṁ te

pratijāne priyo 'si me

Absorb your mind and heart in Me, become My devotee,
worship Me, offer your obeisances to Me, and then
certainly you will come to Me. I make this promise to
you because you are very dear to Me.

This is the best of all verses in Bhagavad-gītā. We
shouldn't consider the following verse (18.66) to be the
best:

sarva-dharmān parityajya

mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo

mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ

Give up all forms of religiosity - worldly or other-
worldly, bodily or mental, varṇāśrama-dharma, the
worship of demigods and god desses, and even the worship
of Nārāyaṇa and Dvārakādhīśa - and come exclusively to
My shelter.

Although this is the final verse, and Kṛṣṇa is telling
us to abandon our dharma, we may think that some sinful
reaction may come to us. But Kṛṣṇa says, "I am
responsible for that. I will excuse you from all sins."
Making our parents cry, making our brothers and
relatives cry, a wife making her husband cry, a husband
making his wife cry, not doing our duty to society, and
not following varṇāśrama-dharma is all adharma,
irreligious, and sinful reaction will come to anyone who
does these things. But Kṛṣṇa says, "I promise that I
will at once free you from any sinful reaction."

The verse that we will describe here, "man-manā
bhava...", is even better than this verse. The verse
"sarva-dharmān parityajya..." gives instruction for
śaraṇāgati, devotional surrender, but this verse gives
the fruit of that surrender, and is therefore even more
exalted.


                             8
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

When we read the Gītā thoroughly, and especially when we
look through the commentaries of our ācāryas, we see
that there are five levels of instructions in Bhagavad-
gītā. First, there are general instructions for
everyone. After this is secret (guhya), then more secret
(guhyatara), then most secret (guhyatama), and finally
the most secret of all secrets (sarva-guhyatama). These
instructions are not given in an expanded form, but in
the form of condensed verses (sūtras).

sarvopaniṣado gāvo

dogdhā gopāla-nandanaḥ

pārtho vatsaḥ sudhīr bhoktā

dugdhaṁ gītāmṛtaṁ mahat

Bhagavad-gītā-māhātmyam (5)

All the scriptures - the Vedas, Purāṇas, Upaniṣads - are
like a cow, and Arjuna is the calf. First the cow feeds
a little milk to her calf, and she becomes pacified by
that. Then the milkman Śrī Kṛṣṇa can milk the cow, and
keep the remainder of the milk aside. Who is the
remainder for? Those that are sudhī, whose intelligence
is pure. Whose intelligence is pure? The great
scientists and scholars of this world? The Bhāgavatam
doesn't say this. It gives the word sumedhaḥ, and who is
sumedhaḥ? A person who performs bhagavad-bhajana,
worship of the Supreme Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa, and who is
rasika, expert in relishing the liquid mellows of
devotion to the Lord (rasa). One who has decided that
engaging in bhagavad-bhajana is the essence of life is
purely intelligent, and the rest are fools.

How are they fools? Go-kharaḥ - amongst the animals, the
fool is the donkey. When we were coming from Delhi
recently, we saw a dog seated on top of a donkey, just
looking around. The donkey was just going on its way in
a relaxed fashion. Therefore the donkey is a big fool.
People load all of their rubbish and heavy things on the
donkey, and it carries them. It doesn't do any work with
its front feet, but does everything with its hind legs,
such as when it wants to kick someone. If you tell it to
go forward it goes backward, and if you tell it to go
backward it goes forward. Such a fool it is, and
similarly those that don't perform bhajana of Bhagavān
are also fools. And who is intelligent? Only those who
engage in bhagavad-bhajana.

After the cow has first fed her calf a little milk,
Kṛṣṇa keeps the remainder in a pot for those that are
sudhī, of pure intelligence, who are dear to Him. Up to
here the milk is the instructions of the Gītā, but there
is something more: on top of the milk will be the
essence, the cream. Churn that, and very soft and
beautiful butter will also be produced. Along with the
butter also come some things to be discarded. Put the
butter on the fire, and in the end, what will we save?
Clarified butter, ghee. From ghee we cannot make another
thing; it is the essence.

Vyāsa gave śukadeva the cream and told him, "My son,

                              9
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

churn it." śukadeva took a churning stick and slowly
churned until butter was produced. He distributed this
butter in the form of the first nine cantos of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, but some people said, "We will not take
butter; we will accept only the essence of butter."

So to them he gave the remainder of the Bhāgavatam, and
therefore the remainder of the Bhāgavatam is so much
greater. What he gave in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is apparently
nowhere in the Vedas and Upaniṣads, but actually it is
there. In what form is it there? Just as there is ghee
spread throughout milk, this essence is in the Gītā,
Upaniṣads, Vedas, Purāṇas and the Rāmāyaṇa. But taking
this milk and then making butter and ultimately ghee is
not an ordinary task. In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, the five
chapters describing the rāsa-līlā, the Gopī-gīta, the
Bhramara-gīta (where Rādhā is speaking to a bumblebee in
the madness of separation from Kṛṣṇa) and the Uddhava-
sandeśa (where Kṛṣṇa sends Uddhava to Vṛndāvana with a
message for the gopīs) are the beautiful ghee that he
made. And to whom in this world did he give it? He
didn't give it to unqualified people, but exclusively to
those who were qualified.

For ordinary people, Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa has said:

yuktāhāra-vihārasya

yukta-ceṣṭsya karmasu

yukta-svapnāvabodhasya

yogo bhavati duḥkha-hā

Bhagavad-gītā (6.17)

Don't eat or sleep too much, and be regulated in working
and recreation, otherwise you will not be able to attain
that rare yoga wherein a soul meets his Creator. In this
general knowledge, He has given the knowledge that we
are not these bodies. Be detached from the desires of
the body and don't act for them.

jātasya hi dhruvo mṛtyur

dhruvaṁ janma mṛtasya ca

Bhagavad-gītā (2.27)

One who has taken birth will certainly die, and
afterwards he will certainly take birth again. Arjuna
was crying for everyone - for his son, wife, relatives,
friends - and we are also crying for this.

aśocyān anvaśocas tvaṁ

prajñā-vādāṁś ca bhāṣase

gatāsūn agatāsūṁś ca

nānuśocanti paṇḍitāḥ

Bhagavad-gītā (2.11)


                             10
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

Those who are wise despair neither for the living nor
the dead. Everyone will die, and those that don't go
today will go tomorrow or the next day. Don't cry or
worry for them, because inside the body is the soul.

nainaṁ chindanti śastrāṇi

nainaṁ dahati pāvakaḥ

na cainaṁ kledayanty āpo

na śoṣayati mārutaḥ

Bhagavad-gītā (2.23)

The soul cannot be harmed by any weapon, burnt by fire,
moistened by water or withered by the wind. The soul is
eternal, but the body is subject to death, so don't be
overly concerned about the body.

Yes, a man can worry for it like this: after becoming
enlightened, and realising that Bhagavān has given this
body in the form of a temple and for the purpose of
performing bhajana, it should be cared for. We should
keep it clean and repair it, because otherwise we won't
be able to do bhajana. Up to here, caring for the body
is all right, but it should be done with a spirit of
detachment. In the end Bhagavān will ask for it back,
and it must be returned. He will ask, "I have given you
such a rare and valuable human form, and what have you
done with it?"

Therefore He has spoken verses like this:

yā niśā sarva-bhūtānāṁ

tasyāṁ jāgarti saṁyamī

yasyāṁ jāgrati bhūtāni

sā niśā paśyato muneḥ

Bhagavad-gītā (2.69)

While ordinary people sleep, the sage is awake in self-
realisation, and while the sage sleeps, ordinary people
are awake in sense gratification. Therefore you should
simply engage in bhagavadbhajana and, considering
happiness and distress to be the same, go on doing your
duty. Up to here it is general instruction.

After this comes guhya, secret instruction, which is
brahmajñāna. The soul (ātmā) is brahma, spiritual by
nature.

sthita-prajñasya kā bhāṣā

samādhi-sthasya keśava

sthita-dhīḥ kiṁ prabhāṣeta

kim āsīta vrajeta kim

Bhagavad-gītā (2.54)

                             11
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017


Arjuna asks, "What are the symptoms of a person whose
consciousness is absorbed in spirituality? How does he
speak, how does he sit and how does he walk?" In the
eighteenth chapter the conclusion is given:

brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā

na śocati na kāṅkṣati

samaḥ sarveṣu bhūteṣu

mad-bhaktiṁ labhate parām

Bhagavad-gītā (18.54)

One who is situated in Brahman sees spirituality
everywhere, and he thinks, "I am also Brahman." Thinking
such he will meditate on Brahman, and will not
experience happiness or distress. He remains steady
through whatever comes to him, and merges his
consciousness in Brahman.

karmaṇy evādhikāras te

mā phaleṣu kadācana

Bhagavad-gītā (2.47)

Go on doing your duty and don't desire the fruits of
your labour. In an ordinary way, this is brahma-jñāna.

After this comes guhyatara, more secret, which is
paramātmajñāna, knowledge of the Supersoul. There are
two classes of beings, fallible (kṣara) and infallible
(akṣara), and then there is Puruṣottama. Bhagavān is
Puruṣottama, who resides in the hearts of all living
entities in the size of a thumb. Meditate on Him, and if
you don't reach Him, try again. Again not reaching Him,
try again.

kleśo 'dhikataras teṣām

avyaktāsakta-cetasām

Bhagavad-gītā (12.5)

That formless Brahman that I mentioned to you before -
don't go there! Beware! There will be more difficulty in
trying to attach your consciousness to something
formless. Instead, meditate on the Paramātmā within the
heart, and one who connects with Him is a real sannyāsī
and a real yogī.

sa sannyāsī ca yogī ca

na niragnir na cākriyaḥ

Bhagavad-gītā (6.1)

One does not become a real sannyāsī just by performing
fire sacrifices, or by muttering "ahaṁ brahmāsmi". This
is all guhyatara, more secret.


                             12
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

And guhyatama, most secret, is given in the ninth
chapter. Pure bhakti is given there, but it is devoid of
rasa. Although it is pure bhakti, it is not full of
rasa. At the end of the eighteenth chapter sarva-
guhyatama, the most secret of all secrets, is given. It
is full of rasa, and is the highest limit of bhakti:

sarva-guhyatamaṁ bhūyaḥ

śṛṇu me paramaṁ vacaḥ

iṣ? 'si me dṛḍham iti

tato vakṣyāmi te hitam

man-manā bhava mad-bhakto

mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru

mām evaiṣyasi satyaṁ te

pratijāne priyo 'si me

Bhagavad-gītā (18.64-5)

"Because you are very dear to Me, I am telling you this
most hidden of all instructions." What is that
instruction? Before this, Śrī Kṛṣṇa had explained up to
the worship of Nārāyaṇa, which is worship of Bhagavān
but with awareness of His opulences. However, in this
verse, four extraordinary activities are described. The
first is man-manā bhava, always think of Me; the second
is mad-bhakto, become My devotee; the third is mad-yājī,
worship Me; and the fourth is māṁ namaskuru, offer
obeisances to Me. If you cannot do the first, then do
the second. If you can't do that, then do the third. If
you can't do that, then just offer obeisances, and
everything will come from that.

Now we will speak on the first part of this verse: "man-
manā bhava - absorb your mind and heart in Me." This is
not a simple thing. For a man to absorb his mind in any
one activity, then his eyes, ears, nose and all his
senses must be completely centred on that. If the mind
cannot concentrate on something, it is more or less
uncontrolled. Sometimes our mind is pondering sense
enjoyment, and sometimes we think about Kṛṣṇa. This is
the conditioned state. But if someone's mind is fully
absorbed in the lotus feet of Bhagavān, then that is the
highest form of worship. When will this be possible? In
the beginning stage of śraddhā, faith, it is not
possible. Then the stage of ruci, taste, will come, and
still it won't be possible. After this we can really
begin to give our heart. In the stage of āsakti,
spiritual attachment, we can give perhaps one-half of
our heart to Him. In the stage of bhāva, devotional
ecstasy, maybe we can give three-quarters of our heart
to Him, but only in the stage of prema, divine love, can
we fully give our hearts to Kṛṣṇa.

Therefore, when Kṛṣṇa was sending Uddhava to the gopīs
in Vṛndāvana, in a clever way, not straight but
crookedly, He told Uddhava, "Uddhava, My mother and My
father are very upset for Me. You go and give them My

                             13
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

message and console them a little."

Uddhava waited there for a moment and then said, "Is
there anything more?"

Kṛṣṇa thought, "What will I tell him and not tell him?"
He became a little worried. After deliberating, He
concluded, "If I don't tell him now, when will I tell
him?"

He said, "Yes, there is one thing. There in Vṛndāvana
are the gopīs, who are the most dear to Me. They have
given Me their entire hearts, and besides Me they know
nothing. For Me they have forgotten all of their bodily
needs and bodily functions. What is the condition of
someone who has forgotten all bodily needs? They have
forgotten eating and drinking, bathing and decorating
themselves with ornaments and clothing, and fixing their
hair. Their bodies will certainly have become thin and
weak, and just see how for Me they have forgotten all of
their bodily relations: husbands, sons, friends,
brothers, wealth and property. They have no love for
anyone but Me, and day and night they are deeply
remembering Me. Uddhava, in this world you have not seen
such an example of how one person can give their heart
to another. Somehow or other they are holding onto their
lives. Their life-airs have risen up to their necks, and
how much longer can they live like this? I don't know if
they can be saved or not. Therefore go quickly, and save
their lives. Go and give them My message, that I am
definitely coming tomorrow or the next day. For this
they are holding onto their lives. They will think,
'Kṛṣṇa has said that He is coming, and He is incapable
of telling a lie.' Clutching onto this hope, it is as if
their lives are hanging on a limb. If the limb breaks,
they will fall, meaning they will give up their lives.
So go quickly."

Therefore the gopīs are the perfect example of man-manā
bhava. Now listen to an example of how Kṛṣṇa takes
someone's heart. We understand that giving our heart to
someone is very difficult, but if instead someone takes
our heart, then it becomes very easy. Otherwise we are
simply unable to give our hearts. In the Kaṭha Upaniṣad
(1.2.23) it says:

nāyam ātmā pravacanena labhyo

na medhayā na bahunā śrutena

yam evaiṣa vṛṇute tena labhyas

tasyaiṣa ātmā vivṛṇute tanūṁ svām

Śrī Kṛṣṇa will select a heart that is dear to Him and
then say, "Come, I will take your heart." Even if we
really desire to give Him our heart, it is very
difficult, but if He desires to take our heart, then it
is possible. But we must make our heart such that when
Kṛṣṇa sees us it will inspire greed within Him. The
heart must be pure in all ways; if there is any impurity
remaining there, He will not take it. But mere purity is
also not sufficient; the hearts of so many jñānīs are
also pure. We must add some special fragrance that,

                             14
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

reaching Kṛṣṇa's nose, will attract Him. Bhaktirasa
should be flowing in the heart. How does Kṛṣṇa take a
heart? The following story will show how.

Kṛṣṇa was taking the cows out to graze for the day in
the forests of Vṛndāvana. His bodily complexion was the
colour of a dark raincloud, His curly black hair was
dangling on His face, and He appeared very, very
beautiful and charming. His friends were spread out in
the four directions chanting "Sādhu! Sādhu!" (meaning
"Excellent! Excellent!") and praising Kṛṣṇa, and singing
and playing their flutes and horns. As they were going
along like this, even the blind people of Vraja would
come out to try and see. One would say, "Where are you
going?"

Someone would reply, "I am going to have darśana of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. Take my hand, let's go!" and with great eagerness
they would go.

All the people of Vraja surrounded the road to see Kṛṣṇa
taking the cows out to graze. Mother Yaśodā and Nanda
Bābā were following behind Kṛṣṇa, saying, "My son, come
back soon, don't go too far away!" Time and again Kṛṣṇa
told them to return, and finally, when He promised that
He would certainly return later in the day, they slowly
went back to their home.

There were so many newly married girls there who had
just arrived in Vraja to live in the homes of their new
husbands. They all went to the doors of their homes to
catch a glimpse of Kṛṣṇa. Some were even peering through
vents, some climbed up on their roofs, and others
climbed to the tops of trees in the kuñjas.

Kṛṣṇa was also searching: He always wants to see new
girls. In one house, there was a new girl who had just
been married two or three days before. She had heard a
long time before how marvellously beautiful Kṛṣṇa
appears when He is taking the cows out to graze. When
she heard Kṛṣṇa coming with the cows, in her heart she
became very restless and eager to have His darśana. But
her new mother-in-law and sister-in-law were sitting
outside the door, and her sister-in-law was especially
nasty towards her. They were both telling her, "You are
not going! We are going, but you cannot. There is a
black snake out there, and if it bites you, you will
never be able to remove its poison. Therefore stay in
the house! We will be back soon."

The girl said, "Where are you going? And I will just sit
here in the house? I will also go!"

"No, it's dangerous - don't go! Your heart is very
immature, and you will never be able to remove the
snake's poison. You just sit there."

"Still I will go with you!"

"No, it's dangerous! You won't go."

"Then I will go alone. All the wives, elderly people,
boys, girls, birds, beasts and insects of Vraja are
going for darśana of Kṛṣṇa, and in Vṛndāvana I alone

                              15
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

will not receive His darśana? Certainly I will go!"

"No, you won't!"

"I am certainly going! Even if you throw me out of this
household I will go!"

Then, seeing that Kṛṣṇa was coming near, the mother-in-
law and sister-in-law quickly ran to see. When they
left, the girl stepped forward and began peering out
through the crack in the door. Her position was such
that she could see out, but no one could see her. Kṛṣṇa
was holding the flute to His lips and playing so sweetly
that it seemed the nectar of His heart was emanating
through the holes of the flute and inundating the entire
area of Vṛndāvana. Those eyes which have not seen this
should be set on fire. Only the eyes which have seen
this beautiful scene are successful. The gopīs were
offering ārati to Kṛṣṇa not with lamps, but with their
eyes. How? Their eyes were like lamps, and the prema in
their hearts was like the oil. Their eyes were burning
as they circled Kṛṣṇa's form with loving sidelong
glances, and they performed arcana of Kṛṣṇa with these
glances. With great happiness, Kṛṣṇa became shy and
accepted all of them.

But He was looking in the direction of that one door.
Kṛṣṇa may or may not want to see someone, but if someone
really wants to see Him, He will certainly see that
person. That day He wanted to see that new girl first of
all. He wanted to leave everyone else behind and go
there immediately, so just then He played a trick with a
calf. Grabbing the tail of the calf, He gave it a twist,
and the calf ran directly to that door, as if it had
been trained for that very purpose. At once Kṛṣṇa and
the calf arrived at that door. Standing in His
threefold-bending posture, with the flute to His lips,
and smiling, He gave His darśana to that girl. Finished!
Her very heart came out from her and He took it and went
on His way. She could only stand motionlessly. This is
taking a heart: man-manā bhava.

If someone attains the mercy of Kṛṣṇa, then certainly He
will take their heart. If we are especially eager,
wondering in our minds, "When will I be able to see the
beautiful form of Śrī Kṛṣṇa?" then Kṛṣṇa will be so
pleased and come and take our hearts. That girl had
performed austerities for millions of years for this
opportunity, and that day she became completely
successful.

She was left standing motionlessly, and fifteen or
twenty minutes passed. Kṛṣṇa had left and entered the
forest, and the dust raised by the cows and boys had
long settled. She was still standing motionlessly
because without her heart or mind, she was helpless.
Then the cruel sister-in-law said to her, "The black
snake Śyāmasundara has bitten you, and now you will
never be able to remove the poison!"

Shaking the girl, somehow she managed to bring her
inside the house. "Here! Take this churning stick and
churn some yoghurt. By doing some hard work your mind
will return to you." But the girl took the wrong pot,

                             16
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

and instead began churning mustard seeds, and it made a
terrible noise. Sometimes she would churn, and sometimes
she would stop. Where was her mind and heart? Kṛṣṇa had
taken them: man-manā bhava.

Again the sister-in-law came, and she said, "Hey! What
are you doing? I will go and complain to my mother about
you!" At once the mother-in-law came and said, "Lift up
this pot. Go and bring water." They placed a large pot
on her head, and on top of that a smaller pot. They also
gave her a small child and said, "Look after this child
and see that he doesn't cry!" They put a long rope in
her hand to lower the pots down into the well, and sent
her off.

Like this she went. Arriving at the well, she made a
noose for lowering the pot down into the well. But
instead of wrapping the noose around the pot, she put it
around the child as if she was going to lower him into
the well! Everyone nearby shouted, "Hey! What are you
doing?" They came running over, and taking the rope from
her hands, saved the child. One gopī said, "It appears
that a ghost has possessed her!"

Another gopī, who knew everything, said, "It wasn't just
an ordinary ghost, it was the ghost of Nanda!"

Vṛndāvana is the place for those who are unable to give
their hearts to their children and family. They leave
everyone crying for them and like refugees come to
Vṛndāvana and cry exclusively for Kṛṣṇa. Even very fine
sons and daughters of kings come to Vṛndāvana, give
their hearts to Kṛṣṇa and engage in bhajana.

Kṛṣṇa told Arjuna, "This is man-manā bhava. Absorb your
mind in Me as the gopīs did."

Arjuna replied, "My Lord, this is a battlefield! How is
it possible for me to give my heart here? You have told
me to fight against Grandfather Bhīṣma, Droṇācārya and
Karṇa. I am unable to do it."

Next He will explain "mad-bhakto - become My devotee."




Chapter Two


mad-bhakto

Become My Devotee

In the last chapter we began explaining the best and
sarvaguhyatama, most secret, verse of Bhagavad-gītā.
Giving examples, we explained what is man-manā bhava.
Just as Kṛṣṇa gave this instruction to Arjuna on a
battlefield, we are also in the midst of a battle. We
are at war with the tendencies of the mind, which is
restless by nature. At that time in Kurukṣetra, there
was a war going on between the Pāṇḍavas and Kauravas.
Just as this manmanā bhava was difficult for Arjuna

                             17
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

then, it is also difficult for us now.

The Pāṇḍavas' army consisted of seven military phalanxes
(akṣauhinīs), and the Kauravas' army consisted of
eleven. Opposite us also is an army of eleven
akṣauhinīs, and we are alone. Kṛṣṇa was the driver of
Arjuna's chariot, but our driver is bad intelligence,
deformed intelligence. Arjuna had a chariot given to him
by the demigod Agni that could not be burnt or
destroyed, but what kind of chariot do we have? Only the
material body, which is subject to disease and death.
Arjuna had the Gāṇḍīva bow for fighting, but what do we
have? We have no help; such is our position of weakness.
Who was sitting on the flag of his chariot? Hanumān.
Arjuna had all kinds of help, but at once his mind
became disturbed and he said, "My Lord, I am unable to
do this man-manā bhava."

The body is our chariot, the soul is its passenger and
the mind is its charioteer. What is the nature of the
mind? Restless; it gives us no help at all. By its
direction we will fall down or stray from the path.

At first, with hands folded together, Arjuna said:

śiṣyas te 'haṁ śādhi māṁ tvāṁ prapannam

Bhagavad-gītā (2.7)

In all ways I am now surrendered unto You. As You
instruct me, I will do.

He heard all of Kṛṣṇa's instructions, and then said, "I
am unable to do this man-manā bhava. How will I absorb
my mind in this way? It is not possible. Opposite us are
Bhīṣma, Droṇa, Karṇa, Duryodhana and Duḥśāsana. So many
great mahārathīs are assembled together to fight against
us."

Opposite us also are six mahārathīs. What are they? The
urges of speech, the tongue, the stomach, the genitals,
the uncontrolled mind and anger. We cannot conquer even
one of these mahārathīs. Even such exalted personalities
as Viśvāmitra and Nārada were affected by one of these
mahārathīs, the sexual urge. In the Rāmāyaṇa it is
described that once Nārada desired to marry a princess,
but he was defeated at a marriage ceremony (svayaṁvara)
when Viṣṇu gave him the face of a monkey. Beyond these
mahārathīs, there are so many kinds of anartha,
impediment, we must contend with. Therefore Kṛṣṇa said,
"Mad-bhakto - become My devotee."

Arjuna considered, and said, "Saying one will become a
devotee is easy, but to actually do it is very
difficult."

To become a devotee, one thing is especially necessary:

anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ

jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu


                             18
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā

Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.1.11)

One should not have any type of material desire. For
attaining bhakti, for attaining the service of Śrī Kṛṣṇa
or a real devotee, there cannot be a scent of any other
desire in the heart. What to speak of the desire itself,
there cannot be even a scent of it. There are to be no
tendencies of jñāna, the cultivation of knowledge
directed towards impersonal liberation, or karma,
fruitive activity.

Without karma - meaning here activity in the general
sense no man can live. He must at least do some karma.
Even at the time of sleeping we are doing some karma.
What are we doing? Breathing, changing position and
dreaming: this is all karma. So it is unavoidable -
without doing some form of karma we cannot live for even
one moment. Anyone who says that he is living entirely
without karma is a pretender. We must do some karma. We
must eat, and to save ourselves from the cold we must
wear clothing. But how will we escape from karma
covering our bhakti? This action will not cover bhakti:
when eating, don't forget Bhagavān. Eat for Bhagavān,
for His service. In our present condition we also cannot
live without jñāna. Knowledge is also necessary. Without
knowledge we will not even know where to place our feet
while walking and we will fall.

But see how these things can cover bhakti. In the name
of helping others, Bhārata Mahārāja made a mistake and
fell down from spiritual life. He had been practising
bhakti and attained a very high stage, up to bhāva. He
saved the baby deer from the mouth of the tiger and from
drowning in the stream, and afterwards he maintained it
by feeding it milk, thinking he was benefiting another
living entity. But because of this activity he had to
take another three births.

Therefore although jñāna and karma will remain, they
must be kept in a position of servitude to bhakti.
Otherwise our bhakti will become covered. So how will we
engage our jñāna and karma? By going to the market and
bringing good quality fruits and vegetables for the
service of the deities. The deities will accept the
offerings and give prasāda to everyone. By this, bhakti
will not be covered; instead it will increase.

On the other hand, we may bring all first-class
ingredients like the best carrots, pure cow's ghee and
coconut, make very beautiful halavā, and then add silver
topping. But if it is for our own enjoyment, then
everything is spoiled. This action will cover our
bhakti, so we must be careful of this.

If we have made this preparation thinking, "I have made
this, I brought the ingredients, I collected the
necessary funds and I will enjoy it," and afterwards
offer it to Bhagavān, then that is somewhat all right,
but it is not completely correct. Do not offer it only
after preparing it, but rather from the very beginning
it should be offered to Bhagavān.


                             19
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

yajñārthāt karmaṇo 'nyatra

Bhagavad-gītā (3.9)

Your action should be a sacrifice for Bhagavān. This is
the instruction of Bhagavad-gītā (9.27) - whatever you
eat or drink should be for sacrifice.

yat karoṣi yad aśnāsi

yaj juhoṣi dadāsi yat

yat tapasyasi kaunteya

tat kuruṣva mad-arpaṇam

Whatever you eat, if you prepare food, if you perform a
sacrifice, if you are keeping a garden - all should be
for offering to the deity. In general the spiritually
inclined people of this world are going on like this.
But Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and the Gauḍīya ācāryas have
taught, "Don't do things in this way! Beware! You'll be
trapped!" Rather we should first offer our very selves
to the deity: "I am Yours." Then whatever we eat or do
will automatically be for Bhagavān.

śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ

smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ

sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

iti puṁsārpitā viṣṇau

bhaktiś cen nava-lakśaṇā

kriyeta bhagavaty addhā

tan manye 'dhītam uttamam

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.5.23-4)

Hearing (śravaṇam) and chanting (kīrtanam) about Kṛṣṇa,
remembering Him (viṣṇu-smaraṇam), serving His feet
(pāda-sevanam), worshipping Him (arcanam), praying to
Him (vandanam), becoming His servant (dāsyam), becoming
His dear friend sakhyam) and fully surrendering to Him
(ātma-nivedanam): this is ninefold bhakti. Performing
these nine types of devotion is the topmost knowledge.

Even if all of these are performed, but the results are
offered to Bhagavān afterwards, then it is devotion
mixed with personal desire (karma-miśra-bhakti), not
pure bhakti. The people of this world generally don't
know this. They just think that they should offer things
to Him, but pure devotees understand the shortcomings in
this. Therefore we should first offer our very selves,
not just the results of our activities; those who follow
the path of karma offer that.

It is like a small boy who is eating while sitting in
the lap of his father. When the boy sees something, he

                             20
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

just puts it into his mouth, and he puts food into the
mouth of his father also, and his father is not
offended. The father is pleased. Why? The boy is fully
dependent on him. He may even punish the boy, but the
boy would never leave him. In order to develop a
relationship like this with Bhagavān, we first offer
everything to our guru, because in our present condition
he is to be seen as Bhagavān. When we develop a direct
relationship with Bhagavān, then there will be no
necessity of formal offerings. The gopīs are eating and
decorating themselves, but they do not make any formal
offerings or perform pūjā to Kṛṣṇa. They are using many
good-quality things in the course of dressing and
decorating themselves and applying their ornaments - but
who is it all for? Whatever they do is for the pleasure
of Kṛṣṇa. As soon as something comes to them, it is
automatically for Kṛṣṇa. In this way we should do
everything exclusively for the pleasure of Kṛṣṇa.

Such bhakti is difficult to attain, and it requires that
we have some merit from our previous lives. And if in
this birth, by the mercy of Bhagavān and the Vaiṣṇavas,
we have been graced with the company of pure Vaiṣṇavas,
then pure bhakti can come. The story of Bilvamaṅgala
Ṭhākura nicely illustrates this point. Although he had
some merit from his previous lives, some specific
desires for enjoyment still remained in his heart. He
kept company with the prostitute Cintāmaṇi, who after
some time became exclusively interested in Kṛṣṇa and
therefore rejected Bilvamaṅgala. After this he crossed
the river to her palace using a dead body for flotation,
and used a snake to climb up to her window. She rebuked
him, and after that he became renounced. Now having a
great desire to meet Kṛṣṇa, he left his home and began
heading towards Vṛndāvana. Perhaps five days later he
stopped at a well to get some water where he saw a young
girl, who gave him some water to drink. But he forgot
about drinking the water and began gazing at her. He
followed her home, and there a brāhmaṇa came to the door
thinking, "Why has this mahātmā come?"

Bilvamaṅgala asked, "Who is the girl that lives here?"

The brāhmaṇa replied, "She is my wife."

Bilvamaṅgala said, "Call her. I want to speak with her a
little."

So he called her, and when she came, Bilvamaṅgala asked
her, "Please give me both of your hairpins."

The brāhmaṇa and his wife thought, "He is a travelling
mendicant, so perhaps he has a thorn or splinter in his
skin that he wants to remove."

So they gave him the hairpins. Bilvamaṅgala did have a
thorn he wanted to remove, but that thorn was in his
heart, and he was unable to reach it. Therefore he took
the hairpins and plucked out his eyes.

There is a saying in Hindi that means, "If there is no
bamboo, there will be no flute." These eyes can be the
root cause of our attachment to this world insofar as
the form of a woman attracts a man, and the form of a

                             21
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

man attracts a woman, and for each other they are the
personification of māyā, illusion. Therefore Srīmad-
Bhāgavatam and other scriptures have warned us to be
very careful about this.

Now blind, Bilvamaṅgala went on his way. He was in such
a mood of deep separation from Kṛṣṇa that now all of his
senses were centred on Bhagavān. On the way there were
many obstacles such as mud-holes and streams, but he was
resolved in his determination and deeply meditated on
Kṛṣṇa as he was going towards Vṛndāvana. Then one day a
young boy came to him and said in a sweet voice, "Bābā,
where are you going?"

Being pleased, Bilvamaṅgala replied, "My son, I am going
to Vṛndāvana. Where are You going?"

"I am also going to Vṛndāvana - I make My living there."

"Vṛndāvana? Then come with me, and hold my walking
stick."

They went off together, and wandering and wandering,
they arrived in Vṛndāvana. On the way what happened?
Inside his heart, Bilvamaṅgala experienced so many
realisations about Kṛṣṇa that were just like nectar.
This is called sādhana. Bilvamaṅgala was a sādhaka. What
we described in the previous chapter concerning the
gopīs was the stage of perfection. As the Gaṅgā emerges
from the Himālayas and flows naturally towards the sea
without any special effort, in the same way the tendency
of the gopīs' hearts flows in the direction of Kṛṣṇa's
feet without ever stopping. This is the level of
perfection, but here we are discussing sādhana. Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu and other scriptures declare that
Bilvamaṅgala was a sādhaka, but then what are we? We are
not even sādhakas. Being only on the first step of
vaidhī-bhakti, will we be arrogant enough to call
ourselves real sādhakas?

Śravaṇam, kīrtanam, viṣṇu-smaraṇam, pāda-sevanam,
arcanam, vandanam, dāsyam, sakhyam and ātma-nivedanam -
there are two kinds of these nine devotional activities.
One is vaidhī-bhakti and the other is rāgānuga-bhakti.
Devotion works in these two ways, and we must follow
them both. It is not that we will leave vaidhībhakti,
but internally our feelings will change. Our external
forms will remain the same, but internally we will have
niṣṭhā, firm faith. Those that have this can be called
real sādhakas. How do they perform sādhana? With tears
flowing from their eyes, they perceive their hearts as
being in the form of a flower and they offer that flower
to the feet of Kṛṣṇa. But without being asked,
automatically Kṛṣṇa will come and take that flower.

Just as in the case of Bilvamaṅgala - he was a sādhaka,
and in the end what happened? Kṛṣṇa Himself came and led
him by the hand to Vṛndāvana. He was engaged in such
sādhana that day and night he was in deep meditation,
but not just passively. He was doing śravaṇam, kīrtanam,
smaraṇam, and pāda-sevanam all in the mood of a sakhī.
From the beginning he did it with the sentiments of a
sakhī. We should also execute that kind of sādhana
wherein there is not even a trace of fruitive activity

                             22
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

or impersonal knowledge. Then gradually one's own
internal identity (svarūpa) will blossom, and in that
form we can offer direct service to Kṛṣṇa. A rāgānuga
devotee should practise sādhana like this.

There is also the example of Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī.
Externally he appeared as a sādhaka, but internally he
was a perfected soul. Internally he had fully realised
his eternal svarūpa, but how did he behave externally?

saṅkhyā-pūrvaka-nāma-gāna-natabhiḥ kālāvasānī-kṛtau

nidrāhāra-vihārakādi-vijitau cātyanta-dīnau ca yau

rādhā-kṛṣṇa-guṇa-smṛter madhurimānandena sammohitau

vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau

Śrī Ṣaḍ-gosvāmy-aṣṭkam (6)

He would chant the holy name in a regulated manner, and
would daily only drink water after completing one lākha
of harināma. Daily he would offer at least one thousand
full prostrated obeisances to Vaiṣṇavas, to special
places of Kṛṣṇa's pastimes and to the holy dhāma. He was
very meek and humble, and day and night he was absorbed
in thinking of Kṛṣṇa.

In his childhood he had received initiation from his
family guru Yadunandana Ācārya, and he attained the
association of Haridāsa Ṭhākura, by whose influence he
began chanting the holy name. He is an eternally
perfected soul, but here we will describe the activities
he performed as an apparent sādhaka, which we should all
accept and follow.

After some time Raghunātha dāsa was married to a girl of
heavenly beauty. He was like a prince, and his physique
was very soft and beautiful. At a very tender age, only
sixteen, he went mad in separation from Kṛṣṇa. Many
times he tried to leave home, but his family would
always catch him and bring him back. He received the
mercy of Nityānanda Prabhu by offering some service to
Him, and was then able to escape from his home. He ran
at night through the forests so that he would not be
detected. For seven days he didn't eat or drink anything
until he arrived at the house of a milkman, who fed him
some milk and puffed rice. At such a tender age, walking
day and night he finally arrived in Jagannātha Purī.

Nowadays when we travel to the dhāma, we make a train
reservation and take one or two thousand rupees in our
pocket. But this is not the conventional standard for
going to the dhāma. Raghunātha dāsa had completely left
his home and family. Without taking any money or
worrying about any arrangement for his eating and
sleeping, and constantly crying in eagerness to meet
Kṛṣṇa, he arrived in Purī where Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
embraced him. Mahāprabhu said, "You have left the stool-
pit (the home of a materialist) to come here?" and He
embraced him again. Sitting nearby was Svarūpa Dāmodara,
and He placed Raghunātha dāsa in his care, saying,
"Svarūpa Dāmodara will be your everything - your father,
mother, brother, spiritual master everything. Today I am

                             23
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

handing you over to him, and therefore you should not
worry about anything." Just see how Bhagavān personally
placed him into the hands of such an exalted guru.

Raghunātha dāsa began staying in Purī and living in a
most renounced fashion. How did he eat? His wealthy
father wanted to make arrangements for his eating, but
he rejected them. He would take the discarded rice from
Jagannātha's kitchen that was even rejected by the cows,
wash it, add a little salt, and maintain his life by
eating that. His only possession was a clay pot for
drinking water; he didn't even have a plate or a
blanket. Since Purī is situated on the shore of the
ocean, it does not become too cold or too hot, so making
one arrangement or another he would sleep there. Taking
a piece of old cloth left behind by others, he would
make a pair of kaupīnas, and wearing just those he would
perform bhajana. But in comparison look at the clothes
that we wear!

After His forty-eighth year Mahāprabhu left this world.
In separation from Him, Raghunātha dāsa gave up eating
altogether. Day and night he was crying. This is
sādhana, and someone who lives like this can be called a
sādhaka. Then, in separation from Mahāprabhu, Svarūpa
Dāmodara gave up his body and entered Goloka Vraja. Then
Raghunātha dāsa gave up even drinking water, and simply
cried day and night.

He could not remain in Purī. Why? His condition was like
that of Nanda Bābā after Kṛṣṇa had gone to Mathurā.
Everything in Nanda Bābā's house reminded him of Kṛṣṇa:
Kṛṣṇa's yellow cloth, Kṛṣṇa's flute, Kṛṣṇa's peacock
feather, etc. He was in such intense pain that he
thought he must leave his home. He went to the banks of
the Yamunā, but there he saw Kṛṣṇa's footprints, and
became overwhelmed in lamentation. He saw the tree from
which Kṛṣṇa had jumped into the Yamunā and subdued
Kāliya, and his remembrance of Kṛṣṇa just increased and
he had to close his eyes. Then he went to Govardhana and
there it seemed that all of the trees were bent over in
separation, lamenting, "Where has Kṛṣṇa gone?" Seeing
Rādhā-kuṇḍa, Śyāma-kuṇḍa, Kusumasarovara and Mānasī-
gaṅgā all just increased Nanda Bābā's separation, until
finally he returned home again.

In the same way, everything Raghunātha dāsa saw brought
remembrance of Caitanya Mahāprabhu and Svarūpa Dāmodara.
Unable to stay in Purī, he walked all the way to
Vṛndāvana. There he offered himself to the feet of Rūpa
Gosvāmī and Sanātana Gosvāmī, and they asked him, "Why
have you come here?"

He replied, "Mahāprabhu and Svarūpa Dāmodara have left
this world, so I also cannot stay. I will give up my
body by jumping from Govardhana, otherwise I will drown
myself at midnight in Rādhā-kuṇḍa, thereby attaining the
feet of Rādhikā. For this reason I have come." Just see
what a thing divine separation is.

Śrī Rūpa and Sanātana prevented Raghunātha dāsa from
committing suicide, and gave him a place to live at
Rādhā-kuṇḍa where he executed all of his service. When
after some time Rūpa and Sanātana also left this world

                             24
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

in separation from Mahāprabhu, he thought, "Upon whom
will I rely now?"

In his separation, Girirāja-Govardhana appeared to be a
python ready to devour him, and Rādhā-kuṇḍa appeared to
be a tigress. Nandagrāma, Varṣāṇā and all the places of
Kṛṣṇa's pastimes now appeared empty. In separation from
Rūpa Gosvāmī he again gave up drinking water, and only
occasionally for maintaining his life he would take a
few drops of buttermilk. Lamenting and rolling on the
banks of Rādhā-kuṇḍa he would cry:

he rādhe vraja-devīke ca lalite he nanda-sūno kutaḥ

śrī-govardhana-kalpa-pādapa-tale kālindī-vanye kutaḥ

Śrī Ṣaḍ-gosvāmy-aṣṭkam (8)

O Goddess of Vraja, Rādhikā! Where are You now? O
Lalitā, where are you? O prince of Vraja, Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
where are You? Are You sitting beneath the trees of
Govardhana, or are You wandering in the forests of
Vṛndāvana?

Calling out in this way, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī would
wander in the four directions of Vraja, overwhelmed in a
mood of great separation. In this way he performed
bhajana. At that time he would take the realisations of
his heart in the form of flowers, and making a garland,
would offer them to the effulgence of the toenails of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā's feet, uttering "Rādhā, Rādhā,
Rādhā..." This is the sādhana for meeting Śrī Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa.

By practising karma-yoga, in the snap of a finger it is
possible to go to the heavenly planets. After performing
austerities, Dhruva even attained Vaikuṇṭha in that very
body. But the kṛṣṇa-bhakti that we are describing here
is very rare and difficult to attain.

Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī composed an offering of a
handful of flowers in the form of a lamentation entitled
Śrī Vilāpakusumāñjali, where he is praying for the
service of Rādhikā: "O Rādhā, when will I get the
opportunity to sweep Your house? In the form of a gopī,
with my own hair I will wash Your drains with scented
water. When will I get the special opportunity to apply
kuṅkuma to Your feet?" These were his prayers. Such
devotees are real sādhakas.

Śravaṇam, kīrtanam, viṣṇu-smaraṇam - in our line, what
is the meaning of the words viṣṇu-smaraṇam? Remembrance
of Rādhā, and remembering the amorous pastimes of Śrī
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī wrote, "The
descriptions of Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa's pastimes are my
only ornament. I have no desire to hear anything besides
this, and I have no desire to go even to Vaikuṇṭha.
Taking just a piece of roṭ#299; for my maintenance, I
will never leave Vṛndāvana or Rādhā-kuṇḍa. My body may
leave here, but my very life will never leave here."
This was his niṣṭhā, his resolute determination.

Great eagerness to attain the service of Bhagavān is
necessary for sādhana. These devotees are real sādhakas,

                             25
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

but what are we? We are just on the first step of
bhakti, which is śravaṇam and kīrtanam, and that also is
of two kinds: niṣṭhita-bhakti and aniṣṭhita-bhakti. Our
sādhana is included within aniṣṭhita-bhakti, because our
intelligence has not yet become immovable. Someone may
be thinking, "I will do bhajana here at home with my
parents because they are getting old anyway. Or, having
heard that the household is likened to a lake of hell, I
will leave it and join an āśrama. But then again,
Arjuna, Śrīvāsa Ṭhākura and the gopīs were great
devotees and they were householders (gṛhasthas),
therefore I should remain a gṛhastha. But Nārada,
śukadeva, the Gosvāmīs and Caitanya Mahāprabhu all
referred to family life as a dark well and left it. They
were unable to do bhajana there. What will I do?
Alright, I will remain for some time and then leave it.
No, on second thought I will go immediately." In this
way we go on undoing what we have already done and being
undecided. We have no niṣṭhā, firm resolution. We are
practising bhakti, but it is aniṣṭhita, so we should
endeavour to make our intelligence immovable and come to
the stage of niṣṭhā.

Then after attaining niṣṭhā there are four kinds of
obstacles (anarthas) to cross over. By sincerely
chanting the holy name and hearing hari-kathā, then
without being called, automatically prestige (pratiṣṭhā)
will come.

muktiḥ svayaṁ mukulitāñjaliḥ sevate 'smān

dharmartha-kāma-gatayaḥ samaya-pratīksāḥ

Kṛṣṇa-karṇāmṛta (107)

Mukti (liberation), with folded hands, will be standing
behind us, saying, "My Lord, can I serve you in any
way?" The eight yogic perfections will also come and
stand behind us with folded hands ready to offer their
services.

Having attained niṣṭhā, then we may be able to absorb
our minds in Kṛṣṇa somewhat, but still some anarthas
will remain. The reactions to our previous karma will
still come, of either sinful or pious actions. Or we may
be practising karma-miśrabhakti: covered bhakti, bhakti
with selfish desires; then the fruit of that will come
also. What big, important people of this world try so
hard to attain but don't get - these things will
automatically become present before us. Abundant
prestige will come to us, and we can easily become
drowned in the enjoyment of that. Therefore be
especially aware of this. There are four kinds of
anartha: those arising from previous sins (duṣkṛtottha),
those arising from previous piety (sukṛtottha), those
arising from imperfect service (bhakty uttha) and those
arising from offences in chanting (aparādhottha). Or if
we even unknowingly commit an offence to the feet of a
Vaiṣṇava, then its reaction must come.

We must leave these four kinds of anartha behind and
move forward in sādhana. Our niṣṭhā will transform into
ruci, and after ruci, then āsakti will come. In the
stage of āsakti, we will have complete attachment in our

                             26
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                        5/5/2017

bhajana.

gurau goṣṭhe goṣṭhālayiṣu sujane bhūsura-gaṇe

sva-mantre śrī-nāmni vraja-nava-yuva-dvandva-śaraṇe

sadā dambhaṁ hitvā kuru ratim apūrvam atitarām

aye svāntarbhrātaś-ca?bhir abhiyāce dhṛta-padaḥ

Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā (1)

Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī says, "O mind, taking your feet,
I request one thing of you. Have deep attachment for the
mantra that the spiritual master has given. Have deep
attachment to those places where Kṛṣṇa has performed
pastimes, such as Rādhākuṇḍa, Śyāma-kuṇḍa, Govardhana,
Nandagrāma, Varṣāṇā, Saṇkeṭa, and the best place of all,
the place of Rādhikā's residence, Yāvaṭa. Ultimately,
for rendering service to Rādhikā, one must live in
Yāvaṭa. You should be attached to all of these places
with deep sentiment."

We should have niṣṭhā and āsakti for both the worship
itself (bhajana) and for the object of worship
(bhajanīya). Bhajana is hearing and chanting and so
forth, and bhajanīya is Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. When our
ruci becomes fully mature for both of these, it will be
āsakti, and then by the mercy of Bhagavān one's heart
will never deviate from Him. This is all included within
"mad-bhakto - become My devotee."

The following story illustrates how Kṛṣṇa cares for
those who have really become His devotees. There was a
brāhmaṇa devotee of Kṛṣṇa who had read many scriptures
and many commentaries on Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam. He read the Gītā every day, and while
reading, many spiritual sentiments would arise within
him. He wrote down his realisations and desired to
publish them so that ordinary people would be able to
easily understand them. In this way he was engaged in
bhajana. From the beginning he never took any
employment. He would only beg for one hour each day, and
the rest of the time he would study the scriptures,
chant the holy name and perform śravaṇam-kīrtanam.

He married, and he and his wife were very content
together, living on whatever Bhagavān gave them. They
had no material desires at all. They only read the Gītā
and contemplated spiritual topics. In the early
afternoon, when most people take their main meal of the
day, he would go out begging. His wife would prepare
whatever he collected, and the couple would subsist
solely on that.

His wife only had one piece of clothing. One day, he
took his wife's cloth and tore from it enough pieces to
cover himself to go out and beg. Before going out, he
had been writing down the meaning of Gītā verses one
after the other. Then this verse came:

ananyāś cintayanto māṁ

ye janāḥ paryupāsate

                             27
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017


teṣāṁ nityābhiyuktānāṁ

yoga-kṣemaṁ vahāmy aham

Bhagavad-gītā (9.22)

He began to analyse this verse: "Ananyāś cintayanto mām:
those whose minds are fully self-controlled, who have no
other object of meditation besides Kṛṣṇa. Ye janāḥ
paryupāsate: one who worships Kṛṣṇa in all ways,
especially by the medium of hearing and chanting,
becomes situated very near to Him. Teṣāṁ
nityābhiyuktānām: for those who are fixed in performing
bhajana like this, then its result also is for the
happiness of Kṛṣṇa, not for themselves. Even if a person
of bad conduct engages in this type of exclusive
bhajana, then Kṛṣṇa will accept him. And if that
exclusive sentiment is not there, then Kṛṣṇa will never
reveal Himself. This verse is related to sādhana, not
the stage of perfection. To those who have exclusively
taken shelter of Kṛṣṇa, He is their protector and
maintainer. Besides Him there is no other."

This brāhmaṇa's nature was very humble and surrendered.
While studying this verse, many nice sentiments were
arising inside him. Then he came to the last line of the
verse. "Yogakṣemaṁ vahāmy aham: Kṛṣṇa is saying that for
His devotees who engage in bhajana in this way, He will
supply all of their requirements such as food and water,
and even collect them and carry them Himself."

The brāhmaṇa stopped and thought, "How can this be? This
is not right. Why? I am now an old man, over seventy
years old. Up until today Bhagavān has never directly
looked after us like this. We have been engaged in
exclusive bhajana, and today there is not a single mouse
in our home. Why? Because there is no food in the house!
We don't even have any earthen pots to catch the
rainwater. There is nothing in our home, not even any
foodstuffs for today's meal! I will go out to beg and
whatever I acquire, we will take that only. Isn't
Bhagavān seeing this? Is He not inside all souls
witnessing everything? Certainly He hasn't taken care of
us as He is saying in this verse. Maybe if we require
something, He would inspire another person to come and
help us, but He would never carry a burden for us on His
own head. I cannot accept this."

Then with a red pen the brāhmaṇa scratched this verse
out, thinking, "It is not possible for Kṛṣṇa to have
spoken this verse. Someone else must have inserted it."

Then he went begging, thinking, "Kṛṣṇa will carry what
we require on His own body? Perhaps He would inspire a
king or some wealthy man to come and help us, but He
wouldn't carry anything on His own head. The all-knowing
and all-powerful Lord? I have heard that he made the
poor brāhmaṇa Sudāmā into a king, but He didn't
physically carry any burden for him. I have never heard
this."

He put it out of his mind and went on begging. Wandering
and wandering, three o'clock passed and he still hadn't

                             28
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

collected a single thing. For instance one man said to
him, "Bābā, I am sorry, but our house is impure. For
three days we cannot give anything because one of our
family members has just died."

Like this he didn't get anything, so he started for
home. Meanwhile, at his home, what was happening? A
beautiful young boy with a dark complexion and wearing
yellow cloth arrived at the gate carrying a bahaṅgī, a
long stick with a bag of goods on each end, on his
shoulders. The bag on one end contained rice, dahl, ghee
and spices, and the bag at the other end contained
sugar, vegetables and different things. He did not
appear strong enough to carry it. He was young, perhaps
only fourteen years old, and His limbs were very
delicate. He was perspiring, and arriving at the gate,
He called out, "Guru-ānījī (wife of the spiritual
master), please open the door!"

The brāhmaṇa's wife replied, "What? My husband has no
disciples."

The boy replied, "Yes, yes, it is possible."

She said, "Then who?"

"I who am speaking, I am a disciple of your husband."

She thought, "What is this? Where has He come from?" She
was unable to open the door because she didn't even have
enough clothing to properly cover herself. But Kṛṣṇa
understood everything, so He handed His own shawl
through the door for her to wear. He said, "Mother,
Gurujī has sent Me. We have obtained all of these things
today. He grabbed Me and sent Me here, saying that he
will be coming soon. I asked him to please wait a minute
so I could get a drink of water, but he said, 'No, You
can drink water and all of that later. Go immediately to
my home.' Seeing that I am such a young boy, still he
loaded all of this on Me and sent Me here."

Hearing all of this the brāhmaṇa's wife began to weep,
and thought, "Such a tender young boy, and He is
perspiring as well! Doesn't this brāhmaṇa have any
mercy? He himself will come empty-handed, and he has
loaded everything on this poor boy? He has no mercy."

Showing her His back, the boy said, "Mother, he has also
scratched Me with his nails."

"Oh! It looks like it will bleed!" She took Him on her
lap and said, "My son, when he comes, I will give him a
good talking to! He poses as a big, self-controlled
devotee, but he cannot even show mercy to a child! My
dear son, please come inside." She brought Him inside
and said, "Sit here and I will prepare something. You
will not leave here without being fed."

She went to the kitchen and began to prepare the rice,
dahl and vegetables that He had brought. Then there was
a knock at the door; the brāhmaṇa had arrived. "Open the
door!" he said.

Very annoyed, the brahmaṇa's wife went to the door and

                             29
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

said, "Have you brought anything? You have come empty-
handed? You loaded everything on that poor boy and then
scratched Him with your nails? Don't you have even a
little mercy?"

The brāhmaṇa replied, "What? What are you talking
about?"

"You know very well - that boy you sent here loaded up
with everything you collected."

"Who? I don't know anything of all this!"

"You loaded it all on that poor child and you have
brought nothing yourself!"

"Where is he then?"

"Come inside and see!"

They went inside the house, but the boy was nowhere to
be seen. They searched the entire house, and all they
found was a thread of yellow cloth where He had been
sitting. After searching and not finding Him, the
brāhmaṇa took his Gītā in his hands and opened it.
Discovering that the red ink with which he crossed out
the verse was no longer there, he began weeping
bitterly, and said, "Today, for us, see how Bhagavān has
carried our burden! This is our evidence. My doubt is
now dispelled."

This is bhakti, and an example of the sādhana that
produces bhakti. Arjuna said, "My Lord, to do this, here
on this battlefield, will be very difficult. I could not
do man-manā bhava, and I also cannot do mad-bhakto.
Please tell me a method that is simple, straight and
easy."

Next the Lord will explain "mad-yājī - worship Me."




Chapter Three


mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru

Worship Me and Offer Obeisances to Me

sarva-guhyatamaṁ bhūyaḥ

śṛṇu me paramaṁ vacaḥ

iṣ? 'si me dṛḍham iti

tato vakṣyāmi te hitam

man-manā bhava mad-bhakto

mad-yājī māṁ namaskuru

mām evaiṣyasi satyaṁ te

                             30
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017


pratijāne priyo 'si me

Bhagavad-gītā (18.64-5)

Because you are so dear to Me, I am now telling you this
most hidden and confidential truth. Hear this from Me;
it is for your benefit. Always think of Me, become My
devotee, worship Me, offer prostrated obeisances to Me,
and then certainly you will come to Me. Because you are
dear to Me, I make this promise.

Here, what is the meaning of the word paramam? The
supreme essence of all the scriptures. If one is not
surrendered by his mind, body and words to the feet of
the spiritual master and Bhagavān, then Kṛṣṇa will not
reveal these truths to him. How must we surrender to the
guru? As it says in the Gītā:

tad viddhi praṇipātena

paripraśnena sevayā

upadekṣyanti te jñānaṁ

jñāninas tattva-darśinaḥ

Bhagavad-gītā (4.34)

One who approaches the guru with these three tendencies:
submission (praṇipātena), relevant inquiry
(paripraśnena) and sincere service (sevayā) is qualified
to understand this knowledge. If someone approaches the
guru and demands answers to his questions, or if he
doesn't attentively listen to the answers and has to ask
the same questions again, then the guru will only give
him superficial instructions. He will not give sarva-
guhyatama, the most hidden knowledge. Concerning this,
Kṛṣṇa has taken a vow that to anyone whose heart has not
been purified by austerities, who is not surrendered and
who has not served guru and Vaiṣṇavas, the essential
knowledge of the Gītā will not be given. First Kṛṣṇa
only told Arjuna to perform sacrifice:

yajñārthāt karmaṇo 'nyatra

loko 'yaṁ karma-bandhanaḥ

Bhagavad-gītā (3.9)

Perform your work as a sacrifice to Bhagavān, otherwise
it will be a cause of material bondage. After that the
Lord gave brahma-jñāna, and then He gave paramātma-
jñāna: "Try to meditate on the form of Viṣṇu who is the
size of a thumb inside your heart:

yoginām api sarveṣāṁ

mad-gatenāntarātmanā

śraddhāvān bhajate yo māṁ

sa me yuktatamo mataḥ


                             31
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

Bhagavad-gītā (6.47)

Yoga is better than fruitive work (karma), impersonal
knowledge (jñāna) or dry austerity (tapasya). And of all
types of yogīs, the one who has surrendered to
Paramātmā, who is fully united with Him in yoga and who
is exclusively worshipping Him with faith, is the best.

Up to here Kṛṣṇa has not revealed His ultimate form; He
has only recommended that we should be inclined towards
Paramātmā. Then at the end of the Gītā He gives the
verse that we are discussing, man-manā bhava. When He
says that we should always think of Him, who is He
referring to? Śyāmasundara, who has very, very beautiful
hair, and on whose head the peacock feather is always
present. He who is standing in His threefold-bending
posture under a kadamba tree in a kuñja of Vṛndāvana. He
who is holding the flute to His beautiful lips, with the
nectar of His heart pouring out from the holes of the
flute. We should always think of this Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa has
not revealed this form in the Gītā until this verse.

Giving the example of the gopīs, we have explained what
is man-manā bhava. In relation to mad-bhakto, we
explained what are śravaṇam, kīrtanam, smaraṇam, etc.
and we looked at how some great devotees performed
sādhana. We explained how they, by following the vision
presented in the books of the Gosvāmīs, practised
sādhana and attained Bhagavān.

In the stage of bhāva, man-manā bhava may be a little
possible, but only in the stage of prema can we really
always be thinking of Kṛṣṇa. It is very rare that
someone will reach the stage of bhāva in their spiritual
practice. In the process of becoming a devotee (mad-
bhakto), first there is sraddhā, then niṣṭhā, ruci,
āsakti and finally bhāva. At the stage of bhāva it can
be said that one has really become a devotee, and can
really begin to think of Kṛṣṇa.

Next Kṛṣṇa says, "Mad-yājī." Yājī means yajña,
sacrifice. If one has not yet developed any real love
for Bhagavān, but has just a little faith, then he can
perform yajña. This sacrifice is a treatment for
material entanglement. A verse concerning this is found
in the conversation between Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and
Rāya Rāmānanda (Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā
8.69)). The deity may be worshipped with sixteen kinds
of paraphernalia, or with twelve kinds, or with five
kinds, but if there is no love in the pūjā, Bhagavān
will never be satisfied. When hunger and thirst are
present, then food and water are tasteful. Food will
only be tasteful to the degree that there is hunger. If
we are not hungry, and someone serves us some nicely
prepared vegetables, we will say indifferently, "Oh,
what have you made?" Then tasting it, we will say,
"There is not enough salt in it." Or we will say that
there is too much salt in it. We will consider the sweet
rice to be too thin, the capātī to be out of shape and
the rasagullā to be flat, not round as it should be. But
if we are hungry, we may take a stale capātī, add some
water and perhaps squeeze a lemon on it, and consider
that it is very tasteful. If we are hungry, then food
will be tasteful.

                             32
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017


Similarly, if there is no love in a sādhaka, then
Bhagavān will not be hungry and will not be satisfied by
that devotee's arcana. If Bhagavān is made hungry by a
devotee's prema, then whether there have been sixteen
kinds of paraphernalia used or only one kind, He will
accept it.

patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ

yo me bhaktyā prayacchati

tad ahaṁ bhakty-upahṛtam

aśnāmi prayatātmanaḥ

Bhagavad-gītā (9.26)

Kṛṣṇa says here that if one simply offers Him a leaf, a
flower, some fruit or water with love, He will accept
it. Whatever is offered with love He will accept. In a
devotee's heart there should always be this love that
creates hunger in Kṛṣṇa.

There is one point here that we must understand. We
should not be thinking, "Why is this offering for the
pleasure of the Lord? Ultimately it is for our own
happiness." In the Bhāgavatam (1.2.6) it says:

sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo

yato bhaktir adhokṣaje

ahaituky apratihatā

yayātmā suprasīdati

The supreme dharma for human society is pure devotion to
Adhokṣaja, the Transcendental Person. This devotion must
be free of ulterior motives and practised constantly to
completely satisfy the self.

Don't attach the meaning to the last line of this verse,
yayātmā suprasīdati, that this is indicating our own
happiness and satisfaction. Then it becomes the desire
for enjoyment, lust. Ātmā here refers not to ourselves,
but that rather for Śrī Adhokṣaja, Bhagavān, we are
performing bhakti. Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the one to be
pleased, and if He is satisfied then our pūjā is
successful. If an activity has been done for our own
pleasure, then we can understand that it is only done
out of lust. But there is one thing: if Bhagavān is
pleased, then automatically the jīva attains his own
satisfaction. But if we are offering pūjā for our own
interests, then it will be sakāma-bhakti, devotion with
selfish motives. We must understand this point well: no
desire for our own pleasure should remain, otherwise it
becomes impure arcana. Most householders, while
performing arcana, pray, "O Lord, I offer the fruit of
all of my activity to Your feet." But what is it really
for? "The happiness and peace of myself and my family."
We should not offer arcana with such desires.

In Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, the story of Pṛthu Mahārāja shows

                             33
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

us what is proper arcana. King Vena was an atheist who
had no faith in Bhagavān and had actually insulted Him,
so the sages decided that he was no longer qualified to
occupy the throne. Simply by using sound vibration they
killed him, but actually it was the reactions to his own
sins that killed him. Now without a king, the subjects
were all very frightened. Dacoits were causing
disturbances and perpetrating cruel and mischievous
acts, so the people prayed to the sages for protection.
The sages decided to churn the thighs of the dead body
of Vena, and from them a sinful personality named Niṣāda
was produced. Next they churned the arms of Vena's body,
and from them Pṛthu Mahārāja appeared. What is the
meaning of pṛthu? One whose fame will be spread in all
directions because of his good qualities, and who can
protect and nurture his subjects, is called pṛthu. He
didn't appear alone; a woman appeared with him. Her name
was Arci, and just as Pṛthu Mahārāja was an empowered
incarnation (śaktyāveśa-avatāra), she was an incarnation
of Lakṣmī-devī. The activity that she performs is called
arcana. What does Lakṣmī do? She serves her master,
Nārāyaṇa, and if anyone serves Bhagavān in this way, it
is called arcana.

Because of the cruelty of Vena and others, the Earth had
hidden all of the food grains inside herself. She was
not giving anything, and therefore many sinful
personalities were born. The people were frightened,
hungry and praying for protection. Then Pṛthu Mahārāja
fixed an arrow to his bow, pointed it at the Earth and
said, "You have hidden all of the food grains within you
and are not giving them, so the people cannot be
nurtured. Therefore I will kill you."

Trembling in fear, the Earth personified assumed the
form of a cow and fled. Seeing that Pṛthu Mahārāja
pursued her wherever she went, she turned back and said,
"O Master, please don't do this. I am surrendered to
you, and you should not kill a cow. You are an
incarnation of Bhagavān, so you should protect me.
Please do this: bring a calf, and by my affection for
the calf, milk will automatically begin to flow from me.
Also bring a pot for the milk and a milkman, and then
please take milk from me."

Pṛthu Mahārāja transformed Svāyambhuva Manu into a calf,
then he himself milked all of the food grains from the
Earth, keeping them in his cupped hands. Enough food for
all living entities was produced and distributed, and
everyone was satisfied. After this, Pṛthu Mahārāja
initiated the performance of one hundred horse
sacrifices at Brahmavarta, where the river Sarasvatī
flows towards the east. They had completed ninety-nine
of the sacrifices when Indra, seeing that the final
sacrifice was about to be completed, thought, "If they
complete these one hundred sacrifices, then they will
disrespect me, and possibly even snatch away my position
as the king of heaven."

Therefore he came in an invisible form, stole the horse
and flew away into the sky. The sage Atri saw everything
and instructed the son of Pṛthu Mahārāja to kill Indra
immediately. Pṛthu's son fixed an arrow to his bow and
prepared to kill Indra, but then he saw that Indra was

                             34
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

wearing the false dress of a sannyāsī, with red cloth,
the markings of three horizontal lines on his forehead,
his body smeared with ashes and his hair knotted at the
top of his head. Thinking him to be a holy man, Pṛthu's
son did not release his arrows. This is the dress of an
atheist, not a devotee. Rāvaṇa wore this same type of
dress when he kidnapped Sītā.

When Indra saw that the son of Pṛthu, having been
informed that Indra was a fraud, was again coming to
kill him, he left behind the animal and the false dress
and fled. Again they started the sacrifice, and again
Indra came. This time he was carrying a trident in one
hand, a staff holding a human skull in the other, and
wearing red cloth and a garland of very large rudrākṣa
beads, the type that are jagged and scratch the skin.
Again Pṛthu's son prepared to kill him, and again Indra
left that dress and fled. Those that adopted this
discarded dress of Indra later came to be known as nara-
kapālī, those that hold a human skull. Previously there
were many of these so-called holy men, but now there are
very few. This happened several times, and each time
Indra left behind the dress of an atheist. There were
some people who adopted these different dresses and
started new atheistic orders.

Seeing that Indra would not be killed by his son, Pṛthu
Mahārāja became extremely angry. He fixed an arrow to
his bow and prepared to kill Indra himself, but the
sages began to pacify him, saying, "Mahārāja, don't be
angry. Please sit here and be peaceful. By mantra we
will call Indra and cast him into the fire."

Pṛthu Mahārāja took his seat, and the sages chanted
indraṁ yajāmahe with such potency that Indra was pulled
there from heaven along with his throne, which is
generally fixed in heaven. As the sages were about to
place him in the fire, he remembered the grandfather of
all, Lord Brahmā, who immediately appeared there and
said, "You cannot kill Indra. He is a partial expansion
of Bhagavān and serves Bhagavān in many ways. Therefore
don't place him in the fire. Release him, because the
aim of your sacrifices will be fulfilled anyway. You are
a great personality; for you what is the necessity of
killing Indra? The body is not the soul; the body is
different from the soul. Those that consider the body to
be the soul are atheists and conditioned souls. You know
this philosophical concept well, so why must you kill
Indra? Therefore release him, and again begin the
sacrifice."

On Brahmā's insistence they released Indra, and again
started the sacrifice. Then Viṣṇu appeared in the
sacrificial arena, with club, lotus, disc and conchshell
in His four hands and Indra at His side. He said, "Your
sacrifice is now complete. Forgive Indra. He is My
partial expansion, and through him I protect and nurture
the world, so you should not remain angry with him for
stealing the sacrificial horse. There are those who have
performed sacrifices with a desire for their own
enjoyment, such as kings who wanted to expand their
empires. Their arcana was based on a bodily conception
of life, but Pṛthu Mahārāja has performed these
sacrifices exclusively for the satisfaction of Hari,

                             35
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

knowing full well the difference between the body and
the soul. Your sacrifices are now successful."

The instruction of this sacrifice is that pūjā should be
done exclusively for the service of Hari and with full
knowledge of the soul (ātma-jñāna). Then Bhagavān will
be pleased. Pṛthu Mahārāja performed these sacrifices
for the protection and welfare of all living entities,
and therefore for the pleasure of Bhagavān. If this
prime factor, this service, is not there, then Bhagavān
will never be satisfied. This service was present in the
worship of Pṛthu Mahārāja, as it is in the worship of
the gopīs and all other great devotees.

We have given an example from the scriptures, now we
will tell a story from our own experience here in
Mathurā. From it we can see how we should have love and
attachment for our pūjā. There was a man who was
worshipping a śālagrāma-śilā. He didn't know all of the
mantras and finer details of pūjā, but in an ordinary
way he was going on with his worship. His vow was that
by four o'clock every morning he would return home from
bathing in the river Yamunā with some Yamunā water to
use for his pūjā and for applying his tilaka. He would
not use any water except Yamunā water, and with great
faith he performed his pūjā in this way without
deviation for about ten or fifteen years.

Then came one new moon night in the month of Māgha
[January-February], and it was extremely dark. A very
strong wind was blowing and it was raining very hard for
the entire night. The water of the Yamunā had risen and
was flowing very fiercely near Viśrāma-ghāṭa, where he
would usually bathe and collect his water. He was
shivering from the cold. It was approximately three
o'clock in the morning, but he wasn't sure of the time.
In those days there were no wristwatches. People would
simply look to see the positions of the Dhruva and śukra
stars and in this way estimate the time. But on this
night the stars could not be seen due to the dense
clouds. After bathing in the Yamunā, it was so dark and
raining so hard that he became lost and could not make
out the way to his home. He was in great anxiety about
protecting his vow, thinking, "How will I make it home?
What will I do?"

Then he saw a small boy of Mathurā coming. He had a
large bag on His head folded over twice to protect Him
from the rain, and He was carrying a lantern in His
hand. He asked in a very sweet voice, "Bābā, where are
you going?"

The man told Him the name of his street and his house
number, and the boy replied, "Yes, I know that place. I
am going near there. Come, I will show you the way."

The man placed his faith in the boy and they went off
together. On the way the boy didn't say anything at all
and the man thought to himself, "Why has this young boy
come out on a night like this?" Shivering, he continued
following the boy until He turned and said, "Bābā, here
is your street. Your house is up that way. I am going
onward."


                             36
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

The man began walking towards his house, but then some
doubt arose in his mind, and he turned and looked in the
direction of the boy. But he didn't see the boy or His
light. Putting his hand to his head, he began to repent:
"Bhagavān, to protect my vow, came in that dress,
holding a lantern to show me the way."

This is arcana. We should have this kind of firm
determination with no consideration of our own happiness
or unhappiness. This is real hunger, and if we perform
pūjā with this hunger, with this prema, then will
Bhagavān not accept it? Therefore Kṛṣṇa says
prayatātmanaḥ (Bhagavad-gītā (9.26)): if anyone simply
offers Him something with faith and love, He will
certainly accept it.

Also, if in the course of serving our guru he reprimands
us for something and we make a mountain out of a
molehill, thinking, "Gurudeva used to be so affectionate
to me, but now receiving this treatment I will leave
him," then this is wrong, and we shouldn't think in this
way. So many difficulties will come to test us in the
service of our guru, but our resolution should be that,
"birth after birth I will never leave my spiritual
master or my Lord."

There is another story related to pūjā and arcana. There
was a brāhmaṇa who was performing deity worship, and
after completing the pūjā he would make an offering of
food, and for this he would receive some wages. If he
first received payment, he would perform the pūjā, but
if he didn't receive any wages, he wouldn't do it. So
what was his real love for? In Bihar and Bengal there
are such professional pujārīs who travel from house to
house. They receive only uncooked food for the pūjā,
such as rice, vegetables and fruit, and some flowers and
clothing also. They then show these items to the deity,
complete the pūjā, and then stash all of the items in
their clothing. They go to a great many houses doing
pūjā like this, and at the end of the day they look to
see, "How much have I collected?" and then return home.

So this brāhmaṇa would only perform pūjā wherever he
could earn his wages. Once, when he was going away for a
couple of days, he lovingly called his son and said, "My
dear son, every day after bathing the deity make the
offering of food." The boy had not learned much about
pūjā, but still he replied, "I will do as you ask."

Later while his mother was preparing capātīs and sabjī,
the boy bathed the deity with Ganges water and tulasī
leaves and after dressing Him, he placed the deity back
on His siṁhāsana. Next he placed the capātīs and sabjī
before the deity, and carefully placing a tulasī leaf on
each preparation, said, "Ṭhākurajī, please take Your
meal now. I don't know all of the appropriate mantras,
but You please eat. I will remain standing just here."

He stood there for some time and then earnestly said,
"Ṭhākurajī, I have been standing here for nearly half an
hour now, and looking at Your plate I see that You still
have not eaten. When my father offers You food, You eat
it with great delight in only three or four minutes. But
just because I don't know the mantras, You are not

                             37
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

eating. Will You remain hungry just because my father is
not here? Then I also will not eat. As long as You don't
eat, I will also not take anything."

With great love and sincerity he was saying this. If
this sentiment is not in our chanting of the mantra,
then the mantra will never be effective. The mantra is
meant to awaken this sentiment within us, and if we are
serving the deity without this sentiment, then how will
He ever accept what we offer?

After waiting a few moments more, the boy said, "O Lord,
You will not eat? Then I will go to sleep without eating
or drinking."

Then Bhagavān could no longer restrain Himself. He leapt
down from His siṁhāsana, took His seat and ate the
offering with both hands. He didn't leave anything
whatsoever on the plate, and He was very pleased. The
boy took the empty plate back to the kitchen and said,
"Mother, Bhagavān has finished eating. With great
difficulty, I finally got Him to accept the offering."

The boy's mother said, "What do you mean 'He ate it'?
Where have the capātīs gone? Where is the sabjī ?"

"He ate them."

"He ate them? How is it possible?"

The next day the boy fed Bhagavān in the same way, and
the following day the brāhmaṇa returned home. His wife
said to him, "For two nights we have gone to sleep
without eating or drinking anything."

"Why?" the brāhmaṇa asked.

"Ṭhākurajī has eaten everything that was offered to
Him."

"Ṭhākurajī has eaten? How?"

After some deliberation, the brāhmaṇa called his son and
said, "My dear son, a rat must have taken the offerings.
They especially like to make their homes under old
siṁhāsanas like we have here. With great comfort he is
living and very easily he is getting whatever he needs
to eat, and he is also getting plenty of ghee to drink."

But his son insisted, "No, Ṭhākurajī has eaten it all!"

"All right, all right. Tonight you again make the
offering."

That night, unknown to his son, the brāhmaṇa hid nearby
while his son was making the offering to see if the
deity was really eating it or not. The boy said, "Lord,
don't be late. Please come quickly and take Your meal."
But the deity stayed in His place, so the boy said,
"Lord, why are You not eating? You have become shy? Why?
What has happened?"

Then softly a voice came: "Today, your father is
watching from over there. Therefore I will not come."

                              38
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                       5/5/2017


The boy replied, "Why? You must come and eat. If you
don't eat, I will be very unhappy."

Then the deity said, "Go over and simply touch your
father."

The boy did so, and at that time the boy's pure
sentiment arose within his father, and then the brāhmaṇa
could see how the deity was actually eating the
offering.

This is the necessary sentiment for performing pūjā. If
there is no such sentiment, no such faith, then there is
no qualification for pūjā. Therefore Kṛṣṇa says
(Bhagavad-gītā (9.26)):

patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ

yo me bhaktyā prayacchati

tad ahaṁ bhakty-upahṛtam

aśnāmi prayatātmanaḥ

I accept whatever is offered to Me by those who have
this exalted sentiment of pure devotion.

Arjuna said, "My Lord, it is not possible for me to do
this type of arcana here on this battlefield. Please
tell me an even easier way."

Then Kṛṣṇa said, "You need something easier? Then māṁ
namaskuru: just offer obeisances unto Me."

Not just any obeisances, but the meaning of the word
namaskāra is offering it without any false ego.

sarva-dharmān parityajya

mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

Bhagavad-gītā (18.66)

Give up all kinds of religion and just surrender
exclusively to Me.

Taking this instruction to heart   we should offer
obeisances to Kṛṣṇa. For one who   offers namaskāra to
Kṛṣṇa like this just once, it is   as if from above he has
jumped into a vast body of water   which is the ocean of
material existence - and then at   once looks back and
sees that he has already crossed   it.

daśāśvamedhī punar eti janma

kṛṣṇa-praṇāmī na punar bhavāya

Even one who has performed ten horse sacrifices takes
birth again, but one who has just once offered
obeisances to Kṛṣṇa never takes birth again.

One will not again enter the cycle of birth and death.
One will not be again forced into the womb of a mother

                             39
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

if they have offered obeisances to Kṛṣṇa just once with
exclusive surrender. This is the meaning of māṁ
namaskuru.

So Arjuna said, "My Lord, I offer obeisances to You not
just once, but hundreds of times!"

In this verse, Kṛṣṇa says, "Mad-bhakto - become My
devotee. Man-manā bhava - absorbing your mind and heart
in Me, engage in bhajana unto Me. At the end of that
bhajana, mad-yājī - worship Me, and after performing
pūjā offer prostrated obeisances to Me."

Now all four activities described in this verse have
become one. With great faith, sentiment and love,
sincerely following all of the limbs of bhakti, offer
your namaskāra to Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa. This is sarva-
guhyatama, the most hidden treasure, and paramaṁ vacaḥ,
the supreme instruction, of Bhagavad-gītā. If anyone
earnestly follows just this one verse, they will
certainly cross over the ocean of material existence and
attain exclusive prema at the feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa.

In condensed form this verse of the Gītā is showing us
how to attain the bhakti of Vraja, and then in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam this conception is delineated in an expanded
form. Therefore the beginning book is Bhagavad-gītā, and
we should never disrespect the Gītā in any way. The
instructions in it should serve as the foundation upon
which we will construct a palace of bhakti wherein we
will perform pūjā to Śrī Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa with great
love. This is the essence of Bhagavad-gītā.




Chapter Four


Vasanta-pañcamī

Vasanta-pañcamī is the first day of the vasanta, or
spring, season. Vasanta-pañcamī and the spring season
have their own special importance, and especially Hindu
people celebrate this with great respect. On this day,
we pick the mustard flower, barley and wheat, and offer
them to our favourite deity. From today, taking drums,
karatālas and different kinds of instruments, we play
vasanta-rāgas, special melodies for the spring season,
and the festival of Holī begins. There will be so many
songs and kīrtanas, and all are related to Śrī Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa. In previous times this was done even more, but
now society has changed somewhat. Still there is great
enthusiasm for this festival.

This time of year, in the trees, creepers, animals,
birds, in any conscious entity, rasa seems to increase.
In the mango tree, flower buds will certainly appear. In
the groves of mango trees, the cuckoo will eat these
buds and start making a kū-kū sound. The trees and
creepers will shed their old leaves and change, and be
newly decorated with new, soft, red leaves. It is as if
they have come to participate in Śrī Kṛṣṇa's vasantī-

                             40
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

rāsa, and with their new decoration, they are
encouraging Him. All of nature at once changes; such is
the spring season.

Also, in Vraja, from this very day, Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs
begin their vasantī-rāsa. There is one rāsa called
śāradīya, or autumn, rāsa, and another called vasantī-
rāsa. On this day, in Bengal, there is worship of the
goddess Sarasvatī. Bengal is mainly a province of
śāktas, those who worship śakti, potency. From the
potency of Rādhikā come Sarasvatī and Durgā, and
according to our line of thought, there is no special
difference between Sarasvatī and Durgā. With great
decoration the Bengalis worship Sarasvatī, the goddess
of knowledge. We worship śuddha-Sarasvatī, the dear
potency of Bhagavān who makes the jīvas move in the
direction of Bhagavān. There is also Vimalānanda-
Sarasvatī, who is the servant of śuddha-Sarasvatī and
another form of her. Vimala means pure: she who in pure
form gives great pleasure (ānanda) to Kṛṣṇa is known as
Vimalānanda-Sarasvatī. She bestows knowledge throughout
the entire universe, and the people of the world serve
her. Because śuddha-Sarasvatī is the root cause of the
good opportunity to hear pure hari-kathā, first of all
we should offer praṇāma to her, and then we may make an
effort to enter into everything related to vasantī-rāsa.

Kṛṣṇa has different rāsas at different times. Amongst
them, śāradīya-rāsa and vasantī-rāsa have their own
special importance. To give great pleasure to all of the
nitya-siddha-gopīs and sādhanasiddha-gopīs, Kṛṣṇa
commences the śāradīya-rāsa. No activity or pastime of
Kṛṣṇa is done for His own pleasure, whereas any activity
that we do, even up to serving the deity, is done for
our own pleasure. We are serving the guru for what? To
get some future pleasure from it, so we will attain
something. We may be performing bhajana, but in doing
that, the idea of giving pleasure to Kṛṣṇa is secondary.
It should be the prime consideration, but in our
conditioned state we are serving merely for our own
peace of mind. That which we do for ourselves is not
bhakti. Gradually, when what we do becomes solely for
the pleasure of Kṛṣṇa and His associates, then only will
it be bhakti. It must be purely for Kṛṣṇa, for Rādhā,
for Their associates, and then it will be śuddhabhakti,
unalloyed devotion.

Kṛṣṇa is Himself the crown jewel of those who are
ātmārāma and āptakāma: He has no unfulfilled desire. All
of His desires are satisfied, so He doesn't need to take
anything from anyone to become complete. In living
entities we find this quality of incompleteness: in our
happiness, knowledge, renunciation or whatever, we are
not complete. By taking from Kṛṣṇa, or taking from other
people, we want to become complete, but Kṛṣṇa is
ātmārāma and āptakāma. He needs nothing to enjoy, but
upon seeing the desires of His devotees, the desire to
enjoy arises within Him.

bhagavān api tā rātrīḥ

śāradotphulla-mallikāḥ

vīkṣya rantuṁ manaś cakre

                             41
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017


yoga-māyām upāśritaḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.29.1)

Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa, witnessing the arrival of those
autumn nights scented with blossoming jasmine flowers,
desired to enjoy loving affairs, and for this purpose He
employed His Yogamāyā potency.

Bhagavān is āptakāma, but still there is some desire in
His heart because He is rasika, and also raso vai saḥ -
the emporium of rasa. There is also desire in the hearts
of the gopīs to taste that rasa. Although Kṛṣṇa is
ātmārāma and āptakāma, today He will be drowned in rasa
because within the gopīs is the desire that Kṛṣṇa will
be pleased. For this purpose they worshipped the goddess
Kātyāyanī, and one year before, during the month of
Kārttika, she gave them a boon, and now their hearts are
eager for the fulfilment of that boon.

The description of śāradīya-rāsa has been given in
ŚrīmadBhāgavatam, and it is very beautiful and pleasing
to the heart.

Vasantī-rāsa has been described in Gīta-govinda by Śrī
Jayadeva Gosvāmī. One other topic of rāsa, āścarya-rāsa,
has been described by Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī in a small
book of Sanskrit poetry named Āścarya-rāsa-prabandha.

What is the meaning of rāsa? Maṇḍalī-vādya-nṛtya: when
in an independent way, one hero and many different
heroines come together and dance to instruments playing
scriptural music, it is called rāsa. This particular
type of dancing has been described in the scriptures,
and we do not see that this rāsa is performed by any
other incarnation of Bhagavān besides Kṛṣṇa. They are
able to do it, but have not, so then what to speak of
any human being. If any human does this, it is called
lust and considered degraded behaviour. When those
devotees who for millions of births have rejected
worldly desires and pleasures and have performed bhajana
with the sentiment of the gopīs, for the pleasure of
Kṛṣṇa meet together in a group in an independent, free
way, dancing to different instruments playing scriptural
music, that is rāsa. But the scriptures have accepted
this in relation to Kṛṣṇa only, and rejected any
possibility of it being related to anyone else. Kṛṣṇa
and the gopīs are engaged in the rāsa dance for each
other's pleasure, and in this there is such an increase
in prema that you will not find it fully described in
any scripture.

Therefore Kṛṣṇa Himself, the crown jewel of all
performers of pastimes, has said, "Upon coming together
for this rāsa dance, what has happened within My heart?
In My heart what are the feelings, and how are they
arising?"

Just as milk is heated and boils over, the waves within
Kṛṣṇa's heart are such that He Himself is unable to
describe them. And it is the same for the gopīs also:
when you have forgotten your own body, what can you
describe? Therefore a few elevated personalities, such

                              42
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

as Vyāsadeva, in the trance of meditation saw this
phenomenon from a position of neutrality. Otherwise they
would have become emotionally involved in it and become
bewildered also. The gopīs were bewildered, Kṛṣṇa was
bewildered, and unless one was seeing it from an aloof
position, one would not be able to describe it.
Therefore Vyāsa was able to describe a little of it.

The goddess Kātyāyanī had given the gopīs a boon, and on
the day of śāradīya-pūrṇimā, Kṛṣṇa saw the moon in a
special way. In the autumn season, when the moon is
full, there are no clouds, smoke or dust in the sky, and
all becomes clear. The season itself is very beautiful.
It is not too hot or too cold, and by the influence of
the moon all kinds of flowers bloom. In the early
evening, the sun sets, and the full moon casts red rays
on his dear one, the personification of the eastern
direction. Our commentators have said that when Kṛṣṇa
saw the moon, He remembered, "Oh, yes. We are members of
the Candra (moon) dynasty, and the original head of the
Candra dynasty is this very Candra whom I see now.
Tonight the indication has arisen in My heart that the
eastern direction is really the wife of Sūrya, the sun.
I am similarly applying colour to the faces of the
gopīs, meaning that I am enjoying amorous pastimes with
them, and in this there is no fault, especially since I
am actually the husband of the entire world."

Seeing the moon, this inspiration arose in Him. At that
time He remembered that a boon had been given to the
gopīs who had been performing austerities for millions
of births, and it was pūrṇimā, the full moon and the
last day of the month for pūjā. They were new gopīs,
young girls, and they gave invitations to Rādhikā,
Viśākhā, Lalitā and all of the gopīs of Vraja-maṇḍala:
"Today please come and join us in our pūjā." So on that
day when their worship was to be completed, Rādhikā,
Viśākhā and Lalitā joined them, but they didn't
participate in the worship. Why? Because they had
already been married, so for them there was no necessity
of saying, "We desire to have the son of Nanda as our
husband." But all of them were present there, and on
that very day Kṛṣṇa took their clothes and gave them all
a boon. He thought, "Today, I will fulfil the desires of
their hearts."

He played His flute, and when all of the gopīs came
there, He said, "I have already had darśana of all of
you, so now please return home. Your duty is to serve
your husbands."

The gopīs replied, "Who in this world can be a guru like
You? You are our gurudeva. There is no instruction as
beautiful as that which you have just given us. Telling
us to serve our husbands there is no greater instruction
than this, so then You are our guru. Previously we were
offering pūjā to Kātyāyanī, and now we have attained
Your service, so You are our gurudeva. Therefore accept
the pūjā we offered before, and if You don't, then You
are not fulfilling Your words, and the reaction to
committing aparādha will come upon You.

ye yathā māṁ prapadyante


                             43
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

tāṁs tathaiva bhajāmy aham

Bhagavad-gītā (4.11)

"'As they surrender unto Me, I reward them accordingly'
- these are Your words. Please fulfil the desires of our
worship. To You we have only brought ourselves; we have
nothing more to offer You, so please be happy. Before,
in our pūjā, we offered dried fruit, rock candy and
sweets - whatever we had, we offered to Kātyāyanī in our
pūjā, but in reality it was all meant for You. Please
accept it, otherwise You are not fulfilling Your words."

Kṛṣṇa could not defeat them with words. In his
description of āścarya-rāsa, Prabhodānanda Sarasvatī has
shown these things a little differently. He has written
that on that day Kṛṣṇa called through the flute, "Rādhe!
Rādhe!" and each of the gopīs thought, "He is calling my
name!"

jagau kalaṁ vāma-dṛśāṁ manoharam

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.29.3)

The meaning of this is very beautiful. Jagau means
"played", and manoharam means "he who steals the heart".
He played His flute in such a way as to steal the
attention of the whole world, and all the gopīs became
automatically attracted. Kṛṣṇa, by His beauty, by His
qualities, by His affection, by His rasa and by all the
other specialities of His style, stole the hearts of all
living entities. He sent a messenger from house to
house. How did He send it? By His lips, through the
medium of His flute, all the rasa of His heart was
expressed in His calling of the gopīs. The wood of the
flute, bamboo, is generally dry, but He injected it with
rasa. He gave a little blow into the flute, and from it
came a very peculiar vibration, the likes of which He
could not have made with His mouth alone.

Emerging from the flute, the vibration saw that in the
entire universe there was no fit receptacle for it, so
it crossed over the entire material universe
(brahmāṇḍa). Going up from there, it also crossed
Vaikuṇṭha, and even crossed Mathurā and Dvārakā.
Entering Vraja this sweet vibration stunned and
bewildered everyone, and put them to sleep. All of the
older ladies of Vraja became unconscious and knew
nothing of what was happening. The sakhās also remained
sleeping. Then, for making the gopīs give themselves to
Kṛṣṇa, that vibration arrived at their ears and saw that
the door was open. Coming across an open door, it
immediately entered through the medium of their ears,
and came to the most valuable of all things: their
hearts. The patience of the heart, the fear and shyness
towards guru - whatever was there, it plundered
everything. And only when it was leaving did the gopīs
come to know of it and say, "Where have our hearts
gone?" They saw that a thief had come and is going away,
where? In the direction from which that vibration came,
so they ran there.

When I joined the mission, there was an older brahmacārī
who would sit in the corner and chant japa, facing the

                              44
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

wall so that nothing would distract him. Every day he
would chant one lākha of harināma. One day while he was
sitting quietly and chanting, he heard a noise, and not
fully to his external senses, he looked to one side and
saw a thief escaping with a money box. As he got up to
pursue the thief, his dhotī began to fall down, so he
clutched it with one hand. With the other hand he was
still taking harināma - he didn't leave his harināma! In
this very state, with one hand on his chanting beads and
the other hand holding up his dhotī, yelling "Thief!
Thief!" he ran after him. Then his foot got caught in
his dhotī and he almost fell! At that time he was not
completely to his external senses, so how could he catch
the thief? He couldn't catch him, but he ran after him
in that condition anyway. Finally more people came and
the thief was caught.

At the time when Kṛṣṇa played the flute, the gopīs were
in a similar condition. It was early evening. One gopī
was serving her husband, another was milking a cow,
another was cooling milk by pouring it from one vessel
to another, another was decorating herself, and others
were doing other things. So when the thief comes, if
there is a delay of even one moment, it won't be
possible to catch him. Therefore the gopīs immediately
ran after Him. Some had applied make-up to only one eye,
and the remainder was in their hands as they left.
Others, in a bewildered state, dressed themselves in a
disorderly fashion, and as they went, their clothes were
dragging on the ground. Not fully externally aware, they
arrived in the arena of rāsa. This is called śāradīya-
rāsa.

During that rāsa, Kṛṣṇa's dearmost gopī exhibited some
jealous anger. Kṛṣṇa was thinking, "I am enjoying with
so many gopīs; no one is as fortunate as Me." But this
gopī thought, "All are equal to Me? He told Me that I
was the dearest to Him, and here I see that He is a
liar. He is dancing and singing with everyone."
Therefore She exhibited māna, jealous anger. Then Kṛṣṇa
grabbed Her and disappeared on the path. The gopīs began
searching. Searching and searching, they saw a pair of
footprints, and along with them was the footprint of
some kiśorī. One group of gopīs understood whose
footprint that was, but the sakhīs in the mood of
Candrāvalī didn't understand whose it was.

anayārādhito nūnaṁ

bhagavān harir īśvaraḥ

yan no vihāya govindaḥ

prīto yām anayad rahaḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.30.28)

The gopīs thought, "Certainly this particular gopī has
worshipped Śrī Govinda the best, therefore He has left
us and taken only Her with Him." Those who were servants
of that gopī recognised Her footprint, and were very,
very happy. "Today the Lord has taken our sakhī and
vanished!" As they went further and further, these gopīs
felt increasing ānanda, but the others were feeling

                             45
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

separation. "We see that Her footprints stop here -
where has She gone? Definitely that gopī had become
tired, and therefore He lifted Her up and carried Her on
His shoulders."

When they went a little further ahead, the gopīs noticed
a place on the ground where someone had been sitting,
and near it some flowers had fallen. There were also
some toe-prints on the ground. "It seems that here Kṛṣṇa
has stood on His toes to pick flowers, so here He has
certainly decorated Her with them." They went a little
further ahead and saw that very sakhī, alone and
lamenting, and some said, "Oh, it was this sakhī Kṛṣṇa
had taken with Him!" Seeing Her crying and crying, the
other gopīs felt some sympathy for Her. Leaving Her
behind, Kṛṣṇa had gone on His way; otherwise they would
have been jealous of Her.

There are so many beautiful things described there in
Chapters 29-33 of the Tenth Canto. In the end, they
again met Kṛṣṇa. He appeared before them, a little
ashamed, and said, "Sakhīs, I am certainly very grateful
to you." They put a question about loving reciprocation
to Him, and His answer was very beautiful. Here we
complete our summary of śāradīya-rāsa.

Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Rāya Rāmānanda, Svarūpa Dāmodara
and Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita were together at the Ratha-yātrā
festival. It was the day of Herā-pañcamī. At that time,
in a drama that was being enacted for the Lord's
pleasure, Śrīvāsa saw that the maidservants of Lakṣmī-
devī had arrested the gopīs and were harassing them. As
a form of taxation they were snatching their ornaments
and punishing them. Very happily they were playing
horns, laughing and saying, "Hey cowherds, you work only
with milk, and you want to be equal to Lakṣmī-devī, the
goddess of fortune? Today she will teach you a good
lesson!"

They were taking some of the gopīs' clothing and beating
them with that, and taking some taxation from them.
Seeing all of this, Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita was very pleased,
and said, "Just see! What is there in Vṛndāvana? The
garlands there are composed merely of guñjā flowers.
Where would they get good quality ornaments? All they
have are these ornaments made of flowers, and they are
wearing these things. Their opulence is petty in
comparison to the massive opulence of Lakṣmī."

Then Svarūpa Dāmodara said, "What is the nature of the
gopīs' ankle bracelets? They are more valuable than the
diamonds on Lakṣmī-devī's head. Only these simple
flowers are necessary for them to attract Śrī Kṛṣṇa.
Since nothing else is necessary, their opulence is the
highest." In this way he described the greatness of the
gopīs.

Mahāprabhu said, "He is correct. I agree that the prema
of the gopīs is the highest of all - it is even higher
than that of Lakṣmī. And amongst all of the gopīs who is
the best?"

Svarūpa Dāmodara replied, "Rādhikā. Rādhikā's prema is
the most advanced of all."

                             46
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017


"How?"

"In the rāsa-līlā, Kṛṣṇa left all others and vanished,
taking only Her. He took Her in a deceptive way."

"Why with deception?"

"Because He was afraid of the other gopīs. If He had
taken Her in front of everyone, then perhaps Candrāvalī
and the others would have become jealous of Rādhikā's
love."

Mahāprabhu said, "We don't want to hear about Him
stealing Her. Because the name of the particular gopī
that He took is not mentioned in the Bhāgavatam, it
could have been Candrāvalī or any other gopī. Please
tell us how Kṛṣṇa directly considers Rādhā only to be
the best."

Here we turn to Jayadeva's description of vasantī-rāsa:
"My heart is palpitating, for I desire to write such a
thing which in this life I have not written before, and
which is not mentioned anywhere: that Kṛṣṇa will fall at
the feet of Rādhikā. We know it well, but Kṛṣṇa is the
Supreme Controller, the cause of all causes, and the
source of all other incarnations. That He falls at the
feet of His own potency who is the form of His
maidservant - I don't know if this is proper, but my
heart is saying that without Kṛṣṇa putting His head at
Her feet, She will not be appeased! I don't know if I am
able to write it."

Jayadeva goes on to describe that on the plains of
GirirājaGovardhana, at Candra-sarovara, Candra remained
throughout the whole of one of Brahmā's nights. What is
the duration of Brahmā's night? Millions of yugas. In
order to witness the rāsalīlā he stayed there, so it is
called Candra-sarovara.

In the spring season, all of the fruits and flowers in
Vṛndāvana come out. The she-cuckoo starts her kū-kū
sound, the peacock starts his ke-kā sound, and it is as
if the pigeons are playing the conchshell, making their
ko-ko sounds. They are all making their own sounds, and
collectively it sounds as if they are playing a śahanāī.
In this way all of the birds and animals become happy,
and there is no one who is not dancing. Forming groups,
Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs start dancing. All young unmarried
girls are present there, and they had been waiting for
one year. For dancing with Kṛṣṇa, for meeting Kṛṣṇa -
for a whole year a fire of separation had been burning
inside them. Not for themselves, not for lust, but for
mitigating this separation.

For really becoming immersed in Kṛṣṇa's rasa, one must
enter into this poetry composed by Jayadeva Gosvāmī.
Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu, His heart full of rasa,
at night would tell Svarūpa Dāmodara, "Please recite
Gīta-govinda for Me." Hearing it, immediately His
pleasure would increase. Svarūpa Dāmodara would read
precisely what Caitanya Mahāprabhu desired to hear.
Sometimes it was the poetry of Jayadeva, sometimes
Caṇḍīdāsa, sometimes Vidyāpati, and sometimes he would

                             47
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

read verses from the five chapters describing the rāsa
dance in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

The gopīs were clapping their hands as if they were
karatālas, and they played drums, the vīṇā and the
sitāra. It was divinely beautiful as the gopīs played
one rāga after another. There are some melodies in which
there is no rasa, so they played only the rāgas that
increased the rasa. Kṛṣṇa sang in a very high pitch, and
in different melodies. The gopīs then sang one song in a
higher pitch than Kṛṣṇa. He wanted to sing higher, but
couldn't, and He could only say, "Sādhu! Sādhu! (Very
nice! Very nice!)" Kṛṣṇa was dancing, and with Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, He danced with such speed and dexterity that He
Himself was astonished, and again He chanted, "Sādhu!
Sādhu!"

With one gopī Kṛṣṇa was holding hands, with another He
was dancing by jumping up and down, another He was
embracing, and another He was kissing on the hand.
Sometimes, with His eyes half-open in great prema, He
would look in the direction of a particular gopī. He
would follow a certain rhythm of racing behind one gopī
after another, and this is how vasantī-rāsa is
described.

In a fraction of a second, as short as the blink of the
eyes, thousands more gopīs arrived and started dancing.
Rādhikā saw that at that time Kṛṣṇa's topmost, supremely
powerful potency (paramaiśvarya-śakti) was not working;
He had stopped it. Here He kept the cause behind
pastimes, Yogamāyā, separate from Him. He placed all of
these potencies far away by telling them, "At this time
you will not do anything; for now you just sit quietly
and watch." In this pastime of Kṛṣṇa, everything was
forgotten. Here, because aiśvarya was not manifest,
Kṛṣṇa didn't know that "I am Bhagavān," and the gopīs
didn't know that "We are Īśvarī, we are the root of
Yogamāyā." All was forgotten.

After a little while, Rādhikā saw, "Kṛṣṇa is a big
cheater. He is cheating Me. He seems to be dancing only
with Me, but actually He is dancing with everyone. Only
because of His speed and dexterity does it seem that He
is alone with Me."

Then Rādhikā exhibited some māna, jealous anger. If we
feel this emotion, there is some selfishness in it, but
in the hearts of devotees there is no selfishness. In
Her heart there is never any envy, but even if there is
some, it is only a transformation of prema and
mahābhāva. Don't consider this to be a deformation, but
rather an aspect of Her variegatedness, Her speciality.

There is milk: add some sugar, and it becomes sweet. Mix
a little kevrā, then a little camphor and other things,
and it becomes more and more sweet and tasteful. Like
this Rādhikā has Her own uniqueness, and for making
Kṛṣṇa even happier, She exhibited some māna. She left
the rāsa dance and went to a kuñja, but then what
happened? Upon arriving there She felt remorse and
thought, "Why did I leave Kṛṣṇa's association? He didn't
leave Me; I left Him. If there is any unfortunate woman,
it is Me. There is no one as unfortunate as Me."

                             48
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017


Meanwhile Kṛṣṇa met one sakhī and requested her, "Please
go to Rādhā and tell Her that Kṛṣṇa is saying, 'I am
very unhappy for You. In the future I will never do such
a thing as I did again, and You will always be happy.
Please forgive Me.'"

The sakhī went to Rādhikā and seeing Her condition said,
"Why are You behaving like this? Leaving Kṛṣṇa, You came
here. He tried to please You, but You wouldn't accept
it, so why are You upset?" Just then Lalitā appeared
there and said, "Kṛṣṇa is a liar! Don't trust Him! Don't
ever reveal Your simplicity to Him! Remain crooked,
otherwise You won't be able to have straightforward
dealings with Him! He will never understand Your value,
so always remain crooked."

The sakhī tried in many ways to pacify Rādhikā, but She
would not be appeased. When the sakhī returned to Kṛṣṇa
and told Him this, He said, "Somehow I must appease
Her." Then Kṛṣṇa thought He would play a joke to appease
Her. Pretending to be very unhappy, His face became
withered and saying, "Now I am going!" He left there and
hid in a nearby kuñja. Then some sakhīs followed behind
Him whispering, "Where is He going? Let us see."

He entered a kuñja and laid down amongst some large
rocks. Seeing Him lie down, the sakhīs returned to
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, Lalitā, Viśākhā and the others, and
told them, "He has gone to a nearby kuñja. Being very
unhappy and in pain from Your separation, He was not
able to go any further, and He has fallen asleep."

They said, "Where?" The sakhīs then led Rādhikā and the
others to the kuñja. They peered into the entrance of
the kuñja and saw that His face was covered. They
couldn't tell if He was crying, or sleeping, or what He
was doing. Then, moving closer, they saw that He was
sleeping. His eyes were closed, and His face was a
little covered. The gopīs exchanged hand signals,
because at that time, their supreme enemy, the flute,
was hanging loosely in His hand! They thought that they
should take it. They did not consider for a moment that
they might be entering a trap, but just that they should
take it.

Then Rādhikā said, "Yes, we should take it, but who will
do it? Who will tie the bell around the cat's neck? Who
will take the responsibility of snatching the flute from
His hand? Friends, this is not a simple thing! His hand
is like a snake. If someone approaches and tries to take
the flute, the snake will bite him, give its 'poison',
and it will never leave him! Therefore who will dare to
try?"

All of them thought together, and concluded that it
would not be possible for anyone except Śrīmatī Rādhikā,
so She said, "If all of you insist, then certainly I
will try."

Very, very slowly, just as a cat does, She crept closer.
Walking very slowly and stealthily, smiling slightly and
watching Him, She went closer. But what was Kṛṣṇa doing?
He had heard everything that they had discussed amongst

                             49
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

themselves, and feeling that He should enjoy Himself a
little, He thought, "If Rādhā is to be appeased, there
must be some direct conversation between us. But there
has not been such an opportunity. Therefore I will let
the flute be taken, and then I will see how I can talk
to Rādhā. I will ask each of them, 'Where did you put My
flute?' and in the course of asking all of them, I will
necessarily come to Rādhā, and then I will get the
chance. It will be a moment of great happiness!"

Hence Kṛṣṇa allowed His hand to become slack. Thinking
Him to be asleep, slowly Rādhikā crept near to Him and
saw that He was apparently deeply asleep. When someone
is sleeping lightly, they can be easily awakened, but
when someone is in deep sleep, you cannot easily awaken
them. Kṛṣṇa appeared to be sleeping like that. Quickly
She snatched the flute from His hand, and at once the
gopīs ran from the kuñja. As they were all running with
their long hair swinging to and fro, Kṛṣṇa opened His
eyes, saying, "Hari, Hari… hey, where has My flute
gone?" He ran outside the kuñja and said to the gopīs,
"You have stolen My flute!"

He said to each gopī, "Did you take it?" until He came
to Rādhā. She replied, "What will I do with this useless
piece of bamboo? Yes, I took it, and I will burn it
also! It is only one piece of bamboo. In our garden we
have thousands of sticks of bamboo, so what is the big
deal about only one piece of bamboo? You can come and
cut thousands and take them!" In this way they were
mutually joking, but they didn't realise that Kṛṣṇa was
knowingly joking with them.

Still Rādhikā was not appeased, although internally She
desired to meet Kṛṣṇa. He had already seen that sending
a messenger would not do it, so what did He do next? He
Himself expanded into Śyāmalī Sakhī. Assuming a very
beautiful form, she approached the gopīs with a basket
of flowers in her hand, and in a sweet voice called out,
"By rendering service to someone, I will mitigate all of
their distress and fatigue, and they will become very
happy."

At that time Rādhikā and the sakhīs were feeling
fatigued and unhappy. Seeing Śyāmalī, really Rādhikā did
not recognise this sakhī as Kṛṣṇa Himself, and Lalitā,
Viśākhā and the others also did not recognise Him. When
Kṛṣṇa assumes another form, who will recognise Him? Even
when an ordinary actor changes dress, we cannot
understand who it is. For this purpose He employed
Yogamāyā, and therefore no one could recognise Him.

Śyāmalī pleased Rādhikā by giving Her a flower garland
that emanated a special fragrance. Rādhikā thought,
"Where has this fragrance come from? Whose fragrance is
this?" Knowing it to be related to Kṛṣṇa, She was very
pleased.

Śyāmalī began saying to Rādhikā, "In this world, there
is no one who is as kind, who has as many good
qualities, who shows respect to everyone, who is as
grateful and who is as expert in all sixty-four arts as
Kṛṣṇa is. What to speak of just in Vṛndāvana, in the
entire brahmāṇḍa there is no one equal to Him. And You?

                             50
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

You have so many good qualities and You are so
beautiful, so towards Him You should not commit any
offence."

Praising Kṛṣṇa like this, and praising Rādhā like this,
Śyāmalī proved that Kṛṣṇa was not at fault. Rādhikā was
fully appeased, and in the end for Her ultimate
happiness, the final weapon was in His hand. Having
returned to His original form, He said to Rādhikā, "In
Me there is a fire of separation, and only the touch of
Your feet can cool it. Therefore be merciful and
decorate My head with Your feet, because by doing so You
will also become happy."

Being pleased, Rādhikā said, "Now agree to one thing.
The flower bracelets on My feet are broken; please
rearrange them. And My hair plait has become loose;
please tie it."

Seeing that He had followed Her every order, She
thought, "He has obeyed all of My orders very nicely. He
will never go to another gopī. Come, let there be rāsa."
At that time, the rāsa-līlā was performed at Candra-
sarovara, and this is how vasantī-rāsa is described in
Gīta-govinda.

Although we do not have the qualification to engage in
śravaṇa and kīrtana of this topic, in brief we have
tried to describe this rāsa and what sentiments of love
came in it. Tasting and tasting this, just see how the
condition of Mahāprabhu became! It was a wonderful
thing! Svarūpa Dāmodara and Rāya Rāmānanda would
describe it to Him. I am only an ordinary person full of
anarthas, but in that place where Svarūpa Dāmodara and
Rāya Rāmānanda are describing this, Kṛṣṇa Himself, full
of rādhā-bhāva, will be there as a listener in the form
of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and He receives so much
ānanda from it. Therefore we will silently remember this
vasantī-rāsa, and when one day genuine spiritual greed
arises in our hearts, we will be able to directly serve
this rāsa.




Chapter Five


Niśānta-bhajana

(1)

The daily pastimes of Bhagavān are divided into eight
parts, and the period from three o'clock in the morning
until the rising of the sun is called niśānta-līlā. It
is the end (anta) of the night (niśā). When the living
entity begins performing bhajana it is like the rising
of the sun. The jīva has been averse to Bhagavān since
time immemorial, and due to this mentality he wanders
through eighty-four lākhas of species.

kṛṣṇa bhuli' sei jīva anādi-bahirmukha


                             51
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

ataeva māyā tāre deya saṁsāra-duḥkha

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 20.117)

Forgetting Kṛṣṇa, the living entity has been attracted
by māyā since time immemorial. Therefore māyā gives him
all kinds of misery in his material existence.

kṛṣṇa-bahirmukha hañā bhoga-vānchā kare

nikaṭ-stha māyā tāre jāpakyā dhare

Prema-vivarta

When the living entity becomes averse to Bhagavān, Māyā-
devī pounces on him and arrests him.

bhayaṁ dvitīyābhiniveśataḥ syād

īśād apetasya viparyayo 'smṛtiḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.2.37)

Misunderstanding himself to be a product of the material
energy, the living entity becomes overwhelmed with fear.
Deceived by māyā, his position becomes reversed -
instead of being the servant of Bhagavān, he becomes
opposed to Him.

Bhagavān's Mahāmāyā is of two types: āvaraṇātmikā-māyā,
which covers the conditioned soul, and vikṣepātmikā-
māyā, which arrests the conditioned soul and casts him
into the eightyfour lākhas of species. The first covers
the jīva with a material physical body and with a subtle
body composed of mind, intelligence and false ego. By
identifying himself with these gross material coverings,
the internal identity (svarūpa) of the living entity
becomes covered. But it is erroneous to think that when
Kṛṣṇa comes to this world His svarūpa also becomes
covered. The clouds do not cover the sun, but they can
obstruct our vision so that we are unable to see the
sun. But if we go up in an airplane, we can then see
that the sun is actually shining and that the clouds are
situated below it. The clouds are limited, whereas the
sky is unlimited, and just as the clouds cannot cover
the unlimited sky, māyā cannot cover Kṛṣṇa. Where there
is Kṛṣṇa, there is no māyā. There, ashamed, she remains
standing behind Him and is unable to do anything.

But Bhagavān is so merciful that He descends to the
material realm in the form of Paramātmā and is always
present in the heart of the jīva as the witness. He
watches over us and looks for any pretext to bring us
back to Him. He is always there in the heart of the
living entity watching and waiting for such a good
opportunity. He is very merciful, but not just merciful;
He is the intimate friend of the jīva. He knows all
about how we can acquire our ultimate good fortune.

When the living entity becomes opposed to Bhagavān and
māyā pounces on him, some desires arise in his heart.
After fulfilling these desires, he realises that, "All
of this is actually not happiness after all." A baby
sees fire, and thinking that it appears very pleasing,

                              52
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

gets up to touch it, but his mother says, "If you touch
the fire you'll be burnt." So she forbids him and takes
him in her lap. But he won't listen and jumps out of her
lap to try again, so what will she do then? She grabs
his hand and touches it momentarily to the fire, and
upon feeling the burning sensation, the baby pulls his
hand away. Never again will he go near the fire. In the
same way that Bhagavān is very merciful, Māyā-devī is
also very merciful. Allowing the jīva to enjoy and
helping him to attain what he desires until the jīva
realises, "In reality this is poisonous!", Bhagavān then
begins to bring the jīva towards Himself.

brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva

guru-kṛṣṇa-prasāde pāya bhakti-latā-bīja

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 19.151)

It is the immense good fortune of the living entity that
Bhagavān comes to him in the forms of guru and
Vaiṣṇavas. He sends the guru to him, and sends the
Vaiṣṇavas to him, and through them the seed of the
creeper of devotion is planted in the jīva's heart. As
long as we do not have this seed of bhakti, for us it is
still niśā, night.

yā niśā sarva-bhūtānāṁ

tasyāṁ jāgarti saṁyamī

yasyāṁ jāgrati bhūtāni

sā niśā paśyato muneḥ

Bhagavad-gītā (2.69)

When sādhus and Vaiṣṇavas are awake, it is night for
worldly people, and what is day for worldly people is
night for the sādhu. Those that have been arrested by
māyā are asleep to everything related to Bhagavān, and
the sādhus that are awake to Bhagavān are asleep to the
enjoying spirit of worldly people. Therefore, for those
not engaged in bhajana, it is niśā, night. They are
trapped in the night of sense enjoyment. When the night
is coming to an end it is called niśānta, and what
brings about the end of the conditioned soul's night?

satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-saṁvido

bhavanti hṛt-karṇa-rasāyanāḥ kathāḥ

taj-joṣaṇād āśv apavarga-vartmani

śraddhā ratir bhaktir anukramiṣyati

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.25.25)

In the company of Vaiṣṇavas, hari-kathā is very tasteful
to the ears and heart. By this process one progresses
very quickly on the devotional path and will attain
śraddhā, rati and bhakti in sequence.

What is the first sign that the night of the jīvas'

                              53
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

enjoying spirit is coming to an end? One attains the
association of guru and Vaiṣṇavas, and then comes to
Vṛndāvana, where day and night hari-kathā is being
spoken. So when the conditioned soul meets a real sādhu,
who can give causeless mercy, then it appears that the
night of his wandering through eighty-four lākhas of
species is coming to an end, and daybreak is coming. The
darkness of māyā will be dissipated, and this is called
niśānta-bhajana.

It is compared to the time when the night is completed
and symptoms of daybreak begin to appear. The peacock
makes the ke-kā sound, and the sparrows begin making the
chā-chā sound. The birds' chā-chā sound is like the
devotees relishing hari-kathā, and the ke-kā sound
indicates that having accepted initiation (dīkṣā) from a
spiritual master, the stars that were so luminous during
the night - meaning the attraction for sense enjoyment,
which until now was shining for the conditioned soul -
are no longer visible. The eastern horizon begins to
turn red, and now we understand that the night has come
to an end, meaning that the conditioned soul's wandering
in the material world will soon come to an end. This is
niśānta-bhajana, and is the dawning of śraddhā, faith.
And where does this faith come from? The thing which
gives śraddhā to the heart of a jīva and moves him in
the direction of liberation and bhakti more than
anything else is sādhu-saṅga, keeping company with
saintly persons. Bhagavān Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself especially
came in the dress of a devotee and went door to door
giving the holy name.

yāre dekha, tāre kaha 'kṛṣṇa'-upadeśa

āmāra ājñāya guru hañā tāra' ei deśa

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 7.128)

Tell everyone you meet the instructions of Kṛṣṇa. Under
My order become a guru and deliver everyone in this
land.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu went from door to door telling
the the living entities, "I went to My guru and he told
Me, 'Study Vedānta!' But I said, 'Gurudeva, I am a big
fool. There is no other fool like Me in this world, so
how will I study Vedānta? Please be merciful and tell Me
an easier method.'

"Then My gurudeva said, 'Alright. I see that You are
unqualified to study Vedānta. Then just remember this
verse:

harer nāma harer nāma

harer nāmaiva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva

nāsty eva gatir anyathā

Bṛhan-nāradīya Purāṇa

"'By chanting the holy name You will attain Your

                             54
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

ultimate good. Besides this there is no other way, no
other way, no other way.'" Saying it once was not enough
- he said it three times. Why? To make our firm faith
arise in harināma: "Definitely you will receive your
highest good fortune by this!" If he had not said it
like this, would we have any faith in the holy name?
Besides harināma there is no other way to attain
happiness and peace of mind and cross over the ocean of
material existence. To make faith arise in the hearts of
the living entities, Mahāprabhu has given this verse.

Suppose a man is sleeping. How will you awaken him? By
calling him: "Hey, get up!" Similarly, loudly singing
nāma-saṅkīrtana acts as a mother who awakens the jīva
who is deeply asleep in the night of illusion. And in
Kali-yuga, the best of all holy names is the mahā-
mantra: Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare;
Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.

khāite śuite yathā tathā nāma laya

kāla-deśa-niyama nāhi, sarva siddhi haya

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya-līlā 20.18)

By chanting it at any time or place, even while eating
or lying down, the holy name gives all perfection.

When I first joined the mission, a doubt arose in me:
"There are no names higher than Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. Mahāprabhu
would go mad by chanting 'Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa,' but in the
mahā-mantra the name of Srīmatī Rādhikā is not given in
an explicit way. Some chant 'Rādhe Kṛṣṇa, Rādhe Kṛṣṇa,
Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Rādhe Rādhe; Rādhe Śyāma, Rādhe Śyāma,
Śyāma Śyāma, Rādhe Rādhe.' What is the harm in that?
Śyāma is a more direct name of Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana, and
by chanting 'Hare Kṛṣṇa' we have to assume that 'Hare'
means Rādhikā. Also 'Rāma' can refer to either the Rāma
of Ayodhyā, Saṅkarṣaṇa Rāma or Balarāma. The direct name
of Rādhikā is not found in the mahā-mantra."

Then I went and asked my gurudeva and other Vaiṣṇavas
also, but perhaps considering me to be unqualified to
understand at that time, they merely said, "The mahā-
mantra is cintāmaṇi, touchstone, and included within it
is sādhya and sādhana, everything. If you need to know
more, read Jaiva-dharma - the answer is there."

Jaiva-dharma states that there is so much rasa in the
mahā-mantra that there is no need to chant any other
names. Mahāprabhu said, "I had faith in what My gurudeva
had said, and I started chanting the holy name. After
chanting and chanting, one day I saw that very name
personified standing before Me in an attractive
threefold-bending posture, attired in the dress of a
cowherd boy, playing the flute, smiling and looking in
My direction with dancing eyebrows. Through the medium
of My eyes, My heart left My body, and laughing, crying
and rolling on the ground, I forgot everything."

Prakāśānanda Sarasvatī had asked Mahāprabhu, "Why are
You not studying Vedānta? Why are You crying?"

Mahāprabhu replied, "It is this holy name that makes Me

                             55
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

sing, dance and cry. In this mahā-mantra there is so
much rasa; please just hear the explanation of only one
word of it. Hare - what is its meaning? Harati kuñje yāḥ
sā rādhikā: Rādhikā enchants Kṛṣṇa's mind in such a way
that it steals Him away to the kuñja. From the word
haraṇa, which means "to steal", comes harā, which
becomes hare. Tell Me then - how beautiful is the
meaning hidden within it?"

In this way, Mahāprabhu, Rūpa Gosvāmī and Raghunātha
dāsa Gosvāmī have extracted this very beautiful meaning
from the mahā-mantra. In the indirect form, parokṣavāda,
there is so much rasa and ānanda that it is more than
what is found in the direct form. In this way they have
described the glories of the mahā-mantra as being
limitless. The spiritual master, the Vaiṣṇavas and the
scriptures make faith in this understanding arise in the
heart of the living entity, and this is called
niśāntabhajana.

(2)

Niśānta-bhajana is of two types: one is within the realm
of sādhana, and the other is within the realm of
perfection, and is rāgānuga-bhajana. In sādhana it is
the first stage of bhakti and is compared to the end of
the night in Kṛṣṇa's līlā. In Kṛṣṇa's pastimes, when
night has passed and daybreak is dawning it is called
niśānta-līlā. It lasts for three hours - from three
o'clock until six o'clock. By the accumulation of
devotional merit (sukṛti) we attain sādhu-saṅga, and
when the seed of faith is planted within us, it is
niśānta-bhajana. And as the word niśā means "night",
here it refers to the darkness of night when the living
entity is opposed to Kṛṣṇa.

bhavāpavargo bhramato yadā bhavej

janasya tarhy acyuta sat-samāgamaḥ

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.51.53)

When the jīva attains saintly association, then this
darkness of māyā begins to dissipate and he can
understand that his night will soon be ending, meaning
that his wandering through countless lifetimes in this
material world will soon be finished.

bhaktis tu bhagavad

bhakta-saṅgena parijāyate

sat-saṅgaḥ prāpyate pumbhiḥ

sukṛtaiḥ pūrva-sañcitaiḥ

Bṛhan-nāradīya Purāṇa (4.33)

By the accumulation of sukṛti, one attains sādhu-saṅga,
and by sādhu-saṅga one attains bhakti. But as long as
one does not have resolute faith in the words of a
sādhu, then it will not be real sādhu-saṅga. "I will die
before I fail to follow the instructions of the sādhu" -
this is the necessary sentiment for performing bhajana.

                              56
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017


The kingdom of sādhana-bhajana for the living entity
stretches from the beginning stage of śraddhā to the
elevated stage of bhāva. In order for śraddhā to arise
within a jīva, in the beginning there must be some
sukṛti that has been acquired unknowingly. This sukṛti
is acquired by unknowingly performing any activity
related to Bhagavān or His devotees, and from the
influence of this sukṛti one attains saintly
association.

The story of Prahlāda Mahārāja illustrates this point.
In his previous life he was a brāhmaṇa, and in his youth
he was well educated and eventually married. He was
adorned with all good qualities and served his parents
faithfully. Once while going somewhere, by chance he
fell into bad association and became attached to a
prostitute. He became so attached to her that he
abandoned the service of his parents, abandoned his wife
and children, sold everything in his house and destroyed
his household life. Stealthily he had taken whatever
possessions he had to this prostitute. Then one day that
prostitute saw that she had taken everything from him
and that he was now penniless, so she began to ignore
him. She would converse with others in his presence, but
she would not speak to him and would just tell him to go
away. Being very distressed, one morning he left that
place and wandered and wandered all day through a jungle
and became very hungry and thirsty. Then evening began
to fall, and being a winter night it began to rain. He
thought, "Now where will I go?" He was fearing that he
might be attacked by a tiger or bear. Then he saw an
old, neglected temple, so he entered it and lay down.
But the discord with the prostitute was paining him like
a thorn in his heart, so he was unable to sleep and all
night he just cried and worried.

In another place that prostitute had repented and began
searching for him. In the night she took shelter in that
same temple not knowing that he was also there. She also
just cried and cried and was unable to sleep. When the
next morning came, they saw each other, and crying, she
at once went and fell at his feet. With great affection
he embraced her, and the previous incident was
forgotten. They returned to their life of misconduct,
but at that time no one understood what great benefit
they received on that day. That day had happened to be
Nṛsiṁhacaturdaśī, the holy appearance day of Lord
Nṛsiṁhadeva, and all day neither of them had drank any
water or eaten anything. They had fasted all day, and
had also remained awake all night, so they received the
benefit of observing Nṛsiṁha-caturdaśī. And whose temple
was it that they had stayed in that night?
Nṛsiṁhadeva's. Unknowingly they received such a great
result from this that in his next life he became
Prahlāda Mahārāja, and she became his wife.

From this he attained the opportunity to hear from
Nārada. When he was still in his mother's womb, he heard
instructions from Nārada continuously for sixty thousand
years. By the mercy of Nārada he became the great
spiritual scholar and exclusive devotee of Bhagavān,
Prahlāda Mahārāja. This is an example of how sādhu-saṅga
is attained as the result of sukṛti, and how bhakti is

                             57
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                      5/5/2017

attained as the result of that sādhu-saṅga.

If even unknowingly someone serves the deity, they will
achieve such a great result. Then if someone knowingly
constructs a temple for the deity, inaugurates the
service of the deity, makes ornaments for the deity, or
faithfully serves Vaiṣṇavas and hears spiritual
philosophy from them sincerely, how much greater will
the result be? So in the kingdom of bhakti this is
called niśāntabhāva and begins with the birth of
śraddhā. And that faith will be in what? Not directly in
Bhagavān at first, but in the words of the scriptures.

'śraddhā'-śabde ?viśvāsa kahe sudṛḍha niścaya

kṛṣṇe bhakti kaile sarva-karma kṛta haya

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 22.62)

"If I just perform bhajana of Kṛṣṇa, then everything is
accomplished." Such a high quality type of faith is
called śraddhā. If that śraddhā is placed in the words
of the scriptures, in the words of the spiritual master,
and in the words of the Vaiṣṇavas, then everything will
come from that. "By following whatever they say,
everything will be all right. Even if everything in my
life is destroyed, then let it be; I will continue
executing bhagavadbhajana" - this is śraddhā, even
though there may be anarthas in our bhajana. There is
aniṣṭhita-bhakti, unsteady devotion, and niṣṭhita-
bhakti, firm devotion. In aniṣṭhita-bhakti, there are
false confidence (utsāhamayī), sporadic endeavour
(ghana-taralā), indecision (vyūḍha-vikalpā), delighting
in the material facilities that come from bhakti
(taraṅga-raṅgiṇī), battling with the desires for sense
pleasure (viṣaya-saṅgarā) and the inability to uphold
vows (niyamākṣamā). Even though all of these may remain,
if one's faith is of good quality, then upon attaining
sādhu-saṅga his internal nature will gradually change.
When one understands that upon attaining sādhu-saṅga the
night - meaning his conditioned state of existence -
will be finished soon, his faith is of good quality.

The end of the night heralds the first of Kṛṣṇa's
pastimes in the daytime. The peacock is sitting in the
upper part of the kadamba tree, and the koel is seated
in the upper part of the mango tree. The parrot is
seated on a branch of the pomegranate tree, and because
his beak is red, he blends in with the red buds of the
tree. The female parrot eats grapes, so she is sitting
on the grape vine. All are ready and waiting for Vṛndā-
devī to give her order, thinking, "When will Vṛndā say?"
Seeing that the appropriate time has come, Vṛndā-devī
gives the order to the birds, "Begin singing!" So they
start making the sound kala-rava. What is the meaning of
kala-rava? Rava means "sound", and kala indicates the
flute, so this sound tells Kṛṣṇa that it is time to
awaken and play the flute. The koel, the hummingbird and
the male and female parrots start singing and become so
intoxicated by making these musical sounds that it seems
Kāmadeva is blowing the conchshell. The male parrot is
awakening Kṛṣṇa, and the female parrot is awakening
Śrīmatī. The peacock is saying ke, which means "who?" He
is referring to Kṛṣṇa, meaning "Who can conquer the

                             58
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

great mountain of Rādhikā's jealous anger, shyness and
patience, which no one else can cross over?" By making
this sound he is saying, "O Kṛṣṇa, please awaken!" The
female peacock is making the kā sound, which also means
"who?", meaning, "Who is it that, even though Her heart
is in the form of a seedling, can overpower the mad
elephant Kṛṣṇa, who is directly Parabrahma Himself?
Rādhikā." Then everyone awakens and the līlā begins.

In this world millions of jīvas are sleeping, and the
kindness of the spiritual master and the Vaiṣṇavas that
awakens them is like a fathomless ocean. We see this in
the life of Gopa-kumāra, and in the life of Vrajanātha
in Jaiva-dharma, and in the lives of so many devotees in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. Without the causeless mercy of
Bhagavān, no jīva whosoever can be spiritually awakened.
Śrīmatī Rādhikā was waiting for Gopa-kumāra to come to
Her in Goloka, so She arranged for him to take birth at
Govardhana. She gave him the opportunity to daily take
the cows out to graze and to wander around Vraja. And
She Herself sent his guru Jayanta to him. Finding any
pretext, She made a plan to bring him to Her.

In the same way the spiritual master and the Vaiṣṇavas
are supremely merciful. If they see that one's sukṛti is
not strong, they somehow arrange that his sukṛti will be
strengthened. For those who already have śraddhā, they
strengthen their faith by bestowing upon them the gift
of their own company. If they see that someone has no
desire for bhakti, they arrange for them to hear hari-
kathā. A paramahaṁsa Vaiṣṇava - who is qualified to
cross the upper limit of the madhyama-adhikāra stage - a
topmost Vaiṣṇava who is nindādi-śūnya, free from the
tendency to criticise others, will cry and be so upset
for us. In the same way that Kṛṣṇa cries and is upset
for us, so the spiritual master and the Vaiṣṇavas are so
upset for us that we cannot possibly estimate it. The
guru and the Vaiṣṇavas suffer so much for us, just like
a mother when she is raising her small child. At night
the mother is sleeping, and the baby's crying awakens
her. Then the child passes stool and cries even more.
Will the poor woman be able to sleep? She undergoes so
much suffering and difficulty in the upbringing of her
child, and the father knows little of it. Only the
mother can fully know it.

Similarly, the spiritual master and the Vaiṣṇavas are
supremely merciful. Making different plans they make
śraddhā arise in others and then always try to
strengthen that faith. Their first duty towards us is to
awaken our faith in the holy name, the guru and the
Vaiṣṇavas, and this is niśānta-bhajana. If someone is to
begin performing bhajana, then for the welfare of their
faith they must understand one thing: that Kṛṣṇa is
Svayam Bhagavān, and especially that Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu is Kṛṣṇa Himself. This must be understood
first - that Mahāprabhu gave His everything to the
jīvas, whereas Kṛṣṇa did not give as much. Kṛṣṇa came in
the form of Mahāprabhu with the bhāva of Rādhikā - what
is the meaning? We are not referring here to the three
sentiments described in this verse (Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 1.6)):

śrī-rādhāyāḥ praṇaya-mahimā kīdṛśo vānayaivā

                             59
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                      5/5/2017


svādyo yenādbhuta-madhurimā kīdṛśo vā madīyaḥ

saukhyaṁ cāsyā mad-anubhavataḥ kīdṛśaṁ veti lobhāt

tad-bhāvāḍhyaḥ samajani śacī-garbha-sindhau harīnduḥ

Desiring to understand the glory of Rādhikā's love, the
wonderful qualities in Him that She alone relishes
through Her love, and the happiness She feels when She
realises the sweetness of His love, Śrī Hari, richly
endowed with Her emotions, appeared from the womb of
Śrīmatī śacī-devī as the moon appears from the ocean.

These three sentiments of Rādhikā can be explained to a
new devotee at a later stage. Here the bhāva of Rādhikā
that we mean is the sentiment of loving kindness for the
living entities. Is this sentiment of mercy found more
in Kṛṣṇa or in Rādhikā? More in Rādhikā, and She is the
one who, like a mother, nurtures us.

Śrīmatī Rādhikā is the one who is the very
personification of kindness for us, and Her
manifestation in this world is the spiritual master. All
of the kindness of Bhagavān is found in the guru.

saṁsāra-dāvānala-līḍha-loka

trāṇāya kāruṇya-ghanāghanatvam

Śrī Gurvaṣṭkam (1)

The spiritual master showers his kindness upon the
living entities, who are suffering in the burning fire
of material existence.

All of Bhagavān's kindness appears in the forms of the
guru and the Vaiṣṇavas. And what instruction do they
give first? That Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu came as the
original guru of Kali-yuga to teach nāma-saṅkīrtana.
That He came with the sentiment of a devotee to give
bhakti. He didn't come in the form of Bhagavān; He won't
give bhakti in that form. He will taste it as Bhagavān,
but in what form will He give it? As a devotee. Without
becoming a devotee, without becoming the āśraya, then
how could He give the viṣaya, kṛṣṇa-prema? Kṛṣṇa is the
only real viṣaya of prema in all of existence, so He
Himself would be unable to give it. Śrī Rādhā and all
other devotees are the āśraya of prema, so they can give
it. Therefore Kṛṣṇa Himself came taking the bhāva of
Rādhā, here the word bhāva meaning karuṇa, kindness.

anarpita-carīṁ cirāt karuṇayāvatīrṇaḥ kalau

samarpayitum unnatojjvala-rasāṁ sva-bhakti-śriyam

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 1.4)

With this karuṇa, for the purpose of tasting three
sentiments and for giving instruction to the souls of
this world, He came. And this is His first instruction:

nāmnām akāri bahudhā nija-sarva-śaktis


                              60
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

tatrārpitā niyamitaḥ smaraṇe na kālaḥ

etādṛśī tava kṛpā bhagavan mamāpi

durdaivam īdṛśam ihājani nānurāgaḥ

Śrī Śikṣāṣṭka (2)

O Bhagavān, Your name is the giver of all auspiciousness
to the jīvas, and therefore, being merciful, You are
eternally manifest in the form of names like Rāma,
Nārāyaṇa, Mukunda, Mādhava, Govinda, Dāmodara and
others. You have invested all of your potency in these
names. Being causelessly merciful You have not imposed
any restrictions upon the chanting of Your names such as
any specified time or place, and therefore they can be
chanted at any time of the day or night. O Lord, this is
Your causeless mercy upon the living entities, but it is
my great misfortune that due to my offences, attraction
for Your name, which is the bestower of all spiritual
fruits, has not arisen within me.

This is His first instruction: the holy name is Kṛṣṇa
Himself. There is an incident from the time of Narottama
dāsa Ṭhākura and Śrīla Lokanātha Gosvāmī concerning this
point. Once when Narottama was chanting japa, a farmer
approached him asking for a pail of water. Not
understanding the full glories of nāma, the holy name -
that it is non-different from nāmī, the possessor of the
holy name, in all respects - he put aside his chanting
beads to perform this charitable activity. Lokanātha
Gosvāmī, knowing that nāma and nāmī are one and the same
and that service to the holy name is service to Kṛṣṇa,
detected a fault in Narottama Ṭhākura. There is no
difference between them. In the stage of practice and in
perfection the holy name is Kṛṣṇa.

Chanting the holy name more and more, Mahāprabhu said,
"I saw Kṛṣṇa in the form of Gopāla standing before Me."
The holy name and Kṛṣṇa Himself are non-different, as
Mahāprabhu has said in this verse from the Śikṣāṣṭka.
Bhagavān descended as an incarnation in the form of so
many names - why? Because there are many different types
of people in the world. Their proclivities and faith are
of many types. Their previously acquired natures are
different, and even in perfection their internal
svarūpas are different. Therefore Bhagavān has descended
in the forms of many different names. He has so many
names like Kṛṣṇa, Nārāyaṇa, Brahman, Paramātmā,
Jagannātha, and also Īśvara, Allah, Khudā and God. But
we can divide all of these names into two categories:
secondary and primary. Names where there is no
specification are secondary, like Īśvara. What is the
meaning of Īśvara? In this name is there a particular
form or shape specified? Just that He is the controller,
but there is no specification. And oṁ can mean Kālī or
Gaurī, but does not specify any particular form. And
Jagannātha - who does that refer to? All incarnations of
Viṣṇu can be called Jagannātha. God is also a secondary
name. "G" stands for generator, meaning creator, "o"
stands for operator, meaning the one who maintains and
nurtures, and "d" stands for destroyer. Allah means He
who is the greatest of all, just like our conception of
Brahman. It is also a secondary name. Hari means one who

                             61
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

steals the consciousness, and is a primary name of
Kṛṣṇa. It can also refer to Narahari and Rāmacandra
along with Kṛṣṇa - these are the three superior
(parāvasthā) incarnations.

Nṛsiṁha, Vāmana, Kalki, Rāma, Kṛṣṇa, Nārāyaṇa and Hari
are all primary names. Primary names are also of two
types. Those names which refer to Bhagavān's aspect of
divine opulence (aiśvarya) are the secondary primary
names, and the names of Kṛṣṇa are the main primary
names. Then there is some further consideration within
the names of Kṛṣṇa. According to the gradation of
importance of Kṛṣṇa's pastimes, there is gradation in
His names also. Of the names Rāsa-bihārī and Yaśodā-
nandana, which name is more special? Rāsa-bihārī. In
this way, within the main primary names are supremely
primary names like Rādhānātha, Rādhā-kānta and
Gopīnātha. They contain some special potency and
indicate a special pastime of Kṛṣṇa. For instance, all
of His unique sweetness (mādhurya) is included within
the name Rāsa-bihārī, and of all Kṛṣṇa's pastimes, this
name indicates the essence of them. By chanting this
name these particular pastimes will be illuminated
within the heart of the chanter.

There are different aspects of rāma-nāma. It bestows
liberation, and therefore has been called the tāraka-
brahma, the sound vibration that helps one cross over
māyā. When referring to Dāśarathi Rāma, it means the
attractor of the hearts of the jīvas who is supremely
merciful and possesses so much special affection
(bhakta-vātsalya) for His devotees. This rāma-nāma
bestows prema and śānta-rasa, as well as dāsya, sakhya
and vātsalya in partial forms. There is no difference
between this name and the name of Kṛṣṇa except for some
special consideration of rasa. But if Rāma refers to
Ramayati Kṛṣṇa or Rādhā-ramaṇa, then it will take one to
the highest point.

All of Bhagavān's potency has been invested in these
names such is His mercy. Who is the first giver of
faith? Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and His associates also. And
who directly delivers us? Our initiating spiritual
master gives us all of this, and our instructing
spiritual master (śikṣā-guru) also gives us this. So
first of all we are indebted to them, and then after
them we are indebted to Mahāprabhu and His associates,
even though Mahāprabhu was the origin. First we put our
faith in the guru, and then we put our faith in
Mahāprabhu, because Mahāprabhu will not accept our
devotion if we bypass the guru.

Therefore He has said nāmnām akāri bahudhā nija-
sarvaśaktis: all of His potencies have been invested
within these names, and they differ according to the
particular name. And no strict rules have been imposed
on the chanting of His names. Suppose someone is seated
facing south and saying the gāyatrī-mantra - is this
correct, or not? No, because a rule (niyama) has been
imposed on chanting gāyatrī. But if someone sits to
chant the holy name facing south, will there be any
harm? No consideration of time or place has been imposed
on the chanting of harināma. Mahāprabhu said that even
while eating and resting we should take harināma. Will

                             62
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

we sit to chant gāyatrī or to perform arcana with
contaminated hands? No, because it will be aparādha, an
offence. But sometimes when we sneeze, we say "Hari,
Hari", and when we stumble over something we say "Rāma,
Rāma", and there is no fault in this because in the
chanting of the holy name there are no such
considerations of time, place or qualification.

If one goes to an unclean place, he will not be able to
absorb his mind in spiritual topics by any means. But if
he sits in a pure place, like Sevā-kuñja, then very
easily he will be able to meditate. There we can discuss
these high spiritual topics, but if we go and sit in an
unsuitable place, will we be able to discuss things like
Rādhikā's niśānta-līlā? Never. Therefore there are so
many sādhanas, and in all of them there is such
consideration, but in the chanting of the holy name
there is no such consideration of time or place. While
eating, lying down, with unclean hands and mouth, or in
whatever condition, one can chant harināma. Suppose
someone has become disabled and is unable to sit up. For
him will a rule be imposed that he must sit up to chant
harināma, and that he cannot chant while lying down?
Suppose someone is in the latrine suffering from
vomiting and diarrhoea. In that condition he won't be
able to practise meditation, perform austerities, do
yoga or anything. Seeing his helpless condition, will we
say that he cannot chant the holy name then, and that
instead someone will have to come and chant in his ear,
"Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa, Rāma, Rāma"? Even in that condition the
result will come from chanting, whereas from any other
sādhana there would be no benefit. Therefore first
making faith in the holy name arise in someone is
niśānta-bhajana, and concerning this Mahāprabhu said:

harer nāma harer nāma

harer nāmaiva kevalam

kalau nāsty eva nāsty eva

nāsty eva gatir anyathā

There is no other way but chanting of the holy name, but
one thing is essential - from where do we hear the
glories of the holy name? From the spiritual master and
the Vaiṣṇavas. Without first attaining sādhu-saṅga one
will not be able to chant the holy name, and even if he
does chant, what kind of nāma he is chanting will be
questionable. The nāma that we have received from the
guru is like a strong seed. From a strong seed a healthy
plant will emerge, but a weak seed will produce nothing.
Similarly, the spiritual master gives us śabda-brahma,
transcendental sound vibration, and taking that harināma
will produce the fruit of kṛṣṇa-prema. But the weak
seed, which is not śabda-brahma and which does not have
perfection inherent within it, will only produce the
fruits of material enjoyment and liberation.

ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanaṁ bhava-mahā-dāvāgni-nirvāpaṇaṁ

śreyaḥ-kairava-candrikā-vitaraṇaṁ vidyā-vadhū-jīvanam

ānandāmbudhi-vardhanaṁ prati-padaṁ pūrṇāmṛtāsvādanaṁ

                             63
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017


sarvātma-snapanaṁ paraṁ vijayate śrī-kṛṣṇa-saṅkīrtanam

Śrī Śikṣāṣṭka (1)

The first effect of the holy name is that it cleanses
the mirror of the heart, the second effect is that it
extinguishes the fire of misery in the forest of birth
and death, the third effect is that like the rays of the
moon it causes the flower of the living entities'
ultimate good fortune to bloom, and the fourth effect is
that it bestows the innermost transcendental knowledge,
which is compared to a young bride. The fifth effect is
that it increases the ocean of transcendental pleasure,
the sixth effect is that it makes us taste the highest
nectar at every step, and the seventh is that it
thoroughly cools and purifies us inside and out. These
are the seven effects of chanting harināma, and after
this it bestows prema, making eight. This gradual
awakening beginning with cleansing the mirror of the
heart is niśānta-bhajana, and after this, when one
meditates with rasika-bhāva on the eight parts of Śrī
Kṛṣṇa's day, direct service to Him is attained.




Chapter Six


Śriyā Śuka

A reason given as to why śukadeva Gosvāmī did not
directly mention Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī's name in Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam is because Mahārāja Parīkṣit had only seven
days to live, and uttering Rādhikā's name would have
thrown śukadeva into ecstatic trance for six months. In
the Brahma-vaivarta Purāṇa it is mentioned:

śrī-rādhā-nāma-mantrena

murcchā ṣaṇ-māsikī bhavet

noccāreta mātra spaṣṭṁ

parīkṣid-dhita-kṛn-muniḥ

If śukadeva Gosvāmī uttered the name of Śrīmatī Rādhikā,
he would at once remember Her pastimes. Due to his
rādhā-prema he would have become āviṣṭ-citta, excited
and fixed in remembering Her pastimes and activities in
the service of Kṛṣṇa. He would then have become
internally fixed on Kṛṣṇa and externally inert for six
months. But Parīkṣit Mahārāja had only seven days to
live, and śukadeva wanted him to have the benefit of
hearing the entire Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

Why would śukadeva Gosvāmī go into an ecstatic trance at
the mere mention of the name of Śrīmatī Rādhikā? In his
commentary on his own Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta, Sanātana
Gosvāmī writes:

"Śrīmatī Rādhikā was the worshipful goddess of śukadeva

                             64
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

Gosvāmī, so whenever he uttered Her name, he would
become āviṣṭ-citta, internally spiritually excited and
externally inert. So in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam he has given
the name of Rādhikā and other gopīs in a hidden way."
śukadeva Gosvāmī has therefore not uttered Her name
directly, but only indirectly. According to the rasa-
śāstra, an indirect utterance is better than a direct
one.

vedā brahmātma-viṣayās

tri-kāṇḍa-viṣayā ime

parokṣa-vādā ṛṣayaḥ

parokṣaṁ mama ca priyam

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (11.21.35)

[Kṛṣṇa said:] The Vedas, divided into three divisions,
ultimately reveal the living entity as pure spirit soul.
The Vedic seers and mantras, however, deal in esoteric
terms, and I am also pleased by such confidential
descriptions.

So śukadeva Gosvāmī also uttered the gopīs' names
indirectly, as in the word anayārādhitaḥ (Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (10.30.28)), which indicates that gopī by
whom Kṛṣṇa was perfectly worshipped, Śrīmatī Rādhikā. A
rasika-bhakta can understand that it was Śrīmatī Rādhikā
who had most perfectly worshipped Kṛṣṇa, whom Kṛṣṇa had
taken away from the arena of the rāsa dance and whom He
had disappeared with in the forest. It was only this
gopī whose head and feet Kṛṣṇa had decorated in a
secluded place. Even upon uttering the word ārādhitaḥ,
which indicates Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and sounds so much
like Her name, śukadeva Gosvāmī at once started becoming
āviṣṭ-citta. But after becoming so emotional, he then
changed the subject.

Also, in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (2.4.14), śukadeva Gosvāmī
used the word rādhasā, meaning "Kṛṣṇa's unequalled
opulence", as an indirect reference to Śrīmatī Rādhikā.
Sanātana Gosvāmī says that in the five chapters of the
Tenth Canto of the Bhāgavatam that describe the rāsa
dance, in the Gopī-gīta, in the Bhramaragīta and in the
Uddhava-sandeśa, śukadeva Gosvāmī has also carefully
used other words to indirectly denote Śrīmatī Rādhikā.
He has used the words kāścid dohaṁ hitvā in verse
10.29.5, the words tais taiḥ padaiḥ in verse 10.30.26,
the words yāṁ gopīm anayat in verse 10.30.35, the words
sā vadhūr anvatapyata in verse 10.30.38 and the words
kācit karāmbujaṁ śaurer in verse 10.32.4. Each of these
quotes denotes Śrīmatī Rādhikā and the other gopīs.
Those who are rasika-bhaktas, whose eyes are open, can
see the names of the gopīs and the name of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā everywhere, but those who are blind cannot.
Therefore we are especially grateful to Sanātana
Gosvāmī, for without his revealing these truths to us,
we could never understand.

But why would śukadeva Gosvāmī really become so
emotional at the mere mention of the name of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā? In the Bhāgavatam it is often stated, "Śrī śuka

                             65
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

uvāca." Śrī śukā means śriyā śukā, or the śuka, parrot,
of Śrī, Śrīmatī Rādhikā. In his Śrī Ānanda-vṛndāvana-
campū, Kavi Karṇapūra explains that previously śukadeva
was the parrot of Rādhikā, and used to sit on Śrīmatī
Rādhikā's left hand while She would feed him the seeds
from a pomegranate fruit. She would pet him
affectionately telling him, "Bolo Kṛṣṇa! Kṛṣṇa!" This
parrot would then sweetly utter the names of Kṛṣṇa.

Once he flew into Kṛṣṇa's garden at Nandagrāma where he
began singing "Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa" as sweetly as Śrīmatī
Rādhikā Herself would, and in the same melodious tone.
Hearing this, Kṛṣṇa was very attracted, and noticing
this beautiful parrot sitting in the pomegranate tree,
He said, "Please speak some more." Then the parrot began
to lament, "Oh, I am very wretched and ungrateful
because I was sitting in the hand of Śrīmatī Rādhikā
Herself, and She was feeding me pomegranate seeds, milk
and rice. She was teaching me how to sing 'Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa'
very sweetly, but I flew away and have come here, so I
am very unfortunate." Then Kṛṣṇa took the parrot in His
hand and began to stroke it. In the meantime, Lalitā and
Viśākhā came and said, "This parrot belongs to our
mistress, Śrīmatī Rādhikā. It is so dear to Her that She
cannot live without it, so please give it to us, and we
will return it to Rādhikā."

Kṛṣṇa replied, "If it is really Hers, then when you call
it, it will come to you. And sakhīs, if he is not really
Hers, then he will not come to you."

They tried many times to call the parrot, but it would
not come to them. Then they began scolding Kṛṣṇa,
saying, "Whatever comes to You never gets returned to
its rightful owner!" Next they approached Mother Yaśodā
and explained the situation, so Yaśodā came and snatched
the parrot away from Kṛṣṇa, saying, "You are always
doing nothing but playing with animals and birds! It is
time for Your bath. Your father is ready to take his
meal, but without You he cannot take it. So come at
once!" Then she gave the parrot to Lalitā and Viśākhā
and dragged Kṛṣṇa away.

Before Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa returned to Goloka Vṛndāvana,
They told the parrot, "You must remain in this world to
propagate Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam." The parrot began to weep,
but They both told him, "Except for you there is no
qualified personality to manifest the Bhāgavatam, so you
must remain here." So after the disappearance of Rādhikā
and Kṛṣṇa, the parrot began searching for a place where
kṛṣṇa-kathā was being spoken. Knowing that śaṅkara was a
great devotee of Kṛṣṇa, he flew to Kailāsa Mountain,
where he found śaṅkara reciting that same
ŚrīmadBhāgavatam to his wife Pārvatī. So he sat in a
tree, and being well camouflaged, his presence was
unknown to śaṅkara.

Because the first three cantos of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam are
very philosophical, in accordance with the nature of a
woman Pārvatī fell asleep as she was hearing it. She
wanted to hear only the romantic pastimes, especially
how Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa would meet and walk and laugh
together. Now and then the parrot would reply, "Yes,
yes," and śaṅkara would carry on eagerly reciting,

                             66
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

thinking that Pārvatī was listening.

When śaṅkara completed reciting the Twelfth Canto,
Pārvatī at once awakened and said, "But I have not heard
what I desired to! Have you already spoken the Tenth
Canto? Please recite it to me again." Then śaṅkara
thought, "Then who has been hearing, and from time to
time saying, 'Yes, yes, it is very nice' in the same
tone as Pārvatī?" He began searching, and then, noticing
that there was a very beautiful parrot sitting on the
branch of a nearby tree, he thought, "A parrot can
imitate anyone's voice, so perhaps he has been saying
it. No unqualified person should hear ŚrīmadBhāgavatam.
Because he is a bird, he is unqualified, so he should be
immediately killed, otherwise he may misuse what he has
heard." Picking up his trident, śaṅkara went to kill the
parrot, but it flew away and entered the āśrama of
Vyāsadeva on the bank of the river Ganges at
Badarikāśrama. There he saw that Vyāsadeva was reciting
the same Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam to his wife, who was so
wonderstruck upon hearing it that her mouth was hanging
open in astonishment. Therefore the parrot flew into her
mouth and went inside her. Pursuing that parrot, śaṅkara
arrived there with his trident in his hand and said,
"Vyāsadeva, I offer praṇāma to you. I am following a
parrot - have you seen it?"

Laughing, Vyāsadeva replied, "Why are you searching for
a parrot?"

"I want to kill it."

"Why?"

"Because he has heard Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, but he is
unqualified to have done so."

"May I ask you what is the result of hearing the
Bhāgavatam?"

"One becomes immortal."

"So if he has now become immortal, how will you kill
him? You should abandon this idea and return to your
āśrama." Realising that the parrot could not be killed,
śaṅkara returned to Kailāsa. After living in his
mother's womb for sixteen years, this parrot appeared in
the form of śukadeva and later spoke the Bhāgavatam. So
because śukadeva was previously śriyā śuka, the parrot
of Śrīmatī Rādhikā Herself, he was so rasika that he
could not utter the name of Rādhikā without becoming
āviṣṭ-citta.

Other Purāṇas mention Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī directly, but
these Purāṇas are not one hundred per cent free from the
tinges of fruitive activity (karma) and impersonal
knowledge (jñāna). Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is beyond the other
Purāṇas and unique in its freedom from all expressions
other than the glorification of kṛṣṇa-bhakti. No hint of
karma or jñāna taints its pages.

The goal of the Bhāgavatam, in essence, even more than
glorifying Kṛṣṇa, is to glorify Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī. This
is so because Rādhikā possesses the most selfless love

                             67
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

for Kṛṣṇa, more than the other residents of Vṛndāvana,
and even more than the other gopīs. This being true, the
Bhāgavatam thus mentions the glories of Rādhikā in
practically every verse. Those who have the eyes to see
can perceive Rādhikā's name everywhere, in every verse.
But śukadeva Gosvāmī has carefully spoken Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam so that these glories are mentioned only
indirectly. This is natural, for one keeps those things
which are dearest to him hidden, protected from the
unqualified who cannot fully appreciate them. As a
chaste wife covers her head in public with her sārī and
uncovers it only in the presence of her husband, so
śukadeva has presented the truth about Śrīmatī Rādhikā
in a covered fashion. Only the rasika-bhaktas, who
possess the proper eligibility, can actually pierce
śukadeva's covering.

Another analogy can help us to understand this point.
The naked body of a woman is not so beautiful, but if
she covers her body with a fine transparent cloth and
then water is poured on that cloth, each of her features
are revealed. This is how to appreciate the beautiful
features of a woman. Similarly, the glories of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā are enhanced through the thin covering supplied
by the author, the supremely intelligent śukadeva
Gosvāmī. Covering Her supreme position also enhances the
ultimate revelation of those glories, as things obtained
with hardship are appreciated more than those easily
attained. Therefore the attainment of prema must
necessarily include the overcoming of obstacles.

Like oil hidden within mustard seeds or butter hidden
within milk, the glories of Śrīmatī Rādhikā are hidden
within ŚrīmadBhāgavatam. But the foolish cannot
recognise them. The commentaries of Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī
and Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura, however, reveal
those glories to us. In verse 10.14.34, Brahmā prayed to
become a blade of grass in Vṛndāvana so he could catch
the dust from the feet of all the residents of Vraja.
Uddhava, on the other hand, also desired to take birth
as a blade of grass in Vṛndāvana, but only wished to
obtain the dust of the feet of one gopī. (The word
caraṇa-reṇu, meaning "the dust from the feet," is
singular in verse 10.47.61.) He wanted only the dust
from the feet of that gopī who had gone off alone during
the rāsa dance. And who was that gopī? Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

After leaving the gopīs during the rāsa dance, Kṛṣṇa was
smiling a mild, closed smile. Inside, He felt ashamed
that He had caused the gopīs some difficulty. Verses
10.32.4, 5, 7 and 8 describe how one gopī (Candrāvalī)
took Kṛṣṇa's feet in her lap, another (Śyāmalā) took His
hand, another (śaibyā) took His other hand, yet another
(Padmā) mildly chastised Him, another (Lalitā) said with
some sarcasm, "Oh, You are a very good friend!" and
another (Viśākhā) was crying. Verse 10.32.6 describes a
seventh gopī who exhibited māna, jealous anger, from a
distance, expressing through Her glance that She
believed Kṛṣṇa was ungrateful, considering all that the
gopīs had done for Him. This was Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is Kṛṣṇa Himself having assumed
the mood of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, and He tells us that the
gopīs are the best worshippers of Kṛṣṇa. If Śrīmad-

                             68
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                      5/5/2017

Bhāgavatam did not contain the glories of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu would have never
touched it. But because Her glories are present within
every verse, He embraced the Bhāgavatam close to His
breast.

Thus Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is certainly the spotless Purāṇa,
and because of its level of presentation of rasa and
siddhānta, it is without a doubt the most authorised
scripture.




Verse Index


A

ananyāś cintayanto māṁ

anarpita-carīṁ cirāt karuṇayāvatīrṇaḥ kalau

anayārādhito nūnaṁ

anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ

aśocyān anvaśocas tvaṁ

B

bhagavān api tā rātrīḥ

bhaktis tu bhagavad

bhavāpavargo bhramato yadā bhavej

bhayaṁ dvitīyābhiniveśataḥ syād

brahma-bhūtaḥ prasannātmā

brahmāṇḍa bhramite kona bhāgyavān jīva

C

ceto-darpaṇa-mārjanaṁ

D

daśāśvamedhī punar eti janma

G

gurau goṣṭhe goṣṭhālayiṣu sujane bhūsura-gaṇe

H

harer nāma harer nāma

I

iti puṁsārpitā viṣṇau


                             69
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                  5/5/2017

J

jagau kalaṁ vāma-dṛśāṁ manoharam

jātasya hi dhruvo mṛtyur

K

karmaṇy evādhikāras te

khāite śuite yathā tathā nāma laya

kleśo 'dhikataras teṣām

kṛṣṇa-bahirmukha hañā bhoga-vānchā kare

kṛṣṇa bhuli' sei jīva anādi-bahirmukha

M

man-manā bhava mad-bhakto

muktiḥ svayaṁ mukulitāñjaliḥ sevate 'smān

N

nainaṁ chindanti śastrāṇi

nāmnām akāri bahudhā nija-sarva-śaktis

nāyam ātmā pravacanena labhyo

P

patraṁ puṣpaṁ phalaṁ toyaṁ

S

sa sannyāsī ca yogī ca

sa vai puṁsāṁ paro dharmo

saṁsāra-dāvānala-līḍha-loka

saṅkhyā-pūrvaka-nāma-gāna-natabhiḥ

sarva-dharmān parityajya

sarva-guhyatamaṁ bhūyaḥ

sarvopaniṣado gāvo

satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-saṁvido

śiṣyas te 'haṁ śādhi māṁ tvāṁ prapannam

śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ

śrī-rādhā-nāma-mantrena

sthita-prajñasya kā bhāṣā

T


                              70
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017

tad viddhi praṇipātena

V

vedā brahmātma-viṣayās

Y

yā niśā sarva-bhūtānāṁ

yajñārthāt karmaṇo 'nyatra

yāre dekha, tāre kaha 'kṛṣṇa'-upadeśa

yat karoṣi yad aśnāsi

ye yathā māṁ prapadyante

yoginām api sarveṣāṁ

yuktāhāra-vihārasya




For information on other books by Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja please visit: www.purebhakti.com

For wholesale inquiries please visit
www.bhaktiprojects.org or contact your local warehouse.



Australia


Attn.: Lilasuka Prabhu

Phone: (61) 266-797-025

E-mail: lilasuka@bigpond.com


Canada


Stanley A. Gill

#25 - 15030 58th Ave.

Surrey, B.C. CANADA V3S 9G3

Attn.: Prasasya Prabhu

Phone: (866) 575-9438

E-mail: stannshel@shaw.ca


Europe - UK (England)


Sri Gour Govinda Gaudiya Matha

                              71
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017


Attn: Jiva-pavana Prabhu

Phone: (44) 153648-1769

E-mail: jivapavana@aol.com


Malaysia


Attn.: Vijaya-krsna Prabhu

012 3854202, 012 3213787, 012 3973723

E-mail: vjkrsna@yahoo.com


Philippines


Quezon City, Metro Manila 1113

Attn: Krishna Candra Prabhu IGVS Radha Krishna Gopala
Mandir

96 ROTC Hunters Clusters 23 Tatalon

Phone: (63) 2783-0267, (63) 91873-32659

E-mail: krsnacandra@yahoo.com


USA


Bhaktiprojects

4589 Pacheco Blvd.

Martinez, CA 94553

Attn.: Vishwambhara Prabhu

Phone. (800) 681-3040, ext. 108

E-mail: vdas@bhaktiprojects.org



For information on becoming a distributor in your area:
e-mail Vishvambhara Prabhu at vdas@bhaktiprojects.org or
call in the U.S. (800) 681-3040, ext. 108.




Other titles by Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja:




The Nectar of Govinda-līlā

                             72
Nectar_of_Govinda-lila.txt                     5/5/2017


Going Beyond Vaikuṇṭha

Bhakti-rasāyana

Śrī Śikṣāṣṭaka

Veṇu-gīta

Śrī Prabandhāvalī

Śrī Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu-bindu

Śrī Manaḥ-śikṣā

Śrī Upadeśāmṛta

Śrī Gauḍīya Gīti-guccha

Śrīmad Bhagavad-gītā

Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī - His Life and
Teachings

Śrī Harināma Mahā-mantra

Jaiva-dharma

Beyond Nirvāṇa

Śrī Vraja-maṇḍala Parikramā

Śrī Bhajana-rahasya

Śrī Brahma-saṁhitā

The Origin of Ratha-yātrā

Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma Parikramā

Śrī Gīta-govinda

Rays of the Harmonist (periodical)




                              73
