Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                         5/5/2017

The Origin of Ratha-yātrā



Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

GVP (2011)



Rating:    ★★★★★

Tags: The Origin of Ratha-yātrā Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja

The Origin of Ratha-yātrā Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārājattt



* * *




* * *




The Origin of Ratha-yātrā

Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja




Contents



PREFACE

INTRODUCTION

MAṄGALĀCARAṆA

CHAPTER ONE THE FIRST HISTORY

CHAPTER TWO THE SECOND HISTORY

CHAPTER THREE GUṆḌICĀ-MANDIRA-MĀRJANA

CHAPTER FOUR MAHĀPRABHU AND KING PRATĀPARUDRA

CHAPTER FIVE REUNION AT KURUKṢETRA

CHAPTER SIX KṚṢṆA MEETS THE GOPĪS AT KURUKṢETRA

CHAPTER SEVEN HERĀ-PAÑCAMĪ


                             1
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

CHAPTER EIGHT THE THIRD HISTORY

CHAPTER NINE JUST AFTER THE FESTIVAL

CHAPTER TEN THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN JAGANNĀTHA PURĪ AND
NAVADVĪPA

CHAPTER ELEVEN CLOSING WORDS

APPENDIX




PREFACE

Our most worshipable Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja began to preach in the West in 1996. In July
1997, he began to observe the Ratha-yātrā Festival in
the West along with his followers, at the same time that
it was taking place in Jagannātha Purī. The festival was
observed in Holland in 1997; in England in 1998; in
France, England, and Holland in 1999; in Wales in 2000;
and again in England in 2001 and 2002.

On one occasion, when Śrīla Mahārāja was addressing his
international audience, he gave the following
explanation for his traveling and holding these
festivals: “Today is pratipat, one day before Ratha-
yātrā. I remember when Śrīla Prabhupāda Bhaktivedānta
Swāmī Mahārāja called for me in his last days. He was
going to join his Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa in Goloka Vṛndāvana,
and He requested me to help the many devotees whom he
had brought from both Western and Eastern countries. In
those last days he also requested me to place him into
samādhi, which I did. There is no difference between
śikṣā-guru and dīkṣā-guru if they are both qualified;
and Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja is my śikṣā-guru, so I must
obey his order. That is why I am traveling around the
world in my old age, by the combined mercy of my dīkṣā-
and śikṣā-gurus, without any desire for worldly profit.”

During each Ratha-yātrā Festival, Śrīla Mahārāja thanked
and blessed the devotees for participating. In 1997,
seeing the success of the festivities, he told his
audience, “Previously, I observed Jagannātha Ratha-yātrā
Festival in Mathurā every year. I am not there this
year, but I am glad that you have helped me to make a
festival here. You were all joining in the kīrtanas, and
all of you were happy, so I think you’ll have the grace
of Jagannātha.”

In each such week-long festival, Śrīla Mahārāja
discussed the quintessence of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and
ŚrīCaitanya-caritāmṛta. He explained that entering into
the deep meaning of Ratha-yātrā enables the devotee to
realize the mission of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the
secret truths of the tattva (philosophical truths) and
līlā (pastimes) of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, and the ultimate goal of
serving Them. Toward the end of one of his Ratha-yātrā
lectures, Śrīla Mahārāja told his audience, “You are
lucky to hear all these topics; it is rare that one
possesses the good fortune to hear all these truths. Try

                            2
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

to take something from what you are hearing. If you take
only a hundred-thousandth part of this teaching of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu, you will be fully successful in
life. I have come here only to give you inspiration, and
all of you who have assembled here are certainly very
fortunate.”

It was in France, in 1999, that Śrīla Mahārāja first
brought up the idea of publishing this book. After
relating the first history of Lord Jagannātha’s
appearance, he told his audience, “I wanted to publish
the history of Ratha-yātrā in BhāgavataPatrikā and
GauḍīyaPatrikā, our Hindi and Bengali monthly magazines.
Now I am thinking that I should make an entire book on
this subject, explaining the three reasons behind
Jagannātha’s appearance. It will be very interesting and
helpful for all devotees.”

Among the Ratha-yātrā Festivals mentioned above, the
largest thus far was held in Birmingham on June 24,
2001. Here are some excerpts from a report on the
festival, published on www.vnn.org:



The cart procession proceeded to Victoria Square, where
a large pavilion had been set up. The organizers of the
event, the devotees of the Birmingham Gour-Govinda
Gauḍīya Maṭha, also set up a mini-fair just in front of
the pavilion, with stalls manned by the local devotees
and their friends from many diverse groups. The fair was
thus billed, “A Universal Interfaith Gathering,” in
honor of the Lord of the Universe, Lord Jagannātha.

Birmingham dignitaries who attended the festival
included the Council General of the Indian Consulate,
the Deputy Mayor of Birmingham, and the president of the
National Council of Hindu Temples and Vice Co-chairman
of Interfaith Network U.K. Before Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja gave his own talk, they gave speeches in the
presence of Śrīla Mahārāja, his devotees, and the
thousands of guests. They expressed appreciation for
Śrīla Mahārāja’s message and the importance of the
devotees’ efforts in bringing Lord Jagannātha to the
people of Birmingham. Ms. Wood of Life Foundation
Worldwide had brought the world peace flame, which had
traveled around the world to five continents and had
been presented to the Pope, Nelson Mandela, and others
who were considered instrumental in bringing about world
peace, and she presented it to Śrīla Mahārāja with
honor.

The material that comprises this book was taken solely
from public lectures that Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja spoke
in English on his world preaching tours during the years
1997–2002. Some of the chapters consist of entire
lectures. Others are compilations of different lectures
and parts of lectures, and they are divided by
subtitles. In presenting this material, for the most
part we have tried to follow the sequence of the events
as they are presented in Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta,
Madhya-līlā, Chapters 12–15, which elaborately describe
the Ratha-yātrā pastimes of Caitanya Mahāprabhu and His
devotees.

                            3
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017


Please forgive us fallen conditioned souls for any
mistakes we may have made in presenting Śrīla Mahārāja’s
teachings in this book.



An aspirant for eternal service to the Vaiṣṇavas,



Śyāmarāṇī dāsī



Pāpa-mocanī Ekādaśī

March 28, 2003

Gopīnātha-bhavana, Śrī Vṛndāvana




INTRODUCTION

In Birmingham, England, on July 22, 2001, the first day
of his visit there and the first day of his series of
classes on Ratha-yātrā, Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja gave a commencement address that heralded the
arrival of the festival. He began his class by
glorifying the many well-decorated deities that he saw
on the altar.

Today I have become very happy. When I first sent the
deity of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu from Navadvīpa to
England, I was very worried that He would be quite alone
there. But now that I have come here, I see a great
utsava (festival) surrounding Him. He is not at all
alone here. He is in the Gambhīrā and He is absorbed in
the Chariot Festival. Jagannātha, Baladeva, and Subhadrā
are here, Nityānanda Prabhu and all his associates are
here, and even Girirāja-Govardhana and all the
associates of Vṛndāvana are here. Vasanta-ṛtu
(springtime) is here, as the scene is full with yellow
flowers, and Caitanya Mahāprabhu is very happy here,
weeping, “O My Prāṇanātha, where are You? O Kṛṣṇa, where
are You? Today I am meeting You after a long time; after
a long separation.”



sei ta parāṇa-nātha pāinu



yāhā lāgi’ madana-dahane jhuri’ genu

Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 13.113)



Now I have gained the Lord of My life, in whose absence
I was being burned by Cupid and was withering away.

                            4
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017




Today is the observance of guṇḍicā-mandira-mārjana; it
is the day to cleanse our hearts. Caitanya Mahāprabhu
wanted to make a seat for Jagannātha, Baladeva, and
Subhadrā – especially for Vrajendra-nandana Muralīdhara
Navakiśora Naṭavara. When He was in Jagannātha’s temple
He never saw Jagannātha, Baladeva, and Subhadrā. Rather,
He always saw Vrajendra-nandana Śyāmasundara playing a
flute and wearing peacock feathers in His turban.

Early this morning, Caitanya Mahāprabhu departed for the
Guṇḍicā Mandira with His entire group of associates,
headed by Nityānanda Prabhu, Advaita Ācārya, Gadādhara
Paṇḍita, Svarūpa Dāmodara, Rāya Rāmānanda, Kāśī Miśra,
and so many others. He took all the Gauḍīya bhaktas from
Bengal, Oriyābhaktas from Orissa, and all the others,
and He requested Kāśī Miśra, “Tell the King that,
together with My associates, I want to wash the whole
temple and surrounding area. He should not send any of
his own servants. We will do all the cleaning ourselves,
and then we will observe a grand Ratha-yātrā Festival.
The King can help from outside.”

Mahāprabhu Himself took many brooms and clay pots.
Starting from Gambhīrā, and performing kīrtana, He
walked through Jagannātha Purī and finally reached the
Guṇḍicā Mandira. We also went there many times with our
gurudeva, Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī,
along with over 500 other devotees, and during
Mahāprabhu’s participation there were thousands of
parties in that very big area, with hundreds of people
in each party.

On this day you should try to clean your hearts, for
there are so many dirty and unwanted things there. We
must try to be careful to avoid the ten nāma-aparādhas,
and also vaiṣṇava-aparādha, dhāma-aparādha, seva-
aparādha, and so on. After that, our many unwanted
habits, especially lust and anger, should be driven from
our hearts. Bhakti can never manifest if lust and anger
are present, because bhakti is very soft, mild, and
especially sweet.

What is the meaning of kuṭīnāṭī? You should at once try
to give up ku (bad habits and activities), those things
that are not favorable for kṛṣṇa-bhakti. You must give
up even those activities, objects and persons that are
very near and dear to you, if they are not favorable.
Nāṭī means those things that are forbidden for bhakti,
and they are discussed in the first and second verses of
Upadeśāmṛta:



vāco vegaṁ manasaḥ krodha-vegaṁ

jihvā-vegam udaropastha-vegam

etān vegān yo viṣaheta dhīraḥ

sarvām apīmāṁ pṛthivīṁ sa śiṣyāt


                            5
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017



A wise and self-composed person can instruct the entire
world if he can subdue the impetus to speak, the
agitation of the mind, the onset of anger, the vehemence
of the tongue, the urge of the belly and the agitation
of the genitals. In other words, everyone may become a
disciple of such a self-composed person.



atyāhāraḥ prayāsaś ca

prajalpo niyamāgrahaḥ

jana-saṅgaś ca laulyaṁ ca

ṣaḍbhir bhaktir vinaśyati



Bhakti is destroyed by the following six faults: (1)
eating too much, or collecting more than necessary; (2)
endeavors that are opposed to bhakti; (3) useless
mundane talks; (4) failure to adopt essential
regulations, or fanatical adherence to regulations; (5)
association with persons who are opposed to bhakti; and
(6) greed, or the restlessness of the mind to adopt
worthless opinions.

You will also have to give up all worship of demigods.
As Caitanya Mahāprabhu instructed Rūpa Gosvāmī, this
should be uprooted, along with all varieties of worldly
desires.

You can even give up nārāyaṇa-sevā, service to Nārāyaṇa
in Vaikuṇṭha, as well as dvārakādhīśa-sevā, service to
Kṛṣṇa in Dvārakā. Offer praṇāma to Dvārakādhīśa and say,
“You are the same Kṛṣṇa, but do You have a flute or
peacock feather? Can You accept Nanda as Your father and
Yaśodā as Your mother?” If He cannot show all these
qualifications, then our attitude toward Him will be, “I
offer daṇḍavat-praṇāma unto You, but from far away.”

Offer more praṇāma to Mathureśa-Kṛṣṇa, and still more to
Yaśodā-nandana Kṛṣṇa. Offer praṇāma to Dāmodara-Kṛṣṇa.
We want to serve Dāmodara, but which Dāmodara? We want
to serve Rādhā-Dāmodara. We like Śrīdāmā, Subala,
Madhumaṅgala, and all of Kṛṣṇa’s friends. We like the
fact that they are Kṛṣṇa’s friends, but we don’t want
them to be our friends, because we do not want to be
cowherd boys in our perfectional stage. Beyond that, we
offer praṇāma to Kṛṣṇa as the beloved of the aṣṭa-
sakhīs, but we actually want only one thing. We want to
serve the mood of Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī. If you can have a
taste for this service, and if you can make this your
objective, then your life will be successful.

Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja came to Western countries and
introduced the Ratha-yātrā Festival, but after his
departure many of his disciples began doing something
wrong; they have chosen a wrong path, and they do not
honor senior devotees. They have so much opulence, and
their gatherings are quite large in number, but they

                            6
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

have no mood of rati, transcendental love and affection.
The actual mood of Ratha-yātrā was shown by Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja in his translation of Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta. In the mood of Śrīmatī Rādhikā
meeting Kṛṣṇa at Kurukṣetra, Caitanya Mahāprabhu said:

sei ta parāṇa-nātha pāinu



yāhā lāgi’ madana-dahane jhuri’ genu




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 13.113)



Now I have gained the Lord of My life, in whose absence
I was being burned by Cupid and was withering away.



Mahāprabhu also sang this song:



yaḥ kaumāra-haraḥ sa eva hi varas tā eva caitra-kṣapās

te conmīlita-mālatī-surabhayaḥ prauḍhāḥ kadambānilāḥ

sā caivāsmi tathāpi tatra surata-vyāpāra-līlā-vidhau

revā-rodhasi vetasī-taru-tale cetaḥ samutkaṇṭhate



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya-līlā 1.78)



That very personality who stole my heart during my youth
is now again my master. These are the same moonlit
nights of the month of Caitra. The same fragrance of
mālatī flowers is there, and the same sweet breezes are
blowing from the kadamba forest. In our intimate
relationship, I am also the same lover, yet still my
mind is not happy here. I am eager to go back to that
place on the bank of the Revā under the Vetasī tree.
That is my desire.



Mahāprabhu had taken this song from a Sanskrit book
named Sāhitya-darpaṇa. Although it was a mundane love
song, which appealed to lusty people, Mahāprabhu was
singing it with His heart melting and tears in His eyes.
Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara understood His deep mood, and there
was a boy named Rūpa, the Rūpa of Mahāprabhu, who also
understood it. After watching Mahāprabhu, he at once
wrote a poem in the same mood in which Mahāprabhu was
singing, and that poem was very high-class:

                            7
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017


priyaḥ so ’yaṁ kṛṣṇaḥ saha-cari kuru-kṣetra-militas

tathāhaṁ sā rādhā tad idam ubhayoḥ saṅgama-sukham

tathāpy antaḥ-khelan-madhura-muralī-pañcama-juṣe

mano me kālindī-pulina-vipināya spṛhayati



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya-līlā 1.79)



My dear friend, now I have met My old and dear friend
Kṛṣṇa on this field of Kurukṣetra. I am the same
Rādhārāṇī, and now we are meeting together. It is very
pleasant, but I would still like to go to the bank of
the Yamunā beneath the trees of the forest there. I wish
to hear the vibration of His sweet flute playing the
fifth note within that forest of Vṛndāvana.”



Rādhārāṇī told Kṛṣṇa, “Oh, My beloved is here, I am here
Myself, and we are meeting here; but there is so much
opulence here. I want to be by the bank of the Yamunā
again, where the kadamba trees emanate a sweet fragrance
and where the beautiful spring season is present. No one
is there; it is a secluded place. My beloved and I are
both there, and we are speaking about so many things. I
want to be there again.”

This parallel verse of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, so much
greater than the verse in Sāhitya-darpaṇa, is the mood
of the Ratha-yātrā Festival. If this Chariot Festival is
performed under the guidance of a high-class devotee,
then it is really Ratha-yātrā.

Prior to Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the Ratha-yātrā Festival
had been taking place for many thousands of years, since
ancient times. There was not so much rasa in it,
however, for the King was observing it alone, with the
help of so much money, and with only his own people. But
now, by the presence of Mahāprabhu, the entire public
was able to participate. Moreover, Mahāprabhu brought
all the moods of Vṛndāvana, especially separation and
meeting after separation, and He instructed us in so
many ways.

Gradually, in seven days, I will try to explain all
these truths so that you can develop greed to obtain
this highest goal of life: service to Śrīmatī Rādhikā.
Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja wanted to give all this, but at
that time the forest was full of so many unwanted thorn
trees everywhere. In order to make the land fertile so
that he could give this, he first had to cut the jungles
of māyāvāda, sahajiyā, sakhi-bhekī, Buddhism, and all
the other bogus philosophies.

He requested me to help him, and that is why I have come
here. I promised to help, so I’m going everywhere to
preach his mission, the mission of my gurudeva, of Śrīla

                            8
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

Prabhupāda Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, and
especially of Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura was the first person to preach to the entire
world, and he inspired Śrīla Prabhupāda Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, who sent so many disciples here and
there, especially to England. At last, Śrīla Prabhupāda
inspired Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja to serve as
his own hands, and Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja quickly spread
Kṛṣṇa consciousness everywhere in the world.

I pray that by Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja’s mercy you can also
preach everywhere in the world, and be of pure, high
character. Distribute books – and read them yourselves
as well – and try to have that greed which is essential
for rāgānuga-bhakti. This is our mission.

A glorification of Śrīla Prabhupāda Bhaktivedānta Swāmī
Mahārāja

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja profusely glorified Śrīla
Prabhupāda Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja at every Ratha-
yātrā Festival, and this is how he began his Herā-
pañcamī lecture when he held Ratha-yātrā in Wales in
July 2000:

My humble obeisances unto the lotus feet of my spiritual
master, oṁ viṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava
Gosvāmī Mahārāja, and the same unto the lotus feet of my
śikṣā-guru, oṁviṣṇupāda Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Swāmī
Mahārāja. It is only by the mercy of my dīkṣā-guru and
śikṣā-guru that I am traveling throughout the world,
even in this old age, and that so many devotees are
coming. I want to give the water that Śrīla Swāmī
Mahārāja has given me, to invigorate the devotees who
have now become weak and who – like creepers, trees, and
sprouts – need “watering” so that they may become
stronger.

When Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja was physically present, his
disciples tried their level best to serve him. At that
time, even very beautiful teenage girls were working
hard here and there in airports, in seaports, and so on,
with no care at all for their tender age. There were
also many very energetic young teenage boys at that
time, working so hard that Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja’s
mission was spread everywhere in only a few years.

If anyone is coming to me, that is only the fruit of
Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja’s preaching – his books, and so on
– and therefore we beg for his mercy. Now he will be
very happy that his followers are again becoming
enthusiastic and inspired. Wherever I go, big crowds
like this and even greater come to hear. They want to
revive their Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and I want to help
them as much as I can.

Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja said that the right and the left
hand of his preaching was book publishing and
distribution, and nagara-saṅkīrtana, and we are doing
this. Nagara-saṅkīrtana is going on again, and we have
published thousands of books. The devotees want still
more, and we are printing them, along with many
magazines. From time to time try to do nagara-saṅkīrtana
in any place or town nearby you, and never think that

                            9
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

you are weak.




MAṄGALĀCARAṆA

oṁ ajñāna-timirāndhasya

jñānāñjana-śalākayā

cakṣur unmīlitaṁ yena

tasmai śrī gurave namaḥ



O Gurudeva, you are so merciful. I offer my humble
obeisances unto you and I pray from the core of my heart
that, with the torchlight of divine knowledge, you open
my eyes that have been blinded by the darkness of
ignorance.



vāñchā-kalpa-tarubhyaś ca

kṛpā-sindhubhya eva ca

patitānāṁ pāvanebhyo

vaiṣṇavebhyo namo namaḥ



I offer obeisances unto the Vaiṣṇavas, who are just like
desire trees, who are an ocean of mercy, and who deliver
the fallen, conditioned souls.



namo mahā-vadānyāya

kṛṣṇa-prema-pradāya te

kṛṣṇāya kṛṣṇa-caitanya-

nāmne gaura-tviṣe namaḥ



I offer my obeisances unto Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya, who is
Śrī Kṛṣṇa Himself. Having assumed the golden hue of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, He is munificently bestowing that rare
gift of kṛṣṇa-prema.



gurave gauracandrāya

rādhikāyai tadālaye

kṛṣṇāya kṛṣṇa-bhaktāya


                            10
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

tad bhaktāya namo namaḥ



I offer my obeisances unto Śrī Gurudeva, Śrī
Gauracandra, Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Her associates, Śrī
Kṛṣṇa and His devotees, and to all Vaiṣṇavas.



jaya jaya śrī-caitanya jaya nityānanda

jayādvaita-candra jaya gaura-bhakta-vṛnda



Glory to Śrī Caitanya and Nityānanda! Glory to
Advaitacandra! And glory to all the devotees of Śrī
Gaura!



bhaktyā vihīnā aparādha-lakṣaiḥ

kṣiptāś ca kāmādi-taraṅga-madhye

kṛpāmayi! tvāṁ śaraṇaṁ prapannā

vṛnde! numas te caraṇāravindam



O merciful Vṛndā-devī! Devoid of devotion and guilty of
unlimited offences, I am being tossed about in the ocean
of material existence by the turbulent waves of lust,
anger, greed, and other inauspicious qualities.
Therefore, I take shelter of you and offer obeisances
unto your lotus feet.

tavaivāsmi tavaivāsmi

na jīvāmi tvayā vinā

iti vijñāya devī tvaṁ

naya māṁ caraṇāntikam



I am Yours! I am Yours! I cannot live without You! O
Devī (Rādhā), please understand this and bring me to
Your lotus feet.




CHAPTER ONE

THE FIRST HISTORY


The appearance of Lord Jagannātha


                            11
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

Today is the day of the Jagannātha Chariot Festival.
What is the meaning behind this festival? Our heart is
like a chariot, and we pray to Kṛṣṇa, “Please come and
sit in my heart.” This is how the gopīs prayed to Him at
Kurukṣetra: “You should come and sit in our hearts. Our
hearts are Vṛndāvana.”

The first history of the appearance of Lord Jagannātha
is given in the Skanda Purāṇa, as well as in the Padma
Purāṇa, the Puruṣottama-māhātmya, and The Diary of
Jagannātha. The particular version presented here is
from the Skanda Purāṇa and the Puruṣottama-māhātmya.
There are minor differences in the versions from the
other scriptures, but the history is basically the same.

In Satya-yuga there lived a King named Indradyumna
Mahārāja, and his wife was Guṇḍicā. That King reigned in
the beginning of the first half of Lord Brahmā’s day,
when Brahmā first created the material world by the
mercy of Kṛṣṇa and with the help of Mahāmāyā. He lived
in middle-India, in the ancient city of Avanti Nagari in
Ujjain, where Kṛṣṇa was taught by Sāndīpani Muni. He and
his queen were very religious and advanced devotees, and
although they were royalty they were always engaged in
the service of Bhagavān. That King wanted to see the
Supreme Personality of Godhead with his own eyes, and he
continually waited for an opportunity. He always prayed,
“When will a day come that I will see my Lord?”

The King used to receive and host travelers from the
various holy places of the world, especially those in
India, in the compound of his palace. One day, some
pilgrims came and spent the night there. They had just
come from a very high class of holy place (tīrtha) and
had taken darśana of the beautiful four-handed Nīla-
mādhava; now they discussed among themselves the glories
of that deity. A brāhmaṇa devotee overheard their
conversation and informed the King’s minister about it,
and he in turn informed the King and made him aware of
the deity’s beauty. He told the King, “Anyone who
receives Nīla-mādhava’s darśana will not have to return
to this world and will be liberated forever. He will
attain a four-handed form and become an associate of
Nārāyaṇa in Vaikuṇṭha. Even if someone simply vows, ‘I
will go to His temple to see Him tomorrow,’ but dies
that day without reaching the temple, he will still go
to Vaikuṇṭha and attain a four-handed form.”

The King wondered, “How can I obtain the darśana of
Nīla-mādhava? Where is He located?” He wanted to ask the
pilgrims, “Where can I find Him?” but they had departed
during the night; so he became upset and decided to
somehow search for the deity. He called Vidyāpati, the
very intelligent son of his priest, as well as his
officials and commanders, and ordered them all to search
in different directions: “Some of you go to the east,
others to the west, others south, and so on. You should
all return within three months. I will give vast wealth
and an important position to the one who informs me of
the deity’s whereabouts.” In this way, all the officials
enthusiastically set out in all directions from Madhya
Pradesh. Vidyāpati, who was very young and handsome and
who possessed all good qualities, went toward the east.


                            12
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

After three months they had all returned except
Vidyāpati, and the King was worried because no one knew
where he was. Vidyāpati had gone to the east coast of
India, near the Indian Ocean, and there he traveled
continually, searching and searching for Nīla-mādhava.
One day, on the shore of the ocean, he saw a very
beautiful village, where there was a mountain covered
with flowers and trees and where the residents were very
cultured. Evening was approaching and he decided to stay
in that village, so he told some of the residents, “I
would like to rest here tonight.” They replied,
“Viśvavasu is the prominent leader of this village. He
is a śabara (a lower caste), but he is very qualified
and religious-minded, and he is also intelligent,
humble, and liberal. Whenever any traveler or guest
comes, he visits Viśvavasu’s house; so you must go
there.”

When Vidyāpati arrived, Viśvavasu was not at home. Only
his very beautiful sixteen-year-old daughter, Lalitā,
was there. She opened the door and said, “You can wait
for my father, because he is not here. He has gone out,
but when he returns home he will arrange everything.
Kindly wait outside.” After some time Viśvavasu arrived.
A very sweet fragrance emanated from his body, and he
was wearing very beautiful and aromatic tilaka. When he
saw his guest, he became ashamed and told him, “Oh,
excuse me for returning so late. Now you may come in.”
He and his daughter took their guest inside. Very happy
to see that

beautiful personality, Viśvavasu told him, “You can
reside here for some days.” Then he told his daughter,
“Take care of this brāhmaṇa. Give him food and
everything else he requires, and look after him in all
respects. There should be no lack of anything.”

Vidyāpati took his meal and rested there. He smelled a
very beautiful fragrance in the house, especially when
the master of the house was home, and he wondered,
“Where does that beautiful fragrance come from? I have
never smelled anything like it in my entire life. And
that girl is so beautiful. I should wait here for a few
days, and it may be that I can find Nīla-mādhava.” He
then began searching here and there for some days.

Lalitā was now regularly serving him, and gradually she
became attached to him. Vidyāpati began to develop a
close friendship with her, and after some time he fell
in love with her. He was already married to someone
else, but still he had great affection for Lalitā; so he
requested her to ask her father to allow him to marry
her. She asked her father, he agreed, and Vidyāpati
became Viśvavasu’s son-in-law.

Viśvavasu went out regularly every day, and returned in
the evening very fresh and fragrant. One day Vidyāpati
privately said to his wife, “My dear, now you are my
wife, and I have great faith in you. Can you tell me
where your father goes every day for worship, and where
that fragrance comes from? Please tell me.”

Lalitā replied, “I cannot say. My father ordered me, ‘Do
not tell anyone where I go. Keep it secret – very, very

                            13
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

secret.’”

Vidyāpati said, “You cannot tell me? You are one with
me, non-different from me. You must tell me, because I
am your husband.”

She replied, “Then you must promise that you will never
tell anyone.”

Vidyāpati then said, “A wife should not speak like this.
I know you are a very chaste wife, so you must tell me.”
He then became silent.

Lalitā said, “I will tell you. He goes to worship a
deity.”

“Which deity?” Vidyāpati asked.

She replied, “I promised not to tell, but I will tell
you because you are my husband. He goes to worship Nīla-
mādhava.”

Vidyāpati became very happy and thought, “After such a
long time I have finally heard the name Nīla-mādhava.
Nīla-mādhava must be somewhere nearby.” He began to show
so much love and affection to his wife that she revealed
everything to him, and he then requested her, “Please
ask your father to take his son-in-law with him.”

She said, “Yes, I will help you.”

After her father returned from worship in the evening
and had taken prasāda, Lalitā approached him and sat on
his lap. With much love and affection she told him, “My
dear father, I want one benediction from you.”

He replied, “Oh, very good. I desire to give you a
benediction. What do you want?”

She told him, “I want something very special. I know
that you will be hesitant to give this to me, but I want
it.”

He father asked, “What do you want?”

She replied, “O father, I desire that you take my
husband with you to see Nīla-mādhava. He wants to take
darśana.”

Viśvavasu pondered whether or not to take him. Worried
that if he brought anyone the deity might be taken or
simply vanish, Viśvavasu was hesitant. When Lalitā saw
that he was not very willing, she said, “If you do not
show Nīla-mādhava to my husband, I will take poison and
die right in front of you. Your objection means that you
do not consider me your loving daughter.” And she
prepared herself to take poison.

These are the most powerful weapons of ladies: “I will
die,” “I will take poison,” “I will commit suicide.”
What will a husband or father say then? Of course, he
will say, “Oh, you can have whatever you want.”

Viśvavasu was now in a dilemma and thought, “What shall

                            14
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

I do? I must save my only daughter. I must give her this
benediction.”

He said, “I don’t want you to die. I will take your
husband with me and show him Nīla-mādhava, but there is
one condition. I will tightly bind his eyes with a black
cloth, and when we reach there I will remove it so he
can take darśana. After that, I will put on the
blindfold again. So he will have darśana, but he will
not know where he is.”

Lalitā then went to her husband and told him, “Father
has agreed to take you. He will blindfold you during the
journey there, but never mind.” Vidyāpati was overjoyed
and agreed to wear the blindfold. After that she told
her father, “Yes, you can bind his eyes with a black
cloth.” Later, when they were seated on the bullock
cart, Viśvavasu placed the black cloth over Vidyāpati’s
eyes. Lalitā, being very clever and intelligent, gave
her husband some mustard seeds and said, “Keep these in
your pocket. Now it is the rainy season. You can drop
them one after another along the way. After some time,
those mustard seeds will grow into plants producing
bright yellow flowers. Then you will be able to follow
the flowers and go there by yourself; you will not have
to ask my father the way.”

Viśvavasu then took Vidyāpati with him along a zigzag
route on the bullock cart. Vidyāpati dropped the mustard
seeds one by one on the ground without his father-in-law
knowing. When they arrived at the foot of the mountain,
they left the bullock cart there, and Viśvavasu took
Vidyāpati by the hand and led him to the temple of Nīla-
mādhava on the top of the mountain. When they entered
the temple, Viśvavasu removed the blindfold so that
Vidyāpati could see Nīla-mādhava. The deity was four-
handed, and He carried the śaṅkha (conch), cakra (disc),
gadā (club), and padma (lotus flower). He was very
beautiful, but unlike Nanda-nandana Kṛṣṇa, He had no
flute and no peacock feather – He was more like
Nārāyaṇa. Nārāyaṇa is very beautiful, but Kṛṣṇa is the
most beautiful of all.

Vidyāpati became very happy and began to weep, thinking,
“I have been searching for Him for such a long time – so
many months – and now I am satisfied. My life is now
successful.” Viśvavasu then told him, “Wait here a
while. I am going to the forest to bring some flowers
and other paraphernalia to worship Him. Then I will
offer candana and other articles, perform arcana, and
then we will return home.”

While Vidyāpati waited, he noticed a beautiful lake with
lotus flowers, humming bees, and some sweetly-singing
birds. The branches of a mango tree hung over the lake,
and a black crow that was sleeping on one of the
branches fell in. Immediately, his soul appeared with
four hands. Then Garuḍa quickly came, took that very
beautiful and glorious four-handed personality on his
back, and flew to Vaikuṇṭha. Vidyāpati began to think,
“Oh! With no practice in bhakti at all, he very quickly
went to Vaikuṇṭha. He never did anything auspicious. He
was impure – a crow – eating flesh and other abominable
things. Yet, simply by falling into the pond he became

                            15
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

four-handed and went to Vaikuṇṭha. Why should I remain
here?” He wanted to climb the tree and jump into the
lake as well, so that he could also attain a four-handed
form and go to Vaikuṇṭha. “I should not wait another
moment,” he thought, and at once began to climb the
tree. When he was about halfway up the tree, however, an
aerial voice called to him, “Don’t commit suicide just
so that you can be liberated and go to Vaikuṇṭha. You
will have to perform many important services for the
benefit of the entire world, so don’t die yet. Be
patient. Everything will be accomplished. Return to
Mahārāja Indradyumna at once and tell him that Nīla-
mādhava is here.”

In the meantime, Viśvavasu returned with many flowers
and other paraphernalia and said to Vidyāpati, “Oh, come
join me.” He had no idea what had happened. Viśvavasu
prepared candana and other ingredients, and throughout
the whole day he performed worship, offered prayers, and
engaged in many other devotional activities. All the
residents of that village were known as dayitās, which
means those who are very near and dear to Kṛṣṇa.
Viśvavasu was known as dayitā-pati, the master of all
those who are near and dear. He served in this way,
although he was a śabara. He was fully surrendered and
always called out, “Nīla-mādhava!” Now Vidyāpati was
also very much charmed with the glories of the deity
and, seeing the worship of Nīla-mādhava performed by his
father-in-law, he became overjoyed.

When Viśvavasu had completed his services, he again
covered Vidyāpati’s eyes with the blindfold, and they
departed. After some hours, traveling again in that
zigzag way, they reached their home. Then Viśvavasu
heard Nīla-mādhava telling him, “You have served Me for
a long time. Now I want to take the royal service of a
very high class of devotee named Indradyumna Mahārāja.
Don’t be afraid and don’t worry.” Viśvavasu, however,
immediately became upset and thought, “Oh, Ṭhākurajī
will go to Mahārāja Indradyumna? I cannot bear the
thought of separation. This boy will return and tell the
King, and the King will come and take Nīla-mādhava.” He
then practically arrested Vidyāpati and imprisoned him
within one of the rooms of his house.

Vidyāpati could not go anywhere, so he told his wife,
“Please help me. I want to return to Madhya Pradesh very
soon. I have promised my King, who wants to come with
his whole family to serve Nīla-mādhava. Please help me.
You are my wife – my other half.”

Lalitā agreed and said, “You can go. I will help you.”
She then told her father, “If you do not release him
from this jail, I will commit suicide at once.” She was
ready to commit suicide, so her father’s heart melted in
compassion and he released Vidyāpati. Now free,
Vidyāpati assured his wife, “I will return very soon.
Don’t worry.” He then quickly left and proceeded towards
Indradyumna’s kingdom.

He walked continually until he finally arrived back in
Avanti Nagari. He had been gone for over six months, and
King Indradyumna became very happy when he heard from
Vidyāpati, “I have discovered Nīla-mādhava. Please come

                            16
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

with me.” The King decided, “I shall go with my entire
kingdom, my wealth, my wife, and my soldiers and
commanders.” He wanted to bring Nīla-mādhava to his
kingdom, to worship Him for the rest of his life.
Proceeding from Ujjain, he reached the place about a
hundred miles south of Purī. But when he reached there,
there were no mustard seed flowers. There was also no
hill and no village, for by the desire of Nīla-mādhava,
the entire village was covered with over a hundred feet
of sand. Everything was covered, including the hill, and
Nīla-mādhava was not there.

The King began to weep. He sat down on a straw mat
facing the ocean and decided, “I will not take anything
to eat until I have darśana of Nīla-mādhava; if I do not
see Him, I will die. I came with my whole kingdom, all
my wealth, my wife, and family, but I did not get the
darśana of the Lord. Oh, I must give up my life.” Then,
as he began to chant, “Nīla-mādhava! Nīla-mādhava! Nīla-
mādhava!” remembering the Lord, an aerial voice called
to him, “I will not come, but do not worry. I will not
come here to give you darśana, but you will be able to
see Me. I am sending Brahmā. You should come with Brahmā
to Vaikuṇṭha, and there you can take My darśana. In this
world I will not give you darśana in the shape of Nīla-
mādhava, but I will manifest in four forms: Jagannātha,
Baladeva, Subhadrā, and Sudarśana cakra. Wait near the
sea where Baṅki-muhana is located.” This place is
presently known as Cakra-tīrtha, and it is by the part
of the ocean known as the Bay of Bengal, where the water
moves towards West Bengal. “Go there and wait, and dāru-
brahma (Bhagavān in the form of wood) will come. He will
manifest in the form of a very large, fragrant, reddish
log, and the signs of śaṅkha, cakra, gadā, and padma
will be seen everywhere on that form. Go there. Take Me
out and make four deities from that log. Then you will
be able to worship Me.”

Brahmā quickly came and took the King with him to
Vaikuṇṭha, where he could freely gaze at Nīla-mādhava as
He conversed with His associates. The King became even
more attached and began to weep, and then Brahmā told
him, “Let us go. He will not come to Earth in this form,
but He will come as four forms. Let us now go to the
place that He has designated, and wait for Him there.”

In the meantime, while the King was gone, many years had
passed and the entire world had now changed. Before
going he had constructed a very large and beautiful,
high temple, but now it was also covered by sand. The
sand had been removed many times, but the temple had
become old and dilapidated. A new King had come and
repaired it, and he had declared, “I am the builder of
this temple.” Now that King Indradyumna returned, he
told the new King, “This is not yours; I have built it,
so I am the owner of this temple. You have only made
repairs.” There was a crow named Kākabhuśuṇḍi, who had
been witness to the pastimes of Rāmacandra and also King
Indradyumna’s building the temple; and now he testified
on the King’s behalf. Brahmā also came forward and
agreed, “This King has built the temple. You have only
repaired it.” In this way, King Indradyumna again became
the master.


                            17
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

Somehow, by Kṛṣṇa’s mercy, the King’s wife was there. He
had no child at all, so there was only he and his wife.
The King and his new associates and army waited for the
deity, and at last he saw the red tree-trunk, marked
everywhere with śaṅkha, cakra, gadā, and padma. He
approached that trunk with his soldiers and elephants
and they tried very hard to take it out of the water,
but they could not do so. Many elephants and strong men,
and even his entire army, could not take the tree-trunk
out of the water.

The aerial voice came again and told the King, “Bring My
old servant Dayitā-pati Viśvavasu, and his daughter as
well. Viśvavasu will carry Me from one side, and the
brāhmaṇa Vidyāpati will take Me from the other side. And
bring a golden chariot for Me. I will come out easily,
and then you can arrange everything.” By the power and
will of Nīla-mādhava, Viśvavasu, Lalitā, and Vidyāpati
were still alive and now they were brought on a chariot
with honor. The King requested the three of them to
enter the waters of the ocean and lift the log.
Vidyāpati and his wife and father-in-law then began to
lift and simultaneously pray to the log, “Jaya
Jagannātha! Jaya Jagannātha! Nīla-mādhava! Nīla-mādhava!
O please, please be merciful and come upon our chariot.”

The log came out very easily, and it was brought on the
golden chariot to the place near to where the Jagannātha
Temple is now situated. The King kept the log there in a
big hall, and he invited all the carpenters of Orissa,
telling them, “I will give you vast wealth if you can
make the vigraha.” Very famous carpenters came there
wanting to make the deity, but their instruments and
tools broke as soon as they touched the iron-hard log.
An old but beautiful brāhmaṇa then came forward. He had
brought some tools, and he told them, “My name is
Mahāraṇa. I am very expert, and I can make you the
vigraha.” That brāhmaṇa was actually Nīla-mādhava or
Jagannātha Himself, in the form of an old brāhmaṇa. He
continued, “I will complete the vigraha in twenty-one
days, but you must promise that the door of this hall
will remain closed. I will be alone there with my tools,
and after twenty-one days I will open the door so that
you can see the deity. At that time you can take Him
into the temple and serve and worship Him.” The King
replied, “Yes, I will obey your instructions. I will not
open the door.”

The brāhmaṇa went inside with his tools, and locked the
door from inside. For fourteen days there was no sound,
and Indradyumna Mahārāja became very worried. He
thought, “What can be the matter? The brāhmaṇa has not
taken a drop of water or anything to eat this entire
time. Perhaps he is dead.” His Prime Minister then told
him, “Don’t open the door. There is some mystery behind
this. Only open it after twenty-one days; not before.”
However, his wife pleaded with him, “If you don’t open
the door now, the brāhmaṇa may die and we will be guilty
of brahma-hatyā (the sin of killing a brāhmaṇa). We must
open the door. Please hurry.” The King replied, “The
brāhmaṇa told me not to open it before twenty-one days
have elapsed. How can I open it?” She beseeched him
again and again, and finally the King called for his
carpenters to cut away the locks; he opened the doors

                            18
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

forcibly and entered.

Inside the hall, the King was struck with wonder, for he
could not see the brāhmaṇa. “Where is the brāhmaṇa
Mahāraṇa?” he asked. The four deities – Jagannātha,
Baladeva, Subhadrā, and Sudarśana cakra – were there,
but they had not been fully completed. Their eyes and
noses were only round shapes, their arms were not full-
length, and their hands and feet were not completed –
nothing was completed. The King began to weep. Opening
up his heart to his Prime Minister, he said, “I have
committed an offense by breaking my promise. Now what
shall I do?” Weeping, he again wanted to commit suicide.

In another account, perhaps in another creation, when
the King opened the door, the brāhmaṇa was present and
at once told him, “Why have you come in the middle of my
work? Now only fourteen days have passed. I wanted
another seven days to make the vigrahas very beautiful.
Why did you open the door? Now there are only round
eyes. Well, I think it must be the wish of God Himself –
Jagannātha. Otherwise I would have been able to complete
the task, and you would not have interrupted me.” Saying
this, the carpenter disappeared, and at that time the
King and his associates knew that he was not simply a
brāhmaṇa carpenter – he was Kṛṣṇa Himself. They began to
lament in separation.

The deity then ordered the King through His aerial
voice, “Don’t worry. There is a mystery behind this. I
desired to manifest like this, and there is a very deep
reason for it. Keep Me in the temple and begin to
worship Me in the form of these deities.” Jagannātha
continued, “Please carry out My orders. Viśvavasu and
his son-in-law Vidyāpati will worship Me, along with
Vidyāpati’s two wives. The sons of Vidyāpati’s brāhmaṇa
wife will take turns to worship Ṭhākurajī, and the sons
of his śabara wife will cook many varieties of
preparations. Many dayitās in the dynasty of Viśvavasu
will serve Me for ten days during a Ratha-yātrā
Festival. Only they will worship Me at that time; no one
else will perform the worship. They alone will take
Baladeva, Subhadrā, and Me on chariots, and they will
bring us to Guṇḍicā Mandira. Make a festival for ten
days beginning from today, and take these chariots to
the Guṇḍicā Mandira.”

It was due to the request of Queen Guṇḍicā that the
events of this pastime unfolded as they did, which is
why the mandira was named after her. Ṭhākurajī
continued, “We will remain there for those days, and
then you may take us back. You should perform many
festivals, like Snāna-yātrā, Candana-yātrā, Herā-
pañcamī, and so on.”

During Candana-yātrā, Jagannātha’s entire body is
covered with candana for many days. At that time, the
vijaya-vigraha deity known as Govinda1 is placed on a
very beautiful boat in Narendra-sarovara, and His boat
pastimes take place. Then, during Snāna-yātrā, the deity
receives abhiṣeka from thousands of pitchers of water
brought from all the holy places in India, and His bath
is so long that he becomes sick. His stomach becomes
upset and He falls ill. At that time, Lakṣmī takes Him

                            19
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                         5/5/2017

to her palace and closes the door for fifteen days. Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu could not survive without the deity,
and therefore He went to Ālālanātha and cried, “Where is
Kṛṣṇa? Where is Kṛṣṇa?” He became mad, so much so that
when He touched the stones at Ālālanātha they melted.
Wherever He offered his praṇāma – wherever His hands,
head, and other limbs were placed – their impressions
became visible in that piece of stone.

Only the dayitās, the family of Viśvavasu Śabara, can
serve Jagannātha at the time of Ratha-yātrā. Actually,
there are two kinds of servants. One is coming from the
dynasty of Vidyāpati’s original brāhmaṇa wife, and these
devotees do arcana and sevā. Those who descend from
Lalitā are called supakara (excellent cooks), because
Jagannātha has accepted them as His cooks even though
they are of a low-class birth. They very quickly and
easily cook not less than one hundred mounds of rice and
dahl, and a variety of other preparations. They are
expert in using many stoves, and they place at least
twenty earthen pots on one stove.2

The King prayed, “O Ṭhākurajī, I want a boon so that I
may serve You.”

Ṭhākurajī replied, “What boon do you want?”

The King said, “I desire that there should be neither
sons nor daughters in my dynasty. I do not want any
children. I know You will grant my desire.”

Ṭhākurajī smiled and asked, “Why don’t you want
children?”

The King replied, “After I die, they will quarrel over
money, and they will have no interest in serving You. So
much money will come for Your service, and they will
think, ‘This property is mine’ or ‘Jagannātha is my
property.’ I don’t want any of my family members to
think, ‘This temple is mine, Jagannātha, Baladeva, and
Subhadrā are my property, and all the money coming as
praṇāmī (donations) is therefore mine to enjoy.’ If they
think in that way, they will use everything for their
own sense gratification and go to hell.”

Nowadays we see this mentality all over India and
everywhere else. These days, neophyte devotees approach
people and say, “Give me some money to serve my
gurudeva. I want to serve Ṭhākurajī – Jagannātha,
Baladeva, and Subhadrā. I want to serve Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa,
so donate something.” Then, when they get that donation,
they do not give a single cent to gurudeva or to
Ṭhākurajī. They think, “Now I am the enjoyer!” They keep
the money in their pocket, and then they enquire, “Where
is the best bank for me to make a deposit?” Someone may
reply, “You can go to Switzerland; it is the very best.”
Then they will say, “No, I want to keep my money in
India so that I can live there. Can you tell me which is
the safest bank in India to keep my money?” They forget
that they collected that money for gurudeva. Would
anyone have given the money if they thought it was for
that disciple? And what will be the punishment? Kṛṣṇa is
in anxiety that He has yet to create a hell that is
appropriate for them.

                            20
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                        5/5/2017


In India, too, many gosvāmīs think they are the owners
of their temples. They take the praṇāmī and engage in
many bogus activities. You should be always careful
about this; otherwise bhakti will not come to you. She
will think, “This person is very selfish. He wants to be
the master of his gurudeva, and also of Kṛṣṇa.”

The King therefore requested, “There should be no one to
take even a single paisā. You are the owner. You
Yourself should depute those who will serve You. The
managers should regularly be changed, and they should be
servants, like trustees.” A trustee is one who can be
trusted to serve without any desire for self-gain. The
King of Orissa is always the trustee, and someone else
is selected after him. They are not actually kings, in
the sense that they cannot take a farthing or a paisā
for themselves. If they were to, they would be ruined.

Upon hearing the King’s words, Jagannātha began to
smile, and thus the Ratha-yātrā Festival began. There
are so many relevant teachings found in this history.




CHAPTER TWO

THE SECOND HISTORY


The reason behind Lord Jagannātha’s appearance

You have now heard the first history, but it does not
fully explain why Jagannātha desired to manifest in a
form that appeared to be incomplete. That explanation is
contained in a somewhat different history, which was
discovered by the Gosvāmīs in Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s
line. It is not written down anywhere in its entirety;
it exists only in the hearts of pure devotees,
especially those devotees who have received Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s mercy. Actually, there are two histories
like this, not just one, and they are both very
beautiful. Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī has included part of
the first of these histories, which is most interesting,
in his Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta.

Kṛṣṇa took birth in Gokula. He manifested Himself
partially in Mathurā as well, but He Himself is fully
the son of Mother Yaśodā and Nanda Bābā. In Mathurā He
did not appear as a son – He appeared with four hands,
and was sixteen years old. He was wearing golden
ornaments, a golden crown, and very opulent clothing,
and His wavy hair was very long. In Gokula, on the other
hand, He emerged from the womb of Yaśodā as a baby,
along with His younger sister. He was actually the son
of Nanda and Yaśodā, not their adopted son. Sometimes it
is written that He was the son of Vasudeva and Devakī,
but the Vrajavāsīs do not accept that idea. They
personally saw Him come from the womb of Yaśodā, so how
could they believe that He took birth in Mathurā? There
was no birth ceremony in Mathurā, but in Vraja, Nanda
Bābā gave thousands of cows to the brāhmaṇas on Kṛṣṇa’s

                            21
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                        5/5/2017

birthday. He donated everything and kept nothing in his
house, but his house still filled up with wealth again.
It was such a good festival.

Kṛṣṇa was raised in Gokula, where Yaśodā bound Him to
the grinding mortar by her love and affection, and where
so many other sweet pastimes took place. When Kṛṣṇa
became older, He went cowherding with His friends,
playing sweetly on His flute. Over a period of time, He
killed Tṛṇāvarta, Bakāsura, Aghāsura, and other demons.
He performed the rāsa-līlā in Vṛndāvana, and He played
at Vaṁśīvaṭa and Keṣī-ghāṭa. Then, after some time,
Akrūra came to Vṛndāvana and told Kṛṣṇa, “Kaṁsa wants to
kill Your father and mother, Vasudeva and Devakī.” Kṛṣṇa
replied, “My father is Nanda Bābā and My mother is
Yaśodā-maiyā. But Vasudeva and Devakī are friends of My
father and mother, so I should go and save them.” He
immediately went with Akrūra, killed Kaṁsa, enthroned
Ugrasena as the king, and after some time He went to
Dvārakā.

Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī’s Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta relates the
following pastime that took place while Kṛṣṇa was
residing in Dvārakā. You have heard of Śrī Nārada Muni,
who is very expert in performing many unfathomable
pastimes to please Kṛṣṇa. He is very near and dear to
Kṛṣṇa, and he always discovers new ways by which he can
glorify Kṛṣṇa’s various manifestations and pure
devotees. It may be said that Nārada Muni is very
“tricky,” because no one can comprehend what he is
doing, or why, or how, or where he is going. Kṛṣṇa is
“tricky,” and so are His gopīs, His mother, His Vraja,
His Yamunā, and His devotees. Similarly, wherever Nārada
goes, only for the purpose of serving Kṛṣṇa, he is
always busy inventing unique ways to glorify his holy
master Kṛṣṇa, along with Rādhikā, the gopīs, and the
devotees.

Once Nārada went to Dvārakā in order to see the ever-
increasingly new glories of Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs. No one
would understand who are the greatest devotees if Nārada
had not revealed this knowledge. He went to Dvārakā to
discover a scheme to glorify them.

In the palace of Rukmiṇī, Nārada saw a big festival
taking place. All the 16,108 queens were present, headed
by the eight prominent queens, such as Rukmiṇī,
Satyabhāmā, Jāmbavatī, Bhadrā, Mitravindā, and
Nāgnajitī; and other Dvārakāvāsīs were also there.
Nārada approached Rukmiṇī, Satyabhāmā, and the other
queens and said in their assembly, “You are very
fortunate to serve Kṛṣṇa. You are the best servants of
Kṛṣṇa. You are His queens. You are the most glorious in
this entire world. I pay my respects to you.” What
Nārada was really conveying to the queens was: “Kṛṣṇa
does not love any of you. I know that He only and always
remembers the gopīs. He does not really want to be with
you – really He wants to return to Vṛndāvana and taste
the love of the gopīs.”

Rukmiṇī   and Satyabhāmā became unhappy and informed
Nārada,   “You are glorifying us, but we are well aware
that we   have not been able to make Kṛṣṇa happy since the
time He   married us. Our love cannot control Him. There

                             22
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

are so many of us, and we are very beautiful and
qualified in all the arts, but still we cannot satisfy
Him.”

Rukmiṇī said, “When He sleeps in my room, on my bed, He
cries continually. Sometimes when He dreams, He takes
hold of my veil and pulls on it, crying, ‘O Rādhikā! O
Rādhikā! Where are You? I will die without You! O
Lalitā, where are you? O Viśākhā, where are you?’
Sometimes He weeps piteously and calls out, ‘Mother
Yaśodā, where are you? I want to eat bread and butter! I
want to sit in your lap! I want to drink your breast
milk! Where are you?’ Sometimes He calls His friends, ‘O
Śrīdāmā! Subala! Madhumaṅgala! Kokila! Bhṛṅga! Where are
you? Come on! Come on! I cannot maintain My life without
you. Where are you? The cows are waiting and you aren’t
coming. Now it’s time for cowherding. You must come.’
And sometimes He even calls His cows, ‘Śyāmalī, Dhavalī,
Kālindī, Gaṅgā, Piśaṅgā! Where are you? Where are you?’
He weeps like this throughout the night, and the entire
bed becomes wet with His tears. And this did not happen
on just one night – He is always like this. He never
sees where we are or who we are. We are just ‘there.’

“We are very sad. We are not near and dear to Him at
all. If we’re near and dear, why does He not call out,
‘Rukmiṇī! Satyabhāmā!’? He never calls out our names.”

Then Satyabhāmā said, “O sakhī, you speak the truth.
Last night He wept bitterly and pulled my veil, calling
out, ‘O Rādhā! O Rādhā!’ He fell unconscious, and I
could not think of what to do. What is the history
behind this? Why does Kṛṣṇa never look upon us, although
we are married to Him? We are so sweet and beautiful,
and we are so expert in all the arts, yet we cannot
please Kṛṣṇa. We want to know how we can please Him.”

Meanwhile, Kṛṣṇa was sitting in His assembly hall named
Sudharmā. This hall was equipped with all kinds of
facilities. Sometimes it was large, sometimes small,
sometimes cool, sometimes warm, and sometimes it was
air-conditioned. It would

provide whatever one desired simply by the power of his
mind. Sometimes one hundred people would be present
there, and sometimes thousands. It expanded and
contracted, like Kṛṣṇa Himself. While the queens were
talking, Kṛṣṇa’s associates were sitting in the council
chamber, discussing various problems and how to solve
them. Ugrasena Mahārāja sat on the throne in the middle,
and Akrūra, Kṛṣṇa, Baladeva, Uddhava, and others sat
beside him.

Kṛṣṇa was not His normal self. He was somewhat upset,
absorbed in worrying about something. In the Padma
Purāṇa it is said:



nāhaṁ tiṣṭhāmi vaikuṇṭhe

yogināṁ hṛdayeṣu vā

tatra tiṣṭhāmi nārada

                            23
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017


yatra gāyanti mad-bhaktāḥ



Kṛṣṇa once told Nārada, “I never live in Vaikuṇṭha, nor
do I live in the hearts of the yogīs. I live in the
hearts of pure devotees. I live wherever they remember
me, and I take rest very comfortably there. I do not
live anywhere else.” It was for this reason that Kṛṣṇa
was upset. Being the Supreme Personality of Godhead, He
could understand the following pastime was taking place
in Rukmiṇī’s palace:

Mother Rohiṇī entered in the midst of the queens. She
was Baladeva Prabhu’s mother, had lived in Vṛndāvana
with Yaśodā for many years, and had nourished and
supported both Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva. As soon as she came
in, all the queens present offered her praṇāma and gave
her a good seat. Then, when she was comfortably seated,
they all approached her and said, “O Mother, we know
that you were in Vraja when Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva were
babies, and you stayed there for eleven years. You know
the history of all the gopīs. You know about the love
and affection of the gopīs, of Mother Yaśodā, and of all
the Vrajavāsīs. We want to know the importance of Vraja.
We want to know what it is about the nature of the
Vrajavāsīs’ love that makes Kṛṣṇa unable to forget them.
Many years have now passed. We have been serving Kṛṣṇa
for more than fifty years, but still He is not
controlled by our loving service. He never calls out, ‘O
Rukmiṇī! O Satyabhāmā!’ Rather, He always calls, ‘Rādhā!
Rādhā! Lalitā! Viśākhā!’ What is the reason for all
this?

“Sometimes His heart melts so much that He calls out,
‘Mother! Mother Yaśodā! Where are you? Give Me bread and
butter. My cows are hungry. I must go out cowherding at
once. The boys are calling Me – Dāmā, Sudāmā, Śrīdāmā,
and others are calling Me. They are waiting for Me by
the door, and all the cows are mooing very loudly. They
are not giving milk to their calves, because they are
all hankering for Me; so I must go at once.’

“He does not think, ‘I am in Dvārakā with My beloved
Rukmiṇī and Satyabhāmā.’ Why? What is there in Vraja?
They do not have any wealth, as we do here. The gopīs
have no ornaments like us, and they are not as
beautiful. They live in the forest, and they can only
decorate themselves with flowers, not with gold and
jewels as we do. Kṛṣṇa used to go cowherding there, and
here He is like a king, so why does He always remember
them? Why has He given His heart to them? We want to
know. Do they know some magic? Do they know an
enchanting mantra? They must know one, and that must be
why Kṛṣṇa always remembers them and weeps for them.

“We are Kṛṣṇa’s 16,108 queens. We are the most beautiful
ladies in the entire world, and our qualities and
expertise in everything is unique and unparalleled.
Still, all of us together can never control Him. Mother,
what is the reason that He never looks toward us? Why is
it that we cannot satisfy one Kṛṣṇa although we are so
many? We serve Him in innumerable ways and we love Him

                            24
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                        5/5/2017

so much, but we cannot satisfy Him. He is only worried
about the gopīs – and about calling out to them. What is
the reason? We want to know everything.”

When Rohiṇī-maiyā remembered her friend Yaśodā and all
the gopīs, she began to weep, and then she began to
explain the reason. She related all of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes,
from boyhood up to His twelfth year. Meanwhile, Kaṁsa’s
mother came in their midst. Being more than a hundred
years old, she was bent over with her head at an odd
angle and walked with a stick. “This is very dangerous,”
she told them. “Why talk about the gopīs and gopas? They
are very cruel, very cruel. Yaśodā could not nurture
Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva properly. They are the sons of
Devakī, but somehow they were sent to Gokula because
their parents were afraid of Kaṁsa. Yaśodā never gave a
drop of yogurt or butter to Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva, so they
were forced to steal them from neighbors’ houses. Then,
when the neighbors complained to Yaśodā, she would
immediately chastise Kṛṣṇa, and sometimes she would tie
His hands and bind Him to a grinding mortar. Yaśodā and
Nanda Bābā were so cruel and evil that they never gave
Kṛṣṇa any shoes or sandals, although the forests were
full of many thorns and hard pieces of stone. Don’t talk
about them.

“Kṛṣṇa used to herd the cows from morning to evening all
over Vraja, with no pay and without shoes or an umbrella
to shield Him from the afternoon sun. There are great
quantities of butter there in Vraja, but He never got
any of it. Anyone would give butter even to a servant,
but they never gave Him any.

“Yaśodā once tied Kṛṣṇa up with ropes. He was weeping
bitterly, but that lady had no mercy. She took a stick
and wanted to beat Him, although He was crying, ‘Mother!
Mother! Please don’t beat Me! I will never do it again!’
He never did anything wrong, but still she wanted to
beat Him. On the other hand, my husband, Ugrasena, is
extremely merciful.

“I think Kṛṣṇa was there for twelve years, and during
that entire time He only received a small quantity of
milk from Mother Yaśodā. Between the ages of five and
twelve years He and Balarāma were merely given some
bread and butter. So we should count how much Yaśodā and
Nanda Bābā spent on Kṛṣṇa during those twelve years. We
should also count how many days He herded the cows
there, and we also have to consider that sometimes He
went to others’ houses and stole their goods. They
should pay Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva some money for the cow-
grazing they did. But on the other hand, Kṛṣṇa received
at least some clothing from them. Anyway, we will count
everything up and call Gargācārya, because he is an
expert accountant, as well as an astrologer. He knows
everything. When he writes the accounts, he will make a
statement regarding the salary owed to Kṛṣṇa and
Baladeva for cowherding, and what was actually already
spent on them.

“We will not   pay for Rohiṇī, because she is a member of
the party of   Nanda, Yaśodā, and the gopīs. We will never
pay for her.   We can only pay for Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva.
There should   be a report. When the accounts are written

                             25
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

and balanced, if anything is owed to Yaśodā and Nanda,
we will pay double.”

Rohiṇī became more and more angry as Padmāvatī
continued, “My husband is extremely broadminded,
generous, and merciful. If anything is owed to Yaśodā
and Nanda, we can pay double, and if something is owed
for Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva’s herding the cows, we will
immediately be compassionate and say, ‘We will not take
anything.’ So we are going to call Gargācārya.”

Mother Rohiṇī then became extremely angry and said, “I
know who you are!” Padmāvatī was the wife of Ugrasena,
but Kaṁsa was not Ugrasena’s son. Once, when Padmāvatī
was very young, she was playing with her friends on the
bank of the Yamunā in the evening. A demon named Drumila
approached her in a lusty mood, and that is how Kaṁsa
was conceived. Rohiṇī continued, “I know that you are
not a chaste lady, and that is why you can’t understand
the glory of the Vrajavāsīs’ love and affection.”

Rohiṇī stopped speaking to Padmāvatī and now addressed
the queens. One by one, she explained the moods of Nanda
Bābā, Yaśodā, Subala, and Śrīdāmā; and at last she began
to speak about the gopīs. She said, “The Vrajavāsīs love
Kṛṣṇa so much that they cannot live without Him. When
Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva were still very young, they wanted to
take the cows out to graze, so they told Mother Yaśodā
again and again, ‘Mother, we want to go cowherding,
because we are gopas. Please give us the order to go.’
When they were not given permission, they began to weep.
At last, Mother Yaśodā told them, ‘You may go with the
calves to a nearby forest in Vṛndāvana, but you must
return home soon.’ She brought them very beautiful shoes
and umbrellas to shade them from the sun, but Kṛṣṇa told
her, ‘The cows are worshipable for us because they are
like our mothers. If you want to give Me shoes, then
bring shoes for all the 900,000 cows. You should bring
400,000 shoes for every 100,000 cows, because they each
have four feet. Bring umbrellas for all of them, too,
and then I will also take the shoes and umbrella;
otherwise I won’t. I don’t want to be their master. I
want to be a servant of the cows, because I am a gopa.
Gopa means maintainer, supporter, and nourisher of the
cows – as their servant.’

“Yaśodā once told Kṛṣṇa, ‘My son, all the gopīs come to
me and complain that You have been going to their houses
and taking butter from their storerooms.’ Kṛṣṇa said,
‘Mother, why are you speaking like this? Maiyā, maiṅ
nahīṅ makkhana khāya – Mother, why do you say that I
have stolen butter? I have not stolen butter and eaten
it. You sent Me cowherding in Madhuvana in the very
early morning, so I went there, and I was always with
the cows. Now it’s evening, so I have come back with the
cows, and after this I will go to bed. When did I have
time to steal butter? If you think I’ve stolen it, then
it must be because I’m not your son. Either you’ve
borrowed Me, or else I took birth somewhere and My
mother left Me, and that is why you think I’m a thief. I
want to go to the Yamunā and jump in – I will not live
with you anymore.’

“Yaśodā at once began to weep bitterly. She embraced

                            26
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa and said, ‘O Kṛṣṇa, You have not taken butter. I
have not said this.’ Kṛṣṇa replied, ‘Mother, I have
taken butter: Maiyā, maiṅ ne hī makkhana khāya,’ and
Yaśodā replied to Him, ‘No, no, You have not taken
butter.’ Then she began to caress Kṛṣṇa. She wept and
bathed Him in her tears, and milk flowed spontaneously
from her breasts. Yaśodā cried, ‘I will never say such a
thing again.’”

Rohiṇī-devī continued, “The Vrajavāsīs only know that
Kṛṣṇa is their son, their beloved, or their friend. You
sometimes think that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead Himself, and you can see His four hands, but
this idea is never present in Vraja. The Vrajavāsīs see
Kṛṣṇa as an innocent boy. He is always dancing and
playing on His flute, His turban is decorated with a
peacock feather, and all the gopīs are His beloveds. He
is Gopījana-vallabha, the beloved of all the gopīs.

“The gopīs do not require a formal relationship with
Kṛṣṇa. Since childhood they have given their hearts and
everything else to Him, and therefore He cannot repay
them. Oh, listen attentively. The gopīs never want to
gain anything from Kṛṣṇa. They always serve Him without
any desire for self-gain. In Dvārakā, you, Rukmiṇī and
Satyabhāmā, are Kṛṣṇa’s wives, but not His beloveds. Do
you know why? Because your love and affection is divided
into many fractions. Besides your husband Kṛṣṇa, you
each have ten sons and a daughter as well. Your one
husband plus these eleven make twelve, so your love and
affection is divided into twelve parts. The gopīs’ love,
on the other hand, is not divided. They have given up
their husbands, they have no children, they do not take
care of their houses, and they have no animals – they
have nothing to look after. Their love and affection is
akhaṇḍa – total, full, and undivided.

“In the relationship of a lover and beloved, a lady
gives her entire time for her beloved, but her love and
affection becomes divided if a child is born. She will
give much more time to the baby than to her husband. If
she has ten or eleven children, her love and affection
will then be divided still further.”

Rohiṇī explained that when the gopīs perform any duty,
such as sweeping in their homes, they always keep Kṛṣṇa
foremost in their minds and hearts. They sweep, and at
the same time they chant, “Govinda Dāmodara Mādhaveti,”
and while cooking, they sing, “Govinda Dāmodara
Mādhaveti.” If a gopī is looking after her elders’ small
son and she wants him to sleep, she pats him and sings,
“Govinda Dāmodara Mādhaveti.” The gopīs do not tell the
babies, “Go to sleep, go to sleep.” Instead they sing,
“Govinda Dāmodara Mādhaveti.” If they are threshing
corn, wheat, or rice, they sing, “Govinda Dāmodara
Mādhaveti.” There are some parrots in the gopīs’ homes,
and very early in the morning, at four a.m., they teach
those parrots, “Repeat after me: ‘Govinda Dāmodara
Mādhaveti.’”

The minds and hearts of the gopīs are always absorbed in
Kṛṣṇa. Their minds and hearts are like a chariot on
which Kṛṣṇa is always sitting, and His mind and heart is
like a chariot on which the gopīs ride. Kṛṣṇa always

                            27
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

thinks of the gopīs, calling, “Rādhe, Rādhe, Rādhe,
Jaya, Jaya, Jaya, Śrī Rādhe...” He always remembers,
“Rādhā, Rādhā! Lalitā! Viśākhā! Mother Yaśodā!”

Kṛṣṇa’s love and affection is divided into many parts.
In the Gītā (4.11) He has promised, “ye yathā māṁ
prapadyante – I will remember those who remember Me,”
and He is bound to keep His promise. He will go to that
place where His devotee remembers Him and chants His
name. He is very loving towards the Vrajavāsīs, but at
the same time, He cannot give up the devotees of
Mathurā, Dvārakā, or other parts of India or the rest of
the world. If anyone chants, He will go to that person.
He always remembers them, and He always feels great
separation from them. Consequently, His love is divided;
but the gopīs’ love is not divided, and that is why He
is so attached to them.

Mother Rohiṇī continued, “Kṛṣṇa used to wipe the faces
of the gopīs when they became tired from dancing and
singing during the rāsa-līlā. The gopīs can sing more
sweetly than He can. He can sing, ‘sā, re, gā, mā, pā,’
but the gopīs can do more than this. Kṛṣṇa will stop
there, but they will sing, ‘sā, re, gā, mā, pā, dā, ni,
sā.’ When Kṛṣṇa heard them He became very happy and
said, ‘Sādhu, sādhu! Very good! I cannot do as you have
done.’ He always used to praise them.”

The gopīs’rati, their love and affection for Kṛṣṇa in
mahābhāva, is called samartha-rati. The word samartha
means capable, suitable, and complete; therefore
samartha-rati means “capable of controlling Kṛṣṇa.” The
rati of the queens of Dvārakā is called samañjasā, which
means that it is doubtful that their love can control
Kṛṣṇa. They are not like the gopīs, whose love is
capable of controlling Him. The gopīs’prema is so
elevated that the queens’ love can never even be
compared with it. The queens’ love reaches the stages of
prema, sneha, māna, praṇaya, rāga, and anurāga.
Sometimes they attain a shadow of mahābhāva, and
sometimes they experience divyonmāda and citra-jalpa,
but only to a very slight extent. Their aṣṭa-sāttvika-
bhāvas cannot go up to ujjvalita (blazing) and
prajvalita (inflamed). Their bhāva may go up to
dhūmāyita, which is compared to a flame covered with
smoke. Sometimes their bhāva is also without smoke, in
other words more intense, but it is never as high as
that of the gopīs. The “smokeless” flame of the gopīs’
love goes up to the highest extent.

Mother Rohiṇī then began to glorify Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s
affection for Kṛṣṇa. She said, “Once Śrīmatī Rādhikā was
sitting on Kṛṣṇa’s lap. A bee came by, humming, thinking
that Her feet were a very fragrant, sweet and tasteful
lotus flower. It wanted to enter Her lotus feet and
Rādhikā became frightened. She tried to chase the bee
away, but it kept coming back. Meanwhile, Madhumaṅgala
came and drove it away with his stick. When he returned,
he boasted, ‘Madhusūdana has gone. I have driven him
away and he will not come back.’ When Śrīmatī Rādhikā
heard this, She forgot that She was sitting in Kṛṣṇa’s
lap and being caressed by Him, and She began to weep.
Taking the word Madhusūdana to mean Kṛṣṇa Himself, She
cried out, ‘O Madhusūdana! Where have You gone? When

                            28
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

will You come back? You must come, otherwise I will
die.’ Speaking in this way, She became unconscious in
Her mood of separation. Astonished, Kṛṣṇa thought, ‘What
shall I do? How will I pacify Her?’”

Rohiṇī-maiyā continued, “Once Kṛṣṇa was going cowherding
with Dāmā, Śrīdāmā, Madhumaṅgala, and all the other
cowherd boys and His hundreds of thousands of cows. Some
of the cows were black, some were golden, and some were
white, and it looked as though the rivers Gaṅgā, Yamunā,
and Sarasvatī were mixing together and separating again.
All that could be seen for miles and miles were the
heads and bodies of cows. Kṛṣṇa was just going to enter
the forest, and Mother Yaśodā and Nanda Bābā were
following Him. They could not leave Him easily, although
Kṛṣṇa told them, ‘It is My wish that you return home
now.’ Just then, Kṛṣṇa somehow saw Lalitā, Viśākhā, and
all the other gopīs as they peered from their windows,
groves, and doors here and there. Kṛṣṇa was at once
attracted, and then He saw Śrīmatī Rādhikā.”



veṇu-karān nipatitaḥ skhalitaṁ śikhaṇdaṁ

bhraṣṭaṁ ca pīta-vasanaṁ vraja-rāja-sūnoḥ

In this verse (Śrī-Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi (39)),
Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī Ṭhākura is explaining that Kṛṣṇa
saw Śrīmatī Rādhikā performing arcana from the corners
of Her eyes, and He very lovingly accepted Her glance.
He began to tremble, His flute fell from His hands, and
His yellow garment fell from His shoulders. He was just
about to faint when Madhumaṅgala pushed Him and said,
“Don’t You see that Your father Nanda Bābā is here? What
are You doing?”

Kṛṣṇa is controlled by this kind of love and affection.
The gopīs have so much affection that they think that
they have only a little.



dhanyāh sma mūḍha-gatayo ’py hariṇya etā

yā nanda-nandanam upātta-vicitra-veśam

akarṇya veṇu-raṇitaṁ saha kṛṣṇa-sārāh

pūjāṁ dadhur viracitāṁ praṇayāvalokaiḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.21.11)



[The gopīs lamented:] The female deer are coming with
their husbands. Their husbands are somewhat black in
color, so they are called kṛṣṇa-sāra. Their husbands
tell them, “You can happily go and see Kṛṣṇa. Don’t fear
– we are with you.” Our husbands are just the opposite.
If they see us talking with Kṛṣṇa or looking at Him,
they come and chastise us. We want to die and take birth

                            29
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

again as deer.



Sometimes Kṛṣṇa becomes upset because He lacks the moods
enjoyed by Śrīmatī Rādhikā, Lalitā, and Viśākhā.
Therefore He comes in the form of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu to learn those moods. Mahāprabhu went to
Godāvarī and met Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda, who is Viśākhā-devī
in his gopī-svarūpa, and there He underwent training for
many days. After that He went to the Gambhīrā, and only
then was He able to taste something of Rādhikā’s love.
The moods of the gopīs are thus very high.

Kṛṣṇa is the ocean of rasa, the mellows exchanged in
transcendental loving relationships. He Himself is rasa,
and He is also rasika, the taster of rasa. At one and
the same time, He is eka-rasa (one rasa) and aneka-rasa
(many rasas). When He is eka-rasa, there is nothing in
all the three worlds, even in Goloka Vṛndāvana, that is
not in Him. He is pūrṇatama, most complete. He knows
everything; nothing is unknown to Him. When He is aneka-
rasa, however, there is a certain mixture of rasas that
He both knows and does not know. Although He knows the
rasa (the taste that He experiences) in Himself, He does
not know the rasa in Śrīmatī Rādhikā. He knows what He
can taste as the enjoyer, but He does not know what is
tasted by the enjoyed. The pastimes of Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, Śacīnandana Gaurahari, are a mixture of both
eka-rasa and aneka-rasa. Eka-rasa is fully in Kṛṣṇa, but
aneka-rasa is fully in Caitanya Mahāprabhu, because in
Him Śrīmatī Rādhikā is present with Kṛṣṇa.

What are the moods in Rādhikā? They are of mahābhāva,
and especially adhirūḍha and mādana.1 Even if Śrīmatī
Rādhikā is sitting on the lap of Kṛṣṇa, She may forget
that She is with Him. She thinks, “Where am I? Where has
Kṛṣṇa gone?” She feels such separation in meeting that
Kṛṣṇa cannot imagine its depth. He thinks, “I am here,
and She is on My lap. My hand is on Her shoulder, and
yet She is searching for Me, crying, ‘Where is He? Where
is He?’ Why is this so?”

To understand Rādhikā’s mood, Kṛṣṇa assumed the form of
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Sometimes it is said that He
stole it, and sometimes it is said that He begged for
it. Rādhikā gave Him something of Her mood, and in the
form of Śrī Gadādhara Paṇḍita, She was testing to see
whether He was playing Her part well or not.

In this way there is something that Kṛṣṇa never knows,
and that is the mood of Rādhikā, the nature of Her love
for Him, and the way in which She tastes the mādhurīs
(sweet mellows) of His flute playing, His beautiful
face, His form, His qualities, and His pastimes.
Although those mādhurīs exist in Kṛṣṇa Himself, He does
not fully know their sweetness – He cannot taste their
sweetness fully. In aneka-rasa, therefore, Kṛṣṇa lacks
something and He has to go to the school of the gopīs.
There, Śrīmatī Rādhikā is like the principal, and
Viśākhā and Lalitā are like departmental heads, and
there He learns something about love and affection.

You should know that if one performs bhajana of Rādhā-

                            30
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa Yugala, and at the same time worships Dvārakādhīśa
and Rukmiṇī or Satyabhāmā, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī will give
him up. She will say, “Go to the queens in Dvārakā.”

An incident occurred one hundred and fifty years ago, in
a place in India called Raṇavāḍī, a village in Vraja-
maṇḍala. A very advanced devotee lived there, and he
always remembered Rādhikā and Kṛṣṇa and Their eternal
pastimes throughout the eight praharas (periods) of the
day. He was so absorbed that he almost forgot his body,
senses, and everything else. One day, however, he had a
desire to go to the places of pilgrimage. As he had
never been to Dvārakā before, he especially desired to
go there. In the meantime, a brāhmaṇa of his village
came to him and said, “I am going to Dvārakā. If you
want, you can come with me. I will pay the full fare and
take care of everything.” The devotee replied, “Yes, I
want to go with you.” So they traveled here and there
together, and finally arrived in Dvārakā.

There is a rule in Dvārakā that if one wants to enter
its territory he must be stamped with the hot firebrand
of a cakra. The brand will remain throughout his life,
but he will receive some medicine so that it will not be
like a scar. That devotee from Vṛndāvana was branded,
and then he entered the city and had darśana of many
places there. After that, he returned to his own place
in Vṛndāvana and tried to resume his bhajana. However,
something strange occurred when he wanted to remember
all of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes: the pastimes no longer came in
his memory, and instead he remembered incidents from
Dvārakā and other places. He became very, very worried
and disturbed because of not being able to chant and
remember as he had done before. He wanted to know the
cause of his misfortune, but he could not discern it.
Although he practiced for many days, the līlās did not
manifest as before.

This Bābājī Mahārāja had a very dear friend who lived at
Rādhā-kuṇḍa. He was called Siddha Kṛṣṇadāsa Bābājī, and
he was always absorbed in remembering Kṛṣṇa, and in
chanting. Tears constantly fell from his eyes, and his
heart was always melted. Bābājī Mahārāja went to visit
his friend, but when Siddha Kṛṣṇadāsa saw him from a
distance, he turned away and refused to converse with
him. “Go away from here at once,” he said, “otherwise
Śrīmatī Rādhikā will be displeased with me as well. I
know that you have gone to Dvārakā and you have accepted
the firebrand there. Why have you come here? If Rādhikā
knows that you have come to me, She will be displeased
with me. Go at once. At once!”

That devotee became very upset and thought, “If the
pastimes of Rādhikā and Kṛṣṇa do not come in my
meditation, what is the use of my life?” He returned to
his bhajana-kuṭīra and locked the door from inside in a
mood of great separation from Śrīmatī Rādhikā. After
three days a fire emanated from his heart, and he was
totally consumed, so that only some ashes remained. The
villagers could not understand why he had not come out
for three days, and finally they broke open the door and
saw that there were only the ashes remaining. “Perhaps
Bābājī was in a mood of separation,” they said. When
they put some wooden sticks in those ashes, the sticks

                            31
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                         5/5/2017

burned at once, and thus they realized, “Yes, Bābājī has
left his body in separation.” To this very day, the
residents of that village celebrate his disappearance
day.

Śrīmatī Rādhikā may give up a devotee if he worships
Rādhikā and Kṛṣṇa of Vraja, but is simultaneously
remembering Rukmiṇī and Satyabhāmā, and offering praṇāma
and arcana to them. You should know all these truths.
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura have written that you should be one-pointed in
your devotion to your gurudeva and your iṣṭadeva. You
can honor everyone, including trees, creepers, animals,
and devotees who are favorable to Kṛṣṇa, and even those
who are not favorable. You can think that Kṛṣṇa is
everywhere, and that all beings are His eternal servants
in their constitutional spiritual forms. However, if one
takes initiation in the rūpānuga line and is trying to
be one-pointed, especially in trying to be a servant of
Rādhikā, he cannot honor everyone in the same way. He
cannot think that all are in the same category.
Dvārakādhīśa-Kṛṣṇa and Vrajeśa-Kṛṣṇa are not the same.
They are the same, but at the same time, They are
different.

If one is just entering bhakti, there is no harm in
worshiping Jagannātha, Rukmiṇī, Satyabhāmā, Rāmacandra,
Nṛsiṁhadeva, Gaura-Nitāi, and also Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. However,
this is not for advanced madhyama-adhikārīs in Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s line. One will have to be
determined in one-pointed devotion; otherwise, Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, the gopīs, and Yogamāyā will give him up.
Though all incarnations and expansions are the same in
tattva-siddhānta, there is some difference from the
perspective of rasa. One cannot remain a neophyte
devotee forever. He should gradually learn all these
truths and try to become one-pointed.

There is no harm in worshiping Jagannātha if one sees
Him as Vrajendra-nandana Śyāmasundara, which is how He
appears in the eyes of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī. Whenever Mahāprabhu went to the Jagannātha
Temple, He did not see Baladeva Prabhu and Subhadrā. He
simply thought, “O Vrajendra-nandana!” and He ran like a
mad person to embrace Him. He never saw Jagannātha’s
large, round eyes, and He never saw Him without His
peacock feather and flute. He thought, “Kṛṣṇa is there,
playing on His flute, His eyes are very attractive, and
He is wearing a large peacock feather.”

Do you see that very Kṛṣṇa there in Jagannātha Purī? Do
you see Rādhikā? At present you do not see Them, and
therefore, in order to achieve this vision, you should
be one-pointed to your gurudeva. There may be many
śikṣā-gurus, but one śikṣā-guru should be prominent so
that we can follow him and give him our hearts. Even the
cloud, the mountain, the earth, and the python may be
our śikṣā-gurus, but one śikṣā-guru should be prominent,
and he is similar to our dīkṣā-guru. There is no
difference between the two. Sometimes the śikṣā-guru may
be superior to the dīkṣā-guru, sometimes the dīkṣā-guru
may be superior, or they may be on the same level.

From the beginning, we should be one-pointed to

                            32
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

Vrajendra-nandana Kṛṣṇa. That Kṛṣṇa should not simply be
Gopī-kānta, the beloved of the gopīs, because if He is,
then He may also be Candrāvalī-kānta, Padmā-kānta, and
Śaibyā-kānta. We should be one-pointed to Rādhā-kānta
and pray, rādhā-kānta namo ’stu te. This is a very deep
and high siddhānta. During the Ratha-yātrā Festival,
Caitanya Mahāprabhu engaged in many elevated dialogues
with His intimate associate, Svarūpa Dāmodara, about the
difference between the love of the gopīs and that of the
queens of Dvārakā. If one has some taste and greed to
follow the gopīs, and his aim and object is samartha-
rati, then he can know something about these topics.
This is the essence of the entire Chariot Festival.

Caitanya Mahāprabhu added to the meaning of the Ratha-
yātrā Festival, turning it in a different way than
previously performed. He made Guṇḍicā like Sundarācala,
Vṛndāvana, while the Jagannātha Purī temple in Nilācala
represented Dvārakā. All the gopīs were in a mood of
great separation at their Guṇḍicā Mandira, just as they
were in Vṛndāvana. That is why, after Jagannātha had
been in the Purī temple for an entire year, He made an
excuse to leave. He told His wife Lakṣmī, “I am so sick.
I need to go somewhere else for ten days, for a change.
I will go and then return very quickly.” That is how He
got permission from Lakṣmī to go.2

Jagannātha-deva took Baladeva with Him, because Baladeva
had taken birth in Gokula as Rohiṇī-suta, the son of
Rohiṇī. His sister Subhadrā is a manifestation of
Yogamāyā, and she always used to associate with Rohiṇī,
so she knew the glories of the gopīs and gopas. She
requested Kṛṣṇa, “Brother, I want to go with You. Please
take me.” And He replied “Yes, you can come.” Lakṣmī
never knew where Kṛṣṇa desired to go. None of the queens
ever knew. Vimalā-devī,3 who represents the queens of
Dvārakā, never knew, and that is why she allowed Him to
go.

Kṛṣṇa was so engaged in playing in the groves with the
gopīs that He forgot to return. On the fifth day, called
Herā-pañcamī, Lakṣmī became very worried and wondered,
“Where has my husband gone?” She searched here and
there, but could not discover His whereabouts. Then,
adorned with great opulence, she sat on a golden chariot
and went to search further with many associates, who
were holding sticks and other paraphernalia. When they
arrived at the Guṇḍicā Mandira and saw Kṛṣṇa’s chariot
there, the associates of Lakṣmī picked up their sticks
and began to beat the chariot. They captured all the
associates of Jagannātha, who were all actually
associates of Mahāprabhu and who represented the gopīs.
When Kṛṣṇa entered a room and locked it from the inside,
Lakṣmī told the gopīs, “You must return Him; otherwise I
will come again and punish you, and Kṛṣṇa as well.”
After speaking like this, she returned.



rathera upare kare daṇḍera tāḍana



cora-prāya kare jagannāthera sevaka-gaṇa

                            33
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                         5/5/2017




saba bhṛtya-gaṇa kahe, – yoḍa kari’ hāta



‘kāli āni diba tomāra āge jagannātha’



tabe śānta hañā lakṣmī yāya nija ghara



āmāra lakṣmīra sampad – vākya-agocara




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 14.211–13)



All the maidservants began to beat the chariot with
sticks, and they treated the servants of Lord Jagannātha
almost like thieves. Finally all of Lord Jagannātha’s
servants submitted to the goddess of fortune with folded
hands, assuring her that they would bring Lord
Jagannātha before her the very next day. Being thus
pacified, the goddess of fortune returned to her
apartment. Just see! My goddess of fortune is opulent
beyond all description.



Mahāprabhu added this idea to the Ratha-yātrā Festival,
that the gopīs brought Kṛṣṇa from the mandira in
Nilācala – they brought Him from Dvārakā.



sei ta parāṇa-nātha pāinu



yāhā lāgi’ madana-dahane jhuri’ genu




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 13.113)



[Śrīmatī Rādhikā said:] Now I have gained the Lord of My
life, in the absence of whom I was being burned by Cupid
and was withering away.

This singing of Rādhikā and the gopīs is the deep mood
behind the Ratha-yātrā Festival. They were pulling the
ropes of Jagannātha’s chariot by their moods of

                            34
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

separation, and He was coming with them to Vṛndāvana.
Caitanya Mahāprabhu was in the mood of Rādhikā, and
therefore, when He came in front of the ratha, it made a
haḍahaḍa, haḍa haḍa (cracking) sound. It was coming –
running – toward Guṇḍicā Mandira. In the mood of
Rādhikā, Caitanya Mahāprabhu did not think, “I am
Kṛṣṇa.” Rather, He saw Kṛṣṇa in the deity of Jagannātha.

Rohiṇī-maiyā related many pastimes, and all the queens
were listening eagerly. As Kṛṣṇa sat in His Sudharmā
assembly hall, He was aware that Rohiṇī was speaking in
Rukmiṇī’s palace, and He could no longer remain where He
was. He wanted to go to the place where Rohiṇī-maiyā was
talking about Vṛndāvana, and at once He arrived at her
door with Baladeva. Subhadrā was already standing guard
at the door, and as she heard Rohiṇī’s words she said,
“Brother, You cannot go in. Maiyā Rohiṇī will rebuke me
if I let You enter. She told me, ‘Stay by the door, and
make sure that no males come here – not even Kṛṣṇa and
Baladeva. If they come, stop them.’ So please remain
here. You can go in when the discussion is finished.”

Although Subhadrā stopped Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva from
entering, they could hear through the door what Rohiṇī
was telling the queens. Kṛṣṇa was standing at Subhadrā-
devī’s left, and Baladeva Prabhu at her right, and
together they began to listen very carefully. As Rohiṇī-
maiyā continued to speak, her heart began to melt, and
all the queens were struck with wonder. As she described
the glories of the love and affection of Vṛndāvana,
Kṛṣṇa became so absorbed that His own heart began to
melt, and His fingers also melted in that love and
affection. As all three heard about the glories of the
gopīs and how they love Kṛṣṇa, they all began to melt.
They wept, and as they wept, their hands melted, their
feet melted, their mouths melted, and only the shapes of
the Jagannātha deities remained. At that time Rohiṇī-
maiyā could not continue her description. She could no
longer speak, for she had fainted from her bitter
weeping.

Gradually, Kṛṣṇa began to return to external
consciousness, and His former shape began to come back,
little by little. When His form had fully returned to
its normal features, Kṛṣṇa entered the palace room and
saw that Mother Rohiṇī had fainted. Then He saw Nārada,
who was looking very guilty, thinking, “I am responsible
for all these incidents. I said something to Rukmiṇī and
Satyabhāmā, and then they called Mother Rohiṇī and she
began to speak about all these topics. So I am guilty.”
As he was thinking like this, Kṛṣṇa told him, “I think
all this has happened only because of you – you are the
main cause. Perhaps you said something to the queens to
worry them, and that is why they began questioning
Mother Rohiṇī. You are the root cause of these events. I
am very happy – very happy. You reminded Me of Vraja,
and I heard its glories. I want to give you a boon. You
may ask Me for anything.”

Nārada then became very happy as well, and he told
Kṛṣṇa, “I want this boon: all three of you melted when
you heard about your pastimes, and the glories of the
gopīs and Vrajavāsīs. My desire is that you will remain
in those forms somewhere in this world, and that the

                            35
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

whole world will see you. In that form, you will be
patita-pāvana, the savior of the fallen, and the entire
world will be liberated by your darśana. That is what I
want. Your hands and feet shrank and you melted
completely. Everything was melted, and at that time you
were absorbed in love and affection. I want the deities
of you three to be manifest in this world and worshiped
everywhere. People throughout the world will see you,
they will learn this history, and they will develop pure
love and affection for you.”

Kṛṣṇa replied, “Yes. Tato ’stu – it will be. I will
manifest these three deities and Sudarśana cakra in
Jagannātha Purī, on the bank of the ocean. We will
always remain there. There is a mountain called Nīlādri
there, and that mountain is in the shape of a tortoise
or a conchshell. I will always be there, and everyone
will be able to see us.”

It is because of this incident that the deity of
Jagannātha smiled when speaking to King Indradyumna.
Jagannātha-deva had been remembering this pastime of
Rohiṇī-maiyā speaking to the queens, and also His
promise to Nārada Ṛṣi.

Why did Kṛṣṇa mention Sudarśana cakra here? Su means
“very good” and darśana means “vision.” If Sudarśana
does not give you eyes, if he does not help you by
purifying you and giving you transcendental vision, you
cannot actually see Jagannātha, Baladeva, and Subhadrā.
You will think they are made of wood, and not very
beautiful. But if Sudarśana gives you this light, this
vision, then you can realize, “He is Vrajendra-nandana
Śyāmasundara.” This history of the appearance of
Jagannātha is very lovely, and you are fortunate to hear
it.




CHAPTER THREE

GUṆḌICĀ-MANDIRA-MĀRJANA


We should know that the Supreme Personality of Godhead
is one without a second. He is the same God for the
Christians, Muslims, Hindus, and all others. There are
not different Gods – He is the same God, the same Allah,
the same Christ. Just as there is one sun and one moon
for the entire world, similarly, there are not different
Gods for different people. How can God be divided? There
cannot be more than one God; otherwise all the gods will
quarrel over territory and position. There is only one
God, but He appears according to the vision of the
devotee.

An analogy can be given in relation to the moon. It
appears that there are fifteen different moons. For
fifteen days the moon gradually increases in size,
eventually becoming a full moon. After that it decreases
in size again, becoming a new moon on the last day of
the month. The “moons” are not different; it is the

                            36
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

names of the moon that are different: full moon, new
moon, quarter moon, and so on. Similarly, there is only
one God, but He appears to be many because people have
seemingly divided Him up by their different languages
and understandings.

Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He has many
manifestations such as Rāma, Nṛsiṁha, Jagannātha,
Baladeva, and Nārāyaṇa, and they are all the same. Even
the person Christians call “God” is the same, for He is
also one of Kṛṣṇa’s manifestations, as are Allah and
Jehovah. These are all names of God’s manifestations.
Some of these manifestations are more complete and have
more power, and some have less power. The full moon, the
new moon, and the stages in between all belong to the
same moon, but we see differences according to our angle
of vision. Actually, the moon is always full, but we
consider that it is waxing or waning when it is covered
to varying degrees.

In the same way, Kṛṣṇa is one without a second. He has
innumerable manifestations, but they are all Kṛṣṇa. We
are also parts and parcels of Kṛṣṇa. We are not Kṛṣṇa,
but at the same time, we are non-different from Him.
Both principles are there: difference and non-
difference. We can use the analogies of the sun and its
rays, and the fire and its heat; they are also different
and non-different. This is an astonishing truth, which
Caitanya Mahāprabhu has explained thoroughly.

The Supreme Personality of Godhead is one without a
second. Sometimes He manifests in this world personally,
and sometimes He sends His associates to give pure
knowledge. All the souls here in this world are eternal
servants of that Supreme Personality of Godhead. This is
the true conception, whether we accept it or not. We
have forgotten Him from the beginning of the creation of
this world, so He sometimes descends and performs very
sweet and powerful pastimes so that all conditioned
souls will be attracted to Him and engage in His
service. He sometimes descends as Kṛṣṇa, sometimes as
Rāma, and sometimes as Jagannātha, Baladeva, and
Subhadrā.

We cannot realize Kṛṣṇa if our hearts are full of lust,
worldly desires, and unwanted habits. He cannot come
into our hearts under these circumstances; so these
impurities must first be given up. There is no place for
doubt in devotion. No one has any confusion or doubt
about whether the sun exists, so why should there be any
doubt about the existence of the creator of millions of
suns? He can create millions and millions of worlds in a
moment, and He can also destroy them. Sometimes He comes
here, only to save us and to engage us all in His
service. Other than serving Him, there is no way to be
happy in this world or in any other world. There is only
one God, and ignoring Him is the cause of our
unhappiness.

We can be happy if we engage in Kṛṣṇa’s service. Don’t
be afraid that serving Him will be like serving someone
in this world. There is immense happiness in serving
Him, more so than in serving your wife, husband,
children, father, and so on. There is very, very

                            37
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

relishable love and affection in His service. There is
so much love and affection in Kṛṣṇa’s transcendental
abode – oceans of love and affection. In this world the
master gains and the servant has to lose something, but
it is not like that there.

First we should know that we are Kṛṣṇa’s eternal
servants, but we have forgotten Him, and that is the
cause of all our suffering and sorrow, birth and death.
We should have very firm faith in this. Don’t have any
doubt that we are spirit souls, parts and parcels of
Godhead, that we are His eternal servants, and that it
is due to forgetting Him that we are suffering now. We
can realize His mercy if we chant His name and surrender
to Him, giving up all doubts as Arjuna did.

Jagannātha-deva, Baladeva Prabhu, and Subhadrā have
descended to this world from their transcendental abode.
We will gradually try to explain the true identity
(svarūpa) of Jagannātha, Baladeva, and Subhadrā – who
they are and how they came to this world.



Today is the day of guṇḍicā-mandira-mārjana, the
cleansing of the Guṇḍicā Temple. ŚrīCaitanya-caritāmṛta
states that the temple of Jagannātha represents Dvārakā,
while the temple at Guṇḍicā is called Sundarācala and
represents Vṛndāvana. All the gopīs, such as Lalitā,
Viśākhā, and Śrīmatī Rādhikā, are there in Vṛndāvana,
and so are Nanda Bābā, Yaśodā, and all the other
Vrajavāsīs. Vasudeva, Devakī, Baladeva, Subhadrā, and
all the other Dvārakāvāsīs reside in Dvārakā. While
Kṛṣṇa resides in Dvārakā, He always remembers the
Vrajavāsīs – His father Nanda Bābā, His mother Yaśodā,
His cows, calves, friends, and especially His beloved
gopīs. He sometimes becomes so distraught in separation
from them that He arranges to go to Vṛndāvana to meet
them.

One day before the Ratha-yātrā Festival, Mahāprabhu
leads all the devotees to the Guṇḍicā Mandira to clean
it. On the next day, Jagannātha goes to Guṇḍicā Mandira
along with Baladeva, Subhadrā, and His devotees for ten
days, after which they all return. Just as Jagannātha
goes to Guṇḍicā Mandira after it is cleaned, so He may
come into your heart if you make it very pure and clean.

This festival of guṇḍicā-mārjana has been performed
every year since Satya-yuga. In ŚrīCaitanya-caritāmṛta
we see that previously, before the participation of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the servants of the King used to
clean that temple, but they would not clean it properly
because they were being paid to do it. They could not
give Jagannātha much pleasure because they had no
devotion. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu therefore told the
King through his priest Kāśī Miśra, “I would like the
service of cleaning the temple and the surrounding area
to be given to us.” He told Kāśī Miśra, Sārvabhauma
Bhaṭṭācārya, and others, “Please get permission from the
King so that this year I Myself will serve the Guṇḍicā
Mandira along with My associates. We will sweep and
clean it ourselves. There is no need to send any
servants of the King; no need at all. We only need some

                            38
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

brooms and pitchers.”

Hundreds and thousands of pitchers and brooms were
obtained, and Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s associates arrived.
Thousands of Bengali devotees and many thousands of
Orissan devotees accompanied Caitanya Mahāprabhu with
dancing and kīrtana. They had about fifteen mṛdaṅgas and
many karatālas. Caitanya Mahāprabhu personally gave them
all garlands and candana, and then, dancing in line
formation, they all began to sing. They all went to
Guṇḍicā Mandira, singing and dancing, and holding their
brooms and pitchers.

The King became very happy. He wanted to meet Caitanya
Mahāprabhu and serve Him, but although he was a very
high-class devotee, he had the name and position of a
king. He had great wealth and reputation and was always
surrounded by armies, commanders, and so on. Following
the regulations of the sannyāsa order, Caitanya
Mahāprabhu never wanted a sense enjoyer (viṣayī) such as
a king to come to Him. He considered that it would be a
disturbance, because He would be bound to hear mundane
talk (viṣayi-kathā). We will be alarmed and fearful if a
snake comes near us, even if its poison has been
removed. Similarly, a devotee fears association with a
sense enjoyer because it will disturb his sādhana-
bhajana. Now, however, we ourselves are like sense
enjoyers, because we are hankering for wealth,
reputation, and position.

Caitanya Mahāprabhu is Svayam Bhagavān Himself. He is
non-different from Jagannātha, but He was playing the
role of a devotee, which is why He had sent a
representative to tell the King, “I want to go
personally and clean the entire temple.” The King had
then requested Kāśī Miśra, who was his superintendent,
minister, priest, and spiritual master, “His devotees
can take whatever utensils and other paraphernalia He
wants.”

Mahāprabhu had thus called His associates, such as
Svarūpa Dāmodara, Rāya Rāmānanda, Gadādhara Paṇḍita, and
others. Advaita Ācārya and Nityānanda Prabhu were also
there, along with all the Gauḍīya bhaktas. There were
thousands and thousands of devotees, and on the evening
before the festival, Mahāprabhu had told them all, “You
should each bring a big broom made of coconut tree
fibers, and each of you should also bring a clay
pitcher.”

Now, on the next day, at about seven in the morning,
devotees assembled from all over India and all over the
world – not only one or two hundred thousand, but about
one million. First Caitanya Mahāprabhu accepted flower
garlands and candana Himself, and then He gave them to
all the devotees. They all wanted to offer praṇāma to
Him, but instead He very humbly offered praṇāma to all
of them. Nityānanda Prabhu wanted to touch His feet, but
He very humbly touched Nityānanda’s feet. He had no
false ego, thinking, “I am a guru; everyone should
respect me. Why should I respect others?” Actually,
people who think like that are not pure devotees. A guru
is one who respects others. His symptoms are:


                            39
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017



tṛṇād api sunīcena

taror api sahiṣṇunā

amāninā mānadena

kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ



Śikṣāṣṭaka (3)



He is very humble, even more so than a blade of grass,
and he is also very tolerant, more so than a tree. Even
if a tree is dry, it will never request, “Water! Water!
Water!” If someone cuts the branches of a tree, it will
not protest, “Oh, spare me! Don’t cut me!” It will never
speak like that. Mango trees give very sweet mangoes,
even if one throws stones at the tree in an attempt to
make the mangoes fall. The bark, seeds, fruits, leaves,
and sap of trees are always for others, not for
themselves. Kṛṣṇa tells us that we should be like the
trees. In other words, our lives should be for others,
not for ourselves, and our lives should be especially
for Kṛṣṇa. If one lives only for himself, he is lower in
consciousness than the trees.

The devotees with Mahāprabhu were touching each other’s
feet and at the same time performing kīrtana. Each
holding a broom and a pitcher, they performed nagara-
saṅkīrtana the entire distance from the Jagannātha
Temple to Guṇḍicā. The hundreds of thousands of devotees
began to bring water from the very large pond known as
Indradyumna-sarovara, and as they did so, they said,
“Kṛṣṇa! Kṛṣṇa!” to each other as they gave and received
the clay pitchers. They were filling their clay pots
with water, carrying the pots on their heads or in other
ways, and giving them to others, saying, “Hare Kṛṣṇa!”
to others on the way. Then, taking back the empty pots,
they again said, “Hare Kṛṣṇa!” In this way they were
running back and forth very quickly. Similarly, while
the devotees were sweeping, they were saying, “Kṛṣṇa!
Kṛṣṇa!” Everything was going on only with the chanting
of the names, “Kṛṣṇa! Kṛṣṇa!” and no other sound could
be heard. If a clay pot was broken due to the haste,
there would be sounds of, “O Kṛṣṇa! Kṛṣṇa!” and new clay
pots were brought from a shop at once.

In this way, everyone was engaged in cleaning the
courtyard of the Guṇḍicā Mandira. Water was thrown
everywhere, and all the areas were cleared so that
torrents of water flowed from the drain like the current
of a river. Mahāprabhu cleaned everywhere, high and low,
throwing water here and there, and thus everything
became as clean as His own heart. This is known as
guṇḍicā-mandira-mārjana.

Your heart is like a throne (siṁhāsana), and you will
have to clean it if you want to keep Kṛṣṇa and Rādhikā
there. First clean it, and then They will come. Who will

                            40
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

clean it? Nityānanda Prabhu may do so and gurudeva may
do so, but you will also have to do something. Guru will
help you; he has the power to do so, and he is very
merciful, but you will also have to do something. You
must follow his orders. Be like Arjuna, who told Kṛṣṇa
in Bhagavad-gītā (2.7): “śiṣyas te ’haṁ śādhi māṁ tvāṁ
prapannam – I have offered myself at Your lotus feet. I
will follow Your order and obey all Your instructions.”
Kṛṣṇa then ordered him to fight, and he was successful.

Similarly, guru can help you if you follow and obey him,
but if you disobey, that is an offense and your desire
to serve Kṛṣṇa will disappear. Try to obey. For example,
gurudeva says, “You should chant every day. You should
chant not less than sixteen rounds, and chant your guru-
gāyatrī and all other gāyatrī-mantras daily.” A disciple
may say, “Gurudeva, I’m very weak, I cannot chant
gāyatrī-mantra. When I chant, I get a headache. I become
sick and my mind becomes upset. What should I do?”
Gurudeva will reply, “You should continue to chant, and
your headache, sickness, and all other disturbances will
go away. But you will have to do it.” Then, if you do
not obey, what can he do?

Although Caitanya Mahāprabhu is Kṛṣṇa Himself, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, He was cleaning the
temple. Merely sweeping with a broom will not do, for a
broom can never touch our hearts. In order to
demonstrate this, Mahāprabhu told His associates, “We
should chant and remember, performing kīrtana along with
the sweeping. Then it will have some effect.” If you are
cleaning your house in your householder life, while you
sweep you can sing, “Govinda Dāmodara Mādhaveti, Govinda
Dāmodara Mādhaveti.” Whatever job you do, chant these
names with your heart, and then your heart will be
“swept.” It will become pure and clear, neat and clean.

Caitanya Mahāprabhu and all His associates began to
perform kīrtana with many mṛdaṅgas, kholas, and
karatālas. The temple compound was so large that over
two million devotees were able to fit there, and they
swept and cleaned everywhere. Mahāprabhu personally took
His uttarīya-veśa (sannyāsa upper cloth), and He cleaned
the spots that were very stubborn. ŚrīCaitanya-
caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 12.1, 99, 104) has stated:



śrī-guṇḍicā-mandiram ātma-vṛndaiḥ

sammārjayan kṣālanataḥ sa gauraḥ

sva-citta-vac chītalam ujjvalaṁ ca

kṛṣṇopaveśaupayikaṁ cakāra



Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu washed and cleansed the Guṇḍicā
Temple with His devotees and associates. In this way He
made it as cool and bright as His own heart, and thus He
made the temple a befitting place for Śrī Kṛṣṇa to sit.



                             41
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017


śrī-haste kareṇa siṁhāsanera mārjana



prabhu āge jala āni’ deya bhakta-gaṇa




Then Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu began to wash the sitting
place of Lord Jagannātha with His own hands, and all the
devotees began to bring water to the Lord.



nija-vastre kaila prabhu gṛha sammārjana



mahāprabhu nija-vastre mājila siṁhāsana




The Lord mopped the rooms with His own clothes, and He
polished the throne with them also.



We should give up all our worldly positions and ego that
dictates, “I am so intelligent; I have so much power; I
am the superintendent; I am the monarch of all; I am
guru.” Advaita Ācārya was Mahā-Viṣṇu Himself, but he was
very humble and polite, and he also cleaned the temple.

All the devotees were sweeping, as was Caitanya
Mahāprabhu Himself. First they swept away very big
stones, stone chips, and pieces of grass. If you want to
make a seat in your heart for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, your
heart must be like Vṛndāvana, and if you do not make
your heart very pure and transcendental like Vṛndāvana,
Kṛṣṇa cannot come. If you have any worldly desires, they
will be like thorns pricking Kṛṣṇa’s body. These thorns
are lust, anger, greed, envy, attachment for worldly
things, quarreling, and criticizing. If you want bhakti,
don’t criticize anyone. Be tolerant and follow this
verse:



tṛṇād api sunīcena

taror api sahiṣṇunā

amāninā mānadena

kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ



Śikṣāṣṭaka (3)

                            42
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017




One who thinks himself lower than the grass, who is more
tolerant than a tree, and who does not expect personal
honor, yet is always prepared to give all respect to
others, can very easily always chant the holy name of
the Lord.



If you do not have these four qualities, you will never
be able to chant, because the holy name is
transcendental. You cannot chant with your tongue, and
you cannot see Kṛṣṇa with your eyes.



ataḥ śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmādi

na bhaved grāhyam indriyaiḥ

sevonmukhe hi jihvādau

svayam eva sphuraty adaḥ



Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.2.234)



Material senses cannot appreciate Kṛṣṇa’s holy name,
form, qualities, and pastimes. When a conditioned soul
is awakened to Kṛṣṇa consciousness and renders service
by using his tongue to chant the Lord’s holy name and
taste the remnants of the Lord’s food, the tongue is
purified, and one gradually comes to understand who
Kṛṣṇa really is.



You should think, “I am serving Kṛṣṇa by chanting – this
is my service. O Kṛṣṇa, please purify me.” If you
surrender and offer yourself unto the lotus feet of
Kṛṣṇa, He will mercifully come and dance on your tongue.

There are three stages of chanting: nāma-aparādha, nāma-
ābhāsa, and śuddha-nāma. When you practice by your
tongue and by your endeavor, this is nāma-aparādha. When
you chant with some śraddhā (faith), then it will be
nāma-ābhāsa, and if your chanting is pure, then Kṛṣṇa
Himself will dance on your tongue. We should try to pray
to Kṛṣṇa, “I offer myself unto Your lotus feet, giving
up all worldly desires. I have no beloved except You.
You are mine.” Be like the gopīs, and then Kṛṣṇa may
come.

When the stones were cleared away, the thousands of
devotees, along with Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Śrī
Nityānanda Prabhu, Śrī Advaita Ācārya, and Śrī Svarūpa
Dāmodara, swept again. Mahāprabhu told them, “I want to
see who has swept up the biggest pile of dust. Everyone
should collect their pile in their cloths, and I will

                              43
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

examine them; otherwise some may cheat the others by
only pretending to sweep, but not really doing so.” In
the end, everyone saw that Mahāprabhu had swept up much
more than all the others combined. Sometimes Mahāprabhu
would give a very sweet lesson to those who were only
pretending, instead of actually sweeping. He would say
to them, “Oh, you have done so much. You should teach
others.” Hearing these joking words, all the devotees
would laugh.

The devotees swept three times, and there is a deep
meaning behind this. We have committed so many offenses,
we are in so much ignorance, and we have so many
unwanted habits. We should very boldly and strongly give
up activities that are not favorable for kṛṣṇa-bhakti,
and we should very boldly reject things and people that
are not favorable to bhakti. We should totally reject
any wish, any desire, or any result that is not
favorable for pleasing Kṛṣṇa or a pure devotee and guru.

You should reject anyone who criticizes high-class
devotees. You can defeat his arguments, and if you are
like Hanumān, you can burn all of Laṅkā and also cut out
his tongue. If you are not of Hanumān’s caliber, then
you should block your ears and simply leave that place
where criticism is going on. Always try to accept only
the things, the society, and the association that are
favorable for bhakti. Do not desire or expect praise for
yourself. Never have any wish to be honored by others,
but always give honor to all devotees according to their
standard of bhakti.

The heart of a devotee who is chanting and remembering
Kṛṣṇa should be pure. Why should a brahmacārī or
sannyāsī who has been worshiping, chanting, and serving
his gurudeva for twenty years have the desire to marry
and amass wealth? And why does he leave aside his
sannyāsa or brahmacārī saffron cloth, and get a
girlfriend or even a boyfriend? This is not advancement
towards Kṛṣṇa. It may be that he has neglected pure
devotees and has no faith in his gurudeva’s words, and
it may also be that his gurudeva is fallen.

A devotee who is chanting the holy name purely from the
beginning will be like Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī.
Dāsa Gosvāmī left everything and never again accepted
worldly enjoyment. Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja
left worldly life and his wife and children, and he
never returned to them again. If brahmacārīs and
sannyāsīs accept worldly life again, it means they have
no faith in Kṛṣṇa’s name. Kṛṣṇa has invested His whole
power, His whole mercy, opulence, and so forth in His
name. Brahmā can create the world only by the mercy of
this name – by his chanting of this name. Śaṅkara, too,
can only perform any task by chanting Kṛṣṇa’s name.
Neither of them can do anything without the help of the
holy name.

We have no faith that Kṛṣṇa’s name can maintain our
lives. From the beginning, we have no taste and have
committed so many offenses. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is
therefore telling us, “You must purify your hearts, if
you want to be devotees and realize Kṛṣṇa, and if you
want Kṛṣṇa to be seated in your hearts.” But you have no

                            44
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

power to do it. You cannot purify your hearts, so who
will purify them? You can do it if you are under the
guidance of Mahāprabhu, Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu, Śrī
Advaita Ācārya, Śrī Gadādhara Paṇḍita, Śrī Svarūpa
Dāmodara, and Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda. Otherwise, your doubts
will never go away, you will commit offenses, and you
will remain attached to unwanted habits. So many desires
to taste worldly enjoyment will come to you, and you
will not be able to check them.

Caitanya Mahāprabhu is therefore instructing us. He
Himself was sweeping, along with His devotees, in order
to teach us. That is why His devotees swept a first
time, then a second time, and then a third time. The
first time they swept, they removed big stones, chips,
and grasses; the second time, they removed very fine
dust; and the third time still finer dust.

When all the dust was taken out, there still remained
spots of black tar, which cannot be removed simply by
sweeping. For this you will have to try much harder. You
will have to use a very sharp instrument, and then you
will have to wash off the spots with a cleaner like
kerosene or alcohol. These spots are our offenses, and
they will not disappear by sweeping alone. These spots
are deceit (kuṭīnāṭī) and desires for profit (lābha),
adoration (pūjā), and fame (pratiṣṭhā). Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 19.159) has explained this, and
Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja has given the translation:



niṣiddhācāra kuṭīnāṭī jīva-hiṁsana



lābha-pūjā-pratiṣṭhādi yata upaśākhā-gaṇa




Some unnecessary creepers growing with the bhakti
creeper are the creepers of behavior unacceptable for
those trying to attain perfection: diplomatic behavior,
animal killing, mundane profiteering, mundane adoration,
and mundane importance. All these are unwanted creepers.



Nowadays, many persons have no proper respect for
Vaiṣṇavas. They tell them, “Oh, you cannot enter our
temple.” Juniors are not giving proper respect to
seniors, and seniors are not giving proper respect,
love, and affection to juniors. This is the problem, and
the root of it is offenses to the holy name. Many
devotees have no regard for the holy name. They have no
strong faith in chanting, and that is why so many senior
devotees are going away and junior devotees are coming,
becoming senior, and then also going away. These are the
problems nowadays. You can easily give up your children,
your wives, your husbands, your relatives, and even your
wealth. But it is very hard to give up the desire for
praise, and it is hard to follow this verse (Śikṣāṣṭaka

                            45
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

(3)):



tṛṇād api sunīcena

taror api sahiṣṇunā

amāninā mānadena

kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ



Thinking oneself to be even lower and more worthless
than insignificant grass that is trampled beneath
everyone’s feet, being more tolerant than a tree, being
prideless, and offering respect to all others according
to their respective positions, one should continuously
chant the holy name of Śrī Hari.



This is the meaning of “sweeping the heart,” and Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu wanted this. At this stage you will
honor even a creeper and a tree, what to speak of
devotees. You will see Kṛṣṇa in everyone and everywhere,
and then you will be able to honor everyone properly. We
should try to sweep in our hearts today, on this sacred
day of guṇḍicā-mandira-mārjana.

We should try to understand what are niṣiddhācāra,
prohibited activities. For example, if you are a
brahmacārī or sannyāsī, be far away from lust.



asat-saṅga-tyāga, – ei vaiṣṇava-ācāra



‘strī-saṅgī’ – eka asādhu, ‘kṛṣṇābhakta’ āra




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 22.87)



A Vaiṣṇava should always avoid the association of
ordinary people. Common people are very much materially
attached, especially to the opposite sex. Vaiṣṇavas
should also avoid the company of those who are not
devotees of Lord Kṛṣṇa.



Try to follow this, whether you are a family man or in
the renounced order. Do not associate with Māyāvādīs who
do not believe in the personal form of Kṛṣṇa or Godhead.
To such persons, everything is God, which means that
everything is zero. Also, do not associate with those

                            46
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

who are lusty – one should remain very far away from
such people. Do not tell lies, do not be duplicitous, do
not be politicians, and do not be hypocrites. These are
basic principles.

Kuṭīnāṭī: ku means “evil,” ṭī means “the,” nā means “no”
or “that which is prohibited,” and ṭī means
“particular.” Kuṭīnāṭī means activities that are like
those of Pūtanā. The word pūtanā means impure, and she
was the first demon killed by Kṛṣṇa; He killed impurity
first of all. First be pure by body, mind, and soul, by
chanting and remembering, and by always serving
Vaiṣṇavas and giving them proper respect.

Jīva-hiṁsana: don’t kill anything, even a creeper. This
is also a basic principle. Jīva-hiṁsana means violence,
but in this connection violence does not only mean
killing by the hands or by a weapon. It also means
killing by the tongue, mind, or heart. Do not be
envious. If you want to be pure devotees, remove envy
from your hearts and don’t criticize any Vaiṣṇava, for
this is also hiṁsā.

These spots will not be removed merely by sweeping, nor
will they disappear simply by washing them with water.
Rather, they will only become stronger and more
prominent. In other words, these spots are not very easy
to remove. They manifest as offenses at the lotus feet
of Vaiṣṇavas and guru, and also as neglect of guru.
Among the ten kinds of nāma-aparādha, the first is the
offense to pure devotees. The aspiring devotee must
remove all these spots quickly, and Caitanya Mahāprabhu
therefore took His own outer garment and washed
everything – up, down, here, there, and everywhere. He
did not leave even one corner unclean.

Thousands and thousands of devotees continually took
water from Indradyumna Sarovara, and placed the water-
pots in the hands of Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara, Śrī Rāya
Rāmānanda, Śrī Gadādhara Paṇḍita, Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu,
Śrī Advaita Ācārya, and Śrīman Mahāprabhu Himself.
Nowadays, those who consider themselves gurus will give
orders to others and do nothing themselves. They think
that they should only taste delicious mahā-prasāda and
enjoy opulent surroundings; they may even have chairs
made of gold. Such false gurus do not remain; rather,
they go to hell.

In this way, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu was clearing away
all unwanted mentalities and behaviors. In the first and
second verses of his Upadeśāmṛta, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī
also discusses the unwanted habits to be swept away.
Without such sweeping, pure bhakti cannot be attained
even in millions of births. In the first verse Rūpa
Gosvāmī states:



vāco vegaṁ manasaḥ krodha-vegaṁ

jihvā-vegam udaropastha-vegam

etān vegān yo viṣaheta dhīraḥ


                            47
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

sarvām apīmāṁ pṛthivīṁ sa śiṣyāt



A sober person who can tolerate the urge to speak, the
mind’s demands, the actions of anger and the urges of
the tongue, belly, and genitals is qualified to make
disciples all over the world.



There are six kinds of vegas (urges), and the root is
the tongue, which has no backbone. If you cannot control
the tongue, all the other five urges will control you;
and if you do control it, everything else is controlled.
The tongue has two functions, the first of which is
speaking. If this function is not controlled, you may
say something wrong to another person and that may
create a very big problem for you – you may even be
ruined forever.

Draupadī, the wife of the Pāṇḍavas, once said something
that was actually correct, but the circumstance in which
she said it was inappropriate. She told Duryodhana,
“Your father is blind, and you are also blind. Like
father, like son.” Duryodhana was offended, and as a
result the great Mahābhārata War was fought and millions
of people were killed. Similarly, the Rāmāyaṇa War was
fought only because of Sītā’s tongue. She chastised
Lakṣmaṇa, and this ultimately led to a war in which so
many were killed. You should therefore try to control
your tongue; do not speak what should not be spoken.

The second function of the tongue is eating. If you eat
meat, fish, and other prohibited items, or if you take
drugs, they will also harm you, and you will not be able
to control your mind or your heart. On the other hand,
everything will be controlled if you take only mahā-
prasāda and chant Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa....

In the second verse of Upadeśāmṛta, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī
states:



atyāhāraḥ prayāsaś ca

prajalpo niyamāgrahaḥ

jana-saṅgaś ca laulyaṁ ca

ṣaḍbhir bhaktir vinaśyati



One’s devotional service is spoiled when he becomes too
entangled in the following six activities: (1) eating
more than necessary or collecting more funds than
required, (2) over-endeavoring for mundane things that
are very difficult to attain, (3) talking unnecessarily
about mundane subject matters, (4) practicing the
scriptural rules and regulations only for the sake of
following them and not for the sake of spiritual
advancement, or rejecting the rules and regulations of

                            48
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

the scriptures and working independently or whimsically,
(5) associating with worldly-minded persons who are not
interested in Kṛṣṇa consciousness, and (6) being greedy
for mundane achievements.



Both Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura and Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja have written commentaries
on how to be free from these habits, and we can clean
our hearts by reading these commentaries. It is stated
in Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja’s purport (ŚrīCaitanya-
caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 12.135)):



Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura explains that
even though one may become free from the desire for
fruitive activity, sometimes the subtle desire for
fruitive activity again comes into being within the
heart. One often thinks of conducting business to
improve devotional activity. However, the contamination
is so strong that it may later develop into
misunderstanding, described as kuṭīnāṭī (faultfinding)
and pratiṣṭhāśā (the desire for name and fame and for
high position), jīva-hiṁsā (envy of other living
entities), niṣiddhācāra (accepting things forbidden in
the śāstra), kāma (desire for material gain), and pūjā
(hankering for popularity). The word kuṭīnāṭī means
“duplicity.” As an example of pratiṣṭhāśā, one may
attempt to imitate Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura by living in a
solitary place.



Some Western devotees once went to Purī. They were not
allowed to take darśana of Jagannātha, Baladeva, and
Subhadrā in the temple, but they were able to go to the
Ṭoṭā Gopīnātha Temple, Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura’s samādhi,
and Siddha-bakula. One of those devotees gave over a
thousand dollars to an Indian pūjārī at Siddha-bakula
and said, “Give me the mālā kept here, the beads on
which Haridāsa Ṭhākura was chanting.” The man took the
thousand dollars, stole the mālā, and gave it to that
“devotee” who then thought, “Oh, when I chant on this
mālā, I will be liberated and I will have bhakti.”
Imitation will not do, however. That person was
offensive. Nowadays many people want to have large mālā
weighing not less than five kilos. They cannot chant
properly, but still they collect big tulasī neckbeads
with “Rādhe, Rādhe” written on them. This will not do;
rather, false ego will increase by this. Try to chant
and remember purely, and associate with devotees. It is
stated in the same purport:



One’s real desire may be for name and fame. In other
words, one thinks that fools will accept one to be as
good as Haridāsa Ṭhākura just because one lives in a
holy place. These are all material desires. A neophyte
devotee is certain to be attacked by other material
desires as well, namely desires for women and money. In
this way the heart is again filled with dirty things and

                            49
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                        5/5/2017

becomes harder and harder, like that of a materialist.
Gradually one desires to become a reputed devotee or an
avatāra (incarnation).



Nowadays there are so many “incarnations” like this.
They have no belief in God, but they want to be guru,
and after some days they fall down. This disease of
false gurus and gods is spreading like the plague, and
now there are so many “gods,” both in India and the
West. We have been duplicitous since our birth; but now
we must become very simple, and we should always honor
devotees.

Also, be free from lobha, the greed for worldly things.
Be free from thinking, “I must have this thing,” or “My
relatives and neighbors have very good cars, but I
don’t.” Be simple like Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī,
who followed the instructions given to him by Caitanya
Mahāprabhu:



grāmya-kathā nā śunibe, grāmya-vārtā nā kahibe

bhāla nā khāibe āra bhāla nā paribe

amānī mānada hañā kṛṣṇa-nāma sadā la’be

vraje rādhā-kṛṣṇa-sevā mānase karibe



ŚrīCaitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 6.236–7)



Do not talk like people in general or hear what they
say. You should not eat very palatable food, nor should
you dress very nicely. Do not expect honor, but offer
all respect to others. Always chant the holy name of
Lord Kṛṣṇa, and within your mind render service to Rādhā
and Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana.



Follow Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, Śrīla Jīva
Gosvāmī, and others like them. Be simple like Caitanya
Mahāprabhu and His associates. Mahāprabhu personally
removed all the spots from the siṁhāsana on which
Jagannātha, Baladeva, and Subhadrā would sit – He did
not leave it to anyone else to do. This means that we
should try to make our hearts like a siṁhāsana where
Jagannātha, Baladeva, and Subhadrā will sit, where Rādhā
and Kṛṣṇa will sit, and where Mahāprabhu will sit. This
opportunity will not come if there are dirty thoughts
and aspirations in our hearts. They will never come.
Take your ears in your hands1 and promise, “From today I
will practice properly.” Kṛṣṇa will provide for you if
you are always chanting and remembering. He will look
after you, and sometimes He may come to you as a
servant, bringing paraphernalia for you on His head.
There are many examples as evidence of this, so do not

                            50
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

worry about how to maintain yourselves. The only problem
should be how to purify yourselves, and how to attain
love and affection for Kṛṣṇa.

While Caitanya Mahāprabhu was cleaning, a very young
Gauḍīya bhakta took a pitcher of water, poured the water
on Mahāprabhu’s feet, and drank some of it. Mahāprabhu
then appeared very angry and said, “What are you doing?
Nonsense! Jagannātha is coming here. Jagannātha is the
Supreme Personality of Godhead Himself, and we are
cleaning here, preparing for Him to come. I am an
ordinary person, a man, and yet this person is washing
My feet and taking that water to drink. This offense is
very bad for Me, and for him.”

If you wash the feet of an ordinary person in Kṛṣṇa’s
temple, it is a very big offense. Of course, Caitanya
Mahāprabhu is Jagannātha Himself, but He is giving
instruction to others. A bona fide guru will never
proudly think, “Very good! My disciple comes and places
flowers on my feet, pours water on them, washes them,
sprinkles that water on others, and then drinks it.” A
pure Vaiṣṇava or guru never considers, “I am an advanced
devotee.” Even Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, in the mood of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, has said:



na prema-gandho ’sti darāpi me harau

krandāmi saubhāgya-bharaṁ prakāśitum

vaṁśī-vilāsy-ānana-lokanaṁ vinā

bibharmi yat prāṇa-pataṅgakān vṛthā



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 2.45)



My dear friends, I have not the slightest tinge of love
of Godhead within My heart. When you see Me crying in
separation, I am just falsely exhibiting a demonstration
of My great fortune. Indeed, not seeing the beautiful
face of Kṛṣṇa playing His flute, I continue to live My
life like an insect, without purpose.



“I have not even a scent of bhakti to Kṛṣṇa. I am more
wretched than anyone.” Rādhikā Herself is saying, “Oh,
the forest deer are superior to me. They can go near to
Kṛṣṇa and beg His love and affection as a beloved, but
we cannot go there. The rivers are also so much more
fortunate than us gopīs. Kṛṣṇa goes to the Yamunā to
bathe and she can embrace Kṛṣṇa; she can give Him a
lotus flower from her hand-like waves. She can give her
whole heart to Kṛṣṇa and tell Him, ‘O my beloved.’ When
Kṛṣṇa plays on His flute, she becomes stunned and stops
flowing. She is much greater than us, for we cannot do
as she does.


                            51
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

“And what is the condition of the calves and cows? The
cows are grazing, but when they hear the sweet sound of
Kṛṣṇa’s flute, they raise their ears to hear and to
drink in the sweet nectar of that flute. Their calves
also drink the nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s flute through their
ears. While they drink the milk from their mothers’
udders, they hear the flute, and at that time they
forget the milk altogether; they neither swallow it nor
spit it out, and it simply remains in their mouths. Oh,
we are not like this.”

Mahāprabhu similarly laments, “The fish are superior to
me. If they are taken from water, they will die at once;
but I am not dying although I have no darśana of Kṛṣṇa.
How wretched I am!”

Nowadays many devotees think, “Gurudeva simply gave us
chanting beads, and by this we became more than God and
we began to control the whole world.” The next day,
however, we see that nothing is there – no tulasī beads,
no chanting beads; nothing. And now they have again
become mice.2

Mahāprabhu performed this pastime in order to teach us
devotional principles, so He called Svarūpa Dāmodara and
told him, “Svarūpa Dāmodara Prabhu! Just see the
behavior of your Gauḍīya bhakta. He is insulting Me in
front of Ṭhākurajī. You have not instructed him how to
be a pure devotee. See how he is behaving! He is in the
temple of Jagannātha, who is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead, and although I am an ordinary person, he is
pouring water on My feet and drinking it. This is very
offensive to Jagannātha, Baladeva, and Subhadrā, and I
am very upset about this.”

Svarūpa Dāmodara then slapped the young devotee and
dragged him outside – as a gesture. Actually, he was
very happy with him. Outside the temple, when he was
beyond Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s view, he told that devotee,
“You have done very well. Caitanya Mahāprabhu is
Jagannātha Himself, but He wants to teach others that we
should not behave like this towards ordinary persons.
You have not done anything wrong. You have done the
right thing. Wait here, and I will call for you again.”
Then, when he was called, that Bengali devotee told
Mahāprabhu, “I have done wrong.” He begged for
forgiveness, and Mahāprabhu forgot the matter.

No one should tell anyone else to worship him. One
should not love anyone or weep for anyone in front of
the deity. You can only do praṇāma to your pure
gurudeva, not to anyone else. Wherever the deities are
present, we should not try to control anyone; that will
be an offense. We can learn all the rules and
regulations of deity worship by reading the book Arcana-
dīpikā.

Nowadays, gurus are coming like kan-gurus. All are gurus
but none are gurus. They are everywhere, like the germs
of a plague. They are cheaters, not gurus. They are not
Bhagavān. In India you can very easily find so many
“Gods,” so many “Supreme Personalities of Godheads.” One
thinks that he is Śaṅkara, another thinks that he is
Gaṇeśa, and someone else thinks he is Sarasvatī.

                            52
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                       5/5/2017

Caitanya Mahāprabhu knew this day would come.

Try to enter the real process of bhakti. Hear from the
proper person, take his words into your heart and try to
follow him. Then you can sweep your heart and also
become a pure devotee. First you will enter the stage of
kaniṣṭha-adhikāra, then madhyama-adhikāra, and then you
will be a devotee. Otherwise, you are like a shadow
devotee – fallen. Kṛṣṇa has given you good intelligence.
You should realize whether someone is a pure devotee or
not, and if he is, then you can hear from him. A sādhu
is a very elevated devotee who embodies the verse:



anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ

jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam

ānukūlyena kṛṣṇānu-

śīlanaṁ bhaktir uttamā



Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu (1.1.11)



The cultivation of activities that are meant exclusively
for the pleasure of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, or in other words the
uninterrupted flow of service to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, performed
through all endeavors of the body, mind, and speech, and
through the expression of various spiritual sentiments
(bhāvas), which is not covered by jñāna (knowledge aimed
at impersonal liberation) and karma (reward-seeking
activity) and which is devoid of all desires other than
the aspiration to bring happiness to Śrī Kṛṣṇa, is
called uttama-bhakti, pure devotional service.



Such a sādhu or guru has no worldly desires. His
devotion is always like a stream of sweet honey, which
flows like an unbroken current when it is poured.

Similarly, you should see whether your own activities –
by body, by words, by mind, and by heart or mood – are
to please Kṛṣṇa or not. Suppose you are taking mahā-
prasāda. Why are you taking it? Is it to please Kṛṣṇa or
not? If you are not taking it to please Kṛṣṇa, then it
is like karma. If you go to sleep for yourself, it is
karma, not bhakti. However, if you go to sleep thinking,
“I will take some rest, and from early morning I will
serve Kṛṣṇa. I will be always chanting, remembering,
worshiping, and serving here and there,” then even your
sleeping is for Kṛṣṇa.



yat karoṣi yad aśnāsi

yaj juhoṣi dadāsi yat


                            53
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

yat tapasyasi kaunteya

tat kuruṣva mad-arpaṇam



Bhagavad-gītā (9.27)



Whatever you do, whatever you eat, whatever you offer or
give away, and whatever austerities you perform – do
that, O son of Kuntī, as an offering to Me.



After some time, whatever you do will be to please Kṛṣṇa
and your pure gurudeva. If someone follows this
principle and always acts to please Kṛṣṇa, you can
accept him as your guru; otherwise don’t. If, when you
were ignorant, you selected as guru someone who does not
perform all his activities to please Kṛṣṇa, Guru, and
Vaiṣṇavas, then reject that person. Reject him totally.
Choose another guru very carefully and take initiation;
otherwise you cannot have pure devotion and love for
Kṛṣṇa.

If you were initiated by a guru who was sincere at one
time, but who fell down later on, reject him at once.
Then you may enter the proper line and accept the self-
realized devotees who are actually following
anyābhilāṣitā-śūnyaṁ jñāna-karmādy-anāvṛtam ānukūlyena
kṛṣṇānuśīlanam. Whatever they do, they do to please
Kṛṣṇa, Guru, and Vaiṣṇavas. They will be in the line of
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrīla Sanātana Gosvāmī, and Śrīla
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī. If a person professing to be a
guru is not actually in that line, he should be rejected
at once. Bali Mahārāja rejected his gurudeva,
Śukrācārya. Bharata Mahārāja rejected his mother,
Prahlāda Mahārāja rejected his father, the gopīs
rejected their husbands, and Vibhīṣaṇa rejected his
brother Rāvaṇa. There are abundant examples of this.

If the guru is chanting and is somewhat in this line but
he cannot give you prema-bhakti, then request him,
“Please permit me to associate with a self-realized
devotee.” If he does not give permission for you to do
so, he is not a pure Vaiṣṇava and he also should be
rejected. However, if he gives the order, “You should
go, and I will also go,” then he is a Vaiṣṇava. You
should respect him, and also go to take the association
of that high-class devotee. This is the proper process,
and it was followed by Śrī Śyāmānanda Gosvāmī, Śrī
Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura, Śrī Śrīnivāsa Ācārya, Śrīla
Haridāsa Ṭhākura, and so many others. If you follow
śāstra and your superiors, you will come to the stage of
madhyama-adhikāra. This is actually the meaning of
guṇḍicā-mandira-mārjana.

It is better to honor real Vaiṣṇavas than to only
worship the deities. Worship the deity, but serve the
Vaiṣṇavas at the same time. Gradually try to come from
the stage of kaniṣṭha to the stage of madhyama. We are
entering kaniṣṭha, but we are not even kaniṣṭha yet,

                            54
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

because we do not have full faith in the deity. When we
realize siddhānta, the established truths of Vaiṣṇava
philosophy, in the association of pure Vaiṣṇavas, we
will gradually become madhyama-adhikārī. This is the
object of today’s function. By this, the seed of the
bhakti-creeper that your gurudeva has given to you will
sprout, and it will then develop into the shape of a
creeper that will ultimately lead you to Goloka
Vṛndāvana. This is the real process.

When all the spots are removed, your status will be of
the nature of pure devotion. Whatever we do, we should
do as a service to Kṛṣṇa, for His pleasure, but this is
not sufficient by itself. There should be no worldly
desire at all in that service. If one takes initiation
from a bona fide guru, and he is chanting, remembering,
and reading books, but he thinks, “I want to be wealthy,
I want to have a very well-qualified son, and a very
beautiful home and wife,” his bhakti will not be pure.
Rather, it will be completely ruined. Even the desire
for liberation is not pure bhakti. It is bhakti, but not
pure uttama-bhakti. It is called āropa-siddha-bhakti, or
sometimes saṅga-siddha-bhakti. His bhakti will be mixed
with karma, jñāna, yoga, or anything else.

More than ninety-five percent of those who call
themselves bhaktas don’t actually follow uttama-bhakti
or pure bhakti. They follow only āropa-siddha-bhakti and
saṅga-siddha-bhakti. What is āropa-siddha-bhakti? Making
a garden or establishing gurukulas and gośālās is not
really bhakti, but it may create impressions (saṁskāras)
in the heart if the fruits are given to Kṛṣṇa. If there
is a gurukula, there is an opportunity that the boys
will be given impressions from childhood for later
development in bhakti. We see, however, that the
students very rarely get these impressions. Many are
ruined and are without character, they do not obey their
fathers and mothers, they are not humble, and they do
not honor devotees. Many are desperate. If that
impression of bhakti had come, it would have been very
good for them. It is only to give this impression that
high-class devotees or gurus establish such
institutions.

If we make a garden, we can take the fruits to the
deities and to pure devotees, but if the fruit is not
given to them, the result will be very bad. Actual
bhakti is that activity in which there is chanting and
remembering only to please Kṛṣṇa. In the past, many
devotees collected vast wealth for their temples. They
collected vast amounts of money in a few days, but what
became of them? They left Kṛṣṇa consciousness. Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja wanted them to become
qualified devotees.

It is not sufficient merely to sweep, or merely to wash
off all the varieties of unwanted habits such as
aparādhas. Something affirmative should be there – a
strong taste for harināma and for hearing hari-kathā. It
is not enough just to clean your heart. What will remain
if you simply do that? Nothing. There should be
something positive. There is no harm if you have no
taste for chanting harināma, but you should have a taste
for hearing hari-kathā. If you do not, then hear again

                            55
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

and again, and give proper respect to the pure devotees
from whom you are hearing.



satāṁ prasaṅgān mama vīrya-saṁvido

bhavanti hṛt-karṇa-rasāyanāḥ kathāḥ

taj-joṣaṇād āśv apavarga-vartmani

śraddhā ratir bhaktir anukramiṣyati



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (3.25.25)

In the association of pure devotees, discussion of the
pastimes and activities of the Supreme Personality of
Godhead is very pleasing and satisfying to the ear and
the heart. By cultivating such knowledge one gradually
becomes advanced on the path of liberation, and
thereafter he is freed, and his attraction becomes
fixed. Then real devotion and devotional service begin.



The speaker should be satām, a pure devotee. Do not
maintain your own false idea that an ordinary person or
devotee is a mahā-bhāgavata. Who has the qualification
to realize who is a mahā-bhāgavata? Śrīla Vaṁśī dāsa
Bābājī Mahārāja, a disciple of Śrīla Gaura-kiśora dāsa
Bābājī Mahārāja, was an exalted uttama-mahā-bhāgavata,
but he used to pretend he was smoking marijuana. He
sometimes put dry fish bones here and there around his
hut so people would think that he ate fish. He
considered, “Those who are materially inclined should
remain far away from me so I can be alone to chant
Kṛṣṇa’s name and remember Him.”

Śrīla Gaura-kiśora dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja was on friendly
terms with Śrīla Vaṁśī dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja, and Śrīla
Prabhupāda Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura honored him
so much. Our Guru Mahārāja, Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava
Mahārāja, used to take his darśana, and at that time
Bābājī Mahārāja gave him many deep teachings. Guru
Mahārāja told us, “Sometimes he spoke such high
philosophy that I could not understand him.” If a
devotee is ignorant and not even a kaniṣṭha Vaiṣṇava,
how can he know who is actually a mahā-bhāgavata? He
will choose an unqualified person as a “mahā-bhāgavata,”
and the next day he will see how that person has fallen
down.

You should see what is your superior’s idea regarding
who is a madhyama-adhikārī or who is an uttama-adhikārī,
and you can also realize this if you follow Kṛṣṇa
consciousness and establish yourself on the platform of
the advanced stage of madhyama-adhikāra. It is an
offense at the lotus feet of the real mahā-bhāgavata if
you do not give him proper respect, and instead give
great respect to a third-class, bogus person, calling
him “mahā-bhāgavata.”


                              56
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017




CHAPTER FOUR

MAHĀPRABHU AND KING PRATĀPARUDRA


The Chariot Festival is performed every year in
Jagannātha Purī, a very beautiful place near the shore
of the Indian Ocean. I have explained that Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu Himself made the Guṇḍicā Temple neat and
clean on the previous day, using His own garments, and
after that Jagannātha went there. I have also related
two histories explaining how Jagannātha, Subhadrā, and
Baladeva Prabhu manifested their forms.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu brought new meaning and light to
the Ratha-yātrā Festival, but only a very few, rare
souls will understand these topics, even if they are
explained completely. Yet, one day you will have to
understand the truths within these topics.



Come with me



You can all come with me to the shore of the ocean at
Nīlācala, to the Bay of Bengal at Purī, where more than
four million devotees have assembled. These devotees are
pulling the chariots and shouting, “Jagannātha-deva kī
jaya, Baladeva Prabhu kī jaya, Śrī Subhadrā-devīkī jaya,
Śacīnandana Gaurahari kī jaya,” and Caitanya Mahāprabhu
is dancing here and there.

Sometimes the chariot does not reach the Guṇḍicā Temple
even after an entire day; it may take two or three days.
Sometimes it will not even move an inch, although crowds
of devotees try to pull it. The devotees want to pull
it, but it cannot move unless Jagannātha desires. When
He wants it to move, it does so very quickly and easily.



Mahāprabhu refuses the King



At the time of Mahāprabhu, Pratāparudra Mahārāja was the
King of Orissa. Although he was the supreme ruler of
that kingdom and a very powerful emperor, he served
Jagannātha by sweeping. He used an ordinary broom made
from the sticks of a coconut tree, with a golden handle,
and he himself swept during the procession. Mahāprabhu
became very happy to see him working and serving like an
ordinary sweeper, and He wanted to meet him. There was a
wall between Mahāprabhu and King Pratāparudra, however,
and that wall was the word “king.” This is a very
dangerous word, because “king” generally refers to one
who has great opulence and wealth, and who is full of
material desires.

                              57
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017


Mahāprabhu wanted to be merciful to King Pratāparudra,
but that wall was there, and it could only be dissolved
by love and affection. There would be no other process.
Although the King was a very high-class devotee, he was
still a king. He had a kingdom, a very beautiful wife
and children, and he possessed great wealth and power. A
very dangerous, poisonous snake is still a snake, even
if its poison has somehow been taken out and its fangs
removed; if anyone comes close to it, it will hiss and
attack. It was for this reason that, prior to the
festival, Caitanya Mahāprabhu had refused to meet King
Pratāparudra, although he was an advanced devotee.

At that time, when the King heard that Mahāprabhu had
refused to meet him, he said, “Caitanya Mahāprabhu has
promised to liberate the entire world and give everyone
kṛṣṇa-prema. I am the only exception. If He is
determined not to see me, then I am determined to give
up my life. If I do not see Him, if He does not give me
His mercy, I will give up my kingdom, my wife, children,
and everything else. I do not need my wealth,
reputation, or position anymore. I will give them all
up.”

Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya pacified the King by saying,
“Don’t do anything in a hurry – wait. The right time
will come and you will be able to serve Him. There is
one means by which you can see Him directly. On the day
of the Chariot Festival, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu will
dance before the deity in great ecstatic love. After
dancing before Jagannātha, He will enter the Guṇḍicā
garden, absorbed in a deep mood. At that time you can go
there alone, without your royal dress, and you can
approach Him as a mendicant – a street beggar. You can
recite Gopī-gīta and the other chapters of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam concerning Lord Kṛṣṇa’s dancing with the
gopīs, and in this way you will be able to catch hold of
the Lord’s lotus feet.”



Mahāprabhu’s dancing



Jagannātha-deva, Baladeva Prabhu, and Subhadrā were
riding on very large, newly built chariots. Baladeva’s
chariot was in front, followed by Subhadrā’s chariot,
and Kṛṣṇa’s chariot came last. As the chariot stood
still, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu gathered all His
devotees, and with His own hand decorated them with
flower garlands and tilaka made with sandalwood pulp. He
then divided all His close associates into four kīrtana
parties. Each party had eight chanters, and He gave two
mṛdaṅgas to each party and ordered them to begin
kīrtana. Śrī Nityānanda Prabhu danced in one party,
Advaita Ācārya danced in the second, Haridāsa Ṭhākura in
the third, and Vakreśvara Paṇḍita danced beautifully in
the fourth. All of them were very good dancers, and they
could all dance throughout the entire day and night.
Svarūpa Dāmodara, Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita, Mukunda, and Govinda
Ghoṣa were the main singers in each of the four
respective groups.

                            58
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017


Mahāprabhu then created three more parties. One was made
up of Bengali householder devotees from the village of
Kulīna-grāma, the second party came from Śāntipura, and
the third party was from Śrīkhaṇḍa. Thus, four parties
chanted and danced in front of Jagannātha-deva, one more
party on each side of Him, and another party behind Him.
In this way there were seven parties, and each party was
followed by thousands and thousands of devotees.

After dividing the devotees into kīrtana parties, Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu began to dance, sometimes in all the
parties at the same time. Caitanya Mahāprabhu is one,
but He manifested seven forms, and He thus began to
dance and sing in each kīrtana party at the same time.
Tears shot from His eyes as if from a syringe, and He
danced very quickly, as Kṛṣṇa had danced in His līlā. At
that time King Pratāparudra saw Him in the form of Kṛṣṇa
and thought, “Oh, He is Kṛṣṇa Himself!”

Although Mahāprabhu was in seven groups at one and the
same time, the devotees in each group were thinking,
“Mahāprabhu is only with us,” and they sang and danced
very happily. This incident was like the pastime that
took place when Kṛṣṇa was taking His meal with His
sakhās at Bhāṇḍīravaṭa, when there were many thousands
of circles of sakhās. Some of the cowherd boys were
behind Kṛṣṇa, some were by His side, and some were very
far away; yet all of them thought, “I’m in front of
Kṛṣṇa. I’m taking prasāda with Him, I’m putting my
prasāda in His mouth and He is putting His in mine.” All
of them – whether they were behind Kṛṣṇa, in front of
Him, beside Him, or anywhere here and there – were
thinking that Kṛṣṇa was always with them. Similarly, at
the time of rāsa-līlā, Kṛṣṇa appeared to be thousands
and thousands of Kṛṣṇas, as many Kṛṣṇas as there were
gopīs, and there was one Kṛṣṇa with each gopī. There was
one Kṛṣṇa in between each pair of gopīs, and one gopī in
between each pair of Kṛṣṇas. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu now
performed the same miracle.

Except for three people – Pratāparudra Mahārāja, Kāśī
Miśra, and Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya – everyone saw
Caitanya Mahāprabhu only in their own group. By
Mahāprabhu’s mercy, the King saw that He was dancing in
the seven kīrtana parties at the same time. His tears
were falling in showers, and sometimes He fell down and
rolled on the earth and the devotees lifted Him up. The
King asked the others, “What am I seeing? Am I wrong?
No, I see Him. He is here, and He is there at the same
time. He is dancing in all seven parties.” Kāśī Miśra
and Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya replied, “You are very
fortunate. You have received Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s
mercy. Only a select few people are seeing this scene as
you are.”

Just to prevent the crowds from coming too near the
Lord, the devotees formed three circles, keeping
Mahāprabhu in the middle. Nityānanda Prabhu led the
first circle; devotees headed by Kāśīśvara and Govinda
linked hands and formed a second circle; and a third
circle was formed around the two inner circles by King
Pratāparudra and his personal assistants, as well as by
his police and soldiers. Pratāparudra’s general,

                            59
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

Haricandana, was with the King, wearing many medals and
guarding him very carefully as hundreds of thousands of
people watched Mahāprabhu dance. So he could see Lord
Caitanya Mahāprabhu dancing,

King Pratāparudra lifted himself by putting his hands on
Haricandana’s shoulders, and he felt great ecstasy.

Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita, who is Nārada Ṛṣi in kṛṣṇa-līlā, also
wanted to watch Mahāprabhu’s beautiful dance. The King
was standing behind Śrīvāsa Ṭhākura, and he wanted to
see Mahāprabhu without interference; but as Śrīvāsa
Paṇḍita was absorbed in watching Mahāprabhu, he was
moving from side to side in such a way that the King
could not see properly. The King’s general warned
Śrīvāsa Ṭhākura, “Don’t do that. The King wants to see.
Stay here on one side.” Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita was so absorbed
that he did not take any notice of the warning at first;
but after Haricandana had told him twice, Śrīvāsa
Paṇḍita became angry and slapped him.

The commander-in-chief was very tall, strong, and stout,
and he wanted to retaliate by arresting Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita.
All the guards also became angry and they wanted to
arrest him as well, but King Pratāparudra immediately
told Haricandana, “Don’t do anything. These are Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s associates, and Mahāprabhu is Kṛṣṇa
Himself. You are so fortunate to be slapped by this very
elevated devotee. You are very fortunate, so be silent.”
And the general did as he was told.

Caitanya Mahāprabhu was reciting a śloka while He
danced, but no one could understand or explain its
meaning – no one, that is, except a boy named Rūpa.
Mahāprabhu’s mood entered Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī’s heart, and
he thus wrote a similar śloka, which Mahāprabhu later
took from the roof of Haridāsa Ṭhākura’s bhajana-kuṭīra,
where Rūpa Gosvāmī was also residing. “How did you know
My mood?” Mahāprabhu asked Rūpa Gosvāmī. Svarūpa
Dāmodara, Rāya Rāmānanda, and all of Mahāprabhu’s other
associates then glorified Rūpa Gosvāmī, and they told
Mahāprabhu, “You have inspired him. How could he have
known without Your inspiration? No one can know this
without Your mercy.” Only someone on the level of
Svarūpa Dāmodara could know; no one else.



Mahāprabhu meets the King



King Pratāparudra was an exalted devotee, and he wanted
to take darśana of Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s lotus feet; but
Mahāprabhu told His associates, “I cannot give him
darśana. He is a king, so he is like a black serpent.”

Mahāprabhu has also said that a wooden statue of a lady
can attract even a muni: dāravī prakṛti hareta muner api
mana. Munis such as Viśvāmitra and Nārada are renounced
and realized, but just to set an example for us and to
teach us how careful we must be, they both performed
pastimes in which they appeared to be under the spell of
illusion. We should be very cautious in the association

                            60
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

of the opposite sex because men and women are like
Kāmadeva (Cupid) for one another; they cannot control
their senses or hearts when they are together. I
therefore request my disciples and friends to be very
careful. You are independent, but you should always
remember these principles.

Mahāprabhu was very strict, so He did not give the King
His association, even though the King was a very
advanced devotee. Moreover, when Nityānanda Prabhu,
Advaita Ācārya, Rāya Rāmānanda, and Sārvabhauma
Bhaṭṭācārya requested Mahāprabhu to see the King, He
told them, “I will leave Purī and go to Ālālanātha or
somewhere else. I will not remain here; you can stay
here with him.”

Since Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu would not agree to see the
King, Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya, Rāya Rāmānanda, and other
associates told the King, “When your beautiful son went
to Mahāprabhu, the Lord embraced him and said, ‘Come and
meet with Me daily.’ In this way, somehow or other you
have ‘half’ taken His darśana, and He has shown His
compassion to you. Mahāprabhu is very satisfied and
pleased with you, and He has given you so much mercy,
especially because you are a very simple person and have
engaged in the service of the Lord as a sweeper. So now,
if you want to have His darśana directly, dress very
simply and go secretly to meet Him when He becomes tired
from dancing in seven parties. He will be lamenting
continually in Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s mood, and at that time
you can approach Him and sing the sweet Gopī-gīta.”



jayati te ’dhikaṁ janmanā vrajaḥ

śrayata indirā śaśvad atra hi

dayita dṛśyatāṁ dikṣu tāvakās

tvayi dhṛtāsavas tvāṁ vicinvate



[The gopīs said:] O beloved, Your birth in the land of
Vraja has made it exceedingly glorious, and thus Indirā,
the goddess of fortune, always resides here. We cannot
live without You, and only maintain our lives for Your
sake. We have been searching everywhere for You, so
please show Yourself to us.



tava kathāmṛtaṁ tapta-jīvanaṁ

kavibhir īḍitaṁ kalmaṣāpaham

śravaṇa-maṅgalaṁ śrīmad ātataṁ

bhuvi gṛṇanti te bhūri-dā janāḥ



The nectar of Your words and the descriptions of Your

                            61
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

activities are the life and soul of those who are
suffering in this material world. When these narrations
are transmitted by learned sages, they eradicate one’s
sinful reactions and bestow good fortune upon whoever
hears them. They are broadcast all over the world, and
they are filled with spiritual power. Certainly those
who spread the message of Godhead are most munificent.



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.31.1, 9)

These verses are some of the most valuable diamonds in
the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. First comes pūrva-rāga1 in Veṇu-
gīta, then this Gopī-gīta, and then Yugala-gīta,
Bhramara-gīta, and Praṇaya-gīta. These most precious
jewels are called pañca-prāṇa-vāyu, the five life airs,
and our main objective is to enter the deep truths of
these gītas. Your life will be successful if you can
realize these topics, especially with the commentaries
by Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī and Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī, and above
all with that of Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura,
who has explained these ślokas in an especially
marvelous way. There are more than one thousand
commentaries on Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, but it is the
commentaries of our Gosvāmīs that express the moods of
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

As mentioned, Caitanya Mahāprabhu had become pleased and
satisfied to see the King sweeping the road.
Consequently, by the influence of His yogamāyā-śakti,
the King was able to see His miracle of dancing in seven
groups at the same time. “What am I seeing?” the King
had said to Sārvabhauma Bhaṭṭācārya. “This is very
wonderful. There is one Caitanya Mahāprabhu dancing in
each party.” Sārvabhauma replied, “This is His mercy.
You swept the road like a street beggar, and now He is
pleased with you. Not everyone sees as you do. Others
think, ‘He is only in our party.’ You have already
received His mercy, so what else remains? Just dress as
a very simple devotee and wait until He takes rest in
the garden.”

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu will also sprinkle His mercy
upon you if you give up all your opulence and the
conception that you are intelligent and qualified. This
will happen if you become like King Pratāparudra, whose
heart was as hollow as a flute for Caitanya Mahāprabhu
to play on, and if you serve your gurudeva and Rādhā-
Kṛṣṇa in this way. By Mahāprabhu’s mercy you can know
His opulence, and everything about His love and
affection as well.

Caitanya Mahāprabhu and the Ratha-yātrā chariot stopped
midway between the Jagannātha Temple and Guṇḍicā. There
were hundreds of thousands of devotees there, offering
many coconuts from wherever they stood, and He accepted
the essence of their offerings with His eyes. They also
offered many sweet and tasty preparations, including
jackfruits, mangoes, and other fruits, some from as much
as a mile or two away, and He ate those by His glance as
well.



                            62
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017


jagannāthera choṭa-baḍa yata bhakta-gaṇa



nija nija uttama-bhoga kare samarpaṇa




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 13.197)



All kinds of devotees of Lord Jagannātha – from
neophytes to the most advanced – offered their best
cooked food to the Lord.



āge pāche, dui pārśve puṣpodyāna-vane



yei yāhā pāya, lāgāya – nāhika niyame




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 13.200)



The devotees offered their food everywhere – in front of
the car and behind it, on both sides and within the
flower garden. They made their offering to the Lord
wherever possible, for there were no hard and fast
rules.



bhogera samaya lokera mahā bhiḍa haila



nṛtya chāḍi’ mahāprabhu upavane gela




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 13.201)

A large crowd of people gathered while the food was
being offered, and at that time Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
stopped His dancing and went to a nearby garden.



Caitanya Mahāprabhu had been dancing for some time, and
now He became somewhat tired.


                            63
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017



yata bhakta kīrtanīyā āsiyā ārāme



prati-vṛkṣa-tale sabe karena viśrāme




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 13.204)



All the devotees who had been performing saṅkīrtana came
there and took rest under each and every tree.



Mahāprabhu was thinking, “I am Rādhikā. Kṛṣṇa has left
Me and gone to Mathurā.” His eyes were full of tears and
He wept, not knowing where He was, or what He was doing.
He did not know anything – only, “Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa!” He
wanted to take some rest along with Nityānanda Prabhu,
Advaita Ācārya, Svarūpa Dāmodara, Vakreśvara Paṇḍita,
Puṇḍarīka Vidyānidhi, Paramānanda Purī, and other
exalted associates. Accordingly, He went into the
Jagannātha-vallabha Garden at Āiṭoṭā in a mood of great
separation, with His heart melting and tears flowing
from His eyes. He laid His head on the root of a tree
and cried, “Where is My prāṇanātha? Where is My Kṛṣṇa?”

The King had been trying to meet Mahāprabhu for many
years, but Caitanya Mahāprabhu had given the
instruction, “I don’t want to meet with a king; he
should not come to Me.” King Pratāparudra had invited
Caitanya Mahāprabhu to his palace, but He had refused to
come. He never met a king or any other royal person, or
anyone who was very wealthy. Beside that, He never
touched any woman, even if she was a young girl.

Now Caitanya Mahāprabhu was lying down and weeping,
lamenting as Śrīmatī Rādhikā had done in separation from
Kṛṣṇa. The King approached Rāya Rāmānanda, Sārvabhauma
Bhaṭṭācārya, Advaita Ācārya, and Nityānanda Prabhu. He
offered praṇāma to them all and said, “I am going to
Caitanya Mahāprabhu. Please bless me.” He then took off
his royal dress and ornaments, and put on very simple
clothes. Wearing only a dhotī and looking like an
ordinary person, he approached Mahāprabhu, took His
lotus feet in his hands, and began to massage them very
gently and expertly. As he did so, he sang:



jayati te ’dhikaṁ janmanā vrajaḥ

śrayata indirā śaśvad atra hi

dayita dṛśyatāṁ dikṣu tāvakās

tvayi dhṛtāsavas tvāṁ vicinvate

                            64
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017




Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.31.1)



He sang ślokas like this in a melody so full of feeling
that Caitanya Mahāprabhu wept more and more, and His
heart melted still further. He had been unconscious, but
now He sat up and cried, “Who is pouring such sweet
nectar in My ears? Go on, go on. Keep on giving Me this
nectar.”

The King continued:



tava kathāmṛtaṁ tapta-jīvanaṁ

kavibhir īḍitaṁ kalmaṣāpaham

śravaṇa-maṅgalaṁ śrīmad ātataṁ

bhuvi gṛṇanti te bhūri-dā janāḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.31.9)



Mahāprabhu could not control Himself. He embraced the
King and asked, “Who are you? Who are you?” King
Pratāparudra told Him, “I am the servant of the servant
of the servant of Your servant.” Mahāprabhu was
satisfied and said, “I am a street beggar, a niṣkiñcana-
sannyāsī. I have no pockets at all, so I have nothing to
give you. I shall therefore give you My embrace, which
is My only wealth.” Mahāprabhu then embraced the King
heart to heart. Both their hearts mixed, and Mahāprabhu
transferred some of His moods to the King’s heart,
empowering and satisfying him.

All the verses of Gopī-gīta have beautiful and esoteric
meanings. They are all connected with each other, and a
rasika devotee can explain the meaning of each śloka for
a month or more. These verses reveal a very pathetic
scene. All the gopīs are feeling separation and begging,
“O Kṛṣṇa, come and meet with us; otherwise we will die.”
Janmanā vrajaḥ means, “You took birth in Gokula-
Vṛndāvana, in Vraja, and that is why Mahā-Lakṣmī sweeps
and serves here, making Vṛndāvana beautiful. It is the
best place for Your sweet pastimes.”

There are many hundreds of meanings for the verse
beginning with the words tava kathāmṛtaṁ tapta-jīvanam,
but I will tell you two meanings in brief. The first is
general, and the second is somewhat deeper. The gopīs
tell Kṛṣṇa: “tava kathāmṛtam – Your sweet pastimes are
the life and soul of those who face great difficulties,
sorrows, and sufferings in the endless chain of birth
and death in this world. Your pastimes are like nectar
for them, and if they hear those pastimes, You Yourself

                              65
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                        5/5/2017

enter their hearts in the form of hari-kathā.”



śṛṇvatāṁ sva-kathāḥ kṛṣṇaḥ

puṇya-śravaṇa-kīrtanaḥ

hṛdy antaḥ-stho hy abhadrāṇi

vidhunoti suhṛt satām



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.2.17)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the Personality of Godhead, who is the
Supersoul in everyone’s heart and the benefactor of the
truthful devotee, cleanses the desire for material
enjoyment from the heart of the devotee who has
developed the urge to hear His messages, which are in
themselves virtuous when properly heard and chanted.



Kṛṣṇa Himself enters the ears and hearts of those who
hear these pastimes very carefully. He comes as a dear
and intimate friend, and clears away their lust, anger,
worldly desires, and problems. He quickly sweeps all
these impediments from their hearts, and when He has
made those hearts clear, He comes to live there. One who
is always unhappy due to being tossed on the ocean of
problems will become happy upon hearing hari-kathā.

Parīkṣit Mahārāja was due to die after seven days from
the bite of a poisonous snake, and no one in this world
was competent to save him. He therefore gave up eating,
drinking, and sleeping altogether, and remained on the
bank of the Gaṅgā for those seven days, hearing from
Śukadeva Gosvāmī.



nivṛtta-tarṣair upagīyamānād

bhavauṣadhāc chrotra-mano-’bhirāmāt

ka uttamaśloka-guṇānuvādāt

pumān virajyeta vinā paśu-ghnāt



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.1.4)



Glorification of the Supreme Personality of Godhead is
conveyed from spiritual master to disciple in the
paramparā system. Such glorification is relished by
those who are no longer interested in the false,
temporary glorification of this cosmic manifestation.

                             66
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

Descriptions of the Lord are the right medicine for the
conditioned soul who is undergoing repeated birth and
death. Who, therefore, will refrain from hearing such
glorification of the Lord, except for a butcher, or one
who is killing his own self?



Śukadeva Gosvāmī had no worldly desires at all. The
hari-kathā spoken by a rasika-tattvajña2 devotee like
him is the greatest medicine for you, for it will cure
you of all diseases and problems. Snakebites and other
calamities will disappear very quickly, along with lust,
anger, and all worldly desires. Do not have any doubt
about this.

Tava kathāmṛtaṁ tapta-jīvanam. The hari-kathā of a self-
realized devotee who explains the sweet pastimes of
Kṛṣṇa will pacify you; you will become calm and quiet,
and you will have a new life. Tapta-jīvanam. When those
who are suffering hear these glories, they will become
happy forever – in this life, and in all their lives to
come. After liberation they will go to Vṛndāvana, and
they will be happy forever. Nityānanda Prabhu assures
us, “I guarantee this. If you are not happy, then chant
and remember Kṛṣṇa. If you do not feel happy as a result
of this, it will be my responsibility.”

Kavibhir īḍitam. Kavis (poets and writers) such as
Brahmā, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, Vālmīki, and Kṛṣṇa-dvaipāyana
Vyāsadeva, who is the highest type of kavi, have all
said kalmaṣa-apaham: all kinds of sins and past fruitive
karmas will disappear very soon. Śravaṇa-maṅgalam: all
kinds of auspiciousness will come to you if you do
nothing but hear hari-kathā. Śrīmad ātatam: this will
cause the glories of your śrī – your opulence, wealth,
beauty, and fortune – to spread all over the world.

One who gives hari-kathā purely will be famous
throughout the world. For example, Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Swāmī Mahārāja was not a very popular speaker before he
took sannyāsa and came to the West. He was very learned,
but not many people came to hear him, and his wife and
children rejected him. However, a miracle occurred after
he took the renounced order and reached America. Within
a very short time he established many centers all over
the world, and he made hundreds of thousands of
devotees. So many people became his servants and
disciples that we cannot count them; this was a miracle.
And I am also now experiencing something similar to
this, although I am like a dry piece of straw.

The greatest donors in this world are those who explain
sweet hari-kathā under the guidance of Śrīla Śukadeva
Gosvāmī, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura,
Śrīla Prabhupāda Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, my
gurudeva, and Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja. Bhuvi gṛṇanti te
bhūri-dā janāḥ – they glorify Kṛṣṇa and thereby benefit
the whole world. There are so many benefactors who can
donate thousands and thousands of dollars or pounds. A
king may give his entire kingdom and a wealthy man may
give the opulence and wealth of even the entire world,
but still they would not be bhūri-dāḥ. The greatest
benefactors are those who describe Kṛṣṇa’s sweet

                            67
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

pastimes to others.

This is a general understanding of the tava kathāmṛtam
verse, which clearly glorifies Kṛṣṇa. Perhaps this is
Candrāvalī’s mood when she is speaking and praying.
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, on the contrary, is in an angry mood,
and She says: “tava kathāmṛtam – Your kathā is not
amṛtam (nectar); it is poison. What type of poison?
Deadly (mṛtam) poison. One should certainly avoid
drinking this poison; in fact, one should keep very far
away from it. If a person merely smells it he will die,
and no one will be able to save him. Those who hear Your
pastimes must die like flapping fish. First they will
flap, and then they will die.”

Tapta-jīvanam. Gopīs like Rādhikā say, “We are the proof
of this. We were perfectly happy in our family life, but
then Kṛṣṇa came and created so many problems, and now we
are helpless. He made us street beggars; we have no
place to stay and now we are on the verge of death.
Anyone who wants to be happy with his family should
never hear Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes.

“Kavibhir īḍitam. Poets will glorify even a paper horse.
They will say, ‘It is very strong, and it runs faster
than the wind and the mind,’ but there is no substance
in their words. Similarly, such kavis have said,
‘Hearing hari-kathā will make you very happy,’ but this
idea is not true; it is bogus. Kṛṣṇa cheated us and His
hari-kathā also cheated us. But now we are intelligent;
we don’t believe in hearing these pastimes anymore, and
we warn everyone else to never hear them. If a lady
hears these pastimes, she will forget her husband and
children. She will become like a bird without a nest,
and she will weep all the time.

“Those who want to be happy with their families, wives,
children, and husbands should not hear the glories of
that black Kṛṣṇa. If anyone hears them, he will cut off
the relationship with his family. Fathers and sons, and
husbands and wives will be separated from each other.
Everyone who hears this hari-kathā will forget their
husbands, wives, children, and everyone else. They will
become mad, always calling, ‘Kṛṣṇa! Kṛṣṇa! Kṛṣṇa!’ We
also became mad, and now we roam here and there, always
weeping and weeping. So Kṛṣṇa’s glories are like poison.

“Anyone who doesn’t want to be like this must not hear
Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, especially from the mouths of
cheaters. They will come with a book under their arms
and say, ‘Come here! Come here! I will relate Kṛṣṇa’s
sweet and beautiful pastimes to you, and I won’t charge
you anything at all. Don’t worry about giving a
donation. There is no cost. Simply hear.’ Such kavis
will sing with a beautiful tune like a śuka, male
parrot. They will charm a person, and then kill him at
once with a very sharp knife. They are bhūri-dā janāḥ,
greatly cutting: they will take away all one’s worldly
happiness, create trouble for him, and make him like a
beggar. So no one should hear from them.

“Those who give hari-kathā are very cruel, even if they
do it as charity, giving classes on Bhāgavatam without
taking any money in return. Instead of listening to

                            68
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                        5/5/2017

them, he should simply give them a donation and say, ‘Go
away from here. We don’t want to hear from you, because
we will forget our wives, our husbands, and all our
relatives. We will lose our wealth and everything else.
We will become beggars and weep forever.’ Nowadays we
are very careful to avoid hearing the glories of Kṛṣṇa.

“But what can we do?” Rādhikā and Her associates
continue, “We cannot give up chanting about Kṛṣṇa and
remembering Him, and we cannot give up hearing His
glories. So what can we do? Those who distribute these
glories are like hunters.”

There are two ways of saying something: a negative way
and a positive way. The negative way has the same
meaning as the positive; it only appears to be negative.
For example, the gopīs once complained to Kṛṣṇa, “We
cannot maintain our lives without You.” Kṛṣṇa replied,
“Then why are you still alive? I am separated from you,
but I see that you have not died yet.” The gopīs
replied, “Do You know why we are still alive? You and
Your friend Brahmā, the Creator, are very cruel. You
both want to give suffering to others; you become very
happy when you see others suffering. How will You be
able to make others suffer if we die? Because of You, we
are the best candidates for suffering, and You will
never find anyone like us. We tolerate so much. To whom
will You give this much suffering if we die? How will
You be happy? Your cruel creator-friend is also like
You, and he also wants to see us suffer. That is why he
put our lives in You, and that is why we don’t die. Our
souls are not here within us. They are in You, and it
was Brahmā who created us like this. If our souls were
with us, we would already have died long ago.



mṛgayur iva kapīndraṁ vivyadhe lubdha-dharmā

striyam akṛta-virūpāṁ strī-jitaḥ kāma-yānām

balim api balim attvāveṣṭayad dhvāṅkṣa-vad yas

tad alam asita-sakhyair dustyajas tat-kathārthaḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.47.17)



[The gopīs said:] Like a hunter, He cruelly shot the
king of the monkeys with arrows. He was conquered by a
woman, so He disfigured another woman who came to Him
with lusty desires. And even after consuming the gifts
of Bali Mahārāja, He bound him up with ropes as if he
were a crow. So let us give up all friendship with this
dark-complexioned boy, even if we can’t give up talking
about Him.



The gopīs lament and weep, “Why do we remember You, hear
so much about You, and chant Your name? We don’t want to

                            69
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

have any love and affection for You, but what can we do
about it? We cannot do anything. We want to forget You,
but Your pastimes always come into our memory.”

The gopīs are anupamā, incomparable; no one in this
world can compare with them. If you hear their pastimes
and try to remember them, they will give you so much
energy and strength that all your unwanted bad habits
(anarthas) will disappear very soon. It is better to
forget your jobs and everything else. There will be no
harm in that, and Yogamāyā will arrange everything for
your maintenance. Kṛṣṇa has given an order to Yogamāyā,
and I myself will also manage everything for you. Don’t
worry that you will have to go to work and perform many
other duties. I have no job, so who is managing all my
affairs? I have thousands and thousands of servants who
always help me. They worry about me and think, “I should
give something to Mahārāja.” Who is behind this? It is
Kṛṣṇa Himself. Have strong faith in Kṛṣṇa. Do not worry
about your maintenance. Chant and remember Kṛṣṇa more
and more.

Don’t worry and wonder, “Who will look after me? What
will become of me after Mahārāja leaves this world? This
is a very big problem.” Actually there is no problem at
all. Chant and remember Kṛṣṇa. By Kṛṣṇa’s order,
Yogamāyā will always help you, and Kṛṣṇa’s cakra will
always save you from danger; do not be worried. Keep
this valuable jewel – the message of the Festival of the
Chariots – in your hearts.

These are not my teachings; they are the teachings of
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, and all the other ācāryas. I have
brought their message to you as a postman. Take it and
be happy. Try to help each other and thus be happy.



The previous king of Orissa



At the commencement of the Chariot Festival,
Pratāparudra Mahārāja, the Emperor of Orissa, began
sweeping the road. Although he was the King, he wore the
dress of a devotee and looked very simple, like a
beggar. He swept using a broom with a golden handle and,
so that the dust on the road would not rise up, with his
own hands he watered the ground with fragrant substances
like rose water. This was the job of a sweeper.

The tradition of the King of Orissa sweeping the road at
the beginning of the Ratha-yātrā Festival is an old one.
Many years before, the previous King, Mahārāja
Puruṣottama Jānā, had also swept the road every year for
Jagannātha-deva. Puruṣottama Jānā was very influential
and powerful, but he would take a golden broom in his
hand and sweep in front of Jagannātha’s chariot,
sprinkling the ground with rose water and other aromatic
substances. Like Mahārāja Pratāparudra, he also dressed
himself like a common person, without shoes and without
royal dress.


                              70
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

When Puruṣottama Jānā (also known as Puruṣottama-deva)
was about 24 years old, he was very beautiful and
strong, and he had an agreement with the King of
Vidyānagara in South India that he would marry the
King’s daughter. He had been communicating with the King
of Vidyānagara through messengers and the King informed
him that he would come to meet him in person, but he did
not specify when. Later, the King went unannounced to
see with his own eyes how beautiful, wealthy, and
qualified Puruṣottama Jānā actually was. He went along
with his whole family, to see if they would agree with
the marriage proposal.

At that time, fortunately or unfortunately, it was the
first day of the Chariot Festival, and King Puruṣottama
Jānā was dressed as a sweeper, sweeping the road before
Jagannātha-deva. Seeing this, the King of Vidyānagara
became quite upset and felt some disgust toward him. He
appreciated that Puruṣottama Jānā was very youthful and
beautiful, but he considered him to be a mere sweeper.
He thought, “He is supposed to be so wealthy and
qualified, but he is sweeping? I wanted to give my
daughter to him, but now I see that he is not qualified.
He is sweeping like a street-cleaner. I cannot give my
daughter to this sweeper.” Thinking like this, he
returned home and canceled the marriage.

A few days after the festival was over, Puruṣottama Jānā
remembered the agreement and wondered what had happened.
He asked his counselors, “That king wanted to give his
daughter to me in marriage, but there has been no recent
indication at all. Why not?” The counselors informed
him, “He saw you sweeping on the day of the Ratha-yātrā
Festival and thought you were a mere sweeper. He doesn’t
want to give his daughter to a common sweeper.” When
Puruṣottama Jānā heard this, he became angry and said,
“I must invade his kingdom!” In his mind, he told that
king, “You don’t know the glory of my Jagannātha-deva!”
He collected all his soldiers and generals, declared war
on that king, and a ferocious battle took place in the
state of that other king.

The King of Vidyānagara worshiped the demigod Gaṇeśa,
who was therefore somewhat favorable towards him. Gaṇeśa
fought against Puruṣottama Jānā’s party and defeated
them. Thus, extremely disturbed, they returned to Purī
empty-handed. Weeping, Puruṣottama Jānā went to the
temple and told Lord Jagannātha, “O Lord, I am your
servant. That very mighty King told me, ‘You are only a
sweeper of Jagannātha,’ and he refused to give me his
daughter in marriage. Please help me. I was sweeping for
You. I thought You would help me at all times, but he
defeated me. I’m serving You, and yet You didn’t help
me. I was defeated because Gaṇeśa helped him. I
remembered You, but You did not help me. Now everyone in
the world will think, ‘Jagannātha has no power, and that
is why His devotee has no power. Jagannātha is very weak
and insignificant.’ This is so shameful; I will die
here. I will not eat or drink anything, and I will die
here in front of You, in Your temple.”

Later that night, King Puruṣottama Jānā had a dream in
which Jagannātha-deva told him, “Try again. Last time
you went straight to war without calling Me and

                            71
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

therefore I did not help you. But now I will help you.
March again with all your soldiers and generals. Don’t
be afraid, and don’t worry. Go and invade that king’s
territory again. Baladeva and I will go there
personally, and somehow you will be aware of this. You
will defeat that king, along with Gaṇeśa, and everyone
else on his side.” Puruṣottama Jānā became very happy
and made arrangements to again invade the kingdom. The
next day he called for more soldiers and generals, and
they started on their way and marched quickly towards
Vidyānagara.

Meanwhile, Jagannātha and Baladeva got up on very strong
and beautiful horses. Baladeva’s horse was white, and
Kṛṣṇa Himself rode a red one. They were both sixteen
years of age, one blackish and the other white, and both
were very powerful, strong, and beautiful. They wanted
Puruṣottma Jānā to have faith that they were going to
fight for him, so they went some miles ahead of him.
Many miles from Purī, they reached a village near
Chilka, Ālālanātha, near a very large and beautiful
lake. There, Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva came upon an old village
gvālinī (milk-lady) carrying a large pot of buttermilk
on her head. It was a hot summer day, and Jagannātha and
Baladeva said to her, “Mother, can you give us some
buttermilk? We are very thirsty.”

“Can you pay me?” the gvālinī asked them. “I will give
you some buttermilk if you pay me.” Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva
replied, “We cannot pay you. We are soldiers of the
King, and we are on the way to battle. Our King is
coming and he will pay you when he reaches here. You can
tell him, ‘Your two soldiers were going this way. One
was blackish and the other white. They were riding on
their horses with their swords and other weapons.’” She
asked, “How will he be able to recognize that you are
his soldiers? How will he know that it is his own
soldiers who have taken this buttermilk?” They replied,
“We will give you some proof to show the King, and then
he will pay you.”

The village lady gave them her whole pot of buttermilk,
and they drank it all and felt satisfied. Then they gave
her their very beautiful rings and told her, “Give these
rings to the King and tell him, ‘The owners of these
rings have gone before you, and they said that you will
pay for their buttermilk.’” The boys then went happily
onwards.

The milk seller waited and waited, and finally the King
arrived there with his entire army of hundreds of
thousands of soldiers. When the army arrived, the old
lady began to search for him, asking, “Where is the
King? Where is the King?” The soldiers told her, “The
King is there,” and she walked up to him and said, “Your
two soldiers have gone ahead. They were both young,
beautiful, and very energetic, and they were riding on
horses. They drank my entire pot of buttermilk, and they
told me, ‘Our King will pay.’ So you should pay for my
buttermilk.”

The King told the old lady, “None of my soldiers have
gone before us.” She replied, “Yes, they have. I’ve seen
them and I’ve given them my buttermilk.” The King told

                            72
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

her, “How can I believe they are my soldiers? All my
soldiers are with me. No one has gone ahead. We are the
first to come.” Then he asked her, “Do you have any
proof?” “Yes,” she said, “I have proof.”

The milk-lady showed the two rings to the King, and on
the rings he saw the names Jagannātha Siṁha and Baladeva
Siṁha (Siṁha means “lion”). He became happy and
inspired, and he thought, “These are the two rings I had
made by the goldsmith. They are the same rings that I
presented to Jagannātha and Baladeva! Jagannātha and
Baladeva have done this for me so that I would know they
are with me. This time I will surely conquer that King.”
He then donated some of his kingdom to that old

village woman. He offered her a large estate, telling
her, “Take this land and nourish many generations of
your family with it.” That lady’s family is living on
the same estate to this very day.

Puruṣottama Jānā then invaded his enemy’s kingdom and
defeated his entire army. He forcibly took away the
King’s daughter and imprisoned her, and all the King’s
counselors as well. He also took the King’s golden
throne, and the deity of Bhaṇḍa (cheater) Gaṇeśa. Bhaṇḍa
Gaṇeśa had been fighting on the side of the King of
Vidyānagara, so Kṛṣṇa and Baladeva captured him and
bound him up, saying, “He is Bhaṇḍa Gaṇeśa.” Gaṇeśa
knows well that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of
Godhead and the all-in-all, yet he took the wrong side.
That is why Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma called him “Cheater
Gaṇeśa.” Puruṣottama Jānā arrested the King, and then
mercifully released him, saying, “I shall not kill you.”
Then, having conquered Vidyānagara, he took permission
of the deity Sākṣi-gopāla, the witness of the young
brāhmaṇa, and brought that deity to Kaṭaka. He also took
the very large and beautiful deities of Rādhā-kānta, who
are still in the Śrī Rādhā-kānta Maṭha in Jagannātha
Purī, where Caitanya Mahāprabhu used to live in the
Gambhīrā. He also took Bhaṇḍa Gaṇeśa, bringing all these
deities to Purī.

In this regard, Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā
5.120–4) states:



utkalera rājā puruṣottama-deva nāma



sei deśa jini’ nila kariyā saṅgrāma




Later there was a fight, and this country was conquered
by King Puruṣottama-deva of Orissa.



sei rājā jini’ nila tāṅra siṁhāsana


                            73
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017



‘māṇikya-siṁhāsana’ nāma aneka ratana




That King was victorious over the King of Vidyānagara,
and he took possession of his throne, the Māṇikya
siṁhāsana, which was bedecked with many jewels.



puruṣottama-deva sei baḍa bhakta ārya



gopāla-caraṇe māge, cala mora rājya’




King Puruṣottama-deva was a great devotee and was
advanced in the civilization of the Āryans. He begged at
the lotus feet of Gopāla, “Please come to my kingdom.”



tāṅra bhakti-vaśe gopāla tāṅre ājñā dila



gopāla la-iyā sei kaṭake āila




When the King begged Him to come to his kingdom, Gopāla,
who was already obliged for his devotional service,
accepted his prayer. Thus the King took the Gopāla deity
and went back to Kaṭaka.



jagannāthe āni’ dila māṇikya-siṁhāsana



kaṭake gopāla-sevā karila sthāpana




After winning the Māṇikya throne, King Puruṣottama-deva
took it to Jagannātha Purī and presented it to Lord
Jagannātha. In the meantime, he also established regular
worship of the Gopāla deity at Kaṭaka.




                            74
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                         5/5/2017

Puruṣottama Jānā also brought the King’s daughter to
Purī, but he decided, “I will not marry her; I will give
her to my sweeper.” Later, when he was ready to give her
away, all of his ministers, who were very kind, saw her
crying and lamenting, “He will give me to a sweeper.”
They pacified her and also told the King, “Don’t worry.
At the right time, during the next Chariot Festival, you
can give this girl to your sweeper.” The next year, when
the Chariot Festival took place again, Mahārāja
Puruṣottama Jānā again swept the road. At that time all
his ministers inspired the beautiful princess to go to
him and say, “I will marry this very sweeper, not any
other.” She boldly told him, “You are the sweeper of
Jagannātha-deva. I only want to marry His sweeper; I
cannot marry any other sweeper.” The King’s advisers
then approached him and said, “Yes, yes, this is very
good. We agree with this proposal. You are a sweeper,
and this girl will be the wife of a sweeper. Why don’t
you accept her? You must accept her.” The girl began to
weep, and the King was bound to accept her as his wife.
Puruṣottama Jānā’s son became a very beautiful prince,
and that prince later became King Pratāparudra, the
associate of Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

The most merciful Jagannātha is surely patita-pāvana,
the savior of the fallen, and He is also bhakta-vatsala
– He always wants to please His devotees.




CHAPTER FIVE

REUNION AT KURUKṢETRA


Mahāprabhu’s mood at Ratha-yātrā



At the beginning of the Ratha-yātrā Festival, Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu offers a prayer to Jagannātha-deva,
not to His form as Lord Jagannātha or Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa,
but to His form as Vrajendra-nandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa:



jayati jana-nivāso devakī-janma-vādo

yadu-vara-pariṣat svair dorbhir asyann adharmam

sthira-cara-vṛjina-ghnaḥ su-smita-śrī-mukhena

vraja-pura-vanitānāṁ vardhayan kāma-devam



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.90.48)



Śrī Kṛṣṇa is He who is known as jana-nivāsa, the
ultimate resort of all living entities, and who is also

                            75
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

known as Devakī-nandana or Yaśodā-nandana, the son of
Devakī and Yaśodā. He is the guide of the Yadu dynasty,
and with His mighty arms He kills everything
inauspicious, as well as every man who is impious. By
His presence He destroys all things inauspicious for all
living entities, moving and inert. His blissful smiling
face always increases the lusty desires of the gopīs of
Vṛndāvana. May He be all-glorious and happy.

Caitanya Mahāprabhu is praying in the mood of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā meeting Kṛṣṇa at Kurukṣetra. There, by their
mood, the gopīs bring Kṛṣṇa to Vṛndāvana and decorate
Him with flowers. By their mood they forcibly give Him
the flute He left in Vṛndāvana with Mother Yaśodā, along
with His peacock feather, and they whisper in His ear,
“Don’t say that Your father and mother are Vasudeva and
Devakī. Don’t say that You are from the Yadu dynasty and
that You are a Yādava. Say only that You are a gopa.”
Kṛṣṇa replies, “Yes, I will follow your instructions.”

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu prays, jayati jana-nivāso
devakī-janma-vādo. This śloka, which Śrī Sanātana
Gosvāmī has quoted in his Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta, has many
profound meanings. If Caitanya Mahāprabhu or Śrīla
Sanātana Gosvāmī were to explain it, they would do so
with a hundred different meanings, each deeper and more
unfathomable than the previous one. It contains the
entire Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam from beginning to end.

The general meaning of jana-nivāsa is, “You are always
in the hearts of all as Paramātmā.” However, Kṛṣṇa
cannot live as Paramātmā in the hearts of the
Vrajavāsīs; He can only be present there in the form of
Vrajendra-nandana Śyāmasundara. Jana also means nija-
jana (near and dear), and therefore it means Kṛṣṇa’s
personal associates. All the Vrajavāsīs are Kṛṣṇa’s
nija-jana, for He is the jīvana (life-air) of Nanda,
Yaśodā, all His friends, and especially of the gopīs. He
is also rādhikā-jīvanera jīvana, the very life of
Rādhikā’s life, and He always resides in Her heart. This
relationship is reciprocal; the Vrajavāsīs are His life,
just as much as He is theirs.

Devakī-janma-vādo. Only Mathurāvāsīs and worldly people
can say that Kṛṣṇa took birth from the womb of Mother
Devakī. General people say this, but actually He is the
son of Mother Yaśodā; she is His real mother.

Yadu-vara-pariṣat svair dorbhir. The members of the Yadu
dynasty are the nija-jana of Dvārakādhīśa-Kṛṣṇa, for
they are His associates. It seems that this śloka refers
to Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa, and describes Arjuna, Bhīma, and His
other associates as His arms. Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa fought in
the Mahābhārata War and in various other battles, and He
fought with Pauṇḍraka Vāsudeva and other demons. The
śloka seems to describe dvārakā-līlā, but actually, in
its deeper meaning, it glorifies Vrajendra-nandana
Kṛṣṇa. In Vṛndāvana, Kṛṣṇa killed Pūtanā and other
demons with his own arms. Moreover, in Vṛndāvana He
killed the greatest demon – the feelings of separation
felt by Śrīmatī Rādhikā and the gopīs.

Sthira-cara-vṛjina-ghnaḥ su-smita-śrī-mukhena vraja-
pura-vanitānām. In Vṛndāvana, Kṛṣṇa always took away all

                            76
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

kinds of problems and suffering, simply with His smiling
face and His flute. What was the suffering of the
Vrajavāsīs? It was only their mood of separation from
Him. They had no other problems at all.

This verse includes the pastimes of Gokula, Vṛndāvana,
Rādhā-kuṇḍa, Śyāma-kuṇḍa, rāsa-līlā, and all the other
Vraja pastimes as well. Vardhayan kāmadevam. In this
connection, Kāmadeva does not mean lust, but prema. What
kind of prema? Sneha, māna, praṇaya, rāga, anurāga,
bhāva, and mahābhāva. The gopīs tell Kṛṣṇa, “You are
that person – that Kāmadeva.” In this way, Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu is offering praṇāma and praying, putting the
whole of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and all of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes
as well, into this one śloka.



The meaning of gopī-bhartuḥ



As I have explained before, Mahāprabhu very rarely sees
Jagannātha, Baladeva, and Subhadrā. When He does, He at
once enters a mood of very intense separation and prays,
“After a long time I am meeting with My most beloved,
for whom I was burning in the fire of separation.” He
addresses Jagannātha as gopī-bhartuḥ and prays, “Pada-
kamalayor dāsa-dāsānudāsaḥ.” The word gopī-bhartuḥ
reveals Kṛṣṇa’s relationship with the gopīs, for it
means “the gopīs’ most beloved,” or “He who is always
controlled by the gopīs.” Mahāprabhu concludes, “I want
to be the servant of the servant of the servant of that
Kṛṣṇa.”



nāhaṁ vipro na ca nara-patir nāpi vaiśyo na śūdro

nāhaṁ varṇī na ca gṛha-patir no vanastho yatir vā

kintu prodyan-nikhila-paramānanda-pūrṇāmṛtābdher

gopī-bhartuḥ pada-kamalayor dāsa-dāsānudāsaḥ



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 13.80)



I am not a brāhmaṇa, a kṣatriya, a vaiśya, or a śūdra.
Nor am I a brahmacārī, a gṛhastha, a vānaprastha, or a
sannyāsī. I identify Myself only as the servant of the
servant of the servant of the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
the maintainer of the gopīs. He is like an ocean of
nectar, and He is the cause of universal transcendental
bliss. He is always existing in full brilliance.



Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu prays not only for Himself, but
for everyone. He is the Supreme Personality of Godhead,
gopī-bhartuḥ Himself, and He offers prayers in order to

                              77
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

teach us how to pray. He is teaching us our actual
identity; we are not Indian or American, nor are we from
Great Britain or anywhere else. We are not brāhmaṇas,
administrative kṣatriyas, mercantile vaiśyas or śūdra
laborers, nor are we brahmacārī students, gṛhastha
householders, retired vānaprasthas, or sannyāsīs in the
renounced order. We are eternally servants of Kṛṣṇa.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu uses the name gopī-bhartuḥ for
further clarification, and by this He is indicating, “We
are not servants of that Kṛṣṇa who lived here and there
in Dvārakā without His flute. Others may be, but as for
My associates and Myself, we are only gopī-bhartuḥ pada-
kamalayor dāsa-dāsānudāsaḥ, the servants of the servants
of the servants of the lotus feet of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
beloved of the gopīs.”

Who is gopī-bhartuḥ? He is Rādhā-kānta, Rādhā-ramaṇa,
and Gopīnātha. The gopīs must be there as the ārādhya
(worshipable deities) of Kṛṣṇa. He must be their
worshiper, and then we are His servants; otherwise not.
We are not Kṛṣṇa’s servants if Rukmiṇī and Satyabhāmā
are there, or if He is four-handed and holding His
Sudarśana cakra. Kṛṣṇa must be with the gopīs, He must
be controlled by their prominence, and especially by
Rādhā. We are servants of that Kṛṣṇa.

We are all transcendental, and our intrinsic,
constitutional nature is to serve Kṛṣṇa; but we are not
servants of all His manifestations. There are very big
differences in these manifestations, and to be the
servant of gopī-bhartuḥ is very, very rare. We can
consider that those who have come in the line of
Mahāprabhu are rādhā-dāsīs, as gopī-bhartuḥ pada-
kamalayor dāsa-dāsānudāsaḥ only applies to the
maidservants of Rādhikā. Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s statement
therefore refers to those who are coming in His
disciplic line, those who are coming in the line of
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, and
our entire guru-paramparā. One day, if our creeper of
bhakti blossoms and the fruits and flowers of prema-
bhakti manifest, we will be able to realize this. This
is the aim and object of our life.



Leading up to the meeting: Kṛṣṇa sends Uddhava to Vraja



Mahāprabhu was so absorbed that He could not utter
Jagannātha’s name. He could only chant, “Jaja gaga! Jaja
gaga!” Tears fell from His eyes, and His heart melted.
One can realize this state only if he is a devotee of
the highest standard. What was the cause of Mahāprabhu’s
bitter weeping? What was the reason behind it?
Mahāprabhu told Svarūpa Dāmodara to sing a song that
suited His mood, and Svarūpa Dāmodara began to sing:



sei ta parāṇa-nātha pāinu



                            78
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017


yāhā lāgi’ madana-dahane jhuri’ genu




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 13.113)



Now I have gained the Lord of My life, in whose absence
I was being burned by Cupid and was withering away.



You will have to consult Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam to understand
the meaning of this verse, because the history of Ratha-
yātrā has been indicated there. Kṛṣṇa left Vraja at the
age of eleven1 and went first to Mathurā, and then after
some time He went to Dvārakā. While He was in Mathurā,
He sent Uddhava to console the gopīs, and later He also
sent Baladeva Prabhu from Dvārakā to console them. The
gopīs had now been feeling separation for a long time.
Everyone in Vṛndāvana was feeling separation from Him,
and even the cows and calves were upset. The gopas and
gopīs were weeping continuously, and everyone, including
the entire forest of Vṛndāvana, was drying up.

When Kṛṣṇa was sending Uddhava from Mathurā, He told
him, “Uddhava, go to Vṛndāvana and pacify My father and
mother, Nanda and Yaśodā, and especially pacify the
gopīs who have given Me their life and soul and
everything they possess. The gopīs always remember Me,
and they do nothing else. They never decorate themselves
and they have even given up taking their meals. They
don’t bathe and they don’t even sleep.”



mac-cittā mad-gata-prāṇā

bodhayantaḥ parasparam

kathayantaś ca māṁ nityaṁ

tuṣyanti ca ramanti ca



Bhagavad-gītā (10.9)



The thoughts of My pure devotees dwell in Me, their
lives are fully devoted to serving Me, and they derive
great satisfaction and bliss from always enlightening
one another and conversing about Me.



The gopīs’ only relief from their feelings of separation
came when they sometimes fainted and sometimes slept.
However, even these two friends – fainting and sleeping

                            79
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                          5/5/2017

– abandoned the gopīs when Kṛṣṇa took them with Him to
Mathurā.

In this way Kṛṣṇa sent Uddhava to Vraja, and there
Uddhava related His message, word by word, letter by
letter. However, this only made the gopīs more unhappy.
Previously they had thought, “Kṛṣṇa has promised that He
will come;” but after hearing the message, they thought,
“Kṛṣṇa will never come,” and they felt even more
separation. Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī began to weep:



he nātha he ramā-nātha

vraja-nāthārti-nāśana

magnam uddhara govinda

gokulaṁ vṛjinārṇavāt




O master   of My life,   O master of the goddess of fortune,
O master   of Vraja! O   destroyer of all suffering,
Govinda,   please lift   Your Gokula out of the ocean of
distress   in which it   is drowning!



Śrīmatī Rādhikā said, “I am dying without Kṛṣṇa. My dear
sakhīs, if Kṛṣṇa does not come, I will die; I will
surely die. Take My body, place it at the base of a
tamāla tree, and place My arms around that tree so that
I may feel connected to Kṛṣṇa. I pray that the water in
My body will mix with Pāvana-sarovara where Kṛṣṇa
bathes, so that I may touch Him. Let the air in this
body go to Nanda Bābā’s courtyard and touch Kṛṣṇa when
He is fanned. May the fire in this body become rays of
sunshine in Nanda Bābā’s courtyard, and then My soul
will be happy. Now I cannot see Kṛṣṇa, or touch Him.”
She was in a very pitiful condition, always in a mood of
deep separation.

Kṛṣṇa was also feeling unbearable separation, but no one
knew that. The gopīs could share their suffering with
each other, but Kṛṣṇa could not share His feelings with
anyone. He wept alone. This is why He sent Uddhava to
Vṛndāvana; He wanted Uddhava to be admitted into the
school of the gopīs, so that he would learn the meaning
of the two-and-a-half letters in the word prema.1 Kṛṣṇa
considered, “When Uddhava understands the love of the
gopīs, he will be qualified to realize My feelings of
separation.”

When Uddhava returned from Vraja, he told Kṛṣṇa about
the glories of the gopīs and their one-pointed love. He
said, “It is so very high that I could not touch it. I
only saw that mountain of love from a great distance,
but still it was so high that my hat fell off the back
of my head as I looked up at it. I cannot imagine how
glorious the gopīs are. I wanted to take the dust of

                               80
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

their lotus feet, but now I am hopeless. I am not
qualified to touch their foot-dust, so I simply offer
praṇāma to it from very far away. Uddhava then uttered
the following prayer in glorification of the gopīs:



vande nanda-vraja-strīṇāṁ

pāda-reṇum abhīkṣṇaśaḥ

yāsāṁ hari-kathodgītaṁ

punāti bhuvana-trayam



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.47.63)



I repeatedly offer my respects to the dust from the feet
of the women of Nanda Mahārāja’s cowherd village. When
these gopīs loudly chant the glories of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
vibration purifies the three worlds.



Instead of becoming pacified by Uddhava’s explanation,
Kṛṣṇa felt more and more separation. He wanted to go to
Vraja, but for some reason He could not.



What Kṛṣṇa never told before



Kṛṣṇa had told Uddhava, “My father and mother are
weeping bitterly. They have become blind, and they are
hardly more than skeletons. Perhaps they will only live
for one or two days more; in fact, they may die at any
moment. Please go and pacify them. And go also to the
gopīs. I know that My father and mother are weeping
bitterly, that they are blind, and may die... but I
don’t know what is the condition of the gopīs. They are
feeling the topmost separation for Me. I don’t know
whether they are alive, or if they have already died; so
go at once, quickly. They always remember Me, keeping Me
on the chariots of their minds, without any selfish
motive. They know that nobody in Mathurā knows My
heart.”

The gopīs know that Kṛṣṇa is very shy, and cannot ask
anyone for something to eat when He feels hungry.
Yaśodā-maiyā is not present in His palace; so who will
pacify Him, and who will serve Him? This is why the
gopīs feel so much separation.

Kṛṣṇa had told Uddhava, “The gopīs are mat-prāṇa, My
life and soul.” He had not said this about His father
and mother, only about the gopīs. He continued, “They
have left everything for Me. For My sake, they have
stopped caring for their bodies and have forgotten all

                            81
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

their bodily duties. I am their only beloved, and they
are My most beloved; indeed, they are My life and soul.
They have left their shyness and their worldly
responsibilities, and they have also abandoned all
social etiquette for Me. For My sake, they have
disobeyed their parents and left their source of
maintenance. I must somehow save them and maintain them.
Now they are far away, thinking, ‘Kṛṣṇa will surely come
tomorrow. If we die now, He will also die when He finds
out.’ This is the reason they somehow maintain their
lives without dying.

“The gopīs think, ‘Kṛṣṇa has promised, and He cannot
break His promise. He must come. He will come tomorrow.’
That is why they maintain their lives. Actually, I think
that they are not maintaining their own lives. Their
lives rest in Me, and I am maintaining them, otherwise
they would have been finished. Go at once and see
whether they have died or not; and if not, please pacify
them.”

Kṛṣṇa had only spoken like this about the gopīs; never
about anyone else, including Arjuna and the Pāṇḍavas, or
His queens, Satyabhāmā and Rukmiṇī. The gopīs are unique
in their boundless and causeless love and affection for
Kṛṣṇa. Our highest aim and object is the love for Kṛṣṇa
that is in the gopīs, and especially in Rādhikā.

When Rādhikā was feeling separation, gopīs like Lalitā,
Viśākhā, Citrā, Campakalatā, and Rūpa Mañjarī were
serving Her and trying to pacify Her; but who could
actually pacify Her? She was totally mad, with no
external sense at all. The others were trying to pacify
Her because their consciousness was still somewhat
functional. Their love is very high, millions of times
greater than that of Uddhava, Satyabhāmā, and Rukmiṇī,
and higher even than that of the other sakhīs of
Vṛndāvana; but it is not as high as Rādhikā’s love.

Rādhikā was totally mad, as Uddhava saw when he
witnessed Her talking to the bumblebee. Actually, Kṛṣṇa
Himself had gone to Vraja in the form of that bumblebee,
and He also saw that Rādhikā was totally mad. She was
lying on a bed of rose petals, which had become dried up
by the touch of Her body, and all the candana that had
been put on Her body to cool Her was also completely
dried. At first, Uddhava could not understand whether
She was dead or alive.

Then, he saw that Rādhikā was very angry with Kṛṣṇa,
criticizing and abusing Him, and calling Him an
ungrateful cheater. No one else could have spoken to
Kṛṣṇa in this way, including Satyabhāmā and the other
queens, and even Mother Yaśodā and Nanda Bābā. Rādhikā
told Him, “You are ungrateful, and You are like a six-
legged bumblebee. Human beings have two legs and animals
have four; but bumblebees have six legs, so they are
more ignorant than any animal. We don’t want to have any
relationship with that black person whose heart is as
black as a bumblebee. Rāma was also black, and he
cheated Śūrpaṇakhā and cut off her nose and ears.”

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam is actually an explanation of the
glory of Rādhikā’s love. Her love is supreme, and it is

                            82
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                        5/5/2017

the goal of all living beings. We can never grasp its
breadth, but we can taste a drop of it, and even that
one drop can drown the entire universe. Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu gave Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī that drop of the
endless ocean of nectar, bhakti-rasa. If we can serve
the gopīs, and especially Rādhikā, we can also have love
and affection for Kṛṣṇa, and then we can feel
separation. Otherwise, it will never be possible.
Caitanya Mahāprabhu, the Six Gosvāmīs, Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, and Śukadeva Gosvāmī have proclaimed this
conclusion: our goal is kṛṣṇa-prema, the prema that the
gopīs have for Kṛṣṇa.

Previously, Uddhava had heard about how much love and
affection the gopīs have for Kṛṣṇa, but he had no
experience of it. He had heard that the gopīs are
Kṛṣṇa’s most beloved, and that Kṛṣṇa is their most
beloved, but even knowing this, he could not know the
intensity and the ways of their love.

Uddhava also loves Kṛṣṇa, and thinks, “Kṛṣṇa is my
master, He is also like my brother, and we have so many
other relationships.” However, Kṛṣṇa did not say
anything about Uddhava’s love. Rather, He told him to go
to Vraja and learn there: “Go and realize the nature of
prema.” He said, “There is no one in Mathurā like these
gopīs.”

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has mercifully sprinkled a drop
of that love on the world (Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-
līlā 1.4)):



anarpita-carīṁ cirāt karuṇayāvatīrṇaḥ kalau

samarpayitum unnatojjvala-rasāṁ sva-bhakti-śriyam

hariḥ puraṭa-sundara-dyuti-kadamba-sandīpitaḥ

sadā hṛdaya-kandare sphuratu vaḥ śacī-nandanaḥ



May the Supreme Lord who is known as the son of Śrīmatī
Śacī-devī be transcendentally situated in the innermost
chambers of your heart. Resplendent with the radiance of
molten gold, He has appeared in the age of Kali by His
causeless mercy to bestow what no incarnation has ever
offered before: the most sublime and radiant mellow of
devotional service, the mellow of amorous love.



Uddhava failed the entrance exam



Uddhava had great love and affection for Kṛṣṇa, but when
he arrived in Vraja, he realized that vraja-prema was
totally new to him. He saw Kṛṣṇa playing with all His
sakhās. Millions and millions of cows were hankering
after Him, and milk was flowing from their bulging
udders because of their spontaneous love. The very

                            83
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

beautiful black and white calves were jumping here and
there, and Nanda Bābā’s big bulls were fighting with
each other.

As Uddhava saw that scene, beautiful ghee lamps
flickered in the gopīs’ rooms, and the light from these
lamps was soft and

fragrant – not like the dead light from electric bulbs.
Varieties of flowers spread their sweet aroma in all
directions, and the songs of the humming bumblebees were
like the blowing of Cupid’s conchshell. Cuckoos and
other birds were singing everywhere, and peacocks were
dancing about and calling, “Ke kaw! Ke kaw!”

All the gopīs were churning yogurt and singing, “Govinda
Dāmodara Mādhaveti.” They were all very beautiful, and
Mother Yaśodā was the most beautiful of all. How else
could Kṛṣṇa have become so beautiful? He would only have
been black otherwise; it was because of her that His
beauty was like the luster of pearls.

Uddhava saw all this, but in a moment the scene changed
completely, and now he saw that all the residents of
Vṛndāvana were weeping for Kṛṣṇa: “O Kṛṣṇa, where are
You? Where are You?” Cows were not going out to graze.
They simply wept, keeping their heads and eyes toward
Mathurā, and the calves were not drinking the milk from
the udders of their mothers. The peacocks were not
dancing; rather, they looked as if they were blind.
Every person and creature was mad in separation from
Kṛṣṇa.

It was now evening, and Uddhava found himself in Kṛṣṇa’s
home, where he became dumbstruck to see the love and
affection of Mother Yaśodā and Nanda Bābā. He could
never have imagined that such high-class love could
exist, but now he was able to realize something of its
elevated nature.

Early the next morning, Uddhava went to Kadamba-kyārī,
where, by Kṛṣṇa’s mercy, he was able to see the gopīs,
who were all mad in separation and just about to die.
This is why Kṛṣṇa had sent him to Vṛndāvana: to try to
be admitted into the school of the gopīs. Kṛṣṇa had told
him, “Be admitted into the school in which I studied.
Then, when you return, we will be able to have some
discussion about love and affection. First, go and
become qualified.”

However, Uddhava was not qualified for admittance into
the school of the gopīs. His entrance examination score
was about 25 percent, but the gopīs demanded more than
85 percent. Still, although they rejected him, he was
able to enter the school and see the very high-class
students there. He saw professors like Viśākhā and
Lalitā, and he saw the principal, Rādhikā Herself. Now
he knew something of the glories of the gopīs, and he
realized a little of their love for Kṛṣṇa. He had never
seen anything like this before, and now he felt, “If I
want to love Kṛṣṇa, I must be admitted into this school.
But I am not qualified.” He therefore requested the
gopīs, “If you do not admit me, can you at least take me
on as a servant, to bring water and clean the school?”

                            84
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

The gopīs rejected even that request, however, and they
told him, “You should go back to Mathurā. First become
qualified, and then you can sweep our kuñjas; you cannot
sweep here at the moment.”

Uddhava then prayed:



vande nanda-vraja-strīṇāṁ

pāda-reṇum abhīkṣṇaśaḥ

yāsāṁ hari-kathodgītaṁ

punāti bhuvana-trayam



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.47.63)



Nanda-vraja-strīṇām means the beloved gopīs of Kṛṣṇa.
Uddhava prayed to them, “I want to offer myself unto the
dust of your lotus feet. I want to keep even one
particle of your foot-dust on my head, and if I can only
get one particle of dust, it must be Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s.”
Neither Brahmā nor Śaṅkara, nor even Satyabhāmā and the
other Dvārakā queens, can attain this.

Kṛṣṇa had sent Uddhava to see the glories of the gopīs,
and now he saw Mount Everest, the highest peak of the
Himālayas of the gopīs’ love. He could not become like
them, however, so he had to return to Kṛṣṇa empty-
handed. “I went there and saw something very mysterious
and wonderful, which I cannot explain,” he told Kṛṣṇa.
“You told me about the gopīs, and what I saw was even
more wonderful than what You told me. But I had to
return without realizing anything.”

Yāsāṁ hari-kathodgītaṁ, punāti bhuvana-trayam. The songs
of the gopīs, such as Bhramara-gīta and Gopī-gīta,
purify the whole universe, and if one recites them, or
even remembers them, he will actually be purified. So
try to recite all these songs (gītas) and know them. The
meanings are very deep, and Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī
Mahārāja wanted to teach that the very wonderful moods
therein are our aim and object. He wanted to teach this
and he did discuss it in his books, but how could he
actually plant it in barren lands and deserts? First he
had to cultivate the lands to make them fertile. He
wanted to give this highest goal, but in the meantime
his Svāminī, Śrīmatī Rādhikā, called to him, “Come at
once! We need your service.”

This is our goal – the dust of the lotus feet of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā.



āsām aho caraṇa-reṇu-juṣām ahaṁ syāṁ

vṛndāvane kim api gulma-latauṣadhīnām

                            85
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                        5/5/2017


yā dustyajaṁ sva-janam ārya-pathaṁ ca hitvā

bhejur mukunda-padavīṁ śrutibhir vimṛgyām



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.47.61)



The gopīs of Vṛndāvana have abandoned the association of
their husbands, sons, and other family members who are
very difficult to give up, and they have forsaken the
path of chastity to take shelter of the lotus feet of
Mukunda, Kṛṣṇa, which one should search for by Vedic
knowledge. Oh, let me be fortunate enough to be one of
the bushes, creepers, or herbs in Vṛndāvana, because the
gopīs trample them and bless them with the dust of their
lotus feet.



Uddhava prayed, “If I cannot attain   Rādhikā’s lotus
feet, then I will be satisfied with   the dust particles
from the feet of any of Her sakhīs.   I don’t want the
dust of Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet, because   I will have to take
a particle of the gopīs’ moods if I   want to please
Kṛṣṇa.”

We must engage in the process given by Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura, and Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura.
The teaching of our present ācāryas is the same wine in
new bottles. The bottles are different colors, but the
wine is the same. If you drink that wine, you will
certainly become mad, but this madness is actually
desirable.



Kṛṣṇa meets His parents at Kurukṣetra



Years later there was to be a solar eclipse and Kṛṣṇa
planned to go to Kurukṣetra with all His commanders, His
army, and all His 16,108 queens. He did not invite Nanda
Bābā directly, but He thought, “Father will know, and he
will not be able to remain in Vraja. He will come at
once; he must come.”

In Vṛndāvana, Nanda Bābā somehow came to know about the
religious function to be held at Kurukṣetra. Thus, all
the gopas, gopīs, and young people prepared their
bullock carts and proceeded toward Kurukṣetra, leaving
Upananda and some other elders in Vraja to look after
everything. They took with them many personal items for
Kṛṣṇa, such as butter and other things that He liked,
and on the way they constantly remembered: “Kṛṣṇa,
Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa.”

By then, the gopīs had been lamenting for perhaps fifty,
sixty, or seventy years. Kṛṣṇa also felt separation for

                            86
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

that long, but even after all those years, He was still
youthful (kiśora), and the gopīs remained young as well.

In the meantime, the sun was covered by a shadow and the
whole world became dark. According to Vedic culture,
during a solar eclipse one should take bath three times:
when it is just beginning, when the sun is fully
covered, and when it is again fully visible. At that
time, one should bathe and give donations in charity. It
is written in Indian history and in the Vedas and
Upaniṣads that many kings used to donate their entire
wealth to the brāhmaṇas and needy persons. Every golden
pot and utensil was given in charity. Having given away
their own clothing, keeping only a loincloth for
themselves, the kings themselves would become penniless.
Those charitable persons were giving so much charity
that there was no longer anyone to take it. Those who
had accepted charity began to give charity to others.
They gave their charity in charity, and therefore there
was no one left to think, “I want charity.” All were
giving and all were satisfied – because Kṛṣṇa was there.
Even recently in India, many people would donate all
these things. Now, however, although giving in charity
is for the betterment of the donors, this culture is
gradually reducing.

Everyone bathed there at Kurukṣetra, made their
donations, and after that they came to Kṛṣṇa’s tent to
take His darśana. Thousands and thousands of ṛṣis,
maharṣis, brahmavādīs, realized souls like Nārada,
Bhīṣma Pitāmaha (the grandfather of the Kauravas and
Pāṇḍavas), Vyāsadeva, Gautama, Yājñavalkya, Duryodhana
and all his brothers, Droṇācārya, Karṇa, and all the
Kauravas came from all over India, and from all over the
world. Ṛṣis and maharṣis from the Caspian sea, like
Kaśyapa, also came, and from Mongolia, sages like
Maṅgala Ṛṣi came with all his sons and daughters. Almost
all the kings of the world had assembled there to bathe
in the very pious lake there, and the crowd consisted of
more than ten million people. All were there to bathe in
that lake, and all were residing there in separate
camps.

Now, everyone assembled in the camp of Vasudeva and
Devakī to take darśana of Kṛṣṇa, and they began to enter
His tent. His tent was so large that thousands of people
could sit inside. Although there was no arrangement for
a loudspeaker, everyone could easily hear Him speak, and
in fact everyone thought, “Kṛṣṇa is sitting near me. I’m
joking with Him, I’m telling Him something, and He is
very happy to hear it.”

The Pāṇḍavas – Yudhiṣṭhira, Arjuna, Bhīma, Nakula,
Sahadeva, and Draupadī – had also joined the assembly,
and their mother, Kuntī, was also there. Kuntī met with
her brother Vasudeva, and pitifully weeping with tears
falling profusely from her eyes, she told him, “Brother,
you did not remember me when my sons were given poison,
when they were about to burn in a fire, or when all
their wealth, kingdom, and everything else was taken and
we were begging here and there. Like a demon, Duryodhana
cheated my sons. He drove them from their kingdom, and
he and Duḥśāsana also tried to strip Draupadī in the big
council where Dhṛtarāṣṭra, Bhīṣma Pitāmaha, and other

                            87
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

elders were present. You are my brother. You should have
remembered me.” Weeping loudly, she put her arms around
Vasudeva’s neck, and Vasudeva Mahārāja also began to
weep. Kuntī continued, “Perhaps, my brother, you forgot
me.”

Vasudeva replied, “O elder sister, please do not lament.
This was all caused by the time factor of Śrī Bhagavān.
At that time my wife and I were imprisoned in the jail
of Kaṁsa, and we were suffering so grievously. Kaṁsa was
always abusing and insulting us. His men bound me in
iron chains and they were kicking me with their boots.
How could I do anything? Moreover, our six sons were
killed right in front of us, snatched from my lap and
put to death. Luckily, Baladeva and Kṛṣṇa are saved. I
was in unbearable distress, and that is why I could not
help you. Nevertheless, despite everything, somehow I
always remembered you, and when I came out of jail I
sent my first message to you.

“Everything depends on the mercy of God. Sometimes we
meet and sometimes we are separated from each other.
Sometimes there is suffering and sorrow, and sometimes
we are very prosperous. Nothing depends on any soul.
Don’t worry anymore. Now it is over.” In this way
Vasudeva was consoling Kuntī.

In the meantime, Nanda Bābā and the Vrajavāsīs were
coming on many bullock carts. Mother Yaśodā, Nanda Bābā,
all the gopīs like Śrīmatī Rādhikā, Lalitā, and Viśākhā,
and all Kṛṣṇa’s cowherd friends like Dāmā, Śrīdāmā,
Sudāmā, Vasudāma, Stoka-kṛṣṇa, Madhumaṅgala, and all
others were on their way. Thousands of gopas and gopīs
were on their way to Kṛṣṇa.

While everyone else was meeting with Kṛṣṇa, someone came
and told Him and Baladeva, “Oh, Your father and mother
are coming in a bullock cart.” When Kṛṣṇa heard this, He
immediately left all the members of the assembly.
Although there were many thousands upon thousands of
devotees, like Kaśyapa, Kavi, Havi, Antarikṣa, Nārada,
Vasiṣṭha, Āgastya, and Vālmīki, Kṛṣṇa left them all and
began to run at once towards Yaśodā and Nanda – weeping
with tears in His eyes. In one second His heart had
melted, and now He called out, “Oh, Mother is coming?
Father is coming?” Upset, He cried out, “Mother, Mother,
where are you?”

The bullock cart had now stopped. Baladeva Prabhu was
following Kṛṣṇa, and they both exclaimed, “Oh, the
bullock cart is here.” Nanda Bābā and Yaśodā-maiyā came
down from the cart, and when they saw Kṛṣṇa they became
overwhelmed and began to weep, “O my son, my son! Kṛṣṇa,
Kṛṣṇa!”

Standing at a distance, all the gopas and gopīs,
including Rādhā, Lalitā, and Viśākhā, were also weeping.
Somehow they had been tolerating their separation from
Kṛṣṇa while traveling from Vraja, and in Vraja they were
also somewhat tolerating. Now, however, as they came
nearer and nearer, their tolerance began to disappear
and they began to cry like babies.

Kṛṣṇa at once sat on the lap of Yaśodā-maiyā, and

                            88
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

Baladeva Prabhu fell at the feet of Nanda Bābā. Seeing
Kṛṣṇa, whom she had lost for years and years, all
Yaśodā-maiyā’s separation mood, in the form of tears,
began to flow out. She wept loudly, “My dear son! My
dear son!” She covered Kṛṣṇa’s face as she had done when
He was a baby, and milk flowed automatically from her
breasts. She covered Him as though He was a helpless,
small baby and she wept bitterly – so bitterly.

In Vṛndāvana she had never wept as much as she did now.
There she was like a statue, and her heart was dried up
in separation. Kṛṣṇa had also been like dry wood, or
like a stone, but now He also wept aloud. Nanda Bābā
took Baladeva in his lap and he also began to weep, and
it was a very piteous scene. Kṛṣṇa cried out, “Mother!
Mother!” Baladeva Prabhu, sitting on the lap of Nanda
Bābā, was crying out, “Father! Father!” and Nanda Bābā
caressed him.

Having followed Kṛṣṇa, Vasudeva, Devakī, and Mother
Rohiṇī arrived there, and Rohiṇī thought, “Oh, how very
wonderful this situation is!” Kṛṣṇa had always been
somewhat shy in front of Devakī. If He was hungry, He
would tell Mother Rohiṇī – not Devakī – and now Devakī
saw Him weep uncontrollably.

Devakī thought, “Kṛṣṇa never sat on my lap. He has never
called me, ‘Mother, Mother.’ But now He is in the arms
of Yaśodā crying, ‘Mother, Mother, Mother.’ Yaśodā
thinks, ‘Kṛṣṇa is my own son,’ and Kṛṣṇa also thinks,
‘My mother is only Yaśodā – not Devakī.’ Yaśodā will
surely take Kṛṣṇa and return to Vraja. Kṛṣṇa will go
forever and He will never return to Dvārakā!”

She wanted to tell Yaśodā, “O Yaśodā, Kṛṣṇa is not your
son. He is my son, but now He is forgetting me and
accepting you as His real mother.” She also wanted to
tell Kṛṣṇa, “You are not the son of Yaśodā. You are my
son.” She could not say all this in the assembly of so
many persons, however, and therefore she spoke her mind
in a roundabout way.

Being very intelligent, she said, “O dear friend Yaśodā,
you are wonderful and merciful. When we were in the
prison of Kaṁsa, we could not support Kṛṣṇa. Then, in a
hidden way, we sent our son to Gokula – to you. Although
He is my son, you have kept and supported Him. You have
nourished Him better than anyone could nourish her own
son. Although you knew that Kṛṣṇa is my son, you
nourished Him as though He was yours. As the eyelids
protect the most important part of the eyes – the pupils
– you protected Kṛṣṇa. You never thought, ‘He is the son
of Devakī.’ You saw Him only as your son. I see,
therefore, that there is no one as merciful as you in
the entire world. You are very humble and broadminded,
and you have served Him up to now. Because of this, He
never remembers me. He always thinks that you are His
mother.”

Rohiṇī saw that Devakī was trying to do something wrong
– she was trying to come between Yaśodā and Kṛṣṇa.
Rohiṇī wanted her not to disturb them. To trick her,
therefore, she quickly said, “Oh, Mother Kuntī and so
many more persons are waiting for you. We should go

                            89
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

there.” She cleverly sent her away to welcome all the
guests, and she also sent Vasudeva Mahārāja.

After some time Yaśodā-maiyā became relieved, but she
could not say anything. She was not in a state to say
anything, and Kṛṣṇa was also in that condition. There
was now only an exchange of moods – from heart to heart.
Yaśodā then thought, “Outside, nearby, all the gopīs
like Lalitā, Viśākhā, and Śrīmatī Rādhikā are waiting.
They cannot meet Kṛṣṇa if I am here – and Nanda Bābā and
Baladeva are also here.”

Up until now the gopīs were checking their moods of
separation and their lives remained in their bodies.
Once they reached Kṛṣṇa, however, they could no longer
tolerate a moment’s separation. They were about to die.
Being very kind and generous, Mother Yaśodā thought,
“They will die if I do not give a chance to them at
once. I must take everyone away from here, by trick, and
then the gopīs will come. If I delay, they will all die.
They cannot tolerate the separation any longer.”

I remember an example from my boyhood, when I was
fifteen. My father was a farmer. I went with him to a
place far from my house, and there I picked a bundle of
very delicious, beautiful green chickpeas. At first I
thought the bundle was very light, when I reached the
midway point it became heavy, and as my village became
nearer I could not bear the weight. When I came into the
village I should have instantly fallen down, but somehow
I persevered. When I reached the door of my house,
however, I could not take the load inside. I dropped it
outside.

This was also the case with the gopīs. When they were in
Vraja they were somehow tolerating separation, and as
they traveled to Kṛṣṇa their separation-feeling
increased. Then, when they saw Kṛṣṇa but had no chance
to meet Him because Yaśodā, Nanda Bābā, and others were
with Him, they could not endure the separation at all.
Yaśodā realized this fact, and she at once took the hand
of Baladeva Prabhu. She put his fingers in her hand and,
looking towards Nanda Bābā, she told him, “Let us meet
with the others.” Being very intelligent, Baladeva
Prabhu also considered, “If I am here, the gopīs will
not come,” and he hurriedly left with his parents.

Yaśodā thus went to Devakī and embraced her, and some
dialogue ensued. Nanda Bābā met with Vasudeva and
others, and they also engaged in conversation.




CHAPTER SIX

KṚṢṆA MEETS THE GOPĪS AT KURUKṢETRA


That time has passed




                            90
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

As Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu dances at the Ratha-yātrā
Festival, He remembers a poem from a mundane Sanskrit
literature called Sāhitya-darpaṇa. He raises His arms
and recites that poem in a loud voice:



yaḥ kaumāra-haraḥ sa eva hi varas tā eva caitra-kṣapās

te conmīlita-mālatī-surabhayaḥ prauḍhāḥ kadambānilāḥ

sā caivāsmi tathāpi tatra surata-vyāpāra-līlā-vidhau

revā-rodhasi vetasī-taru-tale cetaḥ samutkaṇṭhate



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 13.121)



That very personality who stole away my heart during my
youth is now again my master. These are the same moonlit
nights of the month of Caitra. The same fragrance of
mālatī flowers is there, and the same sweet breezes are
blowing from the kadamba forest. In our intimate
relationship, I am also the same lover, yet still my
mind is not happy here. I am eager to go back to that
place on the bank of the Revā under the Vetasī tree.
That is my desire.

Mahāprabhu sings, “In our teenage years, when we were
twelve or fourteen, we used to meet on the bank of the
Revā river, where there were so many fragrant kadamba
trees and vetasī canes.” Cane cannot be uprooted, even
if there is a strong wind. It will bend according to the
direction in which the wind blows, and even a flood
cannot uproot it. It will simply bend this way and that.
Devotees should be like this vetasī cane in their
practice of bhakti.

Mahāprabhu continues, “Although there are thorns in the
groves of vetasī cane, we never cared for them when we
were meeting. We never cared about any problems. We
engaged in very sweet talks on the river bank, opening
our hearts to one another in love and affection, and
there was no one to create any walls or problems. But
some time has passed, and now we are married. You are my
husband and I am your wife, but I am not happy. I was
happy then, but I am not happy now. We are meeting here,
and there is no obstruction. We can live in our home
together without any shame, because we have permission.
We can meet now, because we have a ‘passport’ to meet.
No one will criticize us now, but we don’t have the love
and affection that we had at our first meeting. How
glorious, how beautiful, how sweet and pleasing was that
love! I want you to come to those very groves on the
banks of the Revā river, and I want our love and
affection to be renewed. I want it to be the same as it
was before.”

Mahāprabhu remembers this scene, and He is dancing and
weeping, and reciting this verse at the same time: “yaḥ
kaumāra-haraḥ – He who stole our youth and teenage

                            91
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

years, and played with us, has now become our husband.
Our kaumāra age has been stolen away by marriage.”

A girlfriend and boyfriend meet together without being
married. They meet very secretly here and there, and
enjoy themselves. Then, if after some time they get
married, there is no longer any restriction at all, and
they can meet freely. Mahāprabhu’s mood is like this,
though not exactly the same. In other words, in the mood
of the gopīs, and especially in Rādhārāṇī’s mood, He is
actually saying, “All Your relatives are here at
Kurukṣetra. I cannot meet You in the forest, where we
used to meet. There were many good kadamba trees with
beautiful flowers, all with an abundance of fragrance.
There was no one there to disturb us. There were only
the two of us sitting on the bank of the river, talking
throughout the day without ever stopping. We talked
continually while we were meeting each other and
pleasing each other. I remember this. I do not want a
royal palace or vast wealth. I want to be in that place
where we used to meet together and sit and talk.”

Giving this example, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is
thinking, “We were meeting there in Vṛndāvana, at Rādhā-
kuṇḍa, in Nandagaon, Saṅkeṭa, Ṭera-kadamba, Kadamba-
kyārī, and elsewhere.” The air was so fragrant in the
beautiful groves of kadamba, and Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa used to
meet each other and perform so many pleasant pastimes
there. Sometimes They played on swings and sometimes
They gambled. When Śrīmatī Rādhikā used to defeat Kṛṣṇa,
everyone on the gopīs’ side clapped, and Kṛṣṇa became
very happy even though He was defeated. Sometimes the
gopīs stole Kṛṣṇa’s flute, and He would look for it here
and there. He would say, “Oh, I will die if you keep My
flute. Why are you keeping it? I will have to search
everywhere to see where you have kept it.”

The gopīs remember these pastimes and they tell Kṛṣṇa at
Kurukṣetra, “If You come to Vṛndāvana, we will meet
freely there once again. We cannot meet You here,
because there are thousands and thousands of horses,
elephants, and soldiers. Grandfather Bhīṣma, Droṇācārya,
and many kings are here; Vasudeva and Devakī are here;
and especially, all Your queens are here.”

Kṛṣṇa asks the gopīs, “What shall I do?” They reply, “We
want You to come with us to Vṛndāvana. We are feeling
some happiness in our meeting here, but not full
happiness. We cannot talk with You here in front of the
others, and there is so much opulence here. We remember
Vṛndāvana, when we were kiśora and kiśorī. You were
kiśora at that time, entering Your teenage years, and
You were more beautiful than in Your childhood. There
was no restriction at all at that time. We met freely in
the shade of the kadamba trees, where the fragrance of
the belī, cāmelī, and jūhī flowers mixed together. We
talked with each other happily, and there was no need of
a mediator.”

This is the hidden meaning of the poem of the mundane
poet, which Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī transformed into his own
poem. Rūpa Gosvāmī heard this śloka from Mahāprabhu, and
he at once wrote another śloka that explained it: “I am
that same Rādhā, and You are that same Kṛṣṇa. We used to

                            92
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

be lover and beloved. There was no mediator then, and we
met freely. So many cuckoos were singing, and peacocks
were dancing there. Now we are meeting here, but there
is not as much pleasure as when we met freely in
Vṛndāvana. We want You to come with us to Vṛndāvana, to
play with all the gopas and gopīs. You should make Your
friends happy, and we will also become happy by dancing
and singing with You there – freely.”

Rādhikā is like that lover and Kṛṣṇa is like Her
beloved. They were meeting in Vṛndāvana outside of
marriage – dancing in rāsa-līlā, and meeting each other
and pleasing each other. Sometimes Kṛṣṇa massaged
Rādhikā’s feet and sometimes He applied red lac to Her
feet. Sometimes Rādhikā placed Her foot on Kṛṣṇa’s head,
and Her footprint became like a stamp on it because the
red lac was fresh and moist. That stamp stated: “Now You
are Mine.”

Now Kṛṣṇa becomes ready. A chariot is there, and that
chariot is the gopīs’ hearts. They have made their
hearts like a chariot, and now they tell Kṛṣṇa to sit
there. They say, “You should sit on this chariot of our
hearts and come to Vṛndāvana. We will never give You up.
You will always remain there.” All the gopīs become very
happy as they take Kṛṣṇa to Vṛndāvana on the chariots of
their hearts, and Caitanya Mahāprabhu is bringing this
same mood to Purī.



To bring Kṛṣṇa to His chariot



During the Ratha-yātrā Festival, bringing Kṛṣṇa (in the
form of Jagannātha) to His chariot is a very difficult
and dangerous task. Many strong, tall, and beautiful
dayitās wrap their chaddars around themselves as
wrestlers would, and then, imitating the mood of the
gopīs, they tie Jagannātha-deva with ropes. They “abuse”
Him in so many ways, addressing Him, “Sālā, Sālā!” Sālā
means “brother-in-law,” but in India the word is also
used to abuse others. The dayitās are telling Kṛṣṇa, “We
don’t know where You took birth, or who Your mother and
father are. Perhaps You are fatherless and motherless.”
This is like an abuse.

It is not certain who Kṛṣṇa’s father is – Vasudeva or
Nanda Mahārāja. Neither is it certain who is actually
His mother; in fact, no one is actually His mother. The
gopīs hurl so much abuse at Kṛṣṇa as they pull Him on
the chariot of their hearts, and during the festival
attended by Mahāprabhu, Jagannātha-deva is pulled by
hundreds and hundreds of big wrestlers who jostle Him
back and forth to make Him move forward. He is well
decorated with jewels and many garlands, and He wears
very large peacock feathers on His head.

Then, there is a very big problem when Jagannātha-deva
approaches His chariot to get up on it. Sometimes He
slips from above. Sometimes He does not reach His throne
on the chariot, even after two, three, four, or five
hours, and sometimes even for the whole day. There are

                            93
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

always many parties continually performing kīrtana and
chanting, “Jaya Jagannātha! Jaya Jagannātha! Jaya
Jagannātha, Subhadrā, and Baladeva!”, “Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare
Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare,” and “sei ta parāṇa-nātha
pāinu.”

In this way there were many kīrtanas, and millions of
people were pulling the chariots.



sei ta parāṇa-nātha pāinu



yāhā lāgi’ madana-dahane jhuri’ genu’




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 13.113)



Now I have gained the Lord of My life, in whose absence
I was being burned by Cupid and was withering away.



Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu becomes completely immersed in
this mood, and Jagannātha is totally absorbed in
Mahāprabhu’s dancing and singing. His chariot makes the
sound, “haḍa haḍa, haḍa haḍa.”



gaura yadi pāche cale, śyāma haya sthire



gaura āge cale, śyāma cale dhīre-dhīre




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 13.118)



When Caitanya Mahāprabhu was dramatically enacting the
song, He would sometimes fall behind in the procession.
At such times, Lord Jagannātha would come to a
standstill. When Caitanya Mahāprabhu went forward again,
Lord Jagannātha’s car would slowly start again.



These are very pleasing pastimes. Who made it so? Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu Himself. The Ratha-yātrā Festival
was not like this at first. Before Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s
time, there was only one ratha. It carried Jagannātha,
Subhadrā, and Baladeva and was pulled by their servants

                            94
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

and elephants, but there was no kīrtana and no special
moods. Mahāprabhu introduced these moods by His dancing
and singing when He joined along with His associates
such as Vakreśvara Paṇḍita and others in His kīrtana
party. Hundreds of thousands of devotees also began to
join from Bengal, Orissa, and other places, and all in
all there were not less than four million devotees.

Sometimes Caitanya Mahāprabhu wanted to test
Jagannātha.1 He thought, “Will Kṛṣṇa go forward or not,
if I do not come?” He therefore went behind Jagannātha’s
chariot, and then the chariot stopped. Thousands of
elephants pulled, and millions of people were chanting,
“Jaya Jagannātha-deva! Jaya Jagannātha-deva!” but
Jagannātha became “deaf” at that time, and did not hear
them. Instead, He stood in one place for hours and
hours, until Mahāprabhu came forward and began to sing.
Then Mahāprabhu said, “Everyone else can stop trying. I
will do it alone.” He put His head against the chariot
and pushed it, and it began moving in a good way. The
chariot stopped when Mahāprabhu was behind it, and moved
when He proceeded in front, dancing and singing. In this
way Jagannātha watched the dancing and singing of
Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and it took two or three days to
reach the Guṇḍicā Mandira.

Mahāprabhu sang:



sei ta parāṇa-nātha pāinu



yāhā lāgi’ madana-dahane jhuri’ genu’



We should feel some separation for Kṛṣṇa. We begin by
feeling separation from gurudeva and devotees, and
gradually develop that feeling for Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. This
is our objective, and it has been explained very
beautifully and sweetly in Śrī Caitanya-

caritāmṛta.

The gopīs are weeping and half-dead when they first
reach Kṛṣṇa. Then, when they meet Him, their whole mood
pours from their hearts and they begin to weep even more
bitterly. In their entire lives, they have never wept as
they do on this day. They have become almost senseless
and are about to die, but now they finally have the
chance to come and meet Kṛṣṇa.



gopyaś ca kṛṣṇam upalabhya cirād abhīṣṭaṁ

yat-prekṣaṇe dṛśiṣu pakṣma-kṛtaṁ śapanti

dṛgbhir hṛdīkṛtam alaṁ parirabhya sarvās

tad-bhāvam āpur api nitya-yujāṁ durāpam


                            95
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.82.39)



[Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:] While the young gopīs used to
gaze at their beloved Kṛṣṇa, they condemned the creator
of their eyelids (which would momentarily block their
vision of Him). Now, seeing Kṛṣṇa again after such a
long separation, by their eyes they took Him into their
hearts, and there they embraced Him to their full
satisfaction. In this way they became totally absorbed
in ecstatic meditation on Him, although those who
constantly practice mystic yoga find it difficult to
achieve such absorption.



Now, when Kṛṣṇa sees the gopīs, He also begins to weep
more loudly than before.

Śrī Vyāsadeva and Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī explain the way
in which they meet. A person becomes like this if he
dies and then by good fortune is restored back to life.
The gopīs are all as if dead, but they come to life
again when they see Kṛṣṇa. Here Śukadeva Gosvāmī says:
“kṛṣṇam upalabhya cirād abhīṣṭam – they are meeting
Kṛṣṇa after a long time.” Through their eyes they take
Him into their hearts, and there they embrace Him very
tightly. It is there that they become as one, and this
is especially true for Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

Lakṣmī, who resides on Nārāyaṇa’s chest as a curl of
golden-white hair, always remembers Kṛṣṇa in her heart,
and the ṛṣis and munis who have purified their hearts do
so as well. Still, Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet never actually
manifest in their hearts. They try and try, but no such
event ever occurs. On the other hand, these gopīs, who
are weeping and feeling profound separation, take Kṛṣṇa
into their hearts and embrace Him there.

They cannot speak. They want to speak, but they cannot;
so Kṛṣṇa Himself says, “O gopīs, My friends! You are the
life of My life. I know that you were feeling terrible
separation, thinking that I was very cruel-hearted. You
gave up everything for Me – your husbands, homes,
wealth, reputation, and everything else. You even gave
up your Vedic religious principles of chastity for My
sake, but I left you. Please forgive Me for this. You
must be thinking that I am a very ungrateful creature,
but I am not ungrateful to you. I always remember you.”

After some time, when their weeping subsides, Kṛṣṇa
tells them:



ahaṁ hi sarva-bhūtānām

ādir anto ’ntaraṁ bahiḥ

bhautikānāṁ yathā khaṁ vār


                             96
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

bhūr vāyur jyotir aṅganāḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.82.45)



Dear ladies, I am the beginning and end of all created
beings. I exist both within them and outside them, just
as the elements ether, water, earth, air, and fire are
the beginning and end of all material objects.

“My dear gopīs, I want to tell you a secret. Have you
heard that I am the Supreme Personality of Godhead?
Really I am. You should know that I am Viṣṇu. I am
everywhere, in everyone’s heart, and I am even in the
hearts of animals, grass, and particles of water and
air. I am in your hearts as well. I am everywhere, and
therefore you are never separate from Me.

“An earthen vessel cannot be separated from the earth
from which it is made. You are My parts, so you are like
My body. You are made of Me, and I am everywhere. I am
inside and outside, and up and down. I am in you, so why
do you feel separated? You should go into trance.
Meditate on Me, and then you will realize that I am
everywhere. You should think that your body, your mind –
your everything – is made of My love and affection.
Think about Me and remember Me, and do not be upset. I
am always with you.”

When the gopīs hear this, their feelings of separation
increase more and more, and their mood changes to one of
anger. They tell Kṛṣṇa, not by words, but by mood, “O
big cheater, You are black inside and outside. You
always want to cheat us. We know that You are not
Bhagavān; You are not the Supreme Personality of
Godhead. We know You from the beginning. We know that
You came from Mother Yaśodā’s womb. You were always
weeping for her milk, and always wandering here and
there, telling lies. You put earth in Your mouth, and
then You told Your mother, ‘I have not eaten earth!’ You
were always stealing butter and milk in the houses of
the elderly gopīs and telling them, ‘I have never stolen
anything.’ Bhagavān cannot be like this. Bhagavān cannot
steal the garments of young girls and make them naked.
Can He do that? Why would He do that? The Supreme
Personality of Godhead would do that?

“We know that You are very passionate. You used to call
us by the melody of Your flute: ‘Rādhā! Rādhā! Lalitā!
Viśākhā!’ You called all the gopīs by playing ‘klīṁ’ on
Your flute, and then we came and danced with You. Why
would the Supreme Personality of Godhead come and dance
with us? We also know that You kept Your sweet vaṁśī and
Your head at Rādhikā’s lotus feet, and You begged for
Her forgiveness. Would the Supreme Personality of
Godhead behave like this? Never. You are cheating. We
know that You are not Bhagavān.”



āhuś ca te nalina-nābha-padāravindaṁ

                            97
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017


yogeśvarair hṛdi vicintyam agādha-bodhaiḥ

saṁsāra-kūpa-patitottaraṇāvalambaṁ

gehaṁ juṣām api manasy udiyāt sadā naḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.82.48)



[The gopīs spoke thus:] Dear Lord, whose navel is just
like a lotus flower, Your lotus feet are the only
shelter for those who have fallen into the deep well of
material existence. Your feet are worshiped and
meditated upon by great mystic yogīs and highly learned
philosophers. We wish that these lotus feet may also be
awakened within our hearts, although we are only
ordinary persons engaged in household affairs.



The gopīs speak the words of this śloka externally, but
their real mood is hidden. Internally they are saying,
“You Yourself are drowning in the well of separation
from our love and affection. We know this, and only we
can save You. You cannot save us. We are powerful, and
we can give You life by our love and affection. When You
tell us, ‘You should meditate,’ it is like a joke; this
is a laughing matter for us. You tell us, ‘You should
meditate on Me’ but don’t You remember that we were
playing with You from the beginning of our lives?
Brahmā, Śaṅkara, Śukadeva Gosvāmī, and others can
meditate on Your lotus feet – and nothing but Your lotus
feet – in their hearts, but it may be that these feet
will still not come into their hearts. On the other
hand, we have kept those same feet directly on our
breasts. Why? To please You and to give You
satisfaction, because You become happy when we keep Your
feet there.

“Brahmā was born from the lotus-navel of Padmanābha
Viṣṇu, so he is like that lotus flower. His intelligence
is quite dull, because he has come from the stem of an
inert lotus. How can demigods like Brahmā know anything?
They can pray to You and believe that You are the
Supreme Lord. They can believe that You can create this
entire universe in a second and then destroy it. They
can glorify You like this, but we have known You from
the beginning of Your birth, and we know You at this
very moment. These demigods and yogīs may pray to You
for salvation, or they can pray to You that Your lotus
feet may appear in their hearts. They should do so,
because they are as foolish as anything.

“We are not like them, for we are very clever and
intelligent. We know who You really are: You are only a
black cheater. You can cheat anyone, and You can even
easily take our hearts. Brahmā says – and others say so,
too – that if anyone in this world is drowning in the
well of birth and death, and suffering greatly from old
age and all kinds of troubles and problems, he can chant

                            98
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

Your name and escape from that well. But we are not in
any well like that.

“We are not like Brahmā, that we will meditate on You.
We are hankering for Your satisfaction, not for our own.
We know that You will die without us, and that is why we
have mercifully come to You. Don’t think that we have
come to enjoy our own happiness; we want You to be
happy. We have come here because we want You to remain
alive. We are not weeping for ourselves. We are weeping
for You, because You are helpless. No one can satisfy
You except us, and especially our sakhī Rādhikā. She is
Your life and soul.

“If You want to be happy forever, then please come onto
the chariot of our hearts. We will take You where our
minds and hearts reside, and we will satisfy You there –
not here. We don’t want to meet You here, because we
cannot satisfy You here. Here You have thousands of
wives, so many children, so many generals, a great army,
and so many friends, ṛṣis, and maharṣis. But we remember
Vṛndāvana.”



The gopīs remember Vṛndāvana



Kṛṣṇa tells the gopīs, “You should remember Me and see
Me in trance. I am always there with you. I cannot give
you up.” Now He personally tells them what He explained
in Bhagavad-gītā, what He had requested Uddhava to tell
them, and what He had asked Baladeva Prabhu to tell
them: “You should always remember Me as Paramātmā, as
the yogīs do.”

Somewhat angry, the gopīs continue their reply with this
śloka:



anyera hṛdaya mana, mora mana vṛndāvana,

‘mane’ ‘vane’ eka kari’ jāni

tāhāṅ tomāra pada-dvaya, karāha yadi udaya,

tabe tomāra pūrṇa kṛpā māni



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 13.137)



[Speaking in the mood of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, Caitanya
Mahāprabhu said:] For most people, the mind and heart
are one, but I consider My mind and Vṛndāvana to be one,
because My mind is never separated from Vṛndāvana. My
mind is already Vṛndāvana, and since You like Vṛndāvana,
will You please place Your lotus feet there? I would
deem that Your full mercy.


                              99
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017



Mahāprabhu is remembering Kurukṣetra and thinking, “I am
Rādhikā, and all my friends, the gopīs, are in
Kurukṣetra with Nanda Bābā and Yaśodā.” From there, the
gopīs carry Kṛṣṇa on their mano-ratha, the chariot of
their hearts. They always carry Him in that way.

In Rādhikā’s mood, Mahāprabhu tells Jagannātha-deva,
“Our hearts and minds are the same, and especially, our
hearts are Vṛndāvana. Others’ hearts are not.” We try to
make our hearts and minds one, and we try to make them
both like Vṛndāvana. We want to be in Vṛndāvana, but our
hearts are not there because our minds and hearts are
made of material things. The gopīs are quite different,
and they tell Kṛṣṇa, “Our hearts are Vṛndāvana. You have
said, ‘You should remember Me in trance,’ but we are not
yogīs. We are ordinary people, and we were with You from
the beginning of our lives; from birth.”

Yogīs can meditate in trance, and sometimes they can see
the lotus feet of Paramātmā, but not of Kṛṣṇa. Paramātmā
is not aṁśī, the origin. The origin of Paramātmā is
Garbhodakaśāyī Viṣṇu, and His origin is Kāraṇodakaśāyī
Viṣṇu. His origin is Mahā-Saṅkarṣaṇa, His origin is
Mūla-Saṅkarṣaṇa, His origin is Baladeva Prabhu, and His
origin is Kṛṣṇa.

The gopīs continue, “We always kept Your feet on our
breasts and upon our laps. We played with those feet.
And what to speak of Your feet – You used to massage our
feet with Your hands. We played with You as friends from
the beginning, from our childhood. You could not be
separated from us at that time. You were always with us,
playing here and there in the groves of Govardhana, and
we used to dance with You at Vaṁśīvaṭa. We are not like
yogīs. In their trance, they may think, ‘I pray that the
lotus feet of Paramātmā should appear in my heart,’ but
those feet never come; they may come, but very seldom;
very rarely. As far as we are concerned, we want to
forget You – to forget You. The root of all our problems
is remembering You and Your pastimes – especially
remembering You – so we want to forget You. If You can
forget us, why can we not forget You? But this is the
problem: we cannot forget You. We want to give You up,
but we cannot. We can give You up in the sense that You
can leave Vṛndāvana, as You have done – no harm. But we
cannot give up remembering Your pastimes.”

Previously, when Kṛṣṇa resided in Vṛndāvana, the gopīs
used to say, “Don’t have any relation with that black
person, that cheater. Stay far away from Him and don’t
utter His name. He is the biggest cheater. If anyone
remembers Him, or hears His pastimes, or chants His
name, that person will become bewildered, like a mad
person. If you want to live with your husbands, sisters,
brothers, fathers, and other family members, and if you
want to remain very happy with them, then don’t remember
this boy, or have any relationship with Him. We have
seen that those who remember Him become like birds.
Birds have no homes to live in, and no fields where they
can grow flowers or wheat or anything else. They have
nothing. Similarly, if anyone hears, chants, and
remembers Kṛṣṇa’s glories, they become like street

                            100
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

beggars.”

Now, at Kurukṣetra, they tell Kṛṣṇa, “We can give You
up, as You have given us up. In other words, You are
living in a place very distant from us, and we can also
live far away from You. But we cannot give up
remembering You. You instruct us to remember You, but we
wonder why You are giving us such instructions. We have
always remembered You since our childhood, and yet You
say, ‘You should remember Me.’ We want to forget You
forever, and not remember anything about You. We laugh
at Your words. You are telling very learned Ph.D.
scholars, ‘Oh, you should go to primary school and learn
A-B-C-D.’”

The gopīs begin to weep loudly, and at that time Kṛṣṇa
tells them:



mayi bhaktir hi bhūtānām

amṛtatvāya kalpate

diṣṭyā yad āsīn mat-sneho

bhavatīnāṁ mad-āpanaḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.82.44)



Devotional service that the living beings render to Me
revives their eternal life. O My dear damsels of Vraja,
your affection for Me is your good fortune, for it is
the only means by which you have obtained My favor.



Kṛṣṇa is “tricky”



As you know, only Vedic Hindus can enter Lord
Jagannātha’s temple in Purī; no Western or Eastern
devotees are allowed in. The temple administrators are
very strict. Those who are not actually Hindu by birth
cannot enter, even if they were born in India. Indira
Gandhi, the former Prime Minister of India, was born of
a brāhmaṇa family, but she left her brahminical religion
and married a Muslim. She was a powerful and wealthy
person, but still the pāṇḍās of Purī never allowed her
or her son Rajiv Gandhi to enter the temple. They told
them, “You can come to Purī, but you cannot enter the
temple.” There are so many police guards everywhere, at
all the four doors of the temple. Not even a bird from a
Western or Eastern country can enter; even Western air
cannot get in there.

The guards once checked me at the gate. They said, “Your
eyes are not like the Hindus’ eyes, and you have a
rather fair complexion.” I am not really so fair, but

                            101
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

still they checked me. My paṇḍā was there and he told
them, “O bogus people, he is my client.” And he took me
inside.

The guards are very strict, but Kṛṣṇa is very funny and
“tricky.” They may make these rules, but Kṛṣṇa does not.
Kṛṣṇa – that is, Jagannātha, Baladeva, Subhadrā, and
Sudarśana cakra – come out on the road, and they do not
move quickly at all. They are not in a hurry. Sometimes
they stand at the same place for a day, two days, or
even three days, abundantly giving Their darśana to all.
Jagannātha comes with Subhadrā and Baladeva, by a
“trick,” as Patita-pāvana, the deliverer of the most
fallen. He is Patita-pāvana and He belongs to everyone.
He does not make any distinction between an Indian
devotee, a brāhmaṇa, a kṣatriya, or a Western devotee,
and that is why He plays a trick. He thinks, “I will
remain in the temple for the entire year, but for these
nine or ten days I will be Patita-pāvana. I will go on
the street, and then everyone can receive My darśana and
be liberated.”

Kṛṣṇa is very merciful, and His devotees are more
merciful still. You could not have called parama-
pūjyapāda Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja to preach
in the West, and you have not called me. Our guru-varga
(disciplic succession) has sent me, and Śrīla Swāmī
Mahārāja came because his gurudeva mercifully ordered
him to preach throughout Western countries. Śrīla Swāmī
Mahārāja also came through his own compassion and mercy.
He came on a ship belonging to Scindia Navigation, and,
in his human-like pastimes, he almost died of a heart
attack on the way. He thought, “Will I die? What will
happen?” But Kṛṣṇa’s mercy was with him. Kṛṣṇa wanted
him to come, so he came; and he preached with immediate
effect.

Kṛṣṇa also played a trick with Arjuna during the
Mahābhārata battle. He told him:



sarva-dharmān parityajya

mām ekaṁ śaraṇaṁ vraja

ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo

mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ



Bhagavad-gītā (18.66)

Abandon all varieties of material religion and just
surrender to Me. I shall deliver you from all sinful
reactions. Do not fear.



This is the best instruction to Arjuna in Bhagavad-gītā,
but Mahāprabhu still rejected it. When He met Rāmānanda
Rāya at Godāvarī, He told him, “These are external
things. Say something more.” Why did He reject this

                            102
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

statement? Arjuna felt great pain when Kṛṣṇa gave him
this instruction. He thought, “How ‘funny’ Kṛṣṇa is. He
is telling me to be śaraṇāgata, surrendered. But He has
been my bosom friend for so many years. He has even
slept with me on the same bed.”

Sometimes Arjuna used to place his feet on Kṛṣṇa’s chest
when they both lay down together, and Rukmiṇī and
Satyabhāmā fanned them with cāmaras. At the same time,
Kṛṣṇa’s feet lay upon Arjuna’s chest, and Draupadī and
Subhadrā fanned at the other end of the bed. Kṛṣṇa was
very happy to lie on the same bed as Arjuna, and also to
take prasāda remnants with him.

Arjuna therefore thought, “Friends are far superior to
śaraṇāgatas, and yet He is telling me to surrender.
Haven’t I surrendered? Why is this tricky person telling
me this?” Arjuna was not satisfied, just as the gopīs
were not satisfied, so Kṛṣṇa told him, “Don’t worry. I
am not giving this instruction for you. I am giving it
to others through you.”

Now, at Kurukṣetra, the gopīs also complain to Kṛṣṇa.



The gopīs are more “tricky” than Kṛṣṇa



Mādhurya (sweetness) and aiśvarya (opulence) can never
exist together. There is immense opulence in Dvārakā.
There Kṛṣṇa cannot say, “I am the son of Nanda Bābā and
Yaśodā;” He is bound to say, “I am a kṣatriya, and I am
the son of Vasudeva and Devakī.” He cannot wear a
peacock feather and He cannot play His flute. In Dvārakā
He is surrounded by many thousands of rāja-maharṣis,
queens, horses, and so on, so the gopīs request Him, “We
want You to come to Vṛndāvana.”

The gopīs seem to be very selfish. Why did they request
Kṛṣṇa, “You should give up all the thousands of devotees
in Mathurā and Dvārakā, and come to Vṛndāvana”? I am
giving a very simple answer. All the Vrajavāsīs, and
especially the gopīs, know Kṛṣṇa’s heart. In Vraja,
Kṛṣṇa is not like the Supreme Personality of Godhead.
The Vrajavāsīs cannot think of Him in that way, even in
dreams. They can only think that He is the son of Nanda
Bābā and Yaśodā, the beloved of all the gopīs, and the
friend of Śrīdāmā and Subala Sakhā.

All the Vrajavāsīs want Kṛṣṇa to be happy in every way,
and they also know that He is always very shy. Therefore
Nanda Bābā, Yaśodā, and all the gopīs and friends have
to be very tricky with Him. They know that He will be
shy to eat butter when Yaśodā offers it to Him, so she
plays many tricks to induce Him to eat. Once she told
Him, “Oh Kṛṣṇa, You are so weak, but still You don’t
want to take any bread and butter and other prasāda. How
will Your śikhā become thick like Baladeva’s? You see?
Baladeva is very strong, and his śikhā is very thick and
long. But You are so weak. We cannot compare You with
Him.” Kṛṣṇa replied, “Mother, I want to defeat Baladeva.
Please give Me bread and butter.” This is how Yaśodā and

                            103
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

others trick Kṛṣṇa to make Him eat.

Yaśodā had previously thought, “Kṛṣṇa is going to become
weak, because He doesn’t want to eat anything.” She
therefore called Śrīmatī Rādhikā from Yāvaṭa by a trick,
by regularly sending Rādhikā’s in-laws in Yāvaṭa vast
wealth in the form of many jewels, ornaments, and
garments. Why did Yaśodā call Śrīmatī Rādhikā? She
considered, “Kṛṣṇa doesn’t eat very much, because He
becomes shy and cannot admit His hunger. But He will
become very strong if He eats what Rādhikā cooks.2 If I
send these gifts to Her in-laws, they will surely send
Her to cook.” As a result of Yaśodā’s trick, Śrīmatī
Rādhikā comes and prepares manohara-laḍḍu, amṛta-keli,
and so many other dishes.

There is no one in Mathurā or Dvārakā who can give Kṛṣṇa
delicious food like Yaśodā-maiyā, and Kṛṣṇa can never
address other elderly relatives, “Mother! Mother!”
Yaśodā-maiyā cooked a great variety of preparations
through Rohiṇī, Rādhikā, Lalitā, and Viśākhā. She would
call them all to her kitchen, and they would quickly
prepare many delicious dishes. Then, if Kṛṣṇa was not
eating, Mother Yaśodā would come over and tell Him, “Oh,
I have made a vow to Nārāyaṇa that You will eat this. If
You don’t eat, Nārāyaṇa will be disappointed with You,
and that will be very inauspicious for You.” She would
request Him again, and then He would take His meal.
Neither Devakī nor anyone else in Dvārakā knew all these
tricks. Kṛṣṇa may have felt hungry there, but He was too
shy to ask for anything to eat.

All the gopīs know how Yaśodā-maiyā used to trick Kṛṣṇa
into taking those preparations, so they think, “He will
always be neglected in Dvārakā. He cannot say, ‘Mother,
give me bread and butter.’” The gopīs remember Kṛṣṇa’s
shy nature. Sometimes He would want something from them,
and He would play on His flute to call them all. But
then, when they came to Him, He would tell them, “You
should return home now.” In His heart He thought, “I
want to dance with the gopīs,” and the gopīs thought,
“We want to satisfy Kṛṣṇa.” But because Kṛṣṇa was
tricky, He would tell them, “You should all return
home.” The gopīs are also tricky, however, and they knew
how to satisfy Him. They would tell Him, “Oh, You are
our guru, and we are all Your disciples. Disciples
should worship their guru, and after that they can
worship their husbands or even Nārāyaṇa. If someone is
not worshiping his guru, he cannot satisfy the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, Nārāyaṇa. Therefore, You will be
an offender of the Vedas if You do not accept this
worship.”



ye yathā māṁ prapadyante

tāṁs tathaiva bhajāmy aham

mama vartmānuvartante

manuṣyāḥ pārtha sarvaśaḥ



                             104
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017


Bhagavad-gītā (4.11)



I reward everyone according to their surrender unto Me.
Everyone follows My path in all respects, O son of
Pṛthā.



The gopīs would thus defeat Kṛṣṇa by clever words so
that He could engage in the rāsa dance with them. Kṛṣṇa
desired to touch their bodies, but they would tell Him,
“Oh, You cannot touch us. You should remain far away.”
They were always able to satisfy Kṛṣṇa by continually
increasing His greed.

Kṛṣṇa can only be satisfied by these tricks, which are
not known in Dvārakā or Mathurā, or in any other place
in the world. Thus, the gopīs are selfless. There is no
blemish in their hearts, and they have no desire other
than to please Kṛṣṇa. They serve Kṛṣṇa totally with all
their senses, with their minds, and with their souls,
and He is always indebted to them.

Now Kṛṣṇa assures them, “Those who are engaged in the
process of attaining My love and affection – beginning
with śraddhā, niṣṭhā, ruci, and so on – are all
fortunate. But even more fortunate are those who already
have prema, sneha, praṇaya, and beyond that. You have
these qualities, and they attract Me to come to
Vṛndāvana very soon. Don’t worry. I must come to you,
because you have that sneha, māna, praṇaya, rāga,
anurāga, bhāva, and mahābhāva. Your qualities charm and
attract Me, and they will also compel Me to return with
you to Vṛndāvana.”

The gopīs tell Kṛṣṇa, “You should come on our chariot.”
Their chariot is their minds and hearts, which are the
same as Vṛndāvana. “You should come to Vṛndāvana, and
then we will think that You are entering our trance.
This is ‘trance’ – that You should come to Vṛndāvana.”

Śrīmatī Rādhikā is reminding Kṛṣṇa – that is, Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu is reminding Kṛṣṇa as Jagannātha:
“We are those unmarried teenage girls. We used to meet
in Vṛndāvana with love and affection under the kadamba
trees.”



The meaning of prema



Try to understand the meaning of prema. In English,
there is no exact word for prema; there are only words
such as “love” and “affection.” In Sanskrit, however,
each word has a special meaning. All the stages of
prema, such as āsakti, bhāva, prema, sneha, māna,
praṇaya, rāga, anurāga, and so on, have specific
meanings.


                            105
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

What kind of love does Rādhikā have for Kṛṣṇa? Her love
increases more and more, even if there are circumstances
that should make it diminish. This is the meaning of
prema.

Kṛṣṇa left Rādhikā, the gopīs, and the other Vrajavāsīs
and went to Mathurā, where He took upanayana-saṁskāra
(brahminical initiation), became a kṣatriya, and
declared, “I am the son of Devakī and Vasudeva. I am a
Yādava.” After that He went to Dvārakā, where He married
eight very beautiful princesses, and then 16,100 more,
and then He begot so many children. This should be
enough to break anyone’s love and affection, but here
you can see the nature of the love and affection that
Rādhikā has toward Kṛṣṇa. You can see the nature of the
love of Mother Yaśodā and Nanda Bābā, the love of
Kṛṣṇa’s friends, and the love of all the Vrajavāsīs,
including the cows and other animals. They did not give
up their love and affection, although they were actually
dying of separation.

Here in this world, if a husband divorces his wife and
marries again, the ex-wife will go to court and file a
suit, and he will be bound to sign an agreement to pay
her maintenance. She will forcibly take that money, and
she may also marry another man. She cannot tolerate the
thought that he has given her up, but she will herself
remarry two, three, four, or five times. Thus, here in
this world, love and affection stops when there is an
obstacle. But there, Rādhikā’s love for Kṛṣṇa and His
love for Her did not stop, even though He had so many
wives and children, and even though He changed His name.
If you want to realize that transcendental love, then
try to be like the Vrajavāsīs. Love in this world is not
actually love, it is merely sense gratification and
lust. We simply kick away and divorce our spouse upon
the slightest provocation.

Rādhikā knows that Kṛṣṇa has many wives and many
children. Now He is like a king, and He has changed into
a Yādava – but still Her love increases. This is called
transcendental prema. Read these topics, and then go
deeply into what you have read. Try to forget yourself,
where you are, and what you are doing. Forget everything
else, go deep, become totally absorbed in meditation
upon these topics, and then you will be able to realize
something of this love. It is because you cannot do this
that you become weak in your spiritual life. So try to
hear all these topics in elevated association.

The gopīs have forgotten everything other than Kṛṣṇa.
They are feeling great separation for Him, and
consequently they have become more than yogīs. Through
the window of their eyes, they take Him in their hearts,
and there they embrace Him so intensely that they lose
external consciousness.

I have already described how Kṛṣṇa tried to pacify
Rādhārāṇī and the gopīs by saying, “O gopīs, why are you
feeling so much separation? I am not away from you for
even a moment. There is no separation between clay and a
clay statue or mūrti, because the clay is everywhere in
the mūrti. In just the same way, this physical body is
made of five elements – earth, water, fire, air, and

                            106
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

ether – so one’s body cannot be separated from them. As
one cannot differentiate between the body and these
elements, similarly, You are made of My mood.”

Kṛṣṇa is sac-cid-ānanda-vigraha, the complete form of
eternity, knowledge, and bliss, and Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s
constitutional position is mahābhāva. Because She is the
embodiment of mahābhāva, She is called hlādinī-śakti.
She and Kṛṣṇa are always combined as the essence of
hlādinī and saṁvit. Saṁvit and hlādinī are the same as
cit and ānanda, and that is why Kṛṣṇa told Her, “I am
always with You. I am sac-cid-ānanda, so how can I be
separated from You? I am always in Your body and Your
heart.”

I have already explained that the gopīs became very
sulky and angry when they heard Kṛṣṇa’s words, and they
began to chastise Him, not by words but by mood: “Why
are You telling us these things? We don’t accept this
theory of Yours. We are not yogīs. Yogīs worship You and
meditate upon You, but they cannot purify their hearts,
or even their minds, in thousands and thousands of
births. We, on the other hand, want to forget You
forever. We were so happy in the homes of our fathers
and mothers in Vraja, but You have upset and destroyed
everything. We gave You our whole love, one hundred
percent, or one hundred and ten percent. We left our
fathers, mothers, husbands, children, and everything
else. Our relation was very deep when You were in Vraja,
and it is the same even today. So we want to forget You
forever.

“If You can forget us and all of Your Vṛndāvana –
Gokula, Govardhana, and all Your cows, Your calves, Your
peacocks, Your deer, and even Your own mother from whom
You took birth – then why can we not forget You? This is
the problem: we cannot forget You. From the beginning,
whenever we were engaged in any household task, we sang,
‘Govinda Dāmodara Mādhaveti, Govinda Dāmodara
Mādhaveti.’ Even when we were cleaning our houses,
sweeping, or churning yogurt, tears came from our
melting hearts as we remembered Your pastimes and sang,
‘Govinda Dāmodara Mādhaveti,’ ‘Rādhā-ramaṇa hari bol,’
and ‘Govinda jaya jaya.’”

In Vraja, the gopīs had always been weeping and
lamenting, “O Kṛṣṇa, where are You? Where are You?”
Words cannot explain how they were behaving internally
and externally. Now at Kurukṣetra, they say, “We want to
drive You away from our hearts, but You come inside
automatically. You tell us, ‘Give up saṁsāra-kūpa, the
deep, dark well of family life,’ and, ‘Meditate upon Me
as the yogīs do.’ But where is our family life? We have
no saṁsāra-kūpa.”

The gopīs had forgotten their homes, duties, husbands,
fathers, and mothers, and they had even forgotten to eat
anything or to see anything. They appeared to look at
things just as we do, but they did not see anything.
They only contemplated, “Where is my beloved Kṛṣṇa?”
Only this. It is we who are in the well of family
attachments. Still, although the gopīs were not attached
to their families as we are, Kṛṣṇa advised them, “Come
out of that well and meditate upon Me.”

                            107
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017


The gopīs now reply:



āhuś ca te nalina-nābha padāravindaṁ

yogeśvarair hṛdi vicintyam agādha-bodhaiḥ

saṁsāra-kūpa-patitottaraṇāvalambaṁ

gehaṁ juṣām api manasy udiyāt sadā naḥ



This śloka has two meanings. The meaning for general
persons and for those who are not very advanced devotees
is that the gopīs are requesting Kṛṣṇa, “You are the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. O Kamala-nayana, You
whose eyes are like reddish lotus petals, You are very,
very merciful. We have now fallen into the well of
family life, and we want to remember Your lotus feet as
the yogīs do. We want to meditate, so please be merciful
to us.”

This meaning is external. Sometimes, when juniors try to
instruct superiors, the superiors may reply, “I am very
foolish, and you are so intelligent. I want to obey your
instructions. Please instruct me how to act properly.”
In reality, the senior is angry at heart, and he is
actually speaking sarcastically. His real meaning is,
“I’m so many years older than you, and I am so much more
intelligent than you. You’re instructing me, even though
you’re so junior to me?” Similarly, the gopīs are in an
angry mood, and their deeper meaning is, “O Kṛṣṇa, don’t
try to cheat us. We have known You from the beginning,
and we know that You are a great cheater. You have been
deceiving us for a long time, but now we have become
somewhat clever. You can cheat Lakṣmī-devī, You can
cheat Your wives in Dvārakā, and You can cheat everyone
else; but as for us, we will not enter Your trap.”



The heart cannot consider



anyera hṛdaya mana, mora mana vṛndāvana,

‘mane’ ‘vane’ eka kari’ jāni

tāhāṅ tomāra pada-dvaya, karāha yadi udaya,

tabe tomāra pūrṇa kṛpā māni



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 13.137)



[Caitanya Mahāprabhu, in the mood of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī,
said:] Most people’s minds are one with their heart, but

                            108
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

I consider My mind to be one with Vṛndāvana, because My
mind is never separated from Vṛndāvana. My mind is
already Vṛndāvana, and since You like Vṛndāvana, will
You please place Your lotus feet there? I would deem
that Your full mercy.



The gopīs tell Kṛṣṇa, “We know, and You should also
know, that there is so much difference between the heart
and the mind of a worldly person. The heart is always
full of love, whereas the mind calculates, ‘What is
better for me? What is good? What is bad? This is
better; this is not so good.’ The mind can do all this,
but the heart can never consider whether a person is
beautiful or not, or whether or not he is very
intelligent or qualified.”

Rukmiṇī had heard abundant glorification of Kṛṣṇa’s
mercy, beauty, and all His other qualities. Because of
this, she did not accept the proposal of her friends,
parents, and others to give her in marriage to Śiśupāla.
They told her, “Kṛṣṇa is not a king; He is only the son
of a landlord – and not even that. He is not as

qualified as Śiśupāla. Śiśupāla is the King of kings. He
is a very beautiful young emperor and he has a golden
complexion, whereas this other person is black and
unqualified. When Kṛṣṇa was younger, He always used to
tell lies and steal from others’ houses. You should give
up that black fellow and marry Śiśupāla. Try to obey
your father, mother, and brother.” Rukmiṇī replied,
“Once I have given my heart to someone, I can never,
ever reclaim it.” Without the consent of her father,
mother, and brother, she then sent a brāhmaṇa to Kṛṣṇa
with a message: “I don’t want to marry this jackal. I
have given my heart to a lion. How can a jackal come and
take me away in the presence of the lion? Everything
depends on the lion. I have given myself solely to You,
for You are that lion, and I will not go with that
jackal. If that lion is not qualified and powerful
enough to save me from the jackal, then I will take
poison and die.”

Before Umā was married to Śaṅkara, Nārada came and
revealed Śaṅkara’s glories to her. After that, Śaṅkara
told someone, “Go and test that girl,” so his messenger
went to Umā and told her, “Śiva is an unintelligent,
bogus man. He is always naked, he wears garlands of
skulls and ornaments of snakes, he smears dust from the
ashes of corpses all over his body, he wears rudrākṣa
beads, he always carries a trident, and he sits on a
bull like a mad person. Why have you chosen him to be
your husband?”

Her father also told her, “O my dear darling daughter,
change your mood. I will marry you to an exalted
personality like Viṣṇu, or someone else who is very
beautiful. Why have you chosen Śaṅkara?”

Umā told her father, “It may be that Śaṅkara wanders
naked, plays with ghosts and witches, ornaments himself
with serpents, and sometimes swallows poison. But even
if this is true, I will marry him and no one else. I

                            109
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                        5/5/2017

have chosen him for all time, even though he   does
nothing. I don’t want to give him up. I will   marry him.”
So many other suitors came, and even Śaṅkara   came in
disguise to test her, but she did not change   her mind.

For worldly persons, for all of you, the mind and heart
are different, but these examples confirm that the
hearts of elevated personalities never consider whether
someone is beautiful or not, or what he has done or not
done. The decision to love is “forever.” Anyera hṛdaya
mana. For most people the mind always gives problems.
Sometimes it accepts something, and at other times it
rejects the same thing; this is called saṅkalpa-vikalpa.
But “mora mana vṛndāvana – My mind is Vṛndāvana.” The
mind and heart of the gopīs are one.

The gopīs continue, “You have told us, ‘Meditate upon
Me,’ but from where does meditation come? It comes from
the mind. Understanding comes from the mind. But mora
mana vṛndāvana. Let others meditate. You are instructing
us, ‘You should meditate, and My lotus feet will come in
Your meditation.’ Therefore, we will be satisfied if
Your lotus feet walk to Vṛndāvana; otherwise, we can
never be satisfied.”

Try to make your heart and mind Vṛndāvana, under the
guidance of the gopīs. It does not matter whether you
are male or female. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu has said
that all jīvas – both male and female – are a
transformation of taṭastha-śakti, Kṛṣṇa’s marginal
potency. We are prakṛti (the potency – feminine gender),
not puruṣa (the possessor of the potency – male gender).
Try to realize this. If you think very deeply, these
meanings will come in your heart, and your heart will be
greatly developed. There is no need to do anything else.

If Nārada Ṛṣi comes before the gopīs, however, they will
offer him praṇāma, and it may be that they will take the
dust of his lotus feet. Nārada Ṛṣi will then think, “I
should not upset these gopīs. Kṛṣṇa is my worshipable
Lord, and these gopīs are His worshipable deities, so I
should not disturb their mood.” Then, after the gopīs
leave, he will take their foot-dust and rub it all over
his body.

Even Nārada is not qualified to be the foot-dust of the
gopīs. He prays for this perfection, but he cannot
achieve it. Such perfection is very rarely achieved for
anyone, even Brahmā. Śrī Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī has
written, “I always remember the dust of Rādhikā’s lotus
feet. Even Brahmā, Nārada, Śuka, Śaṅkara, Bhīṣma, and
other devotees like them meditate on Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet
so that His lotus feet may enter their hearts. On the
other hand, when Kṛṣṇa calls to the maidservants of the
gopīs, ‘Come on! Come on!’ they reply, ‘We will not
come. We know that You are a cheater.’ Instead of their
following Kṛṣṇa, He follows them.”



yat-kiṅkarīṣu bahuśaḥ khalu kāku-vāṇī

nityaṁ parasya puruṣasya śikhaṇḍa-mauleḥ


                            110
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

tasyāḥ kadā rasa-nidher vṛṣabhānu-jāyās

tat-keli-kuñja-bhavanāṅgana-mārjanī syām



Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi (8)



O daughter of Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja, O ocean of rasa! The
Supreme Bhagavān, the source of all incarnations who
wears a peacock feather in His hair, falls at the feet
of Your maidservants and propitiates them with many
humble and griefstricken words to be allowed entrance
into Your kuñja where You engage in playful, amorous
pastimes. I would consider my life a success if I could
become one stick in the broom used by Your maidservants
to clean Your delightful grove.



Kṛṣṇa knocks at the door of the gopīs’kuñja, and Śrī
Rūpa Mañjarī and Śrī Rati Mañjarī stand there in a
somewhat angry mood. They tell Kṛṣṇa, “Go back at once,
You cheater. Go back! You cannot come and meet Śrīmatī
Rādhikā. She is angry with You now, and She has told us,
‘Be aware that this cheater may come in a disguise.
Although disguised as a gopī or someone else, He will be
that same Kṛṣṇa, the friend of Subala. I don’t want to
see anything black. Not even a black bumblebee should
enter My kuñja. You should even remove your black
kajjala before you come here.’”

Kṛṣṇa then offers His head at the lotus feet of Rūpa
Mañjarī and her sakhīs, and begs them, “Please allow me
to go there, just for a moment.” They reply, “Never!”
How can we imagine the greatness of Rādhikā’s position?
Śrī Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī concludes, “I want to be a
broom – and not even a whole broom, just one straw of a
broom – that is used for sweeping Rādhikā’s kuñja.” How
glorious She is!



More mysterious meaning



After citing the Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam verse beginning ahuś
ca te nalina-nābha pādāravindaṁ, Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa
Kavirāja Gosvāmī quotes the gopīs (Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 1.82)):



tomāra caraṇa mora vraja-pura-ghare



udaya karaye yadi, tabe vāñchā pūre




                             111
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                         5/5/2017



[The gopīs thought:] If Your lotus feet again come to
our home in Vṛndāvana, our desires will be fulfilled.



The gopīs tell Kṛṣṇa, “O Prāṇanātha! Vraja is our life
and soul. We are telling You the truth: Vraja is our
home. If You do not come and meet us in Vṛndāvana, we
will not be able to remain alive. We will die at once.
Fish become restless the moment they are taken out of
water, and the next moment they are dead. We are in an
even worse condition than that. Fish may have a moment
to live, but we will not be able to live even that
long.”

Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī then quotes Rūpa
Gosvāmī’s deep explanation of that same Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam verse:



yā te līlā-rasa-parimalodgāri-vanyāparītā

dhanyā kṣauṇī vilasati vṛtā māthurī mādhurībhiḥ

tatrāsmābhiś caṭula-paśupī-bhāva-mugdhāntarābhiḥ

saṁvītas tvaṁ kalaya vadanollāsi-veṇur vihāram



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 1.84)



[The gopīs said:] Dear Kṛṣṇa, the fragrance of the
mellows of Your pastimes is spread throughout the
forests of the glorious land of Vṛndāvana, which is
surrounded by the sweetness of the district of Mathurā.
In the congenial atmosphere of that wonderful land, You
may enjoy Your pastimes, with Your flute dancing on Your
lips, and surrounded by us, the gopīs, whose hearts are
always enchanted by unpredictable ecstatic emotions.



The gopīs are sad and feel separation when they see
Kṛṣṇa in the royal dress of a prince of Dvārakā.
Similarly, in their mood, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu felt
separation when He sometimes saw Baladeva and Subhadrā
along with Jagannātha. Usually He saw only Jagannātha –
as Vrajendra-nandana – but when He saw the three deities
there, He immediately remembered the gopīs’ pastimes at
Kurukṣetra.



ei-mata mahāprabhu dekhi’ jagannāthe



subhadrā-sahita dekhe, vaṁśī nāhi hāte

                            112
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 1.85)



In this way, when Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu saw
Jagannātha, He saw that the Lord was with His sister
Subhadrā and was not holding a flute in His hand.



tri-bhaṅga-sundara vraje vrajendra-nandana



kāhāṅ pāba, ei vāñchā bāḍe anukṣaṇa




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 1.86)



Absorbed in the ecstasy of the gopīs, Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu wished to see Lord Jagannātha in His original
form as Kṛṣṇa, the son of Nanda Mahārāja, standing in
Vṛndāvana and appearing very beautiful, His body curved
in three places. His desire to see that form was always
increasing.



The gopīs are actually telling Kṛṣṇa, not by their words
but by their mood, “Kṛṣṇa, You cheater, You should know
that our mind and heart are the same. Our heart is
Vṛndāvana. Tāhāṅ tomāra pada-dvaya karāha yadi udaya
tabe tomāra pūrṇa kṛpā māni (Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta
(Madhya-līlā 13.137)): If you come to Vṛndāvana with us,
You can meet us there with Your flute. Don’t forget Your
flute and peacock feather. And You should change Your
dress. You will have to be the son of Nanda and Yaśodā.
Be Gopī-kānta and Rādhā-kānta, and then You can enter
Vṛndāvana. Otherwise don’t come. We will not allow You
to enter.”



The gopīs’ accusations



The moods of Lord Jagannātha’s Chariot Festival are
very, very mysterious. It seems from an external point
of view that Kṛṣṇa simply instructed Śrīmatī Rādhikā and
the gopīs, “You should chant, remember, and meditate on
Me. Then you can realize My lotus feet in your heart,
and by that meditation you will come out of the well of
worldly attachment.” It also seems that the gopīs

                            113
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

appreciated this instruction and simply replied, “You
have given us good instruction. From now on we will
meditate on You and remember You, and then we will be
able to come out of the well of worldly life and give up
all kinds of attachments.”

However, as I have already explained, the actual mood of
the gopīs is quite different. Externally their words
seem to have a particular meaning, but Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa
Kavirāja has revealed their inner purport. He heard this
meaning from Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, who had
understood everything from Śrīla Svarūpa Dāmodara and
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, and had noted it all down. Kṛṣṇadāsa
Kavirāja Gosvāmī’s explanation therefore follows the
words of Svarūpa Dāmodara, and especially those of Rūpa
Gosvāmī.

Although the gopīs are not satisfied at all by Kṛṣṇa’s
instruction, their anger is also a tie of love and
affection – a crooked tie. The gopīs are actually
saying, “You’ve just told us to meditate, and You
previously sent Uddhava and Baladeva Prabhu, who also
delivered Your message: ‘Meditate on Me.’ You must be
joking! Where is our attachment to this world? Where is
our family attachment? We’ve never had any. ‘Who am I?’
‘Where am I?’ We have forgotten these things. We have
completely forgotten everything, including all of our
senses. Where has our attachment gone? To You! We are
always remembering You when You were in Vṛndāvana. We
remember how we sometimes played together at Rādhā-kuṇḍa
and Śyāma-kuṇḍa, and sometimes under Bhāṇḍīravaṭa, or in
Nandagaon, and how we sometimes used to meet together at
Ṭera-kadamba as well. How glorious it was!”

In those days, Śrīmatī Rādhikā used to go from Yāvaṭa to
Yaśodā-bhavana with all Her sakhīs, headed by Lalitā and
Viśākhā, to cook for Kṛṣṇa. Meanwhile, Kṛṣṇa was milking
His cows midway, at Ṭera-kadamba. As Rādhikā walked with
Her sakhīs, Lalitā said, “We should change our direction
and go by that other path. This cheater has blocked our
way. He’s only milking His cows here because He knows
that we will come this way. Better that we change
paths.” Rādhikā replied, “Oh, why fear? We will not
change our course. Let us see what happens.” As She
continued walking, Kṛṣṇa began milking a cow in such a
way that Her whole face was splashed with milk, and
everyone began to laugh. The gopīs always remembered all
these pastimes. There were so many pastimes that Kṛṣṇa
Himself would not be able to describe them all, even if
He were to have thousands and thousands of mouths.

Now the gopīs say, “We only remember those pastimes! We
already feel so much separation from You, and now You
are telling us, ‘You should meditate on My lotus feet.’
We’re not happy with this instruction. We’re not like
the four Kumāras. Grandfather Bhīṣma and Nārada can
meditate on You, but we want to forget You altogether!
We don’t want to think about You, because You are very
cruel and ungrateful.”

Kṛṣṇa wanted to hear all this. He held His head down in
shame and enjoyed thinking, “All the gopīs are blaming
Me.”


                            114
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                        5/5/2017

The gopīs continue, “Previously, when we were in
Vṛndāvana, You told us, ‘I am coming back tomorrow. If
not, then surely I will come the day after tomorrow.’
But You never came! You never returned! You told
Uddhava, ‘Tell them that I am coming right away. I am
coming after only four days.’ After that Baladeva came
to Vraja, and He said on Your behalf, ‘Oh, don’t be
worried. Kṛṣṇa is coming very soon.’ But You never
came.”



nahe gopī yogeśvara, pada-kamala tomāra,

dhyāna kari’ pāibe santoṣa

tomāra vākya-paripāṭī, tāra madhye kuṭināṭī,

śuni’ gopīra āro bāḍhe roṣa



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 13.141)



[In the mood of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
said:] The gopīs are not like the mystic yogīs. They
will never be satisfied simply by meditating on Your
lotus feet and imitating the so-called yogīs. Teaching
the gopīs about meditation is another kind of duplicity.
When they are instructed to undergo mystic yoga
practice, they are not at all satisfied. On the
contrary, they become more and more angry with You.

“We don’t like Your mode of expression. Tāra madhye
kuṭīnāṭī. There are so many things that are not good
about it. Kuṭīnāṭī. Ku-ṭī-nā-ṭī. You are telling so many
kuṭī, things that are not good, and nāṭī, things that
are not favorable. You say, ‘You should try to meditate
on Me and remember Me.’ But You know that since our
childhood we were never able to forget You for even a
moment.”

This is pure love, without desire for any gain. The
gopīs continue, “You speak to us as if we are
unintelligent, and that makes us angry.”



deha-smṛti nāhi yāra, saṁsāra-kūpa kāhāṅ tāra,

tāhā haite nā cāhe uddhāra

viraha-samudra-jale, kāma-timiṅgile gile,

gopī-gaṇe neha’ tāra pāra



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 13.142)




                             115
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

[Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu continued:] The gopīs have
fallen in the great ocean of separation, and they are
being devoured by the timiṅgila fish, which represent
the ambition to serve You. The gopīs are to be delivered
from the mouths of these timiṅgila fish, for they are
pure devotees. Since they have no material conception of
life, why should they aspire for liberation? The gopīs
do not want that liberation desired by yogīs and jñānīs,
for they are already liberated from the ocean of
material existence.



The gopīs continue, “You speak about a well of material
life (saṁsāra-kūpa), but where are we? We are in an
endless, bottomless ocean of separation. And what is
going on in that ocean? There are whales, and there are
also fish called timiṅgila fish, which are so huge that
they can even swallow those whales.”



vṛndāvana, govardhana, yamunā-pulina, vana,

sei kuñje rāsādika līlā

sei vrajera vraja-jana, mātā, pitā, bandhu-gaṇa,

baḍa citra, kemane pāsarilā



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 13.143)



It is amazing that You have forgotten the land of
Vṛndāvana. And how is it that You have forgotten Your
father, mother, and friends? How have You forgotten
Govardhana Hill, the bank of the Yamunā, and the forest
where You enjoyed the rāsa dance?



vidagdha, mṛdu, sad-guṇa, suśīla, snigdha, karuṇa,

tumi, tomāra nāhi doṣābhāsa

tabe ye tomāra mana, nāhi smare vraja-jana,

se āmāra durdaiva-vilāsa



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 13.144)



Kṛṣṇa, You are certainly a refined gentleman with all
good qualities. You are well-behaved, soft-hearted, and
merciful. I know that there is not even a tinge of fault
to be found in You, yet Your mind does not even remember
the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana. This is only My
misfortune, and nothing else.

                            116
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017




The gopīs, and especially Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, continue to
voice their apparent complaints, “Do you remember
Vṛndāvana for even a moment? Do you remember Govardhana?
In Vṛndāvana, we gopīs were all assembled in rāsa-līlā.
At that time, when we were tired and perspiring, You
used to wipe our bodies with Your pītāmbara (upper
yellow garment).”

Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī tells Kṛṣṇa, “You would ask me, ‘Are
you tired?’ and then I would keep My hand on Your
shoulder.” She used to stand in a “crooked” way and look
at Kṛṣṇa with “crooked” sidelong glances. She leaned on
Him with all Her weight, as if He were a pillar, and She
looked at Him from the corners of Her eyes. When She
leaned on Him in this way, He used to think, “Today, due
to this pose of Rādhikā, My life is successful!”

“Do You remember this?” the gopīs continue. “Do You
remember that we defeated You in dice games? And Rādhikā
used to defeat You in debate. Do You remember that we
used to meet with You in each and every grove of
Girirāja-Govardhana? Do you remember that we served You
in so many ways at Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Yamunā-pulina (the
bank of the Yamunā)?”

Do you know the meaning of Yamunā-pulina? In his song
Yaśomatī-nandana, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has written
yamunā-taṭa-cara gopī-vasana-hara, rasa-rasika-kṛpamaya.
Kṛṣṇa would always come to the bank of the Yamunā,
because He was very eager to meet the gopīs, and He
would think, “If I go there, surely the gopīs will come
to take water from the Yamunā with their very big pots.
Why will they come? Because they have promised, and I
have also promised.” That place on the bank of the
Yamunā is called panaghaṭa, the place where Kṛṣṇa could
easily meet with the gopīs.3 Because all the gopīs came
there, Kṛṣṇa also came. Everyone else thought that the
gopīs were going to fetch water, but when they dipped
their pots into the Yamunā, they never noticed whether
the pots were filled with water or not. They only knew
that their pots were filled with love and affection for
Kṛṣṇa. They used to tell Him, “We cannot put these pots
on our heads. Can You help us?” It was only for that
kind of exchange that Kṛṣṇa would go there. He would
lift their pots and proudly think, “I am helping them.”

Śrīmatī Rādhikā now asks Kṛṣṇa, “Do You remember all
these pastimes on the banks of the Yamunā? Do You
remember what kind of pastimes we used to perform at
Mānasi-gaṅgā? We always remember this! Do You remember
Saṅketa-kuñja?” Saṅketa is halfway between Varṣāṇā and
Nandagaon. “Do You remember Saṅketa? When I was on the
swing with You, You pushed the swing so high that our
garments flew here and there. I was afraid, and I
embraced You and called out, ‘Save me! Save me!’ And You
were easily satisfied by that. Do you remember?” As
Kṛṣṇa heard all this, He was ashamed and held His head
down.

By mood, the gopīs tell Kṛṣṇa, “It is very tragic. How
could You have forgotten all Your sakhās like Dāmā,

                            117
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

Śrīdāmā, Subala, Madhumaṅgala, Kokila, Kiṅkiṇi, Vasanta,
and all others? How could You forget Your father and
mother and all Your friends? It is quite astonishing
that You could forget them all. You are very ungrateful,
and Your heart is harder than a thunderbolt!”

While Śrīmatī Rādhikā and the gopīs were thinking this,
they were in a particular type of very angry mood, but
now their mood suddenly changes. Their various moods are
called bhāva-udaya, bhāva-sandhi, bhāva-śābalya, and
bhāva-śānti.4 Anyone who has not studied Bhakti-
rasāmṛta-sindhu, and what to speak of Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi,
will not be able to taste these moods in thousands of
lifetimes. One cannot know all these truths if he has
not taken the saṅga of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s
associates. He is bound to remain in the chain of birth
and death, sorrow and suffering. I have come to give
this message of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī,
and our entire guru-paramparā.

The gopīs continue to accuse Kṛṣṇa in various angry and
mixed moods. Suppose there is an ugly person who is very
black and unqualified, and his teeth stick out of his
mouth. Someone may say to him, “How handsome you are!
Your teeth are more beautiful than if they were made of
gold, and the whole world is charmed by your smile! You
are so qualified!” What is this? It is sarcasm or
parihāsa, a joke. Similarly, the gopīs’ words appear to
mean, “You are very rasika – very, very rasika! You are
also very sweet, and not at all cruel. You have all good
qualities. Your tongue never speaks any lies; it can
never do so. And Your hands are always controlled; they
cannot do anything wrong.” But what do the gopīs really
mean? They are actually taunting Kṛṣṇa, and telling Him,
“Your tongue is always controlled. How is it controlled?
It has kissed millions of gopīs, and now perhaps it is
satisfied. Your hands and feet are always going towards
the gopīs, searching for them. You have touched the
gopīs, and that is why Your tongue has become pure, You
Yourself have become pure, and everything about You has
become pure.”

The gopīs continue with words that cover their actual
mood, and they tell Kṛṣṇa, “You are very sweet and You
have such a good character! You are very soft and mild,
and You are also very merciful. All of these qualities
are in You. But we are very unfortunate. Even though You
are so qualified, sweet, soft, and merciful, You have
left us, and this is our misfortune. We must have done
something wrong, either in our past lives or in this
life, and that is why You have left us.”

Nanda Bābā has also spoken in this way. When he returned
home after leaving Kṛṣṇa and Balarāma in Mathurā, he was
weeping bitterly. “There was only one true father,” he
said, “and that was Daśaratha Mahārāja. He could not
survive in separation from Rāma. He called out, ‘Hā
Rāma! Hā Rā...!’ and left his body. I cannot do this! My
heart is very cruel, and it is harder than a
thunderbolt. Why could I not die? I wanted to die, but I
could not. Kṛṣṇa is very qualified in every way. He is
sweet and mild, and He has all good qualities. He must
have decided, ‘My mother and father, Yaśodā and Nanda
Bābā, are not qualified, and neither are all the other

                            118
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

Vrajavāsīs. They cannot give Me the love and affection I
want,’ and that is why He left us and went where He
would receive more love and affection.” Speaking thus,
Nanda Bābā fainted.

In the same way, the gopīs are telling Kṛṣṇa, “We are
most unfortunate because You don’t remember any of us.
We know that we have no familial relationship with You,
because we are not married to You. That is why a man can
give up a lady, even if there is some love between them.
On the other hand, if they are married, he will give his
whole mood of love to her. We were not married, and that
is why You could give us up so easily.

“But how could You give up Your mother and father, and
especially Your mother? Your body is made of Your
mother, so how could You forget her? Even if You can
give her up, Your body will always tell You, ‘I am the
son of Mother Yaśodā’ because You are made from her
blood and everything else. It is very strange that You
have left everyone.

“Do You know that because of You the birds are no longer
singing? The cuckoo birds have stopped singing and now
they only weep. The peacocks do not dance now; they are
very sad. The calves do not drink their mothers’ milk,
and the cows are about to die. They no longer eat grass
or anything else, and Mother Yaśodā never cooks.”

Hearing this, Kṛṣṇa began to weep very loudly, and He
was about to fall unconscious. There is a poem
describing this, and it is very heart-rending.



tuhuṅ se rahila madhupura

vrajakula ākula, dukūla kalarava,

kānu kānu kari jhura (1)

yaśomati-nanda, andha sama baiṭhaī,

sāhase uṭhai nā pāra

sakhā-gaṇa dhenu, veṇu-rava nā śuniye,

vichurala nagara bājāra (2)

kusuma tyajiyā ali, kṣiti-tale luṭata,

taru-gaṇa malina samāna

mayurī nā nācata, kapotī nā bolata,

kokilā nā karatahi gāna (3)

virahiṇī rāī, viraha-jvare jare jare,

caudike viraha hutāśa

sahaje yamunā jala, āgi samāna bhela,

kahatahi govinda dāsa (4)

                            119
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                        5/5/2017




In this kīrtana, the Vaiṣṇava poet Govinda dāsa is
singing in Rādhārāṇī’s mood, “O Kṛṣṇacandra, now You
live very far away in Madhupurī – in Mathurā. But what
is the condition of Vṛndāvana? All the Vrajavāsīs are
feeling extreme pain and distress in separation from
You. They call out, ‘Kānu, Kānu!’ But there is no
answer, and only an echo is heard.” Kānu is a nickname
of Kṛṣṇa. “Kānu, Kānu! O Kānu, where are You? Even the
birds are calling, ‘Where are You? O Kānu, where are
You?’ Everyone is weeping. O Yaśomatī-nandana, Yaśodā-
maiyā and Nanda Bābā are crying bitterly. It is as if
they have become blind; they cannot see anymore, and
they only sit and cry. They have no strength, and they
are hardly more than skeletons. They are about to die
because they no longer cook anything. For whom will they
cook? They do not even have enough strength in their
bodies to stand up.

“And what is the condition of all Your cows and friends?
They cannot hear You calling them with Your flute, so
the marketplaces and the roads are all deserted. No one
is there; no one at all. Not only that; previously, the
bumblebees were very busy collecting honey, but now they
are so upset that they have left the flowers, and even
they are crying and rolling on the ground in the pain of
separation.

“All the trees look drab and distressed. The peacocks no
longer dance, and the pigeons no longer sing. The
cuckoos are silent; they no longer call, ‘Kuhu, kuhu.’
All are feeling great pain in separation from You.

“Virahiṇī rāī, viraha-jvare jare jare. Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī
is burning and burning in the fever of separation.
Everywhere, in all directions, everyone is sinking in
the ocean of separation from You. Even the Yamunā does
not flow anymore. This is the condition of Vṛndāvana!
The water that is seen in the Yamunā is actually the
tears that have fallen from the eyes of all the gopīs.
Tuhuṅ se rahila madhupura. Why are you staying so far
away in Mathurā, when everyone in Vṛndāvana is on the
verge of death?”

There is another song by Caṇḍīdāsa, also written in the
mood of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. The words of this song are
heart-breaking, and it is unparalleled in any language
of the world. You cannot hear these topics anywhere
else:



sukhera lāgiyā, ei ghara bāṅdhinu, āgune puḍiyā gela

amiyā sāgare, sināna karite, sakali garala bhela (1)

sakhi! ki mora kapāle lekhi

śītala baliyā, cāṅda sevinu, bhānura kiraṇa dekhi (2)

ucala baliyā, acale caḍinu, paḍinu agādha-jale


                            120
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

lachamī cāhite, dāridrya beḍhala, māṇika hārānu hele (3)

nagara basālāma, sāgara bāṅdhilāma, māṇika pābāra āśe

sāgara śukāla, māṇika lukāla, abhāgī-karama-doṣe (4)

piyāsa lāgiyā, jalada sevinu, bajara paḍiyā gela

kahe caṇḍidāsa, śyāmera pirīti, marame rahala śela (5)



“I built a house in order to be very happy there, but
that house was suddenly burned in a fire. I wanted to
take bath in the ocean of nectar in order to make My
heart very cool, but instead it was crushed and burned.
I wanted to go to the ocean to bathe and to make My
heart soft, but I saw that all the water was gone. There
was no water left at all. Then I looked toward the moon
so that some of its cooling rays would come upon Me, but
it turned out that those were not the cool rays of the
moon; instead, the blazing hot rays of the sun came and
scorched Me.

“I thought I was in a very high place where there was no
water, but instead I see that I’ve fallen into an
endless ocean of water. I wanted wealth, but I became
penniless. A very valuable jewel came into My hand, and
then suddenly it was gone.

“I built a city near the ocean, so that I could get a
valuable jewel from that ocean. Then I made a dam, and I
moved the ocean from one side of the dam to the other.
However, when the ocean was finally drained, the jewel
was nowhere to be seen. It was hidden somewhere, due to
My misfortune. I looked towards the clouds to quench My
thirst, but instead of rain, a thunderbolt came on My
head.

“I loved Kṛṣṇa in order to be happy, and I gave Him My
body, mind, heart, soul, and everything, but He left Me.
The fire of separation enveloped Me and I was burned.
Kṛṣṇa’s love is endless like the ocean, and I wanted to
take bath in that ocean; but what happened? The water
dried up and in its place was a great conflagration.
Everything burned in separation. What should I do?”
Kṛṣṇa would not be able to survive if He were to hear
all these heart-breaking words.

These feelings of Śrīmatī Rādhikā are the mood at Ratha-
yātrā, and this is Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s mood at that
time. He experiences all the sentiments of Rādhikā, and
no one can explain Her moods without the help of His
bhāvas. His moods have been passed on through Śrī
Svarūpa Dāmodara to Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and Śrīla
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, who have expressed them in
their own writings. Try to realize all these truths.

Who went to Kurukṣetra?



This subject matter is very extraordinary. It is not
less in depth and significance than Rāmānanda-saṁvāda

                            121
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

(Mahāprabhu’s conversation with Rāya Rāmānanda as found
in ŚrīCaitanya-caritāmṛta); in fact, it is even deeper.
Kṛṣṇa has promised, “I will never, never give up
Vṛndāvana; I will always be there.” Rādhikā has also
promised, “Kṛṣṇa may go, but I cannot leave Vṛndāvana.”
Then who went to Kurukṣetra? There are innumerable
manifestations of Kṛṣṇa, and so many of Rādhikā as well,
and this is very wondrous. Kṛṣṇa can be thousands and
thousands of Kṛṣṇas at the same time. Yet, there can be
millions more manifestations of Rādhikā than there are
of Kṛṣṇa (as She displayed during rāsa-līlā). She is
very expert.

Rādhikā and Kṛṣṇa eternally play with Their gopī
associates in Vṛndāvana, where Rādhikā is called
Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Rādhikā. She never leaves Vṛndāvana,
and She hardly ever laments. So who was lamenting in
Nandagaon when Uddhava went there? Rādhikā is always
with Kṛṣṇa, so how did this separation come about?

Who went to Mathurā and Dvārakā? Kṛṣṇa’s manifestations
went. Similarly, who was weeping bitterly with all Her
sakhīs in Nandagaon? It was Viyoginī-Rādhā. She was the
one whom Uddhava met, who was feeling intense
separation, and who recited Bhramara-gīta, which is one
of the jewels of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.

Who went to Kurukṣetra? It was Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī
Rādhikā, but in Her manifestation as Saṁyoginī-Rādhikā.
She is the same Rādhā, but as a manifestation. She went
to Kurukṣetra, and there She attracted Kṛṣṇa to return
to Vṛndāvana.



Even Kṛṣṇa cannot know



Tad viddhi praṇipātena paripraśnena sevayā (Bhagavad-
gītā (4.34)). Everything is reconciled when you approach
a realized spiritual master, inquire from him
submissively, and serve him. This process will enable
you to realize everything automatically. Your mental
speculation alone will not suffice. You may be a learned
person, but your learning will not help you; instead, it
will betray you.

I have been explaining the moods of the gopīs at
Kurukṣetra, and Kṛṣṇa’s statements to them. You can also
study this subject matter yourselves, but only a rare
person can go into it very deeply. It is stated in
Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi (4):



yo brahma-rudra-śuka-nārada-bhīṣma-mukhyair

ālakṣito na sahasā puruṣasya tasya

sadyo vaśī-karaṇa-cūrṇam ananta-śaktiṁ

taṁ rādhikā-caraṇa-renum anusmarāmi


                            122
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017



Brahmā, Rudra (Śaṅkara), Bhīṣma, Nārada, and others like
them are very advanced jñānī-bhaktas. They are all
ātmārāma and āptakāma (fully satisfied internally and
externally, respectively), yet even they can only rarely
have darśana of Kṛṣṇa, and what to speak of having
darśana of Rādhikā. The demigods came during Kṛṣṇa’s
rāsa-līlā, but they only saw Kṛṣṇa dancing and singing;
they did not see the gopīs. On the other hand, their
wives saw Kṛṣṇa with the gopīs and fainted. The author
of this prayer, Śrī Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī, says that
if Kṛṣṇa knows that someone has on his head a minute
dust-particle from Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s lotus feet, He will
wholly and solely give Himself to that devotee.

Devotees like Brahmā, Rudra, Śuka, Nārada, Bhīṣma, and
the four Kumāras – Sanaka, Sanandana, Sanātana, and
Sanat-kumāra – are all very elevated, and they are
prominent among the twelve mahājanas. Yet they cannot
control Kṛṣṇa. On the other hand, cūrṇam ananta-śaktim:
the dust of Rādhikā’s lotus feet is so powerful that it
can control Kṛṣṇa very easily. Kṛṣṇa may be happy and
satisfied with the love and affection He receives from
these other devotees, but in comparison to the gopīs,
they cannot control Him in the slightest degree.

If one wants to control Kṛṣṇa, he must search for
Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s foot-dust – even a single particle of
that foot-dust – and try to collect it. In other words,
he must accept the guidance of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrī
Sanātana Gosvāmī, and Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, who
are Rūpa Mañjarī, Lavaṅga Mañjarī, and Rati Mañjarī in
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. Kṛṣṇa will be controlled at
once if He knows, “These are the maidservants of
Rādhikā,” but no one can control Him otherwise. Try to
become a particle of dust of Rādhikā’s lotus feet.

When Brahmā went to Vṛndāvana and saw Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes,
he personally prayed:



naumīḍya te ’bhra-vapuṣe taḍid-ambarāya

guñjāvataṁsa-paripiccha-lasan-mukhāya

vanya-sraje kavala-vetra-viṣāṇa-veṇu-

lakṣma-śriye mṛdu-pade paśupāṅgajāya



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.14.1)



My dear Lord, You are the only worshipable Lord, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, and therefore I offer my
humble obeisances and prayers just to please You. O son
of the King of the cowherds, Your transcendental body is
dark blue like a fresh cloud, Your garment is brilliant
like lightning, and the beauty of Your face is enhanced
by Your guñjā earrings and the peacock feather on Your

                            123
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

head. Wearing garlands of various forest flowers and
leaves, and equipped with a herding stick, a buffalo
horn, and a flute, You stand beautifully with a morsel
of food in Your hand.

Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī is also an extremely elevated
devotee, and in Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes he is a special
parrot belonging to Śrīmatī Rādhikā. He always sits on
Her hand, and She caresses him, feeds him pomegranate
seeds, and teaches him to chant, “Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa,”
“Govinda,” “Vrajanātha,” and “Prāṇanātha.” Śuka always
remains in the association of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa, and he
may even be there to awaken Them during Their pre-dawn
pastimes of niśānta-līlā. That Śuka became Śukadeva
Gosvāmī, and yet Śrī Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī says that
even Śukadeva Gosvāmī cannot control Kṛṣṇa. He can serve
Kṛṣṇa, but only the members of Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s party
can fully control Him.

Śrī Nārada Ṛṣi went to Gokula in Vṛndāvana and thought,
“Kṛṣṇa has just descended to this world, so Rādhikā must
also be present somewhere.” He went to Rāval and
discovered Her there. After that, he performed severe
austerities at Nārada-kuṇḍa and became Nāradī-gopī, but
even Nāradī-gopī cannot control Kṛṣṇa.

Kṛṣṇa Himself became a bumblebee and went to Nandagaon.
There He took darśana of Rādhikā when She was in
mahābhāva-divyonmāda, but He was still unable to
understand the depth of Her mood. Three desires then
manifested in His heart. He became intensely eager to
relish the exalted state of Her praṇaya (loving mood),
Her appreciation of His sweetness, and the rapture in
Her heart at that time. Kṛṣṇa could never go deep enough
to fully understand Rādhikā’s moods of mādana- and
modana-mahābhāva. Her highest mood of love, sva-
saṁvedya-daśā,5 never comes in Him, for He is the
viṣaya, the object of love. It only comes in the āśraya,
the reservoir of love. That is why Kṛṣṇa – in the form
of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu – went to the bank of
Godāvarī and was admitted into the school of Rādhikā’s
personal secretary, Viśākhā, who was there in the form
of Rāmānanda Rāya. Mahāprabhu heard many instructions
there. He learned about Rādhā’s moods, and then He went
to Purī and realized those moods and relished them.

Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s sakhīs, who are Her party members, can
understand and realize Her moods to some extent – more
so than Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa is akhila-rasāmṛta-sindhu, the
object of love, but He is not the container of love. The
container or reservoir is the āśraya-bhakta.

It has been explained in the above verse from Rādhā-
rasa-sudhā-nidhi (yo brahma-rudra-śuka-nārada) that
neither the four Kumāras, nor Nārada as a gopī, nor even
Śukadeva Gosvāmī as Rādhikā’s parrot can fully control
Kṛṣṇa. Even Uddhava could not realize the moods of the
gopīs, although he went to Vṛndāvana and had their
association there. That is why he prayed:



vande nanda-vraja-strīṇāṁ


                            124
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

pāda-reṇum abhīkṣṇaśaḥ

yāsāṁ hari-kathodgītaṁ

punāti bhuvana-trayam



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.47.63)



I repeatedly offer my respects to the dust from the feet
of the women of Nanda Mahārāja’s cowherd village. When
these gopīs loudly chant the glories of Śrī Kṛṣṇa, the
vibration purifies the three worlds.



Be very humble, and hollow like a flute, and then go to
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta and pray.
Then you will very easily realize something. You will
realize that the gopīs’ moods are the most elevated.



caitanya-gosāñira līlā – ananta, apāra



‘sahasra-vadana’ yāra nāhi pāya pāra




ŚrīCaitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 14.256)



The pastimes of Caitanya Mahāprabhu are unlimited and
endless. Even Sahasra-vadana, Lord Śeṣa, cannot reach
the limits of His pastimes.



Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī has explained here that
Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s pastimes are unlimited, endless,
and unfathomable, and even Ananta-śeṣa Baladeva Prabhu
cannot explain them all with His unlimited mouths, even
in unlimited time. How deep these pastimes are! Even
Kṛṣṇa cannot know their depth, although He is an ocean
of rasa. Yet, one can easily know something of their
depth by taking shelter at the feet of Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī and Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī.



śrī-rūpa-raghunātha-pade yāra āśa



caitanya-caritāmṛta kahe kṛṣṇadāsa


                            125
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                        5/5/2017




ŚrīCaitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 14.257)



Praying at the lotus feet of Śrī Rūpa and Śrī
Raghunātha, always desiring their mercy, I, Kṛṣṇadāsa,
narrate ŚrīCaitanya-caritāmṛta, following in their
footsteps.



Kṛṣṇa’s reply



You will be successful in your spiritual life if you
develop positive understanding and moods. It will not be
enough just to think, “Not this, not this, not this.”
Absorption in the positive must be accompanied by
negation of the negative; otherwise you cannot advance.
This is true; but still, absorption in negation will not
help you very much. If one wants to advance in bhakti,
he should try to understand these topics.

The gopīs tell Kṛṣṇa, “We cannot live without You. We
cannot maintain our lives without You. It will be better
if You come to Vṛndāvana, and that Vṛndāvana is non-
different from our hearts. If You don’t come, You will
see Vṛndāvana become completely lifeless. Everyone and
everything there will die.”



śuniyā rādhikā-vāṇī, vraja-prema mane āni,

bhāve vyakulita deha-mana

vraja-lokera prema śuni’, āpanāke ‘ṛṇī’ māni’,

kare kṛṣṇa tāṅre āśvāsana



ŚrīCaitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 13.148)



After Lord Kṛṣṇa heard Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī’s statements,
His love for the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana increased, and
His body and mind became very perturbed. After hearing
of the Vrajavāsīs’ love for Him, He immediately
considered Himself to be always indebted to them. He
began to pacify Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī as follows:



prāṇa-priye, śuna, mora e-satya-vacana

tomā-sabāra smaraṇe, jhuroṅ muñi rātri-dine,


                            126
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                       5/5/2017

mora duḥkha nā jāne kona jana



ŚrīCaitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 13.149)



My dearest Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, please hear Me. I am
speaking the truth. I cry day and night simply upon
remembering all you inhabitants of Vṛndāvana. No one
knows how unhappy this makes Me.



When Kṛṣṇa heard the gopīs’ desperate words, and
especially when He heard from Rādhikā, He became
restless and could not control Himself. He thought, “I
cannot repay the Vrajavāsīs,” and He began to pacify all
the gopīs, especially Rādhikā. He began to weep as He
replied: “Prāṇa-priye, śuna, mora e-satya-vacana – My
most beloved, I am telling you the truth with My pure
heart. Tomā-sabāra smaraṇe, jhuroṅ muñi rātri-dine, mora
duḥkha nā jāne kona jana – My body is there in Dvārakā,
but My heart is with You in Vṛndāvana. I am always
restless, day and night, and I feel unbearable
separation. There is no one in Mathurā to whom I can
reveal My heart. I sent Uddhava to Vraja to be admitted
into the school of gopīs so that he could learn
something about the meaning of prema. I thought that if
he were to become expert, then when he would return I
could describe to him the extent of My separation and he
would realize My heart. But I see that I cannot share My
heart even with Uddhava, nor with Rukmiṇī or Satyabhāmā.
I thus lament continually.”



vraja-vāsī yata jana, mātā, pitā, sakhā-gaṇa,

sabe haya mora prāṇa-sama

tāṅra madhye gopī-gaṇa, sākṣāt mora jīvana,

tumi mora jīvanera jīvana



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 13.150)



[Śrī Kṛṣṇa continued:] All the inhabitants of Vṛndāvana-
dhāma – My mother, father, cowherd boyfriends, and
everyone else – are the same as My life. Amongst all the
inhabitants of Vṛndāvana, the gopīs are directly My life
and soul. And You, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, are the chief
among the gopīs; so You are the very life of My life.



tomā-sabāra prema-rase, āmāke karila vaśe,

āmi tomāra adhīna kevala

                            127
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                         5/5/2017


tomā-sabā chāḍāñā, āmā dūra-deśe lañā,

rākhiyāche durdaiva prabala



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 13.151)



My dear Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, I am always subservient to
the love and affection that you all have for Me. I am
under your control only. The creator is very cruel, for
he has separated Me from You and made Me reside in
distant places.



We are all helpless when it comes to stopping death.
Actually, we are helpless in every way. Similarly, Kṛṣṇa
is saying, “Now I am helpless, and You are also
helpless. The creator has forcibly taken Me very far
away from You and from My birthplace in Gokula. This is
My misfortune.”



priyā priya-saṅga-hīnā, priya priyā-saṅga vinā,

nāhi jīye, e satya pramāṇa

mora daśā śone yabe, tāṅra ei daśā habe,

ei bhaye duṅhe rākhe prāṇa



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 13.152)



When a woman is separated from her lover, or a man from
his beloved, neither of them can live. It is a fact that
they only live for each other, for if one dies and the
other hears of it, he or she will die also.



Kṛṣṇa continues, “It is true that a woman cannot
maintain her life without her beloved. And that beloved
can also not maintain his life without his dear one.
Mora daśā śone yabe, tāṅra ei daśā habe, ei bhaye duṅhe
rākhe prāṇa. Why does a woman not die when she is
separated from her lover? She remains alive only by
thinking, ‘If I die, my beloved will weep bitterly, and
he may also die. So I should not die. I don’t want to
give him any suffering.’ Her lover also thinks, ‘If I
die, she will suffer grievously, and then she may die of
separation.’ For this reason, neither want to die.”



sei satī premavatī, premavān sei pati,

                             128
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                       5/5/2017


viyoge ye vāñche priya-hite

nā gaṇe āpana-duḥkha, vāñche priyajana-sukha,

sei dui mile acirāte



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 13.153)



Such a loving chaste wife and loving husband desire all
welfare for each other in separation and do not care for
personal happiness. Such a loving couple only desire
each other’s well-being, and they certainly meet again
without delay.



This is an important point. The only chaste lady is one
who has such overwhelming love and affection for her
beloved that she always thinks of his welfare, even in
separation. Rāma told Sītā, “I must abandon you for the
rest of my life.” He sent her to the forest, and she
wept bitterly in deep separation. She might have died in
separation, but she was pregnant at that time, and her
two sons Lava and Kuśa took birth soon afterwards.
Although she suffered on account of her husband, she
would say, “I don’t consider whether he has done right
or wrong. I only want him to be happy, wherever he is.”

At that time, Rāma was in his grand royal palace, but he
gave up his pillows, his bed, and every other
convenience. He became austere and renounced there, and
he slept on a mat on the ground, just as Sītā-devī did.
Instead of eating delicious food, he only took some
fruits to maintain his life. He always felt the piercing
pain of her separation, and it was because he could not
survive without her that he performed fire sacrifices
and made statues of her.

The chaste lady who has love and affection for her
beloved husband always thinks of his welfare, and even
if he does something wrong, she doesn’t mind. And the
man also thinks in the same way about his wife or his
beloved. Nā gaṇe āpana-duḥkha, vāñche priyajana-sukha,
sei dui mile acirāte. Neither of them cares for their
own happiness or suffering. They always think of the
happiness and suffering of their loved one.

You should try to understand the instruction given here,
and follow it. If you want to enter that transcendental
realm, then you should begin these dealings with your
gurudeva. If gurudeva is a very high-class devotee, if
he has love and affection for you, and if he is taking
you more and more toward Kṛṣṇa consciousness, then place
your whole concentration on him. Don’t think about your
own suffering and happiness. Rather you should think,
“How can I please my gurudeva?” If this mood is not
present in a disciple, he is bound to give up the line
of devotion. It is stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam:


                            129
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017



śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ

smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ

sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

iti puṁsārpitā viṣṇau

bhaktiś cen nava-lakṣaṇā

kriyeta bhagavaty addhā

tan manye ’dhītam uttamam



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.5.23–4)



[Prahlāda Mahārāja said:] The following nine processes
are accepted as pure devotional service: hearing and
chanting about the transcendental holy name, form,
qualities, paraphernalia, and pastimes of Lord Viṣṇu;
remembering them; serving the lotus feet of the Lord;
offering Him respectful worship with sixteen types of
paraphernalia; offering Him prayers; becoming His
servant; considering Him one’s best friend; and
surrendering everything unto Him (in other words,
serving Him with the body, mind, and words.) One who has
dedicated his life to the service of Kṛṣṇa through these
nine methods should be understood to be the most learned
person, for he has acquired complete knowledge.



In this verse, Śrī Prahlāda Mahārāja uses the word
puṁsārpitā to advise us that one must first offer
himself unto the lotus feet of Kṛṣṇa. To understand this
instruction, we must know that there are two Kṛṣṇas. The
first is guru-bhagavān, and the second is kṛṣṇa-
bhagavān. The first is āśraya (the abode of service),
and the second is viṣaya (the object of service). The
qualifications of a mahā-bhāgavataguru are explained in
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam and the Upaniṣads. You should have
strong faith in such a guru and try to please him. He is
very powerful, and by his own power he will transfer
your sentiments to Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and Mahāprabhu.

Prahlāda Mahārāja is instructing us that one should not
only surrender, he should always engage his heart, mind,
and all his senses to please that sad-guru. The disciple
can please him if he is always chanting and remembering,
glorifying bhakti, Kṛṣṇa, and Mahāprabhu, and preaching
and practicing bhakti-yoga. Then he will be happy.

Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura has explained how Rūpa
Gosvāmī pleased his guru:



                            130
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017


śrī-caitanya-mano-’bhīṣṭaṁ

sthāpitaṁ yena bhū-tale

svayaṁ rūpaḥ kadā mahyaṁ

dadāti sva-padāntikam



Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī Prabhupāda has established within the
material world the mission to fulfill the desire of Lord
Caitanya. When will he give me shelter at his lotus
feet?



There are so many devotees who have pleased their gurus,
but the author of this śloka has given the example of
Rūpa Gosvāmī. Rūpa Gosvāmī knew what Caitanya Mahāprabhu
wanted, and why He descended to this world. This is why
he wrote books such as Bhakti-rasāmṛta-sindhu and
Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi. He established the message of Caitanya
Mahāprabhu and the method to please Him.

Kṛṣṇa continues: “Nā gaṇe āpana-duḥkha, vāñche
priyajana-sukha, sei dui mile acirāte – if the lover and
beloved engage in this way, they will be able to meet
again.” Here, Kṛṣṇa is consoling the gopīs, assuring
them that they will certainly meet again.



rākhite tomāra jīvana, sevi āmi nārāyaṇa,

tāṅra śaktye āsi niti-niti

tomā-sane krīḍā kari’, niti yāi yadu-purī,

tāhā tumi mānaha mora sphūrti



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 13.154)



[Kṛṣṇa said to Śrīmatī Rādhikā:] You are My most dearly
beloved, and I know that You cannot live for a moment in
My absence. I worship Lord Nārāyaṇa just to keep You
alive. By his merciful potency, I come to Vṛndāvana
every day to enjoy pastimes with You, and then I return
to Dvārakā-dhāma. That is why You can always feel My
presence in Vṛndāvana.



We should try to realize Kṛṣṇa’s statements. Do you have
madīya-bhāva, this sense of possessiveness, toward
gurudeva and the pure devotees? If not, then all your
endeavors in spiritual life are zero, and you will not
be able to accomplish anything. You should think,
“Gurudeva is mine. I have left my father, mother,

                             131
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

sister, and family for Kṛṣṇa, and my gurudeva can give
me Kṛṣṇa. Now he is my everything.” Such attachment for
gurudeva will come by cultivation. If we are not
attached to gurudeva and very much attached to everyone
else, there is something wrong. There are two
conceptions in relation to service to gurudeva. The
first conception is, “I will serve all the devotees to
please my gurudeva.” The other conception is, “I will
please all the devotees to serve my gurudeva.” Our
motive should be, “I want to please my gurudeva,” not to
please everybody else. Whatever we do should be to
please gurudeva, not to please everybody else. You can
never please everyone.



yasya prasādād bhagavat-prasādo

yasyāprasādān na gatiḥ kuto ’pi

dhyāyan stuvaṁs tasya yaśas tri-sandhyaṁ

vande guroḥ śrī-caraṇāravindam



Śrī Gurvāṣṭakam (8)



One receives Kṛṣṇa’s benedictions by the mercy of the
spiritual master, and one cannot make any advancement
without his grace. Therefore, I should always remember
and praise him. At the three junctions of the day –
morning, noon, and evening – I should offer my
respectful obeisances unto the lotus feet of my
spiritual master.



Everyone will be pleased if gurudeva is pleased, and
even if others are not pleased there is no harm, as long
as he is pleased. If Kṛṣṇa is somewhat angry with me, no
harm; gurudeva will save me. But if gurudeva is unhappy,
even Kṛṣṇa cannot save me. He will say, “You should go
to your gurudeva.” We should know this fact. When
Durvāsā Ṛṣi tried to kill Ambarīṣa Mahārāja, Kṛṣṇa saved
Ambarīṣa Mahārāja and began to chase Durvāsā Ṛṣi with
His Sudarśana cakra. Durvāsā ran throughout the
universe, and finally reached the Vaikuṇṭha planet
within this universe, where he begged Bhagavān to
protect him. However, Bhagavān told him, “I cannot do
anything to save you. You should go to Ambarīṣa
Mahārāja.”

Kṛṣṇa continues, “I worship Nārāyaṇa to please You, so
that You will not die of separation from Me. By His
merciful potency I go to Vraja to meet You. I wipe the
tears from Your face with My pītāmbara, and I embrace
You; and You think, ‘Kṛṣṇa is in Dvārakā, so how can He
come here? Prehaps I was dreaming, or perhaps I saw a
sphūrti (momentary vision).’ On the other hand, as soon
as You see a tamāla tree, You think, ‘Kṛṣṇa has come.’
When I really come to You, You think, ‘Kṛṣṇa has not

                            132
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

come. It was just a sphūrti,’ but this is not true. I
always come to You, and I meet and embrace You. I sport
with You, and then I return to Dvārakā. Then, when Your
condition is one of extreme separation again, I come to
You again. I always do this.”



mora bhāgya mo-viṣaye, tomāra ye prema haye,

sei prema parama prabala

lukāñā āmā āne, saṅga karāya tomā-sane,

prakaṭeha ānibe satvara



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 13.155)



Our love affair is more powerful because of My good
fortune in receiving Nārāyaṇa’s grace. This allows Me to
come there unseen by others. I hope that very soon I
will be visible to everyone.



“I think that Your unprecedented love and affection will
very soon make Me come in such a way that everyone will
see Me. I have killed so many kings and powerful demons
who were fighting for Kaṁsa, but there are still some
left.”



yādavera vipakṣa, yata duṣṭa kaṁsa-pakṣa,

tāhā āmi kailuṅ saba kṣaya

āche dui-cāri jana, tāhā māri’ vṛndāvana,

āilāma āmi, jāniha niścaya



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 13.156)



I have already killed all the mischievous demons who are
enemies of the Yadu dynasty, and I have also killed
Kaṁsa and his allies, but there are two or four demons
still alive. I want to kill them, and when I have done
so, I shall return to Vṛndāvana very soon. Please know
this for certain.



“You may say, ‘Come immediately,’” Kṛṣṇa tells Rādhikā
and the gopīs, “but if I am in Vraja, the demons will
decide, ‘Kṛṣṇa is there in Vṛndāvana with His father and
mother, Nanda and Yaśodā, and all His friends. We should

                             133
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

try to kill them all. He has no fort, no army, and
nothing with which to fight.’ That is why I purposely
remain here in the fort of Dvārakā, surrounded by water
on every side, and protected by many armies. If I were
in Vṛndāvana and the opposition party came to know of
it, I would not be able to save You. That is why I do
not come right away. I must first kill the remaining
demons.”



sei śatru-gaṇa haite, vraja-jana rākhite,

rahi rājye udāsīna hañā

yebā strī-putra-dhane, kari rājya āvaraṇe,

yadu-gaṇera santoṣa lāgiyā



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 13.157)



I remain in My kingdom because I wish to protect the
inhabitants of Vṛndāvana from the attacks of My enemies;
otherwise I am indifferent to My royal position.
Whatever wives, sons, and wealth I maintain in the
kingdom are only for the satisfaction of the Yadus.



Kṛṣṇa continues, “My only consideration is that the
Vrajavāsīs should not suffer or be disturbed. I live in
Dvārakā, but I am indifferent to My kingdom and
associates there, to My many queens, and to My numerous
sons and daughters. I have no attachment for them.
Rather, I am suffering due to deep separation from the
Vrajavāsīs. Yebā strī-putra-dhane, kari rājya āvaraṇe.
It is only to satisfy the Yadus that I have married so
many princesses and live like a king in Dvārakā. They
are my father’s friends. My father is Nanda Bābā, and
everyone in the Yadu dynasty, such as Vasudeva and the
others, are friends of Nanda Bābā. That is why I remain
in Dvārakā; otherwise I would have already gone to
Vṛndāvana.”



tomāra ye prema-guṇa, kare āmā ākarṣaṇa,

ānibe āmā dina daśa biśe

punaḥ āsi’ vṛndāvane, vraja-vadhū tomā-sane,

vilasiba rajanī-divase



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 13.158)




                             134
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                       5/5/2017

Your loving qualities always attract Me to Vṛndāvana.
Indeed, they will bring Me back within ten or twenty
days, and when I return I shall enjoy both day and night
with You and all the damsels of Vraja-bhūmi.



“I will kill the rest of the demons very quickly, within
ten days. Then I will come back very soon. In fact, You
can consider that I have already come.”



eta tāṅre kahi kṛṣṇa, vraje yāite satṛṣṇa,

eka śloka paḍi’ śunāila

sei śloka śuni’ rādhā, khāṇḍila sakala bādhā,

kṛṣṇa-prāptye pratīti ha-ila



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 13.159)



While Kṛṣṇa was speaking to Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī, He became
very anxious to return to Vṛndāvana. He made Her listen
to a verse that banished all Her difficulties, and which
assured Her that She would attain Kṛṣṇa again.



mayi bhaktir hi bhūtānām

amṛtatvāya kalpate

diṣṭyā yad āsīn mat-sneho

bhavatīnāṁ mad-āpanaḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.82.44)



Any living being becomes qualified for eternal life by
rendering devotional service to Me. But by Your good
fortune, You have developed a special loving attitude
toward Me, by which You have obtained Me.



“Mayi bhaktir hi bhūtānām amṛtatvāya kalpate. Sādhana-
bhakti, devotional activities performed to attain Me, is
like nectar, but Your bhakti is far superior to sādhana-
bhakti. You have no anarthas, and You already have more
than niṣṭhā, ruci, āsakti, bhāva, prema, and sneha.”
There are two kinds of sneha: ghṛta-sneha and madhu-
sneha. Māna follows sneha, and there are two kinds of
māna. There are also two kinds of praṇaya, and after
praṇaya comes rāga, anurāga, bhāva, and finally

                            135
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

mahābhāva. Kṛṣṇa tells the gopīs, “You have everything.
Sādhana-bhakti is very rare in this world, but what you
have is not in this world. Your sneha, māna, praṇaya,
rāga, and anurāga are only found in Goloka Vṛndāvana.
This is the reason that I cannot control Myself, and I
am always bound to follow you; there will be no delay in
My coming to you.”



That love and how to attain it



When Śrīmatī Rādhikā was in Kadamba-kyārī, She
remembered Kṛṣṇa deeply, with great love and affection.
Weeping, She asked a bumblebee, “Kṛṣṇa is coming? When
is He coming? Is He on the way here? Can you tell Me?
How is He? Does He remember His friends in Vraja-bhūmi?
Does He remember His father and mother? Does He remember
us? Does He remember Me? Does He at least say to any of
His queens, ‘Rādhā is not as intelligent as you.’ Or,
does He perhaps tell one of them, ‘That garland is not
as good as the one that the gopīs used to make’?” While
Rādhikā was speaking like this, She became unconscious.

This is the gopīs’ love and affection for Kṛṣṇa, and to
attain it we should try to take up bhakti from the
beginning stages – starting from initial faith,
associating with pure devotees, accepting initiation
from a bona fide guru, and engaging in services under
his direction.

Don’t look here and there, otherwise māyā will attract
you. We should try to be like Kṛṣṇa’s flute; there is
nothing inside it. We should try to accept the “air
vibration” that gurudeva breathes into “that flute,”
because he has taken the moods of pure bhakti from his
guru-paramparā, from Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, and from Caitanya
Mahāprabhu. Your speculation will not do. You may be a
learned person in the material sense, but that will not
help you in spiritual life. Your intelligence will
betray you. You should know this truth, and then you
will realize everything. Everything will come
automatically.




CHAPTER SEVEN

HERĀ-PAÑCAMĪ


The difference between Vṛndāvana and Dvārakā



The meaning of Herā-pañcamī is as follows. On the fifth
day of the Chariot Festival, Lakṣmī-devī becomes very
worried and thinks, “Where has my husband gone? He told
me, ‘I am going for a change of environment for some
days, and I will return very soon.’ It has been five

                            136
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

days now, and still He has not come back.” Unable to
tolerate this, she becomes very angry and gives orders
to all her associates as though they had to fight with
the enemy: “Take up your weapons!” Then she becomes the
commander-in-chief of her “army,” and goes to “attack”
her husband.

During the Ratha-yātrā Festival, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
wanted to taste the mellows of Herā-pañcamī. In early
morning He went to Sundarācala along with His associates
and took darśana of Jagannātha, Baladeva, and Subhadrā
in the Guṇḍicā Mandira. Whenever He went to Jagannātha’s
temple, He used to see Jagannātha as Kṛṣṇa, Vrajendra-
nandana Śyāmasundara, with a peacock feather in His
crown, a flute in His hands, with very beautiful lotus
eyes, and with all the other attributes of Kṛṣṇa when He
is with the gopīs in Vṛndāvana. Mahāprabhu never saw
Baladeva, Subhadrā, or Sudarśana cakra, because Kṛṣṇa
never carries Sudarśana in Vṛndāvana. Mahāprabhu never
prayed to Baladeva or to Subhadrā in the temple. He saw
them both during the Chariot Festival, but otherwise He
saw only Jagannātha. This was all very wonderful.

Jagannātha had gone to Sundarācala (which represents
Vṛndāvana) from His temple in Nīlācala (which represents
Dvārakā) and, on the evening of the fifth day, Lakṣmī
arrived at Sundarācala with all her associates.1 She was
decorated with many precious ornaments made of gold and
jewels, and she wore very beautiful and opulent
garments. The previous day, Kāśī Miśra, who was the guru
of King Pratāparudra, had advised the King, “Bring
Lakṣmī-devī very valuable gold and jeweled ornaments,
and decorate her with them. Make such a beautiful
festival for her that everyone will be struck with
wonder. They should think they have never seen anything
like this before. Caitanya Mahāprabhu wants to taste all
the mellows of this festival.” Accordingly, Lakṣmī was
decorated with gold and jeweled ornaments, opulent
garments, and other paraphernalia.

At the Siṁha-dvāra (lion gate) in front of the
Jagannātha Temple, Kāśī Miśra gave very beautiful seats
to Mahāprabhu and His associates such as Śrīvāsa
Paṇḍita, Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara, and Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda.
Soon after they were seated, Lakṣmī arrived with all her
associates and opulence, as if she was coming to attack
Jagannātha. First she “attacked” Jagannātha’s
associates, who were actually Mahāprabhu’s associates,
like Śikhi Māhiti, Vakreśvara Paṇḍita, and so on, and
then she tied them up and bound them like prisoners. Her
associates then punished them all by striking them with
“whips” made of soft cloth, and she accused them, “Oh,
you should admit your guilt and pay something. You have
taken my husband. Where are you keeping Him? Bring Him
here right now.”

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu was extremely happy to see this
pastime and, tasting its mellows, He said, “I have heard
that when Satyabhāmā used to exhibit māna, She would
remove all Her golden ornaments. Then she would enter a
dark, private room, put on dirty garments, scratch the
ground with her nails, and weep continually. But here I
see another kind of māna in Lakṣmī. She is like a
commander-in-chief going to attack with many soldiers. I

                            137
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                         5/5/2017

have never seen anything like this, nor have I ever even
heard of such a thing.”

Svarūpa Dāmodara then explained that there are many
kinds of māna, and that this māna of Dvārakā is very
different from that of the gopīs in Vṛndāvana.

Mahāprabhu told Svarūpa Dāmodara:



yadyapi jagannātha karena dvārakāya vihāra

sahaja prakaṭa kare parama udāra

tathāpi vatsara-madhye haya eka-bāra

vṛndāvana dekhite tāṅra utkaṇṭhā apāra



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 14.117–18)



Although Lord Jagannātha enjoys His pastimes in Dvārakā-
dhāma and naturally manifests sublime liberality there,
still, once a year He becomes unlimitedly eager to see
Vṛndāvana.



Why did Kṛṣṇa leave Vṛndāvana? Ultimately He did so to
please and pacify the gopīs. It is said that He leaves
Vṛndāvana and comes to Mathurā and Dvārakā because He
cannot forget the devotees there – or anywhere else. He
must support and nourish them. The next question would
then be: after leaving why did He not return, at least
for a visit. One answer is that there is no fort in
Vṛndāvana. If Kṛṣṇa had returned to Vṛndāvana, and
Jarāsandha had come to know that He was really the son
of Nanda and Yaśodā rather than that of Vasudeva and
Devakī, Jarāsandha would have attacked Vṛndāvana and it
would have been ruined. Nanda Bābā was a cowherd, a
gopa, not a warrior, and there were no soldiers in
Vṛndāvana. Jarāsandha would therefore have destroyed all
of Vṛndāvana and then imprisoned Yaśodā and Nanda Bābā,
as Kaṁsa had imprisoned Vasudeva and Devakī.

This is a reason, but it is external. Someone may say,
“At least Kṛṣṇa should go to Vṛndāvana from time to
time, and then He should return quickly.” But Kṛṣṇa has
so many enemies, and all of them would come to know that
He has many friends in Vṛndāvana. They would think,
“They should be attacked, and they should be finished.”
This is another reason He did not return there, but it
is also external.

Someone may say, “Kṛṣṇa was able to take all His
associates of Mathurāpurī to Dvārakā in one night, in
just a minute. He had abundant grand palaces built
there, not only for each of His queens, but also for all
His associates such as Akrūra and Uddhava, as well as
for Vasudeva and Devakī. There were so many thousands

                            138
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

and millions of Mathurāvāsīs. They went to sleep in
Mathurā, and in the morning they saw that they were in
Dvārakā. This was very wonderful, and it shows that
Kṛṣṇa can do anything He likes. Similarly, in one night
He can take to Dvārakā all His associates from
Vṛndāvana, such as Rādhikā, Lalitā, Viśākhā, and all the
other sakhīs, as well as all cowherd boys like Śrīdāmā,
Stoka-kṛṣṇa, Lavaṅga, and Arjuna. He can take His mother
and father, Yaśodā-maiyā and Nanda Bābā, and all the
other Vrajavāsīs as well. Is there any harm in that? If
all the Mathurāvāsīs can be there, the Vrajavāsīs can be
there as well.”

But how will Vṛndā-devī go there? Will Govardhana go
there? This is a very confidential topic. There will be
a conflict between aiśvarya-bhāva and mādhurya-bhāva.
What will Kṛṣṇa say? Will He say, “I am the son of
Vasudeva and Devakī,” or “I am the son of Nanda and
Yaśodā”? This contradiction of mellows would create a
very difficult situation for Kṛṣṇa. Will He play His
flute? Will He wear His peacock feather there? Will He
go cowherding with His friends in Dvārakā? Can He tell
others, “I am the son of Nanda Bābā and Yaśodā”?

By the constitutional nature of aiśvarya and mādhurya,
they cannot exist together. If you become an actual
madhyama-adhikārī and hear all these topics in good
association, you will realize something about the
meaning of aiśvarya-bhāva, and of the mādhurya-bhāva in
Vṛndāvana. Then you can become one-pointed in your
devotion to Vrajendra-nandana. Vṛndāvana cannot go to
Dvārakā, and Dvārakā can never go to Vṛndāvana. They are
opposites, and the attempt to combine them is called
rasa-ābhāsa, contradiction of mellows.

You should know what is aiśvarya and what is the
constitutional nature of mādhurya-rasa. In Dvārakā there
is always opulence, and everyone there knows that Kṛṣṇa
is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. Sometimes He is
four-handed and He can do anything. He can bring a dead
person back to life, and He Himself has no death and no
birth.

In Vṛndāvana, on the other hand, there is always
mādhurya-bhāva. Kṛṣṇa has taken birth from the womb of
Mother Yaśodā, and He is quite helpless. As a baby, He
cannot turn over without His mother’s help. Sometimes He
becomes angry, and He is always hungry. And when hungry,
He steals butter from here and there.

And Kṛṣṇa may tell lies. He will say, “Mother, when have
I stolen butter? I never steal. You send Me cowherding
with My friends very early in the morning. I run here
and there with the cows all day long, and when I return
from cowherding in the evening, being very tired I take
My meal and then go to sleep. So when have I stolen this
butter? I have never done it.” Then, when He begins to
weep, Mother Yaśodā says, “Certainly You have stolen the
butter.” Continuing to weep, Kṛṣṇa replies, “Perhaps I
am not your son, and that is why you are accusing Me of
stealing butter. That is why. Maybe I should go away and
live somewhere else.” Yaśodā-maiyā then begins to weep
and her heart melts. She takes Kṛṣṇa in her lap and
says, “I know You have never stolen butter. You have

                            139
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

never done so.” Kṛṣṇa then tells her, “I have done it,
Mother. I have done it.” Then both of them weep. This is
the mood of mādhurya. Mother Yaśodā ties Kṛṣṇa to a
mortar. How would she be able to do this if she knew
that Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead?

There is one point to note here. In Vṛndāvana, even if
there is a manifestation of opulence, it does not
disturb mādhurya-bhāva. There may be opulence, but the
pastimes of Kṛṣṇa still remain nara-vat, like those of a
human boy. His pastimes there do not go beyond the human
level. For example, Pūtanā came and lifted Kṛṣṇa in her
arms and said, “My dear boy, my dear boy,” although she
wanted to poison Him. He closed His eyes as if He were
afraid of her, and did nothing more than simply suck the
milk from her breast. How could He help it if she died?
He never showed any large or wondrous form. He was like
a child, a boy of only three months – but still she was
killed. Although killing Pūtanā was an act of the utmost
spiritual opulence, it still remains a human-like
pastime.

Before this pastime took place, Kaṁsa was engaged in
conquering the world, and at one point he engaged in a
ferocious battle with Pūtanā. Pūtanā was just about to
defeat him in the battle, but Kaṁsa was an expert
politician, so he told her, “Now I accept you as my
sister. You can help me, and I will help you.” In this
way they made an alliance. So Pūtanā was very, very
powerful; it would be extremely difficult to kill a
demon like her, since even Kaṁsa could not defeat her.
That is why Kṛṣṇa’s killing her is an example of His
opulence.

Also, Kṛṣṇa lifted Govardhana and held him aloft for
seven days on His finger, as an elephant would lift a
lotus flower with its trunk. A man cannot do this, but
Kṛṣṇa did it; and He was smiling and sometimes playing
His flute. He was in a dancing mood, in a threefold-
bending position. All the cowherd boys held up their
sticks and touched Govardhana, saying, “Oh, don’t fall –
stay up there!” They were all thinking that they had
lifted Govardhana. At the same time, Nanda Mahārāja, who
was a very exalted devotee of Nārāyaṇa, prayed, “O
Nārāyaṇa, please do not allow this mountain to fall
down.” And what can be said of the gopīs? They are the
very potency of Kṛṣṇa Himself. Rādhikā looked strongly
at Govardhana with a piercing sidelong glance and told
him, “If you drop down, you will be burnt to ashes. You
should remain aloft within My vision.” From everyone’s
point of view, Kṛṣṇa was not doing anything.

In this way, although lifting Govardhana was a very
great opulence, Kṛṣṇa did not assume a large or four-
armed form. Whether there is opulence or no opulence,
His pastimes are called mādhurya if they are human-like.
In Vṛndāvana, Kṛṣṇa is the friend of all the gopas, He
is the beloved of all the young gopīs, and He is the son
of all the elder gopīs.

This atmosphere cannot exist in Dvārakā. There is only
opulence there, and sometimes Kṛṣṇa may assume a four-
handed form or a universal form. He is bound to say, “I
am the son of Vasudeva and Devakī.” He must. He will

                            140
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

have to say, “I am a kṣatriya,” whereas in Vṛndāvana He
thinks, “I am a gopa.” How would He be able to reconcile
this if all the gopīs and gopas were to come to Dvārakā?
The situation would be against the principle of rasa.

The Vṛndāvana mood will never come to Dvārakā. In
Vṛndāvana, Kṛṣṇa can carry His flute and wear a peacock
feather, and He can manifest His beautiful threefold-
bending form as manmatha-manmathaḥ, the enchanter of
Cupid. But He cannot do this in Dvārakā, nor can He
perform rāsa-līlā there. What would all His queens think
if He were to engage in rāsa with the gopīs on the shore
of the ocean in Dvārakā? Thus, the gopīs will never go
to Dvārakā, and Kṛṣṇa also never goes there in His
original and complete feature. He goes there in another
form, and that form is His manifestation. He will be
Vāsudeva there, for Kṛṣṇa Himself cannot give up being
Vrajendra-nandana Śyāmasundara. He cannot give up
Vṛndāvana, even for a moment. Vṛndāvanaṁ parityajya
padam ekaṁ na gacchati: Kṛṣṇa never goes even a step
outside Vṛndāvana.

Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī and Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī have quoted
the Purāṇas to show that in Kṛṣṇa’s last days, just
after He defeated and killed Dantavakra, He left Dvārakā
and went to Gokula, where He met all the Vrajavāsīs.
Weeping bitterly, He embraced them all, and then He
began playing with all the gopīs and gopas. Then, some
days later, He went to Goloka Vṛndāvana and took with
Him His associates such as Nanda Bābā, Yaśodā, all the
mothers, all the sakhīs, all the sakhās, and also His
Vṛndāvana-bhūmi. Vrajendra-nandana Śyāmasundara thus
entered His aprakaṭa-līlā (unmanifest pastimes), while
He simultaneously returned to Dvārakā in His form as
Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa. These are very secret truths.

Similarly, Jagannātha-deva comes to Vṛndāvana once a
year. His queen, Vimalā-devī (i.e. Lakṣmī-devī),
represents Satyabhāmā, Rukmiṇī, and all the other queens
in Dvārakā. Jagannātha lives in Dvārakā for the entire
year, but once a year He wants to go to Vṛndāvana, and
He plays a trick in order to go there.

During the Herā-pañcamī Festival, Caitanya Mahāprabhu
said:

vṛndāvana-sama ei upavana-gaṇa



tāhā dekhibāre utkaṇṭhita haya mana




ŚrīCaitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 14.119)



Pointing out the neighboring gardens, Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu said, “All these gardens exactly resemble
Vṛndāvana; therefore Lord Jagannātha is very eager to
see them again.”

                            141
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017




bāhira ha-ite kare ratha-yātrā-chala



sundarācale yāya prabhu chāḍi’ nīlācala




ŚrīCaitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 14.120)



Externally, Jagannātha gives the excuse that He wants to
participate in the Ratha-yātrā Festival, but actually He
wants to leave Jagannātha Purī to go to Sundarācala, the
Guṇḍicā Temple, a replica of Vṛndāvana.



nānā-puṣpodyāne tathā khele rātri-dine



lakṣmīdevīre saṅge nāhi laya ki kāraṇe?




ŚrīCaitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 14.121)



The Lord enjoys His pastimes day and night in various
flower gardens there. But why does He not take Lakṣmī-
devī, the goddess of fortune, with Him?



Caitanya Mahāprabhu asked Svarūpa Dāmodara, “If Kṛṣṇa is
going to Sundarācala to play, why doesn’t He take
Lakṣmī-devī? He may take everyone with Him to Vṛndāvana.
What’s the harm in taking Lakṣmī-devī?” There is a
reason behind Mahāprabhu’s question: if Kṛṣṇa were to
take Lakṣmī, it would be against the principles of rasa.

Try to understand this subject, and then you will at
once come to the stage of madhyama-adhikāra. You cannot
understand these topics through deity worship alone,
even if you are always absorbed in worshiping the
deities day and night – to understand them you must
regularly hear high-class hari-kathā. Harināma is the
superior process, especially in Kali-yuga: harer nāma,
harer nāma harer nāma eva kevalam / kalāu nāsty eva
nāsty eva nāsty eva gatir anyathā. There are always
difficulties in deity worship. You cannot purchase
paraphernalia for worship if you have no money, and if
anyone steals your deities there will be a big problem.
On the other hand, chanting harināma does not require

                            142
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

any paraphernalia. Deity worship is especially essential
for gṛhastha-bhaktas, but at the same time, you should
not always remain on the level of kaniṣṭha-adhikāra.
Bhakti is like a current. You should gradually develop
your devotion, even if you are worshiping deities, and
then you may come in the proper line.

Mahāprabhu worshiped Girirāja, who was brought to Him by
a devotee returning from Vṛndāvana. He worshiped both a
guñjā-mālā and a govardhana-śilā, but He was bathing the
śilā with His own tears, keeping Him sometimes on His
head or heart, and sometimes on His eyes. Then, after
six years, He gave them to Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī
and told him to perform the daily worship by offering
only one earthen pot full of water and eight mañjarīs
(tulasī buds) with very soft leaves. While Śrīla
Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī was worshiping them, he was
thinking that the guñjā-mālā is Rādhikā, and Girirāja is
Nanda-nandana, Vrajendra-nandana Śyāmasundara. He was
thinking that He was serving Them personally.

We should try to come to the level of madhyama-adhikāra
and realize all these truths. A kaniṣṭha-adhikārī will
not understand, so try to enter madhyama-adhikāra and
keep high-class association. This is the only process.
Reading books will not be sufficient. They can never
help you completely because the lock and key to
understanding them is in the hands of the pure, self-
realized devotees. The pure devotees can open the lock,
and then you can realize these topics.



yāha bhāgavata paḍa vaiṣṇavera sthāne



ekānta āśraya kara caitanya-caraṇe




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya-līlā 5.131)



If you want to understand Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, You must
approach a self-realized Vaiṣṇava and hear from him. You
can do this when you have completely taken shelter of
the lotus feet of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.



Mahāprabhu had asked Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara why Kṛṣṇa did
not take Lakṣmī-devī with Him to Sundarācala; what harm
would there be in that? Svarūpa Dāmodara replied to
Mahāprabhu’s inquiry:



svarūpa kahe – śuna, prabhu, kāraṇa ihāra



                            143
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                         5/5/2017


vṛndāvana-krīḍāte lakṣmīra nāhi adhikāra




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 14.122)



Svarūpa Dāmodara replied, “My dear Lord, please hear the
reason for this. Lakṣmī-devī, the goddess of fortune,
does not have the proper qualifications to enter the
Vṛndāvana pleasure-pastimes.”



Lakṣmī-devī is not qualified to enter Vṛndāvana. There
are eight prominent queens in Dvārakā, headed by
Satyabhāmā and Rukmiṇī, and 16,100 others as well. These
eight are special, but none of them is qualified to go
to Vṛndāvana. First they will have to take birth from
the wombs of gopīs, marry gopas, and then cheat their
husbands and become Kṛṣṇa’s paramours, as all the gopīs
are. They will have to give up their husbands and
everything else. They will be able to serve Kṛṣṇa in
Vṛndāvana if they are under the guidance of the gopīs;
otherwise such service will not be possible. Lakṣmī-devī
could not enter Vṛndāvana, even though she performed
severe austerities in Baelvana. She wanted to cross the
River Yamunā and see the rāsa-līlā, but she could not.

Yogamāyā is greater than Lakṣmī, and she can control
everyone. When she saw Lakṣmī’s austerities, she
approached her and said, “You are a chaste lady, a
brāhmaṇī, married to Nārāyaṇa. Can you give up your
husband and marry somebody else – a gopa?”

Lakṣmī replied, “I cannot do it. How is it possible?”

Yogamāyā said, “Can you make cow dung paddies?”

Lakṣmī replied, “Oh, I cannot do that. I don’t know
how.”

Yogamāyā asked, “Can you milk cows?”

Lakṣmī replied, “I have never done it before.”

Then Yogamāyā told her, “You cannot go to Vṛndāvana,
because you are not qualified. First you would have to
take birth from a gopī’s womb, associate with the gopīs,
and try to follow them. You would have to marry a gopa
like Durmukha, Durmada, Abhimanyu, or Govardhana Malla.
Then, when you have given up that husband, you would be
able to go to Kṛṣṇa and make Him your beloved. This is
the only process.”

In one kalpa it was Yogamāyā who questioned Lakṣmī-devī,
and in another it was Kṛṣṇa Himself, but both of them
had to tell her the same conclusion: she is unfit for
this rasa.


                            144
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

Svarūpa Dāmodara continued:



vṛndāvana-līlāya kṛṣṇera sahāya gopī-gaṇa



gopī-gaṇa vinā kṛṣṇera harite nāre mana




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 14.123)



In the pastimes of Vṛndāvana, the only assistants are
the gopīs. But for the gopīs, no one can attract the
mind of Kṛṣṇa.

Was Svarūpa Dāmodara telling a lie? The gopas are also
there in Vṛndāvana, but he did not mention them. Rather,
he said that no one but the gopīs can control and steal
away Kṛṣṇa’s heart, and Kṛṣṇa Himself has confirmed this
by His statement in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.32.22):



na pāraye ’haṁ niravadya-saṁyujāṁ

sva-sādhu-kṛtyaṁ vibudhāyuṣāpi vaḥ

yā mābhajan durjaya-geha-śṛṅkhalāḥ

saṁvṛścya tad vaḥ pratiyātu sādhunā



[When the gopīs were overwhelmed with dissatisfaction
due to Lord Kṛṣṇa’s absence from the rāsa-līlā, Kṛṣṇa
returned to them and told them:] My dear gopīs, our
meeting is certainly free of all material contamination.
I must admit that in many lives it would be impossible
for Me to repay My debt to you because you have cut off
the bondage of family life just to search for Me.
Consequently I am unable to repay you. Therefore please
be satisfied with your honest activities in this regard.



Kṛṣṇa has said this only to the gopīs; He has not said
it to anyone else. It is stated in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(10.14.32):



aho bhāgyam aho bhāgyaṁ

nanda-gopa-vrajaukasām

yan-mitraṁ paramānandaṁ


                            145
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

pūrṇaṁ brahma sanātanam



How greatly fortunate are Nanda Mahārāja, the cowherd
men, and all the other inhabitants of Vraja-bhūmi! There
is no limit to their good fortune because the Absolute
Truth, the source of transcendental bliss, the eternal
Supreme Brahman, has become their friend.



One can serve Kṛṣṇa in a male form, as a gopa. Nanda
Bābā can serve Kṛṣṇa as His father, and Gargācārya,
Bhāguri Muni, or Śāṇḍilya Ṛṣi can come to Him as guru
and offer Him blessings. Others, such as Sudāmā, Subala,
Madhumaṅgala, and of course Baladeva Prabhu, can also
serve Kṛṣṇa in a male form. However, no one in a male
form can serve Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Especially, no male can
go to that place where Kṛṣṇa is engaged in pastimes with
Rādhikā and the gopīs. Some friends, such as Subala
Sakhā, Madhumaṅgala, Kokila, Bhṛṅga, and other priya-
narma-sakhās who have some mood of mahābhāva, can
approach and help somewhat from a little distance, but
they cannot enter the kuñjas. On the other hand, all the
gopīs can go there.

It is for this reason that Svarūpa Dāmodara especially
mentioned the gopīs. He said that no one but the gopīs
can go there. Even Mother Yaśodā cannot go there. She
has some idea what Kṛṣṇa is doing there,2 but she cannot
go. Mother Rohiṇī also knows somewhat, but she cannot go
there either. She will remain very far away and, like
Mother Yaśodā, pretend not to know anything. Mother
Yaśodā does not know that Kṛṣṇa meets with the gopīs and
engages in amorous pastimes throughout the night. In the
morning, when she sees Kṛṣṇa with many marks on His
body, she thinks, “Oh, all these naughty boys were
playing with Kṛṣṇa, and they have made scratch marks on
Him.”

If you want to serve Kṛṣṇa fully, you must follow the
process given by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and Śrīla Raghunātha
dāsa Gosvāmī. You should hear and learn all the topics
discussed in Rūpa-śikṣā,3 Sanātana-śikṣā,3 especially in
Rāmānanda-saṁvāda, and still more than that, here in
Ratha-yātrā-prasaṅga, the topics of Ratha-yātrā.
Everything is very clear here. The essence of the
teachings that Mahāprabhu gave to Rūpa Gosvāmī in
Prayāga, the essence of what Rūpa Gosvāmī wrote in
Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi – the essence of everything – is all
here.

This subject matter is like very sweet honey in a
bottle, but the cork is very tight. Bees can fly around
the bottle, and they can lick the glass, but they cannot
taste the honey. If you follow the process, the seed of
pure bhakti can be placed in your heart properly, and
you will enter the line of Rūpa and Raghunātha and
realize something. This is our objective. Otherwise, if
you do not follow the process, your chanting and
remembering and your performance of the other types of
the ninefold bhakti process will not take you to
Vṛndāvana.

                            146
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                        5/5/2017


If you are serving Jagannātha in the mood of the
residents of Dvārakā, and not following the gopīs, do
not be disturbed by what I am saying. First become
madhyama-adhikārī, otherwise you will give up the
worship of Jagannātha, Baladeva, Subhadrā, and Gaura-
Nityānanda prematurely. Don’t do anything rashly. First
try to know all these truths, come to the stage of a
madhyama-adhikārī, and then you can be one-pointed in
your devotion to Kṛṣṇa. You cannot be one-pointed at
your present stage. However, if you hear continually in
good association, you will quickly realize what is
helpful and what is not. At present you are not able to
discriminate.

We should know what is bhāvamayi, bhāva-sambandhī,
bhāva-anukūla, bhāva-aviruddha, and bhāva-pratikūla.4
You will not be able to understand this in a day, but
this is our aim and objective. If you are in the line of
Mahāprabhu, you should be in the line of Rūpa and
Raghunātha. Try to know all these established truths,
and follow in their line. On the other hand, if you are
not of this inclination, you can join the Rāmānuja or
Madhvācārya sampradāyas, and chant and perform kīrtana
in their mood of opulence.

Again, Mahāprabhu is telling Svarūpa Dāmodara:



prabhu kahe – yātrā-chale kṛṣṇera gamana



subhadrā āra baladeva, saṅge dui jana




ŚrīCaitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 14.125)



The Lord said, “Using the Chariot Festival as an excuse,
Kṛṣṇa goes there with Subhadrā and Baladeva.”



Kṛṣṇa lives with His thousands of queens in Dvārakā, but
sometimes His remembrance of Vṛndāvana is so strong that
He cannot control Himself. At that time He tells his
queens, represented by Lakṣmī-devī, “Now I am feeling
sick. I want to go somewhere for a change of climate.”
Jagannātha is pretending. He is actually going to
Vṛndāvana, but He does not tell His wife, Lakṣmī-devī.
Lakṣmī replies, “You can go, but return very soon, and
don’t go alone,” and Jagannātha agrees, “I will not go
alone.”

Baladeva is Jagannātha’s brother, and Subhadrā has great
affection for the gopīs; so He took them with Him in the
chariot and went to the Guṇḍicā Mandira, which
represents Vṛndāvana. He went to meet the gopas and

                            147
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

gopīs, Nanda Bābā, and all His other associates of
Vraja. He first went to Nanda-bhavana, and after meeting
with His parents He left Baladeva and Subhadrā there in
Nandagaon and went alone to Vṛndāvana to play with the
gopīs.

Mahāprabhu said:



gopī-saṅge yata līlā haya upavane



nigūḍha kṛṣṇera bhāva keha nāhi jāne




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 14.125)



All the pastimes with the gopīs that take place in the
gardens are very confidential ecstasies of Lord Kṛṣṇa.
No one knows them.



Why does Kṛṣṇa take Baladeva and Subhadrā with Him?
There is a deep meaning behind this. Baladeva and
Subhadrā would be staying with Yaśodā-maiyā. They do not
understand Kṛṣṇa’s confidential pastimes with the gopīs,
and they do not know where He goes alone at night. They
do not know that He is sometimes at Vaṁśīvaṭa, sometimes
at Sevā-kuñja, and sometimes at Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Kṛṣṇa also
goes to these places in the daytime, and He meets the
gopīs there. He is alone with the gopīs there, sometimes
playing on swings, and sometimes gambling with them,
sometimes being defeated by them, and sometimes having
His flute forcibly taken by them. And sometimes they
play in Rādhā-kuṇḍa or Śyāma-kuṇḍa, throwing water on
each other.

Even Yaśodā-maiyā does not actually know what goes on in
these confidential pastime-places. Only Yogamāyā
Paurṇamāsī, Vṛndā, Dhaniṣṭhā, and Kundalātā know.
Sometimes Subala and Madhumaṅgala know, but even when
they know, they do not go there. So Subhadrā and
Baladeva do not know for what purpose Kṛṣṇa has gone to
Vṛndāvana.

Only Kṛṣṇa knows, and He has brought Baladeva and
Subhadrā only so that Lakṣmī-devī will not mistrust Him.
She will not wonder, “Why has He gone away? Has He run
away to Vṛndāvana?” She will believe, “If Baladeva and
Subhadrā are there, they will soon tell Kṛṣṇa, ‘We
should now return to Dvārakā.’”



ataeva kṛṣṇera prākaṭye nāhi kichu doṣa


                            148
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017



tabe kene lakṣmīdevī kare eta roṣa?




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 14.126)



[Caitanya Mahāprabhu now asked the question:] Since
there is no fault in Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes, why does the
goddess of fortune become angry with Him?



What is the deep meaning behind this question? Why is
Mahāprabhu asking it? Kṛṣṇa is going with Baladeva and
Subhadrā-devī, but they do not know why He is going, and
they do not know that He will play with the gopīs here
and there in the nikuñjas. Since no one knows, who has
told Lakṣmī that Kṛṣṇa is going to play with the gopīs?
No one told her. Also, Kṛṣṇa’s elder brother, Baladeva,
is there with Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa cannot do anything wrong in
the presence of His elder brother. Subhadrā, His younger
sister, is also there with Him. In their presence He
cannot meet the gopīs. Why, then, is Lakṣmī so angry?

Svarūpa Dāmodara replied:



svarūpa kahe, – prema-vatīra ei ta’ svabhāva

kāntera audāsya-leśe haya krodha-bhāva



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 14.127)



It is the nature of a girl afflicted by love to become
immediately angry upon finding any neglect on the part
of her lover.



Because of Kṛṣṇa’s delay in returning, Lakṣmī considers
that He is ignoring her. She thinks, “Oh, He has not
returned. He is neglecting me. He is not actually sick,
as He told me; He was pretending. Now He must be playing
with the gopas and gopīs there – and He must be very
happy!” This is the reason for her anger.

If a woman loves her husband, and her husband has a new
lover, what will happen? An Indian lady will take a
bottle of kerosene oil or petrol, pour it on her body,
and set fire to herself; and only her ashes will remain.
In the West there is no such problem. If one’s husband
keeps three, four, five, or more new lovers, no harm;
the wife will also get new boyfriends. In India,

                            149
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

however, this would create a great problem. The wife
will become very angry, even if she feels a very slight
neglect.

In Vṛndāvana there is not only one kind of māna; there
are thousands. Some are without reason, some with
reason, and there are so many kinds of reasons. Māna is
an advanced stage of prema, and manifests when there is
sthāyibhāva. Upon that sthāyibhāva, uddīpana and
ālambana manifest, and then all the sāttvika-bhāvas and
thirty-three kinds of vyabhicārī moods become manifest.
Vibhāva, anubhāva, sāttvika, and vyabhicārī5 all mix
together on the platform of sthāyibhāva, of which there
are five kinds, and they never change. Before
sthāyibhāva comes rati, and then, after some time,
sthāyibhāva descends from a rāgātmikā-bhakta of Goloka
Vṛndāvana, and that sthāyibhāva is the permanent
platform of prema.

What is the nature of prema? Even when there are many
strong and compelling reasons to break one’s love and
affection, it will increase hundreds of thousands of
times instead. That is prema. There is no self-interest
there. The gopīs only want to please Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa
wants to please the gopīs. It is not like the so-called
love of this world, which ends in quarrel and divorce.

After prema comes sneha, the stage in which one’s heart
will melt if one sees Kṛṣṇa, and one’s eyes will be
always full of tears. There are two kinds of sneha:
ghṛta-sneha and madhu-sneha. Śrīmatī Rādhikā has madhu-
sneha, and Candrāvalī and others like her have ghṛta-
sneha. Madhu-sneha occurs when a gopī thinks, “Kṛṣṇa is
mine,” whereas the mood, “I am Kṛṣṇa’s” is the ghṛta-
sneha of Candrāvalī.

After sneha comes praṇaya, which can be understood by
the following example. We can take massage and bathe in
front of our shadows, or in front of a mirror, without
feeling any shame. We can be naked in front of the
mirror because only our reflection is with us, but we
will be ashamed if another person is present. Similarly,
praṇaya is the stage at which sneha increases to such an
extent that one thinks she and Kṛṣṇa are one soul in two
bodies – like a person and his reflection in a mirror.

After praṇaya comes māna. Sometimes māna arises before
praṇaya, but the general process is that intense praṇaya
comes first, and māna comes after that. Māna appears
when one thinks, “Kṛṣṇa will surely come and pacify me.
He is bound to come.” If this strong faith is there,
that is māna. There are many kinds of māna, as mentioned
earlier, some without reason, and some with reason – and
there are many kinds of reasons.

Rādhikā has unlimited moods. The prominent ones number
360, and therefore there are 360 kinds of gopīs. All the
gopīs have separate individual moods, and all these
moods are found in Śrīmatī Rādhikā. In other words, all
the gopīs are manifestations of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. All the
gopīs and their different moods have manifested by Her
desire, and She is a combination of them all. All moods
reside in Rādhikā, and Her various moods are manifest in
different gopīs. Lalitā is prakharā (outspoken), some

                            150
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

gopīs are dhirā (sober), some adhirā (restless), and so
on. Svarūpa Dāmodara was explaining this, and Mahāprabhu
replied, “More, more, more – I want to hear more.”

When those who have the mood “I am Kṛṣṇa’s” are in māna,
they will weep. They will not protest or call Kṛṣṇa ill
names, and they cannot speak any harsh words to Him;
they will only weep. However, those with the mood that
“Kṛṣṇa is mine” become very angry, and in their anger
they will shoot Kṛṣṇa with the arrows of their harsh
words. When Kṛṣṇa comes to those whose mood is in
between the two aforementioned moods, they will not say
very much. They may say, “You can come. Oh, now You are
very tired.” They will give Him a seat, and sometimes
they will speak harsh, taunting words like, “Oh, You
look so beautiful. You now look like Śaṅkara Mahādeva –
Nīla-rohita Rudra.”6

While Caitanya Mahāprabhu was tasting all this kathā, He
said, “I have never heard anything like this before –
that Lakṣmī has come with her whole party as a
commander-in-chief, as if to attack.” Lakṣmī began to
beat Kṛṣṇa’s chariot, and Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita began
clapping. He was very happy that the associates of
Lakṣmī were chastising the associates of Vṛndāvana,
imprisoning them, “beating” them, taking a fine from
them, taking their garlands and ornaments, and punishing
them.



śrīvāsa hāsiyā kahe, – śuna, dāmodara



āmāra lakṣmīra dekha sampatti vistara




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 14.203)



At this time, Śrīvāsa Ṭhākura smiled and told Svarūpa
Dāmodara, “My dear sir, please hear! Just see how
opulent my goddess of fortune is!”



vṛndāvanera sampad dekha, – puṣpa-kisalaya



giridhātu-śikhipiccha-guñjāphala-maya




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 14.204)

“As far as Vṛndāvana’s opulence is concerned, it

                            151
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

consists of a few flowers and twigs, some minerals from
the hills, a few peacock feathers, and the plant known
as guñjā.”



Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita smiled and said, “There are no golden
crowns in Vṛndāvana. There are only flutes made of dry
bamboo, and some peacock feathers, and Kṛṣṇa only wears
a pītāmbara and flower garlands. There is nothing of any
value there.”



eta sampatti chāḍi’ kene gelā vṛndāvana



tāṅre hāsya karite lakṣmī karilā sājana




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 14.206)



Lakṣmī wondered, “Why did Lord Jagannātha give up so
much opulence and go to Vṛndāvana?” To make Him a
laughing-stock, the goddess of fortune made arrangements
for much decoration.



People in the mood of opulence may think like this. They
are all on the side of Lakṣmī-devī. Svarūpa Dāmodara,
however, being Lalitā in kṛṣṇa-līlā, is of her mood and
therefore a pure Vrajavāsī.



tomāra ṭhākura, dekha eta sampatti chāḍi’



patra-phala-phula-lobhe gelā puṣpa-bāḍī




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 14.207)



[Then the maidservants of the goddess of fortune said to
the servants of Lord Jagannātha:] Why did your Lord
Jagannātha abandon the great opulence of the goddess of
fortune and, for the sake of a few leaves, fruits, and
flowers, go see the flower garden of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī?




                            152
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja wrote these
translations; I am not saying all this. He has
translated the verses, and I am only reading them, so I
am not “guilty.” If anyone says, “Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja is a
sahajiyā and that is why he is saying all these things,”
then my śikṣā-guru, Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja, must be a
greater sahajiyā than me. He will be the guru of the
sahajiyās, and Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, who has
written ŚrīCaitanya-caritāmṛta, will be the mahā-guru of
all sahajiyās. If that is the case, there is no harm in
being “sahajiyā.” If all my gurus are “sahajiyā,” I will
also want to be “sahajiyā.” Actually, those who
criticize may claim to be in the line of Mahāprabhu, but
they are not in the line of our guru-paramparā, of Rūpa-
Raghunātha, or of Svarūpa Dāmodara. Others may say
whatever they like, but we will remain very securely in
the line of Svarūpa Dāmodara. We follow Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja, and we follow his
translations:



“Your master is so expert at everything. Why does He do
such things? Please bring your master before the goddess
of fortune.” In this way, all the maidservants of the
goddess of fortune arrested the servants of Jagannātha,
bound them around the waist, and brought them before the
goddess of fortune. When all the maidservants brought
Lord Jagannātha’s servants before the lotus feet of the
goddess of fortune, the Lord’s servants were fined and
forced to submit. All the maidservants began to beat the
ratha with sticks, and they treated the servants of Lord
Jagannātha almost like thieves. (Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta
(Madhya-līlā 14.208–11))



Here, Jagannātha’s servants were the associates of
Mahāprabhu, and those who were with Lakṣmī-devī were
also the servants of Jagannātha.



saba bhṛtya-gana kahe – yoḍa kari’ hāta



‘kāli āni diba tomāra āge jagannātha’




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 14.212)



Finally all of Lord Jagannātha’s servants submitted to
the goddess of fortune with folded hands, assuring her
that they would bring Lord Jagannātha before her the
very next day.




                            153
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

Jagannātha’s servants made this promise, and then Lakṣmī
fined and punished them and returned to her abode. Now
Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita asked Svarūpa Dāmodara the following
question: “Do you know that all the gopas and gopīs in
Vṛndāvana are very poor? They have no golden ornaments.
They only milk cows and make butter, ghee, and similar
things, and then they use it all themselves. Vṛndāvana
is not like Mathurā and Dvārakā; there are no palaces
there, and the residents have only carts and kuñjas. All
the garlands there are made of flowers, whereas the
garlands in Dvārakā are made of pearls, diamonds, and
other jewels. So why does Kṛṣṇa go to Vṛndāvana?”

Kṛṣṇa goes to Vṛndāvana because the natural love and
affection there is not found in Dvārakā, or anywhere
else. In Dvārakā, love and affection is controlled by
rules and regulations, just as the Vedas control by
rules and regulations. In Vṛndāvana there is no control,
for the gopīs serve Kṛṣṇa by their parakīya mood. This
is possible only in Vṛndāvana, not in Mathurā and
Dvārakā.



svarūpa kahe, – śrīvāsa, śuna sāvadhāne



vṛndāvana-sampad tomāra nāhi paḍe mane?




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 14.218)



Svarūpa Dāmodara then retorted, “My dear Śrīvāsa, please
hear me with attention. You have forgotten the
transcendental opulence of Vṛndāvana.”



vṛndāvane sāhajika ye sampat-sindhu



dvārakā-vaikuṇṭha-sampat – tāra eka bindu




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 14.219)

“The natural opulence of Vṛndāvana is just like an
ocean. The opulence of Dvārakā and Vaikuntha is not even
to be compared to a drop.”



One flower of Vṛndāvana can give millions of diamonds
and other opulences, though Kṛṣṇa’s associates do not

                            154
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

want that. They only make garlands for decoration, and
their ankle bells are made of desire stones (cintāmaṇi)
although they have no need of them. They only use them
when they are dancing.

Suppose you are very wealthy and have many millions of
dollars, but you are not getting any love and affection;
and suppose that somewhere else there is no wealth, but
there is love and affection. Where would you prefer to
be? As long as there is love and affection, there is no
loss in being poor. Similarly, there is no deficiency in
Vṛndāvana because there is only love and affection.
Vṛndāvana is the place of the most elevated love and
affection.

Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality, and therefore He wants
to taste supreme love and affection. He is not satisfied
with any second-class love. Svarūpa Dāmodara was
explaining this, and Mahāprabhu responded, “More, more!
I want to hear more!” The topics presented at the Herā-
pañcamī Festival are all very secret topics from
Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi. Mahāprabhu questioned, and Svarūpa
Dāmodara replied with many ślokas regarding all the
moods of madhyā, pragalbhā, dhīrā, adhīrā, mugdhā,7 and
so on. Try to be at least in madhyama-adhikāra, and then
try to understand all these topics. This is the aim and
object of everyone in Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s line.

Why Kṛṣṇa did not take Lakṣmī



For advanced devotees, who are conversant with the
truths concerning this līlā, the Herā-pañcamī Festival
is superior even to that of Jagannātha’s riding to
Sundarācala. Such devotees know why Caitanya Mahāprabhu
descended to this world. If you are not reading and
hearing the Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, you can
never know why He came, and you will be cheated. Try to
hear Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam from elevated Vaiṣṇavas, and do
not listen to those who say, “Oh, we should not read the
Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.”

Actually, there are three reasons one may say this. The
first is that one has no knowledge, and the second is
that one is following the order of the good devotees who
know everything. These devotees are actually telling us,
“You should begin from the First Canto, proceed to the
Ninth Canto, and then you can finally come to the Tenth
Canto.” The third reason is to create an interest. For
example, one may close his fist and ask, “What is in my
hand? Can you tell what is in my hand?” If someone else
hears this, he may become curious to know. Similarly, if
anyone says, “Don’t read the Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam,” an aspiring devotee will automatically
become curious and ask, “What is there? I should know.”

In my village there was a devotee who used to bathe in
the Gaṅgā every day. If anyone said to him, “Rāma!
Rāma!” he would appear very furious and hold his stick
up as though he wanted to beat that person. The boys of
all the nearby villages used to come to him and say,
“Rāma! Rāma!” and he used to run after them. Why did he
do this? It was just to enthuse them to say, “Rāma!

                            155
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

Rāma!” It was like a game. Similarly, if anyone tells
you not to read Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, you should be curious
to know, “What is inside? There must be some jewel
there.”

If you do not read and hear the Tenth Canto, you will
never be able to decide the aim and object of your life
and devotion. For example, if you hear about Mother
Yaśodā, a greed for motherly love may arise. You may
begin to think about how she loves Kṛṣṇa, the Supreme
Personality of Godhead, and how she bound Him with her
love and affection. A greed for friendship may arise
when you hear that the cowherd boys sometimes play with
Kṛṣṇa, and when you hear that Kṛṣṇa is their life and
soul, and that they cannot remain alive unless they are
playing with Kṛṣṇa; they will die. If Kṛṣṇa hides behind
a tree for a moment, all the cowherd boys wonder
anxiously, “Where is Kṛṣṇa? Where is Kṛṣṇa?” And, if you
hear the most elevated topic in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, the
service of the gopīs to Kṛṣṇa – and especially what is
told in Gopī-gīta, Veṇu-gīta, Bhramara-gīta, and other
such chapters – you may develop a greed for this
service. This is the aim and objective of the most
exalted and pure devotees, and it is not possible to
develop greed without reading and knowing Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam.

The first nine cantos create a platform for the Tenth
Canto by removing all your unwanted desires, offenses,
and worldly requirements and attachments. After that you
should read the Tenth Canto, then you should decide how
to attain the goal of life, and then you should read the
Eleventh Canto.

An even easier process is to follow the essence of
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and that essence is Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta. You will have to read Caitanya-caritāmṛta
and the books of Rūpa Gosvāmī, Sanātana Gosvāmī, Jīva
Gosvāmī, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja
Gosvāmī, Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura, Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura, and Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. In particular,
Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura and Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura have
explained the essence of Caitanya-caritāmṛta in language
that can be understood easily. If you want to be pure
and high-class devotees, you must know all the truths
presented in their literature.

Book distribution will not suffice by itself, and
neither will nagara-saṅkīrtana. Why did Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu bring nagara-saṅkīrtana to this world? You
will have to know the real reason. He did so only to
give gopī-prema. And why did our ācāryas bring the
process of book distribution? It is so that you will
discover the nectar in those books. You must first read
the books yourself, have faith and realize something,
and then your life will be successful. Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja has written about all these
truths in his books, and he himself has said that book
distribution alone will not do; you will have to go deep
and realize the nectar within. He has produced the Kṛṣṇa
book, which is a summary of the Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam, and everything is there, completely. There
he has instructed us to learn about the gopīs’ pure
service to Kṛṣṇa.

                            156
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017


You should know all these facts; otherwise you will
always be lusty. You must read the Tenth Canto in order
to avoid lust. Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja has vividly
clarified this point in his books, and I have quoted
many of his statements in this regard. You should have
strong faith in this. Once he wrote a letter to a
disciple who was very lusty. The disciple had asked, “I
am very lusty. What should I do?” He replied, “You
should read the Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam,
especially the chapters describing the rāsa-līlā. Then
this lust will go, and real transcendental lust for
Kṛṣṇa will come.” Actually, that transcendental lust is
not lust; it is prema. Unless you read and hear, you
cannot realize all these truths.

Now we are coming again to our subject: Herā-pañcamī.
Jagannātha was not alone when He departed on His
chariot. He was with Subhadrā and Baladeva. But why did
Lakṣmī become furious? Jagannātha had become indifferent
to her and was meeting with others. She felt neglected
and became angry over this.

You should know the significance of these three places:
Jagannātha Purī, Vṛndāvana, and Kurukṣetra. First you
should know the significance of Jagannātha Purī. Kṛṣṇa
is the son of Vasudeva and Devakī there. He never has a
flute in His hand, He does not wear a peacock feather,
and He cannot address Nanda Bābā as “Father” or Yaśodā-
maiyā as “Mother.” He will have to forget the gopīs
while He is there. He can think about them in His heart,
but He will not tell any of His queens, like Satyabhāmā,
Rukmiṇī, and others, “I love the gopīs more than you.”
He can never say this.

Jagannātha Purī is Dvārakā. All the Yādavas are there,
and Kṛṣṇa sports with all His queens there. Do you know
Vimalā-devī in the Jagannātha Temple? Rukmiṇī is like
Vimalā-devī. Lakṣmī-devī is also there, and she
represents all the queens, especially Rukmiṇī and
Satyabhāmā. There are no gopīs in the Jagannātha Temple
or Jagannātha Purī. They can never be there, and that is
why it is Dvārakā Purī.

What is Kurukṣetra? Kṛṣṇa has come from Dvārakā to
Kurukṣetra, and therefore it is part of His dvārakā-
līlā. There is a speciality there, though, in that Nanda
Bābā, Yaśodā-maiyā, all the gopīs like Rādhā, Lalitā,
Viśākhā, and most of the other Vrajavāsīs went there to
meet with Kṛṣṇa. Still, there is immense opulence there,
whereas in Vṛndāvana the gopīs freely play with Kṛṣṇa.

Lakṣmī-devī thinks, “There is so much opulence here. Why
should Dvārakādhīśa-Kṛṣṇa go to any impoverished place?”
Kṛṣṇa never told her, “I am going to Vṛndāvana.” He
cheated Her by saying, “I have caught a cold. Now I want
to go somewhere to get some fresh air. I want to go to a
forest, to get a breath of fresh air and feel
rejuvenated.” He played a trick so that Lakṣmī would not
think He was going to run off to Vṛndāvana. To cheat
Her, He took along His brother Baladeva Prabhu and His
sister Subhadrā. He was thinking, “Yaśodā-maiyā knows
them, and Rohiṇī also knows them. I will leave them with
Yaśodā-maiyā and then I will stealthily go to Rādhā-

                            157
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

kuṇḍa, Śyāma-kuṇḍa, and Girirāja-Govardhana, where all
the beautiful kuñjas are situated. I will play with all
the gopīs there. Baladeva Prabhu and Subhadrā will take
their meals with Mother Yaśodā and be very happy there,
and I will go and play. No one will know.” He did not
tell anyone where He was going, and He ran at once to
Vṛndāvana – Sundarācala. Mahāprabhu’s mood has revealed
that the Guṇḍicā Mandira in Sundarācala is Vṛndāvana.
Before Mahāprabhu, no one knew all these high truths,
but now everyone can know.



kṛṣṇo ’nyo yadu-sambhūto

yaḥ pūrṇaḥ so ’sty ataḥ paraḥ

vṛndāvanaṁ parityajya

sa kvacin naiva gacchati



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya-līlā 1.67)



The Kṛṣṇa known as Yadu-kumāra is Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa. He is
different from the Kṛṣṇa who is the son of Nanda
Mahārāja. Yadu-kumāra Kṛṣṇa manifests His pastimes in
the cities of Mathurā and Dvārakā, but Kṛṣṇa the son of
Nanda Mahārāja never at any time leaves Vṛndāvana.



vṛndāvanaṁ parityajya padam ekaṁ na gacchati



Kṛṣṇa never goes even a step from Vṛndāvana.



It is because of Rādhikā that Kṛṣṇa never leaves
Vṛndāvana. He stays there only for Her, and both of Them
do not go anywhere else. Then who went to Kurukṣetra?
Rādhikā will never go there. It was Saṁyoginī-Rādhikā,
who is Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Rādhikā’s manifestation, and
not directly Rādhikā Herself, who went to Kurukṣetra.
Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Rādhikā will always remain at Rādhā-
kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa in Vṛndāvana. If Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa
are always together in Vṛndāvana, why does Rādhikā feel
so much separation from Kṛṣṇa, and why does She always
weep for Him? Sometimes She becomes so absorbed in love
and affection in separation from Kṛṣṇa that even when
She sees a tamāla tree, She thinks, “O Kṛṣṇa! O Kṛṣṇa!
Oh, now You are here.” She quarrels with “Him,” becomes
angry with Him, and sometimes She embraces that tamāla
tree as if it were Him. How can there be a separation
mood there in Vṛndāvana?

There is no actual separation in Vṛndāvana, but there is
some separation mood. In Vṛndāvana there is the rāsa-
līlā, and Prema-sarovara as well, and Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa

                            158
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

feel great ecstasy in meeting there. Who experiences the
separation mood in Nandagaon? Who met with Uddhava? To
whom did Uddhava offer his prayers?



vande nanda-vraja-strīṇāṁ

pāda-reṇum abhīkṣṇaśaḥ

yāsāṁ hari-kathodgītaṁ

punāti bhuvana-trayam



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.47.63)



[Uddhava prayed:] I forever pray to the dust of the
lotus feet of the gopīs in Nandagaon. The hari-kathā
emanating from their lotus mouths in their separation
mood purifies the entire universe.



āsām aho caraṇa-reṇu-juṣām ahaṁ syāṁ

vṛndāvane kim api gulma-latauṣadhīnām

yā dustyajaṁ sva-janam ārya-pathaṁ ca hitvā

bhejur mukunda-padavīṁ śrutibhir vimṛgyām



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.47.61)

The gopīs of Vṛndāvana have given up the association of
their husbands, sons, and other family members, who are
very difficult to give up, and they have forsaken the
path of chastity to take shelter of the lotus feet of
Mukunda, Kṛṣṇa, which one should search for by Vedic
knowledge. Oh, let me be fortunate enough to be one of
the bushes, creepers, or herbs in Vṛndāvana, because the
gopīs trample them and bless them with the dust of their
lotus feet.



In Nandagaon, Rādhikā is Viyoginī-Rādhikā, another
manifestation of Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Rādhikā. Vṛṣabhānu-
nandinī Rādhikā has practically no separation mood at
all, for She and Kṛṣṇa always meet together and embrace.
Her manifestation, Viyoginī-Rādhikā, is present in
Nandagaon, and She appears as Saṁyoginī in Kurukṣetra.
You cannot deeply understand these truths without being
constantly in the association of pure Vaiṣṇavas.

At the Ratha-yātrā Festival, Mahāprabhu experiences the
moods of Saṁyoginī-Rādhikā in Kurukṣetra, not those of
Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī. Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Rādhikā will never
leave Vṛndāvana and go to Mathurā or Dvārakā, even if

                            159
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa weeps bitterly for Her there. Viyoginī-Rādhikā
will also not give up Vṛndāvana to go to Kurukṣetra;
only Saṁyoginī-Rādhikā will go there. So at the Ratha-
yātrā Festival, Mahāprabhu is absorbed in the mood of
Saṁyoginī-Rādhikā, pulling Kṛṣṇa on the chariot from the
Jagannātha Temple – that is, from Dvārakā Purī – to
Vṛndāvana. What can I say more than this? No one can say
anything more.

Lakṣmī came with her associates, riding on a golden
palanquin and profusely decorated with golden ornaments.
She arrived at the Siṁha-dvāra along with musicians
beating drums, and dancing girls who were Jagannātha’s
devā-dāsīs. Caitanya Mahāprabhu was sitting very
comfortably there, and He listened to the dialogue that
ensued.

Why did Kṛṣṇa not take Lakṣmī-devī to Vṛndāvana? She
could not go, because she was not qualified. Even
Satyabhāmā and Rukmiṇī were not qualified to go to
Vṛndāvana, and that is why they never went. One may ask,
“What harm would there be if Rādhikā and all the gopīs
went to Dvārakā?” There would be so much harm; they
would not be satisfied there. They would see Rukmiṇī,
Satyabhāmā, and all Kṛṣṇa’s queens with Him, and He
would not be able to leave their company. Sometimes
Kṛṣṇa’s sons would come to sit on His lap, and Śrīmatī
Rādhikā would not be able to do anything about it. So
She will never go there – never.

If Rādhikā does not go to Dvārakā, how can Lakṣmī go to
Vṛndāvana? She cannot go. After she performed
austerities in Baelvana for thousands and thousands of
years, Kṛṣṇa came and asked her, “Why are you doing
this?” She replied, “I desire a benediction from You. I
want to join the rāsa-līlā.” Kṛṣṇa said, “That is absurd
– you cannot.” “Why not?” she asked. “I’ll tell you
why,” Kṛṣṇa replied. “After this birth, you will have to
take birth in the womb of a gopī in Vṛndāvana, and then
you will have to marry a gopa. After that you will have
to associate with nitya-siddha-gopīs, and only then you
can join the rāsa-līlā, when you are sufficiently
purified.” Even a gopī who has come from the womb of a
gopī is unqualified if she has any children by her
husband. None of the gopīs in the rāsa-līlā have had any
children, and they have nothing to do with their
husbands.

Kṛṣṇa continued, “So how can you go? You will have to
give up your brāhmaṇī body and your chastity to
Nārāyaṇa. You will have to cheat your gopa husband and
absorb yourself in parakīya-bhāva. Then, in the form of
a gopī, you can join the rāsa-līlā.” Lakṣmī objected,
“How can I give up my husband Nārāyaṇa? I cannot give
Him up, I cannot give up my chastity, and I cannot marry
a gopa.” Then Kṛṣṇa said, “Then wait, wait. You will
obtain this boon from Me when you are able to do all
these things.” Even now Lakṣmī is performing
austerities, but she is still not qualified.

You may want this gopī-prema, but it is so very high.
Caitanya Mahāprabhu was very merciful, and He descended
to the material world to give it. It is very precious –
more so than anything. It is very difficult to attain

                            160
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

even for Nārada, Lakṣmī, Śaṅkara, and all the other
great personalities, so what to speak of lesser
personalities? However, if someone has pure greed to
serve Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala, and to serve in the rāsa-līlā,
he is very fortunate.

Let us say someone has become greedy for a rasagullā,
and there is no money in his pocket. Then by grabbing
it, stealing it, or by any means he will get it. In the
same way, if you have that kind of high-class greed for
gopī-prema, an opportunity will come to attain it. Where
there is a will, there is a way; the way must come.

Kṛṣṇa Himself gave the way in His form as Caitanya
Mahāprabhu. He also sent His devotees like Svarūpa
Dāmodara, Rāya Rāmānanda, Rūpa Gosvāmī, Raghunātha dāsa
Gosvāmī, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura, Śrīla Prabhupāda, our gurudeva, and Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja. I have also come, and I
want to give you a little greed for this gopī-prema,
which is the aim and object of our lives. I have not
come to give vaidhī-bhakti, because so many people
coming from India are giving that. They will tell you to
serve Jagannātha, Baladeva, and Subhadrā, and they will
tell you not to read the Tenth Canto of Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam. I have not come for this. I have come in the
line of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, and in the line of Śrīla
Prabhupāda, my gurudeva, and my śikṣā-guru, Śrīla Swāmī
Mahārāja.

A person will not hear if he has no greed for the goal
of life. He is sleeping now, and he will continue to
sleep. If he has no greed or interest, he must sleep
like the camels, dogs, hogs, pigs, and especially like
the donkeys. I have only come for those who have some
taste and greed for this, and I have come to give this
greed to those who want it, so that they can advance in
the line of Mahāprabhu.

When Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita heard these topics from Śrī Svarūpa
Dāmodara, he began to laugh very loudly, “Hee, hee! Ho,
ho!” Caitanya Mahāprabhu was deeply absorbed in the
moods of the festival, and He watched silently as
Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita continued to laugh and tell Svarūpa
Dāmodara, “You don’t know anything. Don’t you see the
opulence of my ārādhya-devī (worshipable deity) Lakṣmī-
devī? She is decorated with golden ornaments, and she
sits on a golden palanquin like a commander-in-chief
with all her associates. But in Vṛndāvana, there is
nothing. The gopīs there can make some garlands, but
only from flowers; there is no abundance of diamonds or
gold – nothing of the kind. There are no golden
palanquins. There are only bullock-carts made of wood
and bamboo. There is nothing there; only flowers. There
are some cows there, giving milk, and there is forest.
Kṛṣṇa can only graze His cows there. He has no throne to
sit on, and He doesn’t even have shoes or an umbrella.
He goes cowherding barefoot, and if He doesn’t do this,
His father may chastise Him.”

Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita continued:




                             161
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

vṛndāvana dekhibāre gelā jagannātha



śuni’ lakṣmī-devīra mane haila āsoyātha




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 14.205)



When Jagannātha decided to see Vṛndāvana, He went there,
and upon hearing this, the goddess of fortune
experienced restlessness and jealousy.



Lakṣmī, who represents Satyabhāmā and the other queens,
thought angrily, “Here in Dvārakā, my husband is always
sitting on a golden throne, and He has so many military
commanders-in-chief, and so many beautiful queens, and
each queen has ten sons and a daughter. Why did Kṛṣṇa go
to Vṛndāvana?”

I have seen something like this in my boyhood. My mother
would give me a slap if she was giving me something
sweet and I wanted something else instead. So Lakṣmī was
very unhappy and angry, and she tried to attack her
husband to force Him to come under her control. She
wanted to defeat Him and bring Him back to Dvārakā by
quarreling and attacking Him.

Mahāprabhu smiled somewhat and said, “Oh, Śrīvāsa
Paṇḍita has the nature of Nārada. He always glorifies
Lakṣmī and Nārāyaṇa, and Dvārakādhīśa. Svarūpa Dāmodara
is a pure Vrajavāsī, and that is why he glorifies the
gopīs. Śrīvāsa cannot do so.”

Almost everyone in this world and universe glorifies
Lakṣmī. Very, very few and rare people glorify the gopīs
and Kṛṣṇa. This is true even in India. There are some
groups that put forward the view that Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
is not authentic evidence. They say that someone other
than Vyāsadeva compiled it; so it is bogus, and
therefore the love and affection of the gopīs is also
bogus. There are many who reject all these topics, and
only high-class devotees have a taste for them.

Svarūpa Dāmodara then said, “O Śrīvāsa, don’t you
remember that the trees in Vṛndāvana are kalpa-vṛkṣa
(desire trees)? They can give millions of tons of gold,
and everything else. Anyone can have whatever he desires
from those trees, but the gopīs have no personal
desires. They simply decorate their hair with the
flowers of those trees.

“The ankle-bells of the gopīs are made of cintāmaṇi, but
the gopīs never use them for fulfilling their desires;
they only wear them to make sweet sounds while they
dance with Kṛṣṇa. The cows are kāma-dhenu. What does
that mean? They not only give milk, but they give the

                            162
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

“milk” of the fulfillment of all desires. They can give
anything a person wants, but the gopas and gopīs don’t
want anything from them. They only want milk and butter.
You don’t know all these truths because you have not
gone to Vṛndāvana. You don’t know even the A-B-C’s of
Vṛndāvana. The flowers there are more valuable than the
pārijāta flowers of the heavenly planets. They are
always fragrant, and they never become stale. They can
give anything, but you don’t remember this.”

He then quoted Brahma-saṁhitā (5.56): “śrīyaḥ kāntā-
kāntaḥ parama-puruṣaḥ – in the spiritual world, all the
female lovers are goddesses of fortune and the male
lover is the Supreme Personality.” After Śrīvāsa Ṭhākura
heard all this from Svarūpa Dāmodara, his mood changed.
He entered the mood of Madhumaṅgala,8 Kṛṣṇa’s intimate
sakhā in Vraja, and then he began to dance, remembering
the glories of Vraja.

After Mahāprabhu heard Svarūpa Dāmodara’s kathā, He went
to a flower garden and along with the devotees took rest
there. Then, after He awoke and bathed, He began singing
and dancing with His devotees, absorbed in kṛṣṇa-prema.
Then, when they had performed kīrtana throughout the
day, Svarūpa Dāmodara tricked Mahāprabhu by telling Him,
“Now we are all tired, so please stop Your dancing.
Jagannātha-deva has sent very beautiful and sweet
prasāda, like rice, dahl, purī, kacaurī, chenā (curd),
paida (coconut), pāna (fruit juice), sara-purī (a kind
of purī made with cream), and many other varieties of
preparations.” Mahāprabhu began to distribute the
prasāda Himself, but Svarūpa Dāmodara said, “Everyone is
waiting for You. No one will take prasāda if You don’t
take.” Then Mahāprabhu sat down and began to taste the
prasāda, and everyone called out, “Hari bol!”

You can read this discussion between Śrīvāsa Paṇḍita and
Svarūpa Dāmodara in its entirety in ŚrīCaitanya-
caritāmṛta [Madhya-līlā, Chapter 14].




CHAPTER EIGHT

THE THIRD HISTORY


We have discussed many topics regarding the Festival of
the Chariots, and about the deities of Jagannātha,
Baladeva, and Subhadrā, but I do not think that we have
touched even a small fraction of their glory. Even if
Anantadeva would come with his thousands and thousands
of hoods to glorify Lord Jagannātha, and Jagannātha
Himself appeared before him, Anantadeva would still not
be able to glorify Him properly.

We have already related two histories explaining
Jagannātha’s appearance, and there is one more, a third
history, which came from the heart of a very advanced
devotee. This history has extraordinarily deep and
secret rasa, transcendental flavor. I used to relate it
in Mathurā and Vṛndāvana, and in Jagannātha Purī as

                            163
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

well. When I told it, everyone listened silently, and
they were moved, for they had never heard such secrets
before. They wondered, “Where has he discovered this?”

A few years later I saw a magazine article by Śrīla Gour
Govinda Mahārāja, a prominent disciple of Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja. As I began to read it, I
thought, “Oh, he has written the same thing here with a
few small changes. How has he taken this from my heart?”
I became happy and thought, “This person, Gour Govinda
Mahārāja, is one of the rare people in this world who
are genuinely in the line of Caitanya Mahāprabhu and the
Gosvāmīs. Only a real devotee can know all these
truths.”

A few years ago, while I was translating some books in
Jagannātha Purī, Gour Govinda Mahārāja came with only
one disciple to meet me. He heard my hari-kathā very
patiently, and he was charmed. We became friends, and he
told me, “I saw you in Vṛndāvana at the time of Śrīla
Prabhupāda’s disappearance, when you placed him in
samādhi. I was there, but at that time I was quite
insignificant. You moved me very much, and I wanted to
meet you and hear your classes, but I could not do so at
that time. Now I have come.”

He continued, “There are some problems. I cannot speak
the glories of Caitanya Mahāprabhu and Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. I am
controlled by some people who don’t want to hear them.
They are creating problems, and even stopping me from
going to Australia, Germany, and other countries. I
cannot open my heart and tell these glories,” and he
began to weep. I embraced him and said, “Don’t worry –
be strong like me. If problems come, jump over them like
a lion. Be like Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja and
my gurudeva.” I consoled him so much, and then he went
away. The next year he went to Māyāpura, and there he
departed from this world while relating this very
history. Many of his disciples came to me weeping, and I
told them, “I will help you. Don’t worry.” His ideas
were very similar to my own, and this story is therefore
also related to him.

What I explained there in Jagannātha Purī and during our
grand Navadvīpa Chariot Festival has also been published
in our monthly magazine, BhāgavataPatrikā. I also
searched for the scripture in which this pastime was
originally written, but no one could tell me where it
was. I asked many learned paṇḍās in Jagannātha Purī, and
they could only tell me, “We’ve read it, and we’ll have
to search for the original book,” but they could not
produce it.



Kṛṣṇa returns to Vṛndāvana



All the Vrajavāsīs feel great separation when Kṛṣṇa goes
to Mathurā and Dvārakā, especially Mother Yaśodā and
Nanda Bābā, and above all, Kṛṣṇa’s beloved gopīs.
Sometimes they faint and lose consciousness, appearing
as if dead, and one may even think, “Oh, they have

                             164
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

died!” Kṛṣṇa also feels separation from the gopīs, and
especially from Rādhikā. Sometimes He also loses
external consciousness, and He remains in that state for
many days.

As we hear and discuss these elevated topics, we feel
proud and think, “My gurudeva and I are in the line of
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī as rūpānuga Vaiṣṇavas.” The senior
devotees are especially aware that our guru-varga, the
gurus in our disciplic succession, are all rūpānuga
Vaiṣṇavas. We should therefore understand Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī’s mood at this Festival of the Chariots.

As discussed previously, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu was
reciting a verse of Sāhitya-darpaṇa over and over again,
even though it was originally written in the base mood
of mundane lovers and is thus against moral etiquette:



yaḥ kaumāra-haraḥ sa eva hi varas tā eva caitra-kṣapās

te conmīlita-mālatī-surabhayaḥ prauḍhāḥ kadambānilāḥ

sā caivāsmi tathāpi tatra surata-vyāpāra-līlā-vidhau

revā-rodhasi vetasī-taru-tale cetaḥ samutkaṇṭhate



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya-līlā 1.78)



That very personality who stole my heart during my youth
is now again my master. These are the same moonlit
nights of the month of Caitra. The same fragrance of
mālatī flowers is there, and the same sweet breezes are
blowing from the kadamba forest. In our intimate
relationship, I am also the same lover, yet still my
mind is not happy here. I am eager to go back to that
place on the bank of the Revā under the Vetasī tree.
That is my desire.



One person, Svarūpa Dāmodara, understood Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s inner meaning, and there was a second
person who did as well – a very young man who later
became Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. No one other than them
understood Mahāprabhu’s deep meaning. Mahāprabhu had
empowered Rūpa Gosvāmī at Prayāga, and given him His
full mercy, so that now he was able to write the meaning
in his own śloka:



priyaḥ so ’yaṁ kṛṣṇaḥ sahacari kuru-kṣetra-militas

tathāhaṁ sā rādhā tad idam ubhayoḥ saṅgama-sukham

tathāpy antaḥ-khelan-madhura-muralī-pañcama-juṣe

mano me kālindī-pulina-vipināya spṛhayati

                            165
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya-līlā 1.79)



Now I have met My very old and dear friend Kṛṣṇa on this
field of Kurukṣetra. I am the same Rādhārāṇī, and now we
are meeting together. It is very pleasant, but still I
would like to go to the bank of the Yamunā beneath the
trees of the forest there. I wish to hear the vibration
of His sweet flute playing the fifth note within that
forest of Vṛndāvana.



The verses from ŚrīCaitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā
13.126–31) that follow this one further explain its
meaning:



avaśeṣe rādhā kṛṣṇe kare nivedana



sei tumi, sei āmi, sei nava saṅgama




[In the mood of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
spoke thus to Lord Jagannātha:] You are the same Kṛṣṇa,
and I am the same Rādhārāṇī. We are meeting again in the
same way that we met in the beginning of our lives.



tathāpi āmāra mana hare vṛndāvana



vṛndāvane udaya karāo āpana-caraṇa




Although we are both the same, My mind is still
attracted to Vṛndāvana-dhāma. I wish that You will
please again appear with Your lotus feet in Vṛndāvana.



ihāṅ lokāraṇya, hātī, ghoḍā, ratha-dhvani



tāhāṅ puṣpāraṇya, bhṛṅga-pika-nāda śuni




                            166
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                         5/5/2017



In Kurukṣetra there are crowds of people, elephants, and
horses, and also the rattling of chariots. But in
Vṛndāvana there are flower gardens, and the humming of
bees and chirping of birds can be heard.



ihāṅ rāja-veśa, saṅge saba kṣatriya-gaṇa



tāhāṅ gopa-veśa, saṅge muralī-vādana




Here at Kurukṣetra You are dressed like a royal prince,
and You are accompanied by great warriors, but in
Vṛndāvana You appeared just like an ordinary cowherd
boy, accompanied only by Your beautiful flute.



vraje tomāra saṅge yei sukha-āsvādana



sei sukha-samudrera ihāṅ nāhi eka kaṇa




Here there is not even a drop of the ocean of
transcendental

happiness that I enjoyed with You in Vṛndāvana.



āmā lañā punaḥ līlā karaha vṛndāvane



tabe āmāra mano-vāñchā haya ta’ pūraṇe




I therefore request You to come to Vṛndāvana and enjoy
pastimes with Me. If You do so, My ambition will be
fulfilled.



Śrīmatī Rādhikā is saying, “I am the same, My beloved
Kṛṣṇa is the same, and we are meeting now after a long
time; but I am not happy here. I want to be in
Vṛndāvana, under the shade of the very fragrant kadamba
trees, where the Yamunā is flowing. We were not married

                            167
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

at that time, and we met freely there without any
messenger. Our love increased simply by our glancing at
each other, and that love reached an extreme height. Now
we are meeting again, here in Kurukṣetra, but I am not
satisfied. I want You to come to My heart, that is,
Vṛndāvana. I want to meet You there again.”

Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has made the meaning clear in his
śloka. If one remembers and follows these ideas, he is
actually a rūpānuga Vaiṣṇava, and if not, he is outside
the disciplic line. Those who forbid others to think
about these things are not rūpānuga Vaiṣṇavas in the
line of Rūpa Gosvāmī. Try to understand this. It is
egoistic to think, “My gurudeva, Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Swāmī Prabhupāda, has not encouraged us to understand
this.” Your gurudeva has explained this thousands of
times, but you have no eyes to see, or ears to hear. He
was a rūpānuga, as were all our past ācāryas, down to
Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura and my gurudeva.

When my gurudeva remembered these topics, his complexion
used to become reddish, yellowish, and whitish, and then
he used to become faint. And when I would tell him these
pastimes, he would weep continuously. All bona fide
gurus are in one line, and if you are not in this line,
you are derailed. Granted, we should not explain this
subject matter to unqualified people, but if we do not
explain it at all, then all these ideas will be gone –
washed away from this world forever. Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa
Kavirāja Gosvāmī has replied to all doubts in this
regard.1 Try to realize this reply.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (7.5.23) states:



śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ

smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

arcanaṁ vandanaṁ dāsyaṁ

sakhyam ātma-nivedanam



Hearing and chanting about the transcendental holy name,
form, qualities, paraphernalia, and pastimes of Lord
Viṣṇu, remembering them, serving the lotus feet of the
Lord, offering the Lord respectful worship with sixteen
types of paraphernalia, offering prayers to the Lord,
becoming His servant, considering the Lord one’s best
friend, and surrendering everything unto Him (in other
words, serving Him with the body, mind, and words) –
these nine processes are accepted as pure devotional
service.



Those who tell us only the general or external meaning
of this śloka should go to the Rāmānuja or Madhvācārya
sampradāyas, for they only know general principles. We
should add the mood of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu to these
principles. For example, in the first line of this

                            168
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                       5/5/2017

śloka, “Viṣṇu” means Kṛṣṇa with Rādhikā and the gopīs.
This is the understanding of those in the line of Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī. Try to understand this. If you never
remember, realize, and explain this to those who are
qualified, you are derailed from our guru-paramparā. You
must come in the proper line.

Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.33.39, 36) also states:



vikrīḍitaṁ vraja-vadhūbhir idaṁ ca viṣṇoḥ

śraddhānvito ’nuśṛṇuyād atha varṇayed yaḥ

bhaktiṁ parāṁ bhagavati pratilabhya kāmaṁ

hṛd-rogam āśv apahinoty acireṇa dhīraḥ



A sober person who faithfully hears or describes the
Lord’s playful affairs with the young gopīs of Vṛndāvana
will attain the Lord’s pure devotional service. Thus he
will quickly conquer lust, the disease of the heart.



anugrahāya bhaktānāṁ

mānuṣaṁ deham āsthitaḥ

bhajate tādṛśīḥ krīḍā

yāḥ śrutvā tat-paro bhavet



When the Lord assumes a human-like body to show mercy to
His devotees, He engages in such pastimes as will
attract those who hear about them to become dedicated to
Him.



Tat-paro bhavet means, “You must do this; otherwise you
are derailed.” You should not do anukaraṇa; that is, you
should not imitate Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes. However, those of
you who are coming gradually to the stage of madhyama-
adhikāra must try to hear these pastimes; otherwise you
are derailed. It is essential to follow the statements
of Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī at the Chariot Festival.

Don’t be confused. Have no doubt at all. You can think
in this way: “The whole world may criticize and be
against me – I don’t care. I care for my gurudeva, for
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, and for our ācārya-varga.” Kṛṣṇa has
given you good intelligence. Use your own intelligence
and don’t run after others’. Try to judge, and see, and
read the authorized śāstras. If you say, “We are
rūpānuga-varga,” you must follow Rūpa Gosvāmī, not
conceal him. Use your intelligence and see for yourself,
and then you will realize what is correct and what is
incorrect. If I conceal my father’s name, is it right?

                             169
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                         5/5/2017

Is it correct to conceal the name of my father?

You can read the translation of this śloka, and after
that you can read the explanation of Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Swāmī Mahārāja2 and especially that of Śrīla Viśvanātha
Cakravartī Ṭhākura.2

Now I am coming again to the point – the third history.
When the gopīs became unconscious because of being
absorbed in feelings of separation from Kṛṣṇa, He also
became unconscious in Dvārakā, thinking, “Rādhikā,
Rādhikā!” This had become a very big problem, and
Nārada, Uddhava, Baladeva Prabhu, and others began
discussing how to bring Him back to consciousness. At
first, they suggested that Nārada should play on his
vīṇā and glorify Vraja, Mother Yaśodā, the gopīs, and
all other Vrajavāsīs, but Nārada objected: “Do you know
what will happen when Kṛṣṇa awakens? He will go to
Vṛndāvana at once, and no one will be able to stop Him.
He will stay there with the gopīs and never return. You
should consider this when you are deciding what to do.”

Now they were in a dilemma. They thought again, and
decided, “Uddhava should go to Vraja and tell Mother
Yaśodā, Nanda Mahārāja, and the gopas and gopīs that
Kṛṣṇa is coming. He will tell them, ‘Now you can welcome
Him.’ No one can know what state the Vrajavāsīs are in
now. Some are even lying here and there unconscious.
When they hear that Kṛṣṇa is coming, they will return to
consciousness and make arrangements to welcome Him. Then
Uddhava will somehow bring Kṛṣṇa to Dvārakā again by a
trick. There will be no problem. Uddhava must go there.
Kṛṣṇa sent him previously, and therefore he should go
now and tell them that Kṛṣṇa is coming.”

Uddhava was very unhappy when he heard this proposal.
“Listen to me,” he told them. “If I go to Vṛndāvana and
say that Kṛṣṇa is coming, they will not believe me
because I bluffed them before. I told them, ‘I am going,
and very soon I will bring Kṛṣṇa here. I will definitely
bring Him.’ After that I requested Kṛṣṇa many times, but
He gave all kinds of excuses, so what could I do? It’s
useless for me to go, because they will not believe me.
They will say, ‘Oh, the liar has come. The cheater has
come!’ Especially Mother Yaśodā will say this.”

Nārada Muni said, “Then Baladeva Prabhu can go. He can
pacify all the gopīs and gopas.” But Baladeva Prabhu
replied in the same way: “I told Kṛṣṇa so many times to
go there, and He always answered, ‘Yes, I will go,’ but
He never went. Finally I went alone and I pacified them
by saying, ‘I promise that I will go to Dvārakā and
bring Kṛṣṇa.’

“I don’t know why this cruel Kṛṣṇa never wants to go
there. He used to be very soft and sweet, but now His
heart has turned to stone. What can I say? If I go, the
Vrajavāsīs will also say about me, ‘Oh, this cheater and
liar has come!’ There is no use in my going because they
will not believe me, either. They cannot be consoled
without Kṛṣṇa’s direct presence. Kṛṣṇa should go
Himself.”

While they were discussing what to do, Kṛṣṇa’s sister

                            170
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

Subhadrā came in and heard everything. “Don’t worry,”
she said, “I’m going. I will go to Vṛndāvana and take
darśana of Mother Yaśodā. First I will sit on her lap,
and then I will caress her and tell her, ‘Mother, Kṛṣṇa
is coming. He was traveling with me, but on the way many
kings surrounded Him and began performing arcana to Him,
praying to Him, and offering Him many presentations.
That is why I have arrived here first. Kṛṣṇa will be a
bit late, but He’s on His way. It may be some hours, or
one or two days, but He is coming.’ I will go door-to-
door to the gopīs’ homes. I will console them and tell
them, ‘Oh, now be happy. Don’t feel separation. Kṛṣṇa is
coming!’ They will become happy, and then I will tell
them, ‘You should all be ready to welcome Kṛṣṇa.’ Later,
I will play a trick and tell My brother, ‘Oh, You are
sitting here, while Your mother Devakī, Your father
Vasudeva, and all Your queens are living there in
Dvārakā?’ I will bring Him back to Dvārakā by some
trick, so don’t worry. Let me first bring a good
chariot. After that Nārada should sing the glory of
Vraja accompanied by his vīṇā, then Kṛṣṇa will return to
consciousness, and after that He will come to Vṛndāvana,
where everything will be ready.”

A chariot was brought and Subhadrā was ready to go. Then
Baladeva said, “If my brother and sister are going, I
must go. I want to meet with my mother and father,
Yaśodā-maiyā and Nanda Bābā, and I want to meet all my
friends and the gopīs. I cannot remain here. I must go.”
Subhadrā said, “Yes, we will go together. Baladeva
Prabhu will go first, and I will follow Him.” So another
chariot was brought, and Baladeva’s ratha was placed in
front of Subhadrā’s. As they were about to leave,
Baladeva Prabhu told Dāruka, Kṛṣṇa’s chariot driver,
“Bring your chariot here and be ready. When Kṛṣṇa
returns to consciousness, take the chariot and fly to
Vṛndāvana.”

Nārada Muni was then requested to glorify Vraja and,
accompanied by his vīṇā, he began to sing very
beautifully. As Nārada’s sweet glorification of Vraja
entered Kṛṣṇa’s ears, He regained consciousness and
thought, “It is morning, and I am in Vraja. Where is My
sweet vaṁśī?” He asked. “Where, where? Oh, I know. The
gopīs are very tricky. They have stolen it. I’ll give
them a good lesson.” Then He stood in a beautiful
threefold-bending form, as He had previously done in
Vraja, and He appeared in a way that no one in Dvārakā
had ever seen before.

As He began searching, He said, “Oh, Lalitā has taken
it! If not Lalitā, then Rādhikā Herself has stolen it
with Viśākhā’s help.” He acted as though He was
searching them to see where they had kept His flute. In
the meantime, He saw Uddhava and asked, “Uddhava, why
are you in Vṛndāvana?” Then He saw Nārada and asked,
“Oh, you are also in Vṛndāvana? From where have you
come?” Nārada replied, “Oh my Lord, You are not in
Vṛndāvana. You are in Dvārakā. This is not the Yamunā;
it is the ocean in Dvārakā Purī. Please remember where
You are.”

Kṛṣṇa was so absorbed that He forgot Uddhava and Nārada
and everyone else, and He was ready to run away to

                            171
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                        5/5/2017

Vṛndāvana   to quickly meet the gopas and gopīs. Uddhava
told Him,   “Prabhu, Your chariot is ready, because we
knew that   You would do this. You can mount Your chariot
and go to   Vṛndāvana immediately.”

Kṛṣṇa wanted to ascend His chariot, but He was so mad in
rādhā-prema that He could not walk alone. Many people
began to assist Him as He walked by, holding Him and
helping Him from the front and back, and from both
sides. He was like a mad person, lost in Rādhā’s love
and affection. Somehow He was taken to the chariot and
raised upon it, and Dāruka at once drove off with great
speed toward Vṛndāvana. Balarāma and Subhadrā were
ahead, and Kṛṣṇa followed behind.

In the meantime, in Vṛndāvana, Rādhikā was in the last
stage of Her life, feeling unbearable separation. She
was just about to die, not breathing in or out, and all
the Vrajavāsīs were very worried, thinking, “She is
going to leave Her body!” Everyone had lost hope that
She would remain alive, and they were totally grief-
stricken. They all thought, “We cannot save Her! She
will certainly die!” Lalitā and Viśākhā were trying hard
to revive Her, but there were no signs of revival.

While this was going on, all the other sakhīs also
assembled there, and they were also extremely upset –
and even Candrāvalī came to show her sympathy. Somehow
Rādhikā said in a very low voice, “If I die, My dead
body should be placed around a tamāla tree. Let the air
in My body be mixed with the air of Nandagaon where
Kṛṣṇa takes His breaths. Let the fire in My body mix
with the sun-rays at Nanda Bābā’s house so that it will
shine there and I will touch Kṛṣṇa. May the earth of My
body mix with the courtyard of Nanda-bhavana, so that
Kṛṣṇa can walk on Me and I can touch Him.” As She
lamented in this way, She again became unconscious.

In the meantime, three chariots arrived in Vraja –
Subhadrā’s and Baladeva’s in front, and Kṛṣṇa’s
following. As soon as Kṛṣṇa reached there, He heard,
“Rādhikā is going to die, and She will not remain alive
for even one more moment.” He ran very quickly to the
spot where She was giving up Her body, and when He saw
Her, He began to cry bitterly. Becoming more and more
absorbed in rādhā-prema, His hands began melting. The
lower part of His body also melted, then His face as
well; and only two large round eyes remained. Just then,
Baladeva Prabhu and Subhadrā arrived, and when they saw
this scene, they could not control themselves and they
also became like Kṛṣṇa.

In the meantime, Lalitā spoke repeatedly in the ear of
Rādhikā, “Rādhā, Rādhā! Kṛṣṇa has come. Kṛṣṇa has come
to meet You! Don’t die.” Viśākhā said in the other ear,
“Kṛṣṇa has come to meet You!” Gradually Rādhikā regained
Her external consciousness, opened Her eyes, and
thought, “Oh, beautiful Kṛṣṇa has come!” She became
further absorbed in the ecstasy of love and affection.
Seeing Her, Kṛṣṇa’s love also increased, and He lost
external consciousness. In that same state He began
rolling on the earth.

Rādhikā told Viśākhā, “Please help Kṛṣṇa; otherwise He

                            172
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

may die. You know the mantra to revive Him. Say in His
ear, ‘Rādhā, Rādhā!’” When Kṛṣṇa heard this sweet
injection of the powerful mantra from the lips of
Viśākhā, “Rādhā, Rādhā, Rādhā, Rādhā!” He opened His
eyes and became so happy again. Gradually He revived,
and They met together and everyone became happy.

Nārada also arrived, and he requested Kṛṣṇa, “Prabhu,
please manifest these three forms that You revealed when
You were absorbed and melted. In that way everyone will
see and realize these truths about You. Please manifest
these forms somewhere in this world.” Kṛṣṇa replied,
“Tathā ’stu, tathā ’stu evam bhavatu! So be it. I will
always remain in this shape in Nilācala, which will be
like Dvārakā, and everyone will be able to come and see
Me there.”

I have told this very beautiful pastime in brief. This
līlā is in the hearts of pure devotees, and Śrīla Gour
Govinda Mahārāja has also touched it. I have also
reconciled some points to clarify any doubts or
misunderstandings about this līlā.

You should know that there are four groups of gopīs in
Vraja: svapakṣā (belonging to Rādhikā’s own group),
vipakṣā (belonging to the group of Her rivals),
taṭastha-pakṣā (belonging to the group that is neutral
to Her), and suhṛt-pakṣā (belonging to the group that is
friendly to Her), and Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes cannot take place
without them. However, there are no parties when Kṛṣṇa
disappears, or when He goes to Mathurā or Dvārakā and a
separation mood manifests in the gopīs’ hearts. At that
time, all the parties become one for Kṛṣṇa, and they
help each other. Candrāvalī, or Bhadrā, or any of the
others may come and pacify Śrīmatī Rādhikā, because Her
separation is the highest. They are very sympathetic
towards Her, because their separation mood is not as
high in comparison. They tell Her, “O Rādhikā, You
should not weep. Kṛṣṇa will come.” Even Candrāvalī, who
has a deep separation mood of her own, will also come
and speak like this.

The interactions here are very mysterious, and I want to
give you realization and entrance into these very
extraordinary pastimes, but you have to become qualified
first. Try to follow regulated bhakti – śravaṇaṁ
kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ smaraṇam – otherwise you will not be
able to maintain your spiritual life. You will become
lusty, and after some time you will think that Kṛṣṇa’s
pastimes are the same as your pastimes of getting
divorced. I have not read scriptures like Govinda-
līlāmṛta, but I know that most of you have copies of all
these books. Many of those who read these have fallen
down, so you should not read them at this time, nor
should you give classes on these topics. Be very, very
careful. Our aim and object is to realize Kṛṣṇa’s
pastimes, but you cannot jump to this. If you want to be
situated on a tree, you must first try to climb up from
the root, and from there you can go to the highest
places. If you try to jump, you will fall down.

I request you to read Upadeśāmṛta, Manaḥ-śikṣā, and
books like them. Try to chant more. Chanting only
sixteen rounds will not suffice. Your gurudeva has given

                            173
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

sixteen and then one, sixteen and then one, sixteen and
then one; there are four sets of sixteen.3 Has he given
this without a purpose? A man may be very expert in
speaking hari-kathā and performing related services, but
if he does not chant because he has no taste, he is a
very weak devotee, and after some time he may fall down.



tan-nāma-rūpa-caritādi-sukīrtanānu-



smṛtyoḥ krameṇa rasanā-manasī niyojya

tiṣṭhan vraje tad-anurāgi-janānugāmī

kālaṁ nayed akhilam ity upadeśa-sāram



Upadeśāmṛta (8)



The essence of all advice is that one should utilize his
full time – twenty-four hours a day – in nicely chanting
and remembering the Lord’s divine name, transcendental
form, qualities, and eternal pastimes, thereby gradually
engaging his tongue and mind. In this way one should
reside in Vraja and serve Kṛṣṇa under the guidance of
devotees. One should follow in the footsteps of the
Lord’s beloved devotees, who are deeply attached to His
devotional service.



Be in Vṛndāvana, under the guidance of a rasika-
tattvajña Vaiṣṇava guru, and always chant the names with
their meaning, knowing and remembering Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa’s
pastimes. Then you will become fully qualified for this
highest object of life.




CHAPTER NINE

JUST AFTER THE FESTIVAL


Who is a Vaiṣṇava?



The first Chariot Festival has now been completed, and
the chariot has returned to Nīlācala. On the return
journey, Mahāprabhu and all His associates continued to
think they were going to Vraja from Kurukṣetra, and they
performed the same pastimes as on their journey to
Guṇḍicā. Śrīla Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī explained that
they did not think, “Kṛṣṇa is returning to Dvārakā.”
Even at the time of returning, they always maintained

                            174
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                       5/5/2017

the idea, “We are taking Kṛṣṇa to Vṛndāvana.”

One day, after the Chariot Festival was over, Nityānanda
Prabhu sat with Mahāprabhu discussing something
confidentially. After that, Mahāprabhu called all His
Gauḍīya bhaktas and one by one glorified them all to
each other. For example He said, “Do you know this
devotee? This is Rāghava Paṇḍita. Throughout the year,
he and his sister Damayantī cook many delicious dry
preparations and bring them here to Me. I keep them with
Me and eat them, little by little, throughout the next
year.”

Then He said, “You know this Vāsudeva Datta? He is a
very high-class devotee. I cannot repay him. Every day
he spends whatever money he receives for Hari, Guru, and
Vaiṣṇavas; he does not keep a single paisā for himself.
O Śivānanda Sena, you should be his accountant and try
to keep his accounts. A householder should have some
balance to maintain his family; he should not be
penniless. Try to keep some of his money aside so that
he can maintain his family; otherwise he will spend
everything on Me.”

In this way, Mahāprabhu called the devotees one by one.
He called Satyarāja Khān, a devotee of Kulīna-grāma, and
said, “Guṇarāja Khān, the father of Satyarāja Khān, has
written in his book The Glory of Kṛṣṇa (Śrī Kṛṣṇa-
vijaya), ‘Kṛṣṇa is my prāṇanātha, my beloved. He is the
only Lord of my life breath.’ For this reason I have
sold myself to his dynasty forever. What to speak of his
family, I honor a dog of their village – all the dogs –
because they take only prasāda and observe Ekādaśī. I
must honor them. If they come to me, I must pacify and
caress them. They are devotees.”

Mahāprabhu blessed Satyarāja Khān and told him, “Every
year you should bring a very thick, strong rope from
your village. You are extremely wealthy, like a king, so
bring it somehow.” Each year Satyarāja Khān would bring
new rope, because the rope by which the chariots are
pulled breaks every year during the festival.

Caitanya Mahāprabhu glorified many devotees in this
meeting, and He also requested Nityānanda Prabhu, “O
Nityānanda, return to Bengal and preach there. Advaita
Ācārya, you should also go there and preach everywhere.
Go to those who are neglected by society. Preach to them
and inspire them to chant the holy name. I will be very
happy if you do this, and I will also be happy if
Nityānanda Prabhu does not come here each year. He
should spend most of his time preaching there.”

I am explaining this same mission to you. You should all
try to preach, distribute books, and help other
devotees; and when I come next year, each of you should
bring at least ten sweet flowers (people) and help them
to become devotees. Nityānanda Prabhu tried to do this,
and he especially embraced those who were neglected,
like the śūdras, kāyasthas, and suvarṇa-vaṇiks. Suvarṇa-
vaṇik means “gold jewelers.” They are neglected in India
because they charge money even when making an ornament
for their mothers. They will not give any concession
even to their fathers and mothers, and because of their

                            175
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

greediness they are hated by society. No brāhmaṇa or
kṣatriya will take even water from their homes, but
Nityānanda Prabhu mercifully went to them, embraced
them, and told them, “Can you chant ‘Hare Kṛṣṇa’? Please
say it just once.” In this way, he preached all over
Bengal. I am also going everywhere in a similar mood,
and you should also follow these principles.

Satyarāja Khān and the residents of Kulīna-grāma then
approached Mahāprabhu and asked some questions. In
ŚrīCaitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 15.102–3) it is
stated:



tabe rāmānanda, āra satyarāja khāṅna



prabhura caraṇe kichu kaila nivedana




After this, Rāmānanda Vasu and Satyarāja Khān both
submitted questions at Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s lotus
feet.



gṛhastha viṣayī āmi, ki mora sādhane



śrī-mukhe ājñā kara prabhu – nivedi caraṇe




[Satyarāja Khān said:] My dear Lord, I am a householder
and a materialistic man, and I do not know the process
of advancing in spiritual life. I therefore submit
myself unto Your lotus feet and request You to instruct
me.”



This question was not for Satyarāja Khān; it was for all
householders. Try to hear this instruction of Mahāprabhu
and obey it. We have also completed our own Chariot
Festival, so Caitanya Mahāprabhu is speaking to all of
you:

prabhu kahena, – ‘kṛṣṇa-sevā’, ‘vaiṣṇava-sevana’

‘nirantara kara kṛṣṇa-nāma-saṅkīrtana’



ŚrīCaitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 15.104)



                            176
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017


Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu replied, “Continue to chant the
holy name of Lord Kṛṣṇa without cessation. Whenever
possible, serve Him and His devotees, the Vaiṣṇavas.”



Yes, this is the main thing – always serving Vaiṣṇavas,
and always engaging in Kṛṣṇa’s service. Śrī Satyarāja
Khān then asked another question for clarification. He
said, “I know how to chant Kṛṣṇa’s name. What you have
explained is clear. One pair of karatālas and two,
three, four, five, or more devotees chanting together:
‘Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa, Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare
Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma, Hare Hare.’ This is
saṅkīrtana.” Kīrtana is performed when one chants alone,
and saṅkīrtana is performed when many assemble together
under the guidance of a self-realized devotee. At that
time it will be saṅkīrtana; otherwise, without such
guidance, it is like the barking of dogs. Try to know
these truths.

“So it is clear,” Satyarāja and Rāmānanda Vasu told
Mahāprabhu, “and we also know how to serve Kṛṣṇa by
performing arcana from the beginning of the day, from
morning to evening: offering ārati, bathing the deities,
offering them rāja-bhoga at midday, and at three o’clock
offering more bhoga, and then again at night, rāja-
bhoga, kīrtana, and ārati. This is kṛṣṇa-sevā. In
addition, those who are qualified should remember the
pastimes of Kṛṣṇa throughout the eight divisions of the
day and night. This is kṛṣṇa-sevā.

“But what is vaiṣṇava-sevā? How can we recognize a
Vaiṣṇava? Please let us know who is a Vaiṣṇava, and what
are his common symptoms?” Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
replied in the following verses (ŚrīCaitanya-caritāmṛta
(Madhya-līlā 15.106–8)):



prabhu kahe, yāṅra mukhe śuni eka-bāra



kṛṣṇa-nāma, sei pūjya, śreṣṭha sabākāra




Whoever chants the holy name of Kṛṣṇa just once is
worshipable and is the topmost human being.



eka kṛṣṇa-nāme kare sarva-pāpa kṣaya



nava-vidhā bhakti pūrṇa nāma haite haya




                            177
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017



Simply by chanting the holy name of Kṛṣṇa, one is
relieved from all the reactions of a sinful life. One
can complete the nine processes of devotional service
simply by chanting the holy name.



dīkṣā-puraścaryā-vidhi apekṣā nā kare



jihvā-sparśe ā-caṇḍāle sabāre uddhāre




One does not have to undergo initiation or execute the
activities required before initiation. One simply has to
vibrate the holy name with his lips. Thus even a man in
the lowest class (caṇḍāla) can be delivered.



Caitanya Mahāprabhu then quoted a śloka from the Purāṇas
to support this:



ākṛṣṭiḥ kṛta-cetasāṁ sumanasām uccāṭanaṁ cāṁhasām

ācaṇḍālam amūka-loka-sulabho vaśyaś ca mukti-śriyaḥ

no dīkṣāṁ na ca sat-kriyāṁ na ca puraścaryāṁ manāg
īkṣate

mantro ’yaṁ rasanā-spṛg eva phalati śrī-kṛṣṇa-nāmātmakaḥ



Padyāvalī (29); ŚrīCaitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā
15.110)



The holy name of Lord Kṛṣṇa is an attractive feature for
many saintly, liberal people. It is the annihilator of
all sinful reactions and is so powerful that, except for
the dumb who cannot chant, it is readily available to
everyone, including the lowest type of man, the caṇḍāla.
The holy name of Kṛṣṇa controls the opulence of
liberation and it is identical with Kṛṣṇa. Immediate
effects are produced when one simply touches the holy
name with one’s tongue. Chanting the holy name does not
depend on initiation, pious activities, or the
puraścaryā (regulative principles generally observed
before initiation). The holy name does not wait for all
these activities. It is self-sufficient.



ataeva yāṅra mukhe eka kṛṣṇa-nāma

                            178
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017




sei ta’ vaiṣṇava, kariha tāṅhāra sammāna




ŚrīCaitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 15.111)



[Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu then finally advised:] One who
is chanting the Hare Kṛṣṇa mantra is understood to be a
Vaiṣṇava; therefore you should offer all respects to
him.



This reply was given in the first year. Śrī Satyarāja
Khān asked his question again the next year, and
Caitanya Mahāprabhu replied with deep meaning, “You
should honor one who chants with some honor for
harināma, whether he is initiated or not, if he does not
commit any offense and he follows the basic principles
regarding gambling, smoking, meat-eating, and other
sins. He should be honored because he can be freed from
past offenses and he may become liberated.”

On the third year the question was asked again. This
time Mahāprabhu explained something more, and His
explanation became complete. Through the Kulīna-grāma
residents He is gradually teaching the general public,
saying in effect that if you want to advance, you will
have to take initiation. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu Himself
took initiation. All these descriptions of the good
effects of chanting will not apply to you if you neglect
the teachings of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrīla Sanātana
Gosvāmī, and Mahāprabhu by not taking initiation.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s replies in the first and
second years were meant to encourage those who do not
know that we must accept initiation. Those who want to
be pure devotees and have heard hari-kathā from such
pure devotees must accept initiation, give up all their
offenses, become advanced, and realize their
relationship with Kṛṣṇa.

Narahari Sarakāra, Mukunda dāsa, and Raghu-nandana were
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s intimate associates from the
village of Śrīkhaṇḍa, near Navadvīpa-dhāma. They were
also present there in that first year, and Mahāprabhu
glorified them, too. He called Mukunda dāsa and asked
him in front of all the devotees, “Mukunda dāsa, are you
Raghu-nandana’s father, or is Raghu-nandana your
father?” Mukunda and Vasu Ghoṣa were both very good
kīrtanīyās and very near and dear associates of Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, and Raghu-nandana was Mukunda’s son. Still,
Mahāprabhu asked Mukunda, “Are you Raghu-nandana’s
father, or is Raghu-nandana your father? I have some
doubt.” He knew that Raghu-nandana was Mukunda’s son,
but He still asked, “Who is the son and who is the
father? Tell me your decision.”

                            179
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017


Mukunda smiled as he replied, “Raghu-nandana is my
father, and I’m his son. A ‘father’ is actually he who
gives kṛṣṇa-bhakti. Our whole family has received kṛṣṇa-
bhakti from Raghu-nandana, so he is not my son; I am his
son.” One may be considered someone’s father in a
worldly sense, but the real father is he who can give
kṛṣṇa-bhakti.

Mahāprabhu became extremely happy and said, “Oh, My
doubt has been dispelled. One who awakens kṛṣṇa-bhakti
is the real spiritual master. You are truly a very
advanced devotee.”

A devotee may have received dīkṣā1 (initiation) from
someone who is not actually qualified to give kṛṣṇa-
bhakti. For example, the devotee may have followed
others who inspired him to take dīkṣā. It may be that he
did not know the meaning of dīkṣā when he took
initiation, but that upon receiving the good association
of a pure devotee afterwards, he came to understand, “I
am receiving bhakti from this pure devotee.” Who, then,
is his guru? Yāṅhā haite kṛṣṇa-bhakti sei guru haya. The
person from whom one receives pure bhakti is actually
guru, and he should be honored as such. This is called
bhāgavata-paramparā.2

The kṛṣṇa-bhakti referred to by Caitanya Mahāprabhu is
the goal of life (prayojana) of all those in the line of
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī, the goal He had explained to Rūpa
Gosvāmī himself. Madana-mohana establishes our sambandha
(relation) with Him, Govinda gives abhidheya (the
process to realize that relationship), and Gopīnātha is
the presiding deity of prayojana. However, Gopīnātha
Himself is not our prayojana; our prayojana is the love
and affection that Rādhikā has for Gopīnātha.

Our prayojana is not the prema that Kṛṣṇa has for
Rādhikā and others. Kṛṣṇa is undoubtedly the ocean of
rasa, but He is not our prayojana. The topmost prayojana
is the gopīs’ love for Kṛṣṇa, and amongst all the gopīs,
Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s love and affection, Her adhirūḍha-
mahābhāva for Kṛṣṇa – not for Kṛṣṇa, but for Gopīnātha.
This understanding is not for everyone; it is for rare
devotees.

The process to achieve this prayojana is stated in
ŚrīCaitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 8.229): “gopī-
ānugatya vinā aiśvarya-jñāne bhajileha nāhi pāya
vrajendra-nandane – no one can attain realization of
this love of Rādhikā for Gopīnātha unless he follows in
the footsteps of the gopīs.” But this is not achieved by
following all the gopīs. We can never achieve it by
following Yaśodā, and we cannot attain it if we follow
other gopīs. Candrāvalī has mahābhāva, but there is
something lacking in her. This highest love is only
possible by following the special mood of Rādhikā, and
it is achieved if we will practice under guidance
(ānugatya). However, we cannot serve under the guidance
of Rādhikā, nor can we follow Her dear sakhīs Lalitā and
Viśākhā. We can only perform ānugatya to Śrī Rūpa
Mañjarī, Rati Mañjarī, and sakhīs like them.

We must especially follow Rūpa Mañjarī, who is always

                            180
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

serving Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Rūpa Mañjarī becomes happy when
Rādhikā is happy, and she feels separation when Rādhikā
feels separation. Sometimes she is so absorbed in the
same mood as Rādhikā that she cannot pacify Her, whereas
Lalitā and Viśākhā can do so. This is because Lalitā and
Viśākhā are not as absorbed as Rūpa Mañjarī and Rati
Mañjarī. The highest class of love that a jīva can
achieve is kṛṣṇa-prema, namely Rādhikā’s prema for
Gopīnātha, attained under the guidance of the mañjarīs.
There is no other process, and there will never be
another process; Caitanya Mahāprabhu Himself has said
this.

Here, Mahāprabhu is speaking about the person who can
give kṛṣṇa-bhakti, and the kṛṣṇa-bhakti to which He
refers is this prayojana. One who gives this is actually
guru. If the śikṣā-guru is giving this whereas the
dīkṣā-guru is not, then the śikṣā-guru is in bhāgavata-
paramparā and he should be given preference. He is more
authentic and he should be honored more. Because you are
performing regulative bhakti at present, you cannot
understand this or follow it fully. Only those who are
engaging in spontaneous devotion, rāgānuga-bhakti, will
understand. Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura could realize
this, and therefore he gave more preference to Śrīla
Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja than to his dīkṣā-guru
Vipina-bihārī Gosvāmī. Śyāmānanda Prabhu, Narottama dāsa
Ṭhākura, and Śrīnivāsa Ācārya gave more preference to
Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī than to their own dīkṣā-gurus. Śrīla
Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī gave more preference to Śrīla
Rūpa Gosvāmī and Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī than to
his dīkṣā-guru, and he writes at the end of every
chapter of his ŚrīCaitanya-caritāmṛta: “śrī-rūpa-
raghunātha-pade yāra āśa caitanya-caritāmṛta kahe
kṛṣṇadāsa – praying at the lotus feet of Śrī Rūpa and
Śrī Raghunātha, always desiring their mercy, I,
Kṛṣṇadāsa, narrate Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta, following in
their footsteps.” This is bhāgavata-paramparā, and it is
very good if the dīkṣā-guru is also in this bhāgavata-
paramparā. Try to know these very secret truths.

Totally absorbed in glorifying all His devotees, one by
one, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu then said, “Just hear the
glory of Mukunda. By occupation he is an Ayurvedic
doctor, a rāja-vaidya (royal physician), and he only
treats kings and other royalty. He is not available for
ordinary people. Externally, he appears to be a royal
physician engaged in governmental service, but
internally he has deep love for Kṛṣṇa. Who can
understand his love?”

One day the royal physician Mukunda dāsa was seated on a
high platform with the Muslim King and was telling the
King about medical treatment. While the King and Mukunda
dāsa were conversing, a servant brought a fan made of
peacock feathers, which he held above the King’s head to
shade him from the sun. When Mukunda dāsa saw the fan of
peacock feathers, he became absorbed in ecstatic love of
Godhead, and fell from the high platform onto the
ground. The King was afraid that the royal physician had
been killed, so he descended and personally brought him
to consciousness. When the King asked Mukunda, “Where
are you in pain?” Mukunda replied, “I am not very much
in pain.” The King then inquired, “Mukunda, why did you

                            181
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                        5/5/2017

fall down?” Mukunda replied, “My dear King, I have a
disease like epilepsy.” The King was extraordinarily
intelligent, however, so he could understand the whole
affair. In his estimation, Mukunda was a most uncommon,
exalted, liberated personality.

Mahāprabhu then glorified the devotion of His associate
Raghu-nandana:



raghu-nandana sevā kare kṛṣṇera mandire



dvāre puṣkariṇī, tara ghāṭera upare



kadambera eka vṛkṣe phuṭe bāra-māse



nitya dui phula haya kṛṣṇa-avataṁse




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 15.128–9)



Raghu-nandana is constantly engaged   in serving Lord
Kṛṣṇa in the temple. On the bank of   a lake beside the
entrance of the temple is a kadamba   tree, which daily
delivers two flowers to be used for   Kṛṣṇa’s service.



It was because of Raghu-nandana’s love and elevated
bhakti that the kadamba tree used to give two flowers
every day, even in the winter, whether or not it was the
season for them to bloom. Mahāprabhu said that his
bhakti was so high that the tree was always controlled
by his love and gave two flowers to him only because he
wished it to do so.

Mahāprabhu then gave three different instructions to
three different devotees. He again spoke to Mukunda with
sweet words: “Your duty is to earn both material and
spiritual wealth. Furthermore, it is Raghu-nandana’s
duty to always engage in Lord Kṛṣṇa’s service. He has no
other intention but the service of Lord Kṛṣṇa.” He then
ordered Narahari: “I wish you to remain here with My
devotees. In this way the three of you should always
execute these three duties for the service of the Lord.”

Rāghava Paṇḍita is another intimate associate of
Mahāprabhu. He used to collect very sweet coconuts from
different places to offer to Kṛṣṇa. One day he had some
coconuts brought from very far away. He had them cut and
prepared, and he was going to offer them to the deity.
However, as his servant was carrying the basket of

                            182
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

coconuts on his head, he put his hands on the ceiling
and then touched the coconuts again. Rāghava Paṇḍita
told his servant, “Take the coconuts out and throw them
into the river or anywhere else; they cannot be offered
to the deity. The dust from peoples’ feet has risen onto
the ceiling, and you touched the ceiling and then
touched the basket of coconuts; so the basket and
everything in it is impure.”

Just see how strict these Vaiṣṇavas were!



The next year



As mentioned previously, in the second year Mahāprabhu
again glorified all the devotees after the Ratha-yātrā
Festival. You should also try to glorify devotees, and
do not criticize them. If you want bhakti, never commit
any offense. Try to honor others, even if they are not
initiated, as long as they are not offensive and as long
as they do not criticize anyone. Otherwise, do praṇāma
to them from very far away – in other words, avoid their
association.

One of the Kulīna-grāma-vāsīs again asked, “Now we are
returning home; so what is our duty? What should we do?”

Listen very carefully and try to understand this. The
Lord replied, “You should engage yourself in the service
of Kṛṣṇa’s servants, and always chant Kṛṣṇa’s holy name.
If you do these two things, you will very soon attain
shelter at Kṛṣṇa’s lotus feet.”

The inhabitant of Kulīna-grāma asked, “Please let me
know who is actually a Vaiṣṇava, and what his symptoms
are.”

Understanding his mind, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu smiled
and explained two principles: vaiṣṇava-sevā and nāma-
saṅkīrtana.



kṛṣṇa-nāma nirantara yāṅhāra vadane



sei vaiṣṇava-śreṣṭha, bhaja taṅhāra caraṇe




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 16.72)



A person who is always chanting the holy name of the
Lord is to be considered the best Vaiṣṇava, and your
duty is to serve his lotus feet.


                            183
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017



In the first year Mahāprabhu had given a general answer,
but now He is replying more specifically. Actually, to
chant means to chant the pure name. Those who are not
initiated can never chant the pure name; rather, they
always chant with offenses. In this verse, the word
śreṣṭha, meaning “best,” does not refer to the uttama-
adhikārī devotee. In this specific connection it refers
to those who are initiated and who are madhyama-
madhyama-adhikārī or uttama-madhyama-adhikārī; that is,
it refers to the intermediate and topmost madhyama-
adhikārīs. They have given up all varieties of offenses
and they always chant and remember Kṛṣṇa’s holy name in
their specific relationship with Him.

The first year, Caitanya Mahāprabhu had told the
inhabitants of Kulīna-grāma that one should give respect
to Vaiṣṇavas, and the second year He told His followers
to serve them. Bhaja means “to serve.” There are some
differences between those Vaiṣṇavas who should be only
honored and those who should be served, but those who do
not have high-class association cannot understand these
differences. On the one hand, they seem very subtle, but
on the other hand they are like the difference between
the earth and sky.

A nirantara devotee is one who can continuously chant
and remember Kṛṣṇa twenty-four hours a day. The word
nirantara means “without any interruption,” and it
applies to one who is like Śrīla Haridāsa Ṭhākura, who
was a disciple of Caitanya Mahāprabhu Himself. Haridāsa
Ṭhākura chanted without offense, and he even transformed
a prostitute into a śuddha-bhakta by his association.

What do you think about the bhajana of Srila Raghunātha
dāsa Gosvāmī and Srila Rūpa Gosvāmī? Were they always
chanting Kṛṣṇa’s names twenty-four hours a day? They
were writing books like Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi throughout the
day and night, so how could they chant all the time? In
fact, sometimes they did not chant for two, three, four,
or five days, because they were not in external
consciousness. Tears would flow from their eyes and they
would begin to faint when they tried to chant. Does this
verse apply to Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and Śrīla Raghunātha
dāsa Gosvāmī? Certainly it does. Theirs was real
chanting of Kṛṣṇa’s names. Their cooking was chanting,
and everything else they did was chanting. They were
totally absorbed in chanting.

Similarly, Śrīla Śukadeva Gosvāmī was the best
kīrtanīyā, even though he was not playing on harmonium
or kartālas. His

kīrtana took the form of always glorifying Kṛṣṇa and His
holy name, remembering Him, and being absorbed in Him.
Such devotees are more than nirantara. Haridāsa Ṭhākura
and many others can be accepted in the category of
nirantara, but Rūpa Gosvāmī, Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī,
and Śukadeva Gosvāmī are more than this.

The inhabitants of Kulīna-grāma had asked this question
in the previous year. Why are they asking again? This
was the same question. First, “Who is a Vaiṣṇava?” and

                            184
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                        5/5/2017

then again, “Who is a Vaiṣṇava?” It is not that the
Kulīna-grāma-vāsīs were foolish for asking the same
question each year. They were exalted Vaiṣṇavas, uttama-
adhikārīs, and that is why they were asking – for the
benefit of all ordinary devotees.

Mahāprabhu first explained about general Vaiṣṇavas, then
about the “best” (second-class) Vaiṣṇavas, and after
that in the third He told about the first-class
Vaiṣṇavas. What he had said in the previous year
concerned the second-class devotees, and what He had
said in the first year was about the third-class
(kaniṣṭha) devotees. Third-class, second-class – and now
He is speaking about the uttama-mahā-bhāgavatas, who are
all more than liberated.



yāṅhāra darśane mukhe āise kṛṣṇa-nāma



tāṅhāre jāniha tumi ‘vaiṣṇava-pradhāna’




ŚrīCaitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 16.74)



[Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu said:] A first-class Vaiṣṇava
is he whose very presence makes others chant the holy
name of Kṛṣṇa.



krama kari’ kahe prabhu ‘vaiṣṇava’-lakṣaṇa



‘vaiṣṇava’, ‘vaiṣṇavatara’, āra ‘vaiṣṇavatama’




ŚrīCaitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 16.75)



In this way, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu taught the
distinctions between different types of Vaiṣṇavas: the
Vaiṣṇava, Vaiṣṇavatara, and Vaiṣṇavatama. Thus He
successively explained all the symptoms of a Vaiṣṇava to
the inhabitants of Kulīna-grāma.



All devotees are Vaiṣṇavas, but some are third-class,
some are second-class, and others are first-class. We
are all Vaiṣṇavas, but the degrees of our vaiṣṇavatā
(qualification as Vaiṣṇava) are not the same. In fact,

                            185
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

there may be thousands of degrees. A kaniṣṭha-adhikārī
can never discriminate between one degree and another.
He has no intelligence to think about the differences.
The kaniṣṭha-madhyama (lower level madhyama) is also not
very qualified, but the madhyama-madhyama (intermediate
madhyama) is somewhat more qualified, and the uttama-
madhyama (topmost madhyama) can behave towards all
Vaiṣṇavas according to their quality and stage.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu said that there are three
divisions – Vaiṣṇava, Vaiṣṇavatara, and Vaiṣṇavatama –
but there are not only three divisions. Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī
explained the many thousands of stages of Vaiṣṇavas, but
who will recognize all these different stages? Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura has said: “ye yena vaiṣṇava ciniyā
laiyā ādara koribe yabe – if you know an advanced
Vaiṣṇava’s category of qualification and you show him
respect according to that category or ability, you can
get his mercy and achieve the ultimate goal of life very
quickly. Otherwise, it is not possible to achieve your
ultimate goal in spiritual life.”

If you cannot recognize what Vaiṣṇava is in what class,
you will wrongly judge, “Oh, he is like me,” or “He is a
mahā-mahā-bhāgavata and everyone else is junior to him.
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī is also junior to my mahā-mahā-
bhāgavata.” You are helpless in this regard, so how can
you decide? If you have the causeless mercy of Rūpa
Gosvāmī and his associates, you can be qualified to
recognize Vaiṣṇavas and honor them accordingly;
otherwise not. For example, it may be that when you
consider the respective qualities of Rūpa Gosvāmī and
Haridāsa Ṭhākura, you will respect Haridāsa Ṭhākura and
not Rūpa Gosvāmī. You may think that Rūpa Gosvāmī is
just a young boy, a mere neophyte who knows nothing. But
Svarūpa Dāmodara will embrace that same Rūpa Gosvāmī to
his chest, and Mahāprabhu will affectionately pat him on
the back and tell him, “Oh, good boy! Good boy! How did
you know My heart?” Try to understand and absorb all
these high-class teachings of Mahāprabhu, and don’t
criticize any Vaiṣṇava.

In regard to the first-class devotee who is always
established in his relationship with Kṛṣṇa, why does he
sometimes want another relationship? For example, Nārada
is an uttama-mahā-bhāgavata in the mood of servitude
(dāsya-rasa), but he also wants to be a gopī. Such
devotees are very “tricky.” They want to taste
everything from top to bottom. They are like Kṛṣṇa.
Kṛṣṇa is also tricky, for He plays with Rādhikā and He
plays with Kubjā. Why did He go to Kubjā? He is fully
satisfied with Rādhikā, but still He wants to taste
everything, from top to bottom.

A kaniṣṭha-adhikārī cannot know his own level of
advancement, nor can he know how to properly respect
devotees according to their respective quality of
bhakti. He must be in the association of a madhyama-
adhikārī. One can know who is madhyama-adhikārī by
association and by hearing hari-kathā. The madhyama-
adhikārī will know some hari-kathā, and especially he
will be serving the Vaiṣṇavas more than the deities. He
has great respect for Vaiṣṇavas, and that is not
possible for a kaniṣṭha-adhikārī. A kaniṣṭha-adhikārī

                            186
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

cannot give up serving the deity to respect any devotee,
whereas a madhyama-adhikārī can do so.

A kaniṣṭha-adhikārī will consider whether or not
something has been offered to Kṛṣṇa, and then he will
give it to that pure devotee as Ṭhākurajī’s prasāda. The
madhyama-adhikārī will not see in this way. When he sees
an uttama-adhikārī taking prasāda, the madhyama-adhikārī
will understand that his offering was millions of times
greater than the kaniṣṭha-adhikārī’s formal offering,
even though the uttama-adhikārī may not have offered the
bhoga to Kṛṣṇa outwardly at all. The uttama-adhikārī has
offered the bhoga by his eyes and by his heart, and that
offering is much more acceptable than a formal offering
by a less advanced devotee. Actually, he has offered
himself, so there is nothing left to offer. This is very
hard for a kaniṣṭha-adhikārī – or even a beginning-level
madhyama-adhikārī – to understand, because it is a
highly elevated stage.




CHAPTER TEN

THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN JAGANNĀTHA PURĪ AND NAVADVĪPA


Kṛṣṇa is the Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is
sarva-śaktimān, almighty, and He is extremely merciful.
He is also very rasika. He is the ocean of rasa, and
therefore He is our worshipable deity. If you go deeply
into bhajana, you will understand many truths in this
regard. Because Kṛṣṇa is rasika-śekhara (the topmost
enjoyer of mellows) and causelessly merciful, He
considers, “How can I show kindness to all the souls
who, having deviated from Me, are suffering so
grievously? How can I attract them?” Thinking in this
way, He wanted to personally descend to this world to
bestow His mercy.

Kṛṣṇa is the ocean of rasa, but this ocean is divided
into two. The first is Kṛṣṇa as the taster and relisher
of rasa, and the second is the container of the ocean of
rasa. Kṛṣṇa is the object of love and the ocean of rasa,
but He is not the container. This rasa is situated in
the heart of Rādhikā. If Rādhikā were not present, there
would be no rasa and Kṛṣṇa would be nirviśeṣa-brahma.

Kṛṣṇa wants to give to the world this ocean of rasa
found in Rādhikā’s heart, which is called mahābhāva. He
wants to donate it to this world, but He cannot. He is
the object of love, and therefore He can only sprinkle
upon the world an idea of what it is like to be the
object. He cannot give the love of those who serve Him.
He cannot give love for Himself because He does not have
it. In order to have that love, therefore, He “stole”
the beauty and intrinsic mood of Rādhikā.

Actually, Kṛṣṇa cannot steal the mood of Rādhikā because
She is always very alert. She is more clever and
intelligent than Kṛṣṇa, because She is His power.
Kṛṣṇa’s intelligence is also Rādhikā. His everything is

                            187
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                        5/5/2017

Rādhikā. He can only wish, and therefore He discovered
another way to get Her mood: He begged it. Because She
and all Her sakhīs are always so alert, if His plan was
to cheat Her and steal away Her love, He would not have
been able to do so. He was not able to independently
enter that realm of love, and therefore He prayed to
Her, “Oh, I beg Your mercy. Please give Me Your beauty
and Your mahābhāva – that love which no one else
possesses.”

Even Lalitā and Viśākhā don’t have that kind of love,
and Kṛṣṇa also does not have it. His love reaches up to
mahābhāva, but the highest feature of mahābhāva, called
mādana, is not found in Him. Kṛṣṇa wanted to take
Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s mādanākhya-mahābhāva – in order to
fully relish His own beauty and His sweetness, and in
order to relish the happiness of such taste.

Rādhikā replied to His prayer, “Yes, I will donate this
to You for some time – as You wish. But You will have to
be admitted into the school of My sakhīs, and You will
have to attend their classes. They can then bestow that
mood upon you, and I will also be there to help You.”

In this way Kṛṣṇa begged, and He thus became Śacīnandana
Gaurahari.



anarpita-carīṁ cirāt karuṇayāvatīrṇaḥ kalau

samarpayitum unnatojjvala-rasāṁ sva-bhakti-śriyam

hariḥ puraṭa-sundara-dyuti-kadamba-sandīpitaḥ

sadā hṛdaya-kandare sphuratu vaḥ śacī-nandanaḥ



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 1.4)



May the Supreme Lord who is known as the son of Śrīmatī
Śacī-devī be transcendentally situated in the innermost
chambers of your heart. Resplendent with the radiance of
molten gold, He has appeared in the age of Kali by His
causeless mercy to bestow what no incarnation has ever
offered before: the most sublime and radiant mellow of
devotional service, the mellow of amorous love.



Who is Śacīnandana, the son of Mother Śacī? He is gopī-
bhartuḥ, Kṛṣṇa Himself – avatīrṇaḥ kalau. Why did He
descend to this world? Karuṇayā – He descended by His
causeless mercy. Nṛsiṁhadeva and Vāmanadeva came here,
and Kūrma, Varāha, and Rāmacandra also came; and they
all gave something to the world. Rāmacandra taught so
many things, especially maryādā – etiquette and worship
in majesty and awe and reverence. Also, many ācāryas
came to this world, like Śrī Madhvācārya, Śrī
Rāmānujācārya, Śrī Viṣṇusvāmī, and Śrī Nimbāditya, but
they gave only regulative bhakti. They taught, “Kṛṣṇa is

                            188
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

worshipable” – not anything else. Similarly, Śrī
Prahlāda Mahārāja explained in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
(7.5.23–4):



śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ viṣṇoḥ

smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam

arcanaṁ vandanam dāsyaṁ

sakhyam ātma-nivedanam

iti puṁsārpitā viṣṇau

bhaktiś cen nava-lakṣaṇā

kriyeta bhagavaty addhā

tan manye ’dhītam uttamam



The following nine processes are accepted as pure
devotional service: hearing and chanting about the
transcendental holy name, form, qualities,
paraphernalia, and pastimes of Lord Viṣṇu; remembering
them; serving the lotus feet of the Lord; offering the
Lord respectful worship with sixteen types of
paraphernalia; offering prayers to the Lord; becoming
His servant; considering the Lord to be one’s best
friend; and surrendering everything unto Him (in other
words, serving Him with the body, mind, and words). One
who has dedicated his life to the service of Kṛṣṇa
through these nine methods should be understood to be
the most learned person, for he has acquired complete
knowledge.



You must surrender to the lotus feet of the Lord, but
you will have to surrender first to dāsa-bhagavān, the
guru, and then ultimately you can perform ātma-
nivedanam, full surrender, to Kṛṣṇa. Moreover, this is
vaidhī-bhakti, and it can only lead us to Vaikuṇṭha –
never to Vṛndāvana. It is not so powerful.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu descended to this world mainly
to give rāgānuga-bhakti, and therefore He is karuṇayā,
the most merciful incarnation. Samarpayitum means to
give. To give what? To give unnata-ujjvala-rasa. Unnata-
ujjvala is not vaidhī-bhakti. Unnata-ujjvala-rasa is
only the love of the gopīs of Vṛndāvana. This love is
not found even in Mother Yaśodā, Rohiṇī, and others like
them. They know something about this rasa, but it is not
found in them.

Mahāprabhu especially descended to give sva-bhakti-
śriyam. Sva means “own.” Who is the “own” of Kṛṣṇa? Only
Śrīmatī Rādhikā is Kṛṣṇa’s own. Her love, Her bhakti, is
prema, sneha, māna, rāga, anurāga, bhāva, mahābhāva, and
even more than this – modana and mādana. Everything is
included in mādana. Separation and meeting are both

                            189
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                       5/5/2017

included – to the highest point.

Mahāprabhu came to sprinkle this mercy of sva-bhakti-
śriyam upon the jīvas. Śriyam means beauty. It is the
beauty of unnata-ujjvala-rasa, but not unnata-ujjvala-
rasa itself. Śrīmatī Rādhikā Herself is the embodiment
of unnata-ujjvala-rasa, and Lalitā, Viśākhā, and all the
other sakhīs are also participants in that rasa. Śriyam
is the mood of Rūpa Mañjarī, Rati Mañjarī, and others
including Kamala Mañjarī and her followers. This is the
mood of service to Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

Mahāprabhu came to sprinkle the mercy of rāga-mārga, the
path by which we can attain the service of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa
Yugala. This path is called rāgānuga-bhakti, and it will
take you to the stage of rāga. In this connection, rāga
is the gopīs’ moods to please Kṛṣṇa.

Mahāprabhu mercifully came to give this mood, but He
Himself was not trained. He was like a person who wants
to become a lawyer, but who must first go to law school
and pass the exams. Still, even after that he cannot
enter the court right away. He must become an apprentice
and practice under the guidance of a qualified and
senior lawyer. After two or three years, when he has
completed his training, he can then enter the court and
plead – not otherwise.

Mahāprabhu descended to this world in Navadvīpa, and
there He appeared from the womb of Śrīmatī Śacī-devī.
Navadvīpa is Vṛndāvana. Navadvīpa and Vṛndāvana are the
same, but in Navadvīpa everything is hidden – as Kṛṣṇa
is hidden in the shape of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. As
Śacīnandana does not look like Kṛṣṇa, similarly
Vṛndāvana, the abode of Kṛṣṇa, is covered in Navadvīpa.
Yet, it is Vṛndāvana. All the twelve forests of
Vṛndāvana exist here and there in Navadvīpa, but in a
covered way.

You should know that there are no Vṛndāvana forests in
Jagannātha Purī. Therefore, Jagannātha Purī can never be
equal to Navadvīpa. A very high class of separation is
tasted by Mahāprabhu in the Gambhīrā, but at the same
time Navadvīpa is Vṛndāvana and Purī is not. Purī is
like Dvārakā. In Dvārakā, Kṛṣṇa laments for the gopīs.
He cannot wear His peacock feather or carry His sweet
vaṁśī, and He cannot declare, “My father and mother are
Nanda and Yaśodā. These are not My real queens – the
gopīs are My dearmost beloveds.”

Do you know the meaning of the word Navadvīpa? Nava
refers to nitya-nava-navāyamāna, which means “always
ever-fresh.” Nava also means nine. Navadvīpa consists of
nine islands, and they denote the nine processes of
bhakti headed by śravaṇam and kīrtanam. The Vedas,
Upaniṣads, and many other Vaiṣṇava literatures have
referred to Navadvīpa in the following way (Brahma-
saṁhitā (5.56)):



śriyaḥ kāntāḥ kāntaḥ parama-puruṣaḥ kalpa-taravo

drumā bhūmiś cintāmaṇi-gaṇa-mayi toyam amṛtam

                            190
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                        5/5/2017


kathā gānaṁ nāṭyaṁ gamanam api vaṁśī priya-sakhī

cid-ānandaṁ jyotiḥ param api tad āsvādyam api ca

sa yatra kṣīrābdhiḥ sravati surabhībhyaś ca su-mahān

nimeṣārddhākhyo vā vrajati na hi yatrāpi samayaḥ

bhaje śvetadvīpaṁ tam aham iha golokam iti yaṁ

vidantas te santaḥ kṣiti-virala-cārāḥ katipaye



I worship that supreme abode of Śvetadvīpa, where the
beloved heroines are a host of transcendental goddesses
of fortune, and the Supreme Personality Śrī Kṛṣṇa is the
only lover; where all the trees are spiritual desire-
trees, and the earth is made of transcendental wish-
fulfilling cintāmaṇi jewels; where the water is nectar,
natural speaking is a melodious song, and walking to and
fro is an artful dance; where the flute is the dearmost
friend; where light is full of knowledge and bliss, and
the supreme spiritual substance that comprises all
things is relishable; where a vast transcendental ocean
of milk is always flowing from millions upon millions of
surabhī cows; and where time is not subject to passing
away, even for half the blink of an eye, because it is
not divided into past and future, but remains in the
undivided eternal present. That divine abode, which is
practically unknown in this world, is known by the name
of Goloka to only a few, rare sādhus.



In his writings, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has quoted this
verse, and Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura also quoted it,
along with many similar verses. Navadvīpa is Śvetadvīpa.
In transcendental Goloka Vṛndāvana there are two parts:
Vṛndāvana and Śvetadvīpa. Vṛndāvana and Navadvīpa are
complementary – without Navadvīpa, Vṛndāvana is
incomplete, and without Vṛndāvana, Navadvīpa is
incomplete. Together they are complete, as when
separation and meeting mix together, the resulting
situation is complete. Where there is no separation
mood, saṁyoga (meeting) is incomplete.

The twelve vanas (forests) and upavanas (sub-forests) of
Vṛndāvana are in Navadvīpa, within the nine islands:
Madhuvana, Tālavana, Kumudavana, Bahulāvana, Kāmyavana,
Khadiravana, Bhadravana, Bhāṇḍīravana, Bilvavana,
Mahāvana, Vṛndāvana, and Lauhavana. All of these
forests, in some way, are in Navadvīpa.

Do not think that Jagannātha Purī is superior to
Navadvīpa. Do not think that the bank of the River
Godāvarī where Mahāprabhu revealed His mahābhāva-
rasarāja mood to Rāya Rāmānanda is superior to
Navadvīpa. Navadvīpa is far superior to both these
places. On one hand, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu revealed
His transcendental form of rasarāja-mahābhāva at
Godāvarī, and that very high class of hari-kathā,
Rāmānanda-saṁvāda, took place there. Also, Caitanya

                            191
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

Mahāprabhu showed His extreme moods of separation in the
Gambhīrā. He jumped in the ocean near there, and He
relished Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s moods of separation with
Svarūpa Dāmodara and Rāya Rāmānanda there. These may be
said, therefore, to be the deepest and highest hari-
kathās, but there are so many reasons why they are not.

Jagannātha Purī is a very elevated pastime place,
especially regarding the gambhīrā-līlā of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, but still it is like Dvārakā. There is no
forest or sub-forest of Vṛndāvana there. Neither Gokula,
Bhāṇḍīravana, Nandagaon, nor Varṣāṇā are there. They are
not on the bank of the Godāvarī, nor are they found in
Kurukṣetra or Jagannātha Purī. Therefore, Navadvīpa must
be superior to these places.

Because so many places exist in Navadvīpa in a hidden
way, Navadvīpa is known as gupta-vṛndāvana. One of the
nine islands of Navadvīpa is Godrumadvīpa, which is
described by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura in his Jaiva-
dharma. Godrumadvīpa is Nandagaon, nearby Varṣāṇā. The
birthplace of Caitanya Mahāprabhu in Māyāpura is Mathurā
and Gokula combined. Caitanya Mahāprabhu is Kṛṣṇa, with
the internal mood and complexion of Śrīmatī Rādhikā.
Kṛṣṇa took birth in Vṛndāvana; partly in Mathurā, but
fully in Gokula, and both places are combined there in
Māyāpura Yogapīṭha.

Then, crossing the Gaṅgā from there to Koladvīpa where
our Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha is situated, we find
Girirāja-Govardhana. There, all the kuñjas and caves
where Kṛṣṇa played with the sakhās and sakhīs are
situated. Nearby there is Rasauli, or rāsa-sthalī, where
Candra-sarovara is located at the foot of Girirāja-
Govardhana, and nearby there is Ṛtudvīpa, where Rādhā-
kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa are situated. The Gaṅgā and Yamunā
rivers meet together at Prayaga and continue to flow
side-by-side to Navadvīpa and all around its nine
islands. Our Devānanda Gauḍīya Maṭha was constructed by
our gurudeva on the west bank of the Gaṅgā, the bank
where the Yamunā flows; and Māyāpura is on the east bank
of the Gaṅgā, the bank where the Gaṅgā flows. Lord
Brahmā performed thousands of austerities on that east
bank.

In Navadvīpa there is Pañcaveṇī, the meeting place of
the Gaṅgā, Yamunā, Sarasvatī, Alakanandā, and Mandākinī.
Mānasī-gaṅgā is there, Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śyāma-kuṇḍa are
there, and this is all very wonderful. In Māmagāchi
(Modadrumadvīpa) Bahulāvana is present, and in the north
of Māyāpura is Bhadravana. Jahnudvīpa is Bhāṇḍīravana,
and Sīmantadvīpa is Mathurā. All these truths have been
explained by Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura in his
ŚrīNavadvīpa-dhāma-māhātmya. Vṛndāvana is in Navadvīpa,
not in Jagannātha Purī or Godāvarī.

There is one very important thing to know, and you
should know it very deeply. With regards to Navadvīpa
being Vṛndāvana, there are two aṣṭa-kālīya-līlās,
eternal pastimes performed during the eight periods of
the day. One is Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s aṣṭa-kālīya-
līlā and one is Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa’s aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā.
Mahāprabhu’s aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā took place in Navadvīpa,
and it is that aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā upon which devotees

                            192
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

meditate. There is no such aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā on which to
meditate in Jagannātha Purī.

In their gaura-gāyatrī-mantra, the brāhmaṇas chant,
“viśvambharāyadhīmahi” and “gaurāya.” Why do they utter
“gaurāya?” Who is Gaura? Gaura, or Gaurāṅga, is Kṛṣṇa,
with the intrinsic mood, beauty, and golden complexion
of Rādhikā. He is actually Kṛṣṇa, but now He is fully
absorbed in the mood of Rādhikā. He feels as though He
has become Rādhikā, but there are three Rādhikās:
Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Rādhikā, Viyoginī-Rādhikā, and
Saṁyoginī-Rādhikā.

Like Kṛṣṇa, Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Rādhikā never goes out of
Vṛndāvana. Kṛṣṇa and Rohiṇī-nandana Balarāma also cannot
go out of Vṛndāvana, because Balarāma always remains
with Kṛṣṇa. Only Their manifestations, Vasudeva-nandana
Kṛṣṇa and Vasudeva-nandana Baladeva, will go to Mathurā
and Dvārakā. The pastimes of Kṛṣṇa in Mathurā and
Dvārakā are transcendental and everlasting, as are the
pastimes of Vrajendra-nandana Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana.
Vāsudeva-Kṛṣṇa eternally sports in Mathurā, and in
Vṛndāvana, Vrajendra-nandana Kṛṣṇa is eternally playing.

Similarly, there are three Rādhikās. Actually there is
only one Rādhikā, but She has three moods or features.
Kṛṣṇa will not change when He goes to Mathurā, but He
will not use His flute and peacock feather. He will
change His father and mother, but not His form. Only His
mood will be changed, and mood is the predominant factor
of determination. If He takes His flute and peacock
feather and tells everyone, “I am the son of Nanda and
Yaśodā,” then He is Vrajendra-nandana Kṛṣṇa. On the
other hand, if He has no peacock feather and flute and
He tells everyone, “I am the son of Vasudeva and
Devakī,” then He is present by His prakāśa
(manifestation). His manifestation is not fully Kṛṣṇa
Himself, the Supreme.

In the same way, Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī Rādhikā is always
with Kṛṣṇa in Vṛndāvana. In Nandagaon, where Rādhikā
felt great separation and spoke Bhramara-gīta, She is
Viyoginī-Rādhikā. Actually, She is never in viyoga
(separation), in the sense that she is never separated
from Kṛṣṇa. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī has explained this truth
in his Lalita-mādhava and also in Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi. This
is why Kavi Karṇapūra has not discussed the līlā of
Mathurā and Dvārakā. He completes his Ānanda-vṛndāvana-
campū just after the rāsa-līlā. Our ācāryas can never
tolerate the idea that Rādhikā should be separated from
Kṛṣṇa. In Her original and complete feature She is
called Vṛṣabhānu-nandinī. She is always with Nanda-
nandana Kṛṣṇa, and the Rādhikā who feels separation in
Nandagaon is Her manifestation, Viyoginī-Rādhikā. She is
the same Rādhikā, but She is feeling separation. Then,
in Kurukṣetra, She is Saṁyoginī-Rādhikā. She goes there
for a moment, for one or two days and, keeping Kṛṣṇa on
the chariot of Her mind, She brings Him back to
Vṛndāvana. Saṁyoga means “always meeting.”

In the mantra “gaurāya svāhā” or “tan no gauraḥ
pracodayāt,” the name Viśvambhara is uttered.
Viśvambhara never lived in the cave (the Gambhīrā) in
Jagannātha Purī, for He is Śacīnandana Gaurahari in

                            193
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

Navadvīpa. From there He gives so much knowledge, so
much love and affection, and a very high-class prema to
the jīvas. He even gave prema to Jagāi and Mādhāi.
Viśvambharāya dhīmahi – we meditate on Him in Navadvīpa.

In the cave of the Gambhīrā, Mahāprabhu played a role of
great opulence. At that time, in the night, no one but
Rāya Rāmānanda and Svarūpa Dāmodara – that is, Viśākhā
and Lalitā – were able to witness His pastimes. At that
time, although he was intimately familiar with all of
Mahāprabhu’s pastimes, even Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī could not
go there. In Godāvarī, Mahāprabhu manifested His form as
rasarāja-mahābhāva – this is opulence. At that time even
Rāmānanda Rāya began to pray like Devakī or Arjuna, “Oh,
You are that same Supreme Personality of Godhead!”

In Navadvīpa there is no opulence. In Navadvīpa,
Śacīnandana played as Kṛṣṇa played with the girls in
Vṛndāvana. While bathing in the Gaṅgā He would say to
the little girls, “Will you marry Me? I want to marry
you; if you will not marry Me then you will not be
happy. Give your offerings of sandeśa and bananas to Me
rather than to Śiva.” This comes in the category of the
aṣṭa-kālīya-līlā of Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and it is
therefore far superior to any līlā in Jagannātha Purī.
In Navadvīpa there is svārasikī-upāsanā, meditational
worship on the continual flow of unlimited līlās taking
place throughout the various periods of each day,
whereas in Purī there is mantramayī-upāsanā,
meditational worship of a specific līlā, in this case
Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s feelings of separation for Kṛṣṇa. In
Navadvīpa, Mahāprabhu performed His mādhurya-līlā,
whereas in Jagannātha Purī the līlā is full of aiśvarya.
In Navadvīpa, Śacīnandana’s school friends could quarrel
with Him. Gadādhara Paṇḍita and Jagadānanda Paṇḍita
always used to quarrel with Him as young schoolboys, and
Śacī Mātā used to chastise her son. In Jagannātha Purī,
however, even the King, although wanting to keep his
head at Mahāprabhu’s lotus feet, could not approach Him.
Rāya Rāmānanda and all others always prayed to
Mahāprabhu. He was not considered their friend, but
rather He was considered much greater than them. In this
way, navadvīpa-līlā is sweeter than the līlā of
Jagannātha Purī, and there are many deep truths hidden
there.

If you take bath in Navadvīpa at Bārakoṇa-ghāṭa, you
will emerge at Keśī-ghāṭa, Vṛndāvana, where the rāsa-
līlā is taking place. However, if you bathe in the ocean
at Jagannātha Purī at Svarga-dvāra, you will not emerge
in Vṛndāvana. Only if you are in the Gambhīrā can you
know something of the glory of Vṛndāvana, and only then
if you have intense greed to go there. Navadvīpa is
therefore more glorious than Jagannātha Purī and it is
even more glorious than the bank of the Godāvarī.

Although Caitanya Mahāprabhu enacted plentiful pastimes
in Navadvīpa, He still felt the necessity to accept
sannyāsa. He did not only want to taste rasa, He also
wanted to sprinkle mercy. In Navadvīpa He was both
tasting and giving something, but in order to give even
more, He accepted the renounced life of a sannyāsī. He
quickly left Śacī Mātā and Viṣṇupriyā, and these were
very sorrowful scenes. Kṛṣṇa abandoned the gopīs in

                            194
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

Vṛndāvana, went to Mathurā, and after that to Dvārakā.
Similarly, Mahāprabhu left Viṣṇupriyā-devī just as
Rāmacandra left Sītā forever, and this was particularly
heart-rending.

After taking sannyāsa, Mahāprabhu went to Purī. After
that He was admitted into the school of Rāya Rāmānanda
and then into the school of Svarūpa Dāmodara, and after
that He preached His mission of rāga-mārga; that is,
rāgānuga-bhakti.

Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu at Ṭoṭā-gopīnātha in Purī



On the occasions that Mahāprabhu saw Subhadrā and
Baladeva, He did not experience much pleasure. Rather,
in front of Baladeva and His sister Subhadrā, He felt
shy and thought, “I have come to Kurukṣetra.” He was in
the mood of Śrīmatī Rādhikā at Kurukṣetra where, in
great separation, She tried to bring Kṛṣṇa (Jagannātha)
to Vṛndāvana. In the mood of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, Mahāprabhu
did not like to see Kṛṣṇa at Kurukṣetra because all His
associates, along with all His queens of Dvārakā, were
present, and there were many horses and elephants.

There was no chance for Rādhikā to be with Kṛṣṇa in
private at Kurukṣetra, and this is why Mahāprabhu felt
unbearable separation during the Ratha-yātrā Festival.
He also felt unbearable separation in the Gambhīrā.
There, His mood was like that of Rādhikā’s in Vṛndāvana
as She felt separation from Kṛṣṇa when He was in
Dvārakā. The mood of separation was always present in
Mahāprabhu when He was in Purī. When Rādhikā went to
Kurukṣetra, She could not take rest with Kṛṣṇa. Instead,
She was given separate accommodation in a tent, and
Kṛṣṇa lived with the Yādavas and His queens. When He
went to His own accommodation, She felt great separation
from Him.

In Purī, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu sometimes saw the sea
as the Yamunā and jumped in it, but once there He wept
still more because Kṛṣṇa would disappear. Sometimes He
became like a tortoise, His limbs drawn into His body,
and sometimes the joints of His hands and legs would
become separated by as much as eight inches and remain
connected only by skin. At that time He sometimes
appeared like a ghost, and when the devotees would see
Him in that condition, they would become fearful and
begin to weep for Him. All this was due to His
separation from Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, to get some relief, He
would go to take darśana of the deity of Ṭoṭā-gopīnātha.
Seeing Ṭoṭā-gopīnātha, He thought, “Oh, I have come to
Vṛndāvana. My prāṇanātha is here.” In this way His tears
of separation would subside.

On the left side of Ṭoṭā-gopīnātha is Rādhikā, on the
right side Lalitā, and both are black like Kṛṣṇa. Rādhā
becomes black by seeing Her prāṇanātha and becoming
deeply absorbed in Him. She sometimes takes Kṛṣṇa’s
flute and begins to play it, and in this way also, being
fully absorbed in Him, She becomes black. This is also
true of Lalitā. Thinking of black Kṛṣṇa, she also
becomes black. This is the mood of Ṭoṭā-gopīnātha

                            195
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

accompanied by Rādhikā and Lalitā. Likewise, in the mood
of Śrīmatī Rādhikā, Kṛṣṇa becomes Mahāprabhu, and at
that time Lalitā becomes Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara.

Although you will not see any other vigraha sitting, He
sits. Some say that when Śrīla Gadādhara Paṇḍita became
old, he could no longer offer garlands to Ṭoṭā-
gopīnātha, and therefore Ṭoṭā-gopīnātha sat down. But
this is not actually true. Caitanya Mahāprabhu
disappeared at the age of 48, and Gadādhara Paṇḍita was
only one year younger. He left this world a year after
Mahāprabhu disappeared, and thus there was no chance for
him to become old. The actual history is that when
Mahāprabhu disappeared, following Mahāprabhu’s order,
Gadādhara Paṇḍita did not leave the worship of Ṭoṭā-
gopīnātha. Always feeling separation from Mahāprabhu, he
quickly became lean and thin, and it was for this reason
that he could not stand up to give Ṭoṭā-gopīnātha a
garland. Seeing Gadādhara Paṇḍita in such a state, Ṭoṭā-
gopīnātha sat down for him, and Gadādhara Paṇḍita
continued to offer garlands along with his tears.

There was a devotee of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu named
Māmu Ṭhākura who used to render various services to Him.
Soon after Mahāprabhu disappeared, Gadādhara Paṇḍita
also disappeared, and at that time his disciple Māmu
Ṭhākura was appointed by the government of Purī to serve
Ṭoṭā-gopīnātha. He was old – about 84 years – and he
could not properly offer garlands to Ṭoṭā-gopīnātha.
Some say that perhaps because Māmu Ṭhākura could not
give garlands to Ṭoṭā-gopīnātha in his old age, Ṭoṭā-
gopīnātha sat down for him. Actually, however, Ṭoṭā-
gopīnātha sat only for Śrīmatī Rādhikā (who appeared as
Gadādhara Paṇḍita). It is a common thing for Kṛṣṇa to
stand up and sit down for Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

At first Mahāprabhu resided in Navadvīpa, from childhood
up to kiśora-līlā, reading and writing. When He was 24
years old He left His home and came to Jagannātha Purī,
where He bestowed His mercy upon Sārvabhauma
Bhaṭṭācārya. After that He went to South India, and
there He met Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda at Godāvarī. First Rāya
Rāmānanda saw Him as rasika-śekhara (Kṛṣṇa). Then He saw
rasarāja-mahābhāva, Śrīmatī Rādhikā and Kṛṣṇa combined,
and he fainted. After that Mahāprabhu returned to Purī
and fully relished the vipralambha-bhāva of Śrīmatī
Rādhikā.

Caitanya Mahāprabhu performed His kiśora-līlā in
Navadvīpa, and therefore Navadvīpa is none other than
Vṛndāvana. Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura and others have
explained that it is actually non-different from
Vṛndāvana, but they never said that Jagannātha-kṣetra is
Vṛndāvana. Rather, Jagannātha-kṣetra represents Dvārakā
or Kurukṣetra.

Those who follow Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and perform
bhajana in Navadvīpa will emerge in Vṛndāvana on the
bank of the Yamunā at Vaṁśīvaṭa. Our ācāryas have
revealed this in their writings, but they have never
said that Jagannātha Purī is the same as Vṛndāvana. Śrī
Kṣetra means Lakṣmī-kṣetra, where Satyabhāmā and
Rukmiṇī, or Mahā-Lakṣmī, reside. If someone leaves his
body in Jagannātha Purī, he assumes a four-handed form

                            196
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

(in Vaikuṇṭha), but this is not so in Vṛndāvana and
Navadvīpa. There, one will become two handed like the
associates of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Therefore, Navadvīpa is
superior to Jagannātha Purī.

The four places of Mahāprabhu are Navadvīpa, Purī,
Godāvarī, and Vṛndāvana. Vṛndāvana and Navadvīpa are the
same, but they are seen as two. At the time of sādhana,
Navadvīpa is seen as Navadvīpa, and when the devotee has
reached perfection, it is seen as Vṛndāvana. In
sādhanāvastha (the stage of performing sādhana) we will
see Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu in the form of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, but when we become perfected, we will
exclaim, “Oh, Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa have together become Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu.” So both are one.

In the intense separation of divyonmāda, Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu used to see Purī as Kurukṣetra and Dvārakā.
As far as Godāvarī is concerned, it is Mahāprabhu’s
“school.” There He learned from His śikṣā-guru, Viśākhā-
devī, in the school of Rāya Rāmānanda, and after that He
returned to Purī. And in Purī, He was always absorbed in
thoughts of Vṛndāvana.

Some people say that the part of Purī in which Ṭoṭā-
gopīnātha resides is gupta-vṛndāvana. It is true that
Mahāprabhu used to see Ṭoṭā-gopīnātha’s dwelling as
Vṛndāvana, but it is not Vṛndāvana. It is part of
Dvārakā and Kurukṣetra, and Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu used
to feel separation there in Purī throughout the entire
day and night. He would only lament in the mood of
separation.

The ācāryas in our disciplic line are associates of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, pālyadāsīs. They want Śrīmatī Rādhikā
to be always cheerful, and She is cheerful when She is
with Kṛṣṇa. We are pleased when Rādhikā is hidden in a
kuñja and Kṛṣṇa is searching for Her, calling, “Where is
Rādhā? Where are Rādhā, Lalitā, Viśākhā, and the
others?” At that time the gopīs are most pleased,
thinking, “Oh, today He is searching.” We should come to
the stage in which we can also be pleased in that way.

In Purī, Rādhikā (Caitanya Mahāprabhu) is always
calling, “O Kṛṣṇa! O Kṛṣṇa!” We do not desire that. We
select as the best place, that place where Kṛṣṇa will
search – a place like Rādhā-kuṇḍa. There Kṛṣṇa
approaches Rādhikā and serves Her lotus feet, and at
that time Rādhikā feels proud and happy. In Purī there
is no rāsa-līlā. Yet Jagannātha Purī is extremely
important. For us, at our stage, the mood of separation
is more helpful than meeting. But ultimately we want
Śrīmatī Rādhikā to be always pleased. In Purī She is
always weeping and we don’t want to see that. We
consider Vṛndāvana the best place, because Vṛndāvana is
where Rādhikā will place Her feet in Kṛṣṇa’s lap, and He
will paint His name on them. Kṛṣṇa will then keep Her
feet on His head and heart, and the fresh color on Her
feet will make stamp-like prints on His body. Kṛṣṇa
always serves Her in Vṛndāvana, where She will say, “Oh,
He loves Me best.” This is what we desire. For sādhana,
on the other hand, separation is helpful. Without
developing feelings of separation, we cannot advance an
inch.

                            197
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017




Ratha-yātrā in Śrīdhāma Navadvīpa – is it contradictory
to the conception of rūpānuga-bhakti?



[In the following article originally printed in the
December 1969 issue of Śrī Bhāgavata Patrikā, Śrīla
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja replies to some doubts regarding the
present-day performance of Śrī Ratha-yātrā in Navadvīpa
by the Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti, as established by Śrīla
Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja.]



Doubt 1: Ratha-yātrā is not performed in Śrī Vṛndāvana.
Therefore, in Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma, which is abhinna-
vraja-maṇḍala (non-different from Vraja), why should
this līlā be exhibited?



Reply 1: The three worshipable deities of the Gauḍīya
Vaiṣṇavas, namely Śrī Madana-mohana, Śrī Govinda, and
Śrī Gopīnātha, have Their respective temples in
Vṛndāvana. The festival of ratha-yātrā-līlā has been
held in these temples with great pomp and splendor for
hundreds of years. At the same time as the Śrī Ratha-
yātrā procession is held in Purī, the same festival is
also held in the temples established by the Gosvāmīs,
such as the Śrī Rādhā-Dāmodara Mandira, and also in the
Śrī Rādhā-Śyāmasundara Mandira, the Śrī Rādhā-
Gokulānanda Mandira, and others. In addition, it is also
held in almost all the prominent temples of the other
sampradāyas such as the Śrī Raṅganātha Temple and the
Śrī Śaha-bihārī Mandira. This annual ratha-yātrā-līlā is
also a common sight in the homes of thousands of
Vrajavāsīs. This procession takes place not only in
Vṛndāvana but also in Mathurā, Nandagaon, Varṣāṇā, and
even at Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Moreover, there are also ancient
temples of Śrī Jagannātha-deva in Vṛndāvana and at
Rādhā-kuṇḍa. Therefore, the statement that the ratha-
yātrā-līlā is not performed in Vṛndāvana or Vraja-
maṇḍala is completely false.

There are rūpānuga Vaiṣṇavas throughout the world. They
have performed the procession of śrī-ratha-yātrā-līlā in
the past, and they are still performing it, in order to
nourish their bhajana. An associate of Śrī Gaurasundara,
Śrī Kamalākara Pippalāi, is a friend of Kṛṣṇa named
Mahābala Sakhā among the dvādaśa-gopālas (twelve
prominent cowherd boys) in kṛṣṇa-līlā. He manifested the
service and pastimes of ratha-yātrā-līlā of Śrī
Jagannātha-deva in Bengal, in the district known as
Maheśa. Even today, this Ratha-yātrā Festival is
observed annually with magnificent pageantry. In the
nearby district of Śrī Rāma-pura, the service of Śrī
Jagannātha-deva is conducted both in Vallabhapura and
Chatra, where Ratha-yātrā has been observed for hundreds
of years. In the village of Dhāma-rāi (in the district
of Ḍhākā), Ratha-yātrā is also very famous.


                            198
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

The Vyāsadeva of śrī-gaura-līlā, Śrī Vṛndāvana dāsa
Ṭhākura, has also established a deity of Śrī Jagannātha-
deva in his own village of Śrīpāṭa, Śrī Māmagāchi in Śrī
Modadrumadvīpa in Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma. The service of
Śrī Jagannātha-deva is still going on there even today.
The Ratha-yātrā of Mahīṣadala, in the district of
Medinīpura, is also very famous. These days, even in
large cities of America such as San Francisco, Śrī
Ratha-yātrā is celebrated in a grand style, in
accordance with the mood of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

Śrīman Mahāprabhu expressed a particular mood in regard
to Ratha-yātrā. He always considered that Śrī Kṛṣṇa,
being mounted upon His chariot, is returning to
Vṛndāvana to meet with all the gopīs, especially Śrīmatī
Rādhikā, who had been afflicted by the severe pains of
separation from Kṛṣṇa for a very long time. We should
always remember that the rūpānuga-ācāryas who had the
necessary facilities manifested this pastime of the
Ratha-yātrā Festival on the earthly plane in order to
stimulate the aforementioned mood of Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu within their hearts and to nourish their
bhajana. Some niṣkiñcana-rūpānuga Vaiṣṇavas, being
bereft of the necessary facilities for observing this
festival, have stimulated this mood within their hearts
by mānasī-sevā, service performed within the mind.
Alternatively, they nourish their bhāva by taking
darśana of śrī-ratha-yātrā-līlā in various places such
as Purī-dhāma. The purpose of both approaches is
fundamentally one; there is no difference between them.



Doubt 2: Seeing the ratha would stimulate a terribly
undesirable apprehension in the hearts of the vraja-
gopīs. Therefore, how can the rūpānuga Vaiṣṇavas, who
are following the moods of the gopīs, join in the Ratha-
yātrā procession?



Reply 2: This concept is also completely wrong in all
respects. Adorned with the sentiment and complexion of
Śrī Rādhā, Śrī Gaurasundara is directly Śrī Kṛṣṇa
Himself. Śrī Gadādhara Gosvāmī (Śrīmatī Rādhikā), Śrī
Svarūpa Dāmodara (Śrī Lalitā), Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda (Śrī
Viśākhā), Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī (Śrī Rūpa Mañjarī), Śrī
Sanātana Gosvāmī (Śrī Lavaṅga Mañjarī), Śrī Raghunātha
dāsa Gosvāmī (Śrī Rati Mañjarī), and all of the
associates of Śrī Gaurasundara, who were all mainly
sakhīs or sakhās in Vraja, assembled together for Ratha-
yātrā. They all danced and chanted before the chariot,
deeply immersed in the mood: “kṛṣṇa lañāvraje yāie-bhāva
antara – let us take Kṛṣṇa and go back to Vṛndāvana.”
Did the associates of Mahāprabhu feel any distress or
anguish upon seeing the chariot? Definitely not. Then
why will their followers, the rūpānuga Vaiṣṇavas, feel
any anguish or undesirable apprehension?

The internal moods of Ratha-yātrā as promoted by Śrī
Gaurasundara are as follows: after a long period of
separation, on the occasion of the solar eclipse at
Kurukṣetra, Śrīmatī Rādhikā and the gopīs met with Śrī
Kṛṣṇa. But Śrīmatī Rādhikā was not satisfied because Śrī

                            199
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

Kṛṣṇa was dressed as a king and surrounded by immense
opulence, elephants, horses, military generals, and His
associates of Dvārakā. She wanted to see Kṛṣṇa dressed
as a cowherd boy in Vṛndāvana, the place of His sweet,
human-like pastimes. Therefore She wanted to bring Kṛṣṇa
back to Vraja. It is evident from the Padma Purāṇa that
śrī-ratha-yātrā-līlā, the pastime of Kṛṣṇa’s returning
again to Vṛndāvana on a chariot, is exhibited in Śrī
Jagannātha Purī and other places. Therefore, what is
there to impede the manifestation of Ratha-yātrā in Śrī
Vṛndāvana or Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma? In order to stimulate
this profound mood that was established by Śrīman
Mahāprabhu, His devout followers can perform Ratha-yātrā
everywhere, and have indeed done so. The mood of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu has been revealed in this verse:



yaḥ kaumāra-haraḥ sa eva hi varas tā eva caitra-kṣapās

te conmīlita-mālatī-surabhayaḥ prauḍhāḥ kadambānilāḥ

sā caivāsmi tathāpi tatra surata-vyāpāra-līlā-vidhau

revā-rodhasi vetasī-taru-tale cetaḥ samutkaṇṭhate



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 13.121)



That very personality who stole away my heart during my
youth is now again my master. These are the same moonlit
nights of the month of Caitra. The same fragrance of
mālatī flowers is there, and the same sweet breezes are
blowing from the kadamba forest. In our intimate
relationship I am also the same lover, yet still my mind
is not happy here. I am eager to go back to that place
on the bank of the Revā under the Vetasī tree. That is
my desire.



And also:



ei dhuyā-gāne nācena dvitīya prahara



kṛṣṇa lañā vraje yāi e-bhāva antara




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 1.56)



Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu used to sing this song [sei ta
parāṇa-nātha] especially during the latter part of the

                            200
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

day, and He would think, “Let Me take Kṛṣṇa back to
Vṛndāvana.” This ecstasy was always filling His heart.



Yes, it is true that when the gopīs, or the Vaiṣṇavas
who have taken shelter of gopī-bhāva, see the chariot
which takes Kṛṣṇa out of Vraja and far away from them,
they feel anguish and the apprehension that Kṛṣṇa will
not return. However, when they see the chariot on which
Kṛṣṇa sat and returned to Vṛndāvana, they become
overjoyed – not sorrowful.

After taking permission from the gopas and gopīs of
Vṛndāvana, Uddhava sat upon his chariot and was about to
return to Mathurā to meet with Kṛṣṇa. At that time the
vraja-gopas and gopīs, overwhelmed with prema, adorned
the chariot with various gifts for Kṛṣṇa and bade
Uddhava farewell with great respect.



atha gopīr anujñāpya

yaśodāṁ nandam eva ca

gopān āmantrya dāśārho

yāsyann āruruhe ratham



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.47.64)



[Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:] Uddhava, the descendant of
Daśārha, then took permission to leave from the gopīs
and from Mother Yaśodā and Nanda Mahārāja. He bade
farewell to all the cowherd men and, about to depart,
mounted his chariot.



Furthermore, after some time, Śrī Baladeva came to
Nanda-Gokula on a chariot. When he arrived, all the
gopas and gopīs welcomed Him with great affection.



balabhadraḥ kuru-śreṣṭha

bhagavān ratham āsthitaḥ

suhṛd-didṛkṣur utkaṇṭhaḥ

prayayau nanda-gokulam



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.65.1)




                            201
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

[Śukadeva Gosvāmī said:] O best of the Kurus, once Lord
Balarāma, eager to visit his well-wishing friends,
mounted his chariot and traveled to Nanda-Gokula.



pariṣvaktaś cirotkaṇṭhair

gopair gopībhir eva ca

rāmo ’bhivādya pitarāv

āśīrbhir abhinanditaḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.65.2)



Having long suffered the anxiety of separation, the
cowherd men and their wives embraced Lord Balarāma. The
Lord then offered respects to his parents, and they
joyfully greeted him with blessings.



Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī, on the basis of the verses of the
Padma Purāṇa, has described that Kṛṣṇa, after killing
Dantavakra, indeed returned to Vraja upon a chariot.
Upon hearing the sound of Kṛṣṇa’s conch and the rumbling
of His chariot, all the gopas and gopīs of Vraja
surmised that Kṛṣṇa was returning. Driven by excessive
eagerness to see Him, even feeble old women ran with
great haste from wherever they were in the direction of
the sound of Kṛṣṇa’s conch and chariot. When they drew
nearer and saw that Garuḍa was sitting on the flag of
the chariot, they became sure that Kṛṣṇa was definitely
returning to Vraja. Being overwhelmed with joy, they
became motionless like statues and were unable to go any
further. Only their gaze advanced in the direction of
the approaching chariot. This is described in the
following verse from Śrī Gopāla-campū (30.34):



strī-bāla-vṛddha-valitā vraja-vāsinās te

kṛṣṇāgatiṁ yadu-purād anumāya-śaṅkhāt

evaṁ dravanti capalaṁ sma yathā vidur na

svātmānam apy ahaha kiṁ punar agra-paścāt



Therefore, the idea that the vraja-gopīs become
distressed and apprehensive upon seeing a chariot in all
circumstances is incorrect.

In the pastime of Śrī Ratha-yātrā, and also on the path
of śrī-rūpānuga-bhajana, the importance of the internal
mood is predominant. Externally perceived substances or
places are not more important than the internal mood. In

                            202
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                       5/5/2017

Ratha-yātrā, the internal mood that Kṛṣṇa is returning
to Vraja is stimulated and inspired, not the pastimes of
Dvārakā or Mathurā. Kṛṣṇa returned to Vraja after being
absent for a very long time, and it is in this mood that
Śrī Jagannātha-deva travels from the Jagannātha Mandira
in Purī to the Śrī Guṇḍicā Mandira. During this journey
Śrī Gaurasundara and His confidential associates
experienced the utmost jubilation, being deeply absorbed
in the moods of Śrī Rādhā and the vraja-gopīs,
respectively. Moreover, they all assembled together
before the chariot, singing and dancing in great joy,
fully absorbed in exactly the same bhāva, during the
ulta-ratha-yātrā (the festival of Jagannātha-deva’s
return to Śrī Mandira from Śrī Guṇḍicā).

Did they think that by observing Ratha-yātrā as it
proceeded in the opposite direction that Śrī Kṛṣṇa was
leaving Vṛndāvana and returning to Mathurā or Dvārakā?
Never. Such an understanding must be mistaken. It has
been mentioned in ŚrīCaitanya-caritāmṛta how Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu and His associates assembled
together, danced, and performed kīrtana at the ulta-
ratha-yātrā:



āra dine jagannāthera bhitara-vijaya



rathe caḍi’ jagannātha cale nijālaya




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 14. 244)



The next day Lord Jagānnātha came out from the temple
and, riding on the car, returned to His own abode.



pūrvavat kaila prabhu lañā bhakta-gaṇa



parama ānande karena nartana-kīrtana




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 14. 245)



As previously, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and His devotees
chanted and danced with great pleasure.




                            203
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

Although the vraja-gopīs, especially Śrīmatī Rādhikā,
were extremely anxious to see Śrī Kṛṣṇa, they would not
leave Vṛndāvana even to go the very short distance to
where Kṛṣṇa was staying in Mathurā. Then how can Śrī
Gaurasundara, who is adorned with the sentiments of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā, along with His associates, stay at the
Purī Mandira or Śrī Gambhīrā? The Purī Mandira and Śrī
Gambhīrā are the embodiment of Dvārakā because the
Ratha-yātrā sets off from there. Alternatively, Śrī
Gaurasundara used to see the gardens of Purī as
Vṛndāvana, the ocean as Yamunā, and Caṭaka-parvata as
Govardhana. In such a Vṛndāvana, what aspect of the
Ratha-yātrā Festival would be contrary to the principles
of rāgānuga- or rūpānuga-bhakti?

Why did the Vrajavāsī Gosvāmīs, Śrīla Ṭhākura
Bhaktivinoda, Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura
Prabhupāda, Śrīla Śrīdhara Mahārāja, and all the
prominent rūpānuga-ācāryas go to Śrī Purī-dhāma to have
darśana of Ratha-yātrā, if Ratha-yātrādarśana would be
the cause of any type of disturbance or apprehension
that something undesirable was about to happen? It
appears that darśana of Ratha-yātrā simply stimulates
vraja-gopī-prema.



Doubt 3: From ancient times up until the present day, no
great personality who was expert in the performance of
bhajana has ever performed the procession of ratha-
yātrā-līlā in Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma, which is abhinna-
vraja, non-different from Vraja-maṇḍala.

Reply 3: This statement is meaningless and incoherent in
all respects for the following reason. From the time of
Śrīman Mahāprabhu until the present day, almost all
Gauḍīya ācāryas and bhaktas have made a pilgrimage to
Purī-dhāma at the time of Ratha-yātrā to have darśana of
the festival. In this way, the divinely inspired vision
of the moods exhibited by Śrī Gaurasundara is stimulated
within their hearts and thus their bhajana is nourished.
Until now, there had been no impetus to manifest Ratha-
yātrā in Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma and our previous ācāryas
had not considered it necessary to do so. However,
whenever the inspiration came in the hearts of great
personalities, they manifested this līlā in various
places in Gauḍa-maṇḍala, such as in the district of
Maheśa. Thus if a great personality is also inspired to
manifest this līlā in Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma, then it is in
no way contrary to the path of śrī-rūpānuga-bhajana.

For example, in the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sampradāya, from
the time of Śrīman Mahāprabhu, Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam has
been considered the natural commentary on Śrī Brahma-
sūtra. However, when the necessity arose, Śrī Gauḍīya
Vedāntācārya Baladeva Vidyābhūṣaṇa Prabhu manifested a
separate commentary, namely ŚrīGovinda-bhāṣya. Is this
activity contrary to siddhānta, or is it the embodiment
of prestige for our Gauḍīya sampradāya?



Doubt 4: Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura did not
perform ratha-yātrā-līlā in Śrī Gaura-dhāma.

                            204
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017




Reply 4: Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura
manifested Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa and Śrī Śyāma-kuṇḍa in
Vrajapattana (at Śrī Caitanya Maṭha) within Śrīdhāma
Māyāpura. He preached daiva-varṇāśrama-dharma, re-
established the use of saffron cloth and tridaṇḍi-
sannyāsa in the Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava sampradāya, and flew
the victory flag of Gauḍīya Vaiṣṇava dharma throughout
the world. Prior to the appearance of this crown jewel
in the dynasty of ācāryas, no other ācārya ever
inaugurated the aforementioned activities. Yet, can any
of these projects of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Prabhupāda be
considered contrary to the principles of rūpānuga-
bhakti? Never. Anyone who says such a thing is utterly
ignorant of bhakti-tattva. [The point here being that,
just as Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura set
precedents in certain areas, so his disciple, Śrīla
Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, can also set
precedents when there is a need to do so.]



Doubt 5: In Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma, how is the darśana of
Dvārakā possible or appropriate?



Reply 5: We have already explained that the predominant
bhāva in śrī-ratha-yātrā-līlā is “kṛṣṇa lañā vraje yāi –
let us take Kṛṣṇa to Vraja.” There is not even the
slightest scent of a sphūrti (momentary vision) or
darśana of Dvārakā in this bhāva. Therefore, even the
question of any kind of dvārakā-darśana arising from the
performance of ratha-yātrā-līlā in Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma
is irrelevant. On the other hand, Śrī Navadvīpa-maṇḍala,
which is non-different from Vṛndāvana, is aṁśi-dhāma,
i.e. the root dhāma in which all other dhāmas exist.
Mathurā, Dvārakā, Ayodhyā, and Paravyoma are all
eternally existing in Śrī Navadvīpa-dhāma, just as all
the plenary portions of aṁśī Kṛṣṇa, such as Nārāyaṇa and
Viṣṇu, exist eternally within Him.

At Candraśekhara-bhavana (Vrajapattana) in Māyāpura-
dhāma, Śrī Gaurasundara personally used to dance in the
mood of Śrī Rukmiṇī, yet it is well known that Śrī
Rukmiṇī-devī is an associate of dvārakā-līlā. Therefore,
if this līlā is possible in Vrajapattana, which is non-
different from Vraja or Śrī Rādhā-kuṇḍa, then how can
dvārakā-darśana be impossible in Śrīdhāma Navadvīpa?
Thus on what grounds can it be said that the
manifestation of ratha-yātrā-līlā is not possible?

Hence, the conclusion is that there is an inseparable
relationship between ratha-yātrā-līlā and rūpānuga-
ānugatya, the pursuance of the pure path established by
Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī. Śrī-rūpānuga Vaiṣṇavas manifest this
līlā throughout Navadvīpa-dhāma and thus, according to
the path founded by Śrīman Mahāprabhu, they inspire the
internal mood expressed in the following verse written
by Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī:



                            205
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017


priyaḥ so ’yaṁ kṛṣṇaḥ sahacari kuru-kṣetra-militas

tathāhaṁ sā rādhā tad idam ubhayoḥ saṅgama-sukham

tathāpy antaḥ-khelan-madhura-muralī-pañcama-juṣe

mano me kālindī-pulina-vipināya spṛhayati



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 1.76)



[Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī said:] My dear friend, now I have met
My very old and dear friend Kṛṣṇa on this field of
Kurukṣetra. I am the same Rādhārāṇī, and now we are
meeting together. It is very pleasant, but still I would
like to go to the bank of the Yamunā beneath the trees
of the forest there. I wish to hear the vibration of His
sweet flute playing the fifth note within that forest of
Vṛndāvana.



This mood thoroughly nourishes the bhajana of the
genuine śrī-rūpānuga Vaiṣṇavas.




CHAPTER ELEVEN

CLOSING WORDS


Sending the deity back



Toward the end of His līlā, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu read
a sonnet written by Śrī Advaita Ācārya:



bāulake kahiha, loka ha-ila bāula



bāulake kahiha, hāṭe nā vikāya cāula




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya-līlā 19.20)



Please inform Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, who is acting
like a madman, that everyone here has become mad like
Him. Inform Him also that rice is no longer in demand in

                            206
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

the marketplace. It is fully available in the market,
but no one is purchasing.



What does this mean? Caitanya Mahāprabhu had been called
by Śrī Advaita Ācārya when there was no “rice” anywhere,
when there was only emptiness everywhere. Mahāprabhu and
His associates then brought “rice,” which was the love
and affection for Kṛṣṇa that is attained through
chanting His name. Now, everyone everywhere had become
satisfied and wealthy. No one needed to buy rice any
more, so there was no more need for shops and
shopkeepers. Advaita Ācārya had called the deity, and
now he was sending Him back to His abode.

Practically no one could understand the letter. Only one
person, Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara, understood, and that is
why he questioned Caitanya Mahāprabhu:



jāniyā svarūpa gosāñi prabhure puchila



‘ei tarajāra artha bujhite nārila’




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya-līlā 19.25)



Although he knew the secret, Svarūpa Dāmodara Gosvāmī
inquired from the Lord, “What is the meaning of this
sonnet? I could not understand it.”



Caitanya Mahāprabhu replied:



upāsanā lāgi’ devera karena āvāhana



pūjā lāgi’ kata kāla karena nirodhana




Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Antya-līlā 19.26)



Advaita Ācārya invites the Lord to come and be
worshiped, and he keeps the deity for some time to
perform the worship.


                            207
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                        5/5/2017



Svarūpa Dāmodara wanted to hear from Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s own mouth, and Mahāprabhu explained
everything: “He called Me, and now he is praying,
‘Please return to Goloka Vṛndāvana.’” Śrīla Haridāsa
Ṭhākura was one of the few people who knew that the Lord
would soon depart, and that is why he left the world
before Mahāprabhu. He was very intelligent.

Then, one day, Caitanya Mahāprabhu went to the temple of
Ṭoṭā-gopīnātha to listen to Śrī Gadādhara Paṇḍita
reciting Bhāgavatam. Gadādhara Paṇḍita was weeping while
explaining the verses, especially this one:



barhāpīḍaṁ naṭa-vara-vapuḥ karṇayoḥ karṇikāraṁ

bibhrad vāsaḥ kanaka-kapiśaṁ vaijayantīṁ ca mālām

randhrān veṇor adhara-sudhayāpūrayan gopa-vṛndair

vṛndāraṇyaṁ sva-pada-ramaṇaṁ prāviśad gīta-kīrtiḥ



Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.21.5)



Śyāmasundara entered the forest of Vṛndā-devī,
accompanied by His cowherd boyfriends. His head was
decorated with a peacock feather, He wore yellow
karṇikāra flowers over His ears, and a dazzling golden-
yellow garment on His body. A fragrant vaijayantī
garland made of five kinds of flowers hung around His
neck, and extended down to His knees. He was splendidly
attired as a beautiful naṭavara, a most expert dancer,
and He appeared just like a very fine actor on stage. He
poured the nectar of His lips through the holes of His
flute, and the cowherd boys followed behind Him, singing
His glories. Śrī Kṛṣṇa made the land of Vṛndāvana even
more charming than Vaikuṇṭha, for He beautified it with
prints of His lotus feet, which were marked with the
conch, disk, and other symbols.



Mahāprabhu became very absorbed and cried out in
separation, “Where is My beloved Vrajendra-nandana
Śyāmasundara?” Then He entered the altar of Ṭoṭā-
gopīnātha, although the curtains of the altar were
closed, and He never returned from there. Hardly anyone
knew what became of Him. He finished His worldly
pastimes, and merged into Ṭoṭā-gopīnātha forever.



Mahāprabhu’s final teaching



Caitanya Mahāprabhu was thinking, “I am Rādhā, and I am

                            208
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                        5/5/2017

taking Kṛṣṇa to Vṛndāvana.” This is the essence of the
entire Chariot Festival. Your prayojana (goal) is that
prema.

We also go to Jagannātha Purī with that objective.
Because Jagannātha Purī is Dvārakā or Kurukṣetra, I
would not be in the mood to go there if it were not for
Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu. I go because of Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s dancing, and because of the way He saw that
unusual figure with round eyes. Caitanya Mahāprabhu
never thought, “Here are Jagannātha, Baladeva, and
Subhadrā.” He saw Vrajendra-nandana Śyāmasundara. At
present, we cannot see Jagannātha like that. We only go
there to obtain that mood of Caitanya Mahāprabhu – to
take all His moods within us. That is why Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī used to go, and that is why Śrīla Sanātana
Gosvāmī and all the other Gosvāmīs were there, as well
as Śrī Svarūpa Dāmodara, Śrī Rāya Rāmānanda, and all
their associates. It was only for this.

You should try to remember all these histories properly.
Then you will have a taste for them, and you will forget
all worldly attachments. You will forget where you are,
and that is the symptom that your bhakti is developing.
It is for this reason that Kṛṣṇa came, Mahāprabhu came,
Nityānanda Prabhu came, Rūpa Gosvāmī and all other gurus
came: only to give these mellows. If you receive even
one drop of them, or even a tiny fraction of a drop,
your life will be successful.

First we should decide on our objective, and that
objective is kṛṣṇa-prema-prayojana. What is kṛṣṇa-prema?
Hanumān’s love for Rāma is prema, and Rukmiṇī and
Satyabhāmā also serve Kṛṣṇa with prema. Subala Sakhā and
Madhumaṅgala also have prema, and so do Pradyumna and
Aniruddha. Uddhava is a high-class premātura-bhakta (a
devotee imbued with overwhelming love); Mother Yaśodā
and Nanda Bābā love Kṛṣṇa still more than Uddhava; and
the gopīs have still greater affection for Kṛṣṇa. Among
these various kinds of prema, which kṛṣṇa-prema is the
highest and most superior?

Caitanya Mahāprabhu did not come to this world to
sprinkle all types of prema, nor did He come only to
give regulated bhakti:

anarpita-carīṁ cirāt karuṇayāvatīrṇaḥ kalau

samarpayitum unnatojjvala-rasāṁ sva-bhakti-śriyam

hariḥ puraṭa-sundara-dyuti-kadamba-sandīpitaḥ

sadā hṛdaya-kandare sphuratu vaḥ śacī-nandanaḥ



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Ādi-līlā 1.4)



May the Supreme Lord who is known as the son of Śrīmatī
Śacī-devī be transcendentally situated in the innermost
chambers of your heart. Resplendent with the radiance of
molten gold, He has appeared in the age of Kali by His

                            209
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

causeless mercy to bestow what no incarnation has ever
offered before: the most sublime and radiant mellow of
devotional service, the mellow of amorous love.



What is unnatojjvala-prema? Is it the mood of Subala?
Can we call his love unnatojjvala-prema? We cannot
attain that type of prema if we do not know this
siddhānta. We can only know these truths if we have
high-class association, because those who have no gopī-
prema cannot explain them. We should therefore go to
rasika Vaiṣṇavas, and they will explain the meaning of
unnatojjvala-bhakti-rasa and kṛṣṇa-prema. Unnatojjvala
or upapati-bhāva refers only to the moods of the gopīs.
Upapati-bhāva means paramour love. Subala does not have
this type of love. He has a high class of love, and the
love of Nanda and Yaśodā is also greatly elevated. They
can control and bind Kṛṣṇa, but not fully. The love of
the queens of Dvārakā is also very exalted, but it still
cannot be called unnatojjvala-prema, because they do not
think, “Kṛṣṇa is my beloved.” Consequently, they can
never actually control Him.

Only the kṛṣṇa-prema of the gopīs can be called
unnatojjvala-rasa, and it can never be given to anyone
else. However, the “beauty” (śrī) of this prema can be
sprinkled upon the jīva, and it is for this purpose that
Kṛṣṇa came to this world in the form of Caitanya
Mahāprabhu. The beauty of this prema is Śrī Rūpa
Mañjarī’s love and affection for Kṛṣṇa and Rādhikā; it
is Rūpa Mañjarī’s service to Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Yugala, with an
inclination toward Rādhikā. If Rādhikā is happy, she is
happy. If Rādhikā is unhappy and in a mood of
separation, she will also be in that mood. If Kṛṣṇa
comes to meet Rādhikā, and Rādhikā tells Rūpa Mañjarī,
“Oh, you should stop Kṛṣṇa there at the door,” she will
at once go and say to Him, “You cannot enter Rādhikā’s
kuñja. You must remain here. You are a cheater, and
Rādhikā is not pleased with You.” Kṛṣṇa will then fall
down at Rūpa Mañjarī’s lotus feet and pray, “Please
permit Me to enter.”



yat kiṅkarīṣu bahuśaḥ khalu kāku-vānī

nityaṁ parasya puruṣasya śikhaṇḍa-mauleḥ

tasyāḥ kadā rasa-nidher vṛṣabhānu-jāyās

tat-keli-kuñja-bhavanāṅgana-mārjanī syām



Śrī Rādhā-rasa-sudhā-nidhi (8)



O daughter of Vṛṣabhānu Mahārāja, O ocean of rasa! The
Supreme Bhagavān, who wears a peacock feather in His
hair, falls at the feet of Your maidservants and
propitiates them with many humble and grief-stricken
words to be allowed entrance into Your kuñja, where You

                            210
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

engage in playful, amorous pastimes. If only I could
become one stick in the broom used by Your sakhīs to
clean Your delightful grove, I would consider my life a
success.



Śrī Prabodhānanda Sarasvatī prays to Śrīmatī Rādhikā,
“Kṛṣṇa folds His palms and prays to the lotus feet of
Rūpa Mañjarī and Rati Mañjarī, ‘Please let Me enter. I
want to take darśana of Rādhā.’ They reply, ‘Never. You
cannot go in.’ I therefore want to be one of the sticks
in the broom that is used for sweeping those kuñjas of
Rādhikā. I just want to be one stick of that broom, and
then I will think myself fortunate.”

This is the greatest prema-prayojana – the moods of the
mañjarīs who are always serving Śrīmatī Rādhikā.

āśā-bharair amṛta-sindhu-mayaiḥ kathañcit

kālo mayāti-gamitaḥ kila sāmprataṁ hi

tvaṁ cet kṛpāṁ mayi vidhāsyasi naiva kiṁ me

prāṇair vrajena ca varoru bakāriṇāpi



Vilāpa-kusumāñjali (102)



Śrīla Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī prays, “O Rādhikā! O
Rādhikā! Where are You? If You are not merciful to me, I
will give up my body. I will die, I will die, I will
die. I don’t want to live in Vṛndāvana or at Rādhā-
kuṇḍa. I don’t want to live at Govardhana, I don’t want
to worship Kṛṣṇa, and I don’t even want to see Him if
You are not merciful to me. I am only waiting for You,
waiting for You. I will die if You are not merciful to
me.”

This is the highest class of prema-prayojana. We must
know that this rare prema is the object of life, and
then we must enter the process to achieve it. This is
the pinnacle of vraja-prema, and you cannot know this
truth if you are not in the association of pure rasika
Vaiṣṇavas. You will not be able to differentiate between
the many grades of prema, and you will be cheated. You
will think “Hanumān’s prema is the highest,” or
“Uddhava’s prema is the highest.” You will not be able
to differentiate between the prema of Dvārakā and the
prema of Vraja.

Caitanya Mahāprabhu came especially to give this rare
mood, and we should try to understand it. But you cannot
achieve this goal if you are not in good association,
and you are only hearing this verse: śravaṇaṁ kīrtanaṁ
viṣṇoḥ smaraṇaṁ pāda-sevanam – that is in relation to
regulated bhakti. Caitanya Mahāprabhu did not come for
that at all; Śrī Rāmānujācārya and Madhvācārya had
already given it. They gave bhakti – but not bhakti-
rasa. Therefore, you cannot have it if you do not read

                            211
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

the books of Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī and Śrīla Raghunātha
dāsa Gosvāmī, and if you have no greed to attain this
elevated unnatojjvala mood. You should follow only the
regulative principles of this type of bhakti – life
after life, after life, after life.

I have only come to remind you of this, and to give you
some understanding and taste. Never be weak. Do not
think about girlfriends and boyfriends. Be situated in
your current position. If you are a family man, remain
in that position. If you are a brahmacārī, remain there.
If you are in the renounced order, remain there. Don’t
deviate from that position. If you are a brahmacārī or
brahmacāriṇī, your love and affection for Kṛṣṇa should
develop. How can you decide to marry if you have taste
for chanting, remembering, and hearing these sweet
pastimes? How can you decide to be attached to any girl
or boy? Material attachment cannot touch those who have
some taste. Such devotees cannot deviate.

Mahāprabhu explained the process for chanting and
remembering harināma, and it is written in ŚrīCaitanya-
caritāmṛta. Mahāprabhu prayed, “I do not want wealth,
reputation, position, a beautiful wife, or advanced
education. I want nothing material. I only want to serve
Kṛṣṇa in all of My lives – birth after birth.”
Mahāprabhu instructed:



tṛṇād api sunīcena

taror api sahiṣṇunā

amāninā mānadena

kīrtanīyaḥ sadā hariḥ



Śikṣāṣṭaka (3)



Thinking oneself to be even lower and more worthless
than insignificant grass which is trampled beneath
everyone’s feet, being more tolerant than a tree, being
prideless, and offering respect to all others according
to their respective positions, one should continuously
chant the holy name of Śrī Hari.



Do not desire praise for yourself, but try to honor
everyone else according to their qualities. If you have
no taste – if you are chanting, but tears do not come
and your heart does not melt – you should think, “Surely
this is due to my past activities, especially my
offenses to Vaiṣṇavas.” Repent for this, and chant and
remember the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa always. Chant twenty-four
hours a day, as Haridāsa Ṭhākura did.

Chant His name thinking, “I am in Vṛndāvana under the
guidance of a qualified and rasika Vaiṣṇava.” This is

                            212
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

the process. You should think, “I am like a particle of
dust at the feet of Kṛṣṇa. This is my constitutional
position; I am part and parcel of Kṛṣṇa. I don’t want to
be separated from Him, but because of my own fault I am
separated. O Vaiṣṇavas! O Gurudeva! Please be merciful
to me so that I can be a dust particle at your lotus
feet forever. I want the same mood felt by the gopīs.”



yugāyitaṁ nimeṣeṇa

cakṣuṣā prāvṛṣāyitam

śūnyāyitaṁ jagat sarvaṁ

govinda-viraheṇa me



Śikṣāṣṭaka (7)



O sakhī, in separation from Govinda, even a moment seems
like a millennium to Me. Tears begin to shower from My
eyes like rain from the clouds, and this entire world
seems void to Me.



The highest aspiration is to serve Śrīmatī Rādhikā,
whose love is very elevated: “Kṛṣṇa is still My beloved,
whether He crushes My heart by separation, or gives Me
great happiness by meeting with Me. I want to serve Him
with love. If He gives intense separation and crushes
Me, He will still be My beloved. I cannot live without
Him in any way.” This was the final teaching of Śrīman
Mahāprabhu.

Jagannātha-deva is Patita-pāvana, the savoir of the
fallen

Now I will tell a recent story about Jagannātha. There
was a brāhmaṇa from Orissa who was very old and could
not walk well. He vowed, “I will go to Jagannātha Purī
and see Jagannātha.” Although it was four hundred miles
to Purī, he began to walk, and he arrived in
Bhuvanesvara at about midnight one night. By that time
his feet and legs were so swollen that he could not walk
another inch, and he sat down under a tree on the side
of the road. Having had nothing to eat or drink for some
time, he was practically starving to death. He had
vowed, “I will not eat until I have taken darśana of
Jagannātha,” but he could not move, and the night was
terribly dark. He had also vowed, “If I don’t get
darśana by this coming morning, I will leave my body.”
Consequently, he simply sat under the tree praying, “O
Jagannātha, I am hopeless. I cannot go on. I will die
right here.”

Just then a car was driving by; something went wrong
with it and it stopped just at the spot where the old
bābā was sitting. The people in the car tried to make it

                            213
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

start, without success. They thought that something
might have dropped into the oil tank and they began to
search for an object with which to take it out, but they
could not find anything. When they saw the old man
sitting there, they wanted to use his stick to remove
whatever had fallen into the oil tank. “O Bābā, where
are you coming from?” they asked. “Why are you sitting
here?” “I was on my way to take darśana of Jagannātha,
but I can’t walk any further,” he replied. “I simply
can’t go on. I will die right here.” He let them take
his stick, and with its help they were able to easily
start their car. “Come with us in our car,” they told
that bābā, and they helped him into their car and drove
off.

They all reached the Jagannātha Temple at exactly four
in the morning. After taking darśana of Jagannātha, the
bābā felt completely better and thought, “My swelling
has gone. All my problems have gone away. Now everything
is fine.” He began to pray to Jagannātha, “Oh, You are
so kind. I could not walk any further, so You sent a car
for me. That car stopped there only for me. They brought
me, and now I am here.” At that moment, someone
approached him and said, “Do you want to take prasāda?
Please, come and take Jagannātha prasāda.”

This is not just a story; it is factual, a true history
that I have heard from a very realized source. You can
believe in Jagannātha. We should pray to Jagannātha, “We
don’t want to go to Vaikuṇṭha to become four-handed. If
You are pleased with us, please be merciful and grant us
the service of Your most beloved Śrīmatī Rādhikā in
Vṛndāvana and Rādhā-kuṇḍa.



śyāmasundara śikhaṇḍa-śekhara

smera-hāsa muralī-manohara

rādhikā-rasika māṁ kṛpa-nidhe

sva-priyā-caraṇa-kiṅkarīṁ kuru



Śrī Rādhā-prārthanā (2)



O Śyāmasundara! O You who have a crown of peacock
feathers! Your face is always graced with a playful
smile, Your flute playing is enchanting, and You are so
expert in relishing rasa with Śrīmatī Rādhikā. Because
You are an ocean of mercy, I am appealing to You to
please make me a kiṅkarī (maidservant) at the feet of
Your beloved.



Śrī Viṭṭhalācārya prays here, “O Śyāmasundara, if You
are pleased with me, if You want to be merciful to me,
then be so kind as to write my name in the register of
Śrīmatī Rādhikā’s dāsīs. I request that my name be

                             214
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

written there. I just want to be Her dāsī; I do not want
anything else.” If we sincerely pray in this way, Kṛṣṇa
will reply, “Yes, I am satisfied. I agree.” We are
chanting and remembering, “Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa,” the
names which are the direct embodiment of Kṛṣṇa and
Śrīmatī Rādhikā. We pray that They may be pleased to
give us this benediction.



Mercy upon the Muslim



Kṛṣṇa is very merciful, especially in His form of
Jagannātha, who is called Patita-pāvana, the savior of
the fallen. The priests and worshipers of Jagannātha
only allow Hindus to have His darśana. Hindus can come
to Purī from anywhere in the world and take darśana. An
Indian Hindu will be allowed inside even if he drinks
great quantities of wine and has a very bad character
with many impure habits, but pure-hearted Western
devotees are not allowed inside the temple, even if they
have given up wine, wealth, reputation, and all material
entanglements. We oppose this policy.

What to speak of others, even India’s late Prime
Minister Indira Gandhi was not allowed to enter the
Jagannātha Temple. They thought that she was not a pure
Hindu, but rather a Parsee or some other religion. They
also doubted whether I am Indian, and they asked me,
“Where are you from?” I told them, “I have come from
Bengal.” “But you don’t have the eyes of an Indian,”
they objected. Then I told them, “Bring my paṇḍā of
Jagannātha. He is an elevated devotee, and one of the
most important men in Jagannātha Purī.” When my paṇḍā
came, he said, “He is my client,” and then they were
satisfied.

Once a devotee from China came to Purī and wanted to see
Jagannātha. I told her, “You should tell them that you
are from Maṇipura.” She told this to the guards and they
let her in, but after a while, they became suspicious
and began to follow her. I then told her, “Go at once.
Take darśana and then fly away from here.” They followed
me, and that devotee as well, but they could not find
out where she had gone, and she was able to take
darśana.

Once there was a pure-hearted devotee, who was a Muslim
by birth, so he was not allowed to enter the temple even
though he was always chanting Hare Kṛṣṇa. At last he
stopped taking food and water, and he went on a hunger
strike outside the temple in front of the gate known as
Siṁha-dvāra, the lion gate on the east side. He danced
and remembered Jagannātha, and after two or three days
he became very weak. He then sat down and continually
called out, “Patita-pāvana Prabhu Jagannātha! Alas
Jagannātha! I have heard that You are very merciful, but
You are not giving me darśana. They are preventing me
from entering the temple.”

Then, at eleven or twelve o’clock at night, out of His
great compassion, Jagannātha opened the main door to the

                            215
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

temple. He came out alone, without Baladeva and
Subhadrā, passed through the doors, and arrived at
Siṁha-dvāra where the devotee was sitting. When the
devotee saw Jagannātha, he became very happy and began
to dance and sing. Later, when the priests opened the
door of the altar at four in the morning to perform
ārati, they saw that Jagannātha had disappeared. They
began to search here and there, and at last they came to
the Siṁha-dvāra and saw Him sitting there alone.
“Jagannātha is sitting here!” they exclaimed. “What is
He doing here?” They saw that the Muslim devotee was
chanting, singing, and weeping, and Jagannātha was also
weeping. The devotee then went away, and Jagannātha was
taken back inside the temple. Jagannātha is truly
Patita-pāvana.



Concluding words



Those who do not chant the names of the Supreme
Personality of Godhead and remember Him can never be
happy. We are all eternal servants of Kṛṣṇa. This
includes those who are chanting and remembering, and
those who are not, those who accept Kṛṣṇa, and those who
do not. All the creepers, trees, worms, insects,
animals, birds, and humans are eternal servants of
Kṛṣṇa. They are His parts and parcels.

Even if you are healthy and wealthy now, and even if you
have all the paraphernalia to be happy, still you will
become old after some time. Your beauty will be
transformed into ugliness, and no one will be able to
help you. Your teeth will fall out, your cheeks will
cave in, your hair will turn gray, and you will be so
weak that you will not be able to walk by yourself; you
will have to take the help of a stick. Then, at the time
of death, you will not be able to take even a hair with
you, no matter what you are collecting now. You will
pass stool and urine, weeping bitterly, and then you
will enter a coma and have to give up your body. Then,
the very dangerous and powerful messengers of death will
come and beat you. They will throw you into a fire, or
they will force you to embrace a red-hot iron pillar.
They will say, “Why were you embracing ladies? Why were
you lusty? Now you should be lusty with this hot iron
pillar.” Remember this. At that time neither your
father, mother, and uncle, nor your wealth, reputation,
and position, will be able to help you.

Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja was sent to this
world by the mercy of his holy master Śrīla
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura, and that of Kṛṣṇa
Himself, Lord Caitanya Mahāprabhu. He was very powerful
– a very powerful ācārya. He went everywhere,
establishing centers and inspiring everyone.

Previously I used to think, “In Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja’s
last days, when he was returning to Kṛṣṇa, why did he
tell me, ‘You should help my devotees. I have brought so
many monkeys – so many disciples’?” I used to think,
“They are so good. Why did he say that to me?” At that

                            216
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

time his disciples served him with their wealth, and by
distributing his books everywhere, by establishing
centers like New Māyāpura, by training hundreds of
students in various gurukulas, by keeping so many cows,
and by preaching extensively. But now I realize why he
gave me that instruction. He had told me, “You should
help my devotees, because after my departure they will
be neglected by superiors and become weak. They may give
up their tulasī neck beads and chanting beads, and even
their chanting. They do not know what is real bhakti.
They do not know what is transcendental devotional
service.” He therefore requested me to come to Western
countries. I came, and now I see that so many senior
devotees are very weak.

I have come here to beg something to put in my jholī (a
sannyāsī’s begging cloth), just as Haridāsa Ṭhākura and
Nityānanda begged, “Please give me a donation.” I do not
want wealth. I do not want any worldly attainments. I
just want you to be bold and strong again. Take tulasī
beads and begin to chant again. If you cannot chant very
much, you can do even two rounds, four rounds, or
sixteen rounds. Harināma is so powerful that it will
very soon attract you, and you will begin to do more
than sixteen – even sixty-four. Some devotees who are
now with me chant sixty-four rounds daily.

We should preach everywhere again, with inspiration.
Many devotees now lack spiritual energy, so I have come
to re-inspire them. Please give me that donation: to
chant again, and to be strong devotees again. Also, try
to help others. Books should be distributed again. Do
some service and always chant Kṛṣṇa’s names and remember
Him.

You can also maintain your life; there is no harm in
that. Sannyāsīs should be sannyāsīs, and brahmacārīs
should be as strong as they were during the time of
Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja. They should have no
girlfriend, and if the lady devotees are very strong,
they should be like the brahmacārīs and thus preach
everywhere. Chanting and remembering is the only way to
be happy. There is no other way.

Guru-niṣṭhā, honor for the powerful and bona fide
spiritual master, is the backbone of bhajana. If you do
not have a pure guru, whom will you worship first,
before you worship Kṛṣṇa and Mahāprabhu? Kṛṣṇa will not
accept your worship if you have no guru, or if your guru
is fallen. Try to realize all these truths.

The main purpose of the Jagannātha Chariot Festival is
this: Jagannātha is Kṛṣṇa Himself. Kṛṣṇa is so merciful
that He has manifested as Jagannātha, Baladeva, and
Subhadrā from Nīla-mādhava, as “melted” forms. Why
“melted?” This was due to Kṛṣṇa’s love and affection for
the gopīs. All the ancient scriptures say that we are
searching for Kṛṣṇa, but this is not true. Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam tells us something else: “Kṛṣṇa is searching
for us.” He is playing on His flute as if to say, “Come
on! Come on!” He is always searching for His friends,
thinking, “Where are My friends? Where are My cows?
Where are My calves?” He is actually worried for us,
searching and thinking, “They are My eternal servants,

                            217
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

and they are unhappy in this world.”

We have so many problems every day. We are all in a well
where poisonous snakes are hissing, and we cannot know
when they will bite. Tigers, which represent death, are
at the top of the well, and we cannot know when death
will come. Parīkṣit Mahārāja had seven days left to
live, but we may not have even a single moment.

Kṛṣṇa has come, and He has sent Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Swāmī Mahārāja for you all. All the Western devotees
were previously like hippies: dancing, drinking wine,
smoking, and eating meat, eggs, and many other
abominable things. No one ever called for Śrīla Swāmī
Mahārāja, but by His mercy Kṛṣṇa sent him: “Go to all
these unhappy people, and try to give them a process by
which they will chant and become happy.”

Kṛṣṇa is sending all this help, and He has also sent me.
I never thought, even in my dreams, that I would leave
Vṛndāvana and come to these Western countries. He
forcibly took my śikhā and dragged me here. He told me,
“You should go and help them. Your guru has helped you,
so why should you not help others? You should go.”

This is Kṛṣṇa’s causeless mercy. He is telling you,
“Somehow chant once in your life, ‘Kṛṣṇa, Rādhā, Rādhā,
Kṛṣṇa, Rāma.’ If you chant, ‘Hare Kṛṣṇa, Hare Kṛṣṇa,
Kṛṣṇa Kṛṣṇa, Hare Hare, Hare Rāma, Hare Rāma, Rāma Rāma,
Hare Hare’ with your heart and soul even once in your
life, I will take you to Goloka Vṛndāvana.”

Don’t commit nāma-aparādha, offenses to the lotus feet
of the holy name. The holy name is Kṛṣṇa Himself, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead. He is so powerful, and
so merciful. Don’t offend any devotees, whether they are
initiated or not. If they are initiated, very good;
honor them with daṇḍavat-praṇāma. If they are not
initiated, then you should think in your mind and your
heart as well, “They are part of Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s
family. Our family is so large.” Try to follow these
principles. If you chant in this way even once in your
whole life, Kṛṣṇa will quickly liberate you.

Do not believe in wealth and do not believe in your job.
A job cannot give you happiness. Your job will not save
you, and it cannot give you pleasure for even a moment.
You can collect wealth, but that cannot save you either.
If you sometimes become so absorbed in Kṛṣṇa that you
forget your job or some other important duty for which
you are responsible, Kṛṣṇa will save you. If you are so
absorbed in chanting Kṛṣṇa’s name that you neglect your
job as a government servant, the government could punish
you. Instead, however, Kṛṣṇa will assume your form and
He will surely do the job for you. Have strong faith in
this.

Available in this world is an especially valuable thing,
something which is very rare – very rare. What is that
rare thing?



sādhu-saṅga, sādhu-saṅga sarva-śāstre kaya

                            218
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017


lava-mātra sādhu-saṅge sarva-siddhi haya



Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta (Madhya-līlā 22.54)



The verdict of all revealed scriptures is that one can
attain all success by even a moment’s association with a
pure devotee.




APPENDIX

Further material related to Chapter 7 in question and
answer format



[Question:] During the Herā-pañcamī Festival, in order
to prove the superiority of Vṛndāvana, Śrī Svarūpa
Dāmodara and Lord Caitanya quoted from Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi.
How was it possible to quote from a book that Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī wrote later on?



[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja:] Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī
has explained that actually this came from Svarūpa
Dāmodara. Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī was a disciple and follower
of Svarūpa Dāmodara, and Svarūpa Dāmodara sprinkled his
mercy on him. These ślokas of Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi were
actually in the heart of Svarūpa Dāmodara, and then they
arose in the heart of Rūpa Gosvāmī. We can reconcile it
in this way.



[Question:] Generally we think of Lakṣmī in Vaikuṇṭha,
but Jagannātha Purī is Dvārakā; so why is Jagannātha’s
consort called Lakṣmī?



[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja:] All of Kṛṣṇa’s queens, like
Rukmiṇī, Satyabhāmā, and so on, are more than Lakṣmī.
Here, Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja Gosvāmī is taking only one
Lakṣmī from Dvārakā. Lakṣmī, or Vimalā-devī, represents
all the queens of Dvārakā.



[Question:] This Lakṣmī, who became more angry than
Satyabhāmā, who has more māna than Satyabhāmā – that is
Vimalā-devī?



[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja:] Yes, Satyabhāmā was sometimes

                            219
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

like this, but not as much. Satyabhāmā does not have so
much honor for such opulence, because she is very near
and dear to Kṛṣṇa. She was a manifestation of Rādhikā,
as Rukmiṇī is a manifestation of Candrāvalī.



[Question:] You said that when Jagannātha is going to
the Guṇḍicā Temple, He brings Baladeva and Subhadrā,
because in this way Lakṣmī-devī will not suspect Him of
enjoying with the gopīs. But Balarāma also performs
rāsa-līlā in Vṛndāvana.



[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja:] But Kṛṣṇa never took him to
any of the kuñjas where He sported with Rādhikā and the
gopīs. Balarāma may go there in the form of Anaṅga
Mañjarī, but he cannot go in the direct way. Nityānanda
Prabhu cannot touch Mahāprabhu when He is in the mood of
Rādhikā, even if Mahāprabhu falls over. Nityānanda
Prabhu will watch from a distance. So Baladeva Prabhu
will never go to the kuñjas. He can go cowherding with
Kṛṣṇa, and Kṛṣṇa will stealthily take Madhumaṅgala or
Subala to Rādhā-kuṇḍa. He will not take Baladeva Prabhu
there, nor will He take Rādhikā’s brother, Śrīdāmā. He
will not take any sakhā, priya-sakhā, or even prāṇa-
sakhā; He will only take a priya-narma-sakhā, and then
only as a messenger.

[Question:] Since all female expansions of Kṛṣṇa
manifest from Rādhikā, what kind of expansion is
Subhadrā?



[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja:] She is Lakṣmī, an expansion
of Śrīmatī Rādhikā. She plays the role of a sister, but
actually she is Mahā-Mahā-Lakṣmī and she serves Kṛṣṇa in
great opulence. She came from Devakī’s womb after Kṛṣṇa.



[Question:] When Kṛṣṇa, Baladeva, and Subhadrā were
listening to the Vṛndāvana pastimes and their arms began
to melt, Sudarśana cakra was not present at that time.
Yet, he is also worshiped in a form similar to theirs.



[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja:] Sudarśana is the vision of
Kṛṣṇa, and therefore he is always with Kṛṣṇa. If
Sudarśana will be merciful and give us the vision of
Kṛṣṇa, then you will see Kṛṣṇa as He is; otherwise you
will see Him as an ordinary boy.

Explanations of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.33.39) from p. 233



In the Second Canto of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, Mahārāja
Parīkṣit also explains that the pastimes and activities
of Lord Kṛṣṇa are medicine for the conditioned souls. If
they simply hear about Kṛṣṇa they become relieved from

                            220
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017

the material disease. They are addicted to material
enjoyment and are accustomed to reading sex literature,
but by hearing these transcendental pastimes of Kṛṣṇa
with the gopīs, they will be relieved from material
contamination. The conditioned soul should hear the
rāsa-līlā dance from an authorized spiritual master and
be trained by him so that he can understand the whole
situation; thus one can be elevated to the highest
standard of spiritual life. Otherwise, one will be
implicated. Material lust is a kind of heart disease of
the conditioned soul. It is recommended that one should
hear, but not from impersonalist rascals. If one hears
from the right sources with right understanding, then
his situation will be different. (Kṛṣṇa book, Chapter
32)



Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura states as follows in
his Sārārtha-darśinī commentary on this verse:

The prefix anu (repeatedly or methodically) when applied
to sṛṇuyāt (to hear) indicates constant hearing. By
continuously hearing from the lips of the śravaṇa-guru
and Vaiṣṇavas and thereafter reciting, narrating, or
describing (those pastimes) in poetry of one’s own
composition, one attains parā-bhakti, or in other words
bhakti that is of the nature of prema (prema-lakṣaṇa-
bhakti).

The suffix ktvā has been used in the formation of the
verb pratilabhya (obtained) as follows: prati + labh +
ktvā. According to the rules of Sanskrit grammar, when
the suffix ktvā is applied to a verbal root with a
prefix, it is replaced by yap. Then letter p is dropped
and thus the final form of the word pratilabhya is
obtained. The suffix ktvā is applied to the first of two
verbs performed by the same agent to show successive
action (i.e. having attained prema, he relinquishes all
lusty desires of the heart). In this case, the first
action is pratilabhya (the attainment of prema) and the
second action is apahinoti (renunciation of the lusty
desires of the heart).

Therefore, the suffix ktvā in the verb pratilabhya
indicates that although lust and other evils still
remain within the heart, prema-bhakti first enters the
heart and by its extraordinary influence destroys all
vices to the root. In other words, hearing and reciting
rāsa-līlā possesses such astonishing power that the lust
in the heart of the faithful sādhaka is destroyed and he
attains prema. Though these two take place
simultaneously, the influence of prema manifests first
and through its effect, all lusty desires of the heart
are dissipated.

Thus, as a result of hearing and chanting the narrations
of the Lord’s pastimes, one first attains prema for the
Lord’s lotus feet and thereafter one’s heart is
liberated from lusty desires and all other
contamination. In other words, he becomes perfectly pure
because prema is not feeble like the processes of jñāna
and yoga. Bhakti is omnipotent and supremely
independent.

                            221
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017


The words hṛd-rogakāma indicate the difference between
lusty desires of the heart and the kāma in relationship
to the Supreme Lord. Kāma which is in relationship to
the Supreme Lord is of the very nature of the nectar of
prema (premāmṛta-svarūpa), whereas the lusty desires of
the heart are exactly the opposite. Therefore, these two
items are distinct from each other. This is
substantiated by use of the words hṛd-rogakāma.

The word dhīra means a paṇḍita, or one who is learned in
the śāstra. One who refuses to accept the claim of this
verse and thinks, “As long as the disease of lust
remains in the heart, prema cannot be obtained,” is said
to possess an atheistic temperament. One who is free
from such a foolish, atheistic demeanor is known as a
paṇḍita or sober person (dhīra). Consequently, only
those who have firm faith in the śāstra are known as
dhīra. Those who have no faith in the statements of the
śāstras are atheists and offenders to the holy name.
Such persons can never attain prema.

Consequently, in the heart of the sādhakas who firmly
believe in the statements of the śāstra, faith arises by
hearing rāsa-līlā and other narrations. Only in the
hearts of such faithful devotees does prema manifest its
influence as a result of hearing līlā-kathā. Thereafter,
lust and all evils present within the heart of the
devotees are destroyed to the root.

Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura’s commentary on
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (10.47.59) is also relevant to the
discussion. There it is stated that bhakti is the only
cause of superior qualities being found in any
individual. Austerities, learning, knowledge, and so on
are not the cause of superior qualities. Although bhakti
is itself of the highest excellence, it does not appear
only in the most exceptional individuals endowed with
all good qualities. On the contrary, it may manifest or
remain even in the most condemned and vile persons.
Furthermore, it causes thoroughly wretched and fallen
persons to attain all good qualities, to become worthy
of the respect of all, and to attain the highest and
most rare association.

For this reason, the opinion that Bhakti-devī enters the
heart only after all anarthas, aparādhas, lust, and
other diseases of the heart have been eradicated, is not
appropriate. On the contrary, by the mercy of the
Supreme Lord or the devotees, or by faithfully executing
sādhana and bhajana, this rare bhakti enters the heart
first and then all anarthas are automatically dissipated
– this conclusion is thoroughly agreeable.

Therefore, only faithful sādhakas with firm belief in
the statements of śāstra, guru and Vaiṣṇavas are
eligible to hear the līlā-kathā of Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam
that are saturated with rasa. And conversely, those who
believe that only sādhakas who are

completely free from all anarthas are eligible to hear
the above-mentioned pastimes, will neither become free
from anarthas nor obtain eligibility to hear, even after
millions of births.January 21, 2007

                            222
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                      5/5/2017


Excerpts from Śrīla Prabhupāda’s Rātha-yātra lecture in
London, on July 13, 1972:



Ladies and gentlemen, I thank you very much for your
kindly participating in this Ratha-yātrā Festival. This
festival is coming down from five thousand years ago,
when Lord Kṛṣṇa, along with His elder brother Balarāma
and His younger sister Subhadrā, came together on a
chariot from Dvārakā to Kurukṣetra. Kurukṣetra still
exists, and the city of Dvārakā also still exists.

According to Vedic culture, when there is a lunar
eclipse people take bath in sacred rivers. They
especially go to the pilgrimage place of Kurukṣetra. At
that time Kṛṣṇa, along with His brother and sister and
other family members, came to Kurukṣetra; and, receiving
this news, the gopīs and inhabitants of Vṛndāvana, where
Lord Kṛṣṇa lived in His childhood, came to see Him
there. Among the gopīs, Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī was the chief,
and when she saw Kṛṣṇa in Kurukṣetra full with opulence,
She said, “My dear Kṛṣṇa, You are also here; I am also
here. But we are missing Vṛndāvana. So I wish that You
come along with Me again to Vṛndāvana and we enjoy in
the forest of Vṛndāvana.”

This feeling of separation was preached by Lord
Caitanya, and this Ratha-yātrā Festival is still
observed in Jagannātha Purī in India. Lord Caitanya
participated in this festival five hundred years ago,
and at that time He was in Rādhārāṇī’s mood of
separation when She was taking Kṛṣṇa back to Vṛndāvana.
So this Ratha-yātrā Festival is a festival of sentiments
for the Vaiṣṇavas. Lord Caitanya taught us how to feel
separation from God. He never taught us that He had seen
God, but He felt the separation of God very severely.
Similarly, His direct disciples, the Six Gosvāmīs, also
prosecuted their devotional service by feelings of
separation.

he rādhe vraja-devīke ca lalite he nanda-suno kutaḥ

śrī-govardhana-kalpa-pādapa-tale kālindī-vane kutaḥ

ghoṣantāv iti sarvato vraja-pure khedair mahā-vihvalau

vande rūpa-sanātanau raghu-yugau śrī-jīva-gopālakau



Ṣaḍ-gosvāmy-aṣṭaka (8)



I offer my respectful obeisances to the Six Gosvāmīs,
namely Śrī Rūpa Gosvāmī, Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī, Śrī
Raghunātha Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, Śrī Raghunātha dāsa Gosvāmī,
Śrī Jīva Gosvāmī, and Śrī Gopāla Bhaṭṭa Gosvāmī, who
were chanting very loudly everywhere in Vṛndāvana,
shouting, “Queen of Vṛndāvana, Rādhārāṇī! O Lalitā! O
son of Nanda Mahārāja! Where are you all now? Are you
just on the hill of Govardhana, or are you under the

                            223
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                        5/5/2017

trees on the bank of the Yamunā? Where are you?” These
were their moods in executing Kṛṣṇa consciousness.



So this Ratha-yātrā Festival is very nice – a “feelings
festival” for the Vaiṣṇava – and anyone who participates
in this festival will gradually develop his dormant love
for Kṛṣṇa. Thank you very much for your kindness.



It doesn’t matter in whatever condition you may be. Our
only request is that you please try to chant these
sixteen words, if it is possible, whenever you have got
time. You have got enough time. You can chant the Hare
Kṛṣṇa mantra when you are walking on the street, when
you are traveling in the bus, or when you are sitting
alone. There is no loss, but the gain is very great.
Therefore our only request is that you take this mahā-
mantra:



hare kṛṣṇa, hare kṛṣṇa, kṛṣṇa kṛṣṇa, hare hare

hare rāma, hare rāma, rāma rāma, hare hare



And we shall periodically remind you by such functions
as we are holding today – the Ratha-yātrā Festival. This
Ratha-yātrā Festival is very old; at least 5000 years
old. Lord Kṛṣṇa, along with His elder brother
Balabhadra, or Balarāma, and His sister Subhadrā, came
in a chariot from Dvārakā to Kurukṣetra. We are
commemorating this arrival of Lord Kṛṣṇa with His family
on their chariot.

This function is held in Jagannātha Purī. In India it is
a great festival, and we are introducing this Ratha-
yātrā Festival in Western countries, along with the Hare
Kṛṣṇa movement. The original progenitor of this Hare
Kṛṣṇa movement, namely Lord Caitanya, took a very active
part in this festival, and therefore, following in His
footsteps, we are also introducing it in Western
countries. As it is being observed in London, it is
simultaneously being held in San Francisco, Buffalo,
Melbourne, Tokyo, and many other places. It is also
being held in India, in Calcutta. Taking part in these
festivals means a step forward for our self-realization.
Rathe ca vāmanaṁ dṛṣṭvā punar janma na vidyate – simply
by seeing the Lord on the chariot, one makes advancement
for stopping the repetition of birth and death.



Table of Contents

CHAPTER ONE THE FIRST HISTORY

CHAPTER TWO THE SECOND HISTORY

CHAPTER THREE GUṆḌICĀ-MANDIRA-MĀRJANA

                            224
Origin_of_Ratha-yatra.txt                         5/5/2017


CHAPTER FOUR MAHĀPRABHU AND KING PRATĀPARUDRA

CHAPTER FIVE REUNION AT KURUKṢETRA

CHAPTER SIX KṚṢṆA MEETS THE GOPĪS AT KURUKṢETRA

CHAPTER SEVEN HERĀ-PAÑCAMĪ

CHAPTER EIGHT THE THIRD HISTORY

CHAPTER NINE JUST AFTER THE FESTIVAL

CHAPTER TEN THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN JAGANNĀTHA PURĪ AND
NAVADVĪPA

CHAPTER ELEVEN CLOSING WORDS




Table of Contents

CHAPTER ONE THE FIRST HISTORY

CHAPTER TWO THE SECOND HISTORY

CHAPTER THREE GUṆḌICĀ-MANDIRA-MĀRJANA

CHAPTER FOUR MAHĀPRABHU AND KING PRATĀPARUDRA

CHAPTER FIVE REUNION AT KURUKṢETRA

CHAPTER SIX KṚṢṆA MEETS THE GOPĪS AT KURUKṢETRA

CHAPTER SEVEN HERĀ-PAÑCAMĪ

CHAPTER EIGHT THE THIRD HISTORY

CHAPTER NINE JUST AFTER THE FESTIVAL

CHAPTER TEN THE RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN JAGANNĀTHA PURĪ AND
NAVADVĪPA

CHAPTER ELEVEN CLOSING WORDS




                             225
