Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt   5/5/2017

Our Gurus: One in Siddhānta, One At Heart




The Difference

OBJECTION 1)

OBJECTION 2)

OBJECTION 3)

OBJECTION 4)

OBJECTION 5)

OBJECTION 6)

OBJECTION 7)

OBJECTION 8)

OBJECTION 9)

OBJECTION 10)

OBJECTION 11)

OBJECTION 12)



CONCLUSION:



The Homonym ISKCON

COMPILATION 1:

COMPILATION 2:

COMPILATION 3:

COMPILATION 4:

COMPILATION 5:

COMPILATION 6:

COMPILATION 7:

COMPILATION 8:

COMPILATION 9:

COMPILATION 10:

COMPILATION 11:

COMPILATION 12:


                           1
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt    5/5/2017

COMPILATION 13:

COMPILATION 14:

REFUTATION 15:



To increase the respected reader’s understanding of the
transcendental relationship between Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Swāmī Prabhupada and Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja, the following articles are presented.




The Difference




This article is a reply to the paper entitled “ISKCON’s
position on Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja” by His Grace Badri
Nārāyaṇa Prabhu. The paper has tried to substantiate the
idea that Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja and Śrīla Prabhupāda
differ in regard to important fundamental principles.

The following article will examine, one by one, the
points made in that paper, in the light of scriptural
evidence and the statements of Srila Prabhupāda himself.
Statements of the ISKCON position paper will be refered
to as OBJECTION, and ours as REFUTATION.




OBJECTION 1)


Śrīla Prabhupāda repeatedly warned about prematurely
hearing descriptions of mādhurya-līlā, the intimate
pastimes Kṛṣṇa enjoys with the gopīs. Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja speaks openly about these topics.

REFUTATION 1) Discussion of the topics of Kṛṣṇa and the
gopīs is not forbidden in the scriptures, and this is
also evidenced by the following statements by Śrīla
Prabhupāda:

“The policy should be that the people may not understand
the gopīs like ordinary girls. You should be careful to
present the gopīs. It does not mean that “We shall not
utter even the name of gopīs. We have taken vow to
boycott the gopīs.” No. They are our worshipable
devotees. How we can avoid them?” (Discussion in Boston:
December 24, 1969)

“The deity worship must be continued by everyone.
Another secret of success is that when one is very much
sexually disturbed, he should think of Lord Kṛṣṇa’s
pastimes with the gopīs, and he will forget his sex
urge. To think of Kṛṣṇa’s pastimes with the gopīs, but

                           2
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt       5/5/2017

not to try to imitate.” (Śrīla Prabhupāda’s Letter to
Hayagriva: November 8, 1968, Los Angeles)

“The Lord is so merciful that He Himself descends to
take the fallen souls back home to the kingdom of
Godhead, where the erotic principles of Godhead are
eternally relished in their real form, distinct from the
perverted sexual love so much adored and indulged in by
the fallen souls in their diseased condition. The reason
the Lord displays the rāsa-līlā is essentially to induce
all the fallen souls to give up their diseased morality
and religiosity, and to attract them to the kingdom of
God to enjoy the reality. A person who actually
understands what is the rāsa-līlā will certainly hate to
indulge in mundane sex life.” (Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta:
Adi-līlā, Chapter Four, Text 31)

Śrīla Prabhupāda    himself spoke about the gopīs – even
with new people.    There is no fault in this. One such
conversation was    even published and distributed en
masse, and it is    presented herein:

Bob: Does he (the devotee) keep his individual likes and
dislikes?

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Yes, he keeps everything. But he gives
preference to Kṛṣṇa. Kṛṣṇa says positively, “I like
these things.” So we have to offer to Kṛṣṇa what He
likes, and then we’ll take prasāda. Kṛṣṇa likes
Rādhārāṇī. Therefore all the gopīs are trying to push
Rādhārāṇī to Kṛṣṇa. “Kṛṣṇa likes this gopī. All right,
push Her forward.” That is Kṛṣṇa consciousness.

Bob: Is Kṛṣṇa attractive to rascals?

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Oh, yes! He was the greatest rascal
also.

Bob: How is that?

Śrīla Prabhupāda: [laughing] Because He was always
teasing the gopīs.

Śyāmasundara: Teasing?

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Yes. Sometimes, when Rādhārāṇī would
go out, Kṛṣṇa would attack Her, and when She would fall
down – “Kṛṣṇa, don’t torture Me in that way” – They
would fall down, and Kṛṣṇa would take the opportunity
and kiss Her. [He laughs.] So, Rādhārāṇī was very
pleased, but superficially Kṛṣṇa was the greatest
rascal. Unless rascaldom is in Kṛṣṇa, how could it be
existent in the world? (Perfect Questions Perfect
Answers: Ch. 1, Kṛṣṇa the All-Attractive)



Since 1970, Prabhupāda’s disciples and followers have
been distributing rāsa-līlā in the Kṛṣṇa book to
literally millions of non-devotees. In most of his books
there are hundreds of beautiful references to the
pastimes of Kṛṣṇa and the gopīs. In the Caitanya-
caritāmṛta, for example, which, Prabhupāda ordered [in a
1974 letter to Jadurāṇī dāsī] to be distributed to all

                              3
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt    5/5/2017

classes of men, Lord Caitanya is taking mahāprasādam of
Lord Jagannātha. In that chapter there are several
verses about the nectar of Kṛṣṇa’s lips. In the mood of
Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and the gopīs, Mahāprabhu says:

“Thereupon, the flute said angrily to Me, ‘Give up Your
shame, fear and religion and come drink the lips of
Kṛṣṇa. On that condition, I shall give up my attachment
for them. If You do not give up Your shame and fear,
however, I shall continuously drink the nectar of
Kṛṣṇa’s lips. I am slightly fearful because You also
have the right to drink that nectar, but as for the
others, I consider them like straw.” (Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta: Antya-līlā, Chapter Sixteen, Text 127)



The pastimes of Kṛṣṇa with the gopīs are not all on the
same level. It is true that certain very intimate or
apparently sensual pastimes should not be disclosed
publicly. Most of the lectures of Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja are posted on the internet for all to
read. All the recordings of the lectures are also
available from his tape ministry on request. Almost all
of Śrīla Mahārāja’s lectures are on the subjects of
Dhruva Mahārāja, Prahlāda Mahārāja, Ambarīṣa Mahārāja,
and the first eight ślokas of Nectar of Instruction –
carefully explaining the purports of Śrīla Prabhupāda.

The readers of this paper are also invited to subscribe
themselves to our internet mailing list (send a blank
message to bvnmharikatha-subscribe@egroups.com), on
which transcriptions of lectures by Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja appear.

It is true that sometimes the lectures of Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja deal with subject matters that may be
considered elevated from the perspective of a novice.
This is because most of the devotees who comprise the
audience of Śrīla Mahārāja have been devotees for twenty
years or more. It goes without saying that a student
cannot stay in primary school until the age of thirty.

It is also true that Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja has spoken on elevated, confidential texts such
as Śrī Vilāpa-kusumāñjali, on the request of certain
senior ISKCON leaders and gurus such as His Holiness
Tamāl Kṛṣṇa Mahārāja, His Holiness Girirāja Mahārāja,
His Holiness Śivarāma Swāmī, His Holiness Dhanurdhara
Swāmī, His Grace Bhūrijana prabhu, Pārtha-sārathi
prabhu, and others. However, these classes were
conducted selectively and in private – not in public.




OBJECTION 2)


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja encourages the reading of
literature Śrīla Prabhupāda restricted for his disciples
or even dismissed as unimportant or tinged with
impersonalism. An example of the former is the intimate

                           4
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt    5/5/2017

writings of the Gosvāmīs, or the latter Tulasī dāsa’s
Ramacarita-manasā.

REFUTATION 2) The scriptures written by our previous
ācāryas, the Gosvāmīs, are relevant to different
devotees at the various stages of their spiritual
development. If Śrīla Prabhupāda has forbidden a
disciple to read a particular scripture in 1969, when he
was in the beginnings of his devotional practice, it
does not mean that that particular disciple should not
read that scripture in the year 2000, when he comes to a
higher stage.

The essential point to address herein is that an
aspiring devotee requires the guidance of an advanced
Vaiṣṇava who can prescribe the appropriate reading
matter in accordance with the level of his progress on
the path of bhakti. This has been expressed by Śrīla
Prabhupāda in the following words:

“In this way, after developing a taste for such things,
one should try to live in Vṛndāvana and pass his time
constantly remembering Kṛṣṇa’s name, fame, pastimes and
qualities UNDER THE DIRECTION AND PROTECTION OF AN
EXPERT DEVOTEE. This is the sum and substance of all
instruction regarding the cultivation of devotional
service.” (Nectar of Instruction: Text Eight)



There can be little doubt that Śrīla Prabhupāda desired
all his followers to study the books of the Gosvāmīs as
they became qualified.

rūpa-raghunātha-pade haibe ākuti

kabe hāma bujhaba se yugala-pirīti

“When shall I become very eager to study the books left
by the six Gosvāmīs? Then I shall be able to understand
the conjugal pastimes of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa.” (Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā: Chapter Twenty-five,
Text 271)

Regarding the Śrī Rāma-carita-mānasa by Tulasī dāsa:
Objection 2 states that the Śrī Rāma-carita-mānasa by
Tulasī dāsa is tinged with impersonalism. Let us read
Śrīla Prabhupāda’s opinion:

“This is a verse composed by a GREAT DEVOTEE, Tulasī
dāsa. He was a devotee of Lord Rāmacandra.” (Montreal:
August 30, 1968)

“So he became a GREAT DEVOTEE of Rama, Tulasī dāsa. His
book, Rāma-carita-mānasa, “Thinking Always of Rama,” is
a very famous book, and it is the only IMPORTANT
LITERATURE in the Hindi language: Rāma-carita-mānasa.”
(Talk in New York: April 12, 1969)

Tulasī dāsa is respected by all Vaiṣṇavas of all
sampradāyas. It is true that many speakers of his book
are tinged with māyāvāda, as are many speakers of the
Śrīmad Bhāgavatam. This does not mean however that the
Śrī Rāma-carita-mānasa of Tulasī dāsa is contaminated by

                           5
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt    5/5/2017

māyāvāda. Tulasī dāsa has written:

īśvara aṁśa jīva avināśi, cetanā amala sadā sukha rāśi

“The living entity, who is forever conscious and full of
bliss, is eternally an indestructible part and parcel of
the Supreme Personality of Godhead.”

This verse is diametrically opposed to māyāvāda. There
is not even one verse of a bona fide translation of Śrī
Rāma-carita-mānasa which has the slightest tinge of
māyāvāda.




OBJECTION 3)


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja says that Śrīla Prabhupāda’s
work is unfinished because he did not provide us with
intimate rasikā literature and methods of rāgānuga-
sādhana. Śrīla Prabhupāda described his unfinished work
as the fact that varṇāśrama-dharma had not yet been
established in his Society, that sets of his books had
not yet been placed in every home, that people were
still going hungry within ten miles of ISKCON temples,
that the Lord’s holy name had not yet been heard in
every town and village, etc.




REFUTATION 3) Although the establishment of varṇāśrama-
dharma is part of the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement, it
is an external objective, whereas the progression into
the higher realms of bhakti is the vital and internal
objective of Śrīla Prabhupāda and his mission. Both of
these points are evident from the following statements:

“The Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement is therefore very much
eager to reintroduce the varṇāśrama system into human
society so that those who are bewildered or less
intelligent will be able to take guidance from qualified
brāhmaṇas.” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam: Canto 10, Chapter 8,
Text 6)

“Simply by following the rules and regulations of the
varṇāśrama system one can worship Viṣṇu. Viṣṇur
ārādhya... Nānyat tat-toṣa-kāraṇam. There is no
alternative to satisfy Him. This is an authorized
statement. But Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, eho bāhya, āge
kaha āra, ‘THIS IS EXTERNAL. THIS IS NOT A VERY
IMPORTANT THING.’” (Lecture in New Vrndavan: May
23,1969)

“The age is so rotten that it is very difficult to
revive this varnasrama-dharma culture. Therefore
Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, ‘eho bāhya, āge kaha āra. Yes,
it is all right but it is EXTERNAL now.’” (Conversation
in London: September 2, 1973)


                           6
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt    5/5/2017

The conception that the primary reason for Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu’s appearance in this world is to spread the
yuga-dharma, nāma-saṅkīrtana in every town and village,
has been said to be external and incidental by Śrīla
Kṛṣṇa das Kavirāja in his Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta:

“Just as these desires are the fundamental reason for
Kṛṣṇa’s appearance whereas destroying the demons is only
an incidental necessity, so for Śrī Kṛṣṇa Caitanya, the
Supreme Personality of Godhead, PROMULGATING THE DHARMA
OF THE AGE IS INCIDENTAL.” (Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta:
Adi-līlā, Chapter Four, Text 36-37)

“The Lord came to propagate sankīrtana. THAT IS AN
EXTERNAL PURPOSE, as I have already indicated.” (Śrī
Caitanya-caritāmṛta: Adi-līlā, Chapter Four, Text 102)

From this evidence it is understood that Śrī Caitanya
Mahāprabhu does not personally establish the yuga-
dharma. Rather, this function is performed by Mahā-Viṣṇu
who is present along with all other avatars within His
body, just as the killing of demons is not performed by
Kṛṣṇa, but rather by Mahā-Viṣṇu who is present within
Him.

If Śrīla Prabhupāda’s primary work was to establish
varṇāśrama dharma, he would be relegated from his true
position of being the servant of the mission of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu or Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, to being the servant
of Mahā-Viṣṇu. Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu does not appear
in this world to establish varṇāśrama dharma. The two
causes for His descent are stated as follows:

“The Lord’s desire to appear was born from two reasons:
He wanted to taste the sweet essence of the mellows of
love of God, and He wanted to propagate RĀGA-MĀRGA
BHAKTI, devotional service in the world on the platform
of spontaneous attraction.” (Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta:
Adi-līlā, Chapter Four, Text 15-16)



Śrīla Prabhupāda writes that unless one practises
rāgānuga-bhakti under the personal guidance of a
perfectly realized guru, one cannot go back home to
Vraja-dhāma, the eternal abode of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa:

“Everywhere in the world people worship Me according to
scriptural injunctions (vaidhī-bhakti). But simply by
following such regulative principles ONE CANNOT ATTAIN
THE LOVING SENTIMENTS OF THE DEVOTEES IN VRAJABHŪMI
(vraja-bhāva).” (Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta: Adi-līlā,
Chapter Three, Text 15)

In the following lecture, Śrīla Prabhupāda states:

“The more you are engaged in devotional service, the
more your senses become pure or uncovered. And when it
is completely uncovered, without any designation, then
you are capable to serve Kṛṣṇa. THIS IS APPRENTICESHIP.
VAIDHĪ-BHAKTI IS APPRENTICE-SHIP. REAL BHAKTI, PARĀ-
BHAKTI, THAT IS RĀGĀNUGA-BHAKTI. (Lecture in Vrndavan:
November 12, 1972)


                           7
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt    5/5/2017

This above-mentioned quote shows that rāgānuga-bhakti is
the next step in Śrīla Prabhupāda’s mission.




OBJECTION 4)


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja presents a view that one born in
a Western body is inherently fallen, especially in
regard to deity worship. Śrīla Prabhupāda engaged and
encouraged his Western disciples in deity worship and
accepted them as full-fledged Vaiṣṇavas.

REFUTATION 4) It is widely known in India that Śrīla
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja is famous among all branches of the
Gauḍīya Matha for promoting solidarity and acceptance
between devotees from the East and West. For the first
time, at the age of almost eighty years, Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja is awarding sannyāsa to disciples during the
Gaura Pūrṇimā celebrations. These disciples are not
Indian devotees but Westerners. What to speak of deity
worship, Śrīla Mahārāja’s Western disciples regularly
conduct the performance of abhiṣeka of the deities at
major festivals and fire sacrifices in his temples in
India and abroad. In addition to this, he has personally
installed dozens of deities of Śrī Śrī Gaura-Nitāi and
Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, for both male and female Western
devotees throughout the world.

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja has recently published Arcana
Dīpikā in English. The original Bengali version, written
by Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja’s dīkṣā-guru, who is also
Śrīla Prabhupāda ‘s sannyāsa-guru, nitya līlā praviṣṭa
Śrī Śrīmad Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Goswami Mahārāja, was
also translated into English by the ISKCON authorities
for use in ISKCON temples.




OBJECTION 5)


Śrīla Prabhupāda said, ‘The ācārya is not God,
omniscient. He is servant of God.’ Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja presents Śrīla Prabhupāda as omniscient.




REFUTATION 5) If Śrīla Prabhupāda is not omniscient, if
he cannot hear us at any time or any place, what would
be the use of praying to him ? What would be the use of
reciting the mantras for offering bhoga in front of his
picture, if he is not present in his picture? Even
demigods such as the gods of air, fire, water, and
others, who are insignificant in comparison to Śrīla
Prabhupāda, all witness the events of this world. This
is described in Śrīmad Bhāgavatam. Śrī Kṛṣṇa has

                           8
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt     5/5/2017

personally confirmed that “sarva deva mayo guruḥ – the
guru is the embodiment of the sum-total of all the
demigods.” “Guruṣu nara-matir /yasya vā nārakī saḥ --
one who considers the spiritual master to have the
consciousness of a mortal being is a resident of hell.”

One may ask why, in some statements, Śrīla Prabhupāda
has presented an idea seemingly contrary to the
statements in his books?

Śrīla Prabhupāda writes:

“Yasmin vijñāte sarvam evaṁ vijñātaṁ bhavati. Anyone who
is a devotee of the Lord knows about the Lord to some
extent, and devotional service to the Lord makes him
able to know everything by the grace of the Lord.
ALTHOUGH A DEVOTEE MAY APPARENTLY EXPRESS HIMSELF TO BE
IGNORANT, he is full of knowledge in every intricate
matter.” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam: Canto 3, Chapter Seven,
Text 8)

“The Vedic mantras say: Yasmin vijñāte sarvam evaṁ
vijñātaṁ bhavati. When the devotee sees the Supreme
Personality of Godhead by his meditation, or when he
sees the Lord personally, face to face, he becomes aware
of everything within this universe. Indeed, nothing is
unknown to him. Everything within this material world is
fully manifested to a devotee who has seen the Supreme
Personality of Godhead.” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam: Canto 8,
Chapter Six, Text 9)

Duryodhana-guru: So in other words that means the pure
devotees can be omniscient?

Prabhupāda: Everything. God is omniscient, so a pure
devotee can become omniscient by the grace of God.
(Morning Walk in Los Angeles: June 8, 1976)

Being a one-hundred-percent Kṛṣṇa conscious personality,
Śrīla Prabhupāda has all eight mystic perfections. This
means he can even reach out and take a fruit from
another planet. This is confirmed in many places in
śāstra, including the following verse and purport:

“My lord! Everything that is mysterious is known to you
because you worship the creator and destroyer of the
material world and the maintainer of the spiritual
world, the original Personality of Godhead, who is
transcendental to the three modes of material nature.”

PURPORT

A person who is cent-percent engaged in the service of
the Lord is the emblem of all knowledge. Such a devotee
of the Lord in full perfection of devotional service is
also perfect by the qualification of the Personality of
Godhead. As such, the eightfold perfections of mystic
power (aṣṭa-siddhi) constitute very little of his godly
opulence. (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam: Canto 1, Chapter Five,
Text 6)



When devotees pray, “nama oṁ visnu-pādāya...”

                           9
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt    5/5/2017

Prabhupāda, who is not physically present before them,
is hearing them. What would be the use of all our songs
and prayers which we have received from our previous
ācāryas if he is not? What would be the use of our guru-
gāyatrī mantra? It is not an empty ritual.




OBJECTION 6)


Śrīla Prabhupāda said that harināma-dīkṣā (first
initiation) is real initiation. Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja
teaches that real initiation begins with brāhmaṇa-dīkṣā.

REFUTATION 6) Śrīla Prabhupāda writes:

“Regarding your questions, second initiation is REAL
INITIATION. First initiation is the preliminary, just to
make him prepared -- just like primary and secondary
education. The first initiation gives him chance to
become purified, and when he is actually purified, then
he is recognized as a brāhmaṇa and that means REAL
INITIATION.” (Letter to Jadurani from New Vrindaban:
September 4, 1972)




OBJECTION 7)


Śrīla Nārāyana Mahārāja ‘re-initiates’ disciples of
Vaiṣṇava gurus in good standing.

REFUTATION 7) Many of the so-called reinitiated devotees
who were disciples of gurus in ‘good standing’ have been
criticized for taking shelter of Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja. However, time proved them to have made the
correct decision, because it was later discovered that
their gurus in ‘good standing’ had simply not yet been
exposed as less than the ācāryas they had posed
themselves to be.

In Bhakti-sandarbha (Anuccheda 238), Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī
has given the injunction that if one’s guru is envious
of an exalted Vaiṣṇava one should immediately reject
that guru and find a mahā-bhāgavata Vaiṣṇava guru. Since
many gurus in ‘good standing’ have committed grievous
offences at the lotus feet of Śrīla Bhakti Rakṣaka
Śrīdhara Mahārāja, Śrīla Gour Govinda Mahārāja, and
Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, their ex-disciples acted in
accordance with scriptural injunctions by rejecting
them. Therefore there was no ‘re-initiation’, only ‘real
initiation’.

If a guru is actually in good standing, then there is no
question of Śrīla Mahārāja re-initiating his disciples.
Rather, he simply gives them instructions and
encouragement in their spiritual practices, and helps
them to develop a deeper faith in their dīkṣā-guru.

                           10
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt    5/5/2017


A misunderstanding sometimes arises because, on rare
occasions, Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja addresses those who
take śikṣā from him with names connected with the vraja-
līlā of Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa. This is sometimes
misunderstood to be re-initiation. One famous example of
this is Jadurani dāsī. Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja
affectionately addresses her as ‘Syamarani’. This does
not in any way mean that she has been re-initiated. Even
Śrīla Prabhupāda would sometimes affectionately address
her as ‘Sadhurani’. This affectionate use of another
name does not mean that Śrīla Prabhupāda has awarded
another initiation.

Besides this, there is substantial historical precedent
in our sampradāya for a śikṣā-guru to change a śikṣā
disciple’s name. Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī changed the name of
Śrī Hṛdaya-Caitanya’s disciple, Duḥkhī Kṛṣṇa dāsa, to
‘Śyāmānanda’. This change of name does not consitute a
re-initiation. Śrī Hṛdaya Caitanya was still his dīkṣā-
guru, and Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī was still his śikṣā-guru.

If the cases of individual devotees in ISKCON are
examined one by one, we will find that no one was re-
initiated. It happens sometimes that a disciple is
rejected by his guru, or a disciple loses faith and
officially breaks the connection with his spiritual
master. In such cases, to avoid unnecessary
misunderstandings, Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja’s secretary
meticulously keeps files of letters from the disciples,
showing that the previously existing guru-disciple
relationship had been terminated before they had taken
shelter of him.




OBJECTION 8)


Śrīla Prabhupāda worked to create a worldwide society
that provided engagement and shelter for his followers.
Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja has not done so.

REFUTATION 8) Most devotees are not informed about the
preaching activities of Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja.
Although he has only preached outside of India for four
years, he has established many temples and preaching
centers in places such as Birmingham, England; Berlin,
Germany; Murwillumbah, Australia; San Paulo, Brazil;
Prabhupāda Gauḍīya Math in Costa Rica, Bhaktivedānta
Gauḍīya Math in Moscow Russia, St Petersburg Russia,
Croatia, Śrī Ananta Gauḍīya Math in Bali, Indonesia; Śrī
Śrī Rādhā Govinda Gauḍīya Math in Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia, Hare Kṛṣṇa Society of the Philippines, Venice
Beach and other places. In addition to this, there are
gṛhastha communities in Wales, U.K.; Badger, California,
Perth and Murwillumbah, Australia, and so on. Śrīla
Mahārāja is also the patron of a gurukula in California.

Besides this, Śrīla Mahārāja never claimed to have
established a worldwide institution. He is only trying
to execute Śrīla Prabhupāda’s order to him. Just before

                           11
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt    5/5/2017

his departure, Prabhupāda requested him to help and
guide his disciples. Thousands of devotees – who had
previously lost some of their faith in Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, devotees who felt neglected and were
forced to leave the temples, devotees who became weak in
their following of the religious principles, and
devotees who wanted to deepen their relation with Śrīla
Prabhupāda – are all becoming reinspired by his love and
his teachings.




OBJECTION 9)


Śrīla Prabhupāda and Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja have
different teachings about the original position of the
jīva (the individual soul).

REFUTATION 9) Śrīla Prabhupāda has given many different
comments to different people in different circumstances
in regard to the origin of the jīva. However, the
CONCLUSION, i.e. the last word on the matter, has been
expressed in his books, which will be the law books for
the next 10,000 years. Prabhupāda writes:

“The CONCLUSION is that no one falls from the spiritual
world, or Vaikuntha planet, for it is the eternal
abode.” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam Canto 3, Chapter Sixteen,
Text 26)

“According to Viṣṇu Purana, Bhagavad-gītā and all other
Vedic literatures, the living entities are generated
from the taṭasthā energy of the Lord, and thus they are
always the energy of the Lord and are not the
energetic.” (Śrīmad Bhāgavatam: Canto 3, Chapter Seven,
Text 9)

We have never associated personally with Kṛṣṇa before.
Prabhupada writes:

“The mature devotees, who have completely executed Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, are immediately transferred to the
universe where Kṛṣṇa is appearing. In that universe the
devotees get their FIRST opportunity to associate with
Kṛṣṇa personally and directly. The training goes on, as
we see in vṛndāvana-līlā.” (Kṛṣṇa Book: Chapter Twenty-
eight)

For further information on this very important subject
of the origin of the jīva, one may refer to “Śrīla
Prabhupāda on the Source of the Jīva”, compiled by Śrīla
Gour Govinda Swāmī, where he gives about 100 supportive
quotes by Śrīla Prabhupāda, as well as many by our
previous ācāryas. One such quote is the following
letter:

“In further reference to your question about the form of
the spirit soul of the conditioned living entity; there
is a spiritual form always, but it develops fully only
when the living entity goes back to Vaikuntha. This form
develops according to the desire of the living entity.

                           12
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt    5/5/2017

Until this perfectional stage is reached, the form is
lying dormant like the form of a tree is lying dormant
in the seed.” (Letter to Rupanaga:1969)

Those who are actually residents of the spiritual
planets, those who are actually associates of the Lord,
never fall down:

“From authoritative sources it can be discerned that
associates of Lord Viṣṇu who descend from Vaikuntha do
not actually fall. They come with the purpose of
fulfilling the desire of the Lord, and their descent to
this material world is comparable to that of the Lord.
The Lord comes to this material world through the agency
of His internal potency, and similarly, when a devotee
or associate of the Lord descends to this material
world, he does so through the action of the spiritual
energy. Any pastime conducted by the Supreme Personality
of Godhead is an arrangement by yogamayā, not mahāmayā.
Therefore it is to be understood that when Jaya and
Vijaya descended to this material world, they came
because there was something to be done for the Supreme
Personality of Godhead. Otherwise it is a fact that NO
ONE FALLS FROM VAIKUNTHA.” (Śrīmad Bhāgavatam: Canto 7,
Chapter One, Text 35)

Mahārāja Yudisthira also does not believe anyone can
fall from Vaikuntha:

Mahārāja Yudhisthira inquired: “What kind of great curse
could affect even liberated viṣṇu-bhaktas, and what sort
of person could curse even the Lord’s associates? For
unflinching devotees of the Lord to fall again to this
material world is impossible. I cannot believe this.”
(Śrīmad Bhāgavatam: Canto 7, Chapter One, Text 34)

There is no mayā at all in Goloka Vṛndāvana dhāma. Śrīla
Prabhupāda often quotes Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī
Ṭhākura’s verse: arādhyo bhagavān vrajeṣa-tanayas tad-
dhāma vṛndāvanam. There, Śrīla Cakravartīpada says that
Kṛṣṇa’s abode is as worshipable as Kṛṣṇa Himself. As
there is no mayā in the transcendental body of
Vrajendranandana Śrī Kṛṣṇa, this is also true for His
abode. Śrīla Cakravartīpada says there that this is the
opinion of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu and that he is not
interested in anyone else’s opinion. Śrīmad Bhāgavatam
(1.1.1) states: dhāmnā svena sadā nirasta-kuhakaṁ satyaṁ
paraṁ dhīmahi. Kṛṣṇa’s abode is forever free from mayā,
so no one there can be deviated from their
constitutional position of loving servitude.




OBJECTION 10)


Śrīla Prabhupāda teaches that the initiating guru takes
the karma of the disciple. Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja
teaches that the guru does not.

REFUTATION 10) It is true that Śrīla Prabhupāda has
mentioned that a spiritual master undergoes some

                           13
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt    5/5/2017

reaction for the misdeeds of his disciples. He writes:

“Therefore, duḥsvapna—bad dreams—occur because of sinful
activities. A devotee sometimes accepts a sinful person
as his disciple, and to counteract the sinful reactions
he accepts from the disciple, he has to see a bad dream.
Nonetheless, the spiritual master is so kind that in
spite of having bad dreams due to the sinful disciple,
he accepts this troublesome business for the deliverance
of the victims of Kali-yuga. After initiation,
therefore, a disciple should be extremely careful not to
commit again any sinful act that might cause
difficulties for himself and the spiritual master.”
(Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam: Canto 8, Chapter Four, Text 15)

This statement is true for a person who has accepted the
position of guru although he himself is not firmly
situated on the transcendental platform. Out of his
intense humility, Śrīla Prabhupāda would sometimes refer
to himself as such a guru. However, if the disciple
accepts the self-realized guru’s expression of genuine
humility as an admittance of his limitation, it will be
a great offense. When this viewpoint is presented by
Śrīla Prabhupāda, it also has the obvious added
advantage of controlling immature and wayward disciples
by inducing feelings of guilt about their misbehavior.
Śrīla Prabhupāda’s perfect humility is confirmed in the
following excerpts from a conversation with Bob Cohen
(later to become Prabhupāda’s initiated disciple). It
shows Prabhupāda’s humility, and it also shows his
desire to give a neophyte a good reason to stop
committing sins:

Bob: Do you personally feel disease and sickness?

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Yes.

Bob: Is this a result of your past karma?

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Yes.

Bob: So one in this material world never escapes his
karma completely?

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Yes, he escapes. No more karma for a
devotee. No more karmic reaction

Bob: But you must be the best devotee.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Hm-m... No, I don’t consider myself
the best devotee. I am the lowest.

Bob: No!

Śrīla Prabhupāda: You are the best devotee.

Bob: [Laughs.] Oh, no, no! But what you say... always
seems right.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Yes.

Bob: Then you must be the best devotee.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Just like Rādhārāṇī, She does not see

                           14
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt     5/5/2017

anyone as a nondevotee. Therefore we try to approach
Rādhārāṇī.

Bob: Who is this?

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Rādhārāṇī, Kṛṣṇa’s consort.

Bob: Ah.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: If anyone approaches Rādhārāṇī, She
recommends to Kṛṣṇa, “Here is the best devotee. He is
better than Me,” and Kṛṣṇa cannot refuse him. That is
the best devotee, but it is not to be imitated: “I have
become the best devotee.” A second-class devotee has the
vision that some are envious of God, but this is not the
vision of the best devotee. The best devotee sees,
“Nobody is envious of God. Everyone is better than me.”
Just like Caitanya-caritāmṛta’s author, Kṛṣṇadāsa
Kavirāja, says, “I am lower than the worm in the stool.”

Bob: Who is saying this?

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Kṛṣṇadāsa Kavirāja, the author of
Caitanya-caritāmṛta: purīṣera kīṭa haite muñi se
laghiṣṭha. He is not making a show. He is feeling like
that: “I am the lowest. Everyone is best, but I am the
lowest. Everyone is engaged in Kṛṣṇa’s service. I am not
engaged.” Caitanya Mahāprabhu said, “Oh, I have not a
pinch of devotion to Kṛṣṇa. I cry to make a show. If I
had been a devotee of Kṛṣṇa, I would have died long ago.
But I am living; that is the proof that I do not love
Kṛṣṇa.” That is the vision of the best devotee. He is so
much absorbed in Kṛṣṇa’s love that he says, “Everything
is going on, but I am the lowest. Therefore I cannot see
God.” That is the best devotee.

Śyāmasundara: One time you said that sometimes you feel
sickness or pain due to the sinful activities of your
devotees. Can sometimes disease be due to that? Caused
by that?

Śrīla Prabhupāda: You see, Kṛṣṇa says:

ahaṁ tvāṁ sarva-pāpebhyo

mokṣayiṣyāmi mā śucaḥ

“I will deliver you from all sinful reaction. Do not
fear.” So Kṛṣṇa is so powerful that He can immediately
take up all the sins of others and immediately make them
right. But when a living entity plays the part on behalf
of Kṛṣṇa, he also takes the responsibility for the
sinful activities of his devotees. Therefore to become a
guru is not an easy task. You see, he has to take all
the poisons and absorb them. So sometimes – because he
is not Kṛṣṇa – sometimes there is some trouble.
Therefore Caitanya Mahāprabhu has forbidden, “Don’t make
many śiṣyas, many disciples.”

Here Śrīla Prabhupāda is playing the role of a neophyte
and at the same time speaking to induce hesitation in
the minds of those who are actually neophyte and want to
play the part of a bona fide spiritual master.


                           15
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt    5/5/2017

“Therefore to make many disciples is a risky job unless
one is able to assimilate all the sins.... That idea is
also in the Bible. Jesus Christ took all the sinful
reactions of the people and sacrificed his life. That is
the responsibility of a spiritual master....”

On other occasions Śrīla Prabhupāda said Lord Jesus only
pretended to die. He never suffered, because he is a
pure devotee. Prabhupada now continues speaking to Bob:

“Because Kṛṣṇa is Kṛṣṇa, He is apāpa-viddha. He cannot
be attacked by sinful reactions. But a living entity is
sometimes subjected to their influence because he is so
small. Big fire, small fire. If you put some big thing
in a small fire, the fire itself may be extinguished.
But in a big fire, whatever you put in is all right. The
big fire can consume anything.”

The aforementioned quote was another example of Śrīla
Prabhupāda’s humility.

Bob: Christ’s suffering was of that nature?

Śrīla Prabhupāda: Mm-m?

Bob: Was Christ’s suffering?

Śrīla Prabhupāda: That I have already explained. He took
the sinful reactions of all the people. Therefore he
suffered.

Bob: I see.

Śrīla Prabhupāda: They should have been ashamed (and
think that) now, if he again commits sinful activities,
his spiritual master has to suffer. A disciple should be
sympathetic and consider this: “For my sinful
activities, my spiritual master will suffer.”

Prabhupada is fully transcendental, untouched by the
material energy, and very clever in persuading the
conditioned souls to act in their own interests.

How can the two statements be reconciled: “The spiritual
master takes the karma of the disciple” and “The
spiritual master does not take the karma of the
disciple.”? They can be reconciled in this way: he takes
them from the disciple, but he does not suffer them.
Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja explains that pure devotees are
like large fires. No matter how much garbage, in the
form of our anarthas and sins, is thrown into a large
fire at the time of surrender, the fire consumes it,
burning it to ashes, and the fire itself is not
affected.

What to speak of himself being free from the touch of
sinful reactions, simply by his glance and presence the
pure devotee can free others from sins. There is no need
of his suffering. This is confirmed in the ISKCON Ācārya
Song Book, in a song by Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura:

“All sins go away in your association. Where shall we
find a master as merciful as you?”


                           16
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt    5/5/2017

“By bathing repeatedly in the sacred Ganges one is
gradually purified. But, O venerable Vaiṣṇava, one is
immediately purified simply by your merciful glance.”

Kṛṣṇa Himself says that great souls are not affected by
material nature. (Bg.9.13)




OBJECTION 11)


Śrīla Prabhupāda envisioned a worldwide society where
many gurus work collegially under a governing body.
Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja practices the Gauḍīya Maṭha
single ācārya system. Note: Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura instructed his followers to also work
together under a governing body and Śrīla Prabhupāda
often cited neglect of this order as the cause for the
break-up of his spiritual master’s mission.

REFUTATION 11) Śrīla Prabhupāda writes:

“His (Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Saraswati Thakura’s) idea
was that the ācārya was not to be nominated amongst the
governing body. He said openly, ‘You make a GBC and
conduct the mission.’ So his idea was amongst the
members of the GBC, who would come out a successful and
self-effulgent ācārya would be automatically selected.”
(Letter to Rūpānuga dāsa: April 24, 1974)

Objection 11 states that Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja
practices the “Gauḍīya Matha single ācārya system.”
However, Śrīla Mahārāja, although a transcendental
personality and not confined to the parameters of any
institution, is a member of the GBC of Śrī Gauḍīya
Vedānta Samiti. Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti was founded
in 1940. The three original trustees of the society were
Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja (Śrīla
Prabhupāda’s sannyāsa-guru), Pujyapadā Nrsimhananda
Brahamacari and, at that time, Abhay Caraṇāravinda
prabhu (later known as His Divine Grace Śrīla A.C.
Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Prabhupāda). Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja
follows the constitution established by these three
trustees.

Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti has one president ācārya, Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Vāmana Gosvāmī Mahārāja. Śrīla
Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja is the vice-president
and secretary of the society. He and others also act as
initiating ācāryas within the society, and the society
is governed by a GBC. To the present day, the GBC of the
Śrī Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti has run its society
peacefully and successfully, and none of its members
have fallen down.




OBJECTION 12)


                           17
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt    5/5/2017


Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja criticized a number of the names
Śrīla Prabhupāda gave to ISKCON deities.

REFUTATION 12) Objection 12 refers to the occasion when
Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja expressed his concern over the
worship of some of the deities of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in ISKCON,
who are being addressed by the names Nila-madhava,
Rādhā-Govinda Mādhava, etc. Śrīla Mahārāja never
criticized names given by Prabhupāda. Rather, he
questioned whether Prabhupāda actually gave them.

Śrīla Mahārāja is simply bringing to our attention that
Śrīla Prabhupāda is a pure devotee of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa in the
mood of Vṛndāvana and, as such, those who wish to follow
him must necessarily also worship Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa according
to the principles explained by Śrīla Prabhupāda and our
previous ācāryas. The names of the above-mentioned
Deities are either rasābhāsa or inappropriate, insofar
as the threefold bending form of Kṛṣṇa playing on a
flute in the company of Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī can never be
addressed by the name of Dvārakādisa, the consort of
Rukmiṇī, or as Rādhā-Pārthasārathi. This has been
clearly explained by Śrīla Prabhupāda in the following
excerpt:

“The gopīs never addressed Kṛṣṇa as Rukmiṇī-ramaṇa.
Kṛṣṇa’s devotees in Vṛndāvana address Him as Rādhā-
ramaṇa, Nanda-nandana and Yaśodā-nandana, but not as
Vasudeva-nandana or Devakī-nandana. Although according
to the material conception, Nārāyaṇa, Rukmiṇī-ramaṇa and
Kṛṣṇa are one and the same, in the spiritual world one
cannot use the name of Kṛṣṇa in the place of Rukmiṇī-
Ramaṇa or Nārāyaṇa. If one does so out of a poor fund of
knowledge, his mellow with the Lord becomes spiritually
faulty and is called rasābhāsa, an overlapping of
transcendental mellows. The advanced devotee, who has
actually realized the transcendental features of the
Lord, will not commit the mistake of creating a
rasābhāsa situation by using one name for another.
Because of the influence of Kali-yuga, there is much
rasābhāsa in the name of extravagance and liberal-
mindedness. Such fanaticism is not very much appreciated
by pure devotees.” (Śrī Caitanya-caritāmṛta: Madhya-
līlā, Chapter Eight, Purport to Text 91)

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja has also stated that the name
Rādhā- Pārthasārathi is rasābhāsa because Śrīmatī
Rādhika never leaves Vrndavana. She is attracted to Śrī
Kṛṣṇa only in His original svayam-rūpa feature, which
can be found only in Vrndavana; she is not attracted to
Dvārakādhīśa-Kṛṣṇa or Kṛṣṇa on the battlefield of
Kurukṣetra. When Śrīmatī Rādhika (in a partial
manifestation) left Vrndavana to go to Kurukṣetra, She
was not satisfied to see Kṛṣṇa dressed like a king; it
was not complementary to Her loving moods towards Him.

Although Kṛṣṇa, Dvārakādhīśa and even Nārāyaṇa are one
by tattva, they are different by virtue of rasa. One may
say that the pastimes of Kṛṣṇa, as mentioned above, have
nothing to do with deities’ names, but Śrīla Prabhupāda
writes:

“Kṛṣṇa’s another name name is Pārtha-sārathi. Pārtha.

                           18
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt    5/5/2017

Arjuna’s name is Pārtha. Pārtha means, ‘The son of
Prtha’. Kunti’s another name is Pṛthā. Kunti’s father’s
name was Prthu, so Kunti’s name was Pṛthā. Therefore
Arjuna’s name was Pārtha. And because Kṛṣṇa served as
the chariot driver of Ajuna, His another name is Pārtha-
sārathi. So it is a fact that God has no name. Sometimes
some philosophers say that ‘God has no name’. That is
fact. But why does God have so many names? THESE NAMES
ARE CALCULATED ACCORDING TO HIS PASTIMES.” (Lecture in
Los Angeles: January. 11, 1974)

Since Rādhā never leaves Vrndavana in Her original form,
and since Kṛṣṇa can never be addressed as Pārtha-sārathi
in Vrndavana, the combination of these names contradicts
the principles of rasa. Prabhupāda writes:

“If there were a hint that transcendental mellows
overlapped in a manner contrary to the principles of the
bhakti cult, Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu would not tolerate
it and would become very angry.” (Caitanya-caritāmṛta:
Madhya-līlā, Chapter 8, Text 97)

According to Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, Prabhupāda never
intended the Delhi deities to be called Rādhā-Pārtha-
sārathi. In the early 1970’s, when Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja heard Their name, he asked Śrīla Prabhupāda why
he had done that. Prabhupāda answered that he had never
given Them such a name, as that would have been a
contradiction to his own books. This history is
confirmed by the siddhānta presented in the following
conversation:

Acyutananda: The deities’ name is Rādhā-Pārtha-sārathi.

Prabhupāda: Hm?

Acyutananda: The name of the Delhi deities is Rādhā-
Pārtha-sārathi. So how do we understand? Because Pārtha
means Arjuna. So Rādhā, how does Rādhā get there?

Prabhupāda: When Kṛṣṇa is Pārtha-sārathi, Rādhā is out
of Him? Does it mean?

Indian man (1): What you mean, Pārtha-sārathi is Śrī
Kṛṣṇa.

Acyutananda: Yes.

Prabhupāda: That’s all. Yes. Rādhā-kṛṣṇa-praṇaya-vikṛtir
āhlādinī-śaktir. When He is fighting, the āhlādinī-śakti
is there. IT IS NOT MANIFEST. (Morning Walk in Madras:
January. 9, 1976)

Here, Śrīla Prabhupāda states that Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī is
NOT MANIFEST in the presence of Pārtha-sārathi.

As far as the names Rukmiṇī-Dvārakādhīśa are concerned,
when Prabhupāda performed the prāṇa-prathistha
(installation) ceremony for “Rukmiṇī-Dvārakādhīśa” in
Los Angeles in 1968, he named the deities “Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa”,
and later he went to India. When he returned, he found
that a disciple had changed the name. Prabhupāda became
disturbed and said, “Kṛṣṇa has a peacock feather and
flute. He is the son of Nanda. Dvārakādhīśa is the son

                           19
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt       5/5/2017

of Vāsudeva. He has no flute and no peacock feather. Why
have you changed the name?” The argument was given that
since the Los Angeles Temple was opulent, and thus
attractive to many people, the names of the deities
should reflect that opulence. Śrīla Prabhupāda replied
that Śrī Śrī Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa are supremely opulent. Shortly
thereafter Prabhupāda again went to India, and the
devotees still kept the name as Rukmiṇī-Dvārakādhisa.

Even if a temple is opulent, and even if the temple
worship is opulent, still, if the vigrahas are in the
shape of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa, i.e. Kṛṣṇa is playing a flute,
then they are Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Śrīla Prabhupāda writes:

“Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa cannot be approached by the neophyte
devotees; therefore temple worship according to
regulative principles is offered to Lakṣmī-Nārāyaṇa.
Although there may be a Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa vigraha, or form,
the worship of the neophyte devotees is acceptable as
Lakṣmī-Nārāyaṇa worship. (Srimad Bhāgavatam: Canto 4,
Chapter Twenty-four, Texts 45-46)




CONCLUSION:




Controversies arise in the Vaiṣṇava community to clarify
important philosophical points for the benefit of all
concerned.

siddhānta baliyā citte nā kara alasa

ihā ha-ite kṛṣṇe lāge sudṛḍha mānasa

“A sincere student should not neglect the discussion of
such conclusions, considering them controversial, for
such discussions strengthen the mind. Thus one’s mind
becomes attached to Śrī Kṛṣṇa.” (Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta: Adi-līlā, Chapter Two, Text 117)

I pray that the points presented herein may serve all
the members of ISKCON, which include Śrīla Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja and his followers, so that they can work
together as one family to preach the mission of Srila
Prabhupāda and our previous ācāryas.

Vaiṣṇava kṛpā leśa prarthi,

(begging for a slight trace of the mercy of the
Vaiṣṇavas)

Tridaṇḍi Svami Bhaktivedānta Araṇya




The Homonym ISKCON


                              20
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt       5/5/2017




A Reply to the Article, ‘Understanding Nārāyaṇa
Mahārāja: His Own Words and Primary Sources’

There was a compilation published on the Cakra website
which attempted to show that Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja’s
teachings are different from those of Śrīla Prabhupāda.

The compilation posted on Cakra is called ‘Understanding
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja: his own words and other primary
sources’, and it offers quotes by both Śrīla Prabhupada
and Srila Narayana Mahārāja. The following article
explains these same quotes from another point of view.

When quoting the compilation, we shall begin with the
word ‘COMPILATION’, and we will begin our own statements
with the word ‘REFUTATION’.




COMPILATION 1:


Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja on A.C. Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Prabhupāda
and ISKCON



Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, Germany: December 12, 2001:

“My śikṣā-guru, nitya-līlā-praviṣṭa oṁ viṣṇupāda Śrī
Śrīmad Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja.”



Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, Mathurā: October 24, 1999:

“We can glorify Swāmīji, Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja.
But those who are falling down, how can they glorify
him? They cannot glorify him, never; they are cutting.
They are establishing that he was the founder of ISKCON,
but I know that he was not founder; he was one of the
members of this in guru-paramparā. It was founded by
Kṛṣṇa, and first ācārya was Brahmā, then Nārada, then
Vyāsa. Only he has changed the name and he has preached
these things in Western countries.”



REFUTATION 1: The compilation’s use of Śrīla Mahārāja’s
quotes, saying that he is the śikṣā disciple of Śrīla
Prabhupāda and then saying that Śrīla Prabhupāda is not
the Founder-ācārya of ISKCON, is meant to show that he
is not really Prabhupāda’s disciple. But Śrīla Mahārāja
is saying nothing that Śrīla Prabhupāda has not said
many times. In his Bhagavad-gītā Preface, Śrīla
Prabhupāda writes:

“Some of them said that it is greatly fortunate for the
Americans that I have started the Kṛṣṇa consciousness

                           21
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt    5/5/2017

movement in America. But actually the original father of
this movement is Lord Kṛṣṇa Himself, since it was
started a very long time ago, but is coming down to
human society by disciplic succession. If I have any
credit in this connection, it does not belong to me
personally, but it is due to my eternal spiritual
master, His Divine Grace oṁ viṣṇupāda paramahaṁsa
parivrājakācārya 108 Śrī Śrīmad Bhaktisiddhānta
Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Mahārāja Prabhupāda.”

Śrīla Prabhupāda also writes in his purport to Śrīmad-
Bhāgavatam (2.9.6): “Thus Brahmā was initiated by the
Kṛṣṇa mantra, by Lord Kṛṣṇa Himself, and thus he became
a Vaiṣṇava, . . .we belong to the Brahmā sampradāya,
directly in the disciplic chain from Brahmā to Nārada,
from Nārada to Vyāsa, from Vyāsa to Madhva Muni, from
Madhva Muni to Mādhavendra Purī, from Mādhavendra Purī
to Īśvara Purī, from Īśvara Purī to Lord Caitanya and
gradually to His Divine Grace Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī,
our divine master.”




COMPILATION 2:


Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, 28th April 1999, morning, Caracas:

“Also you should know that Caitanya Mahāprabhu is the
founder of ISKCON. Swāmīji, A.C. Bhaktivedānta Swāmī
Mahārāja, is one of the prominent ācāryas in this line
only. He is not founder; he’s one of the prominent
ācāryas, who spread all these things [over] whole world,
in a very short time.”

REFUTATION 2: The compilation is trying to say that
Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja does not respect Prabhupāda’s
position as Founder-ācārya of this movement. But
actually, he is establishing Prabhupāda’s glory. With
pride, Śrīla Prabhupāda confirms Śrīla Mahārāja’s
statement in his own Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam purport. There he
says: “The Hare Kṛṣṇa movement is not a new movement as
people sometimes mistakenly think. The Hare Kṛṣṇa
movement is present in every millennium of Lord Brahmā’s
life, and the holy name is chanted in all the higher
planetary systems, including Brahmaloka and Candraloka,
not to speak of Gandharvaloka and Apsaraloka. The
saṅkīrtana movement that was started in this world five
hundred years ago by Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu is
therefore not a new movement.” (SB 7.15.72 Purport)

In his Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam (1.9.6-7 purport), Śrīla
Prabhupāda lists some of the other prominent ācāryas in
this movement. He writes: “He (Nārada) is the son and
disciple of Brahmāji, and from him the disciplic
succession in the line of Brahmā has been spread. He
initiated Prahlāda Mahārāja, Dhruva Mahārāja and many
celebrated devotees of the Lord. He initiated even
Vyāsadeva, the author of the Vedic literatures, and from
Vyāsadeva, Madhvācārya was initiated, and thus the
Madhva-sampradāya, in which the Gauḍīya-sampradāya is
also included, has spread all over the universe. Śrī

                           22
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt    5/5/2017

Caitanya Mahāprabhu belonged to this Madhva-sampradāya;
therefore, Brahmāji, Nārada, Vyāsa, down to Madhva,
Caitanya and the Gosvāmīs all belonged to the same line
of disciplic succession.”

Thus, to be a prominent ācārya in this line is the
greatest glory.




COMPILATION 3:


Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, Murwillumbah, Australia: February.
18, 2002 (eve):

“Your Prabhupāda, Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja, only changed the
name into English. He is not the Founder-ācārya of that
eternal ISKCON. I am ISKCON. I’m not different from
ISKCON. I am ‘Bhaktivedānta’ [Śrīla Bhaktivedānta
Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī Mahārāja]. Like father, like son. I am
the real successor of Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī
Mahārāja, and there is no other. You should know this
very openly. I am Bhaktivedānta and he is Bhaktivedānta,
but he received this name after I did. I’m senior to him
in this regard. I’m Bhaktivedānta, and I’m also ISKCON.
Don’t think that I’m out of ISKCON.”



REFUTATION 3: The above inaccurate quote wants to say
that Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja is trying to usurp
Prabhupāda’s position as founder-ācārya. But the truth
is that he is actually revealing his pride in being
Prabhupāda’s humble servant. The compilation did not
include the preceding sentences and explanation, and it
also substituted an important clarification with a mere
three dots. The following is the actual version of the
statement as it was posted on the Internet. (The words
in brackets, also included in the Internet posting, were
the editor’s.)

“At the time of Śrīla Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī
Ṭhākura, Śrīla Sarasvatī Ṭhākura was the president of
ISKCON. He sent one arm, Śrīla Prabhupāda Bhaktivedānta
Swāmī Mahārāja, who was given sannyāsa by Śrīla Bhakti
Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, and who then gave
ISKCON its English name. [Previously it was called by
different names, like Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti, Gauḍīya
Maṭha, Viśva Vaiṣṇava Rājā Sabhā, and Kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasa
Bhāvitaḥ Mati.] Your Prabhupāda, Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja,
only changed the name into English. He is not the
Founder-ācārya of that eternal ISKCON. The founder-
ācārya is originally Brahmā, and it was actually
established by Kṛṣṇa. All of you who are following this
disciplic succession are ISKCON. Don’t think that you
are not. I am ISKCON. I’m not different from ISKCON. I
am ‘Bhaktivedānta’ [Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Nārāyaṇa Gosvāmī
Mahārāja]. Like father, like son. I am the real
successor of Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja, and
there is no other. You should know this very openly.


                           23
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt    5/5/2017

“I am Bhaktivedānta and he is Bhaktivedānta, but he
received this name after I did. I’m senior to him in
this regard. By my request he became ready to take
sannyāsa, and my guru mahārāja gave sannyāsa to him.
[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja and Śrīla Prabhupāda were both
given the name Bhaktivedānta by Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna
Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja at the time of their sannyāsa
initiations.] I was like the priest at his sannyāsa
ceremony. I performed the fire sacrifice, I made his
daṇḍa and I taught him how to wear his sannyāsa
garments. Although he is junior to me and I’m senior to
him in sannyāsa, he is my śikṣā-guru. I’m his disciple.
I’m Bhaktivedānta, and I’m also ISKCON. Don’t think that
I’m out of ISKCON.”

We had also posted the following quote by Śrīla
Prabhupāda along with Śrīla Mahārāja’s lecture,
confirming Śrīla Mahārāja’s statement that Śrīla
Prabhupāda’s real credit is that he brought to the West,
in the English language, pure, eternal Krsna
consciousness. Prabhupāda stated in a lecture in
Detroit, on August 3, 1975: “It is not that,
‘Bhaktivedānta Swāmī has brought this.’ They say. They
give me the credit. That is my good fortune also. But
actually I am just like a peon. I have brought, but I am
delivering it without any adulteration. That may be my
credit. And if you take it without any adulteration and
practice it, then your life is successful.”

Moreover, the compilation did not quote Śrīla Mahārāja’s
preceding introduction: “You should know one thing.
ISKCON was first established by cātur-mukha (four-
headed) Brahmā. He is our first guru. He is the original
Founder-ācārya of ISKCON, and his disciples like Sanaka,
Sanandana, Sanātana, Sanat-kumara, and Nārada are real
ISKCON preachers. After them, especially in Kali-yuga,
Madhvācārya, Rāmānuja, Viṣṇuswami, Nimbāditya, and so
many others appeared. In our line (the Gauḍīya-
sampradāya), especially in Kali-yuga, Śrī Mādhavendra
Purī is the root, the seed. His disciples are Śrīla
Īśvara Purīpadā and Nityānanda Prabhu; from Īśvara
Purīpadā came Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, and from Him came
Svarūpa Dāmodara. Then, after them, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura and Śrīla Prabhupāda Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī
Gosvāmī Ṭhākura appeared in their line, and they are
also part of the real ISKCON. All these are ideal ISKCON
personalities, and you should always be aware of this.”

Śrīla Mahārāja is simply encouraging us to remember to
honor our previous ācāryas. They can also help us and
bless us. If we think that Prabhupāda is the first in
this movement, we are not glorifying him. He does not
want to be disconnected from his guru-paramparā. His
glory is his chastity to the words and moods of his
disciplic succession. If we think that Prabhupāda is
first, it means we think we don’t have to refer to the
previous ācāryas of the succession to understand what he
is trying to teach. It means we think that we, and
conditioned souls like us, are the authorities on
understanding him.

Regarding Śrīla Mahārāja’s statement that he, as well as
others, can also be given the title ‘Bhaktivedānta’,
Śrīla Prabhupāda confirms this in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam

                           24
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt    5/5/2017

(1.5.24) as follows: “As such, vedānta-vādīs, or the
followers of the Vedānta, indicate the pure devotees of
the Personality of Godhead. Such vedānta-vādīs, or the
bhakti-vedāntas, are impartial in distributing the
transcendental knowledge of devotional service. To them,
no one is enemy or friend; no one is educated or
uneducated. No one is especially favorable, and no one
is unfavorable. The bhakti-vedāntas see that the people
in general are wasting time in false sensuous things.
Their business is to get the ignorant mass of people to
re-establish their lost relationship with the
Personality of Godhead. By such endeavor, even the most
forgotten soul is roused up to the sense of spiritual
life, and thus being initiated by the bhakti-vedāntas,
the people in general gradually progress on the path of
transcendental realization.”

Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja’s dīkṣā-guru, Śrīla Bhakti
Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī Mahārāja, is also Śrīla
Prabhupāda’s sannyāsa-guru. Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava
Gosvāmī Mahārāja gave all his sannyāsa disciples the
title ‘Bhaktivedānta’.

The compilation quoted Śrīla Mahārāja saying, “I am the
real successor of Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja,
and there is no other.” Perhaps the compilation is
trying to say that Śrīla Mahārāja is not bona fide
because a self-effulgent ācārya does not need to
proclaim himself. Actually, Śrīla Mahārāja is only
separating himself from pretender gurus. This statement
is not exclusive but inclusive. When Prabhupāda was
asked in 1969, in Boston, what Jesus meant when he said,
“I am the only son of my father. No one can come to Him
but through me,” Prabhupāda replied, “Me means, ‘by me
or anyone like me; in other words, by me or any bona
fide representative of God.’” Śrīla Mahārāja is not
disparaging other bona fide teachers. He is simply
saying that it is no small thing to perfectly represent
the line of Gauḍīya ācāryas.

Śrīla Mahārāja’s statement can also be seen in this way:
His is the statement of a son who loves his father
(Prabhupāda) so much that he can say, “No one can love
my father as much as I.” This is not at all pride in
himself, but in his beloved Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja, our
Śrīla Prabhupāda. We cannot imagine such love in our
Western culture.




COMPILATION 4:


Hari Sauri 3/31/97 7:54 AM Letter:

“He (Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja) shouted, ‘I am not under your
rules. I am not ISKCON, I am Gauḍīya Math!’”

REFUTATION 4: The compilation is trying to say that
Śrīla Mahārāja contradicts himself to suit his purposes.
But actually, he is putting a spotlight on the real
eternal ISKCON, and distinguishes it from the modern

                           25
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt    5/5/2017

corporate ISKCON. The incident referred to above took
place in Navadvīpa. Hari Śauri and a few of his god-
brothers were trying to chastise Śrīla Mahārāja in harsh
language. They had been accusing him of re-initiating
Gaurāṅgī dāsī, who had actually never been initiated
before. They had also been accusing him of initiating
her on his first meeting with her, without seeing her
qualifications. They said that Prabhupāda’s disciples
waited six months and that this was only Gaurangi’s
first day. But actually she had been born into Kṛṣṇa
consciousness, had been practicing about twenty years,
had read deeply into both Prabhupāda’s and Śrīla
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja’s books, and had been recommended by
several senior devotees. Śrīla Mahārāja replied to them,
without shouting, that he was not part of their
[corporate] ISKCON, and therefore they were not his
authorities. His statement did not at all imply that he
felt himself beyond the rules of eternal ISKCON.

In his lecture of May 13, 200l, in Los Angeles,
California, Śrīla Mahārāja explained Prabhupāda’s glory
in relationship to the eternal ISKCON. The following are
some excerpts.

[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja:] I have seen that Śrīla Swāmī
Mahārāja has given the definition of ISKCON with this
śloka:

kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasa-bhāvitā matiḥ

krīyatāṁ yadi kuto ’pi labhyate

tatra laulyam api mūlyam ekalaṁ

janma-koṭi-sukṛtair na labhyate

“Pure devotional service in Kṛṣṇa consciousness cannot
be had even by pious activities in hundreds and
thousands of lives. It can be obtained only by paying
one price; that is, intense greed to obtain it. If it is
available somewhere, one must purchase it without delay.
Purport: This is the basis of ISKCON.”

[In this regard, Śrīla Prabhupāda is also quoted from
the book Journey to Self-Discovery: “In another verse,
Rūpa Gosvāmī says, kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasa-bhāvitā matiḥ,
krīyatāṁ yadi kuto ’pi labhyate. I have translated the
words Kṛṣṇa consciousness from kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasa-
bhāvitā. So here, Rūpa Gosvāmī advises, ‘If Kṛṣṇa
consciousness is available, please purchase it
immediately. Don’t delay.’ It is a very nice thing.” In
Seattle, Washington, October 4, 1968, Śrīla Prabhupāda
stated: “Kṛṣṇa-bhakti-rasa-bhāvitā matiḥ. Matiḥ means
intelligence or status of mind that I’ll serve Kṛṣṇa. If
you can purchase this status of mind anywhere, please
immediately purchase it.”]

[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja:] “If anyone is not following
this, even he is trying to be ISKCON, he is not really
ISKCON. He is ISKCON ābhāsa (a semblance or shadow). We
see in the semblance of ISKCON that so many members can
fall down. The real ISKCON members, however, will never
fall down. Brahmā is the first in ISKCON, Nārada is
second, Śrīla Vyāsadeva is third, and fourth is Śrī

                           26
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt     5/5/2017

Sukadeva Gosvāmī. They cannot fall down. Śrīla Rūpa
Gosvāmī cannot fall down, and he is also ISKCON. Śrīla
Raghunatha dasa Gosvāmī will never fall down, and he is
also ISKCON. We are all ISKCON, but those who can fall
down, those who are simply trying to be ISKCON, are not
really its members.

“We must help devotees who are in that category. I pray
that Kṛṣṇa will sprinkle His mercy on them so that one
day they will be in the real ISKCON. Generally janma-
koṭi-sukṛtair na labhyate: this high-class standard
cannot be had only by sukṛti (spiritually pious
activities or regulative bhakti). If one gathers sukṛti
for thousands and thousands of births, in relation to
Kṛṣṇa and His devotees or in relation to anything
related to Kṛṣṇa, then it will be real sukṛti. When
sukṛti is in large enough quantity, you can have darśana
of any exalted devotee. Sādhu-saṅga will be achieved.”




COMPILATION 5:


A.C. Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Prabhupāda Letter to. Dr.
Bigelow - Allahabad 20 January 1971:

“I am the Founder-ācārya of the International Society
for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness.”

REFUTATION 5: The compilation is trying to show here
that Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja does not accept
Prabhupāda’s words that he is the founder-ācārya, but
here Prabhupāda is saying he is the founder of corporate
ISKCON, not eternal ISKCON. In the same letter
Prabhupāda writes, “This unnatural life of repeated
birth, death, disease and old age can be stopped when
his consciousness is dovetailed with the Supreme
consciousness of God. That is the basic principle of our
Kṛṣṇa Consciousness Movement.” Prabhupāda is not saying
he is the founder-ācārya of that basic principle.




COMPILATION 6:


A.C. Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Prabhupāda Letter to
Kurusrestha – Bombay 28 December 1974:

“Also your idea of forming a trust between ISKCON and
the leading men in the Indian community is approved by
me. That is very nice. Let the Indians take part in our
movement and help us to push on this mission of Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu. In that trust you must be very
careful to make sure that my name is registered there as
the founder-ācārya and that I am to be the ultimate
authority. In other words, in any case of necessity of
vetoing or canceling any decision made by the other
trustees, I should be able to do like that. My decision

                           27
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt    5/5/2017

should over-rule all the other trustees combined.”

REFUTATION 6: Prabhupāda would never say that he is the
authority over Brahmā, Kṛṣṇa, or his own guru mahārāja;
neither are they trustees. It is clear that he is
speaking of the corporate ISKCON and not the eternal
ISKCON that he speaks of elsewhere. There is a term in
English-language usage called ‘homonym.’ Homonyms refer
to words that have the same spelling or pronunciation
but different meanings. ISKCON is such a homonym.




COMPILATION 7:


Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja conversation, Murwillumbah, Australia:
February 12, 2002 (morning):

“Therefore, in his service to Rādhika, for rati-keli-
siddhyai, a guru cannot serve in his male form. Śrīla
Swāmī Mahārāja and my gurudeva are both serving there in
their female forms as gopīs. In that realm my gurudeva
is Vinoda Mañjarī, Śrīla Prabhupāda Bhaktisiddanta
Sarasvatī Ṭhākura is Nayana Mañjarī, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura is Kamala Mañjarī, Śrīla Jīva Gosvāmī is Vilasa
Mañjarī, Śrīla Rūpa Gosvāmī is Rūpa Mañjarī, and Śrīla
Raghunatha dasa Gosvāmī is Rati Mañjarī. These mañjarīs
can serve Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Conjugal.”

[Śrīpad Bhaktisar Mahārāja:] “And our Śrīla Prabhupāda?”

[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja:] “If you fully surrender, by
body, mind, words and ego, then I may tell you.
Otherwise, I will not. I know who he is, but you do not
know. None of the ISKCON leaders know. Your Prabhupāda
has cheated them all, in the sense that he has not
revealed himself to them at all.’’

REFUTATION 7: Perhaps the compilation is trying to say
that Śrīla Mahārāja said Prabhupāda is a cheater, and
the ISKCON leaders were cheated by him, and he is not a
bona fide spiritual master. But Śrīla Mahārāja is not
saying that at all. He is only saying that Prabhupāda
did not reveal his spiritual identity. Due to their, and
our, not having the qualification to know, he kept it a
secret.




COMPILATION 8:


Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, Lecture given on September 19th,
1994:

“Those who are not rasikā Vaiṣṇavas, they don’t know
tattva, they have not gone to association with any
Vaiṣṇava...they think that to preach whole world...the
name of Kṛṣṇa...and to give Gītā sandesha is the whole

                           28
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt      5/5/2017

thing. So I want to   say that your Prabhupāda has given
these things...only   these things...and not beyond these
things. Then he was   only the servant of MahaViṣṇu, not
of Kṛṣṇa. A strange   thing for them who are ignorant.

“But those who are wise and have done initiation from
any rasikā Vaiṣṇava, bhava-bhakta of Caitanya
Mahāprabhu... Those who have given their heart to them
and have realized anything...very little...they can
realize these things. At first, if any temple is going
on...we’ll have to clear... the ground. The thorns are
there, the trees having thorns ...useless...to be cut,
and to give some land... But to dig and to sweep is not
everything. To dig for basement of this big temple is
not everything. So Swāmīji has at first cleared the
atmosphere... prepared the ground...by preaching name
and the sandesh of Gītā...he prepared. So very important
work. Without this, without this, he could not have
given these things. As Caitanya Mahāprabhu first
preached the whole world Kṛṣṇa name, and he wanted all
Vaiṣṇavas to understand His inner mood... Otherwise
everyone cannot understand...so he has done this task
and it was so necessary for that world...for all
world...he has done but he has not done everything ...by
that doing. It was only basement...foundation.”

REFUTATION 8: This is not an accurate transcription of
Śrīla Mahārāja’s lecture. By misquoting this lecture,
the compilation is trying to show that Śrīla Mahārāja
said that Prabhupāda is not a servant of Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, but rather of Mahā-Viṣṇu. However, nothing
can be further from the truth. Those devotees who were
actually present at that lecture, who heard the taped
recording several times, and who have heard Śrīla
Mahārāja’s various lectures on this same topic many
times, have transcribed it in the following way:

“Those who are not rasikā Vaiṣṇavas, who don’t know
tattva, and who have not had the association of any pure
Vaiṣṇava, think that to preach throughout the world the
name of Kṛṣṇa and to give Gītā-sandesa, the message of
Gītā, is the whole thing. So I want to say that if your
Prabhupāda had only given these things and nothing
beyond these things, then he would have only been the
servant of Mahā-Viṣṇu, not Kṛṣṇa. This strange idea is
for those who are ignorant.

But those who are wise and have taken initiation from
any rasikā Vaiṣṇava and bhavakā-bhakta of Caitanya
Mahāprabhu, those who have given their heart to him and
have realized something, even very little, can realize
these things about who Prabhupāda actually is. First, if
any temple is going to be built, we’ll have to clear the
ground. The trees having thorns are useless and need to
be cut, to give some land for building. But to dig and
to sweep is not everything. To dig for the construction
of the basement of this big temple is not everything. So
Swāmīji has at first cleared the atmosphere and prepared
the ground by preaching the holy name and the sandesh
message of Gītā, and this is very important work.
Without this, he could not have given these more
advanced concepts. Caitanya Mahāprabhu also first
preached throughout the world Kṛṣṇa’s name, but He also
wanted all Vaiṣṇavas to understand His inner mood.

                             29
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt      5/5/2017

Otherwise,   without a foundation, not everyone can
understand   it. So your Prabhupāda has done this task,
and it was   so necessary for all the world, but this is
not all he   did. That was only a basement or foundation.”

The above was only a very small excerpt. As the lecture
continues, Śrīla Mahārāja explains how Prabhupāda has
kept the highest truths of bhakti, śuddha-bhakti or
vraja-bhakti in his books, and whatever we need to
become servants of Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa and Caitanya Mahāprabhu.

In Los Angeles, on May 31, 2000, Śrīla Mahārāja
explained this same principle again: “You should know
who your Prabhupāda is. You should know; then you can
glorify him, otherwise you cannot. He has also
descended. He is an associate of Mahāprabhu, and he has
descended to give that same mood and mission of
Mahāprabhu. He has not only come to preach, ‘You should
do kīrtana, and add that to whatever you are already
doing.’ He also did not come only to establish yuga-
dharma. That is the job of Mahā-Viṣṇu, not of Kṛṣṇa. It
is not Kṛṣṇa’s function. Who is Mahā-Viṣṇu? Śrī Advaita
Ācārya. He is the aṁśa (part) of the aṁśa of the aṁśa of
the aṁśa of the kāla of Kṛṣṇa Himself. He is a part of
the part of the part of the part of Kṛṣṇa. Being so far
away, He can preach with kīrtana, but He cannot give
vraja-bhakti. He is not qualified for this. Only Kṛṣṇa
can do this. When He came, therefore, He preached
through saṅkīrtana that highest love and affection, as
well as the process to achieve it. You should not think
that he was only a preacher of harināma. You should not
think that he only wrote so many books, and published
and distributed them. This is not his ultimate glory.
What is his glory? He is a Rūpānuga Vaiṣṇava, serving
Rādhā-Kṛṣṇa Conjugal in the same way as Rūpa Mañjarī.”




COMPILATION 9:


Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, Bambra, a farm near Melbourne:

“Śrīla Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Mahārāja told me in the last
days, ‘You should help my disciples. They are like
monkeys; I could not train them so much. So always try
to help them.’”

REFUTATION 9: Perhaps the compilation is trying to say
that Śrīla Mahārāja is pretending that Prabhupāda said
something bad about us, his disciples. But there is a
taped recording of this. We have a certain great
conception of ourselves, and because Prabhupāda
encouraged his little new-born babies, we continued to
think we were great. Can so many of us say honestly that
we don’t act like monkeys, at least sometimes, being
lusty and angry, hungry and quarrelsome? We personally
experienced that Prabhupāda called the BBT artists
animals because we quarreled amongst ourselves.
Prabhupāda trained us according to our receptivity to
being trained, and as we continue serving and chanting
and building sukṛti and saṁskāra, devotional credits, we

                             30
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt    5/5/2017

become more trainable. Śrīla Prabhupāda wrote in the
Bhāgavatam (3.32.39-40 Purport):

“Also, there are SO-CALLED DISCIPLES who become
submissive to a spiritual master most artificially, with
an ulterior motive,” and “WE HAVE EXPERIENCE THAT SOME
STUDENTS COME TO JOIN US, but because of being biased in
some particular type of faith, they leave our camp and
become lost in the wilderness.”




COMPILATION 10:


Satsvarūpa Goswāmī:

“In the ultimate issue, however, what matters is not so
much what Śrīla Prabhupāda may or may not have said to
Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, but what Śrīla Prabhupāda said
to us, his disciples. And there is no record of him ever
instructing the members of ISKCON to take direction from
Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, other than to seek his advice
concerning the details of performing Śrīla Prabhupāda’s
samādhi ceremony.”

REFUTATION 10: First, Śrīla Mahārāja is Prabhupāda’s
disciple. He became his disciple in 1947, before most
ISKCON members were born and almost twenty years before
ISKCON was established. As there is no difference
between the dīkṣā and śikṣā-guru, there is no difference
between the śikṣā and dīkṣā disciple. In fact, the śikṣā
disciple may be more advanced and intimate, as in the
case of Śrīla Jagannātha dāsa Bābājī Mahārāja’s best
disciple, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura, who was his śikṣā
disciple. Secondly, COMPILATION 12 states that Śrīla
Mahārāja was not announced. But Prabhupāda
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Ṭhākura also did not announce
to all his disciples about his disciple who later became
our Prabhupāda. Prabhupāda himself states, “They never
thought, ‘Guru Mahārāja gave us instruction so many
things. Why he did not say that, This man should be
ācārya?’ They wanted to create artificially somebody
ācārya and everything failed. They did not consider even
with common sense that if Guru Mahārāja wanted to
appoint somebody as ācārya, why did he not say? He said
so many things, and this point he missed?”

So Prabhupāda himself was not announced or externally
appointed. He manifested as a self-effulgent ācārya, and
those who were sincere recognized him. That is the
system since time immemorial.




COMPILATION 11:


Hṛdayānanda Mahārāja, letter Thursday, 7 December 2000:


                           31
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt    5/5/2017

“Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja states that he is the ‘first’ or
maybe the ‘true’ disciple of Śrīla Prabhupāda etc.
Actually I have personally served Śrīla Prabhupāda for
so many years as a GBC member and he has never mentioned
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, nor was Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja engaged in
any significant service to Śrīla Prabhupāda’s Mission.
Śrīla Prabhupāda never told in any book, article
interview or any other documented statements, that
Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja should become the śikṣā-guru of
ISKCON.”

REFUTATION 11: The thoughtful reader may see the book,
My Śikṣā-Guru and Priya Bandhu ’(My Instructing
Spiritual Master and Dearmost Friend). This book is
important for anyone desiring to further understand the
events from 1922, the year Prabhupāda met his spiritual
master, to the time of his divine departure in 1977.
Śrīla Mahārāja rendered significant service to Śrīla
Prabhupāda in those years, and still does so.

Prabhupāda stated in a lecture on April 26, 1975: “This
is the mission of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu, that you go
and preach and make propaganda about Kṛṣṇa-upadesa. This
is the Kṛṣṇa consciousness movement.” He quoted this
verse on numerous occasions: yāre dekha, tāre kaha
‘kṛṣṇa’-upadeśa/ āmāra ājñāya guru hañā tāra’ ei deśa.
[Caitanya Mahāprabhu instructed:] “Instruct everyone to
follow the orders of Lord Śrī Kṛṣṇa as they are given in
the Bhagavad-gītā and Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam. In this way
become a spiritual master and try to liberate everyone
in this land.” (Caitanya-caritāmṛta, Madhya 7.128)

Śrīla Mahārāja continually fulfills this instruction in
a number of ways. For the last 40 years, fulfilling
Prabhupāda’s desire, the desire of his dīkṣā-guru, and
the desire of the entire guru-paramparā, and assisted by
other sannyāsīs and brahmacārīs, he has been leading the
annual Gauḍīya Vedānta Samiti Navadvīpa-dhāma Parikrama
during Gaura Pūrṇimā. Over twenty thousand devotees,
mostly from India and several hundred from abroad,
attend. Also, during the month of Kārtika, he annually
leads over 700 devotees from all over the world, mostly
from the West, in the Vraja-maṇḍala Parikrama. He has
been doing these parikramas for over 50 years, and for
the past seven years he has been preaching throughout
the world. By his preaching, thousands of Prabhupāda’s
followers and hundreds of Prabhupāda’s direct disciples
have become rejuvenated in their Kṛṣṇa consciousness
practices, and thousands more are just beginning. As
Prabhupāda requested, through his disciples, he
distributes hundreds of thousands of books and is also
publishing books. He gives all credit for his success to
his dīkṣā-guru, Śrīla Bhakti Prajñāna Keśava Gosvāmī
Mahārāja, and to his śikṣā-guru, our Śrīla Prabhupāda.
These are some of his services to Prabhupāda.

Conditioned souls cannot understand a pure devotee like
Prabhupāda, or why he may choose not to tell his young
disciples something at a particular time, and then
disclose it at another time. Prabhupāda’s guru mahārāja
did not announce about Prabhupāda to his institution.

Only a fully self-realized devotee can understand the
ways of another of the same caliber. In Caitanya-

                           32
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt    5/5/2017

caritāmṛta, Madhya-līlā (23.39), Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu
says to Śrī Sanātana Gosvāmī: yāṅra citte kṛṣṇa-premā
karaye udaya, tāṅra vākya, kriyā, mudrā vijñeha nā
bujhaya. “Even the most learned man cannot understand
the words, activities and symptoms of a person situated
in love of Godhead.”

For example, some of the members of the GBC might have
believed that Prabhupāda was making them his spiritual
successors when they helped him in formulating his last
will, but it was not his last will regarding spiritual
matters. After Prabhupāda’s disappearance from our
vision in November of 1977, all the devotees and
congregation members of ISKCON were told that Prabhupāda
had written a last will, making the GBC members the
ultimate managerial authorities and the ultimate
executors in managing all the affairs of ISKCON.
Ironically, however, the will was only a legal document
regarding properties. The following is an excerpt of a
conversation that took place on June 2, 1977, regarding
that will:

Giriraja: So we drafted a will, including the trust for
the properties of India and some of the other...

Prabhupāda: Will? Will. There will be direction that
“Management should be done like this.” That’s all.

Giriraja: Yes.

Prabhupāda: Nobody can say in court case that “This
temple will be in charge of this person, this temple...”

Ramesvara: Yes, just like you said.

Giriraja: So we’ve included those points in your brief
will. Should I read it?

Prabhupāda: Hm?

Giriraja: Then we can type “I, A. C. Bhaktivedānta Swāmī
Prabhupāda, Founder-Ācārya of the International Society
for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness, settler of the Bhaktivedānta
Book Trust, and disciple of Om Viṣṇupadā 108 Śrī Śrīmad
Bhaktisiddhānta Sarasvatī Gosvāmī Mahārāja Prabhupāda,
presently residing at Śrī Kṛṣṇa-Balarama Mandir in
Vṛndāvana, make this, my last will. 1) The Governing
Body Commission, GBC, will be the trustees of the entire
International Society for Kṛṣṇa Consciousness.”

Prabhupāda: You can. Then there will be question, “The
trust deed will be given? Then there will be tax.”

Giriraja: No, because the ISKCON Trust is already there,
and ISKCON is already tax exempt. The only difficulty is
if you create a new trust.

Prabhupāda: No, no new trust.

Giriraja: No.

Prabhupāda: Instead of trustees...

Tamala Kṛṣṇa: Use a different word.

                           33
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt       5/5/2017


Prabhupāda: Ah!

Ramesvara: Not to apply to a trust.

Giriraja: Oh, I see.

Ramesvara: It’s a different word.

Prabhupāda: Supreme managers.

Gopala Kṛṣṇa: Supreme managers. (laughter)

Prabhupāda: Or the ultimate managers, like that.

Gopala Kṛṣṇa: The ultimate executives?

Prabhupāda: Yes.

Tamala Kṛṣṇa: Yes, the executors.

Gopala Kṛṣṇa: Ultimate executors.

Tamala Kṛṣṇa: Or commissioners. You have...

Prabhupāda: Hm. Yes, commissioners.

Tamala Kṛṣṇa: Commissioner is good, ‘cause it’s
already...

Prabhupāda: Use such word.

Tamala Kṛṣṇa: Use a word that’s proper.

Giriraja: Okay.

Tamala Kṛṣṇa: For now just use one word.

Giriraja: “2) Each temple will be a trust property...”

Prabhupāda: Again “trust” word.

Gopala Kṛṣṇa: Again “ISKCON property.”

Giriraja: Okay, we can change that wording.




COMPILATION 12:


Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, Los Angeles, California – 31 May,
2000:

“Never. Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja has not instructed like
this. Has he said that we should go to the atheists’
university? Has Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja told anywhere that
you should go to this bad university or that bad
university? What will be the result? Those who are going
will be like historians. They will not believe in God.
They will not believe in nāma and hari-kathā. They will
not believe that Caitanya Mahāprabhu came from Goloka

                             34
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt    5/5/2017

Vrndavan (Svetadvipa). They will think, Kṛṣṇa was not
God. Gradually this belief will come. They will compare
Caitanya Mahāprabhu with Buddha. They are bound to do
so. They will not be able to have faith in Caitanya-
Caritamrta and in Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam.”

Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, Moscow, 30 July 2000:

“These universities are like slaughterhouses and they
are full of māyāvādis. Śrīla Swāmī Mahārāja came and cut
down all the arguments of the māyāvādis and nirveśeṣa-
vādīs. Why should his disciples join all these things?
It is because they have no faith in their guru’s words,
and because they themselves are not guru at all. They
are fallen from the beginning. There is no position from
which they would fall down.”



REFUTATION 12: The compilation implies that although
Prabhupāda authorizes gurus to study at a university,
Śrīla Mahārāja doesn’t. But there are many quotes from
Prabhupāda’s folio like the ones mentioned below,
confirming Śrīla Mahārāja’s statements:

“Only one who is actually engaged in Kṛṣṇa consciousness
and devotional service can understand what Kṛṣṇa is.
University degrees are not helpful.” (Bhagavad-gītā:
Chapter 18, Text 55 Purport)

“Modern university education practically prepares one to
acquire a doggish mentality with which to accept the
service of a greater master.” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam: Canto
2, Chapter 3, Text 19 Purport)

“Similarly, the so-called educational vibrations of the
tongues of university professors who do not have
spiritual knowledge is like the croaking of frogs.”
(Caitanya-caritāmṛta: Adi-lila, Chapter 8, Text 6
Purport)

“What fool would deny that Lord Caitanya’s approval is
far superior to millions of university doctorates?”
(Renunciation Through Wisdom: Chapter 4, Text 2)

“Someone might object, ‘How can you call an atheistic
gentleman with a university degree a demon? He is so
educated and highly qualified.’ The verdict of the
śāstra is that although he appears to be very learned,
his actual knowledge has been stolen away by maya on
account of his being atheistic.” (A Second Chance)

“Nobody requires a university degree. That is a false
thing. And brāhmaṇa should be very highly learned
scholar. So the brāhmaṇas will give advice to the
kṣatriya how to rule, and the kṣatriya will levy tax,
and vaiśyās will produce food. Then the society will be
perfect.” (Room Conversation: August 1, 1975)

“So this is the position of so-called professor,
student, university – all rascals. This is our
challenge. All rascals. Because they are in the bodily
concept of life.” (Lecture April 11, 1973)


                           35
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt    5/5/2017




COMPILATION 13:


A.C. Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Prabhupāda Letter to Pierre
Sauvageau – Honolulu 2 February 1975:

“I like the idea of yours to continue on for PhD
presenting our books and philosophy in your thesis. This
will be a great service for you to perform and I shall
be very grateful to you if you can do it. Please
therefore go ahead with obtaining PhD and become a
learned scholar in the science of loving Kṛṣṇa.”

REFUTATION 13: The compilation wants to say that
Prabhupāda authorized certain ISKCON gurus to attend
university and get a PhD. This letter is not evidence
that a real sannyāsī or ācārya will attend any other
university than the university of Haridāsa Ṭhākura. This
letter simply encourages a brand new aspiring devotee,
who was already in a university, to become a devotee.




COMPILATION 14:


Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, Śrī Vraja-Mandala Parikrama, p. 45:

“Those who have not scrutinizingly studied the scripture
Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam, and who have not conscientiously
comprehended Śrī Caitanya-Caritamrita, and who have also
not properly understood books like Bhakti-rasāmṛta-
sindhu, Bṛhad-bhāgavatāmṛta, Ujjvala-nīlamaṇi, Kṛṣṇa-
karṇāmṛta and other literatures of this nature, these
people consider vipralambha, the mood of separation, to
be the highest level of ecstasy. Our previous ācāryas
also considered vipralambha to be an exalted state; but
after much reflection, they perceived vipralambha as a
prerequisite to highlight and more fully embellish and
amplify the ecstasy of reunion. If there would be only
vipralambha for all of eternity, what would be the use?
What would be its service? Vipralambha is necessary only
because it intensifies the ecstatic feelings of reunion
again.”

Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja, Śrī Vraja-Mandala Parikrama, p.46:

“So you can see that the mood of vipralambha is much
more complex than possibly the way you envisioned it to
be before. And those who still persist in advocating
that vipralambha is the highest, they do not yet have
the spiritual maturity and understanding to realize that
it is not possible for anything to be more elevated than
Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī and Kṛṣṇa’s ecstatic loving exchanges
in reuniting again.”

From Caitanya Caritamrita: Madhya-līlā chapter 8, text
191-197 in Teachings of Lord Caitanya, A.C.

                           36
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt    5/5/2017

Bhaktivedānta Swāmī Prabhupāda:

“Upon hearing of these transcendental activities, Lord
Caitanya said, ‘My dear Rāmānanda, what you have
explained regarding the transcendental pastimes of Śrī
Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa is perfectly correct, yet there is
something more I would like to hear from you.’ ‘It is
very difficult for me to express anything beyond this,’
Rāmānanda Rāya replied. ‘I can only say that there is an
emotional activity called prema-vilāsa-vivarta, which I
may try to explain but I do not know whether You will be
happy to hear it.’ In prema-vilāsa there are two kinds
of emotional activities—separation and meeting. That
transcendental separation is so acute that it is
actually more ecstatic than meeting.”




REFUTATION 15:


When Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja heard about these
COMPILATION quotes, he gave the following classes to
show that he and Śrīla Prabhupāda preach in the same
line: First, he established his conclusion, and then
showed how Śrīla Prabhupāda actually has the same exact
conclusion. The classes were given in Hilo, Hawaii, on
January 13-14, 2003:

“I have clarified this topic in the above-mentioned
quotes. Separation is only needed because it serves to
increase the enjoyment of meeting; it helps in that.
Still, I want to explain this further:

“Śrīla Viśvanātha Cakravartī Ṭhākura has written that in
madanakya-mahābhāva (the highest limit of love for
Kṛṣṇa) there is the experience of the greatest intensity
of separation in meeting and meeting in separation. All
moods, in their extreme exaltation, are present in
Śrīmatī Rādhika in her madanakya-mahābhāva.

“Kṛṣṇa also reveals Himself, in intense separation
(divyā-viraha). In that mood of separation the gopīs are
fully absorbed in Kṛṣṇa, in all His qualities and in all
His pastimes. Yet, at the same time, they want to
embrace Kṛṣṇa right then and there. They do not want to
burn in the fire of separation.

“The gopīs are not satisfied in their mood of
separation; they cannot be satisfied. Their desire is
this: ‘Kṛṣṇa should come directly in front of us, face
to face, so that He can put His very soft and gentle
lotus feet on our breasts.’ They lament that because
their breasts are very hard, they must place His lotus
feet there with the utmost gentle care. To whose lotus
feet are they referring? The lotus feet of that Kṛṣṇa,
which even Brahmā, Śrī Nārada Ṛṣi, Śrī Śukadeva Gosvāmī,
and Śrī Bhīṣmadeva cannot bring in their trance of
meditation. It is those feet that the gopīs want to
place on their breasts.

yat te sujāta-caraṇāmburuhaṁ staneṣu

                           37
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt    5/5/2017


bhītāḥ śanaiḥ priya dadhīmahi karkaśeṣu

tenāṭavīm aṭasi tad vyathate na kiṁ svit

kūrpādibhir bhramati dhīr bhavad-āyuṣāṁ naḥ

“O dearly beloved! Your lotus feet are so soft that we
place them gently on our breasts, fearing that Your feet
will be hurt. Our life rests only in You. Our minds,
therefore, are filled with anxiety that Your tender feet
might be wounded by pebbles as You roam about on the
forest path.” (Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam: Canto 10, Chapter 31,
Text 19)

“The gopīs lament in this connection, ‘Oh, what shall we
do? Kṛṣṇa likes that His feet are placed on our breasts,
but we are afraid we are hurting Him.’ The gopīs don’t
want to meditate on Kṛṣṇa. They desire this: ‘Kṛṣṇa
should come out from within our hearts so that we can
embrace Him. Only in this way will our fire of
separation be extinguished.’

“Some persons say that vipralambha is higher than
sambhoga. Only a neutral person can say this. Neutral
persons alone can say that it is good if the gopīs only
see Kṛṣṇa in their trance. Such persons can say that
although the gopīs want to embrace Kṛṣṇa, it is better
if Kṛṣṇa’s association comes to them by their mood of
separation. It is better that they always meet Him in
their mood of separation, as they close their eyes and
remember Him in their hearts. Such neutral persons think
that the gopīs’ separation is very good, and such
persons are like Akrūra and Kamsa, who have no desire
for the meeting of Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. Akrūra can say,
‘Take Kṛṣṇa from Vraja. Let the Vrajavāsīs feel
separation; they should be always feeling separation.’
And Kaṁsa will be very happy to say, ‘Bring Kṛṣṇa here
to Mathurā, and I will kill Him there.’

“These two persons can speak in this way, but no
Vrajavāsī wants Kṛṣṇa to be separated from Vraja. Not
even a plant, creeper, or bird of Vṛndāvana wants Kṛṣṇa
to leave Vraja. No one there wants the Vrajavāsīs to
feel separation. None of them think, ‘Separation is so
high.’ And what to speak of the gopīs? What to speak of
Lalitā and Viśākhā, and Rūpa Mañjarī and Rati Mañjarī?

“Those who are confidential servants of Śrīmatī Rādhika,
and who have more affection for Her than for Kṛṣṇa,
never desire Her separation from Kṛṣṇa. In fact,
Vrajavāsīs like Lalitā and Viśākhā, and pālya-dāsīs like
Rūpa Mañjarī, Rati Mañjarī, and Kamala Mañjarī, cannot
tolerate the separation of Rādhika from Kṛṣṇa at all. Do
you know who is Kamala Mañjarī? In her sādhaka form she
(he) is Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura.

“In his song, Śrī Kṛṣṇa Virahe, Śrīla Bhaktivinoda
Ṭhākura writes: ‘I cannot bear to see the feelings of
separation of Rādhika’. He is weeping as he writes,
‘When Rādhika laments in divyon-mada, in the
transcendental madness of separation from Kṛṣṇa she
displayed in Brahmāra-gītā (Rādhika speaking with a
bumblebee) and at other times, I cannot bear it. I don’t

                           38
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt    5/5/2017

want Kṛṣṇa to leave Rādhika. He should always remain
with Her in Vraja.’ He continues, ‘I cannot tolerate the
separation of Rādhika for Kṛṣṇa, but I can easily and
happily give up my life if that will help to bring Kṛṣṇa
to Her.’ This is the mood of the pālya-dāsī of Rādhika.

“Then, in another song, called Vṛṣabhānu Sutā, Śrīla
Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura writes:

rādhā-pakṣa chadi, je jana se jana, je bhave se bhāve
thāke,

amī to rādhikā-pakṣa pati sadā, kabhu nāhi heri tā’ke

“If someone thinks that the separation mood of Śrīmatī
Rādhika is very good, I don’t want to see that person’s
face! It would be a sinful act to see the face of such a
person!”

“Only Mathuravasis, only those who are not able to
appreciate vraja-līlā, like Akrūra and Kaṁsa, will want
Rādhika and Kṛṣṇa to be separated. A rūpānuga Vaisnava
understands that everyone in Vraja is acting in such a
way as to increase the happiness of Śrī Śrī Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa. Uddhava went to Vraja, realized the separation of
the gopīs to a certain extent, and then returned to
Kṛṣṇa and said, ‘You must go at once; otherwise, if You
do not go, Nanda and Yaśodā, all the gopīs, and all the
cows and calves will soon be dead. You must go there.’
Even Baladeva and Rohiṇī-maiya told Kṛṣṇa, ‘Why don’t
you go to Vraja? All will die if You do not go.’
Baladeva told Him, ‘If You do not go there, then I must
go; and I will tell them that You are coming very soon.’
Thus, all the Vrajavāsīs want Kṛṣṇa to be with the gopīs
and with His father and mother in Vraja.

“If vipralambha is higher than meeting, then Lalitā and
the other sakhīs and Mañjarīs would have been trying to
keep Kṛṣṇa out of Vraja. They would have tried to be
very far away from Him. But have they done this? They
can never do so. Do you want this? Do any of you want
Kṛṣṇa to be separated from Rādhika? Do you want Rādhika
to weep and roll on the ground?

“Lalitā once sent a swan to Mathura. When she sent him
off, she told him, ‘Go and tell Kṛṣṇa about the daśamī-
daśa, the tenth stage, of Rādhika’s condition. In the
eleventh stage she would surely die. Nowadays she is
often unconscious, and she engages like a mad person in
varieties of crazy talks (divyonmāda). Go and tell
Kṛṣṇa, ‘You must come in a day, or just now. Otherwise,
if you go to Vraja later, You will not be able to meet
with Rādhika at all. You should always keep this in
mind. If You want to be happy, and if You want to make
all others happy, then come here at once.’

“Thus, according to the explanations of our previous
ācāryas, what I have told is correct. Vipralambha is
only needed to help nourish meeting. If this is not
accomplished there is no necessity of vipralambha. It is
stated in Śrī Ujjvala-nilamani, ‘Na vina vipralambhena
sambhoga pustimasnute. Without vipralambha, meeting will
not be nourished.’


                           39
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt    5/5/2017

“Does meeting come first or does vipralambha come first?
If the gopīs had not met with Kṛṣṇa, how would they have
experienced vipralambha? First there is meeting, and
then separation. Without meeting, the mood of separation
cannot come and Śrīmatī Rādhārāṇī cannot weep for Kṛṣṇa.
Why are you not weeping? Can you weep for Kṛṣṇa from the
core of your heart? You cannot, because you have never
seen Him. If you will see His beauty, His qualities, His
affection, and His love and mercy, then you can cry for
Him. So first is meeting, sambhoga, then separation in
the middle, and then meeting again. There are four kinds
of separation, and they are pūrva-rāga, manā, pravāsa
and prema-vaicittya.

“When Kṛṣṇa goes to the forest, the gopīs feel
separation. They weep for Kṛṣṇa and discuss among
themselves His pastimes in the forest. The ultimate
stage of conjugal love is madanakya-mahābhāva, which is
present only in Rādhika. All varieties of the moods of
meeting and separation reside in madhanakya, and this is
the monopoly of Śrīmatī Rādhika. This wonderful mood of
Rādhika is such that even the highest moods of
separation are enclosed in it. This mood cannot occur at
the time of separation; it occurs only in meeting. It
occurs, for example, when Rādhika is sitting on the lap
of Kṛṣṇa at Prema-Sarovara. Imagining that Kṛṣṇa has
left and will never return, Rādhika laments, ‘Where is
Kṛṣṇa?’ This is very wonderful and tasteful.

“We should try to know all these truths, and that
understanding will reconcile all the statements of your
Śrīla Prabhupāda . I know that he is a philosopher and a
rasika-bhakta as well. He realizes both vipralambha and
sambhoga. Like his predecessor ācāryas, he is a servant
of Śrīmatī Rādhika. Will he say that Rādhā should always
be far away from Kṛṣṇa? Never. I know him. I have been
with him since 1947, and I am still serving him. If he
has written, on a rare occasion, that separation is
higher than meeting, he has done this only for
beginners. We must feel separation for Kṛṣṇa, and we
must lament that we have been separated from Him for a
long time. It is essential for a sādhaka to feel that he
is separated form Kṛṣṇa, and thus he should lament in
separation.*[See endnote.] On the other hand, for the
mature devotee, Śrīla Swami Mahārāja has written in his
many books that separation is only accepted if it helps
increase the enjoyment of meeting.

“I very humbly request those who have doubts to discuss
with me personally this very deep subject. I welcome
them, and I think that by such discussion,
reconciliation will come.

[question]: “I don’t know philosophy and I’m not a
scholar, but I remember that in the Kṛṣṇa book Kṛṣṇa
told the gopīs, ‘I have never left you.’ So the gopīs
are in the mood of separation, but actually Kṛṣṇa never
left them.”

[Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja:] “If He never left, then why
were the gopīs always lamenting and suffering due to
Him? The idea that Kṛṣṇa never left, that He is
everywhere, and therefore there was no need for the
gopīs to lament is the version of Uddhava. This was not

                           40
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt    5/5/2017

the version of the gopīs. Rather, the gopīs defeated all
of Uddhava’s arguments.”

NEXT MORNING, AT A DARśANA

“All the sakhās (cowherd boys) also used to feel great
separation from Kṛṣṇa. Even when Kṛṣṇa would hide behind
a tree, they used to run very quickly to find him; and
the gopīs especially used to experience grievous
separation. It has been written in Śrīmad Bhagavatam’s
Gopī-gītā:

“The meaning is clear. When Kṛṣṇa used to start out in
the morning for cow-grazing, and also when He returned
from cow grazing, the gopīs used to see Him. At that
time they wanted a way to be free from the impediment of
the eyelids covering their eyes. They wanted thousands
of eyes without eyelids – all over their bodies –
because they wanted to see Kṛṣṇa unimpeded. They cursed
the creator, ‘O Brahmā, because of the blinking of the
eyelids that were created by you, our vision of Kṛṣṇa is
disturbed. We cannot tolerate separation from Kṛṣṇa for
even a fraction of a second. Each fraction of a second
seems to us to be thousands and thousands of yugas.’ How
would the Vrajavāsīs be able to tolerate the suffering
of gopīs, and especially of Rādhika?



NEXT NIGHT, DURING CLASS

January 14, 2003

“It was only for beginners and sādhakas that
Paramapūjyāpada Bhaktivedanta Swami Mahārāja said that
one must adopt the mood of separation. We have been
forgetful of Kṛṣṇa since the beginning of time. Thus, a
sādhaka-bhakta should always lament, weep, and feel
separation in his bhajana. He should weep like Śrī
Caitanya Mahāprabhu, like Śrīla Narottama dāsa Ṭhākura,
and like Śrīla Bhaktivinoda Ṭhākura. Beginners must know
that we have forgotten Kṛṣṇa and we have been separated
from Him from time immemorial, and therefore their
bhajana should be full with feelings of separation.

“The mature devotees will also feel separation, but
moreover they will not want Śrīmatī Rādhika to feel
separation from Kṛṣṇa.

“The gopīs criticized Brahmā thus: ‘You don’t know how
to create. You have made us with only two eyes, and you
have also given us eyelids that continue to blink. You
don’t know anything. If any new Brahmā will come and
follow our instructions, he will make thousands and
thousands of eyes throughout our limbs without lids. At
that time we will vividly see Kṛṣṇa when He comes home
from grazing cows in the evening and when He leaves
again in the morning. At present, however, we eagerly
wait for Kṛṣṇa to return throughout the day. Then, when
He comes home and we try to see Him, two things obstruct
our vision. One obstruction is the tears that fall from
our eyes, and second, we have eyelids. When Kṛṣṇa is in
front of us, if for a second we cannot see Him because
of our tears or our eyelids, that second seems as long

                             41
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt     5/5/2017

as thousands and millions of yugas (milleniums). We feel
great separation at this time.’

“If you want the gopīs to always be separated because
this is higher, then what will become of them? They will
die very soon. If you are happy to make them die, then
you can say that the mood of separation is higher. If I
ask those who have written that paper which tries to
prove that separation is higher, ‘Do you want Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa to always be separated and to always feel
separation?’ I think they will not answer in the
affirmative. Only one who has no bhakti at all can say,
‘Yes’ to this.

“Śrīla Kavi-Karṇapūra wrote about the activities of
Kṛṣṇa up to rāsa-līlā, holi-līlā, the swinging pastimes,
and so on, and he never described how Kṛṣṇa went with
Baladeva to Mathura and how He sent Uddhava to Vraja. He
never told this because he could not tolerate the
thought of separation between Rādhā and Kṛṣṇa. He thinks
that if Kṛṣṇa will leave his svāminiji Rādhika and go to
Mathura, Rādhika will die. In Vraja, when Kṛṣṇa used to
go to the forest for cow-grazing, the gopīs hardly felt
any separation in comparison to what they felt when
Kṛṣṇa left for Mathura. When Kṛṣṇa left for cow-grazing,
groups of gopīs used to assemble together to sing Gopī-
gītā and Veṇu-gītā, and thus they maintained their
lives. We should be happy by the meeting of Rādhā and
Kṛṣṇa, and we should be sad in Their separation.

“This is the essence of all our discussion of
yesterday.” [end of class]

The following are quotes from Śrīla Prabhupāda,
confirming the points of Śrīla Narayana Maharaja’s
lecture:

“When the lover and the beloved meet, they are called
yuktā (connected). Previous to their meeting, they are
called ayuktā (not connected). Whether connected or not
connected, the ecstatic emotion arising due to not being
able to embrace and kiss each other as desired is called
vipralambha. This vipralambha helps nourish emotions at
the time of meeting.” (Purport to Śrī Caitanya-
caritāmṛta, Madhya 23.60)

“On the sambhoga platform, the dresses are unlimited,
and in vipralambha they are four in number. The ecstasy
exhibited before the lover and beloved meet, the ecstasy
experienced between them after meeting, the state of
mind experienced by not meeting, and the state of mind
experienced after meeting fearing separation are called
vipralambha. That vipralambha serves as a nourishing
element for future meetings.” (Teachings of Lord
Caitanya)

Regarding feelings of separation for conditioned souls,
Śrīla Prabhupāda writes:

“So for advanced devotee everything is possible, as
described by this gentleman. But that is not for
everyone. That is not a common thing. Exceptional. For
the common person, as Caitanya Mahāprabhu has advised
and as He has practically shown in His life, devotional

                           42
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt    5/5/2017

service in separation: ‘Where is Kṛṣṇa?’ Śūnyāyitaṁ
jagat sarvaṁ govinda-viraheṇa me. ‘I am seeing
everything vacant because I cannot see Kṛṣṇa.’ The same
thing was followed by the Gosvāmīs.” (Prabhupāda ‘s
lecture of Canto Five Śrīmad-Bhāgavatam)

“In Gauḍīya-sampradāya within Caitanya Mahāprabhu’s
descendants, our line of God realization is that feeling
of separation. Not that we have got Kṛṣṇa within our
hand. No. The feeling of separation, worship of Kṛṣṇa by
feeling of separation is better than the worship by
directly meeting. Vipralambha-seva.” (Lecture of
February 2, 1968)

“The real Caitanya Mahāprabhu sampradāya is that one
should be feeling like Caitanya Mahāprabhu: separation,
not sambhoga. Vipralambha . Vipralambha -seva: ‘Oh, I am
so wretched, I could not serve Kṛṣṇa. How I can see
Kṛṣṇa? It is not possible.’ In this way. That is the
teaching of Śrī Caitanya Mahāprabhu . ‘I do not see Him,
neither it is possible for me to see Him...’ This means:
‘What am I? I am an insignificant person.’” (Mayapura:
June 27, 1973)

Both Śrīla Prabhupāda and Śrīla Nārāyaṇa Mahārāja say
much more on this subject, and many others; and a
sincere seeker of the truth can see that there is no
difference between the two.



Table of Contents

The Difference

OBJECTION 1)

OBJECTION 2)

OBJECTION 3)

OBJECTION 4)

OBJECTION 5)

OBJECTION 6)

OBJECTION 7)

OBJECTION 8)

OBJECTION 9)

OBJECTION 10)

OBJECTION 11)

OBJECTION 12)

CONCLUSION:

The Homonym ISKCON

COMPILATION 1:

                           43
Our_Gurus_One_in_Siddhanta_One_at_Heart.txt   5/5/2017


COMPILATION 2:

COMPILATION 3:

COMPILATION 4:

COMPILATION 5:

COMPILATION 6:

COMPILATION 7:

COMPILATION 8:

COMPILATION 9:

COMPILATION 10:

COMPILATION 11:

COMPILATION 12:

COMPILATION 13:

COMPILATION 14:

REFUTATION 15:




                           44
